Digitized by Googl

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

THE

ROMANS UNDER THE EMPIRE.

VOL. IV.

Digitized by Google

PRINTED

LONDON

BY 9 POTT IS IV 00 D E AND CO.
SEW-STUEKT SQUARE

Digitized by Google

HISTORY

.

OF TUB

ROMANS UNDER THE EMPIRE.

BY

CHARLES MERIVALE, B.D.

RECTOB OF lawford:

CHAFLAIN TO THE SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE OF COMMON'S.

NEW EDITION.

IN BIGHT VOLUMES.

VOL. IV.

LONDON:

LONGMAN, GREEN, LONGMAN, ROBERTS, & GREEN.

1865 .

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

CONTENTS

OF

THE FOURTH VOLUME

CHAPTER XXXIL

The imperial administration — 1. The people : 2. The privi -
leged orders: the senate, and the knights: 3. The magis -
trates; the consuls, the praetors, the judges, the quaestors,
and tediles; the prefect of the city; municipal officers —
Officialism — The proconsuls and governors of the pro -
viuces: the municipal privileges of the provinces — 4. The
military establishment: 5. The finances; objects of expen -
diture and sources of revenue — Concluding remarks -

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Anticipations of constitutional monarchy — Indifference of
the mass of the citizens on political questions — Augustus
studies to revive the national sentiment — His conservation
of the patrician caste: of the religious ceremonial — Resto -
ration of temples and special cults— Conservation of the
rights of property: of matrimony — Legislative measures to
encourage marriage — Regulations for the distinction of
classes — Jurisprudence of Augustus — Completion of his
policy — His personal popularity not disturbed by occa -
sional severity — Disgrace and death of Cornelius Gallus —
The jubilee of the Roman people — Considerations on the
authenticity of the imperial history -

C H APTER XXX 1Y,

The organization of the provinces by Augustus — 1. Spain:
final pacification of the mountain tribes — 2. Gaul: tribute
promised by the Britons: reduction of the Alpine tribes —
VOL. IT. a

PAGB

1

53

Digitized by Google

VI

CONTENTS OF

FAGE

3. Mcesia] and] Thrace — 4. Kingdom of Mauretania — 5.
Province of Africa — 6. The Cyrcnaica — 7. Egypt: ex .
pedition of iElius Gallua into Arabia — 8. Egypt: repulse
of the Ethiopians — 9. Asia Minor: Bithynia, Asia, and
the dependent kingdoms — 10. Syria and Palestine : Parthia
and Armenia — 11. Achaia— 12. Illyricum — 13, Italy, Sar -
dinia, and Corsica ....... 112

CHAPTER XXXV.

The Caesarean family — Jnlia, daughter of Augustus, by Scri -
bonia, married to Marcellns, son of Octavia — High promise
and early death of Marcellas — Julia united to Agrippa —
Augustus receives the tribnnitian and the consnlar powers
— Agrippa is raised to a participation in the former — Pre-
fectnre of manners — Revision of the senate — Secnlar games
— Prefecture of the city — Condnct and character of Maece -
nas — Augustas in Gaul, and Agrippa in the East — Conquest
of Rhaetia and Vindelicia by Tiberius and Drusiis, stepsons
of Augustus — Tiberius consnl in 741 — Augustas and Ag -
rippa return to Rome — Augustus chief pontiff— Campaign
of Agrippa against the Pannonians — His illness and death
—Character of Agrippa (a. u. 729 — 742, b. c. 25 — 13) - 1S2

CHAPTER XXXVI.

The children of Agrippa — Character of the Clandii : Tiberias
and Drusus — Marriage of Tiberins and Jnlia — Policy of
the empire on the Rhine and Dannbe — Expedition of
Drnsns in Germany, and Tiberins in Pannonia — Death of
Drnsus, A. u. 745 — Extension of the empire in Thrace and
Moesia — Tiberins invades Germany — Introduction of Cains
Caesar to pnblic life — Death of Maecenas, and final remarks
on his character ( a . p. 742— 747, b. c. 12 — 7) - 232

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The history of Rome assnmes the character of a domestic
drama — Character and condnct of Julia, and of Caius and
Lncius Caesar — Augustas holds the balance between his
grandsons and Tiberias — Disgust and retirement of Tibe-
rins to Rhodes (a. p. 748, b. c. 6) — Disgrace and banish-

Digitized by Google

THE FOURTH VOLUME.

PAGE

ment of Julia — Deaths of Caius and Lncius — Recall of
Tiberius (a. p. 757, a. i>. 4): he receives the tribtmitian
power a seconJ time, and is adopted by Augustus — Con -
spiracy of Cinna, and clemency of Augustus — Review of
the personal habits of Augustus in his later years (a, u.

747, b. c. 7. a. u, 757, a. p. 4) - 2 £l3

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Tiberius, on his return from Rhodes, at first takes no part in
public affairs — After the death of Caius lie comes again
forward — His mission to Gaul in 757 — He reaches the
Elbe — The Marcomanni and the kingdom of Maroboduus
— Expedition of Tiberius Against the Marcomanni in 759
— Frustrated by the revolt of the Pannonians — Alarm at
Rome — Banishment of Agrippa Postumus — The Fan no -
nians are reduced by Tiberius and Germanicus, a.p. 759 —

762 — Intrigues against Augustus — Banishment of the
younger Julia — Banishment of the poet Ovidius Naso, 761
— Discontent of the citizens — The Roman province be -
tween the Rhine and Elbe — Overthrow of Varus and loss
of three legions, 763 — Consternation at Rome — Tiberius
sent to the Rhine — Old age of Augustus —Tiberius re-
ceives the proconsular power, and is virtually associated
in the empire — His hopes of the succession — Rumoured
reconciliation of Augustus with Agrippa Postumus — Re -
cord of the acts of Augustus — Monumentum Ancyranum—

Last days and death of Augustus — Conclusion (a.d. 4 —

14, A.p. 757—767) 303

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Unity of the Roman empire — Contrast between the three
great divisions of the ancient world, the East, the North,
and the West — Variety within the Roman empire: 1. of
languages; 2. of religions; 3. of classes; citizens, subjects,
and allies all gradually tend to a single type — Elements of
unity in the Roman empire from its geographical features
— Italy and the Mediterranean — Communications by sea
and land — Map of the empire: surveys: census and
professio — Brcviarium or register of the empire — The
population of the Roman dominions under Augustus —
Universal tranquillity : Pax Romana. - 3C3

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google

* v?

t

HISTOEY

or THE

ROM AN S UNDER THE EMPIR E .

CHAPTER XXXIL

1

The imperial administration. — 1. The people: 2. The privileged
orders; the senate, and the knights: 3. The magistrates; the
consuls, the praetors, the judges, the quaestors and sediles; the
prsefect of the city; municipal officers. — Officialism, — The pro-
consuls and governors of the provinces: the municipal privileges
of the provinces. — 4. The military establishment: 5. The finances;
objects of expenditure and sources of revenue. — Concluding
remarks.

The last chapter has presented to us the portrait of
the emperor himself, standing out unre-
lieved from the blank canvas; our next ^ter.uu? 1 *
step must be to fill in the back-ground of |SS5™. l tr»-
the picture, to give life and reality to this
central figure, and harmonize the colouring of its
parts. I proceed to bring under a rapid review the
constituent elements of the imperial administration,
to describe the political condition of the Koman
people, the functions and prerogatives of the privi-
leged orders, the powers of the principal magistrates,,
the government of the provinces, the military and
financial systems of the empire, as constituted by
the founder of the monarchy. The settlement ef-
fected by Augustus endured in its main features
throughout the three centuries and a half which
now lie before us ; but that long period is divided
into two unequal portions by the sudden revolution
VOL. IV. B

Digitized by Google

2

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxn.

which broke the sceptre of the Antonines, and finally
subordinated the civil to the military institutions of
the state. Even before the era of the accession of
Pertinaxwe shall remark in particular instances the
innovations of time and circumstance, and observe
the general gravitation of the whole machine towards
a more absolute despotism.

I. The victor of Actium, on his return to Eome,
j Con ,titu- found the people, assembled in their cen-
tiona ofthV turies, the acknowledged arbiters of every
nn'Srth? ople project of law submitted to them by the
empire. senate, while in their tribes they could ori-
ginate measures of their own, at the instigation of
their tribunes, and enforce them upon the collective
body of the citizens. The course of political change,
which in the best ages of the republic had elevated
the commons to a full equality with the patrician
class, had gradually extended the authority of the
popular assemblies, and constituted them in fact, at
the moment when the republic was passing into an
empire, the real makers of the laws. This preroga-
tive of sovereignty the master of the commonwealth
could neither safely seize himself, nor abandon, to a
co-ordinate power in the state. He began therefore
with modestly claiming only the initiative of mea-
sures, through the various magistracies of which he
possessed himself: he then encroached gradually
with his rescripts and proclamations upon the legi-
timate province of the law, and thus accustomed the
people to the rarer use of their highest and gravest
functions. The plebiscite, or measures initiated by
the tribes were the first to cease. The emperor
firmly maintained the dignity of the senate against
the rivalry of the comitia, and required that every
measure should at least receive the assent of the
more illustrious body before it was stamped as law
by the fiat of the centuries. It was not often how-
ever after the reign of the second of the princes,

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

3

Tiberius, that the people were actually summoned to
ratify a law at all. Still less were they indulged
with the exercise of the judicial prerogatives, by
which they had asserted their paramount sovereignty
in the period of the commonwealth. Jealous even
of the powers they entrusted to magistrates of their
own appointment, they ha,d admitted an appeal from
the civil jurisdiction to their own superior tribunal.
The people assembled in their tribes exacted from
their officers an account of the exercise of their func-
tions, and inflicted at least pecuniary mulcts in cases
of malversation. In charges affecting the life of a
Roman citizen, the culprit was summoned before the
popular judicature of the centuries : but the law was
tenderly considerate to the interests of the criminal
and the feelings of his judges, and allowed him to
decline the appointed trial by withdrawing into exile.
Certain of the allied cities were specified as places
of refuge for the accused Roman, and a clause in the
compact between them and the republic guaranteed
the inviolability of their hospitable retreats. But
this judicial prerogative was soon absorbed in the.
general jurisdiction of the emperor, and of the judges
appointed by his authority . 1 The right of appeal
was silently withdrawn from the people, and vested
in the supreme ruler of the state alone : the privilege
of declining a trial was still allowed to linger ; but it
continued to offer no substantial advantages to the
culprit ; for the allied states were rapidly absorbed
into the imperial provinces, and no city of refuge
extended its arms to receive him . 2 The emperor, if

1 Dion, Ivi. 40: ix Si rov Siipov rb Svaxpirov iv reus Stayvdxrtatv is
r V ryv SiKatrrriptui/ lucplStiav fitrarrfyras, ri re i(leefia ru>7 apx<sLp(<rluv
curry irypiifft, xav rabrais rb <pi\6rip.ov cun) rov <t>i\ovflxov <r<pas i[eiraf-
Sttxrt.

* Gibbon ( Decl . and Fall, ch. iii.) has pointed out in striking lan-
guage the impossibility of escaping the wrath or justice of the em-
peror ; but in his summary of the imperial constitution he has not
paused to show how it was that the old means of refuge were pre-
cluded.

B 2

Digitized by Google

4

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

cn. xxxn.

he allowed his victim to evade the disgrace or peril
of condemnation, appointed him his place of exile on
some barren rock, or in some ungenial clime, where
existence was itself a punishment ; or if he withheld
this miserable favour, constrained him to relieve his
judge by self-destruction from the painful necessity
of ordaining his execution.

The duties of legislation were laborious; those of
They a« de- jurisdiction were invidious also; but the
eiection^of 1 * sovereign people possessed another prero-
nmgiitrate*. gative, the sweets of which might counter-
balance the pains and toils of all their other func-1
tions. Assembled in their centuries the Roman
citizens appointed to all the higher magistracies
of the republic ; convened in their tribes they dis-
pensed the lesser or municipal offices of the city.
For these honourable distinctions, for the pleasure
and profit of serving the commonwealth, there
was ever a crowd of competitors, to strive with or
bid against one another, to descend to the meanest
flattery or the darkest intrigues, to hold forth
shows and entertainments with the one hand, and
to lavish gold with the other. The occupants of
every magistracy were annually replaced, and a
fresh crowd of candidates arrayed in white robes and
attended by experienced canvassers, glided through
the streets and public places, visiting from house to
house, or thronging the forums, the theatres and the
baths, till the moment arrived when the voters were
marched across the bridge, and penned in the sheep-
fold, and admitted in secrecy and security to place
their ballots in the urn. The mass of the citizens
divided with the senate, as their executive com-
mittee, the manifold patronage of the state. The
foreign relations of the commonwealth, including
the provinces, were mainly confided to the care of
the latter assembly; and while the people retained
the appointment to the metropolitan offices, they
generally allowed the senate to nominate the pro-

Digitized by Google

ch. zxxn.

UNDER TIIE EMPIRE.

5

consuls, ambassadors and political agents to serve
their interests abroad. The value of these ulterior
appointments had stimulated the competition in the
Field of Mars : the race for preferment was long,
but it was cheered hy the acclamations of the spec-
tators, the excitement of the struggle, and the splen-
did prospect of the prize. It was the policy of the
principate to tame down the passions which had
been generated in the headlong fury of this career.
The prizes were multiplied in number, and dimin-
ished in dignity and value. Augustus stepped into
the arena of public competition to recommend can-
didates of his own selection, and his voice was more
influential than even that of the prerogative century.
He may have adopted some specific measures for
controlling the elections, and ensuring the nomina-
tions he demanded. Such at least seems to have
been the object of the plan he devised of permitting
the citizens in the Italian colonies, which he had
filled with partisans of his own, to send up their
votes to the capital . 1 By thus dispensing with the
voters’ personal appearance, he might obtain a mul-
titude of suffrages which otherwise could not have
been tendered at all, and overpower the unruly or
venal voices of the urban populace. The fate of the
popular elections was precipitated by the discovery
the candidate soon made, that the favour of the prince
was more efficient than that of the people. The sordid

1 The passage from which we learn this curions innovation in the
principles of ancient government is an obscure one. Suet. Oct. 46. :
“ Italiam .... etiam jure et dignatione urhi quodammodo pro parte
aliqua adsequarit, excogitato genere suffragiorum, quse de magistra-
tibus urbicis decuriones colonici in sua quisque colonia ferrent, et sub
diem comitiorum obsignata Romam mitterent.” It seems probable
from the context that this indulgence was limited to the twenty-eight
military colonies of Augustus. Savigny supposes that the right of
voting in this manner was accorded to the decurions only. Others
by ferrent understand ferri juberent, and maintain that the decurions
collected the suffrages of their fellow townsmen for the elections of
the capital.

Digitized by Google

6

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CB. XXXII.

compliances demanded of the canvasser had always
galled the pride of the Roman patrician. To kiss the
hand of the emperor was less painful to him than to
grasp the horny palm of the urban artisan. Before
the captain of the armies, the prince of the senate,
the high priest of the national divinities, he could
prostrate himself without humiliation in the dust ;
but to cringe to the barbarian of yesterday, or the
freedman whom he had himself emancipated, was
a degradation in his fastidious view to which the
direst necessity could hardly reconcile him. The
emperors watched and profited by this feeling. They
redoubled the amusements of the people, while they
withdrew their privileges ; and if a shadow of free
election was still preserved through the reign of
Augustus, his successor promptly swept it away, and
raised but a transient unheeded murmur by its sup-
pression . 1 * * * * * *

Augustus however was actuated by no deliberate
Angortn. «f- wish to degrade the estimation of Roman
tSn 8 the*Si!£" citizenship. The dictator, he may have
Ro'man cw- thought, had gone as far in extending
xen,hip- the franchise as the circumstances, of the
times would justify. His efforts were directed rather
to shutting the door against the provincials than
throwing it more widely open ; and he restricted the
liberty of manumitting slaves to which the cupidity
of needy masters seemed too easily tempted. He
wished the masters of the Roman world to be dis-

1 Tac. Ann. i. 15. Of the limitation with which the language of

Tacitus is to be understood more will be said hereafter. Julius Csesar
had materially curtailed the power of election ; but his arrangement,
which was as distinct as it was arbitrary, lasted only during his life.

Suet. Jul. 41. During the triumvirate the elections had been con-

trolled, but Augustus restored them ostensibly to their ancient form.

Suet. Oct. 40. : “ Comitiorum pristinum jus rednxit.” Comp. Dion,

liiL 21. Some have understood the pristinum jus to mean the regula-

tion introduced by Julius, and assuredly the practice under Augustus

differed little from that under his predecessor.

Digitized by Google

CB. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

7

tinguished by the national costume in which they
had so long ruled over it. During the late disturb-
ances the use of the short military lacerna had super-
seded even in the city the ample folds of the peace-
ful toga. The substitution might be recommended
by its convenience; but it was deemed unseemly,
and moreover it served to recall painful associations.
Augustus was anxious to correct it. He abstained
however from repressive measures, and with admi-
rable tact contented himself with repeating a verse
from the iEneid of "Virgil, with whose noble accents
the Roman world was then first resounding. Behold,
he exclaimed with indignant irony, the lords of earth,
the nation of the gown. 1 * Nevertheless the neces-
sities of his position induced him to pamper this
ill-bred populace with gratifications which could not
fail to break down every remnant of personal or
national pride. The policy of the triumvir had been
a perpetual effort to coax or terrify the unruly citi-
zens. The failure of the sources whence the granaries
of the city had been supplied had long held h i s
affairs trembling in the balance. The sagest counsels
and expedients, backed by the strongest demonstra-
tions of force, had barely sufficed to maintain order
while Sextus was threatening Rome with famine.
This dire experience had determined the emperor
never to trust his power to the caprices of the seasons
or the improvidence of a dissolute mob . 3 Various
causes, both physical and moral, combined to impede
the improvement of agriculture in Italy at a time
when the population of its cities, and especially of
Rome itself, was rapidly increasing, as we may pre-

1 Suet, Oct. 40. : “ Romanos rernm dominos, gcntemque togatam.”

1 An anecdote told of Augustus by Aurelius Victor, if not strictly
credible, though countenanced apparently by Pliny, Hint. Nat. vii.

46., may at least attest the extreme importance supposed to attach to
the due supply of the capital with grain : “ Cives sic amavit ut tridui
fruraento in horreis quondam viso statuisset veneno mori si o pro-
vinciis classes interea non venirent.” Aurel. Viet. Epit. i. 6.

Digitized by Google

8

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

v sume, with their increasing political importance.
Nor were the methods of transport by sea sufficiently
matured under the natural laws of exchange to supply
a sudden deficiency in the harvests of the peninsula.
Disastrous The policy of providing against these peril-
(!?strihutiona ous accidents was forced upon every suc-
°f com. cessive government. But the change from

providing plenty in the markets to doling gratuitous
alms to every poor or lazy applicant, was rapid and
disastrous. Pompeius had trodden in the one course,
Cato had sanctioned the pther. Caesar had modified,
while he admitted, the fatal expedient of a free lar-
gess, and the triumvirs had resorted to it without
shame or remorse to prop their precarious usurpation.
Hitherto however the aid of the magistrate had been
occasional only and irregular. Augustus reduced it to
a system, and made it perpetual. Yet even he saw the
danger, and would have grappled with the difficulty,
had he not been convinced, as he himself avowed in
his later years, that even if he withdrew his gratui-
tous distributions, a successor or a rival would un-
doubtedly restore them. He contented himself there-
fore with imposing restrictions on the claims to his
bounty. When he came to power he found three
hundred and twenty thousand citizens of the male
sex (for females were excluded) enrolled as recipi-
ents of the public dole. It was by the exercise of
no little firmness and energy that he reduced this
number to two hundred thousand by striking off
fictitious claimants and pretended paupers, and by
removing into his colonies as many as could be
tempted to emigrate. The Homan commons were
themselves an impoverished aristocracy in the midst
of a population of slaves and dependent foreigners.
Not many perhaps among them, if they chose to seek
employment, could sink into absolute want. But
the false pride of political rank revolted from the
vulgar industry of trade and labour; and the preju-

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxn.

UNDER TIIE EMPIRE.

9

dice which a wise ruler would have combated with
mild resolution, was confirmed by this ill-judged
indulgence. Yet notwithstanding all his care to
import grain for free distribution from the most
abundant regions of the empire, for which object he
kept his new province of Egypt under his own direct
control, Augustus could not prevent the recurrence
of severe scarcities. The tumults which ensued upon
that of 732 have been already mentioned, and an-
other in 759 constrained the government to adopt
the harshest measures to reduce the number of
mouths in the famishing city. Then it was that
Augustus confessed that these largesses were working
unmitigated evil, retarding the advance of agricul-
ture, and cutting the sinews of industry. 1

II. The senate and the knights were orders of the
Roman people distinguished by certain n Function,
political privileges from the mass of their unde' u'c ate
fellow citizens. The former of these I " public '
have ventured to designate as the executive com-
mittee of the people, whom in some sense it repre-
sented : for under the republic to have exercised any
of the magistracies to which the people elected
constituted a claim to admission into its ranks. It
transacted with dignity, despatch, and at least com-
parative privacy, many state affairs which could not
be confided to a capricious and turbulent assembly.
It conferred with foreign envoys, and when war was
declared by the joint resolution of the senate and
people, it was by the compact energy of the senate
alone that hostilities were conducted. The senate
appointed imperators and proconsuls, decreed them
their provinces, and granted or withheld the honours
of the supplication and the triumph. The same
hand held not only the sword of the commonwealth,
but its purse also ; it imposed taxes and contribu-

1 Suet. Oct. 42, 40. Comp. Mon. Aricvr. iii. 21 ; Dion, lv. 10, 20.

Digitized by Google

10

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxn.

tions of all kinds, and even the quaestors elected by
the people were the accountable agents of the senate . 1
The religion of the state, a political instrument
hardly less important than the legions or the treasury
itself, was subjected to the same ultimate control.
Measures to be submitted for the ratification of the
comitia were first discussed in this assembly. Above
all, the public safety was formally committed to
its guardianship, and at a crisis of unusual danger
the senate was authorized to suspend all ordinary
forms of law, and arm the consuls with irresponsible
powers.

Such were the principal cares of this august order
Augustus under the republic; and they were duly
dignit; of the repaid by the favour and reverence of the
osacr. people, the awe and subservience of foreign-
ers, the robe of honour by which its members were
distinguished, and the long array of places and offices
to which they might aspire . 2 Augustus, while he
owed his elevation to the popular interest in the
state, was anxious to raise up a barrier of wealth and
rank between himself and the spirit of democracy.
While he showed himself anxious to multiply in
many directions the public sources of profit and
dignity, he rigorously confined the number of the
senate to six hundred, the limit fixed before the civil
wars. He raised the property qualification to twelve
hundred thousand sesterces, equivalent to about ten
thousand pounds of our money . 3 In his censorial

1 Cic. in Vatin. 15.: “Eripueras senatui provinciae decerncmte po-
testatcm, imperatoris deligendi judicium, terarii dispensationem, quae
nunquam sibi pop. Romanus appetivit.”

2 Cic. pro Cluent. 56.: “ Senatorem qnerr non posse quod ea con-
dition honores petere ccepisset, quodque permulta essent ornamenta
quibus earn molestiam mitigare posset, locus, auctoritas, domi splendor,
apud exteras gentes nomcn et gratia, toga praetexta, sella cnrulis, in-
signia, fasces, exercitus, imperia, provinciae.”

3 Comp. Suet. Oct 41., with Dion, liv. 17., and the annotations of
the commentators. The ancient Roman law restricted the citizen’s
property in land to a few acres, and accordingly, though this sumptuary

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxn.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

11

capacity he ejected, as we have seen, the impover-
ished and the unworthy, and the appointments he
made, as far as appears, were carefully selected.
The emperors continued to exercise the appointment
to the senate exclusively ; but their practice became
gradually laxer. The admission of provincials to the
order was decried by many as a degradation ; but
more judicious observers remarked the advantage it
derived from the greater simplicity of such members’
tastes and the greater purity of their conduct . 1 But
the provinces at least were proud of the “ right of
senator ship,” which was thus formally conferred upon
them, and rejoiced to be connected by a closer bond
with the interests of their honoured mistress . 1

Augustus decreed that the senate should assemble
twice every month for the despatch of business, and
required that at least four hundred members should
be present at every sitting. In the sultry and pes-
tilential months of September and October he re-
leased them from this fatiguing service, except only
a smaller number chosen by lot, who were constrained
still to meet on the stated days. There Method of
must have been a large amount of business,
even under the empire, to occupy so many 4119 3en<Ue -
councillors so often and so constantly. The forms
indeed of the republican legislation were for the most

regulation was evaded by the occupation of unlimited tracts of public
domain, the census or valuation of his estate regarded his personal
effects also.

1 Tac. Ann. iii. 85.

2 These foreign senators were not only required to reside in Rome,
but forbidden to revisit their native country, except it were Sicily or
the Narbonensis, without special permission of the emperor. In the
time of the younger Pliny candidates for office were compelled to de-
vote a third part of their property to the acquisition of lands in Italy.

“ Now is the time to sell,” he exclaimed to his correspondents, when
Trajan promulgated this decree. “ Scin tu accessisse pretium agris,
prsecipue suburhanis? .... si poenitet te Italicorum praediorum
hoc vendendi tempus tam hcrcule quam in provinciis comparandi.”
Plin. Ep. vi. 19.

Digitized by Google

12

HISTORY OF THE ROMAJSS

CH. XXXII.

part observed : the consul or next superior magistrate,
in his absence, proposed the question of the day; the
opinions of the prince, the consulars, and the other
past magistrates, were asked in order, and their votes
were given by the ballot. The actual magistrates
were forbidden to record their suffrages. Julius Caesar
had appointed in his consulship that the proceedings
of the senate should be published, and these together
with the acts of the popular assemblies and the prin-
cipal events of the day were duly registered in the
acta diuma or journal of the city. But publicity
had no effect in eliciting the truth'; it was meant
rather to degrade the senators as the instruments
of government, than to elevate the tone of public
morality. Caesar himself, and after him Antonius,
had scandalously falsified the reports, and even
affixed the names of absent senators to their decrees
to give them more weight . 1 Augustus, we are told,
forbade this publication : it is more probable that
he merely exercised some discretion in the proceed-
ings he allowed to be divulged.* The usage .con-
tinued to exist, though it excited little interest or
remark, to the latest periods of the empire ; it is
attested by the historians of the third century of our
era, and by the preamble to the code of Theodosius
in the fourth . 3

1 See the just complaints of Cicero in his letters, ad Div. ix. 15.,
xii. 1., and Philipp, v. 4.

1 Suet. Oct. 35. Leclcrc (Journaur Remain*, p. 245.) supposes that
the “ acta temporum D. Augusti ” referred to by Pliny (H. N. vii. 1 1.)
are the record of the proceedings in the comitia, as distinguished from
those of the senate. I rather think the term comprehends all the
reports of public events promulgated in the official bulletin.

’ Sec for instance the textual citations of Vopiscus from the pro-
ceedings of the senate at the election of the'emperor Tacitus : Vopisc.
Tac. 3. seq., and the “Gesta in Senatu P. R in recipicndo codice
Theodosiano.” So usual was it to report the proceedings of the
senate, that a resolution, the publication of which was withheld, was
culled a “ Senatusconsultum taciturn:” see Capitolinus, Gordian. 12.,
who speaks of this as an ancient practice.

Digitized by Google,

ci'. xxxii-

ITMlEP. THE EMPIRE.

13

AmoDgthe most cherished instruments of govern-
ment used by Augustus was the distribution Dif ti nc t ion 0 r
of official business among the higher ranks th6 * !n ** 0 "-
of the citizens, especially the senators. He emplbyed
their industry in matters of petty interest, such as
might exercise their abilities without stimulating
their ambition. He taxed his invention to create new
offices, in order, as he himself professed, that more
persons might participate in the administration of
affairs . 1 The provinces which remained under the
control of the senate continued to be assigned by lot
to consulars and praetorians, while the salutary laws
which required a certain interval between the con-
sulship and proconsulship were now for the first time
really enforced. While however the substance of their
authority dwindled away, the honours and distinc-
tions of the senators sensibly increased. Thelati-
clave or broad purple stripe along the edge of the toga,
and the black sandals fitted with a silver crescent,
constituted the badges of their order. The best places
were allotted them in the theatre and the circus, and
they banqueted in the Capitol at the public charge.
The permission accorded in ancient times to the sons
of senators to sit with their fathers in the assembly
was revived, after long proscription, by the founder
of the empire. With the disuse of the functions of
the censorship, the senate, from an elected or nomi-
nated character, became eventually changed into an
hereditary peerage. Such it had undoubtedly become
in the fourth century of our era , 2 and it seems pro-
bable that the usage we have just noticed may have
had some share in producing the innovation. The
notion of hereditary right seems indeed to grow
spontaneously under the rule of the one or the few.

' Suet. Oct. 41 . : “ Quo plures partem adrainistrandas reipublic®
caperent nova officia excogitavit.” These offices will be specified
in another place.

* Cod. Theod. vL tit. 2. 8. (2.), xii. tit 1 . 58.

Digitized by Google

14

BISTORT OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxn.

It was soon applied to the imperial succession ; but
vehement were the struggles and bloody the revolu-
tions which occurred before that principle was fixed
in the descent of the throne.

It would be premature to examine in this place
the claims of the senate to appoint the

Claim of the , . . . 1 1 . . , . ,

senate to elect successor to the sovereign power, which it

the emperors. . , , , ° . * ,

continued to advance with more or less

success through several centuries. After the disuse
of the comitia of the curies, the senate seems to have

represented that patrician assembly, as most akin to
it in spirit and composition, and to have conferred
the imperium upon the magistrates in the ancient
form. The lex curiata or lex regia, by which this
act was effected, became the legal instrument of the
imperial appointment, and by this law, as we have
already seen, the prerogatives and exemptions of the
deceased emperor were solemnly transferred to his
successor. By the same instrument the acts of the
late ruler were duly confirmed, on no other principle
than that by which the senate of the republic had
ratified the proceedings of its imperators and pro-
consuls. We shall see in the sequel how the senate
presumed, in virtue of these traditional functions, not
only to confirm the appointment or succession of the
emperors, but even, when opportunity favoured, to
elect them of its own free choice. Such a stretch of

prerogative was hailed with acclamations by the
people, and regarded as an assertion of the majesty
of the law, though undoubtedly it was countenanced
neither by law nor prescription. But it was at least
a protest against the all-engrossing power of the
praetorians and the legions, and if the people had
been strong enough to control their own armies, it
would have become the regular and appointed me-
thod of transmitting the imperial authority.

The equestrian order had struggled to wrest from
the senate a share in the administration of the pro-
vinces, and the passions engendered by this rivalry

Digitized by Google M

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

15

liad rent the commonwealth asunder, while it armed
the champions of revolution with their most
effectual weapons. But when the oligar- andXKon.
chy fell, the instruments of its overthrow ° f ^ kn ' 8h, *‘
gained nothing by the change. The spoils of
the senate accrued to the emperor, and not to the
knights. The equestrian order continued, as under
the republic, to farm the revenues of the provinces,
a business which they found more lucrative than the
higher walks of government, shorn as they now were
of their irregular emoluments. The knights retained
their place among the classes from which the judges
were selected ; but this prerogative also, once so
fiercely contested, had lost most of its charms with
the checks imposed upon corruption. Nevertheless
the caresses lavished upon them by the emperors,
who rivalled in the arts of popular flattery the de-
magogues their predecessors, humoured their self-
importance, and kept them contented. The knights,
it was said, are the nursery of the senate : chosen
themselves, under the powers of the censorship, from
the noblest families of Borne, Italy, and the provinces,
it was from among them that the vacancies in the
higher order were supplied. The property required
for the knights was one-third of that demanded of
the senators. They were distinguished from the rest
of the citizens by the decoration of the golden ring,
and to the members of a superior class among them,
the emperor, after the example of the ancient censors,
presented a horse, as a symbol of military rank.
From early times the distinction of knighthood had
become hereditary in many families. Even the
native of an obscure Italian town could boast that
he inherited his rank through several generations . 1
But all the affection with which men regard an

’ Ovid, a native of Sulmo, could boast ( Trist . iv. 10. 7.) that he
was

"Usque a proavis vetus ordinis heercs."

Digitized by Google

16

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CII. XXXII.

honour derived from their progenitors, and all the
panegyrics of Cicero and compliments of the em-
perors, which continued to soothe the ears of the
knights of the empire, could not avail to maintain
the dignity of the order against the overwhelming
infusion of meaner blood, by which it was gradually
swamped. Its respectability was assured by no limi-
tation of number, and the favour of the emperors
continued to make the cheap distinction still cheaper,
till it lost almost all its attraction. In vain did an

imperial decree command the knights to rank next
in dignity to the nobility of the senate, at a time
when the wearing a golden ring was conceded even
to slaves upon manumission. 1

III. I pass on to the principal executive officers
m. e«cu- by whom the empire was administered, the
same generally in name as under the com-
empire. monwealth, the same in most of the out-

ward ensigns of authority, and even in their osten-
sible functions; yet widely different in the source
from which they derived their duties, and the spirit
in which they accordingly fulfilled them.

When the emperor first took his seat between the

The consul. consu ^ s in the senate-house, he pretended
e con.u .. ^ elevate himself as the most eminent of

private citizens to a level with the highest and most
honourable magistracy in the state. But the legiti-
mate majesty of the consulship dwindled away with
its substantial power, and the lustre he reflected as
sovereign ruler upon his assessors on either hand,
became in no long time the proudest distinction
remaining to them. Augustus continued to transact
the business of the senate through their agency.
They were his eyes, his voice, and his hands ; and
the most wary of his successors persisted in the same

1 Cod. xii. tit. 32.: “ Eqiiites Rom. secundum grtidum post clarissi-
matus dignitatem obtinere jubemus after a constitution of Valen-
tinian and Yalens. Comp. Digest, xl. tit. 10. L

Digitized by Google

CE. xxxil. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 17

prudent and moderate policy . 1 The Romans allowed
themselves to be deceived by the mere shadow of
authority which was still thrown over this cherished
magistracy, the earliest birth, and as they still fondly
deemed, the latest pledge of their freedom. While
they allowed its dignity to be prostituted, almost
without a murmur, to the mere nominees of their
actual rulers, while they acquiesced in its degrada-
tion by the process, which soon became habitual, of
transferring it month by month or even at shorter
intervals, from one imperial favourite to another,
that it should be absolutely vacant, for however brief
a space, shocked and distressed them, and it was cited
among the gravest offences of the most wanton of
their tyrants, that he deprived the state for three
days of its supreme magistracy . 2 The extraordinary
respect which the people still persisted in professing
for this almost empty title encouraged the empe-
rors to magnify its distinction as the most brilliant
their omnipotence could confer. From the time of
Tiberius they ceased to make even the show of an
application for the sanction of the tribes or senate
to their nominations. Neither political experience
nor military service was required as a qualification.
Ministers of the imperial household, who were ge-
nerally freedmen of foreign extraction, rhetoricians
and professors, men in short of any grade or charac-
ter who might recommend themselves to the monarch
by subserving his personal interests, were numbered
among the recipients of his most shining favours . 3

1 Comp. Tac. Ann. i. 7. : “ Cuncta Tiberius per eonsules ineipiebat
tanquam vetere republics et ambiguus imperandi ”

2 Suet. Calig. 26. : “ Consulibus oblitis dc natali suo edicere abro-
gavit magistratum, fuitquc per triduum sine summa potestato res-
publica.”

2 Juvenal, vii. 197.:

“ Si fortuna volet, fies de rhetore consul;

Si volet base eadem, fies de consule rhetor:”

an epigram which we also meet with in Pliny, Ep. iv. 11., and

VOL. IV. C

Digitized by Google

18

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. xxxir.

Even the consular ornaments, or personal insignia
of the office, served to content the candidates for
whom no room could be found on the curule chairs.
These ensigns were the same which tradition ascribed
to the kings of the infant state. The dignity of the
consuls was marked by the wreath of laurel on their
brow, the trabea or striped robe of white and purple,
in which they performed the most august ceremonies
of their national faith, and the guard of lictors bear-
ing the axes and rods in token of their summary
authority. Even in the decrepit ages of Byzantine
autocracy the Roman consulship was still qualified
as the noblest of human distinctions . 1 The year
continued to be named after these magistrates down
to the middle of the sixth century of our era . 2 Every
citizen was required to make way for them, and even
to dismount, on meeting them in the streets ; and
every other magistrate rose in their presence, and
lowered the point of his fasces in acknowledgment
of his own inferiority.

Besides presiding in the senate the consuls dis-
charged some judicial duties, not perhaps
very clearly defined or regularly adminis-
tered. The prajtors continued under the empire, as
under the republic, to stand ostensibly at the summit
of all civil and criminal jurisdiction. The city and
foreign praetors, the chief commissioners of the board,

The proctors.

may have been derived by both writers from a common source : “ Ex
professoribus senatores, ex senatoribus professores.”

1 Julian, Chat. iii. : TipAj koS' airr^v rwv SMaiv wdmuv ampopivTi
irpbs iraaav Icrxvv ivrlfifioTros tlvai Soicel. Even at the moment of the
dissolution of the western empire the Gothic historian Jomandes
speaks of the consulship with admiration, as “Sumraum bonum pri-
mumque in mundo decus.” De la Bleterie, M. A. 1 . 1 . xxiv.

2 That is to the year 541, in the reign of Justinian. See Gibbon,
D. fy F. c. 40.; Procop. Anecd. 26. The emperors however still con-
tinued to assume the title of consul at their accession pro forma. The
last who is known to have borne it is Heraclius, on whose sole ex-
isting coin we read ERACAIO CONSUAI. Eckhel, Doctr. Numm.
viii. 333.

Digitized by Google

CHi XXXII*

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

19

continued to issue their edicts annually on their ac-
cession to office, and though forbidden to vary their
own procedure from the canon they had themselves
laid down, their successors were not found to conform
to it until the institution of the praetorian code, or
perpetual edict- of Hadrian. 1 The number of which
the praetors’ college consisted fluctuated according to
the caprice or policy of the emperors. Under the
commonwealth it had been raised from two to eight.
Caesar had appointed as many as sixteen ; but the
Romans seem to have objected to the degradation of
so high an office by this excessive extension, and
Augustus reduced the number to twelve. His suc-
cessor, Tiberius, raised it once more to the limits
fixed by the dictator, but bound himself at the same
time by a voluntary oath never to exceed them.
Besides dispensing justice themselves in Thc u(1Jccs
the tribunals, the praetors had the care of C) “
selecting judges for the trial of causes from the
qualified orders. These, as under the latest insti-
tution of the republic, were the senate, the knights,
and the aerarian tribunes : Augustus added a fourth
class composed of citizens of inferior census, who
were called ducenarii , as having a property of two
hundred thousand sesterces, and such were deemed

fit only to decide in cases of the most trifling
importance.

The censorship was extinguished in its ancient
form from the year 730, and its most im- Thc ^
portant duties were thenceforth discharged edn4«.d or *’
by the emperors themselves, at least to the r u “ e, ‘
time of Claudius, under the name of the prefecture
of manners. 2 The quaestors and aediles continued to
exist under the monarchy; but the quaestors were
subjected in the care of the treasury to the praetors’

1 The lex Cornelia, a.o. 687, compelled the prsetor to abide by his
own edict. Dion, xxxvi. 23.
s Dion, liii. 17., liv. 2.

c 2

Digitized by Google

20

HISTORY OF THE ROMAN'S

CH. XXXII.

control, to whom the judicial business of the sediles
was also transferred . 1 When the aedileship ceased to
be a step to the consulate and proconsulate, it lost its
attraction for the noblest and wealthiest of the sena-
tors, who no longer cared to contend for it in the
Field of Mars, nor to dignify it with lavish expenditure
in the circus. The fall of the tribunate might seem
still more humiliating. The emperors, champions
and representatives, as they professed themselves,
of the people, shrank from abolishing the cherished
symbol of popular independence. Some form of elec-
tion was still retained; after the time of Augustus
the senate may have supplied in this respect the
place of the centuries ; the right of veto on the
proceedings of the senate was at least in theory
allowed; and in the second century of the empire
the sentence of the praetor might actually be stayed
by the interposition of a tribune . 2 But the real
exercise of its awful prerogatives, except perhaps in
a few peculiar cases, was confined to the hands of the
master of the Roman people, to whom nobles and
commons equally bowed, whose pdwer to enact and
to forbid was in fact equally unlimited.

The institution of the prefecture of the city must
Th. prefect have dispelled any lingering delusions upon
of the cay. this subject. The Caesar was embarrassed

by the amplitude of the powers committed to him.
While his own hand sufficed to wield them during
his personal residence in the metropolis, he might
hesitate to restore them, on occasion of his absence,
to the various magistrates upon whose functions he
had encroached. The experiment of abandoning the
commonwealth to the control of its ancient officers had

» Dion, liii. 2.: Suet. Oct. 36.

5 Compare Plin. Epp. i. 23., ix. 13. The attempt which certain
of the tribunes made to extend their jurisdiction beyond the one
mile limit was unsuccessful Tac. Ann. xiii. 28. ; Hoeck, Gesch. des
EOm. Retcha, i. 1. 412.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMTIBE.

21

demonstrated the need of a single central authority,
and the commission with which Agrippa had been
temporarily invested had proved both popular and
successful. On the restoration of public tranquillity,
Augustus seized the opportunity to perpetuate the
instrument which had restored it. The ancient title
of prefect of the city furnished him with a suitable
republican appellation. Even in the time of the
kings, such an officer, it was said, had been deputed
to preside in the city during the sovereign’s absence
on the frontiers. But the consuls had been permitted
to delegate their authority in a similar manner until
the creation of the praetorship provided them with a
more regular substitute. Thenceforth the functions
of the prefect had been confined to the special
occasion of the celebration of the Latin feriae, when
he superseded even the highest ordinary magistrates,
and convened the senate in the place of the consuls
or tribunes . 1 Augustus breathed life and activity
into this antiquated shadow. The prefect of the city
became his most efficient executive minister, and his
deputy for domestic appeals . 2 While himself present
in Eome, he might limit this officer’s functions to
jurisdiction between masters and slaves, patrons and
clients, wards and guardians, usurers and creditors ;
to the superintendence of the city police and the
general care of the public tranquillity ; but whenever
the emperor abandoned the helm of state, tlie duties
of the prefect swelled to still ampler dimensions ; he
was empowered to forbid access to Rome to any citi-
zen he might deem disaffected, and even to deport
him for safe custody to an island. His direct su-
perintendence readied one hundred miles every way
from the city. Augustus was careful to select the
most illustrious personages to confer splendour upon

1 Aul. Gell. xiv. in fin.

Digitized by Google

22

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxir.

an office so conspicuous. The first of his prefects
was Messala, who had refreshed his republican laurels
with triumphs gained under the imperial auspices;
and when the friend of Brutus and Cassius renounced
the charge as too harshly opposed to public freedom,
it was bestowed upon Statilius Taurus. Thenceforth
the emperors professed to make the prefecture the
last and highest step in the career of civil honours,
though occasions were not wanting in which it was
sullied by the appointment of the basest of their
creatures . 1

It was the policy of the emperors, first devised
by the prudence of Augustus, to extend
mJrSdpu 0 and multiply the functions of the Roman
municipality. Miecenas, it was said, had
counselled his master to furnish public occupation to
as many of the citizens as possible, in order to attach
them to the government by interest, and at the
same time give them experience in affairs. To
divert their restless : energies into safe and useful
channels might be deemed of no less importance.
But the time had in fact arrived when the vast
amount of civil business required more regular and
systematic management; when the complexity of
public affairs had outgrown the simple agency of
independent administration. The Romans had ar-
rived at the era of centralization, and it was no
longer possible to leave to private zeal or muni-
ficence the care of their most important and pressing
interests. Accordingly, from henceforth the irre-
gular vigour of individual enterprise was superseded
by the organized industry of boards and commis-

1 See the pretended advice of Maecenas in Dion, lii. 26. 37. The
same counsellor is there made to recommend the appointment of the
emperor’s freedmen to the highest stations, as a measure of security ;
a suggestion which faithfully represents the practice of the later
Caesars, but was repugnant to the spirit of the selections made by
Augustus. Statilius was succeeded in the prefecture by I. Piso.
Tac. Ann. vi. 10.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

23

sions. The care of the public buildings furnished
occupation for one body of commissioners ; the
charge of the roads, of the aqueducts, of the navi-
gation of the Tiber, of the distribution of grain, of
senatorial and equestrian scrutinies, for several
more . 1 It may be presumed that these various
services were compensated from an early period by
fixed salaries, and the government strengthened by
the expedient, so commonly applied in modern
times, of retaining in its pay a host of interested
officials. The history indeed of official remuneration
is an obscure one. It was the first principle of the
ancient free-states that public service should be
esteemed an honour and not a burden. The gene-
rous citizen strained every nerve to compete for the
glorious privilege of lavishing his substance for his
country’s advantage. But if such was the theory,
more vulgar interests were found to operate practi-
cally. At one time the administration of office
furnished many sources of irregular emolument ; at
another the state itself compelled the services of
reluctant citizens, and exacted from them not only
the labour of their heads or hands, but ample
pecuniary contributions also. The regular payment
of fixed salaries, at least to the higher class of civil
administrators, was unknown perhaps in Borne until
the time of Augustus, nor indeed can it be clearly
traced even to that era. Undoubtedly the chief
magistrates continued throughout the imperial
period to serve without official remuneration, and
the system of municipal administration in the
provinces was strictly moulded, in this as in many
other respects, upon the metropolitan model. The
burden of municipal office became, in the general
impoverishment of later ages, odious and intolerable.
The legislation of the emperors teems with notices

* Suet. Oct. 41.

Digitized by Google

24

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

of the desperate efforts their subjects made to escape
from it. It may be doubted indeed whether Augus-
tus himself introduced the payment even of such
inferior offices as have been just described ; but we
may fairly presume, from the advice attributed by
Dion to Maecenas, that such was the established
practice at least in the second century.

The term salai'y itself is derived, as is well known,
from the composition made by the state
me«of for the provision, or, as its simplest
element, the salt of the proconsuls, who
governed the provinces in its behalf.' Some capi-
talist of the city, or the province itself, generally a
Roman knight, undertook, for the consideration of
an allowance from the treasury, or more commonly
perhaps of the proceeds of a local toll or tribute,
to supply the table, the attendance, the public
expenditure in games and spectacles of the governor
throughout his term of office. The farmer of the
salary made his own profit out of this bargain; but
the proconsul was not humiliated by touching the
money of the state; his emoluments were derived
from other and doubtless far less reputable sources.
But thus, at least under the free-state, the principle
of public service was preserved intact. 1 * * 4 Augustus
introduced a more convenient arrangement, which
was meant, we may presume, to operate as a safe-
guard to the interests of the provincials. Hence-
forth the proconsul was to farm his own salary.
The sum supplied to him was still nominally as-
signed for the maintenance of his state ; but he was

1 Strictly speaking, vatarium is the proconsul’s outfit on going to

his province, talar ium the composition for his expenses in it.

1 It should be observed, however, that the provinces were required

to furnish the proconsuls with a certain amount of corn at a low price
( frumentum astimatum ); and that few of these governors refrained
from accepting an additional gratuity under the title of frumentum
honorarium. See Cic. in Pison, 35. Here was a wide opening for
extortion.

Digitized by Google

cn. xxxii.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

25

not required to account to his employers for the sur-
plus he might extract from it by judicious economy.
We may trace in this new arrangement a curious step
in the direction of regular official payment, and of
the clearer and perhaps purer ideas of official duty
connected with it.

Public service has thus its three stages. In the
first the expense and burden are compen-
sated by the honour or indirect advantage : ° f

in the second it is furnished with a salary comu *'
or provision for the liquidation of its contingent
charges : in the third it is directly requited by so
much wages for duties performed. Under the im-
perial government these wages were sometimes paid
in money, and sometimes partly in the maintenance
by the state of the equipage suitable to the appoint-
ment . 1 Remuneration by fees, so common a feature
in the public economy of modem times, seems to be
the resource of governments which, having no fixed
revenues of their own, cannot undertake to defray
regular salaries from a fluctuating public income.

1 Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 42. The enumeration of the objects pro-
vided is trifling and ludicrous from its minuteness and at the same
time its meagreness. The proconsul was required to restore on the
cession of his province the pair of horses, pair of mules, the single
cook and single muleteer which had been furnished him. This edict
of Alexander Severus may be compared with the far more liberal
allowances made in certain instances mentioned in the Hist. Aug.
Scr. Claud. 1 5., Prob. 4. Our curiosity to learn the ordinary amount
of the proconsul’s salary is completely at fault. The allowances
above mentioned refer to special cases. At the beginning of the
third century the governors of Asia and Africa seem to have re-
ceived a million sesterces, about 8000/. Dion, lxxviii. 22. The pro-
curators in the imperial, who corresponded to the quasstors in the
senatorial provinces, were arranged in classes, called ducenarii, cen-
tenarii, or sexagenarii, according as the}’ received 200,000, 100,000,
or 60,000 sesterces (1600/., 800/., 480/.). Dion, liii. 15.; Capitol.
Pertin. 2. The sum which Piso claimed for his vasarium, when he
went into Macedonia, was centies octogies=-\44,000l. Cic. in Pison.
15. This large sum may have been meant to defray the whole ex-
pense of the proconsul’s retinue, and perhaps to cover some military
charges also.

Digitized by Google

26

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CU- XXXII.

But the governors of the Roman province were
allowed to demand certain honorary emoluments.
The principle that the proconsul’s table should he
maintained by the province or city in which he
sojourned gave occasion for certain arbitrary requi-
sitions of com, commuted no doubt for money, which
in the third century were found to require the di-
rect interference of the emperor. Severus and Cara-
calla affected to regulate, with elegance perhaps,
but certainly with little precision, the measure of the
gratuities which might be qgpected from a decorous
hospitality : as regards such compliments, they said,
it is barbarous to refuse them altogether, but in-
decent to accept everything that is offered every-
where, and from everybody . 1 But with this impor-
tant and vague exception, the acceptance of presents
from the provincials was ostentatiously forbidden.

Nevertheless, although the presence of a proconsul
office of the with a numerous retinue was a considerable
procon.uij burden to the province in which he resided,
the show and splendour of his court caused an outlay
which seems to have been universally regarded as an
important element in its economical prosperity. The
entertainments he dispensed attracted great numbers
to the immediate sphere of his lavish expenditure ;
and the cities through which he was accustomed to
make his progress, claimed and extorted an imperial
decree to forbid him to vary the route by which he
reached his destination. Thus we find, for instance.

1 Dig. i. tit. 16. 6. 3.: “ Noe vero in totum xoniis debet abstinere
proconsul sed modum adjiccre, ut neque morose in totum abstincat,
ncque avare modum xeniorum excedat. Quam rem divus Severus
et imp. Antoninus elegantissime epistola sunt moderati, cujus epistolae
verba hsec sunt: quantum ad xenia pertinet audi quid sentimus.
Vetns proverbium est, oCrc irdvra, oUrt iravrirt, ofire irapa irdvri dv. . .
Et quod mandatis continctur, ne donum vel munus ipse proconsul
accipiat .... ad xcniola non pertinet, sed ad ea quae edulium ex-
cedant usura.” This title of the Digest is taken from a treatise of
Ulpian, de Officio Proconsulis, circ. A. D. 210.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

27

that the province of Asia demanded that its governor
should arrive, not by the way of the Hellespont, but
always by sea from Greece or Italy, and make his
first halt at Ephesus . 1 The proconsul indeed was
sent abroad to hold a mimic court, and reflect an
image of the magnificence as well as the majesty of
the conquering republic. He received, at least in
the frontier provinces, a numerous army from the
hands of his predecessor , 2 and during the term of his
office he directed all his movements with no superior
control, only with the risk of his acts being disavowed
by the senate at the instance of some political
opponent. Nor did such a disavowal bring with it
any other inconvenience than the consequent rejec-
tion of his claim to the honours of a supplication or
a triumph. In the summer, as long as there were
any active enemies within or beyond his borders, he
generally employed himself in military operations.
In the winter he resorted successively to the principal
cities of his government, which were designated by
the title of conventus, as the central spots to which
all the public business of the surrounding districts
was brought for his adjustment. The proconsul
exercised the full military imperium not only over
the enlisted soldiers, but over the whole body of the
provincials, whom from the force of old associations
the republic could not learn to regard in any other
light than as her conquered enemies, requiring the

1 Dig. i. tit. 16. 4, 5.: “ Qusedam provinci* ctiam hoc habent, ut
per mare in eas proconsul veniat, ut Asia scilicet .... proconsuli

necessitates! impositam ruv ^njrpoiroAfW ' , t<ptaov attingere

Magni enim faciunt provinciales servari sibi consuetudinem istnm
et hujusmodi prerogatives. ” Cicero came to Ephesus on his way
to Cilicia, and the younger Pliny on his way to Bithynia, Ep. x. 17.
Cicero charges it as a crime on Vatinius that he did not take the
prescribed route : in Vat. 5.

* Under the republic a proconsul could sometimes venture to
baulk his successor by disbanding the legions and rifling the
magazines before his arrival. See the story of Mctellus in Val.
Max. ix. 3. 7.

Digitized by Google

28

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

constant coercion of the sword. He also presided in
the tribunals, and issued an edict, at the commence-
ment of his career, like that of the praetors, by which
he bound himself to administer justice. The claims
of the usurer and the tax-gatherer constituted perhaps
the most pressing matters for his adjudication. By
means of his quaestors he raised the tributes and tolls
demanded by the state ; he was attended by a host
of secretaries, notaries, heralds, lictors, physicians
and augurs ; 1 his train or cohort was swelled by a
number of young nobles, aspirants to place and
favour, who were sent by their friends to receive
under his auspices their first initiation in the mys-
teries of public service. As long as the strict law
of the republic was enforced, which limited the
tenure of provincial government to a single year,
the ' proconsul was forbidden to take his wife with
him on his foreign mission, which was regarded
rather in the light of a campaign than of a civil
employment. But when that restriction was relaxed,
and the proconsulate extended, as was usual under
the emperors, to five or even more years, this rigid
military abstinence was no longer enforced. The
cupidity and licentiousness of the women, who now
followed their husbands to the provinces, gave
occasion for just complaint, and the question of
restoring the ancient discipline was agitated in the
senate on a memorable occasion.’ It was then deter-
mined, not unwisely, perhaps, that the balance of
evil inclined on the other side ; and the indulgent
decree of a later period, which allotted to an un-
married officer a special sum for the maintenance of
a concubine, consulted perhaps the domestic happi-
ness of the provincials rather than the comfort, as it

1 Cic. il in Verr. il 10.: “Comitcs illi tui delecti inanus erant
tuai ; pnefeeti, scribas, niedici, accensi, haruspices, prsecones man us
crant tuse.”

’ Tac. Ann. iii. 32. Comp. Juvenal, vlii. 129.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

29

pretended, of the officer, himself . 1 But though the
military commander was supreme in the province,
his concern did not descend to the control of all its
internal arrangements. While the proconsul and
his retinue were regularly sent from Home to main-
tain obedience and enforce the public dues, the sub-
jects of the state were permitted to retain some-
thing more than the shadow of domestic government.
The Roman colonies enjoyed a municipal
constitution, administered by a senate and inSSm, : n
officers of their own appointment ; and this c pr ° T nc s
local arrangement was gradually extended under the
first emperors to the provincial cities generally. The
duumvirs of the foreign community corresponded to
the consuls, the decurions to the senate of Rome ;
their duties were confined for the most part to
devising and executing regulations of police, levy-
ing contributions for local purposes, and deciding
suits of small amount. These functionaries enjoyed
various important immunities ; they were relieved
from liability to military service, and exempted from
torture and corporal punishment. Two members of
each decuria were sent to Rome to watch over the
interests of their constituents at the centre of govern-
ment. The decurions were permitted to farm the
local revenues for the state ; but in the decline of
the empire this privilege ceased to be a source of
emolument ; they were made personally chargeable
by the governors with the amount of the local tax-
ation, and the honour of their office degenerated into
an intolerable burden. In the decay of society and
civilization this institution had no effect in keeping
alive any sentiments of patriotism or independence ;
but it fostered undoubtedly a mechanical aptitude

1 Lamprid. Alex. Sev. 42.: “Si uxores non haberent, gingulas
ccncubinas, qnod sine his esse non possent” But Ulpinn pro-
nounced it expedient that wives should not accompany their
husbands.

30 HISTOBY OP THE HOMANS ch. xxxil.

for self-government, which survived the crisis of the
barbarian invasions.

The division of the provinces into imperial and
senatorial made by Augustus was no abrupt

Divuion of . ° » 1

the provinces innovation, but only a modification of an
ami sena- arrangement previously existing. Under
the early republic the provinces had ge-
nerally been governed by propraetors, and it was
only on the occurrence of a particular emergency
that one of the consuls, or a consular, was sent with
the title of proconsul, to take the command. Hence
arose a distinction between the more tranquil pro-
vinces, which were ordinarily praetorian, and those
in which large armies were maintained, to which
was assigned the designation of proconsular. The
emperor was glad to build upon these legitimate
foundations. His proconsular potestas gave him
special authority on every frontier of the empire,
and in every district where the temper of the natives
themselves required the control of a strong military
force. The officers whom he appointed to take
charge of these provinces were strictly his military
lieutenants ; he selected them from any rank and or-
der of the state, and as they were seldom consulars
they did not obtain as a class the title of proconsuls.
On the other hand the senate, acting on the part of the
sovereign people, generally selected its highest ma-
gistrates for the government of its own provinces : its
governors held, superior rank, and received perhaps
ampler salaries than those of the emperor’s appoint-
ment ; and they were distinguished by a retinue of
twelve lictors, while their rivals were required to
content themselves with half that number. Never-
theless while Augustus resigned one half of his vast
dominions to the direct control of the senate and
people, he continued to watch with considerable
jealousy over the exercise of this co-ordinate power,
and claimed eventually the right of intruding even

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

31

into the senatorial provinces a legatus of his own to
curb the independence of the proconsul. In one or
two cases, when a senatorial province assumed a
greater political importance, he negotiated an ex-
change with its patrons ; and his successors ultimately
engrossed the whole of the appointments, and united
the entire Roman empire under their undisputed
sway. Dependent and tributary potentates were
uniformly subjected to the supervision of the im-
perial officers . 1

IV. The permanent institution of the emperor’s
proconsular authority naturally led to the Estnbiiih-
perp'etuation of the military establishment, iwing*'
or, in modem phrase, the standing army “ my ‘
of the empire. Originally the legions had been
raised for special services, and disbanded at the
conclusion of each campaign. When the wars of
the republic came to be waged at a greater distance
from the city, and against the regular armies of
Greek or Asiatic potentates, the proconsular levies
were enrolled for the whole period of the contest in
hand. In ancient times Rome secured every petty
conquest by planting in the centre of each conquered
territory a colony of her own citizens ; but when her
enemies became more numerous, and her frontiers
more extensive, it was necessary to maintain her
communications in every quarter by military posts,
and the establishment of permanent garrisons. The
troops once enlisted for the war could no longer be
discharged on the restoration of peace. The return
of their imperator to the enjoyment of his laurels
in the city only brought another imperator, whose
laurels were yet to be acquired, to the legions of the
Rhine and the Euphrates. The great armies of the
provinces were transferred, with the plate and fur-
niture of the pnetorium, the baggage and materials

1 Strabo, xvii. in fin.

Digitized by Google

32

HISTORY OF THE BOHANS

cn. xxxil.

of the camp, from each proconsul to his successor.
The legions came to be distinguished by certain
numbers, indicating the order of their enlistment in
the eastern or western division of the empire re-
spectively, or by special designations of honour, such
as the Martia, or the Victrix. With their names or
numbers the particular history of each was duly re-
corded, and some of them became noted perhaps
for a peculiar character and physiognomy of their
own. The principle of permanence thus established
to his hand, Augustus carried it out systematically,
and extended it from the provinces to Home itself.

He instituted a special service for the
roJVtX- protection of his own person, in imitation
g iirri ;n of of the select battalion which kept watch
round the imperator’s tent. These praetorian
guards were gratified with double pay, amounting to
two denarii daily , 1 and the prospect of discharge at
the end of twelve years, while the term of service for
the legionaries was fixed at sixteen . 2 They were re-
cruited from Latium, Etruria, Umbria, and the old
Roman colonies of central Italy exclusively. They
were regarded accordingly as a force peculiarly na-
tional, nor when reminded of this distinction were
they insensible of the compliment . 3 * * * * 8 But the emperor
did not entrust his security to the Italian troops only.
Besides the praetorian cohorts he kept about his
person a corps of picked veterans from the legions,
a few hundreds in number, together with a battalion

1 These soldiers received nominally twenty ases, but in reality

two denarii, which at this period were actually eqnal to thirty-two

ases. Plin. H. N. xxxiii. 13.

J There is a discrepancy on this point between Tacitus and Dion.

Augustus probably fixed the proetorian’s term at sixteen years,
which was afterwards reduced to twelve, when the former length of

service was required of the legionaries. Comp. Tac. Ann. i. 17.;

Dion, lv. 23.

8 Tac. Hist. i. 84. Otho addresses them as “Italia* alumni et
Romana vere ju vent ns."

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

33

of German foot soldiers, and a squadron of Batavian
horse . 1 Csesar had employed these barbarians, dis-
tinguished for their personal strength and courage,
on the wings of his own armies, and his successor
may have placed his confidence in them on account
of their tried fidelity. In addition, however, to these
household troops, the whole number of which did not
exceed five or six thousand, Augustus first introduced
a regular garrison into the city, consisting of four
cohorts of fifteen hundred men each, which were also
levied exclusively in Italy . 2 He established no per-
manent camp or fortress to overawe the capital. The
soldiers were billeted on the inhabitants, or lodged
in the public edifices : they were always at hand to
repress tumults and preserve the peace of the city,
when the stores of grain ran low, and the prevalence
of tempests on the coast menaced it with prolonged
scarcity. But the ordinary police of the streets was
maintained by an urban guard, named Vigiles or the
Watch, seven hundred of whom sufficed for the ser-
vice. The whole armed force of every description
employed in the city might amount to twelve or
fifteen thousand men.

Augustus disbanded the unruly multitudes who
had crowded into the service of the great rayand
military chieftains of the civil wars. He ^ h e ° 0 ' fth(
strained every nerve to gorge them with kgionari '‘-
the largesses, for which alone they would forego the
periodical plunder of unoffending cities, in which
their leaders had been compelled to indulge them.
But while they were reposing upon their estates, or
rioting with their profuse gratuities, he speedily re-
modelled his military establishment, and equipped
a force of twenty-five legions for the defence of the
empire . 3 He fixed a reasonable scale of pay for

1 Suet. Oct. 49. ; Dion, lv. 24.

1 Tac. Ann. iv. 5. ; Hut. iii. 64. ; Dion. 1. c.

* This was the number of the legions in the reign of the third of

YQL. IV. D

Digitized by Google

34

HISTORY OP THE ROMANS

CD. XXXII.

every armed man in his service, from the rank and
file of the cohorts to the lieutenant of the empe-
ror vnth proconsular rank. The proconsular armies
were maintained and paid by the machinery of the
government in the provinces ; so that the emperor,
without being ostensibly the paymaster of the le-
gions, did in fact, through his lieutenants, hold the
purse upon which they depended. We have seen
how incompetent we are to state the salary of the pro-
vincial governor, nor can we estimate the pay of the
various grades of officers. We only know that the
simple legionary received one denarius daily, a sum
which may equal eight pence half-penny of our
money. A part of this sum was stopped for his arms,
implements, and accoutrements; but he retained
perhaps a larger proportion of it than the pocket
money of the British private, and the simple luxuries
of the wine shop were cheap and accessible. Mar-
riage was strongly discouraged, and generally for-
bidden in the Homan ranks, and the soldier’s allow-
ance was perhaps chiefly expended in averting the
blows of the centurion’s vine-staff, and buying
occasional exemption from the fatigues of drill and
camp duty. 1 If we are justified in drawing an in-
ference from the proportion observed in a military

the Csesar?, Tiberias. Tac. Ann. iv. 5. It would be prematuro to
specify here the disposition of this force in the various provinces as
it stood at the period referred to by the historian.

' Tacitus gives us a curious glimpse of Homan camp-life in his
account of the sedition of the Pannonian legions, a. d. 767 (Ann. i.
16. seqq,). The soldiers complained of the postponement of their
discharge, the irregularity of their pay, the charges made upon it
for arms and equipments, and the intolerable severity of their petty
officers. The prohibition of marriage is expressly affirmed by
Dion, lx. 24. Comp. Herodian, iii. 25.; Tcrtull. Ex A. Castit. 12.,
but this restriction must not be understood to apply to the superior
officers. There are also some passages in Livy which can hardly bo
reconciled with a constant and entire prohibition. Women were
strictly forbidden to follow the army or enter the camp. Seo
Lipsius, de Mil it. Horn. v. 18. This regulation seems to have been
relaxed in later times. See Cod. v. 16.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

35

largess in the time of Caesar, we may conjecture that
the centurion reoeived double, and the tribune four
times, the pay of the legionary . 1

The full complement of each of the twenty-five
legions was six thousand one hundred foot, NumbCT , of
and seven hundred and twenty-six horse ;
and this continued, with occasional vari- tttbIishment -
ations, to be the strength of the legion for a period
of four hundred years . 2 The cohorts were ten in
number ; and the first, to which the defence of the
eagle and the emperor’s* image was consigned, was
nearly double the strength of the others. These
brigades became permanently attached to their
distant quarters: in later times the same three
legions occupied the province of Britain for two or
more centuries. They were recruited ordinarily
from the countries beyond Italy ; in the first instance,
from the Roman citizens in the provinces. But
even while the rights of citizenship were extended,
this restriction was gradually relaxed ; and instead of
being the requisite qualification for admission to the
ranks, the freedom of the city was often bestowed on
the veteran upon his discharge. Numerous batta-
lions of auxiliaries, differently arrayed and equipped
from the legionaries themselves, continued to be
levied throughout the most warlike dependencies of
the empire, and attached to each legionary division . 3

1 Lipsius, de Mil. Rom. v. 16. But compare Juvenal, iii. 132.:

“ Quantum in legione tribuni
Accipiunt donat Calvin® vel Catien®;”

and Pliny, H.N. xxxiv. 6.: “Nee pudet (candelabra ASginetica)
tribunornm militarium salariis cmere.” The tribune’s pay, ac-
cording to the estimate in the text, would amount to about 50/. a
year; much less, I should imagine, than the sums thus loosely
indicated.

2 See Vegetius, ii. 6., who wrote under Valentinian, and de-
scribes the legion as it had existed from ancient times down to his
own days. But its numbers fluctuated considerably during this
interval.

1 Tac. Ann. iv. 5.

D 2

Digitized by Google

36

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxa.

It is generally computed that this force equalled in
number that of the legions themselves, and thus we
arrive at a total of 340,000 men, for the entire armies
of the Roman empire, exclusive of the battalions
maintained in Rome herself.

Augustus may be regarded as the founder of the
Marine e.u- naval power of the great military republic,
biuhment. had exerted indeed her accustomed

vigour on more than one occasion in equipping
powerful fleets, in transporting military armaments,
and sweeping marauders ‘from the seas ; but the
establishment of a permanent maritime force, as one
arm of the imperial government, was reserved for
the same hand which was destined to fix the peace
of the empire on a firm and lasting basis. While
the influence of Rome extended over every creek
and harbour of the Mediterranean, she had no rival
to fear on the more distant coasts of the Atlantic or
the Indian ocean. But experience had shown that
the germ of a great naval power still continued to
exist in the inveterate habits of piracy, fostered
throughout the inland seas by centuries of political
commotion. The Cilician corsairs had distressed the
commerce and insulted the officers of the republic :
the armaments of Sextus had taken a bolder flight
and menaced even the city with famine: a con-
juncture might not be distant when the commander
of these predatory flotillas would dispute the empire
itself with the imperator of the Roman armies.
Augustus provided against the hazard of such an
encounter by equipping three powerful fleets. One
of these he stationed at Ravenna on the upper, a
second at Misenum on the lower sea, a third at
Forum Julii (Frejus) on the coast of Gaul. The
two former squadrons amounted to two hundred and
fifty galleys each, the third to about half that
number. Besides these armaments he posted a
smaller flotilla on the Euxine, and established naval

Digitized by Google

CH, XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

37

stations on the great frontier rivers, the Euphrates,
the Danube, and the Ehine. 1

V. Under the republic, especially in its earlier
period, the objects of public expenditure
were extremely few and simple. The finance',
scanty supply of coined money which puinccVn-
circulated from hand to hand, no less than the common -

wcftlth.

the simple ideas of the primitive econo-
mists, combined to throw, for the most part, upon
private persons the charges which under more
refined systems of government are generally de-
frayed from the revenue of the state. We have seen
how throughout the civil departments of adminis-
tration, service, at least in the higher grades of
office, was rendered gratuitously. On the same
principle it was at first regarded as the citizen’s
duty to fight his country’s battles without pay, and
even to provide himself with his arms and accoutre-
ments. As long at least as he was on actual duty
on foreign soil, the warrior of the republic was
maintained by exactions levied upon the enemy
himself. It was not often that he was compelled
to fight within his own frontiers: under such dis-
astrous circumstances the state, we may suppose,
provided for him the simple fare requisite for his
sustenance; and the tributes of conquered lands,
paid, for the most part, in produce, were convenient
for this purpose. The charge of the public worship
was defrayed probably at first by spontaneous
offerings, and afterwards by special endowments.
The erection of the national temples was generally
the pious and popular undertaking of the wealthiest
and most illustrious nobles, who had acquired
perhaps a large share of the booty of successful
wars : the same source defrayed the cost of the great
military ways which were known by the name of the

1 Tac. Ann. iv. 5.; Hist. iii. 46.; Strab. iv. 1.; Suet. Oct. 40-

i

Digitized by Google

38

HISTORY OF TIIE ROMANS

CEt. XXXII.

chiefs who constructed them. The charge of the
public amusements was among the honourable
burdens of political life. In short, look where we
will through the various departments of public
expenditure, as they appear on the balance sheet of a
modern commonwealth, it is difficult to find any one
which constituted a permanent burden upon the
revenue of the state, according to the primitive
usage of the Roman republic. But in process of
time great innovations took place in the character of
military service. From the middle of the fourth
century of the city, the soldier received daily pay
during the short continuance of his annual cam-
paigns . 1 At a later period the large armies which
were kept up almost on a footing of permanence
even in Italy, and the immediate neighbourhood of
Rome itself, required a constant and heavy outlay
for their bare maintenance. The civil charges of
the commonwealth became at the same time more
extensive and systematic: while the heads of de-
partments, the consuls, praetors, and other high
magistrates, continued to act gratuitously, the vast
increase in public business was doubtless sustained
by a host of clerks and inferior officers, who de-
manded regular remuneration. The state main-
tained an army of slaves in the public works and
bureaux, whom it was necessary to feed and clothe
at the common cost, though their duties were of
course compulsory. All this administrative system
received its full development under the new regime
of Augustus. From his time we may observe that
the government had to provide resources to defray a
constant expenditure under the following general

1 We are expressly assured that the Eoman legionary first re-
ceived pay in the year d.c. 347, Liv. iv. 59.: “ Additum deinde ut
stipendium miles de publico acciperet, quum ante id tempus de suo
quisque functus eo munerc esset.” I cannot consent with Niebuhr
( Horn . Hist. ii. 438. Eng. trans.) to reject this explicit statement

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

39

heads: 1. Military charges, including the pay and
maintenance of the soldiers, arms and implements,
ships and fortifications : 2. Civil service ; i. e. salaries
of officers of justice, of revenue, and of administra-
tion: 3. Public works, embracing also the shows
and entertainments for the people : 4. Corn for
cheap or gratuitous distribution to the populace of
the cities. I know not how far ingenuity might be
carried in casting up the probable amount of these
various items of the imperial budget ; or what ana-
logies might be discovered to assist the investiga-
tion in the practice of modern communities 1 : but
a single consideration is sufficient to discourage any
attempt of the kind ; for we must remember that ah
these burdens were partly imperial and partly local ;
so that it is obviously impossible to form any ap-
proximate estimate of the annual claims on the me-
tropolitan treasury.

Light as were the burdens of the state in the early
ages of the republic, recourse was had to BoDT< . es of
more than one source of revenue to defray republic
them. These consisted of, 1. the public domaiul1 -
domain, a reserved portion of all conquered territory,
the entire produce of which was claimed by the state
as landholder. Ample as this patrimony might seem
to be as soon as the tide of conquest began to set
in steadily, and maintained as it was by increasing
conquests, it became in fact early exhausted. Im-
mense portions of it were transferred to the colo-
nies, and tract after tract was virtually alienated to

1 Dnreau de la Malle (i. 142.) has attempted a comparison be-
tween the cost of the French and Roman armies. It seems that
under Napoleon the entire military charge averaged 1000 francs
per man, and under Louis-Philippe, that is, in time of peace, about
750 francs yearly, equivalent to 40/. and 30/. of our money. At
the same rates the establishment of Augustus might cost from ten to
fourteen millions sterling. The military machines of the Roman
armies may be fairly set in point of expense against modern artillery.
Doubtless a large portion of this sum was charged upon the pro-
vincial revenues.

Digitized by Google

40

IIISTOKY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

private lessees. The agrarian laws of the tribunes
swept away vast territories, and the enactment of
Spurius Thorius in the year 642 abolished even the
trifling or nominal rent-charge which the state still
received upon them in acknowledgment of its real
dominion. 1 Finally, Caesar in his consulship de-
spoiled the republic of the territory of Campania,
the last portion of public domain then remaining
in the occupation of the state itself. 2 The old
system of claiming possession of all conquered
lands seems to have been thenceforth abandoned.
The patrimony of the Gauls, for instance, appears
to have been restored to them, subject, as will be
seen, to a land-tax imposed upon a different footing.
2. Thetri- 2. There was a direct contribution (tri-
butum ' butum ) levied upon the Roman citizens

themselves, according to the value of their property,
as estimated in the periodical census of the people.
When they had land, the tribute was levied upon
the land; when their possessions were limited to
personal effects, the assessment was transferred to
them. The conquest of Macedonia, A. u. 584, brought
a considerable mass of treasure to the coffers of the
state, and opened the prospect of fresh resources ;
the government now ventured to remit this contri-
bution altogether, or at least to relieve from it the
landed possessions of citizens throughout Italy. 3
o. The e». 3. The contributions from which the soil of

pit »ti°. Italy, and therewith all lands beyond the
sea which enjoyed Italian privileges, were thence-

1 Cic. Brut. 36., de Oral. ii. 70.

2 Dureau de la Malle, Econ. Polit. des Romains, ii. 430.

* Plutarch, JEmil. Paul. 38.; Cic. de Off. ii. 22. See vol. iii.
p. 170, note. The question whether this tribute was reimposed in
the time of Octavius, as asserted by Plutarch, is still debated. I am
satisfied with Savigny’s refutation. (See his RStn. Steuervcrfa&sung
with the additional remarks, 1842 and 1849, Vermischte Schrif-
ten, i., in opposition to Walter, who still maintains the affirmative.
ROm. Recht. p. 247 of the first edition.)

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

41

forth exempted, continued to press upon the pro-
vinces. Under the empire the principal source of
public revenue was the direct capitation, which com-
prehended both a land and a poll tax. Throughout
the provinces every subject who possessed land was
assessed thereupon at the rate generally of ten per
cent, on the annual produce in grain, and at five per
cent, on that of wine, oil, and fruits. 1 For the
purposes of revenue the whole soil of the province
was divided into portions designated as capita, heads,
of the estimated value of one thousand solidi, and
in one such fiscal unit several small properties might
be combined. 2 On the other hand, a single property
might of course be divided into several capita. 3
4. The classes which possessed no landed
property paid upon their personal effects :
in the case of mere labourers and even slaves, who
had no property of any kind, the capitation assumed
the form of a direct poll-tax, which was paid for them
by their employers or masters, who were supposed
to indemnify themselves by a deduction from their
wages, or the use of their manual service.

1 This proportion seems enormous, but the rate was probably
commuted in reality, for the convenience of all parties, very much

below its actual value.

3 Jus Civ. ante Justin. Nov. xcii. tit. 16.: “Scd et binos per
jugum vel miUenoa solidos remunerationibus deputandos.” The
solidus or aureus is computed equivalent in weight of gold to
twenty-one shillings one penny English money. This passage has
only recently been noticed. See Bureau dc la Malle, i. 304. ;
Savigny, Vermischte Schr. i. 174. Comp. Nov. xlii. tit. 3., and
Cassiodor. Variar. ij. 38. This division into capita lasted to a late
period of the empire, but the date of its institution is not known.
An important passage regarding the number of these capita is in
Eumenius, Grat. Act. in Constant. 11. But its meaning has been
grievously, and as it seems to me unaccountably, mistaken by
Gibbon (c. 17.) and others.

3 Hence the enigmatical lines of Sidonius Apollinaris, addressing
the emperor :

“ Geryoncs nos esse puta, monstrumque tributum ;

Hinc capita, ut vivam, tu mihi tolle tria.”

Digitized by Google

42

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

The direct revenue derived from these imposts

was levied in various ways. In many parts
p&yment, of the empire it was most convenient to
money, pertiy make the payment in kind, and the govern-

ill produce. ^ ^ o

ment was long in the habit of accepting
large consignments of corn and other raw produce
in place of current coin. These abundant stocks of
provisions never wanted consumers while the armies
of the republic were to be maintained on Roman
soil, and the urban populace, we may believe, was
always ready to receive the overflowings of the fiscal
granaries, whether the government chose to dole
them out at a cheaper rate, or to dispense them gra-
tuitously. We may conjecture that the fatal insti-
tution of regular distributions of grain originated in
this source. The revenues of the state could only be
paid in kind, and the ample stocks thus received
must sometimes either be given or thrown away. But
these occasional largesses would doubtless operate to
discourage husbandry within the narrow limits of the
lands to which Rome was the natural market ; and
accordingly we find that even in the first ages of the
republic the produce of the country round Rome
constantly proved inadequate to supply the popu-
lation of the city. Commissions were repeatedly
appointed to bring grain from more distant parts,
from the territory of the Etrurians and Volscians,
from Campania and from Sicily . 1 Even in much
later times many of the most fertile provinces, such
as Sicily, Sardinia, Spain and Africa, continued to
make their payments to the treasury in raw produce.
Egypt, on account of its superior abundance, was
mulcted in two tenths of its annual harvest. But in
other parts of the empire the publicani farmed the

1 See for instance Liv. ii. 9.: “Ad frunientura comparandum,
missi alii in Volscos, alii Cumas:” ii. 34. “dimissis ad frumentum
coemendum non in Etruriam mo do .... sed quocsitum in Siciliam
quoque.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

43

state revenues for a sum of money, •which they raised
in advance from the bankers and usurers of the
capital. With the advance of civilization this annual
payment of a tithe of the produce was found to be
an obstacle to improvement, and a heavy burden
upon industry. The provinces complained of the
mode in which it was still generally levied, and
were anxious to make their contributions in money.
The policy of Augustus was steadily directed to
effecting this arrangement. The construction of the
great map of the empire by Agrippa was the basis of
his financial operations. His surveyors measured
and valued the soil of the provinces, and divided it
into several classes, according to its capacity of bear-
ing fiscal burdens . 1 The census which he instituted
in Gaul and Palestine was in all probability con-
nected with these new arrangements . 2 But while
he still retained the payment in kind from some of
the provinces, such as Africa and Egypt, for the
special object of supplying the capital with com, he
changed the character of the impost from a tithe of
the produce to a fixed rent-charge upon the esti-
mated value of the soil . 3 In the decline of the pros-
perity of the empire, when cultivation fell again into
decay, it may be presumed that this change from
a variable to a fixed contribution was felt to be op-
pressive to the cultivator.

1 Hyginus, de Limit. Constit. (apod Goes, Script. Rei Agr. p. 198.) :
“ Agri vectigales multas habent constitutiones. In quibusdam
provinciis fructus partem constitutam prsestant : alii quintas, alii Sep-
timus ; nunc multi pecuniam, et hoc per soli scstimationcm. Certa
enim pretia agris constituta sunt, ut in Pannonia arvi primi, arvi
secundi, sylvat glandifera, svlvce vulgaris, pascui.”

2 Dion, liii. 22.; St. Luke, Evang. ii. 1.

3 Hoeck, R. G. ii. 209. The completion of this new system may
be fixed perhaps to the time of Augustus. Such is the opinion of
Savigny, referred to by Dureau de la Malle, ii. 437. But allowances
in kind to provincial governors, &c., arc occasionally mentioned at
a later period.

Digitized by Google

44

mSTOIiY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

Over the treasures concealed beneath the soil, the
Revenue state claimed the same paramount dominion
mines an4° m as over the produce of its surface. The
quamc*. mines and quarries throughout Italy and
the provinces were held in part by the Roman people,
and farmed, like the land-tax, by private speculators ;
in part conceded to individual proprietors, with the
reserve of a fixed rent for the privilege of working
them. The former class consisted principally of
such works as were already at? the time of the con-
quest either royal or public property. Thus it was
found in Macedonia that the state had monopolized
the gold and silver mines, and allowed its citizens
to work those of iron and copper only, and accord-
ingly the same distinction was maintained by the
conquerors . 1 So likewise the rich gold mines of
Spain, which the Carthaginians had worked for their
own profit, fell to the domain of the Roman people . 2
The contractors paid largely for their bargains, and
in return the state supplied them with the forced
labour of condemned criminals. In some cases it

employed in this ignominious service the reluctant
hands of its legionary soldiers . 3 Finally it bound
the population in the mining countries to the soil
itself, and while it allowed them to profit by their
industry, forbade them to desert the works or migrate
in search of other employment . 4 But the contractors,
not content with this premium on their undertakings,
speedily exhausted the richest veins by their care-
From r>h lessness or rapacity. The state adopted a
fl»hc k rib, and similar method in disposing of the salt
works, the fisheries and the forests. The
tolls and dues of cities, ports, roads and bridges, she

1 Liv. xlv. 29.

2 Plin. H. N. xxxiii. 31.; Diodor Sic. v. 38.

* Tac. Ann. xii. 20.; Strabo xiii. 3.

4 Cod. Tbcod. x. tit. 19. 15.: “ Metallarii qui ea regione deserta
in qua videntur oriundi ad externa migrarunt, indubitanter ad
propria: origin is stirpem laremquo revocentur.”

Digitized by Google

CUa XXXII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

45

grasped exclusively in her own hands, and enhanced
them as she saw fit. In the year 694 the tribune
Metellus Nepos carried the abolition of the customs’
duties throughout Italy, but they had been restored
by Julius Cassar, and his successors in power never
again dispensed with them. But their eyes were
constantly directed towards them, with the view
either of relieving their subjects by relaxing them, or
increasing their revenues by additional impositions;
and the attempt or even the wish to remit them
was counted among the highest merits of the most
beneficent of the emperors. 1 Besides these Cu(ton ,, an(J
customs’ duties the Roman government was dutie “-
ingenious in devising modes of extracting a profit
from the enjoyment of every kind of artificial luxury.
Articles of dress and furniture were assessed according
to their value ; the use of fountains, aqueducts, and
baths was subjected to an impost ; taxes were levied
upon the doors, windows, and even the columns of
the citizen’s mansion. It would be tedious
and even disgusting to specify all the ob- succession of
iects and employments from which the state enf«nchi«-

J . . , . 5 ' .... . meat of slaves.

deigned to draw a miserable income, and
we may now terminate this review of the sources
of the imperial revenue with noticing the compre-
hensive assessment of five per cent on the succession
of property, and on the sale and enfranchisement of
slaves. In conclusion I must observe that if it would
be futile to attempt an estimate of the sums required
to meet the current expenditure of the state, it would
be at least equally idle to enter into any calculation
of the amount of its taxation. It may be taken for
granted, however, that these two figures, if we could
ascertain them, would be found by no means to

1 Nero, in the promising period of his career, Trajan, Pertinax,
and Alexander Severus all distinguished themselves by their schemes
for lightening the indirect taxation of the empire. See Dureau de
la Malle, ii. 40.

Digitized by Google

46

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

correspond with each other. Many of the imperial
taxes were collected in the rudest and most expensive
manner, and considering the vast extent of the
taxable area, the infinite variety of taxable objects,
the ignorance and corruption of the fiscal agents,
and the imperfection of methods and communica-
tions, it would not be unreasonable perhaps to as-
sume that one-third of the public dues was never
collected, and one-half of the remainder strayed far
away from its proper destination.

The receipts from these various sources of taxation,
The public as f ar as they found their way to the pub-
the emperw’i he treasury in the capital, fell under the
fireus. management of certain officers responsible
to the senate as the representative of the nation
itself. The power which the emperor actually pos-
sessed over the sums thus collected was not per-
haps the less substantial because it was disguised and
indirect. But throughout the provinces which he
governed by his lieutenants, the proceeds were paid
into a separate chest, for the support of the imperial
government therein. The treasury of the senate
retained the old republican name of the oerarium ;
that of the emperor was denominated the fiscus, a
term which ordinarily signified the private property
of an individual. Hence the notion rapidly grew up,
that the provincial resources constituted the empe-
ror’s private purse, and when in process of time the
control of the senate over the taxes gave way to their
direct administration by the emperor himself, the
national treasury received the designation of fiscus,
and the idea of the empire being nothing else than
Caesar’s patrimony became fixed ineradicably in men’s
minds.

Such was the form of government constructed by
the genius of Augustus from the ruins of

0811 ’ ancient usage bequeathed to him by the
expiring republic. On more than one account it

Digitized by Google

J?

CH. XXXII. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 47

merits attentive consideration even in our days. This
indeed is not the place to enlarge upon the influence
it has exerted upon the social and political insti-
tutions of much later times, though it would be
hardly too much to assert that in some of its most
important features modern history dates its com-
mencement from the battle of Actium. At present
we are more concerned with reviewing the past, and
casting a final glance upon the tendencies of the
period which terminated with this crowning revolu-
tion. The course of events for the last
hundred years had indicated strongly and tendency of
plainly the necessity of monarchical insti- toward
tutions to preserve society in Rome. The
admission of the Italians to the franchise had opened
a career to new ideas, and the traditions of class and
family were rudely assailed by the interests of new r
men, and the influence of foreign manners. The old
Roman rule became, even within the circuit of the
seven hills, an anomaly and an injustice. The mass of
the citizens, reinforced by fresh elements, demanded
the overthrow of an oligarchical ascendancy, and
chose itself champions from among the great captains,
whom the unceasing warfare upon the frontiers pro-
duced in endless succession. At the same time the
narrow basis of the municipal government proved
inadequate to the control of colonies and provinces.
The increasing extent of the Roman dominion re-
quired a firmer rule and a more definite system
of government : nor could these be obtained except
by imparting permanence and independence to the
central authority. It was felt that the prolonged ex-
ercise of power could alone avail to effect the requi-
site reforms, and to superintend their development.
From the time of Marius every political leader,
with the sanction or rather at the instigation of his
followers, aspired in turn to permanent or protracted
authority. The successive consulships of Marius

Digitized by Google

48

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

and Cinna on the one hand, and the perpetual dic-
tatorship of Sulla on the other, show that both parties
tacitly acknowledged the necessity of extending the
term of the imperium, the annual resignation of
which had been formerly prized as the safeguard of
public freedom. The nobles hoped, by allowing a
transient usurpation, such as that of Sulla, or a
limited supremacy, like that of Pompeius, to con-
solidate their monopoly of power. The Marians, or
popular faction, already regarded the creation of a
popular sovereignty as the true solution of the state
of chronic disease to which the body politic was sub-
jected. The one party placed their reliance upon
a series of coups d’etat, while the other contemplated
without dismay the deliberate establishment of a ty-
ranny. It can hardly be doubted that both Lepidus
and Sertorius aspired to supreme power through the
triumph of their adherents. The champion of the
Iberians affected a regal deportment amidst his spu-
rious senate of Romans, provincials and allies. Caesar
himself was bred from his cradle among the traditions
of the great popular houses : from the first moment
that his eyes opened on the political condition of his
country he saw that his party wanted a leader, and
that, whomsoever they made the object of their choice,
they were resolved to carry him to the summit of
power. What the precise nature of that power
should be, what shape the coming monarchy should
assume under the moulding hands of the fortunate
conqueror, no sagacity perhaps could from such a
distance divine : but there can be no doubt that this
idea of monarchy, as the prize of success, was pre-
sented to the champion of the Marians from the first
commencement of his public career. Caesar’s position
differed materially in this respect from that
between the of his great rival. Pompeius, at the head
cnalr°uid of a proud and powerful oligarchy, could

pompous. on ]y direct, the vessel of the state under

forms congenial to the peculiar spirit of his party

Digitized by GoogI

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

49

To have aspired to the tyranny would have been to
cut himself off from the friends with whom he was
connected, and to expose himself helpless and un-
armed to the hostility of inveterate adversaries.
Even the officers of his legions, who were for the
most part nobles, would have drawn their swords
against him. But Pompeius did not shrink from
marching as far in the direction of autocracy as the
sentiments of his own allies would suffer him. He
accepted powers more than once, which contravened
the first principles of public liberty. The Manilian
bill constituted him a king in the provinces. His
sole consulship was a monarchical usurpation. He
fretted within the narrow limits to which the neces-
sities of his position restricted him, and he regretted
perhaps that he had cast in his lot with a jealous
aristocracy, which cramped on all sides his efforts to
rise to sovereignty. At one time he sought, in com-
bination with Caesar and Crassus, to attain supre-
macy in its despite ; at another he seems to have
betrayed its cause, in order to bring matters to ex-
tremity, and extort from it in the camp an authority
which it would not surrender to him in the city. It
may be conceded that he was slow and languid in
the prosecution of his schemes of self-aggrandise-
ment ; but it would be a mistake to ascribe to mo-
deration or good faith his forced acquiescence in
the restraints imposed upon him. The leader of an
oligarchy can never rise to such an elevation as the
champion of a popular party. He can never be
more than ’pr imus inter pares, the first man of his
order. He may be tempted indeed to desert his own
allies, and unite with his opponents ; and such was
the course on the brink of which Pompeius more than
once trembled. But the recollection of His early
career, his family connexions, perhaps even his
personal temper, rendered it impossible for the suc-
cessor of Sulla to become the leader of the Marians.

VOL. IV. E

Digitized by Google

50

HISTOBY OF TITE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

He drew back, though too late to recover the full
confidence of his own friends , and he left the only-
path which could lead to monarchy to be trodden by
his rival Caesar.

The same causes which tended to smooth Caesar’s
in the time road to power, operated still more strongly

•of Octavius A “ o

monarchy in favour of his successor in the next
indispensable, generation. The great vices of the ancient
government had been tyranny in the provinces and
aggression on the frontiers. To these was now added
anarchy at home. The horrors which followed upon
the overthrow of Caesar’s usurpation only proved
that monarchy was indispensable. But Caesar had
trusted too magnanimously to the people as the
basis of his sovereignty. However much they re-
joiced in his supremacy, in which their own seemed
to be reflected, the unarmed multitude were incap-
able of protecting it. Their hero discarded the
defence of the legions, and a few months witnessed
his assassination. Augustus learned circumspection
from the failure of his predecessor’s enterprise. He
organized a military establishment of which he made
himself the permanent head : to him every legionary
swore personal fidelity ; every officer depended upon
his direct appointment. He enlisted under his
banners the most vigorous and restless spirits of the
aristocracy; he subdued their energies to his will
by the restraints of discipline, the allurements of
honour, and the ideas of military devotion. By
engrossing the command of the national forces he
disarmed all competitors for power. But this was
not enough to secure his position. To thwart the
secret machinations of the disaffected it was requisite
to content the people, and to employ the nobility.
The elaborate system of civil administration devised
or perfected by his astuteness preserved the show of
republican government, while it amused the nobles
with a shadow of authority. The last century of the

Digitized by Google

OH. XXXII.

UNDER TEE EMPIRE.

51

commonwealth had witnessed the rale of an oligarchy
under the forms of a democracy : the imperial con-
stitution was the government of an autocrat under
the forms of an aristocracy. The names of the ancient
free state threw a transparent veil over an actual
despotism. The commander of the legions character of hii
was really the master of the citizens, and * uvereigu ‘ y -
the theory of a balance of effective powers was in fact
merely illusory. Yet traditional observance and in-
bred respect for forms and usages, the old national
habits of discipline, and the force of antique associa-
tions, all combined in practice to invest the H»nnonioM
senate and magistracies of Rome with a “emfnuS'
dignity to which the emperors themselves fieta^SSa
were wont obsequiously to bow. The con- re * imc -
stitution of Augustus, in which the senate was pre-
sumed to be the governing power of the state, may
be said to have lasted to the death of Pertinax, in
the year of the city 946 (a.d. 193). The military
revolution by which that emperor was overthrown
established the direct supremacy of the army for
several succeeding generations. But during the long
period of two hundred and twenty years, no emperor
assumed the reins of government without at least
commencing his career with an acknowledgment of
the senate’s paramount authority. Each despot in
succession professed to be guided by the traditions
and precedents of the republic. It is true that ca-
price, insanity, and personal fear impelled some of
the Ctesars to the wanton violation not only of the
rights of humanity, but of every political principle.
But in all such cases the transgression was branded
as a pqfdic crime. A Caligula, a Nero, a Domitian
and a Commodus, were denounced as traitors to the
commonwealth, and public opinion sympathized ac-
cordingly with their destruction. These instances
however were exceptional. The emperors were, for
the most part, deeply conscious of their moral sub-

E 2

Digitized by Google

52

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXII.

jection to the principles of an established order of
things. The majesty of their senate, the body which
transferred to them its own place and power, which
ratified their enactments, and which raised temples
and altars to their honour, impressed them with a
feeling of awe, such as the oaths and religious sanc-
tions of Christian coronations have too frequently
failed to command.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

' UNDER THE EMPIRE.

53

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Anticipations of constitutional monarchy. — Indifference of the mass
of the citizens on political questions. — Augustus studies to revive
the national sentiment. — His conservation of the patrician caste :
of the religious ceremonial. — Restoration of temples and special
cults. — Conservation of the rights of property : of matrimony. —
Legislative measures to encourage marriage. — Regulations for
the distinction of classes — Jurisprudence of Augustus. — Comple-
tion of his policy. — His personal popularity not disturbed by
occasional severity. —Disgrace and death of Cornelius Gallns. —
The jubilee of the Roman people. — Considerations on the authen-
ticity of the imperial history.

The noble fragment we have lately recovered of
Cicero’s treatise on Commonwealths breaks Thc Roman
off with a warm eulogium on a limited ^Sstituttonu
or constitutional monarchy, delivered in mon " uh r-
the person of the younger Africanus, but supposed,
not unreasonably, to convey the genuine sentiments
of the writer himself. There are certain points of
similarity in the position of these illustrious states-
men which, it may be presumed, did not escape the
observation of the political philosopher : both began
their career iu the interest of the people, and
finished it as champions of the oligarchy; both were
conspicuous in their opposition to demagogues ; both
denounced agrarian levellers ; both professed to form
themselves on the model of Roman antiquity, while
they cherished the arts and literature of Greece, and
boasted their insight into its national character.
Accordingly we may readily believe that the expe-
rience of Scipio actually suggested to him the
thoughts which are here ascribed to him by his

Digitized by Google

54

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxni.

later admirer. While the popular notion of mon-
archy among the Romans was simply that of a
despotic autocracy, and the traditional colours in
which they painted the tyrant Tarquin received a
deeper shade from their actual acquaintance with an
Antiochus or an Orodes, more reflecting minds
speculated, we may conceive, from an early period,
on the idea of a legal sovereignty, in which the
prerogatives of the people should be delegated, on
fixed principles, to a magistrate of its own choice.
If their experience could discover no distinct ex-
amples of this happy polity, their imaginations at
least were not idle; and such perhaps was the
shadowy conception they formed to themselves of the
original commonwealth of Rome, the free state of a
Romulus, a Numa, a Tullus, and a Servius. 1 How-
ever this may be, the most perfect government in
the view, we may believe, of the wisest of the
Romans, was a just combination of popular and
aristocratic authority, subjected by mutual concession
to the control of a single hand. It was the govern-
ment by centuries and curies, by a senate and a
king. We may easily imagine that many of the
most earnest thinkers of the later republic, — when
they saw every form and institution torn in pieces
by the furious ambition of demagogues and nobles,
when consuls vied with tribunes in trampling upon

1 Cic. de RepubL iii. 35.; “Hie Scipio, Agnosco, inquit, tuum
morem istum, Spuri, tam aversum a ratione populari. Sed quamquam
potest id lenius ferri quam tu soles ferre, tamen assentior nullum
esse de tribus his generibus quod sit probandum minus. Illud
tamen non assentior tibi proestare regi optimates. Si enim sapientia
cat quae gubemat rem publicam, quid tandem interest hac in unone
sit an in pluribus? Sed errore quodam fallimur in disputando.
Cum enim optimates appellantur nihil potest videri prsestabilius.
Quid enim optimo melius cogitari potest? Cum autem regis est
facta mentio occurrit animis rex etiam injustus: nos autem de
injusto rege nihil loquimur nunc, cum de ipsa regali republica
qutcrimus. Quare cogitato Romnlum aut Poinpilium aut Tullum
regem; forsan non tam illius te rci public® poenitebit.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

55

the laws, and imperators and triumvirs divided the
empire with their swords, — turned often with a sigh
to that pleasing ideal of a political Utopia, where
the king was moderate, the senate wise, the people
devoted, and the subjects satisfied.

But in the eighth century of the city it was too
late to realize any such dream as this. The Too lllte t0
most perfect system of checks and balances the'^mVof
would have fallen to pieces in the hands Auguatu ‘-
of a corrupt and degenerate people. The time for
a fair experiment on constitutional monarchy had
passed for more than a hundred years. The younger
Scipio, when he prophesied the downfall of his
country, was not unaware that even in his own day
the vices of the oligarchy had provoked the re-action
of democracy, and that their differences had become
too inveterate for equal arbitration. A few gene-
rations earlier, perhaps, Rome, free and victorious,
was still pure and honest enough to yield obedience
to authority, and might have offered to the world an
illustrious example of submission to a self-imposed
monarchy. But when once a Gracchus and a Drusus
had given the reins to democratical agitation, no
such change could transpire without exciting un-
appeasable ambitions, and plunging the state into
the direst convulsions. When the republic, after a
brief and restless interval, fell at last under the sway
of an armed chief like Marius or Cinna, the cha-
racter both of the men and of the times forbade the
hope that monarchy might avert the overthrow of
freedom. Nevertheless, as monarchy had now
become inevitable, better that Marius should have
been the first of the emperors than Caesar, while the
Roman mind was still vigorous, capable of receiving
a new impulse and assimilating another polity.
Such he undoubtedly would have been, and the
history of the empire would have dated from the
auspicious termination of the Social Wars, but for

56

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxui.

the successful reprisals of Sulla, and his resolute
reconstruction of the broken rule of the oligarchy.
This counter-revolution stayed abruptly the natural
progress of events, and delayed for fifty years the
doom of the commonwealth. But the system of
Sulla can only be considered as a political ana-
chronism. It had no rightful claim to exist ; it was
the monstrous creation of the sword, repugnant to
the views and aspirations of the great mass of
Romans and Italians, as well as formidable to the
provinces. It avowed its determination to control
the development of society, and stop the political
education of mankind. Hateful as it was, the vic-
tories of Pompeius availed to sustain it through one
generation, while the current of men’s thoughts was
diverted from it by the conquest of Asia, the glare
of foreign wealth, and the allurements of foreign
luxury. But its foundations meanwhile were
silently crumbling away in the decay of the old noble
families, the decline of public virtue, and the scarce
disguised treachery of some of its most conspicuous
supporters. When Caesar arose to strike the long-
expected blow it fell in helpless impotence, and the
violence of a rebel’s hand anticipated by a brief
period the struggles of its natural dissolution.

The Caesarean revolution came indeed too late to
Yet the best save the remains of national virtue ; but to
despair of the republic was a crime with the
of “• Romans, and by a Messala and a Pollio, and
a few of the noblest spirits of their age, Octavius, we
may feel assured, was fondly regarded as the deliverer
for whom the best and wisest citizens had been looking
for an hundred years. The mildness of his sway in
Italy, the firmness with which he had opposed intes-
tine commotion and foreign aggression, the respect he
had evinced for certain traditions of public policy,
on which the safety and good order of the state were

Digitized by Google

CH. X XXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

57

supposed to rest, led them to indulge the hope that
he would continue to preserve all that was good in
the old consular government, while he held it to-
gether with the strong hand of the imperator. The
reflections indeed of the mass of the citizens were
far less deep or philosophical. The decrees of the
senate and the public demonstrations of the populace
have made us already familiar with the outward
manifestation of joy and thankfulness which hailed
the victories both of Julius Caesar and of his suc-
cessor. Yet such expressions of popular sentiment
may easily be feigned, and in these instances we
may be disposed perhaps at first sight to call their
genuineness in question. Can it be true, we ask,
that the Roman people, so proud of their freedom,
so jealous of their rulers, so confident in themselves,
could have really rejoiced in the triumph of the
sword over the guardians and pledges of their laws ?
Or did they indulge the vain imagination that the
victors of Actium and Pharsalia, the men who had
hunted to death a Cicero and a Cato, would restore
the liberties they had wrested from the devoted
champions of the republic? May we not rather
suppose that the mass of the citizens were prepared
in fact to surrender even more than was demanded
of them, and that they received back with surprise
the present made them by the usurpers of the names
and forms of the commonwealth ? In order to an-

swer these questions we must take a wider survey
of the state of public opinion at the time.

It is not a little remarkable how nearly passive

the mass of the Roman people had long
been under the sway of factions and political
intriguers. Far distant was the period
when the great body of the citizens was

Indifference of
the public
mind on poli-
tical ques-
tion!.

wont to rise at the bidding of some trusted leader.

or at the dictates of a common sympathy, and express

its will by a secession to the Sacred Mount, or a

Digitized by Google

58

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

cn. xxx m.

sullen refusal to enlist in the legions. Throughout
the horrors of the Marian and Sullan revolutions,
while Roman blood was flowing in torrents, and
no man’s throat was secure from the gripe of the
assassin, they looked on with palsied apathy, and
submitted to the reign of terror almost without a
murmur. During the struggles of Caesar and Pom-
peius the same populace continued equally inert;
and when the proscriptions were actually repeated
at the bidding of the triumvirs, they were found not
less patient of outrage and massacre than ever. They
seem to have utterly renounced the assertion of any
principle or wish of their own ; the love of life itself
degenerated into a mere animal instinct. Throughout
the civil wars, it was never from the capital, nor even
from Italy, that the impulse was given to the lead-
ing movements of parties : Caesar armed himself in
Gaul, Pompeius in the East, Cato in Africa, Cnaeus
in Spain. Antonius and his rivals depended upon
their mercenary legions, until, in the final struggle,
the aggression of a foreign power aroused the spirit
of the conquering republic, and strengthened the
hands of Octavius with a crowning manifestation of
national sentiment. This was the last spontaneous
levy of the Roman people ; the effort was momen-
tary and the victory immediate ; but they had long
resigned themselves to the tyranny of any ruler,
provided only he were a Roman like themselves.
Their sole hope, at the crisis of each succeeding
usurpation, was that the conqueror would be more
merciful than Sulla ; and when the last candidate
for empire returned in triumph to their presence, the
assurance that he had fought their own battle, that
he was not merely the victor in a civil fray, but the
vanquisher of a foreign foe, satisfied them that his
success would be as bloodless as it was glorious.
In considering the history of Rome we cannot lay
too much stress on the impression made upon the

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

59

national mind by the first proscriptions. To this
frightful period its imaginations were constantly re-
curring; the undying recollection of these horrors
survived every new phase of revolution, and taught
the Eomans to acquiesce in each successive act of
violence as a relief from the recollections of the
past.

To the mass of the Romans, then, it was enough
to be spared from massacre and confisca-
tion. They were ready to exalt to the skies K»“ n
the usurper who refrained from taking all the mixture y
their lives and properties. This, in their
eyes, was the merit of Octavius, and for this they
met him at the gates of the city and led him in tri-
umph to the Capitol and the temples of the gods.
Though dignified with the name of Romans, the
people, it must be remembered, who disgraced a
title consecrated to freedom and self-reliance, had in
fact little in common with the men who first Tendered
it illustrious. Th e result of the great struggle between
the republic and her allies seventy years before, had
mingled in one current the blood of the Romans
and the Italians. Yet between these new compatriots
there was at least a certain affinity in language, ori-
gin, and institutions . 1 Far more fatal to the homo-
geneity of the Roman race was the repeated en-
franchisement of foreign slaves drawn from every
quarter of the known world, the supple Syrian, the
sensual German, the moody and ungovernable Moor.
Various methods, indeed, were devised to impede
the progress of these despised aliens to the highest
offices of the state ; even the complete franchise of
the city was doled out to them with jealous pre-
caution : but the necessities of political chiefs over-

1 The most conspicuous monuments of early Roman literature are
in almost every case the work of Italians rather than of genuine
Romans; yet tho true Roman sentiment is not the less unmistakeably
impressed upon them.

Digitized by Google

60

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

leaped every restraint, and Sulla himself, the
champion of exclusion, admitted a host of foreign-
born clients into his own Cornelian gens. C®sar
took a bolder and more decisive step, but not before
the times were ripe for it, in admitting foreigners
into the senate itself; and the successors to his
policy and power continued to replenish it, after
every massacre, with members of the meanest extrac-
tion. The streets of Rome, which had witnessed the
triumphs of the Scipios and iEmilii, were thronged
with the descendants of their captives ; the villas of
the conquerors of Samnium and Carthage had fallen
into the hands of owners who a few years before
could hardly have pronounced their names.

The long: settled communities of modern civili-

Modern
European
communities
afford no
parallel to
tlvis debase-
ment.

zation can scarcely appreciate perhaps the
extent of this adulteration of race and
blood. Political revolutions we have wit-
nessed ; social and economical changes,
vast in extent and unprecedented in cha-
racter, have occurred at our very doors ; but upon
the physical elements of the population affected by
them, no impression has been made. The people of
modern Europe, therefore, can admit of no compari-
son in respect of physical change with the Romans
of the age of Augustus. The case, however, is dif-
ferent in the opposite hemisphere, where the native
race is overwhelmed from one generation to an-
other by a constant stream of foreign immigration.
The movement of the physical elements of Roman
society may not inaptly be compared, however differ-
ent the causes from which it arose, with that in the
population of North America. And accordingly in
America we observe a rapid change and disintegra-
tion of national sentiment constantly in progress :
the ideas of one decade of years become obsolete in
the next ; manners and fashions are ever fluctuating ;
even the language partakes of the general instability.

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxm.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

61

though retained on its foundations by the influence
of its European sister; a few fixed principles of
polity, belonging perhaps to an exceptional state of
social development, alone remain, like landmarks,
overtopping the ceaseless flow of thoughts and pre-
judices around them. But the local fixity and isola-
tion of the Roman people in its earlier stages had
imparted a similar character to its institutions, and
maintained them in their native forms for several
ages before the era of movement had commenced.
Its notions of religion and polity, interweaved and
entangled together, had sunk, as it were, into the
very soil; its habits of thought on these matters,
which constituted almost its whole life, were cast in a
mould of iron. The Romans, as has been often said,
were a nation of formalists ; not less so than the
Jews themselves; nor, as far as we know, were their
prejudices shaken, or their minds recalled from the
servitude of the letter, by any spiritual expositions
of prophets or philosophers. Among the Romans,
the men of higher light and deeper insight, who
impugned the accredited faith of the people, care-
fully abstained from any attack upon their formulas.
Scsevola, Varro, and Cicero avowed the principle,
that the errors of the vulgar, and the knowledge of
the wise, should be permitted to co-exist with mutual
toleration . 1 But the men who were most deeply
imbued with these forms and prejudices, even the
classes which were their acknowledged depositaries,
were almost extinguished by war and proscription ;
their places became occupied by strangers, men for
the most part who were prepared, on entering their
adopted city, to renounce the ideas of that from

1 S. Augustin, de Civ. Dei, iv. 27. : “ Hsecpontifcx (Scsevola) nosse
populos non vult; nam falsa esse non putat. Expedire igitur
existimat falli in religione civitates. Quod dicere ctiam in iibris
re.rum divinarum ipse Varro non dubitat.” Comp. iv. 31. This is
the principle put forth by Cicero throughout his treatises de Divi-
nation e and de Natura Deorum.

Digitized by Google

62 HISTORY OF TIIE HOMANS ch. xxxur.

which they came, without taking much interest. in
the acquisition of the new. They were proud indeed
of inheriting the glorious name of Romans, and of
claiming affinity with the remnant of the genuine
citizens; but their claims were rejected perhaps
not less contemptuously by the real descendants of
Quirinus than those of the Samaritans by the tribes
of Benjamin and Judah.

The Roman regarded himself in two very dif-
Erpansion of ferent lights, according as he reflected on
his political or his social position. On the
Roman life. one ] ian( ^ soar i n g on the wings of imagina-
tion, he vaunted himself as the favourite of the gods,
the child of destiny, appointed to achieve a vast
mission, no less than the reduction of the world to
political unity ; to beat down by force all opposition
of arms, and constrain men to the simple routine
of peaceful occupations . 1 On the other, he gloated
with mere prosaic interest on the material gains of
conquest. He regarded realms and empires as his
domain, and worked out the resources of a province
with the same zest as his ancestor had devoted t®
tilling his modest glebe. He remembered, on a
wider theatre, how the master of the household had
daily appeased the gods with corn and oil, with a
prayer or a charm ; how he had fed his slaves at his
OAvn board, and dispensed to them with equal care,
both their tasks and their recreations ; how he had
kept the key of his wine bin at his girdle, and chas-
tised his consort, even to the death, if she ventured
to purloin it from his side. Such in the last age of
the republic was still the ideal of Roman life, the
life of a Curius or a Cincinnatus expanded to the
proportions of a Lentulus or a Lucullus. Such was
the life, it was fondly proclaimed, of Remus and his
brother, of the sturdy sons of Latiura and Sabellia.

1 Virg. uEn. vi, : “ Ta regcre imperio popolos,” etc.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

63

Thus the valiant Etruscans had waxed in glory and
power, second only to the Romans themselves ; thus
Rome had become of all created things the fairest
and the strongest .. 1

The drop of pious sentiment enshrined in either
view served in some measure to purify the Si „ n , nfmtt .
turbid elements of which at this period dec<i y-
the mass of the Roman people was composed. Some
moments there were in the existence of the con-
temporaries of the second triumvirate, when all
the wealth of Asia and elegance of Greece seemed
inadequate to compensate for the innocence and
simplicity of the ancient republic. At such times
the sense of lost freedom and forfeited self-esteem
was aggravated by a consciousness of material decay.
Throughout Italy the spoliation of so many estates
and the insecurity of all had cast a blight upon
agriculture ; the harvests failed to support a popu-
lation diminished by war and misery ; the walls of
cities were crumbling into ruin ; the increase of
brigandage cut off the communications between them,
while it redoubled the anxietyof the masters for the
safe custody of their sullen slaves. In Rome itself
the invasion of barbarism was no less apparent.
While the gratification of the multitude was consulted
in the erection of gorgeous edifices for public enter-
tainment, the temples of the gods were suffered to

1 Virg. Georg, ii. nit. : “ Hanc olim veteres Titam coluere Sabini,”
&c. This ideal was of a singularly domestic character. The
tutelary divinities of their country were styled by the Eomans
“gods of their fathers,” and “liome-bom” (di patrii indigetes);
[the old explanation, however, indigetes =indigenaj, can hardly be
sustained] ; their country itself was the“ fatherland” (patria) ; their most
cherished usages were the “custom of their elders” (mos majorum).
They continued to the last to denominate the metropolis of theirworld-
widc empjre “ the town” (urbs), while all foreign lands, far or near,
were simply “ beyond the gates ” (foris). Much confusion is caused
by onr common translation of urbs by “ city,” a designation which
ought in strictness to be confined to the political community
(civitas). Urbs, whatever be its derivation, means the town or
inhabited enclosure.

Digitized by Google

64

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

decay, their images were stained with smoke and
damp, their worship was neglected, their services
forgotten, the holy rites of wedlock were slighted,
and a new race of citizens was springing into life
whose will was their only law, and to whom the most
venerable prescriptions of antiquity were no better
than a dusty parchment.

But in the midst of this desolation, the legislator
The fnnda- who sought to revive the pure sentiments
principle of of antiquity might appeal to a witness in
rei'*o”. a tm their favour which no child of Quirinus
surviving. could venture to impugn. To ascribe to
mere chance the imperial career of the republic, or
even to the virtues of the citizens themselves, apart
from the holy influence of their laws and institutions,
was a blasphemy from which the feelings of every
genuine Roman revolted. Deep and firm was his
persuasion that his city owed its prosperity to the
divine principle of its constitution. The empire of
Rome was a standing evidence in his view to the
truth of the Roman religion, in its widest sense,
as the foundation of -its laws and usages. Already
men’s minds were becoming weaned from positive
belief in the concrete divinities of Olympus, and
fixing themselves more and more upon the abstrac-
tion of the Roman majesty, which their imaginations
were beginning to invest with the form and person-
ality of an actual goddess. 1

To throw himself upon this deep conservative
Augustus feeling, to revive the usages of the ancient
rraervc^'d 0 days, and assimilate the fresh elements of
invigorate it. population to the remnant of its ori-
ginal stock, was the policy of the new master of the
republic. The victories of Actium and Alexandria
soon proved to be something more than the rout of

1 The Smyrnteans boasted that they had been the first to erect a
temple to Urbs Roma. This was in the consulship of the elder
Cato, a.u. 558. Tac. Ann. iv. 56.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

65

a foreign foe or the defeat of a barbaric invasion.
Not only was Isis overthrown, and Anubis driven
howling to his native desert; the majesty of the
gods of Home was not only vindicated, but restored
to honour and recommended with a powerful voice
to the veneration of the citizens. The conqueror
commenced his career of empire by the restora-
tion of the ancient cult. Keligious forms were en-
twined about all the public and private life of the
primitive Koman. The acts of every popular as-
sembly were hallowed by ceremonial observances ;
the conduct of war abroad and of government at
home was alike dependent upon auspices and omens ;
each particular family partook of the rites of the
gens to which it belonged, and cherished the do-
mestic worship of some god or hero from whoni it
derived its name or lineage. Thus, after the extinc-
tion in the fifth century of the family of Potitius, its
first founder, the cult of Hercules had been appro-
priated to the Pinarii, with whom Julius Cassar was
himself connected . 1 The Julii claimed the special
ministry of Venus, the Nautii worshipped Minerva,
the Aurelii Apollo, the Valerii Pluto, while Diana was
honoured by the Calpurnii, Neptune by the Servilii . 2
Some families venerated certain heroes of their own
race, as the Horatii, who performed religious rites
in honour of the brave Horatius who kept the
bridge against Porsena and the Tarquins ; and the
Julii, who adopted as their patron the greatest of
their name, the deified dictator. On stated anni-
versaries the rites of these divinities were celebrated
by the representatives of the gens in a private
chapel ; and though the presence of the members in

1 Liv. i. 7. ix. 29.: “Sacra penes Pinarios resedisse cosqne
mysteria fideliter custodissc.” From this passage compared with
Virgil, JEn. viii. 270., it would seem probable that the Pinarii still
retained this privilege, though Dionysius, i. 40., denies it.

3 See Becker, Handbuch der Rtimischen Altertliumer, ii. 1. 45.

VOL. IV. F

Digitized by Google

66

HISTOBY OF THE BOHANS

oh. xxxm.

general was not required at the ceremony, the favour
of the guardian saint was supposed to be extended to
all. It was extended, indeed, much farther. The wel-
fare of the commonwealth itself was held to be closely
connected with the due observance of these particular
cults, and the law maintained a jealous watch over
their perpetuation; the descent of property was
burdened or illustrated with the obligation to pre-
serve them in force. The annals of these patrician
races were written for their especial honour, and the
public traditions of the commonwealth itself were
corrupted to glorify the most illustrious of its houses.
The images or waxen busts of the deceased, ranged
along the walls of the mansion in the city, were
silent but expressive monuments of the family his-
tory ; and whenever a chief of the house was carried
forth to his sepulchre on the Flaminian or Latin
Way, these effigies of his renowned ancestors, labelled
for all to recognise them, were borne in procession
before him, and reminded the admiring citizens of
the proudest glories of their history.

Accordingly the patricians of the primitive re-
comerv tion P u ^ c constituted a dominant caste, jealous
ot the patri- of its peculiar prerogatives, and admitting
no access to its own divine inheritance ot
dignity and authority. These pretensions had been
. gradually abated by the encroachment of the ple-
beians ; the loss of privilege had drawn down with it
many august but impoverished houses; and not a
few of the oldest families had fallen out of the ranks
of public office, and sunk into insignificance among
the herd of citizens. While they retained their
legitimate place at the head of the legions, the
constant wars* of the republic had drained them of
their best blood ; and when the new nobility of the
commons forced itself into command, the patricians
perished not less rapidly, but more obscurely, in the
ranks. It was about the period of the Gracchi that

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

67

this subsidence of the old aristocracy of birth began
first to be remarked. The increase of wealth and
multiplication of offices had raised a number of new
men into their places, while those that still remained
on the arena of public life were forced to compete
on equal terms with their upstart rivals, and, except
in the possession of a few honorary distinctions, the
patrician was only distinguished from the rest of the
citizens by his exclusion from the tribuneship of the
plebs. The wealthy competitors for the honours of
the state became gradually fused into one common
aristocracy, to which office alone gave a title of ad-
mission. The number of plebeian houses thus
exalted by participation in the curule magistracies,
and enrolled by the censors in the list of the senate,
soon far surpassed the remnant of the patrician.
This new aristocracy, under the title of the nobility,
or the class ennobled by public service, drew a
broad line between itself and the knights, the ignoble
rich, whom it jealously excluded from the higher
functions of the state. But this nobility again, rich,
numerous, and powerful as it was, was decimated in
its turn by massacres and proscriptions. Of the
patrician houses which figure in the early history of
Eome, the greater number disappear from her
annals after the Punic wars, while many of those
which we can still trace there have sunk into com-
parative' obscurity. They are succeeded in the Fasti
by a long series of plebeian names ; but of these,
again, few survive the Civil Wars, and the establish-
ment of the Empire. The houses which rose to
distinction after this epoch were universally of
plebeian origin, and generally little known to fame
at an earlier period.

The custom, indeed, of adoption, invented per-
haps from a religious motive, for the per- or

petuation of the gentile cults, might serve * dop>iOD ’
to maintain the existence of the house, and its name,

F 2

Digitized by Google

68

HISTORY OF THE HOMANS

ch. mm.

long after its genuine blood had really ceased to
flow. Nevertheless, it may be doubted whether this
contrivance was actually of much avail; for the
facility thus given for preserving the legal continuity
of family existence was in itself fatal to the real
perpetuation of race. The pride of name might
thus be satisfied without the propagation of lineal
successors, or submission to the obligations of legi-
timate marriage. Thus while, on the one hand, the
main stem of the Julian gens was prolonged, in
default of natural heirs, by the adoption of an
Octavius, its collateral branches, on the other, once
widely extended, withered wholly away . 1 Besides
adoption, however, the Romans invented another
method for the perpetuation of the gens through its
clientele. The noble Roman was authorized to
confer his name, together with its religious privi-
leges, upon the enfranchised foreigners who ranged
themselves under his patronage. Even the slaves
whom he manumitted were allowed, with occasional
restrictions, to enrol themselves in his clan. Thus,
with the exception perhaps of the Cornelian, the
Julian became under Caesar and Augustus the most
extensive of any Roman house. It had its offshoots
not only in Rome and Italy, but wherever either of
its most illustrious patrons had set his foot and
established his personal influence. The Gauls, the
Britons, and the Iberians more particularly, sought
the honour of this distinguished connexion, which
was liberally bestowed on chiefs and potentates, on
philosophers and statesmen, on artists and gram-
marians. Though the dictator left no natural off-

1 Lord Mahon, near the beginning of his History of England, has
given a table of the representatives of existing English houses about
a century ago, which shows in a striking manner the vitality of our
aristocratic families, maintained as they are solely by succession in
blood either directly or collaterally. But the interval has been a
period of unexampled tranquillity and prosperity to the class in
question.

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxrn.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

69

spring, and only one son by adoption, the name of
Julius continues frequently to recur in the history
of the Romans as long as they retained the gentile
name with its appropriate observances . 1

To the remnant of the patrician families, it has
just been said, certain honorary functions Iiicrea<cof
were still, from ancient usage, attached, jh^rican
Among these was the exalted priesthood of
the Flamens. For the perpetuation of such offices,
which the people continued to regard with super-
stitious reverence, or from the vague desire so
common to usurpers to surround himself with the
ensigns of the polity he had overthrown, Julius
Caesar had introduced a measure for increasing the
number of patrician houses. By the lex Cassia
several plebeian gentes, among them perhaps the
Octavia, to which his nephew belonged, and the
Tullia, so recently illustrated by the genius of
Cicero, were called up to the higher caste . 2 Augus-
tus followed the example of the dictator ; but in
this case, we may believe, with a more distinct
and deliberate object. The political nullity of the
patricians had in fact abated nothing from the
charm which popularly surrounded them ; perhaps
they had even gained in the affections of the people
what they had lost in power. The manifest decay
of those illustrious monuments of the past, the

1 The kinsmen of the great Jnlius Csesar, of whom there were
one or two branches existing in his time, left as far as we know no
successors.

2 The elevation of the young Octavius to the patriciate has been

already mentioned (ch. xxx.); that of Cicero is inferred from the
passage of Dion, xlvi. 22, relating to the orator’s son : vrb

tov Kaurapor /cal aaidtls, is re rous ti/rarplSas iyypa<ptls. Such an
elevation was not simply personal, but was extended to the whole
gens. It seems probable that these two cases were comprehended
along with others in the measure of the dictator which bore the name
of the lex Cassia. This and the lex Ssenia of Augustus are re-
ferred to by Tacitus, Ann. xi. 25. Comp. Suet. Jul. 41. Dion,
xlix. 43., lii. 42.

Digitized by Google

70

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

historical families of the republic, had excited an
interest even in the contemplative spirit of an
Atticus, who had devoted a portion of his abundant
leisure to explore their antiquities and describe their
genealogies. The archaeologist Varro had written
learnedly upon the same theme; at a later period
Valerius Messala, the intimate friend of Augustus,
but a true republican at heart, followed in the same
track. 1 A subject which occupied the thoughts of
three men of such distinction we may well imagine
to have been generally attractive.

The anxiety of Octavius to restore the due con-
Reiigious sideration of the patrician houses, as a

thipiltridiL principle of public conservation, out-
houses. stripped his own movements on his re-
turn homeward from the East at the close of 724.
While still absent in the provinces of Asia, he
directed L. Saenius, the consul suffect, to lay a
measure before the senate for raising several ple-
beian families to the honours of the patriciate. The
law itself, to which the senate dutifully acceded, and
which the tribes were content to register, was dated
from the following year, when the emperor, re-
suming his place in the capital, accepted the powers
of the censorship, and undertook to reconstitute by
various stringent enactments the several orders of
the state. 2 The Romans were highly gratified by
the respect thus paid to their early associations.
The national traditions, which still exercised, as we
have seen, their full influence over the mass of the

1 The etymological writings of Atticus are referred to by Corn.
Nepos, Att. 18. Varro wrote on the subject of families which
claimed a Trojan descent. Servius on Virg. JEn. v. 117. 704. On
the work of Messala and its origin, see Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxxv. 2.

2 L. Scenins was consul suffect with M. Tullius Cicero, son of the
orator, in the latter part of the year 724: but the law which bore his
name, and was introduced by him, is placed under the following
year by Dion Cassius, lii. 42. ; to which Augustus also himself refers
it; Monum. Ancyr. 2.: “ Patriciornm numerum auxi consul y. jnssu
populi et senatus.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

71

citizens, connected the majesty of the republic with
the dignity of its highest caste, who mediated by
their august functions between the state and the
celestial hierarchy. It is a curious fact that the
patrician houses had for the most part attached
themselves to the cult, not of the original Italian
divinities, but of gods of comparatively recent and
foreign importation. But in so doing they had only
followed the course of the religious revolution which
had long been in progress at Borne. Apollo, Venus,
Neptune, Hercules, Pluto, Diana, and at least as the
goddess of war, Minerva also, had been unknown to
the worship of the early Romans ; it was only in the
latter ages of the republic that these deities were
honoured with temples and priesthoods at all . 1 The
principal temples at Rome had been constructed
by the piety of victorious imperators ; and to the
posterity they had ennobled they had bequeathed,
as the most precious of heir-looms, the care of these
sacred edifices. Few, however, of their descendants,
in the latter days of anarchy and irreligion, had
displayed the zeal of the noble Catulus in the resto-
ration of Jove’s temple in the Capitol. The shrines
of the gods, as has been said, were falling on all
sides into ruin, their images were blackened with
smoke, or mouldering with mildew. The sufferings of
the commonwealth were willingly ascribed by the
existing generation to the impiety of that which had
gone before, and the admonitions of the poet were
hailed with general acclamation when he reminded
it that it was the lord of mankind only because it
was the servant of the gods. This pious acknow-
ledgment, said Horace, was the beginning and end
of all its greatness . 2 Augustus perceived, with un-

1 Sec Zumpt in his little tract Religion der iloemer.

2 Horace in the well known passage, Od. iii. 6. :

“ Delicta majorum irameritns lues,

Roinane, donee templa refeceris ....

Dis te minorem quod geris imperas. ”

Digitized by Google

72

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXX1IT.

erring sagacity, the direction of the popular senti-
ment, and at once placed himself at its head. The
duty of renovating the temples had lapsed, by the
death or impoverishment of their appointed guar-
dians, to the nation itself, and he, in his censorial
capacity, was the keeper of the national conscience.
Restoration of Accordingly he restored himself the temple
temple.. 0 f Jupiter Feretrius in the Capitol, which
was said to be the most ancient in Rome ; he
erected another to Jove the Thunderer, to Cybele,
and other divinities. He encouraged the nobles to
vie with him in the pious work, and instructed Livia
to repair the shrines of Juno, the tutelary guardian
of Roman womanhood . 1 Up to this period, the god
Mars, the reputed father of the Roman race, had
never, it is said, enjoyed the distinction of a temple
within the walls. He was now introduced into the
city, which he had saved from overthrow and ruin ;
and the aid he had lent in bringing the murderers
of Caesar to justice, was signalized by the title ot
Avenger, by which he was now specially addressed . 2
There still remained, however, another deity in
whom the emperor retained a peculiar interest
Apollo was the patron of the spot which had given a
name to his great victory of Actiuin ; Apollo himself,
it was proclaimed, had fought for Rome and for
Octavius on that auspicious day ; the same Apollo,
the sun-god, had shuddered in his bright career
at the murder of the dictator, and had terrified
the nations by the eclipse of his divine counte-

1 Monum. Ancyr. 4. Compare Dion, li. 22. Ovid. Fast. i. 649.
r. 157. vi. 637. At. ii. 63. of the same work he addresses the em-
peror as “ templorum positor, templorum sanctc repostor:” and
Livy (iv. 20). calls him, “templorum omnium conditor ant rcsti-
tutor.”

2 The temple of Mars Ultor, of gigantic proportions, “Et dcus est
ingens et opns,” was erected in the new forum of Augustas at the
foot of the Capitoline and Quirinal hills. Ovid describes it, Fast.
v. 550. foil.

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxm.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

73

nance . 1 The courtiers of Augustus insinuated that
their patron was inspired by an effluence from this
glorious being : to him they ventured to ascribe the
real parentage of the restorer of the city, as its
founder had sprung from the auspicious passion of
Mars for Rhea . 2 When they came into his presence
they could not flatter him more adroitly than by
dropping their eyes to the ground, as if dazzled by
the encounter with his celestial radiance . 3 Resides
building a splendid temple to Apollo on the Palatine
hill, the emperor sought to honour him by trans-
planting to the Circus Maximus, the sports of which
were under his special protection, an obelisk from
Heliopolis in Egypt. This flame-shaped column was
a symbol of the sun, and originally bore a blazing orb
upon its summit. It is interesting to trace an intelli-
gible motive for the first introduction into Europe of
these grotesque and unsightly monuments of eastern
superstition.

Descending from the heights, and quitting the
open spaces of the city, which afforded Rc , toration of
commanding eminences and ample room
for his most august constructions, the L * r ” -
restorer of antiquity next proceeded to revive the
modest and retiring worship of the streets and lanes.
The three hundred shrines, all of imposing magni-
tude, which Virgil assures us be dedicated through-
out the city to the “ gods of Italy,” were in fact not

1 Virg. Georg, i. 446.:

“ Ille etiam cxtincto miseratus Cacsaic Romani,

Cum caput obscura nitidum ferrugine tinxit,

Impiaque aetemnm timuerunt saccula noctem.”

Comp. Ovid. Melam. xv. 786.

2 Suet. Oct. 94.; Dion, xlr. 1.

* Suet. Oct. 79.: Oculos habuit claros ac liitidos, quihus etiam
existimari volcbat incsso quoddam divini vigoris, gaudebatque si
quis acrius contnenti, quasi ad fulgorem solis, vultnm submitteret.”
Comp. Plin. Hist. Nat. xi.32.; Aurel. Viet. Epit. 1.; Virg. y£/i. viii.:
“ Geminas cui temporn fiammns Loeta vomunt.”

Digitized by Google

74 HISTOKT 0F THE HOMANS CH. XSXXLI.

temples of the Olympian deities, such as have been
mentioned above, but fanes or chapels of Stata
Mater, the Steadfast Earth, and the Lares, or
domestic Genii, erected in every vicus or district,
for the common worship of the locality. Notwith-
standing the grandeur of their attributes, and the
attraction of their magnificent ceremonials, the
greater divinities, imported from Greece and Asia,
never fully acquired tlft sympathies of the genu-
ine Italians, who still clung with unabated interest
to the simple service of their old household patrons,
the symbols, in their view, of permanence and se-
curity. The Eoman might carry his Penates with
him to every quarter of the globe, but his Lares
still remained at home, and continued to con-
secrate his domestic hearth, and assure the safety
of the neighbourhood. While Jupiter, Mars, and
Quirinus, had each their patrician Flamens, the
Lares were served by freedmen and plebeians. 1
The masters of quarters (magistri vicorum), church-
wardens, as we might call them, of parishes, were
chosen from the local population itself, and con-
stituted an integral part of the municipal govern-
ment of the city. At a later period in his reign,
the emperor seems to have so far yielded to the irre-
sistible propensity of his people to make him an
object of worship, as to have allowed his own name
to be associated with these semi-divinities, and his
image to be erected along with theirs, and that
of the faithful dog who watched together with the
Lares and himself over the domestic security of the

1 See Egger, Historiens cT Auguste, in his curious essay on the
Augustales, p. 369. foil. Porphyrion and Acron, the scholiasts of
Horace, ad Scrm. ii. 3. 281. say, “Ab Augusto Lares, id est, Dii
domestic! positi sunt; ex libertinis sncerdotes dati qui Augustales
appellati.” “Jusscrat enini Augustus in compitis Deos Penates
(Lares) constitui, ut studiosius colerentur. Erant autem libertini
sacerdotes qui Augustales dicuntur.”

Digitized by Google

ca. xxxni.

CKDEU THE EMPIRE.

75

citizens . 1 The festival of the Street-games , 2 which
from the time of the Sabine Tatius had been cele-
brated on the calends of May, was now repeated twice
annually, on that day, and again in August , 3 in
honour of the imperial demigod who had taken it
under his special patronage, and who gradually
became the central object of this popular worship
throughout Rome and Italy, and at least the western
provinces of the empire . 4

During his long tenure of power, and especially
after assuming the functions of the chief
priesthood, Augustus extended his restoring 5 bunt?'
care to every branch of religious service. the°"od P
He revived various solemn games, which Tcrnuau ''
combined the cultivation of religion with the amuse-
ment of the people ; he increased the number of the
special priesthoods and of their individual members,
to advance the honour of the gods, and the dignity
of the noble officials ; 5 nor did he renounce the prin-

1 Ovid. Fast. v. 129. folL:

“ Et caois ante pedes saxo fabricates eodem ....

Mille Lates Geniumque Ducis qui tradidit illos
Urbs habet, et vici numiua trina colunt.”

Hence we have numerous votive inscriptions, Laribus Augustis.

3 Hence in Virgil, JEn. viii. 717.:

“ Ltetitia ludisque via, plausuque ftemebant.”

3 Suet. Oct. 31.: “Coinpitales Lares ornari bis anno instituit
vernis fioribus et asstivis.”

4 This worship of Augustus, or rather perhaps of the Lar of
Augustus, as a demigod or genius, is to be distinguished from the
later cult of the Caesars as deities, which Augustus himself inter-
dicted at least in Rome. Comp. Hor. Od. iv. 5. 34.:

“ Et Laribus tuum
Miscct numen, uti Grcecia Castoris,

Et magni memor Herculis.”

As regards the tercentum delubra of Virgil, we find in the
Regionarii just 265 cediculse enumerated, in each of which were the
figures of two Lares, and the genius of the emperor. Hence, Ovid,
in round numbers, “ Mille Lares.”

s Suet. Oct. 31.: “ Sacerdotum et numeruin et dignitatem sed et
commoda auxit, prsecipue Vestalium virginum,” &c.

Digitized by Google

76

HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS

cn. xxxm.

ciples of religious toleration, which were ordinarily
extended by the Eoman government to all rituals poli-
tically harmless and not flagrantly immoral . 1 * Besides
erecting temples to Jupiter under the names of the
Thunderer and the Spoilbearer, Augustus dedicated
a large amount of bullion, together with gems and
pearls, to the same god, as the tutelar divinity of the
Capitol, the citadel of the empire. The sumptuous
fane of the Capitoline Jupiter had peculiar claims on
the veneration of the Roman citizens ; for not only
the great Lord of the earth was worshipped in it, but
the conservative principle of property itself found
therein its appropriate symbol. While the statue of
Jupiter occupied the usual place of the divinity in
the furthest recess of the building, an image of the
god Terminus was also placed in the centre of the
nave, which was open to the heavens. A venerable
legend affirmed that when, in the time of the kings,
it was requisite to clear a space on the Capitoline to
erect on it a temple to the great father of the gods,
and the shrines of several lesser divinities were to be
removed for the purpose, Terminus alone, the patron
of boundaries, refused to quit his place, and de-
manded to be included within the walls of the new
sy.tem of edifice . 3 Thus propitiated, he was under-
Umitution, stood to declare that henceforth the bounds
"cntionof* °f the republic should never be narrowed ;
boundaries. an( j pledge was more than fulfilled by
the ever-increasing circuit of her dominion. But
the solicitude of this tutelary divinity was not con-
fined to maintaining the frontier of the empire ; as

1 Marcianus in Dig xlvii. 22.: “ Sed religionis causa coire non
proliibcntur, dum tamcn per hoc non fiat contra scnatusconsultum
quo illicita collegia arcentur.” Dionysius Hal. ( Antiq . Rom. ii. 19.)
distinguishes between the toleration and the reception, or as we
should say, establishment, of a foreign cult.

* Ovid. Fast. ii. 667.:

Terminus, ut vctcrcs memorant, conventus in *ede
Eestitit, et magno cum Jove templa tenet.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

77

guardian of the public domain he presided over the
measurement or limitation of every civic territory,
and the private estates assigned out of it ; his bound-
stones were erected to mark out each separate division,
consecrated with rustic offerings, and hallowed with
solemn formularies . 1 * Whenever a portion of a con-
quered district was to be allotted to a community or
a citizen, the augur, with his staff in his hand, turning
himself to the auspicious quarter of the heavens, first
drew an imaginary line across it from end to end in
a direction vertical to himself, then another at right
angles to it from right to left, thus dividing it in his
mind into four equal portions . 8 The portions thus
designated were then separated by balks of certain
width, and again subdivided into smaller parallelo-
grams, according to the number of lots required.
Each lot was marked by bound-stones at its corners
and points of intersection, and along its edges trees
of foreign origin were planted, as a standing witness
to the artificial character of the limitation . 3 * * * * If the

1 The citizen who removed a landmark was devoted to the gods;

the slave was thrown into chains or subjected to hard labour : but it'

he had acted under the authority of his master, he was put to death

with all his family, by way, as it would seem, of punishing his guilty
owner. See the formula in the Scriptores Rci Agrarioc, p. 258. ed.

Goes. These penalties were commuted to a fine by a law of Caius
Ca:sar (lex Mamilia, &c.), which Mommsen ascribes to the Dictator.
But this opinion is controverted by Rudorff, and I have little doubt
that its real author was Caius Caligula. Bee Lachmann’s Rumische

Feldmesser, ii. 223. 244. The law in question is prestrved in the
Pandects. See Digest, xlvii. 21. de termino moto.

* Originally the augur faced the west; afterwards he took a con-
trary position. This appears from Varro, cited by Frontinus, de
limitibus. Hyginus de lim. const, in Lachmann, i. 27. 166., compared
with p. 169. See RudorfTs Gromalische Instil, p. 343. foil, of the
second volume of Lachmann’s collection.

1 It is not surprising that these bound-stones, which undoubtedly
were maintained in innumerable instances for a thousand years,
should have utterly disappeared. They furnished the readiest
materials for building and the repair of roads. Besides, they were
usually placed over pieces of money, like the foundation-stones of
our modern edifices, and were no doubt often torn up for the sake
of the concealed treasure.

Digitized by Google

78

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

space thus allotted was not, as of course it seldom or
never was, strictly rectangular, the remainder was
excluded from this geometrical division, and reserved
as the peculiar property of the state. When the
appointed forms had been completed, the estate of the
citizen or colonist was placed under the protection of
the god Terminus ; and the boundaries once assigned,
marked out, and consecrated, could never again be
changed, whatever change might occur in their
ownership. If, for instance, one of these rectangles
or fundi became divided between more than a single
proprietor, the fundus still remained distinct, and
for purposes of taxation was reckoned as an unit . 1
This mode of land-measuring was a science derived
from the Etruscans, and is perhaps first brought to
our notice by a fragment of writing which dates from
the fifth century of the city . 2 It was, however, at
least as ancient as the Etruscan kings of Rome. The
divisions of land made by the Gracchi and Sulla, and
by the kings themselves, continued to be known by
their irremovable bound-stones down to a late period
of the empire. Though the stones or termini them-
selves have long been uprooted from the soil, it is
said that the names of the original fundi may still be
traced both in Italy and Gaul in the modem appel-
lations of certain well-known farms . 3

The writers on this abstruse subject contain nu-
merous notices of the limitations effected by Augustus,

1 Though the territory of Italy, and the whole ager Roman us
throughout the provinces, was exempted from the land-tax, it did
not escape the succession tax imposed by Augustus.

■ See the fragment ascribed to the augur Vegoia in the Script
Jtei. Agr. p. 258. ed. Goes., i. 350. ed Lachmann.

s Niebuhr (liom. Hist. ii. 629.) refers to two estates in the Cam-
pagna known by the name of la Roiana and la Cipollarn, which he
considers to be fundi Roianus and Ceponianus. A M. Bausset,
cited by Dureau de la Malle, has discovered no less than twenty-five
such names of Roman proprietors preserved in villages, hamlets, and
farms in the neighbourhood of Beziers in France. Dc la Malle,
Econ. Pol. des Romains, i. 183.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

79

and the stones set up by his authority are referred to
by his name . 1 Some of them mark, we may Bcspwudby
suppose, the latest assignments of land he Augu,tus '
made to his veterans after Actium ; but even in the
turbulence of the triumvirate the formalities of an-
cient usage were not perhaps disregarded in this
particular. The land-measurer or agrimensor pre-
ceded the veteran with his pole and chain to mark
out the appointed allotment; but the rude soldier
entered into possession sword in hand, and hardly
sheathed it either to sow or reap the harvest . 2 He
paid perhaps little respect to the bound-stones set
up for him, or even waited for the completion of
augural forms. The emperor, however, was solicitous
to repair whatever irregularities had occurred in the
original appropriation, and studied to revive the
honours of Terminus in conjunction with those of
Jupiter himself . 3

The restoration of the temples of Juno by Augustus
and his consort, indicated the interest the Fnndpie^
new government felt in the institution of re-
marriage. Neither the history nor literature of Rome
can be understood without clearideas upon this branch
of her social economy. All nations have agreed in in-
vesting marriage with a religious sanction; but religion

1 We meet with mention not only of Termini Granchani and Sul-
lani, bnt Augustei, Neroniani, Vespasiani, &c. They were inscribed
with numbers or figures, plated with brass, and differed from one
another in shape. Those of Augustas and Caligula were rotundi,
perhaps rounded at the head; others were quadrati. In the Script
Rei Agr. are many rude figures of these termini, copied from the
MSS.

2 Propert. iv. 1. 130.: “ Abstulit excultas pertica tristis opes.”

3 “ Terminos rotundos quos Augusteos vocamus, pro hac ratione
quod Augustus eos reccnsuit, et ubi defuerunt lapides alios con-
stituit.” — Scr. Rei. Agr. p. 255. ed. Gees. The two appendices on
the subject of Koman limitation at the end of the second volume of
the English translation of Niebuhr’s history should be read in con-
junction with De la Malle’s chapter on the same subject, and
RudorlTs Gromatische Jnstitutionen, in Lachmann’s edition of the
Scr. Rei Agrariee.

Digitized by Google

80

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

and policy were closely connected through every phase
of the social life of the Romans, and in none more
closely than in this . 1 Marriage they regarded as an in-
stitution hallowed by the national divinities for the
propagation of the Roman race, the special favourite
of the gods. Its object was not to chasten the affec-
tions and purify the appetites of man, but to replenish
the curies and centuries, to maintain the service of
the national temples, to recruit the legions and es-
tablish Roman garrisons in conquered lands. The
marriage therefore of Caius and Caia, of a Roman
with a Roman, was a far higher and holier matter, in
the view of their priests and legislators, than the
union of a Roman with a foreigner, of aliens with
aliens, or of slaves with slaves. Even the legitimate
union of the sexes among the citizens was regulated
by the descending scale of confarreation, coemption,
and mere cohabitation ; and the offspring of the
former only were qualified for the highest religious
functions, such as those of the Flamen of Jupiter,
and apparently of the Vestal Virgins, on which the
safety of the state was deemed most strictly to de-
pend . 2

These jealous regulations were fostered in the first
instance by a grave political necessity ; but

Fallen into , J V? 1 r r , i

di.favour md the increase ot the power of Rome, the en-

desuetude. , p . 1

largement of her resources, the multiplica-
tion of her allies, her clients and dependents, had long
relaxed her vigilance in maintaining the purity of her *
children’s descent . 3 The dictates of nature, reinforced

1 Modestinus in tho Digest, xxiii. 2. 1., has a fine definition of
marriage: “Nuptise sunt conjunctio maris et foeminse, consortium
omnis vitae, divini et human! juris communicatio.”

2 See Dczobry, Home au Siicte d’ Auguste, ii. 436.

3 Horace, Od. iii. 6. 17.:

“ Fcecunda cnlpse ssecula nuptias
Primum inquinavere, ct genus, et domos :

Hoc fonte derivata clades

In patriam populumque fluxit.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

81

by the observation of foreign examples, had long re-
belled in this matter against the tyrannical prescrip-
tions of a barbarous antiquity. After the eastern
conquests of the Republic it became impossible to
maintain the race in its state of social isolation. In
his winter quarters at Athens, Samos, or Ephesus,
the rude husbandman of Alba or the Volscian hills
was dazzled by the fascinations of women whose ac-
complishments fatally eclipsed the homely virtues of
the Latin and Sabine matrons. To form legitimate
connexions with these foreign charmers was forbidden
him by the harsh institutions of a Servius or Numa;
while his ideas were so narrowed and debased by bad
laws, that he never dreamt of raising his own country-
women by education to the level of their superior
attractions. Gravely impressing upon his wife and
daughters that to sing and dance, to cultivate the
knowledge of languages, to exercise the taste and un-
derstanding, was the business of the hired courtesan 1 ,
it was to the courtesan that he repaired himself for
the solace of his own lighter hours. The Hetaerae of
Greece had been driven to the voluptuous courts of
Asia by the impoverishment, and perhaps the declin-
ing refinement, of their native entertainers. They
were now invited to the great western capital of
wealth and luxury, where they shared with viler ob-
jects the admiration of the Roman nobles, and im-
parted perhaps a shade of sentiment and delicacy to
their most sensual carouses. The unnatural restric-
tions of the law formed a decent excuse for this class
of unions, which were often productive of mutual re-
gard, and were hallowed at least at the shrine of
public opinion.

1 See the well known description of the accomplishments of the
matron Sempronia, Sallust, Catil. 25. : “ Hscc. tnulier genere atque
forma, praeterea viro, liberis, satis fortunata fait: literis Grmcis atque
Latinis docta; psallere, saltare, elegantius quant necesse est proltee ;
mnlta alia quae instrument:; luxuriae sunt.” Comp. Plautus, Rudens,
proL 43., and Terence, Phorm. i. 2. 36.

VOL. IV. G

Digitized by Google

82

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

Such fortunate cases were, however, at the best,
only exceptional. For the most part, the

Influence of ° 1 • , n ,1 1

the freed- (xrecian mistress ot the proconsul or im-
perator, the object of a transient appetite,
sought to indemnify herself by venal rapacity for
actual contempt and anticipated desertion. The in-
fluence of these seductive intriguers poisoned the
springs of justice before the provincial tribunals.
At an earlier period a brutal general could order a
criminal to be beheaded at his supper table, to ex-
hibit to his paramour the spectacle of death 1 : at
a later, the luxurious governor of a province al-
lowed his freedwoman to negotiate with his .’ sub-
jects for the price of their rights and privileges, or
carried her at his side in his progress through Italy
itself . 2 The frantic declamations of Cicero against

1 This is the story told of L. Flaminius by Valerius Maximus, ii.
9. 3. Cicero alludes to it, de Senect. 12.: “Invitus quidem feci ut

L. Flamininum e Senatu ejicerem, octo annis postquam

consul fuisset; sed notandam putavi libidinem.” Livy’s version of
the same story is still more atrocious. It may be amusing to com-
pare with it the ingenuous confession of Napoleon I. to Las Cases,
in speaking of a connexion he had formed in his first Itab'an cam-
paign. “J’etais bien jeune alors, j’etais heureux, et fier de mon
petit succ&s; aussi cherchai-je a le reconnaitre par toutes les atten-
tions en mon pouvoir; et vous allez voir quel peut etre Tabus de
Tautorite, 4 quoi peut tenir le sort des hommes; car je ne suis par
pire qn’un autre. La promenant un jonr au milieu de nos positions,
dans les environs, au Col de Tende, il me vient subitemeut l’idee de
lui donner le spectacle d’une petite guerre, et j’ordonnai une attaque
d’avant-poste. Nous fumes vainqueurs, il est vrai, mais evidemment
il ne ponvait y avoir de risultnt ; Tattaque etait nne pure fantaisie,
et ponrtant quelques hommes y resterent. Aussi, plus tard, toutes
les fois que le souvenir in'en est revenu a l’esprit, je me le suis fort
reproche.” Las Cases, Mim. de S. H(lene, i. 1 69.

2 See the account of Cheiidon, the mistress ofVerres, Cic. in Verr.
L 40., ii. 47., iv. 32., v. 13., and of Cytheris, Philipp, ii. We can
hardly wonder that the Romans, with their formal notions of the in-
stitution of marriage, should have entertained no moral disapproba-
tion of these connexions. It was only in a political point of view
that the concubinatus of a citizen with a foreign pellet was regarded
as a misalliance. But the pellex must be a free woman: commerce
with a slave, where the choice was not free on both sides, was es-
teemed dishonourable, and the high-minded Roman generally ea-

Digitized by Google

ch. mm.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

83

the licentiousness of Verres and Antonius in this
respect were a fruitless and, it must be admitted, a
hollow attempt to play upon an extinct religious sen-
timent.

The results of this vicious indulgence were more
depraving than the vice itself. The un-
married Roman, thus cohabiting with a of mailed
freed woman or slave, became the father of
a bastard brood, against whom the gates of the city
were shut. His pride was wounded in the tenderest
part; his loyalty to the commonwealth was shaken.
He chose rather to abandon the wretched offspring of
his amours, than to breed them up as a reproach to
himself, and see them sink below the rank in which
their father was born. In the absence of all true
religious feeling, the possession of children was the
surest pledge to the state of the public morality of
her citizens. By the renunciation of marriage, which
it became the fashion to avow and boast, public con-
fidence was shaken to its centre . 1 On the other hand,
the women themselves, insulted by the neglect of
the other sex, and exasperated at the inferiority of
their position, revenged themselves by holding the
institution of legitimate marriage with almost equal
aversion. They were indignant at the servitude to
which it bound them, the state of dependence and
legal incapacity in which it kept them; for it left them
without rights, and without the enjoyment of their
own property : it reduced them to the status of mere
children, or rather transferred them from the power

franchised the object of bis desire. Walckenaer has put this subject
in its true light in his Histoire d' Horace, L 110. fo).

1 See the praises of celibacy in Plautus, Mil Glor. iii. 1. 111.
fol. : “ Quando habeo multos cognatos quid opus sit mihi liberis?”
etc. Comp. Plin. Hist. Nat. xiv. procem. : “ Ccepisse crbitatem in
anctoritate summa et potentia esse, captationem in quaestu maximo."
Tac. Ann. xiii. 52. Scnec. Cons, ad Marc. 19. Augustus says, in
Dion, lvi. 7.: ou ydtp Mi ir ou uovavX fa ^afpere, 1v Hu>ev yvvatKvv Siayrire.
ouM hrriv 8<mr ufiuy t) oiTtirai aovos f) KaBeiSfi fiiyov &AA’ i^ovalay fcal
upplfcw Kai eurt\yaivttv ?x { “'

a 2

Digitized by Google

84

HISTORY OF TIIE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

of their parent to that of their husband. They con-
tinued through life, in spite of the mockery of respect
with which the laws surrounded them *, things rather
than persons ; things that could be sold, transferred
backwards and forwards, from one master to another,
for the sake of their dowry or even their powers of
child-bearing. 2 For the smallest fault the wife might
be placed on trial before her husband, or if he were
more than usually considerate in judging upon his
own case, before a council of her relations. She
might be beaten with rods, even to death itself, for
adultery or any other heinous crime ; while she
might suffer divorce from the merest caprice, and
simply for the loss of her youth or beauty. 3

The latter centuries of the Eoman commonwealth

i are filled with the domestic struggles oc-
the’women casioned by the obstinacy with which poli-

against it. . . , . . _

tical restrictions were maintained upon the
most sensitive of the social relations. Beginning
with wild and romantic legends, the account of these
troubles becomes in the end an important feature in
history. As early as the year 423, it is said, a great
number of Roman matrons attempted the lives of
their husbands by poison. They were dragged before
the tribunals, probably domestic, and adjudged to
death. As many as a hundred and seventy are said

1 For these outward signs of respect, see particularly Ovid, Art.
Amand. i. 32. Festus, in Voc. Matron®.

2 The well-known story of Onto and his wife Marcia has been re-
lated in an early chapter of this history. Plut. Cat. min. 36. 68.
Corap. Plaut. Menachm. in fin.:

“ Venibunt servi, subpellex, fundi, tcdcs, omnia . . .

Venibit uxor quoque etiam, si qnis eraptor venerit."

The uxor is the legitimate wife who has contracted nupticc, a
Roman marriage. Conjux is a term of much wider application.

3 Valerius Maximus (vi. 3.) tells of Egnatins Metellus, who
flogged his wife to death for drinking wine. Comp. Plin. H. N.
xiv. 13. j Gell. x. 23., and the passage in Plautus, Mercator , iv. 6.:

“ Ecastor lege dura vivunt mulieres,

Mnltoqnc iniquiorc miser® quam viri,” etc.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

85

to have suffered . 1 In the following century, after
the promulgation of the Oppian law, which forbade
women to keep more than half an ounce of gold, to
wear robes of various colours, and to ride in the car-
pentum, they formed a new conspiracy — such at least
was the story — not to destroy their husbands, but to
refuse conversation with them and frustrate their
hopes of progeny . 2 This was followed at the distance
of half a century by the Lex Voconia, the most unjust
of laws, in the judgment of the Christian Augustine,
which excluded women from the right of inheriting . 3
Of these laws, however, the first was speedily abro-
gated 4 , the other was evaded, and, by underhand and
circuitous means, women came to receive inherit-
ances, to the great scandal, as we shall hereafter see,
of the reformers under the empire . 5 But the con-
tinued quarrel of the sexes was exaggerated by mutual
jealousy, and at the outbreak of the Catilinarian
conspiracy, it was currently reported among the men,
that the traitors obtained money for their enterprise
from a multitude of matrons, who longed for a bloody
revolution to exterminate their husbands . 3

In the primitive ages the state had not only re-
gulated the forms of marriage, but had ^gfouuon
undertaken to enforce it. Among the duties j£“ 1 * i £ or
of the censors was that of levying fines upon manuge.
the citizen who persisted in remaining single to the

1 Liv. viii. 18. Yal. Max. ii. 5. 3. 2 Ovid, Fast. i. 620. foil.

5 Augustin, de Civ. Dei, iii. 21. The severity of this law is also
stigmatized in the Institutions of Justinian (iii. 2.), and the modifi-
cations explained which were introduced by the imperial legislation.

* The Lex Oppia was abrogated a.u. 557, under the consulship of
M. Porcius Cato and L. Valerius Flaccus. The abrogation was
proposed by the tribunes Fundanius and Valerius, and carried with
the help of clamour and agitation on the part of the women, against
the resistance of Cato and some of their own colleagues. Liv.
xxxiv. 1. foil.

4 Tac. Ann. iii. 23.: “Qute Oppiis quondam aliisque legibus con-
strict®, nunc vinclis exsolutis domos jam ct cxercitus regerent.”

* Appian. Bell. Civ. ii. 2. : xpVf mra iye'ipuv iroAAck trapi ir o\KSiV
yvvaiKuv, a! r oi/s &v!pas fj\Trt£ov tv rfi tiravatTraiTei oiatpdfptiv.

Digitized by Google

86

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

detriment of the public weal. The censure of Camil-
lus and Postumius, a. u. 351, was celebrated for the
patriotic vigour with which this inquisition was made. 1
In process of time the milder method of encouraging
marriage by rewards was introduced, the earliest
mention of which, perhaps, is in a speech of Scipio,
censor in the year 554. At this time, it appears, cer-
tain immunities were already granted to the fathers
of legitimate, and even of adopted, children, which
last the censor denounced as an abuse. 2 But neither
rewards nor penalties proved effectual to check the
increasing tendency to celibacy, and at the period of
the Gracchi an alarm was sounded that the old Roman
race was becoming rapidly extinguished. The censor
of the year 623, Metellus Macedonicus, expounded
the evil to the senate in a speech which seems to have
been among the most curious productions of antiquity.
Could we exist without wives at all , it began, doubt-
less we should all rid ourselves of the 'plague they are
to us : since, however, nature has decreed that we
cannot dispense with the infliction, it 'is best to bear
it manfully, and rather look to the permanent con-
servation of the state than to our own transient satis-
faction. 3 It is still more curious, perhaps, that above
a hundred years afterwards Augustus should have
ventured to recite in the polished senate of his own
generation the cynical invective of a ruder age. But,
so it was, that when the legislation of Julius Caesar
was found ineffectual for controlling the still growing

1 Val. Max. ii. 9. 1. Plat. CamiU. 2.

3 Gell. v. 19. Compare Liv. xlv. 15. Heinecc. Antiq. Roman.
5. 25. 3. Cicero approves of this kind of legislation. See de Legg.
iii. “ Cselibes esse prohibento.”

3 Gell. i. 6. : “ Si sine uxore, Quirites, posse m us esse, omnes ea
molcstia carercmus: sed quoniam ita natura tradidit, ut nec cum
illis satis commode, nee sine illis ullo modo vivi possit, saluti per-
petual potius quam brevi voluptati consulendum.” That the censor
was Metellus Macedonicus, not Numidicus, appears from Liv. Epit
lix. Gcllius quotes a very noble sentiment from another part of the
same speech. i

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXUI.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

87

evil, it was reinforced by his successor with fresh
penalties and rewards, and the bitter measure recom-
mended by the arguments and even the language of
the ancient censor. 1

The importance attached by the emperor to this
fruitless legislation appears from his turn-
ing his efforts in this direction from the
first year of his return to Rome. When *S' ct '

** > B.C. 29.

he took the census with Agrippa, in 72d,
he insisted on carrying into execution the regula-
tions of the dictator, which had been neglected during
the interval of anarchy, and were destined speedily to
fall into similar neglect again. Upon this one point
the master of the Romans could make no impression
upon the dogged disobedience of his subjects. Both
the men and the women preferred the loose terms of
union upon which they had consented to cohabit to
the harsh provisions of antiquity. They despised re-
wards, and penalties they audaciously defied. Eleven
years later Augustus caused the senate to pass a new
law of increased stringency, by which the marriage
of citizens of competent age was positively requited.
Three years’ grace was allowed for making a choice
and settling preliminaries ; but when the allotted
interval was expired, it was found expedient to pro-
long it for two years more : from time to time a
further respite seems to have been conceded, and we
shall find the emperor still struggling almost to the
close of his life, to impose this intolerable restraint
upon the liberty or licence of the times. The con-
sent of the senators themselves, subservient as they
generally were, was given with murmurs of reluc-
tance, the more so, perhaps, as they alone were ex-

5 Suet. Oct. 89. : “ Etiam libros totos et senatui recitavit ct populo
notos per edictom ssepe fecit : ut orationes Q. Metelli de augenda
prole, et Rutilii de vwdo adificiorum : quo magis persuaderet utram-
que rem non a se primo animadvcrsam, aed antiquis jam tunc curaj
fuisse.”

Digitized by Google

88

HISTORY OF THE HOMANS

CH. XXXIII.

cepted from the indulgence, which was now prudently
extended to every lower order of citizens, of permis-
sion to form a legitimate marriage with a freed-
woman . 1 The measure was received indeed with
outward deference, but an inward determination to
evade or overthrow it. Even the poets, who were in-
structed to sing its praises, renounced the obligation
to fulfil its conditions ; while others, whose voices
were generally tuned to accents of adulation, exulted
openly in its relaxation or postponement . 2

The nature of the penalties and rewards assigned
Penalties of by this law shows that the views of Augus-
“w£xSof d tus were for the most part confined to the
marriage. rehabilitation of marriage in the higher
classes, and the restoration of the purest blood of
Rome. On the one hand, celibacy was punished by
incapacity to receive bequests, and even the married
man who happened to be childless, was regarded with
suspicion, and mulcted of one half of every legacy . 3
On the other, the father of a family enjoyed a place

1 Dion, Liv. 16.; who gives as the reason for the relaxation the
disproportion of freeborn males to females, lvi. 7. Comp. Dig.
xxiii. 2. 44. Suet. Oct 34.; “Prae tumultu recusantium perferre non
potuit nisi adempta demum lenitave parte pcenarum, et vacationc
triennii data, anctisque prsemiis.”

1 Horace and Propertius were both unmarried. The former mut-
tered, in language which seems even by its languor and prosaic
structure to betray its insincerity (Carm. Sac -), —

** Diva, producas subolem, Patrumque
Prosperes decreta super jugandis
Foeminis, prolisque nova: feraci

Lego marita.”

The latter exclaimed, with all the fervour of genuine triumph
(ii. 6. 2.),—

“ Gavisa cs certes sublatam Cynthia legem,

Qua quondam edicta flemus uterque diu,

Ne nos dividcret: quamvis diducere am antes
Non queat invitos Jupiter ipse duos! ”

* Tac. Ann. xv. 19. Dion, liii. 13. Gaii Instit. ii. Ill, 286.
Cora. Juvenal, ix. 87. :

“Jura parentis habes; propter me scriberis bseres ;

Legatnm omne capis, neenon et dulce caducum.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

89

of distinction in the theatres, and preference in com-
petition for public office. He was relieved from the
responsibilities of a tutor or a judex, and, as by the
earlier measure of the dictator, was excused from a
portion of the public burdens, if father of three chil-
dren at Rome, of four in Italy, or of five in the pro-
vinces. Of the two consuls, precedence was given,
not to the senior in age, according to ancient usage,
but to the husband and the father of the most nume-
rous offspring . 1 It is clear that such provisions as
these could have had little application to the great
mass of the citizens, who lived on the favour of their
noble patrons or the bounty of the treasury, and bred
up a horde of paupers to eat into the vitals of the
state.

The perverse subjects of this domestic legislation
seem at first to have sought to evade it p ena uie.of
by entering into contracts of marriage uncWilr '
which they afterwards omitted to fulfil. It was ne-
cessary to enact new provisions to meet this subter-
fuge. The facility allowed by the ancient usage to
divorce formed another obvious means of escape : but
again did the vigilant reformer interfere by appoint-
ing the observation of onerous forms for the legal
separation of married persons . 2 When a divorce had
actually taken place, the parties fell again under the
provisions of the marriage law, and were required to
find themselves fresh consorts within a specified in-
terval . 3 Another mode of driving the reluctant

1 Gell. ii. 15. Besides the classical authorities here cited the
reader may refer to the fragments of Ulpian, published in Booking's
Corpus Juris Antejustinianci, and the modern writers on jurispru-
dence, such as Heineccius, Gothofred, Schulting, Brisson, and others
who have written treatises upon the Lex Papia Poppsea, or recon-
structed it from the notices of antiquity. The particulars here given
may be found in all compilations on Roman law.

2 Paulus in Dig. xxiv. 2. 9. : “ Nullum divortiura ratum est, nisi
septem civibus Rom. puberibus adhibitis, prseter libertum ejus qui
divortiuin faciet.”

3 Ulpian. fr. xiv.: “Fceminis lex Jnlia a raorte viri anni tribuit

Digitized by Google

90

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

citizens within the marriage pale was the infliction of
penalties and disgrace upon unchastity beyond it:
while now, for the first time, adultery, which had
been left to be punished by the domestic tribunal as
a private injury, was branded as a crime against the
general well being, and subjected to the animadver-
sion of the state . 1 But Augustus was not satisfied
with directing his thunders against the guilty; be
sought to anticipate criminality by imposing fresh re-
straints upon the licentious manners of the age.
After the example of his predecessors in the censor-
ship, he fixed a scale of expense for the luxuries of
the table, and pretended to regulate the taste of the
women for personal ornaments. At the gladiatorial
shows, from which they could no longer be excluded,
he assigned different places for the two sexes, re-
moving the women to the hinder rows, the least
favourable either for seeing or being seen, and alto-
gether forbade them to assist at the exhibitions of
wrestling and boxing.

The main principles of the old Boman polity were
Regulations' founded upon the distinction of classes, and
Snctton^of in order to revive or reinforce them, the
ciaesei. conservative legislator determined to mark
the distinction by outward tokens. The word of
command went forth, let every Boman know his own
place and keep it. The law of Boscius Otho had
separated the knights from the body of the people,
and assigned them the first fourteen rows in the
theatre. But this ordinance had been invaded, in

vacationem, a divortio sex mensium: lex autem Papia amorte viri
biennii, a repudio anni et sex mensium.” The fragment seems to be
incomplete, and probably went on to specify the interval allowed to
the male sex.

1 Suetonius, Oct. 34., calls this law, “Lex de adulteriis et pu-
dicitia.” Per the particulars see Dig. xlviii. 5.

Horace, Od. iv. 5.: “Mos et lex maculosum edomuit nefas.”

The punishment of adultery consisted in heavy pecuniary fines, and
banishment to an island, and seems therefore applicable only to the
higher classes.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

91

the confusion of the times, by the rampant demo-
cracy of Caesar and Antonius : a plain soldier had
been known to intrude himself into the places thus
set apart for the privileged order; and Augustus him-
self had beheld a senator enter the theatre, where
every seat was already occupied, and no man rise to
make room for him. Freedmen, under pretence of
being attached to the service of foreign potentates,
had penetrated the orchestra itself, which was strictly
appropriated to the senators. These irregularities
were regarded as the symptom of a dislocation of all
social principles. Henceforth they were corrected,
and with the correction it was hoped that the spirit of
antiquity would revive. The soldiers were kept sepa-
rate from the people, the young from the old, the
children’s tutors had their proper places assigned
them by the side of their charges, the married men
were promoted in front of the bachelors, and a sump-
tuary ordinance relegated to the most distant corners
those who ventured to obtrude themselves in un-
seemly raiments . 1

We have already seen how the proprieties of dress
and demeanour were again rigidly enforced. ju.,tn Ctiont
The public entertainments presented an
image of the Eoman state, and there at ,laTOS -
least the citizen was required to appear in full dress,
in the costume of the ancient Quirites. He was for-
bidden to reject the warm and cumbrous toga for
the light habiliments of slaves and foreigners. The
practice in which knights and even senators had
sometimes indulged, of showing their skill in dancing
and acting upon the public stage, was now sternly
prohibited. The Eoman must give way neither to

1 Suet. Oct 44.: “ Sanxitque ne pullatorum quisquam media
cavea sederet.” Compare Calpurnins, at a much later period, Eel.
yii. 26.

“ Venimus ad sedes ubi pulla sordida veste
Inter foemincas spectabat turba cathedrae. "

Digitized by Google

92

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ca. xxxm.

ease nor vanity. But the primitive sense of personal
dignity could scarcely be retained by men who had
lost the support of conscious freedom, and the irregu-
larities thus denounced were ready at every moment
to break out again, upon the slightest relaxation
of vigilance in the government. By imposing a tax
upon the manumission of slaves Augustus might
hope to limit in some degree the infusion of new
and base blood into the veins of the body politic,
and no considerations of humanity withheld him
from a measure which must have tended to worsen
the condition of that unfortunate class. The mild
influence of social tranquillity had not yet succeeded
in softening, as was certainly the case in some re-
spects at a later period, the callous indifference to
human suffering engendered by the habits and insti-
tutions of a race of conquerors. The horrible punish-
ment Augustus inflicted on the slaves who had en-
listed under Sextus Pompeius, consigning them by
thousands to the cross as fugitives, was a punctilious
recurrence to the prescriptions of ancient law, and
was no doubt applauded by the mass of the citizens
as a wholesome exercise of authority for the safety
of the state. But unfortunately we can discover no
certain trace of any later measures of the same em-
peror for ameliorating the condition of servitude,
though one anecdote at least is told of his interfering
to save a slave’s life, and another of his refusing
to punish the murder of an odious master . 1

The discreet usurper, who shrinks from the name
jurisprudence °f a revolutionist, will seek, by controlling
of Augiutiu. t j ie interpretation of existing laws, to avoid
the necessity of enacting new. Such was eminently

1 Dion, liv. 23. Senec. Nat. Quasi, i. 16. The lex Petronia, by
which masters were forbidden to sell their slaves to the exhibitors of
combats with wild beasts, has been referred by many commentators
to Augustas. But the term lex, on which they mainly depend, con-
tinued to be sometimes used after the abolition of the ancient forms

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxm.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

93

the policy of Augustus. The legislation of the tri-
umvirate, if to its arbitrary decrees such a title may
be applied, consisted chiefly in indulgences accorded
to certain classes or interests; and these the new
ruler, after faintly excusing them on the plea of
momentary necessity, surrendered to be absolutely
annulled 1 . His own special enactments were directed,
as we have seen, to the permanent reconstruction
of society upon the basis of at least a pretended
antiquity. Every deviation from ancient forms was
carefully disguised or plausibly palliated. The great
body of the Roman law existed for the most part in
a mass of traditional precedents, upon which the
judicial magistrates formed their own system of pro-
cedure. Their arbitrary conclusions were controlled
however by the general interpretation of the learned,
the patrician jurisconsults, who still claimed, with
more or less success, to be the privileged expounders
of the sense of antiquity in these matters, and were
still consulted, if not strictly obeyed, by the advocates
of their own class. Thus when Servius Sulpicius, the
greatest or at least the second, as a learned jurist
calls him, of Roman pleaders, was in doubt on a
point of law involved in a cause with which he was
concerned, he asked the opinion of Mucius Scsevola.
Not perfectly understanding the reply vouchsafed to
him, he laid his difficulty a second, and again a third
time, before the oracle ; and at last submitted to the
severe rebuke, that it was shameful for a patrician, a
noble and an advocate, to be ignorant of the law
which he had to administer. Thereupon he applied
himself so diligently to the abstruse sfcudy, as to
acquire the highest reputation therein of any of his
countrymen, and to leave them no less than a hun-

of legislation, and other critics ascribe this law with more probability
to the time of Nero. Troplong, Influence du ChrUtianisme sur le
Droit Remain, part ii. chap. ii.

1 a.u. 726. Tac. Ann. iii. 28.; Dion, liii. 2.

Digitized by Google

94 HISTORY OP THE ROMANS CH. xxxill.

»

dred and eighty volumes of commentaries on the
subject, to become a standard authority -with succeed-
ing generations . 1 Such influence as a Scaevola or a
Sulpicius could thus exert Augustus sought to gain to
his own side. His appointment indeed of the prae-
tors secured him the interpretation of the law in all
matters affecting his interests, as far as the edict of
these magistrates could go ; but he shrank from suf-
fering the law to issue solely from the mouth of his
own officers. The middle course which he devised
was to suppress the right of giving opinions hitherto
possessed in theory by all patricians indiscriminately,
and restrict, it to such among them as he chose him-
self to license, ostensibly at least for their eminent
knowledge and character. This change was not per-
haps in fact so startling as it appears ; for the prac-
tice of the jurisconsult’s prerogative had fallen into
general disuse, and was actually confined to a small
number of devoted professors of the science. Such
however as it was, it led the way to the systematic
development of legal principles, which, as it was the
greatest creation of the imperial system, became also
the firmest bulwark of its authority, cementing in
one massive structure the work of a series of revolu-
tions, and throwing a legitimate sanction over mere
military force . 2

1 Pomponius in Digest, i. 2. 42.

• Pomponius (Dig. i. 2. 47.) gives a curious account of the two
schools of juridical authorities which sprang from the teaching of
Ateius Capito and Antistius Labeo respectively. The first of these
learned men had yielded to the imperial blandishments, and accepted
the consulship as the price of his subserviency; the other maintained
a sturdy independence, devoting himself entirely to the business of
his profession. The followers of Capito were attached to the old
traditions; those of Labeo were innovators and original speculators:
the one was succeeded by Masurius Sabinus, Cassius Longinus,
Cfelius Sabinus, Prisons Javolenus, Valens, Tnscianus, and Julianus;
the other by Cocceius Nerva, Proculus, Pegasus, Celsus father and
son, and Priscus Neratius. For the characters of Capito and Labeo
see Tacitus, Anrt. iii. 75.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIU.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

95

This review of the legislation of Augustus must
be closed with some general remarks upon
the policy which directed it. The name th« T £ucyof
of Julius Caesar was the watchword which U8U ‘ us '
had cheered the legions of Oc? vius on to victory,
and it continued dear to the iuass of the Eoman
citizens, by whom the conqueror of the oligarchs
was still regarded as the legitimate descendant of
Marius, and the avenger of the Sullan massacres.
But the popular writers of the Augustan era,
who reflected the sentiments of the court rather
than of the people, seem to have shared in a very
trifling degree this general enthusiasm. Their al-
most total silence on Caesar’s merits, — for Virgil
rarely and Horace never once celebrates his praises,
— must be taken as significant of the peculiar views
and policy of their patron . 1 The merits of the
father and the son were so distinct that, had such
been the pleasure of Augustus, he could have af-
forded to lavish the highest honours on the memory
of his predecessor, without subjecting his own well-
earned fame to any disparagement. The genial
tributes of the Latin muse would have warmed the
feelings of the Romans towards their benefactor
more effectually, had such been his desire, than the
frigid compliments of a temple and a priesthood.
But Augustus, who affected to be the Caesar of
Peace, had a political motive for throwing into the
shade the glories of the hero of Pharsalia. The
death of his last rival Antonius operated a complete

1 The name of the first Caesar is only once introduced by Horace,
to compliment Augustus as “ Cresaris ultor.” The allusion to the
“Julium aid us” applies, perhaps, to the Julian family generally.
When Tydides is said to be “ melior patre,” it is meant to remind
us that Augustus was more illustrious than his father. Ovid has a
similar comparison, Metam. xv. 750. : “ Nequc enim de Ctcsaris actis
Ullura majus opus quam quod pater exstitit hujus.” Virgil mentions
Cesar only three times; Eel. ix. 127., Geo. i. 466., JBn.v i. 826.;
and Propertius never. See Orclli’s note on Horace, Od. i. 12. 47.

Digitized by Google

96

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxra.

change both in his temper and his aspirations.
Henceforth the princeps, or leader of the senate,
succeeds to the triumvir, as the triumvir had suc-
ceeded. to the dictator. He now approaches more
and more closely to the aristocracy, against which
in his early years he had waged a war of extermina-
tion. He opens his arms to it, he devotes to its
interests without reserve all the powers he has re-
ceived from the triumphant democracy. Towards so
generous a conqueror the nobles could not long re-
tain their feelings of rancour, nor persist in refusing
him their support, when they found him full of the
most amiable dispositions towards them, when he
promised and strove with energy and discretion to
revive their ancient consideration, and more than
compensate them for their losses, when he promoted
to the highest offices the son of the murdered Cicero
and a friend of the persecuted Brutus ', when, in
short, by flattery and condescension he sought to
efface the crime of his origin, and the revolutionary
recollections of Mutina and Munda. They listened
with admiration to his accustomed theses on Re-
sistance and Conservation, Reaction and Restitu-
tion ; on a projected system of government which
he propounded as the best, the best at least which
the times admitted, the only system, in fact, by
which the illustrious republic of Rome, could be
preserved ; a system which he is proud to call his
own, though built on the old foundations and
constructed of the old materials overthrown by the
earthquake of civil strife ; with no other ambition,
as he fervently asseverated, than to be called the re-

1 M. Tullius Cicero was consul suffect in the year 724: Dion, li.
19. A son of Crassus tho triumvir held the same office in that year
also. Scstius, the friend of Brutus, was promoted to the consulship
in 731. The family of tho great orator ended in the second genera-
tion in a contemptible drunkard. See the stories of this Cicero's
excesses in Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxii. 3., xiv. 28. Senec. de Bene/, iv.
30. We may suppose that he had forfeited his self-respect after ac-
cepting the consulship from the slayer of his father.

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxm.

UN DEB THE EliriRE.

97

storer of the commonwealth, and hear away in dying
the conviction that his work will survive him . 1

How carefully this system was contrived to in-
terest the higher class, while it tranquillized Augusts
the restless spirits of the lower, has been SfMth'e
seen in the details of this and former ment of his
chapters. To the one it held out the
prospect of honourable employment, while it checked
every prompting of ambition ; to the other it sub-
stituted amusement for occupation, shows and lar-
gesses for military service: and such a system,
while it can be maintained, affords no doubt great
facilities to the march of administration. To the
nobles Augustus could boast that the dictator had
refused to be crowned a king, but had himself
offered to restore the sword of the imperator. He
vaunted the victories he had gained over the na-
tional foes, and the glory the state had acquired
under his direction of its foreign relations. He
pointed to the sacrifices he had made for the general
weal, and compared himself to a Mucius, a Curtius,
or a Decius. Think not, he exclaimed, that the
ancients alone were true 'patriots ; behold in me a
living proof that the love of Rome burns still bright
in her children. Such was the spirit of the old
patricians, and such still exists in the bosom of
the high-born offspring of Quirinus. They are
the true ruler's and fathers of the commonwealth:
fear not that I will ever abandon it to the sivay of
an unprincipled democracy : no ! — sooner will I
perish, sooner beign ! He thus held out to them
the dire figure' of royalty in the furthest distance,

1 Suet. Oct. 28.: “ Quam voluntatem (retincndi Imp.) quum pra;
se ideutidem ferret, quodam etiam edicto his verbis testatus est: Ita
mihi salvara ac sospitam rempublicam sistcrc in Bua sede liceat, atque,
ejus rci fructum percipere quem peto, ut optimi status auctor di car
et moriens ut feram mecuin spem mansura in vestigio suo fundamenta
reipublicse qutc jecero. Fccitque ipse se compotem voti, nisus omni
modo ne quem novi status pceuiteret.”

VOL. IV. H

Digitized by Google

98

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

as a monster to be invoked only in the last necessity
to save the world from chaos. So far from taking
away the life of a single citizen to obtain the crown,
he would sooner lose his own life than wear one !
a life, he it remarked, which the gods will surely
protect, as they have avenged the death of Caesar . 1
To the people he affirmed that the sway of Eome
over the nations was now completed and assured.
All nations should bring their tribute to the Capitol ;
the Roman, proud and untaxed, should enjoy the
fruits of every zone and climate. Every gale should
waft corn to Italy, to be lavished on the citizens by
the hand of their friend and benefactor. The Ro-
man should fold his arms in indolence and satiety,
while his subjects should labour and his rulers think
for him. To his countrymen, one and all, Augustus
could allege that he had secured the stability of
their institutions by his piety to the gods. He bad
bribed Olympus by gifts in which the immortals
delighted. He had set up their fallen altars, re-
paired their temples, revived their services, and
rekindled the flame of devotion in the heart of the
nation. To his own fortunes and to the fortunes of
the state he had attached the powers of heaven for
ever . 2 From the gods he had descended to reha-
bilitate the ancient heroes of his country, restoring 1
their monuments, re-erecting their images, sur-
rounded with triumphal ornaments, and placing
them under the colonnades of his own spacious
forum, as the witnesses and patrons of the glory
he had achieved. The city itself had participated
in his pious solicitude. He honours her as a mother
and a tutelary influence, almost as a goddess her-
self. For her embellishment he constructs many
magnificent works, and requires the wealthy and
the noble to follow his example ; for he is not an
Oriental potentate, but only the first of his own

1 See the supposed harangue of Augustus in Dion, liii. 6. foil.

2 Ovid, Fast. ii. 62. : “ Nec satis est homines, obligat ille deos.”

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxra.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

99

rank of citizens. Indignant at the inundations
which periodically overwhelm, and the conflagra-
tions which so frequently devastate her, he projects
her restoration upon a scale of greater security and
splendour, and boasts at last, as the crowning merit
of his administration, that he found her of brick
and has left her of marble . 1

In reflecting upon the easy acquiescence of the
Romans in a regal tyranny, disguised un- Prospector

, ° J J ° . monarchy not

der such transparent pretensions, we must <u*cour«gini
not forget that they were not in a position Koman..
to anticipate the rapid decline in public spirit
which from this time actually took place among
them. Apart from an antique prejudice, of which
the wisest statesmen may have well been ashamed,
royal rule could not imply, to their minds, de-
generacy and decay. Under the sceptre of Philip
the Macedonians had conquered Greece ; under
Alexander they had subjugated Asia. The Spar-
tans had flourished under a dynasty of kings ;
even the Romans themselves, it might be remem-
bered, had first proved their youthful energies under
the auspices of a Romulus and a Tullus. They were
far, therefore, from anticipating that the greatness
and glory of their country would decline under a
prince’s sway ; it was only in the last agonies of an
impracticable republic that their valour had earned
them no triumphs . 2 For the maintenance of the

1 Suet. Oct. 29.: “Urbem, nequc pro majestate imperii ornatam,
et inundationibus incendiisquc obnoxiam, cxcoluit adeo ut jure si
gloriatus, marmoream sc rclinqucre quam latericiam acccpisset:”
Comp. Dion, lvi. 30., who puts the same expression in Greek, and
adds the moral interpretation; rovro oil rrpbs rb rdv oiKobop.rjjxa.Twv
airrrj I axpi) 3es, aAAcfc rrpbs rb rrjs ipxv s ‘cxvpbv ivtbflta.ro.

* Lucan, i. 12.: “Bella geri placuit nnllos habitura trinmphos.”
The opening lines of the Pharsalia deserve to be studied from this
point of view; as for instance:

“ Hen quantum terra potuit pelagique parari,

Hoc quern civiles hauserunt sanguine dextr® . . .

Sub juga jam Seres, jam barbarns isset Araxcs ”...
h 2

»

Digitized by Google

100

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

living powers of the state they looked, not so much
to the effect of free action and discussion, as to cer-
tain established principles of social organization.
They put their trust, not in a free press and public
opinion, but in the subordination of classes, the
hierarchy of families, the customs of antiquity,
and the traditions of religion. Generally speaking,
law, in the view of the ancients, was something di-
vine and permanent, the exponent of certain eternal
necessities ; whereas we allow ourselves to regard
it as little else than the fleeting expression of every
mood of the national existence. Hence the un-
doubt ing faith of the Romans in sumptuary legis-
lation ; that is, in the attempt to restore, without
regard to outward change in the circumstances of
society, the prescriptions of a normal antiquity.
Hence the conviction of Augustus and his contem-
poraries, that in merely reviving ancient traditions,
he was raising to life the dead bones of the past,
and launching his country upon a new career of
growth and development.

In his personal habits and demeanour Augustus
Moderation in carefully distinguished between the Impe-
ttr al rator and the Princeps. He protected his
Augustus. personal dignity by withdrawing from the
indecent familiarity with which Julius Caesar had
allowed himself to address his legionaries. The
conqueror of the Gauls had deigned to call the
instruments of his victories by the name of fellow-
soldiers ; but Augustus, whether in his edicts or his
harangues, never spoke of them but as his “ soldiers' > ’ >

When after a century’s experience the empire was declared to be
barren of laurels, Lucan expresses the mortification of his class in
bitter language :

“ Sed retro tua fata tulit, par omnibus annis,

Emathisc funesta dies: hac luce cruenta
Effectum, ut Latios non horreat India fasces;

Nec vetitos errare Dallas in moenia ducat,

Sarmaticumque premat succiuctus consul aratrum.’

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

101

only. At a later period he forbade the princes of his
family to employ any other term than this in commu-
nication with them ; a prohibition in which there
was a little pride, and perhaps also a little jealousy . 1
At the same time, however, as the prince of the sen-
ate and the people, he did not fail studiously to dis-
guise all consciousness of his deserts, and shrank
from the appearance of claiming the honours due to
him. Amidst the magnificence displayed around
him, which he chose to encourage in his nobles, his
own manners were remarkable for their simplicity,
and were regulated, not by his actual pre-eminence,
but by the position he affected to occupy of a modest
patrician. His mansion on the Palatine hill was mo-
derate in size and decoration, and he showed his
contempt for the voluptuous appliances of patrician
luxury by retaining the same bed-chamber both in
winter and summer.* His dress was that of a plain
senator, and he let it be known that his robe was
woven by the hands of Livia herself and the maidens
of her apartment. He was seen to traverse the
streets as a private citizen, with no more than the
ordinary retinue of slaves and clients, addressing
familiarly the acquaintances he met, taking them
courteously by the hand, or leaning on their shoulders,
allowing himself to be summoned as a witness in
their suits, and often attending in their houses on
occasions of domestic interest . 3 At table his habits

1 Suet. JuL 67. : Nec milites eos pro condone, sed blandiori nomine
comroilitones appcllabat.” Oct. 25. : “ Ambitiosius id existimans.”

2 Suet. Oct. 72. There is something interesting in the care with
which the Romans traced their honoured emperor from one of his
residences to another, and probably rising a little above the last in
the scale of sumptuousness : “ Ilnbitavit prirao juxta Romanum
forum, snpra scalas annularins, in domo qme Calvi oratoris fuerat;
postea in palatio; sed nihilominns sedibus modicis Hortensianis; et
ncqoe laxitate neque cultu conspicuis,” &c. Comp. Dion, liiL 16.,
lv. 12.

•Suet. Oct. 53.; Quintil. Inst. Orat. vi. 3. 59.; Macrob. Saturn.
ii. 4.

Digitized by Google

102

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

were sober and decorous, and his mode of living
abstemious : he was generally the last to approach
and the earliest to quit the board . 1 His guests were
few in number, and chosen, for the most part, for
their social qualities : Virgil and Horace, the plebeian
poets, were as welcome to his hours of recreation as
Pollio or Messala. His conversation turned on sub-
jects of intellectual interest ; he disdained the amuse-
ment which the vulgar rich derived from dwarfs,
idiots, and monsters . 2 Some ribald stories were
current respecting his private habits, which the citi-
zens gratified themselves with repeating, though at-
taching, perhaps, little credit to them. The future
restorer of religion, and patron of the Olympian hier-
archy, had amused himself, it was said, while yet
triumvir, amidst a crew of boon companions, with as-
suming at a banquet the names and attributes of the
twelve greater gods . 3 The guardian of manners and
reviver of the ancient purity was affirmed, in a si-
milar spirit of detraction and pasquinade, to have
courted, sometimes in the rudest and most open
manner, the wives of the noblest Romans ; not from
unbridled appetite, for his power of self-control was
unquestioned 4 ; but in order, as his apologists averred,
to extract from his paramours the political secrets
of their consorts . 5 Such stories, however, if actually

1 Suet. Oct. 74. 76, 77.

2 Suet. Oct. 83.: “Nam pumilos et distortos et omnes generis
cjusdcm ut ludibria quatdam naturae malique ominis abhorrebat.”

3 Suet. Oct. 70. : “ Caena quoque secretior in fabulis fuit quae
SaiStKdSfos vocabatur.” This and many othor stories against Octa-
vius might be traced to the invention of Antonius. It had been,
generally forgotten, we may presume, when Horace could venture
to sing :

“ Quos inter Augustus recumbens
Purpureo bibit ore nectar.”

4 See an anecdote of the continence of the young Octavius in
Nicolaus Damascenus, Vit. August. 5. 15.

5 Suet. Oct. 69. : “ Adulteria qusedam excrcuisse ne amici quidem
negant; excusantes sane non libidine sed ratione eommissa, quo
facilius consilia adversariorum per cujusque mulieres exquireret.”

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxnr.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

103

current at the time, made little impression upon the
public ; they were too commonly reported of all con-
spicuous characters to take hold of the convictions
of the multitude; nor did the great man himself
think it always necessary to reply to them. Augus-
tus refrained, with remarkable firmness, from check-
ing the licentiousness of his personal detractors by
legal procedure . 1

But if Augustus had the good sense to bear with
temper the virulence of clandestine lam- Jealousy of
pooners, which he knew would evaporate as £uuouie
soon as it reached the air, he was not the guiut.™
less vigilant in marking, and stern in repressing, all
acts of defiance or presumption on the part of his
subjects. The mild and affable patrician, whose
whole heart seemed to be wrapped up in schemes for
the promotion of general prosperity and individual
comfort, was changed at once into a jealous tyrant at
the first sign of political rivalry. Painful was the
impression made upon the public mind when it ap-
peared, from one melancholy instance, that the mere
frown of so kind a master was felt as a disgrace at
his court, and that disgrace at court was regarded as
no other than a sentence of death. Cornelius Gallus,
a Roman knight, a man of fashion and accomplish-
ments, a poet himself of considerable mark, and the
companion of poets and statesmen, had been en-
trusted, by the favour of Augustus, with the govern-
ment of Egypt, where, as we have seen, he had done
him faithful service in repelling the solicitations of
Antonius . 2 But the splendour of his position, as
the first Roman who had sate on the throne of the
Ptolemies, and the flattery of the cringing Orientals,

1 Suet. Oct. 55. : “Etiam sparsos do se in curia famosos libellos
nec expavit, nec raagna cura redarguit.” Comp. Tac. Ann. i. 72.

2 Gallus was in the zenith of his fame as an amatory poet before
the reputation of any of his contemporaries was established. Even
at a later period Ovid speaks of him as inferior to none of them.
Amor. i. 15. 29.

Digitized by Google

104

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ca. xxxm.

who, in the vicegerent and servant of the emperor,
beheld the successor of their own absolute sovereigns,
intoxicated his weak and vain mind, and he suffered
his subjects to erect statues in his honour, and inscribe
his name and exploits on the stones of the pyramids.
In a senator and a proconsul such conduct might
have given no pretext for complaint ; but the case
of the government of Egypt was exceptional : the
jealousy of the emperor was peculiarly sensitive in
regard to every act and word of his factor at Alex-
andria ; and the indiscretions of Grallus were magni-
fied into a charge of treason against the interests of
the republic. The senators, before whose tribunal
the culprit was arraigned on the motion of one of
their own order, hastened with ready adulation to de-
clare him guilty, and desired his removal from his

a . v . 728. command. Augustus appointed an officer to

b. c. as. supersede him, and required his presence in

Rome. On his return the loss of his master’s favour,
the cold reception he encountered from the courtiers,
the sense of disgrace and the apprehension of severer
punishment so worked upon his weak mind, that he
threw himself upon his own sword. Augustus was
himself shocked at this unexpected catastrophe ; it
impressed, no doubt, upon him a painful conviction
of his own isolation : he was sincere, we may believe,
in rebuking the excessive zeal of the officious and
selfish accusers, and complained that he was the only
citizen who could not be angry with a friend without
making him an enemy . 1 Nevertheless the depen-
dents of the court seemed to have distrusted the
sincerity of these regrets. They hastened to abjure
their connexion with the fallen favourite. Virgil,
at the instigation, it is said, of Augustus himself,
suppressed a poetical compliment to the prince of
Roman elegy, and replaced a genuine tribute of re-

' Suet. Oct. 66.; Dion, liii. 23.; Amraian. Marcell. xvii. 4.

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxnr.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

105

gard and admiration with a very pretty but a very
foolish fable . 1

The senators, yet unconscious of the peril in which
their own order stood, had perhaps little con- “cwrd^
cem for the fate of an upstart knight, while A«gu«u^t
the murmurs of fear and discontent which ct™..
may have issued from the associates of the victim
himself were speedily drowned in the strains of praise
and flattery with which the theatre and circus, and
every other public ’place, resounded. The admiration
of the citizens was divided between the splendour, the
variety, and the frequency of the shows their munifi-
cent patron exhibited. The attractions of these were so
irresistible, that almost every house in Rome was de-
serted to attend them, and it was necessary to patrol
the streets with guards on the days of spectacle to
protect the property of their truant inhabitants . 2 It is
said that Augustus himself partook of the popular taste
for the excitement and vulgar pomp of these shows,
and acknowledged an interest in them which was not
generally felt by the more refined and intelligent . 3 * 5
At all events he justly regarded them as one of his
instruments of government : it was civil, in the
Roman sense, to mingle in the amusements of the
citizens ; accordingly, if business prevented him from
attending, he always affected to ask pardon of his
good countrymen, and when present he was careful
to avoid the fault of Julius Caesar, who allowed him-

1 Doriatus in Vit. Virgil. 10. It was believed that the story of

Aristseus, at the end of the fourth Georgic, was written to occupy

the room of an address to Gallus, which the poet was commanded to
expunge. This account is very reasonably questioned by Heyne:
it is not easy to see what place the praises of Gallus can have had in
this connexion, whereas the fable of Aristseus is not inappropriate,
and may be thought perhaps to elevate by its fantastic supcrnaturalism
the extreme humility of the general subject.

1 Suet. Oct. 43.

5 Aurcl. Victor, Epit. i. : “ Quodque est Iseti animi vel amceni,
oblectabatur omni genere spcctaculorum.”

Digitized by Google

106

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

cn. xxxiii.

self to read and write letters and transact affairs in
the hours devoted to general relaxation . 1

The constant plenty which the emperor’s prudent
The people measures secured for Italy and the city, the
themselves sudden abundance of the precious metals,
of general and the impetus it gave to the transactions
prosperity. of trade and commerce, the cessation of the
detested recruiting for the legions, which was now
relegated to the provinces, all combined to fulfil the
warmest anticipations of the blessings of peace, and
reduced to a happy reality the fervent aspirations of
the poets . 2 Mildew corroded blade and spear-head,
but spared the growing crops ; the sword was turned
into a pruning-hook, the corselet into a ploughshare ;
the altar of Peace was erected solemnly in the Eoman
x.v. 741. curia, and her festival was celebrated on the

*- c - 13 - same day with those of Janus, of Safety,

and of Concord . 3 On such occasions the praises of
Augustus, as the author of so much happiness, held
always the foremost place. Even the calamities of
the city were turned into occasions of congratulation.
Once when the Tiber overflowing its banks caused
more than usual devastation, the augurs interpreted
the event as a token of the swelling greatness of the
* ax . 727. emperor. Thereupon a senator named Pa-
bx . 27. cuvius invited the citizens to devote their
lives in company with himself to the life of Augustus,

1 Suet Oct. 45.: “Quoties adesset nihil proctcrea agcbat: seu
vitandi rumoris causa, quo patrem Caesarcm vulgo reprehensum com-
membrabat, quod inter spectandum epistolis libellisque legendis ac
rescribendis vacaret; seu studio speetandi ac voluptatc, qua teneri
se neque dissimulavit unquam, et ssepe ingenue professus est.” Conap.
Tac. Ann. i. 54.: “ Neque ipse abhorrebat a talibus studiis, et civile
rebatur, misceri voluptatibus vulgi.”

2 Ovid, Fast. iv. 925.: “ Aspera Robigo parcas Ccroalibus herbis,”
&c. Comp. Fast. i. 701. 711. Tibull. i. 2. 49.

3 Ovid, Fast. i. 8S1. (March 28):

“Janus adorandus, cumque hoc Concordia mitis,

Et Romana Salus, araquc Paris erit”

Comp. Zonaras, x. 34.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

107

that is, to swear not to survive him . 1 In vain did
the emperor interfere to prevent them from rushing
tumultuously to offer sacrifices to his divinity. When-
ever he returned to Rome from the provinces the
people accompanied him home with hymns and accla-
mations, and care was taken that on such auspicious
occasions no criminal should be capitally punished . 2
The poets urged their countrymen to remember, in
every prayer and thanksgiving, the restorer of order,
the creator of universal felicity. In the temples on
days of public service, around their own hearths on
every ordinary day, they were invited to thank the
gods for all their prosperity, and with the gods them-
selves to join the hallowed names of Troy, of An-
chises, and of /Eneas, the patrons of the Julian race . 3
And when they rose from the evening meal to retire
to rest, the last duty of the day, they were reminded,
was to call with a modest libation for a blessing on
themselves, and on Caesar, the Father of his country . 4

The title of father of his country was indeed the
proudest any Roman could obtain, and this n,, utI( . of
the citizens had long been accustomed to
lavish, privately and irregularly, on their Au « u,tu ’-
hero and patron, when at last the senate took up the
voice of the nation and conferred it upon him with
due solemnity . 5 This act, however, was not sanctioned

1 Dion, liii. 20. This devotion he characterizes as after the manner
of the Spaniards, rbv ruv '\fri\puv rpiirov. Caesar has told us that it
was a custom of the Aquitanians, and it may have been in vogue
among the kindred tribes on both sides of the Pyrenees.

s Suet. Oct. 57. Dion, li. 20.

3 Horace, Od. iv. 15.:

“ Nos et profestis lucibus et sacris, etc.”

' Ovid, Fast. ii. 635.:

“ Et bene nos, patria; bene te pater, optimc Caesar,

Dicite, suffuso per sacra verba mero.”

5 Suet. Oct. 58. Horace, at an early period of his power: “Hie
ames dici Pater atque Princcps.” But the title was not formally
conferred before 752, on the nones of February, in the 13th consul-

Digitized by Google

108 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS CH. xxxin.

by a formal decree ; it seemed perhaps more flattering
to give it the appearance of spontaneous acclamation.
Valerius Messala, one of the noblest of the order, was
deputed by his colleagues to offer the title to the
emperor in the name of the senate and people. * Con-
script Fathers ,’ replied Augustus with tears, l my
wishes are void fulfilled, my vows are accomplished.
1 have nothing more to ask of the immortal gods,
but that I may retain to my dying day the unani-
mous approbation you now bestcnv upon me' 1 The
poet Ovid could declare that the emperor was justly
designated the father of his country, for he had long
been in fact the father of the world. To him, as the
pacifier of the nations, the sovereigns in alliance with
Rome paid homage not less zealously than his own
compatriots. In various kingdoms of the East they
founded cities which they dignified with the name of
Caesarea. They combined for the completion of the
great temple, long before commenced, of Jupiter
Olympius at Athens, and finally dedicated it to the
genius of Augustus. They descended from their
thrones to seek him in bis capital, or wherever they
might overtake him in his progress through the pro-
vinces; divesting themselves in his presence of the
diadem and the purple, and donning the toga of plain
Roman citizenship, as clients attending on a noble
patron. 2

The estimation in which the founder of the empire
was held by the citizens and by foreigners is thus
established, not from the colours in which historians

ship of Augustus. See Spanheim, de Usu Num. 446. Comp. Ovid,
Fast. ii. 1 27. :

“ Sancte rater patriae, tibi Plebs, tibi Curia nomen
Hoc dedit, hoc dcdimus nos tibi nomen Eques.

Ees tamen ante dedit : sero quoque vent tnlisti
Nomina: jam pridem tu Pater Orbis eras.’’

1 Suet. Oct. 1. c.

2 Suet. Oct. 60. : Comp. Eutrop. vii. 5. Cities of the name of
Ctesarca were founded in Palestine, Galatia, Pisidia, Bithynia,
Cilicia, Armenia, and Mauretania. See Pliny, Hist. Nat v. vL

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

109

have pourtrayed his career, but from the unsuspected
testimony of many collateral authorities, con™*™-
We may now proceed to examine in detail,
as far as our means allow, the incidents of I? thl»‘

an administration which has left on the teriod '
whole such a solemn impression of respect. These
incidents are related in a consecutive narrative by
only one writer of antiquity, nor till after an interval
of nearly 200 years. And even this writer admits in
striking language the imperfection of his materials,
and explains the cause of the uncertainty which per-
vades all Roman history from the establishment of
the empire. “ Thus,” says Dion, “ was the Roman
commonwealth reduced to a better and securer form:
and indeed it was no longer possible for it to exist
under popular rule. Henceforth, however, its affairs
can no longer be written as heretofore. For hitherto
every transaction, whether' at home or abroad , was
referred to the cognisance of the senate and people,
and accordingly all public affairs were generally
known, and many related them inwriting. Although,
therefore , many authors were swayed by fear or
favour , by love or hatred, yet the tru tli might gene-
rally be discovered by the comparison of one with
another, combined with the examination of public
recoi'ds. But from henceforth affairs began to be
transacted privily and in silence, and if any were
divulged they were not sufficiently attested to com-
mand implicit credence. For everything, it teas
suspected, was said and done in accordance with the
views of the men inpoiver. From henceforth we find
many things commonly stated which never occurred ,
while others which really took place are not men-
tioned at all ; and almost every incident is distorted
from the truth of facts. Besides, the vastness of the
empire itself, and the multitude of occurrences, makes
it doubly difficult to relate all things accurately.
For events occurred in Rome, in the provinces, and
on the frontiers, of which none but the actors them-

Digitlzed by Google

110

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIII.

selves could ascertain the real circumstances, while
the people generally hieiv not that they occurred at
all. Henceforth therefore I propose to relate affairs
as far as I think requisite, in accordance with the
narrations of others , whether they be true or false,
only occasionally introducing conjectures of my own,
where I am induced to dissent from the ordinary
account hy some special information .” 1 Dion, it
will be remembered, was possessed of all our author-
ities, of Pliny and Seneca, of Suetonius and Tacitus,
as well as of many •thers ; and though, as a Greek
himself, he applied probably, for the most part, to
the Greeks for instruction, he cannot have been
unaware of the pretensions of Tacitus especially to
industry and impartiality, and of the character of a
consummate historian which that writer bore among
his own countrymen accordingly. When this illus-
trious Homan remarks, at the outset of his Annals,
that men of excellent talents were not wanting to
relate the times of Augustus, till deterred by the in-
creasing necessity of adulation, but that the histories
of later principates were falsified either by fear
during the lifetime of the princes themselves, or by
hatred after their death, we may question whether
Dion considered even Tacitus so free both from anger
and affection as he confidently asserts . 1 2 To explain
here my own view of the worth of Tacitus as an
historian, far the most important undoubtedly of all

1 Dion, liii. 19.

! Tacitus, Annal. i. 1.: “ Temporibus Augusti dicendis non defuere
decora ingenia, donee gliscente adulatione deterrerentur. Tibcrii
Caiique ct Claudii ac Ncronis res, florentibus ipsis, ob metnm falsie;
postquam occiderant, reccntibus odiis composite sunt. Inde con-
silium mihi, pauca de Augusto et extrema tradcre, mox Tibcrii prin-
cipatum et cetera; sine ira et studio, quorum caussas procul habeo.”
I cannot pause to give an account here of the various authorities for
our history, but it is a satisfaction to be able to refer the reader to
the well-written criticisms in Dr. Smith’s Dictionary of Classical
Biography. Eggcr’s Historiens <T Auguste is also a valuable work
for appreciating the sources of imperial history.

Digitized by Google

CH. xxxi It. UNDER THE EMPIRE. Ill

our authorities on the subject before us, would be to
anticipate the history itself : the judgment I have
formed of him will be explained, and I hope justified,
as I proceed in the arduous task of comparing him
with himself and with others ; but the reader will not
be in a position fully to appreciate it till he has
studied the reign of Trajan as well as those of Tiberius
and Nero.

Digitized by Google

112

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

The organization of the provinces by Augustus. — 1. Spain: final
pacification of the mountain tribes. — 2. Gaul : tribute promised by
the Britons: reduction of the Alpine tribes. — 3. Moesia and Thrace.
— 4. Kingdom of Mauretania. — 5. Province of Africa. — 6. The
Cyrenaica. — 7. Egypt: expedition of iElius Gallus into Arabia.
— 8. Egypt: repulse of the Ethiopians. — 9. Asia Minor: Bithynia,
Asia, and the dependent kingdoms. — 10. Syria and Palestine:
Parthia and Armenia. — 11. Achaia. — 12. Iilyricum. — 13. Italy,
Sardinia, and Corsica.

Harassed by a century of civil dissensions, and by
continuation twenty years of civil war, during which
warf™*“in r even the traditions of their aggressive policy
or Spain. had been almost forgotten, the Romans re-
garded the overthrow of Antonius as a pledge of uni-
versal tranquillity. The solemn ceremony with which
their victorious hero had closed the gates of Janus
had invested him with extraordinary popularity ; when
he proclaimed the establishment of peace through-
out the world, the citizens accepted the announce-
ment joyfully, without minutely inquiring into its
correctness. They were satisfied perhaps with re-
marking that the conflict their legions still continued
to maintain with the unsubdued hordes of a few
obscure districts, whether within or beyond their
frontiers, could not fairly be classed under the title
of legitimate warfare. In the north of Spain the
Cantabrians, the Vaccsei,and the Asturians were still,
as they had ever been, in arms. These savage tribes,
protected by the inaccessible character of their coun-
try as much as by their bravery, had never yet been
brought under the provincial yoke. The capture and
sack of the Iberian cities, three hundred of which, it

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxiv.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

113

is asserted, had been stormed by au ancient impe-
rator, had had little effect in coercing the liberties of
a people whose fortresses were mountains, and whose
resources were buried in the depths of caves and
forests. The mountains indeed of Spain, especially
of its northern regions, abounded in gold : the ancient
battlefield of the Romans and Carthaginians was re-
puted to possess the greatest natural riches of any
country of the world. It had often pretended to
submit to the proconsuls of the republic, and had
promised tribute : the Iberians had willingly taken
service by the side of the Roman armies ; but when
they found themselves seized by their new masters
and compelled to toil for them in the bowels of the
earth, they revolted again and again imder a yoke
which imposed upon them not subjection only, but
personal servitude. 1 The republic had controlled them
with large forces and a complete civil organization ;
but when the theatre of civil war was transferred from
the west to the east, and a portion of this pressure
was withdrawn, the natives of the wildest districts had
renewed with ardour their implacable hostilities. The
triumvirs, in the midst of their common dangers and
mutual jealousies, had commissioned their ablest lieu-
tenants to lead large armies against them. The real
or pretended victories successively gained over them
had been thought not unworthy of the highest mili-
tary rewards. Caesar had allowed his legates, Fabius
and Pedius, to triumph over Spain in the year 709.

' 1 The wealth especially of the region called Turdetania in the
south of Spain, not in gold only but other precious metals, which are
not commonly found near together, — not only in mineral but in
vegetable riches, which are still more rarely combined in the same
locality, — excites the warmest admiration of Strabo, iii. 2. p. 146.
Lucan, in his account of Ctesar’s campaign on the Sicoris, introduces
an illustration from the working of gold miues (iv. 298.):

“ Non se tam penitus, tam longe luce rclicta,

Merserit Assyrii scrutator pallidus auri.”

For Assyrii, Oudendorp would read Asturii, an emendation in which
I fully concur.

VOL. IV. I

Digitized by Google

114

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

Domitius Calvinus gained a similar distinction in 718,
Norbanus Flaccus in 720, Marcius PhiUppus and
Appius Claudius two years later. Nevertheless, after
so many overthrows, the Iberians were still in arms,
and in the very year which witnessed the general
pacification of Augustus, his officers, Statilius Taurus
and Nonius G-allus, were still contending against
them. 1

In the year 727, the emperor undertook to bring
AugnrtM^ the struggle to a close in person. On quit-
to u p«if>the ting Rome, indeed, he had allowed it to be
perron. understood that he was going to complete the
r. c. 27.' conquest of Britain, which his illustrious
father had twice commenced and twice prematurely
suspended. The barbarians had long since neglected to
transmit the tribute imposed upon them. Arts and
commerce were increasing among them, and they were
proud of the rising importance of their ports and
cities. The announcement that the emperor medi-
tated such an expedition might serve to raise some
enthusiasm among the citizens, but it is not likely
that he ever really intended to engage in so remote
and hazardous an adventure while he was conscious
what a mass of occupation lay before him nearer
home. 2 3 Already, however, the great northern road

1 Fischer’s Zeittafeln. The Spanish era dates from 38 b.c. (a.u.
716), and is supposed to mark some important epoch in the organi-
zation of the province by the Romans. It may coincide with the
campaign of Calvinus, which is only known to us from a notice in
the Fasti Triumphales. The word is derived by Isidorus from ms,
sera {de Her, Nat. 6.) : vEra quoque Csesaris August! tempore posita
est. Dicta antem est sera, ex quo orbis ses reddere professus est
populo Romano.” This may refer to a local census, but the writer
confounds it apparently with the general census of the empire alluded
to in St. Luke’s Gospel. See Egger, Historiens d' Auguste, p. 46.
The Spanish era was preserved in Aragon till 1358, in Castile till

1383, and in Portugal till 1415. See Mim. Soc. Antiq. de France,
v. 28. in an essay upon the site of Emporise.

3 Dion, liii. 22. 25. The ode of Horace (i. 35.), in which he prays
“ Serves itururn Csesarem in ultimos orbis Britannos,” is referred to
the year 727.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

115

of the consul Flaminius had been repaired by his
orders to expedite the march of his legions into Gaul . 1
After crossing the Rubicon and traversing the Cisal-
pine province, he found his progress impeded by the
audacious attacks of the Alpine mountaineers. Leav-
ing Terentius Varro to chastise these marauders, he
continued his route to Narbo, where envoys from
Britain hastened, it was said, into his presence, with
such assurances of respect and submission as might
allow him to abandon without dishonour the inten-
tion he had avowed. At Narbo he held a conventus ,
or general meeting of the representatives of the
Gaulish states, those of the south at least, and com-
menced his elaborate organization of the great pro-
vince beyond the Rhone . 2 But while thus engaged,
the pertinacious insubordination of the tribes of
northern Spain demanded his presence in the camp.
Augustus had already devoted himself to the service
of the commonwealth on fields where little glory was
to be obtained, and where the perils and fatigues of
warfare might seem scarcely compensated by the dis-
persion of a few barbarian hordes. Nor could he
expect to emulate in the mountains of Asturia the
exploits of his father on the plains of Gaul, or of
Pompeius among the wealthy cities of the eastern
world. The campaign he now meditated was obscure ;
yet he knew that solid advantages were to be gained
from victory in the last stronghold of provincial
independence, and besides, his title of imperator re-
quired to be justified by occasional service in the
field. Gaul and Illyricum, Britain and Spain, had
all furnished the first Caesar with imperatorial laurels,
and Augustus thus turned his arms from the one to

1 The repair of this road was commemorated by an arch at cither
end, at the gates of Rome and of Ariminum. (Dion, liii. 22.) The
last of these is still extant, as is also the bridge thrown by Augustas
over the Ariminus, at the exit from the town on the north.

* Dion, l, c.

116

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

the other to emulate the career of his great pre-
decessor.

Accordingly, entering Spain from the Pyrenees in
Mmury the autumn of 727, he advanced into the
SSd'Iickwn heart of the disturbed districts, and pitched
«f Augurtun. jjj s cam p a t Segisama, near the head- waters
of the Pisuerga, while a naval squadron from the
Garonne or Adour watched the coast and harassed
the enemy in the rear. 1 As long, however, as he
kept his troops together in the centre of the enemy’s
position, the barbarians abstained from meeting him
in battle, and confined themselves to the harassing
warfare for which their country has been ever famous. 2
The emperor’s flatterers might assure him that the
foe was terrified by his presence, and would refuse to
he drawn from their fastnesses as long as he remained
before them. At the same time his fatigues, and
perhaps his mortification at the repeated failure of
his military enterprises, prostrated his feeble frame
with sickness of unusual severity. He was soon com-
pelled to quit the scene of operations, and repair to
Tarraco, the head-quarters of the province to which
it gave its name. 3 While Augustus lay stretched
upon his couch the barbarians ventured to issue from
their fastnesses, and assailed the legions. The Can-
tabrians were overthrown in a great battle at Vellica,
among the sources of the Ebro, and were driven from
thence, step by step, to the recesses of the Mons
Vinnius, a lofty and sterile tract in the north of

1 Oros. vi. 21. FI or. iv. 12.

3 The “ unchangeable character of Spanish warfare” is marked by
a single word in Virgil : “ Aut impacatos a teryo horrebis Ibcros.”
How important this contest was felt to be even at Home is attested
by the frequent allusions to it in Horace. See Od. ii. 6. 11., iii. 8.,
iv. 14.; Epist. i. 12. 26. The foe is mentioned with respect even as
late as the time of Lncan, Phars. vi. 258. :

“ Si tibi durus Iber, aut si tibi terga dedisset
Cantaber exiguis, aut longis Teutonus armis.”

3 We learn from Martial, x. 104., that the most direct communi-
cation by sea between Italy and Spain was from Rome to Tarraco.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 117

G-allicia, the summits of which rise more than nine
thousand feet above the sea. Secure as they deemed
themselves, in these inaccessible strongholds, the
mountaineers asserted that the waters of the Atlantic
should overflow these eminences sooner than the arms
of the republic succeed in sealing them.

Nevertheless the skill and perseverance of the
Romans were at last triumphant, and Spain, R« daction Df
it was declared, was once more 'pacified. u* b !Tu.d i “
At the last moment, when the success of '

his lieutenants had become fully assured, colo,uc *-
Augustus was able to rise from his bed, and hasten
to the scene of their exploits, where he devoted him-
self in person to the task of consolidating their con-
quests. The natives w T ere required to descend from
their mountains, and drafted into the cities in the
plains, or quartered, as clients of the conquering race,
within the lines which he now caused to be traced for
the establishment of military colonies. Large num-
bers were sold into captivity ; the chiefs were suffered
to redeem their freedom by the surrender of hostages.
The veterans of the legions were endowed with con-
fiscated lands, and settled in fortified posts, of which
Caesar- Augusta, the modern Saragossa, was chosen, we
are told, for its beautiful situation, more probably
from its convenience as a centre of communication
between Tarraco and Gullsecia, the Pyrenees and the
Tagus. Bracara Augusta, with Asturica Augusta and
Lucus Augusti, served to bridle the rebellious people
of the north . 1 Emerita Augusta, which became at a
later period one of the chief cities of Spain under the

1 Bracara is the modern Braga in the north of Portugal, Asturica
is Astorga in Leon, and Lucus may be traced in Lugo among the
highlands of Gallicia; Emerita is Merida in Estremadura. There
was also a colony, Pax Julia, and a Pax Augusta, probably the same
place, called also Colonia Pacensis, which is supposed to be Beja.
Ukert, Geogr. Gr. und Been. ii. 388. Ebora ( Evora) received the
name of Liberalitas Julia, and Gades (Cadiz) that of Augusta
Julia.

Digitized by Google

118

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHi XXXIV#

Komans, was founded in a more favoured region, and
to this perhaps it owed its eminent splendour and
prosperity. The remains of a magnificent bridge over
the Gruadiana, and of two noble aqueducts, still evince
the consideration it attained under the peaceful sway
of the emperors.

The thirtieth and last triumph over the warlike
prolonged nations of Iberia was celebrated in 728 by
S. Apuleius, under whose conduct, as pro-
in Spain. consul, the final successes had been gained
before the arrival of the emperor in person. Au-
gustus was already satiated with these distinctions,
and demanded no military honours himself for the
victories of his lieutenants. His flatterers recorded
with exultation how embassies from the verge of the
extreme East now reached him on the western mar-
gin of his empire. The envoys, we are assured, of
the Indians and Scythians, famous names of unknown
nations, had traversed the whole breadth of the globe
in quest of the mighty master, and had found him at
length at the spot where they could advance no far-
ther. The Eomans were reminded that in the same
manner the nations of Gaul and Spain had sent am-
bassadors to the court of Alexander at Babylon, to
accept peace at the hands of the greatest of ancient con-

a. o. 729. querors. 1 Augustus prolonged his residence

b. c. 25. j n country till 729, occupying himself

with the organization of the three provinces, and

1 Orosius, vi. 21.: “Interea Csesarem apud Tarragonam citerioris
Hisprinue urbem legati Indorum et Scytharum, toto orbe transmisso,
tandem ibi invenerunt, ultra quod jam quasrere non possent; refu-
deruntquc in Caesarem Alexandri Magni gloriam: quem sicut His-
panorum Gallorumque legatio in medio Oriente apud Babylonem
contemplatione pacis adiit, ita hunc apud Hispaniam in Occidentis
ultimo supplex cum gentilitio munere Eous Indus et Scytha Borens
oravit.”

We may suspect, however, the reality of this remarkable incident,
mentioned only by so late a writer as Orosius, himself a Spaniard.
At a later period a similar embassy is said to have reached Augustus
in the more central locality of Samos.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

119

amusing himself, during the tedious intervals of re-
turning illness, with familiar correspondence with his
friends in Rome. At this period the great epic of
Virgil was promised to the world, and a brother poet
had predicted, in verses current among the circles of
fashion in the capital, that it would eclipse with its
splendour all Roman and all Grecian fame. Something
finer than the Iliad, exclaimed Propertius, is about to
see the light. The exploits of Caesar and the triumphs
of Actium were to be entwined with the legend of
./Eneas and his Trojan fleet. Augustus, to whom
these anticipations were duly reported, urged the poet
with importunate letters to send him a specimen ot
the work, which the modest author continued firmly
to decline. 1

In the year 729 Augustus finally quitted the pen-
insula. It was not long, however, before »«newea
fresh disturbances broke out. In the fol-

. , •ubjngatlon

lowing year Agrippa was employed to sup- ^
press them. In 732 the oppression of i> y Agrippa.
Carisius, propraetor of the northern province, drove
the Asturians to another outbreak, in which they
were presently joined by the gallant Cantabrians.
Three Roman armies were attacked simultaneously,
and only saved, as was affirmed, by the treachery
among the assailants themselves. Carisius A . - 32 .
reduced the stronghold of Lancia, under B ' c * 2,
the mountains of Asturia, in the north of Leon, and
displayed unusual moderation in saving it from con-
flagration, in order that it might remain a monument

1 Propcrt. ii. 34. 65.: —

“ Cedite Romani scriptores, cedite Graii,

Nescio quid majus nascitur Iliade.”

Donatus in Vit. Virgil. 12.45.: “Augustus vero cum turn forte ex-
peditione Cantabrica abesset, et snpplicibus atque minacibus per
jocum literis efflagitaret, nt sibi de ASneide, ut ipsius verba sunt, vel
prima carminis hypographa, vel quodlibct colon mitteret, ncgnvit se
facturum Virgilius ; cui tamen non multo post, perfecta demum
materia, tres omnino libros recitavit, secundum videlicet, quartum et
sextura.’ Comp. Macrob. Saturn, i. 24.

Digitized by Google

120

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

of his victory. Furnius drove the remnant of the
insurgents into the Mons Medullius, between the
Minho and Douro, where he surrounded them with a
circumvallation, fifteen miles in extent, and compelled
them at last to surrender, but not until great numbers
had imitated the devotion of the Numantians and
Saguntines, and destroyed themselves with fire, poison,
and the sword. 1 Nevertheless the last sparks of the
indomitable spirit of independence were not extin-

a. v. 73 . 1 . guished till 735, when Agrippa was once

b. c. 19. more engaged in the work. Some of the

Cantabrian captives in Rome had contrived to assas-
sinate their masters and escape into their own coun-
try, where they excited their compatriots to a fresh
revolt by the recital of their sufferings and re-
venge. So desperate was their last effort of resist-
ance, so well had they profited by their experience of
Roman tactics, that the veterans, had learnt to fear
them in turn, and were with difficulty and only by
severe examples, brought into the field against them.
Among other punishments the legion called Augusta
was forbidden to use the imperial title. But the
conquest was now at last completed, and the severe
measures enjoined by Augustus were carried out with
unflinching perseverance by his trusty coadjutor.
Agrippa was conscious, however, that his services
had reached the limit beyond which they would be
invidious in a subject, and abstained from obtruding
them on the emperor’s notice by demanding a tri-
umph. With this campaign the three provinces
were completely brought under the yoke. 2 From

1 Dion, liv. 5.; Hor. Od. iv. 12. This C. Furnius was not less
skilful as a courtier than as a soldier. See the anecdote in Seneca,
De Benef. ii. 25.: “Nullo raagis Csesarem Augustum demeruit, et
ad alia impetranda facilem sibi reddidit Furnius, quam quod, cum
patri Antonianas partes sccuto veniam impetrasset, dixit, Ilanc
unam, Caesar, habeo injuriam tuam; effccisti ut viverem ct morerer
ingratus.” He became Consul in 737.

2 Liv. xxvii. 12.: “ Hispania prirna Romanis inita provinciarum.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

121

this period the arts of peace and civilization were al-
lowed to germinate without interruption. The fertile
genius of the Iberian population profited to the
utmost by the advantages of its position, secure from
the inroads of war, and opportune for peaceful com-
munication with the rest of the world. The cities
of the great western peninsula became famous for
luxury and letters, and the schools of Bsetica fur-
nished a longer list of historians, poets, and philo-
sophers, than any province of the empire in which
the imperial language was spoken. Throughout
the southern part of the country the nations were
completely Bomanized, so as to forget their ver-
nacular tongue . 1 Beetica was administered by the
senate without any military force, while the Tar-
raconensis and Lusitania, which were placed under
the care of the emperor, required the presence of
his legates only as a protection against their own
intractable mountaineers. Commerce, agriculture,
and manufactures flourished ; the demand of Italy
for grain gave an impulse to industry, and ferti-
lized the Iberian soil with a continual stream of
wealth ; the spirit of disaffection to Borne and the
Caesarean house yielded to the sense of increasing
comfort and abundance ; and the ease and content-
ment of the mass of the population may be esti-
mated from the fact that from henceforth Spain
disappears for four centuries from the page of
military history . 2

Thus removed from the ordinary sphere of his-
torical narrative, Spain presents us with Pol H ica , or _
scanty materials for describing her poli- gJaSSa*
tical organization, and that organization P ro '' inc '*•
itself becomes of comparatively little interest or

qu» quidem contincntis sunt, postrema omnium, nostra demum setate,
ductu auspicioque Atigusti Cssaris perdomita est.”

1 Strabo, iii. 2. p. 151.: ol irepl -rbv Ba<riv teAcims eU rbv 'Pupaiwv
HtTaficfi\TivTai Tpbnoy, ouSe r-fji SkzAcktou tjjj ciptripas tn /xcpyrintyoi.

2 Velleius remarks (ii. 90.), “ Has provincial ad cam pacem per-

Digitized by Google

122

HISTOBY OF THE BOMANS

OH. XXXIV.

importance. It will, be enough to remark, that the
three provinces into which the country was divided
in the time of Caesar continued under the same names
and with nearly the same boundaries. The military
posts by which it was occupied were confined for the
most part to the Asturian mountains. The great
division of the Tarraconensis contained no less than
seven conventus or circles, embracing twelve colonies,
thirteen Roman and eighteen Latin municipia. Three
conventus, nine colonies, and eight municipia, were
enumerated in the smaller district of Bsetica ; while
Lusitania, less populous and advanced, included three
combinations of states, five colonies, and four muni-
cipia only . 1

But to the ample region, divided from Spain by
Affijn of the Pyrenees, which will come repeatedly
vaciflwtion on the scene before us, we must devote our
tanioos, the attention more closely, destined as it was
theMorini. to play a part in almost every domestic
revolution, and many of the foreign transactions, of
its conquerors. Caesar had left Gaul exhausted and
tranquil. He had succeeded in diverting into his
own camps the valour of her most restless spirits,
and had opened to her adventurous chiefs a new career
of fame and fortune in the arena of Roman politics.
During his brief tenure of power, and for a few years
after, the tranquillity of the province continued to
be maintained, though he had withdrawn from it the
strength of the legions by which its submission had
been originally effected. The obedience of the Gauls
was interrupted once only by a rising of the Bello-
vaci 2 ; and this was speedily put down by Decimus

duxit Caesar Augustus, ut qua: maximis bellis nunqnam vacaverant, e®
etiam latrociniis vacnrent.” Orosius, the Spaniard, writing four cen-
turies later, “ Tota Hispania in setemam paccm reclinata.”

1 See Becker (continued by Marqnardt), Handbuck der Roem.
Alterthiimcr, iii. 1. 83. from Pliny and Strabo.

2 Liv. Epit. cxiv. The name of Bratnspantium was changed per-
haps on this occasion by Decimus to Ctesaromagus ; it became after-
wards Bellovaci, now Beauvais.

t

Digitized by Google

CB. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

123

Brutus, to whom, after the reduction of Massilia,
Caesar had entrusted the command. But after the
establishment of the triumvirate, the aspect of affairs
was entirely changed. From that time, both the

north and the south were harassed by repeated dis-
turbances. Agrippa was sent by Octavius in 717 to
quell a revolt of the Aquitanians : no sooner had he
gained an advantage over this people, than he was
summoned in haste to the banks of the Khine, to
check an irruption of German hordes, invited thither
by the Gauls themselves. Agrippa was the first to
adopt the policy of establishing these warlike stran-
gers in settlements within the frontier, where their
jealousy of the natives on the one hand, and their fear
of their own fierce and needy kinsmen on the other,
might serve to retain them in alliance with the re-
public, whose position and interests were now con-
nected with their own. This system, as we shall see,
was carried out more extensively in later ages, till it
became in fact one of the fixed principles of the
Homan administration. Nevertheless, the pacification
effected by Agrippa was precarious and incomplete.
Nine years later the conquest of Aquitania had to be
repeated, and Valerius Messala earned a triumph
over Gaul on the banks of the Adour. 1 Nonius Gal-
lus defeated the Treviri, together with the German
bands they had enlisted in their service ; and C. Car-
rinas gained a victory over the Morini, beyond the

1 Tibull.i. 7. 4.:

“ Hunc fore Aquitanas posset qui fundere gentcs,

Qaem trcmeret forti milite victus Atnr.”

Bat the Aquitania of Messala’s campaign is to be understood in the
wider sense it obtained officially only a few years later, as bounded
by the Rhone and Saone, the Loire and Pyrenees. The poet con-
tinues: —

“ Non sine me tibi partus honos: Tarbella Pyrene
Testis, et Oceani litora Santonici:

Testis Arar, Rhodanusque celer, mugnusque Garumna,
Carnuti et flavi cserula lympha Liger.”

Messala triumphed in 727. See the Fasti Capitolini.

Digitized by Google

124

HISTOBY OF THE BOMAKS

CH. XXXIV.

Somme, whom Virgil, the panegyrist of Augustus,
would fain persuade the Homans to believe the farthest
of mankind. Another irruption of the Germans across
the Rhine was chastised in 729 by Marcus Vinici us. 1

The cause of this disruption of the bands of
inflection Gaulish obedience, which appeared so
«oKd°by u ’ firmly settled (for even* the aggression of
ment nndCT the Germans may be taken as a symptom
tue triumvir,. 0 f disaffection within the province), is to be
sought in the change of treatment to which the
natives were now apparently subjected. Caesar, with
a broad and liberal policy, besides flattering the
martial spirit of the nation* had taken a still surer
means of purchasing their submission by the slender
tribute he had been satisfied to impose upon them.
He required no more than a moderate revenue for
the maintenance of his army of picked veterans,
small in number, and accustomed to seek its reward
in the conquests to which he continually led it.
Gaul was in fact the adopted country of the first
Roman emperor. During the brief period of his
rule in Rome, he formed no general plan of taxation
for the empire, and the region beyond the Alps was
left to develope its natural resources, in peace and
virtual independence, unchecked by the extortions
of the Roman collector. As long as this lenient
system was suffered to endure, Gaul remained
tranquil and contented. But with the accession
of the triumvirs to power, the fiscal demands of
the treasury began to make themselves felt with
more than common severity. The new rulers were
needy ; their armies, raised in desperate rivalry,
were immense in number ; their clients and ad-
herents reckless and insatiable ; and they were com-
pelled to frame their financial system in accordance

1 Virgil, Ain. viii. fin. : “ Extremique hominum Morini.’’ Dion,
li. 20, 21., liii. 29. Comp. Veil ii. 104. : “ In Germania . .' . immen-
snm exarserat bellum.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

125

with the demands importunately urged upon them.
Massacre and confiscation at home, plunder and
extortion abroad ; such was the simple policy of the
new administration. Gaul and Spain, though not
cursed by the presence of the rival chiefs them-
selves, suffered under this pressure hardly less than
Greece and Asia, in which they encamped or resided.
Hence the commotions we have noticed on either
side of the Pyrenees ; hence the campaigns which
violated even the sacred peace of Janus ; hence the
hard-won triumphs of the Octavian generals, swiftly
followed by fresh disturbances ; and hence the ne-
cessity for the arrival of Augustus himself to strike
out in either province the lines of a satisfactory
and permanent settlement.

It was with such a settlement in view that the
emperor had chosen these provinces to be Policy or
governed among others directly from him- taX"™-
self. As an imperial province, the whole or c£ui! on
of Gaul was placed, like the Tarraconensis, under a
purely military regime. An imperial or Caesarean
legatus commanded the legions quartered upon it,
enacted its laws, apportioned its contributions, and
administered justice, under no other control than
that of the imperator himself ; while a procurator,
as the steward of the imperator’s private property,
and generally a simple knight, or merely a freed-
man of his household, collected its revenues for the
maintenance of its public government . 1 The con-
stitutional princeps and limited imperator in the

1 Under the republic the procurator was the man of business of a
private citizen, charged with the care of his property out of Italy:
hence generally his client or freedman. The emperor’s procurator
took the place of the quaestor in the imperial provinces, and in some
assumed the functions of the proconsul himself. Tac. Hist. i. 11.
“ Du® Mauretaniee, Rluetia, Noricnm, Thracia, et qu® ali® procu-
ratoribus cohibentur.” In this case he was called procurator vice
prsesidis, &c. Even in the senatorial provinces there was a procurator
with independent functions, to look after the fiscus or private revenues
accruing to the emperor. See Becker, Eoem. Alter, iii. 1. 300.

Digitized by Google

126

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

city was transformed, in his relation to an imperial
province, into an irresponsible dictator. The or-
ganization of Gaul by Augustus, of which we can
combine the details with tolerable completeness,
furnishes, in its general aspect, a specimen of the
way in which the provinces were ordinarily settled
by victorious proconsuls under the commonwealth.
The civil and political reforms which required such
delicate handling, and so much of preparation and
disguise, when they affected the city, which, in
fact, could only be enforced by the most powerful
commanders with the aid of popular enthusiasm,
could be carried out in the provinces at one blow,
or by one word, at the sole will of the governor
deputed by the state. The sanction of the subjects
of the republic was neither asked nor acknowledged ;
all the proconsul required was the eventual ratifica-
tion of his acts by the senate. In the present case,
this ratification was of course a mere matter of form,
if it was ever even formally, demanded. Augustus,
at the head of the general assembly of the Gaulish
states propounded his views for the division, the
administration, and the assessment of the regions
around him, and the law which proceeded from
his lips was maintained without appeal by the ter-
rors of the sword.

His attention was first directed to the settlement
Organization of the Narbonensis. He had already sum-
Tincla Nu- moned the states of Gaul into his presence

bonensis. a t Narbo, before proceeding into Spain,

and had decreed that a census should be taken of
the three divisions of the Comata . 1 With respect,
however, to the Togata, the more civilized region

1 Liv. Epit. cxxxiv. : “ Cum ille conventum in Narbone ageret,
census a tribus Galliis quas Caesar pater vicerat actus." Dion, liii.
22. : koL axrruv teal avoypeupas iirot^aaro, «ai rbv filor -rfjv r t iroKtreiav
bteKdcfiriaf. It cannot be supposed that this census was completed
during the short stay of Augustus in Gaul in 727.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

127

called hitherto specially the Province, we have seen
how completely it had been gained to the interests
of the oligarchy under the sway of Pompeius, and
the prefects appointed through his influence. The
hostile feeling engendered in this quarter against
the popular party had been defied by Caesar, and
disarmed to a great extent by his discretion. Yet
the Massilians had clearly shown that their sym-
pathies were still Pompeian, and after the reduction
of their city Caesar had taken vigorous measures to
break their spirit. Augustus continued, after the
dictator’s example, to mingle favours with severities
in his treatment of these dubious allies. His first
act was to dedicate a temple to the Justice and
Clemency of his predecessor, as a pledge of the sys-
tem he was resolved himself to pursue. He pro-
ceeded to found or restore colonies for detachments
of his soldiers. Arausio received veterans from the
second legion. Forum Julii from the eighth, Arelate
from the sixth, Basteme from the seventh . 1 * * * * * * These
foundations were distinguished by the full Koman
franchise ; but Augustus was more reserved in com-
municating this privilege than his bolder predecessor,
and Carpentorate, Cabellio, Aquae Sextiae, Nemausus,
with other places which were now allowed to assume
the denomination of Julian or Augustan, marking,
it may be presumed, some close connexion with the
imperator himself, were confined to the Latin rights.
Vienna, the capital of the Allobroges, was already
a colony of earlier date, and it is probable that no
new proprietors were now intruded upon it . 8 Ac-
cording to the analogy of Spain we must suppose

1 Plin. Hist. Nat. iii. 4. Valentia and other towns are designated

as colonies by Ptolemy, Geogr. iL 5. 10.; but these we may sup-

pose, from the silence of Pliny, are of later date.

- Plin. H. N. L c. According to Tacitus, Hist. i. 65., the colonists

of LugdHnum (see below) regarded the Viennese as less genuine

Romans than themselves. The soil of the Allobroges may have

absorbed the blood of the older foundation.

Digitized by Google

128

HISTORY OF THE ROMAKS

CH. XXXIV.

that the wide domain of the Narbonensis was divided
into several conventus, the states of which met in
their assemblies to receive the commands of the
Eoman governor, and to apportion among them-
selves their shares of the fiscal burdens imposed
upon the whole province. Of their number, how-
ever, we are not informed . 1 The chastisement
which fell upon Massilia was the withdrawal from
its supremacy of its dependents, Antipolis and
Agatha. Of these, the former, though on the right
bank of the Yar, was declared to belong to the
Cisalpine province, while the latter obtained the
title and immunities of a Roman city. At the
same time, however, Nicaea, which lay some miles
to the left of the frontier stream, was suffered to
remain a client of Massilia, and a city of the
Transalpine province . 2 The port and arsenals of
Forum Julii were completed by Augustus, and this
colony, called also Classics, as the station of a great
naval armament, and Pacensis, as a surety for the
peace of the empire, became a formidable rival to
the ancient emporium of the Phocagans.

But beyond the Narbonensis the soil of Gaul
The Provfncia extended many hundreds of miles in va-
Lugdunen.i*. r j ous directions, and comprehended more
than one federation of tribes, differing in manners
and language. To forge into one mass the divers
elements of which this region was composed, re-
quired great administrative vigour, and the seat of
its government could not fail to become the centre
and capital of the whole province. During the wars
of Caesar and Pompeius, dissensions in Vienna had
caused the expulsion of a portion of its inhabitants,
originally Roman colonists ; and the outcasts had
betaken themselves to the eminence which over-

1 Becker’s Horn. Alterthumer , iii. 1. 89.

3 Strabo, iv. 1. p. 184. Plin. H. N. iii. 5. : “ Agatha quondam
Massiliensiam.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

129

looks the meeting of the Rhone and Saone, where,
under the auspices of the proconsul Plancus, they
had founded Lugdunum, the city on the hill. 1 This
place, admirably situated both for commerce and
defence, Augustus had garrisoned with a band of
veterans, and had endowed it with a small domain
-extorted from the Segusians on the right bank of
the Saone, to make it independent of the sur-
rounding tribes, the AEdui, the Sequani, and the
Allobroges . 2 Standing at the extreme point or
apex of the ancient province, Lugdunum seemed
to command a view of the new conquests of the
republic in every direction . 3 From this spot, as
the base of his operations, Augustus drew two
geographical lines, radiating, the one to the At-
lantic, the other to the British Channel. The first
took nearly the course of the Loire, except where
it swept southward to exclude the territory of the
Turones, and mark off the province of Aquitania
from the rest of Gaul 4 ; the other adopted first
the channel of the Saone, then struck westward

1 Dion, xlvi. 50. The site of the Roman Lugdunum is on the hill
of Fourvi&res, supposed to be Forum Vetus, to the north of the level
space between the rivers, probably a recent accretion from them, now
occupied by the chief part of' the modern Lyons. Strabo, iv. 3.
p. 192. : iKinapevov tnrb \6<p<p, on a slope beneath the brow of the hill,
unless we should read M.

1 Plin. Hist. Nat. iv. 32.: “ Segusiani liberi in quorum agro
colonia Lugdunum.” For their position, however, west of both
rivers, sec Strabo, iv. I c. (whose account is to be read with caution,
from his mistaking the Loire for the Doubs). Ptol. Geogr. ii. 8.
Comp. Cic. pro Quinct. 25, 26.

*“Q«i locus est exordium Gallinrum.” Amm. Marcel, xr. 1 1.
Strabo, rather differently, iv. 6. p. 208. : tJ> Se A ovytiowov Iv peerep rijs
X&pas IittIv, Sxrirep a.Kpoiro\is , 5ia re rets <rvpf)o\as ra>v irorapwv, xai
Si a rb iyy bs tlvcu vaai xoTr piped.

4 Plinv asserts in one place that the Garonne was still the northern
limit of Aquitania, but shortly afterwards includes in that district
several tribes lying between the Garonne and the Loire. Comp. Hist.
Nat. iv. 31. 33. Mela also retains the pre-Augustan division
(ii. 2.); but Strabo is decisive on the other side: irporrednice 51 rea-
oapz sal Se'na tflvrj r&v pera£v rod rapovva Kal rov A iyvpos rrordpou
vepopivuv. iv. 1. p. 177. See also Ptolemy, Geogr. ii. 7.

VOL. IV. K.

Digitized by Google

130

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

between the Seine and Marne, and reached the
sea nearly at the mouth of the Somme. Beyond
this second line lay the whole region of Belgic Gaul,
together with the realms of the Sequani and Lin-
gones, which were now included within that division.
The shapeless and comparatively narrow strip com-
prehended between these two lines, and extended
to embrace the distant headland of Armorica, re-
ceived its name of Lugdunensis from the new city
which constituted its capital ; but Lugdunum was
destined, from the convenience of its situation, to
become the political and commercial centre of the
whole of Gaul. From hence the great roads of
the province were directed to the extremities of
the land ; and from this starting-point, as from the
walls of the imperial metropolis, the distances along
each line were regularly measured . 1 Here was
established the Gaulish mint, and here was the
residence of the emperor himself, when he chose
to visit the province in person, or of the governor
to whom he deputed its administration.

Lugdunum was a new creation of the Roman
Extent to power, of which it was the citadel and the
government symbol, the moral and the material pledge.

From its position, combined with its poli-
•tates. tical importance, it advanced rapidly in
wealth and numbers, and within perhaps half a cen-
tury had attained, next to Narbo, the greatest popu-
lation of any Gaulish city . 2 The territory specially
assigned to it was withdrawn from the jurisdiction of
the Gaulish states on every side. It was not, how-
ever, the policy of the emperor to break up the old

1 If we may take the statement of Ammianus in the fifth century,
“exinde non millenis passibus sed leugis (1500 pp. Ducange in voc.)
metiuntur” (Amm. 1. c.), as true of this early period, it would seem
that a remarkable concession was made to the habits of the natives,
in measuring the roads of the further provinces by leagues instead
of miles. But the Itineraries authorize no such distinction.

s Strabo, iv. 3. p. 192.

Digitized by Google

cn. xxxiv.

UNDER TIIE EMPIRE.

131

nationalities, or attempt to fuse them into a common
mass. On thp contrary, nowhere was the common
artifice more systematically employed, of inviting the
natives to self-government, under imperial super-
vision, with a machinery fashioned on the model of
the commonwealth itself. We have seen that, with
the exception of the Arvernians, and more especially
of the iEduans, the sovereign authority was exercised
throughout Gaul, either by individual chiefs or aris-
tocratic federations. This form of government was
supported by the influence of the Druids, whose
religion was essentially an engine of aristocratic
polity. While the popular assemblies, wherever the
power was in their hands, had been prompt in obey-
ing the mandates of Rome, the long struggle of the
Gauls against Cassar had been constantly fostered,
and more than once revived, by the animosity of the
chiefs and priesthood. Of the forms of popular
government, therefore, the conquerors had no cause
to be jealous. Here, as elsewhere, the suffering
masses of the people hailed the arrival of the Ro-
mans as an era of deliverance from domestic tyranny.
The fears and anxieties of the new rulers of Gaul
were directed to another quarter. Augustus appears,
as far as we can trace the landmarks of his policy
abroad, to have studied to break dow y n the influence
of the privileged classes, and to raise up, as a bulwark
against it, the machinery of popular institutions. His
first care, it would seem, was to obliterate the old
Gaulish names of the principal cities, which might
be made the rallying cry of the disaffected ; and it is
remarkable that, while he changed the designation of
Bibracte to Augustodunum 1 , and transformed the
names of the obscure oppida of many lesser states
into strange appellations of mixed Romano-Celtic

1 Augustodunnm (Autun), the hill of Augustus, so called, I pre-
sume, from a temple of Augustus which crowned its summit.

x 2

Digitized by Google

132

BISTORT OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

sound 1 , he permitted Lugdunum, as the representa-
tive of no hostile nationality, to retain the vernacular
title which its first settlers had chosen . 2 To these
cities, each the centre of a petty tribe, the people of
each district were invited to resort; in them the
image of a Roman senate or curia was established, to
be the instrument of local government and taxation ;
to them the Gauls were taught to look, as the repre-
sentatives of their name and nation : eventually, but
at what period we cannot determine, its Roman name
fell into disuse, and was superseded by the appella-
tion of the tribe in which it lay ; and the modern
titles of the chief cities of France are derived almost
without exception from those of the clans which were
ranged in resistance to Caesar nineteen hundred years
ago . 3

1 As for instance Jnliomagus, Csesarodunum, Augustobona, Au-
gnstoritum. All such places as these become not merely urbes, but
civitates, or territorial communities. The limits of the dioceses of
France down to the Revolution generally mark, it is said, the ager
of these cities respectively. Dureau de la Malle, Econ. Pol. des
Remains , i. 193. Walckenaer, Geogr. des Gaules, passim.

1 It is singular that this Celtic name (whatever be its true signifi-
cation) should have been chosen by the mixed Gauls and Romans
whom the Allobroges expelled from Vienna, for the city built for
them by Plancus by direction of the Roman senate.

* The original names of the places mentioned in the last note bnt
one arc not known. Their Roman titles became changed respectively
into Andecavi (Angers), Turones (Tours). Tricasses (Troves),
Lcmoviees (Limoges). A similar change took place with regard to
Gaulish names which had never been supplanted by Roman. Thus
Samarobriva became Ambiani (Amiens); Divodurum, Mediomatrici
(Metz); Nemetacum, Atrebates (Arras); Lutetia, Rarisii (Paris);
Durocortorum, Remi (Rheims) ; Avaricum, Bituriges (Bourges);
Mediolanum, Santones (Saintes); Condivicnum, Namnetes (Nantes);
Limonum, Pictavi (Poitiers); and many more. Such a change is
rarely found in the south of Gaul, where the Romans had the longest
resided. Toulouse, Bourdeaux, Narbonne, Arles, Nismes, Vienne,
Valence, Aix, Marseille, &c., still bear the original names not of
tribes but of the cities themselves. Such is generally the case
throughout the more advanced parts of Gaul, the countries of the
A2dui and Sequani, as we see in Autnn, Chalons, Besan^on, Macon,
&c. It is remarkable that no such transformation has taken place
in the local appellatives of Spain or Britain. The Romans changed

-

>

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EilTIRE.

133

The popular assemblies, however, of the cities
were in no respect strongholds of national yunctIons of
independence. The order of decurions or their popular
curials was composed of citizens qualified
by a certain census; their officers, the duumvirs,
aediles, quaestors, and Augustales, were appointed by
rotation rather than by election. Except in a few
cases, where autonomy was specially permitted, they
did not presume to legislate in any but the most
trifling matters of municipal regime. They merely
registered and enforced the decrees of the central
authority, and provided the machinery for levying on
families and individuals their share of the quota of
the state. These quotas were fixed by the census,
which was instituted, as we have seen, by Augustus,
during his brief sojourn in Gaul in 727 ; and was re-
peated and extended by his command at subsequent
periods. The moderate impost, or military contribu-
tion, of his predecessor was now increased, we may
suppose, to the ordinary proportions of provincial
taxation, and pressed more and more heavily on the
bulk of the people, as favoured citizens or cities were
admitted to the immunities of the Eoman franchise.
The political and fiscal organization of the province
formed the basis of the measures for retaining it in
subjection. The discretion with which municipal
privileges were conceded or withheld, and personal
distinctions awarded or promised, softened the ani-
mosity of the conquered, while the show the republic

the Iberian into a Latin name in a great many eases, in some of
which the Latin form is still traced, while in others, perhaps the
greater number, the original name has been recovered. In Britain,
where not changed by the Saxons, our cities retain the British local
appellation, as Venta, Londiniam, Lindum, Eboracum. The cause
of these peculiarities is difficult to trace, and cannot be discussed
within the limits of a note. They would seem, however, to show
that the municipal system was more fully developed in Gaul than in
the other provinces, and probably with the object of popularizing the
local governments as a counterpoise to the influence of the priests
and nobles.

Digitized by Google

134

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS • CH. xxxiv.

could make of her vast material resources, however
distant, terrified and controlled the disaffected. The
politic*! im- military roads, the work of the indefatigable
Agrippa, which led from Lugdunum to the
road ‘' chief cities of the furthest districts, were con-

structed for pouring the legions rapidly to any point
of danger, while the want of cross-roads cut off their
intercourse with one another . 1 Here, as elsewhere,
an effective system of posts was established from place
to place, but solely for the use of the government,
which could thus strengthen itself by the means of
communication which it denied to its subjects . 2 The
itinerary system of the Romans was thus an effec-
tive instrument of centralization in Gaul, just as, at
the present day, the trunk lines of railroad, in the same
country, bring its great cities nearer to the capital,

1 Pompeius is said to have made a line of road over the Alps and
Pyrenees; but it does not appear that Caesar ever constructed any
great permanent way in Gaul or elsewhere. Strabo notices the roads
of Agrippa in Gaul (iv. 6. p. 208), leading from Lugdunum to — 1.
the Rhine; 2. the Somme and the Channel; 3. across the Cevennes
to the ocean; 4. Massilia and Narbo. Besides these roads, the great
aqueduct of the Pont du Gard at Nismes, still existing, is ascribed
to Agrippa on the authority of inscriptions. See Frandsen {Agrippa,
p. 172.), who ascribes it to the date of Agrippa’s second visit to Gaul,
A. U. 1 34, 735.

1 The little that is known of the post-system of the empire is
summed up in a few words in Becker’s Handbuch, iii. i. 304. “ The
institution of Augustus, which became the basis of the later system
known to us from the writings of the Jurists, consisted of a military
service which forwarded official despatches from station to station by
couriers, called in the earlier imperial periods “ speculatores.” (Liv.
xxxi. 24.; Suet Calig. 44.; Tac. Hist. ii. 73.) Personal convey-
ance was confined (as in the time of the republic) to officials: for
this purpose the mutationes (posts) and mansiones (night quarters)
were assigned, and even palatia erected at the latter for the use of
governors and the emperor himself. Private individuals could take
advantage of these state posts within the provinces by a special licence
(diploma) of the governor, and at a later period of the emperor only.”
Under the republic, senators and high personages could obtain the
posts for their private use, as a matter of privilege. The occupation,
it may be observed, of the posts by the government, would give it
a similar advantage to the monopoly of the telegraphs at the present
day.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

135

but throw them relatively further from one another.
Thus enabled to defy local and partial discontent, the
Komans found themselves at liberty to concentrate
the chief forces of the province on the German fron-
tier, where its tranquillity was threatened, not by
internal disturbances, but by foreign invasion. On
the left bank of the Rhine Augustus established two
formidable encampments, each containing four legions,
which, at a later period in his reign, were quartered in
smaller detachments on a long line of fortified posts.
These armaments, ample as they might appear, were
further reinforced by inviting unsettled hordes from
the German side to take up their residence within
the Roman frontier, and thus opposing barbarians to
the barbarians themselves . 1 Caesar himself had been
the first to introduce this policy, to which his succes-
sors in after times attached increasing importance.
The legions were attended by bands of native auxili-
aries, furnished and supported by the principal cities,
in which the most restless spirits of the province
were trained to obey and admire their conquerors,
till long absence from their homes completed the
process of estrangement.

At an earlier period every conquest of the Roman
arms was followed by the rush of emigra- ProjrTeM of
tion to the region newly opened to Italian i KS" ** 1 ’
industry and adventure. In the age, how- Glu1 '
ever, which we are now considering, the springs ot
enterprise had become relaxed. The revolution which
had brought the products of every land in an unceas-
ing stream to Rome itself, had left the Romans satis-
fied, for the most part, with the indolent enjoyment
of wealth and luxury thus wafted to their shores.

1 Strabo, iv. 3. p. 194.; Tac. Ann. xii. 27. The transplantation ot
the Ubii from the right bank of the Rhine to the district of Cologne
and Bonn on the left, was the work of Agrippa, and may be assigned
to the year 716. Frandsen, Agrippa, p. 102. Suetonius is doubt-
less incorrect in ascribing it to the emperor himself. Suet. Oct. 21.

Digitized by Google

136

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

Nevertheless the influence of their civilization con-
tinued to increase abroad in power and attraction.
The provincials on every side sought with fatal ar-
dour to naturalize the tastes and habits to which they
were prone to ascribe the superiority of their con-
querors. Divitiacus, as we have seen, had sojourned
for years at Rome, and attended upon Csesar in his
campaigns, without acquiring the use of the Latin
idiom. But his countrymen soon wiped out the stain
of his indolence or incuriousness. They destined their
capital Bibracte, which they now entitled the Hill of
Augustus, to be the literary metropolis of Gaul, and
embraced with eagerness the imperial present of a
school for instruction in the liberal arts . 1 Massilia
continued to be the centre of Greek education, and
taught the Gauls within the sphere of its influence
to become, as the writers of that language fondly
phrased it, Philhellenes . 2 The literature of the South
flourished for centuries as a brilliant exotic at Tolosa,
Arelas, and Vienna: Lugdunum became celebrated
for its rhetorical contests . 3 The Gauls, naturally lo-
quacious, litigious, and impassioned in thought and
gesture, rushed to the contests of the bar as a con-
genial exercise, while both medicine and philosophy,
imported from abroad, found zealous cultivators
among their acute and enquiring spirits . 4 They re-
nounced the stir of the camp and battle-field for the
formalities of municipal government. The jealousy
of the Italian landlords forbade them to cultivate the

1 Tac. Ann. iii. 43. : “ Augustodanum caput gentis .... nobilis-
simam Galliarum sobolem iiberalibus studiis ibi operatam.”

J Strabo, iv. 1. p. 181.: sr6\ts rocs fiapffdpots ratSevr^pcov

<pi\e\\rivas xarerKfiaae robs TaAdrar.

* Ausonius, de Clar. Urb. : “ Gallula Roma Arelas.” The same
writer has a series of portraits of the professors of eloquence at Bur-
digala, not less illustrious in their day perhaps than the commentators
in the gallery at Leyden. For Lugdunum see more particularly the
well-known passages, Juvenal, i, 44.; Suet. Calig. 20.

4 Strabo, L c. : crotpiorbs yovv vnoSixomai, robs p-tv ISii robs 8t c u
viKeis koiWj pioQoipevat, xaddirep ttul larpous.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

137

vine and olive, to which their soil has since proved
so propitious 1 ; but they devoted themselves to rais-
ing com and cattle, particularly horses, together with
the fabrication of arms, cloths, and stuffs of various
kinds and qualities . 2

The pursuit of arms, arts, and literature might
soothe the restlessness of the Gauls, and Angu , ta ,
keep them industrious and obedient. The "moom
extension of municipal government contri- th * D, “ ld, •
buted to check the excessive influence of the chiefs,
and to balance the authority of the priesthood. The
spirit of Druidism, the popular religion of the greater
part of Gaul, was essentially opposed to the admix-
ture of any foreign civilization, and this element of
disaffection the conquerors studied in various ways
to counteract. Augustus, in offering citizenship to
the most favoured of the nation, made the renunci-
ation of Druidism, as incompatible with Roman usage,
a primary condition of its acceptance . 3 Such a mode
of discountenancing a suspected cult was a step be-
yond the ordinary policy of Rome ; for hitherto the
jealousy of the government had confined itself to for-
bidding obnoxious practices within the walls of the
capital. Augustus affected pious horror at the custom
of human sacrifices, which had been expunged, in-
deed, from the Roman ritual itself within less than a

1 Cic. de Republ. iii. 9. : “ Nos vero justissimi homines qui trans-
alpinas gentes oleam et vitem serere non sinimus, quo pluris sint
nostra oliveta nostrteque vine®.” The prohibition was early defied
(see Suet. Domit. 7.) and eventually repealed. Vopisc. Prob. is.

3 In the Notitia Dignitatum Imp. Occidents, c. 32., seven cities of
Gaul are enumerated as seats of military manufactures: Argentora-
tum, Matisco, Augustodunum, Suessiones, Remi, Treviri, and Am-
biani. Atrebates was also famous for its fabric of red cloth for the
legions. Trebell. GaUien. 6. with the notes of Salmasius. “ Vestitur
Gallia rufis.” Martial. Lingoncs, Santones, and Cadurci manufac-
tured woollen and flaxen fabrics. See Moreau de Jonnes, Statistiqne
des Peuples Anciens, p. 661. Comp, also Juvenal, ix. 30. for the
coarse character of the Gallic woollens; and Martial, vi. *11.: “To
Cadmea Tyros, me pinguis Gallia vestit.”

* Suet. Claud. 25.: “Religiunem Druidarum apud Gallos tantum
civibus sub Augusto interdictum.”

Digitized by Google

138

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

hundred years, but which the Druids continued un-
doubtedly to practise more constantly and extensively
than had been ever done by the Romans or Etruscans.
But while the taking of human life was forbidden, a
compromise was made with the priests, who were
permitted to puncture the skin of the victim, and
sprinkle a few drops of his blood upon the altar . 1

Another and less direct way of emasculating the
obnoxious superstition, was to fuse it, by
of Roman means of real or fancied atnnities, with the
polytheism. rec 0 g n i zec i polytheism of the empire. The

great principle of the imperial government, inherited
indeed from the republic itself, was to declare the
essential unity of the various habits and ideas of its
heterogeneous subjects. Druidism, it was now pro-
claimed, was, in its spirit, no other than the common
religion of the Roman world. Caesar himself had re-
marked, not without surprise, that the Gaulish priest-
hood held the same notion about the gods as the rest
of viankincl. Here was the germ of the grand idea for
the pacification of the country, which Augustus seized
and appropriated. The emperor carried across the
Alps the principle which the senate had so often ap-
plied to Etruria, Greece, and Asia. The gods of Gaul
were admitted to the citizenship of the Roman Olym-
pus, the pantheon of the civilized world. Teutates
and Belenus, Arduinna and Belisana, were declared
to be merely local and special appellations for the uni-
versal divinities of Mercury and Apollo, Diana and
Minerva . 2 Taranis was identified with Jove the Thun-

1 Mela, iii. 2. : “ Manent vestigia (i.e- under Claudius, sixty years
later) severitatis abolitse, atque ut ab ultimis ctedibus temperant, ita
nihilominus, ubi devotos altaribus admovere, delibant.”

a The collections of inscriptions give numerous examples of the
worship of the old Gaulish divinities under the combined Roman and
Gaulish names, e.g. Marti Camulo, Minervse Belisance, Apollini
Beleno, Marti Belatucardo; sometimes we find such combinations
as Beleno Augusto; one inscription in Orelli (1960) gives Ardoinnse,
Camulo, Jovi, Mercurio, Herculi. There are also monuments to the
local divinities of Gaul, as Uese Bibracti, Dere Dcironse.

Digitized by Google

cu. xxxiv.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

139

derer ; Camul or Hesus with Mars, the patron of the
conquering city. Augustus dedicated a temple to
the god Kirk or Circius, the spirit of the Bise, a
blighting wind of the Southern coast, over which he
was supposed to reign with malignant influence . 1 So
far did he advance in this work of fusion as
to claim himself a place among the Gaulish Au|Su£i of
deities, and to encourage his flatterers to
invoke his divinity in connexion with the genii of
their own cities . 2 3 A few years later we shall see them
erect an altar and concentrate a ritual in honour of
Augustus and Rome.

Such was the specious compromise of religious
sentiment which the Gauls were invited DiMontcnt of
to accept. As usual in such cases, in the theDruid »-
towns and among the higher classes, the new ideas
flourished in the sunshine of political favour ; while
the multitude, particularly in the remoter districts,
continued to cling the more fervently to their an-
cient forms and usages. The Druids had to choose
between the two classes of devotees, the courtly and
powerful, the rude and sincere. Whatever their in-
terest might have prompted, their love of country,
their old habits and convictions, above all their pride
of caste and reputed sanctity, forbade them for the
most part to acquiesce in a sacrilege committed by
the hands of foes and strangers. They kept sullenly
aloof from the imperial blandishments, persisting in
the practice, discountenanced but not yet forbidden,
of their rude but imposing ceremonies ; they fostered
the spirit of national hatred among the conquered
people, maintained in secret the reminiscence of
ancient glory and independence, and at length, when

1 Senec. Qu. Nat.v. 17.: “ l~)ivus certe Augustas templum illi

(Circio), quum in Gallia moraretur, et vovit et fecit.” Lucan, i.
407. : “ Solus sua lilora turbat Circius.”

3 “ Augusto sacrum et Genio ciritatis Biturigum Viviscorum.”
Gruter, Inscr. p. 227. Thierry, Gauluis, iii. 258.

Digitized by Google

140

HISTORY OF THE HOMANS

CH. XXXIV,

Augustas
satisfied
with the
promise of
tribute from
the Britons.

the opportunity arrived, unfurled the standard of
revolt, and once more led their clans against the
Roman legions, with the watchwords of empire and
freedom . 1

Besides keeping in check both the Druids within
and the Germans beyond the frontier, two
things were still wanting to secure the sub-
jection of the Gauls, and to give free course
to the imperial plans for their social re-
generation. The first of these was to control the
vaunted freedom of the neighbouring tribes of Britain,
which Caesar himself had felt to imperil the security
of his yet unorganized conquests. The constant and
increasing intercourse between the opposite coasts,
while it consolidated the power of the island chiefs,
might sap the foundations of submission on the con-
tinent. But Augustus was too cautious to engage in
an undertaking of such magnitude as the invasion of a
region, the resources and even the size of which were
but imperfectly known to him, and where he might
find it impossible, even after a first success, either to
advance or recede with honour. He accepted with
alacrity the renewed promise of annual tribute, how-
ever little he might expect its punctual fulfilment,
and trusted to address and intrigue, and the distribu-
tion among the native chiefs of honours and bribes,
for the gradual preparation of a future conquest.
Meanwhile the Romans continued alternately to con-
jure up pictures of the rudeness and inhospitality of
the British barbarians, and again to amuse themselves
with the thought of seeing them led in chains along
the Sacred way 2 ; but while fully convinced that their
arms and counsels were alike invincible, they were

1 Tac. Hist. iv. 54. 59.: “Ne deessent libertati .... juravere pro
imperio Galliarum.” Thierry, l. n.

2 Hor. Od. iii. 4. 33.: “ Visam Britannos hospitibns feros.”

Epod. 7.: “ Intactus aut Britannus ut descenderet

Sacra catenatus via.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIY.

UNDER THE EMITRE.

141

content to leave the glory of the triumph to another
generation . 1

After securing the conquered people from con-
tact with external liberty, it was requisite operation, for
to strengthen the bonds which strained ££”i n 0 g f ,h ®
them to the conquerors themselves. Like the Alp '-
the captive chained to the arm of the soldier who
guarded him, the provinces were bound to Rome
by the great military ways. But these, though ex-
tending through the length of Italy, and again from
the frontier to the extremities of the provinces beyond,
had been long intercepted by the rugged barrier of
the Alps, the perils of which were aggravated by the
jealous ferocity of their native tribes. Many an in-
vader indeed had penetrated them from either side.
The Gauls and Romans had alternately burst through
every obstacle, to strike the foe couched in fancied
security beyond. The opposition of the natives had
succumbed to the resistless determination of a Han-
nibal, or the overwhelming armaments of a Pompeius.
On the other hand, in the intervals of these inter-
national conflicts, the spirit of traffic had tempted
solitary passengers to thread the defiles, and trample
a narrow pathway through the everlasting snows,
while they purchased the forbearance of the moun-
taineers by a regular tribute. Polybius could enu-
merate in his time three routes over the western Alps,
which he distinguished by the names of the tribes on
the Italian side, through whose territories they ran.
On the one hand lay the coast-road through the lands
of the Ligurians; on the other that through the
country of the Salassi, or the valley of the Dora
Baltea ; while a third, between the two, traversed the

1 It was perhaps popularly believed that the Britons had actually
placed themselves under Roman authority. Compare the expression
of so grave and sensible a writer as Strabo, half a century later: xal
olxtiav <T^e5oy ti irapfcnctvaaav rots 'Pupaiois SAjjv tt)v irrjaov. iv. S.
p. 200.

Digitized by Google

142

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

OH. xxxiv.

region of the Taurini, along the defile of the Dora
Susina. 1 Of these the first was most commonly
adopted by the Eomans under the republic ; and the
Aurelian way, which conducted from Eome to the
Cisalpine frontier on the west, was extended under
the name of Julia into the Province. The hostility,
however, of the unsettled tribes of Liguria made it
often impracticable, and Pompeius effected a securer
passage for his troops, that perhaps which now con-
ducts over the Mont Genevre, while Caesar, at least on
one memorable occasion, penetrated into Gaul by the
pass of the Cenis. The final subjugation of the Li-
gurians was effected by Augustus, and commemorated,
with that of the other tribes of the Western Alps, on
a monument, still remaining, not far from Monaco.*
Henceforth the coast, or Cornice road, became as safe
as it was commodious for communication with the
south of Gaul. At the same time the path over the
Cenis, the nearest route to Lugdunum, was improved
and secured by treaty with Cottius, the king of the
Cottian Alps, which included the spurs and summits of
the Cenis, Genevre, and Monte Viso. The barbarian
chief was allowed to retain a nominal sovereignty in
return for his zeal and fidelity, and the bounds of

1 Strabo, IV. 6. p. 209.: Sii AryiW piv tyyurra r<j3 TufifaviKip
■rrfkaytr *7to T7)v Sia Tauplvuv, V ’A vvifiat SirjkBev (ha t))v Sid
Ztakao-truv. These are still the principal routes for entering Italy
from the west. It is uncertain whether Polybius was aware that
there were in fact two practicable passes through the Salassi — those
of the two St. Bernards, or the Pennine and Graian Alps, meeting
at Aosta, and two also through the Taurini — those of the Cenis and
Genevre, which were both known as the Cottian Alps, meeting at
Susa. But if, as is not improbable, he was only thinking of the
descents into Italy, he would not stop to particularise every separate
road he might be acquainted with.

2 Strabo, iv. 6. The spot is indicated by the name of a village,
Turbia (Tropsea),. Mannert, ix. 271. The inscription is given at
length by Pliny, H. N. iiL 24. It records the names of forty-four
conquered tribes. The Ligurians, as we read in Dion, liv. 24., w f ere
finally reduced in 740, but as the inscription is dated Aug. Imp. xiiii.
it cannot have been set up earlier than 746. See below.

Digitized by

cn. xxxiv.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

143

Italy continued for a century to be placed at Ad Fines
or Avigliana, the first ascent of the mountains. 1 But
he was made to feel his entire dependence on his
patrons by the galling spectacle of a Koman colony
planted at the entrance of his dominions, Augusta of
the Taurini, or Turin. Beyond this Alpine tract lay
the cluster of the Graian mountains and the pass of
the Little St. Bernard, with which also the Komans
were already familiar, and by which Caesar seems
to have sometimes travelled. The mountaineers,
named, as we have seen, Salassi, who occupied the
Italian side of this pass, as well as of the Great St.
Bernard further on, constantly resented the intrusion
of strangers. Caesar himself had once lost his bag-
gage in a skirmish with them. 2 In the year 729
Terentius Varro, who had been charged with the task
of reducing them, persuaded them to treat, and then
attacked them unprepared, and captured the whole
tribe. 3 The victims of this signal treachery, 8,000
fighting men and 36,000 old men, women, and chil-
dren, were sold into slavery; and it was stipulated
that their masters should in no case emancipate them
under a period of twenty years. At the point where
the two streams meet which form the Dora Baltea,
the emperor founded a military colony, to which he

1 The Cottian people received Latinitos, and Cottius obtained,
with the name M. Julius, the title of prrefectus. See the inscription
on the arch of Susa erected by him (Orcll. 626.): “Civitates quce
sub eo prafecto fuerunt.” Comp. Strabo, l. c. ; Amm. Marcell. xv.
10. The date of this inscription is fixed to 745 by the words Aug.
Imp. xiii. Trib. pot. xv.; Fischer, Roem. Zeitlafeln.

1 Strabo, iv. 6. 205.: iavK-qaav St nort xal xp<?M aTa Kaiaapos, xa i
iir^$a\ov Kprjixvotis arparoirtSoiS, irpirpamv as SSovoiovvres f) yapvpovv-
t ts iroTapois. The same writer relates that the Salassi mulcted Deci-
mus Brutus one drachma per man, when he crossed their mountains
in his flight from Mutina.

a This Varro was a Licinius Murena, adopted by an A. Terentius
Varro, whose name he accordingly bore. He continued, however,
to be sometimes called '_y his original designation. For the con-
quest of the Salassi see Dion, liii. 25.; Liv. Epit. cxxxv.; Suet. Oct.
21.; Plin. Hist. Nat. iii. 21.

Digitized by Google

144

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

gave the name of Augusta Praetoria, now Aosta, to
assure for ever the safe passage of troops and way-
farers ; and at the entrance of the town he erected a
triumphal arch to attest the utility and glory of his
conquest . 1 The reduction of the Salassi, the most
formidable of the Alpine tribes, coincided with the
submission of the Cantabrians ; and Augustus, while
still occupied with the settlement of affairs in Spain,
could command the temple of Janus to be once more
closed at Rome . 2 This speedy repetition of the aus-
picious solemnity of four years previously, shows how
popular the idea of peace now was with the Romans ;
it marks the striking change that had taken place in
the character of the times and the people, and what
a field was open for the creation of a new national
policy.

Enough has been said to show how means of access
■Pn—not were finally secured for the Roman arms
to Ihe nations beyond the western Alps,
anu Thr«ce. Henceforth the conquerors and their sub-
jects, in that quarter, might tranquilly coalesce. To
occupy the defiles of the mountains to the east was a
matter of hardly less importance, in order to reach the
Rhaetians, the Vindelicians, and the Pannonians, with
whom Rome had become gradually implicated in
almost constant hostilities. Our account, however, of
its conflicts in this quarter may be conveniently de-
ferred. Beyond the Adriatic Augustus had shared
in person the hardships and perils of the Roman
warfare against the Dalmatians and Illyrians, the
success of which, if effected by no brilliant victories,

1 Dion, liii. 25.; 'Strabo, iv. 6. p. 206.

2 Dion, liii. 26. Oros. vi. 21.: “ Cantabricre victori® hunc hono-
rcm C®sar detulit, ut tunc quoquc belli portas claustro cohiberi
juberet. Ita tunc secundo per C.Tsarcm, quarto post urbem condi tam
clausus cst Janus.” This docs not of course imply that Rcfme had
never been at peace but twice before Augustus, in the legendary-
period of Romulus and Numn, but that no chief had been encouraged
by the temper of the times to make a political merit of restoring it.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

145

was not the less solid and permanent. But the ad-
vance of his lieutenants was not checked by the
range of the Mons Boebius, which separates the
waters of the Adriatic from those of the Danube and
the Euxine. Forty years before Actium, while Lu-
cius Lucullus was engaging Mithridates in Asia, his
brother Marcus first traversed the vast plains of
Moesia, and checked the league of Scythians and
Sarmathians with which the king of Pontus was
meditating to penetrate into Italy . 1 The dread of
such a combination among the unknown hordes of
the North survived the overthrow of the man, who
alone, perhaps, could have hoped effectually to wield
it. Accordingly, among the projects of Caesar, which
divided his attention with the task of chastising the
Parthians, was that of a military promenade along
the northern shores of the Euxine and Maeotis. His
successor shared, indeed, in no such romantic visions;
but he allowed his lieutenants to follow in the track
of Marcus Lucullus, to check the aggressions of the
nomade races of the plains, and reduce the Greek
colonies on the western coast of the Euxine to more
direct obedience . 2 Istrus and Dionysopolis, Odessus
and Tomi, Calatis and Apollonia, accepted his power-
ful protection against the Moesians encamped around
them, and the Get®, Iazyges, and Dacians, who
crossed the Danube and poured over the morasses of
lower Scythia . 3 These places became the outposts of
the Roman power, the factories of Roman commerce,
in some cases the prisons of Roman tyranny ; but
the subjugation of Moesia itself continued through
the reign of Augustus to be merely nominal ; it was

1 a. u. 681. b.c. 73. Liv. Epit. xcvii. ; Eutrop. vi. 7. ; Oros. vi. 3.

* Dion, li. 23—27.

* The sites of these places lay on the Bulgarian coast, but none of
them, I believe, have been clearly identified. For the names of the
hostile nations by which they were threatened, see Ovid in the Tris-
tia and Ex Punto. Virgil and Horace mention the Daci. Ukert,
Geogr. der Griech. und Poem. pt. iii. § 22.

VOL. IV. L

Digitized by Google

146

HISTORY OF THE BOHANS

CH. XXXIV.

not till the time of his successor that tribute was
first exacted from it, when it became annexed to the
province of Ulyricum. 1 Some portions of this latter
country were suffered to continue under the sove-
reignty of native chieftains, who were dignified with
the title of king, and alliance with Rome, in return
for the real surrender of their independence. The
victories which he claimed over the Mcesians, in-
decisive as they were, gained for M. Crassus the
honours of a triumph. In Thrace he was emulated
by a Lentulus and a Piso. Rome was appalled by
the accounts these commanders transmitted of the
ferocity of their captives, who gnawed, it was said,
their chains in the fury of a savage despair. 2

From the northern we may pass once more to the
southern frontier of the empire, and the re-
«f mote realm 8 of the Moor and the Numi-

gl> " ' dian, where Augustus without a foe or rival

could make a graceful exhibition of moderation and
generosity. The sway of the Mauretanian Bocchus
extended from the shores of the Atlantic to the city
of Saida, and its independence had been guaranteed
by Julius Caesar after the battle of Thapsus. He
had enlarged it, moreover, with a portion of Juba’s
dominions, or rather, perhaps, restored to it some
territories which the Numidian had wrested from it
This donation was confirmed by Octavius, to whom
Bocchus continued to his death in devoted obedience.
Upon this event, which occurred in 721, the triumvir,
it might be expected, would annex this sovereignty
to the empire. He abstained, however, from this
aggression, and a few years later, in 729, appointed
Juba, the son of the late king of Numidia, who had
been educated at Rome, and imbued with due venera-
tion for Roman institutions, to rule a,s a friend and
ally over it. At the same time he gave the young

* Appian, Bell. Illyr. c. 30. * Floras, iv. 12.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

147

chieftain for wife Cleopatra Selene, the daughter of
Antonius and his Egyptian paramour, and even trans-
ferred to their protection her brothers Ptolemseus and
Alexander. The respect and even favour he thus
displayed to the children of his great enemy, whom
Octavia herself had bred up with her own children,
deserves to be honourably recorded. It was intended,
perhaps, as a mark of his sincere affection for his
noble sister . 1

The dominions of the peaceful and studious Juba
were enlarged by the addition of the tract The prOTinoe
which lies eastward from Saida to the river of Africtt -
Ampsaga. This was the boundary of the Roman
province of Africa, which extended from hence to the
greater Syrtis ; the ancient domain of Carthage
having been increased by the accession of the con-
quered realm of Numidia. This region had been
completely pacified by the wise administration of
Caesar ; nor did it ever again betray an inclination to
espouse the republican cause. When the ports of
Italy were opened to its ample stores of grain, it
advanced rapidly in wealth and importance, and even
the extortions of its prefect Sallustius failed to shake
its fidelity. On the second division of the empire
between the triumvirs, its importance was such that
it could be assigned, with some appearance of respect
and good faith, as the sole portion of one of the
contracting parties. After the overthrow of Lepidus,
Augustus considered the, province as his own con-
quest, and of all his possessions there was none that
caused him so little anxiety or expense. A single
legion sufficed to maintain it, and the emperor could
concede its government to the senate without pre-
judice to his own interests; nor throughout the long
period of his reign did it ever require his presence, a
fact which could be affirmed of only two provinces of

1 Dion, li. 15.. liii. 2G. ; Strabo, xvii. 3. p. S28.
L 2

Digitized by Google

148

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

the empire, one doubtless the most obscure, the other,
perhaps, the most tranquil of all. 1

Beyond the great Syrtis eastward lay the province
Thecyre- of the Cyrenaica, which enjoys through-

nai “- out the whole course of Roman history a

remarkable immunity from political vicissitudes.
Surrendered to the republic by the will of its last
Macedonian sovereign, Ptolemseus Apion, it was for
a time allowed to retain its freedom, on payment of
a moderate tribute. Upon the pretext, however, of
quarrels occurring between its cities, the Romans
shortly afterwards interfered : Lucullus formed it into
a province about the year 680, and Metellus com-
bined it under one government with the opposite
island of Crete. 2 To the transfer of its allegiance, and
again to the loss of its independence, it submitted
without a murmur, and gave its annual tribute of the
gum silphium, which was worth its weight in silver,
without repining. The sword was never required to
enforce its submission. In the civil wars, indeed, it
ventured to assert its indifference to either side, and
it was fortunate, when for a moment it refused admis-
sion to the republican force under Cato, to meet with

1 Sardinia and Africa. Suet. Oct. AT. The Cyrenaica should, I
believe, be added. It is remarkable, however, that the Fasti record
no less than five triumphs over Africa, that is, over the wild tribes
on the frontier, such as the Garamantes and others (see Plin. H.N.

v. 5.), in the early years of the empire; those, namely, of Statilius
Taurus, a.u. 720; of L. Comificius, 722; of L. Autronius Ptetus,
725; of L. Sempronius Atratinus, 733; and of L. Cornelius Balbus,
735. This Balbus was nephew to Caesar’s friend. Pliny remarks
that he was the only foreigner (i.e. from beyond Italy) who ever en-
joyed the honour. He was, moreover, the last Roman subject who
triumphed. The province of Africa being senatorial, the emperor
scrupled thus long to curtail the right of the senate to reward its
own officers.

2 The precise date of the reduction of the Cyrenaica is still a mat-
ter of dispute in consequence of the differing statements of Eutropius,

vi. 9„ and Appian, Bell. Civ. i. 111. See Becker's Jioem. Alt iii. 1 *
222. note. The union of Crete and Cyrene continued under Augus-
tus, who made it a senatorial province under a propraetor with the
title of proconsul. See an inscription in Grater, p. 415. 5.

Digitized by Google

CB. XXXIV.

UNDER TIIE EMPIRE.

149

an equitable opponent who abstained from chastising
its presumption. Throughout the long period of its
connexion with Rome the Cyrenaica attached itself to
no political movements, nor, remote and obscure as
it was, did it ever become the battlefield of contend-
ing parties. Nor was it less favoured by the blessings
of nature. Its configuration is that of a large segment
of a circle projecting into the Mediterranean; and it
consists of a series of terraces rising one behind an-
other, like the seats of a vast inverted theatre, to a
depth of eighty or an hundred miles into the interior,
till bounded by a range of lofty summits which pro-
tect it from the simoom of the desert. Upon these
terraces, fanned by cool breezes from the sea, grow
the products of as many different climates ; and the
fortunate inhabitants of its five cities gathered, in
a succession of harvests prolonged through eight
months of the year, the grains of the north and the
fruits of the south of Europe, together with the gums
and perfumes of Asia and Africa . 1 One only draw-
back to such manifold advantages is recorded in the
annual recurrence of a plague of locusts : to this
must be added the customary extortion of the Roman
officials, as similar in kind, and repeated in similar
succession. Nevertheless, the Cyrenaica, if not free
from this endemic pestilence, may have escaped better
than most of its kindred provinces ; no instance, at
least as far as I remember, occurs of a public scandal
in this quarter.

Crossing the elevated plain of the Libyan desert,
and descending the Catabathmus, its east- Theprovince
ward slope, we alight on the fertile valley of ^ e E ?,$o»" d
the Nile, the latest and most precious ac- uX d Ar‘XiX
quisition of Rome. Little more than half de “ rt '
a century had elapsed since the first political inter-

1 Herod, iv. 198, 199.; Plin. Hist. Nat. xiii. 4.; xvii. SO; and other
• authorities referred to in the article “ Cyrenaica,” Smith’s Diet. Anc.
Geography.

Digitized by Google

150

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

course of the Romans with the Egyptians, and in
that brief period the arms, and still more the craft, of
the Western conquerors had reduced the kingdom of
the Ptolemies to complete servitude. The neighbour-
ing realm of Palestine was traversing with slower and
less direct steps the same fated cycle from independ-
ence to servitude, but at this moment, as we have
seen, it had only reached the stage of royal vassalage.
At no extremity of the empire did the pulse of Roman
life beat more energetically than in these regions.
The south-eastern angle of the Mediterranean had
become the common theatre of the commercial ac-
tivity of all nations. Greeks and Syrians, Jews and
Ethiopians, Persians and Arabians were all mingled
together at this central focus ; but the Romans, more
resolute and self-confident than any, more shrewd
perhaps and keen in business than most of their com-
petitors, were thrusting themselves into every em-
porium of trade, and founding factories in every
haven. Rome had long been glutted with the glories
of Grecian civilization : statues and bronzes, plate and
jewels, had been poured with unbounded profusion
into her markets : but the luxury of the masters of
the world, and not less of their mistresses, was now
taking another direction, and the purveyors to their
taste and cupidity were ransacking the east and south of
Asia for gums and spices, silks, ivory, and costly woods,
for all the most curious products of India and Arabia,
their birds of gayest plumage, and their slaves, bedi-
zened with gems and fragrant with aromatic odours . 1

1 Ovid, Amor, ii.: “Psittacus Eois imitatrix ales ab Indis.”

Yirg. Geo. i. 57.: “ India mittit ebur, rnolles sua thura Sabsei.”

Hor. Od. i. 29. : “ Puer quis ex aula capillis

Ad cyathum statuetur unctis.”

For the vegetable products of India and Arabia, see particularly
Plin. H. N. xii. 8. foil. The objects of Indian commerce, at its fullest
extent, are enumerated by the author of the Periplus marls Erythrori,
and in the Digest, xxxix. 4. 16., de publicanis et vectigalibus. But
these authorities refer to a later period.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

151

The chief emporium of this traffic was Petra, the rock-
hewn city, which filled a narrow gorge in the moun-
tains of Seir, and kept the gate of the eastern and
western desert. From a port on the Arabian shore
of the Red Sea, to which the Greeks gave the name
of Leuce Come or the White Village, the merchandise
of India, Arabia, and Ethiopia, was carried on the
backs of camels to Petra, and from thence to Rliino-
colura on the Mediterranean, for dispersion through-
out the Western world. 1 But the producers of these
luxuries, living in the rudest simplicity, demanded
few of the products of Europe in return, and Italy
continued for centuries to exchange for them its
precious metals only. In the year 730, the higher
circles of the capital were amused and excited by the
rumour, that the emperor was about to send an ex-
pedition to acquire the native seats of these splendid
luxuries. The actual views of the government were
kept perhaps in studied obscurity, and free scope was
given to the wildest ideas of avarice and ambition.
The East, in the imagination of the Romans, glittered
with gold and jewels, as with the rays of its own
morning sun. . The defeat of Crassus was still un-
avenged, the disasters of Antonius unretrieved ; the
fabled treasures of the great Parthian cities invited
the hand of the spoiler, who knew nothing of the
treaties his ruler had made with their chiefs, or
of the motives of the policy which still kept his
sword in its scabbard. With ideas thus vague and
unsettled, the objects of the meditated enterprise
were easily confounded in the minds of the Romans.
At home they had little notion of commerce apart

1 Strabo tells ns that in his time, within half a century, the route
of Arabian commerce had changed to Myos Hormus and Alexandria
by the Nile. This was in consequence of the great impulse given to
the trade of Egypt by its Roman masters. Strabo, xvi. 4.: vuvl 5<
to irAeov as ' AAe^ivSpaav ra> NelAtp Karayerai, ra S' 4k t tjs 'ApaGlas

Ka\ rfjs ’IvStxfjs els Mubs Sp/uoy, ev6’ ineepSeins els Koktuv t rjs QrjGatSos
KapctjAots, tj Siiipvyi rov NeiAou, Keipeyij els ’AAc^dySpetav.

Digitized by Google

152

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CB. XXXIV.

from conquest, and their cupidity was inflamed by
the splendours paraded before them in the triumphs
of Pompeius and Augustus. Accordingly, in the cur-
rent language of .the day, as we may gather it from
the poets of the court, the arms of Kome were to
be directed against the Parthians and Medes, the
Arabians and Indians, the Bactrians and Seres. 1 The
land of the morning was to be explored sword in
hand, subjugated and ransacked. The young nobles
cast aside the tomes of the philosophers, and equipped
themselves in breastplates of Iberian steel, abjuring
the tame lessons of content and simplicity for the
prospect of illimitable booty. 2 Augustus might
shudder, perhaps, at seeing how little the peaceful
occupations to which he had directed the Eoman
youth had really taken hold of their minds. Neither
did it enter into his views to hazard any great scheme
of Oriental conquest : he shrank from risking an en-
counter with the formidable Parthians ; he limited
his preparations to a scale proportioned to an explor-
ing expedition, rather than an invading armament.

Even at a later period, indeed, sober historians did
Expedition not scruple to affirm that the object of Au-
QoifuXainrt gustus was either to form relations of com-
A h u.;.'/). bion '' merce with the Arabs and Ethiopians, or, if
b.c. 24. necessary, to reduce them to submission by
force of arms ; but the account they give of the means
employed seems to show that no armed occupation of
distant regions was actually contemplated. The force
placed under the command of ^Elius Gallus, the of-
ficer chosen for the service, amounted only to ten

' Compare Hor. Od. i. 29.; Propert ii. 10., iii. 4.; Virgil, JEn.
vii. 604.:

“ Sive Getis inferre maim lachrvmabile bellum
Eoisvo Arabisve parent, scu tend ere ad Indos,
Auroramque sequi, Parthosque reposcere signa.”

* Hor. l.c.: “Cnm tu coemptos undique nobilcs

Libros Panieti, Socraticam et domutn,

Mutare loricis Iberis
Pollicitus meliora tendis.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

153

thousand men, forming apparently no more than a
single legion, with auxiliaries, of whom one thousand
were Nabathseans and five hundred Jews. 1 The le-
gionaries were drafted from the army of Egypt, and
Grallus himself had recently served there under the
prefect Petronius. The blunders, however, which he
committed from the very outset, bespeak a strange
want of local information. The Romans, with their
usual vanity, ascribed them to the treachery of their
adviser Syllseus, a minister of the Nabathaean king
Obodas, who sought, they declared, both in his own
interest and that of his master, to harass the invaders
in every possible way. But the first delay was caused
by the error of equipping large war-galleys for the
navigation of the Arabian coast, which is full in many
parts of shoals and rocks. The expedition was kept?
waiting at Cleopatris at. the head of the gulf of Hero-
opolis till a new flotilla of smaller vessels could be
equipped. When all was ready it dropped down the
gulf to the point of Drepanum, and then crossed the
mouth of the Elanitic gulf to the Arabian coast.
Here it ought to have made good its landing, and
taken the caravan route southward in the direction
of the spice regions of Arabia Felix or Yemen, to
which it was bound. But Syllseus, we are told, as-
sured Gallus that there was no practicable coast route,
and persuaded him to continue his course by sea as
far as Leuce Come (Haura). In this latter part of its
voyage, the fleet suffered severely from the difficulties
of the navigation and the violence of winds and tides ;
and the men were already dispirited when they first
touched land after a passage of fifteen days. From

1 Strabo, xvi. 4.: tx av v f pl pvplovs irffotir ruv Ik rrjs Aly inrrov
'P upaluv /cal ruv rrvp.ndxoiv, uv ifcrav ’lovScuoi fiev rrevraKicrwi, N aSaraioi

xIaiol These words have been generally understood to mean
that there were 10,000 Romans besides allies; bat I believe my
interpretation is more correct. Two legions constituted the ordinary
garrison of Egypt, and iElius Gallus was only a subordinate to the
prefect.

Digitized by Google

154

HISTOBY OF THE BOHANS

CH. xxxiv.

hence it was determined to march into the spice
country, opening relations with the intervening states,
chastising such as opposed or betrayed any jealousy
of the armed strangers, and leaving garrisons at the
most important posts for the security of their return.
But though the object of the expedition was not pro-
perly warlike, it was the crafty policy of Syllseus to
engage it in hostilities with tribe after tribe, in order
to exhaust and finally destroy it. Before, however,
the Romans could move in advance, they were dread-
fully harassed by sickness, which particularly affected
their mouths and legs, and seems to have been the
same which modem travellers have described as en-
demic on that part, of the coast . 1 When, at last, after
passing a summer and the succeeding winter under
these distresses, the army was ready to march, Syl-
Jaeus directed it into the country of Aretas, a chief in
alliance with Obodas. This is the name frequently
given by the Greeks and Romans to chiefs of northern
Arabia, and from this and other circumstances it
seems probable that the route of Gallus lay, not south-
ward, in the first instance, but eastward, into the
central plateau of the great peninsula, known by the
name of El Nedjed ; and that the territory of Aretas i
himself was El Kasim, lying on the caravan track from
Medina to Bahrein on the Persian Gulf . 2 Even here,

1 Strabo says, <TTop.aKdKiqi re leal tTKt\orvpGy wttpa(ofUyiit rijs orpa-
nas emxvpiois rddecri, which is curiously confirmed by the observa-
tions of Burckhardt (Travels in Arabia, i. 182. 446, &c.): “ My stay
at Djidda was prolonged to three weeks, chiefly in consequence of
sore legs, a disease very prevalent on this unhealthy coast, where
every bite, if neglected, becomes a serious wound. ... I believe that
one-fourth of the population of Djidda is constantly afflicted with
ulcers on the legs.” See Forster’s Hist. Geogr. of Arabia, ii. 280.
Djidda, it should be remarked, is 300 miles south of Haura; but
Burckhardt’s observations apply to the whole coast of the Hedjaz.

2 Strabo says that Syllseus led the Romans KUK\oiropciais. Mr.
Forster justly remarks, “ While Gallus might be and was deceived,
a Roman general could not be altogether befooled by his Arab con-
ductor. Total ignorance of the country might betray him, as it had
betrayed Crassus, into taking a totally wrong road — an error which

Digitized by Google

CfT. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE. *

155

though the country was not unfriendly, and the track
not unfrequented, the strangers were subjected, by the
artifices of Syllseus, to severe privations ; but when,
at last, they turned southward across an inhospitable
desert, in quest of Agrana (Nedjran), at the first de-
scent of the hills towards the Red Sea, their sufferings
became intense. Three months were spent in reaching
this spot, where the Romans found rest and refresh-
ment ; the chief having fled at their approach, and the
tribe having yielded with little resistance. Six days
beyond Agrana, the Romans fought a battle on the
banks of a river, in which they boasted of destroying
ten thousand Arabs with the loss of two men only.
Nevertheless, from hence every step was contested,
and six months had passed before they reached the
city of Marsyaba, which lay within two days of the
spice country, the cherished object of their expedition.
But the resistance they here encountered, together
with the want of water, determined them to retire
from before its walls at the end of six days. They
had become persuaded of the treachery of Syllasus,
who had led them by a painful and circuitous route,
in order, as was supposed, to employ their arms in
chastising tribes unfriendly to his master. Exhausted
as the Romans were, their leader relinquished the at-
tempt to penetrate southward, and commenced his

his subsequent better knowledge of the country enabled him eventu-
ally to correct ; but no amount of ignorance could induce him to be
led, like the characters of a modern drama, round and round a horse-
pond, as must have been pretty much the case, could we believe him
to have employed alternately six months and two months in his
passage through the same line of country. Yet this is the ground
taken by our highest modern authorities. D’Anville, Gosselin,
Vincent, all agree in conducting and reconducting the Roman army
through the Hedjaz.” Forster supposes, on the contrary, that the
army described two sides of a triangle on its advance, and took the
base on its retreat. See below. Pliny, H.N. vi. 32, refers to this
expedition, and gives a list of towns which the Homans occupied on
their route; but their names afford little or no assistance in deter-
mining it.

Digitized by Google

156

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

retreat. Having once more reached Agrana, instead
of retracing the route by which he had come, he
turned to the left in the direction of the Red Sea,
from whence he led his army, apparently without
impediment, along the coast. On reaching Nera Come
(Yembo), where he arrived in sixty days, he fell in
with the flotilla which had been despatched southward
to wait on his movements, and, once more embarking
with the remnant of his soldiers, crossed over the
gulf to the Bay of Hormus . 1 The failure of the ex-
pedition must have been a severe mortification to
Augustus, whose power rested to so great a degree
on the reputation of success; but he threw a veil
over it, by retaining and even promoting Gallus in
his service, and by refraining from the infliction of
punishment on Syllaeus. The one on his return was
appointed prefect of Egypt, the other ventured to
appear in person at Kome, where he negotiated either
for his master or for himself, but eventually, being

1 The main points to be determined in tracing the route of this
expedition are Leuce Come, Nera Come, and Marsyaba. The two
first of these are, I think, satisfactorily settled by Mr. Forster ( Geogr .
of Arabia, ii. 277. foil.). The first corresponds in signification with
El Haura, the White City, and also in its distance (fifteen days’
voyage) from Cleopatris. the distance in miles, taking the sinuous
line of the coast, being stated at 470. or 31 miles a day. Mr. For-
ster shows also, from Golius, that Nera, a barbarous Greek word
for water, agrees in meaning with Yembo, the name of a town
eighty miles south of Haura on the coast of the Hcdjaz. Marsyaba
may very possibly be Saba or Sabbia, lying midway between the
modern Mecca and Mareb, with the former of which it has been
identified by Gosselin, but by D’Anville, followed by Gibbon, with
the latter. Mareb, however, lies in the centre of the spice region,
while Mecca is too distant from it. I think, with Mr. Forster, that
Gallus went eastward from Haura in the first instance (and this was
the opinion of Burckhardt and of Walckenaer, Vie it Horace, i. 564.),
though I cannot imagine that he got, as that writer represents, almost
within sight of the Persian Gulf. Mr. Forster lays great stress on
the mention of the river, which he thinks he can prove was the
Sancan, the only stream in the vicinity of Nedjran. But his iden-
tification of Agrana with Nedjran on the caravan route from the
Persian Gulf into Yemen cannot be fully relied on, and the maps I
have been able to consult differ widely from each other.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

157

detected in a fresh treason, expiated his offence with
death . 1

While Gallus was thus occupied in Arabia, his
superior officer Petronius, the governor of retroniu.

» 7 o the successor

Egypt, was employed in chastising the otcotmUui.
encroachments of the Ethiopians on the tn a Egypt.
other side of the Eed Sea. During the latter years
of the feeble and enervated rule of the Macedonians
the resources of that fertile country were allowed to
run to waste, and even the defence of their frontiers
had been neglected. While Alexandria flourished
from the concourse of all nations in its streets, and
from the increasing development of Oriental trade,
the old cities of Upper Egypt had utterly decayed,
the industry of the native Copts, no longer strung to
the utmost by importunate taskmasters, had relaxed
and dwindled away, and the Arabs of Nubia and
Ethiopia had encroached upon their domains, and
occupied their crumbling halls . 2 The artificial chan-
nels for the irrigation of the soil, on which the whole
welfare of Lower Egypt depended, had become choked
with sand ; the canal from the Nile to the head of
the Red Sea, begun by Sesostris or Darius, and which
the Ptolemies had undertaken to complete, had either
been left unfinished or was rendered useless from
want of repairs ; the traffic of India, which, even in
default of continuous water-communication, might
have been brought by a short portage to the valley
of the Nile, had been allowed to become diverted to
the route of Petra ; and not more than twenty ves-
sels were despatched annually from Arsinoe to the

* Strabo, /. c. : fritre Si (cal Sheas tv 'P tifig, irpoairoiovfj.fvos pi? eptXtav,
Si TTpbs ainrj rjj novr)ph f koX &Wa KOKOvpy av, teal airorpiiBtls
ri)V Kt<pa\-T)V.

2 Thus the city of Coptos was occupied jointly by Egyptians and
Arabs, that is, Ethiopians. Strabo, xvii. I. p. 815. But the prin-
cipal evidence on this point is drawn from the large proportion of
Arab skulls among the mummies of this period. Sharpe’s Hist, of
Egypt, ch. i. § 3.

Digitized by Google

158 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS CH. xxxiv.

Indian Ocean. Augustus undertook to repair all these
disorders, and unfold the boundless resources of his
new province. But his first prefect, Cornelius G-allus,
was found unequal to the charge, in which, besides
indulging in personal vanity, he had excited by ill-
judged severity the disaffection of an irritable popu-
lation. He had been removed, as we have seen,
from the government of Egypt, and his place had
been supplied by C. Petronius, who brought zeal and
activity to his work. The new governor speedily
quelled the risings of the Alexandrians, and set his
legionaries, freed from the task of coercion, to clear
the canals and remove the causes of insurrection . 1
When this beneficent work was completed, it was
found that a rise of the Nile waters of twelve cubits
sufficed to cover a tract of country which had pre-
viously required fourteen . 2

A portion of the army of Egypt was now drafted
nc defend, off on service in Arabia; but about the
same time the encroachments of the bar-
EtMopw barians on the frontier had become intole-
Bxik - rable, and it was necessary to employ a
force to chastise them. Petronius repaired to Syene,
and demanded of the Ethiopian queen Candace, the
restitution of the booty her subjects had carried off,
including some statues of the emperor himself. The
barbarians retorted by complaints of the aggression
of Roman officers on the frontiers ; to which Petro-
nius replied that the ruler of Egypt was Cossar him-
self, and with him they had to deal and not with his
lieutenants. When, not comprehending this argu-
ment, they ventured to meet him in the field, they
were easily routed, and pursued far into their own
territories. Candace, who is described as a woman of
great spirit, and the more terrible to behold from the

1 Bust. Oct. 18.

2 Strabo, xvii. 1. 788. Ten cubits, instead of twelve, according to
Groskurd’s reading.

Digitized by Google

is ■jyp

CH. XXXIV. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 159

loss of ar% eye, consented to treat for peace with the
cession of the spoils demanded, and of the fortified
post of Premnis ; blit no sooner had Petronius with-
drawn than she collected her forces to attack the garri-
son he had left there, and compelled him to rush back
in haste to its rescue. Negotiations again ensued, and
the Roman referred his adversary to Caesar himself
for terms of permanent pacification. On her demand-
ing who Cce8ar was, he despatched her envoys to
Augustus, who was then in person at Samos, and the
emperor, satisfied with their protestations of respect,
and sensible of the fruitlessness of attempting to ex-
tend his sway into their wild regions, released their
nation from the tribute his prefect had imposed on
them. 1 On the return of iElius Gallus from Arabia
he was appointed to succeed Petronius in the prefec-
ture. In the progress which he made to Syene he
took with him the geographer Strabo, then a young
man, to whose personal examinations and inquiries
on the spot we owe the minute details about Egypt
recorded in his great work.

In the year 733 Augustus once more quitted the
seat of his government to make a proconsular pro-
gress through the Oriental provinces, and settle their
administration on a definite basis. On his way he
first visited Sicily, where he planted Roman
colonies in Syracuse and other cities, im-
poverished perhaps, or depopulated, by the »!<:.' si. '
effects of the late war, and at the same time with-
drew, as it would appear, the privilege of citizenship
accorded generally to the islanders by Antonius. 2

1 Strabo, xvii. 1. p. 820. The campaign of Petronius is referred
to the year 732 : Dion, liv. 5. Augustus is supposed to have coveted
a footing in Ethiopia or Abyssinia, from the apprehension that the
natives might at any time ruin Egypt by turning the course of the
Nile into the Red Sea. Such a project was actually entertained by
Albuquerque, the great captain of the Portuguese in the East, to
punish the Egyptian Sultan for his opposition to the establishments
of that people in India. M'Culloch’s Economical Policy, p. 292.

1 Among the sixty-eight cities of Sicily enumerated by Pliny (Hist,

Digitized by Google

160

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

From thence passing into Greece, he bestowed favours
on Sparta, which had been loyal to his interests, while
he mulcted the Athenians, guilty of the grossest
flattery of his rival, of the most lucrative of their
privileges, that of selling the freedom of their city . 1
Thence he crossed to the island of Samos, where he
passed the winter, shaming, perhaps, by his simplicity
the orgies enacted on the same spot by the wretched
Antonius, and receiving the envoys of many vassal
potentates, among them, as we have seen, those of the
queen of Ethiopia. In the ensuing spring he landed
on the continent of Asia, and undertook the arrange-
ment of its political condition, not heeding the dis-
tinction he had himself made between the provinces
of the emperor and the senate, but exercising, in
virtue of his proconsular power, the same unlimited
authority throughout all as had been conceded to
Pompeius by the Gabinian law.

Armed with irresponsible power, that great con-
Poiiticai queror had prostrated the whole of Lower
of^he'region Asia under the supremacy of Rome; but
of Lower au*. dependence to which he had reduced its

various districts differed in form and degree. At the
commencement of the imperial rule a small portion
only of the regions which extended to the Phasis
and Euphrates was strictly provincial soil ; for in the
centre, and by the side of these provinces, certain
wide tracts were still allowed to remain in the hands
of native princes and priests, in addition to which a
few favoured territories were still suffered to call
themselves autonomous. The power, however, of the
one, and the freedom of the .other, were held alike
in fact at the mere will of the conquerors. The po-
•

Nat. iii. 14.) six only are specified as having the Roman franchise.
We do not know when the franchise was withdrawn, and the act is
ascribed to Augustus only conjecturally. Dureau de la Malle, Econ.
Pol. des liomains, i. 322.

* Dion, liv. 7.; Spanhcim, Orb. Rom. i. 61.

Digitized by Googl

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

161

litieal status of all these regions, excepting that of
the province of Asia, properly so called, was grounded
on the acts of Pompeius, ratified by the decree of
the senate ; and the system he created continued to
subsist in all its principal features into the imperial
period. The dissensions of the republic, the conflict
of Roman parties in this distant sphere, the irrup-
tion of the Parthians, the intrigues of less powerful
barbarians on the frontiers, and, above all, the caprice
and violence of Antonius, had each in turn assailed
and shaken it ; .Augustus himself, in his rapid pro-
gress through Asia on his return from Egypt, had
modified it in various particulars. But the work
which he meditated was not yet complete, and the
same hand which had organized the western half of
the empire in accordance with the matured system of
the imperial policy, was now employed in finally
regulating the affairs of the opposite hemisphere.

Bithynia and Asia were the only provinces in this
quarter which Augustus was content to The pro^nee.
surrender to the government of the senate. Bithyna.

Of these Asia was the earliest acquisition of the re-
public beyond the iEgean, and comprised the regions
of Mysia, Lydia, Caria, and probably the greater part
of Phrygia 1 . This magnificent territory had been
originally obtained by the testament of the last of the
Attali, whose kingdom of Pergamus had been ex-
tended by the aid of the Romans themselves far
beyond its proper limits. Bithynia had also been
acquired by the voluntary cession of its sovereign
Nicomedes. When formed into a province it was ex-
tended by Pompeius, at the expense of the dominions
of Mithridates, as far as the Halys, so as to include
the whole seaboard of Paphlagonia, together with a
part of Pontus. It was divided from Asia by the
Rhyndacus, a river which falls into the Propontis : and

VOL. IV.

1 Cic. pro Flacc, 27.
M

Digitized by Google

162

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

its southern frontier was marked by the ridge of Mount
Olympus, which separated it from Gralatia and Phrygia.
These provinces had been subdivided into numerous
districts for the convenience of levying the appointed
tribute. Thus in Asia there were as many as forty of
these regions, each having its chief town 1 ; another
division was that into conventus or circles for judicial
and administrative purposes, much fewer in number
and proportionally more extensive. The chief cities
of Asia, six in number, were denominated metropoles,
and of these Ephesus was the principal, and the capital
of the whole province ; but in all there were enume-
rated not less than five hundred . 2 Under the re-
public both Asia and Bithynia were governed by pro-
praetors, but under the emperors the officers appointed
to administer them by the senate took the style and
rank of proconsuls . 3

With these arrangements, which constituted the
compcnF&tion ordinary machinery of provincial govern-
me^dto the" ment, Augustus did not interfere. His at-
cities of A«ia. t en tion was directed to meting out justice
to the states and cities which had either sided with
his enemies or been maltreated by them. Several
autonomous cities were now deprived of their free-
dom, while others which had suffered, whether from
Brutus or Antonius, received munificent compensa-
tion by grants of territory or relief from taxation.
This retributive policy Augustus had already inaugu-
rated in his earlier progress; but now, after an in-
terval of ten years, he still found his work incomplete,
and the claims of those who had suffered in his cause
urged him to carry it out to the uttermost. The
people of Cyzicus, who had seized some Roman
citizens in a popular tumult, scourged and executed

1 This was the division of Sulla, which was generally maintained
by his successors. See Becker, Roem. Allerth. iii. 1. 134.

2 Becker, from Philostr. vit. Sophist, p. 36. 21.; and Joseph. Bell.

Jud. it 16. 4. 3 Strabo, xvii. p. 840.; Dion, liii. 12. 14.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

163

them, were now punished with the loss of their na-
tional freedom ; a punishment which was inflicted
also subsequently on the people of Tyre and Sid on . 1
These cities fell henceforward under the direct control
of the proconsul. On the other hand several Asiatic
communities were now presented with the Roman or
the Latin franchise. The temple of the Grecian Arte-
mis claimed from remote antiquity to confer rights of
asylum on the wretches who took refuge within its
enclosure. Alexander of Macedon had extended this
privilege to the circuit of one stadium around it;
Mithridates, letting fly an arrow from the corner of
the roof, had slightly overshot this limit, and enlarged
the sacred precincts accordingly; but Antonius had
doubled the radius of the circle, so as to embrace
within its sphere a large portion of the city. The
Ephesians themselves exclaimed that this put their
homes and hearths in the power of evil-doers, and
Augustus performed a popular act in confining the
asylum once more within reasonable limits . 2

At the south-western angle of Asia Minor several
places on the coast of Caria were held by Cariaan(i
the Rhodians, whose island still retained a* Khode ’-
nominal freedom, and vaunted itself as the last strong-
hold of the maritime and commercial spirit of ancient
Greece. Before the establishment of Roman supre-
macy in the East, Rhodes might not unjustly style
herself the mistress of the sea. In the civil wars she
had furnished a large fleet to Pompeius, which she
had withdrawn from the service of the senate after
the defeat of Pharsalia. Her docks and arsenals con-
tinued under Augustus to be the objects of her pride
and solicitude. Herein still resided, or seemed to
reside, the secret of the independence which even the
emperor respected, and she punished with death the

1 Dion, liv. 7. ; Suet. Oct. 47.

2 Strabo, xiv. 1. p. 641.: ’-AAf^dvSpov fxiv ardbiov itcrtivavros,
MiBptbdrov 8e rd^tvua atpivros iurb Tijs ywvlas toG Kfpdfiov, Kal Si^avros
inrepSaKtaBat puicpb rb tndSiov.

M 2

Digitized by Google

164

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV*

prying intruder who ventured covertly to inspect them.
The .Rhodians offered an asylum moreover to the
teachers of rhetoric and philosophy, and to their city
many of the young patricians continued long to resort
for the highest literary instruction. But they are still
more remarkable for the institution among them,
unique, it may be said, in antiquity, of a regular
poor-law, which seems to have been long established ;
not, as Strabo remarks, that they were democratically
governed, but tbe aristocracy, in the midst of its pride
and power, wisely took this precaution to secure an
unfailing supply of efficient operatives and seamen . 1

We are not sufficiently acquainted with the mode
Autonomous ' in which this system of relief was conducted
i.yda. to decide whether it was in fact an instance
of prudent generosity, or merely, as in the case of the
largesses to the Roman populace, a tribute exacted
from contented industry for the satisfaction of tur-
bulent idleness. Allowing, however, that its principle
was sound, we cannot but remark how little jealousy
the Romans evinced of this example of freedom and
public spirit. Not only did they suffer the autonomy
of Rnodes within sight of their own subject provinces,
but permitted even in their centre the existence of
a political confederacy of twenty-three Lycian towns,
whose deputies met together in common, as the
Greeks and the Ionians had assembled in the days of
their independence. From the character of these
meetings, as well as from the name of the chief Lycian
city, Xanthus, we might imagine that these auto-
nomous communities were themselves of Hellenic
origin; but the Greeks refused to acknowledge the
affinity, and insisted that they were simply Carian.

1 Strabo, xiv. 2. p. 653. The constitution of Rhodes, at least at
an earlier period, is described as a curious combination of aristocracy
and democracy. See Cicero, de Republ. iii. 35. At a later period
again, Dion Chryscstom and Aristides represent the constitution of
Rhodes as popular. Creuzer, in Ivc. Ciccron.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

165

At all events, they deserved the respect shown them
by the Romans for the honourable way in which,
though a maritime people, they abstained from piracy
in its palmiest days, and Xanthus at least, which had
been delivered by Brutus to pillage, might claim con-
sideration at the hands of Augustus. These little
states, however, had suffered so much from the ex-
action of the Roman generals, that even freedom, with
immunity from Roman taxation, seems to have failed
to restore their prosperity . 1

From the Gulf of Pamphylia to that of Issus
stretched the province of Cilicia, To this, ciiid*.
since the time of Pompeius, not only Pamphylia and
Isauria, but also some districts of Pisidia and Phrygia
had been appended. Cilicia was regarded by the
Romans as a very important possession, not for the
wealth of its inhabitants, but, first, as the region from
whence the pirates had issued, and within which they
were still located after their defeat; and, again, as
the key of Syria, with which it was connected by the
passes of the Amanus. Accordingly we always find
it occupied by a strong military force. Augustus
claimed to administer it by officers of his own ap-
pointment; but Cyprus, which was at first attached
to it, he afterwards restored to the senate .' 2 But
though the seas were cleared of pirates, and the
harbours secured, the mountains of Cilicia were still
infested by hordes of robbers ; and it was in order to
keep these marauders in check without expense to
the imperial treasury that the Romans had \wnuug.
permitted the existence on the Taurus and e*i.tinA»u.
Amanus of various petty chieftains with the title of
kings . 3 In the period of the civil wars one chief of
superior craft or energy had succeeded in absorbing

1 Strabo, xiv. 3. p. 664.

- Strabo, xvii. 3. p. 840. A. W. Zumpt Beems to have satisfactorily
shown that Cilicia became annexed to the proconsulate of Syria.
Comment. Epigraph, ii. 93. foil.

* Strabo, xiv. 4. p. 676.

Digitized by Google

166

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

into his own realm the possessions of his neighbours,
and was allowed to hold, in dependence on the re-
public, the gates of Syria and Cilicia. His name was
Tarcondimotus ; but when he was slain by the side of
Antonins at Actium, his son Philopator, who claimed
the succession, was displaced by the conquerors, and
the throne bestowed upon a younger brother of the
same name as the father . 1

The disposition of affairs effected by the republic
Their wbscr- in the Asiatic provinces had remained, for
chieftofthe the most part, intact through the series of
Roman «tate. revolutions which had recently swept over
the country. Neither Caesar nor Brutus and Cassius
had changed in any important particular the admin-
istration of these territories. Even Antonius, whose
sway had been most arbitrary, and whose necessities
most exacting, had spared the institutions of these
regions, while levying from them the heaviest contri-
butions. But throughout the foreign and allied de-
pendencies of the sovereign state, as far as his hand
could reach, he had overthrown dynasties and effaced
political landmarks, for the gratification of his ca-
prices, or from lust of gold. Everywhere thrones
were to be obtained from him for money, and without
money the possession of none was secure. The vas-
sals of the Roman people were transformed into clients
of the triumvir, and were summoned at his call to
maintain his quarrel against his rival, and the gods
and people of Rome herself. They obeyed him re-
luctantly, and betrayed him without scruple. But
the conqueror, who had friends and allies of his own to
serve, did not, for the most part, spare them for this
tardy service, and few, perhaps, of the whole number
of the dependent chiefs of Asia were allowed to retain
their authority on the establishment of his power . 2

1 Dion, liv. 9.

* Dion, li. 2., excepts only Amyntas and Archelaus. Bnt we shall
see immediately that there were some others.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

DNDEB THE EMFIRE.

167

Difficult, indeed, was the game which these
little tributaries were required to play.

The creatures of a proconsul’s breath, and king Sr. ’
the puppets of his caprice, any sense of
gratitude for favours conferred might well be lost in
the sense of his insolence and their own degradation.
Their power, and indeed existence, depended on
their turning precisely at the favourable moment
in a contest in which they took no interest, but in
which their services were demanded by every party
in turn. Among the wariest of the number was
Amyntas, who had been the minister and general
of king Deiotarus. He was sent by his master to
the assistance of Brutus and Cassius ; but without
waiting for the decision of Philippi, which would
have been too late, he had the sagacity to augur
their discomfiture at an earlier period, and could
thus make a merit of his defection. 1 Antonius
accordingly rewarded him with the royal title, and
gave him, upon the death of Deiotarus, which
speedily followed, the greater part of his late mas-
ter’s possessions. His territories extended over the
whole of Gralatia, the tract between the Halys and
the Phasis, together with some portions of Lycaonia
and Pamphylia. 2 Having once turned so oppor-
tunely, he resolved to play the same game agaiu,
and watching the moment when the crimes and
follies of Antonius were manifestly hurrying him
to his ruin, he contrived to signify his desertion to
Octavius just before the battle of Actium. 3 By this
second feat he secured the possession of his throne,
which he continued to enjoy, with no Annexation
further trial of his prudence, till his death ^’iJory.
in 729, whereupon Augustus took the A V - m -
greater part of his dominions, and formed therewith
the province of Gralatia.

1 Dion, xlvii. 48. 2 Dion, xlix. 32.; Strabo, xii. 3. p. 547.

5 Veil. ii. 84. ; Plut. Anton. 63.

Digitized by Google

168

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxrv.

A similar good fortune, though on a smaller scale,
Deiotarus, attended the well-timed adhesion to Octa-
Fapiugonia. vius of Deiotarus Philadelphus. This chief
went over to the western triumvir with Amyntas,
and was allowed, it would seem, in consequence, to
retain his little sovereignty in a part of Paphlagonia,
which again, upon his death, became incorporated
in the province of Galatia. 1 The same was the fate
of several other petty chiefs in this district, and of
ivu-mo, king their territories. Another of the most dis-
°he aLp’.irai. tinguished of these favourites of fortune
was Polemo, the son of a Greek rhetorician, on
whom Antonius «had bestowed the kingdom of Pon-
tus, comprising the eastern portion of the ample
region generally so called, enlarged by the addition
of the seaboard of the Euxine, as far, at least, as
the river Phasis. 2 Augustus confirmed his title to
these dominions, and in 728 conferred upon him
the style of friend and ally of the Roman people.
He even added eventually to his territories the
kingdom of the Bosphorus. 3 Polemo himself was
killed in conflict with some of his barbarian neigh-
bours ; but Jiis territories continued long to escape
the gulf into which so many Asiatic sovereignties
were falling, and retained their nominal indepen-
dence under the sceptre of his widow Pythodoris.
This woman was possessed of uncommon abilities,
and maintained herself on her throne in the midst
of so many hostile or jealous potentates, by the
force of her genius and the discreet choice of her
second husband. She united her fortunes with those
of Archelaus, another client of Augustus, whom
Antonius had placed on the throne of Cappadocia
in reward for the complaisance of his beautiful
mother. 4 To this kingdom, which was originally

1 Strabo, xii. 3. p. 562. * Strabo, xi. 2. p. 499. »

s Dion, liii. 25., liv. 24. ; Strabo, xi. 2. p. 495.

* Dion, xlix. 33.; Strabo, xii. 2. p. 540.

Digitized by Google

CH XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

169

bounded by Galatia and Lycaonia on the west, and
the line of the Anti-Taurus on the north, Augustus
added a portion of Cilicia 1 , and Pythodoris could
bring him a further accession in the adjacent realm
of the Lesser Armenia. In the centre of their
united dominions they founded the city of Sebaste
in honour of their patron, and strenuously defended
his frontiers against the formidable power of the
Parthians . 2

In the conquest of Asia Minor, Sulla and Lu-
cullus, Metellus and Servilius, had each Thc prorince
borne a share; but the subjugation 0 f of8yrU -
Syria, the fairest gem of the imperial diadem of
Rome, was the work of Pompeius alone. The re-
duction of Gaul, it may be said, was the only
achievement that surpassed it, as Caesar was the
only Roman who deserved to be styled superior to
the second Alexander. Syria, in its widest extent,
comprised the whole tract of country, ill-defined, at
least on its eastern frontier, which lay between the
Amanus and Euphrates on the north, and the de-
serts of Mesopotamia and Arabia to the Pelusian
isthmus. In Palestine and some other outlying
districts, the conqueror had suffered the existence
of vassal kings ; but Syria proper, with its wealthy
cities of Antioch and Damascus, Apamea and Emesa,
its active and restless population, its fanatical priest-
hood, and above all its frontier exposed to powerful
and ambitious neighbours, was too precarious a
possession to be placed in the hands of any tribu-
tary monarch. Accordingly Pompeius had at once
enrolled it among the Roman provinces, and had
demanded of the senate that a force of several

1 Strabo, xii. i. p. 535.

1 Cappadocia on the Taurus, the original kingdom of Archelaus,
was formed into a province on his death, a. d. 769. Tac. Ann. ii. '
42. ; Strabo, xii. 1. p. 534.; Lucan, iii. 243. :

“ Vcnere feroces
Cappadoces, duri populus nunc cultor Amani.”

Digitized by Google

170

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV*

legions should be permanently quartered in it, for
the defence of the most important outpost of the
empire. The proconsulate of Syria became the
object of every inordinate ambition; and the pos-
session of this dependency, it was soon discovered,
was pregnant with far more danger than advantage
to the government at home. Caesar redressed the
balance of the East and West, but it was at the ex-
pense of creating a new army, and a new general
inimical to the privileges of the dominant class.
Meanwhile, however, the presence of the legions of
Syria had secured the safety of the province against
the encroachments of the Parthians, amidst all the
troubles of the civil wars, and the terrible disasters
of Crassus and Antonius. Accustomed to submis-
sion, and trained to the yoke of foreign rulers, by
the successive dynasties of the Assyrian, the Per-
sian, and the Macedonian, the natives bore the ex-
actions of their new masters with equanimity : never-
theless Augustus garrisoned their country with a
force of four legions. 1 At the northern extremity of
this region the little kingdom of Commagene reached
to the banks of the Euphrates, and presented the
last vestige of the magnificent domain of the Seleu-
cidae. In the year 723 it was ruled by a king of
the name of Mithridates, who, however, was not
himself a scion of the Macedonian dynasty. 2 Two
years later an Antiochus of Commagene was put
to death, as we read, at Home. The possessor of
the throne from this time to the year 734 is not
known, but at that period Augustus presented it to
another Mithridates, who was but a child. 3

Herodes, king
of Judea.

Two years before the Eastern journey
of Augustus, his friend and adviser Ag-

rippa had inspected in his behalf the provinces of

1 Tac. Ann. iv. 3.

- Plut Anton. 61.; Appian, B. C. v. 10.

* l)ioD, lii. 43., liv. 9.; Hoeck, Rom. GescL i. 370.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDEIl THE EMPIRE.

171

Asia . 1 The politic Herodes had succeeded in gain-
ing the minister’s favour, as previously his master’s,
and had received a full confirmation of the favours
already bestowed upon him. To his kingdom of
Judea were annexed the dominions of various petty
chieftains; he was allowed to choose his own suc-
cessor from among the children whom he had sent
of his own accord to Eome, as pledges of his loyalty.
Few of the vassal kings of Rome were, thus en-
couraged to contemplate the prospect of perpetua-
ting a dynasty. On the arrival, however, Add t o
of Augustus himself, more extensive ad- madeto n hi 3
ditions were made to his territories, in
the districts of Trachonitis, Auranitis, and Batanea,
which were taken from their tetrarch Zenodorus,
because he leagued himself with the Arab robbers
instead of controlling them. Pheroras, a brother of
Herodes, was raised to the sovereignty of a por-
tion of Persea, and Herod was himself guaranteed by
special ordinance from the obnoxious interference of
the governor of Syria. Such were the brilliant re-
wards he obtained for maintaining the police of the
Arabian deserts, chastising the nomade sheikhs, and
gradually inuring them to the stern control of civil-
ized authority . 2 On similar conditions Obodas held,
as we have seen, his sceptre in Petra, and Iamblichus
in Emesa.

Before quitting the Eastern dominions of the
Roman empire we must cast our eyes for a The .
moment on the great empire — the only monarchy
rival empire — which lay beyond their fron-
tier. In their collisions with Parthia the Romans
had been twice unfortunate, and scanty were the

1 In the year 731. Dion, liii. 32.: oh /utmot nal is tV 2vplap
atp'iKtTo, i\\’ tn ftal ftaWov fierptafap iiceTtre flip robs broarparipyovs
(vtp^/tp, alrrbs be ip A iaStp Siirpiipe.

* Joseph. Antiq. xv. 7. 10. 13.; Bell. Jud. i. 20, 21.; Dion, liv.
9.; Strabo, xvi. 2. p. 756.

Digitized by Google

172 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS CH. XXXIV.

trophies they had to set against the overthrow of
one proconsul, the flight of another, and the loss of
their legionary eagles. Nevertheless the events which
had taken place in the interval nearer home were too
tremendous in their character, and their interest ivas
too absorbing to allow them to brood over these distant
disasters. Each political chieftain had in turn re-
joiced secretly in the discomfiture of his personal foe :
the death of Crassus had relieved both Pompeius and
Caesar from a vigilant rival, and the setting of the
sun of Antonius had cast a double brightness on the
rising star of Octavius. The splendour and pre-
tended glories of the new administration might con-
tinue to throw these early misfortunes into the shade:
patriots who dared hardly think of the ancient tri-
umphs of the republic would still less indulge in the
recollection of her failures. Although in the earlier
years of Augustus the writings of the day reflect
often the national fear and hatred of the Parthians,
none ventured to suggest the duty or policy of chas-
tising them. During the closing struggle between
the triumvirs, both Media and Armenia had been
suffered to fall under the tutelage of these formidable
enemies ; but the dissensions of the reigning family
had saved the honour of the Romans by inducing the
rival claimants of the throne to appeal to the arbitra-
tion of the emperor. 1 While Phraates was allowed,
as we have seen, to sit unmolested on his throne, his
son, whom Tiridates had delivered up to Augustus, was
kept in honourable confinement at Rome, and Tiridates
himself entertained with respect and favour in Syria.
This state of things subsisted for several years, during
which the rivals, thus kept apart, continued secretly
to countermine each other. Meanwhile, Rome grew
united and stronger: Parthia was weakened by its dis-
sensions. In the year 731 the claimants for the throne
condescended once more to appeal to the common

1 Dion, li. 18.; Justin, xlii. 5. See vol. iii. ch. xxix.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

173

enemy of their nation. On this great occasion the
demeanour of Augustus was eminently patriotic and
national. He referred their claims to the consider-
ation of the senate, and himself suggested that the
opportunity had now arrived for satisfying the honour
of the country, and effacing the memorials of her
discomfiture. 1 While no decision was yet made re-
specting the settlement of the throne, the standards
and the captives of Carrhae were proudly reclaimed,
as the first condition of arbitration. The Parthian
monarch temporized, and on the part of the Roman
no great anxiety was shown to hasten their recovery.
At last, in the year 734, Augustus, then en- A 0i734
gaged in the settlement of the affairs of Asia, “■ i0 -
repeated in louder tones his demand for satisfaction.
The tardy restoration was quickened by the advance of
Tiberius Nero, the emperor’s stepson, into Armenia,
at the head of a military force, which might easily be
turned against the refractory Parthian. 2 The stan-
dards were restored, or rather, perhaps, the Kettorilt j 0n
bronze eagles which surmounted them — the ^!i. c of*”'
cherished object of the soldier’s affection and Cr "* us -
sometimes of his worship — which he was bound by
the military sacrament never to desert. After an in-
terval of more than thirty years few of the captives
survived, and not many of these would care to re-
linquish their new ties and occupations for the for-
gotten honours of their youth. Phraates himself,
if we may trust the testimony of the imperial medals,
performed homage at the feet of the emperor’s repre-
sentative, and received the crown from his hands.
The long-lost trophies were brought by Tiberius to

1 Dion, liii. 33.

■ Suet. Tib. 9. The line of Horace, Epist. i. 12. 26.. “Jus impe-
riumque Phraates Csesaris accepit genibus minor,” alludes to the
coins struck at this period, on which we see the figure of a trousered
Parthian presenting the emperor with a standard, or, in some cases,
a bow. Eckhel, Doctr. Numm. vi. 95. Comp. Ovid. Fast. v. 593. :
“Parthe, refers aquilas, victos quoque porrigis arcus.'’ Propert. iii.
4 . 17.: “Tela fugacis eqni et braccati militis arcus."

Digitized by Google

174

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

his father, and by him transmitted to Rome, where
they were greeted with fervent acclamations, and de-
posited in the temple of Mars the Avenger. 1 This
splendid edifice, which Augustus had vowed before
the battle of Philippi, in which he was about to take
vengeance on his father’s murderers, was thus ren- ,
dered doubly worthy of its title, as a monument of
national retribution. The poets celebrated this re-
covery as something greater than a victory or a
triumph. Augustus, however, in the monumental
record he has left us of his own exploits, speaks of
it with dignity and moderation. 2

The history of Armenia, during the few years
Armenia. preceding, is equally obscure with that of
Parthia. Antonius had withdrawn from it ingloriously
in 721, and Artaxias, the son of the unfortunate
Artavasdes, being placed on his father’s throne, had
avenged the injuries of his family by murdering all
the Romans in his dominions. His next resource was
to throw himself upon the protection of the Parthians.
He seems, however, to have made some friendly over-
tures to Octavius after the death of Antonius, which
the victorious triumvir thought fit to dignify with

1 Bunsen, Rom. iii. 281., after Piale, maintains that the trophies
were suspended, not in the temple of Mars Ultor in the forum of
Augustus, but in a chapel erected to that deity in the Capitol, on
the ground that the medals represent it as a small circular building,
whereas the temple was ample in size and of the ordinary shape.
Becker takes the same view. Hoeck supposes that the trophies were
first placed in the smaller shrine, and removed at a later period to the
temple, which was not actually dedicated upon completion till 752.
But surely the representation of the temple on the medal is merely
conventional. Dion, who places the temple itself on the Capitol,
may he corrected by an easy transposition. The words of Augustus
himself are: “ Ea antem signa in penetrali quod est in templo Mortis
Ultoris reposui.” Mon. Ancyr. col. 5.

5 Mon. Ancyr. 5. : “ Parthos trium excrcituum Romanorum spolia
et signa restituere mihi, supplicesqne amicitiam pop. Rom. petere
coegi.” The three disasters may include, perhaps, besides the de-
feats of 701 and 719, the inglorious retreat of Antonins from the
Araxes in 721. Dion, xlix, 44.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

175

the name of submission. 1 On the murder of Artaxias
soon after by his own subjects, Augustus commis-
sioned Tiberius to place his brother Tigranes on the
throne, nor did the Parthians, as we have seen, ven-
ture to make any opposition. Armenia, we may con-
clude, fell under the protection of the empire, an event
which the imperial medals commemorate with their
usual magniloquence. 2 Whatever, however, was the
glory of the exploit, Tiberius, it was remarked, claimed
it all as his own, and the prodigies which marked his
progress over the field of Philippi stimulated his
young ambition with visions of future empire. 3

After witnessing the completion of these important
affairs Augustus returned, towards the end Augu „ tu ,
of 734, to bis winter quarters at Samos, t0
where he bestowed the boon of autonomy A - v m -
on the hosts by whom he had been so frequently
entertained. He watched, as we have seen, from this
distant retreat the agitation of public feeling at
Rome, where each ensuing consular election had
called forth an ungovernable spirit of turbulence ;
and the eyes of all sober citizens were turned more
and more anxiously towards him as the man who
could alone restore tranquillity and guarantee its
continuance. Still, however, while affairs seemed not
yet ripe for his august interference, the emperor per-
sisted in holding his court at Samos, transacting
busiuess there through the winter, and receiving the
homage of long trains of admirers from the remotest
parts of India and Scythia. The envoys of Pandion
and Porus, Indian kings, professed to have been four

1 Eckliel, Doct. Numm. vi. 82. : “Gsesar Divi f. Armenia reccpta.”
(a. 17. 725.)

3 Eckliel, vi. 98. : “ Augustus Armenia capta.” Comp. Dion, li.
16., liv. 9.; Veil. ii. 94.

3 Dion, liv. 9. : &rei8i} trphs rovs ti\lirKOvs aurtp TpotreXaivovri dipvGis
ri ns 4k tov tt)S p-dxvs X u P i0V > (cal eic crparovfSov T\Koia&r) y koI jt vp
(K twv fiunuv, twv v-nS tov 'Amuviou iv t$ Ttuppev/ian iSpvBtmuv, airr6-
fxa.7ov aviXapifit • TtStpios fitv Si) tn tovtwv iyavpov to.

Digitized by Google

176

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

years on their travels westward, and apologized for
the diminished retinne with which they approached
his presence by the losses their number had sustained
through fatigue, or in the course of nature . 1 They
brought presents of precious stones, and spices, and
animals hitherto unknown in Europe. The Romans,
says Dion, had never before seen a tiger ; nor, he
believes, had the Greeks either . 2 They presented
him also with a man bora without arms, but who had
learnt to blow the trumpet, to draw the bow, and
dart the lance by means of his toes ; so at least, says
the historian, I am told, though I see not myself how
■it be possible. But the most remarkable part of this
embassy was the self-immolation of an Indian sage,
whose name perhaps w r as Zarmanochanus, who fol-
lowed the court of Augustus to Athens, was there
initiated into the mysteries of Ceres, and then, de-
claring that having lived so long in perfect content
he would not expose himself to the chances of a
reverse, burnt himself publicly, according to the
approved custom of the wise men of his country . 3

At Athens the proconsul slowly returning was met
by accounts from Rome which determined him at

1 Dion, liv. 9.; Strabo, xv. 1. p. 720.

2 Comp. Plin. Hist. Nat. viii. 25.: “ Q. Tuberonc, Fabio Max.
Coss. Theatri Mnrcelli dedicatione, tigriu primus omnium Romm
ostendit (Augustus) in cavea mansmfactum (a. u. 743).” This
animal was probably the royal Bengal tiger, which may have been
unknown to the Romans. They speak so frequently of the Armenian
and Hyrcanian tigers, that I can hardly suppose they were unac-
quainted with the inferior species.

3 Dion, Strabo, l. c. Comp. Lucan, iii. 241. :

“ Proh quanta est gloria genti
Injccisse manum fatis, vitaque repletos
Quod supercst donasse Deis.”

Calanus had made a similar exhibition before Alexander; but he
was old and infirm. See Arrian, Exp. Alex. vii. 3. The name of
Zarmanochanus is spelt in various ways. I retain this orthography
from its similarity to other Indian names as Grecized, such as Forti-
canus, Musicanus, Oxycanus, Assacanus. The philosopher came
from Bargosa (Baroche) on the western coast of India.

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxiv.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

177

last to yield to the importunate solicitations addressed
to him from various quarters, and assume T he province
the direct nomination of the consuls to of AchRiI1 '
be elected by the people. Accordingly our review of
the long progress he had made through almost every
region of the empire here comes to its conclusion ;
but a few words are still wanted to complete our
survey of his dominions. The first province formally
constituted beyond the Adriatic was Macedonia ; but
the whole extent of Greece Proper, or Achaia as it
was denominated by the Romans, together with the
islands around its coast, had been reduced under their
sway for more than a hundred years, though the na-
ture of its government was not perhaps very accu-
rately defined. It is probable that Achaia was not
made a province before Julius Caesar, nor even then
is it easy to determine from the confused statement of
the geographer Strabo exactly what its limits were . 1
It is still a question whether, according to the general
opinion, Thessaly, JEtolia, Acarnania, and certain
parts of Epirus were included in Achaia, or belonged
more properly to Macedonia. Both those provinces
were surrendered by Augustus to the government of
the senate ; and such being the case, it seems not im-
possible that the limits between them were either
not accurately defined or varied from time to time . 2
They both continued to enjoy uninterrupted tran-
quillity; and if the population of Achaia dwindled
with the decay of commerce and the loss of indepen-
dence, the constant resort thither from all parts of the
world of the curious in antiquities and learning, the

1 Becker (Marquardt), llcem. Allerth. iii. 1. 121., refers to a re-
cent treatise by C. F. Hermann, in which he comes to the conclusion
that this organization did not take place till the time of Augustus.
He inclines however himself to an earlier date.

* Achaia was made senatorial in 727, again resumed, in conjunc-
tion with Macedonia, as imperial, in 739. At a later period it was
again transferred to the senate by the emperor Claudius. Becker,

p. 128 .

VOL. IV. N

Digitized by Google

178

HISTORY OF THE RQMANS

CH. XXXIV.

admirers of its historic glory, and believers in the
inspiration of its hallowed soil, continued to maintain
at least a brilliant reflection of its ancient wealth and
splendour. The legions which had recently controlled
Macedonia were removed to the turbulent frontier of
Thrace, Moesia, and Pannonia.

The district of Illyricum, which Caesar had held
together with both the Gauls, was confined
inyncum. ^- me £ 0 a narrow strip of land on the

eastern coast of the Adriatic, from the Istrian penin-
sula to the river Drilon, a rude and barren tract, as it
has ever been, but important in a military sense, as
the outwork of the great central citadel of Italy. The
Bomans in this region had been brought, in the usual
course, into more and more frequent collision with
the half-reclaimed natives themselves, and with their
wholly barbarous neighbours, the Dalmatians, Iapo-
des, and Pannonians. Augustus himself, with his
lieutenants Pollio and Agrippa, had made Illyricum
a field for the martial training of his fresh conscripts.
In the course of a few years the province assumed
grander dimensions, the Dalmatians were incorpo-
rated in it, the Iapodes were subjugated on the fall
of their fortress Metulum, and the Boman arms were
advanced as far as Siscia, a fastness of the Panno-
nians on the waters of the Save. For a moment
Augustus seems to have fancied his work there ac-
complished, and to have offered the pacified province
to the administration of the senate ; but on the oc-
currence of disturbances within, and t hreats of aggres-
sion from without, he renounced this intention as
premature, and appointed two legions, under a com-
mander of his own choice, to watch over its security.
But events of considerable gravity and importance,
which presently occurred in these regions, will again
draw our attention to the Save, and even to the
Danube, to Bhsetia and Yindelicia, to Noricum and
Pannonia. •

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

179

So far and wide, says an historian under the
empire, did the Romans carry their arms
around the circuit of the terrestrial globe, Tti ' 7 '
that the student of their affairs may trace therein the
fortunes, not of a single nation , but of all mankind . 1
And so this faint outline of their political relations,
reduced within the limits of a single chapter, has
brought us in contact with the mines of Asturia
and the looms of India, the painted Britons, and the
sunburnt Ethiopians, the languid decrepitude of
Greece, and the precocious aspirations of Gaul and
Spain. All these various and discordant nationalities
were bound together by the moral sentiment of a
common dependence on a stronger, an abler, and a
wiser people than themselves, who swayed them, from
the sacred soil of Italy, the centre of their common
universe, the heart of their whole animated system.
This moral connexion was represented outwardly to
the eye by the long lines of military road, branching
from the centre of Italy herself, from the golden
milestone in the forum at Rome . 2 Within the bounds
of Italy indeed, the desolation of the Social War, the
massacres of Marius and Sulla, the plantation of colo-
nies, many times repeated, had tended to obliterate
every national distinction, and to assimilate the popu-
lation of the whole peninsula to a single type. The
same process which was in rapid progress throughout
the provinces, was already almost consummated in
the sovereign territory. The ground was cleared for
the completion of the work of fusion, and in Augus-
tus the man was found who had the skill and
energy to effect it. From an early period the name

' Floras, proeem. lib. i. : “ Ita late ubique per orbem terraram nrma .
circumtulit, ut qui res ejus legunt, non unios populi, sed generis
humani fata discant.”

2 Hoeck, Bom. Gesch. i. 386. The “ milliare aureum,” it may be
observed, was not properly a milestone, though popularly so denomi-
nated. The roads might be said to commence at the forum, but the
measured miles began not at the centre, but at the gates of the city.

N 2

Digitized by Google

180

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIV.

of Italy had been popularly attached to the whole
region south of the Alps, though politically it had
been divided into Gallia Cisalpina in the north,
and Italia Proper in the south . 1 * Possibly the popu-
lar use of this common name was a tradition from
times anterior to the first Gallic invasion. But
Italy within the Rubicon had become entirely Roman,
and recently the Gauls also on either side the Po
had received the franchise of the City. There re-
mained, therefore, no substantial distinction between
any portions of the whole country, and Augustus
acted in harmony with the instinct of the times when
he formally pronounced the Var the boundary of
Italy and Gaul.- This favoured tract was exempted
from the sway of a proconsul, whose imperium in the
provinces was a symbol of conquest and domination.
The commander of an army so near to Rome might
have imperilled the security of the emperor. It was
governed by the civil officers of its own colonies and
municipalities; and was divided for administrative
purposes into eleven regions or circles . 3 With the
respective limits of these we are not accurately ac-
quainted, but we may presume they regarded in little
more than name the old and almost forgotten land-
marks of communities and races . 4

1 Polybius, ii. 14., speaks of Italy as the whole region within the
Alps; but, as a Greek, his use of such terms may be geographical
rather than political.

- Strabo, v. ].; Plin. Hist. Nat. iii. 6.; Lucan, i. 404. Nicaea,
lying east of the Var, is assigned by Pliny and Ptolemy to Italy.
Mela, however, and Stcphanus give it to Gaul, as a Mnssilian
colony. Ukcrt, ii. 2. 431.

* The eleven regions of Italy were Transpadana, Venetia, Liguria,
Cispadana, Etruria. Umbria, Picenum, Samnium, Campania, Lucania,
and Apulia. Becker, p. 61., ventures to assign the exact limits of each.

* Ancient writers have illustrated the shape of Italy by various
fanciful similitudes. Polybius likened it to a mathematical triangle,
Pliny to an elongated oak-leaf. Lucan more judiciously fixes his
eye on the dorsnl ridge of the mountains that permeate it; and this,
if we were to indulge in such fancies as the foregoing, we might com-
pare to the sinuosities of a monstrous serpent,-whosc head is in Istria,

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

181

In our review of the provinces of the empire the
two considerable islands of Sardinia and 8 »rdinuand
Corsica have well nigh escaped our notice. Cor * ic * -
Isolated in their position, they were, in fact, not less
exceptional in their character. Near as they were to
the coast of the continent, — the lattef being within
sight of Populonium and even of Liguria, — to the
great Etruscan cities of antiquity, and even to Rome
herself, these islands enjoyed none of the fruits of
Italian civilization, and remained, in the time of
Augustus, as they have continued ever since, dark
spots of barbarism on the skirts of opulence and re-
finement. The northern island, indeed, was rugged
and wild, and covered with impenetrable forests, and
even under the empire was made a hunting field for
slaves of the lowest and rudest character. Sardinia,
more inviting in appearance, and adapted for the pro-
duction of grain, which it sent in large quantities to
Italy, was afflicted by a pestilential miasma which its
possessors had never science or energy to overcome.
Both were placed under the rule of the senate, as
secure, and, at least from their weakness, peaceable.
They were used as places of banishment for political
exiles : the philosopher Seneca passed eight years of
solitude and reflection in the mountains of Corsica 1 ;
and when four thousand freedmen of Rome, infected
with the superstition of the Jews, were transported
to Sardinia, it was observed that if they all perished
of the fever of the country the loss would be of little
importance. 2

whose arched and crested neck is represented by the Alps, his body
by the Apennines, and his tail by the waving curve of Lucania and
Bruttium.

1 Senec. Cons, ad Helv. 6.

* Tac. Ann. ii. 85.: “Si ob gravitatem cceli interissent vile dam-
num.”

Digitized by Google

182

HISTOKY OF THE HOMANS

CB. XXXV.

CHAPTER XXXV.

The Csesarean family. — Julia, daughler of Augustus, by Scribonia,
married to Marcellus, son of Octavia. — High promise and early
death of Marcellus. — Julia united to Agrippa. — Augustus receives
the tribunitian and the consular powers. — Agrippa is raised to a
participation in the former. — Prefecture of manners. — Revision of
the Senate. — Secular games. — Prefecture of the city. — Conduct
and character of Maecenas. — Augustus in Gaul, and Agrippa in
the East. — Conquest of Rhaetia and Vindelicia by Tiberius and
Drusus, stepsons of Augustus.— Tiberius consul in 741. — Augustus
and Agrippa return to Rome. — Augustus chief pontiff. — Campaign
of Agrippa against the Pannonians. — His illness and death. —
Character of Agrippa. (a.u. 729 — 742. B. c. 25 — 12.)

The importance which began, even from their
The cteea- tenderest years, to attach to the members
influe^e lly ' °f the imperial family, attested from an
of i.ivta. early period the direction of the revolution
which was in progress. It was at the commencement
of the year 716 that Augustus married Livia, the
last of the four consorts with whom, in his brief
career, he had already connected himself. Livia was
at this time extremely young, but she had borne one
son to her first husband Tiberius, four years before,
and was already six months with child when led to
his home by her second. She was again delivered of
a male child in due season, which was acknowledged
equally with its elder brother by Tiberius, though
the ardour of her lover’s passion, and the fact that
her husband had been compelled to resign her to him,
gave rise to a suspicion that the child was really the
offspring of Augustus himself. 1 However this might

1 Suet. Claud. 1. : “ Drusum .... Liyia, quum Augusto gravidn
nupsisset, intra mensem tertium peperit; fuitque suspicio, ex vitrico
per adulterii consuetudincm procreatum. Statim certe vulgatus est

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

183

be, the reputed father, who had acquiesced with
courtier-like facility in the loss of his wife, continued
on the best terms with his successor, and at his death,
four years afterwards, recommended both the children
to his guardianship. Livia herself, the sport of these
caprices, was even at the date of her second marriage
little more than a child. It is hardly credible that
she was only twelve years of age at the birth of her
eldest son Tiberius, but at latest she was not more
than twenty when she became the consort of Octa-
vius . 1 But while her personal charms were thus in
their first bloom, her understanding was, perhaps, al-
ready mature. She was a daughter of the Claudian
house, the pride and abilities of which were the com-
mon inheritance of both males and females . 2 She
had been united for four years to a man of eminence,
under guidance of whose experience she had shared
the vicissitudes of civil war, and had fled with him
before her future husband on the failure of the en-
terprise of Perusia. The facility with which she had
been transferred from the guardianship of one poli-
tical chief to that of another might give her an im-
pressive lesson on the instability of female influence.

In her second home she directed all her arts to
securing her position, and became, perhaps, in no
loug course of time, as consummate a dissembler and
intriguer as Octavius himself. While, indeed, she
seconded him in his efforts to cajole the Roman
people, she was engaged, not less successfully, in
cajoling him. Her elegant manners, in which she
was reputed to exceed the narrow limits allowed .
by fashion and opinion to the Roman matrons,

versus: Toir furvxovai *al t pl/nji’a raiSla.” Comp. Suet. Oct. 62.,
Tib. 4.; Dion, xlviii. 44.

1 Pliny (Hist. Nat. xiv. 8.) places her birth A.tr. 700; Dion (lviii.

2.) in 696.

! Livia was daughter of M. Livius Drusus Claudianus, a Claudius
adopted into the Livian gens. Her children were accordingly Claudii
by actual descent on both sides.

Digitized by Google

184

HISTORY OF TnE ROMANS

cii. xxxv.

proved no less fascinating to him than her beauty.'
Her intellect was undoubtedly of a high order,
and, when her personal charms failed to enchain
his roving inclinations, she was content with the
influence she still continued to exercise over his
understanding . 2 While she connived at his amuse-
ments she became the confidante of his policy, and
the sway she acquired over him in the first transports
of courtship she retained without change or inter-
ruption to the day of his death. But Livia was denied
the good fortune of bearing her husband a child ;
and there were objects still nearer to his natural af-
fections than her offspring by another man, though
bred up under his own eye and guardianship . 3

Scribonia, during the short time she had been per-
ju,,., mitted to share the home of the triumvir,
Au U ™tu r ..°by had proved her fertility by the birth of one
marrkti u> daughter, and might, perhaps, have sur-
Miirceutu, rounded the emperor’s throne with a nume-
octavia. roug p r 0 g en y 0 f sons. From this blessing,
however, in which his ambition was so deeply inter-
ested, he excluded himself by his wanton repudiation
of her. When the prospect of having heirs by Livia
began to fail, the daughter of Scribonia, to whom he
had given the name of Julia, acquired the ascendant
in his affections . 4 But a woman could have no poli-
tical position in Rome : the father must be content

1 Tnc. Ann. v. 1.: “Sanctitate domus priscum ad morem, corais
ultra quam antiquis fceminis probatum.”

1 Suet. Oct. 71. Tacitus calls her “ uxor fac-ilis.”

’ In the hope of having sons of his own, and when this hope failed,
for the sake of his grandsons by Julia, Augustus refrained from for-
mally adopting the young Neros. Tiberius, as we shall sec, ac-
quired adoption at a much later period. Suet. Oct. 65., Tilt. 15.

1 Julia, the daughter of Augustus by Scribonia, was born in the
year 7 1 5, and her mother received her bill of divorcement tbc same
day. Dion, xlviii. 34.: 6’ fret, if $ AovkiAs rc Mdpxws xai Taios

XagiVos vwaTeviraf, . . . A Kaiaap . . . fjfiri teat riji Aiovfai ipav tfpx (T0 >
«al 5ia toDto «al TT)f ^KpiSuylav rtKOvadv oi t^irydrpwf artiripipaTO ait-
frflfitpov

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

185

to transfer to the son-in-law of his choice the interest
he felt in his own offspring. It was the natural
policy of Augustus, in order to avoid domestic jea-
lousies, to seek a husband for his child within the
sphere of his own family, and in Marcellus, the son
of his sister Octavia, he found one both suitable in
years and promising in disposition. He had shown
strong marks of affection for his sister, whose force
of character, together with a superiority of two years
in age, had exercised great influence over him. For
her sake he had spared the lives of the spurious chil-
dren of Cleopatra, and had continued to treat with
the consideration due to their rank those she had
herself borne to his rival. But she had had a son and
daughter also by an earlier marriage, and these had
on every account a prior claim to his regard. On his
return from Egypt he united Marcella, just then of
marriageable age, to his friend Agrippa ; but for the
young Marcellus he destined at an early date the hand
of his beloved Julia. In the year 729 the one had com-
pleted only seventeen, the other not more A . u .- 29 .
than fourteen years of age. But the weak- B - c - 25 -
ness of his own health, lately shaken by a dangerous
sickness, urged him to hasten an union to which he
looked for the perpetuation of his family, and the for-
tunes so wonderfully linked with it; and being himself
still detained beyond the sea, he deputed Agrippa to
conduct the ceremonial. Augustus had already raised
the partner in his victories to an elevation at which
it was scarcely prudent to set any limit to his ambi-
tious aspirations. The successive consulships to which
he had been advanced in 725 and 726, were regarded
by the Romans as an indication that he had outstepped
the sphere of a private citizen. In his Spanish cam-
paigns Augustus had divided with him the command
of the army, and shared the praetorian tent. In 729,
when his dwelling was consumed by an accidental
fire, he was invited to take up his residence in the

Digitized by Google

186

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXT.

emperor’s mansion on the Palatine, which was al-
ready beginning to assume the name and character of
the Palace . 1 And now, when the daughter of the
emperor was about to be given in marriage, he was
summoned to take the place, not indeed of the bride-
groom, which, with its pledge of favour and prospect
of inheritance, he might perhaps have justly de-
manded, but of the father of the bride. While he
had served his patron by land and sea,* in peace and in
war, with signal fidelity for so many years, he had
made it, perhaps, apparent that at least he would
serve no other, and that he regarded himself as de-
barred from the first place in the state only by the
existence of one precarious life. The rumour that
Agrippa had counselled the restoration of the repub-
lic, and was himself at heart a true republican, may
have arisen from hints dropped by himself to remind
Augustus that his claims could not safely be dis-
regarded . 2

But neither these rumours, nor the splendour of
Marceiiui his shows, and utility of the manifold
works he designed and executed, availed
,h “ Agrippa. to obtain f or Agrippa any peculiar popu-
larity with the citizens. Born of obscure, and per-
haps vulgar, extraction, he could never perhaps
shake off the manner of the plebeian client, and
invest himself with the easy address of the noble
Roman which won all hearts in an Antonins or an
Octavius. His countenance, as it is exhibited on the
medals, was stem and rigid, expressive of grave
thought and inflexible will, but destitute of all the
graces of feature and expression which secured the
popular triumphs of a Caesar or a Pompeius. It is
probable that he was naturally reserved and haughty,
and that the great but qualifled successes of his

1 Dion, liii. 1. 27.

2 Velleius (ii. 79.) describes him as “parendi, sed uni, scientissi-
mus.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

187

career rendered him still more so. On the other
hand, the regard entertained by the Romans for the
noble Octavia descended in full measure upon her
son, while he was yet too young to exhibit any
character at all. Already, in the year 719, the
triumvir had elevated his sister to an equal share in
every honour and privilege assigned to his consort
Livia. As time passed on, he demanded of the
senate that her son Marcellus should have leave to
anticipate by ten years the age for soliciting the
consulship. He caused him to be chosen axlile for
731, when yet in his twentieth year. At the same
time he placed the young Tiberius, twelve months
his junior, in the quaestorship, to allay, perhaps, the
jealousy of Livia. 1 But it was not so easy to satisfy
Agrippa, who seems to have resented every such act
of favour as an indication of the emperor’s intention
to raise his youthful relative to a speedy participation
in his own pre-eminence.

In the year 731 Augustus had returned to Rome,
and was exercising his eleventh consulship. 2 Si(;kncss of
Struck down by a second illness, more A. u * u ; 3 i’.‘
alarming than the first, we have seen how “• c>
adroitly he contrived, in the very crisis of his dis-

1 Dion’s statement (liii. 28.) is that Marcellus had leave to become
consul ten years before the proper age, and Tiberias to anticipate by
five years the career of honours. Now in strictness the qua:storian
age was thirty, that of the aidile thirty-two. Marcellus therefore
became sedile, and might have become consul, twelve years, and
Tiberius commenced his career not five but eleven years, before
the time. If we are to credit the historian, we must suppose, as is
not indeed improbable, that the decrees in question were merely con-
ventional, implying generally a release from the Lex Annalis, which
long before this time had ceased to be much regarded.

s This was the last of the series of continuous consulships which
Augustus had held, with a single interruption (a.tt. 722) since 721.
He assumed it, we may presume, this year in order to introduce the
young scions of his house into public life with more solemnity. His
assumption in this year also of the tribunitian power may have in-
duced him to waive for the future the now inferior dignity of the
consulship, which he accepted only once subsequently.

Digitized by Google

188

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

order, to flatter the hopes of the friend whom he
esteemed, without blighting the fond anticipations of
the nephew, for whom, perhaps, he felt the deeper af-
fection . 1 When, shortly afterwards, the politic dissem-
bler rose from his couch, he had refrained from commit-
ting himself beyond return with either of the two ex-
pectants ; nevertheless Marcellus could not dissem-
ble his disappointment and jealousy, nor perhaps did
Agrippa abstain from resenting his youthful petu-
lance with undisguised ill-humour. Augustus was
conductor anxious to separate them. With this view
Agiipp*. h e offered Agrippa a splendid mission in
the East, for the regulation of the affairs of one-half
of the empire. Agrippa accepted the charge; but he
went in person no farther than Lesbos, committing
to the care of his legates the execution of the orders
he issued from thence. This conduct may have been
interpreted by some as a token of his moderation ;
but to others it may have seemed an indication of
offended pride, and of a suspicion that his mission
was the result of the emperor’s distrust rather than
of his confidence . 2 Agrippa belongs to the number
of men of high mark and estimation, who have been
judged worthy of reigning because, perhaps, they
have never actually reigned. Little as his personal

1 Dion, liii. 30. ; Suet. Oct. 28. See voL iii. chapter xxx.

5 Dion says: ou pevroi ko! is tV 2upiap ipixero, a\K‘ in teal pciAAov
fitrpidfav ixeiire fitv robs uiroorparnyovs irtpopf. Suetonius also men-
tions it as an instance of Agrippa’s forbearance: “ Quum . . . quod
Marcellus sibi anteferretur, Mytilenas sc, relietis omnibus, contulis-
sct.” Pliny, Hint. Nut. vii. 45., mentions, among the misfortunes
of Augustus, “pudendam Agrippa: ablegationcm.” Velleius, ii. 93.,
says of him: “ Qui sub specie ministeriorum principalium profectus
in Asian:, ut fama loquitur, ob tacitas cum Marcello offensiones
prsesenti se subduxerat tempori.” Josephus, Ant. xv. 10. 2., ex-
presses the opinion common in the East, that Agrippa was associated
in the empire with Augustus: Store 5vo rourwv 'Pw/xaiwy apxV
Siexovrav, Kaioapos sal per’ avrov ’Ayplrwa. Perhaps it was supposed
that a division was made between them, as between the triumvirs.
Frandscn’s Agrippa, p. 45.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXV.

UNDER TlfE EMPIRE.

189

character appears in the history we have received of
his exploits, his behaviour on this occasion is im-
portant from the element of weakness it seems to
disclose, and the tokens it apparently gives of mo-
roseness and selfishness, which, had he ever succeeded
to power, might have rendered him a coward and a
tyrant. We shall presently witness a conspicuous
example of a similar disposition, in which a fair
renown for political ability was overcast by the mis-
fortune of inheriting an empire.

The emperor’s recovery from his recent illness
seems to have been slow and dubious. Recovery of
During the weary hours of convalescence He g «« P u
the pressure of public affairs made itself tian power. .

r i a. ir. 781. “

doubly felt, and there may perhaps be c.23.
some foundation for the notion to which Suetonius
refers, that at this period he meditated, for the se-
cond time, the surrender of his power. 1 But with
returning strength and spirits any such ideas quickly
passed away. The year 731 is memorable in the
life of the first princeps from his acceptance of the
power of the tribunate, the most important, perhaps,
in a constitutional point of view, of all his preroga-
tives ; certainly that which above all others stamped
the empire of the Romans as a government of the
people by the child of the people itself. Augustus
might now regard himself as no longer a military
ruler, but a popular leader, and such is the character
to which the best of his successors constantly aspired.
But the interests of the people could not thus rise
without proportionally depressing those of the privi-
leged classes of the state ; and from henceforth we
must consider the reign of the Roman nobility as
actually extinguished.

But, whatever were the feelings with which Augus-
tus regarded this accession to his dignity, and the com-

1 Suet. Oct. 28. : referred to in chapter xxs. vol. iii.

Digitized by Google

190

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

pletion of his work of popular revolution, the ariticipa-
De*ui and tions he might form of founding a dynasty of
aequiei ot~ tribunes were suddenly cheeked by a terrible
domestic calamity. The young aedile was in
i.c. 23. the midst of his career of office, in which,

assisted by the liberality of his father-in-law, he had
gratified the citizens with the grandeur of his shows,
when towards the end of the summer the fatal malaria
of the city marked him for its prey . 1 The same phy-
sician, Antonius Musa, who had cured the valetudi-
narian Augustus of a fever by the bold expedient of
a cold-water treatment, failed in repeating the ex-
periment on the younger and stronger patient . 2 The
^pperor seems to have been much affected by this
untoward event . 3 It was not only the loss to him of
a favourite child, it was the frustration of a cherished
plan, and a stern memento that fortune, which had
exalted him so high as her vassal, still retained over
him her paramount sovereignty. He caused the
body to be honoured with public obsequies, and the
ashes laid in the mausoleum of his family. He had

1 I suppose that as tedile Marccllns would have passed the sum-
mer in the city superintending the public festivals; but he died, we
are told, at Boise. Propert. ii. 16.:

“ At nunc invisse magno cum crimine Baise;

Quis Dcus in vestra constitit hostis aqua ? "

5 Dion, liii. 30. Augustus was treated, according to Dion, if'vxpo-
XowrUus Ka\ ifivxporocrlais. Pliny (Hist. Nat. xix. 8.) adds, “ lactu-
cis.” Suet. Oct 81.: “ Quia calida fomenta non proderant, frigidis
curari coactus, anctore Antonio Musa.” The cold treatment of cer-
tain cases of fever is now very commonly used with success, where
the patient has strength to bear the violence of the stimulant. In
ague-fever it is said that it would be highly expedient. But we do
not know the precise nature of either of these two cases. Suetonius
says of the illness Augustus suffered in Tarraco, “ destillationibus
jecinore vitiato.”

1 It was natural that high expectations should be formed of a youth
who had such advantages for courting popular favour. VelL ii. 93 :
“ Sane, ut aiunt, ingenuarum, virtutum, Itetusque animi et ingenii,
fortunseque in quam alebatur capax.’’ Seneca (Cons, ad Marc. 2.)
expatiates more amply on the same theme.

Digitized by Google

A.U.731-B.C.23.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

191

erected this monument to his own mortality in his
sixth consulship, the very year of his return to Rome
and assumption of undisputed power. Hard by the
banks of the Tiber, in the grassy meadow where the
Roman youths met in athletic and martial exercises,
there rose a lofty marble tower with three retiring
stages, each of which had its terrace covered with
earth and planted with cypresses. These stages
were pierced with numerous chambers, destined to
receive row within row, and story upon story, the
remains of every member of the imperial family,
with many thousands of their slaves and freedmen.
In the centre of that massive mound the great
founder of the empire was to sleep his last sleep,
while his statue was ordained to rise conspicuous on
its summit, and satiate its everlasting gaze with the
view of his beloved city . 1 Marcellus was the first for
whom those lofty portals opened. The people fol-
lowed his remains with unavailing lamentations,
heaping reproaches on the unkindness of the gods,
and whispering horrid suspicions of the unfair prac-
tices of Livia. The season indeed had been un-
usually fatal ; but in these cases the breath of ru-
mour can never be wiped away, and every historian
has thought it necessary to record that the guilt of
Marcellus’s death was imputed at least to the mother
of Tiberius . 2 The emperor had the fortitude to pro-

1 There are two passages about the mausoleum of Augustus: Suet.
Oct 100., and Strabo, v. p. 256. I think they are sufficient to bear
out this description, which I have taken from Dezobry’s Rome an
Siecle <f Auguste, i. 426., and his charming restoration of the Campus
Martius. Strabo says expressly that there was a statue of Augustus
on the summit, and he can hardly hare been mistaken. Nevertheless
Dezobry contends, from the analogy of similar monuments, that it
was probably surmounted by an urn.

2 Dion. liii. 33. For the honours paid to Marcellus see Servius
on jEn. vi. 862.; and comp. Propert. ii. 16.; the Consol, ad Liviam,
i. 65. ; and the celebrated passage in Virgil himself, JEn. vi. 872. :

“ Quantos ille virum magnam Mavortis ad urbem
Campus aget gemitus, vel qua Tiberine videbis
Funera cum tumulum praeterlabere recentem.”

Digitized by Google

192

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

nounce in person the panegyric of his favourite, and
dedicated in his name a magnificent theatre in the
Campus Martius. 1 But amidst the vain and perish-
able memorials of the deceased which Augustus
might fondly love to accumulate, he was fortunate in
obtaining from the gratitude of Virgil a monument
nobler and more durable than stone. The verses on
the death of Marcel 1 us, which the author of the
jEneid inserted in his poem, bear evident marks of
a hasty interpolation, and so far corroborate the
common belief that they were in fact a later ad-
dition. The graceful story of Octavia’s fainting at
the recital of her darling’s praises, and the hopes so
cruelly frustrated, crowns with its last ray of interest
the head of the noblest of Boman matrons. 2

Whatever aspirations Livia may have cherished
Agrippai> on the death of her husband’s son-in-law,
it was not to her children in the first in-
«idow juiia. stance that the advantage fell. Such of
the citizens as had ventured to augur, from the
favour with which Augustus had treated him, that
it was wished to smooth the way for his succession,
had still regarded the pride and ambition of Agrippa

A rude fragment of the lower story of this mausoleum still re-
mains after many transformations. The explorer passes from a dark
alley under a dark doorway, and ascending a dark stair finds him-
self in a small open amphitheatre. The sepulchre of the illustrious
redile is now dishonoured by the vulgar sports of the bull-ring:

“ inani niunere.”

1 Some of the outer columns of the Theatre of Marcellus still re-
main, and owe their preservation to their having been built in with
modern houses. In one of these Niebuhr was lodged during part of
his residence in Home. Servius, on Virgil’s phrase i. 716.)

“ pesti devota futurte,” observes, “Dc oratione Augusti translata.
locutio quam habuit in tralatione funeris Marcelli, cum diceret ilium
immatnrse morti devotum fuisse.” The first book of the Aineid must
have been written earlier, yet such later insertions were not perhaps
uncommon.' Horace also has the phrase: “Devota morti pectora
liber®.”

s Donat, in Vit. Virgil. 47.: “ Dena sestertia (about 90/.) pro sin-
gulo versu.” Comp. Servius on JEn. 1. c.

Digitized by Google

A.D.731-B.C.23. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 193

as a formidable obstacle to his claims . 1 At this
period the imperial autocracy was assuming a more
fixed and definite character. Though he declined at
the close of this year to resume the consulship which
he had held for several years in succession, and though
on the occurrence of scarcity and inundations he had
firmly refused the dictatorship decreed him by the
senate and pressed upon him not without violence
by the people, Augustus was not the less intent
on shaping the foundations he had himself marked
out for his power, and was not unwilling that his
countrymen should be led to regard him and his
system as the sole pledges of regular government.
Without a partner in his power or an heir to his
pre-eminence, he seemed to stand isolated and de-
fenceless as a mark to the dagger of the assassin.
In fact, the death of Marcellus was speedily followed
by renewed attempts on the life of the em- A . V . 7S3 .
peror . 2 While he withdrew therefore from
Rome, that the citizens might feel by renewed ex-
perience the need of his presence, he determined to
frustrate the designs of his enemies by confirming
and perpetuating his authority. On reaching Sicily
he desired Agrippa to leave his retreat in Lesbos and
meet him. Maecenas had whispered in his ear that
the minister’s power was already too great for a sub-
ject : he must either raise him to his own rank by
marriage with the widow Julia, or contrive to rid
himself of him . 3 * 5 Augustus had resolved upon the
former alternative. He could not balance as a mea-
sure of prudence, between Livia’s striplings and the
trusty veteran of Pachynus and Actium. Agrippa

1 Veil. iL 93. : “ Marcellus . . . quem homines ita, si quid accidisset

Ceesari, successorem potenti® ejus arbitrabantur futurum, ut tamen
id per M. Agrippam securo ei posse contingere non existimarent”

1 The conspiracy of L. Murena and Fannins Csepio. Dion, liii.

3.; Veil. ii. 91. ; Suet. Oct. 19., in the first half of the year 732.

5 Dion, liv. 6., makes Msecenas say, without circumlocution,
kovtov a vrhv xexonjKas, Sxrrt 1) yanGpiv trov ysvfoBtu tl <povev&rii>ai,

VOL. IV. 0

Digitized by Google

191

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

■was married indeed to Octavia’s daughter Marcella;
but the expedient of a divorce was obvious and easy,
and the mother herself, it was said, was prepared
and even anxious to sacrifice her own child to the
higher interests of her brother’s family . 1 She had
abandoned herself to passionate sorrow on the loss
of her son, and had ever since made a parade of her
affliction, and refused to admit of any alleviation.
Crushed in her own dearest hopes and aspirations,
she was alive only to the frustration of those of a
rival, and woke once more from her dream of un-
availing woe to devise a scheme for the mortification
A.U.73S. of Li via , 2 The result of the interview was
B C,2L that Agrippa was sent to Rome, to carry
on the government in the name of Augustus, and to
solemnize his nuptials with the emperor’s daughter . 3
He was thus fixed in the eyes of his countrymen
in the second place in the commonwealth, and was
manifestly designated for admission hereafter, either
in his own person or that of his children, to the
first 4 The ambition of Livia was a second time dis-
appointed.

From this time we must expect to find a veil cast
xjne»«y reit- over the domestic transactions of the im-
Au|u ! b tuV' een perial family. It has become dangerous to
Ana Agrippa. (jjyujgg t 0 public curiosity the privacy of
the palace. The divorced Marcella had borne her
husband more than one child ; but of the fruit of

1 Plutarch, Anton. 88. ; Suetonius, Oct. 63.

2 See the description of Octavia’s mourning contrasted with that
of the magnanimous Livia on a later occasion, by Seneca, Cons, ad
Marc. 2. The rhetorical turn of the philosopher’s pathos is imitated
pretty closely by his nephew Lucan in celebrating the sorrows of
Cornelia, Phars. ix. 109. fol.

* The return of Agrippa to Rome and marriage with Julia took
place in the first half of 733. Fischer, Roem. Zeittafeln.

4 The precedent was cited on a subsequent occasion. Tac. Hist.
i. 15.: “I). Augustus sororis filium Marcellum, dein generum Agrip-
pam, ... in proximo sibi fastigio collocavit. Sed Augustus in domo
successorem quaesivit.”

Digitized by Google

m

ch. xxxv. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 195

this ill-starred marriage we have no further account.
She was wedded herself a second time to Julus An-
tonius, the second son of the triumvir, an union,
however, which met with a still more disastrous end
than the preceding. For two years Agrippa ruled
alone in Rome, while Augustus was abroad in the
provinces, an alteration of his sphere of administra-
tion which gave additional significance to his reputed
association in the empire. 1 About their feelings and
outward demeanour towards each other at this period,
history is entirely silent. Jealousy there must have
been on the one side, pride on the other. Agrippa
must have been conscious that he owed his elevation
not to predilection, for another had been preferred
to him, but to necessity or fear; and of this con-
sciousness Augustus himself cannot but have been
painfully sensible. It seems impossible that the
familiarity of their early friendship can have con-
tinued under these circumstances ; but whatever were
their real feelings, they were mutually careful to
give no handle to rumour, and during the ten years
their union lasted, with increasing marks of external
confidence, there was no whisper of private dissen-
sion between them. No sign did Agrippa betray of
regret at parting from Marcella; if Julia was per-
sonally distasteful to him, or if the licentiousness for
which she was afterwards notorious became apparent
during the period of her union with him, he com-
municated to no one his aversion or resentment. In
the ten years which followed, she bore him two sons
and as many daughters, and was pregnant of a third
son at the time of his death.

•

1 Among other significant incidents which seem to imply a virtual
equality between the two rulers, may be mentioned the statues of
Augustus and himself which Agrippa placed on either side of the
entrance to the Pantheon, and the two halls in his palace to which
Herod, the king of Judea, gave their names respectively. Joseph.
Antiq. xv. 9. 3.; Bell. Jud. i. 21. 1 . Agrippa also erected his own
statue together with one of Augustus on the Propyloea at Athens.

o 2

Digitized by Google

196

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

Agrippa did not long remain in the exercise of his
new authority in Rome. While Augustus
.t ta Bome a was still absent in Asia, the report of re-
ab^nce'of newed disturbances in Graul, and afterwards
Auguitui. gp a - D ^ Qaiied ijj m t 0 the opposite quarter
of the empire, where he speedily repressed an outbreak
of the Cantabrians. It is possible that he may have
reached the capital once more before the return of
Augustus, towards the end of the year 735.* During
his absence, however, and, we may suppose, from
the want of his firm controlling hand, the turbulence
of some ambitious intriguers had brought the go-
a. r. 735 . vernment into peril. Egnatius Rufus„the
*• c - 1# - aedile of the year before, had ventured to
solicit the consulship, vacant by the emperor’s re-
fusal, not at the recommendation of Augustus, but
through his popularity with the citizens. Riots and
bloodshed ensued, though we are left altogether in
ignorance from what quarter they sprang. The
actual consul, Sentius Saturninus, acted, we are told,
with vigour. He chastised the disturbers of the
public peace, and arrested Egnatius and others on a
charge of conspiracy against the emperor’s life, a
charge sufficiently improbable in the absence of the
emperor at many hundred miles’ distance.*

The treason of Egnatius, indeed, never ripened
into act. As with previous conspirators, his nefarious
design was discovered, as we are informed, and stifled
in the bud. But the time had already arrived when
it might be convenient to extinguish a vexatious

1 Fischer ( Roem . Zeit . ) supposes that he had returned before the
summer, 735, from a passage in Frontinus de Aquad. 10.:“ Agrippa
cum jam consul tertium fuisset, C. Sentio, Q. Lucretio Coss. post an-
num xiii. quam Juliam deduxerat (scil. ann. 721), Virginem quoque
in agro Lucullano collectam Romam perduxit: dies quo primum in
urbe responderit V. Id. Jun. invenitur." But there is no reason to
suppose from this that he was in Rome at the time.

3 Veil. ii. 91.: “ Egnatius, aggregatis simillimis sibi, interimere
Csesarem statuit.” Comp. Suet. Oct. 19. j Dion, liv. 10.

Digitized by Google

A.C.735-B.C.19.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

197

ambition by the false imputation of a crime. Satur-
ninus refused the invidious privilege which the senate
would have thrust upon him, of maintaining an armed
guard for his personal security against the disturbers
of the public peace, and distinguished senators were
sent to entreat Augustus to resume the consulship
which he had already waived. He con- Return of
tented himself, however, with nominating
one of the envoys, Q. Lucretius, and shortly *■ c- 19 ‘
afterwards quitted Samos, and re-entered Kome,
after three years’ absence, on the fourth of the Ides
of October . 1 The subordination of Agrippa’s position
to that of his illustrious patron, in general estima-
tion, as well as in outward distinction, is clearly
marked in the application of the senate to Augustus
alone, notwithstanding the presumed association of
the other with him. If the exploits of Agrippa, his
love for his country, and even his services in her
behalf, might in some respects be compared with
those of his imperator, the distinction of the Julian
name was confined to Augustus alone; he alone
could claim descent from tutelary gods and heroes ;
Agrippa, by his recent marriage, might become the
father of a divine race, but Augustus was himself
divine . 2

1 Kalendar. Amitemin, in Fait. Verrian. p. 114. ed. Foggin.
(Orelli, Inscr. ii. 400.) IV. Eid. Oct. August Lud. in circ. Fer. ex
S. C. q. e. d. Imp. Cass. Aug. ex transmarinis provinciis urbem intraTit,
araque Fort. Reduci constituit. Fischer, Roem. Zeit.

2 Agrippa seems to have called himself by his pretnomen and cog-
nomen, and allowed the nomen of his obscure Vipsanian gens to drop.
The lowness of his origin is constantly put forward by the ancients,
as Veil. ii. 127., “novitas famili® haud obstitit,” &c. ; and so late a
writer as Servius, in JEn. viii. 682. : “ Agrippa non adeo claro genere
ortus.” M. Seneca, Controv. ii. 12.: “Tanta autem sub divo Au-
gusto libertas fuit ut pr®potenti tunc M. Agrippa non defuerint qui
ignobilitatem exprobarent. Vipsanius Agrippa fuerat : Vipsanii
nomen, quasi argumentum patema humilitatis, sustulerat, et M.
Agrippa dicebatur. Quum defenderet reum, fuit accusator, qui
diceret: M. Agrippara et quod, medium est, Volebat Vipsanium
intelligi.” See Frandsen’s Agrippa, p. 254.

Digitized by Google

198

HISTORY OF THU ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

The joy which the Romans had vociferously ex-
En thanum pressed on the return of Caesar from Thap-
on ‘the return* sus and Munda, of Octavius himself from
*!c. u 735.‘ u *' Actium and his Asturian battle-fields, was
b. c. 19. again manifested with no less apparent en-
thusiasm when he regained the city after the blood-
less triumphs of his eastern administration. The last
two years had been marked by the paralysis of legiti-
mate order in Rome, and had brought back a painful
reminiscence of the days of demagogic turbulence,
when consuls vied with tribunes in the violation of

the laws. A whole generation had passed since the
comitia had been dissolved, and the tribes dismissed

to their homes without the completion of the business
of their meeting, the election of the chief magistrates
of the states. Such, it might naturally be remarked,
had been the happy effect of lending autocratic author-
ity to the most deserving of the citizens, that the
course of law and order had never since been seriously
interrupted, even in the midst of wars and revolu-
tions. But no sooner did the emperor quit the helm,
than the perils of winds and waves broke out with
redoubled fury. The days of Clodius and Milo re-
turned, intrigues were enforced with the hand of
violence, fraud was cemented with blood. Checked,

perhaps, for a time by the presence of Agrippa, these
disturbances had recommenced on his departure from
the city, and affairs had come to a pass not unlike
that in which Pompeius had been invested with the
sole consulship for the restoration of the commqn-
wealth. Augustus was now invoked, as Pompeius had
been, to accept extraordinary powers for the salvation
of the state : but he already possessed the substance,
and was satiated with the titles of power. His return
to Rome was celebrated, in the fashion of the day, by
honorary distinctions, which were not, however, with-
out their significance. An altar was erected to For-
tuna Redux, the good genius of the state which had

Digitized by Google

t

a.c.735-b.c.19.

DNDER TIIE EMPIRE.

199

brought her hero home, and the day of his return was
marked as a festive anniversary in the calendar. 1
Upon the 12th of October the feast of the Augustalia
was henceforth to be solemnized. But in order to
avoid the display of a solemn reception, he was careful
to make his entry into the city, as on former occasions,
by night. 2 His successes over the Parthians, obtained,
as he vaunted, without a blow, by the mere terror of
his name, he celebrated in due course by the modest
ceremony of an ovation, on which occasion he led his
legions on horseback, through the gates of the city
under an arch erected in his honour. The temple of
Mars the Avenger has been already mentioned, in
which the spoils of Parthia and the recaptured stan-
dards were suspended, while medals were struck to
commemorate the rout of the mail-clad bowmen, and
the homage of Phraates. 3

It was upon this return to Rome, when the senate
and people had repeatedly declared that the AugultQ ,
wheels of government could not move with- *"'££ I the
out the pressure of his guiding hand, that
Augustus allowed the cycle of his adminis- B ° - ia
trative functions to be completed with the assump-
tion for life of the consular power. Nor must we fail
to remark that, at the same time that he thus allowed

1 Dion, liv. 10. Eckhel (vi. 100.) and the numismatists cite medals
referring to this circumstance. Similar honours were afterwards
paid to Domitian (Martial, viii. 65.), Vespasian, Caracalla, and other
emperors. Iteimar on Dion, l. c. They are referred to by Claudian
in the solemn exordium to his “ Sixth Consulship of Honorius
“ Aurea Fortune Reduci si templa priores
Ob reditum vovere ducum.”

It is enrious that this compliment was paid to Honorius, as to
Augustus, upon a pretended restoration of the comitial elections : ,

“ Indigenes habitus native Palatia sumunt,

Et putriis plebem castris gociante Quirino
Mars augusta sui renovat suffragia CampL”

1 Suet, Oct. 5.3., say9. that this was his usual custom. “ Ne qttem
officii causa inquietaret."

’ See above, chapter xxxiv.

Digitized by Google

200

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

the sphere of his own powers to be extended, he did
not fail to advance his colleague Agrippa to a still
nearer equality with himself. He caused him to share
with himself the tribunitian power, the same which
A?rfpj» the most careful of Homan political writers
^dpiiion has designated as the highest and most dis-
nitun power, tinctive prerogative of the Caesar . 1 This
power, however, he limited in the first instance to a
period of five years. About the same time he re-
Prefcctur* sumed, in his own person, the censure or
prefecture of manners,* and proceeded to
«. c. is. exercise it by a second lustration of the
senate, as well as by the introduction of sumptuary
enactments. He proposed, at first, to reduce the
chief assembly of the state to its original number
of three hundred, but the reclamations of the mem-

bers themselves, of whom he was about to demand so
large a sacrifice, induced him to retain as many as six
hundred ; indeed, from the difficulty he acknowledged
in ensuring the attendance of a sufficient number to
transact business, he could hardly have afforded to
reduce it lower by one half. With this reduction of
its numbers was connected, perhaps, the raising of
the census or qualification of the order . 2 This was
the emperor’s second reform of the senate, and warned,
perhaps, by the animosity the first had excited, he
secured the aid of Agrippa in the task, and threw a
portion of the responsibility upon the senators them-
selves, selecting himself, in the first instance, thirty
of the most distinguished, and requiring these to

1 Tac. Ann. iiL 36.: “Id summi fastigii vocabnlum Augustus
repperit . . . M. deinde Agrippam socium ejus potestatis . . . delegit,
ne successor in incerto foret.” Comp. Dion, liv. 12.: 4 8* ’Aypimras
it rqv avrapxiai' r pirov tuA br abrov Tpoi/xOv- Serv. on JEn. viii.
682. : “ M. Agrippa . . . societate Augusti ad summos honorea per-
venit; nam Tribunus plebis quietissimus fuit.” The writer intends
to mark that the tribunate of Agrippa was exercised in perfect ac-
cord with the ruling powers of the state, not, as in the old times of
the demagogues, in opposition to them,

1 Dion, liv. 12. 18.; Suet. Oct. 41.

Digitized by Google

A.0.736-B.C.18.

ITNDEB THE EMPIBE.

201

choose the remainder by a combination of appoint-
ment and ballot. Nevertheless he found himself
the object of desperate hostility to many of the re-
jected ; and it was on this occasion, we are told, that
he deemed it advisable to protect his person with a
guard of faithful friends, to wear a coat of mail under
his robes, and search every senator who approached
him. 1

Now followed also the second attempt of Augustus
to restore the honours of matrimony by ^.uKon 0 f
penal legislation, the character and provi-
sions of which have been specified in a preceding
chapter. The leges Julies of this epoch included also
divers measures, with the particulars of which we are
not acquainted, for the regulation of criminal pro-
cedure in cases of bribery at elections, exactions in
the provinces, and other subjects of administrative
reform. With the close of the year 736, the decennial
period to which Augustus had insisted on restricting
his imperium was about to reach its termi- Hetccept.^
nation. He does not appear to have waited forfi^par..
to be pressed to renew it, but pleading the is.
necessity which still existed for the superintendence
of his vigilant authority, and apprehensive perhaps of
the success of the conspiracies still rife against him,
if he suffered himself to be disarmed, he required the
senate and people, who certainly exhibited no reluc-
tance in complying, to invest him with it once more,
but this time, not for ten, but only for five years.*

The completion of the cycle of the imperial func-
tions could not be more fitly celebrated The r , ud i
than by a revival of the solemn festival,
which, according to a tradition obscurely B 0 - 17 -
floating in the minds of the Romans, was appointed

1 Suet. Oct 35., on the authority of Cremutius Cordus, who, how-
ever, bears the character of a frtyxdeur, and is not to be implicitly
relied on.

1 Dion, liii. 16., liv. 12.

Digitized by Google

202

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

to mark the transition of each succeeding age of
the republic. When the Etruscans laid the founda-
tion of a city, the births of the year, it was said, were
carefully registered, and with the decease of the last
survivor, the first age of the city was supposed to ter-
minate. In a similar way each subsequent age was
calculated ; but this fanciful definition of the saeculum
seems to have been soon lost in the more natural and,
at the same time, stricter notion of a fixed number of
years. Whether, however, the age or century of the
early Romans was a hundred or a hundred and ten of
their years, or whether it was computed with refer-
ence to periods of ten or of twelve months, of ordinary
or intercalated years, remains still a mystery, into
which it is the less Decessary to inquire, inasmuch as
the secular games, anterior to the epoch of Augustus,
seem to have had little significance, and to have been
celebrated with no sort of regularity . 1 But Augustus
determined to seize an opportunity for inaugurating

1 Much has been written upon the mode of computing time to
which the secular games should be referred. I will try to compress
within the limits of a note the most important points for considera-
tion. We learn from Censorious (c. 17.) that Valerius Antias,
Varro, and Livy make 100 years the period of the sceculum, while
Augustus himself and Horace specified 110. The notices we have
of the celebration of these games anterior to the time of Angustus
are so inconsistent that we must conclude there was no such regular
celebration of them at all The discrepancy, however, in the num-
ber of years, as stated to us (100 and 110 ), may perhaps be ac-
counted for by comparing the ordinary year of Numa, 335 days,
with the intercalary years of 377-8 days. Multiplying the first of
these numbers by 110, and the second by 100, the results will come
sufficiently near to one another to satisfy the conditions of a round
number. (I take the hint of this solution from Walckenaer, Hist.
<F Horace, ii. 269., though I cannot subscribe to the method by which
he arrives at still closer results.) But however this may be, succeed-
ing ages soon lost the clue to this synchronism. The emperor Clau-
dius repeated the games a. u. 800, diregarding those of Augustus as
irregular. Claudius was disregarded again in his turn byDomitian,
who renewed the celebration in 841, anticipating, in his impatience,
by six years the period prescribed by Augustus. To the Augustan
computation Severus conformed precisely, and repeated the solemnity

Digitized by Google

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

203

A.C.737-B.C.17.

his rule by a solemn ceremony, and with his usual
tact he perceived how impressive the revival of this
historic tradition might be made. The Sibylline
oracles, searched by bis obsequious priests, readily
presented the sanction he required ; the forms of
the ceremonial were investigated by the most learned
of his legal antiquarians; and the college of the
Quindecemvirs undertook to prescribe the particu-
lars of the observance, and superintend its execu-
tion. The ceremony was to occupy three days and
nights, and, for some time previous to its commence-
ment, heralds were appointed to traverse the streets
of the city and the neighbouring towns, inviting every
citizen to attend upon a solemn spectacle which none
of them had ever yet seen , or could, ever see again . 1
The secular games were, indeed, once more repeated
within the lifetime of a large portion of that same
generation, but never again, assuredly, on so worthy
an occasion, nor, perhaps, with such popular enthu-
siasm. The ceremonies themselves, peculiar to the
occasion, were of the simplest kind, consisting of the
distribution of lustral torches, sulphur, and pitch, to
the citizens at certain stations, and of wheat, barley,
and beans, at another, in which the emperor himself
took a prominent part. The Aventine, the Capito-

in 957, after two intervals of 110 years each Philippas, however,
returned once more to the precedent of Claudius in the year of the
city 1000. This was the last celebration, though Zosimus, in the
year 1067, suggests that the time has arrived for another secular
festival, according to the computation of Severus.

1 Walckenaer’s ingenuity has discovered another reason for fixing
the age at 110 years, in the law of mortality as deduced from certain
French tables. He finds that, in a population of the amount of that
of the Roman empire, which he supposes to be four times that of
France (28,763,192), there will be at any given time sixty-four indi-
viduals aged 105, thirty-two aged 106, sixteen aged 107, eight aged
108, four aged 109, but not one will have arrived at the age of 110.
We cannot suppose that the Etruscans had the means of making
such an induction as this, nor, probably, the caDacity to deduce a
law from it.

Digitized by Google

204

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxv.

line, and the Palatine hills were paraded by crowds
of citizens. Sacrifices were offered for the safety of
the state to the chief divinities of the national religion.
The game of Troy was enacted, together with other
shows, in the circus, and occupied with scenic repre-
sentations the intervals of sacrifice, and divided the
interest of the multitude. The festival concluded
with the performance of an ode of praise and thanks-
giving in the atrium of Apollo on the Palatine, by a
chorus of noble youths and maidens, the auspicious
offspring of the holiest marriages, and both of whose
parents were living . 1 Such were the rites, it was
confidently affirmed, by which Eome had gained the
favour of the gods, and secured their protection ; and
when their due repetition was first discontinued, three
ages later, the champions of expiring Paganism be-
held in their cessation an omen of the dissolution of
the empire, and a not inadequate cause for it. a

By one writer, at least, the name of Agrippa is
institution of associated on equal terms with that of
ofthTcity. Augustus himself, in his account of the

b! c: i7.' secular games, though in the more courtly

panegyrics of the poets no such union or participa-
tion was, perhaps, alluded to . 3 If the antiquarian
Censorinus repeated what he had read in the archives
and on public monuments, Horace and Ovid reflected,
we may suppose, the popular sentiment which per-

1 The nature of the ceremonies may be collected from Horace’s
Cam. SeecuL-, Tac. Ann. xi. 11.; Zosimus, ii. init.- The origin of
the festival is narrated by Zosimus and Valerius Max. ii. 4, 5. For
a lively description of them, see, besides Walckenaer, Dezobry, Borne,
&c„ ii. 412. folL

* Zosimus, ii. 7. : Toirrou 81 /ii) tpvXaxBtvro r (Set tls r)/y vvv ovvfxov-
aav rifias i\Beiv rk rpiffiara SvoKXrjplay.

* Censorinus, c. 17. s “ Quintos ludos, C. Furnio, C. Junio Silano
Coss. anno dccxxxvii. Ctesar Augustus et Agrippa fecerunt.” But
Tacitus, Suetonius, Pliny, and Dion mention Augustus only. Com-
pare the Carmen Sceculare of Horace and the allusion in Ovid, Tritt.
ii. 25. Horace’s hymn is remarkable as an index to the popular
feeling of the time, and shows how far the regard of the Homans for

Digitized by Google

A.U.737-B.C.17.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

205

sisted with unusual fidelity in confining all its enthu-
siasm to the good deeds of Augustus alone. That
Agrippa, however, had now actually reached a point
of elevation at which he could no longer be deputed
by his colleague to discharge an office of dependence,
appears very clearly in the formal institution at this
period of the prefecture of the city. Hitherto, upon
every emergency, it was to the faithful energy of
Agrippa that the control of the capital, the command
of its garrison, the supervision of the disaffected and
suspected in its vicinity, had been entrusted. But this
was an irregular office which had never yet been in-
corporated formally in the system of the imperial
government. Now, at last, Augustus found it neces-
sary to make it regular and perpetual. The associa-
tion of Agrippa in so much of the outward show of
power, had served, perhaps, to exasperate the remnant
of the republicans ; intrigues against the life of the
emperor became more rife than ever, and permanent
machinery might be required for the protection of his
august person . 1 But he did not now depute Agrippa
to act as the commander of his own bodyguard. He
selected in the first place Valerius Messala, the fore-
most of the citizens in the estimation of his country-
men, and second to none in rank and the importance
of his services. He might hope to gratify the Romans,
and disarm their suspicions, by placing in the vanguard
of tyranny a man whom they trusted and admired,
rather than a creature of his own, such as Maecenas.
The Romans, however, and their master, must have
been equally surprised when Messala, after holding

Augustas was removed from the vulgar adulation of later despotisms.
The writer never mentions the name of his hero, and only once
directly alludes to him as “ Clarus Anchiste Venerisque sanguis,”
while hardly a line could fail to remind the citizens indirectly of his
presumed merits. No monument of antiquity gives us a clearer
view of the self-respect of the Roman character, which is, perhaps-
the highest idea of religion of which Paganism was capable.

1 Dion, liv. 15.: teal itcdvtp Kal ’Aypimrlf InSovKfmai.

Digitized by Google

206 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS cn. XXXV.

the office six days, insisted upon resigning it, pleading,
perhaps, his inability to discharge its arduous duties,
but allowing it to be understood that he regarded it
as hostile to liberty . 1 He was succeeded by Statilius
Taurus, whose military distinctions have been already
frequently mentioned, and who had been consul with
Augustus ten years before. Taurus was now a man
of advanced age, but the combined vigour and dis-
cretion with which he acquitted himself became a
theme of general admiration .' 2

Among other tokens of incipient monarchy, must
iMUtrtipa or here be mentioned the select council which
« iteT 1 0 Augustus at this time employed for the

handling of state affairs, which he gradually withdrew
more and more from the consideration of the as-
sembled senate. The first adoption of such a system
is dated from an earlier period ; but in the interval he
had resided but little in the capital, and it was not,
perhaps, till his second return from Asia, and second
reform of the senate, that he allowed this privy
council to become a distinct engine of his government.
The convenience which had first suggested the ar-
rangement became more and more sensibly felt with
the decline in the political training of the great body
of the nobles, and their growing indifference to pub-
lic affairs. Their indisposition to business increased
with the consciousness that their interference was not
wanted, and gradually every transaction of importance

1 Tacitus, Ann. vi. 11.: “ Sumsit ex consularibus qui coerceret
servitia et quod civium audacia turbidum, nisi vim metuat : primus-
que Messala Corvinus earn potestatem, et paucos intra dies finem,
accepit, quasi nescius exercendi.” The studied mildness with which
Tacitus speaks of this office is rather remarkable. Compare Hieron.
iu Euseb. Chron.: Messala Corvinus primus prsefectus urbis factus
sexto die magistratu se abdicavit, incivilem potestatem esse con-
testans.” This appointment is placed at the commencement of 738,
by Frandsen, Ayrippa, p. 80.

2 Tacitus, 1 c .: “ Turn Taurus Statilius, qnanquam provecta setate,
egregie tolcravit.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

207

was left to the secret deliberation of the imperial
councillors. The reception of foreign kings and en-
voys, and some other stated ceremonials, still drew
the senators together; but the real business of the
state soon dropped as completely from their hands
as that of election had slipped from the control of
the people. 1

The more prominent Augustus became in the out-
ward titles and actual substance of power, studiou,
the more did he strive to appear in his
habits and demeanour simply the equal of me&nour.
his citizens. He rejected with signs of horror the
appellation of Dominus , which awkward flatterers
sometimes addressed to him ; and once in the the-
atre when a player uttered the words, 0 just and
generous Lord, and the spectators applied it with
acclamations to the emperor, he repressed their
flattery with a frown and gesture of impatience, and
the next day issued an edict to forbid the use of a
term which seemed to imply that the Romans were
his slaves. 2 When consul, he generally traversed the
streets on foot, nor at other times did he shut himself
up in a close litter. In the senate he rejected, as
far as possible, the distinctions of the consular dignity.
The fathers were given to understand that he did
not wish to be led from his door to the curia by
a crowd of illustrious attendants, nor would he let
them rise from their places when he entered the
assembly or quitted it. As he passed along the streets,
he received petitions with equal affability. The Ro-
mans repeated with delight his playful rebuke of a

1 Suet. Oct 35.; Dion, liii. 21. This council was instituted as a
floating body, consisting of certain of the chief annual magistrates,
and fifteen senators chosen for a period of six months. It was de-
signed originally to prepare measures for the consideration of the
larger assembly. Dion refers to the institution under the year 727.

2 Suet. Oct 53.; Dion, lv. 12. ; but Orosius (vi. 22.) with only the
Christian application of the word in view: “ Domini appellationem,
nt homo, declinavit.”

Digitized by Google

208

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

nervous suppliant, whom he likened to a man giving
a halfpenny to an elephant. Within the curia he
suffered with patience many harsh attacks. One
senator ventured to exclaim, 1 do not know what you
mean! another, I would contradict you, if I might!
Once, on his quitting the assembly in anger at the
noisy altercations which were going on, several voices
shouted after him. We ought to he let speak on public
affairs ! 1 It must he remarked that, with the loss
of personal dignity, such of the senators as did not
sink into abject flatterers, too often sought to assert
their self-respect by ill-mannered freedoms. Augustus
was known to leave the curia precipitately to check
the angry retort which they would sometimes have
provoked from him. When the fathers were discuss-
ing a proposal for appointing some of their body as a
guard of honour to the emperor, Antistius Labeo, who
was notorious for his blunt humour, growled out, I for
one am not fit to be posted before Caesar's bedchamber,
for I snore in my sleep." 1 It was observed that, when
Augustus recommended a candidate for a magistracy,
he conducted him always in person through the public
places, and solicited votes in his favour: his own vote he
gave in his proper tribe, like a private citizen. When
he canvassed for a prince of his own family, he was
careful to add, provided he desen<es the honour.
He allowed himself to be summoned as a witness
before the tribunals, to be examined and interrogated,
and abstained, on the trial of a friend, from the formal
testimony to his public services which was sanctioned
by an invidious custom. 3 So great was now his re-
spect for the rights of property, that the assigner of
the military colonies suffered the proportions of his
forum to be curtailed, rather than trespass upon the

1 Suet Oct. 53, 54.

* Dion, liv. 27. Compare another story of Labeo: Suet. Oct. 54.;
Dion, liv. 1 5.

* Suet. Oct. 56.

Digitized by Googl

CH. XXXV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

209

limits of private occupiers. 1 As consul and corrector
of manners, Augustus was anxious to exhibit strict-
ness and firmness in the dispensation of justice. His
temper was not naturally mild, or the infirmities of
his health made him irritable, and he sometimes for-
got his usual discretion. On one occasion he had
brought a charge against a knight for having squan-
dered his patrimony. The accused proved that he
had, on the contrary, augmented it. Well , replied
the emperor, annoyed at his error, but at least you
are living in celibacy in defiance of recent enact-
ments. The man could reply that, on the contrary,
he was married, and was the father of three legiti-
mate children. The inquisitor was silenced ; but the
accused, not satisfied with his triumph, added aloud,
Ccesar, when next you listen to charges against
good citizens , see that your informants themselves
be honest . a

The time indeed was not far distant, when the
majesty of the emperor, and the sanctity FrMdomof
of the tribunitian power, would demand a
severe account for freedoms far more in- toAu 8 u,tu *-
nocent than these ; but at present, little or no restraint
was imposed upon the moroseness of disappointed
patriots or place-huntefs. The examples of Maecenas
himself, the minister in whom Augustus most con-
fided, might be pleaded in defence of a liberty of
speech which must appear offensive and inexcusable
to our modern notions. This shrewd adviser was
encouraged to watch closely his master’s hasty and
arbitrary temper, and recall him, when requisite, to
a better mood. Once when the emperor was pre-
siding at a criminal trial, and was about to sentence
to death a number of culprits, Maecenas, it is said,
sought to speak with him in private, but being pre-

1 Suet. 1. c.t “ Forum auRustius fecit, non ausus extorquere pos-
sessoribus proximas domos.” Mon. Ancyr. “ privato solo.”

* Macrob. Saturn, ii. 4,

VOL. IT. r

Digitized by Google

210

EISTOBY OF THE HOMANS

CH. XXXV.

vented by the crowd, he tore a leaf from his tablets,
wrote hastily upon it, Up, hangman , and threw it
dexterously into the folds of the emperor’s robe.
Augustus opened and read the paper, and quitted the
tribunal without a word . 1 He was pleased, we are
assured, when he received such corrections as these,
though we may well believe it was only in certain
moods, well understood by those about him, and by
certain persons under peculiar relations to him, that
such liberties could safely be taken.

•The influence indeed which this shrewd adviser
Ewinen of exercised upon Augustus, and through him

upon public affairs, was strongly charao
men^fthe teristic of the circumstauces of the period.

day- Maecenas was a disciple of the school of

Balbus and Oppius, Matius and Pansa, the mild and
courtly favourites of the elder Caesar, whose habits
and temper had marked a reaction from the rough
and bold self-assertion of the men directly preceding
them. Caesar himself, whose early life had been
passed in scenes of angry contention, whose associ-
ates and opponents had been ever ready with the
fierce retort and the rude blow, seems to have taken
pleasure in his later years in reposing himself among
gentler spirits. From such as these the fashion of
forbearance in speech and action had descended upon
the public men of the generation before us. The
writings of the day present, or at least suggest to us,
many pictures of urbanity and delicacy in the trans-
action of affairs, and as it were a studied desire to
put aside the recollections of strife and bloodshed,
which must have pressed so importunately on the
minds of all. With the closing, indeed, of so many
avenues to aspiring ambition, the interests of life
were now less absorbing. Men became more indif-
ferent to success, less furious in their rivalry with one
another; they could afford to tolerate party differ-

2 Macrob. l.c. j Dion, lv. 7.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

211

ences where party itself led to no political prizes.
Between the flatterers of the ruler on the one side and
the grumblers on the other, lay this important class
of polished triflers, polished and trifling in their out-
ward demeanour, yet for the most part, sufficiently in
earnest at heart, and resolved to maintain the balance
of the state, to control the discontented, who were
ready to plunge it into another revolution, and to
shame the corrupt and venal, who would have precipi-
tated it into the arms of tyranny. To this class be-
longed all the greatest statesmen of the day, Mes-
sala, Pollio, Taurus perhaps, and Piso, who succeeded
Taurus in the prefecture of the city. Such was the
temper, and such, we may believe, the views of the
high-minded Agrippa. But to these views no man
gave such distinct form and expression as Maecenas
himself, who for many years governed the republic
in the truest interests of his master, by quietly re-
moving from his path the opposition which might
have stimulated his more selfish passions. By teach-
ing the Romans to be content with the liberties they
were yet able to retain and enjoy, he averted the
further encroachments of despotism. Maecenas was
not a soldier by profession ; nor did he understand
the machinery of military governments. At moments
when the peace of Italy was seriously threatened,
Augustus resorted for its defence to the stronger arm
of Agrippa. But when these crises had passed, he
gave his confidence once more to the man of policy
and sagacity ; and with no ostensible post, for he never
rose above the equestrian rank, nor filled any public
magistracy, Maecenas was in fact, during a long course
of years, the closest and dearest of the emperor’s ad-
visers. To the counsels of this minister M«*n«
the Romans ascribed the subtle policy by prog**-.

. _ A •> *• Augustus

which Augustus gathered into his single ~i.Mrv.tion.
hand the functions of the magistracy and the legisla-
ture. If the imperator actually deliberated on resign-

p 2

Digitized by Google

212

niSTORY OF THE HOMANS

CH. XXXV.

ing his extraordinary powers, it was Maecenas who
was generally believed to have advised his retaining
them. The transformation of the ancient system of
coordinate municipalities to the modern character of
a government emanating from the centre to the ex-
tremities, was reputed to be the work of this able ad-
ministrator ; the chief lines at least of such a change
were drawn by his hand, and filled in by statesmen of
his school in later generations. If we may suppose
any difference of opinion on these matters between the
minister and his master, we may represent Maecenas
to ourselves as the exponent of progress, Augustus of
conservation, the two principles which throughout
the reign of the second Caesar preserved so happy a
balance . 1

The views of the statesman combined with the
natural temper of the man in moulding

minuter Maecenas to habits of life which engaged the

of the empire. . . , . - . . . ° °

curious observation ot his contemporaries,
and have always retained their interest with posterity.
It is to be remembered that he was the first minister,
in the modern sense, of the Roman commonwealth ;
and his deportment, not uncommon, as modern times
bear witness, in men of his class, was novel and pecu-
liar in the eyes of a generation born under the free
republic. The republican statesman of ancient Rome,
an aristocrat by birth, a despot by his military train-
ing, was characterized by strong self-assertion, and
rude independence of sentiment and manner. He
was active, earnest, and busy ; he left no moment
unoccupied ; he rushed from the forum to the camp,
from the senate to his study, with marvellous rapidity
and unwearied diligence; even the softer hours he
allotted to polite conversation had their definite ob-
ject of exercise and improvement. The last age of

1 The traditional idea of the policy of Maecenas may be supposed
to be preserved in the counsels ascribed to him by Dion, lii. 14 — 40.

Digitized by Google

ch. xxxv. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 213

the republic brought out in the strongest way the
harsher features of this unamiable character. The
Romans were hardened by success more than they
were softened by refinement. But about their qual-
ities, such as they were, there had been at least no
disguise. The consul and imperator never pretended
indifference to the honours and advantages of his
position. His countrymen, he knew, were proud
both of the office and of the men who filled it, and
required no concession on his part to any envious
feelings on theirs. Believing himself the greatest
and noblest of his kind, he gave the world to know
it without reserve or delicacy. But with the advent
of the empire all this was destined to undergo a com-
plete change, though it could not arrive immediately.
For more than one generation we shall have to remark
the angry struggles of the old Roman pride against
the dissimulation which circumstances so potently
enjoined it. The great nobles of the Augustan age
felt instinctively that they had fallen from their high
position, and ceased to be the first objects of their
countrymen’s admiration ; but they descended with
reluctance from the pedestal of official eminence, and
strove to deceive themselves with empty titles and
not less empty magnificence. Already a vast revolu-
tion was embodied in the fatal apparition of the first
subject of the empire, the animating spirit of its
policy, the controller of its laws, and dispenser of its
honours, averring entire indifference to all public dis-
tinction, lounging carelessly in the forum, amidst the
men of business and the men of pleasure, with his
robe trailing on the ground, leaning on the arms of
two eunuchs, chatting with the chance comers of his
acquaintance, gazing listlessly at statues and paint-
ings, and basking in the brilliant sun of Italy, or
sporting in song and epigram with the wits and poets
of the day. 1 . How seductive must have been the

1 Seneca, Epiat, 114 .

Digitized by Google

214

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

fashion thus set by the most prosperous and most
political popular of politicians ! The world moulds
jLLnuw itself to the habits of the minister more
literature! readily than to those of the sovereign him-
self ; for the eminence of the one seems attainable by
duly copying his behaviour, that of the other is alto-
gether beyond the sphere of an ordinary ambition.

Undoubtedly in the manners of Maecenas there was
a mixture of nature and artifice. Under the exterior
of careless good humour he concealed real shrewd-
ness, activity, and vigilance ; he was fully possessed
of all the threads of party intrigue, and was never
unprepared, at the fittest moment, to baffle any hos-
tile aspiration . 1 His far-famed patronage of art and
literature was not unalloyed by political motives. The
poets whom he caressed, and with whose names his
own has become inseparably entwined, were in fact
the instruments, perhaps unconsciously, of his system
of government ; and their encomiums on the person
of the most gracious of statesmen, and the glories of
his administration, were inspired, if not by his gold
and his wine, at least by the charm of his affability
and the adroitness of his flattery. The praises
lavished on Maecenas by Virgil, Horace, and Proper-
tius are recorded for all readers ; but we know not
what were the blandishments by which he engaged
or retained them. The same lax philosophy, gilded
with the brilliant name of Epicurus, which Caesar had
used to quell the remorse of his followers, when he
urged them to trample on the sanctions which upheld
the frame of the republic, was employed by Maecenas
to stifle the yearnings of ambition and the murmurs
of discontent. It stimulated activity in the one case,
while it served to paralyse it in the other.

The air of easy and almost contemptuous non-
iTu domettie chalance which Maecenas assumed so suc-
chagrim. cessfully in public life, stands in curious
contrast with the susceptibility he was unable to con-

*' Veil. ii. 83 .

Digitized by Google

CH. XXIV.

UNDER THE EMIGRE.

215

ceal in the conduct of his domestic affairs. The man
who could control the politicians of Rome without an
apparent effort, was himself no better than a strug-
gling captive in the hands of an intriguing woman.
His wife Terentia, or Terentilla, was celebrated for
her beauty and caprices, for the violence of her
temper and the powers of her fascinations. From
the licentiousness of conduct imputed to her we may
suppose that she was unfaithful to him with more
than one lover ; but the interest she excited in Augus-
tus himself was perhaps peculiarly galling to the
uxorious husband, who was unable to resent an injury
inflicted by his master. Terentia is supposed to
have been sister by adoption to Licinius Murena,
who was put to death for a conspiracy against the
emperor in the year 732. 1 It was a remarkable in-
stance of the power she exercised over Maecenas, that
she extracted from him the secret of the discovery
his agents had made of the plot. Once it is said the
angry husband availed himself of the indulgence of
the laws to divorce her without a public scandal ; but
he speedily sued for a reconciliation. His frequent
and transient quarrels 'with her became a topic of
general derision. Maecenas, it was said, married a
thousand times, and every time the same woman. 2
But this inconsistency in the character of the wariest
of ministers might be thought too common to deserve
remark, were it not worthy of observation as a trait
of manners. It would be difficult to discover such
an instance of female domination at an earlier period
of the republic, while it became a prominent and
striking feature in the history of the times which
followed.

The establishment of the prefecture of the city
released both Augustus and Agrippa from the neces-
sity of keeping watch in the capital, where they found

1 Dion, liv. 3.; Suet. Oct. 66. 3 Seneca, Ep. 114.

Digitized by Google

216

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH, XXXV.

it constantly more difficult to maintain, amidst flat-
Adoption of terers and cavillers, the modest reserve they
i.udui, aoni had prescribed to themselves in their inter-
im Julia? course with the citizens. In the year 737
o.' i7. ' Augustus had adopted the two sons whom
Julia had now borne to his son-in-law, in order,
perhaps, to render his own person more secure
against conspirators. The children now received the
names of Caius and Lucius Julius Caesar, names
which sufficed of themselves to impress the Romans
with the conviction that their bearers were destined
to imperial pre-eminence. Agrippa, satisfied with this
mark of confidence, had already betaken himself to
the eastern provinces of the empire, while Augus-
tus was preparing again to inspect in person the *
western. Like Pompeius, the emperor had expe-
rienced the difficulty of abiding strictly by his own
statutes, swerving neither to partiality, nor severity.
If he proposed to quit the helm for a season, there
was no lack of pedants to remind the Romans of the
celebrated example of Solon, who quitted Athens that
his countrymen might try, without fear or favour,
the real strength of his institutions. Nor were there
wanting busy tongues to whisper that he was disturbed

1 Cains, Lucius, and occasionally Sextus, are the only prsenomens
of the Julian family that occur in the Fasti. Every gens had its
proper prsenomens, which it repeated from one generation to another,
and abstained not less carefully from others. Thus the Cornelii were
mostly Caii, Lucii, and Publii ; they have no Titos or Quintus. The
Claudii have no Tftus or Quintus; the ^Emilii no Titus. The
Quinctii are always Titus, Lucius, or Caius. It may be interesting to
remark how these pramomens bore reference originally to nobility of
birth. Thus Caius and Cn«us=gnavus, “ well born Titus and
Lucius are the Sabine and Etruscan words for “noble.” Comp.
Titius, Tatius, on the one hand; on the other Lucumon, Lueeres.
Marcus = “ warrior;” comp. Mamcrcus, Martins. Spurius, superius
(see Donaldson’s Varroniantai, p. 26.)= “high born.” Aulus is cog-
nate with Augustus, &c. = “ noble,” or “venerable.” From Marcus,
Lucius, and Publius we have the gentile names Marcins, Lucilius,
and Pnblilius; as from Quintus, Sextus, and Decimus are formed
Quinctius, Sextius, and perhaps Decius.

Digitized by Google

a,u.73S-b.c.1G.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

217

by the observations made at home on his amour with
Terentia, and wished to enjoy her society beyond the
reach of curiosity. We may conclude from this sur-
mise, whatever other value it may have, that Maecenas
now accompanied his master into the provinces . 1

But in truth the disturbed state of the frontiers
was a sufficient motive for this renewed Disturbances
activity. Not only had many of the Alpine tiers. Disas-
tribes rushed again to arms, and harassed n/uaui. 1U *
the colonists of the Cisalpine, but from be- »•’ c.' u.
yOndthe Alps, also, the Pannonians andNoricanshad
invaded the Istrian peninsula, which now claimed to be
a portion of Italy. The Dalmatian tribes were in open
insurrection ; Macedonia was ravaged by the Mcesian
Dentheletas and Scordisci ; the Sarmatians had inun-
dated Thrace; and lastly, the central fortresses of Spain
were shaken once more by renewed commotions . 2
The government, indeed, was not in any quarter taken
by surprise. Presidiary cohorts were stationed at every
threatened point of attack, and it required no extra-
ordinary effort of their arms to check and overthrow
the aggressors in all directions. An irruption, how-
ever, of the Germans, who had crossed the Lower
Rhine in considerable numbers, was represented as
more formidable. Lollius, the imperial legate on that
frontier, was defeated with some loss and still more
disgrace, for the eagle of the fifth legion was left in
possession of the victors . 3 Augustus hurried, it is
said, across the Alps, with the purpose of marching
against them. But while he was advancing north-
wards, Lollius rallied his troops again, and the Ger-
mans thought it prudent to withdraw from a collision
with the collected forces of the empire. Retreating

1 Dion, liv. 19. * Dion, Hr. 20.

* Suet. Oct. 23.. pays the defeat was “ majoris infamise quam detri-
menti.” Comp. Yell. ii. 97. ; Tac. Ann. i. 10. The favourable cha-
racter Horace gives of Lollius, Od. iv. 9., is in marked contrast with
the imputations of Velleius. We may suspect partiality on the one
side as readily as prejudice on the other.

Digitized by Google

218

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

hastily into their own country, they sent hostages for
their future tranquillity.

Within the confines of the Gaulish province, how-
iniquitom ever, Augustus found a more fatal enemy
SrLkinuT than the Usipetes and the Sigambri. His
pltcTitorta own procurator, Licinus, had shaken the
° au1- fidelity of the Gauls by his monstrous ex-
actions . 1 This man was himself a Gaul by extraction ;
he had been captured in his childhood, and subse-
quently manumitted by Julius Caesar, and, as the
freedman of the dictator’s heir, Octavius, had acquired
by his useful talents the favour and confidence of his
patron. Raised successively to various places of trust
and profit, he had been promoted at last to the
general superintendence of the finances of the im-
perial province. From Lugdunum, the centre of his
administration, he had tyrannized over the whole of
Gaul with the insolence of a despot . 2 He combined,
said the wretched provincials, the pride of the Roman
with the avarice of the sordid barbarian, and he had
no compunction in crushing by his extortions the
chiefs of the native nobility. Not only did he exact
the legitimate dues with ruthless severity, but im-
posed additional burdens for the enrichment of him-
self and his creatures. Such, it was declared, was his
unblushing wickedness, that he made the people pay
their monthly taxes fourteen times in the year. De-
cember, he said, is clearly the tenth, not the twelfth
month. I demand the quotas of two months more,

1 Dion, liv. 21., calls this man Licinius, but as the freedman of
Caesar it is more probable that he took the gentile name of Julius.
On the other hand, the scholiast on Juvenal identifies him with the
Licinus cited as an example of enormous wealth bj Seneca, Persius,
and his author in various places. The reading in Suet. Oct. 67.
Licinium Enceladum seems to be corrupt.

2 Senec. Ludus in Claud. 6.: “Lugduni . . . . tibi Licinius mnltos
annos regnavit.” Seneca might have applied to him the proverb
which he reserves for the emperor Claudius: “Galium iu suo ster*
quilinio plurimum posse.”

Digitized by Google

A.C.738-B.C.16.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

219

which I will call Augusti. 1 When at last complaints
of this injustice reached the ears of the emperor, he
was inclined to sympathize with the oppressed pro-
vincials, and ashamed of the confidence he had re-
posed in a culprit so odious. On reaching Lugdunum,
he required his procurator to render an Au g u.tu.
account of his transactions. But Licinus, L^dLSm.
we are told, finding his position precarious, invited
his master to visit him at his house, and there ex-
posing to his view the hordes he had accumulated,
insinuated that all these treasures, extorted from the
public enemy, he had amassed for the service of the
emperor himself. Augustus acknowledged the policy of
the device, and accepted the splendid bribe. Licinus
continued to advance in his prosperous career, main-
taining himself in favour by the occasional contribu-
tion of great sums to public works in Borne, where
the basilica of Julius Caesar was completed principally
at this freedman’s expense. 2 He acquired the re-
putation of the richest of Roman upstarts ; and when
he died, at a great age, after surviving Augustus
himself, his marble sepulchre was contrasted, with
bitter indignation, with the humble grave of a Cato,
and the unsheltered bier of a Pompeius. 3

The emperor prolonged his residence in Gaul
through the years 739 and 740, and finally Xug0ftnl
completed the arrangements connected with
the organization of the province. His sys- *• c - 73S ’ 7W -
tern of government required him to divide his time
almost equally at home and abroad : he remembered

1 Such seems to be the meaning of Dion, who expresses himself
rather confusedly.’

1 Macrob. Saturn, ii. 4.; Schol. ad Juven. i. 109.

* Comp, the epigram of Yarro Atacinus quoted by the scholia-t
on Pcrsius, ii. 36 :

“ Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacct; at Cato parvo;

Pompeius nullo: quis putet esse Deos ? ”

The freedmen of the great nobles had already become notorious
under the republic for the wealth they had been permitted to accu-

Digitized by Google

220

HISTOBY OF THE ROMANS

cu. xxxv.

that he was imperator as well as princeps, that he
wielded the proconsular power as well as the tribun-
itian. The position of Gaul, moreover, lying between
the hostile zones of Germany and Vindeiicia, de-
manded more than ordinary vigilance. Immense
preparations were now in progress for the effective
subjugation of both those regions, and for binding the
Rhine and Danube together by a chain of Roman out-
posts. It was from Gaul, the great storehouse of men
and material, that the resources for many future cam-
paigns were principally to be drawn. We may be-
lieve that the emperor’s presence there, together with
the attitude assumed by his legions on the frontier,
sufficed to keep the Germans in check, and prevent
any co-operation from that quarter with the tribes
which the Romans were at the same time assailing in
the south. The exploits of the lieutenants of Augus-
tus in the western Alps had secured the passes into
Gaul, but those which led into Germany and Pan-
nonia were still in the hands of the barbarians, and
the communications of Rome with her legions in the
valleys of the Save and Danube lay often at the mercy
of these unmanageable hordes. The Alps from the
Formidable Simplon pass to the sources of the Drave
t^RhaJun* were occupied by the Rhaetians. Beyond
ci"»n.. “ ' the Inn and the Lake of Constance, the
plain which slopes gently towards the Danube was
known by the name of Vindeiicia, Styria, the Kam-
mergut of Salzburg, and the southern half of the
Austrian Archduchy, belonged to the tribes of Nori-
cum, while the passes between that country and Italy
were held by the Carnians. The rich, plains of the
Cisalpine offered a tempting prey to these hungry
mountaineers, and the honour, as well as the security,

mulate. Such was the case especially with Chrysogonus, Heron,
Amphion, Hipparchus, and Demetrius, the freedmen of Sulla, Lu-
cullus, Catulus, Antonins, and Pompeius. Comp. Plin. H. N. xxxv.
18. But the reign of the freedmen in Rome was yet to come.

Digitized by Google

A.C.738.-B.C.16.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

221

of Italy demanded their thorough subjugation. Nor
was it less important to extinguish the sparks of
freedom still visible from the seats of the conquered
Gauls. But these rude warriors wdre not terrified
into submission by the memorable chastisement of
the Salassi ; on the contrary, they were rather ex-
asperated by the treachery which accompanied it,
and retorted the cruelty of the conquerors with no
less shocking barbarity.

Under these circumstances cause of warfare was
never wanting on either side, but the Ro- camp.ijm^af
mans, as usual, pretended that they were
provoked to hostilities by intolerable ag- ai p> .
gressions. 1 The Camuni and Yennones, the people
of the central regions of the Alps, were the first
attacked. P. Silius engaged these tribes in 738, and
worsted, not them only, but the Noricans and Pan-
nonians also, who had made an incursion into Istria. 2
The year following it was resolved to follow up these
successes with method and perseverance. Drusus,
the emperor’s younger stepson, now in his twenty-
third year, took the command of the legions from
Silius, overthrew the Rhaetians in the Tridentine
Alps, traversed the Brenner pass, and defeated the
Brenni and Genauni in the valley of the Inn.
Whether he made any further progress towards
the Danube is not recorded ; it is more probable
that he turned westward to effect a junction with his
brother Tiberius, who had been despatched at the
same time from the Rhenish frontier to attack the
Vindelicians in the rear. Ascending the valley of
the Rhine beyond the frontiers of the Gaulish pro-
vince, Tiberius had reached the Lake of Constance,

1 Dion, liv. 22. : teal raOra fj.lv «at ovir(\(h) irus rot r ovk IvirrivSois
nattiv tSixovv, xav Si Si) rb fi/SjSet- ruv a\uTKOfi4vuv oi>x 8rt rb <paivifi(vnv,
aAAck iral rb iv rois yaarpduiv fri ruv yvvouicuv Sv, fjavrdcus r urlv avtv-
pltrKovrts, i<p8fipov.

1 Dion, liv. 19. ; Flor. iv. 12.

Digitized by Google

222

HISTORY OF THE HOMANS

CH. XXXV.

and had there launched a flotilla, with which he sur-
prised the enemy in quarters where he least expected
to be assailed. He penetrated the gorges of the
Upper Rhine and Inn in every direction ; and at the
conclusion of a brilliant and rapid campaign the two
brothers had effected the complete subjugation of the
country of the Grisons and the Tyrol. 1 The per-
manence of their successes was doubtless assured by
the wholesale slaughter or captivity of the wretched
people. Strike once and strike no more, was the
maxim of the Roman imperator; and perhaps the
process was merciful even where mercy was least in-
tended. But it is impossible not to marvel at the
extraordinary power of the Roman arms, which could
thus in a single campaign storm, rifle and dismantle
the great fortress of modem freedom. The free tribes
of the eastern Alps appear then for the first time in
history only to disappear again for a thousand years ;
their memory was perpetuated on the monument
erected by Augustus, on which he enumerated the
names of four and forty conquered nations. A few
of the bravest among them have obtained a place
in the most martial of Horace’s odes, and swell
the deathless triumph of their twice-fortunate con-
querors.' 2

Having settled the affairs of Gaul, Augustus made
Angu,tu. a final progress into Spain, to receive once
Rom". 8 0 more the submission of the Cantabrians,
mi™' Drusus was retained in command of the
b' cl is.' armies on the Rhine, while Tiberius was
despatched to Rome, to assume the consulship for
741. In the following July, the emperor himself re-
turned to his capital, amidst the same demonstrations
of flattery, which had already greeted him on so many

1 Dion. liv. 22.; Veil. ii. 95.; Strab. iv. 6. p. 206.

3 Horace, Od. iv. 4. :

“ Videre Rhreti bella sub Alpibus
Drusum gerentem,” &c.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

223

former occasions. Cornelius Balbus, who, at the
moment of his arrival being announced, was exhibit-
ing shows in a theatre he had recently erected, pre-
tended that he had sped his return by the auspicious
ceremony. Tiberius, as consul, repaid the compli-
ment by demanding his opinion first of the senators.
An altar, it was decreed, should be placed in the
senate-house, on which incense should be offered for
the safety, not of the state, but of its ruler ; but this
token of respect, the principle of which is recognised
under every modern monarchy, was rejected by one
who still called himself the first citizen of the Roman
republic. The day after his return, which had taken
place, according to his usual custom, at night, Au-
gustus saluted the people from the door of his
Palatine residence, and then, ascending the Capitol,
took the laurel wreath from his fasces, and placed it
on the knees of Jove’s statue. That day the whole
Roman people were admitted to the use of the baths
gratuitously, and the services of their barbers re-
munerated from the fiscus. Augustus then convened
the senate to receive the account of his proconsular
acts; and being himself hoarse from a casual cold,
the recital of his victories and his ordinances was
made by his qusestor. At this time he determined
also the limits of military service, the uncertainty of
which had caused some discontent. Twelve years
were assigned as the term of prastorian, sixteen of
legionary service . 1 Instead of lands, for which, since
the days of Sulla, the veterans had been constantly
clamouring, pensions were henceforth to be given in
money, an arrangement which was accepted by both

1 Dion, liv. 25. A few years afterwards the difficulty of recruiting
induced the emperor to increase the pay of the prietorians after six-
teen and the legionaries after twenty years* service, by which they
were tempted to remain longer under arms. Dion, lv. 23. It would
seem from the complaints of the soldiers at a later period (see Tac.
Ann. i. 17.) that this extension of service was made, at least on some
stations, compulsory.

Digitized by Google

224 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS ch. xxxv.

the citizens and the soldiers as a mutual compromise.
If less splendid than houses and estates, these fixed
rewards were of more real value to the recipients,
while they relieved the citizens from the constant
fear of spoliation, which embittered the glories of
each successful campaign.

While Augustus was occupying himself with the
Agrippi tn affairs of the western provinces, the oppo-

u. 737 .' site hemisphere, as we have seen, he had

b. o. 17. committed to the care of Agrippa. The

exigencies of a government so widely divided,
especially at a period of transition when every state
was resigning itself, with more or less agitation, to a
change from the fitful licentiousness of republican
imperators to the systematic despotism of imperial
procurators, required the personal superintendence
either of the chief of the empire, or of his direct re-
presentative, with the same interests as his own.
Agrippa quitted the city in the summer of 737, and
reached Syria before the winter, accompanied by his
consort Julia, or followed by her at a short inter-
val. While engaged in the administration of this
province, 1 he was visited by Herod of Judea, who
offered, with protestations of friendship and devotion,
to escort him within the frontiers of his own king-
dom. This prince, the most consummate adept in
flattery of all the dependents of the imperial court,
had recently returned from Eome, where he had suc-
ceeded in recovering the liberty of Aristobulus and
Alexander, his sons by Mariamne, who had been kept
there as hostages for his own fidelity. These youths
were received by their countrymen with the strongest
marks of affection for the sake of their much-injured
mother ; nor does Herod himself appear to have en-
tertained any jealousy .of them. But they were all
the more hateful to Salome and her party, through

1 In Syria Agrippa founded the colony of Berytus (Beyront), and
made it a station for two legions, a. c. 739. Strabo, xvi. 2. p. 756.

Digitized by Google

A.U.740— b.c.14.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

225

fear of their influence over their capricious father,
by whom they were already treated with the dis-
tinction due to their birth, and united in marriage,
the one with a daughter of Salome herself, the other
with the child of Arch elans, king of Cappadocia. 1

Herod led his guest through his new cities Se-
baste and Caesarea, which he had named in HeTisitI
honour of Augustus, and displayed to him *," d
the magnificence of his buildings, as if the 7 *[j" or -
most delicate compliment he could pay the B C I3 -
Roman potentate was to show himself not afraid to
reveal the abundance of his resources. Agrippa in
return assured him of his security, and confirmed to
his subjects the privileges accorded them by the first
Caesar. The Jews, it would seem, were flattered by
the Roman entering their city as an admiring visitor,
and sacrificing a hecatomb to their God.' J From
Judea he returned to Asia Minor for the winter, in
order to prepare an expedition for settling the affairs
of the kingdom of the Bosphorus. The throne of
Mithridates had been seized by a pretended descend-
ant of the great king, who called himself by the
Roman name of Scribonius, on his marriage with
Dynamis, the widow of its recent occupant Asander.
This usurpation was unpalatable to the Romans, and
Polemo, king of Pontus, was invited to overthrow it,
and assume the sovereignty under their protection.
The natives, indeed, speedily ridded themselves of
the first of these intruders, but they were reluctant
to admit the second, in support of whose pretensions
Agrippa sailed in the spring of 740 as far as Sinope.
Here he was joined by Herod, whose officious zeal
had prompted him to follow his patron with powerful
reinforcements. The Bosphorus now submitted, and
received Asander. Agrippa had no occasion to pro-

1 Joseph. Ant. Jud. xvi. 1, 2.

* Joseph. /Int Jud. xvi. 2. 1. f/yev <5i ko! els ■rip' itiXiv *wv 'Upo-
aoxvfuruv .... ‘Aypimras 5t teal t£ Seep piv harA/ipil* KariOvatv.

VOL. IV. 4

Digitized by Google

226

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

ceed farther. He returned through the states of
Asia Minor, still accompanied by Herod, who seems
to have feared to lose sight of him, and listened at
Ephesus to the complaints of the Jewish residents,
who resented the desecration of their sabbaths and
holidays, and not less the robbery of the tribute they
annually sent to the temple of Jerusalem. Among
other favours they now received was the important
boon of exemption from service as auxiliaries to the
legions, a privilege conceded to a few only of the
most fortunate communities, and to no other entire
nation but their own. So early did this people
manifest their aversion to the use of arms, which has
been disregarded even in our own times only by the
most despotic of rulers . 1

But Agrippa, notwithstanding the kindness he
exhibited to his favourites, could manifest, it would
seem, no slight capriciousness, when provoked, how-
Har.htr««.t- ever unreasonably. The story of his treat-
SH.p‘«°of h * uient of the people of Ilium may be taken,
iii Um . at ] eas ^ j n illustration of the wanton abuses
of power too common among the Roman commanders
in the provinces. Julia, it seems, chose to bathe
in the Scamander, a mountain stream, which, as
Homer long before had signalized, was liable to the
most sudden and violent rises after rain. The delicate
Roman lady with difficulty escaped from the waves
which had well-nigh overwhelmed the hero Achilles.
The Ilians, who were not more prepared for the ar-
rival of the princess than for the sudden inundation
of their river, were surely blameless in the matter ;
but Agrippa thought fit to impose upon them, for
their imputed neglect, a fine of a hundred thou-
sand drachmas. The intercession, however, of Herod
availed, we are told, in their behalf . 2

1 Dion, liv. 24.; Joseph. Ant. xvi. 2. 2.

2 Nicolaus Damasc. ed. Orell. p. 8. Frandsen’s Agrippa , p. 90.

ed by Google i

A.C.741-B.C.13.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

227

In 741 Agrippa was recalled to Rome, after a four
years’ absence, or as the Orientals them- A g ri PP *
selves understood it, after having: exercised Som™»nd

. . , e , P. decline* a

imperial power tor a period of ten years, triumph,
counting from his first mission in 731. At £c. V
Rome he met Augustus, who had returned about the
same time. During his absence in the East the senate
had decreed him a triumph, together with a suppli-
cation. The triumph Agrippa declined ; but it may
be a question whether he thus meant to acknowledge
that he was only the lieutenant of the imperator, or
whether, as admitted to a participation in empire
itself, he regarded such an honour as beneath his ac-
ceptance. Thus Augustus allowed several of his
lieutenants to triumph, but never condescended to
triumph himself after receiving the imperial powers. 1
Whatever was Agrippa’s motive, the emperor seems
to have been well satisfied with his behaviour, and
desired him to resume the tribun itian power for a
second five years’ term. Nevertheless he could not
be at ease in Rome, where Tiberius, in whom he saw
a formidable rival, was now consul. It is probable,
moreover, that he was annoyed by the loose conduct
of Julia, whose dissolute manners had become already
notorious. He could not risk offending Augustus by
repudiating his daughter, but he was too proud to
connive at irregularities committed under his own
eyes. Before the end of the year he quitted the city
once more for Pannonia, where serious disturbances
had again broken out. 2

The year which followed forms an important epoch

1 All authorities agree that the powers deputed to Agrippa in the

provinces were in some respect greater than those of any mere im-
perial legate. Dion, liv. 28., says expressly, aiiTtjS ruu ixatrraxiBt

t(v T7js 'iraAlas icrxvtrai dviTpetfias.

2 Dion, liv. 28. He went to Pannonia, Dion says, with greater
powers than any Roman officer had ever exercised abroad before
him.

Q 2

Digitized by Google

228

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV.

in the life of Augustus. It beheld his elevation to
Augustus the chief pontificate, the last of the great
pontitv on the offices of the republic which remained to
ilpidus. complete the cycle of his functions as mon-
arch of Rome. At the same time it left him alone
in the possession of all their honours and burdens.
The death of Lepidus removed his scruples against
wresting the sacred office from a living occupant,
however despicable, and early in 742 he became for-
mally invested with the direction of the national rites,
which he had long virtually exercised. 1 Meanwhile
Agrippa had crossed the Adriatic, and proceeded
with undiminished energy to attack the Pannonians,
though in the depth of winter. The barbarians, sur-
prised at the suddenness of the assault, made speedy
submission, which seems to have been accepted with-
out any solid guarantees. Agrippa returned to Italy
without delay ; but he fell sick while on his journey,
and Augustus, who hastened from Rome to Campania
Death of to meet him, found him already dead. 2 He
A * rippa - conveyed the body himself into the city, and
pronounced over it a funeral oration in the forum,
with a curtain drawn before him, because the eyes
of the pontiff might not rest upon a corpse. 3 The
honoured remains were then consumed in the Campus
Martius, aud the ceremonies observed on the occasion
were carefully noted as a precedent for the obsequies

1 On the 6th of March, “ prid. non. Mart." Kal. Muff, in Orell.
In/tcr. ii. p. 386.; Ovid, Fast. iii. 415.; Seneca, de Clem. i. 10.

1 Agrippa died probably before the end of March. Augustus re-
ceived the news of his sickness while celebrating the festival of the
Quinquatrus, “ xiv. — x. Kal. Apr." Ovid, Fast. iii. 809. ; Dion,
liv. 28.

* It is curious that the meaning of this ceremonial should have
been forgotten in the time of Dion. It is explained by Seneca in
relation to a similar scene forty years later. Cons, ad Marc. 15.:
“ Ipse (Tiberius) pro rostris iaudavit filium, stctitque in conspectu
posito corpore, interjecto tantummodo velamento, quod Pontificis
oculos a funere arceret.” But Augustus and Tiberius were both
pedantic in their observances. Comp. Tac. Ann. i. 62.

Digitized by Google

A.C.742-B.C.12.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

229

of the emperor. The ashes were laid up, not in the
tomb which Agrippa had designed for himself, but in
the mausoleum of Augustus, which thus opened the
second time for his second son-in-law . 1 Whatever <
jealousy may at times have existed between the two i
confederates (and it seems impossible but that the
sharing of their prize must have caused some heart-
burning between them), it was now buried in the
family sepulchre, and Augustus lived to feel acutely,
and to lament sincerely, the loss of so faithful a ser-
vant and so useful a colleague. He was not displeased
at the accents of popular admiration which pro-
nounced his friend the best man of his generation.
From the estates of the deceased, which devolved upon
himself, he gratified the citizens with munificent lar-
gesses. Agrippa had bequeathed his baths and gardens
to the people, whose concern may be estimated per-
haps by the report of omens and evil prodigies which
were supposed to attend the catastrophe . 2

There can be little to regret in the loss of the fu-
neral panegyric which Augustus pronounced character of
over his friend, which has sunk into the ob- Agr ' ppil ‘
livion to which all such pieces have been speedily con-
signed. It was more remarkable, assuredly, for what
it disguised than for what it revealed of his character.
Yet it is with reluctance that we let the curtain drop
upon a man so eminent in public life, yet so much
less known to us than from his public career he de-
serves. There is no statesman of the best known
period of Roman history who filled a large space in
the eyes of his countrymen, with whom we are so
little acquainted as Agrippa. His energy, bravery,

1 “ Condidit Agrippara quo te, Marcclle, sepulchro.”

Consol, ad Liv. 67.

2 Dion, liv. 29. The district of the Thracian Chersonese (Gallipoli)
was a private domain of Agrippa, which he bequeathed along with
the rest of his possessions to Augustus. Dion, who mentions the
fact, can give no account of how lie came by this estate.

Digitized by Google

230

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXV,

and conduct, both in military and civil affairs, marked
him for the first place ; yet he was always content with
the second. His countenance, as to which existing
monuments agree with the description of the ancient
writers, was stern and rough, yet his tastes were
liberal and elegant . 1 If we possessed any notices of
his private habits and conversation, we might acquire
perhaps the key to these apparent inconsistencies ;
but no anecdote is preserved of his domestic life ; we
know not what were his relaxations, or who were his
companions in them . 2 The only saying attributed to
him, marks, if genuine, the great spring of his actions,
and the bent of his character. By union , he used
to say, small things become great; by division the
greatest fall to pieces . 3 Such was indeed the maxim
of his life ; such the motto which might fitly be in-
scribed upon his tomb. His whole career was de-
voted to consolidate the empire of his patron; and
the small beginnings of the two youthful adventurers
waxed, through his self-control as much as by his
energy, into the widest development of all human
history. To this he sacrificed the objects which a
more selfish man would alone have regarded. The
only token of personal feeling he exhibited was his
vexation at being apparently postponed to Marcellus.
He resented being made the third person in the em-
pire, but he was satisfied to continue always the

' Pliny (Hist. Nat xxxv. 4.) characterizes his countenance by
the expressive word “ torvitas,” and calls him “ vir rusticitati propior
quam deliciis;” at the name time he remarks the taste he showed in
decorating the city, and making the finest works of art accessible to
the people. See vol. iii. chapter xxviii.

* The story told by Pliny (Hist. Nat. xiv. 28.), that Cicero, the
orator’s son, once in a drunken fit threw a cup at him, is hardly an
exception to this remark.

’ Seneca, Epist. 94. : “ M. Agrippa, vir ingentis animi, qui solus
ex his quos civilia bella claros potentesque fecerunt, felix in pub-
licum fuit, dicere solebat, multum se huic sententite debere: nam
concordia res pnrv® crescunt, discordia maxim® dilabuntur.” The
sentence is in Sallust's Jugurtlia, c. 1 0.

Digitized by Google

A.0.742-B.C.12.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

231

second . 1 He gained his reward in the well-earned
honours of his life, and the unanimous voice of pos-
terity in his favour a ; nor less perhaps in the season-
ableness of his death, which removed him at the age
of fifty-one from the perils of the second place, and
the risk of succeeding to the first . 3

1 Veil. ii. 79.: “ Parendi, sed uni, scientissimus, aliis imperandi
cupidus.” ii. 88. : “ Nec minora consequi potuit, sed non tam con-
eupivit.”

“Seneca, Lc. Dion, liv. 29.: Hpurros ru$> xaB' iavrbv Stcupcwu
ytvi/ityos.

* Pliny (Hist. Hat. vii. 6.) supposes him to have been unhappy,
and connects his sufferings with the inauspicious phenomenon of his
birth: “In pedes procedere nascentem contra natnram estj quo ar-
gument eos appellavere Agrippas, ut segre partos: qualiter M.
Agrippam ferunt genitum, unico prope felicitatis exemplo in om-
nibus ad hunc modum genitis. Quamquam is quoque ad versa pedum
valetudine, misera juventa, exercito sevo inter arma mortesque, ad
noxia successu, infelici terris stirpe omni, sed per utrasque Agrip-
pinas maxime, quse Caium et Domitium Neronem principes genuere,
totidem faces generis humani : prseterea brevitate sevi, quinquage-
simo uno raptus anno, in tormentis adulteriorum conjugis, socerique
praigravi servitio, luisse augurium prseposteri natalis existimatus.”
The passage of course is only important from the sense it evinces of
the misery attendant upon the highest human fortune.

Digitized by Google

232

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

CHAPTEK XXXVI.

The children of Agrippa. — Character of the Claudii: Tiberius and
Drusus. — Marriage of Tiberius and Julia. — Policy of the empire
on the Rhine and Danube. — Expedition of Drusus in Germany,
and Tiberius in Pannonia. — Death of Drusus, a. u. 745. — Ex-
tension of the empire in Thrace and Mcesia. — Tiberius invades
Germany. — Introduction of Caius Ctesar to public life. — Death of
Maecenas, and final remarks on his character, (a. u, 742 — 747.
b. c. 12 — 7.)

Agrippa left two sons, Caius and Lucius, who have
The family of been already mentioned, of the age of eight
Agrippa. an d fi ve years respectively, and more than
one daughter . 1 A third son was born some months
after his decease, to whom Augustus gave the name
of Agrippa Postumus. The favour with which the
emperor had distinguished his daughter’s offspring,
and which he promised to extend to the yet unborn
infant, was their natural right as scions of his own
race ; the claims of Livia’s children on his affections,
though educated under his guardianship, could not
really come in competition with those of Juba. But
while the idea of a family succession was assuming
consistency in the minds both of Augustus and bis
subjects, the weight of empire was becoming daily
more burdensome to the ruler, who knew not indeed,
till he lost Agrippa’s support, how overwhelming it
must prove for a single arm. That untoward event

1 The daughters of Agrippa were Vipsania, the child of his first
marriage, when yet a private citizen, with a daughier of Atticus; and
by his Csesarean princess, a Julia and an Agrippina. Of these two,
more will be said hereafter. Vipsania soon recedes from the view
of public history ; but it is remarked of her, that she alone, of all the
children of Agrippa, died a natural death, without even a suspicion
of violence. Tac. Ann. iii. 19.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXVI.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

233

advanced by another step the intrigues of Livia, and
this time, at least, without suspicion of a crime.
While condoling with her husband on the loss of his
trustiest friend, she could now urge the necessity of
seeking aid from an active and tried associate, and re-
present that by the union of her eldest son with his own
twice-widowed daughter, he might reconcile the claims
of blood with the exigencies of the public weal. Tibe-
rius was, indeed, already married to' Vipsania, the
daughter of Agrippa by a former consort, and to her
he seems to have felt a strongand genuine attachment. 1
Some struggle there may have been in his
mind between feeling and ambition, but the trothed’to
demands of Augustus and the importunities dMpa£he<i
of his mother, whose influence over him was
at all times overwhelming, silenced every *.£.742.
scruple. The youngest of Agrippa’s chil-
dren had not yet seen the light when the mother was
betrothed to her third husband. But the Panno-
nians had resumed their arms on the news of their
conqueror’s death ; and in the decent interval which
was yet to elapse before the marriage could be com-
pleted, Tiberius was directed to conduct a fresh
campaign against these inveterate enemies. 2

The elder of the emperor’s stepsons is destined
to occupy a large space on our canvass, and F!gure Bnd
it will be well to take this opportunity of Titariu' r in f
presenting ourselves with a sketch of his e “ lylife-
figure and character, as they appeared to his country-
men in the earlier stages of his career. If we may
trust the testimony of a noble sitting statue, discovered

1 Suet. Tib. 7.: “Non sine xnagno angore anirai, quum et Agrip-
pinas (Vipsanim) consuetudine teneretur, et Julia; mores improbaret.”
1 Veil. ii. 96.: “ Mors deinde Agrippas. . . . admovit propius Ne-
ronem Csesari : quippe filia ejus Julia, quse fuerat Agrippa; nupta,
Neroni nupsit. Subinde bellum Pannonicum,” &c. Comp. Dion,
liv. 31., who speaks of the emperor’s reluctance: Tt/Mpiov xai Ihfuv
rpoattAtro. The campaign of Tiberius took place in the summer of
this year (a. tj. 742).

Digitized by Google

234

HISTOBY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

in modern times at Piperno, the ancient Privemum,
near Terracina, and now lodged in the gallery of the
Vatican *, which has been pronounced to be a genuine
representation of Tiberius, we must believe that both
in face and figure he was eminently handsome, his
body and limbs developed in the most admirable
proportions, and his countenance regular, animated,
and expressive. In accordance with this description
the biographer of the Caesars assures us that he was
tall and big of bone, with ample chest and shoulders ;
it is added that he was left-handed, and such was the
firmness of his joints, that he could drive, it is said,
his extended finger through a sound apple, and draw
blood from a slave’s head with a fillip. He was fair
in complexion, and the abundance of hair at the back
of his head, which he suffered to fall over his shoul-
ders, was reputed to be characteristic of the Claudian
family.* The statue, above mentioned, preserves
something of a sinister expression in the mouth and
eyes ; the glance is unquiet and scowling, but it is
not impossible that this may be owing to a peculiarity
of vision, which enabled him, it is said, to see clearly
in twilight on first awaking, though this power did
not continue more than a few minutes . 3 His gait,
we are told, was ungraceful, his head being generally
thrown stiffly backward. He was habitually grave
and silent, and when he condescended to address his
attendants, his words were few, slow, and measured,
which gave an unfavourable impression of his temper.
Augustus, who did not fail to notice this demeanour,

1 Bunsen’s Bom, ii. 2. 69. (account of the Mnseo Chiaramonti
in the Vatican): 492. “Sitzende statue des Tiberius, von kolossaler
Grosse, gefunden zu Piperno im Jabre 1796. Neu ist dcr rechtc
Arm, die linke Hand, der rechte Fuss nnd der vordere Theil des
linken.” I have described it myself, I fear imperfectly, from personal
recollection. There is another well-known statue of Tiberius in the
Louvre.

* Suet. Tib. 68.

* Suet. 1. c . ; Plin. Hist. Nat. xi. 37. ; Dion, lvii. 2.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXVI.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

235

and was feelingly alive to the policy of conciliation,
excused it as a fault of manner, rather than of dispo-
sition. Pride and reserve, indeed, were the well-
known qualities of the Claudii, and in many chiefs
of the house they had been known to issue in a
gloomy ferocity, nearly allied, at least, to madness . 1
If Tiberius inherited any seeds of this fatal disposi-
tion, no atmosphere could be more adapted to develope
them than that of a precarious and upstart court.
Surrounded by secret dangers, dubious of his own
position, with a different part to act to every creature
about him, impelled to suspicion of his nearest atten-
dants and distrust of his dearest kinsmen, with a
master and patron exacting from him the strictest
obedience, but requiring at the same time the most
vigorous action, conscious, finally, that his mother,
his only ally, was using him for her own ambitious
projects rather than devoting her influence to his real
advantage, how little chance could he have of escaping
the doom of his race ! Nor do we know how early
he began to indulge in the vicious gratifications, to
which, at a later period at least, he was supposed to
have abandoned himself without restraint, and which,
if truly ascribed to him, must undoubtedly have
tended to precipitate any natural proneness to mental
alienation. Against all these evil i nfl uences might
be set the consummate education he enjoyed in com-
mon with the nobles of his time, combining the grace
and strength of scholarship with a practical training
in affairs . 2 His deep feeling for his wife Vipsania,

1 Mr. Landor, in his dialogue “ Tiberius and Vipsania," has sug-
gested that a taint of madness was hereditary in the Clnudian blood,
and refers to the excessive pride and perverse licentiousness of some
of the name in earlier Roman history. But we must not lay too
much stress on this, for there were many families of the Claudian
gens, and the Neros had formed a distinct race for some centuries.

2 In his youth he was nicknamed “ Old Tiberius,” for his pre-
cocious discretion. Philo Judseus, Leg. ad Caium, 23. : o'v
dAAek Kal «ri viot £iv S •Kparflvri]! iXtytro, 5i’ ai'3<S tJjv xtpl tt)v
iyxhotay.

Digitized by Google

236

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

when required against his will to part from her, com-
mands our sympathy and respect. Some time after
the divorce, on casually meeting her, he betrayed, we
are told, so much emotion, that the politicians who
watched him at every moment found it necessary to
prevent another interview . 1 Meanwhile, the wretched
Julia, whose bridal torch had twice been lit at the
pyre of a deceased husband, indemnified herself for
the laceration of whatever delicacy she may have once
possessed by licentious indulgences, and outraged the
prudery of Tiberius, a man of antique austerity
in pronouncing, at least, upon the vices of Roman
matrons . 2

Of the younger brother, Drusus, we are not in a
character condition to present so complete a portrait,
ofDrmu.. whether physical or moral. Though he has
met with at least one fluent flatterer, who has sung
his praises through a courtly panegyric of five hun-
dred verses, there is no trait of individual character
or feature to be drawn from them, except it be a hint
that bis qualities of feeling and genius were lodged
in a form of ample proportions . 3 We learn indeed
from other sources that the disposition of the younger
Nero was gentle, his manners courteous and popular,
so that both citizens and soldiers might forget in his
presence the prince of an imperial family. Hence
perhaps the rumour, which obtained currency at a
later period, that he was not indisposed, if ever he
attained to power, to restore the liberties of the Ro-

' Suet. Tib. 7.: “Sed Agrippinam (Vipsaniam) ct abegisse post
divortium doluit; et semel omnino ex occursu visam adeo contcntis
et tumentibus oculis prosecutus est, ut custoditum sit ne unquam in
conspectum ejus postea veniret.”

J Suet. l.c.: “ Quum. . . . Julite mores improbaret, ut quam sen-
sisset sui quoque sub priore marito appetcntem, quod sane etiarn
vulgo existimabatur.”

1 See the Consol, ad. Liv. ascribed to Pedo Albinovanus, 262. :

“ Pectoraque ingenii magna cnpnxque domus.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXVI.

fNDER THE EMPIRE.

237

man people. 1 It was asserted that he had actually
avowed such an intention to his brother. This fond
rumour may indeed be justly consigned to the same
limbo of popular imaginations in which we must bury
the counsels ascribed to Agrippa ; though it is more
credible that such advice should be hazarded by the
prop and champion of the imperial power, than by
the youthful aspirant to public honours, whose in-
terests and even life depended on the confidence
reposed in him by his step-father. If any such
generous anticipations reached the ears of Augustus,
— and Tiberius, we are assured, himself denounced
them 2 , — we should hardly hear, as the constant tra-
dition of the Romans, that Drusus was the favourite,
and so manifestly preferred to his elder brother, that
he was surmised to be the emperor’s actual son. 3 On
the whole, it must be allowed that the character we
have received of Drusus depends on too uncertain
testimonies to build any hypothesis upon it ; other-
wise we might readily fancy him heir by blood to the
gallant disposition of a Julius, while Tiberius dis-
played in every feature the harsher lineaments of the
Claudian house. 4

Such were the two pillars of the imperial throne,
on which, during the minority at least of Pni«»
his immediate descendants, the hopes of to <5»ui.
Augustus seemed now to rest. He required of both
an entire devotion to his interests and those of the
state ; he demanded of both the sacrifice of ease and

1 Suet. Claud. 1 . Tac. Ann. i. 33.: “ Credchaturque, si reruns
potitus foret, libertatem redditurus.” Comp. ii. 82. It must be re-
marked that the praises of Drusus were all posterior to his premature
death, and might in some cases be stimulated by the general hatred
towards the brother who survived him.

2 Suet. Tib. 50.; Claud. 1 . Hoeck very reasonably discredits this
anecdote: Ruem. Gesch. i. 2. 14.

2 Suetonius notices, but only to discredit it, a rumour that Au-
gustus caused Drusus to be poisoned out of jealousy at his repub-
lican sentiments.

1 Tac. Ann. i. 4.: “ Yetere atque insita Claudite fnmilise superbia.”

Digitized by Google

238

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CB. XXXVI.

comfort, retaining them in distant provinces and on
savage frontiers, at the head of his armies, far from
the pleasures of the capital, and the temptations it
afforded to unpopular arrogance. At a distance, he
well knew, their martial bearing and exploits would
secure them the favour of the people, which they
might easily forfeit in closer intercourse with them.
Accordingly, while Tiberius was sent to quell the in-
surrection in Pannonia, Drusus had been already
charged with the administration of the Gaulish pro-
vinces on the emperor’s departure to Rome . 1 The
nations beyond the Alps had not yet learned resig-
nation to the exactions of the Roman officials ; the im-
punity accorded, as they believed, to their oppressor
Licinus rankled in their bosoms 2 ; and the inquisition
into their means, together with the fiscal exactions
consequent upon it, which resulted from the census
now held at Lugdunum, must have fanned the flame
of their discontent. The Germans, ever watching
their opportunity, were preparing again to cross the
Rhine whenDrusus invited his subjects to display their
Ai«ar of loyalty to Augustus by erecting an altar at
Auguattuud confluence of the Rhone and Saone.
Lugdunum. gi x ty 0 f th e Gfaulish communities united in
this work of flattery. It was dedicated to Augustus
and Rome conjointly ; the names of the sixty states
were inscribed upon it; and the colossal statue of the
emperor before which it stood was surrounded by
smaller figures representing so many abstract nation-
alities . 3 On the first day of the month of August

1 Dion, liv. 25.

1 The story of the enterprise of a noble Gaul who proposed to
assassinate Augustus in his passage through the Alps, refers, per-
haps, to the odium this transaction excited. Suet. Oct. 79.: “ Vultu
crat adeo tranquillo serenoque, ut quidam a primoribus Galliarum
confessus sit inter suos, eo se inhibitum ac remollitum quominus, ut
destinarat, in transitu Alpium per simulationem colloquii propius
admissus, in prcecipitium impelleret.”

’ Strabo, iv, 3. p. 192., following Groskurd’s reading, which seems

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXVI.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

239

Driisus consecrated this tribute to the majesty of the
empire, and instituted at the same time a festival,
which continued to be annually solemnized on the
spot with shows and music for several centuries. To
impress a still more imposing character on the cere-
mony, he invited the chiefs of every state to attend
it, and prevailed on a noble iEduan to accept the
office of pontiff, assisted by a ministry of Gaulish
flamens.’ The worship of Caesar Augustus, thus in-
augurated in the province, became extended through-
out it, and at one place at least Li via Augusta was
associated in divine honours with her husband . 2 It
was necessary to confront the religious principle of
the Druids by another equally imposing; and the
genius of the mighty emperor and the fortune of the
all-conquering Republic might exercise on the im-
agination of the cowering Gauls no less potent a spell
than the blast of Circius and the thunders of Taranis.

Such were the politic measures of Drusus to quell
disaffection in his rear, while occupied in Roman for-
the task of chastising the Germans, and re- the Rhine.
torting on their own soil their aggressions upon the
territories of Rome. The Rhine we are used to con-
sider as the permanent boundary of the great southern
empire ; and that such for some centuries it really

necessary for the sense. Hoeck, i. 2. 18. This may have suggested
the allegorical figures of the French cities which surround the obelisk
and fountains on the Place de la Concorde at Paris.

1 Liv. Epit. cxxxvii.: “ Ara D. Cassari ad confluentem Araris et
Rhodani dedicate, sacerdote C. Julio Vercundaridubio JEduo.”
Supposing the epitomist to have found Divus Caesar in bis copy of
the original, this has been thought to prove that Livy had not com-
pleted his work till the reign of Tiberius. The altar was undoubtedly
dedicated to Augustus during his lifetime, not to the deceased Julius
See Suet. Claud. 2.; Dion, liv. 32. Gruter, laser, p. 13.: “ Sa-
cerdos Rom. ct Aug. ad arain ad confluentes.” Thierry, Gaulois,
iii. 266., refers to other inscriptions.

2 Thus we read “Dca Augusta Vocontiorum: Liviae Aug. Deas
munic.” Inscriptions cited by Thierry. Luc. in Dauphine is Lucus
Augusti; Die is Dea Augusta.

Digitized by Google

240

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

was, is attested by the chain of fortified posts along
its left bank, which defended the passage of the river
from the spot where it escaped from the mountains of
Helvetia to its mouth in the northern ocean. These
fortresses have since grown for the most part into
considerable towns : Basel, Strasburg, Speyer, Worms,
Mainz, Bingen, Coblenz, Andernach, Bonn, Koln,
Neuss, Nimeguen, and Leyden are all probably sprung
from foundations laid not later than the reign of
Augustus . 1 The left bank of the Rhine has always
been the richer of the two, and has shown accordingly
the 'greater anxiety to provide for its security. The
German side of the river has never been fortified so
jealously as the Gaulish. But though the Romans
seem thus early impressed with a presentiment that
they had here reached the natural limits of their con-
quests, there was a time when, under the guidance
of the impetuous youth who now commanded their
legions, they dreamed of extending their sway into
the heart of Germany, and reducing it to the same
subjection as Gaul and Spain. The head-quarters of
their military force in these regions were now removed
from the Somme or Scheldt, where they had been
fixed by Caesar, and transplanted to the Rhine. De-
tachments of troops were posted in close communi-
cation with one another at all the stations above
mentioned, but the two provinces of the first and
second Germany, divided by the Moselle, had each its
separate military establishment, its proper praetorium
and legatus.

At the same time the limits of the empire had been
on the permanently advanced in another quarter
Danube. to the Danube. The victories of Tiberius
over the Viodelici in the mountains had been followed
by the advance of his successor Piso through the plains

1 The establishment of these fortresses, fifty in number, is ascribed
to Drusus. Floras, iv. 12.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXVI.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

241

which intervene between them and the river, by the
foundation of the colony of Augusta ', the construction
of military roads, connecting it both with Italy and
Gaul, and the establishment of fortified posts along
the course of the stream. Here again the limits of
Roman dominion are marked by the position of the
most ancient stations on the Roman, that is, the
southern bank of the river. The sites of Regens-
burg, Passau, Linz, Vienna, and the little village of
Hainburg, formerly Carnuntum, all sloping towards
the ungenial north, were adopted for purposes of de-
fence. But between the Rhine and the Upper Danube
there intervenes a triangular tract of land, the apex
of which touches the confines of Switzerland at Basel ;
thus separating, as with an enormous wedge, the
provinces of Gaul and Vindelicia, and presenting at
its base no natural line of defence from one river to
the other. This tract was, however, occupied for the
most part by forests, and if it broke the line of the
Roman defences, it might at least be considered
impenetrable to an enemy. Abandoned by Thl . Agri
the warlike and predatory tribes of Ger- D<cum » w *-
many, it was seized by wandering immigrants from
Gaul, many of them Roman adventurers, before whom
the original inhabitants, the Marcomanni or men of
the frontier, seem to have retreated eastward beyond
the Hercynian forest. The intruders claimed or soli-
cited Roman protection, and offered in return a tribute
from the produce of their soil, whence the district
itself came to be known by the title of the Agri
Decumates, or Tithed Land . 2 It was not, however,

• Augusta Vindelicorum is the modem Augsburg, founded, it may
he supposed, about the year 740, after the conquest of Rhsetia by
Drusus. Tac. Germ. 41. s “ Splendidissima Rhsetise provincise co-
lonia.” The Itineraries represent it as the centre of the roads from
Verona, Sirmium, and Trcveri.

1 Tacitus, Germ. 29., writing a century later: “ Non numcraverim
inter Germanise populos, quanquam trans Rhenum Danubiumque
consederint, eos qui Decutnates agros exercent. Levissimus quisque

VOL. IV. R

Digitized by Google

242

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxn.

officially connected with any province of the empire,
nor was any attempt made to provide for its perma-
nent security, till a period much later than that on
which we are now engaged. But as an irregular out-
post of the Roman dominions it exercised consider-
able influence upon the neighbouring barbarians,
in familiarizing them with the features of southern
civilization.

When he had brought the chief men of the various

Druflua
prepare* to
invade
Germany.

states of Gaul together on pretence of pay-
ing divine honours to the emperor, Drusus
required them to furnish him with means
for his projected invasion of Germany. The tribes
first destined for chastisement were the Usipetes and
Tenctheri, whose seats were on the Lippe, and the
Sigambri between the Sieg and Lahn. Behind these
lay the Cherusci on the Ems and Weser, and the Chauci
on the marshy plains which stretch towards the ocean,
both formidable for their power and influence, against
whom he meditated hostilities at a later period. South
of the Lahn the range of the Taunus was occupied by
the Chatti, who extended eastward to the Hercynian
forest in the heart of Germany, and were perhaps a
main portion of the people whom Cassar knew by the
more general appellation of Suevi. While penetra-
ting to the Ems and Weser the Roman general would
require to secure his right flank by the reduction of
this tribe also ; so that six nations, the flower of the
Germans in the north, were included in the young
Caesar’s grand scheme of conquest Augustus had him-
self refrained from advancing tbe conquests of the
empire in this direction, and Agrippa had speedily
withdrawn from the right bank of the Rhine, and
acquiesced in his master’s policy. But the ardour
of his favourite seems now to have prevailed over the

Gallorum, et inopia audax, dubioe possessions solum occuparere
Mox limite acto, promotisque pnesidiia, sinus Imperii, et pars pro-
▼inciae habetur."

Digitized by Google

A.XJ.742-B.C.12.

TINDER THE EMPIRE.

243

emperor’s accustomed moderation. He felt, perhaps,
the importance of allowing the princes of his family
to substantiate by popular exploits the claims he ad-
vanced in their behalf : and while one was employed
in the reduction of Pannonia, to the other he opened
a still wider field of ambition in the untrodden plains
of central Europe.

On reaching the Rhine in the spring of 742,
Drusus lost not a moment in throwing his Expeditions
army across it, and chasing the Usipetes to i»n!T
their strongholds. But this incdrsion was
meant only as a feint to occupy the attention of the
enemy, or to keep his own soldiers employed, while he
was himself intently engaged in preparing for a bolder
and more important enterprise. He proposed to carry
his arms against the Chauci and Cherusci; but he
was anxious to avoid the risks and hardships of a
march through the forests of Germany, and preferred
to embark his legions on the Bhine, and transport
them along the shores of the ocean to the mouth of
the Ems. The first obstacle to this novel and daring
operation had been removed, under his direction, by
cutting a communication from the Rhine to the
Lake Flevus, or Zuyder Zee ; and the channel which
Drusus opened for this purpose still continues to dis-
charge a large portion of the waters of the river. 1
A flotilla adapted for cruising in the shallows of the
North Sea was speedily equipped in the arsenals

1 This channel is generally described as originally a canal from
the Rhino at Arnheim to the Yssel, a small river flowing into the
Znyder Zee, which now gives its name to this eastern branch. It
would be more correct to say that the canal connected the Yssel, a
stream flowing into the Rhine, with the Vecht, which emptied itself
into the lake. The communication thus opened, the weight of the
Rhine-stream turned the waters of the Yssel into the Vecht, and
carried them along with it into the ocean. Upon this subject, and
the changes which have taken place in the lake Flevus, partly from
irruptions of the sea, partly also, perhaps, from the increased volume
of river- water thus poured into it, see Von Hoff, Gesch. der Erd
oberfliiche, l. 253. foil.

& 2

Digitized by Google

244

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

on the river side , 1 and as the season for operations
advanced, the legions were withdrawn from the
districts they had occupied beyond the Rhine, and
embarked for a more distant and extraordinary ser-
vice. The Frisii, who inhabited the shores of the
lake, were converted, by force or persuasion, into
allies for the occasion. Drusus felt the necessity of
securing their assistance in his navigation, or their
succour in case of a reverse. Unpractised as the
Romans were in stemming the ocean tides and cur-
rents, they met with serious disasters in rounding the
coast of Friesland and Groningen, and when cast at
length by the winds and waves on its sandy downs,
gladly put themselves under the guidance of a Frisian
escort, and made the best of their way home across
the continent. The approach of winter furnished an
excuse for this hasty and inglorious retreat. The
invaders had ascertained the practicability, if favoured
by the weather, of transporting their cumbrous arma-
ments with ease and speed to the point they wished
to reach, and not disheartened by the casual failure
of their first attempt, they treasured up the experience
they had gained for a future occasion . 3

Nevertheless, Drusus determined the next year
to change his mode of proceeding, and re-
turn to the ordinary tactics of Roman in-
vasion. Entering again the territories of
the Usipetes and Tenctheri, he crossed them without
opposition, the Germans not venturing to offer resist-

Second

campaign

a. u. 743.

b. c. 11.

1 We gather from a corrupt passage in Floras (iv. 12.), that Bonna
(Bonn) was made a naval station, and apparently connected by a
bridge with a town on the opposite bank. See Art. Gesonia, in
Smith’s Diet. Anc. Geogr.

* This expedition was celebrated in an heroic poem by Pedo Albi-
novanns. A few of his lines have been preserved by Seneca, Suasor,
1. The subject furnished some obvious commonplaces for the rhe-
torical taste which was advancing with rapid strides: such as,

“ Quo ferimur? ruit ipse dies, orbcmqnc reiictum
Ultima perpetuis claudit natura tenebris.”

Digitized by Google

A.U.743-B.C.11.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

245

ance in the field, He threw a bridge across the
Lippe, from the right, as it would appear, to the left
bank, and again struck boldly forwards, traversing
the country of the Cherusci, the modern Paderborn
and Detmold, till he reached the banks of the Weser. 1
The strength of the Sigambrian nation, the most bold
and warlike in that part of Germany, would have
been brought to oppose him, but for the timely
defection of the Chatti from the league of the
barbarians, which called off the force of that people
in another direction. But the Germans had already
learnt the imprudence of meeting their invaders in
open combat. They retired steadily before them, or
hovered assiduously on their flanks, trusting to the
difficulty of the route, the inclemency of the climate,
and the scarceness of provisions, to harass their ad-
vance, and ultimately turn them back. All these
circumstances now conspired to baffle and discourage
the Roman leader. Not venturing to place the Weser
in his rear, he assured his soldiers that inauspicious
omens forbade the further progress of their arms,
and gave orders for the retreat. The Germans, who
were watching their opportunity, now gradually turned
against them, and after annoying them by desultory
attacks, at last closed upon them in a narrow gorge
of the hills. The danger of the legions was imminent,
for, so far removed from succour, no slight or partial
success would have availed to disentangle them. But
the enemy, confident of a complete victory, and re-
gardless of all discipline and discretion, rushed upon
them without concert or precaution ; and when re-

1 Dion, liv. 33.: t 6v re 'Prjvov irtpoutiBr), Ka) tovs Ovtrnrtras «car«-
<TTpf i|aro- i6v rt Aoinrlav Ifeufe, nal is tt)V tuv ^Zuydfifipav ive&aAf,
/cal Si’ auTrjr «ai Is XfpouaidSa Trpofxdiprprt, pt exp 1 tou Oviaovpryov.
It would seem to have been Dion’s idea, if he had any distinct views
on the matter, that Drusus crossed the Rhine north of the Lippe,
again crossed the Lippe from the right to the left bank, and swept
with a circuitous route through the country of the Sigambri, into
that of the Cherusci.

Digitized by Google

246

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

ceived with coolness, and repelled with firm resolution,
broke their ranks, and fled with precipitation. Once
more the Romans could move freely; the Germans
did not again attempt to close with them ; and the
annoyance of their flying attacks was cheerfully borne
by men who had just thrown off the whole weight
of their onslaught. Drusus halted on his retreat to
erect a fortress at a spot on the Lippe which bore
the name of Aliso. 1 In the course of the same sum-
mer, but not, as it would seem, in connexion with
this campaign, he established another Roman outpost
in the country of the Chatti. 2 These sufficed for
tokens of victory, and the emperor obtained for him
the triumphal insignia, with the honour of an ovation,
which he was now summoned to Rome to celebrate.
But the title of imperator, with which his soldiers
saluted him, he was not permitted to accept.

The conduct of the war in Pannonia, which lay
Tttenu.ta nearer to Italy than the German frontier,
JTm.'W may have allowed Tiberius to return to
Rome after the campaign of 742, and fulfil his en-
gagement of marriage with Julia at the commence-
ment of the following year. But his retirement
lasted only during the season of military inaction.
In the spring of 743 he again crossed the Alps, and
renewed his operations against the half-conquered
barbarians. This campaign was not unproductive of
successes, for which the young prince was suffered,
on his second return, in the winter, to enjoy the same
distinctions as were also awarded to his brother, and
Augustus had the satisfaction of exhibiting both his
stepsons to the people in the character of national

1 Dion, l. c. The spot has been supposed to be at Hamm, where
the Lippe is joined by the Alse, or at Elsen. where the Alme falls
into it, about two miles from Paderbom. The one is thirty, the
other about fifty miles east of the Rhine.

2 This fortification is said to have been on the Rhine (Dion, l c.).
It was probably between the Lahn and the Mayn.

Digitized by Google

A D.743-B.C.1 1.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

247

heroes . 1 At this moment, however, the decease of
Octavia, the darling of the last generation of
of citizens, snapped another link which
connected the Empire with the Republic . 9 E - c- “•

Her body was consigned to the appointed resting
place of the Julian family, after the honours of a
public funeral, at which orations were delivered over
it by Drusus and by Augustus himself . 3 She died at
the age of fifty-four, being about two years older
than her brother. Her praises have been already
celebrated in this work, and her noble qualities are
now once more referred to, only to notice the respect
which the Romans could pay to female virtue, while
their customs condemned it for the most part to per-
petual nonage and insignificance. This was perhaps
the first instance of a woman being made the sub-
ject of a National solemnity at Rome; it may be
questioned, however, whether, except in the case
of a sovereign, even the more chivalrous feelings of
modern times have ever prompted so extraordinary a
distinction.

The death of Octavia, grievous as it undoubtedly
was to her brother, was felt by him as a private
rather than a public loss. It does not appear that he
ever consulted her on affairs of state ; and since the
death of her son Marcellus, she had become more
than ever estranged from public life. His continued
own popularity, supported by the merits of or Au g u,iu..
the young Neros, was still advancing. On the Ka-

1 Dion, liv. 34.; Veil. ii. 96. Dalmatia, which had joined the
Pannonians, was now made an imperial province, and the senate
received in exchange the peaceful regions of Cyprus and the Nar-
Lonensis.

* Octavia died, according to Fischer ( Zeittafeln ), in November or
December of 743.

* Drnsns may have been selected for this office from his closer
connexion with the deceased. lie was married to Antonia, daugh-
ter of the triumvir, and sister of Julius Antonius, who was himself
married to the elder Marcella, a daughter of Octavia. The body
was borne by both Tiberius and Drusus. Snet. Oct 61., places her

Digitized by Google

248

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

lends of the ensuing January, the noblest citizens
pressed forward with increasing alacrity to offer him
the customary presents at the commencement of the
new year. Such compliments he was always proud
to receive, but he was careful, it is said, to return
them with interest. He refused, however, to accept
the sums which it was now the fashion to subscribe
for the erection of statues of himself, and directed
that they should be applied instead to the glory of
the national divinities. The people invented another
way of expressing their devotion to him, by throwing
each a piece of money, on a stated day, into the Cur-
tian lake in the Forum, as an offering for his safety.'
At this time Augustus began his strange custom of
sitting one day in every year in the guise of a mendi-
cant at his own palace-gate, and accepting the petty
coins which passers-by placed in his hand. Of his
motive in this practice no certain account could be
given ; but it seems to have had its origin in super-
stitious feeling, and was generally ascribed to the
warning of an oracle or a dream. 2

Early in the year 744, Augustus once more quitted
his capital to visit Gaul ; not, indeed, with
the purpose of urging by his nearer approach
the conquest of the German tribes, for his
views were still pacific, and he was anxious
to shut the temple of Janus, for which he
had actually issued orders, when the report of fresh
disturbances on the Danube compelled him to revoke
them. He charged Tiberius to defend Pannonia from

Third cam-
paign of
Druitu in
Germany,
and hii
death.

a . U. 745.

b. c. 9.

death somewhat later, but the historian, who follows the order of
time, is undoubtedly correct.

1 Suet Oct. 57.: “ Omnes ordincs in lacum Curtii quotannis ex
veto pro salute ejus stipcm jacicbant.” This must be regarded as a
conventional expression. The coin was placed, perhaps, on an altar
which stood over the sacred spot. Ovid, Fast. vi. 403. says,

“ Curtius ille lacus, siccas qui sustinet arns,

Nunc solida est tellus, sed lacus ante fuit.”

* Dion, liv. 35.; but he doubts the story.

r

Digitized by Google

A.r.745-B.c.9.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

249

an irruption of Dacians ; but Drusus, at the same
time, pleaded for another expedition beyond the
Rhine, and the emperor yielded, perhaps reluctantly,
to his instances. In 745 Drusus became consul ; never-
theless he resumed the command of the legions, and
directed his march through the territory of the Chatti,
in which, as we have seen, he had provided already
a basis for future operations. His views of conquest
had now expanded more widely than ever, and the
inexperience of his new enemies, who ventured to
oppose his advance, and allowed him to gain some
partial successes, inspired him with increased confi-
dence. Beyond the Chatti, he reached the habitations
of the Suevi ; then, turning northward, he threw him-
self once more upon the flanks of the Cherusci, and,
crossing the Weser, penetrated the Hercynian forest
as far as the Elbe, the central river of the North.
The Cherusci, more prudent than their southern neigh-
bours, had declined to meet him in arms, and the
advancing legions found themselves left without a
visible enemy in the depths of the wilderness. Mind-
ful of the disasters which had clouded his former re-
treat, Drusus might now be anxious for an excuse to
turn the heads of his columns. It would have been
easy to appeal to some imaginary omens; but the
portent which is related does not seem, from its cha-
racter, to have been a Roman invention. A woman,
it was affirmed, of more than mortal stature, here
crossed his path, addressing him by name, rebuking
his ambition, and announcing a fatal termination to
his career. 1 The invaders hastily erected a trophy on

1 Some writers resolve this supposed apparition into the actual ap-
pearance of a Druidess. Others connect it with an alleged German
superstition, on which Reimar (on Dion in loc.) gives a remarkable
instance: “ August® Vindelicorum adhue visitur in turri Minori-
tarum imago mulieris fanatic® equo veette, qu® Attilre pergenti ex
Italia in Pannoniam sese furibunda objecit, et ter terribili voce ac-
clamavit. Retro, Attila! ” The story, I have little doubt, was a later
fabrication. There is no allusion to it, or to portents of any kind, in
the Consol, ad Liviam.

«Ac * -

Digitized by Google

250

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvr.

the banks of the river, and retraced their steps still
without encountering a human foe. But before they
reached the Rhine, the prediction of the spectre met
with its fulfilment. Drusus fell from his horse, and
the injuries be received terminated, after thirty
days’ suffering, in his death . 1 The camp in which
he lingered, under the protection of the Roman out-
posts, obtained from this disaster the name of Sce-
lerata, or the Accursed. The body was borne along
with military pomp. At Moguntiacum, where the
army may have crossed the Rhine, a monument was
erected in its honour 2 ; but it was not suffered to
repose there. Augustus, who was still at Lugdunum
when the news of his favourite’s illness arrived, sum-
moned Tiberius to attend his brother’s couch, and
when his death was subsequently announced, charged
him to convey the remains to Rome, which he did,
preceding it himself on foot. The emperor, who had
now returned to Italy, received the mournful caval-
cade at Ticinum in the depth of winter. Accompany-
ing the body in person to the city, he pronounced
over it a funeral oration ; and after cremation, the
ashes were deposited in the imperial mausoleum . 3
The youthful hero, baffled in his enterprises, and cut

1 Dion, lv. 1, 2.; Suet. Claud. 1.; Liv. Epit. cxl. (more properly
cxliL). With this event the history of Livy terminated, a. u. 745.
Drusus was now in his thirtieth year. Veil. ii. 97.

* Eutrop. viL 13. Games and military spectacles continued to be
exhibited here on the anniversary of Drusus’s death. An altar had
been already raised to his honour on the banks of the Lippe. Tac.
Ann. ii. 7. The soldiers began now to regard themselves as a dis-
tinct people, with rites and heroes of their own. Augustus required
them to surrender the body of their beloved chief, as a matter of dis-
cipline. Senec. Cons, ad Pdlyb. 34. : “ Modum tamen lugendi non
sibi tantum sed etiam aliis fecit, ac totum exercitum, non solum
raaastuin sed etiam attonituro, corpus Drusi sibi vindicantem, ad moreni
Romani luctns rcdegit, indicavitque non militandi tantum disciplinam
esse servandam, sed etiam dolendi.”

s Suet. Claud. 1 . Augustus further composed an epitaph for the
young Csesar, and wrote a memoir of his life.

Digitized by Google

A.C.745-B.C.9.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

251

off so prematurely in his career, was more than or-
dinarily fortunate in the honours accorded to his
memory. The regrets of his countrymen were both
loud and enduring ; alone of all Roman warriors he
received a posthumous title to commemorate his suc-
cesses; the appellation of Germanicus, which his son
rendered afterwards still more illustrious, became
the dearest, as it was the last, of the heroic names
of Rome. The senate decreed him a triumphal arch,
which still exists, for a triumph scarcely earned, and
never consummated 1 ; and the elegant though feeble
verses of a courtly poet continue still to attest his
virtues, or at least the popular belief in them . 2

"While, however, we remark the signal failure of
the mighty preparations Drusus had made Pe rm»nent
for a vast and enduring conquest, we must
not overlook the importance of their actual of »'>«»»•
results. If the Germans were neither reduced to
subjection, nor even overthrown in any decisive en-
gagement, as the Romans vainly pretended, yet their
spirit of aggression was finally checked ; and from
henceforth for many generations they were fully
occupied with the task of defending themselves . 3
The Chatti and Marcomanni in the south were
thoroughly impressed with a sense of Roman invin-
cibility ; the Marcomanni even quitted their homes
in Suabia, to seek new abodes beyond the Hercynian
forest 4 ; while the Chatti resigned themselves to the
intrusion of Roman settlers within their confines,

1 Suet. 1. c. : “ Marmoreum arcum cum tropaeo Appia via.” This
arch is, with the exception of the Pantheon, the most perfect existing
monument of Augustan architecture. It is heavy, plain, and narrow,
with all the dignified but stern simplicity which belongs to the cha-
racter of its age.

2 See the Consolatio ascribed to Pedo Albinovanus.

3 Veil. ii. 107.: “Ex magna parte domitorem Germani®.” Flor.
iv. 12.: “ Germani victi magis quam domiti erant.” Cons, ad Liv.
457.: “Ignoti victor Germanicus orbis.”

4 Strabo, vii. 2. p. 290.

Digitized by Google

252

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. xxxvi.

and gradually conformed to the example of Gaulish
civilization. In the north the invaders planted them-
selves strongly in defensible positions, and extended
their inroads every year into the territories of the
Sigambri and Cherusci, till the banks of the Ems and
Lippe assumed almost the appearance of a Eoman
province, administered by a Eoman proconsul . 1

To achieve the work interrupted by the death of
preset, of Drusus, his brother Tiberius was summoned
•rm. iiTpm- once more to arms. He had quitted Pan-
Sud moesI™” nonia to attend the funeral procession, but
his task in that province had already been completed
by a solid victory . 8 In quelling the insurrection of
the native tribes, assisted by a revolt of the Dalma-
tians, he had displayed activity and skill, and might
already be esteemed the most consummate captain
of his day. But before we accompany Tiberius to
the Ehine, we must cast our eyes for a moment on
another quarter, the repose of which was affected by
the wars in which he had been thus employed. The
districts of Thrace and Moesia on the Lower Danube
were not too distant from Pannonia to escape the
contagion of its spirit of independence. While the
princes who were suffered to govern nominally in
these countries maintained the fidelity to Eome which
was necessary for their existence, the people them-
selves were little influenced by such politic con-
siderations. The signal of defiance was raised by a
chief of the Bessi named Vologesus, a priest of the
Thracian Dionysus, to whose worship the people were
fanatically devoted. Inflamed with passionate super-
stition, they rose against the king Ehascuporis, a

1 Compare the praise of Stilicho, four centuries later, in the pleas-
ing verses of Claudian, xxi. 218. foil.:

“ Ut Salius jam rura colat, flexosque Sigambri
In falcem current gladios, geminasque viator
Cum videat ripas, qux sit Romans requirat,” &c.

1 Dion, lv. 2.

Digitized by Google

A.C.745-B.C.9.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

253

loyal servant of the empire, overthrew him in battle,
and slew him. Rhaemetalces, his uncle, was driven
into the Chersonese, and the whole nation was at
once arrayed in arms against the foreigner and all
who sided with him. The Romans conducted them-
selves with ability and resolution. L. Piso, who com-
manded in Pamphylia, was summoned from the other
side of the Hellespont to make head against the in-
surgents. For three years he continued to wage war
against them from Illvricum to the shores of the
Euxine, and at the close of his third campaign he
could declare that order was restored and the spirit
of revolt extinguished. The high honours awarded
him by the emperor and senate attest the importance
of the occasion and the merit of his services. 1

With the year 746, Augustus commenced a third
decennial term of his imperium, which August™
seems to have been now renewed as a mat- again the
ter of course, although he pleaded again pSw*
his reluctance to accept it. 2 He still re- H'.cis.
garded the position of his Gaulish provinces with
anxiety ; so much so that, while he invited Tiberius
to complete his brother’s undertakings, he proposed to
take up his own residence once more at Lugdunum,
the keystone of the great arch of the Rheno-Danu-
bian fortifications, and superintend on the spot the
consolidation of his empire in the north. This was
now the only quarter in which he prosecuted offen-
sive warfare; nevertheless, the common notion of
the pacific policy of Augustus is far from correct.
Though he was averse from the bold adventures in
which the great captains of Rome perilled their own
lives and the interests of the republic, and though
no brilliant achievements have given a martial colour

1 Dion, liv. 34. ; Veil. ii. 98.; Flor. iv. 12. 17. (a. tr. 741 — 743).

2 Dion, lv. 6. : / utra Sf Sr/ ravra rijv re fiyspovtlav, Kafaep a<pids

as i\e yev, eVeiSr) Ta ScKa !tt] Sevrepa (ucav SsjBev aSdis

ijrecrTTj.

Digitized by Google

254

HISTORY OF THE HOMANS

CH. XXXVI.

to his long administration, there were in fact few
epochs in which the progress of Roman conquest was
more unremitting . 1 Glancing from the Baltic to the
Black Sea, his vigilant eye marked every point on
which the empire was assailable in the north; and
though not successful, as we shall see, in narrowing
its exposed frontier to the tract between the Vistula
and the Dniester, as he may once have contemplated,
he completed the line of its defences along the Rhine
and Danube, and advanced the bulwarks of Italy a
month’s march beyond the Alps.

Tiberius crossed the Rhine ; but no sooner had he
■men™ entered the Gennan territories, than the
Rhine. tribes on the frontier, with the exception
ii-c.'s. ' of the Sigambri, sent envoys with offers of
submission. He directed them to seek the emperor
in person at Lugdunum ; but Augustus, who saw, as
he thought, an opportunity for effecting a great
conquest without further risk, refused to grant any
terms unless the Sigambri combined in solicitation
with them. Thereupon this people also sent some
chiefs to join the deputation ; and their unscrupu-
lous assailant, having thus got hostages from every
state, did not hesitate to retain them in custody,
and disperse them as prisoners among his fortresses.
Many of the captives thus ill treated, slew them-
selves in their indignation ; but their countrymen,
stunned by the blow which deprived them of their
best leaders, seem for a moment to have submitted
in silence. Augustus gloried without shame in the
happy result of a stroke in which his people, as he
well knew, would equally exult. He allowed the
successes of a bloodless and treacherous campaign

1 Compare, for the policy of Augustus, the statement of Aurelius
Victor, JSpit. 1.: “Arma nisi majoris emolument! causa nunquam
movenda esse : ne compendio tenui, jactura gravi, petita victoria,
similis sit hamo aureo piscantibus: cujus abrupti amissique detri-
mentum nullo capture lucro pensari potest.”

Digitized by Google

A.U.746-B.C.8.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

255

to be magnified with the most extravagant flattery . 1 *
Though he declined to celebrate a triumph on the
occasion, he permitted Tiberius to assume the title
of Imperator and to enjoy that honour in his stead.
He invested him also, now the second time, with
the consulship for the following year . 3 At the same
time, he gratified the soldiers with an extraordinary
largess, on the pretext of his grandson Caius, then
thirteen years of age, having served among them his
first campaign. For himself he accepted the glorious
prerogative of extending the pomcerium of the city,
reserved for such commanders only as had enlarged
the limits of the empire. It was at this time also
that he directed the month Sextilis, which had
proved the most fortunate to him throughout his
career, to be called by his own appellation of Au-
gustus . 3

The emperor was already advancing in years when
he exhibited this activity in repeatedly
visiting a distant province. Since his last into Germany,
dangerous sickness his constitution seems to have
acquired fresh strength; and we hear no more of
that defect of his physical powers, which we have
so often remarked at an earlier period. But in the
young and vigorous prince, who aspired to a share
in his labours, and the inheritance of his preroga-
tives, such activity was more naturally required.
Tiberius hastened back to Rome to commence his

1 Veil. ii. 97. : “ Moles deinde ejus belli translate in Neronem est.”

‘Tiberius had an ovation a.u. 745; Dion, lv. 2.; Veil. ii. 96.
But on this occasion (a. tj. 747) he enjoyed the full honours of the
triumph, Suet. Tib. 9. : “ Quas ob res et ovans, et curru, urbem iu-
gressus est.” See also Dion, lv. 8., Veil. ii. 97.: “ ovans triurapha-
vit,” and afterwards; “turn alter triumphus cum altero consulatu ei
oblatus est.”

* Dion, lv. 6. : Cassiodorus reports that, “ His consulibus (C.
Asinio et C. Marcio, a. u. 746) inter Albim et Rhcnum Germani
omnes Tiberio Neroni dcditi sunt”(Hoeck, i. 2. 33.), but the ex-
tension of the administration beyond the Rhine took place a little
later.

Digitized by Google

236

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXIV].

consulship with the beginning of the year 747 ; but
a. c. 747. he was allowed only a moment to repose
ji.u. 7. from his military duties, and to discharge
the civil functions of his office. Early in the spring
he was once more on his route to Gaul, and with
the arrival of summer, he had placed himself at the
head of the legions, and was engaged in a new
expedition against the German tribes. The depar-
ture of Augustus had been the signal for renewed
disturbances among them, such at least was the pre-
text put forth for the campaign ; but it was evidently
the policy of the Romans to seek occasion for suc-
cessive attacks. Each succeeding advance of the
tide of conquest gained some fresh ground ; and
although the legions retired every autumn within
their own lines, they left behind them traces of
power not easily obliterated. Tiberius had no ex-
tensive plans of conquest ; he was satisfied with
showing himself to the enemy, and occupying their
territory for a few months. He performed, it seems,
in this campaign no action worth recording; and
having led his troops back to their quarters, re-
turned to Rome before the end of the summer. 1

The districts nearest the right bank of the Rhine
Reo.on.of had been utterly exhausted by these re-
ofh. ? J°nro- M peated invasions, in which the invader
gre« there. swe pt away every commodity he could carry
or drive before him. The further the legions pene-
trated, the more scanty became the objects of plun-
der, the more slender the means of subsistence.
Accordingly each succeeding campaign became more
laborious to the troops, and more expensive to the
government. The four expeditions of Drusus had
drained the resources of the Gaulish province, and
exhausted its arsenals and workshops. This was per-

1 Dion, Iv. 8.: iv St rrj Ttpp.avl<f >'Stv &^tov pvripTis avvi^rj. Fiscber,
liotm. Zeitt. a . 0 . 747 .

Digitized by Google

A* U • < 4 4 — B*C. 7 •

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

257

Baps the main cause of the feebleness of the exer-
tions made by his successor. Tiberius was indeed
compelled by the necessities of his position to under-
take active operations. The citizens expected their
future imperator to maintain by constant warfare his
claim to their suffrages ; and Augustus, on his part,
required him to conform to this expectation. It was
not, we may presume, the ■wish of Tiberius to confine
himself to such trifling enterprises. He must have
felt the importance of earning a great reputation in
the career of conquest which was opened to him,
and he chafed perhaps at the want of men, money,
and. supplies of all kinds. Nor was he unaware,
that while he thus relinquished the enjoyment of
ease and luxury, he was in fact distrusted by both
the prince and the people. The emperor already
regarded with pleasing anticipations the progress of
his grandsons in popular favour; of whom Caius,
the elder, was but fourteen years of age, i ntrodac ,i 0n
but had already served a first campaign,
and had recently appeared also in a public pnblic life ‘
capacity in the city. During the absence of Tiberius,
the young Caesar had occupied his place by the side
of the consul Piso, in ordering the votive games on
the emperor’s happy return. 1 This ceremony was fol-
lowed by the inauguration of some works of Agrippa,
which that industrious builder had left unfinished.
He had commenced the construction of a spacious
hall, in which the soldiers were to be assembled to
receive their pay. Its roof had a larger span than
any other in the world, though the Pantheon was
already in existence. At the same time the place of
exercise, which Agrippa had added to the field of
Mars, was opened for public recreation, though the
colonnades which were to surround it, and after-
wards formed, with their fresco paintings, its princi-

1 Dion, lv. 8 . (a. v . 747, b. c. 7).

VOL. IV. S

Digitized by Google

258

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

pal charm, were not yet completed. Funeral games
were now celebrated in honour of this great national
benefactor, in order, no doubt, to conciliate the affec-
tions of the people for his children. But whether a
Nero or a Caesar filled at this moment the most
space in the eyes of the Romans, it was between the
scions of the imperial house that all their interests
were divided; the merits of private citizens were
cast into the shade, and none of them presumed to
step forth and contest the palm of popularity.

In this temper of the public mind, the death of
of Maecenas, the last statesman whose name
Mscena». and fortunes might remind the Romaps of
the days of the Republic, caused probably but little
notice. This event had occurred at the close of the
year 746. For some time previously the people had
remarked a coolness between the emperor and the
minister he had so long loved and trusted, whose
counsels, however, as far as they tended to maintain
the show of ancient forms and stay the downward
progress of despotism, became less palatable as they
could be more easily dispensed with. Some ascribed
this decline in favour to no worthier cause than the
emperor’s passion for Terentia ; others asserted that
Augustus was disgusted at discovering the minister’s
weakness in allowing his wife to extort from him a
state secret. 1 It is easy to suppose that he was
wearied with the freedoms of a friend, who could not
forget? that they had both started on their adventures
together, and exercised the privilege of long and
loyal service to rebuke his master’s indiscretions with
a frankness bordering on rudeness. We may believe
that Maecenas himself became weary of his position,
which never had for him the charms which enchain
more vulgar ambitions ; for he had never sought to
rise above the rank of knighthood, and had declined

1 Senec. Ep. 19.; Dion, liv. 19., lvi. 7.

Digitized by Googl

A.U.746-B.C.8.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

259

the badges of office, the trabea, fasces, and ivory
chair, which still held such sway over the imagina-
tion of his countrymen. It may be questioned in-
deed whether any man is really the happier or the
wiser for divesting himself of the common illusions
of mankind. Such of the ancients as had no hope
of the future, and among them must be numbered
the epicurean Maecenas, found sometimes, in the de-
cline of life, a substitute for such anticipations in a
sedate retrospect, and were consoled on the brink of
the grave by the persuasion that they had fulfilled
their mission. But it was not so with the minister
of the rising empire. His last days of sickness were
disgraced by an abject clinging to life, long after he
had lost all reasonable enjoyment of it. 1 The dis-
grace of (xallu8, the early death of Virgil, the failing
health and approaching end of Horace (it is a ques-
tion whether the minister or his friend survived for
a few days only), must have combined with other
losses in saddening the latter years of one who was
really attached to his friends, and joined with the
tastes of a Sybarite some of the happier instincts of
humanity. The voluptuousness of his habits was of
the most refined and exquisite character, and his
manners were, for the time, a model of urbanity,
without wanting in genuine kindliness. But the de-
licacy and fastidiousness of his tastes were heightened
by the irritation of a fever which constantly preyed
upon him, so that for three years he obtained no
natural rest either by day or by night. 2 His only

1 Seneca, Ep. 101., has preserved some well-known lines ascribed
to Maecenas, in illustration of his unworthy shrinking from death :

“Debilem facito manu, Debilem pede, coxa;

Tuber adstrue gibberum, Lubridos quate dentes:

Vita dum superest, bene est: Hanc mihi, vel acuta
Si sedeam cruce, sustine.”

2 Pliny, Hist Nat. vii. 51. : “ Quibusdam perpetua febris est, at
C. Majcenati : eidem triennio supremo nullo horse moraento contigit
somnus.”

s 2

Digitized by Google

260

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVI.

slumbers, it was said, were procured, under the di-
rection of the physician Musa, by the distant sound
of falling water, a rumour which may have been
suggested by the view of his suburban residence,
which rose like an exhalation above the cascades of
Tibur. 1

The demeanour of Maecenas was remarkable for its
Hi, constitu- apparent ease, which disarmed suspicion,
b'rcon.unt and opened to him the secrets of his ad-

m“nd 0n versaries as well as of his friends. * It was

difficult to believe that a man with the air of an
elegant debauchee was actually awake to every breath
of popular sentiment, dived into the hearts of the
citizens, and traced the aims and motives of every
political cabal. There are no limits perhaps to the
extent to which a cool head and artful temper may
carry this kind of deception ; but such cat-like vigil-
ance can never be united with any real self-abandon-
ment, and little reliance can be placed on the de-
scription we have received of the minister’s geniality
in private. We shall find reason to believe, when we
come to review the characters of the literary com-
panionhood which surrounded the board of Maecenas,
that the patron w r as, even in his most festive hours,
still playing a part, and governing the world from
the head of his table, by the wit and wisdom of his
well-trained associates. If such was the case, we per-
ceive how his earnest activity admitted of no actual
relaxation ; nor can we wonder at the wearing out of
the vital machine under the constant tension of thirty
years of effort. The date of Maecenas’s birth is not
accurately known. It is supposed *that he was a few

’Seneca, Ep. 101. 114. de Pron. iii. 9. That Maecenas had a
villa at Tibur is a constant tradition, and its supposed remains are
still pointed out. See Eustace, Class. Tour , ii. 7.; Dunlop, Hist.
Rom. Liter, iii. 43. There is said, however, to be no direct authority
for the supposition, which may have been derived from a misunder-
standing of the lines of Horace, Od. iii. 29. 6.

Digitized by Google

A.U.746-B.C.8.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

261

years older than his patron, and may have been about
sixty at the time of his death. 1

There seems, on the whole, no reason to seek far
for the motives of the minister’s retirement, can*, ortho
least of all to ascribe it, with Tacitus, to wShTwaa
the blind agency of Fate. 2 The failure of £5terity by
health of one whose whole time and thoughts were
thus absorbed in the duties of his office, is amply
sufficient to account for it, without supposing any
jealousy or distaste on the part of his patron. But
the Romans of a later age could not excuse the ap-
pearance of a slight to one, on whom they looked
with fondness as a model for ministers. The views
of policy they ascribed to him were eminently gene-
rous and liberal ; he was supposed to have encouraged
the expression of public opinion, to have opened a
career to all ranks and classes, to have sought out
merit wherever it was to be found, to have made the
empire, to the best of his power, an administration
of the best men ! To him, also, they attributed the
humane counsels for which the reign of the triumvir
was so favourably remembered. He it was, they
believed, that guided the author of the proscriptions
into the path of clemency ; and when he seemed
about to stray from it, recalled him boldly and
effectively. 3 Such were the principles, they said,
which disarmed disaffection, and rendered the people
contented and their chief secure. This was the work

1 Fischer places his birth, in common with other writers, between
680 and 690 of the city. Roem. Zeittafeln.

2 Tac. Ann. iii. 30.: “Idque et Msecenati acciderat; fato potentise
raro sempitemse, an satias capit aut illos, cum omnia tribuerunt, ant
hos, cum jam nihil reliquum est quod cupiant.”

* The long political pamphlet which Dion Cassias has given us, as
a speech of Maecenas upon the ordering of the empire, is chiefly
valuable on two accounts: first, as representing to a certain extent
the actual form of government in his own time; and, secondly, as
recording, to some extent also, the opinion his contemporaries
entertained of the views and character of the speaker. Dion, Hi.
14 — 10.

Digitized by Google

262

HISTORY OF THE HOMANS

CH. TXXVI.

of Maecenas, and this he effected without spies or
delators, without a law of libel oi a law of majesty.
True, he was only a knight, and he had succeeded to
the post of consuls and senators ; but the generations
which honoured him with these fond reminiscences,
had been made to tremble under the sway of mis-
tresses and freedmen.

Digitized by Google

A.U.747-B.C.7.

UNDER *THE EMPIRE.

263

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The history of Rome assumes the character of a domestic drama

Character and conduct of Julia, and of Caius and Lucius Caesar.
— Augustus holds the balance between his grandsons and Tibe-
rius. — Disgust and retirement of Tiberius to Rhodes (a.u. 748,
b.c. 6). — Disgrace and banishment of Julia. — Deaths of Caius
and Lucius. — Recall of Tiberius (a.u. 757, a.u. 4): he receives
the tribunitian power a second time, and is adopted by Augustus.
— Conspiracy of Cinna and clemency of Augustus. — Review of
the personal habits of Augustus in his later years, (a.u. 747, b.c. 7.
A.U. 757, A.D. 4.)

At this period we seem to enter upon a new phase
of Roman history: for the remainder of The hiJtory
the reign of Augustus, which extended yet °”^“ e the
twenty years further, brought forth no tZmeZf
great men, and not more perhaps than one drama '
great event, which will be related in its place. Many
personages of note, and occurrences of some interest
will flit before us ; but these occurrences will be con-
fined, for the most part, to the affairs of the Caesarean
family and palace, and might indeed be represented
in a drama, the scene of which should be a chamber
in the imperial residence, with but little aid from
the machinery conventionally allowed for narrating
what has passed behind it. The personages of this
domestic piece should be a self-important and irri-
table father, an intriguing stepmother, two rival
heirs — the one gloomy and suspicious, the other
guileless and indiscreet — a daughter whose follies
should serve to point the declamations of her sire
with many grave and decorous maxims ; while the
under-plot of a detected conspiracy might display

Digitized by Google

264

BISTORT OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

the real magnanimity of his character, and solve the
perplexities of his position by an act of judicious
clemency. One grave and national disaster will
break with a ruder shock the course of these private
disquietudes, and recall us once more to the public
theatre, on which the great interests of mankind are
represented.

Amidst these anxieties the time was coming when
The g«r<ien> Augustus would deeply lament the loss of his
on the " discreetest counsellors, from both of whom
inn. he had perhaps been partly estranged by

the machinations of Li via and Tiberius . 1 On the
death of the last survivor of the two, and the one to
whom he was personally most attached, he expressed
much genuine sorrow, though the inferior rank of
Msecenas did not allow him to make any public and
notable manifestation of his grief. In the time of
their mutual familiarity, he had indulged in a sort
of womanish playfulness towards his elder com-
panion, and had made his peculiarities the butt of
good-humoured satire . 2 Maecenas, on his part, gave
the last proof of affection in making the emperor his
heir ; a compliment indeed which was becoming too
customary to be noted as a genuine token of regard.
The fortunate minister had accumulated great wealth,
and among other monuments of his taste and mag-
nificence had erected a noble mansion on the heights
of the Esquiline hill, the most commanding situa-
tion in Rome. The domain of this residence had
been bounded originally by the Agger of Servius,

1 Dion, lv. 7.; Senec. de Benef. vi. 32.: “Ssepe exclamavit, horum

nihil mihi accidisset si aut Agrippa aut Mrecenas vixisset

tota vita Agrippa: et Moecenatis vacavit locus.”

2 Macrobius ( Saturn . ii. 4.) has preserved an arousing specimen
of the imperial banter, aimed apparently at the minister’s affectation
of foreign finery: “Vale mel gentium, melculc; ebur ex Etruria,
laser Arretinum, adamas Supernas, Tiberinum roargaritum, Cilnio-
rum smaragde, iaspi figulorum, berylle Porsense, carbuncule
Italia:.”

Digitized by Google

A.U.747-B.C.7. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 26if

which extended above , a thousand yards along the
north-eastern limits of the city, and was deemed to
afford it sufficient protection, without the addition
of a rampart of masonry. With the increasing se-
curity of the capital against foreign attack, this
mound had ceased to be regarded as a fortification,
and now formed a public promenade, or at least a
causeway for communication from one part of the
city to another. But the prospect it embraced, the
most varied and extensive in Rome, was defaced by
the charnel field of the Campus Esquilinus, which
lay at its feet outside the city. Here, between the
roads which issued from the Esquiline and Viminal
gates, was the plot assigned for casting out the car-
casses of slaves, whose foul and half-burnt remains
were scarcely hidden from the vultures. The Ac-
cursed field was enclosed, it would appear, by neither
wall nor fence, to exclude the wandering steps of
man or beast ; and from the public walk on the sum-
mit of the ridge it must have been viewed in all its
horrors. Here prowled in troops the houseless dogs
of the city and the suburbs ; here skulked the soli-
tary wolf from the Alban hills ; and here, perhaps
to the doleful murmurs of the Marsic chant, the
sorceress compounded her philtres of the ashes of
dead men’s bones . 1 It was high time to sweep away
this abomination of a barbarous antiquity, now be-
come a source of pestilence to the habitations which
daily encroached more closely upon it, as well as
offensive to natural feeling. Maecenas deserved the
gratitude of the citizens, when he obtained a grant
of this piece of ground, cleansed it from its pollu-
tions, and transformed it into a park or garden,
which was either thrown open for the recreation of
the people, or allowed at least to present an agree-
able object to the frequenters of the terrace above

1 See Horace’s Odes to Canidia, Epod. 5. 1 7.

Digitized by Google

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvn.

*266

it . 1 The Esquiline mansion of Maecenas, the roof of
which towered above every other habitation in Rome,
commanded on one side a prospect of the ever-falling
waters of Tibur and the fertile slopes of iEsula, while
on the other it looked down upon the smoke, the
splendour, and the turmoil of the great metropolis . 2
This domain, on becoming the patrimony of the
Caesars, was first inhabited by Tiberius, and was con-
nected at a later period with the far extended pre-
cincts of the imperial residence ; till a new dynasty
sought to ingratiate itself with the mass of the citi-
zens, by converting it, at least in part, into a plea-
sure ground for the public . 3

From this time, however, the affections of Augus-
A»ctionof tus were wholly centred on the members
hi^uughtc/ of his own family. They were subject to
Jim.. no capricious variations, nor were they in-
dulged in any case to an extent which can fairly be
branded as weak or culpable. He might surely be
excused for blindness to the failings of an only

1 Horace, Sat. i. 8. 14. :

“Nunc licet Esquiliis habitare salubribus, atque
Aggere in aprico spatiari, qua modo tristes
Albis informem spectabant ossibus agrum."

Upon which the scholiast remarks: “In Esquiliis Maecenas domum in-
struxit, addiditque amcenos hortos pcrditis prius et subrutis sepulchris.”
3 Horace, Od. iii. 29. :

“ Ne semper udum Tibur et A5sul®

Dedive contemplcris arvum . . .

Omitte mirari beat®

Fumum et opes strepitumque Romse.”

3 It is a common opinion that the public baths of Titus were
within the Horti Maecenatis, and were perhaps an enlargement of
the swimming bath of warm water which Maecenas was the first to
construct at Rome. Dion, lv. 7. The Therm® Titi lay on the brow
of the Esquiline, overlooking the Forum; and it is not impossible
that the gardens of Maecenas may have reached to this spot But
the commanding elevation on which the palace stood must have been
some way further back, not far perhaps from the site of the church
of St. Maria Maggiore, which is the highest spot in Rome, 1 77 feet
above the sea-level. The Campus Esquilinus is now the gardens of
the Villa Negroni.

Digitized by Google

A.U.747-B.C.7.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

267

daughter, till they were forced on his observation by
their notoriety, and the risk of fatal consequences ;
for the fair Julia, though he had sported with her
feelings for the furtherance of his settled policy, when
he required her to marry Agrippa and Tiberius suc-
cessively, he still felt a father’s admiration. When
he declared that if pure and high-born damsels could
not be found to immure themselves in the cloisters of
Vesta, he would devote his own daughter to tend the
sacred fire*, he was prepared to sacrifice all the pride
of the sire to the still greater pride of the sovereign.
He had carefully trained her for the throne or the
temple in the austere habits which he pretended him-
self to cultivate ; but from the time she had become
her own mistress (and the frequent absence and con-
stant occupation of Agrippa had given her in open-
ing womanhood the control of her own leisure and
amusements), Julia had relapsed into a scandalous
levity which had caused him deep mortification.
Nevertheless, the harmony of her union, and the
likeness her children seemed to bear to the hus-
band who acknowledged them, satisfied him that her
fpllies had never degenerated into crime ; and when-
ever he checked by word or sign the wantonness of
her behaviour, she seldom failed to disarm his anger
by the archness of her excuses. Thus, on her appear-
ing one day before him brilliantly attired, Augustus
made no remark, though his countenance indicated
his vexation. The next day she came into his pre-
sence in the decorous habiliments of a sober matron,
upon which he could not refrain from exclaiming
with delight, that now she was arrayed as beseemed
Caesar’s daughter. To-day, she replied, I am dressed
to 'please my father ; yesterday I thought to please
my husband. Again, the eyes of the whole theatre
were turned on one occasion upon Livia and herself,
on their appearing in public, the one attended by a
number of grave seniors, the other surrounded by a

Digitized by Google

268

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

troop of gay and dissolute youths. Augustus remarked
to her the painful contrast between the demeanour
of the empress and the princess. But these young
men, she replied, will grrnv old along with me. 1 2

Excuses such as these, and still more the grace
Her accom- with which they were delivered, softened

Eurinfon!; the father’s heart, and while at one time

ous levltie*. he playfully complained that he had two
troublesome daughters, Julia and the Republic, at
others he would gravely declare that she was a second
Claudia, the most illustrious model of Roman chas-
tity.* Yet he must have sighed at the difference of
her demeanour from the idea he bad formed to him-
self of a Caesarean princess. The conduct, he had
said, of every member of his illustrious family should
be such as might be daily blazoned in the Acts and
Journals of the state . 3 To such an extent did he
carry this prudery with respect to his daughter, that
even after her marriage, as it would seem, he rebuked
her for receiving a visit of compliment at Baiae from
a young nobleman named Vinieius . 4 To such re-
strictions the temper of Julia was peculiarly averse.
The beauty of her countenance is still attested by
coins and gems, and the traits of wit already men-
tioned evince, among others, that she was not less
distinguished for cleverness. The care with which
she had been educated had extended beyond the mere

1 Macrob. Saturn, ii. 5.: “Et hi mecnm senes fient.”

2 Liv. xxix. 14. ; Suet. Tib. 2.

* Suet. Oct. 64. A hundred years before it had been recorded of
M. Livius Drusus that he had wished for a house of glass, that every
citizen might witness every action of his life. The different way in
which Augustus expressed the same idea marks the change from the
time when statesmen lived in public, to that when their proceedings
were only discussed in private coteries.

4 Suet. 1. c. Velleius mentions Vinicii of three generations, and
we cannot determine the precise period of this occurrence. But as
Julia was first married to Marcellus at a very early age, it is not
likely to have taken place while she was yet single; and if she had
been a widow at the time, it would probably have been mentioned
as giving some colour to the emperor’s jealousy.

Digitized by Google

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

269

A.u.747— B.c.7.

household employments to which her father pretended
to destine her. She was a woman of letters and
even erudition, and we may believe that, like the
Sempronia, to whom Sallust pays an equivocal com-
pliment, she danced, played, and sang with a grace
and spirit which had but lately been confined to the
least honourable of Roman women. 1 We cannot be
surprised that she was proud of her position, as well
as of her personal attractions, and courted the danger-
ous admiration she excited. Nor can we fail to sym-
pathize with the magnanimity of her answer to one
who objected that her manners were far removed
from the affected simplicity of her father’s : He for-
gets that he is Ccesar; I cannot hat remember that 1
am Gcesa/r’s daughter . 2 But the memory of Augus-
tus went farther back than Julia’s. He had heard,
in his younger days, how talents and fascinations, such
as hers, had aided in the development of political in-
trigues; that such had been the painted baits with
which a Clodius or a Catiline had caught the gayest
of the young patricians, and precipitated giddy spend-
thrifts into grave conspiracies. Such times might
once more arrive ; and the rumoured amours of
Julia undoubtedly caused him double disquietude,
both as a father and a ruler. On Agrippa’s decease
the emperor was for a time undetermined how to dis-
pose of the widow, now in the full meridian of her
passionate enjoyment of life. His regard for her
good name, and for the dignity of his house, forbade
him to leave the thoughtless matron without the
protection of a legitimate guardian ; but to unite her
with some noble consular would have sown discord in
his own family, and excited importunate pretensions
in the breast of a stranger. Such untoward results
might be averted by giving her to a husband of infe-
rior rank ; and he long scanned the list of the Roman
knights to find her a respectable and trusty bride-

1 Sallust. Catil 25. * Macrob. Saturn, ii. 5.

Digitized by Google

270

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

groom. The intrigues of Livia diverted him, as we
have seen, from this design; but the choice to which
he was finally directed failed to accomplish any of the
objects he had proposed. Tiberius, compelled to sepa-
rate from a wife to whom he was attached, and who
had borne him an onl\ son, and distrusting the light-
ness of the woman he had consented to take in her
stead, was met on her part by dislike and disdain.
The daughter of the emperor despised the son of
the empress. 1 She was proud of the numerous and
flourishing family she had borne in her earlier wed-
lock; she considered her own position secured by their
presumptive expectations, and regarded him as an
unworthy intruder within the sphere of their splendid
prospects. To Tiberius the fruitful Julia bore only
a single child, who died in infancy : from thenceforth
the ill-assorted couple never consented to cohabit
again. 2 During the years which followed the hus
band was but little in Eome ; nor do we hear of the
wife accompanying him into the provinces. The im-
perial palace continued to be her residence ; but she
evaded the superintendence of an indulgent parent,
and soon plunged, without restraint, into levities and
vices which became the theme of every idle tongue.

Many indeed were at that time the idle tongues
The ch&ractcr and the idle hands of the teeming capital.
frt2to lm “ The overwhelming energy, which, but a
female virtue. f ew y ears before, had animated the forum,

the comitia, and the tribunals, was suddenly arrested

1 Niebuhr is reported to have remarked, in his Lectures on Roman
History (Hist. Rom. v. 175.), that Tiberius despised the daughter of
Augustus. But this is evidently an oversight. Tacitus had said
just the reverse: “Julia fuerat in matrimonio Tiberii. , . spreveratque
ut imparem.” A Julia, though by adoption only, was at least an
equal match for a Claudius; besides, the first and beloved wife
of Tiberius had been an obscure Vipsania. Comp. Tac. Ann. ii.
43.: “Eques Romanus Pomponius Atticus” (the grandfather of
Vipsania) “ dcdecere Claudiorum imagines videbatnr.’’

■ Suet. Tib. 7.

Digitized by Google

a.u.747.-b.c.7.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

271

in its full career. But it required more than half a
century of servitude completely to paralyse its im-
pulses. Forbidden to rush in full volume along the
broad channel of public life, it oozed away in a thou-
sand petty interests and trifling occupations. With
the age of Augustus commenced an era of personal
affectation . 1 A graceful address, a splendid equipage,
a distinguished air stamped the candidate for popular
admiration. A success in the counterfeit contests of
the declaimers’ schools, or before the partial tribunal
of a social audience, contented the most ardent aspi-
rants for fame or notoriety. The tone of this class
was indeed far more humane and polished than it
had been fifty years earlier : the young nobility of
Rome were no longer led by ruffians and bravos ;
skill in the use of deadly weapons was no longer
their point of honour ; while the exercises of the
Campus Martius served only to exhibit a fine figure
or complexion, and the last shadows of faction were
cast upon the contests of the Circus. Both men and
women crowded the theatres to be seen rather than
to see. Love-making succeeded to arms ; verse-
making to eloquence ; vanity to ambition ; pride of
notoriety to thirst for glory. The exquisites of the
day were men who dangled in the train of ladies, the
oracles of coteries, the observed of aristocratic re-
unions ; the flattery of the drawing-room was reduced
to a system, and courtship between the sexes taught
as an art . 2 Success in affairs of gallantry became a
title to distinction, and a score of brave young nobles
laid siege to the heart of a princess, who would for-

1 Ovid, Ars Amand. iii. 107.:

“ Corpora si vetercs non sic colnere puellte,

Nec veteres cultos sic habuere viros.”

2 The Ars Amandi of the poet Ovid, the liveliest mirror of the
fashions of the time, came forth about the year 752, as will appear
from a historical allusion which will be referred to in its place. The
Elmores was published earlier.

Digitized by Google

272

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvu.

merly have emulated one another in storming a royal
fortress. Such were the snares which surrounded
the steps of the unfortunate Julia. Eeckless and
daring by nature, exulting in the grandeur of her
station, overflowing with animal spirits, she seemed
to lead the current of fashion which was hurrying
her to irretrievable ruin.

Into this fatal vortex the grandsons of the emperor
Bducfction were now about also to enter. Augustus,
o7c." r hi order to adopt them as his own children,
Ludu.CK.u-. bad bought them, according to ancient
form, of their father, with a piece of money weighed
in a balance. He had taken a deep interest in them
from their earliest infancy, and had carried them with
him on his progresses, and placed them at the foot
of his couch at meals . 1 Their education had been
conducted under his own direction. He once found
Caius, it is said, reading a work of Cicero’s, and,
when the boy would have concealed it, encouraged
him to continue the perusal, saying with a pensive
smile, He was a great man and loved his country . 2
The anecdote is cited in proof of the emperor’s mag-
nanimity ; but it may also show that even his darling
pupils could make only a surreptitious acquaintance
with the noblest models of their language. An educa-
tion thus restricted was at best but a counterfeit ; we
cannot expect that it would have trained the presump-
tive rulers of the empire to virtues suitable to their
station. Brief as their career was destined to be,
there is reason to believe that they profited but little
by the lessons of moderation their grandfather incul-
cated upon them. Lucius, the younger, intoxicated
by the acclamations which had greeted him on his

1 Snet. Oct. 64., who adds a curious trait of affection : “ Nihil toque
elaboravit qnam ut imitarentur chirographum suum.”

3 Plut. Cic. 49. A similar trait of moderation is recorded in his
saying with regard to Cato: “Quisquis prtesentem statum civitatis
commutari non volet, et civis ct vir bonus est.” Mucrob. Sat. ii. 4.

Digitized by Google

A.U. s 47-B.C.7

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

273

casual appearance in the theatre, had urged Augustus
to make his elder brother consul before he had yet
been numbered among the men . 1 Such had been
the fortune of the young Octavius, in the midst
of a revolutionary crisis, and the spoiled children of
the empire would have adopted this exceptional prece-
dent as an ordinary principle of government. May
the gods grant , Augustus had replied, that no such
emergency shall again occur as that which made me
consul before the age of twenty ! A magistracy, he
added, should be given to none but such as have
learned to control both their own passions and those
of the people ; and to this rule , at least, he might
have said, I myself was no exception.

Nevertheless, favours and distinctions were rapidly
showered upon the scions of the imperial Thetritmni-
house; and it was, doubtless, already inti-
mated to them that the period of eligibility Titemu.
to the highest honours should be speedily »• c. «.
abridged. Having conferred upon Caius the priest-
hood, and admitted him to the benches of the senate
at spectacles and banquets, Augustus compensated
Tiberius with the more substantial prerogatives of
the tribunitian power, which was now bestowed upon
him for a term of five years . 2 This elevation, which
might be regarded technically as almost equivalent
to association in the empire, would have made him,
if present in the city, too decidedly superior to the
younger princes. To modify its effect he was re-
moved from the centre of affairs, under the pretext
of a mission to Armenia, which, on the death of
Tigranes, had been invaded by the Parthians. This
nice attempt at equipoise seems, as might have been
expected, to have entirely failed. The grandsons
ventured to show themselves aggrieved by the pre-
dominance thus given to their kinsman, pre-eminent •

1 Dion, lv. 9. 1 Dion, lv. 9.; Suet. Tib, 10.

VOL. IV. T

Digitized by Google

274

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvn.

though he was for his services and experience ; and
the son-in-law was not less hurt at the prospect of a
distant expedition, which he justly regarded as a
specious banishment. It is hardly to be supposed
that Tiberius cowered under the rising favour of these
aspiring youths, or that he voluntarily resigned the
place nearest the throne to avoid collision with them ;
though the one is the reason assigned by the histo-
rians, the other that pretended by himself, for his
relinquishing the hardships and glories of his foreign
mission, and taking up his residence in the obscure
retreat of Rhodes. Still less is it credible that this
abandonment of active service, with all its hopes and
visions of the future, was caused by disgust at the
infidelities of Julia, to which a prevalent rumour as-
Hi. du.itw- cribed it . 1 The cloud was upon him ; the
retiremen t dark humour of his race was at the moment

10 in the ascendant, and prompted him to
shake off with a peevish effort the restraints of his
position, and the dire necessity of eternal dissimu-
lation, which he loathed while he crouched beneath
it. At the mature age of forty years, he solicited a
release from active service, and pretended a wish to
cultivate philosophy in retirement. Augustus was
surprised and vexed. He could not but suspect that
his son-in-law was irritated against the children of
Agrippa, and he demanded, perhaps, some proof of
the affection which ought to subsist between -such
near relatives. Tiberius opened his will, and showed,
by the provisions he had made for their advantage,
that he entertained no personal jealousy . 2 When he
pressed for leave to depart, the emperor pretended

1 Tac. Ann. i. 51.: “Nee alia tam intima Tiberio causa cur Rho-
dum abscederet.”

3 Dion, lv. 9. Comp. Suet. Tib. 10. Velleius, the flatterer of Ti-
berius, says, “ Veritus ne fulgor suus orientium juvenum obstarct
initiis, dissimulata causa consilii sui, commeatum ab socero atque
codern vitrico acquiescendi a coutinuatione laborum petiit.”

Digitized by Googl

A.U.748-B.C.6.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

275

the utmost distress, and joined his own prayers with
Livia’s that he would remain at Rome. Tiberius, not
to be outdone in these transparent professions, threat-
ened to starve himself unless his wishes were indulged.
Having at last obtained his point, he went down to
Ostia, leaving his wife and son behind him, and
parted from his attendants in sullen silence. 1 As he
sailed along the Campanian coast, he was overtaken
by a report of the emperor’s sickness, which induced
him to halt. But when he found that this caused
observation, he determined to proceed without fur-
ther delay, and braved a tempest in prosecuting his
voyage. This secession from affairs took place in the
year 748. At Rhodes, the retired statesman seemed
to abandon all concern for politics. He contented
himself with a small house in the city, and a villa,
not much more spacious, in the suburbs. He fre-
quented, without attendants, the schools and lecture
halls, the resort of philosophers and students, and
amused himself with entering into their discussions
as an ordinary visitor. The Rhodians, indeed, failed
to comprehend such condescension, and incommoded
the august stranger with importunate compliments.
A professor, however, who ventured to respect his
incognito so far as to reprehend his arguments, was
soon convinced of bis mistake by the blows of the
lictors, whom Tiberius summoned to the spot. 2

The sons of Agrippa reaped all the advantages of
this ill-humour. Livia might witness with Cllin , f > _ r
dismay the honours to which her son’s rivals * he
were now advanced, though she dared not "“m? -
manifest her vexation. After an interval B,0-5 ‘
of seventeen years, Augustus allowed himself to be
invested once again with the consular fasces, and

1 This son must have been Drusus, his child by Vipeania. Julia’s
infant, from the account of Suetonius, must have been already dead.

a Suet. Tib. 11. At this place we lose for a few years the guidance
of Dion, and are left to the anecdotes of Suetonius.

t 2

Digitized by Google

276

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvn.

opened the year 749 with due solemnities. He was
about to introduce Caius to the people, on the oc-
casion of his commencing his sixteenth year and
reaching the age to assume the toga. The senators
decreed that the young man should be eligible for
the consulship within five years from that time ; and
anxious though he was to advance his favourite,
Augustus himself, perhaps, interposed to withhold
them from designating him for it at once. 1 When
the emperor appeared once more in 752, surrounded,
now for the thirteenth time, with the ensigns of the
chief office of the free state, the enthusiasm of all
ranks burst forth with extraordinary acclamations.
They had already endowed him with every power,
every distinction, every dignity they had officially to
give; but the man who, after so long a tenure of
power, still preserved to them the forms of liberty
deserved the highest title of reverent affection which
^fwMthe human nature can bestow. The appellation
^nation of Father)' of his Country was the dearest
the feelings of every genuine Roman ; it
»•’ c.' 2 . had been heard indeed sometimes to resound
from the lips of the multitude among the praises of
Augustus ; but now for the first time it was solemnly
pronounced by the voice perhaps of the tribunes,
and formally recorded. It was engraved over the
gateway of the imperial residence, in the interior of
the senate-house, at the foot of the emperor’s statue,
and in the precincts of his forum. 2 A public festival
was decreed upon the occasion. Soon afterwards
Augustus led his younger grandson into the forum,

1 Tac. Ann. i. 3.: “Nondum posita puerili pretexts principes Ju-
ventntis appcllari, destinari Consules, specie recusandi fiagrantissime
concupiverat.”

2 Mon. Ancyr. coL 7. gr. vers. Comp. Kalend. Prenest, in Fast
Verrian. p. 106. (Orelli, Inscr. ii. 384.): “Non. Feb. N. concordi®
in arce feriac ex S. C. quod eo die Imp. Caesar Pont. Max. trib. po-
test. xxi. Cons. xiii. a S. P. q. R. pater patri® appellatus.” Fischer,
Ji. Z. 422. Ovid, Fast. ii. 1 29. See above, chapter xxxiil

Digitized by Google

A.U.752-B.C.2.

UNDER THE. EMPIRE.

277

and presented him in the gown of manhood to the
assembled citizens. The two Caesars received the
title of Princes of the Roman Youth, and rode at
the head of a cavalcade of noble companions, each
with a silver spear and shield . 1 The emperor gave
an extraordinary largess of money to all the citizens
who were registered at the time as recipients of the
public corn ; a number which he had now succeeded
in reducing to about two hundred thousand . 2 In
the course of the year followed the dedication of the
temple, just then completed, of Mars the Avenger,
as a threat and defiance to the Parthians ; and the
martial ardour of the populace was stimulated by
gladiatorial shows of more than usual magnificence,
with the spectacle of a naval combat in the vast
basin which Augustus had excavated on the other
side of the Tiber . 3

The pride, however, with which Augustus regarded
his illustrious grandsons at their entrance race and
into manhood, was dashed by the convic- o? juii*. “
tion he could no longer suppress of the utter de-
pravity of his daughter. The orgies of the wretched
Julia spurned concealment or disguise. Among
the partners of her licentiousness were some of the
noblest youths of Rome, men whose acts and
manners could not fail to be the talk of the whole
city. The excesses in which she indulged were not
less open than profligate. She traversed the streets
and public places of the city by night, attended by
the young bacchanals her companions, and polluted
the dignified solitude of the rostra itself with her
unseasonable revels . 4 In vain had the founder of

1 Mon. Ancyr. col. 3. * Mon. Ancyr. 1. c.

* Mon. Ancyr./. c. ; Suet Oct. 43. Dion (lv. 10.) says that water

was introduced into the Circus Flanuinius, and thirty-six crocodiles
slain there. t

4 Dion, lv. 10. : luxtXyaivovoav ovrus Siart nai iv tj7 ayopif teed
ainrov yt to v pfiuctTos teal vvierap koI avp-irivuv. Seneca (de

Digitized by Google

278

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

the empire devoted himself to the reformation of
public manners ; in vain had he pretended to emu-
late in his own person the severe virtues of the
ancient heroes; the laws by which he affected to
recall the pristine fame and fortune of the state were
trodden under foot by his own daughter, his only
child, the mother of his anticipated successors. Ter-
rible must have been the shock to one who hoped
to found an hereditary dynasty, when he was made
to doubt the legitimacy of its first inheritors. In
the passionate vexation which now overwhelmed
every other feeling, he suffered himself to make a
public avowal to the senate, by the mouth of his
quaestor, of every crime imputed to the culprit. We
cannot tell bow far he had chosen to inquire into
the truth of these charges, which some very near to
him would not scruple to exaggerate ; but it would
seem that he adopted even the worst without qualifi-
cation . 1 Nor cjid his spleen evaporate in words. He
seized not Julia only, but the reputed partners of her
vices also, of whom there were many both of eques-
trian and senatorial rank, and banished them from
Italy. Among them were numbered an Appius
Claudius, a Sempronius Gracchus, a Quinctius, and
a Scipio ; men of rank so exalted that they might
have been tempted to intrigue with her against the
prince and the government. The emperor boasted
that he was satisfied with punishing the gallants of
the princess with no greater severity than if she had

Benef. vi. 32.) goes still further: “ Admissos gregatim adulteros,
pererratam nocturnis comissationibus civitatem, forum ipsum et rostra
ex quibus pater legem de adulteriis tulerat, in stupra placuisse.”

1 Seneca, in the passage above referred to, seems to have the offi-
cial document in his eye. Julia was branded as the vilest mercenary :
“ ex adultera in qusestuariam versa,” &c. Nevertheless she has
found defenders. Kuhkopf (in loc. Senec.) refers to Wieland, Werk.
xxiv. 338. Blackened she may have been; but in those evil times
at what point of degradation was the man or woman who had once
abandoned virtue likely to stop?

Digitized by Google

A.0.752-U.C.2.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

279

been merely a private matron. But the most dis-
tinguished of her paramours was Julius Antonius,
the second of the sons borne by Fulvia to the trium-
vir, whom Augustus had spared for the sake of his
sister, and eventually had elevated to the consulship.
The ungrateful nobleman had corrupted the daugh-
ter of his benefactor, and induced her to conspire
against his life ; and the law of rnajestas or treason
was invoked in this special case to aggravate the
penalties of the law of adultery. Antonius suffered
death. Julia herself, now in her thirty-eighth year,
was exiled to the barren island of Pandateria, where
she was treated with great harshness, and left in want
of ordinary comforts . 1 The political colour of her
offence was marked by the rigorous precautions
taken with regard to the few visitors who were
suffered to approach her. Her mother, Scribonia,
was allowed, and perhaps required, to bear her com-
pany. Tiberius, on hearing of an event at which
he doubtless felt little concern, thought it decent to
intercede for her in a letter ; but his instances were
sternly rejected. He had, indeed, double cause of
dissatisfaction, for, not content with infidelity to his
bed, she had sought to injure him with her father
by attacking his character with libels, in which she
was supposed to have been assisted by Sempronius . 2

The violence with which Augustus acted in this
matter is not inconsistent with his charac-
ter ; for not only was he subject to accesses Augu^m.
of sudden passion, but, when his feelings of anger
and indignation had been long pent up and dis-

1 Macrob. Saturn, ii. 5. Veil. ii. 100.: “ Se et Gallo Caninio
Consulibus, dedicato Martis Templo.” Between Jul. 1. and Oct. 1.
Fischer.

2 Tac. Ann. ii. 53. For the circumstances of this public scandal
see Seneca and Dion, U. cc.\ Suet. Oct. 64. 101.; Tib. 7. 11.; Plin.
Hist. Nat. vii. 46.; Veil. ii. 100. This last writer fixes the date
of Julia’s banishment to the summer of 752. Fischer, Boon. Zeit.
p. 423.

Digitized by Google

280

HISTOKT OF THE BOMAKS

CH. XXXVII.

guised, they were wont sometimes to burst out with
accumulated and terrible force . 1 When a confidante
of Julia named Phoebe hanged herself for fear of
punishment, he was heard to exclaim in bitterness
of spirit. Would that I were Phoebe's father! He
was not slow, however, in recollecting himself, and
perceiving that he had overstepped the limits of
discretion. More than ever did he now lament the
death of Agrippa and Maecenas, whose counsels might
have restrained him in the full career of his fury.
He may have discovered, when too late, that, as re-
garded at least the treasonable practices ascribed to
the lovers of Julia, he had been imposed upon by
their enemies, and perhaps by Livia herself; for
the name of Julius Antonius seems not to have been
erased from the Fasti, the last disgrace which was
ordinarily inflicted upon noble criminals . 2 Never-
theless his indignation against his daughter con-
tinued immovable. It was not till the expiration
of five years that he allowed any mitigation of her
sufferings, nor to the last could he be further pre-
vailed on than to transfer her from her desolate
island to the extreme point of the Italian continent.
When the senators persisted in interceding for her,
he truculently replied by wishing them such wives
and such daughters for their own . 3

Meanwhile the world, according to the expression
c«“l°c*s f ar ^he courtly Velleius, was feeling the
to the East, effect of Tiberius’s retirement. The Par-

A. V. 753. _ .

b.c. 1 . thians, as he proceeds to explain, re-
nouncing the alliance of Rome, laid hands upon

1 Aurelius Victor ( Epit . i.) says that he was merely “paululum
impatiens, levitcr iracundus;” but Suetonius tells a fearful story of
his violence in the case of Q. Gallius. (Oct. 2i) Horace intimates
that he was not to be trifled with even by his courtiers : “ Cui male
si palpere rccalcitrat.”

1 Tac. Ann. iii. 18. See Walckenaer’s Hist, d' Horace, ii. 395.

3 Suet. Oct. 65.

Digitized by Googl

A.C.753-B.C.I.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

281

Armenia. Tigranes, whom the Romans had placed
upon the throne, had died in the year 748 : the
Armenians had taken advantage of this event to
deliver themselves from dependence on their west-
ern protectors, and the sons of the deceased monarch
had ventured to enter on their succession without
seeking their crown from the emperor. Augustus,
resenting this act of freedom, had equipped an expe-
dition against them, from the command of which
Tiberius, as we have seen, had withdrawn himself.
But the Roman legions had proceeded, under an-
other leader, to menace Armenia with invasion : the
sons of Tigranes had been compelled to retire, and a
prince named Artavasdes had been set up in their
room. 1 A counter-revolution speedily followed. Ar-
tavasdes was expelled by his indignant subjects ; the
Parthians were called in to their assistance ; the Ro-
mans suffered a defeat ; and a second Tigranes suc-
ceeded, by the help of foreign arms, to the throne
of his father. 2 This hostile movement on the part
of the Parthians, who had so lately cowered under
the anger of Augustus, bespoke revived confidence
and power. At the same time the Arab chiefs of
the Syrian frontier were provoking the chastisement
of the empire. It was determined to send Caius
Caesar, with a numerous force and extensive powers,
for the settlement of the affairs of the East. 3 In
753 the young prince had reached the age of twenty,
and was designated for the consulship of the ensuing

1 Coins of the year 749 bear the legend “ Armenia recepta,” in re-
ference to this event. Hoeck, i. 2. 48.

2 Tac .Ann. ii.3, 4. : “Jussu Augnsti impositns Artavasdes, et
non sine clade nostra dejectus.”

* Ovid, Art Amand. i. 177. foil, (which seems to fix the date of
publication to the year 752):

“ Ecce! parat Ca:sar domito qnod defuit orbi
Addere: nunc, Oriens ultimo, nostcr eris.

Parthe, dabis pcenas ; Crassi gaudetc sepulti ....
Bellaque non puero tractat agenda puer.”

Digitized by Google

282

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

year. Placed under a veteran adviser, M. Lollius,
the same, however, who had been defeated by the
Germans in Gaul, he might be capable of leading
the Roman legions to victory, at least the glory of
his name and lineage might supply the place of per-
sonal reputation in arms . 1 Augustus, indeed, did
not anticipate any serious resistance to his demands.
He intended his grandson to show himself on the
frontiers, and dictate from thence the terms of capi-
tulation. Possibly he might contemplate some ex-
tension of the limits of the empire on the side of
Arabia, and a renewal of the designs which Gallus
had failed in accomplishing. Geographers and men
of science were to follow the course of the arma-
ment : among these was Dionysius, surnamed the
Circumnavigator, who was a native of the shores of
the Persian Gulf ; and the Mauretanian Juba, who

wrote an account of the expedition, was probably an
attendant upon it . 2

Flushed with the pride of youth and hopes of glory,
interview Caius crossed the JEgean Sea on his way
caius’and to his appointed province. Tiberius, who
rSSS • was already wearied with his retreat, and
B C l - alarmed perhaps at the ease with which
his place had been supplied at the head of the
legions, sought an interview with the young impe-
rator at Samos . 3 Whatever outward marks of respect
the stripling might exhibit towards the veteran who
now paid court to him, it is not likely that the con-
versation which occurred between them gave Tiberius
any real satisfaction . 4 Augustus had been induced

1 Velleius, ii. 102.

2 Plin. Hist. Nat. vi. 27., xii. 14.

2 Suetonius says Samos; Dion, Chios: the former island lay more
directly in the proconsular route from Corinth to Ephesus.

1 Velleius Paterculus, whose flattery of his patron Tiberius is every-
where transparent, wishes it to appear that even in disgrace and
exile he was treated by Caius as his superior: “ Convento prius Ti-
berio Nerone, cui omnem honorem ut superiori habuit,” ii. 101.

Digitized by Google

A.U.753-B.C.I.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

283

to promise his grandson that his elder rival should
neither be recalled to Rome, nor even suffered to re-

turn there, except with his permission ; and if such
permission was now sought it undoubtedly was not
granted. When the exile represented to the emperor
that he had withdrawn to Rhodes solely out of regard
for his young kinsmen, and from anxiety to avoid
causing them injury or annoyance, he was coldly bade
to relinquish all concern for relatives from whom he
had so perversely severed himself . 1

From Samos, Caius proceeded into Syria, and from

thence despatched the imperious demands cam« go* to
he was instructed to make upon the Par- »nd U “nfl?m»

. , . i « • » . •». Herod’s dia-

thian monarch, enioming him to remove his position of
creature Tigranes, and allow the return of *ions.

o s A u 753

Artavasdes to the throne of Armenia; but »• c.' i.

while he left these potent spells to operate in his
absence, he made a progress himself in an opposite
direction. The throne of Judea had been recently
rendered vacant by the death of Herod . 2 The latter
years of this prince’s life, whose successful dexterity,
rather than any grandeur in his designs or brilliancy
in his exploits, had earned him the title of the Great,
had been marked with more bloody and repeated
atrocities than even his earlier career. Ten wives

had borne him a numerous progeny, to poison every
moment of his existence with fear and hatred. His

jealousy had latterly been roused against the children
he had brought back from Rome, and exalted so high

Dion, on the contrary, says, fntivvmtv ovx Stit<£ raim dAAct tea) rciis per*
ainou o&rt. lv. 11. Suetonius speaks even more strongly of the con-
tempt into which Tiberius had fallen.

1 Suet. Tib. 11.: “ Ultro admonitus est dimitteret omnem curam
suorum, quos tam enpide reliquisset.”

2 The death of Herod was marked by an eclipse of the moon just
before the passover in the year u. c. 750, b. c. 4; therefore towards
the end of March (Clinton, Fast. Hell. iii. 256.) or the beginning of
April (Ideler, Chronol. ii. 391. foil.). Joseph. Ant. Jud. xvii. 8. 1.
See Fischer, Boem. Zeit. p. 420.

Digitized by Google

284 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS CH. XXXVII.

in bis favour, and he had caused them both to be put
to death with a vast number of their friends and pre-
sumed adherents. Antipater, another son, the insti-
gator*of these enormities, had soon after shared the
same fate. He had fallen under a charge of treason
to his father ; but Herod seems to have asked per-
mission of Augustus to punish him capitally. The
emperor, after some delay, thought proper to leave
the young man’s fate in his parent’s hands, and, well
aware as he was what that fate would be, he may have
then made the unfeeling jest recorded among his
witty sayings by Macrobius, I had rather be Herod's
swine than his son. 1 Other sons, however, still sur-
vived to ascend the blood-stained eminence. The
will of the deceased monarch appointed, subject to
the approval of the Eoman power, that Archelaus and
Antipas, the children of Malthace, should assume
authority, the one in Judea, the other in the district
of Galilee, while Philip, the offspring of Cleopatra,
should bear rule in the trans-Jordanic region of
Ituraea. Caius may have gone to Jerusalem to con-
firm these dispositions. When there, he offended the
Jews by refusing to enter their temple, and assist at
their national worship, an act of haughty reserve, of
which, however, the emperor signified his approval.
Agrippa, indeed, had offered vows and sacrifices on
that same spot ; but Augustus remembered that he
had himself refrained from visiting the shrines of the
Egyptian divinities. He considered it unseemly in
the chiefs of the Eoman religion to betray any token
of interest in the rites of the foreigner . 2

Caius entered upon his consulship in Syria at the

1 Macrob. Saturn, it 4.: “Porcum quam filium:” but Augustus
undoubtedly used the Greek, 6v fj vtiy.

2 Suet. Oct. 93. Oros. vii. 3. This Christian writer, who assigns
this event to 752, the year in which he places the birth of our Lord,
declares that the great scarcity which afflicted Rome six years after
was a punishment for this insult to the true God.

Digitized by Google

a.d.1-a.u.754.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

285

commencement of the year 754. During his progress
among the states and potentates of the East, Calu> in
his tutor Lollius was chiefly intent on exac-
tions and plunder. The charge of avarice
which had been formerly made against him in Gaul,
and which he had then succeeded in defeating or
evading, was now redoubled, and with a different
result. The Parthians divulged his guilt in receiving
bribes for betraying the secrets of the republic. He
was denounced by Caius to the emperor, and if he
escaped public disgrace and punishment, he owed it
perhaps to the opportuneness of his death, which was
not without suspicion of violence. 1 When Augustus
discovered that his grandson’s opposition to the return
of Tiberius had been prompted by this worthless
adviser, he became himself more amenable to the
entreaties of Livia. With the consent, it is said, of
Caius, he now summoned the exile to Rome, requir-
ing, however, the condition that he should abstain
from taking part in public affairs. At this restriction
Tiberius may have smiled in secret : the fortunes of
the imperial house, flourishing as they seemed at the
opening manhood of Julia’s children, were not yet
beyond the stroke of an adverse fate. 2 Scarcely had
he regained his place by the side of the emperor,
after eight years of absence, than the second of the
young Caesars fell sick and died. Lucius mu, ion of
had been sent on a mission into Spain ; but
he got no further than Massilia, where his m'Swiiu.
brief career was arrested in the summer of A.Vris.

755, in the course of which season the elder brother
proceeded also to enforce his orders with regard to
the affairs of Armenia, as to which he had received
no satisfaction. 3 Caius summoned Phraates to an

1 Suet. Tib. 13. ; Veil. ii. 102. ; Plin. Hist. Nat ix. 35.

2 Velleius, ii. 99., after the event, says, “ Magna nec incerta spe
futurorura.”

* Veil. ii. 102. ; Suet. Oct 65.

Digitized by Google

286

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

interview, which took place on an island in the Eu-
phrates, where the two great empires which divided
the world were represented by the sovereign of the
one and the presumptive heir to the other. 1 The
Roman officers and soldiers, drawn up on the bank,
acknowledged themselves the instruments of a mili-
tary monarchy, and might already, perhaps, anticipate
the time when they should in turn be acknowledged
as its masters. 2 Sufficient explanation or submission
having been offered by the Parthian, who promised
henceforth to desist from interference with the affairs
of Armenia, the two chiefs entertained each other
alternately on the opposite banks of the river. The
death of Artavasdes, however, at this moment, opened
to Tigranes another chance of maintaining himself,
by which he profited, and succeeded by adroit flattery
in securing the favour of the Roman rulers. Augus-
tus condescended to accept his submission ; but in
the mean time, either apprehending a refusal, or
hoping to extort better terms by force, he defied the
*. D.s. young Caesar to a trial of arms. 3 * * * * 8 In 756

*. c. 756 . Caius advanced, but on arriving before the

walls of Artagira, and admitting the governor Addon,
on his offer of capitulation, into his presence, he re-
ceived from him a treacherous wound. From the
effects of this injury his constitution, which was per-
haps, like his brother’s, weakly, was never able to

1 The passage in Velleius is corrupt, and it is not quite clear

whether the Parthian monarchy was represented by its king Phraates

or by his son Phraataces. Comp. Dion, lv. 11.

* Velleius, who was an eye-witness, seems to have felt that this
event constituted an epoch in history. “ Quod spcctaculum stantis

ex diverso, hinc Romani, illinc Parthorum exercitus, cum duo inter

sc eminentissima imperiorum et hominum coirent capita, perquam

clarum et memorabile, sub initia stipendiorum meorum tribnno
militum mihi visere contigit. ’ (ii. 101.)

8 This is the statement of the Exeerpta de Legationibns, inserted
in this place by Ursinus (Dion, edit. Tauchnits), but not admitted
into Store's edition. There is much confusion in the remains of
Dion’s work at this place, lv. 1 1.

Digitized by Google

A.D.3-A.U.7 56*

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

287

rally. Bodily suffering seems to have affected his
temper. During the brief remnant of his life he in-
dulged the petulance of his humour and his natural
bias to idle and frivolous amusements . 1 There were
now no matters of importance to detain him in the
East. He requested permission, however, to remain
in Syria, and to throw off for a time the cares of his
august station. To the latter part of this request
Augustus consented, though with great reluctance,
communicating it, as a matter of imperial concern,
to his obsequious senate : but he earnestly exhorted
the prince to return at least to Italy . 2 Caius pre-
pared to obey, and passed by sea from Syria into
Lycia. But his health was now rapidly sinking, and
at the town of Limyra he finally succumbed, eighteen
months after the death of his brother. The of
citizens were startled as well as distressed c » iu,c ®“ r -
at this recurring fatality. Their suspicions had been
already more than once excited, and now, when the
tardy return of Tiberius to Eome so nearly coincided
with the removal of both his most prominent rivals,
it was not unnatural that they should revive with re-
doubled force . 3 It might be difficult to connect the
death of Lucius in Gaul or of Caius in Asia with Livia
and Tiberius at Eome : but poison operates in secret.

1 Such, I think, is the insinuation of Velleius, whatever it may be
really worth : “ Ex eo ut corpus minus habile, ita animum minus
utilem reipublicse habuit.” ii. 102.

2 The affection of Augustus for his grandson is attested by the
book of letters he addressed to him while absent on this expedition,
some fragments of which have been preserved by Aulus Gellius, xv.
7. 3. “ Ave mi Cai, mens ocellus jucundissimus, quern semper medius
fidius desidero cum a me abes: sed prsecipue diebus talibus qualis
est hodiernus, oculi mei requirunt meum Caium : quem ubicunque hoc
die fuisti, spero lsetum et bene valentem celebrasse quartum et sexa-
gesimum natalem meum (Sept. 24, 754) . . . Deos autem oro, ut
mihi quantumcunque superest temporis, id salvis vobis traducere
liceat in statu reipublicte felicissimo, avSpayaBomnav ifiav koXv SiaSt-
XofiiviDv stationem meam.” Both the princes were at this time
alive.

1 Dion, lv. 11.; Tac. Ann. i. 13.; Plin. Hint. Nat. vii. 46.

Digitized by Google

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvn.

*88

and such secret operations, in the estimation of the
vulgar, may dispense with the ordinary laws both of
time and space. 1

But the race of Agrippa was not yet exhausted,
Augmtua and the rival branch of the imperial house
Sria.! md can scarcely have contemplated wading de-

witu'the liberately through the blood of so many
power for . competitors. Agnppa Postumus, born after
^fi?eye«.. the death of his father, was now in his
a', o! 757. fifteenth year, and might prove worthy of
succeeding to the place of his deceased brothers in the
affections of Augustus, and the hopes of the people.
But whatever the emperor’s inclinations might be,
he felt the claim his countrymen had upon him,
and was too magnanimous to sacrifice the welfare of
the state to a private partiality. He was deeply
distressed at the loss of the youths in whom he
had anticipated not only props for his own declining
strength, but powerful protectors of the public inter-
est. Amidst all the outward appearance of power and
magnificence which surrounded his administration,
he could not fail to perceive how precarious was the
foundation on which the prosperity of the empire now
rested. Every year resistance sprang up, in some shape
or other, on one of the extended frontiers of his do-
minions, and a presentiment might sometimes intrude
on his thoughtful mind, of a dire reverse to be one
day experienced by his arms. The moral force of his
government was founded on its success, and he was
nervously sensible to the consequences which might
ensue upon a great public disaster. Tiberius alone
could now supply to him the place of his trusty
Agrippa. He determined accordingly to devolve

1 The Cenotaphium Pisanum, a monument still in existence,
erected in memory of the yonng Caesars by the townspeople of Piste,
who had recently chosen Lucias as their patron, exhibits a long and
curious inscription in their honour. Orelli, Inter, i. 162. Cains
died in February, 767.

Digitized by Google

A. D.4-A.U.757.

CNDEB THE EMPIKE.

289

openly upon him a share in the government, and for
this purpose insisted, notwithstanding his pretended
reluctance, that he should accept, in conjunction with
himself, the powers of tha tribunate for a second
quinquennium. 1 When Tiberius had before been
honoured with this distinction, it had been accom-
panied with dismissal to the provinces, and followed
by removal from affairs. But with the death of the
young Caesars, and his ow r n readmission to the cares
of state, the position of Tiberius had become mate-
rially changed. This formal investiture now placed
him at once on the same footing as that enjoyed by
the veteran Agrippa during his latter years : and
there can be no doubt that it was universally regarded
as a virtual introduction to the first place in the
empire. I do it, said the emperor, perhaps with a
sigh, for the 'public weal. At the same time he
adopted Tiberius into his own family, and TibCTillf it
together with him the young Agrippa, to ?h°1juii»n“
learn the duties of his station under the family -
auspices of his step-father. Tiberius was required,
moreover, to adopt in his turn Orermanicus, the eldest
son of his late brother Drusus. Whatever were the
anxieties and intrigues of Livia, they might now,
for a time at least, be allayed. The programme
of the succession was significantly shadowed out:
Tiberius had been ordered to assume his place at the
head of the senate, the people, and the army, and
was now exhibited before the eyes of the citizens as
the partner of the emperor’s honours as well as of
his counsels. 2

1 Snct. Tib. 16. Dion, lv. 13., says ten years. Veil. ii. 103.: “Quod .
post Lucii mortem adhuc Caio vivo facere voluerat, atqne vehementer
rcpugnante Nerone crat inhibitus, post utriusque adolescentinm
obitum facere perseveravit.” The adoption which took place at the
same time is dated June 27. A. c. 757, A. d. 4.

2 Suet. Oct. 65., Tib. 15.; Tac. Ann. i.^3.; Dion.lv. 12. Veil,
ii. 103.: “Lajtitiam illius diei, concursumque civitatis, et vota psene
inferentium coelo manus, spemqne conceptam perpetuse securitatis

VOL. IV. U

Digitized by Google

290

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH . JCXXV1I.

After the ceremony of his adoption, Tiberius de-
parted for the German frontier, to under-
l&u take a third expedition, the fortunes of
which will be> presently related, for the
honour of the empire in that quarter . 1 Meanwhile
Augustus, though saddened with disappointments,
and sated perhaps with the gratification of his am-
bition, still plodded on with admirable industry in
the career of civil reformation. The constructive
and administrative tendency of the Koman mind was
developed in none of the great men of the re-
public more remarkably than in the founder of the
empire. The security of his own power he felt to be
now thoroughly established : he had entered, not long
before this period, without an audible murmur, upon
the fourth decennium of his imperial rule . 2 He
could not have required the senate any longer as an
essential instrument of his policy ; its actual power
was gone, and with its power its consideration had
collapsed ; yet blinded by his ruling idea of constitu-
tional renovation, he still persisted in decking the
victim he had already sacrificed. In fact, it was in
irritating the pride and self-love of individual nobles
that his only danger now lay. The people might
make tumultuary assemblies, and demand with im-
portunate cries the recall of his banished daughter :
such demonstrations he could easily repress, and
Thw rcTidon would scarcely condescend to notice. But
w h en jj e repeated this year, for the third
*. o. 767 . time, his dreaded scrutiny of the senate,
and the expulsion of its unworthy members, he once
more deliberately imperilled life and power merely to
satisfy the sentiment of symmetry and completeness.
He had now no Agrippa to stand between him and

seternitatisque Rom. imperii vix perscqui poterimus, nednm hie
implere.”

1 Veil ii. 104, 105.

1 Towards the end of the year 756. Dion, It. 12.

Digitized by Google

a.d.4.-a.u.757.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

291

the angry passions of the degraded senators ; he even
allowed Tiberius to take his departure from Rome
before he committed himself to the task. Acting
through a board of some influential members of the
body, he caused an investigation to be again made
into the lives and means of the whole : all such as
had reason to fear the result of the inquiry he in-
vited, as on a former occasion, to retire of their own
accord ; but when few were found to make this spon-
taneous abdication, he acted with indulgence towards
them, expelling only a small number, while he quali-
fied others, by adding to their fortunes from his own
bounty . 1

The violence indeed of the magnates of the last
generation had been quelled or moderated comptracy
in their children. Augustus needed not
now to conduct his inquiry with a breast- A • m '
plate under his gown in the midst of the senate
house. Nevertheless the covert designs of the am-
bitious or the offended never allowed his vigilance to
slumber. A plot was formed for his destruction, at
the head of which was a Cnaeus Cornelius Cinna, de-
scribed as a son of Faustus Sulla by a daughter of
the great Pompeius . 2 Although this man does not

1 Suet. Oct 53. Dion, lv. 13.: irpairepis re Kal OKtrppirfpot into row
yfipwi wpbs t b riv fiouXfintSv ntnv &ir tx^dveaBai ytyoytis.

2 The story of Cinna’s conspiracy is told by Seneca, de Clem. 9.,
and Dion, lv. 14. foil. They agree in the main fact ; but Seneca is
our authority for the details of the interview between Augustus and
his enemy, while Dion has doubtless invented his long conversation
between the emperor and Livia. Seneca, however, calls the con-
spirator Lucius, and places the event in the fortieth year of Augustus
(a.u. 731), the scene in Gaul; Dion, on the other hand, gives the
name of Cnseus, aud supposes the circumstances to have occurred
twenty-six years later, and at Rome. It may be observed that a son
of Faustus Sulla must have been at least fifty at this latter date, nor
do we know why he should bear the name of Cinna, though an
adoption is not impossible. Suetonius does not mention this among
the conspiracies he enumerates against Augustus. But, whatever
doubt there may be about the person, the period, and the place, the
only point of importance, the fact, namely, of a conspicuous act of
clemency on the emperor’s part, may be considered as established.

u 2

Digitized by Google

292

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

cn. xxx vii.

appear to have been personally aggrieved by the em-
peror’s measures, he may have found instruments for
his private ambition in the mortification and resent-
ment of the disgraced senators. Proud of his descent
and oblivious of the favours he had received at the
hands of Augustus, who had made that descent no
bar to his advancement (indeed it had been the uni-
form policy of the emperor to place the great names
of the oligarch ) 7 at the head of his imperial demo-
cracy), he was vain enough to imagine that he could
himself wield the powers of empire, and that the
old nobility would acquiesce in his supremacy. One
of his accomplices, however, disclosed to the emperor
the design to surprise him in the act of sacrificing,
and slay him at the foot of the altar. Time was
when Augustus would have rushed impetuously to
punish such an attempt in a paroxysm of fear or
anger. But these passions had now cooled down : he
could reason calmly with himself ; he could take de-
liberate counsel with his advisers, how best to baffle
designs which neither the certainty nor the severity
of punishment had hitherto availed to repress. The
Romans ascribed to Livia the merit of persuading
him that mercy was also policy. A remarkable scene
followed. While the chief criminal was yet uncon-
scious that his plot was detected, Augustus summoned
him into his cabinet, and ordered a chair to be set
for him by the side of his own ; and then, desiring not
to be interrupted, proceeded to deliver a discourse,
which, according to his custom in matters of impor-
tance, he had already prepared, and perhaps com-
mitted to writing. He reminded his uneasy auditor
of the grace he had bestowed upon him, though a
political enemy and the son of an enemy; he had
granted him life, had enriched and distinguished him.
He had raised him to the honour of the priesthood,
over more than one competitor from the ranks of the
Ca?sareans themselves. After all these favours, he

Digitized by Google

9

m

A.D.4.-A.U.757. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 293

continued, how could you plot to take away my life 1
Cinna could keep silence no longer : he vehemently
disclaimed the horrid imputation. You promised
not to interrupt me, rejoined Augustus, and pro-
ceeded calmly with his harangue, unfolding all the
details of the conspiracy, and finally asking what end
the traitor could have proposed to himself ; how could
he hope to fill the place of the emperor, who could
not maintain his dignity as a private citizen, but had
recently suffered defeat in a legal encounter with a
freedman ? Be assured , he added, it is not myself
alone who stand in your way, if such be your am-
bition : neither the Paulli nor the Gossi, the Fabii
nor the Servilii, will suffer you to assume domi-
nion over them. Thus did he continue for more than
two hours, to pour forth his premeditated argument,
before be arrived at the unexpected conclusion, in
which he assured the culprit, not of forgiveness only,
but of renewed favour. Let this, he said, ciemcncyof
be the commencement of friendship and AU8UjUl ' -
confidence between us. Shortly afterwards he con-
ferred on him the consulship, and found him ever
afterwards a grateful and sincere adherent, 1 Cinna at
his death bequeathed his property to his illustrious
benefactor ; and this, it was remarked, was the last
occasion of any attempt being made against the life
of the magnanimous Augustus. 2

Such is the story, — the romance, should we call
it ?, — which has embalmed the fame of the ^««c«on.
second Caesar’s clemency, and has served
sometimes to balance in the eyes of posterity the

1 Cn. Cornelias Cinna was consul with Valerius Mcssala, a.u. 758.
It was this circumstance, perhaps, that induced Dion to place the
conspiracy in the year preceding.

2 Scnec. /. c. : “ Hsec cum dementia ad salutcm securitatcmque per-
duxit; liaec graturu ac favorabilem reddidit ; quamvis nondum sub-
actis reipubl. cervicibus manum imposuisset ; hate hodicquc preestat
illi famam, qute vix vivis principibus servit.”

Digitized by Google

294

x HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

selfishness and cruelty of his youth. It is related
with ample details by two writers of. authority, whose
testimonies may be considered as perfectly indepen-
dent . 1 One of them was living at the time, and has
obtained credit, not without reason, for his notices
of historical events interspersed among writings of a
very different character. The suspicion which would
ordinarily attach to such details of private conver-
sation, is removed by the circumstance, elsewhere
attested, that Augustus did habitually prepare and
commit to writing the discourses he was about to
hold ; not only harangues before the senate or argu-
ments in council, but even confidential deliberations
with his own consort . 2 There seems, therefore, no
reason to question the general correctness of the
sketch of this remarkable interview, as given by
Seneca; and assuming its authenticity, it confirms
in a striking manner the impression we have already
received of the absence of any public spirit in the
opposition which the imperial regime still occa-
sionally experienced. It is assumed without a re-
mark, that the object of the conspirator was simply
to leap himself into the seat of Augustus ; that the
chiefs of the old nobility would resent his usurpation,
not as a public wrong, but merely as a grievance to
themselves. The pretence of liberty, once sanctioned
by the name of Brutus, was too transparent to be

1 Seneca and Dion Caseins, U. cc. The philosopher is supposed to
have been born a few years n.c., perhaps twenty years later than the
date he gives himself for the story, but six years before that assigned
to it by the historian. His father lived in Rome, and the great topics
of the day were of course familiar to him. Dion, on the other hand,
consulted the archives and historical writers of note ; but, as a Greek,
he is not likely to have made acquaintance with the secondhand
speculations in moral science of a Roman.

2 Suet. Oct. 84.: “Sermoncs quoque cum singulis, ctiam cum
Livia sua graviores, non nisi in scriptis et c libcllo habebat, ne plus
minusve loqucretur ex tempore.” It maybe added that Augustus
would naturally take care that an incident so much to his credit
should be circumstantially detailed.

Digitized by Google

A.D.4-A.C.757.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

295

advanced again. It was no better than a pretence
fifty years before; it had ceased to be admissible
even as a pretence now. Fifty years before the com-
monwealth might have boasted of one enthusiast in
Cicero, of a solitary fanatic in Cato : but the last of
the race of heroes had left no successors, and the old
fictions of the republic were no longer seriously re-
garded by a single citizen of Rome.

Augustus had thus obtained the licence which he
had once complained was denied to him r riv » t€ h»biu
alone ; secure in the enjoyment of his hL A ^v“o’<i
power, he could now exhibit just resent-
ment without necessarily entailing fatal ,tna
consequences on its object . 1 From principle, as
well as from natural disposition, he maintained in
all their strictness the rules of friendship or fel-
lowship as practised by the nobles of Rome. To
admit a companion to his hours of relaxation was
with him a matter of solemn ceremony, and esta-
blished ever after a mutual claim to confidence
and regard. These connexions were hallowed by
the reciprocal attendance of the parties on occa-
sions of family interest; they were cemented by
correspondence, by presents, and various tokens of
mutual esteem or good will. Such were the offices
or duties of friendship, which constituted a large
part of Roman ethics. Such benevolence Augustus
rigidly exacted from his living associates : it was un-
derstood that he expected it even from the dying;
and though he was said to show no avidity for testa-
mentary bequests, and never to have accepted them
from persons with whom he was personally uncon-
nected, he was strict in requiring such marks of his
friends’ regard, and scrutinized them with jealous
solicitude, as genuine indications of feeling. If grati-

1 On the occasion of the suicide of Gallus, “ illacrymavit, ct vicera
suara conquestus est, quod soli sibi non licerct amicis quantum vellet
irasci.” Suet. Oct. 66. See above, ch. xxxiii.

Digitized by Google

296

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvn.

fied by a liberal bequest he generally waived it for
the benefit of the deceased’s kindred. In the treat-
ment of his personal attendants, his slaves, or his
freedmen, a class who were often more really inti-
mate with the noble Koman than the fellow-citizens
whom he admitted to his friendship, Augustus ob-
tained a character for mildness and consideration . 1
Law and custom, however, gave him power of life
and death over the menials of his household, and he
hardly resented with greater sternness the crime of
one of these who was convicted of adultery with a
matron, than that of another who "had opened his
letters for a bribe . 2 His grandson’s attendants in
the East were still slaves of the imperial family, and
upon these, on proof of their violence or peculation,
he exercised extreme severity. .A third class of the
emperor’s intimates were the women, with whom he
amused his leisure. Public opinion would have to-
lerated any amount of licentiousness in this particu-
lar, had the amours of the chief of the citizens been
confined to freedwomen or strangers. But to force
a slave was reputed indecorous, while to seduce a
matron was branded as a crime. The indulgences
of Augustus were said to be of the latter kind. His
apologists could only allege that his intrigues were a
matter not of passion, but of state-craft, and {hat
he extracted the secrets of his adversaries from the
weakness of their dissolute consorts. This refers,
perhaps, to the period of the great struggles of his
early career ; no such explanation could be offered
in excuse for the weakness of his later years 3 , to

1 Yet Augustas never condescended to ask a freedman to his table,
except in the peculiar instance of the traitor Mcnodorus. Suet.
Oct. 74.

2 Suet. Oct. 67. : “ Proculum . . . mori coegit ; Thallo . . . crura
fregit.”

3 Dion, lviii. 2. : irdin-a ret SoKouvra aiir (fi jjSewr iroioucra , ical ftrjri
SAAo t i rwv (Kchov iroXvrpayixovovcra, Kal ra aippoSimu airrov aBuppara.
peffre SiwKovtra p-iprt aloBavtaOai Tpooiroiovp.ivT\. Comp. Suet. Oct. 69.

Digitized by Google

A.D.4-A. P.757.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

297

which even Livia, the paragon of matronhood, was
supposed to have lent herself.

The vice of gaming with dice must seem a venial
offence in a man whose ordinary pieces Arnuted him-
were nations, and whose stakes were em-
pires. Yet upon this subject the Romans ch * DCt -
had also strong prejudices, and Augustus was gravely
reproached for avowing that he amused himself in
his family, or among his nearest associates, with
games of chance for the most trifling ventures. He
played, says Suetonius, openly and without disguise,
even in his old age; nor did he confine himself to
the genial month of December, but indulged in this
way any day of the year, whether of business or
recreation. 1 Letters have been preserved in which
he recounts to Tiberius his bloodless contests at the
supper table with Vinicius and Silius ; how they had -
played, for pastime not for gain, sporting a single
denarius on each die, and sweeping the modest stakes
with the lucky throw of the Venus. We played
daily through the five-day feast of Minerva, and
kept the table rvarm. Your brother was most voci-
ferous . 2 Yet he lost but little after all ... .

I lost for my part twenty pieces : but then I teas
generous, as usual, for had I insisted on all my
winnings, or retained all I gave away, I should
have gained fifty. But I like to be liberal, and I
expect immortal honour for it. To Julia he wrote :
I make you a present of 250 denarii, the sum I

1 Suet. Oct. 71.: “Alete rumorem nulio modo expavit, lusitque
simpliciter et palam, etiam senex ; ac prteterquam Decembri raense,
aliis quoque, festis profestisque diebus.” Corap. Martial, iv. 14. :

“ Dam blanda vagus alca December
Inccrtis sonat hinc et hinc fritillis.”

2 This allusion to Drusus shows that the letter is not of late date ;
and the words, “ we played yepoyriicur,” innocently, as old men do,
that is, for amusement merely, does not imply that Augustus and
his party were themselves old.

Digitized by Google

298 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS ch. xxxvii.

gave to each of my guests to play at dice vMh at
supper, or, if they pleased, at odd and even. 1 The
biographer seems uncertain whether he ought to pass
over such errors without censure : he contents him-
self, however, with adding that except in this matter
only the continence of the emperor was signal, and
he escaped the imputation of any other failing.

The moderation of Augustus in regard to the size
and outward show of his residences has

Peculiarities . , . . • - , . ...

of L.te and been remarked in our review ot his public

ran- . , e. c b aracter ? ma y be added, that he caused
even a house which Julia had erected to be pulled
down, as too sumptuous and splendid . 2 In the in-
terior of his dwellings he might have indulged with-
out invidious notice in the luxurious decorations
affected by the opulent magnates. It was from a
.peculiarity of taste, therefore, rather than any politic
calculation, that, instead of works of painting or
sculpture, he was fond of collecting natural curiosities,
such as the fossil bones of mammoths and saurians,
which were found in abundance in his island of
Capreae, and were vulgarly reputed to be the remains
of giants and heroes. Thrown from his earliest years
into the vortex of public action, and absorbed in a
game of life and death, it was impossible for Augustus
to imbibe tastes which are seldom acquired except by
reflection and leisure. Nor had he the temper which
affects connoisseurship without knowledge. His turn
of mind was directed to the positive and practical,
and he disdained, after the manner of an antique
Roman, the pretence of sentiment or aesthetic refine-
ment. Though not unversed in literature, and even
a composer, like ever} r well-bred Roman, both in
prose and verse, we can hardly suppose that he took

1 Suet. /. c. : “ Si vellent inter se inter ccenam vel talis vel par im-
par ludere.”

2 Suet. Oct. 73.

Digitized by Google

A.D.4-A. 0.757.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

299

any interest in ethical speculations . 1 The compa-
nions of his leisure hours were j urists, grammarians,
and physicians, rather than philosophers, and he is
not reported to have lent the authority of his name
to any of the still contending schools of thought.
The logical habit of his mind is curiously exemplified
in the statement that he insisted on writing according,
not to established orthography, but to spoken sounds . 2
To the objection that were such a practice to prevail,
it would obliterate the historical derivation and con-
tinuity of language, he would have been wholly in-
accessible. Perhaps he would have been not less
indifferent to the argument, that it would throw the
great mass of existing literature into oblivion, and
condemn even the remainder to be retranscribed. On
the same principle, however, he was more legitimately
careful to avoid affectation and curious refinement in
the choice of words : his chief care, it is said, was to
express his meaning clearly, and, with this view, he
disregarded even grammatical rules, and took no
pains to avoid repetitions. He amused himself with
ridiculing the opposite vices in the style of Maecenas,
whose sentences he compared to frizzled ringlets, and
whose language, he said, seemed steeped in myrrh and
unguents. He called Antonius a madman, for writ-

1 Suetonius (Oct. 85.) enumerates his pieces: a reply to Brutus's
panegyric on Cato (“rescripta Bruto de Catone”); verses on Sicily,
with reference probably to his campaigns there; a tragedy of Ajax,
which he blotted out (“quserentibus amicis quid Ajax ageret, respon-
ds Ajacem suum in spongiam incubuisse”); an account of his own
life as far as the Cantabrian war, in thirteen books; and finally, an
Exhortation to Philosophy, about the nature of which nothing is
said, and which may have merely contained elementary instruction
for his grandchildren. Though a reader of ancient poetry, and
especially of Greek comedy, his attention was chiefly directed to ex-
tracting from it rules of life and policy : “ in evolvendis utrinsque
lingua 1 auctoribus nihil seque sectabatur quam prascepta et cxempla
publice vel privntim salubria.”

* Suet. Oct. 88. : “ Videtur eorum potius sequi opinionem qui
perindc scribendum ac loquamur existiment.”

Digitized by Google

300

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

ing to be admired rather than understood ; nor did
he spare his own pupil, Tiberius, for the affectation
of antique and recondite phraseology. He urged his
grandchild, Agrippina, to make it her aim that
neither readers nor hearers should have any trouble
in understanding her . 1 Meanwhile, the style of the
imperial censor himself, which must have been a
strange one, found happily no imitators. Nothing,
however, remains to tell us how it was criticized in
return : the minute particulars regarding it preserved,
by Suetonius show how long the Romans retained an
interest in everything that related to their great em-
peror ; but even at the distance of a hundred years, it
seemed more respectful to describe his peculiarities
than to reprove them.

The chief of the great empire, the head of so many
departments of administration and the su-
addicted'to pervisor of all, had every minute of his day
eupcri ion. 0 CCU pj e( j overflowing. The details of the

employment of his time may indeed fill us with
astonishment, when we reflect that they refer not to
the overwrought exertions of a few feverish years, but
to the whole course of a long life engaged in public
affairs. Yet Augustus, we are told, never suffered
business, even during his campaigns, to stop his daily
practice of declamation, of reading and writing ; and
the speeches he addressed to the senate and other
bodies were always carefully meditated, and even
transcribed before delivery . 2 With so much method,
such constancy of purpose, together with the self-
control which pre-eminently marked him, it may
seem strange to us to read that he was as timid as a
child in all that related to the superstitions of his
time. He trembled at thunder and lightning, not

1 Suet. Oct. 86. There is nothing peculiar in the style of the few
verses on the death of Virgil ascribed to Augustus.

■ Aurel. Victor, Epit. 1.: “ Ut nullus, ne in procinctu quidem, labe-
retur dies quin legeret, scriberet, declarnaret.” Comp. Suet. Oct. 84.

Digitized by Google

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

301

A.D.4.-A.U.757.

from the vulgar fear of their fatal effects, but from
horror at their occult and mysterious causes ; he
•marked the portents which seemed to attend on his
own career not less anxiously than the weakest of his
subjects; he considered his own and others’ dreams
with painful solicitude, and observed all signs and
auguries with a serious curiosity. 1 He became, in fact,
the victim of the excessive precision and minuteness
of his observation on all subjects, which never suffered
him to rest in the broad principles either of belief or
scepticism, but constantly harassed him with vain and
frivolous inquiries into matters on which no satisfac-
tion could be attained.

After all, the most agreeable feature in the cha-
racter of Augustus, is the good-humoured nisk . n(1
cheerfulness, which sprang apparently from ficwand
a deep-seated contentment, and showed it-
self, among other things, in the pleasure he took in
the simple sports of children, whom he was always
glad to have about him and to play with, which
overflowed also in tokens of affection towards his
nearest connexions. His playful intercourse with
Maecenas and Horace, with his daughter Julia, with
his grandsons Caius and Lucius, and even with the
morose Tiberius, -was the yearning of unaffected feel-
ing. The recorded instances of liis wit and repartee
all bear this character of good humour. Some of
them have been already given in the course of this
narrative, the rest perhaps are hardly worth repeat-
ing. 2 But, as Macrobius remarks, he deserves more

1 Suet Oct. 90—92.

* See especially the collection of his jests in Macrob. Sat. i. 4. In
some there is an ingenious play upon words which could not be ex-
pressed in another language. Perhaps the best are the following :
“ Vettius cum monumentum patris exarasset ; ait Augustus ; Hoc
est vere monurhentum patris colere and, “ Cum multi Severo Cassio
accusante absolverentur; et architectus fori Augusti exspectationem
ope r ia diu traherct; ita jocatus est, Vellem Cassius et raeum forum
accuset.”

Digitized by Google

302

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVII.

admiration for the sarcasms he suffered to be ad-
dressed to himself, some of which were severely
cutting, than for the gentle banter he indulged in
towards others. The attainment of his utmost de-
sires had left him placable in his animosities, and
clement from temper as well as policy. If a Roman
bad any true sensibility, it was in his friendships that
he displayed it, and towards his friends Augustus was
both constant and delicate. A generation had now
grown up to whom the horrors of the proscriptions
were only a whispered tale ; the revolutionary trium-
vir had become in their eyes a kind and genial old
man, grown grey in serving the commonwealth, and
still the guardian genius of the country he had saved.
Loudly as the blessings of his rule were proclaimed,
they felt more sensibly than poets or orators could tell
them that his life was the pledge of their continuance.
As he grew weaker, and betrayed once more the infir-
mities of nature, which had caused such alarm to the
Romans in his younger days, even the best of patriots
must have admitted that he should either never have
been born, or else should never die. 1 That the citi-
zens should have forgotten, under their own vines and
fig-trees, the crimes he had committed against their
unhappy sires may not be hard to comprehend: it is
more difficult to understand the real feelings of the
man who had done such things, and betrayed to the
close of life no uneasy recollection of them.

1 Such may be supposed to be the meaning of Aurelius Victor,
Epit. 1.: “Cunctis vulgo jactantibus, utinam aut non nasceretur aut
non moreretur: alteram enim pessimi exempli, exitus preeclari al-
tertom.”

Digitized by Google

A.D.4-A.U.757.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

303

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

Tiberius, on his return from Rhodes, at first takes no part in public
affairs. — After the death of Cains he comes again forward. — His
mission to Gaul in 757. — Ho reaches the Elbe. — The Marcomanni
and the kingdom of Maroboduus. — Expedition of Tiberius against
the Marcomanni in 759. — Frustrated by the revolt of the Panno-
nians. — Alarm at Rome. — Banishment of Agrippa Postumus. —
The Pannonians are reduced by Tiberius and Germanicus, a.u.

759 — 762. — Intrigues against Augustus Banishment of the

younger Julia. — Banishment of the poet Ovidius Naso, 761. — Dis-
content of the citizens. — The Roman province between the Rhine
and Elbe. — Overthrow of Varus and loss of three legions, 763. —
Consternation at Rome. — Tiberius sent to the Rhine. — Old age of
Augustus. — Tiberius receives the proconsular power, and is vir-
tually associated in the empire. — His hopes of the succession. —
Rumoured reconciliation of Augustus with Agrippa Postumus. —
Record of the acts of Augustus — Monumentum Ancyranum. —
Last days and death of Augustus. — Conclusion. (a.d. 4 — 14.
A. u 757—767.)

Thus reinstated in the highest consideration to which
a citizen could attain beneath the shadow oioomy^ros-
of the imperial power, Tiberius might look f^authode*.
with horror on the humiliation, not unmingled with
personal danger, from which he had so recently
emerged. He had experienced, as the fruit of his
perverse resentment, how short is the step from re-
tirement to oblivion, how precarious the condition of
a royal exile, how nigh, in the case of the most ex-
alted fortunes, disgrace ever borders on destruction.
As the conviction was gradually forced upon him, that
his moody abandonment of his duties had been an
act of fatal impolicy, he had become disgusted with
the retreat which he had chosen, he had buried him-
self in the recesses of his narrow prison-house, had
thrown aside the garb of a senator, and waived the
visits of the officers who still halted on their route at
Rhodes, or turned thither out of their way to pay court

Digitized by Google

304

HISTORY OK THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvin.

to the emperor’s son-in-law. From year to year these
visits of compliment and policy became more rare. The
displeasure of Augustus was more generally known,
and the courtiers took their cue from the indications
he gave of his sentiments. Tiberius was made aware
that if the citizens still spoke of him at all, it was
with an affectation of pity or resentment. One of the
Gaulish states actually voted that his statue in their
forum should be overthrown. In the tent of Caius
Caesar officious persons were found to speak of him
contemptuously as the exile , and even offer to lay his
head at their young patron’s feet . 1 This tone was
encouraged, perhaps, by the arrogant demeanour of
the prince himself in the interview they had had at
Samos ; and the enmity of his tutor Lollius towards
Tiberius, whatever its motive, was sufficiently noto-
rious among the legions. Tiberius meanwhile, un-
easy in mind and dissatisfied with his own conduct,
yet unable to abate the emperor’s resentment, fell
into deep despondency. Able as he undoubtedly was,
he was deficient in a manly reliance on his abilities,
and under discour agement or perplexity his faint-
heartedness took refuge in dreams and omens. From
his childhood, indeed, like many a scion of a ruling
house, he had been pampered with auguries of his
future greatness, in the contemplation of which his
native strength of character may have been partly
no addict. enervated. He now devoted himself still
Mtroiogy. more eagerly to the study of the future, in
which he consulted the skill of the astrologer Thra-
syllus. The post of seer in the household of so wayward
a patron must have been one of peculiar difficulty,
nor was it devoid of danger. Its occupant was the
unwilling depositary of many perilous secrets. He
was employed to cast the horoscope, not of his master
only, but of his master’s enemies or rivals, — of the

1 Suet. Tib. IS.

Digitized by GoogI

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

305

A.D.4-A.U.757.

young Caesars, Caius and Lucius, possibly of Augus-
tus himself. He was made the reluctant accomplice
of investigations which either were already treason-
able, or might hereafter become so. Among the
horrid stories regarding the recluse of Rhodes, which
were now noised abroad to the dismay of the citizens,
it was said that he kept an attendant of Herculean
strength, to hurl into the waves beneath his villa the
wretches whom he had thus possessed of his secret
thoughts and practices. Among these none was so
eminent as Thrasyllus, and accordingly the position
of none was so perilous. The astrologer saved him-
self by an ingenious device. Undoubtedly it required
no occult science to divine the cruel intentions of so
jealous a patron, nor in his moody humours to read
the thoughts which occupied him. One day Thra-
syllus was observed to betray sudden perturbation and
terror. When Tiberius inquired the cause, he de-
clared that his art had just revealed to him that he
was at that moment in imminent peril. Tiberius,
conscious that he had just been meditating his com-
panion’s destruction, was struck with this proof of his
skill in divination, embraced him with transports of
delight, and gave him increasing marks of his con- v
tidence. When his own turn came to watch anxiously
from the cliffs the arrival of a messenger from Rome,
whom he expected to bring his own death-warrant,
Thrasyllus, on descrying the vessel, declared that, on
the contrary, he was the bearer of good tidings. The
conjecture was again fortunate. Tiberius was suddenly
summoned from his exile to the favour of Augustus,
and even to the prospect of empire . 1

1 These stories aro referred to by Suetonius, Tib. 14., and Dion, lv.
11. They are gravely attested also by Tacitus, Ann. vi. 20, 21. The
appearance of an eagle, a bird which was never known to visit Rhodes,
was hailed as a favourable omen. The occurrence is ingeniously
handled in au epigram of Apollonidas, Anthol. Grac. ii. 135., ed.
Brunck.

VOL. IV. X

Digitized by Google

306

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxviir.

Conscious of his error in pretending for once to act
with independence, Tiberius now sought to retrieve
it by entire submission to his chief’s wishes. At
Rhodes he had entreated that an officer might be ap-
pointed to watch him, and report all his words and
on i.i^rctum actions. On his return, under the condition
imposed by Caius that he should abstain
jmwiiT affairs, from public affairs, he renounced the man-
sion of Pompeius, which he had formerly occupied in
the frequented quarter of the Carinse, and courted
seclusion in the more distant gardens of Maecenas . 1
His only public act was to introduce his son Drusus,
on coming of age, to the citizens in the forum ; he
surrendered himself to complete retirement, associated
with the poets and grammarians, studied sentimental
and erotic versifiers, and employed himself in com-
posing an elegy on the death of Lucius Caesar . 2 But
when the decease of the surviving brother opened to
him again a public career, and he was assured
that the republic demanded his assistance, his long-
restrained activity quickly revived. He accepted a
mission to the German frontier, along which a gene-
ral war of attack and defence on either side had been
raging for three years . 3 Since the last campaign he
had conducted in this quarter, the Romans had ac-

1 Suet. Tib. 15. : “ Romam rcvcrsus statim e Carinis et Pompeiann
domo Esquilias in hortos Msecenatis transmigravit.” This fact de-
serves to be noticed as a trait of manners. The life of public men
in Rome was so thoroughly public, their doors standing open from
the earliest hour for the throng of clients and attendants, that the
removal of a few hundred paces from the centre of social movement
was not without political significance. The dwellings of the great
men of the republic had always been in the immediate vicinity of the
forum. It was part of Maecenas’s modest policy to make choice of
a suburban locality.

1 Suet. Tib. 70.: “ Composuit et lyricum carmen cujusest titulus:
conquestio de L. Csesaris morte.” For his taste in poetry, and his
admiration of the Greek writers of the class of Parthenius and Rhia-
nor, see the same author, l. c.

5 Veil. ii. 104.: “Bellum quibusdam in loeis gestum, quibusdam
sustentatum feliciter.’

i

Digitized by Google

A.D.4-A.U.757.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

307

quired substantial advantages beyond the Rhine. The
command of the legions had devolved upon Expedition.
Domitius, the son of the Antonian renegade, tn Germany,
a man of energy and boldness, who had plunged into
the heart of Germany, crossed the Elbe, and planted
on its further bank an altar to Augustus, as a pledge
of the amicable relations he had succeeded for a
moment in establishing with the natives. 1 By the
construction of a road across the heaths and morasses
of the Lippe valley, he had connected the frontiers of
Gaul with the outposts of the empire on the Weser.
He had also transplanted the Hermunduri into the
vacant seats of the Marcomanni, who had quitted
their old habitations about the sources of the Danube,
for a domicile in the remoter region of Bohemia. It
seems, however, that Domitius had been unsuccessful
in his demand on the Cherusci, to receive back some
exiles of their nation; and in quitting the province
without chastising this affront, he had perhaps sub-
jected the Roman authority to contempt. Vinicius,
who succeeded to his command, found him- nnd of
self involved in a formidable war, for the Vi “ iciu *-
conduct of which he was rewarded with the triumphal
ornaments ; but had he performed any considerable
exploit it is not likely that a favourable historian,
such as Velleius Paterculus, would have failed to
specify it. 2

Tiberius quitted Rome for the frontiers in the
summer of 757, and entered at once on Tibcrittiin
the work before him. The events of this
invasion are not known to us; but the A0 - 7sr -
powerful force he commanded seems to have speedily

1 Tac. Ann. iv. 44. : 14 Domitius (lumen Albim cxercitu transcendif,
longius penetrate Germania quam quisquam priorum.” Velleius, it
will be seen, assigns this honour to his hero Tiberius.

2 Dion, lv. 10.; Veil. L c. M. Vinicius was the grandfather of the
friend to whom Velleius addresses his work. It is to be observed,
however, that he seems systematically to depreciate the predecessors
of Tiberius in the German command.

x 2

Digitized by Google

308

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

quelled resistance, and the only record of his exploit
remains in the names of the tribes which are said to
have now submitted to him, the Bructeri, the Canine-
fates, the Attuarii, and Cherusci, lying between the
lower Rhine and the Weser, a district which the Ro-
man arms bad already penetrated in every direction.
His operations were prolonged, perhaps, by the means
he took to secure conquests so often partially effected,
until the middle of December, some months beyond
the usual military season in that severe climate ; and
when he left the army to revisit Rome, he fixed its
winter quarters at the sources of the Lippe, on the
confines of the forest of Teutoburg. 1 From this
point he meditated a deliberate advance in the en-
suing year, and his object in now recrossing the Alps
may have been to extort from the growing timidity
and reluctance of Augustus permission and means
for an enterprise on a grander scale. Returning
accordingly to his legions early in the spring of 758,
A . d .5 he organized a combined expedition by land

u- 7i>8 - and sea, by which the wants of the invad-
ing army might be supplied, and its baggage and
machines of war transported by water into the heart
of the enemy’s country. Reserving for himself in
person the conduct of the main body of his forces in
light array across the wilderness, he directed a nu-
merous flotilla, long since prepared on the Rhine, to
follow in the course explored by Drusus, along the
shores of the Northern Ocean; to penetrate to the
mouth of the Elbe, and ascend its yet unknown
waters, till the armaments should meet together in
an appointed latitude. 2 This remarkable combina-

1 Veil. ii. 105.: “In mediis (Germania;) finibus ad caput Luppise
fluminis:” advanced, therefore, considerably to the east of Aliso.

2 Veil. ii. 106. This remarkable statement deserves to be given
in full: “ Deniqucqnod nunquam antea spe conceptum, nedumopere
tentatum erat, ad quadringentesimum milliarium a Rheno usque ad
flumcn, Albim, qui Semnonum Hcrmundurornmqne fines prasterfluit

Digitized by Google

A.D.4-A.U.757.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

309

tion was actually carried into execution according to
the directions prescribed; and the praises lavished
upon it by Velleius, who shared himself in its
hazards, cannot be regarded as too warm for so me-
morable an achievement, the most remarkable for
the success of its far-sighted arrangements of any
recorded in ancient military history. It is much
to be regretted that we should know so little of its
details, which, if fully presented, would give us ample
insight into the resources of the Roman power . 1 We
only know that the advance of Tiberius had been
triumphant, and perhaps unresisted. In the lack
of victories to celebrate, his encomiast vaunts the
merit, unusual in a Roman general, of sparing the
lives of his soldiers, and exposing himself to no un-
necessary risk . 2 But to Velleius the future emperor
was a demigod, and his deeds divine 3 ; and he re-
cords with enthusiasm the veneration with which
the barbarians regarded him . 4 While the army was

Romanus cumsignis pcrductusestcxercitus; cteodem mira felicitate
et cura ducis, tcmporum quoque obscrvantia, classis quse oceani cir-
cumnavigavcrat sinus, ab inaudito atquc incognito ante mari fiumine
Albi subvccta, plnrimarum gentium victoria, cum abundantissima
rerum omnium copia, cxercitui Csesarique sc junxit.” The point of
junction is left quite indeterminate. It seems hardly credible that
the Roman flotilla can have ascended the stream to the latitude of
the Lippe, or the confluence of the Elbe and Saalc.

1 The battering train of a Roman army was generally little less
cumbrous than modern artillery : but in moving through a country
where there were no stone fortifications, it is probable that this was
in a great degree dispensed with. Nevertheless the provision for
the conveyance of the men’s baggage must have been on an immense
scale, even in their lightest array.

2 Veil, l.c.: *•' Sine ullo detrimento commissi exercitus.”

3 Veil. ii. 94.: “ Cadestissimorum cjtis operum per annos continuos
novem, prtefcctus aut legatus, spectator, pro captu mcdiocritatis nteaj
adjutor fui.”

4 There is something far more natural, and not less interesting, in
the historian’s account of the joy with which the veterans hailed their
•old leader’s return to military life. (ii. 103.) “ Videmus te, impera-
tor ? salvum recepimus? ac deinde, ego tecum, imperator, in Arme-
nia, ego in Rhsetia fui; ego a te in Vindelicis, ego in Tannonia, ego
in Germania donatus sum !’’

Digitized by Google

310

IIISTOBY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

encamped on the left bank of the Elbe, and the
natives, retreating before them, were collected in
force on the other, an aged chief put off from the
further side in a canoe, and from the middle of the
stream addressed the strangers, demanding leave to
cross in safety, and behold the person of their leader.
Conducted to the tent of the imperator, he surveyed
him for a time with silent admiration, and exclaimed,
What madness is this of ours, to contend against
the unseen divinities, and not humbly to seek their
‘presence and make submission to their benign au-
thority ! But 1, by the grace of Ccesar, have this
day seen a god, a privilege I never before attained
nor hoped to attain. Thus saying, he sought per-
mission to touch the hand of the divinity ; and as
he paddled back across the stream still turned his
face towards the Roman bank, with his eyes fixed
constantly upon him. 1 It is obvious to remark,
that if the story be true, the scene might have
easily been arranged, by the prince’s flatterers, to
confirm the allegiance of the native chiefs attend-
ing in his camp. But the children of the German
forests were fully prepared to accept the divine cha-
racter of the great and powerful among men, and
the altar recently erected on their soil had alread\ r
attracted votaries among them. This expedition,
however remarkable in its circumstances, had no
more important results than those which preceded
it. Once only had the Germans ventured to mea-
sure their strength with the advancing legions, when
they paid for their rashness by a signal discomfi-
ture: nevertheless the Romans, on retiring in the
autumn, had left behind them no permanent im-
pression of their successes.

These repeated advances, however, with the speedy
retreat and proffered submission of the natives, though

1 Yell. ii. 107. Compare an epigram of Martial, v. 3.

Digitized by Google

a.».4-a.o.757.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

311

far from having the character of conquests, could not
altogether fail in extending the influence of Th^nfloenee
Rome throughout a great portion of central t^ed t>y

„ , r , „ these repeated

• Europe. 1 hey inspired a strong sense ot invasion.,
her invincibility, and of her conquering destiny ; at
the same time they exalted the respect of the barba-
rians for the southern civilization, which could mar-
shal such irresistible forces at so vast a distance
from the sources of its power. Accordingly the
young chiefs of the Rhine and Elbeland crowded to
Rome, to learn her lessons of government on the
spot ; while many of their followers and dependents
settled within her walls. The views of Tiberius ex-
tended to the complete subjugation of the whole
country before him ; but he had not the military
ardour of the conqueror of the Gauls, nor was he
pressed for time like the rival of Pompeius: he
could afford to wait upon events, and leave the con-
summation of his policy to be developed hereafter.
Meanwhile, the position to which he had been ele-
vated rendered him almost independent of the scru-
ples of Augustus, whose discreet and dilatory system
he was able, when he chose, to overrule. This hesi-
tation, indeed, on the emperor’s part was Au?0 , t0 ,
not inadequately justified by the circum-
stances of the time. Augustus perceived ‘on^^or
but too clearly the goal to which affairs G * nn “ ,T '
were tending, the unchecked preponderance of the
military power. The mercenaries now enlisted un-
der the Roman eagles began to clamour for increased
pay and privileges, and to remonstrate against the
protracted servitude to which they were condemned
by the reluctance of the citizens to embrace the pro-
fession of arms. The nobles and men of fortune,
the strength of the ancient legions, were fully em-
ployed, by the cautious but self-defeating policy of
the emperor, in the civil business of the state ; while
the populace, from whom Marius and Caesar had not

Digitized by Google

312 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS ch. xxxvm.

disdained to recruit, were contented with the dole of
public corn, and refused to earn their bread under
the austere discipline of the camp. Augustus, when
he looked around him, might perceive that this was
but one of many symptoms of the decline of national
spirit, and the failure of his elaborate scheme for
reconstructing the nation. To many it might seem
a trifling matter, that he was now obliged, for want
of legitimate candidates for the Vestal priesthood,
to admit the daughters of freedmen to that dignity;
nevertheless it betrayed but too plainly, to the clear
view of the imperial reformer, the loss of an element
of power in the decay of a venerable tradition . 1 At
such a moment the acquisition of a new province
with its burdens and obligations was hardly a matter
of felicitation; but the Jews had complained so loudly
of the tyranny of Archelaus, that Augustus was in-
duced to summon him to Rome, and thence relegate
him to Vienna in Gaul, while he satisfied the de-
mands of his people by annexing his dominions to
the empire . 2 It was now necessary to keep'a regu-
lar force stationed in the strong places of Judea;
but even the means of paying the soldiery at home
had become a question of difficulty. Augustus largely
contributed to the public service from his private
resources; he encouraged his allies also to bestow
their liberality in the same manner; yet he refrained
from soliciting, nor would he even accept, the sub-
scriptions of individual citizens. He was glad per-
haps to profit by a transient necessity for the im-
position of a permanent charge on the Roman people,
who, since they had been relieved from the land-tax,
were jealous of any encroachment on their cherished
immunity. While he decreed the levy of one-twen-

* 1 Dion, Iv. 22.

2 Joseph. Anliq. xvii. 13. 2., xviii. 2. 1. Judea was made a province
in the last half of the year 759; in the tenth year of Archelaus’s
government. Dion, lv. 27. j Bell. Jud. ii. 7. 3.

Digitized by Google

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

313

A.D.4-A.U.757.

tieth upon the succession to property, he invited the
senators to recommend any other tax they deemed
more eligible ; well assured that while many of them
would be eager to submit to his own view, those who
ventured to dissent from it would neutralize their
opposition by the conflict of opinions among them-
selves . 1

To return, however, to the northern frontiers, to
which our eyes have been so frequently di- m (
rected, we may observe that, within a very of the Mar-
recent period, a remarkable revolution had
taken place in the interior of Germany, which must
be ascribed to the influence of a single chief. The
designation of Marcomanni had been given by the
western tribes to a Suevic clan, settled, as their name

imports, on the march or border of the German ter-
ritory . 2 They formed the advanced guard of the
nation in its struggles to extend westward, and to
penetrate through the defiles of Helvetia into the
pastures of Gaul. But the Restoration of the Hel-
vetii by Caesar, and the subsequent intrusion of Gaul-
ish and Homan settlers on the right bank of the
Rhine, seem to have harassed the Marcomanni,

and made them dissatisfied with possessions which
they could not maintain inviolate. They were in-
duced by the authority of their chief Maroboduus,
or Marbod, to remove in a body eastward : crossing
the Mens Gabreta or Erzgebirge, they poured into
the district of Boiohemum, the homes of the Boii,

' Dion, lv. 25.

2 This is one of the earliest and clearest indications of the radical
identity of the German language of the first and the nineteenth cen-
tury. The Marcomanni arc evidently the men of the marca or limes,
the line which divides one territory from another. Zcuss, die Deuts-
chen, &c. p. 1 14. Another derivation assigned, is from markir, a
wood. But this word is itself derived from marca. Zeuss refers to
Grimm, Rechtsalterthum. p. 497. Some writers Germanize Marobo-
duus into Marbod. But the meaning of this word is not obvious,
and here and elsewhere I have generally preferred the Latin as the
only authorized form.

Digitized by Google

314

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

cn. xxxTin.

and established themselves in the broad, lozenge-
shaped valley of the Moldau and Upper Elbe. With-
in this territory, entrenched in a circumvallation of
mountains, and doubly defended by rocks and forests,
The kingdom the great South-German empire was rapidly
dnn.*ln ° reared under the sway of its spirited ehief-
Germany. tain, who had profited by the lessons he
had learned in an early residence at Rome . 1 Flanked
by the Narisci on one side and the Quadi on the
other, the Marcomanni and their allies confronted,
along the whole line of the Upper Danube, the gar-
risons of Noricum and Yindelicia. Maroboduus
maintained a regular force of seventy thousand foot
and four thousand horse, armed and disciplined after
the Roman model ; and these troops, while still un-
molested by the southern invaders, he had exercised
in reducing his German neighbours, and consolida-
ting his wide possessions. If at an earlier period
the Marcomanni had retired before the aggressions
of the Roman power, they now no longer pretended
to fear it: the provincials who fled from the tyranny
of the proconsuls found an hospitable reception be-
yond the Danube ; while in the discussions which en-
sued, the envoys of Maroboduus were instructed to
alternate a tone of deference towards their formidable
rivals, with the boldest assertions of equality and in-
dependence . 2

The German nations placed themselves for the most
Muroboduus part under the lead of a single chieftain,
pyrrhui^nd whom the Romans were accustomed to de-
Antiochus. scr ibe by the general designation of king.
But the power of this chief was limited on all sides
by prescriptive usage, and the authority of force and
numbers. A political education at the capital of the

1 Veil. ii. 108.: “Maroboduus cerium imperium vimque

regiam coinplexus ammo.”

2 Veil. ii. 109.: “ Legati quos mittebat ad Caesares interdum ut
supplicem commendabant, interdum ut pro pari loquebantur.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXVIII.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

315

empire was ill-suited to the heir of such a sovereignty
as this. No sooner had Maroboduus returned to his
own country, than he aspired to a loftier eminence
above the jealous control of his armed peers. The
crisis in the fortunes of his nation furnished an op-
portunity for securing the object of his ambition, and
he seems to have acquired a much more absolute
sway than his people had before admitted. This was
the circumstance which made him peculiarly for-
midable to the Romans. The imperators on the
frontiers had hitherto profited far more by the divi-
sions of their enemies, than by the vigour of their
own arms. Accordingly, when they beheld for the
first time a nation of warriors arrayed under the
control of a single hand, they felt deprived of their
wonted advantage, and reduced to contend on equal
terms with an opponent whose strength and courage
might compensate for inferior discipline. Hence it
was that they compared the king of the Marcomanni
to Pyrrhus and Antiochus, and declared that he was
not less dangerous to their own empire than the Ma-
cedonian Philip had proved to Athens. 1 They added
that the frontiers of his kingdom and dependencies
extended to within two hundred miles of Italy : it
was more important to observe that the interval was
occupied by half-conquered foreigners, ready to hail
with acclamations the advance of a German deliverer.
But the despotism of Maroboduus was in fact a
source of weakness rather than of strength ; for it
tended to separate his interests from those of the
brave warriors of the north, and divided into two
jealous camps the great Teutonic nation, campaign of
At the commencement of 759, Tiberius
had exchanged his post on the Rhine for
the command of the legions on the sister- A C - 759 -
stream of the Danube. Preparations had been made

1 Tacitus (Ann. ii. 62.) puts this declaration, at a later period, into
the mouth of Tiberius.

Digitized by Google

316

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

for a grand attack on the Marcomanni, whose in-
solence, as the Eomans designated it, had afforded
sufficient pretext for a declaration of war. The
chief station of the Romans in this quarter was
at Carnuntum, the gate of western Europe, where
her greatest river issues from the hills of the Celt
and Teuton into the plains of the Scythian and Sar-
matian. At this important post, which served to
overawe both Noricum and Pannonia, a force, which
may be estimated at six legions, was collected for the
projected invasion. Tiberius, placing himself at their
head, proceeded to lead them westward, in order to
meet an army of not inferior strength which Satur-
ninus was bringing from the Rhine, cutting his way
with spade and axe through the heart of the Hercy-
nian forest. The boldness of this movement must be
allowed for an instant to arrest our attention. There
was not, indeed, much apprehension of any armed
opposition being made to it. The Suevic tribes,
through whose territories it would be directed, had
for the most part abandoned their homes ; and a large
portion of the track it followed lay within the undis-
puted domain of the -wilderness. But when we con-
sider how ignorant the Romans were of these savage
regions, the rudeness of their methods of exploration
by sea or land, and the gloom of the pathless forest
which they had to traverse without even the compass
for their guide, we must confess that the forethought
and methodical arrangement which could insure the
meeting of two armies from such distant points at an
appointed spot, was not less admirable than the just
self-confidence which ventured to rely on them. It
is not quite clear, from the meagre account of our
historian, whether this spot was on the right bank of
the Danube or the left. The latter seems, however,
the more probable. Tiberius crossed the river at
Carnuntum, and struck in a north-westerly direction
towards the frontiers of Bohemia. He had arrived

Digitized by Google

f

AJD.6-A.TT.759. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 317

within five marches of the enemy’s border ; and Sa-
turninus was at the same moment at no greater dis-
tance from it on the opposite side. Whatever might
have been the further result of the arduous He i. readied
campaign in prospect, this combination,
which for its magnitude and precision de- PinnonU -
serves to be compared with that which we have re-
cently admired, had, in fact, virtually succeeded,
when Tiberius was disconcerted by the report of an
insurrection in Pannonia. The provincial garrisons
had been drafted from their camps, and the natives,
who had groaned under the exactions of the Roman
administration, finding themselves relieved from the
accustomed pressure of military force, sprang with
vehemence to arms. With his prey almost in his
clutches, and a victory in prospect more magnificent
than any since those of Aquae Sextiae and Yercellae,
Tiberius was too discreet to hazard for his own glory
the peace and safety of the empire. He offered terms
to Maroboduus, who, with less discretion, was eager
to accept them. The Roman armies were ordered to
retreat simultaneously, and they regained their pro-
vinces at least without dishonour . 1

The nations through which the flame of rebellion
had spread counted, according to a loose oenrratout-
calculation, eight hundred thousand souls ;
the warriors in arms, whose force might he and niyrUM.
more accurately estimated, were computed at two
hundred thousand infantry and eight thousand horse . 2

’ Pion, Iv. 28.; Veil. ii. 112.: “ Turn necessaria gloriosis praeposita,
neque tutum visum, abdito in interiora exercitu, vacuam tarn vicino
hosti Italiam relinquerc.” Tac. Ann. ii. 46. : “ Conditionibus cequis
disccssum.”

2 This, it will be remembered, is nearly the same proportion of
fighting men to a whole population as that which tvas recorded among
the Helvetians. These provinces hR.d been for several years under
the Roman dominion, and the population may have been numbered
for purposes of administration. In such a ease the slaves were pro-
bably omitted from the account.

Digitized by Google

318

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. mvm.

Their numbers, however, were not so formidable as
the union they maintained among themselves, and
the concert which might be apprehended between
them and the various tribes from the Adriatic to the
Euxine. The immediate cause of this revolt was the
raising of levies by Messalinus, the imperial legate,
for enlistment in the army of the Danube. But the
warriors of the northern provinces were not generally
averse to the risks and glories of Roman service, and
it was rather the tyranny of the government which
always pressed most harshly on the subjects whose
loyalty was least assured, that drove them to the
desperate resource of insurrection. The Dalmatians
and Illyrians, the nearest to Italy, whose long resist-
ance, though productive of few great men or great
events, was deemed worthy of detailed recital by the
historiographer of the enemies of Rome, were led by
chiefs whose names, Bato and Pinnes, have been pre-
served to us . 1 They attacked and overpowered some
cohorts stationed in their own country, then turned
southward, assaulted Salona on the Adriatic without
success, and marched southward as far as Apollonia,
to check perhaps the advance of reinforcements from
Greece. At the same time a Pannonian chief, named
also Bato, attempted to carry the strong post of Sir-
mium ; and though he was repulsed and defeated by
Caecina on the Drave, the loss of the Romans was such
as almost to convert his defeat into a victory. The
readiness with which the Pannonians had learnt, not
only the habits and language, but the tactics of their
conquerors, made them peculiarly formidable. No
nation, it was affirmed, that had ever opposed the
Romans, had so well weighed its resources, or seized
more warily the moment for exerting them. The
rout of the local garrisons, the extermination of the

1 Dion, lv. 29. Besides the “ Civil Wars" of Rome, Appian wrote
the “ Affairs, ” that is, the ‘‘contests with the republic” of the Illy-
rians, the Macedonians, and the Carthaginians.

Digitized by Google

A.D.6-A.U.7 59*

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

319

Roman colonists, the abortive attack upon Sirmium,
were only preludes to an organized and general com-
bination against the foreign intruders. On the one
band, the Dacians and Sarmatians were encouraged
to attack the extreme right of the Roman line on the
Danube ; on the other, preparations were made for
penetrating into Italy itself by the route of Naupor-
tus and Tergeste . 1

The accessibility of Italy upon this side, where
her mountain barrier sinks most nearly to Coniterna tioa
the level of the plains, was at all times a AiSSTor
matter of anxiety to her rulers. Augustus, Auga,tu *
shaken by years and dispirited by family losses, for-
got that the rear of the enemy was pressed by the
armaments of Tiberius, and exclaimed, with petulant
vexation, that ten days might bring them to the
gates of Rome. The consternation became general.
In earlier times the republic had disdained to main-
tain a defensive force before the walls of the capital.
Every citizen in those days was a soldier, every father
of a family was a veteran of many campaigns. Rome
could never be taken by surprise. But the vast
change in her social circumstances had produced no
alteration in her material defences. Italy was al-
lowed to remain denuded of regular troops, and her
children shrank from a service to which they were
unaccustomed and averse. It required a strong ap-
peal to their fears to support the vigorous measures
which seemed requisite for their safety. The veterans
were summoned from their estates ; the heads of every
household, male or female, were required to furnish

1 Veil, ii.l 10. : “ Pars petere Italiam decreverat, junctam sibi Nau-
, porti et Tergestis confinio.” Nanportus is evidently from its name
the station of a flotilla, snch as the Romans maintained on some of
their great frontier rivers. It must have stood on the banks of the
Save, near iEmona, the modern Laybach. D’Anville supposes it
to be Ober- Laybach, on the eastern declivity of the Carnian.Alps.
The ancient as well as the modern road from Italy lay through these
places.

Digitized by Google

320

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

a contingent of freedmen for military service; sena-
tors and knights were bid to unbar the doors of their
factories, and pour forth their slaves, whom the state
enfranchised before putting arms into their hands . 1

Whatever apprehensions the emperor may have
st.te of affairs felt at this moment, they were probably
at Home. excited not so much by the hostility of the
barbarians beyond the Alps, as by the disquietude
which had for some time prevailed at Rome. It can
hardly be said that the citizens had any particular
distress to complain of, beyond the occasional recur-
rence of scarcities and inundations. Nevertheless,
their complaints were becoming louder and more fre-
quent. Augustus had yielded to their outcries and
redoubled his largesses. To rid the city of its super-
fluous consumers, he had ordered that the gladiators
and the slaves exposed for sale should be removed to
a hundred miles’ distance. He set the example of
dismissing a portion of his own household ; and he
gave the senators permission, long jealously withheld,
to quit Rome for their estates . 2 But fresh causes of
discontent arose with the same harassing results.
Fires broke out in the city in quickly recurring
Diicontent of succession. Again the people murmured,
mLErf” as if their chief were responsible for as-
vuioui 0 f every element. Under despotic

governments, incendiary fires have been employed to
arrest the attention of the rulers to the wants of their
subjects, and it is not impossible that the hands of

1 Veil. ii. 111. Comp. Dion, lv. 31. It must be observed that
Velleius speaks in much stronger terms than Dion of the anxiety of
this crisis, and may fairly be suspected of exaggerating it from his
known disposition to flatter Tiberius. Nevertheless, Suetonius, no
flatterer of Tiberius, or of any other of the Caesars, could declare
that Rome had experienced no such dangers since the period of the
Panic wars. Tib. 16. : “ Quod gravissimum omnium externorum bel-
lorum post Pnnica per quindecim legiones paremque auxiliortun
copiatn triennio gi-ssit.”

2 Dion, lv. 22, 23, 26.; Oros. vii. 3. A. u. 758,759} Fischer, Iioein.
Ztit.

Digitized by Google

A«Pi6~*AiTJ«f 59.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

321

citizens themselves may have caused the conflagra-
tions they now resented. This, however, was the
origin of the nightly watch of the city, a police
formed in the first instance from the emperor’s own
freedmen, and meant to serve a temporary purpose,
but soon found too useful, both to the public ser-
vice and the imperial interests, to be abandoned . 1
Such long neglect of so obvious a precaution shows
strongly the power of the aristocratic element in the
old constitution. The nobles, secure in their isolated
dwellings on the hills of Rome, had no concern for
the frail and crowded tenements of the commons,
and let matters take their course with frigid indiffer-
ence.* But notwithstanding these concessions made
to the popular cry by the patron of the people, the
discontent of the citizens was little appeased. They
had become tired of their favourite. Augustus had
grown old and morose ; his figure had lost its grace,
his government its brilliancy. The smoothness with
which the machine of empire moved allowed men
to forget how easily it might be disarranged, and
how fatal might be the consequences of disturbance.
The mildness of the administration encouraged the
murmurs of the discontented, and many an aimless
muttering of change was heard in the familiar talk
of a thoughtless populace . 3 Seditious placards were
posted at night in the public places. The origin of
these demonstratibns was said to be traced to a cer-
tain Plautius Rufus, a noble of no personal distine-

1 Suet, Oct. 30. ; Dion, lv. 26.

! The history of this subject is given briefly by Panins in the Digest,
i. 15. 1. “ Apud vetustiores incendiis arcendis triumviri pneerant,

qui ab eo quod excubias agebant nocturni dieti sunt. Interveniebant
non nnnquam ct sediles et tribuni plcbis. Erat iiutcm fnmilia publica
circa portatn ct muros disposita. unde si opus esset evocabatar. Fue-
rant et privntte familiie qui incendia yel mercedc vel gratia exstin-
guerent.” — The service was thus left to the occasional energy of the
magistrates or to private enterprise. “ Deinde D. Augustus maluit
per se huic rei consult ” Reimur on Dion,/. c.

3 Dion, lv. 27. : « ol jtoAAA p.iv xat tpavepu s ytxrfpiwoia StthdAuvy.

VOL. IV. Y

Digitized by Google

322 HISTORY OP THE ROMANS cn. xxxvin.

tion ; it was believed, however, that he was only an
instrument in the hands of concealed agitators . 1
Suspicion and apprehension everywhere prevailed;
and these were increased rather than allayed by the
inquiries of the government, which offered rewards
for the discovery of the guilty and obtained nume-
rous denunciations. A scarcity, with which the city
was threatened, contributed to aggravate alarm, which
only departed with the return of plenty and security ;
Good humour when good humour was restored by the
thegamc^ games of Tiberius and the young Grer-
of Tibenuj. manicus in honour of the still lamented
Drusus. Still greater was the delight universally
manifested when Tiberius inscribed his deceased
brother’s name, in conjunction with his own, on the
temple he now dedicated to the twin-deities. Castor
and Pollux . 2

But scarcely had this cloud passed away, and Ti-
Aiiu-rityof berius returned to the attack on Maro-

the’cbioction. ^oduus beyond the Danube, than the news
of Augustus, arrived of the great Pannonian revolt, which
had broken out in his rear. Fortunately, abundance
reigned at this moment in the city, and while the
supply of their simple necessaries was abundant, the
populace was never dangerous to the government
which maintained it in idleness. Anxious as Au-
gustus must have been, at such a crisis, with the
possibility of a domestic, insurrection to complicate
and aggravate it, he might be reassured by the trem-
bling eagerness with which all classes now joined in
obeying his directions for their common safety. The

1 Suet. Oct 25.; Dion, i. c.

1 This dedication (Suet. Tib. 20.) seems to have taken place early
in the spring of 759, when Tiberius was again at Rome for a few
months before proceeding t<? the campaign on the Danube. Dion,
lv. 27., who adds, ri rt yap ruy ■toXipov Spa 5i$Jkh, koX it rip ir6kw,
birirt vapdrrxot, cw tx^it ire<polra, rb piv ti, ttpaypirtitv tlvwv tvfica, rb
Si W) rkturrov, ipofiovptvos pb& A Cyoucrros &AAo>' Tiva irapa rj)v iaraualav
avrov rpoTipriuTi.

Digitized by Google

A.D.7-A.U.760.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

323

citizens submitted to the fresh imposition of a fiftieth '
on the sale of slaves ; and these repeated recogni-
tions, however trifling in amount, of their liability
to share the burdens of their subjects, served to
confirm an important principle. They marked, in a
way which no politician could mistake, the equaliza-
tion of all classes under the rising monarchy of the
empire.

The new levies, hastily raised and equipped, were
entrusted to the command of the youthful The young
Germanicus, who had now nearly com- iuPaimonu.
pleted his twenty-first year. 1 The name ^c.'rao.
he bore and the favour which already attached to
him, marked him as a fitting leader for this popular
armament: and Augustus beheld with satisfaction
in the third generation of his family, qualities,
both of mind and person, which augured the highest
distinction. This was the more consolatory to the
bereaved grandsire, as the next in years of the
Caesarean house, entitled not less from his name
than Germanicus to the love of the soldiers, though
placed in the same line of succession with him,
seemed to offer no such happy promise. This was
Agrippa Postumus, the youngest child of Julia,
bom after his father’s decease, on whom, as nearest
to him in blood, the affection Augustus had lavished
on Caius and Lucius might now be expected to de-
volve. But from some defect of breeding Dija PPO mt-
if not of temper, the last of the Agrippas at

grievously degenerated from his kindred, “f Agrippl
Ungainly in person, and awkward in every Po ‘ tumuj -
gesture, he seemed unsusceptible, both in mind and

1 The younger Germanicus, son of Nero Claudius Drusus, to whom
the title of Germanicus was assigned after his father’s premature
death, was born a. tr. 739, probably in September. He was now
despatched on his first campaign in the summer of 760. Dion,
lv. 30. His pranomen is not ascertained ; it was probably the same
as his father’s. Nero, which was originally a cognomen, became at
. this time a pranomen of the Claudian house. Suet. Claud . I.

Y 2

Digitized by Google

324

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvin.

body, of the training suitable to his station. Docility,
both moral and physical, was a quality to which the
Romans attached peculiar importance. They con-
sidered a plastic nature the great mark of distinction
between the gentle and the base, the free and the
servile character; and as regarded his own family,
Augustus was no doubt peculiarly sensitive on this
point, which seemed to touch on his imperial mis-
sion : for the beauty of his own person, and the
fineness of his intellect, constituted a powerful ele-
ment in his claim, as well as in that of the divine
Julius, to reign over the free Roman people. That
any of his descendants, whom he had himself reared
or adopted, should prove unworthy in manners or
appearance of the ambrosian blood of their parent
Venus, pierced him to the quick. He considered it
as a personal disgrace, implying some defect on his
own part; and he could not bear that such a failure
should be manifested in the face of his admirers.
To this sentiment the unfortunate but guilty Julia
had been partly sacrificed : Agrippa, even more un-
fortunate, was at least guiltless. The worst that could
be alleged against him was that his manners were
what the Romans contemptuously designated as ser-
vile: he had neither the martial nor the literary
spirit of the true optimate. Instead of devoting
himself to the mimic war of the Campus Martius or
the mimic debates of the rhetoricians’ schools, he
would recline in the shade of a Baian portico, and
listlessly angle in the placid waters beneath it. For
the triumphs of his rod and line he claimed, it was
said, the attributes of Neptune, an assumption which
had been deemed abominable even in Sextus, when
he ruled supreme over the Tyrrhene and Ionian, and
was master of a thousand triremes . 1 Doubtless vigil-
ant enemies were not wanting to insinuate that his

1 Dion, lv. 32.

Digitized by Google

A.D.7-A.C.760.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

325

wanton mother had played false to her husband, and
suffered the turbid blood of a plebeian paramour
to mingle with the Julian ichor. Of all the direct
descendants of Augustus this youth remained alone
to dispute with the Claudian branch of the Caesarean
stem the honours which were now almost assured
to it. The intrigues of Livia did not sleep in the
last crisis of the long contest she had waged against
the claims of the rival race. If, as was reported,
Agrippa allowed himself to use the language of ex-
asperation against her, we may well believe that he
at least gave credence to the current stories of her
machinations and crimes. But it is added that, in
his bursts of uncontrolled passion, he did not spare
Augustus himself, whom he accused of depriving
him of his legitimate patrimony, by the acceptance
of his father’s legacy.

To make such a charge as this against the man who
was able, and naturally willing, to indem-
mty him tar beyond any loss he had sus-
tained, was an act of stolid perversity ; and
such was the character generally, and we must sup-
pose not unjustly, attributed to Postumus . 1 The em-
peror determined, with one last pang, to rid himself
of the embarrassment of so unworthy a claimant on
his favour. He caused him to be arrested and carried
to Planasia, a barren rock off the coast of Ilva,
and there detained as a state prisoner. This extreme
act of parental authority towards a child who had
already assumed the toga, and was accused of no
crime, he caused the senate to ratify by a decree, in
which its motives were explained, and justified no
doubt by ancient precedents . 2 Having nerved him-

1 Tac. Ann. i. 3. : “ Rudem sane bonarum artium et robore corporis
stolide ferocem.” Veil. ii. 112.: “Mirapravitate anirai atqiie ingenii in
pra:cipitia con versus.” Suet. Oct. 65. : “ Ingeniuni sordidura et ferox.”

2 Tac. Ann. i. 6.: “ Malta stevaque Augustus de moribus adoles-
cents questus, ut exiliulh ejus senatus consuko sancirctur perfecerat.”

Digitized by Google

326 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS cn. xxxvin.

self with fortitude thus to violate his feelings for the
common weal, as he imagined, perhaps more truly
as a sacrifice to his own pride, he turned with the
nigh promise yearnings of disappointed affection to the
of ” uc ’ object on which his hopes were now begin-
Germanicus, n | n g to centre, the fair promise of the gal-
lant Germanicus. The appointment of this young
prince to his first military command gave scope to
talents and a disposition not unworthy of Drusus
the well-beloved. Before the end of the year he
had worsted one of the Dalmatian tribes, while Ti-
berius, returning from the Danube, reoccupied Pan-
nonia with an overwhelming force. The chiefs of
the insurgent armies had taken advantage of his
absence to move eastward, in order to intercept the
forces which Severus, who commanded in Moesia,
was bringing up from that quarter. They had suc-
ceeded in meeting him, and had compelled him
to await their onset in his camp, near the Palus
Volcea, or lake of Balaton, but they were unable
to force his well-defended entrenchments. Failing
in this attempt, they found themselves pressed by
the Roman arms on three sides, and falling back
on a country which was no longer able to support
them, they suffered the extremes of famine and pes-
tilence ; yet when at last they sued for peace, they
still sued with arms in their hands, and in an atti-
• tude of defiance, with which the Roman leader dis-
dained to parley. More than once, it was asserted,
did Augustus declare himself satisfied, and exhort
Tiberius to conclude a war which he suspected him
of purposely protracting . 2 But Tiberius knew, per-

Dion. lv. 32. Suetonins states that he was first relegated to Snrren-
tum; afterwards, “nihilo tractabiliorcra immo in dies amentiorem in
insulam transportnvit, sepsitque insuper custodia militum." Suet. /. e.

1 Suet. Tib. 16.:“ Quanquam stepius revocaretur, tamen perseve-
ravit, metnens ne vicinus et pravalens hostis instaret ultro ceden-
tibus.” Comp. Dion, lv. 31.: inrintTtvaas istbyTi/Mpiov, its Svnjdf'yra
(tty 5ia t axtuv airrobs tcparijirai, rplffoma St

Digitized by Google

a.d.!)-a.u.762.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

327

haps, the inveterate hostility the Roman government
had provoked, as well as the resolution of Fin»i «ub-
his opponents. When the Dalmatian Bato the P&nno*
was led captive into his presence, and was th“r\we..
asked what had induced him to revolt, and m
to persist so long in a desperate struggle, It is
your oiun doing, he boldly answered, who send
not dogs or shepherds to protect your sheep , hut
wolves to prey on them. Dalmatia, however, says
the historian, returned to her obedience, partly by
conquest and partly on capitulation. 1 Nevertheless
the gallant Bato, who seems to have been released
on his pretended submission, once more defied the
conquerors. When another Bato, the chief of the
Pannonians, sought the favour of the Romaus
by betraying his colleague Pinnes, the Dalmatian
turned his arms against the traitor, and speedily
overpowered and slew him. The Pannonians now
rose once more against the invaders ; but exhausted
and dispirited by their own divisions, they were
easily reduced. Bato himself did not refrain from
plundering allies who could serve his hopeless cause
no longer. Keeping hold of the passes of the moun-
tains between Pannonia and his own country, he
continued to maintain his personal independence;
but it was the independence of a brigand chief, no
longer of a national leader. The war dwindled into
the chase of a cunning fugitive from post to post,
and ceases from henceforth to occupy a place in
history. The pacification of the great province be-
tween the Adriatic and the Danube was not finally
completed by Germanicus till the autumn of the
year 762. 2

Meanwhile, deprived of the consoling presence of
all his nearest kinsmen, the emperor had begun, in the
solitude of his palace, to find the cares of sovereignty

1 Dion, lv. 33, 34.; Yell. ii. 110—116.

* Dion, lvi. 11 — 17. ; Zonaras, x. 37.

Digitized by Google

328

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

insupportably onerous. He ventured by degrees to
Mortification, cast aside a portion of the overwhelming
of Augustus, responsibilities to which he had subjected
himself. The senators, at whose meetings he had
attended with scrupulous punctuality, were now al-
lowed to determine many matters in his absence;
he desisted from the habit of appearing in person
at the mock elections of the Comitia; while from
the year 760, when the votes had been interrupted
by popular disturbances, he directed all the magis-
trates to be chosen on his own immediate nomina-
tion. The anxieties of the Pannonian war drew
him from the city as far as Ariminum, and the
citizens offered vows for his safety on his departure,
and of thanksgiving on his return, as if he had
undergone the perils of a foreign campaign. Satiety
had left him weary and restless : his cheerful and
collected temper gave way under repeated alarms
and accumulated vexations. After disarming the
animosity of noble intriguers by unexpected cle-
mency, he found himself struck at by the hands
of bondmen and adventurers. His life was at-
tempted by an obscure slave named Telephus, whose
brain was heated with the imagination that he was
destined to reign. Audasius, a convicted forger, and
Epicadus, a foreign freedman, sought to

Fresh con- r m a • J? , T , . ° r

Igahlst him can 7 off Agnppa Postumus and Julia from
their exile, and put them at the head of a
seditious movement. 1 This event, the date of which,
however, cannot be fixed precisely, may have deter-
mined the emperor to inflict banishment upon an-
other member of the same hapless family. Julia
had left behind her at Rome, besides Caius and
Lucius, and the wretched Postumus, two daughters,
a Julia and an Agrippina. The first bf these had
been married to L. zEmilius Paulus, grand-nephew

1 Suet. Oct. 19.

v.

Digitized by Google

A.D.9-A.C.762.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

329

of the triumvir Lepidus, the head of the house
which might still be considered the noblest in
Home ; while the other, who was younger, perhaps
by some years, was united to her kinsman, Grer-
manicus, apparently about her own age. The
JEmilii continued for several generations to betray
the pride of race which could ill brook the ascen-
dancy of a Julius or a Claudius . 1 The son of the
triumvir had perished, as we have seen, for aiming
at the subversion of the emperor’s power; and the
husband of Julia was now doomed also to B.ni.hment
suffer on a charge of conspiracy. The younger Julia,
exact period of this treason is not known, *■ <>•
nor is its punishment specified. The culprit was
confined or banished : his wife, whose irregularities
were numerous and notorious, allied herself with
D. Silanus, and was convicted of adultery. Silanus
was in turn charged with treasonable aspirations,
with what result we know not; but the crime of
Julia, which brought scandal as well as danger on
the imperial house, was punished by relegation to
an island. Augustus was deeply affected at this out-
break of the evil blood of the mother in the next
generation. Though it was recorded, as a proof
of parental feeling, that he never suffered one of

1 The irregular ambition hereditary in the .flSmilii is noted in some
lines of a very late writer, which the historical student may do well
to remember. Rutil. Itiner. 295.

“ Inter castrorum vestigia sermo retexit
• Sardoam, Lepido prcecipitante, fugam . . .

Ille tamen Lepidus pejor, civilibus armis
Qui gessit sociis impia bella tribus . . .

Insidias pad moliri tertius atisus
Tristibus exegit congrua fata reis.

Quartus Csesareo dum vnlt irrepere regno
Incesti pcenam solvit adulterii.”

The last of these cases refers to a later period, and will be recorded
in its place. The iEmilius of whom we are now treating is not men-
tioned in these lines, because he bore the cognomen Paulus. See the
stemma of the JEmilii in appendix to chapter 1.

Digitized by Google

330

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

Lis own race to be put to death, he forbade the
offspring of this hateful amour to be reared, and,
reflecting with indignation on the vices of both
the Julias, exclaimed, in the language of Homer,
better he had never been married and had died
childless . 1

The silence of history throws a veil over the lat-
ter years of Augustus, and has, doubtless,
onhepoet buried many acts of morose seventy, on
which no citizen ventured to consign his
comments to writing. The recollection, however, of
one example of the kind, which may be regarded as a
type of the imperial tyranny at this period, has been
casually preserved. If the personal freedom of the
citizen was still guarded by the laws, and the ac-
cused still competent to defend himself before the
ordinary tribunals ; if advocates were still bold and
judges honourable, there were, nevertheless, powers
beside the laws, which had found a way of dis-
pensing with their application, in cases where their
interference might prove inconvenient. When the
emperor wished to rid himself of a disagreeable
citizen, he directed him to remove from Eome to
some distant spot indicated to him ; and such was
the authority of his mere word, that without de-
fence, without trial, without sentence, without the
use or even threat of force, the culprit at once
obeyed, and plunged silently into oblivion. The
emperor might, if he pleased, appease public curi-

1 Tac. Ann. i. 6.: “In nullius unquam suorum necenr duravit.”
Suet. Oct. 65., quotes from the Iliad, iii. 40. :

atff 6<ptAov &yau6s r’ tfitvai, ttyovis r’ airoAtaOcu.

In the original the expression is addressed by Hector to Paris, —
aid' (xptAts &yov6s r’ (ptvai, Hyafiis r* imoAtoBat :
the word Hyovos evidently meaning “never born;” but Augustus, I
presume, or at least his biographer, understood it differently. The
date of the younger Julia’s banishment is fixed to 761 by Tacitus,
Ann. iv. 7 1. : and Suetonius tells us that her place of confinement was
the island of Trimerus, off the coast of Apulia,

Digitized by GoogI

A.D.9-A.U.762.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

331

osity by declaring the cause of this sudden removal ;
but the mere act of his will required neither the
concurrence nor the ratification of any legal tri-
bunal. Such was the celebrated exile of Publius
Ovidius Naso, a popular favourite, whose abuse of
his noble gifts might seem calculated to disarm a
tyrant’s jealousy, and even secure his approbation.
This illustrious poet, familiar to our childhood under
the cherished name of Ovid, was a man of fashion
and figure, the son of a Koman knight of Sulmo,
who had been introduced to the best society of the
capital, and had succeeded in establishing himself
there by the charm of his writings and the dexterity
of his adulation. He was undoubtedly a writer of
uncommon genius, of a fertility and invention un-
surpassed by any of his countrymen, and little in-
ferior to any in language and versification. His
various compositions comprehend many C hK*eterof
pieces of unsullied purity and grace, which hi * poetrf '
are still the first pages of antiquity we put into the
hands of our children, and among the last on which
we turn the retrospect of our own declining years. But
Ovid had desecrated his abilities by the licentious-
ness of many of his subjects, and the grossness with
which he treated them: he had thrown himself on
the foul track of far inferior men, who sought the
favour of the government by inculcating frivolity
of sentiment, and degrading the character of their
countrymen. It may be said, perhaps, in excuse
for Ovid, that he erred from mere gaiety of heart,
stimulated by the applause of greatness and beauty :
he says of himself, and his protestations are not
unworthy of belief, that his verses were purer than
those he imitated, and his manners purer than his
verses . 1 His amatory poems were principally the

1 See his elaborate but by no means satisfactory excuses in the
second book of Tristia.

Digitized by Google

332

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvin.

work of Lis earlier years, and the maturity of his
powers had been devoted sedulously, nor with less
felicity, to subjects of wider scope and higher in-
terest. 1 While thus honourably engaged, suddenly
at the close of the year 761, he was bade to de-
part from Rome, and the obscure town of Tomi,
on the wild shores of the Euxine, was denoted as
the place to which he should transport himself. 2
A few hours only were allowed him to prepare for
the journey, which was to remove him for ever
from his home, his friends and family. He was
exiled, unheard and unarraigned, and the cause of
his banishment was only vaguely indicated by a
complaint against the pernicious tendency of his
love verses. The poet of intrigue and gallantry had
a wife, to whom he was as tenderly attached as the
severest of the old Roman censors; but she was
forbidden to accompany, or to rejoin him. A single
friend ventured to break the agonies of parting, by

1 Since the publication of the Ars Amandi , which may be fixed to
the year 752, he had laboured on the wonderful epic of the Meta-
morphose in which, though he never veils the licentiousness of
mythological story, he had at least no immoral purpose; and on his
versified rationale of the national calendar, which, with a few inci-
dental blemishes, is on the whole a model of Roman dignity. The
former of these works was completed but not finally corrected at the
moment of his banishment, and was given to the world with some
imperfections; of the latter, the six books we possess were probably
finished, and the remaining six perhaps only rudely sketched out.
Though Ovid speaks of the twelve books as written, “ Sex ego fasto-
rum scripsi totiderftque libellos,” he says, nevertheless, that the work
was interrupted by his disgrace; and, as he complains that he had
no books with him at Tomi, and was unable to study, it seems very
improbable that a work which required so much research could have
been resumed under such unfavourable circumstances. Nor in all
his writings at Tomi does he ever allude to it as in progress.

2 Ovid, Trist. iv. 10. He had at this time, as he informs us, com-

pleted his fiftieth year: “ decern lustris omni sine labc peractis.” He
was born March 20, 711, at the epoch of the battle of Mutina, and
his banishment took place in December of 761. Trist. i. 11. 3. Sec
Fischer in Ann. Clinton is to be understood in the same sense,
though, from some confusion in his arrangement, it requires con-
siderable attention to detect his real view. ,

Digitized by Google

A.D.9-A.U.762. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 333

attending him during the first days of travel; and
he too fell a victim, not long afterwards, to the
tyrant’s fatal suspicions. While the scions of the
imperial family, who might perhaps some day be
recalled, were retained in durance within sight of
the Latian coast ; the unfortunate knight, as if to
preclude all hope of pardon, was cast out on an un-
known frontier, many hundred miles distant. We
observe with an awful sense of the emperor’s power,
that the island of Planasia or Pandateria, past which
whole fleets sailed daily, was deemed a prison out
of which no criminal could break : but our awe is
enhanced on hearing that a citizen condemned to
banishment on the frontiers of the empire should
simply receive an order to repair there, and be left
to find his way, perhaps even unattended, without
fear of his lingering on his route or diverging
from it . 1

The cause of this cruel punishment was surely not
that which Augustus thought fit to assign. Fruitier
It seems to have been of a nature which he on the cause
could not venture to declare openly : had ment. s
it been an offence against public morality, he would
have claimed merit for making it the subject of a
public arraignment. Though the sufferer bows to his
sentence, and acquiesces discreetly in the charge which
he knows to be fictitious, his allusions point plainly
to some other cause, well known to Augustus and to
himself, the possession apparently, and possibly, as
he protests, the innocent possession, of some fatal
secret. The conjectures which have been made re-

1 Ovid records with some minuteness the stages of his long journey
by sea and land, but gives no intimation that even a single officer
was deputed to guard and conduct him. Nor does he seem to have
been under any restraint at Tomi. The inhospitable character of
the neighbourhood may have been considered a sufficient pledge for
his not attempting to escape. It seems, however, that some exiles
contrived to avoid going to their places of banishment. Augustus
animadverted with no great severity upon them. Dion, lvi. 27.

Digitized by Google

334

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

cm. xxxvm.

garding it may be readily dismissed as groundless.
The surmise that he had been detected in an intrigue
with the elder Julia, and that she was in fact the
lady to whom he addressed his love verses under the
name of Corinna, though derived, perhaps, from
nearly contemporary sources, is refuted by the evi-
dence of dates . 1 The only clue, as it appears, to guide
our inquiries is the coincidence of the time with the
disgrace of the younger Julia, and with the treason-
able attempts with which that event seems to have
been connected. When, at a later period, Fabius
Maximus, a man of political consequence, falls under
the emperor’s displeasure, the unfortunate exile, in a
burst of sorrow, would fain take the blame on him-
self, as if his own error had been important enough
to involve in its consequences the fate of his noblest
friend. Putting these circumstances together, it
seems natural to suppose that Ovid, though no public
man himself, got unwittingly implicated in the poli-
tical intrigues of the time, and suffered as an accom-
plice in projects, of the scope of which he was perhaps
actually unconscious . 3 From the scene of his punish-

1 The only ground for this popular but untenable hypothesis, is
the misinterpretation of a passage in Sidonius Apollinaria :

“ Et te carmina per libidinosa
Notum, Naso tener, Tomosque missum.

Quondam Ctesarese nimis puell®

Falso nomine subditum Corinnse.”

Even could it be shown that Julia was meant by the name of the
poet’s mistress Corinna, and that he did really intrigue with her, it
would not follow from this passage that he was banished on that
account The punishment of Julia preceded that of Ovid by nine
years. But he had sung the praises of Corinna almost twenty years
before the first of these dates. The name was probably a mere
poetical abstraction. It may be admitted, however, that Sidonius
refers to a trndition of great antiquity, derived from the appearance
of the Art of Love about the period of the elder Julia’s disgrace.

- Seethe well-known deprecation, Trial, ii. 103., quoted below, and
Epist. ex Pont. ii. 2.:

“ Nil nisi non sapiens possum timidusque vocarij ”
which, taken together, seem to imply that he had shrunk from di-

Digitized by Google

A.D.9-A.P.762.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

335

ment, on the verge of the inhospitable Dobrudscha,
dreary and pestilential now, but then alternating the
frosts of the Neva with the fevers of the Niger, the
wretched victim poured forth his misery in verses of
grace and sweetness, though of little power : he mur-
mured at the loss of every friend and amusement, at
the rudeness of the people, and hostility of their
savage neighbours, while he shuddered at the sight
of the frozen Euxine, or shivered in the agues of the
Danubian marshes . 1 A gleam of reviving cheerfulness
induced him at more favourable moments to cultivate
the hospitality of the natives, and to flatter them by
acquiring their language and even writing verses in
it ; but neither lamentations nor industry availed to
soothe the bitterness of his sorrows, which were only
for a moment allayed by anticipations of future cele-
brity ; and he continued in vain to solicit with abject
humiliation the compassion of the offended emperor.
Though his punishment was not strictly exile, but
only the milder form of relegation, which allowed
him to retain his fortune and his citizenship, and ad-
mitted the hope of eventual pardon, he never obtained
remission of his sentence, though he survived Augus-
tus three years . 2

So well known and so deeply feared was the

vulging some important circumstance which had come accidentally
to his knowledge. Dunlop, Hist. Rom. Lit. iii. 363. The extrava-
gant adulation of Augustus and expressions of personal devotion
which abound in the writings from Tomi, may have been meant as
an atonement for a political fault.

1 Tomi, the spot of Ovid’s exile, is supposed to have been at, or
very near to, the modem Costendje.

2 See this explained in the Tristia, v. 11.:

“ Nec vitam nec opes nec jus mihi civis ademit ....

Nil nisi me patriis jussit abire focis ....

Ipse relegati, non cxsulis, uiitur in me Nomine.”

The date of Ovid’s death, a. u. 770, or early in 771, in his sixtieth
year, is established by Euseb. Chron. ii. p. 157., and the Auctor Vita
Ovid. Fischer in ana. 767. Comp. Clinton, Fast. Hell, iii 27 'i
Fast. Rom. I 5.

Digitized by Google

336

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvm.

emperor’s resentment, from Avhatever cause it pro-
snent dkh ceeded, that the sufferer’s friends seem to

t!l“ people. have been deterred from interceding for him.
They cowered with the rest of the citizens under the
suspicious tyranny which pretended to have done the
state a service in robbing them of the favourite min-
isters of their pleasures. The Loves and Graces
might seem to have fled from the city of Venus with
the banishment of Ovid and the Julias, the one the
high-priest of Gallantry and Dissipation, the others
the most distinguished of their devotees. The pre-
tence of a regard for public morals was derided in
secret by the rising generation of sensualists and
triflers. They thought it hard to be deprived of their
amusements to satisfy the scruples of a worn-out
debauchee, or to glorify the cold correctness of an
unamiable prude. When Ovid, in an unguarded
moment of mythological reverie,' chose to liken his
mysterious crime to the misfortune of Actaeon, who
had startled the shiftless Diana, the Romans were, too
clever in pasquinade not to seize on an obvious in-
nuendo ; nor could it be left to the ingenuity of a
modern to be the first to suggest that he had dis-
covered the empress naked in her bath . 1 It is not

• 1 Ovid, Tri.it. ii. 103.:

“ Cur aliquid vidi, cur noxia lumina feci ?

Cur imprudenti cognita culpa mihi ?

Inscius Actaeon vidit sine veste Dianam :
free da fuit canibus non minus ille suis.”

Dryden has the merit of the conjecture founded on these lines, but
it seems impossible it could have escaped the malicious wit of Ovid’s
own contemporaries. Another notion is, that he had surprised the
emperor himself in some grave indecorum. I have seen a disquisi-
tion to prove that his real offence was his having too nearly divulged
the meaning of the Eleusiuian mysteries. The peccant passage is in
the Metamorphoses, xv. 368.:

“Pressus humo bcllator equus crabronis origo est:

Concava litoreo si demas brachia cancro,

Catera supponas terra, de parte sepulta
Scorpios exibit, caudaque minabitur unca: ”

The reader will be rather inclined to complain that if he really knew
the secret, he has been only too successful in concealing it.

Digitized by Google

A.D.9-A.U.762.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

337

improbable that some of the bitter lampoons against
the emperor’s private habits, specimens of which have
been preserved by Suetonius, date from this reign of
mortification and terror.

The closing years of a long and prosperous reign
have not unfrequently been clouded with state of popu.
popular discontent. Even the subjects and u^iriSu*
courtiers of a despotism become wearied at last with
hearing their sovereign styled the Just, the Benefi-
cent, or the Fortunate. The court of Augustus indeed
had never pandered by meretricious brilliancy to the
tastes of vulgar gentility, and accordingly, in respect
to show and ornament, the setting of the imperial sun
suffered no eclipse. The prince of the Roman people
had presided over the national intelligence. He had
sought to educate his subjects by the patronage of
literary merit, and by his graceful recognition of some
of the best objects of national interest had even cre-
ated a genuine appreciation of them. But the era
of Virgil and Horace, of Varius and Pollio, had quickly
passed away ; the Caesar no longer blandly counten-
anced, with Maecenas at his side, the social intercourse
of the wisest and most genial of the Romans. The
last years of the age, familiarly styled the Augustan,
were singularly barren of the literary glories from
which its celebrity was chiefly derived. One by one
the stars in its firmament had been lost to the world :
Virgil and Horace, Tibullus and Propertius, Varius
and Plotius had long since died ; the charm which
the imagination of Livy had thrown over the earlier
annals of Rome had ceased to shine on the details of
almost contemporary history ; and if the flood of his
eloquence still continued flowing, we can hardly sup-
pose that the stream was as rapid, as clear, and as
fresh as ever. And now the youngest of its race of
poets seemed to extinguish in his disgrace the last
spark of its admired brilliancy. If the remembrance
of their early enthusiasm for the beauty and genius of,

VOL. iv. z

Digitized by Google

338

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

. ch. xxxvm.

Octavius, the father of his country and the saviour of
the state, still survived to temper the dissatisfaction
of the Romans at the gloom of his declining years,
no such tender feelings interfered to modify their dis-
gust at the pretended virtues of his consort, or the
ill-disguised haughtiness of her son. Their feelings
were lacerated by the successive loss of' so many ami-
able princes, in each of whom they beheld a victim
to the machinations of this detested pair ; they mur-
mured at the untoward destiny of the still living
children of Agrippa ; but they turned with the fresh-
ness of a hope which no disappointments could
blight, no evil auguries overshadow, to the opening
promise of the gallant Germanicus, the last of the
national favourites. A spring, summer, and autumn
had passed with nothing to dispel the general dissatis-
faction except an occasional rumour of successes in
Pannonia, and assurances, often repeated, but never
yet fulfilled, of speedy pacification. At last, to the
delight of the citizens, the young hero brought in
person the news of the final subjugation of the enemy,
from which they hoped for a long relief from levies
and exactions. The senate decreed the honours of
a triumph to Tiberius, and appointed two arches
to be erected at conspicuous spots within the con-
quered territory. The triumphal ornaments were
at the same time granted to Germanicus : he was
placed in the rank of praetors, and invited to speak
in the senate next in order to the consulars . 1 The
restrictions of age were relaxed in his behalf, that he
might attain the consulship without delay. But the
celebration of tbe imperial triumph, and the jubilee

1 The triumphal ornaments, the empty distinction henceforth ac-
corded to the emperor’s successful lieutenants, consisted in an ivory
staff surmounted by the figure of an eagle, a curulc chair or stool,
a golden crown, an embroidered mantle, a laurelled statue. Sacri-
fices were offered, with a supplied tio, on the occasion, and the victor
was allowed to receive the title of Imperator.

Digitized by Google

CH. xxxvm.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.
*

335

of the Roman people, were frustrated by the disaster
which is now to be related. 1

The uneasiness of the popular mind might be taken
as a presentiment of the calamity which was Elte n a i OI1 of
impending. Within five days from the re-
storation of tranquillity on the Save and R^e'*nd*
Drave, the empire sustained a shock in the the Elb *-
north, which, had it happened but a little sooner,
must have torn from it either of its Rhenish or its
Danubian possessions. The countries between the
Rhine and Weser, or even the Elbe, the ocean and
the Mayn, had been reduced by the repeated enter-
prises of Drusus and Tiberius to complete subjection.
When Tiberius quitted this region, in the year 758,
the tribes comprised within these ample boundaries
appeared to have submitted placidly to the yoke. It
only remained, apparently, to establish among them
the system of provincial administration, according to
the forms which had proved so generally efficient
elsewhere. The success indeed of the Roman arms
in this quarter had been such as to prove that they
had lost none of their ancient temper in the hands of
the existing generation. The legions had penetrated
the whole country in every direction ; the war-galleys
had swept the coast and stemmed the current of the
fleetest rivers ; military posts had been established in
proper localities, and their communications secured
by permanent roadways. 2 The courage and conduct
of the soldiers, the firmness of the Romans, and the
devotion of the allies, had shown no decline, while

1 Dion, Ivi. 17. Snet. Tib. 1 7. : “Trinmphura ipse distulit, mcesta
civitate clade Variana.”

5 Such were the fortresses of Aliso on the Lippe, and Burchana
(Borkum) at the month of the Ems. Vestiges of Roman fortifica-
tions are still traced in the range of the Taunus-gebirge in Nassau.
Niebuhr believed that remains of the original Roman roads still exist
in the north of Germany, in the wooden causeways of great anti-
quity which crossed the marshes and heaths in that quaiter. Horn.
Hist. r. lect. lviii.

z 2

Digitized by Google

340 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS ch. xxxvin.

• t

the means of armament and supply had been brought
to such perfection, that their movements had been
more extended, their combinations more unerring,
than in any previous campaigns. Bold and obstinate
as the Germans had proved in their long resistance
to such well-appointed adversaries, the effect of this
organized valour had been overwhelming. By force
or persuasion all the northern tribes seemed to be
gained to the empire. The Frisii and Chauci had
merited the distinction of admission to alliance with
Rome, which knitted them more firmly to her interests,
by making them objects of jealousy to their less for-
tunate brethren. The Batavi, in the island between
the Rhine and Waal, served with ardour as cavalry in
the Roman armies. Their neighbours the Caninefates
were subdued. The Usipetes and Tenctheri on the
right bank of the Rhine were overpowered ; while
the Bructeri, the Cherusci, the Chatti, and the Sigam-
bri had only escaped this fate by the care with which
they had avoided a conflict with the invaders, who
had established themselves as conquerors throughout
their territories. Emigrants and colonists had fol-
lowed in the wake of the legions ; various channels
of commerce had been opened with the natives, who
began to relax from their attitude of defiance, and
showed a desire to imbibe the lessons of civilization ;
Germans, noted for their big limbs, blue eyes, and
fair complexion, became conspicuous among the na-
tions which thronged the streets of Rome ; and the
Sigambrian women ministered to the caprice of fashion
by selling their flaxen locks to decorate the sallow
brows of the Italian matrons . 1

Fancied .ecu- The vigilance of Augustus seems for a
Reman* ad- moment to have slumbered in allowing his

ministration in , , y

Germany. latest conquest to remain in an anomalous,
and, as it proved, a precarious position. There

1 Ovid, Amor. i. 14, 49.:

“ Nescio quam pro me laudat nunc iste Sigambram.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXVIII.

UNDER THE EMFIRE.

341

were two ways in which, according to the max-
ims of the time, such an acquisition might be go-
verned. The one was the policy of coercion, exem-
plified in the case of the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
whom the conquerors sought to crush into obedience
by riveting on them the weight of the provincial ad-
ministration, with its civil and military governors,
its judicial and fiscal intendants, and the whole ap-
paratus of official tyranny. There was the policy of
severe exactions, rigorous conscriptions, and whole-
sale confiscations. We have just witnessed the fear-
ful result which might follow from such a system in
the desperate revolt which had thrown Rome into
consternation. This, however, was the method not
unusually adopted wherever the Romans feared the
martial spirit of the conquered ; and though, as in
Spain, it gave rise to repeated outbreaks, it was
nevertheless generally successful, at least in the end.
The other was the policy which Caesar had adopted
in Gaul. His own views indeed were personal rather
than national ; he aimed at making the Gauls useful
servants to himself, rather than submissive subjects
to Rome. But the lenity with which he treated them,
the amount of freedom he allowed them, the light-
ness of the tribute he imposed on them, sufficed to
effect both his own object and that of the state he
professed to serve. The Gauls continued faithful
from gratitude, or at least from contentment, not to
Caesar only but to Rome herself. But the Trans-
rhenane territory was governed on neither of these
principles. It was neither crushed as a province nor
cherished as an ally ; certainly no peculiar harshness
was exercised upon the Germans. They had offered
little opposition to Drusus or Tiberius ; if they had
not voluntarily submitted, they had at least retired
before their advancing legions. Some of them had
evinced a temper more than usually tractable. The
Romans felt themselves secure in the heart of Ger-

Digitized by Google

342

HISTORY OP THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvra.

many, as they had never felt in Gaul, Spain, or Pan-
nonia. While year by year the proconsuls were
waging interminable war against the obscure barba-
rians of Moesia and Mauretania, the Germans, whose
strength and courage, and not less their genius and
understanding, were especially vaunted, seemed not
only to submit without resistance, but to conform
with unexampled alacrity to the ideas of the invader.
Such was the security of the Romans that their co-
horts were suffered to be scattered through a num-
ber of petty posts far asunder. Their winter stations
grew from the concourse of new settlers to the di-
mension of colonies, but without their defences.
The Germans flocked to the stated markets ; and
though not without a sense of uneasiness and vexa-
tion, seemed prepared to abandon one by one every
feature of their native habits.

It was the part of a prudent ruler to encourage
Quintiiius this self-abandonment, but by no means to
m" d'eVT”' precipitate it by pressure. The utmost dis-
Germany, cretion was required in the commander
who should succeed Tiberius, and receive the subju-
gated Germans from their conqueror to instruct and
civilize. No more important selection had the em-
peror to make since he appointed Maecenas to the
government of Italy, or sent Agrippa to control the
turbulence of the mob in the city. And not only
was it important to choose the legate well ; it was
necessary, moreover, to give him distinct instructions,
and while allowing him latitude in the choice of his
means, to prescribe definitely to him his mode of
treatment. In all these particulars Augustus seems
to have failed. The prefect he selected was a man
of no special ability ; as the recent governor of the
tranquil province of Syria, where he had too quickly
enriched himself, he had learnt by easy success to
despise both the provincial subject and the imperial
government, the one for submitting to his extortions

Digitized by Google

A.D.9-A.U.762. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 343

the other for conniving at them . 1 L. Quintilius Varus
was an official pedant. Transplanted to the heart of
Germany, placed at the head of an army, but without
the ordinary machinery of civil government, he con-
ceived the idea of forcing the formalities of the pro-
vincial administration, its tribunals, its police, and its
fiscal charges, on people who had hitherto been allowed
to tax and govern themselves . 2 Had the emperor
given him specific instructions to this effect, he would
at least have guarded the experiment by proper mili-
tary precautions. Had he, on the other hand, forbid-
den such an experiment to be hazarded, Varus would
not have ventured to disobey. But left, as it would
seem, to his own caprice by the oversight of his aged
chief, he chose to disregard the usual habits of the ser-
vice, and pretended to sheathe the sword while he
imposed upon the Germans the yoke of servitude.
While the ancients throw all the blame of what fol-
lowed upon the incapacity of Varus, and some moderns
impute it rather to the indiscretion of Augustus him-
self, we shall be more correct perhaps in dividing it
between them.

Notwithstanding the ardour or levity with which
niainducre- the German chiefs had accepted service
theGermau.. under the foreigner, and the satisfaction
air.' -62. they had felt in partaking of its glittering

distinctions, many doubtless among them still watched
an opportunity of rising against their masters. The
precipitation with which Varus threw off the mask
which concealed the harsher features of Roman do-
mination could not fail to inflame their thirst for in-
dependence. The tedious and intricate forms of
Roman law perplexed and disgusted them ; but per-
sonal freedom, and exemption from blows, still more

1 Dion. lvi. 18. Yell. ii. 117.: “Pecunise quam non contemptor
Syria, cui profuerat, declaravit, quam pauper divitem ingressus, dives
pauperem reliquit.”

* The command of Yarns in Germany dates from a, c. 759.

Digitized by Google

344

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS ch. xxxvm.

from capital punishment, was the birthright of the
free German ; and when a Roman official in the reck-
less exercise of power inflicted dishonour where he
meant no more than a slight admonition, the stroke
of the lictor’s rod left a rankling wound. Still the
spirit of the Germans might have been gradually-
tamed, had not their own mutual jealousies hastened
the outbreak. It was usual for the ruler of a pro-
vince to make a summer progress through his domi-
nions, fixing his camp and tribunal at various spots
successively to acquaint himself with his subjects
and their resources, and brandish over all in turn the
terrors of the axe and rods. During these excursions
the troops which occupied a secure and peaceful
country were allowed for the most part to remain in
their quarters, the safety of the proconsul not requir-
ing their attendance on himself. But Varus was not
so neglectful of his own security. He led forth the
three legions under his orders ; and as he advanced
from place to place he was attended by the chiefs of
the country, who either commanded auxiliary cohorts
or played the courtier in his praetorium. Among the
se-Mte. and most distinguished of these were the leaders
Stea. °f the Cherusci, the brothers Segimerus
ch«uKi. an( j g e g es t es . Segimerus had a son named
Arminius, who had offended his uncle Segestes, by
carrying off his daughter . 1 They had all enrolled
themselves in the Roman service ; Arminius had re-
ceived the citizenship, and been promoted to the
equestrian order. But Segestes was much in the
proconsul’s confidence, and Arminius, conscious of
his animosity towards himself, might apprehend the

’ Of Arminins, almost the only German of this time whom we can
invest with a distinct personality, there will be much to record here-
after. The Germans take a pleasure in designatin'.' him as Hermann,
(Necr-mann), “the general;” but this derivation does not seem
certain enough to induce me to forego the satisfaction of attaching
a proper name to so distinguished a hero.

Digitized by Google

A.D.9-A.C.T62.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

345

effect of his hostile representations. While his father,
his uncle, and a brother, who had caused himself to
be adopted into a Roman house, all attached them-
selves with sincerity to the party of the foreigners,
Arminius devoted himself to their overthrow. He
was the favourite of his countrymen, not for his
bravery only but for his conduct : he was both elo-
quent in speech and prompt in action, qualities in
which the Germans were inferior to both the Gauls
and Romans. He was a man of bold and lofty spirit,
capable of imparting the enthusiasm which he felt
himself. He intrigued with the chief men Armini0 , in _
of various tribes, and brought them readily
into his views. They besieged the procon- puwer ‘
sul with demands for military aid in various quarters,
to overawe their unconquered neighbours or to re-
press the outrages of banditti. Varus was persuaded
to detach cohorts and squadrons from his main body
which were speedily overpowered and cut off. But
before these disasters were known Segestes had de-
tected and denounced the conspiracy. Varus had
advanced to the Weser, and was meditating perhaps
an incursion in the broad plains extending to the
Elbe, through which Tiberius had recently carried
his eagles. At this moment the enemy, who had
laid their toils in his rear, spread the report of an
outbreak in the south of the province, and induced
him to turn his front in that direction . 1 From the
confluence of the little stream of the Werre with
the Weser, or the entrance perhaps of the gorge
known by the name of the Westphalian Gates, he
had to retrace his steps across a wild tract of wooded
hills which separates the W T eser from the sources of
the Ems and Lippe, the last offset from the moun-

1 That this reported outbreak was in the south, among the
Chatti, is conjectured from that being the direction of the expe-
dition of Germanicus at a later period. Hoeck, Roem. Gesch. i. 2.
96. foil.

" T -y- . — ; :

Digitized by Google

346

HISTOKY OF THE BOMANS

ch. xxxvm.

tains of central Europe, before they die away in the
ve™. ad- sandy flats of Lower Germany. The gene-
the'^eirtrf ral elevation of this region is inconsiderable,
Teutoburg. its eminences are separated by narrow

valleys, the bottoms of which were choked with mo-
rasses, while their summits were clothed with dense
forests . 1 The tracts which traversed it, for the Ho-
mans had not taken the precaution of building a
permanent way through it, were sufficiently practi-
cable in dry weather, but with the close of summer the
season of storms and rain was at hand. Varus was
unconscious of these perils. He announced his in-
tention of marching in quest of the reputed delin-
quents. The night before he was to set out, Segestes,
who was at supper with him, declared that the report
■was false, and that he was falling into the snare of
traitors in his own camp. He desired to be kept
in custody himself till the truth of his disclosures
should be proved. But the proconsul paid no regard
to the warning. The conspirators, to lull him into
security, pretended to quarrel among themselves, and
flattered him by appealing to his decision between
them.

The rain had set in before the march began, and
the advance of the troops was from the
first impeded by the elements. The hos-
tility of the natives, no longer disguised,
soon added to their difficulties. At this critical mo-
ment Varus had the weakness to let Arminius and
other chiefs quit the camp, under pretence of bring-
ing up reinforcements. They quickly marshalled the
swarming hordes, and pressed the rear and flanks . of

Yartii is at-
tacked on
hia retreat.

1 The Teutoburger and Lippischer Wald, the Saltus Teutobur-
gensis of Tacitus (Ann. i. 60.), extends N.W. a space of seventy or
eighty miles, and may be described as a tract of parallel hills in
broken chains with flat marshy hollows between them, so that in
crossing them from N.E. to S.W., more than one stage was to be
traversed, each consisting of a level swamp with a defile at either
end.

Digitized t

A.D.9-A.IT.762.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

347

the enemy with repeated assaults. The proconsul,
still blind to the treachery around him, contented
himself with summoning the disturbers of his repose
before his tribunal. The answer to his childish me-
naces presently arrived in the news that the insur-
rection had spread through the country, and that
the establishments of the Roman power had been
forced in every direction. The army was encumbered
with quantities of baggage, besides women and chil-
dren, which it was soon out of its power to protect.
This ignominious loss served at last to awaken Varus
to a sense of his peril. While still involved in the
swamps and woods through which he was making for
the open country to the south, he felt the necessity
of striking directly westward, so as to reach Aliso,
and his communications with the Rhine. Aliso lay
but a few days’ march to his right, but the tracks of
the forest were probably guarded against him, and
he must either explore a more circuitous path or
force his way through all obstacles. The carriages
and remaining baggage he ordered to be burnt, and
pushed hastily forward. The weather continued un-
propitious. The soil was soft and slippery ; the rain
rusted the men’s spear-heads, soaked their leathern
accoutrements, and swelled their wooden shields ; the
wind threw limbs of large trees across their path,
w r hich possibly the enemy had sawn half through
beforehand . 1 Before they had pitched their first en-
campment, the Romans had been roughly handled by
the enemy, who now closed upon them to prevent
their escape. That night they traced their lines with
failing strength and spirit. In the morning they
staggered on with diminished numbers, and already
they had almost lost the appearance of a legionary

1 Dion, lvi. 20.: Kal rck Hupa ruv Sfvtpwv KaraQpavSfitva Kal irara-
Tu-nifMva htripouraov. The explanation is a conjecture of Ludeu’s
(GescA. Deutschlands, L), which is perhaps superfluous.

Digitized by Google

348

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

OB. XXXVIII.

force. They had emerged, however, now from the
woods, and had gained the open upland of swamp
and moor, which slopes from the hill-country to the
valleys of the Eras and Lippe. But the enemy mean-
while had increased in numbers and confidence. Re-
doubling their attacks, they pressed the fugitives on
every side. The soldiers had no reliance on their
imperator, and as he lost his control over them,
Varus lost equally all command over himself. Re-
knii fliniiy membering the example of his father and
of grandfather, who, it seems, had both put
th«e legion.. ^ en( j ^ their own lives 1 , he threw him-
self in despair on his sword. So did many of his
officers. The soldiers, deprived of their leaders, were
butchered without organized resistance. The cavalry
escaped from the field only to be hunted down at a
distance. The Germans had taken their measures
well. Not more than a few stragglers escaped from
the terrible destruction . 2 In the space of three days,
three entire legions, horse, foot, and auxiliaries, were
annihilated; their arms, stores, and accoutrements,
were destroyed; their eagles were retained as tro-
phies . 3

The incompetence of Varus for his post is manifest
from his having left no reserve at Aliso.

A .mall ram- .

ny tacap eto We have seen how, under circumstances
nearly similar, the remnant of the legions
of Crassus was saved by the arrival of succours in its
rear, and similar aid should have now too been at
hand. But the triumph of the Germans was secure.
They could afford time to gloat over their trophies,
to slaughter their captives on altars erected in the

1 Veil, iu 119. The occasions are not mentioned.

2 There is a gap in the 22nd chapter of Dion, which is to be sup-
plied from Zonaras, x. 37.

’ Florus, iv. 12., says that one of the three eagles was saved : but
we read of the recovery of two in Tacitus, Ann. L 60., ii. 25., and of
the third in Dion, lx. 8.

Digitized by Google

A.D.9-A.U.762.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

349

woods, with every circumstance of cruelty and de-
rision, and to search for the body of Varus, whose
head they sent to Maroboduus, as an incentive to rise
against the common enemy. Aliso, which was held
by a handful of men, together with the few fugitives
from the bloody field, was invested with overwhelm-
ing numbers ; but the Germans had not the means
of conducting a siege. The Romans were soon pressed
with hunger ; but they deceived the enemy by a stra-
tagem, and threw him for a moment off his guard, by
which they profited to sally from their entrenchments
and make a rush for the Rhine. The temptation of
booty diverted the victors from the pursuit, and thus
the last fragment of the Roman power in Germany
was saved from the general wreck . 1

Terrible as was the loss of so many officers and
so fine an army, with the destruction of
flourishing settlements, and the slaughter au!" of au-
of multitudes of citizens and allies, the gu ' u *‘
Romans on the Rhine had no time for mourning.
The shout of triumph on the one bank was sure to
find an echo on the other ; the victory of Arminius
might be expected to raise a general revolt both of
Germans and Gauls within the Gaulish provinces.
The energy of Asprenas, who commanded two legions
in this quarter, averted this anticipated disaster.
Flying to the river bank, and receiving with open
arms the straggling fugitives from Aliso, he assumed
so bold an attitude as to daunt both the Germans in
his front and the Gauls behind him. Arminius con-
tented himself with effacing from his own soil the

1 Frontinns, Srateg. iv. 14. Aliso was probably destroyed. It is
one of the very lew historical stations of the Roman armies which it
is impossible to identify with any modern locality. Roman remains
have been found in some spots of this neighbourhood, particularly,
it is said, at Elson, a small village on the Lippe near Paderborn. I
should be inclined, however to look for it a good deal nearer to the
Rhine, and Hamm has been already mentioned as a not improbable
locality.

Digitized by Google

350

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXTIII.

traces of Roman domination; but he met with no
encouragement to cross the border, nor did Maro-
boduus respond to his summons by arming. This
supineness saved the Romans. The news of the dis-
aster roused Augustus once more to energetic action.
Alone, or at least supported only by his son Tiberius,
he manfully confronted the danger, and prepared to
overcome it. He caused the city to be patrolled by
guards, or placed it, as we should say, in a state of
siege, as a precaution against domestic disturbances.
He directed the prefects throughout the provinces to
retain their imperium, lest a change of administration
might shake in any quarter the tottering fabric of
the empire. At the same time he sought to reassure
the citizens by vowing solemn games to Jupiter for
the public security, an act of faith such as was
deemed to have protected the state from the assault
of the Cimbri and the Marsi. 1 The citizens, how-
ever, seem for the most part to have been sunk in the
profoundest apathy. They had already ceased to feel
either for the successes or the disasters of the chiefs
who had usurped all the pleasures as well as the pains
of sovereignty. They hesitated to inscribe their names
on the roll for military service, and the emperor was
forced to stimulate their patriotism by fines, and
even by threats of capital punishment. The levies
which he was enabled to raise by ballot from the
veterans and freedmen, were sent forward as fast as
they could be collected. Yet it was not without
some misgivings that Rome saw herself thus denuded
of defenders. Such was the panic of the government
that even the handful of Gauls and Germans residing
within the walls caused it grave disquietude. Some
squadrons of these foreign auxiliaries had been ad-
mitted into the ranks of the imperial bodyguard.
These were all now disarmed and dismissed from the

1 Suet. Oct. 23. : “Vovit et magnos ludos Jovi Opt. Max. si res-
publiea in meliorem statum vertisset.”

Digitized by Google

A.D.IO-A.tr.763.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

351

city, while such as seemed most obnoxious to sus-
picion were removed to the state prisons. 1

The year 7 63 opened in gloom and amidst all the
bustle of these extraordinary preparations. Tibtriu ,

On the 16th of January, Tiberius dedicated ^ D he ]<x hilie '
a temple of Concord, inscribing on its front A - D - 763 -
the names of himself and his brother Drusus, an act
which the citizens may have construed as a pledge of
his parental care for Germanicus. 2 In the course of
the spring he reached himself the head-quarters on
the Rhine. Even in Gaul some symptoms of in-
subordination had manifested themselves, but these
Tiberius quelled as he advanced. It was a work of
time to replace the material of war which had been
annihilated in the late disaster; the new levies re-
quired training, the old soldiers were discouraged,
and could hardly be trusted in the field. The Ger-
mans, on their part, did not venture on aggression,
and the year passed without hostile movements on
either side.

With the commencement, however, of the follow-
ing year the Roman equipments were com- Blood!e>t
plete, and it was necessary to adopt offensive
operations, and convince the enemy that the “ c ™‘ n7 '
spirit of the empire was not cowed by the A ‘ D- Mr -
blow it had sustained. Germanicus was in the camp
with his uncle, burning with youthful ardour for re-
venge and glory. It was well for his future distinction
that he was required under Tiberius to temper courage
with prudence, and learn the art, most difficult to
a young commander, of sparing his own men, and
economizing his resources. We have admired more

1 Dion, lvi. 23. Suet. Oct. 49. : “Dimissa Germnnorum manu quam
usque ad cladem Varianam inter armigeros cireum se habuerat.’’

- Kalend. Pr eeriest. (Orelli, Inscrip, ii. 383.) “xvii. Kal. Fubr. Con-
cordias Augusta; axles dedicata est P. Dolabella C. Silano cos.’ Comp.
Dion, lvi. 25. Concordia Augusta may refer to the happy harmony
now established between the members of the imperial family, and
between the various orders of citizens also.

Digitized by Google

352

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvm.

than once the breadth and boldness of plan which
distinguished the campaigns of Tiberius, though his
operations were always conducted with caution, and
he never risked defeat by presumptuous temerity. But
now his army was not perhaps thoroughly to be relied
on ; a single check might completely demoralize it,
and it was the last force the state could send into the
field. The excessive care and anxiety he now showed
in his preparations, limiting the amount of baggage,
enforcing the strictest discipline, exercising the ut-
most personal activity and vigilance, yet seeking con-
stantly the support of councils of war, prove how
deeply he felt the gravity of the occasion. With so
large a province to recover, so many nations to re-
duce, so great a disaster to avenge, he confined him-
self to ravaging a few fields and burning a few habi-
tations, in which he lost not a man . 1 The Germans,
on their part, were not seduced into rashness by sud-
den success. They declined to meet the invader in
the field, while he abstained from attacking them in
their strongholds. After traversing the open country,
for a few weeks perhaps, in various directions, Tibe-
rius withdrew slowly behind the Rhine, only careful
to secure his retreat from interruption. Tiberius had
already earned a triumph for his victories in Pan-
nonia ; be forfeited it by no misadventure in Ger-
A „ 12 . many. On his return to Rome he was at

a. v. res. Iggt enabled to celebrate the solemnity

which had been so long delayed . 2 The citizens, as-
sured that their arms had penetrated again into the
recesses of the formidable North, and that every foe
had fled before them, were satisfied with this new
proof of their reputed invincibility, while the con-

1 Comp. Veil. 120. Suet. Tiber. 18. 19. This writer observes
particularly 4 * semper alias sui arbitrii, contentusque se uno, tunc
prater consuetudinem cum pluribus de belli ratione communicavit”

2 Suet. Tiber. 20.: “ Tiberius a Germania in urbem post biennium
represses, trinmphura egit.” The triumph took place on the 16th
January, Kalend. Prcenest. (Orelli, ii. 382.) Fischer, in ann. 765.
Germanicus was this year consul.

Digitized by Google

A.D.12-A. 0.765.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

353

queror himself was doubtless well aware how much
their resources for conquest were really exhausted.
The Romans had recovered the fame of superiority,
but the actual loss they had sustained could not be
replaced without some years of repose. The frontiers
of the empire, as it seemed to the eyes of statesmen,
had permanently receded to the Rhine. 1 The aged
emperor, after the immediate necessity for action had
passed, sank into a state of nervous despondency.
For many months after the news of the Varian mas-
sacre he allowed his hair and beard to grow un-
trimmed, and was even known to dash his head against
his chamber walls, exclaiming with frantic impa-
tience, Varus , Varus , restore me my legions ! To the
end of his days he continued to observe with solemn
mourning the anniversary of that fatal disaster.*

We are now drawing to the close of the long domi-
nation of the second Caesar, the splendour D „
of which, though clouded towards its set- A - V - 7GS -
ting, was never wholly obscured. The year 765 opened
auspiciously for the emperor with the triumph of
Tiberius and the consulship of the brave Germanicus,
who was perhaps the secret object of his pride, and
on whom the people undoubtedly rested their best
hopes for the future. Great we may believe was the
satisfaction, both in the palace and the city, when,
later in the year, the union of this young AoKUStuli
hero with Agrippa’s daughter, Agrippina,
produced a son to inherit, as might be lea,in P ublic -
fondly anticipated, the virtues of his progenitors on
either side. 3 The praenomen of Caius, which was

1 Floras, iv. 12.: “ Hac cl ado factnm, nt impcrium, quod in litore
Oceani non steterat, in ripafluminis Rheni staret.” Possibly Tacitus
alludes in Ann. i 38. “ limes a Tiberio cceptus,” to some outposts
that were still retained beyond that river.

2 Suet. Oct. 23.

3 Caius Germanicus, known afterwards by his nickname of Cali-
gula, was boru on the 30th of September, a. d. 765, at Antium,
Suet. Calig. 8.

VOL. IV. A A

Digitized by Google

354

HISTORY OF TIIE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

bestowed upon him, unknown as it was to the branch
of the Claudii from which he was lineally descended,
might serve to remind the emperor of the favourite
grandson he had lately lost, while it would recall to
the people the remembrance of the great dictator, the
conqueror of the Gauls, the destroyer of the Sullan
oligarchy. With the politic courtesy which rarely
abandoned him, Augustus addressed a letter to the
senate, in which he recommended Germanicus to its
favour and protection, while at the same time he re-
commended the senate itself to the respectful care of
Tiberius. This letter he excused himself from re-
citing in person on the plea of increasing debility :
it was read for him by Germanicus from the consul’s
chair. Failing as he now was in strength and
spirits, he desired his kind friends, the senators and
knights of Rome, no longer to incommode him by
their officious salutations in the curia and the streets,
in his own hall and private apartments, and to abstain
from inviting him to their entertainments, which he
had hitherto sedulously attended. He was gradu-
ally withdrawing himself from the most irksome ob-
ligations of his station, and relaxing the cords which
bound the burden of his honours upon him. He was
more anxious, however, to relieve himself from the
pains or responsibilities of authority than to surrender
its substance. Though he required the senate to re-
new the tribunitian power of Tiberius, and at the
same time to decree him the proconsulate throughout
the provinces, he did not hesitate to accept for him-
self in the year 766 a fifth decennial term of the Im-
perium. To his privy council, now raised from the
number of fifteen to twenty, and always embracing
among its members the consuls actual and designate,
together with other high magistrates, he reserved the
right of discussing all state affairs, and deciding them
without recurring to the senate itself. He had come
but rarely of late into the curia : he now relinquished

Digitized by Google

A.D.13-A.C.766.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

355

his attendance there altogether, and conducted his
deliberations under his own roof, and frequently in
his bedchamber. It was only when he wanted the
confirmation of some unpalatable measure, such as
his tax on successions, that he required the senate to
set to it the seal of its collective authority . 1

This communication of proconsular power abroad
could hardly admit of any other interpreta- Tibet | n<
tion than that the son was thereby formally
associated in the empire with his father. ,ucceMi0D -
The only question that now remained for solution was
whether the emperor would designate others to share
the succession in like manner with Tiberius hereafter.
On this point the jealousy of Livia and her son’s de-
spondent apprehensions could not even yet be tran-
quillised. In vain did the expressions which dropped
from Augustus himself throughout his intercourse
with Tiberius assure him of his esteem and affection.
Whether earnest or playful, his letters continued
always to abound in tokens of admiration. No one,
they declared, could have conducted the late campaign
with more consummate prudence. Tiberius alone,
they said, had restored the public weal, not by delay,
as Fabius of old, but by wariness and discretion . 2
No matter whether or not the aged emperor were
well, provided only the brave Tiberius were not ill.
Such was the flattering tenor of every imperial epistle.
Nevertheless rumours were not wanting that, in con-
versation with his nearest associates, Augustus had
used very different language ; that he had expressed
his fears, not indeed of the ability, but of the temper

1 Dion, lvi. 28. The council of fifteen had been renewed every six
months; the twenty now retained their office for a year. Augustus,
we see, was still far from confining the supervision of affairs to a
mere cabinet. To the last he was not unfaithful to the principle,
“quo plures partem administrandoo reipubliese caperent.” Suet.
Oct. 37.

s Quoting the well-known line of Ennius, “ Unus homo nobis
cunctando restituit rem,” Augustus altered cunctando to viyilando.

A A 2

Digitized by Google

356

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

of his future successor ; that he had muttered with a
sigh, Alas for my people ! to be ground between jaivs
so slow and so relentless .‘ On the other hand, it was
insinuated by some that be was induced to leave the
conduct of affairs to Tiberius, that the contrast he
anticipated between his own rule and his successor’s
might make his end the more generally regretted . 2
He had been heard to murmur at the morosehess of his
stepson’s temper, and been seen to check the cheer-
ful flow of his own spirits in company, when the
gloomy shadow of Tiberius darkened his threshold . 3

Agrippa Postumus still lingered in banishment. It
Reported was possible that, at the last moment, his
gustns to grandfather’s heart might relent towards

banishment, him. If this distrust of his stepson was
truly imputed to him, Augustus hoped to qualify the
evil by making Agrippa his associate in the imperial
inheritance. Under the shades of despotism what-
ever men begin to think likely to be done, is straight-
way reported to have actually been done. Some
writers mentioned it only as a rumour, others stated
it as a fact, — at least it was very generally believed,
— that Augustus had visited his grandson in exile . 4
Adopting every precaution to baffle observation, and
attended, it was said, by a few trusty servants and
with Maximus as his only confidant, he had quitted
the shore of Italy. The interview had been marked
by emotion and tears on either side. Thus much, it
was added, was revealed by Maximus to his wife
Marcia, by Marcia to Livia. The emperor discovered
his companion’s indiscretion, and when shortly after-

1 Suet. Tib. 21.: “Miserum pop. Rom., qni sub tam lentis maxillis
erit.” The metaphor is taken from the circus. Suetonius elsewhere
characterizes the disposition of Tiberius as “ saevain et lentam.”

* Tac. Ann. i. 10.; Suet. 1. c.

* Suet. /. c. But even Suetonius gives no countenance to these
rumours.

* Comp. Tac. Ann. i. 5., with Dion. lvi. 30., and with Plutarch
(dt Garnd. 11.), who tells the story still more dramatically.

Digitized by Google

A.D.13-A.tr.76G.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

357

wards Maximus was found dead under suspicious cir-
cumstances, his wife was heard to accuse herself as
the cause of his decease. Such rumours soon ac-
quired consistency in the mouths of the citizens, and
became repeated as history at a later period. But
Ovid, in one of his desponding letters from the
Euxine, drops a similar accusation against himself,
as in some mysterious way the unworthy means of
his friend’s disaster. It will be remembered that the
exile of Ovid was nearly simultaneous with that of
Agrippa, and hence some colour has been given to
the idea that a political connexion existed between
them . 1 The mystery which attached to the end of so
distinguished a personage shows at least the irritable
state of the public mind at this period. Its morbid
feelings were displayed in a craving for excitement
which overcame every restraint. The passion of men
of birth and figure to encounter the perils of the
arena for a round of popular applause rose higher
than ever ; and Augustus, wearied and disgusted,
relaxed at last the opposition he had so vigorously
maintained to the practice . 2

Had Augustus, indeed, survived some years longer,
a more formidable rival to Livia’s son than The*™™
Agrippa would have arisen in Germanicus. f e r heyetI
Even now, since the last campaign of Tibe- x ‘ D u '
rius, the most important frontier of the empire was in-
trusted to his defence ; his conspicuous ability, and the
popularity he earned or inherited, would doubtless have
recommended him to the emperor for still stronger to-
kens of confidence . 3 But the old man, now reaching

1 Ovid, Ex Pont. iv. 6. 11.:

“ Occidis ante preces, causamqne ego, Maxime, mortis,

Nec fueram tanti, me reor esse turn.”

* Dion, lvi. 25.: fcal rois Inrrtvmv, 5 *al daufidcrtiev l iv to, p.ovop.axf'iv
inerpanri • oXtiov Si 8rt iv oAtyccpla Tivis T7)y dri/ufav rfyv in' aircp ini.

Ktip.ivT)v inotouvTo nal out ccs ami tt }s irtpias Odvarov uxpAt-

< TKUVOV .

* Snet. Calig. 8.: “Germanicum exacto consnlatu in Galllam rais-
sum j ” therefore at the commencement of the year 767.

Digitized by Google

358

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ch. xxxvm.

the completion of his seventy-sixth year, could not but
feel his end approaching. His health, which in his
youth had required constant care and unusual pre-
cautions, had certainly become more confirmed in the
latter half of his life; nevertheless he was subject to
harassing infirmities, and his strength failed under
the weight of suffering no less than of years. 1 He
was anxious to leave his great work complete, as far
as human hands could make it so, and to retire from
the scene with the assurance that he had provided for
the future. As an appropriate close to his career he
proposed to hold now a census of the people, the third
he had undertaken since his accession to power, in
order that the exact state of the commonwealth, its
wealth and population, at the moment of his quitting
it, might be certified to the latest posterity. So much,
indeed, was he impressed with the belief that his de-
cease was at hand, that on the occurrence of an
unlucky omen, which was thought to portend that he
would not survive a hundred days, he desisted from
the work himself, leaving it to be completed by
Tiberius lest it should suffer an unlucky interruption
by his death.

' Suetonius, Oct. 80 — 83., gives some curious details of the habits
'of a Roman valetudinarian. Weakness of the hams and thighs was
relieved by bandages and splints; the forefinger of his right hand,
being liable to numbness, was encased, when he wrote, in horn. In
the winter he wore four under- garments and a thick gown over them,
besides guarding the chest with wool; the legs were also wrapped
up. In the summer he slept in a chamber with open doors, often
under an open colonnade, with fountains of water playing beside him,
and a slave to fan bim. He always, even in winter, wore a covering
for the head when exposed to the sun. His journeys were made in
a litter, generally at night, slowly and by short stages, taking two
days to reach Tibur or Pracneste, at the distance of fifteen or twenty
miles. He preferred going by sea when possible. His precautions
for preserving his health were chiefly, refraining from much bathing,
anointing frequently, and sweating himself before a fire. For exer-
cise, instead of the athletic sports of the palaestra, he was content
with gentle riding and walking, or swinging his limbs in sitting.
His amusements were the languid excitement of fishing, or playing
dice with children.

Digitized by Google

A.D.14-A.U.767.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

359

The census, however, was completed, and the lus-
trum closed, before the middle of 767, and An*n»w«
Augustus still lived. He employed the next record of

« 0 . ... L * his actions:

lew months in compiling a succinct me- theMonu-

mentam

monal of his public acts, to be preserved m Ancjranum .1
the public archives, a truly imperial work, and pro-
bably unique in its kind. The archives of Home
have long mouldered in the dust, but a ruined wall
in a remote corner of her empire, engraved with this
precious document, has been faithful to its trust for
eighteen hundred years, and still presents us with one
of the most curious records of antiquity. The in-
scription, which may still be read on the portico of a
temple at Ancyra, attests the energy, sagacity, and
fortune of the second Ccesar in a detailed register of
all his public undertakings through a period of fifty-
eight years. 1 Commencing with his nineteenth year,
it bears witness to his filial piety in prosecuting his
father's murderers; it touches lightly on the pro-
scriptions, and vaunts the unanimity of all good
citizens in his favour, when 500,000 Romans arrayed
themselves under the banner of the triumvir. It
records his assignment of lands to the veterans, and
the triumphs and ovations decreed him by the senate.
It signalizes his prudence in civil affairs, in revising
the senate, in multiplying the patricians, and in thrice

1 The celebrated Monumentum Ancyranum is a Latin inscription
in parallel columns, covering the walls of the prouaos, or exterior
porch, of a temple of Augustus at Ancyra. It was first copied by
Busbcquius in 1544, and has been transcribed often since : the traces
of the letters have become fainter, but the greater care of recent ex-
plorers has more than balanced this misfortune. In the present
century fragments of the Greek text of the same inscription have
been discovered at Apollonia in Fisidia, which have served to sup-
ply some defects and verify some corrections. See the history of
the Monumentum in Kgger. Histuriens d’ Auguste, p. 412. foil. The
record purports to be a copy from the original statement of Augustus
himself, engraved on two brazen pillars at Home: “Rerum gestarum

divi Augusti exemplar subjectutn.” It runs throughout in

the first person: “ Annos undeviginti natus exordium privato cou-
bilic et privata impensa compare vi,” &c.

Digitized by Google

360

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

performing the lustrum of the people. It enumerates
the magistracies and priesthoods conferred upon him,
and boasts of his three times closing the temple of
Janus. His liberality is commemorated in bis various
largesses both of corn and money, and the contribu-
tions he made from his private treasures to relieve the
burdens of his subjects. His magnificence is made to
appear in the temples and public structures he built
or caused to be built; in his halls and forums, his
colonnades and aqueducts ; nor less in the glorious
spectacles he exhibited, and the multitude of beasts
he hunted in the circus. The patriotism of Octavius
shone conspicuously in the overthrow of the pirate
Sextus, with his crew of fugitive slaves. Italy, it was
added, swore allegiance to him of her own accord,
and every province in succession followed her ex-
ample. Under his auspices the empire had reached
the Elbe, a Roman fleet had navigated the Northern
Ocean, the Pannonians and Illyrians had been re-
duced, the Cimbrie Chersonese had sought his friend-
ship and alliance. No nation had been attacked by
him without provocation. He had added Egypt to
the dominions of Rome ; Armenia, with dignified
moderation, he had refrained from adding. He had
planted Roman colonies in every province. Finally,
he had recovered from the Parthians the captured
standards of Crassus. For all these merits, and
others not less particularly enumerated, he had been
honoured with the laurel wreath and the civic crown;
he had received from the senate the title of Augustus,
and been hailed by acclamation as the father of his
country.

Such are the most interesting statements of this
i.Mt day. of extraordinary document; but to judge of
August™. th e marvellous sobriety and dignity of its
tone, the suppressed anticipation of immortal glory
which it discovers, the reader must refer to the
work itself. Certainly, whatever we may think of
the merits of Augustus, no deed of his life became

Digitized by Google

A.D.14-A.P.767.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

361

him so well as the preparation he made for quitting
it. The grave satisfaction he exhibits shows in a
wonderful manner the triumph in the mind of the
Roman of the citizen over the man. For if in public
affairs his career had been eminently prosperous, and
a vast ambition had been gorged with unexampled
gratification, not the less had his latter years been
embittered beyond tbe ordinary measure of humanity,
by private chagrins and disappointments. The for-
tune of Augustus, proverbial as it became, related
only to tbe one side of his history; the other served
not less to point a moral, and betray the vanity of
all earthly splendour and success . 1 It is important
to notice these indications of the calmness with
which Augustus contemplated the approach of death,
and the preparation he made to meet it, for the esti-
mate they enable us to form of the reports which
ascribed it to the secret machinations of Livia. Such
foul surmises obtain circulation but too commonly on
the decease of an autocrat ; engendered in darkness,
it is generally impossible to trace their sources, or pro-
nounce on their authenticity. But in the instance
before us our means of judging are fortunately more
satisfactory. Tiberius, after completing the lustrum,
prepared to resume the command in Illyricum, where
the attitude of the enemy, or rather, perhaps, of the
legions themselves, might cause some uneasiness. On
his quitting the city in midsummer, the emperor, who
generally spent the hot season in the cool retreat of
Campania, proposed to accompany him towards the
Apulian coast. The Caesars proceeded leisurely to-
gether, halting at various spots on their route, and

1 The readers of Gibbon will remember how, at a late period of
the empire, the best wish that could be solemnly expressed for each
emperor on his accession was, that be might be “ felicior Augusto,” as
well as “melior Trajano.” But compare the very striking passage
in Pliny ( Hist. Nat. vii. 46.) on the mortifications of Augustus: “In

divo Augusto si diligenter testimentur cnucto, magna

sortis humance reperiantur volumina,” &c.

Digitized by Google

362

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXVIII.

showing themselves with good-humoured condescen-
sion to the inhabitants. But at Astura, Augustus
contracted a dysentery, from incautious exposure to
the night air. On recovering partly from the dis-
order, he proceeded to Capreae and Naples, and finally
accompanied Tiberius as far as Beneventum, where
he took leave of him. Tiberius went on to Brundi-
siutn, and took ship for Illyricum, while the elder
traveller returned towards the lower coast, but on
reaching Nola was attacked with a fatal relapse of his
recent sickness . 1 Thereupon messengers were des-
patched in all haste to Tiberius, by the order of Livia,
or of the emperor himself. The expectant successor
returned without delay ; and it was announced that he
came in time to see his father-in-law while yet alive,
to receive his parting injunctions in a long interview,
and to discharge towards him the last offices of filial
piety . 2 But the real moment of the sick man’s de-
cease was never accurately known. The empress, it
may be presumed, would not have chosen to reveal
it while her son was yet absent, and before all requi-
site preparations had been made to secure the recog-
nition of his claims. We may readily excuse her for
taking such precautions to ensure the object of her
life’s ambition; -but the Homans were not content

1 Suetonius gives some interesting details of this last journey,
showing the cheerfulness and self-possession of the invalid to the
last. Oct. 97, 93. Comp. Dion, lvi. 29., Veil. ii. 123. The death of
Augustus is dated the 19th of August, 767, within thirty-seven days
of his seventy-seventh birthday, i.e. September 23. Suet. Oct. 100.
His power, counting from the battle of Actium, Dion, lvi. 29., had
lasted forty-four years all but thirteen days; or, counting from his
triumvirate, fifty-six years all but two months.

1 Suet. Oct. 99. : “ Revocatum ex itinere Tiberium diu secreto ser-
mone detinuit, neque post ulli majori negotio animura accommo-
davit.” Veil. ii. 123.: •* Revocavit filium. llle expcctato revolavit
maturius,” &c. But Tacitus insinuates a doubt, Ann. i. 5.: “ Vixdum
ingressus Illyricum Tiberius, properis mams literis accitur; neque
satis cnmpertum est, spirantem adhuc Augustum apud urbem Nolam,
an exanimem repererit.” And the latter view is maintained by Dion,
lvi. 31.: rain a yap ovtui tois re irKaocn kou a^iomaTorcouis ylypavrai.

Digitized by Google

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

363

a.d.14-a.p.7G7.

with ascribing to her a little venial deceit; they
gravely represented her to have murdered the poor
old man her husband, by giving him poisoned figs.
From what has been said, however, it will be apparent
that there was no adequate motive for the crime ; the
fortunes of Tiberius, if not assured against all re-
moter contingencies, were at the time at least fully
secure; absent as he was from the court and city,
the moment was not such as would be seized for
striking a blow in his behalf ; Augustus, now arrived
on the verge of seventy-seven, had already lived in
safety with his reputed murderess for more than half
a century, and had never been led to waver for an
instant in the confidence he reposed in her ; finally,
we have seen how evidently he was himself impressed
with the anticipation of a speedy dissolution, which
is so often the effect of an inward consciousness of
decay. To exculpate Livia or Tiberius from such a
crime may be hardly worth the endeavour ; but it is
important to mark, the weakness of the grounds upon
which historians of hiirh character could venture to
insinuate it against them.

The closing scene of this illustrious life has been
portrayed for us with considerable minute- Lait mome „„
ness. It is the first natural dissolution of °* f Au * u * tu *-
a great man we have been called upon to witness,
and it will be long, I may add, before we shall as-
sist at another. Let us observe it and reflect upon
it. On the morning of his death, being now fully
sensible of his approaching end, Augustus inquired
whether there were any popular excitement in an-
ticipation of it. Being no doubt reassured upon
this point, he called for a mirror, and desired his
grey hairs and beard to be decently arranged . 1 Then
asking of the friends around him whether he had

1 Suet. Oct. 99.: “Capiilum sibi comi, ac malas labentes coriigi
prseeepic.”

Digitized by Google

364

HISTOBY OF THE BOMANS

ch . xxxvm.

played well his part in the drama of life, he mut-
tered a verse from a comic epilogue, inviting them
to greet his exit with applause . 1 He made some
inquiries after a sick grandchild of Tiberius, and fall-
ing at last into the arms of Li via, bad just strength,
in the last moment of expiring, to recommend to
her the memory of their long union . 2 His end was
perfectly tranquil. He obtained the euthanasia he
had always desired, very different, but not less in
harmony with his character, from that of his prede-
cessor . 3 There was no cynicism, at least to my ap-
prehension, in the gentle irony with which, at the
moment of death, he sported with the vanities of a
human career. Though cheered with no religious
hope for himself, nor soothed with any deep-felt
yearnings towards his survivors, he was supported
on the verge of the abyss by the unfailing power of
national sentiment, and the strong assurance that he
had confirmed by a great achievement the fortunes
of the Koman state.

The history of the emperors will afford us abun-
EiRctof dant materials for estimating the strain
the”h’»r u .rt« upon the heart and brain of the fatal pos-
©r Augustus, pension of unlimited power. Some men it
puffs up and intoxicates with pride, as we have seen
was the case with the bold and magnanimous Caesar ;
others, of vehement and ill-regulated passions, it
may drive to raging madness; some it crazes with
fear, others it fevers with sensual indulgence ; others

1 Suet./, c. : “Ecqnid iis videretur mimnm vitae commode trans-

egisse .... adjecit ct clausulam : ti Si way <x (l koXus, waiy vit/i Aor *

np6 tov, Kal wdvTfs Suets ptTa x a P^ s KTvwfiaaTt.” Comp. Dion, lvi. 30 .

2 Suet. /. c. The child was named Livilla, daughter of Drusus, the
8 on of Tiberius by Vipsania. See Suet. Claud. 1.

* Suet. 1. c. : “ Sortitus facilem exitum et qualem semper optaverat.
Nam fere quoties audissct cito ac nullo cruciatu defunctum quem-
piam sibi et suis (vBayatrlay similem, hoc enim et verbo uti solebat,
precabatur.” The reader may remember Ctesar’s expression, that
the best death is that which is least expected.

Digitized by Google

UNDER THE EMTIRE.

365

A.D.14-A.U.767.

again, whose intellects are weak, though their na-
tures are susceptible and kindly, it may reduce to
absolute imbecility. But there is still another class
of characters, self-poised and harmoniously deve-
loped, in whom it breeds a genuine enthusiasm, a
firm assurance of their own mission, a perfect re-
liance on their own destiny, which sanctifies to them
all their means, and imbues them with a full con-
viction that their might is right, eternal and im-
mutable. At the close of his long career, Augustus
could look back on the horrors in which it had
commenced without blenching. He had made peace
with himself, to whom alone he felt himself respon-
sible ; neither God nor man, in his view, had any
claim upon him. The nations had not proclaimed
him a deity in vain ; he had seemed to himself to
grow up to the full proportions they ascribed to him.
Such enthusiasm, it may be argued, can Haeutim-
hardly exist without at least some rational ^TruThi.
foundation. The self-reliance of Augustus own d,Tuut r - 1
was justified by his success. He had resolved to
raise himself to power, and he had succeeded. He
had vowed to restore the moral features of the re-
public, and in this too he had, at least outwardly,
succeeded. While, however, the lassitude of the
Romans, and their disgust at the excesses of the
times, had been the main elements of his success,
another and more vulgar agent, one which it might
seem to need no genius to wield, had been hardly
less efficacious ; and this was simply his command
of money. Throughout his long reign, Augustus was
enabled to maintain a system of profuse liberality,
partly by strict economy and moderation in his own
habits, but more by the vast resources he had de-
rived from his conquests. He was anxious to keep
the springs of this abundance ever flowing, and he
found means to engage the wealthiest of his subjects
to feed them with gifts and legacies. The people

Digitized by Google

366

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

cn. xxxvm.

were content to barter their freedom for shows and
largesses, to accept forms and temples in place of
conquests ; and while their ruler directed his sump-
tuary laws against the magnificence of the nobles,
because it threw a shade over the economy which
his own necessities required, he cherished the most
luxurious tastes among the people, and strained
every nerve to satiate them with the appliances of
indolent enjoyment, with baths and banquets, with
galleries and libraries, with popular amusements and
religious solemnities.

Yet the secret of his power escaped perhaps the
concluding e y es of Augustus himself, blinded as they
reflection.. doubtless were by the fumes of national
incense. Cool, shrewd, and subtle, the youth of
nineteen had suffered neither interest nor vanity to
warp the correctness of his judgments. The accom-
plishment of his desires was marred by no wander-
ing imaginations. His struggle for power was sup-
ported by no belief in a great destiny, but simply
by observation of circumstances, and a close calcula-
tion of his means. As he was a man of no absorbing
tastes or fervid impulses, so he was also free from all
illusions. The story that he made his illicit amours
subservient to his policy, whether or not it be strictly
true, represents correctly the man’s real character.
The young Octavius commenced his career as a nar-
row-minded aspirant for material power. But his
intellect expanded with his fortunes, and his soul
grew with his intellect. The emperor was not less
magnanimous than he was magnificent. With the
world at his feet, he began to conceive the real
grandeur of his position ; he learnt to comprehend
the manifold variety of the interests subjected to
him; he rose to a sense of the awful mission im-
posed upon him. He became the greatest of Stoic
philosophers, inspired with the strongest enthusiasm,
and impressed the most deeply with a consciousness

Digitized by Google

A.D.14-A.D.767, UNDER THE EMPIRE. 367

of divinity within him. He acknowledged, not less
than a Cato or a Brutus, that the man-God must
suffer as well as act divinely; and though his human
weakness still allowed some meannesses and tri-
vialities to creep to light, his self-possession both
in triumphs and reverses, in joys and in sorrows,
was consistently dignified and imposing . 1

1 The deep impression this ruler’s character made upon a hundred
millions of subjects, is strongly marked in the eloquent though
highflown panegyric which Philo the Jew pronounces upon him:
6 8ia ptyedos gyepovlas auroKparovs Spov ical KaAoKi.yo.dias vpanos ovo-
patrSth 2fflaTTi>s, ou SiaSoxj? ytvous Sxnrtp rl KArpov ptpos ttjc imcv
vpiav AaBuv, a\A‘ avrbs yevop.fi/os ipXV crefiatrpov tral tihj eireira' k. t. A.
Philo, Leg. ad Caium , 21.

Digitized by Google

368

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

CHAPTER XXXIX.

Unity of the Roman empire. — Contrast between the three great
divisions of the ancient world, the East, the North, and the West.
— Variety within the Roman empire: 1, of languages; 2, of reli-
gions; 3, of classes: citizens, subjects, and allies, all gradually
tend to a single type. — Elements of unity in the Roman empire
from its geographical features. — Italy and the Mediterranean. —
Communications by sea and land. — Map of the empire: surveys:
census and professio. — Breviarium, or register of the empire. —
The population of the Roman dominions under Augustus. — Uni-
versal tranquillity; Pax Komana.

The conquests of Sulla and Lucullus, and still more
The empire those of Pompeius, opened a new world to
of the woriu. ^he R onian8) an d extended their dominion,
as they proudly boasted, over another hemisphere.
Lords alike of the East and of the West, their sway
seemed to stretch to the horizon on either side.
They listened first with complacent satisfaction to
the flattery of the Greeks, who sought to extenuate
the shame of their own overthrow by magnifying
the force and glory of their conquerors; but the
orators of the forum soon caught up these exag-
gerated strains, and Cicero himself could venture
to declare that the whole globe was shaken by the
convulsion of the civil wars . 1 The establishment
of the Augustan monarchy, expressing the material
and moral unity of so many climes and nations,
penetrated the Roman mind still more deeply with
a sense of the vastness of the national power, and

1 Polyb. iii. 3. : The Romans, he says, iirolitacw jrairav rJjv oh<ovntvr\v
inrfiKoov ainois. Cic. ad Div. ii. 16., iv. 1.: “ hac orbis terrarum per-
lurbatioue . . . orbcut terrarum ardcrc hello. ”

Digitized by

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

369

the boundless extent of its dominion. If any realms
or nations still lay beyond the tread of the procon-
sular legions, they were known to the mass of the
citizens only as suppliants or tributaries, from the
delusive legends of the imperial medals. These
illusions were widely propagated by the glowing
language of orators and courtly versifiers ; though
not Virgil only and Horace, but Tibullus also and
Propertius, generally speak upon this tempting
theme with dignified moderation. With the lively
and witty Ovid, however, there is an end of all
such reserve. The author of the Fasti and the
Metamorphoses indulges without scruple or reflec-
tion in. the boldest assertions of the unbounded

power of Home, and its extension over all the
earth. He defies great Jove himself, when he
casts his eyes down from the pinnacles of heaven,
to descry throughout creation any object which is
not actually Roman . 1

A glance on the map of the world, as it is known
in our own times, will suffice to reduce these Th „ e
vaunts to their proper limits. At this mo- Sn e .'in f
ment the globe contains three at least, if vJe£“pd h *
not four empires, each of which exceeds in the North
size the dominions of Rome at the period of their

greatest extension, and of which one only comprises
a few acres of all the regions over which Augustus

1 Compare the noble and legitimate aspiration of Horace, “ possis
nihil urbe Roma visere majus," with the reckless assertion of Ovid:
“ Jupiter arce sua totum cum spectat in orbem,

Nil nisi Romanum quod tueatur habet.”

But Horace had said, “totum confecta duella per orbem;” and
Virgil, “ Pacatumque reget patriis virtutibus orbem. ” Seneca views
the subject rather differently. If Rome did not possess the whole
world, she had all that was worth having. “ Omnes considera gentes
in quibus Romaua pax desinit ; Germanos, dico, et quicquid circa
Istrum vagarum gentium occursat. Perpetua illos hyems, tristtf
ccelum (.remit, maiigne solum sterile sustentat, imbrein culmo aut
fronde defendant, super durata glacie stagna persultant, in aliweutuiu
feras captant,” De Provid. 4.

VOL. IV. B B

Digitized by Google

370

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

held sway. 1 It will be fairer, however, to measure
the ideas of the Romans by the knowledge they them-
selves possessed ; though judged even by this test,
the extravagance of their notions will stand reproved.
The tripartite division of the earth’s surface is a tra-
dition of unknown antiquity, though it has been dif-
ferently applied at different epochs. At one time it
was usual to separate Asia from the rest by a vertical
line from north to south, and again to subdivide the
western hemicycle bya line drawn horizontally through
the Mediterranean, into the two continents of Europe
and Africa. At another the cardinal line was traced
from east to west, leaving Europe, with half of Asia,
as a single compartment, above it, and the rest of
Asia with Africa, which were again distinguished
from each other, below. But these divisions were
merely arbitrary ; at least they recommended them-
selves to the eye only. At the period we are now
considering the known world admits of a more phi-
losophical division, with reference to its social and
political features, while the principle of tripartition
may be still retained. At the foundation of the em-
pire the communities of the Roman world were massed
in three principal families, and these continued for
mauy ages to retain their most distinctive charac-
teristics. They may be represented as the East, the
West, and the North : the realms, 1st, of the Parthian,
Indian, and Arabian ; 2nd, of the Roman with all his
subject peoples ; and, lastly, of the German, Scythian,
and Sarmatian. On the one hand, a line drawn from
the crest of the Caucasus across the heads of the
Tigris and Euphrates, descending thence along the
frontiers of Syria and Palestine, till it struck the
northern extremity of the Red Sea, would separate
, the dominions of Rome from those of her chief rival,

1 The Russian, the British, the American, and, if it still exist, tbo
Chinese. Gibraltar, Malta, and the Ionian Islands are the only-
fragments of the Augustan empire included in any of these vast
agglomerations of territory, [a. d. 1855.]

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

371

Parthia, and the allies the Parthian could summon
to bis aid, or the kindred monarchies he might pre-
tend to influence. On the other hand, the eye follow-
ing the British Channel, the Rhine, and the Danube,
and glancing across the Euxine and the Caspian, till
it lost itself in the steppes of central Asia, might
distinguish between the unexplored realms of the
northern barbarians on the left, and the two great
empires of civilized humanity on the right.

The political characteristics of these three coor-
dinate sections may be contrasted not less Their pound
readily than their geographical positions. co"“£d! tic *
In the patriarchal despotism which prevailed La' S e hi Lt.
throughout the East, all power emanated “lo^dd
from the sovereign, and descended through rule-
the channels ordained by his sole will and pleasure.
From the Parthian sultan on his throne at Seleucia,
to the Arab sheikh who directed a handful of roving
bandits from his tent in the desert, the same principle
of government was there generally admitted. The
military chiefship of the Macedonian kings became,
as soon as they were settled in Asia, an uncontrolled
monarchy, checked by no prerogatives of nobles or
people. The successors of Alexander inherited the
tiara of Darius. In the same manner the feudal
principles respected by the old Parthian kings in their
mountain fastnesses, where the great vassals of the
crown had each his proper place and privileges, en-
titled to the deference of the sovereign himself, van-
ished almost as soon as the horsemen of the Oxus
touched the soil of Seleucia and Babylon, and yielded
to the pure autocracy exercised there long before by
the Mede and the Persian.

The chief feature, however, of the northern polities,
if such a term is applicable to so rude a so- QermiinT
ciety, consisted in the voluntary surrender of “ d the
each man’s will and action to a chief chosen liberty,
by himself for a definite object. The German war-

B B 2

Digitized by Google

372

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS.

CH. XXXIX.

riors assembled for the choice of a captain to point
out to them the foe, to lead them against him, to-
divide his territories among them. They required
him also to execute justice between them, and ordi-
narily appealed to his decision, when their passions
were not too strongly excited to forego a mere trial
of strength. But, destitute as they were of cities,
and nearly destitute even of villages, they bad no con-
ception of municipal government, and the intricate
questions of right thence arising. Their property,
held for the most part in common, was hardly a sub-
ject of legal regulation ; religion, directed by the
voice of priests, oracles, and prophetesses, had little
of prescribed system or traditional forms ; while con-
sultation in common for the purpose of permanent
legislation was apparently seldom used. The instinct
of municipal organization which has been since so con-
spicuous among them, remained yet to be developed
in the character of the northern nations. The spirit
of personal independence was as yet a sufficient safe-
guard of freedom, and enabled them to resist with
success the formidable aggressions of their invaders :
but it would not have availed to overthrow the fabric
of an established civilization, much less to replace it;
and the four centuries which were yet to intervene
before the northern races, confronted on the Rhine
and Danube with Roman law's and manners, should
succeed to the empire of the South, were a period of
slow and gradual training in the science of law and
government.

The political notions which animated the two great
x. Greece and civilizing nations of antiquity, the Greek
w ? «t. spirit and the Roman, were remarkable for their
government, similarity. The idea of the city, as the
germ of social development, was common to both.
The spirit of the institutions of Athens and Rome was
in the main identical. It was marked by common
consultation, by oral discussion, by the recognition of

Digitized by Google

CB. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

373

the opinion of the majority as the sentence of the
community, by the combination in the same hands
of the civil, the military, and the religious adminis-
tration, and generally by a preference of the elective
to the hereditary principle in every department of
government. However much of the details of their
political constitution the Romans derived from the
Etruscans, they permitted little deviation, under that
foreign influence, from these great fundamentals.
They created and maintained from the first the the-
ories of government, which have approved themselves
as the soundest to after ages, and which are generally
accepted among the most advanced of modern nations
as the genuine expression of right reason. When the
Romans conquered Italy they found themselves in
collision with no hostile and irreconcileable political
conceptions. There was no difficulty, therefore, in
admitting the nations of the peninsula to the privi-
leges of the conquering city, for they had been edu-
cated to understand and appreciate them by familiarity
with their own. So it was with the conquests of the
Greeks also. Throughout the regions where the Hel-
lenic race had settled, in which it had amalgamated
the natives to a great extent with itself, the ideas of
municipal government had taken root and become
naturalized. The conquerors did not? find it necessary
to supplant these institutions by formulas of their
own : both the one and the other were in fact homo-
geneous. Even in lower Italy and Sicily, and still
more commonly in Greece and Asia Minor, we find
that the petty communities of Hellenic origin were
frequently allowed to retain their laws and local ad-
ministration. The general ideas of self-government
and social progress, which had formed the strength of
Athens and Rome, continued to animate the two great
families, the Italian and Hellenic, in which the moral
force of the united empire resided.

In the West, on the other hand, the native races

Digitized by Google

374

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

had far less of this instinct for municipal govern-
ment: many of them, as in Spain and Africa,
r»"«°5 <l the were probably altogether devoid of it. Here
the conqueror came as an instructor and
a civilizer. Self-government was recommended to the
Gauls and Iberians by the moral superiority of their
new rulers, which they acknowledged with awe and
admiration. 1 Accordingly little effort was required
to impress on these people the advantage of manag-
ing their local affairs under Roman forms. We have
already seen how the western half of the empire be-
came much more closely assimilated to Italy than the
eastern : in the one region Roman ideas were trans-
planted in their full maturity to the foreign land; in
the other they found themselves confronted and held
aloof by a rival civilization at least equal to their
own, long fixed and rooted in the soil.

We may pause in this place, and examine in some
Eiemcntiof detail the elements of variety which thus
t‘£RMw hln existed together in the political condition
empire. 0 f R oman empire; an empire which
comprehended at least a hundred divers races among
its subjects, speaking perhaps many more languages

1 Yet this may be a fit place to remark that the civilization of
barbarians, at least their material cultivation, has been generally more
advanced by instructors whose moral superiority was less strongly
marked, than where the tcnchers and the taught have few common
sympathies and points of contact. Thus, iu our own times, rough
whalers and bridal pirates have done more to Europeanize the natives
of Polynesia than the missionaries ; and it may be believed that the
success of the Romans in assimilating to themselves the barbarian
races of their empire, which has been deemed one of the lost arts, was
owing in a great degree to the low moral standard of the conquerors
themselves, which brought them nearer to the level of their subjects.
When this moral infirmity was found to be united, as in the case before
ns, with intellectual and social superiority, the influence it exercised
over the inferior race was irresistibly seductive. But hence the new
civilization of the Roman provinces was rotten from the first. Its
foundation was laid on a mere quicksand: there were no steadfast
and solid virtues, however rude and homely, at the bottom of it.
Hence Gaul, Spain, and Africa produced no original minds in any
branch of art or science, no schools of thought, no principles of
action, and exercised no moral control on the course of events.

Digitized by Google

CB. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

375

and dialects; which numbered some thousands of
towns or cities, each endowed with its own laws and
administration, each having its several classes of in-
habitants, with peculiar privileges and functions —
the citizen, the metic, the stranger, and the slave ;
which acknowledged at the same time the sanctity
of manifold religions, and suffered a paramount or
exclusive authority to be claimed by a multitude of
distinct divinities, each in its own peculiar sphere.

I. There is no trace of the Romans seeking in any
quarter to impose their own language on v »rietie. of
the conquered races, or proscribing the na- 1 ‘ n * u *« e -
tive tongue. The furthest extent to which they al-
lowed themselves to go in obtruding a single favoured
idiom on their subjects, was in conducting public
business throughout the empire in Latin, a practice
dictated by convenience, though sanctioned no doubt
by a feeling of national pride. The majesty of Rome,
that moral charm on which her authority was made
to rest even more than on her arms, might seem to
require that her chief magistrates and generals should
use no other language than her own, and allow no
other to be addressed to them in the provinces, and
still more that the debates of the senate at home, the
parliamentary model and court of appeal of all na-
tions, should be confined to the vernacular dialect,
at a time when in private every educated Roman was
in the habit of talking Greek almost as commonly as
Latin. Some vigilance was required, in such a state
of things, to maintain the purity of this official
language of the state, to keep the door closed against
the intrusion of alien idioms into its most solemn
discussions; and Tiberius was noted for the strict-
ness with which he insisted on this etiquette in
drawing up the decrees of the senate . 1 The Roman

1 Suet. Tib. 71.: “Sermone Graeco, quanquam alias promptus et
facilis, non tamen usquequaque usus est, abstinuitque maxima in
Senatu, adeo quidem ut monopolium nominatorui, prius remain pos-

Digitized by Google

376 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS ch. xxxix.

language was used in every official act to the furthest
borders of the empire ; but it was translated into the
local dialect, and often again into the Greek, as the
classical channel of communication between the in-
structed of all countries . 1 The Greek language in-
p re valence of deed pervaded, as we have seen, the whole
sCtempro! of the Eastern provinces, and was generally
vincee. understood by the more intelligent even of
the lower classes. Among these the knowledge of it
was probably disseminated by the Greek slaves who
followed in the retinue of every noble Roman, and
generally transacted his business. In Rome, however,
it was acknowledged and prized as the vehicle of
poetry, philosophy, history, and science. In all these
branches of learning the writers of Latin avowed
themselves to be merely imitators; they pretended to
no higher aim than that of naturalizing among their
own countrymen the ideas of their intellectual mis-
tress. They had their children taught Greek from
infancy 2 ; they spoke it habitually in their own fami-
lies ; they wrote in it their private correspondence :
they discussed in it with their learned slaves matters
of art, science, and domestic economy ; and many
masters of Roman literature composed without affec-
tation some pieces in Greek also. They indulged a
humble hope of leaving to posterity a more durable
monument of themselves than stone or brass, by em-
balming the record of their actions in the language

tularit, quod sibi vcrbo peregrino utendum easet. Atque etiam in
quodam dccreto Patrum, quurn tftSArj^a recitaretur, commutandam
censuit vocera,” &c.

1 Hence we read that the inscription on the cross was written in
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. The co-ordination of the three languages
among the Jews is curiously exemplified, as regards personal names,
in the incidental notice of St. Mark’s Gospel, xv. 21.: “Simon the
Cyrenian, the father of Alexander and Rufus.” But generally the
names of Jews mentioned in the New Testament are in about equal
proportion, Greek, Latin, and Hebrew.

1 Dial, de Oral. 29.: “At nunc natus infans delcgatur Grsecul®
alieui ancilla:.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

377

of Xenophon and Thucydides . 1 It is curious how
entirely this calculation has failed. Such memorials
of Roman statesmen and captains have universally
perished ; nor does there exist any composition of a
Roman writer in Greek until we come at least to a
somewhat later age . 2

But Latin, while it thus yielded without reluctance
to the superior claims of its rival through- 0 fi.»tinin
out the East, and to a great extent even in tlMI w “ tern -
Italy and Rome itself, was compensated by a still
more remarkable triumph in the opposite quarters of
the empire . 3 We have no intimation that force was
employed in planting this language in Gaul or Spain
Pannonia or Africa ; that the use of the vernacular
idioms was ever interdicted, or the native children
drafted into schools to learn that of their conquerors.
Yet scarcely had one generation passed away, after
the incorporation of these countries with the empire,
before the use of Latin seems to have become almost
universal among them. Some districts of Gaul con-
tinued, indeed, as at this day, to utter the cherished
sounds of their own Celtic idioms ; the language of the
Vascones or Basques retained its savage supremacy,
as it still does, in remote corners of Spain ; fragments
of the ancient Moorish tongue, and of the Punic en-
grafted on it, lingered, we may believe, among the

1 Thus, besides Cicero’s history of his consulship, there were
memoirs of the younger Scipio, of Lticullus, of Sulla. &c., in Greek.
Fabius Pictor and Cincius wrote Roman history in that language.

1 The Geography of Strabo (in the reign of Tiberius), preserved
to us by its rare merits, is perhaps the earliest of the kind.

s The reason why the Latin never prevailed over the Greek, is
because the Greek is a language of later formation than the other.
A people who had advanced so far in accuracy and discrimination as
to use the article, middle verb, and such a variety of moods, cases, and
inflexions, as the Greeks, could not return to the meagre elements
of the Latin tongue. For the greater antiquity of Latin, see Don-
aldson, New Cralylus, ed. 2. p. 127. But Latin, on the other
baud, was no doubt more copious and varied than any of the western
idioms.

Digitized by Google

378

HISTORY OF TOE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

African provinces'; but in all these vast regions
Latin became, at a very early period, the ordinary
language of the people; it reached, within one ojr .
two centuries, the limits beyond the Alps and the
Pyrenees which it has ever since retained. Strabo,
born in the lifetime of Augustus, tells us that in
some parts of Spain the native language was in his
day already forgotten . 2 Latin, we learn from Velleius
Paterculus, was generally spoken 3 in Pannonia twenty
years after its subj ugation. While Divitiacus had lived
for years at Pome without acquiring it, in the course
of two generations we find Arminius speaking it with-
out hesitation . 4 The conquests of a language seem to
depend, not so much on the comparative numbers of
the people who speak it, as on the moral influence
they exert. We here discover an additional proof
that Rome occupied, in the view of the western races,
the same place which Greece claimed in the eyes of
the Romans. She was beheld with the same awe and
respect, and acknowledged as a mistress in civiliza-
tion more potent than in arms. The western nations
were content never to look beyond Rome for their
ideas, just as the Romans never looked beyond Greece.
The monuments of Egyptian life and manners, which
the children of Hellen acknowledged as the source of
so much of their own inspiration, were merely objects
of vague curiosity to the descendants of Quirinus.
it. vedettes II. Accordingly, while we observe the
of religion. w ic[ e diversities of language thus existing

within the sphere of the empire, we perceive at the

1 Apulcius reproaches an African youth, who lived among the
populace, with the use of Punic, whilst he had almost forgot Greek,
and neither could nor would speak Latin. Apolog. p. 556. The
greater part of St. Augustine’s congregations were strangers to the
Punic. Gibbon, Decl. and Fall, ch. ii.

* Strabo, iii. 2. p. 151. : &AA.’ ol pev TovpSrravol Kal p&Kurra ol wifA
rbv Bair iv .... oiitib rfjs Sia\(KTOv rfjt crtptTtpas ?r» pfpvTiptvot.

’ Veil. ii. 110.: “In omnibus Pannoniis non disciplines tantummodo
sod linguae quoque notitia Romanse, plerisquo etiam literarum usus.’*

4 Tac. Ann, ii. 10,

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

379

same time that they are doomed soon to merge in one
or two superior types of speech. The variety, how-
ever, of the religious systems in vogue under the
Roman dominion, offered a more obstinate resistance
to the tendency, which was now everywhere exhibited,
towards uniformity. According to modern notions
there is nothing more vital to the existence of national
unity than the unity of its religious views. To the
maintenance of this unity philosophers and statesmen
have directed their most ardent efforts, the one by
argument, the others often by force. The dawn of
consciousness that it has ceased to exist has been felt
as a shock which it was necessary to conceal from
popular observation. In proportion as the actual
variety of belief among the people has become ap-
parent, the state itself has seemed to rock to and fro,
to lose its balance, to let go its fixed principles, to
become a mere collection of uncemented atoms. Very-
foreign, however, were any such feelings from the
ideas with which the Romans were conversant. In
the height of their power, when their own faith and
their own right hands were equally potent, they felt
no scruple in allowing every race and every man
among their subjects to worship his God after his
own fashion. We have seen how the national divi-
nities of Gaul were respected by the conquerors ; and
the same was doubtless the case, though we have not
the means of tracing it, in every other province. The
honours paid them by the natives, and even by the
Roman residents, survived in many parts the verna-
cular languages . 1 In Jerusalem, Augustus caused a
sacrifice to be offered daily in the temple for his own
health and fortunes . 2 With few and special excep-
tions only, they allowed foreign cults to be practised

1 The votive inscriptions, of which there are many existing, to
the Gallic divinities, run generally in the name of Roman worship-
pers, and always in the Latin language.

1 Philo, Leg. ad Cai. pp. 588. 592.

Digitized by Google

380 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS CH. XXXIX.

even in the heart of the imperial city ; they suffered
their own Jupiter on the Capitol to be rivalled within
the shadow of his august temple by deities, whose
worshippers proclaimed them the Best and the
Greatest, no less than Jupiter himself.

Nor was this all. There were temples dedicated
Their ioc»i to Jupiter Capitolinus at Corinth, at An-
independence. ti oc h, Augustodunurn, and possibly at

other places, as well as at Rome; nor can we sup-
pose, although no traces of such worship appear, that
Janus and Quirinus, and other Roman divinities,
were entirely without honour in the colonies abroad. 1
The deity of Augustus himself, sometimes in con-
junction with that of Roma, was adored with vows
and sacrifices both in the East and West, though the
worship of the emperor was forbidden to Roman
citizens, or within the bounds of Italy. But we
cannot trace at least any bond of uniformity in the
worship of the same gods thus locally separated. No
jealous eye watched over their ceremonies and ri-
tuals, no authoritative voice denounced the discre-
pancies which might spring up between their ser-
vices, and even the attributes in divers places ascribed
to them. Each temple must be supposed to have
had its own ministers, independent of other kindred
colleges, and subject only to the general but ill-de-
fined authority of the chief of religion, who was chief
also of the state. The management of the estates
bequeathed to it by local piety, the regulation of its
usages, the methods of election into its own body,
were left to the discretion of each separate corpo-
ration. We shall notice at a later period the feeble-
ness of this loose and unconnected system when
opposed to the strict organization of the Christian
churches.

1 Pausan. ii. 4.; Liv. xli. 20. Enmen. Or at. pro instaur. schol. 9,
10. Comp. Tzscbirner, Fall ties Heidenthums, p. 53.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXX X.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

381

III. Another important element of diversity was
the fixed distinction of classes in the em- m Distinc _
pire. The great aim of modern civiliza-
tion is to reduce the component parts of society to
an uniform status, at least in the eye of the law ; to
fuse together all varieties of race and origin, and
abolish or disguise whatever special privileges they
may have claimed or exercised. The administration,
generally retrogressive, of Augustus, had in this
particular also a contrary aim, however it may have
been thwarted by irresistible circumstances. Augus-
tus strove, with a zeal which we may almost call
fanatical, to retrace more strongly the old lines ot
social demarcation, which the disorders of the times
had suffered to disappear. The Roman world was
still composed of citizens, subjects, and
allies : such were the three co-ordinate subjects,
classes of society, each subdivided into *' u es ’
ranks and orders of its own, which alone the law
recognised as entitled to social and political rights.
Beyond these, huddled together with goods and
chattels, lay the outer world of slaves who stare.,
were allowed no part or interest in the law at all.

We have seen with what precision Augustus re-
gulated the places of senators and knights, citizens
and freedmen ; with respect to the admission of
strangers to the franchise he was reserved and scru-
pulous. He abstained altogether from imparting the
boon to whole cities and states, as Caesar and Anto-
nius had done ; to individuals he doled out the pre-
cious gift with a sparing hand. In the provinces the
condition of the people was complicated by Di , tin ct ion ,
a variety of distinctions; and these too he th?pro-“
maintained according to the prescriptions Tince ' -
of the republic. We have no data for assigning the
proportion of the provincial population which be-
longed to the class of subjects, and lay under the
yoke of Roman laws and magistrates, without any

Digitized by Google

382

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

free action of its own. It was not, perhaps, large.
Caesar applauded his own generosity in granting
terras to the whole mass of the Gauls, the use of
their own customs, choice of their magistrates, dis-
cussion of their affairs,, and levying of their local re-
venues. Independence, or autonomy, as it was called,
to this extent was enjoyed, indeed, by a large portion
of every subject people ; but only by special grant at
the time of capitulation, or at a later period under the
patronage of some powerful chieftain. Pompeius gave
autonomy to most of the cities of Asia ; in Greece the
constitutions of the several states were generally re-
modelled at the conquest, but they were allowed them-
selves to administer them. 1 * We have already traced
in many instances the effects of individual favour and
caprice in conferring or withdrawing these coveted
prerogatives. Autonomy, however, did not imply
release from imperial taxation. The land and capi-
tation taxes, sometimes together with a special tri-
bute, were regularly enforced. Fiscal exemption or
immunity was a special boon bestowed only in the
most favoured cases. The free states continued to
mark their years by the names of their chief magis-
trates. Archons and Prytanes, as we learn from
medals and inscriptions, governed to a late period
the communities of Ionian origin, while the Dorian
still obeyed their Ephori and Cosmi. 3 To some of
them the prerogative of coining money was long in-
dulged. Each of them was suffered to maintain its
own fiscal regulations, devised with a view to its own
peculiar advantage, whereby a multitude of conflict-
ing interests was everywhere perpetuated ; and these
were still further complicated by the existence of free
confederations, such as the Panionian, the Amphic,-
tyonic, the Boeotian and Achaean ; the action of which

1 Strabo, xii. xiii. ; Plin. II.N.v.-, Dion, xxxvii. 20. ; Pausan. vii.

16. j Becker’# Roem. Alterth. iii. 1. 143.

1 Hoeck, Roem. Gesch. ii. 218.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

383

may have been mainly confined, however, to matters
of religion and social intercourse.

But the friends and allies of the Roman people,
though often locally situate in the heart of independent
the Roman territories, were neither subject communitie *
to the Roman magistrate, nor tributary to the im-
perial treasury. The terms on which they held their
independence were specifically those of offensive and
defensive alliance; the supply of a military contin-
gent, the extradition of fugitives, and non-intercourse
with the enemies of Rome. In return for such com-
pliances they received the august protection of the
patron state. Much, however, as these apparent
anomalies might seem to militate against the actual
unity of the empire, in practice they did not seriously
affect it. The eye accustomed to the contemplation
of the essential uniformity of the administration,
glanced beyond these petty exceptions without a
pause, and rested upon the grand principle which
predominated over the whole. Friends and allies,
the free and the exempted, all felt but too sensibly
that their privileges were held only at the caprice of
a master. Their independence was after all little
more than a shadow. The edicts of the proconsuls,
and in later times the rescripts of the emperors,
could at any time dissipate and destroy it. Step by
step most of them were in fact brought
down at last to the Common condition of reau“‘dto
subjects. The loss of their political or ,ub3cctlon ‘
civic privileges, meagre as they were, might be a
matter of little regret to them ; but as subjects of
the empire they found themselves compelled to bear
an undue proportion of the imperial taxation, every
deficiency in which was ordinarily supplied by ad-
ditional imposts on the occupiers of the public do-
main. To escape from this ever-increasing burden
was the aim of their most earnest endeavours, and
this could only be effected by acquiring the rights of

Digitized by Google

384

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

citizenship. Every frash admission to the most fa-
voured class so far reduced the area of general tax-
ation, while it increased its intensity. Hence the
impolicy, which Augustus wisely appreciated, of
giving easy access to it. But we shall find his
successors not always so scrupulous, and observe
how the discovery, which was speedily made, that
the privileges of citizenship could be made finan-
cially available, induced them to turn in their ne-
cessities to this fatal resource, and sacrifice to an
immediate expediency the permanent forces of the
empire.

The reserve adopted by Augustus in multiplying
Numben of tt»e dominant class was doubtless mani-
the citixeni. f es t the provincials, who well knew that

a wary ruler must feel alarm at the too rapid
diminution of the tax-payers throughout his domi-
nions, under the opposite policy of his predecessors.
They would observe with satisfaction that the total
number of exemptions, according to the census of
767, did not exceed by more than 500,000 that
which had been calculated forty-one years before,
representing an increase in that period of only about
one in thirty-two, and that it was actually less than
that of the intermediate enumeration of 746. 1
During the confusion of the civil wars no census had
been taken from which a comparison might be in-
stituted between this moderation and the lavish pro-
fusion of Csesar and Antonins. Yet however selfish
and reckless the triumvir had shown himself in this

1 The numbers of the censuses of Augustus, as given on the
Monument of Ancyra, are as follows: a.u. 726, 4,063.000; a.u. 746,
4,233,000: a.u. 767, 4,190,000. These numbers may be supposed
to represent the male citizens of military age throughout the empire:
previous enumerations, the highest of which scarcely exceeded one
tenth of these numbers, must refer to those of the city and its vicinity
only. The ratio these numbers bear to the whole class of citizens
of every age and both sexes, is roughly indicated in the text; it will
be considered more closely a little further on.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

TENDER THE EMPIRE.

385

respect, the views of the dictator at least are entitled
to more consideration. Caesar had felt the need of
infusing new blood largely into the class who fought
the battles of the state. As a conqueror himself he
knew the weakness of his military resources. As a
man of science and letters, he honoured and rewarded
the liberal professions. Sanguine and ambitious, he
relied upon future conquests for replenishing the
treasury his liberality exhausted, and created new
sources of perennial wealth. But Augustus indulged
in no such visions. He found the citizens, at least in
Italy, generally indisposed to military service; but
the resources bequeathed him by his predecessors
sufficed for his more moderate outlay of Roman
blood, and, except on one great occasion of disaster
and panic, he was able to recruit his military gar-
risons without extraneous supplies . 1 But he would
not suffer even the Italians to enjoy a double im-
munity both from arms and taxation. Exemption
from the tax on land was a special privilege, which
they could not be persuaded to forego. Augustus,
by the invention of a duty on succession, which
he imposed exclusively on the citizens, redressed in
some degree the balance. By a simple stroke of
linance he established the essential equality of the
conquerors and the conquered, while he relieved
himself from some portion at least of the pressure
applied to him by those who sought to evade by
becoming citizens their due share in the general
burdens.

There was one source, however, from which, not-
withstanding the emperor’s reluctance, the franchise

1 This applies of course only to the legionary force. The subjects
of the empire continued to furnish auxiliary cohorts, and it is possible
that the proportion they bore to the legions was gradually increased.
Gaul and Spain, and even Germany, furnished numerous and well-
appointed contingents. The Jews were generally exempted from
military service in deference to their religious prejudices. Joseph.
Antiq. Jud. xiv. 10, 11 — 19.

TOL. IV. C C

Digitized by Google

386

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX-

continued to be extended, nor could any direct or
Extension of efficient control be placed upon it. Every
by themanu- proprietor had it in his power to confer
BUre ™ 0 citizenship on his own slave by a legitimate
emancipation, nor, till Augustus interfered, was any
discouragement thrown on this practice, as long as cer-
tain forms were duly complied with. With the stroke
of the praetor’s wand, the slave was turned at once
into a citizen, and the master became a patron . 1 In
the simpler ages of the commonwealth, no provision
had been made, because perhaps none was practically
required, for restraining the cupidity of masters in
this particular. The service of the slave was worth
more to his master than the trifling sum he could
have it in bis power to offer for his freedom. But the
case must have been altered when slaves were pos-
sessed of the highest personal and intellectual qual-
ities. Such men as Cicero’s favourite Tiro, a paragon
of literary accomplishments, might doubtless have
bid high for manumission, had he sighed for the mere
.name of liberty. In many cases indeed the qualities
<of the slave were a pecuniary benefit to the master ;
but it is natural to suspect that the master was often
induced to turn this interest into capital, by selling
the slave his freedom outright.* It was sometimes

1 It is to be observed that there are two inodes of manumission
justa and minus justa, the one being the regular and legitimate method
effected by the stroke of the pnetor’s wand, which conferred a certain
citizenship with limited privileges; the other required no formality
beyond the mere word or certificate of the master, but the freedom
it gave was good only as against the master. The lex Julia Norbana
(a.u. 771) first gave these freedmen a certain political status, by
assimilating them to the Latini. See Wallon, Hist, de I'Esclavage
dans U Antiquiti (ii. 401.), from Gaius (L 22.), who calls them Latini
Juniani. Under the republic the freedman could obtain no political
honours, could vote only in one of the four urban tribes, conld serve
only in the marine, and could not contract marriage with a citizen.
These restrictions were however extinguished in the second gene-
ration.

3 It seems, indeed, to have been a common arrangement that the
slave should be allowed to work on his own account, and recover his

Google

ca. xxxix.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

387

perhaps from humanity, more commonly from a feel-
ing of pride, that he manumitted his slaves on his
death-bed, and secured a longer retinue of clients to
follow his bier. 1 But even in his lifetime his vanity
might be fed by the respect and service of his freed-
men. These people continued after emancipation
attached to the interests of their patron, and were
often admitted to his confidence, in places of trust
which could not with propriety be filled by a slave.
There are no intimations, perhaps, from which we
can judge of the extent to which manumission had
actually been carried, but undoubtedly the common
expectation of release from captivity rendered the con-
dition of- slavery more tolerable. A good and trusty
slave, we infer from a passage in Cicero, might anti-
cipate his emancipation in six years. 2 The measure
of Augustus, which placed a tax on this sale of citi-
zenship, may have had some influence in checking it ;
it is probable, however, that it was meant to serve
another purpose, in feeding the imperial treasury. 3

The slaves formed the last of the classes of the
population ; and the marked contrast of 81lTery . iu
their condition, politically and socially, to |” d <^?bin7Sj
those of the various free men of the empire, ou^SrfJee
constituted, no doubt, the strongest element men,0 « ether -
of diversity in its system. Throughout the whole

freedom for a stipulated sum. It appears, however, that the law
gave him no protection against the violation of this agreement. See
Tac. Ann. xiv. 42.

1 Dion. Hal. Antiq. Rom. iv. 24.

2 Cic. Philipp, viii. II.: “Etenim, patres conscripti, quum in spem
libertatis sexennio post simus ingressi, diutiusque servitium perpessi,
quam captivi frugi et diligentes solent.” He counts the years of his
political servitude from the crossing of the Rubicon (705) to the de-
claration of war against Antonius (711).

’ Under the republic a tax of a twentieth had been levied on the
sale of slaves (from a.u. 398 to 543); and the money thence derived
was deposited in the treasury; from whence (the sum being recorded)
Dureau de la Malle draws a curious but unsafe argument regarding
the number of enfranchisements.

C c 2

Digitized by Google

388

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

extent of the Roman dominions every city and every
mansion was in fact divided into two hostile camps,
those of the masters and the slaves, the tyrants and
their victims. This inveterate hostility of class against
class would appear at first sight to be a source of
weakness, against which no political contrivance could
effectually contend : nevertheless, history seems to
attest that the institutions of slave-states have been
at least as permanent as those of others ; there has
been no instance perhaps, on a large scale, of the
overthrow of a polity by a servile reaction. Not-
withstanding the superficial diversity introduced by
slavery into the Roman state, it was on the whole an
element of unity as well as of strength. It drew the
various classes of free men more closely together by
the sense of a common interest; it induced them to
establish a common system of law and usage, of police
and repression, in reference to it; it left them free to
exercise themselves in arms or letters, while all neces-
sary manual services were performed for them by
others ; by drawing its recruits from manifold sources,
and gradually transfusing them into the body of the
free population, it tended to assimilate the races of
the empire, and obliterate distinctions of blood, lan-
guage, and condition. Drop by drop the stream of
barbarism continually distilled into the reservoir of
the city. The busts of the later empire speak more
eloquently than any other evidence to the gradual
debasement of the old Roman type of form and
countenance.

We have thus seen how even the varieties of lan-
Fiement* of guage, religion, and condition, which pre-
Roilmnein'-* vailed throughout the Roman dominions,
pire. were compensated in a great degree by

certain tendencies to uniformity, and slowly gravitated
towards a single type. There were other respects,
however, in which this progress was more rapid and
apparent, and impressed on the manifold fragments

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

389

of the empire the character of one homogeneous mass.
From age to age the ever increasing area of the Ro-
man dominions continued to be generated round its
centre, the peninsula, which, striking deeply Iulythe
iuto the Mediterranean, almost divides it
into equal parts, until it encircled the whole n * a “ 8e *
of that great basin with a belt of populous provinces,
studded with rich and splendid cities. Before the
conquests of Csesar and Pompeius, the map of the
empire was merely a chart of the Mediter- The Medilcr .
ranean. Cicero had said of the Greek 4

states and colonies throughout the world * heem ‘” re -
that they were a f ringe, as it were, on the skirts of
barbarism; and it was not till the reduction of the
interior of Gaul, Spain, and Lesser Asia that the
Roman power penetrated far, in any quarter, beyond
sight of the friendly waves of the Mediterranean . 1
While the coast teemed everywhere with the products
of industry and civilization, and the hand and mind
of man were as busy and restless as the waves before
his feet, the vast regions at his back were abandoned
to forests and morasses, the abodes of wild animals
and hardly less wild barbarians. In the most flourish-
ing periods of ancient history, the Mediterranean may
be compared to the great inland lakes of the American
continent, skirted with cities, villages, and clearings,
but with illimitable tracts of unredeemed wilderness
stretching behind them. The latest conquests of
Rome annexed the backwoods of Gaul and Germany
in great masses, though even here the colonization of
the Romans, and even the occupation of the natives,

' Cic. de Republ. ii. 4.: “Ita barbarorum agris quasi attexta qiue-
dam videtnr esse ora Graecise.” “ We,” says Plato ( Phcedo,y > . 109. b.),
“who dwell from the Phasis to the pillars of Hercules, inhabit
only a small portion of the earth, in which we have settled round the
sea like ants or frogs round a marsh.” Mark the contrast of national
character in these kindred images — “ Rom an us honos et Graia
licentia”— the one majestic but rhetorical, the other genial though
mean.

Digitized by Google

390

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXtX,

was confined to certain narrow tracks of internal com-
munication. Even in the age of Augustus hardly one
place of any political importance lay at a distance of
twenty miles from the coasts of the midland sea . 1
The consolidation of the Roman power over these
coasts reduced the Mediterranean to the common
highway of all civilized nations ; and when the police
of these waters was duly kept, as was the case under
the emperors, their mutual communications were
regular and rapid. In fair seasons, and with fair
winds, the navigation of the ancients, conducted by
oars and sails, was speedier than our own till the
inventions of the most recent times.* We learn that
vessels from the mouth of the Tiber could reach the
coast of Africa in two days, Massilia in three, Tarraco
in four, and the pillars of Hercules in seven. From
Puteoli the transit to Alexandria had been effected
with moderate winds in nine days ; from Messana in
seven, and once even in six . 3 On the other hand,
however, if the winds and waves were adverse, the
timidity and unskilfulness of the mariners made
their voyages extremely slow and uncertain. Caesar

1 I am speaking of course of places which owed subjection to
Rome, and I except the military colonics and frontier posts in Gaul,
Spain, and Pannonia. I would also except some towns in the in-
terior of Asia Minor, which owed their importance to their position
on the route of the overland traffic from Greece into Upper Asia.
The political importance of Lugdunum was of later growth.

3 Herodotus, iv. 86., reckons 1300 stadia, or 162 Roman miles, a
good twenty-four hours’ sail in summer. See Conybeare and How-
son, Life of St. Paul, ii. 315. foil, from Gres well’s Dissertations, See.,
iv. 517. About seven knots an hour before the wind, for which the
rigging with one mainsail is best adapted, might be the average
speed of sailing.

3 Plin. Hist. Nat xix. 1. Between the period of Augustus and
Pliny, about fifty years, there was probably a considerable advance in
the science of navigation. That writer seems to attribute the in-
creased speed in sailing to the use of the Egyptian linen in place of
the hempen or lattin sails of the ancients, which from its lightness
admitted of a much greater speed : “super antennas addi velorum
alia vela, prseterque alia in proris, et alia in puppibus pandi.”

Digitized by Google

CH XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

391

took twenty-nine days to reach the coast of Italy
from Sardinia, and the Alexandrian vessel in which
St. Paul sailed from the coast of Lycia would have
wintered in a haven of Crete in the midst of its
voyage to Home. The Homans, indeed, only navi-
gated in the finer parts of the year. The communi-
cation between Italy and Spain by water was in-
terrupted from the middle of November and only
recommenced in March . 1 It took as much as three
months to sail from Gades to Ostia in the face of the
east winds which prevailed at a certain season . 2

But with the return of spring or summer the glit-
tering sea was alive with vessels. Rome, Rome the
placed like a mightier Mexico in the centre the 1 commerce
of her mighty lake, was furnished with terr»n«n.
every luxury and with many of her chief necessaries
from beyond the waters; and cities on every coast,
nearly similar in latitude and climate, vied in intense
rivalry with each other in ministering to her appetite.
First in the ranks of commerce was the traffic in
corn, which was conducted by large fleets of galleys,
sailing from certain havens once a year at stated
periods, and pouring their stores into her granaries
in their appointed order. Gaul and Spain, Sardinia
and Sicily, Africa and Egypt were all wheat-growing
countries, and all contributed of their produce, partly
as a tax, partly also as an article of commerce, to the
sustentation of Rome and Italy. The convoy from
Alexandria was looked for with the greatest anxiety,
both as the heaviest laden, and as from the length of
the voyage the most liable to disaster or detention.
The vessels which bore the corn of Egypt were re-
quired to hoist their topsails on sighting the promon-
tory of Surrentum, both to distinguish them from
others, and to expedite their arrival. These vessels

1 Vegetius, v. 9.: “Ex die tertio iduum Novemb. usque iu diem
sextnm iduum Mart, maria clauduntur.”

1 Strabo, iiL 2. p. 144.

Digitized by Google

392

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

moreover, according to the institution of Augustus,
were of more than ordinary size, and they were at-
tended by an escort of war galleys. The importance
attached to this convoy was marked by the phrases,
auspicious and sacred, applied to it . 1 As it neared
the Italian coast, its swiftest, sailers were detached to
go forward and give notice of its approach. Hence it
glided rapidly, by night or day, under the guidance
of the Surrentine Minerva on the right, and on the
left of the lighthouse of Capreae . 2 A deputation of
senators from Rome was directed to await its arrival
at the port where it was about to cast anchor, which,
from the bad condition of the haven at Ostia, was
generally at this period Puteoli in Campania. As
soon as the well-known topsails were seen above the
horizon a general holiday was proclaimed, and the
population of the country, far and near, streamed
with joyous acclamations to the pier, and gazed upon
the rich flotilla expanding gaily before them . 3

The vessels engaged in this trade, however nume-
rous, were after all of small burden. The corn-fleets

1 “ Felix embola, sacra embola.” Statins has a picturesque al-
lusion to the mariner hailing the Isle of Capre® and pouring his
libation before the statue or temple of Minerva on the opposite
height :

“ Modo nam trans sequora terris

Prima Dicarchaeis Pharium gravis intulit annum :

Prima salutavit Capreas, et marginc dextro
Sparsit Tyrrhen® Mareotica vina Miner vac.”

His friend Celer takes his passage on board this vessel, on its return
voyage, to join his legion in Palestine :

“ Quara scanderc gaudet
Nobilis Ausoni® Celer armipotentis alumnus.”

Sylo. iiL 2. 19.

* Stat. Sylv. iii. 5. 100:

“ Teleboumque domos, trepidis ubi duleia nautis
Lumina noctivag® tollit Pharus ®mula Lun®.”

* Seneca, Epist. 78., in which there is a lively account of this
circumstance, says, “ Cum intravere Capreas et promontorium ex
quo alta procelloso speculator vertice Pallas, e®ter® velo jubentur
esse content®, supparum Alexandrinarum insigne indicium eat.”

Digitized by Google

CH. xxxix. UNDER THE EMPIRE. 393'

did not indeed form the chief maritime venture of the
Alexandrians. The products oflndia, which StBple , of
had formerly reached Egypt from Arabia, in

and were supposed indeed in Europe to * err ‘ ne * 11 -
have come only from the shores of the Erythnean Sea,
were now conveyed direct to Cleopatris or Berenice
from the mouths of the Indus and the coast of Mala-
bar, and employed an increasing number of vessels,
which took advantage of the periodical trade winds
both in going and returning. The articles of which
they went in quest were for the most part objects of
luxury; such as ivory and tortoiseshell, s P ic«.*c.,
fabrics of cotton and silk, both then rare iui.
and costly, pearls and diamonds, and more especially
gums and spices. 1 The consumption of these latter
substances in dress, in cookery, in the service of the
temples, and above all at funerals, advanced with the
progress of wealth and refinement. 2 The consign-
ments which reached Alexandria from the East were
directed to every port on the Mediterranean ; but
there was no corresponding demand for the produce
of the West in India, and these precious freights
were for the most part exchanged for gold and silver,
of which the drain from Europe to Asia was uninter-
rupted. The amount of the precious metals thus
abstracted from the currency or bullion of the empire,
was estimated at 100,000,000 sesterces, or about
800, 000?. yearly. 3 The reed called papyrus, P , per from
the growth of which seems to have been Egypt-
almost confined to the banks of the Nile, was in
general use as the cheapest and most convenient
writing material, and the consumption of it through-

1 The objects of the Indian trade are enumerated by Arrian,
Peripl. Erythr. p. 28., and also in the Digest, xxxix. tit. 4. 16.

* See the account of the funeral of Sulla in Plutarch, and of
Poppsea (the wife of Nero) in Pliny, Hist. Nat. xii. 41.

* Plin. Hist. Nat. Lc.: “Minimaque computationc millics een-
tena inillia sestertium annis omnibus India et Seres peninsulaque ilia
(Arabia) imperio nostro adimunt.”

Digitized by Google

394

niSTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

out the world, though it never entirely superseded
the use of parchment and waxen tablets, must have
been immense . 1 It was converted into paper in
Egypt, and thence exported in its manufactured state ;
but this practice was not universal, for we read of a
house at Eome which improved on the native process,
and produced what Pliny calls an imperial or noble
out of a mere plebeian texture . 2 With respect to other
articles of general use, it may be remarked that the
most important, such as corn, wine, oil, and wool, were
the common produce of all the coasts of the Mediter-
ranean, and there was accordingly much less inter-
change of these staple commodities among the nations
of antiquity than with ourselves, whose relations ex-
tend through so many zones of temperature. Hence,
probably, we hear of none of their great cities be-
coming the workshops or emporiums of the world
for any special article of commerce . 3 The
woollens indeed of Miletus and Laodicea,
together with other places of Asia Minor, were re-
nowned for their excellence, and may have been
transported as articles of luxury to distant parts ; but
Africa and Spain, Italy and parts of Greece, were
also breeders of sheep, and none of these countries
depended for this prime necessary on the industry or
cupidity of foreigners. The finest qualities of Greek

1 The papyrus plant, Cyperus papyrus, is found also on the banks
of a rivulet near Syracuse, and has sometimes been converted into
paper there in modern times, as a matter of curiosity. See Wilkin-
son’s Ancient Egyptians, iii. 148.

2 Plin. Hist. Nat, xiii. 23. : “ Excepit hanc Romm Eannii sagax
officina, tenuatamque curiosa interpolatione principalcm fecit e
plebeia.” The ordinary process of this manufacture was to place
two layers of the thin slices of the papyrus crossways, and then
paste and press them together. But Fannius, as I understand Pliny,
plaited the transverse slices. The most elegant paper was rubbed
thin and polished with shells or ivory.

* Hume, in his essay on the “ Populousness of Ancient Nations,”
has the remark, which, as far as 1 have noticed, is correct, that no
great city of antiquity is said to have acquired its importance from
any kind of manufactures.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER TIIE EMPIRE.

395

and Asiatic wines were bespoken at Rome, and at
every other great seat of luxury. The Chian
and Lesbian vintages were among the most
celebrated, but the quantity they could produce
must have been comparatively limited, and an im-
mense proportion of the wines consumed by the na-
tions of the Mediterranean was undoubtedly of home
growth, for few of them were not themselves produ-
cers. Again, while the clothing of the mass of the
population was made perhaps mainly from the skin8
of animals, leather of course could be obtained abun-
dantly in almost every locality. When we remember
that the ancients had neither tea, coffee, tobacco,
sugar, nor for the most part spirits ; that they made
little use of glass, and at this period had hardly ac-
quired a taste for fabrics of silk, cotton, or even flax,
we shall perceive at a glance how large a portion of
the chief articles of our commerce were entirely
wanting to theirs. Against this deficiency, however,
many objects of great importance are to be set.
Though the ruder classes were content with wooden
cups and platters fashioned at their own doors, the
transport of earthenware of the finer and more pre-
cious kinds, and from certain localities, was very
considerable. 1 Though the Greeks and Romaus ge-
nerally were without some of our commonest imple-
ments of gold and silver, such for instance as watches
and forks, it is probable that they indulged even more
than we do in personal decoration with rings, seals,
and trinkets of a thousand descriptions. Their ar-

1 I believe it is now understood that the murrha of the Romans
was not porcelain, as had been supposed from the line,

“ Murrheaque in Parthis pocula cocta focis,”

(Propert. iv. 5. 26.), but an imitation in coloured glass of a trans-
parent stone. It is agreed that the so-called Etruscan ware, of
which such immense quantities were nsed in Italy, was not an
Etruscan, hut a Greek manufacture, and came not even from the
Greeks of Lower Italy, but from the mother country beyond the sea.
Macculloch’s Political Essays, p. 298.

Digitized by Google

396 HISTORY OF THE ROMANS CH. xxxix.

mour and even their peaceful habiliments were orna-
mented with the precious metals, and altogether the
traffic in this particular article, which came chiefly
from the Spanish mines, furnished as important an
element in their commerce as in our own. The con-
veyance of wild animals, chiefly from Africa, for the
sports of the amphitheatres of some hundreds of
cities throughout the empire, must alone have given
occupation to a large fleet of ships and many thou-
sand mariners . 1 Nor were the convoys smaller which
were employed to transport marble from the choicest
quarries of Greece and Asia to many flourishing cities
besides the metropolis ; and even the spoliation of
the forums and temples of the East, not of their
pictures and statues only, but of columns and pave-
ments and almost entire edifices, furnished a notable
addition to the annual freights of the Mediterranean.
The last article of transport which need be enume-
rated is that of troops and military stores, including
engines of war, horses, and even elephants, which
alone must occasionally have required large naval
armaments ; for it was by water, far more than by
land, that the forces of Rome were conveyed to Greece,
Spain, and Asia, as well as to Africa and Egypt.
When we remember that the Mediterranean was closed
for a third part of the year, and that all this variety of
maritime enterprise was crowded into a few months
annually, we shall be disposed to regard with some
indulgence the bold hyperbole of Juvenal, that more
than half mankind was actually upon the water . 2

1 Petron. Satyr. 119.:

“ Preroit advena classes Tigris.”

Such insignificant places as Dorchester and Lillebonne had spacious
amphitheatres ; the one, perhaps, merely of turf with wooden sheds,
but the other a miniature colosseum in architecture and masonry.

2 Juvenal, xiv. 275.:

“ Adspice portus

Et plenum magnis trabibus mare: plus hominum est jam
In pelago."

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

397

After due deduction for the more contracted sphere
of ancient commerce, and the lesser num- Effectof
her of articles, for the extent also to which
the necessaries and conveniences of life to the em » toi
were manufactured at home in the establishments of
wealthy slave-owners, we shall still readily believe
that the intercommunication of the cities of the
Mediterranean, such as Corinth, Rhodes, Ephesus,
Cyzicus, Antioch, Tyrus, Alexandria, Gyrene, Athens,
Carthage, Tarraco, Narbo and Massilia, Neapolis and
Tarentum, Syracuse and Agrigentum, and of all with
Rome, must have been a potent instrument in fusing
into one family the manifold nations of the empire.
While each community retained for the most part its
own commercial laws and customs’ duties, which
operated to some extent in impeding the free inter-
change of their divers commodities, the direct traffic
with Rome was equally free to all ; nor were the tolls
levied on imports into the capital either capricious or
severe. Rome, conspicuous on her seven hills, and
though situated fifteen miles inland, not perhaps in-
visible from the Tyrrhene waters 1 , became the great
central object to which all enterprise and commercial
cupidity looked ; and in the eyes of the Orientals and
the Greeks, the mistress of lands and continents, the
leader of armies, and the builder of roads was re-
garded as the greatest of all maritime emporiums,
and represented in their figurative style as a woman
sitting enthroned upon the waves of the Mediter-
ranean . 2

1 The cross of St. Peter’s may be seen from the sea, but it may
be questioned whether any building of ancient Rome was equally
lofty.

2 “ The great whore that sitteth upob many waters .... Alas,
alas! that great city Babylon .... the merchants of the earth
shall weep and mourn over her, for no man buyeth of her merchan-
dise any more .... The merchandise of gold and silver and
precious stones, and of pearls, and of fine linen and purple, and
silk and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and all manner of vessels of

Digitized by Google

398

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX,

The maritime aspect thus assumed by Rome in the
security of eyes of her subjects beyond the sea, is the
commerce more remarkable when we consider how
empire. directly her ancient policy and habits were
opposed to commercial development. Cicero men-
tions it, among the advantages of her site, that she
was removed from the sea, contact with which was
supposed to have been fatal to her predecessors in
empire, to Athens and Corinth, Syracuse and Car-
thage. 1 The landowners of Rome, in the highday of
her insolent adolescence, had denounced both com-
merce and the arts as the business of slaves or freed-
men. So late as the year 535 a law had been passed
which forbade a senator to possess a vessel of burden,
and the traffic which was prohibited to the higher
class was degraded in the eyes of the lower. 2 But
it would not have been necessary to enact such a

ivory, and all manner of vessels of most precious wood, and of brass
and of iron, and of marble, and cinnamon, and odours, and oint-
ments, and frankincense, and wine and oil, and fine flour, and wheat,
and beasts and sheep, and horses and chariots, and slaves, and souls
of men." Revel, xvii. 1., xviii. 10. “ That great city, wherein were

made rich all that had ships in the sea.” The above is perhaps a
complete enumeration of the imports of the port of Ostia for the
use of Rome. For the sense in which the opprobrious term y itipvy
is applied to Babylon, i. e. Rome, Schleusner compares Isaiah
xxiii. 16., where the Hebrew equivalent is applied to Tyre: “ Quia
fuit propter mercatutam insignia, et sicut meretrix lucri et qusestns
causa cum aliis negotiabatur.”

1 Cic. de Repubh ii. 4.

s Liv. xxi. 63.: “ Ne quis senator, cuive senatorius pater fuerat,
maritimam navem, quae plus quam trecentarum amphorarum esset,
haberet. Id satis habitual ad fructus ex agris vectandos: qmestus
omnis patrihus indecorus visus est.” The measure, however, was
strongly contested, and brought odium upon its author Flarainius.
Compare with this interdict the limited toleration Cicero extends to
the pursuit of commerce: “Mercatura, si tenuis est, sordid a putanda
est; sin magna et copiosa,- inulta undique apportans, non est ad-
modum vituperanda. Atque etiam si satiata qutestu, vel contenta
potius, ut ssepe ex alto in portum, ex ipso portu in agros se posses-
sionesque contulerit. videtur jure optinio posse laudari. Omnium
autem rerum ex quibus aliquid acquiritur, nihil est agricultura melius
..... nihil homine libero dignius.” De. Offic. i. 42.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

399

restriction were not the thirst of lucre already sap-
ping the foundations of the old Roman spirit, which
had allowed itself no other employment but arms and
agriculture. The traders of Rome, instead of con-
necting themselves by relations of commerce with
foreign houses, preferred, under the pressure of these
limitations, to withdraw beyond the sea, and devoted
their industry to the pursuit of wealth removed from
the watchful eyes of the censors and the vulgar pre-
judices of the multitude. The government, in its
barbarous zeal for the ancient traditions, burnt the
captured fleets of Carthage and Corinth. It sought
to destroy the resources of its enemies’ naval power
rather than to increase its own. Possessed of no
native commerce, it beheld with indifference the do-
minion of the seas passing into the hands of pirates ;
nor did it care to create a naval force, and assert its
supremacy in the Mediterranean, till the transport of
its own armies and their generals was menaced and
impeded. When roused at last to act upon the ocean
the Romans did not leave their work imperfect. The
suppression of piracy by Pompeius, the greatest ex-
ploit of his life, was effected once for all. Under the
empire the midland sea became a safer highway than
it had ever been before or, till recent times, has been
since; and the people who dwelt along its shores, and
daily went down upon its waters, were sensibly con-
vinced of the unity of all nations under the sway of
the universal ruler.

It was thus by following the natural train of cir-
cumstances, and by no settled policy of her Home the
own, that Rome secured her march across
the sea, and joined coast to coast with the tion ‘ br land -
indissoluble chain of her dominion. On land, on the
contrary, she constructed her military causeways with
a fixed and definite purpose. Her continental pos-
sessions, at least in the West, were at this time, for
the most part, still in a state of nature : the eultiva-

Digitized by Google

400

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

cn. xxxix.

tion, as has been said, of Gaul and Spain, Illyria and
Pannonia, even of a great part of Italy and Greece,
was still limited to the neighbourhood of the coast and
the valleys of rivers ; while the upper country almost
everywhere presented an expanse of primeval forest,
broken sometimes by grassy prairies, sometimes by
rugged mountains, and again by impassable morasses.
The population of Gaul crept, we know, slowly up
the channel of the rivers, and the native tracks which
conveyed their traffic from station to station were
guided by these main arteries of their vital system.
But the conquerors struck out at once a complete
system of communication for their own purposes, by
means of roads cut or built as occasion required, with
a settled policy rigidly pursued. These high roads, as
we may well call them, for they were raised above the
level of the plains and the banks of the rivers, and
climbed the loftiest hills, were driven in direct lines
from point to point, and were stopped by neither
forest nor marsh nor mountain. Throughout their
course they were studded with inscribed pillars erected
at equal distances of a thousand paces : they were
furnished with stations or post-houses, and kept in
repair by tolls or rates in Italy ; in the provinces, we
may suppose, by the forced labour of the population . 1
It was no part of the policy of the conquerors to
facilitate the intercourse of the natives of the interior,
and the municipal system they introduced among
them tended rather to isolate each separate commu-
nity, and make it independent of those around it.
But the sense of unity and common dependence on a
central authority was admirably maintained by the
instrument of communication with Rome, which, in
whatever quarter the subjects of the state might cross

1 Cic .pro Font. 4.: The cross roads (vicinales vise) were kept in
repair by the owners of the land through which they ran, who were
assessed thereto by the tnagistri pagorum. Siculus Flaccus, in Scr.
Jt. Ayr. 146., ed. Lachmann.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UMDER THE EMPIRE.

401

it, always pointed with a silent finger in the direction
of their invisible mistress . 1 Far as the eye could
reach, till it was lost in the remote horizon, stretched
this mysterious symbol of her all-attaining influence;
and where the sense failed to follow the imagination
came into play, and wafted the thoughts of the awe-
stricken provincial to the gates of Rome and the
prsetorium of the venerable imperator. Along these
channels, as he knew, the armies, the laws, and the
institutions of the city streamed, in ceaseless flow, to
every corner of the earth : they were the veins through
which the life-blood of the empire circulated from its
heart, making every pulse to beat with unfailing har-
mony and precision.

Julius Caesar had commanded this vast machine of
life and movement to be delineated on a The
chart or map, and the work was conducted p>ctu* or map
with such minute and scrupulous care, that emp ‘ ra '
the three commissioners to whom it was entrusted,
were employed twenty-five years in elaborating it . 2
The zeal and activity of Agrippa had watched over
the progress of the work, and finally brought it to
completion. The science of geography had made but

1 For the rate of travelling by land, we may notice that Caesar
reached Geneva from Rome in eight days (Plut. Cas. 17.); and
Suetonius tells us that he commonly performed one hundred miles
in the twenty-four hours. Jul. 57. Tiberius actually travelled two
hundred miles in that time, when he was hastening to Drusus in
Germany. Plin. Hist. Nat. vii. 20. Cicero (pro Rose. Am. 19.)
speaks of fifty-six miles as a good twelve hours’ journey by the
cisium or port-carriage. These are all mentioned as instances of
great speed. Martial gives the more ordinary rate of forty miles
a day:

“ Hispani pete Tarraconis arces.

Illinc Bilbilin et tnum Salonem
Quinto forsitan essedo videbia.”

(x. 104.); the dis f ance of the Roman road through Ilerda and Caesar
Augusta being about two hundred miles.

2 From Caesar’s consulship, 710, to that of Saturninus, 735.
(Hoeck, Ram. Gesch. i. 2. 394.), from iEthicus, whose computation,
however, is not quite accurate.

VOL. IV. D D

Digitized by Google

402

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

little progress before the time of Augustus (there was
little demand for it as long as all civilized men dwelt
around the shores of one marine basin), and the
information of the few writers on the subject was
neither extensive nor precise. The sun and stars
were not observed to ascertain the position of places;
the definitions of latitude and longitude were not
invented till two centuries later. But there existed
ample materials for a comprehensive survey of the
Roman dominions, in an infinite mass of chorogra-
phical details preserved in the local archives, by com-
paring and combining which, and verifying them by
observation and measurement, it was possible, with
vast labour, and not without many inaccuracies, to
work out a map of the entire empire on an uniform
scale. Of the map which Agrippa caused to be en-
graved or painted on the walls of his portico at Rome,
we know only that it represented by a series of dia-
grams the result of this laborious commission. It is
evident, from the nature of the place in which it was
exhibited, that this 'painted world , as it was denomi-
nated, bore no resemblance to the kind of delineation
to which we give the name . 1 It made, we must sup-
pose, no attempt to express the proper configuration
of lands and seas, but simply to represent, in a series
of tables, the order and distances of places upon every
line of road, coast, and river. Its extension along the
walls of a gallery or cloister was meant to keep all its
parts nearly on the same level, in which respect it

1 The source of our acquaintance with the map (orbis pictus) of
Agrippa is Pliny, Hist. Nat. iii. 3.: “Cum orbem terrarum orbi
spectandum propositurus esset .... is namque (sc. Augustus) com-
plexam eum porticnm ex destinatione et commentariis M. Agrippae
a sorore ejus inchoatam peregit.” I conceive that this map was
engraved on the wall of the portico, and the linescolourcd, like the
fragment of the well-known Plan of Rome in the Capitoline museum.
We may get the best idea, perhaps, of its shape and character from
the curious specimen of ancient chorographv called the Peutinger
Table, which may, indeed, be actually a reduction from it adapted to
a later period.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER TOE EMPIRE.

403

may be compared to the sculptured frieze of a temple,
or the pictured series of the Bayeux tapestry. Such
a delineation might serve to amuse and astonish the
multitude ; but it could have been of little real ser-
vice without the supplement of a written description.
This was furnished no doubt by the commentaries of
Agrippa, which explained the portion of the work
addressed only to the eye, and to which the great
geographer Pliny refers as one of his amplest and
most conclusive authorities . 1 We are not, however,
to imagine, that the compilers of the Painted World
did no more than measure itineraries, and state the
result in a diagram or in a volume. They measured,
we may believe, not only the roads, but the areas
which lay between them ; the labour of a quarter of
a century produced no doubt a complete registration
of the size, the figure, and the natural features of
every province, district, and estate throughout the
empire. Every portion of this immense work, it may
be presumed, was traced on vellum, or engraved on
plates of brass : if it was too unwieldy to be com-
prehended on a smgle tablet and exposed at one view
to the gaze of theKoman people, it was preserved piece
by piece as an official record for the examination of
government. It may even be conjectured that copies
of the whole, or of parts, were taken from it, and
multiplied for private or official use . 3

1 Pliny cites Agrippa twenty-six times, according to Frandsen
( Agrippa , p. i88.), and always in such terms as he uses in reference
to known authors of books. There can be no doubt, therefore, of
the nature of the Commentaries, as a work of geographical details.

2 This may be inferred, perhaps, from the line of Propertius
(iv. 3. 36),

“ Cogor et e tabula pictos ediscere mundos;”
and from a passage in Eumenius (de Jnstaur. Schol. 20, 21.): “ Elic
omnium cum nominibus suis locorum situs, spatia, intervalla,
descripti sunt, instruendse pueritiie causa.” These smaller maps
would be something different from the chorographical itineraries
recommended by Vegetius (de lie Mil. iii. 6.) for military purposes :
“ itineraria provinciarum . . . ut non solum consilio mentis veram

D I) 2

Digitized by Google

404

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX*

Chorogra-
phical sur-
veys in use
at Rome.

We’ shall find it difficult, indeed, to acquiesce in
the notion that the Romans had no choro-
graphic maps, when we remember the care
and exactness with which they measured
the surface of every private estate, and represented
its configuration. From a very early period they had
been accustomed to delineate the areas of the national
domains, and of every conquest they successively
added to them. The land surveyor, as has been be-
fore remarked, followed regularly in the track of the
imperator, and lent the aid of his staff and line to
work out the imaginary division of allotted territory
made by the augur according to the forms of the
Etruscan discipline. The assessment of land to the
public revenue, in which under the early republic the
chief element of the national resources consisted, was
apportioned with scrupulous precision, and founded
on authentic registers, including maps as well as
tabular statements. The examination and correction
of these documents, from one lustrum to another,
constituted a critical part of the censorial functions.
Every fifth year the ehorographical statistics of the
Roman territory were carefully revised and adjusted
to the actual facts, and few of these quinquennial
periods elapsed without some extension of its limits,
and a corresponding addition to the duties of the
censorship. After the remission, indeed, of the land-
tax upon the estates of Roman citizens, the state had
less interest in this inquisition. It would seem, never-
theless, to have been still maintained, while the in-
vestigation became further extended to the property
of the subjects throughout the provinces.
The census of the provincials, however, was
different in some respects, and bore a different name

Cen»u« and
Profeaaio.

aspectu oculorum viam profecturis eligerent.” The Itineraries pre-
served to us were constructed, we may suppose, from the records of
the roadmakers, of which a specimen may be seen in the inscription
of Aquillius (Gruter, p. 150.), stating the names of places and dis-
tances on the Way he built from Capua to Rhegium.

Digitized by GoogI

,CX. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

405

from that of the citizens. It was not sanctified by
the same ceremonies ; it did not require to be held
by a censor, but might be taken by the proconsul ;
nor was it necessarily simultaneous with the census
at Rome. The provincial Profession , as it was desig-
nated, extended wherever the land tax was exacted •
and this was the case, not only throughout the sub-
ject countries and communities, but even in those
which were suffered to call themselves autonomous,
provided they had not the further privilege of im-
munity . 1

The geographical science of the Romans thus
advanced in the same proportion with their t t
conquests. Its application was carried out of
from the banks of the Tiber to those of the **" emp ‘ re '
Rhine and Euphrates with the same rigid minuteness,
and its results preserved with no less scrupulous soli-
citude. It furnished an immense mass of materials
for the mathematicians to whom the redaction of the
Caesar’s Universal Geography was confided ; although,
as these professors of science were Greeks, it is pos-
sible that they may have made little account of the
rough practical drawings of the Roman surveyors.
These working drafts were engraved upon brazen
tablets and preserved, together with a complete ac-
count of everything which constituted the value of

1 “In urbc Roma tantum censum agi notum est: in provinces
autem magis prof'essionibus utuntur.” Donations in Carp. Juris
Ante-Theod, cd. Backing, p. 63. The census as applied to Roman
citizens had other objects besides the fiscal. It was designed to fix
the position of the citizen in the classes, and, accordingly, in the
comitia of the centuries, by the amount of his means; and thus the
state acquired an accurate knowledge of the numbers upon which
it could reckon for different kinds of military service. The census
was held in Rome, and the citizens were summoned before the
censors in person. It may be concluded, therefore, though we have
no specific statement to that effect, that it was not applied beyond
the hounds of Italy, nor, till a late period, at any great distance
from Rome. Hence the trifling addition made to the roll of citizen-
ship by the nominal admission of the whole Italian population.

Digitized by Google

406

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX,

the soil, in the archives of the Tabularium . 1 The
Professions of the provinces comprehended, after
the manner of the censorial registers, not only a nu-
merical statement of the freemen and slaves, the
women and children, and cattle of every description,
not only of the. houses and buildings also, but of the
acreage of every farm, with the amount of land
under tillage, in pasture or in wood, and the nature
of its plantations, even to the number of vines, olives,
and other fruit-trees . 2 The elder Cato in his censor-
ship had demanded an exact inventory of clothes,
carriages, trinkets, furniture, and implements . 3 The
names of the owners of land on the borders of each
particular farm were inscribed on the maps, as in
those of our own surveyors. A certain individuality
was attached, at least for fiscal purposes, to separate
parcels of land. Each fundus or estate remained a
constant quantity, while its component parts were
sold or divided among various holders, and the fiscal
liabilities of the whole Caput were apportioned among
them respectively . 4

It was from the precise information contained in
these official registers that Augustus towards the close

1 “Omnes significationes ct formis et tabnlis seris inscribemns,
data, assignata, concessa, excepta, commutata pro suo, reddita veteri
posscssori, et quaecunque alia inscriptio singularum literarum in usu
fuerit, et in acre perraaneat. Libros aeris et typum totius perticae
lineis dcscriptum secundum suas terminationes, adscripts affinibus,
tabulario Ctesaris inferemus.” Hyginus, de Limit. Constit. ed. Goes.
193. cd. Lachmann, p. 202. For lineis, Goesius reads linteis, which
Durcau de la Malle cannot resist the temptation of adopting, and
thence inferring that copies were taken off the plate on linen.

* Lactant. de Mart. Persecut. 23.: “Agri glebatim metiebantnr,
vites et arbores numerabantur, animalia omnis generis scribebantnr,
hominum capita notabantur; unusquisque cum liberis cum servis
aderant.”

* Plut. Cat. Maj. 13.

4 Compare Digest, x. tit. i. 4. : “ Si alter fundus dnorum, alter
trium sit, potest judex uni parti adjudicare locum de quo quaeritur,
licet plures dominos habeat; quoniam magis fundo qnam personis
adjudicari fines intelliguntur.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

407

of his reign, drew up the complete survey of the Ro-
man empire, which he placed in the hands

i 7 r The Brevi-

of the Vestal Virgins, to be delivered to the arium Im~
senate and his successor after his death . 1
To this table of statistics he gave the name of Bre-
viarium or Rationarium. It was the ledger of his
household : but his household comprehended half the
human race . 2 It embraced a succinct but authentic
statement of all the resources of the Roman people,
including indeed some details which lay beyond the
ample verge of the census and profession, as for in-
stance the number not only of the citizens and sub-
jects, but also of the allies; it detailed the state of the
naval as well as military forces of the commonwealth,
the condition of the provinces and dependencies,
and political system of each several community, the
amount of the public revenues, and proceeds of every
import, together with the expenses of the general go-
vernment. At the foot of this compendious synopsis
of Roman affairs the emperor had added a recom-
mendation to his successors to abstain from extending
further the actual limits of the empire. The final
impression left on his mind, by the review of his vast
possessions, was the solemn feeling that they were al-
ready as great as any single man could hope to wield
for the welfare of the people committed to his care . 3

1 Suet. Or.t. 101., comp. 28.: Tac. Ann. i. 11.: “ Opes public® conti-
nebantur: quantum civium sociorumque in armis: quot classes, regna,
provincial tributa aut vectigalia, &c.” Egger. Hist, d’ Auguste, p. 50.
It is not clear, however, whether the Breviarium, the legacy of Augus-
tus, was precisely the same as the Kationarium, or imperial ledger.

2 Augustus was sometimes styled, half in praise, half in mockery,
“ pater families totius imperii.”

* Tac. /. c., Dion, lvi. 33. The immediate source of the emperor’s
compilation was, no doubt, the work of Balbus, the chief of his
statf of surveyors, who had drawn up a statistical survey of the
provinces. See Script, lie Agr. p. 239. ed. Lachmann. Comp.
Cassiodorus, Variar. iii. 52. : "Augusti siquidem temporibus orbis
llomanus agris divisus, censuque descriptus cst, ut possessio sua
nulli liaberetur inccrta, qnam pro tributorum susceperat quantitate
solvenda.” Cited by Dureau de la Malle, Econ. Pol. des Rom. i. 193.

Digitized by Google

408

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

This little book might well be regarded as a sym-
Thc Roman, bol of the unity of the empire. It comprised
accurate^ in- within the compass of a single manual the
on" the* subject result of a mass of statistical information
of population. (j er i ve( i from every comer of the provinces,
and elaborated with a degree of method and a com-
pleteness which has never been rivalled even by mo-
dern civilization until our own century. Under no less
stringent and minute a system would it have been pos-
sible to work the regulation for taxing the succession
to property, or for apportioning the amount of tribute
exacted from the great corn-growing countries. The
details upon which it was based, engraved, as already
stated, on metal plates, and deposited in the vaults of
the treasury beneath the Capitol, might have survived
to this day, had they been left to the slow process of
natural decay. But these documents have suffered
from violence and conflagration, at a time when they
had lost the interest they originally possessed, and
which in our day they would undoubtedly have re-
covered. While Virgil and Livy had a thousand
copyists, no one took the pains to multiply the ex-
emplars of these abstruse documents, which were re-
garded as no better than cast-off almanacks. We
would sacrifice many of the remains of ancient lite-
rature for a transcript of the Breviarium of Augus-
tus, or the tables of finance and population. The
rulers of Rome, we have no reason to doubt, had
the means of glancing at complete details on the
subject of population. The births and deaths, the
marriages and divorces, were all duly registered.
The first enumeration of the Roman people was attri-
buted to the founder of the state ; and a law, ascribed
to Servius Tullius, required that every birth should
be registered by payment of a piece of money in the
temple of Juno Lucina. At every death or fune-
ral a piece of money was similarly offered at the
shrine of Libitina. The assumption of the robe of

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

409

manhood was verified by a fee to Juventas . 1 The
naturalist Pliny illustrated the subject of human
longevity by extracts from a census of Cispadane
Gaul, from which it appears that every inhabitant
was required to state his exact age to the enumerator . 2
If he allowed his imagination to wander beyond the
strict limits of truth in giving his reply, he was at
least liable to be checked by the registers of birth,
which were also regularly kept. Every parent on
taking up his new-born child, entered its birth in
thereto or Journal of Public Events, which was pre-
served as a state document. As regards marriages,
there may be perhaps no direct evidence of the regis-
tration which is here presumed; but that such was
the case in respect of divorces, is more than once
expressly affirmed . 3 If these testimonies apply only
to the case of citizens, we may fairly infer from
analogy that similar regard was had to the registra-
tion of the provincials, though this may have been a
later institution . 4

1 Dion. Hal. iv. 1.

J Pliny refers to a census tinder Vespasian (circa a. d. 70), as
furnishing indisputable evidence as to vital statistics throughout the
empire. His own citations he confines to a small district. At Parma,
he tells us, three persons returned themselves ast. 120 ; two, set. 130;
at Brixellum, one, set. 125; at Placentia, one, art. 131; at Faventia,
one, tet. 135; at Veleiacuni, six, set. 110, four, set. 120, one, aet. 140.
On the whole, in the eighth region of Italy, there were fifty-four
persons of 100, three of 148 years. The figures are no doubt far
too high, hut they prove the main fact that the inquiry was regularly
made. Plin. Hist. Hat. vii. 50.

* Cic. ad Div. viii. 7. : “ Paula Valeria divortium sine causa fecit:
nuptura est D. BrutOj nondum retulerat (set/, in acta).” Juvenal, ii.
136.: “Fient ista palam, enpient et in acta referri.”

ix. 84. : “ Tollis enim ct libris actorum spargere gaudes

Argumenta viri.”

Digest, xxii. tit. 3. 29. : “ Mulier gravida repudiata, absente marito
filium enixa, ut spurium in actis professa est.” Capitolinus, Gord. 5.:
“ Filium Gordianum nomine Antonini et signo illustravit, quum
apud prsefectum serarii more Romano professus filium publicis actis
ejus nomen insereret.”

4 Capitol. M. Anton. §. : “ Jussit apud prsefectos airarii Saturni
unumquemque civium natos liberos profiteri, intra ineesimum diem

Digitized by Google

410

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

The numerical statements of the ancient authorities
The Act are nc *’ th ere f ° re 3 to be lightly disregarded,
or Journal of as they evidently possessed sources of accu-
rate information on manypoints of social eco-
nomy, if they chose to use them. It is to be feared,
however, that, with their loose notions of historical
composition, they rarely took pains to examine these
sources with care and discrimination. The avowed re-
ferences to the Official Journal of the State are meagre
and obscure. 1 The forgeries of some unscrupulous
scholars, who have put forth pretended extracts from
this lost treasure, may remind us how much we have
suffered from the disappearance of the genuine docu-
ments. 2 Of the actual nature of their contents, how-
ever, we can nowhere obtain a clearer idea than from
the mock account of the freedman Trimalchio, a
personage in the curious satire of Petronius, repre-
sented as immensely wealthy, and enacting, on a
smaller but yet a truly magnificent scale, the part of
the imperial owner of the Roman world.

The seventh of the kalends of Sextilis. — On the
estate at Curnce, belonging to Trimalchio, were bom
thirty boys, twenty girls; — were carried from the
floor to the bam 500,000 bushels of wheat ; — were
broke 500 oxen. — The same day the slave Mithri-
dates was crucified for blasphemy against the
emperor's genius . 3 The same day was placed in

nomine imposito. Per provincias tabulariorum publicorum usum
insiituit, apnd quos idem de originibus fieret quod Roma: apud
prtefcctos serarii.”

1 These references are collected by Leclerc, Journaux des Romains,
181 foil., from Cicero, Tacitus, Suetonius, Seneca, the two Plinys,
Dion, and some other writers. The facts elicited from them are,
however, of the most trifling kind.

* The question of these forgeries, as they are now admitted to be,
was warmly debated by the learned for two centuries. They seem
to be traced to the composition of Ludovicus Vives, a friend of
Erasmus.

* Petron. Satyr, c. 53.; vii. Kal. Sext.: “ In prtedio Cumano quod
cst Trimalchionis nati snnt pueri xxx., puellas xx.: sublata in hor-
reum ex area tritici millia modiam quingenta: boves domiti D. :

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

411

the chest the sum of ten million sesterces, which could
not he put out to use. — The same day teas a fire in
the Pompeian Villa, which spread from the house
of Nasta the bailiff . — ‘ How now 1 ’ exclaimed Tri-
malchio ; ‘ when did I buy a villa at Pompeii V —
‘ Last year ,’ replied the intendant, ‘ so it has not yet
come into the audit.’ Trimalchio hereupon fell into
apassion, and cried out — ‘ Whatever estates 1 buy, if
I am not told of them within six months, I will not
have them brought into my accounts at all’ — Then
were recited the cediles ’ ( surveyors’ ) edicts, and the
wills of certain herdsmen, with the excuses they made
for omitting to make their master their heir ; then
again the sums lent by his bailiffs, and the story of a
freedwoman, wife of a watchman , divorced on being
caught in commerce with a slave of the bath; the
case of a porter relegated to Baice ; — of a steivard
accused and examined before the tribunal of the
slaves and retainers of the bedchamber.— This piece
of banter the author himself describes as a counter-
part of the official register of events ; and we may
trace in it the way in which public receipts and
expenses, as well as accidents and offences, were
recorded for the information of the government and
the amusement of the citizens. 1

eodem die Mithridates servus in erneem actus est quia Gaii nostri
genio mnledixerat. Eodem die in arenm relatum est quod collocari
non potuit sestertium centies. Eodem die incendium factum est in
hortis Pompeianis, ortum ex sedibus Nastse villici. Quid? inquit
Trimalchio: quando mihi Pompeiani horti empti sunt ? Anno pri-
ore, inquit actuarius, ct ideo in rationem nondum venerunt. Excan-
duit Trimalchio, et Quincunque, inquit, mihi fundi empti fuerint, nisi
intra sextum mensem sciero, in rationes. meas inferri veto. Jam
etiam edicta sedilium rccitahanturet saltuariorum testamenta, quibus
Trimalchio cum elogio exhseredebatur; jam nomina villicorum et
repudiata a circuitore liberta in balneatoris contubernio deprehensa:
atriensis Baias relegatns : jam reus factus dispensator et judicium
inter cubicularios actum.”

1 Comp. Cicero ( ad Div. viii. 7.), writing to Cmlius from Cilicia,
for the talk of the day recorded in the Acta. Plin. Ep. ix. 15.:
“ nobis sic rusticis urbana acta rescribe.” Leclerc, Journaux, p. 217 .

Digitized by Google

412

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

But the neglect and loss of these precious statistics
have left us dependent on a few casual no-
t"epo7uutu>n tices of history, and such inferences as may
be drawn from analogy, on the point of chief
interest to modern inquirers, the actual amount of
population of the great Roman community. The
statements we have received of the number of citi-
zens concern, of course, a portion only of the whole
mass, nor have we any direct means of comparing
the relative numbers of the citizens and subjects, the
freemen and the slaves. We must go back, for our
starting point in the investigation of this subject,
which we cannot altogether forego, however little
satisfaction we may expect to derive from it, to the
well-known statement of Polybius regarding the
number of men available for arms in the Italian
peninsula. From this datum we may proceed per-
haps, step by step, by the aid of inference and com-
parison, however imperfect, to deduce an approxi-
mate estimate of the population of the Augustan em-
pire : it must, however, be fully understood that such
an estimate can only be put forth as a conjecture.

It appears then, that, in the year of the city 529,
statement of the Romans and their allies the Campanians
r anting the could furnish 273,000 men of all arms,

jopuiation of res t 0 f Italy below the Rubicon, with

the exclusion, however, of some of the wilder districts,
could furnish 477,000. These numbers are under-
stood to comprise all the men between the ages of
seventeen and sixty. 1 But modern tables of life show
that a sum of 750,000 of this age implies a total
of 1,332,902 males; and this number must be doubled

1 Polyb. ii. 24, where twenty thousand are to be deducted from
his total for Cisalpine contingents. We may rely with sufficient
confidence on the accuracy of the enumeration of the Romans, and
perhaps of their allies ; for that of the rest we must be content with
the fact that the author was satisfied with it. The numbers of
Polybius are very nearly verified by Diodorus and Pliny. For the
limits of military age, see Durcau de la Malle, Econ. Put. i. 217.

Digitized by Google

OB* XXXIX*

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

413

to obtain the amount of both sexes together which
would raise the gross total of the free native popu-
lation to 2,665,804. 1 To this must be added, the
number of slaves, as to which it would be fruitless to
hazard a definite conjecture, and also that of foreigners,
which is no less uncertain. Some allowance is further
to be made for the barbarians of the forests and
mountains, and, indeed, the whole population, scanty
as it doubtless was, of the wild peninsula of Bruttium,
who could not be counted on for the defence of the
common soil of Italy, and are accordingly omitted
from the specification of Polybius.

In the sixth century of the city it is not to be sup-
posed that the slaves bore any large propor- Hi.toricai

* - x x utatf Tnent8

tion to the free population of Italy. The
cultivation of the soil was still performed ttonot itaiy
for the most part by free labour, and servile hands
were chiefly employed in menial attendance on the
wealthier classes, and in some kinds of handicraft
and professions. Slaves were as yet generally ob-
tained by war, but the condemnation of a whole
population to bondage was comparatively rare, and
reserved for cases where the greatest severity was
required. The number, however, both of slaves and
foreigners was undoubtedly more considerable in the
Hellenic cities of Magna Graecia; while in the in-
terior and at the extremities of the country there ex-
isted divers native tribes, in a state of wild and iso-
lated independence. The density of population varied

1 “ D’apres les tables dc population calcnlees par M. Duvillnrd, et-
corrigees par M. Mathieu (Annuaire du Bureau des Longitudes pour
1839, p. 178. foil.), le nombre des individus de tout sexe de dix-sept
a soixante ans, pour une population de 10,000,000, est de 5.626,819.”
De la Malle, i. 287. This is a proportion of fourteen to twenty-five;
and the fighting men, whom we sometimes roughly estimate at one-
fourth of a population, are more correctly seven twenty-fifths. Sup-
posing male and female births to be nearly equal, against the drain
of men hy war in a warlike age, Bureau de la Malle sets the loss of
female children by exposure at birth.

Digitized by Google

414

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

exceedingly in different parts of the peninsula. Some
regions swarmed with life. The numbers, indeed,
ascribed to the great Hellenic cities of the south-east
are extravagant, and generally we may observe that
less reliance can be placed in these matters upon
Greek than Roman figures l ; but we can hardly reject
the express statements we have received of the
number of organized communities within the nar-
row bounds of Latium. Between the Apennines, the
Tiber, and the promontory of Circeii, a tract but
sixty miles in length and perhaps thirty in breadth,
the size of an English county, there was a confedera-
tion of states, which was assumed to be always thirty,
though the number might from time to time vary . 2
The extreme smallness of these numerous commu-
nities is self-evident : each was composed of a few
thousand, or even a few hundred warriors, who nestled
on the narrow ledge of a scarped hill, descending
daily into the plain to scratch the soil with spades
and harrows; a soil, however, for the most part of
exceeding fertility, which could easily have been
made to support a swarm of industrious cultivators.
Nevertheless the aggregate of the population in the
most favoured portions of Italy must have been very
considerable. . Far the larger part of the peninsula,
however, was as yet unsubdued by the husbandman.
In early times Italy, now one of the least wooded
countries of Europe, was covered almost throughout
inference. with forests. Many of the summits of
nndVhyTicii Rome derived their names from the woods
features. which originally shaded them, while the
Capitoline and Quirinal were separated by a thick

1 For the exaggerated numbers ascribed to Svharis and Crotona,
see Diodorus (xii. 9.), and even the more judicious Strabo (vi. 1. p.
263.). Similar exaggerations are current with regard to Syracuse
and Agrigentum.

2 Dion. Hal. Ant. Horn. vi. 63. Comp. v. 61., where he enumerates
twenty-four. Pliny (Hist. Nat. iii. 9.) gives the names of fifty-three
towns of Latium which had become extinct in his time.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

415

grove, and the Velabrum was an almost impassable
jungle . 1 Such was the scene which the poet of the
iEneid recalled to his imagination in depicting the
first landing of the Trojans on the destined site of
empire. Virgil’s landscapes, it will be remembered,
are generally umbrageous. The forest of Sila oc-
cupied perhaps one half of Lucania. Large tracks
even in Latium were covered with the bay-trees of
Laurentum, the Arician ilexes, and the Gallinarian
pine forests. Even within the lifetime of Augustus,
Varro could say of Italy that it was so thickly set
with trees as to appear like one continuous orchard . 2
Dionysius, the historian, remarks the convenience of
its rivers for the transport of wood from the interior,
and the Romans gave their cross roads the name of
wood ways , on account of the timber which they were
used in conveying . 3 But the streams of Italy have
long ceased to be navigable, with the disappearance of
the foliage which attracted moisture for their supply,
the value of which for this purpose the Romans seem
to have recognized in appointing special officers to
preserve their forests, and perhaps in placing them
under the protection of religion. The extirpation of
this wild vegetation has led to further changes in the
climate of these regions, the winters being now, as
is generally believed, less rigorous than in ancient
times. Even in the age of Augustus the progress of
this change w T as observable. Columella refers to it in
explanation of the fact that vines and olives grew in
his day in many spots which they formerly refused to

1 Hence the names of the Viminal, the Fagutal, the Querquetu-
lan, and perhaps the Esquiline. A part of the Aventine was called
Laurctum. Dion. Hal. Ant. Rum. iii. 43.

2 Varro, de Re Rust. i. 2. : Many places now bare of trees retain,
it is said,- a name, such as Frassineto, Saliceto, Laureto, which shows
that they were formerly remarkable for their groves. See Moreau
de Jonnes, Statist, des Peup. Anciens, p. 326.

3 Via vieinalis and via lignaria are the common names for by-roads
in the writers de Re Agraria.

Digitized by Google

416

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

inhabit. But the change in this respect has probably
been still greater in other countries of Europe which
the Romans regarded as far colder than their own.
Strabo assures us that the north of Spain was thinly
peopled on account of the severity of the climate.
A Gaulish winter was proverbial for its intensity, and
the central latitudes of the continent were described
as suffering a perpetual frost.

The change which the lapse of centuries has evi-
bums for *n dently effected in the face of the country,
ca cuiatiun of m its climate, and consequently in its ca-
tionof'iUV pacity for cultivation, presents alone an in-
superable obstacle to our obtaining any precise know-
ledge of the amount of its ancient production, from
whence to calculate approximately the numbers of its
population. Nor, indeed, are there any accounts of
its bearing at the present day, from which, supposing
we could form a tolerable estimate of these physical
changes, we might draw a reasonable inference on
this point. Even were there such, we should still be
at a loss to compare with accuracy the relative con-
sumption of different kinds of food at the one time
and the other. We shall be inclined perhaps to sur-
mise that the ancient Italians were greater consumers
of meat than their descendants ; first, from the large
districts of their country which were entirely devoted
to feeding swine ; secondly, from the numbers of the
nobler animals which were reared for sacrifice ; and
again, from the importance they attached to main-
taining at its height the physical strength of their
martial populations. But waiving all such consider-
ations, the most suitable basis we can adopt for an
inquiry, which is too interesting to be altogether
omitted, is that assumed by a modern writer of high
authority on such subjects — a comparison, namely, of
Roman or peninsular Italy with the south-eastern
portion of modern France, which in extent and
climate, in the character of its soil and varietv of

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

417

elevation, bears the nearest analogy to it. 1 Assuming
these two regions to comprise a like proportion of
productive soil, and that Italy, in the time of Au-
gustus, with which we are now concerned, was culti-
vated to the same extent, and with the same industry
as this part of France at the present day, we may
estimate the breadth of land under corn and green
crops annually in the peninsula below the Rubicon
as about two millions and a half of hectares, a figure
which may be multiplied by 2*333 for the number of
acres, or by four for that of Roman jugera. 2 This
extent of land bears a ratio of less than one-fifth to
the whole area. Our next step must be to ascertain
the production of this amount of cultivated soil. We
must inquire the quantity of seed used, and the pro-
portion of the crop to the seed. On both these points
the ancients have given us some definite statements,
which will bear comparison with modern experience.
Five modii, or one bushel and a quarter, it is said,
was the seed required for each jugerum, and we may
infer, as a mean between various statements, that the
average ratio of production was sixfold, a ratio which
holds very closely in the district of France under
comparison. 3 Accordingly, the produce of each ju-

* Wallon, Hist, tie t Esclavage, &c. ii. 76. foil. Comp. Dureau de
la Malle, Econ. Pol. i. 281. foil. The S. E. portion of France is
limited by the meridian of Paris and the forty-seventh degree of
latitude N.

* The statistical tables of France for 1840 give the area of the
S.E. of France at 13,287,463 hectares, and in cereal cultivation
2,490,591 hcct. The area of the Italian peninsula is stated by
Wallon at 7,774 geogr. leagues square, or 15,356,109 hect. Hence
the quantity in cultivation is estimated at 2,878,336 hect., Wallon,
/. c. But this author, following De la Malle, has forgotten that
Modena, Lucca, the Bolognese, the Ferraresc, and part of the
Romagna, belong to the Roman Cisalpine. It appears from Malte-
brun’s tables, that Roman Italy, south of the Rubicon and JEsar,
contains about 6,800 sqaare leagues, which is about 13,450,000
hectares, of which, according to the proportion in France, we may
compute that 2,500,000 are cultivated.

* Comp. Varro, if. R. L 44.; Cic. ii. m Verr. iii. 4. The modius

VOL. IV. E E

Digitized by Google

418

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX,

gerum is to be rated at thirty modii, from whence the
whole amount of the Italian harvest may be easily
estimated. Another mean must next be taken from
the data we possess regarding the quantity of cereal
food consumed by the people of divers ages and
classes, by free men and slaves, by women and chil-
dren ; and when this is fixed at three modii, or three
quarters of a bushel per head per month, or nine
bushels per head for the year, we shall arrive at a
total population of about seven millions 1 ; a number
which may seem on many accounts to deserve our
confidence, being far removed from the exaggerations
of some modem inquirers, who would raise it to
seven-and-twenty or even forty millions, and from
the far more conscientious calculations of another,
who, by an oversight, as it seems, has reduced it to
less than five . 2 If such was the amount of the Italian

equals 2 gallons or a quarter of a bushel. The authorities for the
individual consumption are Cato, Jl. R. 66.; Sallust, fragrn. 3.:
Seneca, Ep. 80. 9.

1 The calculation will stand thus: —

2,500,000 hectares.

4

10,000,000 jugcra.
30

300,000,000 produce in modii.

50,000,000 deduct for seed.

Divide by 36 for annual con- ?
sumption of modii per head \

250,000,000

6,945,000

Or, in round numbers, 7,000,000 population.

1 The forty millions are assigned, if I remember right, by Moreau
de Jonnes in his StalLstigue des Ancims Peuples, a work of little
value except as a collection of texts, to the whole of Italy within the
Alps; the twenty-seven is the result arrived at by Blair, in his -Essay
on Ancient Slavery, but I do not know exactly within what limits he
applies it. On the other hand, Dureau de la Malle, who gives five
millions for peninsular Italy, has made the error of assigning four
modii per month, the consumption of a full-grown man, as the
average of the whole population. His peninsular Italy also exceeds.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

419

production in the time of Augustus, and such the
number of the mouths it could feed, we must still
make an arbitrary addition to the population for the
multitudes which were supported within the peninsula
by importation of grain from abroad. This importa-
tion, which had been resorted to, more or less, from
an early period, first became fixed and constant about
this time ; but we may believe it had by no means
yet reached its maximum . 1 The cultivation of Italy
diminished as the foreign supply increased ; and if
we assume that under Augustus food was then fur-
nished for two additional millions, this total of nine
millions was the largest number of inhabitants ever
collected in ancient times between the Rubicon and
the Straits of Messana . 2 It is not, however, without
hesitation that I pay so much regard to the strong
expressions of the ancients, loose and fallacious as
they often are, regarding the large amount of this
• importation, and the dangers, not of scarcity only,
but starvation, which they supposed to impend on
its failure or deficiency . 3

as shown in a previous note, the true limits. Wallon, taking the
average of individual consumption as ascertained from the French
tables, arrives at the number of 8,1 14,534 for Italy; but he also takes
a more extended Italy than mine.

1 It appears from Josephus, Bell. Jud. ii. 16., and Aurel. Victor,
Epit. 2., that Egypt and Africa supplied Italy, the one with twenty
the other with forty millions of rnodii. This amount would feed
(at thirty-six rnodii per annum) 1,666,666 individuals. To this is to
be added the importation from Sicily, Sardinia, and perhaps other
quarters. The foreign supply had increased under the successors of
Augustus. Tac. Ann. vi. 13. There is a fair presumption that not
Rome only, but other Italian cities were partly fed from abroad.

2 Maltebrun gives the population of the peninsula in 1826: —

Naples (without Sicily) ----- 5,690,000
States of the Church (omitting Bologna, &c ) about - 2,000,000
Tuscany 1,275,000

8,965,000

s It should be observed, however, that the failure of a portion of
the usual supply does not imply the abstraction of a similar propor-
tion from each individual’s consumption. In time of scarcity a

EE 2

Digitized by Google

420

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

The resources of Italy had suffered severely dur-
Thepopui*- ing the civil commotions; yet not much
compared y more, perhaps, than throughout the chronic
the province*, state of war and devastation which had
continued from the commencement of its records.
If its sufferings at the later epoch had been excep-
tional, attempts had been made to compensate them
by exceptional methods. The establishment of mili-
tary colonies, and the constant influx of slave labour,
had tended to restore the level of its population, and
the centre of the empire undoubtedly partook largely
of the general prosperity, during the fifty years’ peace
of the Augustan age. We may regard Italy, there-
fore, at this period, as truly that which her fond chil-
dren represented her, the garden of the world ; and
we cannot pretend to calculate the population of any
other region on a similar basis, as none other, at least
in Europe, approached so nearly to a uniform state of
cultivation. The resources of the Cisalpine territory,
which has been excluded from the above inquiry,
were not regarded as equally developed with those of
peninsular Italy. The valley of the Po was usually
contrasted with the region of the Apennines, as a land
of pasture rather than arable soil ; though it is im-
possible that with so many cities, some of them very
considerable, it could have neglected the production
of grains for the food of man. The surface of this
district is to that of the peninsula in the proportion
of more than six to seven, and we will assume its
population to be one half only, or about four and a
half millions . 1 The inhabitants of Sicily, remark-

large proportion of the population pay more for their food, but con-
tinue to consume as much as ever; the loss in quantity falls entirely
upon the remainder. Hence the importation may have been com-
paratively small, and yet the consequences of a deficiency may have
been sufficiently alanning.

1 Maltebrun gives the Italian areas, in square geographical leagues,
as follows: —

Digitized by Googl

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

421

able for its fertility and the number and opulence of
its cities, cannot be set at less than two millions . 1 To
Sardinia and Corsica together, however, we must not
assign more than one-fourth of this amount. Gaul
beyond the Alps was doubtless for the most part very
thinly peopled. To a great extent it was covered by
primeval forests, but these were diversified by large
tracts of open plain and prairie ; and when Strabo
speaks of the whole country as generally cultivated,
he must mean that it was not intersected by great
mountain regions like Spain or Thrace, by salt or
stony deserts like Asia Minor, nor by basins of sand
like Egypt and Numidia. I have shown some reason
for guessing its population at six millions in the time
of Caesar ; and though it advanced rapidly in wealth
and industry under his successor, it must have taken
many years to recover the desolation it underwent in
the struggle against the conqueror . 2 A large part of
Spain had enjoyed tranquillity for a considerable pe-
riod, and its resources had been actively developed
by the skill and cupidity of Roman settlers. Its in-
habitants, we may suppose, were more numerous than
those of Gaul, but much less so than those of Italy,
We may set them, therefore, at seven or perhaps

The Cisalpine region (Piedmont, Lombardy) •
Add for the duchies and part of Pupal States -
f Tuscany ,

The Peninsula < States of the Church -
[_ Naples -

- 5000 \

- 1000 J

- 1100 1
- 1850 !■
• 3910 J

6000

6860

Sicily 1610

1 Dureau de la Malle has gone into this inquiry, and his result is
only twelve hundred thousand ( Econ . Pol. ii. 380.). The correction
I have applied is nearly the same as Wallon has shown to be appli-
cable to his estimate for Italy. My reference to de la Malle’s book
is to an edition of 1840; I do not know whether it has been since
revised.

2 Though the tribute or military contribution of Gaul was light,
we may imagine how severe must have been the pressure on its in-
dustry from the requisition of men, animals, and material of all kinds
for the vast establishments of the Rhenish camps. Tacitus says, at
a little later period, “Fessas Gallias ministrandis equis.”

Digitized by Google

422

HISTORY OF TIIE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

eight millions. The European provinces north and
east of the Adriatic, comprising Achaia and Mace-
donia, with the Greek islands, Illyria and Dalmatia,
Pannonia, Noricum, Yindelicia and Ehaetia, Thrace
and Moesia, somewhat exceed Gaul in extent ; and
the superior populousness of the first of these dis-
tricts, though far fallen from their palmiest days,
compensating for the barrenness of others, we may
reckon for them, on the whole, an aggregate of ten
millions. The provinces of Asia, however, were un-
questionably far more densely peopled than almost
any portion of Europe. They were filled with innu-
merable cities, the hives of commerce and manufac-
tures. Though they had suffered from the devasta-
tion of many transient conquests, they had for cen-
turies hardly engaged in warfare themselves; they
had maintained no standing armies of idle consumers,
and had countenanced no prejudices against com-
merce and labour. If they doubled Italy in extent,
they more than doubled her in the number of their
inhabitants . 1 This will raise the aggregate for Europe
and Asia to near seventy millions. The provinces of
the last of the three continents had been far less
harassed by war and spoliation ; nevertheless, under
the listless sway of the Ptolemies, Egypt, we are
told, had fallen to one-half of her earlier population.
Diodorus assures us that her people did not exceed
three millions ; but it may be questioned whether he
includes the Greek residents ; and there can be little
doubt that he takes no account of the slaves, or of
the Jews, who alone formed, perhaps, a fourth of the
inhabitants of the Nile Valley . 2 We may believe,

1 I omit the region of Palestine, which was only temporarily in-
corporated in the empire in the latter years of Augustus.

* Diodor. Sic. i. 31. j referred to in chap, xxviii. vol. iii. His ex-
pression is irvuiras \a6s ; but Wesseling asserts that the reading is
uncertain. Fifty years after the death of Augustus, the population of
Egypt, inclusive of Alexandria, is stated by Josephus at seven mil-
lions and a half of tribute payers. Bell Jud. ii. 16. 4. There seems
to be no proof that the poll-tax was extended to slaves.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

423

moreover, that the resources of this favoured region
grew as rapidly under the rule of the Caesars, as they
had fallen under its Macedonian tyrants. The dis-
tricts of Cyrene and Africa remain still to be esti-
mated : the former small in extent, hut renowned for
exuberant fertility, and the commercial activity of its
cities, which had suffered no check since the suppres-
sion of the Cilician piracy; the latter long rejoicing in
the impulse given to its industry by the demands of
Italy. The returns from these regions may swell the
general account to a total of eighty-five millions for the
population of the empire of Augustus, including both
sexes, all ages, and every class of inhabitants.

It may be observed, in conclusion, that the portion
of the globe which constituted this empire Aneientlind
far exceeds at the present day the numbers u^ 0 n™f& pu '
thus assigned to it at the period under con-
sideration ; at the same time, the revolutions comp ‘ red -
which have swept at intervals over both the East and
the West have reversed the social importance of the
two great spheres of the Casarean dominions : the dis-
tricts of Asia and Africa, which we have just surveyed,
at that period the most flourishing of all, have now
sunk almost to the lowest depths of a progressive de-
cay ; while, on the other hand, the European provinces
are - at this moment occupied by more than twice as
many souls as acknowledged the sway of Augustus
throughout those regions, although peninsular Italy
has itself remained perhaps stationary in population . 1

‘ We ma - v estimate- Under Augu , tlIS> at

Gaul (i. e. France, Belgium, Switzer-

land, &c.) now at

40,000,000

6,000,000

Spain and Portugal ...

18,000,000

8,000,000

Italy (Piedmont and Lombardy) -

7,500,000 )

4 'tOO 000

Smaller States -

1,500,000 J

“•wUUiUuw

The Peninsula ...

9,000,000

9,000,000

The Islands (Sicily, &c.)

2,500,000

2,500,000

Turkey in Europe (with Greece and

Servia) .....
Germany (south of the Danube) -

12,000,000 7

9,000,000 J

io,ooo,oco

European provinces -

100,000,000

40,000,000

Digitized by Google

424

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

Though statesmen, conversant with the returns of
a view of the the census and profession, may have begun
pSfi'foVad- from an earlier time to contemplate the
idea Jr unity, population of the empire as a whole, such
a view must have been still foreign to the mass of
the people, and perhaps the comprehensive estimate
of Diodorus Siculus with reference to Egypt, is the
first indication of such a spirit even among men of
letters and intelligence. When it became general it}
would mark more strongly than any thing else the
consummation of the change in popular sentiment,
from the narrow ideas of tribe and nation to the
broader view of the unity of mankind. The loose
conjecture of Paganism, that divers nations sprang
from divers heroes, and the heroes themselves from
the gods, was ready to yield to the more enlightened
doctrine of the unity of race, already disseminated in
Home by the Jewish scriptures, and may have been
rendered popular through the fashionable poetry of
the author of the Metamorphoses . 1 A wise govern-
ment might have turned to good effect this growing
tendency to acknowledge the unity, and consequently
the essential equality of man ; but while statesmen
were unconscious of its importance, and regarded it
with little interest, it was seized, under a higher di-
rection, by the preachers of a new religion, and -be-
came the basis of a church or spiritual empire, which

The population of the Asiatic and African provinces at the present
day, meagre as it is, is too uncertain for specification; but under
Augustus we may thus enumerate it: —

Asia Minor and Syria .... 27,000,000

„ „ Cyprus - - * - 1,000,000

„ „ Egypt .... 8,000,000

„ „ Cyrene and Africa - - 9,000,000

45,000,000

Grand total - * 85,000,000

1 Ovid Metam. i. 78.:

“ Natus homo cst: sive hunc divino seminc fecit
Ille opifex rcrum, mundi melioris origo,” &c.

The legends of Prometheus and Deucalion both imply the unity of
mankind, and a single act of creation.

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

425

eventually overlapped on every side the bounds of
the Caesarean dominions.

But the sense of unity thus beginning to germi-
nate received its first practical expression in Thc Pax
the acquiescence with which the Romans
beheld the universal peace which seemed vcr “ 1 1*"*-
about to envelope them. The grandeur of this new
and strange idea made a deep impression on their
imaginations. Some faint sighs for rest may be heard
in the philosophy of Lucretius; but the poetry of
the Augustan age echoes with jubilant strains at its
supposed attainment. Ah ! vjIlo was the first to
forge the sword of iron ? How brutal , how truly
iron-hearted was he ! 1 Such were the complacent
declamations of the friends of peace, recited or sung
before admiring audiences, and wafted from province
to province. The transition of the Roman mind
from aspirations of unlimited aggression to views of
mere repression and control was sudden, but it was
not the less permanent. Henceforth the policy of
government or the ambition of princes might some-
times dictate an attack ; but the people evinced no
disposition for conquest, and would scarcely rouse
themselves to avenge a national dishonour. Let the
wild tribes of the exterior, the outside barbarians ,
they exclaimed, be taught to respect the majesty of
the empire : let them be satisfied that she meditates
no assault on them ; let them receive from her
hands the pledge of safety and tranquillity. The
Roman Peace, which it was her mission to extend to
the German or the Parthian, might be accepted by
them as a boon, or must be endured as a burden . 2

It became the settled policy of the imperial govern-
ment, while acquiescing in these common yearnings

1 Tibull. i. 10. I.

“ Quis fuit horrendos primus qui protulit crises?

Quam ferus et vere ferreus ille fuit ! ”

* Virgil, JEn. vi. 853.; “pacisque imponere morem.”

Digitized by Google

426

HISTORY OP THE ROMANS

CH. XXXIX.

for peace, to fortify and guard the frontiers as the
Troopiund best security against war. The limits to
by wh.ch thu which the generals of the republic had al-
Mcured. y ready advanced formed a strong and w^ll-
defined natural frontier at almost every point of the
whole circuit. We have seen how its standing forces
were posted along the lines of the Rhine and Danube,
their quarters secured by a long chain of fortifications,
and still further protected by the systematic devastation
of the regions in their front, and the transport of the
nearest barbarians within the limits of the adjacent
province. In the East the frontier of the Roman
dominion was less accurately defined ; but the moun-
tain passes which lead into Lesser Asia, practicable
for armies during some months only in the year, were
easily guarded, aud the nominal independence of
certain states inclosed within the empire was a wise
provision for its defence in that quarter. The pas-
sage of the Euphrates was guarded at the most avail-
able points by fortified posts ; aud from thence to the
Red Sea, from the Red Sea to the Atlas, and from the
Atlas to the ocean, the Roman Peace was, for the
most part, effectually secured by deserts and solitudes,
which there at least the conquerors had not made but
found . 1

Within these sacred limits of the Roman Termi-
nus the repose of the empire was calm,
orTe subject passive, and almost deathlike. The shores
of the mighty ocean might still resound with
the murmurs of the eternal conflict of servitude and
freedom, but the depths of its central abysses were
unmoved alike by winds and currents. The Alps,
the Atlas, the Pyrenees, and the Haemus were the
last retreats of native independence : but the power
of Augustus (so languid or timid on the frontiers),

1 Compare the well-known expression of the British chief in Ta-
citus ( Agric . 30.), so applicable in other quarters: “ Solitudinem
faciunt, paccm appellant.”

Digitized by Google

CH. XXXIX.

RUDER TIIE EMPIRE.

427

had been directed against his internal foes with a
pertinacity which shows, that if his arm seemed any-
where weak, it was restrained, not by infirmity, but
by policy. Ever and anon the subject nations lifted
their heads and beheld with amazement and mortifi-
cation, by what a mere shadow of military force they
were actually controlled, and again lay quietly down,
and resigned themselves to their humiliation. Spain
and Egypt, they remarked, were kept in obedience
each by two legions ; Africa by one only ; Gaul by
two cohorts or twelve hundred men ; Greece by the
six lictors of a single propraetor . 1 The sway of Rome
throughout the provinces was a government of opi-
nion ; it was maintained by the skill with which the
interests of individuals and classes were consulted, by
a system no doubt of political corruption, which, at
least, was better than the sword, by the remembrance
of the ills of barbaric lawlessness, above all, by a
sense of the moral superiority of the conquerors.
When the spiritual yearnings of the world, thus paci-
fied and amalgamated, began shortly to issue in a
burst of religious enthusiasm, under a Providential
guidance, the conviction of the essential force and
greatness of the Roman character was the firmest
bulwark of heathenism against the assaults of Chris-
tianity.

Nevertheless it was in vain that men cried peace,
peace, when there was no peace. The war of
greatest of Roman historians has lamented »iiemiy
that the empire could furnish only a narra- beneath the

. _ r , , J c jurfaceofthe

tive of petty events, and a survey ot con- Kom.n reaee.
temptible characters ; yet he has succeeded in invest-
ing this barren subject with a livelier interest, and
inspiring it with a deeper pathos, than have been
developed by the more stirring themes of any of his
rivals. And yet he was not aware of the conflicts

1 See a striking passage to this effeet in Josephus, Bell. Jud. ii. 16.

Digitized by Google

428

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS.

CH. XXXIX.

that were really impending — the wars worse than
civil that were actually fermenting beneath that
unruffled surface — the foes more terrible than Gaul
or Carthaginian, who were slowly struggling upwards,
like the warriors of Cadmus, to destroy or be de-
stroyed beneath the light of heaven. The human ap-
pearance of our Lord Jesus Christ dates from about,
the middle of the reign of Augustus. This mysterious
event, in which we trace the germ of Koman dissolu-
tion, and still mark the frontier line between ancient
and modern civilization, though once commonly as-
signed to the year 753 of the city, is now universally
referred to a somewhat earlier period ; and amoug
many conflicting opinions, the best chronologers are
still divided between the years u.C. 747 and 749, or 7
and 5 b.c . 1 It was not, however, till more than half
a century later that the political consequences of the
Christian revelation began to be felt : with these our
history will be concerned hereafter, and it is not ne-
cessary to refer to them any further by anticipation.

1 Fischer, with Ideler and Reinold, place the date in 747; but
Clinton in 749. A remarkable light has recently been thrown upon
this point, by the demonstration, as it seems to be, of Augustus Zumpt,
in his second volume of Commentat tones Epigraphies, that Quirinius
(the Cyrenius of St. Luke, ch. ii.) was first governor of Syria, from
the close of a. u. 750, b. c. 4, to 753, b. c. 1. Accordingly the enu-
meration begun or appointed under his predecessor Varus, and be-
fore the death of Herod, was completed after that event under
Quirinius. It would appear from hence that our Lord’s birth was
a. v. 750, or 749 at the earliest. Though I have used the first volume
of Zumpt’s Commentationes, I have not yet seen the second, and have
learnt his view from a passage pointed out to me in the Christian

Reformer for Oct. 1 855.

END OF THE FOURTH VOLUME.

I.0KD05 & ' ! r '

PH Ilf TB H BY SPOTTISWOODK A X 1$ J •; • *S |

HHW-SXHBBt SQCaBB V “"

' 1 'J

m

Digitized by Google

Digitized by Google
