11  If

I(  111

11

$8

flf

■jairifiitivifitli

GIFT  OF

SEELEY  W.  MUDD

and

GEORGE  I.  COCHRAN MEYER  ELSASSER

DR.  JOHN  R.  HAYNES WILLIAM  L.  HONNOLD

JAMES  R.  MARTIN MRS.  JOSEPH  F.  SARTORI

to  the

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

SOUTHERN  BRANCH

JOHN  FISKE

Vc

HISTOEY

OF

THE EOMANS

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.

BY

CHARLES  MERIVALE,  B.D.,

LATE FELLOW OF ST. JOHN'S COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.

FROM THE FOURTH LONDON EDITION.

WITH  A COPIOUS  ANALYTICAL  INDEX.

VOL. V.

NEW  YORK:
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,

443 & 445 BROADWAY.
1865.

: : •' .-" .  :■• ■::.'.
■ .;■:•■ .  ■ ■  ■•■■,;■,■:

.  ■  .  .  • •  •

•  • . *. . •

•  .•  •.• •

...

•  -•.•  ■'•;••.

■  •  ■  .  ■ ....■• .
■ ■ •..-.•,,

:  • . • !

~VGr
ZJtQ>

CONTENTS

OF THE FIFTH VOLUME.

CHAPTER XLII.

Tiberius  succeeds  to  the  empire. — His  condescension  to  the  senate,  and  pretended  re-
luctance to  accept  power. — Mutiny  of  the  legions  in  Pannonia  and  on  the  Rhine,
quelled  by  Drusus  and  Germanicus. — Character  of  Germanicus. — His  popularity
awakens  the  jealousy  of  Tiberius. — Campaigns  of  Germanicus  beyond  the  Rhine  in
767,  768,  and  769. — He  revisits  the  scene  of  the  slaughter  of  Varus. — Disaster  on  his
return  by  sea. — Germanicus  reaches  the  Weser. — Quarrel  between  Arminius  and  his
brother  Flavius.— Battle  of  Idistavisus.— Successive  defeats  of  the  Germans,  and  bar-
ren trophies  of  the  Romans. — Second  disaster  by  sea. — The  eagles  of  Varus  recovered.
— The  frontier  of  the  empire  recedes  finally  to  the  Ehine. — Return  of  Germanicus  to
Rome,  and  triumph  there. — Gloomy  forebodings  of  the  people  (a.  d.  14-17.,  A.  tr.  767-
770.) Page  7

CHAPTER  XLIII.

Mission  of  Germanicus  to  the  East,  and  of  Drusus  to  Illyricum. — Retirement  of  Marobo-
duus,  and  death  of  Arminius. — Germanicus  journeys  through  Greece  and  Asia  Minor.
— Intrigues  of  Piso  and  Plancina  against  him. — He  settles  the  affairs  of  Armenia,
and  visits  Egypt.— His  sickness  and  death  imputed  to  Piso.— Grief  of  the  citizens. —
Piso  attempts  to  seize  the  government  of  Syria. — Is  baffled  and  sent  to  Rome. —
The  friends  of  Germanicus  accuse  him  before  the  senate. — His  defence,  suicide
and  condemnation.— Tiberius  free  from  suspicion  of  the  murder  of  Germanicus.—
Imposture  of  Clemens. — Intrigues  of  Libo  Drusus. — Deterioration  in  the  conduct  of
Tiberius.— Influence  of  Livia  over  him.  and  of  Sejanus  (a.  u.  770-778.,  A.  D.  17-20.) 50

CHAPTER  XLIV.

The  functions  of  the  Comitia:  1.  Election  of  magistrates;  2.  Legislation;  8.  Jurisdic-
tion ;  Transferred  to  the  senate,  and  hence  to  the  emperor  himself. — The  emperor's
control  over  the  senate.— The  law  of  Majestas :  Its  origin,  application,  and  extension
under  Tiberius  from  acts  to  words  and  injurious  language. — Cases  of  constructive
Majestas.— Delation  encouraged  by  Tiberius. — Consolidation  of  the  Roman  dominions
under  Tiberius.— Stations  and  discipline  of  the  legions.— The  government  and  im-

■ ,

:4IjS58

iv  CONTENTS.

proved  treatment  of  the  provinces. — Government  of  Italy  and  the  city. — Dissipation
of  the  times. — Measures  of  Tiberias. — His  own  vices  and  virtues. — His  deference  to
the  senate. — Defects  of  temper  and  demeanour ....  Page  96

CHAPTER  XLV.

Comparison  between  Augustus  and  Tiberius. — Sejanus  useful  without  being  formidable. —
Disturbances  in  Africa  and  revolt  in  Gaul. — Overthrow  of  Sacrovir  (a.  tr.  774.). — The
tribunitian  power  conferred  upon  Drusus  (a.  tr.  775.). — Intrigues  of  Sejanus:  Estab-
lishment of  the  praetorian  camp. — Drusus  poisoned  by  Sejanus  (a.  tr.  776.). — Deteriora-
tion of  the  principate  of  Tiberius. — Death  of  Cremutius,  Cordus.  and  others. — Sejanus
demands  the  hand  of  Livilla,  and  is  refused  by  Tiberius. — He  conceives  the  project  of
withdrawing  Tiberius  from  Rome. — Retirement  of  Tiberius  to  Caprese  (a.  tr.  780.). —
His  manner  of  life  there. — Further  deterioration  of  his  government. — Death  of  the
younger  Julia  and  the  empress  Livia  (a.  xj.  782.)  (a.  tr.  774-782.,  a.  d.  21-29.)  162

CHAPTER  XL VI.

The  fate  of  the  family  of  Germanicus. — Banishment  of  Agrippina  and  her  son  Nero. —
Disgrace  and  imprisonment  of  her  son  Drusus. — Persecution  of  her  friends. — Fate  of
Asinius  Gallus. — Culmination  of  the  fortunes  of  Sejanus. — His  alliance  with  the  im-
perial family  and  consulship  (a.  v.  784.). — Alarmed  at  the  jealousy  of  Tiberius,  he  con-
spires against  bim. — Tiberius  determines,  with  the  assistance  of  Macro,  to  overthrow
him. — His  arrest  in  the  Senate-house,  and  execution. — Proscription  of  his  adherents. —
Vengeance  for  the  murder  of  Drusus. — Savage  cruelty  of  Tiberius. — Horrible  death
of  the  younger  Drusus. — Agrippina  starves  herself. — Infatuation  of  Tiberius. — His
mortification  at  the  despondency  of  the  nobles. — Voluntary  deaths  of  Nerva  and  Ar-
runtius. — Prospects  of  the  succession. — Caius  Caligula  and  the  young  Tiberius. —
Ascendency  of  Macro. — Last  days  and  death  of  Tiberius  (a.  c  790.). — Eifects  of  the
reign  of  Terror:  Alarm  of  the  nobles;  thoughtless  dissipation  of  the  populace. — The
provinces  generally  well  cared  for  and  prosperous. — Example  from  the  state  of  Judea
(a.  d.  29-37.,  A.  F.  782-790.) 214

CHAPTER  XLYTI.

The  family  of  Herod  the  Great  at  Rome. — Berenice,  and  her  children  Herodias  and
Agrippa. — Herodias  repudiates  her  husband  Philippus,  marries  Herod  Antipas,  and
receives  a  principality  in  Palestine. — Agrippa  courts  the  young  Caius,  and  imbues  him
with  the  ideas  of  Oriental  sovereignty. — Falls  under  displeasure  of  Tiberius,  and  is
arrested. — On  the  death  of  Tiberius  he  is  released,  and  taken  into  favour  by  Caius. —
First  commencement  of  the  new  principate. — Liberality  of  Caius. — His  subservience
to  the  senate. — Attempts  to  restore  the  Comitia. — Becomes  consul,  July,  790. — His
industry  in  administration. — Magnificence  of  his  shows. — He  falls  into  excessive  dissi-
pation.— His  dangerous  illness. — Despair  of  the  citizens  and  provincials. — On  his  re-
covery his  head  turned  by  flattery. — Puts  to  death  the  young  Tiberius,  Macro  and
Ennia,  and  Silanus. — His  extravagances,  necessities,  and  cruelty. — Believes  himself  a
God,  and  requires  his  subjects  to  worship  him. — Indifference  of  the  Romans  and
Greeks.— Resistance  of  the  Jews. — Disturbances  at  Alexandria. — Agrippa  goes  to
Palestine:  Intrigues  against  Antipas  and  Herodias:  Obtains  their  banishment,  and
succeeds  to  their  dominions. — Caius  orders  his  statue  to  be  set  up  in  the  Jewish  syna-
gogues, and  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem. — Mission  of  Philo  the  Jew,  and  interview
with  the  emperor  (a.  d.  37-40.,  a.  v.  790-793.)  ..... 274

CONTENTS.  V

CHAPTER XLVIII.

Reflections  on  the  deficiency  of  our  materials  for  the  history  of  Cains. — Defects  of  his
education  and  training.— His  contempt  for  political  disguises. — The  priesthood  of  the
Arician  Diana.— Colossal  character  of  his  conceptions :  His  architectural  extrava-
gances.—The  viaduct  over  the  Velabrum. — The  bridge  of  boats  at  Baise. — His  extrav-
agant luxury.— He  pretends  to  eloquence.— His  spite  against  great  reputations,  and
belief  in  his  own  divinity. — Systematic  persecution  of  the  wealthy  nobles. — Massacre
of  exiles.— The  people  alienated  by  taxation.— His  expedition  into  Gaul.— Overthrow
of  Lentulus  Gstulicus  and  Lepidus.— Pretended  invasion  of  Britain.— Returning  to
Rome,  he  plays  the  tyrant  without  disguise. — Conspiracies  against  him. — He  is  slain
by  Cassius  Chajrea. (a.  d.  39-41.,  a.u.  792-794.)  .  .  .  Page  320

CHAPTER  XLIX.

The  senate  deliberates  on  the  state  of  affairs. — The  praetorians  carry  off  Claudius  to  their
camp  and  swear  allegiance  to  him. — The  senate  yields  and  accepts  him  as  emperor. —
He  proclaims  an  amnesty,  excepting  only  Chserea  and  a  few  others. — Contempt  and
neglect  with  which  he  had  been  treated  in  his  early  years. — His  devotion  to  literature.
— He  takes  the  policy  of  Augustus  as  his  model :  1.  His  military  exploits  and  conduct
of  foreign  affairs.  2.  His  revision  of  the  senate  and  knights,  and  census  a.  v.  800.
3.  His  administration  of  religious  affairs. — Secular  games  a.  v.  800.  4.  His  laborious
administration  of  justice.  5.  His  buildings  and  constructions:  The  Aqua  Claudia:
The  Portus  Augusti :  Draining  of  the  lake  Fucinus.  6.  His  public  shows  in  the  Am
phitheatre,  and  mock  sea-fight  in  the  lake  Fucinus. — Gluttony  and  intemperance  as-
cribed to  him .......... 364

CHAPTER  L.

Claudius  subject  to  the  influence,  1.  Of  women :  His  wives :  Messalina.  2.  Of  freedmen :
Polybius,  Narcissus,  &c. — Treatment  of  the  sisters  of  Caius. — Banishment  of  Seneca.
— Death  of  App.  Silanus. — Conspiracy  of  Scribonianus. — Invasion  of  Britain  and
triumph  of  Claudius. — Death  of  Valerius  Asiaticus. — Internal  administration  of  Clau-
dius.— Rivalry  of  Messalina  and  Agrippina. — Messalina's  amour  with  Silius,  and  daring
marriage  with  him. — Alarm  and  anger  of  Claudius. — Her  disgrace  and  death. — In-
trigues for  a  successor.— Claudius  marries  Agrippina. — Her  son  Domitius  betrothed
to  his  daughter  Octavia :  Adopted  under  the  name  of  Nero. — Influence  of  Agrippina :
She  founds  the  Colonia  Agrippinensis. — Advancing  popularity  of  Nero. — Agrippina
effects  the  destruction  of  Lepida. — She  poisons  Claudius. — Nero  succeeds  to  power. —
Remarks  on  the  character  of  Claudius. — The  adoration  paid  him  during  his  life  by
Seneca,  and  abuse  of  him  after  his  death. — The  Apocolocyntosis. — Flattery  of  Nero.
(a.  u.  714-S07.,  a.  d.  41-54.) 39S

HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

UNDER THE  EMPIRE.

CHAPTER  XIII.

TIBERIUS SUCCEEDS TO THE EMPIRE. HIS CONDESCENSION TO THE SENATE, AND

PRETENDED RELUCTANCE TO ACCEPT POWER. MUTINY OF THE LEGIONS IN

PANNONIA AND ON THE RHINE, QUELLED BY DRUSUS AND GERMANICUS.

CHARACTER OF GERMANICUS. HIS POPULARITY AWAKENS THE JEALOUSY OF

TIBERIUS. CAMPAIGNS OF  GERMANICUS BEYOND THE RHINE IN 767,  768,  AND

769. HE REVISITS THE SCENE OF THE SLAUGHTER OF VARUS. DISASTER ON

HIS RETURN BY SEA. GERMANICUS REACHES THE  WESER. QUARREL  BETWEEN

ARMINIUS AND HIS BROTHER FLAVIUS. BATTLE OF IDISTAVISUS. SUCCESSIVE

DEFEATS OF THE GERMANS, AND BARREN TROPHIES OF THE ROMANS. SECOND

DISASTER BY SEA. THE EAGLES OF VARUS RECOVERED. THE FRONTIER OF

THE EMPIRE RECEDES FINALLY TO THE RHINE. RETURN OF GERMANICUS TO

ROME, AND TRIUMPH THERE. GLOOMY FOREBODINGS OF THE PEOPLE. (a.  D.

14-17.,  a.  u.  767-770.)

IT  may  be  recorded  in  praise  of  Augustus,  among  few
other  sovereigns  who  have  long  survived  the  date  of
their  early  popularity,  that  no  burst  of  general
satisfaction  hailed  the  announcement  of  his  de- ready  to  ac-
cease. The  old  man  had  no  doubt  become  stale succession  of6
and  wearisome  to  his  countrymen ;  a  damp  had
been  cast  on  their  spirits  by  the  dull  shade  of  a  monoto-
nous rule,  which  had  long  ceased  to  be  relieved  by  gleams
of  adventitious splendour. The prosperity of his latter
years  had  been  clouded  by  alarming  disasters ; yet  these
had  not  so  depressed  the  feelings  of  the  nation  as  the  leaden
weight  of  an  administration  which  seemed  concerned  only

8  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  14.

to  avert  motives  of  popular  excitement.  The  generation
which  had  admired  Augustus  as  the  genius  of  beneficent
government  had  descended  into  the  tomb :  it  had  been  suc-
ceeded by  one  which  regarded  him  only  as  a  despot,  or,
more  unfavourably  still,  as  a  pedant.  "Whatever  discontent,
however,  might  lie  smothered  beneath  the  external  forms  of
loyal  submission,  the  approaching  end  of  his  long  domina-
tion was  anticipated  in  no  quarter  as  the  advent  of  a  new
era.1  Augustus  himself  justly  presumed  that  no  party  con-
templated the  restoration  of  the  republic  on  his  demise ;  he
was  content  to  warn  his  successor  against  the  personal  am-
bition of  the  most  eminent  nobles,  those  who  might  be  ex-
pected to  covet  the  sovereignty,  and  those  who  without
coveting  might  be  deemed  fit  to  wield  it.2  But  the  great
mass  of  the  citizens  acquiesced  at  this  crisis  in  the  convic-
tion that  the  man  who  had  shared  his  later  counsels  would
be  appointed  heir  to  his  relinquished  powers.  They  con-
templated without  a  murmur  the  succession  of  Tiberius  to
the  complete  cycle  of  the  imperial  functions,  from  no  per-
sonal regard  or  admiration,  nor  from  any  deliberate  belief
that  he  was  the  fittest  of  the  citizens  to  assume  preeminence,
but  from  a  half-conscious  acknowledgment  of  his  divine  or
legitimate  right  as  the  adopted  son  of  the  hero  Augustus,
himself  the  adopted  son  of  the  divine  Julius.  Such  is  the
proneness  of  the  human  mind  to  discover  a  right  for  an  once
established  and  uncontested  might ;  so  smooth  is  the  path  of
usurpation,  when  it  has  once  succeeded  in  scaling  the  bar-
riers of  the  law.  It  was  not  in  vain  that  Augustus  had
cherished  among  his  subjects  the  remnant  of  religious  feel-
ing ;  he  was  rewarded  by  becoming  himself  the  centre  of
their  idolatry,  and  imparting  a  ray  of  his  own  adorable  god-
head to  the  heir  of  his  name  and  titles.

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  4. :  "  Postquam  provecta  jam  senectus  aegro  et  corpore  fati-
gabatur,  aderatque  finis  ct  spes  novae:  pauci  bona  libertatis  incassum  disse-
rere:  plures  bellum  pavescere,  alii  cupere:  para  multo  maxima  imminentea
dominos  variis  rumoribus  disserere."

2  Tac.  Ann.  i.  13.

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  9

But  with  the  fortunes  of  Augustus,  Tiberius  did  not  in-
herit that  reliance  on  his  personal  merits  which  nerved  the
arm  of  his  predecessor,  and  imbued  him  with  so  seif-distmst  of
lofty  a  sense  of  his  mission.  Though  certainly  Tlbenus-
with  no  mean  ability,  both  military  and  administrative,  he
seems  to  have  been  wanting  in  the  higher  quality  of  genius
which  seizes  or  makes  its  opportunities,  and  floats  on  the
crest  of  the  swelling  waves  of  a  national  inspiration.  Of
this  he  was  himself  painfully  sensible ;  and  it  was  the  con-
sciousness that  he  could  neither  kindle  the  imagination  of
the  soldiers  like  Julius,  nor  of  the  citizens  like  Augustus,
that  made  him  feel  less  secure  of  their  obedience  than  he
really  was.  He  had  suffered,  indeed,  though  mainly  through
his  own  perverseness,  a  fall  from  power,  which  rendered  him
keenly  alive  to  the  precariousness  of  his  elevation,  and  to  the
dangers  which  attend  on  infirmities  of  temper  in  the  great.
The  secret  of  his  predecessor's  success  had  lain,  as  he  was
perhaps  aware,  in  the  perfect  equilibrium  of  his  abilities  and
his  temper,  in  the  combination  of  genius  with  self-command ;
his  own  conscious  deficiency  in  this  particular  chilled  him  as
an  omen  of  ultimate  failure,  as  it  had  already  been  the  cause
of  his  temporary  disgrace.  Tiberius  reigned  in  the  constant
apprehension  of  the  crash  which  he  expected  to  overwhelm
him ;  the  sword  of  Damocles  seemed  ever  suspended  over
him  ;  and  he  scanned  with  angry  perturbation  the  counte-
nances of  all  who  approached  him,  to  discover  whether  they
too  saw  the  fatal  spectre  which  was  never  absent  from  his
own  imagination.1

At  the  critical  moment  he  might  himself  have  hesitated,
and  looked  timidly  around  him  ;  but  he  was  fortunate,  if  one
mav  sav  so,  in  having  in  his  mother  Livia  an

'  * '  °  Death  of  An-

ally endued  with  the  unity  of  object  and  prompt- pustus  an-

ness  in  action  which  so  strongly  characterize  her

sex. Augustus,  it  seems  probable,  had  not  yet  breathed  his

1  One  passing  stroke  from  Pliny  on  this  subject  rivals  in  effect  the  elabo-
rate paintings  of  Tacitus :  "  Tiberius  tristissimus,  ut  constat,  hominum."  Hwt.
Nat.  xxviii.  5.

10  HISTORY OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  U.

last,  and  his  step-son,  hastily  recalled  from  the  Dalmatian
coast,  was  not  yet  in  attendance  on  his  death-bed,  when  the
empress  boldly  ventured  to  take  the  necessary  measures  to
prevent  the  tidings  of  his  decease  being  too  soon  made  pub-
lic. When,  however,  Tiberius  was  himself  on  the  spot,
there  was  no  further  occasion  for  disguise,  and  the  demise  of
the  late  imperator  was  proclaimed  at  the  same  moment  with
the  substitution  of  a  successor.1  The  fidelity  of  the  few
troops  about  the  capital,  already  bound  by  the  military
sacrament  to  their  actual  chief's  coadjutor,  was  sufficiently
assured  ;  obedience  to  the  orders  of  Tiberius  had  become
habitual  to  them.  Nor  was  there  any  real  cause  for  appre-
hension lest  a  rival  should  start  up  among  the  nobility  of  the
capital.  Of  the  possible  competitors  already  designated  by
Augustus,  Lepidus,  he  had  said,  was  equal  to  empire,  but
would  disdain  it ;  Asinius  Gallus  might  be  ambitious  of  it,
but  was  unequal  to  the  post ;  and  one  only,  the  rich  and
high-born  Arruntius,  had  the  spirit  both  to  desire,  and,  if  oc-
casion served,  to  contend  for  it.2  But  Arruntius  bore  no
official  distinction  or  military  reputation ;  no  circumstances
had  combined  to  smooth  his  way  to  such  an  elevation,  and
the  only  immediate  risk  of  competition  lay  in  the  members
of  the  Csesarean  family  itself.  Of  these,  Germanicus  was  at
the  moment  absent :  Drusus,  the  youthful  child  of  Tiberius,
had  yet  acquired  no  independent  position ;  but  the  wretched
Agrippa  still  lingered -in  his  island-prison,  and  the  rumour

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  5. :  "Provisis  quae  tempus  monebat,  simul  excessisse  Augus-
tum  et  rerum  potiri  Neronem,  fama  eadem  tulit."

2  Tac.  Ann.  i.  13.:  "M.  Lepidum  dixerat  capacem,  sed  aspernantem;  Gali-
um Asinium  avidum,  et  minorem ;  L.  Arruntium  non  indignum,  et  si  casus  da-
retur  ausurum."  M.  J3milius  Lepidus  was  brother  of  the  Paulus  iEmilius,
husband  of  the  younger  Julia,  who  conspired  against  Augustus.  See  chap,
xxxviii.  He  continued  in  the  enjoyment  of  favour  and  dignity  till  his  death,
a.  u.  786.  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  27. ;  see  below.  C.  Asinius  Gallus  was  son  of  Asin-
ius Pollio,  and  married  to  Vipsania,  the  divorced  wife  of  Tiberius.  For  his
death,  783,  see  below.  L.  Arruntius  was  son  of  a  lieutenant  of  Augustus  in
the  battle  of  Actium  (consul  a.  u.  732).  nis  suicide,  a.  u.  790,  will  be  men-
tioned in  its  place.

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  H

that  Augustus  had  recently  visited  him  in  secret,  and  held
out,  not  without  tokens  of  affection,  some  hopes  of  release
and  favour,  had  excited  the  jealous  fears  both  of  Livia  and
her  son. As  soon  as  Augustus  ceased  to  breathe,
and  even  before  his  decease  was  proclaimed,  an ^"nauonof
order  was  conveyed  to  the  centurion  in  guard 4us.Ppa  ?°StU
over  the  captive  to  put  him  to  death. Such  was
the  belief  of  the  times ;  but  whether  the  order  was  issued
by  Livia,  without  her  son's  privity,  or  whether  it  was  the
first  act  of  the  new  Caesar's  authority,  the  propagators  of  the
rumour  were  not  agreed. A  hint  seems  indeed  to  have  been
thrown  out  that  Augustus  had  instructed  the  keepers  to  kill
their  prisoner  as  soon  as  his  own  death  should  be  known,  to
anticipate  the  risk  of  disturbance  in  the  succession ;  and  Ti-
berius publicly  declared  that  the  deed  was  not  commanded
by  him ;  nevertheless  he  took  no  steps  to  explain  the  mys-
tery, and  the  perpetrators  of  a  crime  thus  officially  acknowl-
edged were  allowed  to  remain  unquestioned.1

With  the  announcement  of  the  emperor's  demise  Tiberius
summoned  the  senate  by  virtue  of  his  tribunitian  power.9
The  consuls  Appuleius  and  Pompeius  came  for-

x  A  .  Tiberius  con-

ward,  as  the  first  magistrates  of  the  republic,  to vencs  the  sen-
swear  obedience  to  him  as  their  imperator,  and
the  formula  was  repeated  by  all  the  officers  of  the  state,
and  echoed  by  the  soldiers  and  the  citizens.' The  ceremony

1  Tacitus  ascribes  the  act  without  hesitation  to  Tiberius  :  "  Primum  facinus
novi  principalis  fuit  Postumi  Agrippae  caedes "  .  .  .  .  and  Dion  follows  him.
Suetonius  speaks  more  dubiously :  "  Quos  codicillos  dubium  fuit  Augustusne
moriens  reliquisset  quo  materiam  tumultus  post  se  subduceret,  an  nomine  Au-
gusti  Livia,  et  ea  conscio  Tiberio  an  ignaro  dictasset."  Yelleius  seems  to  in-
sinuate that  Agrippa  died  before  Augustus.  In  the  will  of  the  emperor,  made
sixteen  months  before  his  own  decease,  he  made  no  mention  of  this  grandson;
but  nothing  can  be  built  on  this  omission.  Tacitus  and  Suetonius  both  agree
that  the  centurion  reported  to  Tiberius,  "  Factum  esse  quod  impcrasset,"  and
that  Tiberius  replied  with  anger,  "  Neque  imperasse  se,  et  rationem  facti  red-
dendam  apud  senatum ;"  but  took  no  further  notice  of  the  affair.  See  Tac.
Ann.  i.  6. ;  Suet  Tib.  22.;  Dion,  lvii.  8.

2  Suit.  Tib.  23.:  "Jure  tribunitiac  potestatis  coacto  senatu."

*  Tac.  Ann.  i.  7. :  "  Primi  Coss.  in  verba  Tiberii  Caesaris  juravere." In  tho

12  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  14.

passed  smoothly  without  demur  or  scruple.  Tiberius  alone,
perhaps,  was  astonished  at  the  readiness  with  which  his  fel-
low-citizens accepted  from  the  lips  of  their  magistrates  the
obligation  to  maintain  the  imperial  system  in  his  person.
The  terms  in  which  he  had  convoked  the  fathers  had  been
studiously  moderate  and  cautious.  He  had  carefully  avoided
committing  himself  to  any  personal  views :  he  had  only  re-
quested that  they  should  consult  about  the  honours  due  to
the  deceased;  while  for  himself  he  proposed  to  continue
meanwhile  in  attendance  on  the  venerated  remains,  the  sole
public  function  which  he  claimed  the  right  to  discharge.
Yet  he  had  not  scrupled  to  assume  the  ordinary  ensigns  of
power  at  the  emperor's  death-bed,  he  had  disposed  the  sen-
tinels and  given  the  watchword  without  reserve;  even  in
presenting  himself  in  the  forum  and  the  senate  he  had
adopted  a  military  escort ;  still  more,  he  had  dispatched  his
own  orders  to  the  legions  in  the  provinces ;  in  short,  he  had
shown  no  signs  of  hesitation  in  anything  but  his  address  to
the  senators  themselves.1  As  associated  indeed  in  the  impe-
rium  he  was  perfectly  competent  to  take  these  military
measures ;  but  the  motive  which  impelled  him  to  act  so
promptly  was  his  fear  of  Germanicus,  the  commander  of
several  legions  and  the  favourite  of  the  people,  who,  it  might
be  apprehended,  would  rather  choose  to  seize  the  supreme
power  at  once  than  wait  for  its  descent  to  him  hereafter.9

camp  from  which  the  usage  was  derived  the  legatus  Imperatoris  first  uttered
the  oath  of  obedience — "pnestitit  sacramentum" — to  his  general;  then  the
centurions,  and  finally,  the  soldiers — "  jurabant  in  verba  legati " — took  his  oath
upon  themselves.  But  the  military  sacrament  had  now  become  a  general  oath
of  allegiance,  which  the  consuls  proposed,  and  the  rest  of  the  citizens  repeated
after  them. Comp.  Suet.  Jul.  84. ;  Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  145.

1  Tac.  Ann.  1.  c. :  "  Defuncto  Augusto  signum  pnctoriis  cohortibus  ut  im-
perator  dederat ;  excubiae,  arma,  caetera  aulas ;  miles  in  Forum  miles  in  Curiam
comitabatur ;  literas  ad  exercitus,  tanquam  adcpto  principatu,  misit ;  nusquam
cunctabundus  nisi  quum  in  Senatu  loqucrctur."  Comp.  Suet.  Tib.  24. ;  Dion,
lvii.  2.

2  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Causa  praecipua  ex  formidinc  ne  Germanicus,  in  cujus  manu
tot  lcgiones,  immensa  sociorum  auxilia,  mirus  apud  populum  favor,  habere  im-
perium  quam  exspectare  mallet."

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  13

Tiberius  had  a  further  reason  for  courting  the  suffrages  of
the  senate,  rather  than  commanding  them :  he  was  anxious
to  appear  to  owe  his  election  to  the  national  voice,  rather
than  slip  into  the  succession  as  the  adopted  heir  of  a  woman-
ruled  dotard.  It  suited  his  temper,  moreover, — and  in  esti-
mating the  acts  of  the  moody  Tiberius  we  must  regard  his
temper  even  more  than  his  policy, — thus  to  ascertain  the
real  sentiments  of  the  courtiers,  whose  voices  he  could  have
easily  constrained.

Already,  sixteen  months  before  his  death,  Augustus  had
sealed  his  will,  and  placed  it  beyond  his  own  reach  in  the
custody  of  the  Vestals.1  By  this  instrument  he
had  made  a  careful  disposition  of  his  property,  ment  of  Augus-
after  the  manner  of  a  private  citizen.  The  bulk
of  it  he  had  bequeathed,  after  expressing  his  regret  at  the
loss  of  Caius  and  Lucius,  to  Tiberius  and  Livia  in  unequal
proportions,  the  former  receiving  two  thirds,  the  latter  one
third  only ;  but  even  this  share  was  beyond  what  the  law
allowed  to  a  widow,  and  required  a  special  exemption  from
the  senate.*  It  was  provided  at  the  same  time  that  Livia
should  be  adopted  into  the  Julian  family,  and  distinguished
with  the  title  of  Augusta.  In  default  of  the  survival  of
these  his  first-named  heirs,  he  called  his  grandsons  and  their
children  to  the  inheritance,  one  third  of  which  was  to  de-
scend to  Drusus,  the  son  of  Tiberius,  the  remainder  to  be
apportioned  among  Germanicus  and  his  three  male  children.
The  unfortunate  Julias  were  specially  excepted  from  all  bene-
fit in  this  arrangement,  and  a  clause  was  added  by  which
their  remains  were  forbidden  to  rest  in  the  Csesarean  mauso-
leum. Of  Agrippa  Postumus  no  mention  seems  to  have  been
made.  Failing  all  natural  or  adoptive  successors,  the  em-
peror had  taken  the  precaution  of  inserting  some  names  of

1  Suet.  Oct.  101. ;  Tac.  Ann.  i.  8. ;  Dion,  lvi.  32,  33.

a  The  lex  Voconia  had  allowed  a  widow  to  inherit  only  a  fourth,  and  this
had  been  reduced  to  a  fifth  by  the  lex  Papia  Popprea.  It  may  be  said,  how-
ever, that  Livia  bad  been  released  from  the  severity  of  this  law  by  receiving
the  Jus  trium  liberorum. Dion,  lv.  2. See  Reimar's  note  on  Dion,  lvi.  32.

14  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  H.

the  chief  nohility,  even  such  as  he  was  known  to  have  re-
garded during  his  lifetime  with  distrust  and  dislike,  either
to  conciliate  their  favour  towards  his  descendants,  or  as  an
empty  display  of  generosity.  But  the  property  which,  after
fifty  years  of  power,  the  emperor  had  to  bestow,  did  not  ex-
ceed what  might  be  expected  from  a  citizen  of  the  first
rank ;  and  it  was  burdened  by  liberal  donations  to  the  public
treasury,  to  the  citizens  individually,  to  the  legionaries  and
the  guards  of  the  palace,  and  also  to  a  few  private  friends.1
Last  public  -^-s  regar(led  public  affairs,  the  last  counsels  he
counsels.  gave  his  children  and  the  commonwealth  were

exhortations  to  prudence  and  moderation.  He  requested
that  no  ostentation  of  magnificence  should  induce  them  to
emancipate  many  slaves  at  his  funeral ;  that  they  should  ab-
stain from  admitting  the  subjects  of  the  empire  indiscrimi-
nately to  the  honours  and  privileges  of  the  ruling  race ;  that
they  should  summon  all  men  capable  of  affairs  to  a  share  in
their  administration,  and  not  accumulate  all  public  functions
in  a  single  hand ;  lastly,  that  they  should  rest  satisfied  with
the  actual  extent  of  the  frontiers,  nor  risk,  by  the  lust  of  fur-
ther conquests,  the  loss  of  the  provinces  they  possessed :  for
so  he  had  paused  himself  in  the  career  of  his  own  successes,
and  preferred  to  present  gain  or  personal  glory  the  perma-
nent interests  of  the  republic.2

Tiberius  was  anxious  that  the  citizens  should  notice  the
deference  paid  by  the  deceased  ruler  to  their  presumed  su-
premacy, and  fancy  that  the  empire,  with  its  various  pow-

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Populo  et  plebi  ccccxxxv.,  preetoriarum  cohortium  militibus
singula  nummum  millia,  legionariis  ccc,  cohortibus  civium  Rom.  ccccc.  num-
nios  viritim  dedit."

5  Dion,  lvi.  33.  These  counsels  seem  to  have  been  appended  to  the  regis-
ter of  the  empire  (its  forces,  revenues,  &c),  which  Augustus  bequeathed  to  the
state.  Tac.  Ann.  i.  11.:  "Proferri  libellum  recitarique  jussit:  opes  publicae
continebantur,  &e addideratque  consilium  coercendi  intra  terminos  im-
perii." See  chap,  xxxix.  It  was  still  a  question,  however,  whether  this  last
advice  was  the  result  of  care  for  the  public  weal,  or  of  envy  towards  his  suc-
cessor.

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  15

ers  and  prerogatives,  was  still  their  oAvn  to  give

• 1  i 1  i  mi  i  i  • t Funeral  hon-

or to  withhold. lhe  senate  and people vied ours  decreed

in  the  honours  they  heaped  on  the  memory  of  so
loyal  a  sovereign.  The  body,  it  was  decreed,  shonld  be
borne  into  the  field  of  Mars  through  the  gate  of  triumph,
but  Tiberius  himself  interfered  to  moderate  the  officious  zeal
of  individual  courtiers.  The  populace  signified  their  resolve
to  consume  the  remains  in  the  forum,  and  an  armed  guard
was  required  to  prevent  this  irregularity,  to  avert  the  riots
which  might  have  ensued,  and  spare  the  superstitious  feel-
ings which  would  be  hurt  by  it.  But  the  vapid  admiration
of  the  sated  sight-seers  of  Rome  was  finally  contented  with
the  decorous  solemnities  of  a  national  apotheosis.  The
senate,  the  same  body,  at  least  in  name,  which  had  struck
down  another  Ctesar  sixty  years  before,  which  had  conceded
honours  to  his  corpse  under  bitter  compulsion,  and  driven  his
adorers  from  his  shrine  with  blows  and  menaces,  now  com-
bined with  all  classes  of  the  citizens  in  a  common  act  of  ex-
travagant adulation.  The  procession  of  the  knights  who
attended  on  the  bier  held  its  march  from  the  suburban  sta-
tion of  Bovilla?  to  the  centre  of  the  city ;  orations  in  praise
of  the  deceased  were  pronounced  by  Tiberius  and  his  son
Drusus  from  the  steps  of  the  Julian  temple  and  from  the
rostra ;  from  the  forum  the  honoured  remains  were  borne
upon  the  shoulders  of  the  senators  to  the  place  of  cremation
in  the  Campus  Martins.  Temples,  priests,  and  holy  observ-
ances were  decreed  to  the  divine  Augustus,  as  before  to  the
divine  Julius,  for  a  praetor  was  found  to  affirm  that  he  had
seen  his  soul  ascend  from  his  ashes  into  the  celestial  abodes.
This  testimony,  such  as  it  was,  followed  an  ancient  and  aus-
picious precedent,  and  was  rewarded  with  a  splendid  present
from  Livia.1  On  the  death  of  Csesar  no  such  vision  had  been
required:  Home  and  the  world  believed  without  a  witness,
that  a  spirit  more  than  human  had  exchanged  life  for  immor-
tal it  v.

Meanwhile a scene  was being enacted in the Senate
1  Suet.  Oct.  100. ;  Dion,  lvi.  46.

16  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  [A.D.  14.

House  of  much  more  importance  to  the  interests  of  the  citi-
Tiberius  in  the  zens  than  that  which  concerned  the  remains  of
senate.  fallen greatness just consigned to the tomb.

Tiberius  had  learnt  from  the  policy  of  his  sire  that,  however
bold  and  decided  his  movements  might  be  in  the  camp  and
the  provinces,  he  must  govern  the  nobles  in  the  city  by  craft
and  management.  Following  implicitly  the  example  which
had  been  set  him  on  more  than  one  solemn  occasion,  he  now
met  the  professions  of  submission  to  his  authority,  which  the
senators  eagerly  tendered,  with  pretending  to  shrink  from
its  acceptance.  He  began  with  uttering  ambiguous  general-
ities about  the  vast  extent  of  the  empire,  and  the  arduous-
ness  of  the  task  of  governing  it.1  From  thence  he  proceeded
to  insinuate  that  the  charge  was  in  fact  too  great  for  a  single
hand,  and  might  tax  the  powers  of  more  than  one  associate.
He  hinted,  perhaps,  at  the  policy  of  appointing  a  third  tri-
umvirate, to  divide  the  cares  to  which  Augustus  had  alone
been  equal ;  as  it  had  required  the  vigour  of  three  combined
imperators  to  wield  the  sword  of  Caesar.  He  was  not  una-
ware that  among  the  traditions  of  the  republic  the  triumvir-
ate was  more  obnoxious  than  even  the  monarchy,  and  he
might  anticipate  that  the  fear  of  returning  to  a  rule  stamped
with  the  fatal  impress  of  massacre  and  civil  war,  would
throw  his  hearers  on  the  only  other  feasible  alternative,  the
perpetuation  of  imperial  supremacy.  The  senators  received
his  harangue  in  silence,  rather  from  uncertainty  as  to  his  real
wishes  than  from  any  hesitation  of  their  own ;  for,  with  the
exception  of  the  few  among  them  who  might  cherish  schemes
of  personal  aggrandizement,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
general  sentiment  was  to  acquiesce,  however  reluctantly,  in
the  substitution  of  Tiberius  for  Augustus.  But  the  smooth
progress  of  the  trick  was  presently  inl  errupted  by  the  cap-
tious question  of  Asinius,  who  ventured  to  ask  the  speaker
what  part  of  the  imperial  functions  he  was  prepared  himself

1  Veil.  ii.  124. :  "  Veluti  luctatio  civitatis  fuit  pugnantis  cum  Cajsare  senatus
populique,  ut  stationi  patcrnac  succederet ;  illius  ut  potius  requalem  civem  quam
eminentem  licerct  agcre  principem."

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  17

to  accept. Tiberius  was  for  a  moment  embarrassed ;  but  re-
covering himself,  he  replied  adroitly  that  it  was  not  for  him
to  choose  or  to  reject  any  particular  charge,  when  for  his
own  part  he  would  willingly  be  excused  from  all. The  rash
or  petulant  inquirer  sought  to  cover  his  retreat  by  declaring
he  had  no  other  motive  in  asking,  but  to  show  by  the  answer
he  should  elicit  that  the  state  was  one  and  indivisible,  and
could  only  be  governed  by  a  single  head. The  session  ended
with  the  understanding  of  all  parties  that  the
government  should  continue  in  the  hands  of  Ti- tions  of  em-
berius,  Avith  all  the  functions  amassed  by  his  pre- tacit  undeJ-
decessor.1 No  formal  decree,  however,  was  pro- hands  of  Tibe-e
nounced  to  this  effect ;  he  already  possessed  the nus"
imperium,  which  required  no  further  instrument  to  give  him
the  control  of  the  legions  and  provinces ;  the  tribunitian  and
proconsular  power  had  been  granted  on  a  previous  occasion,
and  the  prerogatives  of  the  consular  were  sufficiently  under-
stood without  a  distinct  and  formal  recognition. The  prin-
cipate  was,  perhaps,  virtually  conferred  without  a  special
act,  by  tacitly  yielding  the  first  voice  in  the  senate,  while
the  popular  suffrage,  in  which  lay  the  disposal  of  the  chief
pontificate,  might  be  easily  taken  for  granted. The  time
had  come  when,  whatever  artifices  might  still  be  required
for  the  management  of  the  senate,  the  chief  of  the  state
need  keep  terms  no  longer  with  the  popular  assemblies. The
appointment  of  the  consuls,  with  the  forms  of
voting,  was  noAV  finally  withdrawn  from  the  cen- SpriralgM1"
tones,  and  therewith  the  last  frail  remnant  of  the ^^p10
political  privileges  of  the  Roman  people  was  sub-
stantially abolished. The emperor  henceforth  nominated

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  11-13. ;  Suet.  Tib.  24. 5  Comp.  Dion,  Ivii.  2.  That  there  was
no  regular  decree  on  this  occasion,  as  was  usual  in  later  times,  for  conferring
the  imperial  prerogatives,  appears  from  the  fact  that  Tacitus  and  Suetonius  arc
not  agreed  as  to  the  turn  the  discussion  ultimately  took :  the  former  gives  us
to  understand  that  Tiberius  broke  up  the  meeting  without  any  specific  declara-
tion of  assuming  the  empire ;  but  Suetoniu3  says,  expressly,  that  he  agreed  to
undertake  the  charge,  at  least  for  a  season.

vol.  v. — 2

18  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  U.

four  candidates,  and  allowed  the  senate  simply  to  make
choice  of  two  among  them :  but  the  aspirants  for  honour
were  no  longer  subjected  to  the  humiliation  of  suing,  or  the
pain  of  being  refused,  and  the  express  recommendation  of
the  emperor  himself  was  considered  as  in  fact  authoritative.
The  senators  accepted  with  gratitude  the  relief  from  a  deli-
cate and  invidious  responsibility,  and  the  people  submitted
to  the  change  with  scarce  an  audible  murmur.1

While  the  supreme  power  was  thus  quietly  changing
hands  at  the  centre  of  the  empire,  events  of  no  little  mo-
ment were  happening  on  the  frontiers,  where  the

Discontent  of  rr  o ^

the  legions  in seeds of  future revolutions were sown by a

Pannonia.  .  .  ...

mutinous  soldiery.  The  insubordination  which
Caesar  had  experienced  more  than  once  among  his  own  le-
gionaries, was  the  effect  of  his  indiscriminate  enlistments,
and  the  licentious  principles  he  had  instilled  into  his  follow-
ers. The  three  legions  which  now  occupied  Pannonia  under
Junius  Bkesus  were  composed  in  a  great  measure  of  recruits
promiscuously  levied  to  repress  the  recent  revolt.  Though
among  these  many  veterans  were  mingled,  it  seems  impossi-
ble that  the  complaints  they  put  forth  of  having  served
thirty  or  even  forty  years  without  obtaining  their  discharge,
could  have  been  true  of  any  large  number.  Harassed  as  the
actual  veterans  may  have  been  by  a  service  protracted,  under
the  necessities  of  the  times,  far  beyond  the  legitimate  period,
we  may  conjecture  that  the  turbulence  of  the  recent  levies
had  given  an  impulse  to  their  dissatisfaction.  They  com-
plained of  their  wounds  and  privations ;  of  the  intolerable
harshness  of  camp  discipline ;  of  the  meagreness  of  their
daily  dole ;  of  the  miserable  and  distant  recompense  of
allotments  on  a  barbarous  frontier.  The  few  days  of  rest  or
rejoicing  which  the  legate  allowed  them,  on  the  confirma-

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  15.:  "Turn  primum  a  campo  comitia  ad  Patres  translata
sunt,"  etc. ;  but  at  the  close  of  this  book  (c.  81.)  the  same  author  remarks,  in
apparent  contradiction  to  this  statement,  "  De  comitiis  consularibus,  quae  turn
primum  illo  prineipe  ac  deinceps  fuere,  vix  quidquam  firmare  ausim,"  etc.  The
subject  will  be  treated  more  fully  in  a  subsequent  chapter.

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  19

tion  of  the  empire  to  Tiberius,  were  occupied  by  the  most
ardent  spirits  in  fanning  the  sparks  of  sedition ;  yet  it  must
be  observed,  that  among  all  their  murmurs  they  never  pre-
tended that  the  death  of  Augustus  released  them  from  their
legitimate  subjection  to  his  associate.1

The  authority  of  Bkesus  was  soon  overthrown.  The
troops  insisted  that  the  term  of  their  service  should  be  defi-
nitely fixed  at  sixteen  years.2 They  demanded

J  •  "  Drusus  is  sent

also  a  further  advance  in  the  rate  of  the  legion-  to  quell  the
ary's  pay,  which  Julius  Caesar  had  already  raised
to  double  the  earlier  standard  of  the  republic.3  The  legatus
was  compelled  to  send  his  son  to  Rome  as  the  bearer  of  these
requisitions,  which  wore  the  character  of  a  defiance,  for  the
Roman  in  the  camp  lost  every  right  of  the  freeman  ;  his
only  patron  was  the  tribune  in  the  Forum,  his  sole  means  of
redress  his  vote  in  the  Comitia.  Nor  while  awaiting  a  reply
from  the  emperor  and  senate,  did  the  soldiers  return  frankly
to  obedience.  Conscious  of  the  crime  of  indiscipline,  they
broke  into  frenzies  of  anger  and  jealousy,  struck  or  slew
their  centurions,  and  insulted  their  commanders.  Drusus,
being  dispatched  promptly  with  some  praetorian  cohorts  to
recover  their  fidelity,  found  them  in  open  mutiny,  occupying
their  camp  and  drawing  their  rations,  but  refusing  every
work  and  exercise. The  prince  was  furnished  with  no  defi-

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  16.

2  Hitherto  the  term  of  service  for  the  legionary  was  twenty  years,  and  six-
teen for  the  praetorian,  the  name  by  which  the  guards  of  the  emperor's  person,
and  tent  or  palace,  came  now  to  be  distinguished.  But  even  at  the  end  of  that
period  Augustus  had  introduced  the  custom  of  exauctoratio,  by  which  the  le-
gionaries were  relieved  from  some  of  the  more  severe  duties  of  the  service,  but
still  retained  under  their  colours,  instead  of  missio  or  complete  discharge.

3  The  soldiers  demanded  the  denarius  per  day  instead  of  the  ten  ases.  The
denarius  had  been  raised  to  the  value  of  sixteen,  or,  as  some  say,  twelve  ases,
and  such  was  apparently  the  increased  demand.  But  if  I  understand  Pliny
rightly,  this  point  they  never  actually  gained :  the  denarius  continuing  always
to  be  counted  as  ten  ases  in  military  payments.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxiii.  3. :  "  Dena-
rium  in  militari  stipendio  semper  pro  x  assibus  datum."  But  the  whole  ques-
tion is  involved  in  great  difficulty.  See  Lipsius,  Excurs.  vi.  and  vii.  in  Tac.  and
the  notes  of  Walther,  Hitter,  and  other  commentators.

20  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  14.

nite  instructions ;  his  father  had  withheld  from  him  the
requisite  authority  for  conceding  demands  which  he  still
hoped  to  evade.  The  soldiers  were  infuriated  at  this  disap-
pointment. Drusus  was  actually  attacked  by  tumultuary
hands  and  with  difficulty  rescued  ;  night  intervened,  hut  the
morning  seemed  about  to  dawn  on  the  entire  defection  of
three  legions.  Suddenly  the  moon  became  eclipsed,  and  be-
fore it  emerged  from  the  ominous  shadow,  clouds  had  gath-
ered in  the  sky,  and  seemed,  to  the  affrighted  and  ignorant
multitude,  to  threaten  its  total  extinction.  The  men  were
struck  with  dismay ;  and  while  the  fit  of  fear  or  remorse
was  upon  them,  Drusus  seized  the  moment  for  promises  and
caresses.  In  return  for  some  vague  assurances  of  redress
from  the  emperor,  he  engaged  them  to  surrender  their  ring-
leaders, on  whom  he  inflicted  the  full  vengeance  of  outraged
discipline,  with  the  consent  and  approbation  of  the  fickle
multitude.1

Almost  at  the  same  moment,  and  from  similar  motives  of
discontent,  a  mutiny  had  broken  out  also  among  the  legions

on  the  Rhine.  The  danger  was  far  greater  in
tk>Snamongathe  tms  case  tban  in  tbe  other;  the  army  of  the
Ehlne!  °n  the Rhenish  frontier  numbered  not  less  than  eight

legions,  posted  in  two  divisions  in  the  Upper  and
Lower  Germania  ;  and  the  direction  of  the  entire  force  was
intrusted  to  Germanicus,  as  commanding  in  chief  through-
out the  whole  province  of  Gaul.  Not  only  did  the  muti-
neers clamour  for  higher  pay  and  more  indulgent  treatment ;
but  the  legions  of  the  lower  province  proclaimed  that  they
would  carry  the  youthful  Csesar  in  triumph  to  Rome,  and
gird  him  with  the  sword  of  their  deceased  leader.  They
obtained  complete  mastery  over  their  officers,  and  the  legate
Aulus  Ctecina ;  and  their  outbreak  was  scarcely  kept  in
check  by  the  yet  undecided  attitude  of  the  upper  division,
which  C.  Silius  still  restrained  from  open  mutiny. Germani-

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  1 6-30. :  "  Promptura  ad  asperiora  ingcniuin  Druso  erat :  vo-
catos  Vibulenum  et  rercennium  interfici  jubot."  But  could^any  commander
have  done  otherwise  ?

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  21

cus  was  absent  at  Lugdunum,  where  he  was  presiding  over
the  census  of  the  Gaulish  states.  Here  he  received  the
news  of  the  late  emperor's  death,  with  orders  from  Tiberius
to  tender  to  the  provincials  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  the
elect  of  the  senate.  This  duty  he  was  intent  on  discharging,
without  apprehension  of  any  military  outbreak,  when  the
report  of  the  state  of  affairs  in  his  camp  interrupted  his
proceedings.  The  soldiers  had  assailed  their  officers  with
violence  ;  they  had  murdered  tribunes  and  centurions ;  obe-
dience was  at  an  end,  and  the  legate  himself  was  constrained
to  deliver  into  their  hands  the  objects  of  their  bitterest
hatred.1

The  Roman  quarters  among  the  Ubii  had  been  for  some
days  in  a  state  of  confusion  and  anarchy,  when  Germanicus
arrived  and  threw  himself  boldly  into  the  midst.
The  young  Cresar  was  personally  adored  by  the j™^
soldiers ;  nor,  had  it  been  otherwise,  were  anv  of  L"gdun»m  t°

'  >  J  suppress  it.

them  prepared  to  discard  the  authority  of  a  scion
of  the  imperial  house.  On  his  appearance  among  them  they
cast  themselves  at  his  feet,  imploring  his  sympathy  with
their  just  complaints,  the  most  aged  of  the  veterans  seizing
his  hands,  it  was  said,  and  thrusting  them,  as  if  to  kiss  them,
within  their  lips,  that  he  might  feel  their  toothless  gums,  and
learn  to  appreciate  the  length  of  their  ill-requited  services.
Some  showed  him  the  scars  of  their  wounds,  others  the
marks  of  the  centurion's  vine-rod.  The  men  soon  lashed
themselves  into  fresh  fury,  and  with  loud  cries  adjured  Ger-
manicus to  lead  them  straight  to  Rome,  and  assume  the  em-
pire under  their  protection.  The  young  Caesar  shrank  with
horror  from  such  a  treason,  and  possibly  they  might  in  their
frenzy  have  done  violence  to  his  person  had  not  his  attend-
ants snatched  him  hastily  from  their  grasp.  But  meanwhile
their  emissaries  were  soliciting  the  adhesion  of  the  legions
of  the  Upper  Germania,  stationed  at  Moguntiacum ;  and
while  undecided  as  to  their  ultimate  objects,  they  already
talked  of  commencing  their  rebellion  by  the  plunder  of  the

1  Tac  Ann.  L  31,  32. ;  Suet  7».  25. ;  Dion,  Ivii.  5.

22  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  14.

Ubii  and  the  cities  of  Gaul.  The  military  chiefs  were  well
aware  that  this  dissolution  of  discipline  on  the  frontier
would  bring  the  Germans  immediately  across  it,  and  the
civil  war  which  must  ensue  between  the  faithful  allies  of
Rome  and  her  own  insurgent  children  would  be  aggravated
by  foreign  invasion,  and  possibly  by  provincial  revolt.  As-
sembled in  the  imperator's  tent,  they  hastily  concerted  an
offer  of  terms  to  the  soldiers,  to  which  they  pledged  the
name  of  Tiberius  himself.  Besides  the  required  revision  of
the  term  of  service,  ample  donatives  in  money  were  prom-
ised, as  soon  as  the  legions  should  return  to  whiter  quarters.
This  was  not  enough.  The  insurgents  demanded  that  the
stipulated  sum  should  be  paid  down  on  the  instant,  and  the
private  coffers  of  Germanicus  and  his  officers,  as  well  as  of
the  emperor  himself,  were  ransacked  to  satisfy  them.1

This  sacrifice  was  after  all  unavailing. The  appearance

of  envoys  from  the  senate,  charged  to  examine  the  soldiers'

demands,  was  the  signal  for  a  fresh  disturbance ;

of  Germanic!^ for  the  alarm  quickly  spread  that  the  concessions

and  his  success  -,  , .  ..  -,  .  ,

in  quelling  the  made  on  the  spur  of  momentary  danger  would
mu  my.  ^.^  ^  ^e  ratified  on  maturer  deliberation. The

more  violent  of  the  mutineers  persuaded  their  comrades  to
refuse  all  accommodation,  and  so  formidable  was  the  atti-
tude now  assumed,  that  Germanicus  was  forced  to  surrender
the  eagles  to  the  keeping  of  the  rebellious  legionaries,  and
in  fact  to  relinquish  the  command.  At  most  he  could  only
secure  a  retreat  for  the  envoys,  on  whom  the  fury  of  the  in-
surgents was  about  to  fall,  and  at  the  same  time  for  his  wife
and  children,  whom  he  was  anxious  to  remove  to  a  place  of
safety.  Agrippina,  a  woman  of  masculine  spirit  and  devoted
to  her  husband,  could  hardly  be  persuaded  to  quit  his  side.
When  she  at  last  took  leave,  with  a  few  female  attendants,
carrying  in  her  arms  her  infant  child  Caius,  the  pet  and
playfellow  of  the  soldiers,  the  feelings  of  the  spectators  were
moved  to  remorse.  Germanicus  seized  the  moment  to  remind
them  of  the  claims  of  his  own  family  upon  them,  and  of  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  34-36.

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  23

love  they  had  borne  to  his  father  Drusus ;  nor  did  he  fail  to
recall  to  remembrance  the  glories  of  Augustus,  the  victories
of  Tiberius,  and  the  spirit  with  which  the  immortal  Julius
had  quelled  the  mutiny  of  his  soldiers  by  addressing  them  as
citizens.  This  last  passionate  appeal  proved  successful.  The
insurgents  fell  on  their  knees,  and  implored  him  to  punish
the  guilty,  to  spare  the  penitent,  and  lead  the  pardoned  host
directly  against  the  enemy.  They  conjured  him  to  recall  his
wife  and  child,  and  not  leave  them  as  hostages  in  the  land  of
the  Gauls,  but  retain  them  under  the  safeguard  of  the  Ro-
man legions.  Nor  did  they  fail  to  deliver  of  their  own
accord  to  the  punishment  of  the  axe  and  rod  those  whom
they  regarded  as  their  ringleaders,  whom  their  officers  gladly
left  it  to  themselves  to  point  but.  The  ferocious  zeal  with
which  each  offender  denounced  such  as  he  chose  to  think
more  guilty  than  himself  presents  a  fearful  picture  of  human
passion.1

When  we  meet  among  the  scions  of  the  imperial  house
with  one  described  as  eminently  virtuous  and  noble,  we  must
prepare  to  hear  that  his  career  was  melancholy,
that  his  promise  ended  in  disappointment,  and  Qermanicuf
his  death  was  premature.  Such  a  death  at  least
doubly  gilds  his  virtues,  while  it  may  anticipate  the  develop-
ment of  crimes  or  vices.  Of  all  the  chiefs  of  Roman  his-
tory, none  has  been  represented  in  fairer  colours  than  the  ill-
fated  Germanicus.  We  have  seen  already  that  he  was  the
nephew  of  Tiberius,  being  the  son  of  the  gallant  Drusus,
whose  title  he  was  permitted  to  inherit,  by  a  daughter  of  the
triumvir  Antonius.2  Augustus  had  connected  him  still  more
closely  with  himself,  by  uniting  him  to  the  child  of  Agrippa
by  his  own  daughter  Julia.  Adopted  by  Tiberius,  he  was
p laced  on  the  same  line  of  succession  as  his  cousin  Drusus,
to  whom  he  was  two  or  three  years  senior ;  and  after  the
deaths  of  Caius  and  Lucius  Caesar,  who  had  shone  so  bi-iefly
as  twin  stars  in the  firmament,  the  fortunes  of  the two

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  37-44.

5  Suet.  Claud.  1. ;  Calig.  1.;  Tlut.  Anton.  87.

24  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  14.

adopted  brothers  seemed  to  rise  together  in  auspicious  con-
junction.1 Whatever  brilliant  future  might  be  in  store  for
Germanicus,  the  Romans,  if  we  may  believe  their  posthu-
mous testimony  to  his  merits,  were  fully  persuaded  that  he
deserved  it.  His  natural  abilities  had  been  carefully  culti-
vated. He  had  been  trained  equally  in  the  art  of  war  and
the  exercise  of  civil  employment.  His  first  laurels  had  been
gained  in  his  twenty-second  year,  in  the  wars  of  Paimonia
and  Dalmatia,  the  successful  issue  of  which  was  in  a  great
measure  ascribed  to  his  energy  and  conduct.2  In  the  year
765  he  had  been  summoned  to  the  consulship,  and  in  the
highest  rank  of  magistracy,  young  as  he  was,  his  country-
men had  marked  in  him  all  the  skill  in  affairs  which  is  com-
monly attained  only  by  experience.  The  government  of  the
Gaulish  provinces,  too  extensive  a  command  to  be  entitled  a
mere  proconsulate,  followed  on  the  expiration  of  his  func-
tions in  the  city ;  and  there,  at  the  head  of  eight  legions,
before  the  most  formidable  opponents  of  the  Roman  power,
he  stood  in  the  eyes  of  the  soldiers  and  provincials  as  little
less  than  an  emperor  himself.  The  large  training  of  the
highest  Roman  education  had  fitted  him,  amidst  these  public
avocations,  to  take  a  graceful  interest  in  literature.  His
compositions  in  Greek  and  Latin  verse  were  varied,  and
perhaps  more  than  respectable  for  school  exercises,  with
which  only  they  should  be  compared.2 Nor  did  he  neglect

1  Germanicus,  born  in  September  739  (see  above,  ch.  xxxviii.),  was  now,  at
the  close  of  767,  in  his  twenty-ninth  year.  The  date  of  the  birth  of  Drusus  is
not  accurately  known ;  it  was  probably  a  short  time  before  the  separation  of
Tiberius  from  his  mother  Vipsania,  in  742.

2  Dion,  lvi.  15. See  above.

3  The  Greek  comedy  of  Germanicus  (Suet.  Calig.  3.)  was  probably  a  mere
scholastic  imitation,  such  as  was  generally  the  character  of  the  Greek  verses  of
the  young  Roman  nobles.  The  translation  of  Aratus  which  is,  I  think  properly,
ascribed  to  him,  was  a  tour  de  force,  to  which  we  can  hardly  attach  any  practi-
cal use,  though  even  Cicero  occupied  himself  in  a  similar  version  of  the  poet
of  astronomy.  But  Ovid  solicits  his  patronage  for  the  most  learned  of  his  own
works,  at  a  time  when  such  applications  were  not  merely  compliments.  Fast.
i.  init. Comp.  Ex.  Pont.  iv.  8.  67.

A.  U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  25

the  practice  of  oratory,  which  he  employed,  as  was  always
specially  recorded  of  those  whose  memory  the  Romans  de-
lighted to  honour,  in  the  defence  rather  than  the  prosecution
of  the  accused.1  His  manners  were  eminently  civil  both  at
home  and  abroad,  such  as  became  the  son  of  the  man  who,
according  to  the  fond  belief  of  the  citizens,  would  have  re-
stored the  commonwealth ;  and  while  he  comported  himself
towards  his  countrymen  as  an  equal,  his  demeanour  to  for-
eigners and  allies  was  affable  and  condescending.  In  the
camp  his  behaviour  was  in  striking  contrast  both  with  the
reserve  of  Augustus  and  the  mal-address  of  Tiberius.  He
lived  freely  among  his  soldiers,  whose  humours  he  sought  to
natter,  like  the  first  and  greatest  of  the  Caesars,  by  sympathy
and  kindness.  When  he  explored  his  men's  sentiments  on
the  eve  of  a  perilous  undertaking,  by  traversing  their  quar-
ters disguised  at  night,  he  might  hear  his  own  merits  made
the  theme  of  their  conversation,  and  assure  himself  of  the
confidence  they  reposed  in  his  valour  and  fortune.2  His  pop-
ularity with  all  classes,  especially  with  the  soldiers,  was  fully
shared  by  his  consort.  The  greatest  praise  they  could  be-
stow on  a  woman  was  to  liken  her  to  the  Roman  matrons  of
a  hallowed  antiquity,  and  to  bless  her  for  her  love  to  her
husband,  and  the  fertility  which  they  hailed  as  its  surest
token.3

The  strong  contrast  which  the  character  of  Germanicus
thus  presented  to  that  of  his  uncle  might  have  given  cause  for
jealousy  and  distrust  even  in  a  private  family :  jcaiousy  of  Ti-
bet ween  members  of  a  ruling  dynasty,  the  course benus-

1  Suet,  1.  c. ;  Dion,  hi.  26. ;  Ovid,  Fast.  i.  21. :

"  Quae  sit  enim  culti  facundia  scnsimus  oris,
Civica  pro  trepidis  cum  tulit  anna  reis."

3  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  13. The  occasion  will  be  specified  below.

s  Agrippina  bore  her  husband  nine  children,  of  whom  three  died  in  infancy,
the  others,  three  sons  and  as  many  daughters,  survived  their  father,  and  will
all  find  a  place  in  these  pages.  Suet.  Calif).  7.  With  regard  to  one  who  died
in  childhood,  a  pleasing  trait  is  recorded  of  Augustus :  "Insigni  festivitate,
eojnfl  effigiem  habitn  Cupidinis  in  eede  Capitolinffi  Veneris  Livia  dedicavit,  Au-
gustus in  cubieulo  suo  positam,  quoliescunque  introiret,  cxosculabatur."

26  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  14.

and  succession  of  which  were  established  on  known  and
long-respected  principles,  it  would  have  led  no  doubt  to
estrangement  and  mutual  dislike ;  but  the  misfortune  of  Ti-
berius and  his  nephew  lay  in  the  vagueness  of  the  title  by
which  the  one  enjoyed  power,  and  the  other  might  be  ex-
pected to  aspire  to  it.  The  claim  of  Julius  Caesar  to  reign
over  the  Romans  was  emphatically  that  of  the  worthiest.
He  founded  his  usurpation  on  the  virtual  presumption  that
the  republic  required  a  chief,  and  he  was  himself  the  fittest
to  become  such.  It  was  the  aim  of  Augustus,  of  which  he
never  lost  sight  for  a  moment,  to  strengthen  his  human  right
as  the  heir  of  Julius  by  the  divine  right,  to  which  he  also
pretended,  of  moral  fitness.  This  human  right,  if  I  may  so
call  it,  of  inheritance  might  be  strengthened  in  the  third  de-
scent ;  but  Tiberius,  painfully  alive  to  his  own  deficiencies,
and  conscious  of  no  personal  claim  to  the  reverence  of  his
countrymen,  felt  that  the  divine  right  no  longer  pertained  to
him,  and  was  constantly  harassed  by  the  apprehension  that
the  Romans,  still  looking  for  the  worthiest  to  reign  over
them,  would  turn  from  him  to  the  younger  scion  of  the  wor-
thiest of  Roman  houses.  Every  despot  is  discontented  at
being  outshone  by  the  rising  glories  of  his  presumptive  suc-
cessor ;  but  few  have  the  excuse  of  the  unfortunate  Tiberius,
who  felt  that  every  laurel  placed  on  the  brow  of  Germanicus
constituted  a  claim,  not  to  succeed  him  on  the  throne,  but
to  eject  him  from  it.  Other  usurpers  have  stepped  at  once
within  the  circle  of  admitted  principles  of  descent.  The
subjects  of  a  Napoleon  or  a  Cromwell  were  familiar  with  the
idea  of  dynastic  sovereignty  ;  but  it  was  otherwise  with  the
children  of  the  old  Roman  republic.  The  Caesars  had  every
rule  and  principle  of  monarchy  to  create  ;  and  it  was  not  till
they  had  established  the  rights  of  legitimacy,  that  the  em-
perors could  feel  the  personal  security,  which  was  the  best
guarantee  for  their  temperate  exercise  of  power.  The  mutiny
of  the  German  legions  revealed  to  Tiberius  a  secret  of  fatal
significance. The  cries  of  the  legionaries  Ccesar  Germanicus

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE.  EMPIRE.  27

will  not  endure  to  be  a  subject,  confirmed  the  presentiment  of
his  own  self-disparaging  conscience.1

After  all,  this  distrust  of  his  own  ahilities,  which  were
certainly  considerable,  was  the  great  and  fatal  defect  in  the
character  of  the  self-tormentor.  The  state  of  pu-
pilage in  which  he  had  been  held  by  Augustus  f0e J^ly^hl
may  account  perhaps  for  this  self-disparagement,  e,^jte^nted
and  for  the  meanness  with  which  he  ultimately
threw  himself  on  the  support  of  a  favourite  far  less  able
than  himself.  The  trifling  results  of  his  own  last  campaign
in  Germany  made  him  the  more  jealous  of  the  plans  now
urged  by  Germanicus  for  the  entire  subjugation  of  the  inso-
lent victors  of  Teutoburg.  Yet  it  was  more  than  ever  neces-
sary to  enrploy  the  discontented  legions,  who  had  placed
themselves  without  reserve  under  their  young  Caesar's  orders,
and  to  precipitate  them  headlong  on  the  Elbe  was  the  surest
way  of  averting  a  march  upon  the  Tiber.  The  soldiers  them-
selves were  burning  for  occupation ;  they  were  anxious  to
wash  out  in  blood  the  stain  of  mutiny,  which  ever  left  a  dark
and  burning  spot  on  the  conscience  of  the  Roman  legionary.

During  the  crisis  of  these  military  outbreaks,  the  em-
peror's conduct  was  marked  by  consummate  artifice  and
caution. He  successfully  evaded  binding  him-

.„  .  .,.,  ,.-.,.  His  artifice  in

sell  to  any  precise  stipulation  by  which  his  su-  dealing  with
preme  authority  could  be  compromised,  while
he  allowed  his  son  and  nephew  to  treat  with  the  mutineers,
and  amuse  them  with  specious  hopes  beyond  their  power  to
confirm.2  His  advisers  at  Rome  urged  him  to  go  in  person
and  quell  the  sedition  by  the  majesty  of  his  presence,  as,
until  the  latest  periods  of  his  reign,  Augustus,  on  every
great  emergency,  had  quitted  the  city  for  the  provinces.

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  31.:  "Magna  spe  fore  ut  Germanicus  Caesar  imperium  alte-
rius  pati  nequiret."

3  The  cry  for  a  sixteen  years'  service  seems  to  have  been  listened  to,  hut
Tiherius  soon  afterwards  took  occasion  to  disregard  his  concession,  and  fixed
twenty  years  for  the  regular  legionary  term.  Tac.  Ann.  i.  78.:  "Ita  proxinue
Beditionis  male  consulta  ....  abolita  in  postcrum."

28  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  14.

Always  professing  to  be  about  to  take  some  decided  step,
Tiberius  continued  to  allege  excuses  for  indecision  and  inac-
tivity. He  was  aware  that  at  Rome  he  was  supported  by
the  name  and  influence  of  the  senate,  which  as  a  body  was
entirely  devoted  to  the  imperial  government.  In  the  camp,
on  the  contrary,  he  knew  not  on  whom  he  might  depend,  or
how  far  the  traditions  of  military  allegiance  still  retained
their  potency.  By  remaining  within  the  precincts  of  the
city  he  could  escape  direct  comparison  with  Drusus  and
Germanicus,  from  which  he  shrank  with  the  instinct  of  self-
distrust  ;  and  there  he  was  under  the  protection  of  the
armed  force  of  the  capital,  which  at  the  moment  of  assuming
power  he  had  bound  to  his  service  by  the  most  solemn  for-
mulas. Moreover,  his  own  jealous  nature  suggested  that  to
whichever  of  the  two  camps,  the  Pannonian  or  the  German,
he  should  repair,  he  might  awaken  the  jealousy  of  the  other.
Finally  he  argued,  it  rather  befitted  the  majesty  of  the  im-
perial power  to  judge  of  the  complaints  of  its  subjects  at  a
distance,  than  to  wrangle  with  them  on  the  spot.  Neverthe-
less, to  break  the  force  of  the  petulant  murmurs  which  as-
sailed him,  Tiberius  pretended  to  have  resolved  to  quit
Rome  for  the  frontiers,  and  caused  preparations  to  be  made
for  his  anticipated  departure.  But  first  the  winter  season,
and  when  that  was  past,  the  pressure  of  business  at  home,
still  furnished  him  with  pleas  for  delay.  His  own  ministers
and  intimates  were  long  deceived  as  to  his  real  intentions,
the  citizens  still  longer,  and  longest  of  all  the  provinces  them-
selves.1 Meanwhile  he  was  anxious  to  court  the  good  opin-
ion of  the  senators  by  the  general  conduct  of  his  administra-
tion at  home.  In  matters  of  personal  concern  he  rivalled  and
even  exceeded  the  moderation  of  Augustus  him-

Poliey  of  Ti-  ,  .  °

berius  in  the sell He  interposed  with  specious  words  to  re-
sonate. .  ..  .  ..

strain  the  extravagant  compliments  showered  on

him  by  the  nobles,  and  checked  the  servile  impatience  with

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  47. :  "  Cetcrum,  lit  jam  jamque  iturus,  legit  comites,  conqui-
sivit  impedimenta,  adornavit  naves :  mox  hiemem  aut  negotia  varie  causatus,
primo  prudentes,  dein  vulgum,  diutissime  provincias  fefellit."

A.U.  767.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  29

which  they  pressed  forward  to  swear  obedience  to  his  enact-
ments, not  only  past  hut  future.  In  the  senate  he  suffered
all  men  to  discuss  his  measures  with  freedom,  and  propose
motions  of  their  own,  on  which  he  was  often  among  the  last
to  declare  his  sentiments.  He  was  proud  of  the  appellation
of  Prince,  but  would  not  endure  to  be  addressed  as  Impe-
rator  or  Dominus.1  "While  he  encouraged  the  appointment
of  priests,  rituals,  and  games  in  honour  of  his  deified  prede-
cessor, he  vehemently  repelled  the  preposterous  adoration
proffered  to  himself  by  citizens  or  provincials.  Yet  the  mod-
eration of  Tiberius  was  simply  politic,  and  was  tinged  by  no
ray  of  generosity  or  clemency.  The  hapless  Ovid  he  suf-
fered still  to  languish  in  the  exile  from  which  neither  en-
treaties nor  flatteries  availed  to  release  him.2  The  lapse  of
fifteen  years  had  not  softened  his  spite  against  his  miserable
consort,  who  was  now  treated  with  even  increased  rigour  in
her  confinement  at  Rhegium,  till  she  sank  under  her  sorrows
and  possibly  under  the  most  cruel  privations,  in  the  first
months  of  her  husband's  elevation.3  Her  paramour,  Sem-
pronius  Gracchus,  retained  in  an  island  off  the  coast  of
Africa  during  the  lifetime  of  Augustus,  was  slain  by  one  of
the  earliest  mandates  of  his  successor.  The  only  trait  of  gen-
tleness the  new  ruler  exhibited  was  in  his  behaviour  to  his
mother,  Avhom  he  never  ceased  to  regard  with  respect  and
even  with  awe,  allowing  himself  to  be  guided  or  thwarted
by  her  to  the  last,  with  the  docility  of  his  childish  years.4
Nevertheless,  though  he  suffered  Livia  to  assume  great  au-
thority over  himself,  he  strictly  forbade,  as  a  Roman  matron,
her  taking  any  ostensible  share  in  public  affairs,  and  curtailed

1  Dion,  lvii.  7,  8.

2  The  date  of  Ovid's  death,  "  set.  60,"  may  range  between  April  770  and
April  771.

3  Tac.  Ann.  i.  58.  The  death  of  the  elder  Julia  is  placed  by  this  writer
within  the  year  767,  which  embraced  little  more  than  three  months  of  the  new
principate.  Yet  he  speaks  of  her  death  as  the  result  of  the  long  and  deliber-
ate severities  of  the  new  emperor :  "  Inopia  ac  tabe  longa  percmit,  obscuram
fore  necem  longinquitate  exilii  ratus."

4  Dion,  lvii.  12.

30  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  [A.  D.  U.

the  excessive  honours  the  senate  would  have  lavished  upon
her.

But  we  must  return  from  Rome  to  the  frontiers  once
more,  with  the  histoi-ian  Tacitus,  and  follow  the  culminating
Germanicus  star  °f  tne  ^ero  Germanicus.  No  sooner  had  he
gions  across  the  quelled  the  sedition  in  his  camp,  than  the  young
Khine.  Caesar,  postponing  to  a  fitter  moment  the  busi-

ness of  the  census  at  Lugdunum,  transported  his  impatient
soldiers  across  the  Rhine,  and  ]:>romised  them  an  opportunity
of  effacing  the  stain  of  disaffection  in  the  blood  of  the  na-
tional enemies.  The  slaughter  of  Varus  was  yet  unavenged,
and  the  last  incursion  of  Tiberius  had  failed  to  restore  the
authority  of  the  empire  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river.  An
attempt,  indeed,  had  been  made  to  define  the  frontier  of  a
Transrhenane  province  between  the  Lippe  and  the  Ruhr  by
the  line  of  the  Csesian  forest,  and  a  supplemental  rampart  of
wood  and  earth ;  but  this  work  had  been  left  incomplete,  and
Germanicus  now  cut  his  way  through  it  without  hesitation.1
He  was  resolved  to  place  the  bulwarks  of  the  Roman  empire
much  further  to  the  east.  Dividing  his  forces  into  four  corps
(wedges  the  Romans  called  them,  and  the  name  was  well
applied  to  the  service  in  which  they  were  employed,  of
breaking  their  way  through  eveiy  obstacle,  and  splitting  to
the  heart  the  vast  region  before  them),  he  swept  a  large  ex-
tent of  territory  with  fire  and  sword,  and  startled  from  their
lairs  the  warriors  of  many  formidable  nations.  The  Marsi,
whom  he  first  reached,  were  taken  unprepared,  and  made  to
suffer  severely ;  the  Bructeri,  Tubantes,  and  Usipetes  re-
treated before  him,  or  evaded  his  onset,  and  wide  as  he
spread  his  battalions  he  could  not  force  them  to  join  battle.
Harassed  on  the  flanks  and  rear,  it  was  only  by  a  great
effort  that  he  succeeded  in  shaking  off  the  enemy  whom  he

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  50. :  "  Propero  agmine  sylvam  Caesiam,  limitemque  a  Tiberio
coeptum,  scindit."  Of  the  Csesian  forest  nothing  is  known  except  from  this
passage.  It  extended  probably  along  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine  between  the
streams  mentioned  in  the  text,  and  the  lines  commenced  by  Tiberius  were  a
rampart  of  earth  and  palisades  beyond  it.

A.U.  T68.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  31

could  not  assail,  and  eventually  bringing  back  his  troops
with  no  great  loss  to  their  winter  quarters.  This  incursion,
it  must  be  remembered,  was  made  towards  the  close  of  the
year,  when  he  could  not  expect  to  obtain  any  considerable
results.  Tiberius,  it  is  said,  received  the  account  of  these
proceedings  with  mixed  feelings.  The  suppression  of  the
mutiny  relieved  him  from  anxiety ;  but  he  was  far  from  satis-
fied with  the  sacrifice,  as  he  deemed  it,  of  dignity,  and  the
compromise  of  state  principles  by  which  it  had  been  achiev-
ed.1 Nevertheless  he  consented  to  sanction  the  pledges  his
son  and  nephew  had  given  ;  and  in  addressing  the  senate  he
enlarged  on  the  merits  of  Germanicus,  while  he  affected  to
speak  with  modest  reserve  on  those  of  his  own  son  Drusus.
Nor  did  he  fail  to  crown  the  trifling  exploits  of  this  desul-
tory incursion  with  the  honour  of  a  triumph,  the  celebration
of  which,  however,  was  to  be  deferred  till  the  conclusion  of
the  war,  and  the  anticipated  conquest  of  Germany.

In  the  following  year,  a.  tj.  768,  Germanicus  recommenced
his  operations  at  an  earlier  season,  and  with  more  definite
plans.  He  had  equipped  a  force  of  eight  legions  Renewed  ope-
for  the  field,  with  perhaps  an  equal  number  of  %£&££*  °er'
auxiliaries  and  irregular  skirmishers  ;  four  of  A  D  15
these  legions  were  directed  to  cross  the  Rhine  A- r- T68-
from  the  great  camp  at  Vetera,  under  the  command  of  the
able  and  experienced  Csecina,  and  penetrate  into  the  territory
of  the  Cherusci ;  the  other  four  were  led  by  the  Ctesar  him-
self into  the  district  of  the  Taunus,  and  were  destined  to
keep  in  check  the  Chatti,  whose  powerful  confederation  Avas
ever  ready  to  harass  the  flank  of  a  Roman  armament  in  the
north,  or  even  to  seize  the  opportunity  •  of  invading  the
Gaulish  province.  The  resistance  opposed  by  the  Chatti  in
the  field  was  easily  overcome.  The  Romans  destroyed  their
stronghold,  known  by  the  name  of  Mattium ; and  having

1  Tacitus  adds  (Ann.  i.  52.)  that  he  was  mortified  by  the  glory  Germanicus
acquired.  It  is  possible  that  the  young  general's  popularity  at  Rome  caused
his  success  to  be  magnified  or  extolled  beyond  its  deserts.  It  was  evidently
far  too  slender  to  cause  in  itself  any  reasonable  ground  of  jealousy.

32  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  15.

thus  crippled  their  means  of  annoyance,  returned  to  the
Rhine,  to  cooperate  in  another  direction  with  the  expedition
of  Caecina.  The  short  interval  which  had  elapsed  since  the
defeat  of  Varus  had  sufficed  to  divide  the  victorious  Che-
rusci  into  hostile  parties.  Segestes,  the  favourer  of  the  Ro-
mans, besieged  hy  his  son-in-law  Arminius,  solicited  their
relief.  He  could  offer,  in  return  for  their  assistance,  many
spoils  of  the  Varian  disaster;  and  was  able  to  deliver  to
them  many  noble  women,  the  wives  or  children  of  the  chiefs
of  his  nation.  Among  these  was  Thusnelda,  his  own  daugh-
ter, the  consort  of  Arminius,  a  woman  of  high  spirit,  and
more  attached  to  the  cause  of  her  husband  than  that  of  her
parent.  These  important  hostages  were  transferred  to  the
other  side  of  the  Rhine.  The  wife  of  Arminius  was  sent  to
Ravenna  in  Italy,  where  the  child  she  bore  him  was  bred  in
the  fashions  of  his  captors,  and  lived,  we  are  told,  to  expe-
rience some  sport  of  adverse  fortune,  the  particulars  of  which
have  failed  to  descend  to  us.1  The  division  to  whom  this
easy  success  had  fallen  was  recalled  once  more  to  the  Roman
quarters,  and  Tiberius  himself  conferred  on  Germanicus  the
title  of  imperator.

Arminius  and  his  faithful  Cheruscans  were  exasperated  at
this  treachery  of  their  old  chief,  which  seems  indeed  to  have
Germanicus  re-  disgusted  even  those  among  them  who  would
of  the  slaughter*  nave  laboured  for  a  compromise  between  the
of  varus.  hostile  powers. The  defection  of  Inguiomerus,

a  kinsman  of  Arminius,  but  one  who  had  leant  hitherto  to
the  Roman  side,  convinced  Germanicus  that  there  was  no
longer  room  for  craft  and  diplomacy,  but  that  the  whole  of
north  Germany  must  be  thoroughly  subdued  by  the  sword,
or  finally  abandoned.  The  temporizing  policy  of  Augustus,
who  hoped  gradually  to  sap  the  spirit  of  liberty  by  the
charm  of  Roman  caresses,  must  now  be  regarded  as  a  failure ;

1  Tacitus  related  it  in  his  Annals ;  and  it  must  have  found  a  place  in  one
of  the  lost  portions  of  that  work,  probably  in  the  great  lacuna  in  the  fifth  book,
which  refers  to  the  date  u.  c.  784. :  "  Educatus  Ravenna;  puer  quo  mox  ludi-
brio  conflictatus  sit  in  tempore  memorabo." Ann.  i.  58.

A.U.  768.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  33

insult  and  injury  had  exasperated  the  German  chiefs  beyond
hope  of  reconciliation  ;  arms  alone  could  decide  whether  the
empire  should  be  extended  to  the  Elbe,  or  restrained  hence-
forth within  the  barrier  of  the  Rhine.  This  was  the  result
to  which  the  young  Caesar's  impetuosity  had  brought  affairs
on  the  frontier :  it  remained  to  be  seen  whether  the  same
ardent  spirit  could  effect  the  conquest  of  the  people  whom  it
had  so  thoroughly  alienated.  Towards  the  summer  his  plans
were  matured  for  a  simultaneous  attack  in  three  directions
on  the  Cherusci,  as  the  heads  of  a  general  confederacy.
Caecina  was  ordered  to  lead  his  force  through  the  country  of
the  Bructeri  to  the  Ems ;  a  body  of  cavalry  was  dispatched
by  a  more  northerly  route  along  the  borders  of  the  Frisii  to
the  same  destination ;  while  Germanicus  himself  embarked
with  four  legions,  to  coast  the  shores  of  the  continent,  and
enter  the  river  at  its  mouth.  The  three  corps  effected  their
junction  with  that  precision  to  which  the  Romans  had  now
attained  by  repeated  experiments,  having  swept  away  all
resistance  throughout  the  region  between  the  Lippe  and  the
ocean,  which  their  eagles  had  before  scarcely  penetrated.
Caecina  had  overthrown  the  Bructeri  in  an  encraffement  of
some  magnitude,  and  had  recovered  the  eagle  of  the  Nine-
teenth legion.  The  division  of  Germanicus  ascended  the
waters  of  the  Ems,  or  skirted  its  banks,  till  it  reached  the
forest  of  Teutoburg,  where  it  explored  the  vestiges  of  the
great  disaster  after  the  lapse  of  six  years,  and  traced  with
mournful  interest  the  remains  of  the  camps  of  Varus,  which
showed  by  their  diminished  size  and  unfinished  defences  the
failing  strength  and  decreasing  numbers  of  the  flying  force
at  each  successive  nightfall.  The  soldiers  collected  the
bones  of  their  slaughtered  countrymen,  still  ly-
ing, some  in  heaps  together,  others  scattered  at ours  paid  to  the

if.  t  '-i.!  r>  -i  remains  of  tho

unequal  distances,  and  paid  them  iuneral  rites, slaughtered

erecting  over  the  remains  a  monumental  barrow,

of  which  the  Caesar  himself  placed  the  first  sod.1 Advanc-

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  61,  02.:  "  Cupido  Caesarem  invadit  solvendi  suprema  tuiliti-
bus  ducique  ....  primum  exstruendo  tumulo  ccspitcm  Caesar  posuit."
vol.  v. — 3

34  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  15.

ing  further,  their  excited  feelings  were  relieved  by  an  oppor-
tunity for  action.  Arminius  had  availed  himself  of  the  re-
cesses of  his  forests  to  conceal  a  portion  of  his  forces,  and
the  Romans  were  too  eager  for  the  onset  to  take  due  precau-
tions against  surprise.  The  presence  of  mind  of  Germanicus
saved  them  from  a  severe  disaster ;  but  though  the  victory
remained  at  last  undecided,  it  became  prudent  to  withdraw
from  the  field,  and  retire  to  the  stations  already  fortified  on
the  Ems.  From  hence,  on  the  approach  of  the  winter  season,
they  were  led  back  to  the  frontier  by  the  same  routes  by
which  they  had  advanced.  Cfficina  making  his  way  through
woods  and  marshes  to  the  head  of  the  causeway  of  Domi-
tius,  was  attacked  by  Arminius,  and  reduced  to  perilous
straits.  Enclosed  within  his  lines  by  overpowering  numbers,
he  owed  his  deliverance  to  the  rashness  of  the  Germans,  who
once  repulsed  were  easily  thrown  into  confusion  by  a  dexter-
ous manoeuvre.  A  great  slaughter  ensued  among  them,
from  which  Arminius  made  his  escape  with  some  loss  of
honour.  The  Romans  thus  relieved  continued  their  home-
ward march,  and  arrived  in  safety  at  Vetera,  where  the  ru-
mour of  their  surprise  and  destruction  had  already  preceded
them.  The  residents  of  the  left  bank,  in  their  alarm,  would
have  broken  their  communications,  and  abandoned  the  fugi-
tives to  their  fate,  had  not  Agrippina  shown  herself  worthy
of  her  husband's  and  her  father's  courage.  Placing  herself
at  the  head  of  the  bridge,  from  which  she  refused  to  move,
she  awaited  the  return  of  the  remnant  of  the  rout ;  and  as
the  long  train  of  four  unbroken  legions  defiled,  with  ensigns
displayed,  before  her,  she  addressed  them  with  the  warmest
acknowledgment  of  their  deserts,  her  heart  swelling  with
wifelike  pride  and  emotion.1

The  return  of  Germanicus  himself  was  subjected  to  perils
of  another  kind,  and  clouded  with  serious  disasters.  He  had
descended  the  Ems  on  board  his  vessels ;  but  when  he  put

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  09.  The  writer  obtained  this  anecdote  from  the  elder  Pliny,
who  wrote  an  account  of  the  German  campaigns.  Vetera  Castra  is  the  mod-
ern Xanten,  nearly  opposite  to  Wesel. Mannert.  Oeogr.  iii.  431.

A.  U.  768.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  35

out  to  sea,  anions  the  shallows  of  the  Frisian

. 1 /»  t .  ,. ,  1  r,  Disaster  of  Ger-

coast,  he  found  it  necessary  to  lighten  them,  b  or  manicus  on  his
this  purpose  he  disembarked  two  legions,  charg-
ing them  to  conduct  their  march  homeward  within  sight  of
the  ocean.  Obeying  these  directions,  however,  too  closely,
a  great  number  of  the  men  were  lost  in  the  equinoctial  tides,
which  overflowed  the  level  shores,  and  swept  away  a  large
portion  of  their  stores  and  baggage.1  The  main  strength  of
the  legions  was  at  last  collected  once  more  in  winter  quar-
ters ;  but  to  recruit  them  to  their  proper  footing,  and  supply
their  full  complement  of  horses  and  equipments,  it  was  ne-
cessary to  put  under  requisition,  not  the  Rhenish  provinces
only,  but  the  whole  extent  of  Gaul,  and  even  Spain  and  Italy.
The  collection  of  means  of  transport  for  such  forces  as  the
Roman  generals  moved  year  by  year  in  these  regions,  over
wide  tracts  of  uncultivated  heath  or  woodland,  from  which
every  vehicle  and  beast  of  burden  was  swept  by  the  retreat-
ing natives,  must  have  taxed  to  the  utmost  the  resources  of
all  the  provinces  of  the  West.  The  more  we  study  the  his-
tory of  these  expensive  though  fruitless  campaigns,  the  more
shall  we  admire  the  powers  of  the  Roman  government,  the
effective  organization  of  every  branch  of  its  service,  and  the
well-trained  energies  of  all  its  officers,  from  the  imperator  to
the  centurion  and  primipile.2

It  appears  from  this  narrative  that  the  success  of  Ger-
manicus  in  these  forays  had  been  dubious  at  best.  He  had
left  no  more  solid  monument  of  his  prowess  than

.  1 1  -,  - __ .  ,  , Tiberius  mur-

ine barrow  erected  over  the  Varian  remains ;  and murs  at  the

this  the  natives  indignantly  levelled  as  soon  as of  these  cam-

his back  was  turned. No fortress had  been p

established  to  check  the  enemy's  return  into  the  tracts  from

which  he  had  been  for  a  moment  dislodged ;  no  roads  had

been  formed  to  assist  the  advance  of  a  future  expedition ;

the  savage  mode  of  warfare  which  the  invader  had  as  usual

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  70.

8  Tac.  Ann.  71.:  "Ad  supplenda  exercitus  damna  certavere  Galliac,  His-
paniac,  Italia ;  quod  cuique  promptum,  arma,  equos,  aurum,  oflfercntes."

36  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  15.

permitted  himself  in  ravaging  the  country  with  fire  and
sword,  had  made  it  not  less  untenable  by  Roman  settlers
than  by  its  native  possessors.  Tiberius  was  far  from  satisfied
with  these  results ;  and  while  he  suffered  the  citizens  to  re-
gard the  surrender  of  Segestes  and  the  capture  of  Thusnelda,
the  sole  trophies  of  the  campaign,  as  substantial  tokens  of
success,  for  which  not  Germanicus  only,  but  his  lieutenants
also,  might  deserve  the  triumphal  insignia,  he  was  at  heart
deeply  vexed  with  the  real  failure  of  the  year's  exertions.
His  ill-humour  vented  itself  in  murmurs  against  his  nephew's
conduct,  who  had  damped,  he  said,  the  courage  of  the  le-
gionaries by  showing  them  the  bloody  traces  of  a  Roman
defeat ;  he  even  pretended  that,  in  performing  funeral  rites,
Germanicus  had  profaned  the  sanctity  of  his  Augural  office.
He  cavilled  at  the  spirited  movement  of  Agrippina,  in  which,
he  insinuated,  she  had  overstepped  the  duties  of  her  sex,  to
ingratiate  herself  with  his  legions.  What  would  be  left,  he
asked,  for  the  imperators  themselves  to  do,  if  their  wives
could  venture  to  pass  along  the  lines  of  the  maniples,  to  ap-
proach the  standards,  and  offer  with  their  own  hands  lar-
gesses to  the  soldiers.  He  complained  that  the  mutinous
spirit  of  the  army  had  been  conjured  by  the  intrigues  of  a
woman,  when  the  name  of  the  chief  of  the  commonwealth
had  failed  to  coerce  it.1

The  assumption  of  so  ungracious  an  attitude  towards  the

defenders  of  the  national  interests,  in  the  midst  of  foreign

foes  and  domestic  sedition,  was  at  best  impolitic ;

TheEomans  . '  . *  '

offended  at  this  the  Romans  regarded  it,  moreover,  as  unjust  and
base,  and  unworthy  of  the  descendant  of  their
magnanimous  Csesars.  They  ascribed  it,  however,  less  to
the  jealous  temper  of  their  ruler  himself,  than  to  the  sinister
influence  of  a  low-born  favourite,  impatient  of  a  rival's  suc-
cesses, who  now  prompted  his  master's  apprehensions,  and
suggested  the  recall  of  Germanicus  that  he  might  no  longer
spend  the  blood  and  treasure  of  the  empire  in  schemes  for

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  69. "  Compressam  a  muliere  seditionem,  cui  nomen  Princi-
pis  obsistere  non  quiverit."

A.U.  769.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  37

his  own  advancement,  from  which  the  nation  derived  no
benefit.1  This  fatal  adviser  will  be  brought  more  formally
on  the  stage  at  a  later  period :  it  is  enough  to  say  of  him
now  that  Tiberius  listened  with  complacency  to  his  question-
able counsel.  But  the  hesitation  now  becoming  habitual
with  him  in  all  public  affairs  still  prevented  him  from  acting
upon  it ;  while  the  young  Csesar,  burning  for  martial  fame,
and  equally  unconscious,  perhaps,  both  of  the  suspicions
raised  against  him,  and  of  the  failure  of  his  recent  enter-
prise, was  redoubling  his  preparations  for  another  campaign,
and  dreaming  of  more  conclusive  successes.3

The  failure  of  the  last  expedition  was  ascribed  at  the
Roman  quarters  to  no  defect  in  the  valour  of  the  soldiers,  or
the  skill  of  their  chiefs,  but  simply  to  the  natu-  Third  cam.
ral  difficulties  of  the  route  they  had  chosen,  ScuiGer"
Avhich  lay  further  to  the  north,  and  was  more  A  D  16
embarrassed  by  swamps,  forests,  and  broad  riv-  A- u- 769-
ers,  than  the  regions  with  which  the  invaders  acquainted
themselves  in  their  earlier  operations.  It  may  be  supposed,
moreover,  that  the  inhospitable  wilderness  was  exhausted  of
its  scanty  resources.  Accordingly,  Germanicus  prepared  a
naval  armament  on  a  larger  scale  than  before,  which  he  col-
lected in  the  island  of  the  Rhine  and  Wahal,  and  directed
through  the  channel  of  the  lake  Flevus  to  the  ocean.3  Be-
fore embarking,  however,  he  sent  his  legate  C.  Silius,  to
make  a  demonstration  against  the  Chatti  in  the  south,  and
led  himself  a  force  of  six  legions  along  the  valley  of  the
Lippe,  to  secure  the  roads  and  strongholds,  and  provide  for
the  defence  and  supply  of  his  armies  on  their  return.4  This
done  he  transported  the  main  strength  of  his  armaments  in
a  thousand  vessels,  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ems,  thus  saving
them  a  great  amount  of  time  and  fatigue. Leaving  his

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Accendebat  haec  onerabatquc  Scjanus."
a  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  5.

3  He  descended  into  this  lake  by  the  Fossa  Drusiana,  the  channel  which
Drusus  cut,  as  before  mentioned,  from  the  Rhine  to  the  Ysscl.

4  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  6.

38  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  16.

ships  at  their  anchorage  under  sufficient  protection,  he  then
directed  his  march  towards  the  south-east,  so  as  to  strike  the
He  confronts  hank  of  the  Weser  at  a  spot  where  the  Germans
force^onthe  ^ad  assembled  a  large  force.  In  the  ranks  of  the
Weser.  invading  army  there  was  a  brother  of  Arminius

entrusted  with  a  command,  whose  fidelity  to  the  Romans
was  attested  by  the  loss  of  an  eye  in  their  service,  and  by
the  surname  of  Flavins,  which  he  had  adopted  as  the  client
of  a  Roman  officer.  Arminius,  we  are  told,  demanded  a
parley  with  the  renegade  across  the  stream  which  divided
the  hostile  arrays ;  and  when,  according  to  the  agreement,
they  were  left  to  converse  alone,  began  by  inquiring  the  oc-
casion of  his  wound.  Flavius  specified  the  place  and  the
engagement.  And  what,  demanded  the  other,  was  your  re-
icard?  Increase  of  pay,  a  gold  chain  and  chaplet,  with
other  military  distinctions,  was  the  reply.  And  when  the
German  freeman  retorted  with  a  sneer  on  these  vile  badges
of  servitude,  the  Romanized  Flavius  continued  unabashed  to
urge  on  him  the  obvious  inducements  to  submission,  such  as
the  magnitude  of  the  Roman  power,  the  clemency  of  the
emperor,  the  kindness  with  which  his  wife  and  child  had
been  treated,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  sure  penalty  of  re-
sistance. Arminius  replied  by  appealing  with  fervour  to  the
love  of  their  country,  the  memory  of  their  fathers,  and  the
venerable  names  of  their  ancestral  divinities  :  he  contrasted
with  pride  his  own  position,  as  the  chief  of  his  own  people,
with  the  subaltern  rank  of  his  recreant  brother.  From  argu-
ment the  debate  was  presently  swayed  to  rebukes  and  mu-
tual invectives,  until,  exasperated  as  they  were,  they  would
have  plunged  into  the  stream  and  decided  their  controversy
in  its  waves  had  not  the  comrades  of  Flavius  interfered  and
carried  him  away,  leaving  Arminius  vainly  defying  with  up-
lifted voice  and  hands  the  adversaries  whom  he  could  not
reach.1

The  next  morning  the  Romans  effected  the  passage  of  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  9,  10.

A.U.  769.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  39

Weser  in  the  face  of  the  enemy,  not  unwilling  perhaps  to
give  way,  and  draw  them  further  into  the  heart  Germamcusex-
of  a  thick  jungle  with  a  broad  river  in  the  rear.  JjJSgST
In  the  depths  of  a  sacred  forest  the  Germans  had  diers-
collected  the  forces  of  many  nations,  and  were  preparing  to
assail  the  invaders'  camp  by  night.  The  imagination  of  our
eloquent  historian  Tacitus  kindles  with  the  approaching  ca-
tastrophe of  the  great  epic  of  the  German  wars,  and  from
the  Homeric  dialogue  of  his  Flavius  and  Arminius,  he  pro-
ceeds to  chaimi  us  with  the  night  adventure  of  his  hero  Ger-
manicus.  Not  trusting  entirely  to  the  reports  of  his  brave
but  sanguine  officers, — and  the  spirit  of  flattery,  he  thought,
might  sway  the  representations  of  his  personal  attendants, —
the  imperator  resolved  to  explore,  disguised,  and  at  night,
the  real  temper  of  the  soldiers,  and  ascertain  how  far  he
might  rely  on  the  courage  which  had  never  yet  been  fairly
confronted  with  the  victors  of  the  Teutoburg.  Wrapt  in  his
Gaulish  bearskin,  and  attended  by  a  single  companion,  he
traversed  the  lanes  of  the  camp  and  leant  over  the  tent-
ropes.  The  soldiers  he  found  everywhere  vying  with  one
another  in  the  praise  of  their  young  general :  one  boasted  of
his  noble  descent,  another  of  his  manly  beauty ;  his  patience,
his  kindness,  his  serene  temper  were  in  the  mouths  of  all.
To-morrow,  they  said,  in  the  ranks,  they  would  prove  their
gratitude  and  affection :  they  would  sacrifice  to  vengeance
and  glory  the  faithless  foe  who  had  violated  the  peace  of
Rome.  At  this  moment  an  emissary  of  Arminius  riding  to
the  foot  of  the  rampart,  proclaimed  aloud  in  the  Latin  tongue
his  leader's  promise  of  wives,  lands,  and  a  daily  largess  to  all
who  would  abandon  the  Roman  service  and  take  refuge  in
the  ranks  of  freedom.  The  offer  was  received  with  shouts
of  Indignant  scorn.  Let  but  the  day  break,  exclaimed  the
legionaries,  let  but  battle  be  joined,  and  we  will  seize  each  for
himself  on  wives  and  lands  and  plunder.  Germanicus  with-
drew well  ] (leased  with  the  result  of  his  experiment,  which
was  succeeded  by  a  dream  of  favourable  omen.  The  har-
angue In-  addressed  next  morning  to  his  men  contains  a  vivid

40  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  16.

description  of  the  disadvantage  under  which  the  barbarian
laboured,  from  the  size  and  weight  of  his  weapons,  his  want
of  defensive  armour,  his  slow  and  unwieldy  motions,  his
ignorance  of  discipline,  and  impatience  both  of  toil  and  pain.
Everything  that  made  him  most  terrible  at  first  sight  was
found,  when  examined,  an  encumbrance  and  a  defect.  En-
couraged and  confirmed  in  their  hopes  and  expectations,  the
Romans  prepared  cheerfully  for  the  combat.1  On  the  other
hand,  Arminius  and  his  associates  were  not  less

Arminius  en-
courages the prompt  and  energetic. Each  at  the  head  of  his

Germans.

own  people  described  the  Roman  army  as  the
mere  remnant  of  the  Varian  legions,  the  swiftest  of  foot,
who  had  saved  themselves  once  by  flight  from  German  ven-
geance :  they  were  no  other  than  the  recreants  of  the  Rhen-
ish camps,  who  would  rather  rise  against  their  own  officers
than  rally  in  the  face  of  the  enemy.  These,  they  said,  were
the  slaves  who  had  been  reduced  by  stripes,  the  wretches
who  had  skulked  from  pursuit  of  the  brave  Cherusci  to  the
furthest  shores  of  the  ocean.  Nor  were  the  Germans  suffered
to  forget  how  cruel  and  rapacious  these  ruffians  had  shown
themselves  in  their  moments  of  success  :  the  freedom  of  the
patriot  warriors  was  the  last  possession  left  them ;  let  them
now  defend  it  with  their  lives.2

The  position  of  the  Germans  occupied  the  declivity  of  the
hills  which  bounded  the  valley  of  the  TVeser,  extending  into

the  broad  plain  at  their  foot  and  resting  on  a

Great  battle  l  ,.-./.

and  victory  of wood  in  the  rear,  which,  from  the  absence  of  un-

the  Romans.

dergroAVth,  presented  no  obstacle  to  a  retreat.
The  Romans,  however,  having  crossed  the  stream  at  various
points,  contrived by  skilful movements to  outflank their
opponents  ;  and  while  the  cavalry  gained  the  wood  behind

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  12,  13.  2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  14.

3  Tacitus  calls  the  spot  "  Campus  cui  Idistaviso  no-men."  There  is  no  clue
for  identifying  it.  See  the  article  on  the  word  hi  Smith's  Dictionary  of  Geog-
raphy, in  which  Grimm  is  said  to  have  shown  that  the  plain  was  probably
called  Idisiaviso,  that  is,  Hie  maiden's  meadow,  from  idisi,  a  maiden,  and  wiese,
a  meadow.

A.U.  769.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  41

them,  the  main  strength  of  the  legions  engaged  their  atten-
tion in  the  plain.  The  front  line  of  the  Germans,  drawn  up
at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  was  driven  back  and  sought  refuge
in  the  wood,  at  the  same  moment  that  the  bodies  kept  in  re-
serve behind,  assailed  by  the  Roman  horse,  were  dislodged
from  its  shelter,  and  driven  headlong  towards  the  plain.
The  Cherusci,  the  bravest  and  steadiest  of  the  native  forces,
had  occupied  the  centre  of  the  declivity ;  but  neither  their
resolute  courage,  nor  the  skill  and  vigour  of  their  leader  Ar-
niinius,  availed  to  sustain  them  against  the  overwhelming
pressure  of  the  conflicting  tides  of  fugitives  on  either  side.
Thus  thrown  into  confusion,  the  rout  of  the  Germans  was
rapid  and  complete.  Arminius  and  Inguiomerus  still  main-
tained the  unequal  contest  with  conspicuous  gallantry  ;  but,
hemmed  in  between  the  advancing  forces  of  the  Romans,
their  destruction  seemed  inevitable,  and  they  owed  their
lives,  as  was  suspected,  to  the  treachery  of  some  German
auxiliaries,  who  sixffered  them  to  burst  through  their  ranks,
disfigured  and  wounded.  Broken  in  front  and  rear,  the
remnant  of  their  host  took  flight  at  every  point  where  they
could  find  an  opening :  great  numbers  were  slain  in  attempt-
ing to  cross  the  river  before,  many  more  fell  in  the  wood  be-
hind them,  where  they  climbed  the  trees  for  safety,  but  were
transfixed  with  arrows,  or  crushed  by  the  felling  of  the  trees
themselves  :  over  an  area  of  ten  miles  in  width  the  ground
was  thickly  strewn  with  the  bodies  of  the  slain  ;  and  if  the
combat  itself  had  been  soon  decided,  the  pursuit  and  slaugh-
ter continued  without  intermission  till  nightfall.  At  the
close  of  the  day  the  victors  reared  a  great  mound  of  earth,
which  they  surmounted  with  the  arms  of  their  slaughtered
enemies,  and  the  chains  found  ready  in  their  camp  for  bind-
ing their  captives.  On  the  summit  they  raised  a  stone  pil-
lar inscribed  with  the  names  of  the  conquered  tribes  ;  and,
finally,  the  army  saluted  the  absent  Tiberius  with  the  title
of  Imperator,  ascribing  the  fortune  of  the  day,  with  redou-
bled loyalty,  to  his  sacred  auspices.1

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  16-18.

42  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  16.

Yet  no  sooner  had  they  completed  these  memorials  of
their  triumph  than  the  worsted  foe  rallied,  it  seems,  for  an-
Eenewed  en-  other  contest.  Doubtless  the  victory  had  been
iMiTuccesTof  far  less  complete  than  the  flatterers  of  the  em-
the  Romans.  pH.e  or  the  panegyrist  of  Germanicus  had  repre-
sented it.  The  barbarians,  we  are  assured,  were  about  to
fly  beyond  the  Elbe,  and  relinquish  their  territories  for  ever,
when  the  report  of  the  erection  of  this  insulting  monument
roused  them  from  their  panic  and  despair.  Once  more  fling-
ing all  timid  counsels  to  the  winds,  they  seized  a  spot  sur-
rounded by  woods  and  morasses,  and  defended  by  an  old  na-
tive earthwork,  and  there  collecting  in  a  mass  fonnidable
alike  from  its  numbers  and  resolution,  defied  the  advance  of
the  conqueror.  Here  invasion  reached  its  limits.  Germani-
cus indeed  led  his  legions  steadily  to  the  foot  of  the  well-
manned  lines.  He  made  skilful  dispositions  for  attacking
them.  He  forced  the  mound,  entered  the  narrow  area  within
which  the  Germans  were  thronged  densely  together,  with  a
swamp  behind,  and  incapable  of  retreat.  The  struggle  was
furious  and  bloody.  Everything  was  against  the  Germans ;
the  closeness  of  the  combat,  in  which  their  long  swords  and
even  their  unwieldy  frames  were  a  disadvantage ;  the  recol-
lection of  their  late  defeat ;  and  the  consciousness  that  their
last  stronghold  was  stormed  before  their  faces.  Even  Ar-
minius  had  lost  his  gallant  spirit ;  broken  by  repeated  de-
feats or  the  wounds  he  had  sustained,  he  was  less  decided  in
his  orders  and  less  conspicuous  in  the  medley.  Never,  on  the
other  hand,  did  Germanicus  more  strenuously  exert  himself.
He  strove  to  carry  with  his  own  hand  the  victory  his  dispo-
sitions had  brought  within  his  grasp.  Throwing  his  helmet
from  his  head,  that  no  Roman  might  fail  to  recognize  him,  he
adjured  his  soldiers,  in  the  midst  of  their  ranks,  to  redouble
blow  on  blow,  and  give  no  quarter :  this,  he  cried,  was  no
day  for  making  captives,  but  for  utterly  destroying  the  Ger-
man nation.  Multitudes  of  the  barbarians  were  slain,  while
the  invaders  acknowledged  but  a  trifling  loss.  Nevertheless
the  legions,  we  are  told,  were  recalled  from  the  scene  of

A.  U.  769.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  43

slaughter  to  their  camp  for  the  night,  "while  we  hear  nothing
of  the  rout  or  retreat  of  the  enemy.  It  is  admitted  that  the
engagement  of  the  cavalry  in  another  quarter  was  indecisive.
Xo  song  of  triumph  arose  on  the  dispersion  of  the  great  Ger-
man confederacy,  at  the  abandonment  of  their  country,  or
their  flight  behind  the  Elbe  ;  there  is  no  word  of  their  suing
for  peace  or  pardon.  If  Germanicus  erected  yet  another
trophy,  and  emblazoned  it  with  a  flaunting  inscription,  pro-
claiming that  he  had  subdued  all  the  nations  between  the
Rhine  and  Elbe,  the  narrator  of  his  exploits  himself  confesses
that  the  boast  was  vain  and  presumptuous.  Of  all  the  native
tribes  the  Angrivarii  alone  offered  to  capitulate;  but  their
humble  submission  appeased,  it  is  said,  the  vengeance  of  the
conqueror,  and  he  consented  to  accept  it  as  a  national  ac-
knowledgment of  defeat.1

Nor  was  it  from  any  anxiety  about  his  own  return  that
Germanicus  acquiesced  so  easily  in  this  pretended  pacifica-
tion. The  second  month  of  summer  saw his „

Ketnrn  of  Ger-

le<rions  withdraw  from  their  advanced  posts  in manicus  again

0  .  .  .  tit nnprosperous.

the  Cheruscian  territory,  and  retire,  some  by  land,
but  a  large  force  on  board  the  numerous  flotilla  which  had
wafted  them  to  the  mouth  of  the  Ems.2  The  vessels  were
assailed  by  severe  gales,  and  once  more  suffered  terribly  from
the  violence  of  the  winds  and  waves,  though  the  fears  of  the
timid  mariners  may  have  magnified  the  loss  and  danger.
These  disasters,  however,  sufficed  to  raise  the  Germans  again
in  arms,  so  little  had  they  been  dispirited  by  the  dubious
success  of  the  recent  invasion.  Germanicus,  always  prompt
and  active,  however  questionable  we  may  think  his  skill  in
conducting,  or  forethought  in  planning,  his  expeditions,  col-
lected his  troops  without  delay,  and  by  a  rapid  incursion  into
the  lands  of  the  Marsi  and  Chatti,  checked  at  least  the
contagion  of  their  revolt. The  recovery  of  the  last  of  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  19-22.

2  Tac.  Am,,  ii.  28.:  "Adulta  jam  restate:"  thus  explained  by  Scrvius  on
Virg.  Ed.  x.  74. ; Gcorg.  i.  43.

44  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  16,

a Varian  eagles  shed  a  final  o-leam  of  glory  over

Recovery  of  the  .  °  » J

last  of  the  va- the  enterprises  of  Rome  in  this  quarter. Once

rian  eagles.  » -i ■  it

more  the  legions  were  led  back  to  their  winter
stations.  The  young  Caesar  was  assured  that  the  enemy  had
never  felt  such  consternation  and  despair,  as  when  they  found
him  prepared  to  take  the  field  at  the  moment  when  his  fleet
was  lying  wrecked  on  their  shores.  Never  were  they  so  much
disposed  to  entertain  counsels  of  submission,  as  during  the
winter  that  followed.  One  more  campaign,  he  was  convinced,
would  complete  the  conquest  of  the  North.  But  while  med-
itating on  his  future  triumphs,  he  was  admonished  by  many
letters  from  Tiberius,  that  it  was  time  to  abandon  projects
which  had  reaped  in  fact  nothing  but  recurring  disappoint-
ments. It  was  time,  the  emperor  suggested,  to  change  the
policy  which  had  hitherto  reigned  in  the  Roman  quarters,
and  relinquishing  the  employment  of  military  force,  which
had  been  attended  with  grave  losses  both  by  sea  and  land,
trust  to  the  surer  and  safer  method  of  engaging  the  enemy
in  domestic  dissensions.  Closely  as  the  German  confederates
had  been  bound  together  under  the  pressure  of  foreign  ag-
gression, seeds  of  disunion  were  still  rife  among  them,  and
the  policy  of  intrigue,  ever  patient  and  watchful,  could  hardly
fail  in  the  end  to  undermine  the  nationality  of  the  barbarians.
If  further  laurels,  he  added,  were  yet  to  be  gained  by  arms,
it  was  fair  to  leave  the  harvest  to  be  gleaned  by  the  strip-
ling Drusus,  for  whose  maiden  sword  no  other  foe  but  the
Germans  was  left.1

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  26.  Suetonius  (Tib.  52.)  adds  that  Tiberius  was  generally
reputed  to  have  disparaged  the  glorious  successes  of  Germanicus,  as  prejudicial
to  the  public  interests.  It  is  vexatious,  however,  to  observe  how  little  reliance
we  can  place  on  the  panegyric  of  Tacitus.  His  story  of  the  last  campaign
bears  strong  features  of  romance.  The  interview  of  the  German  brothers  is
an  heroic  episode.  It  is  not  usual  with  ordinary  mortals  to  converse  across  a
stream  an  hundred  yards  in  width.  The  night  watch  of  Germanicus,  though
not  in  itself  improbable,  is  suspiciously  in  unison  with  the  epic  colour  of  the
general  narrative ;  and  the  splendid  victories  ascribed  to  him  are  evidently  be-
lied by  the  results.  The  account  of  the  shipwreck  of  the  flotilla  is  a  clang  of
turgid  extravagances,  amplified  perhaps  from  the  statement  which  Pliny  may

A.  U.  7G9.]  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  45

The  reasoning  of  Tiberius  -was  specious,  and  the  course
he  suggested  required  only  vigilance  and  perseverance  to  be
fully  successful.  But  in  laying  down  a  line  of  The  frontiers
traditional  policy,  which  might  demand  the  care  to^y bounded
of  many  years,  and  of  more  than  one  or  two  gener-  by  the  Khine-
ations  to  effect  it,  he  could  pledge  neither  himself  nor  his
successors  to  persist  in  it.  In  fact,  the  central  government
ceased  from  this  time  to  take  any  warm  interest  in  the  sub-
jugation of  the  Germans;  and  the  dissensions  of  their  states
and  princes,  which  peace  was  not  slow  in  developing,  at-
tracted no  Roman  emissaries  to  the  barbarian  camps,  and
rarely  led  the  legions  beyond  the  frontier,  which  was  now
allowed  to  recede  finally  to  the  Rhine.1  The  conquests  in-
deed of  Germanicus  had  been  wholly  visionary :  the  language
of  Tacitus  is  equally  extravagant  both  in  vaunting  his  tri-
umphs, and  in  blazoning  his  disasters  ;  and  the  almost  total
silence  of  Dion,  a  far  more  sober  authority,  on  the  exploits
of  the  popular  hero,  stamps  his  campaigns  with  merited  in-
significance. Nevertheless  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt
that  the  discipline  of  the  legions,  and  the  conduct  of  their
officers,  even  without  the  genius  of  a  Sulla  or  a  Ctesar  at  their
head,  must  gradually  have  broken  the  resistance  of  the  north-
ern freemen,  and  that  little  more  of  toil  and  patience  was
wanting  to  make  the  Elbe  the  permanent  frontier  of  their
conquests.  This  accession  of  territory  would  have  materially
abridged  the  long  line  of  the  national  defences,  and  the  gar-
risons of  the  Elbe  and  Danube  might  have  afforded  each
other  mutual  support  in  the  peril  of  a  barbarian  invasion.  It
is  not  impossible  that  the  result  of  one  or  two  more  cam-
paigns at  this  critical  moment  might  have  delayed  for  a
hundred  years  the  eventual  overthrow  of  the  Roman  Empire.
It  would  be  too  much  to  say  that  the  failure  of  such  a  result
is  to  be  regretted;  nor  can  we  venture  to  lament,  for  the

have  founded,  with  little  discrimination,  upon  the  fears  and  fancies  of  the  sur-
vivors.

1  We  shall  trace  at  a  later  period  some  further  advances  of  the  empire  be-
tween the  upper  Rhine  and  Danube.

46  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  16.

sake  of  the  Germans  themselves,  that  they  were  not  at  this
period  reduced  to  subjection  to  a  power  of  higher  and  liner
organization  than  their  own.  But  while  the  gallantry  with
which  the  Germans  defended  their  savage  homes  must  always
excite  our  admiration,  while  we  applaud  their  courage  and
self-devotion,  and  thrill  at  the  echoes  of  their  shouts  of  defi-
ance and  songs  of  triumph,  it  will  be  well  to  guard  against
an  unreflecting  sympathy  with  that  misnamed  liberty  for
which  they  so  bravely  contended.  The  liberty  of  the  Ger-
mans was  at  best  only  the  licence  of  a  few  chiefs  and  warriors,
backed  by  a  dark  and  a  bloody  superstition,  in  which  the
mass  of  the  people,  the  bravest  and  least  corrupted  part  ot
the  nation,  had  no  genuine  share.1  Notwithstanding  the
false  colours  he  has  aimed  at  throwing  over  it,  the  picture  of
Teutonic  freedom  Avhich  Tacitus  gives  us  is  gloomy  and  re-
volting, with  its  solitary  caves  or  wigwams  in  the  forest,  its
sexes  undistinguished  in  dress,  its  women,  cared  for  indeed,
but  not  for  their  charms  or  virtues,  but  as  beasts  of  burden
and  implements  of  labour.  That  it  was  powerless  to  effect
any  progress,  or  to  rise  of  itself  to  a  higher  sphere  of  civili-
zation, appears  from  the  continued  barbarism  of  the  four
succeeding  centuries,  during  which  it  roamed  its  forests  un-
assailed  by  Rome,  and  constrained  by  no  foreign  pressure.
The  instincts  of  Order  and  Devotion,  which  distinguished
the  northern  conquerors  of  Europe,  lay  undeveloped  in  the
germ,  till,  in  the  course  of  Providence,  they  met  the  forms
of  Law  and  of  Religion  which  they  were  destined  so  happily
to  impregnate. As  with  their  own  lusty  youths,  to  whom

1  Tacitus,  in  his  curious  but  fanciful  picture  of  Teutonic  life  and  manners,
would  make  it  appear  that  the  whole  body  of  freemen  were  equal  and  inde-
pendent ;  but  this  is  contrary  to  all  experience,  and  is  opposed  to  the  usage  of
client  or  retainership,  which  seems  to  have  been  common  in  Germany  as  well
as  in  Gaul.  The  slaves  of  the  Germans,  as  our  author  himself  remarks  (Ger-
man. 25.),  were  not  domestic,  like  the  Roman,  but  attached  to  the  soil ;  they
were  in  fact  not  slaves,  but  serfs,  and  as  such  we  may  be  assured  that  they
bore  arms  in  their  lords'  following.  The  German  polity  was  probably  no  other
than  clanship,  under  which  a  system  of  the  grossest  tyranny  is  upheld  by  a
perverted  sentiment  of  honour.

A.U.  770.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  47

the  commerce  of  the  sexes  was  forbidden  till  they  had  reached
the  fulness  of  manly  vigour,  the  long  celibate  of  German
intelligence  may  seem  designed  by  a  superior  Wisdom  to
crown  it  with  inexhaustible  fertility.1

The  offer  of  the  consulship,  which  the  emperor  now  ten-
dered to  his  nephew,  was  equivalent  to  a  command  to  abandon
the  camp ;  and  Germanicus  was  compelled,  with

r'  ........  Germanicus  13

sore  reluctance,  to  relinquish  his  visions  of  nn- recalled  to

„  . .  Rome.

mortal  glory  for  the  empty  pageant  01  municipal
honours.  It  was  natural  that  he  should  see,  in  this  sudden
abridgment  of  his  triumphs,  not  the  prudence  but  the  jealousy
of  his  chief;  and  such  unquestionably  was  the  general  view
of  the  army,  delighted  with  his  liberality  and  condescension,
and  of  the  people,  not  unwilling  to  form  the  most  unfavour-
able judgment  on  the  acts  of  a  ruler  so  destitute  of  the
genial  graces  which  captivate  an  unreflecting  populace.  Yet
it  cannot  in  fairness  be  imputed  as  a  crime  to  the  emperor,
if  he  desired  to  break  the  connexion  between  his  kinsman
and  the  distant  legions  of  the  Rhine,  which  had  already  ex-
pressed their  readiness  to  carry  him  to  Rome  and  place  him
on  the  throne  of  the  Csesars.  Germanicus,  with  the  gener-
osity and  perhaps  carelessness  which  belonged  to  his  charac-
ter, had  given  some  ground  of  umbrage  by  offering  largesses
to  the  soldiers  from  his  own  resources,  such  as,  under  a  mon-
archical regime,  can  only  proceed  safely  from  the  monarch
himself;  and  Tiberius  merely  followed  the  policy  of  his  pre-
decessor in  allowing  no  more  than  two  or  three  successive
campaigns  to  the  same  leader,  beneath  the  same  eagles,  and
in  the  same  quarter  of  the  empire.

With  the  close  of  the  year  769,  Germanicus  quitted  the
scene  of  his  high-spirited  efforts,  being  summoned  to  cele-
brate the  triumph  which  was  offered  him  in  lieu Triumph  of
of  victory. Of  this  flattering  distinction,  indeed,
the  emperor  took  to himself  the  lion's share. a.  c.  770.

1  Tac.  German.  20. :  "  Sera  juvenura  Venus,  eoque  inexhausta  pubertas."
1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  41. :  "Bellum(iue,  quia  conficere  prohibitus  erat,  pro  conl'ccto
habebatur."

48  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  17.

The  triumphal  arch,  which  was  erected  on  the  slope  of  the
Capitoline,  was  designated  by  the  name,  not  of  Germanicus,
hut  of  Tiberius.1  The  recovery  of  the  eagles  of  Varus,  and
the  overthrow  of  the  Germans,  were  together  blazoned  on
the  medals  which  commemorated  the  solemnity.3  As  the
victor  approached  the  city,  the  populace,  full  of  enthusiasm,
poured  forth  from  the  gates  to  the  twentieth  milestone  to
meet  him,  and  the  ardour  of  the  praetorians,  the  body-guards
of  the  emperor  himself,  was  not  less  conspicuous  than  if  they
had  served  under  his  colours  or  partaken  of  his  benefactions.3
The  triumph  was  celebrated  on  the  26th  of  May;  the  Che-
rusci,  the  Chatti,  the  Angrivarii,  and  generally  the  nations
between  the  Rhine  and  Elbe,  were  specified  as  the  vanquished
enemy.4  Captives  were  forthcoming,  of  noble  birth  and  dis-
tinction among  their  people,  to  adorn  the  ceremony ;  and  it
was  without  remorse,  without  even  compassion,  that  the
Romans  beheld  Thusnelda,  the  betrayed  wife  of  Arminius,
led  before  them,  with  the  infant  child  whom  she  had  borne
in  servitude  and  sorrow.5  The  spoils  of  war  were  also  ex-
hibited, and  the  mountains  and  rivers  of  Germany,  together
with  the  battles  themselves,  were  represented  in  pictures  or
emblematically  designated.  But  the  citizens  gazed  at  none
of  these  shows  so  intently  as  at  the  figure  of  the  young  im-
perator  himself,  conspicuous  for  the  manly  graces  of  his  per-

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Fine  anni  arcus  propter  aedem  Satumi  ob  recepta  signa  cum
Varo  amissa,  ductu  Germanici,  auspiciis  Tiberii  ....  dicatur."  This  arch  of
Tiberius,  as  it  is  called,  but  I  know  not  on  what  precise  authority,  stood  on  the
slope  of  the  Clivus  Capitolinus.  Dezobry  supposes  that  it  was  small  and  plain,
from  its  having  apparently  been  erected  and  dedicated  in  the  course  of  one
year.  Another  arch  of  Tiberius  was  erected  by  the  emperor  Claudius  near  the
theatre  of  Pompeius. Suet.  Claud.  1 1 .

2  See  Eckhel,  Doctr.  Numm.  vi.  209. :  "  Signis  receptis  devictis  Germanis."
Tiberius  took  the  title  of  Germanicus  (Dion,  lvii.  8.),  but  declined  that  of  Pater
Patriae. Tac.  Ann.  i.  *72.

3  Suet.  Calig.  4.

4  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  41. :  "C.  Caecilio,  L.  Pomponio,  coss.,  Germanicus  Caesar,
a.  d.  vii.  Kal.  Junias,  triumphavit  de  Cheruscis,  Chattisque,  et  Angrivariis."

6  Strabo,  vii.  p.  291. :  who  gives  the  child  the  name  of  Thumelicus.

A.U.  770.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  49

son,  and  surrounded  in  his  chariot  by  the  five  male  descend-
ants of  his  fruitful  union  with  Agrippina.  Surely  there  was
no  room,  behind  so  well-plenished  an  equipage,  for  the  slave
who  attended  the  happiest  of  heroes  in  the  crisis  of  his  feli-
city, and  whispered  in  his  ear  that  he  was  only  mortal !  Yet
the  spectators  at  least  required  no  such  grisly  memento.  In
the  midst  of  their  brilliant  jubilee  they  were  smitten  with
a  painful  misgiving :  they  remembered  how  their  affection
for  the  father,  Drusus,  had  been  blighted  by  sudden  disap-
pointment, how  Marcellus,  the  uncle,  had  been  snatched  away
in  the  glow  of  his  youthful  popularity :  brief  and  ill-starred,
they  murmured  to  themselves,  were  the  loves  of  the  Roman
people.1

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  41.:  "Breves  et  infaustos  populi  Romani  amores."  The
list  of  early  bereavements  of  the  same  class  might  be  enlarged  with  the  names
of  Caius  and  Lucius  Caesar,  and  even  of  Agrippa  Postumus ;  but  I  do  not  ven-
ture to  step  beyond  the  lines  traced  by  Tacitus,  and  attach  to  any  of  these  the
same  painful  reminiscences  he  has  specified  in  the  case  of  the  others.

vol.  v.

50  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  17.

CHAPTER  XLIII.

MISSION OF GKRMANICDS TO THE EAST, AND OF DRUSUS TO ILLYRICUM. RETIRE-
MENT OF MAROBODUUS, AND DEATH OF ARMINIUS. GERMANICUS JOURNEYS

THROUGH GREECE AND ASIA MINOR. — INTRIGUES OF PISO AND PLANCINA

AGAINST  HIM. HE SETTLES THE AFFAIRS OF ARMENIA,  AND VISITS EGYPT.

HIS SICKNESS AND DEATH IMPUTED TO PISO. GRIEF OF THE CITIZENS. PISO

ATTEMPTS TO SEIZE THE GOVERNMENT OF SYRIA. IS BAFFLED AND  .SENT TO

ROME. THE FRIENDS OF GERMANICUS ACCUSE HIM BEFORE THE SENATE.

HIS DEFENCE, SUICIDE, AND CONDEMNATION. TIBERIUS FREE FROM SUSPICION

OF THE MURDER OF GERMANICUS. IMPOSTURE OF CLEMENS. INTRIGUES OF

LIBO DRUSUS. DETERIORATION IN THE  CONDUCT OF TIBERIUS. INFLUENCE OF

LIVIA OYER HIM,  AND OF SEJANUS. (a.  D.  17-20.),  A.  U.  770-773.

THE  cloud which  lowered  on  the countenance  of  the
Roman  people  was  dispelled  by  an  act  of  opportune
liberality. Tiberius  now  stepped  forward  in  the

Mission  of  Ger-  - .  . .

manicus  to  the  name  oi  his  adopted  son  to  bestow  on  the  citi-
zens a  largess  of  three  hundred  sesterces  a-piece,
and  they  hailed  with  acclamations  the  announcement  that
the  senate,  at  his  desire,  had  chosen  their  favourite  for
the  consulship  of  the  ensuing  year.  It  was  considered  as  a
special  mark  of  honour  that  the  emperor  deigned  to  accept
the  same  office  in  conjunction  with  him.  But  ere  the  period
for  his  assuming  it  had  arrived,  a  new  duty  had  been  found
for  him  to  discharge.  The  affairs  of  the  East  required  to  be
set  in  order.  The  demise  of  Archelaus,  the  king  of  Cappa-
docia,  who  had  lately  died  at  Rome  of  distress  and  appre-
hension, under  a  charge  preferred  against  him  in  the  senate,
had  offered  an  opportunity  for  annexing  that  country  to  the
empire,  and  its  ample  revenues  had  enabled  Tiberius  to  re-

A.U.  770.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  51

duce  by  one-half  the  tax  of  a  hundredth  on  sales.1  The  or-
ganization of  this  new  acquisition  remained  to  be  completed.
At  the  same  time  the  people  of  Commagene,  and  the  still
autonomous  districts  of  Cilicia,  were  said  to  desire,  on  the
recent  death  of  their  native  princes,  to  be  subjected  to  the
direct  dominion  of  the  Romans,  while  the  provincials  of
Judea  and  Syria,  on  their  part,  were  exclaiming  against  the
weight  of  the  imperial  burdens,  and  entreating  to  be  partially
relieved  from  them.2  Nor  was  the  peace  which  had  reigned
between  Rome  and  Parthia  since  the  interview  of  their  chiefs
on  the  Euphrates  secure  and  satisfactory.  After  more  than
one  court-revolution,  Vonones,  a  son  of  the  great  Phraates,
whom  Augustus  had  retained  as  a  hostage,  perhaps  at  his
father's  desire,  and  had  bred  in  Roman  manners,  had  been
called  to  the  throne  by  the  voice  of  his  countrymen,  and
placed  there  with  the  consent  of  the  imperial  government.
But  his  subjects  soon  manifested  disgust  at  the  foreign  habits
of  their  new  ruler,  and  ventured  to  discard  him.  He  took
refuge,  it  appears,  not  among  his  old  friends  the  Romans,  but
in  the  kindred  land  of  Armenia,  which  not  only  offered  him
an  asylum,  but,  in  the  actual  vacancy  of  its  own  throne,  ac-
cepted him  precipitately  as  its  sovereign.  Hereupon  Arta-
banus,  chief  of  the  neighbouring  kingdom  of  Media,  but
himself  of  the  royal  race  of  the  Arsacidrc,  whom  the  Parthians
had  invited  to  rule  over  them,  required  the  Armenians  to  sur-
render the  fugitive :  but  Silanus,  the  proconsul  of  Syria,  was
instructed  to  anticipate  this  result,  and  had  succeeded  in
getting  possession  of  his  person  by  artifice,  to  be  kept  in
custody  within  the  Roman  frontiers,  and  employed  on  some
future  occasion. The  Parthians  were  indignant  at  the  loss

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  42.:  "Fructibus  ejus  levari  posse  centesimge  vectigal  pro-
fessus,  ducentesimam  in  posterum  statuit."  But  Cappadocia  was  proverbially
a  poor  country :  "  Mancipiis  locuples  eget  aeris  Cappadocum  rex :"  perhaps
some  treasures  were  found  accumulated  in  the  royal  strongholds.

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Provinciae  Syria  atque  Judaea,  fessffl  oneribus,  deminutionem
tributi  orabant."  For  the  annexation  of  Judea  on  the  banishment  of  Arche-
laus,  see  above,  chap,  xxxvii.

52  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  17.

of  their  victim,  the  Armenians  mortified  at  the  insult  to  the
object  of  their  choice ;  but  Silanus  was  directed  to  amuse
and  negotiate  with  both  powers,  and  avoid  an  open  rupture  by
all  the  arts  of  diplomacy.1  Tiberius  might  hope  that  the
mission  of  a  chief  of  higher  name  and  authority,  attended
by  an  imposing  force,  and  surrounded  with  the  pomp  of  im-
perial dignity,  would  awe,  as  on  former  occasions,  the  mur-
murs of  his  rivals  into  silence.  Resolved  not  himself  to
abandon  the  helm  of  government,  and  deeming  his  own  son
Drusus  too  inexperienced  for  the  arduous  office,  he  made
choice  of  Germanicus  to  represent  the  majesty  of  the  empire
in  the  East.  For  this  purpose  he  placed  him  in  the  same  po-
sition as  Agrippa  had  held  under  Augustus,  and  required  the
senate  to  confirm  by  a  decree  his  appointment  to  an  extraor-
dinary command  over  the  provinces  beyond  the  Hellespont,
with  full  powers  for  making  war  or  peace,  for  annexing
provinces,  enfranchising  cities,  and  modifying  their  burdens.
Tiberius  would  allow  no  delay.  The  young  Caesar  was  di-
rected to  cross  the  sea  the  same  autumn,  and  the  consulship,
which  he  had  been  summoned  from  Germany  to  hold,  he  was
permitted  to  retain  in  Asia.2

In  the  course  of  the  same  year  Drusus  was  sent  into  Illy-
ricum,  with  directions  to  watch  the  movements  of  the  Ger-
mans on  their  southern  frontier.3 Of  the  two

Drusus  at  the  .

same  time  sent  princes  Drusus  was  supposed  to  be  the  emperors
favourite,  and  such,  as  his  own  child  in  blood  and
the  child  of  his  cherished  Vipsania,  he  might  naturally  be.
But  the  citizens  cast  themselves  on  the  opposite  side,  and
showered  all  their  affection  on  Germanicus,  whose  character
was  made  to  shine  in  popular  narratives  in  contrast  with  that
of  his  less  fortunate  cousin.  A  reason  for  this  preference
they  discovered  in  the  fact  of  his  higher  maternal  descent,
for  Germanicus  was  the  son  of  an  Antonia ;  while  the  mother
of  Drusus  was  a  Vipsania  only,  and  his  grandsire,  Pomponius

1  For  the  affairs  of  Parthia  and  Armenia  in  detail,  see  Tae.  Ann.  ii.  1-4.

2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  43.  3  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  44.

A.U.  770.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  53

Atticus,  the  friend  of  Cicero,  was  a  simple  knight.1  But  the
cousins,  or  brothers  as  they  were  legally  styled,  were  uncon-
scious of  these  jealousies,  or  at  least  unaffected  by  them.
Whatever  dissimilarity  there  might  be  in  their  tempers,  they
lived  in  perfect  amity.  Tiberius  was  anxious  that  Drusus
should  emulate  the  elder  prince  in  the  career  of  public  toils
and  honours.  He  was  glad  to  remove  him  from  the  dissipa-
tions of  the  capital ;  he  was  desirous  also  of  completing  his
military  training  ;  it  was  surmised  by  some  that  he  felt  more
secure  in  his  own  elevation  above  the  laws  when  each  of  his
children  stood  at  the  head  of  one  of  the  chief  armies  of  the
republic.  But  the  state  of  affairs  on  the  Danubian  frontier
undoubtedly  required  the  presence  of  a  commander  on  whose
loyalty  and  zeal  the  emperor  could  fully  rely,  and  the  mis-
sion both  of  Germanicus  and  Drusus  seems  to  have  been
dictated  by  a  legitimate  policy.

The  withdrawal  of  the  Koman  forces  from  the  soil  of
Germany  had  restored  peace  to  its  northern  districts ;  but  no
sooner  were  Arminius  and  his  Cheruscans  reliev- war  between
ed  from  their  annual  aggressions,  than  they  turn- mannUnd  the
ed  their  arms  on  their  own  brethren,  the  Suevi  in Cnerusci-

A.  D.  17-19.

the  south.  The  kingdom  of  M aroboduus,  which  a.'  v.  770-772.
he  professed  to  rule  after  the  fashion  he  had  learnt  in  the
city  of  the  universal  conquerors,  gave  umbrage  to  the  na-
tional spirit  of  the  yet  untamed  barbarians.  Even  among
his  own  subjects  there  were  many  who  viewed  his  innovations
with  disgust.  On  the  first  onset  of  the  Cherusci,  the  Sem-
nones  and  Langobardi,  who  were  numbered  among  the
Suevic  tribes,  went  over  to  them ;  and  this  defection  was  but
partially  balanced  by  the  caprice  of  Inguiomerus,  the  bravest
of  the  northern  patriots,  who,  with  a  band  of  clients  and  re-
tainers, attached  himself  to  the  service  of  Maroboduus.  Nor
indeed  had  the  Cherusci  been  so  long  confronted  with  the
Roman  legions  without  acquiring  some  knowledge  of  their
tactics.  When  the  two  native  armies  met  in  the  field  they
were  found  to  be  armed  and  marshalled  alike,  after  the  fash-

2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  43.

54  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  19.

ion  of  the  masters  of  the  art  of  war.  Each  of  the  rivals
could  vaunt  that  they  had  learnt  to  baffle  the  terrible  Romans
with  their  own  weapons :  the  Cherusci  could  point  to  the
spoils  they  had  wrested  from  Varus  ;  the  Marcomanni  boasted
that  they  had  kept  Tiberius  himself  at  bay  and  sent  him  back
unlaurelled  across  the  Danube.  The  battle  which  now  en-
sued between  them  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  Maroboduus ;
and  upon  this,  many  of  the  tribes  he  had  enlisted  under  his
standards  passed  over  to  the  other  side :  when  he  could  no
longer  make  head  against  the  triumphant  Arminius,  he  pros-
trated himself  before  the  emperor  and  implored  his  succour.
Tiberius  replied  that  he  had  no  right  to  look  for  assistance
from  the  power  from  which  he  had  himself  withheld  aid  in
its  contest  with  the  Cherusci :  nevertheless  the  Romans  were
magnanimous  as  well  as  powerful,  and  would  not  refuse  to
interfere  to  save  their  new  client  from  destruction.  It  was
under  these  circumstances  that  Drusus  was  dispatched  to  the
Danube,  with  directions  ostensibly  to  negotiate  terms  for
Maroboduus  :  but  he  received,  it  would  seem,  more  private
instructions,  to  raise  fresh  enemies  against  him,  and  secretly
effect  his  ruin  from  another  quarter.1  Shielded  from  the  vio-
lence of  Arminius,  the  king  of  the  Marcomanni  was  over-
thrown by  the  intrigues  of  Catualda,  a  chief  of  the  Goth-
ones,  who  had  suffered  some  injury  at  his  hands.  Driven
across  the  Danube,  he  addressed  a  letter  to  Tiberius,  in
which  he  solicited  an  asylum  in  the  Roman  terri-
seeL  shelter tories,  and  his  request  was  coldly  granted. Re-

within  the  Eo- , • -i • i  t_i  n  .  t>  i.

man  domin-  tamed  in  honourable  connnement  at  Kavenna,  ne
was  constantly  amused  with  the  hope  of  being
restored  to  power  by  the  Roman  armies :  but  the  expected
moment  never  came,  and  after  lingering  in  suspense  and  dis-
appointment through  a  period  of  eighteen  years,  he  died  at
last  an  object  of  scarcely  merited  contempt  to  the  few  who
yet  remembered  that  he  had  been  a  king  and  the  founder  ot
a  kingdom.4

The  success  of  the  artifices  of  Tiberius  against  German

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  44-46.  2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  63.

A.U.  774.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  55

liberty  was  further  exemplified  in  the  offer  he  is  said  to  have
received  at  this  period  from  a  chief  of  the  Chatti,  Death  of  Ar.
to  effect  the  removal  of  Arminius  privily.  The  mu£u£;  2i.
barbarian  demanded  to  be  furnished  with  some  ,  A- u- m-
subtle  poison,  such  as  the  Romans  were  but  too  skilful  in  pre-
paring. This  nefarious  proposal  was  recited  to  the  senators
by  the  emperor's  command,  that  they  might  hear  his  gener-
ous reply  to  it.  Their  fathers,  he  reminded  them,  had  for-
bidden the  employment  of  poison  against  Pyrrhus,  for  the
Romans  were  wont  to  avenge  themselves  on  their  enemies,
not  by  secret  machinations,  but  openly  and  with  arms.1  But
the  empire,  in  fact,  had  no  more  now  to  fear  from  the  influ-
ence of  its  ancient  antagonist ;  for  Arminius,  the  bulwark  of
German  independence,  degenerated  in  the  hour  of  his  tri-
umph from  the  virtues  of  a  patriot  chief,  and  himself  affect-
ed the  tyranny  over  his  countrymen  which  he  had  baffled  in
Germanicus,  and  rebuked  in  Maroboduus.  His  people  re-
torted upon  him  the  lessons  of  freedom  with  which  he  had
inspired  them,  and  after  a  struggle  of  some  length  and  many
vicissitudes,  he  was  slain  by  domestic  treachery.  The  liber-
ator of  Germany  had  achieved  victory  over  the  Romans,  not
in  their  youth  and  weakness,  like  Pontius  or  Porsena,  but  at
the  period  of  their  highest  power  and  most  varied  resources.
His  life  was  extended  through  thirty-seven  years  only,  dur-
ing twelve  of  which  he  had  enjoyed  the  chief  place  among
his  countrymen :  his  name,  though  its  reputation  was  cloud-
ed at  its  close,  continued  long  to  be  chanted  in  their  house-
holds as  the  watchword  of  liberty  and  glory:  but  to  the
Greeks,  whose  view  was  limited  to  the  world  of  Hellas,  the
fame  of  the  German  hero  remained  unknown  ;  and  even  the
Romans  disregarded  it  in  comparison  with  more  ancient  ce-
lebrities, till  Tacitus  rescued  it  from  obscurity,  and  poured
on  it  the  full  flood  of  his  immortal  eloquence.'

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  88.  See,  for  the  generosity  of  Fabricius,  Plutarch  in  Pyrrh.
12. ;  Cic.  de  Off.  Hi.  22. ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  5.  1.  and  other  writers.

3  Tac.  Ann.  1.  c.  If  the  twelve  years  of  his  authority  are  counted  from
the  defeat  of  Varus  (762),  his  death  would  take  place  in  744. Tacitus  does V

56  HISTORY  OF  THE  KOMANS  [A.D.  17.

The  operations  which  occurred  at  the  same  period  on  the
southern  frontier  of  the  empire  were  of  little  political  impor-
tance. While  the  African  provinces  were  num-

Career  of  Tac-

farinas  in  Af-  hered  among  the  most  opulent  of  the  Roman  pos-
sessions, they  were,  from  the  character  of  the
country,  generally  exempt  from  the  barbarian  warfare  by
which  so  many  other  districts  were  harassed  or  alarmed.
The  skirts  of  the  long  chain  of  the  Atlas,  indeed,  always
harboured  tribes  of  unsubdued  and  predatory  barbarians ;
but  the  strength  of  the  African  hordes  was  so  feeble,  their
means  and  resources  so  limited,  that  their  warfare  was  rather
that  of  a  banditti  than  of  hostile  nations.  Only  when  mar-
shalled by  a  chief  of  Roman  origin  or  training  could  they
become  formidable  either  from  their  skill  in  war  or  their
powers  of  combination.  Thus  in  the  wars  of  the  first  Csesar,
a  knight  named  Sittius  had  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  a
disciplined  force,  with  which  he  had  seemed  for  a  moment  to
hold  the  balance  between  the  contending  factions  of  Rome
itself.  We  now  read  of  the  exploits  of  a  native  warrior
named  Tacfarinas,  who  turned  the  science  he  had  acquired  in
the  Roman  camp,  as  a  captain  of  Numidian  auxiliaries,  into
an  instrument  of  arrogance  and  insult  to  the  majesty  of  the
empire.1  Having  deserted  the  service  of  the  proconsul,  he
had  gathered  round  him  the  bands  of  roving  robbers  who
infested  the  mountains,  and  had  divided  them  into  troops
and  companies.  Accepted  as  their  chief  by  a  tribe  called  the
Musulani,  he  had  associated  with  them  the  Moorish  warriors  on
their  borders,  who  owned  the  sway  of  a  leader  named  Ma-
zippa  :  while  the  one  body,  armed  and  trained  after  the  man-
ner of  the  legions,  formed  the  main  strength  of  these  confed-
erate forces,  the  other,  following  the  fashion  of  the  country,
skirmished  actively  on  its  flanks,  and  carried  fire  and  sword
within  sight  of  the  Roman  cantonments.  Disaffection  was
spreading  among  the  subject  nations  of  the  province  itself,

not  mark  the  date  very  distinctly. Dion  only  once  mentions  the  name  of  Ar-
minius,  in  connexion  with  Varus,  and  never  alludes  to  him  again.
1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  52.

A.U.  771.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  57

when  the  proconsul  Furius  Camillus  advanced  with  the  forces
under  his  command  to  repress  it  by  a  decisive  blow.  The
defence  of  the  peaceful  province  had  been  entrusted  to  a  sin-
gle legion  with  its  auxiliary  cohorts,  and  this  little  army  well
handled  was  sufficient  to  overcome  all  resistance  in  the  field.
Taefarinas,  confident  in  the  tactics  he  had  learnt  from  his
late  masters,  ventured  to  give  battle,  and  suffered  a  speedy
defeat.  The  proconsul  claimed  the  honours  of  a  conqueror ;
and  Tiberius,  it  was  surmised,  was  the  more  willing  to  errant
them  on  account  of  the  obscurity  of  his  name,  which,  high
as  it  once  stood  in  the  fasti  of  the  republic,  had  been  illus-
trated by  no  distinctions  since  the  almost  forgotten  days  of
the  Gaulish  invasion.1  Camillus  himself  had  had  no  previ-
ous experience  in  arms  ;  nor  was  he  now  elated  with  success,
or  tempted,  as  the  chastiser  of  a  horde  of  savages,  to  believe
himself  a  mighty  general.  He  was  not  indeed  aware  of  the
fact,  soon  proved  by  the  event,  that  his  success  was  illusory
and  indecisive.

Germanicus,  after  passing  but  a  few  months  in  Rome,  had
departed  by  Ancona  and  the  Dalmatian  coast,  where  he  had
had an  interview  with Drusus,  to assume  his Tiberlu8lII
ample  powers  in  the  East. Bv  the first  dav £.ermani,'ys '

x *  »  J II.,  consuls.

of  the  new  year,  the  commencement  of  his  con-
sulship, he  had  arrived  at  Nicopolis,  the  city  a.'u!771.
founded  by  Augustus  on  the  shores  of  the  Ambracian  Gulf.
The  descendant  in  blood  of  Antonius,  and  in  law  of  Octavius,
might  behold  with  mingled  feelings  the  scene  of  a  battle  so
fortunate,  and  at  the  same  time  so  fatal,  to  his  race.2  From
thence  he  shaped  his  course  through  Athens,  where  he  recom-
mended himself  to  the  citizens  by  his  studied  moderation,  in
dismissing  all  his  lictors  but  one ;  and  received  in  return  the
highest  compliments  the  Athenians  could  confer,  which  con

1  Tac.  1.  c. : "Nam  post  rccipcratorem  Urbis,  filiumque  ejus  Camillum,
penes  alias  familias  imperatoria  laus  fuerat."

Tac.  Ann.  ii.  53. :  "  Sacratas  ab  Augusto  manubias  (the  beaks  suspended
in  the  temple  of  Apollo)  castraque  Antonii,  cum  reeordationc  majonun  suorum
adiit."

58  HISTOEY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  18.

sisted,  it  would  seem,  in  a  studied  panegyric  on  their  own
greatness.1  From  Athens  he  crossed  to  Euboea,  and  thence
to  Lesbos,  in  the  usual  track  of  the  Roman  proconsuls.  From
Lesbos,  however,  he  took  a  Avider  sweep,  visiting  the  Pro-
pontis  and  the  cities  on  both  its  shores,  and  entering  the
Euxine  Sea,  partly  to  gratify  his  interest  in  scenes  of  historic
celebrity,  partly  to  console  and  encourage  by  his  presence
the  places  which  had  suffered  most  severely  from  the  vicissi-
tudes of  war  and  the  oppression  of  unjust  rulers.3  Only  the
year  before  no  less  than  twelve  cities  of  the  interior  had  been
overthrown  or  damaged  by  a  destructive  earthquake :  but
steps  had  been  already  taken  through  a  special  commission
of  inquiry,  and  by  the  prompt  remission  of  several  years'
tribute,  to  repair  the  effects  of  this  extraordinary  visitation.3
Germanicus  does  not  seem  to  have  made  it  part  of  his  busi-
ness to  visit  the  sufferers.  His  travels  were  prompted  per-
haps chiefly  by  curiosity  of  a  character  more  or  less  enlight-
ened. Thus,  for  instance,  he  steered  for  the  coast  of  Samo-
thracia,  in  order  to  be  admitted  to  the  mysterious  rites  of  the
Cabiric  priesthood,  but  could  not  reach  it  from  adverse  winds.
He  landed,  however,  on  the  shore  of  Ilium,  again  skirted  the
coast  of  Asia,  and  consulted  the  oracle  of  Apollo  at  Claros,
where  the  priest  who  revealed  the  answer  of  the  divinity  is
said  to  have  given  him  an  intimation  of  the  early  death
which  awaited  him.

The  interests  which  Germanicus  thus  appears  to  have  in-
dulged were  scarcely  worthy,  perhaps,  of  the  prince  to  whom
PisoCn»us  public  affairs  of  so  much  importance  were  en-
poinTexi'procwi-  trusted,  at  a  moment  when  every  step  he  took
sui  of  sj-na.  was  watched,  as  he  must  have  known,  with  jeal-
ous scrutiny,  not  only  by  the  emperor,  but  by  at  least  one

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Excepere  Graci  qusositissimis  honoribus,  Vetera  suoruni  facta
dictaque  praferentes,  quo  plus  dignationis  adulatio  haberet."

2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  54.

3  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  47. :  "Eodcm  anno  (770)  duodecim  celebres  Asiae  urbes  con-
lapsae  nocturno  motu  terra  ....  mittique  ex  Senatu  placuit  qui  prasentia
epectaret  refoveretque." A  praetorian  senator  was  sent  to  obviate  any  jealousy

A.U.  771.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  59

powerful  rival  among  the  nobles.1  It  is  possible,  indeed,
that  the  innocent  character  of  a  traveller  and  a  sightseer
was  purposely  adopted  to  disarm  suspicion :  but  in  fact  a
wiser  man  than  the  young  Caesar  would  have  felt  that  he  was
more  concerned  to  guard  by  vigorous  and  decisive  move-
ments against  the  intrigues  of  a  fellow-subject  than  the  dis-
trust of  their  ruler.  On  appointing  Germanicus  to  the  com-
mand in  the  Eastern  provinces,  Tiberius  had  taken  the  pre-
caution, so  his  conduct  was  interpreted,  of  removing  from
the  government  of  Syria  the  prince's  friend  and  adherent
Silanus,  and  placing  there  a  man  whose  pride  and  personal
pretensions  might  be  used  as  an  instrument  for  controlling
his  ambition.3  Cnams  Piso,  on  whom  this  ap-  Pride  of  the
pointment  was  conferred,  was  a  member  of  the  gens,Uandn0n-
Calpurnian  gens,  which  claimed  as  high  an  anti-  clsare^fam-6
quity  as  any  of  the  oldest  families  of  Rome,  and  il>'-
at  least  in  the  last  century  of  the  republic,  had  repeatedly  fill-
ed the  highest  magistracies.  The  surname  of  Piso  was  com-
mon to  more  than  one  branch  of  this  noble  house,  and  the
proenomen  Cmeus  had  descended  to  the  personage  now  before

on  the  part  of  the  consular  governor  of  the  province. It  is  just  possible  that
this  might  be  the  reason  why  Germanicus  omitted  to  visit  the  injured  cities.

1  Tacitus  notices  the  antiquarian  spirit  of  the  Greeks  rather  contemptuously.
Hist.  ii.  4. :  "  Spectata  opulentia  donisque  regum,  quasque  alia  laetum  antiquita-
tibus  Graecorum  genus  incertae  vetustati  affigit."  But  the  Roman  nobles
showed  their  Hellenic  culture  by  affecting  a  similar  taste;  thus  Caesar,  the
Caesar  at  least  of  Lucan,  spent  a  day  in  visiting  the  plain  of  Troy,  under  the
guidance  of  a  native  cicerone:  "Herceas,  monstrator  ait,  non  respicis  aras?"
1' liars,  ix.  979.  Comp.  viii.  851.:  "Nam  quis  ad  exustam  Cancro  torrente
Syenen  Ibit,  et  imbrifera  siccas  sub  Pleiade  Thebas,  Spectator  Nili  ?  "  and  the
whole  spirit  of  the  description  of  the  Nile  in  the  tenth  book.  See  also  the
address  to  Celer  in  Statius,  Sylv.  ii.  2.  197. :

"  Te  praeside  noscat
Unde  paludosi  ftccunda  licentia  Nili  ....
Due  et  ad  /Emathios  Manes  ubi  belliger  urbis
Conditor  Hyblaeo  pcrfusus  nectare  durat  .  .  .  ."
4  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  43. The  daughter  of  Silanus  was  betrothed  to  Nero,  the
eldest  son  of  Germanicus,  then  a  mere  child. The  marriage  seems  never  to
have  taken  place.

60  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  18.

us  from  a  father  who  had  fought  through  the  wars  of  Caesar
and  Pompeius,  had  shared  the  disasters  of  Cassius  and  Bru-
tus, and  though  pardoned  by  Octavius,  had  disdained  to  so-
licit employment  under  the  new  institutions.1  Only  when
spontaneously  offered  him  by  the  emperor  had  he  deigned  to
accept  the  consulship.  Cmeus  Piso,  the  son,  was  reputed  a
proud  man  among  the  proudest  of  circles,  the  magnates  of
the  expiring  free  state  and  the  rising  empire ;  a  class  whose
intense  self-assertion  was  inflamed  by  family  names,  family
rites,  family  images  and  ensigns.  The  decline  of  their  num-
bers after  the  slaughter  of  the  Sullan  wars  had  imparted  still
greater  concentration  to  this  feeling ;  and  claiming  complete
equality  among  themselves,  they  hesitated  to  acknowledge  a
superior  even  in  the  emperor  himself.  To  an  JEmilius  or  a
Calpurnius,  a  Lepidus  or  a  Piso,  the  son  of  an  Octavius  was
still  no  more  than  a  plebeian  imperator,  raised  to  power  by
a  turbulent  commonalty  ;  a  breath,  they  felt,  had  made  him,
and  a  breath,  they  fondly  believed,  might  yet  overthrow  him.
Whether  as  an  emperor  or  a  private  senator,  whatever  might
be  his  actual  powers,  his  pretensions  to  legitimate  right  they
haughtily  despised  and  repudiated.  They  had  marked,  no
doubt  with  peculiar  jealousy,  the  alliance  of  the  plebeian
Octavius  with  one  of  their  own  houses,  the  Claudian,  the
nobility  of  which  it  was  impossible  to  gainsay :  but  this
served  only  to  convert  their  disdain  into  jealousy,  and  impel
them  to  a  state  of  antagonism  or  rivalry,  from  which  they
had  before  held  contemptuously  aloof.  When  once  invited
to  compare  themselves  with  their  ruler,  it  was  easy  to  per-
suade them  that  each  had  individually  a  claim  to  empire,  to
the  full  as  good  as  the  man  whom  fortune  had  placed  in  the
ascendant.  Piso  deemed  himself  the  natural  equal  of  Tibe-
rius, or  if  he  had  any  misgivings  of  his  own,  his  consort

1  Tac.  Ann.  1.  c. ;  Comp.  Smith's  Did.  of  Class.  Biography,  art.  Piso,  nos.
22,  23.  There  were  also  two  Cnaeus  Pisos  before  the  last-mentioned,  one  quaes-
tor to  Pompeius  in  the  Piratic  War,  the  other  the  associate  of  Catilina,  mur-
dered in  Spain.  It  is  not  clear  from  which  of  these  the  Pisos  in  the  text  de-
scended.

A.U.  771.]  *  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  61

Plancina,  the  daughter  of  Munatius  Plancus,  the  chief  who
for  a  moment  had  trimmed  the  scales  betAveen  the  armed
factions  of  the  republic,  was  of  a  temper  to  dispel  or  over-
rule them.  This  imperious  woman  had  formed,  p]anc;nai  Wjfe
morever,  an  intimacy  with  the  empress-mother,  "4urUe  of*"
in  whose  plans  for  prolonging  the  tutelage  of  Llvia-
Tiberius  she  had  pi-obably  borne  a  part.  She  had  learnt  to
despise  the  son  in  the  cabinet  of  the  mother.  Still  more  did
the  vainglorious  pair  look  scornfully  on  the  children  of  the
man  for  whom  they  had  so  little  respect  himself.  Piso  be-
lieved that  he  was  appointed  to  the  government  of  Syria  in
order  to  check  the  ambitious  designs  which  it  was  so  easy  to
impute  to  Germanicus,  and  Plancina  may  have  been  instruct-
ed by  Livia  to  play  the  rival  to  Agripjnna ;  for  the  people  at
least,  were  easily  persuaded  that  the  imperial  house  was  al-
ready a  prey  to  domestic  jealousies.  Conscious  of  their  own
preference  for  Germanicus,  they  were  not  less  convinced  of
the  partiality  of  Tiberius  for  Drusus,  and  they  were  persuad-
ed that  the  fertility  of  Agrippina,  the  consort  of  the  one,
must  be  a  source  of  mortification  and  dislike,  when  contrast-
ed with  the  barrenness  of  Livilla,  the  wife  of  the  other.1

The  mission  which  Piso  seems  to  have  considered  as  co-
vertly confided  to  him,  that  of  thwarting  his  superior,  and
bringing  his  authority  into  contempt,  he  began  conduct  of  Piso
to  discharge  with  zeal,  and  even  precipitate  vehe-  m  Syna*
mence,  from  the  moment  he  quitted  Italy.  Following  Ger-
manicus to  Athens,  he  pretended  to  reflect  on  his  unseemly
derogation  from  the  majesty  of  the  ruling  people,  in  paying
his  tribute  of  courteous  admiration  to  the  monuments  of  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  43.  The  name  Livilla,  the  diminutive  of  Livia,  was  used
frequently  to  distinguish  the  wife  of  Drusus  from  the  empress-mother.  Livilla
was  a  daughter  of  the  elder  Drusus,  and  sister  of  Germanicus,  married  first  to
Caius  Caesar  in  very  early  youth,  and,  on  his  decease,  to  the  son  of  Tiberius,
her  cousin.  She  may  have  had  one  daughter  Julia,  afterwards  united  to  Nero
Drusus  and  RubeUius  Blandus,  in  the  first  ten  years  of  her  second  marriage ;
but  it  was  not  till  112  that  she  bore  a  son,  one  of  twins,  named  Tiberius  Ge-
mellus. See  Ann.  ii.  81.

62  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  * [A.  D.  18.

city  of  Minerva.  The  prince,  though  not  uninformed  of  this
insolent  behaviour,  nevertheless  treated  his  subordinate  with
marked  kindness  :  on  one  occasion  he  even  saved  his  life,  by
sending  him  assistance  when  in  danger  from  a  storm  at  sea,
and  when  his  death,  if  he  had  been  overwhelmed  in  the  wa-
ters, might  have  been  fairly  ascribed  to  accident.  From
Rhodes,  where  they  met  for  the  first  time,  Piso  proceeded
direct  to  the  eastern  provinces,  while  his  chief  still  lingered
on  his  route :  and  on  reaching  Syria  and  the  quarters  of  the
legions,  began  without  delay  a  course  of  conduct  which
seems  to  point,  not  so  much  to  a  studied  hostility  to  German-
icus,  as  to  a  rash  and  crude  design  of  seizing  supreme  power
for  himself.  Not  only  did  he  adopt  every  method  of  corrup-
tion, to  make  himself  a  party  among  the  officers  and  soldiers  ;
he  went  so  far  as  to  dismiss  both  centurions  and  tribunes  of
his  own  authority,  and  to  remodel  the  command  of  the  troops
to  suit  his  own  purposes.1  The  men,  debauched  already  by
the  general  relaxation  of  discipline,  seem  to  have  been  easily
won  over ;  and  even  the  provincials,  unconscious,  it  would
appear,  of  the  true  duties  of  a  Roman  imperator,  applauded
his  indecent  indulgence,  and  entitled  him  the  Father  of  the
Legions?  In  these  artifices  he  was  warmly  seconded  by
Plancina,  who  courted  the  soldiers  by  appearing  at  their  re-

1  The  exact  position  of  Piso  towards  Germanicus,  which  seems  to  have
allowed  him  considerable,  but  ill-defined  authority,  is  marked  by  the  term  adjio-
tor  applied  to  him  by  Tiberius  at  a  later  period,  Ann.  iii.  12.  It  will  be  re-
membered that  when  the  young  Caius  Caesar  was  sent  by  his  grandfather  Au-
gustus to  compose  the  affairs  of  the  East,  a  rector  was  provided  him,  to  advise
or  even,  inexperienced  as  he  was,  to  direct  his  public  measures.  His  first  rector
was  Quirinius  {Ann.  iii.  48.),  who,  as  A.  Zumpt  has  shown  in  his  Comment.
Epigraph,  ii.,  was  probably  proconsul  of  Syria  at  the  time  of  his  arrival.  The
appointment  of  Piso  seems  to  have  been  meant  as  an  imitation  of  the  policy
of  Augustus.  In  the  proconsul  of  Syria  Germanicus  received  not  a  rector,  but,
as  an  older  man,  an  adjutor  only,  whose  duties  were  less  clearly  defined ;  there
is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  Tiberius  had  any  sinister  view  in  giving  him  this
honorary  assistant.

2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  55.:  "Ut  sermone  vulgi  Parens  Legionum  haberetur."  It
is  not  clear  perhaps  whether  the  writer  means  by  vulgm  the  generality  of  the
provincials,  or  the  rank  and  file  of  the  army  itself.

A.U.  771.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  63

views  and  exercises,  a  practice  which  the  Romans  pronounced
unfeminine  ;  and  the  rumour  was  industriously  spread  that
the  conduct  of  her  husband,  and  her  own  constant  abuse  of
Germanicus  and  Agrippina,  were  not  displeasing  to  the  em-
peror himself.

Strange  indeed  it  must  appear,  if  these  proceedings  have
been  truly  reported,  and  if,  as  we  are  assured,  he  was  fully
acquainted  with  them,  that  Germanicus  should

.  ., ,  .  .  Germanicus

have  postponed  their  repression  to  any  other  leaves  it  unno-
object  of  his  mission  whatever.  Such  conduct  votes  himself
could  have  no  other  result,  whatever  the  feeling
which  originally  prompted  it,  than  military  insubordination,
and  discord  in  camp  and  council ;  and  it  is  difficult  to  con-
ceive that  the  vicegerent  of  the  emperor  could  have  any
other  duty  so  urgent  as  that  of  crushing  the  first  germs  of
civil  commotion.  Germanicus,  however,  was  advised  other-
wise. The  settlement  of  the  relations  of  the  empire  with
Armenia  was  the  direct  object  of  his  mission,  and  to  this  he
calmly  devoted  his  whole  attention.  In  order  to  give  full
weight  to  the  terms  he  was  instructed  to  impose,  he  marched
in  person  within  the  Armenian  frontiers  at  the  head  of  his
forces.  Instead,  however,  of  restoring  the  fugitive  Vonones,
still  retained  in  custody  in  Syria,  to  the  throne  from  which
the  jealousy  of  the  Parthians  had  ejected  him,  he  affected  to
consult  the  wishes  now  expressed  by  the  capricious  Arme-
nians themselves,  in  appointing  in  his  room  a  son  of  Polemo,
king  of  Pontus,  named  Zeno,  whose  early  train-  He  crowns  ze_
ing  in  their  own  customs  gave  him  a  nearer  claim  di°adem  ofAr-
to  their  regard.  In  the  royal  city  of  Artaxata,  menia-
and  surrounded  by  many  of  the  native  nobility,  the  Ro-
man Caesar  placed  the  diadem  on  his  destined  vassal's  head,
saluting  him  in  the  name  of  his  new  subjects  with  the  title
of  Artaxias,  signifying  greatness  or  sovereignty.  To  the
envoys  of  Artabanus,  who  professed  an  ardent  wish  to  culti-
vate the  friendship  of  Rome,  and  begged  for  their  chief  the
honour  of  an  interview  on  the  Euphrates,  he  replied  with
the  dignity  which  befitted  his  position,  and  the  modesty,  at

64  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  19.

the  same  time,  which  was  peculiar  to  himself.  He  assented,
moreover,  to  the  request  of  the  Parthians  that  he  would  at
least  remove  Vonones  further  from  the  frontier,  and  assigned
him  a  residence  at  Pompeiopolis,  on  the  Cilician  coast.  Von-
ones, it  seems,  had  been  making  interest  with  Piso  and
Plancina,  and  built  on  their  influence  his  hopes  of  returning
in  triumph  to  Armenia  or  even  to  Parthia.  It  was  surmised
that  the  ease  with  which  Germanicus  yielded  on  this  point
to  the  desires  of  Artabanus  was  partly  owing  to  the  hostile
relations  subsisting  between  himself  and  the  Syrian  procon-
sul. Piso  had  offended  him,  as  an  imperator,  beyond  for-
giveness in  disobeying  his  commands  respecting  the  move-
ment of  troops,  and  the  meeting  between  them,  which  took
place  at  their  winter  quarters  at  Cyrrhus,  had  been  marked
by  coldness  on  the  one  side,  and  defiance  hardly  disguised  on
the  other.  Piso  had  taken  on  himself  to  check  the  custom-
ary adulation  of  an  eastern  prince,  who  had  offered  Germani-
cus a  crown  of  gold,  of  much  greater  weight  than  that  he
tendered  to  his  subordinate,  rejecting  the  present  to  himself
with  pretended  indignation,  and  exclaiming  that  the  compli-
ments addressed  to  his  superior  befitted  the  son,  not  of  a
Roman  prince,  but  of  a  Parthian  tyrant.1

The  formal  reduction  of  Commagene  and  Cappadocia  to
the  condition  of  provinces,  completed  the  work  of  the  year.
_ .  In  the  folio  win  o-  winter  Germanicus  made  a  tour

Germanicus  »

visits  Egypt.  m  Egypt,  with  the  professed  object  of  examining
a.  n.  19.  the  state  of  that  province  ;  but  his  ardour  in  the
study  of  antiquities  was,  it  would  appear,  a  more
urgent  motive  for  his  journey.3  His  behaviour  to  the  natives
there  was  as  usual  studiously  moderate  and  courteous  :  he
not  only  appeared  among  them  unattended  by  soldiers,  and
in  the  peaceful  garb  of  a  Greek  philosopher,  as  Scipio  had
visited  Sicily  in  the  heat  of  the  Punic  war,  but  opened  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  56-58.

2  The  motive  which  Suetonius  alleges,  to  take  measures  for  the  relief  of  an
impending  scarcity,  is  not  mentioned  by  Tacitus,  and  seems  at  least  superfluous.
Suet.  Tib.  52. ;  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  59.

A.  U.  772.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  65

granaries  for  the  cheaper  and  more  abundant  supply  of  grain.
Tiberius  is  said  to  have  addressed  him  with  a  gentle  reproof
for  a  condescension  which  was  deemed  unworthy  of  his  sta-
tion ;  but  the  affairs  of  Egypt  lay  beyond  the  sphere  of  his
mission,  and  he  was  rebuked  more  pointedly  for  disregarding
the  rule  established  by  Augustus,  that  no  senator  nor  even  a
knight  should  enter  Egypt  at  all,  except  with  the  emperor's
special  permission.  While,  however,  these  unfavourable  re-
marks were  yet  unknown  to  Germanicus,  he  continued  his
progress,  ascending  the  Nile  from  Canopus,  visiting  the  Pyr-
amids and  temples  on  its  banks,  and  listening  with  awe  and
wonder  to  the  mysterious  music  which  breathed  from  the  face
of  Memnon.1  He  consulted,  moreover,  the  oracle  of  the  bull
Apis,  and  received,  it  was  said,  an  ominous  response.2  Nor
did  he  retrace  his  steps  till  he  had  reached  Elephantine  and
Syene,  the  furthest  limits  of  the  empire.3  The  real  objects
of  his  mission  to  the  East  had  been  already  accomplished,
and  he  might  amuse  his  leisure  with  contemplating  the  won-
ders of  the  land  of  mystery  and  fable  ;  but  the  notice  which
now  reached  him  of  the  emperor's  displeasure,  hastened  per-
haps his  departure  from  it.  The  senate  indeed,  while  it  lis-
tened with  silent  deference  to  the  murmurs  of  Tiberius,  con-
curred in  voting  an  ovation  to  his  nephew  for  his  settlement
of  the  affairs  of  Armenia,  and  an  ovation  also  to  his  son  for
the  capture  of  Maroboduus.  The  two  princes  were  invited
to  enter  the  city  in  solemn  procession  together.4 But  Ger-

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  60.  2  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  viii.  71.

3  Tac.  ii.  61.:  " Elcphantincn  ac  Syencn,  claustra  olim  Romani  imperii;
quod  nunc  (in  the  time  of  Trajan)  rubrum  ad  mare  patescit ; "  meaning  perhaps
the  Indian  Ocean.  Syene,  the  modern  Assouan,  was  supposed  to  lie  under  the
Tropic  of  Cancer,  a  fact  which  the  ancients  established  from  the  direct  rays  of
the  sun  being  visible  there,  as  they  affirmed,  at  the  summer  solstice  at  the  bot-
tom of  a  well.  This  phenomenon,  however,  might  be  observed  at  any  spot
within  a  quarter  of  a  degree  of  the  actual  circle.  Mannert.  x.  i.  322. ;  Malte-
brun,  Geogr.  i.  9.  Its  exact  latitude,  indeed,  is  24°  5'  N.,  while  the  tropical
circle  is  23°  28',  a  difference  of  37'.  It  is  said,  however,  that  the  inclination
of  the  shadows  is  still  not  perceptible  to  the  eye  there.

4  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  64.

vol.  v. — 5

66  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  19.

Germanicns  re-  mamcus  now  shaped  his  course  from  Egypt  to
turns  to  Syria.  Syria,  where  he  found  that  his  regulations  and
appointments  had  been  audaciously  overruled  by  Piso.  The
warmth  to  which  he  was  at  last  excited  by  this  insolence
seems  to  have  determined  the  offender  to  quit  the  province
of  his  own  accord.  Piso  had  already  made  preparations  for
relinquishing  his  post,  when  the  feeble  state  of  health  into
which  the  Caesar  now  fell  induced  him  to  defer  his  departure.
Presently,  however,  the  young  prince  seemed  to  revive,  and
the  provincials  vied  with  one  another  in  courtly  demonstra-
tions, at  which  Piso  was  so  mortified  as  to  break  out  into
actual  violence  against  the  astonished  populace  of  Antioch.
Retiring,  however,  no  further  than  Seleucia,  he  there  pro-
posed to  await  the  event  of  his  chief's  sickness,  which  had
His  sickness  again  returned ;  while  the  attendants  of  German-
l™n  adminis?01  ^cus  murmured  their  suspicions  that  he  had  ad-
teredbyPiso.  ministered  poison  to  their  patron.  They  pre-
tended, moreover,  that  he  had  assailed  his  life  with  magical
incantations,  in  proof  of  which  they  produced  charms  and
amulets,  with  the  remains  of  human  bones,  hidden  under  the
floor  of  his  apartment,  and  the  name  of  Germanicus  inscribed
on  leaden  tablets  buried  amongst  these  implements  of  witch-
craft. The  Romans  were  fully  persuaded  of  the  pretended
powers  of  sorcery,  and  they  had  ample  experience  perhaps
of  the  actual  effects  of  poison :  yet  it  hardly  occurred  to
them  that  the  use  of  the  one  must  be  superfluous  as  an  ad-
junct to  the  other.  We  may  be  allowed  to  think  that  in
producing  this  secondary  proof  of  Piso's  criminality,  they
have  weakened  the  credibility  of  the  primary  accusation.1

Meanwhile  the  messengers  whom Piso  sent  to inquire

after  the  prince's  health  were  naturally  regarded  as  spies,  if

not  as  assassins. Germanicus,  it  seems,  was  him-

DeathofGer-  .  „ .  .  7

manicns.  sell  iully  impressed  with  the  idea  that  he  was

a.  d.  19. the  victim  of  treachery,  and  he  dictated  from  his

bed  a  letter  to  the  culprit,  in  which  he  formally

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  69. ;  Dion,  lvii.  18.

A.U.  772.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  67

renounced  his  insidious  pretensions  to  friendship.1  At  the
same  time  he  commanded  him  to  surrender  the  ensigns  of
authority,  and,  as  some  related,  to  quit  the  province,  fearing
to  expose  to  his  implacable  hatred,  on  his  own  anticipated
demise,  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  his  defenceless  family.2
Whether  commanded  or  only  admonished,  Piso  sullenly  sub-
mitted. He  put  himself  on  board  a  vessel,  and  sailed  west-
ward :  nevertheless  he  continued  to  linger  on  his  route,
awaiting  the  moment  of  the  prince's  dissolution  to  return,
and  boldly  seize  again  the  proconsular  power  in  Syria.  Ger-
manicus  grew  rapidly  worse.  With  his  failing  breath  he
called  his  friends  into  his  presence,  and  adjured  them  to
prosecute  Piso  and  Plancina  as  the  real  authors  of  his  death,
and  charge  the  senate  to  avenge  his  murder  with  a  stern  and
righteous  judgment.  Many  brave  and  noble  spirits  were
assembled  round  his  bed,  devoted  to  the  republic  and  the
Caesarean  family,  and  this  appeal  to  their  affection  was  not
made  in  vain.  They  promised  to  hold  his  last  wishes  sacred ;
nor  did  they  fail  in  their  promise.3  Finally  the  dying  man
turned  to  his  faithful  Agrippina,  whose  heart  was  ready  to
break  with  grief  and  rage,  and  implored  her  to  moderate
her  transports,  to  check  the  fury  of  her  indignation,  and  for
the  sake  of  their  children,  so  dear  to  both,  abstain  from  any
show  of  pride  which  might  give  offence  to  personages  more
powerful,  as  he  said,  than  herself.  This  covert  allusion  was
supposed  to  point  at  Tiberius  himself;  and  the  rumour  was
eagerly  embraced  by  a  licentious  populace,  that  their  favour-
ite with  his  last  breath  had  warned  his  relict  to  beware  the
malice  of  her  natural  guardian.*

The  character  of  Germanicus,  as  I  have  already  inti-
mated, is  represented  as  one  of  the  most  interest-
ing of  Roman  history. It  is  embellished  by  the on  hla  charac-
warmest  and  most  graceful  touches  of  the  great-
est master  of  pathos  among  Roman  writers,  and  invested

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  70.:  "Componit  epistolas,  queis  amicitiam  ci  renuntiabat."
J  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Addunt  plcrique,  jussum  provincia  decedcre."
*  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  71.  '  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  72.

68  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  19.

with  a  gleam  of  mournful  splendour  by  the  laments  and  ac-
clamations of  the  populace  to  whom  he  was  endeared.  It  is
the  more  difficult  to  form  a  just  estimate  of  it,  from  the  im-
possibility of  distinguishing,  in  the  pages  of  Tacitus,  the  gen-
uine statements  of  history  from  the  gloss  put  upon  them  by  a
sentimental  admirer.  On  the  whole,  the  impression  we  may
most  justly  receive  is,  that  Germanicus  was  a  man  of  warm
and  generous  temper,  but  too  soft,  perhaps,  and  flexible  in
disposition  ever  to  have  become  a  patriot  or  a  hero.  His
condescension  to  the  susceptibilities  of  the  Athenians  and
Alexandrians  was  rather  puerile  than  statesmanlike.  It  is  a
childish  affectation  in  a  ruler  to  pretend  to  be  an  equal.  The
hard  and  self-controlling  Tiberius  was  right  in  reproving  it.
The  emperor,  the  real  man  of  the  world,  trained  in  action
and  suffering,  knew  better  the  painful  requirements  of  the
imperial  station.  Nor,  again,  was  the  taste  the  young  prince
exhibited  for  mere  curiosities,  and  the  excitement  of  sight-
seeing, quite  worthy  of  his  deep  responsibilities.  His  pro-
ceedings, indeed,  are  described  by  Tacitus  in  the  spirit  of  a
dilettante,  and  some  portion  at  least  of  the  frivolity  which
seems  to  attach  to  them  may  be  laid  perhaps  to  the  charge
of  the  author  rather  than  of  the  actor  himself.  Such,  never-
theless, under  the  circumstances  of  the  times,  was  not  the
stuff  of  which  the  ruler  of  a  hundred  millions  of  men  could
auspiciously  be  made.  We  shall  meet,  as  we  proceed,  with
similar  examples  of  well-disposed  youths  bom  in  the  Roman
purple,  displaying  in  early  life  almost  feminine  graces  of
character,  but  degenerating  under  the  trials  and  burdens  of
maturer  years  into  timid  and  selfish  tyrants.  But  it  is  futile
perhaps  and  presumptions  to  draw  conclusions  from  such
slight  and  shadowy  data  as  we  possess:  the  remains  of  Ger-
manicus have  been  embalmed  in  some  of  the  most  eloquent
pages  of  history,  and  it  seems  a  kind  of  desecration  to  turn
him  in  his  tomb.

The  decease  of  the  illustrious  Caesar  drew  tears  from  the
provincials,  and  even  from  the  people  of  the  neighbouring
countries,  while  allies  and  tributaries  felt  that  they  had  lost

A.U.  772.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  69

in  him  a  eenerous  friend  and  protector. Solem-

ra  ... Germamcus

nized  a  distance  from  the  home  of  his  race,  his fondly  com-

.  . pared  to  Alex-

funeral  was  not  adorned  with  the  images  oi  his andertne

•  •  • i  i  Great

ancestors,  which  occupied  their  niches  along
the  walls  of  the  paternal  mansion:  but  the  place  and
circumstances  of  his  death,  cut  off  as  he  was  by  prema-
ture disease  far  from  his  native  soil,  on  the  spot  which  his
virtues  and  genius  had  made  his  own,  throw  some  colour  of
excuse  over  the  fond  idea  of  a  resemblance  between  him  and
the  great  Alexander.1  The  character  of  the  renowned  Mace-
donian conqueror  was  indeed  the  type  to  which  the  Romans
were  constantly  turning.  Pompeius  had  emulated  it ;  even
Crassus  had  aspired  to  it ;  the  flatterers  of  Octavius  had  con-
fidently ascribed  it  to  their  patron.  The  claims  of  Germani-
cus  to  such  a  comparison  were  slight  indeed :  the  only  points
of  similitude  that  could  be  pleaded  for  him  were  his  youth
and  generosity,  the  first  an  universal,  the  second  a  common
attribute  of  early  manhood :  yet  such  is  the  charm  of  these
qualities  that  they  gained  him  more  perhaps  of  his  country-
men's admiration  than  if  he  had  conquered  a  Mithridates,  or
avenged  the  defeat  of  Carrha?.  His  body  was  consumed  in  the
forum  at  Antioch,  after  being  exposed  to  public  Suspicions  of
view  naked.  Such  as  were  already  preoccupied  P°ison-
with  the  conviction  of  his  assassination  are  said  to  have
traced  on  it  indubitable  marks  of  poison ;  while  less  preju-
diced observers,  it  was  admitted,  perceived  no  indications  to
justify  the  suspicion.  The  friends  of  Germanicus,  however,
were  intent  on  bringing  the  supposed  culprits  to  justice.
They  seized  a  woman  named  Martina,  a  creature  of  Plancina,
and  one  already  obnoxious  in  popular  estimation  to  the
charge  of  a  professed  poisoner,  and  sent  her  to  undergo  ex-
amination at  Rome,  while  they  concocted  their  formal  accu-
sations against  both  Piso  and  his  wife.  The  lieutenants  of
the  deceased  prince,  and  as  many  senators  as  were  present,
took  on  themselves,  in  the  absence  of  any  regular  authority,

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  73.

70  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  19.

to  choose  a  proconsul  for  Syria,  in  anticipation  of  the  legiti-
mate appointment  of  the  emperor.  It  was  important  for
their  views  against  the  late  proconsul  to  occupy  the  place  he
had  so  reluctantly  vacated,  and  shut  the  doors  of  the  prov-
ince against  his  unauthorized  return.  The  imperium  was
devolved,  after  some  discussion  among  them  and  the  compe-
tition of  more  than  one  candidate,  upon  Cnams  Sentius.1
Agrippina  herself  made  no  longer  stay  in  Syria,  but  embark-
ed with  her  children,  and,  bearing  the  ashes  of  her  husband,
directed  her  course  for  Rome.9

Piso  meanwhile  awaited  the  long-expected  assurance  of
his  enemy's  demise  at  the  island  of  Cos.  His  triumph  was
indecent  exult-  insolently  avowed.  He  did  not  hesitate  to  offer
ationofPiso.  vows  and  sacrifices  on  the  occasion;  and  his
wife,  it  was  remarked,  chose  that  moment  for  putting  off  the
garb  of  mourning  which  she  had  recently  adopted  for  the
death  of  a  sister.3  Nor  were  there  wanting  among  the  ad-
herents of  the  disgraced  proconsul  advisers  who  counselled
him  to  return  without  delay  to  Syria,  and  claim  the  province
as  his  own.  His  dismissal,  if  such  it  really  was,  had  been  ir-
regular ;  it  had  been  unauthorized  either  by  the  emperor  or
the  senate ;  the  substitution  of  a  successor  might  be  repre-
sented as  violent  and  indecent.  His  son  Mai'cus,  however,
would  have  dissuaded  him  from  so  daring  an  act,  so  near  akin
to  treason  and  rebellion,  and  recommended  rather  his  contin-
uing on  his  course  to  Rome,  and  seeking  at  the  emperor's
hands  restitution  of  the  government  of  which  he  had  been,
as  was  alleged,  so  arbitrarily  deprived.4  The  bolder  advice
prevailed.  The  more  Tiberius  actually  rejoiced  in  the  death
of  the  prince  he  so  deeply  distrusted,  the  more,  it  was  argued,
would  he,  for  appearance  sake,  steel  himself  against  the  ap-
peal of  that  prince's  acknowledged  enemy.  At  the  same
time  the  pride  of  Piso  revolted  against  the  indignity  of  kneel-
ing even  to  the  noblest  of  the  Romans.  If  terms  were  to  be
made,  he  would  make  them  sword  in  hand. Without  abso-

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  Ii.  2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  15.  3  Tac.  1.  c.

4  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  16.

A.U.  772.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  71

lutely  contemplating  an  armed  insurrection  against  the  im-
perial authority,  he  still  rashly  fancied  that  his  position
would  be  more  secure  and  independent  at  the  head  of  the
Syrian  legions,  than  as  a  solitary  suppliant  at

11  « 1  1  -IT  1  1  H6  ClaimS  the

the  door  ot  the  palace. He  addressed  a  letter  to government  of

.  .  .  Syria.

the  emperor,  setting  forth  his  complaints  against
Germanicus,  and  representing  his  claims  to  the  government
of  which  he  had  heen  abruptly  deprived.  Then  summoning
to  him  his  guards  and  centurions,  he  retraced  his  steps  tow-
ards Antioch.  Landing  on  the  coast,  he  intercepted  some
detachments  which  were  marching  into  Syria,  while  at  the
same  time  he  required  the  petty  chiefs  of  Cilicia  to  furnish
him  with  their  stipendiary  forces.1  The  Mediterranean  itself
was  not  wide  enough  to  allow  the  foes  of  Agrippina  to  pass
her  without  meeting.2  An  altercation  ensued  between  them,
which  nearly  led  to  a  desperate  encounter ;  but  when  Vibius
Marcus,  who  conducted  the  widow  homeward,  cited  the  as-
sassin, as  he  freely  styled  him,  to  purge  himself  at  Rome,
Piso  abstained  from  a  hostile  defiance,  and  replied  that  he
would  not  fail  to  appear  at  the  legitimate  summons  of  the
praetor.  At  the  outset  of  his  daring  enterprise  his  courage
seems  to  have  already  failed  him.  His  forces,  indeed,  were
altogether  inadequate  to  the  service  for  which  he  had  design-
ed them,  and  his  only  hope  must  have  lain  in  the  cowardice
or  want  of  faith  of  the  chiefs  opposed  to  him.  But  Sentius
stood  his  ground  firmly.  He  repelled  Domitius,  the  officer
whom  Piso  had  sent  before  him  to  secure  a  footing  in  Syria ;
and,  when  Piso  himself  took  refuge  in  the  fortress  of  Celen-
deris  in  Cilicia,  advanced  with  the  forces  of  the  province

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  78.  Cilicia  Aspera,  as  has  been  shown  by  Zumpt  (Comm.
Bpigr.  ii.),  was  annexed  to  the  province  of  Syria  after  its  separation  by  Au-
gustus from  Cyprus,  which  was  surrendered  to  the  senate.  Hence  we  infer
tliiit  Quirinius,  who  gained  the  triumphal  ornaments  for  his  victories  over  the
Homonadenses,  a  Cilician  tribe,  was  actually  governor  of  Syria.  Tac.  Ann.
Hi.  48.  Accordingly  the  bold  act  of  Piso  in  arming  the  militia  of  this  dis-
trict was  not  an  invasion  of  another  governor's  authority,  but  only  the  asser-
tion of  what  he  pretended  to  be  rightfully  his  own.

*  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  79.

72  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  19.

against  him,  and  sat  down  resolutely  to  reduce  it.  In  vain
did  Piso  try  all  the  arts  of  persuasion  and  corruption  on  both
the  men  and  their  leaders.  Baffled  and  reduced  to  despair
he  sued  for  leave  to  remain  unmolested  in  the  place,  on  sur-
rendering his  arms,  till  the  question  of  the  Syrian  govern-
ment should  he  decided  by  the  emperor.  His  conditions
were  rejected,  and  no  other  indulgence  was  accorded  him
than  leave  to  quit  his  place  of  refuge,  and  take  ship  direct  for
Rome.1

Thus  defeated  in  an  enterprise  so  questionable  in  its  char-
acter, Piso  must  have  felt  his  position,  whether  as  a  suppliant
for  the  prince's  favour  or  a  claimant  for  his  iustice,

Sympathy  of  r .  J  '

the  Romans  for  iar  more  insecure  than  it  had  been  before  he
rashly  turned  back  from  Cos.  The  temper  of  the
citizens  was  inflamed  violently  against  him.  In  their  breasts,
at  least,  there  was  no  doubt  of  his  guilt ;  and  the  freedom
with  which,  in  the  bitterness  of  their  sorrow,  they  coupled
the  names  of  Tiberius  and  Livia  with  those  of  the  detested
Piso  and  Plancina  was  far  more  likely  to  irritate  the  emperor
against  him,  than  induce  him  to  throw  a  shield  over  his  mis-
fortunes. The  first  news  which  arrived  at  Rome  of  the
failing  health  of  Germanicus  had  excited  popular  suspicion
against  his  uncle  :  it  was  muttered  that  his  reputed  patriot-
ism, and  the  desire  ascribed  to  him  to  restore  the  republic,
were  the  cause  of  the  fatal  hostility  of  the  head  of  his  house.
On  a  premature  announcement  of  his  death  the  whole  city
spontaneously  assumed  all  the  outward  marks  of  an  appointed
mourning ;  and  when  again  fresh  arrivals  from  Syria  pro-
claimed that  he  was  still  living,  the  people  passed  to  the
opposite  extreme  of  frantic  exultation,  till  the  doors  of  the
temples  were  burst  with  the  pressure  of  the  crowd  of  grate-
ful worshippers.8  But  the  fatal  assurance  of  his  actual  decease
was  not  long  delayed. The  usual  honours  paid  to

Demonstra-  _  c  ^  A

tions  of  grief the  dead  Caesars  were  decreed  him  with  more  than
usual  genuineness  of  feeling. Triumphal  arches

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  79-81.  a  Suet.  Calig.  5. ;  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  82.

A.U.  772.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  73

were  erected  to  him,  not  in  Rome  only,  but  on  the  Rhine
and  among  the  heights  of  the  Amanus  ;  and  it  was  recorded
upon  them  that  he  had  died  for  the  republic?  His  statues
were  set  up  in  various  cities,  and  sacrifices  made  before  them ;
finally  his  bust  was  placed  in  the  libraries  and  public  galler-
ies among  the  masters  of  Roman  eloquence.  The  exhibition
of  this  feeling  was  directed  personally  to  the  hero  :  the  rest
of  the  imperial  house  could  claim  no  share  in  it.  When
Livilla,  the  wife  of  Drusus,  herself  the  sister  of  the  lamented
prince,  brought  forth  at  this  time  a  twin-birth  of  sons,  and
Tiberius  proudly  boasted  that  never  before  had  such  good
fortune  befallen  a  parent  so  illustrious,  the  people  took  no
part  in  his  rejoicings,  but  rather  murmured  at  an  event  which
seemed  to  add  weight  and  influence  to  a  rival  branch  of  the
Coesarean  family.2

The  arrival  of  Agrippina  and  her  mournful  equipage,  first
at  Brundisium,  and  presently  in  the  city,  awoke  the  sorrows
of  the  people  to  a  louder  and  if  possible  a  more Arrival  of  the
universal  explosion. The  funeral  honours  granted T^^s  at
by  the emperor were not wanting in decent AD  20
solemnity. He  ordered  the  magistrates  of  every A- u- 773-
district  through  which  it  passed  to  meet  and  attend  it  on  its
way ;  he  directed  that  tribunes  and  centurions  should  bear
the  urn  on  their  shoulders,  and  the  altars  of  the  Dii  Manes
should  smoke  with  propitiatory  sacrifices. Drusus,  with  the
younger  brother  and  children  of  Germanicus,  went  forth  as
far  as  Tarricina  to  meet  it:  the  consuls,  the  senate,

I  Funeral  hon-

and  a  large  concourse  of  all  ranks  fell  in  with ours  paid  them

.  . ,  ,  . , by  the  people.

the procession  as  it  drew  nearer  to  the  city.

Rut  one  thing  seemed  still  wanting  to  complete  these  funeral

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  83.

4  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  84.  Of  these  children  one  was  Tiberius  Gemellus,  whose
name  will  appear  again  on  these  pages :  the  other  seems  to  have  died  in  in-
fancy.

*  Other  extraordinary  signs  of  grief  arc  recorded  by  Suetonius,  1.  c.  Even
foreign  princes  laid  aside  their  royal  ornaments  on  the  day  when  this  solem-
nity was  reported  to  them ;  the  king  of  the  Parthians  abstained  from  the  state
exercise  of  hunting.

^4  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  20.

honours.  The  emperor,  the  chief  of  the  house  which  had  lost
so  distinguished  a  member,  the  chief  of  the  state  which
mourned  so  cherished  a  hero,  was  himself  absent.  Even
within  the  city,  and  after  the  dear  remains  had  been  con-
Eeserved  de-  signed  to  the  Caesarean  mausoleum,  Tiberius
berius  andf  Tl"  abstained  from  appearing  in  public,  and  letting
Livia.  j^g  pe0pje  behold  him  in  the  same  garb  of  mourn-

ing as  themselves.  Livia  also  maintained  a  similar  reserve ;
nor  less  did  Antonia  herself,  the  mother  of  the  deceased.
The  suspicions  already  current  against  Tiberius  and  the  aged
enij>ress  were  confirmed  by  this  unaccountable  coldness :  it
was  rumoured  that  they  kept  close  within  the  palace  lest  the
people  should  discover  that  under  the  guise  of  sorrow  their
eyes  were  really  tearless  ;  and  Antonia,  it  was  believed,  was
forbidden  to  attract  attention  to  their  absence  by  showing
herself  to  the  citizens.1  These  surmises  were,  perhaps,  hardly
fair.  Tiberius  may  have  had  no  personal  affection  for  his
nephew  :  he  was  probably  jealous  of  him,  and  mortified  at
his  popularity :  in  the  midst  of  the  wailing  citizens  he,  at
least,  might  have  been  no  genuine  mourner.  Yet  it  is  diffi-
cult to  suppose  that  one  so  long  trained  in  dissimulation
would  have  found  it  hard  to  cast  a  decent  cloud  over  his
countenance,  and  a  man  so  crafty  and  politic  as  he  is  repre-
sented, would  have  affected  at  least  the  feeling  of  the  hour,
however  little  he  may  have  really  shared  it.  The  fact  is,
however,  that  the  breast  of  Tiberius  was  something  very
different  from  a  mere  calculating  machine.  He  had  strong
feelings,  and  even  violent  prejudices  on  certain  points  of
conduct.  He  detested  all  outward  expression  of  sensibility
from  temper  rather  than  policy.  The  lightness  and  frivolity
of  the  Italian  character,  enfeebled  as  it  now  was  by  moral
and  sensual  indulgence,  its  vehement  gesticulations,  its  ready
laugh  or  sigh,  its  varying  smiles  and  tears,  he  despised  with
cynical  indignation.  Self-sufficing  himself,  and  always  self-
controlled,  he  scorned  the  woe  or  the  pleasure  which  seeks

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  3.

i3.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  * 7

to

relief  or  sympathy  from  any  outward  demonstrations.  There
was,  moreover,  a  dogged  obstinacy  about  him  which  for-
bade him  in  this  case  to  yield  to  the  wishes  and  expectations
of  the  people,  just  as  on  a  former  occasion  he  had  held  out
morosely  against  the  reasonable  inclinations  of  Augustus.
He  was  in  fact  one  of  those  very  unamiable  men  who  subject
their  conduct  to  harsh  interpretations  from  mere  perverse-
ness  of  temper,  and  the  dislike  and  distrust  they  create  in
the  breasts  of  those  around  them.  In  certain  positions  in
life  such  men  are  unavoidably  thrust  into  crimes,  and  into
such  we  shall  soon  find  Tiberius  impelled  without  the  power
of  resistance.  But  it  is  probable  that  at  this  period  at  least
he  was  much  misconstrued,  and  the  time  has  not  yet  come
to  employ  those  sable  colours  in  which  the  brush  of  his  de-
lineator must  eventually  be  dipped.

The  injustice,  indeed,  of  the  historians  generally,  and  even
of  a  Tacitus  or  a  Suetonius,  could  touch  him  no  further  in
his  tomb :  but  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  injustice  of
the  Romans  of  his  own  day  went  far  to  confirm  the  vices,
and  exasperate  the  hatred,  they  so  impatiently

. Tiberius  checks

proclaimed.  Such  was  the  inconsistency  of  his  the  flow  of  pop-
character  that  Tiberius  was  keenly  alive  to  the
popular  opinion  which  he  allowed  himself  so  wantonly  to
outrage.  He  had  long  felt  soreness  and  resentment  at  the
distaste  his  countrymen  had  from  an  early  period  evinced  for
him.  Mortified  at  the  disappointment  of  his  wish,  if  not  his
efforts,  to  conciliate  them,  not  the  less  was  he  piqued  at  the
success  of  his  predecessor  in  the  same  course,  from  whose  ar-
tifices his  own  pride  revolted.  The  wound  festered  in  silence
and  concealment.  Conscious  of  unpopularity  himself,  he  be-
came jealous  of  every  mark  of  popular  favour  towards  others,
and  conceived  by  degrees  a  deadly  fear  of  the  guileless  mul-
titude of  dupes  and  drones  around  him.  Speaking  of  his
position  in  relation  to  his  people,  he  is  said  to  have  used  the
expression,  I  hold  a  wolf  by  the  ears.1 The  description  was

1  Suet.  Tib.  25. :  "  Ut  saepc  lupum  se  auribus  tenerc  diccret." Donatns  or

76  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  20.

a  totally  false  one :  it  was  the  excuse  of  a  coward  to  him-
self, which  he  sought  presently  to  justify  by  acts  of  spasmod-
ic ferocity ;  but  the  populace,  meanwhile,  unconscious  of  its
master's  alarms,  and  alive  only  to  his  infirmities,  indulged  in
the  luxury  of  woe  with  a  levity  as  frivolous  as  it  proved
eventually  fatal.  Not  content  with  maliciously  comparing
with  this  neglect  of  Tiberius  the  warm  feeling  exhibited  by
Augustus  on  the  death  of  Drusus,  his  going  forth  two  hun-
dred miles  in  the  depth  of  winter  to  meet  the  bier,  conveying
it  in  person  into  the  forum,  and  pronouncing  the  funeral  ad-
dress from  the  rostra,  they  lavished  all  their  praises  and  ac-
clamations on  the  widow  of  their  favourite,  declaring  her  the
true  glory  of  Rome,  the  only  genuine  child  of  their  late  mas-
ter, the  last  surviving  specimen  of  ancient  virtue.1  Their
vows  for  her  safety  were  mingled  with  passionate  adjurations
for  the  health  and  happiness  of  her  offspring,  and  their  escape
from  the  perils  which  surrounded  them.  Tiberius  chafed  at
these  ebullitions  of  ill  humour,  and  was  provoked  to  check
them  by  an  edict,  in  which  he  gravely  declared  that  many
noble  Romans  had  died  for  the  republic,  but  none  had  been
bewailed  with  such  an  outburst  of  sensibility.  It  was  well,
he  said,  that  it  should  be  so,  well  for  himself  and  for  the  peo-
ple ;  but  let  some  moderation  be  observed.  There  was  a  cer-
tain dignity  and  reserve  becoming  a  prince  and  an  imperial
people,  which  might  be  disregarded  by  private  persons  and
petty  commonwealths.  Enough  had  been  given  to  sorrow  ;
let  them  remember  the  example  of  the  divine  Julius  on  the
loss  of  his  only  daughter,  of  the  divine  Augustus  on  the
death  of  his  grandsons.  How  often  had  the  Roman  people
borne  Avith  firmness  the  rout  of  its  legions,  the  slaughter  of
its  generals,  and  the  overthrow  of  its  noblest  families !
Princes  are  mortal,  the  state  is  eternal.  Let  every  one  return
to  his  affairs:  let  every  one,  he  added, — for  the  season  of  the

Terence  (P/iorm.  Hi.  2.  21.)  gives  the  Greek  proverb:  tuv  uruv  exu  r"v  Mkov
ovt"  exeiv  0^  ci<j>e'iai  dvvajuu. Baumgarten  Crusius  on  Suet.  1.  c.

1  Tac.  Ann.  Hi.  4. :  "  Decus  patriae,  solum  Augusti  sanguinem,  unicum  anti-
quitatis  specimen."

A.U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  77

Megalesian  games  was  at  hand, — let  every  one  resume  his
amusements.  And  so  the  great  tide  of  life  closed  over  the
remains  of  Germanicus.1

AVhile  he  was  thus  sowing  the  seeds  of  a  long  and  deep
misunderstanding  between  himself  and  his  people,  Tiberius
was  reflecting,  with  eloomy  misgivings,  on  the

•  /.-r.-  m,  1  ?.' .  Piso  refers  his

late  proceedings  of  Piso. Though  morbidly  ieal- cause  to  the

r.  B  ,°  J  J  emperor.

ous  01  any  encroachment  on  the  paramount  au-
thoritv  he  claimed  at  home  and  abroad,  he  was  not  the  less
fixed  in  his  resolution  not  to  obtrude  it  on  general  notice  by
a  direct  vindication.  His  aim  was  to  throw  on  the  senate  the
burden  of  defending  the  prerogatives  it  had,  as  he  pretended,
spontaneously  conferred  011  him.  Accordingly,  while  he
watched  the  acts  of  the  proconsul,  scrutinized  his  motives,
and  strove  to  penetrate  his  designs,  he  was  not  less  vigilant
in  observing  the  disposition  of  the  nobles,  and  estimating  the
support  they  would  tender  to  himself.  Piso's  daring  attempt
to  recover  a  province  from  which  he  had  been  officially  dis-
missed was  an  insult  to  the  government :  but  would  the  sen-
ate regard  it  as  an  insult  to  itself? — did  it  identify  the  empe-
ror's cause  with  its  own  ? — might  it  not  rather  decline  to  in-
terfere between  the  master  and  the  instrument  he  had  him-
self chosen,  and  lean,  at  least  in  inclination,  to  the  side  of  a
member  of  its  own  body,  in  opposition  to  the  authority  which
rivalled  and  controlled  it  ?  Such  considerations  as  these,
which  Piso  himself  fully  understood,  weighed  forcibly  on
Tiberius,  and  made  his  measures  appear  uncertain  and  vacil-
lating. The  culprit  relied  on  the  boldness  and  decision  of  his
attitude.  When  required  by  Sentius  to  refer  his  cause  to  the
judgment  of  the  emperor,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  accept  the
challenge.  From  the  coast  of  Cilicia  he  had  proceeded  in  the
direction  of  Rome  ;  nevertheless  he  did  not  care  to  betray  by
his  haste  any  symptoms  of  anxiety.  He  travelled  slowly
from  city  to  city,  and  instead  of  taking  the  direct  route  by
Dyrrhachium  and  Brundisium,  sent  his  son  in  advance  with

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  G.

78  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  20.

letters  full  of  obsequious  deference  to  the  emperor,  while  he
stepped  himself  aside  into  Dalmatia  to  obtain  an  interview
with  Drusus,  who  had  returned  there  from  attending  the  obse-
quies of  Germanicus.  Tiberius  received  the  young  man  with
courtesy  and  even  favour.  Drusus,  on  the  other  hand,  whose
demeanour  was  generally  open  even  to  bluntness,  affected  a
reserve  and  caution,  in  which  he  had  evidently  been  instruct-
ed by  his  father,  but  assured  Piso  of  his  hope  and  trust  that
the  rumours  about  the  manner  of  the  Caesar's  death  would
prove  entirely  groundless.1

The  minds  both  of  the  citizens  and  the  chiefs  of  the  state
being  in  a  feverish  state  of  excitement,  every  step  the  cul-
He  reacts  P1'^  took  became  a  matter  of  suspicion  and  mis-
Kome.  construction. If  on  landing  at  Ancona  he  fell  in

with  a  legion  on  its  march  to  Rome,  having  been  removed
from  Pannonia  under  orders  for  Africa,  and  accomjjanied  it
for  some  miles  on  its  route,  it  was  reported  that  he  had  un-
duly courted  the  favour  of  the  officers  and  soldiers  ;  if,  again,
he  left  it  at  Narnia,  and  betook  himself  to  the  easier  trans-
port of  a  vessel  down  the  Tiber,  it  was  suggested  that  his
conscious  guilt  sought  to  avoid  just  suspicion,  or  that  his
treasonable  plans  were  not  yet  fixed  and  mature.  It  was
charged  against  him  as  a  grave  misdemeanour  that  he  had
allowed  his  bark  to  be  fastened  to  the  walls  of  the  Cesarean
mausoleum  on  the  margin  of  the  Campus  Martins.  The
pomp  and  even  the  affectation  of  cheerfulness  with  which  he
took  his  way  into  the  city,  attended  by  a  retinue  of  clients,
together  with  his  wife  Plancina,  and  a  bevy  of  her  female
friends,  gave  umbrage  to  a  populace  bent  on  taking  offence.
They  pointed  with  malicious  spite,  as  their  ancestors  might
have  done  two  or  three  centuries  before,  to  the  mansion  of
the  Pisos  overhanging  the  forum,  in  proud  defiance  of  the
commons  below,  and  resented,  as  tokens  of  guilty  ambition,
the  laurels  and  flags  with  which  it  was  decorated  to  receive
its  long  absent  master ;  nor  less  at  the  number  of  friends  and

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  V,  8.

A.  U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  79

courtiers,  who  repaired  thither  to  salute  him  and  partake  of
his  hospitality.1  The  death  of  the  poisoner  Martina,  which
occurred  suddenly  on  her  passage  to  Rome,  was  regarded  by
many  as  a  device  of  the  accused  himself,  or  was  taken  as  an
indication  of  collusion  between  him  and  his  prosecutors.2

Such  being  the  temper  of  the  public  mind,  and  so  strong
the  appearances  of  Piso's  double  guilt,  there  could  be  no  lack
of  accusers  to  spring  up,  and  seize  the  occasion  His  accu8ers
to  make  a  show  of  their  eloquence,  their  zeal  for  j^™  gainst
law  and  justice,  their  love  for  the  Roman  people  ^im-
and  the  family  of  their  ruler.  It  might  rather  be  apprehend-
ed that  the  ends  of  justice  would  be  defeated  by  the  precipi-
tation of  intemperate  assailants,  or  even  by  the  false  play
of  pretended  enemies.  Accordingly  when  Fulcinius  Trio,  a
young  noble,  ambitious  of  notoriety,  came  forward,  the  day
after  Piso's  arrival,  to  lodge  an  impeachment  against  him,  the
real  friends  of  Germanicus,  those  to  whom  he  had  personally
committed  the  vindication  of  his  cause,  were  alarmed  for  the
success  of  their  maturer  plans.  Two  of  these,  Vitellius  and
Veranius,  immediately  entered  the  court,  and  protested
against  Trio's  right  to  prosecute  at  all,  declaring  at  the  same
time  for  themselves  that  they  were  not  come  to  declaim  in
behalf  of  Germanicus,  but  to  attest  by  their  solemn  evidence
the  fact  of  Piso's  criminality.  These  representations  were
judged  to  have  weight,  and  Trio  was  refused  permission  to
make  his  oration  against  the  culprit,  as  regarded  his  alleged
misconduct  in  the  East :  he  was  indulged,  however,  with  an
opportunity  of  uttering  an  harangue  on  the  early  career  of  Piso,
and  of  blackening  his  character,  to  the  extent  of"  his  ability,
by  a  general  defamation.  Such  were  the  facilities  the  Roman
procedure  gave  to  the  young  and  ambitious  declaimcr :  but
attacks  like  these  were  mere  empty  displays  of  rhetoric,  and
served  no  purpose  but  to  amuse  the  idle  or  gratify  the  ma-
licious. Meanwhile  Piso's  friends,  disregarding  such  frivolous
demonstrations,  and  fixing  their  attention  on  the  real  point

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  9.  5  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  7.

80  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  20.

of  attack,  were  striving  to  secure  the  emperor  himself  as
judge  in  the  case ;  for  the  emperor's  consular  or  tribunitian
power  gave  him  formal  jurisdiction  in  the  criminal  trials,
whenever  he  chose  to  exercise  it.  Piso  had  every  reason  to
shrink  from  an  appeal  to  the  people  ;  nor  was  he  without
grave  apprehension  of  the  bias  of  the  senators  against  him.
His  best  chance  of  a  favourable,  or  even  of  a  fair  hearing  lay
before  the  tribunal  of  Tiberius  himself,  who  had  at  least  no
partiality  for  Germanicus,  and  who,  it  was  well  known,
was  indisposed  to  parade  himself  as  the  author  of  strong
measures  against  senators  and  nobles.  But  Tiberius,  on  his
part,  shrank  from  the  invidious  position  of  a  judge  in  a  case
so  delicate.  Not  directly  refusing  the  onerous  responsibility,
he  seated  himself  indeed  on  the  bench  with  certain  of  his
own  intimates  as  his  assessors ;  but  after  listening  for  a  time
to  the  denunciations  of  the  one  party,  and  the  obtestations  of
the  other,  he  finally  remitted  the  adjudication  of  the  cause
intact  to  the  senate.1

Nothing  now  remained  for  the  accused  but  to  prepare  his
defence  in  the  regular  way. He  solicited  the  noblest  and

ablest  men  in  the  city  to  plead  his  cause.  L.
Piso  before  the Arruntius, Asinius Gallus,  S. Pompeius, and

others  hardly  less  illustrious,  refused  on  various
pretences  to  defend  him.  M.  Lepidus,  L.  Piso,  and  Livineius
Regulus,  at  length  promised  to  stand  by  him  ;  and  great  was
the  admiration  of  the  citizens  at  the  confidence  of  the  friends
of  Germanicus  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  assurance  of  the
culprit  on  the  other ;  while  they  anxiously  asked  one  another
what  the  conduct  of  Tiberius  would  be,  and  whether  he  would
sternly  repress  all  personal  feeling,  and  leave  free  scope  to  the
force  of  truth  and  the  influence  of  eloquence  and  reason.2  The
proceedings  indeed  were  opened  by  the  emperor  in  a  speech
The  proceed-  °^  studied  fairness  and  moderation.2  He  repre-
liTpe^ehfrom y  sented  that  Piso  had  been  a  trusty  officer  of  Au-
Tibenus.  gustus,  and  that  he  had  himself,  not  without  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  10.  2  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  11.

3  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  12. :  "  Die  Senatus  Caesar  orationem  habuit  meditate-  tem-
peramento."

A.U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  81

consent  of  the  senate,  attached  him  as  a  coadjutor  to  Ger-
manicus.1  Whether  in  that  capacity  he  had  exasperated  his
chief  by  contumacy  and  rivalry,  whether  he  had  betrayed
satisfaction  at  his  death,  or  even  actually  effected  it,  it  was
for  the  senate,  he  said,  impartially  to  decide  :  if  the  former,
he  would  himself  resent  it  as  a  father,  but  he  would  not  judi-
cially punish  it  as  a  prince  ;  but  if  the  latter,  it  would  be  the
duty  of  the  senators  on  their  part  to  visit  the  murderer  with
a  murderer's  reward,  and  console  the  family  of  the  deceased
with  the  vengeance  which  the  law  prescribed.  He  recom-
mended them  to  examine  carefully  the  charges  of  seditious
intrigues  and  irregular  ambition  ;  and  whether  the  culprit
had  actually  attempted  to  recover  his  province  by  arms,  or
his  faults  had  been  exaggerated  by  the  malice  of  his  accusers,
whose  over-zeal  the  emperor  felt  bound  at  the  outset  to  stig-
matize and  repress.2  For  what  right  had  they,  he  asked,  to
expose  the  body  to  the  public  eye,  and  invite  provincials  and
foreigners  to  examine  the  pretended  tolcens  of  poison  which
it  icas  impossible  to  test,  if  after  all  the  crime  was  still  un-
proved and  matter  of  judicial  inquiry  ?  He  went  on  to
charge  the  judges  not  to  allow  his  private  sorrow,  great  as
he  assured  them  it  was,  to  influence  their  decision  ;  to  exhort
the  accused  to  omit  no  topic  suitable  for  his  own  defence,  or,
if  necessary,  for  the  inculpation  of  Germanicus  himself;  to
encourage  his  advocates  to  exert  their  eloquence  to  the  ut-
most in  the  cause  of  the  unfortunate  defendant ;  finally,  he
begged  all  parties  to  disregard  any  popular  surmises  that
might  be  promulgated  to  his  own  personal  discredit  in  the
matin-.

Thus  encouraged,  or  possibly  perplexed  and  frightened,

1  Tac.  L  c. :  "Adjutorem  Germanico  datum."  For  the  force  of  this  ex-
pression, see  above.

2  Tacitus  says,  "  Armis  rcpetita  provincia ; "  that  is,  he  claimed  by  force
of  arms  possession  of  his  own  province.  If  he  had  occupied  a  post  such  as
Celendcris  in  another  province,  and  employed  its  native  forces,  there  would
have  been  no  question  of  the  gravity  of  his  crime,  and  no  excuse  for  neglecting
to  animadvert  upon  it. A.  Zuinpt,  Comment.  Epigraph,  ii.

vol.  v. — 6

82  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  20.

the  senators  addressed  themselves  to  the  work  before  them.
Speeches  in  ac-  '^wo  days  were  allowed  to  the  managers  of  the
cusation.  prosecution  for  exhibiting  their  charges;  then,

after  an  interval  of  six  days,  three  more  were  granted  for
the  defence.  Fnlcinius  Trio,  who  had  thrust  himself,  as  has
been  said,  into  the  front,  began  with  a  long  and  desultory  at-
tack on  the  conduct  of  Piso  when  he  formerly  governed  in
Spain ;  an  abuse  of  rhetoric  only  sanctioned  by  custom,  but
which  could  hardly  produce  even  the  petty  result  to  which
it  was  directed,  of  creating  an  unfavourable  impression
against  the  accused  in  the  minds  of  his  judges.  An  import-
ant part  of  the  space  allotted  for  the  prosecution  was  wasted
in  this  unprofitable  skirmish.  When,  however,  the  genuine
accusers  stood  forward  with  the  decisive  features  of  the  case
in  hand,  they  found  the  tribunal,  from  whatever  reason,  so
well  disposed  towards  them,  that  they  were  not  required  to
bring  on  every  point  the  most  conclusive  evidence.  Servaeus,
Veranius,  and  Vitellius  followed  one  another  in  denouncing
the  culprit  with  equal  fervour,  and  the  last  of  the  three  with
consjficuous  eloquence,  for  his  enmity  to  Germanicus,  his  in-
trigues with  the  soldiery,  his  attempts,  only  too  successful,
by  poison  and  magic,  against  the  life  of  his  commander,  and
finally,  his  armed  assault  on  the  prerogatives  of  the  republic.
Had  Piso  not  been  first  conquered  as  an  enemy,  argued  Vi-
tellius, he  could  not  have  been  now  prosecuted  as  a  criminal.
Then  followed  an  interval  for  the  judges  to  reflect,  and  for
the  accused  to  prepare  his  defence.  On  most  points  of  at-
tack neither  refutation  nor  excuse  were  possible ;  the  politi-
cal charges  were  too  patent  to  be  rebutted,  too  flagrant  to  be
palliated.  Here  at  least  the  replies  of  Piso  were  weak  and
Piso  defends  vacillating.  The  charge  of  poison,  however,  he
himself.  did  not  shrink  from  meeting  with  a  steadfast  de-

nial ;  and  this,  indeed,  either  from  mismanagement  on  the
part  of  the  prosecution,  or  from  the  real  absence  of  any  rea-
sonable grounds  of  proof,  had  completely  broken  down ;  for
it  was  founded  not  on  any  alleged  connexion  between  Piso
and  the  notorious  Martina,  nor  on  testimony  extorted  from

A.U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  83

his  slaves,  whom  he  freely  tendered  for  examination  on  the
rack,  but  on  the  monstrous  and  incredible  story,  that,  at  a
banquet  given  by  the  prince,  while  reclining  at  his  side,  he
had  with  his  own  hands  communicated  poison  to  the  viands
on  the  table.1  The  rumours  of  magical  incantations  were
invented  perhaps  for  the  populace  of  Antioch  and  Rome  :
though  repeated  in  the  presence  of  the  senators,  we  hear  of
no  attempt  either  to  substantiate  or  refute  them.  But  the
judges,  some  on  one  account,  some  on  another,  were  implac-
able. Tiberius  himself  could  not  forgive  the  attempt  upon
the  province,  and  the  senators,  for  the  most  part,  were  obsti-
nately convinced  that  the  prince  had  met  his  death  by  unfair
contrivance.  There  prevailed,  however,  among  them  a  vague
suspicion  that  there  had  been  collusion  of  some  sort  between
Piso  and  the  emperor  himself.  It  is  possible  that  some  of  the
judges  or  the  accusers  ventured  to  suggest  that  Piso's  instruc-
tions should  be  produced,  and  that  this  was  refused  both  by  the
one  and  the  other.2  Meanwhile  the  people  had  satisfied  them-
selves of  the  full  atrocity  of  the  culprit's  guilt.  They  sur-
rounded the  tribunal  with  cries  of  vengeance,  threatening  that
if  acquitted  by  his  judges,  they  would  tear  the  murderer  to
pieces  with  their  own  hands.  They  would  have  broken  the
busts  and  statues  of  Piso  within  their  reach,  and  exposed  them,
in  default  of  his  own  mangled  limbs,  on  the  Gemonian  stairs,
had  not  a  military  force  arrived  in  time  to  protect  them.  The
criminal  was  removed  from  the  bar  in  a  closed  litter,  attend-

5

1  Slaves  could  not  be  questioned  by  torture  against  their  own  master,  ex-
cept, under  the  emperors,  in  cases  of  treason ;  but  he  might  offer  them  to  be
tortured  as  witnesses  in  his  favour.  Rein,  Criminal-Rechl  der  Homer,  p.  542.
Pliny  mentions  (Iliit.  Nat.  xi.  71.)  that  Vitellius  in  his  speech,  still  extant  in
the  writer's  day,  argued  that  poison  had  been  administered,  from  the  fact  he
asserted  that  the  heart  of  Germanicus  would  not  burn.  (Comp.  Suet.  Calig.  1.)
The  same,  however,  was  believed  to  occur  in  the  case  of  the  morbus  cardiacus
(heartburn  or  cardialgia :  v.  Uardouin's  note) ;  and  Piso  pleaded  that  this  was
the  malady  of  Germanicus.

a  At  this  place  there  is  an  unfortunate  lacuna  in  the  MSS.  of  our  authority
Tacitus:  the  words,  " scripsissent  ....  expostulates ;  quod  hand  minus  Ti-
berius quam  Piso  abnuere,"  seem  to  point  obscurely  to  this  supposition.

84  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  20.

ed  by  a  tribune  of  the  praetorians :  some  supposed  that  this
was  to  shelter  him  from  the  popular  indignation,  but  others
already  whispered  that  it  was  determined  to  sacrifice  him.1

Thus  ended  the  first  day  of  the  defence,  and  the  culprit
re-entered  his  house  with  a  gloomy  presentiment  of  defeat.
Thus  far,  however,  his  wife  had  affected  to  unite  her  cause  with
his,  and  had  loudly  declared  that  she  would  share  his  fortune
for  good  or  for  evil.  If  the  general  feeling  was  not  less  strong
against  her  than  against  her  husband,  she  might  indulge  in
warmer  hopes  of  protection  from  the  favour  of  Livia  ;  and  as
long  as  her  interests  were  united  with  his,  he  might  trust  to
escape  under  the  shelter  of  her  superior  influence.  But  while
Piso  was  battling  desperately  for  his  life  in  the  Senate-house,
Plancina  was  soliciting  the  empress  in  the  recesses  of  the  pal-
ace, keeping  more  aloof  from  him  as  the  charges  seemed  to
press  harder,  urging  excuses  for  herself  independent  of  him,
and  finally  separating  her  cause  from  his.  As  soon  as  Piso
Deserted  bv  discovered  this,  he  felt  that  his  last  hope  was
commits'su!-0  gone.  Hesitating  to  confront  his  accusers  again,
Clde-  he  was  with  difficulty  prevailed  on  by  his  sons  to

nerve  his  resolution  for  a  second  appearance  before  his
judges.  There  he  heard  the  charges  once  more  repeated,
and  underwent  interrogations  which  seemed  to  wax  more
manifestly  hostile :  but  when  he  looked  towards  Tiberius,
and  observed  how  cold  and  reserved  was  his  demeanour,  how
studiously  he  repressed  every  mark  either  of  compassion  or
anger,  he  felt  that  his  doom  was  inevitable.  Carried  back
once  more  to  his  own  dwelling,  he  called  for  his  tablets,  as
if  to  compose  the  peroration  of  his  defence,  wrote  a  few  lines,
which  he  sealed  and  delivered  to  a  freedman,  after  which  he
bathed  and  dressed  as  usual  for  supper,  and  retired,  after
taking  it,  to  his  couch.  At  a  late  hour  of  the  night,  seizing
the  moment  of  his  wife  leaving  his  bedchamber,  he  ordered
the  doors  to  be  closed. The  first  who  entered  at  daybreak

1  Tac.  Ann.  ill.  13,  14.:  "Vario  rumore,  custos  salutis  an  mortis  exactor
sequeretur."

A.U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  85

discovered  him  lying  with  his  throat  severed,  and  his  sword
on  the  ground  beside  him.1

Such  an  end  at  such  a  moment  gave  rise  to  many  whis-
pered surmises.  The  Romans,  ever  prone  to  suspect  foul
plav  and  underhand  contrivance,  could  easily  be „

1 J  '  J  ,  Rumour  that

led  to  impute  the  catastrophe  to  the  emperor  him- Piso  was  put  to

....  ,  . death  by  the

self:  and  it  is  worth  while  to  notice  that  our  his- emperor's  or-

.  .  dor,  unfairly

torian  reveals  to  us  on  this  occasion  the  question- countenanced

.  ,  i  • i  /.by  Tacitus.

able  sources  to  which  we  seem  to  owe  many  ot
his  gravest  incriminations.  I  have  heard  old  people  mention,
he  says,  that  Piso  had  often  certain  papers  in  his  hand,  the
contents  of  xohich  he  did  not  publicly  divulge  ;  but  that  his
friends  used  to  affirm  that  they  were  the  actual  instructions
addressed  to  him  by  Tiberius  regarding  the  unfortunate
Germanicus.  These  he  had  resolved  to  lay  before  the  sena-
tors, and  reveal  the  real  guilt  of  the  emperor,  had  not  Sejanus,
the  confidant  of  Tiberius,  dissuaded  him  by  false  hopes  from
his  purpose.  They  added  that  he  did  not  kill  himself,  but
was,  in  point  of  fact,  assassinated?  The  writer  concludes
this  narration,  however,  with  cautioning  the  reader  that  he
does  not  affirm  this  circumstance  as  an  ascertained  fact ;  and
such,  it  must  be  remarked,  is  too  frequently  his  habit,  to  be
excused,  perhaps,  only  from  the  paucity  of  trustworthy  doc-
uments in  his  reach, — to  insinuate  the  truth  of  popular  ru-
mours under  pretence  of  merely  recounting  them.  It  is  not
too  much  to  assert  that  he  really  means  us  to  believe  most
of  the  stories  he  thus  repeats,  under  the  protest  that  he  can-
not vouch  for  them.  "With  this  caution  against  the  seduc-
tive influence  of  the  most  eloquent  of  historians,  I  return  to
the  narrative  before  us.

Tiberius  expressed,  it  seems,  his  mortification  at  the  death
of  the  criminal :  he  might  easily  foresee  and  deplore  the  sus-
picions to  which  it  would  expose  him. He  al- gontenco
lowed  the  son  of  the  deceased  to  read  to  the  sen- °eainst  rifl0-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  15.

*  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  16.:  "Quorum  ncutrum  asscvcraverim :  nequc  tamen  occu-
lcre  debui  narratum  ab  iis  qui  nostram  ad  juvcntam  duraverunt."

86  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  TA.D.  20.

ate  the  last  words  his  father  had  written,  which  were  now  found
to  contain  a  vindication  of  his  own  children  from  the  charge
of  treason  from  which  he  had  failed  to  relieve  himself,  and
an  appeal  to  the  emperor  in  their  favour,  by  the  five  and
forty  years  of  his  own  faithful  services,  by  the  consulships
accorded  him  by  Augustus,  and  the  friendship  extended  to
him  by  Tiberius  himself.  Such,  he  said,  was  his  last  dying
petition.  Of  the  false  Plancina  he  made  no  mention  at  all.
The  case  for  the  defence  being  thus  abruptly  cut  short,  the
accusers  might  still  use  their  right  to  reply.  But  the  sena-
tors were  not  unmoved  at  the  spectacle  of  war  still  waged
against  a  prostrate  and  insensible  victim.  They  were  satis-
fied with  expunging  Piso's  name  from  the  Fasti,  and  confis-
cating a  portion  of  his  estates,  decreeing  at  the  same  time
that  his  elder  son  Marcus  should  be  banished  for  ten  years,
and  Cmeus,  the  younger,  renounce  the  praenomen  he  had  de-
rived from  his  father.  Tiberius  interfered  to  obtain  some
mitigation  even  of  this  sentence,  protesting  that  it  was  too
much  to  disgrace  the  name  of  Piso,  when  that  of  Marcus
Antonius,  who  had  fought  against  his  country,  and  of  Julus,
who  had  dishonoured  the  imperial  house,  were  allowed  to  re-
tain their  place  in  the  rolls  of  honour.  He  spared  also  the
property  of  the  deceased,  on  this,  as  on  other  occasions,  dis-
playing a  laudable  abstinence  in  this  respect.  But  he  had
used  his  influence,  in  deference  to  his  mother,  to  screen  Plan-
cina from  prosecution ;  and  so  poignantly  did  he  feel  the  dis-
grace of  this  interference,  so  much  was  he  mortified  at  the
murmurs  of  the  citizens,  as  to  seek  to  repair  his  credit  by  a
show  of  lenity  and  moderation  towards  her  husband  and
family.  At  the  same  time,  he  restrained  the  adulation  which
would  have  decreed  him  extraordinary  honours  for  thus
avenging  the  loss  of  Germanicus.  It  was  no  matter,  he  pro-
tested, of  public  joy  and  thanksgiving ;  it  was  the  last  act
of  a  domestic  calamity,  fit  only  to  be  buried  in  the  recesses
of  his  own  memory.  Upon  the  accusers,  however,  he  be-
stowed places  in  the  priesthood,  and  promised  to  elevate  Trio
to  civil  distinctions,  cautioning  him  at  the  same  time  to  use

A.U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  87

his powers of  oratory  with  temper  and  discretion  in  fu-
ture.1

A  calm  review  of  the  circumstances  of  this  celebrated
trial  seems  to  leave  no  cloud  of  suspicion  on  the  conduct  of
the  emperor  himself.  It  results  clearly  from  the  Tiberius  free
acknowledgments  of  the  narrator,  whose  hostili-  p7e™ninregard
ty  to  Tiberius  is  strongly  marked,  as  we  shall  Germanicus.°f
see,  throughout  the  course  of  his  history,  that  the  No  f  of  tho
evidence  in  proof  of  the  murder  was  completely  murder-
nugatory.  Still  less  does  there  appear  any  reasonable
ground  to  implicate  Tiberius  himself  in  the  schemes  of  Piso,
even  supposing  Piso's  guilt  in  this  respect  to  be  still  matter
of  question.  The  fault,  which  gave  rise  to  the  most  unfa-
vourable surmises,  lay  in  his  want  of  firmness  and  decision
in  conducting  the  case.  However  deeply  irritated  at  his
proconsul's  contumacy,  he  could  not  divest  himself  of  the
jealous  distrust  of  his  too  subservient  nobles,  which  impell-
ed him  constantly  to  throw  on  them  the  responsibility  of  an
inquiry,  which,  as  chief  of  the  state,  was  legitimately  his
own.  The  position  he  held  was  a  source  of  unceasing  alarm
and  anxiety  to  him.  Already  he  found  himself  beset  by  the
first  dangers  of  an  intruding  dynasty,  the  repeated  apparition
of  rival  claimants  and  pretenders.  The  first  steps  of  his  il-
lustrious predecessor  had  been  dogged  by  the  upstart  Ama-
tius.  At  a  later  period  Augustus  had  been  persecuted  by  a
bold  impostor,  who  declared  himself  the  real  son  of  Octavia,
for  whom  Marcellus  had  been  substituted  by  fraud.2  The
death  of  the  wretched  Postumus  was  speedily  followed  by
the  enterprise  of  one  of  his  slaves,  named  Cle-  Enterprise  of
mens,  who  pretended  to  represent  him.  On  the  cieinens?nder
demise  of  Augustus,  this  man,  we  are  told,  form-  A  r  lf)
cd  the  design  of  hastening  to  Planasia,  and  car-  a. u. 769.
rying  off  his  master  to  the  legions  on  the  Rhine.  lie  might
have  succeeded,  but  for  the  slowness  of  the  merchant  vessel
in  which  he  sailed  for  the  island. On  arriving  there  he  found

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  17-19.  2  Val.  Max.  ix.  15.  2.

88  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  prince  already  despatched.  Conceiving  at  once  a  still
more  daring  project,  he  secreted  or  dispersed  the  ashes  of  the
murdered  man,  to  destroy  the  evidence  of  his  death,  and  re-
tired for  a  time  to  Cosa,  on  the  opposite  coast  of  Etruria,  till
his  hair  and  beard  were  grown,  to  favour  a  certain  likeness
which  he  actually  bore  to  him.  Meanwhile,  taking  a  few
intimates  into  his  confidence,  he  spread  a  report,  which  found
ready  listeners,  that  Agrippa  still  lived.  He  glided  from
town  to  town,  showing  himself  by  twilight,  for  a  few  min-
utes only  at  a  time,  to  men  prepared  for  the  sudden  appa-
rition, until  it  became  noised  abroad  that  the  gods  had  saved
the  grandson  of  Augustus  from  the  fate  intended  for  him,
and  that  he  was  about  to  visit  the  city  and  claim  his  rightful
inheritance.  At  Ostia,  Clemens  was  received  by  a  great
concourse  of  people,  and  numbers  repaired  privily  to  him  on
his  entrance  into  Rome.  It  was  long,  however,  before  Ti-
berius could  resolve  to  act  vigorously  against  him.  He  would
rather  have  left  the  vulgar  imposture  to  die  a  natural  death,
than  interfere  to  check  it  with  the  bruit  of  arms.  At  last
he  determined  to  exert  himself.  The  pretender  was  speedily
entrapped,  by  two  simulated  believers,  and  brought  bound
to  the  palace.  When  asked  by  Tiberius  what  right  he  had
to  assume  the  name  of  Agrippa  ?  The  same,  he  replied,
that  you  have  to  that  of  Cossar.  The  names  of  no  loftier
accomplices  could  be  extorted  from  him,  and  it  is  probable
that  the  design  was  from  first  to  last  merely  a  wild  concep-
tion of  his  own.  Tiberius  was  glad  to  bury  the  whole  mat-
ter in  oblivion.  He  put  the  man  to  death  in  the  recesses  of
the  palace,  and  had  the  body  secretly  removed,  nor  did  he
cause  inquiry  to  be  made  into  any  circumstances  of  the  at-
tempt, though  some  of  his  own  family  and  many  knights
and  senators  were  said  to  have  privily  favoured,  and  even
given  money  to  advance  it.  Such  was  the  received  account
of  the  affair ;  as  much,  that  is,  as  the  emperor  chose  to  re-
veal, or  the  people  ventured  to  guess  of  it.J

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  39,  40. ;  Suet.  Tib.  25.  •  Dion,  lvii.  16.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  89

But  the  sally  of  an  obscure  slave  was  far  less  formidable
than  the  intrigues  of  illustrious  nobles,  equals  of  the  emperor
himself  in  birth  and  ancestral  honours.  It  was  intrigues  of
a  tradition  of  the  party  which  Tiberius  histori-  Lib° ^™JnB-
cally  represented,  that  every  scion  of  a  consular  A-u.  769.
house  was  a  possible  candidate  for  the  empire ;  and  if  his
own  jealousy  ever  slept  for  a  moment,  officious  advisers  were
not  wanting  to  excite  his  fears,  and  urge  him  to  renewed
vigilance.  A  young  noble  named  Libo  Drusus,  of  the  Scri-
bonian  gens,  the  same  which  had  given  consorts  to  both
Octavius  and  Sextus  Pompeius,  was  suspected,  from  the  ac-
cession of  Tiberius,  of  cherishing  the  project  of  supplanting
him.  His  juvenile  ambition  had  been  fostered  by  the  arti
fices  of  a  pretended  friend,  who  had  tampered  with  the
weakness  of  his  character,  and  led  him  into  criminal  relations
with  the  soothsayers  and  diviners,  who  were  casting  the
horoscopes  of  the  unwary,  and  nattering  with  dangerous
dreams  every  illicit  aspiration.  Libo  admitted  to  his  bosom
the  wildest  hopes  of  fulfilling  the  pretended  destiny  of  his
illustrious  ancestors.  The  sharer  of  his  counsels  betrayed
them  in  due  time  to  the  emperor.  Such,  however,  was  the
apprehension  Tiberius  entertained  of  the  influence  of  a  noble
name,  that  he  did  not  venture  at  once  to  check  him.  On
the  contrary,  he  continued  for  more  than  a  year  to  load  him
with  honours ;  while  such  was  his  fear  of  personal  violence,
that,  when  Libo  assisted  him  at  a  sacrifice,  he  caused  him  to
be  furnished  with  a  knife  of  tin ;  and  in  conversing  with
him,  pretended  always  to  lean  confidentially  on  his  arm,  to
prevent  him  from  drawing  forth  the  weapon  which  he  might
carry  beneath  his  girdle.1  It  was  not  till  he  had  obtained
distinct  proof  that  Libo  had  consulted  a  magician,  who  pre-
tended to  evoke  the  dead  for  unhallowed  inquiries,  that  Ti-
berius ventured  to  convene  the  senate,  to  deliberate,  as  the
tenour  of  his  summons  ran,  upon  a  dreadful  and  monstrous
crime. Libo  Avas  soon  made  aware  of  his danger. lie

1  Suet.  Tib.  25.

90  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  20.

clothed  himself  in  mourning,  and  glided  from  house  to
house,  suing  in  vain  for  the  advocacy  of  his  illustrious
friends.  All  shut  their  doors,  or  turned  their  backs  upon
him.  On  the  day  of  the  trial,  he  appeared  in  the  senate
without  a  patron,  and  studied  only  to  excite  commiseration
by  real  or  pretended  sickness.  Of  accusers  there  was  no
lack.  Among  them  was  Firrnius,  the  false  friend  already
noticed,  and  Fulcinius  Trio,  the  rabid  declaimer.  The
charges  produced  embraced  some  of  the  wildest  fictions.
One  of  the  prosecutors  asserted  that  he  had  been  promised
gold  enough  to  pave  the  Appian  Way  to  Brundisium.  On
this  and  other  testimonies  scarcely  less  trivial,  it  was  de-
termined to  examine  his  slaves ;  and  as  the  law  forbade  the
examination  of  a  master's  slaves  against  him  in  a  capital
case,  Tiberius  caused  them  to  be  enfranchised  before  sub-
jecting them  to  the  question.  Libo  now  felt  that  his  fate
was  decided.  Returning  home,  after  the  first  day's  investi-
gation, for  as  yet  the  personal  liberty  of  the  noble  Roman
was  never  restricted,  even  under  a  capital  charge,  he  sat
down  to  table,  but  after  some  hesitation,  accomplished  his
own  destruction.1  The  prosecution  was  carried  on  notwith-
standing ;  and  when  the  culprit's  guilt  was  finally  declared
to  be  proved,  Tiberius  asserted  that  he  intended  to  pardon
him,  had  he  allowed  him  the  opportunity.2

The  readiness  of  the  senators  to  combine  against  the
presumed  enemies  of  the  prince,  the  zeal  with  which  they
Apprehensions  yie<^  with  one  an°ther  in  leading  the  prosecution
of  Tiberius.  against  them,  the  eagerness  with  which  they
united  in  decreeing  their  death,  and  the  confiscation  of  their
property,  all  these  tokens  of  devotion  might  have  reassured
even  the  fears  of  Tiberius,  and  made  him  feel  secure  of  the
submission  of  his  courtiers.  But  it  seems  to  have  had  rather
the  contrary  effect  of  alarming  him.  He  saw  in  it  the  most
fatal  evidence  of  the  degradation  of  the  Roman  character,

1  Thus  when  Cicero  assigned  the  Catilinarian  conspirators  to  the  custody
of  certain  nobles,  the  legal  fiction  of  their  freedom  was  ostensibly  respected.
8  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  27-31.

A.U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  91

and  he  augured  from  it  that  the  time  would  arrive  when,
every  bond  of  religious  feeling  being  broken,  the  loyalty
with  which  Augustus  had  inspired  his  subjects  would  give
way  to  selfish  passions,  and  the  man  who  should  succeed  in
out-bidding  him  in  popularity,  would  become  master  of
their  venal  affections.  These  apprehensions  were  increased
by  every  expression  of  freedom  hazarded  by  his  anticipated
rivals,  which  he  presumed  to  be  grounded  on  the  conviction
that  their  time  was  coming,  and  that  there  was  in  the  com-
munity a  large  mass  of  feeling  which  responded  to  their
pretensions.  Among  the  nobles  there  was  a  certain  class
who  affected  to  indemnify  themselves  for  the  loss  of  substan-
tial liberty  by  petty  sallies  of  impatience,  and  scarce  dis-
guised irony,  and  among  these  Piso  had  been  eminently  con-
spicuous. Thus,  for  instance,  when  Tiberius  had  announced,
on  a  certain  occasion,  that,  contrary  to  his  usual  reserve,  he
would  give  his  opinion  on  a  particular  charge  in  person,  Piso
ventured  to  ask,  would  he  speak  first  or  last  ? — if  first,  he
added,  I  shall  have  a  guide  to  follow  ;  if  last,  I  fear  lest  I
may  through  ignorance  dissent  from  you.  Such,  says  Taci-
tus, were  some  of  the  last  traces  of  expiring  liberty.1
"While,  however,  any  such  traces,  however  slight,  still  re-
mained, the  shadowy  phantom  of  the  Republic  continued  to
flit  before  the  eyes  of  the  Ca3sar.  There  was  still,  he  appre-
hended, a  germ  of  sentiment  existing,  on  which  a  scion  of
his  own  house,  or  even  a  stranger,  might  boldly  throw  hinir
self,  and  raise  the  standard  of  patrician  independence.  The
death  of  Piso  concurred  with  that  of  Germani-  Eeiieve(i  by  the
cus  to  relieve  him  from  the  terrors  of  this  hateful  ^antoisMuT"
anticipation.  From  this  time  he  began  really  to  PlS0-
reign.  He  was  well  aware,  indeed,  that  he  had  fastened  on
himself  the  hatred  of  the  citizens  by  the  mere  suspicion  of
liis  complicity  in  deaths  which  had  so  manifestly  served  his
interests;  he  knew  that  all  his  acts  and  measures  would
henceforth  be  construed  to  his  injury,  and  a  dark  cloud  of

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  74. Comp.  ii.  35.

92  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  20.

national  distrust  hang  for  ever  on  his  memory.  But,  on  the
other  hand,  these  were  the  mere  shadows  of  evil.  To  the
loss  of  his  good  name  he  was  becoming  more  and  more  hard-
ened. The  flattery  of  poets  and  historians,  even  the  clam-
orous applause  of  the  populace,  he  could  buy  again  if  he
chose ;  but  with  his  cynical  contempt  for  his  people,  he  did
not  think  them  worth  the  cost  in  shows  and  largesses.  He
now  felt  himself  safe  from  the  machinations  of  his  nearest
enemies,  and  free  to  exchange  the  disguised  autocracy  of  his
predecessor,  which  he  wanted  himself  the  tact  and  modera-
tion to  wield,  for  the  direct  and  harsh  exercise  of  uncon-
trolled dominion.

Nevertheless,  while  Tiberius  was  thus  rising  supreme
over  the  laws  of  his  country,  and  the  lives  and  fortunes  of
Secret  influence  the  citizens,  he  was  not  himself  exempt  from  cer-
ofLivia,  tain  concealed  and  mysterious  influences,  which

continued  almost  insensibly  to  direct  and  control  him.  The
first  of  these  was  the  will  of  Livia,  who  seemed  now,  in  ex-
treme old  age,  to  reap  the  full  fruits  of  her  ambition,  the
passion  to  which  she  had  subjected  every  other  inclination
through  her  long  career  of  intrigue.  Her  son  had  risen  un-
der her  auspices,  and  mainly,  perhaps,  by  her  direct  contriv-
ance, to  the  summit  of  power  which  she  had  so  deeply  cov-
eted for  him,  and  her  own  influence  over  him  had  increased
rather  than  diminished  with  his  success.  All  Rome  regarded
the  empress-mother  with  far  more  awe  and  obsequious  sub-
mission than  the  empress-consort.  If  she  had  really  been
the  mistress  of  the  councils  of  Augustus,  he  at  least  had  re-
tained the  ostensible  power.  But  the  habits  of  obedience
she  had  early  impressed  on  her  son  remained  deeply  stamped
on  his  retentive  disposition ;  nor,  however  much  her  yoke
might  sometimes  gall  him,  had  lie  the  spirit  to  reject  it  when
he  became  the  master  of  all  the  world  besides.  The  women
whom  she  admitted  to  her  intimacy  presumed  to  defy  the
laws,  under  her  protection.  On  one  occasion  her  favourite,
Urgulania,  being  cited  as  a  witness  before  the  senate,  re-
fused to  appear,  and  the  praetor  was  complaisantly  sent  to

A.U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  93

take  her  examination  in  private,  a  privilege  not  accorded
even  to  the  sacred  character  of  the  Vestals.1  On  another,
the  same  Urgulania  was  the  cause  of  a  struggle  for  suprem-
acy between  Tiberius  and  his  mother.  It  was  considered  a
remarkable  instance  of  firmness  on  his  part,  that  he  insisted
on  her  paying  down  the  fine  imposed  on  her  by  a  judicial
sentence.  But  the  greatest  triumph  of  Livia's  authority  was
seen  in  the  acquittal  of  her  Mend  Plancina.  The  emperor,
consummate  as  was  his  power  of  dissimulation,  failed  to  dis-
guise the  disgust  he  felt  at  the  part  he  was  reduced  to  play
in  deference  to  this  love  of  power.

Another  influence  behind  the  throne  has  already  been
glanced  at,  in  accounting  for  the  jealousy  Tiberius  felt  of  the
martial  aspirations  of  Germanicus.  The  most
eloquent  of  the  emperor's  flatterers,  in  con-
cluding his  brief  survey  of  Roman  history  which  has  come
down  to  us,  with  a  review  of  the  opening  promise,  such  as
he  represents  it,  of  this  ill-fated  reign,  after  painting  in
flaunting  colours  the  virtues  and  successes  of  the  third
Caesar,  glides  into  the  reflection,  that  the  good  fortune  of
the  greatest  men  is  generally  to  be  traced  in  part  to  the
merits  of  their  most  cherished  advisers.  Thus  the  valour
of  the  Scipios  was  supported  by  the  genius  of  the  Lgelii,
and  Augustus  himself  reclined  on  the  arms  of  an  Agrippa
and  a  Taurus.  In  like  manner,  he  adds,  did  Tiberius  rejoice
in  the  powerful  aid  of  Lucius  Sejanus,  a  man  of  rare  ability,
vigorous  alike  in  mind  and  body,  a  loyal  servant,  a  cheerful
companion,  one  whose  natural  modesty  evinced  his  actual
desert,  and  smoothed  the  way  for  his  well-merited  advance-
ment.2 This  and  much  more  does  Velleius  say  in  the  praise
of  the  favourite  of  Tiberius,  the  man  whose  name  has  be-
come a  by-word  in  history  for  all  that  is  most  fulsome  in
adulation,  most  base  in  dissimulation,  most  atrocious  in
crime.  Sejanus  belonged  to  the  ^Elian  gens,  perhaps  by
adoption,  and  his  paternal  family  was  only  of  equestrian

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  34.:  "Tiberius  hactenus  indulgere  niatri  civile  ratus."
*  Velleius  Paterculus,  ii.  127.

94  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  20.

rank.1  On  the  mother's  side  he  is  said  to  have  descended
from  a  more  illustrious  ancestry.  He  was  born  at  Vulsinii
in  Etruria.  He  seems  to  have  first  established  his  fortunes
on  the  favours  of  a  wealthy  debauchee ; a  but  when  he  suc-
ceeded in  attaching  himself  to  the  person  of  the  young  Caius
Cresar,  the  prospect  of  public  eminence  began  to  open  upon
him.  On  his  second  patron's  premature  decease  he  trans-
ferred himself  to  the  service  of  Tiberius,  over  whom  he  soon
acquired  an  influence,  which  it  became  the  object  of  his  life
to  confirm  and  extend.  But  the  arts  by  which  such  influence
is  obtained  over  a  timid  and  self-distrusting  character,  how-
ever sly  and  suspicious,  do  not  always  imply  any  great  su-
periority of  talent ;  and  the  enemies  of  Sejanus  refused  to
allow  the  object  of  their  abhorrence  the  praise  even  of  emi-
nent talents.  They  would  only  admit  that  he  was  active
and  hardy  in  frame,  and  was  not  deficient  in  boldness  and
enterprise :  he  had,  they  said,  the  address  to  conceal  his
own  vices,  while  he  was  shrewd  in  unmasking  the  disguises
of  others.  His  pride  and  meanness  were  equal  one  to  the
other,  and  he  could  carry  a  pretence  of  moderation  in  his
demeanour,  while  his  lust  of  power  and  lucre  was  really
unbounded.3

On  his  patron's  succession  to  the  empire,  Sejanus  was

found  useful,  and  retained  the  influence  he  had  acquired  by

his  skill  in  relieving;  him  from  the  weight  of  his

Bejanus  prefect  .  °  .

of  the  Prir-  burdens  without  seeming  to  take  them  on  him-
self. Tiberius  sent  him  on  a  confidential  mission
to  advise  the  young  Drusus  in  Pannonia ;  but  he  was  speed-
ily recalled  from  this  distant  service,  and  appointed  colleague
with  his  father  in  the  command  of  the  praetorian  cohorts,
quartered  in  the  vicinity  of  the  capital.  This  charge  placed
him  in  a  position  of  the  strictest  intimacy  with  the  emperor,

1  L.  JElius  Sejanus  was  the  son  of  Seius  Strabo,  a  Roman  knight.

2  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  1. ;  Dion,  lvii.  19.  This  was  M.  Apicius,  the  second  of  the
three  noted  gourmands  of  the  name,  who  are  supposed  to  have  flourished  in
succession  from  the  time  of  Augustus.

3  Tac.  1.  c. ;  Dion,  1.  c.

A.  U.  773.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  95

over  whose  personal  safety  it  was  his  duty  to  watch,  while
he  provided  for  the  execution  of  his  orders  in  Rome.  Here
he  may  have  suggested  that  distrust  of  Germanicus  to  which
the  Romans  ascribed  the  hero's  recall  from  the  Rhenish
frontier ;  he  may  have  prompted  the  mission  of  Piso,  as  a
check  on  the  presumed  ambition  of  the  young  prince  in
Asia ;  he  may  have  whispered  to  the  proconsul  of  Syria  an
assurance  that  his  opposition  to  his  chief  wovdd  not  be  dis-
tasteful to  the  sovereign  power  at  home.  However  this  may
be,  Tiberius  required  a  staff  to  lean  upon,  and  Sejanus  was
strong  enough  and  bold  enough  to  supply  one.  Anxious  as
the  new  emperor  was,  from  his  first  accession,  to  know  every-
thing, and  to  do  everything  himself;  impatient  as  he  was  of
leaving  aflairs  to  take  their  course  under  a  wise  but  distant
superintendence,  and  jealous  of  all  interference  with  his  own
control ;  yet,  finding  day  by  day  that  the  concerns  of  his
vast  administration  were  slipping  away  beyond  the  sphere
of  his  personal  guidance,  from  the  inability  of  any  single
mind  to  embrace  them  all  together,  he  was  reduced  to  the
necessity  of  falling  back  on  extraneous  assistance ;  and  he
preferred,  from  the  character  of  his  mind,  to  draw  irregular
aid  from  a  domestic  favourite,  rather  than  throw  irresponsi-
ble power  into  the  hands  of  his  remote  vicegerents.  He
controlled  the  satraps  in  his  provinces  by  the  agency  of  a
vizier  at  home.

96  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS

CHAPTEK  XLIY.

THE FUNCTIONS OF THE COMITIA : 1. ELECTION OF MAGISTRATES; 2. LEGISLA-
TION ; 3. JURISDICTION  : TRANSFERRED TO THE SENATE, AND HENCE TO

THE EMPEROR HIMSELF. THE EMPEROR'S CONTROL OVER THE SENATE. THE

LAW  OF  MAJESTAS  :  ITS  ORIGIN,  APPLICATION,  AND  EXTENSION  UNDER  TIBE-
RIUS FROM  ACTS  TO  WORDS  AND  INJURIOUS  LANGUAGE. CASES  OF  CON-
STRUCTIVE MAJESTAS. DELATION  ENCOURAGED  BY  TIBERIUS. CONSOLIDA-
TION OF THE ROMAN  DOMINIONS UNDER TIBERIUS. STATIONS  AND DISCIPLINE

OF THE LEGIONS. THE GOVERNMENT AND IMPROVED TREATMENT OF THE

PROVINCES. GOVERNMENT OF ITALY AND THE CITY. DISSIPATION OF THE

TIMES. MEASURES  OF  TIBERIUS. HIS  OWN  VICES  AND  VIRTUES. HIS  DEF-
ERENCE TO THE SENATE. DEFECTS OF TEMPER AND DEMEANOUR.

THE  democracy,  when  roused  to  deadly  struggle  against
the  aristocracy,  generally  gains  the  victory ;  hut  the
fruits  of  victory  it  has  seldom  the  capacity  to  re-

General  result  .  _  .

of  the  struggle tain. The  empire  of  the  Ca?sars  was  founded,  as

between  de-  .

mocracy  and we  have  seen,  on  the  passions  and  just  claims  of

aristocracy.  i-iir-i-n

the  popular  branch  of  the  Koman  community ;
hut  while  the  show  of  power,  its  trappings,  and  even  its
emoluments,  fell  again  into  the  hands  of  the  nobility,  the
real  substance  eluded,  as  usual  in  such  cases,  the  grasp  hoth
of  the  one  and  the  other.  "We  have  already  remarked  the
care  of  Augustus  to  raise  the  dignity  of  the  senatorial  order,
while  he  repressed  all  free  action  in  the  commons,  and  de-
prived them,  one  by  one,  of  the  prerogatives  they  had  ac-
quired through  so  many  revolutions.  Though  the  descend-
ant and  representative  of  Marius,  he  was  in  fact,  as  regarded
the  relations  of  the  two  rival  orders  of  the  state,  no  other
than  a  second  Sulla.1

1  See  Hoeek's  Rom.  Gcsch.  i.  3.  p.  50.  foil. I  have  found  the  advantage  of

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  97

But  whatever  remained  to  be  done,  to  reduce  the  Roman
plebs  to  utter  insignificance,  was  speedily  effected  by  the
regulations  of  Tiberius.  The  balance  between  The  balance
the  conflicting  powers  of  the  state  was  only  '^oTau^6
trimmed  for  the  moment  by  the  sagacity  and  tus-
fortune  of  Augustus,  for  whom  all  parties  were  content  to
waive  the  exaction  of  their  legitimate  or  pretended  rights.
When  a  successor  followed,  with  less  personal  authority  and
less  delicacy  in  the  management  of  it,  the  machine  of  govern-
ment might  have  been  in  danger  of  collapsing.  The  appoint-
ment of  magistrates,  the  enactment  of  laws,  the  constitution
even  of  the  judicial  tribunals,  had  all  been  left  unfixed  in
principle,  and  abandoned,  as  occasion  arose,  to  the  wisdom
and  moderation  of  the  emperor,  on  which  all  equally  relied.
The  Romans  acquiesced  in  the  fiction  which  was  now  palmed
upon  them  of  equal  laws  and  a  regular  constitution :  but  in
fact  the  limits  of  every  department  of  government  were  nor-
mally undefined.  This  was  a  state  of  things  More  logical
which,  however  passive  in  temper  the  mass  of  pont^of  Ti-tbe
the  nation  had  now  become,  could  not  longer  berius-
endure  in  the.  face  of  a  restless  and  sensitive  nobility.  Tibe-
rius, moreover,  from  the  character  of  his  mind,  required  a
more  logical  development  of  the  polity  he  had  undertaken  to
direct,  and  that  polity  had  begun  spontaneously  to  assume,
as  the  condition  of  its  existence,  both  outward  form  and  in-
ternal organization.

The  transfer  of  the  business  of  the  popular  assemblies  to
the  senate  is  announced,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Tacitus  with  a
coolness  and  indifference  which  mav  seem  scarcely

„  .  .  J  „,,  J The  three-fold

worthy  01  its  apparent  importance, whatever functions  of  the

.  . .  /> i 1  •  •  t  i  Coinitia.

the  aspirations  ot  the  historian  may  have  been
for  the  so-called  liberty  of  the  old  aristocracy,  the  traditions
of  which  he  has  hallowed  by  his  eloquent  declamations,  it  is
probable  that  no  Roman  of  his  day,  the  second  century  from
the  fall  of  Roman  independence,  really  felt  the  value  of  the

having  before  me  this  author's  luminous  view  of  the  constitution  of  the  em-
pire under  Tiberius.

vol..  v. — 7

98  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS

forms  of  the  free  state,  which  had  so  long  passed  from  degra-
dation to  oblivion.  But  in  fact  the  change  which  he  here
announced  was  less  important  than  at  first  sight  it  appears.
On  the  other  hand,  the  action  of  the  Comitia  had  been  al-
ready paralysed  for  half  a  century,  and  was  now  only  quick-
ened occasionally  by  the  emperor  himself  to  serve  his  own
purposes,  while,  on  the  other,  its  presumed  functions,  though
thus  ostensibly  abolished,  were  not  in  reality  absolutely  ex-
tinguished. The  functions  of  the  Comitia,  whether  the  peo-
ple met  by  tribes  or  centuries,  were  properly  threefold,  those
of  Election,  of  Legislation,  and  of  Jurisdiction  ;  and  it  will
be  desirable  to  pause  at  this  point  of  our  narration,  to  review
briefly  the  position  in  which  the  empire  found  these  functions
respectively. —

I.  The  popular  privilege  of  election,  whether  of  the  high-
er or  the  lower  magistrates,  had  been  limited  by  the  first
I.  The  election  Caesar,  and  after  him  by  the  triumvirs.  In  the
of  magistrates,  plenitude  of  their  confidence,  the  people  had
urged  their  patron,  the  Dictator,  to  assume  the  sole  nomina-
tion to  all  civil  offices ;  and  it  was  by  a  mere  act  of  grace  on
his  part  that  the  free  choice  of  one  half  of  them  was  remit-
ted to  the  popular  assemblies,  while  of  the  other  he  accepted
only  the  right  to  nominate  and  recommend,  the  latter  act
being  of  course  virtually  equivalent  to  a  direct  appointment.1
The  proceedings  of  the  triumvirs  were  merely  irregular  and
revolutionary.2  They  grasped  the  direct  appointment  of  all :
but  it  was  among  the  first  cares  of  Augustus,  on  succeeding
to  his  parent's  inheritance,  to  return  to  the  principles  set
forth  by  Csesar,  and  restrict  himself  to  the  nomination  of  one
half  of  the  magistrates,  leaving  to  the  assemblies  of  the
tribes  and  centuries  the  unfettered  election  of  the  rest.  He
claimed  only  a  veto  on  the  nomination  of  unworthy  candi-
dates ;  but  while  he  reserved  to  himself  the  decision  of  what
should  constitute  merit  or  demerit,  he  reduced  in  fact  the

1  With  the  exception  of  the  consuls,  the  appointment  of  whom  lie  reserved
solely  to  himself. Dion,  xliii.  45. See  above,  ch.  xxi.

2  Appian,  iv.  2.,  v.  73. ;  Dion,  xlvii.  15.,  xlvi.  35.  53.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  99

succession  to  all  places  of  trust  and  power  to  a  matter  of
personal  favour.  Such  was  the  pretended  restoration  of  the
prerogatives  of  the  people,  for  which  Augustus  obtained
credit : '  it  was  a  part  of  the  general  system  of  dissimulation
with  which  he  deceived  a  willing  people,  a  system  which
could  only  succeed  in  the  hands  of  one  whose  personal  mer-
its wore  dearer  to  them  than  any  consistent  Augustus  nom-
theory  of  government.  It  was  with  a  peculiar  i^tes  fTthe"
feeling  of  complacency  that  they  beheld,  year  Comitltu
after,  the  solemn  mockery  of  the  emperor's  descent  into  the
Field  of  Mars,  when  he  led  his  clients  by  the  hand,  recom-
mending their  claims,  and  asking  for  them  the  suffrages  of
all  comers,  till  he  finally  registered  his  own  vote  in  their  be-
half2 Such  was  the  practice  of  Augustus  through  the  greater
j)art  of  his  long  reign.  Towards  its  close,  when  he  could
less  easily  bear  the  fatigue  of  this  repeated  exertion,  he  con-
tented himself  with  furnishing  his  nominees  with  written
credentials,  and  spared  himself  the  trouble  of  attending  per-
sonally with  them.3  Even  this  was  not  precisely  a  novelty ;
it  was  following  the  precedent  of  the  Dictator,  and  it  was
accepted  by  the  people  as  a  sufficient  recognition  of  their
ultimate  right  of  election.  They  continued  to  go  through  the
ancient  forms  of  polling,  with  the  bridge,  the  penfold,  and
the  urn ;  and  with  respect  at  least  to  those  places  to  which
the  emperor  abstained  from  nominating,  a  stranger  only  his-
torically conversant  with  the  system  of  the  free-state  might
have  found  perhaps  nothing  in  the  methods  of  procedure  to
awaken  him  from  his  dream  of  the  republic  of  the  Scipios.

With  an  instrument  of  government  so  conveniently  ad-
justed to  his  hand,  so  facile  and  flexible  to  every  touch,  it

1  Suet  Oct  40. :  "  Comitiorum  pristinura  jus  reduxit."  Dion,  lvi.  46. :  to
re  at-iu/ia  ri.iv  apxaipeoioiv  avru  erf/pr/ae.

2  Suet.  Oct.  56.:  "  Quoties  magistratuum  comitiis  interessct,  tribus  cum
candidatis  suis  circumibat,  supplicabatque  more  solemni.  Ferebat  et  ipse  suf-
fragium,  ut  unus  e  populo."

8  Dion,  lv.  34. :  ypa/i/iara  riva  inndeic  awioTT)  rf  re  ■kIIjOei  ml  T(f  dr'/uu
hoove  eonovdaS-e.

100  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

is  not  likely  that  Augustus  ever  thought  of  plac-

Tiberius  nomi-  J  . . °  °  \

nates  to  the  ing  further  restrictions  on  the  pretended  freedom
of  election.  Tiberius,  however,  found  it  advis-
able to  announce  that  the  reform  which  he  himself  meditated
had  already  been  conceived  and  planned  by  his  predecessor.1
But  the  transfer  of  power,  or  rather  of  the  show  of  power,
which  he  made,  did  not  extend  to  closing  the  assemblies
either  of  the  tribes  or  centuries  for  purposes  of

The  Comitia  .  .  /.

still  meet  to  ac- election. While  he  continued  the  system  of  nom-

cept  the  ap-  .  ,  ,  .  .

pointmentsof ination  and  recommendation,  addressing  it  not

thp  so  nut  6

to  the  Comitia  but  to  the  senate,  he  still  allowed
the  people  to  meet  in  their  accustomed  places,  and  with
the  ancient  forms,  to  accept  and  ratify  the  choice  of  the  su-
perior order.2  Hence  we  find  the  term  Comitia  still  occasion-
ally employed,  though  not  quite  correctly,  to  represent  the
election  of  magistrates  ;  and  the  meetings  of  the  people  in
the  booths  or  septa,  and  on  the  plain  of  the  Campus  Martius,
continued  to  take  place  periodically  to  a  much  later  period
of  the  imperial  history.3  The  candidates,  already  assured  of
their  appointment,  waited  on  the  steps  of  the  neighbouring
temples  while  the  auspices  were  taken  and  other  tedious  sol-
emnities, which  had  long  lost  their  significance,  performed ;
and  these  were  finally  closed  by  the  announcement  of  a  her-

I  Veil.  ii.  124. :  "Primum  principaliuni  ejus  operum  fuit  ordinatio  coniitio-
rum  quain  manu  sua  scriptam  D.  Augustus  reliquerat."  The  pretexts  assigned
may  be  surmised  from  the  further  remarks  this  author  makes  on  the  subject
(c.  126.):  "revocata  in  forum  fides;  submota  foro  seditio,  ambitio  campo,  dis-
cordia  curiae;  sepultaeque  ac  situ  obsitae  justitia,  aequitas,  industria  civitati
redditae."

II  Thus  although  in  Ann.  i.  15.  Tacitus  had  said  that  the  Comitia  were  now-
transferred  from  the  Campus  to  the  Senate-house,  in  the  eighty-first  chapter  of
the  same  book  he  describes  the  action  of  the  Comitia  as  still  continuing :  "  De
comitiis  consularibus  quae  turn  primum  illo  principe  ac  deinceps  fuere  vix  quid-
quam  firmare  ausim :...."  Comp.  Dion,  lviii.  20.  I  have  stated  in  the  text
what  appears  to  have  been  the  ordinary  arrangement ;  but  this,  it  must  be  un-
derstood, was  subject  to  occasional  irregularities.

3  The  Comitia  of  the  tribes  under  the  empire  met  no  longer  in  the  Forum,
but  in  the  Septa  Julia  of  Agrippa  in  the  Campus  Martius. Dion,  liii.  23.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  101

aid  that  the  election  had  fallen  on  the  nominee  of  the  em-
peror.1 From  henceforth,  however,  we  are  to  consider  not
only  that  every  consular  appointment  is  made  by  the  mere
voice  of  the  emperor,  but  that  every  other  magistrate  is
chosen  by  the  senate,  partly  on  the  imperial  nomination,
partly  with  a  show  of  free  selection,  and  finally,  that  to  these
at  least  the  popular  sanction  is  also  ostensibly  given.2  The
effect  of  the  reform,  therefore,  is  after  all  not  the  transfer  of
any  substantial  power  from  the  one  assembly  to  the  other,
but  simply  an  additional  ray  of  pale  and  doubtful  lustre
cast  on  the  laticlave  of  the  senator.

II.  The  second  function  of  the  Comitia,  that  of  legislation,
stood  on  a  somewhat  different  footing  from  that  of  election.
The  popular  prerogative  of  choosing  the  officers  Ir  ^  er
of  state  had  never  been  called  in  question  through-  of  lesislatiun-
out  the  career  of  the  republic  :  it  might  be  considered  as  ab-
solutely inherent  in  the  people  and  inalienable  from  them.
Jealous  of  its  own  rights,  and  disposed  to  encroach  upon  all
others,  the  senate  notwithstanding  had  never  ventured  to
claim  a  share  in  the  appointment  of  magistrates  who  were  to
preside  over  the  common  weal.  But  the  limits  of  the  pop-
ular authority  in  the  making  of  the  laws,  on  the  other  hand,
had  been  a  constant  subject  of  dispute  between  the  two  great
powers  of  the  state.  Previous  to  the  enactment  of  the  fa-
mous Lex  Hortensia,  one  of  the  great  charters  of  the  rights  of
the  commons,  the  Scita  of  the  Plebs  were  not  binding  on
citizens  generally  until  they  had  been  ratified  by  the  senate.

1  See  the  description  of  this  ceremony  in  Pliny,  Paneg.  63.,  and  the  pas-
sages from  Suet.  Domil.  10.  and  Senec.  Ep.  118.,  which  are  brought  to  illus-
trate it.

3  The  practice  of  a  later  period,  as  described  by  Dion  (lviii.  20.),  was  prob-
ably the  same  in  substance  as  that  of  the  Tiberian  :  tup  6e  6fj  nal  rac  dA/lac
apxac  aiToiwTuv  it-eXiyeTO  boov<;  r/fe/le,  mi  o<j>a<;  eg  to  cwio'piov  iolrrcfnre,  tovq
fitv  owiaTac  avn',  olwep  vnb  tzcivtuv  ijpovvTO,  tovq  6e  etvI  te  toic  SiKaifofiaoi,
nal  iizl  Trj  bp.o7.oyiq.,  tu  te  Kkr/pCfi  irotov/ievoc  ■  nal  fiera  tovto  ec  te  tov  df/fiov
nal  i:r  to  tv'/J/Ooc  (the  centuries  and  the  tribes)  oi  Trpoar/KovTEc  avTCfJ,  ryq  apxaiar
6alar  eveko,  naBairep  /cat  vvv  ugte  ev  e'm6vi  6okeIv  yiyvEcOat,  eo'iovteq  aTZEfai-

K.VWTO.

102  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

The  Comitia  of  the  tribes  were  now  rendered  completely  in-
dependent of  the  superior  order :  nevertheless  it  was  some
time  before  they  asserted  the  powers  thus  secured  to  them  in
defiance  of  the  senate,  with  which  they  had  been  long  accus-
tomed to  co-operate  harmoniously.  The  most  flourishing
period  of  the  Roman  free-state  was  that  in  which  the  two  co-
ordinate bodies  were  aware  of  their  respective  prerogatives,
but  each  abstained  from  pressing  them  against  the  interests
independent  0I" the  other.  While  the  people  were  the  real
thffribeTbfi-  depositaries  of  legislative  power,  the  senate  en-
dues ofseV  J°yed  the  riSht  of  nominating  provincial  govern-
ate-  ors,  and  through them  of  ruling  the  provinces :

its  decrees  regarded  the  general  administration  of  the  em-
pire, and  these,  as  well  as  the  appointments  it  made,  were
honourably  respected  by  the  assemblies  of  the  commons.
When,  however,  the  Gracchi  and  their  successors  on  the
tribunitian  benches  thought  fit  violently  to  resent  the  advan-
tages which  the  senate  drew  to  itself  from  this  division  of
government,  the  several  prerogatives  of  the  two  orders,
never  accurately  adjusted,  were  easily  made  to  clash.  The
equilibrium  of  mutual  forbearance  once  disturbed,  it  was  im-
possible to  restore  the  balance.  Though  the  popular  right  of
legislation  was  admitted,  the  senate  had  many  ways  of
thwarting,  as  well  as  influencing  it  indirectly.  The  dema-
gogues, to  counteract  this  influence,  resorted  to  the  violent
measure  of  requiring  the  assent  of  the  senators  to  their  most
obnoxious  propositions,  under  pain  of  judicial  penalties.1  This
state  of  chronic  hostility  and  defiance  was  only  for  a  moment
suspended  by  the  reforms  of  Sulla,  who  compelled  the  tribes
to  submit  the  Scita  to  the  ratification  of  their  rivals  the  sen-
ate.8 But  the  time  had  passed  when  the  selfish  and  grasping
measures  of  the  senatorial  body  could  be  reconciled  with
the  claims  of  the  inferior  order  to  its  full  share  in  the  general
government,  and  all  Sulla's  legislation  fell  with  a  crash
together, under  the pretended patronage  of Crassus and

1  Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  i.  29.  ■  Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  i.  50.

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  103

Pompcius.  Henceforth  the  legislative  monopoly  of  the  co-
raitia  remained  unquestioned:  it  was  only  subject  to  the  indi-
rect checks  still  left  in  the  hands  of  the  consuls  and  augurs.
It  was  perhaps  from  their  consciousness  of  the  existence  of
these  clucks,  however,  that  the  leaders  of  the  people  gen-
erally contrived  to  secure  the  approval  of  a  majority  of  the
senate  for  their  measures,  and  maintained  to  the  last  a  show
of  concurrent  legislation.1

Nor  had  the  senate  indeed  refrained,  on  its  part,  from
encroaching  on  the  legislative  functions  of  its  rivals,  and
snatching  by  various  devices  a  substantive  power  Legislative
of  legislation  for  itself.  It  demanded  that  its  SJfjSia
Consulta  should  have  the  same  independent  force  hy  the  senate-
as  the  Scita  of  the  Plebs.  As  far  as  regarded  merely  ad-
ministrative regulations,  there  was  nothing  in  this  contrary
to  ancient  and  legitimate  usage ;  the  Senatusconsultum  TTlti-
micrn,  so  often  alluded  to,  by  which  the  senate  gave  full
powers  to  the  consuls  in  cases  of  emergency,  was  only  an
extreme  application  of  its  undoubted  right  to  secure  the
efficiency  of  the  executive  in  every  act  and  movement.  The
senate  pretended,  however,  still  further  to  the  right  of
annulling  the  resolutions  of  the  comitia  ;  and  here  again  an
extreme  instance  of  its  exercise  has  been  more  than  once
noticed,  in  the  special  release  it  accorded  from  certain  laws,
if  not  from  the  whole  cycle  of  the  laws  of  the  commonwealth.
To  such  encroachments  the  tribes  were  forced  to  submit
whenever  one  of  their  tribunes  had  been  gained  by  the  oppo-
site faction,  an  event  of  no  uncommon  occurrence ;  but  no
legitimate  right  could  be  established  on  a  series,  however
long,  of  exceptional  irregularities,  against  which  the  great
body  of  the  people  had  never  failed  to  protest.  Augustus,
as  the  champion  of  the  people,  was  careful  to  give  full  force
to  their  legislative  prerogative.  Though  he  generally  pro-
posed his  measures  to  the  senate,  and  obtained  its  formal
consent  to  the  ordinances  which  emanated  in  fact  from  the

1  Sec  Dion,  xxxvi.  7.  20.,  xxxviii.  7.;  Appian.  Bell. Civ.  ii.  12.;  Ilocck,
Rom.  Gcsch.  i.  3.  p.  58.

104  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

small  committee  of  its  body  which  he  took  into  intimate
counsel,  he  seems  to  have  always  submitted  them  to  the
comitia  of  the  centuries  also,  and  obtained  for  his  Julian
legislation  the  sanction  of  every  order  of  the  state.1  His
long  and  busy  reign  sufficed  to  settle  the  principles  of  law ;
it  remained  for  his  successor  rather  to  regulate  the  details
of  government,  than  reconstruct  its  essential  forms.  Hence
Tiberius,  averse  by  temper  to  the  multiplication  of  legal
enactments,  had  little  occasion  to  call  into  play  the  full
machinery  of  law-making.  With  the  wider  diffusion  of  the
franchise  the  resident  citizens  of  Rome  ceas"ed  to  represent
the  interests  of  the  conquering  race  ;  while  the  provincials
were  assuming  more  real  importance  in  the  eyes  of  the  ruler,
and  the  administration  of  the  provinces,  which  had  always
been  the  function  of  the  senate,  became  more  and  more  co-
ordinate with  the  general  administration  of  the  empire.
Accordingly,  without  any  ostensible  reform,  or  the  direct
abolition  of  the  popular  prerogative,  we  find  the  power  of
making  laws  practically  withdrawn,  under  Tiberius,  from
the  comitia  of  the  tribes.  Two  instances  only  are  known  of
Leges  passed  in  the  regular  course  under  his  administration,
while  the  Consulta  of  the  senate  are  sufficiently  numerous.3
But  the  rights  of  the  people  in  this  respect  were  never  for-
mally annulled  ;  and  even  through  another  century  examples
are  cited  of  laws  passed  and  ratified  according  to  the  usage
of  antiquity.  The  decrees  of  the  senate,  however,  came,  at
least  immediately  after  Tiberius,  to  be  designated  in  many
cases  as  laws,  and  to  carry  the  full  force  of  the  more  regular
enactments.3

1  Heincccius,  Antiq.  Roman,  i.  tit.  2.  44.  Projects  of  law  which  had  been
sanctioned  by  the  senate  were  afterwards  demanded  (rogatae)  of  the  Comitia
Centuriata,  by  which  they  were  ratified  as  leges.  But  the  Scita  of  the  Comitia
Tributa  were  made  equivalent  to  leges  by  the  lex  Hortensia.

2  The  lex  Junia  Norbana  (Gai.  i.  22.,  iii.  56. ;  Ulp.  i.  10.),  and  the  Lex  Vi-
sellia  (Ulp.  iii.  5. ;  Hoeck,  Rom.  Gesch.  i.  3.  p.  59.).  On  the  other  hand,  exam-
ples of  senatusconsulta  constantly  occur  in  Tacitus  and  Dion.  The  whole
scries  of  the  leges  Julia;  is  a  monument  of  comitial  legislation  under  Augustus.

3  Thus  Ulpian  (early  in  the  third  century,  a.  d.)  says,  "  Non  ambigitur  sena-

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  105

"We  have  in  this  a  second  instance  of  the  way  in  which
an  appearance  of  authority  was  given  to  the  senate,  which
in  fact  was  a  mei-e  idle  show.  The  legislative  Transferred  to
powers  of  this  assembly  were  restricted,  just  as  ggMtoriaTTabi-
the  elective,  by  the  real  and  substantial  preroga-  f^th? emperor
tive  of  the  emperor,  supreme  alike  over  all.  himself-
Much  reliance,  indeed,  cannot  be  placed  on  the  assertion  of
Dion  that  the  senate  formally  invited  Augustus  to  make
what  proposals  he  pleased,  and  proposed  even  to  bind  itself
by  an  oath  beforehand  to  accept  them  as  laws  ;  for  in  the
beginning  of  the  empire  the  senate  could  hardly  have  as-
sumed any  such  power  of  dispensing  with  the  concurrence
of  the  popular  assembly.1  That  it  obsequiously  placed  its
own  suffrage  at  his  disposal  is  credible  enough  ;  but  even
this  is  to  be  understood  of  an  extraordinary  and  momentary
abdication  of  its  proper  responsibility.  ~Noy  in  fact  did  Au-
gustus himself  definitively  accept  it.  When,  however,  he
chose  himself  a  cabinet,  consisting  of  a  select  number  of  sena-
tors, including  the  consuls  and  princes  of  his  own  family,  to
confer  with  on  affairs  of  state,  the  senate  did  undoubtedly
transfer  all  its  proper  functions  to  this  body,  which  was  in
fact  a  standing  committee  of  its  OAvn  order,  and  was  con-
sidered to  represent  the  wisdom  of  the  whole.  The  measures
which  had  been  discussed  and  adopted  by  this  conclave  were
still  promulgated  before  the  entire  assembly,  by  which  they
were  accepted  with  acclamation,  and  through  this  channel
the  prince  of  the  senate  acquired  unlimited  j)ower  of  legisla-
tion. Tiberius,  it  seems,  did  not  retain  this  select  council.
His  measures  emanated  from  his  own  breast  alone,  except

ti.rn  jus  faccre  posse."  Dig.  i.  3.  §  9.  Asconius  had  long  before  specified  the
eases  in  which  the  senate  could  control  the  legislative  prerogative  of  the
people :  "  Quatuor  omnino  genera  sunt  in  quibus  per  senatum  more  majorum
statuatur  aliquid  de  legibus.  Unum  est  ejusmodi,  placere  legem  abrogari :  alte-
ram, quae  lex  lata  esse  dicctur  ea  non  vidcri  populum  teneri :  tertium  est  de
legum  derogationibus."  The  fourth  case,  which  Asconius  omits,  refers  to  the
UgUnu  so'vere.  Ascon.  in  Cornel,  p.  67.  cd.  Orell.  Sec  Rein,  Criminal- Redd
dcr  Rom.  p.  62.
1  Dion,  liv.  10.

106  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS

when  he  chose  to  take  a  private  counsellor,  such  as  Sejanus,
into  his  confidence.  He  convened  the  fathers  to  listen  to  an
address  from  his  own  mouth,  in  which  he  explained  the  scope
of  his  plans,  and  proposed  them  for  the  assembly's  consider-
ation ;  or  he  put  up  some  private  member  to  make  the  propo-
sition, when  he  chose  to  disguise  his  own  inclinations.  He
introduced  also  the  custom  of  sending  a  written  despatch  to
be  read  to  the  assembly  in  his  absence,  in  which  his  views
on  any  project  of  law,  proposed  by  himself  or  by  another,
were  declared  or  insinuated.1  But  in  all  these  cases  the
senate  was  regarded  as  competent  to  discuss  and  amend,  and
even,  if  it  had  the  courage,  to  reject,  though  the  latter  alter-
native may  have  never  been  actually  assumed.  Many
instances,  however,  are  recorded  of  individual  senators  argu-
ing upon  the  imperial  proposition,  and  even  condemning  it,
and,  at  least  at  the  commencement  of  the  Tiberian  principate,
it  was  deemed  a  refinement  of  flattery  to  affect  such  freedom
of  discussion.  This,  perhaps,  is  the  limit  to  which  the  im-
perial authority  extended  in  the  matter  of  legislation  at  this
period  :  it  was  practically  complete,  but  in  outward  show
reached  only  to  recommendation.  It  must  be  understood,
however,  that  the  senate,  in  its  proneness  to  adulation,  was
constantly  representing  itself  as  the  devoted  slave  of  the
prince,  and  the  mere  registrar  of  his  decrees ;  accepting,  in
short,  the  practice  as  if  it  were  the  law  of  the  time,  and
satisfying  its  own  pride  and  dignity  by  a  mental  reservation,
to  the  effect  that  its  concession  to  its  chief  was  a  mere  volun-
tary cession  of  its  undoubted  prerogatives,  which  it  might  at
any  time  resume,  and  which,  in  fiict,  on  the  death  of  each
emperor,  reverted  ipso  facto  to  itself,  to  be  ceded  to  his
successor  or  withheld  from  him  at  its  own  proper  pleasure.3

1  The  epistola  or  libcllus  of  the  princeps  was  recited  by  one  of  the  quaestors,
who  was  called  his  candidatus.  Digest,  i.  13.  §  4.:  "Ex  quacstoribus  quidam
sunt  qui  candidati  Principis  dicuntur,  quique  epistolas  ejus  in  senatu  legunt."

a  It  was  not,  I  think,  till  the  time  of  the  Antoniues,  as  we  shall  see  here-
after, that  the  Oratio  or  Rescriptum  of  the  emperor  was  referred  to  in  the
same  terms  as  a  Lex. Comp.  Digest,  xxiii.  2.  §§  51,  58,  60.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  107

III.  In  regard  to  criminal  jurisdiction  the  loss  of  the
popular  assemblies  was  still  more  complete  and  signal,  while
the  senate,  at  least  in  outward  appearance,  gained  .  .

11  i •  m-  The  crimi-

all  that  the  people  had  lost. From  early  times nai  jurisdiction

11  r,  of  the  people

there  had  been  a  certain  rivalry  betAveen  the  two and  of  the  sen-

ate.

powers  in  respect  to  jurisdiction,  and  the  mutual
limit  of  their  prerogatives  on  this  point  was  not  strictly
defined.  The  people  in  their  centuries, — the  assembly  in
which  wealth  and  station  were  most  fully  represented,  and
not  merely  numbers,  as  in  the  tribes, — claimed  the  ultimate
right  of  deciding  on  the  citizen's  caput,  that  is,  his  civil
status,  and,  at  least  in  political  cases,  it  was  before  this
assembly  that  the  chief  magistrates  were  required  to  summon
offenders.  But,  on  the  one  hand,  the  comitia  of  the  tribes
encroached  gradually  on  this  prerogative  ;  on  the  other,  the
senate  claimed  exclusive  jurisdiction  over  the  acts  of  the
citizens  in  the  provinces,  and,  by  some  irregular  and  unex-
plained usurpation,  sometimes  within  the  bounds  of  Italy
also.1  The  last  remnant  of  the  supreme  power  originally
inherent  in  the  people,  was  the  right  of  appeal  to  it,  which
was  always  possessed  by  the  criminal  in  capital  cases ;  though
even  here  too  the  senate  presumed  to  evade  the  principle  of
the  law,  by  declaring  in  extreme  cases  the  state  in  danger,
and  thrusting  extraordinary  powers  in  the  hands  of  the  con-
suls. Thus  the  accomplices  of  Catilina  were  brought  to  trial
before  the  senate,  condemned,  and  executed  without  appeal,
much  to  their  own  astonishment  at  the  vigour  of  the  pro-
ceeding, and  not  without  great  offence  to  the  people,  or
at  least  to  their  leaders. But  throughout  the  , ,  .

.  °  . . .  Over-ridden  by

last  century  of  the  free  state  the jurisdiction the  feed  tri-

i  • •  -ii  i  bunals.

both  of  the  comitia  and  the  senate  was  almost
completely  over-ridden  by  the  institution  of  the  Quaistiones
perpetual,  the  permanent  or  fixed  tribunals,  and  the  old  con-

1  This  jurisdiction  of  the  senate  in  the  provinces  was  a  part  of  its  adminis-
trative competence  therein  through  its  officers.  Polybius  asserts  that  in  his
time  it  had  jurisdiction  also  within  the  bounds  of  Italy  in  cases  of  treason,  con-
spiracy, and  murder. Polyb.  vi.  13. ;  Hoeck,  i.  8.  p.  63.

108  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

test  between  the  two  political  bodies  of  the  commonwealth
was  exchanged  for  a  competition  among  its  leading  classes
for  admission  to  these  tribunals,  or  a  preponderance  in  them.
The  appeal  to  the  people  was  tacitly  extinguished  by-
Augustus,  who  reserved  the  right  of  judgment  in  the  last
The  appeal  resort  to  himself  alone,  in  virtue  perhaps  of  his
fromthe people  tribunitian  power,  by  which  he  Avas  the  consti-
to  the  emperor,  ^uted  guardian,  and  in  some  sense  the  vicegerent
of  the  tribes.1  But  both  he  and  still  more  his  next  successor
invited  the  senate  to  take  cognisance  of  many  offences  which
had  hitherto  been  subjected  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the  fixed
tribunals. Maecenas,  we  are  told,  advised  that

Cognisance  of  .  .

charges  against all charges as-amst senators, their wives and

senators

children,  should  be  referred  to  the  senate  alone  ;
and  it  has  been  supposed,  no  doubt  too  hastily,  that  the
counsels  popularly  ascribed  to  this  minister  indicate  the
actual  course  pursued  by  his  master.2  In  this  case,  however,
it  would  be  too  much  to  affirm  that  either  the  first  or  the
second  princeps  actually  transferred  from  the  tribunals  to  the
senate  the  cognisance  of  all  charges  against  members  of  its
own  body.  In  Piso's  process,  for  instance,  though  the  cul-
prit was  himself  a  senator,  the  prosecutors  commence  their
proceedings  by  invoking  the  emperor  to  investigate  the  affair
in  person,  and  he  declines  the  task  as  inconvenient  rather
than  irregular.  He  goes  on  to  say  in  his  reply  that,  in  re-
mitting the  affair  to  the  judgment  of  the  senate,  he  evinces
his  regard  to  the  rank  of  Germanicus  ;  for  in  a  less  conspicu-
ous case  the  appointed  tribunal  for  murders  would  have  been

1  The  coraitia  of  the  centuries,  as  has  been  before  remarked,  represented
the  Roman  people  in  their  military  character,  and,  therefore,  were  held,  not  in
the  Forum,  but  beyond  the  walls :  the  distinctive  meaning  and  rights  of  this
assembly  became  extinguished  as  the  citizens  ceased  to  constitute  the  military
force  of  the  republic.

2  Dion,  lii.  31.  Hoeck  relies  on  this  passage  as  if  it  were  an  express  state-
ment of  the  law  or  practice  under  Augustus.  It  is,  however,  pretty  well  un-
derstood, as  I  have  elsewhere  remarked,  that  the  counsels  the  historian  puts
into  the  mouth  of  Maecenas  represent  more  correctly  the  usage  of  his  own  time,
t.  e.  the  third  century.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  109

folly  competent  to  undertake  the  process.1 It  would  appear,
however,  that  the  Qurcstiones,  though  still  existing,  were
gradually  degraded  from  the  high  position  they  held  under
the  republic. The  senate  received  jurisdiction  in  cases  not
only  of  Majestas  and  Eepetunclce,  that  is,  of  Treason  and
Extortion,  hut  of  Murder,  Poisoning,  Bribery,  and  others  :
and  this  was  not  confined  perhaps  to  charges  against  mem-
bers of  its  own  order. A  less  invidious  and  at  the  same  time
a  more  brilliant  prerogative  of  this  body,  however,  was  that
of  deciding  upon  the  offences  of  allies  and  dependent  sover-
eigns against  the  interests  of  the  Roman  state  and  its  chief.
This was  a  function  which  the assembly  had The  senate  un-
claimed from  an  early  period,  as  the  executive  of  becomesThf6
the  Roman  people  abroad  ;  nor  had  it  ever  been JJS^Sjmt
wrested from the senate by  the comitia,  nor diction-
transferred to any special tribunal. On the whole, the
senate,  from  the  time  of  the  Tiberian  principate,  may  be  de-
scribed as  a  high  Court  of  Criminal  Jurisdiction  of  the  most
comprehensive  kind.

The  Romans,  consistently  with  their  inveterate  jealousy
of  all  that  savoured  of  monarchical  authority,  refused  to  as-
sign the  highest  judicial  competence  to  any  single  Paramount  jU-
judge  ;  and  when  the  unwieldy  proportions  and  emp^^Sm*0
gross  unfairness  of  such  a  tribunal  as  that  of  the  8el1-
people  themselves,  assembled  in  their  comitia,  became  no
longer  tolerable,  they  invented,  in  the  Qusestiones  Perpetuae,
a  sort  of  virtual  representation  of  themselves  by  standing
committees.  The  number  of  members  of  each  of  these  boards
might  vary  from  three  or  four  to  twenty  or  thirty,  or  even
more.  Charges  of  inferior  gravity  were  referred  to  a  com-
mission, consisting  nominally  of  a  hundred  members,  but

■  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  12. :  "  Id  solum  Gcrmanico  super  legos  pracstitcrimus,  quod
in  curia  potius  quam  in  foro,  apud  senatum  quam  apud  judices,  de  inorte  ejus
anquiritur."  An  ordinary  case  of  murder  would  have  been  tried  by  the  qua>
stores  homicidii  in  a  basilica  adjoining  the  Forum.  The  quaestiones  perpetuae
were,  by  legal  fiction,  committees  of  the  tribes,  and  the  basilicas  were  the  com-
mittee-rooms of  the  Forum,  their  place  of  assembly.

HO  HISTORr  OF  THE  ROMANS

sometimes  in  reality  much  exceeding  that  number.  The
vital  principle  of  the  most  perfect  systems  of  modern  proce-
dure, which  secures  the  responsibility  of  the  judge  by  isola-
ting him  from  the  rest  of  the  community,  and  bringing  public
opinion  to  bear  on  him  from  the  eminence  of  his  character
and  position,  was  abhorrent  from  the  democratical  spirit  of
the  Romans,  and  the  fixed  idea  of  their  polity,  that  truth
was  to  be  found  in  the  decisions  of  a  majority.  These  views,
however,  were  irreconcileable  with  the  principles  of  mon-
archy ;  and  the  emperor  had,  in  fact,  no  alternative,  but
either  to  appoint  special  judges  of  eminence  enough  to  make
their  decisions  respected,  or  to  become  himself  the  controller
of  the  decisions  of  a  more  numerous  and  less  responsible
body.  From  the  moment  that  judicial  competence  was
spread  over  a  body  of  six  hundred  members,  the  concentra-
tion of  actual  jurisdiction  in  the  hands  of  their  chief  became
inevitable.  It  is  of  little  consequence,  therefore,  to  inquire
from  which  of  his  special  functions  the  princeps  might  most
logically  derive  the  judicial  prerogative  which  was  soon
found  to  attach  to  him ;  whether  it  proceeded  from  the  sover-
eignty of  the  people  lodged  virtually  in  his  person ;  whether
from  the  military  autocracy  of  the  imperium ;  or  whether
from  the  combination  of  the  consular,  the  proconsular,  and
the  tribunitiau  powers,  each  of  which  undoubtedly  conferred
jurisdiction  in  particular  cases.  Of  the  first  of  these  hypoth-
eses, it  may  be  remarked  that  the  sovereignty  of  the  people
was  certainly  not  at  this  period  directly  and  legitimately
transferred  to  the  emperor  ; *  of  the  second,  that  the  judicial
functions  of  the  imperator  were  restricted  to  the  camp ; 2  and

1  Even  at  a  much  later  period  the  basis  of  the  imperial  power  assumed  by
Ulpian,  after  Gaius,  is  of  course  a  mere  legal  fiction :  "  Quod  populus  ei  et  in
eum  omnem  suam  potestatem  conferat."

2  Dion  affirms  (liii.  17.)  that  the  emperor  derived  from  his  imperium  the
right  of  putting  senators  and  knights  to  death  within  the  city.  This  is  one  of
many  passages  of  this  writer  of  the  third  century  in  which  he  puts  the  admit-
ted usage  of  his  own  day  on  the  footing  of  earlier  and  legitimate  principles.
The  practice  employed,  as  we  shall  sec,  by  Tiberius  himself,  in  the  latter  part

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  HI

of  the  last,  that  the  jurisdiction  of  the  three  magistracies
above  named  was  in  each  case  specifically  limited  ;  nor  would
the  combination  of  all  together  extend  so  far  as  to  cover  that
claimed  and  exercised  by  the  emperor,  which  was,  indeed,
practically  unlimited.  It  may  be  admitted,  however,  that  it
was  the  jurisdiction  of  the  emperor  in  these  several  capacities
that  gave  him  his  ground  of  vantage  for  consolidating  his
more  sweeping  pretensions.  In  proportion  as  these  powers
themselves  became  more  extensive,  so  did  the  judicial  quali-
cation  they  imparted  become  less  strictly  defined.  The  im-
perial prerogative  of  Pardon  was  an  extension  or  distortion
of  the  tribunitian  right  of  Succour ;  that  of  revising  or  annul-
ling the  decrees  of  the  senate  was  an  exasperation  of  the
privilege  of  Intercession  ;  and  we  can  imagine  how,  when  the
emperor  was  thus  raised  above  all  legitimate  principle  and
usage,  both  accused  and  accusers  might  combine  to  cast
themselves  at  the  foot  of  the  throne,  and  solicit  the  arbitra-
tion of  a  judge  from  whose  pre-eminence  they  might  expect
impartiality.  The  Romans,  it  must  always  be  remembered,
were  to  the  full  as  impatient  in  thrusting  irregular  powers
upon  their  ruler  as  he  was  in  usurping  them.1  From  the
combination  of  both  these  impulses,  the  jurisdiction  of  the
senate  had  become,  before  the  death  of  the  second  princeps,
entirely  dependent  on  his  direction ;  and  whenever  his  inter-
ests were  at  stake,  the  judicial  sentence  of  the  fathers  was  no
other  than  the  expression  of  his  will  inspired  by  himself.  In
the  same  way,  moreover,  the  decisions  which  he  pronounced
with  his  own  mouth  were  generally  merely  the  echoes  of  his
private  pleasure.8 Accordingly,  except  in  certain  outward

of  his  reign,  was  a  mere  usurpation  of  the  sword,  and  bore  no  constitutional
sanction.  It  was  precisely  for  such  usurpations  as  this  that  the  acts  of  certain
of  the  emperors  were  formally  rescinded  by  the  senate  after  their  deaths.

1  Hence  the  memorable  expression  ascribed  to  Tiberius  himself,  with  regard
to  the  Roman  people :  "  0  homines  ad  servitutem  paratos."  The  sentiment
was  no  doubt  commonly  in  men's  mouths.  So  Caesar  in  Lucan :  "  Dctrahimus
dominos  urbi  servirc  paratae." Pilars,  i.  351.

•  See  Uoeck,  i.  3.  08. ;  citing  Suet.  Tib.  GO.  02. ;  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  70.

112  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

show,  and  the  popular  estimation  thereto  attaching,  the
senate  derived  little  or  no  advantage  from  its  apparent
triumph  over  the  people  in  the  matter  of  jurisdiction.  In
this  as  in  other  respects  it  was  the  mere  passive  instrument
of  the  emperor's  will,  and  its  character  became  insensibly
degraded  by  the  consciousness  that  all  its  magnificent  pre-
tensions were  no  better  than  empty  shadows.  With  a  set
of  high-sounding  formulas  ever  in  its  mouth,  it  was,  in  fact,
only  blowing  bubbles  for  the  amusement  of  a  frivolous  popu-
lace.—

Such  was  the  process  by  which  the  three  sovereign  rights
of  the  Roman  people  were  gradually  taken  from  them  and
transferred  in  name  to  the  rival  body  of  the  senate,
the  emperor  in  but  in  fact  to  the  emperor  himself.  Henceforth
lation,  and  ju-  it  depended  on  the  personal  character  of  the  chief
whether  the  government  of  Rome  assumed  or  not
the  appearance  of  that  autocratic  despotism  which  it  really
was,  however  the  fact  mio-ht  be  disguised.  As  regarded  the
right  of  jurisdiction,  Tiberius  continued  for  the  most  part  to
maintain  the  principle  of  administration  which  he  had  assert-
ed from  the  first,  that  of  using  the  senate  as  the  ostensible
instrument  of  his  government.  He  refrained  generally,  as  in
Piso's  process,  from  assuming  judicial  powers  himself,  and
referred  all  suitors  for  his  decision  to  the  great  assembly  of
the  state.  This  moderation  sufficed  to  satisfy  the  mass  of  his
subjects.  The  reform  of  the  rights  of  election  caused  but  a
slight  murmur  among  the  people  from  whom  they  were
finally  withdrawn  ; '  the  abolition  of  their  legislative  and
judicial  competence  was  aceepted  without  a  sign  of  mortifi-
cation. The  populace  of  Rome  had  bidden  farewell  to  all  its
political  interests,  and  it  is  only  from  their  connexion  with
politics  that  the  rights  of  legislation  and  jurisdiction  are  ever
interesting  to  the  great  body  of  a  nation.  The  senate  itself
was  flattered  by  the  appearance  of  a  victory  over  the  rivals
with  whom  it  had  waged  such  long  and  dubious  warfare.

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  15.:  "Neque  populus  adcmptum  jus  questus  est  nisi  inani

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  113

It  might  amuse  itself  with  the  idea  that  it  had  found  com-
pensation for  the  disasters  of  Pharsalia  and  Philippi,  and
that  the  chiefs  who  had  been  borne  to  power  on  the  shoulders
of  the  popular  party  had  been  compelled,  even  in  the  moment
of  their  elevation,  to  negotiate  the  support  of  the  power
which  thev  had  worsted  in  the  field. But  the ^

•'  The  emperors

princeps  had  in  fact  orot  the  senate  completely control  over  the

r  r  °  -L  senate  through

under  his  influence. The  poAvers  of  the  censure the  powers  of

1  iTi  the  censorship.

alone,  the  highest  and  most  venerable  perhaps
of  any  functions  of  administration,  gave  him,  under  the  fairest
disguise,  a  direct  means  of  controlling  it.  The  sum  of  twelve
hundred  thousand  sesterces  being  fixed  as  the  qualification
for  a  place  in  the  assembly,  the  emperor  encouraged  men  of
birth,  whose  fortunes  had  fallen  below  this  standard,  to
apply  to  him  for  an  increase  of  means  ;  at  the  same  time  he
took  care  to  let  them  feel,  by  an  occasional  repulse,  accom-
panied with  harsh  observations,  how  mere  a  matter  of  favour
such  an  indulgence  would  be.  After  aiding,  as  Petitlon  of  a
it  was  styled,  the  census  of  several  of  the  body,  PauPer  senator-
his  rejection  of  the  petition  of  a  pauper  senator  named  Hor*
talus,  a  grandson  of  the  illustrious  Hortensius,  caused  con-
siderable dismay.  How  the  wealth  accumulated  by  that
busy  advocate  had  been  dissipated,  does  not  appear ;  but
already  under  the  principate  of  Augustus,  Hortalus  had
received  a  pecuniary  gratification,  to  enable  him  to  marry
and  rear  a  family,  and  maintain  the  honours  of  his  historic
house.  Still,  however,  was  he  haunted  by  the  demon  of
poverty.  Rising  in  his  place  in  the  senate-house,  at  the  open
doors  of  which  he  had  stationed  his  four  sons,  and  turning
himself  on  the  one  hand  to  the  bust  of  Hortensius,  conspicu-
ous among  the  images  which  adorned  the  hall,  on  the  other
to  that  of  Augustus,  he  addressed  a  speech  to  Tiberius,  en-
treating him,  in  the  names  of  both,  to  afford  him  the  succour
he  required.  But  whether  from  a  settled  policy  of  degrading
the  representative  of  a  great  republican  name,  or  from  per-
sonal dislike,  or,  as  Tacitus  insinuates,  merely  from  a  spirit
of  surly  opposition  to  the  inclination  of  the  senators  around
vol.  v. — 8

114  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

him,  Tiberius  not  only  rejected  the  application,  but  rebuked
it  as  presumptuous  and  importunate.  The  divine  Augustus,
he  said,  gave  you  money  spontaneously,  without  solicitation,
nor  did  he  mean  to  bind  himself  or  me  to  repeat  the  same
liberality  on  all  occasions.  He  consented,  however,  to  gratify
the  senate  by  making  a  trifling  present  to  the  children ;  after
which  he  made  no  further  effort  to  save  the  rapid  decline  and
degradation  of  their  house.1

This  control  over  the  senate  was  still  further  assured  by

the  right  of  its  princeps  to  convene  it  at  his  own  pleasure  on

extraordinary  occasions,  as  well  as  to  prorogue

The  emperor's .  J . .  '  , . .

control  over  the its  ordinary  sittings. If  he  could  not legiti-

senatebythe  .  .  „,  ...

law  of  Majes-  mately  require  it  to  aihrm  every  proposition  he
placed  before  it,  he  was  enabled  at  least  to  defeat
at  once  any  motion  that  was  disagreeable  to  himself,  either
by  dissolving  the  assembly,  or  even  by  putting  his  veto  up-
on the  transaction.  The  utmost  liberty  it  continued  to  pos-
sess extended  not  to  acts,  but  merely  to  language,  if  the  in-
distinct murmurs  and  interjectional  sarcasms  which  were
occasionally  heard  within  its  walls  could  be  dignified  with
such  an  appellation.  But  every  such  indication  of  inde-
pendent opinion,  however  disguised  and  smothered,  was
watched  with  a  jealousy  which  the  substance  of  power  never
allowed  to  slumber,  and  the  law  of  Majestas  or  Treason,
which  Tiberius  brandished  over  the  heads  of  his  counsellors,
was  an  instrument  of  flexible  and  searching  application  for
unveiling  their  hidden  sentiments,  no  less  than  for  controlling
their  conduct.

Majestas,  according  to  the  Ovidian  apologue,  was  the
daughter  of  Dignity  and  Respect,  who  first  after  the  disper-
sion of  primeval  chaos  taught  the  rules  of  COlirt-
Origin  of  the.  l  5;  .  -,. . .  .

law  of  Majes- esy  to  the rude and undisciplined divinities.
Ages  rolled  away,  and  when  the  Giants  rose  in

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  37,  38.
3  Ovid,  Fast.  v.  23. :

"  Donee  Honos  placidoque  decens  Reverentia  vultu
Corpora  legitimia  imposuere  toris."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  115

arms  to  restore  universal  anarchy,  Jove  overthrew  them
with  his  bolts,  and  defended  the  majesty  of  the  gods,  never
again  to  be  presumptuously  assailed.  Hence,  she  ever  sits
beside  him ;  she  cherishes  and  protects  him ;  the  awe  in-
spired by  her  influence  makes  his  sceptre  to  be  obeyed  with-
out force  of  arms.  She  has  descended  also  upon  the  earth.
Romulus  and  Xuma  acknowledged  and  adored  her  ;  nor  less
did  their  successors,  each  in  his  own  generation.  She  it  is
that  makes  our  fathers  and  mothers  to  be  respected;  she  at-
tends upon  our  youths ;  she  protects  our  virgins :  she  com-
mends to  the  consul  his  fasces  and  ivory  chair ;  finally,  she
rides  aloft  on  the  laurelled  chariot  of  the  imperator.1  Such
was  the  language  by  which  a  flatterer  of  Augustus  might
divert  the  imagination  of  his  countrymen  from  the  idea  of
the  abstract  majesty  of  law  and  constitutional  principle,  to
that  of  the  glory  which  surrounded  the  person  of  the  ruler ;
from  the  recollection  of  kings  and  consuls  to  the  contempla-
tion of  the  emperor  himself,  over  whom  all  the  ensigns  of
office  were  suspended.  Under  the  empire  the  law  of  majesty
was  the  legal  protection  thrown  round  the  person  of  the
chief  of  the  state :  any  attempt  against  the  dignity  or  safety
of  the  community  became  an  attack  on  its  glorified  repre-
sentative. Nevertheless,  it  is  remarkable  that  the  first  legal
enactment  which  received  this  title,  half  a  century  before
the  foundation  of  the  empire,  was  actually  devised  for  the
protection,  not  of  the  state  itself,  but  of  a  personage  dear  to
the  state,  namely,  the  tribune  of  the  people.  Treason  to  the
state  indeed  had  long  before  been  known,  and  defined  as
Perduellio,  the  levying  of  war  against  the  commonwealth.
Laws  on  this  subject  had  existed  from  the  time  of  the  kings.
But  the  crime  of  majesty  was  first  specified  by  The  lex  Apu.
the  demagogue  Apuleius,  in  an  enactment  of  the leia' A- u- 654,

Honot  and  Reverentia  arc  correlatives :  the  one  is  the  honourable  station  or
office,  the  other  the  respect  due  to  it.
Ovid;  1.  c. :

"  Ilia  datos  fasces  commendat,  eburque  curule ;
Ilia  coronatis  alta  triumpliat  equis."

116  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

year  654,  for  the  purpose  of  guarding  or  exalting  the  dignity
of  the  champion  of  the  plebs.  Any  attempt  against  the  pre-
rogatives of  this  popular  officer  was  declared  to  be  an  as-
sault on  the  greatness  and  dignity  of  the  commonwealth
itself:  to  detract  from  the  majesty  of  the  tribune  was  an
offence  which  the  new  law  smote  with  the  penalties  of
treason.1

The  law  of  Apuleius  was  followed  by  that  of  another  tri-
bune, Varius,  conceived  in  a  similar  spirit. But  it  was  the
object  of  Sulla,  in  the  ample  and  methodized

ThelexVaria:  J  '  *

the  les  Come-  scope  of  his  Cornelian  constitution,  to  withdraw
the  definition  of  majesty  from  a  mere  offence
against  public  officers,  to  attempts  on  the  general  interests
of  the  commonwealth.  The  dictator  conceived  and  em-
bodied, in  the  spirit  of  a  proud  republican,  the  noble  senti-
ment of  a  patriot  of  our  own,  that  There  is  on  earth  a  far
diviner  thing,  Veiled  though  it  be,  than  parliament  or  king.
He  recalled  men's  minds  from  the  vulgar  personifications  to
which  democracy  naturally  inclines,  to  the  higher  abstrac-
tions of  an  enlightened  political  wisdom.  The  distinction
between  Majestas  and  Perduellio  henceforth  vanishes  :  the
crime  of  Treason  is  specifically  extended  from  acts  of  vio-
lence to  measures  calculated  to  bring  the  state  into  con-
tempt. It  is  made  to  include  not  only  acts  of  commission,
but  many  cases  of  the  neglect  or  imperfect  performance  of
duty.2 It  is  now  majestas  in  a  public  officer,  not  only  if  he

1  Among  the  numerous  treatises  upon  this  subject  I  have  particularly  re-
ferred to  some  chapters  in  the  work  of  Rein,  on  the  Criminal  Law  of  the  Ro-
mans. He  assigns  the  date  of  the  lex  Apuleia  to  654  u.  c,  not  652.  The  per-
sonal application  of  the  law  appears  in  a  passage  of  Cicero  (De  Invent,  ii.  17.):
"  Majestatem  minuisti  quod  tribunum  pi.  de  templo  deduxisti ; "  but  the  more
general  definition  of  the  crime  is  given  in  the  Ad  Herenn.  ii.  12. :  "  Majestatem
is  minuit,  qui  ea  tollit,  ex  quibus  civitatis  amplitudo  constat."  Again,  the  two
branches  of  the  crime  are  combined  in  one  view  (De  Invent,  ii.  IV.):  "  Majes-
tatem minuere  est,  de  dignitate,  aut  amplitudine,  aut  potestate  populi,  aut  eorum
quibus  populus  potestatem  dedit,  aliquid  derogare : "  or  once  more,  "  Aliquid
de  re  publica,  quum  potestatem  non  habeas,  administrare."  Rein,  Crim.-Recht
der  Romer,  p.  509.

3  Thus  on  the  words  of  Cicero  against  Verres  (2  Vcrr.  i.  33.),  "Quid  im-

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  117

wages  war  without  due  authority  from  the  state,  or  betrays
his  trust  to  the  enemy,  or  foments  sedition  among  the  citi-
zens or  mutiny  among  the  soldiers ;  but  if  he  shrinks  from
asserting  to  the  full  the  prerogative  of  his  office,  whether
military  or  civil,  or  forbears  to  deliver  his  prisoners  to  the
proper  authorities  for  punishment  or  ransom.1  To  remove  or
overthrow  a  monument  of  the  glory  of  the  commonwealth,
such  as  a  statue  or  a  trophy,  might  afford  ground  for  a
charge  of  this  nature,  as  wounding  the  pride  of  the  nation
or  touching  its  honour.*

The  motive  for  Caesar's  legislation  on  the  subject  of  ma-
jestas,  in  which  he  went  further  into  details  than  Sulla,  but
in  no  respect  diverged  from  his  principles,  was  no  other  per-
haps than  a  determination  to  obliterate  every  monument  of
the  usurpation  of  the  senate,  and  its  redoubted  dictator.
Caesar  was  the  hereditary  antagonist  of  Sulla,  and,  to  com-
plete the  full  cycle  of  his  rivalry,  it  was  necessary  that  he
should  emulate  his  predecessor  in  legislation  as  well  as  in
arms  and  administration.  The  chief  provisions  The  lex  Julill
of  the  lex  Julia  on  this  subject  have  been  pre-  de  Restate.
served  to  us  by  the  jurists  of  the  later  empire ;  but  we  are
not  perhaps  quite  competent  to  decide  how  far  the  law,  as  it
came  from  Julius  himself,  was  modified  by  his  next  succes-
sors. It  is  still  a  disputed  point  whether  Augustus  promul-
gated any  distinct  lex  Julia  of  his  own  upon  Majestas;
though  there  is  no  question  that  in  some  respects  he  ex-
tended the  law  of  his  predecessor,  including  in  his  definition
the  publication  of  written  pasquinades  against  the  emperor,
as  an  indirect  mode  of  bringing  the  person  of  the  ruler  into

minuisti  jus  legationis,"  the  Pseudo-Asconius  remarks  (Orell.  p.  182.):  "Qui
potestatem  suam  in  administrando  non  def'enderit,  imminuti  magistrates  veluti
majestatis  kesae  reus  est."

1  Caesar's  juvenile  act  of  audacity  in  punishing  his  captive  pirates,  and  re-
fusing to  deliver  them  to  his  superior  officer,  was  a  defiance  of  the  Cornelian
law  of  Majestas. See  above,  ch.  hi.

a  This  is  one  of  the  charges  Cicero  brings  against  Verres  (2  Vcrr.  iv.  41.),
of  which  he  affirms,  "  Est  majestatis  quod  imperii  nostri  glorias  rerumque  pub-
licarum  monumenta  evertere  atque  asportare  ausus  est"

118  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

contempt,  and  smoothing  the  way  for  disaffection  and  re-
sistance. This  is  perhaps  the  only  trace  of  any  desire  on
the  part  of  the  two  first  emperors  to  give  the  law  a  special
application  for  their  own  protection ;  and  even  in  the  Corne-
lian law  some  provision  seems  to  have  been  made  to  check
the  licence  of  railing  against  the  constituted  authorities.1

It  will  be  important,  for  the  just  appreciation  of  later

usage  in  respect  to  this  grave  offence,  the  highest,  except

sacrilege,  known  to  the  Roman  law,  to  place  before  our  eyes

a  comprehensive  sketch  of  the  Julian  enactments  regarding

it. Maiestas,  then,  was  defined  to  be  injury  to

Provisions  of  J  ' . '  J  . J

the  Julian  Law  the  state  : — 1.,  in  respect  of  its  public  enemies,  as

of  Majesty.  . .  .  -

by  the  surrender  of  cities  or  persons,  the  abetting
or  assisting  them  in  their  enterprises,  desertion  to  them,  cow-
ardice in  action  against  them,  and  the  like :  2.,  in  respect  of
its  internal  constitution,  as  by  illicit  combinations,  clubs,  and
conspiracies,  or  more  openly  by  sedition  and  riot :  3.,  in  re-
spect of  its  officers,  as  when  one  magistrate  encroached  on
the  functions  of  another,  or  withheld  from  his  successor  the
forces  of  his  province,  or  released  a  criminal  from  punish-
ment, or  made  war  without  public  authority ;  or,  again,
where  one  compassed  the  death  of  a  public  officer,  or  wrested
from  him  his  prerogatives  :  4.,  from  the  falsification  of  the
public  documents. — It  was  necessary  to  the  establishment  of
the  crime  to  prove  the  criminal  intention ;  but  the  attempt
was  held  to  be  equally  obnoxious  to  the  law  as  the  act  it-
self, and  the  accomplice  by  aid  or  counsel  was  amenable  to
the  same  punishment  as  the  principal.'  This  punishment
was  simple  and  uniform.  It  consisted  in  the  interdiction  of
fire  and  water,  which  was  practically  equivalent  to  banish-
ment, and  was  attended  with  confiscation  of  property,  being

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  iii.  11. :  "Et  si  Sulla  voluit  ne  in  quemvis  impune  declamare
liceret."

2  See  Rein  (Criminal-Reck/,  pp.  518-528.),  chiefly  from  the  writings  of  the
jurists.  Tacitus  (Ann.  i.  72.)  states  the  principle  of  the  law :  "  Si  quis  pro-
ditione  exercitum  aut  plebem  seditionibus,  denique  male  gesta  re  publica  majes-
tatem  populi  Romani  minuisset :  facta  arguebantur,  dicta  impune  erant."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  119

the  same  penalty  which  attached  to  the  more  ancient  crime
of  perduellio.1  The  trial  of  charges  of  this  kind  was  regu-
larly reserved  for  one  of  the  special  tribunals. n

J  *■  . Reserve  of  Au-

Duriner  the  brief  period of  Caesar's power  it gustusinits

~  x  application.

docs  not  appear  that  this  tribunal  was  ever
called  into  action.  Trials  for  majesty  were  few  even  un-
der the  long  principate  of  his  successor.  Augustus  care-
fully abstained  from  the  employment  of  an  engine  winch
lie  well  knew  must,  from  the  nature  of  things,  tend  to
fix  in  men's  minds  a  sharp  distinction  between  the  chief
of  the  state  and  the  state  itself.  The  sacredness  which
attached  to  the  tribunitian  office,  now  vested  in  himself,
could  not  fail  to  raise  the  person  of  the  ruler  above  the  ab-
stract ideas  of  constitutional  principle ;  but  he  was  anxious
not  to  hasten  the  moment  when  the  people  of  Rome  should
regard  the  law  of  treason  merely  as  a  device  for  their  ruler's
security.  He  felt  himself  protected  by  other  and  stronger
safeguards  ;  while  the  chief  danger  of  his  position  actually
lay  in  the  risk  of  his  disguise  being  torn  too  rudely  from
him.

It  has  been  already  shown  how  the  natural  policy  of  Ti-
berius pointed  in  another  direction.  The  second  princeps
required special guarantees for his security. _  .

Accordingly,  from  the  very  commencement  of protection  de-

°  J  '  * .  . .  manded  for  the

his  reign,  we  mark  a  change  in  popular  opinion,  person  of  the
which  he  fostered  and  encouraged.  The  person
of  the  emperor  begins  now  to  be  the  great  subject  of  the  law
of  treason  :  though  not  formally  so  pronounced,  the  idea  that
the  emperor  is  himself  the  state  begins  to  predominate  in  the
national  feeling  over  every  other.  The  emperor  is  now  in
the  world  what  the  gods  are  in  Olympus,  a  being  to  be
reverenced  and  feared  simply  for  himself,  without  regard  to
his  attributes,  or  the  qualities  he  may  be  supposed  to  em-
hod  y. Attempts  on  his  life  become  heinous  deeds,  only  to

1  Tac.  Ann.  ill.  50. :  "  Bonis  amissis  aqua  et  igni  arceatur :  quod  perindc
censeo  ac  si  lege  majestatis  tcneretur."  Comp.  iii.  38.  G8.,  iv.  42. ;  Paulus,  v,
29.  1.

120  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

be  compared  with  sacrilege  against  the  blessed  divinities.
Not  only  such  overt  acts,  however,  but  any  conduct  or  lan-
guage which  could  be  construed  into  the  compassing  of  his
death,  became  involved  in  the  crime  and  penalties  of  treason.
Rome  was  full  of  soothsayers  or  magicians,  who  pretended,
by  casting  horoscopes  or  evoking  dead  men's  spirits,  to  com-
municate a  knoAvledge  of  future  events.  By  playing  on  the
credulous  cupidity  of  heirs  or  fortune-hunters,  these  impos-
tors acquired  wealth  and  consideration.  In  the  age  of  Catul-
lus, a  wicked  parent  might  wish  for  the  death  of  his  son,  or
the  son  disclaim  all  sorrow  for  the  loss  of  his  parent :  but  in
the  next  generation  Ovid  could  represent  the  guilty  spend-
thrift as  inquiring  into  the  years  of  the  sire  who  stands  be-
tween himself  and  fortune.1  To  inquire  thus  into  the  years
of  the  emperor,  to  explore,  that  is,  the  secret  of  his  destined
term  of  life,  was  now  reputed  treasonable :  there  must  be,  it
was  argued,  some  stronger  motive  for  such  an  inquiry  than
mere  indecent  curiosity :  the  man  who  sought  to  ascertain
beforehand  the  day  of  the  emperor's  doom  must  have  some
illicit  interest  in  the  dire  event ;  he  must  cherish  the  hopes
of  a  traitor  in  his  heart.2  Not  only  pasquinades  and  inju-
rious publications  of  every  kind  directed  against  the  emperor
were  now  comprehended  in  the  qualification  of  majestas,  but
also  abusive  and  insulting  language,  which  Augustus  had  so
magnanimously  tolerated.  The  two  first  Caesars,  and  gener-
ally the  best  and  wisest  of  their  successors,  allowed  ample
licence  to  the  tongue,  in  the  freedom  of  which  the  Romans
continued  to  demand  indulgence  long  after  they  had  sur-

1  Compare,  among  the  signs  of  human  degeneracy  in  Catullus,  liv.  401. :

"  Destitit  extinctos  natus  lugere  parentes  :
Optavit  genitor  primsvi  funera  nati "

with  Ovid,  Metam.  i.  148. :

"  Filius  ante  diem  patrios  inquirit  in  annos."

2  Faulus,  v.  21.  3.:  "Qui  de  salute  principis  vel  de  summa  reipublicre
mathematicos  ....  consulit,  cum  co  qui  respondent  capite  punitur."  Tertull.
Apol.  35. :  "  Cui  opus  est  pcrscrutari  super  Cjesaris  salute,  nisi  a  quo  aliquid
adversus  ilium  cogitatur  vel  optatur  aut  post  ilium  speratur  et  sustinetur  ?  "

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  121

rendered  all  independence  of  action.1  This  licence  of  lan-
guage was  fostered  by  the  manner  of  their  edu-  Licence  of  lan-
cation.  We  have  seen  how  they  were  brought  f^g  thfiio-
up  from  childhood  as  gladiators  in  the  arena  of  mans-
debate  and  declamation :  fence  of  tongue  was  the  weapon
with  which  they  were  to  maintain  against  every  assailant
their  honour,  their  fortunes,  and  their  lives.  Readiness  of
speech  and  ease  in  the  handling  of  the  weapons  of  retort  and
sarcasm  were  carried  from  the  schools  of  rhetoric  to  the  tri-
bunals of  the  forum,  and  again  from  the  places  of  their  pub-
lic exercise  to  the  private  assembly  or  banquet.  Scurrility
of  language  was  indeed  characteristic  of  the  Italians,  and  was
common  to  all  classes:  it  extended  from  the  senators  and
knights  to  the  lowest  of  the  populace ;  it  startled  alike  the
decorum  of  patrician  nuptials  and  enlivened  the  humours  of  the
Saturnalia.  The  coarse  ribaldry  of  the  Fescennine  farces
embodied  the  same  spirit  of  unbounded  personality  which
glows  in  the  polished  sentences  of  Cicero,  or  flashes  from  the
point  of  an  epigram  of  Catullus.  According  to  Roman  hab-
its of  thought,  and  agreeably  perhaps  to  the  theory  of  the
Roman  polity,  the  private  life  and  habits  of  the  citizen  were
as  much  the  property  of  his  fellow-countrymen  as  his  con-
duct in  public  affairs.  His  domestic  vices  were  charged  as
crimes  against  society,  and  an  accusation  of  bribery  or  extor-
tion was  habitually  introduced  by  a  pretended  exposure  of
sins  of  lewdness  or  intemperance. This  licence  of  defamation

1  The  laws  of  the  twelve  tables  had  specified  defamatory  writings,  or  pub-
lication generally,  as  one  kind  of  Injuria ;  but  the  excessive  severity  of  the
penalty,  which  was  no  less  than  death,  seems  to  show  that  the  crime  was  not
practically  visited  at  all.  The  disuse  of  this  process  gave  occasion  for  the
pnetors  to  issue  notices  against  libel  in  their  edicts,  and  one  or  two  cases  occur,
under  the  free  state,  of  actions  for  slander,  for  satirical  writings,  or  misrepre-
sentations on  the  stage.  Fines  and  civil  infamy  were  the  penalties  now  attached
to  this  offence.  Sulla,  and  after  him  Augustus,  legislated  specifically  upon  the
subject  of  the  famosi  libelli;  confining  themselves,  however,  to  writings  only,
and  allowing  full  licence  to  merely  oral  abuse.  For  the  proceedings  of  Augus-
tus, see  Suet.  Oct.  51.;  Tac.  Ann.  i.  72.  See  this  subject  fully  discussed  by
Rein,  pp.  354-385.

122  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

was  the  birthright  of  the  free  Roman,  of  which  he  was  often
more  jealous  than  of  his  independence  in  thought  and  action.
He  might  subject  himself  to  the  arbitrary  authority  of  a  tri-
bune or  a  dictator  without  a  murmur,  as  long  as  he  was  per-
mitted to  retort  upon  them  with  jests  and  scandalous  anec-
dotes. No  government  could  maintain  itself  on  the  basis  of
popular  opinion  without  repressing  these  extravagant  excess-
es. When  the  chief  of  the  state  was  raised  to  an  eminence
from  which  he  could  not  descend  into  the  arena  of  personal
controversy,  it  became  a  necessary  act  of  policy  to  restrain
the  licence  of  attack  by  measures  of  adequate  severity.1

Two  accounts  are  given  us  of  the  provocation  which  in-
duced Augustus  to  extend  or  restore  the  laws  against  defama-
tory  writings. On  the  one  hand,  we  are  told  that

Conduct  of  Au- .  _, , _  , . . .  .  „

gustus  and  Ti-  he  was  onended  by  the  licentiousness  01  a  writer
spect  to  inju-  named  Cassius  Severus,  who  lashed  the  most  illus-
=  D  '  trious  of  the  citizens  of  both  sexes  indiscriminately.3
We  may  infer,  therefore,  from  this  statement,  that  the  em-
peror now  afforded  the  protection  of  the  law  to  women  as
well  as  to  men,  which  was  probably  a  novelty  ;  at  least,  the
principle  of  the  original  laws  of  libel  was  founded  on  the  civil
dignity  of  the  citizen,  to  which  a  woman  could  lay  no  claim.3
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  stated  that  he  was  moved  to  this
course  by  an  attack  made  on  himself  by  Junius  Novatus,  a
partisan  of  the  unfortunate  Agrippa.  If  this  be  true,  the
confirmation  of  the  law  must  have  been  among  the  latest  acts
of  the  aged  emperor's  reign.4  In  either  case,  its  does  not  ap-
pear that  the  first  princeps  gave  himself  any  other  protection

1  On  one  occasion  Augustus  threatened  to  retort:  " Faciam  sciat  iElianus
et  me  linguam  habere ;  plura  enim  de  eo  loquar :  "  but  he  abstained  neverthe-
less from  committing  himself  to  the  unequal  encounter. Suet.  Oct.  51.

2  Tac.  Ann.  i.  72. :  "  Commotus  Cassii  Severi  libidine  qui  viros  foerninasque
illustres  procacibus  scriptis  diffamaverat."

3  Injuria  was  anything  which  unfavourably  affected  the  public  estimation
of  a  citizen,  and  consequently  his  power  of  serving  the  state.  But  Augustus
treated  Defamation  not  as  Injuria,  but  as  Majestas,  the  greater  s,cope  of  which
enabled  him  to  throw  the  shield  of  the  law  over  illustrious  women  also.

*  Suet.  Oct.  1.  c.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  123

in  this  particular  than  what  he  allowed  to  every  citizen.  As
regarded  himself,  he  is  said  to  have  heen  very  mild  in  prose-
cuting or  punishing  this  offence,  and  to  have  refused  to  in-
inquire  at  all  into  mere  oral  invectives.1  Very  different,
however,  was  the  conduct  in  this  respect  of  his  uneasy  suc-
cessor. The  awkward  and  ungenial  manners  of  Tiberius
had  been  an  early  subject  of  ill-natured  remark :  he  was  al-
ready accused  of  gross  intemperance,  against  which  many
pungent  epigrams  were  directed.3  But  as  he  rose  in  emi-
nence and  power,  the  attacks  on  him  assumed  a  more  serious
form,  impugning  his  character  as  a  ruler,  imputing  to  him
cruelty  beyond  the  law,  and  a  pride  indecent  even  in  the  first
of  the  citizens.  The  free  insinuation  of  disagreement  be-
tween the  prince  and  his  mother  might  lead  to  inconvenient
revelations  of  his  domestic  privacy.3  When  on  his  first  ac-
cession to  power  his  pleasure  was  taken  by  the  praetor  about

1  Suet.  Oct.  55.  He  contented  himself,  according  to  this  writer,  with  con-
tradicting by  proclamation  jome  of  these  attacks,  and  forbade  the  senate  to
prohibit  by  a  decree  the  introduction  of  posthumous  abuse  of  the  emperor  in
wills.  But  Dion  (lvi.  27.)  says  that  he  caused  some  libels  against  him  to  be
burnt,  and  punished  the  writers.

2  Suet.  Tib.  42.  The  supposed  fragment  quoted  by  Burmann  is  in  fact  this
passage  of  Suetonius  versified :

"  Exiude  plcbs  Quiritium  vocavit
Non  Claudium  Tiberium  Neronem,
Sed  Caldium  Biberium  Meronem."

Comp.  Suet.  Tib.  59. :

"  Fastidit  vinuin  quia  jam  sitit  iste  cruorem ;

Tarn  bibit  hunc  avide  quam  bibit  ante  merum."

3  Tac.  Ann.  i.  72 :  "  Hunc  quoque  asperavere  carmina,  incertis  auctoribus
vulgata,  in  sfevitium  superbiamquc  ejus,  ct  discordem  cum  niatre  animum."
We  may  conceive  the  effect  on  prince  and  people  of  such  an  epigram  as  the
following  placarded  on  the  walls  of  a  modem  European  capital :

"  Aspice  ft-licem  sibi  non  tibi,  Romulc,  Sullam  :

Et  Marium  si  vis  aspice,  sed  reducem :
Nccnon  Antoni  civilia  bella  moventis,

Nee  semel  infectas  aspice  caede  manus  :
Et  die,  Koma  perit :  regnabit  sanguine  multo

Ad  regnum  quisquis  venit  ab  cxsilio."

124  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  appointment  of  the  special  commission  for  Majestas,  he
evaded  the  question  with  a  general  reply.  He  did  not  intend
to  allow  these  cases  to>  fall  under  the  jurisdiction  of  an  inde-
pendent tribunal,  but  to  reserve  them  for  the  cognisance  of
his  own  instrument,  the  senate ;  or  perhaps  at  this  time  he
had  not  really  determined  what  course  he  should  pursue.
At  first  he  met  such  accusations  with  a  magnanimity  worthy
of  a  great  monarch  :  Let  them  hate  me,  he  was  heard  to  ex-
claim, as  long  as  in  their  hearts  they  respect  me  /  in  a  free
state,  he  added,  both  mind  and  tongue  shoidd  be  free :  but
unfortunately  he  could  not  maintain  this  elevation  of  senti-
ment, and  the  bitterness  with  which  he  presently  revenged
himself  on  his  detractors  was  supposed  to  prove  that  the
charges  against  him  were  pointed  with  the  fatal  sting  of
truth.1

When,  however,  it  once  became  known  that  the  new
princeps  was  jealous  of  his  estimation  in  the  minds  of  the
Crime  of  Maj-  citizens,  and  would  not  suffer  himself  or  his
from  writings  position  to  be  disparaged  by  railing  defamation,
to  words.  there  were  many  to  urge  him  forwards,  and  im-

pel him  beyond  the  bounds  he  may  have  originally  prescribed
to  himself.  It  was  impossible  to  maintain  any  clear  distinc-
tion between  the  guilt  of  written  and  merely  spoken  libels.
It  might  be  said,  indeed,  that  the  one  admitted  of  direct
proof,  while  the  other  could  only  be  prosecuted  on  the  pre-
carious ground  of  hearsay  evidence  ;  or  that  the  one  argued
deliberate  intention,  the  other  might  be  a  momentary  ebulli-
tion of  thoughtless  spleen  ;  or,  lastly,  that  the  one  was  a
crime  recognized  by  the  ancient  laws,  the  other  was  not  less
expressly  countenanced  by  them  as  a  privilege  of  the  Roman
freeman.  But  all  these  considerations  gave  way,  and  not
unjustly,  to  the  conviction  that  the  malice  might  be  the  same,
the  injury  equal  in  either  case,  and  that  common  sense  and
equity  demanded  that  they  should  both  be  brought  under

1  Suet  Tib.  42. :  "  Oderint  dum  probent :  dein  vera  certaque  esse  ipse
fecit  fidem."  28. :  "  In  civitate  libera  linguam  mentemque  liberas  esse  de-
bcre."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  125

the  same  category  of  crime. Tiberius  was  encouraged,  not
by  courtiers  only,  but  by  jurists  and  philosophers,  in  extend-
ing the  definition  of  majesty  from  writings  to  words ;  and  in
so  doing,  he  only  carried  out  a  sound  and  reasonable  princi-
ple. But  this  was  not  all. It  was  easy  to  see  that  there
might  be  many  other  ways  of  bringing  the  person  of  the
sovereign  into  contempt,  besides  either  writings  or  words.
The  same  jurists  who  could  not  blind  themselves  to  the
logical  sequence  from  one  of  these  to  the  other,  were  at  a
loss  to  distinguish  from  them  a  variety  of  actions,  some
monstrous  and  many  merely  ridiculous. Thus  Falanius,  a
knight  of  obscure  position,  was  accused  of  disre- constructive
spect  to  the  princeps,  amounting  to  the  guilt  of  case  ofi'aia-
treason,  inasmuch  as  he  had  admitted  a  low  and £r"u8sand  Ru"
profligate  actor  to  assist  in  celebrating  the  rites  15

of  the  deified  Augustus.  Another  of  the  same  A-u- 76&
class,  named  Rubrius,  was  charged  with  having  forsworn
himself  in  the  name  of  that  illustrious  divinity,  and  again,  of
allowing,  at  the  sale  of  a  villa,  the  sacred  image  to  be  sold
along  with  it.  It  was  pretended  that  disrespect  towards  the
deceased  Ctesar  was  an  injury  to  his  living  successor.  But
Tiberius  refused  to  subscribe  to  this  doctrine.  He  wrote  a
letter  to  the  consuls  in  favour  of  the  accused,  asserting  that
Livia  herself,  in  exhibiting  games  in  her  husband's  honour,
had  not  deemed  it  requisite  to  inquire  into  the  life  and  man-
ners of  all  the  professional  people  she  employed ;  adding  that
perjury  in  the  name  of  Augustus  was  no  more  a  subject  for
human  laws  than  the  violation  of  an  oath  to  Jupiter ;  and
ending  with  the  memorable  aphorism,  profane  perhaps  in  the
mouth  of  any  one  not  himself  next  of  kin  to  divinity,  that
the  gods  should  be  left  to  mind  their  own  honour.1  About
the  same  time  a  man  of  higher  rank  and  charac-  n  ,a
ter,  named  Granius  Marcellus,  apparently  a  con-  Marccllus-
nexion  of  the  imperial  house,  then  prrctor  of  Bithynia,  was

'  Tac.  Ann.  i.  78. :  "  Jusjurandum  perinde  sestimandum  quam  si  Jovem  fo-
fellisaet :  Dcorum  injuriac  Dis  curoc."

126  '  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

accused  by  an  officer  of  his  own  staff  of  having  uttered  in
conversation  some  reflections  on  the  emperor's  personal
habits  ;  a  charge  which,  we  are  assured,  it  was  impossible  to
refute,  so  strong  was  the  presumption  against  any  man  of
having  remarked  on  the  profligacy  which  was  notorious  to
all  the  world.  But  a  more  specific  charge  against  the  praetor
was  that  of  having  placed  his  own  effigy  in  a  higher  and
more  conspicuous  place  than  those  of  the  Caesars,  which,  as
remotely  connected  with  his  family,  adorned  the  hall  of  his
mansion :  it  was  even  suggested,  as  an  impious  flattery  at
which  the  emperor's  modesty  would  revolt,  that  he  had  re-
moved the  head  from  an  image  of  Augustus,  and  replaced  it
with  that  of  his  living  successor.  In  this  case  also  Tiberius
rebuked  the  officious  zeal  of  the  prosecutor.  The  culprit  was
acquitted  of  the  charge  of  treason ;  but  he  happened  to  lie
at  the  time  under  a  charge  of  extortion  in  his  province,  and
on  this  the  senate  was  permitted  to  condemn  him.1

But  of  all  the  charges  of  this  nature  now  preferred,  none
was  more  extravagant  than  that  against  Lutorius  Priscus,  a
CaseofLuto-  knight  who  had  obtained  great  success  with
rius  Priscus.  some  verses  he  had  composed  on  the  death  of
Germanicus.  Tiberius  himself,  relaxing  from  his  usual  re-
serve and  parsimony,  had  rewarded  the  well-timed  compli-
ment with  an  imperial  largess.  On  the  occasion  of  an  illness
which  occurred  to  Drusus,  the  poet  was  tempted  to  try  the
fortune  of  his  muse  again,  and  prepared  a  second  dirge,  in
anticipation  of  a  second  demise  in  the  Caesarean  family.
Drusus  recovered ;  but  the  author's  vanity  prevailed  over
prudence  and  propriety,  and  he  recited  his  verses  before  a
fashionable  audience.  The  matter  became  noised  abroad,  an
information  was  laid  against  the  culprit,  and  on  the  motion
of  Haterius,  a  consul  designate,  the  senate  condemned  him  to
death  as  guilty  of  speculating  on  a  Caesar's  death,  and  there-
fore, by  an  easy  inference,  of  compassing  it  by  wishes  and
prayers. Of  the  senators  two  only  ventured  to  excuse  him

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  74.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  127

on  the  ground  of  thoughtlessness  and  levity :  exile  they
would  have  regarded  as  sufficient  punishment  for  a  fault
which  could  hardly  he  expected  to  find  imitators.  But  their
representations  were  unavailing.  The  wretched  man  was
dragged  to  prison  and  immediately  strangled.  Tiberius,
who  was  absent  from  Rome  at  the  time,  was  mortified  at  this
sanguinary  proceeding,  and  still  more,  perhaps,  at  the  in-
decent haste  with  which  it  had  been  conducted.  Refraining
from  any  direct  censure  of  Haterius,  or  the  senate  generally,
he  contented  himself  with  praising  the  sentiments  of  the
more  merciful  minority,  and  decreed  that  henceforth  an  inter-
val of  ten  days  should  always  elapse  between  sentence  and
execution,  to  leave  room  for  the  exercise  of  pardon.  This
considerate  provision  continued  in  force  not  only  during  the
government  of  Tiberius,  but  under  his  successors  also.1

But  the  senate  pretended,  in  its  servile  adulation,  to
grieve  at  the  restraint  which  the  emperor  thus  imposed  on
its  headlong  zeal  in  defence  of  his  dignity.  A  Case  of  Enniu8<
knight  named  Ennius  was  soon  afterwards  de-  a.d.  22.
nounced  for  having  melted  down  an  image  of  the  A- v- 77°-
emperor,  and  converted  it  into  plate  for  the  service  of  the
table.  On  this  occasion  Tiberius  peremptorily  forbade  pro-
ceedings to  be  instituted.  Thereupon,  Ateius  Capito,  now
grown  grey  in  reputation  as  the  most  eminent  jurist  of  his
times,  assumed  the  tone  of  injured  liberty,  and  complained
that  the  fathers  should  be  debarred  from  the  free  exercise  of
their  undoubted  right  of  judgment :  the  crime,  he  declared,
was  a  grave  one,  and  however  mild  he  might  be  in  avenging
a  private  wrong,  he  for  one  could  not  suffer  the  majesty  of
the  republic  to  be  assailed  with  impunity.  Tiberius  knew
the  man,  the  hoary  apologist  for  the  Cesarean  usurpation,

1  For  the  story  of  Lutorius  Priscus,  sec  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  49-51.,  under  the
date  A.  c.  114.  a.  d.  21.  Dion  (in  lvii.  15.)  relates  that  a  certain  Vibius  Rufus
prided  himself  on  possessing  two  great  curiosities,  the  relict  of  Cicero,  and  the
chair  in  which  Caesar  was  slain,  as  if  the  one  could  make  him  an  orator,  and
the  other  an  emperor ;  and  seems  to  think  it  showed  great  moderation  in  Ti-
berius to  overlook  such  a  treasonable  imagination.

128  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

and  could  appreciate  at  its  proper  value  this  empty  show  of
zeal  for  independence.  He  paid  no  regard  to  the  objection,
but  persisted  in  his  interference  ;  not  displeased  at  the
jealousy  with  which  the  jurist  was  henceforth  more  gener-
ally regarded,  who  thus  disgraced  his  own  name,  and  de-
graded in  the  eyes  of  the  citizens  the  dignity  of  his  sci-
ence.1

Such,  indeed,  was  the  proneness  of  the  senate  to  this
mode  of  flattery,  that  no  public  charge  against  an  illustrious
Case  of  suanus. citizen  seems  to  have been  thought  complete,
A  D  22  unless  coupled  with  the  imputation  of  disrespect

a.  tj.  775.  towards  the  emperor."  Thus  about  the  same
time  we  hear  of  Silanus,  proconsul  of  Asia,  being  accused  of
extortion  ;  but  no  sooner  was  the  impeachment  set  forth,
than  a  consular,  an  sedile,  and  a  praetor  started  up  with  some
other  vague  charges  against  him,  as  that  he  had  profaned
the  divinity  of  Augustus,  and  disparaged  the  majesty  of
Tiberius.  In  the  trial  which  followed,  the  enrperor  seems
to  have  disdained  to  take  notice  of  these  accessory  incrimi-
nations. The  case  against  Silanus  was  sufficiently  clear.
He  had  not  the  courage  or  the  eloquence  to  defend  himself,
but  threw  himself  despairingly  on  the  imperial  clemency,  and
the  dignity  of  his  own  family,  for  protection.  Tiberius,
however,  fortified  by  the  conduct  of  Augustus  in  a  case  of
similar  guilt,  and  glad  to  gratify  the  popular  sentiment  by
making  an  example  of  so  noble  a  culprit,  encouraged  the
senate  to  proceed  to  sentence  against  him ;  and  when  it  de-
creed the  punishment  of  relegation  to  an  island,  interfered
only  to  mitigate  the  penalty  by  naming  Cythera  as  the  place
of  confinement,  instead  of  the  more  inhospitable  rock  of
Gyarus.8

Tiberius  had  exhibited  similar  magnanimity  in  two  pre-
vious cases,  whicli  are  reserved  to  be  mentioned  together,

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  70.

s  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  38. :  "  Postulaverat  rcpctundis,  addito  majestatis  crimine,
quod  turn  omnium  accusationum  complcmcntum  erat."
3  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  66-69.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  129

because they relate  to women  ; for  political  . , ,

J  n  • Case  of  Apuloia

charges  asrainst  women  were  a  new  feature  in  andLepida.
Roman  procedure.  Apuleia  Varilia  was  a  con-  a.d.  17.
nexion  of  the  imperial  family,  being  a  grand-
daughter of  Octavia ;  as  such,  the  crime  of  adultery,  with
which  she  was  charged,  became  an  offence  against  the  law
of  Majesty.  But  to  enhance  her  guilt,  expressions  of  disre-
spect towards  Augustus  and  Tiberius,  and  even  against
Livia,  were  imputed  to  her.  Upon  the  first  and  principal
charge  the  emperor  was  satisfied  with  referring  the  prosecu-
tors to  the  Julian  law  of  adultery :  he  refused  to  listen  to
the  charge  of  disrespect  towards  himself  and  his  mother ;  the
insinuation  of  an  offence  against  the  sanctity  of  Augustus  he
would  alone  permit  to  be  made  the  subject  of  inquiry.  This
last  charge  speedily  fell  to  the  ground ;  but  the  licentiousness
of  an  illustrious  matron,  which  was  amply  proved,  was  pun-
ished with  removal  beyond  the  two  hundredth  milestone.1
Nearly  similar  to  this  was  the  case  of  Lepida,  who  combined
with  her  iEmilian  ancestry  a  connexion  with  the  Sullan  and
Pompeian  houses,  and  who  was  esteemed  of  sufficient  politi-
cal importance  to  be  subjected  to  charges  of  adultery  and
poisoning,  aggravated  by  inquiries  through  the  soothsayers
into  the  destinies  of  the  imperial  family.  In  this  instance,
also,  we  find  Tiberius  exercising  great  moderation  in  regard
to  the  charges  which  affected  himself,  first  desiring  the  senate
to  dismiss  them  altogether,  and  when  it  persisted,  forbidding
the  examination  of  the  culprit's  slaves  against  her.  She  was
ultimately  convicted  on  the  other  accusations,  and  interdicted
fire  and  water ;  but  even  then,  the  confiscation  of  her  estates,
which  should  properly  have  followed,  was  remitted.3

Such  was  the  moderation  of  Tiberius  for  several  years
from  the  commencement  of  his  reign,  in  the  defence  of  his
own  person  and  position  ;  such  was  the  difficulty Tho  injustice
in  which  he  was  placed  by  the  overweening  zeal SKStfSwa
of  flatterers,  and  still  more  by  the  ambition  or ™i»utation-

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  50.  3  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  22,  23.

VOL.  V. — 9

130  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

cupidity  of  senators,  who  sought  distinction  or  profit  from
the  trade  of  criminal  accusation.  Tiberius  himself,  besides
the  desire  he  manifested  for  the  attainment  of  substantial
justice,  was  admitted  on  all  hands  to  be  free  from  the  sordid
vices  so  common  among  his  countrymen.  He  was,  to  use
the  strong  but  rough  expression  of  Tacitus,  firm  enough
against  money}  But  if  he  has  failed  in  other  respects  to
obtain  from  history  all  the  justice  he  sought  to  obtain  for  his
people,  the  cause  lay  partly  in  himself,  and  in  the  peculiar
infirmity  into  which  his  excess  of  zeal  betrayed  him.  The
mind  of  Tiberius  was  characterized  by  a  certain  painful  pre-
ciseness :  he  was  possessed  with  the  litigious  spirit  which
insists  on  its  presumed  rights,  in  spite  of  every  inconvenience.
He  was  deficient  in  breadth  of  view,  and  sought  in  vain  to
compensate  for  it  by  subtlety  and  acuteness.  Accordingly,
we  are  not  surprised  to  find  that  the  general  and  statesman,
the  chief  of  innumerable  armies,  and  the  head  of  a  confederacy
of  nations,  was  moreover  a  purist  in  his  use  of  language,  and
fond  of  disputing  with  the  grammarians  on  the  exact  mean-
ing of  words,  full  of  notes  and  queries  on  the  most  trifling
and  puerile  subjects  of  literary  curiosity,  in  which  certainly
truth  could  not  be  attained,  and  as  certainly  was  not  worth
attaining.2  Tiberius  carried  in  short  to  the  throne  the  tem-
per of  a  pedant,  and  a  pedant  on  the  throne  is  in  danger  of
His  encourage-  becoming  a  tyrant.  Hence  the  encouragement
lators  orcrimi3-"  ne  unfortunately  gave  to  the  criminal  informers,
nai  informers.  or  delators ;  an  encouragement  which  he  soon
acknowledged  to  be  pernicious,  and  withdrew  in  dismay,  till
the  distrust  and  apprehensions  of  increasing  years  drove  him
again  into  the  same  fatal  course.  The  delator  was  properly
one  who  gave  notice  to  the  fiscal  officers  of  moneys  that  had

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  18. :  "  Satis  firmus  adversum  pecuniam."

2  Suet.  1%.  70. :  "  Affectatione  et  morositate  nimia  obscurabat  stylum  .  .  .
monopolium  nominaturus  prius  veniam  postulavit."  Dion  (lvii.  15.)  says  that
he  suffered  a  project  of  law  to  drop  rather  than  use  a  Greek  word  for  which
there  was  no  Latin  equivalent.  Com  p.  also,  the  story  of  Capito,  in  lvii.  17.,
and  Suet,  de  lllustr.  Gramm.  22.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  131

become  due  to  the  treasury  of  the  state,  or  more  strictly  to
the  emperor's  fiscus.1  The  title  was  first  extended  from  this
narrow  sphere  to  persons  who  lodged  information  in  case  of
any  offences  punishable  by  fine  ;  and  when  Augustus  under-
took to  legislate  comprehensively  on  the  subject  of  marriage,
its  obligations  and  its  violations,  he  was  induced,  by  the
great  difficulty  of  executing  the  provisions  of  an  unpopular
enactment,  to  subsidize  by  pecuniary  rewards  informers
against  its  transgressors.3  It  was  the  aim  of  Augustus  to
attach  every  citizen  to  some  peculiar  branch  of  industry :
wherever  he  could  he  gave  direct  occupation  ;  in  many  other
cases  he  indirectly  pointed  out  where  it  might  be  found.  He
now  called  into  existence  a  new  employment,  though  he  did
not  himself  live  to  see  its  progress  and  development.  Many
were  the  knights  and  senators  who  now  learnt  to  make  a
traffic  of  their  eloquence  and  accomplishments,  in  the  service
of  the  emperor,  by  the  vindication  of  his  unpopular  laws.
They  reaped  their  reward  not  in  money  only, — though  a
portion  of  the  pecuniary  mulct  fell  regularly  to  their  share,
and  the  senate  not  rarely  decreed  them  a  special  remunera-
tion,— but  in  political  distinction  also,  and  even  in  a  notoriety
akin  to  fame.  Their  love  of  power  was  amply  gratified,
when  they  saw  the  criminal,  a  man  perhaps  of  the  noblest
birth  and  highest  position,  quail  before  their  well-known
energy  and  audacity,  and  desist  from  a  hopeless  contest  with
their  acknowledged  powers  of  persuasion.  Feared  by  the
great,  they  became  the  patrons  and  champions  of  the  people,
who  were  always  ready  to  behold  in  the  attack  on  noble
offenders  a  vindication  of  popular  rights  and  principles.
They  acquired  in  the  forum  some  portion  of  the  consideration
which  attached  of  old  to  the  sturdy  independence  of  the
tribunes,  while  they  were  thrust  into  the  favour  and  confi-
dence of  the  princeps,  or  at  least  of  his  nearest  advisers  in  the

1  Fee  Rein,  Criminal- liccltl,  p.  814,  note.

2  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  28. :  "  Inditi  custodes,  ct  lege  Papia  Poppsea  praemiis  in-
dued."

132  , HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

palace. The  trade  of  the  delator  became  thus,  under  bad
emperors,  the  broad  and  beaten  track  of  a  crafty  ambition.1

But  this  infamous  practice  became  so  marked  a  feature  in

Roman  society,  and  affected  so  painfully  the  imaginations  of

the  people,  that  it  will  be  well  to  spend  a  few

Passion  of  the  r r '  . .  r  .

Romans  for  ac- moments  here  in  depicting  to  ourselves  its  action

cusation.  .  .___  .  , ._

more  widely.  W  e  must  trace  it  back,  like  every
other  pest  of  the  imperial  times,  to  its  first  origin  under  the
republic,  when  the  evil  inherent  in  its  principle  was  disguised
or  even  ennobled  by  loftier  aims,  and  by  the  freshness  of  its
growth  m  an  atmosphere  of  freedom.  The  liberty  of  the
Roman  citizen,  the  prime  jewel  of  his  existence,  was  to  be
maintained  at  any  price.  It  was  maintained  by  a  system  of
universal  terrorism.  Every  citizen  was  invited  to  watch
over  the  conduct  of  his  compatriots,  and  to  menace  every
deviation  from  the  path  of  civil  virtue  with  a  public  accusa-
tion. Every  young  noble  was  trained  in  the  art  of  pleading,
partly  to  enable  him,  when  his  own  turn  came,  to  defend
himself,  but  primarily  to  furnish  him  with  weapons  of  oifence,
and  thereby  with  the  means  of  self-advancement.  Rhetoric
was  an  instrument  of  power,  by  which  he  might  expect  to
make  himself  admired  by  the  people,  and  feared  by  competi-
tors of  his  own  class.  He  fought  his  way  to  public  honours
on  the  floor  of  the  law-courts,  dragging  successively  from
their  benches  the  tribunes,  the  prsetors,  and  the  consuls,  be-
fore whom  he  first  began  his  career  of  eloquence.  The  in-
trigues and  treasons  of  the  men  in  power  did  not  always
suffice  to  furnish  victims  for  this  mania  of  impeachment :  it
was  necessary  to  extend  the  inquisition  into  the  provinces,
and  summon  before  the  bar  of  Roman  opinion  the  governors
who  had  sinned,  if  not  against  the  laws  of  the  republic
against  those  at  least  of  humanity  and  justice.  To  interest
the  citizens,  to  inflame  their  passions,  to  bias  their  judgments
on  the  subject  of  crimes  thus  perpetrated  on  remote  provin-

1  On  the  rewards  of  the  delators,  see  Suet.  Tib.  61. ;  Dion,  lviii.  14. ;  Tac.
Ann.  ii.  32.,  iv.  30.,  vi.  47.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  133

cials,  required  great  exertion  of  art  and  eloquence  ;  but  the
genius  and  industry  of  the  young  advocates  and  their  teachers
kept  pace  with  every  demand  upon  them.  Feelings  of  party
were  appealed  to  in  the  place  of  genuine  patriotism.  The
truth  of  the  accusation  became  of  little  importance ;  it  was
the  great  triumph  of  the  rhetorician,  not  unfrequently  gained
to  baffle  the  interests  of  a  political  faction,  without  regard  to
the  intrinsic  merits  of  the  case.  The  young  orator,  who  at
the  age  of  nineteen  or  twenty  could  sway  the  votes  of  a
bench  of  judges  against  some  veteran  proconsul,  grown  grey
in  the  service  of  the  state,  was  marked  as  sure  to  rise  to  the
highest  political  eminence.1  The  energy  and  aggressive
spirit  of  the  Romans  was  ever  conspicuous  in  the  toga  no
less  than  in  the  sagum ;  they  preferred  the  attack  to  the
defence,  in  the  forum  as  well  as  in  the  field.

It  was  the  glory  of  Cicero  that  he  abstained  in  his  early
career,  while  yet  his  fame  was  to  be  acquired,  from  this
common  routine  of  prosecution,  and  sought  the The  want  nn.
less  dazzling  career  of  a  pleader  for  the  accused. ofr^eateandire'
Yet  in  the  most  glowing  of  his  effusions,  both  in ^fordo? top
public and private  causes,  he  appears as the <iuence-
assailant ;  and  neither  humanity  nor  policy  prevent  him  from
declaring  himself  the  enemy  of  the  man  against  whom  he
seeks  to  enlist  his  hearers'  prejudices.3 The  Romans  made
no  scruple  of  avowing  their  personal  animosities  ;  the  spirit
of  revenge  with  them  was  a  virtue  which  a  man  would  affect
if  he  had  it  not.8 In  the  heart  of  the  Roman  friendship

1  Thus  Crassus  maintained  an  accusation  at  nineteen  years,  Caesar  at
twenty-one,  Pollio  at  twenty-two. Tac.  de  Oral.  34. ;  Quintil.  Inst.  xii.  6.

s  There  are  some  curious  passages  in  the  speech  de  Provinciis  Consularibus,
in  which  Cicero  excuses  himself  for  seeming  to  waive  his  notorious  hostility  to
Caesar:  "8.  Me  communis  utilitatis  habere  rationem  non  doloris  mei."  "18.
Accepi  injuriam ;  inimicus  esse  debui ;  non  nego."  "  20.  Hoc  tempore  rei
publicse  consulere,  inimicitias  in  aliud  tempus  reservare  deberem."

'  Tac.  de  Oral.  36. :  "  Assignatae  domibus  inimicitias.  40.  Jus  potentissi-
mum  qucmque  vcxandi,  atqne  ipsa  inimicitiarum  gloria."  Hint.  ii.  53. :  "Ut
novus  adhuc,  et  in  senatum  nuper  ascitus,  magnis  inimicitiis  clarcsceret."
Champagny,  Ce&ars,  i.  p.  237.

134  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

occupied  the  place  of  love ;  it  was  invested  with  a  sanctity
and  solemnity  of  obligation  which  approached  almost  to
chivalry :  but  the  reaction  from  it  was  an  enmity  not  less
deeply  felt  nor  less  solemnly  pronounced :  the  foe  was  not
less  devoted  than  the  friend.1  Neither  shame  therefore  nor
humanity  interfered  to  check  this  passion  for  accusation,  in
which  the  Romans  were  to  the  full  as  unscrupulous  and  un-
unfeeling,  though  dealing  with  their  own  countrymen,  as
they  were  in  invading  the  lands  of  the  foreigner.  This  fear-
ful vice  was  gilded  under  the  free  state  by  the  splendour  of
the  objects  to  which  it  was  directed,  the  magnitude  of  the
interests  involved,  and  the  abilities  and  powers  of  the  giants
it  summoned  to  the  contest.3  In  the  atmosphere  of  liberty  it
called  many  corresponding  virtues  into  action ;  it  produced
on  the  whole  one  of  the  highest  manifestations  of  human
nature,  and  taking  the  good  with  the  evil,  we  may  not
perhaps  be  entitled  to  regret  the  existence  which  was  per-
mitted to  it.  But  for  the  same  vice,  as  it  appeared  under
the  empire,  no  such  excuse  can  be  offered.  Then  too,  as
soon  as  the  young  patrician  had  quitted  the  schools  of  the
declaimers,  he  longed  to  make  a  trial  of  his  accomplishments,
and  sought  an  object  on  which  to  flesh  the  maiden  sword  of
his  eloquence.  There  were  no  longer  party  interests  into
which  to  throw  himself; the  class  of  intriguing  politicians

1  The  Duel,  the  legitimate  descendant  of  private  warfare,  could  have  no
place  in  Roman  society,  which  regarded  man  as  the  citizen  only,  an  unit  in  the
body  corporate.  Personal  violence  was  prohibited  by  law,  and  even  carrying
arms  was  interdicted.  The  Cut,  the  resource  of  sullenness  and  shyness,  is,  I
believe,  a  strictly  English  institution ;  and  the  formal  renunciation  of  friendship
was  the  last  resource  of  outraged  feeling  among  the  Romans.  Thus  Germani-
cus  sends  Piso  a  solemn  declaration  that  their  friendship  is  at  an  end.  Tibe-
rius forbids  Labeo  his  house.  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  29. :  "  Morem  fuisse  majoribus,
quoties  dirimerent  amicitias,  interdicere  domo,  eumque  finem  gratia)  ponere."
In  reply  to  the  common  apology  for  the  duel,  that  it  prevents  assassination,  it
may  be  remarked  that  assassination  was  almost  unknown  to  a  late  period
among  the  Romans.

1  The  reader  should  refer  to  the  passage  of  Tacitus  de  Oral.,  Zi-Z1.,  one
of  the  most  interesting  in  ancient  literature.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  135

no  longer  existed,  whose  attempts  against  the  liberties  of  the
commonwealth  demanded  his  vigilance  and  invited  his  ex-
posure ;  the  provinces,  administered  at  last  on  settled  princi-
ples, and  kept  under  the  eye  of  the  central  government,
afforded  still  some,  but  much  rarer,  cases  of  public  wrong  to
denounce  and  avenge.  What  remained  then  for  the  young
aspirant  ?  how  exercise  the  gifts  he  had  so  long  been  foster-
ing in  private,  and  ventilate  abroad  the  talents  to  which
schools  and  saloons  had  accorded  such  inspiriting  acclama-
tions ?  The  progress  of  special  legislation,  diverted  as  it  was
from  the  public  to  the  private  career  of  the  Roman,  entering
into  his  dwelling  and  penetrating  the  recesses  of  his  home
life,  gave  birth  to  manifold  modes  of  transgression  and  eva-
sion, such  as  the  prying  eyes  of  a  domestic  spy  alone  could
track.  The  government,,  which  might  despair  of  vindicating
its  authority  by  the  exertions  of  its  own  officers,  was  grateful
to  the  passion  for  forensic  distinction,  which  now  urged  the
aspirant  for  fame  to  drag  to  light  every  petty  violation  of
every  frivolous  enactment.  According  to  the  spirit  of
Roman  criminal  procedure,  the  informer  and  the  pleader
were  one  and  the  same  person.  There  was  no  public  accuser
to  manage  the  prosecution  for  the  government  on  information
from  Avhatever  sources  derived ;  but  the  spy  who  discovered
the  delinquency  was  himself  the  man  to  demand  of  the  senate,
the  praetor,  or  the  judge,  an  opportunity  of  proving  it  by  his
own  eloquence  and  ingenuity.  The  odium  of  prosecution
was  thus  removed  from  the  government  to  the  private  delator;
an  immense  advantage  to  a  rule  of  force  which  pretended
to  be  popular.  The  common  right  of  accusation,  the  birth-
right of  the  Roman  citizen,  the  palladium,  so  esteemed,  of
Roman  freedom,  became  thus  the  most  convenient  instrument
of  despotism.  But  however  odious  such  a  profession  might
generally  make  itself,  whatever  the  infamy  to  which  it  would
be  consigned  by  posterity,  those  who  practised  it  reaped  the
reward  they  sought  in  money  and  celebrity,  in  influence  and
authority,  in  the  favour  of  the  prince,  and  not  rarely  in  the
applause  of  the  multitude. They  could  wreak  their  malice

136  HISTOKY  OF  THE  KOMANS

on  their  private  enemies  under  the  guise  of  zeal  for  the  public
service  ;  they  might  gratify  the  worst  of  passions,  and  exult,
under  the  shadow  of  the  imperial  tyranny,  in  the  exercise  of
a  tyranny  hardly  less  omnipotent  of  their  own.  The  social
corruption  such  a  state  of  things  produced  grew  fast  and
rankly,  and  is  marked  by  the  swift  progress  of  the  contagion
from  the  first  raw  and  ignoble  professors  to  men  of  real  dis-
tinction in  the  state.  Beginning  with  youths  fresh  from
school,  or  the  teachers  of  rhetoric  themselves,  it  soon  spread
to  magistrates  and  consulars,  and  many  of  the  most  illustri-
ous statesmen  of  the  early  empire  were  notorious  for  their
addiction  to  this  meanest  and  most  debasing  of  vices.

As  for  Tiberius  himself,  the  fanaticism  with  which  he
strove  to  execute  in  detail  the  laws  bequeathed  him  by  his
Encourage-  predecessors,  induced  him  early  to  stoop  to  the
«onbyfTibe-  degradation  of  countenancing  the  practice  of
rius-  delation. Refusing  to  bend  under  the  enormous

burden  of  public  affairs,  and  disdaining  or  fearing  to  associate
with  himself  any  assistant,  as  Augustus  had  wisely  done
from  the  first,  he  strove  pertinaciously  to  make  himself
familiar  with  the  whole  machinery  of  government,  and  to
take  a  personal  share  in  all  its  procedure.  He  was  constant
in  attendance  on  the  judicial  trials  of  the  senate,  but  only  to
secure  the  impartiality  of  its  decisions ;  he  assisted  also  at
the  tribunals  of  the  magistrates,  taking  his  seat  at  the  ex-
tremity  of  the  bench,  to  avert  the  suspicion  of  unfairly  in-
fluencing them.1  Delation  he  prized  as  the  machinery  by
which  the  true  ends  of  justice  could,  as  he  imagined,  most
readily  be  obtained.  When  he  discovered  the  vile  uses  to
which  it  was  put,  and  felt  its  impolicy  and  unpopularity,  he
did  not  refuse  to  check  and  discourage  it ;  and  he  established
a  new  tribunal  of  fifteen  senators,  by  the  weight  of  whose
character  he  may  have  hoped  to  moderate  it,  and  afford,  as

1  Suet.  Tib.  33. :  "  Ac  primo  eatenus  interveniebat  ne  quid  pcrperam  fieret
....  assidebatque  juxtim  vel  ex  adverse-  in  parte  primori."  Comp.  Tac.
Ann.  i.  75.:  "In  cornu  tribunalis."  Dion,  lvii.  1.  But,  as  Tacitus  remarks.
"  Dum  veritati  consulitur,  libertas  corrumpebatur."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  137

was  said,  some  alleviation  to  the  peril  and  terror  of  the  citi-
zens.1 Certain  it  is  that  the  records  of  the  earlier  years  of
the  Tiberiau  despotism  abound  in  evidence  of  the  emperor's
solicitude  for  the  pure  administration  of  justice,  and  the  con-
stant struggle  in  which  he  was  engaged  with  the  reckless
spirit  of  violence  and  cruelty,  of  which  accusers  and  judges
equally  partook.  Ultimately  his  own  steadfastness  and  con-
stancy gave  way.  He  yielded  to  the  torrent  he  could  no
longer  stem  alone.  He  resigned  himself  to  the  sedulous  at-
tentions of  an  evil  counsellor,  who  relieved  him  by  consum-
mate artifice,  without  his  consciousness,  of  great  part  of  his
burden,  and  persuaded  him  to  neglect  the  rest,  and  leave  the
corruption  of  society  to  take  its  course.  Tiberius  was  in-
duced to  acquiesce  in  the  necessity  of  vices  he  had  originally
striven  to  resist,  and  to  wrap  himself  in  the  selfish  conviction  that
his  own  safety  was  the  highest  object  of  government.  Then
came  the  full  development  of  the  occult  principles  of  the  law
of  treason ;  then  came  the  fierce  and  fanatical  stimulus  which
was  given  to  the  appetite  for  delation :  the  conflgration  raged
over  Rome  and  Italy,  involving  every  noble  mansion  in  its
blaze,  and  overthrowing  many  to  their  foundations.1  It  was
ruled  to  be  criminal  to  perform  before  an  emperor's  effigy  on
a  coin  or  ring  any  act  which  would  be  indecent  in  the  pres-
ence of  the  emperor  himself,  such  as  to  strip  a  slave  for
chastisement,  or  even  to  strip  oneself  for  the  bath ;  finally,  a
citizen  was  condemned  for  entering  a  brothel  with  a  piece  of
money  on  which  the  imperial  countenance  was  stamped.3
While  the  fountain  of  justice  was  polluted  by

x  " Extravagances

founding  inquiry  into  these  offences  on  no  ex- of  the  Law  of

°  J  n  Majesty.

press  laws,  but  only  on  perverse  and  extravagant
deductions  from  them,  the  legitimate forms of  procedure

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  28.

a  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Urbemque  et  Italiam  et  quod  usquam  (avium  corripuerant,
multorumquc  excisi  status."  Comp.  Ann.  i.  *73. :  "Quibus  initiis,  quanta  Ti-
berii  arte,  gravissimum  cxitium  irrepserit,  dein  rcpressum  sit,  postremo  arscrit,
cunctaque  corripuerit."

*  Suet.  Tib.  59. It  must  remembered  that  the  emperor's  was  not  the  only

138  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

"were  no  longer  carefully  preserved.  Though  in  cases  of
majestas  the  senate  alone  was  the  authorized  tribunal,  the
prince  gradually  claimed  to  take  cognisance  of  them  himself.
Tiberius  ceased  to  abide  by  the  ordinary  rules  of  evidence.
Augustus  himself  had  evaded  the  principle  of  law,  that  a
slave  might  not  be  examined  by  torture  against  his  master,
by  causing  him  to  be  seized  and  sold  to  a  public  officer,  and
then  stretched  as  the  slave  of  another  on  the  rack.1  But
even  this  formality  was  no  longer  observed.  The  penalty  of
death  was  frequently  substituted  for  banishment,  and  the
worst  precedent  of  the  Sullan  -proscriptions  was  sometimes
followed,  in  subjecting  the  criminal's  children  to  the  same
fate  as  himself.  The  property  of  the  condemned  was  confis-
cated :  if  his  life  was  spared,  he  might  "be  disqualified  from
making  a  will ;  and  if  he  perished  before  sentence  by  his  own
hand,  baffled  justice  might  avenge  herself  by  the  infliction  of
a  b  2"  posthumous infamy.4 On the case  of  iElius

a.  tt.  775.  Saturninus,  who  was  flung  from  the  Tarpeian
rock  for  a  libel  on  the  emperor,  an  historian  remarks  that  this
was  one  only  of  many  instances  of  the  infliction  of  death  for
reflections  on  the  life  and  habits  of  Tiberius ;  upon  which  he
adds,  that  the  Romans  marvelled  at  the  impolitic  jealousy
which  thus  exposed  by  public  processes  details  which,
whether  true  or  false,  acquired  from  these  processes  only
their  general  notoriety  and  acceptance.  People,  he  says,
imagined  Tiberius  must  be  mad  to  insist,  often  against  the
explicit  denial  of  the  accused,  that  crimes  and  vices  had  been
imputed  to  him,  which  a  man  of  sense  would  have  willingly
left  unnoticed. But  for  the  wisdom  and  policy  of  his  general

head  still  stamped  upon  the  current  coins.  Other  members  of  the  Caesarean
family  partook  of  that  honour.  The  gold  and  silver  coinage  was  imperial,  but
Augustus  allowed  the  senate  to  issue  the  copper  currency.  The  names,  how-
ever, of  the  triumviri  monetales  do  not  occur  on  medals  after  the  year  740,
according  to  Eckhel,  Doctr.  Numm.  v.  64.

1  Dion,  lv.  5. ;  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  67.

2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  31.  This  was  called  "  damnatio  memoriae"  Suetonius
crowns  this  confusion  of  law  and  justice  by  saying,  "  Omne  crimen  pro  capi-
tali  receptum."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  13 9

administration,  -which  was  still  patent  to  the  world,  this  hy-
pothesis of  insanity  would  have  received  general  assent :  as
it  was,  his  conduct  in  this  respect  could  only  he  viewed  as  a
strange  example  of  human  inconsistency.  The  particulars,  how
ever,  of  these  charges,  thus  scrupulously  and  minutely  detailed
in  the  language  of  legal  procedure,  were  preserved  in  the  public
records,  which  thus  became  an  official  repository  for  every
calumny  against  the  emperor  which  floated  on  the  impure
surface  of  common  conversation.  We  cannot  but  suspect
that  this  was  the  storehouse  to  which  Tacitus  and  Suetonius,
or  the  obscurer  writers  from  whom  they  drew,  resorted  for
the  reputed  details  of  a  prince's  habits,  whom  it  was  the
pleasure  and  interest  of  many  parties  to  blacken  to  the  ut-
most. The  foulest  stories  current  against  Tiberius  were
probably  the  very  charges  advanced  against  him  by  libellers
such  as  Saturninus,  which  he  openly  contradicted  and  de-
nounced at  the  time,  and  which  would  have  sunk  into  obliv-
ion with  the  mass  of  contemporary  slander,  but  for  the  rest-
less and  suicidal  jealousy  with  which  he  himself  registered
and  labelled  them  in  the  archives  of  indignant  justice.1

The  subjects  of  Tiberius,  we  are  assured,  conceived  a
high  opinion  of  the  wisdom  and  policy  of  his  general  admin-
istration. Even  Tacitus,  not  a  favourable  nor consolidation
even  a  just  critic  of  his  character,  admits  that  his dominion  un°
conduct  in  regard  to  the  law  of  majesty  was  the der Tiberius-
only  blot  on  a  government  distinguished,  at  least  for  many
years,  by  prudence,  equity,  and  mildness.2 But  Tacitus,  as
we  shall  presently  see,  is  far  from  consistent  with  himself  in
this,  as in other expressions of  opinion. The first and
most urgent duty  of  the chief  of  the empire, following
the  traditions  of  the  consular  administration,  was  to  main-
tain the  honour  and  security  of  her  possessions  abroad,  and
against  the  foreigner  on  the  frontiers. The  law  of  empire,  in

1  Dion,  lvii.  22,  23.

2  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  6. :  "  Leges,  si  majestatis  quaestio  exiincrctur,  bono  in  usu."
By  this  we  are  not  to  understand  merely  the  judicial  procedure,  but  tiie  han-
dling of  the  broad  principles  of  administration.

140  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  popular  view,  was  continual  progress  and  aggression.  To
extend  the  limits  of  his  own  province  was  the  business  of
every  proconsul,  and  to  extend  the  limits  of  every  province
was  still  reputed  the  paramount  duty  of  the  imperator,  him-
self the  universal  proconsul.  The  first  idea  of  Caesar,  on  at-
taining sovereignty  in  the  city,  was  to  effect  the  annexation
of  Parthia.  Augustus  had  no  such  wild  ambition,  no  such
blind  instinct  of  conquest:  he  sedulously  abstained  in  many
quarters  from  pushing  forward  the  conquering  eagles,  feeling
as  he  did  that  the  extent  of  his  possessions  was  already  quite
as  great  as  one  arm  could  control,  too  great  indeed,  as  had
been  amply  demonstrated,  for  the  jealous  co-rule  of  consuls
and  senators.  Nevertheless  Augustus  had  never  wholly  de-
sisted from  aggressive  warfare  beyond  the  Limits  of  Ter-
minus. In  Egypt  and  Arabia,  as  well  as  still  later  in  Ger-
many, he  had  maintained  views  of  conquest,  though  he  had
refrained  from  putting  out  in  any  quarter  the  whole  strength  of
his  armies.  During  his  reign  the  empire  had  been  increased
with  solid  additions ;  and  it  had  been  no  vain  boast  of  his
courtiers  that  he  had  advanced  its  frontiers  into  new  zones
and  under  unknown  constellations.1  Yet  Augustus,  it  was
well  known,  had  left  to  his  successor,  as  a  legacy  of  political
wisdom,  the  counsel  not  to  extend  the  limits  of  Roman  sov-
ereignty. This  advice  Tiberius  frankly  accepted.  He  with-
drew his  legions,  as  soon  as  the  ambition  of  Germanicus
would  permit  him,  within  the  Rhine ;  and  if  he  allowed  cam-
paigns to  be  still  waged  in  the  valleys  of  the  Atlas,  these
were  strictly  for  security  and  not  for  conquest.  His  abstain-
ing from  the  plantation  of  military  colonies  in  the  provinces,
was  a  pledge  of  the  sincerity  of  his  peaceful  policy.3  Instead
of  extending  the  frontiers,  he  was  intent  on  consolidating  his
possessions  within  them,  converting  tributary  kingdoms  into
taxable  provinces,  and  reducing  restless  barbarians  to  some-

1  Virg.  JEn.  vi.  795. :

"  Jacet  ultra  sidera  tcllus,
Extra  anni  Solisque  vices  .  .  .  ."

2  See  A.  Zumpt: Comment.  Epigraph,  i.  381.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  141

thing  more  than  a  nominal  subjection.  It  was  under  this
reign,  accordingly,  that  the  far  regions  of  Africa,  so  long  ex-
posed to  plunder  and  disturbance  from  the  nomade  hordes  in
the  recesses  of  their  mountains,  were  placed  in  a  state  of  se-
curity, which  continued  unassailed  for  centuries ;  that  the
authority  of  Rome  was  first  established  permanently  through-
out the  wild  district  of  Thrace,  so  important  for  connecting
the  conquest  of  Rome  on  the  Danube  with  the  sources  of  her
wealth  in  the  Lesser  Asia;  that  Cyzicus  and  Cappadocia
were  incorporated  in  the  universal  empire,  and  made  to  con-
tribute from  their  wealth  or  poverty  to  relieve  the  pampered
impatience  of  taxation  in  Rome  and  Italy.  All  these  were  in
fact  substantial  conquests,  though  they  might  not  be  known
by  such  a  title,  in  which  the  emperor  spared  no  artifice  nor
even  fraud,  while  he  cautiously  abstained,  as  far  as  possible,
from  the  use  of  arms.1  The  reign  of  Tiberius  deserves,  ac-
cordingly, to  be  marked  as  an  era  of  no  trifling  moment  in
the  consolidation  of  the  Roman  power.  It  is  probable  that
his  own  contemporaries  were  by  no  means  unaware  of  this,
and  abundantly  satisfied  with  a  policy  which  threw  many  of
their  burdens  on  their  subjects  and  auxiliaries.  Victories  and
triumphs  could  have  done  no  more.  But  a  hundred  years
later,  as  we  shall  see,  another  emperor  arose,  who  added  wide
provinces  to  the  unwieldy  bulk  of  his  dominions,  and  per-
formed martial  exploits  which  recalled  the  days  of  the  Scipios
and  Caesars ;  and  transient  and  fruitless  as  his  successes
proved,  they  served  to  point  an  unfavourable  and  unjust  com-
parison with  the  bloodless  gains  of  his  predecessor.  Tacitus,
who  wrote  under  the  inspiration  of  the  glories  of  Trajan,
though  admitting  the  general  wisdom  of  the  third  Caesar's
policy,  condescends  to  sneer  at  his  abstinence  from  conquest,
as  something  pusillanimous  and  unworthy  of  the  Roman  name.8

1  Suet.  Tib.  37. :  "  Hostiles  motus  per  legates  compescuit ;  nee  per  eos
nisi  cunctantcr  et  necessario.  Reges  suspectosque  comminationibus  magis  ct
querelis  quam  vi  repressit."

Q  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  32. :  "  Princeps  proferendi  imperii  incuriosus  erat."  Com-
pare iv.  4.  with  a  direct  allusion  to  the  conquests  of  Trajan,  "  Quanto  sit  an-

142  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

While,  however,  Augustus  had  been  obliged  to  entrust
the  conduct  of  his  campaigns  to  princes  raised  almost  to  an
„ . . equal  rank  and  power  with  himself,  his  succes-

Stahons  of  the  A  , . .  „

legions  under sor,  by  refraining  from  aggressive  warfare,  with

Tiberius.  ,, ,  ,  . .  .  .

all  the  vast  combinations  it  required,  could  keep
all  his  lieutenants  in  the  modest  position  befitting  their  vo-
cation, and  spare  the  empire  the  perils  which  might  flow
from  an  excited  and  pampered  ambition.  The  legions  were
maintained  in  the  same  stations  as  under  Augustus.  The
bank  of  the  Rhine  was  still  guarded,  as  we  have  seen,  by
eight,  four  in  the  Upper,  and  as  many  in  the  Lower  Ger-
mania.  The  Iberian  provinces  were  secured  by  three  only :
for  their  reduction,  though  recent,  was  now  justly  deemed
complete.  Mauretania,  which  Augustus  had  at  one  time  in-
corporated with  the  empire,  had  been  again  erected  into  a
tributary  kingdom,  and  given  to  Juba,  as  a  present  from  the
Roman  people.  The  African  provinces  were  held  by  two
legions,  and  two  more  were  stationed  in  Egypt.  Four  were
assigned  for  the  protection  of  the  East ;  they  were  quartered
principally  at  Berytus  on  the  Mediterranean,  at  Antioch  and
Csesarea,  or  in  scattered  detachments  on  the  heights  of  the
Taurus  and  Libanus :  they  showed  a  front  to  the  Parthians
on  the  Euphrates,  and  supported  the  trembling  thrones  of  the
petty  chiefs  of  the  Caucasus,  who  were  maintained  as  a  check
on  the  more  powerful  sovereigns  of  the  plains.  Thrace  was
consigned  to  the  defence  of  kings  of  its  own  nation,  under
Roman  superintendence ;  while  two  legions  were  posted  on
the  Danube  in  Pannonia,  and  as  many  on  the  same  stream,
after  it  took  the  name  of  Ister,  in  the  lower  regions  of  Moesia.
Two  more  divisions,  making  a  total  complement  of  five-and-
twenty,  were  quartered  in  Dalmatia,  and  formed  a  reserve
for  the  armies  of  the  East,  while  at  the  same  time  they  were
near  enough  to  awe  the  submissive  populations  of  Greece  and
Lesser  Asia. Their  position  at  Apollonia,  Dyrrhachium,  or

gustius  impcritatum."  Here  again,  as  m  the  case  of  delation,  we  6ee  how
Tacitus's  estimate  of  the  policy  of  Tiberius  is  coloured  by  his  glowing  concep-
tions of  his  own  master's  glory.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  143

Nicopolis  -was  more  important  from  its  proximity  to  Italy,  of
which,  in  fact,  they  constituted  virtually  the  garrison ;  for
the  empire  still  preserved  the  tradition  of  the  republic,  that
the  legions  were  the  instruments  of  foreign  domination,  not
of  domestic  authority;  and  no  legionary  force  was  allowed
to  pitch  its  tents  within  the  sacred  limits  of  the  land,  all  the
free  inhabitants  of  which  were  now  Koman  citizens.  The
police  of  Italy  was  entrusted  to  a  force  of  the  name  of  which
she  had  not  yet  learnt  to  he  jealous.  Three  Urban  and  three
Prretorian  cohorts,  the  city  guards  and  the  life  guards,  kept
watch  over  the  security  of  the  metropolis  and  the  person  of
the  ruler ;  but  these  it  was  thought  necessary  to  levy  exclu-
sively from  the  most  central  districts  of  the  peninsula,  from
Latium  itself  or  from  Umbria  and  Etruria,  and  the  ancient
colonies  of  the  Latin  franchise.1  Slender  as  these  forces  ap-
pear for  the  defence  of  so  vast  a  territory,  we  are  to  remem-
ber that  the  auxiliary  troops  dispersed  in  the  provinces
where  they  were  most  needed  are  not  included  in  the  list;
and  these,  we  are  assured,  in  general  terms,  may  have
equalled  the  number  of  the  legionaries.3

It  might  be  easier  to  maintain  the  fidelity  and  discipline
of  these  numerous  armies  in  the  excitement  of  warfare  than
under  the  dull  monotony  of  the  camp  in  time  of The  discipline
peace. Tiberius's  success  in this respect, — for sinuously13
after  the  first  commencement  of  his  reign  there niaintame(i-
was  no  mutiny,  nor  even  the  seditious  attempt  of  a  discon-

1  In  giving  this  list  of  the  legions,  Tacitus  (Ann.  iv.  5.)  refers  particularly
to  the  ninth  year  of  Tiberius  (a.  u.  776.  a.  d.  23.).  He  does  not  mention,  and
seems  indeed  not  to  know  of  any  German  guards  at  Rome.  Augustus,  we
have  seen,  had  such  a  body-guard ;  but  he  dismissed  them  after  the  defeat  of
Varus,  and  it  is  probable  that  they  were  not  re-embodied  by  his  successor.

*  Tacitus  points  out  this  difference  between  the  legions  and  the  auxiliary
cohorts,  that  the  latter  were  constantly  moved  from  place  to  place,  while  the
former  were  kept  stationary.  The  exact  proportion  of  auxiliaries  was  uncer-
tain, and  no  doubt  varied.  Dion,  lv.  24.  That  they  were  generally  about
equal  to  the  legionaries  may  be  deduced  from  Tacitus,  Ann.  iv.  5.  Suet.  '1  il>.
16.  and  from  the  arrangements  of  the  Ilyginian  camp.  See  Marguardt  in
Becker's  Ram.  Allcrth.  iii.  2.  p.  365.

144  HISTORF  OF  THE  ROMANS

tented  officer, — arose  no  doubt  from  his  firmness  in  refusing
concession  to  demands  for  relaxation  and  indulgence.  The
complaints  which  startled  him  on  his  accession  to  power  were
put  down  partly  by  the  vigour  of  his  envoys,  the  princes  of
his  own  family,  but  partly  also  by  vague  assurances  of  re-
dress, extorted  from  his  first  alarm;  these  however  he  re-
tracted or  evaded  on  recovering  his  presence  of  mind.  The
crisis,  it  may  be  allowed,  was  one  at  which  any  actual  con-
cession might  probably  have  broken  down  the  whole  system
of  iron  discipline  on  which  the  obedience  of  the  legions  rest-
ed. Nor  would  Tiberius  encourage  the  soldiers  to  look  for
extraordinary  gratuities  by  occasional  largesses,  such  as
Augustus  and  Caesar  before  him  had  so  liberally  dispensed.
After  paying  them  the  sum  bequeathed  them  by  his  prede-
cessor, which  indeed  he  thought  it  became  him  to  double,  he
made  no  farther  appeal  to  their  favour  and  gratitude,  except
on  one  important  occasion,  at  a  late  period  of  his  reign,  in
requital  for  a  particular  service.1  He  trusted,  for  securing
their  devotion,  solely  to  the  regard  they  entertained  for  his
title  of  Imperator,  and  the  deserts  by  which  he  had  attain-
ed it.

Not  only  the  respect  in  which  the  commonwealth  was
held  by  foreign  potentates,  but  the  submission  and  awe  of  the
The  governors  provincial  populations,  depended  mainly  on  the
keptfor' several  firmness  of  the  hand  which  kept  her  soldiers  to
years  in  office,  their  standards.3  The  tranquillity  and  content-
ment of  the  provinces  under  Tiberius  bear  witness  to  his
merits  as  commander  of  the  Roman  armies.  While  writers
with  whom  we  are  the  most  familiar  depict  the  character  of
this  Caesar  in  the  most  hideous  colours,  and  only  with  manifest
reluctance  admit  any  circumstances  which  bespeak  the  moder-
ation and  equity  of  his  rule,  it  is  remarkable  that  the  inde-
pendent testimony  of  two  provincial  authorities  combines  to

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  36. ;  Dion,  lvii.  5. ;  Suet.  Tib.  48.

2  Veil.  ii.  126. :  "  Diffusa  in  orientis  occidentisque  tractus,  et  quidquid  mcri-
diano  aut  septentrione  finitur,  pax  augusta  per  orones  terrarum  orbis  angulos
a  latrociniorum  metu  servat  immunes."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  145

assure  us  that  in  the  provinces  at  least  his  administration  was
beneficent,  and  his  memory  held  in  honour.  Thus  Philo  of
Judea  speaks  in  glowing  terms  of  the  wisdom  and  mildness
of  the  government  of  Alexandria  under  the  auspices  of  Tibe-
rius, and  exalts  still  more  eloquently  the  happy  condition  of
the  world  at  the  moment  of  his  demise.1  Again,  the  Jewish
historian  Josephus  confirms  the  statement  of  others,  that  this
emperor  departed  widely  from  the  ordinary  principle  of  pro-
vincial administration,  in  prolonging  the  stay  of  the  procon-
suls from  its  usual  brief  term  to  a  longer  and  ultimately  to  an
indefinite  period.2  This  novel  usage,  he  assures  us,  though
allowing  that  it  coincided  with  the  emperor's  habits  of  pro-
crastination, and  a  certain  infirmity  of  purpose  which  grew
upon  him  in  age,  was  conceived  in  a  spirit  of  equity,  and  in-
tended to  remove  the  main  cause  of  the  sufferings  of  the
provinces,  in  the  ardour  with  which  each  new  governor  had
hastened  to  make  his  fortune.  Tiberius  was  wont  to  justify
his  policy  by  an  appropriate  apologue: — A  number  of  flies
had  settled  on  a  soldier's  wound,  and  a  compassionate  passer-
by was  about  to  scare  them  away.  The  sufferer  begged  him
to  refrain.  These  flies,  he  said,  have  nearly  sucked  their  full,
and  are  beginning  to  be  tolerable:  if  you  drive  them  off,  they
will  be  immediately  succeeded  by  fresh  comers  with  keener  ap-
petites. The  progress  indeed  of  regular  government  seemed
to  demand  a  change  on  this  point,  which  should  enable  the
affairs  of  the  empire  to  be  conducted  by  fixed  and  uniform
procedure,  while  it  spared  the  people  the  fluctuations  as  well
as  the  expenses  incident  to  a  continual  change  of  governors.
It  serves  to  mark  the  transition  now  in  progress  in  the  gov-
ernment of  the  provinces,  from  the  sway  of  an  encamped  pro-
consul to  that  of  an  established  viceroy.  There  seems  no
reason  to  doubt  that  the  conduct  of  Tiberius  in  this  par-
ticular, stripped  of  all  unfair  interpretation,  was  part  of  a  set-

1  Philo  in  Flacc.  1,2.;  Legal,  in  Cai.  2. :  H(  yap  i6o>v  .  .  .  .  ovk  iOavfiace
nm  KaTETr'/Ayrj  rye  inreprpvovc  ml  -travrog  Myov  Kpeirrovor  evirpayiat;.  Thia
curious  passage  will  deserve  to  be  noticed  more  particularly  at  a  later  period.

*  Joseph.  Anliq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  §  5.

VOL.  V. — 10

146  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

tied  and  well-meant  policy,  however  much  it  may  have  in-
dulged the  personal  indolence,  to  which  alone  his  detractors
have  chosen  to  ascribe  it,  or  agreed  with  his  jealous  indispo-
sition to  multiply  the  number  of  distinguished  and  confi-
dential coadjutors.1  But  it  caused,  we  may  suppose,  great
dissatisfaction  among  the  candidates  for  place  and  emolu-
ment, and  may  be  ranked  among  the  motives  of  the  hatred
of  the  nobility  towards  him.

This  change  in  the  view  in  which  the  provinces  were  to

be  regarded,  no  longer  as  prostrate  enemies,  but  as  common

children  of  the  state  with  the  citizens  themselves,

Improved  .  '

treatment  of  appears  in  the  acknowledgment  first  made  bv  Ti-
the provinces.  .  „ . .,  •,.,.

benus  ot  the  duty  of  extending  the  public  liber-
ality to  the  wants  of  the  national  dependents.  A  great  step
was  gained  in  the  cause  of  humanity  and  civilization,  a  great
advance  towards  the  overthrow  of  the  selfish  prejudices  of
conquest,  when  the  subjects  were  admitted  to  have  claims  on
the  state  as  well  as  obligations  towards  it.  It  marks  the
commencement  of  what  has  been  called  the  reaction  of  the
provinces  upon  Rome,  when,  on  the  occasion  of  an  earth-
quake, which  overthrew  not  less  than  twelve  cities  of  Lesser
Asia,  the  prince  proclaimed  aloud  that  it  was  an  imperial
calamity  and  merited  relief  from  imperial  resources.8  The
control  of  the  provincial  governors  was  no  longer  left  to  the

1  Suet.  Tib.  41.  63.;  Tac.  Ami.  i.  80.,  vi.  21.  Dion  (lviii.  23.)  accounts
for  it  differently :  tooovtov  "Kkffioq  tuv  te  aXkuv  kcu  tuv  (3ov1evtuv  cltvuXeto
ucte  Toiig  apxovTag  tovq  k7iTjput6vq,  rovg  fiev  toTpa.Ttjyr)K.6TaQ  enl  rpia,  tovq  d>
vna.TEvn6Ta.(;  tiri  tf  ett)  raq  f/yE/iovEiag  tuv  e'Ovuv,  arropia  tuv  Siads^ofiEvuv
ovt6vc  axelv.  But  whatever  be  the  merits  of  the  system,  it  was  introduced  in
fact  not  by  Tiberius,  but  by  Augustus. See  Dion,  lv.  28.

2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  47.  (a.  v.  110.  a.  d.  11.),  alluded  to  also  by  Pliny.  Hist.  ]\Tat.
ii.  86. :  "  Eodem  anno  xii.  celebres  Asia)  urbes  collapsae  nocturno  motu  terrje."
Their  taxes  were  remitted  for  a  term  of  years,  large  sums  were  granted  them
in  ready  money,  and  a  special  commissioner  was  sent  by  the  senate  to  superin-
tend its  application.  See  above,  chap,  xliii.  The  twelve  cities  all  lay  in  the
district  of  Lydia.  This  earthquake  is  perhaps  the  most  destructive  of  any  on
record.  Comp.  Von  Hoff,  Erdoberjlach.  iv.  169.  But  even  while  I  write  the
city  of  Broussa  is  trembling  to  its  foundation  with  another.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  J4<7

casual  and  interested  activity  of  self-constituted  accusers,  or
to  the  jealousy  of  political  partisans :  never  before  had  the
officials  been  kept  in  the  path  of  moderation  and  purity  by
the  restraints  of  a  systematic  procedure ;  and  the  many  in-
stances in  which  they  were  still  accused  and  convicted  of
rapacity  and  injustice  may  be  accepted  in  proof,  not  of  the
increased  frequency  of  their  guilt,  but  of  greater  vigilance  in
detecting  it.  It  will  be  remarked,  also,  on  examining  the
cases  of  this  kind  recorded,  that  they  refer  more  commonly
to  the  senatorial,  such  as  Asia  and  Africa,  than  to  the  impe-
rial provinces.1  In  the  latter  the  officials  were  appointed
more  directly  by  the  emperor  himself,  and  their  duties  and
prerogatives  more  definitely  prescribed.  Good  conduct,
whether  in  the  highest  posts  or  the  lowest,  secured  them  un-
disturbed enjoyment  of  their  places  for  many  years  or  even
for  their  lives.  The  happier  lot  of  these  provinces  is  attest-
ed by  the  fact,  that  to  be  removed  from  the  rule  of  the  sen-
ate and  placed  under  that  of  the  emperor,  was  regarded  as  a
boon  by  the  provincials  themselves.1  The  old  plan,  indeed,
of  farming  the  revenues  of  the  provinces  by  the  publicani,
now  as  heretofore  generally  Roman  knights,  still  continued
in  force :  the  time  had  not  yet  arrived,  perhaps,  when  this
system,  which  recommended  itself  quite  as  much  for  its  sim-
plicity and  convenience  as  for  the  means  it  afforded  of  en-
riching the  ruling  class,  could  be  dispensed  with.  The  cor-
poration of  publicani,  which  engaged  for  the  revenues  of  a
district,  required  the  heads  of  towns  and  cantons  to  assess
the  proportions  of  houses  and  families;  and  probably  the
levy  was  thus  on  the  whole  more  equitably  as  well  as  more
economically  made,  with  the  aid  of  local  knowledge,  than  it
would  have  been  by  processes  more  familiar  to  ourselves,  and
adapted  to  more  homogeneous  populations.  But  Tiberius
deserves  credit  for  the  firmness  with  which  he  resisted  the
temptations  which  commonly  beset  a  government  under  this

1  See  Hoeck,  Jiosm.  Gesch.  L  3.  98.

1  Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  i. 76. "  Achaiam  et  Maccdoniam  oncra  depreeantes
levari  in  praesens  proconsulari  impcrio  tradique  Cuesari  placuit."

148  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

method  of  taxation.  He  refused  to  apply  the  screw  to  his
financial  agents,  and  require  the  larger  return  which  he  was
assured  might  easily  be  extracted  from  them.  A  good  shep-
herd, he  was  wont  to  say,  must  shear  his  sheep  and  not  flay
them.1  Among  his  wholesome  regulations  for  the  protection
of  the  provincials  against  the  rapacity  of  their  rulers  was  a
decree,  by  which  the  officers,  however  guiltless  they  might
be  themselves,  were  made  responsible  for  the  misconduct  of
their  consorts  in  this  particular :  for  the  women,  it  was  found,
were  more  prone  to  take  bribes  and  sell  the  favours  of  the
government  than  the  men.  He  ruled,  however,  after  a  de-
bate, the  details  of  which  are  curious  and  not  uninstructive,
that  the  attendance  of  the  wives  upon  their  husbands  abroad
was  a  less  evil  than  such  as  might  flow  from  forbidding  them
that  indulgence."

But  the  care  of  Tiberius  was  not  confined  to  the  provinces.

He  devoted  himself  with  untiring  industry  to  the  reform  of

abuses  in  the  government  of  Italy,  to  assuring

Government  of  . °  , „ . .

Italy  and  the  general  security  and  tranquillity,  and  alleviating
distress.  He  protected  the  inhabitants  from  rob-
bers and  banditti  by  military  posts  in  various  places,  and
stimulated  the  diligence  of  the  city  police.  His  measures
for  maintaining  order  in  the  capital  were  temperate  and  well
considered.  Instead  of  treating  the  players,  whose  over-ar-
dent admirers  were  constantly  fighting  and  rioting  about
them,  as  mere  servants  of  the  government,  and  subjecting
them  again,  as  before  the  time  of  Augustus,  to  the  rods  of
the  Praetor,  he  was  satisfied  with  reducing  the  public  grants
for  their  encouragement,  and  forbidding  the  senators  from
entering  their  dwellings,  and  the  knights  from  trooping
round  them  in  the  streets :  the  theatre  alone,  he  declared,  was
control  over  appropriated  to  visiting  them.  At  the  same
the  players.  time,  they  were  no  longer  held  responsible  for  the
peace  of  the  city ;  but  the  penalty  of  banishment  was  de-

1  Suet.  Tib.  32. :  "  Boni  pastoris  esse  tondere  pecus  non  dcglubere. Comp.
Tac.  Ann.  iv.  6.;  Dion,  Mi.  10.
a  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  20.  foil.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  149

nounced  against  the  spectators  who  should  cause  disturbances
there.1  On  occasion,  however,  of  a  riot  which  occurred  in
the  year  776,  we  find  that  both  the  players  themselves,  and
the  leaders  of  the  theatrical  factions,  were  expelled  together
from  the  city,  nor  was  the  emperor  prevailed  on,  by  the
most  pressing  instances,  to  recall  the  offenders.8

This  interference  with  their  amusements  was  a  grave  of-
fence to  the  populace.  When  Tiberius  limited  the  number
of  gladiators  in  the  arena,  the  citizens  complained  with  bit-
terness that  he  took  no  genial  pleasure  in  the  old  Roman  re-
creations. They  were  indignant  at  having  their  draught
of  blood  measured  to  them  by  drops.  Though
all  classes  were  equallv  addicted  to  the  crime  or  ers  expelled

.  " .  -. . .  -i fr°m  Italy.

folly  of  consulting  conjurors  and  diviners,  the
measures  which  Tiberius  enforced,  after  the  example  of  Au-
gustus, Agrippa,  and  the  legislators  of  the  free  state  before
them,  for  expelling  the  astrologers  from  Italy,  caused  far  less
dissatisfaction.  This  latter  prohibition,  indeed,  was  easily
evaded.3  The  emperor  himself,  the  most  superstitious  of  his
nation,  could  not  resolve  to  rid  his  own  palace  of  the  herd  of
soothsayers,  who  so  well  knew  how  to  play  upon  his  fears
and  hopes.  While  he  indulged  himself  in  prying  into  his
own  future  fates,  he  could  not  prevent  the  inquiries  of  friends
or  enemies,  flatterers  and  intriguers :  to  cast  the  imperial
horoscope  became  the  dangerous  amusement  from  which  few
courtiers  or  politicians  had  the  firmness  to  abstain.  The
Jfathematici,  said  Tacitus,  are  a  class  who  mislead  the  am-
bitious and  disappoint  the  powerful ;  who  will  always  be  for-

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  75.;  Suet.  Tib.  34.  Comp.  Digest,  xlviii.  19.  28.  §  3. ;  Veil.
it  126. :  "  Comprcssa  theatralis  seditio."

2  Huet.  Tib.  37.;  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  15.

3  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  32.  One  of  these  people  was  thrown  from  the  Tarpeian
rock,  another  was  beaten  to  death  with  the  stick,  the  ancient  military  punish-
ment. Tacitus  says,  "  Consules  extra  poitam  Esquilinam,  cum  classicum  ca-
nere  jussissent,  more  prisco  adverterc."  This  is  explained  by  Buetonius,  j\i  r.
49. :  "  Nudi  hominis  cerviccm  insurcre  fume  et  corpus  virgis  ad  nccem  ca>
dcre."

150  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

bidden  a  place  among  us,  yet  will  always  be  retained
here.1

These  measures  against  the  astrologers  were  not  more  in-
effectual than  those  which  Tiberius  also  took  for  the  suppres-
s  ession  of  sion  of  Egyptian  and  Jewish  rites.  He  was  not
and  Jewish"1  ^ec^'  nowever>  to  these  regulations  by  the  princi-
rites.  pies  which  animated  his  predecessor. He  did

not  regard  himself  as  the  defender,  or  restorer  of  the  ancient
cult,  as  the  patron  of  Roman  observances  in  opposition  to
novel  and  extraneous  usages.  He  looked  merely  to  the  prac-
tical evils  which  might  result  from  any  heterodox  movement,
and  his  zeal  against  these  Oriental  innovations  was  roused  by
the  mystery  in  which  they  were  for  the  most  part  shrouded,  by
the  nocturnal  ceremonies  which  they  generally  affected,  and
by  the  connexion  with  the  dreaded  inquiry  into  the  future
generally  ascribed  to  them.  A  single  case  of  gross  scandal
imputed  to  the  priests  of  Isis  at  Rome  was  sufficient  perhaps
to  give  colour  to  the  emperor's  strong  proceedings  against
that  cult  and  its  followers.  The  statue  of  the  goddess  was
precipitated  into  the  Tiber,  and  her  rites  forbidden  in  the
capital.2  Similar  measures  were  taken  against  the  religious
observances  of  the  Jews  at  Rome.  When  required  to  enlist
in  the  Roman  armies,  this  people  pleaded  their  ancient  na-
tional prejudice  against  military  service,  and  the  indulgence
it  had  enjoyed  from  earlier  Caesars.  But  this  refusal  was  now
made  a  pretext  for  accusing  them  of  disloyalty,  for  the  pro-
hibition of  their  worship,  the  demolition  of  their  sacred  in-
struments and  vestments,  and  finally  their  expulsion  from
Italy.  Four  thousand  freedmen,  of  Jewish  origin  or  tenets,
were  drafted  from  Rome  into  Sardinia,  to  repress  the  brigand-
age of  that  wild  region.3 It  would  seem,  however,  that  at  a

1  Tac.  Hist.  i.  22. :  "  Genus  hominum  potentibus  infidum,  sperantibus  fal-
lax,  quod  in  civitate  nostra  et  vetabitur  semper,  et  retinebitur."

2  See  in  Josephus  (Aniiq.  xviii.  3.)  the  story  of  Mundus,  whose  licentious
passion  was  gratified  by  the  priests  of  Anubis.

*  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  85. :  "  Quatuor  inillia  libertini  generis  ea  superstitione  in-
fecta:  et  si  ob  gravitatem  coeli  interissent,  vile  damnum." I  infer  from  the

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  151

later  period  Tiberius  relaxed  in  his  severity  towards  this  peo-
ple, and  adopted  means  of  conciliating  them.  They  were
fain  to  believe  that  the  harshness  of  his  earlier  legislation  was
due  to  the  malignant  influence  of  the  detested  Sejanus.1

The  establishment  of  a  regular  system  of  legal  protection
for  subjects  of  every  degree  went  hand  in  hand  with  the
abolition  or  limitation  of  such  irregular  substi- ,

°  .  Limitation  of

tutes  for  it  as  the  risdit  of  asvmrn,  with  which the  right  of  asy-

lum.

religious  feeling  had  stepped  in  where  human  law
failed  to  perform  its  duty.  It  was  chiefly  in  the  eastern  prov-
inces that  this  right  of  asylum  was  recognised,  and  sanction-
ed by  long  usage  and  favour.  The  multiplication  of  these
places  of  refuge,  fostered  by  the  cupidity  of  the  priest,  had
extended  a  dangerous  impunity  to  all  manner  of  crimes,  and
increased  the  number  of  offenders.  Such,  however,  was  the
influence  of  the  priests  on  the  superstition  of  the  vulgar,  that
every  attempt  to  check  this  encouragement  to  disorder  had
been  vehemently  resented,  and  had  led  in  many  cases  to  dis-
turbances and  riots.  Tiberius  undertook  to  abate  the  nui-
sance, and  acted  with  good  sense  and  decision.  He  required
the  cities  which  exercised  this  right  of  protection  in  their
cherished  fanes,  to  produce  just  grounds,  by  prescription  or
legal  ordinance,  for  the  claims  they  advanced.  He  limited
the  extent  of  territory  to  which  the  privilege  should  apply,
for  it  was  claimed  not  for  the  sacred  walls  only,  or  the  outer
inclosure  of  the  temple,  but  often  for  large  tracts  of  land
around  them;  he  defined,  perhaps  with  greater  strictness,
the  character  of  the  offences  to  which  protection  should  be

construction  that  the  writer  here  expresses  the  sentiment  of  the  decree  itself,
rather  than  his  own.  Suet.  Tib.  36. :  "  Judseorum  juventutem  per  speciem
sacramenti  in  provincias  gravioris  cceli  distribuit."  Comp.  Senec.  Ep.  108.
The  incident  has  been  already  referred  to  in  chap,  xxxiv.  The  victims,  as  I
suppose,  were  partly  Jews  by  extraction,  but  perhaps  more  generally  prose-
lytes of  Greek  or  Asiatic  origin.

1  Philo.  Lrgat.  ad  Cai.  24.  On  the  statement  of  Tertullian  (Apol.  5.),  re-
garding the  favour,  as  he  pretends,  of  Tiberius  towards  Christianity,  I  shall
speak  on  a  future  occasion.

152  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

granted ;  and  thus,  without  abolishing  the  institution  itself,
he  set  some  hounds  to  its  licence,  with  the  approbation,  no
doubt,  of  the  wisest  of  his  subjects.1  In  Rome,  the  centre
of  law  and  rights  well  understood,  the  privilege  of  asylum
had  never  flourished  as  in  the  more  disturbed  regions  of  the
East.  Nevertheless  the  tribunitian  sanctity  of  the  emperor
became  gradually  extended  to  his  statues,  and  culprits  or  fu-
gitive slaves,  on  touching  an  image  or  picture  of  the  august
personage,  were  allowed  to  defy  the  law,  and  the  privileges,
otherwise  unbounded,  of  their  masters.  This  means  of  pro-
tection was  soon  turned  to  a  weapon  of  offence ;  holding  up
an  imperial  coin  between  his  thumb  and  finger,  any  ruffian
might  stand  in  the  public  streets  and  rail  with  impunity
against  the  honourable  and  noble:  the  client  might  abuse
and  threaten  his  patron,  the  slave  might  even  raise  his  hand
against  his  master.  This  flagrant  abuse  was  not  checked,  for
none  ventured  to  brave  the  delators,  who  might  easily  frame
on  the  attempt  a  process  of  majestas,  until  a  senator  having
been  pelted  with  opprobrious  language  by  a  woman,  a  noto-
A  D  21  rious  delinquent,  whom  he  was  bringing  to  jus-

a.  v.  774  ^ice,  Drusus  himself,  at  the  request  of  the  per-
plexed fathers,  interposed  and  threw  the  offender  into  prison,
in  spite  of  the  emperor's  image  which  she  eloquently  brand-
ished in  his  face.8

This  insolent  defiance  of  public  opinion  and  the  general

sense  of  morality  was  an  ominous  sign  of  the  times. No

sumptuarv  laws,  though  sanctioned  by  the  wisest

Flagrant  dissi-  \ . J  J . °  J

pation  of  the  politicians,  and  invoked  by  the  uneasy  con-
sciences of  the  citizens  themselves,  availed  to
stem  the  dissipation  and  extravagance,  which  increased  with
every  restriction  upon  nobler  aims  and  occupations.  The
vast  sums  notoriously  expended  on  the  dainties  of  the  table,

1  Suet.  Tib.  3Y. :  "  Abolevit  et  vim  moremque  asylorum  qua;  usquam
erant;"  but  Tacitus  (Ann.  iii.  60.)  modifies  this  statement:  "  Crebrescebat
Graecas  per  urbes  licentia  atque  impunitas  asyla  statuendi  ....  facta  senatus-
consulta  quis,  magno  cum  honore,  modus  tamen  prsescribcbatur."

2  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  36.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  153

the  profusion  of  table  ornaments,  plate,  and  jewellery,  and
the  extravagant  prices  given  for  articles  of  mere  fashion,
such  as  vases  of  mixed  Corinthian  metal,  and  boards  of
Xumidian  citron-wood,  provoked  the  indignation  of  the  mo-
rose Tiberius.1  He  urged  the  senate  to  repression.  But  his
counsellers  were  indisposed  to  strong  measures,  and  the  em-
peror himself  soon  wearied  of  the  hopeless  struggle.  Con-
tenting himself  with  some  trifling  regulations  for  appearance
sake,  he  acknowledged  with  a  sigh  that  the  times  were  not  fit
for  a  censorship  of  manners.  When  the  rediles  represented
that  the  sumptuary  laws  of  Augustus,  fixing  the  prices  for
certain  articles  of  luxury,  were  habitually  disre-  .

yarded,  he  replied  that  those  after  all  were  but spairsofcheck-
.  -,  ,  'ng  't  by  sump-

trifling  matters  compared  with  the  real  dangers tuary  laws.

accruing  to  the  commonwealth  from  the  demands  a.  d.  22.
of  selfish  cupidity  and  the  accumulation  of  great
estates.  Italy,  he  exclaimed,  yea,  Rome  herself  depends  for
her  daily  food  on  foreign  harvests,  on  the  vicissitudes  of  the
weather,  and  the  uncertain  humours  of  the  Ocean.  Unless
our  provinces  come  to  our  support,  will  our  farms  maintain
us,  or  our  forests  feed  us  ?  He  alluded  to  the  neglect  of
cultivation  throughout  the  peninsula,  which  was  now  gen-
erally remarked,  and  to  the  complaints  which  had  grown  in
force  for  a  hundred  and  fifty  years,  of  the  decline  of  the  an-
cient strength  of  the  country,  the  population  of  free  labour-
ers. This,  he  said,  was  a  graver  concern  than  the  price  of
plates  and  dishes ;  the  latter  might  be  a  fitting  matter  for
the  cediles  to  care  for,  as  consuls,  praetors,  and  every  other
magistrate  had  each  their  proper  sphere  of  vigilance ;  but
something  of  higher  and  more  general  interest  was  demand-
ed of  the  princeps.  While  therefore  he  maintained  the  peace
and  credit  of  the  empire,  and  quelled  the  turbulence  or  cor-
ruption of  the  assemblies,  and  the  faction  of  the  senate, —

'  Tcrtull.  de  pallio,  5. :  "  M.  Tullius  quingentis  millibus  orbcm  citri  omit,
qua  bis  tantum  Asinius  Gallus  pro  mcnsa  cjusdem  Maurctanne  nunierat."
Comp.  Lucan,  ix.  426.,  x.  144.;  Petronius,  Satyr.  119.;  Martial,  ix.  CO.;  Pliu.
Nat.  Hist.  v.  15.

154  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

while  he  provided  for  the  wants  of  the  day  before  him,  and
supplied  an  abundance  of  grain  to  the  city, — he  cast  on  the
sediles  the  care  of  the  sumptuary  enactments  which  were
vainly  expected  to  train  the  age  to  economy,  but  which  the
age  rejected  with  insolent  contempt.1

As  regarded  public  morality,  Tiberius  marched  in  the
steps  of  his  predecessor,  not  indeed  in  the  spirit  of  an  enthu-

shameiessness  siast>  or  witn  any  ardeilt  aspirations  for  the
of  both  sexes.  pUrity  of  the  Roman  blood  or  honour  of  the  Ro-
man name,  but  as  a  matter  of  duty  and  discipline.  He  re-
sented the  insensibility  to  shame  of  many  of  the  young
citizens  even  of  knightly  or  senatorial  families,  who  in  their
passion  for  displaying  their  accomplishments  as  singers  or
dancers  on  the  stage,  a  degradation  strictly  forbidden  to  their
class,  contrived  to  get  themselves  legally  degraded,  to  ena-
ble them  thus  to  present  themselves  with  impunity.  Against
this  ignoble  evasion  new  and  more  stringent  edicts  were  lev-
elled. In  making  the  licentiousness  of  a  Roman  matron  a
public  offence,  Augustus  had  overshot  his  mark.  Among
other  impediments  which  arose  to  the  enforcement  of  the
Julian  legislation  on  this  delicate  subject,  it  was  found  diffi-
cult to  induce  disinterested  persons  to  prosecute  as  public
accusers.  Possibly  it  was  with  the  view  of  obviating  the
scandal  of  open  procedure  in  such  lamentable  cases,  that
Tiberius  revived  the  primitive  usage,  and  delivered  the  cul-
prits to  be  tried  and  punished  by  their  own  kinsmen,  after
the  manner  of  the  ancients.  In  the  olden  time,  these  domes-
tic tribunals  had  inflicted  even  death  for  trifling  indecorums.
But  the  law  allowed  the  defenceless  frail  ones  a  method  of
escape,  which  some  women  did  not  scruple  to  embrace.  The
penalties  of  irregularity  were  strict  and  severe ;  but  from
these  professed  prostitution  was  exempted,  and  immunity
might  be  purchased  by  exchanging  the  decent  stole  of  ma-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  53,  54. ;  Veil.  ii.  126. :  "  Revocata  in  forum  fides,  summota
e  foro  seditio,  ambitio  campo,  diseordia  curia  ....  quando  annona
moderatior  ?  "

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  155

tronhood  for  the  toga  of  the  avowed  courtesan.1  While  re-
sort to  this  disgraceful  refuge  was  confined  to  a  few  plebeian
cases  it  attracted  little  notice  ;  when,  however,  wives  of  men
of  the  highest  class  were  found  to  inscribe  themselves  on  the
a>dile's  list,  to  escape  the  loss  of  dowry,  confiscation,  and
banishment,  the  penalties  of  the  Julian  law,  the  princeps  de-
termined to  close  this  last  means  of  retreat,  by  a  new  and
sweeping  edict.8

The  Roman  legislators  had  never  been  famous  for  adher-
ing in  their  own  persons  to  the  rules  they  enforced  on  their
fellow-citizens. What  then,  it  may  be  asked,

'  J  7 Immorality

was  the  private  character  of  the  man  who  show- ascribed  to  ti-

..,.,,. berius.

ed  himself  thus  harsh  and  prudish  in  his  public
capacity?  His  amusements  and  relaxations,  no  mean  ele-
ment in  the  character  of  every  Roman,  were  frivolous  rather
than  corrupt ;  nor,  yet  at  least,  can  he  fairly  be  charged  with
habits  of  excessive  indulgence.  In  regard  to  women,  there
is  no  evidence  against  the  morals  of  Tiberius  up  to  the  period
we  are  now  considering :  towards  the  wife  of  his  choice  he
had  shown  strong  affection,  while  as  to  the  worthless  consort
who  was  imposed  upon  him,  however  sternly  he  may  have
resented  her  profligacy,  we  know  not  that  it  was  provoked
by  similar  profligacy  on  his  part.  The  prejudices  of  the
Romans  were  early  excited  against  him,  and  no  reliance  can
be  placed  on  their  malicious  assertions  that  his  natural  re-
serve was  a  mask  assumed  to  conceal  the  grossest  improprie-
ties. On  this  score,  neither  history  nor  anecdote  has  any
story  at  this  time  against  him :  the  charge  of  habitual  intem-
perance rests  chiefly  upon  a  ribald  epigram,  which  may  have
originated  in  the  licence  of  the  camp ; s  while  the  saying  as-

1  Hor.  Sat.  i.  2.  63. :  "  Quid  interest  in  matrona,  ancilla,  peccesvc  togata  ?  "

a  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  85. ;  Suet.  Tib.  35. The  enactment  on  this  subject,  cited

by  Papinian  (Dig.  xlviii.  5.  10.),  is  probably  that  of  Tiberius :  "  Mulier  qua)

evitandte  poena)  adulterii  gratia  lenocinium  feccrit  aut  operas  suas  scenae  loca-

verit,  adulterii  accusari  damnarique  ex  senatusconsulta  potest."

3  Pliny  asserts  indeed  that  Tiberius  was  intemperate  in  his  youth,  but  ad-
mits that  no  such  charge  coul(" be  laid  against  him  in  his  latter  years. Plin.

156  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

cribed  to  him  that  a  man  must  be  a  fool  who  required  a  phy-
sician after  thirty,  seems  to  show  that  he  enjoyed  robust  and
equal  health,  such  as  was  never  maintained  through  a  long  life
by  a  confirmed  drunkard.1  Nor  can  we  doubt  the  untiring
perseverance  with  which  Tiberius  devoted  himself  through  at
least  the  greater  j>art  of  his  principate  to  the  engrossing  cares
of  his  station,  cares  which  above  all  others  demanded  a  clear
head  and  a  sound  body.  For  several  years  he  never  quitted
the  dust  and  din  of  Rome  for  a  single  day,  and  his  time  was
given  without  intermission  to  the  discussions  of  the  senate,
to  the  procedure  of  the  tribunals,  to  conferences  with  foreign
envoys,  and  every  other  detail  of  his  world-wide  administra-
tion. The  charge  of  profligacy,  up  to  this  period,  but  slightly
supported  by  external  testimony,  falls  to  the  ground  before
such  strong  internal  evidence  of  its  falsehood.

But  the  morality  of  Tiberius  was  not  confined  to  absti-
nence from  gross  vice,  or  refraining  from  luxuries  and  indul-
ms  simplicity  gences  which  might  have  been  less  unsuitable  to
and  frugality.  njs  position.  He  was  anxious  to  exhibit  the  an-
cient ideal  of  the  Roman  statesman  in  practising  the  house-
hold virtues  of  simplicity  and  frugality.  His  domestic  econ-
omy, formed  on  the  pattern  of  Augustus,  received  additional
hardness  and  severity  from  the  habits  of  the  camp,  with  which
he  had  been  so  long  familiar.  The  number  of  his  slaves  was
limited ; the  freedmen  who  managed  his  private  concerns

Hist.  Nat.  xiv.  28. :  "  In  senccta  jam  severus ;  sed  ipsa  juventa  ad  merum  pro-
nior  fuerat."  He  tells  an  anecdote,  or  rather  a  popular  surmise,  which  must
be  taken  for  what  it  is  worth,  that  he  selected  Lucius  Piso  for  the  post  of  pre.
feet  of  the  city  on  account  of  his  admirable  qualities  as  a  boon  companion ;  as,
for  instance,  that  he  could  drink  for  two  days  and  nights  without  intermission.
Plin.  1.  c.  Comp.  Senec.  Epist.  83.

1  The  holding  of  this  paradox,  attributed  to  the  great  Napoleon  and  others,
dways  indicates  exuberant  health  and  spirits.  Suetonius  says  of  Tiberius  on
this  point  (776.  69.):  "  Valetudine  prospera  usus  est,  tempore  quidem  princi-
pals paene  toto  propre  illaesa,  quamvis  a  tricesimo  Eetatis  anno  arbitratu  earn
suo  rexerit,  sine  adjumento  consilioque  medicorum."  Tacitus  (Ann.  vi.  46.):
"  Solitus  eludere  medicorum  artes,  atque  cos  qui  post  tricesimum  aetatis  annum
ad  internoscenda  corpori  suo  utilia  vel  noxia  alieni  consilii  indigerent."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  157

were  kept  strictly  within  the  honds  of  modesty  and  propriety.
Their  services  were  rewarded  with  exactness,  but  at  the  same
time  parsimoniously ;  nor  did  their  employer  ever  surrender
to  them  any  portion  of  his  real  authority,  or  allow  them  un-
due influence  over  himself.1  The  carefulness  he  exhibited  in
the  government  0f  his  household  was  an  earnest  of  the  econ-
omy  of  his  public  administration ;  and  as  such  the  citizens
might,  at  least,  have  admired  it,  how  ever  few  imitators  it  could
find  among  them.  But  Augustus  had  had  the  art  of  combin-
ing personal  simplicity  with  a  wise  liberality  in  public  mat-
ters, which  was  beyond  the  conception  of  his  more  narrow-
minded  successor.  The  people  were  piqued  at  the  cessation
of  the  largesses  which  used  to  flow  to  them  from  the  coffers
of  their  inimitable  favourite.  Tiberius,  who  took  no  pleasure
in  the  sports  of  the  theatre  or  circus,  and  could  not,  like  Au-
gustus, good-humouredly  affect  it,  reduced  the  salaries  of  the
mimes  and  the  numbers  of  the  gladiators.  He  lavished  no
treasures  on  the  decoration  of  the  city,  content  to  execute
with  scrupulous  fidelity  the  designs  his  predecessor  had  left
uncompleted.  Yet  he  too  could,  on  worthy  occasions,  exhibit
munificence  on  an  imperial  scale.  His  relief  to  the  ruined
cities  of  Asia  was  conceived  in  the  spirit  of  an  Augustus  or  a
Julius,  and  the  aid  he  extended  to  the  decayed  scions  of  no-
ble houses  at  home  showed  that  he  could  be  generous  from
policy,  as  well  as  sparing  from  temper.*  In  times  of  scarcity
he  did  not  fail  to  check  the  rise  of  prices,  according  to  the
best  lights  of  his  day,  by  compensating  the  dealers  in  grain
from  his  own  means ;  and  from  the  same  well-managed  re-
sources he  indemnified  the  citizens  for  their  losses  by  the  great

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  1.:  "  Ran  per  Italiam  Caesaris  agri,  modesta  sorvitia,  intra
paucos  libcrtos  domus :  ac  si  quando  cum  privatis  disceptaret,  forum  ac  jus."
I5ut  a  darker  colour  is  presently  dashed  into  the  modest  drab:  "quae  cuncta
non  quidem  comi  via  sed  horridus  ac  plerumque  formidatus,  rctinebat  tamen,
donee,"  &c.

3  Veil.  ii.  126.:  "  Fortuita  non  civium  tantummodo  sed  urbium  damna
principis  munificentia  vindicat."

158  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

fire  which  ravaged  the  quarters  of  the  Caelius  and  Aventine.1
The  whole  empire  reaped  abundant  fruits  from  this  prudent
considerateness,  in  the  undiminished  supply  of  all  sources  of
public  revenue,  and  the  opening  of  new  ones.  The  govern-
ment was  enabled  to  fulfil  every  engagement  with  punctual-
ity :  its  civil  officers,  regularly  and  adequately  paid,  had  no
excuse  for  extortion,  its  soldiers  were  kept  within  the  bounds
of  discipline,  and,  receiving  punctually  their  daily  dole,  sub-
mitted without  a  murmur  to  the  labours  of  the  camp  and  the
threats  of  the  centurion.

At  the  same  time,  with  all  his  frugality,  Tiberius  obtain-
ed the  rare  praise  of  personal  indifference  to  money,  and  for-
bearance in  claiming  even  his  legitimate  dues.2

His  moderation  .  .  °

in  regard  to In  many  cases  in  which  the  law  enriched  the

money.  .

emperor  with  the  property  of  a  condemned  crim-
inal he  waved  his  right,  and  allowed  it  to  descend  to  the
heir.  He  frequently  refused  to  accept  inheritances  bequeath-
ed him  by  persons  not  actually  related  to  him,  and  checked
the  base  subservience  of  a  death-bed  flattery.  With  all  these
genuine  merits  towards  the  commonwealth,  he  was  not  blind
to  the  advantage  he  might  derive  from  pretending  to  another
virtue,  which  ranked  high  in  the  estimation  of  the  Romans,

but  to  which  he  had  no  real  claim. From  the

His  show  of  .

deference  to commencement  of  his  pnncipate  he  affected  the

♦lip  fipriitf1

most  obsequious  deference  to  the  state,  as  repre-
sented by  the  senate,  the  presumed  exponent  of  its  will.  His
first  care  was  to  make  it  appear  to  the  world  that  his  own
pre-eminence  was  thrust  on  him  by  that  body,  which  alone
could  lawfully  confer  it.  We  have  seen  under  what  dis-
guises, and  by  what  circuitous  processes,  he  had  gradually
drawn  into  his  own  hands  the  powers,  by  which  he  seemed
only  seeking  to  enrich  the  senate  at  the  expense  of  every
other  order. The  promptness  of  its  adulation,  the  proneness

1  Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  87.,  iv.  64.,  vi.  45.;  Veil.  ii. 130.;  Suet.  Tib.  48.
Dion,  lviii.  26.

2  Tacitus  (Ann.  iii.  18.)  says  of  him,  as  before  quoted,  "Satis  firmus,  ut
ssepe  memoravi,  adversus  pecuniam." Comp.  Dion,  lvii.  10.  1 1.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  159

of  its  servility,  he  strove  to  check  sometimes  with  grave  dig-
nity, at  others  with  disdainful  irony.  When  it  proposed  to
call  the  month  of  November,  in  which  he  was  born,  after  his
name,  as  July  and  August  had  derived  their  titles  from  his
predecessors,  What,  he  asked,  will  you  do  if  there  should  be
th  irteen  Caisars  f  *  He  would  not  allow  himself  to  be  called,
in  the  addresses  of  its  members,  Dominus  or  Lord,  as  the  style
of  a  slave  towards  his  master,  nor  his  employments  Sacred,
as  belonging  only  to  divinity ;  nor,  again,  would  he  have  it  said
that  he  required  its  attendance  at  his  summons.  He  never
entered  the  Curia  with  an  escort  of  guards,  or  even  of  un-
armed dependents,  and  rebuked  provincial  governors  for  ad-
dressing their  despatches  to  himself,  and  not  always  to  the
senate.2  His  own  communications  to  the  august  order  were
conceived  in  a  tone  of  the  deepest  respect  and  even  subser-
vience. I note  say,  he  would  declare,  as  I  have  often  said
before,  that  a  good  and  useful  prince  should  be  the  servant  of
the  senate,  and  the  people  generally,  sometimes  of  individual
magistrates.  Such  was  his  demeanour  throughout  the  first
years  of  his  government :  it  was  only  late,  and  by  degrees,
that  he  drew  forth  the  arm  of  power  from  the  folds  of  this
specious  disguise,  and  exhibited  the  princeps  to  the  citizens
in  the  fulness  of  his  now  established  authority.  But  even  to
the  last,  though  capricious  and  irregular  in  his  behaviour,  we
are  assured  that  his  manner  was  most  commonly  marked  by
this  air  of  deference,  and  the  public  weal  continued  still  to  be
manifestly  the  ruling  object  of  his  measures.3

We  have  here  before  us  the  picture  of  a  good  sovereign
but  not  of  an  amiable  man.  Had  Tiberius  been  so  fortunate
as  to  have  died  at  the  close  of  a  ten  years'  prin-

,  ill  in  i  ,  The  promise  of

cipate,  iie  would  have  left  an  honourable  though his  reign  mar-

.,  ...  ,  „  ^^ ° red  by  defects

not  an  attractive  name  in  the  annals  of  Rome: of  temper  and

he  Avould  have  represented  the  Cato  Censor  of

the  empire,  by  the  side  of  the  Scipio  of  Augustus  and  the

1  Dion,  lvii.  18.  *  Suet.  Tib.  27.  30.  32.

■  Suet.  7'ib.  29.  33. :  "  Paulatim  Principem  exseruit,  praestititquc,  ct  bi  va-
rium  diu,  commodiorem  tamen  saepius  et  ad  utilitates  publieas  proniorcm."

160  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Camillas  of  Csesar.  The  sternness  and  even  cruelty  he  had
so  often  exhibited  would  have  gained  him  no  discredit  with
the  Romans,  so  long  as  they  were  exerted  against  public
offenders  for  the  common  weal,  and  for  no  selfish  objects.
Even  the  suspicion  which  from  the  first  attached  to  him  of
having  procured  the  death  of  Agrippa  was  probably  little  re-
garded :  the  exile  of  Augustus  was  already  branded  as  a
monstrous  production  of  nature  which  ought  never  to  have
been  reared,  and  might  Avith  little  blame  be  got  rid  of.  But
as  the  fine  and  interesting  features  of  his  person  were  marred
by  a  constrained  and  unpleasing  mien  and  expression,  so  the
patience,  industry,  and  discretion  of  Tiberius  were  disparaged
by  a  perverse  temper,  a  crooked  policy,  and  an  uneasy  sensi-
bility. The  manners  of  the  man,  a  martinet  in  the  camp,  a
clerk  in  the  closet,  a  pedant  in  the  senate-house,  carried  with
them  no  charm,  and  emitted  no  spark  of  genius  to  kindle  the
sympathies  of  the  nation.  The  princeps,  from  his  invidious
and  questionable  position,  if  once  he  failed  to  attract,  could
only  repel  the  inclinations  of  his  subjects.  If  they  ceased  to
ascribe  to  him  their  blessings,  they  would  begin  without  de-
lay to  lay  to  his  charge  all  their  misfortunes.  The  mystery
of  the  death  of  Germanicus  threw  a  blight  on  the  fame  of  Ti-
berius from  which  he  never  again  recovered.  From  that  mo-
ment his  countrymen  judged  him  without  discrimination,  and
sentenced  him  without  compunction.  The  suspicion  of  his
machinations  against  Germanicus,  unproved  and  improbable
as  they  really  were,  kindled  their  imaginations  to  feelings  of
disgust  and  horror,  which  neither  personal  debauchery,  nor
the  persecution  of  knights  and  nobles,  would  alone  have  suf-
ficed to  engender.1

1  Tacitus,  we  have  seen,  had  special  inducements  to  do  less  than  justice  to
Tiberius ;  nevertheless,  his  account  of  the  tyrant  is  not  on  the  whole  incon-
sistent. But  there  is  no  part  of  Dion's  history  in  which  he  fails  so  much  as  in
his  delineation  of  this  Csesar' s  character.  It  is  a  mere  jumble  of  good  and
bad  actions,  for  which  the  writer  sometimes  apologizes,  and  insinuates  as  his
excuse  that  the  author  of  them  was  mad.  The  stories,  however,  themselves
are  often  extravagant  and  puerile. Such,  for  instance,  is  that  of  the  architect,

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  161

who,  being  sentenced  to  banishment  by  Tiberius  from  mere  spite,  because  he
had  performed  the  wonderful  feat  of  straightening  an  inclined  wall,  in  order  to
ingratiate  himself  with  the  tyrant,  threw  a  glass  vessel  to  the  ground,  picked  up
the  fragments,  and  set  them  together  again,  whereupon  he  was  immediately
put  to  death,  as  too  clever  to  be  suffered  to  live.  (Dion,  lvii.  21.  comp.  Petro-
nius,  Satyr.  51.  The  origin  of  the  story  may  be  traced  perhaps  to  a  statement
in  Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.  xxxvi.  66.)  There  is  something  Oriental  in  the  turn  which
the  fancy  of  Dion  not  unfrequently  takes.
vol.  v. — 11

162  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  21.

CHAPTER  XLV.

COMPARISON  BETWEEN  AUGUSTUS  AND  TIBERIUS. — SEJANUS  USEFUL  WITHOUT BEING

FORMIDABLE. DISTURBANCES  IN  AFRICA  AND  REVOLT  IN  GAUL. OVERTHROW  OF

SACROVIR (A.  U. 7*74.). THE TRIBUNITIAN POWER CONFERRED UPON DRCSUS,

(A.  U. 775.). INTRIGUES OF SEJANUS : ESTABLISHMENT OF THE PR.ETORIAN

CAMP. DRUSUS POISONED BY SEJANUS (a.  U. 776.). DETERIORATION OF THE

PRINCIPATE OF TIBERIUS. DEATH OF CREMUTIUS CORDUS AND OTHERS.

SEJANUS DEMANDS THE HAND OF LIVILLA, AND IS REFUSED BT TIBERIUS.

HE CONCEIVES THE PROJECT OF  WITHDRAWING  TIBERIUS FROM  ROME. — RETIRE-
MENT OF TIBERIUS TO CAPRS1 (a.  U.  780.). HIS MANNER OF LIFE THERE.

FURTHER DETERIORATION  OF  HIS  GOVERNMENT. DEATH  OF  THE YOUNGER JULIA

AND OF THE EMPRESS LIVIA (A.  U. 782.). (a.  U. 774-782. A.D. 21-29.)

I  HAVE  described  the  rise  and  progress  of  Tiberius  to  a
distinguished  eminence  among  Roman  statesmen :  I
Comparison  be-  have  now  to  introduce  the  reader  to  the  decline
tnseandATfbeS-  an(l  ^a^  °f  ms  well-earned  reputation.  The  ruin
of^enius  and"1  °f  so  ^r  a  character,  and  the  frustration  of  such
themanofabii-  respectable  abilities  and  virtues,  was  not  the
a.  d  21  work  of  a  day,  nor  the  effect  of  any  single  crime
A.U.  747.  or  failure.  The  temper  of  the  times  and  the  cir-
cumstances of  his  position  presented  the  most  formidable  ob-
stacles to  a  sustained  good  government,  which  the  Romans
had  not  perhaps  the  patriotism  to  appreciate  or  support.
But  the  honourable  ambition  of  the  second  princeps  to  see
everything  with  his  own  eyes,  and  execute  everything  with
his  own  hands,  was  in  fact  itself  suicidal.  Augustus,  with
the  Roman  world  exhausted  and  prostrate  at  his  feet,  crav-
ing only  to  be  moulded  by  his  policy  and  informed  with  in-
spiration from  his  mouth,  had  accustomed  himself  from  the
first  to  act  by  able  and  trusty  ministers. He  was  wisely

A.U.  774.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  !63

content  to  see  many  things  with  the  eyes  of  a  Maecenas,  to
act  in  many  things  with  the  hands  of  an  Agrippa.  His
bravest  auxiliary  he  ventured  generously  to  connect  with
himself  by  the  bonds  of  a  family  alliance.  At  a  later  period
he  educated  the  members  of  his  own  house  to  relieve  him,  one
after  another,  of  some  of  the  functions  of  his  station.  Ti-
berius he  associated  with  himself  on  terms  of  almost  complete
equality.  But  Augustus  was  a  man  of  genius:  he  was  the
soul  of  the  Roman  empire:  fame,  fortune,  and  conscious
ability  had  inspired  him  with  unwavering  self-reliance.  It
was  impossible  for  his  successor,  bred  in  the  sphere  of  an  ad-
jutant or  an  official,  to  have  the  same  lofty  confidence  in
himself,  and  to  discard  with  a  smile  the  suggestions  of  every
vulgar  jealousy.  Tiberius,  thoroughly  trained  in  the  routine
of  business,  might  believe  himself  competent  to  the  task  of
government ;  he  might  devote  himself  with  intense  and  rest-
less application  to  every  detail  of  the  public  service,  and
struggle  against  his  overwhelming  anxieties  with  desperate
and  even  gallant  perseverance.  But  he  was  animated  by  no
inward  consciousness  of  power,  and  when  he  felt  himself
baffled  by  the  odds  against  him,  he  could  not  look  round
serenely  for  the  help  he  needed.  Those  of  his  own  household
he  repelled  from  him  as  enemies,  and  instead  of  choosing  the
ablest  counsellor  in  the  fittest  quarter,  allowed  himself  to  fill
under  the  influence  of  the  nearest  and  least  scrupulous  intri-
guer. Even  Sejanus  he  did  not  formally  appoint  as  his  min-
ister, nor  avowedly  surrender  to  him  any  definite  share  in  his
affairs ;  but  he  yielded  him  his  own  mind  and  will  in  all
things,  let  the  conduct  of  the  empire  slip  insensibly  out  of
liis  own  hands,  and  allowed  the  world  to  despise  him  as  the
puppet  of  his  own  minion.

It  has  been  already  represented  that  Tiberius,  from  the
character  of  his  mind,  preferred  the  services  of  an  obscure
and  humble  client  to  those  of  an  associate  of  lofty Tho  ieajon8y
rank  and corresponding  pretensions. Accord- ^irnV.'.i'J'v  Viic
ingly,  in  giving  his  confidence  to  Sejanus,  he „"'', '!'.',£ .,',' tr^"
never  contemplated  raising  him  to  a  position  of 8t'Jami

1U8.

164  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  21.

independent  authority :  on  the  contrary,  he  conceived  that
the  meanness  of  his  origin,  the  subordinate  office  he  filled,  and
above  all,  perhaps,  the  mediocrity  of  his  talents,  were  a  suffi-
cient guarantee  against  his  rising  into  rivalry  with  himself.
The  imperial  The  imperial  family  still  flourished  with  numer-
lamiiy.  ous  scions  •  among  these  his  own  son  occupied

the  first  place ;  and  this  prince,  since  the  death  of  his  cousin
Germanicus,  united  every  claim  of  birth,  years,  and  ability
to  share  with  his  father  the  toils  and  honours  of

Tiberius  and  . .  .

Drusus,  con-  administration.  In  the  year  774,  accordingly,
Tiberius  appointed  himself  consul  in  conjunction
with  Drusus,  an  union,  however,  of  which  the  citizens,  it  is
said,  augured  unfavourably :  for  all  the  previous  colleagues
of  Tiberius — namely,  Varus,  Piso,  and  Germa*nicus — had  per-
ished by  violent  and  shocking  deaths.1  Both  in  this  in-
stance, and  in  a  fifth,  which  afterwards  followed,  these  fore-
bodings, it  will  appear,  were  destined  to  be  fatally  fulfilled.
A  deep  gloom  was  settling  on  the  imperial  palace,  from
whence  no  light  gleamed  to  cheer  the  Roman  people,  and
dispel  with  the  prospect  of  future  prosperity  the  misgivings
which  now  assailed  them.  The  emperor  began  to  betray  a
disposition  for  retirement  and  solitude.  The  moments  he
could  abstract  from  the  ceaseless  pressure  of  business  he  de-
voted to  consultation  with  astrologers  and  diviners,  listening
to  their  interpretation  of  his  dreams,  and  requiring  an  expo-
sition of  the  occult  meaning  of  every  sound  that  reached  him,
or  vision  that  flashed  upon  his  sight.  In  order  perhaps  to
secure  himself  from  observation  in  pursuits  which  he  had  in-
terdicted to  the  citizens,  he  was  now  anxious  to  escape  from
the  city,  where  his  residence  had  been  for  many  years  un-
broken, so  painful  was  the  assiduity  he  had  bestowed  on  the
details  of  his  vast  administration.  For  this  purpose  he  with-
drew to  the  pleasant  coast  of  Campania,  professing  that  his
health  required  change  of  scene  and  alleviation  of  labour,
leaving  the  conduct  of  the  executive  in  the  hands  of  Drusus,

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  31.;  Dion,  lvii.  20.

A.U.  774.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  165

though  he  retained  a  vigilant  supervision  of  affairs,  and  con-
stantly explained  his  views  and  wishes  in  despatches  address-
ed to  the  senate.  The  behaviour  of  the  young  consul,  thus
watched  and  guided,  seems  to  have  been  temper-  Characterof
ate  and  judicious.  He  smoothed  the  differences  Drusus-
between  the  proudest  and  most  turbulent  of  the  nobles  ;  and
his  interference  was  the  more  graceful  as  it  Avas  employed  to
enforce  an  act  of  submission  on  the  part  of  a  Lucius  Sulla,  a
contemporary  of  his  own,  towards  Domitius  Corbulo,  a  man
of  greater  age  and  political  experience.1  He  checked,  as  we
have  seen,  the  licentious  appeal  to  the  imperial  majesty  as  a
protection  for  calumnious  railing,  and  evaded  rather  than
opposed  the  unseasonable  rigour  of  the  reformers,  who  asked
the  senate  to  prohibit  the  governors  of  provinces  from  taking
their  consorts  with  them.  He  had  himself,  he  said,  derived
much  comfort  from  the  society  of  his  own  partner  in  his  vari-
ous military  missions,  and  Livia,  still  the  mirror  of  Roman
matrons,  had  marched  by  the  side  of  Augustus  from  Rome
to  every  frontier  of  the  empire.  Drusus  at  this  time  was
thirty  years  of  age.  From  his  earliest  adolescence  he  had
been  employed  in  the  career  of  arms,  and  he  had  already
been  distinguished  by  a  previous  consulship  in  the  year  76  8.2
He  was  well  known  therefore  both  to  the  soldiers  and  the
people ;  and  though  neither  the  one  nor  the  other  bestowed
on  him  the  regard  they  had  lavished  on  his  cousin,  he  was
not  on  the  whole  unpopular  with  either.  Even  his  vices
were  favourably  contrasted  with  those  of  his  father.  He
might  be  cruel  and  sanguinary  in  his  enjoyment  of  the  sports
of  the  circus ;  the  sharpest  of  the  gladiator's  swords  received
from  him  the  name  of  Drusian :  but  this  was  better,  in  the
popular  view,  than  the  moroseness  of  Tiberius,  who  evinced
no  satisfaction  in  such  spectacles  at  all. He  might  be  too

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  81.  This  Corbulo  must  be  distinguished  from  another  of
the  same  name,  whose  exploits  and  melancholy  fate  will  occupy  some  of  our
future  pages.  lie  had  already  filled  the  office  of  praetor,  and  is  represented  as
an  elderly  personage. The  younger  Corbulo  died  nearly  fifty  years  later.

8  Tac.  Ann.  i.  55. :  "  Druso  Capsare,  C.  Norbano  Coss.  a.  u.  768."

166  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  21.

much  addicted  to  revelry  and  carousing :  but  this  again  was
a  fault  which  a  few  years  might  correct,  and  which  showed
at  least  some  geniality  of  temper,  more  amiable  than  his
father's  reserve.1  We  have  a  surer  evidence  of  his  merits  in
the  atfection  in  which  he  had  lived  with  his  more  popular
cousin,  and  the  tenderness  he  displayed  for  the  bereaved
children.  Of  these  the  eldest,  known  by  the  name  of  Nero,
was  now  sixteen;  the  second,  Drusus,  was  younger  by  a
single  year ;  while  Caius,  the  third,  was  only  eleven.  The
family  of  Germanicus  had  consisted  altogether  of  nine,  a
number  apparently  very  unusual  in  a  Roman  household.8

Some  fresh  incursions  of  Tacfarinas  at  this  period  within

the  borders  of  the  African  province  induced  the  emperor  to

address  a  missive  to  the  senate,  to  whom  the

Renewed  dis-

turbances  in  government  attached,  requiring  it  to  appoint  an
efficient  proconsul  without  delay,  to  undertake
the  task  of  finally  reducing  him.  The  provinces  allotted  to
the  senate  were  precisely  those  in  which  there  was  least  ap-
prehension of  serious  hostilities,  or  prospect  of  the  active  em-
ployment of  their  governors  in  the  camp.  To  equip  an  army
for  actual  service,  to  select  an  experienced  commander,  and
send  him  forth  to  reap  laurels,  and  perhaps  to  earn  a  triumph,
was  to  trench  upon  the  imperial  prerogative ;  the  submissive
senators  shrank  from  exercising  a  right  which  accident  had
thus  put  into  their  hands,  and  begged  to  refer  the  choice  to
the  emperor.  With  his  usual  dissimulation,  Tiberius  affected
some  displeasure  at  the  duties  of  the  fathers  being  thus
thrown  on  himself;  for  he  already  bore,  as  he  declared,  a
heavier  burden  than  one  man  could  well  sustain.  He  refused
to  do  more  than  nominate  two  candidates,  M.  Lepidus  and
Junius  Blaesus,  between  whom  he  required  the  senate  to  make

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  44.,  iii.  SI.;  Dion,  lvii.  13,  14.;  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xiv.  28.:
"  Nee  alio  magis  Drusus  Caesar  regenerasse  patrem  Tiberium  ferebatur."

2  The  horrid  practice  of  exposure  and  infanticide — "  Nuruerum  liberorum
finire,"  as  Tacitus  gently  qualifies  it  {Germ.  19.) — has  been  already  referred  to.
The  fact  that  women  bore  no  distinctive  pracnomen,  is  terribly  significant.  It
seems  to  show  how  few  daughters  in  a  family  were  reared.

A.U.  774.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  167

the  final  selection. Both  disclaimed  the  honour ;

consul.

BIjpsus  ap-

but  Bloesus  was  uncle  to  Seianus,  and  for  him,  as pointed  Pro-

was  well  known,  the  appointment  was  actually-
reserved.  The  excuses  of  Lepidus  were  accordingly  accept-
ed ;  those  of  his  rival,  probably  less  sincere,  were  courteously
waived ;  and  the  favourite  was  gratified  by  the  elevation  of
a  kinsman,  of  no  previous  distinction,  to  a  place  of  power,
which  he  might  employ  perhaps,  at  some  future  period,  for
the  advancement  of  his  own  fortunes.1

The  consulship  of  Drusus  was  distinguished,  however,  by
commotions  of  far  greater  importance  in  another  quarter.
The  success  with  which  the  Germans  had  defend-

Revolt  in  Gaul.

ed  their  liberties  against  the  invaders,  had  not
been  unobserved  by  the  nations,  pacified  though  they  were,
and  bowed  to  the  yoke  for  three  quarters  of  a  century,  with-
in the  Rhine.  For  their  advantage  the  discovery  seemed  to
be  made  that  the  legions  were  not  invincible ;  perhaps  they
read  the  secret  of  this  decline  of  their  efficiency  in  the  muti-
nous spirit  which  had  been  manifested  in  their  encampments.
The  panic  which  had  recently  pervaded  Italy,  the  alarm
Augustus  had  himself  exhibited,  and  the  violent  measure  of
expelling  the  dreaded  Germans  from  the  city,  were  taken  as
a  confession  of  weakness.  At  the  same  time  the  exactions
of  the  fiscal  officers  were  continued  and  perhaps  redoubled ;
the  demands  made  for  military  supplies  had  become  intoler-
ably grievous :  at  last  some  chiefs  of  the  native  tribes,  men
who  had  been  distinguished  with  the  franchise  of  the  city,
and  admitted  to  the  name  and  clientele  of  the  imperial  house,
were  roused  by  the  general  discontent,  or  their  own  ambi-
tious hopes,  to  intrigue  against  the  power  of  the  conquerors..
The  ramifications  of  their  conspiracy  extended,  it  was  said,
through  every  tribe  in  the  country ;  its  chief  centres  were
among  the  Belgffi  in  the  north,  and  the  iEdui  in  the  interior ;
the  most  prominent  of  its  leaders  in  the  one  quarter  bore  the
Roman  appellation  of  Julius  Florus,  in  the  other  that  of

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  35.

168  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  21.

Julius  Sacrovir,  a  name  which  seems  to  mark  him  as  a  man
of  priestly  family,  and  armed,  therefore,  with  all  the  influ-
ence of  his  proscribed  caste.  But  the  measures  of  the  patriot
chiefs  were  disconcerted  by  the  premature  outbreak  of  the
Andi  and  Turones.  Sacrovir  himself,  in  order  to  save  ap-
pearances, was  compelled  to  head  his  auxiliary  cohorts  by
the  side  of  the  legionaries,  and  assist  in  coercing  his  own  im-
prudent allies.  Nevertheless  his  real  sentiments  did  not  es-
cape suspicion ;  and  when  he  threw  off  his  helmet  on  the
field  of  battle,  in  the  exuberance,  as  he  protested,  of  his
courage  and  resolution,  some  of  the  rebel  captives  did  not
hesitate  to  declare  that  he  had  made  himself  known  to  his
friends  to  divert  their  missiles  in  other  directions.  Tiberius
was  informed  of  this  presumed  treachery,  but  he  thought  fit
to  take  no  notice  of  it.1

The  speedy  reduction  of  the  Turones  and  Andi  did  not

suppress  the  meditated  revolt. When  the  moment  arrived

the  Belgae  were  not  unfaithful  to  their  en^age-

Insurrection  of  .  ,  .

the  Beigae  sup- ments, notwithstanding this discouragement.

pressed.  —^  °  °

.Moras  gained  a  few  Treviran  auxiliaries,  and
gave  the  signal  for  revolt  by  the  massacre  of  some  Roman
traders.  His  ranks  were  soon  swelled  by  followers  of  his
own  clan,  and  by  the  needy  and  oppressed  of  the  surround-
ing tribes  ;  but  unable  to  make  head  against  the  Romans  in
the  field  they  were  driven  to  seek  a  refuge  in  the  dense  for-
ests of  the  Ardennes.  Here  they  were  surrounded,  captured
and  disarmed,  chiefly  by  the  efforts  of  a  personal  enemy  of
Floras,  a  Gaul  who  himself  bore  the  name  of  Julius  Indus.
Florus  now  threw  himself  on  his  own  sword,  and  the  Belgian

insurrection  was  at  once  suppressed. The  resist-

Eesistance  of  -r-i  -i •  1 «  •

the  ^Edui  un- ance  of  the  .zLdui  under  Sacrovir,  who  flew  at  the

der  Sacrovir.

same  time  to  arms,  Avas  more  resolute  and  proved
more  formidable.  The  vigour  of  this  tribe  was  greater,  its
resources  and  alliances  more  considerable,  and  the  forces  of

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  40. :  "  Eodem  anno  Galliarum  civitates  ob  magnitudinem
aeris  alieni  rebellionem  coeptavere."  J  bid.  41. :  "  Tiberius  ....  aluit  dubita-
tione  bellum."

A.U-.  m.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  iqq

the  Romans  were  stationed  at  a  greater  distance  from  it.
The  rumour  of  the  disaffection  was  even  greater  than  the
reality.  It  was  reported  at  Rome  that  no  less  than  sixty-four
Gaulish  states  had  revolted  in  a  body,  that  the  German  tribes
had  united  their  forces  with  them,  that  the  obedience  of
either  Spain  was  trembling  in  the  balance.  The  flower  of
the  youth  of  the  entire  province  was  collected  in  the  impe-
rial university  at  Augustodunum.  Arms  had  been  purchas-
ed or  fabricated  in  secret,  and  there  were  many  brave  young
hands  to  wield  them.  The  chiefs  of  every  clan  were  follow-
ed to  the  field  by  hosts  of  slaves  and  clients,  very  imperfect-
ly equipped ;  but  considerable  reliance  was  placed  on  the
native  gladiators,  of  whom  some  troops  were  maintained  in
the  Romanized  capital,  who  were  clad  in  complete  chain  or
scale  armour,  and  were  expected  to  form  a  firm  and  impene-
trable phalanx.1  It  required  a  pitched  battle,  with  numer-
ous armies  arrayed  on  both  sides,  to  bring  this  last  revolt  to
an  issue.  Nevertheless,  when  Silius,  the  Roman  general,  was
at  leisure  to  direct  two  legions,  with  their  auxiliaries,  from
their  quarters  in  Belgica,  against  the  centre  of  this  insurrec-
tion, its  power  of  resistance  was  found  to  be  far  below  the
alarm  it  had  created.  The  Roman  soldiers  were  CrushedtySi.
animated  with  the  most  determined  spirit ;  the  lius-
hope  of  plunder  among  the  opulent  cities  of  the  long  pacified
province  nerved  their  discipline  and  courage,  while  the  ap-
proach of  the  successors  of  the  Caesarean  conquerors  spread
dismay  among  the  raw  levies  of  the  Gauls.  At  the  twelfth
milestone  from  Augustodunum  the  insurgents  awaited  the
advance  of  the  Romans.3  Their  main  body,  consisting  chiefly
of  the  naked  or  light-armed,  was  speedily  broken  and  put  to

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  43. :  "  Crupellarios  vocant."  Thierry  derives  the  word  from
the  Gaelic  "crup,"  "  resserrer  et  aussi  rendre  impotent ;  crupach  et  crioplach,
perclus,  manchot." Thierry,  Gaulois,  iii.  275.

2  The  site  of  this  battle  must,  in  all  probability,  have  been  to  the  north  of
Augustodunum,  on  the  road  into  Belgica,  from  whence  the  Romans  were  ad-
vancing. It  would,  therefore,  be  almost  on  the  spot  where  Caesar  routed  the
Uelvctii  in  his  first  campaign.

170  HISTOEY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  21.

flight ;  the  mail-clad  stood  their  ground,  because  they  were
unable  to  shift  it ;  but  poles,  axes,  and  pitchforks  completed
the  work  of  the  sword,  and  once  overthrown  the  iron  masses
could  rise  no  more.

Sacrovir  the  Druid,  the  leader  and  soul  of  the  rebellion,
had  effected  his  escape  from  the  field ;  but  his  associates,  now
Death  of  Sa-  cowed  and  spiritless,  refused  to  defend  Augus-
pietioifof  the1"  todunum,  and  threatened  to  deliver  him  into  the
war-  hands  of  the  victors. Flying  from  thence  to  a

neighbouring  homestead,  he  engaged  his  few  faithful  com-
panions to  sacrifice  themselves  over  his  body  in  mutual  com-
bat, having  first  fired  the  house,  and  involved  the  scene  of
blood  in  a  general  conflagration.  It  was  not  till  this  catas-
trophe was  accomplished  that  Tiberius  could  proclaim,  in  a
letter  to  the  senate,  the  origin  and  at  the  same  time  the  com-
pletion of  the  war.1  He  could  now  afford,  without  exciting
too  much  apprehension,  to  give  a  full  and  fair  account  of  the
recent  danger,  and  to  apportion  their  due  meed  of  praise  to
his  commanders,  while  he  claimed  for  himself  the  merit  of
having  directed  their  movements  from  a  distance.  He  con-
descended to  excuse  himself  and  Drusus  for  having  allowed
an  affair  of  so  much  moment  to  be  transacted  in  the  field
without  their  own  active  participation.  It  was,  he  felt,  some-
thing new  in  the  military  annals  of  the  republic,  that  the
imperator,  the  commander  of  her  armies  and  the  minister  of
her  policy,  and  the  consul,  the  executive  instrument  of  her
will,  should  entrust  her  vital  interests  to  the  hands  of  tribunes
and  lieutenants  ;  but  the  capital  was  becoming,  under  the
regimen  of  a  single  man,  of  far  more  importance  than  the
frontiers,  and  any  cause  of  alarm  from  abroad  must  redound
with  double  force  on  the  centre  of  the  empire.  Now  that  the
alarm  was  removed,  he  added,  he  might  venture  himself  to
quit  Rome,  and  visit  the  districts  so  recently  disturbed.  The

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  4*7. :  "  Turn  demum  Tiberius  ortum  patratumque  bellum  se-
natui  scripsit."  Velleius  (ii.  129.)  turns  this  into  a  compliment :  "Quantae
molis  bellum  ....  mira  celeritate  compressit,  ut  ante  P.  R.  vicisse  quam  bel-
lare  cognosceret,  nuntiosque  periculi  victoria}  pracederet  nuntius ! "

A.U.  774.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  171

senate  applauded  his  sagacity,  and  decreed  a  Supplication
for  the  return  he  promised  from  his  sojourn  in  a  suburban
pleasure  house,  such  as  had  often  been  tendered  for  Augus-
tus, after  distant  and  perilous  expeditions.  The  proposal  of
an  individual  flatterer,  that  he  should  be  invited  to  enter  the
city  from  Campania  with  the  honours  of  an  ovation,  he  de-
clined, not  perhaps  without  some  resentment  at  an  excess
of  officious  adulation,  which  seemed  to  savour  of  mock-
ery.

Probably  the  emperor  had  no  real  intention  of  quitting
Italy.  His  years  and  increasing  infirmities  might  furnish  a
colourable  excuse  ;  the  constant  pressure  of  busi-  TheTribuni-
ness  close  at  home  was  in  fact  an  adequate  rea-  ^ed0upeonCon
6on.  From  day  to  day  the  obsequious  senators  ^ct^nwitb11
continued  to  urge  him  to  regulate  by  his  mere  Tlberms-
word  every  public  concern,  and  as  regularly  did  he  reply
with  formal  and  diffuse  epistles,  reproving  them  for  their  in-
dolence or  timidity,  and  then  proceeding  to  discuss,  balance,
and  decide  the  questions  submitted  to  his  attention.  In  the
year  775,  on  the  completion  of'his  son's  consulship,  he  de-
sired the  senate  to  confer  on  him  the  tribunitian  power  in
conjunction  with  himself,  as  Agrippa  had  been  joined  with
Augustus,  and  afterwards  himself,  in  the  highest  of  all  hon-
orary titles.  It  was  as  a  mere  title  indeed  rather  than  a  sub-
stantive office  and  function  that  the  jealous  emperor  meant
this  dignity  to  be  imparted.  As  such  it  might  suffice  to  an-
swer the  murmurs  he  anticipated  on  the  avowal  of  his  own
debility.  Nevertheless,  amidst  every  outward  demonstration
of  subservience  and  respect,  the  new  appointment  was  can-
vassed in  some  quarters  with  freedom,  and  received  with  ill-
disguised  dissatisfaction.  The  pride,  it  is  said,  of  the  pre-
sumptive emperor  made  him  unpopular  in  the  senate ;  and  he
was  not  reputed  to  have  yet  fairly  earned,  though  indeed  he
had  served  the  republic  at  home  and  abroad  for  eight  years,
a  claim  to  be  thus  designated  as  the  future  autocrat  of  Rome.
The  loyalty  of  the  Romans,  at  least  of  the  proud  and  quer-
ulous nobles,  bore  still  a  skin  of  soft  and  delicate  texture,

172  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  22.

which  might  be  wounded  by  the  slightest  shifting  of  the
trappings  in  which  it  had  arrayed  itself.1

But  this  discontent  at  the  elevation  of  Drusus,  and  the
complaints  that  he,  at  least,  had  no  excuse  from  age  or  in-
firmity for  declining the hardships  of  distant

Ambition  and  . J  °  . *

intrigues  of  Se-  service,  to  which  nevertheless  his  lather  did  not
choose  to  dismiss  him,  were  prompted  or  fos-
tered, we  may  believe,  by  the  artifices  of  Sejanus.  The  un-
paralleled indulgence  this  man  had  obtained  from  his  patron
only  inspired  him  with  the  ambition  of  supplanting  the  more
legitimate  object  of  imperial  favour.  His  influence  had
acquired  the  government  of  Africa  for  his  uncle,  and  with
it  the  command  of  an  army,  and  the  conduct  of  an  important
war.  On  the  successful  issue  of  the  campaigns  in  which
Bloesus  was  now  engaged,  and  on  the  final  defeat,  as  he
vaunted,  of  the  daring  foe,  who,  though  regarded  by  the
Romans  as  no  better  than  a  deserter  and  a  bandit,  had  pre-
sumed to  offer  terms  of  accommodation  with  the  emperor  on
the  footing  of  a  rival  potentate,  Sejanus  succeeded  in  getting
him  leave  to  accept  the  imperatorial  title  from  his  soldiers ;
a  military  distinction  now  rarely  and  reluctantly  accorded,
treading,  as  it  apparently  did,  too  closely  on  the  imperial
designation  of  the  chief  of  the  state  himself.  Even  Augustus
had  discountenanced  the  licence  earned  and  claimed  by  the
legions  at  the  close  of  a  well-fought  day.  Blresus  was  the
last  Roman  officer  in  whose  case  this  military  salutation  was
formally  sanctioned  by  the  emperor.  It  was  only  as  the
proconsul  of  a  senatorial  province  that  he  could  have  any
pretence  for  hearkening  to  it ;  and  it  was  authorised  this
last  time  out  of  regard  only  for  Sejanus,  Tiberius  resolving,
we  may  believe,  never  again  to  place  a  nominee  of  the  senate
in  a  position  to  merit  it.a It  was  fitting  that  the  last  sur-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  56,  59.

'  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  74.  De  la  Bleterie  remarks  {Mem.  Acad.  Inser.  xxi.)  that
Cornelius  Balbus,  the  last  private  citizen  who  triumphed,  and  Blecsus,  the  last
who  was  saluted  imperator,  were  both  proconsuls  of  a  senatorial  province,  the
only  one  in  which  military  operations  might  be  anticipated. The  next  emperor

A.U.  775.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  173

viving  -witness  of  the  glories  of  the  ancient  Republic  should
expire  with  this  final  flicker  of  its  military  independence.
At  the  close  of  this  year,  the  commencement  of

. Death  and  ob-

the  sixty-fourth  since  the  fatal  era  of  Philippi, sequiesofju-

J  .nia  Tertulla.

Junia  Tertulla,  the  niece  of  Cato,  the  wife  of
Cassius,  the  sister  of  Brutus,  was  carried  to  the  resting  place
of  her  illustrious  house.1  In  her  had  centred  the  revenues  as
well  as  the  traditions  of  many  noble  families,  and  she  grati-
fied a  just  pride  by  distributing  her  riches  by  will  among
the  most  distinguished  personages  of  the  city,  omitting  only
the  emperor  himself.  Tiberius  bore  the  slight  without  re-
mark, and  permitted  the  virtues  of  the  deceased  to  be  cele-
brated in  a  speech  from  the  rostra,  which  could  not  fail  to
revive  the  memory  of  a  thousand  republican  glories.  But
the  leaders  of  the  funeral  procession,  when  they  carried  be-
fore the*  bier  the  images  of  the  Manlii,  the  Quinctii,  the
Servilii,  and  the  Junii,  and  of  twenty  in  all  of  the  noblest
houses  of  Rome,  were  instructed  to  forbear  from  exhibiting
the  busts  of  Cassius  and  Brutus,  who,  in  the  pithy  words  of
the  historian,  were  in  fact  all  the  more  remarked  for  the
absence  of  their  illustrious  effigies.2

The  success  which  had  thus  far  attended  the  intrigues  of
Sejanus,  had  inspired  him  with  hopes  the  most  unbounded.
The  prefecture  of  the  city,  with  which  he  had „

1  ...  „ Sejanus  estab-

been  invested,  was  the  immediate  instrument  of  lanes  the  Prse-
the  imperial  will,  and  though  it  had  been  held
before  him  by  Messala,  Taurus,  and  Piso,  among  the  most
honoured  names  in  Rome,  it  was  not  of  a  nature  to  confer
cither  power  or  dignity  itself.  But  the  new  adventurer  con-
ceived a  design  of  using  it  to  advance  an  inordinate  ambition.
Hitherto  the  soldiers  of  the  praetorian  guard,  who  were
placed  under  his  orders,  were  quartered,  nine  or  ten  thousand

withdrew  the  legion  of  Africa  from  the  command  of  the  senatorial  proconsul,
and  placed  it,  as  we  shall  see,  under  an  officer  of  his  own  appointment.

1  The  battle  of  Philippi  was  fought  in  the  autumn  of  712.

2  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  70. :  "  Sed  prafulgebant  Cassius  atque  Brutus  eo  ipso  quod
effigies  eorum  non  visebtuitur."

1 74  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  23.

in  number,  in  small  barracks  at  various  points  throughout
the  city,  or  in  the  neighbouring  towns.1  Dispersed  in  these
numerous  cantonments,  they  were  the  less  available  on  a
sudden  emergency :  their  discipline  was  lax,  and  scattered
up  and  down  among  the  citizens,  they  were  liable  to  be
tampered  with  by  the  turbulent  or  disloyal.  Yet  Augustus
had  never  ventured  on  a  step  so  bold  and  novel  as  to  bring
them  altogether  into  a  camp,  and  let  the  citizens  see  and
number  the  garrison  by  which  they  really  were  enthralled.
He  had  kept  no  more  than  three  cohorts  or  eighteen  hundred
men  in  the  city  or  at  its  gates.  It  was  left  for  the  days  of
confirmed  and  all  but  acknowledged  royalty,  and  the  private
ambition  of  a  minister,  to  achieve  this  regal  consummation.
Perhaps  the  terror  of  the  Varian  disaster,  when  the  city
itself  was  supposed  for  a  moment  to  be  defenceless  against  a
foreign  foe,  gave  the  first  excuse  for  the  change  which  was
its  site  and  di-  speedily  introduced.  Beyond  the  north-eastern
mensions.  angle  of  the  city,  and  between  the  roads  which

sprang  from  the  Viminal  and  Colline  gates,  the  prefect
marked  out  a  regular  encamjmient  for  the  quarters  of  these
household  troops.  The  line  of  the  existing  enclosure  which
was  traced  about  two  centuries  later,  exhibits  a  rectangular
projection,  by  which  the  limits  of  the  spot  and  its  dimensions
are  still  ascertained.  An  oblong  space,  the  sides  of  which
are  five  hundred  and  four  hundred  yards  respectively,  em-
bracing an  area  of  two  hundred  thousand  square  yards,  was
arranged  like  a  permanent  camp  for  the  lodgment  of  this
numerous  force.8  Having  collected  his  myrmidons  together,
the  prefect  began  to  ply  them  with  flatteries  and  indul-
gences : he  appointed  all  their  officers,  their  tribunes  and

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  2. Dion,  10,000,  Tacitus  and  Suetonius,  9000.

2  The  dimensions  of  the  praetorian  camp  are  given  in  Bunsen's  Rome,  iii.  2.
359.  The  ordinary  camp,  according  to  the  arrangement  of  Polybius,  was  a
square  of  207'7-J-  English  feet  for  a  consular  army  of  two  legions,  or  including
allies,  19,200  men.  This  area  would  contain  480,000  square  yards.  See  Gen-
eral Roy's  llil'dary  Antiquities  of  Vie  Romans  in  Britain.  According  to  the
system  of  Hyginus,  in  the  time  of  Trajan,  the  soldiers  were  packed  much  more
closely.

A.U.  776.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  175

centurions,  and  at  the  same  time  found  means,  through  the
agency  of  the  senate,  of  advancing  his  creatures  to  employ-
ment in  the  provinces.  It  was  strange  to  see  how  Tiberius
shut  his  eyes  to  the  manoeuvres  thus  practised  before  his
face.  On  the  most  public  occasions  he  loudly  proclaimed
that  Sejanus  was  the  associate  of  his  own  labours :  he  per-
mitted his  busts  and  statues  to  be  set  up  in  the  theatres  and
forums,  and  even  to  receive  the  salutation  of  the  soldiers.1

Still,  notwithstanding  these  unprecedented  marks  of
favour,  and  the  symptoms  they  revealed  of  the  emperor's
infirmity,  Sejanus  could  not  fail  to  see,  in  the  re- „  tJ .

-1  ' °  ,  Machinations

cent  elevation  of  Drusus,  how  far  his  master  yet  of  Sejanus
was  from  contemplating  the  transfer  of  empire
from  his  son  to  a  stranger.  To  remove  the  rival  whom  he
despaired  of  supplanting  was  become  necessary  for  his  own
security ;  for  Drusus  was  instinctively  hostile  to  him  ;  he
had  murmured  at  his  pretensions,  unveiled  his  intrigues,  and
in  the  petulance  of  poAver  had  even  raised  his  hand  against
him.2  The  prince  had  complained  that  his  father,  though
having  a  son  of  his  own,  had  in  fact  devolved  no  small  por-
tion of  the  government  on  a  mere  alien.  Sejanus,  he  mut-
tered, was  regarded  by  the  people  as  the  emperor's  actual
colleague :  the  camp  of  the  praetorians  was  the  creation  of
his  caprice  for  the  advancement  of  his  authority  ;  the  soldiers
had  transferred  to  him  their  military  allegiance,  and  his
image  had  been  openly  exhibited  as  an  object  of  popular
interest  in  the  theatre  of  Pompeius.8  Moreover  he  had
already  contracted  an  alliance  with  the  family  of  the  Caesars
by  the  betrothal  of  his  daughter  to  a  son  of  Claudius,  the
surviving  brother  of  Germanicus.4 But  Drusus  was  married

1  Tac.  iv.  2. :  "  Facili  Tiberio  atque  ita  prono,  ut  socium  laborum  non  modo
in  sermonibus,  sed  apud  Patres  et  Populum  cclebraret ;  colique  per  theatra  ct
fora  effigies  ejus,  interque  principia  legionum  sineret."

s  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  3.  3  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  7.

4  Tac.  Ann.  Hi.  29.:  "Adversis  animis  acceptum  quod  filio  Claudii  socer  Se-
janus dc.-tinarctur."  This  marriage  did  not  take  effect,  Drusus,  the  son  of
Claudius,  dying  by  a  singular  accident  while  yet  a  chill,  a  few  days  after  the

176  HISTORY  OF  THE  KOMANS  [A.D.  23.

to  a  weak  and  vain  woman,  whom  Sejanus,  by  affecting  a
violent  passion  for  her,  had  succeeded  in  seducing  and  at-
taching vehemently  to  his  interests.  Divorcing,  as  the  first
step  in  his  designs,  his  own  consort,  Apicata,  he  had  extend-
ed to  Livilla  the  prospect  of  marriage  with  himself,  and
therewith  of  a  share  in  the  empire  to  which  she  encouraged
him  to  aspire.  Such  at  least  was  the  story  which  was  long
afterwards  revealed  by  the  confessions  of  their  slaves  under
torture  ;  a  story  of  little  value,  perhaps,  except  as  displaying
the  current  of  popular  opinion  ;  for  the  wife  of  Drusus,  it
might  be  supposed,  was  already  nearer  to  the  throne  than
the  paramour  of  Sejanus.  Probably  the  unfortunate  woman
consulted  no  other  tempter  than  her  own  passion,  and  was
persuaded  to  listen  to  his  solicitations  for  the  removal  of  the
obstacle  between  them.1  With  the  help  of  a  confidential
physician  and  a  corrupt  slave,  they  contrived,  after  many
delays,  to  administer  poison  to  the  prince,  of  which  he  lin-
gered long  enough  to  give  his  decline  the  appearance  of  a
casual  sickness,  brought  on,  as  some  imagined,  by  intemper-
ance.'

The  loss  of  the  unfortunate  son  of  Tiberius  seems  to  have
been  attended  with  none  of  those  passionate  regrets  which

betrothal.  Suet.  Claud.  21. :  "  Drusum  Pompeiis  impuberem  amisit  piro,  per
lusum  in  sublime  jacto  et  hiatu  oris  excepto,  strangulatum ;  cui  et  ante  paucos
dies  filiam  Sejani  despondisset." Dion,  lx.  32.

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  8. :  "  Sejanus,  maturandum  ratus,  deligit  venenum,  quo
paulatim  irrepente,  fortuitus  morbus  adsimularetur :  id  Druso  datum  per  Lyg-
dum  spadonem,  ut  octo  post  annos  cognitum  est."  Another  version  of  the
story,  which  Tacitus  cannot  refrain  from  repeating,  though  he  acknowledges
how  little  it  deserved  credit,  was,  that  Sejanus  contrived  to  poison  the  cup
which  Drusus  was  about  to  present  to  his  father,  and  warned  Tiberius  not  to
accept  it ;  whereupon  Drusus,  having  no  suspicion  of  the  fraud,  and  anxious  in
his  innocence  to  avert  suspicion,  himself  swallowed  the  draught.  Tiberius,
however,  was  persuaded  that  he  committed  the  suicide  in  despair  on  being  dis-
covered. Tac.  Ann.  iv.  10.  Such  were  the  fantastic  horrors  which  obtained
credence  among  the  citizens,  and  such  wild  credulity  is  perhaps  the  strongest
evidence  of  their  fears  and  sufferings.

2  This  was  the  cause,  according  to  Suetonius  (Tib.  62.),  to  which  Tiberius
himself  was  induced  to  attribute  it.

A.U.  776.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  I77

have  thrown  a  mournful  interest  over  the  de-  Firmness,  real
cease  of  his  nephew.  The  family  of  the  popular  Tibcrius^t  this
favourite  seemed,  on  the  contrary,  to  gain  fresh  loss-
lustre  from  the  disaster  which  thus  befell  the  rival  branch  of
the  imperial  house.  No  suspicion  was  aroused,  no  inquiry  at
least  was  made  into  the  cause  of  the  young  Caesar's  death.
.  The  image  of  antique  fortitude  which  Tiberius  pretended  to
present,  caused  some  curious  remarks,  but  little  admiration,
among  the  soft  impulsive  people,  who  had  long  cast  aside
the  iron  mask  of  their  ancient  discipline.  Entering  the  sen-
ate, where  the  consuls,  in  sign  of  public  mourning,  had  relin-
quished their  place  of  honour,  and  were  sitting  promiscuous-
ly on  the  common  benches  of  the  senators,  he  bade  them
resume  their  curule  chairs,  and  declared  that  for  himself,  he
found  his  only  consolation  in  the  performance,  more  strict
than  ever,  of  his  public  duties.  Tearing  himself  from  the
corpse  of  his  child  and  the  embraces  of  his  family,  he  rushed,
with  redoubled  devotion,  into  the  affairs  of  the  republic.  He
lamented  the  extreme  age  of  his  mother  Livia,  his  own  de-
clining years,  now  deprived  of  the  support  of  sons  and
nephews,  and  asked  leave  to  recommend  to  the  fathers  the
last  survivors  of  his  hopes,  the  youthful  children  of  German-
icus.  The  consuls  sprang  to  their  feet,  and  left  the  room  to
conduct  the  young  Nero  and  Drusus  into  the  assembly.
They  placed  them  before  the  emperor,  who  taking  them  by
the  hand  exclaimed:  These  orphans  I  placed  under  the  pro-
tection of  their  uncle,  entreating  him  to  regard  them  as  his
own.  Now  that  he  too  is  dead,  1 turn  to  you,  fathers,  and
adjure  you  by  the  gods  of  our  country  to  receive,  cherish,  and
direct  these  great-grand-children  of  Augustus.  Then  turning
to  the  young  men  he  added :  Nero  and  Drusus,  behold  your
parents :  in  the  station  to  which  you  have  been  born,  your
good  and  evil  are  the  good  and  evil  of  the  state.1

In  betraying  the  hollowncss  of  his  conduct  to  a  genera-
tion keenly  alive  to  an  overacted  hypocrisy,  Tiberius  showed

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  8. :  "  Ita  nati  estis  ut  bona  malaque  vestra  ad  rem  publi-
carn  pertineant."

vol..  v. — 12

178  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  23.

The  Romans  h°w  little  he  comprehended  the  character  of  the
riul^prctend-  times.  Augustus  might  repeat  the  farce  of  pre-
eto?f  the  re-e"  tending  to  restore  the  Republic  ;  but  when  the
public.  second  princeps  now  proposed,  in  the  fulness  of

his  simulated  affliction,  to  imitate  this  magnanimity,  every
feeling  of  compassion  for  the  loss  he  deplored  and  of  admira-
tion for  his  fortitude  was  overwhelmed  by  a  sense  of  ridicule.
It  was  a  relief  to  both  parties  to  divert  their  thoughts  with
the  splendid  pageant  of  a  funeral,  in  which  the  long  line  ol
heroes  of  the  Julian  and  Claudian  houses,  from  ^Eneas  and
the  Alban  kings  on  the  one  side,  from  Clausus,  the  Sabine
chieftain,  on  the  other,  was  represented  by  their  genuine  or
imaginary  effigies.  Even  while  Tiberius  was  pronouncing
the  expected  eulogy  on  the  virtues  of  the  deceased,  Sejanus,
attending  at  his  side,  might  be  emboldened,  by  the  coolness
with  which  the  citizens  received  it,  to  plan  the

The  masculine  .  ?  A

virtues  of  completion  of  his  schemes  by  a  series  of  fresh

atrocities.  The  brave  Agrippina  was  not  of  a
character  to  be  corrupted  like  the  weak  Livilla :  her  virtue
was  invincible,  and  her  vigilance  never  slept  in  guarding  her
children  from  the  perils  that  environed  them.  But  the  cir-
cumstances of  her  bereavement,  and  the  favour  which  had
been  extended  to  her  enemy  Plancina,  had  left  a  fatal  impres-
sion on  her  mind.  With  a  rooted  distrust  of  the  emperor  she
joined  a  bold  and  no  doubt  a  fierce  and  violent  spirit.  Like
a  true  Roman  she  exercised  without  fear  or  shame  the  na-
tional licence  of  the  tongue,  and  in  a  court  where  no  whisper
was  not  repeated,  proclaimed  aloud  to  every  listener  the
wrongs  of  which  she  deemed  herself  the  victim.1  The  fer-
tility with  which  her  marriage  had  been  blest  had  been  long
a  source  of  jealousy  to  the  morbid  self-love  of  the  empress-
mother,  which  even  in  extreme  age,  and  though  her  son  had
reached  the  summit  of  her  wishes,  was  piqued  by  the  mater-
nal taunts  of  this  Niobe  of  the  palace.2  The  court  was  filled
with  spies  and  intriguers,  encouraged  by  Sejanus,  with  the

1  Tertull.  Apol.  25. :  "Ilia  lingua  Romana."  a  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  12.

A.U.  776.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  1^9

assurance  of  favour  from  the  emperor  himself,  to  place  the
worst  construction  on  her  words  and  actions,  and  to  entice
her  by  insidious  artifices  to  utter  every  sentiment  of  pride
and  impatience.  To  the  suspicion  that  he  was  hostile  at
heart  to  his  nephew's  family,  Tiberius  gave  perhaps  some
colour  by  the  moroseness  with  which  he  repelled  the  compli-
ment to  them,  by  which  some  of  his  least  wary  courtiers  now
sought  to  gratify  him.  When  the  priests  direct-
ed that  vows  should  be  offered  for  the  health  of patently  jesi-

.v  •  i  •  u»  ...  ,  .  , , ous  of  the  fam-

ine prmceps  nimseli,  conjoining  therewith  the  iiy  of  German-
names  of  Nero  and  Drusus,  he  rebuked  them  im-
patiently for  their  unseasonable  ofticiousness.  But  with  his
usual  maladroitness,  the  terms  he  used  were  such  as  seemed
to  imply  a  feeling  of  jealousy  towards  the  young  men.  He
complained  that  to  join  them  with  himself  in  this  prayer  for
the  imperial  family  was  to  make  as  much  of  their  health,
young  and  vigorous  as  they  were,  as  of  the  grave  infirmity
of  years  under  which  he  felt  himself  to  labour.  Did  you  this,
he  peevishly  added,  at  the  request  of  Agrippina,  or  were  you
moved  to  it  by  her  menaces  f  When  they  protested  warmly
against  either  imputation,  he  recollected  himself,  and  con-
fined himself  to  a  moderate  rebuke,  at  the  same  time  desiring
the  senate  to  abstain  henceforth  from  exciting  a  giddy  ambi-
tion by  premature  distinctions.1  Sejanus  followed  in  his
master's  key,  and  declared  his  alarm  lest  the  state  should  be
split  into  factions  by  the  partisans  of  Agrippina  and  her
children.  He  even  recommended  measures  for  reducing  the
influence  of  certain  nobles  who  had  shown  most  alacrity  in
serving  them.  Tiberius,  sore  and  vexed  with  himself  and  all
about  him,  acquiesced  in  every  counsel  his  only  favourite  ad-
ministered to  him :  he  showed  his  ill-humour  by  a  captious-
ness  which  could  never  refrain  from  bitter  speeches  even  on
the  most  trifling  occasions.  Disregard  and  sympathy  seem-
ed to  be  equally  distasteful  to  him.  When  the  citizens  of
Ilium  sent  envoys  to  condole  with  him  on  the  death  of  Dru-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  17.

180  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  24.

sus,  a  deputation  which  could  not  reach  him  till  some  months
after  the  event,  he  condoled  with  them  in  return  for  the  loss
of  their  excellent  countryman  Hector.1

The  year  776,  the  ninth  of  Tiberius,  is  marked  by  Tacitus

as  the  turning  point  in  character  of  the  second  principate.

Up  to  this  time  the  government,  he  affirms,  had

Deterioration  n  _ .  , .

of  the  princi-  been  conducted  with  honour  and  advantage  to
rius  from  the  the  commonwealth ;  and  thus  far  the  emperor,
he  adds,  might  fairly  plume  himself  on  his  do-
mestic felicity,  for  the  death  of  Germanicus  he  reckoned
among  his  blessings,  rather  than  his  afflictions.  From  that
period,  however,  fortune  began  to  waver :  sorrows  and  dis-
appointments harassed  him  and  soured  his  temper:  he  be-
came cruel  himself,  and  he  stimulated  cruelty  in  others.'"1
The  mover  and  contriver  of  the  atrocities  which  followed,  it
was  allowed  on  all  hands,  was  the  wretched  Sejanus.  Their
instruments  were  the  corrupt  and  profligate  courtiers,  who
pressed  forward  to  earn  the  rewards  of  delation,  and  soon
outstripped  by  their  assiduity  even  the  ardour  of  Sejanus
himself.  While  the  intrigues  of  the  aspiring  favourite  were
directed  against  the  friends  and  allies  of  the  family  of  Ger-
manicus, Tiberius  was  perhaps  unconscious,  in  his  retirement,
of  the  secret  machinations  of  the  prefect,  and  seemed  to  won-
der more  and  more  at  the  zeal  of  his  subjects  in  hunting
down  all  whom  they  presumed  to  be  his  enemies,  and  bring-
ing them  to  condign  justice.  His  personal  fears,  and  by  this
time  the  selfishness  of  his  character,  had  degenerated  into  ex-
cessive timidity,  were  constantly  excited  by  the  pretended
Fate  of  c.  si-  discovery  of  plots  against  him.  The  wife  of
lius-  Silius,  the  pacifier  of  Gaul,  was  a  friend  of  Agrrp-

pina ;  her  husband  accordingly  was  marked  out  for  the  first
victim,  and  accused  of  the  gravest  crimes  against  the  state.8
It  was  affirmed  that  he  had  connived  at  the  ripening  pro-

1  Suet.  Tib.  52.

2  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  1. :  "  Cum  repente  turbare  fortuna  ccepit;  saevire  ipse  aut
sojvientibus  vires  prabere."

3  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  19.

A.U.  777.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  181

jects  of  Sacrovir,  instead  of  crushing  the  conspiracy  in  the
germ :  even  when  victorious,  his  triumph,  it  was  insinuated,
was  sullied  by  selfish  cupidity,  and  the  faithful  subjects  of
the  empire  had  been  made  to  groan  under  exactions  which
should  have  been  confined  to  those  who  had  joined  in  the
rebellion.  Such,  it  was  said,  were  the  vehemence  and  perti-
nacity with  which  these  charges  were  pressed  upon  him,  that
despairing  of  his  defence,  he  anticipated  the  inevitable  sen-
tence by  a  voluntary  death.1  He  was  not  perhaps  wholly
innocent.  But  his  wife,  moreover,  was  driven  into  banish-
ment; and  the  emperor's  appetite  for  prosecution  was  at
length  whetted,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  the  delators,  by
the  rich  plunder  which  he  was  persuaded  to  taste.  The
treasures  which  Silius  was  convicted  of  having  extorted  from
the  provincials  were  in  no  case  restored  to  them.  Among  the
throng  of  courtiers  who  sought  to  gratify  the  government  by
enhancing  the  penalties  of  the  condemned,  the  only  course
which  remained  for  the  best  and  wisest  senators  was  to  miti-
gate indirectly  the  dangers  of  the  accused,  by  restricting  the
rewards  of  delation.  M.  Lepidus  earned  distinction  in  this
small  but  honourable  band  by  the  proposal,  A  D  25
which  was,  however,  probably  ineffectual,  that  a.u-778.
the  profits  of  the  accusers  should  be  limited  to  one  fourth  of
the  culprit's  fortune,  while  the  remainder  was  to  be  restored
to  his  guiltless  children.  It  was  deemed  worthy  of  remark,
amidst  so  many  instances  of  servility  in  the  nobles  and  jeal-
ousy in  their  masters,  that  such  a  proposal  should  have  been
made  at  all,  and  made  without  being  resented.  Tacitus,  as
a  disciple  of  the  school  of  the  fatalists,  of  which  the  language
at  least  was  fashionable  in  his  day,  is  constrained  on  this  oc-

1  The  object  of  this  suicide,  a  course  to  which  we  shall  find  the  accused  not
unfrequently  resort,  was  the  hope  of  preventing  the  confiscation  of  property
which  would  follow  upon  a  judicial  sentence.  Silius,  whatever  gains  he  had
acquired  in  his  province,  had  been  enriched  by  the  liberality  of  Augustus,
and  in  seizing  upon  his  fortune  for  the  fiscus,  Tiberius  for  the  first  time  showed
an  appetite  for  personal  lucre:  "Prima  erga  pecuniam  alienam  diligentia."
Tac.  Ann.  iv.  20.

182  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  TA.D.  25.

casion  to  inquire  whether  the  favour  or  hostility  of  princes  is
a  matter  of  mere  chance  and  destiny,  or  whether  there  may
not  still  be  room  for  prudent  counsel  and  good  sense  in  the
conduct  of  human  affairs  ;  whether  a  secure  path  of  life,  how-
ever hard  to  trace,  might  not  still  be  discovered  amidst  the
perils  of  the  times,  between  the  extremes  of  rude  independ-
ence and  base  servility.1  The  great  defect  of  the  Romans
at  this  period  lay  in  their  want  of  the  true  self-respect  which
is  engendered  by  the  consciousness  of  sober  consistency.
Bred  in  the  speculative  maxims  of  Greek  and  Roman  repub-
licanism, they  passed  their  manhood  either  in  unlearning  the
lessons  of  the  schools,  or  in  exaggerating  them  in  a  spirit  of
senseless  defiance.

Silius,  it  would  seem,  had  laid  himself  open  to  the  attacks
of  the  informers,  and  there  were  others  against  whom  the
Prosecution  favourite's  intrigues  were  directed,  whose  public
cvemutTu^Cor-  crmies  or  personal  vices  had  alienated  from  them
dus-  the compassion of  the citizens. Nevertheless

another  of  his  victims  seems  to  have  been  a  man  of  real
merit,  though  not  of  such  a  description  as  to  engage  for
him  a  great  amount  of  popular  sympathy.  Cremutius  Cor-
dus,  a  follower  of  the  Stoic  philosophy,  had  composed  the
Annals  of  the  Roman  Commonwealth  during  the  period  of
the  Civil  Wars.  He  had  praised  the  patriotism  of  Brutus,
and  had  called  Cassius  the  last  of  the  JRomans,  a  phrase
which,  under  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  was  not  a  mere
speculative  inquiry,  but  a  pungent  incentive  to  violence.
Augustus,  indeed,  had  actually  perused  the  volume,  and
though  he  found  in  it  no  panegyric  on  himself,  did  not  com-
plain of  it  as  disloyal  or  dangerous.  But  Augustus  was
strong  in  the  affections  of  his  people,  and  could  afford  to  dis-
regard the  sophisms  of  the  most  vehement  of  declaimers.
Tiberius  was  far  from  sharing  the  confidence  of  his  prede-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  20. :  "  Unde  dubitare  cogor  fato  et  sorte  nascendi,  ut  caetera,
ita  Principum  inclinatio  in  bos,  offensio  in  illos :  an  sit  aliquid  in  nostris  con-
siliis,  liceatque  inter  abruptam  contumaciam  et  deforme  obsequium  pergere  iter
periculis  et  metu  vacuum."

A.U.  778.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  183

cessor.  He  felt  or  fancied  every  moment  that  he  felt  his
throne  tottering ;  but  this  very  sense  of  weakness  induced
him  to  abstain  from  any  act  which  might  arouse  the  people
from  the  lethargy  into  which  they  had  fallen.  It  was  not
till  the  conduct  of  affairs  came  into  the  hands  of  a  minister
with  personal  ends  to  serve,  that  such  experiments  were
made  on  the  general  patience,  as  the  prosecution  of  a  respect-
able citizen,  like  Cremutius,  for  the  expression  of  a  political
opinion.  The  accusers  were  clients  of  Sejanus,  and  though
we  know  not  what  was  the  special  object  of  the  favourite's
hostility,  we  may  suppose  that  the  philosopher  was  known
as  a  partisan  of  Agrippina.  "Whatever,  however,  was  his
real  crime,  the  charge  against  him  was  that  of  exciting  the
citizens  to  rebellion  ;  a  charge  which  no  judge  in  modern
times  could  deem  to  be  rebutted  by  the  reply  that  the  os-
tensible objects  of  his  praise  had  been  dead  seventy  years.
To  urge  as  an  argument  that  Augustus  had  tolerated  his
language  a  little  while  before  was  merely  trifling :  every
government  must  judge  of  the  licence  that  may  be  gi-anted
to  hostile  criticism,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  later  period
were  essentially  different  from  those  of  the  earlier.  But  the
victim  of  Sejanus  had  no  security  for  a  fair  trial,  a  reasona-
ble hearing,  or  a  temperate  sentence.  He  provoked  his
judges  and  aggravated  his  offence  by  anticipating  injustice
by  violence.  Cremutius,  now  an  old  man,  having  delivered
himself  of  a  speech,  such  perhaps  as  Tacitus  ascribes  to  him,
full  of  bitter  invective  against  the  government  and  the  times,
went  home  without  awaiting  the  proceedings  with  which  he
was  threatened,  and  put  an  end  to  his  own  life  by  starvation.
His  books  were  ordered  to  be  burnt ;  but  some  copies  of
them  were  preserved,  and  all  the  more  diligently  studied  by
the  few  who  had  secreted  them.1

It  must  be  remembered  that  in  the  peculiar  position  of
Tiberius,  policy  required  him  to  give  wide  scope  to  individ-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  34,  35. Comp.  Suet.  Tib.  61.; Calig.  16.;  Dion,  lvii.  24.;
Scncc.  Comol.  ad  Marc.  1.  22.

184  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  25.

ual  action  in  matters  that  did  not  immediately

Tiberius  inter-  .  J

feres  to  check concern  his  own  power  and  security. For  the

the  delators.  .  „ . .  -

persecution  ot  citizens  by  citizens  he  was  not  at
least  legally  responsible :  and  it  was  one  of  those  shadows
of  liberty  which  he  was  careful  in  conceding,  to  allow  his
subjects  the  gratification  of  their  private  enmities  before  the
ordinary  tribunals.  The  peculiar  constitution  of  the  Roman
legal  procedure,  which  permitted  and  indeed  urged  every
citizen  to  assume  the  character  of  a  public  prosecutor,  served
to  exonerate  the  chief  of  the  state,  in  the  view  of  his  own
countrymen,  from  a  large  portion  of  the  odium  which  later
ages  have  cast  upon  him.  At  the  same  time  the  firmness  he
occasionally  exhibited,  in  spontaneously  interposing  to  check
the  licentiousness  of  his  people,  was  regarded  by  the  citi-
zens as  a  token  of  extraordinary  consideration,  and  contin-
ued to  secure  him,  among  so  many  motives  they  had  for  dis-
liking him,  no  small  share  of  their  respect  and  even  favour.
Thus,  when  Plautius  Sylvanus,  a  praetor,  was  hurried  before
him,  on  the  charge  of  having  murdered  his  wife,  and  pleaded
that  she  had,  unknown  to  him,  laid  violent  hands  on  herself,
he  marched  direct  to  the  chamber  of  the  accused,  and  satis-
fied himself  by  personal  examination  of  the  unquestionable
signs  it  exhibited  of  a  struggle  and  murder.  Such  vigour
and  presence  of  mind  could  not  fail  to  make  a  favourable
impression  on  the  multitude.1  When  Salvianus  brought  a
charge  against  a  noble  citizen  on  the  day  of  the  Latin  Feriae,
he  resented  the  desecration  of  that  holy  season,  and  caused
the  intemperate  accuser  to  be  himself  banished.*  Again,
when  Serenus  was  condemned  for  seditious  intrigues,  on  the
accusation  of  his  unnatural  son,  and  the  senate  proceeded
without  hesitation  to  sentence  him  to  death,  Tiberius  inter-
posed to  annul  the  decree,  and  desired  his  precipitate  judges
to  pass  a  second  vote.  Hereupon  Asinius  Gallus  projiosed
that,  instead  of  death,  the  criminal  should  be  relegated  to
the  isle  of  Gyarus  or  Donusa ;  and  again  Tiberius,  observing

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  22.,  a.  u.  777.  3  Tac.  Ann,  iv.  36.,  a.  u.  118.

A.U.  778.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  185

that  those  barren  rocks  were  destitute  even  of  water,  de-
clared that  where  life  was  conceded  the  necessaries  of  life
ought  not  to  he  withheld.1  In  the  case  of  a  knight  named
Coniinius,  who  had  been  condemned  for  the  publication  of
libellous  verses  against  himself,  he  extended  to  the  convicted
Criminal  a  free  pardon.5  Such  instances  of  lenity  might  con-
trast  favourably  with  the  relentless  ferocity  of  the  nobles
towards  one  another ;  they  allowed  the  citizens  still  to  be-
lieve that  in  the  dangerous  times  on  which  they  had  fallen,
their  best  protection  lay  in  the  chief  of  the  commonwealth,
elevated  by  his  station  above  the  ordinary  passions  of  the
envious  and  malignant  aniono-  themselves. They  .

V  .  , The  Romans

were  full  ot  Gratitude  to  him  also  for  the  erood acknowledge

. ,  ,  .  .the  good  for-

iortune  which  seemed  to  attend  on  his  public  ad- tune  of  his  ad-

. .  .  xt i t  i  tit  ministration.

ministration.  He  had  been  enabled  to  suppress,
by  a  happy  accident,  an  alarming  insurrection  of  slaves  in
Apulia,  the  nurse  of  servile  seditions.3  The  year  777  had
witnessed  the  final  pacification  of  Africa.1  While  the  em-
peror, out  of  compliment  perhaps  to  the  success  attributed
to  Bhesus,  had  imprudently  withdrawn  a  large  part  of  the
forces  in  the  province,  and  encouraged  the  restless  Tacfarinas
to  renew  his  attempts  in  that  quarter,  the  gallantry  of  the
new  proconsul  Dolabella  had  sufficed  to  bring  the  enemy  to
bay,  to  overpower  and  reduce  him  to  self-destruction.  The
citizens  rejoiced  at  this  consummation  of  a  tedious  and  ex-
pensive warfare,  which  had  sometimes  threatened  their  sup-
plies, and  were  proud  at  beholding  an  embassy  from  the  re-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  30.  The  treatment  of  the  exiles  seems  generally  to  have
been  sufficiently  mild.  They  seem  to  have  been  allowed  to  a  great  extent  the
choice  of  their  island ;  and  when  Augustus  forbade  them  to  settle  at  any  spot
within  fifty  miles  of  the  continent,  he  excepted  the  pleasant  retreats  of  Cos,
Rhodes,  and  Lesbos.  He  also  confined  them  to  a  single  vessel  of  a  thousand
amphorffi  and  two  pinnaces  for  the  voyage  and  conveyance  of  their  families,
which  further  were  limited  to  twenty  slaves  or  freedmen. Dion,  lvi.  27.

'-  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  81.,  a.  u.  777.

3  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  27.,  a.  t\  777.

4  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  23. :  "  Is  demum  annus  populum  Romanum  longo  adversum
Numidam  Tacfarinutcm  bcllo  absolvit."

186  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  25.

mote  Garamantes,  which  came  to  solicit  their  clemency.
Such,  however,  was  the  influence  of  Sejanus  that  Tiberius
refused  the  triumphal  ornaments  to  the  victor,  in  order  not
to  dim  the  lustre  of  the  honours  already  accorded  to  the
favourite's  uncle.1  But  in  the  provinces,  where  the  genuine
merits  of  the  emperor  were  known  without  those  drawbacks
which  were  but  too  notorious  at  Rome,  his  popularity  was
perhaps  unalloyed.  When  he  insisted  on  referring  to  the
senate  the  charge  of  malversation,  which  the  people  of  Asia
brought  against  his  procurator,  and  the  fathers,  thus  encour-
aged, ventured  to  condemn  the  culprit,  the  grateful  provin-
cials decreed  a  temple  to  Tiberius  in  conjunction  with  Livia
and  the  Senate  of  Rome.  This  example  was  about  to  be
followed  by  the  people  of  Further  Spain :  but  on  this  occa-
sion the  emperor  declined  the  honour ;  an  act  of  modesty  for
which  he  acquired  little  credit,  at  least  among  his  own  coun-
trymen, who  regarded  it  as  pusillanimous  and  mean.  The
best  of  mortals,  they  complacently  urged,  had  ever  aspired
to  the  highest  distinctions ;  thus  Hercules  and  Bacchus  among
the  Greeks,  and  Quirinus  among  the  Romans,  had  sought
and  gamed  a  place  among  the  gods  of  Olympus :  Augustus
had  lived  a  hero's  life  in  the  hopes  of  such  an  ap>otheosis.
Princes,  they  said,  may  command  the  present,  but  it  should
be  their  dearest  ambition  thus  to  take  pledges  for  the  future  ;
indifference  to  fame  is  in  fact  a  disregard  of  virtue?

At  the  extraordinary  elevation  to  which  he  had  now  ar-
rived, the  head  of  the  favourite  began  to  whirl,  and  to  his
Sejanusdc-  fevered  imagination  the  utmost  objects  of  his
rius  the°tJnde"  ambition  seemed  almost  within  reach.  Once  ad-
of  Liviiia.  mitted  within  the  pale  of  the  Csesarean  family,

there  would  be  no  distinction,  divine  or  human,  which  he
might  not  expect  to  fall  on  him.  The  last  and  most  arduous
step  yet  to  be  effected  by  his  own  happy  boldness,  was  to
secure  his  entrance  therein  by  marriage  with  the  widow  of
Drusus. If  he  had  any  hesitation  at  the  last  moment  in  tak-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  26.

2  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  38. :  "  Contcmptu  famae  contemni  virtutcs."

A.U.  778.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  18<7

ing  the  plunge  which  must  mar  his  fortunes,  if  it  failed  to
make  them,  the  instances  of  Livilla  herself,  the  partner  of
his  guilt  and  the  depositary  of  his  secret,  could  not  safely
be  disregarded  ;  the  impatience  of  the  woman  overcame  the
last  lingering  scruples  of  his  discretion.  Sejanus  composed
an  address  to  the  emperor;  for  Tiberius,  shy  and  ever  fearful
of  committing  himself,  had  now  adopted  the  custom,  most
foreign  to  the  free-spoken  habits  of  the  Roman  nobles,  of
requiring  every  suit  to  be  made  to  him  in  writing.  The  fa-
vour of  Augustus,  urged  the  suitor,  in  the  first  instance,  and
latterly  the  many  tokens  of  approbation  he  had  received  from
his  successor,  had  taught  him  ever  to  confide  his  wishes  to  the
ears  of  the  prince,  even  before  disclosing  them  to  the  immor-
tal gods.  For  splendid  honours  he  Jiad  never  sued ;  to  watch
and  toil  in  the  ranks  for  the  safety  of  his  imperator  was  his
privilege  and  pleasure.  Nevertheless  he  had  attained  the
fairest  of  all  distinctions,  in  being  associated  in  many  public
functions  with  the  Coesar  himself  T his  was  tlie  foundation
of  his  present  hopes.  Augustus,  he  had  heard,  in  seeking  to
establish  his  daughter,  had  deigned  to  review  the  order  of
Roman  knighthood.  Were  a  husband  now  required  for  Li-
villa, would  not  Tiberius  cast  his  eye  upon  a  friend,  one
pledged  to  be  content  with  the  glory  of  such  a  connection,  and
never  to  renounce  the  laborious  duties  already  laid  upon  him.
For  his  own  part,  he  should  be  amply  satisfied  roith  the  secu-
rity he  shoidd  thus  obtain  against  the  malice  of  Agrippina,
and  that  for  his  children's  sake,  not  for  his  own  /  for  him-
self it  was  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  to  have  lived  so
long  in  the  intimacy  of  a  prince  so  illustrious.

Tiberius,  on  receiving  this  application,  which  appears  to
have  been  wholly  unlooked  for,  penned  a  hasty  answer  at
the  moment,  in  which  he  praised  the  regard  Se-  ni8  guit  ^
janus  had  ever  shown  him  and  referred  slightly  Jecte<L
to  the  favours  with  which  he  had,  on  his  own  part,  requited
it.  He  desired,  he  said,  a  short  time  to  consider  the  matter
more  fully ;  and  finally  replied,  that,  while  other  men  were
permitted  to  look  solely  to  their  own  advantage,  princes  in  all

188  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  25.

affairs  of  moment  must  have  regard  to  the  opinion  of  the
world.  Accordingly,  he  continued,  he  would  not  resort  to
the  ansioer  ichich  lay  easiest  and  nearest  at  hand — namely,
that  it  was  for  Lavilla  herself  to  determine  whether,  after
Drusus,  she  woidd  wed  another,  or  continue  to  bear  her  ad-
verse fortune  under  the  roof  of  her  father-in-law  /  further,
that  she  had  a  mother  and  a  grandmother,  advisers  nearer
than  himself '/ — no,  he  woidd  act  more  straightforwardly,
and  represent  in  person  to  his  friend  the  objections  which
really  militated  against  his  suit.  The  passions  of  Agrip-
pina,  he  would  remind  him,  xoould  unquestionably  break  out
more  vehemently  than  ever,  if  the  marriage  of  Livilla  shoidd
sever  the  imperial  family  ;  the  rivalry  of  the  women  of  Cae-
sar's house  would  undermine  the  fortunes  of  his  children.
iSejanus,  he  added,  was  deceived  if  he  imagined  that  it  was
possible  for  him  to  remain  in  his  present  modest  rank.  Once
wedded  to  a  Cains  Ccesar,  and  again  to  a  Drusus,  his  new
wife  xoould  never  deign  to  end  her  career  in  alliance  with  a
simple  knight.  Could  the  emperor  himself  permit  it,  did  he
think  that  the  Roman  people  would  endure  it,  who  had  wit-
nessed her  brother,  her  father,  and  their  noble  ancestors  all
crowned  successively  with  the  highest  honours  of  the  state  f
Was  it  true  that  Augustus  had  for  a  moment  contemplated
the  union  of  his  daughter  icith  the  knight  Proculeius,  yet  to
whom  did  he  actually  espouse  her?— first,  to  the  illustrious
Agrippa,  and,  secondly,  to  Tiberius  himself,  to  the  man,  in,
short,  whom  he  had  destined  for  his  successor.  But  in  say-
ing this  the  emperor  felt  that  he  touched  on  delicate  ground.
Sejanus  was  too  useful  to  be  discarded,  too  formidable  to  be
driven  to  despair,  and  he  dared  not  directly  cut  off  from  him
even  the  audacious  hope  of  association  in  the  empire,  or  of
succession  to  it.  Accordingly  he  concluded  with  fair  words,
hinting  that  he  had  yet  more  important  confidences  in  store
for  the  friend  of  his  bosom,  and  that  no  distinction  was  in
fact  too  great  for  his  transcendent  merits,  when  the  proper
time  should  arrive  for  worthily  acknowledging  them.1

1  Tac.  Ann,  iv.  39,  40.

A.  I".  778.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  189

If  such  -was  the  language  Tiberius  really  held,  I  see  no
reason  to  doubt  its  sincerity.  It  was  his  habit  to  provide
for  present  exigencies  by  any  artifice  that  of-  Aiarm  and  re_
fered,  but  to  leave  the  more  distant  future  to  cir-  trigues'of  se-
curastances.  I  do  not  imagine  that  he  had  formed  ^anus-
at  this  period  any  deliberate  intention  of  thwarting  the  am-
bitious views  of  his  favourite,  or  had  destined  any  one  of  his
own  kindred  to  the  succession.  But  he  shrank  with  a  selfish
instinct  from  encouraging  in  any  quarter  hopes  which  might
get  beyond  his  control,  and  again,  he  was  alarmed  at  the
consequences  of  too  abruptly  quashing  them ;  so  that  be-
tween the  one  apprehension  and  the  other,  his  whole  study
was  to  keep  the  presumptions  of  those  around  him  in  a  state
of  perpetual  suspense.  This  was  the  Tiberian  scheme  of  pol-
icy. Let  those  who  describe  Tiberius  as  a  man  of  consum-
mate ability  and  penetrating  genius,  represent  it,  if  they  can,
as  something  eminently  deep  and  subtle :  to  me  it  seems  to
bear  the  impress  of  great  moral  infirmity,  while  its  execution
was  as  clumsy  as  its  conception  was  feeble.  It  may  be  ques-
tioned, however,  whether  this  occurrence,  the  account  of
which  I  have  taken,  with  all  other  historians,  from  Tacitus,
is  after  all  correctly  represented.  Sejanus,  we  are  given  to
understand,  was  too  well  versed  in  courts,  and  familiar  with
the  forms  of  an  official  refusal,  to  retain  after  receiving  this
answer  any  portion  of  his  hopes  :  he  regarded  it,  further,  as
the  token  of  a  settled  enmity  and  design  for  disgracing  him.
Yet  it  would  seem,  in  point  of  fact,  that  even  after  this  re-
buff he  was  not  forbidden  to  cherish  still  his  brilliant  antici-
pations, and  that  at  a  later  period  Livilla  was  suffered  to  en-
ter at  least  into  betrothal  with  him.1  Nor,  according  to  the
statements  of  Tacitus  himself,  did  he  exhibit  at  the  time  any
signs  of  despair. lie  proceeded  without  a  pause  to  repair

1  Dion  (lviii.  1.)  calls  her  afterwards  his  fieMdw/upog,  which  seems  to  im-
ply her  being  actually  betrothed ;  and  we  can  put  no  less  definite  meaning  cer-
tainly on  the  phrase  gener,  which  is  implied  to  him  in  the  fragment,  obscure
and  corrupt  it  is  true,  of  Tac.  Ann.  v.  G.  I  am  compelled  to  suspect  that  Tac-
itus has  sacrificed  the  truth  to  introduce  this  interesting  dramatic  interlude.

190  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  26.

the  broken  meshes  of  his  intrigues ;  and  while  he  postponed,
at  least  for  the  moment,  his  views  of  an  imperial  alliance,
he  revolved  new  plans  for  making  doubly  sure  the  impend-
ing ruin  of  his  rival  Agrippina.  But  he  was  anxious  to  re-
move the  emperor  from  the  constant  sight  of  the  pomp  with
which  he  continued  to  surround  himself,  of  the  crowds  that
haunted  his  levees,  and  proclaimed  aloud  that  he  was  the
real  fountain  of  all  imperial  favour :  on  the  one  hand  he
feared  the  jealousy  of  his  master ;  on  the  other,  it  was  hardly
less  dangerous  for  the  favourite  to  waive  the  importunate
admiration  of  sycophants  and  courtiers.  To  divert  the  one
and  yet  retain  the  other,  one  means  only  presented  itself,
namely,  to  induce  the  emperor  to  quit  the  arena  of  public
life,  and  bury  himself  in  a  distant  retreat,  whence  all  his
orders  would  pass  through  the  hands  of  the  minister.1  The
immediate  attendants  of  the  imperator  were  properly  his
centurions  and  tribunes;  these  were  the  sentinels  at  his
chamber-door,  the  companions  of  his  daily  exercises ;  by  their
hands  every  letter  to  the  consuls  or  senators  would  be  con-
veyed :  and  Sejanus,  as  captain  of  the  praetorians,  and  the
source  of  favour  and  promotion  among  them,  could  thus
keep  close  watch  upon  the  correspondence  of  his  chief,  as
soon  as  he  should  have  debarred  him  from  personal  inter-
course with  the  citizens.

The  repeated  excursions  Tiberius  had  now  made  from
Rome,  and  his  long  continued  cessations  from  the  irksome
Quarrel  be-  routine  of  residence  in  the  city,  had  confirmed
andAgHpi^nx  n^s  inclination  for  indolence  and  retirement ;
a  n.  26.  nor  was  there  any  difficulty  in  persuading  him
a.u.  779.  tjiat  jjjg  increasing  infirmities  demanded  re-
pose, after  so  many  years  of  labour.  But  before  he  betook
himself  to  the  retreat  he  had  perhaps  long  contemplated  for
his  old  age,  some  striking  scenes  of  anger  and  recrimination
occurred  between  him  and  Agrippina,  which  confirmed  and

1  Tac,  Ann.  iv.  41.:  "Sejanus  non  jam  de  matrimonio,  sed  altius  metuens
....  hue  flexit  ut  Tiberium  ad  vitam  procul  Roma  amcenis  locis  degendam
impelleret. Multa  quippe  providebat  .  .  .  ."

A.U.  779.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  191

exasperated  whatever  ill  feelings  subsisted  between  them.
Among  the  attacks  and  insidts  which  were  hazarded  against
the  wretched  princess  by  the  suitors  for  the  favour  of  Sejanus,
was  the  prosecution  of  her  cousin  Claudia  Pulchra  by  a  noble
delator,  on  a  charge  of  adultery  combined  with  majesty.1  It
was  affirmed  that  she  had  sought  to  employ  poison  against
the  emperor's  life,  as  well  as  the  more  subtle  influence  of
charms  and  incantations.  When  the  trial  came  on,  Agrip-
pina  rushed  into  the  emperor's  presence,  at  a  moment  when
he  was  in  the  act  of  sacrificing  to  his  father's  divinity.
Should  the  same  man,  she  exclaimed,  offer  victims  to  Augus-
tus, and  also  persecute  his  children?  To  this  blunt  address
she  added  a  shower  of  invectives  against  him,  together  with
vehement  protestations  of  her  kinswoman's  innocence.  For-
getting for  once,  under  this  unexpected  attack,  the  pertina-
cious reserve  in  which  he  was  wont  to  wrap  himself,  Tiberius
at  last  broke  silence  with  a  Greek  quotation,  implying,  Must
I  be  denounced  as  a  tyrant  because  you  are  not  a  queen  f  *
Rebuffed  by  this  cold  sarcasm,  Agrippina  retired  hastily  to
her  chamber,  and  flung  herself  on  her  couch,  where  rage  and
mortification,  combined  with  the  news  of  Claudia's  condem-
nation, threw  her  into  a  dangerous  fever.  When  Tiberius
visited  her  sick-room,  the  poor  creature's  spirit  was  so  much
broken,  that  she  burst  into  tears,  and  implored  him  to  take
pity  on  her  solitary  state  by  giving  her  a  husband  to  support
and  defend  her.  She  was  still  young,  she  said,  and  might
become  again  a  mother,  and  brought  up  in  all  the  dignity  of
Roman  matronhood,  she  could  find  no  solace  except  in  a
lawful  husband. There  were  many  nobles,  she  remarked,

1  Lipsius  cannot  trace  the  origin  of  this  Claudia,  or  her  affinity  with  Agrip-
pina. She  is  called  her  sobrina,  i.  e.  cousin  by  the  mother's  side ;  and  from
ner  name  I  conceive  that  she  was  descended  from  the  Claudia,  daughter  of  P.
Clodius  Pulcher,  to  whom  Augustus  was  originally  affianced,  and  whose  hus-
band is  not  known.  Her  only  real  connexion  with  the  imperial  family  lay  in
the  union  of  her  son  Quintilius  Varus  with  a  daughter  of  Agrippina  and  Ger-
manicus.

a  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  52.:  "  Correptamque  Grajco  vcrsu  admonuit:  non  ideo
laedi  quia  non  regnaret."

192  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  26.

Avho  would  proudly  assume  the  right  of  protecting  the  widow
and  children  of  Germanicus.  Tiberius,  thus  abruptly  solicit-
ed on  a  point  which  deeply  concerned  his  policy,  might  have
replied  in  nearly  the  same  terms  as  those  he  had  addressed
to  Sejanus  :  his  duty  to  the  state,  as  Tacitus  himself  allows,
would  not  suffer  him  to  countenance  a  request  which  must
issue  in  fresh  jealousies  and  enmities  between  the  members
of  the  imperial  family.  But  he  did  not  choose  to  reveal  to
an  impatient  woman  the  apprehensions  to  which  the  accom-
plishment of  her  wishes  would  subject  him,  or  make  the
humiliating  confession  that  he  coidd  not  venture  in  all  respects
to  follow  the  exalted  policy  of  Augustus :  lest  he  should
give  an  opening  for  inconvenient  discussion,  he  left  her,  in
his  awkward  way,  without  speaking  a  word.  The  scene
which  thus  passed  in  the  recesses  of  the  palace  was  not
generally  disclosed,  but  was  recorded  in  her  private  memoirs
by  the  daughter  of  Agrippina  herself,  a  personage  of  whom
I  shall  have  much  to  relate  hereafter.1

In  the  height  of  her  distress,  and  when  the  vexations  of

her  position  had  thrown  her  more  than  ever  off  her  guard,

Sejanus  contrived  to  instil  fresh  and  yet  more

against  Tibe- shocking  suspicions  into  the  mind  of  the  unfortu-

rius  instilled  /,.,  , ,  ,  .

into  the  mind  nate  princess,  which  served  only  to  complete  the
disgust  and  alienation  of  Tiberius.  The  minister's
creatures  ventured,  under  the  guise  of  friendly  care  for  her,
to  insinuate  that  her  uncle  was  seeking  an  opportunity  of
poisoning  her,  and  enjoined  her  to  avoid  partaking  of  food  at
his  table.  The  widow  of  Germanicus  was  residing  under  the
roof  of  the  head  of  the  Cesarean  family  :  there  was  no
separate  establishments  for  princes  or  princesses  of  the  blood

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  53. :  "  Quae  Neronis  principis  mater  vitam  suam  et  casus
suorum  posteris  memoravit."  It  is  natural  to  surmise  that  the  revelations  of
the  palace  which  our  historians  relate,  are  derived  in  a  great  measure  from
these  family  memoirs,  and  it  is  impossible  to  overlook  the  probability  that  the
conduct  both  of  Tiberius  and  Sejanus  would  be  seriously  misrepresented  by  an
hereditary  enemy  to  both.  At  a  later  period  I  shall  have  occasion  to  show
more  particularly  how  another  history  appears  to  have  been  vitiated  by  the
same  writer's  unscrupulous  malice.

A.U.  779.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  193

imperial ;  but  it  was  only  on  special  occasions,  perhaps,  that
the  emperor  invited  the  females  of  his  house  to  sup  in  com-
pany with  him.  Agrippina  had  neither  the  temper  nor  the
art  to  dissemble.  Reclining  by  the  side  of  her  host,  she
rejected  every  dish  presented  to  her  with  cold  and  impassive
mien,  and  without  excuse  or  observation.  Tiberius  could
not  fail  to  remark  her  behaviour,  nor  to  guess  its  motive.
To  assure  himself,  he  offered  her  some  apples  with  his  own
hand,  recommending  their  flavour  ;  but  she,  all  the  more
confirmed  in  her  suspicions,  handed  them  untasted  to  the
attendants.  Hereupon  Tiberius  turned  to  his  mother  on  the
other  side,  and  muttered  that  none  could  wonder  at  any
show  of  harshness  in  his  conduct  towards  one  who  scrupled
not  to  intimate  her  apprehensions  of  his  intent  to  poison
her.  The  incident  was  speedily  noised  abroad,  and  the
rumor  prevailed  that  he  was  actually  meditating  her  destruc-
tion, and,  not  daring  to  effect  it  by  public  process  before  the
face  of  the  citizens,  was  contriving  secret  means  of  assassi-
nation.1

Informed  by  his  spies  of  the  whispers  thus  circulating
among  his  subjects,  Tiberius  was  annoyed,  if  not  seriously
alarmed. He  tried  to  give  another  current  to

, .  ,  ii«ii«  •  Eleven  cities

men's  thoughts,  and  directed  their  attention  to of  Asiacon-

. ,  «  . -  -iii  ■.  . „ ten(i  f°r  the

the  curious  rivalry  now  presented  by  eleven  chief  honour  of  mak-
communities  of  the  province  of  Asia,  each  of  their  tutelar  di-
which  sought  to  approve  itself  the  worthiest
claimant  for  the  honour  of  erecting  a  temjde  to  Rome  and
her  glorious  imperator.  The  pretensions  they  severally  ad-
vanced were  all  nearly  similar,  appealing  to  the  splendour
of  their  mythological  origin,  as  founded  by  some  Jove-
descended  hero,  to  their  connexion  with  Troy,  the  reputed
parent  of  Rome  herself,  or  to  their  well-attested  fidelity  to
their  conquerors.  The  claims  of  Hypaepe,  Tralles,  Laodicea,
Magnesia,  Pergamus,  Ephesus,  Sardis,  and  others,  were  heard
successively  ; but  all  were  finally postponed  to  those  of

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  54.
vol.  v. — 13

194  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  26.

Smyrna,  whose  people  had  crowned  their  merits  towards  the
Republic  by  stripping  the  raiment  from  their  own  backs  to
supply  the  necessities  of  Sulla's  army.  Tiberius  attended  in
the  senate  throughout  these  discussions,  which  were  pro-
tracted for  several  days,  and  showed  himself  more  busy  and
active  in  public  matters  than  had  been  usual  with  him  for
some  time  past.1  Nevertheless,  he  had  been  long  meditating
a  final  retirement  from  Rome  ;  and  the  increasing  suspicions
and  even  offensive  remarks  of  the  citizens  tended  no  doubt
to  ripen  this  resolution.  Five  years  before  he  had  allowed
himself  to  be  absent  for  a  whole  twelvemonth  in  Campania :
he  now  sought  the  same  retreat  once  more  ;  but  this  time  he
probably  determined  in  his  own  mind  never  again  to  return.
The  motives  of  this  determination  were  variously  assigned
by  the  ancients,  and  it  is  probable  that  more  than  one  com-
bined to  produce  a  resolution  so  important. We

Tiberius  medi-

tatcs  retiring  may  believe  that  it  was  at  least  partly  owing  to
the  influence  of  Sejanus,  who  desired,  as  has  been
before  observed,  to  withdraw  his  jealous  master  from  the
daily  sight  of  his  favourite's  undue  pre-eminence.  It  is  pos-
sible also  that  Tiberius  may  have  been  anxious  to  escape
from  the  dominion  his  mother  still  continued  to  exercise  over
him  ;  for  he  was  conscious  that  he  owed  the  empire  to  her
influence  over  Augustus,  or  so  at  least  she  was  herself  firmly
persuaded,  and  never  alloAved  him  to  forget  it.  It  seems
probable,  however,  that  he  was  thus  driven  into  solitude  by
the  infirmity  of  his  own  temper ;  by  his  dislike  of  the  show
and  trappings  of  public  life;  by  the  shyness  which  was
natural  to  him,  and  which  had  been  undoubtedly  increased
to  a  morbid  degree  by  the  long  and  painful  solitude  of  his
banishment  at  Rhodes.  As  he  grew  older  he  seemed  more
to  lose  his  presence  of  mind  in  public ;  and  if  sometimes  a
senator  broke  out  into  invectives  against  him,  or  assailed
him  with  unseasonable  questions,  he  became  confused  and

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  55,  56.  That  the  temple  was  to  be  specially  dedicated  to
Tiberius,  though  not  mentioned  in  this  place,  appears  by  comparing  it  with  cc.
15.  37.

A.U.  779.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  195

agitated.  His  temper  was  exasperated  by  the  imputations
made  or  insinuated  against  him,  and  the  charge  of  severity
in  his  judgment  on  criminals  piqued  him  to  actual  ferocity,
which  afterwards  all  the  more  distressed  and  alarmed  him.1
For  this  retirement  he  had  been,  as  we  have  seen,  a  long
time  preparing,  and  the  motives  which  now  impelled  him  to
it  were,  we  may  suppose,  the  same  which  had  long  been
familiar  to  his  thoughts,  to  which  increasing  years  had
given  strength  and  poignancy.  The  bitterest  of  Motivesas.
his  enemies,  however,  declared  that  he  had  no  cribed  t0  bim-
other  wish  than  to  exercise  in  secret  the  cruelty  and  atrocious
lewdness  to  which,  they  asserted,  he  was  utterly  abandoned ;
or  that  he  was  ashamed  of  exhibiting  to  the  public  gaze  the
ungraceful  leanness  of  his  bent  and  shrivelled  figure,  the
baldness  of  his  forehead,  and  a  face  deformed  by  spots  and
pimples,  or  the  patches  with  which  he  concealed  them.a
We  have  already  seen  reason  for  questioning  the  habitual
intemperance  and  dissoluteness  of  Tiberius,  to  which  such
disfigurements  as  these  were  popularly  imputed ;  but  the
prejudice  against  him  was  deeply  rooted  in  the  minds  of  the
Romans,  and  was  confirmed  by  repeated  stories  of  the  black-
est colour,  and  the  disgust  at  the  horrid  monster  expressed,
it  was  said,  by  every  woman  to  whom  he  made  his  loathsome
advances.

The  immediate  pretext  for  quitting  Rome  was  the  object
of  dedicating  temples  recently  erected  to  Jupiter  at  Capua,
and  to  Augustus  at  Nola,  the  spot  from  whence  TiberiU8  its
the  late  emperor  had  ascended  into  the  heavens.3  Eome-
It  was  in  the  year  779  that  Tiberius  slunk,  as  it  were,  out  of
the  city,  with  only  a  single  senator,  named  Cocceius  Nerva,
in  attendance  upon  him,  nor,  besides  Sejanus  himself,  more

1  Compare  particularly  the  story  in  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  42. :  "Caesar  objectam
sibi  adversus  reos  inclementiam  eo  pervicacius  amplexus."

2  Tac.  A7in.  iv.  57.:  "Erant  qui  crederent  in  sencctute  corporis  quoque
habitum  pudori  fuisse."  He  was  now  (a.  u.  77(J)  in  bis  sixty-seventh  year.
"Traditur  ctiarn  matris  impotentia  extrusum."

3  Suet.  Tib.  45.

196  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  26.

than  one  knight.1  The  rest  of  his  retinue  was  composed  of
a  few  men  of  learning,  chiefly  Greeks,  and  some  of  them,  no
doubt,  astrologers.  The  departure  of  the  chief  of  the  state
from  the  centre  of  government,  except  to  command  armies
abroad,  or  during  the  recess  of  business  allowed  in  the  sum-
mer heats,  had  been  so  unusual,  that,  while  the  emperor's
real  intentions  were  still  confined  to  his  own  bosom,  the
vulgar  were  busy  in  conjecturing  the  result,  and  the  search-
ers of  the  heavens,  ever  faithful  interpreters  of  the  popular
instinct,  whispered  that  their  art  revealed  to  them  that  he
was  destined  never  to  return.  It  was  dangerous  to  give
publicity  to  such  surmises,  which  the  sanguine  and  impa-
tient shaped  readily  into  the  assurance  that  his  death  was  at
hand,  and  so  brought  many  into  trouble  on  the  charge  of
anticipating  the  prince's  decease.5  The  conjecture,  indeed,
proved  literally  correct,  though  not  in  the  way  that  was
anticipated.  Tiberius  never  again  entered  Rome :  but  no
man,  says  Tacitus,  could  have  imagined  that  a  Roman  would
voluntarily  abandon  his  country  for  a  period  of  eleven  years.
Harsh,  indeed,  and  unreal  the  historian's  phrase  may  ap-
pear to  our  notions,  to  abandon  one's  country,  or,  more
__  AJLt  „ strongly  still,  to  exist  without  a  country,  thus

What  the  Ro-  .  °  J  \  .  .  ■* '

mans  meant  by applied  to  a  citizen  quitting  the  walls  of  Rome  to

"  patria  carere,"  .,.  71

abandoning reside  in  a  suburban  retreat  on  the  coast  of  Cam-
one's  country.  . B ._ _  . .  .

pama.  Doubtless  we  may  trace  in  it  something  of
an  affection  of  antique  sentiment,  from  which  Tacitus  is  by
means  always  exempt,  not  strictly  in  accordance  with  the
genuine  feelings  of  the  time.  We  have  seen,  indeed,  how
deeply  Cicero  was  moved  at  the  thought  of  quitting  the
neighbourhood  of  his  beloved  city.  His  sensibility  was  more
acute  than  other  men's,  but  it  only  pointed  in  the  same  direc-
tion as  theirs. The  levity  of  Milo  on  the  occasion  of  his  ban-

1  Tac.  1.  c.

-  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  58.:  "Ferebant  periti  coelestium,  iis  motibus  siderum  ex-
cessisse  Roma  Tiberium  ut  reditus  illi  negaretur ;  unde  exitii  causa  multis  fuit,
properum  finem  vitae  conjectantibus  vulgantibusque."

3  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  58. :  "  Ut  libens  patria  careret."

A.TJ.  779.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  19y

ishment  caused,  perhaps,  some  revulsion  in  the  sympathy  of
his  party  with  him. Even  in  the  camp  of  Pompeius  the  fu-
gitive patriots  could  scarcely  retain  their  assurance  that  they
were  still  genuine  Romans.1 But  we  have  seen  how  desper-
ate was  Cicero's  affliction  at  being  exiled  beyond  the  seas;
how  loath  lie  was  to  follow  the  self-expatriated  consuls ;  how
anxious  at  the  first  moment  to  make  his  peace  with  the  con-
queror and  return ;  how,  in  the  last  crisis  of  his  fortunes,  the
imminent  perils  of  his  post  at  Rome  could  not  induce  him
finally  to  desert  it. Cicero  would  have  been  hardly  less  un-
happy in  a  Campanian  retirement  than  in  Greece  or  Macedo-
nia, if  doomed  irrevocably  to  sojourn  among  its  foreign  as-
sociations ;  for  in  this  respect  the  change  from  Rome  to  Na-
ples was  hardly  less  complete  than  that  to  Rhodes  or  Athens.
The  Greek  cities  of  Campania  were,  as  we  have  seen  before,
in  almost  every  particular,  accurate  and  vivid  copies  of  those
beyond  the  sea  :  their  foreign  manners  and  habits,  attractive
as  they  were  to  the  world-worn  seeker  for  amusement  and
relaxation,  were  reputed  by  every  true  Roman  altogether  un-
worthy of  his  constant  adoption. Rome  was  the  proper
sphere  of  his  business  and  duty,  the  shrine  of  the  gods,  the
sacred  soil  of  the  auspices,  the  tribunal  of  the  laws,  the  sta-
tive  camp  of  the  warrior  nation. There  the  Roman  girded
himself  for  the  work  of  his  great  moral  mission,  to  spare  the
subject,  but  beat  down  the  proud  ;  elsewhere  he  might  loose
his  robes  and  put  off  his  sandals,  and  indulge  in  recreations,
which  his  conscience,  strictly  questioned,  could  scarcely  dis-
tinguish from  vices.2 To  play  the Greek,  for  which  his  vo-
cabulary furnished  him  with  a  short  expressive  term,  was  in

1  The  arguments  of  Lucan  against  this  sentiment  are  not  uninstructive.
Pharsal.  v.  26. :  "  Rerum  nos  summa  sequetur

Imperiumque  comes  ....  non  unquam  perdidit  ordo

Mutato  sua  jura  solo  ....

Ordine  de  tanto  quisquis  non  exsulat,  hie  est."
'  Thus  Ca;sar  was  reproached  as  "puer  male  pnecinctus." The  loose  trail-
ing of  his  toga  in  the  forum  was  objected  to  Maecenas. Such  a  want  of  eti-
quette was  reputed  a  token  of  dissoluteness  of  morals. Suet.  Ner.  51. :  "  Adeo

193  HISTORr  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  26.

his  view  pleasant  but  wrong : *  it  might  be  excused  in  the
overwrought  statesman,  in  the  exhausted  soldier,  in  the  mere
thoughtless  youth  ;  but  only  as  an  exception  to  the  common
rule  of  life  and  conduct,  as  a  rare  holiday  breaking  the  stern
routine  of  daily  practice,  to  which  his  birth  and  breeding  de-
voted him.  The  Roman  must  live  and  die  in  harness.  An
Atticus  renounced  with  the  forms  and  duties  of  Roman  life
most  of  the  rights  and  privileges  of  a  Roman  citizen.  As
an  Athenian  burgher  he  forfeited  the  franchise  of  the  con-
quering state ;  and  the  exemption  he  enjoyed  from  the  ca-
lamities of  the  civil  war  was,  in  another  view,  the  penalty  he
paid  for  the  loss  of  the  name  of  Roman.  But  assuredly  such
were  not  the  sentiments  of  the  citizens  of  the  age  of  Tiberius,
still  less  those  of  a  century  later.  Life  at  Rome,  while  it
still  retained  most  of  the  outward  forms  of  antiquity,  the
harsh  restrictions  upon  freedom  of  action  and  conversation
which  had  been  endured  by  the  Scipios  and  Catos,  had  lost
the  charms  of  political  independence,  for  which  alone  they
had  been  content  to  endure  them.  The  Roman  noble  now
chafed  at  the  stiff  etiquette  of  his  ancestors  ;  he  shrank  from
the  importunate  observation  of  his  clients  ;  he  loathed  the
obeisances  of  his  subjects,  conscious  that  he  deserved  them
neither  by  personal  merits,  nor  substantial  power ;  he  rejoic-
ed to  escape  from  a  multitude  of  jealous  critics  to  companions
who  had  no  claim  to  watch  or  control  him,  who  considered
his  countenance  as  a  favour,  and  never  paused  to  reflect

pudendus  ut  .  .  .  .  prodierit  in  publicum  sine  cinctu  et  discalceatus."  Hor.
Sat.  ii.  1.  71.:

"  Quin  ubi  se  a  vulgo  et  scena  in  secreta  remorant
Virtus  Scipiadae  et  mitis  sapientia  Laeli,
Nugari  cum  illo  et  discincti  ludere,  donee
Decoqueretur  olus,  soliti."

1  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  2.  11. :  "  Si  quem  Romana  fatigat

Militia  assuetum  Graecari."

Hence  also  "graecatus,"  "  grcecanicus,"  applied  to  the  manners  of  Romans  imi-
tated from  the  Greek.  "  Gnecanicus  miles,"  a  dissolute  or  luxurious  soldier.
See  Facciolati  in  voc.

A.U.  779.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  199

whether  it  was  unworthy  in  him  to  give,  or  in  themselves  to
accept  it.  Still  the  actual  abandonment  of  the  prescriptive
post  of  duty  was  rare  and  remarkable.  It  was  affirmed,  for
instance,  of  Lucius  Piso,  one  of  the  chief  magnates  of  the
Tiberian  senate,  that  in  his  disgust  at  the  proceedings  of  the
delators,  he  had  expressed  among  his  compeers,  a  determina-
tion to  withdraw  from  the  city,  and  therewith  from  public
life  altogether.  It  had  been  well  for  him  had  he  actually
executed  this  threat :  he  had  the  courage  to  bring  the  favour-
ite of  the  empress  to  justice,  but  not  to  quit  the  scene  of  his
dangerous  activity,  and  only  avoided  by  the  opportuneness
of  his  death  the  penalty  of  charges  of  which  he  was  speedily
convicted.1

The  retirement  of  Tiberius  himself  from  the  public  stage
was  however  in  no  respect  a  real  relinquishment  of  public
occupation. No  one supposed that  he  would

1  . .  Tiberius  noes

cease  thereupon  from  retaining  the  supreme  over- not  abandon

1  °  *  . public  affairs.

sight  of  the  affairs  ot  the  commonwealth ;  nor,  in
the  existing  state  of  political  usage,  was  there  any  real  im-
pediment to  his  ruling  the  empire  from  his  quiet  retreat.  The
undefined  character  of  the  supreme  authority  had  this  ad-
vantage for  its  possessor,  that  it  bound  him  to  no  stated
functions,  requiring  his  presence  at  certain  times,  at  certain
places.  The  consul  must  take  the  auspices,  and  these  could
be  taken  only  at  Rome  ;  a  dictator  must  perform  the  rites  of
the  Latin  Ferise  on  the  Alban  hill ;  a  tribune  must  not  absent
himself  from  the  city  during  the  period  of  his  office :  but
none  of  these  restrictions  applied  to  one  who  retained  the
power  of  all  these  officers,  but  was  exempt  from  their  re-
strictions. Even  though  in  theory  the  safety  of  the  state
might  be  regarded  as  entwined  with  the  performance  of  cer-
tain religious  ceremonies  by  the  chief  pontiff,  yet  from  the
time  at  least  of  Julius  Caesar,  the  presence  of  that  august

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  34. :  "  Inter  quae  L.  Fiso  ambitum  fori,  SEevitiam  oratorum
accusationes  rninitantium,  incrcpans  abire  se  ct  ccdere  Urbe,  victurum  in  aliquo
abdito  ct  kmginquo  rure  tcstabatur."  Comp.  iv.  21.  This  was  not  the  L.  Piso,
prefect  of  the  city.

200  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  27.

official  had  been  for  many  years  dispensed  with,  and  there
was  nothing  new  at  least  in  Tiberius  delegating  to  others,  or
altogether  omitting,  duties  which  his  imperial  predecessors,
and  Lepidus  in  his  retreat  at  Circeii,  had  been  permitted  to
waive.  Nevertheless  this  act  was  not  without  grave  signifi-
cance. Whenever  Augustus  had  withdrawn  from  the  heart
of  the  empire,  it  was  only  to  impart  fresh  vigour  to  the  ac-
tion of  its  extremities  :  never  for  a  moment  had  he  resigned
his  ostensible  place  as  the  prime  mover  of  the  whole  machine,
or  let  his  subjects  imagine  that  the  wheels  of  government
could  continue  to  revolve  by  the  mere  impulse  once  com-
municated to  them.  The  retreat  to  Campania  was  thus  a
great  step  in  the  development  of  despotism,  the  greatest  step
perhaps  of  all,  inasmuch  as  it  made  it  at  once  apparent  that
the  institution  of  monarchy  was  an  accomplished  fact,  and
no  longer  the  creature  of  variable  popular  caprice.

The  retirement  of  Tiberius  did  not  fail,  however,  to  be

followed  by  a  succession  of  public  calamities,  and  these  were

generally  ascribed  to  so  strange  and  inauspicious

Disastrous  oc- "  "  .  °  *■

currencesas- a  proceeding. A  private  speculator  had  under-

cribed  to  the  *l  °  "»«/.•,

retirement  of taken,  as  a  matter  01  profit,  one  of  the  magnificent

Tiberius.

works  which  in  better  times  it  was  the  privilege
of  the  chief  magistrates  or  candidates  for  the  highest  offices
to  construct  for  the  sake  of  glory  or  influence.  In  erecting  a
vast  wooden  amphitheatre  in  the  suburban  city  of  Fidenae,
he  had  omitted  the  necessary  precaution  of  securing  a  solid
foundation ;  and  when  the  populace  of  Rome,  unaccustomed,
from  the  parsimony  of  Tiberius,  to  their  favourite  spectacles
at  home,  were  invited  to  the  diversions  of  the  opening  day,

which  they  attended  in  immense  numbers,  the

Fall  of  the  am-  •  J

phitheatre  at  mighty  mass  gave  way  under  the  pressure,  and
covered  them  in  its  ruins.  Fifty  thousand  per-
sons, or  according  to  a  lower  computation  not  less  than
twenty  thousand,  men  and  women  of  all  ranks,  were  killed
or  injured  by  this  catastrophe,  which  called  forth  an  edict
from  the  senate,  forbidding  any  one  henceforth  to  exhibit  a
gladiatorial  show,  unless  his  means  were  independent  and

A.U.  780.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  201

ample,  while  the  rash  projector  was  driven  into  exile ;  a  mild
punishment,  perhaps,  if  it  was  right  to  punish  him  at  all.
The  care  and  attention  lavished  on  the  sufferers  by  the
wealthiest  people  at  Rome,  the  spontaneous  offering  of  med-
ical care  and  attendance,  served  at  least  to  remind  the  citi-
zens of  the  best  days  of  the  republic,  in  seasons  of  public
calamity.  But  this  sorrow  had  not  been  forgotten  when  it
was  redoubled  by  the  disaster  of  a  srreat  fire,

J  °  Conflagration

which  ravaged  the  whole  of  the  Cielian  hill  and  on  the  CeUan
a  considerable  area  of  the  city  besides,  occupied
with  dwellings  of  every  class.  This  catastrophe,  however,
gave  Tiberius  occasion  to  exhibit  a  munificence  and  consid-
eration for  his  people,  for  which  he  had  not  yet  acquired
credit.1  The  senate  decreed  that  the  hill  should  henceforth
bear  the  name  of  Augustus,  in  memory  of  this  imperial  lib-
erality, and  more  particularly  because,  in  the  midst  of  the
general  destruction,  an  image  of  the  emperor,  it  was  report-
ed, had  alone  been  left  standing  and  unscathed.  A  similar
prodigy  had  occurred  in  the  case  of  another  personage  of  the
imperial  house,  the  famous  Claudia  Quinta,  whose  effigy  had
twice  escaped  the  flames,  and  been  placed  thereupon  as  a
sacred  relic  in  the  temple  of  the  Mother  of  the  gods.2

But  to  more  intelligent  observers  these  calamities  were
far  less  alarming  than  the  steady  advance  of  the  toils  which
were  gradually  surrounding  the  family  of  Ger-  progress  of  de_
manicus.  Though  the  charges  urged  against  its  lation-
members  were  managed  by  private  delators,  none  could  doubt
that  Sejanus  himself  was  the  mover  of  the  horrid  conspiracy.
The  first  approaches  against  this  illustrious  house  were  made
cautiously  from  a  distance  ;  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  sap
the  outworks  of  the  family  in  the  persons  of  its  remoter  con-
nexions, before  assailing  the  citadal,  and  attacking  the  mother
of  the  princes  and  the  princes  themselves.  Domitius  Afer,
the  same  who  had  prosecuted  Claudia  Pulchra  to  condemna-

1  VelHus,  ii.  130.

5  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  62-64. It  is  hardly  necessary  to  observe  that  the  new  name
of  the  Calian  soon  fell  into  disuse.

202  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  27.

tion,  proceeded  to  advance  charges  of  treason  or  licentious-
ness against  her  son,  Quintilius  Varus,  the  husband  of  one
of  the  daughters  of  Germanicus.1  In  this  odious  prosecution
he  was  joined  by  Dolabella,  a  kinsman  of  the  unfortunate
youth.  The  conduct  of  the  first  caused  at  least  no  surprise,
for  he  was  poor  and  delation  was  his  trade  :  but  Dolabella
had  no  such  excuse  ;  and  when  he,  highborn  and  wealthy  as
he  was,  stood  forward  to  shed  noble  blood,  the  same  which
flowed  in  his  own  veins,  the  citizens  were  astonished  and  in-
dignant. For  once  the  senators  ventured  to  stem  the  tor-
rent  of  delation,  which  Sejanus  was  evidently  directing  to
his  OAvn  guilty  purposes.  They  resolved  before  pronouncing
sentence  to  await  the  decision  of  the  emperor  himself.3  Such
was  the  state  of  affairs,  under  the  sway  of  the  favourite  and
his  creatures,  that  Tiberius  was  regarded  as  the  last  hope  and
refuge  of  the  oppressed.  Possibly,  for  we  hear  no  more  of
the  result,  his  interference  saved  the  victim  on  this  occasion.
Nevertheless  the  power  of  Sejanus,  whatever  shock  his  re-
cent rebuff  may  have  given  it,  was  now  completely  re-estab-
lished. A  fortunate  accident  had  enabled  him  to  prove  his
devotion  to  the  emperor  by  saving  his  life  at  the  risk  of  his
own.  In  the  course  of  an  entertainment  which  Tiberius  had
held  in  the  cool  recess  of  a  grotto  in  Campania,  the  roof  of
the  cavern  had  suddenly  given  way,  and  covered  the  tables
and  the  guests  themselves.  Sejanus,  in  the  midst  of  the
confusion,  had  thrown  himself  across  the  prostrate  body  of
his  master,  and  bending  in  the  form  of  an  arch,  with  a  great
exertion  of  his  herculean  strength,  had  shielded  him  from  the
falling  fragments.3  This  act  of  courage  had  made  a  great
impression  on  Tiberius,  and  seemed  at  least  to  have  obliter-
ated the  unfavourable  feelings  which  the  late  affair  between

1  This  Quintilius  Varus  was  the  son  by  Claudia  Pulchra  of  the  Varus  who
perished  in  Germany.  His  marriage  to  a  daughter  of  Agrippina,  whose  name
is  not  known,  is  mentioned  by  M.  Seneca,  Controv.  i.  1.  3.  It  is  strange  that
Tacitus  should  have  omitted  to  mention  this  connexion ;  but  we  have  seen  that
he  was  not  well  informed  as  to  the  position  of  Claudia.

a  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  66.  2  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  59. ;  Suet.  T%.  39.

A.U.  780.]  UNDER  TIIE  EMPIRE.  203

them  misdit  have  excited. The  minister,  to  whom

0  Renewed  fa-

a  double  share  of  the  cares  of  government  were vourof  Seja-

nus.

now  confided,  could  easily  persuade  the  senators
that  his  influence  with  his  master  was  quite  unbounded,  and
that  no  cloud  had  ever  passed  over  the  sunshine  in  which  he
basked.  He  set  spies  to  watch  every  word  and  movement
of  Nero,  the  eldest  child  of  Agrippina,  and  suborned  the
wife  and  brother  of  the  luckless  youth  to  urge  him  to  indis-
cretions, and  aggravate  them  by  misrepresentation.  Such,
however,  were  the  young  prince's  admirable  sense  and  con-
duct that  no  handle  could  be  found  for  framing  an  accusation
against  him ;  while  the  rash  and  thoughtless  Drusus  too
often  laid  himself  open  to  the  machinations  of  the  common
enemy  of  their  family.1

Having  performed  the  dedication  of  the  temples  in  Cam-
pania, which  had  furnished  the  immediate  pretext  for  his  re-
moval from Rome,  Tiberius,  in the year  780,

i.  -vr i •  o  Tiberius  re-

crossed  the  bay  of  In  aples  in  quest  of  the  spot tires  to  the  isi-

•  • i i -i-ii  t -i • -in i  • r> i  and  °f  Capreie.

which  he  had  already  destined  ior  his  final  re-
treat.2 In  vain  had  he  issued  orders,  while  traversing  the
dense  populations  of  the  continent,  that  no  man  should  pre-
sume to  disturb  his  sullen  meditations,  and  had  even  lined
his  route  with  soldiers  to  keep  his  importunate  admirers  at  a
distance.  The  concourse  of  idle  and  gaping  multitudes
whom  his  arrival  brought  everywhere  together  became  more
and  more  odious  to  him,  and  the  sullenness  with  which  he
spurned  observation  gave  colour  to  the  notion  that  he
shunned  exhibiting  to  strangers  the  deformity  of  a  diseased
and  bloated  countenance.  He  hastened  to  bury  himself  in
the  pleasant  solitudes  of  the  little  island  of  Caprese.  While
yet  in  the  maturity  of  his  powers  Augustus  had  been  at-
tracted by  the  charms  of  this  sequestered  retreat ;  he  had
been  struck  particularly  with  the  omen  of  a  blighted  ilex
reviving  here  during  a  visit  he  paid  to  the  spot.  Its  genial
climate,  he  conceived,  might  conduce  to  the  maintenance  of

1  Tac.  Asm.  iv.  60.  3  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  67.

204  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  27.

his  own  health  in  more  advanced  age,  and  with  this  view  he
obtained  the  cession  of  it  from  the  Neapolitans,  to  whose
city  it  belonged,  in  exchange  for  the  more  important  nor,  as
Description  of  rePuted,  less  salubrious  island  of  iEnaria.1  Ca-
Capre».  preaB  at  this  time  indeed  was  little  better  than  a

barren  rock,  the  resort  of  wild  goats,  from  which  it  derived
its  name,  about  eleven  miles  in  circuit :  but  it  lay  within  two
hours'  row  of  Misenum,  the  great  naval  station  of  the  Lower
Sea.  Easily  accessible  from  the  mainland  at  one  point,
which  it  required  little  vigilance  to  secure,  the  island  is  sin-
gularly difficult  of  approach  at  every  other.  Its  shores  con-
sist of  limestone  cliffs,  sheer  precipices  in  most  parts  plung-
ing directly  into  the  deep  sea.  They  are  furrowed  here  and
there  by  those  caverns  celebrated  for  the  play  of  coloured
light  in  their  recesses,  which,  after  having  amused  and  aston-
ished the  curious  of  our  time  as  recent  discoveries,  are  now
ascertained  to  have  been  the  forgotten  haunts  of  Roman  lux-
ury. In  the  interior,  an  uneven  but  cultivable  surface  rises
at  either  end  of  the  island  to  the  height  of  one  thousand  and
two  thousand  feet  respectively;  the  eastern  or  lower  pro-
montory having  been,  according  to  tradition,  the  favourite
sojourn  of  Tiberius,  and  its  dizzy  cliff  the  scene  of  his  savage
executions.  We  have  before  noticed  the  channel,  six  miles
wide,  which  separated  it  from  the  coast  of  Campania,  whence
it  seems  to  have  been  divorced  by  a  convulsion  of  nature,
and  the  two  famous  sea-marks  which  faced  each  other  on
opposing  summits,  the  pharos  of  Capreae  and  the  temple  of
Surrentum. But  while  few  other  spots  could  have  combined

1  JSnaria  or  Inarime  was  famous  for  its  medicinal  springs :  "  ^Enariaeque
lacus  medicos."  Stat.  Sylv.  iii.  5.  104.  Augustus  got  possession  of  Capreae  in
the  year  725.  Dion,  lii.  43.  Comp.  Suet.  Oct.  92.  Virgil,  on  his  return  from
Greece  in  735,  devoted  the  remaining  months  of  his  life  to  the  revision  of  the
..Eneid  at  Naples,  and  some  passages  even  in  the  earlier  books  bear  marks  of
interpolation  at  this  period.  Possibly  the  reference  to  Caepreae  (jEn.  vii.  735.)
is  meant  as  a  compliment  to  Augustus :  "  Teleboum  Capreas  cum  regna  teneret
Jam  senior."  Augustus,  then  just  completing  his  forty-fifth  year,  was  on  the
verge  of  Roman  seniority.

A.U.  780.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  205

the  requisites  of  solitude  and  difficult  approach  with  such
actual  proximity  to  the  seat  of  government,  Tiherius  was
not  insensible  to  the  charms  of  its  climate,  and  even  the  at-
tractions of  its  scenery;  to  the  freshness  of  its  evening
breeze,  the  coolness  of  its  summers,  and  the  pleasing  mild-
ness of  its  winters.1  The  villas  he  erected  on  the  fair-
est sites  within  these  narrow  limits,  twelve  in  number  and
named  after  the  greater  gods  of  the  Olympian  consistory,
enjoyed,  we  may  suppose,  every  variety  of  prospect,  com-
manded every  breath  of  air,  and  caught  the  rays  of  the
sun  at  every  point  of  his  diurnal  progress.3  From  the
heights  of  Capreoe  the  eye  comprehended  at  one  glance
the  whole  range  of  the  Italian  coast  from  the  promontory
of  Circe  to  the  temples  of  Paestum,  clearly  visible  through
that  transparent  atmosphere.  The  Falernian  and  Gauran
ridges,  teeming  with  the  noblest  vineyards  of  Italy,  the
long  ranges  of  the  Samnite  Apennines,  even  to  the  dis-
tant  Lucanian mountains,  formed the  framework  of  the

1  Statius  {Sylv.  iii.  5.)  invites  Lis  -wife  to  the  shores  of  his  native  Par-
thenope :

"  Quas  et  mollis  hyems  et  frigida  temperat  aestas^
Quas  hnbelle  fretum  torpentibus  alluit  undis."

Could  the  lady  resist  so  sweet  an  invitation  to  so  sweet  a  place  ?

a  Tac.  1.  c.  In  his  charming  description  of  the  villa  of  Pollius  on  the  Sur-
rentine  promontory,  Statius  specifies  the  various  objects  in  view  from  the  spot,
which  are  nearly  the  same  as  those  commanded  by  Capreae.  The  spacious  resi-
dence of  his  friend  comprised  all  the  advantages  which  could  be  sought  for  in
the  divers  localities  of  the  Tiberian  pleasure-houses :  "  Qua;  rerum  turba !
locine

Ingenium  an  domini  mirer  prius  ?  haec  domus  ortus
Prospicit,  et  Phcebi  tenerum  jubar ;  ilia  cadentem
Detinet,  exactamque  negat  dimittcre  lucem  ....
Ilaec  pelagi  clamore  fremunt ;  haec  tecta  sonoros
Ignorant  fluctus,  terraeque  silentia  malunt  ....

....  Quid  mille  rcvolvam
Culmina,  visendique  vices  ?  sua  cuique  voluptas
Atqoe  omni  proprium  thalamo  mare,  transquc  jacentem
Nerea  diversis  servit  sua  terra  fenestris  .  .  .  ."

Stat.  Sylv.  ii.  2.  44.

206  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  27.

picture,  -while  Vesuvius  reared  its  then  level  crest,  yet  un-
scarred  by  lava,  directly  in  the  centre.  Facing  the  south,
the  spectator  gazed  on  the  expanse  of  the  Sicilian  Sea.  So
wide  is  the  horizon  that  it  is,  perhaps,  no  fiction  that  at  some
favourable  moments  the  outlines  of  the  fiery  isles  of  iEolus,
and  even  of  Sicily  itself,  are  within  the  range  of  vision.  The
legends  of  Circe  and  Ulysses,  of  Cimmerian  darkness  and
Phlegrsean  fires,  of  the  wars  of  the  Giants  with  Jupiter,  and
the  orraceful  omens  which  attracted  the  first  settlers  to  these
shores  from  Greece,  had  perhaps  a  strange  fascination  for  the
worn-out  soldier  and  politician.1  Reclining  on  the  slopes  of
Capreae,  and  gazing  on  the  glorious  landscape  before  him,
Tiberius  might  dream  of  a  fairyland  of  the  poet's  creation,
and  seek  some  moments  of  repose  from  the  hard  realities  of
his  eternal  task,  to  perplex  his  attendants  with  insoluble
questions  on  the  subjects  of  the  Sirens'  songs  and  the  name
of  Hecuba's  mother.2  Nor  could  he  be  unmoved,  though
dallying  with  these  fanciful  shadows,  by  the  deep  interest
which  the  records  of  actual  history  had  thrown  over  the
fateful  scene.  Tbere  lay  the  battle-fields  of  the  still  youth-
ful republic :  there  the  rugged  Roman  was  first  broken  by
the  culture  of  Hellas :  there  captive  Greece  first  captured  her
conqueror.  There  were  the  plains  in  which  the  strength  of
Hannibal  had  wasted  in  ignoble  luxury ;  and  the  dark  crater
of  Vesuvius,  from  whence  had  issued  the  torrent  of  servile
insurrection,  when  the  empire  of  the  world  was  for  a  mo-
ment shaken  by  the  rage  of  a  Thracian  bondman.  The  great
Italian  volcano  had  slumbered  since  the  dawn  of  history.
Tokens  indeed  were  not  wanting  on  the  surface  of  the  fires
still  seething  beneath  the  j)lains  of  Campania ;  the  sulphur-

1  Stat  Sylv.  iii.  5.  79. :

"  Parthenope,  cui  mite  solum  trans  tequora  vectse
Ipse  Dionsoa  monstravit  Apollo  columba."

2  Suet.  Tib.  70. :  "  Maxime  tamen  curavit  notitiam  historite  fabularis,  usque
ad  ineptias  atque  derisum.  Nam  et  grammaticos,  quod  genus  hominum,  ut
diximus,  maxime  appetebat,  ejusmodi  fere  quaestionibus  experiebatur :  quae
mater  Uecubae :  quod  Achilli  nomen  inter  virgines  fuisset :  quid  Sirenes  cantare
sint  solitae."

A.U.  780.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  207

ous  exhalations  of  Baire  and  Puteoli  still  attested  the  truth
of  legends  of  more  violent  igneous  action  on  which  the  local
mythology  was  built.  But  even  these  legends  pointed  to  no
eruption  of  Vesuvius  :  no  cone  of  ashes  rose  then  as  now
from  its  bosom  ;  and  cities  and  villages  clustered  at  its  foot
or  hung  upon  its  flanks,  unconscious  of  the  elements  of  con-
vulsion hushed  in  grim  repose  beside  them.1

During  his  protracted  sojourn  in  this  pleasant  locality  the
imperial  hermit  crossed  but  rarely  to  the  continent,  and
twice  only  made  as  if  he  would  revisit  the  city.2

J  •  Occupation  of

The  seclusion  of  his  lonely  rock  was  guarded  with Tiberius  at  Ca-

*  .  preae.

the  strictest  vigilance,  and  the  chastisement  he
was  said  to  have  inflicted  on  the  unwary  fishermen  who
landed  on  the  forbidden  coast  increased  the  mysterious  hor-
ror with  which  it  came  soon  to  be  regarded.3  But  day  by
day  a  regular  service  of  couriers  brought  despatches  to  him
from  the  continent ;  nor  did  he  ever  relax  from  the  scrupu-
lous attention,  in  which  he  had  so  long  been  trained,  to  the
details  of  business  sent  him  by  his  ministers,  which  must
have  employed  his  mind  and  tasked  his  patience  for  many
hours.  lie  was  surrounded  moreover  in  the  recesses  of  his
privacy  by  a  number  of  literary  men,  professors  of  Greek
and  other  foreign  extraction,  among  whom  he  diverted  him-
self with  abstruse  inquiries,  such  as  have  been  already  no-
ticed, into  the  most  unprofitable  questions  of  mythology  or
grammar.  Distraction  of  mind  was  the  object  of  his  literary
recreations  ;  but  like  the  generality  of  his  busy  and  restless
countrymen,  he  had  no  taste  for  matters  of  really  interesting
inquiry,  and  his  studies,  if  not  pernicious,  were  at  best
merely  curious.  He  was  peculiarly  addicted  to  conversation
with  the  soothsayers,  of  whom  he  entertained  a  troop  about

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Prospectabatque  pulchcrrimum  sinum,  antcquam  Vesuvius
mons  ardescens  faciem  loci  vertcret."  This  was  written  about  thirty  years
after  the  destruction  of  Herculaneum  and  Pompeii.

2  Suet.  Tib.  72. :  "  Bis  omnino  toto  secessus  tempore  Romam  redire  co-
natus,"  scil.  arm.  786.  788. Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  1.;  Dion,  lviii.  21.  25.

3  Suet.  Tib.  60.

208  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  27.

his  person,  making  constant  experiments  of  their  skill  in  the
examination  of  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  his  associates.
Such  was  the  account  which  reached  the  city  of  the  life  of
the  imperial  misanthrope  :  it  was  coloured  no  douht  and  dis-
torted, inflamed  and  exaggerated :  nevertheless  it  did  not
suffice  to  satisfy  the  prurient  curiosity  of  the  citizens,  stimu-
lated heyond  its  wont  by  the  extraordinary  circumstance  of
his  retirement  from  public  observation.  They  filled  the
hours  they  supposed  to  be  vacant  from  business  with  amuse-
ments of  a  far  less  innocent  character,  with  debaucheries  of
the  deepest  dye,  and  cruelties  the  most  refined  and  sanguin-
ary :  they  accused  the  Roman  Caesar  of  the  crimes  of  a  Me-
dian or  Assyrian ;  as  if  their  perverted  imaginations  de-
lighted in  contrasting  the  most  exquisite  charms  of  nature
with  the  grossest  depravation  of  humanity:  and  all  these
charges,  whether  or  not  they  were  in  his  case  really  true,  of
which  we  have  little  means  of  judging,  found  easy  credence
from  the  notorious  vices  of  their  own  degraded  aristocracy.1
The  retirement  of  Tiberius  to  Caprese  has  been  justly
regarded  as  an  important  turning-point  in  his  career ;  inas-
Further  dete-  much  as,  having  thereby  screened  himself  from
S?veriimentohfe  the  hated  gaze  of  his  subjects,  he  could  thence-
Tibenus.  forth  give  the  rein,  without  shame  or  remorse,  to

the  worst  propensities  of  his  nature.  From  this  time  un-
doubtedly we  find  him  less  anxious  to  moderate  the  excessive
flatteries  of  the  senate,  or  to  mediate  between  its  servile
ferocity  and  the  wretched  victims  of  the  delators.  Even  on
the  calends  of  January,  the  strictest  holiday  of  the  Roman
year,  he  could  turn  his  solemn  missive  of  vows  and  congratu-
lations to  a  demand  for  the  blood  of  Titius  Sabinus,  of  dis-
tinguished equestrian  family,  who  had  been  betrayed  by  a
base  intrigue.11  What  a  commencement  for  the  new  year  is
this!  exclaimed  the  affrighted  citizens.  What  victims  are
these  with  which  Sejanns  requires  to  be  appeased! What

1  Suet.  Tib.  43-15.

2  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  68. :  "Junio  Silano  et  Silio  Nerva  coss.  (a.  u.  781),  foedum
anni  principium  incessit."

A.  U.  780.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  209

day  from  henceforth  will  pass  without  an  execution,  if  a
season  so  holy  and  festive  must  be  profaned  teith  the  chain
and  cord!  But  the  emperor  had  attained  a  position  in
which  he  could  despise  these  murmurs.  The  complaints  he
urged  upon  the  senate  of  the  peril  in  which  he  fancied  him-
self to  stand,  as  the  mark  of  so  many  secret  conspiracies  and
machinations,  were  interpreted  into  dark  insinuations  against
his  own  nearest  kindred  :  every  member  of  the  imperial
family,  cut  off  by  age  or  accident,  was  supposed  to  relieve
him  either  from  the  fear  of  intrigues,  or  the  mortification  of
being  observed  or  thwarted.  Presently  the  Romans  imag-
ined that  the  cares  of  empire  were  neglected :  an  outbreak
of  the  Frisii,  which  seems  in  fact  to  have  been  speedily  re-
pressed, was  exaggerated  by  their  undue  apprehensions ;
and  it  was  believed  that  Tiberius  disguised  the  real  extent
of  the  disaster  to  avoid  the  necessity  of  sending  a  special
legate  to  retrieve  it.1  Nevertheless  the  senate,  we  are  told,
Avas  not  so  much  concerned  for  a  frontier  injury,  as  for  the
perils  by  which  it  seemed  itself  environed  at  home  ;  and
against  these  it  could  devise  no  other  precaution  than  the
most  lavish  adulation  of  the  emperor.  It  decreed  an  altar  to
Clemency  and  another  to  Friendship,  by  the  side  of  which
images  of  Tiberius  and  Sejanus  were  to  be  erected,  and  at
the  same  time  importuned  its  prince  with  fresh  entreaties  for
the  happiness  of  once  more  beholding  him.  But  neither
Tiberius  nor  his  favourite  vouchsafed  a  visit  to  the  city  or
its  vicinity.  They  contented  themselves  with  leaving  the
island,  and  exhibiting  their  august  presence  at  the  nearest
point  of  the  Campanian  coast.  Thither  flocked  the  senators,
the  knights,  and  numbers  of  the  inferior  citizens,  more  appre-
hensive of  their  reception  by  Sejanus  than  even  by  Tiberius
himself:  nor  did  the  minister's  conduct  belie  the  dread  they
had  conceived  of  him,  since  the  retirement  of  his  master  had
served  to  exalt  him  to  a  higher  pinnacle  than  ever.  Amidst
the  various  avocations  of  life  in  the  city,  the  trooping  of

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  12.
vol.  v. — 14

210  HISTORY OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  28.

flatterers  and  courtiers  to  his  levees  might  be  less  open  to
remark  ;  but  in  the  country,  where  there  was  no  other
occupation  and  no  other  diversion,  every  one's  eyes  intently
watched  all  the  rest,  and  the  Romans  were  shocked  at  the
evidence  they  presented  to  one  another  of  the  extent  of  their
own  servility.  At  last  Sejanus,  in  his  arrogance,  as  they
said,  forbade  them  even  to  throng  his  doors  or  crowd  around
him  on  the  sea-shore  ;  he  was  afraid  no  doubt  of  the  jealousy
of  his  master;  and  they  returned  in  dismay  and  dejection  to
their  homes,  to  expiate  hereafter  as  a  crime  the  intimacy  they
had  so  blindly  pressed  upon  him.1

The  year  781,  the  first  of  Tiberius's  sojourn  at  Caprea?,
beheld  the  death  of  the  unfortunate  Julia,  the  grand-daugh-

, .  ter  of  Augustus,  in  the  barren  island  of  Trimerus,

Death  of  Julia «,,«..

the  younger, off  the  coast  of  Apulia  ;  a  woman  whose  amours

the  grand-

daughter  of  Au-  had  once  threatened  to  raise  up  candidates  for
the  throne,  but  who  in  her  disgrace  had  been  so
completely  abandoned  by  her  friends  and  family  that  she
owed,  it  was  said,  the  protraction  of  her  miserable  existence
for  years  to  the  ostentatious  compassion  of  Livia.4  She  was
speedily  followed  to  the  grave  by  this  hateful  protectress.
The  mother  of  the  emperor,  having  held  in  her  own  hands
for  seventy  years  the  largest  share,  it  may  be,  of  actual
power  of  any  personage  in  the  state,  paid  at  last  the  debt  of
nature,  at  the  moment  when  her  son  had  effected  his  escape
from  her  oversight,  and  had  perhaps  for  the  first  time  defied
Death  of  the  her  influence.  She  died  in  the  year  782,  at  the
empress  Livia.  advanced  age  of  eighty-six,  a  memorable  example
of  successful  artifice,  having  attained  in  succession,  by  craft
if  not  by  crime,  every  object  she  could  desire  in  the  career
of  female ambition.3 But she had long survived every

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  74.

a  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  71. :  "  Augusta;  ope  sustentata,  quae  florentis  privignos  cum
per  occultum  subvertisset,  misericordiam  erga  adflictos  palam  ostentabat."

3  Tac.  Ann.  v.  1.;  Dion,  lviii.  2.  Pliny  makes  her  eighty-two:  but  as  Ti-
berius was  now  in  his  seventieth  year,  the  earlier  date  assigned  for  her  birth  is
undoubtedly  the  true  one. Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xiv.  8.

A.  U.  781.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  211

genuine  attachment  she  may  at  any  time  have  inspired,  nor
has  a  single  voice  been  raised  by  posterity  to  supply  the
want  of  honest  eulogists  in  her  own  day.  Her  obsequies
gave  occasion  for  the  first  public  appearance  of  Caius,  the
youngest  of  the  sons  of  Germanicus,  at  this  time  in  his
seventeenth  year,  to  pronounce  her  funeral  oration ;  for  Tibe-
rius excused  himself  from  attending,  while  he  persisted  in
making  no  change  in  the  usual  disposition  of  his  day,  and
forbade  the  senate,  pretending  that  such  was  her  own  desire,
to  decree  divine  honours  to  the  deceased.1  At  the  same
time  he  took  occasion  to  show  his  sense  of  the  liberty  he  had
recovered  by  his  mother's  death,  by  some  pointed  remarks
on  the  servile  flattery  of  the  woman'' s  friends,  her  associates.
These  remarks  were  directed,  it  was  believed,  more  particu-
larly against  the  consul  Fufius,  who  had  ventured,  under  the
powerful  protection  of  the  empress,  to  indulge  in  unseemly
sneers  against  the  emperor  himself.2  While  such  was  the
demeanour  of  Tiberius,  it  was  evident  that  he  felt  no  per-
sonal regret  for  the  loss  he  had  sustained,  and  the  funeral
passed  over  with  little  ceremony  or  magnificence.  Even  the
will  of  Livia  remained  for  a  long  time  unexecuted.3

The  obsequies  of  the  consort  of  Octavius  were  celebrated
under  the  name  she  had  long  borne  in  public  of  Julia  Au-
gusta. Bv  admission  into  the  Cassarean  family

Ilcr  churactcr.

she  had  become  invested  with  the  undefinable
charm  of  far-descended  glory  common  to  the  children  of
Venus  and  lulus,  which  might  seem  to  extend  to  her  a  right-
ful claim  to  apotheosis  hereafter,  together  with  her  husband
and  his  divine  parent.  But  her  union  with  Octavius  had  in
the  meantime  entitled  her  to  a  share  in  the  high  and  express-
ive designation  of  August,  which  was  scarcely  distinguished

1  Tac.  Ann.  v.  1.  2. ;  Dion,  lviii.  2.

2  Tac.  1.  c. :  "Dicax  idem,  et  Tiherium  acerbis  facetiis  irriderc  SC-litus."

*  Suet.  Tib.  51.  In  this  and  the  preceding  chapter  instances  are  given  of
the  impatience  with  which  Tiberius  latterly  bore  the  domination  of  his  mother;
his  harsh  language  towards  her  and  about  her,  and  the  indifference  he  manifest-
ed at  her  decease.

212  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  29.

in  the  popular  apprehension  from  that  of  mistress  or  sovereign.
She  glided  gracefully  from  the  wheel  and  the  women's
chamber  to  the  chair  of  council  and  even  to  the  throne  of
state  :  the  first  of  Roman  matrons  she  had  been  suffered,  if  not
to  assume  a  public  capacity,  at  least  to  be  addressed  as  a  public
character.1  Though  little  scrupulous,  we  may  believe,  in  the
pursuit  of  her  personal  objects,  she  was  not  without  a  right
royal  sense  of  the  true  dignity  of  her  unexampled  position.
To  the  sterner  counsels  of  her  husband  she  brought  the
feminine  elements  of  softness  and  placability.  The  policy  of
Augustus  in  his  later  years  was  impressed  with  the  mildness
and  serene  confidence  of  his  consort ;  and  even  under  the
gloomier  tyranny  of  his  successor  her  chamber  was  the  asy-
lum of  many  trembling  victims  of  persecution,  her  extended
arm  bade  defiance  to  the  arts  of  an  Afer  and  the  power  of  a
Sejanus.3  .  Nor  was  her  private  benevolence  less  conspicu-
ously exerted  in  behalf  of  noble  indigence.  She  caused  many
poor  but  well-born  children  to  be  educated  at  her  own  ex-
pense, and  gave  portions  to  many  marriageable  maidens.3  Her
fidelity  to  her  husband  may  have  been  the  result  of  prudence,
her  devotion  to  her  son  a  calculation  of  ambition  ;  but  it  is
impossible  not  to  read  in  the  monuments  of  her  innumerable
household,  the  tirers  of  her  person,  the  attendants  at  her  re-
pasts, the  ministers  of  her  charities,  whom  she  survived  to
bury in one family mausoleum, tokens of kindness and

1  Thus  we  find  her  addressed  in  the  Consolaiio  de  morte  Drusi  as  Princeps.
The  senate  upon  her  death  decreed  her  an  arch,  and  the  title  of  Mater  Patrife,
which  Tiberius  refused  to  ratify :  nevertheless  medals  exist  on  which  such  a
legend  appears,  and  it  is  a  question  whether  these  were  not  struck  in  her  hon-
our even  during  the  lifetime  of  Augustus.  See  Eckhel,  vi.  154,  155.  Livia
ultimately  obtained  deification  under  the  principate  of  her  grandson  Claudius.

2  Dion,  1.  c. :  /cat  arplda  avrij,  b  /17/de/iip  aAlt)  ywaiKi,  tiprityioavTo,  on  re
ovk  bXiyovq  ctpuv  kceckiiei,  /cat  on  Tzaldaq  ttoA/Iwv  ereTpdQei.  Veil.  ii.  130. :
"  Per  omnia  diis  quam  hominibus  similior  foemina,  cujus  potentiam  nemo  sensit
nisi  aut  levatione  periculi  aut  acccssione  dignitatis."

3  The  Roman  Juno  was  as  merciful  as  she  was  modest,  if  we  may  believe  a
fantastic  story  of  Dion's  :  yvfivobg  wore  avdpaQ  anavTijaavraQ  avTrj  nal  fiiXXov-
rac  6ca  tovto  OavaruOijGeaOai  iauccv  elnovca  on  oii6h>  avSpiavruv  ratf  cutypo-
vovaaic  ol  toiovtoc  diafiipovci. Dion,  1.  c.  .

A.  U.  782. J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

213

generosity,  however  mingled  with  pride,  which  appeal  forci-
bly to  our  admiration.1  But  a  later  generation  could  never
forgive  her  for  being  the  mother  of  Tiberius ;  and  every  step
by  which  the  tyrant,  the  patron  of  the  informers,  the  deci-
mater  of  the  senate,  advanced  to  the  sovereignty  of  the
Koman  people  was  ascribed  to  the  ambition,  the  arts,  and
the  crimes  of  the  unfortunate  Livia.  The  proscriptions  were
forgotten  in  fifty  years,  the  delations  never.

1  The  single  columbarium  of  Livia  which  has  been  discovered,  and  prob-
ably there  were  more,  contains  the  ashes  of  above  a  thousand  of  her  slaves  and
freedmen :  the  diversity  of  their  employments,  all  of  which  are  carefully  re-
corded, is,  as  may  be  supposed,  almost  infinite.  See  Wallon,  Esclavage,  ii.  145.,
foil,  after  GorL

014  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  29.

CHAPTER  XLYI.

THE  FATE OF THE FAMILY  OF GERMANICUS. BANISHMENT OF AGRIPPINA  AND  HER

SON  NERO. DISGRACE  AND  IMPRISONMENT  OF  HER  SON  DRUS17S. PERSECUTION  OF

HER  FRIENDS. FATE OF ASINIUS  GALLUS. CULMINATION  OF  THE FORTUNES  OF

SEJANUS. HIS  ALLIANCE  WITH THE IMPERIAL FAMILY  AND CONSULSHIP  (a.  U.

784.). ALARMED  AT  THE  JEALOUSY  OF  TIBERIUS,  HE  CONSPIRES  AGAINST  HIM.

TIBERIUS  DETERMINES,  WITH  THE  ASSISTANCE  OF MACRO,  TO  OVERTHROW  HIM.

HIS  ARREST  IN  THE  SENATE-HOUSE,  AND  EXECUTION. PROSCRIPTION  OF  HIS  AD-
HERENTS.  YENGEANCE  FOR  THE  MURDER  OF  DRUSUS. SAVAGE  CRUELTY  OF  TI-
BERIUS.  HORRIBLE DEATH OF THE YOUNGER DRUSUS. AGRIPPINA STARVES

HERSELF. INFATUATION  OF  TIBERIUS. HIS  MORTIFIGATION  AT  THE  DESPONDENCY

OF  THE  NOBLES. VOLUNTARY DEATHS OF NERVA  AND ARRUNTIUS. PROSPECTS

OF  THE  SUCCESSION. CAIUS  CALIGULA  AND  THE  YOUNG  TIBERIUS. ASCENDENCY

OF  MACRO. LAST  DAYS  AND  DEATH  OF TIBERIUS  (a.  U.  790.). EFFECTS  OF  THE

REIGN  OF  TERROR  : ALARM OF THE  NOBLES  ; THOUGHTLESS DISSIPATION  OF  THE

POPULACE. THE  PROVINCES  GENERALLY  WELL CARED FOR  AND PROSPEROUS.

EXAMPLE  FROM  THE  STATE  OF  JUDEA. (a.  D. 29-737.,  A.  U.  782-790.)

THE  first  incident  which  marked  the  withdrawal  of  Livia's
protecting  wing  from  the  afflicted,  was  the  appearance
Tiberius  com-  °f  a  harsh  despatch  from  Tiberius  to  the  senate,
senate  of  Agrip-  directed  against  Agrippina  and  her  son  Nero.
pina  and  Nero.  This  letter,  it  was  believed,  had  been  written
some  time  earlier,  but  withheld  through  the  influence  of  the
empress,  who,  while  she  was  gratified  by  the  depression  of
the  family  of  Germanicus,  had  nevertheless  exerted  her-
self, not  without  success,  to  shield  it  from  ruin.  The  emperor
now  complained  in  bitter  terms  of  the  alleged  misconduct  of
his  grand-nephew ;  not,  indeed,  of  any  political  intrigues  to
his  own  prejudice,  but  of  personal  vices  and  dissoluteness :

A.U.  7S2.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  215

against  the  chaste  matron,  his  mother,  he  had  not  ventured
to  utter  even  such  imputations  as  these,  hut  had  confined
himself  to  reproving  once  more  the  vehemence  so  often  re-
marked in  her  language  and  demeanour.  The  senators  were
in  great  perplexity :  ready  as  they  were  to  carry  out  the
commands  of  their  master,  however  atrocious,  they  dared  not
act  on  murmurs  which  conveyed  no  express  order,  and  made
no  demand  on  their  active  interference.  While  they  delib-
erated, however,  warned  hy  one  of  their  own  body  to  take
no  hasty  step  in  so  delicate  a  matter,  the  people  assembled
before  the  doors,  and  bearing  aloft  the  effigies  of  their  fa-
vourites, shouted  aloud  that  the  letter  was  an  abominable
forgery,  and  the  lives  of  the  emperor's  nearest  kindred  were
menaced  without  his  knowledge,  and  in  defiance  of  his  incli-
nations. These  cries  evidently  pointed  at  Sejanus  as  the
contriver  of  a  foul  conspiracy ;  but  the  favourite,  perceiving
his  danger,  played  dexterously  on  his  master's  fears,  repre-
senting the  movement  as  an  act  of  rebellion,  the  images  of
Nero  and  Agrippina  as  the  standards  of  a  civil  war,  till  he
wrung  from  him  a  second  proclamation,  in  which  the  impet-
uosity of  the  citizens  was  sternly  rebuked,  the  tardiness  of
the  senate  reproved  more  mildly,  and  the  charges  against  the
culprits  repeated,  with  a  distinct  injunction  to  proceed  at
once  to  consider  them  with  due  formality.'

Thus  encouraged  and  stimulated  to  take  their  part,  the
senators  declared  that  they  had  only  been  withheld  from  a
more  zealous  defence  of  the  imperial  majesty  by

.  . They  are  ban-

the  want  of  definite  instructions.  Sejanus  tri-  lshedtotoi-
umphed  ;  accusers  sprang  up  at  his  beck ;  the
process  was  carried  through,  we  may  believe,  with  all  the
disregard  of  decency  and  justice  for  which  the  tribunal  of
the  fathers  had  long  been  infamous;  and  though  we  have  lost
the  details  of  it,  we  know  that  its  result  was  fatal  to  its  un-
fortunate victims,  and  that  both  the  mother  and  son  were

Tac.  Ann.  v.  5.,  a.  0.  782. From  this  point  there  is  a  lacuna  of  twa
years  in  the  annals  of  Tacitus.

216  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  29.

banished  to  barren  islands,  the  one  to  Pandateria,  the  other
to  Pontia.  True  to  the  indomitable  ferocity  of  her  character,
the  she-wolf  Agrippina  resisted  the  atrocious  mandate  with
violence,  and  in  her  struggle  with  the  centurion  in  whose
charge  she  was  placed,  such  was  the  horrid  story  which  ob-
tained credence  with  the  citizens,  one  of  her  eyes  was  act-
ually struck  from  her  head.1  Sejanus  now  urged  his  success
with  redoubled  energy.  He  had  removed  his  two  most  con-
spicuous rivals  to  an  exile  from  which  the  members  of  the
imperial  family  were  never  known  to  return.  Drusus  still
remained,  of  an  age and  character  to  compete

Sejanus  oh-  .,«..,  n  ,  .  n  . .  „.,

tains  the  dis- with  him  in  the  career  ot  his  ambition. Iiberius

grace  of  the  . , ..  .  .  ,  . , ,  .

younger  d™-  retained  this  prince,  together  with  his  younger
brother  Caius,  about  his  own  person  at  Capreae  :
there  was  the  more  reason  to  fear  the  favour  he  might  acquire
with  his  aged  relative  ;  nor  were  there  the  same  opportuni-
ties for  misrepresenting  his  conduct,  or  urging  him  by  insid-
ious advisers  into  political  intrigues.  But  Sejanus,  in  seduc-
ing the  affections  of  his  consort  Lepida,  found  the  means  of
undermining  his  credit  with  the  emperor.  The  faithless
spouse  was  engaged,  by  the  promise  perhaps  of  marriage
with  Sejanus,  as  the  wife  of  another  Drusus  before  her,  to
excite  the  jealousy  of  Tiberius  against  her  husband  ;  and
thus  even  the  recesses  of  the  imperial  retreat,  in  which  the
old  man  had  sought  to  bury  himself  from  the  crimes  and
follies  of  the  world  he  hated,  were  opened  to  the  machina-
tions of  his  most  intimate  friends  and  relatives.  Drusus  was
dismissed  from  Capreae,  and  ordered  to  repair  in  disgrace  to
Rome.  But  Sejanus  was  not  satisfied  with  this  indication  of
the  sovereign's  anger :  fearing  lest  his  master  might  change
his  mind,  he  induced  the  consul  Cassius  Longinus  to  make  a
motion  in  the  senate  on  the  prince's  presumed  misconduct ;
and  the  fathers  hastened  to  respond  to  it  by  declaring  him  a
public  enemy.  Drusus  was  immediately  placed  under  arrest ;
but  the  privileges  of  noble  rank  still  exempted  him  from  con-

1  Suet.  Tib.  53.

A.U.  782.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  217

fineinent  in  the  Mamertine  dungeons,  and  he  Avas  thrust,  in
mockery  of  the  free  custody  which  was  his  legal  right,  into
a  subterranean  chamber  of  the  palace.1

Livia,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been  surrounded  in  her  later

years  by  a  little  court  of  her  own  favourites,  and  among

them  were  many  grumblers  and  captious  enemies

Tiberius  perse-  ■/ o  ^  j.

cures  the  of  the  emperor,  who  obtained  leave,  by  flattering

friends  of  Livia. ,  .  „ I .  .  . ,

the  vanity  of  their  mistress,  to  vent  even  in  her
ears  their  ill-feeling  towards  the  chief  of  the  state.  In  vain
had  Tiberius  chafed  under  the  jeers  of  this  licensed  coterie  ;
the  influence  of  his  mother  had  protected  it,  and  he  had  been
compelled  to  brood  in  secret  over  mortifications  which  he
had  not  the  spirit  to  resent.  But  he  had  not  forgotten  a
murmur  or  a  smile ;  and  as  soon  as  the  patroness  of  the
group  was  removed,  he  made  his  long-checked  vengeance
felt  by  its  members  in  succession.  The  friends  of  Agrippina
and  her  children  he  regarded  in  a  still  more  serious  light.
They  constituted,  in  his  view,  not  a  private  clique  of  dissatis-
fied scoffers,  but  a  political  faction ;  they  Avere  not  discon-
tented with  his  conduct  or  government,  but,  as  he  thought,
and  others  doubtless  thought  the  same,  prepared  as  foes  and
rivals  to  substitute  another  government,  the  government  at
least  of  another,  in  its  room.  In  the  councils  of  this  faction
lay,  as  he  conceived,  the  germs  of  a  revolution  of  the  palace
and  even  of  civil  war.  Among  its  chiefs  were  men  of  the
Cruel  fate  of  highest  birth  and  character.  None  was  more  dis-
^frtettd  of^UnB'  tinguished  than  Asinius  Gallus,  noAV  an  old  man,
A-rippma.  an(j  a  veteran  dissembler,  Avhose  pretensions  have

:il  ready  been  noticed.  This  man  had  presumed  to  take  to
wife  the  unfortunate  Vipsania,  the  same  from  whom  Tiberius
had  been  compelled  to  separate  himself;  and  besides  the  per-
sonal feelings  which  this  marriage  had  caused  him,  Tiberius
beheld  In  it  a  covert  aspiration  to  a  share  in  the  imperial  in-
heritance. At  the  commencement  of  his  principate  he  had
been  openly  treated  by  Asinius  as  an  equal  in  an  assembly

1  Suet.  Ttl>.  54. ;  Dion,  lviii.  .'{.,  a.  u.  783. At  this  point  there  is  a  .short
break  in  the  remains  of  Dion's  history.

218  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A..D.  30.

of  equals.  In  consequence  he  had  never  ceased  to  regard
him  with  jealousy ;  and  when  latterly  he  observed  him  pay-
ing marked  court  to  Sejanus,  he  resented  it  perhaps  as  an  at-
tempt to  disguise  increasing  hostility  to  himself.1  When
Asinius  came  at  last  to  Capreae,  as  the  bearer  of  a  vote  of
fresh  honours  to  the  favourite,  Tiberius  received  him  indeed
with  the  utmost  apparent  cordiality,  but  at  the  same  time
clandestinely  dispatched  an  accusation  against  him  to  the
senate,  and  the  senate  proceeded  to  pass  sentence  upon  him
without  a  hearing,  at  the  very  moment  that  he  was  being  en-
tertained at  the  emperor's  table.  The  consuls  sent  a  prsetor
to  Capreae  to  arrest  him  before  the  eyes  of  his  host,  who  af-
fected surprise  and  sympathy,  and  desired  that  he  might  be
kept  in  honourable  custody  till  he  should  come  in  person  to
take  cognisance  of  so  lamentable  a  case.3  This  period,  how-
ever, never  arrived ;  and  it  was  not  till  after  three  years  of
close  and  cruel  imprisonment  that  Tiberius  consented  at  last
to  give  the  word,  not  for  his  release,  but  for  his  execution,
accompanied,  it  was  said,  with  the  savage  remark,  JVbto  at
last  I  have  taken  him  back  to  favour.3

The  base  dissimulation  of  Tiberius,  which  he  now  seemed,
from  long  habit,  to  practise  almost  unconsciously,  and  where
for  his  own  purposes  it  was  least  required,  may  serve  to  ag-
gravate our  disgust  at  his  callous  insensibility.  We  need  not
suppose,  however,  that  it  was  from  any  wanton  cruelty  that
so  long  a  punishment  was  inflicted  on  the  sufferer.  Among
Procrastination  the  infirmities  which  grew  on  Tiberius  with  ad-
t^mofTibc-  vancing  age  were  irresolution  and  procrastina-
tion, and  neither  in  giving  audience  to  an  eni-

nus.

1  Of  Asinius,  Augustus,  as  we  have  seen,  had  said  that  he  was  ambitious
but  incapable.  The  conceit  and  captiousness  of  his  feeble  character  appears  in
the  presumption  with  which,  like  his  father  Pollio,  he  criticized  the  language
and  genius  of  Cicero.  Quintil.  xii.  1.  22. ;  Gell.  Nod.  Ait.  xvii.  1. ;  Suet.
Claud.  41. ;  Flin.  £pist.  vii.  4.

*  Dion,  lviii.  3.

3  Dion,  lviii.  23. :  who  repeats,  however,  the  same  expression  on  another
occasion.  Comp.  also  Suet.  77J.  61.:  "Et  in  recognoscendis  custodiis  precanti
cuidam  poena}  maturitatem  respondit :  nondum  tecum  in  gratiam  redii."

A.U.  783.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  219

bassy,  nor  in  deciding  the  fate  of  a  criminal,  could  he  deter-
mine to  act  with  the  promptness  which  befitted  his  position.1
His  jealousy  once  aroused  with  regard  to  Sejanus,  he  could
not  nerve  himself  to  any  definite  course  of  action.  The
clamours  even  of  the  insensate  populace  had  not  been  lost
upon  him  ;  though  every  demand  for  the  punishment  of  his
relatives  had  come  to  him  direct  from  the  senators,  he  could
not  but  perceive  that  the  favourite  might  have  moved  them
to  it.  From  the  objects  of  suspicion  thus  indicated  to  him,
every  suspicion  rebounded  on  the  head  of  the  favourite  him-
self. While  he  sought  to  disguise  his  doubts  and  anxieties,
yielding  in  every  point,  more  readily  than  ever,  to  the  coun-
sels of  his  insidious  adviser,  and  consenting  at  his  instance  to
the  disgrace  of  his  kinsmen  or  courtiers,  he  shrank  day  by
day  from  issuing  the  order  which  should  deprive  him  irre-
coverably of  their  services.  Thus  while  he  kept  Asinius  and
Drusus  in  confinement  to  gratify  Sejanus,  he  could  not  yet
resolve  to  deliver  them  to  the  executioner.  Meanwhile  he
continued  to  heap  fresh  honours  on  his  minister  with  a  rest-
less profusion,  which  itself  implied  distrust.  Though  the
hopes  Sejanus  had  conceived  of  entrance  into  the  Julian
house  through  an  union  with  Livilla  had  been  dis-

°  ,  Sejanus  be-

courasced  and  deferred,  it  appears  that  the  em- comes  affianced

°  -,  .  . ,  .  . .  to  Livilla.

peror  relaxed  after  a  time  in  his  opposition  to
them,  and  that  they  were  crowned,  as  has  been  said,  at  least
with  the  ceremony  of  a  betrothal.  The  marriage  indeed
may  never  have  taken  effect,  though  so  completely  was  the
connexion  of  Sejanus  with  his  master  secured  by  the  mere
act  of  affiance,  that  he  receives  from  Tacitus  the  title  of  his
son-in-law.*  But  the  loss  of  the  greater  part  of  the  fifth
book  of  Tacitus's  Annals  deprives  vis  of  our  surest  guide  to
the  machinations  of  the  emperor  and  his  minister. It  would

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  5.

5  Tac.  Ann.  v.  6.,  vi.  8.  See  above.  Zonaras  (xi.  2.)  says  expressly  that
1k>  was  married  to  Julia,  daughter  of  Drusus;  but  Julia,  the  only  daughter  of
Drusus  we  know  of,  wa3  married  to  Nero.  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  29.,  iv.  GO.,  vi.  27.
See  Rittcr  on  Ann.  vi.  8.,  Suet.  Tib.  65.:  "Spe  allinitatis  deccptum."

220  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  31.

seem  probable,  however,  that  Tiberius,  soon  after  the  con-
finement of  Drusus,  became  alarmed  at  the  formidable  atti-
tude his  favourite  had  assumed  ;  and  we  may  believe  that,  in
conferring  upon  him  the  last  marks  of  confidence  he  was
really  meditating  his  overthrow. Nevertheless

He  is  advanced ,  , _  ..  „ .__  . -, ,  ,

to  the  consul-  when,  on  the  first  day  of  784,  Sejanus  entered
with  Tiberius  on  the  consulship,  the  worshippers
of  his  uprisen  star  were  disturbed  by  no  presentiment  of  its
impending  decline.  The  origin  of  bej  anus  was  not  such  as
to  entitle  him  to  an  honour  from  which  Msecenas  had  modest-
ly shrunk ;  but  his  flatterers,  ascending  higher  in  the  annals
of  the  republic,  compared  his  rise  with  that  of  a  Coruncanius,
a  Carvilius,  a  Marius,  or  a  Pollio.  It  was  no  novel  principle,
they  declared,  for  the  senate  or  people  to  choose  the  best
men  for  distinction  regardless  of  their  birth ;  and  it  was  now
left  for  Tiberius  to  show  that  the  wisdom  of  the  emperor
was  not  inferior  to  that  of  the  citizen.1  While,  however,  all
orders  vied  with  one  another  in  the  respect  they  paid  to
Sejanus,  while  the  petitioners  who  had  flocked  to  the  minis-
ter in  Campania  had  been  more  numerous  than  those  who
courted  the  prince  himself,  while  games  and  holidays  were
voted  in  his  honour,  and  before  his  images  or  jnctures  altars
were  raised,  vows  conceived,  and  sacrifices  offered,  an  excess
of  flattery  which  the  emperor  had  personally  spurned,  Tibe-
rius trembled  more  and  more  for  his  own  safety,  and  was  anx-
ious at  least  to  remove  their  idol  from  his  pres-

Tiberiusand  .*

Sejanus  con-  ence.  Accordingly,  when  he  associated  bej  anus
with  himself  in  the  consulship,  he  deputed  him
to  perform  alone  the  actual  functions  of  both  in  the  city  ;  and
now  Sejanus,  it  was  remarked,  was  emperor  of  Rome,  while
Tiberius  was  merely  lord  of  an  island.8  The  senators  receiv-
ed the  leader  of  their  debates  with  acclamations,  and  Sejanus,
though  not  unconscious  of  the  workings  of  jealousy  in  his
master's  mind,  persuaded  himself  that  he  had  reached  an

1  Veil.  ii.  128.

2  Dion,  lviii.  5. :  cjote  oweMvti  einelv,  avruv  piv  avroKparopa,  tuv  6e  T«-
fitpiov  vr]aiapx&v  riva  elrai  SokeIv.

A.TJ.  784.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  221

eminence  from  which  he  could  control  or  even  defy  them.
The  attachment  of  the  citizens  towards  him  was  now,  he  con-
ceived, amply  demonstrated :  the  alacrity  with  which  they
hailed  him  as  the  emperor's  colleague  betokened  their  full
consent  to  his  seizing  the  undivided  empire.  The  decree  of
the  senate,  which  now  conferred  on  him  jointly  with  Tiberius
the  consulate  for  five  years,  sounded  in  his  ears  like  the  en-
tire surrender  of  the  government  to  his  hands,  as  it  had  for-
merly been  surrendered  to  Augustus  ;  and  if  any  material
resources  were  yet  required  to  secure  his  usurpation,  he  could
wield,  as  he  conceived,  in  his  faithful  praetorians  the  final  ar-
bitrament of  the  sword.

Since  his  accession,  however,  to  the  principate,  it  had
been  the  custom  of  Tiberius  to  retain  his  consulships  only
for  a  short  period. In  771  he  had  abdicated  of-

r>  n  f  •  r>  Tiberius  and

nee  after  a  lew  days;  in  774  after  three  months.1 Sejamis resign

■x-r  i  p n  i  n* -i n  'ne  consulship.

JN  ow  also,  far  Irorn  accepting  the  proffered  five
years,  he  resigned  the  consulship  in  the  fifth  month  ;  and  Se-
janus, it  seems,  was  required  at  the  same  time  to  give  way
to  a  consul  suffect.2  Faustus  Cornelius  Sulla  was  supplied
in  the  place  of  the  one,  Sextidius  Catullinus  received  the
fasces  from  the  other.  Sejanus  possibly  now  felt  for  the  first
time  that  he  was  treading  a  downward  path.  The  flattering
decree  by  which  his  consulship  was  held  up  to  the  imitation
of  all  future  magistrates,  the  offer  of  the  proconsular  power
which  was  at  the  same  time  made  to  him,  and  his  elevation
by  the  emperor  to  the  dignity  of  the  priesthood,  would  all
fail  to  reassure  him ;  for  at  the  same  time  Cains  Coesar  was
advanced  to  the  priesthood  also,  and  the  favour  with  which
the  young  prince  was  mentioned  in  an  imperial  rescript  had
been  accepted  by  the  citizens  as  a  token  that  he  was  actually
destined  for  the  succession.  Uneasy  and  irresolute  in  the
midst  of  his  success,  Sejanus  bethought  himself  of  the  re-

1  The  consulship  of  784  was  Tibcrius's  fifth.  See  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  151.  Sue-
tonius, in  calling  it  his  third,  is  speaking  only  of  his  principate.

*  Hoeck,  Roan.  Gcsvh.  i.  3.  p.  153.  from  Noris.  J:'j/is/.  Uons.  in  Grav.  77ics.
xi.  404.

222  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  31.

source  which  had  hitherto  never  failed  him,  of  a  personal  in-
terview with  his  patron.  He  asked  permission  to  visit  his
affianced  bride,  who  was  retained  beneath  the  roof  of  her
father-in-law  at Capreae,  under the pretext  of  a  sickness

from  which  she  was  suffering.  But  to  this  de-
Tiberius  re-  .  „  ,
fuses  to  see  Se-  mand  liberius  returned  a  refusal,  though  soft-
ened by  the  excuse  that  he  was  himself  prepar-
ing speedily  to  remove  with  his  family  to  Rome.1  This  re-
pulse was  followed  by  a  decree  forbidding  divine  honours  to
be  paid  to  any  mere  mortal,  and  fatal  significance  was  at-
tached to  a  letter,  throughout  which  the  bare  name  of  Seja-
nus  was  mentioned,  without  the  addition  of  any  of  his  titles.
At  the  same  time  some  of  his  personal  enemies,  it  was  ob-
served, received  unusual  favours  ;  all  which  things  were  not
overlooked  by  an  anxious  and  vigilant  herd  of  courtiers,  as
ominous  of  impending  disgrace.  Already  the  crowd  of  sen-
ators and  freedmen  began  to  waver  in  their  devotion  to  the
upstart.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  his  spirits  were  sometimes
raised  by  the  hints  the  emperor  took  care  to  drop  of  his  own
failing  health;  by  the  death  of  Nero  in  his  confinement,
starved,  as  was  reported,  by  his  unnatural  uncle's  com-
mands ; a  and  by  the  appointment  of  his  creature  Fulcinius
Trio  to  the  consulship  for  the  latter  part  of  the  year.  He
was  most  concerned,  however,  by  the  manifest  failure  of  the
hopes  he  had  entertained  of  the  good  will  of  the  people,
whose  predilection  for  Caius,  the  youngest  of  the  beloved
family  of  Germanicus,  had  recently  been  warmly  expressed.
Regretting  that  he  had  wanted  courage  to  strike  openly
while  armed  with  the  authority  of  the  fasces,  he

who  concerts  ....  . .

measures  began  now  to  concert  with  his  nearest  intimates

the  means  of  assassination. The  arrival  of  Ti-

1  This  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  Dion,  lviii.  7. :  6  &  ovv  Ttflipiog  ralg  fih>
lepuavvaig  eti/itjoev  avrbv,  ov  fif/v  kcu  peTeTrifi^aTO,  aXka  nai  aiTTjoafiivy  ol
07TUQ  e c  T7/v  Ka/nraviav,  knl  ivpotyaaei  rf/q  ncXkovvjupov  vouqaaoqg,  ehdiy,  koto,
X^pav  fielvai  Trpooeraijev.

2  The  death  of  Nero,  which  falls  within  the  period  for  which  we  have  lost
the  narration  of  Tacitus,  is  learnt  from  Suetonius,  Tib.  5.

A.U.  734.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  223

berius  at  Rome  would  furnish  ample  opportunity  to  a  friend,
a  kinsman,  and  a  minister.  Several  of  the  senators  had  en-
gaged in  the  enterprise,  the  guards  had  been  tampered  with
and,  it  was  hoped,  secured ;  but  the  plot  was  soon  extended
beyond  the  limits,  of  safety.  One  of  the  con-  The  conspiracy
spirators,  named  Satrius  Secundus,  already  infa-  is  divuleed-
mous  as  a  delator,  revealed  it  to  Antonia,  the  aged  mother
of  Germanicus,  a  woman  of  noble  character,  who  preferred,
of  the  two  persecutors  of  her  race,  to  save  Tiberius  and
destroy  Sejanus.1

The  emperor,  possessed  of  all  the  proofs  he  required,  hes-
itated, as  usual,  to  act.  He  shrank  from  openly  denouncing
the  traitor,  and  demanding  his  head  of  the  sen-  Measures  of  Ti-
ate;  and  against  a  covert  surprise  Sejanus  had  cumvent  Seja-
sufficiently  guarded  himself.  The  stroke  of  Ti-  uus-
berius  was  prepared  with  infinite  cunning,  and  executed  with
consummate  dexterity  and  boldness.  He  entrusted  it  to
Sertorius  Macro,  an  officer  of  the  body  guard,  on  whom,  in
the  absence  of  Sejanus,  he  had,  perhaps,  relied  for  his  per-
sonal security  at  Caprea?.  To  this  man  he  gave  a  commis-
sion to  take  the  command  of  the  praetorians  at  Rome,  and
even  empowered  him,  in  the  last  necessity,  to  lead  forth
Drusus  from  his  dungeon,  and  place  him  at  the  head  of  af-
fairs.2 It  might  not  be  safe,  however,  to  assume  authority
over  a  jealous  soldiery,  devoted,  apparently,  to  their  familiar
chief,  and  estranged  from  an  emperor  whose  person  they
had  almost  forgotten.  But  Macro,  resolute  and  crafty,  was
not  daunted.  He  aspired  to  fill  himself  the  place  of  Sejanus,
and  so  lofty  an  ambition  was  to  be  deterred  by  no  ordinary
peril.  Reaching  Rome  at  midnight,  the  17th  of  October,
he  sought  an  interview  with  Memmius  Regulus,  now  the
colleague  of  Trio  in  the  consulship,  and  known  for  his  stead-

1  Joseph.  Ardlq.  xviii.  7.  6.  This  conspiracy  is  unknown  to  Dion  appar-
ently, but  alluded  to  by  Tacitus,  Suetonius,  and  Josephus.  The  loss  of  tliis
portion  of  the  Annals  has  deprived  us  of  distinct  proof  of  it,  but  it  was  men-
tioned no  doubt  in  the  Memoirs  of  Agrippina.

■  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  23. ;  Suet.  Tib.  65.

224  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  31.

fast  loyalty.  Opening  to  him  the  purport  of  his  mission,  he
required  him  to  convene  the  senate  early  in  the  temple  of
Apollo,  which  adjoined  the  imperial  residence  on  the  Pala-
tine. The  spot  was  somewhat  removed  from  the  common
thoroughfares  of  the  city,  and  the  approach  to  it  by  three
narrow  gates  might  be  easily  guarded  against  a  sudden  at-
tack. Another  recommendation  might  be  its  proximity  to
the  place  where  Drusus  was  confined,  should  it  become  ne-
cessary to  produce  him.  Macro  next  repaired  to  Graecinus
Laco,  the  captain  of  the  Urban  police,  and  with  him  con-
certed measures  for  occupying  the  avenues  to  the  temple
with  his  armed  force,  while  he  should  himself  amuse  the
dreaded  pi'setorians,  and  keep  them  close  in  their  distant
quarters.  Thus  prepared,  he  threw  himself  in  the  way  of
Sejanus,  as  the  minister,  wondering  at  the  hasty  summons,
and  foreboding  no  good  to  himself  from  it,  was  proceeding
to  the  meeting  escorted  by  an  armed  retinue.  To  him  Macro
blandly  intimated  that  the  occasion  for  which  the  fathers
were  convened  was  in  fact  no  other  than  the  gracious  ap-
pointment, now  about  to  be  announced,  of  Sejanus  himself
to  the  tribunitian  power,  an  appointment  equivalent,  as  gen-
erally understood,  to  formal  association  in  the  empire.  In-
toxicated with  the  prospect  of  the  consummation,  at  the
moment  when  he  had  rashly  resolved  to  hazard  every  thing
on  a  daring  treason,  Sejanus  was  thrown  completely  off  his
guard.  Shaking  off  at  the  temple  door  the  attendance  of
his  clients  and  soldiers,  he  entered  with  a  light  step  and
smiling  countenance;  while  Macro,  hastily  communicating
to  the  praetorians  without  that  he  was  appointed  their  pre-
fect, and  promising  them  an  ample  largess  on  his  installation,
induced  them  to  return  with  him  to  their  camp,  and  attend
while  he  announced  the  circumstance  to  their  comrades.  He
only  waited  to  present  the  emperor's  letter  to  the  consuls,
and  then  withdrew  quietly  in  the  tumult  of  applause  which
greeted  it,  leaving  Laco  to  watch  the  proceedings.  He  re-
quired a  little  time  to  compose  the  temjjer  of  the  guards,  of
whose  ready  acceptance  of  his  appointment  he  could  not

A.U.  T84.1  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  225

feel  secure.  With  this  object  the  letter  of  Tiberius  had  been
made  more  than  usually  diffuse.  The  consuls  handed  it  in
due  form  to  the  quaestor,  and  as  soon  as  the  buzz  of  expecta-
tion, and  the  compliments,  already  passing  between  Sejanus
and  his  flatterers,  who  comprehended  the  great  body  of  the
senate,  were  hushed,  it  was  deliberately  recited.

Sejanus  composed  himself  to  endure  the  long  preamble
of  the  imperial  missive,  such  as  had  before  often  taxed  his
patience,  but  never  so  much  as  on  this  fatal  occa-  His  digpatch  t0
sion.1  It  commenced  with  a  passing  reference  to  the  senate-
various  affairs  of  state ;  then  diverged  to  a  gentle  reproof  of
Sejanus  himself  for  some  trifling  neglect ;  thence  wandered
again  to  more  general  subjects,  mixed  with  strange,  and  as
it  seemed  fantastic,  complaints  of  the  solitude  of  the  poor
old  man,  and  his  precarious  position.  It  required  one  of  the
consuls  to  come  with  a  military  force  to  Capreae,  and  escort
the  princeps  into  the  city,  that  in  the  midst  of  his  faithful
citizens  he  might  securely  unbosom  his  griefs.  From  these
desultory  complaints,  however,  the  letter  descended  grad-
ually to  particulars,  and  proceeded  to  demand  the  punish-
ment of  certain  personages  well  known  as  adherents  of  Se-
janus. For  some  time  the  senators  had  been  growing  un-
easy, not  knowing  what  upshot  to  anticipate  to  a  missive,
the  tone  of  which  waxed  less  and  less  in  harmony  with  the
addresses  to  which  they  had  been  accustomed.  One  by  one
they  slunk  away  from  the  minister's  side,  and  left  him  won-
dering and  irresolute,  still  clinging  to  the  hope  that  all
would  end  as  he  wished,  and  shrinking  to  the  last  from
the  appeal  to  force,  which  must  irrevocably  compromise
him.  The  agitation  of  the  assembly  became  more  marked.
Sejanus  looked  anxiously  around.  Suddenly,  before  the
whole  letter  was  yet  unrolled,  he  found  himself  closely
thronged  by  the  chiefs  of  the  senate,  and  precluded  from
shifting  his  position,  while  the  sentence  with  which  the  long
missive  terminated  denounced  him  by  name  as  a  traitor,  and

1  Juvenal,  x.  71. :  "  Vcrbosa  ct  grandia  cpistola  venit  A.  Capreia."
vol.  v. — 15

226  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  31.

required  the  consuls  to  place  him  under  arrest.  Regulus
called  on  him  to  surrender.  Unaccustomed  to  hear  the  voice
of  authority,  or  bewildered  with  the  sense  of  danger,  he
paused,  and  on  a  second  summons  demanded  in  confusion
whether  he  was  actually  called '?  Once  more  the  summons
was  repeated,  and  as  he  rose,  Laco  confronted  him  sword  in
hand,  the  senators  sprang  in  a  body  to  their  feet,  and  heaped
insults  and  reproaches  upon  him  ;  while  Regulus,  fearing  the
risks  of  delay,  staid  not  to  put  the  question  to  the  vote,  but

Seanus is ar-  on  tne  nrs*  vmce  given  for  his  arrest,  bade  the
rested,  lictors  seize  his  hands,  and  hurried  him  off  under

an  escort  of  guards  and  magistrates.  Rapidly  as  he  was
transported  from  the  Palatine  to  the  Mamertine  dungeon,  for
no  measures  of  law  or  etiquette  were  kept  at  a  crisis  of  such
peril,  the  populace  was  already  apprised  of  his  disgrace,  and
as  he  was  led  across  the  forum  he  might  behold  with  his
own  eyes  the  consummation  of  his  fall,  in  the  overthrow  of
his  statues  with  ropes  and  hatchets.  The  effigies  of  public
men,  conspicuous  in  the  Sacred  Way,  or  enshrined  in  halls
and  theatres,  served  often  to  divert  from  more  important  ob-
jects the  fury  of  an  enraged  populace.  To  crush  the  marble
image  of  an  enemy  to  powder,  to  break  the  gold  or  brass  for
the  melting  pot,  and  condemn  to  ignoble  uses  the  hated
limbs  and  lineaments,  was  the  first  impulse  of  scorn  and  pas-
sion, and  might  sometimes  save  his  palace  from  destruction
and  his  family  from  outrage.1  Macro  in  the  meantime  had
not  been  less  successful  in  the  camp.  By  boldly  advancing
his  offers  to  an  immense  amount,  he  had  appeased  the  first
outbreak  of  sedition  among  the  soldiers,  and  when  the  sena-
tors ascertained  that  they  were  secure  on  that  side,  they  met
again  the  same  day  in  the  temple  of  Concord,  as  the  spot
nearest  to  the  prison.  Here,  encouraged  by  the  acclamations
of  the  people  and  the  indifference  of  the  praetorians,  they
proceeded  to  anticipate  the  well-perceived  wish  of  the  sover-

See  the  well-known  lines  of  Juvenil,  x.  61.  foil. :

"  Ex  facie  toto  orbe  secunda
Fiunt  urceoli,  pelves,  sartago,  patellae."

A.U.  784.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  227

eign,  by  decreeing  death  to  the  traitor.  Seja-  andputt0
nus  -was  immediately  strangled  in  the  depths  of  deatk
his  prison,  and  his  body  dragged  to  the  foot  of  the  Gemonian
stairs  for  exposure.  His  death  was  followed  without  delay
by  the  arrest  of  his  family,  his  kinsmen  and  friends,  the  ac-
complices of  his  cherished  schemes,  or  the  instruments  of  his
fraud  and  cruelty ;  while  every  one  who  hated  the  favourite
or  professed  to  love  the  emperor  hurried  to  the  spot  where
his  remains  were  lying,  and  trampled  with  contumely  on  the
ruins  of  power.1

The  first  days  which  followed  this  catastrophe  at  Rome
were  filled  with  scenes  of  confusion  and  slaughter.  The
populace  rushing  from  one  extreme  to  the  other,  confusion  at
now  denounced  the  fallen  minister  as  the  per-  ^j? orders  of8
verter  of  the  emperor's  well-known  generosity,  cilizons-
and  wreaked  on  his  friends  and  creatures  their  vengeance  for
every  wrong  inflicted  by  Tiberius  on  the  children  and  adher-
ents of  Germanicus.  The  praetorians  were  offended  at  the
superior  reliance  the  emperor  had  placed  on  the  police,  and
vented  their  unreasonable  indignation  in  acts  of  riot  and
plunder.  The  senators,  one  and  all,  apprehensive  of  the  jeal-
ousy both  of  the  emperor  and  the  populace,  rushed  headlong
to  condemn  every  act  of  flattery  they  had  so  lately  commit-
ted. They  decreed  that  none  should  wear  mourning  for  the
traitor,  that  a  statue  of  Liberty  should  be  erected  in  the
forum,  that  a  day  of  rejoicing  should  be  held,  and  finally
that  the  anniversary  of  the  happy  event  should  be  sanctified
by  extraordinary  shows  and  solemnities.  Excessive  honours,
they  proclaimed,  should  never  again  be  paid  to  a  subject :
and  no  vow  should  be  conceived  in  the  name  of  any  mortal
man,  save  of  the  emperor  only.8  Yet,  so  inconsistent  is  ser-
vility, they  heaped  in  the  same  breath  distinctions  almost

1  Dion,  lviii.  9-11.;  Seneca  die  Tranqii.  Anim.  ii.  9.:  "Quo  die  ilium  scna-
tus  deduxerat  populu.s  in  frusta  divisit." Juvenal,  1.  c.

1  The  few  existing  coins  of  Scjanus  have  been  purposely  defaced,  Eckhel,
Doclr.  Numm.  vii.  195.  We  have  busts  ascribed  to  Drutus,  Cicero,  and  An-
tonius,  but  none,  I  believe,  of  the  disgraced  minion  of  Tiberius.

228  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  31.

equal  to  those  of  Sejanus  upon  both  Macro  and  Laco,  which
only  the  good  sense  of  those  fortunate  officers  induced  them
to  decline.  They  urged  Tiberius  to  accept  the  title  of  Father
of  his  Country,  an  assumption  he  had  ever  modestly  declined,
and  now  again  rejected  with  becoming  resolution,  as  well  as
the  proposal  that  the  senate  should  swear  to  all  his  acts.
His  rugged  nature  was  softened  by  the  sense  of  his  deliver-
ance. The  iron  tears  glistened  on  his  cheek.  Steadfast  as  I
feel  myself  he  said,  in  good  and  patriotic  principles,  yet  all
things  human  are  liable  to  change  /  and  never,  so  may  the
gods  help  me,  will  I  bind  the  fathers  to  respect  all  the  future
acts  of  one  who,  even  by  falling  from  his  right  senses,  may
at  any  time  fall  from  virtue.1

Tiberius,  however,  on  his  solitary  rock  had  suffered  hours
of  intense  and  restless  anxiety.  The  desperate  resolution  to
intense  anxiety  wnicn  he  had  braced  himself  for  the  destruction
of  Tiberius.  0f  Sejanus  had  given  a  shock  to  his  whole  sys-
tem, and  during  the  interval  of  suspense  he  seemed  alto-
gether unnerved.  He  had  disposed  a  system  of  telegraphic
communications  to  reach  from  Rome  to  Caprese ;  and  while,
planted  on  the  highest  pinnacle  of  his  island,  he  watched  for
the  concerted  signal  of  success  or  failure,  a  squadron  of  the
swiftest  triremes  lay  ready  below  to  waft  him,  if  required,
without  delay  to  the  legions  of  Gaul  or  Syria."  When  at
last  the  news  of  the  arrest  and  execution  reached  him,  though
relieved  from  an  intolerable  anxiety,  he  was  yet  so  far  from
recovering  his  equanimity  that  he  refused  admittance  to  the
deputation  of  senators,  knights,  and  citizens  sent  in  haste  to
congratulate  him;  nor  would  he  even  grant  an  interview
to  Regulus,  his  well-tried  adherent,  when  he  came,  as  the
letter  had  directed  him,  to  escort  the  emperor  to  Rome  with
a  military  equipage.

That  the  fall  of  a  discarded  favourite  should  be  followed
by  the  disgrace  of  his  family,  and  perhaps  of  his  intimate

1  Suet  Tib.  67.

2  Dion,  lviii.  13.;  Suet.  Tib.  65.:  "  Speculabundus  ex  altissima  rupe."

A.U.  784.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  229

associates,  would  not  be  extraordinary  under  any

.  .  ,  .....  T Proscription  of

monarchical  regime ;  but  the  wide  and  sangui-  the  friends  of
nary  proscription  which  now  descended  on  the
nobility  of  Rome  may  confirm  our  surmise  of  the  actual
guilt  of  Sejanus,  and  of  the  discovery  of  a  real  plot  against
the  ruler.  Had  indeed  the  long  gathering  discontent  of  the
citizens  come  at  last  to  a  head  ?  were  the  murmurs  which,
whether  waking  or  sleeping,  ever  pressed  on  the  ears  of  Ti-
berius, actually  about  to  explode  in  revolt  or  assassination  ?
was  the  long  day-dream  of  his  life,  that  he  held  a  wolf  by
the  ears,  on  the  point  of  being  realized  in  a  fatal  catastro-
phe ?  Such  at  least  was  the  conviction  under  which  his
courage  and  even  his  reason  staggered.  Tormented  as  he
was  "by  these  miserable  alarms,  we  can  be  little  surprised  at
the  bloodshed  in  which  he  sought  to  drown  his  apprehen-
sions. Yet  in  the  midst  of  his  frenzy,  he  was  not  unmindful
of  his  accustomed  policy.  The  culprits  whom  he  demanded
for  punishment  were,  at  least  at  first,  a  few  only  of  the  most
conspicuous  ;  and  these,  with  perhaps  one  or  two  exceptions,
he  was  content  to  reserve  for  a  future  sentence.  The  choice
as  well  as  the  condemnation  of  the  majority  of  these  vic-
tims fell  to  the  senate  itself,  which  partly  from  hatred  of  the
fallen  minister,  partly  to  ingratiate  itself  with  its  terrified
master,  lent  a  ready  ear  to  the  delators,  or  impelled  the
course  of  justice  with  encouragements  and  rewards.  Among
the  first  to  follow  the  fortunes  of  Sejanus  was  his  uncle
Blaesus,  the  object  but  recently  of  such  special  honours.
Yet  the  sons  of  Blaesus  Avere  spared ;  and  even  a  brother  of
the  great  criminal  was  suffered  to  escape,  though,  if  we  may
believe  a  strange  anecdote  which  has  been  reported  to  us,  he
had  ventured  to  hold  up  the  emperor  to  unseemly  ridicule.1

1  The  voluntary  deaths  of  two  Blaesi,  evidently  near  relations  and  probably
sons  of  Blaesus  the  uncle,  arc  mentioned  on  a  latter  occasion.  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  40.
Lucius  Sejanus,  as  pnetor,  had  taken  the  fancy  of  ridiculing  Tiberius,  who  was
bald,  by  collecting  a  set  of  bald  performers  for  the  Floralia.  The  5000  link
boys,  who  were  appointed  to  light  the  populace  on  their  return  from  the  theatre,
were  all  closely  shaven. Tiberius  pretended  not  to  notice  the  insult. Bald

230  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

One  of  his  nearest  associates,  named  Terentius,  was  suffered
to  plead  that,  in  giving  his  confidence  to  the  favourite  in  the
height  of  his  influence,  he  had  done  no  more  than  follow  the
example  of  Tiberius  himself.  A  horrid  story  indeed  is  re-
lated of  the  execution  of  the  young  children  of  Sejanus,  who
were  hurried  off  to  death,  with  circumstances  perhaps  of
more  than  ordinary  atrocity,  in  the  first  frenzy  of  the  pro-
scription.1 It  has  been  imagined  that  the  historian  Velleius
Paterculus,  whose  brief  but  spirited  sketch  of  Roman  affairs
terminates  with  the  sixteenth  year  of  Tiberius,  and  who  is
notorious  for  his  flattery  of  Sejanus,  was  involved  in  the  gen-
eral wreck  of  the  fallen  minister's  adherents  :  but  there  seems
no  reason  to  suppose  this,  the  work  itself  having  evidently
reached  its  destined  termination.2  On  the  whole,  it  would
appear  that  Tiberius,  hardly  less  afraid  to  follow  up  his  blow
than  in  the  first  instance  to  strike  it,  was  satisfied  with
watching  from  his  retreat,  which  for  several  months  he  did
not  venture  to  quit,  the  proceedings  of  the  senate  against  all
who  could  be  deemed  his  enemies.  Nor  was  it  only  fear  for
himself  that  alternately  exasperated  and  unnerved  him.  A
terrible  disaster  recurred  to  his  memory.  The  death  of  his
son  had  been  unexpected  and  premature.  Sejanus  had  so-
licited the  widow  in  marriage. Suspicion  worked  fiercely  in

men,  adds  the  historian,  were  from  that  time  called  Sejani,  one  does  not  well
see  why. Dion,  lviii.  19.

1  The  story  can  only  be  told  in  the  words  of  Tacitus  himself:  "Portantur
in  carcerem  filius  imminentium  intelligens,  puella  adeo  nescia,  ut  crebro  inter-
rogaret,  quod  ob  delictum,  et  quo  traheretur  ?  neque  facturam  ultra :  et  posse
se  pucrili  verbere  moneri.  Tradunt  temporis  ejus  auctores  quia  triumvirali
supplicio  adfici  virginem  inauditum  habebatur,  a  carnifice  laqueum  juxta  com-
pressam :  exin  oblisis  faucibus,  id  aetatis  corpora  in  Gemonias  abjecta."  Ann.
v.  9.  By  the  salvo,  "  tradunt,"  &c,  I  conceive  the  writer  to  intimate  that  the
story  was  not  detailed  in  all  its  horrors  by  accredited  histories,  but  was  one  of
the  flying  anecdotes  of  the  day  (comp.  Ann.  i.  1. :  "Recentibus  odiis  compo-
sitse"),  which  he  found  too  piquant  to  omit  from  his  tableau.  Compare  the
reference  to  it  in  Suetonius,  who  carelessly  generalizes  the  particular  story  into
an  ordinary  occurrence.  Tib.  61.  Dion  (lviii.  11.)  merely  copies  from  the
above.

8  Veil.  ii.  131.:  "  Voto  finiendum  volumen  sit."

A.U.  784.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  231

the  tyrant's  brain.  Had  Drusus  perished  by  poison,  and  was
Sejanus  the  murderer  ?  The  surmise  was  speedily  verified.
Apicata,  the  divorced  wife  of  Sejanus,  had  been  spared  in
the  search  after  the  accomplices  of  his  recent  crimes.  Her
hatred  to  the  husband  who  had  so  deeply  injured  her  was  a
sufficient  guarantee  perhaps  for  her  innocence  of  all  concert
with  him  now.  But  when  she  saw  her  children  involved  in
the  fate  of  their  father  she  was  distracted  with  conflicting
feelings. As  the  last  revenge  she  could  take  on

~  ^  V  engoance  on

the  cause  of  all  her  misery,  she  revealed  every the  murderers

, .  , , , i <»  -r-v  of  Drusus.

circumstance  connected  with  the  death  oi  Drusus,
with  which  she  appears  to  have  made  herself  well  acquainted,,
the  amours  of  Sejanus  and  Livilla,  their  guilty  hopes  and
machinations,  and  the  means  by  which  they  effected  the  de-
struction of  their  victim.  Having  made  this  disclosure,  and
excited  the  horror  and  dismay  of  the  emperor  to  a  pitch  of
frenzy,  she  put  an  end  to  her  own  life.  Eight  years  had
elapsed  since  the  crime  had  been  committed  ;  but  means  for
investigating  the  circumstances  were  still  at  hand,  nor  were
objects  wanting  on  whom  the  thirst  for  vengeance  might  be
wreaked.  The  slaves  and  other  agents  employed  were
sought  out  and  questioned  in  the  presence  of  Tiberius  at
Capreae,  and  the  guilt  of  Livilla  established  beyond  a  doubt.1
The  public  execution  of  a  daughter  of  the  imperial  house  was
still  an  act  from  which  the  emperor  Avould  shrink ;  but  he
had  other  means  not  less  sure  for  punishing  her,  and  the  re-
port that,  spared  the  cord  or  the  falchion,  she  was  starved  to
death  in  the  custody  of  Antonia  seems  not  unworthy  of
belief.4

Early  in  the  year  785  Tiberius  crossed  the  narrow  strait
which  separates  Capreoe  from  Surentum,  and  made  a  progress

1  The  stones  of  the  tortures  which  used  to  be  enacted  in  the  presence  of
Tiberius  at  Capreee  for  his  amusement,  of  the  bodies  thrown  over  the  dill's,  &c.
(Suet.  Tib.  G2.),  originated  probably  in  the  report  of  the  proceedings  of  this  do-
mestic tribunal.

2  Comp.  Suet.  Tib.  C'J.  with  Dion,  lviii.  11.

232  HISTORr  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  32.

__ .  along  the  Campanian  coast,  as  if  about  to  revisit

Tiberius  quits ...  . .  .

Caprese  and  ap- his  capital. The  citizens,  still  willing  to  deceive

proaches  Eorue.  ,  .  °

themselves  as  to  his  character  and  motives,  were
exulting  in  the  assurance  that  with  the  fall  of  Sejanus  a
marked  and  happy  change  would  appear  in  his  behaviour.
To  the  blighting  influence  of  an  unworthy  favourite  they
fondly  ascribed  the  reserve,  the  moroseness,  and  hardness  of
their  master's  temper,  forgetting  how  the  germs  of  these
vices  had  been  already  manifested  in  his  early  youth,  and
that  they  were  such  as  advancing  years  could  riot  fail  to
confirm  and  aggravate.  But  as  they  had  lately  clapped
their  hands  with  savage  delight  over  every  fresh  victim
offered  to  the  emperor's  safety,  so  they  were  now  prepared
to  welcome  the  emperor  himself,  as  one  restored  from  an
unjust  exile,  and  to  exchange  with  him  smiles  of  mutual  love
and  reviving  confidence.  From  Rhodes  he  had  returned  to
the  cold  embrace  of  a  haughty  father  ;  from  Caprese  he
would  be  welcomed  by  the  acclamations  of  a  humble  and
self-reproachful  people.  But  the  ardent  greeting  they  re-
served for  him  was  destined  never  to  be  tendered.  They
were  surprised,  perhaps,  to  hear  that  his  excessive  timidity
had  induced  him  to  quit  the  land,  and  take  refuge  on  board
a  trireme,  which  bore  him  up  the  Tiber,  while  guards  at-
tended on  his  progress,  and  rudely  cleared  away  the  specta-
tors from  either  bank.  Such  was  the  strange  fashion  in
which  he  ascended  the  river  as  far  as  the  Csesarean  Gardens
and  the  Xaumachia  of  Augustus  ;  but  on  reaching  this  spot,
and  coming  once  more  beneath  the  hills  of  Rome,  he  sud-
denly turned  his  prow  without  landing,  and  glided  rapidly
down  the  stream,  nor  did  he  pause  again  till  he  had  regained
his  island.1  This  extraordinary  proceeding,  the  effect  of  fear
or  disgust,  caused  no  doubt  deep  mortification  among  the
populace.  It  was  followed  by  indignant  murmurs,  and
petulantly  ascribed  to  the  foulest  motives.  Such,  it  was
muttered,  was  the  caprice,  not  of  a  princeps  or  an  imperator,

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  1.

A.U.  785.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  233

the  child  of  law  and  organized  government,  but  of  a  kin 2 :
such  a  king  as  ruled  with  despotic  sway  over  the  slaves  of
Asia ;  such  a  king  as,  guarded  in  the  citadel  of  Ctesijflion  or
Artaxata,  despised  all  human  feelings,  and  trampled  on  all
principles,  sporting,  for  his  selfish  pleasure,  with  not  the
lives  only,  hut  the  honour  of  his  miserable  subjects  ;  such  as
tore  from  them  their  children  to  mutilate  or  deflower,  and
stimulated  his  brutal  passions  by  the  nobility  of  his  victims.
All  this  and  worse  was  now  freely  ascribed  to  the

i  *■ r^  -ii-i-  t Atrocious  li-

recluse  01  Caprese  : he  slunk,  it  was  asserted, centiousness

„  i  • 1  r- i  t  t  i ascribed  to  him.

trom  the  sight  01  the  good  and  pure,  to  the
obscurity  of  his  detestable  orgies  ;  he  was  the  patron  of
panders,  the  sport  of  minions  ;  he  was  drunk  with  wine,  and
drunk  with  blood  ;  the  details  which  were  freely  circulated
of  his  cruelty  and  licentiousness  were  coloured  from  the  most
loathsome  scenes  of  the  stews  and  the  slave-market.

Such,  unfortunately,  w*as  the  open  and  flagrant  character
of  Roman  vice,  that  even  the  best  and  purest  of  the  citizens
were  too  much  familiarized  w*ith  its  worst  feat-  Thisiicentious-
ures  to  shrink  from  describing  it  w*ith  hideous  mra  wcV^fMs
minuteness.  We  may  be  permitted  to  cast  a  veil  class-
over  a  picture  which  called  up  no  blush  on  the  face  of  that
generation,  the  fidelity  of  which,  as  regards  Tiberius  himself,
we  have  no  right  either  to  affirm  or  deny.  The  excessive
sensuality  of  the  Roman  nobles,  pampered  by  all  the  appli-
ances of  art  and  luxury,  w*as  in  fact  the  frenzy  of  a  class
deprived  of  the  healthy  stimulus  of  public  action,  and  raised
above  the  restraints  of  decency  and  self-respect.  The  worst
iniquities  ascribed  to  Tiberius  may  be  paralleled  in  the  con-
duct of  private  individuals,  the  accounts  of  which  may  have
been  coloured  by  a  prurient  imagination,  but  at  least  have
not been distorted by malice.1 The senators, however,

1  If  I  accept  the  charges  of  Tacitus  and  Suetonius  against  Tiberius,  it  is
from  my  persuasion  of  the  general  character  of  vice  in  high  places,  as  pour-
I raved  by  Juvenal,  Pliny,  Seneca,  Petronius,  and  in  fact  almost  every  writer  of
these  times.  Gems,  mosaics,  and  other  objects  have  been  found  in  modern
times  at  Capri,  representing,  it  is  said,  the  very  monstrosities  indicated  by  the

234  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  33.

evinced  no  shame  at  the  degradation  into  which  their  chief
had  fallen.  They  hastened  to  vote  that  the  estates  of  Seja-
nus  should  be  confiscated,  not  to  the  treasury  of  the  state,
but  to  the  private  purse  of  the  emperor ;  and  then,  appre-
hending perhaps  that  his  late  hasty  retreat  had  been  caused
by  distrust  of  his  subjects,  ordained  that  whenever  he  vouch-
safed to  visit  the  Curia  a  special  guard  of  their  own  body
should  attend  upon  him.  A  similar  honour  had  been  tendered
to  Julius  Caesar,  and  even  Augustus,  on  a  certain  occasion,
had  availed  himself  of  such  a  protection  ;  it  is  not  easy,
therefore,  to  understand  why  it  should  have  been  left  in  this
case  to  one  of  the  least  considerable  of  the  order  to  propose,
or  be  discussed  and  sanctioned  with  a  smile  of  ridicule.1
Tiberius,  however,  declined  the  equivocal  compliment,  which,
indeed,  would  have  little  served  to  calm  his  fears  had  he
really  entertained  the  intention  of  again  entering  the  senate-
house  ;  for  it  was  among  his  proposed  guards  themselves,  of
whom  few  were  not  related  to  or  associated  with  some  of  his
victims,  that  his  most  dangerous  enemies  were  numbered.
At  this  moment  his  breast  was  torn  by  conflicting  alarms.
When  his  first  fury  against  Sejanus  was  satiated,  or  his  first
blind  apprehensions  removed,  he  showed  an  inclination  to
desist  from  the  proscription,  and  allow  himself  in  more  than
one  instance  to  be  swayed  to  mercy ;  not  from  compassion
or  clemency  perhaps,  but  through  fear  of  irritating  too
many  families,  and  aggravating  the  perils  against  which  he
was  guarding.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  spirit  of  delation
which  he  had  evoked  was  now  too  potent  to  be  laid.  It  had
become  the  ambition,  the  glory,  the  livelihood  of  many  ;  and
to  deprive  them  of  it  was  to  sow  the  seeds  of  perilous  dis-

historians,  and  have  been  considered  as  conclusive  proofs  of  the  facts  charged
against  him.  It  is  quite  possible,  however,  that  these  objects  were  suggested
by  the  descriptions  themselves.  At  all  events  it  must  be  remembered  that  the
island  was  occupied  by  many  successive  proprietors  after  Tiberius,  and  among
them  by  the  virtuous  M.  Aurelius,  all  of  whom  must  have  had  these  indecent
figures  constantly  in  their  sight.  The  age  and  the  class  must  bear  their  share
of  the  common  guilt :  "  factum  defendite  vestrum,  consensistis  enim."
1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  2. ;  Dion,  lviii.  17.

A.U.  T86.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  235

satisfaction  among  the  cleverest,  the  boldest,  and  the  most
desperate  class  of  citizens.  "While  trimming  the  vessel  of
his  fortunes  between  this  Scylla  and  Charybdis,  another  rock
soon  appeared  ahead.  News  was  brought  to  Rome  that  a
pretender  to  the  name  of  the  unfortunate  Drusus,  still  a
prisoner  in  the  palace,  had  appeared  in  Achaia  and  Asia,  and
had  deceived  many  by  the  similarity  of  his  person,  and  the
devotion  to  him  of  some  of  the  freedmen  of  the  emperor
himself.  As  the  reputed  son  of  Germanicus  he  was  received
in  various  quarters  with  open  arms.  The  Greeks  were  easily
moved  by  anything  strange  and  novel ;  the  legions  of  Egypt
and  Syria,  to  which  he  was  making  his  way,  had  loved  and
admired  the  man  he  claimed  for  his  father.  But  the  vigour
of  the  imperial  commanders  speedily  checked  his  enterprise.
He was pursued across the ./Egean and  the

1  g  ...  An  impostor

Isthmus  of  Corinth  to  Nicopolis  in  Epirus,  where, arrested  and

r  . f .  put  to  death.

it  appeared,  having  been  more  strictly  interroga-
ted, he  had  retracted  his  first  assertion,  and  represented  him-
self as  of  noble,  but  inferior  and  less  invidious  parentage.
From  Epirus  he  had  taken  ship  as  if  for  Italy,  while  the
emperor  was  duly  apprised  by  his  lieutenants  that  he  might
be  expected  to  arrive  there.  This,  according  to  some  ac-
counts, was  the  last  that  was  publicly  heard  of  him  :  other
writers,  however,  pretended  to  know  for  certain  that  he  fell
into  the  hands  of  the  emperor,  and  was  promptly  destroyed.'
The  miserable  ends  of  Drusus  and  Agrippina,  which
followed  at  no  long  interval,  were  possibly  determined  and
hastened  bv  this  untoward  event. When  Tibe- „ „_,

t  J  t  Horrible  end

rius  perceived  how  easily  even  a  false  Drusus of  the  young

,  ....  .  Drusus.

might  lead  a  movement  against  him,  he  might  be
impelled  at  last  to  make  his  decision  regarding  the  fate  of
the  real  one. What  that  decision  would  be  could  not  be  for
a  moment  doubtful. The  poor  youth  had  been  too  fearfully
wronged  to  be  again  trusted  with  liberty. Yet  Tiberius

1  Tacitus  (Ann.  v.  10.)  relates  this  occurrence  towards  the  end  of  the  year
784,  while  Dion  (lviii.  25.)  places  it  as  late  as  787,  supposing,  perhaps,  that  it
could  not  have  occurred  before  the  death  of  the  real  Drusus.

236  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  33.

must  have  regretted  the  step  he  had  taken,  at  the  suggestion
of  Sejanus,  of  alienating  his  innocent  kinsman  from  him.  It
was  not  that  he  wished  to  clear  the  field  of  promotion  for  a
grandson  by  the  removal  of  his  grand-nephews.  To  Caius,
the  youngest  son  of  Germanicus,  he  was  at  the  moment  dis-
playing the  highest  favour,  while  he  kept  his  mother  and
brother  in  such  cruel  durance.  To  the  stripling  Caius  he
seemed  already  to  hold  out  the  prospect  of  succession  :  he
bred  him  under  his  own  eye  at  Capreae  ;  he  kept  him  close
in  attendance  on  his  person,  and  gave  him  in  marriage
one  of  the  noblest  maidens  of  the  city,  the  daughter  of
M.  Junius  Silanus.1  It  was  rumoured,  not  unnaturally,
that  he  was  about  to  reconcile  himself  to  the  surviving  mem-
bers of  his  nephew's  family,  to  atone  for  the  death  of  Nero
by  the  release  and  reinstatement  in  their  proper  honours  of
Drusus  and  Agrippina.  But  the  relentless  monster  had
determined  far  otherwise.  Not  only  had  he  destined  Drusus,
after  three  years'  confinement,  to  death,  but  he  allowed  him
to  perish  in  lingering  torment  by  withholding  from  him
necessary  food.  On  the  subject  of  death  by  starvation  the
Romans  seem  to  have  had  a  peculiar  feeling  which  we  can
hardly  understand.  In  many  cases  of  suicide  which  occurred
about  this  period,  we  find  the  sufferer  choosing  rather  to
perish  miserably  by  inanition  than  to  give  himself  a  blow.
More  particularly  we  may  observe  in  the  imperial  murders
which  have  been  recorded,  that  the  victim  was  often  left  to
die  of  mere  want,  and  untouched  by  the  sword.  A  super-
stitious notion  may  have  been  current  that  death  by  famine
was  a  kind  of  divine  infliction  ;  it  might  seem  like  simply
leaving  nature  to  take  its  appointed  course.  The  Romans
were  so  familiar  with  the  practice  of  exposing  infants,  and
even  the  infirm  and  old  among  their  slaves,  that  they  may
have  regarded  with  some  lenity  the  crime  of  murder  in  this,
as  they  deemed  it,  extenuated  form.  It  was  merely,  forsooth,
leaving  to  the  care  of  the  gods  those  whom  it  was  incon-

1  Suet.  Califf.  12.;  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  20. M.  Junius  Silanus  was  the  brother
of  Decimus  Silanus,  the  paramour  of  the  younger  Julia.

A.U.  786.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  237

venient  or  impolitic  to  care  for  oneself.  Tiberius,  with  a
bluntness  of  perception  which  seems  almost  inconceivable,
addressed  a  letter  to  the  senate,  detailing  in  the  minutest
way  the  circumstances  of  this  miserable  death,  showing
how  the  poor  wretch  had  prolonged  his  existence  for  nine
days  by  gnawing  the  stuffing  of  his  pallet,  and  recording
every  sigh  and  groan  he  had  uttered,  even  to  the  last  impre-
cations he  had  heaped  on  his  tormentor.  Every  syllable  was
duly  vouched  by. the  testimony  of  slaves,  who  had  been  set
to  watch  his  last  moments.  It  is  impossible  to  believe  that
this  was  a  mere  wanton  piece  of  unnatui'al  cruelty.  It  must
have  had  a  political  purpose  ;  and  we  may  conjecture  that  it
was  meant,  first,  to  establish  on  unquestionable  testimony,
the  actual  demise  of  Drusus;  and,  secondly,  to  prove  that  no
drop  of  the  Julian  blood  had  been  shed,  no  spark  of  his
divine  spirit  extinguished,  by  the  hand  of  the  executioner.1

The  senate  shuddered,  we  are  assured,  with  horror  at  the
recital  of  this  abominable  epistle ;  but  the  prosecution  of  the
house  of  Germanicus  had  not  yet  reached  its  AoTippina
climax.  After  the  downfall  of  Sejanus,  in  whom  starves  herself.
she  recognised  her  fiercest  enemy,  Agrippina  may  have  al-
lowed herself  to  indulge  fresh  hopes.  But  it  soon  became
only  too  manifest  that  the  crimes  of  Sejanus,  by  which  she
had  herself  so  grievously  suffered,  were  made  a  pretext  for
cruelties  with  which  they  had  no  connexion,  and  that  the  ex-
asperation of  the  emperor  against  his  old  minister  would
bring  no  alleviation  to  the  lot  of  that  minister's  victims.  She
continued  to  linger  in  cheerless  exile  :  whether  in  that  soli-
tude she  was  afflicted  with  the  intelligence  of  her  two  elder
sons'  miserable  end,  or  suffered  to  learn  the  favour  with
which  her  youngest  was  at  the  same  time  entertained,  she
seems  in  either  case  to  have  soon  despaired  for  herself,  and
to  have  resolved  to  escape  by  her  own  deed  from  miseries
which  were  now  past  relief.  It  was  reported  that  she  put  an
end  to  her  own  existence  by  pertinacious  abstinence  from

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  24. ;  Suet.  Tib.  65. ;  Dion,  lviiii.  13.  (a.  v.  786.  a.  d.  33.)

238  HISTORY OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  33.

food,  in  spite  of  the  emperor's  command  that  nourishment
should  be  forced  upon  her ;  an  act  of  fortitude  not  unworthy
of  her  determined  and  vigorous  character.  Even  after  her
death  Tiberius  was  base  enough  to  insult  her  memory,  by
charsrino:  her  with  a  criminal  amour,  and  insinuating-  that
she  had  abandoned  life  in  disgust  and  mortification  at  the
execution  of  her  lover  Asinius.  The  common  voice  of  her
fellow-citizens,  not  too  prone  to  believe  in  virtue,  absolved
her  from  this  foul  accusation ;  her  faults  were  not  those  at
least  of  feminine  weakness,  and  had  her  chastity  been  as-
sailable, it  would  not  perhaps  have  withstood  the  artifices  of
Sejanus.1  Nevertheless,  that  her  memory  might  be  branded
with  ignominy,  Tiberius  required  the  senate  to  pronounce
the  anniversary  of  her  birth  a  day  of  evil  omen,  and  to  note
in  the  calendar  as  providential  coincidence  that  her  death
had  occurred  on  the  day  of  the  punishment  of  Sejanus.  He
claimed  credit  for  himself  that  he  had  not  taken  her  life  by
violent  means,  and  had  forborne  from  exposing  her  body  in  the
Gemoniae.  The  senate  acquiesced  and  applauded  as  it  was
required,  and  decreed  solemn  thanks  to  the  emperor  for  his
clemency  ;  moreover,  that  a  yearly  festival  should  be  cele-
brated on  the  auspicious  eighteenth  of  October.  The  remains
of  Agrippina  and  her  children  were  excluded  from  the  mau-
soleum of  the  Caesars,  until  Caius  at  a  later  period  caused  them
to  be  exhumed  from  their  ignoble  sepulchres  and  removed  to
the  resting-place  which  became  them.2

The  prosecution  meanwhile  of  the  friends  of  Sejanus  had
continued  unabated,  the  emperor  vying  with  his  own  crea-
Massacre  of  the  tures  and  flatterers  in  discovering  matter  of  ac-
FriendsbofdSoja-  cusath)n  against  every  one  who  could  be  proved
nus-  or  credibly  suspected  of  participation  in  his  guilt.

1  I  will  not  dwell  upon  the  faults  of  Agrippina ;  but  it  must  be  observed
that  even  Tacitus  represents  them  in  very  strong  language:  "^Equi  impatiens,
dominandi  avida,  virilibus  curis  foeminarum  vitia  exuerat."

2  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  25.  Agrippina  died  on  the  18th  of  October,  786,  two  years
after  Sejanus.  Comp.  Suet.  Tib.  33,  54.;  Callg.  15.;  Dion,  lviii.  22.,  lix.  3.
The  bones  of  Drusus  only  were  dispersed  and  could  not  be  recovered.

A.U.  786.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  239

But  Tiberius  had  actually  shed  the  blood  of  a  few  only :
his  victims  were  quartered  as  captives  on  the  magistrates  and
nobles,  or  confined,  perhaps,  in  stricter  durance  within  his
own  palace.  Some  of  them  had  been  plundered  and  reduced
to  beggary :  some,  perhaps,  had  been  tortured ;  some  were
guilty,  but  their  lives  protected  by  their  powerful  connexions ;
other,  unquestionably  innocent,  might  be  personally  obnox-
ious. Tiberius  was  harassed  by  the  anxiety  of  determining
how  to  apportion  their  punishments  ;  whom  it  might  be  safe
to  pardon,  and  whom  it  Avould  be  invidious  to  destroy.  Sud-
denly the  tyrant  was  seized  with  a  horrid  caprice,  a  fit,  it
may  be,  of  madness,  on  the  verge  of  which  his  unquiet  brain
was  ever  trembling,  and  he  conceived  the  idea  of  relieving
himself  from  his  perplexity  by  a  single  stroke  of  the  pen.
He  issued  an  order,  such  as  there  was  no  parallel  for  in  his
previous  policy,  and  such  as,  in  one  so  little  wont  to  initiate
a  novelty  either  in  counsel  or  in  act,  can  hardly  be  ascribed
to  anything  but  uncontrollable  frenzy,  that  all  the  captives
of  the  Sejanian  conspiracy  should  at  once  be  put  to  death  as
traitors.  The  order  was  executed  without  compunction.
Not  men  only,  but  women ;  not  adults  only,  but  children,
were  involved  in  the  frightful  massacre :  some  were  noble,
many  of  baser  birth ;  in  some  places  they  perished  singly,  in
others  they  fell  in  promiscuous  slaughter  one  upon  another.
The  mangled  bodies  were  exposed  in  the  Gemonise,  and  guards
were  placed  around  to  drive  away  their  mourning  relatives,
or  to  watch  and  report  their  lamentations.  After  some  days'
exposure  the  remains  were  dragged  to  the  river  bank  and
flung  into  the  stream,  and  even  those  which  were  cast  back
upon  the  land  were  forbidden  the  rites  of  sepulture.  The
common  duties  of  humanity,  says  Tacitus,  were  abandoned
in  the  general  terror;  and  all  natural  compassion  cowered  in
silence  beneath  the  tyranny  that  reigned  rampant  in  every
quarter.1

1  Tax:.  Ann.  vi.  19.  Comp.  Suet.  (Tib.  61.),  who,  however,  specifics  twenty  as
the  greatest  number  that  fell,  at  least  on  any  one  day,  and  the  massacre  prob-
ably passed  off  in  a  single  paroxysm. The  language  of  Tacitus,  it  may  be  pro-

240  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  33.

It  lias  been  suggested  that  there  may  have  been  a
touch  of  insanity  in  the  conduct  of  Tiberius  at  this  period,
Despair  and  ancl  certainly  there  is  something  more  than  the
samtTof  Tibe-  mere  atrocity  of  the  acts  themselves  to  counte-
rius-  nance  a  supposition  which  may  afford,  perhaps,  a

slight  relief  to  the  mind  of  the  reader.  The  blood  of  the
Claudii,  as  we  have  before  noticed,  was  tainted,  apparently
through  many  generations,  with  an  hereditary  vice,  some-
times manifesting  itself  in  extravagant  pride  and  insolence,
at  others  in  ungovernable  violence ;  and  the  whole  career  of
Tiberius  from  his  youth  upwards,  in  its  abrupt  alternations
of  control  and  indulgence,  of  labour  and  dissipation,  had
been  such  in  fact  as  might  naturally  lead  to  the  unsettlement
of  his  mental  powers.  This  inward  disturbance  showed  it-
self in  a  very  marked  manner  in  the  startling  inconsistency
which  became  now  more  and  more  apparent  in  his  conduct.
While  at  this  period  Tacitus  denounces  in  the  most  glowing
terms  the  vehemence  and  recklessness  of  his  cruelty,  the
particular  anecdotes  he  relates  of  his  behaviour  are  generally
indicative  of  transient  fits  of  leniency.  He  was  extremely
sensitive,  says  Suetonius,  to  the  pasquinades  which  circulated
against  him  in  the  capital,  to  the  imputation  freely  cast  on
him  of  degrading  and  secret  enormities,  and  to  the  furious
invectives  of  his  perishing  victims.  The  king  of  the  Par-
tisans had  the  audacity  to  address  him  a  letter,  in  which  he
noted  with  disgust  his  indolence  and  shameless  indulgences,
and  urged  him  to  satisfy  by  a  voluntary  death  the  sentiment
of  universal  execration.  Yet  these  charges  and  insults  Ti-
berius himself  freely  published  to  the  world  at  the  very  time
that  he  complained  so  bitterly  of  them :  no  man  could  say

sumed,  is  considerably  exaggerated.  But  Lucan's  tableau  of  the  proscriptions
is  not  improbably  coloured  from  the  account  he  had  himself  heard  from  the
witnesses  of  this  dreadful  sacrifice  (ii.  101.) :

"  Nobilitas  cum  plebe  perit,  lateque  vagatur
Ensis,  et  a  nullo  revocatum  est  pectore  ferrum  ....

....  nee  jam  alveus  aranem,
Nee  retincnt  ripse,  redeuntque  cadavera  campo."

A.  U.  786.1  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  241

•worse  things  of  him  than  he  spontaneously  and  consciously-
admitted  of  himself  in  the  extraordinary  revelations  he  made
of  his  own  feelings.  At  last,  we  are  told,  he  fell  into  a  state
of  disgust  and  desperation.  A  letter  he  addressed  to  the*
senate  has  been  in  part  preserved  to  us  by  his  awe-stricken
contemporaries,  whom  it  deeply  impressed,  breathing  as  it
does  the  very  spirit  of  incipient  madness  in  the  terrors  of  a
distressed  conscience,  unable  to  fasten  on  the  precise  and
proper  object  of  its  perturbation.  What  to  write  to  you,
Fathers,  at  this  juncture,  he  said,  or  hoic  not  to  write,  or  what
to  forbear  from  writing,  the  Gods  confound  me  worse  than  I
feel  day  by  day  confounded,  if  I  know.1  So  had  his  crimes
and  abominations,  says  Tacitus,  redounded  to  his  own  pun-
ishment. Nor  in  vain,  the  historian  goes  on  to  moralize,
was  the  wisest  of  philosophers  wont  to  maintain  that,  could
the  hearts  of  tyrants  be  opened  to  our  gaze,  we  should  behold
there  the  direst  wounds  and  ulcers  /  for  the  mind  is  torn  with
cruelty,  lust,  and  evil  inclinations,  not  less  truly  than  the  body
by  blows.*

The  despair  of  the  now  miserable  tyrant  is  hardly  less
strongly  marked  in  his  distress  at  the  circumstances  of  the  death
of  an  attached  adviser  and  servant,  Cocceius  Ner-  His  mortiflca.
va,  a  man  held  high  in  repute  as  a  legal  authority,  *\™  ft  coC!ul'
and  one  whose  character  and  attainments  were  ceius  NerTa-
among  the  most  respectable  supports  of  the  Cesarean  govern-
ment. The  fortunes  of  Nerva  were  flourishing  in  the  full  sun-
shine of  his  master's  favour ;  his  health  of  body  was  unimpair-
ed, and  his  mind  mature  and  vigorous :  he  had  no  outward  cause
of  chagrin,  none  of  apprehension  for  the  future.  Yet  this
man,  it  was  announced,  had  formed  the  resolution  of  termin-
ating his  own  existence ;  for  it  had  become  the  fashion  to
make  an  avowal  to  one's  friends  and  family  of  such  an  inten-
tion. Tiberius  sought  the  suicide's  chamber,  where  he  was

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  6.  under  the  date  785  :  "His  verbis  exorsus  est,  Quid  scri-
bam  vobis,  P.  C,  aut  quo-modo  scribam,  aut  quid  omnino  non  scribain  hoc  tem-
pore, Pi  me  Deacque  pejus  perdant  quam  perire  me  quotidie  sentio,  si  sciam."

1  Tac.  Ann.  1.  c.  from  Plato  de  Republ.  p.  675. ;  Ritter  in  loc.
vol.  v. — 16

242  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  33.

calmly  awaiting,  in  discourse  with  his  friends  and  relations,
with  resolute  refusal  of  all  sustenance,  a  slow  and  painful
death.  Tiberius  entreated  him  to  explain  the  motive  of  this
desperate  determination,  to  which,  however,  the  sufferer
could  not  be  persuaded  to  return  a  distinct  answer.  With
friendly  zeal  he  solicited  him  to  desist  from  it,  but  again
without  success.  Lastly,  he  urged  how  injurious  it  would  be
to  his  own  reputation  as  emperor,  if  one  of  his  nearest  inti-
mates should  thus  make,  as  it  were,  his  escape  from  life
without  even  assigning  a  motive  to  allay  the  agitation  of  the
public  mind.  Nerva  calmly  waived  all  discussion  upon  the
subject,  and  the  all-powerful  ruler  found  himself  repulsed
and  impotent  in  the  presence  of  one  who  had  sentenced  him-
self to  death.  Those  who  were  best  acquainted  with  the
real  sentiments  of  the  suicide  averred  that  the  melancholy
state  of  affairs  had  filled  the  safe's  mind  with  alarm  and  in-
dignation,  and  that  he  had  deliberately  resolved  to  shun  the
future  with  honour,  while  still  uninjured  and  unassailed.1

Nor,  it  may  be  believed,  did  the  example  of  Nerva  remain
without  imitators. None  of  them,  however,  was  so  illustri-
ous as  L.  Arruntius,  a  noble,  as  we  have  seen,  so

Voluntary  .  .  .  '  '  . .  '

death  of  Ar- distinguished  in  character  and  position  that  Au-

runtius.  .  ..  *  .  ,

gustus  had  not  omitted  to  note  him  among  those
chiefs  of  the  senate  who  might,  as  he  said,  have  contended
with  his  own  heir  for  the  empire.  This  man,  however,  not-
'  withstanding  this  invidious  distinction,  and  in  spite  of  the
crabbed  humour  with  which  he  had  ventured  to  gibe  at  the
emperor  himself,  had  escaped  unharmed  almost  to  the  last
year  of  Tiberius.  Yet  from  the  fortitude  of  his  crowning  act
we  believe  that  he  had  merited  this  escape  by  no  unworthy
compliances  :  he  had  merely  abstained  from  irritating  his
master's  jealousy  by  measuring  himself  with  him  in  overt
opposition.  On  the  occurrence  of  a  disastrous  inundation,  it
was  to  Arruntius  that  the  task  was  assigned  of  providing
for  the  future  security  of  the  city,  which  involved  perhaps

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  26.

A.  U.  786.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  243

some  arbitrary  interference  with  the  rights  of  property,  of
which  the  Romans,  however  great  the  necessity  for  it  might
be,  were  always  excessively  jealous.  At  one  period  Tiberius
proposed  to  remove  him  from  Rome  by  the  honourable  ap-
pointment of  a  government  in  Spain ;  but  again,  unable  to
prevail  on  himself  to  entrust  a  possible  rival  with  so  much
power,  he  had  kept  him  by  his  own  side  in  the  capital,  requir-
ing him  to  execute  his  office  by  the  hands  of  legates.  The  dela-
tors had  been  eager  to  fasten  a  charge  upon  one  who  stood
so  exposed  to  their  aim ;  but  he  had  defeated  at  least  one  ac-
cusation, and  secured  the  punishment  of  his  assailants.  At
last,  however,  he  was  more  fatally  involved  in  a  charge
brought  against  a  certain  Albucilla,  the  wife  ofSatrius,  the  de-
nouncer of  Sejanus.  Treasonable  practices,  impiety,  as  it  was
phrased,  against  the  emperor,  had  been  alleged  against  her ;
and  as  the  looseness  of  her  conduct  was  notorious,  the  known
or  supposed  partners  of  her  debauchery  were  presumed  from
that  circumstance  to  be  concerned  also  in  her  disloyalty.
Among  these  was  Arruntius  ;  but  so  little  could  be  really
advanced  against  him,  or  so  adverse  or  indifferent  was  Tibe-
,  rius  to  the  prosecution,  that  the  accused  were  permitted  to
remain  at  large  with  only  a  vague  charge  hanging  over  them.
Some  of  them  by  merely  keeping  quiet  escaped  all  further
animadversion.  The  friends  of  Arruntius  would  have  per-
suaded him  to  rely  on  the  emperor's  clemency,  and  make  no
movement  on  his  own  part.  But  he  proudly  refused  to  owe
his  safety  to  an  evasion.  The  same  conduct,  he  declared,
does  not  become  all  men  alike.  I  have  lived  long  enough.  I
have  nothing  to  regret  but  having  endured  life  so  long  amidst
so  many  insults  and  dangers,  exposed  as  I  have  been  to  the
arrogance  formerly  of  Sejanus,  and  now  of  Macro : — for
Macro  had  by  this  time  become  almost  as  obnoxious  as  his
predecessor. —  True,  I  might  perhaps  still  secure  myself  for
the  brief  period  which  yet  remains  to  the  aged  emperor  ;  but
how  coxdd  I  hope  to  escape  intact  through  the  reign  of  his
successor?  With  these  words  he  caused  his  veins  to  be  open-
ed, and  allowed  himself  to  bleed  to  death. lie  foresaw  a

244  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  37.

more  intolerable  servitude  impending,  and  resolved  to  flee
alike  from  the  recollection  of  the  past,  and  the  prospect  of
the  future.  Though  Arruntius  himself  might  have  escaped
on  this  occasion,  Albucilla  was  eventually  condemned  and
executed ;  while  those  of  her  accomplices  were  selected  for
banishment  or  disgrace  who  were  most  obnoxious  for  their
crimes,  and  particularly  for  that  of  delation.1

In  the  midst  of  his  terrors  and  his  cruelties  Tiberius  was

distressed  and  perhaps  amazed  at  the  evidence  these  deeds

afforded  of  the  horror  in  which  his  government

Reflections  on  .  .  °

the  policy  of  Ti-  was  now  held.  11  in  the  proscription  of  all,  even
of  his  nearest  kin,  who  had  seemed  to  menace  his
power,  he  had  shown  himself  sanguinary  and  relentless,  yet
these  were  but  few  in  number ;  they  belonged,  moreover,  as  he
might  presume,  to  a  class  too  far  exalted  above  the  mass  even
of  the  nobles  of  Rome  to  excite  much  general  sympathy.
Why,  he  might  ask,  should  the  Romans  interest  themselves
in  mere  family  quarrels,  and  the  bootless  question,  which  can-
didate for  the  tyranny  should  actually  climb  the  throne?
But,  on  the  other  hand,  he  may  have  flattered  himself  that
in  the  punishment  of  many  bad  citizens,  by  which  his  reign
had  been  distinguished,  he  had  shown  a  sense  of  equity  and
public  spirit.  Every  Roman  was  concerned  in  his  overthrow
of  an  upstart  like  Sejanus ;  in  the  just  retribution  he  had
launched  at  the  detestable  delators,  the  foes  not  of  the  prince
but  of  the  people  themselves  ;  in  the  high  moral  feeling  he
had  displayed  in  chastising  the  vices  of  women  of  quality ;
in  pronouncing  sentence  on  an  Albucilla,  a  Claudia,  an  Ur-
gulania,  and  recently  on  Plancina :  for  the  wife  of  Cmeus
Piso,  though  long  protected,  first  by  the  favour  of  Livia,  and
still  later  by  the  disinclination  of  Tiberius  to  give  a  triumph
to  Agrippina,  had  at  last  been  sacrificed  to  the  unappeased
enmity  of  the  citizens.  He  might  affect  to  plead  for  himself,
as  his  successor  afterwards  pleaded  for  him,  that  it  was  not
he  that  had  warred  against  the  senate,  but  the  senators  against

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  47,  48.  under  the  year  790.

A.  U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  245

one  another.  Of  the  four  great  nobles  indeed  whom  Augus-
tus specified  as  not  unfit  to  compete  with  him  for  empire,
three  had  since  perished  by  violent  deaths.  Nor  can  Tibe-
rius himself  be  relieved  from  the  guilt  of  effecting  the  death
of  Asinius  Gallus.  Of  neither  Piso,  however,  nor  Arruntius
could  it  be  said  that  he  had  devised  and  compassed  his  de-
struction ;  and  the  consideration  in  which  Lepidus  continued
to  be  held  shows  that  the  highest  rank  and  position  were  not
necessarily  fatal  to  their  possessor.1  M.  iEniilius  Lepidus,
the  son  of  iEmilius  Paulus  and  a  Fausta  Cornelia,  who  thus
combined  in  his  origin  descent  from  the  most  illustrious  of
the  Roman  houses,  might  have  considered  himself  a  far  greater
man  than  any  Octavius  or  Antonius,  and  have  looked  down
with  complacent  superiority  upon  even  a  Julius  or  a  Claudius.
But  this  distinguished  noble  had  acquiesced  in  the  choice,  if
such  we  may  call  it,  of  the  Roman  people :  taught  by  the
insignificance  into  which  his  kinsman  the  triumvir  had  fallen,
that  the  day  of  great  names  had  passed,  that  the  nobles  were
unworthy  to  bear  rule  and  the  people  incompetent,  he  had  suf-
fered the  chief  of  the  Claudii  to  take  precedence  of  him  in  the
senate  ;  and  while  occupying  himself  the  second  place,  he  had
used  his  influence  discreetly  and  liberally,  and  had  succeeded
more  than  once  in  tempering  the  severity  of  his  colleagues.2
Another  of  the  notabilities  of  the  preceding  reign,  who  had  also
retained  his  honours  under  Tiberius,  was  Lucius  Piso,  chief
pontiff  and  prefect  of  the  city,  a  man  of  ability  Avithout  ambi-
tion, who  had  discharged  the  functions  of  a  difficult  post  with
tact  and  considerateness,  while  in  the  senate  his  voice  had  al-
ways been  given  on  the  side  of  justice,  and  when  that  was  de-
feated, had  at  least  recommended  moderation.3 Such  were  the

1  These  four  nobles  are  here  mentioned  together,  because  Tacitus  leaves  it
uncertain  whether  Cmcus  Piso  or  Arruntius  was  one  of  the  three  especially  des-
ignated by  Augustus.  "  De  prioribus  (i.e.  Gallus  and  Lepidus)  consentitur ;  pro
Arruntio  quidam  Cn.  Pisonem  tradidere."  He  adds,  untruly  as  we  have  seen :
"  Omnesque  prater  Lepidum,  variis  mox  criminibus,  struente  Tiberio,  circum-
venti  sunt." Ann.  i.  18.

2  For  instances  of  the  influence  of  Lepidus,  see  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  50.,  iv.  20.

*  Veil  ii.  98.;  Tac.  Ann.  vl.  10.:  "L.  Piso  pontifex,  raruin  in  tanta  clari-

246  history  of  the  uomans  [A.D.  «r.

men  who,  without  despairing  of  their  position,  and  flying  to
death  or  retirement,  could  find  a  sphere  for  their  virtues  even
under  the  strong  constraint  ol'  the  imperial  government ;  and

from  more than one passage  of  TaoitUS,  severe as  ho is  in

judging  the  orimes  and  policy  oi'  Tiberius, il  appears  to  have
been  well  understood  among  the  nobles,  that  even  under  bad
princes  there  ia  still  a  sphere  for  great  men  ;  that  loyalty  and
moderation  combined  irith  industry  and  vigour  obtain  the
more  genuine  honourtfrom  the  proneness  of  the  proud  and
turbulent  to  rush  on  certain  ruin  without  advantage  to  an>/.1
It  may  be  true  that  Tiberius,  in  one  of  his  gloomiest
moods,  dissatisfied  with  himself  yet  indignant  at  the  dissatis-
faction of  his  people,  actually  iravo  vent  to  his
Question  of  . . ' '  '  .

BnooeBslon  to  vexation  in  the  memorable  quotation  from  a
tin-  empire.  .  .  ,  _  .

tragic  writer,  After  my  death  perish  the  world
infire,*  But  the  same  sentiment  has  been  ascribed  to  other
tyrants  in  later  times,  and  may  be  regarded  as  expressive
merely  o(  the  judgment  mankind  in  general  have  formed  of
their  extravagant  selfishness.  As  regards  Tiberius,  indeed,
it  may  have  been  put  into  his  mouth  by  a  later  generation
Which  had  suffered  under  the  sway  of  successors  even  worse
than  himself',  and  believed  that  in  consigning  them  to  such
ruthless  rulers  he  had  evinced  a  wanton  indifference  to  their
misery,  if  not  rather  a  fiendish  exultation  in  it.  l>ut  our
estimate  of  the  conduct  of  Tiberius  in  this  particular  must
be  founded  on  a  fair  consideration  of  the  circumstances  in
which  he  was  placed. We  must not  suffer  ourselves  to  be

tudine,  facto  obiit"  (aim,  785) :  "nullius  senilis  sentential  Bponte  auctor,  et
quotiens  necessitas  iugrueret,  cupienter  moderans  ....  &&&&  ad  octogesimum
annum  process!!  ....  prsecipua  ox  eo  gloria  quod  prsefectus  urbi  reoans  con-
tinuum pote8tatem,  el  Insolentia  parendi  grariorem,  mire  temperavit."  For  the
Boandaloua  charges  against  the  prefect  Piso,  see  above,  chap.  xliv.

1  Tac.  Ann,  It.  '20. ;  Agric  (•_'.

*  Dion,  lvii.  28. :  roi  ro  ri>  hpxaiov  hftab  Oardvroc  yala  ftt\ih'/Tu  rrvpi.  See.
the  allusions  to  the  sentiment  in  the  ancients,  Cio.  dtjin,  i.  19, ;  Senee.  </<•  Clem.
\\.'2.\  Suet.  Wer.  88. ;  Claudlan  in  lit/Jin.  ii.  19.  in  Ueimar's  note. Comp.  Suet.

Tib.  62. :  "  [dentidem  felioem  Priamum  rocabat,  quod  supcrstes  omnium  Buorum
exstitisset."

A.U.  700.]  UHDEB  THE  EMPIBS.  247

biassed  by  the  notion-  of  u  later  age,  to  which  the  principle
of<lin<)  appointment!  had  become  familiar.  After  weighing
the  statements  of  different  writers,  we  shall  see  reason  proba-
bly to  accede  to  thai  of  Tacitns  in  preference  to  others,
according  to  whom  Tiberius  made  no  appointments,  desig-
nations, or  recommendation  of  a  successor  to  the  imperial
prerogatives.  He  could  not  have  done  so  without,  directly
violating  the  settled  principle  of  his  government,  which  he
pretended  to  found  on  the  spontaneous  concession  of  the
people.  The  establishment  of  monarchy  wan  not  even  yet
reco'_Mii-ed  as  a  constitutional  act.  The  chief  of  the  Julii
mighl  appoint,  like  any  private  citizen,  the  heir  to  the  do
mestic rites  and honours  of  his  house; hut,  this  inheritance

conveyed  do  title  to  the  [mperium  or  Principate,  the  Consu-
lar or  the  Tribunitian  power.  Herein  lay,  as  Tiberius  was
well  aware,  the  secrel  of  the  new  government's  weakness
this  uncertainty  as  to  the  future  was  the  main  cause  of  the
tyranny  into  which  he  had  himself  insensibly  lapsed.  No
greater  blessing  could  have  been  bestowed  on  the  Romans

by  a  wise  and honest,  ruler  than  the transmutation  of  their

polity  from  a  pretended  commonwealth  to  an  acknowledged
monarchy.  But  dire  experience  had  not  yet  perhaps  taught
them  to  acquiesce  in  the  assumption  by  their  dying  chief  of

a  power  over  their  politieal  future. Would  they  re-pert,  his

disposition  of  their  indefeasible  prerogatives  after  his  decea

Would  they  not,  on  the  contrary,  resent  it?  This  was  a
question  which  Augustus  had  not  ventured  to  ask.  Vet  the
founder  of  the  empire  had  been  too  deeply  interested  in  the
succesf  of  hi-,  work  to  h-uve  its  prospects  to  blind  chance,

He  had  shown  himself  anxiou:-,  during  his  own  term  of
government,  to  pave-  the  way  for  the  recognition  of  his  in-
tended successor,  by  gradually  investing  the  proposed  heir
of  hi-  private  fortunes  with  public  honour-  and  title-  akin  to
his own; so that  Tiherius had been able,  on his fat  1m

decease,  to  glide,  almost  unobserved,  into  the  sovereign
power.  Such  undoubtedly  was  the  generous  policy  which
became  a  ruler  to  whom  the  interests  of  the  state  were  really

248  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  37.

dear,  and  who  sought  to  found  the  greatness  of  his  own  house
on  the  prosperity  of  the  people.  But  to  such  a  policy  the
spirit  of  Tiberius  was  not  perhaps  equal.  A  cruel  misfortune
had  deprived  him  of  Germanicus ;  but  so  had  Augustus  also
lost  his  Agrippa.  Drusus  was  removed  from  him  by  the
treachery  of  an  unworthy  favourite  ;  but  in  like  manner  his
predecessor  had  had  to  mourn  the  early  and  ill-omened  loss
of  Caius  and  Lucius.  Here,  however,  the  parallel  ceased.
While  the  first  princeps  continued  after  every  disappointment
to  repeat  his  genuine  efforts  to  secure  the  principles  of  family
succession,  and  called  Tiberius  himself,  in  default  of  still
nearer  kinsmen,  into  alliance  and  partnership  in  the  empire ;
the  second  sacrificed  all  to  an  unworthy  jealousy,  and  chose
rather  to  murder  his  nephews  than  to  risk  the  chance  of  being
supplanted  by  them.

Accordingly,  towards  the  end  of  his  career,  Tiberius  found
himself  supported  by  only  three  surviving  males  of  the  line-
age of  Caesar,  and  none  of  these  had  received  any
members" of  the training  in  public  life. Tiberius  Claudius  Drusus,

imperial  family. ,  . ,  ,  t i  o ^

born  in  the  year  744,  was  the  last  ot  the  sons  of
the  eldest  Drusus,  and  the  nephew  of  the  reigning  emperor,
by  whom  he  had  been  adopted  on  his  father's  death,  at  the
desire  of  Augustus.  But  Claudius  (to  give  him  the  name
by  which  he  will  become  familiarly  known  to  us)  was  re-
puted to  be  infirm  both  in  health  and  understanding.  Like
Agrippa  Postumus,  he  was  destined  from  early  youth  to  be
excluded  from  public  affairs,  and  all  political  instruction  had
been  purposely  withheld  from  him.  Yet  he  was  not  perhaps
destitute  of  talents;  he  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of
books,  and  possibly  he  appreciated  them,  while  the  weakness
of  his  bodily  frame  contributed  to  keep  him  from  the  ruder
and  coarser  diversions,  to  which  the  want  of  practical  em-
ployment might  have  driven  a  bolder  and  more  vigorous
man.  His  character  and  attainments,  however,  we  shall
have  a  future  occasion  to  estimate  more  precisely :  for  the
present  it  is  enough  to  say  that  he  had  probably  owed  his
life,  amidst  the  fall  of  so  many  of  his  relations,  to  the  general

A.  U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  249

conviction  that  he  was  unfit  to  rule,  and  therefore  not  to  he
feared  as  a  candidate  for  the  suffrages  of  the  people.  Upon
him  the  emperor  scarcely  deigned  to  hestow  a  thought  at
this  crisis.  Two  others,  however,  there  were,  both  much
younger  than  Claudius,  between  whom  the  hopes  of  the
Julian  house  were  divided  :  Caius,  the  youngest  son  of  Ger-
manicus,  and  Tiberius,  surnamed  Gemellus,  the  child  of  the
second  Drusus  ;  the  one  grand-nephew,  the  other  grandson,
of  the  emperor,  but  both  equally  reputed  his  sons  or  grand-
sons by  adoption.1  Of  these  Caius  was  born  in  the  year  765,
Tiberius  in  772.4  The  former  had  been  enrolled  at  an  early
age  among  the  augurs  and  pontiffs,  and  had  since  been  ad-
vanced to  the  quaBstorship,  the  first  step  in  the  legitimate
career  of  honours ;  the  latter  had  not  yet  been  introduced
into  public  life,  his  tender  years  hardly  yet  permitting  it.
From  neither  of  these  strijdings  certainly  could  the  emperor
anticipate  any  rivalry  with  himself;  but  untried  and  almost
unknown  as  they  still  were,  he  shrank  from  insulting  even  his
subservient  senate  by  claiming  for  them  the  highest  preroga-
tives. The  daughters  of  Germanicus  he  had  married  to
citizens  of  distinction.  Julia  was- united  to  Vinicius,  whose
municipal  and  equestrian  extraction  had  been  recently  illus-
trated by  the  rise  of  both  his  father  and  grandfather  to  the
consulship.3  Drusilla  had  wedded  a  Cassius,  whose  family
was  plebeian,  though  it  vied  with  the  noblest  of  Rome  in
antiquity  and  reputation,  besides  the  peculiar  lustre  which
had  been  shed  upon  it  in  more  recent  times. A  third  daugh-

1  It  has  been  mentioned  before  that  Agrippina  had  borne  five  sons  and  four
daughters  to  Germanicus.  The  deaths  of  Nero  and  Drusus  have  been  recorded
in  their  place :  two  other  sons  seem  to  have  died  in  infancy.  Caius,  the  young-
est of  the  five,  was  now  the  sole  survivor.

a  This  Tiberius  had  also  the  name  of  Gemullus,  which  seems  to  show  that
he  was  one  of  the  male  twins  whom  Livilla  bore  to  Drusus  in  the  year  772.
Tac.  Ann.  ii.  84.;  see  above,  chap,  xliii.  The  other  child,  as  has  been  said,
probably  died  in  infancy.

*  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  15.  Vinicius,  the  patron  of  Vcllcius  Paterculus,  was  prob-
ably an  adherent  of  Sejanus,  and  owed  his  alliance  with  the  Cacsarcan  family  to
the  favour  of  so  powerful  a  friend.

250  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

ter,  who  bore  her  mother's  name,  Agrippina,  was  affianced
to  a  man  of  higher  rank  than  either  of  these,  a  Cnseus  Domi-
tius  Ahenobarbus,  descended  lineally  from  the  three  Domitii
whose  names  have  been  successively  signalized  in  these
pages.  A  fourth,  whose  name  has  not  been  recorded,  was
united  to  the  son  of  Quintilius  Varus.  Again,  after  the
death  of  her  husband  Nero  Germanicus,  the  younger  Julia,
the  daughter  of  Drusus  and  Livilla,  had  been  espoused  to
Rubellius  Blandus,  a  second  connexion  which  might  properly
be  regarded  as  an  unworthy  descent  from  the  first,  inasmuch
as  his  nobility  dated  only  from  the  last  generation.1  But  in
casting  his  eyes  on  these,  and  perhaps  other  scions  of  the
old  aristocracy,  Tiberius  could  discover  none  whose  eminence
entitled  him  to  be  exalted  above  all  the  rest  of  his  order ;
the  levelling  effects  of  his  tyranny  were  already  manifest  in
the  general  mediocrity  of  talent  in  the  senate,  and  the  public
mind  was  not  unprepared  to  admit  the  rule  of  hereditary
succession  as  a  state  necessity.

The bitterest of  Tiberius's enemies admits,  not as  it
would  seem  without  some  inconsistency,  that  he  was  anxious
at  heart  to  settle  the  succession  on  a  secure  foot-
points  Caius ing,  and  would  have  disregarded,  in  making  his

and  Tiberius  °\  . .  e  . ° ,,

Gemellus  heirs choice,  the  opinion  of  his  contemporaries,  could

of  his  private , ,  _,  -i->i  i a-  j?

fortune.  he  have  felt assured  ot the  approbation  ot a

a.d.  85. grateful posterity. Nevertheless, after much
restless  deliberation,  the  failing  old  man  was  con-
strained to  leave  it  in  all  the  uncertainty  above  described :

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  27. :  "  Cujus  avum  Tiburtem  equitem  Romanum  plerique
meminerant."  Juvenal  (viii.  39.)  employs  the  name  of  Rubellius  to  represent
the  pride  of  those  who  have  greatness  thrust  upon  them :

"  Tecum  est  mihi  sermo,  Rubelli
Blande :  tumcs  alto  Drusorum  stemmate  tanquam
Feceris  ipse  aliquid  propter  quod  nobilis  esses.
Ut  te  conciperet  quae  sanguine  fulget  Iuli ;
Non  qua;  ventoso  conducta  sub  aggere  tesit."

Domitius,  Vinicius,  Cassius,  and  Rubellius  are  mentioned  together  in  Ann.  vi.
45.  as  the  four  progeneri,  grandsons-in-law  of  Tiberius.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  251

he  abandoned  to  fate,  says  Tacitus,  the  decision  to  which  he
icas  himself  unequal.1 But  already  in  the  year  788  he  had
made  a  testament,  appointing  Cains  and  Tiberius  co-partners
in his private heritage,  with  whatever advantage might
thence  accrue  to  them  in  regard  to  their  public  pretensions ;
and  in  the  event  of  the  death  of  either,  the  survivor  was  des-
tined to  inherit  from  the  deceased.2 The  elder  of  the  two
princes  at  least  was  not  unmoved  by  the  prospect  of  the  for-
tunes which  seemed  so  likely  to  befall  him. Caius  was  not
insensible  to  the  advantage  he  enjoyed  in  popu- cams Germani-
lar  favour,  and  especially  among  the  soldiers,  as ™t8knu^d  Ca-
the  son  of  Germanicus. Though  actually  born Hsula-
in  the  peaceful  retirement  of  Antium,  he  had  been  carried  in
infancy  to  the  stations  of  the  Rhenish  legions,  and  bred  up
in  the  midst  of  the  soldiery,  and  he  gladly  countenanced,  we
may  suppose,  the  common  belief  that  he  had  first  seen  the
light  in  the  camp.3 As  a  child,  he  had  been  accoutred  in
the  military  garb,  and  it  was  from  the  boots,  or  caligce,  which
he  was  made  to  wear,  that  the  soldiers  gave  him  his  familiar
nickname  of  Caligula. The  mutiny  on  the  Rhine  was  act-
ually quelled,  it  was  said,  by  showing  to  the  troops their
young  pet  and  playfellow. But  these  rude  caresses  were  not,
as  he  early  leamt,  to  be  accepted  without  danger,  and  he

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  45. :  "  Quippc  illi  non  pcrinde  curse  gratia  prsesentium  quam
in  posteros  ambitio:  mox  inccrtus  animi,  fesso  corpore  consilium,  cui  impar
erat,  fato  permisit."

'  Suet.  Tib.  19.

'  Suet.  Califf.S.:  "  Ubi  natus  sit  incertum  diversitas  tradentium  facit.  Cn.
Lentulus  Ga?tulicus  Tiburi  genitum  scribit ;  Plinius  Secundus  in  Treveris,  vice-
Ambiatino,  supra  confluentes  ....  Versiculi,  imperante  mox  eo  divulgati,
apud  hibernas  legiones  procreatum  indicant :

In  castris  natus,  patriis  nutritus  in  armia
Jam  designati  Principis  omen  erat.

Iv.no  in  actis  Antii  editum  invenio."

4  Tac.  Ann.  i.  41.;  Dion,  lvii.  5.;  Suet.  Calig.  9.:  "Caligula?  cognomen
castrensi  joco  traxit,  quia  manipulario  habitu  inter  militcs  educabatur  ....
post  excessum  Augusti  tumultuantes  ....  solus  baud  dubic  conspectu  suo
flexit."

052  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

was  careful  to  disguise  the  pleasure  he  took  in  the  favour  in
which  the  citizens  held  him.  Nor  less  anxiously  did  he  con-
ceal any  emotions  of  an  opposite  character,  which  the  suffer-
ings of  his  mother  or  brothers  may  have  awakened  in  his
breast.  A  practised  dissembler  from  his  early  years,  for
from  the  first  daAvn  of  consciousness  he  found  himself  the
inhabitant  of  a  palace,  and  closely  attached  to  the  person  of
the  all-dreaded  imperator,  he  studied  to  clothe  his  counte-
nance day  by  day  with  the  expression  assumed  by  Tiberius
himself,  to  penetrate  his  sentiments  and  echo,  as  it  were,  his
very  words.  He  was  ever  on  the  watch  to  anticipate  the
wishes  of  the  tyrant,  and,  at  a  later  time,  the  remark  of  the
orator  Passienus  obtained  a  great  success,  that  no  man  was
ever  a  better  servant,  or  a  worse  master.1

Caius  Caesai*,  by  the  direction  of  his  grandsire,  had  mar-
ried in  786  Claudia,  or  Claudilla,  the  daughter  of  M.  Junius
Macro  obtains Silanus ;  but  this  consort  he  had  lost  in  the  third
otSE?7 year  of  their  union.2 At  this  latter  period  the
a.  d  36  eilc^  °f  Tiberius  was  visibly  approaching. While

a.  it.  782.  his  bodily  strength  was  failing  his  mind  contin-
ued unimpaired,  and  the  power  as  well  as  the  habit  of  dis-
simulation retained  its  full  vigour  to  the  last.  No  conscious-
ness of  his  own  decay  could  extort  from  him  any  disclosures
of  his  actual  views  regarding  the  imperial  inheritance.  The
ambitious  and  intriguing  spirits  at  Rome  trembled  in  uncer-
tainty as  to  the  future,  and  Tiberius  kept  his  courtiers  still
attached  to  his  side  by  refusing  to  indicate  by  word  or  ges-
ture in  what  quarter  they  should  look  for  his  successor.  He
even  let  it  be  supposed,  it  would  seem,  that,  dissatisfied  with
the  prospect  opened  to  him  Avithin  the  limits  of  the  Caesarean
family,  he  meditated  removing  both  the  grandson  and  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  20. :  "  Immancm  animum  subdola  modestia  tegens  .  .  .
qualem  diem  Tiberius  induissct,  pari  habitu,  non  multum  distantibus  verbis.
Unde  mox  scitum  Passieni  oratoris  dictum  pcrcrebuit ;  neque  meliorem  unquam
servum,  neque  deteriorem  dominum  fuisse."

2  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  20.  Suetonius  {Calig.  12.)  gives  her  name  more  correctly,
Junia  Claudilla. Dion  is  inaccurate  in  placing  the  marriage  in  788. :  Iviij.  25.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  253

grand-nephew  by  death.1  Nevertheless  the  arts  of  the  vet-
eran dissembler  could  not  blind  the  wariest  of  his  observers.
Since  the  overthrow  of  Sejanus,  the  bold  and  crafty  Macro
had  wielded  no  small  share  of  that  minister's  power,  but  he
had  never  succeeded  in  gaining  the  personal  favour  and  con-
fidence of  his  master.  Though  at  the  head  of  the  praetorians
and  of  the  police  of  the  city,  he  had  not  been  advanced  to
the  more  brilliant  honours  of  the  state.  For  these  he  must
be  content  to  look  to  the  exigencies  of  a  new  reign,  in  which
his  talents  and  position  might  command  still  higher  promo-
tion ;  and  it  was  now  his  object  to  divine  the  future  emperor,
and  bind  him  to  himself  by  some  signal  service.  As  shrewd
in  observation  as  he  had  proved  himself  bold  in  action,  he
fixed  without  hesitation  upon  Caius  as  the  destined  chief  of
the  state.  To  secure  an  ascendency  over  him  he  employed
the  artifices  of  his  wife  Ennia,  who  insinuated  herself  into
the  affections  of  the  young  and  idle  voluptuary  at  a  moment
when  his  fancy  was  unoccupied,  and  soon  acquired  for  her
husband  all  the  influence  he  desired.  You  leave  the  setting
sun  to  court  the  rising,  muttered  Tiberius,  whom  nothing
could  escape  :  but  he  gave  no  further  token  of  displeasure,
and  the  people  accepted  the  words,  which  were  speedily
noised  abroad,  as  an  intimation  that  already  in  his  own  mind
he  had  determined  to  transmit  the  empire  to  his  grand-
nephew.  Another  sentence,  which  was  ascribed  to  him,
seemed  not  less  significant  of  this  intention.  Observing  one
day  a  cloud  pass  over  the  countenance  of  Caius,  on  his  mak-
ing a  gesture  of  kindness  towards  the  young  Tiberius,  for
whom  he  seems  to  have  felt  some  yearning  of  natural  affec-
tion, he  was  reported  to  have  said  to  him,  You  will  kill  him
and  another  will  kill  you?  The  young  dissembler  had  never
been  able  to  impose  on  his  uncle's  practised  sagacity.  Tibe-
rius had  observed,  not,  it  is  said,  without  a  malignant  satis-
faction, the  gross  sensuality  and  cruel  or  degrading  sports  in

1 Suet. TSb.  62.

5  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  45. :  "  Occidcs  tu  hunc,  ct  te  alius." Dion,  lviii.  23. Comp.
Philo,  1.  c.

254  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  36.

which  he  delighted,  hoping,  as  was  commonly  surmised,  that
they  would  divert  him  from  the  aspirations  of  a  premature
amhition,  or  even  expecting,  as  some  ventured  to  suggest,
that  the  crimes  of  the  ensuing  reign  would  extinguish  the
recollection  of  his  own.1

Tacitus,  as  we  have  seen,  assures  us  that  Tiberius  aban-
doned the  imperial  succession  to  fate  ;  by  which  he  evidently
means  that  the  emperor  addressed  no  direct  in-

Ideas  regarding .  m  x

the  disposal  of junction  or  recommendation  to  the  senate  upon

the  succession:  r

expression  of a  subject  on  which,  as  he  well  knew,  he  could

Tacitus.  .  ii«  tii  •

exercise  no  real  authority.  In  the  phrase  itself,
the  current  language  of  the  philosophy  of  the  time,  there  is
nothing  remarkable ;  nor  do  I  imagine  that  there  is  any  allu-
sion in  it  to  the  story  upon  this  subject  narrated  by  Jose-
phus,  which  deserves,  however,  to  be  recorded  in  illustration
Anecdote  told  °^  tne  character  of  the  age.  Tiberius,  says  the
by  Josephus.  Jewish  historian,  on  his  return  to  Caprea?  from
his  last  visit  to  the  continent,  was  seized  with  a  consumptive
attack,  which  at  first  did  not  threaten  danger :  but  as  the
disorder  gained  ground  he  began  to  feel  that  his  end  was
actually  approaching ;  whereupon  he  commanded  Euodus,
the  most  confidential  of  his  freedmen,  to  send  his  two  grand-
children to  him  betimes  the  next  morning,  that  he  might  ad-
dress them  before  he  died.  After  giving  this  direction,  he
prayed  the  gods  to  make  known  to  him  by  some  token  which
of  the  two  they  destined  to  succeed  him :  for  although  his
wish  was  to  leave  the  empire  to  the  young  Tiberius,  he  felt
that  his  own  inclination  ought  to  yield  to  the  manifestations
of  the  divine  will.  Accordingly  he  proposed  to  himself  a
sign  by  which  that  will  might  be  discovered  ;  and  this  was,
that  whichever  of  the  princes  should  first  come  into  his  pres-
ence, him  he  would  regard  as  called  to  the  empire.  Having
thus  piously  placed  himself  in  the  hands  of  the  gods,  he  pro-
ceeded, with  a  natural  inconsistency,  to  control,  if  possible,
their  decrees,  by  desiring  the  tutor  of  Tiberius  to  make  sure

1  Suet.  Calig.  11.;  Dion,  lviii.  23.

A.  U.  790.  J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  255

and  bring  his  charge  at  the  earliest  hour  possible.  But  this
prince,  spending  some  time  over  his  morning  meal,  was  act-
ually forestalled  by  Caius,  much  to  the  emperor's  regret,
who  was  moved  to  tears  at  the  unhappy  fortune  of  his  own
offspring,  not  only  excluded  by  providence  from  the  sover-
eign power,  but  exposed,  as  he  well  knew,  to  the  direct  risk
of  destruction.  Commanding  himself,  however,  with  a  great
effort  he  said  to  Caius,  My  son,  although  Tiberius  is  nearer  to
myself  than  you  are,  yet  both  of  my  own  choice,  and  in  obe-
dience to  the  gods,  into  your  hands  I  commit  the  empire  of
Home.  To  these  solemn  words  he  added,  according  to  the
same  authority,  an  earnest  entreaty  that  he  would  continue
to  love  his  unprotected  kinsman,  enforced  by  a  warning  of
the  perils  of  his  own  position,  and  of  the  pains  which  wait
on  human  ingratitude.1

Of  all  our  principal  authorities  for  the  history  of  this
period  Josephus  undoubtedly  stands  the  nearest  in  point  of
time  ;  nevertheless,  bred  as  he  was  in  the  ideas  La8t  day8  of
of  a  foreigner  or  a  provincial,  his  information  on  Tibenus-
matters  of  constitutional  principle  is  often  at  fault ;  and  the
anecdote  just  related  is  of  little  historical  value,  except  as
showing  the  more  indulgent  way  in  which  the  character  of
Tiberius  might  be  regarded  beyond  the  precincts  of  Rome
or  Italy.  This  writer  is  not  indeed  correct  in  the  place  he
assigns  for  the  death  of  the  emperor,  a  point  on  which  a
Roman  historian  could  hardly  have  made  a  mistake.  It  was
early  in  the  year  790  that  Tiberius,  now  in  his  seventy-eighth
year,  quitted  for  the  last  time  his  retreat  in  Capreae,  and
moving  slowly  from  villa  to  villa,  arrived  within  seven  miles
of  the  city  on  the  Appian  Way.  Again,  having  taken  one
more  view  of  its  distant  buildings,  he  turned  his  back  finally
upon  them,  terrified,  so  it  was  reported,  by  an  evil  omen,  and
retraced  his  languid  steps  along  the  coast  of  Campania.3  At
Astura  he  fell  sick  ;  but  having  a  little  recovered  he  pro-
ceeded onwards  to  Circeii. Here,  anxious  to  avert  suspicion

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  6.  9.
'J  Suet.  Tib.  72. :  "  Ostento  tcrritus."

256  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  37.

of  his  illness,  he  not  only  presided  at  the  exercises  of  the
camp,  but  even  cast  javelins  with  his  own  hand  at  the  beasts
which  were  driven  before  his  seat  in  the  amphitheatre.  By
this  exertion  the  old  man  both  strained  and  overheated  him-
self; yet  though  his  symptoms  grew  worse,  he  insisted  on
continuing  his  progress  as  far  as  Misenum,  where  he  pos-
sessed the  voluptuous  villa  of  Lucullus  ;  nor  would  he  allow
any  change  to  be  made  in  his  sensual  and  perhaps  intemper-
ate habits  at  table.1  His  courtiers  and  attendants  looked  on
with  awe  and  trepidation.  Every  one  felt  assured  that  the
days  of  the  tyrant  were  numbered  ;  yet  every  one  feared  to
pay  his  court  too  soon  by  a  day  or  an  hour  to  the  expected
heir  of  his  fortunes.  All  eyes  were  turned  on  Charicles,  the
emperor's  confidential  physician ;  and  Caius  himself,  per-
haps, was  the  first  to  urge  him  to  contrive  to  feel  the  dying
man's  pulse,  for  Tiberius  persisted  to  the  last  in  disguising
his  actual  condition,  and  thus  ascertain  how  much  life  was
yet  left  in  him.  Charicles,  it  seems,  was  about  to  quit  the
court  for  a  few  days :  possibly  his  master  had  dismissed  him
on  purpose  to  blind  the  eyes  of  the  watchful  observers
around  him.  Rising  fi-om  the  table,  and  taking  the  empe-
ror's hand  to  kiss  it,  he  managed  to  touch  the  wrist.  Tibe-
rius noticed  the  touch  and  immediately  guessed  its  motive.
He  called  for  fresh  dishes  and  more  wine,  nor  would  he  con-
sent to  break  up  the  festivities  till  a  later  hour  than  ordina-
ry.* On  rising  he  even  received  one  by  one  the  salutations
of  all  his  guests,  according  to  his  wont,  keeping  all  the
while  an  erect  posture,  and  addressing  to  each  a  word  in
reply. But  Charicles  had  attained  his  object,  and  his  science

1  Suet.  1.  c. :  "  Nihil  ex  ordine  quotidiano  prcetermitteret,  se  convivia  quidem
ac  cameras  voluptates,  partim  intemperantia,  partim  dissimulatione."  But  Pliny,
in  the  passage  before  cited  {Hist.  Nat.  xiv.  28.),  while  he  allows  the  intemper-
ance of  Tiberius  in  his  youth,  expressly  declares  that  his  abstemiousness  was
strict  if  not  austere  ("severus  atque  etiam  saevus:"  the  words  are  perhaps  cor-
rupt) in  this  respect  in  later  years.  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  50. :  "  Jam  Tiberium  corpus,
jam  vires,  nondum  dissimulatio  deserebat :  idem  animi  rigor ;  sermone  ac  vultu
intentus,  quaesita  interdum  comitate  quamvis  manifestam  defectionem  tegebat."

'"'  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Instaurari  epulas  jubet,  discumbitque  ultra  solitum."

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  257

was  not  to  be  deceived.  He  assured  Macro  that  the  patient
could  not  survive  more  than  two  days.  Tiberius  was  the
more  anxious,  it  was  said,  to  regain  Caprese,  because  he  was
offended  at  the  neglect  of  the  senate  to  expedite  the  condem-
nation of  some  criminals  he  had  required  it  to  sentence,  and
could  not  venture  on  a  stroke  of  authority  except  from  his
inaccessible  citadel.  But  whether  or  not  this  were  so,  his
hopes  and  fears  were  all  about  to  close,  and  Capreae  he  was
destined  never  again  to  visit.  Unfavourable  weather  com-
bined with  the  advance  of  his  malady  to  retain  him  at  Mi-
senum ;  and  whether  his  dissolution  was  altogether  natural,
or  hastened  by  foul  means,  as  commonly  suspected,  it  was
not  perhaps  delayed  beyond  the  term  assigned  to  it  by  the
physician. The  actual  circumstances  of  the  tv-

,  ,  ,  . ~  His  death.

rant  s  end  were  variously  reported.  On  the  1 7th
of  the  calends  of  April,  or  the  16th  of  March,  says  Tacitus,
he  had  fainted  away,  and  it  was  imagined  he  had  ceased  to
breathe.  The  courtiers  trooped  without  delay  to  congratu-
late Caius,  who  quitted  the  chamber  to  surround  himself,  as
was  supposed,  with  the  ensigns  of  power,  when  suddenly  it
was  reported  that  the  sick  man's  voice  and  vision  had  re-
turned, and  he  had  called  to  his  attendants  for  nourishment.
The  consternation  was  universal ;  the  crowd  hastily  dis-
persed, and  every  man  framed  his  countenance  to  a  look  of
ignorance  or  anxiety.  Caius  himself  was  struck  speechless
in  expectation  of  immediate  punishment.  But  Macro  was  at
his  side,  and  Macro  was  resolute  and  prompt  as  ever.  Heap
more  bedclothes  upon  him,  he  whispered,  and  leave  him.1
Tacitus  insinuates  without  hesitation  that  he  was  stifled,  and
his  account  has  been  most  commonly  followed ;  he  refers,
however,  to  no  authority.* On  the  other  hand,  a  contempo-

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Caesar  in  silentium  fixus  a  gumma  spc  novissima  exspectabat :
Macro  intrepidus,  opprimi  senem  injectu  multae  vestia  jubet,  disccdiquc  a  lim-
ine."

a  Thus  Dion,  lviii.  28.:  Seiaag  ovv  eke'ivoc  /it)  ml  a%r/6<Jc  avaouOrj,  o'vte
E/Kpayslv  ti  airi/cavTi  avrc.',  <l>g  ml  fitvaftTjGOfiEvy,  Wwkc,  ml  'ifiArta  7ro/Ud  ml
iraxia,  <Jf  *<"  6spp.aaiar  nvbc  Seo/iev^  Trpootpafe  •  ml  oirur  anlnvi!-ev  avrbv,
ovvapafikvov  ttoc  avTif  ml  tov  MfiKpuvoc.
vol.  v. — 17

258  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

raiy  of  the  events  seems  to  describe  the  old  man's  death  as
simply  natural.  Feeling  himself  sinking,  said  Seneca,  Tibe-
rius took  off  his  ring,  and  held  it  for  a  little  while,  as  if  about
to  present  it  to  some  one  as  an  instrument  of  authority ;  but
soon  replaced  it  on  his  finger,  and  lay  for  a  time  motionless  :
then  suddenly  he  called  for  his  attendants,  and  when  no  one
answered,  raised  himself  from  his  bed  with  failing  strength,
and  immediately  fell  lifeless  beside  it.1  This  account  Avas
distorted  by  others  into  the  denial  of  necessary  sustenance,
and  actual  death  by  exhaustion,  while  some  did  not  scruple
to  affirm  that  Caius  had  caused  him  to  be  poisoned.3

Caesar,  the  high-handed  usurper,  met  an  usurper's  death,

by  open  violence  in  the  light  of  day. Augustus,  after  fifty

years  of  the  mildest  and  most  equitable  rule  the

The  character •>  »

of  Tiberius  not  times  admitted,  sank  at  last  by  a  slow  and  pain-
mysterious.  .  *  \.

less  decay  into  the  arms  of  those  dearest  to  him,

amidst  the  respectful  sympathies  of  an  admiring  people.
The  end  of  Tiberius,  whether  consummated  by  treachery  or
not,  was  shrouded  in  gloom  and  obscurity ;  the  chamber  of
mortality  was  agitated  to  the  last  by  the  intrigues  and  fears
of  the  dying  man  and  his  survivors.  The  fellow  country-
men of  the  detested  tyrant  seem  to  have  deemed  it  fitting
that  one  whose  life  was  to  them  a  riddle  should  perish  by  a
mysterious  death.  For  my  own  part,  I  would  rather  repre-
sent him  as  a  man  whose  character  was  sufficiently  trans-
parent, whose  apparent  inconsistencies,  often  exaggerated
and  misrepresented,  may  generally  be  explained  by  the  na-
ture of  his  position,  and  the  political  illusions  with  which  he

1  Suet.  Tib.  73. :  "  Seneca  eum  scribit,  intellecta  defectione,"  &c.  The  elder
Seneca,  who  is  known  to  have  written  a  history  of  his  own  times,  died  towards
the  end  of  Tiberius,  at  an  advanced  age.  This  must  be  the  account  of  his  son
the  philosopher ;  but  there  is  no  such  passage  in  his  existing  works.  Suetonius
in  another  place  ( Calig.  12.)  gives  another  account:  "Caius  veneno  Tiberiura
aggressus  est,"  &c.

a  Tacitus  gives  March  16.  for  the  date  of  this  event,  Dion,  March  26.  Ti-
berius, born  November,  712,  was  in  the  middle  of  his  seventy-eighth  year.
Dion,  1.  c. :  tfiiu  de  enra  /cat  hfidofiijKovTa  ett),  kol  fifptac  reaaapag,  nal  fmepaQ
iwia.

A.  U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  259

was  required  to  encircle  himself.  It  is  the  character  of  the
age  in  which  he  was  placed,  an  age  of  rapid  though  silent
transition,  rather  than  of  the  man  himself,  which  invests  him
with  an  historical  interest.  This  is  the  point  to  which  it
will  be  well  to  direct  our  attention,  before  letting  the  curtain
drop  on  the  personage  with  whom  the  forms  of  the  republic
perished,  and  the  despotism  of  the  Caesars  finally  dropped  its
mask.1

The  practice  of  delation,  so  rapidly  developed  under  the
rule  of  Tiberius,  introduced  a  new  principle  into  the  govern-
ment of  his  day,  and  marked  it  with  features  of  jud?mcnt  of
its  own.  It  is  hardly  possible  to  overrate  the  ef-  ^  k^™*^011
fects  of  this  practice  on  the  general  complexion  of  Tibtrius-
of  the  Roman  polity,  nor  is  it  easy  to  exaggerate  the  horror
with  which  it  came  to  be  regarded.  It  was  an  attempt  to
reconcile  the  despotism  of  the  monarch  with  the  forms  of  a
republic ;  to  strengthen  the  sovereign  power  by  weakening
its  subjects ;  to  govern  the  people  by  dividing  them,  by  de-
stroying their  means  of  combination  among  themselves,  by
generating  among  them  habits  of  mutual  distrust  and  fear,
and  finally  plunging  them  into  a  state  of  political  imbecility.
We  have  already  seen  how  this  system  was  in  fact  the  prod-
uct of  peculiar  circumstances  rather  than  the  creation  of  a
deliberate  will ;  nevertheless  the  chief  of  the  state  was  made,
not  unnaturally,  to  bear  the  whole  responsibility  of  it,  and
the  disgust  of  the  nobler  spirits  of  Rome  at  the  tyranny  of
spies  and  informers  was  turned  against  the  prince  himself,  in
whose  interest  at  least,  if  not  at  whose  instigation,  their  en-
ormities were  for  the  most  part  perpetrated. If  we  examine

1  Thus  Ferguson  concludes  his  history  of  the  Roman  republic  with  the
death  of  Tiberius.  Tacitus  describes,  according  to  his  view,  the  different  epochs
in  the  character  of  Tiberius.  Ann.  vi.  51.:  "Morum  quoque  tempora  illi
diversa:  egregium  vita  famaquc,  quoad  privatus,  vel  in  imperiis  sub  Augusto
fuit:  occultum  ac  subdolum  fingendis  virtutibus,  donee  Germanicus  ac  Drusus
superfuere :  idem  inter  bona  malaque  mixtus,  incolumi  matre :  intestabilis
sa-vitia,  sed  obtectis  libidinibus,  dum  Sejanum  dilexit  timuitve :  postremo  in
scelera  simul  ac  dedecora  prorupit,  postquam,  remoto  pudorc  et  mctu,  suo  tan-
tum  ingenio  utebatur."

260  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

the  authorities  for  the  history  of  the  reign  we  have  been  review-
ing, we  shall  find  that  those  who  were  nearest  to  the  times
themselves  have  generally  treated  Tiberius  with  the  greatest
indulgence.  Velleius  Paterculus  indeed,  and  Valerius  Max-
imus,  his  contemporaries  and  subjects,  must  be  regarded  as
mere  courtly  panegyrists :  but  the  adulation  of  the  one,
though  it  jars  on  ears  accustomed  to  the  dignified  self-respect
of  the  earlier  Romans,  is  not  more  high-flown  in  language  and
sentiment  than  what  our  own  writers  have  addressed  to  the
Georges,  and  even  the  Charleses  and  Jameses,  of  the  English
monarchy ;  while  that  of  the  other  is  chiefly  offensive  from
the  connexion  in  which  it  stands  with  the  lessons  of  virtue
and  patriotism  which  his  book  was  specially  designed  to  il-
lustrate. The  elder  Seneca,  the  master  of  a  school  of  rheto-
ric, to  which  science  his  writings  are  devoted,  makes  no  men-
tion of  the  emperor  under  whom  he  wrote  ;  but  his  son,  bet-
ter known  as  the  statesman  and  philosopher,  though  he  was
under  the  temptation  of  contrasting  the  austere  and  aged
tyrant  with  the  gay  young  prince  to  whom  he  was  himself
attached,  speaks  of  him  with  considerable  moderation,  and
ascribes  the  worst  of  his  deeds  to  Sejanus  and  the  delators
rather  than  to  his  own  evil  disposition.1  In  the  pages  of
Philo  and  Josephus,  the  government  of  Tiberius  is  represent-
ed as  mild  and  equitable :  it  is  not  till  we  come  to  Suetonius
and  Tacitus,  in  the  third  generation,  that  his  enormities  are
blazoned  in  the  colours  so  painfully  familiar  to  us.  It  will
suffice  here  to  remark  that  both  these  later  writers  belong  to
a  period  of  strong  reaction  against  the  Csesarean  despotism,
when  the  senate  was  permitted  to  raise  its  venerable  head
and  resume  a  show  at  least  of  imperial  prerogatives  ;  when
the  secret  police  of  Rome  was  abolished,  delation  firmly  re-
pressed, freedom  of  speech  proclaimed  by  the  voice  of  the
emperor  himself,  and  the  birthright  of  the  citizen  respectful-
ly restored  to  him.  There  ensued  a  strong  revulsion  of  feel-
ing, not  against  monarchy,  which  had  then  become  an  ac-

1  Seneca,  Ep.  21. ;  de  Benef.  iii.  26. ; Consol.  ad  Marc.  15.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  261

cepted  institution,  but  against  the  corruptions  which  had
turned  it  into  tyranny;  and  Tiberius,  as  the  reputed  founder
of  the  system  of  delation,  bore  the  odium  of  all  the  crimes
of  all  the  tyrants  who  had  succeeded  him.  Tacitus  admits
that  the  affairs  of  Tiberius  were  misrepresented  during  his
power  by  fear,  and  after  his  death  by  spite :  yet  we  cannot
doubt  that  Tacitus  himself  often  yields  to  the  bias  of  his  de-
tractors, while  Suetonius  is  at  best  indifferent  to  the  truth.1
After  all,  a  sober  discretion  must  suspend  its  belief  regarding
many  of  the  circumstances  above  recorded,  and  acknowledge
that  it  is  only  through  a  treacherous  and  distorting  haze  that
we  have  scanned  the  features  of  this  ill-omened  principate.

Nevertheless,  the  terror  which  prevailed  in  the  last  years
of  Tiberius,  to  whomsoever  it  is  chiefly  to  be  ascribed,  exer-
cised a  baleful  influence  over  society  at  Rome,  The  rei  of
and  shows  by  effects  which  are  still  discoverable  terror  at  Rome,
that  it  has  been  but  little  exaggerated.  It  has  left  perma-
nent traces  of  itself  in  the  manifest  decline  and  almost  total
extinction  of  literature  under  its  pressure.  The  Roman
writers  addressed  only  a  small  class  in  the  capital ;  to  be  pop-
ularly known  in  the  provinces,  to  be  read  generally  through-
out the  Roman  world,  was  a  privilege  reserved  for  few,  and
anticipated  perhaps  rarely  by  any.  Even  in  the  capital  the
poet  and  historian  composed  their  works  for  a  circle  of  a
few  thousand  knights  and  senators,  for  the  friends  and  fami-
lies of  their  own  few  hundreds  of  acquaintances,  whom  they
invited  to  encourage  their  efforts  by  attending  their  recita-
tions. The  paralysis  which  benumbed  the  energies  of  the
Roman  nobility  at  this  crisis  of  terror  and  despair,  extended
naturally  to  the  organs  of  their  sentiments  and  opinions.  Not
history  only  and  philosophy  suffered  an  eclipse,  Its  effc(.t  upon
but  poetry  also,  which  under  Augustus  had  been  ,lterature-
the  true  expression  of  the  national  feelings,  became  mute

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  1. :  "  Tiberii  Caiique,  ct  Claudii,  ac  Neronis  res,  florentibus
ipsia  ob  metum  falsae,  postquam  occiderant  rccentibw  odiis  composite  sunt."
There  seems  reason  to  believe  that  the  hostility  to  Tiberius's  memory  increased
rather  than  diminished  in  the  course  of  the  succeeding  century.

262  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

when  the  feelings  themselves  could  no  longer  be  trusted  with
utterance.  We  have  seen  how  Cremutius  was  subjected  to
persecution  for  pronouncing  that  Brutus  and  Cassius  were
the  last  of  the  Romans.  A  tragedian  was  accused,  and  if
accused  we  may  presume  perhaps  that  he  was  condemned,
for  speaking  evil  of  the  king  of  men,  Agamemnon  ;  and  va-
rious authors  were  assailed,  and  their  writings  sentenced  to
proscription,  to  whose  recitations  the  last  princeps  had  him-
self listened  with  indulgence.1  The  poems  which  were  tol-
erated were  generally  the  most  trifling  and  perhaps  licentious
in  character."  The  sly  irony  of  the  fable,  a  style  of  compo-
sition adopted  by  slaves,  and  imitated  from  the  servile  Orien-
tals, seems  not  unsuitable  to  these  perilous  times.3  The  name
of  Phaedrus  belongs  in  all  probability  to  the  Tiberian  period,
but  it  is  curious  that  no  later  writer  for  four  centuries  should
have  cared  to  notice  him.4  Similar  or  worse  has  been  the
fate  of  a  more  serious  writer,  Manilius,  the  author  of  an  elab-
orate poem  on  Astronomy  and  its  spurious  sister  Astrology,
a  theme  of  some  danger  under  the  circumstances  of  the  times,
but  which  he  has  treated  with  irreproachable  discretion ;  it
is  owing  perhaps  to  the  disgrace  under  which  the  forbidden
science  fell  that  this  innocent  work  lapsed  into  entire  obliv-

1  Suet.  Tib.  61.  It  will  be  remembered  by  scholars  that  Atrides  is  the  in-
vidious nickname  often  applied  by  the  poets  to  the  Roman  tyrants.  Comp.
Juvenal,  iv.  65. :  "  Itur  ad  Atridem."

8  Such  seems  to  have  been  the  character  of  the  verses  of  Lentulus  Gaetul-
icus. Martial,  prcef.  i. ;  Plin.  Ep.  v.  3.

s  Phaedrus  says  of  his  own  style  of  composition  (Prol.  ad.  iii.  33) :

"  Nunc  fabularum  cur  sit  inventum  genus
Brevi  docebo. Servitus  obnoxia,
Quia  quae  volebat  non  audebat  dicere,
Affectus  proprios  in  fabellas  transtulit."

4  Phaedrus  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  freedman  of  Tiberius.  Seneca  ex-
horts Polybius,  a  freedman  of  Claudius,  to  divert  his  mind  by  writing  fables  a
few  years  later :  but  even  then  he  calls  this  kind  of  composition,  "  Intentatum
Romanis  ingeniis  opus."  Senec.  Consol.  ad  Polyb.  2*7.  Martial  (iii.  20.)  alludes
to  a  Phaedrus,  but  not  apparently  as  a  fabulist.  "  An  aemulatur  improbi  jocos
Phacdri  ?  "

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  263

ion, and has escaped the mention  of  any  writer of  an-
tiquity.1

The  deep  gloom  which  settled  on  the  face  of  higher  so-
ciety at  Rome  was  heightened  by  its  contrast  with  the  friv-
olous dissipation  of  the  populace,  who  though  de-

.  No  traces  of  it

prived  of  the  glitter  of  a  brilliant  court,  and  sur-  among  the  pop-
rounded  by  signs  of  mourning  and  humiliation
among  their  natural  leaders,  not  the  less  abandoned  themselves
to  the  sensual  enjoyments  which  alone  they  relished,  and  re-
joiced in  their  utter  indifference  to  political  principles,  to
parties  and  to  men.  They  clamoured  with  exultation  over
the  body  of  the  traitor  ;  nevertheless,  had  the  goddess  Nur-
sia,  says  the  moralist,  but  favoured  her  Etruscan  votary,  had
but  the  false  intriguer  circumvented  the  guileless  old  man,  on
the  instant  they  woidd  have  been  heard  proclaimitig  Sejanus
a  Caesar  and  an  Augustus.2  In  the  one  class  was  abandon-
ment of  public  life,  shame,  despair  and  suicide ; — the  intoler-
able evils  of  the  time  drove  men  not  to  religious  consolations,
but  to  a  restless  inquiry  into  the  future,  or  a  vain  attempt  to
lull  the  sense  of  the  present  in  philosophic  apathy : — the
other  rushed  headlong,  hour  by  hour,  to  the  baths,  shows,
and  largesses,  or  shouted  at  the  heels  of  the  idol  of  the  mo-
ment, or  sighed  and  perhaps  murmured  at  his  loss,  and
speedily  resigned  itself  to  oblivion  of  the  fitful  emotion  of
the  day.

YVe  must  be  careful  notwithstanding  to  observe  that  both
the  shame  and  the  degradation  were  for  the  most  part  con-
fined to  the  city  and  its  vicinity,  which  lay  in  the General  state
very  shadow  of  the  despot. Tiberius  was  con- ^cmity  in  the
tent  to  sacrifice  Rome  to  the  exigencies  of  his Province8>

1  In  this  total  absence  of  the  "  testimonia  veterum,"  the  dale  of  Manilius  is
ascertained  from  his  allusions  to  the  death  of  Varus  (i.  897.),  to  Augustus  as
still  living  (i.  922),  and  again  to  the  island  of  Rhodes  as  the  "  hospitium  recturi
Principis  orbem." iv.  764.

8  Juvenal,  x.  74. :  "Idem  populus,  si  Nursia  Tusco

Favisset,  si  opprcssa  foret  secura  sencctus
Principis,  hac  ipsa  Sejanum  diceret  hora
Augustum."

264  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  37.

position  ;  but  he  ruled  the  provinces  on  the  whole  in  a  Ro-
man spirit,  and  maintained  the  dignity  of  the  empire  for  the
most  part  intact  from  the  centre  to  the  frontiers.  The  stabil-
ity of  the  system,  if  decaying  at  the  heart,  might  still  be
measured  by  the  strength  and  solidity  of  its  members.  At
no  period  did  the  bulwarks  of  the  Roman  power  appear  more
secure  and  unassailable.  The  efforts  of  Drusus  and  his  son
to  overpower  the  Germans  on  their  own  soil  had  been  stu-
pendous ;  they  had  wielded  forces  equal  at  least  to  those
with  which  Caesar  had  added  Gaul  to  the  empire,  and  yet
had  not  permanently  advanced  to  the  eagles  in  any  direction.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  was  soon  found  that  the  Germans
were  only  formidable  under  the  pressure  of  an  attack.  When
the  assault  relaxed,  the  power  they  had  concentrated  in  re-
sistance crumbled  readily  away.  "With  the  death  of  Arminius
all  combined  hostility  to  Rome  ceased  among  them.  They
never  dared  to  retort  in  concert  the  invasions  under  which
they  had  suffered.  Meanwhile  the  arts  and  manners  of  the
South  advanced  incessantly  among  them ;  their  political  dis-
sensions were  fostered  by  the  enemy,  and  in  the  weakness
caused  by  mutual  jealousy  they  turned  with  awe  and  wonder
to  the  image  of  the  immense  and  undivided  empire,  the  skirt
of  whose  robe  trailed  majestically  on  their  borders.  At  the
same  time  the  long  respite  from  military  exactions  allowed
the  pursuits  of  ease  and  luxury  to  fructify  within  the  limits
of  the  provinces.  Gaul  was  no  longer  drained  from  year  to
year  by  the  forced  requisitions  of  men  and  horses,  of  arms
and  stores,  which  had  fed  the  exhausting  campaigns  of  Ger-
manicus.  Her  ancient  cities  decked  themselves  with  splendid
edifices,  with  schools  and  theatres,  aqueducts  and  temples.
The  camps  on  the  Rhine  and  Danube  were  gradually  trans-
formed into  commercial  stations,  and  became  emporiums  of
traffic  with  the  north  of  Europe,  where  the  fur  and  amber  of
the  Hercynian  forests  and  the  Baltic  coast  were  exchanged
for  wine  and  oil  or  gold  and  silver,  those  instruments  of  lux-
ury which  nature  was  supposed,  in  mercy  or  in  anger,  to  have

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  265

denied  to  the  German  barbarians.1 Such  a  state  of  affairs
allowed  the  emperor  to  persist  in  his  favourite  plan  of  leav-
ing the  provincial  governors  for  years  unchanged  at  their
posts. Each  succeeding  proconsul  was  no  longer  in  a  fever
of  haste  to  aggrandise  himself  by  the  plunder  or  renown  of
a  foray  beyond  the  frontiers. The  administration of  the
provinces  became  a  matter  of  ordinary  routine ;  it  lost  its
principal  charms  in  the  eyes  of  the  senators,  who  could  at
last  with  difficulty  be  induced  to  exchange  the  brilliant  pleas-
ures of  the  capital,  with  all  its  mortifications  and  perils,  for
the  dull  honours  of  a  distant  prefecture. Nothing  is  more
significant  of  the  actual  improvement  in  the  condition  of  the
subject  than  this  fact,  which  is  advanced  by  Tacitus  as  a  proof
of  the  decay  of  public  spirit  and  the  degeneracy  of  the  age.*
Nor  can  I  discover  in  general  the  justice  of  accusing  Ti-
berius of  neglecting  the  safety  of  his  remote  possessions,
which  seem,  on  the  contrary,  to  have  flourished valance  of
securely  in  the  armed  peace  of  his  august  em- JJJjJS-™  '£„
pire.a In  Gaul  the  revolt  of  Sacrovir  and  his fr°n«ei£
Belgian confederates  was effectually  suppressed: the  out-
break of  the  Frisians  seems,  though  at  some  cost Ganl  and  Ger.
of  blood,  to  have  been  speedily  quelled.4 Nor many-
have  we  any  distinct  confirmation  of  the  assertion  of  Sue-
tonius, that  Tiberius suffered  the  province  to  be  ravaged
with  impunity  by  the  Germans,  which,  if  true,  can  apply

1  Tac.  Germ.  5. :  "  Argentum  et  aurum  propitii  an  irati  Di  negaverint  du-
bito."  This  well-known  assertion,  so  remarkably  inaccurate,  as  it  has  proved,
in  fact,  was  provoked  perhaps  by  the  failure  of  the  first  speculation  in  Nassau
mines.  See  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  20. :  "  Curtius  Rufus  ...  in  agro  Mattiaco  reeluscrat
specus  quaerendis  venis  argenti ;  undo  tenuis  fructus,  nee  in  longum  fait."

s  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  27. :  "  Egregium  quemque  et  regendis  exercitibus  idoneum,
abnuere  id  munus."  The  distrust,  however,  or  indifference  of  Tiberius  was
more  distinctly  shown  in  his  keeping  some  of  his  governors  at  home  for  years
after  nominally  appointing  them.  Such  were  the  cases  of  yElius  Lamia  and  Ar-
runtius. Tac.  1.  c.

'  Suet.  Tib.  41. :  "  Armeniam  a  Parthis  occupari,  Mcesiam  a  Dacis  Sarmat-
isquc,  Gallias  a  Germanis  vastari  ncglexit."

4  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  72.

266  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  fA.D.  37.

only  to  some  transient  violation  of  the  frontiers.  That  dis-
grace indeed  to  this  extent  actually  attended  the  Roman
government  seems  not  improbable,  from  circumstances  which
have  transpired  regarding  the  conduct  of  the  commander  in
those  parts,  For  many  years  the  legions  of  the  Upper
Rhine  were  confided  to  a  senator  of  high  consideration  ;  but
he  was  said  to  have  gained  the  devotion  of  both  his  own  sol-
diers and  those  of  the  lower  province,  by  the  popularity  of
his  manners  and  the  laxity  of  his  discipline.1  Such  conduct
proceeded,  we  may  confidently  affirm,  either  from  culpable
negligence  or  from  criminal  aspirations.  Tiberius  was  doubt-
less alarmed.  Lentulus  Gaetulicus,  such  was  the  officer's
name,  was  denounced  by  a  delator ;  but  his  marriage  with
the  daughter  of  Sejanus  seemed  a  surer  ground  of  attack
than  a  charge  of  incapacity  or  treason.  Tiberius  pretended
to  listen  to  an  accusation  thus  artfully  framed,  the  senators
were  blinded,  and  Gaetulicus  was  threatened  with  removal
and  disgrace.  Undismayed,  he  addressed  from  his  camp  a
letter  to  the  emperor,  urging  that  he  had  not  sought  connex-
ion with  the  minister  of  any  motion  of  his  own,  but  at  the
suggestion  of  Tiberius  himself;  that  if  he  had  been  deceived
by  the  arts  of  the  traitor,  his  fault  was  only  the  same  as  his
master's :  it  was  unjust  that  he  should  suffer  for  an  error
which  had  been  in  fact  common  to  both.  His  loyalty,  he
protested,  was  unshaken,  and  so  it  would  remain  as  long  as
he  was  himself  trusted ;  but  the  arrival  of  a  successor  to  his
command  he  should  regard  as  no  other  than  a  sentence  of
death,  and  to  such  he  would  refuse  to  bow.  The  emperor,
he  boldly  added,  might  continue  to  rule  the  state,  but  he
would  retain  the  government  of  his  own  province.  The
rumour  of  so  proud  a  defiance  struck  the  citizens  with  aston-
ishment ;  but  Gretulicus  kept  his  place,  and  the  impunity
which  was  thus  accorded  to  a  son-in-law  of  Sejanus  engaged
them  to  believe  it.  Tiberius,  they  whispered,  knew  well
how  deep  was  the  general  dissatisfaction  with  his  rule ;  he

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  30. :  "  Effusse  clcmentiae,  modicus  sevcritate."

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  267

was  conscious  also  of  the  infirmities  of  age,  and  aware  that
his  authority  rested  after  all  on  opinion  rather  than  on  its
own  intrinsic  force. He  refrained  from  risking  a  collision.1

Nor  does  the  assertion  of  Tiberius's  indifference  seem  to
be  better  founded  with  regard  to  Moesia.  Tacitus  steps  fre-
quently aside  from  his  domestic  narrative  to  re- ^r .

*  J  n  Mcesia.

cord  the  affairs  of  this  region  and  the  exploits  ot
the  emperor's  lieutenants ;  while  Appian  makes  special  men-
tion of  the  conquest  of  Moesia  under  Tiberius,  and  of  the
establishment  of  provincial  government  in  this  quarter  by
his  hand.2  Sabinus,  Pandus,  and  Labeo  seem  to  have  held
the  command  there  successively  during  the  first  half  of  this
principate,  and  these  men  at  least  were  not  allowed  to  in-
dulge in  indolence,  for  their  exertions  and  victories  are  a
theme  to  which  the  historian  repeatedly  refers.  At  a  later
period,  indeed,  we  shall  read  of  an  incursion  of  the  Roxo-
lani,  a  people  of  Sarmatia,  during  a  season  of  commotion  at
Rome,  and  this  is  not  improbably  the  occurrence  which  Sue-
tonius had  actually  in  view.3  Moesia,  in  the  reign  of  the  sec-
ond princeps,  was  one  of  the  best  appointed  of  the  imperial
provinces.  Two  legions  were  quartered  in  it,  and  a  military
road  from  the  borders  of  Pannonia  led  along  the  bank  of  the
Danube  to  the  Euxine  at  Tomi,  thus  securing  the  communi-
cations of  the  presidiary  cohorts  through  the  whole  length
of  the  only  exposed  frontier.  The  north-eastern  comer  of
the  province,  for  the  Romans  did  not  care  to  occupy  the  pes-
tilential marshes  of  the  Dobrudscha,  was  also  connected  by
a  coast-road  with  Byzantium  on  the  Thracian  Bosphorus/

But  the  emptiness  of  these  charges  can  be  more  clearly
shown  in  the  case  of  the  dependent  kingdom  of  Armenia,

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Reputante  Tiberio  publicum  sibi  odium,  extremam  aetatem,
magisr|uc  fama  quam  vi  stare  res  suas."  We  shall  see  reason  at  a  later  period
to  believe  that  the  command  of  Gaetulicus  was  really  fraught  with  danger  to  the
imperial  interests.

1  Tac.  Ann,  ii.  66.,  iv.  5. ;  Appian,  Illyrica,  30.

3  Tac.  Hist.  i.  76.— a.  u.  823.  a.  d.  70. Comp.  Suet.  1.  c.

*  Bergier,  Grands  Clvcmins,  p.  501).

268  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

which,  according  to  the  same  authority,  Tiberius

Armenia.  '  .  .

suffered  to  be  seized  by  the  Parthians,  and  wrest-
ed from  the  patronage  of  the  empire.  It  appears,  on  the
contrary,  from  the  particular  recital  of  Tacitus,  that  the
bold  occupation  of  this  kingdom  by  Artabanus  was  imme-
diately resented  by  the  emperor  with  the  energy  of  a  younger
man.  Not  only  were  the  wild  mountaineers  of  the  Caucasus,
the  Iberians  and  Albanians,  invited  to  descend  upon  the  in-
truders ;  not  only  were  the  sons  of  Phraates  released  from
their  long  detention  at  Rome,  and  directed  to  present  them-
selves on  their  native  soil,  and  claim  the  allegiance  of  their
father's  subjects ;  but  a  Roman  general,  L.  Vitellius,  a  man
of  distinguished  valour  and  experience,  was  deputed  to  lead
the  forces  of  Asia  and  Syria  against  the  enemy ;  and  while
it  was  hoped  that  a  vigorous  demonstration  would  suffice  to
hurl  him  back  from  the  territory  in  dispute,  instructions  were
not  withheld,  it  would  appear,  to  push  on  if  necessary,  and
smite  the  Parthians  with  the  strong  hand  of  the  empire.
But  these  combinations  proved  speedily  successful.  Arta-
banus, already  detested  by  many  of  his  most  powerful  sub-
jects, was  compelled  to  descend  from  his  throne,  and  take
refuge  in  the  far  wilds  of  Hyrcania ;  while  Tiridates,  the  son
of  Phraates,  was  accepted  in  his  room.  The  army,  which
had  crossed  the  Euphrates,  returned  victorious  without  strik-
ing a  blow,  though,  by  a  subsequent  revolution,  Artabanus
was  not  long  afterwards  restored,  and  admitted,  upon  giving
the  required  hostages,  to  the  friendship  of  his  lordly  rivals.1
If  Tiberius  refrained  from  enlarging  his  empire  by  fresh
conquests,  he  was  not  the  less  intent  on  consolidating  the
Thrace,  Cappa-  unwieldy  mass  by  the  gradual  incorporation  of
ria.  the  dependent  kingdoms  inclosed  within  its  lim-

its. The  contests  between  two  rival  brothers,  Cotys  and
Rhascuporis,  in  Thrace,  gave  him  a  pretext  for  placing  the
fairest  part  of  that  country  under  the  control  of  a  Roman
officer,  thus  preparing  the  way  for  its  ultimate  annexation.8

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  31-37. ;  Joseph.  Anliq.  xviii.  5.
a  Tac.  Ann.  u.  67.

A.U.790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  269

On  the  deatli  of  Archelaus,  king  of  Cappadocia  in  770,  his
country  was  declared  a  Roman  province,  and  subjected  to
the  rule  of  an  imperial  procurator.1  At  the  same  period  the
frontier  kingdom  of  Commagene  was  placed  under  the  gov-
ernment, of  a  propraetor.8  Syria,  the  great  stronghold  of  the
Roman  power  in  the  East,  was  still  skirted  by  several  tribu-
tary kingdoms  or  ethnarchies,  such  as  Chalcis,  Emesa,  Da-
mascus, and  Abilene;  but  the  dependency  of  Judea,  the
wealthiest  and  proudest  of  all  these  vassal  states,  had  been
wrested  under  Augustus  from  the  dynasty  to  which  it  had
been  entrusted,  and  was  still  subjected  by  his  successor  to
the  control  of  the  proconsul  at  Antioch.

Herod  the  Great,  on  his  death-bed,  had  sent  his  seal,  to-
gether with  an  ample  present,  to  Augustus,  in  token  of  the
entire  dependence  upon  Rome  in  which  he  held

• •  mi  •  /»  t Division  of

his  dominions. This  act  of  vassalage  procured Palestine  bo-

,.  ,  ,  .  „  „ , -i.  ••  twecn  the  sons

him,  perhaps,  the  ratification  oi  the  disposition  of  Herod  the
he  had  made  of  his  territories  between  Archelaus,
Herod  Antipas,  and  Philippus.  To  the  first  was  allotted  the
kingdom  of  Judea,  including  Samaria  and  Idumea,  but  with
the  loss  of  the  cities  of  Gaza,  Gadara,  and  Hippo,  which
were  now  annexed  to  the  government  of  Syria.  To  the  sec-
ond fell  the  districts  of  Galilaea  to  the  west,  and  Peraea  to
the  east  of  the  Jordan ;  while  the  Trachonitis,  Auranitis,
and  Gaulonitis  formed  with  Itursea  the  tetrarchy  of  Philip,
extending  northward  to  the  borders  of  Damascus.'  But  the
rival  kinsmen  were  not  satisfied  with  this  division.  Arche-
laus and  Antipas  repaired  to  Rome  to  plead  against  one
another ;  but  while  they  were  urging  their  suits  before  the
tribunal  of  the  senate,  the  provisional  government  which  the
Romans  had  established  in  Judea  was  suddenly  attacked  on
all  sides  by  bodies  of  armed  insurgents.  Their  leaders,  how-
ever, were  not  men  of  rank  or  commanding  influence,  and
the  revolt  was  in  no  sense  a  national  movement. It  was

1  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  42.;  Dion,  lyii.  17.;  Suet.  Tib.  28.;  Strabo,  xii.  p.  634.

a  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  56.

'  Joseph.  Antii;.  xvii.  11.  §  4.

270  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  87.

speedily  crushed  by  Varus,  then  proconsul  of  Syria,  the
same  who  ten  years  afterwards  perished  so  miserably  in  Ger-
many, and  punished  with  the  atrocious  severity  too  common-
ly employed  in  such  cases.1  Archelaus,  confirmed  in  his  sov-
ereignty, continued  to  reign  in  these  lamentable  auspices  in

Judea.  His  subjects,  still  mindful  of  the  sons  of
banfsbment  of their  beloved  Mariamne, never  regarded him

with  favour ;  and  it  has  been  mentioned  how  they
complained  to  Augustus  of  his  tyranny,  and  obtained  his
removal  from  the  throne.  He  was  finally  sent  into  exile  at
Vienna  in  Gaul.

The  fall  of  Archelaus  left  the  throne  of  Judea  and  Sama-
ria without  a  direct  claimant,  and  the  emperor  took  the  op-
„  ,  portunity  of  attaching  them  to  the  Roman  domin-

Judea  annexed .  *L .  ...

to  the  Roman  ions.  This  acquisition  was  placed  under  the
general  administration  of  the  proconsul  of  Syria,
but  governed  more  directly  by  an  imperial  procurator,  who
took  up  his  abode  at  Csesarea  Philippi.  Of  the  character  of
the  new  government  we  find  no  complaints  even  in  the  Jew-
ish writers  whose  accounts  of  this  period  have  been  preserv-
ed to  us.  Both  Augustus  and  his  successor  appear  to  have
instructed  their  officers  to  continue  to  respect  the  peculiar
habits  and  prejudices  of  the  Jews : 3  whatever  may  have
been  the  ordinary  severities  of  Roman  domination,  it  was
not  till  the  arrival  of  Pontius  Pilatus,  about  the  middle  of
the  reign  of  Tiberius,  that  any  special  grievance  was  inflicted
upon  them.  They  complained  that  the  new  procurator  com-
menced his  career  with  a  grave  and  wanton  insult.  He  en-
tered Jerusalem  with  standards  flying,  upon  which,  accord-
ing to  the  usage  of  the  time,  the  image  of  the  emperor  was
displayed.  The  old  religious  feeling  of  the  Jews  against
Government  of  *ne  representation  of  the  human  figure  was  rous-
Pontius  Pilate. e(j  to  indignation : they  remonstrated  with  the

1  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  ii.  5. ;  Antiq.  xvii.  10.

2  Fischer  {Rvern.  Zcit.  a  759.)  fixes  the  annexation  of  the  province  to  the
last  half  of  this  year. Comp.  Dion,  lv.  27. ;  Joseph.  Antiq.  xviii.  2.  1.

3  Philo,  legat.  ad  Cat,  37.

A-U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  271

procurator,  nor  would  they  listen  to  his  excuse  that  the  Ro-
mans had  their  customs  as  well  as  the  Jews,  and  that  the
removal  of  the  emperor's  portrait  from  his  ensigns  by  an
officer  of  his  own  might  he  regarded  as  a  crime  against  his
majesty.  But  if  Tiberius  was  merely  the  creature  of  the  de-
lators in  his  own  capital,  in  the  provinces  he  retained  his
good  sense  and  independence.  Perhaps  it  was  by  a  special
authorization  from  him  that  Pilate  consented  to  withdraw
the  obnoxious  images.1  Nevertheless,  the  Jews,  under  the
guidance  of  their  priests,  continued  to  watch  every  act  of
his  administration  with  inveterate  jealousy,  and  when  he
ventured  to  apply  a  portion  of  the  temple  revenues  to  the
construction  of  an  aqueduct  for  the  supply  of  their  city,
broke  out  into  violence  which  provoked  him  to  severe  meas-
ures of  repression.  Mutual  exasperation  led  probably  to
further  riots,  followed  by  sanguinary  punishments :  the  gov-
ernment of  Pilate  was  charged  with  cruelty  and  exaction,
and  at  last  the  provincials  addressed  themselves  to  Vitellius,
the  governor  of  Svria.2 Nor  were  their  expec-

.  . J  ,  „.  ,  t -, Recall  and  ban-

tations  disappointed.  JLne  proconsul  required  ishment  of  Pi-
his  procurator  to  quit  the  province,  and  submit
himself  to  the  pleasure  of  the  offended  emperor.  Tiberius,
indeed,  was  already  dead  before  his  arrival,  but  the  new
ruler  attended  without  delay  to  his  lieutenant's  representa-
tions, and  Pilate  was  dismissed  with  ignominy  to  Vienna.3
From  the  confidence  with  which  Tiberius  was  appealed  to  on
a  matter  of  such  remote  concern,  it  would  seem  that  the  vig-
ilance of  his  control  was  not  generally  relaxed  even  in  the
last  moments  of  his  life.

While  Judea  and  Samaria  were  thus  annexed  to  the  Ro-
man province,  Galilee,  and  the  outlaying  regions  of  Peraea
and  Iturrca,  were  still  suffered  to  remain  under Con(1;tion  of
their  native  rulers ; and  the  dominions  of  the ae'ltomaa*
great  Herod  became,  as  we  shall  see,  once  more g°vernment-

1  Joseph.  Ardiq.  Jud.  xviii.  4.  1. ;  Bell.  Jud.  ii.  9.  3.

7  Joseph.  Anliq.  Jutl.  xviii.  5.  2. :  /cat  Ili/MTor,  dim  ireoiv  tiiarpiTpac 'ml
'lovdaiovr,  e'tr  'Pdj/xrfv  i/KElytrro,  ralr  'OvlrelXiov  IvroTialc,  ovk  bv  avreinuv.
*  Joseph.  1.  c. ;  Euscb.  Jfat.  Eocl.  ii.  7.

272  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS  [A.D.  37.

united  transiently  under  a  single  sceptre  at  no  distant  period.
If,  however,  we  consider  the  condition  of  the  Jewish  provin-
cials under  the  Roman  fasces,  we  shall  find  reason  to  believe  that
it  was  far  from  intolerable,  and  presented  probably  a  change
for  the  better  from  the  tyranny  of  their  own  regal  dynasties.
Doubtless  the  national  feeling,  as  far  as  it  extended,  was  out-
raged in  its  cherished  prepossessions  by  the  substitution  of  a
foreign  for  a  native  domination.  The  nobles  and  the  priests,
who  preserved  and  reflected  this  sentiment,  and  who  suffered
in  consideration  under  foreign  sway,  fostered  the  prejudices
of  the  people  to  the  utmost,  excited  their  discontent,  fanned
the  flame  of  sedition,  and  then  betrayed  their  clients  to  the
sword  of  relentless  executioners.  It  may  be  admitted  that
the  fiscal  exactions  of  the  procurator  were  more  uniformly
rigid  than  those  of  Herod,  whose  remission  of  a  large  por-
tion of  his  people's  taxes  had  gained  him  favour  in  the  midst
of  his  atrocities.  Yet  the  amount  of  freedom  and  security
enjoyed  by  the  Jews  under  a  Quirinius  and  a  Pilate  shows
the  general  leniency  of  the  Roman  government  at  this  period.
The  warm  descriptions  of  provincial  felicity  by  the  Jewish
authority  Philo,  which  will  be  cited  hereafter,  may  be  colour-
ed to  suit  a  purpose,  and  it  may  be  impossible  to  produce
any  distinct  facts  to  support  this  general  conjecture.  Yet
indications  ai'e  not  wanting  in  the  writings  of  the  Evange-
lists, which  contain,  abstracted  from  their  religious  signifi-
cance, the  most  interesting  record  in  existence  of  the  social
condition  of  antiquity, — for  they  alone  of  all  our  ancient  doc-
uments are  the  productions  of  men  of  the  people, — to  show
that  the  mass  of  the  population  of  Judea  was  contented  and
comparatively  happy  under  the  rule  of  the  Roman  procura-
tor.1 Such  is  the  impression  I  receive  from  the  representa-
tions of  common  life  in  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament.
The  instances  they  allege  of  cruelty  and  injustice  are  drawn
from  the  conduct  of  the  Jews  towards  one  another,  rather

1  These  writings  refer  in  point  of  time  to  the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius.
The  dates  variously  assigned  for  the  Crucifixion  range  from  a.  d.  27  to  A.  D.  33.
Clinton  fixes  it  at  a.  d.  29,  a.  u.  782,  the  sixteenth  year  of  Tiberius.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  2*3

than  of  the  foreigner  towards  the  native.  The  Scribe  and  the
Pharisee  are  held  np  to  odium  or  contempt,  not  the  minister
of  police  or  the  instrument  of  government.  The  Romans
are  regarded  in  them  as  the  protectors  of  the  people  against
their  domestic  tyrants.  The  duty  of  paying  them  tribute  is
urged  as  the  proper  price  of  the  tranquillity  they  maintain ;
their  fiscal  officers  are  spoken  of  with  forbearance ;  their  sol-
diers are  cited  as  examples  of  thoughtful  toleration  ;  the  vice
of  the  provincial  ruler  is  indifference  and  unbelief  rather
than  wanton  violence ;  and  the  tribunal  of  the  emperor  him-
self is  appealed  to  as  the  last  resort  of  injured  innocence.
The  freedom  of  movement  enjoyed  by  the  subjects  of  Rome,
the  permission  so  fully  allowed  them  of  passing  from  town
to  town,  from  frontier  to  frontier,  of  assembling  together  for
social  and  religious  objects,  of  flocking  in  crowds  into  the
city  or  the  wilderness,  at  the  call  of  popular  leaders  or
preachers,  all  indicate  a  state  of  personal  liberty  which
might  be  envied  throughout  the  continent  of  Europe  at  the
present  day.1

1  It  may  be  said  perhaps  that  this  indulgence  was  owing  to  the  want  of
means  of  repression  rather  than  of  the  desire  to  repress. The  imperfections  of
the  police  of  the  empire,  from  the  slenderness  of  its  military  force,  were  com-
pensated by  the  severity  of  its  punishments.
tol.  t. — 18

274  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

CHAPTEE  XLYII.

THE  FAMILY  OF  HEROD  THE  GREAT  AT  ROME. BERENICE,  AND  HER  CHILDREN  HEROD-

IAS AND AGRIPPA. HERODIAS REPUDIATES HER HUSBAND PHILIPPUS,  MARRIES

HEROD  ANTIPAS,  AND  RECEIVES  A  PRINCIPALITY  IN  PALESTINE. AGRIPPA  COURTS

THE  YOUNG  CAIUS,  AND  IMBUES  HIM  WITH  THE  IDEAS  OF  ORIENTAL  SOVER-
EIGNTY.  FALLS UNDER DISPLEASURE OF  TIBERIUS,  AND IS  ARRESTED. ON  THE

DEATH  OF  TIBERIUS  HE  IS  RELEASED,  AND  TAKEN  INTO  FAVOUR  BY  CAIUS. FIRST

COMMENCEMENT  OF  THE  NEW  PRINCIPATE. LIBERALITY  OF  CAIUS. HIS  SUBSER-
VIENCE TO  THE  SENATE. ATTEMPTS  TO  RESTORE  THE  COMITIA. BECOMES  CON-
SUL, JULY, 790. — HIS INDUSTRY IN ADMINISTRATION. MAGNIFICENCE OF HIS

SHOWS. HE FALLS  INTO EXCESSIVE  DISSIPATION. HIS DANGEROUS ILLNESS.

DESPAIR OF THE CITIZENS AND PROVINCIALS. ON HIS RECOVERY HIS HEAD

TURNED  BY  FLATTERY. PUTS  TO  DEATH  THE  YOUNG  TIBERIUS,  MACRO  AND  ENNIA,

AND SILANUS. HIS EXTRAVAGANCES, NECESSITIES, AND CRUELTY. BELIEVES

HIMSELF  A  GOD,  AND  REQUIRES  HIS SUBJECTS TO  WORSHIP HIM. INDIFFERENCE

OF THE ROMANS AND GREEKS. RESISTANCE OF  THE JEWS. DISTURBANCES  AT

ALEXANDRIA. AGRIPPA  GOES TO  PALESTINE  : INTRIGUES  AGAINST ANTIPAS  AND

HERODIAS  : OBTAINS  THEIR  BANISHMENT,  AND  SUCCEEDS  TO  THEIR DOMINIONS.

CAIUS ORDERS HIS STATUE TO BE  SET  UP  IN  THE JEWISH SYNOGOGUES,  AND  IN

THE  TEMPLE  AT  JERUSALEM. MISSION  OF  PHILO  THE  JEW,  AND  INTERVIEW  WITH

THE  EMPEROR. (a.  D.  37-40.  A.  U.  790-793.)

THE  son  of  Philip,  king  of  Macedon,  could  find  among
the  free  citizens  of  the  Grecian  republics  no  youth  of
equal  rank  to  compete  with  him  in  the  games  of

Royal  children *  * .  °

educated  at Olympia,  and  the  heir  of  an  Augustus  or  Tiberius

Borne.  • i , t t -, • ,  . ,  • ~ ,

might  already  disdain  the  companionship  of  the
children  of  Roman  knights  and  senators.  But  the  capital  of
the  world  was  now  frequented  by  the  scions  of  many  royal
families.  The  children  of  dependent  sovereigns,  invited  to
receive  a  Roman  education,  were  retained  there  as  pledges
for  their  parents'  fidelity ;  the  pretenders  to  disputed  thrones

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  275

were  encouraged  to  lay  their  claims  before  the  emperor  in
person,  and  allowed  to  wait  year  after  year  for  his  final  de-
termination. A  distinguished  society  of  royal  birth  was
thus  collected  together  in  the  centre  of  republican  equality,
objects  of  remark  and  interest  to  those  around  them,  to
whom  they  communicated  the  ideas  in  which  they  had  them-
selves been  bred  quite  as  fast  as  they  imbibed  the  notions  of
their  conquerors.

The  awe  with  which  these  illustrious  strangers  might  at
first  regard  the  institutions  of  their  mighty  mistress  would
naturally  abate  upon  closer  acquaintance  with  them.  They
found  the  Romans  profoundly  dissatisfied  with  the  noble
polity  of  their  ancestors,  discarding  one  by  one  the  guaran-
tees of  their  ancient  freedom,  and  abandoning  themselves  to
an  ignorant  admiration  of  the  hollow  splendour  of  Oriental
despotism.  What  remained  of  the  equal  laws  to  which  the
vital  forces  of  the  conquering  republic  had  been  ascribed,
appeared  to  their  closer  examination  a  mere  shadow  and  pre-
tence. Unable  to  appreciate  the  real  energy  which  still
moved  under  these  antiquated  forms,  and  the  influence  his
old  traditions  still  practically  exerted  upon  the  Roman
citizen,  they  learnt  to  look  with  complacent  disdain  upon
the  names  of  the  senate  and  people.  The  Roman  nobles,  on
the  other  hand,  notwithstanding  the  public  and  official  con-
tumely with  which  they  treated  the  most  illustrious  of  their
subjects,  did  not  fail  to  admire  in  their  hearts,  with  a  blind
reverence,  the  social  prescriptions  of  eastern  civilization,  and
were  not  slow  to  acquire,  under  the  tuition  of  these  gallant
kings  and  princes,  a  glowing  interest  in  the  forms  of  Oriental
monarchy.1

In  this  circle  of  distinguished  foreigners  the  dynasties  of
Thrace  and  Cappadocia,  of  Egypt,  Syria  and  Armenia,  were
all  represented. But  none  among  them  were  at

,  .  .  ,  ,  „ , Herod  Aprippa

this  time  so  conspicuous  as  the  members  of  the educatedat
family  of  Herod  the  Judean,  some  of  whom  were

1  Hor.  Sat.  i.  3.12.:  "  Modo  reges  atque  tretrarchas,  Omnia  magna  loquens."

276  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

domiciled  for  many  years  at  Rome,  and  admitted  to  the
most  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  princes  of  the  Cesarean
house.  The  imperial  city  was  in  fact  at  this  period  the
common  asylum  of  many  unfortunate  princes  who  would
in  their  own  country  have  been  exposed  to  certain  destruc-
tion from  the  horrid  precautions  of  dynastic  jealousy.  I
have  not  paused  to  enumerate  precisely  the  members  of  his
own  family  whom  the  tyrant  of  Judea  had  successively  put
to  death.  For  many  years  his  own  children  had  been
screened  from  his  fury  by  the  shadow  of  the  imperial  palace :
when  at  last  they  had  been  restored,  at  his  instance,  to  their
native  soil,  they  had  been  led  speedily  to  the  scaffold  before
the  eyes  of  their  indignant  countrymen.  But  Augustus  had
again  interfered  to  save  the  monster's  grandchildren.  Hero-
des,  the  son  of  Aristobulus,  to  whom  the  name  of  Agrippa
had  been  given  in  compliment  to  the  emperor's  friend  and
minister,  had  been  removed  to  Rome  soon  after  his  father's
death,  and  with  him  his  mother  Berenice,  and

His  mother  ,  *  .  ,  ,

Berenice  and  his  elder  sister  Herodias.  These  children  united
the  blood  of  the  rivals  Salome  and  Mariamne :
their  nearest  kinsmen  had  perished  by  the  hands  of  the  exe-
cutioner, and  the  dominions  which  should  have  descended
to  their  father  Aristobulus  and  his  brother  Alexander  had
been  divided  among  their  uncles,  the  offspring  of  their
grandfather's  later  marriages.  At  Rome,  however,  they  had
been  received  with  kindness.  Antonia,  the  daughter  of  the
triumvir,  might  remember  the  intimacy  which  had  subsisted
between  her  father  and  Herod,  and  she  introduced  the
grandchildren  of  the  king  of  Judea  to  the  society  of  her  own
offspring  by  Drusus.3  Herod  Agrippa,  born  in  the  year  743,
was  but  one  year  older  than  Claudius,  the  youngest  of  her
children,  with  whom  he  was  bred  up  in  the  closest  intimacy.

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  6.  3. :  tov  'Ayp'mirav  .  .  .  OavfiaTog  aS-itiraTov
yeyevr/fJ.ivovt  be  £K  ■ko.vv  idi&Tov,  ml  irapa  naoav  66^av  tuv  e166tuv  avTov,  kirl
rooSvde  tjvS-tjOt]  dwdfieuc  xviii.  7.  1. :  'Hp6dov  tov  fiaackiug  okiyov  irpb  rrjq
reXevTf/g  'Aypinnas  iv  ry  'Vutfnj  6iacTo>fievog.

2  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  1.

A.U.  790.J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  277

Both  Herod  and  his  sister  inherited  the  ambitious  spirit  of
their  house.  Upon  the  disgrace  of  Archelaus,  and  the  va-
cancy of  the  throne  of  Judea,  they  might  hope,  through
their  interest  with  the  rulers  of  the  empire,  to  recover  that
portion  of  their  ancestral  inheritance.  Notwithstanding,
however,  their  intrigues  and  aspirations,  the  imperial  gov-
ernment still  retained  its  new  acquisition,  and  showed  no
disposition  to  relinquish  it.  All  their  views  were  now  co-
vertly directed  to  saving  some  inferior  province  or  principality
from  the  wreck  of  their  grandsire's  sovereignty.  But  the
schemes  of  the  sister  were  thwarted  by  the  indolence  of  her
husband  Philippus,  while  the  golden  hopes  still  cherished  by
the  brother  could  only  be  revealed  in  the  royal  magnificence
he  displayed  in  a  private  station.  The  liberality  with  which
he  courted  the  chiefs  of  Rome,  and  led  the  career  of  prodi-
gality among  them,  soon  exhausted  his  resources  and  plunged
him  into  desperate  embarrassments.  Nor  could  he  retrieve
his  affairs  by  flattery  of  the  emperor,  for  Tiberius,  after  the
death  of  Drusus,  refused  to  see  any  of  the  young  prince's
companions,  whose  presence  would  have  renewed  his  sorrow.
Philippus,  the  despised  husband  of  Herodias,  was  a  son
of  Herod  the  Great  by  a  second  Mariamne,  who  had  easily
resigned  himself  to  the  obscure  privacy  which,

o  .  Agrippa  at-

on  account,  perhaps,  of  his  acknowledged  imbe- taches  himself

'  L  l '  .  to  Caius  Ca'sar.

cility  of  character,  had  been  assigned  him  on  the
division  of  his  father's  fortunes.  The  union  of  an  uncle  and
a  niece  was  abhorrent  to  Roman  notions,  and  these,  we  may
suppose,  were  still  more  offended  when  Herodias,  impatient
at  the  restraint  imposed  upon  her  by  a  consort  she  disdained,
and  solicited  at  the  same  time  in  marriage  by  another  uncle,
Antipas,  presumed  to  repudiate  Philippus  by  her  own  act,
and  unite  herself  with  his  half-brother.1  Nevertheless,  the
favour  of  the  imperial  family  now  smoothed  the  way  before
her.  She  returned  with  her  new  husband  to  Samaria,  the
province  which  had  been  erected  into  a  sovereignty  in  his

1  Joseph.  Ardiq.  Jiul.  xviii.  C.  4. :  em  ovyxvou  ippovqoaaa  tuv  narpiuv.

278  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

favour,  and  obtained  a  subordinate  appointment  for  her
brother  as  governor  of  the  city  of  Tiberias.  But  Agrippa
did  not  long  remain  satisfied  with  this  inferior  position.  The
compassion  of  friends  and  kinsmen  furnished  him  with  funds
for  recommencing  his  career  of  politic  extravagance  at  Rome,
to  which  spot  in  the  decline  of  the  reigning  emperor,  he  once
more  betook  himself.1  He  threw  himself  with  renewed  fer-
vour into  the  pleasures  and  dissipations  of  his  imperial  pa-
trons, drew  off  gradually  from  his  early  associate,  the  stupid
and  neglected  Claudius,  in  whose  prospects  there  was  little
to  encourage  him,  and  having  to  choose  for  an  ally  between
the  grandson  and  the  grand-nephew  of  Tiberius,  shrewdly
attached  himself  to  the  latter."  Agrippa  was  twice  the  age
of  the  stripling  Caius :  intelligent  and  active,  and  well  versed
in  men  and  affairs,  he  soon  acquired  unbounded  ascendency
over  the  young  prince,  now  trembling  in  the  uncertainty  of
his  own  fortunes,  and  oscillating  between  the  brightest  hopes
of  power  and  the  direst  apprehensions.  To  Caius  such  a
friend  and  mentor  as  the  Jewish  chief  was  invaluable.  With
Agrippa  he  passed  the  hours  he  could  steal  from  the  exacting
jealousy  of  his  uncle  ;  from  him  he  learnt  the  customs  of  the
East  and  the  simple  machinery  of  Asiatic  despotism,  and  im-
bibed a  contemptuous  disgust  at  the  empty  forms  of  the  Re-
public, which  served  only,  as  he  might  in  his  blind  inexperi-
ence imagine,  to  impede  the  march  of  government,  while
they  contributed  nothing  to  its  security.  He  saw  the  loath-
ed and  abject  Tiberius  cowering  in  terror  before  a  senate
more  abject  in  its  terrors  than  himself,  hiding  his  person  from
the  sight  of  his  subjects,  feeling  his  way  before  every  step,
and  effecting  every  end  by  intrigue  and  circumvention ;
while  the  petty  lord  of  a  Syrian  plain  or  watercourse  was
every  inch  a  king ;  while  in  the  little  town  of  Samaria,  as  he

1  Joseph.  Aniiq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  3. :  w^ero  en'  'AXet-avSpctag  irMuv  tvda
'  AleS-avdpov  Selrat  rov  AXafiapxov  fivpiddag  elaoai  daveia  avrC  Soiivac.  In
this  and  other  enterprises  Agrippa  was  assisted  by  the  good  sereices  of  his  wife
Cyprus,  the  daughter  of  Phasael,  a  brother  of  Herod  the  Great.

2  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  4.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  279

heard,  every  word  of  the  tetrarch  was  obeyed  without  re-
monstrance or  hesitation.

But  it  was  not  in  the  simplicity  of  their  despotic  author-
ity only  that  the  sovereigns  of  the  East  so  far  transcended,
he  was  assured,  the  princes  and  imperators  of  the  He  inflameshis
rival  hemisphere.  Their  wealth  was  more  abun-  ™tTthede-
dant,  for  all  the  possessions  of  their  subjects  were  Ip^ou"'/116
held  only  in  dependence  upon  them ;  their  splen-  Jerusalemi
dour  was  more  dazzling,  for  thirty  generations  of  autocrats
had  striven  to  excel  one  another  in  the  arts  of  magnificence
and  display.  The  capitals  of  the  Oriental  monarchs  far  ex-
ceeded in  beauty  and  convenience  the  mass  of  dark  and
smoky  cabins,  in  which  the  conquerors  of  the  world  were
still  doomed  to  burrow.  But  of  all  the  cities  of  the  East
none  equalled  Jerusalem  in  splendour.1  The  great  Herod
had  adorned  it  with  buildings,  the  magnificence  of  which
outshone  anything  that  could  yet  be  seen  at  Rome.  His
theatres  and  gymnasiums,  his  forums  and  colonnades,  were
of  the  costliest  materials  and  the  noblest  proportions.  The
precincts  of  the  temple,  which  he  rebuilt  upon  the  holiest  of
Jewish  sites,  and  enlarged  with  an  outer  court  of  much
greater  dimensions,  might  have  contained  all  the  fanes  of
Rome  together.  For  fifty  years  marble  had  been  piled  xipon
marble  in  constructing  it.J  It  occupied  the  whole  summit
of  the  hill  of  Moriah,  next  to  Zion  the  most  prominent  quar-
ter of  the  city,  and  rising  upon  enormous  substructions  from
the  deep  valleys  beneath,  seemed  like  one  immense  citadel,
the  Capitol  of  the  Jewish  nation.3 On  the  rival  summit  of

1  Pliny  (Hist.  Nat.  v.  14.)  calls  Jerusalem,  "  longe  clarissima  urbium  Orien-
ti-,  non  Judaeae  modo ;"  referring,  it  may  be  supposed,  to  its  external  splendour
rather  than  to  its  historic  fame.  Although  this  writer  may  be  suspected  of  a
wish  to  flatter  his  patrons  Vespasian  and  Titus,  its  conquerors,  his  glowing  lan-
guage is  sufficiently  borne  out  by  Josephus,  Strabo,  and  Tacitus.

3  Josephus  dates  the  commencement  of  the  third  temple  from  the  eighteenth
year  of  Herod's  reign,  a.  u.  734,  n.  c.  20,  and  it  was  not  yet  fully  completed.
Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xv.  11.  1.,  xx.  9.  7.

a  Strabo,  xvi.  2.  p.  763. ;  Tac.  Jfisl.  v.  12. :  "Templum  in  modum  arcis."
Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  v.  5.,  vi.  C.

280  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  37.

Mount  Zion,  the  highest  elevation  in  Jerusalem,  was  planted
the  royal  residence ;  no  modest  mansion  for  the  most  emi-
nent of  Roman  senators,  but  a  palace  worthy  of  the  name,
an  abode  befitting  an  Oriental  potentate,  erected  not  by  the
contributions  of  the  populace,  but  by  confiscation  of  the  es-
tates of  the  great  and  powerful  of  the  land.  Surrounded
with  lofty  Avails  and  towers,  springing,  like  the  temple,  from
the  depths  of  the  gorges  beneath,  containing  vast  halls  and
ample  corridors,  its  courts  filled  with  trees  and  grass-plots,
with  reservoirs,  fountains,  and  running  streams,  it  was  a  pal-
ace, a  villa,  and  a  fortress  all  in  one.1  Zion  and  Moriah  faced
each  other  across  the  deep  and  narrow  trench  of  the  Tyro-
poeon,  and  the  temple  and  palace  were  connected  by  a  bridge
or  causeway,  across  which  the  sovereign  marched  above  the
heads  of  his  subjects,  as  the  sun  passes  in  the  heavens  from
cloud  to  cloud.  If  the  kings  of  Judea  had  abstained  as  yet
from  claiming  the  title  of  divinity,  from  regard  to  the  fan-
tastic scruples  of  their  people,  such  at  least  was  the  honour
to  which  the  Eastern  potentates  might  generally  pretend,
and  such,  should  he  ever  be  restored  to  authority  in  his  na-
tive land,  Agrippa  himself  already  meditated  to  assume,
and  the  mag- The  slaves  of  Asia  acknowledged  their  sovereigns

niflcence  of  it3  , °  °

sovereigns.  as  the  sole  fountains  of  life  and  property ;  they
regarded  them  as  above  the  law  or  beside  the  law ;  no  privi-
leged ranks  and  classes  of  men,  no  traditions  and  prescrip-
tions of  accustomed  usage,  stood  between  them  and  their
arbitrary  caprices ;  uncles  and  nieces,  brothers  and  sisters,
sons  and  mothers  might  marry  at  their  will : 2  to  the  multi-
tude they  held  in  fact  the  place  of  Gods  upon  earth ;  to  deny
them  the  title  might  seem  mere  senseless  prudery.

1  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  v.  4.  4.

2  The  steadfast  abhorrence  of  the  Romans  for  these  irregularities  is  one  of
the  finest  traits  in  their  character. Comp.  Lucan,  Phars.  viii.  397. :

"  Num  barbara  nobis
Est  ignota  Venus  ?  .  .  .  Epulis  vesana  meroque
Regia  non  ullos  exceptos  legibus  horret
Concubitus  .  .  .  ."

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  281

Such  was  the  sovereignty  of  which  Agrippa  talked,  and
such,  when  the  associates  conversed  together  on  the  future
succession  to  the  principate  of  Tiberius,  was  the Influence  of
sovereignty  to  which  the  young  aspirant  was  en- those  oriental

"J  <>  <->  ideas.

couraged  to  look. We  shall  trace  throughout
the  brief  career  of  Caius,  the  first  despot  or  sovereign  prince
of  Rome,  the  influence  of  the  ideas  which  his  friend  thus
opened  to  him. "We  are  arrived  at  a  period  when  the  per-
sonal character  of  their  ruler  has  come  to  exercise  a  decisive
influence  on  the  sentiments  no  less  than  on  the  welfare  of  the
Roman  people,  and  through  them  of  the  world  at  large. It
becomes  the  more  important  therefore  to  note  the  conditions
under  which that character  was  formed. Since  the  over-
throw of  the  renegade  Antonius,  Rome  had  enjoyed  a  respite
from  the  invasion  of  Asiatic  principles  and  notions. Augus-
tus had  set  up  bulwarks  against  them  which  Tiberius  had
not  failed  to  respect :  it  remained  for  the  puerile  selfishness
of  Caius,  under  tuition  of  the  wily  foreigner,  to  introduce
into  the  city  an  element  of  disunion  more  fatal  to  her  polity
and  manners  than  the  arms  of  a  triumvir  or  the  edicts  of  an
imperator. The prostitution of  personal dignity  by  self-
display  in  the  theatre  and  circus  ;  the  assumption  of  the  di-
vine  character,  to  the utter destruction of  all remaining
sense  of  religion;  excessive  extravagance  in  shows  and  build-
ings ; indulgence  of  self  and  indulgence  of  the  populace,
together  with  savage  oppression  of  the  nobler  classes  ;  un-
stinted gratification  of  brutal  ferocity ; — all  these  are  attri-
butes of  Oriental  sovereignty,  which  Caius  was  first  of  the
Roman  emperors  to  exercise,  but  in  which  some  of  his  suc-
cessors rioted,  if  possible,  even  more  furiously  than  himself.

Caius,  now  in  the  middle  of  his  twenty-fifth  year,  was  by
nature  more  impressible  than  was  usual  with  his  hard  and
prosaic  countrymen.1 The  poetical  and  rhetori-

*  J  l  .  Cams  unsound

cal  exercises  to  which  he  had  been  directed,  with- both  in  mind

.  . and  body.

out  the  compensating  influence  of  severer  train-

1  Dion  notes  that  Caius  at  the  moment  of  Tibcrius's  death  wanted  five
months  and  four  days  to  complete  his  twenty-fifth  year. lis.  6.

282  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

ing,  which  had  been  unkindly  withheld  from  him,  had  im-
parted perhaps  a  certain  flaccidity  to  his  character,  confirmed
by  the  enervating  voluptuousness  in  which  he  had  been
steeped  from  his  cradle.  His  constitution  was  weakly.  In
childhood  he  had  been  subject  to  fits,  and  though  he  out-
grew this  tendency,  and  learnt  to  bear  fatigue  of  body,  he
was  not  unfrequently  seized  with  sudden  faintings.  Early
indulgence  in  every  caprice,  and  premature  dissipation,  had
strained  his  nerves  and  brain,  till  at  last  a  temperament  nat-
urally excitable,  and  harassed  by  constant  fever,  seemed  al-
ways to  tremble  on  the  verge  of  delirium.  It  was  said  of
him,  at  least  in  his  later  years,  that  he  never  slept  for  more
than  three  hours  together.  Through  the  weary  darkness  of
the  night  he  would  toss  in  restless  agitation  on  his  bed,  or
pace  with  hurried  and  unequal  strides  the  long  resounding
corridors,  shouting  impatiently  for  the  dawn.  His  dreams
were  wild  and  terrible,  and  in  his  waking  visions  his  mind
seemed  ever  on  the  stretch  with  the  vastness  of  its  shadowy
images,  in  which  he  fancied  he  beheld  the  great  Spirit  of  the
Ocean,  and  engaged  in  converse  with  him.  The  might  and
majesty  of  the  Cesarean  empire,  as  of  a  Titan  that  defied
the  Gods,  inflamed  his  perturbed  imagination,  his  concep-
tions expanded  like  the  welling  visions  of  a  dream,  and  his
grasp  of  power  was  a  fitful  struggle  to  realize  a  sick  man's
nightmare.1

While  the  germs  of  this  unhappy  temperament,  so  pitia-
ble in  a  private  man,  so  fearful  in  a  ruler,  were  still  undevel-
Agrippa  ar-  oped  in  his  youthful  frame,  deep  must  have  been
blrfus  andre-  tne  charm  to  Caius  of  his  conversations  with
accession  of6  -A.»ripPa>  which  revealed  to  him  glimpses  of  a
Caius.  yet  unknown  world  of  splendour  and  enjoyment.

But  they  were  dangerous,  as  indeed  every  step,  word,  and
look  in  his  position  was  fraught  with  danger. It  happened

1  Suet.  Califf.  50. :  "  Valctude  ei  neque  corporis  neque  animi  constitit.
Puer  comitiali  morbo  vexatus,  &c. :  mentis  valetudinem  et  ipse  senserat  .  .  .
incitabatur  insomnia  maxime;  neque  enim  plus  quam  tribus  nocturnis  horia
quiescebat,"  &c.

A.  U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  283

that  the  friends  were  one  day  taking  the  air  together  in  a
carriage,  when  the  Judean  took  occasion  to  express  his  hope
that  no  long  time  would  elapse  before  the  realization  of  their
cherished  wishes ;  that  the  sceptre  would  soon  drop  from  the
grasp  of  the  aged  emperor,  and  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  his
nephew.  But  the  charioteer  listened  as  he  drove,  and  re-
ported the  conversation  to  Tiberius.  Agrippa  was  suddenly
arrested  and  placed  in  confinement,  where  he  remained,  un-
heard and  untried,  for  the  six  months  which  intervened  be-
fore the  emperor's  final  illness.  Caius  trembled  at  this  dis-
grace, the  prelude,  as  he  might  anticipate,  to  his  own,  and
redoubled  the  servile  compliances  with  which  he  paid  court
to  the  tyrant.  Antonia,  whose  influence  was  still  in  the  as-
cendant, averted  the  danger  from  her  grandson,  and  suc-
ceeded in  softening  in  some  degree  the  rigour  of  Agrippa's
captivity.1  Tiberius  was  getting  visibly  weaker.  The  min-
isters of  the  imperial  tyranny  were  on  the  watch,  and  at
every  symptom  of  his  end  approaching  made  some  relaxation
in  their  treatment  of  the  prisoners,  who  at  his  death  might
suddenly  be  restored  to  liberty  and  power.  The  friends  of
Agrippa  were  not,  it  seems,  prevented  from  visiting  him,  and
some  there  were  who  were  not  afraid  of  doing  so.  One  day
a  freedman  entered  his  chamber  with  an  air  of  mystery,  and
whispered  in  his  ear  in  the  Jewish  language,  the  Lion  is
dead?  It  seems  that  the  premature  report  of  the  emperor's
death  had  reached  him.  The  captive  understood  his  mean-
ing, and  cried  aloud  with  joy.  When  the  centurion  who
guarded  him  was  admitted  to  a  knowledge  of  the  secret,  he
urged  his  prisoner  to  take  a  seat  at  his  own  table,  and  cele-
brate with  festivity  the  event  from  which  they  both  antici-
pated his  speedy  deliverance.  But  suddenly  the  news  ar-
rived of  the  emperor's  unlooked-for  recovery.  He  had  quit-
1  ed  his  residence,  it  was  added ;  he  had  summoned  his  at-
tendants ;  he  was  already  on  his  way  to  liomc. Dire  was

1  Joseph.  Ant'tq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  8.

a  Joseph.  Anti'j.  Jvul.  xviii.  1.  10.:  owvevoar  irpbg abruv  y\Laoi)T\\  'Eftpai-
uv}  Ttlvqusv  6  ?,iuv,  <prjoiv.

284  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

the  consternation  in  the  prison,  as  at  the  same  moment  in  the
palace.  The  pleasant  party  was  rudely  broken  up.  Trem-
bling for  the  consequences  of  his  imprudence,  the  centurion
sought  to  compensate  by  redoubled  violence  for  the  indul-
gence he  had  shown  his  prisoner.  He  loaded  Agrippa  with
chains,  and  threatened  him  loudly  with  death.  The  confir-
mation of  the  first  report  came  opportunely  to  restore  his
equanimity,  and  to  allow  Agrippa  to  profit  by  the  order
which  soon  arrived  from  Caius  for  his  release.

But  the  alarm  which  had  been  excited  by  the  premature
announcement  of  the  tyrant's  decease  was  not  universally
allayed  by  this  confirmation  of  the  event.  Too
ofnTiberiuash  many  still  feared  that  it  was  only  a  device  to  dis-
pres^thefr65"  cover  the  real  sentiments  of  the  people,  and  sub-
a^ainsthim  Jec*  *°  a  bloody  punishment  all  who  should  ven-
ture to  give  utterance  to  the  general  satisfaction.
Some  condemned  victims  were  awaiting  in  prison  the  expira-
tion of  the  ten  days'  respite  which  the  law  allowed  them  ;
and  it  was  believed,  we  are  assured  (such  was  the  horror  of
the  times),  that  when  the  death  of  Tiberius  was  announced,
the  gaolers,  either  refusing  to  credit  it,  or  in  default  of  au-
thority for  refraining,  consigned  those  whose  term  had  ar-
rived, in  spite  of  their  cries  and  obtestations,  to  the  hands
of  the  executioner.1  There  is  reason,  indeed,  to  believe,  that
this  atrocity,  a  parallel  to  which  has  actually  occurred  in
modern  times,  was  merely  a  popular  invention :  but  the  re-
port served  to  exasperate  still  more  the  fury  of  the  multi-
tude, which,  on  the  assurance  that  the  lion  was  really  dead,
burst  out  into  wild  exclamations  of  disgust  and  hatred.  Ti-
berius  to  the  Tiber,  they  cried,  and  called,  it  is  said,  for  the
hook  and  ropes  to  drag  the  body  to  the  Gemonise  and  to  the
river,  that  the  goddess  Earth  and  the  spirits  of  the  buried

1  Suet.  Tib.  75.  This  story,  which  is  given  as  a  popular  rumour,  is  opposed
to  the  express  declaration  of  Dion  (lviii.  27.),  that,  on  the  first  occurrence  of  Ti-
berius's  illness,  the  condemned  were  respited  to  await  the  event,  and  is  not  en-
titled to  much  credit.  The  parallel  case  alluded  to  is  that  of  the  last  victims
of  Robespierre.

A.  U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  285

might  not  receive  it  into  their  holy  keeping.1  But  this  ebul-
lition of  feeling,  if  it  has  been  truly  represented  to  us,  was
not  lasting  :  a  calmer  expression  of  popular  disapprobation,
which  demanded  that  the  remains  should  be  hastily  con-
sumed at  a  distance,  and  not  brought  to  Rome  at  all,  was
also  speedily  overruled  ;  and  it  was  left  to  the  senate  to  de-
cide, with  the  consent  of  the  new  chief  of  the  state,  Iioav  the
body  of  the  late  emperor  should  be  disposed  of,  and  how  his
memory  should  be  treated.*

If  the  populace  of  the  city  really  entertained  any  vehe-
ment dislike  of  their  late  ruler,  it  was  not  for^  his  cruelty,  by
which  they  had  been  little  affected,  but  for  the  -j^g  wi„  of  Ti_
ungenial  austerity  of  his  government,  at  which  nuUedbyUie
they  had  long  repined,  and  which  they  might  senate-
expect  to  give  way,  under  the  sway  of  a  gay  and  gallant
youth,  to  an  era  of  festivities  and  amusements.  The  senate,
which  had  far  more  reason  to  hate  the  patron  of  Sejanus  and
the  delators,  comported  itself  at  least  with  decent  gravity.
The  announcement  of  the  emperor's  actual  decease  was
brought  to  the  fathers  by  Macro,  in  a  letter  from  Caius.  He
was  commissioned  to  present  to  them  at  the  same  time  the
testament  of  Tiberius :  but  while  he  desired  in  his  new  mas-
ter's name  that  all  the  posthumous  honours  formerly  as-
signed to  Augustus,  the  public  funeral,  the  confirmation  of
his  acts,  and  the  deification,  should  now  be  decreed  to  his
successor,  he  declared  that  the  dying  man's  disposition  of  his
patrimony  was  the  act  of  an  incapable  dotard,  and  required
that  it  should  be  solemnly  annulled.  The  legal  validity  of
this  instrument,  as  we  have  seen,  could  extend  only  to  the

1  Suet.  1.  c. :  "  Ut  pars,  Tiberium  in  Tiberim,  clamitarent :  pars  Terrain
matrem,  Deosuue  Manes  orarent,  ne  mortuo  sedem  ullam,  nisi  inter  impios,
darent."

1  The  people  demanded  that  the  body  should  be  consumed  in  the  amphi-
theatre at  Atella,  the  public  place  nighest  at  hand,  instead  of  being  brought  to
Rome ;  also  that  it  should  be  semiuslulalum,  scorched  and  not  burnt  decently
to  ashes,  as  was  usual  with  the  cheap  and  hurried  obsequies  of  slaves  and  crim-
inals.

286  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

private  property  of  the  testator ;  hut  all  felt  how  strong  a
claim  it  would  constitute  to  a  division  of  political  sover-
eignty, and  Macro  might,  perhaps,  actually  represent  to  the
senators  how  incongruous  it  was  to  give  a  presumptive  right
to  the  empire  to  a  stripling  like  the  young  Tiberius,  who  had
not  yet  reached  the  age  which  entitled  him  even  to  a  seat  in
their  assembly.1  The  late  emperor's  wish  to  make  his  grand-
son and  grand-nephew  joint-heirs  of  all  the  property  or
power  he  might  be  able  to  bequeath  was  too  generally  known,
perhaps,  to  admit  of  the  suppression  of  his  testament ;  but
Macro  was  assured  of  the  favour  in  which  the  child  of  Ger-
manicus  was  held  by  the  people,  and  he  counted  on  certain
means  of  overcoming  whatever  reluctance  the  fathers  might
have  to  cancel  it.3  The  rush,  indeed,  of  the  populace  into
the  Curia  decided  and  hastened  their  resolution.  The  will
was  set  aside  ;  a  public  funeral  was  appointed  ;  but  the  con-
sideration of  further  honours  for  the  deceased  was  postponed
to  a  decree  by  which  all  the  functions  and  dignities  of  em-
pire were  at  once  conferred  upon  Caius.3

Full  of  anxiety  at  the  fortunes  which  were  about  to  open
upon  him,  the  young  emperor  placed  himself  at  the  head  of

1  The  idea  that  the  two  princes  were  left  co-heirs  of  the  empire  was  strongly
impressed  upon  the  minds  of  all  our  Greek  authorities.  See  Dion,  lix.  1. ;  Philo,
Leg.  ad  Cai.  4.  Josephus  says  that  Tiberius  recommended  his  grandson  to  Caius
as  his  associate  in  power.

■  Dion,  lix.  1.

8  Suet.  Calig.  14.  This  biography  is  headed  in  the  editions  of  Suetonius
with  the  name  of  Caligula,  and  I  refer  to  it  under  that  title :  but  it  should  be
remarked  that  Suetonius  in  his  text  always  calls  this  prince  Caius  or  Caius
Caesar,  and  such  is  the  appellation  given  him  uniformly  by  Tacitus,  Seneca,  and
Pliny,  as  well  as  the  Greek  writers  generally.  I  need  not  say  that  such  is  also
his  designation  on  medals.  Aurelius  Victor,  in  his  trifling  abridgment  of  his-
tory, is  perhaps  the  first  writer  who  gives  him  the  name  of  Caligula.  This,  as
has  been  mentioned,  was  a  mere  nickname  of  the  camp,  and  though  it  con-
tinued current  there,  the  emperor  himself  always  resented  it:  "Nee  impune
cessit  primipilario  quod  Caligulam  dixerat."  Senec.  de  Const.  Sap.  18.  The
later  acceptance  of  the  name  is  due  perhaps  to  the  careless  epitomists,  who
wished  to  save  themselves  trouble  in  distinguishing  between  the  various  Caesars
who  bore  the  praenomen  of  Caius.

A.  U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  287

Caius  conducts

the  mourning  procession  which  conducted  the  re-

mains  of  Tiberius  from  Misenum  to  Rome. The the  obsequies

of  Tiberius.

people  streamed  forth  from  the  towns  on  the  way
and  from  the  city  itself  to  meet  him,  as  the  leader  of  a  tri-
umphal rather  than  of  a  funeral  pageant.  Along  the  road-
side altars  were  decked  for  sacrifice,  and  steamed  with  in-
cense ;  torches  blazed  and  flowers  were  strown  in  profusion
before  him.  Every  joy  and  blessing  were  invoked  upon  his
head,  and  voices  were  heard  throughout  the  crowd  address-
ing him  with  the  most  endearing  appellations.1  In  the  uni-
versal delight  and  anticipation  of  good  days  to  come,  the
crimes  and  injuries  of  the  dead  tyrant  were  forgotten,  and
to  the  execution  of  the  decree  in  his  honour  no  resistance
was  offered.  Though  basking  in  the  sunshine  of  popular  fa-
vour, the  behaviour  of  the  young  aspirant,  for  he  could
hardly  yet  feel  secure  of  his  position,  was  measured  and  dis-
creet. As  chief  mourner  at  the  imperial  obsequies,  he  pro-
nounced a  funeral  oration,  the  tone  of  which  was  sober  and
moderate,  respectful  alike  to  the  deceased  and  to  his  people,
nor  unaccompanied  with  a  decent  tribute  of  tears.  From  the
merits  of  Tiberius  he  turned  with  warmer  enthusiasm  to  the
exploits  of  Augustus  and  Germanicus,  and  traced  to  those
sainted  heroes  of  his  line  his  own  personal  claims  to  the  re-
gard of  the  Roman  people.  From  the  forum  the  body  was
carried  with  the  proper  ceremonies  to  the  Campus  Martius
for  cremation,  and  the  ashes  finally  enshrined  in  the  Cesar-
ean mausoleum.'  At  the  close  of  the  solemnities,  Caius  pre-
sented himself  in  the  senate-house,  and  addressed  the  fathers
and  others  there  assembled  in  a  speech  full  of  flattery  and
submissiveness.  lie  declared  himself  the  child  or  ward  of
the  senators,  prepared  to  share  with  them  the  toils  and  pleas-
ures  of  office,  and  to  guide  all  his  actions  according  to  their
wise  direction.' Nor  did  he  fail  to  assume  a  tone  of  regret

1  Suet. Catig.  18.: "Super  fausta  omina  sidus,  et  pullum,  et  pupum  ct
alumnum  appellantes."

2  Smr.  OaSff.  15.;  Dion,  lviii.  28.,  lis.  3.
5  Dion.  lix.  6.

288  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

at  being  unable  to  accomplish  the  late  emperor's  wishes  with
regard  to  his  infant  grandson.  At  his  tender  years,  he  said,
he  stands  yet  in  need  of  tutors,  teachers,  and  guardians :  but
I  will  be  more  than  tutor,  teacher,  or  guardian  to  him/  1
will  be  his  father,  and  he  shall  be  to  me  as  a  son.1  At  the
same  time  he  scrupulously  executed  the  will  of  Tiberius  in
every  other  particular.  It  comprised  liberal  donations  to
the  prsetorians  and  to  the  citizens  generally :  the  former  he
doubled,  the  latter  he  increased  by  the  sum  which  had  been
promised  but  never  paid  them,  on  his  own  assumption  of  the
toga,  together  with  the  interest  accruing.  Nor  were  the  po-
lice of  the  city,  or  the  legions  beyond  the  bounds  of  Italy,
forgotten  in  this  prudent  liberality,  which  was  still  further
enhanced  by  the  payment  of  the  bequests  of  Livia,  which
her  parsimonious  son  had  neglected  to  carry  into  effect.*
For  this  and  still  greater  profusion  ample  provision  was
found  in  the  treasures  accumulated  by  Tiberius,  the  sum  of
which  was  differently  stated  by  the  authorities  of  the  day,
but  which,  on  the  estimate  of  Suetonius,  which  is  not  the
highest,  may  have  amounted  to  twenty-one  millions  of  our
money.3

Nor  were  the  liberal  acts  of  the  new  emperor  confined  to
this  promiscuous  munificence  in  gifts  and  largesses. He  is-
sued a  general  pardon  to  the  occupants  of  the
of  tbe  new  em- imperial  prisons,  and  recalled  the  banished  from

pcror,

their  exile.  The  informations  and  pretended  evi-
dence relating  to  the  treasonable  practices  which  had  been
imputed  to  his  mother  and  brothers,  he  burnt  publicly  in  the
forum,  declaring  at  the  same  time  that  he  had  abstained  from
perusing  them,  and  had  not  acquainted  himself  even  with  the
names  of  the  delators.4 When  a  paper  was  presented  to  him

1  Philo.  leg.  ad  Cai.  4. :  kyi>  6ey  i<p7iy  iratdayuyovc  ical  6t8acnakovc  nal  enc-
rpdTrov;  virep/3&Xuv,  ifiavrbv  ifir]  ypdcpu  Ttarepa,  viov  tie  knelvov.

2  Suet.  Tib.  51. ;  Calig.  16. ;  Dion,  lix.  2.

3  Suet.  Calig.  37. :  "  Totum  illud  Tiberii  Ca?saris  vicies  ac  septies  millies
sestertium."  Saestertia  27  x  100,000  =  2,700,000  =  at  8/.  the  sestertium,
21,600,000/.  4  Dion,  lix.  6.

A.  U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  289

which  purported  to  divulge  an  intrigue  against  him,  he  re-
jected it  with  the  exclamation  that  he  had  given  cause  of
offence  to  no  man.1  He  proscribed  the  most  infamous  minis-
ters of  vice,  the  creatures  of  the  worst  of  the  nobles,  and  as
it  was  reported  of  Tiberius  himself,  expelling  them  indig-
nantly from  the  city,  and  was  with  difficulty  dissuaded  from
throwing  them  into  the  sea.  The  writings  of  Labienus,
Cremutius,  and  Cassius  Severus,  which  the  senate  had  sup-
pressed, were  at  his  instance  restored  to  circulation  :  it  was
for  the  interest,  he  declared,  of  every  good  prince  that  his-
tory should  be  written  and  read.  He  published  the  accounts
of  the  state,  after  the  example  of  Augustus,  an  example
which  Tiberius  from  indolence  or  reserve  had  neglected  to
follow.  As  regarded  the  judicial  functions  of  the  emperor,
the  behaviour  of  Caius  was  eminently  popular,  in  abolishing
the  appeal  to  himself  from  the  tribunal  of  the  superior  mag-
istrates. Into  the  means  and  character  of  the  senators  he
made  no  invidious  inquisition ;  they  had  suffered  enough
under  the  Tiberian  persecutions :  but  he  revised  strictly,
though  with  no  undue  severity,  the  roll  of  the  equestrian
order,  enriching  it  with  the  addition  of  many  new  members
from  the  wealthiest  classes  of  Italy  and  the  provinces ;  and
he  added  a  fifth  decuria  to  the  bench  of  judices,  which  was
overburdened  with  its  duties.  Under  his  auspices  many  pro-
vincial communities  received  the  gift  of  Roman  citizenship.8
The  heir  of  the  Drusi  attempted,  as  Suetonius  expresses  it,
to  revive  the  Comitia  for  the  election  of  magistrates  ;  but  his
magnanimous  policy  was  defeated  by  the  indifference  of  the
nobles  to  public  office,  for  the  candidates,  it  seems,  were  sel-
dom more  numerous  than  the  places,  or  if  a  greater  number
at  any  time  offered,  they  contrived  to  come  to  a  private  ar-
rangement among  themselves.8 The  centuries  convened  for

1  Suet.  Califf.  15.:  "Contendcns,  nihil  sibi  admissum  cur  cuiquam  invisus
essct."

3  See  Agrippa's  speech  in  Thilo,  leg.  ad  Cai.  c.  36. :  <j>ifajv  tviuv  narpidac
l?.Tjr  TTJc  'Pu^iaiKf/r  i/l-iuiaar  iro7uTktac.

1  Suet.  Califf.  16. :  "Tentavit  et  comitiorum  more  revocato  suflragia  populo

VOL.  V. 19

290  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

the  election  found  they  had  nothing  to  do,  but  go  through
the  empty  forms  and  disperse.  After  two  years'  trial,  Caius
resumed  the  plan  of  direct  nomination  recommended  to  nim
by  his  predecessors,  and  as  far  as  the  real  substance  went,
the  usage  of  popular  election  was  finally  suppressed.  Such,
together  with  the  remission  of  the  percentage  on  sales  in
Italy,  an  impost  which,  though  trifling  in  its  amount,  seemed
to  trench  on  the  cherished  immunity  of  the  conquering  race,
and  many  acts  of  liberality  to  individuals,  were  the  benefi-
cent measures  which  ushered  in  the  reign  of  the  new  empe-
ror.1 His  piety  towards  his  OAvn  relations  was  not  less  con-
spicuous, nor  did  it  serve  less  to  recommend  him  to  the  re-
gard of  the  citizens.  Immediately  after  his  first  appearance
in  the  senate,  he  hastened,  amidst  the  prayers  and  vows  of
the  people — for  the  weather  was  tempestuous — to  seek  in
person  the  ashes  of  his  mother  and  brother  in  their  desolate
islands.  Having  collected  these  august  remains,  and  care-
fully inurned  them,  he  conveyed  them  in  his  own  arms  to
Rome,  ascending  the  river  from  Ostia  with  funeral  pomp,  and
laid  them  in  the  imperial  mausoleum,  appointing  at  the  same
time  an  annual  service  in  memory  of  the  deceased.  The
name  of  the  month  of  September  he  changed  to  Germanicus,
an  alteration  which  was  not  destined  to  survive  him,  and
conferred  upon  Antonia,  through  a  decree  of  the  senate,  all
the  distinctions  which  the  piety  of  Tiberius  had  before  as-
signed to  Livia.*  Claudius,  who  had  hitherto  been  left  in  the
obscurity  of  the  equestrian  rank,  he  invited  to  assume  the
consulship  in  conjunction  with  himself,  and  saluted  the  young

reddere."  Dion  no  doubt  expresses  a  common  and  probably  a  just  feeling  of
the  injudiciousnesss  of  this  attempted  concession  of  political  rights  to  a  people
who  seemed  incapable  of  using  them  discreetly :  rot»c  <J*  efuppovac  khvirfaaro,
t?iOyc<yafj.£Vovc  brt  aav  eki  roZc  7roA/loZc  al  ap^al  avdig  yevuvrai ....  ttoWo.  nal
Seiva  ovfifiqaeTai. lix.  9. Comp.  Veil.  ii.  124.,  cited  above.

1  These  acts,  which  all  belong  to  an  early  period  in  this  reign,  have  been
here  brought  together  in  one  view,  though  some  of  them  may  date,  perhaps,  in
its  second  year.  The  revival  of  the  Comitia  was  made  in  791  :  the  first  consul-
ship of  Caius  was  assumed  without  any  pretence  of  election.

2  Dion,  lix.  3.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  . 291

Tiberius,  on  the  day  of  his  claiming  the  toga,  with  the  title
of  Prince  of  the  Roman  Youth.  His  natural  sensibility
prompted  him,  further,  to  demand  honours  for  his  three  sis-
ters, a  thing  unheard  of  under  the  Roman  commonwealth.
It  was  ordained  that  the  sacramental  oath  of  the  citizens  to
the  emperor  should  contain  the  words,  I  will  not  hold  myself
nor  my  own  children  dearer  than  Cains  Caesar  and  his  sis-
ters, and  that  every  motion  of  the  consuls  in  the  senate
should  conclude  with  the  invocation  of  a  blessing  upon  him
and  them  together.1  All  these  measures  were  accepted  with
unbounded  delight  by  the  jubilant  populace.  When  Caius
assumed,  at  the  instance  of  the  senate,  the  collective  honours
of  the  empire,  he  had  insisted  on  making  a  single  exception,
declining  with  the  modesty  of  tender  youth  the  appellation
of  Father  of  his  Country.4  This  conduct  the  people  regard-
ed perhaps  with  satisfaction,  as  a  tribute  to  the  Nemesis
which  scans  with  evil  eye  the  heights  of  human  prosperity ;
nor  were  they  less  pleased,  we  may  believe,  at  his  refraining
from  pressing  on  the  senate  the  confirmation  of  Tiberius's
acts.  The  name  of  the  tyrant  disappeared  from  henceforth
from  the  public  instruments,  in  which  the  titles  and  functions
of  succeeding  emperors  were  recited.'  The  vulgar  notion  of
Deity  was  that  of  a  Being  who  presides  with  dignified  inter-
est over  the  sports  and  amusements  of  his  creatures,  and  to
such  a  character  the  gloomy  recluse  of  Capreae  had,  in  the
estimation  of  the  Romans,  no  claim  whatever.  If  the  sen-
ate, with  its  usual  servility,  would  have  acquiesced  in  the
apotheosis  of  a  tyrant  who  had  degraded  and  decimated  it,
the  citizens  interposed  to  forbid  the  honour,  and  Caius  made
no  effort  to  enforce  it.  The  enthusiasm  with  which  the  early
promise  of  the  new  principate  was  received,  might  be  esti-
mated from  the  multitude  of  an  hundred  and  sixty  thousand
victims  which,  it  was  computed,  were  offered  in  gratitude  to
the  Gods  in  the  course  of  the  first  three  months.  Its  birth-
day, it  was  decreed,  should  be  sanctified  with  the  name  and

1  Suet  Califf.  15.  ■  Dion,  lix.  3.  *  Dion,  lix.  9.

292  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37

rites  of  the  Parilia,  as  the  era  of  the  new  foundation  of  the
state.1

The  young  man's  personal  defects  and  vices,  of  which
some  mention  has  already  heen  made,  were  unknown,  it  must
he  observed,  at  this  time  to  the  mass  of  the  citi-
suiship  of  zens. The  cunning  and  selfishness  which  we  have

already  noticed  in  him,  the  ferocity  which  found
pleasure,  it  is  said,  in  the  sight  of  torments  and  executions,
his  unworthy  taste  for  the  company  of  dancers  and  gladia-
tors and  for  vulgar  shows,  the  defects  in  his  education,  and
his  moral  inaptitude  for  all  elevating  subjects  of  thought,
had  been  concealed  from  the  eyes  of  the  RomaDS  in  the  re-
cesses of  the  palace.  For  five  years  his  residence  had  been
mostly  confined  to  Capreae.  At  a  later  period  it  was  report-
ed that,  in  spite  of  all  his  dissimulation,  he  had  not  been  able
to  conceal  the  vileness  of  his  nature  from  Tiberius  himself,
and  the  monster  was  supposed  more  than  once  to  have  re-
marked, not  without  a  grim  satisfaction,  that  Caius  lived  for
his  own  and  all  men's  perdition,  and  that  he  was  rearing  a
serpent  for  the  Romans,  and  a  Phaethon  for  the  universe.9
But  if  any  vague  rumours  of  this  prince's  faults  reached  the
ears  of  the  multitude,  they  were  easily  excused  in  a  son  of
Germanicus,  on  the  plea  of  inexperience  and  bad  example.
The  Romans  had  yet  to  learn  the  horror  of  being  subject  to
a  master  who  had  never  been  trained  to  mastery  over  him-
self. His  accession  to  the  principate  was  signalized,  as  we
have  seen,  by  unexpected  moderation,  by  profuse  liberality,
and  by  some  traits  of  generous  feeling ;  but  when  on  the
calends  of  July,  three  months  later,  he  assumed  the  consul-
ship, he  confirmed  their  warmest  anticipations  by  an  address
to  the  senate,  in  which  he  exposed  without  reserve  all  the
vices  of  his  predecessor,  and  denounced  them  to  general  exe-
cration. At  the  same  time  he  promised  to  conduct  his  own
career  on  very  different  principles,  and  declared  himself  the

1  Suet.  Calig.  14.  16.

5  Suet. Ccdig. 11.:  "Exitio  suo  omniumque  Caium  vivere, et  se  natri-
cem  pop.  Romano,  Phaethontem  orbi  terrarum  educare."

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  TnE  EMPIRE.  293

devoted  minister  of  the  august  assembly  before  him. The
fathers,  apprehensive  that  such  auspicious  sentiments  might
one  day  change,  thought  it  possible  to  fix  them  by  decreeing
that  the  harangue  which  contained  them  should  be  annually
recited  in  their  presence. During  the  two  months HiB  devotion  t0
which  followed  Caius  seems  to  have  striven  assid- busine88-
uously  to  redeem  his  pledge  of  good  government. Untrain-
ed as  he  was,  and  immoderate  alike  in  every  caprice,  he
threw  himself  perhaps  into  this  work  with  feverish  impetu-
osity. The  liberal  and  equitable  measures  connected  with
his  name  may  be  for  the  most  part  referred  to  this  brief
period,  during  which  he  placed  himself  in  fact  as  well  as  in
name  at  the  head  of  affairs. Two  summer  months  were  hon-
ourably spent  in  a  labour  which  was  probably  beyond  his
strength. On  the  arrival  of  the  last  day  of  August,  the  an-
niversary of  his  birth,  he  proposed  to  exchange  the  duties  of
industry  for  those  of  festive  hospitality. His  popularity,
which  had  gone  on  increasing  from  day  to  day,  was  crowned
by  the  ardour  with  which,  descending  from  the  awful  chair
of  state,  he  plunged  into  the  full  tide  of  the  national  amuse-
ments, by  the  splendour  of  the  shows  he  exhibited,  and  the
novelty  as  well  as  variety  of  the  dissipations  he  provided.
He  professed  to  restore  the  golden  age  of  Augustus,  the  age,
as  he  imagined,  of  universal  recreation,  which  had  suffered  a
gloomy  eclipse  under  the  leaden  sceptre  of  Tiberius. The
consecration  of  a  temple  to  the  divine  founder  of  the  empire,
which  had  been  slowly  completed  by  his  successor,  furnished
a  fitting  memorial  for  the  birthday  of  the  reign- IIis bllc  en.
ing  sovereign. The  magnificence  which  was  now Urtainment8-
displayed  was  such  as  had  not  been  witnessed  at  least  by  two
generations. The  ceremony  was  conducted  by  Caius  him-
self, in  a  triumphal  robe,  borne  in  a  chariot drawn  by  six
horses : after  the  completion  of  the  sacrifices,  a  hymn  was
sung  by  a  select  chorus  of  noble  children,  whose  fathers  and
mothers  were  both  alive ;  a  banquet  was  given,  not  to  the
senators  only,  but  also  to  their  wives  and  families,  as  well  as
to  the  mass  of  the  citizens ;  the  festival  was  followed  by  an

294  HISTORY"  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  S7.

entertainment  of  divers  kinds  of  music,  and  by  horse  and
chariot  races,  recurring  in  rapid  succession  through  two
days.  Four  hundred  bears,  and  as  many  lions  and  panthers,
were  slaughtered  in  the  amphitheatre ;  patrician  youths  en-
acted the  game  of  Troy ;  while  the  emperor  himself  presided
over  these  manifold  sports,  and  sate  benignly  through  them
with  his  sisters  by  his  side,  and  surrounded  by  the  ministers
of  the  Augustan  hero-worship.  That  no  citizen  might  be
required  to  absent  himself  from  a  scene  in  which  his  prince
condescended  to  take  delight,  the  public  offices  were  closed
and  business  suspended,  and  even  the  term  of  private  mourn-
ing was  abridged.  Widows,  provided  at  least  they  were  not
pregnant,  might  straightway  marry  without  scandal.  To
set  the  spectators  quite  at  ease,  they  were  not  required  to
make  their  obeisance  to  the  emperor;  they  were  even  per-
mitted to  disencumber  themselves  of  their  sandals,  as  at  a
private  entertainment,  and  to  cover  their  heads  for  protec-
tion against  the  sun,  as  in  the  forum  and  the  streets.  This,
it  is  said,  was  the  first  occasion  of  the  use  of  cushioned
benches  at  the  games ;  but  as  yet  this  indulgence  was  con-
fined to  the  senators  only.1

Such  a  festive  inauguration  of  amusements  long  disused
might  be  excused  on  the  first  celebration  of  an  imperial  birth-
He  rushes  into  da7>  at  the  outset  of  a  y°unS  prince's  reign,  and
dissipation.  a^  ^he  close  of  a  weary  session  of  public  busi-
ness. But  with  Caius  it  was  the  opening  of  a  new  era  of
enjoyment  from  which  he  never  afterwards  desisted.  Re-
signing in  the  third  month  the  chair  of  magistracy  he  rushed
for  recreation  into  the  wildest  dissipations.  While  the  con-
sul suffectus  supplied  his  place  at  the  head  of  affairs,  the  em-
peror abandoned  himself  to  a  long  holiday  of  uninterrupted
amusement,  His  enthusiasm  for  the  public  spectacles  was
the  frenzy  of  one  just  escaped  from  the  dreary  confinement
of  a  hermitage.  Soon  sated  with  every  fresh  object,  he
sought  renewed  excitement  in  variety  and  strangeness. He

1  Dion,  lix.  1. ;  Suet.  Calig.  17.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  295

introduced  the  novelty  of  nocturnal  spectacles,  at  which  the
whole  city  was  illuminated  with  lamps  and  torches.  Money
and  viands,  at  his  command,  were  thrown  liberally  to  the
populace.  He  indulged  too  in  a  giddy  humour  which  was
not  always  dignified.  On  one  occasion,  when  he  feasted  the
citizens  at  a  gorgeous  banquet,  he  was  so  pleased  with  the
justice  a  certain  knight  did  to  the  luxuries  before  him,  that
he  ordered  his  own  plate  to  be  offered  to  him.  A  senator,
who  similarly  gratified  him,  was  inscribed  at  once  on  the
list  of  prrctors.  The  games  of  the  circus  were  continued,
with  occasional  interludes,  through  the  whole  twelve  hours
of  the  day ;  and  on  some  special  festivals  the  arena  was
strown  with  cinnabar  and  borax,  and  the  chariots  driven  by
none  under  the  rank  of  a  senator.1  But  even  these  follies
were  less  criminal  than  the  vices  and  sensualities  to  which
they  led  the  way.  If  Caius  desired  that  his  people  should
riot  without  stint  in  the  pleasures  which  had  so  long  been
grudged  them,  not  less  was  he  resolved  to  indulge  himself
to  the  utmost  in  the  gratification  of  every  sense.  He  let  fall
the  mask,  hitherto  but  loosely  worn,  of  discretion  and  mod-
esty, and  revelled  with  furious  appetite  in  the  grossest  vo-
luptuousness of  every  kind.  The  consequence  of  these  ex-
cesses was  not  slow  to  follow.  The  young  man's  weakly
constitution  was  unable  to  bear  the  strain  to  which  he  sub-
jected it,  and  in  the  eighth  month  of  his  delirious  dream  he
was  prostrated  by  a  severe  and  dangerous  illness.  Caius  fall8  8ick
The  warm  sympathy  which  was  now  displayed  Despair  of  tho
for  him,  not  in  Rome  only  but  throughout  the  Pe°Ple-
provinces,  shows  how  large  a  space  the  chief  of  the  Roman
state  already  filled  in  the  interests  of  the  vast  population
over  which  he  seemed  so  conspicuously  to  tower.  Multitudes
crowded  round  the  palace  in  which  he  lay,  both  by  day  and
night,  making  anxious  inquiries  after  his  health. A  citizen,

1  Suet.  Calig.  18.  Pliny  mentions  this  use  of  cinnabar  (minium)  and  borax
(chrysocolla).  Hist.  Nat.  xxxiii.  27:  "Visumque  jam  est  Neronis  principis
spectaculis  arenam  Circi  chrysocolla  stcrni,  quum  ipse  concolori  panno  auriga-
turus  esset." He  describes  these  substances  in  xxxiii.  26,  37.  foil.

29G  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

Afranius  Potitus,  solemnly  devoted  his  own  life  for  the
prince's  preservation,  and  a  knight  named  Atanius  Secundus
vowed  to  descend  into  the  arena,  and  fight  among  the  glad-
iators, in  the  event  of  his  happy  restoration.  Such  were  the
extravagances  which  found  favour  in  that  day  of  unreal  and
fantastic  sentiment.  The  Romans  themselves  were  not  per-
haps unconscious  of  the  folly  which  they  encouraged  and  ap-
plauded, and  the  story  that  Caius  on  his  recovery  compelled
his  devotees,  the  one  to  kill  himself,  the  other  to  risk  the
chances  of  mortal  combat,  was  possibly  invented  as  an  ex-
pression of  the  prevailing  cynicism  of  the  times.1

The  account  which  has  been  preserved  to  us  of  the  grief

and  dismay  of  the  provinces  at  the  prospect  of  the  emperor's

early  loss  is  remarkable,  not  only  as  a  testimony

and  distress  in to  the  wide-spread  interest  in  his  person,  but  for

the  provinces.  .  .  ...

the  picture  it  presents  of  the  general  prosperity
at  this  epoch.  We  must  remember  that  the  shadow  of  the
Tiberian  tyranny  extended  little  beyond  the  immediate  pre-
cincts of  Rome  and  Capreae,  and  though  the  description
which  follows  is  fantastically  drawn,  it  seems  to  betoken  an
actual  state  of  substantial  and  permanent  well-being,  not
confined  to  a  single  locality,  nor  dependent  on  the  life  of  an
individual,  but  flowing  from  a  well-organized  and  universal
system  of  administration.  Who,  asks  Philo,  the  Jewish
philosopher  of  Alexandria,  icas  not  amazed  and  delighted  at
beholding  Caius  assume  the  government  of  the  empire,  tran-
quil and  well  ordered  as  it  was,  fitted  and  compact  in  all  its
members,  North  and  South,  East  and  West,  Greek  and  Bar-
barian, Soldier  and  Civilian,  all  combined  together  in  the
enjoyment  of  a  common  peace  and  prosperity  !  It  abounded
everywhere  in  accumulated  treasures  of  gold  and  silver,  coin
and  plate  ;  it  boasted  a  vast  force  both  of  horse  and  foot,  by
land  and  by  sea,  and  its  resources  flowed  in  a  perennial
stream.  Nothing  was  to  be  seen  throughout  our  cities  but
altars  and  sacrifices,  priests  clad  in  white  and  garlanded,  the

1  Dion,  llr.  8.  9. ;  Suet.  Calig.  14,  18.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  297

joyous  ministers  of  the  general  mirth  ;  festivals  and  assem-
blies, musical  contests  and  horse  races,  wakes  by  day  and  by
night,  amusements,  recreations,  pleasures  of  every  kind  and
addressed  to  every  sense.  The  rich,  he  continues,  no  longer
trampled  upon  the  poor,  the  strong  upon  the  weak,  masters
upon  servants,  or  creditors  on  their  debtors ;  but  the  inde-
pendence of  every  class  met  with  due  respect y  so  that  the
Saturnian  age  of  the  poets  might  no  longer  be  regarded  as  a
fiction,  so  nearly  was  it  revived  in  the  life  of  that  blessed
era.  Such  was  the  state  of  things  at  the  accession  of  Caius ;
such,  he  adds,  it  remained  for  a  space  of  seven  happy  months,
at  the  end  of  which  the  news  arrived  of  the  alarming  illness
of  the  emperor.1  Alas  !  he  had  discarded  the  simplicity  of
his  earlier  mode  of  living ;  he  had  abandoned  himself  to
wine  and  lust  and  manifold  excesses,  and  in  that  short  space
he  had  reached  the  brink  of  a  premature  grave.  When  these
sad  news,  says  Philo,  were  spread  among  the  nations, — for
the  season  for  sailing  was  about  to  close  with  the  decline  of
autumn,  and  all  who  did  not  wish  to  winter  abroad  were  has-
tening home  from  every  quarter, — every  enjoyment  was  at
once  cast  aside,  every  city  and  house  teas  clouded  with  sorrow
and  dejection,  in  proportion  to  its  recent  hilarity.  All  parts
of  the  world  sickened  with  Caius,  and  were  worse  sick  than
he,  for  his  was  the  sickness  of  the  body  only,  theirs  of  the
soul.  All  men  reflected  on  the  evils  of  anarchy,  its  wars,
plagues,  and  devastations,  from  which  they  foresaw  no  pro-
tection but  in  the  emperor's  recovery.  But  as  soon  as  the
disease  began  to  abate,  the  rumour  swiftly  reached  every  cor-
ner of  the  empire,  and  universal  were  the  excitement  and
anxiety  to  hear  it  from  day  to  day  confirmed.  The  safety
of  the  prince  was  regarded  by  every  land  and  island  as  iden-

1  The  security  and  outward  prosperity  of  the  empire  under  this  principate
may  be  further  inferred  from  the  curious  comment  of  Orosius:  "  Servi  rebelles
et  fugitivi  gladiatores  perterruere  Romam,  evcrtere  Italiam,  Siciliam  dclcvere,
jam  paene  univcrso  humano  generi  toto  orbe  metuendi.  In  diebus  autcm
Salutis  hoc  est,  temporibus  Christianis,  convellere  quictem  non  potest  vel  Cicsar
infestus." Oros.  vii.  5.

298  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

tical  with  its  own.  Nor  was  a  single  country  ever  so  inter-
ested before  in  the  health  of  any  one  man,  as  the  whole  world
then  was  in  the  preservation  of  the  adorable  Cains.  >So
blind,  concludes  the  sage,  is  the  mind  of  man  to  the  matters
that  most  nearly  concern  it,  guessing  and  imagining  this  and
that,  but  in  fact  knowing  nothing.1

This  extravagant  flattery,  such  as  that  against  which  the
mature  good  sense  of  Pompeius  had  not  been  proof,  easily

turned  the  weak  and  giddy  brain  of  Caius  Csesar.
mpted  by  He  began  in  his  wild  hallucinations  to  regard  the

life  which  had  been  saved  by  so  many  prayers
as  something  sacred  and  divine,  and  to  justify  to  himself  any
means  that  might  seem  conducive  to  its  protection.  He  felt
aggrieved  by  the  nearness  of  the  youthful  cousin  whom  he
had  deprived  of  his  inheritance,  and  quickly  persuaded  him-
self that  his  existence  was  a  source  of  danger  to  the  occu-
„  pant  of  the  throne. It  was  enough  to  affirm  that

He  puts  the  r  ,  °

young  Tiberius  the  wretched  object  of  his  jealousy  had  plotted
against  him :  the  citizens  had  no  love  nor  inter-
est but  for  the  child  of  Germanicus,  the  giver  of  all  good
gifts  to  them ;  and  when  Caius  caused  him  to  be  privately
despatched,  not  venturing  still,  from  a  sense  of  shame  per-
haps rather  than  of  distrust,  to  bring  him  to  trial,  they  ac-
quiesced in  the  murder  as  an  act  of  wholesome  expediency.9
A  centurion  presented  the  poor  lad  with  a  sword,  with  the
order  to  thrust  it  into  his  own  bosom  ;  but  so  untrained  was
he  in  the  use  of  weapons,  that  he  was  obliged,  it  was  said,  to
ask  instruction  how  to  use  it  effectually.8

The  charm  which  blinded  the  Romans  to  the  crimes  and
vices  of  their  new  ruler  was  simply  the  contrast  he  presented
Degraded  man-  m  n*s  manners  to  the  sullen  recluse  who  had
ners  of  Caius.  robbed  them  of  their  pleasures.  Caius  was  en-
dowed with  no  personal  recommendations  of  figure  or  coun-

1  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cai.  4.

2  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cai.  10. :  anoivuvrjvov  apxtjv  deofibe  tyvaeuc  atiivT]Toe  ....
ovtoc  a  iraOelv  EfiiXXT/aev  av  .  .  .  .  loxvpfaepoe  uv  t}\ivvoto  .  .  .

*  Suet.  C'alig.  23. ;  Dion,  lix.  9. ;  Philo,  1.  c.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  299

tenance.  His  features,  if  not  altogether  devoid  of  beauty,
were  deformed  by  a  harsh  and  scowling  expression,  and  seem
even  in  the  ri<nd  marble  to  writhe  with  muscular  contortion.
His  head  was  bald ;  his  complexion  sallow  and  livid ;  his
body  was  long,  and  his  neck  and  legs  slender ;  his  gait  was
shambling,  and  his  voice  hoarse  and  dissonant.1  But  he  was
popular  with  the  rabble,  and  the  knights  and  senators,  who
had  lately  trembled  before  the  sovereign,  now  cowered  be-
fore the  rabble  ;  for  he  lived  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  :  all
his  actions  were  public  ;  he  sate  through  the  day  the  ob-
served of  all  observers  in  the  circus  ;  even  his  vices  and  sen-
sual indulgences,  gross  and  startling  as  they  were,  he  made
matters  of  parade  and  ostentation.  The  habits  of  Greece
and  Asia  had  suffered  the  rulers  of  the  state  to  take  part  in
the  public  contests  of  skill  and  agility,  from  which  the  pride
of  the  Roman  noble  revolted  ;  kings  of  Hellenic  blood  had
not  disdained  to  contend  for  prizes  in  the  lists  at  Antioch  or
Selucia ;  even  the  renegade  Antonius  had  striven  for  mastery
in  the  schools  of  Alexandria.  With  such  examples  before
him,  Caius,  the  first  of  the  Roman  emperors,  did  not  forbear
from  singing  and  dancing  in  public,  under  the  tuition  of  a
noted  tragedian.3  His  passion  for  the  sports  of  the  circus
led  him  to  descend  in  person  into  the  arena  as  a  charioteer,
and  even  it  is  said,  as  a  gladiator.8 If  the  base  multitude

1  Suetonius  {Calig.  50.)  and  Seneca  (de  const.  Sap.  18.)  vie  with  one  another
in  investing  this  prince  with  the  most  odious  traits  of  deformity :  "  Statura  fuit
eminenti,  colore  expallido,  corpore  enormi,  gracilitate  maxima  cervicis  et  cru-
rum,  oculis  ct  temporibus  concavis,  fronte  lata  et  torva,  capillo  raro  ac  circa
verticem  nullo,  hirsutus  caetera."  "  Tanta  ill!  palloris  insaniam  testantis  foedi-
tas  erat,  tanta  oculorum  sub  fronte  anili  latentium  torvitas,  tanta  capitis  des-
tituti  et  emendicatis  capillis  aspersi  deformitas,"  &c.  This  is  mere  sign-paint-
ing. Medals  and  busts  concur  in  giving  us  such  a  countenance  as  I  have  de-
scribed in  the  text.

5  Dion,  lix.  5.  29. ;  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cat.  30.

'  Dion,  lix.  5. :  ■koo16vtoc  61  di)  tov  xp6vov  Kal  ec  £f/?.u/ja  Kal  ff  ayuviafia
izo7.7.ciV  Trporj/.Qev  appara  re  yap  f/Xaoe  Kal  epovopexnaev-  opx'/ff£i  TE  kxP'laaT0,
Kal  rpayudiav  virenpivaTo-  Kal  ravra  ptv  nov  acl  inoiet  •  ana!;  Se  itotc  tovc
irpitTovc  rfjc  yepovoiac  airovdi]  vvkt^c,  £>e  Kal  ck'  avayKal6v  ti  (iolTxvfia  fiera-
nefifdfievoc,  lipx'/oaro.

300  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

were  delighted  at  seeing  knights  and  senators  driven  to  ex-
hibit themselves  for  their  amusement,  much  more  were  they
charmed  at  the  condescension  of  the  emperor  himself,  in
bearing  a  part,  like  the  deities  of  old,  in  the  sports  and  con-
tests of  his  creatures.  From  this  time,  under  imperial  en-
couragement, charioteering  began  to  take  the  place  of  a  state
institution.  The  rival  parties  or  factions  were  known  by
their  colours, — the  Green,  the  Blue,  the  Red,  and  the  White,
— and  the  people  enlisted  themselves  on  the  sides  of  their
favourites  with  an  ardour  that  menaced  sometimes  the  peace
of  the  city.  The  Green  was  the  faction  to  which  Caius  at-
tached himself:  he  frequented  its  stables,  lived  familiarly
with  its  grooms  and  drivers,  and  gave  all  his  confidence  to
some  of  its  most  noted  performers.  He  endowed  it  with  a
separate  place  of  exercise,  a  circus  or  stadium,  in  the  four-
teenth region  of  the  city,  to  which  the  name  of  Caian  con-
tinued long  afterwards  to  be  attached.1

The  nobles  might  sigh  over  this  odious  degradation  of

the  majesty  of  the  Coesars ;  yet  it  was  better,  they  might

think,  that  Caius  should  prostitute  it  in  these

Bloodiness  of  .«.

the  gladiatorial trifling  amusements,  than  guard  it  with  the  cruel

shows-  • i  r> rn-i •  i

jealousy  of  Tiberius.  As  long  as  the  emperor
and  people  were  amused  together,  they  hoped  to  enjoy  in
tranquillity  their  own  voluptuous  indolence  ;  but  they  must
have  beheld  with  dismay  the  prodigality  which  in  a  few
months  had  squandered  all  the  savings  of  the  late  reign,  and
began  to  call  for  fresh  contributions  ;  nor  could  they  have
been  unconcerned  at  the  increasing  bloodshed  and  ferocity
which  now  distinguished  the  gladiatorial  shows.  The  am-
phitheatre of  Taurus  was  not  spacious  enough  for  the  com-

1  Dion,  lix.  4. ;  Suet.  Calig.  55.:  "Prasime  factioni  addictus  et  deditus."
On  one  occasion  he  presented  a  charioteer  of  the  Green,  named  Eutychus,  with
a  sum  of  2,000,000  sesterces,  or  16,000/.  Suet.  1.  c. ;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jvd.  xix.
3.  It  was,  I  suppose,  in  his  enthusiasm  for  the  art  that  he  threatened,  accord-
ing to  Suetonius  (c.  55.),  to  make  his  horse  Incitatus,  or  Galloper,  a  consul.
Dion  believes  that  he  actually  did  m  ake  him  a  priest  of  his  own  divinity  (Us
28.).

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  301

batants  who  were  launched  into  the  arena.  The  Septa  in  the
Campus  Martius,  and  other  capacious  buildings,  were  seized
for  these  cruel  ceremonies.  Not  only  did  the  emperor  him-
self exhibit  these  spectacles ;  he  required  the  prsetors  and
axliles,  who  since  the  disuse  of  popular  election  had  been
relieved  from  this  service,  to  conform  once  more  to  the  cus-
tom of  the  commonwealth.  The  restrictions  imposed  by
Augustus  on  the  number  of  the  gladiators  were  utterly
swept  away.  It  was  the  delight  of  Caius  to  witness,  not  the
dexterous  fence  of  single  pairs  of  swordsmen,  but  the  pro-
miscuous strup-p-linp-  of  armed  bands  together.  He  was  not
content  with  the  combats  of  slaves  or  criminals,  or  even  of
occasional  volunteers  from  the  ranks  of  Roman  citizenship.
He  compelled  the  free  and  noble  to  expose  themselves  in
these  horrid  contests  on  various  pretences,  and  on  one  occa-
sion presented  as  many  as  six-and-twenty  knights  together.
The  combats  with  wild  beasts  were  carried  on  with  the  same
prodigality  of  human  blood.  Once,  when  the  number  of
criminals  condemned  to  this  service  was  not  found  sufficient,
he  suddenly  commanded  some  of  the  spectators  within  the
rails  to  be  dragged  into  the  arena,  and  opposed  defenceless
to  the  lions.1

Caius  was  not  slow,  as  might  be  expected,  to  profit  by
the  lessons  he  was  thus  taking  in  the  art  of  shedding  blood.
There  was  still  another  personage  in  Rome  on ^  ^
whom  he  looked  with  no  less  jealousy  than  on niaareputto

,  i  t death.

the  innocent  Tiberius,  the  man  to  whom  he  owed
his  empire  and  possibly  even  his  life.  The  disposition  of  the
late  emperor  towards  his  nephew  had  been  always  doubtful.
It  was  supposed  by  many  that  he  detested  his  evil  nature,
and  meditated  his  removal  for  the  safety  of  one  nearer  to
him. Macro,  the  tyrant's  sole  confidant,  had  boasted  to

1  Dion,  lix.  10. ;  Suet.  Calig.  27.  The  story  is  not  unlike  some  of  the  traits
of  cynical  irony  of  which  we  read  in  Caius,  and  may  not  be  beyond  the  bounds
of  credibility :  the  addition  that  he  caused  the  tongues  of  these  victims  to  bo
cut  out,  to  prevent  their  outcries,  seems  a  mere  extravagant  fiction.  He  was
generally  careful  to  keep  on  good  terms  with  the  populace.

302  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  37.

Caius  that  he  had  saved  him  from  destruction  not  less  than
three  times.  Whether  this  were  true  or  not  it  was  at  least
indiscreet  to  refer  to  it,  and  in  hastening  the  end  of  Tiberius,
and  engaging  the  senate  to  accept  his  successor,  Macro  had
laid  obligations  on  Caius  too  great  to  be  repaid.  By  this
time  the  connexion  between  the  prince  and  Ennia  had  be-
come irksome  to  the  licentious  lover,  as  yet  too  shy  to  break
his  chains  without  blushing.  He  had  promised  to  make  her
his  empress,  but  he  now  hesitated  to  satisfy  her  claim.  On
the  one  hand,  the  husband  ventured  to  give  unpalatable
counsels.  He  urged,  it  is  said,  high  and  generous  views  of
the  duties  of  empire,  and  rebuked,  perhaps,  the  wanton  levity
which  disgraced  the  purple  of  the  Csesars.  On  the  other,
the  wife  pressed  the  fulfilment  of  the  engagement  made  to
her,  and  lavished  on  her  sated  admirer  caresses  which  now
only  disgusted  him.  Caius  had  released  his  friend  Agrippa
from  confinement,  and  had  conferred  on  him  the  sovereignty
of  a  district  in  Palestine.  But  he  did  not  immediately  dis-
miss him  to  the  enjoyment  of  it ;  his  society  was  too  agree-
able, his  counsels  too  convenient,  to  be  at  once  dispensed
with.1  The  prince  continued  to  imbibe  lessons  in  kingcraft
from  the  Eastern  politician,  and  to  emulate,  under  his  ex-
perienced guidance,  the  behaviour  of  Asiatic  autocrats  ;  and
we  shall  not,  perhaps,  err  in  ascribing  to  this  influence  the
resolution  he  adopted  of  ridding  himself  first  of  his  cousin,
and  soon  afterwards  of  his  unamiable  mentor.  The  storm
which  was  impending  over  Macro  was  soon  made  visible  to  the
courtiers.  Caius  was  observed  to  frown  at  his  approach,  and
heard  to  mutter,  I  am  no  longer  a  boy,  but  see,  here  is  my
tutor  /  here  is  the  subject  who  fancies  himself  a  ruler:  J  who
was  born  a  prince,  nursed  by  emperors,  cradled  in  the  cabinet
of  state,  must  bow  forsooth  to  an  audacious  upstart,  a  novice
affecting  the  airs  of  a  hierophant?  The  minister,  as  may  be
supposed,  did  not  long  survive  the  utterance  of  such  senti-
ments by  such  a  master. Macro  received,  as  the  last  favour,

1  Joseph.  Antig.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  11.  3  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cai.  8.

A.  U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  303

permission  to  be  his  own  executioner,  and  Ennia,  the  partner
of  his  intrigues,  and  equally  disappointed  in  their  success,  fell
at  the  same  time  with  him.1

The  destruction  of  the  emperor's  greatest  benefactor  was
soon  followed  by  the  murder  of  a  man  of  much  higher  dis-
tinction, and  one  whom  from  his  station,  expe-  M  gilann8
rience,  and  intimate  connexion  with  himself,  he  p^u^msdf  to°
might  have  regarded  as  the  most  able  and  faith-  lleath-
ful  of  his  friends.  Caius  had  been  united,  as  has  been  men-
tioned, in  early  youth  to  Claudia,  the  daughter  of  M.  Junius
Silanus,  a  personage  whose  ancient  nobility  might  entitle
him  above  almost  any  other  citizen  to  the  honour  of  an  im-
perial alliance.  The  prince's  father-in-law  had  been  treated
with  the  highest  distinction  both  by  Tiberius,  with  whom  he
had  ingratiated  himself  by  discreet  but  not  servile  flattery,
and  afterwards  by  his  successor.  He  had  been  appointed  to
the  government  of  Africa  ;  but  latterly  the  jealousy  of  Caius
had  been  excited  against  him,  the  death  of  his  daughter  had
relaxed  the  bonds  of  affinity  between  them,  and  the  advice
he  presumed  to  offer  was  ill-received  and,  perhaps,  unskilfully
tendered.  The  command  of  the  legion  and  one  half  the  pa-
tronage of  the  province  had  been  withdrawn  from  him,  and
placed  in  the  hands  of  another  officer,  who  was  sent  to  watch
him,  and  his  innocently  providing  himself  with  an  antidote
to  seasickness  was  represented,  we  are  told,  as  a  precaution
against  poison.  Preparations  were  made,  at  the  emperor's
instance,  for  bringing  him  to  trial  for  treasonable  designs ;
but  on  the  refusal  of  a  noble  orator  to  conduct  the  accusation,
he  was  got  rid  of  more  summarily  by  an  order  to  kill  him-
self.2

The  emperor's  pecuniary  necessities,  in  which  his  extrav-

1  Suet.  Califf.  26.;  Dion,  lix.  10.

s  Suet.  Califf.  23. ;  Dion,  lix.  8. ;  and  more  particularly  Philo,  legal,  ad  Cat.
9.  I  cannot  but  regard  tbis  story  as  suspicious.  It  was  a  strong  act  of  policy,
and,  in  the  disturbed  state  of  the  African  frontier,  not  an  unreasonable  one,  to
weaken  the  arm  of  the  senatorial  proconsul  by  placing  an  imperial  legatu3  by
his  side.  Such  an  encroachment,  however,  on  the  independence  of  the  senate
might  naturally  be  resented,  and  an  invidious  fiction  be  grafted  on  it.

304  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  37.

agance  had  already  involved  him,  were  perhaps  the  primary
Rapid  succes-  motive  of  this  and  other  atrocities  which  quickly
tion9°andXcon-  followed.  The  treasury  was  exhausted,  and  un-
fiscations.  popular  taxes  had  heen  remitted;  but  his  pas-

sion for  show  and  expenditure  increased  with  indulgence,  and
the  appetite  of  the  people  required  to  be  pampered  with
novelty  and  variety.  The  fatal  facility  of  murder,  without
even  the  intervention  of  any  judicial  process,  offered  a  dire
temptation  to  power  unchecked  by  principle  or  pity.  Dela-
tion, ever  ready  at  his  beck,  was  too  dear  an  instrument  for
the  prodigal  to  use.  Informers  and  orators  required  a  por-
tion of  the  victim's  fortune,  and  their  most  zealous  efforts
might  sometimes  fail  of  success ;  but  a  simple  order  to  the
accused  to  despatch  himself  was  attended  with  no  expense,
and  it  was  moreover  sure  to  be  effectual.  This  was  the  pro-
cess by  which  the  emperor's  blows  were  made  generally  to
fall  on  men  whose  sole  crime  was  their  riches ;  but  if  any
pretext  was  wanted,  the  papers,  real  or  pretended,  of  Tibe-
rius, the  same  which  he  had  recently  professed  to  destroy
unopened,  sufficed  to  furnish  matter  of  accusation.  The  two
crimes  most  commonly  alleged,  as  most  odious  to  the  nobility
on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the  populace  on  the  other,  were
complicity  in  the  bloody  artifices  of  Sejanus,  and  hostility
to  the  house  of  Germanicus.1

While  the  feelings  of  the  profligate  were  thus  becoming
hardened  in  cruelty,  they  were  suddenly  embittered  by  a  do-
mestic loss,  which,  spoilt  and  pampered  as  he

Despair  of  ,  ,  ■, ,.  r™

Cams  on  the was,  seems  to  have  shattered  his  reason. 1  he

death  of  his  .  _ .

eister  Drnsiiia.  three  sisters  oi  Cams  have  already  been  mention-
ed. The  scandalous  rumours  of  the  day  insin-
uated that  he  had  indulged  an  incestuous  passion  for  all  of
them  in  turn,  a  horror  almost  unknown  among  all  the  horrors
of  Roman  vice,  and  which  only  once  before  had  been  ascribed
by  party  malice  to  a  profligate  of  an  earlier  age.  The  pub-
lic honours  he  had  obtained  for  them,  and  certain  marks  of

1  Dion,  lix.  4,  6,  10 ,  Ix.  4.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  305

favour  he  was  said  to  bestow  on  them  in  private,  hardly
suffice  to  establish  the  credit  of  this  charge  as  regards  at
least  two  of  the  sisters ;  but  the  commerce  of  Caius  with
Drusilla  is  too  circumstantially  attested  to  be  reasonably  re-
jected. He  had  been  rebuked,  it  is  said,  for  this  intrigue  by
Antonia  while  yet  a  stripling.  Tiberius  united  Drusilla  to
Cassius  Longiuius  ;  but  Caius,  when  he  attained  to  power,
separated  her  from  her  husband,  and  after  living  for  some
time  openly  with  her,  gave  her  to  an  unworthy  favourite,  M.
Lepidus,  who  seems  to  have  resigned  her  to  him  again  with-
out scruple.  His  passion  for  this  poor  creature  knew  no  lim-
its. In  his  illness,  if  we  may  believe  our  accounts,  he  had
actually  named  her  heiress  of  the  empire  and  of  his  official
dignities.1  But  he  recovered,  while  she  shortly  afterwards
fell  sick  and  died.  Caius  was  plunged  in  a  frenzy  of  despair.
He  commanded  that  she  should  be  honoured  with  a  public
funeral  of  extraordinary  magnificence,  that  all  business
should  cease",  and  even  the  commonest  affairs  of  domestic  life
be  suspended  on  pain  of  death.3  For  himself,  he  rushed  from
the  city  to  the  solitude  of  his  Alban  villa,  declared  that  he
was  incapable  of  appearing  in  the  distressing  pageant,  and
abandoned  himself  instead  to  the  most  trifling  amusements.3
Once  again  he  burst  from  his  retreat,  and  with  his  beard  and
hair  untrimmed  hastened  down  the  Italian  coast  till  he  reach-
ed Sicily,  where  he  diverted  himself  with  the  ordering  of
some  public  games  at  Syracuse.  When  this  humour  was
satisfied,  he  returned  not  less  abruptly  to  Rome,  to  close  the
season  of  mourning  and  appoint  divine  honours  for  the  de-
ceased. The  senate  acquiesced  without  hesitation.  Not  only
did  it  decree  her  the  honours  of  the  blessed  Livia,  but  added
that  her  gilded  statue  should  be  placed  in  the  Curia,  and

1  Suet.  Calirf.24.:  "  Heredem  quoque  honorum  atque  imperii  soger  instituit."

2  Suet.  1.  c. :  "Justitium  indixit;  in  quo  risisse,  lavisse,  coenasse,  cum  pa-
rentibus  aut  conjure  liberisvc,  capital  fuit." Comp.  Dion,  lix.  11.

'  Seneca,  Cons,  ad  Polyb.  36. :  "  Conspectum  civium  suorum  profugit  .  .  .
justa  non  pracstitit,  sed  in  Albano  buo  tesseris  ac  foro,  provocatis  hujusmodi
aliis  occupationibus,  acerbissimi  furoris  lcvabat  mala."
vol.  v. — 20

306  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  38.

another  in  the  temple  of  Venus,  to  which  the  same  adoration
should  be  paid  as  to  the  daughter  of  Jupiter.  She  was  to
bear  in  heaven  the  title  of  Panthea,  the  Universal  Divinity ;
a  temple  was  to  be  erected  to  her ;  men  and  women  were  en-
joined to  provide  themselves  with  her  consecrated  images
for  their  private  devotions ;  women  were  to  swear  henceforth
by  no  other  name.  The  worship  of  Drusilla  or  Panthea  was
imposed  a  duty  upon  all  the  cities  of  Italy  and  the  provinces.
A  senator,  Livius  Geminus,  swore  that*  he  had  with  his  own
eyes  beheld  her  ascend  into  heaven,  and  he  confirmed  the  as-
sertion by  steadfastly  imprecating  curses  on  himself  and  his,
if  he  spake  not  the  truth.  The  perjury  was  awarded  on  earth
by  the  gift  of  a  million  of  sesterces.  Having  strained  his
morbid  feelings  to  this  pitch  of  fanatacism,  the  crazy  monster
relieved  them  by  an  outburst  of  cynical  humour.  He  de-
clared that  if  any  man  dared  to  mourn  for  his  sister's  death
he  should  be  punished,  for  she  had  become  a  goddess ;  if  any
one  ventured  to  rejoice  at  her  deification,  he  should  be  pun-
ished also,  for  she  was  dead.1

So  far  was  Caius  constant  to  this  fantastic  passion  that
he  never  afterwards  swore,  it  is  said,  by  any  other  name
Caius  marries  than  Drusilla's.  His  unbridled  fancy  had  before
pudiates'toUia  impelled  him  to  snatch  himself  a  wife  from  the
Paulina.  arms  of  her  husband,  after  the  manner,  as  he

himself  pompously  proclaimed,  of  Romulus  and  Augustus ;
and  this  victim  being  repudiated  a  few  days  only  after  the
deification  of  Drusilla,  he  repeated  the  same  feat  with
another.3  The  first  of  these  wives  was  Orestilla,  the  consort
of  Cn.  Piso,  the  son  of  the  enemy  of  Germanicus ;  the  other
was  Lollia  Paulina,  the  most  celebrated  beauty  of  her  days,

1  Suetonius,  Dion,  11.  cc.  Seneca,  however,  by  whom  the  story  was  proba-
bly suggested,  gives  it  no  such  extravagant  turn :  "  Eodem  tempore  quo  templa
illi  constituebat  ac  pulvinaria,  cos  qui  parum  mcesti  fuerant  crudeli  afficiebat
animadversione."

8  Suet.  Califf.  25.  On  the  occasion  of  his  marriage  with  Orestilla,  the  wife
of  C.  Piso :  "Matrimonium  sibi  repertum  exemplo  Romuli  et  Augusti."  The
first  had  thus  carried  off  Hersilia  (Plut.  Rom.  14.),  the  last  Livia.

A.U.  791.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  307

who  was  united  to  a  distinguished  noble,  Memmius  Regulus,
the  consul  who  had  arrested  Sejanus.1  But  Caius  was  not
smitten,  perhaps,  so  much  by  the  charms  of  her  person  as  of
her  estate,  for  she  was  the  richest  woman  in  Rome,  the  heiress
of  the  extortioner  of  Gaul ;  and  the  emperor,  like  a  mere
private  spendthrift,  was  driven  to  restore  his  shattered  for-
tunes by  a  judicious  alliance.  Lollia  displayed  hei  magnifi-
cence with  a  pomp  truly  imperial.  I  have  seen  her,  says
Pliny,  on  no  occasion  of  special  solemnity,  but  at  a  plain
citizens  bridal  supper,  all  covered  with  pearls  and  emeralds —
her  hair  and  head-dress,  ears,  neck,  and  fingers — worth  as
much  as  forty  millions  of  sesterces.  Such  was  the  style  in
which  she  came  to  witness  the  act  of  marriage.  Nor  were
these  the  love  tokens  of  a  princely  prodigal ;  they  were  the
treasures  of  her  grandsire,  amassed  from  the  spoils  of  prov-
inces. Such  was  the  end  of  all  this  rapine.  Lollius  suffered
disgrace  and  perished  by  his  own  hand,  that  his  grand-
daughter forsooth  might  blaze  by  lamp-light  in  the  splendour
of  forty  millions?  But  once  united  to  the  rapacious  empe-
ror, she  was  not  suffered  long  to  parade  this  brilliancy.  She
too  was  repudiated  in  her  turn  by  the  inconstant  prince,  and
we  can  hardly  suppose  that  she  was  suffered  a  second  time
to  carry  off  her  jewels  with  her.3  Nevertheless,  we  shall
find  her  recommended  again  for  her  riches  as  the  bride  of
another  emperor;  nor  does  Pliny,  in  noting  the  splendour  of
her  fortune,  remark  how  suddenly  she  was  deprived  of  it.

In  the  second  year  of  his  principate  Caius  performed  an
imposing  ceremony,  the  distribution  of  crowns  and  sceptres
to  various  foreign  applicants.  The  solemnity  was  IIerod  Aprjppa
not  the  less  interesting  from  the  respect  he  paid  2i8Bovc'r?£nty
to  the  forms  of  the  republic.  A  silken  curtain,  ^ thc  Ea8t-
then  most  rare  and  precious,  was  drawn  across  a  lofty  stage

1  Dion,  lix.  12.  J  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  ix.  58.

'  Suet.  Califf.  25. :  "  Brevique  missam  fecit  intcrdicto  cujusquam  in  pcrpe-
tuum  coitu."  This  prohibition  means,  perhaps,  that  6he  wa9  forbidden  to  con-
tract another  marriage,  in  order  that  the  emperor  might  not  be  required  to  re-
store her  portion.

308  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  38.

in  the  forum ;  and  the  emperor  was  discovered  seated  be-
tween the  consuls.  He  recited  the  decree  of  the  senate,
which  conferred  the  throne  of  Ituraea  upon  Soemus,  of  the
lesser  Armenia  upon  Cotys,  of  Thrace  upon  Rhtemetalces,
and  of  Pontus  upon  Polemo.1  At  the  same  time  Agrippa,
who  recently,  on  the  death  of  Philip,  had  been  gratified  with
his  tetrarchy,  to  which  the  districts  of  Abilene  and  Coele-Syria
had  been  added,  was  allowed,  after  long  delay,  to  repair  to  his
new  dominions.4  As  the  first  pledge  of  his  amity,  the  emperor
had  already  presented  him,  on  his  release  from  custody,  with  a
chain  of  gold  of  equal  weight  with  the  iron  fetters  which
had  bound  him  to  his  warder.  This  present  was  no  more
than  a  token  perhaps  of  the  riches  which  were  at  the  same
time  heaped  upon  him,  which  enabled  him  to  exhibit  his  ac-
customed magnificence  in  Rome  during  the  period  that  Caius
still  chose  to  retain  him  about  his  own  person.  But  these
shining  marks  of  favour,  and  the  consciousness  of  his  per-
sonal influence,  did  not  fail  to  inspire  him  with  more  ambi-
tious views.  He  aimed  at  recombining  under  his  sceptre  the
broken  fragments  of  the  great  sovereignty  of  Herod,  one
portion  of  which  was  now  under  the  immediate  government
of  Roman  officials,  another  still  occupied  by  his  kinsman
Antipas  and  his  sister  Herodias.  He  employed  perhaps  the
period  of  his  prolonged  sojourn  in  Rome  in  imbuing  his  pa-
tron's mind  with  distrust  of  the  rulers  of  Samaria ;  and  the
mutual  recriminations  of  the  Jewish  princes,  which  the  gov-
ernment forbade  to  issue  in  an  appeal  to  arms,  could  only  be
controlled  eventually  by  the  direct  decision  of  the  emperor.

It  was  in  the  fall  apparently  of  the  year  791  that  Agrippa
sailed  for  the  East.  The  speediest  and  surest  voyage  from
Agrippa  arrives  Rome  to  Palestine  lay  not  by  way  of  Brundisium
on  hlrway'to  anc^  tne  Hadrian  and  Carpathian  seas,  but  by  the
Palestine.  longer  route  of  Puteoli  and  Alexandria,  on  ac-

1  Dion,  lix.  12.

2  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  fJ.  11.  Agrippa  was  relieved  from  his  attend-
ance on  his  patron  in  the  second  year  of  the  Caian  principate,  on  promising  to
return  whenever  his  presence  was  required.

A.U.  791.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  309

count  of  its  favourable  winds,  and  the  superiority  of  the
vessels  which  ran  between  those  important  havens.  It  was
to  Alexandria,  therefore,  on  the  recommendation  of  the  em-
peror himself,  that  Agrippa  in  the  first  instance  repaired.
His  presence  there  gave  rise  to  scenes  of  disorder,  which
were  not  without  their  influence  on  the  future  fortunes  of  the
Jewish  people,  and  must  not  be  passed  over  in  silence.

No  one  yet  perhaps  could  augur  that  the  Jewish  people,
the  citizens  of  a  narrow  and  obscure  corner  of  the  empire,
would  one  day  divide  the  interest  of  mankind  The  Jews  at
with  Rome  itself,  in  a  great  and  mortal  struggle.  fUHed1bylthe"
Yet  no  other  city  but  Jerusalem  might  seem  at  natives-
this  period  to  rival  the  capital  of  the  Caesars,  as  the  centre
of  a  compact  and  at  the  same  time  a  wide-spread  nationality,
and  the  beloved  metropolis  of  innumerable  colonies  planted
in  every  land.  No  other  city  was  so  bound  to  the  hearts  of
its  children  throughout  the  world  by  its  customs  and  tradi-
tions, its  faith  and  its  aspirations.  No  other  possessed  with-
in its  bosom  the  germs  of  universal  conquest :  it  yet  remain-
ed to  be  seen  whether  circumstances  would  suffer  the  mate-
rial extension  of  its  power  over  alien  nations,  or  whether  its
authority  should  eventually  be  confined  to  a  moral  and  spir-
itual pre-eminence.  But  as  the  presence  of  the  Roman  was
felt  on  every  foreign  shore  as  that  of  a  material  organizer
and  controller,  so  the  Jews  appear  in  some  mysterious  way
to  have  rebuked,  by  the  force  of  their  character,  Avherever
they  established  themselves,  the  feeble  decrepitude  of  the
races  around  them.  The  disintegration  of  ancient  nationali-
ties was  nowhere  more  manifest  than  in  the  teeming  city  of
Alexandria,  where  the  Greek  and  Copt  mingled  in  ill-cement-
ed union,  and  were  bound  most  strictly  together  by  their
common  hatred  of  the  Jews  residing  among  them.  The
number  of  this  foreign  race  in  Egypt  has  already  been  stated
at  a  million;  of  the  five  sections  of  the  great  emporium  of
the  East  two  were  principally  inhabited  by  Jews,  and  they
were  found  scattered  in  considerable  force  throughout  the
others. But  if  the  proportion  of  this  element  to  the  indigen-

310  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  38.

ous  population  was  so  large,  its  habits  were  less  gregarious,
its  temper  less  excitable  :  it  was  devoted  to  the  quiet  pursuit
of  commerce  or  letters ;  it  had  no  wish  for  the  exercise  of
arms,  nor  was  it  entrusted  with  them.  The  native  Alexan-
drians, however,  regarded  these  Jewish  denizens  as  aliens  to
be  hated  and  despised  ;  lively  and  turbulent  themselves,  they
were  ever  ready  to  break  out  in  violence  against  their  graver
neighbours,  and  it  required  all  the  vigilance  and  impartial
austerity  of  the  Roman  rule  to  protect  the  one  from  the
bitter  animosity  of  the  other.  The  arrival  of  Agrippa  seems
to  have  been  the  signal  for  an  outburst  of  this  national  jeal-
ousy. It  was  the  humour  of  the  Alexandrians  to  mock  and
injure  the  Jews  on  all  occasions :  they  now  chose  to  make
the  new  king  of  the  Jews  a  special  object  of  derision,  and
for  this  purpose  taking  an  idiot  of  the  name  of  Carabas,  well
known  in  their  streets,  they  crowned  him  with  a  diadem  of
papyrus  leaves,  put  a  reed  in  his  hand,  and  bore  him  in  mock
triumph  through  the  city,  attended  by  a  body-guard  of  chil-
dren armed  with  sticks.1  On  reaching  the  quarters  of  their
foes  they  redoubled  their  shouts  and  acclamations,  saluting
him  with  the  titles  of  Lord  and  King.  Instead  of  checking
this  outrage,  by  which  the  Jews  were  naturally  exasperated,
the  Roman  Governor,  Avilius  Flaccus,  seems  to  have  en-
couraged and  applauded  it.  This  man,  after  serving  Tiberius
discreetly  in  the  command  of  Egypt  for  the  space  of  five
years,  had  fallen  out  of  favour  with  the  new  emperor,  and
was  seeking,  as  the  Jewish  party  imagined,  to  recover  it.
The  cherished  enmity  of  Jewish  political  leaders  to  Rome,
and  the  uneasy  jealousy  of  the  state  towards  them,  was  well
known  to  the  men  who  bore  ride  in  these  parts  :  the  Roman
officials  had  themselves  too  often  provoked  them  purposely
by  injustice,  in  order  to  make  their  exasj>eration  a  pretext  for
harsher  measures  of  repression.  Such  perhaps  was  the  ob-
ject which  Flaccus  now  had  in  view  ;  such  at  least  it  appear-
ed to  the  sufferers  themselves,  one  of  whom,  the  most  dis-

1  riiilo,  in  Flaccum,  6.

A.U.  791.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  31 1

tinguished  name  in  their  secular  literature,  has  denounced  it
with  no  little  eloquence  and  feeling.  Tiberius  had  forbidden
the  worship  of  his  pretended  divinity  in  Rome  :  even  in  the
provinces  he  had  restrained  and  discouraged  it.  He  knew  that
it  was  absurd  ;  and  nothing  absurd  in  politics,  he  shrewdly  de-
termined, could  continue  to  be  always  safe.  But  the  crude
inexperience  of  his  youthful  successor  was  troubled  by  no
such  scruples.  The  governors  of  the  provinces  were  induced
to  believe  that  they  could  in  no  way  pay  court  to  him  more
palatably,  than  by  impelling  their  subjects  to  the  adoration
of  the  Caesar.  The  excessive  repugnance  of  the  Jews  to  ad-
mit anv  representations  of  the  human  form  into

. *  .  .  .  Statues  of  the

their  places  ot  relisrious  meeting  incited  Flaccus emperor  in-

-i  i-  /.  i  m- ■  ,  ti truded  into  the

to  adopt  this  means  of  humiliating  them,  and  he Jewish  sj-na-
instigated  their  fellow-citizens  in  Alexandria  to
demand  that  statues  of  the  emperor  should  be  erected  in
their  synagogues. Tumults  and  bloodshed  quickly  followed.
The  Alexandrians,  as  the  strongest  party,  drove DiStm.bances
the  Jews  into  a  single  quarter  of  the  city,  plun- at  Alexandria-
dering  and  burning  their  residences  throughout  the  rest,  and
subjecting  many  of  them  to  death  and  tortures. But  the
prefect,  who  had  acted  thus  shamefully,  found  that  in  his  zeal
he  had  fatally  overreached  himself. The  government  at
Rome,  always  sensitive  about  the  condition  of  Egypt,  was
seriously  alarmed  and  offended. He  was  sum-

ii  o  -i  •  i-ii Flaccus,  the

moned  home  to  answer  for  the  peril  into  which  he Roman  govern-

or  (lis'Tuccti

had  brought  the  storehouse  of  Italy,  and  sent
thither  in  chains  by  his  successor  Bassus.1

Agrippa  hastily  quitted  the  scene  into  which  his  presence
had  introduced  so  terrible  a  disturbance,  and  prosecuted  his
voyage  to  Palestine.  His  arrival  in  his  new  prin-  nanishmont  of
cipality  excited  the  alarm  and  jealousy  of  the  "TuV^'aT*
rulers  of  Samaria,  on  whose  compassion  he  had  A  D  30
so  lately  lived.  Antipas  was  wary  and  circum-  A- u-  "'•'-•
gpect,  slow,  perhaps,  to  feel,  and  still  slower  to  move;  IIc-

1  Philo in  Flacc.  6-18.:  tovto  Kaivdrarov  vTrf/ieive  4>?i&iiKor  iv  x&P?  *K
afriyciro,  iro?£[iiov  rpdirov  ^uyprjO.lc- Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  9.  1.

312  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  39.

rodias,  more  quick  and  prompt,  if  not  really  more  ambitious,
than  her  husband,  urged  him  with  all  her  influence  to  repair
to  Rome,  and  sue  for  the  province  of  Judea,  or  at  least  for
such  a  confirmation  of  his  actual  sovereignty  as  might  se-
cure it  against  the  intrigues  of  their  artful  neighbour.1  It
was  long  before  she  could  prevail  on  him  to  risk  the  voyage
to  Italy,  whence  so  many  occupants  of  Eastern  thrones  had
never  returned.  At  last  they  sailed  together  for  Baiae,  where
Caius  was  then  sojourning,  closely  followed  by  Agrippa,
with  charges  against  them  of  complicity  with  a  new  revolu-
tion in  Parthia,  and  of  preparing  to  hold  Samaria  against  the
Romans  with  seventy  thousand  stand  of  arms  they  had  there
collected.  The  result  of  the  interviews  which  the  rivals  had
successively  with  the  emperor  was  that  Antipas  was  de-
prived of  his  sovereignty,  and  relegated,  first  to  Lugdunum,
and  afterwards  to  the  distant  province  of  Spain.8  Herodias,
as  the  daughter  of  Antonia's  friend  Berenice,  was  indulged
with  an  offer  of  pardon,  together  with  some  portion  of  her
estates ;  but  this,  with  the  high  spirit  of  a  Jewish  matron,
she  firmly  rejected,  and  insisted  on  sharing  her  husband's
disgrace.  The  fortunate  Agrippa  was  now  grati-
ceivcs  Samaria, fied  with  the  addition  of  Samaria  to  his  domin-

in  addition  to .  .  ,

histetrarchy ions. The  province  of  Judea  alone  remained  to

of  Galilee.  , *  .  TT

reunite  the  sovereignty  of  Herod.
Caius  had  now  played  the  autocrat  without  restraint  or
remonstrance  for  more  than  two  years,  and  his  pride  had
Caius  claims  di-  Deen  inflated  to  the  highest  pitch.  The  foreign
vine  worship,  princes,  whom  he  had  assembled  about  his  throne
and  admitted  to  his  table,  had  pampered  him  with  fulsome  ad-
ulation. They  had  vied  with  one  another  in  doing  homage  to
him  as  the  dispenser  of  crowns ;  they  had  suffered  him  to
regard  and  treat  them  as  his  vassals,  and  acknowledged
themselves  as  merely  ministers  of  his  paramount  authority.
When  they  contended  among  themselves  for  precedence,  he

1  Salvador  (i.  454.)  reminds  us  how  Antipas  is  characterized  as  a,  fox  in  the
Gospels. St.  Luke,  xiii.  32.

2  Joseph.  Antiq.  xviii.  8.  2.

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  313

cut  short  the  dispute  with  the  maxim  of  Homer,  One  chief,
one  king.  It  is  mentioned,  as  the  height  of  his  daring  inso-
lence, that  he  all  but  assumed  the  diadem,  and  converted  the
shadow  of  the  prineipate  into  the  reality  of  a  royal  rule.1
But  the  Eastern  King  was  always  near  allied  to  Divinity.
This  was  a  political  dogma  which  the  Macedonians  had
found  established  in  Asia,  and  they  had  willingly  /ivailed
themselves  of  it.  Regarding  the  Godhead  as  a  Spirit  of  Joy
and  Bounty  only,  without  the  sterner  attributes  and  moral
excellences  attached  to  him  by  the  Western  and  Northern
world,  the  Oriental,  and  the  Greek  especially,  was  prone  to
discover  an  emanation  of  Divinity  in  every  human  dispenser
of  worldly  blessings.  Giver  of  good  things,  Giver  of  pros-
perity, Avas  the  title  with  which  he  was  content  to  address
the  Judge  and  Supreme  Ruler  of  the  Universe  : a  it  was  easy
to  divert  his  adoration  from  the  supreme  to  the  lesser  givers,
his  own  chiefs  and  kings,  who  were  nearer  to  him,  and  whose
bounty  he  could  more  sensibly  appreciate.  If  they  were  not
almighty,  even  the  Gods  above  were  subject  one  to  another,
and  all  to  Fate : 3  if  they  were  vicious  and  impure,  the  Gods
too  had  their  pleasant  vices:  their  follies  and  even  their
crimes  were  little  regarded  as  long  as  these  imperfections
did  not  touch  the  mass  of  their  worshippers.  It  was  long
before  the  higher  moral  sense  of  the  Romans  could  yield  as-
sent to  this  degrading  view  of  the  Deity;  but  when  the
populace  grew  thoroughly  corrupt,  and  imbued  in  a  great
degree  with  Oriental  phantasies,  the  upper  class,  with  no
belief  of  its  own,  was  willing  that  they  should  amuse  and
deceive  themselves  by  any  belief  however  preposterous.
The  divine  honours  paid  to  so  many  of  his  race,  and  the  reg-

1  Suet.  C'aliff.  22. :  "  Exckmavit,  e/f  noipavoQ  loro  e/f  fiaoilevs :  Nee  mul-
tum  abfuit  (juin  Ktatim  diadema  sumerct,  speciemque  principatus  in  regni  for-
mam  converteret."

8  Callimachup,  in  Jov.  91.:  6iJTop  iauv,  Surop  anrjuoavvTjc  ....
•  Stat.  Bylv.  iii.  3.  52. :

"  Mox  crcseit  in  illos
Impcrium  Supcris ;  scd  habent  et  Numina  legem."

314  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  39.

ular  form  which  the  Caesar-worship  was  assuming  amidst  the
ruins  of  ancient  rituals,  made  a  lively  impression  on  the  im-
agination of  the  excitable  Cains.  When  eleven  cities  of
Asia  contended  before  the  senate  for  the  honour  of  devoting
themselves  to  the  worship  of  Tiberius,  the  claims  of  Miletus
and  Ephesus  had  been  rejected  because  they  were  too  deeply
engaged  in  the  service  of  Apollo  and  Diana.1  The  cult  of
the  emperor,  they  were  given  to  understand,  ought,  wherever
it  was  established,  to  precede  every  local  religion  ;  or  rather
his  worshippers  ought  to  divide  their  vows  and  sacrifices
with  no  other  patron.  The  principle  thus  gravely  asserted
Caius  carried  out  without  compunction.  He  aspired  not
only  to  be  recognised  as  a  God,  but  claimed  the  same  pre-
eminence among  the  Gods  as  he  enjoyed  without  a  rival
among  human  potentates.  His  assumption  of  the  name  and
attributes  sometimes  of  Hercules,  sometimes  of  Bacchus,
sometimes  of  Apollo,  was  the  whim  of  his  monstrous  imag-
ination ;  but  when  he  announced  that  he  was  the  Latian  Ju-
piter himself,  still  more  when  he  pretended  to  converse  as
an  equal  or  superior  with  Jupiter,  and  challenged  him  with
an  Homeric  verse  to  combat,  he  asserted  that  the  worship  of
the  Caesar  was  paramount  throughout  the  world  to  every  othei
formula  of  religious  devotion.8

This  assumption  of  divinity,  in  which  even  the  Romans
acquiesced,  met,  we  may  suppose,  with  no  resistance,  and
This  claim  ad-  was  admitted  almost  without  remark  in  the  prov-
with  Imn™''  inces  generally.  The  Athenians  might  sigh  to
ference,  see  ^}ae  heads  of  some  of  their  noblest  images

struck  off,  and  the  trunks  carried  to  Rome  to  be  united  to
the  features  of  a  barbarian  emperor ;  but  it  was  the  insult  to
art,  taste,  and  feeling,  not  to  their  languid  religious  princi-

1  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  55.

2  Suet.  Catig.  22. :  "  Cum  Capitolino  Jove  secreto  fabulabatur,  mode-  insu-
surrans,  ac  prsebens  invicem  aurem,  modo  clarius  nee  sine  jurgiis.  Nam  cora-
minantis  audita  est :  ?/  /Savaeip',  f/  eyij  fft."  II.  xxiii.  724.  Comp.  Dion,  lix.
28.,  and  a  story  in  Seneca,  de  Ira,  i.  ult.

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  315

pies,  which  they  chiefly  resented.1  But  with  the  Jews,  both
at  home  and  abroad,  it  was  far  otherwise.  Where,  indeed,
their  numbers  were  few,  and  their  sense  of  nationality  weak-
ened by  distance  or  dispersion,  the  order  to  set  up  the  em-
peror's statue  in  their  synagogues  might  excite  no  direct
resistance ;  but  wherever  numbers  and  union,  as  but  resented
well  as  obstinate  prejudices,  gave  them  strength,  tI,>nYy<tifena"
they  sternly  refused  to  admit  the  accursed  thing  Jews-
within  their  walls,  and  defied  the  powers  of  earth  to  intrude
it  on  them.  At  Alexandria  the  contest  had  issued  in  riot
and  bloodshed.  The  Jews  were  overpowered  for  the  time.
We  have  seen  indeed  that  the  indiscretion  with  which  the
prefect  had  encouraged  their  assailants  had  been  followed  by
his  disgrace  ;  but  this  had  been  merely  a  popular  persecu-
tion, and  the  resistance  of  the  Jews  to  it  might  be  excused,
and  its  abettor  punished.  When,  however,  the  decree  of  the
senate  should  be  launched,  with  the  sanctions  of  law  and
power,  for  the  establishment  of  the  emperor's  worship,  in  the
synagogue,  opposition  to  it  would  be  regarded  with  far  other
eyes,  the  fury  of  the  multitude  would  be  backed  by  all  the
force  of  Rome,  and  the  hands  of  the  prefect  strengthened  for
a  complete  and  final  victory.  When  Bassus  arrived  to  take
the  place  of  Flaccus,  he  bore,  perhaps,  in  his  hands  the  in-
strument of  this  spiritual  tyranny.  The  triumph  of  the
Jewish  party  was  but  short-lived.  Not  only  in  Alexandria
but,  as  they  were  informed,  in  Judea  and  throughout  the
world,  the  decree  for  the  worship  of  the  idol  of  stone  would
be  speedily  enforced  without  remorse.  Possibly  there  was
still  a  moment  of  suspense  before  the  bolt  fell.  The  Alexan-
drian Jews  sought  to  avert  it  by  a  direct  appeal  to  the  sense
or  mercy  of  the  emperor.  Among  many  learned  and  elo-
quent men  who  adorned  their  persuasion,  was  at  that  time
one  of  peculiar  eminence,  whose  profound  erudition  and  skill
in  moulding  the  belief  of  his  country  to  the  philosophy  of

2  Suet.  1.  c. Wc  must  remember  the  infatuated  worship  they  had  them-
selves paid  to  Antonius  in  the  guise  of  Bacehus  more  than  seventy  years  before.

316  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  39.

the  Greeks,  have  given  him  a  high  place  in  the  ranks  of  class-
ical literature. Philo the  Jew,  as  he  "was  spe-

Mission  of  .  ....

Philo  the  Jew. cially  designated,  to  distinguish  him  from the

a.  d.  40. manv  scholars  who  once  bore  the  same  name  but
a.  v.  793. , *  .  ., .  . . . .

have  long  passed  into  oblivion,  was  now  sent

with  four  others  as  a  deputation  from  his  countrymen  in
Egypt,  to  lay  before  Caius  the  grievances  under  which  they
suffered,  to  explain  the  nature  of  their  religious  scruples,  and
to  avert  if  possible  the  wrath  of  the  self-styled  Divinity  by
protestations  of  loyalty  and  true  devotion.

The  account  of  this  embassy,  which  the  illustrious  envoy
has  himself  left  us,  is  one  of  the  most  curious  monuments
interview  of  °f  antiquity.  No  other  fragment  of  ancient  his-
voyftrithb  en"  t0IT>  excepting  perhaps  the  fourth  of  Juvenal's
Cams.  Satires,  gives  us  so  near  an  insight  into  the  actual

domestic  life  of  the  rulers  of  the  world ;  and  though  the
style  of  Philo  is  laborious  and  turgid,  and  the  character  of
his  mind,  ever  exercised  in  weaving  plausible  unrealities,
such  as  to  engage  little  confidence  in  his  judgment  or  even
in  his  statements  of  fact,  nevertheless  we  cannot  rise  from  its
perusal  without  feeling  that  we  have  made  a  personal  ac-
quaintance, to  use  the  words  of  another  sophist,  with  the
kind  of  beast  called  a  tyrant.1  As  Antipas  and  Agrippa  had
contended  which  should  outstrip  the  other  in  first  reaching
the  prince's  ante-chamber,  so  the  Alexandrians  sent  now
their  deputation  as  well  as  the  Jews,  and  both  the  one  and
the  other  landed  almost  at  the  same  moment  on  the  coast  of
Campania.  The  Jews  were  much  dismayed  at  hearing  on
their  arrival  that  Petronius,  the  governor  of  Judea,  had  been
commanded  to  erect  a  colossal  figure  of  the  Caesar  in  the
temple  of  Jerusalem,  even  in  the  Holy  of  Holies ; a  and  that
the  consummation  of  this  crowning  impiety,  retarded  for  a

1  The  saying  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  twenty  years  later,  as  recorded  by
Philostratus,  iv.  37. :  to  Se  Ot/piov  tovto  b  nakovziv  oi  noTCkbi  rvpavvov,  ovte
bizboai  al  KEtyaXal  aliTu  oida,  ovte  el  yafitpuvvx^v  te  ko.1  mpxapodovv  'ictiv.

2  Philo,  legat.  ad  Caium,  20. :  olxETai,  yfi£>v  to  iep&v  avdpiavTa  mkoocialov
eiouT&Tu  t<jv  ad'vTov  avaTEdf/vai  6  Taioe  npoaETa^E  Aibc  E'lriKArjccv  avToi).

A.U.  r93.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  317

moment  by  that  officer's  hesitation  at  the  prayers,  the  mur-
murs, and  the  menaces  of  the  true  believers,  was  urged  more
imperatively  than  before  by  a  fresh  injunction  from  Rome,
and  now  only  awaited  the  completion  of  the  abominable  im-
age by  the  hands  of  Phoenician  artificers.  At  this  moment
the  tyrant  was  flitting  from  one  of  his  villas  to  another,  fol-
lowed by  trains  of  courtiers  and  petitioners,  and  among  them
the  rival  envoys  of  Egypt,  long  unable  to  obtain  an  au-
dience. At  last  he  summoned  these  last  to  an  interview  to-
gether in  the  gardens  of  Maecenas,  which  he  had  connected
with  the  ample  pleasure  grounds  of  the  Lamias,  and  where
he  was  engaged  in  planning  extensions  and  alterations,  to
adapt  the  proudest  seats  of  the  nobility  to  the  proportions
of  a  royal  residence.  This  icas  the  spot,  says  Philo,  chosen
whereon  to  enact  the  catastrophe  of  the  great  drama  of  Jew-
ish nationality.1  Here,  he  continues,  ice  found  the  tyrant,
surrounded  by  stewards,  architects,  and  workmen, — every  hall
and  chamber  thrown  open  for  his  inspection, — ranging  from
room  to  room.  Called  into  his  presence,  we  advanced  rever-
ently and  discreetly,  saluting  him  by  the  title  of  Augustus
and  Imperator.  Halting  for  a  moment  in  his  eccentric
course,  he  suddenly  addressed  them.  What,  said  he,  are
you  the  God-haters,  the  men  who  deny  my  divinity,  confessed
by  all  the  world  besides  f a  and  he  raised  his  hand  towards
heaven  with  a  frightful  execration.  The  Alexandrians  pressed
forward  in  their  turn  with  odious  adulation.  Lord  and  mas-
ter, said  their  spokesman  Isidorus,  still  more,  and  more  justly,
will  you  hate  them,  when  you  learn  that  of  all  mankind  these

Jews  alone  have  refused  to  sacrifice  for  your  safety

Lord  Caius,  Lord  Caius,  exclaimed  the  Jews,  we  are  spi-
dered.' We  have  sacrificed  for  you,  we  have  offered  heca-
tombs, we  have  not  feasted  on  the  flesh  of  our  victims,  but

1  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cat.  44. :  neldi  yap  ettI  izapovaiv  i/filv  i)  Kara  izavroq  tov
t&vovc  e/iehte  OKTjvojiaTeiaQai.  SpafiaroTcoiia.

2  I'liilo,  1.  c. :  v/icic  kari  01  Oeo/ntaeic,  oi  Oebv  fir)  vofii^avTeq  clvai  fie,  tov
7,6t)  napa  ■naaiv  ro'tq  a?.?.oic  avu/iofayyr/fitvov.

1  Pliilo,  c.  45. :  Kvpie  Taiet  ovKntyavTovfieda.

318  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  40.

have  made  holocausts  of  them,  not  once  but  thrice  already  >
first  when  you  assumed  the  empire,  again  when  you  were
restored  from  your  dire  disease,  once  more  for  the  success  of
your  expedition  against  the  Germans.  .  .  .  Be  it  so,  replied
he,  ye  sacrificed  for  me,  hut  not  to  me.  The  unfortunate
Jews  were  struck  dumb  with  abysmal  terror.1  For  a  mo-
ment they  were  relieved  by  the  emperor  suddenly  rushing
off  to  some  distant  apartments,  some  upstairs,  some  below,
examining  their  proportions  and  decorations,  approving  here,
ordering  changes  and  reconstructions  elsewhere.  The  en-
voys  were  hurried  in  his  train,  backwards  and  forwards,  the
Alexandrians  pressing  on  with  them,  and  ever  jeering  and
mocking  them,  as  in  a  play.  But  at  the  next  pause  in  his
career,  Caius  tui*ned  round  abruptly  with  the  question,  Pray,
gentlemen,  why  do  not  you  eat  pork  ?  Whereat  the  Alexan-
drians in  their  glee  so  far  forgot  themselves  as  to  burst  into
loud  uncourtly  merriment,  which  brought  on  them  frowns
and  shrugs  from  some  of  the  emperor's  attendants.  The
moment  was  favourable  to  the  Jewish  envoys,  and  they  an-
swered discreetly,  Every  people  has  its  special  customs  /  our
opponents  are  not  without  their  own  peculiarities.  .  .  Some
nations,  one  of  them  meekly  suggested,  refrain  from  eating
the  flesh  of  young  lambs.  .  .  Quite  right  too,  screamed  the
emperor,  their  meat  is  bad.  Pleased  with  his  joke,  which
took  the  Jews  by  surprise,  he  went  on  more  mildly  to  inquire
into  the  national  usages  of  their  countrymen :  but  when  they
began  to  address  him  in  a  set  speech,  explaining  and  justify-
ing the  principles  of  their  polity,  he  soon  cut  them  short,
afraid,  as  Philo  surmised,  to  listen  to  a  justification  which  he
should  be  unable  to  refute,  and  rushed  back  to  his  architec-
tural fancies.  Among  the  wonders  before  them,  the  envoys,
terrified  as  they  were,  could  not  help  remarking  the  windows
of  one  chamber  filled  with  a  transparent  stone,  admitting
the  light  but  warding  off  the  wind,  and  tempering  the  burn-
ing rays  of  the  sun. Once  more  the  emperor  came  up  to

1  Philo,  c.  45. :  <ppini]  (i'vdiog.

A.U.  793.J  UNDER  TIIE  EMPIRE.  319

them,  and  desired  them,  with  less  asperity  than  at  first,  to
resume  their  explanations ;  hut  again  he  interrupted  them
alter  a  few  words  by  running  oft'  to  superintend  the  arrange-
ment of  some  pictures.  The  Jews  continued  still  to  follow
him,  more  dead  than  alive  from  fear,  putting  in  from  time  to
time  a  few  words  of  solicitation  or  apology,  but  addressing
themselves  all  the  while  in  silent  prayer  to  the  great  God  of
their  fathers.  He  had  mercy,  says  Philo,  upon  us,  and
turned  at  last  the  emperor's  heart  to  pity.  .  .  Men  icho  think
me  no  God,  exclaimed  Caius,  are  more  unfortunate,  after  all,
than  criminal /  and  with  this  remark  he  left  the  place  and
dismissed  them.  Though  his  last  words  were  not  ungracious,
the  Jews  perceived  that  they  had  failed  in  the  object  of  their
mission,  and  returned  home  with  heavy  hearts,  with  no  hope
in  the  compassion  or  justice  of  man.  They  betook  them-
selves to  their  God,  and  they  found  deliverance.  The  reso-
lution indeed  of  the  tyrant  was  in  no  wise  shaken  ;  the  in-
stances even  of  Agrippa,  whom  the  Jews  engaged  to  plead
their  cause,  and  to  enforce  moral  with  political  arguments,
were  totally  unavailing.1  The  orders  to  Petronius  were  re-
peated with  increasing  stringency,  and  every  plea  and  pre-
text for  delay  disregarded.  The  Jews,  stung  to  madness,
were  preparing  to  defend  their  holy  place  at  the  price  of
their  national  existence,  when  in  a  moment  a  blow,  that
might  seem  heaven-directed,  struck  down  the  monster,  and
paralysed  the  sacrilege.  But  the  crimes  of  this  semi-Oriental
divinity  have  yet  to  be  described  more  particularly,  before
we  can  rejoice  as  it  deserves  in  the  just  retribution  of  his
downfall.

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  9.  8.  According  to  this  writer  Caius  at  one
moment  yielded  to  Agrippa,  and  rescinded  his  orders  to  Petronius ;  but  on
hearing  of  the  resistance  the  Jews  were  prepared  to  make,  repeated  them
more  vehemently  than  ever.  The  last  missive,  however,  did  not  reach  Petro-
nius till  after  the  news  had  arrived  of  the  tyrant's  death.  Comp.  Tae.  But.  v.
9. :  "  Jussi  a  Caio  Caesare  efligiem  ejus  in  templo  locare,  arrna  potius  sumpse-
runt:  qucm  motum  Ciesaris  mors  diremit."

320  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOMAXS  \A.  D.  37.

CHAPTER  XLVIII.

REFLECTIONS ON  THE  DEFICIENCY  OF OUR  MATERIALS  FOR  THE  HISTORY  OF  CAIUS.

DEFECTS OF HIS EDUCATION AND TRAINING. HIS CONTEMPT FOR POLITICAL

DISGUISES. THE  PRIESTHOOD  OF  THE  ARICIAN  DIANA. COLOSSAL  CHARAC-
TER OF  HIS  CONCEPTIONS :  HIS  ARCHITECTURAL  EXTRAVAGANCES. — THE  VIA-
DUCT OYER  THE  VELABRUM. THE  BRIDGE  OF  BOATS  AT  BAL.E. HIS  EXTRAV-
AGANT LUXURY. HE PRETENDS TO ELOQUENCE. HIS SPITE AGAINST GREAT

REPUTATIONS, AND BELIEF IN HIS OWN DIVINITY. SYSTEMATIC PERSECUTION

OF THE 'WEALTHY NOBLES. MASSACRE OF EXILES. THE PEOPLE ALIENATED

BY TAXATION. HIS EXPEDITION INTO GAUL. OVERTHROW OF LENTULUS

G-ETULICUS AND LEPIDUS. PRETENDED  INVASION OF BRITAIN. RETURNING TO

ROME, HE PLAYS THE TRYANT WITHOUT DISGUISE. CONSPIRACIES AGAINSI

HIM. HE IS SLAIN BY CASSIUS CHJEREA. (a.  D.  39-41.,  A.  U.  792-'794.)

THE  loss  of  several  books  of  the  annals  of  Tacitus  leaves
us  dependent  for  our  knowledge  of  the  domestic  events
The  principate  °f  tne  third  principate  on  the  meagre  pages  of
il  the1  annals  of  Dion  and  Suetonius.  Of  that  immortal  work,
Tacitus.  every  gap  in  which  may  be  equally  deplored  as

a  loss  to  history  and  to  philosophy,  four  books,  from  the  sev-
enth to  the  tenth,  contained  the  affairs  of  less  than  ten  years ;
a  larger  space  proportionally  than  the  writer  had  allowed  to
the  details  of  the  Tiberian  administration ;  from  whence  we
may  conclude  that  the  later  period  was  even  more  prolific
than  the  earlier  in  important  and  interesting  events.  If  two
or  even  three  of  these  books  Avere  appropriated,  as  we  may
suppose,  to  the  reign  of  Caius,  many  circumstances  must  un-
doubtedly have  been  deemed  worthy  of  more  particular  con-
sideration than  we  find  in  the  dry  statements  of  Dion,  and
the  desultory  anecdotes  of  the  Roman  biographer,  and  must
have  occupied,  in  the  thoughtful  view  of  a  wiser  writer,  no

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  32l

unimportant  place  in  the  general  history  of  his  countrymen.
We  may  presume  that  in  them  the  affairs  of  the  Roman
administration  in  the  East  (of  which  we  now  derive  our
information  from  Jewish  sources  only)  were  treated  with  the
fulness  of  detail  and  wealth  of  language  which  hecame  the
pen  of  the  most  eloquent  of  historians,  and  with  all  that
deep  interest  in  the  subject  which  must  have  been  felt  by
one  who  had  lived  to  witness  the  strucfo-le  and  awful  catas-
trophe  in  which  they  had  resulted.  From  them  we  should
have  learnt,  perhaps,  the  real  nature  of  the  complaints  of  the
Alexandrians  against  the  Jews,  and  have  been  admitted,  at
least,  to  a  familiar  acquaintance  with  the  condition  of  the
Egyptian  capital,  with  its  mixed  population  of  surly  Copts,
subtle  and  garrulous  Greeks,  reserved  and  busy  Hebrews.
We  should  have  traced,  in  a  few  burning  touches  never  to
be  obliterated,  the  fierce  unyielding  character  of  that  mar-
vellous people,  to  whom,  as  the  surest  of  human  depositaries,
were  committed  the  oracles  of  God.  We  should  have  re-
ceived more  particular  details  of  the  false  and  offensive  state-
ments regarding  the  origin  of  the  intruders  from  Palestine,
which  circulated  among  their  enemies,  and  which,  as  we  dis-
cover from  the  allusion  of  Tacitus  himself  at  a  later  period,
were  accepted  by  the  Romans  with  the  prone  credulity  of
national  exasperation.1

But  more  especially  we  might  expect  to  have  found  in
these  lost  books  a  judicious  and  temperate  survey  of  the  state
of  public  feeling  at  Rome,  and  a  comparative  How  Tacitus
view  of  the  genius  of  the  nation  as  it  appeared  p^nlluhe
under  the  first  and  under  the  third  princeps  ;  emi)eror  Caiu8-
with  an  estimate  of  the  manifest  decline  of  national  senti-
ments, and  decay  of  ancient  ideas,  which  could  render
possible  the  existence  of  a  tyranny  Oriental  in  its  features,  a
reign  of  abject  terror  and  self-abasement  in  the  centre  of  the
Western  capital,  in  the  midst  of  every  outward  appliance
of  luxury  and  festive  enjoyment. We  should  have  seen

1  Tactitus,  Hist.  v.  2-5.
vol.  v. — 21

322  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

perhaps  portrayed  in  glowing  characters  the  circumstance
which  marked  the  great  distinction  between  the  despotism
of  a  Tiberius  and  a  Caius  :  that  the  one  blighted  with  its
chill  shadow  the  germs  of  national  enjoyment ;  while  the
other,  though  far  more  wanton  and  ferocious,  surrounded
itself  with  all  the  most  alluring  forms  of  gaiety  and  voluptu-
ousness. Above  all,  we  should  have  admired  the  dark  picture
of  the  terrible  emperor  himself,  drawn  as  Tacitus  only  could
have  drawn  him,  as  a  deified  Tarquin  or  a  crowned  and
sceptred  Catilina.  In  a  few  striking  lines  he  has  already
described  him  to  us,  such  as  he  was  in  early  youth,  a  de-
graded and  servile  dissembler,  drowning  all  sense  of  honour
and  affection  in  obscene  sensuality,  making  himself  unworthy
of  life  for  mere  life's  sake : '  in  another  place  a  single
expression  escaping  from  his  pen,  implies  his  belief  in  the
monster's  insanity ; a  and  this  no  doubt  is  the  view  of  his
character  which  the  complete  account  of  his  career,  had  it
descended  to  us,  would  have  brought  out  in  full  and  startling
relief.

The  most  cursory  examination,  indeed,  of  our  existing
authorities  will  show  that,  while  they  seem  to  vie  in  reciting
_ „ ,  the  worst  atrocities  of  the  Caian  principate,  there

Possibly  some ...  *  r '

injustice  has is  much  in  which  their  accounts  contradict  each

been  done  to

the  character other  and  much  about  which  a  thoughtful  reader

of  Caius.  ....  &

is  constrained  to  suspend  his  credence.  Critics,
accordingly,  have  not  been  wanting  who,  rejecting  as  con-
fused and  incredible  the  bulk  of  this  hostile  testimony,  have
suggested  that  Caius  was  in  truth  the  victim  of  the  capital
and  the  nobility,  a  protector  of  the  provinces  and  the  popu-

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  20.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  3. :  "  Caii  turbata  mens."  Again,  but  not  quite  in  the
same  sense  (Hist.  iv.  48),  "Turbidus  animi."  Seneca,  in  a  passage  quoted
above,  speaks  of  his  insania  as  sufficiently  manifest.  So  again  (Cons,  ad  Polyb.
36.),  "Furiosa  inconstantia."  Statius,  Sylv.  iii.  3.  TO.  "furiis  agitatus."  Sue-
tonius assures  us  that  he  was  himself  sensible  of  his  infirmity,  and  proposed  to
take  a  course  of  hellebore  in  retirement.  Calig.  50.  His  distraction  of  mind
his  habitual  fever  and  sleeplessness,  as  described  by  this  writer,  are  strongly
indicative  of  intermittent  insanity.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  323

lace,  whose  character  was  blackened  with  desperate  malice
by  the  animosity  of  partisans.  Even  the  adverse  testimony
of  Tacitus,  they  would  urge,  might  have  served,  as  in  the
case  of  Tiberius,  to  discredit  some  statements  of  his  col-
leagues, and  thus  to  mitigate  our  idea  of  the  crimes  of  the
object  of  their  common  hostility.  It  is  possible  we  might
read  in  the  character  of  Caius,  thus  sifted  by  cross-examin-
ation of  the  adverse  witnesses,  an  anxiety  to  avoid  the
errors  of  his  predecessor;  and  that  as  Tiberius  secluded
himself  from  his  people,  and  fell  into  the  hands  of  an  un-
worthy favourite,  his  successor  may  have  resolved  to  know
everything  and  do  everything  himself,  to  rely  on  no  minister
or  adviser,  but  rushing  unceasingly  from  Rome  to  Italy,
from  Italy  to  the  provinces,  to  inform  himself  of  every  detail
of  his  world-wide  administration :  a  task  to  which  no  man
was  equal,  least  of  all  a  sickly  youth  of  imperfect  education
and  unbalanced  intellect, — a  task  which  had  overstrained
the  energy  of  a  Julius,  the  sagacity  of  an  Augustus,  and  the
prudent  industry  of  a  Tiberius.  That  there  was  a  period  at
the  commencement  of  his  brief  principate  during  which  there
was  at  least  a  struggle  between  beneficent  wishes  and  selfish
inclinations,  when  his  liberal  and  patriotic  declarations  were
not  consciously  insincere,  nor  his  deference  to  the  people  and
senate  assumed  at  the  mere  dictate  of  fear,  cannot  fairly  be
disputed.  His  activity  was  certainly  remarkable  ;  many  of
his  plans  of  public  improvement  were  as  wise  as  they  were
bold ;  the  vigilance  of  his  government  never  relaxed ;  though
well  aware  of  the  perils  of  his  position,  he  was  harassed  by
no  craven  timidity  ;  we  hear  of  no  complaints  under  him  of
affairs  neglected  and  foes  encouraged :  yet  he  yielded  himself
to  no  minister  or  favourite  ;  he  did  his  own  work  with  a
vehement  impetuosity,  no  less  conspicuous  in  the  toils  of
administration  than  in  the  excesses  of  debauchery.  Never-
theless, the  verdict  of  antiquity  has  gone  against  him.  The
question  with  our  imperfect  lights  will  not  bear  to  be  re-
opened ;  and  we  have  no  other  course  but  to  join  in  the
general  condemnation  pronounced  upon  the  miserable  strip-

324

HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  3T.

ling,  of  whom  the  "best  that  can  be  said  is  that  the  wildness
of  a  brain,  stricken  in  the  cradle  with  hereditary  insanity,
was  aggravated  by  the  horrors  of  his  unnatural  position.
Accepting  the  common  impression  of  his  character  as  on  the
whole  sufficiently  established,  I  shall  be  satisfied  with  point-
ing out  in  one  or  two  remarkable  instances,  the  apparent
misrepresentation  of  conduct  really  wise  and  laudable.

The  men,  it  must  be  observed,  who  had  preceded  Caius
in  empire  had  all  been  trained  to  rule  by  long  exercise,  and
Disadvantages  na^  teste<l  their  powers  in  the  best  of  schools,  in
under  which  he maniv obedience to  the circumstances which

succeeded  to  •>  m  ,  .

power.  controlled  them. Caius  alone  had  inherited  his

autocracy  without  undergoing  this  discipline,  for  the  mere
abject  servility  of  his  submission  to  his  uncle  does  not  deserve
the  name  of  a  moral  and  reasonable  training. It  was  only
for  a  short  time  that  he  had  enjoyed  any  expectation  of
eventually  succeeding,  and  the  sole  course  which  then  offered
for  reaching  the  glittering  prize  was  to  crouch  unremarked
in  the  shadow  of  the  emperor's  footstool. He  was  jealously
precluded  from  the  efforts  which  might  have  helped  to  fit
him  for  the  arduous  post  before  him. Such  instruction  as  he
received  was  confined  to  merely  literary  exercises  :  the  habit
of  declamation,  though  ostensibly  the  training  of  a  Cicero
or  a  Demosthenes,  had  in  fact  no  more  bearing  on  real  affairs
than  the  lessons  of  a  modern  schoolboy. When  we  read
that  Caius  pronounced  a  funeral  harangue  over  the  bier  of
Livia  at  the  age  of  fifteen ;  that  Augustus  and  Julius  Caesar,
and  others,  performed  similar  feats  in  still  tenderer  years,
we  must  consider  these  exercitations  as  mere  conventional
themes,  composed  by  rule  and  measure,  and  under  a  tutor's
eye. As  a  scholar  Caius  showed  some  vivacity,  and  achieved,
perhaps,  some  success  ;  the  remarks  recorded  of  him  in  later
years  show  natural  wit  and  cleverness  : 1 but  there  is  no
reason  to  suppose  that  his  mind  expanded  by  exercise  and

1  As,  for  instance,  his  calling  Livia  an  Ulysses  in  petticoats  ("  Ulyxem  stola-
tum"),  and  describing  the  style  of  Seneca,  the  philosopher,  as  untempered  mor-
tar ("  arenam  sine  calce  "). Suet.  Calig.  23,  53.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  325

observation,  or  that  he  ever  learnt  much  more  than  what  his
pedagogues  instilled  into  him.1 Such  talents  and  such  ac-
complishments had  none  of  the  bone  and  muscle  of  true
intellectual  strength,  and  could  impart  no  just  self-reliance
to  the  pupil,  who  entered  almost  at  the  same  moment  on
manhood  and  on  empire. There  is,  however,  another  respect
in  which  the  practical  training  of  the  earlier  emperors,  de-
nied to  Caius,  aided  in  the  development  of  their  native  genius
for  government. At  this  crisis  in  the  life  of  the  Roman
people,  when  society,  shaken  to  its  basis,  trembled  on  the
verge  of  hopeless  anarchy,  the  broad  enunciation  of  a  princi-
ple or  theory  of  government  might  have  overturned  it  in  a
moment. It  Avas  not  for  the  safety  of  their  rulers  only  that
it  was  requisite,to  rest  in  practical  expedients  ;  it  was  much
more  essential  to  the  welfare  of  the  people  that  they  should
be  kept  in  ignorance  of  the  real  views  of  their  rulers,  and
allowed to indulge in the dream  of  independence, from
which  they  derived  their  self-respect,  and  walked  with  firmer
step  and  erecter  carriage. If  the  substance  of  freedom  was
irretrievably  lost,  it  would  have  been  mere  cynicism  to  strip
them  of  the  shadow  which  they  still  mistook  for it,  and
deprive  them  of  the  last  consolations  of  their  brilliant  servi-
tude. This  was  the  lesson  which  Augustus  and  Tiberius
learnt  in  the  school  of  experience,  before  their  time  arrived
for  applying  it :  but  such  a  lesson  was  never  impressed  on
the  rude  mind  of  their  successor. Caius,  when  he  found
himself  the  master  of  a  legion  of  slaves,  felt  neither  shame
nor  scruple  in  proclaiming  his  own  power,  and  exacting  their
devotion. lie  despised  as  ignoble  the  caution  of  his  prede-
cessors in  disclaiming  the  full  ackowledgment  of  their  un-
doubted prerogatives. lie regarded himself, not as a
Princeps  or  Imperator,  but  as  a  King  ; and  if  he  did  not

'  It  must  be  allowed,  however,  that  Josephus  (Aniiq.  Jiul.  xix.  2.  5.)  speaks
highly  of  this  prince's  education,  though  he  admits  that  it  was  nullified  by  the
curse  of  his  position :  tTrpuTevae  re  tuv  kut"  avrov  ttoIctuv,  oil  fiffv  avriox&v
ola  re  iylvero  avrij  ra  Ik  tt}c  iraideia<;  avk~kcycvTa  ayaOa  wpor  tuv  'are?MvTa
bfaOpov  airy  iinb  rf/c  i^ova'iar.

326  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

extort  from  his  subjects  the  odious  title,  he  allowed  the  idea
to  become  impressed  on  them  by  jurists  and  moralists ;  so
that  we  may  now  begin  to  trace  the  dawning  in  the  Roman
mind  of  the  theory  of  royal  prerogative.  The  complete  and
irresponsible  power  he  claimed  over  the  persons  and  property
of  his  people,  and  even  the  soil  on  which  they  stood,  was
derived  neither  from  hereditary  nor  elective  right :  it  was
the  prey  of  the  strongest,  which  Fate  had  placed  in  his
hands,  and  which  Force  only  could  secure  to  him.1  His
wild  untutored  intellect  could  grasp,  perhaps,  no  higher  or
subtler  principle  of  authority  than  this  :  it  was  ever  present
to  his  mind  and  harassed  it  with  perpetual  anxiety  :  he  lived
in  constant  oscillation  between  the  exultation  of  unrestrained
enjoyment  and  the  depressing  consciousness  of  danger :  he
strained  his  imagination  to  realize  by  the  most  wanton  ex-
cesses the  substance  of  unlimited  power,  at  one  moment  as
an  excitement,  at  another  as  a  relief  and  consolation.

Many  instances  are  given  of  these  excesses,  to  some  of
which  the  course  of  our  narrative  will  compel  us  to  refer.
strange  story  I  mention  one  only  in  this  place,  which  seems  to
hoocuf  "hf"  illustrate,  in  a  form  which  may  be  regarded,  per-
Ancian  Diana.  hapSj  as  mythical  rather  than  strictly  true,  the
turn  which  the  position  of  Caius  gave  to  his  reflections.  In
the  dark  recesses  of  the  woods  which  overshadowed  the
lake  of  Nemus,  stood  a  chapel  of  the  Tauric  Diana,  whose
sanguinary  rites  on  the  shores  of  the  Cimmerian  Bosphorus
were  remembered,  though  no  longer  practised,  in  the  milder

1  Thus,  we  read  in  Seneca,  de  Benef.  vii.  4. :  "  Jure  civili  omnia  Regis  sunt,
et  tamen  ilia  quorum  ad  regem  pertinet  universa  possessio,  in  singulos  dominos
descripta  sunt,  et  unaqu&'que  res  habet  possessorem  suum  ....  Ad  reges  po-
testas  omnium  pertinet,  ad  singulos  proprietas."  True,  he  is  here  laying  down
a  general  principle :  but  its  applicability  to  the  Roman  polity  of  his  day  is  hardly
disguised.  So  again  (vii.  6.):  "Caesar  omnia  habet,  fiscus,  ejus  privata  tantum
ac  sua ;  et  universa  in  imperio  ejus  sunt,  in  patrimonio  propria."  (Plin.  Paneg.
50.),  praising  the  moderation  of  Trajan :  "  Est  quod  Caesar  non  suum  videt."
Compare  at  a  later  period,  Gaius,  ii.  1. :  "  In  provinciali  solo  dominium  populi
Romani  est  vel  Caesaris.  Memento,"  said  Caius  of  himself  (Suet.  Calig.  29.),
"  omnia  mihi  et  in  omnes  licere."

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  327

clime  of  Latiura.  Nevertheless,  the  belief  still  commonly-
prevailed  that  the  priest,  or  king  as  he  was  denominated,  who
ministered  at  her  altar  was  qualified  for  his  office  by  the
slaughter  of  his  predecessor,  and  held  it  only  by  the  tenure
of  strength  in  combat  or  swiftness  in  flight  against  the  next
aspirant.  Such  was  the  legend  of  the  shrine,  which  had  be-
come embodied  in  the  poetical  ritual  of  Ovid,  and  was  noted
even  in  the  graver  treatise  of  the  geographer  Strabo.1  If  so
wild  an  usage  had  ever  actuallv  existed,  and  received  the
sanction  of  authority,  we  may  believe  that  it  had  long  fallen
into  desuetude.  But  the  story  rendered  current  by  the  cred-
ulity of  popular  antiquarians  excited  the  curiosity  and  hor-
ror of  the  vulgar ;  and  Caius,  ever  logical  in  his  deductions,
and  a  shrewd  proscriber  of  all  hollow  pretensions,  affected
indignation  that  the  actual  incumbent  of  the  office,  the  cham-
pion of  the  grove,  should  enjoy  his  dignified  indolence  un-
challenged. He  instigated,  we  are  assured,  a  stronger  man
to  seek  him  in  his  retreat,  and  required  him  to  defend  his
preferment  with  his  life.3  We  may  imagine  the  grim  satis-
faction with  which  the  imperial  philosopher  might  reduce
this  theory  of  succession  to  practice.  Such,  at  all  events,
was  the  view  he  took  of  his  own  position.  He  regarded  him-
self, sometimes  perhaps  with  a  bitter  smile,  as  no  other  than
the  minister  of  a  bloody  destiny,  once  raised  to  power  by  a
deed  of  blood,  and  liable  to  be  cast  down  not  less  suddenly
by  another.

The  contemplation  of  his  extraordinary  position  as  the
deified  autocrat  of  the  world,  lying  as  it  did  almost  beyond
the  verge  to  which  a  Roman's  imagination  could Caiu8  imbibes
at  this  period  extend,  seems  to  have  filled  this |J™ "^^
vain  creature's  mind  with  an  inward  assurance, nature-

1  Ovid,  Fast.  in.  271.:

"  Rcgna  tcnent  fortesque  manu  pedibusque  fugaces,
Et  perit  exemplo  postmodo  quisquc  suo."
Comp.  Strabo,  v.  3.  p.  239. :  rb  &  'Aprefiiatov  b  nakovai  Nf/wr  .  .  .  .  nai
yap  ti  (iapfiapiKov  Kparel  Kal  lnvdinbv  irepl  rb  hpbv  idor-  i-ifr/pfc  ovv  iarlv  ael,
nepiano-xuv  rdf  tnidcoec;,  iroifior  afilrveoOac.

a  Suet.  Cal.  35. :  "  Ncmorensi  rcgi,  quod  roultos  jam  anno3  potiretur  sacer-
dotio,  validiorcm  adversarium  Bubomavit."

328  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  37.

which  he  mistook  perhaps  for  the  inspiration  of  divinity,
that  he  was  altogether  a  being  of  different  texture  from  the
common  clay  of  mortality.  As  shepherds  or  herdsmen  differ
in  species  from  the  animals  they  dispose  of,  so,  he  boldly
argued,  must  the  ruler  of  the  Roman  world  belong  to  a  higher
and  grander  existence  than  the  troop  of  slaves  he  governs.1
When  this  conception  had  taken  possession  of  him,  it  became
his  passion  to  realize  it  in  every  outward  act ;  to  prove  to
himself,  to  manifest  to  the  world,  that  he  was  subject  to  none
of  the  laws  by  which  mere  men  are  controlled ;  that  his
transcendental  being  was  elevated  above  the  restraints  of  all
inferior  existences  ;  that  he  stood  in  incommunicable  dignity
far  aloof  from  the  ordinary  sympathies  of  humanity :  while
no  conception  was  so  daring,  no  combination  so  preposterous,
as  to  be  beyond  his  power  to  execute.  Thus,  on  the  one
hand,  we  find  him  taking  a  pride  in  showing  himself  inacces-
sible to  the  ordinary  sentiment  of  pity,  steeling  himself  to
the  sight  of  pain,  and  at  last  feeling,  or  affecting  perhaps  to
feel,  an  actual  pleasure  in  it ; 2  exulting  again  in  the  defiance
of  the  rules  of  common  decency,  and  indulging  in  open
shamelessness  of  behaviour,  for  the  mere  wanton  sport  of  of-
fending and  horrifying  his  associates.  It  was  in  this  spirit
that  he  complained  that  his  reign  was  signalized  by  no  great
public  calamity,  such  as  the  Varian  massacre,  or  the  fall  of
the  theatre  at  Fidenae.3  On  the  other  hand,  he  delighted  in
the  execution  of  the  most  fantastic  projects,  to  prove,  as  it
would  seem,  that  he  was  lord  both  of  sea  and  land,  and  of
all  the  powers  of  nature,  and  that  nothing  was  too  extrava-
gant, nothing  too  amazing,  for  the  deified  Caesar  to  effect.
To  stand  on  the  summit  of  a  lofty  basilica  and  scatter  money

1  Philo,  leg.  in  Cai.  11.

2  It  pleased  him  to  say  that  he  practised  the  afiiarpeipia,  or  steadfastness
of  the  Stoics,  in  accustoming  himself  to  gaze  upon  human  suffering  without
blenching.  Pliny  remarks,  as  a  peculiarity  of  this  emperor's  eyes,  that  they
seldom  or  never  winked :  he  calls  them  "  oculi  rigentes  "  (H.  N.  xi.  54.) ;  but
whether  this  was  natural,  or  had  been  attained  by  muscular  effort,  he  does  not
6ay.

3  Suet.  Calig.  81.

A.U.  790.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  329

to  the  populace,  seemed  to  him  an  act  of  divine  munificence ;
to  sail  along  the  Campanian  coast  in  enormous  galleys,  equip-
ped with  porticoes,  baths,  and  banquet  halls,  interspersed
•with  gardens  and  orchards,  delighted  him  as  a  defiance  of
the  elements.1

We  find  the  colossal  character  of  this  wonder-worker's
conceptions  running,  as  generally  with  the  Roman  potentates,
in  the  direction  of  material  constructions. To

,  Colossal  con-

2)1(11  down  in  order  to  re-erect,  to  change  the  square ceptions  of

.  .  Caius :  his  ar-

mto  the  round : — such,  in  a  word,  was  the  idea chitecturai  ex-

•,.■,  ,.  .  „ ,  /»t-i-i travaganccs.

winch  governed  the  passion  of  the  time  for  build-
ing, which  was  constantly  projecting  the  bay  of  the  tribune
from  the  flat  wall  of  the  basilica,  replacing  the  oblong  tem-
ple of  Greece  Avith  the  circular  dome-vaulted  Pantheon,  and
turning  the  arch,  the  genuine  invention  of  native  art,  to  sup-
port story  above  story,  and  rear  Antiochs  and  Alexandrias
upon  the  area  of  Rome.  To  build  was  to  create,  and  to
create  was  divine.  Fired  with  the  persuasion  of  his  august
divinity,  Caius  rioted  in  the  number  and  magnificence  of  his
architectural  undertakings.  He  completed  the  temple  of
Augustus,  which  Tiberius  had  left  unfinished,  and  effected
the  repair  or  restoration  of  the  theatre  of  Pompeius,  which
had  suffered  by  an  accidental  conflagration,  while  he  com-
menced an  amphitheatre  of  his  own  on  the  site  of  the  Septa
in  the  Campus.8  The  great  aqueduct  which  conveyed  the
waters  of  the  Aqua  Claudia  to  Rome,  together  with  those  of
the  Anio  Nov  us,  which  were  conducted  in  a  separate  chan-
nel above  them,  was  also  designed  by  Caius,  though  the  work
was  far  too  gigantic  to  be  accomplished  during  his  short  ten-
ure of  power.  The  furthest  point  from  which  these  streams
were  carried  was  more  than  fifty-six  miles  from  the  city;  but
for  a  distance  of  nearly  ten  miles  the  channel  was  suspended
on  an  unbroken  series  of  arches,  which  in  some  places  ex*

1  Suet,  fuliff.  87. :  "  Nihil  tam  efficere  concupiscobat  quani  quod  posse  effici
negoretur."

2  Suet.  Califf.  21.:  "  Opera  sub  Tiberio  semiperfeeta  .  .  .  absolvit."

330  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  38.

ceeded  an  hundred  feet  in  height.1  This  was  reputed  in
every  respect  the  greatest  of  all  the  fine  works  of  this  kind
executed  at  Rome ;  and  however  needless  and  extravagant
may  have  been  the  ostentation  displayed  in  its  method  of
construction,  we  must  not  fail  to  admire  the  utility  of  its  de-
sign. Several  works  are  enumerated  which  Caius  projected
for  the  decoration  of  the  provinces,  hut  of  these  none  per-
haps were  completed,  nor  indeed  did  they  deserve  to  he  so  ; 2
unless  we  except  one  of  a  different  kind,  the  cutting  of  the
Isthmus  of  Corinth,  the  expediency  of  which  is  so  manifest,
that  it  is  much  to  he  wondered  that  among  the  many  project-
ors who  designed,  none  ever  succeeded  in  effecting  it.  It  is
hardly  possible  to  give  serious  credit  to  one  of  the  plans
ascribed  to  him,  that  of  building  a  city  in  the  passes  of
the  Alps.  It  seems  more  reasonable  to  suspect  that  the  peo-
ple chose  thus  to  caricature  some  scheme  of  beneficence,
such,  for  instance,  as  the  establishment  of  a  hospice  in  the
wilderness  of  snows.3  The  creation  of  harbours  of  refuge
at  Rhegium  and  on  the  opposite  coast  of  Sicily  for  the  corn
ships  which  encountered  the  perils  of  the  Messanian  straits
was  worthy  of  a  prudent  government ;  but  though  design-
ed and  begun,  the  undertaking  languished  for  lack  of  funds,

The  imperial  anc^  was  never  completed.*  The  enlargement  of
palace  of  Caius. t ^e  paiace  0f  the  Csesars  was  a  freak  of  Oriental

extravagance.  From  the  northern  angle  of  the  Palatine  hill
where  the  modest  residence  of  Augustus  had  overlooked  the
forum,  Caius  extended  a  series  of  chambers  and  arcades  to
the  valley  beneath,  and  made  the  temple  of  Castor  and  Pol-
lux serve  as  a  vestibule  to  the  imperial  abode.  The  emperor,
it  is  said,  would  frequently  take  his  stand  between  the  statues
of  the  twin  deities,  the  guardians  of  the  city,  and  thus  ex-

1  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxvi.  24.  10. ;  Frontinus,  de  Aquceducl,  13,  14. ;  Becker,
Bom.  Alterth.  i.  704.

2  Suet.  1.  c. : "  Destinaverat  et  Sami  Polycratis  regiam  restituere,  Mileti
Didymcum  peragere." Com.  Dion,  lix.  28.

3  Suet.  1.  c. :  "  In  Alpium  jugo  urbem  condere."

4  Joseph.  Ardiq.  Jud.  xix.  2.  5.

A.U.  791.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  331

hibit  himself  for  the  adoration  of  the  passers  by.  But  he
affected  to  converse  with  Jupiter  himself,  enshrined  in  the
temple  of  the  Capitol,  and  for  this  purpose  he  required  a
readier  means  of  access  to  the sacred  mount.  .

His  viaduct

Accordingly  he  carried  a  viaduct  from  the  Pala- across  the  Ve-

a  J  1 1  -i  •  labrum.

tine  to  the  Capitohne,  a  bold  construction,  sus-
pended above  the  buildings  of  the  Velabrum,  and  designed,
we  may  suppose,  to  rival  the  bridge  over  the  Tyropceum  at
Jerusalem,  one  of  the  chief  wonders  of  the  Eastern  metrop-
olis, of  which  he  had  often  loved  to  hear.1

That  so  vast  a  structure  should  have  been  flung  boldly
across  so  wide  and  deep  a  gorge,  and  completed  within  the
space  of  two  or  three  years,  may  excite  our  wonder,  and  al-
most stagger  our  belief,  yet  it  may  seem  still  more  astonish-
ing that  every  remnant  and  vestige  of  it  should  have  been
swept  entirely  away.  It  is  probable  indeed,  that  this  demol-
ition was  consummated  within  a  few  years  after  the  first
completion  of  the  edifice.  But  this  is  only  one  out  of  many
instances  of  the  promptness  with  which  the  great  Roman
builders  overthrew  whatever  stood  in  the  way  of  newer  and
generally  still  grander  designs,  and  transferred  the  enormous
piles  of  hewn  materials  to  fresh  and  often  very  different  des-
tinations. The  most  remarkable  and  renowned,  however,  of
this  emperor's  creations  was  constructed  of  far  less  solid  ma-
terials, and  never  intended  perhaps  to  serve  any  other  than
a  temporary  purpose.  If  we  may  believe  the  accounts  we
have  received  from  various authors,  the  great „  ._,,

°  IIis  bridge

bridge  of  boats  which  Caius  threw  across  the across  the

s  Gulf  of  Baiao.

Baian  Gulf  from  Bauli  to  Puteoh  was  a  freak  of

1  Suet.  Calig.  22. :  "  Super  templum  Augusti  ponte  transmisso  Palatium
Capitoliumque  conjunxit."  The  site  of  this  temple  is  not  known,  but  it  may
\  cry  well  have  been  at  the  foot  of  the  Palatine  and  of  the  house  of  Augustus.
The  width  of  the  valley  from  crest  to  crest  is  above  two  hundred  yards.  Pliny
takes  occasion  from  this  junction  of  one  quarter  of  the  city  with  another  to  say,
with  a  bold  perversion  of  language,  that  Caius  surrounded  Home  with  his  palace :
"  His  vidimus  urbem  totam  cingi  domibus  principum  Caii  ct  Neronis."  WA
Nal.  xxxvi.  24.  5.

332  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  39.

insane  vanity,  the  most  extravagant  toy,  perhaps,  that  human
folly  ever  invented  to  sport  with  one  day  and  cast  away  the
next.  Between  Baiae  and  Bauli,  on  the  western  side  of  this
celebrated  bay,  a  spit  of  land  projects  a  few  hundred  yards
into  the  sea  towards  the  opposite  point  of  Puteoli,  about  two
miles  distant ;  and  this  is  also  nearly  the  depth  qf  the  arc
defined  by  these  two  prominent  headlands.  From  Puteoli,
on  the  other  hand,  a  mole  advanced  into  the  water,  built  upon
arches,  the  remains  of  which  extend  twelve  hundred  feet ;
and  thus  there  existed  on  either  side  of  the  bay  the  rudi-
ments, the  one  natural  the  other  artificial,  of  a  complete  mole
or  breakwater.  It  was  by  a  parallel  mound  or  bank  at  the
bottom  of  this  bay  that  the  sea  was  excluded  from  the  Lu-
crine  Lake  and  the  Avernus  beyond  it.  The  great  work  of
Agrippa,  who  converted  this  lake  into  a  haven  by  perforat-
ing the  mound  with  a  ship-canal,  has  been  noticed  in  an  ear-
lier chapter.  It  was  not  beyond  the  means,  nor  above  the
bold  conception,  of  a  wise  and  paternal  ruler  to  improve  on
this  political  masterpiece,  by  the  construction  of  a  mole,  vast,
indeed,  as  its  dimensions  must  have  been  both  in  length  and
depth,  at  the  entrance  of  the  outer  gulf.  Such  was  the  prin-
ciple of  the  works  effected  by  the  steadfast  energy  of  a  later
emperor,  which  still  exist  at  Civita  Vecchia  or  Centumcellse ;
and  the  great  amount  of  shipping  which  must  have  been
often  assembled  at  Puteoli,  as  well  as  the  importance  of  its
cargoes,  might  have  justified  the  expense  and  grandeur  of
such  an  undertaking.  But  no  such  purpose  can  be  ascribed
to  Caius  ;  his  object  was  as  selfish  as  the  means  he  employed
were  showy  and  unsubstantial.  The  ancient  legions  of  the
bay  ascribed  the  dyke  of  the  Lucrine,  a  broad  shingle-bank
thrown  up  in  the  course  of  ages  by  the  sea,  to  the  creative
power  of  Hercules ;  and  the  ambition  to  vie  with  the  man-god
was  more  powerful  with  the  self-styled  divinity,  who  affected
to  rival  him,  than  any  magnificent  conceptions  of  imperial
policy.  He  ransacked,  we  are  told,  the  havens  far  and  near
to  collect  every  vessel  he  could  lay  hands  on,  till  commerce
was  straitened  in  every  quarter,  and  Italy  itself  threatened

A.  17.792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  333

with  famine.  These  vessels  he  yoked  together  side  by  side,
in  a  double  line,  extending  from  one  shore  to  the  other.1  On
this  broad  and  well-compacted  base  he  placed  an  enormous
platform  of  timber ;  this  again  he  covered  with  earth,  and
paved,  after  the  manner  of  a  military  highroad,  with  stones
hewn  and  laid  in  cement.  The  way  thus  built  was  furnished
with  numerous  stations  or  post-houses,  for  the  use  of  which
fresh  water  was  conveyed  by  an  aqueduct  from  the  continent.2
Such,  it  seems,  was  this  extraordinary  bridge :  it  could  never
have  been  intended  to  retain  it  permanently ;  it  was  doubt-
less necessary  to  restore  the  vessels  which  had  been  pressed
into  the  service  of  the  prince's  vanity ;  but  he  determined
before  abandoning  his  work  to  enact  on  it  a  peculiar  pageant,
the  novelty  and  brilliancy  of  which  should  transcend  every
recorded  phantasy  of  kings  or  emperors.9  The  venerable
seer  Thrasyllus  had  prophesied,  it  seems,  at  an  earlier  period,
that  the  young  Caius  would  no  more  become  emperor  than
he  would  ever  drive  his  chariot  across  the  gulf  of  Baiae.*
Caius  had  indeed  attained  to  power,  yet  the  words  might
still  ring  ominously  in  his  ears;  pride  and  superstition  com-

1  Dion,  lix.  17.:  dtp'  ovnep  nal  lifibq  iv  re  ri)  \rakia  nal  iv  Vufii)  [ia.7u.crra
iuxvpbg  eyevE-o.  We  may  be  allowed  to  suspect  that  this  statement  is  founded
upon  a  remark  of  Seneca  which  will  hardly  bear  it  out.  De  Brev.  Vit.  18.:
"  Dum  ille  pontes  navibus  jungit,  et  viribus  imperii  ludit,  aderat  ....  alimeu-
torum  egestas.  Exitio  paene  et  fame  constitit  ....  superbi  regis  imitatio."
But  the  scarcity  he  speaks  of  occurred  at  the  moment  of  Caius's  death,  which
was  two  years  later,  when  there  was  found,  it  was  said,  to  be  no  more  than  seven
or  eight  days'  consumption  of  corn  in  the  granaries.

7  Suet.  Califf.  19.;  Dion,  lix.  17.;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  1.  The  first
makes  the  length  3G00  paces,  the  second  26  stades,  the  last  30  stades;  but  the
real  distance  is  about  two  miles.

3  Suet.  1.  c.  :  "  Novum  atque  inauditum  genus  spectaculi  excogitavit."  Eu-
menius  (I'mmj.  in  Constant.  13.)  alludes  to  this  pageant,  which  he  calls,  in  his
courtly  language,  "Delicata  vectatio  principis  otiosi."  Clinton.  Fast.  Rom.
A  pp.  p.  5.

4  Suet.  1.  c. :  "  Non  magis  Caium  imperaturum  quam  per  Baianum  sinum
equis  discursumm."  The  author  tells  us  that  he  had  as  a  boy  heard  his  grand
fithcr  mention  this,  as  supposed  in  the  palace  to  have  been  the  real  motive  for
this  whimsical  undertaking.

334  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  39.

bined,  perhaps,  to  urge  him  on,  and  he  declared  that  he  would
drive  across  the  bay,  not  alone  in  his  chariot,  but  attended
by  an  army,  and  arrayed  as  an  emperor  indeed.  The  great
world  of  Rome  mustered  on  the  shores  around  to  witness
the  imperial  miracle.  From  Puteoli  to  Misenum  the  semicir-
cle of  the  bay  was  crowded  with  admiring  multitudes ;  the
loungers  of  the  baths  and  porticoes  sallied  forth  from  their
cool  retreats ;  the  promenaders  of  the  Lucrine  beach  checked
their  palanquins  and  chariots,  and  hushed  the  strains  of  their
delicious  symphonies  ;  the  terraces  of  the  gorgeous  villas
which  lined  the  coast,  and  breasted  the  fresh  and  sparkling
ripple,  glittered  with  streamers  of  a  thousand  colours,  and
with  the  bright  array  of  senators  and  matrons,  drowning  the
terrors  which  day  and  night  beset  them  in  shrieks  of  childish
acclamation.  The  clang  of  martial  music  echoed  from  shore
to  shore.  From  Bauli  the  emperor  descended  upon  the
bridge, — having  first  sacrificed  to  the  gods,  and  chiefly  to
Neptune  and  Envy, — arrayed  in  a  coat  of  mail  adorned  with
precious  gems,  which  had  been  worn  by  Alexander  the  Great,
with  his  sword  by  his  side,  his  shield  on  his  arm,  and  crown-
ed with  a  chaplet  of  oak-leaves.1  On  horseback,  followed  by
a  dense  column  of  soldiers,  he  traversed  the  solid  footway,
and  charged  into  Puteoli  as  a  conquering  foe.  There  he  in-
dulged his  victorious  army  with  a  day  of  rest  and  expecta-
tion. On  the  morrow  he  placed  himself  in  a  triumphal  car,
and  drove  back  exulting,  in  the  garb  of  a  charioteer  of  the
Green  at  the  games  of  the  Circus.  The  mock  triumph  was
adorned  by  pretended  captives,  represented  by  some  royal
hostages  from  Parthia,  at  the  time  in  custody  of  the  Roman
government.  The  army  followed  in  long  procession.  In  the
centre  of  the  bridge  the  emperor  halted,  and  addressed  an

1  Suet.  Dion,  11.  cc.  These  sacrifices  seem  hardly  in  accordance  with  Caius's
character,  but  that  to  Livor  or  Envy  is  perhaps  significant  in  connexion  with
Hercules :

"  Diram  qui  contudit  Hydram  ....
Comperit  invidiam  supremo  fine  domari."

Hor.  Epist.  ii.  2.  10.

A.  U.  792.J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

335

harangue  to  his  soldiers  on  the  greatness  of  their  victory,
from  a  tribunal  erected  for  the  purpose.  He  contrasted  the
narrow  stream  of  the  Bosphorus  and  the  Hellespont,  at  most
seven  stades  in  width,  with  the  broad  ocean  which  he  had
yoked  in  chains,  and  declared  that  the  exploits  of  Xerxes  and
Darius  were  trifles  compared  with  his  mightier  enterprise.1
After  wearying  both  himself  and  his  heai-ers  with  this  pro-
digious folly,  he  distributed  money  among  them,  and  invited
them  to  a  banquet.  At  this  entertainment  the  emperor  re-
tained his  place  on  the  bridge,  but  the  soldiers  were  collected
around  him  for  the  most  part  in  vessels.  It  extended  far  into
the  night,  and  at  nightfall  the  bridge  and  the  ships  were  il-
luminated with  torches,  and  at  the  signal  the  whole  curving
line  of  coast  shone  forth,  as  in  a  theatre,  with  innumerable
lights.2  Charmed  with  the  stillness  of  the  water,  and  the
brilliancy  reflected  upon  it,  the  populace  crowded  round  in
boats,  and  partook  of  the  mirth  and  festivity.  But  their
holiday  did  not  end  without  a  frightful  disaster,  many  of  the
spectators  in  the  boats  or  on  the  bridge  being  jostled  ac-
cidentally into  the  waves.  Those  who  fell,  and  those
who  might  have  saved  them,  were,  it  seems,  equally
intoxicated ;  the  light  was  uncertain ;  no  one  gave,  or
none received orders ; and the  emperor himself,  we  are

1  It  is  remarkable  that  there  should  be  no  allusions  to  this  exploit  in  Pliny
or  the  poets,  to  whom  it  might  often  have  furnished  an  apt  illustration  ;  as,  for
instance,  when  Juvenal  says ;

"  Quidquid  Grcecia  mendax
Audet  in  historia,  cum  stratum  classibus  isdem
Suppositumque  rotis  solidum  mare." x.  174.
or  Lucan :

"  Talcs  fama  canit  tumidum  super  sequora  Xerxem
Contruxisse  vias,  multnm  cum  ponlibtis  ausus
Europamque  Asia;,  Scstonque  admovit  Abydo."

rhars.  ii.  67-'.

2  The  description  of  Dion  is  more  than  usually  vivid :  tov  yap  xuPl0V
ItrjvoEidovc  ivror,  nvp  navraxoOev,  mda-xep  iv  OeaTpy  rivi,  edeixOq,  (jure  fir/fie-
uiav  alcOrjaiv  tov  ok6t  v  yevtoOar  xal  yap  ri/v  vvKxa  yfxipav,  ua-eo  tov  t//v
tf&'/.CGoav  yf/v,  noif/oai  r/OD.rjaev. lix.  17.

336  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  39.

told,  was  overcome  with  wine :  whether  drunk  or  sober,  it  is
not  impossible  that  he  enjoyed  the  horror  of  the  scene,  and
even  forbade  assistance  to  be  rendered  to  the  sufferers.1

Among  the  tasteless  extravagances  of  the  day  there  was
none  to  which  the  vulgar  rich  more  commonly  devoted
themselves  than  that  of  the  table. It  was  not  so

. .  ,  ,  .  Extravagant

much  their  ambition  to  surround  themselves  with  luxury  of  the
the  most  graceful  or  gorgeous  appliances  of
luxury,  with  richly  furnished  chambers,  with  exquisite  music,
with  couches  and  tables  of  costly  materials  and  elaborate
workmanship,  though  all  these  too  had  their  votaries,  as  to
amaze  their  guests  with  the  extraordinary  money  value  of
the  articles  they  managed  to  consume.  It  was  for  their
rarity  only  that  nightingales  and  peacocks,  and  the  tongue
and  brain  of  phoenicopters,  whatever  these  creatures  may  be,
could  be  regarded  as  delicacies ;  still  less  could  it  give  any
pleasure  to  the  palate  to  swallow  pearls  dissolved  in  power-
ful acids.  But  such  was  the  rampant  luxury  of  Caius,  in
which  he  strove  to  imitate  or  rather  to  outdo  the  Oriental
Cleopatra.  In  this  and  other  particulars  of  the  same  kind
he  succeeded  probably  in  surpassing  all  previous  examples :
he  contrived,  we  are  assured,  to  expend  the  amount  of  eighty
thousand  pounds  sterling  on  a  single  repast ;  and  having
effected  this,  he  could  say  complacently,  a  man  should  be
frugal,  except  he  be  a  Ccesar*  This  vehement  ambition  to
be  the  first  in  everything  he  deigned  to  undertake,  extended

1  Suetonius  says  plainly  (Caliy.  32.) :  "Quum  multos  e  litore  invitasset  ad
tie,  repente  omnes  pracipitavit.  Quosdam  gubemacula  apprehendentes,  contis
remisque  detrusit  in  mare."  But  according  to  Dion  the  intoxication  was  gen-
eral :  k/nn^adelg  6e  itai  iiirepKopyg  nal  airov  nal  fted^g  yev6fievog,  gv%vov<;  /nev
Tuv  hraipuv  If  T7/v  dakaaaav  and  rift  ye<j>vpac  eppiipe,  ovxyovq  61  ml  tuv  d/U
2,uv  iv  nloioig  £fifl6Xov<;  Ixovai  irapaTrXevcrac  Karedvasv,  c>gte  nal  anoteadai
rivac  •  ol  yap  nlieiovc  Kain ep fieOv  ovt ec ,  kcru8r/<Tav.

8  Suet.  Califf.  3*7. :  "  Aut  frugi  esse  hominem  oportere  aut  Caesarem."
Comp.  Senec.  Com.  ad  Hclv.  9,  11.  The  famous  epicure  Apicius,  in  the  reign
of  Tiberius,  was  said  to  have  devoured  in  his  career  of  good  living  an  hundred
millions  of  sesterces,  or  800,000/.,  and  to  have  put  an  end  to  his  life  when  he
found  that  he  had  only  ten  millions,  or  80,000/.,  left.

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  337

to  many  unworthy  objects  besides  gluttony  and  charioteer-
ing. It  was  a  little  better  directed  when  the  Caius  affects  to
Caesar  presented  himself  before  the  senate  or  the  be  ^  or;ltur-
tribunals  as  an  orator,  and  made  perhaps  some  effort  of  mind
and  understanding  to  deserve  the  acclamations  which  were
only  too  sure  to  follow.  On  one  occasion,  at  least,  a  man
who  had  unfortunately  incurred  his  displeasure  was  saved
by  sacrificing  his  own  reputation  as  a  speaker  to  the  vanity
of  his  imperial  antagonist.1  But  even  the  victims  of  tyranny
might  not  always  show  such  forbearance  towards  it,  and
Caius,  in  the  midst  of  the  applause  with  which  his  genius  was
greeted,  must  have  frequently  felt  mortification  at  the  real
hollowness  of  his  pretensions.  His  passion  for  fame  degener-
ated, as  might  be  expected  in  so  base  and  selfish  a  nature,
into  a  brutal  envy  of  the  fame  of  others,  and  a  passion  for
destroying  every  well-earned  reputation.  He  caused,  we  are
told,  the  statues  of  the  heroes  of  the  republic,  which  Augus-
tus had  set  up  in  the  Campus,  to  be  overthrown  and  broken,
so  that  the  names  could  not  be  restored  to  the  figures  they
belonged  to ;  *  after  which  he  issued  a  decree,  which  itself
was  not  perhaps  unreasonable,  though  opposed  to  the  most
cherished  customs  of  antiquity,  that  no  statue  of  a  living
man  should  be  erected,  at  least  without  a  special  authoriza-
tion from  the  chief  of  the  state.  He  proceeded,  Hi8  spUc
however,  with  still  baser  spite  to  deprive  the  rfplTtati^Tof
images  of  illustrious  houses  of  the  insignia  by  various  kinds.
which  they  were  distinguished  ;  as,  for  instance,  the  Cincin-
nati of  their  ringlets,  and  the  Torquati  of  their  golden
collars.  He  forbade  the  last  collateral  descendant  of  the
great  Pompeius  to  bear  the  surname  of  Magnus  ;  nor  would
he  allow  the  modest  worth  of  Agrippa  to  be  honoured  by
placing  his  effigies,  as  in  the  Pantheon  and  elsewhere,  by  the

'  See  the  story  of  Domitius  Afcr  in  Dion,  lix.  19. :  cnreiire  fitv  oiidtv  ov6e
cnre'/.oyt/oaTo,  Oav/iafctv  fit  fiy  nal  KaranenXfixOai  tt/v  fieivdrr/ra  tov  Talov
7rf)OG7coiq(?6fievor  .  .  . etrf/vei.

'  Suet.  Calif/.  34. :  "  Ut  restitui  salvia  titulis  non  potucrint."
vol.  v. — 22

338  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  39.

side  of  those  of  Augustus.1  Descended  himself  from  this  ple-
beian statesman,  he  resented  his  origin  as  degrading  to  a
Caesar,  and  let  it  be  understood  that  he  was  actually  the  grand-
son of  Augustus,  through  an  incestuous  commerce  with  the
unhappy  Julia.5  He  heaped  his  insensate  injuries  not  less
basely  on  another  description  of  greatness,  in  commanding
the  works  of  Virgil  and  Livy  to  be  removed  from  the  libra-
ries ;  for  the  one,  he  said,  had  neither  genius  nor  learning,
the  other  was  a  negligent  blunderer.3  He  even  threatened
to  abolish  the  immortal  songs  of  Homer.  Plato  expelled  the
father  of  fiction  from  his  state  /  why,  he  asked,  should  not
I  from  mine  f  With  such  principles  of  conduct,  or  rather
with  such  impulses,  it  might  be  expected  that  the  tyrant
would  deride  with  a  sneer  the  curious  labours  of  the  jurists,
and  accordingly,  we  are  told,  that  he  proposed  not  only  to
abolish  the  institution  of  the  jurisconsults,  but  even  threat-
ened to  annul  every  existing  canon  in  Rome  and  throughout
the  empire,  and  make  his  own  word  and  will  the  sole  measure
of  law  to  mankind.4

Such  were  the  passionate  freaks  by  which  this  infatuated
being  strove  to  realize  to  himself  the  omnipotence  which  he
Caiusreaiivim-  claimed.  In  the  strange  perverted  state  of  re-
notionof Ms a  ligious  conceptions  at  the  period,  I  see  no  reason
own  divinity.  ^0  (J0ul>t  that  Caius  was  really  possessed  with  a
vague  notion  of  his  own  divinity.6 The  gods  of  those  days,

-  Suet.  Calig.  23. ;  Dion,  lx.  5.  a  Suet.  Calig.  1.  c.

3  In  this,  as  in  other  cases,  it  seems  not  impossible  that  the  extravagance
imputed  to  Caius  is  a  blind  or  wilful  perversion  of  his  enemies.  A  deficiency
of  invention  in  Virgil  and  of  accuracy  in  Livy  may  surely  be  admitted  by  em-
peror or  author  without  the  imputation  of  unworthy  jealousy.

4  Suet.  Calig.  34. ;  Philo,  leg,  ad  Cai.  17. :  vdfiov  yap  f/yov/ievoc  eavrbv,
rove  tuv  EKacaraxov  vop.o6eT(Jv  uc  icevac  pr/aeig  iXvev.

6  Hoeck,  who  only  wants  the  faculty  of  imagination  to  be  an  historian  of  a
high  class,  cannot  comprehend  the  fact  of  this  belief.  I  am  sensible  how  im-
perfect is  my  account  of  the  phenomenon,  but  I  foci  no  difficulty  in  crediting  it :

"  Nihil  est  quod  credere  de  se
Non  possit  cum  laudatur  Dis  aequa  potestas."

Juvenal,  iv.  70.

A.  U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  339

if  they  did  not  actually  touch  the  earth,  flitted,  at  least,  very
near  to  its  surface. To  partake  in  some  sense  or  other  of  the
godhead  was  the  dream  of  philosophers  as  well  as  the  boast
of  tyrants. Nor  was  Caius  capable  of  that  lofty  irony  with
which  Augustus  or  Tiberius  could look  with complacent
scorn  on  the  flatteries  of  vulgar  courtiers. It  was  not  diffi-
cult to  persuade  him  of  the  truth  of  that  which  all  around
him  asserted  ;  nor  had  he  sufficient  power  of  reasoning,  when
any  misgiving  of  the  fact  obtruded  itself,  to  analyse  the  idea
of  divinity,  and  compare  his  humanity  with  it. This  is  far
from  the  same  thing  as  a  conviction  of  the  fact  itself. Caius,
we  may  suppose,  was,  from  the  feeble  constitution  of  his  mind,
incapable  of  a  steadfast  conviction,  or  of  grasping  truth  at
all His  intellect  was  passively  recipient  in  such  matters :
he  imbibed  the  notions  suggested  to  him,  and  if  occasionally
he  sported  with  them  in the  exuberance  of  his  levity,  we
are  not  to  suppose  that  he  scornfully  disbelieved  the  charac-
ter with  which  the  world  had  invested  him. The  divinity,
indeed,  which  he  affected  was  something  very  different  from
the  moral  inspiration  claimed  by  his  predecessors. It  was  all
outward  and  sensuous. In  his  passion  for  scenic  represen-
tation, he  delighted  to  array  himself  in  the  garb  of  Hercules
or  Bacchus,  or  even  of  Juno  and  Venus,  to  brandish  the  club
or  the  thyrsus,  or  disguise  himself  in  a  female  headdress,  and
enact  the  part  of  the  deity  in  the  temples  or  in  his  private
apartments.1 Whatever  god  he  affected  to  be,  the  senate
and  people  shouted  vehemently  around  him,  with  the  admira-
tion of  spectators  in  a  theatre  rather  than  the  reverence  of
worshippers.

Our  accounts  of  the  principate  of  Caius  have  not  generally
preserved  the  regular  order  of  events.  The  building  of  the
bridge  is  placed  bv  Dion,  our  onlv  annalist,  in  792,

.  11,,  ,  .  ,  Systematic

and  it  is  probable  that  the  triumphal  show  was persecution  of
exhibited  in  the  spring  of  that  year. This  era  is
important,  as  marking  apparently  the  final  exhaustion  of  the
ordinary  revenues  of  the  state,  which  sank  under  this  wild

1  Dion,  lix.  26.

340  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  39.

paroxysm  of  extravagance,  and  required  a  new  development
of  tyranny  to  recruit  them.  From  this  period  we  may  date
the  confirmed  and  systematic  persecution  of  the  rich  nobility,
which  gave  this  reign,  notwithstanding  all  the  fair  promise
of  its  commencement,  a  bad  pre-eminence  in  crime  in  the  eyes
of  the  senate.  Hitherto,  amidst  all  his  follies  or  atrocities,
Caius  had  continued  still  to  wear  the  mask  with  which  he
had  begun  his  career,  and  professed  to  abominate  the  conduct
of  his  predecessor  and  to  abjure  his  policy.  The  creatures
of  the  Tiberian  government,  those  especially  who  had  made
themselves  detested  by  delation,  were  still  in  disgrace  ;  and
the  vituperation  of  the  late  emperor,  in  which  many  tongues
were  now  heard  to  indulge,  had  been  regarded  as  a  passport
to  favour  with  his  successor.  The  senate  continued  to  in-
dulge in  this  delusion  to  the  last ;  until  Caius,  resolved  to
repair  his  fortunes  by  a  course  of  prosecution  and  confisca-
tion, and  to  revive  in  all  its  horrors  the  application  of  the
law  of  majesty,  ventured  to  introduce  his  new  policy  by  an
open  panegyric  on  the  ruler  he  had  so  lately  denounced.  If
we  are  to  believe  the  historian,  he  did  not  pretend  to  the
grace  of  consistency.  I  am  Emperor ;  he  exclaimed,  to  the
amazement  of  his  auditors,  and  I  may  say  one  thing  to-day
and  the  contrary  to-morrow :  but  it  is  not  for  you,  citizens
and  subjects,  to  assail  the  memory  of  him  who

Cains  eulogizes

the  government was  once  your  chief. He  then proceeded  to

of  Tiberius.  * .  J  »,-..,,

enumerate  the  persons  who  had  perished  under
Tiberius,  and  showed  or  pretended  to  show  that,  in  almost
every  case,  they  had  been  the  victims  of  the  senate  rather
than  of  the  emperor ;  some  had  accused  them,  others
had  borne  false  witness  against  them,  all  had  combined  in
voting  for  their  destruction.  Moreover,  he  continued,  with
pitiless  logic,  if  Tiberius  was  in  fault,  you  shoidd  not  have
decreed  him  honours  in  his  lifetime,  or  having  done  so,  you
should  not  after  his  death  have  annxdled  them.  You  it  was,
senators,  he  exclaimed,  who  swelled  the  pride  of  Sejanus
by  your  flatteries,  and  then  destroyed  the  monster  you  had
yourselves  created. You  wronged  your  prince  /  you  mur-

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  341

dered  his  minister:  I  can  look  for  no  good  at  your  hands.
And  then  he  went  on  to  introduce  the  prosopopoeia  of
Tiberius  himself,  addressing  him,  approving  of  all  he  had
said,  and  recommending  him  to  love  none  of  them,  nor
to  spare  any  :  for  they  all  hate  you,  they  all  wish  for  your
death,  and  they  icill  kill  you  if  they  can.  Then  look  not
to  pleasing  them,  nor  care  for  what  they  say  of  you ;
but  care  only  for  your  own  will  and  pleasure,  and  provide,
as  is  meet  and  right,  for  your  own  august  safety.  At  the
end  of  this  wild  harangue  Caius  ordained  that  the  laws  of
majesty  should  be  again  enforced,  and  that  they  should  be
graven  afresh  on  brazen  tablets.  The  senate  and  people
trembled,  we  are  told,  alike  at  the  visions  of  terror  which
were  opened  to  them.  The  fathers  were  at  first  struck  dumb
and  could  make  no  reply ;  the  next  day  they  met  together
again  to  pay  servile  court  to  the  tyrant.  They  lauded  his
speech  as  a  monument  of  truth  and  regard  to  his  uncle's
memory,  thanked  him  for  his  mercy  in  pardoning  them  and
suffering  them  still  to  live,  and  decreed  that  his  august  words
should  be  recited  annually  in  their  hearing,  and  sacrifices
performed  to  the  imperial  clemency.  To  these  compliments
were  added  the  more  ordinary  honours  of  a  golden  statue,  a
choral  festival,  and  an  ovation.1

It  is  hardly  possible  to  resist  the  impression  that  these
proceedings  have  been  represented  to  us  in  a  grotesque  cari-
cature :  nor  is  that  impression  diminished  Avhen

1  Bantering

we  come  to  examine  the  details  of  the  persecu- humour  pecu-

x  .  liar  to  Cams.

tion  which  followed.  Yet  there  is  a  certain  con-
sistency in  the  ghastly  banter  which  equally  in  the  pages  of
Dion  and  Seutonius,  of  Joscphus  and  Philo,  forms  the  pe-
culiar feature  in  the  character  of  this  tyrant  among  his  kin-
dred. The  Romans  were  astounded  at  the  deposition  of  their
consuls  from  office  for  neglecting,  so  little  even  yet  had  the
etiquette  of  royalty  been  established  among  them,  to  ordain
a  festival  on  the  anniversary  of  the  emperor's  birthday.
They  were  still  more  scandalized  at  three  days  being  suffered

1  Dion,  lix.  10.

342  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  39.

to  pass  without  the  appointment  of  their  successors,  and  the
republic  being  left  for  that  interval  without  its  highest  magis-
trates.1 It  seems,  however,  that  Caius  assigned  another  mo-
tive for  the  disgrace  of  these  consuls.  They  had  kept  holiday
for  the  victory  of  Augustus  over  Antonius.  Now  Augustus
was  the  grandfather  of  the  emperor's  mother  Agrippina ;  but
on  the  other  hand,  Antonius  bore  the  same  relation  to  his
father  Germanicus  ;  and  we  are  told  that  he  had  whimsically
declared  beforehand,  that,  whether  they  mourned  or  feasted
on  the  occasion,  he  would  convict  them  equally  of  treason.3
Even  when  the  cupidity  of  the  ever-needy  despot  demanded
the  blood  of  the  wealthiest  senators,  he  could  still  make
sport  of  his  own  tyranny.  Thus  we  read  that  when,  on  the
condemnation  and  death  of  Junius  Priscus,  his  wealth  was
found  to  fall  much  below  the  amount  anticipated,  the  em-
peror affected  to  regret  that  his  victim  had  deceived  him,
and  thrown  away  his  own  life  through  want  of  candour.
The  condemnation  at  this  time  of  L.  Annaeus  Seneca,  distin-
guished at  a  later  period  as  one  of  the  chief  of  Roman  phi-
losophers, seems  to  show  that  he  had  become  already  noted
for  the  riches  which  have  thrown  some  slur  on  his  reputation
as  a  teacher  of  wisdom.  He  was  saved  by  the  assurance
conveyed  by  a  friend  that  he  was  already  far  advanced  in  a
decline,  and  that  his  possessions  might  soon  be  grasped  with-

1  Suet.  Calig.  26.:  "Consulibus  oblitis  de  natali  suo  edicere  abrogavit
magistratum,  fuitque  triduo  sine  summa  potestate  respublica."

2  Dion  (lix.  20.)  places  this  event  under  the  year  792.  Caius  commenced
It  as  consul  with  L.  Apronius.  He  laid  down  the  office  himself  after  thirty
days,  and  was  succeeded  by  Sanquinius.  Apronius  held  the  office  six  months.
It  does  not  appear  who  were  the  unfortunate  consuls  who  suffered  from  this
frolic.  One  of  them  put  himself  to  death  from  mortification ;  but,  as  Caius's
birthday  was  August  31.,  and  the  battle  of  Actium  Sept.  2.,  we  must  conclude
that  the  deposition  took  place  in  September.  Dion  goes  on  to  say  that  Caius
hereupon  resumed  the  consulship,  abolished  the  Comitia,  and  appointed  Domi-
tius  Afer  his  colleague.  But  as  he  went  into  Gaul,  as  we  shall  see,  this  same
year  with  the  avowed  object  of  engaging  in  a  campaign,  for  which  the  season
must  have  been  very  far  advanced  in  October,  the  story  is  liable  to  some  sus-
picion.

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  343

out  even  the  trouble  of  a  prosecution.  Caius  had  devised
various  means  for  drawing  into  his  coffers  the  estates  of  the
rich  nobles  on  their  deaths.  In  this  case  the  accused  was
allowed,  perhaps,  to  compound  for  life  by  bequeathing  his
property  to  the  emperor,  and  sacrificing  on  the  altar  of  his
Clemency.  It  is  to  this  insatiable  cupidity  that  Massaweotthe
we  may,  perhaps,  ascribe  an  act  of  cruelty,  which,  cxiles-
as  it  is  represented  to  us,  seems  such  a  mere  ferocious  caprice
that  we  should  hesitate  to  believe  it  of  any  but  a  confirmed
madman.  I  can  only  give  the  story  in  the  words  of  Philo,
and  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  form  his  own  conclusions  upon
it.  Cains,  they  say,  lying  one  night  sleepless,  began  to  think
of  the  noble  exiles  in  the  islands,  and  how,  though  nominally
suffering  pains  and  penalties,  they  were  actually  enjoying  a
life  of  ease,  quiet,  and  luxury.  "  What  sort  of  exile,''''  he
said  to  himself,  "  is  this  foreign  sojourn  of  theirs,  revelling
as  they  do  in  abundance  of  all  good  things,  and  living  in  a
pleasant  retirement  the  lives  of  true  philosophers  f  "  And
thereupon  he  issued  orders  to  put  the  most  illustrious  of  them
to  death,  Flaccus,  the  late  prefect  of  Alexandria,  being  first
on  the  list.  It  would  seem  at  least  from  this  anecdote,  as
has  been  elsewhere  intimated,  that  the  ordinary  condition  of
the  exiles  was  one  of  considerable  indulgence,  and  that  they
were  allowed  the  enjoyment  of  their  fortunes.  That  the  em-
peror should  have  caused  some  of  the  wealthiest  to  be  exe-
cuted upon  very  trifling  pretexts  in  order  to  seize  on  their
possessions  seems  only  too  probable.1

But  the  spendthrift put  no  curb  on  his  lavish prodi-
gality, and  his  necessities  became  more  and  more „„

0 J  '  ...  The  populace

urgent  continually. Had  he  limited  his  demands alienated  by

«  *  11  „  1  .  taxation.

for  plunder  to  the  class  of  the  wealthy  aristoc-

1  Thilo,  in  Flacc.  sub  fin.  Comp.  Dion,  lix.  18.  and  Suet.  Calig.  28.,  who
gives  a  still  finer  point  to  the  story.  "  Revocatum  quendam  a  veterc  exilio
sciscitiitus,  qnidnam  ibi  facete  consueeset,  respondente  eo  per  adulationem,
Deos  semper  oravi  ut,  quod  evenit,  perirct  Tiberius  et  tu  imperares ;  opinans
Fibi  quoque  exules  6uoa  mortem  imprecari,  misit  eircum  insulas  qui  universos
eontrucidarent."

344  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  39.

racy,  he  might  have  still  retained  the  favour  of  the  pop-
ulace, on  whose  amusements  so  much  of  his  ill-gotten
riches  was  expended  ;  but  when,  in  order  to  provide  a  more
certain  and  constant  flow  of  gold  into  his  coffers,  he  ven-
tured to  smite  the  mass  of  the  citizens  with  new  or  in-
creased taxation,  he  converted  the  whole  Roman  people  into
an  enemy,  and  stood  thenceforth  naked  in  the  eyes  of  his-
tory, without  friend  or  apologist.  The  conquering  nation,
whatever  else  it  had  lost,  still  retained  an  excessive  jealousy
of  taxation,  which  it  blindly  confounded  with  tribute.  It
was  still  the  privilege  of  the  Roman,  whatever  other  distinc-
tions he  had  surrendered,  to  be  exempt  from  the  most  direct
imposts.  It  was  still  the  fiction  of  the  commonwealth  that
the  Roman  paid  in  personal  service  the  contribution  for  the
support  of  his  empire,  which  was  commuted  to  the  subject  for
money.  But  in  fact,  at  this  time,  the  citizen  was  using  every
endeavour  to  escape  both  from  one  burden  and  the  other,
and  the  light  taxation  which  Augustus  had  already  imposed
upon  him  barely  compensated  for  the  general  relaxation  of
his  civil  and  military  obligations.  It  might  have  been  the
wish  of  a  wise  and  benevolent  ruler  to  equalize  the  burdens
of  the  empire  by  bringing  Italy  under  the  same  fiscal  yoke
as  the  provinces.  But  neither  Augustus  nor  Tiberius  had
ventured  to  levy  custom  on  the  commerce  or  productions  of
that  favoured  spot ;  and  the  decree  by  which  Caius  now  im-
posed a  rate  on  imports  at  the  harbours  on  the  coast,  and  at
the  gates  of  the  cities  in  the  interior,  and  even  of  Rome  it-
self, must  be  taken  as  a  token  of  caprice  or  tyranny  rather
than  of  an  equitable  intelligence.  Yet  it  might  not  be  un-
reasonable to  suppose  that  the  fees  he  exacted  from  suitors
before  the  tribunals  were  intended  to  improve  the  position
of  the  judges,  and  render  the  course  of  justice  more  pure  ;
and  even  the  tax  he  is  said  to  have  levied  upon  prostitution
may  have  been  meant  as  a  measure  of  policy  and  outward
decorum.  It  is  easy  to  understand  the  outcry  it  would  raise-
and  the  gross  charges  it  might  suggest  against  the  emperor

A.  U.  792.1  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  345

himself.1 It  "was  believed  that,  among  less  innocent  contriv-
ances for  raising  his  revenues,  he  had  actually  succeeded  in
making  gold,  of  excellent  quality,  but  so  little  in  quantity  as
not  to  defray  the  expense  of  the  manufacture.2 It  is  not
improbable  that  he  attained  the  same  end  by  debasing  the
currency.1 The delight  with  which  he contemplated  the
gold  he  thus  amassed  was  represented  as  something  mon-
strous and  insane  :  at  times  it  was  affirmed  he  would  cause
it  to  be  spread  in  heaps  upon  the  floor,  and  wade  in  it  with
bare  feet,  or  fling  himself  down  and  roll  frantically  upon  it.4
Whatever  favour  he  may  have  once  enjoyed  with  the  popu-
lace from  the  splendour  of  the  shows  with  which  he  indulged
them, — a  favour  which  was already,  perhaps,  beginning  to
wane  from  satiety,  and  even  from  disgust, — it  was  speedily
swallowed up in  feelings  of  indignation and resentment.
The  universal  selfishness  which  he  had  so  long  pampered
turned  in  a  mass  against  him. The  citizens  refused  to  obey
in  the  theatre  his  signal  to  applaud  or  to  condemn :  they  be-
held with  indifference  the  feats  of  the  imperial  athlete  him-
self; the  shows  and  games,  which  they  had  regarded  almost
as  their  daily  food,  ceased  at  last  to  attract  them ; B  and  it
was  probably  in  vexation  at  this  sullen  yet  passive  disobe-
dience, which  baffled  both  his  menaces  and  caresses,  that  he
uttered  his  well-known  exclamation,  accompanied  no  doubt
with  the  significant  gesture  by  which  he  intimated  his  cruel
will  to  his  headsmen,  Would  that  the  people  of  Rome  had
but  one  neck  ! 8

1  Suet.  Calig.  40.  2  Plin.  Hist  Nat.  xxxiii.  22.

'  Thus  we  find  that,  "  Emptum  plus  minus  asse  Ca'iano,"  was  an  expression
for  anything  particularly  worthless.  Stat.  Sylv.  iv.  9.  22.  The  copper  coinage
of  Caius  was  called  in  by  his  successor. Dion,  lx.  22.  *  Suet.  Calig.  42.

6  We  shall  the  less  wonder  at  the  self-restraint  on  their  part  if  we  accept  liter-
ally the  story  of  Suetonius,  that  he  amused  himself  sometimes  by  causing  the
awning  in  the  circus  to  be  withdrawn,  and  forbidding  the  scorched  spectators
from  retiring.  It  must  be  remembered,  however,  that  as  the  circus  was  never
more  than  partially  veiled,  a  large  portion  of  the  multitude  must  have  always
been  exposed  to  the  heat  of  the  sun. Suet.  Calig.  26.

8  Suet.  Calig.  80.  32.  Comp.  Senec.  Apocolocynt.  0.  "  Gestu  illo  solutai
manus  ....  quo  decollare  homines  solcbat."

346  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  39.

"We  may  place  the  mummery  of  the  Baian  triumph  in  the
spring  or  early  summer  of  792,  the  season  when  the  Cam-
Caius  under- panian  coast  was  most  thronged  with  lounging
dltionTeamst anc*  gazmS  multitudes,  and  which  on  that  ac-
tne  Germans, count  would  most  prohably  be  chosen  for  the
emperor's  grand  act  of  self-glorification. This,  we  are  told,
was  promptly  followed  by  the  fiercest  access  of  his  tyranny
and  the  increasing  exactions  which  his  empty  treasury  re-
quired. But  nearly  at  the  same  moment  Caius, — I  follow
now  implicitly  the accounts  we have  received, — pretended
to  have  a  nobler  object  in  view. On  making  a  progress  to
the  Clitumnus,  two  or  three  days'  journey  from  Rome,  in  the
autumn  of  the  same  year,  he  remarked  how  slender  was  the
number  of  his  escort  of  Batavian  horsemen,  and  the  thought
came  suddenly  into  his  head  that  the  battalion  might  be  re-
cruited by  a  successful  incursion  into  the  German  territories.
He  announced  that  the  barbarians  were  encroaching  on  the
Roman  frontiers,  and  required  his  powerful  arm  to  check
them  ;  but  his  mind  was  filled  at  once  with  visions  of  the
sums  he  might  extort  from  the  provincials  both  of  Gaul  and
Spain,  to  replenish  his  coffers,  and  slake  his  craving  thirst
for  gold. From  the  Clitumnus,  accordingly,  he  set  out,  ap-
parently without  even  returning  to  Rome ;  the  legions  and
auxiliaries  he  required  for  his  expedition  were  directed  with
all  speed  to  follow. For  his  own  part  his  march  was  irregu-
lar and  intermittent ;  sometimes  so  rapid  that  his  guards
could  hardly  keep  up  with  him,  even  though  they  laid  their
colours  on  the  backs  of  their  animals ;  sometimes,  again,  so
tardy  and  deliberate  that  he  was  borne  himself  on  men's
shoulders,  and  the  cities  through  which  he  was  to  pass  were
required  to  sweep  the  roads  and  lay  the  dust  before  him.1
He  was  attended  throughout  by  a  train  of  players  and  glad-
iators, dancers  and  women,  the  vile  retinue  of  a  Parthian

1  Suetonius  {Calig.  43.)  speaks  of  this  expedition  as  a  sudden  thought,
which  is  quite  consistent  with  the  character  before  us.  Dion  (lix.  21.)  differs
upon  this  and  other  minor  points ;  but  in  general  the  two  accounts  agree  re-
markably.

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  347

sovereign.  On  reaching  the  camp  on  the  Rhine,  he  displayed
his  sense  of  discipline  hy  animadverting  severely  on  the  offi-
cers -whose  contingents  were  slow  in  arriving  at  head  quar-
ters :  some  whose  term  of  service  was  on  the  point  of  expir-
ing, he  degraded,  on  the  pretext  of  their  age  and  infirmities,
and  reduced  the  pay  or  pensions  of  the  veterans  to  one  half
of  the  sum  guaranteed  them.1  But  after  all  there  was  no
enemy  to  chastise  ;  and  the  young  warrior  devised  the  expe-
dient of  sending  a  few  captives  across  the  river,  and  placing
them  in  concealment,  while  the  alarm  was  sounded  in  the
prietorium  that  the  foe  was  at  hand.  Thereupon,  rising  has-
tily from  table  with  his  guests,  he  galloped,  attended  by  a
few  body-guards  only,  into  the  wood,  dispersed  the  pretended
adversaries,  plucked  some  branches  from  the  trees,  and  sus-
pended on  them  the  trophies  of  his  victory :  then  returning,
he  upbraided  the  legions  which  had  lagged  behind,  and  re-
warded his  companions  with  a  new  kind  of  military  chaplet,
in  which  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  were  represented,  and  to
which  he  gave  the  name  of  the  crown  exploratory.  But
enough  of  this  mummery.  The  pretended  victory,  we  are
told,  was  duly  notified  in  a  laurelled  letter  to  the  senate ;
and  the  fathers  were  petulantly  upbraided  for  indulging  in
their  banquets,  their  baths  and  theatres,  while  their  emperor
was  exposing  his  august  person  to  the  darts  of  the  barba-
rians. At  the  same  time  the  submission  of  a  fugitive  prince
from  Britain  was  accepted  and  blazoned  forth  as  the  capitu-
lation of  the  whole  island.

To  me  indeed  it  seems  impossible  to  mistake  the  spirit
of  caricature  in  which  these  accounts  are  written ;  and
even  had  we  no  clue  to  a  better  understanding

_ ,  ,  Explanation  of

01  the  circumstances,  I  should  be  little  disposed the  foregoing
to  confide  in  them. But  it  will  be  remembered
how,  towards  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  the  com-
mand of  the  legions  on  the  Rhine  Avas  left  by  him  reluctantly
in  the  hands  of  a  chief  whom  he  had  not  the  courage  to  dis-

*&*

Suet.  Califf.  44.

348  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  TA.D.  39.

possess.  Lentulus  Gaetulicus  had  defied  the  emperor,  and
the  emperor  had  succumbed  to  his  menaces.  Tiberius  was
old  and  timid,  and  satisfied  perhaps  that  the  obedience  of  the
legions  would  at  least  last  his  own  time  :  but  Caius  partook
neither  of  his  fears  nor  his  confidence.  The  relaxation  of
discipline  by  this  legate  had  given  occasion  to  attacks  on  the
part  of  the  Germans.  But  it  was  much  more  dangerous  to
the  imperator,  as  a  token  of  independence  on  the  part  of  his
own  officer;  and  it  was  with  the  bold  determination,  as  I
conceive,  to  put  down  this  rising  spirit,  that  Caius,  under
pretence  of  defending  the  frontiers,  left  Rome  for  Gaul,  to
defend  himself  and  his  imperial  authority.  In  daring  Caius
was  not  deficient ;  perhaps  he  had  not  sense  enough  fairly  to
estimate  the  dangers  which  beset  him.  But  at  such  a  crisis
daring  was  the  best  wisdom,  and  the  apparition  of  the  re-
doubted emperor  in  the  midst  of  a  disaffected  camp,  together
with  some  examples  of  sternness,  which  showed  that  he  was
not  to  be  trifled  with,  may  have  actually  saved  the  state
from  a  bloody  and  bootless  revolution.

The  senators,  in  the  tyrant's  absence,  to  return  to  the
narrative  before  us,  were  indulging  in  a  happy  respite  from
Caius  at  their  troubles,  and  had  willingly  offered  vows  in

Lugdunum.  the  temples  for  every  success  he  could  desire,  and
recommended  the  provinces  to  follow  their  example.1  As
the  season  drew  to  a  close  Caius  repaired  to  Lugdunum,  the
spot  from  which  Augustus  and  Germanicus  had  directed  the
administration  of  the  country,  and  conducted  its  census.
From  hence  he  issued  requisitions  to  the  cities  for  extraordi-
nary contributions,  and  devised  methods  of  extorting  money
from  the  nobles.  Offences  against  the  state  were  investi-
gated and  multiplied,  and  punishment  only  redeemed  by  the
payment  of  heavy  fines. So  well  was  he  satisfied,  it  would

1  Suet.  Califf.  45. Philo,  alluding  to  these  religious  ceremonies,  describes

them  not  as  thanksgivings  for  victories  gained,  but  as  vows  for  future  successes.

Comp.  leg.  ad  Cai.  in  a  passage  already  referred  to  (c.  45.) :  /cut  yap  Idvcafcev

.  .  say  the  Jewish  envoys  .  .  .  Ttpurov  filv .  .  . rpirov  6e} Kara  r ij v

i  Kir  id  a  rfjc  TepfiaviKf/c  v'iktjc.

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  349

seem,  by  these  experiments  of  the  actual  riches  of  his  Gaul-
ish subjects,  that  he  conceived  an  extraordinary  plan  for  di-
verting a  large  portion  of  them,  with  little  risk  or  trouble,
into  his  coffers.  Orders  were  despatched  to  Rome  to  trans-
mit to  Lugdunum  the  costly  furniture  and  decorations  of
some  of  the  imperial  residences.  These  it  was  determined
to  sell  by  auction,  and  it  was  expected  that  the  vanity  of  the
admiring  natives  would  induce  them  to  pay  profusely  for  ob-
jects of  such  peculiar  interest.  The  precious  goods  arrived,
transported  by  innumerable  carriages  and  beasts  of  burden,
the  requisition  for  which  sufficed  for  a  time  to  cripple  the
industry  of  Italy ;  and  Caius  himself,  as  auctioneer,  explained
and  eulogized  the  several  articles,  and  urged  his  courtiers  to
bid  warmly  against  each  other.  This,  he  said,  is  a  vase  or
statue  tohich  Antonius  sent  from  Eqypt  ;  that  is

_  . _ .J  V7 '  .  .  , Auction  of  the

a  gem  or  picture  xchich  Augustus  brought  tenth  imperial
him  from  the  East ;  this  was  a  trophy  of  my
father's  ;  this  was  a  trinket  of  my  mother's.1  Such  a  recom-
mendation was  of  course  felt  as  a  command,  and  the  sale
proceeded  gloriously.  The  sums,  however,  thus  scraped  to-
gether were  flung  the  next  moment  away.  A  large  portion
was  spent  in  a  donative  to  the  Gallic  legions ;  not  less  per-
haps was  squandered  on  the  games  which  were  now  solem-
nized in  the  Gallic  capital.  The  provincial  nobles  had  already
instituted  games  in  honour  of  Augustus,  which  were  enacted
before  his  altar :  the  lively  genius  of  the  nation  had  begun
to  emulate  the  literary  efforts  of  Greece  and  Rome,  and  con-
tests in  eloquence  and  versification  held  a  prominent  place  in
these  exhibitions.  Whatever  might  be  the  merit  of  these
trials  of  wit  and  fancy,  Caius,  with  the  low  humour  natural
to  him,  proceeded  to  degrade  them  by  the  unseemly  penalties
he  inflicted  on  the  unsuccessful  competitors,  some  of  whom
were  required  to  obliterate  their  compositions  with  their
tongues,  or  be  cast  headlong  into  the  furious  waters  of  the
Rhone.1

1  Dion,  lix.  21.;  Suet.  Calig.  39.

8  Suet. Calig.  20. Comp.  the  allusion  of  Juvenal :  "  Lugdunenseni  rhetor
dicturus  ad  aram  "  (i.  44.).

350  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  39.

Whatever  were  the  freaks  of  cruelty  or  folly  with  which
the  tyrant  actually  disgraced  his  sojourn  among  the  Gauls,
Conspiracy  Jei  ^  we  yiew  the  enterprise  in  the  light  in  which
against  Caius.  j  have  ventured  to  place  it,  as  a  hold  stroke  of
defensive  policy,  we  shall  he  disposed  to  look  with  some  in-
dulgence on  the  bloody  executions  with  which  it  is  said  to
Execution  of  have  been  attended.  Whether  it  be  the  case  that
Lepidus"andd  Gsetulicus  resented  his  chief's  intrusion  by  con-
Lmaandf  spiring  against  his  life  and  power,  or  whether  the
Agrippina,  sentence  of  death  which  now  descended  on  him
was  only  a  tyrant's  measure  of  precaution,  there  can  be  lit-
tle doubt  that  the  position  he  occupied  was  incompatible
with  the  dignity  or  safety  of  the  imperial  throne.  There
seems,  however,  reason  to  surmise  that  he  laid  himself  open
to  the  blow  by  an  act  of  direct  provocation.  Caius  was  ac-
companied into  Gaul  by  his  surviving  sisters,  and  by  some
of  the  habitual  companions  of  his  pleasures  among  the  nobil-
ity of  Rome.  Of  these  none  was  so  conspicuous  as  M.  iEmil-
ius  Lepidus  the  youthful  minion  before  mentioned,  whom  he
had  united  to  Drusilla,  and  whom,  as  was  generally  believed,
he  had  intended  to  associate  with  her  in  the  succession.  The
weakness  of  the  emperor's  health,  and  his  late  severe  illness,
might  have  seemed  for  a  moment  to  bring  this  splendid  in-
heritance almost  within  reach  of  the  fortunate  aspirant.  The
sceptre  of  the  world,  for  which  the  iEmilii  had  so  often  con-
tended, seemed  about  to  descend  into  his  grasp.  But  the
death  of  his  patron's  favourite  sister  suddenly  obscured  the
prospect.  Still  doomed  to  a  private  station,  he  continued
perhaps  to  brood  over  his  disappointment ;  and  it  is  not  im-
probable that  the  charge  now  advanced  against  Lepidus,  of
intriguing  with  Julia  or  Agrippina,  or  even  with  both  at
once,  and  of  combining  with  them  to  overthrow  the  ruler  of
the  state,  was  in  fact  substantially  true.  The  authority  and
abilities  of  Gaetulicus,  if  gained  to  their  side,  would  lend
strength  to  the  blow ;  and  discontented  as  he  probably  was,
and  perhaps  alarmed  for  his  own  safety,  nothing  is  more
likely  than  that  Goetulicus  was  drawn,  as  some  accounts  rep-

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  35  j

resented,  into  their  conspiracy.  Such  at  least  was  the  state-
ment which  Caius  caused  to  be  circulated.  The  secret  of  the
plot  was  betrayed,  and  its  leaders  seized  and  cut  off  in  Gaul,
at  the  end  of  the  year  792.  The  guilty  sisters  were  con-
demned to  banishment,  and  Agrippina  was  compelled  to
carry  the  urn  containing  her  paramour's  ashes  on  foot  to
Rome.  In  the  account  of  this  affair  which  Caius  transmitted
to  the  senate  for  publication,  he  disclosed  without  reserve
every  particular  of  their  wanton  and  shameless  lives;  though
the  Romans  were  fully  persuaded  that,  however  vicious  they
had  proved  themselves,  the  brother  had  been  their  seducer,
and  the  partner  of  their  worst  iniquities.  At  the  same;vhe
sent  three  swords,  which  he  declared  had  been  intended  for
his  assassination,  with  directions  that  they  should  be  sus-
pended as  votive  offerings  in  the  temple  of  Mars  the  Avenger.
As  his  sisters,  at  his  desire,  had  received  many  distinctions
from  the  senate ;  he  enjoined  that  in  the  future  no  such  ex-
traordinary marks  of  favour  should  be  conferred  on  any  of
his  own  relations.1

On  receiving  their  master's  account  of  the  conspiracy  he
had  detected,  and  the  danger  from  which  he  had  relieved  the
state  by  its  discovery,  the  senators  had  hastily  An  ovation
sent  a  deputation  to  convey  their  humble  congrat-  suppression!1)?
ulations,  and  offer  him  the  honours  of  an  ovation :  thia  C0USPiracy-
but  he  complained  of  the  number  of  the  envoys  as  beneath
the  importance  of  the  occasion,  and  of  the  ovation  as  un-
worthy of  so  great  an  achievement ;  he  treated  his  visitors
as  spies,  and  particularly  resented  the  mission  of  Claudius,
who  accompanied  them,  as  sent  to  direct  and  admonish  him
with  the  authority  of  an  uncle.  He  was  on  the  Rhine  at  the
time  of  their  arrival ;  and  it  was  said  that,  in  his  ill-humour,
he  even  suffered  Claudius  to  be  thrown  into  the  stream.
Great  was  the  terror  Avhich  this  reception  created  at  Rome,
where  dire  apprehensions  already  reigned  of  the  proscrip-
tions which  might  be  expected  to  follow  on  the  recent  dis-

1  Suet.  C'aliff.  24. ;  Claud.  9. Dion,  lix.  22.

352  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  39.

closures. The  furious  caprices  of  the  emperor  were  mani-
fested again  in  his  sudden  repudiation  of  Lollia,  whom  he
accused  of  sterility,  and  the  advancement  of  Mi-

Caius  marries  . _  . , .  .  .  .

Miionia  Cseso-  loma  Ca?sonia,  with  whom  he  was  known  to  have
been  for  some  time  connected,  to  the  perilous
honour  of  his  hand.  This  woman,  whose  name  was  long
held  in  detestation,  is  represented  to  us  as  neither  young  nor
handsome  ;  hut  it  was  believed  that  she  had  attracted  and
retained  her  lover's  interest  by  the  use  of  philtres,  which  con-
tributed to  unsettle  his  mind,  and  render  him  more  intracta-
ble than  ever.  Caesonia  had  borne  three  children  to  a  former
husband,  and  was  far  advanced  in  pregnancy  at  the  time  of
this  marriage.  When,  however,  a  daughter  was  born  to  him
within  a  month  of  the  nuptial  solemnity,  Caius  did  not  scru-
ple to  acknowledge  the  child  as  actually  his  own,  to  carry  it
to  the  temples  of  the  gods,  to  lay  it  in  the  lap  of  Minerva,
and  to  give  it  the  Csesarean  appellation  of  Julia  Drusilla.1

From  Gaul  Caius  had  announced  to  the  senate  that  he

Cains  assumes was  about  to  assume  the  consulship  for  the  third

smpird  con8ul" time  at  the  commencement  of  793  at  Lugdunum,

.  „  .„ and  had  at  the  same  time  indicated  whom  he  re-

A.  D.  40.

a.  xr.  793.  quired  to  accejit  it  as  his  colleague.  But  this
nominee  happening  to  die  a  few  days  before  the  first  day  of
January,  the  fathers  were  thrown  into  perplexity,  the  tri-
bunes and  praetors  not  venturing  to  convene  the  senate  on
their  own  responsibility  while  there  was  still  a  consul  absent
from  the  city.  They  rushed  tumultuously  to  the  Capitol,
and  performed  the  customary  sacrifices,  not  omitting  to  pros-
trate themselves  before  the  emperor's  vacant  chair,  and  lay
upon  it  the  new  year's  presents,  which,  from  the  time  of  Au-

1  Dion,  lix.  23,  28. ;  Juv.  vi.  616. ;  Suet.  Calig.  25. ;  Joseph.  Antiq.  xix.  1.
Suetonius  assures  us  that  the  emperor  was  the  more  convinced  that  the  child
was  his  own,  by  the  ferocity  it  showed  from  his  birth,  attacking  with  its  nails
the  eyes  and  countenances  of  its  playfellows.  It  should  be  observed  that  Dion
speaks  of  its  being  carried  to  the  Capitol ;  but  it  is  clear  that  the  marriage  and
birth  took  place  in  Gaul.  The  confusion  in  Dion's  chronology  of  this  reign  is
very  great.

A.U.  792.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  353

gustus,  the  Caesars  had  been  wont  to  accept  on  these  solemn
occasions.  This  done,  they  repaired  of  their  own  accord  to
the  Senate-house,  and,  neglecting  all  state  affairs,  consumed
the  day  in  complimentary  harangues  and  fulsome  adulation
of  the  tyrant.  On  the  third  day  they  recovered  somewhat
of  their  presence  of  mind.  The  praetors  constituted  them-
selves a  commission  for  conducting  the  business  of  the  sen-
ate, and  convened  it  in  the  usual  form.  Nevertheless,  such
was  the  abject  terror  in  which  it  lay,  that  it  dared  not  pro-
ceed to  any  matters  of  administration  till  it  was  announced
that  Caius  had  abdicated  his  functions  on  the  andresifniSon
twelfth  day,  and  that  the  consuls  designate  were  the  twelfth  day.
at  liberty  to  ascend  their  chairs.  The  first  act  of  the  senate
under  their  presidency  was  to  decree  that  the  birthdays  of
Caius  and  Drusilla  should  be  solemnized  with  the  same  hon-
ours as  that  of  Augustus ;  but  their  countrymen  excused  this
new  baseness,  by  asserting  that  the  decree  was  made  in  com-
pliance with  an  expressed  command.1  The  fears  of  the  be-
wildered nobles  were  more  particularly  excited  at  this  mo-
ment by  the  report  that  their  persecutor  was  attended  in  Gaul
by  a  routine  of  foreign  princes,  such  as  Agrippa  and  Anti-
ochus  of  Commagene,  who,  as  they  apprehended,  were  in-
structing him  in  the  arts  of  Eastern  sovereignty ;  and  the
fact  of  his  having  summoned  Ptolemceus,  son  of  Juba,  king
of  Mauretania,  to  his  presence,  and  put  him  to  death  for  the
sake  of  his  riches,  caused  gloomy  forebodings  among  such  of
the  patricians  at  home  as  still  retained  their  much  coveted
possessions.3

The  conspiracy  had  been  detected,  the  disloyal  punished ;
the  legions,  warned  by  the  fate  of  their  contumacious  chief,
were  transferred  to  Servius  Galba,  by  whom  discipline  was
enforced  with  pristine  severity.  Furloughs  were  withheld,
the  labours  of  the  camp  were  redoubled,  the  soldiers  were

1  Dion,  lix.  24.

3  Dion,  1.  c. :  Suet.  Caluj.  26. Ptolemacus  was  the  son  of  Juba  by  Cleopa-
tra Selene,  daughter  of  M.  Antonius. Ue  was,  therefore,  the  grandson,  Caius
the  great  grandson,  of  the  triumvir.
vol.  v.— 23

354  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  40.

taught  both  to  work  and  to  fight,  and  to  feel  the  difference
between  a  dissolute  intriguer  in  the  prsetorium  and  a  stern
warrior  of  the  ancient  stamp.  When  they  ventured,  in  the
relaxation  of  a  camp  spectacle,  to  applaud  him,  he  drily  re-
buked their  unwarrantable  freedom  with  the  order  to  keep
m „ , their  hands  under  their  cloaks.1 The  winter  of

The  "British

expedition" of  793  was  occupied  in  preparations  for  a  descent
upon  Britain,  and  the  military  season  was  opened
by  the  emperor's  advance  from  Lugdunum,  or  from  the
Rhine,  to  the  shores  of  the  channel.  The  troops  which  he
had  assembled  in  Gaul  are  said  to  have  been  exceedingly
numerous ;  the  enterprise  he  had  in  view  was  nothing  less
than  the  complete  reduction  of  the  island,  the  submission  of
which  had  been  promised  him  by  a  recent  fugitive.  At  Ges-
soriacum  the  legions  were  mustered  in  great  force.  While
awaiting  the  moment  of  embarkation,  they  were  directed  one
day  to  take  up  a  military  position  on  the  beach ;  horse  and
foot  were  drawn  up  in  order  of  battle  fronting  the  waves  of
the  ocean,  and  the  whole  armament  of  catapults  and  other
engines  of  war  was  arrayed  on  their  flanks,  or  in  the  rear,  as
if  for  immediate  engagement.  Caius  himself  reviewed  his
army  from  a  trireme  at  sea  ;  then  landed  and  placed  himself
on  a  lofty  tribunal,  as  about  to  give  the  signal  for  battle.
Suddenly,  amidst  the  clang  of  trumpets  and  measured  voices
of  the  centurions,  the  order  issued  to  pile  arms  and  pick  up
shells,  with  which  every  man  hastened  to  fill  his  helmet  and
laid  them  at  the  emperor's  feet.  Collected  into  a  vast  heap
together,  these  spoils  of  the  ocean,  as  Caius  described  them,
were  sent  to  Rome,  and  the  senate  was  directed  to  deposit
them  with  due  solemnity  among  the  treasures  of  the  palace
and  Capitol.  In  token  of  this  pretended  victory,  the  empe-
ror, we  are  told,  caused  a  lighthouse  to  be  erected  to  guide
vessels  by  night  into  the  harbour ;  and  the  campaign  being
thus  auspiciously  terminated,  he  presented  the  men  with  a

1  Suet,  in  Gall).  6. ;  "A  Caio  Caesare  Gaetulico  substitutus,  postridie  quam
ad  legiones  venit,  solenni  forte  spectaculo  plaudentes  inhibuit,  data  tessera  ut
manus  poenulis  continerent."

A.U.  793.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  355

largess  of  a  hundred  sesterces  apiece,  and,  as  if  this  liberality-
had  exceeded  all  previous  examples,  bade  them  retire,  glad
and  rich,  from  his  presence.1  The  good  fortune  which  has
given  us  a  clue  to  the  real  proceedings  of  Caius  on  the  Rhine,
through  the  mists  of  malicious  misrepresentations,  seems  here
■wholly  to  desert  us.  Yet  I  hesitate  to  believe  that  the  Brit-
ish expedition,  as  it  was  sarcastically  denominated,  was  such
a  monstrous  farce  as  it  has  been  described.  The  erection  of
a  lighthouse  indicates  at  least  an  intelligent  purpose,  and
cannot  have  been  a  mere  whimsical  fancy.  Possibly  Caius
was  diverted  from  a  real  intention  of  attacking  Britain,  by
some  act  of  submission,  from  which  he  anticipated  the  open-
ing of  freer  and  more  regular  communications  with  the
natives.  Even  the  picking  of  shells  may  be  a  grotesque  mis-
representation of  receiving  a  tribute  of  Rutupian  pearls.

Nevertheless,  whatever  distrust  we  may  feel  of  the  bur-
lesque account  of  this  exploit  transmitted  to  us,  Caius  c]aim8  a
the  claim  Caius  now  advanced  to  a  triumph,  as  """"P11'
for  a  glorious  success,  was  no  doubt  utterly  extravagant ;  nor
is  it  incredible  that  the  tricks  with  which  he  is  said  to  have
given  colour  to  it,  were  hardly  less  absurd  than  they  are  de-
scribed. Seven  times,  he  declared,  the  army  had  acknowl-
edged his  victories  by  saluting  him  as  Imperator.  The
British  chief  Adminius,  who  had  solicited  through  his  aid
restoration  to  power,  was  retained,  he  said,  as  a  pledge  of
the  barbarians'  submission.  He  had  placed  his  foot  upon  the
ocean,  and  reduced  it  to  dependence  for  ever.  Accordingly
he  issued  orders  to  the  imperial  procurators  to  prepare  a
triumph  on  the  most  magnificent  scale  that  had  ever  yet  been
attempted ;  but  directed  them  at  the  same  time  not  to  lavish
on  it  the  treasures  of  the  fiscus,  but  to  extort  the  requisite
sums  from  the  citizens  and  provincials,  for  which  purpose  he
gave  them  full  authority  over  the  property  of  all  his  subjects.
Meanwhile  he  collected,  for  lack  of  veritable  captives,  a  few

1  Suet.  Calif/.  46. ;  Dion,  lix.  25.  Compare  the  references  to  this  affair  in
Tacitus  (Agric.  13.,  German.  37.):  "  Mox  ingentes  Caii  Ca?saris  mime  in  ludi-
brium  versae."

356  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  40.

German  slaves  or  fugitives,  or  hired  the  tallest  and  bulkiest
of  the  Gauls  themselves,  causing  them  to  dye  their  hair  red
and  let  it  grow,  to  acquaint  themselves  with  the  language  of
the  tribes  beyond  the  Rhine,  and  assume  German  appella-
tions.1 To  make  the  intended  ceremony  still  more  imposing
he  directed  the  galleys  in  which  he  had  put  to  sea  to  be  im-
pelled against  the  stream  of  the  Rhine  and  thence  drawn
overland  to  the  rivers  of  Gaul,  and  thus  conveyed  to  Rome.
The  legions  were  wafted  by  this  circuitous  course  more  ex-
peditiously, perhaps,  than  they  could  have  marched  by  land ;
and  Caius  led  them  throughout  in  person,  and  visited  on  his
way  the  stations  on  the  Lower  Rhine,  in  which  his  father
had  planted  his  tent,  and  with  which  his  own  childhood
had  been  familiar.  Possibly  he  conferred  here  with  Galba  on
the  last  measures  he  might  require  to  punish  the  designs  of
Gaetulicus,  and  his  harsh  and  violent  temper  may  have
prompted  him  to  a  more  bloody  inquisition  than  he  found  it,
on  reflection,  prudent  to  enforce.  But  the  report  that  he  now
remembered  the  mutiny  of  certain  legions  against  Germani-
cus,  and  the  expulsion  of  Agrippina  from  the  camp,  with  him-
self an  infant  in  her  arms,  and  proposed  in  his  fury  to  mas-
sacre, after  twenty-five  years'  interval,  the  whole  of  the  bat-
talions which  bore  their  name,  and  when  dissuaded  from  this
bloody  purpose  was  only  deterred  by  his  fears  from  decimat-
ing them,  is  surely  too  extravagant  for  belief.2

1  Suet.  Calig.  47. :  "  Coegitque  non  tantum  rutilare  et  submittere  comam,
sed  et  sermonem  Germanieum  addiscere  et  nomina  barbarica  ferre."  Compare
the  evident  allusion  to  this  trick,  real  or  imputed,  in  Persius,  vi.  45. :  "  Jam
lutea  gausapa  captis,  Essedaque,  ingentesque,  locat  Caesonia  Rhenos."  But  after
all  the  captives  of  Caius  were  never,  perhaps,  exhibited  in  Rome  at  all ;  and  we
have  in  Tacitus  a  similar  account  of  an  imposture  practised,  as  he  assures  us,  at
a  later  period  by  Domitian  (Agric.  39.).  Possibly  the  habit  of  wearing  false
flaxen  hair  had  made  the  citizens  suspicious  of  the  genuine.

2  Suet.  Calig.  48. :  "  Consilium  iniit  nefandae  atrocitatis  legiones  .  .  .  con-
trucidandi  ....  vixque  a  tarn  praecipiti  cogitatione  revocatus  inhiberi  nullo
modo  potuit  quin  decimare  velle  perseveraret.  Vocatos  itaque  ad  concionem
inermes  ....  equitatu  armato  circumdedit.  Sed  quum  vidcret  suspecta  re
plerosque  dilabi  ad  resumeuda  ....  arma  profugit  concionem,"  &c. Not-

A.U.  793.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  357

It  has  been  recorded  how,  when  Augustus  was  journey-
ing simply  habited  among  the  Alps,  a  Gaul  who  had  design-
ed to  attack  him  was  restrained  by  the  imposing  majesty  of
his  countenance.1 Far  different  was  the  impres- Cain8return8
sion  which  the  stage-divinity  of  Caius  made  on t0  Kome-
the  rude  minds  of  the  provincials. One  of  them,  beholding
him  on  his  tribunal  glittering  with  the  insignia  of  Jove,  was
seen  to  smile :  the  emperor  demanded  what  he  thought  of
him;  I  think  you  a  great  absicrdity,  was  the  blunt  reply.
Possibly  the  imperial  mummer  at  the  moment  had  been  think-
ing the  same ;  at  all  events,  his  sense  of  humour  was  touched,
and  the  man,  being  no  better  than  a  low  artificer,  was  allow-
ed to  escape  unpunished.3 He  reserved  all  his  anger  for  the
nobles  and  senators,  who,  it  seems,  not  venturing  to  decree
him  honours  after  their  late  ungracious  reception,  and  appre-
hensive lest  his  claim  to  congratulation  on  his  maritime  suc-
cesses might  prove  no  more  than  a  grim  jest,  had  neglected
to  invite  him  to  enter  the  city  in  triumph. I  am  coming,
he  exclaimed,  I  am  coming — but  not  for  the  senate — -for  the
knights  and  people  who  alone  deserve  my  presence  among
them. For  the  senate  I  will  neither  be  a  prince  nor  a  citizen,
but,  clapping  his  hand  on  his  sword,  an  imperator  and  a  con-
queror. He  then  forbade  any  of  the  order  to  come  forth  to
meet  him,  and  waiving  the  offer  of  a  triumph,  which  they
had  too  long  withheld,  made  his  entry  with  the  solemnity  of
an  ovation  only,  and  scattered  money  to  the  populace. His
return  took  place  on  his  birthday,  the  last  day  of  August,  in
the  year  793.'

The  last,  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  Romans  themselves  the
most  abominable,  phase  of  the  Caian  tyranny  remained  still

withstanding  the  particularity  of  this  account,  I  must  reject  the  whole  as  in-
credible.

1  Suet.  Oct.  79.

■  Dion,  lix.  '26. :  nal  oc  airenpivaro,  epu  yap  avrb  to  te;£0£V,  on  fitya  irapa-
}„flpT)na-  ml  ovdiv  fitvToi  6clvov  InaOe,  onvrdTopoc  yap  i(v.

1  Suet  Caliy.  49.

358  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  40.

Cains  finally  to  be  exhibited.  They  had  witnessed  nis  assump-
aVtyraSn^indelf  tlon  °f  divinity  with  a  smile ;  and  even  the  rivalry
autocrat.  he  had  affected  with  the  Jupiter  of  the  Capitol,

whose  thunders  he  pretended  to  imitate,  and  with  the  tale
of  whose  parricide  and  incest  he  had  met  the  imputation  of
similar  crimes  against  himself,  had  excited  no  other  feeling,
perhaps,  but  one  of  placid  amusement.1  The  selfish  coward-
ice with  which  the  nobles  had  beheld  the  cruelties  inflicted
on  so  many  of  their  own  class,  without  raising  a  hand,  or
even  a  murmur,  on  their  behalf,  amazing  as  it  seems  to  us  at
first  sight,  may  be  accounted  for  by  the  distrust  of  one
another,  with  which  the  system  of  delation  had  generally
imbued  them.  The  people  growled  with  indignation  at  the
unwonted  exactions  imposed  on  them;  nevertheless,  they
could  not  long  resist  the  seductions  of  new  shows  and  largess-
es. The  style  and  character  of  the  principate  had  been
coloured  indeed  more  and  more  by  the  arbitrary  usages  of
Eastern  monarchy ;  no  rule  or  privilege  could  continue  to
hold  its  ground  against  the  will  of  the  prince,  whose  caprices
could  be  enforced  with  the  naked  sword  by  a  devoted  body-
guard. But  it  was  not  till  he  entered  Rome  in  the  garb  of  an
Imperator,  and  made  the  forum  his  camp  and  the  palace  his
praetorium, — it  was  not  till  he  brandished  the  fasces  in  the
eyes  of  the  citizens,  and  subjected  them  to  military  law, —
that  Caius  really  appeared  to  Roman  imaginations  as  a  Pisis-
tratus  or  a  Tarquin.  From  this  time  the  die  was  cast,  and  he
finally  abandoned  all  the  decorous  fictions  of  the  republic.
He  avowed  himself  a  tyrant,  and  continued  thenceforth  to
wear  the  outward  ensigns  of  autocracy  with  out  scruple." He

1  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Ccesar.  4. :  "  Cum  Jovera  se  ob  incestum  ....  assereret."
Comp.  Dion,  lix.  26. :  Zevc  te  elvai  etzTmtteto,  nal  6ia  tovto  k<h  ywati-iv  akXaiQ
re  Tro?.?.alr  nal  toIq  adetyalg  fidXiara  cwelvai  TrpoE<j>aoioa.TO.

a  Aurel.  Victor,  de  Ccesar.  4. :  "  His  elatus  dominum  dici,  atque  insigne
regni  capiti  nectere  tentaverat."  In  the  Epitome  the  same  author  asserts  that
Caius  actually  wore  the  diadem.  Suetonius,  in  a  passage  before  referred  to,
Bays  that  he  was  very  near  assuming  it,  and  only  desisted  on  the  assurance  that
he  had  risen  above  the  highest  eminence  of  kings  and  sovereigns. Calig.  22.

A.U.  793.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  359

can  hardly  have  been  unconscious  that  this  overt  act  of
usurpation  would  raise  him  up  more  dangerous  enemies  than
all  his  previous  atrocities.1  Another  Caius  had  perished  hy
the  dagger,  and  such  was  the  fate  which  he  must  have  ap-
prehended for  himself.  But  the  disdain  he  felt  for  the
wretched  people  he  had  trampled  upon,  seems  to  have  forti-
fied his  courage.  "When  a  plot  against  his  life  was  discover-
ed by  the  treachery  of  one  of  the  conspirators,

,  *  .  • t  j • .. L • 3 .  Conspiracy

and  the  persons  implicated  m  it  tried  to  save  against  him
themselves  hy  denouncing  some  of  his  most  fami-
liar associates,  such  as  the  captain  of  his  guards,  and  his
favourite  freedman  Callistus,  he  went  up  holdly  to  the  ac-
cused, bared  his  breast,  and  offered  them  a  sword  to  take  his
life  if  they  really  desired  it."  This,  at  least,  was  not  the  act
of  a  coward,  such  as  Caius  is  generally  represented  ;  nor,  it
may  be  added,  in  spite  of  many  furious  declamations  against
him,  can  we  charge  him  with  bloody  severity  in  revenging
this  attempt  upon  his  person.  Cerialis,  the  leader  of  the
conspiracy,  though  put  to  the  question  to  reveal  its  extent,
was  suffered  to  escape  with  his  life,  to  perish  many  years
after  in  a  similar  enterprise  against  another  master.8

The  senate,  however,  seized  the  occasion  to  recover  their
master's  favour  by  decreeing  solemn  games  for  his  preserva-
tion, and  by  offering  him  a  seat  in  the  Curia  so crowning  ex-
far  elevated  above  the  floor  that  his  person  should {^a^0  of
be  inaccessible  to  an  assailant.4 This  anxiety  to PrinciPatc-
place  him  as  it  were  beyond  their  own  reach  may  indicate

1  Josephus  mentions,  among  the  atrocities  of  Caius  which  gave  the  great-
est offence,  his  allowing  slaves  to  lay  informations  against  their  masters.  Antlq.
xix.  i.  2.  Another  provocation  was  the  report  that  he  meditated  transferring
the  seat  of  empire  to  Alexandria  or  Antium,  his  birthplace. Suet.  Calig.  49.

3  Zonaras,  xi.  6.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  17.  The  language  of  Seneca  in  his  treatise  on  Anger  (Je
Ira,  1 '.». )  Btrongly  exemplifies  the  baneful  passion  against  which  he  preaches.  It
is  impossible  to  attach  much  importance  to  denunciations,  the  climax  of  which
is  that  Caius  allowed  some  of  his  victims  to  be  executed  at  night.  "  Quid  turn
inaudituin  quam  nocturnum  supplicium?  .  .  quantulum  fuit  luccm  exspec-
tare ! "

4  Dion,  lix.  26.

360  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A-D-^O.

that  the  intended  attack  upon  him,  like  that  upon  Julius
Coesar,  was  to  have  been  made  in  the  Senate-house,  and  that
the  consent  of  the  whole  body  of  senators  was  fully  expected.
In  the  face  of  such  evidence  of  the  general  detestation  in
which  he  was  held,  Caius  still  relied  on  disarming  his  foes  by
inspiring  them  with  mutual  jealousy  and  distrust.  Shrink-
ing from  combination  and  almost  from  conversation  with  one
another,  they  vied  in  paying  abject  court  to  the  tyrant,  or  to
the  vilest  of  his  creatures.  Among  the  foremost  of  these
was  a  freedman  named  Protogenes,  who  was  said  to  carry
about  with  him  two  tablets,  inscribed  the  Sicord  and  the
Dagger,  which  contained  the  names  of  the  persons  destined,
the  one  to  execution,  perhaps,  the  other  to  assassination.1
Whenever  this  noted  delator  entered  the  Senate-house,  the
fathers  crowded  round  to  take  him  obsequiously  by  the
hand.  On  seeing  a  certain  Scribonius  Proculus  thus  coming
forward  to  greet  him,  What !  he  exclaimed,  durst  thou  salute
me,  enemy  as  thou  art  to  Caesar  ?  and  at  the  words  the  sen-
ators fell  upon  the  wretched  man,  and  stabbed  him  to  death
with  their  styles.2  Such  an  instance  of  slavish  pusillanimity
might  reassure  the  emperor  amidst  the  dangers  by  which  he
was  actually  environed.  He  indulged  more  freely,  perhaps,
than  ever  in  the  notion  of  his  own  omnipotence,  and  rioted
in  the  fantastic  caprices  to  which  such  a  notion  seemed  al-
ways to  prompt  him.  One  day,  at  a  public  banquet,  when
the  consuls  were  reclining  by  his  side,  he  burst  suddenly  into
a  fit  of  laughter ;  and  when  they  courteously  inquired  the
cause  of  his  mirth,  astounded  them  by  coolly  replying  that
he  was  thinking  how  by  one  word  he  could  cause  both  their
heads  to  roll  on  the  floor.3 He  amused  himself  with  similar

1  Dion,  1.  c.  Suetonius  {Calig.  c.  49.)  says  that  these  ypafifiara  Ivypd
were  discovered  among  the  emperor's  papers  after  his  death.  At  the  same
time  a  chest  was  also  found,  filled  with  a  great  variety  of  poisons,  the  power
and  qualities  of  which  were  carefully  marked,  as  ascertained  by  experiment.
When  they  were  thrown  into  the  sea,  the  fishes  perished  far  and  near.

2  Dion,  1.  c.

3  Suet.  Calig.  32. :  "  Quid  nisi  uno  meo  nutu  jugulari  utrumque  vestrum
statim  posse?"

A.U.  793.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  3g]

banter  even  with  his  wife  Ca?sonia,  for  whom  he  seems  to
have  had  a  stronger  feeling  than  for  any  of  his  former  con-
sorts. While  fondling  her  neck  he  is  reported  to  have  said,
Fair  as  it  is,  hoic  easily  I  could  sever  it.1

But  the  end  of  this  monstrous  principate,  not  yet  four
years  old,  was  already  drawing  nigh ;  and,  if  we  may  be-
lieve our  accounts,  the  tyrant's  overthrow  was  Conspiracy  of
due  not  to  abhorrence  of  his  crimes  or  indisrna-  Cassms  charea.
tion  at  his  assaults  on  the  Roman  liberties,  so  much  as  to
resentment  at  a  private  aifront.  Among  the  indiscretions
which  seem  to  indicate  the  partial  madness  of  the  wretched
Caius,  was  the  caprice  with  which  he  turned  from  his  known
foes  against  his  personal  friends  and  familiars.  Thus  he  sac-
rificed to  a  freak  of  ill-humour  the  tragedian  Apelles,  the
companion  of  his  pleasures,  and  instigator  of  many  of  his  ex-
cesses. No  one  felt  himself  secure,  neither  the  freedmen  who
attended  on  his  person,  nor  the  guards  who  watched  over
his  safety.  Among  these  last  was  Cassius  Chaerea,  tribune
of  a  praetorian  cohort,  whose  shrill  woman's  voice  provoked
the  merriment  of  his  master,  and  subjected  him  to  injurious
insinuations.2  Even  when  he  demanded  the  watchword  for
the  night  the  emperor  would  insult  him  with  words  and  ges-
tures. Choerea  resolved  to  wipe  out  the  affront  in  blood.
He  sought  Callistus  and  others,  the  same  apparently  who  had
before  been  accused  of  conspiring  against  Caius,  and  who
had  lived  in  apprehension  ever  since.  He  soothed  the  jeal-
ousies which  Caius  had  sown  between  them,  persuaded  them
to  trust  one  another  in  their  common  peril,  and  organized
with  them  and  some  of  the  most  daring  of  the  nobles  a  plot
against  the  emperor's  life.  Yet  this  was  not  a  conspiracy  of
the  senate  :  it  had  no  consular  or  praetor  at  its  head,  nor  had
it  any  ulterior  project  in  view. There  was  no  design  of  sac-

1  Suet.  Calig.  33. :  "  Tam  bona  cervix  simul  ac  jussero  demetctur."
3  Boet  Calig.  56.:  Hcnec.  de  const.  Sap.  18.:  "  Chacreac  tribuno  militum  scr-
mo  non  pro  manu  erat,  languidus  sono  ct  infracta  voce  suspectior. Buic  ( feiofi
rignum petenti  modo  Veneris,  modo  Priapi  dabat." Joseph.  Afttiq.  ./"</.  \i\.
1.  5.  ;  Dion,  lix.  29.

362  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  41.

rificing  the  tyrant  in  the  Curia,  and  proclaiming  tyranny  at
an  end.  From  want  of  resolution  the  deed  was  postponed
from  day  to  day,  and  not  portents  only,  but  some  treacher-
ous whispers  may  have  warned  the  emperor  to  beware  of
Cassius  !  A  woman  named  Quintilia,  the  mistress  of  one  of
the  conspirators,  refused  under  torture  to  discover  the  de-
sign.1 Caius  contented  himself  with  despatching  an  order
for  the  execution  of  a  Cassius  Longinus,  proconsul  of  Asia,
who  was  accordingly  summoned  to  Rome,  but  arrived  there
just  too  late  to  suffer  by  the  tyrant's  mandate.2  At  last,
after  many  delays,  the  festival  of  the  Palatine  games  was
fixed  on  for  carrying  the  project  into  effect.  Four  days  did
Caius  preside  in  the  theatre,  surrounded  by  the  friends  and
guards  who  were  sworn  to  slay  him,  but  still  lacked  the
courage.  On  the  fifth  and  last,  the  24th  of  January  794,
feeling  indisposed  from  the  evening's  debauch,  he  hesitated
at  first  to  rise.  His  attendants,  however,  prevailed  on  him
to  return  once  more  to  the  shows  ;  and  as  he  was  passing
through  the  vaulted  passage  which  led  from  the  palace  to
the  Circus,  he  inspected  a  choir  of  noble  youths  from  Asia,
who  were  engaged  to  perform  upon  the  stage.  He  was
about  to  call  them  back  into  the  palace  to  rehearse  their
parts  before  him,  but  the  leader  of  the  band  excused  himself
on  account  of  hoarseness.  Caius  was  still  engaged  in  con-
versation with  them  when  Chterea  and  another  tribune,  Sa-
binus,  made  their  way  to  him :  the  one  struck  him  on  the
throat  from  behind  with  his  sword,  while  the  other  was  in
the  act  of  demanding  the  watchword.  A  second
blow  cleft  the  tyrant's  jaw.  He  fell,  and  draw-
ing his  limbs  together  to  save  his  body,  still  screamed,  1
live!  I  live!  while  the  conspirators  thronging  over  him,  and
crying,  again! again! hacked him  with thirty  wounds.

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  1.  c.

a  Suet.  Calig.  57. ;  Dion,  lix.  29.  This,  however,  would  suppose  an  interval
of  nearly  two  months,  which  seems  hardly  admissible.  Cassius  had  been  the
husband  of  Drusilla,  whom  he  was  forced  to  relinquish  to  Caius,  to  be  united
to  M.  Lepidus.

Death  of  Caius.

A.U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  353

The  bearers  of  his  litter  rushed  to  his  assistance  with  their
poles,  while  his  body-guard  of  Germans  struck  wildly  at  the
assassins,  and  amongst  the  .crowd  which  surrounded  them,
killed,  it  was  said,  more  than  one  senator  who  had  taken  no
part  iu  the  affair.  The  conspirators  extricated  themselves
from  the  narrow  passages,  and  left  the  body  where  it  fell.
It  was  borne  in  secret  by  friendly  hands  to  the  pleasure
grounds  of  the  Lamian  palace,  and  there  hastily  and  imper-
fectly consumed,  and  thrust  into  a  shallow  tomb.  At  a  later
period,  the  sisters  Livia  and  Agrippina,  restored  from  ban-
ishment, exhumed  it,  reduced  it  solemnly  to  ashes,  and  con-
signed it  again  to  a  more  decent  sepulchre.  Till  this  was
done  the  shade,  we  are  assured,  could  have  no  rest  itself,  nor
would  it  suffer  the  keepers  of  the  garden  to  slumber  undis-
turbed at  nisrht.1

a

1  Suet.  Calig.  59.  Caius  was  slain  in  his  thirtieth  year.  His  reign  lasted
three  years,  ten  months,  and  eight  days,  from  the  16th  of  March,  790,  to  24th
of  Jan.  794.

364  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

CHAPTER  XLIX.

THE  SENATE  DELIBERATES  ON  THE  STATE  OF  AFFAIRS. THE PRAETORIANS CARRY  OFF

CLAUDIUS  TO  THEIR  CAMP  AND  SWEAR  ALLEGIANCE  TO  HIM. THE  SENATE  YIELDS

AND  ACCEPTS  HIM  AS  EMPEROR HE PROCLAIMS AN AMNESTY,  EXCEPTING ONLY

CTLEREA AND A FEW  OTHERS. CONTEMPT AND NEGLECT  WITH  WHICH HE HAD

BEEN TREATED IN HIS EARLY YEARS. HIS DEVOTION TO LITERATURE. HE

TAKES  THE  POLICY  OF  AUGUSTUS  AS  HIS  MODEL  :  1.  HIS  MILITARY  EXPLOITS  AND
CONDUCT  OF  FOREIGN  AFFAIRS. 2.  HIS  REVISION  OF THE SENATE  AND  KNIGHTS,

AND CENSUS A.  U. 800. 3. HIS ADMINISTRATION OF RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS.

SECULAR  GAMES  A.  U.  800.  4.  HIS  LABORIOUS  ADMINISTRATION  OF  JUSTICE.  5.
HIS  BUILDINGS  AND  CONSTRUCTIONS  :  THE  AQUA  CLAUDIA  :  THE  PORTUS  AUGUSTI  :
DRAINING  OF  THE  LAKE  FUCINUS. 6.  HIS  PUBLIC  SHOWS  IN  THE  AMPHITHEATRE,

AND MOCK SEA-FIGHT IN THE LAKE FUCINUS. GLUHTONY AND INTEMPERANCE

ASCRIBED  TO  HIM.

THUS,  after  an  interval  of  eighty-four  years,  another
Caius  Csesar  fell  by  the  hand  of  the  assassin,  but  one
Confusion  of  wno  would  never  have  been  mentioned  in  con-
the  assassins.  junction  with  the  first,  except  for  the  likeness
of  his  name  and  of  the  manner  of  his  death.1  The  parallel,
however,  was  not  confined  to  the  first  act  of  the  tragedy ;  its
subsequent  scenes  presented  a  repetition  of  nearly  similar
circumstances ; — the  same  confusion  among  the  assassins
themselves,  the  same  hasty  and  ill-concerted  attempts  at
establishing  the  freedom  they  had  recovered,  and,  lastly,  a
like  defeat  and  overthrow  by  the  strong  and  well-directed
will  of  a  military  power.  It  would  seem  that  the  Romans,
strong  as  they  were  in  individual  enterprise,  and  though
trained  by  all  their  habits  to  delibei*ation  in  common,  were

1  Tac.  Hist.  iii.  68. : "  Rcpentina  vis  dictatorem  Caesarem  oppresserat :
occulta;  Gaium  insidiae."

A.U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  365

little  capable  of  combining  to  any  purpose;  possibly  the
very  force  of  their  personal  characters,  and  the  vehemence
of  their  wills,  rendered  them,  in  the  gravest  crises  of  their
history,  thus  unfit  for  united  action.

When  each  of  the  conspirators  had  thrust  his  weapon
into  the  mangled  body,  and  the  last  shrieks  of  its  agony  had
been  silenced,  they  escaped  with  all  speed  from  The  consul8
the  corridor  in  which  it  lay ;  but  they  had  made  genatTfo^de-
no  dispositions  for  what  was  to  follow,  and  were  hberatlon-
content  to  leave  it  to  the  consuls  and  senate,  amazed  and  un-
prepared, to  decide  on  the  future  destiny  of  the  republic.
Among  the  first  of  the  emperor's  friends  Avho  penetrated  to
the  spot  where  he  fell,  was  the  trusty  Agrippa,  who  threw  a
mantle  over  the  body,  and  tried  for  a  moment  to  conceal  the
fact  of  his  death.  But  the  violence  of  the  German  guards,
and  the  sturdy  bearing  of  a  consular,  Valerius  Asiaticus,
who  proclaimed  aloud  that  the  tyrant  had  ceased  to  breathe,
and  how  much  he  regretted  having  borne  no  part  in  the
transaction  himself,  made  it  fully  known,  and  at  the  same
time  daunted  the  courage  of  those  who  might  have  avenged
it.  There  remained  no  other  duty  for  Agrippa  to  perform
but  to  carry  off  the  remains,  and  while  awaiting  the  course
of  events,  consign  them  hastily  to  the  grave.  While  the
Germans  were  awed  by  the  imposing  attitude  of  Valerius,
some  cohorts  of  the  city  guards  accepted  the  orders  of  the
consuls,  and  occupied  the  public  places  under  their  direction.
At  the  same  time  the  consuls,  Sentius  Saturninus  and  Pom-
ponius  Secundus,  the  latter  of  whom  had  been  substituted
for  Caius  himself  only  a  few  days  before,  convened  the  sen-
ate, not  in  the  accustomed  Curia,  because  it  bore  the  name
of  Julian,  but  in  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter.  The
first  act  of  the  sitting  was  to  issue  an  edict  in  which  the  tyr-
anny of  Caius  was  denounced,  and  a  remission  of  the  most
obnoxious  of  his  taxes  proclaimed,  together  with  the  prom-
ise of  a  donative  to  the  soldiers.  The  fathers  next  proceeded
to  deliberate  on  the  form  under  which  the  government  should
be  henceforth  administered. On  this  point  no  settled  princi-

366  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  41.

pies  prevailed.  Some  were  ready  to  vote  that  the  memory
of  the  Caesars  should  be  abolished,  their  temples  overthrown,
and  the  free  state  of  the  Scipios  and  Catos  restored ;  others
contended  for  the  continuance  of  monarchy  in  another  fam-
ily, and  among  the  chiefs  of  nobility  more  than  one  candidate
sprang  up  presently  to  claim  it.  The  debate  lasted  late  into
the  night ;  and  in  default  of  any  other  specific  arrangement,
the  consuls  continued  to  act  as  the  leaders  of  the  common-
wealth. Saturninus  obtained  a  decree  in  honour  of  the  re-
storers of  public  freedom,  and  especially  of  Cassius  Chaerea,
the  head  and  hand  of  the  conspiracy.  When  the  hero  ap-
proached the  curule  chairs  and  demanded  the  watchword  of
the  consuls,  he  was  entrusted,  amidst  vociferous  acclama-
tions, with  the  sacred  name  of  Liberty.  The  senators  sepa-
rated. Chasrea  delivered  the  word  to  the  four  Urban  co-
horts, and  despatched  a  tribune  named  Lupus  to  execute  the
vengeance  of  the  state  on  the  wretched  Caesonia,  whose  re-
puted influence  over  her  husband  marked  her  as  an  object  of
particular  detestation,  and  on  her  child,  the  monster's  only
offspring.1

But  while  the  seriate  deliberated,  the  praetorian  guards  had
resolved.*  Accident  presented  them  with  an  object  to  rally
The  pratorians  round,  and  a  keen  sense  of  interest  combined
dm? toTheir11"  with  the  consciousness  of  power  to  determine
swear  aile-  them  to  exert  the  strength  which  their  union  and
giance  to  him.  discipline  gave  them.  In  the  confusion  which
ensiled  on  the  first  news  of  the  event,  several  of  their  body
had  flung  themselves  furiously  into  the  palace,  and  begun  to
plunder  its  glittering  chambers.  None  dared  to  offer  them
any  opposition ;  the  slaves  and  freedmen  fled  or  concealed
themselves.  One  of  the  inmates,  half  hidden  behind  a  cur-
tain in  an  obscure  corner,  was  dragged  forth  with  brutal  vio-
lence ;  and  great  was  the  intruders'  surprise  when  they  rec-
ognised him  as  Claudius,  the  long  despised  and  neglected

1  Suet.  Calig.  60. ;  Dion,  lx.  1. ;  Joseph.  Aniiq.  Jud.  xix.  2.
5  Gibbon,  Bed.  and  Fall,  ch.  iii.

A.U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  3(j7

uncle  of  the  murdered  emperor.1  He  sank  at  their  feet  al-
most senseless  with  terror:  but  the  soldiers  in  their  wildest
mood  still  respected  the  blood  of  the  Caesars,  and  instead  of
slaying  or  maltreating  the  suppliant,  the  brother  of  German-
icus,  they  hailed  him,  more  in  jest  perhaps  than  earnest,  with
the  title  of  Imperator,  and  carried  him  off  to  their  camp.
During  the  night,  while  the  senate  was  still  debating,  and  the
soldiers,  now  collected  in  greater  numbers,  were  pressing  the
empire,  which  he  dared  not  yet  accept,  with  more  determina-
tion upon  him,  the  consuls,  informed  of  his  place  of  retreat,
sent  6ome  of  the  tribunes  to  invite  him  to  their  meeting,  to
deliver  his  opinion  upon  the  state  of  affairs.  To  this  sum-
mons he  timidly  replied  that  he  was  detained  in  the  camp  by
force,  and  the  clash  of  arms  and  menacing  attitude  of  the
soldiers  seemed  sufficiently  to  confirm  the  excuse.  In  the
morning,  when  it  was  found  that  the  senate  had  come  to  no
conclusion,  and  that  the  people  crowding  about  its  place  of
meeting  were  urging  it  with  loud  cries  to  appoint  a  single
chief,  and  wTere  actually  naming  him  as  the  object  of  their
choice,  Claudius  found  courage  to  suffer  the  praetorians  to
swear  allegiance  to  him,  and  at  the  same  time  promised  them
a  donative  of  fifteen  thousand  sesterces  apiece.11  At  the
same  time  Agrippa,  who  had  quitted  the  half-burnt  bones  of
Caius  to  repair  to  the  long-deserted  associate  in  whose  for-
tune he  now  confided,  went  in  his  interest  to  the  senate,  and
exhorted  it  to  yield  with  a  good  grace  to  the  force  which
was  about  to  be  arrayed  against  it.  While  protesting  that
all  his  own  wishes  were  on  its  side,  he  declared  that  there
was  no  hope  of  its  success  in  the  impending  struggle.  The
praetorians,  he  said,  besides  their  greater  numbers,  are  trained

1  Suet.  Claud.  10. :  "Prorepsit  ad  solarium  proximum,  intcrquc  pratenta
forilms  vela  se  abdidit."  The  solarium  was  the  terrace  or  portico  outside  the
house;  the  windows  which  opened  upon  it  were  furnished  with  curtains.  Some
historians  have  adopted  Burmann'H  unnecessary  conjecture  "  scahirium, '  as  if
Claudius  had  hidden  himself  under  the  stairs.  Dion  says,  iv  yuvia  nov  cuoTeivy .
Josephus,  /card  ri  irpoofiaTov  b/.iyatc  (iaOfjiai  xuPl0V- And'].  Jud.  xix.  .'!.

3  Suet.  Claud.  10.:  "Primus  Cacsarum  fideiu  inilitis  etiun  prffimio  pifmc-
ratus." This  fatal  example  we  shall  find  regularly  followed  for  the  future.

368  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

and  veteran  soldiers  y  our  forces  are  a  mere  handful  of  slaves
and  freedmenr  He  earnestly  counselled  it  to  temporize  and
negotiate.  On  the  other  hand,  he  secretly  urged  Claudius  to
persist  in  his  claims  to  unconditional  submission,  though  he
recommended  him  to  speak  of  the  august  assembly  in  terms
of  respect  and  consideration,  to  flatter  its  vanity  by  affecting
to  consult  it,  and  by  promising  to  approve  himself  in  all
things  a  ruler  of  a  different  stamp  from  the  tyrant  who  had
goaded  it  to  its  futile  assertion  of  liberty.*

The  senators  assembled  once  again  in  the  temple  of  Jupi-
ter ; 3  but  now  their  numbers  were  reduced  to  not  more  than
a  hundred,  and  even  these  met  rather  to  support

The  senate  ' .  #  ,  rr

submits,  and the pretensions of  certain of  their  members,

accepts  l-Ti

Claudius  as  who  aspired  to  the  empire,  among  whom  were
Valerius,  Asiaticus,  and  JMinucianus,  the  hus-
band of  Julia,  than  to  maintain  the  cause  of  the  ancient
republic.  But  the  formidable  array  of  the  praetorians,  who
had  issued  from  their  camp  into  the  city,  and  the  demonstra-
tions of  the  popular  will,  daunted  all  parties  in  the  assem-
bly: even  the  guards  in  which  it  confided,  vacillated,  and
Chserea  in  vain  protested,  almost  alone,  against  the  substitu-
tion, as  he  said,  of  an  idiot  for  a  madman ;  while  Sabinus
sullenly  declared  that  he  would  not  survive  the  advent  of
another  Caesar  to  power.  Presently  the  Urban  cohorts
passed  over,  with  their  officers  and  colours,  to  the  opposite
side.  All  was  lost :  the  praetorians,  thus  reinforced,  led  their
hero  to  the  palace,  and  there  he  commanded  the  senate  to
attend  upon  him.  Nothing  remained  but  to  obey  and  pass
the  decree,  which  had  now  become  a  formal  act  of  investi-

1  The  Vigilcs,  or  Urban  cohorts,  were  a  corps  of  freedmen,  according  to  the
institution  of  Augustus.  Besides  them,  the  senators  might  have  armed  their
slaves.

2  Suet.  Dion,  11.  cc. ;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  4.

3  Josephus  says  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  ~NiK7/<popog  or  Victor.  He  may
mean  Jupiter  Stator,  whose  temple  below  the  Capitoline  was  not  unfrequently
used  for  its  meetings  by  the  senate,  or,  more  probably,  this  is  his  way  of  ex-
pressing the  temple  of  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol,  to  whom  the  spoils  of  victory
{yiKrjTijpia)  were  dedicated.

A.U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  369

ture,  by  which  the  name  and  honours  of  Imperator  were  be-
stowed upon  the  new  chief  of  the  commonwealth.  Such  was
the  first  creation  of  an  emperor  by  the  military  power  of  the
pra?torians :  we  shall  witness  at  no  distant  period  the  inter-
ference of  a  still  stronger  power,  that  of  the  legions  them-
selves, in  the  work.1

Surrounded  by  drawn  swords  Claudius  had  found  courage
to  face  his  nephew's  murderers,  and  to  vindicate  his  author-
ity to  the  citizens,  by  a  strong  measure  of  retri- ciaudiuspro-
bution,  in  sending  Chaerea  and  Lupus,  with  a  few nestyfexccpt-
others  of  the  blood-embrued,  to  immediate  exe- o^jfand  a
cution  ;  while  Sabinus,  omitted  from  the  proscrip- few  otherB-
tion,  kept  his  word  to  his  associates  by  throwing  himself  on
his  own  sword. Claudius  was  satisfied  with  this  act  of  vig-
our, and  proceeded,  with  a  moderation  but  little  expected,
to  publish  an  amnesty  for  all  the  words  and  acts  of  the  late
interregnum.' Nevertheless  for  thirty  days  he  did  not  ven-
ture to  come  himself  into  the  Curia,  so  terrible  was  the  im-
pression the  deed  of  blood  had  made  upon  him,  and  so  con-
scious was  he  of  his  personal  inferiority  to  the  nobles  who
had  aspired  to  the  place  he  occupied  in  virtue  of  his  name
alone. When  at  last  he  recovered  courage  to  take  his  seat
between  the  consuls,  he  caused  the  prefect  and  tribunes  of
his  guard  to  attend  constantly  about  his  person,  a  precaution

1  Aurel.  Vict,  de  Ccesar.  4. :  "  Ita  Romae  regia  potestas  firmata."  A  coin
of  Claudius  bears  on  one  side  the  legend  imper.  recept.  (imperatore  recepto);
on  the  other,  pr-etor.  recept.  (prcetorianis  receptis).  Eckhel,  Dodr.  Numm.
vi.  235.

1  Suet.  Claud.  11.:  "  Imperio  stabilito  nihil  antiquius  duxit  quam  id  biduum
.  .  .  memoria;  eximere."  Dion,  lx.  3.  Orosius  speaks  in  magniloquent  lan-
guage of  this  act  of  clemency,  vii.  6.  This  Christian  writer  takes  a  peculiar
view  of  the  reign  of  Claudius.  At  its  commencement,  he  says,  the  apostles
Peter  and  Paul  came  to  Rome,  the  faith  was  preached,  and  Rome  was  blessed
in  consequence  with  many  signal  advantages — a  merciful  emperor,  a  wise  ad-
ministration, prosperity  at  home  and  abroad.  Rut  after  Claudius  expelled  the
Jews  or  Christians  from  the  city,  all  this  was  changed.  Rome  was  harassed  by
famine,  the  emperor  abandoned  himself  to  sanguinary  tyranny,  and  perished  in
the  end  miserably  by  poison.
vol.  v. — 24

370  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

to  which  Tiberius  had  occasionally  consented,  but  which
Caius  had  boldly  disregarded.1  The  same  apprehensions  fol-
lowed him  from  the  Curia  to  the  council-room,  to  the  hall  of
audience,  and  even  to  the  private  apartments  of  the  palace.
Before  the  curtains  which  veiled  the  entrance  to  his  ante-
chamber guards  were  posted  to  examine  all  who  entered.
Down  to  a  late  period  of  his  principate  even  women  and
children  were  not  exempted  from  the  search,  lest  they  should
bear  about  them  concealed  weapons.  Satellites,  lance  in
hand,  were  stationed  at  the  head  and  foot  of  his  couch  at  the
banquet,  and  he  was  even  served  at  table  by  soldiers.  This
jealous  custom  he  retained  to  the  end  of  his  reign,  and  it
became  an  established  etiquette  of  the  court  under  his  suc-
cessors. Even  when  he  visited  a  sick  friend,  for  Claudius
affected  as  far  as  possible  the  obliging  manners  of  a  patrician
citizen,  he  caused  the  chamber  of  the  invalid,  and  even  his
bedclothes,  to  be  carefully  examined.2

The  personal  fears,  indeed,  of  the  new  emperor  contrib-
uted with  a  kindly  and  placable  disposition  to  make  him
anxious  to  gain  his  subjects'  good-will  by  the

Fears  and  °  .  .  *

moderation  of gentleness and urbanity of his deportment.3

Claudius.  .  *

b  ar  from  assuming  the  cold  reserve  of  Tiberius,
or  the  ferocious  pride  of  his  nearest  predecessor,  Claudius
showed  himself  full  of  consideration  for  all  who  had  any
claims  on  the  prince  and  father  of  the  people.  His  procla-
mation of  amnesty  was  followed  by  the  pardon  of  numer-
ous exiles  and  criminals,  especially  such  as  were  suffering
under  sentence  for  the  crime  of  majestas.  The  wretched
sisters  of  Caius  were  recalled,  and  allowed  to  return  to  their

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  15.

5  Suet.  Claud.  35. :  "  Quanquam  jactator  civilitatis."  Dion  (be.  3.) :  of  the
guards  in  the  banquet  hall :  nal  tovto  fiev  i%  ckelvov  Karadeixdiv  Kal  6ei>po  asl
■yiyveTcu.  Of  the  personal  search :  i)  6k.  epewa  ?/  Sia  tt&vtuv  did,  'QveoTraciavov
iTTavaaro.

8  Aurel.  Victor,  dc  Casar.  4. :  "  Pleraque  per  formidinem  tamen  egregio
consultabat."

A.  U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  3^

domestic  duties  or  dissipations.1  Many  harsh  enactments  of
the  late  ruler  were  annulled,  and  compensation  made  wher-
ever it  was  possible.  Confiscated  estates  were  relinquished.
Moderation  and  generosity  characterized  the  fiscal  measures
of  the  opening  reign :  the  new-year's  presents,  which  Caius
had  not  only  accepted  but  solicited, — to  enable  him,  as  he
said,  to  bear  the  expense  of  rearing  a  daughter, — were
waived,  and  even  interdicted.  The  emperor  refused  the  in-
inheritanee  of  any  man  who  had  relatives  of  his  own  ;  he
persisted,  moreover,  to  the  last  in  declining  the  praenomen
of  Impcrator.*  The  statues  of  which  Caius  had  plundered
Greece  and  Asia  were  generally  sent  back,  and  the  temples
he  had  seized  for  his  own  cult, — as  for  instance,  that  of
Apollo  at  Miletus,  one  of  the  finest  edifices  of  the  age, —
were  restored  to  their  proper  divinities.  The  honours  which
Claudius  paid  to  the  memory  of  his  brother  Germanicus  and
his  parents,  as  well  as  to  Livia  and  to  Augustus,  were  ac-
cepted as  a  pledge  that  he  would  take  these  illustrious  exam-
ples for  his  model,  and  for  their  sake  he  was  excused  for  not
withholding  respect  even  from  Caius  and  Tiberius.'  The
discovery  Claudius  made,  or  pretended,  of  lists  of  intended
victims,  and  of  the  fatal  poison-chest,  added  to  the  horror  of
the  citizens  at  the  monster  from  whom  they  had  escaped,
and  made  them  doubly  grateful  for  the  goodness  of  his  suc-
cessor. The  popularity  of  the  new  prince,  though  mani-
fested, thanks  to  his  own  discretion,  by  no  such  grotesque
and  impious  flatteries  as  attended  on  the  opening  promise  of

1  Dion,  lx.  4.  Suet.  {Claud.  12.)  says  that  he  obtained  the  express  sanction
of  the  senate  for  every  such  act  of  grace.

1  Suet.  Claud,  12.  This  peculiarity  is  confirmed  by  the  coins  and  inscrip-
tions. Sec  Eckhel,  Dodr.  Numm.  vi.  247.  The  moderation  of  Claudius  is
specified  also  by  Dion,  lx.  5.

'  Suet.  Claud.  11.:  "  Jusjurandum  neque  sanctius  sibi,  ncque  crebrius  .  .  .
(mam  per  Augustum.  Arise  Li  viae  di  vinos  honores  ....  parentibus  inferias
publicas  .  .  .  .  Ne  Marcum  quidcm  Antonium  inhonoratum  transmisit.  Tiberio
marmorcuin  arcum  peregit."  Though  he  abolished  the  acts  of  Caius — those
of  Tiberius  had  been  abolished  before — he  refused  to  make  a  festival  of  the
day  of  his  assassination.

372  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41

Caius,  was  certainly  not  less  deeply  felt.  When,  a  few
months  after  his  accession,  during  a  temporary  absence,  a
report  was  spread  of  his  assassination,  the  people  were  vio-
lently excited ;  they  assailed  the  soldiers  and  the  senate  with
cries  of  treason  and  parricide,  and  were  not  appeased  till  the
chief  magistrates  came  forward,  and  solemnly  protested  that
their  favourite  was  safe,  and  returning  rapidly  to  the  city.1

The  confidence  indeed  of  the  upper  classes,  after  the
bitter  disappointment  they  had  so  lately  suffered,  was  not
The  early  life  to  ^e  so  %ntly  won.  The  senate  and  knights
of  Claudius.  might  view  their  new  ruler  with  indulgence,  and
hope  for  the  best ;  but  they  had  been  too  long  accustomed
to  regard  him  as  proscribed  from  power  by  constitutional
unfitness,  as  imbecile  in  mind,  and  which  was  perhaps  in
their  estimation  even  a  worse  defect,  as  misshapen  and  half-
developed  in  physical  force,  to  anticipate  from  him  a  wise  or
vigorous administration.3 The nesrlect with

He  had  been  °.  ,  f  ° ,

treated  with which his  education  was treated  in his  early

neglect  and  J

contempt  for years  when  he  was  aoandoned  to  the  care  of

his  infirmities  .  .  _

of  mind  and  nurses,  and  the  instructions  01  a  coarse  and  sense-
less pedagogue,  who  exasperated  his  infirmities
by  ill-usage,  was  owing  probably  to  the  crime  which  a
Roman  parent  seldom  forgave,  the  weakness  of  his  constitu-
tion and  the  distortion  of  his  frame.3  In  another  rank  he
would  have  been  exposed  perhaps  in  infancy  ;  as  the  son  of
Drusus  and  Antonia  he  was  permitted  to  live :  but  he  be-
came from  the  first  an  object  of  disgust  to  his  parents,  who
put  him  generally  out  of  their  sight,  and  left  him  to  grow
up  in  the  hands  of  hirelings  without  judgment  or  feeling.

1  Suet.  Claud.  12.

2  Aurel.  Vict,  de  C'cesar.  4. :  "  Et  sane  quia  vecors  erat  mitissimus  videba-
tur  imprudentibus."

3  Suet.  Claud.  2.:  "Edam  post  tutelam  receptara  alieni  arbitrii  et  sub
poedagogo  fuit;  quem  barbarum  et  olim  superjumentarium,  ex  industria  sibi
appositum,  ut  se  quibuscunque  de  causis  quam  ssevissime  coerceret."  Publius,
the  eldest  son  of  the  first  Scipio  Africanus,  is  perhaps  the  only  known  instance
of  a  Roman  of  his  birth  and  station  withheld,  under  the  commonwealth,  from
public  affairs  by  the  delicacy  of  his  constitution. Cic.  Brut.  19. ; Of.  83.

A-  U.  794.  |  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  373

The  child  was  born  at  Lugdunum,  in  744,  on  the  first  of
Augnst,  the  auspicious  day  of  the  dedication  of  the  altar  of
Augustus,  and  received  the  name  of  Tiberius  Claudius  Dru-
sus,  to  which  was  afterwards  added  that  of  Germanicus,  on
the  premature  decease  of  his  father.  His  childhood  and
youth  were  one  long  sickness,  uncheered  by  parental  affec-
tion ;  and  he  seems  to  have  been  deemed  from  the  first  unfit
for  any  bodily  exercises.  His  mother  was  not  ashamed  to
call  him  a  monster  of  a  man,  an  abortion  of  nature :  the
greatest  expression  of  contempt  she  could  apply  to  any  one
was  to  call  him  more  a  fool  than  her  son  Claudius.  His
grandmother  Livia  held  him  in  disdain,  and  seldom  even
spoke  to  him  :  her  admonitions  Avere  given  in  short  and  sharp
letters,  or  conveyed  to  him  by  the  mouth  of  others.  His
sister  Livilla,  on  once  hearing  that  he  might  possibly  be
called  hereafter  to  power,  exclaimed  loudly  at  the  unworthy
fate  of  the  Roman  people  to  fall  under  such  a  governor.
Augustus  himself,  who  should  have  known  human  nature
better,  and  who  might  have  felt  sympathy  with  bodily  in-
firmity, could  not  endure  that  any  of  his  race  should  lack
the  personal  qualities  which  befitted  the  highest  station,  and
slighted  the  poor  youth  both  in  public  and  in  his  own  family.
Some  fragments  of  the  emperor's  correspondence  are  cited,
to  show  the  little  esteem  in  which  he  held  him.1  Thus  he
consults  with  Livia  how  the  youth  is  to  be  treated,  and  how
far  it  will  be  proper  to  produce  him  in  public.  He  may  be
suffered  to  attend  at  a  pontifical  banquet,  if  he  will  submit
to  conform  to  the  example  and  guidance  of  a  cousin  ;  but  he
can  not  be  permitted  to  witness  the  games  of  the  circus  from
the  conspicuous  elevation  of  the  imperial  lodge.  He  must
not  be  seen  at  the  festival  of  the  Latin  Feria?,  either  at  Alba
or  in  Home.  If  he  can  follow  the  sacred  procession  up  the
mountain  with  his  brother  Germanicus,  people  will  ask  why
he  is  not  entrusted  with  municipal  office,  which  of  course  is
out  of  the  question. I  wish,  says  Augustus,  that  the  poor

1  Suet.  Claud.  4.

374  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

creature  would  take  pains  to  imitate  some  respectable  person-
age in bearing,  gait, and  gesture You  may

imagine,  he  adds,  how  surprised  I  was  to  find  something  to
like  in  his  declaiming,  for  you  know  that  he  cannot  ordina-
rily even  speak  so  as  to  be  understood.  With  this  strong
prejudice  against  his  grandchild,  we  cannot  wonder  that  the
emperor  allowed  him  to  enjoy  no  higher  distinction  than  the
formal  dignity  of  the  Augurate,  and  that  in  the  distribution
of  his  legacies,  in  which  he  carefully  marked  the  degrees  of
his  esteem,  he  left  him  no  more  than  the  trifling  bequest  of
eight  hundred  sesterces.1

The  obscurity  in  which  the  young  man  was  retained  by
Augustus,  continued  still  to  envelope  him  under  the  next
„  principate. He  petitioned  Tiberius  to  be  suffered

Withheld  from  ,

active  life,  he to  partake  of  the  honours  and  burdens  of  the

devotes  him-  , . . .

self  to  literary state,  but  the  empty  distinction  of  the  consular

labours.  ,  r J  .  , _

ornaments  was  the  utmost  that  was  conceded  to
him.  After  this  mortification  he  relinquished  all  hope  of
public  service,  and  retired  to  his  country  seats,  where  he
associated,  as  was  reported,  with  none  but  the  meanest  com-
panions. The  men  of  his  own  class,  indeed,  were  too  busy
in  paying  court  to  the  emperor  or  his  favourites  to  attend  to
a  despised  outcast :  his  early  friend  Agrippa,  as  we  have
seen,  deliberately  cast  him  off  as  an  unprofitable  acquaint-
ance. Yet  there  is  no  evidence  of  his  having  replaced  these
selfish  companions  by  less  worthy  associates.  The  charges
of  drunkenness,  gambling,  and  addiction  to  women,  all  which
were  now  heaped  upon  him,  are  probably  exaggerated.3
The  extent  of  his  literary  labours,  in  which  he  rivalled  the
most  industrious  students  of  antiquity,  seems  alone  to  pre-
clude the possibility of excessive habitual irregularity.

1  Suet.  Claud.  4.  Champagny  observes  (Cesars,  i.  331.):  "Auguste  ne
l'aimait  pas ;  il  n'en  fit  jamais  qu'un  Augure :  il  le  trouvait  trop  imbecile  pour
faire  autre  chose  que  deviner  l'avenir."

3  Suet.  Claud.  5. :  "  Seper  veterem  segnitiae  notam,  ebrietatis  quoque  et
aleie  infamiam  subiit."  Comp.  c.  33.  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  49. :  "  Quum  privatus  olim
conversatione  scurrarum  iners  otium  oblectaret."

A- U.  794.1  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  375

Claudius,  we  are  told,  composed  a  history  of  Roman  affairs
from  the  battle  of  Actium  in  no  less  than  forty-one  hooks ;
to  this  he  added  a  biography  of  himself,  or  memoir  of  his
own  times,  in  eight,  a  history  of  the  Etruscans  in  twenty,  and
of  the  Carthaginians  in  eight  also.1  Besides  these  ponderous
historical  works,  he  composed  a  defence  of  Cicero  against  the
criticisms  of  Asinius  Gallus,  a  comedy  in  the  Greek  language,
and  a  treatise  on  the  art  of  dice-playing.2  It  may  be  sus-
pected, indeed,  that  a  great  part  of  the  labour  of  these
various  compositions  was  shared  by  the  grammarians  and
learned  freedmen  with  whom  the  literary  Roman  generally
surrounded  himself;3  but  whatever  allowance  we  make  for
their  assistance,  it  will  still  appear  that  he  possessed  a  power
of  application  quite  inconsistent  with  the  weakness  of
intellect  which  his  maligners  so  freely  imputed  to  him.
Nevertheless  these  respectable  occupations  gained  him  no
consideration.  Tiberius  treated  him  to  the  last  with  a  con-
tumely and  injustice  which  seems  to  have  revolted  the
citizens.  Caius,  out  of  deference  to  the  general  sentiment,
elevated  him  to  the  consulship,  and  allowed  him  to  appear
at  the  spectacles  in  the  place  which  befitted  him,  where  he
sometimes  represented  the  absent  emperor  himself;  but  in
private  he  was  still  subjected  to  the  grossest  indignities,  and

1  The  first  of  these  works  he  began  originally  from  the  death  of  Caesar,  but
was  admonished  by  his  mother  and  Livia  that  the  theme  was  ill  suited  to  his
position.  Of  his  own  life  he  wrote  "  magis  inepte  quam  ineleganter,"  which
seems  to  mean  that  the  style  was  better  than  the  subject.

1  Suet.  Claud.  41.  42.  The  Etruscan  and  Carthaginian  histories  were  writ-
ten in  Greek:  I  suspect  from  this  that  Claudius's  historical  works  were  mostly
compilations,  or  even  transcripts.  The  Latin  language  probably  afforded  him
no  originals  on  these  foreign  subjects.  Claudius  had  also  some  grammatical
fancies.  He  wished  to  introduce  three  new  letters  into  the  Roman  alphabet,
the  digamma,  the  psi,  and  another  which  is  not  known.  See  Lipsius's  note  on
Tac.  Ann.  x\.  14.  The  y  and  V  may  still  be  traced  on  some  monuments  of  this
rei^n,  but  they  did  not  survive  it.

8  Suetonius  (I.  c.)  mentions  a  Sulpicius  Flavus  as  assisting,  and  the  great
historian  Livv  as  encouraging,  him  in  his  historical  labours.  In  the  same  way
we  read  of  Ateius  Philologus  making  historical  collections  for  the  use  of  Sallust
and  Asinius  I'ollio. Suet,  de  illustr.  Gramm.  10.

376  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

the  emperor's  boon  companions  were  encouraged  to  make
sport  of  his  reputed  imbecility.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  he
came  at  any  time  late  to  the  imperial  supper  table,  the  guests
would  spread  themselves  on  the  couches  and  keep  him  stand-
ing ;  if  he  fell  asleep  after  eating,  they  would  put  rough
gloves  on  his  hands,  to  enjoy  his  confusion  when  he  rubbed
his  eyes  on  waking.1  Such  were  the  consequences  at  Rome
and  in  the  palace  of  being  born  of  a  weekly  constitution,  and
of  having  suffered  from  paralysis,  of  halting  on  one  leg,  of
trembling  in  hand  and  head,  and  of  having  perhaps  the
speech  affected  with  thick  and  imperfect  utterance.2  Even
the  good  nature  which  the  poor  man  exhibited  under  these
trials  of  his  temper  was  turned  into  ridicule,  and  denounced
as  a  sign  of  the  weakness  of  his  understanding.  That  the
judgment  of  one  from  whom  the  practical  knowledge  of  men
and  things  had  been  withheld  was  not  equal  to  his  learning,
and  that  the  infirmities  of  his  body  affected  his  powers  of
decision,  his  presence  of  mind,  and  steadfastness  of  purpose,
may  easily  be  imagined :  nevertheless,  it  may  be  allowed
that  in  a  private  station,  and  anywhere  but  at  Rome,  Clau-
dius would  have  passed  muster  as  a  respectable,  and  not,
perhaps,  an  useless  member  of  society.

The  opinion  which  is  here  given  of  this  prince's  character
may  possibly  be  influenced  in  some  degree  by  the  study  of
Claudius  affects  n*s  countenance  in  the  numerous  busts  still  exist-
poik^of6  th°  m»>  which  represent  it  as  one  of  the  most  inter-
Augustus.  esting  of  the  whole  imperial  series. If  his  figure,

as  we  are  told,  was  tall,  and  when  sitting  appeared  not  un-
graceful, his  face,  at  least  in  repose,  was  eminently  handsome.

1  Suet.  Claud.  8.  Comp.  the  satirical  ludus  de  morie  Claudii,  or  Apocolo-
cynlosis  of  Seneca  (in  fin.):  "Apparuit  subito  C.  Caesar,  et  petere  ilium  in
servitutem  coepit :  producit  testes  qui  ilium  viderant  ab  illo  flagris,  ferulis,  cola-
phis  vapulantem."

2  Suet.  Claud.  30. ;  Dion,  lx.  2. ;  Juvenal,  vi.  620. :  "  Tremulum  caput
....  manantia  labra."  Senec.  Apocol. :  "  Bona?  staturce,  bene  canum  .  .  .  .  as-
sidue  caput  movere,  dextrum  pedem  trahere  ....  respondisse  nescio  quid  per-
turbato  sono  et  voce  confusa."

A.U.  794]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  377

But  it  is  impossible  not  to  remark  in  it  an  expression  of  pain
and  anxiety  which  forcibly  arrests  our  sympathy.  It  is  the
face  of  an  honest  and  -well-meaning  man,  who  feels  himself
unequal  to  the  task  imposed  upon  him.  There  is  the  look  of
perplexity  in  which  he  may  have  pored  over  the  mysteries  of
Etruscan  lore,  carried  to  the  throne  of  the  world,  and  engag-
ed in  the  deepest  problems  of  finance  and  citizenship.  There
is  the  expression  of  fatigue  both  of  mind  and  body,  which
speaks  of  midnight  watches  over  books,  varied  with  mid-
night carouses  at  the  imperial  table,  and  the  fierce  caresses
of  rival  mistresses.  There  is  the  glance  of  fear,  not  of  open
enemies,  but  of  pretended  friends ;  the  reminiscence  of  wan-
ton blows,  and  the  anticipation  of  the  deadly  potion.  Above
all,  there  is  the  anxious  glance  of  dependence,  which  seems
to  cast  about  for  a  model  to  imitate,  for  ministers  to  shape  a
policy,  and  for  satellites  to  execute  it.  The  model  Claudius
found  was  the  policy  of  the  venerated  Augustus ;  but  his
ministers  were  the  most  profligate  of  women,  and  the  most
selfish  of  emancipated  slaves.  This  imitation  of  the  measures
of  the  great  founder  of  the  empire  is  indeed  the  key  to  the
public  policy  of  the  Claudian  principate.  Both  at  home  and
abroad  we  shall  find  the  new  ruler  following  the  lines  already
traced  by  his  illustrious  ancestor ;  and  our  examination  of
his  career  of  sovereignty  will  place  in  the  strongest  light  the
points  of  difference  between  the  middle  of  the  eighth  cen-
tury of  Rome  and  its  termination. —

I.  The  commencement  of  the  new  reign  was  marked
by  the  renewed  activity  of  the  armies  on  the  frontiers.
Serving  Galba,  confirmed  in  his  command  on  1.  Military  en-
the  Bhine,  led  his  forces  across  that  river  into  thereSmrf
the  territory  of  the  Chatti,  whom  he  had  found  n;""lm-*-
some  pretext  for  visiting  with  the  terror  of  the  Roman
arms.  Corbulo  gained  some  successes  over  the  Chauci,
constructed  roads  and  canals  for  the  further  prosecution
of  his  enterprises,  and  was  preparing  to  accomplish  the
long-intermitted  task  of  German subjugation, when  com-

378  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

manded  to  desist  from  so  large  and  perilous  an  undertaking.1
At  the  same  time,  at  the  southern  extremity  of  the  empire,
the  majesty  of  Rome  was  vindicated  against  the  Maurusians,
a  people  of  the  still  unsettled  province  of  Mauretania.8  Sue-
tonius Paullinus  was  the  first  of  the  Romans  that  crossed  the
range  of  the  Atlas.  Penetrating  a  ten  days'  march  south-
ward, he  reached  a  river  which  was  called  the  Gir,  one  of  the
streams  perhaps  which  fall  from  the  southern  slopes  of  those
mountains,  and  are  lost  in  the  sands  of  the  Sahara.3  But
Claudius  determined  to  earry  into  effect  the  plan  which  Au-
gustus had  prematurely  announced,  of  an  invasion  and
thorough  reduction  of  the  great  island  of  Britain.  As  his
ancestor  had  proposed  to  follow  in  person  the  steps  of  Julius
Caesar,  so  Claudius  was  not  content  to  leave  this  important
achievement  in  the  hands  of  his  lieutenants,  but,  untrained
as  he  was  to  arms,  he  quitted  the  cares  of  administration  in
the  capital,  and  joined  his  legions  on  the  further  side  of  the
channel.4  The  particulars  of  this  deliberate  aggression  will
deserve  to  be  fully  related  in  another  place :  it  is  enough  here
to  say  that  it  was  completely  successful ;  and  though  little
resistance  was  offered,  and  Claudius  himself  found  no  enemy
to  confront  him  in  the  field,  it  was  of  sufficient  importance  to
merit  the  distinction  of  a  triumph,  which  the  emperor  claim-
ed, and  led  with  great  pomp  and  ceremony  in  the  year  797.
Claudius  proved  himself  not  unworthy  of  the  honour,  which
of  all  Roman  conquerors  Sulla  and  Augustus  had  alone
usurped  before  him,  of  extending  the  limits  of  thepomoerium

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  18,  20.  Our  authorities  do  not  distinguish  between  this
and  the  Corbulo  who  has  been  mentioned  under  the  reign  of  Tiberius.  I
have  there  shown  that  they  were  certainly  different  persons.  Of  this  Corbulo
more  will  be  said  on  a  later  occasion.  2  Dion,  lx.  9.

3  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  v.  1.  This  river  seems  to  have  been  confounded  with  the
Niger,  of  which  the  ancients  had  some  vague  reports.  The  size,  direction,  and
periodical  swelling  of  the  Niger  suggested  the  idea  of  its  connexion  with  the
Nile,  which  was  not  quite  extinct  in  recent  times.  "Et  Gir  notissimus  amnis
JSthiopum,  simili  mentitus  gurgite  Nilum." Claudian,  dc  laud.  Slil.  i.  252.

*  Suet.  Claud.  17.;  Dion,  lx.  19.  foil.

A.U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  879

in  token  that  the  frontiers  of  the  empire  had  been  advanced
under  his  auspices.1

The  foundation  of  colonies  had  been  one  of  the  great  pub-
lic merits  of  Augustus.  It  had  gratified  the  soldiers  ;  it  had
given  independence  to  many  needy  citizens ;  it  Foundation  of
had  proved  his  personal  disinterestedness,  in  the  colonies-
relinquishment  of  tracts  of  tributary  domain,  and  the  aban-
donment of  some  sources  of  the  imperial  revenue.  On  the
other  hand,  the  parsimony  of  Tiberius  had  been  manifested
in  his  abstaining  from  these  popular  benefactions.  No  colony
of  Tiberius  is  mentioned ;  none  of  his  careless  and  grasping
successor  Caius.  But  Claudius  was  distinguished  among  the
Roman  Imperators  by  his  politic  munificence  in  this  particu-
lar. It  was  his  ambition  to  lengthen  the  cords  and  strength-
en the  stakes  of  the  empire ; — he  restored  some  impoverished
foundations  in  Italy,  and  established  new  colonies  in  the
frontier  provinces.  The  famous  cities  of  Treves,  Cologne,
and  Colchester  owe  their  origin,  among  others,  to  his  hand,
and  their  celebrity  partly  perhaps  to  the  wisdom  with  which
he  chose  their  sites,  and  the  bounty  with  which  he  endowed
them.3

From  his  place  between  the  consuls  in  the  Senate-house,
Claudius,  as  the  chief  of  the  Roman  people,  dispensed  crowns
to  subject  potentates  with  imperial  munificence.

t  i  t  n His  conduct  in

The  suppliants  who  had  thronged  the  court  of regard  to  for-
Tiberius  and  Caius  were  relieved  from  their  pain-
ful attendance,  and  sent  to  play  the  tyrant  in  their  turn  at
home. Antiochus,  long  a  petitioner  in  the  antechamber  of
the  senate,  was  now  restored  to  the  throne  of  Commagene ;

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  23. :  "  Pomoerium  auxit  Ccesar,  more  prisco,  quo  iis  qui
protulere  impcrium,  ctiam  terminos  urbis  propagare  datur.  Nee  tamen  duces
Romani,  quanquam  magnis  nationibus  subaetis,  usurpaverant  nisi  L.  Sulla  ct  D.
Augustus."  Aurcl.  Victor,  de  Caesar.  4. :  "  Retenti  fines  seu  dati  imperio
Romano."  Spanheim  traces  on  the  medals  of  Claudius  that  he  received  the
title  of  Impcrator  no  less  than  twenty-seven  times.  Spanh.  de  usuNum.  ii.  404.
Augustus  had  received  it  only  twenty-one  times. Tac.  Ann.  i.  9.

1  See  A.  Zumpt,  "  de  coloniis  Romanorum  militaribus."  Comm.  Epigr.  \.
385.

380  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

and  Mithridates,  who  claimed  descent  from  the  great  Eastern
hero,  received  a  grant  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Bosphorus,  for
which  Polemo,  its  recent  occupant,  was  indemnified  with  a
district  of  Cilicia.1  The  services  of  Herod  Agrippa,  who
had  managed  so  adroitly  to  aid  in  securing  the  empire  for
Claudius,  received  a  brilliant  and  complete  reward,  not  only
in  the  confirmation  of  his  authority  in  Galilee,  but  in  the  ad-
dition to  his  dominions  of  Samaria  and  Judea.  By  the  ces-
sion of  this  wealthy  province  the  kingdom  of  the  Great  Herod
was  once  more  reunited,  and  constituted  far  the  most  impor-
tant of  all  the  vassal  sovereignties  of  the  empire.  At  the
same  time  the  little  district  of  Chalcis  in  Syria  was  erected
into  a  principality  for  a  younger  brother  of  Agrippa.  The
Jews,  though  they  had  welcomed  the  transfer  of  their  coun-
try from  Antipas  and  Herodias  to  the  less  capricious  juris-
diction of  a  Roman  proconsul,  accepted  this  new  arrange-
ment with  marked  satisfaction.  Agrippa  was  personally
popular  with  them,  and  the  memory  of  the  first  Herod,  tyrant
as  he  was,  was  still  held  in  admiration  by  the  great  body  of
the  people.  But  besides  this,  the  emperor  had  accompanied
his  new  dispositions  with  decrees,  in  which  the  impious  en-
croachments of  Caius  on  their  national  privileges  were  for-
mally disavowed,  the  malice  of  their  oppugners  in  the  great
Eastern  cities  restrained,  and  the  free  enjoyment  of  their  re-
ligious usages  specifically  confirmed.  The  return  of  Agrippa
to  Palestine  and  his  entry  into  Jerusalem  was  a  national  tri-
umph. He  studied  to  retain  the  approbation  of  his  subjects
by  acts  of  munificence,  and  flattered  their  pride  by  his  show
of  independence.  But  when  he  ventured  on  the  royal  act  of
extending  and  strengthening  the  fortifications  of  his  capital,
he  was  sternly  reminded  of  the  realities  of  his  position  by
the  interdict  of  the  proconsul  of  Syria,  and  compelled  to  de-
sist. Nor  could  the  circumstances  of  his  own  kingdom  sufler
him  to  forget  that  his  subjects  were  divided  into  two  rival
parties,  whose  claims  he  was  required  constantly  to  compro-

1  Dion,  lx.  8.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  381

mise,  and  whom  he  could  hardly  hope,  with  all  his  craft,  to
combine  into  a  nation  of  common  and  united  sentiments.
"While  the  Jewish  element,  bent  fanatically  on  the  mainten-
ance of  its  ancient  customs,  and  jealous  of  every  transgres-
sion of  its  cherished  principles,  expected  him  to  conform
strictly  to  its  religious  rites,  to  court  its  priesthood,  and  offer
sacrifice  in  its  temples,  the  Pagans  and  Hellenizers,  hardly
less  numerous  or  powerful,  elevated  him  above  all  laws  and
usages,  and  pressed  on  him  with  impetuous  zeal  the  attributes
of  divinity.  At  Jerusalem  Agrippa  enacted  the  Jew  with
solemn  gait  and  tragic  countenance,  amidst  general  acclama-
tion ;  but  at  Coesarea  he  allowed  the  more  genial  part  of  the
Greek  to  be  imposed  on  him.  It  was  at  a  festival  in  this
Hellenic  capital,  after  an  harangue  he  had  addressed  to  the
populace,  that  they  shouted,  It  is  the  voice  of  a  Death  of  Herod
god,  not  of  a  man.  His  mirth  was  turned  into  As"PPa-
sadness.  He  was  smitten  at  the  same  instant  with  a  sore
disease,  and  died  after  a  few  days'  illness,  at  the  premature
age  of  fifty-four.1  This  unexpected  catastrophe  seems  to  have
unhinged  the  plans  of  the  Roman  government.  So  impor-
tant a  charge  as  the  sovereignty  of  Palestine  could  be  in-
trusted only  to  a  tried  servant  of  the  emperor;  and  even
Agrippa  had  given  cause  of  jealousy  by  the  relations  he  had
cultivated  with  the  princes  on  his  frontier.  None  of  his  family
merited  to  succeed  him.  His  brother  Herod  was  allowed  to
continue  in  the  obscure  dignity  of  his  petty  chiefdom,  and
his  son  Agrippa,  already  resident  as  a  hostage  in  Rome,  was
retained  there  in  honourable  custody ;  while  the  dominions
of  the  sn*oat  Idumean  reverted  once  more  to  the  control  of
the  proconsul  of  Syria,  and  acquiesced,  with  a  few  uneasy
murmurs,  in  its  full  incorporation  with  the  empire.

II.  From  the  day  that  the  first  Caesar  fell  beneath  the
daggers  of  a  senatorial  faction,  it  had  become  a  tradition  of
the  state  to  regard  the  senate  as  the  natural n  cinndius
counterpoise  to  the  emperor,  and  as  a  rival  whom ."IL-'nity  "f  tho
it  was  necessary  for  him  to  amuse  with  flatteries, 8enat0-

1  Josephus,  Antiq.  Jvd.  xix.  8. :  Act.  Apost.  xii.,  a.  u.  797.  A.  d.  44.

382  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

or  control  by  force.  The  mutual  jealousy  of  these  two  co-
ordinate authorities,  long  kept  in  check  by  the  discretion  of
Augustus,  had  been  exasperated  by  a  sense  of  mutual  wrong
under  Tiberius,  and  had  broken  out  in  furious  violence  under
his  overbearing  successor.  But  Claudius,  on  his  accession,
freely  acknowledged  that  the  overthrow  of  Caius  by  a  just
retribution  had  convinced  him  of  the  folly  of  all  hostile  dem-
onstrations, and  he  solemnly  proclaimed  his  intention  of  con-
stituting the  senate  the  friend  and  confidant  of  his  own  ad-
ministration.1

It  was  a  fundamental  principle  of  the  Roman  municipal

polity  that  the  citizen  should  contribute  in  his  person,  the

subject  in  his  means,  to  the  service  of  the  state.

Alt6IT  til  6  CX"  mi

ample  of  Au- The  great  problem  of  statesmen  was  to  make

gustus.here-  *

vises  the  list these  two  obligations  balance  one  another:  to

of  the  order.  -

compensate  the  commonwealth  for  the  immunity
from  taxation  of  a  portion  of  its  children  by  laying  on  them
the  most  onerous  and  important  employments.  The  mem-
bers of  the  senate  were  made  responsible  for  the  discharge
of  the  highest  magistracies ;  but  in  order  that  these  offices
should  be  adequately  filled  by  men  of  fortune  equal  to  their
expense,  and  of  consideration  suitable  to  their  dignity,  it
was  necessary  to  maintain  this  functionary  reservoir  con-
stantly at  the  same  exalted  level,  to  prevent  it  sinking  from
the  poverty  or  meanness  of  its  individual  members  too  low
to  furnish  the  required  supply.  Hence,  the  expediency  of
the  frequent  revisions  of  the  list  of  the  senate,  such  as,  under
the  republic,  had  been  executed  by  the  censors  at  rapidly
recurring  intervals,  and  had  been  repeated  more  than  once
by  Augustus.  But  the  last  of  these  solemn  inquisitions,  on
which  the  eyes  of  the  citizens  had  always  turned  with  in-
tense and  even  superstitious  interest,  had  taken  place  as  far
back  as  the  year  751  * Tiberius  had  shrunk  from  the  labour

1  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  ii.  11.  2.

2  Dion,  lv.  13.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  last  extraordinary  Lectio
Senatus :  but  probably  the  censure  of  the  year  767,  just  before  Augustus's
death,  did  not  pass  without  some  special  cases  of  removal.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  383

or  the  odium  of  renewing  them.  Cains  had  wantonly  neg-
lected to  do  so.  It  was  left  for  Claudius,  whose  mind  teemed
with  antique  prepossessions,  and  who  was  appalled  by  no
drudgery,  to  follow  the  example  of  the  founder  of  the  em-
pire, and  consolidate  afresh  the  basis  of  the  civil  administra-
tion. The  fierce  independence  of  the  fathers  had  been  tamed
by  indolence  or  fear,  and  we  hear  no  more  on  this  occasion
of  the  resentment  of  the  expelled  members,  or  the  murmurs
of  the  body  in  general.  Claudius  demanded  of  them  a  true
statement  of  their  means,  and  insisted,  on  their  possessing
the  requisite  qualification ;  nor  can  we  suppose  that  he  neg-
lected the  show  at  least  of  inquiring  into  their  manner  of
life,  and  visiting  with  condemnation  such  as  appeared  un-
worthy to  stand  at  the  head  of  Roman  society.  But  he  was
mild  and  temperate  in  the  exercise  of  his  authority.  Hav-
ing no  political  factions  to  court  or  intimidate,  he  had  no
need  to  expose  himself  to  the  charge  of  political  partiality ;
and  he  showed  himself  liberal  in  supplying  the  needs  of  no-
ble but  impoverished  families.  Nevertheless,  this  revision
thinned  the  benches  of  the  Curia,  and  showed  the  citizens
but  too  plainly  that  the  progress  of  affairs,  even  since  the
time  of  Coesar  and  Augustus,  had  concentrated  wealth  in
few  hands,  and  swept  many  illustrious  houses  into  obscurity.
To  remedv  this  evil,  to  obliterate  the  traces  of

i  •  • i  i •  .rii t  i  ii He  supplies  va-

this  social  revolution,  Claudius  proposed  to  call canciesfrom

,  , i  •  /. i i • i  the  wealthiest

up  to  the  senate  the  wealthiest  of  the  knights families  in  the
and  even  of  lower  ranks.1 Nor  did  he  confine
his  view  within  the  limits  of  Italy. The  senate  had  already
received  accessions  from  Spain,  Africa,  the  Narbonensis,  and
other  provinces. The  Jus  Honorum,  or  claim  of  admission
to  the  senate  and  the  magistracies,  which  were  filled  from
the  senate  or  served  themselves  to  replenish  it,  had  been
formerly  conceded  to  the  citizens  of  many  foreign no  open,  th(>
communities  by  Ccesar,  Pompeius,  and Angus- SSSrtothe"1"
tus. The  principle  thus  acknowledged  awaited Uuuls-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  25. ;  Dion,  lx.  29.

384  HISTORV  OF  THE  ROMANS

further  extension,  on  fitting  occasions,  from  every  new  ruler ;
and  Claudius  had  both  precedent  and  expediency  in  his
favour  when  he  decreed  its  application  to  the  whole  of  Gallia
Comata,  or  at  least,  as  the  first  step  in  the  process,  to  the
^Edui,  the  first  Gallic  ally  of  Rome,  the  friends  and  brothers,
as  they  had  been  styled,  of  the  Roman  people.  This  prefer-
ence of  the  Gauls  over  other  subjects  was  justified  by  their
tried  fidelity  during  the  period  which  had  elapsed  since  their
conquest.  It  was  tendered  as  a  boon  at  the  close  of  their
first  century  of  submission.  But  it  was  really  owing  to  the
favour  with  which  the  enrperor  regarded  their  country  as  his
own  birthplace,  and  still  more,  perhaps,  to  the  intimate  rela-
tions his  father  and  brother  had  held  with  it  during  their
long  administration  there.  The  measure  was  received  in-
deed with  some  murmurs  of  discontent :  undoubtedly  it  de-
served to  be  explained  more  luculently,  both  as  to  its  motives
and  anticipated  results,  than  in  the  rambling  and  inconclu-
sive arguments  actually  used  by  its  propounder,  as  we  may
judge  from  the  fragment  of  the  speech  in  which  he  recom-
mended it,  preserved  on  a  brazen  tablet  which  was  discov-
ered three  centuries  ago  at  Lyons.1  But  its  advantages  re-
quired in  fact  no  imperial  expositor.  On  the  one  hand,  the
attraction  of  provincial  notabilities  to  Rome  might  be  re-
garded as  a  security  for  the  faithful  service  of  the  connex-
ions they  left  behind ;  on  the  other,  the  Avants  and  interests
of  the  province  might  thus  be  brought  directly  to  the  knowl-
edge of  the  imperial  city  itself:  in  short,  it  was  a  step
towards  the  fusion  of  the  two  great  elements  of  society  at
the  time,  an  advance  in  the  development  of  political  unity,

1  See  the  contents  of  the  "  Tabulae  aerese  dure  Lugduni  erutae  ad  latus  S.  Sebas-
tiani,  a.  1529,  qure  Claudii  Imp.  orationem  continent  super  civitate  Gallis  danda,"
in  an  excursion  of  Lipsius  to  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  23.  They  have  been  published  with
a  commentary  by  Zell  in  Germany,  according  to  Iloeck's  references :  but  I  have
not  seen  the  tract  myself.  It  is  curious  to  compare  this  genuine  transcript  of
the  emperor's  words  with  the  paraphrase,  if  such  it  may  be  called,  of  Tacitus
(Ann.  xi.  24.) ;  which  is  important,  as  showing  what  degree  of  authenticity  may
be  claimed  for  the  speeches  and  conversations  he  attributes  to  his  characters.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  385

and  as  such  it  assisted  in  the  genial  task  of  riveting  the  sym-
pathies of  the  world  together.  At  a  later  period  another
happy  consequence  appeared,  in  the  effect  produced  on  the
higher  classes  at  Rome  hy  the  simpler  tastes  of  these  repre-
sentatives of  provincial  manners.  The  senseless  extrava-
gance of  the  children  of  the  conquerors,  and  their  vile  imita-
tion of  the  Greeks  and  Orientals,  were  shamed  by  the  decent
self-respect  of  the  yet  uncorrupted  barbarians.1

The  order  thus  revised  and  rendered  worthy  of  its  impe-
rial functions  was  required  to  apply  with  assiduity  to  its
duties,  and  fresh  penalties  were  assigned  to  in-

, ,  , ,  rrn  ? , .  Claudius  re-

dolence and  absence. The  senate  evinced  its  re- vises  the  Hst  of

the  knights.

newed  activity  under  this  reign  by  the  promul-
gation of  a  great  variety  of  laws.  The  second  or  equestrian
order  was  subjected  to  a  similar  inquisition,  and  refreshed
once  more  with  the  infusion  of  baser  blood."  Notwithstand-
ing the  creation  of  new  patrician  houses  by  Augustus,  this
caste,  to  which  some  of  the  most  solemn  religious  functions
appertained,  continued  to  dwindle  away,  and  required  addi-
tional grafts.3  The  effects  of  luxury,  of  vice  and  celibacy,
had  proved  more  fatal  than  the  sword  of  the  executioner.
But  all  these  causes  combined  to  decimate  the  ancient  fami-
lies ;  and  we  observe,  more  and  more,  the  rise  of  new  names
into  distinction,  and  lose  sisrht  in  the  same  pro-

• •,-,  ,  Censorship  of

portion  of  old  and  cherished  appellatives. In  or- Claudius,
\  *  /.  V., t  -, A.r.  800.

der  to  carry  out  these  reiorms,  Claudius  assumed

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  55.:  "Novi  homines  e  municipiis  et  coloniis  atque  etiani
provinciis  in  Senatum  crcbro  assumpti  domesticam  parcimoniam  intulerunt."

3  Suet.  Claiid.  16.

3.  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  25. :  "  Paucis  jam  reliquis  familiarum  quas  Romulus  majo-
rum  et  L.  Brutus  minorum  gentium  appellaverant ;  exhaustis  etiam  quas  dicta-
tor Caesar  lege  Cassia  et  princeps  Augustus  lege  Ssenia  sublcgere."

*  The  barbarism  of  the  double  gentile  name  seems  to  appear  first  about  this
period,  as  in  the  grammarian  Remmius  Fannius  Paloemon,  originally  a  slave.
We  meet  with  the  same  in  Naevius  Sertorius,  and  also  in  Milonia  C&'sonia
This  usage  may  owe  its  origin  to  adoption,  the  name-  of  both  the  original  and
the  adoptive  gens  being  now  often  retained  in  conjunction.  From  this  time  the
double  appellative  occurs  very  frequently.  At  first  the  names  so  conjoined
vol.  v. — .:>

386  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  censorship  in  800,  and  held  a  lustrum.1 Augustus,  as
we  have  seen,  when  he  performed  this  solemnity,  had  ab-
stained from  adopting  the  title  of  Censor. Whatever  his
motive  for  this  innovation  may  have  been,  his  successor  was
more  punctilious  in  preserving  the  name,  together  with  the
functions  of  the  office. The  enumeration  of  the  citizens  on
this  occasion  gave  a  result  of  5,984,072  males  of  military  age,
which  may  imply  a  total  Roman  population  of  not  less  than
25,41 9,066.a Thirty-four  years  before  the  return  amounted
to  only  4,897,000,  or  a  total  of  about  17,400,000;  and  this
considerable difference  is  not  to  be accounted  for  by  the
mere  increase  of  population  in  the  course  of  a  single  genera-
tion. While,  however,  it  may  be  taken  as  evidence,  in  some
degree,  of  the  general  prosperity  which  is  for  the  most  part
indicated  by  a  rapid  increase  of  births  over  deaths,  we  must
consider  it  also  as  a  result  of  the  fresh  introductions  into  the
class  of  citizens  which  were  in  progress  under  Tiberius  and
Caius. This  increase  was  still  more  developed  under  the
next  principate. It  is  probable  that  Claudius  conferred  the
boon  on  many  communities  as  well  as  individuals  ;  and  it  is
not  impossible  that  both  he  and  Caius  made  a  traffic  of  it  for
their  private  advantage. Such,  at  all  events,  was  undoubt-
edly the  case  with  his ministers  and  favourites,  many  of
whom  amassed  enormous  fortunes  by  procuring  the  franchise
from  their  master  for  wealthy  applicants. The  Roman  citi-
zen was  still  exempt  from  the  most  onerous  requisitions  of
the  state,  the  poll  and  land  tax ;  and  the  twentieth  on  suc-
cessions was  lightened  to  him  when  the  property  descended

were  generally  obscure  ones ;  at  a  later  period  we  shall  be  startled  by  a  Julius
Calpurnius,  an  Jilius  Aurelius,  a  Claudius  Rutilius,  a  Flavius  Valerius  Aurelius,

&c.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  13,  25.;  Suet.  Claud..  16.;  Dion,  lx.  29.;  Plin.  Hist.  Xat.

x.  2.

See  Tacitus  (1.  c.)  compared  with  the  somewhat  different  statement  of
Eusebius.  For  the  proportion  of  males  between  1 7  and  60  to  the  sum  of  a
population,  see  Clinton,  Fast.  Hell.  ill.  457,  461.  Hoeck,  Rcem.  Gesch.  i.  2.
286.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  387

in  a  direct  line.1  The  sale  of  the  franchise  by  the  emperor
was  in  fact  no  other  than  the  spendthrift's  economy ;  it  was
living  upon  the  capital  of  the  state.  The  fatal  extravagance
of  the  system  was  first  perceived  at  a  somewhat  later  period,
and  we  shall  see  some  checks  put  on  the  claim  to  immunity
by  succeeding  emperors.

IIL  Nor  did  the  example  of  Augustus  fail  to  remind  his
curious  imitator  that  the  care  of  the  national  religion  is
among  the  first  duties  of  the  conservative  re-

,■._'.  III.  Measures

former. Claudius  promptly  acquiesced  m  the for  the  conser-

,,.  .,,.,,...  „  ~ .  vation  of  the

general  disgust  with  which  the  impieties  01  Cams  national  re
had  been  regarded.  The  assumption  of  the  spe-
cial attributes  of  divinity,  the  club  of  Hercules,  and  the
thyrsus  of  Bacchus,  and  the  caricature  of  the  national  deities,
which  had  disgraced  the  last  reign,  found  no  favour  or  in-
dulgence from  him.  The  Orientalism  which  had  pervaded
the  court  and  sanctuary  under  the  disciple  of  Agrippa,  was
swept  sternly  away  by  the  historian  of  Etruria.  In  other
matters  the  measures  of  Claudius,  as  chief  of  the  state  relig-
ion, seem  to  have  been  generally  practical  and  useful.  He
limited  the  number  of  holidays,  which  were  become  a  serious
impediment  to  business ;  but  as  regarded  the  foreign  cults
which  had  so  often  intruded  into  the  city,  and  been  so  often
banished  from  it,  he  contented  himself  with  proscribing  such
only  as  seemed  politically  dangerous.  The  Jews,  who  had
been  expelled  by  Tiberius,  but  who  seem  to  have  lately  re-
covered their  position  there  through  the  influence  of  Agrippa,
were  treated  with  indulgence,  till  the  disturbances  they  ex-
cited by  seditions  or  domestic  dissensions  caused  them  to  be
chased  once  more  from  the  city.*  The  spirit  of  the  antiqua-
rian was  again  visible  in  the  treaty  Claudius  contracted  with
Agrippa  by  the  sacrifice  of  a  swine  in  the  forum  ;  in  his
restoration  of  the  expiatory  offerings  of  Servius  in  the  grove
of  Diana ;  and  in  his  proposing  to  appoint  a  senatorial  com-

See  Dion,  lv.  25.,  and  Gicrig's  explanation  of  Plin.  Paneg.  39.
1  Suet  Claud.  25.:  "  Jtukeos  impulsorc  Chresto  assiduc  tumultuantcs  Roma
expulit." On  this  celebrated  passage  more  will  be  said  hereafter.

388  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

mission  to  examine  the  conduct  and  efficiency  of  the  Haruspi-
cinal  discipline.1  The  chief  pontiff  celebrated  the  completion
of  the  eighth  century  with  the  ceremony  of  secular  games.
But  in  this  his  vanity  seems  to  have  prevailed  over  his  liter-
ary prepossessions,  for  he  could  not  but  have  been  aware
that  the  Etruscan  Saeculum  bore  no  reference  to  a  period  of
an  hundred  years  ;  nor,  in  fact,  had  more  than  sixty-three
years  elapsed  since  Augustus  had  summoned  the  Romans  to
behold  a  solmnity  which  none  then  living  had  before  seen,
and  none  should  ever  see  again?

IV.  Among  other  merits  which  history  has  ascribed  to

Augustus  was  the  sedulous  industry  with  which,  after  the

manner  of  the  old  patricians,  he  had  occupied

IV.  Patience

and  industry  himself  with  dispensing  justice  to  the  citizens.
the  administra- The  patient  application  of  his  laborious  follower

tion  of  justice.  .  ,  .  t.  .  ,.  ■,

was  eminently  conspicuous  in  this  practice  also.
Sometimes  in  the  open  forum,  sometimes  in  the  neighbouring
basilicas,  Claudius,  old  and  infirm  as  he  was,  would  endure
from  hour  to  hour,  every  day  of  business,  the  drudgery  of
judicial  investigations,  and  give  at  least  decent  attention  to
the  clamorous  appeals  of  the  advocates,  who,  emboldened  by
his  unexampled  patience  and  good  nature,  would  venture  not
unfrequently  to  worry  and  even  insult  him.  So  little  did  he
spare  himself  in  this  irksome  duty,  that  his  measure  for  cur-
tailing the  numerous  non-days  of  the  calendar  was  ascribed
to  a  wish  to  grain  more  time  for  the  labours  of  the  tribunals.3
When,  after  a  long  morning  sitting,  he  arose  at  last  for
refreshment, — even  if,  as  on  one  occasion,  the  odour  of  a
pontifical  banquet,  prepared  in  the  adjoining  temple,  served

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  15.

3  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  11.;  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  vii.  48.  The  secular  games  of  Au-
gustus were  a.  v.  '73'7 ;  those  of  Claudius  a.  v.  800.  "  Quare  vox  praeconis
irrisa  est,  invitantis  more  solemni  ad  ludos,  quos  nee  spectasset  quisquam,  nee
spectaturus  esset:  quum  superessent  adhuc  qui  spectaverant,  et  histrionum,
producti  ohm,  tunc  quoque  producerentur." Suet.  Claud.  21.;  Plin.  1.  c.

'  Suet.  Claud.  14,  15.;  Dion.  lx.  4,  17.  Comp.  the  satirical  Apocohci/nlo-
sis :  "  Si  memoria  repetis,  ego  eram  qui  tibi  ante  templum  tuum  jus  dicebam
totis  diebus  mense  Julio  et  Auprusto."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  359

to  hasten  his  movements, — the  petitioners  for  a  hearing
would  sometimes  obstruct  his  passage  and  cling  about  his
person,  till  he  meekly  resumed  his  seat,  and  devoted  the  after-
noon also  to  their  affairs.1  However  this  passion  for  judicial
functions  might  be  open  to  caricature,  and  however  his  intel-
lectual infirmities  might  betray  themselves  in  occasional
haste,  frivolity,  or  indecision,  the  conduct  of  Claudius  seems
to  have  been  actuated  by  a  sincerely  beneficent  intention,
and  shows  beyond  dispute  the  principles  of  moderation  and
equity  which  distinguished  him.  A  man  can  hardly  be
naturally  a  tyrant  who  takes  pleasure  in  meting  out  justice,
and  deciding  questions  of  right.  It  was  with  real  satisfaction
therefore,  we  may  believe,  that  Claudius  suppressed  the  laws
of  majesty,  and  forbade  the  practice  of  delation  ;  that  he  re-
linquished the  most  grievous  exactions  of  his  predecessor ;
that  he  promised  never  to  subject  a  Roman  citizen  to  torture ;
that  he  declined  to  raise  the  festivals  of  his  house  to  the
dignity  of  national  solemnities.  When  he  repressed  the
encroachments  of  the  freedmen,  and  caused  false  pretenders
to  the  franchise  to  be  capitally  punished,  and  again  when  he
withdrew  the  liberty  which  Caius  had  allowed  to  slaves  of
giving  evidence  against  their  masters,  he  consulted  principles
of  Roman  law  to  which  the  citizens  attached  considerable
importance.  It  was  not  in  the  interests  of  humanity,  but  of
a  jealous  and  inquisitorial  policy,  that  such  indulgences  had
been  granted,  and  it  gave  occasion  to  intolerable  licence.
The  justice  indeed  of  Claudius  was  little  tempered  with
mercy.  Under  his  reign  more  parricides,  it  was  said,  were
adjudged  to  the  ancient  punishment  of  the  sack  than  in  all
the  ages  that  had  elapsed  before  it.a  Nevertheless,  one  of
his  enactments  at  least  remains  to  show  that  his  views  with
respect  to  the  servile  population  were  milder  and  more
enlightened  than  those  of  previous  legislators.  He  ordained
that  the  sick  slaves  exposed  in  the  temple  of  ^Esculapius
should,  if  they  recovered,  obtain  their  freedom  ; but  the

1  Suet.  Claud.  16,  33.

2  Suet.  Claud.  34. ;  Scnec.  de  Clem.  i.  23.

390  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

masters  who  ridded  themselves  of  their  obligations  to  the  old
and  infirm  by  actually  putting  them  to  death,  as  may  have
been  sometimes  done,  he  declared  guilty  of  murder.  We
may  hope  that  this,  the  only  recorded  instance  of  his  con-
sideration for  that  degraded  caste,  was  in  fact  but  a  single
specimen  of  a  more  extensive  legislation.1

V.  In  the  construction  of  enormous  works  of  magnificence

or  utility  the  Romans  beheld  the  most  flattering  reflection  of

their own greatness. The undertakings of

V Material  .

constructions  Claudius  were  not  unworthy  of  this  colossal  age
of  material  creations  ;  yet  they  were  not  the
mere  fantastic  conceptions  of  turgid  pride  and  unlimited
power.  The  aqueduct  begun,  as  we  have  seen,  by  Caius,
was  completed,  after  several  years'  labour,  by  his  successor,
from  whom  it  derived  the  name  of  Claudian,  by  which  it
was  thenceforth  distinguished.  This  channel  secured  for  the
city  the  purest  and  most  abundant  of  all  its  supplies  of  water,
and  enriched  the  populace  with  the  cheapest  and  most  useful
of  its  luxuries.  The  charges  which  have  been  made  against
Caius,  of  withdrawing  first  the  vessels,  and  afterwards  the
carts  and  waggons  of  Italy  from  their  ordinary  employment
in  conveying  food  to  the  population,  and  of  leaving  Home  at
his  death  with  no  more  than  a  week's  consumption  of  grain
in  store,  though  involving  probably  considerable  misrepre-
sentation, seem,  nevertheless,  to  have  been  grounded  on  the
scarcity  which  actually  broke  out  more  than  once,  and  lasted
for  several  years,  during  the  government  of  his  successor.
It  must  be  considered  among  the  difficulties  with  which  the
feeble  old  man  had  to  contend,  and  it  may  serve  to  enhance
our  idea  of  the  merits  of  his  laborious  administration,  that
he  received  from  the  selfish  tyrant  before  him  the  legacy  of
empty  granaries,  as  well  as  an  exhausted  treasury.2  It  is
not  impossible  that  the  senate's  ready  acquiescence  in  the

1  Suet.  Claud.  25. :  "  Quod  si  quis  necare  mallet  quem  quam  exponere,
cacdis  crimiiie  teneri." Comp.  Dion,  Ix.  13,  29.

2  Aurel.  Victor,  de  Ccesar  4. ;  Senec.  de  Brev.  Vil.  18. ;  C.  Caesar  "  decede-
bat ....  septem  aut  octo  dierum  cibaria  superesse."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  3  91

choice  of  the  prfetorians  was  determined  by  the  prospect  of
a  famine  in  the  city,  a  popular  riot,  and  a  servile  insurrection ;
and  the  republicans  of  the  day  may  well  have  consented  to
waive  their  speculative  principles  in  favour  of  an  emperor,
at  a  moment  when  the  tribes  and  centuries  of  antiquity
would  have  demanded  the  creation  of  a  dictator.  It  has
been  seen  that  the  Alexandrian  corn  ships  came  to  anchor  at
Puteoli,  more  than  an  hundred  miles  from  the  place  of  their
cargo's  destination.  Such  was  the  want  of  harbours  or
secure  roadsteads  along  the  strand  of  Latium,  that  it  was
only  the  smaller  coasting  vessels  of  Gaul  or  Spain  that  could
venture  to  run  to  land  at  any  nearer  point.  The  mouth  of
the  Tiber  had  become  nearly  choked  up  by  the  accumulation
of  sand,  and  the  few  vessels  that  now  sought  the  quays  of
Ostia  were  generally  obliged  to  ride  at  anchor  in  the  offing.
The  engineers  despaired  of  clearing  and  keeping  open  a
passage  in  the  main  stream  of  the  river ;  but  they  now,  under
the  direction  of  Claudius,  resorted  to  the  plan  of  cutting  a
new  channel  from  the  right  bank,  a  little  above  the  deserted
harbour,  and  constructing  an  artificial  haven,  with  the  aid  of '
two  moles  advanced  into  the  sea.  The  entrance  was  illumi-
nated by  a  light-house ;  and  from  henceforth,  as  long  as
science  and  industry  survived  in  the  capital  of  the  world,
the  vessels  which  supplied  it  with  its  first  necessary  could
come  by  day  or  by  night  to  a  safe  and  convenient  anchorage,
and  transfer  their  freight  to  the  barges,  to  be  propelled
against  the  descending  current  by  the  labour  of  The  portus
men  or  horses.1  To  this  haven  was  given  the  neThar'ixmr  at
name  of  Portus  Romanus  or  Portus  Augusti,  to  0stia-
distinguish  it  from  the  now  neglected  establishment  of  Ostia.
Claudius  himself  deserves  the  entire  credit  of  this  bold  and
salutary  undertaking  ;  for  he  persisted  in  it  notwithstanding
the  remonstrances  of  his  timid  engineers,  and  the  great  out-
lay it  required. Its  importance  was  speedily  shown  ;  for  in

1  Suet.  Claud.  20.:  Dion,  lx.  11.;  Plin.  Jlkt.  Nai.  ix.  5.,  xvi.  76.  g  '2.  An
immense  vessel,  which  Cuius  had  constructed  to  convey  an  obelisk  from  Alex-
andria to  Rome,  wa3  sunk  to  form  the  foundation  of  the  mole.

392  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  eleventh  year  of  his  reign  the  empire  was  visited  by  a
scarcity,  which  seems  to  have  followed  on  the  failure  of  the
crops  throughout  the  provinces,  and  redoubled  exertions
were  required  to  save  the  capital  from  famine.  Rome  was
in  an  uproar ;  the  multitude  surrounded  the  emperor  in  the
forum,  and  assailed  him  with  the  most  violent  gestures.1
The  precautions  of  Augustus  on  similar  occasions,  with  the
expulsion  of  foreigners  from  the  city,  were  again  resorted  to.
The  importation  of  grain  into  Rome  required  more  method
and  attention  than  had  hitherto  been  given  to  it ;  and  the
completion  of  a  harbour  to  which  corn  could  be  brought  at
all  seasons,  was  wisely  followed  by  a  measure  to  encourage
the  construction  of  ships  of  greater  size  than  had  usually
been  employed  in  the  trade.

Another  undertaking,  though  its  object  was  merely  of
local  utility,  deserves  to  be  recorded  for  its  magnitude.  The
The  emissary  Marsians  had  represented  to  Augustus  the  disas-
cfnuhs? lake  ters  to  wllich  their  country  was  liable  from  the
swelling  of  the  waters  of  the  Fucinus,  a  basin
among  their  mountains  in  the  heart  of  Italy,  nearly  thirty
miles  in  circumference,  which  receives  the  drainage  of  several
valleys,  but  has  no  apparent  natural  outlet.  Among  the  lime-
stone hills  which  encircle  it  there  are  probably  subterranean
clefts  through  which,  as  in  other  regions  of  similar  forma-
tion, a  portion  of  its  Avaters  drains  away  ;  but  they  are  not
capable  of  expansion  with  the  increase  of  volume  within,  and
in  seasons  unusually  wet  the  lake  overflowed  the  lips  of  its
crater,  submerging  a  great  extent  of  valuable  land.  The
tunnel  by  which  the  superfluous  waters  of  the  Alban  lake,  a
much  smaller  reservoir,  are  still  carried  off  was  a  work  of  the
early  Republic.  But  this  emissary  is  little  more  than  a  mile
in  length,  while  the  perforation  required  for  the  Fucinus,
which  Augustus  shrank  from  undertaking,  was  not  less  than

1  Four  famines  are  specially  mentioned  as  occurring  in  this  reign : — 1.  at
Rome  in  the  first  and  second  year ;  2.  in  Judea  in  the  fourth :  3.  in  Greece  in
the  ninth  ;  4.  at  Rome  in  the  eleventh.  Brotier  on  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  43.  Comp.
Suet.  Claud.  18.;  Joseph.  Antiq.-Jud.  xx.  2.  5.;  Act.  Apost.  xi.  28.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  393

three.  Claudius  however  was  not  deterred  by  difficulties
which  labour  and  money  could  surmount.  He  did  not,  per-
haps, stop  to  calculate  with  accuracy  the  real  utility  of  the
work.  He  commanded  it  to  be  done,  and  his  command  was
executed ;  but  it  occupied  thirty  thousand  men  for  eleven
years,  an  amount  of  labour  which  no  doubt  might  have  been
more  profitably  employed  in  many  other  ways.  Unlike  the
Alban  tunnel,  which  has  continued  to  discharge  its  waters
without  intermission  for  two  and  twenty  centuries,  the  emis-
sary of  the  Fucinus  fell  speedily  into  decay,  and  required  to
be  repaired  and  restored  to  efficiency  by  a  later  emperor.  It
has  now  been  completely  choked  up  for  many  hundreds  of
years,  and  the  meadows  on  the  shelving  bank  of  the  lake  are
still  subject,  as  in  ancient  times,  to  the  caprices  of  the
seasons.1

VI.  Measures  for  the  amusement  of  the  populace  may
properly  be  mentioned  next  after  such  as  were  intended  for
its  well  being ;  for  in  view  of  the  Roman  admin-  vr  Measures
istrator  the  two  were  of  co-ordinate  and  almost  „ent  ofThe86
equal  necessity.  If,  on  the  one  hand,  he  provid-  citizens-
ed  the  people  with  cheap  corn,  on  the  other,  that  they  might
have  no  reasonable  pretext  for  discontent,  he  was  careful
to  furnish  them  with  the  unfailing  excitement  of  magnificent
public  exhibitions.  Accordingly,  if  Claudius  executed  im-
mense works  of  engineering,  for  supplying  the  metropolis
witli  water,  for  securing  the  access  of  her  richly-freighted
flotillas,  or  for  averting  a  periodical  inundation,  not  less  was
he  required  to  watch  with  simulated  interest  the  long-pro-
tracted combats  of  men  and  beasts,  in  which  the  multitude
expected  their  ruler  to  share  their  own  barbarous  satisfaction.
We  have  already  admired  the  patience  with  which  Augustus
submitted  to  this  tax  on  his  time  and  temper.  Tiberius,  we
have  seen,  could  not  school  his  stubborn  mind  to  a  similar
sacrifice.  Caius  shared  the  vulvar  taste  for  brutal  excite-
ment,  and  in  this  instance,  at  least,  could  court  popularity

1  Suet.  Claud.  20.;  Dion,  lx.  11.

394  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Avhile  he  gratified  his  own  appetite.  Claudius,  patient  and
plodding  by  nature,  regarded  this  condescension  as  a  legiti-
mate portion  of  the  routine  to  which  he  had  devoted  himself;
and  he  sate  through  the  weary  hours  of  popular  amusement
without  interest,  it  may  be  believed,  but,  at  the  same  time,
without  disgust.  His  constitutional  insensibility  did  not
even  require  the  rest  and  diversion  of  mind  which  were  com-
The  jjiadiato-  monly  demanded  even  by  the  mass  of  the  pop-
rial  shows.  ulace.  In  the  shows  of  the  amphitheatre,  after
the  morning  exhibitions,  there  was  an  interval  allowed  for
rest  or  refreshment,  during  which  the  spectators  retired  for
the  most  part  from  the  spot,  to  resume  their  places  at  a  later
hour.  Claudius,  it  was  observed,  rarely  availed  himself  of
this  respite.  His  bodily  infirmities  perhaps  made  him  averse
from  change  and  motion,  and  he  was  content  to  retain  his
seat  in  the  imperial  tribune,  and  witness  the  interludes  of
rope-dancing  and  jugglers'  feats,  which  formed  a  languid  en-
tertainment in  the  intervals  of  blood-shed.  It  is  said,  indeed,
that  he  was  not  satisfied  with  these  innocent  recreations,  and
sometimes  called  for  a  fresh  supply  of  gladiators  to  fill  the
hours  of  suspense.1  If,  at  least,  the  spectators  made  the  de-
mand, he  would  comply  with  it  with  his  usual  apathy.  The
general  taste  for  these  spectacles  was  increasing,  and  under
Claudius  it  certainly  received  no  check.  He  suffered  himself
indeed  to  be  made  the  tool  of  the  popular  humour  here  as
elsewhere,  condescending  to  bandy  coarse  jokes  with  the
multitude,  and  degrading  the  majesty  of  empire  to  the
level  of  vulgar  buffoonery ;  nor  can  we  resist  the  testimony
of  our  authorities  to  his  brutal  indifference  to  human  suffer-
ing, and  his  morbid  curiosity  in  scrutinizing,  and  as  it  were
analysing  it  in  his  victims.9

Augustus  had  exhibited  a  mock  sea-fight  in  the  basin  he
constructed  on  the  bank  of  the  Tiber,  and  Claudius  directed

1  Suet.  Claud.  34.;  Dion,  lx.  13.

2  Suet.  1.  c. :  "  Sffivum  et  sanguiuariurn  natura  fuisse,  magnis  minimisque
npparuit  rebus.  Tormenta  qusestionum  ....  exigebat  coram  ....  jugulari
jubebat  ut  exspirantium  fades  videret."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  395

a  show  of  siege  operations,  and  the  storming  of  a  city,  in
the  meadows  of  the  Campus  Martius  ;  but  we  do  not  read
that  on  either  of  these  occasions  the  illusion  was  carried  to
the  extent  of  actual  bloodshed.  It  was  very  dif-  Grand  8pecta.
ferent,  however,  with  the  extraordinary  specta-  fi^onThe
cle  which  Claudius,  towards  the  close  of  his  reign,  lake  FuciDU8-
paraded  on  the  Fucine  lake,  to  celebrate  the  completion  of
his  work  there,  and  the  first  admission  of  its  water  into  the
tunnel  he  had  constructed.  He  summoned  the  population  of
Rome  and  Italy  to  witness  from  the  surrounding  hills  the
manoeuvres  of  two  fleets  of  triremes  and  quadriremes,  man-
ned by  armies  of  gladiators,  while  vessels  filled  with  soldiers
were  posted  on  the  shores  to  prevent  desertion,  and  cut  of
retreat.  One  authority  estimates  the  opposing  armaments  at
twelve  vessels  each,  another  at  fifty ;  while  Tacitus,  whose
numbers  are  not  generally  excessive,  declares  that  the  com-
batants engaged  were  as  many  as  nineteen  thousand,  and
that  the  whole  circuit  of  the  lake  was  lined  with  the  flotilla
which  guarded  them ;  an  exaggeration  manifestly  of  the
most  flagrant  kind.  Refinements  of  luxury  formed  a  horrid
combination  with  the  atrocity  of  the  spectacle.  Claudius,
armed  and  cloaked  as  an  Imperator,  with  his  consort  in  a
military  mantle  by  his  side,  seated  himself  on  a  throne  over-
looking the  waters,  attended  by  senators,  knights,  and  sol-
diers. The  combatants,  who  were  styled  Sicilians  and  Rho-
dians,  defiled  before  him,  and  saluted  him;  and  when  he
graciously  returned  their  greeting,  it  was  understood  as  an
intimation  that  the  contest  was  not  intended  to  be  mortal.1
When  the  vessels  were  drawn  up  in  array,  the  figure  of  a
Triton  in  silver  was  made  to  emerge  suddenly  from  the  lake,
and  sound  the  signal  for  engagement.  They  went  through
the  manoeuvres  of  a  sham  fight,  advancing  and  retreating,
Striking  and  rebounding  from  each  other;  but  the  emperor,
Ave  are  told,  was  not  satisfied  with  this  peaceful  display,  and
ordered  the  attack  to  commence  in  earnest. Dion  assures  us

1  Suet.  Claud.  21. :  "Ave  imperator,  morituri  tc  salutant"

396  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

that,  when  the  men  hesitated  to  destroy  one  another,  he  caus-
ed his  own  flotilla  to  charge,  and  cut  them  in  pieces.  Sue-
tonius, more  soberly,  only  suggests  that  he  thought  of  doing
so;  but  Tacitus  here  at  least  is  more  moderate  than  either  of
his  compeers,  and  announces  that,  after  many  wounds,  the
combatants  were  separated  and  dismissed.  Such  remarkable
discrepancies  in  the  relation  of  a  matter  of  such  patent  no-
toriety may  put  us  on  our  guard  against  many  astounding
anecdotes  of  their  times  with  which  these  authors  perplex
and  provoke  us.1

In  reading  of  the  shattered  health  and  frame  of  the  prince
who  was  raised  unwillingly  to  the  throne  from  his  desk,  at  a
Personal  in-  period  far  beyond  the  middle  of  life,  untrained
tributedTo6  at  f°r  government,  and  with  no  natural  bent  tow-
ciaudms.  ar(jg  ag-airgj  we  cannot,  but  admire  the  force  of  the

Roman  character,  which  appears  to  have  borne  this  feeble
creature  through  labours  which  might  task  the  highest  pow-
ers and  the  happiest  disposition.  Yet  this  incessant  strain  of
mind  and  body  seems  to  have  been  favourable  to  his  health,
which  recovered  its  tone  under  the  labours  of  the  principate.
The  wear  and  tear  of  a  life  so  trying  required  no  doubt  the
support  of  stimulants  ;  the  excess  in  eating  and  drinkiDg  to
which  Claudius  is  said  to  have  been  addicted,  and  which  has
made  his  name  notorious  for  gluttony,  was  at  first  perhaps
no  more  than  indulgence  of  the  craving  which  his  exhausted
powers  naturally  excited.  Encouraged  by  the  artifice  of  the
wives  and  parasites  who  ruled  him,  he  lapsed  more  and  more
into  gross  intemperance,  and  the  pains  of  indigestion,  from
which  he  suffered  so  acutely  as  to  meditate,  it  was  said,  es-
caping from  them  by  suicide,  were  caused,  we  may  believe,
by  this  habitual  abuse.2 His  jaded  appetite  was  excited  by

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  56.;  Suet.  Claud.  21.;  Dion,  lx.  33.  It  seems  to  have
been  in  connexion  with  this  exhibition  that  Claudius  gave  a  banquet  at  the  head
of  the  emissary,  at  which  the  sudden  rush  of  the  water  into  the  tunnel  before  the
proper  moment  was  very  near  causing  a  frightful  catastrophe.  Tacitus,  c.  67. ;
Suet.  c.  32.

*  Suet.  Cla-.td.  31.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  397

the  splendour  of  his  banquets  and  the  numbers  of  the  com-
pany :  his  viands  were  often  spread  in  ample  halls  or  pleas-
ure grounds,  and  his  couches  crowded  by  many  hundreds  of
guests.  On  such  occasions  he  gratified  his  senses  to  the  ut-
most, and  seldom  rose  from  table  till  he  had  gorged  to  re-
pletion, and  required  to  relieve  his  stomach  by  vomiting.  In
judging  of  the  character  of  the  poor  old  man,  whose  private
failings  have  been  elevated  into  notoriety,  some  allowance
must  be  made  for  the  coarseness  of  the  times,  and  the  ordi-
nary licence  of  his  associates.  Nor  must  we  forget  how
readily  the  scandalous  anecdotes  of  the  day  were  accepted
by  annalists  and  biographers  as  veritable  history.  With  re-
gard to  women,  the  intemperance  of  which  he  is  accused  may
be  almost  confined  to  the  ease  with  which  he  passed
from  the  caresses  of  one  lawful  wife  to  those  of  a  suc-
cessor: of  all  the  Caesars  Claudius  stands,  on  the  whole,
the  most  nearly  free  from  the  charge  of  illicit  and  dis-
graceful indulgences.1  But  now  for  the  first  time  at  Rome
the  story  of  the  prince's  wives  becomes  the  history  of  the
principate ;  the  city  of  Scipio  and  Augustus  recedes  for  a
moment  from  our  view,  and  we  seem  to  stray,  as  in  a  way-
ward dream,  through  the  saloons  of  Versailles  or  Aranjuez.

1  Suet.  Claud.  33.  Two  of  his  female  favourites  are  named  by  Tacitus  {Ann.
xi.  30.),  and  Dion  has  a  passing  remark  on  his  intemperance  with  regard  both
to  wine  and  women.  But  the  particulars  of  his  alleged  excesses,  from  which
his  gluttony  has  become  so  generally  infamous,  are  confined  to  the  scandalous
chronicle  of  his  biographer.

398  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

CHAPTEK  L.

CLAUDIUS SUBJECT TO THE INFLUENCE, 1. OF WOMEN: HIS WIVES: MESSALINA.

2. OF FREEDMEN  : POLYBIUS,  NARCISSUS,  ETC. TREATMENT OF THE SISTERS OF

CAIUS. BANISHMENT  OF  SENECA. DEATH  OF  APPIUS  SILANUS. CONSPIRACY OF

SCRIBONIANUS. INVASION OF BRITAIN  AND TRIUMPH  OF CLAUDIUS. DEATH  OF

VALERIUS  ASIATICUS. INTERNAL  ADMINISTRATION OF CLAUDIUS. RIVALRY OF

MESSALINA AND AGRIPPINA. MESSALINA'S AMOUR WITH SILIUS, AND DARING

MARRIAGE WITH HIM. ALARM AND  ANGER  OF  CLAUDIUS. HER DISGRACE AND

DEATH. INTRIGUES FOR A SUCCESSOR. CLAUDIUS MARRIES AGRIPPINA. HER

SON DOMITIUS BETROTHED TO HIS DAUGHTER OCTAVIA : ADOPTED UNDER THE

NAME  OF  NERO. INFLUENCE  OF AGRIPPINA  : SHE FOUNDS THE COLONIA AGRIP-

PINENSIS. ADVANCING POPULARITY OF NERO. AGRIPPINA EFFECTS THE DE-
STRUCTION OF LEPIDA. Slffi  POISONS  CLAUDIUS. NERO  SUCCEEDS TO  POWER.

REMARKS ON THE CHARACTER  OF  CLAUDIUS. — THE  ADORATION  PAID  HIM  DURING

HIS  LIFE  BY  SENECA,  AND  ABUSE  OF  HIM  AFTER  HIS  DEATH. THE  APOCOLOCYNTC-

SIS. FLATTERY  OF  NERO.  (a.  U.  794-807.  A.  D.  41-54.)

THE  ruler  to  whom  the  conduct  of  affairs  was  now  en-
trusted had  been  bred,  beyond  the  usual  term  of  infan-
ciaudius  sub-  e7i  ^J  t^ie  women  °f  the  imperial  household  ;  for
influence0  ofhe  tne  weakness  of  his  sickly  frame  still  required  the
women.  care  0f  female  nursing  at  an  age  when  the  young

Roman  was  ordinarily  transferred  to  his  tutors  and  the
masters  of  his  athletic  exercises.  To  the  last  he  continued
to  feel  the  need  of  the  petty  attentions  and  ministrations
of  the  gentler  sex.  In  early  adolescence  his  guardians
proposed  to  provide  for  his  domestic  comfort  by  espousing
him  to  consorts  of  their  own  selection ;  but  of  those  who
were  successively  chosen  for  the  honour  two  were  lost  to  him
before  marriage  ;  the  one  being  rejected  on  account  of  the
offence  her  parents  had  given  to  Augustus,  the  other  dying

A.U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  399

untowardly  on  the  day  appointed  for  the  nuptials.1  Claudius
was  at  last  united  to  Plautia  Urgulanilla,  who,  to  judge
from  the  names  she  thus  combined,  was  the  daughter  perhaps
of  Plautius  Silvanus,  a  distinguished  commander  in  Pannonia,
"whose  tragic  story  has  been  related  under  the  principate  of
Tiberius,  and  was  descended  from  Urgulania,  the  proudest  of
the  friends  of  Livia.3  By  this  noble  bride  Claudius  became
the  father  of  two  children:  the  first  of  them  was  the  Drusus
to  whom  the  daughter  of  Sejanus  was  affianced  almost  at  his
birth,  and  who  died  in  infancy ;  the  second  was  a  girl,  and
received  the  name  of  Claudia.  But  when  her  mother  was
detected  intriguing  with  a  freedman  of  the  household,  and
repudiated  by  her  husband,  Claudius  disowned  the  infant,
and  shocked  the  Romans  by  causing  it,  at  the  age  of  five
months,  to  be  ruthlessly  abandoned.3  By  iElia  Petina,  the
daughter  perhaps  of  iElius  Tubero,  to  whom  he  next  united
himself,  he  had  one  child  only,  whom  he  called  after  his
mother  Antonia,  and  who  became  affianced  to  Cnseus  Pom-
peius  Magnus  the  son  of  a  Crassus,  who  thus,  by  a  strange
favour  of  fortune,  combined  a  descent  from  two  triumvirs,
with  an  alliance  with  the  families  of  three  others.*  The  union
with  Petina  lasted  probably  some  years  ;  and  it  was  in  the
reign  of  Caius,  as  we  may  suppose,  that  Claudius  divorced
himself  from  her  on  some  trifling  disagreement.  A  third
marriage  with  Valeria  Messalina  speedily  folloAved:  the  two
children  she  bore  him  came  into  the  world  towards  the  com-

1  Suet.  Claud.  26.  The  first  was  vEmilia  Lepida,  the  great  granddaughter
of  Augustus,  being  the  child  of  his  granddaughter  Julia  by  L.  Paullus,  and  sis-
ter of  M.  ^Emilius  Lepidus,  the  friend  and  victim  of  Caius  Caligula ;  the  second,
Livia  Medullina,  of  the  family  of  the  Camilli.

1  For  Plautius  Silvanus,  see  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  22.;  Veil.  ii.  112.;  Dion,  lv.  34.
He  was  tin-  grandson  of  Urgulania,  the  friend  of  Livia.

3  Suet.  Claud.  27.  It  seems  not  unlikely  that  this  horrid  act  was  perpe-
trated in  imitation  of  Augustus,  who  forbade  the  infant  of  the  younger  Julia  to
be  nourished.  Hut  to  cast  away  a  child  which  had  once  been  taken  up,  was  an
abuse  of  the  paternal  authority  from  which  the  feelings  of  the  Romans  revolted.

4  For  ^Elius  Tubero,  see  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  1.

400  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

mencement  of  his  principate.1  The  shamelessness  of  the
women  of  the  higher  ranks  has  been  noticed  on  former  oc-
casions :  the  precariousness  of  the  position  they  held  in  mar-
riage seems  to  have  made  them  despair  of  acquiring,  or  at
least  of  long  retaining,  domestic  influence ;  and  they  too
often  abandoned  themselves  to  indulgences,  from  which  they
had  no  motives  either  of  affection  or  prudence  to  withhold
them.  Of  all  the  Roman  matrons,  however,  Messalina  has
acquired  the  most  infamous  celebrity :  her  name  has  been
used  even  to  our  own  times  as  the  greatest  byword  of  re-
proach to  her  sex  ;  the  satirist  has  striven  in  vain  to  influence
the  glowing  colours  which  the  historian  has  flashed  upon  her
crimes.  As  the  wife  of  a  man  whom  she  probably  despised,
it  would  seem  absurd  to  suppose  that  she  put  any  unusual
check  on  the  wanton  passions  of  her  class ;  yet  we  may  see
reason  hereafter  to  question,  at  least  to  their  full  extent,  the
enormities  for  which  she  has  been  so  signally  notorious.

Messalina  was  the  daughter  of  Valerius  Messala  Barbatus,

sometimes  called  also  Messalinus,  who  stood  in  the  relation  of

cousin  to  Claudius  by  marriage: for  his  wife,

Character  and _ .  . _  J  ■,■,-,  »  .,

influence  of  Domitia  Lepida,  was  a  granddaughter,  while
Claudius  was  himself  the  grandson,  of  the  trium-
vir Antonius.  This  Lepida  seems  to  have  been  herself  disso-
lute as  well  as  ambitious,  and  such  were  the  qualities  which
descended  from  her  to  her  child.2 Nevertheless  Messalina,

1  The  son,  who  received  a  few  years  after  his  birth  the  surname  of  Britan-
nicus,  had  completed,  according  to  Tacitus,  his  fourteenth  year  in  808  (Ann.
xiii.  15.),  and  was  therefore  born  a.  v.  794:  if,  however,  he  was  only  two  years
younger  than  Nero  (see  Ann.  xii.  25.),  he  must  have  been  born  as  early  as  792
or  793.  Suetonius  also  contradicts  himself  in  saying  that  the  child  was  born
on  the  20th  day  after  his  father's  accession  (i.  e.  in  Feb.  794),  and  in  his  second
consulship ;  for  this  did  not  commence  till  795.  I  take  the  middle  of  these
dates,  viz.  Feb.  794.  It  does  not  appear  whether  the  daughter,  called  Octavia,
was  older  or  younger  than  her  brother.

-  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  64.  Domitia  Lepida  was  sister  to  Cn.  Domitius,  the  hus-
band, as  will  be  afterwards  recorded,  of  Agrippina  minor,  and  father  of  the  Em-
peror Nero.  She  was  daughter  to  L.  Domitius  by  Antonia  major,  according  to
Suetonius, — minor,  according  to  Tacitus,  less  correctly, — and,  therefore,  grand-

A.  U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  401

at  the  time  when  she  consented  to  attach  herself  to  the  for-
tunes of  Claudius,  could  have  had  no  prospect  of  a  throne.
However  little  she  may  have  regarded  her  husband,  she  clung
no  doubt  to  the  position  she  had  acquired  with  him,  all  the
more  vehemently  as  it  was  strange  and  unexpected,  and  her
most  earnest  efforts,  her  vices  and  her  crimes,  would  be  di-
rected, we  may  suppose,  to  securing  it.  Whatever  may
have  been  the  irregularity  of  her  conduct,  it  was  doubtless
her  wish  to  disguise  it  from  him,  and  she  succeeded  in  keep-
ing him  convinced,  at  least  to  the  last  moment,  of  her  entire
devotedness.  But  his  character  was  too  weak  to  allow  her
to  put  entire  trust  in  his  convictions :  he  was,  in  fact,  con-
stantly swayed  by  the  influence  of  one  or  another  of  those
about  him ;  the  whisper  of  a  friend  or  courtier  might  blast
her  dearest  schemes,  and  her  intrigues  were  directed  to  se-
curing in  her  interest  the  persons  by  whom  he  was  most
closely  surrounded.  For  this  purpose,  we  are  assured,  she
amassed  money  and  she  lavished  favours.  She  joined  with
the  ministers  of  the  court  in  selling  appointments  to  the
wealthiest  applicants,  in  extorting  bribes  by  threats  and
prosecutions,  in  procuring  the  confiscation  of  the  estates  of
nobles,  and  persuading  the  emperor  to  bestow  them  on  her
self;  thus  enriched,  she  sought  to  bind  her  accomplices  to  her
side  by  dividing  her  plunder  with  them,  and  entangling  them
in  her  fascinating  caresses.  Perilous  as  such  a  guilty  com-
merce was,  she  carried  it  on  with  boldness  and  success,  and
continued  during  several  years  to  enjoy  the  full  confidence
of  her  husband,  while  she  closed  the  lips  both  of  her  para-
mours and  victims.  But  the  connexion  in  which  she  may
thus  have  placed  herself  with  the  freedmen  of  the  palace,  the
real  ministers  of  the  court  and  instruments  of  the  imperial
pleasure,  has  proved  fatal  at  least  to  her  reputation  with
posterity.  Whatever  were  her  vices  and  domestic  treasons,
they  might  have  been  overlooked  perhaps  by  historians,  who

daughter  of  the  triumvir  Antonius  and  Octavia. Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  44. ;
Suet.  Ncr.  5.

vol.  v.— 26

402  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

were  generally  content  to  rebuke  the  petulance  and  ambition
of  women  with  a  contemptuous  sneer ; '  but  no  infamy  could
be  too  atrocious  to  charge  upon  the  matron  who  was  guilty
of  a  criminal  association  with  a  Polybius  or  Narcissus,  the
vile  Grecian  ministers  of  a  Roman  imperator,  the  men  who
sounded  a  lower  depth  even  in  the  depths  of  delation,  by
sacrificing  the  best  blood  of  Quirinus  to  the  cupidity  of
branded  and  base-born  foreigners.

The  regimen  of  women  who  trafficked  in  offices  of  state,
an  enormity  hitherto  unknown  in  Rome,  might  have  been
™„  -o  ;™o„  „p regarded  as  the  last  degradation  of  the  common-

The  regimen  of o  »

the  freedmen.  wealth,  had  it  not  been  followed  by  the  still
more  degrading:  regimen  of  freedmen.  Next  to  his  women
it  was  by  his  freedmen  that  Claudius,  we  are  told,  was  gov-
erned. The  facility  of  enfranchisement  has  been  already
mentioned.  We  have  seen  how  the  slaves  of  a  noble  house-
hold were  of  two  very  different  classes ;  of  which  the  lower
consisted  of  mere  menial  drudges,  the  rude  boors  of  Thrace,
Africa,  or  Cappadocia ;  while  the  upper,  principally  from
Greece  and  Syria,  comprised  the  polished  instruments  of  fas-
tidious luxury,  exquisitely  trained  and  educated,  and  accus-
tomed, by  every  compliance,  however  abject,  to  ingratiate
themselves  with  their  sensual  and  pampered  masters.  While
the  former  class  had  little  hope  perhaps  of  improving  their
condition,  or  escaping,  if  not  prematurely  worn  out  by  toil,
a  neglected  and  even  an  abandoned  old  age,  the  latter  might
calculate  on  securing  their  freedom  early,  after  which  they
enjoyed  a  thousand  opportunities  of  rendering  themselves  as
necessary  to  their  patron  as  they  had  previously  been  to
their  master.  The  intercourse  of  the  Roman  noble  with  his
fellow-citizens  had  been  always  stiff  and  ceremonious :  the

1  It  was  Valerius  Messala,  or  Messalinus,  the  father  of  the  empress,  who
had  resisted,  in  the  time  of  Tiberius,  the  proposition  that  the  wives  of  provin-
cial governors  should  be  forbidden  to  accompany  their  husbands  abroad.  He
had  used  the  proud  old  Roman  argument :  "  Viri  in  eo  culpam  si  foemina  modum
excedat."  This  man  and  Aurelius  Cotta  Messalinus  seem  to  have  both  been
sons  of  Messala  Corvinus. See  Ruperti  on  Tacitus,  Ann.  ii.  32.

A.  U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  403

many  privileges  they  had  in  common  gave  even  the  plebeian
a  claim  to  formal  respect  from  his  patrician  neighbour  ;  and
it  was  rarely  that  the  ties  of  confidence  and  easy  friendship
subsisted  between  men  so  neai'ly  equal  in  consideration,  so
often  rivals,  and  always  liable  to  become  so.  But  the  Ro-
man magnate  wearied  of  the  unceasing  round  of  convention-
alities in  which  he  moved,  and  longed  for  associates  with
whom  he  might  unbend  in  real  familiarity,  without  demean-
ing himself  to  the  company  of  mere  slaves.  The  fashion  of
employing  freedmen  for  the  service  of  the  patrician  house-
hold, and  the  management  of  domestic  affairs,  was  first  im-
ported into  Rome  by  the  conquerors  of  the  East,  by  Sulla,
Lucullus,  and  Pompeius ; — who  were  too  proud,  after  enjoy-
ing the  submission  of  kings  and  potentates,  to  recognise  the
equality  of  their  fellow-citizens.  Caesar  indeed,  with  his
usual  magnanimity,  had  disdained  to  avail  himself  of  this
unworthy  indulgence.  The  ascendancy  he  naturally  exer-
cised over  all  that  came  in  contact  with  him,  enabled  him  to
secure  the  spontaneous  services  of  men  of  birth  and  consid-
eration hardly  inferior  to  his  own,  such  as  Matius,  Oppius,
and  Hirtius.  Such  were  the  stewards  of  his  revenues,  the
managers  of  his  public  and  private  benevolences,  Romans  in
birth  and  blood,  men  attached  to  him  by  real  friendship,  but
who  felt  that  they  could  ply  without  disgrace  before  his
acknowledged  superiority.  But  even  the  inheritor  of  a
throne  had  no  such  personal  influence  as  nature's  emperor,
the  first  of  the  Coosars.  Augustus,  great  as  he  was  in  genius
as  well  as  in  station,  scarcely  found  such  willing  subservience
among  the  citizens  of  his  native  country.  Agrippa  became
too  powerful  to  continue  really  his  friend ;  the  self-respect
even  of  Maecenas  grew  at  last  irksome  to  him.  lie  had  re-
course to  the  venal  attachment  of  his  freedmen,  whose  fidel-
ity exacted  no  requital,  and  hardly  expected  an  acknowledg-
ment ;  and  of  these  he  held  many  in  intimacy,  and  cultivated
their  esteem.  The  names  of  Polybius  and  Ililarion,  of  Li-
cinus,  Eunus,  and  Celadus,  occur  in  history  or  inscriptions

404  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

among  the  trusty  freedmen  of  the  first  princeps.1  He  neither
required  of  them  degrading  services,  nor  again  did  he  suffer
them  to  gorge  themselves  with  the  spoils  of  his  suitors.  He
enjoyed  the  solace  of  their  intimacy,  and  when  most  anxious
for  privacy,  and  the  ever-coveted  respite  from  the  formalities
of  patrician  life,  it  was  in  the  suburban  villa  of  one  of  these
humble  ministers  that  he  would  disburden  himself  of  the
cares  of  his  station.2  Tiberius,  whose  strict  self-discipline,
at  least  till  the  latter  years  of  his  retirement,  was  even  more
severe  and  unremitting,  allowed  himself  no  such  relaxation  ;
his  freedmen  were  few  in  number,  and  seem  to  have  enjoyed
no  portion  of  his  confidence.  The  perturbed  spirit  of  Caius
was  agitated  by  restless  furies  which  never  suffered  him  to
seek  repose,  or  court  the  charms  of  simplicity  for  a  moment.
During  the  fitful  fever  of  his  brief  grasp  of  power  he  never
threw  off  the  public  man  and  the  sovereign ;  he  never  sought
the  shade,  or  cast  upon  another  the  cares  and  toils  of  his  aw-
ful pre-eminence.  None  ever  possessed  more  than  a  moment-
ary influence  over  him.  But  the  fashion  of  keeping  freed-
men always  in  attendance  on  the  Roman  noble  had  become,
from  the  prevailing  indolence  of  the  age,  by  this  time  gen-
eral, and  Caius  had  many  such  about  his  court,  though  he
deigned  to  make  little  use  of  them.  When,  therefore,  a
prince  succeeded  to  whom  ministers  and  confidants  were  a
necessity,  the  institution  was  ready  to  his  hands.  The  va-
rious services,  partly  official,  partly  menial,  which  monarchs
in  modern  times  have  been  allowed  by  the  spirit  of  feudal-
ism to  exact  from  their  noble  vassals,  Avere  discharged  for
Claudius  by  these  Grecian  adventurers.  Polybius  was  the
director  of  his  studies,  who  unrolled  for  him  perhaps  the
dusty  volumes  of  Etruscan  lore,  in  which  he  pretended  to
instruct  his  countrymen.  Narcissus  was  his  secretary ;  Pal-
las was  his  steward.  To  Felix,  the  brother  of  Pallas,  he
gave  the  command  of  a  province  and  an  army.  The  eunuch
Posides,  whatever  his  special  functions  may  have  been,  was

1  Suet.  Oct.  61,  101.  with  notes  of  Baumgarten-Crusius.

2  Suet.  Oct.  72.

A.  U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  405

among  that  class  of  his  intimate  attendants  which  the  Roman
borrowed  from  the  domestic  establishments  of  the  East.
Narcissus  was  the  most  confidential  of  his  advisers ;  Harj)o-
cras,  Myron,  Amphaeus,  Pheronactes,  and  Drusillanus  are
mentioned,  though  with  no  specified  offices,  among  the
friends  and  favourites,  who  shared  in  the  cares,  or  amused
the  leisure  of  a  patron  who  lacked  the  faculty  of  originating
for  himself  either  his  employments  or  his  diversions.1  These
were  the  men  who  secured  the  intimacy  of  the  chief  of  the
Roman  nobility ;  they  occupied  his  attention  to  the  exclusion
of  senators  and  consulars ;  they  suggested  the  measures  of
his  administration,  engaged  favourable  audiences  for  foreign
potentates,  directed  the  appointment  of  proconsuls  and  le-
gates, controlled  the  march  of  armies  and  the  campaigns  of
imperators :  these  were  the  men  who  determined  with  Mes-
salina  who  should  be  the  victims  of  delation,  who  were  the
fattest  for  sacrifice,  who  the  most  pliant  for  corruption  ;  to
these  every  noble  Roman,  every  wealthy  foreigner,  paid
court  by  presents  and  flatteries ;  upon  these  Messalina  be-
stowed her  own  favours,  and  procured  for  them  within  the
walls  of  the  palace  itself  the  noblest  women  of  Rome.3  Most
of  these  men  amassed  colossal  fortunes  ;  the  wealth  of  Pal-
las and  Narcissus  became  proverbial;  and  when  Claudius
was  once  heard  to  complain  of  the  slenderness  of  his  own
imperial  revenues,  it  was  replied  that  he  would  be  rich
enough  if  his  two  wealthy  freedmen  would  deign  to  take
him  into  partnership.8  Both  the  one  and  the  other  of  these
favourites  were  honoured  by  the  senate  with  the  insignia  of
high  magistracies,  though  it  was  impossible  to  admit  them
to  such  offices  themselves,  and  they  were  loaded,  moreover,

1  Suet.  Claud.  28. ;  Senec.  Apocol.  14. ;  Tertull.  de  Pall  5.

4  Suet.  Claud.  24.;  Dion,  lx.  2,  11,  18.

'  Suet.  Claud.  28. :  "  Abundaturum  si  a  duobus  libertis  in  consortium  re-
ciperetur."  Of  Narcissus  Dion  says  (lx.  34.),  fivpiaSac  nXeiovc  fivpiuv  elxe,  kiu
npooetxov  avru)  n6?.eir  nal  fiaotkeic.  Of  Pallas  Tacitus  (Ann.  xii.  '>'■'>.):  "  Pal-
lanti  ccntics  quadratics  sestertium  ccnsuit  consul  dcsignatus."  Juvenal,  i.  108. :
"  Ego  possidco  plus  Pallantc  et  Liciis."

406  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  41.

with  enormous  grants  of  public  money.1  As  long  as  the
good  understanding  between  the  empress  and  the  freedmen
was  maintained  by  mutual  compliances,  the  emperor  re-
mained the  infatuated  victim  of  their  heinous  conspiracy.
He  continued  to  be  deluded  for  years  with  the  notion  that
he  was  governing  Rome  with  the  energy  of  an  ancient  con-
sul or  dictator,  but  his  operations,  contrived  and  guided  by
their  hands,  were  little  more  than  the  mere  shadows  of  sov-
ereignty :  if  he  made  the  laws,  the  administration  of  them,
in  which  alone  the  real  government  consisted,  was  still  sub-
jected to  their  control,  and  was  exercised  from  East  to  West
by  their  creatures.  Claudius,  under  the  influence  of  his
wives  and  children,  enacted  not  their  prince  but  their  minis-
ter.5

Such  at  least  is  the  conclusion  to  which  the  testimony  of
all  our  authorities  would  lead  us.  Nevertheless,  if  the  evil
influences  of  the  Claudian  court  were  so  paramount  as  they
are  described,  it  must  be  deemed  strange  that  its  public  pol-
icy was  so  well  directed,  and  on  the  whole  so  nobly  executed,
as  we  have  seen  it  to  have  been,  and  that  the  scandals  of  the
reign  of  Messalina  and  the  freedmen  are  confined  for  the
most  part  to  the  interior  of  the  palace.  It  will  be  seen,  as
we  proceed,  that  the  worst  enormities  of  the  government  of
Claudius  refer  to  affairs  on  which  we  are  quite  unable  to
speak  with  certainty ;  while  the  merits  of  his  principate,  what-
ever estimate  we  may  form  of  them,  relate  precisely  to  the
matters  which  are  most  patent  to  the  judgment  of  history.
To  return,  however,  to  the  narrative  before  us.  Even  in  the
first  year  of  the  new  reign,  while  the  public  conduct  of  the
emperor,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  was  earning  merited  ap-
plause, the  imperial  fiimily  was  torn  with  jealousies,  and
harassed  by  intrigues. Among  the  first  acts  of  Claudius

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  38.,  xii.  53. Pliny  (Epp.  vii.  29.,  viii.  6.)  mentions  the
Senatusconsultura,  and  the  monument  erected  to  Pallas  with  an  inscription.

2  Suet.  Claud.  29. :  "  His  uxoribusque  deditus,  non  principem  sed  minis-
trum  egit."

A.U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  497

was  the  recall  from  banishment  of  the  sisters  of
Caius:  but  Messalina,  it  is  said,  was  jealous  of  sisters  of  Caius,
Julia's  fascinations,  and,  irritated  at  the  secret banishment  of
interviews  she  was  reported  to  enjoy  with  her
uncle,  succeeded  in  driving  her  once  more  into  exile  for  her
reputed  irregularities. Her  punishment  was  shared  by  the
philosopher  Seneca,  who  was  alleged  to  have  criminally  in-
trigued with  her. He  was  confined,  by  a  decree  of  the  sen-
ate, to  the  rude  and  unhealthy  island  of  Corsica.1 Banighmentof
Here  he  was  detained  for  some  years,  apparently Seneca-
till  the  fall  of  Messalina  herself;  yet  it  is  at  least  remarka-
ble, that  his  voice,  which  has  uttered  some  of  the  fiercest
denunciations  of  the  crimes  and  vices  of  the  emperor,  should
be  totally  silent  on  the  enormities  of  the  empress. It  has
already  been  noticed  that Caius  had  intended  to  put  the
great  Stoic  moralist  to  death  for  no  other  reason  than  the
reputation  of  his  wealth,  and  at  a  later  period  we  again  read
of  him  as  one  of  the  richest  men  of  his  time. It  would
seem,  therefore,  that  on  this  occasion  he  was  not  deprived  of
his  estates  ;  and  if  Messalina  was  really  the  promoter  of  his
exile,  the  prosecution  cannot  be  imputed  to  the  cupidity  so
generally  ascribed  to  her. Of  the  wretched  Julia  we  hear
no  more  but  that  the  malice  of  her  persecutors  was  not  yet
satisfied,  and  that  she  was  not  suffered  long  to  survive  her
second  disgrace.5

The  year  795  was  marked,  according  to  the  same  authori-
ties, by  a  crime  of  still  deeper  atrocity,  ascribed  to  the  same
baneful  influence. The  shamelessness  of  the  em- I)cath  of  .
press and the  weakness  of  the  man  she  gov- PlusSiIanu8-
erned,  were  frightfully  exemplified  in  the  death  of  Appius

1  Dion,  Ix.  8. ;  Scnec.  Comol.  ad  Polyb.  30,  32.  Claudius,  says  Seneca,
"me  dejecit  qnidem,  sed  impulsum  a  fortuna  et  cadentem  Bustinuit,  ct  in  prae-
ccps  euntcm  leniter  divinac  manus  usus  moiloratione  dcposuit."  An  enemy  of
Seneca  denounces  him  at  a  later  period  as  "domus  Gcrmanici  adultcrum."
Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  42.

3  Suet.  Claud.  29. ;  Dion.  Ix.  8,  18.

408  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  41.

Silanus.1 This  nobleman,  the  head  at  this  period  of  the  great
Junian  house,  was  connected  with  the  iEmilii,  the  Cassii,
and  with  the  Cresars  themselves :  Claudius  proposed  to  draw
still  closer  the  bonds  of  alliance  between  their  families,  and
strengthen  thereby  the  bulwarks  of  his  own  imperial  throne.2
With  this  view  he  recalled  him  from  the  command  of  a  prov-
ince in  Spain,  united  him  in  marriage  with  the  mother  of  the
empress,  and  affianced  his  son  to  his  own  daughter  Octavia
then  a  tender  infant. But,  from  whatever  cause,  Messalina,
it  seems,  conceived  an  implacable  enmity  against  him:  it
was  surmised  that  she  had  cast  on  him  amorous  glances
which  he  had  not  deigned  to  return ;  at  all  events,  she  re-
solved on  his  destruction,  and  concerted  with  Narcissus  an
extraordinary  plan  for  its  accomplishment. Early  one  morn-
ing the  favourite,  for  Narcissus  at  this  moment  stood  fore-
most in  his  patron's  graces,  burst  suddenly  into  his  apart-
ment, with  affected  alarm,  and  related  that  he  had  dreamt
that  night  that  the  emperor  had  been  murdered  by  Silanus.
Messalina,  the  partner  of  the  imperial  chamber,  thereupon
declared  that,  strange  to  relate,  the  very  same  vision  had
occurred  also  to  herself. Claudius  was  horrified  and  bewil-
dered. At  the  next  moment  Silanus  presented  himself,  ac-
cording to  a  previous  appointment ;  but  in  his  consternation
the  appointment  had  slipped  altogether  from  the  emperor's
memory,  and  he  beheld  in  his  unseasonable  intrusion  a  proof
of  his  meditated  crime. The  confederates  seized  their  ad-
vantage :  they  hastily  extorted  from  their  dupe  an  order  for
their  victim's  arrest  and  immediate  execution ;  and  the  next
day  Claudius  recounted  the  occurrence  to  the  senate,  and

1  Dion  (lx.  14.)  calls  him  erroneously  Caius  Appius  Silanus :  his  pnenomen
was  Appius,  and  his  nomen  Junius.

2  Appius  Silanus  was  married  first  to  ^Emilia  Lepida,  the  great  granddaugh
ter  of  Augustus,  through  the  two  Julias.  By  her  he  had  two  sons,  Marcus  and
Lucius,  and  a  daughter  Junia  Calvina.  Lepidus  the  triumvir  and  Cassius  the
tribune  were  among  the  connexions  of  this  family.  Caius  Caligula  had  married
Claudia  or  Claudilla,  daughter  of  a  M.  Silanus,  consul  in  '772.  See  the  Genea-
logical Tables  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.

A.  U.  794.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  409

publicly  thanked  the  faithful  servant  who,  even  in  his  sleep,
had  watched  over  his  patron's  safety.1  In  this  or  similar
ways,  we  are  assured,  died  many  others  also,  who  seemed  to
stand  in  the  way  of  Messalina  and  her  confederate.  When-
ever they  wanted  to  rid  themselves  of  an  enemy,  nothing
was  easier  than  to  excite  the  dotard's  apprehensions  and  pro-
cure a  sentence  of  death,  disgrace,  or  banishment.  In  his
moments  of  terror  he  was  ready  to  subscribe  his  name  to
any  order  of  cruelty  or  injustice :  as  soon  as  the  paroxysm
bad  subsided,  he  would  forget  all  that  had  passed,  and  was
known  to  inquire  sometimes  the  next  day  for  the  persons  he
had  so  recently  consigned  to  the  executioner,  and  to  wonder
at  their  absence  from  his  table.  When  reminded  of  the
cause  of  their  non-appearance,  he  was  visibly  surprised  and
mortified.2  It  seems  probable  that  this  imputation  of  ex-
traordinary weakness  and  obliviousness  is  merely  a  perver-
sion of  some  actual  instances  of  absence  of  mind,  not  unpar-
donable, perhaps,  in  one  so  painfully  occupied  with  cares
and  manifold  occupations ;  but  we  have  seen  enough  of  the
earnestness  and  general  good  sense  of  Claudius  to  question
the  truth  of  charges  which  would  ascribe  to  him,  while  yet
in  the  full  activity  of  his  faculties,  whatever  they  may  have
been,  the  infatuation  of  second  childishness.

Meanwhile  the  spirit  of  resistance  to  the  imperial  tyranny
which  had  so  long  slumbered  in  the  breasts  of  a  trampled
aristocracy,  but  had  at  last  awakened  under  the
insane  despotism  of  Caius,  continued  to  pervade vinictanus and

i  i  /» i  t i • -i  mi i  i  Scriboniunus.

the  ranks  of  the  senate  and  knights.  The  blow
struck  bv  Choerea  had  been,  as  we  have  seen,  almost  acci-
dental ;  it  was  unconnected,  at  least,  with  any  general  con-
spiracy ;  and  the  sudden  resolve  of  the  prsetorians  found  the
chiefs  of  the  state  unprepared  and  vacillating.  But  since
the  opportunity  for  acting  had  passed  away,  many  plans  of
action  had  been  discussed  and  concerted. The  ease  with

1  Suet.  Claud.  37. ;  Dion,  1.  c. Tacitus  alludes  to  this  murder. Ann.  xi.
29.

a  Suet.  Claud.  39. ;  Dion,  1.  c.

410  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  42.

which  the  tyrant  had  heen  overthrown  astonished  the  men
who  had  so  long  shrunk  from  the  attempt.  The  obtrusion
of  a  weak,  but  not  the  less  dangerous  despot  upon  them,
though  at  first  sullenly  acquiesced  in,  was  all  the  more  deeply
resented.  A  common  sympathy  drew  together  many  of  the
nobles  to  overthrow  the  existing  government  and  replace  it
by  a  better  system,  or  at  least  by  a  better  man.  Their  eyes
were  cast  upon  Annius  Vinicianus,  as  apparently  the  fittest
of  their  class  to  reconstruct  the  authority  of  the  senate.
But  the  fruitless  act  of  the  gallant  tribune  had  warned  them
that  it  was  not  enough  merely  to  strike  down  the  occupant
of  the  throne ;  it  was  necessary  to  secure  the  support  of  a
legionary  force,  strong  enough  to  control  the  praetorians,  and
protect  the  cradle  of  new-born  liberty.  Of  the  special  claims
of  Vinicianus  to  the  post  assigned  him  we  have  no  account ;
from  his  name  we  may  conjecture  that  he  was  a  Vinicius,
allied  to  the  reigning  family,  and  adopted  into  the  ancient
house  of  the  Annii.  Among  the  conspirators  was  Furius
Camillus  Scribonianus,  proconsul  of  Dalmatia ;  and  this  man,
endeared  perhaps  to  the  troops  he  commanded  by  the  late
successes  of  a  Camillus  in  Africa,  if  not  by  the  recollection
of  his  ancestor's  exploits  against  the  Gauls,  offered  to  bring
a  military  force  to  support  the  contemplated  movement.  In-
toxicated with  the  confidence  of  success,  he  hurled  defiance
at  the  emperor  from  his  camp  beyond  the  Adriatic,  and  sum-
moned him  scornfully  to  descend  from  his  throne  and  hide
his  head  in  obscurity.  Claudius,  we  are  assured,  was  smit-
ten with  consternation.  He  took  the  warning  of  the  rebel
legate  into  serious  consideration,  and  actually  debated  with
his  courtiers  on  the  necessity  of  submission.1  But  the  vaunts
of  Camillus,  as  it  soon  appeared,  were  empty  and  ineffectual.
When  he  disclosed  his  intentions  to  the  soldiers,  and  invited
them  to  follow  him  into  Italy,  in  the  name  of  the  ancient
republic,  he  found  them  altogether  indifferent,  or  rather  hos-
tile to  a  cry  they  scarcely  comprehended. When  they  turned

1  Suet.  Claud.  13,  35. ;  Dion,  lx.  15. Tacitus  alludes  to  the  event,  which
he  had  narrated  in  one  of  his  lost  books,  in  Ann.  xii.  52.

A.U.  795.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  411

their  swords  against  him  he  had  no  resource  but  in  speedy
flight  to  an  island  off  the  coast ;  and  even  there  he  seems  to
have  been  speedily  surprised  and  killed  by  one  of  his  angry
officers.1  The  lesrions  which  had  behaved  with  such  unex-
pected  fidelity  were  loaded  with  caresses  by  the  emperor.
The  Seventh  and  Eleventh  received  from  the  senate  the  ap-
pellations of  Claudian,  Pious,  and  Faithful.  The  discovery
of  the  plot  was  followed  by  a  bloody  proscription.  The
guiltiest  or  the  most  conspicuous,  and  among  them  Vini-
cianus  himself,  were  subjected  to  judicial  sentence ;  others
escaped  condemnation  by  suicide.  Claudius  in  his  terror
forgot  his  regulations  regarding  the  testimony  of  slaves,  and
invited  denunciations  without  scruple  from  every  quarter:
yet  it  is  recorded  that  he  generally  spared  the  families  of  the
culprits,  and  remitted  in  their  favour  the  confiscation  of  the
forfeited  estates.  Among  the  sufferers  was  one  only  of  the
rank  of  praetor ;  and  he  was  required  to  abdicate  his  office,
before  the  emperor  would  subject  him  to  the  punishment  of
the  sword.  Narcissus  and  Polybius,  supported  by  Messa-
lina,  bore  the  principal  odium  of  this  inquisition ;  those  who
suffered,  and  those  who  escaped,  were  supposed  to  owe  their
fortune  respectively  to  the  demands  advanced  by  court-
favourites  for  their  condemnation  or  acquittal,  and  these,  in
either  case,  sought  only  their  personal  emolument.  The
famous  and  affecting  story  of  Arria  and  Paetus  is  connected
with  this  proscription,  and  may  serve  to  impress  it  on  our
recollection.'

The  discovery  of  this  formidable  combination  against  his
life  and  power  might  easily  render  the  shy  and  suspicious
emperor  a  mere  puppet  henceforth  in  the  hands  of  his  advis-
ers." Then  commenced,  we  might  suppose,  in  earnest  the

1  Tacitus  {Hist.  ii.  75.)  mentions  this  deed,  the  name  of  the  soldier,  and  the
fact  of  his  receiving  high  promotion  in  consequence.  It  is  curious  that  a  cir-
cumstance, apparently  so  notorious,  should  have  been  unknown  to  Dion,  who
Bays  that  Camillas  threw  himself  on  his  own  sword.

2  Suet.  Dion,  11.  cc.  Tbe  story  of  Arria  and  Paetus  is  told  at  length  by  the
younger  Pliny,  Epist.  iii.  16. Comp.  Martial,  i.  14.

'  There  is  an  obscure  reference  to  a  second  attempt  against  Claudius  by

412  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  42.

reiffn  of  Messalina  and  the  freedmen :  thenceforth

Strange  incon-  °  -i -i i  «  ■

sistency  in  the the  pretended  ruler  of the  state  misjht  he  ex-
accounts  of  the  .  "f
conduct  of pected  to  withdraw  more  and  more  from  puhhc

observation,  and  every  affair  of  government  to
be  transacted  by  the  agency  of  his  confidential  instruments.
The  man  who  had  deliberated  on  retiring  from  power  at  the
first  challenge  of  an  audacious  rival,  who  again,  after  the
suppression  of  the  revolt,  essayed,  as  we  are  assured,  to  ab-
dicate, but  was  prevented  by  influence  behind  the  throne,
could  scarcely  recover  courage  to  wield  the  sceptre  of  the
world  from  the  height  of  the  Palatium.1  Accordingly,  we
may  picture  to  ourselves  the  corruption  which  would  now
pervade  every  department  of  public  affairs,  subject  as  they
were  to  the  control  of  a  degraded  and  venal  crew,  and  veiled
by  their  contrivance  from  the  scrutiny  of  the  nominal  ruler.
We  may  imagine  the  wiles  of  the  depraved  and  wanton  Mes-
salina ;  how  she  steeped  the  senses  of  her  consort  in  brutal
indulgences;  how  she  pandered  to  his  grossest  appetites,
while  she  gratified  her  own  amorous  caprices  or  satiated  her
Cupidity  unobserved.  All  this,  indeed,  and  more,  stands  re-
corded on  the  page  of  what  is  designated  as  the  history  of
Rome ;  and  it  is  only  here  and  there  that  a  corner  of  the
veil  is  raised,  and  we  are  permitted  to  see  the  unfortunate
Claudius  still  acting  as  emperor  of  the  Romans,  still  presiding
on  the  tribunals,  still  listening  with  patience,  if  not  with
favour,  to  the  pertinacious  attacks  on  his  own  powerful  freed-
men, which  the  most  eloquent  pleader  of  the  day  did  not
hesitate  to  launch  against  them,3  still  assisting  at  the  delib-

Asinius  Gallus,  son  of  the  Gallus  whom  Tiberius  had  put  to  death,  and  Statilius
Corvinus,  the  one  the  grandson  of  Pollio,  the  other  of  Messala,  in  Suetonius,
Claud.  13.  and  Dion,  lx.  27.  The  conspiracy  was  abortive,  and  its  authors
seem  to  have  been  treated  with  contemptuous  lenity.  Of  Gallus  Dion  says,
CfiiKpd-aTOC  ml  dvceidkoTaTOQ  (Jv,  Kan  tovtov  Ka.Ta<ppovqdelc,  yfku-a  [lalJkov  fj
Kivdwov  cxpTiev.

1  Suet.  Claud.  36.

2  Quintil.  List.  Orat.  vi.  3,  81.:  "Afer  cum  ageret  contra  libertum  Claudii
Caesaris,  et  ex  diverso  qv.idam  conditionis  ejusdem,  cujus  erat  litigator,  excla-
masset,  Praeterea  tu  semper  in  libertos  Caesaris  dicis :  Nee  mehercule,  inquit,

A.U.  795.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  413

erations  of  the  senate,  still  controlling  the  affairs  of  prov-
inces and  nations,  devising  schemes  and  settling  the  details  of
colonization,  thirsting  for  military  toils  in  addition  to  his  in-
tense application  to  business  at  home,  and,  coward  as  we  are
assured  he  was,  actually  quitting  Rome,  the  focus  of  hostile
intrigue,  and  throAving  himself,  like  another  Augustus,  into
the  wildest  fastnessess  of  barbarian  enemies.  Such  are  the
strange  inconsistencies  of  the  history  before  us,  which  it  only
remains  for  us  to  set  over  against  one  another,  but  which  we
cannot  pretend  to  reconcile  or  explain.

Accordingly,  the  year  796,  the  next  which  followed  on
the  abortive  attempt  of  the  malcontents,  witnessed  the  pro-
gress of  Claudius  with  military  pomp  from  Ostia

.  .  . .  ,  Campaign  and

into  the  heart  of  Britain,  an  expedition  the  par- triumph  of

r  I  Claudius.

ticulars  of  which  may  be  reserved  for  another
chapter.  Claudius  was  absent  from  the  city  six  months.  On
his  return  he  was  greeted  by  the  senate  with  a  decree  for  a
triumph,  an  honour  not  unmerited  by  his  success.1  He  assum-
ed in  token  of  his  exploits  the  title  of  Britannicus,  an  appel-
lation which  was  communicated,  moreover,  to  his  infant  son,
and  which  has  superseded  in  history  the  name  of  Tiberius
Claudius  Germanicus,  by  which  the  child  had  been  originally
designated.  The  triumph  of  Claudius  was  rendered  remark-
able by  his  voluntary  self-abasement  in  climbing  the  steps  of
the  Capitoline  temple  on  his  knees,  an  act  performed,  per-
haps, in  imitation of  Julius Csesar.3 It was  followed  by

quidquam  proficio."  This  was  the  same  Domitius  Afer  who  had  aided  Sejanus
in  persecuting  the  family  of  Germanicus,  and  who  had  pretended  to  be  over-
come by  the  eloquence  of  Caius.  Pliny  and  Quintilian  speak  of  him  as  the
greatest  orator  of  his  time,  and  we  have  seen  that  he  was  one  of  the  supplest  of
courtiers.  Yet  he  stood  up  against  the  freedmen  of  Claudius,  and  survived
most  of  them,  dying  at  last  in  prosperity  and  honour  in  the  sixth  year  of  Nero
Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  19.

1  Suet.  Claud.  17.;  Tac.  Agric.  13.;  Dion.  lx.  10.  foil.;  Plin.  Hint.  Nat-
xxxiii.  16.  On  his  return  Claudius  seems  to  have  abandoned  die  vEiiiiliaii  Way,
and  embarked  on  the  canal  by  which  Augustus  connected  the  Po  with  the
Adriatic  at  Ravenna. Plin.  //.  N.  iii.  20.

3  Dion,  lx.  20. See  above,  chapter  xix.

414  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  43.

solemn  games,  and  was  made  the  occasion  of  bestowing  many-
gracious  distinctions,  both  civil  and  military,  on  the  most  de-
serving officers  of  the  state.  If  Claudius  was  proud  of  ap-
pearing to  rival  Augustus,  not  less  did  he  pique  himself  on
comparing  his  beloved  Messalina  to  the  chaste  and  noble
Livia.  To  her  accordingly,  as  to  the  consort  of  the  first
princeps  before  her,  were  decreed  at  his  instance  a  seat  of
honour  by  her  husband's  side  on  all  public  occasions,  and  the
permission  to  ride  in  the  carpentum,  which  had  formerly  been
forbidden  to  the  sex  by  the  law  of  Oppius,  and  was  still  gen-
erally confined  to  sacerdotal  personages  at  the  greatest  so-
lemnities.1 So  unworthy,  however,  was  the  chief  ofHhe  Ro-
man matrons  of  these  honourable  distinctions,  that  when  the
brass  coinage  of  Caius  was  called  in  by  the  decree  of  the  sen-
ate, she  obtained  the  metal  to  cast  of  it  statues  of  a  dancer
named  Mnester,  with  whom  she  was  furiously  smitten.2  Like
so  many  others  of  the  men  on  whom  she  fixed  her  admira-
tion, Mnester,  if  we  may  believe  the  historians,  was  moved
neither  by  caresses  nor  menaces  to  gratify  her,  and  was  at
last  only  driven  into  her  embraces  by  the  express  command
of  the  emperor  himself,  to  whom  she  had  ventured  shameless-
ly to  apply  for  it.  In  this  and  many  other  cases,  we  are  told,
Messalina  solicited  a  like  indulgence  from  her  fond  and  facile
spouse,  and  he  without  hesitation  complied.3  At  other  times,
when  she  wandered  from  the  imperial  couch  in  quest  of  the
coarsest  gratifications,  she  would  cause  one  of  her  handmaids

1  Dion,  1.  c. ;  Suet.  Claud.  17.  Comp.  Calig.  15.  He  had  previously  made
an  exception  in  favour  of  his  mother  Antonia.  Of  the  use  of  the  carpentum
Tacitus  says  {Ann.  xii.  42.),  "  Qui  mos  sacerdotibus  et  sacris  antiquitus  conces-
sum."

4  The  senate,  according  to  Dion,  caused  the  brass  coinage  which  bore  the
head  of  Caius  to  be  melted  down  from  disgust  at  the  tyrant's  memory.  Dion,
1.  c. :  xal  hrpaxGr]  fiev  tovto,  ov  fitvtot  nal  ec  to  [UTitlov  t'^a/l/coc  ixfapyocv,
dW  avdpiavrar^  k.  t.  1.  I  have  already  shown  that  there  is  reason  to  surmise
that  this  coinage  was  debased,  and  am  disposed  to  doubt  the  whole  of  Dion's
story  concerning  it.

3  Dion,  1.  c. :  to  iT  avTo  tovto  nal  irpbg  hXkovQ  cvxyovs  lirpaTTEV

A.U.  796.J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  415

to  take  her  place  by  the  side  of  the  besotted  slumbcrer.1  It
seems  necessary  to  say  thus  much  upon  the  subject,  disgust-
ing as  our  authorities  have  represented  it,  in  order  to  show
how  grossly  improbable  are  the  details  of  Messalina's  licen-
tiousness, and  to  guard  the  reader  against  too  easy  a  belief
in  some  astounding  incidents  which  have  yet  to  be  related.

We  seam,  indeed,  in  perusing  the  narrative  before  us,  to
be  •weltering  in  a  dream  of  horrors,  which,  nevertheless,  ex-
ert  over  us  a  kind  of  fascination,  and  however

.  Messalina  s

we  mav  pause  at  intervals  to  question  the  phan- process  in

wickedness.

tasms  they  present  to  us,  forbid  us  to  shake  off
our  constrained  assent  to  their  reality.  The  destruction  of
Julia,  which  had  followed  shortly  after  her  second  banish-
ment, was  succeeded  at  no  long  interval  by  the  death  of  her
husband  Vinicius.  Messalina,  says  the  historian,  was  appre-
hensive of  his  vengeance :  Messalina,  adds  the  historian  in
the  same  sentence,  was  incensed  at  his  repudiation  of  her  li-
centious advances.  If  such  different  statements  are  not  in
themselves  absolutely  incompatible,  it  will  be  admitted  at
least  that  they  are  open  to  suspicion ;  and  when  we  find  that
the  overthrow  of  Vinicius  was  effected  by  no  overt  act,  no
public  charge  and  judicial  sentence,  but  was  popularly  as-
cribed to  the  occult  agency  of  poison  administered  by  the
contrivance  of  the  empress,  a  cloud  of  distrust  must  be  al-
lowed to  rest  on  the  whole  story.2  Hitherto  we  have  been
left  to  the  inferior  authority  of  Dion  or  Suetonius ;  but  now,
at  last,  we  seem  to  recover  the  guidance  of  a  firmer  hand,
and  the  next  act  of  Messalina's  wickedness  is  described  in  the
pages  of  Tacitus.  The  great  chasm  in  this  writer's  annals
extends  from  the  death  of  Tiberius,  at  the  end  of  his  sixth,

1  Dion,  lx.  18.  compared  with  the  well-known  passage  in  the  sixth  satire  of
Juvenal.  Aurrlius  Victor  and  the  elder  Pliny  repeat  also  some  scandalous
Btories  which  Inar  on  their  faces  strong  marks  of  a  prurient  invention.  It  will
appear  from  her  mother's  age,  which  will  be  noticed  by  and  by,  that  Messalina
must  have  been  married  from  the  nursery.  She  can  hardly  have  been  more
than  eighteen  at  this  time.

5  Dion,  lx.  27.

416  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  47.

to  the  seventh  year  of  Claudius,  in  the  middle  of  his  eleventh
book.1 In  this  year,  the  800th  of  the  city,  Va-

Destruction  of  ...  ,  »• i  •i-  ,

Valerius  Asi- lenus  Asiaticus,  whose  high  position  among  the

fit  10  lis

nobles  of  Rome  has  already  been  mentioned,
■was  one  of  the  consuls.  The  connexion  imputed  to  him  with
a  woman  named  Poppa?a  is  said  to  have  given  offence  to  Mes-
salina,  who  coveted,  moreover,  the  gardens  of  Lucullus  on
the  Pincian  hill,  which  he  had  inherited,  and  which  he  was
adorning  with  more  magnificence  than  ever.  She  induced  a
delator  named  Suilius  to  assail  the  pair  with  a  charge  of
adultery,  and  caused  Sosibius,  the  tutor  of  her  child  Britan-
nicus,  to  suggest  to  the  emperor  at  the  same  time  how  dan-
gerous were  the  wealth  and  influence  of  such  a  man,  one  who
was  supposed  to  have  been  a  chief  instigator  of  the  murder  of
Cains,  who  had  extolled  the  act  and  claimed  glory  for  it  in
public,  whose  high  consideration  extended  from  the  city  to
the  provinces,  and  who,  it  was  reported,  was  about  to  betake
himself  to  Gaul,  of  which  he  was  a  native,  and  where  he  had
great  connexions,  and  place  himself  at  the  head  of  the  Ger-
manic legions.  The  army  was  already  becoming  an  object
of  jealousy  to  the  emperor.  Claudius  was  in  a  moment
alarmed  at  the  prospect  of  rebellion  and  civil  war.  He  im-
mediately summoned  his  guards,  and  sent  Crispinus,  the  pre-
fect of  the  praetorians,  with  a  detachment  to  Baia?,  where
Asiaticus  was  seized  in  his  villa,  thrown  into  chains,  and
hurried  to  the  city.  The  consul  was  not  allowed  to  defend
himself  before  the  senate  :  the  trial,  if  such  it  may  be  called,
was  conducted  in  the  private  apartments  of  the  emperor,  in
the  presence  of  his  creatures  and  freedmen.  Charges  of  li-
centiousness and  of  treasonable  practices  were  strangely
mixed  up  together,  and  advanced  against  him  by  Suilius  and
Messalina  herself;  but  these  he  treated  with  lofty  disregard,
till  the  imputation  of  disgraceful  effeminacy  roused  the  spirit
of  the  Roman  noble  within  him.  His  energetic  and  passion-
ate defence  had  great  effect  upon  Claudius,  and  even  drew

3  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  1.

A.U.  800.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  41 Y

tears  of  sensibility  from  the  empress,  who  slipped  out  of  the
room  to  conceal  her  emotion,  whispering  only  to  a  confeder-
ate, as  she  passed,  that  the  criminal,  nevertheless,  must  not
be  suffered  to  escape.1  Asiaticus  was  remanded,  but  Poppyea,
in  the  meanwhile,  under  the  terror  of  impending  condemna-
tion, was  induced  to  put  an  end  to  her  own  life.  The  catas-
trophe was  concealed  from  Claudius,  who  invited  her  hus-
band some  days  afterwards  to  his  table,  and  wondered  why
he  had  come  without  his  wife.  I  have  just  lost  her,  he  quiet-
ly replied,  and  sat  down  to  supper.3

Among  the  prosecutors  of  the  unfortunate  Asiaticus  was
L.  Yitellius,  one  of  the  most  notorious  of  the  class  of  court
flatterers,  in  which  he  was  the  more  infamous

•  •  i  •  tt  m„ .  Egregious  flat-

from  his  high  birth  and  station.  U  nder  Tiberius  teries  of  L.  vi-
he  had  governed  Syria,  and  had  done  good  ser-
vice to  the  state  and  its  ruler  in  requiring  the  king  of  Parthia
to  pay  homage  to  the  emperor's  portrait  on  the  legionary
standards.'  He  was  the  first  of  the  citizens  who  actually
adored  Caius  as  a  god.  On  his  return  from  his  province  he
entered  the  auguBt  presence  with  his  head  covered,  with
measured  steps  and  downcast  eyes,  as  a  worshipper,  and
finally  prostrated  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  divinity.  "When
Caius,  in  his  maddest  mood,  asked  him  if  he  had  never  seen
him  in  the  embrace  of  Luna,  he  adroitly  replied  that  the
Gods  alone  had  the  privilege  of  beholding  one  another.4
From  this  time  Vitellius  reigned  at  Rome  as  the  prince  of
flatterers.  After  the  death  of  his  first  patron  he  attached
himself  not  less  sedulously  to  Claudius  and  his  favourites.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  2.

*  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Ad  quod  functam.fato  respondent."  The  husband  of  Poppoj.i
was  a  Scipio.

3  Suet.  Vitel.  1.  2.j Calig.  14.:  Dion,  lix.  27.

4  Dion,  1.  c. :  BtT&Xhoc  fiiv  ovv,  ckeIOev  ap^afievoc,  navrao  Kal  fierd  tovto
tovc  u'/.?sivr  KO?MKeig  vKcpe(ia7.cro.  When  Claudius  was  performing  the  cere-
monies of  the  hundreth  year,  Vitellius  addressed  him  with  the  words  "Srcpe
facias,"  a  customary  greeting  on  occasions  of  ordinary  sacrifice,  but  involving  a
magnificent  hyperbole  in  the  case  of  a  Secular  rite.

vol.  v. — 27

418  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  47.

He  sought  and  obtained,  the  honour  of  taking  off  Messalina's
sandals,  one  of  which  he  would  carry  in  his  bosom  and  fre-
quently take  out  and  kiss  with  fervour.  He  placed  golden
statues  of  Narcissus  and  Pallas  among  the  images  of  his  own
family.  Envied  for  his  success  in  this  career  of  ignominy,
he  became  the  object  of  many  scandalous  imputations,  and
the  high-minded  Asiaticus  complained  that  he  should  owe
his  ruin  to  the  arts  of  so  shameless  a  libertine.  Vitellius
himself  pretended  to  lament  the  fall  of  his  ancient  friend  ;  he
enumerated  the  services  of  Asiaticus  and  his  family,  and
when  Claudius  actually  deliberated  on  acquitting  him,  made
a  merit  of  demanding  for  him  the  favour  of  being:  allowed  to
choose  his  mode  of  death.  Claudius,  ever  swayed  by  the
last  speaker,  graciously  consented,  and  with  this  proviso  the
sentence  was  recorded  against  him.  Asiaticus  declined  the
counsel  of  his  friends  to  starve  himself,  a  course  which  might
leave  an  interval  for  the  chance  of  pardon ;  and  after  the
lofty  fashion  of  the  ancient  Romans,  bathed,  perfumed,  and
supped  magnificently,  and  then  opened  his  veins  and  let
himself  bleed  to  death.  Before  dying  he  inspected  the  pyre
prepared  for  him  in  his  own  gardens,  and  ordered  it  to  be
removed  to  another  spot,  that  an  umbrageous  plantation
which  overhung  it  might  not  be  injured  by  the  flames.1

The  success  of  this  accusation  seems  to  have  incited
Suilius  to  further  delations,  and  the  success  of  Suilius  stimu-
iMHgence  of  lated  the  cupidity  of  many  other  delators.  The
mfnisterta"  the  fondness  of  Claudius  himself  for  judicial  proce-
laws.  dure  made  this  in  fact  a  delicate  mode  of  flattery.

He  was  proud  to  find  his  own  vigilance  in  maintaining  justice
responded  to  by  zeal  and  activity  in  the  accusers,  and  he

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  3. :  "  Tantum  illi  securitatis  novissimae  fuit.  Such  is  the
generous  patrician's  sense  of  the  glories  of  his  family  estate  which  "  Mancipio
nulli  datur,  omnibus  usu,"  The  suburban  plantations  of  the  Roman  nobility
might  be  now  of  three  hundred  years'  growth.  Propertius  may  describe  to  ua
how

"  Nemus  omne  satas  intendat  vertice  sylvas,
Urgetur  quantis  Caucasus  aboribus."  i.  14.  6.

A.U.  800.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  419

plumed  himself  on  not  disappointing  them  in  the  promptness
of  his  convictions,  and  the  severity  of  his  sentences.  How-
ever well-meaning  Claudius  may  have  heen,  however  much
he  may  have  contided  in  his  own  conscientiousness,  it  is  but
too  apparent  that,  amidst  the  glitter  of  false  rhetoric,  and
the  noisy  display  of  false  sentiment  around  him,  he  had  not
the  strength  of  will  or  understanding  to  strucro-le  for  the
truth,  or  aim  steadily  at  the  right.  If  the  imperial  judge
was  laborious,  it  may  be  believed  that  he  was  not  unfre-
quently  capricious  and  fitful.  The  cause  which  had  dragged
painfully  through  a  long  morning  sitting  may  have  been
interrupted  occasionally  by  an  intemperate  carousal,  and
only  resumed  with  feelings  of  weariness  and  disgust.  After
all  the  plodding  industry  he  manifested,  he  was  accused,  not
perhaps  without  foundation,  of  giving  sentence  often  with
only  one  side  heard,  sometimes  with  neither.1  With  a
master  so  vain  and  so  unstable,  surrounded  by  a  crew  of
greedy  parasites  all  playing  on  his  weaknesses,  the  last  hope
of  the  class  over  whom  these  accusations  were  always  im-
pending was  to  mitigate,  if  possible,  the  zeal  of  the  accusers
by  diminishing  their  temptations.  An  ancient  law  of  the
republic  had  forbidden  the  noble  advocate  to  accept  fee  or
reward  for  the  exercise  of  his  eloquence  at  the  bar  of  justice ;
yet  for  many  generations  this  dignified  piece  of  legislation

'  Senec.  Apocol.  11.:

"Quo  non  alius

Potuit  citius  discere  causas;

Una  tantum  parte  audita,

Soepe  et  neutra."
The  satirist  is  confirmed,  or  copied,  by  Suetonius  in  saying  that  Claudius  put
to  death  in  the  course  of  his  reign  thirty  senators  and  above  three  hundred
knights.  The  numbers  may  readily  be  suspected.  We  may  remember  the
three  hundred  whom,  according  to  one  account,  Caesar  slew  after  Thapsus,  the
three  hundred  killed  by  Antonius  at  Brundisium,  the  three  hundred  sacrificed
by  Octavius  at  Perusia.  The  slaughters  ascribed  to  Claudius  were  not  massa-
cres, but  judicial  executions,  and  these  rarely,  perhaps,  for  crimes  against  him-
self. His  stolid  nature  knew  no  mercy,  and  he  consigned  to  death  without  re-
morse every  victim  of  a  sanguinary  code  and  of  a  harsh  and  barbarous  pro-
cedure.

420  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  47.

had  been  treated  as  a  dead  letter.  Hortensius  and  Cicero,
and  many  able  pleaders,  before  and  since,  had  erected  fortunes
on  the  grateful  acknowledgments  of  their  clients  ;  and  the
penalty  which  Augustus  had  sanctioned  for  a  violation  of
this  law  had  probably  been  rarely  enforced.1  The  assign-
ment by  Tiberius  to  the  delators  of  a  share  in  the  spoils  of
their  victims  was  an  infringment  of  the  spirit  of  this  regula-
tion :  but  the  defence  of  the  imperial  majesty  was  supposed
to  override  every  other  consideration.  Now  at  last,  after  a
long  interval,  the  nobles  who  had  failed  to  overthrow  the
new  tyranny  by  arms,  sought  to  repress  it  by  an  appeal  to
the  law  of  Cincius,  and  demanded  in  fact  of  Claudius  the
abolition  of  what  his  predecessors  had  deemed  their  surest
safeguard.  Claudius,  with  that  strict  submission  to  the
letter  of  the  law  which  seems  to  have  been  more  strongly
marked  in  him  than  the  sense  of  equity  or  of  right  reason,
allowed  the  matter  to  be  brought  into  public  discussion.
C.  Silius,  a  consul  designate,  ventured  to  advocate  the  return
to  the  ancient  principles,  while  the  ordinary  practice  had
an  unpopular  defender  in  the  delator  Suilius.  Nevertheless,
the  senate  could  not  shut  its  eyes  to  the  injustice  and  im-
policy of  forbidding  all  remuneration  to  oratorical  talent,
and  contented  itself  with  restricting  it  to.  the  sum  of  10,000
sesterces,  about  eighty  pounds  sterling,  for  the  advocacy  of
any  single  cause ;  a  limitation  which,  had  it  been  actually
enforced,  as  we  cannot  suppose  was  the  case,  must  have
greatly  discouraged  the  profession,  the  high  consideration  of
which  has  generally  been  found  the  strongest  bulwark
against  the  authority  of  unscrupulous  governments.  It  was
not  by  such  methods  that  the  vice  of  delation  was  to  be
checked ;  nor  do  we  find  that  this  abortive  recurrence  to  the
principles  of  a  simpler  state  of  society  had  the  slightest  effect
in  controlling  it.  As  far,  however,  as  we  can  understand  the
circumstances,  the  conduct  of  Claudius  seems  to  do  him
much  honour."

1  Dion,  liv.  18.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  5-7. On  the  "lex  Cincia,"  see  Cie.  de  Oral.  ii.  71.,  and

A.U.  800.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  421

The  subjugation  of  Southern  Britain  was  celebrated  in
the  year  800  by  the  ovation  of  Aulus  Plautius,  the  same
able  and  successful  officer  who  had  prepared  the  r^  Becular
way  for  the  triumph  of  the  emperor  three  years  g*™69-
before.  The  honour  of  the  greater  triumph  could  not  be
conferred  on  a  lieutenant ;  but  Claudius  showed  no  unworthy
jealousy  of  his  exploits,  the  most  glorious,  perhaps,  of  any
since  the  time  of  Ca?sar ;  and  after  investing  him  with  the
triumphal  ornaments,  the  laurelled  crown  and  robe,  actually
walked  on  his  left  hand,  while  Plautius  rode  himself  on
horseback  through  the  streets  to  the  Capitol.1  This  was
unquestionably  the  greatest  honour  imperial  Rome  ever
bestowed  on  a  subject ;  but  the  modesty  of  Plautius  was
equal  to  his  merit,  and  he  continued  to  enjoy  the  favour  of
his  masters  by  giving  their  jealousy  no  umbrage.  The  city
had  now  completed  eight  centuries  of  fame  and  fortune,  ac-
cording to  popular  computation,  and  though  only  sixty-three
years  had  elapsed  since  Augustus,  following  the  pontifical
traditions,  had  been  called  on  to  celebrate  secular  games,
Claudius,  in  his  turn,  was  easily  persuaded  that  the  auspicious
era  deserved  to  be  commemorated  by  a  similar  solemnity.
Among  other  festivities,  the  Game  of  Troy  was  rehearsed
by  noble  youths,  and  Britannicus,  then  in  his  seventh  year,
was  introduced  to  the  people,  as  a  participator  in  the  cere-
mony, or  at  least  a  witness  of  it.  But  another  child,  the  son
of  the  emperor's  niece  Agrippina,  by  her  deceased  husband
Domitius,  made  a  more  conspicuous  figure. The  age  of

Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  42.,  xv.  20. ;  Plin.  Ep.  v.  21.  The  "lex  Cincia"  seems  to  have
embraced  two  particulars :  1.  the  prohibition  of  fees  for  advocacy ;  and,  2.  cer-
tain restrictions  upon  gifts  in  general.  With  the  second  of  these  we  arc  not
here  concerned :  as  regards  the  first,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  there  was  not
some  distinction  made  between  fees  paid  by  a  client  for  his  defence,  and  re-
wards assigned  by  the  state  for  the  prosecution  of  a  criminal :  the  latter  may
naturally  have  become  a  matter  of  jealousy  to  the  class  who  found  themselves
so  often  placed  as  criminals  at  the  bar ;  but  to  the  other  no  reasonable  objec-
tion could  be  advanced.  I  do  not  find,  however,  any  such  distinction  referred
to  in  the  few  passages  which  relate  to  this  law.
1  Suet.  Claud.  24. ;  Dion,  lx.  30.

422  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  47.

Lucius  Domitius  exceeded  his  cousin's  by  three  years :  he
was  beautiful  in  person,  and  he  was  the  grandson  of  the  still-
lamented  Germanicus,  and  on  all  these  accounts,  it  was  to  him
that  the  Romans  looked  with  present  favour,  and  of  him  that
they  formed  the  fairest  auguries.1  The  appearance  of  the  two
children  on  that  day,  and  the  different  reception  they  en-
countered, might  be  taken  by  a  thoughtful  spectator  as  a
presage  of  the  fate  that  was  reserved  for  them,  of  the  prema-
ture death  of  the  one,  and  the  guilty  glories  of  the  other.

Our  history,  at  least  in  its  earliest  stages,  has  presented
a  succession  of  antagonisms  between  the  lords  of  human  kind,
The  first  deadly  *he  mortal  duels  of  a  Sulla  and  Marius,  a  Caesar
"omen  at  an<^  Pompeius,  an  Octavius  and  Antonius: but

Eome.  these  deadly  feuds  have  been  confined  to  the

harder  and  coarser  sex ;  the  rivalry  of  Cleopatra  and  Octavia
was  a  contest  of  beauty  and  fascination,  expressed  only  by
lofty  scorn  on  the  one  side,  and  by  sly  depreciation  on  the
other.  But  we  have  now  before  us  a  contest  of  another
stamp.  The  shows  of  the  arena  at  this  period  were  some-
times disgraced  by  the  combats  of  armed  Amazons  ;  but  the
court  of  Claudius  was  the  first  to  present  the  hideous  spec-
tacle of  two  women,  of  the  highest  birth  and  rank,  and
closely  connected  by  ties  of  blood  and  marriage,  engaged
in  a  desperate  encounter  of  intrigue  and  perfidy,  ending  in
the  violent  overthrow  of  the  one  and  the  rise  of  the  other,
but  equally  in  the  eternal  infamy  of  both.  Considering  how
little  regard  was  generally  paid  to  women  in  private,  and
still  less  in  public  life  at  Rome,  nothing  seems  to  me  to  mark
so  much  the  feebleness  of  Claudius,  as  the  licence  thus
assumed  by  two  rival  princesses  to  convulse  the  world  with
a  quarrel  of  the  boudoir,  and  the  power  they  had  to  stamp  a
character  on  the  history  of  their  times.

Messalina  had  in  vain  procured  the  banishment  of  Julia,
while  her  sister  Agrippina,  certainly  not  inferior  in  beauty,

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  11.  It  seems  most  probable,  amidst  the  conflicting  ac-
counts, that  Britannicus  was  born  early  in  794,  and  Nero  in  790,  December  15.
Suet.  Ner.  6. Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  25.

A.  U.  800.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  423

enersfv,  and  unprincipled  ambition,  was  suffered

' . . *  L „,  '  Mutual  hatred

to  remain  m  Koine.  Ihe  emperors  niece  con-  o£  Messalina
tinued  to  occupy  a  place  next  to  the  empress
herself  in  the  imperial  household,  to  divide  with  her  the
attentions  of  the  courtiers,  and  even  to  exert  her  blandish-
ments, not  without  effect,  on  the  iinwary  good  nature  of
her  uncle.  We  may  imagine  the  jealousy  of  the  reigning
favourite  ;  the  anxiety  with  which  she  would  watch  every
movement  of  an  aspirant  whom  she  had  injured  and  menaced,
and  from  whom  she  had  no  mercy  to  expect,  of  a  woman
leagued  with  her  enemies  and  intriguing  with  her  friends  ;
her  fears  for  the  affections  of  her  husband,  for  the  fidelity
of  his  freedmen,  for  the  precarious  prospects  of  her  son.
Watched  in  turn  by  an  able  and  unsparing  foe,  with  full
access  to  the  ear  of  Claudius,  and  ever  ready  to  abuse  it,  the
6tay  of  the  wretched  she  had  oppressed,  the  hope  of  the
ambitious  she  had  repelled,  Messalina  must  have  been  indeed
the  weakest  of  her  sex,  if  she  really  paraded  the  utter  disre-
gard of  decorum  as  well  as  duty,  which  has  been  ascribed  to
her.  It  seems  incredible  that  the  husband  should  be  suffered
to  remain  ignorant  of  wrongs  which  could  so  easily  be  di-
vulged to  him,  were  they  so  gross  and  notorious  as  after  her
death  they  were  declared  to  have  always  been.  While
Messalina  lived  and  reigned,  it  might  be  more  dangerous
to  slander  her  ;  but  we  must  obseiwe  that  Agrippina  be-
came both  the  victor  and  survivor  in  the  strife  between
them.  Who  can  doubt  that  it  was  then  her  aim  to  disgust
the  mind  of  Claudius  with  the  woman  he  had  once  admired,
to  disgust  both  him  and  the  citizens  with  the  child  she  pre-
tended to  have  borne  him,  and  thus  prepare  the  way  by
unscrupulous  detraction  for  the  elevation  of  her  own  son
above  Britannicus  ?  By  constituting  herself  the  narrator  of
the  contest  she  made  history  tell  the  tale  as  she  wished  it  to
be  told.  She  had  succeeded  in  representing  Messalina  to
posterity  in  the  same  hideous  colours  in  which  she  had  before
represented  her  to  her  contemporaries.  Historians,  wearied
with  the  vain  task  of  seeking  for  truth  in  documents  of  state

424  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  \A.  D.  47.

and  imperial  manifestos,  turned  eagerly  to  revelations  of  the
palace  vouchsafed  by  an  inmate  of  its  recesses,  an  actress  in
its  most  private  scenes  ;  and  the  memoirs  of  Agrippina  were
no  doubt  accepted  as  an  authority  on  transactions  which  she
was  most  concerned  in  tricking  with  the  falsest  colours.  An
anecclotist  such  as  Suetonius,  or  a  professioned  satirist  like
Juvenal,  would  readily  embrace  the  piquant  calumnies  of  a
triumphant  intriguer :  that  even  Tacitus  yielded  to  the  same
attractions,  may  be  fairly  assumed  from  his  referring  to  these
very  memoirs  as  authentic  documents  on  another,  nor  a  less
delicate  subject.1  We  have  no  choice,  however,  but  to  read
the  story  in  the  light  in  which  these  brilliant  declaimers
have  placed  it,  only  bearing  in  mind  the  foul  source  from
which  it  has,  in  all  probability,  descended  to  us,  and  re-
marking such  tokens  of  its  distortion  from  the  truth  as  an
attentive  perusal  cannot  fail  to  suggest  to  us.

Nor  must  we  overlook  the  circumstance  that  others  be-
sides Agrippina  were  interested  in  overthrowing  the  object
of  their  fear,  no  less  than  of  her  detestation. The

The  freedmen  -i-iit t  -i« -it

conspire  with  confederacy  which  had  so  long  subsisted  between
the  empress  and  the  freedmen  might  be  dissolved
by  mutual  jealousies  and  intrigues.  Polybius,  who  had
reigned  supreme  in  the  imperial  household,  was  the  friend
of  Seneca,  and  as  such  it  seems  probable  that  he  became  at-
tached to  the  party  of  Agrippina.  Messalina  procured  at
last  his  disgrace ;  and  this  was  doubtless  the  last  triumph
she  obtained  over  the  rising  influence  of  her  rival.  The  tri-
umph cost  her  dear.  It  alarmed  and  alienated  from  her  the
other  minions  of  the  palace.  When  they  found  that  the
guilty  commerce  they  had  so  long  maintained  with  her  had
ceased  to  secure  their  own  lives  and  fortunes,  they  might
easily  be  persuaded  to  transfer  their  power  to  the  opposite

1  Pliny,  whose  appetite  for  information  was  on  most  subjects  indiscriminate,
consulted  the  memoirs  of  Agrippina  as  veritable  history.  See  his  preface  and
Hist.  Nat.  vii.  6.  8. ;  and  comp.  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  54.  Nor  is  there  any  difficulty
in  believing  that  a  story  once  accredited  became  repeated  with  even  additional
colouring  by  succeeding  writers.

A.U.  800.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  425

side.  They  aided,  as  we  shall  see,  in  the  overthrow  of  Mes-
salina :  it  may  readily  be  believed  that  they  effected  their
success  by  fraud,  and  defended  it  by  unscrupulous  falsehood.
Messalina's  enmity  towards  Agrippina  and  Domitius  was
redoubled,  we  are  told,  at  perceiving  the  manifest  disposition
of  the  citizens  in  their  favour ;  and  she  would

.,*.,.  Amour  of  Mes-

have  sought  means  ot  destroying  her  rival  by  Miina  with  si-
suborned  accusers,  had  she  not  been  preoccupied
at  the  moment  by  a  new  and  strange  passion,  which  seemed
akin  to  fascination.  She  had  fallen  in  love  with  Caius  Silius
before  mentioned,  who  was  reputed  not  only  the  handsomest,
but  one  of  the  most  virtuous  of  the  nobles.1  She  had  in-
sisted on  his  divorcing  his  wife,  in  order  to  obtain  entire  pos-
session of  him.  Silius  Avas  either  unconscious  at  first  how
deadly  her  caresses  were,  or  possibly  he  conceived  that  to
reject  her  advances  would  be  certain  destruction,  while  in
admitting  them  there  might  be  chances,  at  least,  of  escape.
To  her  caresses  she  added  bribes,  and  held  out  the  hope  of  a
more  splendid  destiny,  till  he  yielded  to  her  demands,  and
was  amazed  to  find  himself  courted  without  reserve,  his
house  besieged  by  her  repeated  visits,  all  his  movements
watched  and  followed.  Brilliant  presents  were  thrust  upon
him,  the  highest  public  office  laid  at  his  feet,  and  finally  the
slaves,  the  freedmen,  and  all  the  glittering  retinue  which
attended  the  emperor  himself,  were  arrayed  before  his  door,
as  if  the  fortunes  of  the  principate  had  been  actually  trans-
ferred to  him.8

But  Messalina  was inconstant ; her  amour  with  Silius,
however  flagrant  its  guilt,  lost  somewhat  of  its  charm  from

1  Juvenal,  x.  331.:

"  Optimus  hie  et  formosissimus  idem
Gcntis  patrician  rapitur  miser,  extinguendus
Messalina;  oeulis."

This  C.  Silius  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  son  of  Silius  the  commander  of  the
Roman  forces  in  Gaul  under  Tiberius,  who  was  consul  a.  u.  706,  and  put  an  end
to  his  own  life,  being  charged  with  Majestas,  in  777:  see  above.
8  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  12.

426  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  48.

Pre itati  *ts  veiT  °Penness  an(l  facility,  and the object

sinus.  of  her  capricious  passion  perceived  that  she  too

a.d.  48. often strayed  from  him  to  new  and  unknown

A.U.  801.  . ,  __•'  ._ ,  _ ,

rivals.  He  was  mortified  and  alarmed,  and  ven-
tured to  demand  the  immediate  fulfilment  of  her  most
glowing  promises.  Let  us  wait  no  longer,  he  said,  on  the
old  man's  slow  decay:  the  innocent  might  be  content  to
bide  their  time,  and  amuse  themselves  with  the  pleasures  of
anticipation ;  but  guilty  as  they  were,  they  must  act  at  once
with  promptitude  and  boldness.  He  urged  that  he  was  now
single  and  childless,  and  prepared  to  adopt  Britannicus :  were
Claudius  once  removed,  Messalina,  he  vowed,  should  retain
in  his  arms  all  the  power  and  splendour  she  had  enjoyed  by
the  side  of  the  emperor.  He  would  seize  the  supreme  au-
thority, but  he  would  reign  in  the  name  of  Messalina's  son,
the  last  scion  of  the  Csesarean  family.  To  these  instances,
however,  his  paramour  was  now  less  eager  to  listen;  not
from  any  lingering  regard  for  her  miserable  husband,  but
through  fear  of  raising  her  lover  to  a  position  in  which,  in
his  turn,  he  might  prove  unfaithful  to  herself.  Nevertheless
the  prospect  of  a  pretended  marriage  still  inflamed  and  stim-
ulated her,  from  the  very  grandeur  of  its  infamy,  which
gives  the  last  flavour  to  crime  in  the  imagination  of  the  most

wanton  of  criminals.1 I  am  well  aicare.  savs

Tacitus  affirms  .  ,

that  Messalina Tacitus,  whose  steps  we  have  been  closely  follow-

and  Silius  were .  .  t _<» i» •  t

regularly  mar-  mg,  what  a  fiction  and  fable  it  will  be  deemed,
that  in  a  town  which  knows  everything,  and
keeps  no  secrets,  any  human  being  ever  reached  such  a  pitch
of  audacity,  least  of  all  one  a  consul  designate,  the  other  the
consort  of  the  sovereign,  as  to  meet  on  a  day  appointed,  with
witnesses  to  sign  and  seal,  as  for  a  regidar  and  legitimate
marriage  ;  that  she  shoidd  listen  to  the  words  of  the  diviners,
approach  the  temples,  sacrifice  to  the  Gods,  and  recline  her-
self at  the  nuptial  board ;  finally,  that  she  should  suwender
herself  as  to  the  embraces  of  a  husband,  and  the  rites  of  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  26. : "  Nomen  tamen  matrimonii  concupivit,  ob  magnitu-
dinem  infamige,  cujus  apud  prodigos  novissima  voluptas  est."

A.U.  801.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  427

nuptial  chamber.  But  far  be  it  from  me  to  invent  or  to  col-
our for  the  marveVs  sake:  I  only  relate  precisely  that  which
those  who  have  gone  before  me  have  themselves  heard  and
committed  to  writing.1

The  historian  requires  us  to  believe, — and  his  account
corresponds  with  those  of  every  other  existing  authority, —
that  Messalina  was  actually  married  to  Silius  Incredibilitv  of
with  the  most  formal  ceremonies,  during  the  this  account.
lifetime  of  her  legitimate  husband,  and  without  any  act
of  divorce  having  passed  between  them ;  for  the  deed,
though  enacted  publicly  before  all  the  rest  of  the  world,
was  done  without  the  husband's  knowledge,  who  was  the
last  to  learn  the  disgrace  which  had  fallen  on  his  house.3
Such  an  incident  has  assuredly  no  parallel  in  civilized  life :
to  admit  it  as  a  fact,  we  must  suppose  at  least  that  the
most  sacred  forms  and  feelings  of  society  were  at  the  time
confounded  or  abjured,  that  the  Romans  of  the  age  of  Clau-
dius were  living  alike  without  laws  and  national  princi-
ples. But  for  such  a  supposition  there  is  no  ground  what-
ever. There  was  at  this  period  no  such  relaxation  of  con-
ventional restrictions ;  on  the  contrary,  the  reign  of  Clau-
dius, himself  a  formalist  and  a  purist,  was  probably  marked
by  a  strong  reaction  of  strictness  and  austerity  on  the  most
delicate  points  of  usage.  If  the  law  allowed  a  woman  for-
mally to  repudiate  her  husband,  yet  such  an  act  could  only
be  done  by  direct  communication  with  him;  whereas  Tac-
itus declares  that  Messalina  demanded  the  rites  of  mar-
riage with  Silius  unknown  to  Claudius,  and  therefore  while
still  the  legal  wife  of  a  living  husband.3  Can  we  suppose
that  the  culprits,  however  reckless  themselves,  would  have

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  27.:  "Haud  sum  ignarus  fabulosura  visum  iri  ....  sed
nihil  compositum  miraculi  causa,  verum  audita  scriptaque  senioribus  tradam."
. *  Juvenal,  1.  c. :  "  Dedecus  ille  domus  scict  ultimus." This  is  not  a  mere
phrase  of  rhetoric,  but  is  fully  confirmed  by  the  historians.

*  For  the  women's  license  of  divorcing  their  husbands  under  the  later  re
public  and  the  empire,  see  Cic.  ad  Div.  viii.  7. ;  Sencc.  de  Bene/,  iii.  10. ;  Mar-
tial, vi.  7.  ;  Juvenal,  vi.  224.

428  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  48.

found  creatures  so  subservient  to  their  wild  behests  as  to
rush  on  the  certain  punishment  which  must  have  awaited
their  abetting  them  ?  In  accepting  the  common  story  of  this
marriage  we  are  driven  at  least  to  the  notion  that  Claudius
was  reputed  at  the  time  no  better  than  an  idiot,  with  whom
any  extravagance  might  be  ventured :  yet  we  have  seen  am-
ple grounds  to  think  far  more  favourably  both  of  his  under-
standing and  courage.  It  happens,  however,  that  a  word
dropped  almost,  as  it  would  seem,  accidentally  by  Suetonius
supplies  a  clue  to  the  real  character  of  this  extraordinary
event,  and  may  remove  from  the  story  at  least  its  grossest
improbability.  It  is  not  clear,  indeed,  whether  the  writer
himself  believes  the  version  of  the  occurrence  at  which  he
hints.  This  circumstance,  however,  is  of  little  importance
to  its  correctness ;  for  Suetonius,  as  we  have  seen,  was  too
fond  of  a  ribald  scandal  to  brook  the  overthrow  of  the  popu-
lar tale  of  wonder.  Claudius,  it  is  sus;o;ested,  had  been  as-
The  marriage  sured  by  the  diviners  that  evil  was  about  to  be-
gawbyciau-  fal1  the  husband  of  Messalina.  From  such  super-
diushimseit  stitions  few  indeed  at  that  time  were  exempt,
and  his  yielding  to  them  is  no  argument  of  peculiar  weak-
ness. He  conceived  the  idea  of  evading  his  impending  fate
by  marrying  his  wife  to  another  man.  It  was  rumoured,
accordingly,  that  the  nuptials  of  Silius  were  actually  of  the
emperor's  own  contrivance ;  that  he  in  fact  not  only  recom-
mended and  urged  them,  but,  to  prevent  evasion,  sealed  him-
self the  documents  necessary  to  their  validity.1  It  is  not
mentioned,  indeed,  but  of  this  there  can  be  no  reasonable
doubt,  that  he  had  previously  divorced  his  wife  in  due  form,
in  order  to  make  her  new  marriage  legitimate.  Simple  and
unceremonious  as  the  act  of  divorcement  might  be,  it  was
nevertheless  of  immense  significance. The  scandalmongers

1  Suet.  Claud.  29. :  "  Nam  illud  omncm  fidem  excesserit,  quod  nuptiis  quas
Messalina  cum  adultero  Silio  fecerat,  tabellas  dotis  et  ipse  consignaverit,  induc-
his  quasi  de  induslria  simularcnhtr,  ad  avertendum  transferendumque  periculum,
quod  imminere  ipsi  per  quaedam  ostenta  portenderetur."  The  construction  of
the  sentence  is  difficult,  but  its  meaning  can  hardly  be  doubted.

A.U.  801.]  NDER  THE EMPIRE.  429

of  the  day,  the  parasites  of  Claudius,  the  foes  of  Messalina,
above  all,  Agrippina  herself  in  her  memoirs,  may  have  com-
bined, each  for  reasons  of  their  own,  to  heighten  the  colour-
ing of  the  story  by  dropping  this  essential  feature  in  it ;  but
it  seems  far  more  likely  that  this  conspiracy  against  the  truth
of  history  should  have  succeeded,  than  that  the  marriage
itself,  with  its  bright  array  of  Auspices  and  Flamens,  of  at-
tendants and  witnesses,  should  have  been  celebrated  in  defi-
ance of  law,  religion,  and  the  common  feeling  of  the  people,
without  the  sanction  of  the  emperor  and  husband.

The  sequel  of  the  narrative,  as  told  by  Tacitus  himself,
will  tend  to  confirm  this  view.  The  emperor's  household
were  struck  with  consternation,  and  the  freed-  combination  of
men,  who  wielded  his  power,  trembled,  we  are  acainsTMesBa-
assured,  at  a  revolution  of  the  palace  so  strange  lina-
and  ominous.  From  the  passion  which  Messalina  had  con-
ceived for  Silius,  they  had  already  anticipated  danger,  even
before  it  reached  the  height  of  an  audacious  defiance.  Cal-
listus,  Pallas,  and  Nai-cissus  had  all  shared  in  the  alarm,  and
had  combined  to  deter  her  from  the  indulgence  of  an  in-
trigue, more  perilous  to  herself  and  to  them  than  any  of  the
licentious  loves  to  which  she  had  before  abandoned  herself.
That  she  should  stray  to  the  embraces  of  afreedman,that  an
obscure  player,  such  as  her  favourite  Mnester,  should  dance
himself  into  the  chamber  of  the  empress,  might  be  a  dis-
grace to  the  emperor ;  but  the  intrusion  there  of  a  patrician
and  a  senator,  a  man  of  ability  as  well  as  consideration,  was
in  fact  a  defiance  to  themselves.1  When,  however,  it  ap-
peared that  their  opposition  would  have  no  other  effect  than
to  expose  them  to  her  resentment,  they  desisted  from  their
futile  admonitions,  and  the  two  first  of  the  associates  seem  to
have  resigned  themselves  to  let  things  take  their  course.
Narcissus,  however,  whether  from  personal  apprehensions,  or
urged  by  Agrippina,  determined  that  the  empress  should  fall.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  28. :  "  Dum  histrio  cubiculum  principis  insultavcrit,  dede-
cus  quidem  inlutum  ;*scd  discidium  procul  abfuisse;  nunc  juvenem  nobilem
....  majorem  ad  spem  accingi."

430  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  48.

The  marriage  with  Silius,  once  effected, — and  it  mattered  lit-
tle how  it  had  actually  been  brought  about, — might  be  rep-
resented as  an  insult  to  the  husband,  treason  agaiust  the
prince,  impiety  towards  the  Gods.  Nevertheless,  though
plainly  required  to  defend  himself,  the  state,  and  the  people
with  a  high  hand,  the  firmness  of  Claudius  could  not  be  de-
pended upon  ;  such  was  the  sluggishness  of  his  feelings,  such
his  devotion  to  his  consort,  so  many  the  deeds  of  blood  he  had
already  perpetrated  at  her  demand.  Caution  and  artifice  were
required  in  dealing  with  one  so  weak,  so  easily  impressible
by  the  first  speaker,  but  not  less  easily  moved  by  his  next
successor.  As  soon  as  Messalina's  daring  project  was  exe-
cuted, and  while,  as  we  are  assured,  it  was  yet  unknown  to
Claudius,  who  was  at  the  time  performing  sacrifices  at  Ostia,
Narcissus  persuaded  two  women,  with  whom  his  master  was
familiar,  to  break  to  him  the  terrible  news.  One  of  these,
named  Calpurnia,  demanded  an  interview,  and  throwing  her-
self at  his  feet  announced  with  loud  lamentations  the  circum-
stances of  his  dishonour.  The  other,  a  G^eek  freedwoman,
named  Cleopatra,  who  was  standing  by,  thereupon  inquired
her  authority,  and  she  desired,  as  had  been  pre-arranged,
that  Narcissus  should  be  interrogated.1  Thus  brought  upon
the  scene,  the  favourite  humbly  confessed  his  fault  in  having
too  long  concealed  the  crimes  of  his  mistress,  and  her  amours
with  many  a  noble  citizen,  with  a  Titius,  a  Vettius,  and  a
Planting ;  but  the  present  case,  he  asserted,  was  more  atro-
cious than  any  of  these,  and  he  could  no  longer  keep  silence.
Did  Claudius  know  that  he  had  been  divorced  by  his  own
wife?  that  the  people,  the  senate,  the  soldiers,  had  all  icitness-
ed  the  marriage  of  Silius  ?  was  he  yet  unconscious  that,  un-
less he  acted  with  vigour,  the  city  was  even  now  in  the  power
of  the  husband  of  Messalina  ?  a

1  Of  these  women  Tacitus  says  with  a  circumlocution  which  is  meant  for
delicacy,  "  Quarum  is  corporibus  maxime  insueverat."  Yet  it  is  impossible  not
to  suspect  that  this  Calpurnia  is  the  same  whom  Agrippina  afterwards  sub-
verted, "  Quia  formam  ejus  laudavcrat  princeps,  nulla  libidine,  sed  fortuito  ser-
mone." See  Ann.  xii.  22.

2  Tac  Ann.  xi.  29,  30.: "An  discidium  tuum  nosti? nam  matrimonium

A.U.  801.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  43  j

Claudius,  we  are  assured,  was  surprised  and  astounded
at  this  revelation  of  guilt  in  one  whose  fidelity  he  had  never
doubted. It  was  difficult  to  persuade  him  of  the

„  -,  .  -I'-ii Claudius  in-

fact ;  out  it  was  confirmed  again  and  again  by  the  censed  and
officers  of  his  household.  The  plans  of  Narcis-
sus had  been  well  laid :  all  conspired  to  assure  the  emperor
that  he  was  the  victim  of  an  abominable  crime ;  that  his
honour,  and  still  more  his  power  and  safety,  were  fatally
compromised.  Even  on  the  supposition  that  he  had  himself
set  this  marriage  on  foot  with  the  object  which  has  been  sug-
gested, we  may  still  understand  how  the  representations  of
interested  advisers  might  persuade  him  to  regard  it  very  dif-
ferently after  its  accomplishment,  and  make  him  feel  that  his
device  for  evading  a  distant  danger  had  actually  entangled
him  in  another  more  imminent.  But,  however  this  may  be,
he  readily  acceded,  we  are  told,  to  the  instances  of  those
about  him,  urging  him  to  throw  himself  at  once  into  the
camp  of  the  prsetorians,  and  postpone  revenge  or  justice  till
he  had  secured  his  safety.  Their  object  was  to  prevent  an
interview  between  him  and  his  wife.  On  his  way  to  Rome
he  was  almost  overpowered  by  his  alarms.  Am  I  yet  em-
peror  ?  ...  Is  Silius  no  longer  a  subject  f  were  the  ques-
tions he  was  continually  asking :  and  so  great  was  his  terror,
such  the  apparent  prostration  of  his  power  of  will  and  pur-
pose, that  Viteliius  and  Largus,  who  accompanied  him  in  his
carriage,  feared  to  animate  a  courage  which  they  apprehend-
ed would  again  fail  him  at  the  last  moment.'

The  6cene  now  changes  to  the  suburban  palace  of  the
bridegroom,  where  Messalina  was  abandoning  herself  to  vo-
luptuous transports.  The  season  was  mid-au-  Nuptia]  or(ric3
tumn,  the  vintage  was  in  full  progress  ;  the  wine-  of  Mossalina-
press  was  groaning,  the  ruddy  juice  was  streaming  ;  women
girt  with  scanty  fawnskins  danced  as  drunken  Bacchanals
around  her :  while  she  herself,  with  her  hair  loose  and  disor-

Silii  vidit  populus  ct  Senatus  ct  miles ;  ac  ni  propcre  agis,  tenet  Urbcm  mari-
tus."

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  31. :  "An  ipse  imperii  potcns?  an  Silius  privatus  esset?"

432  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.l).  48.

dered,  brandished  the  thyrsus  in  the  midst,  and  Silius  by  her
side,  buskined  and  crowned  with  ivy,  tossed  his  head  to  the
flaunting  strains  of  Silenus  and  the  Satyrs.  Vettius,  one,  it
seems,  of  the  wanton's  less  fortunate  paramours,  attended  the
ceremony,  and  climbed  in  merriment  a  lofty  tree  in  the  gar-
den. When  asked  what  he  saw,  he  replied,  An  awful  storm
from  Ostia  /  and  whether  there  was  actually  such  an  ap-
pearance, or  whether  the  words  were  spoken  at  random,  they
were  accepted  afterwards  as  an  omen  of  the  catastrophe
which  quickly  followed.1

For  now  in  the  midst  of  these  wanton  orgies  the  rumour
swiftly  spread,  and  swiftly  messengers  arrived  to  confirm  it,
Consternation  tnat  Claudius  knew  it  all,  that  Claudius  was  on
the^mperor^  n*s  way  to  ^ome,  and  was  coming  in  anger  and
wrath.  for  vengeance. The  lovers  part :  Silius  for  the

forum  and  the  tribunals ;  Messalina  for  the  shade  of  her  gar-
dens on  the  Pincian,  the  price  of  blood  of  the  murdered
Asiaticus.  The  jovial  crew  was  scattered  on  every  side :  but
meanwhile  armed  soldiers  had  surrounded  the  spot,  and  all
that  could  be  seized  were  thrown  suddenly  into  chains.  Mes-
salina, sobered  in  a  moment  by  the  lightning  flash  which  re-
vealed her  danger,  had  not  lost  her  presence  of  mind.  She
resolved  to  confront  the  emperor.  She  summoned  her  son
and  daughter  to  accompany  her  into  their  father's  presence ;
at  the  same  time  entreated  the  chief  of  the  Vestals  to  attend
her,  and  intercede  for  her  with  the  supreme  pontiff.  Three
only  of  her  women  ventured  to  remain  by  her  side :  with
these  she  traversed  the  length  of  the  city  on  foot ;  but  her
appearance  in  distress  and  mourning,  on  which  she  had
counted  for  commiseration,  attracted  no  voice  or  gesture  of
compassion,  and  mounting  a  common  cart  at  the  gates  she
proceeded  sadly  on  the  road  to  Ostia.3

Claudius  was  at  the  same  time  advancing,  but  slowly  and
timidly  ;  for,  amongst  his  other  causes  of  alarm,  he  distrust-

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Sivc  ceperat  ca  species,  seu  forte  lapsa  vox  in  praesagium
vertit."

2  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  32.

A.U.  801.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  433

ed  the  loyalty  of  Lusius  Geta,  the  prefect  of  his

11  1 ,  1  -.  Meeting  of

guards,  and  knew  not  whether  he  was  about  to Claudius  and

._  __ . Messalina.

enter  Home  as  an  emperor  or  a  captive.  .Narcis-
sus, however,  was  at  hand,  and  boldly  urged  that,  at  such  a
crisis,  the  command  of  the  soldiers  should  be  transferred  for
a  single  day  to  one  of  his  trusty  freedmen,  at  the  same  time
offering  himself  to  take  it.  Claudius  consented  ;  Narcissus
assumed  the  command ;  and  while  the  train  moved  slowly
along,  insisted  on  taking  his  seat  in  the  emperor's  carriage,
lest  Vitellius  and  Largus,  less  resolute  than  himself,  should
allow  his  courage  to  evaporate.  Even  to  the  last  indeed
Claudius  still  vacillated.  At  one  moment  he  exclaimed  with
fitful  vehemence  against  the  abominable  crimes  of  his  consort,
but  again  he  melted  into  tears  at  the  recollection  of  her  chil-
dren ;  while  Vitellius,  not  knowing  how  the  matter  might
end,  discreetly  confined  himself  to  such  exclamations  as,
How  shocking  !  and,  Is  it  possible  ?  Narcissus  could  pre-
vail neither  on  him  nor  on  Largus  to  reason  calmly  with  their
master,  and  confirm  him  in  the  apprehension  of  his  intoler-
able wrong.  Such  were  the  circumstances  under  which  Mes-
salina came  in  sight,  and  requested  leave  to  present  to  him
Britannicus  and  Octavia.  Narcissus  could  only  whisper  in
his  ear  the  odious  name  of  Silius,  and  remind  him  of  the  di-
vorce, the  marriage,  and  the  treason,  while  he  thrust  letters
at  the  same  moment  into  his  hand  containing  proof  of  her
numerous  infidelities.  He  contrived  indeed  to  prevent  the
children  being  shown  to  him ;  but  the  Vestal  Vibidia  forced
her  way  into  the  emperor's  presence,  and  claimed  perhaps  the
privilege  of  her  order  to  save  a  passing  criminal  from  death.
Narcissus  was  obliged  to  assure  her  that  his  master  would
himself  hear  the  culprit,  and  give  her  an  opportunity  of  de-
fence.1

Claudius  meanwhile  uttered  not  a  word. Vitellius  af-
fected ignorance  of  the circumstances  alleged, Execution  of
and  shrank from the responsibility  of  giving wSentofhto
any  orders. Narcissus  took  the  lead,  and  every uccomi,liC08-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  33,  34.
vol.  v.— 28

434  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  48.

one  yielded  to  him  the  position  he  had  thus  boldly  assumed.
He  required  the  house  of  Silius  to  be  thrown  open,  and
caused  the  emperor  to  be  conducted  thither.  In  the  hall
stood  the  image  of  Silius  the  father,  disgraced  by  Tiberius,
which  the  senate  had  ordered  to  be  overthrown ;  while  the
effigies  of  the  Neros  and  Drusi,  the  kinsmen  of  the  emperor
himself,  were  placed  ignominiously  behind  it.  When  his  in-
dignation had  been  sufficiently  inflamed  by  this  spectacle,
which  seemed  of  itself  to  proclaim  the  criminality  of  the
culprit's  projects,  Claudius  was  hurried  to  the  camp.  The
praetorians  stood  to  arms  to  receive  him :  he  was  thrust  on
the  tribunal,  and,  prompted  by  Narcissus,  made  to  utter  a
few  confused  words,  whereupon  they  called  aloud  for  the
condign  punishment  of  the  guilty.  Silius,  arrested  and
brought  in  fetters  to  the  spot,  declined  to  defend  himself;
nor  would  he  stoop  to  any  entreaties  except  only  for  speedy
death.  He  was  executed  forthwith,  together  with  Titius,
Vettius,  and  altogether  seven  knights  of  distinguished  fam-
ily, accused  of  abetting  him  in  his  crime.1  Mnester  the  dan-
cer was  added  to  the  number,  that,  among  so  many  honoura-
ble victims,  no  pity  might  seem  to  be  extended  to  a  mere
ignoble  player,  though  he  vehemently  protested  that  no  man
had  so  stoutly  resisted  the  seductions  of  Messalina,  and  that
he  was  among  the  first  on  whom,  had  she  succeeded,  her  re-
sentment was  destined  to  fall.  Another  youth  of  family,
named  Montanus,  was  included  in  the  proscription,  for  no
other  crime  than  that  of  having  for  a  single  day  found  favour
in  the  eyes  of  the  adulteress.

Nevertheless  Messalina  still  hoped. She  had  withdrawn
again  to  the  gardens  of  Lucullus,  and  was  there  engaged  in

1  The  "  lex  Julia  de  adulteris  "  required  that  there  should  be  seven  Roman
citizens  witnesses  to  a  divorce ;  and  if  it  be  true  that  Claudius  had  actually  di-
vorced his  wife  in  order  to  marry  her  to  Silius,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  these
were  the  parties,  whom  it  was  thought  advisable  to  remove.  The  act  of  divorce
was  read  by  a  freedman,  and  this  part  may  have  been  enacted  by  Mnester.
Paulus  in  Digest,  xxiv.  2.  §  9.  Comp.  Juvenal,  vi.  46. :  "  Collige  sarcinulus,
dicet  libertus,  et  exi."

A.U.  801.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  435

composing  addresses  of  supplication  to  her  hus-  vacillation  of
band,  in  which  her  pride  and  long-accustomed  de™h  oUfMet
insolence  still  faintly  struggled  with  her  fears.  salina-
Narcissus  was  not  insensible  to  his  danger,  and  was  anxious
to  strike  his  last  blow  without  delay.  But  the  emperor  still
paltered  with  the  treason.  He  had  retired  to  his  palace ;  he
had  bathed,  anointed,  and  lain  down  to  supper ;  and  warmed
with  wine  and  generous  cheer,  he  had  actually  despatched  a
message  to  the  poor  creature,  as  he  called  her,  bidding  her
come  the  next  day  and  plead  her  cause  before  him.  Narcis-
sus knew  how  easy  might  be  the  passage  from  compassion  to
love ;  even  the  solitary  night  and  the  vacant  couch  would
kindle,  he  feared,  a  sentiment  of  yearning  and  compunction
in  the  fond  dotard's  mind.  Gliding  from  the  chamber,  he
boldly  ordered  a  tribune  and  some  centurions  to  go  and  slay
his  victim.  Such,  he  said,  was  the  emperor's  command ;  and
his  word  was  obeyed  without  hesitation.  Under  the  direc-
tion of  the  freedman  Euodus,  the  armed  men  sought  the
outcast  in  her  gardens,  where  she  lay  prostrate  on  the
ground,  by  the  side  of  her  mother  Lepida.  While  their  for-
tunes flourished  dissensions  had  existed  between  the  two ;
but  now,  in  her  last  distress,  the  mother  had  refused  to  de-
sert her  child,  and  only  strove  to  nerve  her  resolution  to  a
voluntary  death.  Life,  she  urged,  is  over  /  nought  remains
to  look  for  but  a  decent  exit  from  it.  But  the  soul  of  the
reprobate  was  corrupted  by  her  vices ;  she  retained  no  sense
of  honour ;  she  continued  to  weep  and  groan  as  if  hope  still
existed  ;  when  suddenly  the  doors  were  burst  open,  the  tri-
bune and  his  swordsmen  appeared  before  her,  and  Euodus
assailed  her,  dumb-stricken  as  she  lay,  with  contumelious  and
brutal  reproaches.  Roused  at  last  to  the  consciousness  of
her  desperate  condition,  she  took  a  weapon  from  one  of  the
men's  hands  and  pressed  it  trembling  against  her  throat  and
bosom.  Still  she  wanted  resolution  to  give  the  thrust,  and
it  was  by  a  blow  of  the  tribune's  falchion  that  the  horrid
deed  was  finally  accomplished.  The  death  of  Asiaticus  was
avenged  on  the  very  spot; the  hot blood  of  the  wanton

436  IIISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  49.

smoked  on  the  pavement  of  his  gardens,  and  stained  with  a
deeper  hue  the  variegated  marbles  of  Lucullus.  The  body-
was  given  up  to  her  mother.  Claudius  had  not  yet  risen
from  table  when  it  was  announced  to  him  that  Messalina  was
no  more.  Whether  she  had  fallen  by  her  own  hand  or  by
another's  was  not  distinctly  declared ;  nor  did  he  inquire.
Again  he  called  for  wine,  pledged  his  guests,  heard  songs
and  music,  and  exhausted  all  the  formalities  of  the  banquet.
Nor  on  the  following  day  did  he  allude  to  the  circumstance,
or  manifest  any  emotion  of  joy  or  hatred,  of  anger  or  sor-
row, neither  on  seeing  the  triumphant  foes  of  Messalina,  nor
her  sorrowing  children.  The  senate  favoured  the  oblivion
he  seemed  to  court  for  the  event,  by  decreeing  that  her  name
should  be  effaced  from  all  public  and  private  monuments.
Narcissus  was  rewarded  with  the  ornaments  of  the  quaestor-
ship.1

Such  were  the  circumstances  of  the  fall  of  Messalina,  as
they  were  commonly  related  and  believed.  Stamped  with
intri<mes  for  the  authority  of  Tacitus  and  Juvenal,  they  have
successor  to  since  been  received  and  repeated  by  all  histo-
Messaiina.  rians  of  the  empire. Whatever  the  crimes  of  the

miserable  woman  may  have  been, — and  the  stain  of  wanton-
ness, as  well  as  of  cruelty  so  often  in  her  station  allied  to  it,
is  indelibly  attached  to  her  name, — there  seems  reason  to
surmise  that  her  enormities  have  been  exaggerated  by  sinis-
ter influence,  and  that  the  last  fatal  act,  in  particular,  for
which  she  suffered,  was  misrepresented  by  a  monstrous  arti-
fice. It  may  still  remain  doubtful  whether  she  was  the  vic-
tim of  Agrippina's  ambition  or  of  the  fears  of  the  freedmen ;
whether  these  two  powers  combined  together  for  her  over-
throw, or  whether  each  followed  its  own  objects  with  mutual
jealousy  and  distrust. The  factions  which  still  festered  in

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  37,  38. ;  Dion,  lx.  31. ;  Suet.  Claud.  39.  This  writer  men-
tions, as  an  instance  of  the  forgetfulness  or  absence  of  mind  of  Claudius,  that
after  the  death  of  Messalina,  he  was  heard  to  ask  at  supper,  Why  my  lady  did
not  come?  "cur  domina  non  veniret."  Messalina  can  hardly  have  been  more
than  twenty-three  or  twenty-four  at  her  death.

A-U.  802.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  437

the  bosom  of  the  palace  soon  made  themselves  odiously  ap-
parent. During  the  first  fever  of  his  apprehensions,  and
while  still,  perhaps,  under  the  wing  of  his  faithful  praeto-
rians, Claudius,  it  is  said,  in  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  had
made  confidants  of  his  soldiers,  and  had  declared  to  them,
that  since  matrimony  had  succeeded  so  ill  with  him,  never
again  would  he  subject  himself  to  the  caprices  of  another
consort ;  if  he  forgot  this  vow  they  might  hack  him  in  pieces
with  their  swords.1  But  this  resolution  was  of  very  short
duration.  His  freedmen  had  determined  otherwise ;  the
most  powerful  among  them  sought  each  to  secure  his  power
by  raising  a  client  of  his  own  to  the  first  place  in  his  affec-
tions, and  he  was  too  easily  led  by  the  artifices  of  those  about
him  to  make  any  resistance  to  wishes  which  were  seconded
by  his  own  amorous  temperament.  But  he  was  perplexed
by  the  difficulty  of  choosing  between  the  candidates  offered
for  his  selection,  all  of  whom  were  equally  ready  to  yield  to
him.  Narcissus  intrigued  for  ./Elia  Petina,  the  same  whom
Claudius  had  formerly  repudiated ;  Callistus  for  Lollia  Pau-
lina, the  rejected  of  the  emperor  Cains,  while  Pallas  became
the  champion  of  Agrippina  herself.  The  first  was  recom-
mended on  the  ground  of  her  former  intimacy,  as  well  as  her
connexion  with  the  imperial  house  through  the  family  of  the
Antonii ;  the  second  had  the  merit,  in  addition  to  her  im-
mense riches,  of  being  childless,  and  therefore  the  less  likely
to  regard  Britannicus  with  jealousy;  the  last,  besides  her
descent  from  Germanicus,  and  the  popular  favour  which  ac-
companied her,  had  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  plead  her
own  cause  covertly,  by  the  opportunities  consanguinity  gave
her  of  hanging  fondly  upon  her  uncle,  and  enticing  him  with
her unsuspected caresses. a If  the charms of

1  Ambition  and

Agrippina,  then  perhaps  three  and  thirtv  vears artifices  0f

ff  7j 1  1  1 *U ■  U  Agrippina.

01  age,  had  already  passed  their  prime,  her  pow-

1  Suet  Claud.  26. :  "  Quatenus  sibi  matrimonia  male  ccdercnt  permansurum
Be  in  caelibatu ;  ac  nisi  permanisisaet  non  recusaturum  confodi  manibus  ipsorum."

a  Suet.  Claud.  26. :  "  Per  jus  osculi  et  blanditiarum  occasiones  pellectus  in
amorem." Of  the  three  rivals  Tacitus  says,  "Suam  quaeque  nobilitatem,  for-

438  HISTORV  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  49.

ers  of  artifice  and  intrigue  had  reached  their  full  maturity ;
and  she  soon  effected  the  impression  at  which  she  aimed.1
Ere  yet  the  emperor  had  avowed  his  intention  of  espousing
her,  she  was  conscious  that  the  prize  was  within  her  reach,
and  began  to  exercise  over  him  the  influence  of  a  wife.  She
began  already  to  extend  her  views  to  the  elevation  of  her
son  Domitius  by  uniting  him  to  the  orphan  Octavia ;  and  as
the  girl  was  affianced  to  Lucius  Silanus,  the  son  of  the  mur-
dered Appius,  she  did  not  hesitate  to  plan  the  frustration  of
that  arrangement  by  aiming  a  scandalous  charge  against  the
betrothed  husband.  She  gained  over  Vitellius ;  this  supple
courtier  pretended,  that  as  censor  two  years  before,  he  had
noted  the  young  man's  immoralities,  and  now  insinuated  a
charge  of  incest  against  him.a  Claudius,  as  guardian  of  the
public  virtue,  was  shocked,  as  the  confederates  expected,  at
this  odious  imputation,  and  allowed  Vitellius,  although  the
censorship  was  passed  and  the  lustrum  closed,  to  promulgate
his  edict  for  removing  him  from  the  senate.3  The  blow  was
the  more  severe  inasmuch  as  he  had  been  advanced  that  year
to  the  prsetorship  ;  and  he  was  now  degraded  without  being-
heard  in  his  own  defence,  perhaps  even  before  he  was  aware
of  the  conspiracy  against  him.  This  was  the  first  step
towards  rescinding  the  act  of  his  betrothal,  which  speedily

mam,  opes  contendere."  The  first  qualification  seems  to  apply  especially  to
Petina,  the  second  to  Agrippina,  and  the  last  to  Lollia ;  and  it  seems  clear  from
what  follows  (Ann.  xii.  22.)  that  the  divorced  wife  of  Caius  had  not  been  de-
prived of  the  magnificent  dowry  she  had  brought  him.

1  Agrippina  seems  to  have  been  born  in  769.  Suetonius  tells  us  (Calig.  7.)
that  the  three  sisters  were  born  in  consecutive  years,  and  the  birth  of  Julia
(Livilla  in  Suetonius)  is  placed  by  Tacitus  in  7*71.  Agrippina  seems  to  have
been  the  eldest  of  the  three.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  4. :  "  Nomine  Censoris  serviles  fallacias  obtegens."  Vitel-
lius had  been  joined  with  Claudius  in  the  office.  Of  Silanus  Seneca  says
(Apocol.  8.) :  "  Sororem  suam  festivissimam  omnium  puellarum,  quam  omnes
Venerem  vocarent,  maluit  Junonem  vocare."

3  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Locto  pridem  Senatu."  The  order  had  been  duly  revised,  and
in  strictness  the  removal  of  the  culprit  from  its  ranks  should  have  awaited
another  lectio.

A.  U.  802.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  439

followed.  The  office  to  which  he  had  been  preferred  in  con-
sideration of  his  affinity  to  the  imperial  house,  he  was  re-
quired to  resign  on  the  last  day  of  the  year ;  and  thus  dis-
graced he  was  suffered,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  hide  himself  in
obscurity,  while  the  way  was  smoothed  for  the  destined  nup-
tials of  Domitius  and  Octavia.

Yet  an  obstacle  still  intervened  between  Agrippina  and
the  elevation  to  which  she  aspired.  Ancient  usage  and  the
national  sentiment  lonsr  engrafted  upon  it,  though

, .  , . S  r  '  The  senate

with  no  express  legislative  declaration,  forbade sanctions  the

-r»  l  •  ft  t union  °f an

among  the  Komans  the  marriage  of  an  uncle  and uncle  with  a

Ilit'C-t'

niece.  Claudius  had  just  declared  his  horror  at
incest,  and  here  was  an  union  proposed  to  him  to  which  that
term  in  its  full  force  at  least  popularly  applied.  It  had  been
rumoured,  indeed,  whether  truly  or  not,  that  the  first  Ca?sar
was  prepared  to  defy  the  national  sense  of  delicacy  ;  but
Claudius  had  less  courage,  and  if  it  was  easy  to  overcome  his
moral  scruples,  it  was  more  difficult  to  confirm  his  resolution.
Again  Vitellius  came  forward  to  Agrippina's  assistance.  He
took  occasion  to  demand  publicly  of  the  emperor  whether  he
would  submit  to  the  blind  prejudices  of  the  populace,  or  be
swayed  by  the  counsel  and  authority  of  the  senate  ?  Claudius
decorously  replied  that  he  was  himself  only  one  of  the
citizens,  and  could  not  venture  to  controvert  the  judgment
of  the  fathers  of  the  republic.  Then  repair,  I  conjure  you,
to  the  palace,  and  there  await  my  coming,  said  Vitellius
earnestly  ;  and  then  entering  the  Curia,  he  besought  an  im-
mediate hearing  on  a  subject,  most  important,  as  he  declared,
to  the  commonwealth.  After  expatiating  with  feeling  on
the  splendid  solitude  of  the  Caesar  in  the  recesses  of  his
palace,  and  his  need  of  a  faithful  partner  to  share  his  pleas-
ures and  anxieties,  he  protested,  that  if  Claudius  now  yearned
for  a  consort,  he  had  amply  proved  by  his  long  devotion  to
the  laws  that  he  was  yielding  to  no  unworthy  impulse.  The
orator  proceeded  to  enlarge  on  the  happy  fortune  of  the
times,  in  having  a  prince  who  sought  only  a  legal  marriage,
instead  of  invading,  as  others  had  been  known  to  do,  the

440  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  49.

marriage  rights  of  the  citizens  ;  and  then  recommending  the
claims  and  merits  of  Agrippina,  he  argued  with  all  the  art
of  a  practised  rhetorician  against  the  prejudices  which  seemed
to  forbid  so  eligible  an  union.  Other  nations,  he  said,  per-
mitted such  alliances  ;  nor  was  it  beneath  the  dignity  of
Rome  to  consult  the  customs  even  of  foreigners.  Formerly
the  marriage  of  cousins  had  been  prohibited,  yet  its  recent
permission  had  produced  no  evil.1  Similar  results,  he  argued,
would  follow  a  wise  relaxation  in  the  present  instance  also ;
and  prejudices,  after  all,  were  the  growth  of  habit  and  usage,
and  would  follow  the  current  of  legislation.  The  compliance
of  a  part,  at  least,  of  his  audience  outran  even  the  eloquence
of  the  speaker.  The  harangue  was  hardly  concluded  before
a  tumult  of  assentation  arose  which  admitted  of  no  further
discussion,  but  threatened,  if  he  yet  hesitated,  to  overbear
the  prince's  scruples  by  force.  A  multitude  had  already
collected,  crying  aloud  that  the  Roman  people  was  of  one
mind  with  the  senators.  Vitellius  swiftly  bore  the  news  to
his  anxious  master,  and  Claudius,  passing  rapidly  through
the  crowd  of  the  forum,  amidst  a  burst  of  acclamations,
entered  the  Curia  and  moved  for  a  decree  to  legalize  the
marriages  in  question.  Claudius  and  Agrippina  were  united
„  __,  in  the  year  802. It  might  seem  a  delicate  mode

Marriage  of  »«

Claudius  and  of  flattery  to  contract  these  preposterous  alliances ;
but  a  knight,  named  Alledius,  was  the  only
citizen  who  could  be  induced,  by  the  hope  of  the  prince's,  or
even  of  Agrippina's  favour,  to  do  such  violence  to  natural
feeling.3  This,  however,  was  of  little  importance ;  the  con-
science of  the  feeble  Claudius  was  easily  put  to  sleep,  and  it

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  6. :  "  Sobrinarum  diu  ignorata."  On  the  marriage  of  cou-
sins german,  the  commentators  refer  to  Plutarch,  Qua>si.  Rom.  6.,  who  shows
the  occasion,  but  not  the  date  of  the  restriction  being  removed.  The  union  of
Marcellus  and  Julia  was  an  illustrious  instance  in  later  times.  But  marriage
of  uncles  with  nieces  was  forbidden.  The  law  of  Claudius  licensed  marriage
with  a  brother's  daughter,  but  not  with  a  sister's,  and  this  distinction  was  in
force  in  the  time  of  Gaius. See  Inst.  i.  62

2  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  7.

A.U.  802.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  441

became  the  business  of  his  mistress,  now  enthroned  by  his
side,  to  lull  it  constantly  by  gentle  opiates,  through  the
course  of  wickedness  on  which  she  was  about  to  enter.1

It  is  not  unimportant  to  notice  these  lingering  scruples,
this  solemn  discussion,  and  this  sudden  downfall  of  the  bar-
riers of  religious  principle,  at  a  moment  when

°  r , r. >  .  The  authority

the  whole  bent  of  legislation  had  been  studiously of  the  senate

.  * and  Emperor

directed  to  preserve  or  restore  the  sanctions  of over  matters  of

_  .  ,  . _ . national  usage.

ancient  usage,  lhey  mark,  on  the  one  hand,  the
general  observance  thus  far  of  ancient  forms  ;  while,  on  the
other,  they  allow  us  to  perceive  how  hollow  that  observance
was,  and  how  easily  it  could  be  overruled  by  modern  licen-
tiousness. They  may  lead  us  indeed  to  reject  as  incredible
the  common  story  of  Messalina's  impudent  no-marriage  ;
nevertheless,  they  may  prepare  us  for  violations  not  less
audacious,  of  the  laws  of  nature  and  of  man,  which  we  shall
meet  with  hereafter.  The  authority  of  the  senate  and  the
licence  of  the  Caesar  to  create  law  and  right  of  their  own
sovereign  will,  were  thus  established  with  the  concurrence
of  the  people,  and  to  their  entire  satisfaction ;  yet  the  au-
thority and  licence  were  shared  by  these  two  still  co-
ordinate powers ;  it  remained  yet  to  be  seen  whether  either
could  destroy  the  other,  or  if  destroyed  continue  to  exist
without  it.

A  century  earlier  the  wretch  who  was  driven  to  despair
by  persecution  stalked  with  gloomy  resolution  to  the  hearth-
stone of  his  enemy,  and  slew  himself  upon  it,  to gnjcide  of  L
establish  an  avenging  demon  in  his  house  for SiIanus-
ever.1 But  this  superstition  had  now  died  away,  or  the
cli ambers  of  the  Caesar  were  no  longer  accessible,  and  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  4-7.  Suetonius  tells  us  that  Claudius  repealed  a  provision
of  the  Julian  law  introduced  by  Tiberius,  which  forbade  men  of  sixty  years  from
contracting  marriage.  It  has  been  supposed  that  this  was  done  to  legalize  his
own  union  with  Agrippina,  as  though  at  this  time  he  was  himself  almost  on  the
verge  of  sixty.  See  Claud,  23.  and  the  note  of  Baumgarten  Crusius.  But  he
was  actually  fifty-eight  only.

*  See  the  story  of  Cicero  in  Plutarch,  Cic.  47.  above,  ch.  xxvi.

442  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  49.

suicide  could  seek  his  last  consolation  only  in  the  hope  of
fixing  on  the  tyrant  the  indignation  of  his  fellow  countrymen.
Silanus  chose  the  moment  of  Agrippina's  triumph  to  put  an
end  to  his  own  life,  assured  perhaps  that  he  could  not  long
escape  her  enmity,  and  exulting  in  the  power  of  casting  at
least  a  gloom  over  the  city  on  the  day  of  her  ill-omened
nuptials.  Nevertheless  her  cruelty  was  restrained  neither
hy  shame  nor  fear :  his  sister  Calvina,  the  presumed  partner
of  his  guilt,  was  sentenced  to  exile  hy  the  voice  of  the  sub-
servient senators  ;  and  to  the  decree  which  inflicted  this
punishment,  Claudius  caused  a  clause  to  he  added  enjoining
the  lustration  of  the  city  hy  solemn  sacrifices.1  The  citizens,
who  had  before  scowled  or  murmured,  laughed  now  at  the
notion  that  at  such  a  moment,  when  one  illustrious  incest
was  openly  paraded,  the  secret  guilt  of  another  should  re-
quire a  special  expiation.  It  is  said,  however,  that  Agrip-
pina  was  moved,  even  in  the  first  flush  of  her  success,  by  the
disgust  at  her  conduct,  and  sought  to  extenuate  her  disfavour
hy  recalling  Seneca  from  exile,  and  promoting  him  to  the
Recall  of  sen-  prretorship.  The  philosopher  was  already  in
eca  from  exile,  high  repute  for  his  character  and  acquirements,
and  his  appointment  to  the  care  of  her  child's  education  was
perhaps  the  best,  as  well  as  the  most  popular,  that  could  be
made.  It  is  probable,  however,  from  his  sharing  the  disgrace
of  Julia,  that  he  was  previously  connected  with  Agrippina
herself,  and  held  a  conspicuous  place  in  the  clique  or  faction
which  had  roused  Messalina's  apprehensions.3

The  marriage  of  the  mother  was  quickly  followed  by  the
betrothal  of  the  son,  then  in  his  twelfth  year,  to  Octavia,  an

alliance  for  which  Claudius  had  been  gradually
betrothed  to prepared  by  the  counsels  of  the  friends  he  most

relied  on.  Domitius  took  his  place  at  once  by
the  side  of  Britannicus  in  every  favour  the  doting  emperor
could  hestow : nevertheless,  the  complete  ascendancy  she

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  8.

a  Tac.  1.  c. For  the  date  (a.  u.  802.)  see  Clinton,  Fast.  Rom.

A.  U.  802.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  443

had  acquired  over  her  facile  husband  failed  to  allay  the
jealousies  of  the  new-made  empress.  Of  iElia  Petina  indeed,
who  seems  to  have  been  defended  by  the  insignificance  of  her
character,  we  hear  no  more  ;  but  the  rivalry  of  the  rich  and
noble  Lollia  was  not  to  be  forgiven.  Repulsed  by  one
emperor  and  disappointed  of  another,  she  was  accused  of
consulting  the  Chaldeans  about  the  imperial  nuptials.1
Claudius  himself  condescended  to  harangue  against  her  in
the  senate ;  but  in  denouncing  her  guilt,  he  wandered,  as
usual,  into  historic  details  on  the  greatness  and  antiquity  of
her  family,  and  commiserating  her  fall,  contented  himself
with  demanding  her  banishment  from  Italy,  with  the  loss  of
her  famous  fortune,  a  sum  of  five  million  sesterces  being  alone
reserved  to  her.  But  Agrippina,  it  seems,  was  dissatisfied
with  the  lenity  of  this  sentence,  and,  according  to  common
belief,  sent  a  tribune  to  invite  or  compel  her  to  kill  herself*
About  the  same  time  another  matron  named  Calpurnia, —
whether  she  was  the  same  who  has  before  been  mentioned  as
a  favourite  of  the  emperor  does  not  clearly  appear, — was  also
disgraced  by  the  artifices  of  the  empress,  for  no  other  cause
than  because  Claudius  had  been  heard  to  speak  in  praise  of
her  beauty :  it  was  admitted,  indeed,  that  the  remark  had
been  made  in  perfect  innocence,  and  the  Fury  of  the  palace
did  not  push  her  anger  to  extremities.

Agrippina  still  marched  on  triumphantly. Claudius,  beset
by  freedmen,  and  especially  by  Pallas,  the  creature  and,  as
was  supposed,  the  paramour  of  his  consort,  vield-
ed  to  the  persuasions  which  were  blandly  urged adopted  by

i  .  tt  • t t /> i  i r Claudius,  as-

upon  him. He  was  reminded  of  the  example  of sumesthe
Augustus,  and again  of  Tiberius,  in  fortifying
the  position  of  their  own  children  by  calling  older  kinsmen
to  its  support. Both  precedents  were  of  evil  augury. But

V

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  22.

a  Dion  tells  a  horrid  story,  that  when  the  head  of  Lollia  was  brought  for
her  inspeetion,  Agrippina  forced  open  the  mouth  with  her  own  hand,  to  look
for  certain  marks  in  the  teeth,  by  which  to  assure  herself  of  its  identity,  lx.
32.

444  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  50.

the  imperial  pedant  was  proud  to  walk  in  the  steps  of  his
renowned  predecessors  ;  and  in  the  year  S03,  the  next  after
his  marriage,  he  consented  to  adopt  Domitius  into  the  Clau-
dian  house,  to  place  him  formally  on  the  same  line  of  succes-
sion with  his  own  son,  and  inasmuch  as  he  was  three  years
the  senior,  to  give  him  actual  precedence  in  the  career  of
honours.  This,  it  was  remarked  hy  the  genealogists,  was  the
first  instance  of  the  adoption  of  a  son  hy  any  Claudius  of  the
patrician  hranch  of  that  illustrious  house,  which  had  main-
tained its  name  and  honours  in  direct  male  descent  from  the
era  of  Attus  Clausus  the  Sabine,  if  not  of  Clausus  the  ally
of  .iEneas.  It  proved  fatal  to  the  race.  L.  Domitius  thus
introduced  into  his  stepfather's  family  received  the  name  of
Nero,  a  name  long  renowned  for  the  obligations  it  had  laid
on  Rome,  but  destined  henceforth  to  become  infamous  for
ever  throughout  the  world.1  The  marriage  to  which  he  was
pledged  with  his  cousin  Octavia,  now  become  his  sister,  was
incestuous  and  abominable  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen.
But  worse  than  this  was  the  position  of  jealous  rivalry  in
which  he  was  placed  with  regard  to  the  injured  Britannicus.
This  poor  child  was  supposed,  even  at  his  tender  years,  to
have  some  quickness  of  parts,  and  he  did  not  fail  to  perceive
the  guile  which  lurked  beneath  the  pretended  affection  of
Agrippina.  One  by  one  the  slaves  and  attendants  of  his
childhood,  between  whom  and  himself  there  existed  a  mu-
tual attachment,  were  removed,  as  he  well  knew,  by  her  arti-
fices, and  replaced  by  creatures  of  her  own  ;  and  by  these  he
was  educated  as  the  son  of  a  plebeian  client,  rather  than  as
a  noble  by  birth,  still  less  as  heir  to  the  purple.3  The  eleva-
tion, as  it  may  now  be  called,  of  this  cruel  stepmother  to  the
title  of  Augusta  by  a  decree  of  the  senate  seemed  to  crown
her personal ambition.3 Henceforth she  laboured  for  her

1  Hor.  Od.  iv.  4.  37. :  "  Quid  debeas,  0  Roma,  Neronibus,"  &c.

2  Dion,  lx.  32. :  ug  /cat  tuv  tvx^vtutv  riva  rptyecdai  endiei.

3  Livia  was  styled  Augusta  after  her  husband's  decease ;  Messalina  bore  the
title  on  ber  coins,  though  these  perhaps  are  provincial :  but  Agrippina  was  the
first  wife  of  a  reigning  emperor  who  enjoyed  it  by  a  decree  of  the  senate.  See
Eckhel,  Doclr.  Numm.  vi.  252.  foil.

A.  U.  803.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  445

son's  advancement  only.  There  were  few  that  did  not  anti-
cipate the  transfer  of  the  empire  to  her  child  from  those  of
Messalina,  and  the  commiseration  of  the  citizens  for  the  hap-
less Britannicus  was  already  strongly  excited.

But  the  contentions  of  rival  princes  and  the  conflicts  of
civil  war  were  ever  flitting  before  the  minds  of  the  occu-
pants of  power  at  Rome. The  praetorians  had

.  1 /»  />  •  ii  Agrippina

decided  the  fate  of  empire  at  the  last  vacancy ; courts  the

,  -ii  i  •  />  i army.

the  legions  might  be  expected  to  interfere  at  the
next,  and  throw  their  weight  into  the  scale  between  Nero
and  Britannicus.  It  was  doubtless  with  a  view  to  conciliate
the  soldiers  that  Agrippina's  masculine  spirit  aspired  to  posi-
tions which  had  hitherto  been  never  occupied  by  women ;
that  she  displayed  herself  to  the  citizens  and  the  army  in
the  character  of  a  chief  of  the  legions.  To  plant  Her  foundation
a  colony  was  a  proper  function  of  an  imperator,  AOTipptaensi^
of  one  to  whom,  among  other  powers,  that  of  orCoi<ysae-
taking  the  auspices  and  performing  the  proper  rites,  was  duly
intrusted  by  the  vote  of  the  Curies.  It  was  the  boast  of
Agrippina  that  she  was  the  first,  possibly  she  was  the  last
also,  of  Roman  women  who  founded  a  colony  of  Roman
veterans.1  The  illustrious  city  of  Cologne  owes  its  origin  to
the  caprice  of  this  empress,  who  transformed  a  village  of
the  Ubii  on  the  Rhine  into  a  stronghold  of  Roman  domin-
ion.' Here,  or  in  the  camp  adjacent,  Agrippina  had  herself
been  born  ;  here  had  stood  the  proetorium  of  her  father  Ger
manicus,  and  here  perhaps  her  grandsire  Agrippa  had  effected
the  passage  of  the  frontier  stream.  Agrippina  was  fond
also  of  assuming  a  conspicuous  place  in  military  spectacles.

1  The  foundation  of  a  city  by  Dido  in  the  iEneid,  and  her  sitting  before  the
temple  septa  armis,  indicated  to  the  Roman  reader  tha't  she  was  a  queen,  not
less  plainly  than  the  royal  title  applied  in  so  marked  a  manner  to  her.

3  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  27.  If  originally  founded  by  Agrippa  himself,  as  another
passage  of  Tacitus  ( Germ.  28.)  seems  to  imply,  it  must  have  been  reconstituted
by  Agrippina,  and  received  from  her  the  name  which  in  found  in  inscriptions,  of
Colonia  Claudia  Augusta  Agrippinensium.  It  is  curious  that  this  abnormal
colony  has  alone  of  all  its  kindred  foundations  retained  to  the  present  day  the
name  of  Colonia.

446  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  50.

When  Caractacus,  the  conquered  British  chief,  was  brought
in  chains  before  the  emperor's  tribunal  at  Rome,  where  he
was  surrounded  by  his  guards  and  the  officers,  she  seated
herself  on  another  tribunal  by  his  side,  and  received  together
with  him  the  homage  of  the  captive  and  his  family.1  That
a  woman  should  thus  take  her  station  in  front  of  the  stand-
ards was  considered  bold  and  unfeminine  :  the  veteran  Pliny
deemed  it  worthy  of  grave  remark,  as  a  token  of  the  times
in  which  he  had  lived,  that  he  had  himself  in  his  youth  be-
held the  consort  of  Claudius  witnessing  the  sea-fight  of  the
Fucine  lake,  arrayed  in  a  soldier's  cloak,  by  the  side  of  the
imperator.3  Nor  less  surprised  perhaps  were  the  foreign  en-
voys to  see  her  seated  together  with  the  emperor  when  ad-
mitted to  a  solemn  audience.  But  Agrippina,  says  Tacitus,
affected  to  be  a  partner  in  the  empire  which  her  sire  had  de-
fended and  her  grandsire  won :  she  boasted  herself  the  daugh-
ter of  one  imperator,  the  sister  of  another,  the  consort  of  a
third ;  moreover,  she  expected,  and  indeed  was  destined,  to
become  the  mother  of  a  fourth ;  a  combination  of  which
there  was  no  previous,  and  probably  no  later  example.9  Her
face  was  associated  with  the  emperor's  on  the  coinage.4  It
was  remarked  also  that  her  ascending  the  Capitol  in  the  car-
pentum,  or  litter  reserved  for  the  priests  and  the  divine  im-
ages, was  an  assumption  of  honours  beyond  her  sex  ;  but
this  distinction  had  been  conceded  by  Augustus  to  Livia,
and  by  Claudius  himself  to  Messalina.  But,  in  pride  and
outward  show,  no  less  than  in  dissoluteness  of  manners  and

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  36,  37.

2  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxiii.  3. :  "  Nos  vidimus  Agrippinam  Claudii  principis,
edente  eo  navalis  proelii  spectaculum,  assidentem  ei  indutam  paludamento."

3  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  42.  Germanicus,  as  the  quasi-associate  of  Tiberius,  Claudius,
Caius,  and  Nero.  So  it  was  said  of  Elizabeth,  daughter  of  our  Edward  IV.  and
queen  of  Henry  VII.,  that  she  was  "  daughter  to  a  king,  sister  to  a  king,  wife
to  a  king,  and  mother  to  a  king,  and  to  two  queens  also."  Strype's  Memorials,
i.  c.  35.

4  Eekhel,  Bod.  Numm.  vi.  257. :  "Fuit  Agrippina  ex  Augustorem  uxoribus
prima,  cujus  imaginem  perinde  atque  suam  in  nummis  signari  indulsit  maritus."

A.  U.  803.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  447

relentless  bloodshed,  Agrippina  had  now  learnt  to  rival  the
predecessor  she  had  overthrown.1

The  advancement  of  the  youthful  Nero  to  imperial  power
was  in  progress  even  at  this  early  period.  In  the  year  804
he  was  invested  with  the  gown  of  manhood,  and  Nero  intro.
designated  for  consul,  at  the  instance  of  the  de-  ^SuX™0
voted  senate,  as  soon  as  he  should  reach  his  A  D  51
twentieth  year.  But  in  the  mean  time  he  was  A-v- 804-
deputed  to  hold  proconsular,  or  vice-imperial,  power  beyond
the  city ;  which,  as  he  was  still  retained  beneath  the  roof  of
the  palace,  was  for  the  present  a  mere  honorary  title,  and
only  a  presage  of  the  substance  that  was  to  follow.  He  re-
ceived, moreover,  the  flattering  style  of  Prince  of  the  Roman
Youth.  Agrippina  took  occasion  from  these  special  distinc-
tions, to  mark  in  every  way  the  difference  between  her  son
and  the  still  infant  Britannicus  :  the  one  was  to  be  regarded
as  a  man,  the  other  to  be  treated  always  as  a  child  ;  the  one
was  exhibited  to  the  people  in  official  robes,  while  the  other
appeared  only,  if  he  appeared  at  all,  in  the  praetexta  of  the
pupil  and  the  minor.  Meanwhile  centurions  and  tribunes,
freedmen  and  tutors,  as  many  as  seemed  to  favour  the  off-
spring of  Messalina,  or  even  to  commiserate  his  fortune,
were  removed  from  about  him  on  various  pretences  ;  and  his
once  casually  calling  his  brother  by  his  original  name  of
Domitius  was  construed  into  an  insult,  to  which  he  must
have  been  instigated  by  the  evil  disposed  among  his  friends
and  attendants.2

Whatever,  indeed,  were  the  crimes  and  excesses  of  the
wretched  Messalina,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  her  artifices
or,  if  we  may  so  believe,  her  genial  fascinations

'  J  .  .  Increasing  in-

had  surrounded  her  with  many  friends,  and  the fluence  of

Agrippina.

enterprise  of  Narcissus  against  her  had  not  been
unattended  with  danger  to  himself  and  to  the  emperor. We
have  seen  that  Vitellius  and  Largus  had  refrained  from  stim-
ulating Claudius  against  her,  and  that  Lusius  Geta,  the  pre-

1  Dion,  lx.  33.  a  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  41.

448  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  51.

feet,  was  deemed  so  attached  to  her  interests  as  to  be  an  ob-
ject of  distrust  and  apprehension  to  his  agonized  master.
Another  officer  of  the  guard,  named  Crispinus,  was  still  re-
garded as  her  partisan  ;  and  both  these  men,  important  from
the  position  they  held,  were  supposed  to  be  still  devoted  to
the  interests  of  her  desolate  children.  Agrippina  watched
with  sleepless  vigilance  for  the  moment  to  supplant  them,
and  at  last  she  prevailed  on  the  emperor  to  risk  a  revolution
of  the  palace  by  dismissing  them  from  their  posts,  and  re-
placing them  with  a  favourite  and  staunch  adherent  of  her
own.  The  new  prefect,  Afranius  Burrhus,  was  brave  and
able,  and  once  armed  with  authority  from  the  emperor,  made
himself  master  of  the  camp  without  a  struggle.1  We  shall
see  hereafter  that  he  was,  moreover,  independent  and  honest,
as  far  perhaps  as  his  position  could  allow ;  but  he  under-
stood that  it  was  by  Agrippina  that  he  had  been  advanced,
and  by  her  he  might  at  any  time  be  displaced,  and  he  at-
tached himself  to  her  interests  and  the  faction  of  her  son,  as
far  as  it  was  now  opposed  to  that  of  Britannicus.  The  de-
struction which  fell  on  many  of  the  freedmen  may  probably
be  ascribed  to  their  adherence  to  the  party  of  Messalina ;
Callistus,  the  patron  of  Lollia,  seems  to  have  sunk  into  ob-
scurity; while  Narcissus,  who  had  recommended  Petina,
could  with  difficulty  retain,  notwithstanding  his  signal  ser-
vices, any  portion  of  his  former  influence.  The  paramount
sway  which  Agrippina  now  exercised  over  her  spouse,  and
over  all  who  sought  to  retain  his  favour,  was  remarkably
manifested  in  her  saving  Vitellius  from  a  charge  of  Majesty
brought  against  him  by  a  senator ;  who  not  only  failed  in
his  prosecution,  but  was  himself  sentenced  to  banishment,
and  interdicted  fire  and  water.  Nevertheless,  though  Agrip-
pina triumphed,  the  people  were  uneasy  at  the  prospect  of
civil  war,  or  unnatural  murder  which  seemed  opening  before
them.  The  year  804  wUs  celebrated  for  the  prodigies  which
attended  it :  among  the  most  calamitous  of  these  was  an

Tac.  Ann.  xii.  42.

A.U.  804.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  449

earthquake,  by  which  many  houses  in  Rome  were  overturned,
and  many  people  killed  in  the  panic  which  ensued.  The  har-
vest foiled  generally  throughout  the  provinces,  and  the  sup-
ply of  corn  to  the  capital  ran  low.  Only  fifteen  days'  con-
sumption remained  in  the  granaries.  The  populace  rioted
for  "bread,  and  actually  attacked  the  emperor  when  transact-
ing business  in  the  forum.  They  drove  him  tumultuously
from  his  tribunal,  and  would  have  injured  and  perhaps  torn
him  in  pieces,  but  for  the  prompt  succour  of  a  military  force.1
Augustus  had  required  that  every  revelation  of  the  fu-
ture should  be  stamped  with  the  license  of  government,  and
Tiberius  had  expelled  from  Italv  the  pretenders

.  „  ...  ... Measures  of

to  astrological  science. Claudius,  in  the  spirit  of Claudius  for

. . .  ,  ,  ,  » . . „.  , maintaining

imitation,  perhaps,  rather  than  01  intelligent  pol- morality  and

,  „  ,. -,.  i-i^i  •• good  order.

icy,  sought  to  enforce  this  edict,  which  the  citi-
zens had  treated  with  scornful  disregard.  The  measure  in-
deed, as  Tacitus  declares,  was  fruitless ;  yet  it  hardly  de-
serves to  be  called  harsh.  Perhaps  its  immediate  motive
was  the  reputed  crime  of  a  young  Scribonianus,  the  son  of
the  officer  who  had  revolted  in  Dalmatia.  He  was  accused
of  intriguing  against  the  emperor's  life  by  consulting  these
dangerous  impostors.  Claudius  was  alarmed,  but  he  was
also  mortified  at  the  ingratitude,  as  he  esteemed  it,  of  one
whose  life  and  dignity  he  had  spared  in  the  wreck  of  his
father's  fortunes.  Scribonianus  was  banished  ;  nor  did  he
long  survive.  Some  pretended  that  he  fell  a  victim  to  poison,
while  others  affirmed  that  his  death  was  merely  natural ;  so
impossible  was  it  to  arrive  at  the  truth  in  such  matters,  so
indifferent,  it  may  be  added,  were  the  Romans  generally  to
the  truth.'  At  the  same  time  the  emperor  continued  to  exert
unremitting  vigilance  in  maintaining  the  dignity  of  the  sena-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  43.  Suetonius  (Claud.  18.)  says  that  he  was  pelted  with
crusts  of  bread.  This  licentious  conduct  of  the  populace  does  not  imply  any
special  contempt  for  Claudius.  One  of  the  most  deeply  respected  of  all  the  em
perors  was  treated  in  the  same  manner  at  a  later  period.  See  Aurel.  Victor,
Epit.  30.  in  Anton.  Pio.

3  Tac.  Aim.  xii.  52.:  "  Ut  quisquc  credidit  vulgavcrc."
vor..  v.— 29

450  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  52.

torial  order :  he  took  measures  for  removing  from  its  ranks
the  members  who  had  descended  into  poverty,  and  such  as
on  this  account  voluntarily  resigned  received  his  marked  ap-
probation. The  thunders  of  the  law,  conceived  in  a  spirit
of  ancient  fanaticism,  were  levelled  against  matrons  who
had  degraded  their  class  by  forming  connexions  with  slaves ;
such  abandoned  wretches  were  to  be  reduced  to  the  state  of
servitude  themselves.  It  had  been  often  remarked  that  the
freedmen  were  generally  the  harshest  in  their  treatment  of
the  less  fortunate  brethren  from  whose  ranks  they  had  them-
selves recently  emerged ;  and  it  was  Pallas,  the  pampered
paramour  of  two  empresses,  who  advised  this  measure,  se-
vere against  the  unfortunate  women,  but  doubtless  still  more
severe  against  their  more  miserable  partners  in  guilt.1  He
received  his  master's  thanks,  however,  for  the  wholesome
austerity  of  his  counsel,  and  was  recompensed  with  the  prae-
torian ornaments,  and  a  colossal  grant  of  public  money  by
the  subservient  senators.  A  Cornelius  Scipio  went  so  far  in
adulation  as  to  affirm  that  he  was  sprung  from  Pallas,  the
legendary  king  of  Arcadia,  and  moved  that  he  should  be
specially  thanked  for  deigning  to  assist  their  deliberations,
and  take  his  place  among  the  servants  of  the  emperor.  Clau-
dius undertook  however  to  declare  that  his  freedman  was
satisfied  with  honorary  distinctions,  and  would  beg  respect-
fully to  decline  the  present,  and  continue  in  his  state  of  actual
poverty ;  a  poverty,  it  was  remarked,  of  some  three  hundred
millions  of  sesterces.3

The  favour  and  authority  of  this  fortunate  upstart  con-
tinued still  to  increase.  He  was  able  to  protect  his  brother
Claudius  ex-  Felix,  who  had  been  advanced  already  through
lese^of  ethelvi  h*s  mterest  to  the  procuratorship  of  Judea,  where
knights.  liis  exactions  had  driven  the  people  into  riot  and

1  Thus  the  younger  Pliny,  telling  the  story  of  one  Largius  Macedo,  who  was
attacked  by  his  slaves,  says  that  he  was  "  Superbus  alioqui  dominus  et  saevus,
et  qui  servisse  patrem  suum  parum,  immo  nimium,  meminisset." Episl.  iii.  14.

3  Tac.  xii.  53. :  "  Sestertii  ter  millies : "  300  million  sesterces  equal  about
2,400,000*.

A.U.  805.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  451

revolt.  It  was  at  his  instance  also,  perhaps,  that  Claudius
now  empowered  the  knights  who  managed  the  fisc  in  the
provinces,  and  even  in  Rome,  to  exercise  jurisdiction  or  judi.
cial  authority,  such  as  was  entrusted  to  the  magistrates,  the
consuls  and  prnetors  at  home  and  their  deputies  abroad.  This
principle  of  arrangement  had  already  been  sanctioned  by
Augustus  with  respect  to  the  exceptional  government  of
Egypt;  it  had  been  extended  sometimes  to  certain  other
localities ;  but  it  was  reserved  for  Claudius  to  establish  it
generally  as  an  instrument  of  monarchical  rule,  by  which
authority  derived  directly  from  the  chief  of  the  state  was
placed  throughout  the  empire  on  the  same  level  as  that  of
the  officers  of  the  people.1

The  influence  of  Agrippina  continued  still  in  the  ascend-
ant, nor  to  the  end  of  her  husband's  life  did  it  experience  any
decline ; for  Claudius  was  not  naturally  capri-

...  .  .  Continued  m-

cious :  he  was  as  patient  in  suffering  as  in  acting, fluence  of

A  / u  U A  , 11  Agrippina.

and  never  seems  to  have  revolted,  even  mentally,
against  the  domestic  tyranny  to  which  he  had  now  once
more  subjected  himself.  Almost  the  last  public  act  of  his
principate  was  receiving,  at  her  instigation,  the  scandalous
charges  now  brought  against  Statilius  Taurus,  a  man  of
wealth  and  ancestral  dignity,  who  had  recently  returned  to
Rome  laden,  as  it  was  affirmed,  with  the  spoils  of  the  prov-
ince of  Africa.  The  crime  objected  to  him  was  not,  however,
extortion  in  his  government  only,  but  the  more  odious  prac-
tice of  magic.  Claudius  allowed  his  case  to  be  brought
under  the  cognisance  of  the  senate ;  it  was  believed,  how-
ever, that  both  charges  were  equally  false,  and  prompted
solely  by  the  malice  of  Agrippina,  who  coveted  his  house
and  gardens.  But  neither  the  sympathy  of  his  peers,  nor  the
common  persuasion  of  his  innocence,  availed  to  save  the

1  Tac,  Ann.  xii.  60. :  "  Claudius  omne  jus  tradidit  de  quo  totiens  scditionc  aut
armis  ccrtatum."  See  Lipsius,  Excurs.  ii.  on  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  The  procurators
of  the  emperor  were  knights,  and  Tacitus  seems  to  regard  this  as  a  settlement
of  the  ancient  contest  between  the  senate  and  the  equestrian  order  for  the
Judicia.

452  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  53.

object  of  a  powerful  enmity.  The  accused,  proud  and  indig-
nant, preferred  a  voluntary  death  to  the  humiliation  of  re-
plying to  his  accusers  before  a  tribunal  of  freedmen  and
courtiers  ;  and  the  senators,  who  were  now  seldom  consulted
in  proceedings  which  related  to  the  emperor's  safety  and
dignity,  could  only  express  their  sentiments  by  expelling  the
prosecutor  from  their  assembly,  with  a  burst  of  petulant  dis-
gust which  resisted  even  Agrippina's  efforts  to  protect  him.1
But  this  covert  persecution  of  one  hapless  family,  and
these  attacks  on  the  most  eminent  of  the  nobles,  were  excep-
Nero  comes  for-  tions  to  the  general  posture  of  affairs,  which  were
Tocateofpopu-  st^  f°r  tne  most  part  conducted  with  temper  and
lar  measures.  moderation.  It  was  the  policy  of  Claudius,  or
his  advisers,  to  maintain  the  populace  in  good  humour  at
whatever  cost,  and  this  might  still  be  effected,  at  the  expense
of  the  tax-payers  of  the  provinces,  by  multiplied  shows  and
reiterated  largesses.  While  the  aged  emperor's  sun  was  thus
setting  with  a  milder  and  serener  ray  than  might  have  been
anticipated  from  the  elements  of  storm  and  confusion  with
which  he  seemed  to  be  surrounded,  another  light  was  rising
in  the  opposite  quarter,  portending,  as  was  fondly  antici-
pated, a  season  of  beneficent  rule  and  widely  extended
happiness.  In  the  course  of  806,  while  still  only  in  his  six-
teenth year,  Nero  was  permitted  to  celebrate  his  marriage
with  Octavia.  In  order  to  acquire  some  popularity  for  an
union  of  so  questionable  a  character,  the  young  prince  was
instructed  to  come  forward  in  public,  and  graciously  plead,
in  speeches  made  for  him  by  his  tutor,  the  cause  of  liberality
for  more  than  one  distinguished  client.  He  harangued  first
in  behalf  of  the  venerable  community  of  Ilium,  the  ancestor
of  Rome,  the  parent  of  the  Julian  race  ;  the  glories  of  which,
real  or  fabled,  he  set  forth  with  eloquence  and  ingenuity,  and
demanded  that  it  should  for  their  sake  be  relieved  from  all
public  burdens  for  ever.3 Again  he  pleaded  for  the  colony

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  59. A.  u.  806.

5  It  seeems  not  improbable  that  Lucan  makes  his  apparently  purposeless
digression  to  describo  the  site  of  Troy  (Phars.  ix.  964.  foil.),  in  compliment  to

A.  U.  SOC]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  453

of  Bononia,  for  which,  when  distressed  by  a  ruinous  confla-
gration, he  solicited  a  grant  of  money.  About  the  same  time
the  Khodians  were  allowed  to  recover  their  autonomy,  which
seems  to  have  been  withdrawn  from  them  on  account  of
some  domestic  sedition ;  and  tribute  was  remitted  to  Apamea
for  five  years  in  consideration  of  the  damage  it  had  sustained
from  an  earthquake.1  Claudius  himself  made  an  harangue,
which  seems  to  have  been  highly  characteristic  of  his  pedan-
tic style,  in  favour  of  granting  the  boon  of  immunity  to  Cos.
He  spoke  largely  on  the  antiquity  of  the  Coans.  The  Ar-
gives,  he  said,  or  rather  Ccous,  the  father  of  Latona,  was  the
first  inhabitant  of  the  island ;  by  and  by  .ZEsculapius  brought
thither  the  divine  art  of  healing,  which  was  practised  there
with  eminent  success  by  his  descendants  from  generation  to
generation.  Having  enumerated  many  of  these  skilful  prac-
titioners, and  distinguished  the  periods  in  which  they  flour-
ished, the  emperor  came  at  last  to  the  special  praise  of  his
own  physician  Xenophon,  and  declared  that  he  yielded  to
his  entreaties  in  relieving  his  countrymen  from  all  imperial
contributions,  and  devoting  their  island  from  henceforth  to
the  service  of  the  god  of  healing  only.*

The  last  year  of  the  emperor's  life  and  reign,  the  807th
of  the  city,  opened  once  more  with  prodigies  of  evil  import,
which  were  supposed  to  betoken  the  decay  of

.  .  .  Further  tri-

public principle and deterioration of  national umphsot

s x  11  Agrippina.

sentiment. It  was  natural,  perhaps,  to  augur

the  interest  his  patron  Xcro  thus  showed  in  the  sacred  city. The  young  em-
peror may  have  taken  to  himself  the  lines  applied  to  Julius :
"  Gentis  Iulea;  vestris  clarissimus  aris
Dat  pia  thura  nepos  ....
Restituam  populos  ;  grata  vice  mcenia  reddent
Ausonidtc  Phrygibus,  Romanaque  Pergama  surgent."

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  58. ;  Suet.  Claud.  25.  Ncr.  7.  The  young  prince's  orations
were  in  Greek.  It  docs  not  appear  clearly,  though  it  may,  I  think,  be  inferred
from  Tacitus,  that  these  last  indulgences  were  obtained  by  Nero,  and  I  have
left  the  statement  equivocal  as  I  found  it.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  61.  The  Byzantians  petitioned  also  for  relief,  and  were
exempted  from  payment  for  five  years.

s  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  64. :  "  Mutationem  morum  in  detenus  portendi."

454  HISTORY  OF THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  54.

that  the  advent  of  a  young  and  gallant  prince  to  power
would  commence  a  new  era,  both  in  government  and  in
society ;  that  the  pensive  retrospect  of  Augustus  and  his
later  imitator  would  be  exchanged  for  a  burst  of  buoyant
anticipations,  and  that  Nero  would  pay  his  court  to  the
future,  as  Claudius  had  venerated  the  past.  Among  these
portents,  that  which  alone  can  interest  us  was  the  fact  that
all  the  chief  magistracies  lost,  in  the  course  of  a  few  months,
one  of  their  occupants  by  death  ;  a  quaestor,  an  sedile,  a
tribune,  a  prastor,  and  a  consul.1  This  fatality  made  a  con-
siderable impression  upon  the  populace ;  but  none  of  them
was  so  much  alarmed  at  these  omens  as  Agrippina  herself  at
the  boding  words  which  were  heard  to  fall  from  Claudius  in
a  moment  of  inebriation,  that  it  was  his  fate  to  suffer  the
crimes  of  all  his  consorts,  but  at  last  to  punish  them.''  The
palace,  it  seems,  was  still  distracted  by  female  jealousies.  It
is  remarkable,  after  the  account  we  have  perused  of  the  un-
pardonable crime  and  condign  punishment  of  Messalina,
together  with  her  guilty  associates,  that  her  mother  was
sufFered  still  to  haunt  the  precincts  of  power,  and  to  intrigue
against  the  woman  who  had  succeeded  in  supplanting  her
daughter.  Domitia  Lepida,  the  sister  of  Cn.  Domitius,  and
cousin  as  well  as  sister-in-law  to  Agrippina,  was  not  many
years  her  senior,  and  was  still  reputed  little  inferior  to  her  in
the  autumn  of  their  personal  charms.3  But  the  contest
between  them  was  not  now  for  the  heart  of  a  paramour.
The  arts  of  Lepida  were  directed  to  diverting  the  childish
reverence  of  Nero  from  his  mother  to  his  aunt,  and  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  64. ;  Dion,  lx.  35.  According  to  Suetonius  the  old  man
entertained  a  presentiment  of  his  approaching  end,  and  betrayed  it  more  than
once. Claud.  46.

2  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Fatale  sibi  ut  conjugum  flagitia  ferret  dein  puniret."  Comp.
Dion,  lx.  34. ;  Suet.  Claud.  43.

3  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  64. :  "  Nee  forma  aetas  opes  multum  distabant."  If  Agrip-
pina was  now  thirty-eight,  the  mother  of  Messalina  can  hardly  have  been  more
than  forty-five.  This  Domitia  Lepida  may  be  called  the  younger,  to  distinguish
her  from  an  elder  sister  of  the  same  name,  who  will  appear  on  the  scene  later.
See  Suet.  N'er.  34. ;  Dion,  lxi.  17.

A.  U.  807.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  455

caresses  she  lavished  upon  him  seems  to  have  had  some  effect
on  his  warm  and  impressible  temper.  Agrippina  trembled
for  her  influence,  not  over  the  actual,  but  over  the  future
emperor.  Both  these  women,  it  is  said,  were  equally  disso-
lute in  manners,  equally  violent  in  temper ;  each  fought  for
possession  of  the  young  prince  with  the  desperate  determina-
tion to  use  her  power  with  him  to  destroy  the  other.  But
the  genius  or  the  fortune  of  Agrippina  prevailed.  She  sub-
orned delators  to  charge  her  rival  with  the  crime  of  seeking
to  marry  Claudius  after  destroying  his  actual  wife  by  incan-
tations ;  to  this  was  added  the  more  palpable  treason  of
raising  a  servile  insurrection  in  Calabria.  These  charges
were  deemed  to  be  sufficiently  proved,  and  Claudius  gave
full  scope  to  the  vengeful  cruelty  of  the  conqueror.  Lepida
was  condemned  and  executed,  in  spite  of  the  remonstrances
of  Narcissus,  rendered  desperate  himself  by  the  overthrow
of  the  only  influence  which  had  hitherto  placed  any  check
on  the  triumphant  despotism  of  Agrippina.  Narcissus  had
received  the  quaestorial  ornaments  as  the  reward  of  his  ser-
vices ;  but  he  had  found  himself  outstripped  in  the  race  of
favour  by  Pallas,  the  confidant  of  the  new  empress,  and  full
of  discontent  and  apprehension  for  himself,  he  was  anxious
to  6ave  the  mother  of  his  own  victim,  to  counterpoise  the
power  which  had  risen  upon  her  fall.1  He  now  muttered
moodily  to  his  friends  that  whether  Britannicus  or  Nero
succeeded  to  power,  his  own  destruction  was  equally  assured :
nevertheless,  his  life,  he  insinuated,  was  ever  at  the  service
of  his  master  ;  as  he  had  tracked  the  adultery  of  Messalina
and  Silius,  he  had  ample  proofs  to  convict  Pallas  and  Agrip-
pina also  ;  and  he  threatened  to  bring  up  the  offspring  of  the
late  empress  to  avenge  himself  on  the  betrayers  of  his  father
and  the  real  assassins  of  his  mother.8

■  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  38. :  "  Dccreta  Narcisso  qilaestoria  insignia ;  levissimum
fastidit  ejus,  cum  supra  Pallantem  et  Callistum  ageret."

5  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  65. :  "  Matris  ctiam  interfectores  ulciscerctur."  It  appears
that  KarciMUfl  knew  that,  though  himself  the  most  prominent  actor  in  the  re-
cent tragedy,  there  existed  actual  proof  against  Agrippina  of  an  important  share
in  the  conspiracy.

456  HISTORY OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  54.

Such  were  the  conflicting  schemes  and  interests  hy  which,
in  addition  to  the  ever-recurring  cares  of  empire,  the  declin
Decline  of  mS  years  °f  the  most  patient  of  masters  were

Claudius.  disturbed. But  Claudius,  now  in  his  sixty-fourth

year,  and  exhausted  with  toil  at  least  as  much  as  hy  the  in-
temperance in  which  he  may  have  indulged,  fell  sick  at
Rome,  and  was  induced  to  quit  his  constant  station  in  the
city, — for  he  had  pertinaciously  denied  himself  the  custom-
ary relaxation  of  occasional  retreat  to  baths  and  villas, — for
the  medicinal  air  and  water  of  Sinuessa.1  Agrippina,  we  are
assured,  had  long  determined  to  hasten  his  still  lingering
end,  and  precipitate  by  a  crime  the  advent  of  her  son  to
power.  But  she  continued  anxiously  to  debate  with  herself
what  kind  of  poison  to  employ ;  fearing  lest,  if  the  agent
were  too  active,  the  secret  might  betray  itself,  and  again,  if
it  were  too  slow  and  gradual,  the  victim  might  come  to  sus-
pect the  cause  of  his  sensible  decline,  and  take  measures  even
in  his  last  hours  to  defeat  her  aspirations.  The  crime  of  poi-
soning; was  rife  in  Rome. Caius  had  made  elabo-

Ap-ippina  con-  o

trues t0  Poison  rate  experiments  in  the  science,  and  many  must
have  been  his  agents  and  familiars,  who  lived  by
pandering  to  the  murderous  passions  of  the  day.  One  at
least  of  these  horrid  professors,  the  infamous  Locusta,  has
obtained  a  name  in  the  annals  of  crime,  and  has  been  digni-
fied by  the  grave  irony  of  Tacitus  with  the  title  of  an  instru-
ment of  monarchy.3  The  men  accused  her  of  being  the  ac-
complice of  many  wicked  wives  who  wished  to  rid  them-
selves of  their  husbands ;  possibly  she  was  equally  accessible
to  either  sex ;  but  the  only  case  recorded  against  her  is  that
of  Agrippina  and  Claudius,  in  which  she  was  employed  to
prepare  a  potion  for  the  unfortunate  emperor. The  substance

1  Strabo,  v.  p.  351.,  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxi.  4.,  Martial,  xi.  8. See  Hoeck,
Rom.  Gesch.  i.  3.  330.

3  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  66. :  "  Diu  inter  instrumenta  regni  habita." Comp.  Juve-
nal, i.  71.:

"  Instituitque  rudes  melior  Locusta  propinquas
Per  famam  et  populum  nigros  efferre  maritos."

A.U.  807.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  457

"which  she  offered  to  compound  was  calculated  to  unsettle
the  mind  without  producing  immediate  death.1  Halotus,
one  of  the  slaves  of  the  palace,  and  the  taster  of  the  impe-
rial viands,  was  engaged  to  administer  the  dose,  which  was
concealed  in  a  dish  of  mushrooms,  the  favourite  delicacy  of
the  emperor's  supper  table.2  The  treacherous  morsel  was
swallowed ;  but  from  the  quantity  of  wine,  as  was  supposed,
that  he  had  drunk,  or  from  the  natural  relief  of  his  over-
loaded stomach,  the  poison  failed  of  effect.'  The  murderess
was  alarmed.  She  feared  discovery  from  the  suspicions  of
Claudius,  or  from  the  treachery  of  her  detestable  allies.
Throwing  away  further  precautions,  she  called  on  the  physi-
cian Xenophon,  whom  she  had  already  secured  in  case  of
need.  This  man  thrust  a  poisoned  feather  down  the  suffer-
er's throat  under  pretence  of  aiding  him  to  vomit,  and  this
time  at  least  the  venom  was  deadly  and  the  effect  sufficiently
rapid.*

Claudius  fell  senseless  on  his  couch,  and  was  removed,  as
if  fainting,  to  his  chamber.  Agrippina  called  for  flannels
and  restoratives,  and  pretended  to  applv  them  to

, ,  ,.,'.,.  ,  •  « , ! Death  of  Clau-

the  body,  while  it  lay  in  the  agonies  01  death, diusandsucces-

t  n  i  • • i t t  t mi  sion  °f  Nero.

and even  after  the  spirit  had departed, lhe

sickness  of  the  emperor  was  now  publicly  announced,  and

1  Tac.  1.  c. :  "  Exquisitum  aliquid  placebat  quod  turbarct  mentem  et  mortem
differret"

2  It  appears  from  inscriptions  that  the  office  of  taster  was  already  known  in
the  court  of  Augustus. Gruter,  p.  602.,  Hoeck,  Horn.  Gesch.  i.  3.  329.

3  The  words  of  Tacitus  (xii.  6"7.),  "  Socordiane  Claudii  an  vinolentia,"  with
some  varieties  of  reading,  having  caused  much  perplexity.  If  they  are  correct,
I  should  imagine  socordia  to  mean  the  languid  action  of  the  internal  organs,
which  might  be  supposed,  with  what  reason  I  know  not,  to  retard  the  operation
of  the  poison.  Ruperti  quotes  from  Livy,  xxvi.  14.:  "Impletae  cibis  vinoque
vena;  minus  efficacem  in  maturanda  morte  vim  veneni  faciunt."  I?y  the  words,
"nee  vim  medicaminis  statim  intellectam,"  Walthcr  supposes  that  the  guetta
did  not  at  once  perceive  that  poison  had  been  given :  but  inteUigere  is  the
proper  word  for  feeling  the  effect  of  a  medicine  or  a  wound.  Comp.  Statius,
'Huh,  xi.  540. :  "  Mox  intellecto  magis  ac  magis  aeger  anhelat  Vulnere."

*  Tac.  1.  c.  There  is  surely  some  confusion  in  the  account  of  Tacitus,  what-
ever may  be  the  corruption  of  his  text. The  first  poison,  as  he  says  himself,

458  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  54.

the  senate  summoned  to  hear  the  vows  of  the  consuls  and
priests  for  his  recovery.  While  these  ceremonies  were  in
progress,  however,  measures  were  preparing  in  the  palace
for  the  succession  of  Nero:  the  doors  were  kept  strictly-
closed,  and  placed  under  guard  of  the  trustiest  officers.
Agrippina,  affecting  an  excess  of  grief,  held  Britannicus
clasped  to  her  bosom,  calling  him  her  pet  and  darling,  and
the  image  of  his  dear  father,  and  keeping  him  by  every  artifice
from  quitting  the  chamber.  His  sisters,  Antonia  and  Octa-
via,  were  in  like  manner  detained  within  the  palace  ;  while
rumours  were  spread  that  the  sufferer  was  reviving,  and
despatches  sent  to  the  guards  and  legions,  declaring  that  all
went  well,  and  that  the  astrologers  predicted  his  happy  recov-
ery. Thus  twelve  or  more  hours  passed.  On  the  morrow
at  mid-day,  the  thirteenth  of  October,  the  doors  of  the  pal-
ace were  suddenly  thrown  open,  and  Nero,  with  Burrhus  at
his  side,  walked  straight  to  the  guardhouse,  at  the  outer
gate.1  At  the  prefect's  word  of  command,  he  was  received
with  acclamations,  and  lifted  in  a  litter  on  the  men's  shoul-
ders. Some  indeed  still  hung  back  and  murmured,  Where
is  Britannicus?  but  there  was  none  to  bid  them  act  for
him,  and  they  speedily  followed  the  first  impulse  which  had
been  given  them.  Nero  was  carried  to  the  camp ;  he  made
a  suitable  address,  promised  the  expected  donative,  after  his

was  not  intended  to  take  speedy  effect ;  the  second  must  have  been  rapid  indeed
not  to  be  rejected  with  the  vomiting  which  immediately  ensued.  Suetonius
gives  other  versions,  all  somewhat  different,  of  the  circumstances.  Claud.  44.
Comp.  Dion,  lx.  34.

1  We  may  conclude  from  Tacitus  that  Claudius  died  soon  after  being  car-
ried from  the  supper  table,  about  midnight  of  the  12th — 13th;  but  his  demise
was  announced  as  taking  place  some  hours  later,  and  the  13th  was  the
day  stated  in  the  Fasti.  Comp.  Dion,  lx.  34. ;  Suet.  Claud.  45.  Seneca
(Apocol.  2.)  pretends  that  he  did  not  expire  till  after  mid-day :  "  Inter  sextam
et  septimam  erat : "

"  Jam  medium  curru  Phoebus  diviserat  orbem,
Et  propior  nocti  fessas  quatiebat  habenas."

Born  Aug.  1.  a.  u.  744,  Claudius  died  Oct,  13.  a.  u.  807,  aged  sixty-three
years,  two  months,  and  twelve  days. See  Clinton,  Fast.  Rom.  i.  36.

A.U.  807.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  459

father's  example,  and  was  saluted  imperator.1  The  senate  ac-
cepted -without  hesitation  the  declared  will  of  the  praetorians ;
nor  was  there  afterwards  any  dissent  on  the  part  of  the
legions  in  the  provinces.  The  first  act  of  the  fathers  was  to
decree  the  deification  of  Claudius,  who  was  thus  honourably
dismissed,  with  the  least  possible  delay,  from  the  remem-
brance of  the  citizens  to  the  pious  services  of  his  appointed
Flamens.  His  funeral  was  ordered  with  great  splendour,
according  to  the  precedent  of  Augustus,  and  the  magnifi-
cence of  Agrippina  on  the  occasion  was  not  inferior  to  that
displayed  formerly  by  Livia.  But  his  will  was  never  pub-
licly recited ;  it  was  feared  that  the  preference  it  gave  to  the
adopted  son  over  the  actual  would  cause  remark  and  dissat-
isfaction.*

We  meet  with  more  than  one  instance  in  the  imperial  his-
tory of  the  parents  suffering  for  the  sins  of  their  children.
We  have  already  seen  how  much  reason  there  is

*  Estimate  of

to  believe  that  the  hatred  of  the  Romans  to  1 1- the  character

, .  ,.  ,  ,..  . of  Claudius.

benus  disposed  them  readily  to  accept  any  cal-
umny against  Livia.  Tiberius  himself  was  hated  the  more
for  the  crimes  of  his  successor  Caius  ;  and  there  is  ground  to
surmise  that  much  of  the  odium  which  has  attached  to  Clau-
dius is  reflected  from  the  horror  with  which  Nero  came  after-
wards to  be  regarded.  Thus  did  the  Romans  avenge  them-
selves on  the  authors  of  the  principle  of  hereditary  succes-
sion so  long  unknown  to  their  polity,  and  known  at  last  so
disadvantageously.  Of  Claudius,  at  least  a  feeling  of  com-
passion, if  not  of  justice,  may  incline  us  to  pronounce  with
more  indulgence  than  has  usually  been  accorded  to  him.3
He  was  an  imitator,  as  we  have  seen,  of  Augustus,  but  only

1  Suet.  Ner.  8. ;  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  69. ;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xx.  8. :  Dion
(Xiphilin),  lxi.  3.

5  Suet.  Claud.  45.;  Tac.  1.  c.;  Dion,  Ix.  35.

3  Philostratus  (in  Vil.  Apoll.  v.  27.)  judges  more  mildly  of  him:  pera  yap
rbv  npurov  avroKparopa,  i(j>'  ov  ra  'Vupaiuv  6uKoapf/87jf  rvpawiSeq  ovtu
XaTxTral  ioxvoav  enl  Trcvrr/KovTa  Itt/  d>c  pr/6e  KXavSiov  ra  pica  to'vtuv  rpia-
Kiiitra  ap!;avTa  xprlcr<jV  &6!-ai.

460  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  54.

as  the  silver  age  might  parody  the  golden ;  for  the  manners
he  sought  to  revive,  and  the  sentiments  he  pretended  to  re-
generate, had  not  been  blighted  by  the  passing  tempest  of
civil  war,  but  were  naturally  decaying  from  the  over-ripe-
ness of  age.  Nevertheless,  it  was  honourable  to  admire  a
noble  model ;  there  was  some  generosity  even  in  the  attempt
to  rival  the  third  founder  of  the  state.  Nor,  in  fact,  does
any  period  of  Roman  history  exhibit  more  outward  signs  of
vigorous  and  successful  administration :  none  was  more  fer-
tile  in  victories  or  produced  more  gallant  commanders  or
excellent  soldiers ;  domestic  affairs  were  prosperously  con-
ducted ;  the  laborious  industry  of  the  emperor  himself  tired
out  all  his  ministers  and  assistants.  The  senate  recovered
some  portion  of  its  authority,  and,  with  authority,  of  cour-
age and  energy.  Claudius  secured  respect  for  letters,  in  an
age  of  show  and  sensuality,  by  his  personal  devotion  to
them.  From  some  of  the  worst  vices  of  his  age  and  class
he  was  remarkably  exempt.  His  gluttony,  if  we  must  be-
lieve the  stories  told  of  it,  was  countenanced  at  least  bj'
many  high  examples ;  his  cruelty,  or  rather  his  callous  insen-
sibility, was  the  result  of  the  perverted  training  which  made
human  suffering  a  sport  to  the  master  of  a  single  slave,  as
well  as  to  the  emperor  on  the  throne ;  and  it  was  never  ag-
gravated at  least  by  wanton  caprice  or  ungovernable  pas-
sion. The  contempt  which  has  been  thrown  on  his  charac-
ter and  understanding  has  been  generated,  in  a  great  degree,
by  the  systematic  fabrications  of  which  he  has  been  made
the  victim.  Though  nattered  with  a  lip-worship  which
seems  to  our  notions  incredible,  Claudius  appears  to  have
risen  personally  above  its  intoxicating  vapours ;  we  know
that,  in  one  instance  at  least,  the  fulsome  adulation  of  a  man,
the  most  remarkable  of  his  age  for  eloquence  and  reputed
wisdom,  failed  to  turn  the  course  whether  of  his  justice  or
his  anger.

The  circumstances  of  this  adulation,  and  of  its  disap-
pointment, it  is  due  to  the  memory  of  Claudius  to  detail.

A.U.  80T.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  461

We  have  no  distinct  account  of  the  cause  of

. -,  i  • i Claudius  hon-

Seneca's  banishment,  which  is  ascribed,  by  little ouredasadeity

.  r  by  Seneca  dur-

better  than  a  guess,  to  the  machinations  of  JNles-  ing  his  life-
salina  against  the  friends  and  adherents  of  Julia.
However  this  may  be,  we  have  seen  with  what  impatience
the  philosopher  bore  it.  On  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  a
brother  of  Polybius,  he  addressed  a  treatise  from  his  place
of  exile  to  the  still  powerful  freedman,  such  as  was  styled  a
Consolation,  in  which  he  set  forth  all  the  arguments  which
wit  and  friendship  could  suggest  to  alleviate  his  affliction
and  fortify  his  wisdom.  After  assuring  him  of  ^e  cons?lation
the  solemn  truth  that  all  men  are  mortal,  and  re-  ^  Polybius-
minding  him  that  this  world  itself,  and  all  that  it  contains,
is  subject  to  the  common  law  of  dissolution ;  that  man  is
born  to  sorrow ;  that  the  dead  can  have  no  pleasure  in  his
grief;  that  his  grief  at  the  best  is  futile  and  unprofitable ;  he
diverts  him  Avith  another  topic  which  is  meant  to  be  still
more  effectual.  The  emperor,  he  says,  is  divine,  and  those
who  are  blessed  by  employment  in  his  service,  and  have  him
ever  before  their  eyes,  can  retain  no  idle  interest  in  human
things  ;  their  happy  souls  neither  fear  nor  sorrow  can  enter ;
the  divinity  is  with  them  and  around  them.1  Me,  he  de-
clares, this  God  has  not  overthrown  y  rather  he  has  supported
when  others  supplanted  me  ;  he  still  suffers  me  to  remain  for
a  monument  of  his  providence  and  compassion.  Whether
my  cause  be  really  good  or  bad,  his  justice  will  at  last  pro-
nounce it  good,  or  his  clemency  will  so  regard  it.  Meanwhile,
it  is  my  comfort  to  behold  his  pardons  travelling  through  the
world :  even  from  the  corner  where  J  am  cast  away  his  mercy
has  called  forth  many  an  exile  before  me. One  day  the  eyes

of  his  compassion  will  alight  on  me  also Truly  those

thunderbolts  are  just  which  the  thunderstriclcen  have  themselves
learnt  to  adore.  May  the  immortals  long  indulge  him  to  the
world!  may  he  rival  the  deeds  of  Augustus  and  exceed  his
years  ! While  still  resident  among  us,  may  death  never  cross

1  Scnec.  Ccns.  ad  Polyb.  31. :  "Non  dcsinam  totics  tibi  oflerre  Cacsarcm."

462  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  54.

his  threshold!  Distant  be  the  day,  and  reserved  for  the  tears
of  our  grand-children,  when  his  divine  progenitors  demand
him  for  the  heavens  which  are  his  own!1

Such  were  the  phrases,  sonorous  and  unctuously  polished,
which  Polybius  was  doubtless  expected  to  recite  in  the  ears
His  adoration  °f  the  imperial  pedant :  standing  high  as  he  still
pmvoTuna-  did  in  the  favour  of  Claudius  and  Messalina,  he
vailing.  had  the  means,  and  was  perhaps  not  without  the

will,  to  recommend  them  with  all  his  interest,  and  intercede
in  the  flatterer's  behalf.  Yet  Claudius,  it  would  seem,  re-
mained wholly  unmoved  by  a  worship  more  vehement  than
Ovid's,  and  enhanced  still  more  by  the  unquestioned  reputa-
tion of  its  author.  Whatever  had  been  the  motives  of  his
sentence  against  Seneca,  it  was  not  by  flattery  that  he  could
be  swayed  to  reverse  it.  Surely,  as  far  as  we  are  competent
to  judge,  we  must  think  the  better  both  of  his  firmness  and
his  sense.9  Shortly  afterwards  Polybius  was  himself  sub-
verted by  the  caprice  of  Messalina ;  Messalina  in  her  turn
was  overthrown  by  Agrippina ;  and  it  was  not  till  the  sister
of  Julia  had  gained  the  ascendant,  that  Seneca  obtained  at
her  instance  the  grace  he  had  vainly  solicited  through  the
good  offices  of  the  freedman.

But  however  little  Claudius  may  have  relied  on  the  sin-
cerity of  this  brilliant  phrasemonger,  he  could  scarce  have
Seneca's  satire  anticipated  the  revulsion  of  sentiment  to  which
uonhof  c'lau?"  so  ardent  a  worshipper  would  not  blush  to  give
dins-  utterance  on  his  demise. It  was  natural  of  course

that  the  returned  exile  should  attach  himself  to  his  benefac-
tress :  from  her  hands  he  had  received  his  honours  ;  by  her
he  was  treated  with  a  confidence  which  flattered  him.  No
doubt  he  was  among  the  foremost  of  the  courtiers  who  de-

1  Senec.  Com.  ad  Polyb.  26,  31,  32.

2  It  should  be  remarked  that  we  cannot  speak  with  certainty  of  this  pre-
sumed intercession  of  Polybius.  It  is  possible  that  the  Consolation  did
not  reach  him  till  he  was  no  longer  in  a  position  to  serve  its  author ;
but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  this  to  have  been  the
case.

A.U.  807.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  4G3

serted  the  setting  to  adore  the  rising  luminary.  Yet  few,
perhaps,  could  believe  that  no  sooner  should  Claudius  be
dead,  ere  yet  the  accents  of  official  flattery  had  died  away
which  proclaimed  him  entered  upon  the  divine  career  of  his
ancestors,  than  the  worshipper  of  the  living  emperor  should
turn  his  deification  into  ridicule,  and  blast  his  name  with  a
slander  of  unparalleled  ferocity.  There  is  no  more  curious
fragment  of  antiquity  than  the  Vision  of  Judgment  which
Seneca  has  left  us  on  the  death  and  deification  of  Claudius.
The  traveller  who  has  visited  modern  Rome  in  the  autumn
season  has  remarked  the  numbers  of  unwieldy  and  bloated
gourds  which  sun  their  speckled  bellies  before  the  doors,  to
form  a  favourite  condiment  to  the  food  of  the  poorer  classes.
When  Claudius  expired  in  the  month  of  October,  his  soul,
according  to  the  satirist,  long  lodged  in  the  inflated  empti-
ness of  his  own  swollen  carcass,  migrated  by  an  easy  transition
into  a  kindred  pumpkin.  The  senate  declared  that  he  had
become  a  god ;  but  Seneca  knew  that  he  was  only  transform-
ed into  a  gourd.  The  senate  decreed  his  divinity,  Seneca
translated  it  into  pumkinity ;  and  proceeded  to  give  a  bur-
lesque account  of  what  may  be  supposed  to  have  happened
in  heaven  on  the  appearance  of  the  new  aspirant  to  celestial
honours.1  A  tall  gray  haired  figure  has  arrived  halting  at
the  gates  of  Olympus :  he  mops  and  mows,  and  shakes  his
palsied  head,  and  when  asked  whence  he  comes  and  what  is
his  business,  mutters  an  uncouth  jargon  in  reply  which  none
can  understand. Jupiter  sends  Hercules  to  interrogate  the

1  The  piece  here  alluded  to  is  entitled  in  the  MSS.  and  editions  Ludus  de
mortc  Claiidii  Ccesaris.  Its  style  is  very  similar  to  that  of  Seneca,  with  whose
works  it  has  been  found,  and  in  brilliancy  and  point  it  is  by  no  means  un-
worthy of  the  great  master  of  rhetoric.  It  contains,  indeed,  no  allusion  to  the
gourd  or  pumpkin  ;  but  Dion  tells  us  (lx.  35.)  that  Seneca  wrote  a  satire  on  the
deification  of  Claudius  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Apocolocynlosis  (or  pump-
kinification),  and  there  seems  no  ground  to  doubt  the  identity  of  the  two  pieces.
It  is  not  uncommon  in  ancient  literature  for  the  same  work  to  be  cited  under
two  names.  Thus  the  poem  of  Lucan  is  sometimes  called  F/iarsalia,  some-
times de  bello  civili.

464  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  54.

creature,  for  Hercules  is  a  travelled  god,  and  knows  many
languages ;  but  Hercules  himself,  bold  and  valiant  as  he  is,
shudders  at  the  sight  of  a  strange  unearthly  monster,  with
the  hoarse  inarticulate  moaning^  of  a  seal  or  sea-calf.  He
fancied  that  he  saw  his  thirteenth  labour  before  him.  Pres-
ently, on  a  nearer  view,  he  discovers  that  it  is  a  sort  of  man.
Accordingly  he  takes  courage  to  address  him  with  a  verse
from  Homer,  the  common  interpreter  of  gods  and  men ;  and
Claudius,  rejoicing  at  the  sound  of  Greek,  and  auguring  that
his  own  histories  will  be  understood  in  heaven,  replies  with
an  apt  quotation.1  To  pass  over  various  incidents  which  are
next  related,  and  the  gibes  of  the  satirist  on  the  Gaulish  ori-
gin of  Claudius,  and  his  zeal  in  lavishing  the  franchise  on
Gauls  and  other  barbarians,  we  find  the  gods  assembled  in
conclave  to  deliberate  on  the  pretensions  of  their  unexpected
visitor.  Certain  of  the  deities  rise  in  their  places,  and  express
themselves  with  divers  exquisite  reasons  in  his  favour ;  and
his  admission  is  about  to  be  carried  with  acclamation,  when
Augustus  starts  to  his  feet  (for  the  first  time,  as  he  calls  them
all  to  witness,  since  he  became  a  god  himself,  for  Augustus
in  heaven  is  reserved  and  silent,  and  keeps  strictly  to  his  own
affairs),  and  recounts  the  crimes  and  horrors  of  his  grand-
child's career.  He  mentions  the  murder  of  his  father-in-law
Silanus,  and  his  two  sons-in-law  Silanus  and  Pompeius,  and
the  father-in-law  of  his  daughter,  and  the  mother-in-law  of
the  same,  of  his  wife  Messalina,  and  of  others  more  than  can
be  named.  The  gods  are  struck  with  amazement  and  indig-
nation. Claudius  is  repelled  from  the  threshold  of  Olympus,
and  led  by  Mercuiy  to  the  shades  below.  As  he  passes  along
the  Via  Sacra  he  witnesses  the  pageant  of  his  own  obsequies,
and  then  first  apprehends  the  fact  of  his  decease.  He  hears
the  funeral  dirge  in  which  his  actions  are  celebrated  in  most
grandiloquent  sing-song,  descending  at  last  to  the  abruptest

1  Senec.  Apocol.  5. :

■n'f  n6dev  elc  avdpiJv,  Tz6dt  irol  -kt6mq  ;  .  .  .  .
'Ili66ev  fie  Qipuv  ave/iog  KikSvcogi  nilaooev.

A.  U.  807.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  465

bathos.1  But  the  satirist  can  strike  a  higher  note  :  the  ad-
vent of  the  ghost  to  the  infernal  regions  is  described  with  a
sublime  irony.  Claudius  is  come,  shout  the  spirits  of  the
dead,  and  at  once  a  vast  multitude  assemble  around  him,  ex-
claiming, -with  the  chant  of  the  priests  of  Apis,  We  have
found  him,  we  have  found  him y  rejoice  and  be  glad!*
Among  them  was  Silius  the  consul  and  Junius  the  praetor,
and  Trallus  and  Trogus,  and  Cotta,  Vettius,  and  Fabius,  Ro-
man knights,  whom  Narcissus  had  done  to  death.  Then
came  the  freedmen  Polybius  and  Myron,  Harpocras,  Am-
phaeus,  and  Pheronactes,  whom  Claudius  had  despatched  to
hell  before  him,  that  he  might  have  his  ministers  below.
Next  advanced  Catonius  and  Rufus,  the  prefects,  and  his
friends  Lusius  and  Pedo,  and  Lupus  and  Celer,  consulars,  and
finally  a  number  of  his  own  kindred,  his  wife  and  cousins,
and  son-in-law.  Friends  everywhere  simpered  the  fool ;
pray  how  came  you  all  here  ? Sow  came  we  here  ? thun-

1  Senec.  Apocol.  12.:  "Ingenti  jizyalrfyopiq.  naenia  cantabatur  anapcestis;
fundite  fletus,  edite  planctus,  fingite  luctus,"  &c.

2  Senec.  Apocol.  13.:  "Claudius  Caesar  venit .  .  .  evpf/m/iev,  avyxaipu/XEV."
Great  has  been  the  success  of  this  remarkable  passage,  which  may  possibly
have  suggested  the  noble  lines  of  Shakspeare,  Rich.  III.  Act.  i.  sc.  4. :

Clarence  is  come,  false,  fleeting,  perjured  Clarence,
That  stabbed  me  in  the  field  by  Tewksbury.

It  is  more  probable  that  Voltaire  had  it  in  his  mind  when  he  pronounced  on
the  fate  of  Constantino  and  Clovis ;  and  more  than  one  stanza  of  Byron's  Vision
of  Judgment  is  evidently  suggested  by  it.  Lucan  also,  in  almost  every  page  of
whose  poem  I  trace  the  study  of  his  uncle  Seneca,  seems  to  have  had  it  before
him  in  those  inspired  lines,  Phars.  vi.  in  fin. :

"  Tristis  felicibus  umbris
Vultus  erat :  vidi  Decios,  natumque  patremque,
Lustrales  bellis  animas,  flentemque  Camillum
Et  Curios ;  Syllam  de  te,  Fortuna,  querentem  ....
Abruptis  Catilina  minax  fractisque  catenis
Exsultant  Mariique  truces  nudique  Cethegi  .  .  .  ."
Comp.  also  Juvenal,  ii.  153.:

"Curius  quid  scntit  et  ambo
Scipiadae  ....  quoties  hinc  talis  ad  illos  Umbra  venit."
vol.  v.— 30

466  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  54.

dered  Pompeius  Pedo  :  who  sent  us  here  but  thou,  0  murderer
of  all  thy  friends!1  And  thereupon  the  new  comer  is
hurried  away  before  the  judgment  seat  of  yEacus.  An  old
boon  companion  offers  to  plead  for  him ;  iEacus,  most  just
of  men,  forbids,  and  condemns  the  criminal,  one  side  only-
heard.  As  he  hath  done,  he  exclaims,  so  shall  he  be  done  by?
The  shades  are  astounded  at  the  novelty  of  the  judgment :
to  Claudius  it  seems  rather  unjust  than  novel.  Then  the
nature  of  his  punishment  is  considered.  Some  would  relieve
Tantalus  or  Ixion  from  their  torments  and  make  the  imperial
culprit  take  their  place ;  but  no,  that  would  still  leave  him
the  hope  of  being  himself  in  the  course  of  ages  relieved.  His
pains  must  be  never  ending,  still  beginning :  eternal  trifler
and  bungler  that  he  was,  he  shall  play  for  ever  and  ever  with
a  bottomless  dicebox.3

Such  was  the  scorn  which  might  be  flung  upon  the  head

of  a  national  divinity,  even  though  he  were  the  adopted

father  of  the  ruler  of  the  state  ;  nor  perhaps  was

Seneca's  ex-  '  *  * .

travagant  flat- the  new  and  upstart  deity  much  more  cavalierly

tery  of  Nero.  .

treated  than  might  sometimes  be  the  lot  of  the
established  denizens  of  Olympus.  It  is  true  that  Nero  at  a
later  period  thought  fit  to  degrade  his  parent  from  these  ex-
cessive honours,  and  even  demolished  the  unfinished  works
of  his  temple  on  the  CEelian  hill :  *  but  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  Seneca  reserved  his  spite  until  this  catastrophe,
or  that  the  prince  evinced  any  marks  of  displeasure  at  the
unrestrained  laughter  with  which  doubtless  his  satire  was

1  For  Catonius,  see  Dion,  lx.  18.  ;  for  Junius,  Rufus,  and  Vettius,
Tac.  Ann.  xi.  35.  Pompeius  Pedo  seems  to  be  the  same  who  is  there  called
Urbicus.

a  Senec.  1.  c. :

El  ks  Tzadoi  ra  f  ipege  Sinn  k*  idela  ykvono  ....
"  Claudio  iniquum  magis  videbatur  quam  novum."
3  Senec.  1.  c.  in  fin. :

"  Refugit  digitosque  per  ipsos
Fallax  assiduo  dilabitur  alea  furto."

*  Suet.  Claud.  45. ; Vespas.  9.

A.U.  807.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  467

greeted.1  While  the  memory  of  the  deceased  emperor  was
thus  ruthlessly  torn  in  pieces,  the  writer  had  been  careful  to
exalt  in  terms  the  most  extravagant  the  anticipated  glories
of  his  successor ;  and  the  vain  thoughtless  heir  perceived  not
that  the  mockery  of  his  sire  was  the  deepest  of  insults  to
himself.  Of  the  figure,  accomplishments,  and  character  of
Nero  I  shall  speak  more  particularly  hereafter :  enough  that
he  was  young,  that  he  was  not  ungraceful  in  appearance,
that  he  had  some  talents,  and,  above  all,  the  talent  of  ex-
hibiting them.  With  such  qualifications  the  new  occupant
of  a  throne  could  never  want  for  flatterers.  To  sing  them,
the  sage  of  the  rugged  countenance  mounts  gaily  on  the
wings  of  poetry,  and  sports  in  strains  of  mellifluous  mellow-
ness, such  as  might  grace  the  erotic  lyre  of  the  most  callow
votary  of  the  Muses.  At  last,  he  says,  in  mercy  to  his
wretchedness,  the  life-thread  of  the  stolid  Claudius  had  been
severed  by  the  fatal  shears.  But  Lachesis,  at  that  moment,
had  taken  in  her  hands  another  skein  of  dazzling  whiteness,
and  as  it  glided  nimbly  through  her  fingers,  the  common
wool  of  life  was  changed  into  a  precious  tissue  : 2 — a  golden
age  untwined  from  the  spindle.  The  Sisters  ply  their  work
in  gladness,  and  glory  in  their  blessed  task ;  and  far,  far
away  stretches  the  glittering  thread,  beyond  the  years  of
Nestor  and  Tithonus.  Phoebus  stands  by  their  side,  and
sings  to  them  as  they  spin, — Phoebus  the  God  of  song  and
the  God  of  prophecy.  Stay  not,  0  stay  not,  gentle  sisters  ;
he  shall  transcend  the  limits  of  human  life  y  he  shall  be  like
me  in  face,  like  me  in  beauty  /  neither  in  song  nor  in
eloquence  behind  me.  He  shall  restore  a  blissful  age  to
wearied  men,  and  break  again  the  long  silence  of  the  Laws.

1  Nero  is  said  to  have  called  mushrooms  the  food  of  Gods,  Qeuv  liptj/ia.
fcuet.  Ncr.  3.  The  jest  of  Gallio,  Seneca's  brother,  that  Claudius  was  dragged
to  heaven  by  a  hangman's  hook,  is  conceived  in  a  similar  spirit  of  inhuman
banter.  Dion,  lx.  86.  Juvenal's  phrase,  "Tremulumque  caput  dcscendere
ju.-sit  In  coelum"  (vi.  623.),  is  equally  happy,  and  for  once  less  coarse  than
either.

a  Scncc.  Apocol.  4. :  "Mutatur  vilis  pretioso  lana  metallo."

468  HISTORY  OF  THE  KOMANS  [A.D.  54.

Yes, — as  when  Lucifer  drives  the  stars  before  him,  and
morning  dissipates  the  clouds,  the  bright  sun  gazes  on  the
world,  and  starts  his  chariot  on  its  daily  race, — so  Cossar
breaks  upon  the  earth ;  such  is  the  Nero  whom  Home  now
beholds  ; — beams  his  bright  countenance  with  tempered  rays,
and  glistens  his  fair  neck  beneath  its  floating  curls.1

1  Senec.  1.  c. :

"  Hie  mihi  similis  vultu,  similisque  decore,
Nee  cantu  nee  voce  minor ;  felicia  lassis
Ssecula  prsestabit,  legumque  silentia  rumpet  ....
Talis  Csesar  adest ;  talem  jam  Roma  Neronem
Aspiciat :  flagrat  nitidus  fulgore  remisso
Vultus,  et  efiuso  cervix  formosa  capillo  "

APPENDIX TO CHAPTEK L.

GENEALOGICAL TABLES.

TABLE  I.

C.  Julius  Caesar,

prtetor,  =  Aurelia

d.  670.  I

C.  Jclits  Caesar,

dictator, =1.  Cornelia,

b.  654,  k.  710.

dr.  of  Cinna.

=2.  Pompeia,  =3.  Calpurnia,

dr.  of  Pompeius dr.  of  L.  Pi  so.
Rufus.

Julia  —  M.  Atius  Balbus.

Atia.
Tab.  II.

Cn.  Pompeius=Julia by  adoption,
Magnus.  C.  Octavius,

aft.  C.  Julius  Ca?sar
Octavianus  Augustus.
Tab.  II.  IV.

TABLE  II.

C.  Octavius  =  1.  Ancharia.

Octavia  (major).

-2.  Atia,  dr.  of  Atius  Balbns,
and  Julia,  sister  of
Julius  Ciesar.
Tab.  I.

Octavia  (minor)
d.743.

1.  C.  Marcellus,
cons.  704.

■■  2.  M.  Antonius,
triumvir.
Tab.  III.

M Mim-llus,  —  Julia,  dr.  Marcclla —

I).  711.  of  Augustus.  (major;.

d.  7:) I.

1.  M.  Agrlppa.

2.  .lulus  Antonius.
son  of  the
triumvir.

Tab.  III.

C.  Octavius,  b.  691,

adopted  by  Julius  Caesar,
Augustus,  727.
Tab.  IV.

Hiaroello,

(minor).

470

APPENDIX.

TABLE  III.

M.  Antonius,  orator.

M.  Antonius  Creticus,  praetor.

M.  Antonius,  triumvir, = 1.  Fadia. 2.  Antonia.
k.  724.  = 8.  Fulvia.

Julus  Antonius,
k.752.

=  4.  Octavia  Minor.

L.  Domitius
Ahenobarbus

Antonia
(major).

Antonia
(minor.)

Drusus  Claudius  Nero.
Tab.  V.

Agrippina
(minor).
Tab.  V.

i.  Do

I

Cn.  Domitius. Domitia  Lepida,
(major)
m.  Oispus  Passienus,
k.  809.

L.  Domitius,
afterwards
Nero.
k.821.

Domitia
Lepida  (minor)
m.  M.  Valerius
Messalinus.
k.  807.

Germanicus,
b.  739.
d.  772.
Tab.  V.

Messalina,  b.  about  778.

wife  of
Claudius,  k.  801.

Tab.  VI.

Livia  or  Livilla,
m.  1.  C.  Caesar.

Tab.  IV.
2.  Drusus,  son
of  Tiberius.
Tab.  V.

Tibe

>enus
Claudius.
b.  744.
d.  807.

TABLE  IV.

C.  Octavius,
afterwards  Augustus, = 1.  Claudia,
b.  691. d.  767.  . 2.  Scribonia

8.  Livia  Drusilla.
Tab.  V.

Caius  Caesar,
m.  Livilla.
Tab.  IIL
d.  757.

L.  Caesar,
d.  755.

Julia

1.  M.  Marcellus.

2.  M.  Agrippa

(Tab.  II.)
■ 8.  Tiberius  Nero.

cb.il'

a  cuild,
d.  infant.

Agrippa  Postumus
k.767.

Julia  =
d.781.

^Emilius
Paulus.

I
Agrippina
(major),
k.  786.

Germanicus.
Tab.  V.

M.  .iEmilius  Lepidus,  k.  792.
=  Drusilla,  sister  of
Caius  Caligula,  d.  791.
Tab.  V.

jEmilia  Lepida  =  1.  Claudius.
=  2.  App.  Junius
Siianus.

Table  VIII.

APPENDIX.

471

rf.a

j-  .

U

H
ffi

O

<

!

a  5

a  .2
a^-

Jg«3

■S  joi

.'^d

3

o

O

u

<a

•3

3

HO

.2  3

-SB
I

ill

«f  §.

a  gj

prtj

.  to"

ft

£3

iberius

emellu

790.

.£•■3

£Q

E-KSJ4

i>

H

CD

-  £»

1

O  2  3

d  ^

r*  *■*

a  "3 .

£a

La

fid

Nero,  so
German!

Blandus

m°

»-5 tri

g  ri  o

1 n

.  §  S  8

■ II

.2

5-^d

3

P

"-»

,0  to

iTe  3

SP  3

111
«3  3

2  a

to  ao  C

"oSit

&  a  o

^  a^
. . id

n to C>

-dP2  2

Hi II

013 rjQ

^  =  .5  S  §

_  cs  cc  a  a  .3

ft  I ! -d

to

«-  tri

d g

=3s sa

£g3 2  a>*

Oh  3^3  •
qH  n  in  3  a
•aq'-i-E^H

EoHoo

fcrt <=*'<

Mi

age*

-=3  1.23
"Si

2  «'
a  a

«=*»

i^i'3

o

to  3

«.2  o

T  Z2  to

.So  3

II  II  I  -

3d

2  «r  .

2"ats

3"

«a

3  g «r

O  °  3ti-

.d-d

472

APPENDIX.

TABLE  VI.

Tib.  Claudius  =1.  Emilia  Lepida  =  2.  Livia  Medullina  =3.  Plautia  Urgulanilla.

Drusus  Germanicus,  Tab.  IV.

b.  744.  emp.  794.
d.  807.

Drusus,
d.  infant.

Claudia,
d.  infant.

-«4.  ^Elia  Petina

=5.  Valeria  Messalina =6.  Agrippina
(minor).
Tab.  III.  V.

Antonia,

—  1.  On.  Pomp.  Magnus.

«=  2.  Faustus  Sulla.

Octavia

=  Nero.

Britannicus,
b.  794.  k.  809.

TABLE  VII.

(From  Smith's  Classical  Biography.)

M.  ^Emilius  Lepidus  —  Appuleia.
cons.  676.

L.  ^Emilius  Paulus,
cons.  704.

M  .(Emilius  Lepidus,
triumvir  =  Junia.

Cornelius  Scipio

^Emilianus,

k.  by  Pompeius,  677.

Paulus  jEmilius  Lepidus,  M.  ./Emilius  Lepidus,
cons.  720  =  Cornelia. conspired  against  Augustus.
I  k.724.

L.  iEmilius  Paulus,  M.  jEmilius  Lepidus, ^Emilia  Lepida.

cons.  754  =  Julia,  gr.  dr.  cons.  760.

of  Augustus.

Of  uncertain  origin.

JEmilius
Lepidus  =  Drusilla.
k.  792. (Tab.  IV.)

.(Emilia.
Lepida  =  1.  Claudius.

2.  App.  Silanus.
Tab.  VIII.

^Emilia  Lepida,

m.  Drusus,  son  of

Germanicus,

d.789.

Q.  iEmilius  Lepidus.
cons.  783.

Q.  iEmilius  Lepidus,
cons.  764.

APPENDIX.

473

TABLE  Vin.

(From  Smith's  Classical  Biography.)

D.  Junius  Silanus,  cons.  692  =  Servilia,

mother  of  Brutus.

M.  Silanus,
cons.  729.

Junia  —  Lepidus,
triumvir.

Junia  —  C.  Cassius  Longinus.

M.  Silanus,  cons.  772.

I
D.  Silanus.

Junia ■
Claudilla.

Catus  Caligula.

Junia  Silana  —  C.  Silius.

C.  Silanus,  cons.  763.

App.  Silanus,  cons.  781  =■  ^Emilia  Lepida. Tab.  IV.
k.  801.  gt  gd.  dr.  of  Augustus.

M.  Silanus,
k.  808.

L.  Silanus,
affianced  to
Octavia,  dr.  of
Claudius,
k.  802.

D.  Torquatus  Silanus,
cons.  806.

Junia  Calvina,
m.  Yitellius.

Junia  Lepida.

END OF THE FIFTH VOLUME.

Any  of  these  Books  sent  free  by  mail  to  any  address  on  receipt  of  Price.

RECENT  PUBLICATIONS

OF

D. APPLETON & CO.,

443 & 445 BROADWAY, NEW YORK

The  Life  and  Correspondence  of

THEODORE  PARKER,  Minister  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Congre-
gational Society,  Boston.  By  John  Weiss.  With  two  Por-
traits on  Steel,  fac-simile  of  Handwriting,  and  nineteen  Wood
Engravings. 2  vols.,  8vo. 1,008  pages. Price,  $6.

"These  volumes  contain  an  account  of  Mr.  Parker's  childhood  and  self-
education  ;  of  the  development  of  his  theological  ideas;  of  his  scholarly  and
philosophical  pursuits  ;  and  of  his  relation  to  the  Anti-Slavery  cause,  and  to
the  epoch  in  America  which  preceded  the  civil  war.  Ills  two  visits  to  Europe
are  described  in  letters  and  extracts  from  his  journal.  An  autobiographical
fragment  is  introduced  in  relation  to  Mr.  Parker's  early  life,  and  his  letters
of  friendship  on  literary,  speculative,  and  political  topics  are  freely  inter-
spersed. The  illustrations  represent  scenes  connected  wii  h  various  periods  of
Mr.  Parker's  life,  the  houses  he  dwelt  in,  his  country  haunts,  the  meeting
house,  his  library,  and  the  Music  Hall  in  which  he  preached."

Catechism  of  the  Steam  Engine,

In  its  various  Applications  to  MinbS,  Mills,  Steam  Navigation,

Railways,  and  Agriculture. With  Practical  Instructions  for

the  Manufacture  and  Management  of  Engines  of  every  Class.

By  JonN  Bourne,  C.  E. New  and  Revised  Edition. 1  vol.,

12mo. Illustrated. Cloth. $2.

11  In  offering  to  the  American  public  a  reprint  of  a  work  on  the  Steam
Engine  so  deservedly  successful,  and  so  long  considered  standard,  the  Pub-
lishers have  not  thought  it  necessary  that  it  nhould  be  an  exact  copy  of  the
1.  .  1  hIi  edition.  There  were  some  details  in  which  they  thought  it  could  lie
improved  and  better  adapted  to  the  use  of  American  Engineers.  On  this  ac-
count the  size  of  the  page  has  been  increased  to  a  fulll'imo.  to  admit  of  larger
illustrations,  which,  In  the  English  edition,  are  often  on  too  small  a  BOale,  and
gome  of  this  illustrations  themselves  have  been  supplied  by  others  equally  ap-
plicable, more  recent,  and  to  in  more  familiar  examples.  The  first  part  of
i  ipter  XI.,  devoted  in  the  English  edition  to  English  portable  and  fixed
agricultural  engines,  in  this  edition  gives  place  entirely  to  Illustration!  from
American  practice,  of  steam  engines  as  applied  to  different  purposes,  and  of
appliances  and  machines  necessary  to  them.  But  with  the  exception  of  some
of  the  illustrations  and  the  description  of  them,  and  the  correction  of  a  few
typ  I  errors,  this  edition  is  a  faithful  transcript  of  the  latest  English

edition."

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.

History  of  the  Romans  under  the

Empire.  By  Charles  Meritale,  B.  D.,  late  Fellow  of  St.  John's
College.  7  vols.,  small  8vo.  Handsomely  printed  on  tinted
paper.  Price,  in  cloth,  $2  per  vol.  Half  Morocco  extra,  $3  50.

CONTENTS :

Vols.  I.  and  II. — Comprising  the  History  to  the  Fall  of  Julius  Caesar.

Vol.  III. — To  the  Establishment  of  the  Monarchy  by  Augustus.

Vols.  IV.  and  V. — From  Augustus  to  Claudius,  b.  c.  27  to  a.  d.  54.

Vol.  VI. — From  the  Reign  of  Nero,  a.  d.  54,  to  the  Fall  of  Jerusa-
lem, a.  d.  70.

Vol.  VII. — From  the  Destruction  of  Jerusalem,  a.  d.  70,  to  the
Death  of  M.  Aurelius.

This  valuable  work  terminates  at  the  point  where  the  narrative  of  Gibbon
comnnjnces.

"  When  we  enter  on  a  more  searching  criticism  of  the  two
writers,  it  must  be  admitted  that  Merivale  has  as  firm  a  grasp  of  his  subject  as
Gibbon,  and  that  his  work  is  characterized  by  a  greater  freedom  from  preju-
dice, and  a  sounder  philosophy.

"  This  history  must  always  stand  as  a  splendid  monument
of  his  learning,  his  candor,  and  his  vigorous  grasp  of  intellect.  Though  he
is  in  some  respects  inferior  to  Macaulay  and  Grote,  he  must  still  be  classed
with  them,  as  one  of  the  second  great  triumvirate  of  English  historians."—
North  American  Review ,  April,  1863.

Practice  in  the  Executive  De-

partment  of  the  Government,  under  the  Pension,  Bounty,  and

Prize  Laws  of  the  United  States,  with  Forms  and  Instructions

for  Collecting  Arrears  of  Pay,  Bounty,  and  Prize  Money,  and

for  Obtaining  Pensions. By  Robert  Sewell,  Counsellor  at

Law. 1  vol.,  8vo. Sheep. Price,  $3  50.

"  I  offer  this  little  book  with  confidence  to  the  profession,  as  certain  to
Bave  lawyers,  in  one  case,  if  they  never  have  any  more,  more  time  and  trouble
than  its  cost.  To  the  public  generally,  the  book  is  offered  as  containing  a
large  amount  of  useful  information  on  a  subject  now,  unfortunately,  brought
home  to  half  the  families  in  the  land.  To  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the  Army
it  will  also  be  found  a  useful  companion  ;  and  it  is  hoped  that  by  it  an  amount
of  information  of  great  value  to  the  soldiers,  and  to  their  families  at  heme,
will  be  disseminated,  and  the  prevailing  ignorance  respecting  the  subject
treated  of  in  a  great  degree  removed." — Extract  from  Preface.

Hints  to  Riflemen.

By  H.  W.  S.  Cleveland.  1  vol.,  12mo.  Illustrated,  with  nu-
merous Designs  of  Rifles  and  Rifle  Practice.  Cloth.  Price,  $1  50.

u  I  offer  these  hints  as  the  contribution  of  an  old  sportsman,  and  if  I  suc-
ceed in  any  degree  in  exciting  an  interest  in  the  subject,  my  end  will  be  ac-
complished, even  if  the  future  investigations  of  those  who  are  thus  attracted
should  prove  any  of  my  opinions  to  be  erroneous." — Extract  from  Preface.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.

Laws  and  Principles  of  Whist,

Stated  and  Explained,  and  its  Practice  Illustrated  on  an  Original

Svstem,  by  means  of  hands  played  completely  through. By

Cavendish. From  the  fifth  London  edition. 1  vol.,  square

16mo. Gilt  edge. 81  25.

"An  excellent  and  very  clearly  written  treatise;  the  rules  of  the  game
thoroughly  explained ;  its  practice  illustrated  by  means  of  hands  played  com-
pletely through,  and  much  of  the  roinutiie  and  finesse  of  the  game  given  that
we  have  never  seen  in  any  other  volume  of  the  kind.  Whist  players  will  re-
cognize it  as  an  authority  ;  and  that  it  is  a  success  is  proved  by  its  having
already  gone  through  Ave  editions.  It  is  got  out  very  neatly,  in  blue  and  gold,
by  the  publishers."— Com.  Bulletin.

Roba  cli  Roma.

By  W.  W.  Stort. 2  vols.,  12mo. Cloth,  $3.

"  Till  Rome  shall  fall,  the  City  of  the  Seven  Ilills  will  bo  inexhau9tib!o  as
a  subject  of  interest.  'Roba  di  Roma'  contains  the  gatherings  of  an  honc.-t
observer  and  a  real  artist.  ...  It  has  permanent  value  to  entitle  it  to  a
place  of  honor  on  the  shelf  which  contains  every  lover  of  Italy's  Rome-books."
— AthentBum.

Heat  considered  as  a  Mode  of

Motion. Being  a  Course  of  Twelve  Lectures  delivered  at  the

Royal  Institution  of  Great  Britain. By  JonN  Tyndall,  F.R.S.

Author  of  "The  Glaciers  of  the  Alps." 1  vol.,  12mo. With

101  illustrations. Cloth. $2.

'•Xo  one  can  read  Dr.  Tyndall's  book  without  being  impressed  with  the
Intensity  of  the  author's  conviction  of  the  truth  of  tho  theory  which  it  is  his
object  to  illustme,  or  with  the  boldness  with  which  lie  confronts  the  difficul-
ties which  he  encounters.  *******  Dr.  Tyndall's  is
the  first  work  in  which  theundulatory  ormechanical  theory  of  heat  has  been
placed  in  a  popular  light ;  but  we  are  sure  that  no  ono,  however  profound  his
Knowledge  upon  the  subject  of  which  it  treats,  will  rise  from  its  perusal  with-
out a  feeling  that  he  has  been  both  gratified  and  instructed  in  a  high  degree
while  read* jig  its  pages."— London  Reader.

Life  of  Edward  Livingston,

Vayor  of  the  City  of  New  York ; Member  of  Congress  ; Senator

of  the  United  States ;  Secretary  of  State ;  Minister  to  France  ;

Author  of  a  System  of  Penal  Law  for  Louisiana ;  Member  of

the  Institute  of  France,  etc. By  Charles  H.  Hunt,  with  an

Introduction  by  Georqe  Bancroft. 1  vol.,  8vo. Cloth,  (8.50.

"  Ono  of  the  purest  of  statesmen  and  the  most  genial  of  men,  was
Edward  Livingston,  whose  career  Is  presented  la  this  volume. * * * *

' I  be  author  of  this  volume  has  dune  the  country  a  service lie  has  t:iven

ns  In  a  becoming  form  an  appropriate  memorial  of  ono  whom  NUX ling  iroii-

•ratlons  will be proud to name us  un  American  Jurist  and  statesman ." —
MvamjeUnt.

I

D APPLETON  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.

Round  the  Block.

An  American  Novel. With  Illustrations. 1  vol.,  12mo. Cloth.

Price,  $1  50.

"The  story  is  remarkably  clever.  It  presents  the  most  vivid  and  various
pictures  of  men  and  manners  in  the  great  Metropolis.  Unlike  most  novels
that  now  appear,  it  has  no  'mission,' the  author  being  neither  a  politician
nor  a  reformer,  but  a  story  teller,  according  to  the  old  pattern,  and  a  capital
story  he  has  produced,  written  in  the  happiest  style,  and  full  of  wit  and  ac-
tion. He  evidently  knows  his  ground,  and  moves  over  it  with  the  foot  of  a
master.  It  is  a  work  that  will  be  read  and  admired,  unless  all  love  for  good
novels  has  departed  from  us  ;  and  we  know  that  such  is  not  the  case."— Boston
Traveler.

The  History  of  Civilization  in

England. By  Henry  Thomas  Buckle. 2  vols.,  8vo. Cloth.  $6.

"Whoever  misses  reading  this  book,  will  miss  reading  what  is,  in  various
respects,  to  the  best  of  our  judgment  and  experience,  the  most  remarkable
book  of  the  day— one,  indeed,  that  no  thoughtful,  inquiring  mind  would  miss
reading  for  a  good  deal.  Let  the  reader  be  as  averse  as  he  may  to  the  writer's
philosophy,  let  him  be  as  devoted  to  the  obstructive  as  Mr.  Buckle  is  to  the
progress  party,  let  him  be  as  orthodox  in  church  creed  as  the  other  is  hetero-
dox, as  dogmatic  as  his  author  is  sceptical — let  him,  in  short,  find  his  preju-
dices shocked  at  every  turn  of  the  argument,  and  all  his  prepossessions  whis-
tled down  the  wind— still  there  is  eo  much  in  this  extraordinary  volume  to
stimulate  reflection,  and  excite  to  inquiry,  and  provoke  to  earnest  investiga-
tion, perhaps  (to  this  or  that  reader)  on  a.  track  hitherto  untrodden,  and
across  the  virgin  soil  of  untilled  fields,  fresh  woods,  and  pastures  new — that
we  may  fairly  defy  the  most  hostile  spirit,  the  most  mistrustful  and  least
sympathetic,  to  read  it  through  without  being  glad  of  having  done  so,  or  hav-
ing begun  it,  or  even  glanced  at  almost  any  one  of  its  pages,  to  pass  it  away
unread." — New  Monthly  (London)  Magazine.

Illustrations  of  Universal  Prog-

ress. A  Series  of  Essays.  By  Herbert  Spencer,  Author  of  "  The

Principles  of  Psychology;"  "Social  Statics;"  "Education."

1  vol.,  12mo. Cloth,  $1  75.

"  The  readers  who  have  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Ilerbert  Spencer
through  his  work  on  Education,  and  are  interested  in  his  views  upon  a  larger
range  of  subjects,  will  welcome  this  new  volume  of  '  Essays.'  Passing  by
the  more  scientific,  and  philosophical  speculations,  we  may  call  attention  to  a
group  of  articles  upon  moral  and  political  subjects,  which  are  very  pertinent
to  the  present  condition  of  affairs." — Tribune.

Thirty  Poems.

By  Wm.  Cullen  Bryant.  1  vol.,  12mo.  Cloth,  $1.25  ;  cloth  gilt,
$1.75;  mor,  $3.50.

"  No  English  poet  surpasses  him  in  knowledge  of  nature,  and  hut  few  are
his  equals.  Ho  is  better  than  Cowper  and  Thomson  in  their  special  walks  of
poetry,  and  the  equal  of  Wordsworth,  that  great  high  priest  of  nature." —
The  World.

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.

An Introduction  to Municipal

Law,  designed  for  General  Readers,  and  for  Students  in  Colleges
and  High  Schools.  By  John  Norton  Pomkroy.  1  vol.,  8vo.
544  pages. Cloth,  $3.

"  I  have  spent  nearly  four  days  in  reading  your  book,  and  am  willing  to  say,
in  reference  to  it,  that,  when  considered  in  rrference  to  its  scope  and  the  design
had  in  view  in  entering  upon  is,  it  is  a  work  of  great  merit.  The  topics  are
presented  clearlv,  discussed  with  ability,  and  in  the  main  satisfactory  results
arrived  at.  Parts  I.  and  II.,  I  think,  may  prove  very  useful  to  students  at  law
and  young  lawyers,  as  there  is  a  great  deal  in  the  history  of  the  law,  and
especially  in  its  sources,  both  common  and  civil,  that  is  very  clearly,  briefly,  and
logically  stated,  and  more  available  in  the  manner  presented  in  your  work  than
In  any  other  that  I  am  acquainted  with."— From  Amob  Dban,  Esq.,  Albany
Law  School.

Thackeray ;

The  Humorist  and  Man  of  Letters,  the  Story  of  his  Life,  with
particulars  of  his  early  career  never  before  made  public.  By
Theodore  Taylor,  Esq.  Illustrated  with  a  Portrait,  one  of
the  latest  taken  from  life  ;  View  of  Thackeray's  House  ;  Fac-
simile of  his  Handwriting ;  Humorous  Illustrations  by  Georgo
Cruikshank ;  and  other  Pictures  and  Sketches.  One  vol.,
l2mo. Cloth. Price,  $1  25.

"  The  author,  Mr.  T.  Taylor,  long  resident  in  Paris,  has  been  collecting  in-
formation for  many  years,  and  has  much  to  say  of  Mr.  Thackeray's  artist  life  in
that  city.  The  book  is  illustrated  with  a  portrait  and  some  curious  original
sketches." — From  the  Guardian.

The  Iron  Manufacture  of  Great

Britain.  Theoretically  and  Practically  considered :  Including
Descriptive  Details  of  the  Ores,  Fuels,  and  Fluxes  employed  ;
the  Preliminary  Operation  of  Calcination ;  the  Blast,  Refining,
and  Puddling  Furnaces;  Engines  and  Machinery;  and  the
Various  Processes  in  Union,  etc.,  etc.  By  W.  Trurav,  C.  E.,
formerly  Engineer  at  the  Dowlais  Iron  Works,  under  tho  late
Sir  John  Guest,  Bart.  Second  Edition,  revised  from  the
manuscripts  of  the  late  Mr.  Truran,  by  J.  Arthur  Phillips,
Author  of  "  A  Manual  of  Metallurgy,"  "  Records  of  Mining,"
etc.,  and  Wm.  II.  Dohman.  One  vol.,  imperial  8vo.  Con-
taining 84  Plates. Price,  §10.

D.  APPLETON  <fe  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS

Principles  of  Political  Economy.

With  some  of  their  Applications  of  Social  Philosophy. By  John

Stuart  Mill.  2  vols.,  8vo.  Printed  on  tinted  paper.  Cloth,  $6.

l:  In  the  whole  range  of  extant  authorship  on  political  economy,  there  is
no  writer  except  Adam  Smith  with  whom  John  Stuart  Mill  can,  without  in-
justice, be  compared.  In  originality,  Adam  Smith,  as  being  the  acknowl-
edged father  of  the  science,  takes  the  precedence,  as  he  does  also  in  exuber-
ance of  apt  illustration.  But  in  rectitude  of  understanding,  clearness  and
sagacity,  Mill  is  fully  his  peer  ;  in  precision  of  method,  range  of  topics,  and
adaptation  to  the  present  state  of  society,  he  is  altogether  his  superior.  The
'  Wealth  of  Nations'  now  belongs,  indeed,  rather  to  the  history  of  the  science
than  to  its  exposition.  But  the  '  Principles  of  Political  Economy'  is  an  orderly,
symmetrical,  and  lucid  exposition  of  the  science  in  its  present  advanced  state.
In  extent  of  information,  b/eadth  of  treatment,  pertinence  of  fresh  illustra-
tion, and  accommodation  to  the  present  wants  of  the  statesman,  the  mer-
chant, and  the  social  philosopher,  this  work  is  unrivalled.  It  is  written  in  a
luminous  and  smooth,  yet  clear-cut  style  ;  and  there  is  diffused  over  it  a  soft
atmosphere  of  feeling,  derived  from  the  author's  unaffected  humanity  and
enlightened  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  masses."

The  New  American  Cyclopaedia.

Edited  by  George  Ripley  and  Charles  A.  Dana.  Now  com-
plete, in  16  vols.,  8vo.,  double  columns,  750  pages  each.
Cloth,  $4;  Sheep,  $4  75  ;  Half  Mor.,  $5 ;  Half  Russia,  $5  50
per  volume.

The  leading  claims  to  public  consideration  which  the  New  American  Cy-
elopcedia  possesses  may  be  thus  briefly  stated  :

"  1.  It  surpasses  all  other  works  in  the  fullness  and  ability  of  the  articles
relating  to  the  United  States.

"2.  No  other  work  contains  so  many  reliable  biographies  of  the  leading
men  of  this  and  other  nations.  In  this  respect  it  is  far  superior  even  to  the
more  bulky  Encyclopaedia  Britannica.

"  3.  The  best  minds  in  this  country  have  been  employed  in  enriching  its
pages  with  the  latest  data,  and  the  most  recent  discoveries  in  every  branch  of
manufactures,  mechanics,  and  general  science.

"4.  It  is  a  library  in  itself,  where  every  topic  is  treated,  and  where  in-
formation can  be  gleaned  which  will  enable  a  student,  if  he  is  so  disposed,  to
consult  other  authorities,  thus  affording  him  an  invaluable  key  to  knowledge.

"6.  It  is  neatly  printed,  with  readable  type,  on  good  paper,  and  contains
a  most  copious  index.

"  6.  It  is  the  only  work  which  gives  anything  approaching  correct  descrip-
tions of  cities  and  towns  of  America  or  embraces  reliable  statistics  showing
the  wonderful  growth  of  all  sections."

Queen  Mab.

A  New  Novel.  By  Julia  Kavanagh.  1vol.,  12mo.  Cloth,  $150.

"  No  English  novelist  of  the  present  day  ought  to  hold,  wo  think,  a  higher
rank  in  her  own  peculiar  walk  of  literature  than  Miss  Kavanagh.  There  is  a
freshness  of  originality  about  all  her  works,  and  an  individual  character
stamped  on  each, — there  is,  moreover,  a  unity  of  thought  and  feeling,  a  har-
mony, so  to  speak,  pervading  each  separate  work,  that  plainly  speaks  original
(TOnius,  while  the  womanly  grace  of  her  etchings  of  character,  is  a  marvel  of
artistic  excellence." — Tablet.

University  of  California  ^

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY ^ACWJY^

from  which  it  was  borrowed.

REG'DU*

Form  L-9-15wi-2,'36

UNIVERSITY  of  CALIFORNIA

AT

LOS  ANGELES

LIBRARY

DG
^76

i^erivale -

M54h History of

-3rch '

r&Zr

"tfttl

ie iiomarj
v.J3 under the

empire •

JjtVaA.R

tod.  A  ft.

Alio J]

vi.5

3  1

158  00940  9060

UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY
""II

A 000  361  982 2

mm

r  •,  *  t »  l  ■

;'

■J

!

- i

if*  f»^

f

I

'{MM

kmJ

if  i

if  i

if

»?>

Kfli

»?»

(?

(ft

l!

'4KKMM»rlfi?i?£>I»

llil

PIMM

fiftf
