HISTORY

OF

THE ROMANS

UNDER THE EMPIRE.
VOL.  I.

LONDON :

SPOTTISWOODBS  AND  SHAW,
New-Street-Square.

HISTORY

THE ROMANS

UNDER  THE EMPIRE,

BY

CHARLES  MERIVALE,  B.D.

L.ATK FELLOW OF ST.  JOHN^S COLLEGE, CAMHR1OOR.

VOL.  I.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR

LONGMAN, BROWN, GREEN, AND LONGMANS,

PATERNOSTER-ROW.
1850.

:DG-

.276

M5
V,  I

79789(1

PREFACE.

THE  portion  of  this  history  now  offered  to  the
public  embraces  the  period  from  the  first  Trium-
virate to  the  death  of  Julius  Caesar.  The  life  and
times  of  the  great  man  by  whose  name  it  might
fitly  be  designated,  present  on  the  one  hand  the
close,  on  the  other  the  commencement  of  an  era.
Caesar  prostrated  the  Roman  oligarchy,  and  laid  the
foundations  of  the  Empire  in  the  will  of  the  middle
classes.  He  levelled  the  barriers  of  municipality,
and  infused  provincial  blood  into  the  senate  and
people  of  Rome.  Preceding  Imperators  had  an-
nexed provinces,  Caesar  began  to  organize  the  con-
quests of  the  commonwealth.  From  an  early
period  of  his  career  he  was  fully  conscious  of  the
real  nature  of  the  revolution  on  which  he  was  em*
barked ;  but  if  it  was  his  hand  that  moulded  and
directed  it,  the  change  he  effected  was  in  fact
demanded  by  his  party  and  enforced  by  circum-
stances. Though  the  structure  of  his  personal
ambition  perished  with  him,  the  social  foundations
on  which  it  rested  remained  firmly  rooted  in  the
soil ;  and  the  comprehensive  imperium  of  his  suc-
cessors rose  majestic  and  secure  from  the  lines
originally  drawn  by  the  most  sagacious  statesman

VI  PREFACE.

of  the  commonwealth. The  career  of  Csesar  is  the
prelude  to  the  history  of  four  centuries.

I  have  stated  in  my  first  chapter  the  limits  I
venture  to  assign  to  the  work,  namely,  the  transfer
of  the  seat  of  empire  from  Kome  to  Constantinople.
I  shall  endeavour  to  trace  throughout  the  long
period  before  me  the  effects  of  conquest  and  supre-
macy upon  the  Roman  people  ;  the  reaction  of  the
provinces  upon  the  capital ;  the  struggles  of  the
conquered  nations  to  assert  for  themselves  a  share
in  the  dignities  and  privileges  of  the  conquering
race ;  and  the  gradual  fusion  into  one  mass  of
Italians,  Britons,  Africans,  and  Orientals.  I  shall
have  to  inquire  how  far  the  boast  of  the  Romans
themselves  was  true,  who,  when  they  beheld  the
result  of  this  universal  fusion  and  settlement,  ex-
claimed, that  their  city  alone  had  been  wise  and
just  enough  to  promote  this  beneficent  revolution
of  her  own  accord.1  For  we  shall  see  that  her
concessions  were  in  a  great  degree  extorted  from
her ;  and  the  crowning  event  which  obliterates  the
last  vestige  of  Roman  sentiments,  the  establishment
of  Christianity,  was  in  fact  the  conquest  of  Rome
by  her  own  subjects.

1  Claudian.  de  Cons.  Stilich.  iii.  150. :

"  Hsec  est  in  gremium  victos  quae  sola  recepit,
Humanumque  genus  communi  nomine  fovit,
Matris  non  dominie  ritu  ;  civesque  vocavit
Quos  domuit,  nexuque  pio  longinqua  revinxit."

Rutilius,  Itiner.  i.  '63."  f '  '•*•

£<j  Fecisti  patriam  diversis  gentibus  unam,

Profuit  injustis,  te  dominante,  capi :
Dumque  offers  victis  proprii  consortia  juris,
Urbem  fecisti  quod  prius  orbis  erat.

PREFACE.  Vll

The  records  we  possess  of  the  period  to  which
these  two  volumes  are  confined,  are  more  ample
than  those,  perhaps,  of  any  other  portion  of  an-
cient history;  but  the  course  of  this  work  will
lead  us  over  many  long  and  dreary  tracts,  diver-
sified by  few  objects,  and  admitting  of  little  de-
tailed description.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  I  have
studied  not  to  lose  sight  altogether  of  the  pro-
portions suited  to  a  long  historical  work,  and
have  sought  to  compress  my  materials  to  the
utmost  limit  consistent  with  perspicuity.  At  the
same  time,  the  remarkable  deficiency  of  our  recent
literature  in  any  complete  narrative  of  the  most
interesting  period  of  Roman  annals,  has  constantly
tempted  me  to  expatiate ;  and  I  have  been  un-
willing to  forego  the  opportunity  of  supplying  it
substantially,  in  case  circumstances  should  prevent
the  further  prosecution  of  my  general  design.

The  scanty  illustration  of  these  times  by  English
writers  has  been  amply  compensated  by  the  abun-
dance and  copiousness  of  the  contributions  of  con-
tinental scholars.  The  volumes  of  Michelet,  Amedee
Thierry,  Duruy,  Hoeck,  Abeken,  and  others,  have
lain  open  before  me  throughout  the  course  of  my
own  studies ;  and  the  elaborate  work  of  Drumann,
in  which  he  has  amassed  every  notice  of  antiquity,
and  connected  them  all  together  with  admirable
ingenuity  and  judgment,  has  supplied  me  with  a
storehouse  of  references,  to  which  I  have  not
scrupled  to  resort  freely.  But  without  affecting
originality,  which  could  only  have  been  extremely

Vlll  PREFACE.

defective,  I  believe  that  much  of  my  reading,  and
most  of  my  conclusions,  may  lay  claim  at  least  to
independence.

My  obligations  to  Dr.  Arnold's  History  of  the
Later  Commonwealth  are  acknowledged  in  another
place.  The  rapid  sketch  he  has  given  of  the  times
of  Julius  CaBsar  deserved  to  be  retraced  by  the
same  pen ;  the  armour  in  which  he  made  his  first
literary  essay  he  would  doubtless  have  furbished
anew  for  a  riper  achievement.  If  he  had  lived  to
continue  his  general  history  of  Rome  to  the  period
before  me,  it  is  needless  to  say  that  my  ambition
would  have  been  directed  elsewhere  ;  and  that,  as
his  admirer  and  friend,  I  should  have  joined  the
public  voice  in  hailing  his  extended  work  as  worthy
of  himself  and  his  subject.

"  Si  mea  cum  vestris  valuissent  vota,  Pelasgi,
Non  foret  ambiguus  tanti  certaminis  hseres,
Tuque  tuis  arruis,  nos  te  poteremur,  Achille."

CONTENTS

THE FIRST VOLUME,

CHAPTER  I.

General  principles  of  Roman  History  illustrated  by  the  legend  of  the
foundation  of  the  city.  —  Exclusion  :  Comprehension.  —  Romans  ;
Patricians,  Plebeians.  —  Romans ;  Latins.  —  Romans ;  Italians.  —
Romans ;  Provincials.  —  Tyranny  of  the  Romans :  wrongs  of  the
provinces;  Sertorius;  Mithridates ;  the  Pirates. — Internal  strength
and  weakness :  Spartacus.  —  Spirit  of  Reform :  rise  of  a  middle
class  :  modification  of  Roman  ideas.  —  Claims  of  the  Provincials  to
Comprehension  :  their  gradual  recognition.  —  Development  of  the
idea  of  Unity,  moral  and  political.  —  Christianity  :  Monarchy.  —
Extinction  of  Roman  ideas.  —  Scope  of  the  work  -  Page  1

CHAP.  II.

Position  and  policy  of  the  Oligarchy  or  Senatorial  party. — Character
of  its  principal  leaders  :  Catulus,  Lucullus,  Crassus  :  Pompeius,  the
favourite  of  the  Senate :  his  pre-eminent  position :  he  introduces
reforms,  and  countenances  the  claims  of  the  Knights :  retains  the
advocacy  of  Cicero.  —  Elevation  of  Cicero  to  the  Consulship.  —
Conspiracy  of  Catilina. — Cicero's  services  to  the  Oligarchy. — Their
contempt  for  him,  and  jealousy  of  Pompeius.  —  Influence  of  Cato.
—  General  imbecility  of  the  Nobles.  —  Character  and  pretensions
of  the  Popular  or  Marian  party.  —  Critical  position  of  the  Oli-
garchy -  56

CHAP.  m.

Character  and  political  views  of  Caesar.  —  His  early  dangers  and  good
fortune. — He  assumes  the  leadership  of  the  Marian  party :  harasses
the  Senate  with  repeated  attacks :  becomes  Quaestor,  JSdile,  and

X  CONTENTS.

Supreme  Pontiff:  escapes  the  attempt  of  his  enemies  to  include
him  in  the  proscription  of  Catilina's  associates :  he  alone  fulfils  the
idea  of  the  hero  demanded  by  the  age  -  -  Page  104

CHAP. IV.

Defeat  and  death  of  Ca,tilina.  —  The  Oligarchy  derives  great  con-
fidence from  this  success,  and  defies  Pompeius.  —  Popularity  of
Cicero.  —  Caesar's  progress  in  the  attainment  of  honours  and  power.
—  Return  of  Pompeius  from  Asia :  he  resents  the  attitude  of  the
Senate  towards  him.  —  The  Senate  turns  the  licentiousness  of
Clodius  to  a  political  object.  —  Pompeius  allies  himself  with  Caesar
and  Crassus.  —  The  Triumvirate.  —  Caesar's  Consulship,  and  con-
tinued hostilities  between  him  and  the  Senate.  —  He  obtains  the
.  province  of  Gaul.  —  Clodius  elected  Tribune  :  his  popularity,  and
machinations  against  Cicero.  —  Abandonment  of  Cicero  by  the
Consuls,  and  coldness  of  the  Triumvirs.  —  He  is  assailed  by  Clodius,
and  retires  into  exile  -  141

CHAP.  V.

Early  conquests  of  the  Gauls  :  their  formidable  hostility  to  Rome.  —
Gradual  success  of  the  Romans  in  the  contest  between  them.  —
Reduction  of  Gallia  Cisalpina. — Alliance  of  Rome  with  Massilia. —
The  Romans  acquire  a  province  beyond  the  Alps. — Gaulish  Ethno-
logy:—1.  The  Iberians:  2.  The  Gael:  3.  The  Belgse—  Dis-
crepancy between  Csesar  and  Strabo :  modern  theory  of  a  distinction
between  the  Kymry  and  Gael  in  Gaul  as  well  as  Britain — Physical
and  moral  characteristics ;  Civilization  ;  Religion  :  4.  The  German
tribes  in  Gaul.  —  General  character  of  the  Gauls,  and  amount  of
their  population  -  -  213

CHAP.  VI.

The  Suevi  enter  Gaul,  and  establish  themselves  in  the  territory  of
the  Sequani.  —  The  alliance  of  the  Republic  solicited  by  both
the  Gauls  and  Germans.  —  Movement  among  the  Helvetii :  they
threaten  to  enter  the  Roman  province :  Caesar  leaves  Rome,  and
assumes  his  command  in  Gaul :  repels  the  invasion  of  the  Helvetii :
follows  them  into  the  territory  of  the  Mdni :  defeats  and  compels
them  to  return  to  their  own  country.  —  Caesar  advances  against  the
Suevi :  negotiates  with  their  king  Ariovistus :  obtains  a  complete
victory,  and  expels  the  Germans  from  Gaul.  —  Caesar's  first  cam-
paign, A.U.  696,  B.C.  58  -  271

CHAP.  VII.

Caesar's  second  campaign  in  Gaul,  A.U.  697. — War  with  the  Belgians.
—  Reduction  of  the  Suessiones  and  BellovacK  —  Gallant  resistance

CONTENTS.  XI

of  the  Nervii.  —  General  submission  of  the  Belgian  tribes,  and  of
the  North-western  states  of  Gaul.  —  Unsuccessful  campaign  of
Galba  in  the  Alps. —  Caesar's  third  campaign,  A.  u.  698. —  Reduction
of  the  Veneti  and  Armorican  tribes.  —  P.  Crassus  conquers  the
Aquitanians.  —  Caesar  chastises  the  Menapii  and  Morini.  —  Pacifi-
cation of  Gaul  -  Page  316

CHAP.  VIII.

The  banishment  of  Cicero  is  followed  by  the  confiscation  of  his
property.  —  His  house  on  the  Palatine,  and  his  Tusculan  villa.  —
Triumphant  career  of  Clodius.  —  He  removes  Cato  from  Rome
under  pretence  of  an  honourable  mission  to  deprive  the  King  of
Cyprus. —  Character  of  M.  Brutus,  who  accompanies  Cato. —  Cicero's
unmanly  complaints.  —  Exertions  of  his  friends  in  his  behalf.  —  His
wife  Terentia.  —  Atticus  :  Hortensius.  —  Reaction  in  his  favour.  —
Clodius  disgusts  Pompeius.  —  Election  of  Consuls  favourable  to
Cicero.  —  He  is  recalled,  and  is  received  in  Italy  with  acclamations.
A.TJ.  696,  697,  B.C.  58, 57  -  -  360

CHAP.  IX.

Pompeius  obtains  an  extraordinary  commission  for  supplying  the  city.
—  Application  of  the  King  of  Egypt  to  be  restored  to  his  throne. —
Intrigues  of  the  Nobles  in  relation  to  it.  —  Violence  of  Clodius.  —
The  Triumvirs  confer  together  at  Lucca.  —  Pompeius  and  Crassus
elected  Consuls  in  spite  of  the  opposition  of  the  Nobles.  —  Spain
and  Syria  decreed  to  them,  and  Caesar's  command  prolonged  for  a
second  term  of  five  years.  —  Pompeius'  theatre  and  shows.  —  He
remains  in  Italy,  and  governs  his  province  by  legates.  —  Cicero
reconciled  with  Crassus.  —  Gabinius  restores  the  King  of  Egypt.  —
He  is  impeached,  attacked  by  Cicero,  but  acquitted  :  again  accused
on  another  charge,  defended  by  Cicero,  but  condemned  and  ba-
nished.—  Cicero  courts  the  Triumvirs.— Corrupt  proceedings  of  the
candidates  for  the  Consulship.— Paralysis  of  the  constitution. —
Death  of  Julia,  and  reflections  on  the  political  importance  of  that
event,  A.  u.  697 — 700,  B.  c.  58— 54  -  -  393

CHAP. X.

Caesar's  fourth  campaign,  A.  u.  699. — Invasion  of  Belgium  by  German
tribes. —  Caesar  drives  them  beyond  the  Rhine.  —  Crosses  that  river
and  chastises  the  Sicambri.  —  He  invades  Britain.  —  Caesar's  fifth
campaign,  A.U.  700.  — He  invades  Britain  a  second  time  with  larger
forces.  —  Crosses  the  Thames,  and  defeats  Cassivellaunus.  —  Re-
ceives hostages  and  tribute,  and  retires.  —  Revolt  of  the  Gauls.  —
Destruction  of  two  legions  in  Belgium.  —  Courageous  resistance  of

Xll  CONTENTS.

Q.  Cicero.  —  Caesar's  sixth  campaign,  A.U.  701.  —  He  makes  an
incursion  beyond  the  Rhine.  —  Destruction  of  the  Eburones.  —
Defence  of  Aduatuca.  —  Pacification  of  Belgium  -  Page  445

CHAP.  XL

State  of  the  Parthian  monarchy.  —  Crassus  meditates  an  expedition
against  the  Parthians.— First  invasion,  A.U.  700.  —  Second  invasion,
A.U.  701. — He  is  deceived  by  the  Parthians,  and  misled  by  his  guides.
— Fatal  engagement  beyond  Charrhae. —Death  of  the  younger  Crassus.
—  Crassus  enticed  into  a  conference  and  slain  in  a  fray.  —  His
remains  insulted.  —  An  interregnum  at  Rome.  —  Pompeius  prevails
on  the  Tribunes  to  allow  the  election  of  Consuls. —  Assassination  o
Clodius. — Disturbances  in  the  city.  —  Pompeius  appointed  sole
.Consul  for  the  year  702.  —  Trial  of  Milo.  —  The  proceedings  of  the
forum  controlled  by  an  armed  force  -  -  -  -  502

CORRIGENDA IN  VOL.  I.

P.  54.  note,  line  3,  from  bottom. For  "  An.  Nat."  read  "  Natur.  Quasi."

367.  I.  17. For  "^sulae,"  read  "  JEsula."

489.  1. 5.  Dele  "  numbered  the  First."  I  cannot  recover  the  au-
thority on  which  I  have  assigned  this  number  to  the
legion  in  question,  which  is  inconsistent  at  least  with
Dion's  statement,  xxxviii.  47.  See  Vol.  II.  p.  81.,  where
Dion  should  have  been  referred  to.

5O3.  1.  8.  from  bottom. For  "second,"  read  "  third."

HISTORY

OF

THE ROMANS

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

CHAPTER  I.

GENERAL  PRINCIPLES  OF  ROMAN  HISTORY  ILLUSTRATED  BY  THE

LEGEND  OF  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  THE  CITY EXCLUSION  :

COMPREHENSION. ROMANS  ;  PATRICIANS,  PLEBEIANS.  —  RO-
MANS; LATINS. — ROMANS;  ITALIANS. — ROMANS;  PROVINCIALS.

TYRANNY OF THE ROMANS: WRONGS OF THE PROVINCES;

SERTORIUS;  MITHRIDATES;  THE  PIRATES. INTERNAL  STRENGTH

AND  WEAKNESS  :  SPARTACUS.  —  SPIRIT  OF  REFORM  :  RISE  OF
A  MIDDLE  CLASS:  MODIFICATION  OF  ROMAN  IDEAS.  —  CLAIMS
OF  THE  PROVINCIALS  TO  COMPREHENSION  :  THEIR  GRADUAL
RECOGNITION. DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  IDEA  OF  UNITY,  MORAL

AND  POLITICAL.  —  CHRISTIANITY:  MONARCHY.  —  EXTINCTION
OF  ROMAN  IDEAS.  —  SCOPE  OF  THE  WORK.

THE  Romans  regarded  the  Palatine  as  the  cradle  contrast
of  the  City  of  the  Seven  Hills.  It  was  from  the
opposite  slope  of  the  Janiculum  that  they  de-
lighted  to  behold  the  chain  of  eminences  which  for  a  city,
surrounded  this  central  summit,  and  comprehended
within  its  circuit  the  most  interesting  sites  and
monuments  of  their  history.1  The  configuration

"  Hinc  septem  dominos  videre  monies,

Et  totam  licet  sestimare  Romam. " Martial,  iv.  64.
VOL.  I.  B

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  of  the  six  exterior  heights,  from  the  Capitoline  on
the  left  to  the  Aventine  on  the  right,  presented
an  almost  continuous  ridge  of  unequal  elevation,
abutting  at  either  extremity  on  the  channel  of  the
Tiber.  Between  the  Aventine  and  the  Caelian  a
small  stream  made  its  way  into  the  inclosure,  and
a  depression  in  this  natural  rampart  between  the
Quirinal  and  the  Esquiline  was  replaced  by  the
mound  of  Servius1 ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  time  of
Trajan  that  an  opening  was  excavated  between  the
,"  Capitoline  and  the  Quirinal.  Where  the  Tiber
first  fell  under  the  shadow  of  the  Servian  walls,  the
Capitoline  descended  abruptly  into  the  hollow,  and
sustained  on  its  precipitous  summits  the  defences
of  the  city  to  the  north.  The  Aventine,  pre-
senting the  opposite  horn  of  the  ridge,  sloped
gradually  to  the  water's  edge,  and  might  seem
from  its  position  to  invite  the  commerce  of  the
world  to  the  widest  and  richest  valley  south  of  the
Apennines,  teeming  with  the  products  of  Etruscan
civilization.  Its  aboriginal  monsters  were  exter-
minated by  the  Tyrian  Hercules,  the  genius  of
commercial  enterprise.2  But  in  the  depths  of  an-
tiquity, before  the  foundations  of  Kome  were  laid,
the  single  outlet  to  the  waters  which  collected

1  "  Ut  unus  aditus  qui  esset  inter  Esquilinum  Quirinumque  mon-
tem  maximo  aggere  objecto  fossa  cingeretur  altissima." Cic.  de  Rep.
ii.  6. The  Viminal  lies  between  these  two  hills,  a  little  behind  the
agger  of  Servius,  which  connects  their  bases. There  is  very  little
depression  in  the  ridge  now  perceptible  in  this  quarter. It  is  re-
markable that  Cicero  makes  no  mention  of  the  hollow  through  which
the  Aqua  Crabra  flowed  into  the  city ;  but  he  was  thinking  only  of
defences  against  invasion  from  the  north.

2  See  the  Legend  of  Cacus,  Virg.  JEn.  viii.

"Cacus  Aventinse^timor  atque  infamia  sylvae." Ovid.  Fast.  i.  551.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  3

round  the  base  of  the  Palatine,  was  choked  by  a  CHAP.
desolate  morass,  and  the  rank  growth  of  primitive
forests  buried  the  central  eminence  in  almost  im-
penetrable concealment.  Such  a  position  was  ad-
mirably adapted  for  a  place  of  retreat,  and  offered
an  impregnable  shelter  to  crime  and  rapine.  It
seemed  created  by  Nature  herself  to  be  the  strong-
hold of  a  people  of  reserved  character  and  pre-
datory habits.  It  was  destined  to  become  the  den
of  the  wolves  of  Italy.1  The  legend  of  the  founda-
tion of  the  Eternal  City,  which  affirmed  that  the
divine  omens  decided  the  contest  of  the  brothers
and  the  pretensions  of  the  rival  summits,  furnishes
a  striking  illustration  of  the  subsequent  fortunes
of  the  Roman  people.  They  chose  between  a
career  of  conquest  and  plunder,  and  of  discovery
and  commerce.  Romulus  founded  Rome,  Remus
might  have  founded  a  Carthage.

Nor  is  it  only  in  the  local  features  of  its  ori-  Antipathy
ginal  birthplace  that  the  isolation  of  the  Roman  ma^to0"
character is  thus  vividly  depicted. The  native  foreisners-
ferocity  of  the  people  is  stamped  upon  its  earliest
traditions. The  author  of  the  race,  it  was  said,
was  rejected  and  exposed  by  his  natural  guardians.
The  sustenance  denied  him  by  man  was  afforded
him  by  the  most  savage  beast  of  the  desert. He
grew  up  to  slay  his oppressor,  to summon the
injured  and the outlawed to his standard, and
wreak  with  them  wild  vengeance upon  mankind
around him. In  the  same  manner, the morose

1  Such  was  the  expression  of  Telesinus  the  Samnite:  "  Nunquam
defuturos  raptorcs  Italicae  libertatis  lupos,  nisi  sylva  in  quara  refugere
solerent  esset  excisa." — Veil.  ii.  27.

VOL,,  i.  *B  2

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  pride  of  the  Roman  people,  and  their  antipathy  to
\  ___  foreign  habits,  are  strongly  marked  on  every  page
of  their  history.  They  scorned  the  humanizing
pursuits  of  commerce,  and  the  genial  tendencies
of  social  refinement.  They  were  inflamed  by  a
passion  for  destroying  the  monuments  of  their
conquered  enemies,  their  arts  and  literature.  They
established  the  most  odious  distinctions  between
themselves  and  their  subjects,  insulted  them  by
their  legislation  and  defamed  them  in  their  his-
tories.

The  policy The  Roman  polity, however,  presents  another
side  which  lays  much  greater  claim  to  our  interest.

them*  UP°n  However  selfish  and  exclusive  the  sentiments  were
which  constituted  its  basis,  necessity  compelled
it  at  sundry  periods  to  admit  aliens  and  even
enemies  into  alliance  and  association  with  itself.
The  annals  of  the  Roman  people  affords  us  the
most  perfect  illustration  of  the  natural  laws  which
seem  to  control  the  rise  and  progress  of  nations.
The  almost  uninterrupted  succession  of  their
triumphs,  the  enormous  extent  of  the  dominion
they  acquired,  and  the  completeness  of  the  cycle
through  which  they  passed  from  infancy  to  final
decrepitude  and  decay,  combine  to  present  them
to  us  as  the  normal  type  of  a  conquering  race.
One  principle  seems  to  be  established  by  their
history,  namely,  that  it  is  the  condition  of  perma-
nent dominion,  that  the  conquerors  should  absorb
the  conquered  gradually  into  their  own  body,
by  extending,  as  circumstances  arise,  a  share  in
their  own  exclusive  privileges  to  the  masses  from
whom  they  have  torn  their  original  independence.

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.

Thus  only  can  they  provide  a  constant  supply  of CHAP.
fresh  blood  to  recruit  their  own  exhausted  ener-
gies, and  strengthen  the  basis  of  their  power  while
they  extend  the  limits  of  their  conquests.

All  conquering  nations  feel  an  instinctive  re-  This  policy
pugnance  to  making  this  sacrifice  of  pride  and
immediate  interest ;  all  struggle  blindly  against  the
necessity ;  those  alone  which  in  due  season  submit  dominion.
to  it  retain  the  permanence  of  their  institutions
and  counteract  the  inherent  principle  of  decay.
The  obstinacy  with  which  the  Dorian  conquerors
of  Sparta  resisted  this  necessity  checked  their  ca-
reer of  aggrandizement,  and  brought  their  political
existence  to  a  premature  termination.  We  are
ourselves  witnesses  at  the  present  day  to  the  con-
sequences of  such  resistance  in  the  impending  ruin
of  a  more  magnificent  empire,  the  dominion  of  the
Turks  in  Greece  and  western  Asia.  On  the  other
hand,  the  latest  conquerors  of  our  own  island  and
of  Gaul  have  acknowledged  the  conditions  thus  at-
tached to  the  triumph  of  their  arms ;  and  the
effects  of  their  victory,  itself  long  since  forgotten,
have  endured  through  a  succession  of  many  cen-
turies. It  was  by  gradually  communicating  to
their  subjects,  however  reluctantly,  the  outward
badges  and  privileges  of  the  conquering  caste,  that
the  Normans  and  Franks  averted  the  reaction
which  must  otherwise,  sooner  or  later,  have  swept
away  the  progeny  of  a  mere  handful  of  adventurers
before  the  accumulating  numbers  they  had  for  a
time  coerced.  But  in  relinquishing  the  privileges
extorted  by  arms,  they  have  retained  the  ascend-

B 3

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,

The  prin-
simna°tion"

legends  of
Rome.

ancy  naturally  due  to  superior  genius,  and  have
each  impressed  their  own  character  indelibly  upon
the  institutions  which  all  the  inhabitants  of  the
soil  now  regard  equally  as  their  own.  Again,  the
time  may  arrive  in  the  social  progress  of  a  nation
when  the  incorporation  of  its  component  elements
has  become  complete,  but  the  struggle  of  races  has
been  succeeded  by  a  struggle  of  ideas  ;  the  con-
flicting interests  and  feelings  of  different  classes
may  require  a  similar  system  of  timely  concession  ;
the  rise,  for  instance,  of  new  religious  convictions
may  threaten  to  act  with  explosive  force  in  the
bosom  of  society,  and  demand  a  new  social  com-
bination at  the  hands  of  prudent  statesmen.  In
this  respect  also  the  history  of  the  Roman  people
in  its  latest  developments  furnishes  a  manual  of
experience  to  the  philosophical  inquirer.

The  spirit  of  this  assimilative  principle,  if  we
may  so  denominate  it,  may  be  traced  in  the
venerable  legend  which  related  the  deed  of  violence
by  which  the  founder  of  the  city  sought  to  multiply
the  numbers  of  his  subjects.  The  contest  with  the
Sabines,  who  resented  the  rape  of  their  women,
ended  in  the  association  of  the  hostile  tribes  in  the
bonds  of  kinship  and  alliance.  The  divided  throne
of  Romulus  and  Tatius  was  a  type  of  the  double
chairs  of  the  patrician  and  plebeian  consuls,  and  of
the  successive  extension  of  the  Roman  franchise  to
the  Latins,  the  Italians,  and  the  Provincials.  The
infant  colony,  thus  recruited,  sprang  rapidly  into
vigorous  adolescence.  The  city  of  Romulus  spread
from  the  Palatine  over  the  surrounding  ridge,  and
connected  with  a  single  wall  the  fortresses  which

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

were  planted  on  its  heights.1 The  development  of CHAP.
the  commonwealth  consisted  in  the  periodical  re-
petition of  this  original  experiment ; it  was  by
carrying  out  this  principle  of  incorporation  that  it
rose  to  empire.

Nevertheless,  a  large  portion  of  the  history  of  struggle  be.
Eome  is  no  other  than  a  record  of  the  desperate
resistance  she  offered  to  the  claims  of  her  subjects
for  comprehension  within  the  pale  of  her  privileges.
The  timely  amalgamation  which  took  place  so
repeatedly  between  the  conquerors  and  the  con-
quered, is  to  be  attributed  to  the  good  fortune  of
the  commonwealth,  rather  than  to  the  wisdom  and
foresight  of  her  rulers.  Under  the  regal  govern-
ment, indeed,  as  far  as  we  may  trust  the  records
which  have  descended  to  us,  the  principle  of  equal
association  was  admitted  and  practised  liberally.
Romulus  shared  his  throne  with  the  king  of  the
Sabines.  Tullus  transplanted  to  Rome  the  citizens
of  Alba.  The  most  ancient  enumerations  of  the
Roman  people  seem  to  indicate,  by  their  rapid
increase,  that  they  carried  out  this  policy  syste-
matically as  long  as  they  were  governed  by  a  line
of  kings.  But  as  the  monarchical  form  of  govern-
ment is  generally  favourable  to  the  obliteration  of
distinctions  between  the  various  elements  of  which
a  nation  is  composed,  so  the  oligarchical,  which
followed  upon  the  expulsion  of  the  Tarquins,
evinced,  as  it  always  does,  an  opposite  tendency.
As  the  light  begins  to  brighten  about  the  cradle  of
the  Roman  institutions,  we  discover  distinct  traces

"  Septemque  una  sibi  muro  circumdedit  arces."

Virg.  Georg.  ii.  fin.
B 4

8  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  of  the  existence  within  their  pale,  not  of  two
'  classes  only,  the  warriors  and  their  subjects,  but
of  a  third  also,  occupying  a  position  between  the
others,  sharing  in  the  name  and  in  an  inferior
degree  in  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  dominant
class.  The  patricians  and  plebeians  of  Rome  re-
present, at  this  early  period,  two  races  of  different
origin,  the  former  of  which  has  admitted  the  other,
whether  on  compulsion  or  by  concession,  after  a
fruitless  resistance,  or  by  spontaneous  arrangement,
to  a  certain  prescribed  share  in  the  privileges  of
government  and  the  rights  of  conquest.  It  exacts,
in  return,  a  strict  alliance  against  the  unruly
subjects  and  jealous  enemies  common  to  both.
During  a  century  and  a  half  of  republican  govern-
ment, while  the  external  policy  of  the  state  is
developing  its  tendency  to  universal  aggression,
and  the  work  of  aggrandizement  and  self-defence
seem,  to  the  eye  of  the  mere  bystander,  to  be
animated  by  a  common  instinct,  there  exists,
nevertheless,  internally  a  strong  under-current  of
hostility  between  these  half-reluctant  yokefellows.
The  plebs  is  resolutely  working  its  way  to  the
attainment  of  a  complete  equality  with  the  populus,
to  the  common  enjoyment  of  all  public  honours
and  emoluments,  and  a  full  guarantee  for  the
personal  liberty  of  its  members.  Its  numbers  are
gradually,  although  slowly,  augmented  by  the  ad-
mission into  its  ranks  of  the  class  of  freedmen,
those  individuals  whom  compassion,  self-interest,
or  great  public  services,  elevated  occasionally  from
the  herd  of  slaves  to  the  rank  of  Roman  citizens.
In  some  cases  the  whole  free  population  of  an  allied

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  9

or  friendly  city  was  admitted  in  a  body  to  the  CHAP.
rights  of  Roman  citizenship.  It  was  enrolled
in  one  of  the  existing  plebeian  tribes,  or  added
another  to  the  number,  thus  directly  increasing
the  power  and  influence  of  the  inferior  order,  while
at  the  same  time,  as  the  clientele  of  some  patrician
house,  it  reflected  additional  lustre  upon  the  privi-
leged class.  At  last  the  commons  attain  their
object.  They  acquire  an  equal  share  in  the  public
offices  and  honours,  participate  in  the  same  system
of  law,  in  the  same  rites  of  religion,  in  the  common
enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  conquest.  The  two
nations  coalesce  into  one.  From  this  era,  the  body
politic  appears  to  be  animated  with  new  vigour.
The  career  of  victory  is  no  longer  checked  by
the  defection  of  the  commons  at  some  important
crisis.  The  hostility  of  the  enemy  is  no  longer
encouraged  by  the  suspicion  that  the  councils  of
his  adversary  are  divided.  The  course  of  another
century  witnesses  the  extension  of  the  Roman
dominion  over  the  whole  of  Italy,  and  the  vigorous
republic  is  already  prepared  to  contest  the  sove-
reignty of  the  West  with  the  long-settled  and  deep-
rooted  power  of  Carthage.

We  find,  however,  that  the  Romans  do  not  enter  The  Latin
upon  this  mortal  conflict  in  exclusive  dependence  and  com-'
upon  their  own  resources. The  burghers  and  the
commonalty  together  are  already  far  outnumbered  in  the
by  the multitude  of  their subjects,  whom they
continue  to  treat  as  aliens,  who  are  jealous  of  their
sway,  and  may  be  expected  to  turn  against  them
at  any  favourable  opportunity. The  strength  of
the Romans must be invigorated, that of the

10  HISTOEY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. Italians reduced. Accordingly, we remark the
institution  of  a  new  form  of  qualified  citizenship

conferred  upon  certain  dependent  communities,
either  as  a  reward  for  good  service  to  the  republic,
or  as  a  sop  to  appease  their  cravings  for  union
with  it.  The  Latin  franchise,  as  it  was  termed
from  the  people  to  whom  it  was  first  assigned,
placed  its  possessor  in  a  state  of  subordinate  com-
munion with  the  Roman  people.  The  principal
advantage  which  it  conferred  related  to  the  means
of  holding  and  disposing  of  property ;  but  the
Latin  was  not  deemed  worthy  to  mingle  his  blood
with  the  Roman,  and  the  child  of  a  mixed  marriage
became  a  Latin,  and  not  a  Roman  citizen.  Nor
did  the  republic  concede  to  these  dependants  the
complete  right  of  suffrage ;  to  which,  however,
she  half-opened  her  jealous  portals  by  allowing
the  discharge  of  certain  local  magistracies  to  con-
fer a  title  to  enrolment  in  a  plebeian  tribe,  and
the  full  acquisition  of  her  privileges.  On  the
other  hand,  however,  she  required  the  recipients
of  her  favour  to  enlist  in  her  service.  To  be
admitted,  even  on  such  unequal  terms,  to  partner-
ship with  the  victorious  republic  was  an  honour
much  esteemed,  and  one  which,  as  it  was  gradually
extended  to  a  considerable  number  of  Italian  towns,
particularly  in  Samnium  and  Campania,  and  after-
wards beyond  the  sea,  conciliated  many  doubtful
friends  and  materially  contributed  to  the  strength
of  Rome.

contest  of  It  was  obvious,  however,  that  in  giving  her  sub-
andrpie"S  jects  this  foretaste  of  her  own  freedom,  the  republic
transferred  was  directly  encouraging  the  demand  for  its  full

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  11

and  entire  enjoyment.  In  the  mean  while,  not  only  CHAP.  ;
was  her  genuine  blood  drained  by  constant  war-
fare, but  every  new  conquest  required  a  fresh  graft  to  the  richer
from  the  parent  stock  to  garrison  or  to  colonize  it.
Whilst  she  strove  to  repair  the  losses  of  war  in  her
dependencies,  she  enhanced  the  injury  which  it
had  inflicted  upon  herself.  The  inevitable  conse-
quence, the  claim  of  citizenship,  was  hastened  by
internal  dissensions.  Within  the  walls  of  Rome
itself,  the  old  contest  of  the  burghers  with  the  com-
monalty had  been  insensibly  transferred  to  the
richer  and  poorer  classes,  the  nobility  and  the
populace.  Undoubtedly  many  families  of  the
plebs  were  as  noble  and  as  wealthy  as  any  of  the
patrician  order ;  but  the  latter  were  all  ennobled
by  birth  and  station,  and  the  political  advantages,
of  which  they  enjoyed  so  large  a  share,  had  as  yet
allowed  few  to  descend  into  poverty.  The  mass  of
the  plebeians,  on  the  other  hand,  comprehended  all
the  citizens  of  obscurer  birth,  and  nearly  all  of  in-
ferior means.  Accordingly,  when  a  struggle  arose
between  the  upper  and  lower  classes,  old  names  and
old  jealousies  were  appealed  to  on  both  sides ;  the
contest  assumed  the  title  of  one  between  patricians
and  plebeians,  and  the  name  probably  conduced
to  give  a  false  colour  and  illegitimate  tendency  to
the  thing.  The  poorer  classes  claimed  certain
rights  with  regard  to  the  public  property,  of  which
they  had  been  dispossessed,  not  as  plebeians,  but
simply  as  citizens ;  but  their  cause  was  advocated
by  the  tribunes  of  the  plebs  ;  the  prejudices  of  the
plebs,  of  every  one  enrolled  in  a  plebeian  tribe,
whether  noble  or  mean,  rich  or  poor,  were  invoked

12  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  in  its  support.  It  was  the  sympathy  of  old  asso-
L  ciation,  rather  than  any  actual  participation  in
injury,  that  drew  the  members  of  the  plebeian
nobility  into  a  quarrel  altogether  apart  from  their
personal  interest,  or  rather  one  which  was  contrary
to  it.  The  attraction  was  not  universal  ;  many  of
the  richer  plebeians  fell  into  the  ranks  of  the  patri-
cian aristocracy  which  generally  opposed  these
claims  ;  and  in  the  subsequent  phases  which  the
contest  assumed,  individuals  were  found  to  fluc-
•  tuate  reciprocally  between  the  one  side  and  the
other.  But  the  struggles  of  the  privileged  and  the
unprivileged  continued  to  be  described  by  the  old
party  designations,  and  the  popular  faction  might
be  astonished  to  see  themselves  triumphing  under
the  leadership  of  the  patrician  Julius,  while  the
nobles  accepted  with  distaste  and  reluctance  the
services  of  a  plebeian  Porcius  and  Pompeius.
proprietary  The  Licinian  rogations,  enacted  in  the  year
the  389  of  the  city,  had  laid  the  foundations  of  a

rogations- virtual equality  between the patrician and ple-
the  Agra- foeian orders. The principle of the most im-

rian  laws  of

the  Gracchi,  portant  of  these  measures  was  to  destroy  the
actual  monopoly  of  the  use  of  the  public  lands
which  the  patricians  enjoyed,  and  to  limit  the  oc-
cupation of  each  individual  to  a  certain  number  of
acres.  Since  that  time,  however,  the  rich  and
powerful  had  again  gradually  encroached  upon  this
regulation,  and  while  they  grasped  at  immense  tracts
of  land,  which  they  could  not  profitably  occupy,
had  left  a  vast  proportion  of  the  poorer  citizens
without  their  rightful  means  of  subsistence.  The
law  in  fact  had  fallen  entirely  into  desuetude.  Ti-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  13

berius  Gracchus,  alarmed  at  the  progressive  de-  CHAP.
population  of  Italy,  and  perceiving  how  the  enor-
mous disproportion  of  properties  was  tending  to
the  extirpation  of  the  class  of  free  citizens,  fixed
his  eye  upon  these  obsolete  enactments  as  the  legi-
timate means  of  restoring  the  balance  between  the
rich  and  poor.  His  immediate  object  was,  not  the
enrichment  or  elevation  of  the  plebeians,  but  simply
the  restoration  of  the  poor  and  needy  citizens  to  a
state  of  honourable  independence.  The  actual  law
was  doubly  favourable  to  his  views  of  re- distri-
bution; for  not  only  had  the  Licinian  rogations
never  been  abrogated,  but  the  title  by  which  alone
public  land  could  be  occupied  was  always,  strictly
speaking,  revocable  by  the  state.  It  was  not  the
nobility  of  Rome  only  who  were  alarmed  by  the
project  of  this  new  agrarian  division.  The  Italians
also  combined  with  them  in  determined  opposition
to  it.1  The  senates  of  the  Italian  towns  were  at  this
time  even  more  aristocratical  than  that  of  Rome
itself;  for  amidst  all  the  popular  modifications  to
which  her  own  constitution  had  been  subjected,  it
had  always  been  the  policy  of  the  republic  to  stifle
democratic  movements  in  her  dependencies.  It  is
probable,  therefore,  that  the  Italian  governments
were  attached  to  the  Roman  nobility  by  mutual
interests  and  sympathies.  The  nobles  repaid  their
goodwill  with  kindly  oifices,  and  to  many  of  the
allies  the  use  of  portions  of  public  land,  so  jea-
lously withheld  from  the  democracy  at  home,  was

1  "Nobilitas  noxia  atque  eo  perculsa,  modo  per  socios  et  nomen
Latinum  .  .  .  Gracchorum  actionibus  obviam  ierat." —  Sallust,  B.  J.
42.  Comp.  Prosper  Merimee,  Etudes  sur  VHistoire  Rom.  i.  48.

14  HISTORY OF THE ROMAHS

CHAP, conceded  by  special  enactment,  to  more,  perhaps,

' by  favour  and  connivance.

The  state Notwithstanding  this  foreign  support  the  aris-
tocracy were  foiled  by  the  courage  and  patriotism

concession °^  ^e  Gracchi,  who  acted  with  that  thorough  faith
claims  of in  the  truth  and  iustice  of  their  cause,  which  affords

the  Italian  •  *  rpi  . n

allies  to  the  the  surest  promise  of  success.  Ihe  agrarian  laws
franchise,  were  carried,  though  their  authors  perished  in  the
Resistance  struggle,  and  their  enactments  proved  to  be  too
Romans.  intricate  and  impracticable  to  be  ever  fairly  put
S°Tri-  m  execution.  But,  imperfectly  as  they  were  ad-
mmistered,  their  salutary  effect  may  be  gathered

war.

but  eventual  from  the  extraordinary  energy  which  the  republic
of  the5  put  forth  during  the  thirty  years  that  followed,
A.™666,  signalized  by  the  destruction  of  Jugurtha  and  the
B.C.  ss.  Cimbri,  and  the  repeated  triumphs  of  Marius  and
Metellus,  of  Fabius  and  Scaurus.  Meanwhile,  the
Italians  had  been  brooding  in  secret  over  the  ideas
which  the  late  reformation  had  suggested  to  them.
Upon  reflection,  they  acknowledged  that  the  pre-
carious enjoyment  of  a  few  acres  of  the  public  land
was  a  privilege  far  inferior  to  the  franchise  of  the
city.1  The  popular  party  in  Rome  were  still  rest-
less, and  agitated  the  state  with  demands  for  new
agrarian  laws  to  remedy  the  inefficiency  of  the
former.  They  encouraged  the  demands  of  the
Italians,  who  began  forthwith  to  knock  at  the  gates
of  the  constitution.2  Great  was  the  outcry  of  the

1  Appian  (B.C.  \.  18.)  describes  how  they  were  harassed  by  the
commissioners  who  attempted  to  carry  out  the  appointed  re-distribu-
tion of  land.  TttWTrt  re  Srj  Kai  TCLQ  tTrl  TOVTOIQ  TOJV  diKaZovrwv  i7rti%ti£  ou
<j>epovT££  oi  'IraXiJrai.  .  .  .

.  2  Kai nvfQ  tlfftjyovvTO  TOVQ  avfifiaxovQ  uTravrctQ, o'i  £/}  Trepi  Ttjg  yrjQ
/uaXiora  avreXsyov, elg TI)V  'Pw/ia/wv TroXme'aj/ avaypatyat,  w

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  15

nobles  against  the  treachery  of  the  citizens  who  CHAP.
were  prepared  to  level  the  barriers  of  exclusion.  '
As  usual  in  popular  struggles,  moderate  conces-
sions were  refused,  and  the  cry  only  grew  the  louder
for  extreme  measures.1  The  nobles  flew  to  arms
with  a  spirit  that  cowed  domestic  treason,  while  it
maintained  its  ground  no  less  resolutely  against
foreign  aggression.  The  apprehensions  entertained
by  the  ruling  class  of  the  personal  loss  which  would
ensue  to  them  from  the  admission  of  such  a  host
of  competitors  to  the  scramble  for  public  honours
and  emoluments,  not  less,  perhaps,  an  honourable
though  mistaken  abhorrence  of  the  dilution  which
Roman  blood  and  Roman  sentiments  would  suffer
from  this  foreign  influx,  united  both  the  patricians
and  plebeians  which  composed  it  in  one  stern  and
indomitable  phalanx.  Alone,  amidst  every  possible
combination  of  internal  dissension  and  treachery,
did  the  old  Roman  nobility,  a  few  hundred  families
at  most,  maintain  the  struggle  by  their  courage
and  wealth,  against  the  whole  force  of  Italy,  pre-
cipitated into  arms  by  the  brilliant  prospects  re-
vealed to  them  by  the  popular  intriguers.  As  the
contest  proceeded,  the  claim  to  citizenship  was
exchanged  for  the  deadliest  vows  of  extermination,
and  it  was  for  their  existence  rather  than  their
prerogatives  that  the  Romans  had  to  contend.
The  result  of  the  contest  was  in  every  way  worthy
of  their  military  and  political  reputation.  Suc-
cessful everywhere  in  the  field,  they  paused  at  the

X^piTi  vfpl  rfJQ  yjjf  ov  8toiao[jLtvov£. nai  t$ix°VTO  aafievoi  TovB'  ot  'Ira-
AuJrm,  TrporiO'tvTfQ  T(Sv  ^wp/wv  T^V  TroXireiav.  —  App.  B.C.  i.  21.  cf.  i.  34.
1  Val.  Max.  ix.  5.  1.  ;  Merimee,  i.  60.

16

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,

'

moment  of  victory,  and  to  each  nation,  as  it  re-
signed  its  claims,  presented  the  boon  of  citizenship
as  a  free  gift.  The  whole  of  Italy  received  the
full  franchise  of  the  city.1

Retrospect.  The  Romans  had  now  arrived  at  that  period  in
their  career  as  a  nation,  at  which  the  existing
generation  begins  to  reflect  upon  the  past,  and  to
trace  the  steps  by  which  it  has  arrived  at  its  actual
development.  They  could  not  fail  to  recognise  the
peculiar  feature  which  distinguishes  their  history
from  that  of  all  the  popular  governments  of  the
ancient  world,  the  principle  of  expansion  and  as-
sociation, which  had  carried  them  triumphantly
through  every  crisis,  and  strengthened  year  by
year  the  foundations  of  their  magnificent  empire.
Sallust  hails  with  satisfaction  the  early  application
of  this  happy  policy  by  the  founder  of  the  city  2  ;
and  it  is  to  this  pre-eminently  that  Cicero  at-
tributes the  extent  and  vitality  of  the  Roman  do-
minion.3 Dionysius,  in  the  striking  passage  in
which  he  enumerates  the  principal  causes  of  the
grandeur  of  the  people,  who  had  mortified  the
vanity  of  his  countrymen  by  their  easy  overthrow
of  the  descendants  of  Leonidas  and  Themistocles,
contrasts  the  humane  and  liberal  policy  of  the

1  Appian.  B.  C.  i.  49.  ;  Veil.  ii.  17. The  principal  enactments  by
which  the  franchise  was  extended  to  the  Italians  were  the  Lex  Julia
(A.  u.  664.)  and  the  Lex  Plautia  Papiria  (A.U.  665.). But  the  actual
process  of  enfranchisement  was  more  gradual  than  has  generally  been
supposed. Many  difficulties  were  thrown  in  the  way  of  individuals
seeking  to  be  enrolled  ;  the  acquisition  of  the  metropolitan  required
the  relinquishment  of  the  local  franchise. Several  states  declined  the
honour. See  Duruy's  elaborate  note,  Hist,  des  Rom.  ii.  213.  and
Niebuhr,  Lect.  on  Rom.  Hist.  i.  387.

2  Sallust.  B.  C.  6.  3  Cic.pro  Balbo,  31.

UNDEK THE EMP1KE.  17

Romans  with  the  feeble  jealousy  and  exclusiveness CHAP.
of  the Greeks.1 "  What was the cause," says  _ '

Tacitus,  "  of  the  fall  of  the  Lacedaemonians  and
Athenians,  but  that,  powerful  as  they  were  in
arms,  they  spurned  their  subjects  from  them  as
aliens?"2

The  nobles, although  they  had  given  wray  to  Triumph  of
their  opponents  on  the  vital  point  of  the  right  of
suffrage, still clung  to  the  hope of  maintaining
their  superiority. At  first  they  tried  to  limit  the  ously

f  J  r  1  i  -A -i  the

preponderance  or  new  voters  by  arbitrarily  re-  casement
stricting  them  to  a  small  number  of  the  tribes.3
But  amidst  the  violence  of  the  civil  wars,  which
assailed  the  most  sacred  landmarks  of  the  con-
stitution, such  invidious  distinctions  could  not
long  be  maintained.  On  the  first  triumph  of  the
popular  party,  its  leader  hastened  to  reward  the  ser-
vices of  the  Italians  by  abolishing  these  injurious
restrictions.  The  whole  of  the  tribes  were  now
thrown  open  to  them,  and  from  this  time  it  was
evident  that  they  had  it  in  their  power,  by  acting
with  steadiness  and  concert,  completely  to  master

1  Dionys.  Ant.  ii.  16,  17.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  24. ;  where  the  remark  is  put  in  the  mouth  of  the
Emperor  Claudius,  when  he  urged  the  senate,  according  to  his  uniform
policy,  to extend  the  franchise  to  the  mass  of  the  Gaulish  people.
He  adds,  "  At  conditor  noster  Romulus  tantum  sapientia  valuit,  ut
plerosque  populos  eodem  die  hostes  dein  cives  habuerit."

3  The  original  arrangement  lasted  so  short  a  time  that  its  nature
seems  to  have  been  speedily  forgotten. Velleius  (ii.  20.)  says  that
the  Italians  were  enrolled  in  eight  tribes,  apparently  eight  of  the
existing  thirty -five  ;  on  the  other  hand,  Appian  (B.  C.  i.  49.)  affirms
that  ten  new  tribes  were  created  for  them. In  either  case  they  were
liable  to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  old  Roman  citizens  in  the  comitia,
where  questions  were  decided  by  the  majority,  not  of  votes,  but  of
tribes.

VOL.  I.  C

18  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, the Roman element  in  the  comitia. But  many
' causes  combined  to  avert  this  result. The  Italians

had  no  longer  any  distinct  interest  at  variance
with  that  of  the  Romans,  while  they  retained
many  causes  of  jealousy  and  disunion  among
themselves.  The  distance  at  which  they  lay  from
the  centre  of  action  made  it  impossible  for  them  to
watch  the  shifting  currents  of  the  Roman  forum,
and  the  inactivity  to  which  they  were  thus  con-
demned by  their  position  soon  bred  in  them  a  total
indifference  to  questions  of  temporary  interest.
The  apprehension,  therefore,  that  the  introduction
of  the  Italian  element  into  the  constitution  would
have  the  effect  of  Italianizing  Rome,  was  totally
groundless.  Nevertheless,  it  is  certain  that  from  this
time  the  denationalization  of  Rome  began,  though
we  must  look  to  another  quarter  for  its  origin.
The  city  became  from  henceforth  the  common
resort  of  all  that  was  neediest  and  vilest  in  the
suburban  population.  There  grew  up  a  multitude
of  reckless  adventurers,  eager  to  sell  themselves
to  the  demagogues  of  any  party,  controlling  the
elections  by  corruption  or  violence,  obstructing  the
peaceful  march  of  public  affairs,  rendering  law
impotent  and  justice  impracticable.  Conscious  of
their  strength  and  services,  these  hungry  merce-
naries claimed  and  obtained  a  subsidy  from  the
state.  They  quartered  themselves  on  the  govern-
ment, which  was  compelled  to  tax  the  industry
of  the  provinces  for  their  maintenance.  The  mis-
fortune or  error  of  the  statesmen  of  the  day  lay
in  their  failing  to  invent  a  system  by  which  the
votes  of  the  distant  municipals  might  be  brought

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  19

to  bear  against  the  mob  of  the  forum. The  idea CHAP.
of  popular  representation  was  altogether  foreign '
to  the  mind  and  habits  of  the  age  : but  under
Augustus  the  elections  were  conducted  by  taking
the  votes  severally  in  the  different  towns.1 We
may  imagine  that  the  introduction  of  this  plan  by
a strong government,  like  that  of  Sulla,  might
have  infused  a  new  element  of  stability  into  the
tottering  machine  of  the  republican  constitution.

Marius  was  wafted  into  power  with  the  full  tide  oligarchical
of  the  Italian  confederacy.  He  was  the  first  to  set  the
example  of  proscribing  and  massacring  the  leaders

of  the  party  opposed  to  him  2  :  but  his  views  were  exclusive

-,.  i  -. T  ,  or  Roman

narrow  and  sordid,  and  he  took  no  measures  to  policy.
secure  the  ascendancy  of  the  popular  faction.  Sa-
tiated with  the  acquisition  of  a  seventh  consulship,
he  was  snatched  away  by  a  timely  death  from  the
disgrace  and  ruin  with  which  his  friends  were
speedily  overtaken.3  The  return  of  Sulla,  the
champion  of  the  nobility,  with  his  victorious  army
from  Asia,  surprised  them  without  plans  or  re-
sources. The  younger  Marius  threw  himself  into
the  arms  of  the  Samnites,  still  the  implacable
enemies  of  Rome,  and  was  ready  to  transfer  to
their  country  the  seat  of  empire.  The  views  of
Sulla,  on  the  other  hand,  were  thoroughly  na~

1  Suet.  Oct.  46.  :  "  Excogitate  genere  suffragiorum  quae  de  magis-
tratibus  urbicis  decuriones  colonici  in  sua  quisque  Colonia ferrent,
et  sub  diem  comitiorum  obsignata  Romam  mitterent."

2  Sulla  indeed  was  the  first  who  decreed  a  proscription  by  law  ;
and  on  this  account  Velleius  assigns  him  the  ignominy  of  inventing
this  mode  of  carrying  on  the  struggle. "  Primus  ille  exernplurn  pro-
scriptionis  invenit." ii.  28.

3  Merimee  thinks  that  Marius  committed  suicide,  i.  247.  ;  see  Plut.
Mar.  45.

c 2

20  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  tional.  The  massacres  by  which  he  decimated  the
'  Italian  races,  the  proscriptions  by  which  he  swept
off  the  leaders  of  the  popular  party  in  the  city,
together  with  his  vigorous  exercise  of  the  extra-
ordinary powers  which  the  gratitude  of  the  tri-
umphant nobles  conferred  upon  him,  in  abrogating
laws  which  had  fixed,  for  more  than  a  generation,
the  balance  of  the  constitution,  all  tended  to  the
same  end,  the  restoration  and  defence  of  the  aris-
tocratic supremacy.  Even  his  introduction  of  a
multitude  of  soldiers  and  slaves  to  the  franchise,
revolutionary  as  it  was  in  principle,  found  its
excuse  in  the  aim  he  had  in  view,  that  of  counter-
acting the  suffrages  of  the  Italians,  which  even  he
dared  not  directly  annul.  He  abridged  the  power
of  the  tribunes1,  who,  in  addition  to  their  original
office  of  protecting  the  interests  of  the  plebs,  had
usurped  considerable  control  over  the  deliberations
of  the  senate.  He  restored  to  that  body  the
judicia 2 ;  that  is,  the  exclusive  right  of  sitting  in
judgment,  by  the  appointment  of  the  praetor  or
other  magistrate :  a  right  which  was  most  eagerly
coveted  and  jealously  guarded,  for  the  sake  of  the
influence  it  conferred,  and,  not  less,  of  the  oppor-
tunity it  offered  for  reaping  the  fruits  of  corrup-
tion. The  popular  party  was  cowed,  and  the
nobles  promised  themselves  a  long  enjoyment  of

1  Liv.  Epit  Ixxxix. ;  Vell/ii.  30. ;  Appian.  B.  C.  i.  100. ;  Cic.  de
Leg.  iii.  9. :  "  In  ista  quidem  re  vehementer  Sullarn  probo,  qui  tri-
bunis  plebis  sua  lege  injuriae  faciendae  potestatem  ademerit, auxilii
ferendi  reliquerit."

2  Pseudo-Ascon.  in  Cic.  Divinat.  8. :  "  Victor  Sulla  legem  tulerat
ut  Senatorius  ordo  judicaret,  et  judicavit  per  decera  annos  turpiter."
Cornp.  Cic.  in  Verr.  i.  13.  37.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  21

the  new  oligarchical  constitution. Their  gratitude CH\P.
for  his  services,  together  with  the  devotion  of  his
veterans,  and  the  terror  of  his  own  name,  main-
tained the  dictator  in  undisputed  power,  and  con-
tinued to  protect  his  person  after  his  abdication.

The  course  of  events  will  lead  us,  on  some
future  occasions,  to  trace  the  remains  of  resentment
and  antipathy  to  Rome  which  lingered  long  in
some  regions  of  the  peninsula :  but,  for  the  most
part,  the  ambition  of  the  Italian  races  was  now
quelled ;  they  were  content  to  regard  the  city  of
Romulus  as  their  own  metropolis,  and,  while  they
enjoyed  the  fruits  of  her  wide-wasting  domination,
gradually  learned  to  take  pride  in  her  name.  We
must  now  extend  our  view  beyond  the  limits  of
Italy,  and  estimate,  from  the  condition  of  the  pro-
vinces, the  good  fortune  of  Rome,  which  had  thus
acquired  new  strength  and  resources  in  a  mo-
mentous crisis  of  her  external  affairs.

The  provinces  of  the  republic  occupied  the  The  Roman
whole  northern  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  from  pro
the  Pillars  of  Hercules  to  the  Bay  of  Issus,  ex-
cepting the  region  which  lay  between  the  frontier
of  Macedonia  and  the  Euxine  Sea.  The  barbarous
wilds  of  Thrace  were  indeed  repeatedly  traversed  by
the  Roman  armies  on  their  expeditions  to  the  East1,
but  no  attempt  was  made  to  subjugate  them  till
after  the  death  of  Sulla,  nor  were  they  occupied
permanently  with  a  civil  establishment  till  the
reign  of  Augustus.2  The  Narbonensis  did  not

1  Cicero,  De  Prov.  Cons.  2.,  makes  mention  of  a  permanent  mili-
tary way  through  Macedonia  to  the  Hellespont.

2  Comp.  Mannert,  Geogr.  der  Griech.  und  Rom.  vii.  61. M.  Lu-

c 3

22

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
I.

Relation  of
the  pro- •
vincials  to
Rome.

irvx  fr*vf-7

extend  far  into  the  interior  of  Gaul,  and  one  half
of  Asia  Minor  was  withheld  from  the  grasp  of  the
Koman  conquerors  by  Mithridates,  king  of  Pontus.
On  the  other  coasts  of  the  great  inland  sea,  the
domain  of  Carthage,  a  tract  comparatively  small,
was  the  only  country  which  acknowledged  their
domination.  The  extent  of  their  empire,  under
Sulla,  was  hardly  one  half  of  that  to  which  it  at-
tained under  Augustus  and  Trajan.

The  various  relations  in  which  the  different
classes  of  the  provincial  population  stood  to  the
ruling  city,  admit  of  a  parallel  with  the  members  of
a  Eoman  household.  The  colonies  of  Roman  citizens
planted  in  the  provinces,  with  the  full  exercise  of  all
their  national  rights,  and  presenting  a  miniature  of
the  metropolis  herself,  held  the  position  of  the  son
towards  the  paterfamilias :  the  conquered  peoples,
who  had  thrown  themselves  on  the  mercy  of  the
victor,  were  subjected  to  his  dominion  as  unre-
servedly as  the  slave  to  that  of  his  master :  those
among  them  whom  the  state  had  restored  to  the
enjoyment  of  their  own  lands  and  institutions,  oc-
cupied a  place  analogous  to  that  of  freedmen.
Some  cities  or  nations  had  voluntarily  sought  a
connexion  with  Rome  on  terms  of  alliance,  but
with  acknowledged  inferiority ;  others,  again,  stood
on  a  more  independent  footing,  offering  a  mutual
interchange  of  good  offices  and  of  citizenship ;  and,
lastly,  there  were  some  which  entered  into  con-

cullus  triumphed  over  the  Thracians,  A.  u.  683,  Eutrop.  vi.  10.
M.  Crassus  subjugated  them  A.  u.  724,  Dion.  ii.  23.  For  reasons  of
policy  Augustus  refrained  from  reducing  the  country  to  the  form  of
a  province.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  23

federacy  with  the  republic  with  perfect  equality  CHAP.
of  rights  on  both  sides.  All  these  had  their  proto-
types respectively  in  the  clients,  the  guests,  and
the  friends  of  the  Roman  noble.  Within  the  limits
of  each  Roman  province  there  were  generally
some  states  which  stood  in  these  several  relations
to  the  Republic ;  and  the  severity  of  the  military
and  civil  administration  of  the  country  was  main-
tained or  relaxed  towards  them  according  to  their
respective  claims.  But,  after  all,  the  mass  of  the
provincial  population  belonged  to  the  class  of
dediticii,  that  is,  those  who  had  originally  sub-
mitted without  conditions,  the  slaves,  as  they  may
be  termed,  of  the  great  Roman  family.  They
were  subjected  to  the  severest  fiscal  and  other
burdens,  enhanced  by  the  rapacity  of  their  rulers,
who,  from  the  consul  or  prastor  to  the  lowest  of
their  officers,  preyed  upon  them  without  remorse
and  without  satiety.

It  was  the  general  rule  that  the  consuls  and  Govem-

.  , .  « ™ • ,1 meut  of  the

praBtors,  after  serving  their  year  01  omce  in  the  provinces
city,  should  proceed  to  administer  for  one  or  some-  consuls,  &c.
times  three  years  the  affairs  of  a  province.  The
state  placed  large  standing  armies  at  their  dis-
posal, threw  enormous  patronage  into  their  hands,
and  their  ambition,  avarice,  or  mutual  rivalry,  far
more  than  any  sense  of  the  public  interests,  im-
pelled them  to  exert  themselves,  during  their  brief
career,  in  reducing  frontier  tribes,  in  quelling  in-
surrections which  their  own  injustice  constantly
excited,  and  whenever  they  could  find  an  excuse
for  it,  in  annihilating  the  ancient  liberties  and
privileges  still  retained  by  the  more  favoured

c 4

24  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  classes  of  the  provincials.  Surrounded  by  an  army
of  officials,  all  creatures  of  their  own,  all  engaged
in  the  same  work  of  carving  out  fortunes  for  them-
selves, and  abetting  their  colleagues,  the  procon-
suls had  little  sense  of  responsibility  to  the  central
government,  and  glutted  their  cupidity  without
restraint.  The  tithes,  tolls,  and  other  imposts,
from  which  the  public  revenue  was  drawn,  were
farmed  by  Roman  contractors,  belonging  generally
to  the  order  of  knights,  who  had  few  opportunities
of  rising  to  the  highest  political  offices  at  home ;
and  the  connivance  of  their  superiors  in  the  pro-
vince, backed  by  the  corrupt  state  of  public  feeling
in  Rome,  shielded,  to  a  great  extent,  the  sordid  prac-
tices by  which  they  cheated  both  the  state  and  its
subjects.  The  means  of  enrichment  which  the  pro-
vinces afforded  to  the  nobility  became  the  ultimate
object  of  many  of  the  deepest  political  intrigues.
A  man  of  ruined  fortune  looked  to  the  office  of
proconsul,  as  the  sole  means  of  retrieving  his  affairs.
To  obtain  it,  he  allied  himself  with  the  individual
or  the  party  by  whose  influence  he  might  hope  to
rise  successively  through  the  various  steps  which
led  to  the  consulship.  He  first  obtained  the  post  of
quaestor,  from  thence,  after  a  due  interval,  he  might
hope  to  be  elected  aedile,  next  prastor,  and  ulti-
mately consul.  His  grand  object  was  then  obtained,
for  upon  the  expiration  of  his  term  of  office  he  de-
parted as  governor  to  a  consular  province ;  he  cal-
culated on  repaying  the  expenses  of  his  various
contests,  on  liquidating  the  debt  of  gratitude  to  his
adherents,  and  accumulating  a  vast  fortune  for  his
own  gratification,  or  the  advancement  of  his  party.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  25

The  cupidity  which  animated  individuals  was  in  CHAP.
fact  the  mainspring  of  the  political  factions  of  the
time.  The  spoil  of  the  provinces  was  the  bait  with  Wrongs  and
which  the  popular  leaders  had  lured  the  Italians  to  discontent
their  standards.  All  the  legal  rights  of  citizenship
had  been  conceded,  but  the  old  oligarchic  families,
dignified  by  historic  associations,  and  revelling  in
the  wealth  accumulated  by  centuries  of  conquest,
still  hoped  to  maintain  their  grasp  of  the  larger
share  of  honours  and  emoluments  which  they  had
contrived  to  make  generally  accessible  only  to  the
richest.  They  still  looked  with  scorn,  and  infused
the  same  sentiment  into  the  people,  on  the  New
Men,  the  men  of  talents  and  education,  but  of
moderate  origin  and  fortune,  who  were  striving  on
all  sides  to  thrust  themselves  into  public  notice.
The  judicia,  or  occupation  of  the  bench  of  justice,
was  the  great  instrument  by  which  they  protected
their  monopoly ;  for  by  keeping  this  in  their  own
hands  they  could  quash  every  attempt  at  revealing,
by  legal  process,  the  enormities  of  the  provincial
administration.  This  was  the  battle  field  to  which,
as  we  shall  see,  the  instinct  of  the  orator  led  Cicero
to  transfer  the  contest ;  and  when,  by  a  concurrence
of  fortunate  circumstances,  he  found  the  means  of
exposing  to  the  eye  of  day  the  glaring  iniquity  of
the  system,  the  nobles  were  forced  to  surrender,  if
not  their  prerogatives,  at  least  their  impunity  in
abusing  them.  But  as  far  as  each  party  succeeded
in  retaining  or  extorting  a  share  in  the  plunder,  the
same  system  was  carried  on  by  both.  It  would  be
unfair  to  point  to  either  as  having  exceeded  the
other  in  rapacity  and  tyranny.  The  distress  and

26  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  consequent  alienation  of  the  provinces  became  the
pressing  evil  and  danger  of  the  times.  Adven-
turers sprang  up  in  every  quarter,  and  found  a
floating  mass  of  discontent  around  them,  from
which  they  were  certain  of  deriving  direct  assist-
ance, or  of  meeting  at  least  with  sullen  approba-
tion. Powerful  antagonists  to  the  dominion,  even
to  the  existence  of  the  conquerors  of  the  world,  rose
out  of  the  schools  of  gladiators  and  the  holds  of
pirate  vessels.  The  fuel  was  heaped  for  the  burn-
ing, and  any  spark  was  sufficient  to  set  it  in  a  blaze.
The  first  use  of  power  which  the  Emperors  made,
was  to  control  the  fiscal  tyranny  of  the  proconsuls
and  publicani.  The  revolution  of  Drusus  and  the
Gracchi  opened  the  spoils  of  the  world  to  the  Ita-
lians ;  but  those  of  Julius  and  Octavius  closed  them
again,  and  restored  them  to  their  rightful  owners.
The  luxuriance  of  Roman  oppression  flourished
but  for  a  century  and  a  half;  but  in  that  time  it
created,  perhaps,  the  most  extensive  and  searching
misery  the  world  has  ever  seen.  The  establish-
ment of  the  imperial  despotism  placed  in  the  main
an  effective  control  over  these  petty  tyrants ;  and
notwithstanding  all  the  crimes  by  which  it  won  its
way,  and  the  corruptions  which  were  developed  in
its  progress,  it  deserves  to  be  regarded,  at  least  in
this  important  particular,  as  one  of  the  greatest
blessings  vouchsafed  to  the  human  race.1
Their  dis-  The  retirement  of  Sulla  proved  how  necessary

content

1  We  may  indeed  infer,  from  a  remarkable  passage  in  Cicero,  that
even  the  fiscal  oppression  of  the  Romans  was  not  so  galling  as  that
which  the  provincials  sometimes  exercised  upon  one  another,  when
they  had  the  power.  See  Cic.  ad  Qu.  i.  1.  11.:  "  Non  esse  autem
leniores  in  exigendis  vectigalibus  Grsecos  quam  nostros  publicanos

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  27

his  energy  and  reputation  had  been  to  sustain  the CHAP.
weight  of  empire  upon  the  slender  basis  of  the

oligarchical  faction.  In  the  west  the  whole  Spanish  breaks  forth
nation  rose  against  its  oppressors.  In  the  farthest
east  the  ability  of  Mithridates  was  seconded  by
the  good  will  of  the  conquered  races  of  Asia  Minor.
Wherever  he  showed  his  ensigns,  the  people  rose
without  hesitation,  and  welcomed  him  as  their
deliverer.  At  the  same  time  the  oppression  of  the
conquerors  of  the  world  had  driven  thousands
from  honest  and  peaceful  occupations  to  resort  to
piracy  for  vengeance  or  subsistence.  The  roving
corsairs  of  the  Cilician  coast  found  their  resources
multiplied  by  the  conflux  of  these  restless  and  dis-
contented adventurers,  and  their  vessels  penetrated
all  the  gulfs,  and  insulted  every  harbour  in  the
Mediterranean,  with  a  system  of  organization  co-
extensive with  the  great  sphere  of  maritime  traffic.1
Such  was  the  disordered  state  of  Italy  itself,  that  a
mere  handful  of  gladiators  having  escaped  from
their  prisons,  and  fled  into  the  hills  to  avoid
pursuit,  collected  around  them  a  multitude  of
miserable  or  turbulent  men,  and  were  elevated,
even  against  their  will,  into  rebels  and  enemies  to
the  commonwealth.  It  was  not  till  these  various
combinations  of  her  foes  and  subjects  against  her
were  successively  suppressed,  that  the  power  of

Line  intelligi  potest,  quod  Caunii  nuper,  omnesque  ex  insulis,  quae
erant  ab  Sulla  Rhodiis  attribute,  confugerunt  ad  Senatum,  nobis  ut
potius  vectigal  quam  Rhodiis  penderent."  Comp.  Liv.  xli.  6.  The
ingenuity  of  the  Greeks  in  the  art  of  fiscal  extortion  is  signalized  in  a
long  series  of  instances  by  Aristotle,  CEcon.  ii.

1  App.  B.  M .  92. :  Ov  IJLOVIJQ  %TI  T/;f  twag  $a\daor)£  tKpdrow^  dXXd  rt}c

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
I.

Revolt  of
the  Spanish
provinces  in
combina-
tion with
the  remnant
of  the  po-
pular or
Marian
party. Ser-
torius.

Rome  was  finally  established  throughout  her  do-
minions.

1.  Sertorius  was  a  Sabine  by  birth,  a  Roman
citizen,  who  had  served  with  distinction  in  the
armies  of  Marius  against  the  Cimbri,  and  again
with  great  success  and  reputation  in  Spain.1  In
the  civil  war  he  attached  himself  to  the  popular
party,  and  enjoyed  a  share  in  the  government  with
Marius  and  Cinna.  His  moderation  and  disin-
terested patriotism  contrasted  advantageously  with
the  selfish  principles  of  his  colleagues  ;  his  name
was  untainted  with  the  guilt  of  their  proscriptions.
After  their  deaths  he  despaired  of  resisting  suc-
cessfully the  reviving  fortunes  of  the  aristocracy
under  Sulla,  and  having  no  confidence  in  the  cha-
racter of  the  younger  Marius,  he  abandoned  the
defence  of  the  popular  cause2,  and  retired  into
Spain,  not  without  arms  in  his  hands.  The  ha-
rassed provincials,  who  seem  to  have  been  already
attached  to  him,  received  him  as  a  deliverer  from
the  tyranny  of  the  proconsular  government,  which
now  became  identified  with  the  rule  of  Sulla  and
the  nobility.  But  the  energy  with  which  the  dic-
tator proceeded  to  quell  their  insurrection  was
irresistible.  The  rude  barbarians  were  unable  to
face  his  veteran  legions,  and  Sertorius  fled  pre-
cipitately to  New  Carthage,  and  thence  crossed  to
Africa.  For  a  short  time  the  Spanish  provinces

1  Plutarch's  life  of  Sertorius,  from  which  these  details  are  princi-
pally taken,  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  in  his  series  of  biographies.
The  character  of  the  hero  is  the  most  romantic  in  all  Roman  history,
and  the  traits  of  humanity  and  moderation  which  distinguish  it  are
such  as  the  mild  philosopher  most  loved  to  paint.

2  Plut.  Sertor.  6. :  HavTaTraoiv  cnroyvovs  TTJV  TTO\IV  wj
piav.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  29

returned  to  their  obedience,  while  their  champion  CHAP.
flitted  from  place  to  place,  attempting  various  com-
binations against  the  dominant  party,  but  without
success.  Proscribed  and  banished  from  Rome,  he
proposed  to  sail  for  the  far-famed  islands  of  the
West,  and  establish  his  sovereignty  in  the  paradise
of  Grecian  legend.1  But  a  native  war  between
rival  pretenders  to  the  throne  of  Mauretania  tempted
him  to  remain  on  the  continent  of  Africa,  where  he
met  and  defeated  a  Roman  army  under  one  of  Sulla's
lieutenants.  The  old  sentiment  of  party  animosity
thus  flattered,  he  gladly  listened  to  an  invitation
from  the  Lusitanians  to  lead  a  new  revolt  against
the  Roman  power.  The  cause  of  the  oligarchy  in
Spain  was  entrusted  to  the  care  of  Metellus,  now
aged  and  unfit  to  cope  with  a  vigorous  antagonist  ;
moreover,  the  retirement  of  Sulla  soon  deprived
the  Romans  of  the  soul  which  used  to  animate
their  exertions.  By  successive  victories  nearly  the
whole  of  the  peninsula  was  wrested  from  the
armies  of  the  republic2,  and  acknowledged  the
chieftainship  of  the  hero  of  the  West.  The  sway
of  Sertorius  was  studiously  mild  and  conciliatory.
His  views  were  comprehensive,  and  not  content
with  his  present  elevation,  he  looked  forward  to
the  establishment  of  a  permanent  sovereignty.  He
detained  the  children  of  the  nobles  as  hostages  for
their  fidelity  ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  educated

1  Plut.  Sertor.  9.  : Tav0'  d  St/orwptoc  aKovaag  epwra  ^av^aarov  tcrxfv
rag  vrjaovg  icai  Iqv  iv  rjavxiq,  rvpavmdos  cnraXXayeig  icai

2  Liv.  Spit.  xc.  :  "  L.  Manlius,  proconsul,  et  M.  Domitius,  legatus
ab  Herculeio  qusestore,  victi  sunt."  Cf.  Flor.  iii.  22.  ;  Oros.  v.  23.  ;
Plut.  Sertor.  12.

30  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, them  in  Roman  arts  and  manners,  and  proposed  to
' breed  up  a  generation  which  should  understand

and  wield  the  principles  of  enlightened  govern-
ment. His  military  force  was  now  strengthened
by  the  arrival  of  some  veteran  troops  of  the  Italian
party,  who  had  compelled  their  general,  Perperna,
to  lead  them  over  to  him.  His  camp  became  the
resort  of  fugitives  from  Rome,  whose  object  was  to
renew  the  old  civil  contest  on  a  more  favourable
field.  From  this  moment  the  designs  of  Sertorius
seem  to  have  undergone  a  change.  He  surrounded
himself  with  the  nucleus  of  a  new  senate  from
among  his  Roman  adherents ;  he  aimed  at  a  tri-
umphant return  to  the  imperial  city,  and  the  re-
storation of  his  party  and  their  principles,  and
began  to  treat  his  Spanish  followers  rather  as
faithful  allies  than  as  his  adopted  countrymen.
Accordingly,  when  Mithridates  sent  ambassadors
to  him  to  negotiate  a  combined  attack  upon  Italy
and  a  partition  of  her  provinces  (for  Rome,  he
said,  cannot  withstand  the  union  of  the  new  Pyr-
rhus  with  the  new  Hannibal),  Sertorius  haughtily
rejected  his  alliance,  and  declared  he  would  never
allow  a  barbarian  to  possess  an  inch  of  Roman
territory,  beyond  Bithynia  and  Cappadocia,  miser-
able countries  which  had  always  been  ruled  by
kings,  and  the  sovereignty  of  which  he  cared  not
to  dispute.1
contest  be-  While  contemplating  these  ultimate  results,  Ser-

tween  Ser-

1  Mithridates,  according  to  Plutarch,  was  content  to  furnish  Ser-
torius with  3000  talents  and  40  ships,  in  return  for  this  empty
acknowledgment  of  his  claim  to  Bithynia  and  Cappadocia.  The  cir-
cumstantial account  which  this  writer  gives  of  the  whole  transaction

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  31

torius  continued  to  maintain  his  position  against  CHAP.
Cn.  Pompeius,  who  now  shared  with  Metellus  the
command  of  the  Koman  armies.  Though  a  far  tonusand
abler  general  than  his  colleague,  and  though  sue-  Pompeius-
cessful  in  various  engagements  with  the  lieutenants
of  his  formidable  enemy,  Pompeius  was  baffled  by
the  address  and  vigilance  of  a  chieftain  who  com-
pensated for  his  deficiency  in  disciplined  troops,
by  availing  himself  of  the  desultory  mode  of  war-
fare for  which  the  Spanish  people  have  been  ever
famous.1  There  existed  also  a  jealousy  between
the  Roman  commanders,  and  Pompeius  suffered
a  severe  check  in  hastening  to  give  battle  before
the  arrival  of  Metellus,  who  eventually  saved  him
from  total  rout.  "  If  the  old  woman  had  not
come  up,"  said  Sertorius,  "  I  would  have  whipped
this  stripling  back  to  Rome."  The  two  generals
could  not  long  maintain  the  field  against  an  enemy
who  possessed  all  the  communications  of  the  coun-
try, and  the  skill  to  avail  himself  of  them.  Me-
tellus was  compelled  to  retire  into  Gaul  to  recruit
his  forces,  while  Pompeius  took  up  a  defensible
position  in  the  country  of  the  Yaccaei,  and  wrote
pressing  letters  to  the  senate  for  further  supplies.2

The  influence  which  Sertorius  acquired  over  the  Death  of
Spaniards  was  unbounded. When,  with  their  usual
fickleness  and  mutual  distrust, some  tribes  were

seems  more  worthy  of  credit  than  Appian's  loose  assertion  that  Ser-
torius surrendered  to  Mithridates  the  whole  of  the  Roman  province
of  Asia.  Plut.  Sertor.  23,  24.  ;  Appian.  B.  M.  68.

1  Plut. Pomp. 19.  : Aie/coTrre -yap CIVTOVQ Kai friarr) TronciXog &v  o
TroXs/tioc,  Kcti  dtivog  iv  /Spa^si  TroXXaxou  TrtpHpavfjvai,  /cat  /Ltfrayayav  air'
aXXwv  etQ  aXXouc  ay&vaq.

2  Sallust.  Ep.  Pomp.  Fr.  Hist.  iii.  4.

Pompeius.

32  HISTOIIY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  inclined  to  return  to  their  obedience  to  Rome,  he
recovered  by  an  appeal  to  their  superstition  the
submission  which  was  due  to  his  genius.  He
trained  a  milk-white  hind  to  follow  and  caress  him
like  a  dog,  and  pretended  that  it  was  a  gift  of
Diana,  and  was  his  familiar  counsellor  and  pro-
tectress.1 The  artifices  he  made  use  of,  if  we  may
believe  the  popular  tales,  to  revive  the  confidence
of  his  followers  by  means  of  this  creature,  were  an
ordinary  kind  of  imposture  ;  but  it  is  pleasing  to
think  that  we  may  trace,  in  the  fondness  he  showed
for  a  favourite  animal, .  the  same  tenderness  and
humanity  for  which  he  was  conspicuous  in  a  fe-
rocious age,  and  which,  it  was  said,  impelled  him
to  offer  more  than  once  to  relinquish  the  contest,
that  he  might  again  visit  his  mother,  who  was
still  living  a  widow  and  childless  in  Rome.2  It  is
with  pain,  however,  that  we  remark,  on  his  part,
one,  though  only  one,  act  of  savage  cruelty.  Jea-
lousies at  last  arose  between  his  Roman  and  his
native  adherents ;  he  was  threatened  with  the  de-
sertion of  his  Spanish  nobility,  and  in  a  moment  of
anger  or  alarm  he  caused  the  massacre  of  their
children  whom  he  had  retained  as  hostages.  This
act,  while  it  sullied  his  fame,  could  not  fail  to  ruin
his  fortunes.  His  lieutenant  Perperna  intrigued
against  him,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  dissensions
spreading  in  the  camp,  was  enabled  to  assassinate

1  Plut.  Sertor.  11. ;  Aul.  Gell.  xv.  22.

2  Plut.  Sertor.  22.  : Kai yap fy  ^tXoVarpic  KU\  TTQ\VV  i-x<>>v  'iftfpov
rov  Kart\Qt"iv. .  . .  kv  fit  TCUQ vt/eaw; ^ttTTE/jTrero Trpoi;  Mere\\ov  Kai  Trpog
IIo/i7rr/iW, %TOifji.os wv TO. oTrXa KaraBkaQai  ical fliovv i$ut)Tr]Q

rat  Be  ou^  IJKKFTO. Ttjc;  irarpifioc;  t7ri
VTC avry  Kat  ro  ffvprrav  toaKeifteWf

UiNDER THE EMPIRE.  33

him  with  impunity.1  The  traitor  assumed  the  CFTAP.
place  of  his  victim  at  the  head  of  the  allied  armies,
but  their  strength  was  daily  weakened  by  the
desertion  of  the  Spaniards.  From  this  moment
the  success  of  the  arms  of  Rome,  ever  patient  and
vigilant,  was  no  longer  doubtful.  Perperna  was
defeated  and  taken  in  the  first  engagement,  and
vainly  attempted  to  avert  the  punishment  he  de-
served by  betraying  the  names  of  his  adherents  in
the  city.  Pompeius,  out  of  generosity  or  policy,
refused  to  inspect  the  list.2  Perperna  was  put  to
death  and  his  forces  entirely  broken  up,  the  Spa-
niards submitting  once  more  to  the  dominion  which,
they  had  so  nearly  succeeded  in  overthrowing.

2.  The  long struggle  of  Mithridates, king  of  contest  of
Pontus,  with  the  Roman  power, began  with  his
attempts  to  gain  possession  of  the  neighbouring
kingdoms  of  Bithynia  and  Cappadocia.  which  had  favour  by

, V  ... •  rp,  . , theprovin-

been  taken  under  its  protection. Ihe  success  with  dais  in  the
which  his  arms  were  crowned  encouraged  him  to  *
carry  war  into  the  Roman  territories  in  Asia  Minor,
and  throughout  those districts the spirit  of  the
people  was  so  favourable  to  him  that  he  had  no
difficulty  in  relieving  them  for  the  moment  from
the  yoke  of  the  republic.3 The  enthusiasm  with

1  Plut.  Sertor.  26.  ;  Veil.  ii.  30. ;  Liv.  Epit.  xcvi. ;  Or.os.  v.  23.

2  Plut.  Pomp.  20.

3  This  appears  incidentally  from  Appian's  narrative,  7£ .M.  20,  21,
22.  28. He  says  expressly  in  one  place :  rQ  KO.I  ^aKiara  8fj\ov  iytvtro
rffv  'A.<riav  ov  <J><$6w Mi0pi$arou  juaXAov  ij  /ii<m  'Pwjuai'wy rotate  t£  airot'£
tpydffaaOat. The  clemency  which  the  barbarian  conqueror  showed  to
the  vanquished,  indicates  that  he  came  rather  as  a  deliverer  than  an
enemy. Velleius  excuses the  readiness  with  which  the  Athenians
received  the  lieutenant  of  Mithridates  (ii.  23.)  ;  but  Tacitus  brands
them  as  allies  of  the  enemy  of  Rome,  "  Mithridatis  adversus  Sullain
socios." (Ann.  ii.  55.)

VOL.  I.  D

34  HISTOEY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  which  he  was  received  marks  the  excessive  hatred
'  which  that  yoke  had  inspired.  It  is  evident  that
even  the  capricious  tyranny  of  Oriental  despotism
was  preferred  to  all  the  benefits  of  European  civi-
lization, blighted  as  they  were  by  the  systematic
rapacity  of  the  Roman  governors.1  The  character
of  the  great  king  of  Pont  us  has  come  down  to  us
laden  with  all  the  crimes  that  the  malevolence  of
his  rivals  could  fasten  upon  it ;  and  in  estimating
it  we  must  never  forget  that  the  sources  from
whence  our  historians  drew  their  information,  were
the  contemporary  narratives  of  unscrupulous  ad-
versaries. We  know  of  no  native  documents  from
which  they  could  have  borrowed ;  and  the  memoirs
of  Sulla  himself,  the  personal  opponent  of  Mithri-
dates,  were  doubtless  considered  by  the  Romans
the  most  authentic  records  of  the  contest  between
them.  We  have  too  many  proofs  of  the  malig-
nity of  the  Roman  writers  to  pay  any  respect  to
their  estimate  of  the  character  of  their  enemies.
The  abilities  which  the  Eastern  despot  exhibited
may  naturally  raise  a  prejudice  in  his  favour  ;  and
when  we  consider  in  addition  the  moderation  and
magnanimity  which  he  displayed  on  several  occa-
sions, we  shall  be  the  more  inclined  to  look  for
other  explanations  of  the  atrocities  imputed  to  him
than  the  personal  cruelty  to  which  the  Romans  re-

1  This  is  strongly  expressed  in  the  speech  of  Mithridates  (Justin,
xxxviir.  7.)?  where  he  makes  a  direct  appeal  to  the  passions  of  the
provincials  :  "  Tantumque  me  avida  exspectet  Asia  ut  etiam  vocibus
vocet :  adeo  illis  odium  Romanorum  incussit  rapacitas  proconsulum,
sectio  publicanorum,  calumniae  litium."  Compare  Pliny's  remark  on
the  infamous  character  his  countrymen  had  acquired,  when  speaking
of  the  death  of  Aquilius,  down  whose  throat  molten  gold  was  poured
by  order  of  Mithridates.  (H.  N.  xxxiii.  3.)

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  35

ferred  them.  The  general  massacre  of  the  Roman  CHAP.
settlers  throughout  their  Asiatic  possessions,  which
followed  upon  the  success  of  Mithridates?  is  more
likely  to  have  been  an  act  of  national  vengeance
than  the  execution,  as  the  historians  represent  it,
of  a  tyrant's  mandate.1

The  triumphs  of  the  king  of  Pontus  were  not  Attempt  of
limited  to  Asia. In  Greece  the  same  predisposing
cause produced similar effects, and almost the

admmistra

whole  of  that  country  was  wrested  from  the  tion:  not
Romans  with  equal  ease  and  rapidity.  It  is  true  byPpome-
that  the  skill  and  energy  of  Sulla  recovered  these  peius*
provinces  after  many  desperate  engagements ;  but
the  hostility  of  the  inhabitants,  the  result  of  mis-
government,  had  been  amply  manifested,  and  not
less  the  precariousness  of  the  tenure  by  which  their
obedience  was  maintained.  Sulla  pursued  his  vic-
torious career  into  Asia,  and  compelled  the  enemy
to  accept  terms  of  peace,  by  which  the  whole  of  his
conquests  were  wrung  from  his  grasp.  The  pro-
vinces were  again  subjected  to  their  former  servi-
tude. It  seems,  even  from  the  accounts  of  the
Romans  themselves,  that  during  the  years  that  fol-
lowed, while  Sulla  was  enjoying  his  paramount  au-
thority in  Rome,  the  generals  to  whom  the  military
occupation  and  defence  of  the  Asiatic  frontier  were

1  It  is  worth  observing,  as  an  illustration  of  the  carelessness  of  the
Romans  in  reporting  groundless  calumnies,  that  Plutarch  (Pomp.  37.),
speaking  of  this  very  subject,  mentions  Theophanes,  a  literary  con-
temporary of  Cicero,  as  having  asserted  that  Pompeius  discovered
among  the  papers  of  Mithridates  a  letter  from  a  certain  Rutilius,
urging  him  to  the  perpetration  of  this  massacre,  whereas  it  appears
incidentally  from  a  passage  of  Cicero  (pro  Rabir.  Post.  10.),  that  it
was  only  by  a  stratagem  that  Rutilius  himself  escaped  being  made  a
victim.

D 2

36  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  committed,  acted  with  much  perfidy  in  their  trans  •
'  actions  with  Mithridates,  trying  to  provoke  him  to
renew  the  war,  in  the  hope  of  turning  it  to  their
own  glory  or  emolument.1  It  was  not  till  after
the  dictator's  death,  however,  that  the  contest  was
renewed.  Lucullus  assumed  the  principal  com-
mand of  the  Roman  forces,  and  he  alone  perceived
the  real  weakness  of  the  republic,  and  strove  to
apply  a  remedy.  The  publicani  or  farmers  of  the
revenue  had  redoubled  their  exactions  to  acquit
themselves  of  the  obligation  they  had  contracted
to  defray  the  expenses  of  Sulla's  campaigns.  The
new  proconsul  took  immediate  measures  to  relieve
the  provincials  from  the  fresh  burdens  imposed
upon  them  on  this  account2;  at  the  same  time  he
began  a  series  of  reforms  in  the  administration,
and  held  forth  hopes  of  permanently  ameliorating
the  condition  of  the  disaffected  natives.  Nor  did
he  neglect  the  celebration  of  festivals  and  exhibition
of  magnificent  spectacles,  at  once  congenial  to  his
personal  taste,  and  the  usual  beguilements  of  pro-
vincial servitude.  To  effect  these  objects,  it  was
necessary  to  gain  time  and  re-establish  confidence.
But  the  armies  of  Mithridates  had  already  appeared
in  the  field,  and  the  people  had  risen  to  receive  him
with  all  their  former  alacrity.  Lucullus  strove  in
vain  to  repress  the  impatience  of  his  officers,  who
despised  his  prudential  measures,  and  were  eager
to  oppose  force  to  force.  The  arms  of  the  republic
sustained  some  partial  losses ;  they  were  magnified

1  App.  B.  M.  64.  : Movprjvctg  ftiv.  .  .  .  ir6\e^ioi>  «00jO/i<7£
iiri9vfji.iav  &pia/j.€ov.

2  Plut.  Lucull  20.  23.

UNDER THE EMPIRE .  37

perhaps  by  the  voices  of  the  classes  interested  in  CHAP.
provincial  oppression,  till  the  people  at  Eome  be-
gan to  murmur  against  the  Fabian  policy  of  their
general.  Though  he  obtained  eminent  successes,
and  restored  the  domination  of  his  country  upon  a
more  solid  footing  than  before,  he  was  charged  with
delaying,  for  personal  objects,  the  consummation
of  his  victories,  and  finally  superseded  in  his  com-
mand. The  brilliant  and  decisive  operations  of  Pom-
peius,  to  whom  the  conduct  of  the  war  was  next
intrusted,  might  seem  to  justify  his  predecessor's
disgrace.  But  if  Pompeius  had  greater  military
talents  than  Lucullus,  and  if  his  influence  over  a
soldiery  demoralized  by  alternations  of  rout  and
plunder,  was  more  efficient  for  the  restoration  of
discipline,  the  views  of  the  other  were  certainly
the  nobler  and  more  statesmanlike.  It  is  probable
that  the  triumph  of  Pompeius  was  owing  as  much
to  the  exhaustion  of  the  enemy  as  to  his  own
prowess;  it  appears,  at  all  events,  that  having
gained  the  laurels  which  it  was  his  ambition  to
secure,  he  declined  to  risk  his  popularity  with  the
Eoman  nobles  by  checking  their  career  of  extortion
in  the  provinces.

3.  The  great  traffic  which  flourished  for  cen-  origin  of
turies  between  Greece,  Egypt,  and  Syria,  presented
peculiar  temptation  to  the  habits  of  piracy  which
seem  to  have  prevailed  in  those  seas  from  the
earliest  times.  The  father  of  history  traces  the
origin  of  European  and  Asiatic  hostility  to  the
predatory  enterprises  of  lawless  adventurers.1  Such
is  the  natural  configuration  of  the  coasts  of  Greece

1  Herod,  i.  init. ;  comp.  Thuc.  i.  5.
D 3

38  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  and  Asia  Minor,  together  with  the  intermediate
L  islands,  that  this  plague  of  piracy  has  never  been
thoroughly  eradicated  from  the  waters  which  flow
about  them.1  The  sea-line  of  either  continent
is  broken  by  innumerable  bays  and  creeks,  and
bristles  with  projecting  headlands ;  in  such  regions
the  science  of  navigation  requires  the  aid  of  pe-
culiar local  knowledge.  The  interior  of  the  country
is  also  generally  difficult  of  access :  precipitous
mountains  alternate  with  deep  valleys ;  here  and
there  only  a  broader  expanse  is  opened  by  a  river
of  more  than  usual  volume.  The  population  of
the  interior  congregated,  even  in  the  best  times,
about  spots  of  isolated  fertility,  large  tracts  of
impassable  mountain  territory  intervening  between
them.  Under  such  circumstances,  the  recesses  of
every  bay  formed  the  surest  retreats  for  piratical
adventurers,  in  which  to  repair  their  vessels,  enjoy
their  booty,  and  riot  away  the  intervals  of  re-
pose. The  policy  of  the  Romans  did  not  allow  the
provincials  to  maintain  an  effective  military  force
to  destroy  these  nests  of  marauders;  during  the
Mithridatic  war  the  coasts  of  Greece  and  Ionia
swarmed  with  them  ;  but  it  was  through  the  policy
of  the  king  of  Pontus,  that  Cilicia  became  their  prin-
cipal stronghold.  Despairing  of  ultimate  success,  he
determined,  it  was  said2,  to  leave  a  sting  rankling

1  Compare  Mr.  Finlay's  intelligent  work  on  Greece  under  the
Romans,  p.  38. :  "  It  is  said  that  the  piracies  committed  during  the
late  revolutionary  war  contributed  quite  as  much  as  the  humanity  of
the  allies  to  the  signature  of  the  treaty  of  the  6th  of  July,  1827,  and
to  the  foundation  of  a  German  monarchy  in  Greece."

a  Appian.  B.  M.  92.  :  MifyHddr/yc,  ort  Trpwrov  'PwfiaioiQ  fTroXeftei  Kai
riji;  *A(7ta£  txpciret,  2|vA\a  TTtpi  ri\v  'EAAocfa  Troroi'julvof,  fi

UNDER THE EMPIHE.  39

in  the  vitals  of  the  republic. With  this  view,  having CHAP.
driven  in  the  feeble  outposts  of  the  Eoman  power,  _ '
he  encouraged  the  piratical  hordes  of  the  Eastern
seas  to  collect  on  the  coast  of  Cilicia.1 Here  they
established  their  docks,  arsenals,  and  magazines  :
here  there  grew  up  an  organized  system  of  rapine
and defiance, a lieet, a nation, and perhaps a
government,  of  pirates.

The  rise  of  such  a  power,  menacing  not  only  the  it  flourishes
security  of  individual  life  and  property,  but  harass-

iner  the  communications  and  clipping  the  revenues  of  the

P  ,  ,  ,  • V  «, ..  , .  r  vincial  go-

of  the  state,  show  how  inefficient  the  government  vemment,
of  the  provinces  must  have  been,  and  how  alienated  disaffection
the  affections  of  the  natives  who  did  not  shake  off  ^ntcbeespro"
the  marauders  from  their  coasts.2 Meanwhile,  the
needy  and  oppressed,  whoever  had  suffered  from
the  scourge  of  war  or  from  the  rapacity  of  a  foreign
official,  the  most  adventurous,  at  least,  and  ener-
getic among  them,  contributed  to  swell  the  numbers
of  this  pirate  state.3 The  commerce  between  Italy,
Greece,  Syria,  and  Egypt,  was  in  a  great  measure
an  interchange  of  necessaries,  which  war  and  even
anarchy  could  not  materially  restrict. Year  after
year,  whole  fleets of  merchant  vessels, with  all

KaQsZfiv rrJG  'Acriaf, TO. re aXXa Tcdvra  iXvfAaiveTO, Kai «£ Ttjv

1  Appian.  1.  C.  :  Nav£  re  *eai  oTrXa  iravra  trsKTaivovro  /i«X«rra  irtpl

\tyonkvr\v  KtXt/ctav,  T)I/  KOIVOV  atyuv  vtyoppov  f/  arparoTTtSov
tvai.

2  Sulla  and  Lucullus  restored  the  Roman  government  in  Cilicia,
but  made  no impression  upon  the  piratical  establishments  on  the
coast.

3  Plut.  (Pomp.  24.)  says  that  piracy  began  to  be  embarked  in  as  a
sphere  of  honourable  enterprise  by  men  of  wealth  and  station  :  'Qg  Kai
$6%av  riva  Kai  <j>i\ori[Jiiav  rov  e

J> 4

40  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  their  passengers  and  cargoes,  fell  into  the  hands  of
'  the  corsairs.  Such  were  their  power  and  audacity
that  they  often  dashed  as  far  as  sixty  miles  inland,
and  carried  off  not  only  plunder,  but  the  inha-
bitants of  towns  and  villas.1  The  ransom  of  the
captives  might  enrich  their  coffers  ;  their  enlistment
in  the  same  cause  of  lawless  resistance  to  all  regular
power,  and  therefore  more  especially  to  Rome,
would  increase  their  numbers ;  even  their  murder,
and  more  particularly  that  of  Roman  citizens,
'  struck  greater  terror  into  society,  and  drew  the
bands  of  the  confederacy  closer.  Stations  and
settlements  were  formed  throughout  the  Mediter-
ranean. It  was  on  the  coast  of  Spain  that  Ser-
torius  fell  in  with  a  fleet  of  Cilician  privateers,  and
obtained  their  assistance  in  reducing  the  islands
named  Pityusa3.  Another  squadron  of  pirates
treated  with  Spartacus  for  the  conveyance  of  his
followers  across  the  straits  of  Messina.2  Four
hundred  cities,  according  to  Plutarch3,  fell  into
the  hands  of  these  adventurers ;  they  possessed  a
thousand  vessels ;  their  pride  and  audacity,  the
splendour  of  their  equipments,  and  their  insolent
ostentation  of  wealth,  were  more  galling  to  the
Roman  government  than  even  their  violence.4

1  Antonia,  the  daughter  of  the  orator  M.  Antonius,  was  seized  by
these  adventurers  on  a  high  road  in  Italy  and  ransomed  at  great  cost.
(Plut.  L  c.)

2  Plut.  Crass.  10.  3  Plut,  Pomp.  24.

4  Cicero  (pro  Leg.  Manil.  12.)  enumerates  some  of  their  principal
exploits  :  —  The  seizure  of  Cnidos,  Colophon,  and  Samos;  the  sack  of
Caieta ;  insults  and  injuries  inflicted  within  the  harbours  of  Ostia  and
Misenum ;  the  Roman  fleet  shut  up  in  Brundisium ;  the  successive
capture  of  twelve  Roman  praetors.  "Edam  Appia  via  jam  care-
bamus."  Comp.  App.  B.  M.  98.  Both  Julius  Caesar  and  P.  Clodius
fell,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  into  their  hands.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  41

Many  of  the  principal  temples,  the  great  storehouses  CHAP.
of  the  wealth  of  the  Grecian  world,  which  had
escaped  the  cupidity  of  so  many  conquerors,  were
plundered  by  these  unscrupulous  robbers.  In  some
places,  they  established  within  their  walls  the  rites
of  Mithras  and  secret  Oriental  mysteries,  as  if  they
wished  to  make  war  against  the  religion  no  less
than  the  civilization  of  Europe.  But  their  prin-
cipal delight  was  in  torturing  and  destroying
citizens  of  the  republic,  against  which  their  hatred
was  chiefly  concentrated.

The  honour  and  security  of  the  commonwealth  Reduction
demanded  a  decisive  stand  to  be  made  against  this  p[r^es  by
growing evil. Murena, and  after  him  Servilius  f*™1^"8'
Isauricus,  while  holding  commands  in  Asia,  had  B.C.  67.
attempted  to  check  it  without  success. But  the
republic  had  an  immense maritime force  at  its
disposal  ;  it  required  only  a  controlling  genius  at
the  head  to  bring  it  all  into  action. Pompeius,  to
whom  the  task  was  committed,  distributed  his  ar-
mament in  three  divisions  so  as  to  sweep  the  whole
of  the  Mediterranean,  and  surprized  the  world  by
reducing  the  squadrons  of  the  pirates,  together
with  their  strongholds  in  Cilicia,  within  the  space
of  three  months. He  effected  his  purpose,  indeed,
as  much  by  negotiation  as  by  force. He  admitted
the  pretensions  of  the  marauders  to  the  dignity  of
a  nation1,  not  treating  them  as  outlaws,  but  con-
descending to  settle  many  of  them  in  colonies  both

App. B.  M. 92.  : J5aai\tvai 8' fi$i] Kai  rvpavvoiq  fj

vrovQ  opoiovvrtQ.  Velleius  discovers  to  us,  by  an  incidental
expression,  that  the  Romans  were  jealous  of  this  condescension  :
"  Sunt  qui  hoc  carpant."  (ii.  32.)  Compare  the  reluctance  of
Tiberius  to  treat  with  Tacfarinas  as  a  hostis.  (Tac.  Ann.  iii.  73.)

42  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, in  Greece  and  Asia  Minor,  while  he  associated  his
.  own  name  with  them,  by  giving  to  Soli,  which  he

rebuilt  for  their  occupation,  the  sounding  appel-
lation of  Pompeiopolis.1

Theita-  These  accounts  may  suffice  to  evince  the  de-
the  other  testation  in  which  the  Roman  government  was
cond'iiated  held  throughout  the  provinces.  We  see  the  na-
by  their  tives  ready  everywhere  to  throw  themselves  head-

comprehen-  .  .

sion  in  the  long  into  any  enterprise  that  seerns  to  menace  the
state.arThey  fortunes  of  the  republic.  We  see  how  passively
counte°  they  regard  the  rise  of  a  hostile  power,  even  where
nance  to  the  they  are  themselves  the  first  to  suffer  from  it.

T% 11 i  i  i i

Equally  harassed,  whether  in  war  or  m  peace,
their  distress  drives  them  to  despair;  they  break
B.C.  77.  their  ties  with  society,  and  plunder  even  the  nations
whom  they  avenge.  The  energy  with  which  the
Romans  combated  and  triumphed  over  this  mass
of  resistance  strikes  us  with  wonder  and  awe.
Their  hands  were  nerved  with  the  strength  which
the  incorporation  of  the  Italians  supplied  to  them.
With  much  partial  but  smothered  disaffection  in  the
districts  which  had  suffered  most  from  the  excesses
of  the  civil  wars,  with  many  opposing  views  and
wishes,  the  Italians  felt  nevertheless,  on  the  whole,
that  their  interests  were  identified  with  those  of
the  sovereign  power,  which  revelled  in  the  plunder
of  the  provinces  from  the  east  to  the  west.  The
deadliest  animosities  of  classes  and  parties  were
extinguished  in  the  sense  of  common  danger.  The
popular  faction  acquiesced  in  the  superiority  which
their  rivals  had  acquired,  and  which  it  would  have
been  madness  to  attempt  at  such  a  moment  to

1  App.  B.  M.  97. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  28. ;  Strabo,  xiv.  5.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  43

overthrow.  The  selfish  ambition  of  individuals  CHAP.
enlisted  little  sympathy  for  a  time  on  either  side.
Upon  the  abdication  of  Sulla,  M.  ^Emilius  Lepidus,
one  of  the  consuls  for  the  year  and  a  man  of  the
highest  family  distinctions,  conceived  the  project
of  placing  himself  at  the  head  of  the  popular  party,
and  extorting  from  the  republic  the  same  supreme
dominion  which  ifc  had  conceded  to  the  military
services  of  their  late  dictator,  and  to  the  necessities
of  a  period  of  revolution.  He  calculated  upon  a
supposed  reaction  in  the  public  mind  from  the
atrocities  of  the  late  government,  and  upon  his
own  conspicuous  station  and  the  power  attached  to
it.  His  schemes  were  so  little  disguised,  even
during  his  occupation  of  office,  that  the  senate
attempted  to  bind  him  by  a  solemn  oath  not  to
make  war  against  his  colleague  Catulus,  upon
succeeding  to  a  proconsular  government.1  But  he
no  sooner  reached  his  province,  the  Cisalpine  Gaul,
than  he  collected  the  legions  assigned  to  him,  and
marching  into  Etruria,  planted  his  standard  among
the  remnant  of  that  proscribed  nation,  burning
with  a  sense  of  its  wrongs  and  sufferings.2  But
even  there  the  courage  or  the  strength  was  wanting
to  furnish  any  solid  support  to  his  reckless  enter-
prise. Defeated  at  the  Milvian  bridge  in  a  despe-
rate attempt  to  surprise  the  city,  and  unable  to
make  head  against  the  forces  of  the  republic,  he
retired  into  Sardinia ;  but  the  enemy  he  had  pro-

1  Appian.  B.  C.  107.

2  Sail ust says  : "Etruria atque omnes reliquiae belli arrectae "
(Fragm.  Hist.  i.  14.) ; but  the  ardour  of  the  Etrurians  was  soon
extinguished.

HISXOKY OF THE KOMANS

CHAP,  yoked  pursued  him  into  his  retreat,  and  he  perished,
unaided  by  the  Italians,  in  a  petty  and  inglorious
warfare.1  M.  Junius  Brutus,  who  embarked  upon
a  similar  ad.venture,  was  shut  up  in  Mutina,  and
there  taken  and  put  to  death.2

Revolt  of  Another  remarkable  event  of  this  period  throws
tors  under"  mucn  light  upon  the  condition  of  Italy  ;  and  tends
spartacus.  ^o  show  both  its  social  corruption  and,  at  the  same

Supported  .  rru  IT  •

bymuiti-  time,  its  political  vigour.  I  he  gladiatorial  ex-
discon-f  f  e  hibitions  had  already  begun  to  form  the  great
ttaitedimt  nati°nal  diversion  of  the  Romans  and  Italians.
queued,  Slaves,  captives,  and  criminals  were  the  ordinary
counte-  C  victims  of  this  barbarous  passion  :  but  freemen,

th"  Italian  an^  even  citizens,  not  unfrequently  hired  them
states.  ^  selves  to  the  keepers  of  the  schools,  by  whom  the
B.  c.  73.  '  gladiators  were  paid,  well-fed,  and  instructed  in
the  art,  and  might  at  the  end  of  three  years  obtain
a  discharge.  This,  indeed,  and  other  enactments
regarding  the  practice,  show  that  it  was  not,  at
least  in  early  times,  such  a  mere  bloody  butchery
as  it  is  generally  represented.  It  happened  that  a
numerous  body  or  family  of  gladiators  was  kept  at
Capua  by  one  Lentulus  Batiatus,  to  be  let  out,
according  to  the  custom  of  the  time,  on  occasions
of  public  entertainment.  A  large  party  of  these
people  plotted  to  escape,  but  seventy-eight  only
out  of  the  number  succeeded  in  breaking  prison.3
They  began  by  seizing  upon  the  spits  and  other
implements  in  the  house  of  a  cook:  with  these

1  Lepidus  died  of  a  fever. App. B.  C.  i.  109.;  Floras,  iii.  23.  :
"  Ibi  morbo  et  poenitentia  interiit."

2  Plut.  Pomp.  16.

3  Plut,  Crass.  8—12.  ;  Appian.  B.  C.  i.  116—121. Florus,  iii.  20.,
states  the  number  at  thirty.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  43

arms  they  overpowered  the  escort  of  a  large  con-  CHAP.
signment  of  gladiatorial  weapons,  which  they  fell
in  with  on  the  road ;  took"  refuge,  it  is  said,  in  the
first  instance  in  the  then  extinct  crater  of  Mount
Vesuvius ;  and  soon  made  themselves  masters  of  a
neighbouring  fortress.  Having  proceeded  to  the
election  of  officers,  their  first  choice  fell  upon
Spartacus1,  a  Thracian  by  birth,  a  man  of  re-
markable strength  and  courage,  and  endowed  with
a  mildness  as  well  as  sagacity  of  character  above
his  condition.  The  first  success  of  the  insurgents
in  the  field  was  in  an  engagement  with  the  troops,
which  were  sent  without  delay  from  Capua  to
check  their  revolt.  This  victory  supplied  them
with  the  arms  of  a  regular  soldiery,  for  which  they
gladly  exchanged  their  own  imperfect  equipments.
More  confident  in  themselves,  and  with  increasing
numbers,  they  met  and  defeated  a  Roman  force  of
3000  men  under  C.  Clodius,  and  were  now  daily
joined  by  bands  of  fugitive  slaves  and  turbulent
marauders.2  In  the  course  of  three  years,  during
which  Spartacus  continued  to  make  head  against
the  power  of  the  republic,  the  numbers  of  his
armies  are  successively  estimated  at  40,000,  70,000,
and  100,000  men.  He  was  in  complete  possession
of  the  southern  provinces  of  the  peninsula ;  he
sacked  some  of  the  principal  cities  in  Campania,

1  It  appears  that  he  had  deserted  from  the  army,  been  retaken,  and
sold  into  slavery  ;  if  at  least  we  may  attach  any  credit  to  the  violent
language of Florus : "  De stipendiario Thrace miles, de milite
deserter,  inde  latro,  dein  in  honore  virium  gladiator." (Flor.  I.  c.)

2  The  shepherds  of  the  Apulian  mountains  (see  Lucan  ix.  182.)
were  a  lawless  and  desperate  class  of  men,  ready  to  join  in  any  in-
surrectionary enterprise. Comp.  Ascon.  in  Orat.  in  Tog.  Cand.  p.  88.
Orell.

46  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  and  pillaged  the  farms  and  villas  of  the  Sabine
mountains.1  In  the  field  he  obtained  brilliant
victories  over  Cassinius  and  the  pra3tor  Yarinius ;
but  at  the  height  of  his  success  he  was  not  deceived
as  to  the  real  weakness  of  his  resources,  and  urged
his  followers  to  effect  their  escape  across  the  Alps,
and  betake  themselves  to  their  own  homes  in  Gaul
and  Thrace,  to  which  countries  most  of  them
belonged.2  But  the  plunder  of  the  whole  of  Italy
seemed  within  their  reach,  and  was  too  tempting
an  object  to  be  relinquished  in  the  first  flush  of
victor}7.  The  senate  was  now  seriously  alarmed,
and  sent  the  two  consuls,  Gellius  and  Lentulus,
with  considerable  forces,  to  confront  the  public
enemy.3  But  the  danger  had  not  yet  reached  its
height :  both  the  consuls  were  ignominiously  de-
feated. They  were  deposed  from  their  commands,
and  Crassus  appointed  to  continue  the  war.  Mean-
while, dissensions  arose  in  the  horde  itself ;  parties
separated  from  the  main  body,  and  were  cut  off  in
detail.  The  Italian  states  gave  no  indication  of
sympathizing  with  a  revolt  of  slaves  and  robbers.
The  legions  of  the  republic,  numerous  and  well-
appointed,  closed  in  upon  the  motley  and  disor-
ganized stragglers.  Retracing  his  steps  from  the
north  of  Italy,  Spartacus  now  contemplated  trans -

1  Hor.  Od.  iii.  14.

2  Plut. Crass.  8. TQi/ oi TroXXol  TaXarai  icai  6p<[.K££. Crixus  and
(Enomaus,  the  principal  leaders  next  to  Spartacus,  were  both  Gauls.
Eutrop.  vi.  7. ;  Oros.  v.  24. Liv.  (Epit.  xcvii.)  speaks  of  a  large  body
of  the  fugitives  as  mostly  Germans  and  Gauls.

3  Lucan,  a  faithful  depositary  of  the  traditions  of  the  old  oligarchical
government,  dignifies  him  with  the  appellation  of  hostis,  or  foreign
foe  :  "  Ut  simili  causa  caderes  qua  Spartacus  hostis,"  ii.  554.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  47

porting  his  followers  into  Sicily,  and  there  reviving  CHAP.
the  embers  of  the  servile  war  which  had  recently
set  that  island  in  a  blaze.  A  fleet  of  Cilician  pirate
vessels  lay  off  Rhegium,  and  with  these  bitter
enemies  of  Rome  the  rebel  chief  negotiated  a
passage  across  the  straits.  But  they,  impolitic  no
less  than  faithless,  secured  the  stipulated  price,
and  sailed  away  without  performing  their  agree-
ment.1 Crassus  was  now  in  full  pursuit  of  the  in-
surgents, whom  he  drove  into  the  town  of  Rhegium,
and  there  blockaded.  By  a  skilful  manoeuvre
Spartacus  made  his  escape,  but  only  with  a  portion
of  his  forces ;  this,  however,  was  enough  to  terrify
the  Roman  general,  who  feared  that  the  enemy
would  outstrip  his  pursuit,  and  pounce  upon  Rome
itself  before  he  could  be  overtaken.  Anticipating
the  worst,  he  entreated  the  senate  to  recall  to  its
defence  Lucullus  from  Asia,  and  Pompeius  from
Spain  ;  again,  repenting  of  having  invited  his  rivals
to  share,  perhaps  to  rob  him  of  the  honours  of  the
war,  he  redoubled  his  efforts  to  bring  it  to  a  close
before  their  arrival.2  But  Spartacus  was  desti-
tute of  the  means  to  make  the  attack  upon  Rome
which  was  apprehended,  and  the  Italian  states
continued  immovable.  He  defended  himself  with
obstinate  bravery ;  but  after  alternate  victories  and
defeats,  was  slain  in  a  final  and  decisive  battle.
The  remnant  of  his  followers  was  exterminated  by
Pompeius,  who  arrived  in  time  to  put  the  finishing
stroke  to  the  war,  and  to  reap,  from  the  partiality

1  Plut.  Crass.  10.  2 App.  B.  C.  i.  120.

VOL.  I.  *» 8

48

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,
L

corruption
or  the  Ro.
man  go-

displayed
elections,

of  the  people,  a  disproportioned  share  in  the  glory
of  its  termination.  Crassus  lavished  upon  the
multitude  one-tenth  of  his  immense  wealth  ;  he
feasted  them  at  ten  thousand  tables,  and  fed  the
citizens  at  free  cost  for  three  months.1  But  Pom-
peius  alone  they  regarded  as  their  preserver  ;  in
him  they  centered  the  whole  of  their  gratitude  ;
and  it  was  only  through  his  assistance  that  Crassus
obtained  a  share  in  the  consulship.

The  frightful  corruption  of  the  Roman  govern-

. . L  ,. r ,1

ment  in  the  provinces  was  symptomatic  01  the
general  relaxation  of  public  morality  at  home.  On
turnmg  our  eves  to  tne  great  metropolis  from
whence  this  stream  of  profligacy  was  issuing,  we
find  every  act  of  its  senate,  its  comitia,  and  its
forum,  marked  with  the  same  stain  of  selfishness
and  venality.  The  senate  retained  with  a  con-
vulsive grasp  every  privilege  which  Sulla  had  won
for  it:  the  judicia,  or  tribunals  for  the  cogni-
zance of  political  impeachments,  appropriated  by
him  to  that  order,  were  shameless  alike  in  their
partiality  and  corruption.2  The  favour  of  the
people  was  sought  and  gained  by  profuse  lar-
gesses ;  the  means  of  seduction  allowed  by  law,
such  as  the  covert  bribery  of  shows  and  festivals,
were  used  openly  and  boldly  ;  while  others  which
were  expressly  interdicted,  such  as  the  direct

1  Plut.  Crass.  12.

2  Cicero  allows  that  the  venality  of  the  judices,  who  presided  at
the  qucBstiones  perpetuce,  cast  a  stigma  upon  the  whole  order  :  "  Totus
ordo  paucorum  improbitate  et  audacia  premitur,  et  urgetur  infamia
judiciorum." (i.  In  Verr.  12.) In  another  place,  warming  with  his
subject,  he  brands  the  judicia  of  the  senate  as  regia  dominatio. (n.  In
Verr.  v.  68.)

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  49

influence  of  money,  were  practised  not  less  lavishly  CHAP.
in  the  polling  booths,  where  the  restraint  of  the
ballot  was  worse  than  ineffectual.  Not  unfre-
quently  mere  violence  took  the  place  of  bribery :
disturbances  were  purposely  created ;  mobs  were
formed  and  drilled,  and  battles  ensued.  In  the
confusion  the  consuls  interfered,  and  broke  up  the
proceedings.  The  great  public  magistracies  were
left  vacant  for  whole  months,  from  the  impossibility
of  conducting  the  elections  with  even  a  show  of
legitimate  order.

It  has  already  been  shown  that  a  large  portion  Dissolute
of  the  urban population  whom the  nobles  thus
systematically  debauched,  were  no  better  than  a
needy  rabble,  dissolute  in  morals,  and  destitute  of
any  sense  of  national  honour. The  ready  market  the  ancient
offered  for  their  votes  was  attractive  to  the  lowest  Sious^pint
and  vilest  of  the  Italians, and  the  mob of  the  oftheR°-
comitia  was  swelled  by  the  worst  class  of  the  new  Moral  su-
citizens. Too  proud  to  work  where  labour  was  thTknights
the  mark  of  the  slave,  a  multitude  of  free  men,  senators
steeped  in  the  lowest  poverty,  found  a  bare  sub-  Growth  of

r  J  7  a  middle

sistence  in  their  idleness  from  this  annual  sale  of  class.
their  highest  privilege,  and  presented  ready  in-
struments for  any  political  adventurer  who  pro-
mised either  present  pay  or  prospective  rapine.
But  the  Romans  had  a  natural  genius  for  the  arts
by  which  money  is  made  and  accumulated.  The
cautious  and  frugal  habits  of  the  middle  orders  in  a
former  age  of  the  republic  still  survived  in  that  class
of  the  commonalty  to  which  the  equestrian  families
belonged,  who  had  always  formed  the  strength

VOL.  I.  E

50  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, of  the  Marian  party. This  was  the  class  which

had  suffered  most  in  the  civil  wars. It  had  been

decimated  and  almost  crushed  by  the  massacres
and  proscriptions  of  Sulla.  The  restoration,  how-
ever, of  domestic  peace  was  soon  followed  by  the
revival  of  its  fortunes.  The  nobility  struggled  in
vain  to  keep  it  in  the  state  of  depression  to  which  it
had  been  reduced.  Its  members,  too,  had  their
family  recollections.  Their  modest  patrimonies
gave  them  an  hereditary  interest  in  peace  and  order.
They  were  educated  and  intelligent,  and  knew  the
power  which  these  advantages  conferred.  The
making  of  money  was  their  first  object :  to  this
the  bent  of  their  dispositions  instinctively  impelled
them ;  and  the  circumstances  of  the  state,  over-
flowing with  the  wealth  poured  in  from  the  pro-
vinces, gave  them  a  great  advantage  over  their
rivals,  whose  political  necessities  required  them
year  by  year  to  scatter  their  fortunes  among  the
mob.  This  class  consisted,  1.  Of  those  who  at-
tached themselves  to  the  great  families,  and  hung
upon  their  favours  and  patronage,  whether  in  the
forum,  the  provinces,  or  the  camp:  2.  Of  those
who,  in  spite  of  the  ancient  prejudices  against  com-
merce, and  the  arts  and  sciences  of  polished
society ',  engaged  with  all  their  energy  in  those
lucrative  pursuits,  and  were  not  ashamed  of  minis-
tering to  the  growing  taste  for  luxury  and  refine-
ment :  3.  Of  the  government  officials,  a  class
hitherto  in  the  infancy  of  its  development,  but
one  which  the  gradual  progress  of  uniformity  and

1  Cic.  de  Off.  i.  42.,  in  Verr.  ii.  5.  18.;  Liv.  xxi.  63.:  "Quapstus
omnis  patribus  indecorus  visus."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  51

system  in  the  administration  was  slowly  raising  CHAP.
into  an  important  body.1  It  became  evident  to
the  clear-sighted  politician  that  this  was  the  order
in  which  the  real  strength  of  the  nation  lay,  and
that  it  was  this  monied  aristocracy  which  must
eventually  dispose  of  the  government.  An  honest
and  patriotic  statesman  might  hope  through  their
influence  to  place  the  commonwealth  upon  a  new
and  permanent  basis ;  the  merely  selfish  adven-
turer might  combine  with  him  to  advance  their
interests,  with  the  hope  of  forging  them  into  in-
struments for  his  own  ends.  The  course  of  this
history  will  show  how  the  principal  leaders  of
party  leaned  successively  upon  the  support  of  this
body,  and  how  important  was  the  part  it  played
in  the  conversion  of  the  republic  to  a  monar-
chical form  of  government.  The  rise  of  this
middle  class,  hostile  to  both  the  higher  and  lower,
and  resolved  to  control  them  equally,  was  the
chief  internal  element  in  that  mighty  revolution.
One  further  glance  at  the  provinces  will  reveal  to
us  a  second  parallel  force  co-operating  from  with-
out, and  destined  to  form  the  other  main  support
of  the  Imperial  Colossus.

The  legal  rights  of  the  Koman  citizen  were  of  Fiscal  im-

1  The  great  mass  of  official  writing  was  conducted  originally  by
slaves  or  freedmen  below  the  class  of  citizens.  Niebuhr,  Hist,  of
Rome,  iii.  299.  E.  T.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  unfortunate
institution  of  slavery  deprived  the  state  of  that  large  class  of  citizens,
of  moderate  tastes  and  conservative  tendencies,  who  contribute  so
much,  as  inferior  dependents  on  government,  to  the  stability  of
modern  polities.  But  the  superior  officers  and  chiefs  of  department
were,  at  least  in  the  later  periods  of  the  republic,  in  the  enjoyment
of  the  complete  franchise.

E 2

52  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, two  kinds,  social  and  political :  the  former  con-
L sisted  chiefly  in  certain  immunities  and  privileges
regarding  marriage,  inheritance, and  the  posses-
sion of  property ;  the  second  secured  his  person
from  the  disgrace  of  corporal  punishment, gave

the  pro.  him  an  appeal  from  the  decision  of  the  magistrates
comprehln-  to  the  people,  the  exercise  of  the  suffrage  and
eligibility  to  public  offices,  and  an  escape  from
sentence  of  death  by  voluntary  banishment.  In
later  times  another  immunity  was  acquired  by  it,
.  of  more  substantial,  at  least  of  more  universal,  in-
terest. The  reduction  of  Macedonia  by  Paulus
^Emilius,  in  the  year  585  of  the  city,  supplied  such
abundant  resources  to  the  treasury,  that  the  public
domains  in  the  occupation  of  Roman  proprietors
were  from  thenceforth  released  from  the  payment
of  the  land  tax l ;  and,  in  general,  the  indulgence
which  the  state  evinced  to  her  citizens,  as  regarded
their  public  contributions,  perpetuated  an  invidious
distinction  between  them  and  the  inferior  class  of
subjects.  Accordingly,  as  the  pressure  fell  more
and  more  upon  the  provinces,  the  anxiety  to  escape
from  it  became  proportionally  urgent.  At  the  same
time  this  anxiety  on  the  one  side  was  met  by  ample
reasons  of  policy  on  the  other.  The  diminution  of
the  free  population  of  Italy  was  the  most  notorious
evil  of  the  times  ;  and  it  was  viewed  with  the
greater  alarm,  as  the  extension  of  the  dominions

1  Cic.  de  Off.  ii.  22.  The  tax  was  reimposed  in  the  consulship  of
Hirtius  and  Pansa,  A.  u.  711.  (Plut.  JEmil.  38.);  but  this  seems  to
have  been  merely  a  temporary  expedient :  see  Bureau  de  la  Malle,
Econ.  Polit.  des  Romains,  1.  ii.  c.  9.  The  city  itself  and  the  whole
of  Italy  were  relieved  from  all  tolls  by  the  laws  of  Metellus  Nepos,  in
694.  Dion,  xxxvii.  51. ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  16.

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  53

of  the  state  rendered  the  permanent  augmentation CHAP.
of  her  armies  indispensable.1  .

The progressive enlightenment  of  the  Roman  Gradual  en-
statesmen caused the constant addition  of  new  ^^n^e.nt
names  to  the  roll  of  citizenship. Successful  gene-  ™ states*
rals  were  allowed  the  privilege  of  rewarding  their  Tendency
adherents  with  this  precious  boon. Fidelity  to  the  general
state  began  to  constitute  a  claim  to  its  immunities,  [Braces  of
which  was  more  graciously  conceded,  as  the  benefits  the  empire,
of  incorporation  were  more  sensibly  perceived. As
the  people  became  gradually  aware  that  the  great
revolution  of  the  Social  war  had  brought  with  it
more  good  and  less  evil  than  had  been  anticipated,
the  extension  of  the  rights  of  the  metropolis  to  the
distant  provinces  lost  the  character  of  an  incon-
sistency and  anomaly  in  the  constitution. Local
prejudices  died  away,  in  the  familiar  contemplation
of  the  vast  ness  of  the  empire  and  the  mutual  rela-
tionship of  its  several  members. The  mind  of  the
nation  expanded  to  the  conception  of  infusing  unity
of  sentiment  into  a  body,  which  was  wielded  by  a
single effort, and from  a  common centre. One
after  another there arose political crises, which
demanded  the  central  combination  of  all  the  powers
of  the  state  in  a  single  hand. The  success  of  each
experiment  became  an  argument  for  its  repetition,
till  the  idea  of  submission  to  the  permanent  rule
of  one  man  first  ceased  to  shock,  and  was  finally
hailed  with acclamation. The  monarchy  was  at

1  The  most  important  evidence  regarding  this  depopulation  of
Italy  may  be  found  at  the  beginning  of  Appian's  history  of  the  civil
war.  There  is  no  subject  on  which  there  is  such  a  complete  consent
of  the  original  authorities.  The  discussion  of  its  causes  and  effects  is
reserved  for  a  future  opportunity.

^  /i.4*$.  B  3

frjeP/*  )

54

HISTORY Oi? THE ROMANS

CHAP
I.

Anticipa- '
tions  of  a
new  era.
Contempo-
raneous
manifesta-
tion of
Christianity
and  mon-
archy. De-
velopment
of  the  idea
of  unity.
Its  con-
summation
in  the  poli-
tical esta-
blishment
of  Chris-
tianity.

first  veiled  under  the  old  republican  forms.  Gra-
dually the  veil  was  dropped.  Lastly,  the  theory  of
a  republic  was  dismissed  from  men's  minds,  and  fell
into  the  same  oblivion  into  which  its  real  forces  had
already  sunk.  Under  the  supremacy  of  a  single
ruler  all  varieties  of  class  became  merged  together ;
and  when  the  citizens  ceased  to  be  discriminated
among  one  another,  there  seemed  no  reason  for
maintaining  distinctions  between  the  constituent
races  of  which  the  empire  was  composed.

At  the  same  period  there  arose  in  various
quarters  of  the  world  mysterious  voices,  of  which
historians  have  repeated  the  echoes,  indicating  a
general  but  undefined  presentiment  that  an  age  of
social  or  moral  unity  was  approaching.1  The  East
was  roused  to  a  fervid  anticipation  of  the  advent  of
some  universal  conqueror  who  should  melt  all
mankind  into  a  crude,  inorganic  mass.  Accus-
tomed from  its  infancy  to  a  succession  of  mon-
archical dynasties,  it  was  uneasy  under  the  re-
publican organization  and  individual  development
which  followed  upon  the  Koman  conquest.  It
sighed  for  the  coming  of  another  Cyrus  or  Alex-
ander. But  these  sounds  found  a  responsive  chord
in  the  West  also.2  The  sublime  vaticinations  of
the  Virgilian  Sibyl,  bringing  the  predictions  of
the  Hebrew  prophets  home  to  the  breasts  of  the

1  See  the  well-known  passages  of  Suetonius  (Vesp.  4.)  and  Tacitus
(Hist.  v.  13.),  confirmed  by  Joseph  (B.  J.  vi.  5.  4.)  and  Zonaras  (xi.
16.)  referring  to  a  lost  book  of  Appian. Comp.  Philo,  de  Pram,  et
Pcen.  16.

2  Virg.  Eel  4. Comp.  Suet.  Aug.  94. ;  Yell.  ii.  59. ;  Senec.  An.
Nat.  i.  2.,  for  the  prodigies  and  predictions  which  regarded  the  future
empire  of  Augustus.

UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  55

Italians,  foreshadowed  a  reign  of  peace,  equality,  CHAP.
and  unity,  whether  under  a  political  or  a  moral
law.  At  last,  with  the  birth  of  the  monarchy,
there  sprang  up  the  gerrri  of  the  greatest  of  social
revolutions,  the  religion  of  Christ.  It  was  this
dispensation  which  seized  and  developed,  with
intuition  and  energy  truly  divine,  the  latent
yearnings  of  mankind  for  social  combination.  Its
essence,  from  a  human  point  of  view,  consisted  in
the  doctrine  of  the  fundamental  equality  of  men.
As  it  marched  along,  it  trod  under  foot  all  pre-
judices of  race  and  caste.  Persecution  might
check  the  growth  of  its  numbers,  but  only  made
its  principles  more  conspicuous ;  and  when  it
counted  its  converts  by  thousands,  its  unconscious
disciples  were  already  millions.  The  task  to  which
the  following  pages  are  devoted  is  that  of  tracing
the  expansion  of  the  Roman  nation,  together  with
the  development  of  the  ideas  of  unity  and  monarchy,
from  the  last  days  of  the  republic  to  the  era  of
Constantine.  We  commence  with  a  period  when
the  senate  still  fondly  imagined  that  the  govern-
ment of  the  world  was  the  destined  privilege  of  one
conquering  race,  that  its  life-source  was  enshrined
in  the  curia  of  Romulus  and  Camillus.  The  point
at  which  our  review  may  appropriately  terminate
is  the  day  when  the  civilized  world  received  its
laws  and  religion  from  the  mouth  of  an  autocrat,
whose  sole  will  transferred  the  seat  of  empire
without  a  shock  from  the  sacred  circle  of  the
seven  hills  to  a  village  on  the  Bosporus.

VOL.  I.  *B 4

56  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  II.

POSITION  AND  POLICY  OP  THE  OLIGARCHY  OR  SENATORIAL
PARTY.  —  CHARACTER  OF  ITS  PRINCIPAL  LEADERS  :  CATULUS,
LUCULLUS,  CRASSUS  :  POMPEIUS,  THE  FAVOURITE  OF  THE
SENATE  :  HIS  PRE-EMINENT  POSITION  :  HE  INTRODUCES  RE-
FORMS, AND  COUNTENANCES  THE  CLAIMS  OF  THE  KNIGHTS:

RETAINS THE ADVOCACY  OF CICERO ELEVATION OF CICERO

TO THE CONSULSHIP. CONSPIRACY OF CAT1LINA.  —  CICERO'S

SERVICES TO THE OLIGARCHY. THEIR CONTEMPT FOR HIM,

AND JEALOUSY OF POMPEIUS.  —  INFLUENCE OF CATO.

GENERAL IMBECILITY OF THE NOBLES. CHARACTER AND

PRETENSIONS  OF  THE POPULAR  OR  MARIAN PARTY CRITICAL

POSITION OF THE OLIGARCHY.

CHAP. THE  loss  of  its  great  champion, Sulla,  left  the
oligarchy  without any  acknowledged  leader. It

may  be  supposed  that  the  haughty  nobles  were  not
oligarchy  of  displeased  at  being  released  from  the  domination
Bome.  o£  a  military  chieftain,  and  that,  as  long  as  they
could  maintain  their  ascendancy  without  one,  they
would  be  little  disposed  to  submit  to  a  second.
It  was  difficult  indeed  among  a  body  so  illustrious
for  wealth  and  family  honours,  and  so  well  trained
to  public  affairs,  to  select  an  individual  by  the  in-
fluence of  whose  name  and  character  the  rest
would  be  content  to  be  guided.1  If  we  would
form  to  ourselves  an  idea  of  what  was  the

1  The  nobility  of  Rome  had  universally  more  or  less  of  a  military
education  ;  they  were  hereditary  jurisconsults,  and  were  for  the  most
part  early  initiated  into  the  conduct  of  public  affairs.  The  author  of
the  treatise  De  Corrupt.  Eloq.  says  of  them,  "  Ex  his  intelligi  potest,
Cn.  Pompeium  et  M.  Crassum  non  viribus  modo  et  armis,  sed  ingenio
quoque  et  oratione  valuisse;  Lentulos  et  Metellos  et  Lucullos  et

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  57

number  of  the  nobility  of  Rome,  and  upon  what  CHAP.
their  influence  rested,  we  must  go  back  for  a
moment  to  the  origin  of  the  patrician  houses,  and
their  subdivision  into  families.  In  the  earliest
form  of  the  constitution,  the  patres  were  divided
into  three  tribes,  thirty  curies,  and  three  hundred
gentes  or  houses.  The  members  of  these  latter
were  connected  among  themselves  by  identity  of
name  and  community  of  religious  rites ;  whether
they  were  descended  originally  from  a  single  stock
respectively,  is  a  question  upon  which  we  need
not  enter.  At  all  events,  we  may  be  assured  that
any  idea  of  blood-connexion  was  forgotten  from  an
early  period ;  that  the  gens  was  replenished  and
increased  by  the  introduction  sometimes  of  clients,
sometimes  of  foreigners,  so  that  its  original  patri-
cian element  might  in  time  be  completely  absorbed
in  the  plebeian  admixture ;  that  some  houses  lost
their  patrician  status  by  the  poverty  of  their
members,  or  the  effect  of  marriages  of  disparage-
ment ;  and  that,  from  whatever  cause,  the  number
of  the  oldest  houses  had  fallen  off  so  considerably,
that  in  the  time  of  Augustus  it  was  reduced  to  not
more  than  fifty.1  Those  among  them,  however,
that  flourished,  spread  into  many  families  bearing
the  same  name,  such  as  the  Cornelii  and  JEmilii,

Curiones,  et  cseteram  procerum  manum,  multum  in  his  studiis  operae
curseque  posuisse  ;  nee  quenquam  illis  temporibus  magnam  potentiam
sine  eloquentia  consecutum."

1  Dionys.  Ant.  Bom.  i.  85. :  'Iicavov  fe  xal  r6  airo  rov  icpariarov
jVMpi/jioVj  £«  tie  rov  Tpuiiicov  TO  tvytvkararov  ty  vofJuZoptvov,  t%  o$  Kal
ytvtai  rivtQ  In  TTfpifjaav  a'g  «/*£  Trtvrf]Kovra  juciXiffra  ol/coi.  This  claim  to
Trojan  descent  was  of  course  a  mere  affectation;  but  it  would  not
have  been  conceded  by  popular  opinion  except  to  families  of  real
antiquity,  such  as  the  Julii,  Sergii,  and  others.

58  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  which  were  distinguished  one  from  another  by  the
cognomen  only.  Thus  among  the  Cornelii  there
were  Scipios,  Sullas,  and  Lentuli ;  while  the  ^Emilii
bore  the  names  of  Lepidus,  Scaurus  or  Paullus.
The  plebeian  houses  were  established  on  the  same
principle,  and  were  from  an  early  period  consider-
ably more  numerous.  The  nobility  consisted  pro-
perly of  all  who  were,  in  legal  phrase,  ennobled
by  their  ancestors  having  served  the  curule  magis-
tracies.1 All  such  were  entitled  to  a  seat  in  the
senate  by  the  appointment  of  the  censors.  The
number  of  this  body  amounted  perhaps  to  five
hundred  in  the  time  of  Cicero2 ;  and  the  election
which  had  been  made  by  Sulla  had  weeded  out  all
those  whose  poverty  rendered  them  unfit  to  hold  a
place  in  an  oligarchy,  the  influence  of  which  de-
pended, in  a  great  degree,  on  the  wealth  of  its
individual  members.  The  party  which  attached
itself  to  the  senate  was  no  doubt  considerably
more  numerous,  and  comprised  a  large  portion  of
the  knights,  who  were  bound  to  that  body  in  many
respects  by  community  of  interest.  It  was  sup-
ported also  by  a  numerous  class  of  clients  both  in
Rome  and  throughout  the  provinces ;  even  where
the  old  social  feelings  attached  to  that  kind  of
connexion  were  forgotten,  there  were  still  sub-

1  The  curule  magistracies  were  those  of  the  consul,  praetor,  aedile,
and  censor ;  also  of  the  dictator  and  the  master  of  the  horse.

2  This  may  be  inferred  from  two  passages  in  Cicero's  works. In  a
letter  to  Atticus  (i.  14.)  he  speaks  of  a  division  in  a  very  full  assem-
blage of  the  senate,  when  there  appeared  four  hundred  on  one  side  and
fifteen  on  the  other. On  another  occasion,  referred  to  in  the  speech
post  Red.  in  Senat.  10.,  the  house  was  extremely  full,  and  four  hun-
dred and  seventeen  were  present. Allowance  must  be  made  for  the
number  of  those  who  were  engaged  in  the  provincial  administration.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  59

stantial  advantages  appertaining  to  it,  which  made  CHAP.
it  difficult  to  be  shaken  off.  Whole  cities  and  states
sometimes  put  themselves  under  the  protection  of
a  senatorial  patron.  A  more  direct  bulwark  of  the
oligarchy  was  the  army  of  above  one  hundred
thousand  veterans  whom  Sulla  had  settled  in  Italy,
who  were  well  aware  how  insecure  was  the  tenure
on  which  they  held  their  newly-acquired  pos-
sessions, and  were  bound  by  every  motive  to  the
cause  of  the  aristocracy.

The  consuls  for  the  year  676  of  the  city,  in  which  Leaders  of
Sulla  died,  were  M.  jEmilius  Lepidus  and  Q.  Luta-  garchy .
tius  Catulus.  The  ^Emilian  house  was  divided  into  Catulus>
a  patrician  and  a  plebeian  branch ;  but  the  blood  of
either  was  among  the  noblest  in  Rome,  and  there
were  few  houses  that  numbered  more  distinguished
names  in  their  annals,  or  were  adorned  with  more
trophies  of  family  pride.  Lepidus,  we  have  seen,
aspired  to  be  a  second  Sulla ;  but  he  had  no  hope
that  the  nobility  would  put  him  forward  above  all
the  rest  of  his  class,  and  his  only  resource  lay  in
appealing  to  the  passions  of  the  Marians  and
Italians,  in  raising  the  flames  of  civil  war,  and
placing  himself  at  the  head  of  a  military  faction.
His  colleague,  Catulus,  on  the  other  hand,  was  the
most  moderate  and  disinterested  of  all  the  great
men  of  his  day ;  indeed,  there  is  perhaps  no  cha-
racter in  the  history  of  the  commonwealth  which
commanded  more  general  esteem,  or  obtained  more
blameless  distinction  in  political  life.  We  have  no
evidence  that  his  talents  were  of  the  highest  order,
Except  in  crushing  the  feeble  movement  of  Lepidus,
he  performed  no  military  exploit.  Nor  was  his

60  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  eloquence  of  the  character  qualified  to  sway  the
'  turbulent  democracy  of  the  Forura,  or  unravel  the
crafty  intrigues  of  the  Senate.  But  he  proved  him-
self useful  to  his  country  in  throwing  the  weight  of
his  reputation  into  the  scale  of  justice  and  the  con-
stitution, and  in  supporting  more  ardent  and  enter-
prising men  in  the  cause  which  he  deemed  the
best.  He  declaimed  openly  against  the  corruption
of  the  tribunals  and  the  spoliation  of  the  provinces.1
He  was  the  firm  advocate  of  the  extension  of  the
judicia  to  the  knights  and  of  the  restoration  of
their  powers  to  the  tribunes,  though  both  these
measures  were  opposed  to  the  immediate  interests
of  the  nobles ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  combated
the  bills  of  Gabinius  and  Manilius  for  conferring
extraordinary  and  dangerous  powers  on  Pompeius.
He  lent  all  his  influence  also  to  strengthen  the
hands  of  Cicero  against  Catilina  and  his  open  or
concealed  adherents.  The  people  offered  a  marked
testimony  to  their  sense  of  his  merits  when,  in
opposing  the  Gabinian  Law,  he  asked,  "  If  we  place
such  extraordinary  powers  in  the  hands  of  one
man,  to  whom  shall  we  look  to  save  us  if  he
perish  ?"  with  one  accord  the  multitude  ex-
claimed, that  their  resource  should  be  in  Catulus
himself.2  Accordingly,  he  enjoyed  for  many  years
the  prindpatus,  or  primacy  of  the  senate,  the  most
honourable  title  in  the  commonwealth,  which  fell
into  desuetude  upon  his  death,  and  was  only  re-
vived, after  the  expiration  of  liberty,  to  swell  the
dignities  and  privileges  of  Augustus.3

1  Cic.  in  Verr.  i.  15.  2  Cic.  pro  Leg.  Man.  20.

3  See  the  essay  of  De  la  Bleterie,  Mem.  de  TAcad.  des  Inscr.  t.  xxiv.
p.  261.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  61

L.  Licinius  Lucullus  was  another  noble,  of  high  CHAP.
character  and  immense  wealth,  whose  military  ex-
ploits evinced  talents  for  command,  while  his  ad-  Lucuiius
ministrative  powers  were  still  more  conspicuous.
But,  though  ambitious  of  distinctions,  he  wanted
energy  to  devote  himself  to  public  business,  and  to  .
court  popularity  with  a  jealous  and  exacting  party.
His  reforms  in  the  government  of  the  provinces  in
Asia  must  have  been  unpalatable  to  the  senate,
and  it  requited  the  grudge  by  seizing  an  oppor-
tunity to  remove  him  from  his  command  in  the
East.  He  is  accused  of  avarice  ;  and  it  may  give
some  colour  to  the  charge,  that  he  condescended  to
accept  another  appointment  in  Thrace,  instead  of
returning  at  once  and  asserting  his  natural  position
in  Rome.  When  he  did  return,  it  was  rather  to
enjoy  his  wealth  in  ostentatious  ease  than  to  enter
into  the  current  of  public  affairs.1  He  may,  per-
haps, be  ranked  next  to  Catulus,  though  at  a  long
interval,  for  the  real  purity  and  patriotism  of  his
motives,  qualities  so  rare  at  that  period.  But  he
had  neither  strength  of  character  nor  unscrupu-
lousness  enough  to  control  the  fiendish  passions
and  headlong  venality  of  a  Roman  faction.

Again,  in  the  general  mediocrity  of  talent  among  crassus.
the  highest  nobility,  a  distinguished  place  was  oc-
cupied by  M.  Licinius  Crassus.  He  may  be  re-
marked as  a  genuine  representative  of  one  side  of
the  old  Roman  character,  which  has  been  already
referred  to;  namely,  their  shrewdness  and  sordid
diligence  in  the  accumulation  of  money,  which
made  so  many  of  the  national  heroes  strict  domestic

1  Plut.  Lucull  38.

62  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  economists,  sullied  such  illustrious  names  with  the
stain  of  usury  and  extortion,  and  impelled  so  many
thousands  of  a  lower  class  to  establish  themselves
as  traders  on  every  coast,  and  incessantly  repair
the  destruction  of  their  countrymen  in  the  pro-
vinces. Crassus  was  descended  from  a  branch  of
the  Licinian  family,  to  which  the  surname  of
Dives1,  or  the  Kich,  had  been  attached,  from  the
excessive  wealth  of  some  of  its  members.  But
there  was  none  of  the  race  to  whom  the  title  was
so  justly  applicable  as  to  the  contemporary  of  Ca-
tulus  and  Lucullus.  His  name  became  proverbial
among  his  countrymen  as  the  richest  of  the  Romans2,
and  the  head  grows  dizzy  in  estimating  his  trea-
sures in  the  minute  coinage  of  the  nation.3  The
wealth,  indeed,  which  he  amassed  sinks,  after  all,
into  insignificance  when  compared  with  some  of
the  fortunes  of  later  times ;  but  it  is  to  be  re-
membered, that  his  position  compelled  him  to
spend  almost  as  fast  as  he  accumulated,  and  there
seems  to  have  been  no  want  of  liberality  in  his
mode  of  dispensing  his  treasures  when  his  interest
required  it.  But  what  is  chiefly  remarkable  is,
that  his  acquisitions  were  made,  not  by  brilliant

1  Cic.  de  Off.  ii.  16.,  of  the  father  of  M.  Crassus,  "P.  Crassus,  cogr
nomine  Dives."

2  Comp. Cic. ad  Att.  i.  4., de  Fin.  iii.  22.; Sallust. B.  C.  48.;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii.  47. ;  Plut.  in  Crass.  Cces. ;  Tertull.  Apolog.  11.

3  His  father's  estates  had  been  confiscated  by  the  Marians,  and  Plu-
tarch {Crass.  2.)  states  that  he  possessed  at  first  only  300  talents. Be-
fore setting  out  on  his  expedition  to  Parthia  he  estimated  his  substance
at  7000. Pliny  (H.  N.  1.  c.)  gives  the  sum  of  200,000,000  sesterces,
which  make  above  8300  talents. The  talent  is  equal  in  weight  of
silver  to  about  200Z.  of  our  money. It  seems  uncertain  whether  these
sums  are  meant  to  include  the  capital  invested  in  slaves,  houses,  and
lands.

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  63

successes  or  glaring  extortions,  but  simply  by  the  CHAP.
sure  and  steady  process  of  waiting  upon  the  neces-
sities of  his  friends  or  rivals1,  of  buying  at  the
cheapest  and  selling  at  the  dearest  moments ;  by
the  careful  and  judicious  use  of  accumulating  ca-
pital, such  as  laying  out  large  sums  on  the  edu-
cation of  a  multitude  of  slaves,  with  the  view  of
deriving  a  profit  from  their  accomplishments.  In
the  disordered  state  of  private  fortunes  at  Eome  at
the  time,  we  may  conceive  how  a  shrewd  politician
might  in  this  way  attach  to  himself  a  number  of
adherents,  especially  one  who  had  no  prominent
vices  to  disgust,  or  brilliant  talents  to  alarm  them.
Around  him  rallied  the  monied  interests  of  the
city ;  that  large  class  who  were  silently  and  cau-
tiously founding  fortunes  on  the  spoils  of  the  pro-
vinces, while  the  great  chiefs  were  squandering
their  means  in  largesses  to  the  people,  and  wasting
their  time  and  energies  in  the  race  of  preferment.
He  repaid  their  favour  by  exerting  himself  for
their  advancement,  and  combined  with  Pompeius
to  restore  to  the  knights  a  share  in  the  judicia ;
but,  without  yet  aspiring  to  the  leadership  of  the
oligarchy,  he  contrived  to  secure  a  large  portion  of
their  confidence,  and  was,  in  fact,  the  principal
link  which  continued  to  bind  the  senate  and  the
knights  together,  notwithstanding  their  mutual
jealousy  and  sometimes  conflicting  pretensions.

However  conscious  the  nobles  might  be  that  their
privileges  demanded  the  fostering  protection  of  the

1  Plut.  Crass.  2. :  Tat£  KOIVOIQ  drvxiaiQ  Trpoaody  rfj  ptyiarp  ^ptjcrdfjifvog.
Some  curious  modes  in  which  he  made  his  money  are  there  men-
tioned.

64  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  most  able  and  successful  general  of  his  time,  it  was
'  not  without  distrust  and  reluctance  that  they  con-
sented to  court  the  favour  of  Cnaeus  Pompeius.
This  illustrious  personage  was  the  son  of  Pom-
peius Strabo,  a  noted  captain  in  the  previous  civil
wars.  The  name  of  the  father  was  associated  with
many  of  the  greatest  enormities  of  that  frightful
period.  Though  commanding  in  the  name  of  the
senate,  he  had  been  the  object  of  its  dislike  and
suspicion ;  and  the  pertinacity  with  which  he  fol-
lowed his  own  plans,  independent  of  its  direction,
had  marked  him  as  one  who  possibly  aspired  to
usurp  at  some  fitting  season  authority  over  both
parties  in  the  state.  Bred  up  under  the  auspices
of  such  a  parent,  and  familiarized  from  his  child-
hood with  the  licentious  sentiments  of  an  am-
bitious soldiery,  it  would  seem  that  schemes  of
this  kind  were  fermenting  in  the  head  of  the
younger  Pompeius  from  his  early  years.  Sulla
divined  and  distrusted  him ;  but  his  followers
were  powerful,  his  predilections  ostensibly  oligar-
chical ;  every  enterprise  he  undertook  was  crowned
with  extraordinary  success  ;  and  when  at  the  age
of  twenty-four  he  returned  victorious  from  his
campaign  in  Africa  against  the  remnant  of  the
Marians  and  their  Numidian  allies1,  the  dictator
hailed  him  with  the  appellation  of  Magnus2,  and
reluctantly  allowed  him  the  honour  of  a  triumph
unexampled  in  so  youthful  a  conqueror.  He

1  Liv.  Epit.  Ixxxix. ;  Eutrop.  v.  9.

2  The  occasion  upon  which  this  celebrated  title  was  conferred  has
been  the subject  of  much  discussion. Drumann (iv.  335.),  after
weighing  the  various  conflicting  authorities,  acquiesces  in  the  state-
ment of  Plutarch  (Pomp.  13.),  which  is  followed  in  the  text.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  65

soon  requited  this  favour  by  uniting  with  Catu-  CHAP.
lus  to  repress  the  insurrection  of  Lepidus.  He
was  not  yet  of  sufficient  standing  to  enter  upon
the  career  of  civic  honours,  when  the  successes  of
Sertorius  demanded  the  employment  of  his  mili-
tary talents  in  the  Spanish  war.  There,  as  we
have  seen,  his  final  victory  was  achieved  rather
through  the  treachery  of  Perperna  than  by  his
own  prowess ;  the  grateful  senate,  however,  did
not  scrutinize  his  merits  too  closely,  but  rewarded
him  with  a  second  triumph,  and  confided  to  him,
as  its  most  zealous  champion,  the  execution  of  its
policy.  Nevertheless,  while  it  was  their  interest
thus  to  flatter  and  caress  him,  the  nobles  looked  with
much  disdain  upon  his  municipal  extraction  and
his  plebeian  descent,  unennobled  by  great  family
honours.  He  was  not  suffered  to  forget  that  he
was  in  fact  but  little  removed  from  the  despised
condition  of  a  New  Man,  and  that  the  real  basis  of
his  fortunes  must  rest  on  his  personal  abilities,  not
on  the  love  or  sympathy  of  the  dominant  party.
He  saw,  moreover,  the  fact,  to  which  that  party
obstinately  blinded  itself,  that  its  foundations  were
too  narrow  for  the  permanent  maintenance  of  its
power.  He  felt  his  own  strength,  and  chose  with
decision  the  policy  which  he  maintained  consistently
through  the  greater  part  of  his  career,  as  long,
perhaps,  as  circumstances  allowed  him  to  choose
his  own  course ;  namely,  that  of  raising  up  a  middle
class  to  be  the  bulwark  of  the  nobility  and  of  the
state  itself  against  the  turbulence  of  the  rabble
and  the  disaffection  of  the  provinces.  With  this
view,  he  did  not  hesitate  to  place  himself  in  direct

VOL. I.  F

66

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
II.

Pompeius
undertakes
a  reform  in
favour  of
the  eques-
trian order.
Prosecution
of  Verres.

opposition  to  the  wishes  of  the  nobility  on  points
which  they  considered  vital  to  their  interests.
Such,  especially,  was  the  great  measure  of  raising
the  knights  to  their  former  share  in  the  judicia,
which  was  necessary  to  elevate  the  position  and
enhance  the  estimation  of  that  important  order;
and  not  less  so  to  relieve  the  nobles  themselves
from  the  burden  of  general  odium  which  was
threatening  to  overwhelm  them.  Nor,  at  the  same
time,  did  he  fail  to  observe  that  in  carrying  out
this  policy  he  was  gradually  removing  the  super-
structure of  his  fortunes  from  the  basis  of  the
aristocracy  generally  to  that  of  his  own  personal
adherents,  and  shifting  his  ground  to  a  position  in
which  he  might  be  entirely  independent  of  the
senate.

The  restoration  of  the  tribunitian  prerogatives
and  the  judicia  were  kindred  and  connected  mea-
sures. In  his  first  harangue  after  his  election
to  the  consulship,  Pompeius  promised  to  effect
both1,  and  his  declaration  was  received  by  the
people  with  the  loudest  acclamations.  But  the
nobles  resisted  with  desperation,  notwithstanding
the  counsels  of  the  illustrious  Catulus  and  the
wisest  men  among  them.  It  was  necessary  to
daunt  their  courage  by  a  signal  exposure,  and
the  notorious  guilt  of  Verres,  who  had  just  re-
turned from  exercising  the  praetorship  in  Sicily,
furnished  an  occasion.  The  zeal  and  eloquence

1  Pompeius  and  Crassus  were  consuls  A.U.  684,  B.  c.  70.  Pseudo-
Ascon.  in  Cic.  Divin.  8. :  "  Primus  Sicinius,  trib.  plebis,  nee  multo
post  Quintius,  et  postremo  Palicanus  perfecerant,  lit  trib.  potestatem
populo  darent  consules  Cn.  Pompeius  Magnus,  et  M.  Licinius  Crassus."
Cf.  Liv.  Epit.  xcvii. ;  Veil.  ii.  30. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  22.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  67

of  Cicero  were  enlisted  on  the  side  of  justice  CHAR
and  substantial  power,  and  the  successful  issue
of  the  prosecution  clothed  the  cause  of  the  people
with  irresistible  moral  influence.  The  criminal
had  boasted  that  the  fruits  of  his  three  years'
occupation  of  office  would  be  sufficient,  those  of
the  first  to  make  his  own  fortune,  those  of  the  se-
cond to  reward  his  advocates  and  partizans,  those
of  the  last,  and  most  abundant,  to  secure  the
suffrages  of  his  judges.  No  wonder  that  Cicero
ventured  to  express  his  expectation  that  the  pro-
vinces would  soon  come  forward  of  their  own
accord,  and  pray  for  the  repeal  of  the  laws  against
malversation,  since  they  only  served  to  redouble
the  extortions  of  their  oppressors  to  ensure  the
means  of  corrupting  the  tribunals.1  During  the
forty  years,  he  adds,  that  the  knights  had  served
on  the  bench  of  justice,  there  had  not  been  a
single  instance  even  of  the  suspicion  of  corruption2;
it  had  now  become  the  rule  rather  than  the  ex-
ception. But  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  change
which  was  now  about  to  take  place  failed  to
restore  any  such  golden  age  of  judicial  purity.

It  was  not  to  be  expected,  however,  under  the
circumstances,  where  the  judges  were  so  deeply
interested  in  the  impunity  of  members  of  their
own  order,  whose  turn  it  might  be  next  day  to
decide  upon  accusations  against  themselves,  that

many  instances  would  occur of  criminals being

knights.

1  Cic.  i.  inVerr.  13—15.

2  Pseudo-Ascon.  in  Divin. 8. : "  C. Gracchus  legem  tulerat,  ut
equites  Rom.  judicarent. Judicaverunt  per  annos  quadraginta  sine
infamia." See  above,  p.  20.  note  2. But  Appian  allows  that  the
knights  were  no  better  than  the  senators  (B.  C.  i.  22.).

F 2

68  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  brought  to  the  bar  of  justice.  Notorious  as  was
'  the  guilt  of  numbers,  as  regarded  their  conduct
both  towards  the  provinces  and  the  allies,  we  hear
of  only  three  cases  of  trial  for  malversation  before
this  of  Yerres,  those,  namely,  of  the  two  Dolabellas,
governors  of  Macedonia  and  Cilicia,  and  of  C.
Antonius,  proconsul  of  Greece.  But  in  the  present
instance,  it  is  clear  that  the  hands  of  the  prose-
cutor were  strengthened  by  the  determination  of
the  government  to  bring  the  question  to  an  issue,
both  the  consuls,  Pompeius  and  Crassus,  being
equally  intent  on  carrying  so  popular  a  measure.
The  criminal  resorted  to  every  possible  means  to
postpone  the  trial  till  the  next  year,  when  one  of
his  private  friends,  Hortensius,  would  be  consul,
and  another,  Metellus,  the  praetor  to  whose  lot  it
had  fallen  to  preside  in  such  causes  as  that  which
was  now  impending.1  But  the  activity  and  dex-
terity of  Cicero  defeated  every  artifice,  and  the
preliminary  oration,  with  which  he  opened  the
proceedings,  revealed  the  general  features  of  so
frightful  a  system,  that  defence  was  at  once  aban-
doned as  hopeless.  Verres  fled  from  judgment,
self-banished ;  but  the  accuser  followed  up  his
success  by  publishing  the  series  of  speeches  which
he  had  prepared  for  delivery,  in  which  he  gives  in
detail  the  whole  catalogue  of  his  victim's  enor-
mities. The  disgrace  of  these  disclosures  could
neither  be  evaded  nor  palliated;  the  system  ad-
mitted of  no  defence ;  and  the  senate  resigned  its
contest  with  the  government,  which  promised  to

1  Cic.  i.  in  Verr. 8. : "  Cum  pratores  designati sortirentur,  et
M.  Metello  obtigisset  ut  is  de  pecuniis  repetundis  quaereret."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  69

amend  it.  But  it  is  exceedingly  doubtful  whether  CHAP.
its  vices  were  really  checked  by  the  alteration
which  was  made  in  the  constitution  of  the  tri-
bunals. From  the  subsequent  conduct  of  Pompeius
with  regard  to  the  reforms  of  Lucullus  in  Asia,
and  from  the  general  character  of  his  colleague,  we
can  hardly  indulge  in  the  idea  that  they  took  any
genuine  interest  in  the  cause  of  honour  and  justice ;
and  as  for  Cicero,  we  find  him,  the  very  next  year,
defending  Fonteius  against  the  complaints  of  the
provincials  of  Gaul,  with  a  recklessness  of  lan-
guage and  indifference  to  the  merits  of  the  case  far
exceeding  the  licence  of  a  hired  advocate.  But
the  knights  gained  by  these  enactments  an  im-
portant step  in  political  advancement,  and  the
middle  class  began  to  coalesce  into  a  firm  and
compact  body,  conscious  of  its  unity  and  strength.

At  the  same  time,  the  generous  assistance  of  Progress  of
Catulus,  and  others  among  the  nobles,  enabled  the  vivai^f  the"
consuls  to  effect  a  further  measure  of  public  bene-  censorshiP-
fit. They  revived  the  oifice  of  censor,  after  a  long
interval  in  which  it  had  lain  in  abeyance1;  and  the
magistrates  appointed  thereto,  L.  Gellius  Publicola
and  On.  Cornelius  Lentulus,  undertook  their  func-
tions in  the  spirit  of  better  times. They  assigned
to  Catulus  the  distinguished  post  of  princeps,  or
leader,  of  the  senate. They  made  also  a  rigid  in-
quiry into the means and  qualifications of  the
members  of  that  body,  of  whom  they  ejected  no
less  than  sixty-four,  as  either  unworthy  from  their
character,  or  incompetent  from  their  fortunes,  to
discharge  the  duties  of  the  order  according  to  the

1  Cic.  ii.  in  Verr.  v.  7. ;  comp.  Liv.  Epit.  xcviii. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  22.

F 3

70  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  intentions  of  antiquity.  These  public  acts  are
'  important  as  showing  the  temper  of  the  times,  and
the  growing  sense  of  the  necessity  for  adminis-
trative reforms  ;  they  also  throw  much  light  upon
the  cautious  and  quiet  policy  which  characterized
Pompeius,  who  threw  all  his  influence  into  the
descending  scale  of  popular  opinion.

Reserve  af- Upon  the  expiration  of  his  consulship,  Pompeius
did  n°t  accept,  as  was  usual,  the  government  of

Extraordi- a  province. He  had  already  attained  the  highest

nary  powers "  J  c

thrust  upon .  ordinary  honours  of  the  state,  and,  pure  as  he  was
Gabinian  e  in  his  private  conduct  and  moderate  in  his  habits,
nan  bins.1"  *'ne  emoluments  of  the  proconsulate  offered  no
temptation  to  him.  The  overweening  confidence
which  he  entertained  in  the  reputation  he  had
already  acquired  forbade  him  to  conceive  any
jealousy  of  Lucullus,  Metellus,  and  the  other  com-
manders in  the  provinces.  He  remained  therefore
at  Rome,  affecting  the  reserve  and  retirement  of
one  who  would  only  condescend  henceforward  to
serve  the  state  in  great  emergencies ;  but  he  well
knew  that  the  increasing  dangers  of  the  common-
wealth must  soon  call  him  forth  amidst  tenfold
acclamations.  When  Gabinius,  taking  advantage
of  the  general  panic  caused  by  the  Cilician  pirates,
proposed  to  confer  upon  him  extraordinary  powers,
to  invest  him  with  command  over  the  whole  of  the
Mediterranean  coasts1,  and  every  city  and  district
within  fifty  miles  inland,  the  senate  stood  aghast.
But  the  cause  was  not  that  of  the  senate  and  the
nobles  only.  The  whole  empire  was  frenzied  with

1  Cic.  pro  Leg.  Manil. ;  Dion,  xxxvi.  6. ;  Veil.  ii.  31. ;  Liv.  Epit.
xcix,,  A.  u.  687,  B.  c.  67.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  71

alarm,  and  ready  to  rush  upon  any  remedy  that  CHAP.
offered  itself.  The  city  trembled  for  its  daily  sus-
tenance ;  the  government  apprehended  the  violence
of  a  starving  mob.  In  spite  of  the  strong  dissuasions
of  Catulus  and  others,  the  appointment  of  Pornpeius
to  this  enormous  command  was  carried  by  the  gene-
ral voice  of  the  nation.  The  skill  and  vigour  with
which  he  conducted  himself,  the  universal  confi-
dence which  he  immediately  restored,  the  rapid  influx
of  provisions  into  the  capital,  all  seemed  to  justify
the  wisdom  of  the  measure.  Having  taken  a  short
time  to  make  his  dispositions,  divide  his  forces,
and  secure  the  most  important  communications,
Pompeius  set  sail  with  a  well-appointed  fleet  for
the  principal  resort  of  his  roving  enemies.  In
two  months  the  wound  was  staunched,  in  six  it
was  healed  over1,  by  the  establishment  of  the
offending  marauders  in  continental  colonies :  health
and  strength  returned  in  the  natural  order  of
events.  The  danger  of  the  return  to  Rome  in  a
private  capacity  of  one  who  had  now  tasted  so
much  of  absolute  power  was  again  staved  off  by
the  increasing  difficulties  of  the  Mithridatic  war.
Lucullus  was  recalled,  and  another  bill  was  in-
troduced by  Manilius,  to  confer  upon  the  great
champion  of  the  republic  the  command  of  the
whole  of  the  eastern  provinces.2  Again  the  nobles

1  Cic.  pro  Leg.  Manil.  12. : "  Tantum  bellum.  .  .  .  Cn.  Pompeius
extrema  hieme  apparavit,  ineunte  vere  suscepit,  media  aestate  con-
fecit." Comp.  Plut.  Pomp.  28. : OVK  iv  -jrXuovi  xpov^ rpidSv  firjvwv.
Liv.  Epit.  xcix. ;  Florus,  iii.  6.,  and  the  Auctor  de  Vir.  Illustr.  p.  77.
shorten  the  time  to  forty  days.

2  A.  u.  688,  B.  c.  66. Cic.  pro  Leg.  Manil. ;  Veil.  ii.  33. ; Dion,
xxxvi.  25. ;  Liv.  Epit.  c. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  30.

F 4

72  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  were  terrified  at  the  power  they  had  called  into
'  existence ;  again  did  Catulus  and  others,  the  wise
and  prudent  of  their  party,  resist  this  accumulation
of  honours.  Pompeius  was  supported  by  the
general  voice  of  the  people;  by  the  intrigues  of  all
his  friends  and  adherents  in  the  senate ;  by  Crassus
and  Caesar,  who  looked  with  favour  upon  these
deviations  from  the  principles  of  the  constitution ;
and  he  might  command  the  spirited  eloquence  of
Cicero,'  who,  now  rising  rapidly  into  public  notice,
'resolved  at  once  to  throw  his  fortunes  into  the  wake
of  the  great  conqueror's.

Cicero.  The  merit  of  striking  out  the  only  available  line

of  policy  for  maintaining  the  ascendancy  of  the
old  Roman  families  is  due  to  Pompeius ;  but  the
development  which  the  industry  and  sagacity  of
Cicero  gave  to  these  views  seems  to  mark  him
out  especially  as  their  patron  and  representative.
Every  circumstance  combined  to  dispose  him  to
assume  the  position  of  a  moderate  champion  of
the  aristocracy.  As  a  New  Man,  the  offspring  of
an  equestrian  family  in  the  obscure  municipium
of  Arpinurn,  he  was  an  object  of  jealousy  to  the
nobles,  who  had  never  allowed  one  of  his  class
to  ascend  to  the  highest  offices  of  the  state  by
the  ordinary  course  of  honours.  Yet  a  towns-
man of  Cicero,  and  one  of  even  inferior  claims
to  civic  distinction,  had  but  lately  been  raised
by  the  civil  wars  to  the  enjoyment  of  seven
consulships,  and  the  blood  of  the  young  Arpinate
was  inflamed  with  ambition  by  so  illustrious  an
example.  Cicero,  however,  had  none  of  the  daring
character  of  Marius ;  if  he  ever  harboured  any

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  73

aspirations  after  military  renown,  they  were  satis-  CHAP.
fied  by  a  single  campaign.  But  as  the  shocks  of
civil  war  subsided,  a  nobler  field  was  thrown  open
to  the  accomplishments  of  peace ;  and  he  felt  from
an  early  period,  in  the  consciousness  of  industry
and  genius,  an  earnest  of  brilliant  success  in  the
forum  and  at  the  bar.  He  perceived  instinctively
that  the  talents  which  rendered  Pompeius  so  illus-
trious in  the  field  must  require  in  the  city  the  co-
operation of  the  orator  and  the  jurist ;  and  he  fore-
saw that  by  making  himself  necessary  to  the  military
champion  of  the  state,  he  might  command  his  sup-
port in  return,  and  climb  to  the  highest  political
honours.  When  the  young  orator  entered  public
life,  the  pre-eminence  of  the  great  conqueror  was
unrivalled,  and  the  prospects  of  his  policy  highly
flattering.  Whether,  under  other  circumstances,
Cicero  would  have  thrown  himself  into  the  arms
of  the  democratic  party,  and  laboured  for  the  sub-
version of  the  existing  constitution,  it  is  hardly
reasonable  to  inquire.  Certainly  the  moderation
and  conservative  character  of  the  views  he  uni-
formly advocated  correspond  with  the  natural  bent
of  his  temper,  always  alive  to  present  practical
evils,  but  accustomed  to  pause  at  every  step,  and
anxiously  weigh  the  advantages  of  general  over
particular  expediency.

Having  thus  chosen  his  political  views,  Cicero  cicero  an
carried  them  out  through  life  with  a  steadiness
hardly  to  be  expected  even  in  a  firmer  man,  and
conceived  an  interest  in  the  classes  whose  cause  he
advocated,  and  even  an  affection  for  them,  which
is  one  of  the  most  pleasing  features  in  his  character.

74  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  His  great  object  was  to  elevate  that  middle  class
of  which  we  have  already  spoken,  as  a  guarantee
for  the  integrity  of  the  constitution.  He  laboured
diligently  to  soften  away  the  conflicting  tenden-
cies of  the  nobles  and  commons,  of  the  Romans
and  Italians,  of  the  victors  and  the  vanquished  of
the  late  civil  wars.  Nor  was  his  political  course
warped,  like  that  of  his  leader  Pompeius,  by  any
illegitimate  hopes  of  rising  above  the  laws  which
he  administered  or  defended.  His  ambition  was
great  and  noble,  but  was  honestly  limited  to  the
enjoyment  of  the  highest  honours  of  the  constitu-
tion. He  succeeded  in  attaining  the  consulship,
the  most  eminent  office  in  the  state,  and  in  its  dis-
charge performed  a  service  for  his  country  as  bril-
liant as  any  recorded  in  the  Roman  annals.  But
his  career  of  public  usefulness  was  cut  short  by
the  jealousy  of  his  associates,  and  the  selfishness
of  his  early  patron.  Intoxicated  by  success,  he
had  allowed  himself  to  forget  how  unnatural  and
precarious  his  elevation  really  was ;  and  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  his  own  vanity  contributed  in  a
great  measure  to  his  fall.  But  the  nobles  were
willing  to  prove  to  the  world  the  inherent  weak-
ness of  any  man,  however  splendid  his  abilities,
who  had  not  the  genuine  aristocratic  basis  of  wealth
and  birth  to  rely  upon;  and  Pompeius  selected
Cicero  to  be  the  victim  of  his  wrath,  when  he
wished  to  show  his  power,  and  hurl  defiance  at  the
senate,  yet  did  not  venture  to  inflict  upon  it  a  wound
which  should  really  smart.

While  Pompeius  was  prosecuting  the  war  against

5ecret°con Mithridates  with  all  the  powers  assigned  him  by  the

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  75

Manilian  bill,  Cicero  continued  to  watch  over  the  in-  CHAP.
terests  of  their  common  policy  in  the  city.  He  had
already  acquired  great  reputation  as  an  orator  and
a  pleader.  He  extended  and  confirmed  his  friend-
ships  by  the  causes  he  undertook  to  defend.  At  the
same  time,  he  sought  and  obtained  successively  the
principal  civil  offices  of  the  commonwealth.  In  the
meanwhile  affairs  were  ripening  for  a  crisis  to  which
many  parties  seem  to  have  been  looking  as  the
signal  for  a  general  scramble  for  power.  Pom-
peius, Crassus,  Caesar,  and  all  the  prominent  states-
men of  the  time,  were  undoubtedly  prepared  for
an  outbreak  among  the  needy  and  reckless  men,
with  whom  the  ranks  of  highest  birth  and  station
abounded.  The  most  dangerous  enemy  to  the
aristocracy  was  one  whom  it  nourished  in  its  own
bosom.  The  violent  changes  which  had  so  lately
occurred  in  political  affairs  had  bred  up  a  race  of
men  of  ungoverned  enmities  and  desperate  resolu-
tions. Public  and  private  life  had  become  one
great  gambling  booth,  in  which  the  most  abrupt
alternations  of  luck,  daily  occurring,  had  rendered
multitudes  of  men  equally  reckless  of  good  and
evil  fortune.  The  city  was  destitute  of  any  leader
of  acknowledged  pre-eminence  in  civil  or  military
influence.  The  moment  had  come,  in  the  absence
of  Pompeius,  when  Italy,  and  even  the  world,  might
become  the  prey  of  the  most  daring  adventurer.
The  return  of  that  general  with  his  legions  from
the  East  was  too  remote  a  contingency  to  disturb
the  hopes  of  the  unsettled  heads  which  met  in
secret  conclave,  and  divided  in  imagination  the
spoils  of  Rome.  Pompeius  was  awaiting  at  a  dis-

76  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, tance  the  result  of  the  expected  commotion,  and
' was  well  pleased to be removed  from  the city,

where  his  presence  would  have  stifled  it  in  the
cradle,  assured  that,  whatever  might  be  the  imme-
diate issue,  the  substantial  power  was  secure  in  his
hands  to  mould  the  ultimate  event  to  his  own
views.  The  names  of  both  Crassus  and  Ca3sar
were  mentioned  in  the  confident  rumours  of  the
time  as  connected  with  the  conspiracy.  It  was
said  that  the  former  was  to  have  become  dictator,
and  the  latter  his  master  of  the  horse.  When,
however,  one  of  the  parties  implicated  stepped
forward  to  give  evidence,  and  included  Crassus
among  the  individuals  he  denounced,  the  senate
declared  the  charge  incredible,  and  refused  to  listen
to  the  accuser's  testimony.1  Cicero  constantly
declined  to  bring  any  such  charge  against  Caesar,
though  pressed  to  do  so  by  some  of  the  most
powerful  of  the  nobles ;  and  at  a  later  period  he
was  declared  by  a  public  act  to  be  free  from  the
slightest  suspicion.2  If  the  validity  of  this  evi-
dence in  their  favour  be  not  altogether  beyond
question,  there  are  many  circumstances  which  make
it  extremely  improbable  that  personages  of  their
character  and  views  would  mingle  in  an  enterprise
of  such  a  nature.  There  is  no  reason,  however,  to
doubt  that  both  of  them  speculated,  like  Pompeius,
not  without  complacency,  on  the  result  of  an  out-
break which  threatened  to  divide  and  weaken  the
nobility.

First  con- The  original  cause  of  the  celebrated  conspiracy
catiuna0f °f  Catilma  was traced to  his  disappointment  at

abortive.

1  Sallust,  B.  C.  48.  2  Suet  Jul.  17.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  77

being  prevented  from  suing  for  the  consulship,  by  CHAP.
a  charge  brought  against  him  by  Clodius  of  mal-
versation in  his  province.  This  had  taken  place
in  the  year  u.  c.  688.  A  story  obtained  very
general  credit,  though,  as  the  case  never  came
before  the  public,  its  authenticity  must  always
remain  uncertain,  that  upon  this  repulse  Catilina
entered  into  a  plot  with  Autronius  Paetus,  who
had  been  also  deprived  of  the  consulship  for  bri-
bery, with  Calpumius  Piso  and  others,  having  for
its  object  the  murder  of  the  successful  candidates,
and  seizure  of  the  powers  of  the  state  by  violence.
Piso,  who  had  previously  acquired  the  government
of  one  of  the  provinces  of  Spain,  was  to  have
organized  there  a  military  force  to  counterpoise
the  legions  of  the  senate  under  the  command  of
Pompeius.  The  scheme,  it  was  said,  was  detected,
and  the  principal  conspirators  discovered.  Piso
himself  was  cut  off  by  an  attack  of  bandits,  or  pos-
sibly assassins1 ;  but  the  proceedings  which  the
senate  threatened  to  institute  against  the  culprits
were  stopped  by  the  intervention  of  a  tribune,  and
the  circumstances  of  the  plot  were  never  formally
revealed.

So  great,  however,  was  the  influence  of  Catilina,  character
from  his  ancient  blood  and  personal  connexions,
that  not  only  was  the  executive  power  unable  to
bring  him  to  conviction  upon  this  flagrant  charge,  sociates.
but  he  did  not  shrink  from  proceeding  straightway
to  canvass  for  the  consulship  of  the  next  year,
and  that  too  while  a  charge  for  malversation  was
still  hanging  over  him. L.  Sergius  Catilina  is  repre-

1  Sallust,  B.  C.  19. :  "Nos  earn  rem  inmedio  relinquemus."

78  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  sented  to  us  as  a  reckless  voluptuary,  bankrupt  in
IL  fortune  and  character,  supporting  his  extravagance
by  pandering  to  the  vices  of  headstrong  and  pro-
digal youth,  with  the  one  eminent  virtue  of  per-
sonal courage,  which  he  had  manifested  in  his
early  years  in  the  wars  of  Marius  and  Sulla,  and
one  peculiar  talent,  that  of  cajoling  and  influencing
even  the  best  and  wisest  citizens  of  the  state.
These  qualities  sufficed  to  place  him  at  the  head  of
a  faction,  which  embraced  personages  of  such  mark
and  authority  that  the  ordinary  powers  of  the
constitution  were  not  deemed  strong  enough  to
suppress  their  treasonable  machinations.  The
most  astonishing  circumstance  of  all  is  the  fact
revealed  to  us  in  one  of  Cicero's  own  letters,  that
being  himself  a  competitor  with  Catilina  for  the
consulship,  he  proposed  at  one  time  to  undertake
the  defence  of  his  rival's  conduct  in  his  province,
with  the  view  of  strengthening  himself  by  a  coa-
lition with  so  hateful  a  character.1  As  it  hap-
pened, however,  the  pliant  orator  had  not  the
disgrace  of  appearing  as  the  advocate  of  one  whom
he  was  called  upon  the  next  year  to  denounce  as
the  foulest  monster,  the  most  universal  culprit  of
the  age.  Catilina  escaped  condemnation,  appa-
rently by  the  corruption  of  his  judges.2  He  was
unsuccessful,  however,  in  his  suit  for  the  consul-
ship, which  was  obtained  by  Cicero  and  Antonius.
The  greater  part  of  the  ensuing  year  was  occupied
with  the  discussion  of  various  salutary  laws  pro-
posed by  Cicero,  while  the  rejected  candidate  was
resorting  once  more  to  his  secret  machinations

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  2.  2  Cic.  /.  c.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  79

against  the  state.  The  names  of  his  coadjutors  CHAP.
again  show  how  noble  were  the  families,  how
exalted  the  stations,  of  the  men  who  were  thus
ready  to  plunge  into  a  revolution  with  little  pros-
pect of  permanent  success,  nor,  as  it  appeared  to
their  contemporaries,  under  the  blinding  influence
of  any  party  enthusiasm.  The  members  of  the
conspiracy  seem,  indeed,  to  have  belonged  mostly
to  the  faction  of  Sulla1,  and  may  have  appertained
to  the  class  of  disappointed  aristocrats,  disgusted
with  the  policy  by  which  the  leaders  of  their  party
were  breaking  them  in  to  a  more  liberal  form  of
government ;  but  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  their
views  were  rather  personal  than  political,  that
they  had  resolved  upon  the  abolition  of  debts  and
a  new  division  of  offices  and  honours,  and  hardly
looked  further.2  Among  them  were  two  nephews
of  the  dictator.  Autronius  and  Cassius  Longinus
had  lately  been  candidates  for  the  consulship ;
there  was  a  tribune  elect,  Calpurnius  Bestia ;  Cor-
nelius Lentulus  and  Cornelius  Cethegus  were  no-
bles of  high  distinction,  though  lost  in  character ;
while  the  consul  Antonius  was  strongly  suspected
of  looking  at  least  with  favour  on  the  designs  of
the  conspirators.  Nor  did  rumour  fail  again,  with,
however,  little  probability,  to  include  both  Crassus
and  Cassar  in  the  list.3  With  this  extensive  in-

1  After  giving  the  names  of  the  leaders,  Sallust  adds :  "  Juventus
pleraque  sed  maxime  nobilium." (B.  C.  17.)

2  Sallust,  B.  C.  21.:  "Turn  Catilina  polliceri  tabulas  novas,  pro-
seriptiones  locupletium,  magistratus,  sacerdotia,  rapinas."

3  To  these  were  to  be  added  needy  people  of  all  classes. Cicero
remarks  with  surprise  that  some  of  the  victims  of  Sulla's  confiscations
had  joined  in  the  conspiracy  :  "  Quam  turbam,  dissimillimo  ex  genere,

80  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  fluence  among  the  highest  ranks  of  the  nation,
'  Catilina  and  his  associates  counted  no  less  upon
the  turbulence  and  spirit  of  rapine  which  animated
the  lower  population  of  the  city.  They  expected,
moreover,  the  armed  assistance  of  large  bodies
among  the  Sullan  veterans,  who  had  already  squan-
dered, with  the  recklessness  of  fortunate  adven-
turers, the  possessions  they  had  so  suddenly  ac-
quired.1 They  proposed,  further,  to  solicit  and
stimulate  the  hostile  feelings  still  prevalent  among
some  of  the  Italian  races  towards  Rome.2  They
even  hoped  to  seize  upon  the  gladiators'  schools  at
Capua,  and  arm  a  new  insurrection  of  slaves  and
criminals  against  law  and  property.3  This  last
measure,  indeed,  was  the  only  enormity  to  which
Catilina  hesitated  to  assent.  He  was  urged  to  it
more  especially  by  Lentulus4 ;  and  when  so  de-
grading a  proposal  was  discovered  in  the  hand-
writing of  one  of  the  Cornelii,  it  put  the  finishing
stroke  to  the  horror  and  indignation  of  the  Roman
people.

distinguebant  homines  perculsi  Sullani  temporis  calamitate." (Pro
Mur.  24.)

1  Cic.  in  Cat.  ii.  9. :  "  Hi  sunt  coloni  qui  se  insperatis  repentinisque
pecuniis  sumptuosius  insolentiusque  jactarunt :  hi  qui  asdificant,  tan-
quam  beati,  dum  prsediis,  lecticis,  familiis  magnis,  conviviis  apparandis
delectantur,  in  tantum  ses  alienum  inciderunt,  ut  si  salvi  esse  velint
Sulla  sit  iis  ab  inferis  excitandus." Comp.  Sail.  B.  C.  16.  28.

2  Sallust,  L  c. C.  Manlius  betook  himself  to  Faesulae,  in  Etruria,
Septimius  to  Picenum,  C.  Julius  to  Apulia.

3  Sallust,  B.  C.  30.

4  Such  was  the  tenor  of  the  letter  of  Lentulus  to  his  principal,
which  was  discovered  on  the  person  of  Volturcius  :  "  Auxilium  petas
ab  omnibus,  etiam  ab  infimis ;  "  which  was  interpreted  by  a  verbal
message,  "  Quum  ab  senatu  hostis  judicatus  sit,  quo  consilio  servitia
repudiet." Sail.  B.  C.  44.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  81

The  secret  of  the  conspirators,  long  bruited  CHAP
about  by  common  report,  was  first  revealed  to
Cicero  by  Fulvia,  the  paramour  of  one  of  the  Detection
parties  implicated.  No  sooner  did  he  comrnu-  *
nicate  it  to  the  senate,  than  a  decree  was  hastily
passed,  conferring  upon  the  consuls  irresponsible
power  for  the  suppression  of  the  smouldering  con-
flagration.1 But  the  discovery  of  the  plot  was
only  the  beginning  of  their  difficulties.  In  a  case
of  such  importance,  involving  the  lives  of  person-
ages so  exalted,  with  the  spirit  of  the  populace  so
adverse  or  questionable,  and  the  leaders  of  the
democracy  ever  on  the  watch  to  seize  upon  the
slightest  false  move,  it  was  necessary  to  place  the
affair  in  such  a  light  as  to  carry  the  passions  of
the  people  along  with  the  government.  Cicero
manifested  consummate  adroitness  in  the  bold  and
apparently  hazardous  course  which  he  pursued.
He  first  drove  Catilina  to  despair  by  proving  his
own  perfect  acquaintance  with,  all  his  designs,  and
then  allowed  him  quietly  to  make  his  escape  from
the  city,  and  even  to  take  refuge  among  his  armed
adherents.  As  soon  as  he  was  gone,  and  his  open
defection  known,  the  consul  could  convene  the
senate,  and  cause  him  to  be  declared  a  public
enemy.  He  could  then  represent  him  as  an
invading  foe,  ready  to  fall  upon  the  city  at  the
head  of  the  men  of  Etruria  and  Picenum ;  he
could  revive  the  old  panic  of  a  Gallic  outbreak,
aggravated  by  the  terrors  of  a  servile  war.  No
cry  was  more  certain  to  stir  the  blood  of  the

1  Sallust,  _B.  C.  29. :  "  Senatus  decrevit,  darent  operam  Consules,
ne  quid  respublica  detriment!  caperet."
VOL.  I.  G

82  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  Roman  people  and  combine  them  against  the  com-
'  mon  enemy.  From  that  moment,  also,  he  could
convict  of  treason  any  citizen  who  should  be  dis-
covered merely  corresponding  with  the  proscribed
outlaw.  No  further  proof  of  treasonable  purposes
was  required  than  the  fact  of  having  sent  him  a
line  of  writing,  however  vague  and  disguised  its
import.  The  consul  resorted  to  further  artifices
to  get  documents  of  such  a  nature  into  his  hands.
He  succeeded  in  securing  with  letters  on  their
persons  some  of  the  messengers  employed  by  the
conspirators,  and  extorted  from  them  at  the  same
time  additional  verbal  communications.  When  he
had  made  himself  master  of  these  instruments,  he
caused  all  the  conspirators  whose  names  had  been
already  indicated  to  him  to  be  arrested.  He  pro-
duced them  successively  before  the  senate,  and  con-
fronted them  with  their  own  messengers  and  the
evidence  of  their  hands  and  seals.  The  proofs  which
he  had  already  acquired  from  his  creatures  Fulvia
and  Curius  were  doubtless  laid  before  the  senate
and  fully  investigated.  These  would  specify  the
particular  business  assigned  to  each  of  the  as-
sociates, the  murder  of  the  consul,  the  burning  of
the  city  at  various  points,  the  signals  which  were
to  pass  between  the  leader  and  his  followers,  the
final  division  of  the  spoil.  It  is  remarkable,  how-
ever, that  in  the  third  Catilinarian  oration,  which
Cicero  addressed  to  the  people  immediately  upon
the  completion  of  the  examination  and  the  con-
viction of  the  criminals,  he  enters  into  no  judicial
proof  of  their  guilt  as  conspirators  against  the
government.  He  contents  himself  with  declaring

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  83

the  evidence  upon  which  they  have  been  convicted  CHAP.
as  traitors  to  be  their  correspondence  with  Cati-
lina,  a  public  enemy,  arid  their  intercourse  with
certain  deputies  of  the  Allobroges,  a  Gaulish  clan
who  at  the  moment  were  objects  of  great  alarm
to  the  Romans.1  This  was  enough  to  brand  them
as  men  pledged  to  succour  an  invading  enemy,
to  introduce  him  into  the  city,  and  deliver  it  to
be  plundered  by  Etruscans  and  Gauls.  This  was
enough  to  justify  all  the  frightful  descriptions  of
fire  and  slaughter  with  which  Cicero  had  long
kept  the  ears  of  the  public  tingling.  But  to  prove
the  further  guilt  of  the  accused  to  the  world  would
have  involved  the  disclosure  of  the  degrading
means  to  which  the  consul  had  been  compelled
to  resort,  his  intercourse  with  the  basest  of  men
and  women  ;  it  would  have  been  unbecoming  the
dignity  of  the  government,  and  inconsistent  with
the  politic  reserve  of  an  aristocratic  assembly.2
Nor,  perhaps,  would  it  have  added  to  the  force  of
Cicero's  arguments  to  have  exhibited  proofs  of  de-
signs against  himself,  for  he  was  not  then  a  fa-
vourite with  the  populace ;  nor  of  the  conspirator's
intention  of  sharing  the  magistracies  and  priest-
hoods, to  which  it  might  be  wholly  indifferent.

1  Cic.  in  Catil  iii.  9. : "  Homines  Galli  ex  civitate  male pacata,
quaB  gens  una  restat  quae  pop.  Rom.  bellum  facere  et  posse  et  non
nolle  videatur."

2  The reserve  which Cicero maintained in this  matter  was  not
unnoticed  by  his  contemporaries ; but  if  it  was  made  a  subject  of
attack  by  Clodius,  it  met  with  the  full  approbation  of  graver  and
better  citizens. Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  14. : "  Me  tantum  comperisse  omnia
criminabatur." Comp. ad  Div.  v. 1. This was the phrase with
which  the  consul  was  accustomed  to  indicate  his  knowledge  of  facts
when  he  refrained  from  revealing  his  sources  of  information.

G 2

84  HISTOEY OF THE EOMANS

CHAP.  The  object  of  the  government  was  fully  obtained
'  by  the  partial  disclosures  it  chose  to  make ;  and
the  presumption  which  some  modern  writers  have
entertained,  that  the  conviction  of  the  criminals
was  not  based  on  adequate  legal  proof,  is  altogether
nugatory.

Execution  The  ingenuity  and  eloquence  of  the  great  orator
spiratoS!n"  conciliated  thus  far  the  favour  of  the  people,  and
nerved  the  arm  of  the  aristocracy  with  a  strength
to  which  they  had  long  been  strangers.  Nine  of
the  principal  conspirators  had  been  convicted  and
were  in  confinement ;  the  question  of  their  punish-
ment still  remained  for  decision.  The  old  theory
of  ^the  constitution,  as  interpreted  at  least  by  the
patricians,  gave  the  chief  magistrate  power  of  life
and  death  as  soon  as  the  senate  should  decree,  as
had  been  already  done,  the  famous  formula,  that
"the  consuls  see  that  the  state  suffer  no  harm."
Nor  were  precedents  wanting  to  support  an  act  of
extreme  rigour,  and  the  majority  of  that  assembly
might  be  found  prepared  to  justify  and  applaud  it.
But  Cicero  was  aware  that  the  commonalty  had
never  formally  acquiesced  in  such  a  stretch  of  pre-
rogative ;  that  their  power  as  well  as  their  jealousy
of  the  nobles  had  much  increased  since  its  last
exercise  in  the  time  of  the  Gracchi.  There  existed
also  a  conflicting  principle  in  the  Roman  law,  ac-
cording to  which  no  citizen  could  be  put  to  death
except  by  a  vote  of  the  people.  On  the  one  hand,
the  nobles  still  hesitated  to  appeal  to  the  people,
by  which  they  would  risk  the  failure  of  justice  and
vengeance  altogether ;  on  the  other,  their  dele-
gation of  authority  would  afford  no  protection  to

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  85

the  consul  who  should  venture  to  act  upon  it,  if  CHAP.
his  personal  enemies  could  succeed  in  raising  the
passions  of  the  populace  against  him.  Cicero,
therefore,  in  the  moment  of  triumph  was  too  wary
to  assume  at  once  the  responsibility  which  was
thrust  upon  him.  He  was  anxious  to  fortify  him-
self by  a  more  express  declaration  of  the  com-
mands of  the  senate,  and  once  again  convened  it  to
deliver  its  collective  judgment  upon  the  prisoners.
A  vivid  idea  of  the  interesting  debate  which  ensued
may  be  gathered,  partly  from  the  genuine  speech
of  Cicero  himself,  partly  from  the  historical  nar-
rative of  Sallust,  who  places  the  arguments  of  the
opposite  parties  in  the  mouths  of  Cato  and  Caesar
respectively.1  The  leaders  of  the  oligarchy  were
evidently  inclined  to  decree  capital  punishment,
which  Caesar  vigorously  opposed.  The  relation
in  which  he  was  surmised  by  some  to  stand  to-
wards the  conspirators  might  throw  suspicion  on
the  arguments  he  advanced  in  their  behalf;  never-
theless, there  was  evidently  much  reason  in  his
favour,  and  as  the  champion  of  the  popular  party
he  could  not  be  expected  to  acquiesce  in  the  as-
sumption by  the  senate  of  the  power  of  life  and
death.  Banishment  or  imprisonment  was,  he  con-
tended, the  extreme  penalty  which  the  law  de-
nounced against  any  citizen.  Cato,  on  the  other
hand,  maintained  that  the  convicted  criminals  were
no  longer  citizens,  but  open  enemies  of  the  state,

1  How  near  the  language  which  Sallust  attributes  to  his  speakers
approaches  to  the  words  they  really  uttered  is  impossible  to  con^
jecture  ;  but  Plutarch  mentions  that  the  speech  of  Cato  was  the  only
one  which  was  preserved,  having  been  taken  down  in  shorthand  at
the  time,  by  Cicero's  directions.  Pint.  Cat.  Min.  23.

G 3

86  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, who  had  forfeited every  Roman privilege. But
neither  party  did,  in  fact,  lay  much  stress  upon

the  letter  of  the  law.  Policy  or  expediency  dic-
tated the  arguments  on  each  side.  Cato's  opinion
prevailed,  and  the  hands  of  the  consul  were
strengthened  by  a  deliberate  vote  of  the  senate  in
favour  of  the  course  which  he  himself  advocated.
Question  The  time  had  long  gone  by  in  which  the  justice
theTredi-5  an(l  morality  of  public  acts  could  be  measured
charge°f  the  strictly  by  the  standard  of  existing  laws.  The  old
maxim,  that  the  safety  of  the  state  is  the  highest
of  all  laws,  was  never  more  applicable  than  in  the
present  instance,  upon  the  assumption  that  the
colour  which  the  senate  gave  to  the  views  of  the
conspirators  was  genuine  and  true.  That  their  re-
presentation of  the  facts  of  the  case  is  borne  out
by  the  concurrent  testimony  of  the  records  of  an-
tiquity admits  of  110  question.  But  it  must  be
/acknowledged,  that  such  writers  as  Dion  Cassius,
Appian,  and  Plutarch,  afford  us  little  independent
evidence  ;  and  that  they  mainly  relied  upon  the
contemporary  authorities  of  Sallust  and  Cicero,
neither  of  whom  can  be  admitted  as  unexception-
able witnesses.  The  first,  a  member  and  originally
an  adherent  of  the  aristocracy1,  had  suffered  ex-
pulsion from  the  senate  for  his  notorious  profli-
gacy, and  he  had  attached  himself  to  Caesar  at  the
time  when  he  sat  down  to  compose  his  history  of

1  There  is  a  life  of  Sallust  among  the  Vita  Illust.  Grammat,  attri-
buted to  Suetonius,  but  its  authority  is  far  from  good.  The  common
anecdotes  to  his  discredit  are  derived  from  the  testimony  of  Varro
(Gell.  xvii.  18.)  and  the  Schol.  in  Horat.  Sat.  i.  2.  His  ejection  from
the  senate  is  mentioned  by  Dion  (xl.  63.  A.  u.  704),  but  the  pretext
i  s  not  assigned.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  87

the  Catilinarian  conspiracy.  If  we  might  expect  CHAP,
from  this  circumstance  that  he  would  make  the
most  unsparing  revelation  of  any  artifices  and  ex-
aggerations on  the  part  of  his  personal  enemies
(supposing  them  to  be  really  liable  to  such
charges),  which  he  nowhere  pretends  to  do,  we
must  acknowledge,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the
character  of  his  mind,  as  disclosed  in  his  narrative,
was  totally  deficient  in  any  deep  insight  into  the
views  and  motives  of  his  contemporaries.  He  may,
indeed,  have  been  too  closely  connected  with  in-
dividuals, still  surviving  and  still  powerful,  to  de-
sire to  unmask  the  real  features  of  the  case,  and
discover  to  us  the  secret  springs  of  action  by  which
the  contending  parties  were  actuated.1  But,  from
whatever  cause,  while  the  stains  upon  his  own
character  made  him  feel  a  base  pleasure  in  ex-
posing the  vices  of  the  times,  and  especially  of  the
class  which  had  declared  him  unworthy  of  its
countenance,  the  sketch  which  he  has  given  us  is  *
remarkable  chiefly  for  its  impotent  display  of
events  without  causes,  the  worthlessness  of  which
as  an  historical  monument  is  scarcely  disguised  by
the  terseness  of  its  diction  and  the  brilliancy  of  its
imagery.  The  declamations  of  Cicero,  though  far
more  interesting  documents,  are  of  hardly  less
suspicious  authority.  It  might  be  easy  to  repre-
sent them  as  fraudulently  devised  to  enhance  the
terrors  of  the  ignorant  both  among  the  senate  and
the  people,  to  justify  measures  of  violence  and  in-

1  Sallust,  as  may  be  supposed,  was  familiarly  acquainted  with  the
principal  personages  of  the  republic.  Comp.  B.  C.  48. :  "  Ipsum
Crassum  ego  postea  praedicantem  audivi."

G 4

88  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  justice  by  the  most  falsely-coloured  pictures  of  the
'  public  danger.  For  it  is  certainly  a  reasonable  ob-
jection to  the  view  he  gives  us  of  the  imminence  of
a  revolution,  that  he  represents  his  enemy  as  too
notorious  a  villain  to  be  really  dangerous  to  any
constituted  government.

General  It  seems,  however,  on  the  whole,  more  probable

S^f the  tnat  tne  V^ces  °f  Catilina  and  the  weakness  of  his
Policy  of associates  are  overdrawn  to  suit  the  vulgar  taste  of

the  senate  °  .

with  regard  the  hearers,  than  that  the  reality  and  magnitude
of  the  peril  are  seriously  exaggerated.  But  it
must  be  observed,  that  the  position  of  the  senate
at  the  moment  was  such  that  it  was  glad  to  seize
the  opportunity  to  show  a  front  of  more  than  usual
daring  in  the  face  of  the  enemies  who  encompassed
it.  The  patron  it  suspected  and  feared  had  with-
drawn from  it  only  to  make  a  bolder  leap  in  his
attempt  to  scale  the  fortress  of  its  prerogatives.
He  had  left  it  exposed  to  the  furious  attacks  of  the
Marian  party,  whose  courage  and  bitterness  had
revived  in  his  absence.  The  bolder  spirits  among
the  nobility  conceived  that  the  crisis  had  arrived
at  which  they  might  secure  themselves  against
both  the  open  and  the  secret  foe.  The  conspiracy,
they  might  think,  came  opportunely  to  give  them
a  pretext  for  combining  in  an  act  of  daring  justice,
so  that  the  consciousness  of  their  own  prowess
might  inspire  them  with  confidence,  and  draw
forth  the  energies  of  those  who  were  fittest  to  lead
them.  They  may  have  been  making  a  tool  of
Cicero  even  while  they  most  loudly  applauded  the
glaring  pictures  of  impending  conflagration,  with
which  he  scared  the  timid  into  approval  of  their

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  89

measures.  The  languor  with  which  the  consul  CHAP.
Antonius  conducted  the  campaign  against  the  pub-
lic enemy,  while  it  appeared  to  the  uninitiated  a
symptom  of  wavering  loyalty,  may  possibly  have
been  the  result  of  secret  instructions,  in  order  that
a  larger  force  might  be  collected  and  disciplined
under  the  officers  of  the  senate.  When  the  ap-
pearance of  danger  was  at  its  height,  the  moment
was  seized  to  fix  the  resolution  of  the  waverers
by  an  act  of  violence  which  cut  off  from  them
all  retreat.  It  might  be  expected  that  Pompeius
on  his  return  would  make  this  stretch  of  au-
thority a  pretext  for  military  interference.  The
nobles  pledged  themselves  by  it  to  the  most  des-
perate resistance.  They  threw  down  the  gauntlet,
and  defied  the  commander  of  their  legions  to  take
it  up.  Assuredly  they  miscalculated  their  own
strength,  if  they  thought  they  could  have  withstood
him  for  a  moment ;  but  perhaps  they  knew  the
man  they  had  to  deal  with,  and  trusted  that  their
imposing  attitude  would  awe  him  into  acquies-
cence. Undoubtedly  they  were  fully  prepared  to
sacrifice  Cicero,  whom  they  disliked  and  despised ;
and  he  was  so  far  aware,  we  may  presume,  of  their
unfriendly  dispositions,  as  to  insist  upon  impli-
cating them  together  with  himself  in  all  the  re-
sponsibility of  the  execution  of  the  conspirators.
If  such  was  the  secret  policy  of  the  nobles,  it  cer-
tainly was  not  unsuccessful.  Their  boldness  cowed
Pompeius,  whose  vindictive  jealousy  they  so  far
propitiated  by  abandoning  Cicero,  that  he  inter-
posed once  more  between  them  and  the  Marians ;
until,  with  the  rise,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  of

90  HISTOEY OF THE KOMANS

CHAP.  Caesar's  influence,  the  opportunity  for  claiming  an
undivided  ascendancy  passed  away,  and  the  former
champion  of  the  knights  was  glad  at  last  to  place
himself  under  the  orders  of  the  senate,  and  make
the  most  of  such  honours  and  powers  as  they  were
willing  to  dispense  to  him.

cato.  The  name  of  M.  Porcius  Cato  has  already  been

introduced  as  a  leader  of  the  aristocratic  party.
Younger  by  a  few  years  than  any  of  his  political
rivals,  he  entered  upon  the  stage  of  public  life  at  a
somewhat  later  period.  The  absence  of  Pompeius
in  Asia  first  made  room  for  him  in  the  councils  of
the  nobility,  whose  cause,  though  himself  a  ple-
beian (one,  however,  of  most  ancient  and  honourable
descent),  he  embraced  with  more  thorough  and  ex-
clusive devotion  than  any  of  his  contemporaries.
His  character  was  rigid  and  untractable,  and
marked  a  reaction  from  that  laxity  of  manners
and  principles  which  the  circumstances  of  the
time  had  rendered  general,  and  which  unfortu-
nately seemed  indispensable  for  efficient  political
action.  Well  read  in  books,  his  mind  had  no
power  to  assimilate  the  lessons  of  history ;  a  sys-
tematic follower  of  the  Stoic  philosophy,  the  genuine
springs  of  human  action  were  unknown  to  or  dis-
regarded by  him.  He  idolized  the  name  of  his
great-grandfather,  Cato  the  Censor ;  and  while  he
studiously  formed  himself  upon  that  ancestral
model,  he  had  in  fact  already  inherited  a  kindred
disposition.  But  the  Censor  lived  at  a  time  when
public  opinion  still  respected  the  principles  at  least
of  old  Roman  austerity.  It  was  a  minority  of  the
extravagant  and  the  speculative,  the  innovators  in

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  91

practice  and  theory,  against  whom  he  contended ;  CHAP.
and,  unsuccessful  as  he  was,  he  still  preserved  the
reverence  of  the  people,  and  bequeathed  them  an
honoured  name  for  the  admiration  of  posterity.
The  younger  Cato  applied  the  same  rules  and
maxims  to  his  own  times,  which  were  rapidly  be-
coming obsolete  above  a  century  before.  The  poet  of
the  civil  wars  compares  Pompeius  to  the  venerable
oak,  majestic  in  its  decay,  and  honoured  for  its
antique  associations1;  Caesar  to  the  lightning  of
Jupiter,  which  spares  nothing  venerable,  nothing
holy,  neither  the  monarch  of  the  forest  nor  the
temples  of  its  own  divinity  ;  Cato  he  might  have
likened  to  the  rocky  promontory  which  marks  the
ancient  limits  of  an  encroaching  ocean,  still  re-
sisting the  action  under  which  the  neighbouring
cliffs  have  mouldered  away,  and  barely  attached
to  the  continent  by  a  narrow  and  diminishing
isthmus.  Yet  even  the  iron  disposition  of  the  Stoic
was  not  unaffected  by  the  change  of  circumstances
since  the  period  which  he  most  admired.  The
same  temper  which  made  the  elder  Cato  a  severe
master,  a  frugal  housekeeper,  the  cultivator  of  his
own  acres,  the  man  of  maxims  and  proverbs,  con-
verted the  younger  into  a  pedantic  politician  and  a
scholastic  formalist.  Private  life  had  become  ab-
sorbed in  the  sphere  of  public  occupations  ;  the
homely  experience  of  the  individual  was  lost  in
the  recorded  wisdom  of  professional  philosophers.
The  character  of  the  Censor  had  been  simple  and
true  to  nature  ;  that  of  his  descendant  was  a  sys-
tem of  elaborate  though  unconscious  affectations.

1  Lucan.  i.  136.  foil.

92  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  When  the  hopes  of  the  oligarchy  began  to  revive
'  with  the  long  absence  of  Pompeius,  and  the  in-
influence  of  fluence  of  more  flattering  advisers  to  replace  that
the  oiigar-  of  the  fortunate  soldier  who  had  so  long  been
tSreb*up"  courted  through  fear,  the  nobles  found  in  Cato  a
tween  the  younger,  and.  as  they  conceived,  a  more  efficient

senate  and * . fo '  '.  i

the  knights,  leader,  of  obstinate  character  and  uncompromising
devotion  to  the  narrowest  views  of  their  party.
Cato  had  been  the  most  urgent  of  all  the  speakers
in  the  debate  for  the  capital  punishment  of  the
conspirators ;  a  measure  which  flattered  the  pride
of  the  senate,  and  the  success  of  which  increased
their  opinion  of  their  own  power.  At  the  per-
suasion of  the  same  rash  counsellor  they  pro-
ceeded to  break  that  union  with  the  equestrian
order  which  had  been  the  aim  of  all  Cicero's  policy,
and  the  subject  of  his  most  complacent  self-lauda-
tion. The  senate  had  already  bitterly  offended
this  rising  interest,  the  clients  of  Pompeius  and
Crassus  no  less  than  of  Cicero,  by  resolving  to
institute  inquiries  into  their  malversations  in  the
judicial  office,  in  revenge  for  their^  intrusion  into
those  cherished  functions,  for  the  prosecution  of
Yerres,  and  all  the  insults  they  had  received  since
the  death  of  Sulla.1  Soon  afterwards  certain  of
the  knights,  who  had  contracted  with  the  censors
for  the  revenues  of  the  Asiatic  provinces,  finding
that  in  their  cupidity,  as  Cicero  himself  acknow-
ledges, they  had  overreached  themselves,  besought
the  government  to  relax  the  terms  to  which  they
were  pledged.  The  senate  would  listen  to  no  ac-
commodation. Cato,  partly  from  the  natural  se-

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  17,  18.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  93

verity  and  strictness  of  his  character,  partly  from  CHAP.
his  class  prejudices,  opposed  them  with  the  utmost
vehemence,  and  prevailed  upon  the  assembly  to
reject  their  appeal,  after  degrading  them  by  long
suspense.1  The  deepest  jealousy  and  hostility  re-
vived between  the  two  orders2,  and  this  dissension,
as  it  broke  up  the  policy  of  Cicero  and  Pompeius,
was  in  a  great  measure  the  turning  point  of  the
events  of  the  period.

Thus  frustrated  in  his  darling  project  of  amalga-  cicero  in-
mating  the  upper  classes  in  a  durable  league,  Cicero  the  senate
from  this  time  began  to  incline  more  to  the  senato-  rather  than

•11  i  •  i  TTII  11

rial  than  to  the  equestrian  order.  He  had  tasted  the
sweets  of  admission  into  the  highest  ranks  of  the
community,  and  his  self-love  forbade  him  to  re-
nounce its  fascinations  and  descend  again  to  the  level
from  which  he  had  sprung,  and  where  alone  he  could
act  with  dignity  and  independence.  He  complained
that  the  knights  had  deserted  the  senate,  though  his
vanity  would  not  allow  him  to  say  that  they  had
cooled  in  their  devotion  to  himself.  He  was  proud
of  their  having  assembled  around  him  to  defend
his  person  during  the  crisis  of  the  Catilinarian
conspiracy  3 ;  yet  when  they  arrayed  themselves
on  the  Capitoline  hill  to  protect  the  deliberations
which  preceded  the  condemnation  of  the  criminals,
they  were  no  less  resolutely  asserting  the  integrity
of  the  commonwealth  and  the  privileges  of  its
several  classes.4  But  he  soon  learnt  that  the  ser-

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  18.  2  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  19.

3  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  19.: "Vidi nostros publicanos  facile a senatu
disjungi,  quanquam  a  me  ipso  non  divellerentur."

4  Cic.  ad  Att  ii.  1.:  "Nunc  vero  quum  equitatus  ille  noster  quern
ego  in  clivo Capitolino collocaram  senatum deseruerit.  .  .  .  equites
curias  bellum,  non  mihi."

94  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  vices  he  had  performed  could  give  him  no  effective
control  over  a  party  which  despised  their  bene-
factor, and  were  determined  to  depreciate  his
merits.  The  conviction  of  the  miserable  ineffi-
ciency of  many  of  the  principal  nobles  was  forced
upon  him ;  nor  could  he  be  insensible  of  the  danger
their  cause  incurred,  when  they  professed  to  put
themselves  under  the  guidance  of  a  leader  such  as
Cato,  whose  ways  and  views  were  so  alien  from
their  own,  and  whose  disposition  was  so  untract-
able.1  As  to  Cato  himself,  we  may  imagine  the
perplexity  with  which  he  must  have  regarded  the
several  sections  of  the  party  among  whom  he  occu-
pied so  conspicuous  a  place.  He  had  to  choose
his  counsellors  and  instruments  either  among  the
elder  men,  who  were  indolent  and  immovable  in  ac-
tion, insensible  to  public  morality,  even  to  the  con-
tempt of  outward  decency ;  or  among  the  younger,
who  were  violent  on  the  other  hand,  and  reckless,
their  hot  patrician  blood  inflamed  no  less  by
luxury  than  pride.  The  early  years  of  the  former
class  had  been  mostly  passed  in  camps.  The  urgent
dangers  of  the  republic  had  allowed  them  little
leisure  even  at  home  to  cultivate  the  refinements
of  social  life.  At  a  later  period,  crowned  with  suc-
cess, and  with  all  the  enjoyments  of  wealth  sud-
denly placed  at  their  feet 2,  they  plunged,  from
mere  ignorance,  into  a  tasteless  imitation  of  the
sensual  civilization  of  the  East.  The  pictures  of

1  Cic.  1.  c. :  "  Sed  tamen  ille  (Cato)  optlmo  animo  utens,  et  summa
fide,  nocet  interdum  reipublicas.  Dicit  enim  tanquam  in  Platonis
noXiTf/p,  non  tanquam  in  Romuli  faece,  sententiam."

°  Comp.  Plut.  Lucull.  40.  :  NsoTrXovra  d'  ^v  TOV  AOVKOV\\OV  TO,
rd  KaO'  ijp,ipav.  .  .  .  ZrjXwrbv  avtXtvQkpoiQ  TTOIOVVTOS  ICLVTOV.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  95

vice  which  the  writers  of  the  age  have  left  us  are CHAP.
principally  taken  from  the  highest  aristocracy ;  and
the  habits  of  a  Piso  and  a  Gabinius  leave  no  doubt
of  the  barbarian  coarseness  of  the  class  to  which
they  belonged.

The  introduction  of  Grecian  models  of  art  and  character
literature,  which  had  so  honourably  distinguished  my. e  Se-1"
the  age  of  LaBlius  and  Scipio,  produced  in  fact  a  S^1"4
very imperfect  effect upon the progress of  the  form  taken

.••.».*.*..«.:*,*  by  Roman

national  mind.  Jbor  half  a  century  it  seemed  to  civilization.
be  making  a  genuine  impression  upon  a  people  far
from  deficient  in  natural  sensibility,  or  incapable
of  appreciating  the  excellence  of  its  originals.
During  that  happier  period  it  seemed  not  idle  to
expect  that  Rome  might  become  a  rival  to  her  mis-
tress and  instructress,  even  in  her  own  arts.  But
this  fair  prospect  was  overcast  by  the  circumstances
that  supervened.  It  might  have  been  hoped  that,
as  among  other  nations,  so  in  Rome,  the  time  had
arrived  when  arms  should  give  place  to  the  pur-
suits of  peace,  and  the  fruits  of  youthful  education
have  room  and  leisure  to  mature  in  riper  years.
But  the  destiny  of  the  race  of  conquerors  pre-
vailed. Each  succeeding  generation  became  more
immersed  in  war  than  its  predecessor ;  the  turbid
stream  of  military  habits  never  ran  itself  clear ;
the  camp  continued  to  pour  its  sanguine  flood  into
the  silver  current  of  humanity  and  letters.  Even
those  individuals  who  were  most  celebrated  for
their  love  of  polite  literature  had  little  of  that
genuine  devotion  to  it  which  courts  retirement  and
rejoices  in  simplicity.  The  purity  even  of  Cicero's
taste  may  be  called  in  question,  though  he  was  far

96  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  removed  from  the  voluptuous  refinements  which
enervate  the  mind  and  vitiate  morality.  But  Lu-
cullus  and  the  accomplished  orator  Hortensius,
second  only  to  Cicero  among  his  contemporaries,  a
scholar  and  a  wit,  no  less  than  a  pleader  and
debater,  did  more  to  degrade  than  to  exalt  the
tastes  they  affected  to  patronize.  The  display
which  Lucullus  made  of  his  libraries  and  galleries
of  art,  throwing  them  open  to  public  admiration,
however  much  in  advance  of  the  real  wants  of  the
age1,  and  calculated  to  create  envy  rather  than
gratitude,  might  yet  be  represented  as  a  more
magnanimous  use  of  his  wealth  than  the  vulgar
profusion  by  which  others  of  his  order  courted  the
favour  of  the  multitude.  But  those  who  knew
him  more  intimately  discovered  how  little  real
interest  he  took  in  these  honourable  resources  of
dignified  leisure.  In  his  later  years  he  withdrew
himself  almost  entirely  from  public  life,  and  seemed
to  devote  all  his  languid  energies  to  the  invention
of  new  refinements  upon  the  luxury  of  the  table.2
His  example  countenanced  and  corrupted  those
about  him.  One  after  another  the  nobles  sank
into  a  lethargy  almost  incomprehensible.  The
writers  of  a  later  period  have  associated  the  proudest
names  of  Rome  with  the  preposterous  novelties  by
which  they  amused  their  idleness.  A  Gabinius,  a
CaBlius,  a  Crassus,  were  immortalized  by  the  ele-
gance of  their  dancing.3  A  Lucullus,  a  Hortensius,

1  In  fact,  it  was  the  Greeks  in  Rome,  and  not  the  natives,  who
took  advantage  of  this  munificence. Pint.  Lucull.  42.

2  Veil, ii, 33. ; comp. Plut. Cat. 19.,  Lucull.  40. ; Plin.  H.  N.
xxviii.  14.

3  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  10. The  affectation  of  Hortensius  in  dress  and
manner  is  noted  by  A.  Gellius,  i.  6.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  97

a  Philippus,  estimated  one  another,  not  by  their  CHAJ>.
eloquence,  their  courage,  or  their  virtue,  but  by
the  perfection  of  their  fish-ponds  and  the  singu-
larity of  the  breeds  they  nourished.  They  seemed
to  touch  the  sky  with  their  finger,  says  their
mortified  advocate,  if  they  had  stocked  their  pre-
serves with  bearded  mullets,  and  had  taught  them
to  recognize  their  master's  voices,  and  come  to  be
fed  from  their  hands.1

If  the  austere  virtue  of  Cato  was  roused  to  in-  Ferocity  of
dignation  at  these  degenerate  patricians,  the  ten-

dencies.  on  the  other  hand,  of  the  younger  men  of  amons  th2

J  °  nobility.

the  party  were  not  less  repugnant  to  his  sense  of
justice  and  reverence  for  law.  If  Lucullus  and
Hortensius  were  frivolous  and  narrow-minded,  they
had  at  least  the  merit  of  moderation  and  humanity.
The  remembrance  of  the  horrors  of  the  civil  wars,
no  less  than  the  refinement  they  had  derived  from

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  ii.  1.  :  "Nostri  autem  principes  digito  se  ccelum
putant  attingere,  si  mulli  barbati  in  piscinis  stint,  qui  ad  manus
accedant  ;  alia  autem  negligunt."  Comp.  Varro,  de  R.  R.  iii.  1  7.,
•who  gives  some  curious  descriptions  of  the  fish-ponds  of  Lucullus  and
Hortensius.  The  former  cut  through  a  mountain  to  introduce  salt
water  into  his  preserve,  for  which  feat  Pompeius  gave  him  the  nick-
name of  Xerxes  Togatus.  (Veil.  ii.  34.)  Pliny,  H.  N.  ix.  80.  and  foil.
celebrates  the  inventions  of  Hirrius,  Philippus,  Murena,  and  others,
and  mentions  anecdotes  of  their  extravagance  :  "  Invasit  deinde
singulorum  piscium  amor."  The  ponds  of  Hortensius  were  at  Bauli,
"  in  qua  mursenam  adeo  dilexit  ut  exanimatam  flesse  creditur."  Com-
pare Martial,  x.  30.  :

"  Natat  ad  magistrum  delicata  mursena  ;
Nomenculator  mugilem  citat  notum,
Et  adesse  jussi  prodeunt  senes  mulli."

It  seems  that  this  folly  lasted  a  hundred  and  fifty  years.  Horten-
sius was  said  to  moisten  his  planes  with  wine  (Macrob.  Saturn,  ii.  9.),
and  was  the  first  Roman  who  brought  peacocks  to  table.  (Plin.  H.  N.
x.  23.)

VOL.  I.  H

98  HISTOBY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, their  Greek  education,  made  them  shrink  from  the
jj

'  sight  of  human  blood.  But  the  rising  generation
had  no  such  reminiscences  to  stifle  their  natural
ferocity ;  and  the  increasing  barbarity  of  the  public
spectacles,  perhaps,  it  may  be  added,  of  the  re-
cognized usages  of  warfare,  steeled  their  hearts
against  the  compunctions  of  their  fathers.  They
had  not  learnt  from  experience  the  inevitable  re-
quital of  blood  for  blood,  and  breathed  nothing  but
vengeance  and  destruction  against  every  one  who
ventured  to  cross  their  path.  They  would  govern
the  commonwealth  by  impeachments  and  assas-
sinations; they  would  bring  back  the  days  of
Sullan  ascendancy;  and  certainly  nothing  but  a
perpetual  dictatorship  could  spring  out  of  their
anarchical  policy.  These  were  that  Bloody-minded
Youth,  of  whom  Cicero  speaks  with  such  aversion
and  fear,  who  hired  bands  of  ruffians  to  attend
them  in  the  forum,  nor  travelled  beyond  the  gates
of  the  city  without  an  armed  retinue.1  Such
demonstrations  of  course  begot  rival  ones  on  the
other  side ;  quarrels  and  collisions  naturally  oc-
curred, the  elections  were  constantly  suspended  by
acts  of  violence,  the  assemblies  of  the  people  were
interrupted  by  the  clang  of  arms,  the  sacred  privi-
leges of  the  tribunes  were  violated,  and  the  most
august  personages  of  the  state  driven  from  their
posts  by  fear  for  their  lives.  Caasar  and  Cicero,

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  7.,  written  in  the  year  695  :  "  Megabocchus
(Curio)  et  hsec  sanguinaria  juventus  inimicissima  est."  In  another
place  he  calls  them  "  grex  Catilinse."  The  mildest  terms  which  he
can  apply  to  them,  when  speaking  of  the  temporary  favour  which
they  showed  himself,  are  "libidinosa  et  delicata  juventus."  {Att.
5.  19.)

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  99

Cato  and  Pompeius,  all  suffered  alike  and  in  turn CHAP.
from  the  unbridled  ferocity  of  such  men  as  Clodius
and  Milo,  Metellus  and  Curio.

The  nobles,  when  they  struck  their  great  blow  Position  and
against  the  associates  of  Catilina,  had  intended  ^^^
that  the  effect  of  their  boldness  should  rebound  Marian

.  , .  .  party  in  op-

upon  their  more  distant  enemies.  One  of  these,  as  position  to
we  have  seen,  was  Pompeius,  whose  hands  were  chy.°M
tied  at  the  moment  by  the  exigencies  of  the  wars
in  which  he  was  engaged,  and  the  extent  of  whose
power  might  be  veiled  by  the  remoteness  of  the
stage  on  which  it  was  exercised.  The  other  was
the  popular,  or,  as  it  may  more  conveniently  be
denominated,  the  Marian  party,  the  remnant  of  the
faction  which  had  opened  the  gates  of  Home  to
the  Italian  nations ;  which  had  already  once  ruled
the  commonwealth,  and  still  aspired  to  recover  its
ascendancy  through  the  newly-created  influence
of  its  foreign  adherents.  Though  its  chief  men
had  been,  with  the  exception  of  Marius  himself,
inferior  to  few  of  the  nobility  in  rank  and  origin,
the  political  principle  on  which  it  took  its  stand
was  that  of  renouncing  the  exclusive  privileges  of
Eoman  birth,  and  combining  in  one  phalanx  of
common  interests  the  aristocracy  of  Italy  and  the
provinces.  The  democratic  character  which  it
assumed  was  partly  a  screen  to  facilitate  the  at-
tainment of  these  ulterior  objects,  which  in  them-
selves were  far  from  popular  with  the  mob  of
Eome.  It  was  not  as  a  protection  to  the  poorer
citizens  that  the  Marians  advocated  the  revival  of
the  tribunitian  power,  though  the  interests  of  that
class  furnished  a  convenient  pretext.  The  tri-

H 2

100  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  bunate  invested  its  holders  with  the  privilege  of
'  personal  inviolability,  and  was  anciently  regarded
as  the  shield  of  the  people  against  the  violence  of
the  nobles.  But  at  a  later  period  it  had  usurped
great  aggressive  powers  also,  and  claimed  at  least
an  equal  share  with  the  consulate  in  the  initiation
of  legislative  measures.  This  was  the  claim  which
Sulla  had  annulled,  and  which  the  Marians  were
determined  to  revive ;  could  they  succeed  in  this,
the  tribunate  would  become  in  their  hands  an
irresistible  instrument  of  encroachment  and  usur-
pation. Another  of  their  favourite  objects,  the
elevation  of  the  equestrian  order,  had  a  similar
tendency :  but  the  knights  constituted  an  exclusive
nobility  among  themselves,  and  were  tainted  with
the  same  illiberality  towards  their  inferiors  which
they  experienced  in  their  own  persons  from  the
higher  aristocracy.  Nor  was  it  easy  to  counteract
the  influence  of  Cicero,  and  the  great  men  who
combined  with  him  to  constitute  this  class  an  ally
and  bulwark  of  the  nobility;  for  it  was  attached
by  interest,  as  well  as  by  origin,  to  the  traditional
policy  of  the  conquering  republic,  and  was  not
less  jealous  of  the  interference  of  foreigners  with
its  privileges  than  the  members  of  the  senate  itself.
The  on-  In  the  meanwhile,  the  government  did  not  fail

tSaTntheir~ to  exercise  a  jealous  control  over  the  command  of
command  of  the  armies  of  the  state,  and  to  entrust  them  solelv

the  armies  '  •/

of  the  state,  to  those  on  whom  it  could  rely,  at  least  as  against
their  common  enemy  the  Marians.  By  exerting
all  its  influence  to  secure  the  election  of  its  own
partizans  to  the  highest  magistracies,  it  was  enabled
to  consign  the  legions  in  the  provinces,  year  by

I

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  101

year,  to  officers  of  its  own  choice.  The  army,  CHAP.
which  had  long  lost  its  original  constitution,  and
had  become  a  standing  force  of  soldiers  enlisted  for
a  long  term  of  years,  had  ceased  to  retain  the
political  predilections  which  its  members  used  to
bring  fresh  to  the  camp  from  every  annual  election.
It  had  exchanged  its  love  for  patrician  patrons  or
popular  demagogues  for  pure  military  devotion  to
the  persons  of  its  leaders,  and,  officered  as  it  now
was,  under  the  ascendancy  of  the  senate,  gave  such
steady  support  to  the  existing  government,  that
any  attempt  at  a  revolution,  except  on  the  pre-
carious chance  of  a  coup-de-main,  such  as  that  of
Catilina,  must  have  been  deemed  hopeless  by  any
cool  and  reasonable  statesman.  The  troops  of
Pompeius,  of  Lucullus,  of  Metellus,  and  the  other
proconsuls,  though  quartered  in  every  province  of
the  empire,  constituted  a  garrison  to  the  city,  too
distant  to  control  the  ordinary  course  of  the  go-
vernment, but  sufficiently  near  to  overawe  any
intriguers  who  had  sense  enough  to  forecast  the
results  of  a  few  weeks  or  months  of  resistance.1

Nevertheless,  the  conviction  seemed  to  be  general
that  the  Marians  were  growing  in  strength. The

1  This  was  the  immediate  effect  of  Marius's  own  reform  in  the
constitution  of  the  army.  His  object  was  to  popularize  the  military
force  of  the  republic,  and  wean  it  from  its  devotion  to  the  state ;  and,
with  that  view,  he  abolished  the  property  qualification,  which  had
been  formerly  required  of  every  citizen  who  offered  to  enlist.  Sail.
B.  J,  86. :  "  Non  ex  classibus  et  more  majorum,  sed  uti  cujusque
lubido  erat,  milites  Marius  scripsit,  capite  censos  plerosque.  Id
factum  alii  inopia  bonorum,  alii  per  ambitionem  consulis  memorabant,
quod  ab  eo  genere  celebratus  auctusque  erat,  et  homini  potentiam
quaerenti  egentissimus  quisque  opportunissimus,  cui  neque  sua  curse,
quippe  quse  nulla  sunt,  et  omnia  cum  pretio  honesta  videntur."

H 3

102  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  senate  felt  an  unseen  power  clasping  it  about  with
'  bands  from  which  it  could  scarcely  extricate  itself,
paralyzing  its  energies  and  overshadowing  its  pros-
pects. However  secure  it  was  of  the  soldiers  while
still  retained  under  their  ensigns,  it  knew  that  to
disband  and  disperse  them  in  colonies,  though  de-
manded by  themselves  and  on  many  accounts  ex-
pedient, must  cause  an  immediate  dissolution  of
the  ties  by  which  their  allegiance  was  assured.
No  class  was  more  ready  for  tumult  and  revolt
•than  the  veterans  of  Sulla,  settled  in  apparent  ease
and  contentment  throughout  Italy ;  they  only
wanted  leaders  of  their  own  choice  to  plunge  into
another  civil  war  and  scramble  for  fresh  booty.
The  chiefs  of  the  hostile  party  were  moving  all  the
passions  of  the  vast  constituency  of  the  city,  to
compass  their  own  election  to  the  curule  magis-
tracies, as  opening  the  direct  road  to  the  provinces
and  the  command  of  the  national  armies.  Thus  it
was  that  a  traitor  to  the  aristocracy  had  obtained
the  government  of  part  of  Spain,  and  had  sworn  to
bring  over  his  troops  to  the  support  of  the  Catili-
narians ;  a  danger  which  had  been  only  averted
from  the  government  by  his  premature  and  sus-
picious death.  This  instance  was  enough  to  show
how  imminent  was  the  peril  of  the  senate  even  in
the  midst  of  its  most  apparent  security.  To  defend
itself  against  a  surprise  in  this  quarter,  it  strove
by  its  command  of  the  public  tribunals  to  expose
and  chastise  the  reckless  bribery  of  its  opponents.
But  from  bribing  the  electors  it  was  an  easy  step
to  corrupt  the  votes  of  the  judges,  and  the  Marians
soon  found  that  they  could  succeed  in  the  halls

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  103

of  justice  not  less  readily than  in  the comitia. CHAP.
When  this  last  bulwark  began  to  be  undermined,
the  nobles  felt  that  the  time  was  at  hand  when
they  must  unsheath  the  sword  in  their  own  defence, .
or  surrender  to  the  dictation  of  terms  the  extent  of
which  they  could  hardly  conjecture.

H 4

104  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  III.

CHARACTER AND POLITICAL VIEWS OF CAESAR. HIS EARLY

DANGERS  AND  GOOD  FORTUNE. HE  ASSUMES  THE  LEADER-
SHIP OF  THE  MARIAN  PARTY  I  HARASSES  THE  SENATE  WITH
REPEATED  ATTACKS  :  BECOMES  QUAESTOR,  ^EDILE,  AND  SU-
PREME PONTIFF:  ESCAPES  THE  ATTEMPT  OF  HIS  ENEMIES

TO  INCLUDE  HIM  IN  THE  PROSCRIPTION  OF  CATILINA's  AS-
SOCIATES :  HE  ALONE  FULFILS  THE  IDEA  OF  THE  HERO
DEMANDED  BY  THE  AGE.

CHAP. THE  policy  and  conduct  of  the  popular  party  at
the  great  crisis  of  the  commonwealth  may  be  best

character  understood  by  tracing  the  career  of  its  illustrious
of  caesar.  iea^er?  W}1O  stood  forth  far  more  prominently  among
his  own  associates,  and  gave  more  distinct  expres-
sion to  their  views,  than  was  the  case  with  any
one  of  the  chiefs  of  the  opposite  faction  whose
character  has  already  passed  under  our  review.
To  that  grand  array  of  aristocratic  gravity,  of
military  renown,  of  learning  and  eloquence,  of  aus-
tere and  indomitable  virtue,  were  opposed  the
genius  and  resources  of  one  man.  He  bore,  in-
deed, an  ancient  and  honourable  name  ;  his  talents
for  war  were,  perhaps,  the  highest  the  world  has
ever  witnessed ;  his  intellectual  powers  were  almost
equally  distinguished  in  the  closet,  the  forum,  and
the  field ;  his  virtues,  the  very  opposite  to  those  of
Cato,  were  assuredly  not  less  conspicuous.  But
he  possessed  one  qualification  for  success  more
essential  than  all  these  ;  the  perfect  simplicity  of
his  own  character  gave  him  tact  to  appreciate  the

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  105

real  circumstances  and  tendencies  of  public  affairs, CHAP.
to  which  his  contemporaries  were  signally  blind.

He  watched  the  tide  of  events  for  many  anxious
years,  and  threw  himself  upon  it  at  the  moment
when  its  current  was  most  irresistible.  Favoured
on  numerous  occasions  by  the  most  brilliant  good
fortune,  he  never  lost  the  opportunities  which  were
thus  placed  within  his  grasp.  He  neither  indulged
himself  in  sloth  like  Lucullus,  nor  wavered  like
Pompeius,  nor  shifted  like  Cicero,  nor,  like  Cato,
wrapped  himself  in  impracticable  pride;  but,  equally
capable  of  commanding  men  and  of  courting  them,
of  yielding  to  events  and  of  moulding  them,  he
maintained  his  course  firmly  and  fearlessly,  with-
out a  single  false  step,  till  he  attained  the  topmost
summit  of  human  power.

Caius  Julius  CaBsar,  the  greatest  name  in  history,  His  parent-
was  descended  from  a  genuine  Roman  family  of  Son  w°ith
high  antiquity.1  He  seems  to  have  been  himself

the  first  to  claim  descent  from  the  hero  lulus,  the  he  inherits
offspring  of  JEneas, and  through  him  from  the  ship  of  the

goddess  Venus2  ;  a  legendary  genealogy  which  the
poets  adopted  with  ardour  and  rendered  univer-  £e°™Jvree~es<!
sally  familiar.3 The  name  of  Julius  Julus  occurs  of  MS  views.
several  times  in  the  list  of  the  earlier  consuls,  but
this  branch  of  the  house  seems  to  have  become

1  The  Julii  were  both  patrician  and  plebeian  :  the  branch  which
bore  the  surname  of  Caesar  belonged  to  the  former  class.

2  In  the  funeral  oration  which  he  pronounced  over  his  aunt  Julia,
who  had  been  the  wife  of  Marius. (Suet.  Jul.  6.) At  this  time  he
was  in  full  pursuit  of  the  great  object  of  his  ambition,  and  this  asser-
tion of  his  divine  descent  must  be  regarded  as  a  stroke  of  policy,  and
not  as  a  mere  ebullition  of  youthful  vanity.

3  Veil.  ii.  41.;  App.  B.  C.  ii.  68.;  Dion.  xli.  34.  ;  and  the  poets
passim.

106  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  extinct ;  while  that  from  which  Caius  Caesar  him-
'  self  sprang  could  also  boast  of  more  than  one  con-
sulship, and  a  large  share  of  other  public  honours.
Besides  the  father  and  grandfather  of  Caius,  whose
names  are  honourably  recorded,  several  of  his
uncles  and  cousins  are  mentioned  in  the  annals
of  the  time.  They  seem,  for  the  most  part,  to
have  taken  the  side  of  the  aristocracy  in  the  civil
wars1,  and  more  than  one  of  them  were  slain
by  Fimbria  among  the  enemies  of  Marius  and
China.2  But  Marius  himself  was  married  to  a
Julia,  sister  to  the  father  of  the  future  dictator ;
and  the  nephew  inherited  from  his  uncle  the  cham-
pionship of  the  popular  party,  his  connexion  with
which  he  further  cemented  in  early  youth  by
espousing  the  daughter  of  China.3  Having  thus
planted  himself  in  decided  opposition  to  the  oli-
garchy, he  was  not  dazzled  by  the  brilliancy  of
their  position,  nor  deceived  in  his  estimate  of  their
vaunted  strength  and  resources.  He  knew  how
rotten  was  the  foundation  on  which  their  power
really  rested,  which  was  no  more  than  the  tradi-
tionary awe  of  the  lower  ranks,  and  the  precarious
influence  of  interests  ill  understood.  On  the  other

1  L.  Julius  Caesar  was  consul  at  the  commencement  of  the  Social
war,  and  took  the  command  of  the  Roman  armies. In  the  heat  of
the  struggle  he  perceived  the  wisdom  of  concession,  and  succeeded  in
carrying  a  law  for  the  admission  of  the  Italians  to  the  franchise  of  the
city. But  the  character  of  the  war  was  changed  by  this  time,  and
many  of  the  Italians  refused  to  avail  themselves  of  the  boon. (Cic.
pro  Balb.  8.) The  son  and  grandson  of  this  Caesar  were  noted  parti -
zans  of  the  senate  at  a  later  period,  though  they  had  little  influence
in  public  affairs.

2  Flor.  iii.  21.

3  Cornelia, by  whom  he  had  his  only  daughter  Julia. (Suet.
JuL.  \.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  107

hand,  he  was  thoroughly  conversant  with  the  CHAP.
growing  elements  of  the  Marian  forces.  He  knew
that  their  strength,  great  as  it  was  even  at  Eome,
under  the  very  shadow  of  the  patrician  majesty,
was  supported  moreover  by  many  external  bul-
warks, such  as  the  ambition  of  the  Italians,  the
restlessness  of  the  veterans,  and  even  the  hatred  of
the  provincials  to  the  ruling  class,  with  whose  in-
justice and  tyranny  they  were  most  familiar.1  He
foresaw  that  the  genuine  Koman  race  would  be
overwhelmed  by  the  pressure  of  its  alien  subjects ;
but  he  conceived  the  magnificent  idea,  far  beyond
the  ordinary  comprehension  of  his  time,  of  re-
ducing the  whole  of  this  mighty  mass,  in  its  ut-
most confusion,  to  that  obedience  to  the  rule  of  a
single  chieftain  which  it  scorned  to  render  to  an
exhausted  nation.  He  felt,  from  the  first,  the
proud  conviction  that  his  was  the  genius  which
could  fuse  all  its  elements  into  a  new  Universal
People;  and  the  more  he  learnt  to  appreciate  his
contemporaries,  the  more  was  he  persuaded  that
none  among  them  was  similarly  endowed.  He
aimed  at  destroying  the  moral  ties,  the  principles  or
prejudices  by  which  the  existing  system  of  society
was  still  imperfectly  held  together.  But  he  did  so
from  no  love  of  destruction  or  pride  of  power,  but
because  he  felt  how  obsolete  and  insecure  they  had
become,  and  because  he  trusted  in  his  own  re-
sources to  create  new  ideas  in  harmony  with  his
new  institutions.

Caesar  was  called  upon  to  assert  his  character  He  is  per-

1  "  Romanes  odere  crimes,  dominosque  gravantur

Quos  novere  magis."  Lucan.  vii.  284.

108  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

,  CHAP,  and  his  political  principles  at  the  very  outset  of  his
'  career.  Sulla,  suspicious  of  the  youthful  nephew
secuted  by  of  his  rival,  and  urged  probably  to  destroy  him  by
party."  '  his  own  adherents,  but  restrained  by  some  lurking
feeling  of  mercy,  or  sympathy  with  a  kindred
genius,  required  him  to  divorce  his  wife  Cornelia,
and  thus  loosen  his  connexion  with  the  Marians.1
Their  party  was  at  the  moment  in  its  lowest  state
of  despair.  The  proscription  had  lopped  off  all  its
leaders,  and  no  one  dared  to  raise  his  head  above
the  ranks  of  the  multitude,  who  were  protected  by
their  insignificance.  There  was  no  one  among
them  to  whom  Caesar  could  appeal  for  protection ;
yet,  though  now  only  in  his  eighteenth  year2,  he
resolutely  refused  to  comply  with  the  dictator's
command.  Sulla  was  staggered  by  his  boldness,
and  still  refrained  from  striking.  Even  Pompeius,
the  rising  favourite  of  the  senate,  had  divorced
Antistia  at  the  decree  of  the  tyrant,  and  Piso
Annia,  the  widow  of  Cinna.  But  the  dictator,  it
would  seem,  was  growing  weary  of  power.  He
was  satisfied  with  the  revolution  he  had  effected  ;
he  entertained,  as  he  proved  by  his  abdication,  a
feeling  of  magnanimous  confidence  in  the  stability
of  his  work ;  and,  in  a  moment  of  generosity  or
malice,  he  spared  the  life  of  one  from  whose  genius
he  anticipated  a  brilliant  career.  Nevertheless,  he
is  said  to  have  remarked,  that  in  Caesar  there  was

1  Suet.  Jul.  1. :  Plut.  Cess.  1.

2  A.  u.  672,  B.  c.  82. Caesar  was  born  A.U.  654,  B.  c.  100. Of  his
most  celebrated  contemporaries,  Crassus  was  born  about  B.C.  115.;
Pompeius  and  Cicero,  both  B.  c,  106. ;  Cato,  B,  c.  95.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  109

more  than  one  Marius,  and  to  have  warned  the  CHAP.
oligarchs  to  "  beware  of  that  young  trifler."1
They  were  not  prone  to  disregard  their  master's
predictions,  and  Caasar  did  not  escape  altogether
with  impunity.  He  paid  for  his  constancy  by  the
loss  of  his  place  in  the  priesthood  and  of  his  wife's
fortune.2  He  was  himself  compelled  to  seek  an
asylum  at  a  distance  from  Rome,  beyond  the  im-
mediate observation  of  his  enemies  ;  and  until  his
pardon  was  assured,  he  lurked  in  disguise  among
the  Sabine  mountains.3

The  friends  of  Caesar  had  represented  to  the
dictator  his  youth,  his  careless  habits,  his  insigni-
ficance,  as  reasons  why  he  might  be  spared  with  J^  ^  popu~
safety.  The  reply  of  Sulla  showed  that  he  saw
further  into  his  character  than  ordinary  observers.
He  had  the  acuteness  to  know  how  much  energy
and  power  of  application  is  frequently  concealed
in  youth  under  an  exterior  of  thoughtless  dis-
sipation. There  can  be  no  doubt  *that  the  future
orator,  historian,  and  statesman  must  have  been
actively  employed  from  his  earliest  years  in  storing
his  mind  with  learning,  and  laying  the  foundations
of  the  varied  interest  in  literature  which  he  after-
wards developed.  He  was  also  deeply  meditating

1  Suet.  Ic.  ;  Plut.  I.e.; Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  3.: "Ut  puerum  male
praecinctum  caverent." Dion,  xliii.  43.  :  Toi/  /ca/cws  fawvptvov  ^uXar-

TtffOf.

2  Suet.  Jul.  i.

3  He  was  discovered  and  seized  by  one  Cornelius  Phagita,  from
whom  he  escaped  by  a  bribe. It  is  recorded  by  Suetonius,  as  an
instance  of  the  clemency  of  his  character,  that  he  never  avenged  him-
self upon  his  captor  in  the  time  of  his  power. (Suet.  Jul.  74.  ;  Plut.
Cces.  1.) He  was  pardoned  at  the  intercession  of  the  Vestal  virgins,
of  Mamercus  JEmilius,  and  Aurelius  Gotta. (Suet.  Jul.  1.)

110  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  part  which  he  should  play  in  political  affairs.
'  The  great  popular  party  of  the  last  generation  lay
exhausted  and  shattered  on  the  ground.  He  deter-
mined to  revive  and  consolidate  it,  and  claimed,
with  the  generous  devotion  of  youth,  to  be  the
organ  of  its  passions  and  the  centre  of  its  affections.
The  boldness  of  his  demeanour  in  collision  with  the
all-formidable  dictator  stamped  him  at  once  as  a
man  fit  to  command.  He  seemed  to  leap  at  once
into  one  of  the  niches  of  fame  and  popularity  in
which  the  figures  of  the  great  men  of  the  day  were
admired  and  courted  by  the  multitude.  His  next
step  was  to  make  himself  conspicuous  abroad,  to
form  connexions  for  himself  and  his  party  among
the  nations  and  potentates  beyond  Italy,  who  were
yearning  for  a  nearer  access  to  the  privileges  or
favour  of  Rome.  At  this  period  the  generals  of
the  republic  in  the  East  were  intently  occupied  in
recovering  the  authority  in  the  provinces  which
Mithridates  had  wrested  from  her  in  his  first  con-
test. Caesar  learnt  the  first  rudiments  of  warfare
at  the  siege  of  Mytilene,  under  Thermus.1  He
profited  by  the  opportunity  of  a  mission  to  the
court  of  Nicomedes,  king  of  Bithynia,  to  gain  the
personal  as  well  as  the  political  friendship  of  that
monarch,  who  eventually  bequeathed  his  possessions
to  the  Roman  people.2  He  also  served  under
Servilius  in  Cilicia ;  but  as  soon  as  the  news  of  the

1  Suet.  Jul.  2.

2  The  influence  which  Csesar  obtained  over  the  king  of  Bithynia,
leading,  as  it  apparently  did,  to  this  successful  result,  excited  the
jealousy  of  the  nobles,  and  was  rewarded  by  the  circulation  of  in-
famous but  wholly  unsupported  charges  against  his  private  character.
(Suet.  Jul.  2. ;  comp.  49,  50.)

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  Ill

dictator's  death  reached  the  camp,  he  abandoned CHAP.
the  army  and  returned  to  play  a  more  conspicuous
part  in  civil  affairs.

Upon  the  abdication  of  Sulla,  no  one  had  dared  BU*  **>-

/,  .  ,T •!•,,•  111 stains  from

to  move  a  finger  against  the  institutions  he  had  joining  the

es

some  of  the

established,  such  was  the  terror  the  monster  still
inspired, though disarmed and  decrepid. Upon  ImPeacn

r  '  B  some  of

his  death,  the  self-control  of  the  young  aspirant  principal
was  manifested  in  his  holding  aloof  from  the  pre-
mature reactionary  movement  of  Lepidus.1  Nor
did  he  entangle  himself  in  any  way  in  the  projects
of  Sertorius.  Throughout  life  he  never  trusted
himself  to  the  schemes  and  combinations  of  others.
Whatever  intrigues  he  may  have  favoured  with
the  view  of  thrusting  more  hasty  and  violent  men
into  action,  he  was  careful  not  to  compromise  his
own  ulterior  plans  by  proclaiming  himself  an  open
enemy  of  the  government,  till  he  had  acquired  a
position  from  which  he  might  direct  and  control
every  instrument  he  chose  to  employ.  Accord-
ingly, while  the  sedition  of  Lepidus  was  rapidly
working  the  destruction  of  its  movers,  Cassar  was
betaking  himself  to  slower  and  more  secret  methods
of  moulding  circumstances  to  his  designs.  He
undertook  the  impeachment  of  Dolabella,  a  dis-  A.U.  677.
tinguished  noble,  for  malversation  in  his  province  ;
and,  although  the  senators  succeeded,  as  judges,  in
screening  the  delinquent,  his  accuser  was  rewarded
by  the  unbounded  applause  of  the  people.  The
provinces  hailed  him  as  the  patron  of  the  subject

1  Suet.  Jul.  3.  :  "  Et  Lepidi  quidem  societate,  quanquam  magnis
conditionibus  invitaretur,  abstinuit,  quum  ingenio  ejus  diffisus,  turn
occasione  quam  minorem  opinione  offenderat."

112  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, against  the  citizen,  and  defiance  was  boldly  hurled

'_ against  the  privileges  of  the  aristocracy. A  similar

A.U.  678.  result  followed  a  second  attack  upon  Antonius.
In  this  case  the  accused,  though  he  escaped  at  the
time,  was  expelled  from  the  senate  by  the  censors
six  years  afterwards.  It  was  evident  that  u  the
young  trifler's  "  blows  already  told.1

Caesar  Still  acting  upon  his  principles  of  caution  and

toricatrhe~  delay,  Ca3sar  retired  again  from  Rome,  and  occu-
Athens.  Ef-  piecj  himself  for  some  time  at  Rhodes  in  attendance

fects  of  the r

prevalent  upon  the  instructions  of  the  rhetorician  Molo.2
foreign*  Even  in  this  proceeding,  however  trifling,  we
study.  may  discover  a  trace  of  the  independence  of  his
character.  It  had  been,  from  early  times,  the
practice  of  the  Roman  nobles  to  educate  their
young  men  for  the  bar  and  the  forum,  by  ob-
servation of  the  orators  of  the  day,  their  own
friends  and  relations.  The  school  was  a  noble
one  ;  its  models  lived  and  breathed,  and  transacted
the  real  business  of  the  state.  All  their  words
had  a  meaning,  and  might  be  traced  to  effective
results.  But  the  practice  nourished  exclusive
views  of  state-policy,  and  tended  to  confine  the
management  of  affairs  in  the  hands  of  the  fa-
voured class  who  had  private  access  to  the  dis-

1  Suet.  Jid.  4. Cn.  Cornelius  Dolabella,  consul  A.  TJ.  673,  had  been
proconsul  of  Macedonia. C.  Antonius,  afterwards  consul  with  Cicero
(691),  was  accused  of  extortion  in  Greece. These  impeachments  are
coupled  with  that  of  Verres  for the  enormity  and  notoriety  of  the
offence  in  each  case  :

"  Inde  Dolabella  est  atque  hinc  Antonius,  inde
Sacrilegus  Verres." Juv.  viii.  105.

2  Suet.  L  c. ; Plut.  Cas.  3.  who  is  wrong  in  the order of  time.
(Comp.  Drumann,  iii.  135.) Cicero  had  studied  under  Molo  a  few
years  previously. (Plut.  Cic.  4.;  Cic.  Brut.  91.)

fe.

UNDEll THE EMPIRE.  113

cussions  and  exercises  of  the  nobility.  The  sullen  CHAP.
patricians  of  the  imperial  times  looked  back  with
regret  to  the  period  when  the  halls  of  the  Greek
rhetoricians  had  not  yet  become  the  resort  of
political  adventurers,  and  pointed,  with  bitter  tri-
umph, to  the  sarcasm  of  Cicero,  who  had  once
called  them  schools  of  impudence.1  Yet  Cicero
himself,  the  young  Italian,  to  whom,  no  doubt,
the  arts  and  experience  of  the  nobility  were  far
from  freely  communicated,  had  forged  his  own
best  weapons  in  the  workshop  which,  when  himself
ennobled,  he  thus  harshly  stigmatized.  And  Ca3sar
also  may  have  been  compelled  to  learn  the  business
of  the  forum,  in  some  degree,  from  the  mouths  of
the  sophists,  while  he  was  urged,  no  less  by  his
own  views  and  inclination,  to  bring  their  studies
into  fashion  by  his  example,  and  throw  wide  the
portals  of  political  education.  Predisposed  as  he
was  to  imbibe  liberal  and  cosmopolite  ideas,  his
personal  observation  of  the  men  of  Greece  and
their  modes  of  thinking  might  have  been  highly
influential  in  enlarging  his  views,  and  shaking  to
their  foundations  the  prejudices  held  sacred  by  his
countrymen.  The  school  of  Molo,  the  resort  of
the  ardent  and  enlightened  youth  of  all  nations,
may  have  prepared  the  way  for  his  senate  of  Gauls,
and  Spaniards,  and  Africans.

1  See  the  passage  in  the  Dial,  de  Oratoribus,  35. :  "  At  nunc  adoles-
centuli  nostri  deducuntur  in  scenas  scholasticorum,  qui  rhetores
yocantur  :  quos  paullo  ante  Ciceronis  tempera  extitisse,  nee  placuisse
majoribus  nostris,  ex  eo  manifestum  est,  quod  L.  Crasso  et  Domitio
censoribus  cludere,  ut  ait  Cicero,  ludum  impudentiae  jussi  sunt."  The
passage  of  Cicero  occurs  in  the  De  Orat.  iii.  24.  The  words  are  put
into  the  mouth  of  L.  Crassus,  but  this  speaker  is  considered  generally
to  represent  the  sentiments  of  the  writer.  A

VOL.  I.  I

114

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.

the  pirate*

fortune.

The  many  imminent  risks  of  his  life  which
Caesar  incurred  confirmed  him  in  the  steadfast  con-
He  is  cap-  fidence  with  which  he  relied  on  his  good  fortune,
which  became  one  of  the  secrets  of  his  success.
During  his  retirement  in  the  East,  he  fell  into
the  hands  of  the  Cilician  pirates,  who  were  not
unaccustomed  to  make  a  parade  of  their  defiance
of  Rome  by  murdering  the  officers  of  the  republic
whom  they  captured.  Fortunately,  the  name  of
Caesar  was  not  yet  enrolled  in  the  annals  of  the
magistracy  ;  but  his  birth  and  the  wealth  of  his
family  were  well  known,  and  the  ruffians  were
satisfied  with  demanding  a  ransom.  Some  ro-
mantic embellishments  are  added  to  the  story  by
the  imagination  of  the  narrators,  in  accordance
with  the  reckless  magnanimity  of  character  with
which  tradition  loved  to  invest  her  favourite  hero.1
He  disdained,  it  was  said,  to  purchase  his  liberty
at  so  mean  a  price  as  twenty  talents,  and  offered
his  captors  fifty.  At  the  same  time  he  threatened
them  with  his  vengeance,  and  pledged  himself  to
return  with  a  fleet,  arrest  the  pirates,  and  crucify
them  as  common  robbers.2  His  vengeance,  indeed,
did  not  slumber.  After  his  release,  he  collected
some  forces,  attacked  arid  overcame  his  captors.
He  was  content,  however,  with  offering  to  send
them  to  Junius  Silanus,  the  proconsul  of  Asia,

1  Plut.  Cces.  2.  ;  Poly  sen.  Stratagem,  viii.  23.  1.

2  Plutarch  gives  a  graphic  account  of  the  way  in  which  Csesar  is
supposed  to  have  passed  his  time  among  the  pirates  while  waiting  for
his  ransom. He  spent  eight  and  thirty  days  among  them,  not  so  much
like  a  prisoner  as  a  prince  surrounded  by  his  guards,  and  he  joined
in  their  sports  and  exercises. He  read  his  poems  and  speeches  to
them,  and  scoffed  at  their  bad  taste  if  they  did  not  applaud  them.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  115

under  whose  military  authority  he  was  acting,  CHAP.
that  they  might  suffer  condign  punishment  at  his
hands.  The  proconsul,  in  reply,  ordered  him  to
sell  them  as  slaves,  but  Caesar  resented,  as  an
insult  to  himself,  the  lenity  or  avarice  which  could
dictate  such  an  act.  He  boldly  disregarded  the
command,  arid  sentenced  his  prisoners  to  the  cross,
the  death  of  slaves  and  robbers  :  but  the  historians
thought  it  worth  recording,  as  an  instance  of  the
clemency  always  attributed  to  Caesar  in  compa-
rison with  his  contemporaries,  that  he  allowed
them  to  be  put  to  death  by  a  less  painful  process,
before  he  inflicted  upon  their  bodies  the  last  in-
dignity of  the  law.1

Upon  his  return  to  the  city,  Caesar  prepared  He  enters
to  enter  upon  the  career  of  public  office,  for
which  his  extreme  youth  had  hitherto  disqua-
lined  him.  He  now  began  to  pay  his  court  to  ward
the  people  with  systematic  assiduity.2  His  high
character,  his  noble  aspect  and  popular  manners,
even  the  lustre  of  his  patrician  descent,  recom-
mended him  to  their  affections ;  moreover,  he  had
chosen  his  side  as  a  patron  of  the  popular  cause,
and  had  bearded  the  oligarchy  in  their  stronghold,
the  courts  of  justice.3  But  it  was  not  sufficient  to
enlist  their  prejudices  in  his  favour.  The  can-

1  Suet.  Jul.  74.

2  The  fascination  of  Caesar's  manners  and  address  is  specially  noted.
Plut.  Cfss.  3.

3  The  people,  says  Plutarch  (Lucull.  1.),  set  the  young  orators  upon
noble  delinquents,  just  as  well-bred  whelps  are  hounded  upon  wild
beasts  :  'Edom  St  KCLI  aXXwg  avrols  dvtv  TrpoQavtwc  OVK

i 2

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  didate  for  the  suffrages  of  the  people  availed  hirn-
'  self  profusely  of  the  arts  of  bribery  and  corruption,
and  carried  out  the  lax  morality  of  the  day  with
characteristic  energy.  His  private  fortune  had
never  been  large ;  his  wife's  dowry  had  been
seized  by  Sulla ;  and  he  found  himself  reduced  to
the  greatest  straights  in  supplying  the  demand
of  this  policy.  But  he  drew  boldly  upon  his  own
matchless  self-confidence.  He  borrowed  of  all  his
friends,  and  even  of  his  rivals;  he  pledged  his
future  fortunes ;  he  held  out  the  lure  of  places  and
provinces  to  the  wealthier  of  his  own  faction ;  the
last  reward  of  their  fidelity  could  be  obtained  only
by  placing  him,  at  whatever  cost,  on  the  pinnacle
of  public  honours.  The  pre-eminence  of  his  ge-
nius, however,  was  soon  discovered  by  his  own
party;  as  he  rose,  his  adherents  must  rise  with
him.  Accordingly,  he  was  supported  and  impelled
forwards  by  the  combined  efforts  of  all  who  had
money  to  stake  upon  the  great  game  he  was  play-
ing for  their  common  advancement.

csesar  defies  Meanwhile,  the  policy  which  Pompeius  had  de-
liberately  adopted  after  crushing  the  faction  of
Sertorius,  that  of  surrendering  the  most  obnoxious
privileges  which  Sulla  had  conferred  upon  the
senate,  found,  of  course,  a  zealous  partizan  in  the
youthful  patriot.  This  was  the  beginning  of  the
intercourse  between  the  two  great  rival  statesmen
of  the  age,  and  they  mutually  cultivated  an  ap-
pearance of  friendship,  although  little  cordiality
could  really  exist  between  the  cold,  correct,
and  selfish  Pompeius  and  the  gay  ambitious

UNDER THE EMPIRE,  11?

intriguer  with  whom  he  condescended  to  act.1  CHAP.
Nor  did  the  latter  affect  any  concealment  of  his
political  designs,  as  far  as  they  had  yet  perhaps
dawned  upon  his  own  mind,  His  Marianisrn
became  more  openly  avowed  every  day,  and  it
was  only  a  misplaced  contempt  for  one  whom  he
regarded  as  a  spendthrift-  and  a  reveller  that
could  suffer  Pompeius  to  view  it  with  such  un-
concern. On  the  death  of  Julia,  the  widow  of
Marius,  her  nephew  pronounced  a  funeral  oration
in  her  honour.2  Of  course  a  much  larger  share
of  his  panegyric  was  devoted  to  the  hero  Marius
than  to  the  respectable  matron,  the  ostensible
subject  of  the  ceremony.  The  family  honours  of
the  old  Arpinate  were  scanty,  but  his  exploits
had  raised  his  name  to  a  level  with  the  most
illustrious  Romans ;  and  when  the  orator  boasted
in  the  same  breath  of  his  descent  from  the  gods,
and  his  connexion  with  the  plebeian  champion,
the  people  felt  it  as  a  compliment  to  themselves,
and  declared  that  two  such  illustrious  titles  to  their
esteem  were  fitly  associated  in  the  same  person.
Sulla  had  attempted,  in  the  wantonness  of  his
power,  to  obliterate  the  remembrance  of  his  rival.
No  monuments  were  allowed  to  rise  in  his  honour.
The  public  exhibition  of  his  bust  was  forbidden.
But  Caesar  boldly  violated  the  law,  and  paraded  an  A.  u.  686.
image  of  Marius  among  the  other  insignia  of  his
family.3  He  set  the  example  of  appealing  to  the

1  Pompeius  was  enjoying  his  first  consulship,  with  Crassus  for  his
colleague,  A.  u.  684,  B.  c.  70.

54  A.U.  686,  B.C.  68.

3  Flut.  CCBS.  5.  On  the  death  of  his  wife  Cornelia,  about  the  same
time,  he  delivered  also  a  funeral  oration  over  her.  It  was  not  the

i  3

118

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
III.

Serves  (he
office  of
quajstor  in
Spain.

passions  of  the  people,  by  thus  placing  before  their
eyes  the  figure  of  their  favourite  at  the  moment
when  they  least  expected  or  dared  to  hope  it  ;  an
example  which  was  afterwards  imitated  in  his  own
case  by  Antonius,  when  forbidden  to  plead  for
vengeance  by  words.  In  both  instances  the  effect
upon  the  excitable  blood  of  the  South  was  electric  ;
and  from  that  moment,  perhaps,  the  popular  party
regarded  Caesar  as  the  representative  of  their  lost
chieftain,  and  the  heir  to  their  favour  and  af-
fections.

Caesar  at  this  period  was  serving  the  office  of
quaestor,  upon  the  expiration  of  which  he  followed
the  propraetor  Antistius  Yetus  to  Spain.1  In  his
share  in  the  administration  of  the  province  he
obtained  the  praise  of  industry  and  vigour.2  The
sophists,  who  were  wont  to  parade  him  as  a
striking  instance  of  the  conversion  of  a  dissolute
youth  to  the  noblest  virtues  and  aims,  imagined  a
sudden  change  to  have  taken  place  in  his  cha-
racter at  this  time,  and  ascribed  it  to  his  reflec-
tions on  beholding  a  statue  of  Alexander  the  Great
at  Gades,  and  to  a  dream  of  auspicious  inter-
pretation.3 But  there  is  really  no  trace  of  any
such  conversion  in  Caesar's  history.  His  morals

custom  to  bestow  this  honour  upon  young  married  women,  and  Caesar
obtained  credit  by  this  act  for  peculiar  kindness  and  affection  to  the
memory  of  his  wife.  He  probably  seized  the  opportunity  to  proclaim
to  the  world  his  connexion  with  the  family  of  China,  in  whose  behalf
he  supported  the  bill  of  Plautius  for  allowing  the  adherents  of  Serto-
rius  to  return  to  Rome.  Suet.  Jul.  5.  ;  Gell.  xiii.  3.

1  Plut.  C<BS.  5.  2  Veil.  ii.  43.

3  Suet.  Jul.  7.  ;  Dion,  xxxvii.  52.  ;  but  they  differ  as  to  the  time,
which  Dion  puts  some  years  later.  Plutarch  connects  the  dream
pl  piyvvffQai  Tt)v  appijror  pi^ir')  with  the  passage  of

tHca  Tr avTov
the  Rubicon.

ILNDEU THE EMPIRE.  Il

were  from  the  first  as  lax  as  those  of  the  youth  of  CHAP.
the  time  generally,  and  his  devotion  to  sensual
pleasures  continued  through  life  to  be  little  worthy
of  one  who  had  so  much  both  within  and  without
him  to  exalt  and  purify  his  character.  From  the
very  outset  of  his  career  he  placed  an  object  of
political  ambition  before  his  eyes  ;  nor  was  he  at
any  time  more  thoroughly  in  earnest  than  when
he  defied  the  dictation  of  Sulla  in  his  earliest
youth.

After  an  interval  of  two  years,  the  young  chain-  Becomes
pion of  the Marians  gained  another  step  in  the

of  the
nobles.

career  of  public  honours.  He  was  elected  to  the  sclf  l)y
office  of  sedile1,  a  post  which  afforded  peculiar  the  family
opportunities  to  a  candidate  for  popular  favour,  pemsTre-
and  in  which  he  acquitted  himself  very  much  to  stort;sthe

J  trophies  of

the  satisfaction  of  the  people. Following  steadily  Manus,and

1111 T  i  • i i i -i i  baffles  the

the  bold  policy  which  he  had  adopted  upon  mature  indignation
calculation,  he  bade  high  for  their  applause  by  the
magnificence  of  his  shows  and  entertainments.2  He
had  prevailed  upon  his  colleague  Bibulus,  a  wealthy
noble,  to  furnish  the  sums  requisite  for  this  pro-
fuse expenditure,  for  his  own  private  resources
were  exhausted,  and  his  debts  amounted  to  thirteen
hundred  talents.  He  might  share  the  credit  of
generosity  with  his  colleague3,  but  he  knew  that

1  A.U.  689,  in  the  consulship  of  P.  Cornelius  Sulla  and  P.  Autro-
nius  Paetus. The  election  took  place  of  course  in  the  year  preceding.

2  The  gladiatorial  shows  with  which  he  celebrated  the  memory  of
his  father  were  peculiarly  splendid. "  Omni  apparatu  arenas  argenteo
usus  est," Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiii,  16.

3  Even  this  was  not  the  case,  for  the  goodwill  of  the  people  insisted
upon  ascribing  the  whole  merit  to  their  favourite. Bibulus  consoled
himself  by  making  the  best  bon-mot the occasion allowed  : "  Nee
dissimulavit  collega  ejus  M.  Bibulus  evenisse  sibi  quod  Polluci  ;  ut

i 4

J/20  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  its  more  substantial  recompense  would  accrue  to
'  himself  alone.  In  the  mean  time  he  had  been  for-
warding with  all  his  influence  the  schemes  by  which
the  friends  of  Pornpeius  were  pandering  to  their
patron's  ambition,  and  widening  the  breach,  already
apparent,  between  him  and  the  senatorial  party.
A.  u.  687.  He  had  chosen  to  connect  himself,  by  a  second
marriage,  with  the  Pompeian  house ;  and  his  de-
votion to  the  aggrandizement  of  its  chief  might  be
mistaken  by  its  object,  and  by  the  world,  for  family
affection.1  The  success  of  the  Manilian  bill  was
owing,  probably,  far  more  to  the  crafty  support  of
Caesar  and  Crassus  than  to  the  eloquence  of  Cicero.
The  exhibition  of  the  bust  of  Marius  in  a  funeral
procession  had  already  irritated  the  nobles ;  but
now  a  greater  insult  was  inflicted  upon  them.
Among  his  other  acts  of  munificence  as  aedile,
Caesar  had  decorated  the  forum,  the  basilicas,  and
the  Capitol  with  pictures  and  statues ;  he  had
enlarged  them  with  additional  porticoes  for  the
gratification  of  the  people,  and  these  also  he  had
adorned  with  monuments  of  taste  and  luxury.2
One  morning  there  suddenly  appeared  among  the
new  ornaments  of  the  Capitol  the  statue  of  Marius
surrounded  by  the  trophies  of  his  Cimbric  and
Jugurthine  victories.3  The  people  were  intoxicated
with  delight ;  the  nobles  scowled  with  undisguised

enim  fralribus  aedes  in  foro  constituta  tantum  Castoris  vocaretur,  ita
suam  Csesarisque  munificentiara  unius  Caesaris  dici."  Suet.  Jul.  10. ;
Dion,  xxxvii.  8.

1  Pompeia,  Caesar's  second  wife,  was  the  daughter  of  Q.  Pompeius
Kufus,  consul  with  Sulla  A.U.  666. If  there  was  any  connexion  by
blood  between  the  two  great  branches  of  this  gens,  it  must  have  been
a  very  remote  one.

2  Suet.  Jul  10.  3  Suet.  Jul.  11. ;  Plut,  Co?.?.  6.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  121

indignation.  The  author  of  the  deed  did  not  pro-  CHAP.
claim  himself;  but  neither  party  could  err  in
assigning  it  to  the  daring  aedile.  Catulus,  once
more  at  the  head  of  his  part}7,  determined  to  bring
him  to  punishment  for  this  direct  breach  of  the  law.
His  bitterness  was  inflamed,  over  and  above  his
political  enmity  to  the  Marians,  by  the  remembrance
of  a  brother  who  had  been  one  of  the  most  dis-
tinguished victims  of  their  proscription.1  He  ac-
cused Caesar  of  having  by  this  act  thrown  off  the
mask  from  his  ulterior  designs ;  of  no  longer  sub-
verting the  republic  with  mines,  but  of  assailing  it
with  the  battering-ram.2  Caasar  defended  himself
before  the  senate,  and  succeeded  in  foiling  his
accuser;  but  his  triumph  was  not  owing  to  the
favour  of  his  audience,  but  to  the  temper  of  the
people,  upon  which  the  nobles  dared  not  make  an
experiment.  It  would  appear,  from  the  historians,
that  the  trophies  of  Marius  retained  possession  of
their  conspicuous  place  in  front  of  the  Capitol,  an
indication  of  the  popular  strength,  which  must
have  shaken  the  nerves  even  of  Cato  himself.3

Still  the  resolution  of  both  parties  became  more  The  nobles
firmly rooted ; the combat waxed  warmer  and  retaliatc-

1  Cic.  de  Orat.  iii.  3.

2  Plut.  Cces.  6. :  Oy,c  tn  jap  inrovo^oiQy  t<pr],  KaT<r«p,  a\,V  frfi]  ^-^avciiQ
a'ipti  rfjv  TToXirtiav.

3  Suet.  JuL  11.: "  Tropaea restituit." Veil.  ii.  43.: "  Restituta
monumenta." They  make  no  mention  of  their  having  been  removed.
Propertius  (iii.  11.  46.)  speaks  of  them  as  existing  at  a  later  period:
"Jura  dare  et  statuas  inter  et  arma  Mari,"  and  Val.  Max.  vi.  9.  14. :
"  Cujus  bina  tropaea  in  urbe  spectantur." The  antiquaries  of  modern
Rome  thought  they  had  discovered  a  portion  of  these  identical  trophies
in  the  monument  now  placed  at  the  top  of  the  steps  which  lead  to  the
Campidoglio ;  but  the  illusion  has  been  dispelled  by  the  greater  acute-
ness  of  later  critics.

122  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  warmer.  The  senate  hastened  at  the  earliest  op-
portunity to  strike  another  blow.  The  republic
claimed  possession  of  Egypt  upon  the  pretence  of  a
will  made  in  their  favour  by  the  king,  Ptolemasus
Alexander  I.,  during  the  ascendancy  of  Sulla  ;  but
the  government  had  prudently  abstained  from  en-
forcing these  pretensions.1  It  preferred  leaving
the  fertile  plains  on  which  Italy  relied  for  no  small
portion  of  her  daily  sustenance  in  the  hands  of  a
dependent  sovereign,  to  subjecting  them  to  the
ambition  or  cupidity  of  a  citizen.  But  Caesar  was
now  anxious  to  reap  the  first-fruits  of  the  fame  he
had  acquired,  and  relieve  himself  from  some  part
of  the  load  of  his  immense  pecuniary  obligations.
He  solicited  the  appointment  to  an  extraordinary
mission,  for  the  purpose  of  constituting  the  country
a  province  of  the  empire,  and  arranging  its  ad-
ministration. The  senate,  however,  in  its  jealousy
of  Pompeius,  and  of  all  who  appeared  to  side  with
him,  conceived  that  Caasar  proposed  to  strengthen
the  hands  of  its  general  in  the  East  by  adding  to
his  enormous  powers  the  control  of  one  of  the
granaries  of  the  city.  Accordingly,  it  peremp-
torily rejected  the  demand,  and  proceeded,  in  ad-
dition to  this  insult,  for  the  claim  was  fair  and
reasonable,  to  make  another  move  against  its  in-
dignant enemy.  It  made  use  of  one  of  the  tri-

i  Cicero  throws  suspicions  upon  the  validity  of  this  claim  (De  Leg.
Agr.  ii.  16.)  ;  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  republic  conceived  it  had
a  legitimate  title  to  the  country,  and  it  seems  most  probable  that  this
was  the  pretext  of  Caesar's  demand.  The  account  given  by  Suetonius
(JuL  11.),  that  he  proposed  to  restore  a  king  whom  the  Egyptians
had  expelled,  is  evidently  a  confusion  of  dates  and  circumstances
Comp.  Drumann,  iii.  146.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  123

bunes,  named  Papius,  to  introduce  a  plebiscitum,  CHAP
decreeing  the  removal  of  all  aliens  from  Rome.1
The  pretence  was,  that  strangers  from  the  pro-
vinces flocked  into  the  city  and  interfered  with  the
popular  elections,  where  the  immense  number  of
the  genuine  voters  rendered  it  impossible  to  exer-
cise due  caution  in  taking  the  suffrages.  But  this
blow  was  more  particularly  aimed  at  the  Trans-
padane  Gauls,  who  were  anxious  to  exchange  their
Latin  franchise  for  that  of  Rome.  Caesar,  while
passing  through  their  country  on  his  return  from
Spain,  had  listened  affably  to  their  representations,
and  they  had  gladly  connected  themselves  with
him  as  their  patron  and  political  adviser.  This
measure,  therefore,  seemed  calculated  to  gall  the
popular  leader,  and  reduce  the  estimation  in  which
the  provincials  began  to  hold  him.2  But  the  time
was  coming  when  such  attacks  would  only  draw
closer  the  ties  between  the  subjects  of  the  republic
and  their  chosen  defenders  ;  and,  at  a  later  period,
the  persecution  of  a  Transpadane  Gaul  was  one  of
the  crowning  insults  which  drove  Cassar  to  take
up  arms  against  the  senate.

It  was  now  Cassar's  turn  to  strike. The  crea-

tures  of  Sulla,  who  had  perpetrated  at  his  insti-  again!3  Pn>-

pro-

gation  the  atrocities  of  the  proscription,  had  ob-
tained  an  act  of  indemnity  to  relieve  them  from  la's  asents

..-,"-,  -,

tne  legal  guilt  incurred  by  the  murder  of  Roman
citizens. Sulla  had  caused  a  general  enactment  to

1  Dion,  xxxvii.  9.

2  This  was  called  the  Lex  Papia  de  peregrinis  or  de  civitate  Ro-
mana,  A.U.  689. Dion,  xxxix.  9.;  Schol.  Bob.  in  Orat.  pro  Arch.
Cic.  de  Off.  iii.  11.

124  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  be  passed,  defining  and  assigning  punishments  for
every  mode  of  assassination,  but  including  a  special
exemption  for  his  own  agents  in  that  bloody  work.1
By  discharging  the  office  of  aedile,  Caesar  acquired
the  right  of  assisting  the  praetors  in  the  performance
of  their  judicial  functions,  and  administered  the
law  in  the  department  to  which  the  investigation
of  charges  of  murder  was  referred.  While  acting
in  this  capacity,  he  permitted  accusations  to  be
made  against  two  of  Sulla's  ruffians,  Luscius  and
Bellienus,  and  pronounced  sentence  of  death  upon
them.2  It  seems  that  Catilina  was  dragged  before
the  same  tribunal,  on  a  similar  charge,  but  was
allowed  to  escape  conviction.3  These  prosecutions
gave  great  satisfaction  to  the  people,  whom  the
violation  of  an  unpopular  law  had  ceased  to  sur-
prise or  disgust.  The  victims  of  these  convictions
were  justly  odious,  and  they  fell  without  commiser-
ation. But  Caesar  did  not  stop  here.  These  pro-
ceedings were  merely  intended  to  prepare  the  way
for  another  and  more  terrible  demonstration  against
his  opponents.4  Thirty-six  years  before  L.  Satur-
ninus,  a  tribune  and  favourite  of  the  people,  had
headed  a  revolt  against  the  government,  and  seized
upon  the  Capitol.5  The  consuls,  Marius  and  Va-

1  This  was  the  Lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis. Suet.  Jul.  11.

2  Cato,  in  his quaestorship,  had  already  prosecuted  the  agents  of
Sulla  who  had  received  public  money  in  reward  for  their  services  to
him  in  the  proscription. Plut.  Cat.  Min.  17.

3  Dion  xxxvii.  10.

4  The  case  of  Rabirius  may  be  conveniently  noticed  here,  as  be-
longing to  the  same  series  of  attacks  upon  the  persons  of  the  nobility
as  those  just  mentioned. But  it  did  not  occur  till  the  early  part  of
Cicero's  consulship,  A.  u.  691.

5  A.U.  654,  the  year  of  Caesar's  birth. .

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  125

lerius,  summoned  the  citizens  to  their  aid.  The  CHAP.
principal  men  of  all  parties  seem  to  have  obeyed
the  invitation ;  and,  after  besieging  the  public
enemy  in  his  fortress,  they  at  last  reduced  him
by  cutting  the  pipes  which  supplied  it  with  water.
The  consuls,  it  appears,  offered  him  pardon  on
capitulation1;  but  it  so  happened  that,  upon  his
opening  the  gates  and  descending  from  his  fast-
ness, a  tumult  arose,  his  party  was  attacked,  and
himself  killed  in  the  confusion.  A  slave  named
Scaava  came  forward,  declared  himself  the  man
who  had  struck  the  blow,  and  obtained  a  public
reward  for  the  good  service  he  had  done  the  state.
For  many  years  no  further  notice  was  taken  of  the
circumstance.  But  it  was  determined  in  Caesar's
councils  to  make  this  event,  so  long  passed,  a  pre-
text for  another  attack  upon  the  oligarchy ;  and  an
aged  senator  named  Rabirius  was  picked  out  to
suffer  the  charge,  now  apparently  advanced  for  the
first  time,  of  having  been  the  real  author  of  the
deed.  The  man  himself  was  not  unjustly  obnoxious,
as  being  one  of  the  worst  specimens  of  the  cupidity
and  tyranny  of  his  class ;  but  the  charge  against
him  seems  to  have  been  monstrously  iniquitous,  and
was  preferred,  perhaps,  on  that  very  account,  that
its  extravagance  might  evince  in  the  most  glaring

1  Cicero's  argument  that  the  pardon  of  the  consuls  was  not  valid
because  it  had  not  been  formally  ratified  by  the  senate  is  a  paltry
quibble ;  but  such  an  act  on  the  part  of  Marius,  who  was  sometimes  a
reluctant  instrument  in  their  hands,  would  be  regarded  with  jealousy
by  that  body,  Cic.  pro  Rabir.  ]  0.  The  whole  speech  is  an  appeal  to
the  passisns  much  more  than  to  the  judgment  and  equity  of  his
hearers ;  but  the  facts  of  the  case  were  in  themselves  overwhelmingly
strong  in  favour  of  the  accused.

,^

126  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, manner  the  determination  of  the  popular  leaders
_  to  drive  the  senate  to  extremity. The  trial  was

held  before  a  tribunal  at  which  Caesar  himself
presided,  together  with  his  kinsman  Lucius,  by  the
extraordinary  appointment  of  the  praetor.1  Cicero
defended  the  criminal ;  but  his  eloquence  was  not
likely  to  be  of  any  avail,  and  sentence  was  given
against  his  client.  Consternation  reigned  in  the
ranks  of  the  nobility.  The  charge  was  capital,
and  an  appeal  lay  in  one  quarter  only,  the  comitia
of  the  tribes.  This  resource  seemed  to  offer  but  a
slender  chance  of  success,  but  it  was  necessary  to
resort  to  it ;  and  it  might  be  faintly  hoped  that
the  eloquence  of  the  unrivalled  orator  would  have
greater  effect  upon  an  excitable  multitude  than
upon  cool  and  prejudiced  individuals.  But  Cicero
again  failed ;  and  but  for  the  timely  interference  of
a  praetor,  Metellus  Celer,  the  unfortunate  Rabirius
could  hardly  have  escaped  the  confirmation  of  his
sentence.  When  the  frontiers  of  Rome  were  but  a
few  miles  from  her  gates,  and  the  advance  of  the
Etruscans  behind  the  barrier  of  the  Vatican  and
Janiculan  hills  was  frequently  sudden  and  unper-
ceived,  watch  was  kept  upon  an  eminence  beyond  the
Tiber,  to  give  notice  of  the  approach  of  an  enemy,
whenever  the  people  were  occupied  with  the  trans-

1  They  were  styled  duumviri  perduellionis,  judges  of  murder.
L  Caesar  had  been  consul  the  preceding  year,  and  was  generally  con-
nected with  the  party  of  the  senate,  but  he  seems  on  this  occasion  to
have  been  completely  under  the  influence  of  his  kinsman  Caius.  Dion,
xxxvii.  27.  The  circumstances  of  this  trial,  which  we  gather  from  a
comparison  of  Cicero's  pleadings  with  Dion's  succinct  narrative,  have
given  rise  to  much  controversy.  The  statement  in  the  text  is  taken
from  Dion.

UNDER THE EM  TIRE.  127

action  of  business  in  the  Campus  Martius.  The  sig-  CHAP.
nal  of  danger  was  the  removal  of  the  great  white  flag
which  floated  conspicuously  on  the  summit  of  the
Janiculan.1  The  people  broke  up  hastily  from  their
elections  or  debates,  and  rushed  to  man  the  walls.
The  old  custom  remained  in  force  for  centuries
among  a  people  more  than  usually  retentive  of
formal  observances.2  Metellus,  acting  no  doubt  in
concert  with  the  leaders  of  the  prosecution,  struck
the  flag,  and  suspended  the  proceedings.  The  ex-
cited and  blood-thirsty  populace  understood  and
perhaps  laughed  at  the  trick,  consenting  cheerfully
to  be  baulked  of  their  prey  for  the  sake  of  a  con-
stitutional fiction.  The  object  of  the  accusation
being  already  gained,  the  prosecutor  Labienus  did
not  press  the  matter  further,  and  it  was  allowed  to
fall  into  oblivion.

Indefatigable  in  harassing  the  aristocracy,  the  Theagra-
leaders  of  the  popular  party  had  already  under-

taken  to  support  the  agrarian  bill  proposed  in  the  *ne°ph0enrof
previous  year  by  one of  the  tribunes, Servilius  the  Marian
Rullus. The  object  of  the  tribune  was  to  get  a
board  of  commissioners  appointed  to  carry  into  effect
three  great  popular  measures.3 The  first  of  these
was  the  division  among  the  commonalty  of  all  the
public  land  beyond  Italy  which  had  been  acquired
by  the  republic  since  the  era  of  the  consulship  of

1  Serv.  ad  JEn.  viii.  1.:  "Alii  album  et  roseum  vexillum  tradunt,
et  roseum  bellorum,  album  comitiorum  signum  fuisse."

2  Dion,  who  gives  this  account  (xxxvii.  28.),  says  that  the  practice
still  continued  in  his  own  day  :  Ka«  trt  r«  icai  vvv  oViaf  fWica  Troitlrai.

3  Cic.  de  Leg.  Agr.  contra  Bull.  ;  Plut.  Cic.  12. The  discussion
of  these  measures  took  place  at  the  commencement  of  Cicero's  con-
sulship, 691. His  first  speech  was  spoken  on  the  first  of  January  (in
Pison.  2.).

128  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  Sulla  and  Pornpeius  Rufus,  in  the  year  of  the  city
666.  This  embraced  a  great  proportion  of  the
conquests  of  Lucullus  and  Pompeius  in  the  East ;
for  all  the  lands  of  conquered  enemies,  which
were  neither  assigned  to  Roman  colonies  nor  re-
stored to  the  natives  upon  their  submission,  be-
came public  domain,  and  were  granted  in  occu-
pation on  easy  terms  to  favoured  citizens,  but  with
no  right  of  property.  In  Italy,  also,  the  event
of  the  Marsic  war  had  thrown  much  of  the  landed
property  of  the  vanquished  party  into  the  posses-
sion of  the  state  ;  and  this  had  either  been  given
to  the  Sullan  veterans  as  colonists,  or  let  to  them
as  tenants.  This  portion  of  the  public  domains,
which  had  been  acquired  since  the  period  assigned
by  the  tribune,  he  excepted  from  his  law,  and  did
not  venture  to  touch.1  However  popular  such
interference  might  have  been,  it  would  doubtless
have  been  dangerous.  Cicero  declares  that  it  would
have  involved  the  kindred  of  the  mover  of  the  bill
himself  in  the  common  ruin  of  those  who  had
benefited  by  the  dictator's  liberality.  But  it  would
have  been,  no  doubt,  a  great  boon  to  the  clamorous
poverty  of  the  urban  populace  to  have  received  a
share  of  the  public  land  in  the  East,  whatever  its
amount  may  have  been,  which  we  have  no  means
of  estimating.

In  the  second  place,  the  commissioners  were  to
institute  an  inquiry  into  the  pecuniary  transactions
of  the  successful  generals  of  the  republic,  who  had
returned  from  their  Eastern  victories  laden  with

1  This  war  was  terminated  in  the  year  of  Sulla's  and  Pompeius's
consulship :  Rullus  drew  his  line  immediately  previous  to  that  epoch.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  129

the  spoils  of  war  and  the  presents  showered  upon  CHAP.
them  by  subjects  and  allies.  It  was  proposed  that
the  whole  of  the  sums  which  they  hard  thus  per-
sonally acquired,  beyond  what  they  had  expended
upon  public  works,  or  handed  over  to  the  treasury,
should  be  restored  to  the  commissioners  appointed
to  make  the  investigation.  Pompeius  himself,  such
was  the  gratitude  and  delicacy  of  the  republic,  was
to  be  exempted  from  this  restitution ;  but  the
account  of  others  was  to  be  made  retrospective;
even  inherited  property,  it  seems,  was  to  be  swept
into  the  net ;  and  it  was  from  Faustus  Sulla,  the
son  of  the  dictator,  that  the  amplest  return  was
anticipated.

A  third  provision  of  the  law  was,  that  a  tax
should  be  imposed  upon  all  public  lands  excepted
from  the  sale.  The  monies  thence  accruing  might
be  used  by  the  commissioners  in  making  such
purchases  of  land  for  division  as  they  should  judge
desirable.  But  the  point  upon  which  Cicero,  who
resolutely  opposed  the  measure  throughout,  lays  the
greatest  stress,  as  the  most  arbitrary  and  dangerous
of  its  enactments,  was  that  by  which  certain  do-
mains in  Campania  were  to  be  divided  among  the
commonalty,  and  colonies  to  be  drafted  to  Capua
and  neighbouring  places.  He  declares  his  grave
apprehensions  lest  Capua  should  thus  become  the
seat  of  a  great  plebeian  community  in  antagonism
to  Rome  ;  he  enlarges  upon  the  dangers  which  were
apprehended  from  that  city  in  the  time  of  Hanni-
bal; expatiates  upon  the  pride  and  vicious  cha-
racter attributed  to  its  inhabitants  in  all  ages,  and
denounces  the  scheme  as  one  which  must  infallibly

VOL.  I.  K

130  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS

CHAP, create  a  great  rival  power  in  the  centre  of  Italy.
It  may  be  recollected  that  in  the  course  of  the

Social  war  the  allies  had  threatened  to  destroy
Eome  and  transfer  the  common  seat  of  government
to  Corfinium.1  Such  perils  might  occur  again ;
and  though  Cicero  himself  may  have  entertained
no  serious  apprehension  from  the  foundation  of  the
new  colony,  we  can  understand  how  plausible  his
argument  was,  as  addressed  to  the  jealous  pride  of
the  Koman  comitia.  The  orator's  speeches  against
the  agrarian  law  of  Rullus  were  amongst  the  most
specious  triumphs  of  his  art.  In  three  successive
harangues,  he  first  convinced  the  senate  of  the
impolicy  of  the  proposal,  then  persuaded  the  people
that  it  would  be  of  no  advantage  to  their  inte-
rests, and,  finally,  defended  himself  with  vehemence
against  the  insinuation  of  the  tribune  that  his  op-
position to  it  had  been  grounded  on  personal  views,
critical  po-  The  fact  was,  with  regard  to  Cicero  and  his
vigorous  hostility  to  this  measure,  that  its  intro-
duction placed  him  in  a  critical  position,  from
which  it  required  consummate  dexterity  to  extri-
cate him  with  any  appearance  of  honour.  He  had
just  reached  the  summit  of  his  ambition,  first  by
the  advocacy  of  certain  popular  claims,  under  the
wing  of  Pompeius,  and  again  by  persuading  the
nobles  that  he  had  been  an  aristocrat  throughout
at  heart,  that  his  liberal  tendencies  had  been
misunderstood,  and  that  he  was,  in  fact,  entirely

1  Veil.  ii.  16.  :  "  Caput  imperii  sui  Corfinium  elegerant  quod  appel-
larunt  Italicum." Comp.  Lucan,  ii.  136. :

"  Turn,  cum  pasne  caput  nmndi  rerumque  potestas
Mutavit  translata  locum,  Romanaque  Samnis
Ultra  Caudinas  speravit  vulnera  furcas."

UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  131

devoted  to  their  interests. The  bill  of  Kullus  was CHAP.
a  test  of  his  real  policy,  which  he  could  not  evade.

It  was  one  of  those  decisive  measures  which  try
the  mettle  of  the  adherents  of  party  ;  no  man
could  support  it  and  profess  himself  an  oligarch  ;
no  man  could  oppose  it  and  retain  the  affections  of
the  people.  It  was  an  ingenious  device  of  the
Marians  to  compel  Cicero  to  break  with  the  people,
whom  he  had  thus  far  cajoled  and,  as  they  deemed,
betrayed  to  the  senate.  Cicero,  indeed,  was  most
reluctant  to  pronounce  openly  in  favour  of  the
aristocratic  party,  though  it  was  to  their  cause
that  he  doubtless  proposed  from  henceforth  to
devote  himself.  The  effort  he  made  to  the  last  to
convince  both  parties  that  he  was  really  advo-
cating their  interests  could  deceive  neither,  and
the  noisy  declamations  he  vented  about  the  ima-
ginary dangers  of  his  new  Carthage  were  only
meant  to  cover  his  ignominious  retreat  from  a
position  which  was  no  longer  tenable.

C.  Calpurnius Piso was a nobleman of  high  casar  pro-
reputation,  and  a  devoted  partizan  of  the  senate.
He  had  been  consul  in  the  year  of  the  city  687.

He had subsequently obtained the province of  catuiusfor

^11  i xi  Ai  J i_ 1  i ^i the  dignity

(jaul  beyond  the  Alps, and  had  suppressed the  of  supreme

mutinous  spirit  of  the  natives  with  unscrupulous
severity. The  Allobroges  preferred  against  him  a  °^  figi
charge  of  malversation,  and  his  judicial  murder  of  B.C.  63.  '
a  Transpadane  Gaul  gave  Caesar,  as  the  patron  of
that  people, an opportunity  of  coming forward
and conducting their prosecution.1 Cicero was

1  Sallust,  S.  C.  49.  :  "  Piso  oppugnatur  in  judicio  pecuniarum  re-
petundarum,  propter  cujusdam  Transpadani  suppliciura  injustum."

K 2

132  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS

CHAP,  intimately  connected  with  this  Piso,  whom  he
had  extolled  to  Atticus  as  the  pacificator  of  the
Allobroges1,  and  with  whom,  while  absent  in  Gaul,
he  had  concerted  measures  for  his  own  elevation  to
the  consulship.2  He  now  undertook  his  defence,  and
the  judges  found  no  difficulty  in  acquitting  him.3
This  result  was  a  matter  of  little  concern  to  the
popular  party,  who  were  satisfied  with  seeing  the
breach  between  the  chiefs  of  the  rival  factions
daily  widened,  and  their  personal  animosities  ren-
dered irreconcileable.  Piso  vowed  revenge,  and
soon  afterwards  made  a  desperate  effort  to  obtain
it,  in  concert  with  Catulus,  who  was  at  the  same
time  stung  by  a  new  disappointment.  We  have
already  seen  what  indignation  this  nobleman,  the
veteran  champion  of  the  Sullan  constitution,  mani-
fested when  the  upstart  leader  of  the  Marians
exhibited  the  spoils  of  their  revered  hero  in  the
Capitol.  He  had,  moreover,  failed  in  getting  this
audacity  punished ;  the  trophies  remained  to  per-
petuate the  recollection  of  the  insult.  We  may
imagine  the  mortification  with  which  the  idol  of
the  nobles,  the  honoured  prince  or  leader  of  the
senate,  would  daily  regard  them.  How  bitterly  he
must  have  felt  it  when,  upon  offering  himself  as  a
candidate  for  the  office  of  Pont  if  ex  Maximus,  the
most  dignified  elevation  to  which  a  citizen  could
aspire,  he  found  the  same  CaBsar,  still  young  in
years,  still  a  novice  in  political  affairs,  still  unknown

'  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  13.  2  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  1.

3  Cic.  pro  Flacco,  39.  :  "  Consul  ego  nuper  defendi  C.  Pisonem,

qui  quia  consul  fortis  constansque  fuerat,  incolumis  est  reipublicae
conservatus."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  133

by  any  civil  or  military  exploits,  starting  in  au-  CHAP.
dacious  competition  with  him.1  For  the  nobles
professed  to  regard  Cassar  merely  as  a  reckless
spendthrift,  and  to  consider  his  well-known  pecu-
niary embarrassments  his  only  claim  to  notoriety.
Catulus  offered,  perhaps  in  derision,  to  buy  off  his
opposition  by  ministering  to  his  necessities,  that
the  field  might  thus  be  left  open  to  the  rivalry  of
himself  and  Servilius,  a  worthy  candidate,  who
had  just  returned  in  triumph  from  the  East  with
the  title  of  Isauricus.  But  Caesar  knew  his  own
position,  and  had  calculated  his  resources.  He
refused  the  offers  of  Catulus  with  scorn,  declared
that  he  would  persevere  in  the  contest,  and  that,
as  for  his  debts,  he  was  prepared  to  borrow  more
to  win  it.2  The  enactments  of  Sulla  had  with-
drawn from  the  people  the  appointment  to  the
sacerdotal  college,  and  had  constituted  that  body
self-elective.  What  mode  the  dictator  assigned  for
the  appointment  of  the  supreme  pontiff  does  not
clearly  appear,  but  it  was  probably  confided  to  the
comitia  of  the  centuries  by  the  same,  law  of  La-
bienus  which  had  restored  the  election  of  the
priests  generally  to  the  people.  It  was  apparently
only  a  few  months  or  weeks  since  this  great  tri-
umph had  been  achieved  by  the  popular  party  3,
and  Caesar  might  reasonably  count  upon  the  good
offices  of  the  electors.  Nor  did  he  conceal  from

1  Sallust,  B.  C.  49.  :  "  Catulus  ex  petitione  pontificates  odio  incen-
sus,  quod  extrema  setate,  maximis  honoribus  usus,  ab  adolescentulo

Cassare  victus  discesserat."

2  Plut.  CtBS,  7.  : 'O  dt  KO.I  TrXfid)

3  Dion,  xxxvii.  37.  ;  comp.  Fischer,  Rom.  Zeittafeln,  228.

134  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  himself  that  he  staked  all  his  fortunes  upon  the
"  die.  When  the  moment  arrived,  and  he  was  about
to  present  himself  in  public,  his  mother  attended
him  in  tears  to  the  door  of  his  house,  and  he  em-
braced her  with  the  words,  "  This  day  you  will
behold  your  son  either  supreme  pontiff  or  an
exile."1  The  election  terminated  in  his  elevation
to  the  much-coveted  honour.  The  old  traditions  of
the  state  were  violated  in  favour  of  one  so  young
and  inexperienced ;  and  the  senate  was  taught  that
its  civil  influence  was  gone  for  ever ;  it  must  now
gird  itself  for  the  battle,  and  place  its  trust  in  its
purse  and  its  sword.

The  nobles The  deadly  animosity  which  had  been  fostered
attempt  to between  the leaders of  the  rival  factions  by  so

implicate  *

Caesar  in  many  contests  might  be  sufficient  to  account  for
conspiracy,  the  charge,  so  often  made  against  Caesar,  of  having
been  concerned  in  the  conspiracy  of  Catilina,  even
if  we  had  not  the  direct  assurance  of  contempo-
raries that  such  was  its  real  origin.  Smarting
under  their  late  vexations,  Piso  and  Catulus  com-
bined with  their  united  influence  to  urge  Cicero  to
include  their  hateful  enemy  in  the  arrests  which
he  was  meditating.2  They  even  attempted  bribery,
but  without  effect.  The  consul  was  either  too
honest,  or,  at  least,  too  cautious.  He  could  not
venture  to  punish  Caesar  capitally,  and  to  have
included  him  in  the  list  of  the  accused  would  have

1  Suet.  Jul  13.

2  Sallust,  B.  C.  49. :  "  Sed  iisdem  temporibus  Q.  Catulus  et  C.  Piso
neque  precibus  neque  gratia  neque  pretio  Ciceronem  impellere  potu-
erunt,  uti  per  Allobroges  aut  per  alium  indicem  C.  Ctesar  falso  nomi-
naretur."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  135

saved  all.  But  the  triumphant  career  upon  which  CHAP.
the  young  Marian  was  now  entering,  successful  in
every  encounter  with  the  nobles,  where  the  public
exposure  of  their  enormities  was  in  itself  success,
growing  also  as  he  was  in  strength  as  well  as  in
popularity,  affords  a  strong  argument  in  favour
of  his  innocence.  The  only  temptation  he  could
have  had  to  join  in  an  act  of  violence  lay  in  his
pecuniary  embarrassments.  But  in  this  respect  a
person  in  Caesar's  position  had  resources  which
common  minds  little  appreciated.  He  was  re-
garded by  his  friends  as  the  rising  sun,  destined  to
be  the  fountain  at  some  future  day  of  all  honours
and  emoluments.  In  that  age  of  universal  reckless-
ness no  mode  of  gambling  was  more  general  than
that  of  staking  mens'  fortunes  on  the  success  of
political  adventurers.  Whatever  enterprize  Caesar
announced,  money  always  flowed  in  to  effect  it.

The  line  of  argument  which  he  adopted  in  the  Caesar  ad-
senate,  when  the  punishment  of  the  criminals  came  ™n°hfnt  *
to  be  debated,  was  not  dictated  by  any  personal  J*"l^e  on
interest  in  their  behalf. He  declared that they  spirators:
were  justly  liable  to  the  severest  of  all  possible  enedwmi
penalties,  but  to  the  free  and  high-minded  banish-
ment,  he  contended, and  imprisonment  would  be
worse  than  death. These,  accordingly,  were  the
punishments  which  he  advocated,  and  he  enforced
his  arguments  by  the  consideration  that  these,  at
least,  were  strictly  legal ;  for  the  people  alone,  he
maintained,  had  power  to  decree  death  on  a  charge
of  treason. Such  tampering  with  the  letter  of  the
law  on  the  part  of  the  nobility  had  been  the  great

K 4

136  HISTOEY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, cause  of  offence  which  had  embittered  the  rivalry

'_ of  political  factions. The  murders  of  the  Gracchi

and  of  Saturninus  had  roused  the  people  to  the
most  direful  vengeance.  The  proscriptions  of  Sulla
were  no  more  than  a  similar  stretch  of  prerogative
on  a  more  extensive  scale.  The  execution  of  Len-
tulus  and  his  associates  would  reopen  the  sluices  of
bloodshed  ;  reaction  would  follow  upon  reaction  ;
each  party  would  alternately  decimate  the  other.1
This  was  the  popular  argument  of  the  day.  The
commonalty  were  depressed,  and  they  naturally
made  their  strongest  appeals  to  the  principles  of
mercy ;  but  that  Oa3sar  really  felt  the  force  of  his
own  reasonings  may  be  believed  from  the  example
of  clemency  which  he  conspicuously  set  when  he  was
himself  in  the  ascendant.  But  the  nobility,  as  has
been  already  said,  were  in  a  position  of  strength,
in  which  an  act  of  bold  severity,  if  followed  by
prudence  and  moderation,  might  have  cowed  their
enemies  on  either  side,  and  re-established  the  con-
stitution. Unfortunately  they  perpetrated  the  vio-
lence recklessly,  and  neglected  to  anticipate  and
avert  its  effects.  Their  cry  for  blood  was  not  the  po-
litic severity  of  Cicero,  but  the  thirst  of  wild  beasts.

1  Caesar's  arguments,  though  ultimately  unsuccessful,  had  consider-
able influence :  "  Metum  injecit  asperiora  suadentibus,  identidem
ostentans  quanta  eos  in  posterum  a  plebe  Romana  maneret  invidia."
Suet.  Jul.  14.  Tiberius  Nero  had  preceded  Caesar  in  declaring  similar
sentiments.  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  5. ;  Sail.  B.  C.  50.  How  deeply  the
violence  of  Sulla  had  sunk  into  the  minds  of  the  Roman  people  may  be
estimated  from  a  remarkable  passage  of  Dionys.  A.  R.  v.  77.  It  was
not  the  cruelty,  but  the  irregularity  of  his  proceedings  that  made  so
lasting  an  impression.  His  dictatorship  was  a  mere  tyranny.  He
acted  as  no  Roman  had  ever  acted  before,  and  treated  Romans  as
Romans  had  never  before  been  treated.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  137

Even  the  precincts  of  the  senate  house  were  pro-  CHAP.
faned  by  their  barbarous  passions.  Caesar,  on  leav-
ing the  Temple  of  Concord,  in  which  this  celebrated
deliberation  had  been  held,  was  attacked  by  a  mob
of  knights,  partizans  of  the  oligarchy,  the  friends
especially  of  Piso  and  Catulus,  from  whose  drawn
swords  he  was  with  difficulty  preserved  by  the
influence  of  Cicero  and  the  zeal  of  his  own  as-
sociates.1 His  position  as  an  enemy  of  the  aris-
tocracy was  now  more  distinct  than  ever.  The
contest  between  them  had  assumed  the  form  of
personal  hostility,  in  that  last  and  most  frightful
shape  in  which  it  was  familiar  to  the  Romans.
Rage,  hatred,  and  defiance  expelled  all  milder
counsels  ;  and  while  every  one  was  hastening  to
array  himself  on  one  side  or  the  other,  the  middle
party,  the  object  of  the  fostering  care  of  the  best
and  wisest  statesmen,  dwindled  away  into  impotence
and  insignificance.

The ranks of  both  parties in  the  state  were  Extrava-
filled  with  men  of  practical  ability, whose lives  popui^y9
had  been  passed  in  the  free  and  active  spheres  of  afloat-

r  Want  of  an

the  camp  and  the  forum  ;  but,  with  the  exception  original  and
of  Cassar himself, it  would  be  difficult  to  point  mimfto1
out  a  single  individual  of  original  genius,  or  one  gulde  them*
who  could  discern  the  signs  of  the  times,  and  con-
ceive  comprehensive measures  in harmony  with
them. The  temper  of  the  Roman  people  at  this
crisis  of  their  history  required  the  guidance  of  a
mind  of  more  vigorous  grasp  than  was  possessed
by a Cicero or a Pompeius, whose talents as
public men  were limited to a capacity  for  ad-

1  Pint.  Cces.  8.

138  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  ministration,  in  which  respect  we  shall  have  occa-
sion more  than  once  to  signalize  their  ability,  but
who  could  neither  understand  nor  grapple  with
the  great  evil  of  the  Sullan  revolution,  which  had
checked  the  natural  progress  of  reform  demanded
by  the  extension  of  the  Roman  franchise,  and  re-
stored the  landmarks  of  a  constitution  which  was
no  longer  the  legitimate  exponent  of  the  national
character.  The  people  had  already  undergone  a
marked  change  in  their  ideas  and  motives  of
action,  while  they  were  still  clinging,  with  the
pertinacity  for  which  they  were  remarkable,  to
forms  from  which  the  living  spirit  had  departed.
The  extent  and  rapid  succession  of  their  con-
quests, bringing  with  them  an  overwhelming  ac-
cession of  public  and  private  wealth,  had  filled
men's  minds  with  the  wildest  anticipations.  The
extravagance  of  each  succeeding  year  eclipsed  the
profuseness  of  its  predecessor.  M.  Lepidus,  the
consul  in  the  year  of  Sulla's  death,  erected  the
most  magnificent  dwelling  that  had  been  seen  up
to  his  day  in  Home ;  within  thirty -five  years  it  was
outshone  by  not  fewer  than  an  hundred  mansions.1
The  same  was  the  case  with  the  extension  of  the
territorial  possessions  of  the  nobility,  their  accu-
mulation of  plate,  jewels,  and  every  other  article  of
luxury,  and  not  less  the  multiplication  of  their
slaves  and  dependents.  The  immoderate  interest
which  ready  money  commanded  shows  that  the
opening  of  new  channels  to  enterprize  outstripped
even  the  rapid  multiplication  of  wealth.  Mines  of
gold  lay,  as  it  were,  at  the  feet  of  any  man  who

1  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  24.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  139

could  procure  means  to  purchase  the  soil  above  CHAP.
them.  The  price  was  trifling  compared  with  the
gains  to  be  acquired ;  but  whether  the  specu-
lator succeeded  or  was  ruined,  the  usurer  reared
a  stately  fortune  in  ease  and  security.  All  eyes
were  turned  from  the  barrenness  of  the  past  and
fixed  upon  a  future  of  boundless  promise.  Men
laughed  at  the  narrow  notions  of  their  parents  and
even  of  their  own  earlier  years.  It  is  only  once  or
twice  in  the  course  of  ages,  as  on  the  discovery  of
a  new  continent,  or  the  overthrow  of  a  vast  spiri-
tual dominion,  that  the  human  imagination  springs,
as  it  were,  to  the  full  proportion  of  its  gigantic
stature.  But  even  a  generation  which  has  wit-
nessed, like  our  own,  an  extraordinary  development
of  industrial  resources  and  mechanical  appliances,
and  has  remarked  within  its  own  sphere  of  pro-
gress how  such  circumstances  give  the  rein  to  the
imagination,  what  contempt  for  the  past,  what  com-
placent admiration  of  the  present,  and  what  daring
anticipations  they  engender  regarding  the  future,
may  enter  into  the  feelings  of  the  Romans  at  this
period  of  social  agitation,  and  realize  the  ideas  of
an  age  of  popular  delirium.

When  the  mind  of  a  nation  is  thus  excited  and  cjcsar  the
intoxicated  by  its  fervid  aspirations,  it  seeks  relief
from  its  own  want  of  definite  aims  in  hailing  the
appearance  of  a  leader  of  clearer  views  and  more  the  crisis-
decisive  action. It  wants  a  hero  to  applaud  and
to  follow,  and  is  ready  to  seize  upon  the  first  that
presents  himself  as  an  object  for  its  admiration,
and  to  carry  him  forward  on  his  career  in  triumph.
Marius,  Sulla,  and  Pompeius,  each  in  their  turn

140  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  claimed  this  eager  homage  of  the  multitude ;  but
'  the  two  former  had  passed  away  with  their  gene-
ration, and  the  last  lived  to  disappoint  the  hopes
of  his  admirers,  for  whom  he  was  not  capable  of
extending  the  circuit  of  the  political  horizon.  For
a  moment  the  multitude  was  dazzled  by  the  elo-
quence and  activity  of  Cicero,  but  neither  had  he
the  intellectual  gifts  which  are  fitted  to  lead  a
people  onward.  The  Romans  hailed  him  as  the
saviour  and  father  of  his  country,  as  another
Romulus  or  Camillus1;  but  this  was  in  a  fit  of
transient  enthusiasm  for  the  past,  when  their  minds
were  recurring  for  a  moment  to  their  early  founders
and  preservers.  It  was  still  to  the  future  that
their  eyes  were  constantly  directed ;  and  it  was  not
till  the  genius  of  Cassar  burst  upon  them,  with  all
the  rapidity  and  decision  of  its  movements,  that
they  could  recognize  in  any  of  the  aspirants  to
power  the  true  captain  and  lawgiver  and  prophet
of  the  age.

1  Cic.  in  Pis.  3. ;  Plut.  Cic.  22. ;  Appian.  B.  C.  ii.  7. ;  Plin.  //.  N.
vii.  30. ;  Juvenal,  viii.  244.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  141

CHAP.  IV.

DEFEAT AND DEATH OP CATILINA.  —  THE OLIGARCHY DERIVES
GREAT CONFIDENCE FROM THIS SUCCESS, AND DEFIES POM-

PEIUS.  —  POPULARITY OF CICERO.  CAESAR'S PROGRESS IN

THE  ATTAINMENT  OF  HONOURS  AND  POWER. — RETURN  OF
POMPEIUS  FROM  ASIA  :  HE  RESENTS  THE  ATTITUDE  OF  THE
SENATE  TOWARDS  HIM.  —  THE  SENATE  TURNS  THE  LICENTI-
OUSNESS OF  CLODIUS  TO  A  POLITICAL  OBJECT POMPEIUS

ALLIES  HIMSELF  WITH  C^SAR  AND  CRASSUS. THE  TRIUM-
VIRATE.—  CJESAR'S  CONSULSHIP,  AND  CONTINUED  HOSTILITIES

BETWEEN  HIM  AND  THE  SENATE. HE OBTAINS  THE  PROVINCE

OF GAUL CLODIUS ELECTED TRIBUNE: HIS POPULARITY,

AND MACHINATIONS AGAINST CICERO. ABANDONMENT OF

CICERO  BY  THE  CONSULS,  AND  COLDNESS  OF  THE  TRIUMVIRS.
HE  IS  ASSAILED  BY  CLODIUS,  AND  RETIRES  INTO  EXILE.

CATILINA  had  replied  to  the  denunciations  of  Cicero CHAP.
with  a  few  words  of  furious  menace ;  but,  on  leaving
Rome,  he  addressed  letters  to  some  of  the  prin-  catmna
cipal  men  of  the  city,  in  which  he  declared  his  in-  KS
tention  of  betaking;  himself  to  Massilia  as  a  place  of  of  the  in:

°  r  surgents  in

voluntary  exile.1 But  to  Catulus,  who  either  was,  Etruna.
or  whom  at  least  he  wished  to  be  considered,  a  ^c'es. '
more  intimate  friend  he  opened  himself  without
disguise. He  declared  that  he  was  urged  to  ex-
tremity by  the  violence  of  personal  enemies ;  that
he  could  no  longer  endure  to  see  the  elevation  of
unworthy  Romans  to  places  of  trust  and  honour,
from  which  he  was  himself  excluded  by  unjust
suspicions ;  that,  in  short,  he  was  now  resolved  to

1  Sail.  B.  C.  33,  34.

142  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, effect  a  revolution  in  the  state,  for  such  was  the

IV

obvious  meaning of  his  threat  to  undertake  the

defence  of  the  poor  and  the  oppressed  in  Italy  and
the  city.1  On  reaching  Arretium  in  Etruria  he
assumed  the  insignia  of  military  command,  and
repaired  to  the  carnp  of  his  adherent  Mallius,  who
had  already  gone  forward  to  raise  the  standard  of
revolt,  and  was  actively  appealing  to  the  hopes  and
necessities  of  the  rustic  population.  The  senate
forthwith  issued  a  decree  by  which  Catilina  and
his  lieutenant  were  declared  enemies  of  the  state,
and  ordered  the  consul  Antonius  to  levy  troops
for  their  destruction.  At  the  same  time  it  deemed
it  prudent  to  offer  pardon  to  all,  except  the  two
leaders,  who  should  abandon  the  guilty  enter-
prize;  but  not  a  single  man,  it  was  said,  was  found
to  desert  his  chiefs.  On  the  other  hand,  while  some
supplies  of  men  and  money  were  forwarded  from
his  coadjutors  in  Eome,  Catilina  received  con-
siderable additions  to  his  forces  from  among  that
desperate  class  which  rejoiced  in  the  prospect  of
an  impending  revolution,  and  now  rushed  to  share
the  peril  and  the  spoil  without  any  previous  con-
cert with  the  conspirators.2

HIS  defeat The  rebel  force  now  consisted  of  two  legions  of

lth' the  ordinary  complement,  but  not  above  one  fourth

of  the  number  were  fully  equipped,  the  rest  having

1  Sail.  B.  C.  35.

2  Among  these  traitors  to  the  state  was  a  youth,  A.  Fulvius,  the  son
of  a  senator,  who,  being  arrested  on  his  way  and  brought  back,  was
put  to  death  by  his  father's  order. (Sail.  B.  C.  39. ;  Dion,  xxxvii.
36.;  Val.  Max.  v.  8.  5.) This  imitation  of  the  discipline  of  the  ancient
republic  excited  neither  applause  nor  indignation  among  the  languid
voluptuaries  of  the  senate. Meriinee,  ii.  183.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  143

armed  themselves  with  any  weapons  which  they  CHAP.
could  seize  or  fashion  for  the  occasion.  While
awaiting  the  result  of  his  friends'  machinations  in
Kome,  Catilina  kept  to  the  mountains,  out  of  the
reach  of  the  consul's  forces.  Antonius  himself
showed  great  tardiness  and  indecision ;  his  conduct
was  open  to  the  suspicion  of  sympathy,  if  not  of
concert,  with  the  enemy  he  was  sent  to  subdue.
But,  fortunately  for  the  republic,  his  lieutenants
were  men  of  vigour  and  activity.  The  prsetor,
Metellus  Celer,  had  checked  by  the  rapidity  of  his
movements  the  spirit  of  disaffection  which  was
beginning  to  manifest  itself  in  either  Gaul.  He
was  at  the  head  of  three  legions,  with  which  he
occupied  Picenum  and  Umbria,  and  watched  the
northern  flanks  of  the  Apennines.  Hasty  and  ill-
concerted  risings  in  Bruttium  and  Apulia  had  also
been  speedily  quelled  ;  yet,  if  Catilina  could  have
burst  from  the  toils  by  which  he  was  surrounded,
he  might  have  taken  advantage  of  the  winter
season  to  rouse  rebellion  throughout  Italy,  and
have  collected  resources  for  another  year's  cam-
paign.1 The  news  of  the  detection  and  defeat  of
the  conspiracy  reached  him  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Faesulae.  His  first  impulse  was  to  make  for
Gaul,  with  which  view  he  traversed  the  territory
of  Pistoria,  and  was  about  to  cross  the  Apennines,
when  he  found  himself  confronted  by  Metellus  with
firm  resolution  and  superior  numbers.  Something
might  still  be  hoped  from  the  favour  or  timidity  of
Antonius,  and  he  turned  again  to  throw  himself
upon  the  consular  army.  Antonius  shut  himself

1  Cic.  pro  Sest.  5.

144

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

Differences

CHAP,  up  under  pretence  of  illness,  and  allowed  the  com-
'  mand  to  devolve  upon  Petreius,  a  veteran  of  un-
flinching fidelity.  Catilina's  undisciplined  bands
had  no  chance  against  their  opponents  as  soon  as
they  met  in  the  field  ;  yet  they  fought  to  the  last
with  the  ferocity  of  wild  beasts,  unless,  indeed,
their  devotion  to  their  leader  deserves  a  nobler
title.  Three  thousand  of  their  number  were  slain
in  the  combat,  and  each  man  fell  on  the  spot  on
which  he  had  been  marshalled  for  the  battle.  The
body  of  Catilina  himself  was  found  far  in  advance
of  the  line,  among  the  corpses  of  the  enemy,  and
the  expression  of  his  dying  countenance  still  cor-
responded to  the  passions  which  had  animated  him
in  life.1

While  the  generals  of  the  republic  were  still
^un^ng  ^ne  common  enemy  in  the  Apennines,  and
the  senate,  the  machinations  of  his  associates  had  not  yet  been
exposed,  the  leaders  of  the  senate  were  allowing
themselves  to  quarrel  among  one  another,  as  if
they  had  no  one  to  fear  either  within  or  without
the  city.  The  election  of  consuls  for  the  ensuing
year  had  fallen  upon  D.  Junius  Silanus  and  L.
Licinius  Murena.  Sulpicius,  who,  as  well  as  Catilina
himself,  was  one  of  the  disappointed  candidates,
resented  the  decision  of  the  comitia,  and  brought
forward  a  charge  of  bribery  against  Murena.  He
was  a  distinguished  member  of  the  aristocratic

1  Sallust,  B.C.  61.  ;  Floras,  iv.  1.  ;  Dion,  xxxvii.  39,  40.  Catilina
made  his  escape  from  Rome  Nov.  9,  A.U.  691,  of  the  unreformed
calendar,  equivalent  to  Jan.  13,  B.C.  62.  The  execution  of  the  con-
spirators took  place  Dec.  5  ==  Feb.  7,  and  he  was  slain  in  the  begin-
ning of  the  year  692  =  the  middle  of  March,  B.C.  62.  Fischer,  Zeit-
tqfeln,  p.  221.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  145

party,  and  obtained  the  assistance  of  Cato  in  pro-  CHAP.
moting  his  suit.  We  may  believe  that  even  the
stern  moralist  would  not  have  lent  himself  to  this
proceeding  at  such  a  moment,  had  not  the  guilt
of  the  accused  been  gross  and  notorious.  It  is  not
likely,  however,  that  his  rival  came  into  court  with
clean  hands.  At  all  events,  in  the  existing  crisis
of  affairs,  it  was  most  import-ant  that  the  executive
should  not  be  paralysed  by  depriving  Silanus  of
his  appointed  colleague,  and  withdrawing  his  at-
tention from  the  care  of  the  public  interests  to  the
harassing  duties  incident  to  a  fresh  election.  This
Cicero  saw,  and  immediately  stepped  forward  to
defend  Murena,  to  whose  military  reputation  he
trusted  for  giving  an  imposing  attitude  to  the
defiance  which  the  senate  was  on  the  point  of
hurling  at  its  enemies.1  The  exertions  of  the
orator  were  successful,  and  his  speech  is  more  than
usually  interesting,  from  the  tone  of  banter  in
which  he  indulges  towards  men  in  whom  the
senatorial  party  reposed  the  highest  confidence;
from  the  disparagement  he  throws,  on  the  one
hand,  upon  the  legal  science  for  which  Sulpicius
was  justly  celebrated,  and  upon  the  Stoic  phi-
losophy, on  the  other,  of  which  Cato  was  the
advocate  and  the  pattern.  In  a  subsequent  work,
of  more  pretensions  to  sober  argument,  he  alludes
to  this  speech,  and  acknowledges  that  he  had  pur-
posely adapted  his  rhetoric  to  the  taste  of  a  vulgar

1  The  speech  pro  Murena  was  delivered  after  Catilina's  retreat,
but  before  the  execution  of  his  associates  (c.  37.)  ;  Murena's  military
services  are  extolled  (cap.  5.  9.  16.).

VOL.  I.  L

146

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
IV.

Caesar
praetor.
The  nobles
indicate
their  suspi-
cions of
Pompeius.

audience.1  But  we  must  regard  this  curious  ef-
fusion of  levity  as  a  sign  that  the  orator  was
already  puffed  up  with  the  success  of  his  policy,
and  did  not  scruple  to  gratify  his  vanity  by  de-
preciating the  merits  of  the  chief  men  of  his  own
party.  Cato,  who,  with  all  his  outward  austerity,
was  a  man  of  singular  good-humour,  smiled  at  his
opponent,  and  quietly  remarked  to  those  about
him  how  witty  a  consul  the  republic  enjoyed.2

In  the  midst  of  their  contentions  for  the  highest
office,  the  nobles  had  allowed  Ca3sar  to  obtain  one
of  the  second  places  in  the  scale  of  power,  the
praatorship,  which  he  held  in  conjunction  with
M.  Calpurnius  Bibulus,  the  candidate  of  the  op-
posite party.  The  most  prominent  among  the
tribunes  were  M.  Cato  and  Metellus  Nepos,  a
brother  of  Celer,  the  praetor  of  the  preceding  year.
Nepos  was  an  adherent  of  Pompeius,  and  was  sent
by  him  from  Asia  to  canvass  for  the  tribuneship,
that  on  his  own  return  he  might  secure  the  ser-
vices of  an  ally  in  that  important  office.  Cato,  it
was  said,  had  resisted  the  solicitations  of  his
friends  to  allow  himself  to  be  nominated  for  another
seat  on  the  tribunitian  bench,  declaring  that  the
post  was  too  invidious  for  one  who  was  resolved
not  to  swerve  in  the  conduct  of  affairs  from  the
strictest  rules  of  probity  and  justice.  But  while

1  Cic.  de  Fin.  iv.  27. ;  comp.  Quintil.  xi.  1.

2  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  21. Niebuhr  excuses  Cicero's  levity,  and  repre-
sents it  as  the  innocent  expression  of  natural  cheerfulness  and  playful
spirits  on  the  happy  termination  of  an  arduous  enterprize. (Lect.  on
Rom.  Hist.  ii.  29.) But  the  affair  of  Catilina  had  not  yet  reached  its
crisis ;  and  though  the  consul  might  be  confident  that  he  possessed  the
means  of  crushing  the  enemy,  his  mind  must  have  been  engrossed  with
anxiety  regarding  him.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  147

on  his  journey  into  Lucania,  to  escape  from  the  CHAP.
turmoil  of  the  approaching  elections,  he  met  Nepos,  '
who  had  just  landed  at  Brundisium.  He  knew  or
divined  the  object  of  this  sudden  arrival,  and
ordered  his  horses'  heads  to  be  turned  towards
Rome,  resolved  to  defeat  the  election  of  a  creature
of  Pompeius,  or  at  least  to  place  himself  in  a  situ-
ation in  which  he  might  neutralize  his  baneful  in-
fluence.1 He  sought  and  obtained  the  tribuneship,
in  which  he  was,  at  the  same  time,  associated  with
the  enemy  whom  he  had  set  himself  to  watch,
whose  evil  schemes  he  was  prepared  to  counteract
by  the  free  exercise  of  his  official  veto.2  Such
were  the  suspicions  which  the  leaders  of  the  aris-
tocracy already  entertained  of  their  once  favourite
champion.

This  early  preparation  for  a  year  of  violence
and  intrigue  was  amply  justified  by  the  events  deprive0  ca-
which  followed. On  the  first  of  January,  when

the  consuls  entered  upon  their  duties,  it  was  cus-  restoring

c  11 ^ ^' £  • x  J the  Capitol,

tomary  for  all  the  chief  men,  the  magistrates  and  but  is  de-

dignitaries  of  the  state,  to  proceed  to  the  Capitol,
and  there  offer  them  their  solemn  greetings.3  Caesar,  B>  c-  62<
however,  instead  of  assisting  in  this  act  of  official
courtesy,  took  advantage  of  the  absence  of  his  col-
leagues and  rivals  to  address  the  people  in  the
forum,  and  to  propose  that  Catulus  should  be  de-
prived by  their  vote  of  the  honours  due  to  him  as

1  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  20.  *  Cic.  pro  Mur.  3.

3  We  find  this  custom  alluded  to  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  later
by  Pliny  (Ep.  ix.  37.)  :  "  Vides  quam  non  delicata  me  causa  obire
primum  consulatus  tui  diem  non  sinat  :  quam  tamen  hie,  ut  praesens,
votis,  gaudio,  gratulatione  celebrabo."

L 2

148  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  restorer  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  which  was
now  on  the  point  of  completion.1  That  august
edifice,  the  glory  of  the  City  and  the  Empire,  had
suffered  severely  in  the  conflagration  which  took
place  during  the  conflict  of  Sulla  and  Marius.2
The  charge  of  restoring  it  in  a  manner  worthy  of
the  extended  greatness  of  the  republic  had  been
assigned  to  Catulus,  as  prince  of  the  senate  and
the  most  illustrious  of  all  her  citizens.3  He  had
accepted  the  commission  with  pride,  and  bestowed
infinite  care  on  its  execution,  nor  had  he  shrunk
from  incurring  vast  personal  expense,  that  his
name  might  deserve  to  be  inscribed  on  its  front  by
his  grateful  countrymen.  Csesar  brought  forward
a  charge  of  peculation  against  him,  and  demanded
the  production  of  his  accounts ;  while  at  the  same
time  he  insisted  that  he  should  not  be  permitted
to  put  the  finishing  hand  to  the  work,  but  that
the  burden  and  the  glory  should  be  transferred  to
Pompeius.  This  attack  was,  perhaps,  not  seriously
meant  to  succeed.  It  answered  the  purpose  of
enraging  and  alarming  the  nobles,  of  thwarting  a
personal  enemy,  above  all,  of  menacing  the  aris-
tocracy with  the  vengeance  of  the  chieftain  they
distrusted.  It  was  also  an  overture  of  more
cordial  alliance  between  the  two  rivals.  But  the

1  See  Cic.  in  Verr.  ii.  4.  31.

2  Not  by  accident,  but  designedly. Some  charged  Sulla,  others
Carbo,  with  having  applied  the  torch. Tacitus,  Hist.  iii.  72.  says,
"  fraude  privata."

3  Sulla  originally  undertook  it,  but  died  before  the  work  had  pro-
ceeded far. This  disappointment,  it  was  said,  was  the  only  exception
to  the  universal  good  fortune  from  which  he  obtained  his  surname  of
Felix. "  Hoc  solum  felicitati  ejus  negatum." Tac.  1.  c. ;  comp.  Plin.
H.  N.  vii.  43.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  149

nobles,  on  hearing  what  was  going  forward,  rushed  CHAP.
from  the  presence  of  the  consuls  into  the  forum,
with  all  their  friends  and  adherents,  and  succeeded
in  averting  the  threatened  blow.  The  name  of
Lutatius  Catulus  was  duly  inscribed  upon  the
noblest  monument  of  the  national  pride,  and  bore
witness  to  the  glory  of  the  most  blameless  hero  of
the  aristocracy  until  the  temple  was  again  de-
stroyed by  fire  in  the  civil  wars  of  Vitellius  and
Vespasian.1

The main object  of  the  extraordinary  powers
which  Pompeius  enjoyed  had  been  recently  attained

by  the  death  of  the  terrible  Mithridates  in  the  pre-  °f  4MithI?-

J  *  dates,  who

ceding  year. The  power  of  the  Eastern  tyrant  had  forms  anew
been  gradually  broken  by  the  perseverance  of  a  tion  against
succession  of  Roman  generals,  and  he  had  been  r  me'
finally  expelled  from  all  the  territories  which  he
had  inherited  or  acquired  on  the southern  shore
of  the  Euxine. The  ascendancy  which  Pompeius
had  gained  over  his  army,  and  probably  the  zea-
lous assistance  of  the  civil  administrators  through-
out the  East,  whose  extortions  he  had  not  chosen,
like  Lucullus,  to  check,  gave  him  far  more  com-
plete command of  his resources  than  his  prede-
cessors ever  possessed. Accordingly,  he  obtained

1  Tac.  /.  c.  ;  Suet.  Vit.  15.  Dion  (xliii.  4.)  says  that  the  senate
decreed  (A.F.  708)  that  the  name  of  Catulus  should  be  erased,  and
that  of  Caesar  substituted.  In  modern  times,  indeed,  an  inscription
has  been  found  within  the  tabularium  bearing  the  name  of  Catulus  :
"  Q.  Lutatius  Q.  F.  Q.  N.  Catulus  substructionem  et  tabularium  de
s.  s.  faciendum  coeravit."  This,  however,  refers  only  to  a  small  and
inferior  part  of  his  work.  The  tabularium,  the  depository  of  the
public  archives,  was  built  against  the  face  of  the  Capitoline  hill,  upon
a  huge  substruction  of  masonry  between  the  two  summits  of  that
eminence.

L 3

150  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  an  easy  conquest  over  Tigranes,  king  of  Armenia,
and  received  his  submission  with  favour  upon  pay-
ment of  an  adequate  tribute.1  He  drove  the  king
of  Pontus  beyond  the  Caucasus :  but  to  pursue
him  further  was  a  service  of  no  little  danger,
for  such  a  charm  did  the  mighty  monarch  carry
with  him,  even  in  exile  and  disgrace,  that  wher-
ever he  came  the  nations  rose  to  welcome  and  obey
him.  Mithridates  retreated  round  the  north-eastern
coasts  of  the  Euxine,  and  established  his  court  at
Panticapeum,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Cimmerian
Bosporus.2  Pompeius  relinquished  the  pursuit,
and  turned  southwards  in  search  of  wealthier  lands
to  plunder  and  feebler  sovereigns  to  intimidate ;
while  the  enemy  whom  he  had  been  specially  com-
missioned to  destroy  was  maturing  a  new  combi-
nation against  the  power  of  Rome,  more  gigantic
and  formidable  than  any  which  his  bold  imagina-
tion had  before  conceived.  As,  at  an  earlier  period,
his  far-seeing  sagacity  had  induced  him  to  enter
into  negotiations  with  Sertorius  in  Spain,  so  he
now  communicated  with  the  restless  warriors  of
Gaul,  and  proposed  to  traverse  Dacia  and  Pannonia
with  a  Scythian  horde  at  his  back,  and  join  his
impatient  allies  at  the  threshold  of  Italy.3  Even
at  the  farthest  extremity  to  which  his  power  ever
reached,  this  extraordinary  man  could  leave  a
durable  name  in  the  traditions  of  the  native  popu-
lation. A  ledge  on  the  summit  of  a  rock  pro-

1  Veil.  ii.  37.  2  Appian.  B.  Mithrid.  107.

3  Dion,  xxxvii.,  11. ;  Flor.  iii.  5.  ;  Appian.  B.  M.  109. :  '
IK  7TO\\ov

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  151

jecting  into  the  sea,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  CHAP.
Odessa,  is  popularly  known  at  this  day  as  the
"  throne  of  Mithridates."  1  But  the  ordinary  re-  but  puts  an
suit  of  Oriental  polygamy  hastened  the  old  man's  *&!£.  the
end.  He  had  excited  against  himself  hostility  in
the  bosom  of  his  own  family.  Three  sons  and
three  daughters  he  had  put  to  death  to  secure  his
throne,  but  another  of  his  children  named  Phar-
naces,  whom  he  had  destined  for  his  successor,
eager  to  defeat  the  wild  enterprize  which  his  father
meditated,  and  gain  the  favour  of  the  Romans,
revolted  against  him.  Deserted  by  his  troops  and
people,  Mithridates  prepared  to  embrace  a  volun-
tary death.  His  system,  it  was  affirmed,  had  been
fortified  against  poison  by  the  habitual  use  of  an-
tidotes ;  he  was  compelled  to  require  the  services
of  a  Gaulish  attendant,  and  fell  upon  the  sword
reluctantly  presented  to  him.2

The  treason  of  Pharnaces  was  rewarded  with  successes  of
the  kingdom  of  the  Bosporus,  and  he  was  received  syrfa  and"*
by  Pompeius  into  the  friendship  and  alliance  of  the  Palestine-
republic. Meanwhile, the  mere  presence  of  the
Roman  general  with  his  army  had  sufficed  to  an-
nex many  rich  provinces  to  the empire. When
Pompeius  desisted  from  the  pursuit  of  the  king  of
Pontus,  he repaired to the  court  of  Antiochus,
surnamed  Asiaticus,  in  Syria,  and  ordered  him  to
descend  from  the  throne  of  the  Seleucidse  and  sur-
render his  country  to  the Roman  people. This
sovereign,  the  last  of  a  dynasty  which  had  wielded
the  sceptre  of  Syria  for  two  centuries  and  a  half,

1  Michelet,  Hist.  Rom.  Hi.  c.  4.

2  Dion  ;  Appian. ;  Liv.  Epit.  cii.

L 4

152  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  and  had  furnished  a  succession  of  seventeen  kings1,
'  had  entered  upon  his  hereditary  rule  on  the  ex-
pulsion of  Tigranes  by  the  Roman  arms.  But  the
country  was  totally  unable  to  defend  itself  against
the  Parthian s  and  Armenians  ;  it  was  too  rich  or
too  critically  situated  to  be  intrusted  to  a  de-
pendent monarch,  and  Pompeius  reduced  it  with-
out hesitation  to  the  form  of  a  province.  Phoe-
nicia and  Ccele- Syria  submitted  to  the  same  yoke
without  an  audible  murmur,  and  became  incor-
porated in  the  proconsular  government  of  Syria.
At  Damascus  the  conqueror  received  the  appeal  of
Hyrcanus,  who  had  been  deprived  of  the  high-
priesthood  of  Judea  by  his  younger  brother  Aris-
tobulus.  He  listened  to  the  usurper's  defence  of
his  conduct  in  assuming  the  title  of  king ;  but  he
condescended  to  weigh  the  arguments  of  the  Jewish
statesmen  and  the  usages  of  the  nation,  and  finally
undertook  to  restore  Hyrcanus  to  power,  and  re-
establish the  ancient  theocracy.  The  Jews,  how-
ever, would  not  submit  to  foreign  dictation.  Aris-
tobulus  was  their  favourite.  They  wished,  as  of
old,  to  have  a  king  to  reign  over  them.  They
defended  their  freedom  of  choice,  and  the  object
whom  they  had  chosen,  with  all  the  valour  and
obstinacy  of  their  race.  For  three  months  the
temple-citadel  held  out  against  the  skill  and  pa-
tience of  the  Eomans:  but  the  fanaticism  of  the

1  Appian  (B.  Mithr.  70.)  calculates  the  period  at  270  years,  and
adds  fourteen  for  the  duration  of  the  rule  of  Tigranes.  He  is  mani-
festly in  error.  Seleucus  began  his  reign  B.C.  312,  with  which  year
his  era  commences  (Clinton,  Fast.  Hell,  in  ann.)  ;  and  from  thence  to
B.  c.  64  (A.  u.  690)  are  248  years  complete.  Various  computations  may
be  compared  in  the  Art  de  Verifier  les  Dates^  ii.  337.  ed.  8vo.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  153

people,  which  was  kindled  by  the  excitement  of  CHAP.
patriotism,  proved  their  ruin  ;  for,  as  on  former  ^  '
occasions,  their  presumptuous  confidence  in  divine
favour  induced  them  to  omit  the  requisite  means
of  defence,  and  their  fastness  was  surprized  during
a  season  of  unguarded  ceremonial.1  The  victor
replaced  Hyrcanus  in  the  high-priesthood  and
abolished  the  royal  title.  He  made  the  country
dependent  upon  Rome;  but,  though  he  violated
the  Holy  of  Holies  by  his  profane  presence,  he
appears  to  have  acted  with  more  than  usual  mode-
ration in  sparing  the  sacred  furniture  and  trea-
sures of  the  temple.2  If  the  death  of  Mithridates
had  been  longer  delayed,  it  was  the  intention  of
Pompeius  to  have  made  a  campaign  against  the
Nabatha3ans  ;  and  it  was  now  his  idle  ambition  to
penetrate  to  the  Eastern  Ocean,  as  he  had  carried
the  arms  of  the  republic  in  Spain  to  the  shores  of
the  Atlantic.3  But  that  important  event  demanded
his  return  to  Asia  Minor.  He  there  completed  the
arrangements  of  his  foreign  policy,  and  gave  his
last  directions  for  the  settlement  of  the  provincial
administration.  The  basis  upon  which  the  edifice
of  social  order  had  been  established  by  Lucullus
remained  unshaken  after  his  successor  had  left
Asia.4

1  Josephus,  Antiq.  Jud.  xiv.  4.  3. ;  Strabo,  xvi.  2. :

2  Dion  (xxxvii.  16.)  says  the  contrary :  Tcavra  r

but  the  other  is  the  statement  in  which  the  rest  of  our  authorities
concur.  See  Drumann,  iv.  467.  The  spoliation  of  the  temple  of
Jerusalem  was  reserved  for  Crassus.

3  This  may,  perhaps,  be  regarded  as  a  rhetorical  flight  of  Plutarch's,
who  amplifies  it  still  further  (Pomp.  38.).

4  Cic.  Acad.  ii.  1. ;  comp.  Plut.  Pomp.  39.

154

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.

*

The  zeal  with  which  the  nobles  had  rushed  to
the  defence  of  Catulus  could  not  fail  to  mortify
The  nobles the  jealous disposition of Pompeius, and their
statesmen  might  regard  the  death  of  Mithridates
[  with  alarm  rather  than  satisfaction,  for  nothing

.  u.  69i.

putedto  now  remained  to  delay  the  conqueror's  return  to
take  accounts  of  their  proceedings  in  his  absence.
It  was  in  vain  that  Cato  sneered  at  the  feeble
resistance  of  the  Asiatics,  and  asserted  that  the
successes  of  their  conqueror  were  merely  victories
over  women.1  The  power  and  ability  of  so  great
a  captain  were  not  to  be  charmed  away  by  empty
taunts.  It  was  a  better  policy  to  fortify  the
position  of  the  senate  by  courting  the  services  of
its  most  distinguished  military  members.  Lu-
cullus  had  lately  received  the  long-delayed  honour
of  a  triumph  :  the  technical  objection  that  he  had
not  actually  finished  the  war  in  the  East  was  over-
ruled, and  his  real  merits  were  not  unduly  re-
warded by  an  unusual  stretch  of  the  senate's
prerogative.2  This  year,  Q.  Metellus,  another  scion
of  the  same  illustrious  family  which  furnished  a
tribune  at  the  late  elections  and  a  prator  at  the
preceding,  was  flattered  with  a  similar  honour.3
He  received,  at  the  same  time,  the  surname  of
Creticus,  in  token  of  his  final  reduction  of  the
savage  mountaineers  of  an  island  which  it  had
taken  three  years  to  subdue.  But  the  importance
of  his  victory  was  to  be  estimated,  not  so  much
by  the  resources  or  valour  of  its  population,  as  by

1  Cic.  pro  Mwr.  14.

2  Cicero  seems  to  claim  the  merit  of  having  extorted  this  act  of
justice  and  good  policy  (Acad.  ii.  1.)  :  «'  Nos  consules  introduximus
paene  in  urbem  currum  clarissimi  viri."

s  Yell.  ii.  34

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  155

the  convenience  of  its  harbours  and  fastnesses  for CHAP.

IV.

protecting the commerce of  the Mediterranean,  '

and imposing  a  bridle upon  piracy  in  the  sur-
rounding seas.

No  sooner  had  Metellus  Nepos  arrived  in  Rome  Popularity
than  he  put  himself  in  communication  with  Caesar,  ^u"^,
and  the  two  agitators  acted  in  concert  in  their  Bt  c-  62>
schemes  for  harassing  the  party  to  which-  both
were  equally  hostile.  Nepos  began  his  career  as
tribune  by  denouncing  the  execution  of  Catilina's
associates.1  He  declaimed  against  it,  on  the  one
hand,  as  a  crime  against  the  people ;  on  the  other,
as  offensive  to  Pompeius,  the  saviour  of  the  state
and  the  champion  of  the  constitution.  Thus  early
were  the  nobles  made  to  feel  the  handle  they  had
given  their  protector,  if  he  should  choose  to  over-
throw their  power  by  force,  and  pretend  that  he
was  avenging  an  illegal  murder.  Under  Cato's
undaunted  leadership,  however,  they  mustered  all
their  courage.  Cicero  himself  presented  a  bold
front  to  his  accusers;  and  the  people  for  once
were  not  forgetful  of  the  preservation  of  their
homes  and  hearths  by  his  patriotic  vigour.  On
the  first  day  of  the  new  year,  when  the  consul
was  about  to  lay  down  his  office  and  to  make
the  customary  oration  to  the  people,  the  tribune
offered  to  impose  silence  upon  him,  declaring  that
it  was  unfit  that  the  murderer  of  Roman  citizens
should  address  an  assembly  of  free  men.  Amidst
the  uproar  which  this  proceeding  excited,  Cicero
was  only  able  to  exclaim,  with  a  solemn  adjuration,
that  he  had  saved  the  state,  and  the  universal

1  Dion,  xxxvii.  42. ;  Plut.  Cic.  23.

156

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

Violence  of

the  nobles.

CHAP,  shout  of  applause  overwhelmed  every  sound  of
contention.1  But  it  might  be  a  matter  of  ominous
significance  to  him  that  this  innocent  or  neces-
sary act  of  self-defence  was  resented  by  Celer,  the
brother  of  Nepos.  The  late  praetor,  though  now
enjoying  the  proconsulship  of  Gaul  by  Cicero's
surrender  of  his  own  prior  claim,  and  though
professing  himself  both  his  personal  and  political
friend,  was  unreasonable  enough  to  address  to  him
a  letter  of  bitter  remonstrance,  to  which  his  cor-
respondent replied  with  becoming  spirit.

The  attack  was  repulsed.  But  Catilina  had  not
^eep*f.bune  yet  been  defeated ;  and  the  tribune  now  moved  a
rogation  to  the  people  for  recalling  Pompeius  with
his  troops,  and  giving  him  full  powers  for  the
destruction  of  the  common  enemy.  The  senate
shrunk  from  offering  any  such  invitation;  it  would
rather  have  thrown  some  obstacle  in  the  way  of
his  return,  and  rejoiced  in  the  dilatoriness  of  his
present  proceedings.  It  exerted  all  its  influence
to  thwart  the  odious  proposal.  It  was  now  that
the  part  Caesar  was  playing  became  manifest.  He
appeared  as  the  counsellor  and  confidant  of  the
demagogue,  whose  violence  was  rapidly  tending  to
make  any  reconciliation  between  the  oligarchy  and
their  former  leader  impossible.  The  tribune  had
occupied  the  forum  with  a  crowd  of  his  own

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  v.  1,2.  Plutarch  (Cic.  I.  c.)  attributes  the  favour
with  which  Cicero  was  received  to  the  good  offices  of  Cato,  who  was
the  first  to  address  him  as  the  "  Father  of  his  country."  Plutarch  is
not  correct,  perhaps,  in  saying  that  he  was  the  first  who  received  this
honourable  distinction  ;  at  all  events,  he  was  the  last  while  the  voice
of  the  Roman  people  continued  really  free :  "  Roma  patrem  patri^e
Ciceronem  libera  dixit."  Juv.  viii.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  157

adherents.  He  presented,  moreover,  a  startling  CHAP.
array  of  military  force,  whether  to  protect  his  own
inviolable  person,  or  to  overawe  his  opponents.  It
was  with  difficulty  that  Cato,  who  would  not  be
withheld  from  appearing  by  the  advice  and  en-
treaties of  his  friends,  could  make  his  way  to  the
conspicuous  position  where  the  functionaries  of
the  state  presided  over  the  popular  assembly.
Ca3sar  and  Nepos  were  sitting  side  by  side.  Cato
advanced  and  took  his  seat  directly  between  them,
to  interrupt  their  private  communications.  Nepos
directed  the  proper  officer  to  read  aloud  the  pro-
posed resolution :  Cato  snatched  the  paper  from
his  hand,  and  tore  it  in  the  face  of  the  multitude.
This  boldness  had  already  raised  a  cry  in  Cato's
favour,  when  his  colleague,  furious  at  being  thus
thwarted,  began  to  recite  its  tenor  from  memory.
Thermus,  another  of  the  tribunes  and  an  adherent
of  Cato,  stopped  Nepos's  mouth  with  his  hand.
This  was  a  violent  way  of  interposing  the  tribu-
nitian  veto,  the  means  of  control  which  each  of
those  officers  legally  possessed  over  every  one  of
his  colleagues ;  but  it  hit  the  humour  of  the  ex-

O  '

cited  multitude,  and  was  crowned  with  tumul-
tuous acclamation.  A  scene  of  riot  and  disorder
followed,  which  prevented  the  adoption  of  any
measure  under  the  sanction  of  legal  forms;  and
although  it  was  necessary  for  the  friends  of  Cato
to  hurry  him  from  the  strife,  and  to  secure  his
safety  in  the  temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux,  the
object  of  Nepos  was  defeated,  and  a  great  triumph
obtained  for  the  insulted  senate.1

1  Plut,  Cat.  Min.  26—30.

158

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
IV.

The  nobles
venture  to
insult
Caesar,  and
are  com-
pelled to
make  repa-
ration.

But  the  aristocratic  party  was  fated  always  to
push  its  victories  too  far.  The  senate,  elated  by
the  unaccustomed  sounds  of  popular  applause,
ventured  to  suspend  by  main  force  both  Nepos  and
CaBsar  from  the  functions  to  which  they  had  been
duly  elected  by  the  people.1  The  tribune  fled  to
the  camp  of  his  patron,  proclaiming  that  the  sanctity
of  his  office  had  been  profaned  by  violence.  CaBsar,
with  greater  resolution,  threw  himself  upon  the
protection  of  his  allies  and  adherents,  and  continued
to  administer  his  praetorial  functions  in  defiance
of  every  hostile  menace.  He  refused  to  quit  his
tribunal  till  compelled  by  a  military  force,  where-
upon he  dismissed  the  lictors  who  attended  upon
him,  divested  himself  of  his  official  insignia,  and
retired  with  dignity  to  his  private  dwelling.  The
populace  now  assembled  to  avenge  the  insult
offered  to  their  favourite.  A  riot  ensued,  which
compelled  the  consuls  to  retrace  their  steps,  not
without  the  most  obsequious  expressions  of  re-
spect and  deference  to  him.2  But  how  hollow
these  compliments  were,  how  insincere  the  appear-
ance of  reconciliation,  is  amply  demonstrated  by  a
fresh  attempt  which  was  made  at  the  same  moment
to  implicate  him  in  the  late  conspiracy,  the  inquiry
into  which  was  still  in  progress.  The  ostensible
promoters  of  the  charge  were  L.  Vettius  and  Q.
Curius,  both  men  of  notorious  character,  who  had

1  A  few  days  before  this  the  populace  had  assembled  outside  the
place  were  the  senate  was  sitting,  on  a  report  that  Caesar  was  being
roughly  handled  within, and  so  alarmed  the  consuls  that  they  sent
Cato  in  all  haste  to  appease  the  tumult  by  the  promise  of  a  regular
largess  of  corn. Plut.  Goes.  8.

2  Suet.  Jul  16.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  159

already  sold  themselves  to  the  senate,  and  de-  CHAP.
nounced  the  plot  in  which  they  had  in  fact  been
deeply  engaged.1  Vettius  declared  that  he  could
produce  letters  from  Caesar  to  Catilina;  Curius
only  professed  to  have  ascertained  his  guilt  from
the  mouth  of  their  common  leader.  It  is  hardly
to  be  supposed  that  these  wretches  would  have
ventured  to  assail  the  champion  of  the  people,  and
a  man  of  such  well-known  courage  and  resources,
unless  they  had  received  direct  encouragement  from
some  of  the  chiefs  of  the  senate.  CaBsar,  with  his
usual  decision,  went  straightway  to  Cicero,  and  en-
gaged him  to  remove  any  suspicion  of  his  criminality.
The  late  consul  declared  publicly  that  it  was  by
CaBsar  himself  that  the  first  intimation  of  the  danger
had  been  made  to  him.  It  does  not  appear  whether
this  had  really  been  the  fact  ;  but  the  testimony
of  Cicero  could  not  be  discredited.  Not  only  was
Cassar  acquitted,  but  the  reward  assigned  to  Curius
as  the  supposed  discoverer  of  the  plot,  was  taken
from  him,  and  handed  over  to  the  object  of  his
calumny.  Yettius  was  sacrificed  to  the  wrath  of
the  people,  and  thrown  into  prison  ;  nor  did  Novius
the  quaBstor,  who  had  ventured  to  allow  his  su-
perior magistrate  to  be  cited  before  his  tribunal,
escape  a  similar  chastisement.2

Another  incident  occurred  during  Caesar's  praB-
torship,  which  is  mentioned  by  Suetonius  as  an  in-

stance  of  his  zeal in  defending  the  clients  who  d*fiance  of

the  senate.

intrusted their  interests to his care.3 It is so

1  Dion,  xxxvii.  41.  ;  Sallust,  B.  C.  17.  2  Suet.  Jul.  17.

3  Suet.  Jul.  71 The  occurrence  is  not  mentioned  by  any  other
writer.

160  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  briefly  related  that  we  are  at  a  loss  fully  to  under-
'  stand  it;  but  it  seems  at  least  to  give  further
indications  of  the  confidence  he  now  felt  in  his
position,  and  the  spirit  of  defiance  which  animated
all  his  transactions  with  the  government.  He  was
appealed  to  by  a  Numidian  chieftain  named  Ma-
sintha,  to  defend  him  against  a  claim  for  tribute
on  the  part  of  Hiempsal,  the  tributary  sovereign
of  the  country.  Hiempsal  sent  his  son  Juba  to
Rome,  to  take  the  proper  measures  for  having  the
cause  decided  by  the  tribunals  of  the  republic;
for  the  kingdom  of  Numidia  had  recently  been
constituted  a  Roman  dependancy  by  Pompeius,
and  the  senate  assumed  the  right  of  determining
the  political  relations  of  the  king  and  his  vassals.
It  seems  that,  when  the  republic  declared  itself  in
.  favour  of  the  royal  claim,  Cassar  did  not  abstain
from  a  personal  insult  to  Juba,  whose  beard  he
pulled  in  derision.  But  the  majesty  of  Rome  he
still  more  gravely  insulted ;  for  when  it  was  decided
that  Masintha  should  be  delivered  to  Juba  for
the  punishment  of  his  contumacy,  Ca9sar  snatched
him  from  the  hands  of  the  officers,  and  carried
him  to  his  own  house,  the  pontifical  mansion  in
the  Via  Sacra,  where  he  kept  him,  not  surely
in  concealment,  as  Suetonius  says,  but  in  open
defiance  of  the  senate,  until  his  departure  for
Spain  some  months  afterwards,  when  he  assigned
him  a  place  in  his  suite.

Early  life At  length  fortune  seemed  to  throw  in  the  way

racterof °^  tne  n°bles  an  opportunity  for  creating  disunion

ciodius. among the popular  leaders. We have hitherto

contemplated  Caesar  as  the  sole  representative  of

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  161

his  party;  and  so  great  was  the  pre-eminence  of  CHAP.
his  talents  and  the  ascendancy  of  his  character,
that  he  maintained  that  position  without  a  rival
throughout  his  career.  But  the  giddy  multitude
had  also  its  favourites,  and  among  them  was
P.  Clodius,  a  young  man  of  very  dissolute  habits,
but  not  without  some  popular  talents x,  upon  whom
it  lavished  no  small  portion  of  its  admiration.  Con-
nected with  several  of  the  principal  men  of  the
state,  Clodius  enjoyed  every  advantage  in  the
outset  of  his  public  life.  He  was  admitted  to  the
confidence  of  Lucullus  in  Asia,  whom  he  betrayed
by  exciting  a  mutiny  in  the  ranks,  the  first  occasion
on  which  he  essayed  the  arts  of  a  demagogue.2
Marcius  Eex,  when  commanding  in  Cilicia,  had
placed  a  portion  of  the  fleet  under  his  control,  with
which  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  pirates.3  Re-
leased by  the  intervention  of  Pompeius,  he  betook
himself  to  Antioch,  thrust  himself  into  the  affairs  of
the  Syrians,  and  narrowly  escaped  death  for  the
disturbances  which  he  excited.  Having  thus  suc-
ceeded in  embroiling  every  affair  in  which  he  had
taken  part,  he  returned  to  Rome,  and  there  ap-
peared in  the  character  of  a  patriot.  He  accused
Catilina  of  malversation,  and  again  experienced  an
ignominious  failure.4  But  though  he  became  in-
volved in  the  common  suspicion  of  a  guilty  ac-
quaintance with  the  designs  of  the  conspirators,  he
was  in  fact  a  supporter  of  Cicero  in  the  process

1  Veil.  ii.  45. :  "  P.  Clodius,  homo  nobilis,  disertus,  audax."

8  Plut.  Luc.  34.  3  Dion.  xxxv.  15.

4  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  1.

VOL  I.  M

162  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, of  their  detection.1 Meanwhile,  he  was  no less
' intent  upon  making  love  to  the  women,  than  upon

quarrelling  with  the  men,  and  it  seemed  as  if  his
triumphs  were  destined  to  be  confined  to  the  weaker
sex.  The  odious  charge  that  he  lived  in  incest
with  his  sisters  can  only  be  regarded  as  a  current
tale  of  scandal,  the  truth  of  which  it  would  be
preposterous  to  assume.2  But  he  was  a  favoured
admirer  of  Pompeia,  the  wife  of  CaBsar  ;  and  it  was
in  the  prosecution  of  this  licentious  intrigue  that
he  perpetrated  an  act,  the  discovery  of  which
raised  him  to  a  disgraceful  notoriety,  and  was  well
nigh  creating  a  fatal  dissension  between  the  popular
leader  and  an  important  section  of  his  party.
He  profanes  The  Bona  Dea,  an  old  Italian  divinity,  whom
terieTofthe  the  antiquaries  of  superstition  sought  to  identify

2*'  with  various  Greek  and  Latin  goddesses,  enjoyed
B.C.  62.  rtie  honour  of  a  peculiar  festival,  at  which  none
but  women  were  allowed  to  attend.  The  presence
of  any  of  the  male  sex  was  deemed  a  pollution,  and
expected  to  bring  a  curse  upon  the  nation.  The
intruder,  it  was  once  devoutly  believed,  would  be
visited  with  the  loss  of  his  sight  ;  but  no  instance
had  yet  been  known  of  the  wrath  of  the  goddess
being  tempted  to  this  extremity.  The  ceremony
was  held  in  the  month  of  December3,  in  the
mansion  of  one  of  the  consuls  or  prastors,  and  the

1  Cic.  de  Har.  Resp.  3.  ;  Plut.  Cic.  29.

2  Cic.  de  Har.  Resp.  20.,  ad  Div.  i.  9.  : "  Qui  non  plurls  fecerat
Bonam  Deam  quam  tres  sorores." The  three  sisters  were  married
respectively  to  Marcius  Rex,  L.  Lucullus,  and  Metellus  Celer. The
last  was  the  Clodia  whose  gallantries  and  political  intrigues  are  so  fre-
quently stigmatized  by  Cicero. Drumann,  ii.  374.  foil.

3  Drumann,  ii.  204.  note.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  163

mistress  of  the  house  had  the  honour  of  presiding.  CHAP.
The  matrons  of  Rome  were  assembled  at  night  '
under  the  roof  of  Pompeia,  in  the  official  dwelling
of  the  chief  pontiff,  which  lay  at  the  foot  of  the
Palatine  hill,  nearly  opposite  to  the  spot  where  two
half-buried  columns  now  mark  the  entrance  to  the
temple  of  Romulus  and  Remus.  The  beardless
gallant  introduced  himself  into  the  house  in  the
garb  of  a  female  musician ;  he  had  corrupted  one
of  Pompeia's  maids,  and  sent  her  to  acquaint  her
mistress  with  his  arrival.  The  appointment  had
probably  been  concerted.  But  meanwhile  he  in-
cautiously allowed  himself  to  be  seen  by  another
female  attendant.  Being  addressed  by  her,  his
person  or  his  voice  immediately  betrayed  him.1
The  alarm  was  given,  and  the  utmost  consternation
prevailed.  Aurelia,  the  mother  of  Caesar,  a  Roman
matron  of  the  ancient  stamp2,  who  professed  to
keep  strict  watch  over  the  virtue  of  her  daughter-
in-law,  speedily  threw  a  veil  over  the  mysteries  of
the  goddess,  and  rushed  through  the  house,  a  torch
in  her  hand,  to  discover  the  intruder.  He  was
surrounded  and  recognized,  but  allowed  to  escape.3
The  matrons  who  had  assembled  to  assist  at  the
ceremony  dispersed  to  their  homes,  and  none  of
them  failed  to  inform  her  husband  that  night  of
the  interruption  of  the  rites  and  the  pollution  of
the  city.  The  next  day  the  story  was  bruited  far

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  12. ;  Plut.  Cic.  28. ;  Dion,  xxxvii.  45.

2  Comp.  the  author  of  the  Dial,  de  Corrupt.  Eloq.  c.  28. :  "  Sic  Cor-
neliam  Gracchorura,  sic  Aureliam  Csesaris,  sic  Atiam  Augusti  matrem
praefuisse  educationibus  ac  produxisse  principes  liberos  accepiinus."

3  "  Aurelia  pro  testimonio  dixit  suo  jussu  eum  esse  dimissum."
Schol.  Bob.  in  Orat.  in  Clod,  et  Curion.  5.  3.

M 2

164  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, and  wide,  and  the  cry  of  indignation  and  fear  re-

' sounded  over  the  seven  hills.

The  nobles  Such  a  moment  of  national  panic  presented  a
golden  opportunity  to  the  politic  advisers  of  the
ai>istocracy,  and  it  was  with  no  religious  feeling,

account,  but  for  Cicero  himself  scoffs  at  the  goddess  who  failed

are  baffled  « • •  .  i 11* it i

by  csesar.  to  strike  the  impious  intruder  blind1,  that  they
consulted  the  pontiffs  and  the  Vestal  virgins,  from
whom  they  received  the  most  formal  assurances
that  a  crime  had  been  committed  which  demanded
signal  expiation.  Caesar,  as  the  chief  of  the  ponti-
fical college,  could  not  abstain  from  coinciding  in
this  solemn  declaration.  Accordingly,  he  felt  it
incumbent  upon  himself  to  divorce  his  wife  ;  yet  he
could  not  be  induced  to  fasten  his  suspicions  pub-
licly upon  Clodius,  nor  to  come  forward  as  his
accuser.  This  was  the  point  at  which  his  enemies
were  aiming.  A  man  of  his  influence  might  have
insured  the  conviction  of  the  criminal  ;  at  all  events,
it  was  obvious  that,  by  invoking  punishment  upon
Clodius,  he  would  have  incensed  many  of  their
common  friends,  and  during  a  long  and  bitter
struggle  a  thousand  incidents  might  occur  to  widen
the  breach  in  their  party.  But  though  disappointed
in  this  hope,  the  nobles  would  not  let  go  their  hold
of  their  victim.  According  to  the  ordinary  mode  of
procedure  in  cases  which  were  confined  to  questions
of  fact,  the  judges  were  selected  by  lot  for  the
decision  of  each  particular  cause  from  the  list  of
one  hundred  and  five,  previously  drawn  by  the
same  method  from  the  three  orders  of  senators,
knights,  and  gerarian  tribunes.  But,  whether  the

1  Cic.  pro  Dom.  40.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  165

charge  against  Clodius  was  one  for  which  there  CHAP.
was  no  exact  precedent,  or  whether  its  importance
might  be  held  to  justify  a  departure  from  the  usual
course,  the  senate  wished  the  judges  to  be  assigned
by  the  direct  appointment  of  the  prsetor.  This
also  was  a  method  not  unknown  to  the  constitution  ;
and  though  the  advantage  it  offered  to  the  senate
seems  obvious,  we  do  not  hear  that  it  was  regarded
by  their  opponents  as  unjust  or  invidious.  Ac-
cordingly, the  new  consuls,  Piso  and  Messala,  were
enjoined  to  move  a  rogation  to  the  people  to  sanc-
tion this  mode  of  procedure.  Messala  went  to  work
in  good  faith ;  but  his  colleague  was  easily  won
over  by  the  enemy,  and  allowed  every  obstacle  to
be  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  enactment  which
he  himself  proposed.  Cato  pushed  the  matter
forward  with  his  usual  promptitude  ;  Cicero  joined
in  the  general  outcry,  always  hoping  to  be  floated
to  the  top  in  every  current  of  popular  opinion ;  but
he  dared  not  commit  himself  to  active  measures.
Pompeius  was  expected  daily  with  his  army  at  the
gates  of  Kome ;  all  parties  were  intriguing  with
him,  but  no  one  yet  knew  what  his  judgment  in
the  matter  might  be ;  it  was  the  part  of  prudent
men  not  to  put  themselves  too  prominently  forward
at  so  critical  a  moment-
It  was  in  January  of  the  year  693  that  the
conqueror  of  the  East  reached  the  shores  of  Italy,
No  sooner  did  he  touch  the  land  than  he  falsified  bands  his
the  apprehensions  of  the  city  by  disbanding  his  enters  the
host  of  veterans,  with  the  promise  of  ample  rewards
for  their  services,  which  he  felt  secure  of  obtaining

M 3

166  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, from  the  senate  and  people.1 Rome  received  the
.  news  with  surprise,  gratification,  and,  it  must  be

added,  contempt.  But  there  was  no  difficulty  at
least  in  affecting  gratitude,  and  the  great  captain
was  escorted  into  the  city  with  the  liveliest  de-
monstrations of  respect  and  joy.  His  entry  into
Rome  was  the  celebration,  it  was  said,  of  a  triumph,
not  over  the  kings  of  Asia,  but  over  himself,  the
heir  of  Sulla,  the  child  of  the  proscriptions.2  When
the  pageant  was  over,  the  proconsul  required  time
to  cast  his  eyes  around  him,  and  obtain  an  insight
into  the  position  of  affairs.  Meanwhile,  his  conduct
was  in  every  respect  studiously  moderate.  Every
word  he  uttered  was  noted  and  treasured  up  by
innumerable  ears,  every  movement  was  watched
and  criticized;  all  parties  hung  in  suspense,  and
awaited  in  silence  the  declaration  of  his  sentiments.
But  amongst  all  parties  he  found  no  friend ;  perhaps
he  sought  none :  his  coldness  and  vanity  were
equally  repulsive,  and  he  was  too  fearful  of  com-
mitting himself  by  premature  disclosures  to  court
the  intimacy  of  any  one.  But  among  the  number
of  those  who  crowded  about  him  and  tendered
advice  and  service,  it  is  probable  that  Caesar  ac-
quired his  usual  ascendancy,  unsettling  his  views
and  shaking  his  resolutions.

He  ex-  The  first  harangue  which  the  new-comer  made

sdTwiVh™"  to  the  senate  was  so  cautiously  worded,  that  no
great  re- indication  whatever  of  his  thoughts  could  be  drawn

serve  on

public

affairs.  l  The  reception  of  Pompeius,  and  the  whole  proceedings  in  Clodins's

trial  are  related  with  great  liveliness  by  Cicero  in  two  of  his  letters  to

Atticus,  i.  14.  16.

2  Drumann,  iv.  479. ;  comp.  Dion,  xxxvii.  50. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  43. ;

Veil.  ii.  40.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  167

from  it.  The  coldness  of  his  demeanour  before  CHAP.
that  assembly  might  raise  a  fear  that  he  reserved
his  animation  for  the  forum,  and  his  confidence  for
the  popular  demagogues.  At  the  instigation  of
Piso,  Fufius  Calenus,  one  of  the  tribunes  in  the
interest  of  Clodius,  stepped  forward  and  invited  him
to  address  the  people  in  the  Flaminian  Circus.
As  soon  as  he  appeared  there,  Fufius  straightway
demanded  of  him  whether  he  approved  of  the
rogation  of  the  consuls,  by  which  the  judges  in
the  forthcoming  trial  were  to  be  assigned  by  the
praetor.  Pompeius  parried  the  thrust :  his  answer,
as  Cicero  triumphantly  proclaimed,  was  that  of  a
true  aristocrat ;  he  made  a  laboured  speech,  with
many  unmeaning  words,  in  which  he  magnified
the  authority  and  majesty  of  the  senate,  and  pro-
fessed to  regard  it  with  the  most  devoted  respect.
The  consul  Messala  was  encouraged  by  this  ap-
parent overture  to  ask  his  opinion,  when  he  next
presented  himself  in  the  senate,  on  the  affair  of
Clodius  and  the  proceedings  of  the  government.
But  the  crafty  dissembler  again  shrunk  within
himself;  his  reply  was  courteous  but  indefinite,
and  was  limited  to  a  general  approbation  of  the
behaviour  of  the  nobles.  He  then  turned  to
Cicero,  and  expressed  a  hope  that  he  had  said
enough  on  that  point.  The  applause  with  which
even  this  guarded  language  was  received,  induced
Crassus  to  rise  and  deliver  a  studied  panegyric
upon  the  conduct  of  the  late  consul.  Cicero,
sitting  next  to  the  object  of  universal  attention,
and  watching  every  turn  in  his  countenance,

M 4

168  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, thought  that  he  perceived  a  gleam  of  approbation
' stealing  over  it. He  rose  to  take  advantage  of  the

favourable  moment,  and  enlarged,  with  his  usual
copious  rhetoric,  on  the  dangers  from  which  the
state  had  been  preserved,  and  his  own  share  in
the  glory  of  the  deed.  He  spoke,  as  he  alone
could  speak,  of  the  dignity  of  the  senatorial  order,
the  good  feeling  of  the  knights,  the  favourable
attitude  of  the  Italians,  the  paralysis  of  every
element  of  disaffection,  the  cheapness  of  provisions,
the  security  of  the  commonwealth.1  The  senate
responded,  to  the  speaker's  entire  satisfaction  ;  it
was  the  crowning  day  of  Cicero's  vanity  ;  yet  one
triumph  was  wanting  to  it,  Pompeius  would  not
be  drawn  into  any  further  indication  of  his  views.
Proceedings  When  the  day  came  for  moving  the  rogation,
afusT^hest  tne  friends  of  Clodius,  the  remnant,  as  Cicero
end  in  invidiously  asserts,  of  the  Catilinarian  crew,  with

failure:  dis-  J  \

appoint- the younger Ourio, a reckless demagogue and
spendthrift,  at  their  head,  attempted  to  resist  the

meditates  influence  of  the  nobles  by  various  irregular  ma-
vengeance.  noBUvres  :  but  the  opposite  party  displayed  more
than  usual  vigour;  Cato,  Hortensius,  and  Favo-
rinus,  Cato's  shadow2,  spoke  with  energy  in  the
cause  of  justice,  and  the  assembly  at  last  separated
without  coming  to  a  decision.  Once  more  the
senate  met,  and  resolved  in  favour  of  the  rogation
by  a  majority  of  four  hundred  to  fifteen,  notwith-
standing the  personal  entreaties  of  the  accused.

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  \.  14.  : "  Quid  multa?  totum  hunc  locum,  quern  ego
varie  meis  orationibus  soleo  pingere,  de  flamma,  de  ferro,  —  nosti  illas
\7jKu0ouc,  —  valde  pertexui." Compare  as  specimens  of  these  XrjKvOot,  the
Orat.  in  Pis.  2.,  pro  Mur.  39.

2  Drumann,  ii.  209.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  169

Clodius's  addresses  met  with  no  other  success  than  CHAP.
that  of  raising  a  laugh  against  Cicero,  whom  the
aristocracy  were  never  displeased  to  see  made
ridiculous.  The  mover  of  the  rogation,  fortified
by  the  prestige  of  this  overwhelming  majority,
would  now  have  beaten  down  all  opposition ;  but
Hortensius,  by  an  unlucky  scruple,  counselled  con-
cession at  the  last  moment,  and  waived  the  essential
point  in  question,  the  assignment  of  the  judges  by
the  praetor.  He  thought  the  guilt  so  manifest  that
the  culprit's  escape  was  impossible:  a  sword  of
lead,  he  said,  would  suffice  to  slay  him :  the  con-
cession would  be  graceful  in  appearance,  while  it
could  have  no  evil  consequence.  But  he  was
deceived.  Fifty-six  judges  were  chosen  by  lot,  a
mode  of  selection  which  no  doubt  in  itself  admitted
of  much  false  play ;  but,  at  all  events,  there  were
many  among  them  whose  poverty  and  bad  cha-
racter cast  equal  suspicion  on  their  honesty.  The
friends  of  Clodius  strained  every  nerve  to  seduce
them1 :  money  was  showered  upon  them,  promises
were  lavished  without  stint ;  the  noblest  and
fairest  women  of  Rome  were  induced  to  grant
them  their  favours ;  the  corruption  of  this  in-
famous tribunal  became  a  by-word  to  succeeding
generations.2  Yet  the  testimony  which  was  pro-
duced against  the  accused  seemed  to  make  his
escape  impossible ;  his  own  plea,  that  he  was
absent  at  Interamna  on  the  night  in  question,  was

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  \.  16.5. :  "  Arcessivit  ad  se,  promisit,  intercessit,  de-
dit,"  &c.

2  Senec.  Ep.  97. :  "  Atqui  dati  judicibus nummi  sunt ;  et  quod
hac  etiam  nunc  pactione  turpius  est,  stupra  insuper  matronarum  et
adolescentulorum  nobilium  salarii  loco  exacta  sunt."

170  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  refuted  by  the  direct  testimony  of  Cicero1;  the
'  mother  of  the  injured  husband  asserted  her  know-
ledge of  his  guilt ;  the  slaves  of  the  house  con-
fessed it  under  torture2;  one  word  from  Cassar
would  have  sufficed  to  settle  the  matter ;  but  that
word  nothing  could  extort  from  him.  "  Then  why
divorce  Pompeia  ?  "  cried  the  nobles  in  their  vex-
ation ;  the  reply  was  adroit  and  spirited :  "  The
wife  of  CaBsar  must  be  above  suspicion."3  The
eloquence  of  Cicero  carried  even  the  multitude
with  him,  and  the  judges  affected  to  be  terrified
by  the  demonstrations  of  popular  disgust.  They
demanded  a  military  guard  for  their  protection,
while  Catulus  asked,  with  bitter  irony,  if  they
feared  to  have  their  pockets  picked  of  their  bribes.
The  cause  was  at  last  decided  in  favour  of  Clodius
by  a  majority  of  thirty- one  over  twenty-five,  which
was  less,  perhaps,  than  might  have  been  expected
from  the  composition  of  the  tribunal.  The  nobles
consoled  themselves  as  they  best  might,  by  the  evi-
dence its  smallness  gave  to  the  substantial  justice  of
their  cause,  and  to  the  bias  of  public  opinion;  but
they  were  more  sorely  disappointed  at  having  failed
to  create  that  dissension  between  Caesar  and  his
domestic  rival  which  they  had  fondly  anticipated.
It  was  upon  Cicero,  however,  that  the  force  of  the
blow  rebounded.  He  had  made  an  implacable
enemy  of  one  with  whom  he  had  hitherto  culti-

1  Cic.  pro  Mil.  17.;  Quintil.  iv.  2.  88.

2  Scliol.  Bob.  in  Orat.  in  Clod.  vi.  3. Abra,  the  servant  of  Pom-
peia, was  put  to  the  question. It  would  appear  from  Cicero,  pro  Milon.
22.,  that  the  slaves  of  Clodius  were  tortured  also  :  "  de  servis  nulla
qusestio  est  in  dominum  nisi  de  incestu,  ut  fuit  in  Clodium."

3  Suet.  Jul.  74.;  Plut.  Cas.  10.,  Cic.  29.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  171

vated  terms  of  amity  ;  and  from  henceforth  Clodius CHAP.
seemed  to  devote  every  faculty  he  possessed  to  the
prosecution  of  a  memorable  revenge.

Ca3sar could afford  to  smile at the  impotent  ca?saras-
machinations  of  his  enemies,  but  he  had  one  more

boon to ask  of  the  good  genius  which had so  °fapro-

vince

constantly  befriended  him.  He  had  succeeded  in
every  step  which  he  had  hitherto  taken  in  the  city.
He  had  obtained  great  honours,  and  wielded  at
the  moment  almost  unequalled  influence.  But
his  rivals  were  powerful  in  the  field  :  Lucullus
and  Crassus,  as  well  as  Pompeius,  were  expe-
rienced generals  ;  they  had  gained  the  attachment
of  armies;  they  could  raise  troops  with  a  stamp
of  the  foot  ;  and  when  raised,  they  could  lead
them  to  victory.  But  Caesar  had  neither  veterans
at  his  command,  nor  means  to  levy  recruits.  His
name  was  unknown  in  war,  and  was  no  watchword
to  the  aspirants  either  for  plunder  or  for  glory.
Accordingly,  being  satisfied  with  the  peaceable
attitude  assumed  by  Pompeius,  and  assured  that
the  parties  in  the  state  were  so  nicely  balanced
that  no  material  change  could  suddenly  occur  in
the  situation  of  the  political  game,  he  determined
to  retire  to  the  Further  Spain,  the  province  which
had  been  assigned  to  him  on  the  expiration  of  his
late  office,  there  put  himself  at  the  head  of  a
Roman  army,  and  store  his  coffers  with  the  spoils
accruing  whether  from  war  or  peace.  But  such
were  his  private  embarrassments  that  he  could  not
even  leave  Rome  for  his  destination  without  one
more  extraordinary  effort.  He  applied  to  Crassus
for  a  loan  of  eight  hundred  and  thirty  talents,  to

172

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
IV.

and  baffles
the  project
of  his
enemies  to
detain  him
at  Rome.

A  u.  693,
B.C.  61.

satisfy  his  most  pressing  creditors,  and  to  equip
himself  for  the  expedition.1  Crassus  was  not  un-
willing to  furnish  him  with  the  sum  required,  as  a
requital  for  past,  and  an  incentive  to  future  services ;
for  the  jealousy  which  he  had  sown  between  Pom-
peius  and  the  senate  was  hailed  by  Crassus  and  all
the  ambitious  statesmen  of  the  day  as  a  direct
service  to  themselves.2

The  delay  which  these  arrangements  required
was  nearly  fatal  to  the  propraetor's  expedition  itself.
For  in  the  mean  while,  the  senate  was  occupied
with  the  affair  of  Clodius;  and  a  decree  was
passed,  no  doubt  with  special  reference  to  Caesar,
that  the  praetors  should  not  depart  for  their  pro-
vinces until  it  had  been  discussed  and  finally
settled.  Accordingly,  the  details  of  his  commission
had  not  been  arranged,  the  sum  which  the  state
should  contribute  to  his  expences,  the  number  of
the  troops  to  be  entrusted  to  him,  the  names  of
those  who  were  to  constitute  his  retinue,  were  not
determined,  when  Caesar,  resolved  not  to  allow  his
designs  to  be  frustrated,  suddenly  left  Eome  in  the
middle  of  the  year,  and  betook  himself  to  his  pro-
vince in  defiance  of  every  impediment.  He  had
reason  to  apprehend  that  a  scheme  was  in  contem-
plation to  retain  him  at  home  by  a  political  im-
peachment3; but  he  knew  that  when  once  at  the

1  Plut.  Crass.  7.,  Cces.  11. It  was  on  this  occasion,  according  to
Appian  (B.  C.  ii.  8.),  that  he  said  he  wanted  250,000  sestertia  to  be
worth  nothing.

2  Plut.  Cces.  11.:  'ETTI  "Kpaacrov  Karifyvyt.  TrXovauLrcnov  ovra  'PwfJiaiatv^
fitofjitvov  de  rijf  KaiactjOOf  d.Kp,fJ£  KO.I  SepfioTijTOQ  tirl TYJV  irpdg Hofjnri'iiov

OLVTlTToXlTiiaV.

3  Suet.  Jul.  18. :  "  Incertum,  metune  judicii  quod  privato  para-
batur,  an  quo  uiaturius  sociis  implorantibus  subveniret."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  173

head  of  his  legions,  his  enemies  would  not  dare  to CHAP.

TV

recal  him,  and  he  trusted  to  reap  such  a  harvest '
both  of  treasure  and  reputation,  as  would  divert
the  effects  of  their  malice  on  his  return.

The  whole  of  ancient  Iberia  was  divided  at  this  The  Roman
time  into  two  provinces,  the  Hither  and  the  Fur-  ?n°sj>ain!
ther.1  The  former  extended  from  the  Pyrenees
along  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean  to  the  Sinus
Urcitanus,  near  the  south-eastern  angle  of  the
peninsula.  The  line  of  the  sea-shore  was  studded
with  numerous  Koman  settlements ;  the  Celtiberi,
occupying  the  central  parts  of  the  country,  from
whence  the  great  rivers  take  their  rise,  had  been
conquered  at  an  early  period,  and  were  rapidly
assimilating  to  the  type  of  the  victorious  nation2 ;
the  brief  season  of  their  education  under  Sertorius
had  already  borne  fruit  in  a  spirit  of  discipline  and
obedience.  But,  throughout  the  northern  districts,
the  limits  of  the  province,  as  well  as  of  the  Roman
authority,  were  less  clearly  defined.  The  Cantabri,
Vacca3i,  Astures,  and  Callaici,  the  remnant  of  the
old  and  unmixed  Iberian  stock,  maintained  among

1  Spain ;  Hispania,  Iberia :  the  former  name  was  given  by  the  Car-
thaginians to  the  south-western  extremity  of  the  peninsula,  and  was
probably  a  Phoenician  word. The  rough  breathing  and  sibilation  are
characteristic of  their appellations : comp. Hasdrubal, Hiempsal,
Thapsus,  Ruspina,  Hispalis,  Hispania,  Hesperia  (?). The  Romans
adopted  the  name  from  them. On  the  other  hand,  the  Greek  geo-
graphers gave  the  country  the  name  of  Iberia,  which  may  have  been
derived,  through  the  Massilian  traders,  from  the  river  Iberus. But
it  is  probable  that  the  earliest  population  of  all  the  north  and  centre
called  themselves Iberians. Plin.  H.  N.  iii.  3. :  "Iberus — amnis,
quern propter universam Hispaniam Graeci appellavere Iberiam."
Comp.  Mannert,  Geog.  i.  227.

2  They  were  subdued  by  the  arms  and  artifice  of  Cato  the  Censor,
about  A.  u.  557. Appian,  Hisp.  41.

174  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  barren  mountains  their  sullen  independence.  The
southern  and  western  portion  of  the  peninsula
constituted  the  further  province,  which  was  after-
wards subdivided  into  two,  the  Anas  or  Guadiana
forming  the  line  of  demarcation  between  them.1
The  coast  of  the  Mediterranean  and  the  valley  of
the  BaBtis  were  the  abodes  of  wealth  and  luxury,  of
art  and  science ;  but  even  these  favoured  districts
were  liable  to  the  sudden  attacks  of  savage  neigh-
bours, and  the  vigilance  of  the  provincial  govern-
ment was  constantly  exercised  in  protecting  the
central  retreats  of  peaceful  civilization.2

Having  thus  invested  himself,  as  it  were,  with
campaign  the  government  of  his  province,  the  proprastor  pro-
ln  Sp«LnQ  ceeded,  in  the  same  spirit,  to  raise  ten  cohorts  from

A.U. i)if;l.  '

his  own  resources,  in  addition  to  the  twenty  which
were  stationed  in  the  country.  The  tribes  of  Lusi-
tania,  beyond  the  Tagus,  had  never  yet  submitted
to  the  Roman  yoke,  and  behind  them  lay  the
mountains  of  Gallicia,  which  harboured  a  race  to
whom  even  the  name  of  the  republic  was  almost
unknown.  The  provincial  governors  lived  in  a
state  of  almost  perpetual  warfare  with  the  petty
chieftains,  whose  nominal  dependence  was  marked
by  the  imposition  of  a  tribute,  seldom  paid  except
when  exacted  by  force  of  arms.  Even  the  neces-
sity of  self-defence  might  justify  the  repeated
incursions  by  which  they  restrained  the  hungry
wanderers  on  their  frontiers.  The  crime  of  the
officers  who  represented  the  majesty  of  Rome  in

1  Caes.  B.  C.  i.  38. :  "  A  saltu  Castulonensi  ad  Anam."

2  Liv.  xxxiv.  17. :  "  Omnium  Hispanorum  maxime  imbelles  habentur
Turdetani."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  375

these  distant  possessions,  was  not  so  much  their .CHAP.
encroachment  upon  the  rights  and  liberties  of  an  .

implacable  enemy,  as  the  hasty  and  incomplete
method  of  warfare  which  they  adopted.  They
struck  their  blows  at  random,  not  for  the  ultimate
security  of  the  interests  committed  to  their  care,
but  for  the  gratification  of  their  personal  ambition
or  avarice,  and  persevered  in  no  definite  plan  of
conquest.  Ca3sar  seems  to  have  acted  with  a  diffe-
rent sense  of  his  duty  as  a  provincial  governor.
He  was  not  satisfied  with  the  mere  avowal  of  sub-
mission ;  he  required  a  guarantee  that  submission
should  be  permanent :  he  carried  war  into  the  fast-
nesses of  the  mountains,  and  drove  the  enemy
from  his  retreats  into  the  open  plains.  Nor  was  he
to  be  diverted  from  his  purpose  even  there  by  the
booty  which  the  natives  craftily  threw  in  his  way ;
he  thrust  home  at  the  main  body  of  his  opponents,
pursued  them  over  broad  rivers,  drove  them  to  the
borders  of  the  sea,  and  into  islands  on  the  coasts.
He  collected  vessels  from  Gades,  and  with  their
assistance  finally  reduced  these  last  strongholds.
In  this  way  he  effected  the  complete  subjugation
of  the  districts  of  Lusitania  north  of  the  Tagus,
including  the  wild  fastnesses  of  the  Herminian
mountains  and  the  rapid  waters  of  the  Durius.
Brigantium  in  Gallicia,  protected  on  the  land  side  by
the  difficult  character  of  the  surrounding  country,
he  attacked  with  a  naval  armament,  and  erected
his  victorious  standard  at  the  furthest  extremity
of  his  province.1

1  Brigantium  seems to have been either  the  modern  Ferrol  or
Coruiia. Mannert  decides  for  the  former,  but  the  remains  of  an  old

176  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. The  success  of  the  new  candidate  for  military
.  fame  gave  a  brilliant  earnest  of  his  future  glories.

His  civil  The  brief  space  which  he  could  devote  to  civil
affairs,  must  have  been  employed  with  at  least  equal
energy.  The  great  complaint  of  the  provincials,
throughout  the  Roman  dominions,  was  the  pressure
of  their  debts  to  the  government.  The  farmers  of
the  public  revenues  exacted  their  dues  with  the
utmost  severity.  But  they  and  the  Roman  resi-
dents generally,  with  the  eye  to  money-making  so
characteristic  of  the  nation,  were  always  ready  to
accommodate  the  natives  with  usurious  loans,  and
thus  extricate  them  from  immediate  difficulties  at
an  enormous  eventual  sacrifice.  The  revenues,  not
of  individuals  only,  but  of  cities  and  states,  became
mortgaged  beyond  the  possibility  of  redemption.
The  persons  of  the  debtors  and  of  their  families
were  liable  to  be  seized  and  sold  into  slavery.
When  the  affair  came  to  this  point,  we  may  imagine
how  ready  a  refuge  was  offered  to  the  victim  by
the  bands  of  brigands  in  the  mountains.  The  ad-
ministration of  Caesar  was  particularly  directed  to
the  abolition  of  this  cause  of  perennial  warfare.
He  effected  an  adjustment  by  which  the  debts  were

Roman  tower  near  the  latter  place  may  remind  us  that  Brigantium
was  celebrated  for  its  lighthouse.  (Oros.  i.  2.)  The  two  modern
towns,  however,  lie  nearly  opposite  to  each  other  across  a  bay,  and
the  lighthouse  might  serve  as  a  beacon  to  vessels  bound  for  either
destination.  The  Mons  Herminius  is  supposed  by  both  Drumann  and
Mannert  to  have  lain  south  of  the  Tagus,  but  it  would  rather  appear
from  Dion's  account  to  have  been  situated  near  the  Douro.  It  may
probably  be  identified  with  the  Sierra  d'Estrella  in  the  province  of
Beira.  The  authorities  for  the  history  of  this  campaign,  important
only  as  a  prelude  to  Caesar's  great  military  achievements,  are  Plutarch,
CCBS.  12  ;  Dion,  xxxvii.  52,  53.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  177

to  be  liquidated  by  instalments,  and  is  said  to  have  CHAP.
conciliated,  by  his  wisdom  and  prudence,  the  good-
will of  either  party.  The  tribute  which  had  been
imposed  upon  the  province  by  Metellus  Pius,
during  the  Sertorian  war,  was  remitted  by  the
senate  at  the  propraetor's  instance ;  upon  which
service  he  founded  a  just  claim  to  the  gratitude  of
the  Spanish  people.1  At  the  same  time,  he  did
not  neglect  the  main  object  of  his  own  visit  to  the
country.  He  amassed  a  considerable  treasure  for
himself,  and  took  care  to  satisfy  the  cupidity  of
his  followers  and  soldiers  in  due  proportion.2  The
army  saluted  him  on  the  field  with  the  title  of
Imperator.

During  the  absence  of  Cassar,  Pompeius  con-
tinued slowly  and  irresolutely  to  press  upon  the
senate  the  ratification  of  his  acts  in  the  Eastern
wars.  He  had  expended  large  sums  of  money  in
the  service  of  the  state,  he  had  levied  contributions
from  subjects  and  allies,  he  had  conferred  privi-
leges upon  cities  and  crowns  upon  political  par-
tizans.  All  this  he  had  done  in  the  exercise  of
his  own  discretion,  invested  as  he  was  with  the
extraordinary  powers  of  the  Manilian  law ;  never-

1  Auct.  de  B.  Hisp.  42.

2  Suetonius,  in  a  passage  where  he  rakes  together  all  the  charges
which  were  made  against  the  subject  of  his  memoir  during  his  life-
time and  afterwards  (Jul.  54.),  says  that  he  was  accused  of  accepting
presents  from  individuals,  and  even  soliciting  them. This  is  not  im-
probable, but  no  one  seems  to  have  made  any  charge  against  him  of
fraud  or  rapine  in  his  civil  administration. His  enemies,  with  all  their
unscrupulous  animosity,  never  threatened  to  bring  his  conduct  as  a
provincial  governor  before  a  judicial  tribunal. Caesar's  propraetorship
was  an  object  of  panegyric  among  his  countrymen. Comp.  Cic,  pro
Balb.  19.;  Veil.  ii.  43.;  Plut.  Caw.  12.

VOL.  I.  N

178  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  theless,  he  was  anxious  that  his  proceedings  should
be  confirmed  by  a  special  decree  of  the  senate,  to
relieve  him  from  all  future  responsibility.  But
that  body  was  well  pleased  to  have  an  opportunity
of  humiliating  the  haughty  general.  Lucullus,
more  particularly,  grudged  the  distinctions  of  his
rival  and  successor  in  the  Eastern  command1,  and
insinuated  that  he  had  been  himself  the  first  to
break  the  power  of  Mithridates,  leaving  him  an
easy  prey  to  a  fresh  adversary  with  augmented
resources.  And  the  tyrant  had,  after  all,  escaped
from  his  pursuer,  arid  robbed  the  pretended  con-
queror of  half  his  glory  by  a  voluntary  death.2

The  senate  listened  with  approbation  to  these
A.U.  693.;  unworthy  objections,  and  gradually  recovered  its
sept.  22, 23.  courage  jn  ^he  presence  of  one  who  had  so  lately
been  the  master  of  its  legions.  It  had  concealed
its  enmity  under  a  flourish  of  acclamations  when
Pompeius  entered  Rome,  accompanied,  not  by  his
troops,  but  a  crowd  of  flatterers  and  courtiers.3
The  studied  modesty  of  his  bearing  roused  the
presumption  of  the  nobles,  in  the  same  proportion
as  it  allayed  their  jealousy.  He  would  not  accept
any  title  to  designate  the  theatre  of  his  conquests,
and  perpetuate  their  memory  in  connexion  with
his  name.  He  was  content  with  the  simple  ap-
pellation of  Magnus,  the  Great,  which  had  been

1  Plut.  Pomp.  46.

2  Lucan  (i.  336.)  puts  this  depreciating  language  in  the  mouth  of
Caesar :

"  Lassi  Pontica  regis

Pi  aalia,  barbarico  vix  consummata  veneno."

3  Veil.  ii.  40.  :  "  Quo  magis  homines  timuerant,  eo  gratior  civilis
tanti  imperatoris  reditus  fuit."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  179

sanctioned  by  the  popular  voice  at  an  earlier  CHAP.
period,  and  which,  in  a  single  word,  more  than
comprised  all  local  designations.1  He  further
declined  any  mark  of  public  approbation,  except
the  permission  to  wear  a  laurel  chaplet  and  the
triumphal  insignia  at  the  spectacles  of  the  Circus.2
Meanwhile,  he  exhibited  the  solemnity  of  his  tri-
umph, such  an  one  as  Rome  had  never  before
seen.3  It  was  not  so  remarkable  for  the  munificence
of  the  festivals  by  which  it  was  attended,  or  for
the  public  shows  in  the  theatre  and  Circus,  as  for
the  interest  and  value  of  the  spoils  which  rendered
it  illustrious.  The  treasures  of  Mithridates,  col-
lected from  the  plunder  of  Greece,  were  not  re-
stored to  the  sufferers,  but  reserved  to  enrich  the
friends  of  the  latest  victor.  Works  of  painting
and  statuary  were  eclipsed  by  vast  hoards  of  plate,
and  the  novel  luxury  of  gems  and  pearls  and
crystal  vases.  The  taste,  indeed,  for  these  objects
in  Rome  dated  its  introduction  from  this  auspicious
event4;  so  rapid  was  the  transition  the  people
made  from  the  old  Italian  barbarism  to  that  stage

1  Ovid.  Fast.  i.  603.  :

"  Magne,  tuum  nomen  rerum  mensura  tuarum  est."
So  also  Octaviarms  took  the  title  of  Augustus  :

"  Si  petat  a  victis  tot  sumat  nomina  Caesar

Quot  numero  gentes  maximus  orbis  habet."

£  Dion,  xxxvii.  21. ;  Veil.  L  c.  observes:  "  Id  ille  non  plus  quam
semel,  et  hoc  sane  nimium  fuit,  usurpare  sustinuit."  The  glories  of
the  triumph  were  a  giddy  elevation  which  furnished  a  constant  theme
to  the  moralists.  Nemesis  could  hardly  endure  the  provocation  of
seeing  a  mortal  sitting  among  his  fellow-citizens  in  the  robe  in  which
he  had  thrice  ridden  to  the  temple  of  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol :  "  Vela-
mina  summo  Ter  conspecta  Jovi."  Luc.  ix.  1 77.

3  Comp.  Plutarch's  elaborate  account,  Pomp.  45.

4  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  7.

N 2

180  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, in  a  nation's  life  when  it  finds  delight  in  mere

•rxr

brilliancy  and  rarity  and  meretricious  ornament.1

Represses  This  harmless  gratification  of  his  vanity,  how-
ever,  did  not  avail  to  advance  the  immediate  object
°f  P°mpeius's  interest.  The  soldiery  which  had

his  veterans,  been  disbanded  at  Brundisium,  required  the  ful-
filment of  the  ample  promise  of  lands  which  he  had
held  out  to  them.2  Sulla  had  demanded  estates  for
his  veterans  ;  why  should  not  Poinpeius  extort  the
same  ?  But  the  copy  had  not  the  boldness  of  the
original ;  the  vision  of  the  dictatorship  still  eluded
his  grasp.  He  attempted  to  gain  his  point  by
management  suited  to  the  times  ;  but  in  this  also
he  failed,  from  want  of  adroitness.  He  had  se-
cured, by  the  ordinary  methods  of  corruption,  the
election  of  two  consuls  for  the  year  694,  on  whose
political  or  private  sentiments  he  thought  he  could

A.  u.  694, relv.3 But  the  one,  L.  Afranius.  was  a  mere  cypher

B.  c.  60.  J

1  Pompelus  is  the  first  Roman  who  can  be  confidently  charged  with
the  bad  taste  of  allowing  himself  to  be  represented  by  a  naked  statue.
This  was  the  fashion  which  the  Greeks  applied  to  the  representation
of  deities  and  heroes,  and  it  consorted  suitably  with  features  of  ideal
beauty  and  majesty. In  the  Roman  emperors  the  combination  of  the
naked figure,  with the  ordinary  human  head  trimmed  and  curled
according  to  the  fashion  of  the  day,  is  generally  ludicrous. The  em-
perors, however,  who  claimed  kindred  with  the  divinities,  were  not
altogether  inconsistent. But  a  naked  figure  of  a  Roman  citizen,  before
the  age  of  apotheoses,  was  preposterous  and  unmeaning. Pompeius
was  probably  misled  by  personal  vanity,  for  he  was  one  of  the  hand-
somest men  of  his  day. (Plut.  Pomp.  2. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  10.  ;  Veil.
ii.  29.) The  famous  statue  in  the  Palazzo  Spada  at  Rome,  which  is
supposed  to  represent  him,  and  to  be  that  beneath  which  Caesar  was
assassinated,  can  hardly  be  presumed  genuine  ;  but  another,  also  naked,
preserved  in  the  Villa  Castellazzo  near  Milan,  has  a  better  claim  to
our  confidence. See  Winckelmann,  GeacJi.  der  Kunst,  xi.  1.

2  Though  the  legions  were  disbanded,  it  must  be  supposed  that  at
least  a  part  of  them  re-assembled  to  accompany  the  triumph  of  their
general.

3  Cic.  ad  Att.  i. 16.: "In  comitia  omnibus  invitis  trudit  noster

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  181

among  statesmen,  one,  says  Cicero,  who  did  not  CHAP.
know  the  value  of  the  thing  he  had  bought,  and
who  understood  dancing  better  than  politics.1  The
other,  Metellus  Celer,  had  received  a  personal  affront
from  his  patron,  who  had  divorced  his  sister  Mucia
immediately  upon  his  return  to  Rome.2  It  was
under  these  unfavourable  auspices  that  one  of  the
tribunes,  named  Flavius,  was  engaged  to  bring  for-
ward a  bill  on  similar  principles  to  that  of  Rullus,
for  a  division  of  lands  in  Italy  among  the  veterans
of  Pompeius  and  the  poorer  classes  of  the  city.
These  lands  were  to  consist  partly  of  public  do-
mains, partly  of  estates  to  be  bought  by  the  go-
vernment with  the  spoils  of  the  late  war.  Cicero,
who  had  opposed  the  former  agrarian  enactment
with  so  much  bitterness,  speaks  with  moderation  of
this.  He  professes,  in  his  correspondence,  to  have
bestowed  some  pains  on  shaping  and  amending  it,
and  to  have  studied  to  reconcile  the  interests  of
individuals  with  those  of  the  state  and  of  Pom-
peius himself.3  If  such  was  his  tone  in  addressing
a  private  friend,  he  was  probably  still  more  guarded
and  conciliatory  to  all  parties  in  the  senate.  But
if  the  sting  was  thus  taken  out  of  an  unpalatable
and  violent  measure,  the  nobles  only  relaxed  their
opposition  to  fall  into  indifference  and  stifle  the

Magnus  Auli  filium." Plutarch  notices  the  audacious  openness  with
which  Pompeius  bribed  the  voters. (Pomp.  44.)

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  19. ;  Dion,  xxxvii.  49.

2  Dion,  1.  c.  ;  Plut.  Pomp.  42. Mucia  was  the  daughter  of  Mucius
Scaevola,  and  half-sister  of  Celer  and  Nepos. She  was  suspected  of
familiarity  with  Caesar.

3  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  19. :  "  Et  sentinam  urbis  exhauriri  et  Italias  soli-
tudinem  frequentari  posse  arbitrabar  : "  this  was  the  language  of  the
Gracchi.

N 3

182  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  project  by  procrastination.  The  city  was  occupied,
'  on  the  one  hand,  by  a  topic  of  private  scandal,  the
intrigue  of  a  noble  named  Memmius  with  the  wife
of  a  brother  of  Lucullus.1  On  the  other,  it  was
amused  by  the  manoeuvres  of  Clodius,  who,  in  his
anxiety  to  obtain  a  seat  on  the  bench  of  tribunes,
was  seeking  to  be  adopted  into  a  plebeian  family
by  a  vote  of  the  people.2  Every  one  knew  that
his  ultimate  object  was  to  obtain  the  means  of
injuring  Cicero,  and  the  city  looked  on  with  more
curiosity  than  solicitude.

But  is  About  the  same  time  news  arrived  from  Gaul

obliged  to Q£  ^Q  commotions  with  which  that  country  was

(insist  iroro  «/

his  de- menaced,  and  of  the  great  preparations  which  the

mands.  ..  i  •  /.  •

Helvetii  were  making  lor  a  national  emigration,
which  threatened  to  respect  neither  the  Roman
province  nor  the  territories  of  the  allies.  A  revo-
lution in  Gaul  was  always  a  matter  of  deep  alarm
at  Rome.  The  senate  decreed  that  the  consuls
should  undertake  by  lot  the  defence  of  the  two
provinces  on  either  side  of  the  Alps,  and  that
deputies  of  consular  rank  should  be  sent  imme-
diately to  levy  troops  and  provide  for  the  security
of  the  national  possessions.  Distinguished  men
were  promptly  selected  for  this  important  charge ;
but  Cicero  and  Pompeius  were  specially  reserved,
as  statesmen  whose  services  at  such  a  crisis  could
not  be  dispensed  with  at  home.3  The  imminence
of  this  Gallic  war  cooled  down  whatever  interest
the  agrarian  bill  had  excited.4  Pompeius,  fearing

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  18.  2  Cic.  L  c.

3  Such  was  Cicero's  complacent  interpretation  of  this  proceeding
(ad  Att.  i.  19.).

4  Cic.  L  c.  :  "  Scd  hsec  tota  res  interpellatu  bello  refrixcrat."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.

to  exasperate  the  people  by  pressing  his  demands  at  CHAP.
such  a  moment,  desired  his  friends  to  desist;  but  IV'
he  bitterly  regretted  the  precipitation  with  which
he  had  disbanded  his  army  and  confided  him-
self to  the  gratitude  or  fears  of  his  countrymen.1
It  would  seem  that  the  people  generally  were  not
much  less  jealous  of  their  national  champion  than
the  senate  itself.  They  conceived  that  his  plan  for
enriching  the  rabble  of  the  forum  by  grants  of
public  land,  was  no  better  than  a  cover  to  his
designs  upon  their  liberty.2

It  was  a  great  descent  for  Pompeius  to  make  ms  schemes

for  embroil
ing  public

from  giving  the  word  of  command  to  consuls  and  for  embroil'

consulars,  to  wielding,  as  his  instruments,  the  affairs-
most  turbulent  of  the  tribunes  and  popular  dema-
gogues.3 To  this  degradation  he  was  reduced  by
the  hostility  of  Lucullus  and  the  resentment  of
Metellus  Celer.  The  consul,  for  the  gratification
of  his  private  pique,  paid  court  to  Cicero  and  the
senatorial  party,  and  the  creature  of  favour  and
corruption  became  all  at  once,  in  their  eyes,  an
admirable  magistrate,  a  patriot,  and  a  statesman.
The  violence  of  his  opposition  to  Pompeius  pro-
voked violent  retaliation.  The  tribune  Flavins,
presuming  on  his  new  patron's  support,  actually
seized  the  consul's  person,  and  threw  him  into
prison.  Metellus  was  well  pleased  to  parade  his

1  Dion,  xxxvii.  50.

2  The  populace  insulted  him  in  the  theatre. An  actor  having  occa-
sion to  say  in  his  part,  "  Nostra  miseria  tu  es  magntis,"  was  required
to  repeat  the  words  several  times.  At  the  words,  "  virtutem  istam  veniet
tempus  cum  graviter  gemes,"  the  audience  burst  into  loud  acclama-

tions. Cic.  I.  c.

3  Compare  Plutarch's  remarks,  Pomp.  46.

N 4

184  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  injuries  before  the  eyes  of  the  city.  He  summoned
'  the  senators  to  hold  their  deliberations  in  his
cell.  Flavius  erected  his  tribunal  before  the  prison
door  to  prevent  their  ingress ;  they  caused  the
wall  to  be  pulled  down,  and  walked  into  the  pre-
sence of  their  chief.  Pompeius  was  not  yet  har-
dened to  such  scandalous  proceedings,  and  has-
tened to  repress  his  adherent's  zeal.1  Such  mo-
deration, however,  would  have  been  a  bright
spot  in  the  history  of  these  times  of  selfish  vio-
lence, had  it  been  accompanied  by  any  attempt  to
check  the  degeneracy  of  the  age,  and  infuse  new
vigour  into  the  workings  of  the  constitution.  But
Pompeius  had  no  wish  to  effect  any  thing  for  the
good  of  the  state,  unless  it  would  surrender  itself
wholly  to  his  discretion.  Then,  and  not  before,
he  was  ready  to  try  the  experiment  of  reform,  to
bring  to  bear  all  the  influence  he  was  known  to
enjoy,  all  the  wisdom  and  magnanimity  he  was
supposed  at  least  to  possess.  It  would  still  remain
to  be  seen  what  talents  the  successful  warrior  really
had  for  civil  administration.  But  no  party  in  the
state  was  yet  willing  to  buy  so  doubtful  a  good  at
so  uncertain  a  price.  Meanwhile,  the  idea  began
to  dawn  upon  his  mind,  that  by  the  artful  applica-
tion of  his  resources,  his  wealth,  his  power,  his
private  connexions,  he  might  clog  the  proceedings
of  all  parties,  and  throw  the  executive  into  a  state
of  abeyance.  The  dread  of  mob-rule,  and  of  the
violence  of  demagogues,  would  ultimately  prevail,

1  This  story,  it  must  be  remarked,  rests  solely  on  the  authority  of
Dion  (/.  c.)  ;  and  if  true,  it  is  strange  that  it  should  not  be  alluded  to
by  Cicero.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  185

as  nearer  and  more  urgent,  over  the  apprehension CHAP.
of  dictatorial  despotism  ; and  the  author  of  the
confusion  would  alone  be  able  to  disentangle  it.

Great  as  Pompeius  undoubtedly  was,  it  was  a  weakness
cardinal  defect  in  his  character  that  he  failed  to
keep  his  principal  aim  steadily  in  view,  and  allowed
minor  objects  to  divert  his  course  and  fret  away
his  energies.  This  may  be  observed  even  in  his
military  career,  in  which  his  genius  was  most  con-
spicuous. In  the  Spanish  campaigns  his  operations
were  desultory  and  indecisive,  and  there  seem  to
be  traces  of  similar  feebleness  in  his  contest  with
Mithridates  ;  his  countrymen  were  dissatisfied,  and
suspected  him  of  protracting  the  struggle  for  poli-
tical objects.  In  the  city  this  want  of  decision
became  daily  more  evident.  The  consequence  was
that  Pompeius  failed  to  acquire  any  moral  as-
cendancy over  his  associates.  His  virtues  were
sobriety  and  moderation,  and  these  he  possessed  in
an  eminent  degree.  But  when  these  qualities  are
not  the  result  of  resolute  self-control,  but  arise
from  a  deficiency  in  animation  and  the  sense  of
enjoyment,  they  have  little  attraction  for  men  of
warmer  temperaments,  and  exercise  still  less  com-
mand over  their  imaginations.  Accordingly,  no
man  was  so  constantly  deceived  in  the  persons
whom  he  selected  for  his  instruments  :  they  dis-
covered his  weaknesses,  and  shook  off  the  yoke  of
his  condescension.  The  distance  which  he  affected
in  his  intercourse  with  those  about  him,  arose
partly  from  natural  coldness,  but  more  perhaps
from  his  own  distrust  of  his  power  over  them.
They  mistook  it  at  first  for  greatness  of  soul  ;  but

186  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, when they approached nearer to the self-pro-
claimed  hero,  they  found with disgust  of  what
ordinary  clay  he  was  formed.
His  dissi- Nor  can  it  be  disguised  that  this  coldness  and
mulatto reserve had been  known  by  their usual fruits,

detected.  •*

in  an  early  career  of  remorseless  cruelty  and  in-
veterate dissimulation.  The  nobles  who  shuddered
at  the  idea  of  Pompeius  assuming  the  powers  of
the  dictatorship,  well  knew  the  school  in  which  he
had  been  brought  up,  and  the  proofs  he  had  given
of  having  imbibed  its  lessons.  He  had  licked  the
sword  of  Sulla;  and  as  with  young  tigers  who
have  once  tasted  blood,  they  could  never  be  as-
sured that  his  thirst  was  sated.1  He  was  himself
another  Marius  or  Sulla,  no  better,  only  more
disguised.2  Under  the  orders  of  the  dictator  he
had  shed  the  best  blood  of  Rome,  and  had  been
branded  with  the  title  of  the  young  hangman.3  He
had  put  to  death  a  Carbo,  a  Brutus,  a  Scipio
^Emilianus ;  nor  had  he  ever  evinced  any  symptom
of  compassion  or  clemency.  His  word  was  not  to  be
trusted,  he  was  capa,ble  of  disowning  his  own  com-
mands, neither  friend  nor  enemy  could  rely  on  his
actions  corresponding  with  the  sentiments  he  ex-
pressed.4 Eome  might  have  yielded  to  a  chieftain

1  Luc.  i.  327. :

"  Utque  ferae  tigres  nunquam  posuere  furorem,

Quas  nemore  Hyrcano,  matrum  dum  lustra  sequuntur,
Altus  csesorum  pavit  cruor  armentorura ;
Sic  et  Syllanum  solito  tibi  lambere  ferrum
Durat,  Magne,  sitis."

2  Tac.  Hut.  ii.  38. :  "  Occultior,  non  melior."

3  Val.  Max.  vi.  2.  8. :  "  Adolescentulus  carnifex."

4  Cic.  adDiv.  viii.  1.  3. :  "  Soletaliud  sentire,  aliud  loqui." Comp.
r«l  Alt.  i.  13.  4.,  ii.  20.  2.  ii.  22.  1.,  iv.  9.,  iv.  15.  7.  ;  Drumann,  iv.  545.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  187

who  demanded her  submission with the drawn CHAP.
sword, but  it  was  too  much  to  expect  that  she
should  put  herself  voluntarily  in  the  power  of  one
who  affected  to  ask  it  as  a  favour  to  have  the  lives
and  liberties  of  her  children  placed  in  his  hands.1

From  the  moment  of  his  return  to  the  city,  He  makes
Pompeius  was  casting  his  eyes  around  him  to  find  ^Sn^o^
creatures  who  might  further  his  occult  ends,  without  Caesar.
either  compromising  himself  or  asserting  too  much
independence  of  his  direction.  In  these  intrigues
he  was  singularly  unfortunate.  When  he  divorced
his  wife  Mucia,  he  had  perhaps  already  in  view
the  formation  of  an  advantageous  alliance.  He
proposed,  it  was  said,  to  connect  himself  with  the
family  of  Cato,  with  whose  character  and  position
he  must,  if  so,  have  been  strangely  unacquainted.
The  overture  was  rejected  with  disdain.2  In  Cicero,
indeed,  he  found  a  willing  flatterer,  and  with  him
he  carried  on  a  long  course  of  dissimulation  and
cajolery,  which  was  transparent  to  every  one  except
its  object.3  "  In  vain,'7  he  said  to  him,  "  should  I
have  earned  the  glories  of  a  triumph,  hadst  not
thou  preserved  the  city  for  me  to  triumph  in."4
Indeed,  he  paid  his  court  to  his  dupe  so  assiduously,

1  The  later  Romans  drew  this  distinction  between  their  submission
to  the  usurpers  of  the  civil  wars,  and  to  the  legalized  despotism  of  the
emperors. Luc.  iv.  fin. :

"  Jus  licet  in  jugulos  nostros  sibifecerit  ense
Sylla  potens,  Mariusque  ferox,  et  Cinna  cruentus,
Caesareseque  domus  series,  cui  tanta  potestas
Concessa  est"

2  Plut.  Pomp.  44.

3  It  is  evident  that  Cicero  was  warned  against  Pompeius  by  his
friend  Atticus. Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  17.  10.,  ii.  1.  6.

4  Cic.  de  Off.  i.  22.

188  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  and  showed  himself  so  frequently  in  his  company,
'  that  the  young  nobles  gave  him  jestingly  the  name
of  Cnaeus  Cicero.  But  he  seems  to  have  early
satisfied  himself  that  he  could  make  little  use  of
the  orator's  services.  Again,  he  was  disappointed
in  the  behaviour  of  both  the  consuls ;  the  one  was
imbecile,  the  other  unexpectedly  hostile;  his  in-
terests were  not  advanced  by  either.  Clodius  was
too  giddy  and  too  self-willed  to  be  trusted  as  an
ally;  the  services  of  Flavius  it  was  beneath  the
•  dignity  of  the  great  Pompeius  to  appear  to  require.
Crassus  was  aiming  like  himself  at  the  exasperation
of  the  public  dissensions,  with  the  blind  presump-
tion that  his  wealth  and  the  number  of  his  clients
would  give  him  the  advantage  over  all  competitors
in  a  period  of  popular  discord.  But  with  Crassus
he  was  at  deadly  feud,  for  neither  were  of  a  temper
to  forget  an  ancient  jealousy,  and  Pompeius  least
of  all  men  knew  how  to  make  an  overture  of  recon-
ciliation. It  was  in  these  circumstances  that  he
was  disposed  to  invite  Caesar  to  his  counsels,  in
whom  he  had  already  discovered,  as  he  thought,  all
the  alacrity  to  serve  him  that  he  could  desire.
Caasar,  he  conceived,  had  no  consideration  to  lose
in  the  eyes  of  the  nobility,  of  whose  opinion  he
stood  himself  so  much  in  awe;  while  his  temper
and  necessities  seemed  equally  to  encourage  him
to  defy  the  consequences  of  the  most  daring  ag-
gressions. We  may  suppose  further,  that  in  the
view  of  a  man  so  decorous  and  correct  as  Pompeius,
the  character  of  the  profligate  Marian  appeared  so
bad,  that  he  might  expect  to  be  able  at  any  time
to  shake  off  and  disown  the  connexion  with  im-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  189

punity. The  return  of  Caesar  from  his  province CHAP.
was  opportune  for  the  views  of  both  parties,  and
they  lost  no  time  in  coming  to  the  show  of  a  mutual
understanding.1

Rome  had  no  rewards  for  the  honourable  and
beneficial  discharge  of  civil  duties  in  the  provinces  ;
but  the  military  successes  of  the  propraetor  in  Spain

entitled  him  to  claim  the  distinction  of  a  triumph,  ofatri-
Caesar  addressed  letters  to  the  senate,  detailing  his
exploits  and  soliciting  their  reward.  But  the
consulship  was  an  object  of  more  solid  advantage  ;
and  as  the  year  of  Afranius  and  Celer  advanced,
the  time  drew  near  when  it  might  be  sued  for  and
won.  One  obstacle  intervened.  The  jealousy  of
the  law  forbade  the  Imperator  to  enter  the  city
before  the  day  of  his  triumph,  while  the  vanity  of
the  people  demanded  the  appearance  in  the  forum,
on  three  stated  occasions,  of  every  candidate  for
their  suffrages.  It  was  true  that  the  senate  had
frequently  obtained  for  its  favourites  a  dispensa-
tion from  this  latter  regulation.  Marius  had  been
raised  to  the  consulship,  Lucullus  to  the  aedileship,
each  in  their  absence.2  A  few  years  later  Cato
was  the  foremost  to  propose  a  similar  indulgence
to  Pompeius,  while  he  held  the  proconsulate  of
Spain,  and  was  scrupulously  refraining  from  enter-
ing the  city.3  But  on  the  present  occasion  the
nobles  were  rejoiced  to  throw  an  impediment  in
the  way  of  the  man  they  hated  ;  they  conceded

1  It  is  at  this  period  that  the  name  of  Csesar  first  occurs  in  the
letters  of  Cicero,  and  is  introduced  to  us  with  the  ominous  words  :
"  Csesar  cujus  nunc  vend  valde  sunt  secundi  "  (ad  Att.  ii.  1.).

*  Plut.  Mar.  14.,  Luc.  1.  ;  Cic.  Acad.  ii.  1.

3  Plut.  Pomp.  54.

190  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  triumph  on  purpose  that  they  might  exclude
IV'  him  from  the  consulship.1  When  his  friends  were
urgent  to  obtain  a  decree  in  his  favour,  the  rigid
patriot  resorted  to  an  artifice,  and  wore  out  the
day  with  an  interminable  harangue.2  Undoubt-
edly the  nobles  expected  that  Caesar  would  have
foregone  the  uncertain  contest  for  the  consulship  ;
but  on  the  contrary  he  relinquished  the  triumph,
and  hastily  leaving  his  province  before  the  arrival
of  his  successor,  appeared  in  Rome  in  due  season
to  solicit  the  votes  of  the  citizens.  It  was  a
compliment  to  the  majesty  of  the  people  to  exhibit
this  preference  of  their  honours  before  those  of  the
senate  ;  but  in  Caesar's  eyes  the  value  of  the  one
outweighed  a  hundred  times  the  empty  glory  of
the  other.  He  formed  a  coalition  with  a  wealthy
candidate,  L.  Lucceius3;  the  nobles  put  forth  all
their  strength  on  behalf  of  Bibulus,  and  contributed
an  immense  sum  to  bribe  the  centuries.  Even
Cato  joined  in  this  audacious  cabal,  and  thus  by
his  example  set  the  seal  to  the  universal  acknow-
ledgment, that  law  was  impotent  and  revolution
inevitable.4

The  cabai Meanwhile,  Crassus, set aside equally  by  the
leaders  of  the  various  sections  of  the  nobility,  the

,  and  j^e?  ^ne  profligate,  and  the  impracticable,  felt
the  first  himself  ill  at  ease,  even  in  his  conspicuous  position.
Cautious,  industrious,  and  studious  of  appearances,
he  was  himself  equally  removed  from  all  these
extremes;  and,  without  any  open  rupture,  his
influence  with  his  party  seemed  to  slip  from  under

1  Dion,  xliv.  41.  2  Suet.  Jul  18.  ;  Dion,  xxxvii.  54.

3  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  17.  11.  4  Suet,  Jul  19.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  191

him.  The  return  to  Rome  of  Caesar,  the  main-  CHAP.
spring  of  every  thing  original  and  active,  breathed
new  life  into  him  as  well  as  into  Pompeius,  and
was  calculated  to  form  a  new  era  in  the  fortunes
of  both.  The  Marian  candidate  for  the  consulship
was  already  prepared  to  establish  an  intimate  con-
nexion with  each,  and  at  the  same  time  to  reconcile
them  to  one  another.  Crassus  soon  began  to  listen
with  satisfaction  to  the  overtures  of  so  skilful  a
negotiator.  A  little  adroit  flattery  served  to
smooth  over  the  wounds  his  vanity  had  received ;
and  he  was  easily  induced  to  withdraw  his  coun-
tenance from  friends  who  knew  not  how  to  ap-
preciate his  importance,  and  bestow  it  upon  those
who  had  the  prudence  to  solicit  it.  Thus  did  the
three  competitors  for  supreme  power  combine  to
form  a  league  among  themselves  for  their  mutual
advancement.  The  covenant  was  that  no  pro-
ceedings should  be  allowed  to  take  place  in  the
commonwealth  without  the  consent  of  each  of  the
three  contracting  parties.1  United  they  consti-
tuted a  power  beyond  all  the  resources  of  the  com-
monwealth to  cope  with.  However  much  or  little
they  might  deign  to  consult  the  forms  of  the  con-
stitution, their  influence  was  really  omnipotent,
their  voice  decisive.  The  cabal  only  wanted  open
avowal  to  be  recognized  as  the  usurpation  of  abso-
lute power,  and  the  distribution  of  this  power  in
more  than  one  hand  alone  distinguished  it  from  a
monarchical  despotism.  Such  was  the  triumvirate
of  Pompeius,  Caesar,  and  Crassus,  which  bore  its
legitimate  fruit  in  the  empire  of  Octavius.

1  Suet.  Jul  19.

192  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  The  curtain  now  draws  up  for  the  commence-

TV

'  ment of  another act in the great drama, and

Reflections  discloses  to  us  a  new  development  of  the  history
character  of  of  the  Roman  people.  The  blood  of  the  Roman
this  league.  an(j  ^e  Julian  has  mingled  in  one  common  cur-
rent ;  the  counter-revolution  has  obliterated  all
traces  of  the  Sullan  reform ;  the  contest  has  ended
in  raising  individual  statesmen  to  a  position  in
which  they  can  array  their  own  private  ambition
against  the  general  weal.  Each  great  chieftain
finds  himself  at  the  head  of  a  faction  whose  in-
terests centre  in  him  alone,  who  are  ready  to  fight
under  his  banner  arid  for  his  personal  aggrandize-
ment, and  have  ceased  to  invoke  the  watch-
words of  party  or  the  principles  of  class.  The
triumvirs  are  now  leagued  together  to  undermine
the  old  form  of  government ;  by-and-by  they  will
fly  asunder,  and  challenge  each  other  to  mortal
duel.  Each  will  try  to  strengthen  himself  by
an  appeal  to  old  names  and  prejudices,  and  the
shadows  of  a  popular  and  a  patrician  party  will
again  face  each  other  on  the  field  of  Pharsalia ;
but  the  real  contest  will  be  between  a  Caesar  and  a
Pompeius,  no  longer  between  the  commons  and
the  nobility.  For  the  one  party  has  no  common
object  of  sufficient  interest  to  bind  it  firmly  to-
gether; the  other,  though  every  privilege  and
every  traditional  feeling  is  in  peril,  has  no  reliance
on  its  leaders,  by  whom  it  has  been  so  often  be-
trayed, and  has  become  a  mere  gathering  of  des-
perate men,  crowded  together  by  an  instinct  of
resistance,  but  animated  by  no  vital  principle  of
permanence  or  progress.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  193-

It  was  precisely  at  this  period,  the  crisis  of  the  CHAP.
fortunes  of  the  oligarchy,  that  the  best  and  wisest
of  its  champions  became  lost  to  it.  Catultis  died  Death  of
in  the  same  year1  which  witnessed  Caesar's  return
to  Rome  and  the  establishment  of  the  triumvirate.
The  confusion  into  which  the  affairs  of  his  party
from  henceforth  fell  confirms  the  truth  of  the
mournful  panegyrics  which  Cicero  pronounces
upon  him.  "  He  was  a  man  whom  neither  the
tempests  of  danger  nor  the  breezes  of  glory  could
ever  divert  from  his  course,  either  through  hope
or  fear."2  "  Since  the  death  of  Catulus,"  he  writes
in  a  letter  of  this  period,  "  I  maintain  the  true
policy  of  my  order,  without  a  protector  and  with-
out a  companion."3

The  effects  of  this  triple  union  soon  became
apparent.  The  election  of  Caesar  to  the  consulship
was  carried  by  acclamation  ;  the  nobles  could  only  for  the
succeed  in  thrusting  in  Bibulus  as  his  colleague.
This  was  the  second  time  that  these  reluctant
yoke-fellows  had  been  joined  together  in  public
office,  and  there  was  little  prospect  of  their  bearing
their  honourable  burdens  with  decent  unanimity.
In  the  heat  of  the  rumour  of  a  Gallic  tumult,  the
senate  had  already  assigned  the  two  Gauls  to  the
consuls  of  the  year;  but  the  aspect  of  things
became  less  warlike,  and  Metellus  feared  that  he
should  have  no  opportunity  for  acquiring  a  tri-

1  In  the  middle  of  the  consulship  of  Metellus  Celer. Cic.  pro  Cod.
24.

2  Cic.  pro  Sest.  47.

8  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  20. Asinius  Pollio  commenced  his  history  of  the
civil  wars -with  the  consulship  of  Afranius  and  Metellus  :  "Motum  ex
Metello  consule  civicum." Hor.  Od.  ii.  1.
VOL.  I.  O

194  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, umph.1 It  now  hastened  to  allot  their  future  pro-
vinces to  the  consuls  newly  designated,  and  made

a  feeble  attempt  to  guard  against  Caesar's  in-
creasing power  by  decreeing  to  them  the  super-
vision of  the  roads  and  forests  ;  a  paltry  charge,
not  worthy  even  of  Bibulus.2  Caesar  was  justly
incensed  at  this  manoeuvre,  but  he  had  no  doubt
of  being  able  to  counteract  it  when  the  time  should
arrive  ;  mean  white,  he  had  a  game  to  play,  and  he
commenced  it  with  his  usual  decision.

HIS  pro- ' The  influence  of  Caesar  and  his  allies  far  out-
weighed that of  his colleague, not  only  in  the

humbes  the  forum,  but  even  within  the  precincts  of  the  senate.

nobles,  and  "  ,

gratifies  Finding  himself  outvoted  and  thwarted  on  every
>mpems.  occasiOI1?  Bibulus  at  last  refused  to  convene  the
senators,  and  shut  himself  up  in  his  own  house,
where  his  friends  assembled  and  discussed  their
plans  and  prospects  at  least  without  interruption.
As  the  absence  of  one  consul  prevented  the  other
from  convoking  the  senate,  it  was  hoped  that  this
secession  would  cripple  the  power  which  Caesar
was  threatening  to  use  against  his  opponents  ;  but
he,  nothing  daunted,  convened  the  popular  as-
semblies whenever  he  had  occasion,  and  proposed
and  carried  whatever  measures  he  chose.  In  this
way  he  passed  an  agrarian  law,  similar  to  that  of

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  20.

2  Suet.  JuL  19. :  "  Provinciae  minimi  negotii." It  is  possible,  how-
ever, that  this-  charge  was  not  quite  so  trivial. Ccelius  writes  to
Cicero,  in  the  year  704,  that  Curio  was  about  to  propose  a  law  in  the
interest  of  Caesar,  "  viariam,  rion  dissimilem  agrariae  Rulli,"  and  com-
bines it  with  a  lex  alimentaria. (Cic.  ad  Div.  viii.  6.) Any  measure
which  threw  the  public  burdens  on  the  privileged  classes  would  be
agreeable  to  CaBsar.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  195

Flavius,  by  which  he  satisfied  the  veterans  of  CHAP.
Pompeius,  and  settled  a  colony  of  twenty  thou-
sand citizens  at  Capua.  The  colonists  were  se-
lected from  the  heads  of  families  who  had  as  many
as  three  children ;  a  principle  which  was  after-
wards frequently  resorted  to  as  a  means  of  encou-
raging the  multiplication  of  the  Roman  people.
The  party  who  met  at  the  house  of  Bibulus  coun-
selled a  sudden  attack  upon  Cesar's  supporters  in
the  comitia,  and  the  consul  of  the  nobles  rushed
sword  in  hand  into  the  midst  of  the  assembly,
challenging  his  colleague  to  an  appeal  to  arms.
But  his  friends  were  outnumbered,  and  forced  to
exert  all  their  efforts  to  save  their  champion  and
bear  him  off  into  a  place  of  security.  Cato  dis-
tinguished himself  in  this  unseemly  riot  by  pushing
through  the  crowd  to  the  rostrum,  protected  by
the  inviolability  of  his  office  ;  but  the  harangue
which  he  commenced  enjoyed  no  such  privilege,
and  was  soon  drowned  in  the  uproar  which  it
excited.  Caesar  was  less  scrupulous  than  even  the
city  populace,  and  ordered  his  lictors  to  seize  the
tribune  and  drag  him  from  the  place.1  Lucullus,
old  and  feeble,  was  grievously  ill-treated,  and  only
saved  his  life  by  throwing  himself  at  his  enemy's
feet.2  When  the  bill  had  thus  been  passed  by  the
people,  the  victorious  consul  required  the  senators
to  ratify  it  by  an  oath  of  obedience.  By  threat-
ening to  obtain  an  enactment  to  make  refusal
capital,  he  succeeded  in  forcing  it  down  the  throats
of  Cato  and  his  staunchest  adherents.3  Pompieius's

i  App.  B.  C.  ii.  12.  *  $uet.  Jul.  20.  3  App.  S C.  ii,  12.

o 2

196  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CELA.P.  satisfaction  was  completed  by  a  decree  of  the
'  senate  sanctioning  the  acts  of  his  government  in
the  provinces.  He  hugged  himself  with  delight  at
the  success  of  his  intrigues,  and  regarded  the  es-
tablishment of  the  triumvirate  as  the  crowning
stroke  of  his  policy.1

Mysterious  Much  of  the  violence  and  apparent  bitterness  of
of  a  conspi-  the  statesmen  of  the  day  which  we  have  witnessed
hitherto,  may  be  attributed  to  the  excitability  of
^e  Italian  character,  prone  to  the  most  exag-
gerated expression  of  its  feelings.  After  all,  the
politicians  of  Rome  continued  to  live  together  in
private  with  much  harmony  and  good  temper :  their
public  feuds  were  often  forgotten  in  the  relaxation
of  social  intercourse.  Their  conduct  was  rather
that  of  rival  gamesters  than  of  deadly  enemies.
But  at  this  crisis  an  event  occurred  which  served
to  sow  dark  suspicions  between  honourable  oppo-
nents, and  reminded  men  once  more  of  the  use  of
the  dagger,  to  which  the  national  mind  was  never
long  a  stranger.  L.  Vettius,  whose  name  has
already  received  dishonourable  mention,  either  at-
tempted, or  confessed  that  he  had  been  suborned
to  attempt,  the  lives  of  Caesar  and  Pompeius.2  He
was  arrested  with  the  poniard  upon  him,  which  he
was  to  employ  in  the  deed  of  assassination,  and
which  he  declared  had  been  furnished  him  by  the
consul  Bibulus.  His  disclosures  tended  to  irnpli-

1  Dion,  xxxviii.  5.

2  This  story  is  given  in  detail  by  Cicero  (ad  Att.  ii.  24.). Compare
Suet.  Jul  20.;  Pint.  Luc.  42.,  and  Cic.  in  Vat.  11.;  also  the  Schol.
Bobianajoro  Seat.  p.  308.,  in  Vatin.  320. These  writers  agree  in  in-
sinuating that  the  plot  was  a  fabrication  of  Caesar's. Appian  (B.  C.
ii,  12.)  suggests  an  unsatisfactory  reason. Dion,  xxxviii.  9.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  197

cate  the  most  conspicuous  members  of  the  sena-  CHAP.
torial  party,  Cato  and  Cicero,  and  more  especially
the  younger  Curio.  The  nobles  defended  them-
selves by  insinuating  that  the  pretended  plot  was
a  fabrication  of  Caesar  himself.  Yettius,  they  as-
serted, had  promised  to  break  down  Curio's  influ-
ence by  fastening  upon  him  a  charge-  which  should
cover  him  with  odium  and  disgrace.  With  this
view  he  had  insinuated  himself  into  the  young
man's  confidence,  and  gradually  prepared  him  for
the  announcement  of  his  intended,  blow.  Curio
escaped  the  snare,  and  revealed  the  plot  to  his
father ;  the  father  to  Pompeius.  Such  was  the
story  as  told  by  the  nobles.  To  this  there  was
nothing  to  be  opposed  but  Yettius's  word,  and  that
doubtless  was  totally  without  value.  The  criminal
was  thrown  into  prison,  and  was  found  some  days
afterwards  dead  in  his  bed.  His  death  was  at-
tributed to  suicide,  but  the  rumour  prevailed  that
he  had  been  despatched  for  the  convenience  of
others.1  Of  whom  ?  of  those  who  were  really  at
the  bottom  of  the  scheme,  whether  a  genuine  or  a
feigned  one.  Of  Caesar  then  ?  Assuredly  not ;  for
Brutus,  whom  the  culprit  had  named,  was  the  sou
of  Caesar's  favourite,  Servilia.  More  probably,  of
Curio  and  the  violent  section  of  young  aristocrats,,
who  declaimed  against  the  tyranny  of  the  trium-
virs while  they  lauded  the  memory  of  tyrannicides,
and  who  were  certainly  capable  of  any  excesses.2

lfGicero  (Z.  c.)  attributes  his  death  directly  to  Vatinius,  in  the  in-
terest of  Caesar.

2  Cic.  ad  Att.  ii.  7. :  "  Megabocchus  (Curio)  et  haec  sanguiuaria  ju-
ventus  ....  grex  Catiiinse  ....  (comp.  ad  Att,  ii.  8.).  The  spirit  of  Ca-
tilina  was  not  extinguished.  When  C.  Antonius,  under  whose  auspice^,

o  3.

198  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. They  alone  must  be  content  to  bear  the  suspicion
' of  any  act  of  unusual  enormity  ascribed  generally

to  a  party  which  reckoned  among  its  leaders  such
honourable  men  as  Lucullus,  Cato,  and  Cicero.
ob- Bibulus  did  not  venture  forth  again  in  public
proconsul- during  the  remainder  of  his  term  of  office. Caesar

tw?  Gauis6  ccmtimiecl  to  administer  the  affairs  of  the  common-
andiiiyri-  wealth  without  the  aid  or  opposition  of  his  col-
years.  league.1  The  release  of  the  knights  from  the
rigour  of  the  terms  on  which  they  farmed  the
revenues  of  Asia  was  another  of  his  measures2;  a
wise  one  in  itself,  and  at  the  same  time  conducive
to  his  own  interests  ;  for  that  body,  already  alien-
ated from  the  senate  by  the  repulse  they  had  before
suffered,  and  apparently  cooling  in  their  gratitude
towards  Cicero,  their  unsuccessful  patron,  were
delighted  to  transfer  their  allegiance  to  the  popular
champion.  The  increased  influence  which  the  con-
sul acquired  by  these  proceedings  he  took  care  to
confirm  and  extend  by  the  greatest  display  of  mu-
nificence in  his  shows  and  entertainments.3  The
alarm  with  respect  to  Gaul  had  in  some  measure
subsided  during  this  year  ;  but  the  people,  on  the
motion  of  Vatinius,  conferred  upon  their  favourite

the  arms  of  the  conspirators  had  been  defeated,  was  convicted  of  mal-
versation and  banished  in  the  year  695,  the  tomb  of  his  victim  was
crowned  with  flowers  by  unknown  hands.  Cic.  pro  Place.  38.

'  Suet,  Jul.  20.  :  "  Ut  nonnulli  urbanorum  quum  quid  per  jocuni
testandi  gratia  signarent,  non  Caesare  et  Bibulo,  sed  Julio  et  Csesara
consulibus,  actum  scriberent  ....  utque  vulgo  ferrentur  hi  versus  :

"  Non  Bibulo  quicquam  nuper,  sed  Caesare  factum  est  :

Nam  Bibulo  fieri  consule  nil  memini."  —  Comp.  Dion,  xxxviii.  8.

2  Suet.  1.  c.  ;  Appian.  B.  C.  ii.  13.  ;  Dion.  I.  c.

3  One  of  Caesar's  popular  acts,  of  more  than  ordinary  sagacity,  was
his  providing  for  the  publication  of  the  proceedings  of  the  senate.
Suet.  Jul.  20.  ;  Duruy,  Hist,  des  Romains,  ii.  399.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  199

the  charge  of  the  Cisalpine  province,  together  with  CHAP.
that  of  Illyricum,  for  the  space  of  five  years ;  an
extraordinary  stretch  of  their  prerogative,  but  one
for  which  the  Manilian  and  Gabinian  laws  afforded
ample  precedents.  Both  Crassus  and  Pompeius
blindly  supported  the  interests  of  their  colleague,
and  extorted  for  him  from  the  senate  the  addition
of  the  Transalpine  province,  the  seat  of  expected
war.1  But  his  enemies  were  well  pleased  perhaps
to  rid  themselves  of  his  detested  presence  upon
any  terms ;  while  it  was  now  the  main  object  of
his  ambition  to  obtain  the  conduct  of  extensive
and  protracted  military  operations,  to  create  an
army  of  devoted  adherents,  and  enrich  a  numerous
retinue  of  the  best  families  in  Rome.  At  the  same
time  Pompeius  offered  his  hand  to  Julia,  his  rival's
daughter 2,  and  this  alliance  was  regarded  as  a
pledge  that  both  were  thoroughly  in  earnest  in
their  combination  to  oppress  the  republic.  In
vain  did  Cato  warn  the  senate  that  it  had  raised
up  a  king  over  itself,  and  introduced  him,  guards
and  all,  into  the  citadel  of  the  commonwealth.
Even  Caesar  himself  seems  for  once  to  have  been
intoxicated  with  success,  and  to  have  vaunted  in
unmeasured  language  of  the  triumph  he  had

1  The  one  province  was  probably  at  this  time  a  necessary  comple-
ment to  the  other. Caesar  constantly  levied  in  the  Cisalpine  Gaul  the
troops  which  he  required  for  his  campaigns  in  the  remoter  province.
Dion,  xxxviii.  8.

2  Veil.  ii.  44. ;  Dion.  lib.  xxxviii.  9.;  Suet.  Jul.  21. Caesar  gave  his
daughter  to  Pompeius,  though  she  was  betrothed  at  the  time to
another. He  at  the  same  time  married  Calpurnia,  the  daughter  of
L.  Calpurnius  Piso.

o 4

200  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, achieved  over  his  enemies,  and  the  vengeance  he

measures.

A,U.  69

would  wreak  upon  them.

ciodius  The  affairs,  however,  of  the  city  were  at this

moment  assuming  a  character  of  more  intense  in-
terest  than ever. After  vacating  the  consulship

D  • *

A,U.  696,  at  the  commencement  of  the  year  696,  and  taking
the  command  of  his  legions,  C^sar  still  continued
to  linger  outside  the  walls  to  watch  events.  The
new  consuls  were  L.  Calpurnius  Piso  and  A.  Ga-
binius,  both  adherents  of  the  triumvirs,  and  the
latter  especially  devoted  to  the  interests  of  Pom-
peius.  They  seein  both  to  have  been  equally  no-
torious as  men  of  depraved  characters  and  dan-
gerous dispositions,  though  the  former  paraded  an
almost  cynical  affectation  of  republican  virtue.2
Caesar  had  exerted  himself  to  effect  the  adoption
of  OTodius  into  a  plebeian  house.  The  forms  of  the
law  were  satisfied  or  evaded  3,  and,  to  the  utter
dismay  of  the  nobility,  the  shameless  demagogue
was  elected  to  the  office  of  tribune.  AYhile  his
immediate  object  was  well  known  to  be  the  perse-
cution of  Cicero,  his  personal  enemy,  he  was  gene-
rally understood  to  be  a  creature  of  Pompeius,  and
feared  as  a  ready  instrument  for  the  furtherance
of  his  treacherous  schemes.  The  consuls  were
necessitous  and  greedy;  and  the  young  tribune

i  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  33.,  Pomp.  48.  ;  Suet.  JuL  22.

*  Cf.  Cic.  Or.  post  Red.  4.,  pro  Dom.  9.,  pro  Sest.  7.,  de  Prov.  Cons.
3.,  in  Pison.  4.  But  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  our  knowledge  of
them,  especially  of  Piso,  is  derived  principally  from  their  enemy,  and
that  he  at  an  earlier  time  had  spoken  more  favourably  of  them  (ad
Qu.  Fr.  i.  2.).

3  Cic.  ad  Ait.  ii.  12.  ;  Veil.  ii.  45.  ;  Suet.  Jid.  20.  ;  Dion,  xxxviii.  12.
Cicero  advanced  various  technical  objections  to  the  legality  of  this
adoption  (pro  Dom.  13.  29.)-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  201

made  no  scruple  to  assure  them,  on  the  strength  CHAP.
of  the  favour  in  which  he  was  held  by  the  people,
of  the  reversion  of  two  of  the  most  lucrative  pro-
vinces at  the  expiration  of  their  year.1  With  such
a  combination  of  influential  men  to  back  him,
Clodius  did  not  delay  for  a  moment  in  pushing
forward  a  series  of  measures,  calculated  both  to
increase  his  popularity  and  to  curtail  some  of  the
most  vital  powers  of  the  oligarchy.  He  began  with  „
proposing  a  gratuitous  distribution  of  corn  to  the
needy  citizens.2  He  introduced  a  bill  to  limit  the
power  of  the  censors  in  expelling  unworthy  mem-
bers from  the  senatorial  body.3  He  also  effected
the  restoration  of  the  collegia,  guilds  of  trades,
which  had  been  suppressed  only  a  few  years  before
by  a  decree  of  the  senate.  These  guilds  dated
their  origin  from  the  time  of  Numa4,  and  were
undoubtedly  in  the  first  instance  an  institution
worthy  the  wisdom  of  the  reputed  lawgiver  of  the
monarchy.  They  were  calculated,  at  the  era  of
their  foundation,  and  long  after,  to  raise  the
estimation  of  the  kinds  of  labour  which  they
fostered  and  protected ;  a  matter  of  importance

1  Cic.  de  Prov.  Cons.  2. :  "  Syria  et  Macedonia  quas,  vobis  invitis
et  oppressis,  pestiferi  illi  consules  pro  eversss  reipublicae  praemiis  occu-
paverunt."

2  Lex  Clodia  frumentaria. Ascon.  in  Pison.  p.  9.

3  Lex  Clodia  de  censoria  notione. Ascon.  in  Pison.  1.  c.  :  "  Quar-
tara  (legem  tulit  Clodius)  ne  quern  censores  in  legendo  senatu  pras-
terirent  neve  qua  ignominia  afficerent,  nisi  qui  apud  eos  accusatus  et
utriusque  censoris  sententia  damnatus esset." Dion, xxxviii. 13. ;
comp.  Cic.  pro  Sest.  25. This  law  was  again  abolished  by  Scipio  in  his
consulship,  A.  r.  702.

4  Plut.  Num.  31. Many  of  these  guilds  are  specified  by  Plutarch,
Num.  27.,  and  Pliny,  //.  N.  xxxjv.  1.,  xxxv.  46. ;  comp.  Dionys.  A.  E.
iv.  43. See  various  inscriptions  in  the  collections.

202  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  in  a  city  of  soldiers  and  landowners,  among  whom
'  trade  and  shopkeeping  were  generally  held  in
contempt.1  At  a  much  later  period  these  guilds
gave  consistency  and  weight  to  the  class  next
below  that  of  the  knights  and  publicans,  one
which,  without  the  enjoyment  of  public  office
or  dignity,  had  nevertheless  a  stake  in  the  com-
monwealth and  an  interest  in  its  well-being.  Their
direct  tendency  to  consolidate  the  power  of  the
middle  ranks  of  society  made  them  extremely  ob-
noxious to  the  aristocratic  party,  which  had  only
recently  effected  their  suppression.2  At  the  same
time,  it  must  be  allowed  that,  in  a  period  of  faction
and  licence,  and  the  occasional  ascendancy  of  mere
mob-government,  they  were  liable  to  be  perverted
to  the  worst  purposes,  and  to  become  hotbeds  of
seditious  intrigue.  In  the  existing  condition  of
the  city,  familiarity  with  secret  bonds  of  union,
secret  signs  and  devices,  and  peculiar  social  dis-
tinctions, all  tended  to  foster  that  spirit  of  lawless
combination  which  was  menacing  the  ruin  of  the
commonwealth.  On  the  other  hand,  the  persons,
the  property,  and  the  repute  of  the  trading  classes
had  no  further  need  for  special  protection ;  the
growth  of  luxury  and  refinement  rendered  their
services  indispensable,  and  ensured  them  respect.
Accordingly,  Cicero  opposed  their  restoration  ;  and
we  shall  find  hereafter  how  cautiously  the  wisest  em-
perors watched  and  restrained  them.  But  Clodius
undoubtedly  was  looking  to  the  further  use  to

1  Cic.  de  Off.  i.  42.

2  "  L.  CaBcilio,  Q.  Marcio  consulibus,  collegia  sublata  sunt  quae  ad-
yersus  rempublicam  videbantur  esse." Ascon.  in  Pison.  §  8.,  A.IT.  686.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  203

which  an  unscrupulous  demagogue  might mould CHAP.
them,  and  succeeded  in  carrying  his  measure  tri-
umphantly.1

A  still  more  important  step  was  the  repeal  of  Repeal  of
the  JElian  and  Fufian  laws,  which  had  become
practically  one  of  the  most  efficient  weapons  of  the
oligarchy  in  the  deadly  struggles  in  which  it  was
engaged.2  These  statutes  directed  that  whenever
the  comitia  were  convened  the  consuls  should  con-
sult the  auspices  and  signs  of  the  heavens,  according
to  the  prescribed  forms  ;  and  if  they  declared  them
to  be  unfavourable,  the  assembly  was  to  be  at  once
dissolved,  and  its  acts  rendered  invalid.  This  became
a  constitutional  check  in  the  hands  of  the  consuls
to  the  power  of  the  tribunes3,  who,  among  their
other  prerogatives,  possessed  that  of  summoning
the  assemblies  of  the  people.  Thus,  when  Bibulus
had  refused  to  attend  the  comitia,  he  had  performed
these  ceremonies,  as  he  asserted,  in  his  own  house,
and  had  discovered  the  proceedings  of  the  people
to  be  informal.  The  act  by  which  Clodius  had

1  Lex  Clodia  de  collegiis. Ascon.  in  Pison.  1.  c. :  "  Post  novem  annos
quam  sublata  erant,  P.  Clodius  trib.  pi.  lege  lata  restituit  collegia."
Comp.  Dion,  xxxviii.  13.

2  Lex  Clodia  de  auspiciis. Cic.  pro  Sest.  15. ;  Ascon.  /.  c. ;  Dion.
I.  c. We  do  not  know  what  were  the  actual  provisions  of  the  new
law,  but  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  they  went  the  whole  length  of
repealing  the  consular  prerogative  in  a  matter  so  closely  connected
with  the  popular  superstitions. A  few  years  after  this  we  find  the
consuls  still  obnouncing,  and  thus  vitiating  the  proceedings  of  the
comitia,  as  heretofore. It  may  be  urged,  however,  that,  after  the  defeat
of  Clodius,  the  laws  passed  in  his  tribunate  would  be  little  regarded  by
the  opposite  party. Yet  Cicero  speaks  of  the  Lex  ^Elia  Fufia  as  en-
tirely abolished  (in  Vatin.  8,  9.).

3  The  tribunes  had  also  the  power  of  taking  the  auspices,  and  were
accustomed  to  thwart  the  proceedings  of  their  colleagues  by  these
means. Cic.  in  Vatin.  8.

204  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  obtained  his  adoption  into  the  plebs  had  been
vitiated  in  a  similar  manner ;  and,  at  a  later  pe-
riod, Cicero  argued  on  this  ground  that  his  enemy's
election  to  the  tribunate  had  been  null  and  void
from  the  first,  and  all  his  subsequent  acts  illegal.
To  overthrow  this  bulwark  of  the  constitution  was
naturally  a  great  object  with  Clodius  himself  and
his  party,  however  manifest  it  might  be  that  the
power  of  the  people  had  outgrown  the  danger  to
which  it  was  in  earlier  times  exposed  from  it.
But  having  cleared  his  way  by  all  these  preliminary
movements,  the  tribune  next  proceeded  to  make  his
meditated  attack  upon  the  destroyer  of  Catilina's
associates.

Danger  ot  WG  have  already  seen  how  rapidly  Cicero  fell  in
°osUion  general  estimation  arid  influence  after  the  eventful
period  of  his  consulship.  As  he  felt  himself  sinking,
he  strove  to  buoy  himself  up  by  constantly  dinning
into  the  ears  of  senate  and  people  the  glories  of  his
consulship,  and  pouring  around  his  own  actions
the  same  flood  of  rhetorical  hyperbole,  which  might
be  excusable,  if  not  always  graceful,  in  his  pleadings
for  others.1  The  virulence  of  the  great  contending
factions  had  thrown  both  equally  beyond  the  reach
of  his  moderate  counsels,  and  the  superior  lustre  of
the  triumvirs  had  cast  his  services  and  abilities
entirely  into  the  shade.  The  three  allies  had  no
occasion  to  encumber  themselves  with  a  fourth
colleague  for  the  sake  of  talents  with  which  they
could  dispense ;  and  it  is  but  justice  to  the  great
orator  to  say  that  he  was  too  sincere  a  patriot  to

1  Plut.  Cic.  24.  :  Qvrt  yap  /3ov\r)i/,  ovrt  Srj/jov,  OVTS  fueaffrt'iptov  r\v
ffvvtXQilv,  ki>  (f  fJiif  KctTiXivav  tdti  SpvXXovfAtvov  aKovaai  Knl  AivrXoK.
The  reader  will  be  pleased  with  the  good-humoured  apology  which
the  biographer  makes  for  his  hero.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  205

sell  himself  to  such  a  cause.  But  at  the  same  time,  CHAP.
the  suspicion  which  haunted  him,  that  he  was  in
constant  danger  of  being  seduced  by  their  intrigues,
was  altogether  unfounded.  Difficult  as  it  is  to
read  the  real  designs  and  objects  of  the  crafty
confederates  under  the  disguises  which  they  all
knew  how  to  assume,  it  seems  to  have  been  their
deliberate  aim  to  inflict  a  wound  upon  the  aris-
tocracy through  the  sides  of  their  vaunted  consul.1
Pompeius  at  least  contemplated,  as  we  may  con-
jecture, that  the  sympathy  of  his  order  and  of  his
personal  friends  might  raise  a  tumult  in  Cicero's
defence,  and  looked  steadily  for  the  moment  when
an  armed  interference  would  be  .necessary  to  restore
peace  to  the  republic,  and  elevate  one  of  the  cabal
to  an  avowed  and  legalized  supremacy.

Caesar  indeed,  with  his  natural  kindness  and
friendly  feeling2,  would  have  spared  Cicero  the
humiliation  of  a  public  disgrace.  He  offered  him

.  . .  ... which  he

a  place  in  the  list  of  commissioners  for  dividing  rejects.
the  Campanian  lands3 ;  a  post  of  honour,  inasmuch
as  it  was  coveted  for  lucre's  sake  by  the  greatest
personages, and still more one of  influence, in
which  he  might  have  surrounded  himself  with  a

1  Veil.  ii.  45. :  "  Non  caruerunt  suspicione  oppressi  Ciceronis  Caesar
et  Pompeius." Cicero  allows  (pro  Sest.  7.)  that  Pompeius  had  given
him  an  assurance  that  he  would  require  a  solemn  promise  from  Clodius
not  to  molest  him ;  but  it  is  evident  that  he  had  no  faith  in  the  tri-
umvir's sincerity.

2  Dion,  xxxviii.  11. kTritiKtorkpav  piv  yap  QVTOIQ  ti\rjxtl Qvmv,  Kai
ov  iravu  p$Si«)(;  iOvuovro  ....  SrvfJiy  p.ii>  dr}  oiiiiv  ixaP'Z(roi *•  T-  ^«

3  Veil.  1.  c. :  "  Hoc  sibi  contraxisse  videbatur  Cicero  quod  inter  xx
viros  dividendo  agro  Campano  esse  noluisset." Comp.  Cic.  ad  Att.
ix.  2. ;  Quintil.  xii.  1.  16. It  appears  from  a  letter  to  Atticus  (ii.  5.),
that  the  orator  was  expecting  the  offer  of  a  mission  to  Egypt,  of  which
he  speaks  with  much  affected  coyness. It  does  not  appear  whether
the  offer  was  ever  made,  but  probably  not.

206  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  multitude  of  friends  and  expectants.  When  Cicero
'  refused  this  offer,  Caesar  pressed  him  to  become  one
of  his  lieutenants  in  Gaul,  which  would  at  least  have
removed  him  from  the  scene  of  the  machinations
in  progress  against  him.1  But  the  orator  seems  to
have  considered  this  appointment  as  beneath  his  dig-
nity, and  would  not  consent  to  be  withdrawn  from
the  sphere  in  which  he  conceived  his  political  im-
portance to  lie.  He  persisted  also  in  his  fond  hope
that  the  Roman  people  would  not  desert  him  in
extremity2 ;  that  his  enemy's  schemes  would  even-
tually be  frustrated ;  that  Pompeius  would  step  in
at  the  last  moment  for  his  protection.  It  was  not
till  he  found  every  solicitation  rejected  with  in-
creasing marks  of  distrust,  that  Caesar  seems  to
have  determined  to  abandon  to  his  fate  the  op-
ponent of  his  policy.3  As  he  saw  the  crisis  ap-
proach, he  hovered  about  the  city  with  such  troops
as  he  had  collected,  and  was  evidently  in  a  better
position  than  either  of  his  colleagues  for  striking
at  the  dictatorship,  if,  in  the  midst  of  these  im-
pending convulsions,  the  state  should  lose  its
balance.

Cicero  ap- In  *he  mean  time  Pompeius,  who  was  jealous  of
peais  to  the any  union  between Caesar  and Cicero,  remarked

compassion  »

of  the

people:  l  Cic.  ad  Aft.  ii.  18.

2  Dion,  xxxviii.  16. : To  wrote,  ovv  TOIQ  Xoyi<rjuolc. KpaTrjativ  IXTrtcrac,
Kal  yap  i9dpfffi  Trapci  Xoyov  ticnrep  avf^sraorojc.  iStdiei.

3  The  degree  of  sanction  which  Cassar  gave  to  the  persecution  of
Cicero  has  never  been  estimated  with  precision. This  is  owing  to  the
politic  reserve  which  the  orator  adopts  in  speaking  of  one  by  whom  he
was  more  completely  overawed  than  by  any  other  of  his  contemporaries.
If  the  answers  of  Atticus  to  his  letters  had  been  preserved,  we  should
no  doubt  possess  the  key  to  many  hints  of  the  value  of  which  we  are
now  unconscious. Abeken,  Cicero  in  semen  Briefen,  p.  91.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  207

the  latter' s  distrust  with  satisfaction.  From  old  CHAP.
habits  of  respect  and  awe,  the  orator  continued
still  to  look  to  him  as  alone  possessed  of  real  power
to  restrain  the  popular  demagogue ;  and  Pompeius
did  not  hesitate  to  lure  him  on  to  the  last  with
false  hopes,  in  order  to  prevent  his  throwing  him-
self into  the  arms  of  another.  From  Crassus,  a
personal  enemy  *,  Cicero  had  no  assistance  to  expect,
and,  notwithstanding  every  soothing  assurance  on
the  part  of  Pompeius,  he  could  not  but  behold
with  increasing  terror  the  development  of  his
enemy's  plans.  It  was  by  giving  way,  however,
to  these  apprehensions  that  he  animated  the  courage
of  his  enemies,  and  confirmed  the  coldness  and
secret  treachery  of  those  who  professed  to  protect
him.  He  hastily  determined  to  try  the  effect
of  appealing  to  the  compassion  of  his  countrymen,
whom  he  had  saved  from  revolution,  or  at  least
of  the  party  whose  ascendancy  he  had  preserved.
Accordingly,  he  suddenly  appeared  in  public  in
black  garments,  as  a  suppliant  for  favour  and  com-
miseration2; a  theatrical  display  never  adopted
except  by  persons  actually  under  accusation.  This
stroke  of  policy  was  not  unsuccessful  among  the
orator's  friends,  but  it  had  no  effect  upon  the
hostile  or  indifferent.  The  senate  indeed  clothed
itself  in  mourning,  and  vast  numbers  of  the  knights
and  other  classes  followed  the  example.  Even
Publius  Crassus,  the  triumvir's  son,  a  devoted  ad-
mirer of  the  statesman  and  philosopher,  assumed
the  general  costume  of  fear  and  sorrow :  as  many
as  twenty  thousand  of  the  citizens  embraced  the

1  Pint.  Crass.  13.  *  Plut.  Cic.  30.

208  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  fashion  of  the  day.1 But  the  creatures  of  Clodius

IV

'  were  unabashed : their  confidence  even rose, as

they  beheld  the  effect  of  the  mere  distant  rumour
of  their  leader's  machinations.  They  made  a  jest
of  the  mourners,  raised  tumults  in  the  streets,  and
assailed  both  Cicero  and  his  adherents  with  mud
and  stones.2

of  Pom.  The  friends  of  the  orator,  more  terrified  and

perplexed  than  ever,  now  made  a  last  effort  to
secure  the  protection,  or  at  least  ascertain  the
intentions  of  the  consuls  and  triumvirs.  They
deemed  it  impossible  that  any  men  who  aspired  to
hold  the  reins  of  government  should  continue  to
countenance  the  violence  of  a  faction  which  had
taken  possession  of  the  streets.  But  Gabinius
treated  their  representations  with  scorn.3  Piso,  to
whom  Cicero  applied  in  person,  as  a  connexion
of  his  family,  though  less  rude,  proved  not  more
tractable.4  "He  affected  to  treat  the  suppliant  con-
sular with  frankness.  He  explained  to  him  that
Gabinius  was  compelled  by  his  poverty,  if  not  by
his  inclination,  to  espouse  the  popular  side,  and
that  since  he  despaired  of  obtaining  anything  from
the  senate,  his  hopes  of  succeeding  to  a  rich  province
depended  upon  the  favour  of  the  tribunes.  It  was
his  own  duty,  he  argued,  to  advance  the  interests
of  his  colleague,,  just  as  Cicero  himself  had  catered

1  Cic.  Or.  post  Red.  ad  Quir.  3.,  pro  Sest.  11,  12.,  and  elsewhere.
Dion,  xxxviii.  16. The  consuls  issued  an  edict  to  forbid  this  sign  of
sympathy.

2  Plut.  Cic.  L  c. ;  Dion,  1.  c. ;  Cic.  pro  Mil.  14.

3  Cic.  pro  Sest.  11.

4  Dion  (I.  c.)  thinks  that  he  was  not  personally  hostile  to  Cicero,
and  gave  him  the  advice  which  he  really  deemed  the  most  expedient
under  the  circumstances.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  209

for  the  benefit  of  Antonius ;  irony  the  more  cutting,  CHAP.
since  it  was  rumoured,  falsely  we  may  believe,
that,  in  conceding  to  Antonius  the  government  of
Macedonia,  the  orator  had  stipulated  for  a  share  of
its  expected  profits.  He  ended  with  coldly  taking
leave  of  his  visitor,  recommending  him,  as  the
common  duty  of  every  citizen,  to  provide  for  his
own  interests  and  safety.1  In  the  mean  time  the
heads  of  the  senatorial  party  betook  themselves,
with  a  numerous  attendance  of  citizens,  to  the
house  of  Pompeius,  on  the  Alban  hill,  whither  he
had  retired  on  purpose  to  avoid  the  solicitations
which  he  foresaw,  and  which  he  feared  perhaps  to
be  unable  to  parry.  The  Clodians,  indeed,  had
plied  him  with  secret  admonitions  to  protect  himself
against  the  dagger  of  the  friend  he  was  betraying,
and  then  gave  out  that  his  retirement  was  adopted
for  the  sake  of  personal  security.2  Pompeius  re-
plied to  the  deputation  by  referring  them  to  the
consuls,  the  appointed  guardians  of  the  public
peace  and  of  private  rights :  if  they  thought  fit  to
summon  him  to  arm  in  their  defence,  he  was  ready
to  obey  the  call.3  To  Cicero  himself,  who  even
after  this  repulse  ventured  to  apply  to  him  in
person,  he  answered  more  explicitly,  that  he  could
do  nothing  against  the  will  of  Caesar ;  and  herein
we  may  believe  that  he  threw  off  for  once  his  usual

1  Cic.  in  Pis.  6. This  account  rests  upon  Cicero's  own  representa-
tion of  the  affair,  but  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  its  correctness
in  the  main. The  historian  may  disregard  the  coarse  personalities
which  the  orator  flings  against  his  enemies,  the  effeminacy  attributed
to  the  perfumed  Gabinius,  and  the  crapulousness  of  his  sententious
colleague.

2  Cic.  pro  Sest.  18.,  pro  Dorn.  11.  3  Cic.  in  Pison.  81.
VOL.  I. P

210  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  dissimulation, and  confessed  the  truth, that  the

IV*

whole  affair  was  really  hurried  irresistibly  along  by

the  impulse  which  Caesar  had  given  it.

cipdiuspre- Clodius  had  fixed  deeply  the  roots  of  his  popu-
to  e  larity  when  he  brought  forward  the  bill  to  which
°"  all  his  previous  efforts  were  intended  to  pave  the

way*  ^e  Pr°P°se^  tnat  tne  assembled  people
safety;  who  should  declare,  in  general  terms,  that  every  one
voluntary  who  was  guilty  of  the  blood  of  a  citizen,  without
exile*  legal  sanction,  should  be  put  under  the  ban  of  .the
state  and  interdicted  from  fire  and  water.  This
was.  in  fact,  a  sentence  of  outlawry,  by  which  the
person  so  attainted  was  denied  legal  protection,
his  property  was  confiscated,  to  harbour  him  was
rendered  penal,  and  any  one  was  allowed  to  slay
him  with  impunity.  Such  a  resolution  would  be,
at  first  sight,  no  more  than  a  confirmation  of  laws
already  existing  ;  but  it  would  bind  the  people  to
enforce  their  dormant  austerity,  and  it  would
point  directly  at  Cicero,  who,  by  putting  Lentulus
to  death  on  the  authority  of  a  decree  of  the  senate,
had  violated  the  popular  interpretation  of  the  con-
stitution.1 The  tribune  convened  the  people  in
the  Flaminian  Circus,  outside  the  walls,  to  give
Caesar  an  opportunity  of  attending  its  delibera-
tions, for,  being  invested  with  a  military  command,
he  could  not  enter  the  city.  He  took  part  in  the
discussion,  reminding  the  assembly  of  the  opinions
he  had  expressed  in  the  senate  against  the  capital
sentence,  and  renewed  his  condemnation  of  the
conduct  of  the  consul  and  his  party  both  on  legal

1  See  Cicero's  speeches  after  his  return  from  exile,  and  his  letters
to  Atticus. Dion,  xxxviii.  17.;  Plut.  Cic.  30,  31.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  211

and  political  grounds ;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  he  CHAP.
faintly  dissuaded  the  adoption  of  the  present  pro-
posal, on  the  ground  that  the  time  for  animad-
version was  past,  and  that  it  was  better  to  bury
the  whole  matter  in  oblivion.  But  the  people
affirmed  the  resolution,  and  Clodius  was  deter-
mined not  to  throw  away  the  arms  which  it  put
into  his  hands.  It  was  thought  by  many,  and
by  Cicero  himself  at  a  later  period,  that  his  best
course  would  have  been  to  take  no  notice  of  this
proceeding,  which  did  not  expressly  accuse  him,
and  thus  defy  the  enemy  to  a  direct  attack.1  To
accept  this  resolution  as  affecting  himself  was  to
acknowledge  his  conduct  liable  to  the  imputation
of  irregularity,  which  the  senate  and  their  champion
himself  indignantly  denied.  Some  advised,  and
among  them  was  old  Lucullus,  to  draw  the  sword
at  once,  not  in  defence  of  Cicero  only,  but  of  the
senate,  of  the  constitution  of  Sulla,  of  the  interests
of  the  best  and  bravest  classes  of  the  nation.2
There  was  no  safety,  they  argued,  in  parleying  any
longer  with  the  popular  demagogues:  every  year
was  adding  to  their  strength ;  their  leaders  clung
closer  together  instead  of  splitting  asunder;  the
opposite  party  had  already  fallen  into  the  hands  of
three  chiefs  with  a  common  object;  if  it  came
under  the  power  of  one,  its  unity  of  purpose  and
action  would  be  irresistible.  But  others  persuaded
Cicero  to  bow  to  the  present  storm,  which  they  felt

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  iii.  15. :  "  Cseci,  cseci,  inquam,  fuimus,  &c quod,

nisi  nominatim  mecum  agl  coeptum  fuerit,  perniciosum  fuit."

2  Lucullus  recommended  Cicero  to  remain  in  the  city  and  defy  the
malice  of  his  enemies. (Plut.  Cic.  31.) He  must  assuredly  have  con-
templated bringing  matters  to  a  crisis  by  a  resort  to  arms.

r 2

212  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, assured  could  be  only  transient.1 The  popularity
.  of  so  miserable  a  creature  as  Clodius  could  not  last ;

better  counsels  must  ultimately  prevail  in  the  breast
of  statesmen  so  respectable  as  Pompeius,  at  least,
and  Crassus.  If  he  left  Eome  for  the  present,  the
matter  might  be  more  easily  smoothed  over,  the
sentence  modified,  and  perhaps  shortly  reversed.2
Cicero  yielded  to  this  advice,  which  was  probably
the  wiser  of  the  two,  with  the  general  prudence
and  humanity  of  his  disposition3 ;  but  he  marred  the
grace  of  the  concession,  in  the  eyes  of  posterity,  by
the  unmanly  lamentations  with  which  he  accom-
panied it.  The  last  act  of  the  retiring  patriot  was
to  take  an  image  of  Minerva,  which  he  prized  among
his  household  treasures,  and  place  it  in  the  temple
of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter4;  thereby  signifying  that
the  citizen  who  had  once  saved  his  country  by  his
presence,  recommended  its  preservation  during  his
enforced  absence  to  the  goddess  of  moderation  and
wisdom.5

1  Hortensiws  and  even  Cato  were  of  this  opinion. Plut.  Cat.  Min.
35. ;  Dion,  xxxviii.  17.

2  The  laws  allowed  a  Roman  citizen  to  escape  capital  punishment
by  voluntary  exile ;  but  in  such  case  they  permitted  the  confiscation
of  his  property,  and  inflicted  upon  him  civil  incapacity  to  the  fullest
extent.

3  His  views  are  expressed  with  eloquence  and  sense  in  the  speech
Pro  Sest.  19—21.

4  Plut.  Cic.  31. ;  Dion.  /.  c. ;  Cic.  de  Legg.  ii.  17.

5  Middleton, Life of  Cicero. A better interpretation  perhaps
would  be,  that  in  time  of  anarchy  wisdom  must  seek  refuge  under  the
protection  of  power.

UNDER THE EMPIKE.  213

CHAP.  V.

EARLY  CONQUESTS  OP  THE  GAULS  :  THE1K  FORMIDABLE  HOSTI-
LITY TO  ROME.  —  GRADUAL  SUCCESS  OF  THE  ROMANS  IN  THE
CONTEST  BETWEEN  THEM  --  REDUCTION  OF  GALLIA  CISALPINA.
—  ALLIANCE  OF  ROME  WITH  MASSILIA.  —  THE  ROMANS  AC-
QUIRE A  PROVINCE  BEYOND  THE  ALPS.  -  GAULISH  ETHNO-
LOGY: —  1.  THE  IBERIANS:  2.  THE  GAEL:  3.  THE  BELGuE  -
DISCREPANCY  BETWEEN  C.ESAR  AND  STRABO:  MODERN  THEORY
OF  A  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN  THE  KYMRY  AND  GAEL  IN  GAUL
AS  WELL  AS  BRITAIN  —  PHYSICAL  AND  MORAL  CHARAC-
TERISTICS ;  CIVILIZATION  ;  RELIGION  :  4.  THE  GERMAN  TRIBES
IN  GAUL.  —  GENERAL  CHARACTER  OF  THE  GAULS,  AND  AMOUNT
OF  THEIR  POPULATION.

OF  all  the  nations  with  which  Rome  had  come CHAP.
into collision,  two alone could boast  of  having v>
reduced her  to  submission  : the Etruscans had  victorious
extorted hostages  at  her  gates  ; the Gauls had

encamped  within  her  walls,  and  carried  off  the  in  Europe
ransom  of  her  existence.1  The  surrender  of  the
city  to  Porsena,  attested  by  the  most  veracious  of
her  historians,  had  spread  an  expiring  gleam  over
the  annals  of  the  Etruscan  nation,  already  de-
clining from  its  highest  power,  and  doomed  to
speedy  decay  and  entire  subjugation.  The  vic-
torious attack  of  Brennus,  in  the  fourth  century  of
her  career,  marks  the  era  at  which  the  tide  of
Gaulish  conquest  was  at  its  full.  About  that
period  the  name  of  the  Gauls  was  more  terrible,

i  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  24.  :  "  Capti  a  Gallis  sumus,  sed  et  Tuscis  obsides
dedimus."  Pliny  (Hist.  Nat.  xxxiv.  39.)  states  that  the  treaty  which
Porsena  concluded  with  the  Romans  forbade  them  the  use  of  iron
except  for  implements  of  husbandry.

214  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, throughout  Europe  and  Western  Asia,  than  that
' of any other conquerors. They had occupied
almost  every  part  of  Spain, and  might  still be
traced  in  the  remotest  corners  of  the  Peninsula.1
The  indigenous  Iberians  had  been  compelled  either
to  amalgamate  with  them,  or  to  make  their  escape
through  the  passes  of  the  Pyrenees. In  a  series
of  repeated  immigrations, they  had  succeeded  in
establishing  themselves  throughout  the  North  of
Italy, overthrowing the languid power of the
Etruscans  in  those  regions,  and  re-peopling  their
half-deserted  cities  with  colonists  of  a  new  race.
From  the  central  recesses  of  the  parent  country
vast  swarms  were  still  incessantly  issuing. One
horde  established  a  Gallic  sovereignty  on  the  banks
of  the  Danube. A  second  penetrated  into  Illyria,
and prepared  the  way  for  the  successive  waves
which  spread  over  Paeonia  and  Macedonia,  which
broke  against  the  defiles  of  Thermopylae,  and  were
at  last  shivered  to  atoms  in  the  gorges  of  Delphi.
Another  band,  still  more  adventurous, succeeded
in crossing the Thracian Bosphorus, and  made
itself  master  of  the  greater  part  of  Asia  Minor.
The  populous  coasts  of  the  ^Egean  Sea,  with  all
the  fair  cities  of  Ionia,  were  overrun  by  these  bar-
barians in  the  third  century  before  our  era ;  and,
after  many  vicissitudes  of  fortune  in  their  wars
against the kings  of  Syria,  they  still  left  their
name impressed upon a province  of  Asia, and
became,  as  mercenary  troops,  the  main  defence  of
the  thrones  of  their  conquerors.2

1  The  Gallaeci  or  Callaici,  in  Gallicia,  and  the  Celtic!  near  the  mouth
of  the  Guadiana,  were  of  Gaulish  descent.

2  Justin,  xxv.  2. See  Amedee Thierry's Histoire des Gaulois.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  215

However much the Romans might strive to CHAP.
disguise the  full extent of their disgrace, the v"
taking  of  the  city  by  the  Gauls  left  a  deep  and  Their  cap.
permanent impression upon their minds. War  cuy6  Teales
with the Gauls was thenceforth regarded with  adeepim-

D,  pression  on

peculiar  alarm  and  horror.  It  was  designated,  not  the  minds
by  the  ordinary  term  of  War,  but  as  a  Tumult ;  Romans.
an  era  of  dismay  and  confusion,  when  the  cus-
tomary regulations  of  the  state  must  be  suspended,
and  the  usual  immunities  from  service  overruled.1
The  defeat  of  the  Allia  continued  to  be  com-
memorated in  the  calendar  as  an  anniversary  of
evil  omen 2 ;  and  a  special  hoard  of  treasure  was
deposited  in  the  Capitol,  never  to  be  touched
except  for  the  purpose  of  repelling  a  Gallic  in-
vasion.3 The  strength  and  stature  of  the  bar-
barians, so  much  exceeding  those  of  the  Italian
races,  made  it  necessary  for  the  Roman  generals  to
improve  the  equipment  of  the  legionaries.  Camillus
introduced  the  helmet  of  brass  or  iron,  and  fortified
the  shield  with  a  rim  of  metal,  to  turn  the  edge
of  the  heavy  but  untempered  Gaulish  sword ;  he
furnished  his  soldiers  also  with  a  long  pike,  to
keep  the  gigantic  enemy  at  a  distance.4

partie  i.  ch.  i.  iv.  x.  I  shall  have  frequent  occasion  to  refer  to  this
admirable  work,  as  also  to  the  same  writer's  Histoire  de  la  Gaule  sous
V Administration  Romaine.  The  one  I  shall  cite  under  the  title  "  Gaulois,"
the  other  under  that  of  "  Gaule."

1  Plut.  Cam.  41.  :  Ovrw  S'  ovv  6  <p6€o£  r\v  l<rxvP°£i  &<*rt  SreaOcu  vofiov
atptlcrOai  TOVQ  tEptlg  orparfiag  %w,o/£  av  /t?)  TaXariKog  y  TroXs/jiog.

2  Luc.  vii.  409. :  "  Et  damnata  diu  Romanis  Allia  fastis." Comp.
Ovid.  A.  A.  i.  413.,  and  elsewhere.

3  App.  J3.  C.  ii.  41.  :  "A  (jxunv  tiri  KtXroig irdXai avv apq,
TtQfjvat. K.  T.  \.

4  Plut.  Cam.  40. ;  Polyaen.  Strat.  viii.  7. These  pikes  (v

p 4

216

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
V.

Continu-
ation of  the
struggle  be-
tween the
Romans
and  Gauls.

Fresh  im-
migration
of  Gauls
into  Italy,
A.  u.  455.

For  a  while  the  Gauls  passed  annually  under
the  walls  of  Rome,  in  quest  of  booty  from  Latium
or  Campania.  At  last  the  Eomans  took  courage,
and  ventured  to  issue  from  their  retreat  and
obstruct  the  march  of  the  depredators.  The  tactics
of  the  generals  of  the  republic  were  signalized  by
caution  no  less  than  by  bravery,  and  the  result  of
more  than  one  well- fought  campaign  was  the  final
deliverance  of  Central  Italy  from  these  periodical
ravages.  The  popular  stories  by  which  the  events
of  this  conflict  were  embellished,  of  the  golden
collar  won  by  Manlius,  and  of  the  raven  which
aided  Valerius  in  his  unequal  combat,  evince  the
long-continued  interest  with  which  the  Romans
regarded  this  desperate  struggle.1

The  next  contest  which  took  place  between  the
two  nations  was  decided  at  a  greater  distance  from
the  hearths  of  the  republic.  In  the  year  of  the
city  455,  a  new  swarm  of  barbarians  issued  from
the  defiles  of  the  Alps,  and  threatened  to  overthrow
the  earlier  establishments  of  their  own  countrymen
within  that  barrier.  The  Cisalpine  Gauls  diverted
them  from  their  unnatural  enterprize  by  pointing
to  the  riches  of  the  South,  and  opening  to  them
a  passage  to  the  frontiers  of  Etruria.  Some  of
their  own  hordes  also  offered  to  accompany  the
new  comers.2  The  Etruscans  were  engaged  at  the
moment  in  the  secret  preparation  of  a  mighty
armament  against  Rome.  Alarmed  and  discon-

were  probably  massive  and  heavy,  and  not  adapted  for  throwing.
The  famous  pilum  was  apparently  this  same  pike  shortened  to  six
feet,  and  used  principally  as  a  missile.  (Gaulois,  i.  iii.)

1  Sail.  B.  J.  114.  :  "Cum.  Gallis  pro  salute  non  pro  gloria  certare*"

2  Liv.  x.  10.;  Polyb.  ii.  19.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  217

certed  at  the  arrival  of  the  strangers  demanding  CHAP.
lands  as  the  price  of  peace,  they  sought  to  enlist  '
them  on  their  own  side  by  the  amplest  promises
of  Roman  plunder.  Meanwhile,  they  offered  an
immediate  donative  in  money.  The  price  was
stipulated  and  paid  down,  when  the  Gauls  treach-
erously refused  to  move  without  the  more  sub-
stantial present  of  a  fixed  territorial  settlement.
"  Give  us  lands,"  they  exclaimed,  "  and  we  will
be  your  allies  now  and  hereafter ;  if  not,  we  will
retrace  our  steps  with  the  treasures  we  have  already
extorted."  Deceived  and  baffled,  the  Etruscans
deliberated,  and  determined,  with  becoming  spirit,
to  have  no  further  dealings  with  such  perfidious
and  dangerous  allies.  The  Gauls  kept  their  word,
and  recrossed  the  Apennines  ;  but  discord  soon
arose  between  the  Transalpine  and  Cisalpine  di-
visions of  their  army,  and  the  greater  part  of  both
were  sacrificed  in  the  furious  encounters  which
resulted  from  their  disputes.

Meanwhile,  however,  the  ramifications  of  a  great  coalitions
Italian  coalition  were  extending  themselves  through-
out  the  Peninsula. The  Samnites  and  Umbrians  Italian9

against

united  with  the  Etruscans ;  and,  strong  as  they  Rome,
were  in  their  native  confederacy,  the  allies  deter-
mined  to  enlist  the  Cisalpine  Gauls  also  in  the
common  enterprize.  The  Romans  flew  to  arms
with  undaunted  spirit.  The  struggle  that  ensued
was  terrific,  and  seldom  had  the  republic  been
brought  into  more  signal  peril.  The  imprudence
of  Fabius  and  the  devotion  of  .Decius  were  among
the  events  by  which  this  war  was  signalized.  The
Gauls,  in  their  turn,  complained  that  they  were

218

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
V.

A.U.  470.
B.C.  284.

The  Gauls
join  Han-
nibal and
share  his
reverses.

betrayed  by  the  Etruscans,  who  were  induced  to
desert  their  allies  by  a  judicious  movement  of
the  Koman  forces,  which  carried  fire  and  sword
into  their  defenceless  territories.  The  fatal  day
of  Sentinum  ended  with  the  defeat  and  immense
slaughter  of  the  Gauls  and  Samnites,  more  espe-
cially of  the  former.1  When  they  were  once  more
engaged  by  the  Etruscans  to  unite  the  forces  of
the  two  nations  together,  the  Samnites  were  in-
capacitated from  joining  the  new  coalition.  In
this  war  the  Romans  were  uniformly  successful,
and  it  was  terminated  by  the  great  battle  at  the
Vadimonian  lake,  where  the  Boii  and  Senones,  the
flower  of  the  Cisalpine  forces,  were  entirely  de-
feated ;  and  the  Romans  could  boast  for  the  first
time  of  having  reduced  their  most  formidable
enemy  to  sue  for  peace.2  The  solicitations  of
the  vanquished,  however,  were  not  made,  or  not
listened  to,  till  the  nation  of  the  Senones  had  been
almost  exterminated  by  Drusus,  and  their  capital,
Sena,  transferred  to  the  conquerors,  who  estab-
lished a  Roman  colony  within  its  walls.  The  vic-
torious legions  returned  to  the  city  with  the  iden-
tical treasure,  as  they  fondly  boasted,  which  had
been  surrendered  by  their  ancestors  as  the  ransom
of  the  Capitol.3

These  disasters  effectually  broke  the  strength  of
the  Cisalpine  Gauls,  nor  did  they  again  venture
to  threaten  the  republic  with  invasion  and  con-

1  Liv.  x.  26.  2  Liv.  Epit.  xii.

3  Suet.  Tib.  3. :  "Drusus  ....  traditur  ....  pro  prsetore  ex  pro-
vincia  Gallia  retulisse  aurum  Senonibus  oliin  in  obsidione  Capitolii
datum,  nee,  ut  fama  est,  extortum  a  Camillo."

UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  219

quest. The  power  of  Kome  gradually  extended CHAP.
and  consolidated  itself  in  the  Peninsula ;  and,  during '
the  interval  of  the  first  two  Punic  wars,  her  citi-
zens carried  their  arms  beyond  the  limits  of  Italy
Proper,  and  effected  the  subjugation  of  the  Boii
and  Insubres. The  arrival  of  Hannibal  was  hailed  A-u- 632-

B.C.  222.

as  an  opportunity  of  deliverance  and  revenge.  But
the  Gallic  tribes  did  not  rise  simultaneously,  as  in
former  times,  in  reply  to  his  call  for  assistance.
He  obtained  succours  from  the  Gauls,  indeed,  as
from  other  nations  of  Italy,  but  not  in  such  over-
whelming numbers,  nor  with  such  zeal  and  confi-
dence of  success,  as  he  had  hoped  and  anticipated.
It  was  against  the  genius  and  moral  resources  of
the  individual  that  Rome  had  to  contend  in  her
wars  with  Hannibal,  rather  than  against  the  spirit
and  energy  of  his  allies.  When  these  resources
failed,  the  Gaulish  auxiliaries,  despairing  of  the
condition  of  their  own  country,  now  deprived  of  its
last  defender,  devoted  themselves  to  the  interests
of  their  Carthaginian  leaders,  and  followed  the
remnant  of  their  host  into  Africa.1

Thus cowed in spirit and reduced  in  power,  cisalpine
fortune  favoured  the  Cisalpines  with  no  more  such
golden  opportunities. But  they  were  yet  untaught
to  submit  to  a  foreign  master  ;  and  while  the  Ho-  about  the

i ,  1 1  .  i •  •••  i end  of  the

mans  continued  to  strengthen  their  position  on  the  sixth  cen.
Po  by  colonies  and  fortified  works,  the  indignation  ^ of  the
of  the  natives  frequently  broke  out  in  desultory
and  fruitless  resistance. Under  the  Carthaginian

1  The  Gauls  and  Ligurians  formed  together  a  third  part  of  the
Carthaginian  forces  at  the  battle  of  Zama. App.  Pun.  40.

220  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. Hamilcar,  they  attacked  and  destroyed  Placentia 1 ;
but  their  success  was  transitory, and repaid  by

a  bloody  defeat.  Wars  followed  upon  wars ;
treachery  on  their  own  part  led  to  cruel  retali-
ation on  that  of  the  enemy.  The  Boii  at  last
broke  up  from  their  harassed  and  insulted  homes,
and  migrated  in  a  body  to  the  banks  of  the
Danube.  The  Komans  gradually  pushed  their
conquests  to  the  foot  of  the  Alps,  and  closed  the
defiles  of  the  mountains  against  the  reinforcements
which  might  have  poured  in  from  the  Further  Gaul.
Towards  the  end  of  the  sixth  century  of  the  city,
the  whole  region  between  the  Eubicon  and  the
Alps  was  reduced  to  the  form  of  a  Eoman  pro-
vince, secured  by  numerous  garrisons  and  watched
with  unremitting  vigilance.  The  name  of  Gallia
Cisalpina  still  remained,  as  a  memorial  of  the
people  in  whom  the  republic  had  found  her  most
dangerous  and  most  inveterate  enemy ;  and  every
year,  after  the  completion  of  his  term  of  office,  one
of  the  consuls  went  forth  with  a  numerous  army
to  govern  the  province,  which  might  be  intrusted
only  to  personages  of  the  highest  authority  and
greatest  experience  in  the  state.

First  trans-  In  the  meanwhile,  however,  the  Eoman s  had  not
neglected  to  secure  their  acquisitions  within  the
Carrier  of  the  Alps  by  checking  the  movements  of

nance  with  the  Gallic  tribes  beyond  it.  Massilia,  the  modern
Marseille,  had  been  founded  some  centuries  before
this  era  by  a  Grecian  colony ;  but  it  was  by
slow  and  painful  steps  that  this  celebrated  city
extended  its  influence  along  the  southern  coast  of

1  A.U.  554,  B.C.  200;  Liv.  xxxi.  10.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  221

Gaul.  Notwithstanding  the  numerous  maritime  CHAP.
colonies  which  it  established,  it  with  difficulty
maintained  its  own  existence  against  the  tribes
of  the  interior,  and  the  intimate  relations  which
it  cultivated  with  the  great  Italian  republic  from
an  early  period  were  found  to  be  of  equal  conve-
nience to  either  party.

The  Massilian aristocracy,  which enjoyed  the  Massiiia,  its

, .  T . . A x.  ~J1  /I  position  and

exclusive  administration  of  the  government1,  was  resources.
purely  mercantile,  and  possessed  little  or  no  terri-
torial wealth.  Like  the  other  commercial  settle-
ments of  the  Greeks  in  ancient  times,  and  many  of
the  Italian  republics  of  the  middle  ages,  Massiiia
was  unable  to  defend  itself  by  the  unassisted
strength  of  its  own  native  population.  While
other  states,  in  similar  circumstances,  have  de-
pended upon  the  fidelity  of  mercenary  troops,  the
Massilians  rested  their  security  mainly  upon  their
alliance  with  Rome.  Under  the  shelter  of  this
great  military  power,  their  commerce  flourished
and  expanded  on  all  sides.  Syracuse  and  Carthage
were  crushed  by  the  universal  conquerors:  the
maritime  power  of  Etruria  had  dwindled  into  in-
significance under  the  blighting  influence  of  their
oppressive  domination.  The  mercantile  activity
of  Greece,  which  had  migrated  from  Athens  to
Rhodes  and  Corinth,  was  impaired  by  internal
weakness,  and  repressed  by  the  harassing  activity
of  the  pirates  in  the  eastern  Mediterranean.  Ac-
cordingly, Massiiia  reigned  for  a  considerable  period
without  a  rival  in  the  career  of  commerce.  But

1  Strab.  iv.  1.  ;  Aristot.  Pol.  v.  6. ;  Cxs.  B.  C.  i.  35. ;  Cic.  de  Pep.
i.  27.

222  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  her  trade  was  mainly  supplied  by  the  produce  and
'  the  wants  of  the  vast  continent  which  lay  behind
her.  She  opened  regular  communications  with  the
interior  of  Gaul,  and  from  thence  with  the  ocean
and  the  British  isles ;  thus  substituting  a  direct
and  safer  route  for  the  perilous  circumnavigation
of  the  Phoenician  coasting  vessels.  The  wines  and
other  produce  of  the  South  found  their  way  up  the
Ehone  and  Saone,  then  by  a  short  portage  to  the
Seine  and  Loire,  or  across  the  plains  of  Languedoc,
to  the  Garonne,  and  so  to  the  coasts  of  the  Atlantic.1
The  interchange  of  commodities  between  Gaul  and
Britain  was  constant  and  regular,  producing  a  close
moral  and  intellectual  connexion  between  those
distant  regions.  Meanwhile,  the  riches  which  accu-
mulated in  the  emporium  of  all  this  traffic  disposed
the  Massilians  to  cultivate  the  arts  and  enjoy  the
luxuries  of  their  mother  country;  and  their  learned
leisure  was  crowned  with  a  reputation  hardly  any
where  exceeded  beyond  the  bounds  of  Greece  it-
self.2 But  the  jealousy  of  the  maritime  tribes  of
Southern  Gaul  was  not  appeased  by  the  blandish-
ments of  commerce  and  social  refinement.  The
Ligurians  especially,  the  rudest  and  most  restless
of  the  number,  were  engaged  in  almost  constant

1  Strabo  observes  (iv.  1 .)  how  conveniently  the  great  rivers  of  Gaul
lie  for  the  purposes  of  commerce  :  OVTMQ  £v<pvujg  i<rxf/  r"  pvLQpa irpds
«XX»/Xa. The  same  is  eminently  the  case  as  regards  the  construction
of  railroads. The  three  great  valleys  of  the  Saone,  the  Loire,  and  the
Seine  are  separated  by  a  table  land  of  moderate  elevation. At  one
period  of  the  Roman  domination  the  commerce  of  the  whole  of  Gaul
radiated  from  Autun,  in  the  centre  of  this  district.

2  Strabo  (7.  c.)  remarks  that  Massilia  became  a  place  of  resort  for
the  purpose  of  liberal  education,  not  only  to  the  Gauls,  but  even
to  the  Romans  themselves.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  223

hostility  with  the  Greek  colonists.  The  position  CHAP.
occupied  by  this  people  commanded  the  most  prac-
ticable of  the  Alpine  passes,  where  the  mountains
descend  into  the  Mediterranean.  The  Romans  had
no  object  more  at  heart  than  to  obtain  the  posses-
sion of  this  key  to  Gaul ;  and  the  claims  upon  their
assistance  which  their  new  ally  was  constantly
making  could  not  fail  to  afford  them  a  pretext  for
seizing  it.

The  first  interference  of  the  Romans  in  the  affairs  The  Ro-
of the  Massilians  occurred  in  the  year  of  the  city  ™™ferT
600. Antipolis  ( Antibes),  and  Nicaea  (Nice),  two  with  the

x  v . . ''  ''  affairs  of

offsets  from  the  original  Grecian  stem,  were  be-  Transalpine
leaguered  by  the  Ligurians,  in  the  midst  of  whose
territory  they  lay,  and  were  on  the  point  of  sur-
rendering.  The  arrogant  republic  sent  ambassadors
to  require  the  assailants  to  desist  from  an  enter-
prize  against  the  dependencies  of  an  ally.  But  the
mountaineers  refused  to  listen  to  their  representa-
tions, or  even  to  allow  them  to  land.  In  making
the  attempt,  Flaminius,  the  principal  commissioner,
was  severely  injured,  and  some  lives  were  lost  in
the  encounter.  The  deputation  sailed  away  to
Massilia,  where  the  wounds  of  Flaminius  were
assiduously  tended,  while  the  news  of  the  violence
done  to  him  was  conveyed  to  Rome.  The  event
was  stigmatized  as  a  violation  of  the  law  of  nations,
and  so  specious  a  pretext  for  decisive  hostilities
was  embraced  with  eagerness.  The  Oxybii  and
Deceatas  were  specially  marked  out  for  vengeance
as  the  guilty  tribes.  An  army  was  assembled  at
Placentia,  under  the  consul  Opimius.  ^Egitna,  the
offending  town,  was  taken  and  sacked,  and  the

224  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  armies  of  the  audacious  barbarians  defeated  after
'  an  ineffectual  resistance.  The  consul  gave  up  their
territory  to  the  Massilians,  and  compelled  the  rest
of  their  kindred  tribes  to  surrender  hostages  for
their  good  behaviour.  The  Roman  troops  occupied
the  country  through  the  winter  ;  but  it  does  not
appear  that  they  established  fortresses,  or  made  any
permanent  settlement  there.1

Formation  This  first  campaign  of  the  Romans  beyond  the
Transalpine  Alps  had  been  short  and  easy,  nor  did  its  success
about™6'  contribute  to  the  territorial  aggrandizement  of  the
A.  u.  623.  republic.  In  the  epitomes  of  the  national  history
it  was  not  thought  worthy  of  mention.2  It  was  in
the  year  629  that  a  second  occasion  presented  itself
for  pushing  an  army  into  Gaul.  The  wars  of
Fulvius  Flaccus  against  the  Salyi,  and  of  Calvinus
against  the  Vocontii,  undertaken,  in  the  first  in-
stance, at  the  request  of  the  Massilians,  ended  in
the  discovery  of  the  alluring  baths  of  Provence  at
Aquae  Sextiaa  (  Aix),  and  the  foundation  of  a  Roman
town  within  the  lines  of  the  consular  encampment.
Massilia  gained  a  large  accession  of  territory  ;  but
the  Romans  had  set  their  foot  firmly  upon  the  soil
of  Gaul.  From  this  moment  wars  succeeded  one
another  with  rapidity.  The  republic  had  now  an
interest  of  its  own  in  the  country  to  preserve  and
extend.  It  formed  alliances  with  some  of  the
native  states,  and  made  their  grievances  a  pretext
for  assailing  others.  Hence  the  fierce  contest  with

1 Polyb.  xxxiii.  7,  8.  : Kal  ravra  ^iv  b'£t~iav  tAafo  *at  TI]V  apxnv  Kai

2  Florus  (iii.  2)  says  : "  Primi trans Alpes arma  nostra  sensere
Salyi."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  225

the  Allobroges,  with  the  Arverni  and  their  king CHAP.
Bituitus,  between  whom  and  the  ^Edui,  who  claimed '
the  friendship  of  Rome,  there  existed  an  ancient
enmity.1 The interference between these rival
states  gave  a  great  development to  the  Roman
policy,  for  most  of  the  Gaulish  tribes  were  bound
to  one  or  the  other  of  them  by  ties  of  fear  or
interest. Fabius  Maximus  defeated  with  immense
slaughter  the  combined  forces  of  the  Arverni  and
Allobroges  near  the  banks  of  the  Isere  ;  his  col-
league Domitius  inveigled  Bituitus  into  his  camp,
and  by  a  signal act  of  treachery  cast  him into
chains,  and  sent  him  to  Rome.2 The  senate  cen-
sured  the perfidy  of  the consul,  but  failed  not
to  profit  by  it. Bituitus  was  detained  in  Italy
as  a  hostage  for  the  submissive  behaviour  of  his
people  and  of  his  son  Congentiatus,  whom  it  was
proposed to place on his  father's throne, after
receiving  a  Roman  education. In  the  mean  time
the  whole  tract  of  country  between  the  Alps,  the
Rhone  and  the  maritime  possessions  of  the  Mas-
silians, was reduced to the form of a Roman
province. The  territory  of  the  Salluvii  and  Allo-
broges, comprehending the modern Savoy, was
absorbed,  together  with  that  of  many  smaller  tribes,
in  this  extensive  conquest,  and  the  whole  district
received,  by  way  of  eminence,  the  appellation  of  the
Province. The  Arverni  were  treated  with  more

1  A  strict  alliance  was  formed  between  the  Romans  and  the  j3Eduans,
and  the  terms  of  brothers  and  kinsmen  were  frequently  interchanged
between  them. Caes.  B.  G.  i.  43. ;  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  25. ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  i.  19.

2  This  Domitius  was  an  ancestor  of  the  Emperor  Nero. The  au-
thorities for  this  war  are  Liv.  Epit.  Ixi.  Ixii.;  Oros.  v.  14.;  Flor,  Hi.  4.;
Plin.  H,  N.  vii.  50. The  date  A.U.  623,  A.C.  131.

VOL.  I.  Q

226  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, consideration. Situated  beyond  the  Rhone  and
v' the Cevennes1,  they  were too remote to be an

object  of  immediate  cupidity  to  the  Romans,  and
their  power  and  influence  were  so  great  that  it
appeared  more  politic  to  accept  them  as  allies  than
to  threaten  them  with  subjugation.

importance  The  highest  importance  was  attached  to  the
province,  outpost  of  the  Roman  power  established  beyond
the  Alps.  It  was  reserved  as  a  consular  province,
and  every  year  one  of  the  consuls  marched  into  it
'with  an  army,  to  maintain  it  in  subjection  and
defend  it  from  the  intrigues  and  violence  of  the
neighbouring  tribes.  But  the  principal  object  of
the  Roman  governor  was  to  extend  its  frontiers.
In  the  years  immediately  succeeding,  Manlius,
Aurelius  Cotta,  and  Marcius  Rex  successively
crossed  the  Rhone,  and  seized  upon  several  dis-
tricts between  that  river,  the  Cevennes,  and  the
Pyrenees.  Some  tribes  were  conquered  by  arms,
while  the  easy  submission  of  others,  such  as  the
VolcaB  Tectosages,  gained  for  them  the  title  and
privileges  of  allies.  These  new  acquisitions  were

1  Strabo  (iv.  2.  fin.)  describes  the  dependencies  of  the  Arverni  as
extending  to  Narbo  and  the  frontiers  of  the  Massilian  possessions  in
the  South,  but  the  centre  of  their  power  lay  in  the  mountainous  dis-
trict of  Auvergne.  They  were  received,  like  the  JEdui,  into  the  alliance
and  friendship  of  Rome.  Tacitus  says  that  the  Mdui  alone  of  all  the
Gaulish  nations  were  honoured  by  the  Romans  with  the  title  of
brothers.  It  is  probable  that  Lucan,  when  he  gives  the  Arverni  a
claim  to  this  distinction  (i.  428.),

"  Arvernique  ausi  Latio  se  fingere  fratres,
Sanguine  ab  Iliaco  populi,"

confuses  them  with  the  JEdui,  both  nations  in  his  time  being  equally
Romanized.  It  is  remarkable  that,  in  his  enumeration  of  the  Gaulish
nations,  he  omits  all  mention  of  the  latter  people.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  227

maintained  by  the  establishment  of  a  colony  at  CHAP.
Narbo  Martius  (Narbonne),  which  served  also  as  v>
a  check  upon  Massilia,  and  a  rival  to  her  in  arms
and  commerce.  This  city  became  one  of  the  prin-
cipal colonies  of  the  republic  beyond  the  limits  of
Italy.  The  final  subjugation  of  a  portion  of  the
Alpine  tribes  by  Marcius,  the  completion  of  the
Domitian  road  along  the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,
and  the  precarious  occupation  of  the  passes  of  the
Graian  and  Cottian  mountains,  afforded  means  of
rapid  access  from  Italy  to  every  part  of  its  trans-
alpine possessions.1

While  the  victorious  republic  was  occupied  with  origin  of
the  organization  of  its  new  province,  a  great  but
transient  revolution  threatened  to  shake  its  power  tones.
to  its  foundations.  Distant  rumours  of  vast  na-
tional migrations  among  the  Gaulish  races  had
already  found  their  way  to  the  ears  of  the  Koman
annalists ;  but,  conspicuous  as  were  their  results  in
the  constant  irruption  into  Italy  of  new  swarms  of
barbarians,  their  features  were  indistinct,  and  their
causes  unknown.  The  observation  of  the  intelligent
people  of  the  South  gradually  became  more  keen,
their  interests  more  awakened.  The  movement  of
the  Cimbri  and  Teutones,  at  the  beginning  of  the
seventh  century  of  the  city,  which  weakened  the

1  Oros.  v.  14. ;  Liv.  Epit.  Ixiii.  The  campaign  of  Appius  Claudius
against  the  Salassi,  A.TJ.  611,  shows  that  at  that  early  period  the  pos-
session of  the  pass  of  the  little  St.  Bernard  was  an  object  of  importance.
He  defeated  the  hostile  tribes ;  but  we  cannot  suppose  that  one  such
victory  was  sufficient  to  give  the  Romans  a  permanent  hold  of  their
country.  It  is  probable  that  both  the  Graian  and  Cottian  passes  were
only  used  by  them  occasionally,  and  at  the  price  of  a  stipulated  pay-
ment.

Q 2

228  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  power  of  the  Gauls,  while  it  served  to  develop  the
ambition  of  the  Romans,  was  more  carefully  noticed
and  more  accurately  detailed.  The  Cimbric  Cher-
sonesus  seems  to  have  been  adopted  as  a  place  of
refuge  by  a  remnant  of  the  mighty  nation  known
by  the  cognate  names  of  Cimmerii,  Cmibri,  or
Kymry,  left  behind  in  the  course  of  its  westward
progress,  and  cut  off  from  the  rear  of  the  advancing
host  by  the  rapid  influx  of  the  Teutonic  races
behind  it.1  The  Cimbric  is  generally  recognized
as  one  branch  of  the  great  Celtic  family,  and  a
broad  line  has  always  been  drawn  by  ethnologists
between  this  and  the  Teutonic.  The  union  of  the
offspring  of  such  inveterate  foes  in  any  common
enterprize  of  magnitude  has  been  pronounced  im-
possible, and  various  conjectures  have  been  ha-
zarded to  reconcile  the  statements  of  history  with
the  supposed  nature  of  things.2  But  the  progress
of  knowledge  on  these  subjects  has  served  to  smooth
the  difficulty.  As  our  investigations  proceed,  we
discover,  on  the  one  hand,  a  greater  variety  of

1  The  Cimbri  are  designated  as  Gauls  by  Sallust,  B.  J.  114.;  Flor.
iii.  3. ;  Diod.  Sic.  v.  32. ;  Appian.  Illyr.  4. Plutarch,  on  the  other
hand,  terms  them  Germans. (Mar.  11.) But  little  regard  can  be  paid
to  these  assertions  on  either  side. Among  recent  and  more  critical
authorities I observe that Zeuss (Deutschen und  Nachbarstamme,
p.  144.)  maintains  their  German  origin.

2  Certain  cantons  in  the  mountains  about  Vicenza  and  Yerona  have
been  supposed  from  the  peculiarity  of  their  language  to  be  peopled  by
the  descendants  of  the  Cimbri  who  penetrated  into  Italy. It  is  said
that  a  Danish  prince  visited  them  and  recognized  the  dialect  as  that
of  his  own  country. Their  language  has  indeed  been  proved  to  be
German by M.  Edwards (Lettre  a  Am.  Thierry,  p.  91.) ; but an
Italian  writer,  Count  Giovanelli,  has  discovered  in  Ennodius  and
Cassiodorus  the  fact  of  the  establishment  of  a  German  colony  in  that
district  in  the  time  of  Theodoric,  from  which  these  people  are  in  all
probability  derived.

UNDER  THE EMHRE.  229

shades  of  distinction  between  the  several  branches  CHAP.
of  one  principal  family ;  on  the  other  the  differences
between  families  themselves  appear  to  be  less  deci-
sively marked.  Thus,  among  the  Celtic  populations
of  Gaul,  we  shall  observe  a  Gaelic,  a  Cimbric,  and
perhaps  a  Belgic  variety,  each  having  some  dif-
ferent characteristics,  yet  all  blended  together  and
maintaining  a  common  affinity  through  various
points  of  contact.  To  Cassar's  observation  the
connexion  between  the  Celtic  Belgians  and  the
Teutonic  Germans  seemed  more  close  than  that
between  the  different  races  of  the  same  Celtic
family.  This  view  is  no  doubt  essentially  erro-
neous ;  but  the  fact  that  so  accurate  an  observer
should  have  made  the  mistake,  may  suffice  to  con-
vince us  how  powerfully  the  accidents  of  intercourse
and  proximity  may  operate  in  sundering  kindred
and  amalgamating  independent  elements.  There
seems  therefore  no  objection  to  the  supposition  that
the  Celtic  tribe,  isolated,  as  has  been  described,
from  the  rest  of  its  brethren,  and  closely  pressed
by  the  vicinity  of  a  Teutonic  population,  gradually
assimilated  itself  to  its  immediate  neighbours.  The
sudden  occurrence  of  a  common  danger  would  na-
turally draw  more  closely  the  bonds  of  social  al-
liance; the  feelings  of  ancient  antipathy  would
give  way  before  the  claims  of  mutual  distress  ;  and
thus  the  representatives  of  widely  divergent  stocks
might  eventually  combine  in  political  union.  We
shall  have  occasion  hereafter  to  notice  a  very
similar  case,  the  union  of  the  Celtic  Belgians  with
their  German  neighbours  within  the  Rhine,  when

Q  3

230  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, they  associated  together  to  resist  the  invasion  of
the  Komans.1

Their  great  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  low  countries
SSouth  between  the  Elbe  and  the  Baltic,  which  were  the
seventh  the  sea^/s  °^  ^ne  Cimbri  and  the  Teutones,  were  ha-
century  of  rassed,  in  the  early  part  of  the  seventh  century,
by  a  series  of  destructive  inundations,  followed,
by  scarcity,  famine,  and  pestilence.2  The  inha-
bitants of  the  neighbouring  shores  of  Friesland
and  Holland  might  have  combated  these  enemies
•  with  courage  and  industry,  and  by  their  per-
severing labour  have  kept  their  footing  in  the
country.  But  the  Cimbri  and  their  neighbours
had  no  local  attachment,  and  little  of  local  interest
to  tie  them  to  the  soil  they  occupied.  Nations  are
slow  in  losing  the  habit  of  movement,  and  the
confidence  with  which  their  fathers  had  repeatedly
wandered  forth  in  quest  of  new  settlements  had
not  abated  in  the  later  generation.  The  Cimbri
and  Teuton es  made  a  joint  resolution  to  migrate
in  one  mass,  and  seek  new  abodes  in  the  South,
wherever  fortune  might  permit  them  to  establish
themselves.3  The  inhabitants  of  Northern  Ger-

1  It  will  be  seen  that  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones  were  afterwards
joined  by  the  Helvetii  and  Ambrones,  both  of  them  undoubtedly
belonging  to  the  Celtic  family.

2  Appian  (Illyr.  4.)  says  that  the  country  of  the  Cimbri  was  afflicted
by  earthquakes  and  a  pestilence. Strabo  (vii.  2.)  alludes  to  a  report
that  their  migration  was  caused  by  an  inundation  of  the  waters  of  the
sea. He  is  disposed  to  doubt  the  truth  of  this  account,  but  gives  no
satisfactory  reason  for  disputing  it.

3  A  remnant  were  left  behind. Strabo  mentions  that  the  Cimbri,
in  the  time  of  Augustus,  sent  an  embassy  to  apologize  for  the  teme-
rity of  their  ancestors. The  emperor  seems  to  have  regarded  them  as
a  German  people  (see  Monum.  Ancyr.} :  "  Cimbrique  et  Chatiides  et
Semnones  et  ejusdem  tractus  alii  Germanorum  populi." By  that  time

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  231

many  were  thinly  scattered,  without  fortresses  or CHAP.
fixed  habitations ;  they  offered  no  resistance  to  the '
progress  of  the  invader,  nor  inducements  to  his
stay,  and  the  barbarian  horde  shot  across  them
as  an  arrow  through  the  yielding  air. Indeed  the
central  regions  of  the  continent  were  for  the  most
part  covered  with  forests  and  altogether  unsettled.
Accordingly,  from  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  to  the
Danube,  and  even  to  the  foot  of  the  Rhastian  Alps,
was,  as  it  were,  but one step to this gigantic
emigration. But  here  the  Romans  rushed  forward  The  Ro-
to stem  the  torrent,  the  nature  of  which  they  had  j^teSthem
been  taught  by  long experience  to  fear. They  f"^6  de~
seized  upon the passes of the mountains, and  A-u- 641-
haughtily  commanded  the  invaders  to  retire  from
the  territories  of  a  people  whom  the great re-
public entitled  her  friends. The  barbarians  were
appalled by  this bold defiance from an enemy
whom  they  had  never  yet  seen,  but  whose  fame
was  bruited  throughout  Europe. They  hesitated
in  their  career, and  offered  to  apologize  for  an
insult  committed  in  ignorance. The  Roman  ge-
neral, Papirius  Carbo,  acted  with  base  treachery
in  attacking  their  camp  unexpectedly, while  he
delayed  the  return  of  the  deputation  they  had  sent
to  wait  upon  him.1 But  neither  his  perfidy  nor

they  had  probably  lost  every  trace  of  their  Celtic  descent. Comp.
Tac.  Germ.  37.

1  Appian,  Gall.  fr.  13.:  Oi  <5e  ItvrovtQ  ....  irpoatTrtfjnrov  ayvorjaai
Tt  Tr]v  ig  'Pw/mioug  NoipiKwv  ^tviav  ....  avroQ  fie  .  .  .  .  ddoicfirwi;  dva-
Travo/jievotQ  tn  Tolg  Ttvroaiv  ffj,irfaojv  e<5o»K£  Siicrjv  a.iriGTiac,.  It  may  be
conjectured  that  the  apology  of  the  Teutones  was  a  pretence,  and
that  while  they  promised  to  abstain  from  injuring  the  Noricans,  they
had  no  intention  of  quitting  the  neighbourhood,  where  their  position
necessarily  gave  umbrage  to  Rome.

Q 4

232  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  his  arms  succeeded  in  averting  the  danger.  The
'  bloody  combat  which  ensued  terminated  in  the  de-
feat of  the  Romans  with  such  loss,  that  they  would
have  been  unable  at  the  moment  to  maintain  pos-
session of  the  passes,  if  the  enemy  had  had  the
presence  of  mind  to  follow  up  his  victory.1  But  the
barbarians  were  yet  undecided  as  to  their  future
course.  They  contented  themselves  with  spoiling
the  undefended  countries  south  of  the  Danube,
until,  having  gorged  themselves  with  booty  during
a  three  years'  sojourn,  they  changed  the  direction
of  their  march  towards  Gaul,  and  entered  it  with
the  favour  and  co-operation  of  the  most  powerful
of  the  Helvetic  tribes.

They  turn The vas^ multitude now spread itself with
to  the  west,  augmented numbers  over  the  Belgian territory.

enter  and  fe  °.  ., / 7

overrun  entering  its  frontiers  between  the  Rhine  and  the
Jura.  In  some  districts  it  met  with  resistance,
and  was  engaged  in  sanguinary  struggles,  but  ge-
nerally the  inhabitants  hastened  to  propitiate  the
foe  by  the  offer  of  hospitality  and  an  appeal  to  the
ties  of  kindred.2  The  invaders  seem  to  have  shown
no  disposition  to  rest  from  their  wanderings  in  the
territories  which  they  might  have  extorted  from
the  native  population;  but  the  city  of  Aduatucum,
in  the  country  of  the  Eburones,  they  reserved  as  a
magazine  for  their  stores  and  booty,  and  a  safe  re-

1  The  battle  is  said  to  have  taken  place  at  Noreia. (Strabo,  v.  1 .)
Noreia  is  supposed  by  Groskurd  (Strabo,  in  Zoc.)  to  be  the  modern
Friesach,  in  Carinthia,  between  the  Mur  and  the  Drave. Walckenaer
(Geog.  des  Gaules,  ii.  80.)  places  it  at  Coring,  near  Gmund.

2  Strabo  says  that  the  Belgae  alone  throughout  Gaul  were  able  to
resist  the  invaders ;  but  Caesar  (B.  G.  ii.  4.)  seems  to  confine  this  suc-
cess to  those  tribes  in  Belgium  which  were  of  German  origin.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  233

treat  for  their  old  men  and  children,  who  could  no  CHAP.
longer  endure  the  fatigues  of  endless  adventure.1
The  combined  hordes  next  turned  their  faces  to  the
South  of  Gaul,  where  they  met  with  no  serious  im-
pediment to  their  progress ;  and  it  was  not  till  they
had  exhausted  the  resources  of  the  regions  which
lay  in  their  way,  that  their  rapacity  was  tempted  by
the  rich  and  flourishing  possessions  of  the  Eoman
power.  It  was  in  the  Province  that  they  declared
their  intention  of  taking  up  their  abode,  and  they
boldly  demanded  an  assignment  of  lands  from
the  proconsul  Silanus.  He  returned  a  contemp-
tuous  refusal,  which  he  followed  up  with  a  vi-
gorous  attack  upon  the  audacious  intruders.  But  Sllanus:
the  strength  and  spirit  of  the  barbarians  of  the
North  again  triumphed  over  the  panic-stricken
legionaries ;  and  it  was  chiefly  by  the  skilful  use
of  its  natural  barriers  that  the  Province  was  pro-
tected from  invasion,  till  a  new  army  could  be
sent  into  the  field.  The  arrival,  however,  of
these  fresh  forces  only  brought  with  it  new  defeats.
L.  Cassius  was  routed  with  one  army,  and  himself  cassius  and
slain,  in  the  defence  of  the  frontiers2;  the  remnant  Scaurus:
of  his  legions  was  compelled  to  pass  under  the
yoke.  Aurelius  Scaurus  was  taken  prisoner  in
another  quarter,  with  the  total  loss  of  a  second.
The  Cimbri  began  to  deliberate  whether  they

1  Aduatucmn,  according  to  D'Anville,  is  the  modern  Falais. It  may
be  recognized  perhaps,  from  the  particular  description  which  Csesar
(J5.  G.  ii.  29.)  gives  of  the  locality. Its  inhabitants  in  his  time  were
the  descendants  of  the  Cimbric  garrison.

2  Liv.  Epit.  Ixv. : "  In  finibus  Allobrogum." Oros.  v.  15.  says,
"  Tigurinos  usque  ad  Oceanum  persecutus,"  which  I  can  only  suppose
is  a  strange  mistake  for  the  Lacus  Lemanus. Thierry,  Gaulois,  n.
jii. :  "  A'  la  vue  des  remparts  de  Geneve."

234:  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  should  not  at  once  cross  the  Alps  and  carry  their
arms  into  Italy ;  but,  startled  by  the  resolute
defiance  of  their  captive,  they  preferred  to  se-
cure their  position  in  the  Province,  and  reduce
the  towns  in  the  interior,  a  task  of  difficulty
and  fatigue  to  an  unskilled  and  undisciplined
multitude.  Eome  put  forth  her  resources,  and
assembled  another  powerful  army  to  cover  the
cities  of  the  Mediterranean.  But  her  generals,
Caepio  and  Manlius,  did  not  act  in  concert;  the
jealous  pretensions  of  the  one  ruined  both  himself
and  his  colleague.  The  two  camps  were  forced
one  after  the  other  on  the  same  day ;  the  rout  was
more  complete,  and  the  slaughter  more  over-
whelming than  had  befallen  the  republic  since  the
fields  of  Cannae  and  the  Allia.  On  the  one  hand,
the  Province  lay  defenceless  at  the  feet  of  the
invaders,  with  all  its  wealthy  colonies  and  com-
mercial establishments ;  on  the  other,  the  Alps
were  unguarded,  and  a  bold  advance  might  carry
destruction  and  desolation  into  the  heart  of  Italy.
Rome  trembled  at  the  name  of  the  Cimbri,  which
recalled  to  her  all  the  horrors  of  Gallic  invasion.1
Never  did  Fortune  play  a  more  wanton  trick  for
her  favourite  children  than  when  she  averted  both

1  The  figure  of  the  Cimbrian  warrior  which  Marius  painted  in
derision  on  a  shield,  and  set  up  in  a  conspicuous  part  of  the  forum  (if
Mariano  be  not  a  corruption  for  Manliano,  see  Cic.  de  Oral.  ii.  66.),  was
an  imitation  of  a  similar  mockery  of  a  much  earlier  date,  commemo-
rating probably  (comp.  Liv.  vii.  10.)  the  victory  of  Manlius  over  the
gigantic  Gaul.  The  scutum  Cimbricum  was  the  sign  of  a  banker's
office  in  the  consulship  of  L.  JEmilius  Paullus,  A.TJ.  586,  according  to
a  curious  inscription  given  by  Reinesius,  p.  342.  (Thierry,  Gaulois,
Introduction.)  The  terms  Cimbri  and  Galli  were  used  by  the  Romans
of  that  day  as  synonymous  ;  the  precise  distinction  between  them  will
be  shown  presently.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  235

these  impending  dangers,  and  directed  the  more CHAP.
enterprising  of  the  barbarian  hordes  towards  the
frontiers  of  Spain,  while  she  engaged  the  remainder
in  the  enjoyment  of  ease  and  luxury  on  the  spot
where  they  had  won  their  triumphs. The  main  But  invade
body  of  the  invaders  was  occupied  in  an  inglorious

incursion  beyond  the  Pyrenees  for  the  space  of  penetrating

TVT  i  -1 Ai r>  J into  Italy.

two  years.  Meanwhile,  the  Romans  recovered
from  their  consternation,  and,  acting  in  the  spirit
which  the  crisis  demanded,  broke  through  every
rule  to  appoint  Marius  to  the  command,  and  to  give
him  the  authority  of  the  consulship  for  three
years  successively.  The  new  general  reached  the
province  before  the  return  of  the  enemy,  and  the
great  military  works  which  he  effected  for  the
security  and  convenience  of  his  future  operations
already  marked  the  energy  and  foresight  of  his
character,  before  the  opposing  forces  took  the  field.
The  barbarians  had  now  resolved  upon  the  in-
vasion of  Italy,  and  divided  their  armament,  with
the  view  of  crossing  the  mountains  simultaneously
from  the  West  and  the  North,  and  meeting  at  an
appointed  rendezvous  on  the  banks  of  the  Po.
The  Cimbri  and  Helvetii  took  the  longer  circuit  ;
the  Teutones  and  Ambrones  were  to  cut  their  way
through  Marius's  legions,  and  penetrate  the  Cottian
or  the  maritime  Alps.1

The  events  of  the  short  campaign  which  fol-
lowed,  as  preserved  in  the  picturesque  narrative  of
Plutarch,  are  more  than  usually  striking.  The  ad-
miration  in  which  the  name  of  the  Roman  general
was  so  long  held  by  his  countrymen  caused  them  A.U.  652,

B.C.  102.
1  Plut.  Mar.  15.

236  HISTOKY OP THE ROMANS

CHAP,  to  treasure  up  every  quaint  rudeness  which  fell
'  from  the  rough  soldier's  lips  during  the  awful  mo-
ments of  suspense  which  preceded  the  final  cata-
strophe. But  we  must  confine  our  hasty  glance
to  the  great  encounter  which  took  place  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Aqua3  Sextia?.  After  the  unpre-
cedented series  of  six  successive  defeats  which  the
Komans  had  sustained  in  conflict  with  their  formid-
able enemy,  they  here  gained  a  victory  which  ba-
lanced all  their  former  losses.  The  barbarians  were
totally  exterminated,  the  survivors  of  that  bloody
day  falling  one  by  one  under  the  vengeance  of  the
provincials  in  their  vain  endeavours  to  escape
northwards.  It  would  be  useless  to  repeat  the
enumerations  of  the  slain  given  with  great  varia-
tions by  the  different  historians.  It  is  evident
that  the  whole  horde  was  annihilated;  and  the
dead,  lying  unburied  upon  the  field,  gave  to  it
the  frightful  appellation  of  the  Putrid  Plain,  which
seems  still  to  be  retained  in  the  name  of  Pourrieres,
a  village  which  marks  the  spot.1  The  proprietors
in  the  neighbourhood  fenced  their  vineyards  with
the  bones  of  the  giants  of  the  north;  but  the
greater  portion  of  the  ghastly  mass  sank  gradually
into  the  soil,  and  the  fields  over  which  the  Roman
and  the  Teuton  fought  and  struggled  on  that
terrible  day  became  celebrated  for  their  rank  fer-
tility.2

1  Plut.  Mar.  15—24. ;  Thierry,  Gaulois,  n.  iii.

2  The  French  antiquaries  have  taken  great  interest  in  tracing  the
existing  monuments  and  traditions  of  these  events. (See  Mem.  Soc.
Antiq.  Franq.  ix.  48.,  xvi.  1.) The  localities,  it  seems,  may  be  dis-
tinctly pointed  out  in  the  valley  of  the  Arc,  about  ten  miles  east  of
Aix. The  ancient  names  of  several  hills  and  villages  are  still  pre-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  237

The enterprize  of  the Cimbric  horde,  though CHAP.
more  successful  in  the  outset,  was  crowned  with '

disaster  no less overwhelming. The barbarians  And  at

descended  into  Italy  by  the  pass  of  the  Brenner,  r>estruSion

and  drove  before  them  the  troops  commanded  by
Catulus,  the  aristocratic  colleague  of  Marius.  They  hordes.
crossed  the  Adige  and  reached  the  banks  of  the  Po,
where  they  expected  to  meet  their  companions,
whose  absence  surprised  but  did  not  seriously  dis-
quiet them.  Unfavourable  rumours  began  to  be

served  in  their  modern  appellations.  The  Mont  Ste.  Victoire,  on  the
side  of  which  the  army  of  Marius  was  arrayed,  evidently  derives  its
name  from  the  battle.  The  people  of  the  neighbourhood  have  kept
festival  there  from  time  immemorial,  and  the  addition  of  the  term
Saint,  together  with  the  Christian  exterior  given  to  the  solemnities,
may  be  ascribed  to  the  pious  policy  of  the  mediaeval  church.  "  Les
habitans  de  Pertuis,"  says  M.  Castellan,  "  petite  ville  au  de  la  de  la
Durance,  a  trois  lieues  d'Aix,  paraissent  en  avoir  mieux  conserve  la
tradition  que  tous  les  autres  peuples  du  voisinage.  Us  s'y  rendent
au  bruit  des  tambours,  et  des  fifres.  Des  prieurs  nommes  annuelle-
ment,  choisis  pour  diriger  la  marche  et  maintenir  le  bon  ordre,  se
chargent  aussi  de  la  subsistance  des  pelerins,  parmi  lesquels  se  trouvent
des  personnes  des  deux  sexes  et  meme  des  enfans.  Arrives  sur  le
sommet,  apres  une  journee  de  marche  par  des  chemins  peu  praticables,
ils  campent  en  plein  air  ;  et  des  que  la  nuit  commence,  ils  mettent  le
feu  a  un  grand  monceau  de  broussailles,  sautant  tout  autour  en  signe
d'allegresse.  Repete  a  Pertuis,  aussitot  que  la  flamme  y  est  apergue,
ils  font  entendre  reciproquement  au  lointain,  a  cris  redoubles,  ces
paroles  dignes  de  remarque,  '  Victoire,  victoire  !  '  "  Compare  this
account  with  Plutarch's  narrative,  Mar.  22.  :  /ztrd  &  rr}v  pdxrjv  o
(3ap€apiK<Zv  oTrXwv  Kai  XaQvpwv  TO.  fiev  iKTrpfTrrj  KOI  oXoKXrjpa.

7TS\6%t' TWI/ t>' dXXdJV 17TI TTVpCLQ jU£yrt\7J£ KaTaffWptVffaG TO 7T\r}9og

Sivaiav  [ityaXoTrpeTri]'  Kai  row  ffrparov  7T£pi£OTwro£  iv  orrXoiQ  tart-
tpi^ad^voQ  avroc,  wffTrfjO  tOog  farlv,  ava\a€wv  rijv  Trtpi-
v  Kai  \a€(jjv  Sqida  Kaiofjisvrjv^  Kai  81  a/i(/)orepa»v  TtZv  xtipiov  dvatr^div
TOV  ovpavov,  tf.it\\tv  viprjafiv  rfj  Trvpy,  ....  ^itya\i]Q  ovv  %apa.Q  roTf
aytvonkvriQ  6  ffrparog  i)0'  r/^ovjjf  tvoTrXitp  TIVL  Kpory  Kai
Trarayy  awijXdXa%av.  Thierry  (Gaulois,  L  c.)  adds  another  interesting
illustration  of  the  same  tradition;  "  Le  matelot  Proven9al,  pres  d'entrer
dans  la  rade  de  Marseille,  montrant  au  voyageur  le  sommet  lointain
de  la  montagne,  lui  dit  aujourd'hui,  comme  disaient  ses  ancetres
d'Arelate  ou  de  Fosse  :  '  Voila  le  Temple  de  la  Victoire  !  '  "

238  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS

CHAP,  heard  around  them :  but  the  Cimbri  were  too  con-

y

.  fident  in  the  invincibility  of  the  tribes  by  whose

side  they  had  so  often  conquered  to  apprehend
the  possibility  of  their  destruction.  They  per-
sisted for  some  months  in  awaiting  their  promised
arrival,  and  consumed  the  period  of  inaction  in  the
sensual  indulgences  to  which  the  charms  of  climate
and  abundance  invited  them.  At  last  Marius  ap-
peared before  them  at  the  head  of  his  victorious
legions.  The  Eomans  announced  their  triumph
and  the  annihilation  of  the  Teutons,  with  bitter
sarcasms ;  nor  were  the  Cimbri  backward  in  pre-
paring for  a  final  struggle.  The  great  battle  of
the  Campus  Raudius,  near  Vercellae,  whither  the
barbarians  seem  to  have  advanced  by  a  lateral
movement  in  quest  of  their  expected  allies,  gave
another  complete  victory  to  the  arms  of  Rome.
The  slaughter  of  the  invading  army  was  not  less
entire  than  that  of  the  other  division  ;  and  the
republic  preserved  a  lasting  monument  of  the  peril
from  which  it  had  been  rescued  in  the  titles  and
rewards  which  it  showered  upon  the  head  of  its
illustrious  champion.
oppression  When  the  cloud  of  danger  had  passed  away,  the
F  Romans  might  have  remembered  with  gratitude
the  fidelity  with  which  the  natives  of  the  Province
had  resisted  the  temptation  to  join  the  invaders.
With  the  single  exception  of  the  Volcse  Tectosages  *,

1  Dion,  Fr.  97.  :  2Ta<rt'a<ra<ra  Trpoe  TO.Q  roJv  Kijufpwv  f\7rida£.  The
temerity  of  the  Volcas  cost  them  their  independence,  for  they  were
allies  and  not  subjects  of  the  republic,  though  the  Romans  had  in-
vented a  pretext  for  introducing  a  garrison  into  their  city  Tolosa.
Having  risen  and  overpowered  this  military  force,  they  were  marked

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  239

apparent  connexion  with  the  Belgians  CHAP.
may  have  caused  them  to  sympathize  with  the
Cimbri,  the  Gallic  tribes  of  the  south  gave  no
encouragement  to  the  invaders.  But  their  con-
stancy was  attributed  to  timidity,  and  the  exac-
tions of  the  oppressor  were  restrained  neither  by
fear  nor  remorse.  The  soldiers  of  Marius  demanded
lands  ;  the  Roman  citizens  throughout  the  country
were  clamorous  for  compensation  for  their  losses.
It  was  decreed  that  the  districts  of  the  Province
which  the  invaders  had  occupied  should  not  be  re-
stored to  their  original  proprietors,  but  divided
among  the  claimants  of  the  ruling  nation.  When
the  Gauls  ventured  to  complain,  it  was  coldly  re-
plied that  having  lost  their  lands  to  the  Cimbri,
the  Romans  had  acquired,  by  reconquest,  a  right  to
their  possession.1  Such  was  the  notion  of  the  re-
lations of  ruler  and  subject  which  found  favour
among  the  governors  of  a  state  which  boasted  its
principles  of  j  urisprudence  no  less  than  its  military
prowess.  The  natives  sullenly  submitted;  but  it
was  evident  that  this  ill-treatment  had  rendered
them  now,  whatever  they  may  have  been  before,
enemies  to  Rome  and  secret  conspirators  against

out  for  vengeance  by  Servilius  Csepio,  who  was  aware  of  the  great
riches  which  the  city  contained.  He  took  advantage  of  the  absence
of  the  Cimbri  in  Spain,  attacked  Tolosa,  and  gave  it  up  to  plunder.
But  the  treasure  which  had  formed  a  part  of  the  spoil  of  Delphi  was
fated  to  bring  a  curse  upon  its  possessors,  and  the  end  of  Ca3pio  was
not  more  prosperous  than  that  of  the  people  whom  he  reduced  to
servitude.  Strab.  iv.  1.

1  Appian,  S.  C.  i.  29. :  'O  p,tv  'ATrov\i'j'iog  vop.ov  tiattyepe  dia.ddaa.o9ai  ytfv,
offtjv  tv  ry  vvv  virb  'Pw/*atW  ica\ovfj.evy  FaXart^  Kt/i£po»,  yevog  KcXrwV,
KaTti\T]<f>eaav'  Kal  avrovs  o  Mdpiog  evayx°G  t£fXd<7a£  rrjv  y^v  &£  OVKITI
TaXoraJj/  tg  'Pwpai

240  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. her. Nor  was  this  all,  for  poverty  and  disappoint-
' ment  compelled  them  to  look  to  arms  and  violence,
as  the  only  means  of  obtaining  bare  subsistence.
Henceforth  there was  no  hope  for them  but in
Disaffection  the  chances  of  tumult  and  confusion. This  soon
appeared  ;  for  the  event  of  the  Social  war,  which

e6 drove  the  proscribed  adherents  of  Marius  in  great
Marians  and  numbers  into  this  region,  the  cradle  of  his  glory,

Sertorius.  7  J  7

and  the  adopted  home  of  many  of  his  veterans,
found  the  Gauls  well  disposed  to  listen  to  the  in-
vitations of  their  shattered  party,  and  avenge  its
cause  upon  the  Roman  government.  It  was  from
Gaul  that  Sertorius  derived  a  great  part  of  his
resources  :  the  Province  threw  itself  into  the  arms
of  his  lieutenants,  and  accepted  the  decrees  of  his
senate,  composed  of  the  fugitives  of  the  Marian
faction.1  When  Pompeius  was  sent  by  the  nobles
to  crush  the  rebellion  in  Spain,  he  was  compelled
to  make  good  his  footing  in  the  Gaulish  province
before  he  could  venture  to  cross  the  Pyrenees.
The  Marians  indeed  made  but  a  feeble  resistance.
The  vengeance  of  the  Roman  general  and  of  Fon-
teius,  who  was  charged  with  the  restoration  of
the  senatorial  authority,  fell  upon  the  unfortunate
natives  with  more  weight  than  ever.2  From  many
of  their  cities,  such  as  Tolosa,  Ruscino,  and  Bi-
terrae,  they  were  immediately  expelled,  and  colo-
nies of  the  conquering  people  planted  in  their
room.  The  success  which  finally  crowned  the
arms  of  the  republic  in  Spain  fastened  the  yoke
of  servitude  still  more  firmly  upon  their  necks.

1  Oros.  v.  23.  compared  with  Caes.  B.  G.  iii.  20.

2  Thierry,  Gaulois,  n.  iv.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  24 L

Fonteius continued  to  exercise  the  functions of CHAP.

governor,  and  organized  throughout  the  country '

a  system  of  tyranny,  which may  be  sufficiently  Tyranny  of

appreciated even from the pleadings of  Cicero

in its defence. The  orator makes no attempt

to refute the charges of  avarice and  extortion  fended  by

• T  •  i  i  Cicero.

brought  against  his  client  otherwise  than  by  con-
temptuously rejecting  the  credibility  of  any  testi-
mony of  a  Gaul  against  a  Roman.  Cicero's  speech
is  indeed  a  more  instructive  exposition  of  the
horrors  of  provincial  suffering  than  any  detail  of
particular  charges  could  be.  The  contumelious
indifference  which  it  breathes  to  the  rights  of  a
foreign  subject  implies  much  more  than  a  con-
sciousness of  the  guilt  of  the  accused.  It  shows
how  frightfully  the  mind  even  of  a  philosopher
could  be  warped  by  national  prejudice  and  the
pride  of  dominion ;  it  further  indicates  what  was
the  temper  of  the  senatorial  body  presiding  on
the  bench,  before  whom  such  an  overt  denial  of
justice  could  be  paraded.  Pompeius,  who  had
professed  to  purify  the  tribunals  and  to  pacify  just
complaints,  withheld  his  countenance  from  an  accu-
sation against  a  creature  of  his  own.  The  whole
force  of  the  aristocratic  party  arrayed  itself  in
vindication  of  its  privileges.  The  judges  absolved
the  culprit,  and  the  suppliants  relapsed  into  appa-
rent submission,  still  brooding  over  the  wrongs  of
their  country  and  meditating  revenge.  Not  only
was  Fonteius  acquitted,  but  his  system  of  oppres-
sion seems  to  have  continued  unrelaxed.1  The

1  Another  governor  of  the  province,  Calpurnius  Piso,  was  accused
of  similar  tyranny,  again  defended  by  Cicero,  and  again  acquitted  by
VOL.  I.  R

242  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, provincials were overwhelmed with debts eon-
' tracted  to discharge  the burdens imposed  upon
them  by  the  state,  the  pressure  of  which  had  been
aggravated  by  successive  years  of  famine. Nor
was  the  surrender  of  lands  and  goods  sufficient
to  satisfy  the  law  and  the  creditor  as  long  as  the
obligation  was  not  wholly  redeemed. The  person
of  the  debtor  might  be  sold,  together  with  his  wife
and  family,  into  the  most  cruel  slavery. He  might
be  driven  to  labour  in  chains  on  the  public  works,
or  to  wait as a menial on  the commands  of  a
Roman  colonist. Such  was  the  system  pursued
by  the  remorseless  policy  of  the  republic,  and  such
the result upon which even the reformer and
philanthropist  could  look  with  complacency.
TheAiio- Nevertheless,  the  Gauls  still  continued  to  hope
SeputLfto ^r  justice at  the hands of  the  Roman  people.
Rome  to ^^Q  Allobroges,  plunged  into  desperate  poverty  by
tice:  they the  pressure  of  their  debts,  which  threatened  the
th confiscation  of  their  entire  territory,  sent  an  em-
catena,  j^ggy  to  Rome  to  plead  their  cause  and  sue  for
mercy. It  was  during  the  secret  progress  of  Ca-
tilina's  machinations  that  the  foreign  deputies  were
deploring  the  frustration  of  their  hopes  by  delay
and  neglect. While  in  this  mood  they  were  craftily
addressed  by  Umbrenus,  a  creature  of  the  conspi-
rators, and  at  the  same  time  a  person  well  known
to  the  Gauls,  among  whom  he  had  lived  and  traf-
ficked. He  condoled  with  them  on  their  misfor-
tunes,  sympathized  with  their sense  of  ill-treat-

the  judges.  (Cic.  pro  Place.  39.)  Among  the  atrocities  which,  on
another  occasion,  Cicero  imputed  to  P.  Clodius  were  his  extortions  in
Gaul  as  quaestor.  Cic.  de  Har.  Rrxp.  20.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  243

ment,  confirmed  them  in  their  apprehension  that CHAP.

no  reparation  was  to  be  obtained  from  the  justice  ^_

or  clemency  of  the  ruling  powers,  and,  finally,  when
he  had  moved  their  indignation  and  despair  to  the
proper  pitch,  revealed  to  them  the  existence  of  a
plot  for  the  overthrow  of  the  government.  Nothing
could  be  so  opportune,  he  said,  to  its  success  as  an
outbreak  in  the  Transalpine  province,  which  was
in  fact  already  partially  disturbed.  Nothing  could
be  so  agreeable  to  the  conspirators,  or  so  strongly
command  their  favour  and  grateful  recollection.
The  Allobroges  had  it  in  their  power  to  avenge
themselves  at  one  blow  upon  the  party  from  whose
tyranny  they  suffered,  and  to  secure  from  the
victors  every  reward  and  advantage  they  could
desire.1

At  first  the  delegates  lent  a  willing  ear  to  a  They  re-
proposition  so  alluring  and  unexpected. But  a  conspiracy
moment's reflection suggested to them a safer  toCicero-
means  of  obtaining  their  end. They  took  counsel
with  Fabius Sanga, the  patron  and  advocate  of
their  nation,  disclosed  to  him  the  whole  occurrence,
and  by  his  advice  offered  to  betray  every  circum-
stance to  the  consul  Cicero. The  fortune  of  the
republic  thus  prevailed  at  the  crisis  of  her  utmost
peril ;  such  evidence  was  placed  in  the  hands  of
the  government  as  sufficed  to  put  it  on  its  guard
against  the  impending danger. The Allobroges
were  directed  to  enter  warmly  into  the  plot,  to  at-
tend the  meetings  at  which  it  was  discussed, to
obtain  written  and  sealed  assurances  from  the  chief

1  Sail.  B.  C.  40. ;  Cic.  in  Catil  iii.  6.
R 2

244

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
V.

Ingratitude
of  the

senate.  The
Allobroges
revolt,  and
are  subdued.

A.U.  693.
B.C.  61.

Reflections
on  the
contest  be-
tween the
Romans
and  Gauls.

conspirators,  in  which  the  invitation  to  insurrection
and  promise  of  reward  should  be  distinctly  con-
veyed. When  their  hands  were  full  of  these  fatal
documents  they  were  seized,  according  to  agree-
ment, by  the  agents  of  the  consul,  and  the  treason
stood  revealed  to  the  world.

We  may  suppose  that  the  consul  and  senate
were  not  slow  to  promise  their  favour  and  pro-
tection to  the  foreigners  in  return  for  a  service  the
importance  of  which  they  recognized  in  the  most
public  way.1  But  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether
the  Allobroges  derived  any  benefit"  from  the  fidelity
of  their  representatives.  Harassed  and  disappointed
they  allowed  the  conspirators  to  rouse  them  at
last  to  actual  rebellion.2  The  insurgents  invaded
the  frontiers  of  the  Province,  and  attempted  to
excite  a  general  movement  among  the  population.
A  moment  earlier  this  would  have  caused  great
alarm  and  been  pregnant  with  serious  danger ;
but  the  senate  had  recovered  its  confidence  with
the  fall  of  Lentulus  and  his  colleagues,  and  a
vigorous  campaign,  under  the  conduct  of  Pom-
ptinus,  sufficed  to  reduce  the  Gauls  once  more  to
their  former  subjection.3

We  have  thus  traced  step  by  step  the  slow  and
indignant  retreat  of  Gallic  independence  from  the
Apennines  and  the  Tiber  to  the  Garonne  and  Ce-
vennes.  Civilization  has  triumphed  over  barba-
rism :  the  one  gave  union  to  the  Romans,  and  a

1  Cic.  in  Catil.  iv.  3. :  "  Hesterno  die  praemia  legatis  Allobrogiim
dedistis  amplissiina."
*  Sail.  B.  C.  42.
3  Dion,  xxx vii.  47,  48. ;  Cio.  De  Prov.  Cons.  13. ;  Liv.  Epit.  cm.

UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  245

distinct  object  as  well  as  method  to  their  policy  ;  CHAP.
while  the  other,  notwithstanding  the  external  culti-  _
vation  of  their  principal  tribes,  still  kept  the  Gauls
asunder  by  petty  jealousies  and  divisions.  Though
identified  for  the  most  part  one  with  another  in  the
great  features  of  language  and  character,  there  ex-
isted among  them  certain  shades  of  difference,  both
in  origin  and  sentiments,  and  this  disadvantage
was  aggravated  by  their  want  of  foresight  and
mutual  self-control.  The  conquest  of  Gaul  is  one
of  the  most  complete  and  distinct  episodes  in  Ro-
man history  ;  but  its  interest  and  value  as  a  portion
of  human  annals  must  be  lost  to  those  who  fail  to
discriminate  between  the  various  elements  of  which
the  vanquished  race  consisted.  When  Caesar  dis-
tinguished so  carefully  between  the  different  popu-
lations of  Gaul,  it  was  not  merely  in  the  spirit  of
the  antiquarian  that  he  placed  his  information  on
record.  He  wrote  as  the  practical  warrior  and
statesman,  who  had  thoroughly  scanned  their  means
of  resistance,  and  estimated  with  sagacity  the  moral
and  material  resources  from  which  he  had  the
fairest  province  of  his  empire  to  form.

The  original  authorities  from  whom  we  learn  sources  of
the  main  facts  regarding  the  ethnology  and  cha-  ^re-

moter of  the  Gauls  are,  as  is  well  known,  princi-
pally  two,  Caesar  himself  and  Strabo.  The  first  ettmol°gy-
lived  for  nine  years  in  the  heart  of  the  country,  and
spoke  of  the  state  of  things  which  he  himself
witnessed,  with  all  the  advantages  of  acute  ob-
servation and  consummate  literary  ability  ;  the
second,  better  acquainted  in  his  own  person  with
the  East  than  the  West,  depended  partly  upon  the

R 3

246

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
V.

Quadruple
division  of
ancient
Gaul.

1.  The
Iberians.

accumulated  knowledge  of  a  century  later,  and
partly  on  the  accounts  of  Posidonius1,  who  had
travelled  in  Gaul  in  the  time  of  Marius.  A  careful
criticism  may  make  use  of  the  one  of  these  autho-
rities to  explain  or  correct  the  other ;  and  their  re-
spective statements,  where  apparently  conflicting,
may  possibly  be  reconciled  by  the  consideration  of
the  different  circumstances  under  which  they  wrote.
The  outline  here  presented  of  the  antiquities  of
Gaulish  history  is  the  result  of  a  comparison  of  both,
together  with  such  additional  illustrations  as  mo-
dern research  and  reflection  have  enabled  us  to
supply.2

The  population  of  that  large  portion  of  the
European  continent  which  was  known  to  the  an-
cients by  the  name  of  Gallia  was  distributed  in
four  principal  divisions,  varying  more  or  less  in
origin,  in  language,  and  institutions.

1.  The  whole  of  the  South,  from  the  Garonne
to  the  Pyrenees,  and  along  the  coast  of  the  Medi-
terranean, was  occupied  principally  by  a  race  al-
together distinct  from  their  Gallic  neighbours.
Under  the  name  of  Iberi,  they  have  generally
been  considered  as  the  remnant  of  a  family  of
nations  which  occupied  much  of  the  southern
part  of  Europe  before  the  arrival  of  the  great
Celtic  race  in  the  West.  The  Vascones  and

1  Posidonius  is  frequently  referred  to  by  Strabo,  particularly  in
books  iii.  iv.  and  xi. He  visited  Massilia  and  the  Narbonensis,  was
born  A.U.  619,  and  died  A.U.  703. (Ukert,  Geogr.  der  G.  und  R.
i.  174.)

2  I  have  been  principally  guided  by  Thierry's  elaborate  history  :
see  particularly  the  Introduction,  which  has  been  much  enlarged  in
the  third  edition,  Paris,  1845.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  247

other  tribes  of  the  Spanish  peninsula  are  proved  to  CHAP.
have  been  closely  connected  with  the  Iberi,  and
these  must  be  considered  ethnologically  distinct
from  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  southern  parts  of
Gaul.  The  Iberians,  it  is  supposed,  were  originally
thrust  forth  from  Gaul  into  Spain,  and  back  again
by  a  retrograde  movement,  when  the  Celtic  race
first  penetrated  through  the  Pyrenees.  Of  the
older  race  such  as  neither  submitted  to  the  new
comers  nor  mingled  with  them1  were  compelled,
for  the  most  part,  to  make  their  escape  through
the  western  and  eastern  outlets  of  the  mountains,
whence  they  spread  themselves  to  the  Garonne  on
the  one  side,  to  the  Cevennes,  the  Rhone,  and
the  Alps  on  the  other.  They  became  known  in
the  West  and  the  East  respectively  by  the  names
of  Aquitani  and  Ligures.  In  the  former  region
they  remained  stationary ;  on  the  other  side  they
continued  to  push  forward,  driving  the  Sicani  be-
fore them,  and  finally  established  themselves  along
the  coast  of  the  Mediterranean,  from  the  Pyre-
nees to  the  river  Macra.2  We  have  seen  how  the
whole  of  this  coast  fell  gradually  into  the  hands  of
the  Greeks  of  Massilia  and  the  Roman  invaders.
The  Aquitani  continued  to  occupy  the  triangle
between  the  Pyrenees,  the  Garonne,  and  the  Bay
of  Biscay,  within  which  they  formed  a  confederacy,
holding  little  intercourse  with  the  Gaulish  tribes
beyond  the  river,  speaking  a  language3  and  main-

1  The  Celtiberi,  a  people  widely  spread  in  the  Spanish  peninsula,
were  said  to  be  a  mixed  race  of  conquerors  and  conquered. (Diodor.
Sic.  v.  33.;  comp.  Lucan,  iv.  9.)

2  Thucyd.  vi.  2. ;  Avien.  Or.  Marit.  132.,  &c.

3  Strab.  iv.  1.  init.  (comp.  2.  init.)  :  Tot>c  ' ' A.KOVITUVOV^  reXtwi;  i £»/\\a)>

R 4

248  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, taining institutions peculiar to themselves, but
' jealously watched and domineered over by the
colonies  of  the  republic  at  Narbo, Bit  erne,  and
Tolosa.

2.  The  Ga-  2.  The  Gauls,  properly  so  called,  the  Galatse  of
or  Gael.  '  the  Greeks,  the  Galli  of  the  Romans,  and  the  Gael
of  modern  history,  formed  the  van  of  the  great
Celtic  migration1  which  had  poured  into  the  West
at  various  intervals  during  many  hundred  years.
Their  origin,  as  well  as  the  causes  and  events  of
their  early  movements,  is  lost  in  the  night  of  ages.
Having  overrun  the  south  of  Gaul  and  penetrated
into  Spain,  they  lost  a  part  of  the  territory  thus
acquired,  and  the  re-occupation  of  Aquitania  by  the
Iberian  fugitives  placed  a  barrier  between  the
Celts  in  Spain  and  their  brethren  whom  they  had
left  behind  them  in  the  North.  In  the  time  of  the
Komans  the  Galli  were  found  established  in  the
centre  and  east  of  the  country  denominated  Gaul,
forming  for  the  most  part  a  great  confederation,  at
the  head  of  which  stood  the  Arverni.2  It  was  the

ov  ry  yXwrry  /uoj'ov,  d\\oL  /cat
ri  TaXaraTc. (Compare  Zeuss,  die  Deutschen  und  die  NacJibarstamme,
p.  163.)

1  The  term  Celtae,  Celts,  which  is  now  generally  adopted  as  the
generic  appellation  of  one  of  the  principal  families  of  the  human  race,
was  confined  by  the  ancients  to  the  Gauls,  and  seems  to  have  had
originally  a  still  more  limited  signification,  as  the  designation  of  cer-
tain tribes  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Marseilles.  Strab.  iv.  1.  fin.  :
'Airb  Toi)Td)v  d'  olfiai  Kal  rovg  avfiTravTaQ  TaXarag  KsXrovg  dirb  TWV  'EX-
Xr/i/wv  irpoaayoptvQijvcu.

*  The  power  of  the  Arverni  might  be  estimated,  says  Strabo  (iv.  2.),
by  the  many  contests  they  maintained  with  Rome,  and  the  numbers
they  brought  into  the  field  :  Aiirttvav  dt  r^v  dpxrjv  ^XP1  Nap&Jvof,  icai
TWV  opwv  rrjs  MafftraXiwri^ot,"  fxparovv  fit  icai  TWV  f^fXP1  Hvpjjvtjc  i9i>u>vt
teal  pfXP1  'Qxtavov  Km  'Pqvov  ;  after  which  he  gives  an  instance  of  the
barbaric  splendour  of  their  king  Bittus  or  Bituitus.

UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  249

policy  of  the  Romans  to  raise  the  ^Edui  into  com-  CHAP.
petition  with  this  dominant  tribe,  and  with  this  '
view  they  distinguished  them,  as  we  have  seen,
with  especial  marks  of  favour.  The  Arverni,  whose
name  is  retained  in  the  modern  appellation  of
Auvergne,  occupied  a  large  district  in  the  middle
and  south  of  Gaul,  and  were  surrounded  by  tribu-
tary or  dependent  clans.  The  ^Edui  lay  more
to  the  north  and  east,  and  the  centre  of  their  pos-
sessions is  marked  by  the  position  of  their  capi-
tal Bibracte,  the  modern  Autun,  situated  in  the
highlands  which  separate  the  waters  of  the  Loire,
the  Seine,  and  the  Saone.1  The  one  nation  was
better  placed  for  defence,  the  other  for  commerce ;
and  with  the  spread  of  riches  and  civilization,  the
ancient  influence  of  the  Arverni  seemed  on  the
point  of  giving  way  to  the  more  active  ambition
of  their  rivals.  Other  Gallic  tribes  stretched
beyond  the  Saone:  the  Sequani2,  who  afterwards
made  an  attempt  to  usurp  this  much-coveted  pre-
eminence ;  the  Helvetii  and  other  mountain  races,
whose  scanty  pastures  extended  to  the  sources  of
the  Rhine;  the  Allobroges,  who  dwelt  upon  the
Isere  and  Rhone3,  and  who  were  the  first  of  their
race  to  meet  and  the  first  to  succumb  before  the
irresistible  prowess  of  the  Roman  legions.  Ac-

1  Strabo  places  them  between  the  Arar  (Saone)  and  the  Dubis,  by
which  he  evidently  means  the  Liger  (Loire). He  makes  the  same
mistake  in  this  name  twice. See  Groskurd's  Strdbo,  iv.  3.  §  2.

2  The  valley  of  the  Doubs  formed  the  centre  of  the  Sequanese
territory,  which  reached  to  the  Jura  and  the  Rhine,  Strab.  iv.  3.

3  The  settlements  of  the  Allobroges  occupied  the  space  between
these  two  rivers,  and  extended  also  a  little  beyond  the  latter  into  the
modern  province  of  Franche  Comte.

250  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, cording to  the  classification  both  of  Caesar  and
v* Strabo,  the  Turones,  Pictones,  and  Santones  must

be  comprised  under  the  same  general  denomination.
It  is  probable,  however,  that  the  relationship  in
these  three  cases  was  not  so  close,  as  these  tribes
do  not  appear  to  have  formed  a  part  of  the  political
confederation  of  the  Galli.

3.  The  3.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  limits  thus  assigned

*Kpmcyl*~  t°  that  portion  of  the  ancient  Celtic  population
calTand  °^  ^au*  whick  ig  appropriately  designated  by  the
strabo.  term  Galli,  embrace  at  least  the  whole  centre  and
east  of  the  country.  Beyond  the  Seine  and  Marne,
the  north-east  was  occupied  by  a  race  whom  Caesar
characterizes  as  not  less  different  from  the  Galli
in  language,  manners,  and  institutions1,  than  were
the  Iberi,  whom  modern  ethnologists  represent  as
belonging  to  a  distinct  family.  To  this  race  he
gives  the  name  of  Belgae,  and  informs  us  that
in  their  own  estimation  they  were  principally  de-
scended from  a  German  stock,  the  offspring  of
some  early  migration  across  the  Rhine.  Accord-
ing to  Caesar's  view,  the  Gallic  race  extended
much  further  than  the  limits  above  assigned  to  it,
and  included  the  people  of  the  North-West,  from
the  mouth  of  the  Loire  to  that  of  the  Seine ;
whereas  Strabo,  following  probably  the  information
of  Posidonius,  gives  the  whole  of  Gaul  north  of  the
Loire  to  the  Belgae.  At  the  same  time,  the  geo-
grapher by  no  means  concurred  in  Caesar's  view  of
the  origin  of  this  third  race,  which  he  believed  to
be  Gaulish  and  not  German,  though  differing  widely

1  Cxs.  B.  G.  i.  1. ;  coinp.  Strab.  iv.  3.  init.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  251

from  the  Galli,  or  Gauls  of  the  central  region.  CHAP.
According  to  his  account  we  should  regard  them  as
a  variety  of  Celts,  distinct  both  from  the  Iberi  on
the  one  side,  and  the  Teutons  on  the  other.  In
order  to  explain  these  conflicting  statements,  we
must  observe  that  Caesar's  account  is  not  strictly
consistent  with  itself,  for  certain  among  the  Belgic
tribes  he  contrasts  with  the  rest  as  being  German  by
origin,  and  forming  separate  leagues  among  them-
selves for  mutual  defence  in  the  midst  of  jealous
and  probably  alien  neighbours.1  The  great  mass,
therefore,  even  of  the  Belgae  were  still  Celts ;  but,  as
the  immigration  of  Teutons  was  an  event  of  gradual
progress,  it  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  in  the
time  of  Posidonius  the  population  beyond  the  Seine
was  as  yet  little  tainted  with  the  admixture  of  the
foreign  element.  At  that  period  the  middle  race
between  the  Loire  and  the  Seine  may  have  been
more  akin  to  the  Belgae,  as  Strabo,  viewing  them
with  the  eyes  of  the  earlier  writer,  represents,  than
with  the  Galli,  south  of  the  Loire,  to  whom  Caesar,
on  the  contrary,  assimilates  them.  We  may  con-
clude that,  with  whatever  mixture  of  German  blood,
still,  even  in  the  time  of  Caesar  the  main  element  of
the  whole  population  of  the  North  was  Celtic,  dif-
fering from  the  Gallic  subdivision  of  the  family,  and
requiring  to  be  designated  by  a  distinctive  appel-
lation. This  fact  of  the  division  of  the  Gauls  into  Theory  of
two  races  is  one  of  great  importance  in  the  history  onife™101
of  the  Celtic  family,  though  its  announcement  Gaulsinto

'  Cses.  B.  G.  ii.  4,  5.  The  Belgsc  themselves  only  affirmed  that
most  of  them  (plerosque)  were  of  German  origin,  and  Tacitus  re-
marked among  them  a  certain  "  affcctatio  Germanicaj  originis."

252  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, seems  to  have  been  left  to  very  modern  times.1 It
' may  be  traced,  however  obscurely,  in  several  ways,

two  races,  which  can  only  be  cursorily  indicated  here.  Thus,
f°r  instance,  the  existence,  in  the  neighbouring
island  of  Britain,  of  two  Celtic  races,  the  Gael  and
the  Kymry,  with  different  types  of  language  and
feature,  is  well  known.  In  Gaul  there  remain  at
the  present  day  vestiges  of  only  one  of  these  lan-
guages, the  Kymric,  which  is  still  spoken  in  some
portion  of  Brittany,  a  district  included,  as  we  have
seen,  in  the  Belgica  of  Strabo.  The  common  theory,
that  the  population  of  this  country  is  the  offspring
of  certain  immigrations  from  the  opposite  coast,
is  wholly  untenable.2  The  supposition  that  three
such  scanty  infusions  of  Kymric  blood  as  genuine
history  records,  should  have  sufficed  to  change  the
language  and  physical  character  of  the  whole  people
of  the  Peninsula  is  inconsistent  with  the  doctrine
of  the  permanence  of  type  in  the  majority  of  every
mixed  population,  which  modern  experience  so
strongly  attests.  The  Kymry,  then,  as  distin-

1  I  believe  that  Thierry  was  the  first  to  discuss  it  scientifically.
The  introduction  to  the  third  edition  of  the  Hist,  des  Gaulois  notices
the  favour  with  which  the  theory  has  been  received. Niebuhr  gave  a
hint  of  the  same  view  in  his  lectures  on  Roman  history,  delivered
before  Thierry's  work, but  published  since. (Lect.  on  Rom.  Hist.
ii.  1.  44.) On  the  other  hand,  Arnold  criticizes  and  hesitates  to  adopt
it. (Hist,  of  Rome,  i.  c.  24.)

2  Three  such  are  particularly  mentioned:  the  first,  A.D.  285,  when
Constantius  Chlorus  assigned  lands  to  some  fugitives  in  the  territory  of
the  Curiosolitae ;  the  second,  a  century  later,  when  Conan  Meriadec
followed  the  usurper  Maximus  from  Britain,  and  obtained  a  sove-
reignty in  Armorica  after  his  defeat ;  and  the  third,  some  years  after,
when  the  same  Conan  invited  a  few  settlers  to  confirm  his  power  in
the  Peninsula. (Daru,  Hist,  de  Bretagne,  i.  53.) The  stories  of  sub-
sequent immigrations  of  the  Kymry  in  the  fifth  century  are  regarded
by  Niebuhr  as  certainly  fabulous.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  253

guished  from  the  Gael,  were  the  first  known  in- CHAP.
habitants  of  this  part  of  Gaul,  and probably  of
Belgica  generally.

Some  further  evidence  of  this  division  of  races  Evidence
may  be  discovered,  it  is  said,  in  the  different  types
of  feature  which  are  still  strongly  characteristic  of
the  population  of  the  north  and  south  respectively,  tinctiong.
This,  undoubtedly,  is  a  subject  which  requires
much  closer  investigation  than  it  has  yet  received
before  it  can  be  regarded  as  furnishing  substantive
and  independent  evidence  of  the  fact  in  question.
Yet  it  is  too  interesting  and  important  to  be
altogether  omitted.  A  curious  observer1  has  dis-
tinguished, among  a  great  mass  of  what  may  be
called  neutral  characters,  two  opposite  types  of
form  and  feature  prevalent  in  different  parts  of
Gaul  respectively.  In  the  one,  the  shape  of  the
head  is  long  and  oval,  the  forehead  high  and
narrow,  the  nose  curved  downwards  and  pointed,
the  chin  small.  This  type  of  head  is  generally  ac-
companied with  a  tall  and  spare  figure,  and  prevails
throughout  the  northern  parts  of  Gaul,  the  Belgica
of  Strabo.  The  other  is  distinguished  by  a  flat
head,  a  forehead  low  and  broad,  the  face  round  or
approaching  to  square,  the  chin  prominent,  the
nose  small  and  straight  or  turning  upwards ;  the
corresponding  stature  is  short  and  the  figure  thick.
This  is  the  type  which  prevails  in  the  centre
and  east  of  France.  The  one  type  occurs  through-
out the  seats  of  the  Kymry,  the  other  in  those  of
the  Gael.  It  will  be  readily  admitted  that,  among

1  M.  Edwards,  LfMrc  d  Anted.  Thierry.

254  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  Celtic  populations  of  our  own  islands,  the  latter
'  of  these  types  is  strongly  characteristic  of  the  High-
land Gael  and  also  of  the  Irish.  The  former  an-
swers precisely  to  the  characters  most  generaUy
prevalent  among  the  Welsh,  though  among  them
there  is  undoubtedly  a  large  intermixture  of  the
other  type  also.

Evidence  But  if  there  exist  even  at  the  present  day  certain
amTpoiu™  physical  characteristics  which  seem  to  attest  the
racterist*cs  earty  diversity  of  the  great  races  by  which  Gaul
was  occupied,  we  may  discover  still  further  evidence
of  the  same  fact  both  in  their  political  combinations
and  their  social  institutions.  The  campaigns  of
Caesar  bring  us  successively  into  acquaintance  with
distinct  confederacies  existing  in  different  parts  of
the  country,  with  little  intercourse  or  communion
between  one  another.  The  first  is  that  of  the
Arverni,  JEdui,  Sequani,  and  other  central  and
eastern  tribes ;  beyond  them  the  Belgica  of  Caesar
forms  a  separate  cluster  of  nations,  closely  con-
nected among  themselves,  but  maintaining  no  po-
litical relations  with  their  southern  neighbours.
The  tribes  of  Normandy  and  Maine  hang,  as  it  were,
loosely  upon  the  skirts  of  the  Belgians  Proper,  and,
though  less  intimately  united  with  them,  are  easily
induced  to  join  in  a  common  cause.  The  Armori-
cans,  strictly  attached  to  one  another,  are  allied
moreover  with  all  the  tribes  on  the  northern  coast,
and  seem  to  be  no  less  closely  linked  with  the  for-
tunes of  the  Turones,  Andi,  arid  others  on  the
lower  Loire.  In  short,  there  exists  a  certain  homo-
geneity throughout  the  whole  Belgica  of  Strabo.
Even  to  the  south  of  the  Loire  it  may  be  suspected

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  255

that  the  San  tones  and  Pictones  belong  to  the  same  CHAP.
race  with  the  communities  to  the  north.  The  re-
quest of  the  Helvetians  to  the  Sequani,  to  be  per-
mitted to  fix  themselves  in  the  territory  occupied
by  these  tribes  x,  seems  to  show  that  no  strict  bonds
of  blood  or  sentiment  existed  between  the  nations
of  the  eastern  and  those  of  the  western  centre  of
Gaul.

The  progress  which  civilization  had  made  in  the  Additional
northern  and  more  southern  parts  of  Gaul  respec-
tively,  seems  also  to  indicate  the  distinct  and  later
development  of  the  Kymric  element  of  the  popu-  character
lation. At  the  time  when  the  northern  invaders
were  disputing  the  soil  of  Italy  with  the  republic,  i
they  showed  in  one  respect  a  striking  inferiority  to

.  -,  TT  I-, communi-

opponents  with  whom  they  were  so  equally  matched  ties
in  the  field.  It  marked  the  national  aptitude  of  tlvely*
the  Romans  to  imbibe  the  lessons  of  civilization,
that  from  the  first  they  regarded  the  city  with  the
ideas  of  freedom,  sympathy,  and  unity  attaching  to
it,  as  the  source  or  nucleus  of  political  society.
Hence  arose  the  deep-set  principles  from  which  were
unfolded  their  conceptions  of  civil  government,  of
personal  independence,  of  social  rights  and  their
correlative  duties.  But  the  feeling  of  citizenship,
the  moving  principle  of  Greek  and  Roman  life,  had
little  power  of  spontaneous  development  among  any
races  of  Celtic  origin.  The  natural  ties  which
held  society  together  among  the  Gauls  were  rather
personal  than  civil.  The  Gaul  devoted  himself  to
the  service  of  his  chieftain,  whether  as  a  serf,  a
client,  or  a  friend  ;  the  chieftains  dwelt  apart,  and

1  Cses.  B.  G.  I  9,  10.

256  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  issued  forth  to  war  or  council  attended  by  a  retinue
of  dependents,  of  whom  they  exacted  a  sort  of  feudal
service  in  return  for  their  maintenance. l  A  state
of  society  of  this  kind  gives  room  for  the  display  of
emulation  and  personal  attachment,  but  it  tends  to
isolate  the  elements  of  a  nation  rather  than  to  con-
centrate them.  The  strength  of  the  whole  body
was  broken  up  by  the  petty  factions  and  feuds
which  existed  among  its  members ;  and  while  the
courage  of  the  Gauls  was  unsurpassed,  and  their
Onset  formidable  from  its  impetuosity,  they  wanted
those  moral  ties  between  man  and  man  by  which
alone  disasters  can  be  borne  and  retrieved.  Such
was  the  general  character  of  the  Gaulish  people ;
but  in  process  of  time  their  manners  and  principles
of  action  had  admitted  of  partial  modification.
"When  the  Romans  saw  themselves  at  last  arrayed
front  to  front  against  the  great  powers  of  central
Gaul,  they  found  its  political  institutions  in  all
the  uncertainty  and  tremulousness  of  a  period  of
transition.  The  increase  of  arts  and  commerce  had
collected  masses  of  the  population  in  cities;  Bi-
bracte,  Noviodunum,  Genabus,  Vienna,  and  Tolosa,
were  marts  of  commerce  and  strongholds  of  popu-
lar independence.  The  germs  of  municipal  liberty
had  taken  root  in  the  bosom  of  the  Gaelic  states,
and  the  influence  of  the  chieftains  of  clans  was  gra-
dually bowing  before  it.  These  states  were,  for
the  most  part,  governed  by  a  chieftain  exercising
a  nominal  sovereignty,  but  elected  and  controlled

1  Compare  the  account  of  Orgetorix  in  Caesar  (J5.  G.  i.  4.) :  u  Omnem
suam  familiam,  ad  hominum  millia  decem,  undique  coegit  et  omnes
client es  obaeratosque  suos."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  257

by  a  popular  assembly.  The  nobility  struggled  by  CHAP.
artifice  and  intrigue  to  maintain  a  remnant  of  their  '
authority,  while  the  bolder  and  more  ambitious
of  their  class  cherished  schemes  of  aggrandizement
and  usurpation.  Political  power  among  the  Gaelic
tribes  had  fallen,  for  the  most  part,  into  the  hands
of  the  commonalty,  but  public  virtue  had  withered
almost  before  it  blossomed;  for  the  communities
whose  institutions  were  the  most  liberal,  and
condition  the  most  advanced,  were  precisely  those
which  submitted  most  readily  to  the  Roman  domi-
nation. But  the  northern  or  Kyrnric  tribes  were
still  subject  to  the  primitive  rule  of  their  kings
and  nobles  ;  among  them  the  class  of  the  common-
alty had  as  yet  received  no  development.  They
possessed  no  great  cities,  no  public  marts  of  in-
dustry and  commerce.  The  places  which  we  find
dignified  by  the  names  of  towns,  or  oppida,  were
for  the  most  part  merely  entrenched  fastnesses  on
lofty  eminences  or  in  woody  coverts,  whither  a
whole  tribe  might  retreat  in  case  of  attack  with  all
its  movables  and  cattle1;  but  in  the  intervals  of

i  On  this  point  there  is  much  diversity  of  opinion.  A  writer  in  the
Mem.  Soc.  Antiq.  de  France  argues,  —  1.  That  the  term  civitas,  when
applied  to  the  Gaulish  barbarians  by  Caesar,  never  means  a  city,  but
always  a  state :  2.  That  the  designation  of  urbs  is  used  only  two  or
three  times;  of  Avaricum,  B.  G.  vi.  9.,  vii.  15. ;  of  Gergovia,  vii.  36. ;  of
Alesia,  vii.  68. :  3.  That  oppidum  (Strab.  typovpiov)  is  always  a  place
of  refuge  and  defence  merely.  He  urges  that  Caesar's  description  of
the  oppida  implies  that  they  were  almost  empty  spaces  ;  large  armies
manoeuvred  in  them,  as  at  Avaricum  40,000  Gauls  assembled  "  in
foro  et  locis  patentioribus,"  vii.  28.  In  the  oppidum  of  Vesontio
Caesar's  officers  dwelt  in  tents,  i.  39.  Critognatus  speaks  of  it  as  a
great  calamity,  that  on  the  invasion  of  the  Cimbri  the  Gauls  were
compelled  to  resort  to  their  oppida,  vii.  77.  When  Gaul  was  con-
quered, one  of  the  means  taken  to  break  the  people  to  servitude  was
to  compel  them  to  inhabit  their  oppida  by  seizing  their  lands :  "  com-
VOL.  I.  S

258  HISTOEY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  peace  the  people  dwelt  in  hamlets  or  detached
'  habitations,  in  the  situations  most  convenient  for
fishing,  hunting,  or  husbandry.1  That  the  oppida
were  riot  intended  for  permanent  residence  appears
clearly  in  the  case  of  the  Armoricans,  at  least,  from
their  position  on  the  rockiest  and  most  remote
peninsulas.

Different The  religious  ideas  prevalent  among  the  Gauls
may  furnish  us  with  another  clue  to  the  distinction

between  their  several  races.  The  theological  system
the  Gael.  knOwn  to  us  by  the  name  of  Druidism,  from  the
appellation  of  its  priests,  was  claimed  by  the  Kymry
of  Britain  as  their  own  invention.2  Without  at-
taching any  credit  to  this  assertion  in  its  literal
meaning,  it  may  nevertheless  be  taken  to  represent
the  fact  that  Druidism  was  preserved  in  its  purest
and  most  systematic  form  in  our  own  island  ;  and
the  express  statement  of  Caesar  is  sufficient  to
prove  that  the  highest  instruction  in  its  mysteries
flowed  from  thence,  and  that  its  votaries  were

pulsos  in  oppida  multatis  agris,"  vii.  54.  He  asserts  that  in  the  ancient
Celtic  languages,  the  Low-Breton  for  instance,  there  is  no  word  for  a
city  in  our  sense.  The  assemblies  of  the  people  were  held  not  in
cities,  but  in  the  open  air,  at  the  common  frontiers  of  several  nations,
vi.  13.  So  religious  ceremonies  were  performed  in  forests  and  on
mountains,  &c.  The  argument  is  probably  pushed  too  far,  but
Walckenaer  (Geogr.  des  Gaules)  is,  I  think,  too  sweeping  in  his  re-
jection of  it.

1  The  Gauls  built  their  scattered  dwellings  principally  in  the  woods
and  on  the  banks  of  streams  ;  "  aastus  vitandi  causa." They  were  made
of  the  branches  of  trees'and  clay  (Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  30.),  and  thatched  with
straw  (Vitruv.  i.  1  .)  ;  only  a  ground  floor,  as  appears  from  the  absence
of  any  word  in  the  old  Celtic  to  signify  stage  or  story. Accordingly,
there  exist  no  remains  of  domestic  buildings  of  the  Celts  in  Gaul.

2  CJES.  B.  G.  vi.  13.:  "Disciplina  in  Britannia  reperta  atque  inde
in  Galliam  translata  esse  existimatur  :  et  nunc,  qui  diligentius  earn
rem  cognoscere  volunt,  plerumque  illic  discendi  causa  proficiscuntur."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  259

wont  to  flock  thither  to  imbibe  its  most  spiritual CHAP.

lore. The  great  religious  assembly  of  the  whole  '

of  Gaul  was  held  in  the  territory  of  the  Carnutes,
north  of  the  Loire.1  It  was  in  the  northern
and  western  parts  of  the  country  that  the  Druids
seem  to  have  exercised  the  greatest  influence  in
political  affairs ;  it  was  there  that  they  continued
to  animate  successive  revolts  against  Rome,  till
they  and  their  religion  became  marked  out  as
objects  of  inveterate  persecution.  In  those  regions
also  the  most  important  and  most  numerous  remains
of  Druidical  worship  still  exist,  and  support  the
inference  that  it  was  among  the  Kymry  in  Gaul
as  well  as  in  Britain  that  the  oldest  and  purest
form  of  Druidism  flourished.  The  character  of
the  system  was  essentially  Oriental,  and  forms
another  link  in  the  chain  which  connects  the
Kymry  of  the  West  with  the  Cimmerii  of  the
Euxine  shores2,  and  through  them  with  the  pri-
mitive hives  of  Asia.  It  corresponded  in  many
important  particulars  with  the  simple  and  com-
paratively spiritual  character  of  the  Persian  theo-
sophy ;  it  taught  the  purity  of  the  Godhead  as  a
metaphysical  abstraction,  and  the  eternity  of  the
soul's  existence  by  transmigration3 ;  it  had  its

1  The  spot  is  said  to  have  been  at  Dreux. (Moebe  in  Caes.  /.  c.)
Caesar  states  that  the  Gauls  considered  it  the  centre  of  their  country,
which  might  be  nearly  true  of  the  Kymric  confederacies.

2  Diodor.  Sic.  v.  32.

3  There seems  no  reason  to suppose  that  the  Druidical  dogma
maintained,  like  that  of  Pythagoras,  the  transmigration  of  the  human
soul  into  the  bodies  of  animals. See  Diodor.  v.  28. It  is  not  quite  cer-
tain even  that  Caesar  represents  the  soul  as  passing  from  one  human
body  into  another  (vi.  14.) :  Lucan  (i.  460.)  and  Mela  (iii.  2  )  only
assert  a  belief  in  its  immortality,  implying  the  existence  of  a  future

s 2

260  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  mysteries  and  initiatory  rites,  by  which  the  mind
'  of  the  votary  was  withdrawn  from  the  contempla-
tion of  the  manifold  energies  of  the  Godhead  to
that  of  his  essential  unity ;  it  abounded  in  symbols,
inculcated  retirement  and  meditation,  and  upheld
the  character  of  its  priesthood  as  mediators  between
earth  and  heaven:  again,  it  made  use  of  natural
phenomena  as  means  to  elevate  the  mind  to  a
comprehension  of  a  first  cause,  glided  from  thence
into  the  frivolous  delusions  of  astrology,  and
finally  degenerated  into  all  the  impieties  and  hor-
rors of  belief  in  magic.1  Hence  its  addiction  to
human  sacrifices2,  the  last  resort  of  superstitious
terror  endeavouring  to  extort  the  secrets  of  futu-
rity from  a  reluctant  power,  and  to  control  the
course  of  destiny.  But  by  the  side  of  this  Orien-
tal theism  there  existed  another  system,  much  less
distinctive  in  its  character,  an  elemental  worship
of  the  grossest  kind,  in  which  the  objects  of  nature
were  identified  with  the  memory  of  deceased  he-
roes, and  the  sun  and  stars,  the  thunder  and  the
whirlwind,  were  worshipped  as  the  visible  repre-
sentatives of  superior  beings.  The  Roman  sceptic
was  surprised  to  find  the  barbarians  adoring,  as  he
said,  the  same  divinities  whom  his  own  critical
acuteness  had  rejected.  Jupiter  and  Apollo,  and  the
rest  of  the  host  of  Olympus,  were  recognized  in  the

state.  See  an  essay  by  Chiniac  de  la  Bastide,  in  Leber,  Coll.  de  Pieces
relatives  a  VHistoire  de  France,  p.  iii.

1  Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  14. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxx.  4. :  "  Britannia  hodieque
earn  (magiam)  attonite  celebrat,  tantis  casrimoniis,  ut  dedisse  Persis
videri  possit."  Compare  Clem.  Alex.  Strom,  i.  71.;  Ammian.  xv.  9. ;
Mel.  iii.  2.

?  Diodor.  Sic.  v.  31. ;  Strab.  iv.  4. ;  Csss.  B.  G.  vi.  16.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  261

consistory  of  the  Gallic  deities  ;  Mercurius  seemed CHAP.
to  hold  the  highest  place  among  them,  under  the '
name  of  Teutates,  and  was  venerated  as  the  patron
of  all  their  civilization  ; the  sun,  or  Apollo,  was
worshipped  by  the  name  of  Belenus  ;  Taranis  re-
presented the  thunderer  Jupiter  ;  and  Hesus  was
their  Mars,  the  god  of  battles.1 We  may  assign
the  worship  of  Belenus  and  Teutates  to  the  tra-
ditions imported  into  Gaul  by the Phoenicians.2
The  Greek  colonists  of  the  coast  may  also  have  had
their  share  in  moulding  the  Western  polytheism  to
the  shape  of  the  Eastern  ;  but  it  must  still  remain
a  question  how  far  this  form  of  heathenism  was
independent  of  Druidism3, and  how  far,  on  the
other  hand,  it  was  a  degeneration  from  that  more
spiritual  system  in  accordance  with the sensual
tendencies  of  the  period  and  the  people. But  if
the  councils  and  institutions  of  the  Gaelic  nations
were  more  independent  of  Druidical  influence,  it
must  have  exerted  a  vigorous  ascendancy  over  the
lower  classes,  and  taken  deep  root  in  the  remoter
and  less  frequented  districts. In  the  north-western  Existing
angle  of  Gaul,  comprised  between  the  lower  Loire  S-°DrSm
and  the  Seine,  the  region  in  which  the  Kymry  seem  in  Gaul-
to  have  been  most  unmixed,  there  exist  at  the  pre-
sent day  about  ninety  remains  of  Celtic  monuments,

1  Cses.  B.  G.  vl  17. ;  Luc.  i.  445.

2  The  Phoenician  origin  of  the  worship  of  Teutates  (Theuth)  is
confirmed  by  that  of  a  Mercurius  in  Spain. (Liv.  xxvi.  44.) Bil-
lingsgate is  a  record  of  the  worship  of  Belenus  in  Britain ;  Tottenham,
Tattingstone,  &c.,  of  Teutates.

3  This  hypothesis  is  maintained  by  Thierry,  who  considers  JDruid-
ism  to  have  been  only  adopted  by  the  Gael  at  a  later  period. (Gauloist

H.i.)

s 3

262  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  all  probably  of  religious  significance.  They  abound
'  equally  on  the  rocky  coasts  of  Brittany,  and  the
wooded  hills  of  Normandy,  in  the  meadows  of  Anjou,
and  the  plains  of  the  Orleanois.1  In  central  and
eastern  Gaul  similar  remains  are  confined  to  the
highlands  about  the  sources  of  the  Seine,  the  Loire,
the  Allier,  and  the  Vienne.  Within  those  narrow
limits  about  fifty  such  may  be  enumerated.  But
in  the  lowlands  of  the  Gaelic  territory  they  either
never  existed  or  have  been  altogether  obliterated.
Throughout  the  Province  not  more  than  one  or  two
vestiges  of  the  kind  can  be  traced.  Here  perhaps
they  were  most  ruthlessly  exterminated  by  the  arm
of  Roman  persecution.  Their  number  is  also  very
small  in  the  north-eastern  or  Belgic  provinces  of
France ;  and  there  too  they  were  trodden  into  the
soil  by  the  heel  of  the  Roman  legionary  quartered
for  centuries  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  German
frontier,  or  were  worn  away  by  the  attrition  of
succeeding  waves  of  invaders,  the  Sueve,  the  Frank,
and  the  Burgundian.  In  Aquitania  the  presence
of  the  Celt  is  attested  by  only  one  or  two  monu-
ments of  his  religion,  and  the  antiquity  of  these
may  possibly  remount  to  the  earliest  period  of
Gaulish  history.  But  in  the  district  between  the
Gironde  and  the  lower  Loire  they  are  hardly  less
numerous  than  in  Brittany  and  Maine,  and  are
there  scattered  indiscriminately  over  hill,  plain,
and  valley,  in  token  of  the  general  diffusion  and
security  of  the  worship  which  they  subserved.

1  These  enumerations  are  made  from  Hocquart's  Carte  ArcJieo-
logique  de  la  France.  These  various  monuments  are  almost  universally
cromlechs,  dolmens,  or  rocking-stones.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  263

4. The Rhine, which  formed  the  geographical CHAP.
boundary  between  Gaul  and  Germany,  was  never

a  barrier  capable  of  restraining  the  migratory  pro-  The  Bei-
pensities  of  the  northern  races,  or  preventing  the  cStfc*
repeated  transit  of  invaders  from  the  right  to  the  people>  with

*  f  o  an  inter-

left  bank. Accordingly,  the  Kymric  population,  mixture  of

i  • rT  j  B.V  ,, J  •  m i Teutonic

which  had  spread  over  the  northern  region  of  Gaul,  tribes.
was  constantly  harassed  by  the  Teutonic  hordes,
which  pressed  hungrily  on  its  rear.  The  Germans,
who  had  introduced  themselves  within  the  limits
of  Gaul,  were  already,  in  the  time  of  Caesar,  inter-
mixed in  a  great  degree  with  the  earlier  possessors,
besides  retaining,  in  some  localities,  their  own
names  and  characteristics.  Such  were  the  Ebu-
rones,  Treviri,  and  Nervii,  the  Segni,  Caeresi,  and
Pa3mani,  who  all  dwelt  apart  from  the  Kymry,
with  distinct  habits  and  institutions.  But  it  is  to
the  whole  of  this  population,  thus  fused  and  inter-
mingled, that  Caesar  applies  the  name  of  Belgae ;
a  name,  however,  which  can  be  shown  not  to  be
properly  generic,  but  to  be  appropriated  in  strictness,
like  that  of  Celt  originally,  to  certain  particular
tribes.1  We  have  already  noticed  some  traces  of  sub-
division among  the  great  Kymric  race,  and  the  boun-
dary between  the  pure  and  the  mixed  Kymry  may  be
placed  on  the  line  of  the  Seine  and  Marne.  We
may  readily  believe  that  this  mixed  people  had  lost
much  of  the  genuine  manners,  language,  and  re-
ligion of  its  Celtic  ancestors  ;  and  this  may  account
for  the  paucity  of  its  sacerdotal  monuments,  as
well  as  for  the  difference  which  Caesar  so  strongly
marks  between  its  language  and  that  of  the  Gael.

1  Thierry,  Gaulois,  Introd.  Ivii.
s 4

264

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
V.

Their  cha-
racter and
mode  of
life.

But  he  is  undoubtedly  mistaken  in  his  assertion
that  the  Belgians  were  for  the  most  part  of  German
origin,  their  essential  identity  with  the  Celts  being
sufficiently  established  by  the  declarations  of  Posi-
donius  and  Strabo,  together  with  the  strong  pre-
sumptions that  have  been  adduced  from  physio-
logical and  other  evidence.

This  people,  however,  as  it  was  the  last  to
emerge  from  the  rudeness  of  its  primeval  forests,
and  was  unable  to  shake  off  from  its  bosom  the
unmixed  barbarism  of  a  still  younger  race  clinging
so  closely  about  it,  so  it  was  much  behind  the  rest
of  the  Gaulish  population  in  all  the  elements  of
civilized  existence.  Throughout  the  extensive
region  which  it  occupied,  we  hear  of  no  place  de-
serving the  name  of  a  city,  except  perhaps  Sama-
robriva,  the  modern  Amiens,  the  bridge  over  the
Somme.  The  Morini  and  Menapii  fed  entirely  on
fish  and  the  eggs  of  wild  fowl ;  they  dwelt  in  the
recesses  of  their  woods  and  morasses,  with  no
more  sense  of  cleanliness  and  comfort  than  the
Teutonic  Eburones  and  Nervii.  The  Belgians
were  noted  for  the  use  of  the  scythed  chariot *,  one
of  the  rudest  and  earliest  implements  of  war.
They  rejoiced  in  passing  their  whole  lives  with
arms  in  their  hands.  The  German  tribes  haughtily

i  Lucan,  i.  426.:

"  Et  docilis  rector  rdstrati  Belga  covini."

Thierry  attributes  the  scythed  chariot  to  the  Treviri,  but  I  question
whether  the  Germans  ever  used  it*  Mela  iii.  6.  says  :  "  Bigis  et  cur-
ribus,  covinos  vocant,  Gallice  armati."  Covinus  appears  to  be  a  Celtic
word,  common  both  to  the  Kymric  and  Gaelic  variety.  Caesar,  how-
ever, makes  no  mention  of  scythed  chariots  among  the  Gauls  or
Britons.  (Cluver.  Germ.  Ant.  i.  335.)

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  265

excluded  from  their  territory  the  purveyors  of  all  CHAP.
foreign  articles,  whether  of  use  or  luxury.  Ac-
customed to  constant  warfare  with  a  more  savage
and  ferocious  race  than  themselves,  the  Belgians
acquired  a  renown  for  bravery  beyond  all  the
other  inhabitants  of  Gaul.1  They  affected  to  de-
spise their  brethren  in  the  South,  kept  aloof  from
their  confederacies,  and  were  even  inclined  to  dis-
own their  kinship.

The  limits  of  the  Belgian  conquest  are  broadly  some  of
denned  by  the  two  great  rivers  which  have  been  penetrated
mentioned ;  but  it  is  probable  that  some  of  these
tribes  penetrated  far  into  the  South.  The  Volcse,
who  occupied  a  district  between  the  Rhone  and
the  Pyrenees,  in  two  divisions  distinguished  by  the
names  of  Arecomici  and  Tectosages,  are  connected
with  the  Belgians  by  the  co-ordinate  appellation  of
BolgaB,  and  even  Belgae.2  The  fate  of  Britain  was
similar  to  that  of  Gaul.  There  also  the  conquering
Kymry  found  the  Belgians  at  their  back  before
they  had  well  time  to  turn  themselves  round  in
the  habitations  of  the  vanquished  Gael.  There,
too,  the  new  comers  brought  along  with  them  a
portion  of  Teutonic  blood ;  and  the  south-eastern
angle  of  the  island,  the  limit  of  their  progress,
came  to  be  inhabited  by  a  mixed  people,  who
seemed  to  superficial  observers  to  have  little  in
common  with  the  race  upon  whom  they  had  in-
truded themselves.

But,  notwithstanding the familiar intercourse  Hostility
thus  established  between  the  Celtic  and  Teutonic  S^

Germans.

1  Cacs.  B.  G.i.  1.;  Ammian.  xv.  11.

2  Thierry,  Gaulois,  Introd.  p.  li — Iv.

266  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  tribes  who  shared  the  north-east  of  Gaul,  the
enmity  between  the  two  races  continued  unabated,
the  Germans  hovering  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhine
with  numbers  and  courage  daily  augmenting,  the
Gauls  crouching  in  abject  terror  before  an  enemy
whom  they  dared  not  encounter,  or  even  inviting
him  within  their  frontiers  to  fight  their  battles  for
them.  The  time  had  long  passed  since  the  Gauls
had  been  an  emigrating  and  a  conquering  people.1
Their  incursions  into  the  German  territories  had
once  been  no  less  numerous  and  successful  than
those  by  which  they  had  possessed  themselves  of
one  half  of  Italy  and  devastated  nearly  the  whole.
But  step  by  step  they  had  been  hurled  back  in
both  quarters  by  nations  fiercer  or  better  disciplined
than  themselves.  The  progress  of  moral  and  phy-
sical culture  among  them  had  taken  a  direction
which  paralysed  their  means  of  defence  both  against
the  Germans  and  the  Romans.  It  enervated  their
bodies  and  subdued  their  daring  courage,  as  com-
pared with  the  wild  barbarians  of  the  North,  while
it  had  no  tendency  to  impart  that  community  of
sentiment  and  identity  of  purpose,  which  hold  the
scales  of  victory  so  evenly  between  civilized  powers.
General  ^he  ancient  writers  abound  in  descriptions  of

character  of  ^he  character  of  a  nation  which  performed  so  con-

t.he  Gauls.  .  .

spicuous  a  part  in  the  early  history  of  Europe.  In
stature  the  Gauls  are  uniformly  represented  as  ex-
ceeding the  people  of  Greece  and  Italy.  Undoubt-
edly the  disproportion  between  the  Italians  and  the

1  Tac.  Germ.  28. :  "  Validiores  olim  Gallorum  res  fuisse  summus
auctorum  divus  Julius  tradit,  eoque  credibile  est  etiam  Gallos  in  Ger-
maniam  transgresses."  Comp.  Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  24.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  267

Kymry  was  strongly  marked ;  and  the  Senones,  from  CHAP.
whom  the  Eomans  derived  their  most  formidable
conceptions  of  the  Gaulish  warriors,  as  well  as  the
Cispadanes  generally,  were  of  the  Kymric  race.
The  lightness  of  complexion  ascribed  to  the  nation
was  also  characteristic  of  the  northern  rather  than
of  the  southern  population.  It  may  be  conjectured
that  a  change  of  habits  and  perhaps  of  climate  has
embrowned  a  skin  which  paled  under  the  shadow
of  primeval  forests 1 :  yet  even  now  the  darkest-
haired  Gael  has  not  the  olive  tint  of  the  Italian
and  Greek.  The  temper  of  the  Gauls  in  general
was  lively,  frivolous,  and  irascible,  inconstant  even
to  perfidy,  violent  in  language  and  gesture 2 ;  their
courage  was  daring  and  impetuous,  but  not  capable
of  enduring  resistance  and  reverses.3  At  the  same
time  they  were  noted  for  simplicity  and  good-hu-
mour, and  rushed  gaily  into  danger  without  arti-
fice or  malice.  But  their  great  defect  was  the
want  of  patience  and  true  earnestness,  and  of  the
moral  firmness  which  controls  a  prejudice  and  re-
frains from  a  gratification  for  the  sake  of  an  ulte-
rior result.  Their  want  of  self-control  and  self-

1  Arnold,  Hist,  of  Rome,  i.  529.

2  The spirit of  bravado for  which  the  Gauls  were remarkable
(cnrti\r]Tai  de  Kal  avarariKol Kal  Ttrpayydrm'evoi  VTrap^ovffi. Diod.  Sic.
v.  31.)  is  aptly  illustrated  by  the  reply  of  their  chieftains  to  the  vain-
glorious question  of  Alexander  the  Great. After  exhibiting  before
them  a  great  display  of  his  magnificence  and  power,  he  ended  by  de-
manding of  them,  What  was  the  thing  in  the  world  they  were  most
afraid  of? "  We  fear  nothing,"  they  replied,  "  except  it  be  lest  the
sky  fall." Strab.  vii.  3. ;  compare  Posid.  ap.  Athen.  iv.  40. ;  .ZElian.
xii.  23.

3  Tac.  Agric.  11.,  comparing  the  Gauls  and  Britons,  says  of  both:
"  In  deposcendis  periculis  eadem  audacia,  et,  ubi  advenere,  in  detrec-
tandis  eadem  formido."

268  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

CHAP,  respect  was  manifested  in  the  brutal  sensuality  to
'  which  they  were  addicted.  It  may  be  guessed
that  the  worst  of  their  vices  disgraced  those  prin-
cipally who  came  in  contact  with  the  sickly  re-
finement of  the  Greek  settlers :  but  even  the
over-civilized  nations  of  the  South  affected  to  be
shocked  at  their  enormity.  The  Gauls  exhibited
docility  in  learning  and  considerable  aptitude  for
practical  avocations.  They  carried  on  commerce
in  various  articles  of  manufacture ;  and,  though
their  coinage  was  rude  in  execution,  we  know  that
the  art  of  working  metals  was  in  extensive  use
among  them.  They  were  acute  in  intellect,  and
curious  in  speculation,  though  they  never  produced
a  spontaneous  literature.  But  their  intercourse
with  Rome  gave  a  new  stimulus  to  their  genius ;
and  under  the  empire  the  cities  of  Gaul  were
hardly  second  to  any  as  seats  of  learning  and
schools  of  rhetoric.

Population  The  spirit  of  careless  exaggeration,  which  was
wont  to  regard  the  desert  region  of  the  North  as
the  teeming  parent  of  innumerable  nations,  has
vanished  before  the  calculations  of  experience  and
reason ;  and  it  will  be  readily  allowed  that  at  least
one  half  of  Gaul  was  occupied  in  the  time  of
Caesar  by  unsettled  and  scanty  tribes,  who  aban-
doned a  vast  proportion  of  their  territory  to  the
barrenness  of  nature,  while  in  the  remnant  which
they  professed  to  cultivate  they  barely  scratched
the  soil.  If  the  numbers  of  their  fighting  men
are  represented  as  enormous,  we  must  remember
that  war  was  the  only  occupation  of  the  people
of  the  North,  and  that  at  least  a  fourth  of  each

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  269

nation  was  ready  at  any  moment  to  start  up  in  CHAP.
arms.1  In  the  South  the  manners  of  the  people
approached  much  nearer  to  those  of  civilized  life,
and  the  richness  of  the  soil  was  developed  by  a
due  application  of  labour.  A  calculation  of  the
entire  population  has  been  made  for  the  period  of
the  fourth  century  of  our  era  upon  grounds  which
apparently  deserve  confidence,  and  the  result  gives
a  total  amount  of  ten  millions  and  a  half.2  At
that  period  the  country  had  been  for  some  time
exposed  to  the  ravages  of  barbarian  invasion,  and
the  growth  of  the  population  had  doubtless  been
checked  by  a  long  term  of  misgovernment.  Never-
theless, it  would  be  preposterous  to  suppose  that
the  semi-barbarous  Gauls  of  Caesar's  age  approached
at  all  nearly  to  that  number.  Ca?sar  himself
boasted,  as  we  learn  from  Plutarch3,  that  he  had
combated  three  millions  of  men ;  and  in  this  round
number  we  may  conjecture,  from  the  ideas  of  the
time,  that  he  meant  to  comprehend  the  whole  male
population4  of  the  hostile  states.  If,  on  the  one

1  When  the  whole  mass  of  the  Helvetic  tribes  migrated  to  the
amount  of  368,000  souls,  92,000  men  were  capable  of  bearing  arms.
Caes.  B.  C.  i.  29. Caesar  assures us  that  he  saw the  precise  data
from  which  this  enumeration  was  made. In  the  Pannonian  revolt
the  total  number  of  the  insurgent  tribes  is  stated  generally  at  800,000,
that  of  the  warriors  at  200,000. Veil.  ii.  110.

2  Bureau  de  la  Malle,  Econ.  Pol.  des  Romains,  i.  301.;  Duruy,  Hist,
des  Pomains,  ii.  409.

3  Plut.  Cces.  15.,  who,  however,  evidently  interprets  the  statement
literally.

4  The  Roman  census  noticed  only  the  males  capable  of  bearing
arms,  or  about  one  fourth  of  the  population ;  but  in  Caesar's  time  the
enumeration  of  the  plebs  urbana  who  received  largesses  comprised  all
above  ten  years,  and  was  perhaps  understood  popularly  to  embrace
the  whole  of  the  male  sex,  to  whom  it  was  actually  extended  by  Au-
gustus at  a  later  period.  (See  Dion.  Ii.  21. ;  Suet.  Oct.  41.)

270  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP  hand,  the  tribes  of  Germans  and  Britons  whom
Caesar  met  in  the  field  are  to  be  deducted  from
this  calculation,  we  have  to  add  the  inhabitants  of
the  Province,  on  the  other,  in  order  to  obtain  the
number  of  the  whole  Gaulish  people,  which  we  may
fairly  conclude  to  have  reached  about  six  millions
at  the  date  of  his  invasion.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  271

CHAP.  VI.

THE  SUEVI  ENTER  GAUL,  AND  ESTABLISH  THEMSELVES  IN  THE
TERRITORY  OF  THE  SEQUANI.  —  THE  ALLIANCE  OF  THE  RE-
PUBLIC SOLICITED  BY  BOTH  THE  GAULS  AND  GERMANS.

MOVEMENT  AMONG  THE  HELVETII  :  THEY  THREATEN  TO

ENTER  THE  ROMAN  PROVINCE:  CAESAR  LEAVES  ROME,  AND
ASSUMES  HIS  COMMAND  IN  GAUL  :  REPELS  THE  INVASION  OF
THE  HELVETII  :  FOLLOWS  THEM  INTO  THE  TERRITORY  OF  THE
^EDUl:  DEFEATS  AND  COMPELS  THEM  TO  RETURN  TO  THEIR

OWN COUNTRY. CAESAR ADVANCES AGAINST THE SUEVI  :

NEGOTIATES  WITH  THEIR  KING  ARIOVISTUS  :  OBTAINS  A
COMPLETE  VICTORY,  AND  EXPELS  THE  GERMANS  FROM  GAUL.
—  CAESAR'S  FIRST  CAMPAIGN,  A.U.  696.  B.C.  58.

AT  the  period  at  which  we  have  now  arrived  in CHAP.
the  contest  between  the  Gauls  and  Romans  a  third VL

power  comes  into  action,  one  of  which  we  have  The
already  caught  indistinct  glimpses,  but  which,  from
this  time  forward,  is  destined  to  be  seldom  long  Suevi-
removed  from  our  observation.  The  independence
of  Northern  and  Central  Gaul  is  now  threatened,
not  only  by  the  crafty  ambition  of  the  South,  but
more  directly  by  impetuous  assaults  from  the
opposite  quarter  also.  The  banks  of  the  Ehine
were  tinged  with  a  deeper  shade  of  barbarism  than
the  countries  that  lay  further  to  the  west.  On
the  left,  several  offshoots,  as  we  have  seen,  from
the  Teutonic  family  were  already  settled.  It  was
only  within  a  late  period  that  these  immigrations
had  taken  place,  and  the  stream  of  German  inva-
sion still  continued  to  pour  in  at  intervals.  The
Suevi,  a  very  formidable  clan,  were  now  hovering

272  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  on  the  right  bank,  impatiently  awaiting  an  op-
portunity of  following  in  the  steps  of  their  pre-
decessors. These  savage  warriors  were  unac-
quainted even  with  the  rudiments  of  civilized  life.1
Their  polity  was  simply  the  military  supremacy  of
the  strongest  and  bravest.  They  neither  built
towns  nor  cultivated  land,  but  dwelt  in  temporary
encampments,  sleeping  under  the  branches  of  trees
or  in  the  open  air,  using  their  forests  and  moun-
tains as  places  of  security,  and  wherever  they  were
unconfined  by  the  pressure  of  their  neighbours,
moving  periodically  from  spot  to  spot  in  restless
migration.  But  their  enterprizes  were  undertaken
rather  for  plunder  than  with  a  view  to  a  per-
manent change  of  abode,  and  they  were  not  in  the
habit  of  going  forth  to  war  with  their  wives  and
children,  betraying  in  that,  as  in  other  respects,  a
want  of  definite  purpose  which  marks  the  lowest
scale  in  human  progress.

Menacing In  the  year  of  Kome  693  the  forces  of  Ario-

the^uevif vistus,  the  king  of  the  Suevic  nation,  were  stand-

A.  u.  693. ing  on  £1^  (Jerman  side  of  the  middle  Rhine,  ready

to obey the  first invitation to cross  it.2 They

1  Some  figures  on  the  column  of  Trajan  (see  Fabretti,  Columna
Trajana,  p.  16.)  represent  the  mode  of  wearing  the  hair  adopted  by
this  people  and  their  kindred  tribes,  as  described  by  Tacitus  (Germ.
38.)  :  "  Insigne  gentis  obliquare  crinem  nodoque  substringere  ....
apud  Suevos  horrentem  capillum  retro  sequuntur." The  front  hair
is  gathered  back  in  a  large  knot  or  ball  on  the  top  of  the  forehead.

2  The  date  of  the  irruption  of  the  Suevi  is  not  fixed  by  the  autho-
rities.  A  passage  in  Ariovistus's  reply  to  Caesar,  B.  G.  i.  44. :  "  Neque
bello  Allobrogum  proximo  ^iEduos Romanis auxilium  tulisse,"  has
been  supposed  to  refer  to  the  campaign  against  the  Helvetii  on  the
frontier  of  the  Allobroges,  A.U.  696. But,  in  the  first  place,  the  Allo-
broges  took  no  part  in  that  war ;  and,  again,  the  -ZEdui  in  their  pros-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  273

formed  a  compact  body  of  warriors,  fifteen  thou-  CHAP.
sand  strong,  unencumbered  with  baggage  or  fol-
lowers, accustomed  to  a  life  of  unceasing  activity,
and  despising  every  appliance  of  luxury  or  comfort.
In  the  disturbed  state  of  the  interior  of  Gaul  at
that  moment,  such  a  summons  could  not  long  be
wanting.  The  JEdui  had  taken  advantage  of  their
commanding  position  to  oppress  the  neighbouring
states.  Their  rivals,  the  Arverni,  had  been  con-  Ascendancy

.  , .  .  .  _.  7  _  , .  . - - of  the  ^Edui

siderably  weakened  by  their  contests  with  the  in  central
Komans,  and  their  influence,  founded  upon  fear  c
rather  than  favour,  had  dwindled  away  as  rapidly
as  their  power.  The  latter  had  been  suffering  also
from  intestine  divisions,  one  of  their  nobility,
named  Celtillus,  having  attempted  to  usurp  supreme
authority  among  them.1  On  the  other  hand,  the
jEdui  had  been  received  into  strict  alliance  with
the  Romans  upon  terms  of  professed  equality.
They  were  proud  to  be  acknowledged  as  the  friends
and  brothers  of  the  illustrious  conquerors ;  but
the  levity  of  the  Gaulish  character  was  marked
by  their  perversely  holding  aloof  from  them,  when
their  aid  might  have  been  expected  against  the
revolt  of  the  Allobroges.2  They  wished  perhaps
to  parade  their  independence  before  the  eyes  of
the  Gauls  around  them,  who  doubtless  observed
with  jealousy  the  favour  in  which  they  were  held

trate  condition  could  not  have  given  any  assistance.  The  war,  there-
fore, with  the  Allobroges  must  have  been  that  of  the  year  692,  and
must  have  taken  place  before  the  -ZEdui  were  menaced  by  the  Suevi
and  their  allies.  Accordingly,  the  date  of  the  arrival  of  the  Germans
cannot  be  placed  earlier  than  693,  nor  the  reception  of  Divitiacus  at
Rome  before  the  end  of  that  year.

1  Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  4.

2  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  44. See  above.
VOL.  I.  T

274

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
VI.

The  Se-
quani  com-
plain of
their  ty-
ranny.

They  invite
the  Suevi
to  their
assistance,
throw  off
the  yoke  of
the  jEdui,
and  assume
the  leader-
ship of  the
Gaelic
tribes.

by  the  Romans.  But  the  republic  was  deeply  of-
fended, and  soon  found  an  occasion  for  showing  its
resentment.  The  Sequani  complained  bitterly  of
the  tyranny  of  the  JEdui,  who  had  imposed  heavy
tolls  on  the  navigation  of  the  Saone,  the  common
highway  for  the  commerce  of  both  nations  with  the
Province  and  the  coasts  of  the  Mediterranean.1
When  these  exactions  became  no  longer  tolerable,
the  injured  people  determined  to  shake  them  off  by
an  appeal  to  arms.  The  Arverni  also  were  easily
induced  to  unite  in  a  confederacy  against  their  an-
cient rivals ;  but  to  rise  against  the  JMui  was  to
brave  at  the  same  time  the  displeasure  of  the
Romans,  to  give  a  pretext  at  least  to  the  southern
invader  for  interfering  with  the  affairs  of  Central
Gaul.  It  was  to  secure  themselves  from  danger
in  this  quarter  that  the  allies  determined  to  give
the  Suevi  an  interest  in  their  defence.  The  re-
sources of  the  German  tribe  were  undefined  and
unknown,  but  their  proximity  was  imminent,  the
terror  of  their  name  was  great,  and  their  neigh-
bours made  the  fatal  mistake  of  fancying  that
they  could  counterbalance  the  hostility  of  Rome.

Accordingly,  Ariovistus  and  his  warriors  were
invited  within  the  Gaulish  territory,  and  they
readily  set  their  feet  upon  the  soil  of  the  Sequani.
The  Romans  at  the  moment  were  so  much  occu-
pied with  domestic  perils  that  they  could  pay  no
attention  to  this  important  movement.  Possibly
the  JEdui,  conscious  of  their  own  recent  treachery,
were  ashamed  to  invoke  their  assistance ;  perhaps
the  republic  was  well  pleased  to  leave  them  for

1  Strab.  iv.  3.

UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  275

once  to  fight  their  own  battle  upon  unequal  terms.  CHAP.
The  contest  quickly  terminated  in  their  complete
discomfiture,  and  the  conditions  which  they  were
compelled  to  accept  were  highly  disadvantageous
and  disgraceful.1  They  surrendered  the  children
of  their  nobility  to  the  Sequani  as  hostages,  and
swore  never  to  wage  war  for  their  recovery,  never
to  solicit  the  succour  of  the  Romans,  or  to  withhold
such  respect  and  submissive  behaviour  towards  their
triumphant  enemy  as  are  due  from  the  client  to
his  patron.  The  Sequani  affected  to  seize  the
honourable  pre-eminence  from  which  the  ^Edui
had  thus  fallen,  and  claimed  the  leadership  of  the
tribes  in  that  part  of  Gaul.

Among  the  JMui,  the  chief  magistrate,  or  ver-
gobret,  had  no  power  to  resist  the  national  will,  of
which  he  was  no  more  than  the  interpreter  and  assistance
organ.2  But  Divitiacus,  who  occupied  that  station,  Romans,
felt  acutely  the  dishonour  of  his  countrymen,  and
refused  to  submit  in  his  own  person  to  the  terms
in  which  the  multitude  acquiesced.  He  escaped
with  difficulty  beyond  the  frontiers,  and  took  re-
fuge in  Rome,  where  he  hoped  to  obtain  the  suc-
cour of  the  republic  for  the  recovery  of  the  honour
and  influence  of  his  nation.  Gaul  could  have  sent
no  man  more  fit  by  his  intellectual  cultivation  to

1  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  31.: "Cum  his  ^Eduos  eorumque  clientes semel
atque  iterum  armis  contendisse,  magnam  calamitatem  pulsos  accepisse,
omnem  nobilitatem,  omnem  senatum,  omnem  equitatum  amisisse."

2  Caesar  terms  this  magistrate  vergobretus,  which  Celtic  scholars
derive  from  the  words  ver-go-breith  ("  homme  de  jugement,"  O'Brien,
Thierry). He  was  elected  by  a  council  of  priests  and  nobles,  and
had  the  power  of  life  and  death. But  his  office  was only  annual
{B.  G.  i.  16.),  and  a  second  of  the same family  could  not  hold  it
during  the  lifetime  of  a  previous  occupant. (B.  G.  vii.  33.) '

T 2

276  HIST6RY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  command  for  her  the  respect  and  sympathy  of  a
civilized  people.  Divitiacus  belonged  to  the  Druidi-
cal  caste,  and  was  well  versed  in  all  the  lore  it
boasted.  As  an  expounder  of  the  mysteries  which
already  attracted  the  curiosity  of  the  Roman  sages,
his  society  was  peculiarly  agreeable  to  Cicero,  who
has  enshrined  in  his  immortal  pages  the  memory
of  their  friendly  intercourse.1  The  recommendation
of  so  illustrious  a  patron  secured  for  the  wanderer
of  the  North  more  than  ordinary  respect.  When
he  appeared  in  the  senate  to  plead  the  cause  of  his
countrymen,  the  allies  and  brothers  of  the  republic,
he  was  requested  to  take  his  seat  among  the  as-
sembled nobles.  But  this  honour  he  modestly
declined,  and  delivered  his  address  leaning  on  his
shield.2  Caesar,  who  took  an  interest  in  every
object  of  human  science,  no  less  than  in  the  affairs
of  state  to  which  he  had  been  regularly  trained,
engaged  in  an  intimacy  with  the  Gaulish  chieftain,
which  forms  one  of  the  most  pleasing  features  in
his  life  and  character  for  its  tenderness,  disin-
terestedness, and  fidelity.  It  was  in  all  proba-
bility from  conversation  with  Divitiacus,  who
became  his  constant  companion  in  his  Gallic  cam-
paigns, that  he  derived  a  great  part  of  the  ac-
quaintance he  manifests  with  the  history  and  in-

1  Cic.  de  Divin.  i.  41.

2  The  story  is  recorded  by  Eumenius,  a  native  of  Autun,  and  we
may  conjecture  that  it  was  preserved  traditionally  among  the  yEdui
( Gratiar.  Act.  Constant.  3.)  :  "  Princeps  JEduus  in  senatum  venit,  rem
docuit,  cum  quidem  oblato  consessu  minus  sibi  vindicasset  quam  da-
batur, scuto  innixus  peroravit." Livy  (xxxviii.  21.)  describes  the
Gaulish  shield  as  a  long,  narrow, and flat plank : "  Scuta longa,
cseterum  ad  amplitudinem  corporum  parum  lata,  et  ea  ipsa  plana,
male  tegebant  Gallos."

UNDER THE EMPIKE.  277

stitutions  of  his  adversaries.  But,  in  the  mean-  CHAP.
while,  the  simplicity  of  the  ^Eduan's  character  was
not  proof  against  the  seductions  of  Roman  refine-
ment. He  evidently  became  a  convert  to  the  views
and  sentiments  of  the  conquering  nation  ;  in  his  ad-
miration for  the  arts  and  sciences  which  flourished
in  the  metropolis  of  the  South,  he  gradually  forgot
the  ruder  virtues  of  his  own  countrymen ;  and
he  familiarized  himself  with  the  fatal  idea  that  a
foreign  dominion  might  exalt  and  ennoble  the
people  whom  it  enslaved.

But,  however  well  pleased  individuals  might  be
to  display  their  magnanimity  and  urbanity  before  suevi?
the  eyes  of  an  admiring  stranger,  the  government
had  too  many  anxious  cares  pressing  upon  it  to
decide  at  once  the  tenor  of  its  Gallic  policy.  The
Allobroges  had  just  been  subjugated,  but  their
resistance  had  cost  blood  and  treasure ;  moreover,
the  ^Edui  had  done  nothing  for  their  allies  towards
hastening  the  termination  of  the  struggle.  Mean-
while, the  course  of  affairs  in  the  city  was  evidently
leading  to  the  entire  subjection  of  the  republic  to
the  will  of  an  odious  triumvirate,  and  whichever
of  the  three  chiefs  should  claim  the  conduct  of  a
new  war  would  acquire  thereby  a  fearful  pre-
eminence. As  far,  therefore,  as  the  senate  was
concerned,  the  solicitations  of  Divitiacus  fell  upon
unwilling  ears.  Moreover,  Ariovistus,  on  his  part,
had  not  been  idle.  He  also  solicited  an  alliance
with  the  Roman  people  ;  and  his  representations,
backed  as  they  were  by  so  powerful  a  force
quartered  almost  on  the  frontier  of  their  posses-
sions, were  not  without  effect.  Anxious  to  avoid

T 3

278  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  war  at  any  price,  the  senate  temporized,  and  en-
'  couraged  the  German  to  make  his  appearance  in
person.1  While  Divitiacus  was  still  at  Rome,  the
government  bestowed  upon  his  rival  the  titles  of
friend  and  ally,  and  presented  him  with  magni-
ficent tokens  of  its  regard.2  If  the  senate  could
have  had  its  own  way,  it  would  have  continued  to
balance  the  two  parties  one  against  the  other,  and
tried  by  these  means  to  prevent  aggression  on
The  repub-  either  side.  But  it  was  with  the  people,  after  all,
that  the  determination  of  the  matter  really  lay  ;

sMe  o?the an(^  w^en  they  insisted,  shortly  afterwards,  upon

jFAui. the  appointment  of  Caesar  to  his  Gallic  command,

with  such  extensive  and  permanent  powers,  it  was

a  distinct  declaration  of  the  national  will  in  favour

of  a  decisive  and  warlike  policy  beyond  the  Alps.

This  declaration,  however,  was  not  made  till  the

progress  of  events called more  imperatively  for

Roman  interference,  and  Csesar's  position  was  such

as  enabled  him  to  take  the  conduct  of  it.

The  se-  Meanwhile,  the  Suevi  became  enamoured  of  the

oppressed charms  of  their  new  habitation, its  climate,  fer-

by  their tilitv,  and  cultivation. Not  less  than  one-third  of

(Jerman  J  '

allies.  the  territory  of  the  Sequani  had  been  surrendered
to  them,  and  as  it  was  too  extensive  for  their  own
occupation,  they  introduced  fresh  hordes  of  their
countrymen  into  it,  till  their  force  amounted  to
one  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  warriors.3  The
Sequani,  insulted  and  harassed,  fled  from  their

1  Plut.  Cces.  19.:  KatVoi  TOV  (3acn\sa  Trporepov  avrdSv  *Apio€vffTov  iv

2  Gees.  B.  G.  i.  43.  :  "  Eex  appellatus  a  senatu  et  amicus,  munera
amplissima  missa."

3  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  31.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  279

villages  and  betook  themselves  to  their  places  of CHAP.

VI

defence,  while  the  ^Edui,  suffering  probably  still  '
greater  oppression,  rose  in  arms  against  the  savage
intruders.  But  Ariovistus  was  not  to  be  easily
dislodged.  According  to  the  practice  of  his  coun-
trymen he  fortified  himself  in  a  morass  on  the
upper  Saone,  and  commanded  the  country  from  his
inaccessible  fastness.  Secure  in  his  position,  he
repeated  and  increased  his  demands,  requiring
another  third  part  of  the  territory  of  his  hosts,  in
order  to  settle  there  a  new  colony  of  Harudes  from
beyond  the  Rhine.  He  interposed  to  prevent  any
restoration  of  hostages  between  the  rival  nations,
whose  mutual  animosity  he  strove  by  all  means  to
foster  for  his  own  purposes,  while,  as  far  as  his
power  extended,  his  rapacity  and  cruelty  raged
unchecked.

The  growing  resistance  of  the  neighbouring  na-  Restiess-

V? ,  -, ,  « ,,  ness  of  the

tions  was  suddenly  paralysed  by  one  of  those  pe-
riodical  migrations  which  were  wont  to  spread
confusion  throughout  the  whole  land.  The  Hel-  .

0  emigration

vetn,  who  inhabited  a  great  part  of  modern  Swit-  into  Gaui.
zerland,  had  grown  impatient  of  the  narrow  limits
in  which  they  were  crowded  together,  and  harassed
at  the  same time by the  encroachments  of  the
advancing German tide.1 The Alps and Jura

1  The  account  which  was  commonly  given  of  this  people  and
their  migration  is  that  they  were  a  pastoral  tribe,  abounding  in  wealth,
and  of  a  peaceful  disposition;  it  was  the  example  of  the  Cimbri
and  Teutones,  with  whom  they  came  in  contact,  that  corrupted  their
natural  simplicity,  and  suggested  visions  of  conquest  and  rapine.
Strab.  vii.  2.,  following  Posidonius.  But  Caesar  says  they  were  the
bravest  of  the  Gauls,  from  their  constant  warfare  with  the  Germans  on
their  frontier.  Caes.  B.  G.i.l.

T 4

280  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, formed  barriers  to  their  diffusion  on  the  south  and

VT

west,  and  the  population  thus  confined  outgrew
the  scanty  means  of  support  afforded  by  its  moun-
tain valleys.  One  swarm  had  indeed  separated
from  the  main  body  not  many  years  before,  uniting
itself  with  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones,  and  pene-
trating into  Gaul  by  the  northern  outlet  of  their
territory.  But  the  German  tribes,  whose  increasing
numbers  had  closed  against  them  the  old  Gaulish
route  to  the  east  of  Europe,  had  now  settled  them-
selves on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine  also  ;  and  the
Helvetii,  who  felt  some  contempt  perhaps  for  their
Gallic  neighbours,  were  the  less  disposed  to  assail
an  enemy  so  formidable  as  the  Suevi,  and  at  the
same  time  so  poor.  The  western  outlet,  therefore,
where  the  Rhone  rushes  out  of  the  lake  of  Ge-
neva and  threads  a  narrow  defile  on  its  way  into
France,  was  the  point  to  which  their  eyes  were  di-
rected. Divided  into  a  number  of  small  cantons,
they  owned  the  supremacy  of  no  single  chieftain  ;
but  one,  by  name  Orgetorix,  possessed  at  this  time
the  principal  influence  among  them,  and  was  am-
bitious of  placing  himself  at  their  head.  His  sug-
gestion that  the  entire  nation  should  transplant
itself  to  a  foreign  soil  was  received  with  universal
approbation.  He  proposed  that  it  should  march
in  one  mass  into  the  heart  of  Gaul,  promised  it
an  easy  victory  over  the  most  martial  and  powerful
of  its  opponents,  and  dominion  over  the  whole
Gaulish  people.  He  hoped  to  rise  himself  to  un-
disputed sovereignty  over  his  own  countrymen,
and  through  them  to  rule  over  the  whole  breadth
of  the  land  from  the  Alps  to  the  ocean.1

1  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  2.;  Dion,  xxxviii.  31.;  Plut.  Cces.  18.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  281

This  enterprize,  extravagant  as  it  may  appear,  CHAP.
was  no  more  than  what  the  Cimbri  might  in  all
probability  have  accomplished,  had  they  kept  it
steadily  in  view,  and  at  a  later  period  it  was  not
the  mere  dream  of  a  visionary.  Orgetorix  did  death-
not  look  merely  to  the  employment  of  arms,  how-
ever much  he  relied  upon  the  fancied  superiority
of  his  countrymen  in  war.  He  was  well  ac-
quainted with  the  state  of  Central  Gaul,  and  the
political  jealousies  of  individuals  and  classes  which
constituted  its  weakness.  He  intrigued  with  am-
bitious chieftains  among  the  Mdui  and  Sequani  for
aid  and  encouragement.  Dumnorix,  the  brother
of  Divitiacus,  who  had  succeeded  him  in  the  office
of  vergobret  \  and  was  anxious  to  extend  the  au-
thority and  duration  of  his  office,  was  won  over
by  the  crafty  Helvetian  by  promises  of  assistance
and  the  bribe  of  his  daughter  in  marriage.  Cas-
ticus,  the  son  of  Catarnantaledes,  late  king  of  the
Sequani,  had  failed  in  obtaining  the  succession
upon  his  father's  death,  and  was  burning  with  in-
dignation at  the  affront.  Similar  views  of  aggran-
dizement were  opened  to  him  also,  and  his  co-
operation promptly  secured.  But  in  the  mean
while  the  Helvetii  began  to  suspect  the  personal
views  which  their  champion  was  harbouring  under
the  semblance  of  zeal  for  the  public  good.  He
was  summoned  to  attend  before  the  popular  as-

1  It  has  been  mentioned  already,  on  the  authority  of  Csesar  (B.  C,
vii.  33.),  that  it  was  illegal  for  a  second  personage  of  the  same  family
to  hold  this  or  any  other  political  office  during  the  lifetime  of  the
prior  occupant.  If  this  statement  is  correct,  it  would  seem  that
Dumnorix,  who  was  a  popular  favourite,  had  already  succeeded  in
getting  the  law  relaxed  in  his  behalf.

282  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, sembly,  and  challenged  to  defend  himself  against
.  the  charge  of  aspiring  to  the  tyranny. Accord-

ing to  the  custom  of  the  barbarians,  who  seem
never  to  have  contemplated  the  possible  innocence
of  an  accused  party,  he  was  to  plead  his  cause  in
chains,  and,  if  unsuccessful,  the  penalty  was  death
by  fire.  Orgetorix  accepted  the  conditions,  and
the  day  was  appointed :  in  the  interval,  however,
he  collected  all  his  friends  and  dependants  to  the
number  of  ten  thousand,  and  effected  his  escape.
The  nation  flew  to  arms  to  recover  the  person  of
the  fugitive;  but  his  sudden  death  arrested  their
indignation.  Disappointment  and  despair,  it  was
rumoured,  had  driven  the  guilty  intriguer  to  put
an  end  to  his  existence.

prepara-  The loss, however, of  their principal  adviser

caused  no  change  in  the  counsels  of  the  Helve-
tians. They  sought  no  alliance  with  discontented
chieftains  in  the  neighbouring  states,  but,  con-
fident in  their  unassisted  strength,  determined
calmly  to  abandon  their  homes,  and  trust  to  their
own  fortune  and  valour  to  find  themselves,  with
their  women  and  children,  a  more  desirable  resi-
dence elsewhere.  They  devoted  the  next  two
years  to  making  the  necessary  preparations,  and
to  collecting  a  sufficient  store  of  provisions.  The
third  was  destined  for  the  enterprize  itself.  Mean-
while, they  extended  their  design  by  embracing  in
their  league  the  Kauraci,  the  Tulingi1,  and  the

1  Augusta  Rauracorum  is  the  modern  Bale.  The  position  of  the
Tulingi  is  quite  uncertain,  as  they  are  not  mentioned  elsewhere.
See  Thierry,  Gaulois,  n.  v. ;  Le  Deist,  Cesar,  ind.  in  voc. ;  Casar,
ed.  Lemaire.  Stuhlingen  is  on  the  German  side  of  the  Rhine  near

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  283

Latobrigi. The  next  point  to  be  decided  regarded CHAP.
the  precise  course  which  they  should  take. Two

routes  might  conduct  them  westward  into  Gaul:  choice  be.
the  one  following  the  defile  of  the  Ehone  along  ^InTo
the  north  bank  of  that  river,  and  thus  penetrating  Gaul-
into  the  country  of  the  Sequani ;  the  other  lying
to  the  south,  and  crossing  the  territory  of  the  Al-
lobroges  in  the  direction  of  the  Province.1  The
former  of  these  roads  was  one  of  the  utmost  diffi-
culty from  the  nature  of  the  country.  For  many
miles  the  mountains  descend  almost  perpendicu-
larly into  the  torrent  below.  Modern  engineers
have  succeeded  in  making  a  road  along  the  brow
of  these  cliffs;  but  the  ease  with  which  the  tra-
veller now  winds  round  their  projecting  precipices,
and  above  the  most  tremendous  abysses,  serves  to
enhance  his  conception  of  the  perils  which  must
have  attended  a  march  among  them  before  these
obstacles  were  overcome.  The  emigrants  soon  de-
cided that  this  route  was  impracticable  in  the  face
of  an  enemy.  The  other  alternative  offered  a  pas-
sage the  difficulties  of  which  might  not  be  insur-
mountable. The  Ehone  might  be  crossed  either
by  the  bridge,  which  already  existed  at  Geneva 2,
the  frontier  town  of  the  Allobroges,  in  possession
at  this  period  of  a  Eoman  garrison,  or,  if  this  was

Schaffhausen.  Walckenaer  places  the  Latobrigi  at  Breggen,  near
the  sources  of  the  Danube  (ii.  272.).  Tacitus,  it  will  be  remembered,
extends  the  territory  of  the  Helvetii  to  the  Hercynian  forest  {Germ.
28.)-

1  Csesar,  B.  G.  i.  6.

2  Cses.  /.  c. It  is  said  that  the  name  of  this  place  does  not  occur
again  for  a  period  of  four  hundred  years  ;  but  inscriptions  have  been
found  there  which  sufficiently  prove  that  it  was  a  place  of  importance
under  the  Romans. Walckenaer,  Geogr.  des  Gaules,  i.  263.

284  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  closed  against  them,  the  stream  presented  fords
'  which  might  be  used  by  bold  men  accustomed  to
stem  the  torrents  of  the  mountains.1  The  Helve-
tians determined  to  force  their  way  through  the
country  of  the  Allobroges,  and  to  trust  either  to
arms  or  persuasion  to  obtain  a  passage  through
the  Province  and  across  the  Rhone  into  the  centre
of  Gaul.  They  indulged  a  hope  that  the  people  of
the  country  would  be  eager,  from  their  known
hostility  to  the  Romans,  to  afford  every  facility  to
a  transient  invader.  But  the  favourable  moment
had  passed ;  the  decisive  victory  of  Pomptinus  had
cowed  the  spirits  of  the  Allobroges,  and  their  ter-
ritory, in  the  language  of  the  republic,  was  already
pacified.2

have  seen  that  CaBsar,  on  the  expiration  of
obtained the government  of  the

diate  neigh-  two  Gauls,  together  with  Illyricum ;  and  that  the
of  Rome,  people  were  so  strongly  impressed  with  the  military
>.u.  696.  importance  of  these  provinces  in  the  impending
crisis,  as  to  confer  the  command  upon  him  for  a
term  of  five  years.  The  enterprizes  already  medi-
tated by  their  barbarian  foes  were  not  yet  quite
ripe  for  execution.  The  proconsul  was  content  to
watch  them  from  a  distance  during  the  first  months
of  the  year.  The  development  of  his  own  political
schemes  still  required  his  proximity  to  Rome ;  he
was  engaged  in  abetting  the  revolutionary  pro-
ceedings of  the  popular  tribune,  and  overawing
the  deliberations  of  the  nobles  by  fixing  his  camp

1  Caes.  /.  c. :  "  Nonnullis  locis  vado  transitur."

2  Cic.  de  Prov.  Cons.  13.;  Caes.  1.  c. :  "Allobroges  qui  nuper  pacati
erant."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  285

before  the  gates  of  the  city,  at  the  same  time  that  CHAP.
he  communicated  with  his  lieutenants  beyond  the
Alps,  and  kept  a  vigilant  eye  upon  the  movements
of  the  Helvetic  tribes.  The  course  of  three  months
saw  the  success  of  all  his  schemes.  Domitius  and
Memmius,  in  the  interest  of  the  nobles,  compelled
him  to  defend  the  acts  of  his  consulship  before  the
hostile  tribunal  of  the  senate,  from  which,  however,
he  extorted  an  entire  ratification  of  them.1  The
triumph  of  Clodius  over  the  nobility  was  also
completely  effected  in  this  short  interval.  Cicero,
who  had  refused  to  accept  the  proconsul's  pro-
tection, was  on  the  point  of  flying  from  the
vengeance  of  his  enemy.2  The  power  of  the  trium-
virate was  established  upon  an  unassailable  basis,
while  Ca3sar  had  secured  by  the  marriage  of  his
daughter  an  ascendancy  over  the  spirit  of  his  rival
Pompeius.

At  this  moment  the  news  arrived  at  the  camp  of
the  proconsul  that  the  cloud  which  had  so  long  been

gathering  on  the  frontiers  was  at  last  fully  charged  and  reaches

.  J  & his  army  on

and  about  to  burst. Ine  Koman  province,  it  was  the  Rhone.
added,  was  the  quarter  upon  which  the  first  fury
of  the  tempest  was  destined  to  break. The  Helvetii,
having  completed  their  preparations,  appointed  the
twenty-eighth  day  of  March  for  the  meeting  of

1  Schol.  Bob.  in  Oral,  pro  Sest.  p.  297.  :  "  Ipsius  Csesaris  orationes
contra  hos  exstant  quibus  et  sua  acta  defendit  et  illos  insectatur."
Comp.  Suet.  Jul  23.  73.

2  Caesar  and  Cicero  must  have  left  Rome  almost  on  the  same  day.
Cicero  had  reached  Lucania  April  8  (Ep.  ad  Ait.  iii.  2.). This  date
coincides  with  April  27  of  the  reformed  calendar. Plutarch  (Cces.  14.)
says,  Kaia-ap  ov  -rrportpov  i%fj\dtv  im  rrjv  (TTpaniav  r\  Karaaraffiaaai  KIKE-
pbjva  [itTa  K/\o>c?tou,  Kal  avvffi€a\^v  tK  TfJ£  'iraXiag. Comp.  Abeken,  Cic.
in  seinen  Brief  en,  p.  111.;  Fischer,  Mm.  Zeittafeln,  p.  239.

286  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  their  collective  forces  at  the  western  outlet  of  the
_____  lake  Lemanus.1  The  whole  population  of  the
assembled  tribes  amounted  to  three  hundred  and
sixty-eight  thousand  souls,  including  the  women
and  children ;  the  number  that  bore  arms  was
ninety-two  thousand.2  They  cut  themselves  off
from  the  means  of  retreat  by  giving  ruthlessly  to
the  flames  every  city  and  every  village  of  their
land ;  twelve  of  the  one  class  and  four  hundred  of
the  other  were  thus  sacrificed,  and  with  them  all
their  superfluous  stores,  their  furniture,  arms,  and
implements.  Cassar's  levies  were  still  incomplete  ;
he  left  his  camp  with  only  a  few  attendants,  and
reached  the  Rhone  in  eight  days,  at  the  point
where  the  legion  which  defended  the  Province  was
awaiting  his  arrival.3  He  immediately  broke  down
the  bridge  at  Geneva4,  thus  placing  a  strong  na-
tural barrier  between  the  colony  and  the  foe ;  for
the  stream  which  rushes  from  the  lake  has  all  the
violence  of  a  mountain  torrent,  with  the  volume  of

1  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  6. March  28,  A.U.  696= April  16,  B.C.  58.

2  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  29.;  Plut.  Cces.  18.  makes  the  whole  number  some-
what less,  but  states  the  amount  of  the  fighting-men  at  one  hundred
and  ninety  thousand. But  compare  what  has  been  said,  p.  269.

3  Caesar's  words  are,  "  quam  maximis  potest  itineribus  in  Galliam
ulteriorem  contendit,"  which  leaves  it  uncertain  whether  he  marched
with  his  troops,  or  went  alone  for  greater  expedition. Plutarch,  who
however  is  to  be  read  with  great  caution,  says  that  he  effected  the
transit  in  eight  days:  'Oycioatoc;  kirl  TOV  'PoSavov  r]\9tv. The  march  of
a  Roman  army  was  ordinarily  twenty  miles  a  day  (Veget.  i.  10.).  The
distance  from  Rome  to  Geneva  could  not  have  been  less  than  six
hundred  miles. Cicero  (pro  Quint.  25.)  asserts  that  the  distance  to
the  territory  of  the  Segusiani (Lyons)  was  seven  hundred  Roman
miles.

4  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  6. :  "  Ex  eo  oppido  pons  ad  Helvetios  pertinet  ....
pontem  jubet  rescindi."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  287

the  outlet  of  a  vast  reservoir.  The  Helvetians  CHAP.
were  startled  at  the  proconsul's  sudden  appearance,
and  his  energetic  determination  to  forbid  their
progress.  They  deemed  it  necessary  to  try  con-
ciliation. They  despatched  a  deputation  to  the
Roman  quarters,  with  instructions  to  represent
their  designs  as  innocent  and  peaceable,  and  to
request  a  passage  through  the  territories  of  the
republic,  that  they  might  explore  some  land  of
refuge  in  the  farthest  extremities  of  the  west.
They  bound  themselves  in  the  most  solemn  mari-
ner to  respect  the  property  of  the  provincials  on
their  march.  But  it  was  not  consistent  with  the
policy  of  the  Roman  government  to  allow  of  such
manifold  disturbance  as  the  contemplated  move-
ment would  produce.  The  shock  of  the  proposed
migration,  by  breaking  up  existing  combinations,
would  dispossess  the  republic  of  all  the  advantages
she  enjoyed,  and  compel  her  to  enter  upon  fresh
intrigues  and  reconstruct  her  policy.  But  Csesar
makes  no  profession  of  looking  so  far  ;  he  merely
says  that  he  distrusted  the  faith  of  the  Helvetians ;
and,  remembering  their  defeat  of  Cassius  and  the
disgrace  of  a  Roman  army,  which  they  had  passed
under  the  yoke,  regarded  them  as  inveterate  ene-
mies to  whom  no  favour  should  be  shown,  and
from  whom  no  moderation  could  be  expected.

The  Helvetii  had  assembled  on  the  right  bank  TheHeive-
of  the  Rhone, and awaited the  return  of  their  tempt&to
envoys  from  the  Roman  camp. In  order  to  gain  *™J  ^
time  for  the  arrival  of  the  reinforcements  which  he  are  repulsed,
expected,  the  proconsul  appointed them  to  come
to  him  again  to  receive  his  answer  on  the  thirteenth

288  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  of  April.1  During  the  interval  he  set  his  soldiers
VI>  to  work  with  the  spade  and  pickaxe,  and  drew  a
long  line  of  ditch  and  rampart  from  the  extremity
of  the  lake  along  the  left  bank  of  the  river  to  the
point  where  it  rushes  into  the  gorge  of  the  Jura.
The  skill  and  energy  of  the  Roman  legionary  suf-
ficed to  complete  this  fortification,  about  fifteen
miles  in  length,  in  the  course  of  the  few  days
allotted  to  the  task.  On  the  ides  of  April  the
Helvetians  returned,  and  renewed  their  application
for  leave  to  pass  through  the  Province.  Csesar
was  now  prepared  with  his  reply.  He  declared
that  the  history  of  the  republic  afforded  no  prece-
dent for  such  a  concession,  and  declined  to  yield  to
their  demand.  The  Helvetii  were  not  discouraged
by  this  refusal.  They  made  some  hasty  prepara-
tions, and  resolved  to  force  the  passage  of  the
river.  The  fords  in  so  impetuous  a  stream  were
extremely  difficult  and  dangerous;  nevertheless,
they  made  several  attempts  to  cross,  both  by  day
and  night,  sometimes  by  plunging  into  the  river,
sometimes  with  armaments  of  boats  and  rafts.
But  the  rampart  running  close  along  the  edge  of
the  stream  was  defended  with  military  skill,  every
attempt  to  gain  a  footing  on  the  left  bank  was
defeated,  and  the  assailants  were  compelled  ulti-

1  The  Helvetii  met  on  the  28th  of  March,  but  it  is  not  said  that
they  sent  their  deputation  on  that  day,  nor  is  it  likely  that  they  should
have  done  so  without  some  little  delay  for  consultation.  The  author
of  the  Precis  des  Guerres  de  Cesar,  which  pretends  to  be  written
from  Napoleon's  dictation  to  his  attendant  Marchand  at  St.  Helena,
calculates  the  extent  of  the  work  performed  by  Caesar's  legion,  and
estimates  the  time  requisite  at  from  ten  to  fifteen  days  (p.  34.).

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  289

mately  to  abandon  all  hope  of  making  good  their CHAP.
exit  in  this  direction.1

To  skirt  the  right  bank  between  the  river  and  They  adopt
the  mountains  became now  the  more  feasible  of
the  two  alternatives; but  this  could only  be  ef-

fected  by  securing the goodwill of  the natives.  the  Rhone.
The  Sequani  had  declared  their  resolution  to  de-  creases  his
fend  to  the  utmost  this  access  to  their  territory,  follows""1
and  had hitherto refused  to  entertain any pro-  them-
posals of  negotiation with the intruders. But
Dumnorix  had  been  gained  over  by  Orgetorix  to
the  cause  of  the  Helvetii. The  death  of  his  ad-
viser had  not  damped  the  ambitious  hopes  which
the  ^Eduan  had  been  led  to  conceive,  and  he  was
willing  to  offer  any  assistance  towards  an  enter-
prize  upon  which  he  grounded  his  views  of  per-
sonal  aggrandizement. By his intervention the
Sequani  were  induced  to  grant  the  Helvetii  the
favour  they  desired, upon  receiving  pledges for
their  peaceable  behaviour. The  migrating  hordes
again declared that they had no other wish
but  to  obtain  a  passage through  the  country  of
the  Sequani  and -ZEdui, that  they  might  finally
settle  themselves  in the  western parts of  Gaul.
They  pointed  out  the  country  of  the  Santones  as

i  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  8.  Polysenus  has  collected  in  his  Strategematicon
numerous  stories  respecting  Caesar's  manoeuvres  which  are  contra-
dicted by  the  simple  narrative  of  Caesar  himself.  On  this  occasion
he  pretends  that  the  Roman  general  allowed  a  great  part  of  the  Hel-
vetians to  cross  the  river,  and  then  attacked  and  destroyed  them
while  they  were  reposing  from  their  fatigues.  Cassar  could  not  have
failed  to  mention  this  if  it  had  been  the  fact  ;  but  it  is  moreover
inconsistent  with  his  account  of  the  defences  he  threw  up.  The
stories  told  by  Polyaenus  are  generally  unworthy  of  credit.  Polyaen.
Strat.  viii.  23.

VOL.  I.  U

290  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  that  in  which  they  proposed  to  establish  their
'  sovereignty.  The  Romans,  however,  considered
that  the  settlement  of  so  restless  and  warlike  a
people  to  the  north  of  the  Garonne,  on  which  river
some  of  their  own  most  flourishing  districts  lay 1,
would  be  a  source  of  great  inconvenience  and
danger.  Not  much  was  to  be  expected  from  the
resistance  which  the  .ZEdui  might  be  disposed  to
make,  nor  had  Caesar  yet  sufficient  strength  at
hand  to  follow  the  wanderers  on  their  track,  and
give  efficient  reinforcements  to  the  efforts  of  his
allies.  For  the  moment  he  was  obliged  to  leave
them  unmolested,  while  he  hastened  in  person  into
Italy  to  collect  and  expedite  the  movement  of  ad-
ditional troops.  He  left  T.  Labienus,  a  distin-
guished officer,  whose  merits  will  come  frequently
under  our  notice,  to  defend  the  rampart  he  had
erected,  while  he  urged  forward  by  his  own  pre-
sence the  levy  of  two  fresh  legions.  Three  others
he  carried  off  from  their  station  at  Aquileia,
and  as  soon  as  he  had  thus  assembled  a  force  of
five  legions,  he  hurried  back  into  Gaul  by  the
route  of  the  Cottian  Alps.2  He  had  chosen  this
line  as  the  most  direct  for  the  point  he  had  in

1  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  10.:  "Non  longe  a  Tolosatium  finibus,  ....  locis
patentibus  et  maxime  frumentariis." Dion,  xxxviii.  32.

2  By  the  passage  of  the  Mont  Genevre  to  Brianc,on. The  neigh-
bouring route  by  Susa,  the  Mont  Cenis  and  the  valley  of  the  Arc  was
first  rendered  practicable  by  the  native  chief  Cottius  in  the  time  of
Augustus. It  was  from  him  that  all  the  part  of  the  Alpine  chain,
in  which  both  these  passes  lie,  derived  the  name  of  Cottian. It  seems
previously  to  have  been  known  by  the  name  of  Julian,  and  that  possibly
from  Caesar's  passage. The  more  usual  but  longer  route  would  be  that
by  the  Col  de  Tiniers  and  Barcelonnette,  discovered  by  Pompeius-
Sail.  Fr.  Hist.  iii.  3. ;  Appian.  B. C.  i.  109. ; Walckenaer,  G.  des
G.  i.  225.  538.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  291

view ;  but  the  path  he  took  was  perhaps  the  least  CHAP
frequented  of  all  the  Alpine  tracks,  and  his  pro-
gress was  obstructed  by  the  mountain  tribes,  the
Centrones,  Garoceli,  and  Caturiges,  who  assembled
to  defend  their  fastnesses  against  the  intrusion  of
the  stranger.  Caesar  cut  his  way  through  every
obstacle.  He  reached  the  Rhone  at  Vienne,  or
Lyons,  and  crossed  to  the  right  bank  of  that  river,
above  its  confluence  with  the  Saone.  In  the  in-
terval the  Helvetii  had  threaded  the  defile  of  the
Jura  with  all  their  enormous  train  of  women  and
children,  of  horses  and  carriages.  Caesar  hoped
perhaps  to  meet  and  check  them  before  they
reached  the  Saone  ;  but  encumbered  as  they  were,
and  slowly  as  they  moved,  they  had  already  got  be-
fore him,  and  his  object  was  now  no  longer  to  meet
but  to  pursue  them.  The  Saone,  the  Arar  of  the
Romans x,  offered  no  formidable  barrier.  Its  width
is  moderate  and  its  current  gentle,  though  it  is  only
in  contrast  to  its  furious  neighbour  that  it  can  be  re-
presented as  stagnant  or  sluggish ;  nor  is  it  easy  to
understand  the  language  of  Caesar,  who  declares  that
the  eye  can  hardly  distinguish  which  way  it  flows.
This  obstacle  had  already  been  overcome  by  the
greater  part  of  the  advancing  horde,  though  it
had  taken  them  twenty  days  to  effect  the  transit ;
and  the  jEdui,  who  had  not  ventured  to  impede
their  passage,  were  now  suffering  under  the  inso-
lence of  the  intruders  almost  without  resistance.
They  placed,  indeed,  their  whole  reliance  upon
Caesar  and  the  Roman  forces,  whose  aid  they

1  The  modern  name  is  traced  in  Saucona,  the  appellation  given  to
it  by  Ammianus,  xv.  11.

u 2

292  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, loudly  invoked  in  the  name of  their  ancient al-
' liance.1 Their champions  were  advancing  with
rapid  strides. The  tribe  of  the  Tigurini 2,  consti-
tuting one  fourth  of  the  whole  confederacy, had
not  yet  crossed  the  Saone,  when  Caesar  came  up
with it,  and instantly  gave  it  battle  with  three
legions. This  was  the  same  tribe  which  had  de-
stroyed L.  Cassius  and  his  army  exactly  fifty  years
before.3 Among  the  Romans  who  had  fallen on
that day was the grandfather of  Piso, Caesar's
father-in-law,  and  the  energy  of  the  Roman  general
was  stimulated  by  the  recollection  of  both  a  public
He  over- and  a  private  calamity. The  barbarians  were  in-
T^urlnf commoded  by  the  mass  of  baggage,  which  had  been
and  defeats placed  under  their  care  as  forming  the  rearguard
of  the  whole  armament. The  attack  was  totally
unexpected. They  were easily routed,  and suf-
fered  immense slaughter,  only a small remnant
escaping  into  the  woods  in  the  vicinity.4
The  Heive- The  fugitives  were  allowed  to  make  their  escape
oveTta^of  unmolested, while Caesar proceeded to build a
negotiation,  bridge  with the greatest expedition, and trans-
ferred his  army  to  the  right  bank  of  the Saone.
The  Helvetians  were  alarmed at  the  rapidity  of

1  Dion,  xxxviii.  32.

2  The pagus  Tigurinus may  be the  canton of  Zug  or  of  Uri.
Turicum,  the  name  of  Zurich  in  the  middle  ages,  is  proved  to  have
been  its  Roman  appellation  also by  an inscription, "sta(tio) Tu-
ricen(sis),"  found  there  in  1741. Walckenaer,  i.  312.

3  A.U.  646,  Appian.  Fr.  de  Rebus  Gall.  iv.  3.:  Oi  Tiyvpioi  d'  avriZv

€[j,TTfjO(r9f.v  TltiawvoQ  Kai  Ka&ffiov  nva  arparov  t\6vrtq  viro

4  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  12.  If  the  Tigurini  amounted  to  23,000  warriors,
i.  e.  one  fourth  of  the  whole,  they  were  probably  out-numbered  by
three  Roman  legions  with  their  Gaulish  auxiliaries.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  293

his  movements.  Not  only  had  he  destroyed  their  CHAP.
rearguard  in  one  battle;  he  had  given  another
proof  of  vigour  and  skill  beyond  their  own  in
crossing  the  river  in  a  single  day.  Accordingly,
they  sent  a  deputation  to  confer  with  him,  and
while  they  offered  to  submit  their  destination  to
his  direction,  and  seek  their  future  residence  in
any  quarter  that  he  should  indicate,  they  at-
tempted to  disguise  their  apprehensions  of  a  col-
lision with  his  forces  by  reminding  him  of  their
former  successes  against  the  republic.  The  aged
Divico,  to  whom  the  conduct  of  the  negotiation
was  confided,  had  been  the  leader  of  their  army  in
the  famous  battle  of  which  they  boasted ;  and  they
trusted  that  the  language  of  defiance  and  contemp-
tuous warning  would  fall  with  greater  weight  from
his  lips.1  But  the  proconsul  was  not  to  be  moved
by  such  devices.  The  more  they  thought  fit  to
remind  him  of  the  calamities  of  the  republic,  the
more,  he  said,  would  they  incite  him  to  avenge
them.  Moreover,  it  was  not  an  ancient  quarrel
that  he  had  come  to  renew ;  he  sought  compensa-
tion for  their  present  insults  to  Kome  and  injuries
to  her  allies.  He  ended,  not  with  issuing  direc-
tions regarding  their  destination,  but  by  requiring
them  to  make  satisfaction  to  the  JEdui,  and  pledge
themselves,  by  the  delivery  of  hostages,  to  submit
to  the  commands  which  the  Romans  should  impose
upon  them.  Divico  arrogantly  replied  that  his
nation  was  more  accustomed  to  take  than  to  give

1  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  13,  14.

U 3

294

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,

'

The  Heive-

and  are

to  the  re-

hostages,  as  the  Romans  had  good  reason  to  know  ;
and  with  this  taunt  the  conference  broke  up.

The  next  morning  the  barbarians  pursued  their
march.  Csesar,  who  had  now  brought  up  his  whole
f°rces5  nung  close  upon  their  rear,  and  skirmishes
took  place  between  the  cavalry  of  the  two  hosts.
A  brilliant  success  obtained  by  the  Helvetii  in  an
affair  with  the  JEduan  auxiliaries  encouraged  them
to  engage  more  frequently  in  these  partial  hosts,
which  the  Roman  general,  who  could  not  trust
either  to  the  valour  or  constancy  of  his  allies,
was  anxious  on  his  part  to  avoid.  In  this  way  the
rival  armies  moved  for  fifteen  days  up  the  course
of  the  Saone  1  ;  the  one  slowly  and  deliberately
foraging  for  its  supplies,  and  courting  the  attacks
of  the  enemy's  advanced  guard  ;  the  other  closely
observing  and  following  all  its  movements,  but
studiously  declining  a  general  engagement.  The
space  thus  traversed  could  not  have  been  more
than  one  hundred  miles,  when  the  emigrants
made  a  movement  to  the  left,  and  struck  across
the  country,  the  Romans  still  hanging  on  their
rear.  This  manoeuvre  reduced  Caesar  to  great
difficulty.  As  long  as  he  kept  to  the  bank  of
the  Saone,  he  could  draw  his  supplies  from  the
Roman  province  behind  him.2  But  the  JEdui  on
their  part  were  extremely  negligent  in  providing

1  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  15. The  time  which  Caesar  assigns  to  this  march
creates  some  difficulty. The  distance  from  Lyons  to  Chalons  is  not
abore  ninety  miles,  and  it  was  probably  from  the  vicinity  of  the  latter
place  that  the  Gauls  turned  to  the  west  and  abandoned  the  valley.
It  is  evident  that  the  Helvetians  made  no  exertions  to  escape  from
their  pursuer,  and  that  he  did  not  attempt  to  arrest  their  progress.

2  CJBS.  B.  G.  i.  16.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  295

for  his  wants.  While  he  was  occupied  in  pre-  CHAP.
venting  the  common  enemy  from  destroying  their
villages  and  produce,  they  made  no  efforts  to  bring
provisions  to  his  camp.  It  was  still  early  in  June,
and  the  standing  corn  was  not  yet  ripe ;  nor  if
provisions  had  been  ready  to  his  hand,  would  it
have  suited  his  policy  to  irritate  the  natives  by
seizing  upon  them.  Nevertheless,  he  resolved  to
persevere  in  his  previous  tactics,  and  not  to  aban-
don the  track  of  the  enemy,  till  matters  at  last
came  to  a  crisis,  and  he  was  compelled  to  summon
the  chiefs  of  the  ^Edui,  and  make  a  formal  com-
plaint of  their  conduct.1  Liscus,  the  vergobret,
replied  in  the  name  of  his  countrymen.  He
pointed  to  Dumnorix  as  the  real  though  con-
cealed cause  of  all  the  coldness  and  tardiness  which
they  had  betrayed ;  but  it  was  not  till  Caesar  with-
drew him  to  a  private  conference  that  he  ventured
to  expose  the  intrigues  which  were  secretly  in  pro-
gress, the  private  understanding  which  existed
between  Dumnorix,  the  Helve tii,  Bituriges,  and
others,  the  hopes  which  he  drew  from  their  assu-
rances, the  power  and  influence  which  he  had  al-
ready acquired  in  his  own  country.  The  presence
of  the  Romans  was  the  sole  obstacle  to  the  consum-
mation of  his  intrigues,  and  all  his  endeavours
were  now  devoted  to  impeding  their  movements,
and  cutting  off  their  resources,  until  they  should
be  compelled  to  retreat.  It  even  appeared  that  the
disaster  which  had  lately  occurred  to  the  -ZEduan
cavalry  was  caused  by  his  treachery.  Divitiacus

1  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  17—20.

u 4

296  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  accompanied  the  expedition  in  the  proconsul's  re-
'  tinue.  Though  conscious  that  his  brother's  schemes
were  directed  no  less  against  the  liberty  than  the
best  policy  of  their  common  country,  he  threw
himself  at  Cesar's  feet,  and  used  every  solicitation
to  save  the  culprit's  life.  It  may  be  remarked
that  though  he  had  been  two  or  three  years  re-
sident in  Rome,  he  was  unable  to  express  himself
in  the  Latin  tongue ;  a  circumstance  the  more
surprising  considering  the  admiration  with  which
he  regarded  the  life  and  manners  of  the  civilized
South.  Caesar  made  use  of  an  interpreter  in  con-
versing with  him.1  Dumnorix  was  spared ;  but
the  proconsul  gave  him  to  understand  the  peril
into  which  he  had  thrown  himself,  and  placed  his
actions  under  vigilant  observation.

Caesar  en- The  Helvetii  were  now  making  their  way  slowly
across  the  hilly  country  which  separates  the  feeders

a  decisive  of  the  Saone,  the  Loire,  and  the  Seine. In  the

battle,  and  '

entirely  de-  centre  of  this  tract  lies  the  city  ol  Autun,  ongi-

featsthem.  named  Bibracte,  the  capital of  the ,Edui.

CaBsar  still  following  close  upon  the  heels  of  the
advancing  host,  found  himself  at  a  distance  of
eighteen  miles  from  this  place,  apparently  to  the
north  of  it.2  Here,  however,  it  became  necessary  to
cease  from  pursuit,  and  make  for  the  city,  where
the  provisions  he  demanded  awaited  him.  This
abandonment  of  his  previous  tactics,  much  as  he
might  regret  its  necessity  at  the  time,  prepared  for

1  Caes.  B.  O.  i.  19.: "Divitiacum ad  se vocari  jubet, et  quo-
tidianis  interpretibus  remotis,  per  C.  Valerium  Procillum,  principem
Galliae  provinciae,  familiarem  suum,  cui  summam  reruin  omnium  fidern
habebat,  cum  eo  colloquitur."

2  Cws.  B.  G.  \.  23.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  297

him  an  opportunity  of  giving  battle  on  ground  of  CHAP.
his  own  choice.  The  Helvetii,  regarding  it  as  a
flight,  exulted  in  it  as  a  symptom  either  of  weak-
ness or  cowardice.  Turning  round  to  follow  their
pursuer,  their  advanced  columns  soon  fell  in  with
the  rear  of  the  Roman  legions.  Ca3sar  had  time
to  select  his  position  on  the  side  of  a  hill x,  along
which  he  ranged  his  infantry  in  three  lines,  al-
lowing the  cavalry  to  descend  into  the  plain,  and
there  sustain  the  first  shock  of  the  assailants.  The
Helvetians,  placing  their  baggage  and  waggons  in
the  rear,  charged  with  the  whole  weight  of  their
mass  in  compact  order.  The  Roman  cavalry  soon
gave  way  before  them,  and  retired  without  confu-
sion upon  the  lines  of  infantry.  Hereupon  the
general,  dismounting  first  from  his  own  charger,
caused  the  cavalry  to  dismount  also,  and  send  their
horses  in  the  rear,  that  all  might  be  on  an  equality.
It  is  evident  that  he  distrusted  his  auxiliaries,
of  whom  that  arm  was  entirely  composed 2,  who
served  under  the  command  of  Dumnorix ;  and  he
feared  lest  any  weakness  or  treachery  on  their
part  should  discourage  his  own  legionaries.  The
Gauls  advanced  in  close  array,  their  shields  inter-

1  Caesar  ranged  his  four  veteran  legions  on  the  side  of  the  hill,  and
kept  the  two  legions  of  raw  levies  in  reserve  on  the  summit  (c.  24.).
His  whole  legionary  force  therefore  might  amount  to  36,000  men,  and
we  may  add  at  least  half  as  many  more  for  auxiliaries. The  disparity
of  numbers  between  his  forces  and  those  of  the  enemy,  reduced  by  the
loss  of  the  Tigurini,  was  not  very  great. In  point  of  skill,  discipline,
and  the  material  of  war,  there  could  be  no  comparison  between  them.
The  only  danger  of  the  Romans  lay  in  the  doubtful  fidelity  of  their
allies.

2  It  appears  from  c.  42.  that  there  were  no  Roman  horse  in  the
army.

208  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  laced  above  their  heads  to  repel  the  expected
'  discharge  of  stones  and  arrows.  But  the  massive
pilum  of  the  Roman  infantry  did  better  service
than  any  such  light  missiles.  Hurled  from  a  van-
tage ground  it  pierced  the  wooden  targets  through
and  through,  entangling  several  together,  and  de-
priving their  bearers  of  the  free  use  of  their  arms.
The  array  of  the  barbarian  phalanx  was  thus
loosened  and  broken,  and  as  soon  as  its  confusion
was  perceived,  down  rushed  the  Romans  upon  it
with  the  drawn  sword.  The  Gauls  could  either
make  no  resistance  or  were  forced  to  abandon
their  shields  to  extricate  themselves  from  one  an-
other. After  a  short  combat  they  fled  to  another
hill  at  the  distance  of  a  mile,  hotly  pressed  and
followed  up  the  acclivity.  A  diversion  was  here
created  in  their  favour  by  the  arrival  of  the  Boii
and  Tulingi,  who  were  the  last  to  reach  the  field
of  action,  and  were  now  able  to  check  the  advance
of  the  Romans.  The  conflict  continued  to  rage
with  unabated  fury  in  the  space  between  the  two
hills.  The  Gauls  gradually  retreated  upon  their
waggons,  but  always  presenting  their  face  to  their
opponents :  throughout  the  battle,  which  lasted  the
whole  of  the  long  summer's  day  and  late  into  the
night,  not  one  of  them  was  seen  to  turn  his  back.
The  entrenchment  which  they  had  hastily  thrown
up,  and  behind  which  they  had  so  long  defended
themselves,  was  at  last  carried  ;  but  a  vast  body
escaped  from  the  field,  one  hundred  and  thirty
thousand  according  to  Caesar's  computation,  and
succeeded,  by  rapid  marches  northward,  in  reaching
the  borders  of  the  Lingones  in  four  days.  The

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  299

care  of  the  wounded  and  the  necessity  of  seeking  CHAP.
provisions  at  Bibracte,  prevented  Csesar  from  pur-
suing them.  But  his  victory  had  been  sufficiently
decisive,  and  the  loss  of  the  vanquished  was  tre-
mendous. He  hoped  that  the  letters  he  despatched
to  the  Lingones,  threatening  them  with  the  ven-
geance of  the  republic  if  they  gave  food  or  any
other  succour  to  the  fugitives,  would  effect  the
destruction  of  the  remainder,  or  force  them  to  sur-
render. After  a  halt  of  only  three  days  he  found
himself  once  more  in  a  condition  to  follow  upon
their  track.

The  Lingones  had  no  sympathy  with  the  un-  Terms
welcome  intruders, and  being  secure  of  Cassar's  fondle  ik
support, they  wanted  no  further  inducement  to

own  coun-

engage  them  to  refuse  the  wanderers  a  passage,  to  return

TV i  J  J r • !_•  ^i  j. P li into  their

Disheartened  and  famishing  the  remnant  of  the
crumbling  host  were  soon  compelled  to  surrender,  try<
and  .submit  to  any  terms  which  the  victor  should
be  pleased  to  impose  upon  them.  His  measures
were  indeed  sufficiently  lenient,  but  for  this  he
had  a  political  object.  The  laws  of  war  as  inter-
preted by  the  Romans  placed  an  enemy,  when
captured  with  arms  in  his  hands,  entirely  at  the
disposal  of  the  conqueror.  Sometimes  the  whole
nation  was  sold  into  slavery,  sometimes  it  was
even  put  indiscriminately  to  the  sword,  if  ven-
geance or  policy  seemed  to  demand  it.  But  Caesar,
inflexible  as  was  his  severity  whenever  he  deemed
it  fitting,  accepted  on  this  occasion  the  surrender
of  his  helpless  enemies  as  an  act  of  voluntary
submission,  and  contented  himself  with  command-
ing them  to  return  in  a  body  to  their  own  country.

300  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  It  was  important  that  the  space  which  they  had
'  left  vacant  should  be  peopled  again,  as  otherwise
it  would  have  attracted  a  colony  of  Germans,  and
brought  a  new  and  restless  neighbour  to  the  very
doors  of  the  Province.  He  laid  upon  the  Allo-
broges  the  burden  of  furnishing  the  survivors  of
the  horde  with  the  necessary  provisions,  until  they
could  rebuild  their  habitations  and  restore  their
soil  to  cultivation.  A  small  body  of  six  thousand
men  had  escaped  from  this  convention,  and  were
trying  to  cut  their  way  into  Germany.  They  were
brought  back  to  the  Roman  camp  by  the  zeal  of
the  Gaulish  tribes  through  whom  they  had  to  pass,
and  these  the  proconsul,  as  he  tells  us,  "  treated  as
enemies;"  a  phrase  of  fearful  import,  which  leaves
us  only  uncertain  whether  they  were  put  to  the
sword  or  sold  as  slaves.  The  tribe  of  the  Boii
were  allowed  to  remain  in  the  interior  of  Gaul,  at
the  instance  of  the  jEdui  themselves,  who  admired
their  military  prowess,  and  wished  to  settle  them
as  allies  and  defenders  in  some  districts  of  their
own  country.  The  whole  number  of  those  who
returned  to  their  homes  amounted  to  one  hundred
and  ten  thousand  souls.1

The  Gauis The  Gauls  were  penetrated  with  surprise  and
their  court7  admiration  at  the  power  of  the  republic,  which,  at

1  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  21 — 29.  Caesar  caused  a  census  to  be  taken.  In
the  camp  of  the  Helvetians  lists  were  found  in  which  the  names  of
the  several  confederate  tribes  and  their  respective  contingents  were
registered.  These  documents  were  written  literis  Greeds,  either  in
the  Greek  language  or  more  probably  in  Greek  characters.  It  is  not
to  be  supposed  that  the  Helvetians  were  familiar  with  the  language,
since  Caesar  {B.  G.  v.  48.)  uses  it  expressly  to  conceal  the  purport  of
his  despatches  from  the  Servians,  who,  rude  as  they  were  themselves,
might  easily  have  found  an  interpreter  if  such  knowledge  had  been

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  301

this  distance  from  its  home,  had  struck  down  an CHAP.
enemy  before  whom  their  own  concentrated  energies

had  quailed.  The  ability  of  the  leader  and  the  to  the  vio
constancy  of  his  legions  through  all  the  fatigues  *°r^  pro'
of  so  long  a  march,  and  the  pressure  of  so  many
difficulties,  impressed  them  with  a  higher  sense  of
the  character  of  their  ancient  rivals  than  national
vanity  had  hitherto  allowed  them  to  entertain.
They  began  at  last  to  recognize  the  Romans  as  a
superior  race.  Every  state  hastened  to  vie  with
its  neighbours  in  strains  of  respect  and  adulation.
Deputations  from  every  tribe  crowded  one  upon
another,  congratulating  the  proconsul  on  his  success,
expressing  the  thanks  of  the  Gaulish  people  for  a
deliverance  such  as  they  dared  least  expect  from  a
stranger,  so  recently  their  deadly  foe.  But  for
Roman  intervention  Gaul,  they  confessed,  would
have  been  overrun  from  the  Rhine  to  the  Ocean,
its  cities  destroyed,  its  political  relations  subverted,
and  the  yoke  of  servitude  imposed  perhaps  upon
the  entire  nation.

But  if  their  most  imminent  danger  had  been  Their  ap-
that  of  conquest  by  the  Helvetii,  the  prospect  of  ^^
the  advance  of  the  Germans  was  not  in  reality  less  croach-
alarming. In  the  midst  of  their rejoicings for  the  suevi.
their  late  deliverance,  the  Gaulish  chieftains  still
exhibited tokens of  secret apprehension. They
communicated  their  fears  to  Ca3sar,  and  desired
his  permission to convene an  assembly  of  dele-
generally  diffused  among  the  southern  Gauls. Cassar  uses  the  same
phrase  in  speaking  of  the  Druids  :  "  In  publicis  privatisque  rationibus
Graecis  utuntur  literis  "  (comp.  Tac.  Germ.  3.),  where  also  it  is  diffi-
cult to  determine  the  true  meaning.

302  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  gates  from  various  states  to  determine  upon  a
'  plan  of  united  action.1  The  council  was  accord-
ingly held.  The  result  was  that  the  deputies
returned  to  the  Roman  camp,  and  placed  them-
selves entirely  at  the  proconsul's  disposal.  The
whole  affair  was  transacted  with  the  utmost  secresy.
The  Gaulish  chieftains,  especially  the  JMuan,
were  so  cowed  by  the  tyranny  of  Ariovistus,  that
they  dared  not  utter  their  apprehensions  above
their  breath.  It  was  not  till  they  were  assured
of  the  discretion  as  well  as  the  favour  of  the
Roman,  that  they  ventured,  with  Divitiacus  for
their  spokesman,  to  develop  the  state  of  their
relations  with  the  German  intruders,  the  oppres-
sion under  which  they  were  suffering,  their  ardent
thirst  for  deliverance,  and  their  resolution  to  put
themselves  under  the  guidance  of  their  puissant
ally.
He  espouses  The  command  which  the  Helvetii  had  received

the  cause

of  the  Gauis  to  return  to  their  original  seats,  and  maintain
their  ancient  barriers  against  the  Germans,  fore-
shadowed the  policy  of  the  Roman  general.  With
whatever  hopes  of  amity  the  senate  might  have

1  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  30. :  "  Petierant  uti  sibi  concilium  totius  Gallise  in
diem  certam  indiceret,"  &c.  Some  writers  imagine  from  this  and  one
or  two  similar  expressions  that  the  whole  of  the  Gaulish  tribes  were
united  in  a  general  confederation,  and  consulted  together  occasionally
for  the  common  good.  But  this  opinion  has  no  foundation.  The
author  of  the  commentaries  uses  the  word  totus  in  a  very  loose  way.
He  is  here  speaking  only  of  the  two  confederations  of  which  the  ^Edui
and  Arverni  were  respectively  at  the  head,  as  appears  clearly  from
the  following  chapter.  But  these  embraced  none  of  the  states  of  Aqui-
tania,  Belgium,  nor  even  the  western  division  of  Gaul.  It  was  not
likely  that  the  people  of  Armorica  or  the  tribes  on  the  Rhine  should
have  asked  permission  to  attend  a  general  convention  from  a  Roman
commander  whose  name  could  scarcely  have  reached  them.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  303

amused  Ariovistus,  he  could  not  but  feel  assured  CHAP.
that  the  intentions  of  the  proconsul,  whom  it  had
sent  to  manage  the  affairs  of  Gaul  with  absolute
power,  were  decidedly  hostile  to  his  views.  Caesar
had  settled  the  question  between  him  and  the  ^Edui
as  to  which  of  the  two  Rome  should  keep  her  word
with ;  it  was  hardly  possible  to  be  true  to  both,
and  the  governor  of  the  province  had  perhaps  no
other  alternative  but  to  choose  between  them.
Nor  was  the  attitude  adopted  by  the  German
chieftain  calculated  to  disarm  the  jealousy  of  the
republic.  He  declared  formally  that  he  had  entered
Gaul  as  a  conqueror,  equally  with  the  Romans,
and  he  claimed  to  share  the  country  with  the
invaders  from  the  South:  "You  have  your  pro-
vince," he  said,  "and  I  will  have  mine."1  The
Romans  could  endure  no  such  partnership.  Their
influence  in  Gaul  beyond  the  Rhone  rested  mainly
upon  the  reliance  which  the  natives  might  be
induced  to  place  on  their  will  and  power  to  protect
them.  They  well  knew  how  the  prevalence  of  such
an  opinion  would  assist  in  breaking  up  the  national
spirit  of  independence,  and  they  already  foresaw
the  rapid  absorption  of  new  victims  into  the  mass
of  their  conquests.  Caesar,  in  fact,  embodied  the
sentiments  and  policy  of  his  countrymen,  and  in
determining  to  espouse  the  cause  of  the  Gauls
against  the  Germans,  it  is  not  necessary  to  suppose
that  he  wantonly  courted  a  rupture  with  Ario-
vistus from  motives  of  personal  ambition.

1  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  44. ;  or  in  the  words  of  Florus,  iii.  10.:  "  Quid  est
Caesar  ?  si  vult,  veniat :  quid  ad  ilium  quid  agat  nostra  Germania  ?
num  ego  me  interpono  Romanis  ?  "

304  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. Indeed,  the  demands  which  the  proconsul  made
YL upon the  German  chieftain  bore  a  semblance  of

moderation,  and  were  such  as  a  potentate  of  less
pride  and  wilfulness  might  have  secured  his  safety
^v  accepting.1 He  was  required  to  transport  no
tion.  more  of  his  countrymen  across  the  Rhine,  to  re-

store their  hostages  to  the  JEdui  and  Sequani,  and
to  enter  into  relations  of  amity  with  the  states
which  he  had  hitherto  trodden  under  his  feet.
Upon  these  conditions  the  proconsul  declared  him-
self willing  to  maintain  the  good  understanding
that  had  thus  far  subsisted  between  the  rival
powers.  He  would  urge  no  pretensions  to  di-
minish the  authority  which  Ariovistus  had  ac-
quired in  Gaul.  But  the  barbarian,  flushed  with
success,  would  listen  to  no  proposals  which  did
not  recognize  his  sudden  and  precarious  occupa-
tion of  Gallic  territory  as  an  equal  title  to  inde-
pendent sovereignty  with  the  slowly-consolidated
dominion  of  the  Romans.  He  courted  war  as
between  two  equal  and  rival  powers ;  the  alliance
which  the  Romans  had  formed  with  the  Gaulish
states  he  treated  with  scorn,  and  disputed  their
right  to  step  forward  as  the  defenders  of  the  ^Edui.
While  these  discussions  were  in  progress,  certain
of  that  nation  came  to  Caesar  with  further  com-
plaints of  the  violation  of  their  territory  by  the
German  warriors :  at  the  same  moment  the  Treviri
also  besought  his  assistance  to  prevent  an  incursion
of  the  Suevi,  one  hundred  of  whose  cantons  had
already  assembled  all  their  forces  on  the  bank  of
the  Rhine,  for  the  purpose  of  a  general  migra-

1  Caes.  B.  G.  i.  34—36.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  305

tion. It  was  of  the  utmost  importance  to  strike  a CHAP
blow  before  this  multitude  could  effect  a  junction  _  _

with  Ariovistus.  Ca&sar  immediately  placed  him-
self  at  the  head  of  his  legions,  and  marched  to-
wards  the  encampment  of  the  German  chieftain,
prepared  to  bring  the  conference  to  a  close  in  person,
or  to  enforce  his  demands  by  arms.  When  he  had  Panic  in
reached  Vesontio  (Besan£on),  in  the  country  of  the  army.
Sequani,  where  it  was  necessary  to  halt  a  few  days
to  provision  the  troops,  symptoms  of  insubordi-
nation began  to  manifest  themselves  in  the  Eoman
camp.1  The  proconsul  was  attended,  according  to
the  custom  of  the  times,  by  a  number  of  young
men  of  family,  who  came  to  make  under  his  eye
their  first  essay  of  arms.  The  privations  and
terrors  of  a  Gallic  campaign  were  more  harassing
than  such  as  they  might  have  submitted  to  in
the  soft  climate  of  Asia,  among  the  luxuries  and
amusements  of  the  ancient  world.  The  name  of
the  Gauls  indeed  had  been  gradually  stripped  of
its  ancient  terrors  ;  but  the  republic  had  not  come
in  collision  with  the  Germanic  races  since  the  in-
vasion of  the  Teutones,  and  the  hard-won  victory
of  Marius  had  not  sufficed  to  obliterate  the  remem-
brance of  her  last  great  panic.  Accordingly,
when  the  Sequani  were  interrogated  about  the
Germans,  and  described  them  as  the  most  terrible
of  men,  of  tremendous  stature,  of  hideous  form,  of
savage  cruelty,  warriors  who  had  not  slept  under
a  roof  for  fourteen  years2,  the  shattered  nerves  of

1  CECS.  B.  G.  i.  39—41.;  comp.  Plut.  Cces.  19.;  Dion,  xxxviii.  35,
*  Cjes.  B.  G.  i.  36.
VOL.  I.  X

306  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  dissolute  patricians  gave  way.  From  these
'  effeminate  volunteers  the  panic  spread  to  the  vete-
rans, and  pervaded  the  camp.  Many  sought  leave
of  absence  and  fled  from  the  danger ;  others  whom
a  sense  of  honour  retained  at  their  standards,  were
yet  unable  to  conceal  their  fears,  and  did  even
more  harm  by  remaining.1  It  required  all  Cae-
sar's address  and  patience  to  make  head  against
the  growing  spirit  of  dismay.  When  all  his  pri-
vate persuasions  seemed  to  fail,  and  the  eloquence
of  his  public  harangues  was  exhausted  upon
the  soldiery,  he  threw  himself  at  last,  with  the
tact  of  a  more  experienced  general,  upon  their
feelings  of  pride  and  emulation.  No  commander,
he  said,  had  ever  been  ruined,  unless  by  the  deser-
tion of  his  fortune  or  his  own  injustice.  He  de-
clared his  reliance  upon  the  fortune  which  had
already  so  conspicuously  attached  itself  to  him,  at
the  same  time  he  was  no  less  animated  by  the
consciousness  of  his  rectitude.  Such  was  his  con-
fidence, that  he  was  resolved  to  go  through  with
the  affair  he  had  undertaken,  though  with  no
more  than  a  single  legion.  The  tenth  legion  he
knew  he  could  trust,  and  with  the  services  of
all  the  rest,  if  they  chose  to  desert  him,  he  could
afford  to  dispense.  This  speech  deserves  to  be
remarked  as  the  first  occasion  on  which  Caesar  ex-
pressed that  unbounded  reliance  upon  his  fortune,
which  became  with  him  so  fixed  a  principle.  He
had  already  succeeded  so  often,  against  such  odds,

1  Florus,  iii.  10.,  copying  Caesar,  c.  39.:  "  Itaque  tantus  gentis  novae
terror  in  castris,  ut  testamenta  passim  etiam  in  principiis  scribc-
rentur."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  307

and  at  such  imminent  risks,  that,  sober-minded  CHAP.
as  he  was,  and  at  the  maturest  season  of  life,  the
conviction  was  forced  upon  him,  that  his  career
was  watched  by  a  special  providence,  and  destined
to  lead  to  some  conspicuous  end.  The  tenth
legion  was  that  to  which  the  defence  of  the  Pro-
vince had  been  committed  at  the  commencement
of  Cesar's  proconsulate.  It  was  the  same,  per-
haps, which  had  made  Pomptinus  victorious  over
the  Allobroges,  and  it  had  more  recently  main-
tained the  line  of  the  Khone  against  the  threat-
ened invasion  of  the  Helvetians.1  The  favoured  di-
vision received  the  compliment  with  acclamations,
while  the  rest  of  the  army,  stung  with  remorse,
determined  to  wipe  off  the  stain  they  had  incurred,
and  declared  their  readiness  to  dare  the  worst.

Having  thus  arrested  the  contagion  of  terror
among  his  soldiery,  their  leader  lost  no  time  in
bringing  them  into  the  enemy's  presence.  Never-  vistus>
theless,  it  was  his  object  to  conduct  the  quarrel,
if  possible,  to  a  peaceable  issue,  and  accord-
ingly he  proposed  a  conference  to  the  German
chieftain.  They  met  on  a  hill  rising  from  the
centre  of  a  plain,  where  they  could  be  observed  by
either  army,  and  the  openness  of  the  ground  offered
no  lurking-place  for  an  ambuscade.2  Each  was
attended  by  a  squadron  of  cavalry  of  equal  numbers.
Caesar  had  no  Koman  cavalry,  nor  could  he  well
confide  in  his  Gaulish  auxiliaries :  yet  he  was  re-
solved not  to  reject  the  arrangement  proposed  by
his  adversary,  nor  betray  any  appearance  of  dis-

1  Guischard,  Mem.  Milit.  iii.  15.  2  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  43—45,

x 2

308  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  trust  or  dread.  He  caused  a  party  of  Gauls  to  dis-
'  mount,  and  placed  the  infantry  of  his  favourite
legion  upon  their  horses.  Thus  escorted  he  met
Ariovistus  at  the  appointed  spot,  and  recommenced
a  discussion  upon  the  points  which  had  already
been  debated  between  them.  The  disputants  failed,
as  before,  to  come  to  any  satisfactory  conclusion.
Caesar  persisted  in  his  previous  demands  with  the
firmness  of  a  Roman  imperator,  representing  the
fixed  resolution  of  the  government  of  which  he
was  merely  the  agent.  Ariovistus  had  nothing  but
his  own  will,  his  own  views  and  policy  to  appeal
to :  though  moderate  and  even  respectful  in  manner,
he  had  no  less  confidence  and  constancy  than  his
rival.  Each  party  urged  his  own  right  to  make
conquests  over  the  Gauls.  The  German,  indeed,
admitted  the  equal  claims  of  both,  while  the  Roman
contended  that  the  priority  of  his  own  country's
relations  with  Gaul  gave  it  the  right  of  excluding
all  competitors  from  the  ground.  The  conference,
i-t  is  related,  was  interrupted  by  the  impatience  of
the  German  horse,  who  suddenly  assailed  the  Ro-
mans with  stones  and  arrows.  Cassar  immediately
withdrew,  and  prepared  for  more  serious  hostilities.
A  further  attempt  at  negotiation  failed  through  the
inconstancy  of  the  German  chief,  who  invited  the
Roman  general  to  a  second  conference,  but  treated
as  spies  the  envoys  whom  he  sent  in  his  stead,  and
threw  them  into  chains.1

1  Cses,  B.  G.  i.  46,  47.  Caesar  seems  anxious  to  represent  the  per-
fidy of  the  barbarian  in  the  strongest  colours,  and  does  not  fail  to  in-
form us  that  his  envoys,  C.  Valerius  Procillus  and  M.  Mettius,  were
selected  by  him  as  having  been  guests  of  Ariovistus.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  309

The  spot  at  which  these  occurrences  took  place  CHAP.
lay  in  the  centre  between  the  two  armies,  which
were  twenty-four  miles  apart.  Csesar  abstained  Decisive
from  advancing,  and  formed  a  large  entrenched  t;ieen  £c
camp  to  contain  the  whole  of  his  forces,  in  expec-
tation  of  an  immediate  attack  from  the  Suevi,  who
manoeuvred  around  him,  and  established  their  lines,
at  a  distance  of  two  miles,  between  him  and  Ye-
sontio,  from  which  place  he  drew  his  supplies.
Finding  the  enemy  disposed  to  defer  the  contest,
it  now  became  the  wish  of  the  Roman  general  to
force  him  to  a  battle.  He  led  his  troops  in  front
of  the  German  position,  and  drew  them  up  in
battle  array,  but  to  no  purpose.  This  operation
he  repeated  several  days  in  succession  ;  still  the
Germans,  generally  so  impetuous  and  so  confident
of  victory,  would  neither  attack  him  in  his  trenches
nor  meet  him  in  the  open  field.  It  appeared  from
the  account  of  some  captives  that  this  reserve  was
not  the  effect  of  the  superior  discipline  introduced
by  Ariovistus,  but  arose  from  a  motive  of  supersti-
tion. On  such  occasions,  they  reported,  whether
to  fight  or  to  refrain  was  determined  by  the  de-
cision of  the  women,  whom  the  Germans  were  ac-
customed to  regard  with  peculiar  deference.1  The
women  had  consulted  together,  according  to  the
prescribed  forms  of  divination,  and  declared  that
their  countrymen  could  not  conquer  if  they  engaged

1  The  superstitious  veneration  paid  to  women  by  the  Germans  is
noticed  by  Tacitus  (Germ.  8.):  "Inesse  sanctum  quid  et  providum
fceminis  putant,  nee  aut  consilia  earum  aspernantur,  aut  responsa
negant."  See  also  Hist.  iv.  61.  Strabo  makes  the  same  remark  of
the  Cimbri  (vii.  2.).  Dion  (xxxviii.  48.)  follows  Csesar.

x 3

310  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  before  the  new  moon.1  Having  ascertained  the
'  cause  of  the  enemy's  inactivity,  Csesar  took  advan-
tage of  it  to  make  a  movement  by  which  he  out-
*  flanked  them,  and  then  entrenched  a  second  camp  in
the  rear  of  their  position,  thereby  re-establishing  his
communications.  He  was  now  in  a  situation  to
compel  them  to  fight,  and  at  last,  after  one  or  two
indecisive  skirmishes,  was  gratified  by  seeing  the
whole  German  host  issue  from  its  camp  into  the
plain,  and  there  spread  itself  in  barbarian  array,
tribe  by  tribe,  the  women  and  children  in  the  rear,
intermingled  with  the  vast  assemblage  of  waggons,
with  which  it  seemed  anxious  to  cut  off  the  pos-
sibility of  flight.  It  formed  in  a  huge  phalanx,
the  men  raising  their  shields,  after  the  manner  of
the  Helvetii,  like  an  enormous  coat  of  mail,  over
their  heads.  The  Romans  discharged  their  piles,
and  rushed  headlong  upon  the  unwieldy  mass,
each  man  marking  his  own  object  and  making  di-
rectly for  it.  Unable  to  break  the  compact  lines
of  the  enemy,  they  leapt  upon  them,  and,  tearing
up  the  serried  shields,  pierced  their  half- stifled
bearers  from  above  ;  a  desperate  mode  of  attack,
to  which  little  resistance  could  be  offered,  but
exposing  to  inevitable  death  the  assailant  who
should  fall  into  the  midst.  The  right  wing  of
the  Germans  was  at  last  broken  and  scattered  in
flight ;  but  the  left  resisted,  and,  swaying  slowly
this  way  and  that,  overpowered  the  forces  con-
fronted with  it.  The  third  line  or  reserve  of  the
Romans  was  then  brought  into  the  field,  and  at
last  the  Germans  were  thoroughly  routed  on  every

1  Tac.  Germ.  11.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  311

side.  The  fugitives  burst  through  the  barrier  of  CHAP.
waggons  in  their  rear,  and  fled  precipitately  to-
wards the  Rhine.  The  distance  was  only  five
miles1,  and  the  pursuit  was  not  slackened  to  the
very  brink  of  the  river.  Ariovistus  succeeded  in
crossing  by  means  of  a  boat :  not  many  of  his
followers  were  equally  fortunate.  Some  swam
across,  but  a  far  greater  number  was  slain  by  the
indefatigable  fury  of  the  victors.  The  fate  of  the
women  was  perhaps  not  less  bloody.  Two  wives  of
the  German  king  perished 2 ;  of  their  daughters
one  was  slain,  another  captured.  The  Roman
general  was  well  pleased  to  recover  Procillus,  the
bearer  of  the  late  flag  of  truce,  whose  guards  were
overtaken  while  dragging  him  along  in  their  flight.
Three  times,  he  related,  had  lots  been  drawn  in  his
presence,  to  decide  whether  he  should  be  burnt  at
once  in  sacrifice,  or  reserved  for  a  future  occa-

1  The  manuscripts  of  Caesar  read  quinque,  which  agrees  with  the
old  Greek  translation,  TiaaapaKovra  ara^ia. But  Plutarch  makes  the
distance  four  hundred  stadia,  or  fifty  miles. The  context  gives  little
assistance  towards  determining  between  these  accounts. We  only
know  that  Caesar  marched  seven  days  after  leaving  Besancon,  and
made  a  circuit  of  fifty  miles. The  distance  of  Besancon  from  the
Rhine,  in  a  direct  line,  is  about  eighty  miles. Adopting  the  reading  of
our  text,  the  field  of  battle  would  probably  lie  between  Basle  and
Muhlhausen.

2  "  Utraeque  perierant,"  Cses.,  whom  Orosius  recklessly  contradicts,
saying  :  "  duas  captae  sunt." It  would  not  be  worth  while  to  mention
this  discrepancy,  but  to  point  out,  once  for  all,  the  extreme  careless-
ness of  many  of  the  later  writers in going  over  Caesar's  ground,
although  they  must  have  had  his  commentaries  in  their  hands. The
only  work  which  could  have  come  into  competition  with  his,  for  the
author's  means  of  personal  knowledge,  was  the  history  of  his  own
times  by  Asinius  Pollio,  but  we  are  not  informed  whether  that  writer
entered  into  the  details  of  the  Gaulish  campaigns About  plurality  of
wives  among  the  Germans,  comp.  Tac.  Germ.  18.

x 4

312  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, sion  ;  each  time  he  had  owed  his  life  to  the  chance

of  sortilege.1

The  Suevi  who,  as  before  mentioned,  had  ar-
rived on  the  banks  of  the  Ehine,  and  were  pre-
paring to  cross  into  Gaul,  and  partake  in  the
flourishing  fortunes  of  their  countrymen,  were
struck  with  consternation  at  the  apparition  of  the
flying  king  and  his  routed  horde.  They  had  no
further  appetite  for  aggression,  and  would  gladly
have  returned  in  safety  to  their  homes.  But  the
Ubii  25  whose  hostility  they  had  provoked  on  their
march,  turned  upon  them,  and  made  great  slaugh-
ter in  their  ranks.  The  soil  of  Gaul  was  thus  de-
livered from  the  German  invaders,  and  its  security
in  that  quarter  seemed  at  least  for  a  time  to  be
sufficiently  assured.3  The  proconsul  led  his  troops
into  winter  quarters  among  the  Sequani,  where  he
left  Labienus  in  command.  Having  accomplished
both  his  immediate  objects  in  two  campaigns  and
a  single  season,  he  retired  for  the  winter  into  the
Hither  Gaul,  and  convened  the  annual  assembly  of
that  province.4

Composi- When  Cassar  entered  the  Transalpine  province
tion  of ne  found,  as  we  have  seen,  no  more  than  a  single

Cscsar  s

legions. legion  observing the frontiers. The colonies  of
the  republic  were  defended  by  a  provincial  militia,

1  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  53.

'  2  The  Ubii,  better  known  in  later  times  as  a  Cisrhenane  people,
dwelt  at  this  period  beyond  the  Rhine,  to  the  south  of  the  Sigambri,
probably  on  the  Mayn  and  Lahn,  surrounded  by  the  Suevi.  Comp.
Zeuss,  die  Deutschen,  &c.,  p.  87.

3  It  seems  that  Ariovistus  died  shortly  afterwards. Comp.  B.  G.
v.  29.:  "  Magno  esse  Germanis  dolori  Ariovisti  mortem."

4  Ctes,  B.  G.  i.  54.

UNDER THE EMPIRE,  313

forming  not  separate  legions,  but  a  number  of  CHAP.
cohorts  attached  to  the  regular  Koman  force. 1
The  rapidity  of  communication  by  means  of  the
great  roads,  by  which  it  was  the  policy  of  the
Romans  to  bind  together  every  important  position,
may  have  enabled  them  to  dispense  with  keeping
stationary  garrisons  in  all  the  principal  towns.
The  full  complement  of  the  legion  amounted  to
six  thousand  infantry.  For  its  complete  equip-
ment it  required  also  a  body  of  three  hundred
horse :  but  the  cavalry  which  Caesar  employed
throughout  his  Gallic  campaigns  was  almost  en-
tirely Gaulish.2  This  compact  body  was  attended
into  the  field  by  auxiliary  forces  composed  of  the
allies  or  subjects  of  the  republic,  not  levied  from
the  neighbouring  states  only,  but  drawn  also  from
more  distant  possessions.  Caesar  brought  into  the
field  javelinmen  from  Numidia,  bowmen  from
Crete,  and  slingers  from  the  Balearic  isles.3  Be-
sides the  legion  already  stationed  in  the  province,
the  state  furnished  the  proconsul  wkh  three  more ;
and  these  he  summoned  from  Aquileia  to  join  in
the  pursuit  of  the  Helvetii.  But,  not  satisfied
with  the  number  prescribed  him  by  the  decrees  of

1  It  appears  from  the  inscription  of  a  coin  (Thes.  Goltz.  p.  237.)
that  the  colony  of  Arausio  (Orange)  was  founded  by  the  thirty- third
cohort  of  the  second  legion. See  Harduin.  ad  Plin.  H.  N.  iii.  4.

2  Spanish  cavalry  are  mentioned  B.  G.  v.  26. It  is  probable  also
that  Caesar  had  some  Numidian  squadrons  (ii.  7.)- Guischard,  Mem.
Milit.  iii.  37.

3  Caes.  B.  G.  ii.  7. The  Numidian  light  infantry  used  darts  four
feet  in  length. Polyb.  i.  74.;  Appian.  Hisp.  25.,  Pun.  ii.  71.

"  uJEquaturusque  sagittas
Medorum  treinulum  cum  torsit  missile  Mazax."  —  Luc.  iv.  680.

314  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  senate  and  people  \  he  undertook  to  raise  two
'  others  in  addition  at  his  own  charge  2,  though  he
afterwards  contrived  to  make  the  state  maintain
them.  Nor,  when  the  magnitude  of  his  operations
required  fresh  succours,  did  he  restrict  himself
even  to  this  number.  In  the  second  year  of  the
war  we  shall  see  him  enter  the  country  of  the
Nervii  with  eight  legions 3,  and  provide  himself
with  at  least  three  more  at  a  later  period,  to  oc-
cupy a  more  extended  field  of  enterprize.4  ~
Military  These  troops,  composed  partly  of  veterans,  but

acqSrfdby  principally  of  new  conscripts,  were  soon  inured  to
his  troops.  eqllal  discipline  and  bravery,  and  vied  with  each
other  in  feats  of  prowess  and  devotion  to  their
commander.  Their  great  leader  was  not  insensible
how  much  he  owed  to  their  faithful  services.  No
general  was  ever  more  lavish  of  his  praises  than
he  who  recorded  his  soldiers'  achievements  in
his  own  imperishable  commentaries  on  the  Gallic
war.  Distinguished  as  they  all  were  in  turn,
there  was  one  legion,  the  tenth,  on  which,  as  we
have  seen,  he  looked  with  peculiar  confidence,  and
which  he  exalted  by  his  encomiums  to  unrivalled
celebrity  in  military  annals.  And  as  with  his
soldiers,  so  was  it  also  with  his  officers.  Caesar  be-
trayed no  jealousy  of  the  merits  of  Labienus,  the
foremost  of  that  renowned  band  of  warriors.  Nor

1  Plut,  Cats.  14.,  Pomp.  48.,  Cat.  Min.  33. ;  Dion,  xxxviii.  41.

2  Suet,  Jul.  24.

3  CJBS.  B.  G.  ii.  23.

4  Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  32. These  included  one  -which  Caesar  borrowed
of  Pompeius  in  the  year  700,  and  again  restored  to  him,  on  his  de-
mand, four  years  afterwards. Cecs.  B.  G.  vi.  1.,  viii.  54.;  Appian.
B.  C.  ii.  29. ;  Dion.  xl.  65.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  315

had  he  any  occasion  to  fear  the  rivalry  even  of  the  CHAP.
best  of  the  captains  he  had  formed  in  his  own
school ;  for  Labienus,  who  had  acquired  immortal
laurels  in  Gaul,  as  second  to  the  proconsul,  failed
no  less  signally  when  he  deserted  to  the  side  of
Pompeius,  and  arrayed  himself  against  his  former
leader.  The  proconsul  carried  with  him  Quintus,
the  brother  of  Marcus  Cicero,  and  Publius,  the  son
of  the  triumvir  Crassus  :  both  of  them  became  good
officers  under  his  eye.  Cotta  and  Sabinus,  Tre-
bonius  and  Decimus  Brutus  obtained  celebrity
under  the  same  auspices.  The  two  former  were  cut
off  by  the  sudden  attack  of  an  overwhelming  enemy ;
the  two  latter  survived  to  conspire  against  their
generous  commander,  the  founder  of  their  fame  and
fortunes.1

1  Guischard  (Mem.  Milit.  iii.  46.)  gives  a  complete  list  of  Cassar's
officers,  as  far  as  they  are  known  to  us-:  T.  Labienus,  P.  Con-
sidius,  Q.  Pedius,  Q.  Titurius  Sabinus,  L.  Aurunculeius  Cotta,  Ser-
vius  Galba,  Decimus  Brutus,  P.  Sulpicius  Rufus,  Q.  Atrius,  C.  Tre-
bonius,  C.  Fabius,  Q.  Cicero,  L.  Roscius,  L.  Munatius  Plancus,  L.
Silanus,  C.  Antistius  Regulus,  T.  Sextius,  C.  Volcatius  Tullus,  L.
Minucius  Basilus,  L.  Caesar,  M.  Antonius,  Caninius  Rebilus,  M.
Sempronius  Rutilus,  Q.  Calenus,  and  P.  Vatinius.  Most  of  these
personages  became  distinguished  in  various  ways  in  the  eventful
years  which  followed  upon  the  wars  of  Gaul.

316

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
VII.

Review  of
the  state  of
Gaul.

CHAP.  VII.

OESAR'S SECOND CAMPAIGN IN GAUL,  A.U.  697. — WAR  WITH

THE  BELGIANS. REDUCTION  OF  THE SUESSIONES  AND  BEL-

LOVACI. GALLANT  RESISTANCE  OF  THE  NERVII.  —  GENERAL

SUBMISSION  OF  THE  BELGIAN  TRIBES,  AND  OF THE  NORTH-
WESTERN STATES  OF  GAUL.  —  UNSUCCESSFUL  CAMPAIGN  OF
1  GALBA  IN  THE  ALPS.  —  CJSSAR'S  THIRD  CAMPAIGN,  A.U.  698.

REDUCTION  OF  THE  VENETI  AND  ARMORICAN  TRIBES.

P.  CRASSUS  CONQUERS  THE  AQUITANIANS. CAESAR  CHASTISES

THE  MENAPH  AND  MORINI. PACIFICATION  OF  GAUL.

THE  state  of  affairs  in  Gaul  had  undergone  con-
siderable change  during  the  few  months  which
Csesar  had  occupied  in  its  defence.  Two  for-
midable hordes  of  invaders  had  been  defeated  and
expelled,  and  the  power  of  the  Germans,  which  had
threatened  the  country  with  permanent  subjugation,
was  so  effectually  broken,  that  the  frontier  tribes  of
Gaul  might  hope  again  to  see  the  day  when  they
should  push  their  incursions  across  the  Rhine,  in-
stead of  being  the  prey  of  adventurers  from  beyond
it.  But  in  the  place  of  these  two  enemies  the  Gauls
had  introduced  far  into  the  interior  of  their  country
a  power  which,  under  the  name  of  a  friend  and  ally,
already  threatened  to  reduce  them  not  less  com-
pletely to  servitude.  When  Caesar  crossed  the
Alps  for  the  winter  he  quartered  his  troops,  not
within  the  limits  of  the  Roman  province,  but  in  the
territory  of  the  Sequani.  What  was  the  meaning
of  this  innovation  ?  Was  there  any  possibility  of

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  317

Ariovistus  returning  after  his  signal  defeat  with CHAP.

another  horde  of  Suevi  to  recover  his  Gallic  pos-  '_

sessions  ?  or  were  the  Sequani,  weakened  as  they
were  now  by  the  oppression  of  the  Germans,  ex-
posed so  helplessly  to  the  hatred  of  the  zEdui  as
to  require  a  Roman  garrison  for  their  protection  ?
It  would  appear  that  the  proconsul  already  an-
ticipated the  aggressive  movement  which  was  about
to  take  place  among  the  Belgian  tribes.  The
Sequani  he  knew  had  fallen  for  ever  from  that
high  estimation  among  the  Gauls,  in  virtue  of
which  they  had  been  allowed  to  assume  the  pre-
eminence heretofore  occupied  by  the  Arverni.  Not
only  their  political  weakness,  but  the  remembrance
also  of  their  treachery  in  inviting  the  Germans  across
the  Rhine,  disgusted  the  petty  states  which  had
formerly  served  them  as  clients.  Of  these  some
now  betook  themselves  to  the  .ZEdui  with  the  offer
of  allegiance  ;  others,  not  forgetting  the  tyranny  of
that  nation  during  its  prosperity,  and  suspicious
of  a  people  who  piqued  themselves  on  their  inti-
macy with  the  Romans,  looked  out  for  some  other
patron.  The  Remi  were  the  most  powerful  of  the  ,
Belgian  tribes.  They  envied  the  position  to  which
the  chief  states  of  Southern  Gaul  had  attained  as
leaders  of  numerous  confederacies,  and  rejoiced  in
succeeding  to  a  part  at  least  of  the  influence  lately
enjoyed  by  the  Sequani.1  They  also  were  in  turn
distrusted  by  the  other  Belgic  states,  which  has-

1  Caasar  (B.  G.  vi.  12.),  speaking  of  this  period,  says :  "  Eo  turn
statu  res  erat,  ut  longe  principes  haberentur  .2Edui,  secundum  locum
dignitatis  Remi  obtinerent."

318

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
VII.

The  Ro-
mans es-
stablish
their  influ-
ence over
theSequani.

Confede-
racy of  the
Belgian
tribes
against  the
invaders.

tened  to  form  an  alliance  among  themselves,  while
the  Eemi  haughtily  kept  aloof.

In  the  meanwhile  the  Romans,  on  their  part,
were  improving  the  advantages  they  had  secured.
The  establishment  of  their  winter  quarters  among
the  Sequani  gave  them  paramount  influence  over
that  broken  and  dejected  people.  They  restored
the  hostages  of  whose  retention  the  ^Edui  so  bit-
terly complained  ;  but  in  return  they  surrounded
their  camps  and  councils  with  Roman  spies  and
a'gents,  and  contrived  to  get  into  their  own  hands
the  real  direction  of  their  affairs.  The  blandish-
ments of  Italian  civilization  were  found  efficient
in  reconciling  the  proudest  of  the  Gauls  to  the
universal  yoke.  Divitiacus,  the  gentle  victim  of
Southern  luxury,  was  a  useful  instrument  in  the
conquerors'  hands ;  while  the  restless  intrigues  of
his  brother  Dumnorix  awakened  no  response  in
the  breasts  of  a  people  already  dreaming  of  a  new
career  of  supremacy  under  Roman  patronage.

While  the  JEdui  were  thus  familiarizing  them-
selves with  these  silken  fetters,  the  Remi  also  were
not  unwilling  to  bend  before  the  influence  of
Rome,  with  the  hope  of  consolidating  their  power.
But  the  other  Belgian  tribes,  unbroken  as  yet  by
war  and  uncorrupted  by  artifice,  united  themselves
under  the  ]ead  of  the  Suessiones,  and  rose  in  arms
against  the  intruders.1  The  rumour  of  their  in-
tended outbreak  reached  Caesar  before  it  had  actu-

1  Caes.  B.  G.  iv.  4.  and  foil.  Under  the  sway  of  a  chieftain  named
Divitiacus,  the  Suessiones  had  recently  become  the  most  flourishing
and  powerful  of  the  Belgian  states,  and  had  extended  their  sove-
reignty over  a  part  of  Britain.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  319

ally  burst  forth.  He  hastened  to  raise  two  new  CHAP.
legions,  and  hurried  back  from  Italy  to  the  scene
of  danger.  The  Belgians  had  met  together  in  a
general  conference;  the  Suessiones,  the  Nervii,  the
Bellovaci,  the  Atrebates,  the  Ambiani,  the  Morini,
the  Menapii,  the  Caletes,  the  Velocasses,  the  Vero-
mandui,  all  the  nations  from  the  mouth  of  the
Meuse  to  that  of  the  Seine,  together  with  those  of
the  interior1:  to  these  were  added  the  tribes  of
German  descent ;  the  Eburones,  Condrusi,  Caeresi,
and  Paemani2,  all  joined  in  this  mighty  coalition,
and  the  armies  it  brought  into  the  field  num-
bered altogether  two  hundred  and  ninety  thousand
men.  The  Eemi  alone  refused  to  league  them-
selves in  the  common  cause3,  and  attempted  in
vain  to  sow  dissension  among  the  confederates.
Accordingly,  upon  them  the  whole  weight  of  the
Belgian  forces  was  in  the  first  instance  directed.
They  appealed  to  the  proconsul  for  protection,  and
offered  to  place  themselves  entirely  at  his  disposal.
They  sent  him  hostages,  and  proposed  to  open
their  fortresses  to  his  soldiers.  Ca9sar  embraced
their  offer  with  alacrity,  promised  them  the  protec-
tion of  the  republic,  and  at  the  same  time  took
measures  to  secure  their  entire  dependence  for  the
future.  The  Roman  forces  were  immediately  put

1  These  names  are  identified  with  the  following  modern  places  and
districts  respectively,  Soissons,  Hainault,  Beauvais,  Artois,  Amiens,
the  coast  of  the  Pas  du  Calais  and  West  Flanders,  East  Flanders,
Pays  de  Caux  in  Normandy,  the  Vexin,  the  Vermandois.

2  Brabant,  Liege,  and  Limburg.

3  The  Remi  were  a  powerful  people,  and  occupied  probably  a  great
part  of  the  three  departments  of  Aisne,  Marne,  and  Ardennes. Bi-
bracte  (Bievre)  is  sometimes  mentioned  as  their  capital,  and  sometimes
Durocortorum  (Rheims).

320  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
VII

'  in  motion  to  succour  the  suppliant  state.  Mean-
while, the  -ZEdui  showed  their  usual  want  of  good
faith  or  of  energy ;  the  assistance  demanded  of
them  was  tardily  and  reluctantly  supplied.  Divi-
tiacus,  still  attending  upon  Ca3sar,  and  still  en-
tranced in  admiration  of  him,  hastened  to  per-
suade his  countrymen  to  adopt  more  active  mea-
sures. The  legions  advanced  to  the  banks  of  the
Axona  (Aisne)  which  they  crossed,  and  then
awaited  in  an  entrenched  camp  the  expected  attack
of  the  Gallo- Germans.

commence-  Bibrax,  or  Bibracte,  the  capital  of  the  Kemi,
inent  of  the  ^gfa  miles  distant  from  the  Koman  encampment,
csesar's  was  ^  ^jg  moinent  assailed  by  the  confederates.

second  cam-  J

paign.  Their  mode  of  attack  was  to  clear  the  ramparts  by
B.cU.*57.  '  a  constant  discharge  of  stones  and  arrows,  and  to
advance  parties  of  sappers  to  their  foot  under  the
cover  of  a  storm  of  missiles,  their  shields  firmly
compacted  over  their  heads.  Their  progress  was
slow,  but  its  success  seemed  certain.  The  de-
fenders were  exhausted  with  wounds  and  fatigue.
At  last  their  leaders  found  means  of  communi-
cating with  the  Roman  general.  They  represented
that  they  were  not  in  a  condition  to  hold  out
longer  ;  unless  prompt  assistance  arrived  the  place
was  lost.  Caesar  hastily  despatched  some  cavalry
and  light  troops,  which  penetrated  the  loose  array
of  the  blockading  forces,  and  were  received  with-
in the  walls.  The  Belgians,  disappointed  at  the
escape  of  their  prey,  had  not  the  firmness  to  re-
commence their  frustrated  work:  after  spending
a  few  days  in  ravaging  the  neighbourhood,  they
broke  up  from  their  lines  and  advanced  towards

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  321

the  Roman  position. Cesar's  eagle  eye  measured CHAP.
from  a  distance  the  extent  of  their  encampment
by  the  smoke  by  day  and  the  fires  at  night,  and
estimated  its  length  at  not  less  than  eight  miles.

The  numbers  of  the  enemy  and  their  reputation  The  Bei-
for  superior  prowess  made  Caesar  pause  before  he  c«sat?8  po-

ventured  to  give  them  battle.  The  result  of  a  few  t
cavalry  skirmishes  reassured  him,  and  he  resolved
to  challenge  the  Belgians  to  a  general  engagement.
The  confederates,  nothing  loth,  issued  from  their
camp  as  soon  as  they  saw  the  Romans  before  them,
and  prepared  to  receive  the  shock.  The  procon-
sul's camp  was  placed  on  the  summit  of  a  gentle
acclivity.  In  front  the  ground,  as  it  verged  to-
wards the  plain,  was  sufficient  in  space  for  the
evolutions  of  the  six  legions  which  he  brought  at
once  into  action.  His  rear  reclined  upon  the  river,
and  he  communicated  with  the  further  bank  by
a  bridge,  the  passage  being  guarded  by  an  earth-
work and  a  small  detachment  under  Titurius  Sa-
binus.  The  two  fresh  legions  he  kept,  according
to  his  general  practice,  as  a  reserve  within  his
lines.  But  as  his  principal  danger  lay  in  the  risk
of  being  outflanked  by  superior  numbers,  he  drew
a  trench  from  either  side  of  the  hill  to  a  distance
of  four  hundred  paces,  erecting  works  at  each  ex-
tremity, which  he  fortified  with  great  care,  and
supplied  with  all  his  engines  of  defence.  Thus
advantageously  posted,  the  Romans  were  sheltered
moreover  by  a  morass  in  their  front,  into  which
they  hoped  the  enemy  would  impetuously  plunge.1

1  Caesar's position is said to  have been  a  little below  Pont-a-
Vuire,  on  the  Aisne,  where  a  morass  still  exists  in  the  direction  which

VOL.  i.  y

322  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. But the Gallo- Germans possessed  prudence and
' caution  no  less  than  bravery,  and  rested  on  their

arms,  awaiting  the  onset  of  the  Komans  as  in-
vaders and  aggressors.  The  cavalry  engaged,  and
the  Romans  had  the  best  of  the  encounter;  but
when  he  found  that  the  Belgians  could  not  be  in-
duced to  charge,  Caesar  withdrew  his  legions  within
his  camp.

but  are  Thus  unsuccessful  in  enticing  the  Romans  from

t*thatgreat  their  vantage  ground,  the  Belgians  changed  their
slaughter,  plan.  By  a  lateral  movement  they  reached  the
banks  of  the  river  at  a  place  where  the  stream  was
fordable,  with  the  intention  of  crossing  it,  and  thus
throwing  themselves  upon  the  enemy's  rear.  As
soon,  however,  as  the  detachment  at  the  bridge
head  observed  this  demonstration,  they  apprized
the  general,  and  he  immediately  despatched  his
horse  and  light  troops  to  prevent  its  taking  effect.
These  squadrons,  crossing  the  river  by  the  bridge,
reached  the  ford  before  the  Belgians  had  made
good  their  passage,  and  attacked  them  with  their
missiles  while  yet  struggling  in  the  middle  of  the
stream.  A  party  which  had  already  gained  the
opposite  side  was  surrounded  and  cut  to  pieces
by  the  cavalry.  The  attempt,  though  persisted  in
with  obstinate  bravery,  completely  failed,  and  the
Belgians  were  forced  to  betake  themselves  again  to
their  former  quarters.  The  country  which  they
had  ravaged  began  now  to  fail  in  supplies ;  while  at

he  indicates.  A  camp  placed  here  would  be  distant  14,000  toises
from  Rheims,  22,000  from  Soissons,  16,000  from  Laon,  and  8,000
from  Bievre,  which  is  supposed  to  have  been  Bibracte  of  the  Remi.
Precis  des  Guerres  cle  Cesar,  p.  44. ;  Mannert,  ii.  207.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  323

the  same  time  they  heard  that  Divitiacus,  having  CHAP.
collected  the  ^Eduan  forces,  had  entered  their  con-
fines, and  was  carrying  fire  and  sword  to  their
own  homes.  The  confederates,  ill-assorted  and
undisciplined,  flew  each  to  the  defence  of  his  own.
The  confusion  which  attended  upon  this  hasty
break-up,  was  reported  to  Caesar,  and  he  darted
upon  the  disorganized  mass  with  the  rapidity  of
lightning.  The  rear-guard,  if  such  it  might  be
called,  made  a  brave  resistance ;  but  the  Romans
were  invincible  in  their  numbers  and  their  skill,  and
the  day  was  spent  in  merciless  carnage  rather
than  conflict.

On  the  morrow  the  conqueror  pushed  his  success  Reduction
further.1  He  marched  upon  Noviodunum,  the  sfones,Su
principal  stronghold  of  the  Suessiones.  Having
failed  in  taking  it  by  the  first  sudden  assault,  he
constructed  the  movable  towers  which  the  Romans
used  in  their  regular  sieges,  advancing  them  filled
with  combatants  to  the  ramparts,  and  carrying  on
from  them  a  war  of  missiles,  under  cover  of  which
the  walls  were  either  mined  or  shattered  by  the
battering-ram.  These  engines  were  hitherto  un-
known to  the  Gauls,  and  they  soon  found  them
to  be  much  more  efficient  than  their  own  rude
operations.  They  hastened  to  anticipate  the  venge-
ance of  the  conqueror  by  timely  capitulation.  The
lives  of  the  garrison  and  inhabitants  were  assured
to  them  at  the  prayer  of  the  Remi ;  but  Cassar  in-
sisted upon  the  surrender  of  their  arms,  together
with  the  persons  of  the  principal  citizens  and  of

1  Caes.  B.  G.  ii.  12. Noviodunum  is  said  to  be  Soissons. D'An-
ville  ;  Mannert.  n.  i.  205.

Y 2

324  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, the  king's  two  sons. The  nation  was  then  received
among  the  subjects  of  the  republic.

and  of  the Straightway  the  Bellovaci,  into  whose  territory
iiovaci. Cgggar  immediately  advanced,  despairing  of  effectual
resistance, courted  the  clemency  of  the  invader.
At  the  first  rumour  of  his  approach,  the  population
had  crowded  into  Bratuspantium,  their  principal
fortress,  with  all  the  valuables  they  could  remove.
From  hence  they  sent  out  a  train  of  old  men  in
the  garb  and  attitude  of  suppliants. When  the  pro-
consul advanced  within  sight  of  the  walls,  he  found
them  crowned  with  multitudes  of  women  and  chil-
dren, all  stretching  forth  their  hands  towards  him,
and  signifying  by  their  gestures  the  extreme  of  fear
and humiliation. Divitiacus also undertook to
plead their cause. He urged the  wishes  of  his
own  people  for  their  pardon,  declaring  that  they
had  formerly  been  faithful  allies  of  the  JEdui,  and
had  only  abandoned  them  at  the  instigation  of  a
few  evil-disposed  individuals. The  authors  of  the
revolt  had  escaped  into  Britain,  with  which  country
the  Bellovaci  entertained  close  relations. The  mass
of  the  nation,  being  relieved  from  their  presence,
would,  he  doubted  not, return  to  its  duty, and
thereby  increase  the  reputation  of  the  JEdui  for
influence  with  Rome  and  clemency  towards  their
fellow-countrymen. Caesar  was  not  indisposed  to
allow  his  allies  the  credit  of  thus  saving  their  an-
cient clients. He  professed  to  be  overcome by
the  prayers  and  arguments  of  Divitiacus ;  but,  in
consideration  of  the  size  and  importance  of  this
state  \  he  demanded  from  it  not  fewer  than  six

1  Cses.  B.  G.  ii.  4. :  "  Plurimum  inter  eos  Bellovacos  et  virtute  et

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  325

hundred  hostages. When  he  had  received  these, CHAP.
and  had  seized  upon  all  the  arms  he  could  collect,
he  left  the  country,  and  entered  that  of  the  Am-
biani,  who  made  their  submission  and  met  with
similar  treatment.

Thus  far  the  Belgians  had  done  little  to  justify  The
their  reputation  for  superior  valour.  The  force
opposed  to  them  was  indeed  overwhelming;  but
they  had  yielded  almost  without  essaying  their
strength.  But  it  was  not  so  with  the  Nervii  and
their  immediate  allies,  the  Aduatuci,  the  Atrebates,
and  Yeromandui.  The  Nervii  were  peculiarly  proud
of  their  German  descent,  and  affected  to  despise
what  they  termed  the  effeminacy  of  their  Gaulish
neighbours.  According  to  their  ideas,  the  only
security  for  maintaining  their  national  bravery  was
the  preservation  of  the  barbarian  character  in  all
its  unsophisticated  rudeness.1  Accordingly,  they
interdicted  the  introduction  of  foreign  goods,  pro-
hibited the  use  of  wine  and  other  delicacies,  and
prided  themselves  on  the  coarseness  of  their  mode
of  life.  They  bitterly  taunted  the  Suessiones,  Bel-
lovaci,  and  Ambiani  with  their  cowardly  submis-
sion, declared  their  resolution  to  maintain  the
struggle  with  their  own  unassisted  resources,  and
challenged  the  Roman  general  to  follow  them  into
their  fastnesses.  Contemptuously  rejecting  the  de-
fences, clumsy  as  they  were,  which  their  Gaulish
neighbours  adopted,  they  erected  no  walled  fort-

auctoritate  et  hominum  numero  valere." They  boasted that they
could  bring  an  hundred  thousand  warriors  into  the  field.
1  Cses.  B.  G.  ii.  15.

r 3

326  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  resses1;  their  dwellings  were  merely  open  villages ;
'  their  places  of  strength  the  woods  and  marshes  in
which  their  country  abounded.  They  sheltered
their  families  in  the  impregnable  islands  which  ob-
struct the  outlets  of  the  Scheldt  and  Meuse,  while
the  whole  flower  of  the  nation  and  its  allies,  ex-
cepting the  Aduatuci,  who  had  not  yet  arrived,
took  up  their  position  behind  the  Sabis  (Sambre),
in  the  direction  in  which  the  enemy  was  expected
to  advance.2  The  Roman  general  was  not  less
anxious  to  meet  them,  marching  as  he  was  at  the
head  of  one  of  the  finest  armies  that  had  ever
taken  the  field,  consisting  of  eight  legions,  all  full
of  confidence  in  his  good  fortunes  and  their  own
valour.  He  was  attended  also  by  many  of  the
Belgian  chieftains,  who  wished  to  make  a  display
of  zeal  in  his  cause,  while  in  reality  they  were
watching  the  first  opportunity  of  harming  him.

1  Caesar  describes  (ii.  17.)  the  peculiar  mode  which  the  Servians
adopted  for  impeding  the progress  of  cavalry,  by  forming  hedges
of  thorns,  brushwood,  and  the  twisted  branches  of  trees.

2  What  this  direction  was  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  with  pre-
cision. Caesar  marched  from  Amiens ;  but  the  ISTervii  had  no  capital
city  for  him  to  strike  at. He  would  therefore  seek  out  their  army
wherever  it  might  be  posted. He  says  that  he  marched  three  days
through  the  Servian  territories. If  this  is  to  be  interpreted  strictly,
it  would  lead  him  between  the  Scheldt  and  the  Sambre,  on  the  right
bank  of  the  one  and  the  left  of  the  other. If  the  Nervii  placed  them-
selves on  the  right  bank  of  the  Sambre,  they  would  have  abandoned
their  country  to  him  entirely,  nor  would  the  barrier  of  the  Scheldt
have  prevented  his  ravaging  at  least  one  half  of  it. If  he  directed
his  line  of  march  through  the  country  of  the  Veromandui,  the  Nervii
might  have  defended  the  access  to  their  territories  by  placing  them-
selves on  the  left  bank  of  the  Sambre, near  Maubeuge  ; or  if  he
crossed  the  country  of  the  Atrebates,  he  might  propose  to  force  the
passage  of  the  Scheldt  at  Conde  or  Valenciennes. The  critics  have
generally  supposed  the  second  of  these  courses  to  be  that  which  he
adopted.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  327

Some  of  them  gave  secret  notice  to  Bodugnatus,  CHAP.
the  Nerviaii  chieftain,  that  the  order  of  the  ad-
vance was  such  that  the  army  might  be  attacked
with  great  advantage.  Each  legion  marched  sepa-
rately, followed  by  its  long  train  of  baggage  and
military  engines.  If  the  head  of  this  winding
column  were  boldly  assailed,  it  might  be  cut  off  be-
fore effectual  assistance  could  be  rendered  from  the
ranks  behind.  But  the  Belgians  had  not  fought
against  the  Eomans  long  enough  to  understand
their  tactics.  As  soon  as  Caesar  learnt  that  he  was
approaching  the  enemy,  he  altered  the  disposition
of  his  troops.1  Six  legions  now  advanced  in  front,
next  followed  the  whole  of  their  collected  baggage,
under  the  escort  of  the  two  legions  of  recent  levies,
who  formed  the  rear  guard  on  the  march  and  the
reserve  on  the  day  of  battle.  He  selected  for  the
site  of  his  encampment  a  hill  descending  with  a
gentle  slope  to  the  river  Sabis.  As  fast  as  the
legions  arrived  on  the  ground  they  were  employed
in  throwing  up  their  earthworks  for  the  night's
shelter.  The  cavalry  were  despatched  to  clear  the
banks  of  the  stream  of  some  bodies  of  the  enemy's
horse,  that  the  troops  might  enjoy  their  watering-
places  unmolested.  The  Belgian  skirmishers  here-
upon retreated  up  the  opposite  hill  into  the  wood
which  crowned  it,  where  their  main  body  had  al-
ready established  itself  under  shelter  and  unper-
ceived  by  the  Romans.

While  the  legionaries  were  busily  employed  upon  The
their  works,  the  train  of  baggage  began  to  gain  the
summit  of  the  hill. This  was  the  appointed  signal  p°sition»

1  Cses.  B.  G.'u.  19.
T 4

328  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, for the Nervii to burst  from  their  concealment

in  the  wood. They  had  long  waited  for  it,  and

great  had  been  their  disappointment  as  they  saw
legion  after  legion  take  up  its  ground  before  its
arrival.  But  they  were  not  discouraged  when
they  found  that  the  whole  Koman  army  stood
before  them.  The  suddenness  of  their  appear-
ance, and  the  rapidity  of  their  charge,  gave  them
a  great  advantage.  Ca3sar  was  taken  by  sur-
prise ;  it  was  impossible  to  issue  at  once  all  the
orders  requisite  for  the  disposition  of  so  large  a
force.  All  his  quickness  and  presence  of  mind
would  have  been  unavailing,  had  the  Romans
been  less  thoroughly  practised  in  the  kind  of  war-
fare, and  less  trained  to  act  for  themselves  in
cases  of  emergency.  Each  man  seemed  to  know,
as  if  by  instinct,  what  it  was  his  part  to  do,  and
where  to  betake  himself.  The  standard-bearers  flew
to  their  ensigns  planted  in  the  ground ;  the  men
flocked  around  them;  line  and  battalion  formed
spontaneously.  Though  many  had  not  time  to  seize
their  helmets,  or  draw  off  the  leathern  coverings
from  their  shields,  though  some  of  the  standards
were  yet  furled,  and  the  hedges  with  which  the
country  had  been  obstructed  prevented  some  divi-
sions from  seeing  the  movements  of  the  others,  yet
in  a  few  minutes  the  whole  scattered  multitude
was  disposed  in  all  the  intricate  order  of  Roman
battle-array.  Meanwhile,  the  charge  of  the  Nervii
had  swept  off  the  squadrons  of  Gaulish  horse,  to-
gether with  the  light  skirmishers  who  had  crossed
the  stream,  hurling  them  back  upon  the  right
wing  of  the  Romans,  in  which  were  the  twelfth  and

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  329

seventh  legions.  On  the  left  the  ninth  and  tenth  CHAP.
met  the  attack  of  the  Atrebates,  arid,  aided  by
the  superiority  of  ground,  repulsed  their  wearied
and  breathless  assailants.  The  Atrebates,  thus
beaten  from  the  brow  of  the  hill,  recrossed  the
river  in  confusion,  losing  many  in  its  waters,  the
Eomans  pursuing  them,  and  compelling  them  to
renew  the  combat  on  the  other  side.  At  the  same
time  the  Eoman  centre,  consisting  of  the  eighth
and  eleventh  legions,  sustained  the  charge  of  the
Veromandui,  and  confined  their  assailants  to  the
strip  of  level  ground  between  the  acclivity  in  front
and  the  river,  which  they  had  tumultuously  crossed,
in  their  rear.

The  conflict  was  thus  raging  in  every  quarter  and  cany
with  no  decided  success  on  either  side,  when  a  move-  {
ment  of  the  Nervii  on  the  right  suddenly  changed
the  face  of  affairs.  Their  numbers  were  such  as
to  enable  them  to  keep  the  Eomans  in  check  with
a  part  only  of  their  forces,  while  another  division
turned  their  flank,  and  rushed  furiously  up  the
hill  on  which  the  encampment  was  marked  out.
On  the  summit  of  this  acclivity  the  cavalry,  which
had  been  repulsed  from  the  other  side  of  the  river,
had  taken  breath  and  formed  again  ;  but  the  sight
of  the  Nervii  revived  their  former  panic,  and  they
fled  a  second  time  without  a  blow.  Meanwhile,  the
-suttlers  and  occupants  of  the  camp,  which  the
reserve  had  not  yet  reached,  had  followed  the  left
wing  in  the  hope  of  sharing  in  the  plunder  of  the
Atrebates,  whose  confusion  on  the  first  attack  had
appeared  irrecoverable.  When  they  now  turned
their  heads  and  beheld  the  Nervii  in  possession  of

330  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, their  works,  they  cried  that  all  was  over,  and  dis-
,  persed  in  every  direction. At  the  same  moment

the  cavalry  which  the  Treviri  had  sent  to  Caesar's
assistance,  glad  to  believe  the  battle  lost,  left  the
field  with  precipitation,  and  spread  far  and  wide
the  welcome  news,  that  the  Roman  camp  was  taken,
and  the  army  totally  routed.

imminent  Caesar  had  been  himself  engaged  on  the  left  wing ;
the  Roman  one  moment  yet  remained  to  confirm  the  flagging
army.  resolution  of  the  legions  on  the  right,  and  a  glance
revealed  to  him  at  the  critical  instant  the  immi-
nence of  his  peril.  He  threw  himself  immediately
into  the  post  of  danger.  He  found  the  twelfth  le-
gion almost  surrounded,  and  the  men  huddling
together  about  their  ensigns,  the  centurions  and
standard-bearers  for  the  most  part  slain,  despair
beginning  to  prevail  among  the  survivors,  and  fugi-
tives escaping  in  numbers  from  the  ranks.  The
Nervii  meanwhile  were  concentrating  their  forces
all  around  them,  and  pressing  the  attack  with  inex-
haustible energy.  In  this  extremity  the  personal
exertions  of  the  general  decided  the  fortune  of
the  day.  He  knew  that  the  reserve  was  pressing
eagerly  forward  to  his  succour;  but  to  maintain
his  position  and  prevent  premature  dispersion  it
was  necessary  to  gain  more  room  for  his  men  to
use  their  arms,  and  to  execute  the  manoeuvre  of
turning  the  two  legions  back  to  back.  Caesar,  in-
deed, well  knew  his  duty  as  a  general  to  abstain
from  personal  exposure  in  combat;  but  on  such
an  occasion  as  this  he  could  throw  off  all  re-
straint, and  fight  in  the  first  rank  with  the  mean-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  o31

est  of  the  soldiery.  "When  his  men  saw  him  thus  CHAP.
measuring  himself  with  the  enemy  hand  to  hand,
armed  with  a  buckler  which  he  had  snatched
from  a  soldier  of  the  hindmost  rank1;  when  they
heard  him  encouraging  their  centurions  by  name,
and  acquitting  himself  among  them  as  their  equal
and  fellow,  every  hand  was  nerved  with  new  vigour,
every  order  he  could  utter  was  obeyed  with  ardour
or  anticipated  by  instinct,  and  a  few  minutes  suf-
ficed to  clear  a  space  in  which  the  two  legions
could  spread  their  ranks  and  place  themselves  in  a
position  for  mutual  support  and  defence.2

Thus  arrayed  the  Romans  were  able  to  maintain  The  Roman
themselves,  at  least  for  a  time,  against  the  numbers  rescued  by
and  energy  of  their  assailants. The  Nervii  made
little  use  of  distant  missiles :  they  trusted  to  their  serve-
great  strength  and  stature,  and  were  eager  to  close
with  an  enemy  to  whom  they  held  themselves  per-
sonally superior. But  the  cool  intrepidity  of  the
sturdy  legionary,  together  with  his  thorough  com-
mand of  his  cut  and  thrust  sword  of  unfailing
temper,  was  more  than  a  match,  man  to  man,  for
the  German  with  his  ponderous falchion, which
embarrassed  the  slow  and  heavy  movements  of  its
bearer. The  agile  Roman,  looking  over  the  rim  of

1  Compare  the  conduct  of  Marius  in  the  battle  with  the  Teutones.
Plut.  Mar.  20.

2  Compare  Suet.  Jul.  62.  :  "  Inclinatam  aciem  solus  ssepe  restituit,
obsistens  fugientibus  retinensque  singulos,  et  contortis  faucibus  con-
vertens  in  hostem  :  et  quidem  adeo  plerumque  trepidos,  ut  aquilifero
moranti  se  cuspide  sit  comminatus,  alius  in  manu  retinentis  reliquerit
signum." Also  Lucan.  vii.  576. :

"  Promovet  ipse  acies,  impellit  terga  suorum,
Verbere  conversse  cessantes  excitat  hastae."

332

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
VII.

The  Nervii
are  routed,

his  shield,  held  close  to  his  breast,  attracted  the
eye  of  his  gigantic  foe,  while  he  pierced  his  belly
from  below ;  and  as  long  as  he  had  room  to  use
his  weapons,  his  activity  and  skill  in  fence  made
him  almost  invulnerable.  At  length  the  reserve
made  its  appearance  on  the  brow  of  the  hill,  and,
at  the  same  moment,  Labienus,  on  the  left  wing,
having  driven  the  Atrebates  to  the  summit  of  the
German  position,  and  even  occupied  their  camp,
perceived  from  above  the  distress  of  his  general,
and  detached  the  tenth  legion  to  his  assistance.  A
strong  reinforcement  of  troops,  some  fresh  and
the  others  victorious,  now  poured  exultingly  upon
the  rear  and  flanks  of  the  Nervii.  The  fugitives
reappeared  in  the  field,  and  proved  by  renewed
exertions  their  anxiety  to  efface  the  stain  of  their
defection.  The  wounded  and  the  dying  collected
their  failing  energies  to  raise  themselves  on  their
shields  and  hurl  their  arms  at  the  enemy.  Courage
and  confidence  everywhere  revived,  and  the  victory
of  the  Romans  became  at  last  assured.  Neverthe-
less, the  resolution  of  the  Nervii  remained  indomi-
table to  the  last.  They  were  celebrated  as  the
bravest  of  the  Belgians,  themselves  the  bravest  of
the  Gauls,  and  never  did  they  better  sustain  their
character  than  on  that  fatal  day.  Their  eulogy  is
preserved  in  the  written  testimony  of  their  con-
queror; and  the  Romans  long  remembered,  and
never  failed  to  signalize,  their  formidable  valour.1
But  this  recollection  of  their  ancient  prowess

1  The  authorities  for  the  account  of  this  great  battle  are  :  —  Caes.
B.  G.  ii.  19—27. ;  Liv.  Epit.  civ. ;  Plut.  CCES.  20. ;  Flor.  iii.  10. ;  Dion,
xxxix.  3. ;  Oros.  vi.  7.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  333

became  from  that  day  the  principal  monument  of CHAP.
their  name  and  history,  for  the  defeat  they  now
sustained  almost annihilated  the  nation. Their  and  their
combatants  were  cut  off  almost  to  a  man. The  most^e-'
elders  and  the  women,  who  had  been  left  in  secure  str°yed-
retreats,  came  forth  of  their  own  accord  to  solicit
the  conqueror's  clemency,  and  enumerated  the  losses
of  their  tribe. "  Of  six  hundred  senators,"  they
said,  "  we  have  lost  all  but  three ;  of  sixty  thousand
fighting  men  five  hundred  only  remain." Caesar
treated the survivors with compassion, allowed
them  the  free  use  of  their  territories, and pro-
mised to  shelter  the  scanty  remnant  from  the  malice
of  the  neighbouring  tribes.

The  narrative  of  Caesar,  which  forms  so  clear  observa-
and  interesting  a  guide  through  the  whole  course
of  his  policy  and  tactics  in  Gaul,  is  in  general  so
concise,  and  enters  so  little  into  technical  details,
as  to  foil  the  military  critics  who  profess  to  study
in  it  the  art  of  war.  Nevertheless,  it  would  be  diffi-
cult to  persuade  ourselves  that  in  this  celebrated
battle,  in  which  he  ran  such  imminent  risk  of  de-
struction, he  was  not  completely  taken  by  surprize,
and  had  failed  to  adopt  the  precautions  of  a  con-
summate captain.  He  had  sent  forward  his  scouts
in  the  early  part  of  the  day ;  and  it  was  from  some
deserters  perhaps  from  his  advanced  parties  that
the  Belgians  had  ascertained  the  spot  where  he
proposed  to  form  his  encampment  for  the  night.1
When  he  arrived  on  the  ground  he  intended  to
take  up,  he  still  pushed  cavalry  and  light  infantry
in  front  to  clear  the  country  before  him ;  but  these

1  C*s.  B.  C.  ii.  17.|

334  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  were  so  little  in  advance  of  him,  or  performed  their
'  service  so  negligently,  as  to  allow  a  wood,  appa-
rently only  a  few  bowshots  from  his  lines,  to  con-
ceal the  whole  force  of  the  enemy  assembled  im-
mediately behind  it.  At  the  same  moment  he
allowed  his  troops  to  pile  their  arms  and  proceed
to  the  work  of  raising  their  entrenchments  as  if
in  perfect  security.  If  he  could  not  trust  his
Gaulish  cavalry  out  of  his  sight,  he  should  at  least
have  taken  the  precaution  of  keeping  a  large  portion
of  his  forces  under  arms  to  protect  the  others
while  laying  out  the  camp.  This  from  his  own
account  he  would  appear  to  have  neglected,  and  to
have  trusted  partly  to  his  belief  that  the  enemy
was  still  at  a  distance,  and  partly  perhaps  to  the
natural  defence  of  the  river,  though  he  admits  that
the  stream  was  only  three  feet  in  depth.  The  ra-
pidity of  the  barbarian  onset  was  probably  greater
than  he  had  anticipated;  but  it  may  be  conjectured
that  he  exaggerates  the  confusion  in  which  his  own
forces  were  found,  and  that  at  least  the  legions  of
Labienus,  on  the  left,  were  not  unprepared  for  the
possibility  of  an  attack.1

Reduction  The  remainder  of  the  Belgian  forces  effected
Adoatud  their  escape  during  the  protracted  resistance  of  the
Nervii,  and  betook  themselves  to  their  several  homes,
each  hoping  that  his  own  turn  of  retribution  might
come  the  last.  The  Aduatuci,  who  had  not  ac-
tually borne  a  share  in  the  battle,  were  the  first
upon  whom  the  Romans  threw  themselves.2  Their
forces  were  in  full  march  to  join  the  combined

1  Precis  des  Guerres  de  Cesar,  p.  45.

2  Cses.  B.  G.  ii.  29—32.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  335

armies  of  their  countrymen  when  they  learnt  the  CHAP.
news  of  the  day's  disaster.  But  they  relied  on  the
strength  of  their  chief  position,  and  defied  the  vic-
tors to  a  trial  of  arms.  Deserting  every  village  and
open  place,  they  collected  the  whole  of  their  popu-
lation, together  with  all  their  movables,  in  one  spot,
the  flat  summit  of  a  rocky  eminence,  defended  on
three  sides  by  a  natural  escarpment,  and  on  the
fourth  by  a  double  rampart  on  the  brow  of  a  gentle
declivity.1  This  tribe  were  the  descendants  of  the
garrison  which  the  Cimbri  had  left  in  that  part  of
the  country  in  charge  of  their  hoarded  spoils  before
they  set  out  on  their  fatal  expedition  to  Italy.2
They  had  increased  from  a  body  of  six  thousand
warriors  to  a  population  of  ten  times  that  number,
of  whom  nineteen  thousand  were  counted  as  com-
batants. Despising  the  quailing  and  unresisting
tribes  which  lay  between,  Ca3sar  made  directly  for
the  entrenchment  of  these  bolder  enemies.  He
quietly  constructed  his  engines  of  assault  and  his
towers,  with  the  use  of  which  most  of  the  Belgians
were  still  unacquainted.  The  besieged  collected  on
their  walls,  in  the  strength  of  which  they  were
blindly  confident,  and  inquired  tauntingly,  what
was  the  purpose  of  these  monstrous  and  cumber-
some machines,  and  how  a  nation  of  dwarfs  (for
the  small  stature  of  the  Italians  was  always  a  matter

1  D'Anville  discovers  a  spot  which  corresponds  with  this  descrip-
tion in  Falais;  others  identify  it  with  Namur. Mannert  (n.  i.  199.)
makes  the  country  of  the  Eburones  extend  from  the  Scheldt  to  the
Meuse,  and  places  their  fortress  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Maestricht ;
while  Walckenaer  shows  that  it  is  most  probably  Tongres  (G.  des  G.
11.  286.).

2  Ca?s.  B.  G.  ii.  29.

336  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, of  derision  to  the  northern  barbarians)  should  move
them  to  the  assault  ? The  Romans  made  no  repty,

but  finished  their  preparations,  and  applied  their
mechanical  forces,  till  the  towers  were  seen  to  nod
above  the  summit  of  the  Belgian  ramparts.  The
besieged  were  panic-stricken,  and  declared  that  the
gods  themselves  fought  on  the  side  of  the  invaders.
They  had  now  no  other  thought  than  how  to  make
terms  with  their  invincible  enemy.  They  only
entreated  that,  if  required,  as  they  expected,  to
deliver  up  their  arms,  they  might  be  protected
against  their  neighbours,  so  universal  was  the  feel-
ing of  insecurity  among  the  Gallic  tribes,  their
jealousy  of  each  other  and  sense  of  mutual  injuries.
This  was,  no  doubt,  the  secret  of  the  speedy  dis-
solution of  the  formidable  confederacy  which  the
Belgians  had  formed  at  the  beginning  of  the  year.
Caesar  gave  the  promise  they  desired,  and  demanded
their  arms.  They  threw  down  from  their  walls  im-
mense quantities  of  weapons  and  armour,  till  the
heap  equalled,  it  is  said,  the  height  of  the  rampart ;
but  a  gleam  of  hope  had  entered  into  their  breasts,
and  they  still  reserved  a  considerable  store  which
they  concealed  in  a  chosen  spot.  The  Roman  army
was  then  admitted  within  the  enclosure,  and  the
Their.  place  formally  surrendered.  Having  thus  obtained
Severely7  apparently  his  principal  object,  the  proconsul  was
punished,  preparing  to  quit  the  country,  and  extend  his  in-
cursions into  other  districts.  He  withdrew  his
troops  from  the  fortress,  and  passed  the  night  in
his  own  camp.  The  Aduatuci  seized  their  hidden
weapons,  and  made  a  desperate  sally  upon  the
Roman  entrenchments,  which  they  expected  to  find

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  337

now  less  carefully  guarded. But  the  vigilance  of CHAP.
the  general  had  not  been  lulled  asleep. At  the
first  approach  of  danger  the  soldiers  were  found
at  their  posts,  and  after  a  furious  encounter,  pro-
longed by  the  conscious  guilt  and  despair  of  the
barbarians,  the  Romans  were  completely  victorious.
The  next  day  Caesar  re-entered  their  stronghold
without  resistance,  and  vindicated  the  injured  ma-
jesty of  the  republic  by  selling  the  whole  remnant
of  the  tribe  as  slaves. The  remaining  states  now  General
poured  in  offers  of  submission,  which  appear  to  have  Of  the  Bei-
been  accepted  on  easy  terms. We  must  suppose  giant
that  Caesar  exacted  from them the  surrender  of
their  arms,  together  with  sufficient  pledges  for  their
fidelity. But  he  abandoned  to  them  the  free  pos-
session of  their  lands  and  laws. He  trusted  to  the
gradual  influence  of  Roman  manners,  to  the  coun-
sels of  the  Roman  emissaries  whom  he  introduced
among  them,  and  to  the  weight  of  the  mere  name
of  the  republic  in  directing  the  conduct  of  their
political  affairs,  to  familiarize  them  in  no  great
length  of  time  with  a  state  of  entire  dependence.

It  was  probably  not  till  after  the  great  defeat  Caesar  semis
of  the  Nervii,  in  which  the  whole  of  Caesar's  forces  to'  demand

had  been  engaged,  that  he  was  enabled  to  detach

a  single  legion,  under  the  command  of  his  young  tribes  in  the

»  J  o north-west.

lieutenant  P.  Orassus,  the  son  of  the  triumvir,  to
secure  the  tranquillity  of  the  tribes  inhabiting  the
coast  of  the  British  channel  beyond  the  mouth  of
the  Seine.1  Among  these  were  the  Lexovii,  the
Unelli  2,  the  Curiosolitse  and  the  Osismii.  On  the

1  Cses.  B.  G.  ii.  34.

1  Unelli,  mod.  C6tentin  :  Osismii,  dep.  Finisterre  :  Curiosolitse,  mod.
VOL.  I.  Z

338  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  southern  shore  of  Armorica  dwelt  the  Veneti,  the
most  formidable  of  all  the  nations  which  composed
the  western  division  of  the  Kymric  population  of
Gaul.  These,  together  with  the  Aulerci,  Rhedones,
Carnutes,  Andi,  and  Turones,  occupied  the  whole
space  between  the  lower  Seine  and  the  lower
Loire,  and  were  apparently  closely  united  among
themselves,  while  at  the  same  time  the  traditional
recollection  of  a  common  origin  made  them  look
not  without  feelings  of  sympathy  upon  the  fate
of  the  Belgians  in  the  east.  In  the  affairs  of  the
south  they  took  no  interest,  and  seem  to  have
had  little  acquaintance  with  the  character  of  the
foreign  power  which  the  ^Edui  had  recently  called
into  Gaul.  The  small  force  which  Crassus  led  was
sufficient  to  terrify  them,  one  after  another,  into
submission.  The  proconsul  was  satisfied  perhaps
with  deterring  them  from  giving  aid  to  the  Bel-
gians, and  considered  the  surrender  of  a  few  host-
ages into  his  hands  as  an  ample  acknowledgment
of  his  superiority.  The  Carnutes,  the  Andi,  and
the  Turones,  whose  countries  formed  the  key  of  the
whole  region  north  of  the  Loire,  were  selected  to
bear  the  burden  of  provisioning  the  Roman  army,
which  was  quartered  in  their  territories  for  the
wmter-  Having  thus  secured  the  extensive  ac-
itaiyforthe  quisitions  he  had  made  in  this  successful  campaign,
Caesar  hastened  himself  to  the  Hither  Gaul,  as  in

Coursault,  dep.  Cotes  du  Nord :  Veneti,  mod.  Vannes,  dep.  Morbihan.
Lexovii  is  a  conjectural  reading  for  Sesuvii,  an  unknown  name.
They  occupied  a  part  of  the  coast  of  Calvados.  The  Aulerci  be-
longed to  Maine  and  the  south  of  Normandy,  the  Rhedones  to
Rennes  in  Bretagne.  Mannert.  n.  i.  149.  &c. ;  comp.  Cses.  B.  G.  iii.
9.  11.  17.  29.,  vii.  75.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  389

the  autumn  preceding.1  He  took  up  his  residence  CHAP.
at  Lucca,  at  the  extreme  frontier  of  his  province,
where  he  put  himself  in  communication  with  his
friends  at  Rome,  and  held  a  brilliant  court  of  clients
and  dependents.  The  senate,  however  hostile  and
jealously  disposed,  was  dazzled  by  the  brilliancy
of  his  achievements,  or  unable  to  stem  the  torrent
of  popular  acclamation.  It  decreed  a  thanksgiving
of  fifteen  days  in  honour  of  his  victories,  a  duration
exceeding  that  of  any  previous  festival  of  the  kind.

The  campaigns  which  have  been  narrated  in  the  comparison
preceding  pages,  signalized  as  they  were  by  a  rapid
succession  of  hard-fought  battles  in  the  open  field,
suggest  some  remarks  upon  the  nature  of  the  point  of
warfare  in  which  Caesar  and  his  veterans  reaped
their  undying  laurels.  While  the  counsels  of  the
Gauls  were  marred  by  manifold  jealousies,  and  by
their  independent  mode  of  carrying  on  the  war,
even  after  they  had  been  brought  into  alliance,  the
Romans  enjoyed  the  inestimable  advantage  of  a
single  head  to  plan,  and  an  army  disciplined  as  a
single  hand  to  execute.  The  senate  allowed  their
general  uncontrolled  power  in  the  administration
of  his  province,  and  the  resources  he  could  com-
mand were  at  all  times  sufficient  to  bring  into
action  as  many  troops  as  he  could  supply  or  ma-
noeuvre. On  the  other  hand,  the  personal  qualities
of  the  Gauls,  their  courage  and  bodily  strength,
were  at  least  equal  to  those  of  their  opponents ;  in
size  and  stature  they  were  individually  superior,
though  wanting  in  that  compactness  of  limb  and
power  of  endurance  which  at  this  time  so  eminently

1  Caes.  B.  G.  ii.  35.
z 2

340  HISTOEY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  distinguished  the  natives  of  southern  Europe.1
'  As  regarded  the  climate  of  the  country  in  which
the  war  was  waged,  neither  side  perhaps  had  any
advantage  over  the  other.  The  Gauls,  indeed,
fought  on  their  own  soil  and  under  their  own
skies,  colder  in  winter  and  more  humid  at  all  sea-
sons than  those  south  of  the  Alps.  But  the  habits
and  discipline  of  the  Roman  soldier  had  hardened
him  against  the  exhalations  of  the  marshes  and  the
change  or  privation  of  food,  no  less  than  against
the  extremities  of  heat  and  cold.  Throughout  his
Gallic  campaigns  Caesar  makes  no  allusion  to  the
prevalence  of  sickness  in  his  camps ;  and  if  it  be
true  that  his  ranks  too  were  recruited  from  the
south  of  Gaul,  yet  it  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the
Roman  legionary  seems  rarely  to  have  suffered  from
those  accidental  causes  of  mortality  which  are  more
to  be  dreaded  in  modern  warfare  than  the  sword.
Caesar's  troops  quartered  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Brundisium  in  the  autumn  of  the  year  705  suffered
from  the  malaria  of  the  Apulian  coast,  but  these
were  composed,  to  a  great  extent,  of  recruits  from
physical  the  northern  parts  of  Gaul.2  How  much  of  this
effects  of  immunity  is  to  be  attributed  to  his  food,  his

climate,  J  t  t  '

food,  and habits,  and  his  clothing,  is  a  question  which  de-
serves  more  attention  from  the  physiologist  than

1  The  composition  of  Caesar's  legions  will  be  considered  more  par-
ticularly on  a  future  occasion  ;  his  soldiers  were  for  the  most  part
Roman  citizens  of  the  Gallic  provinces  on  either  side  of  the  Alps.
These  might  be  either  of  Roman  or  of  Gaulish  extraction.  The  con-
tempt expressed  by  the  Belgians  for  their  diminutive  stature  is  an
additional  proof  of  the  great  diversity  of  race  among  the  inhabitants
of  different  parts  of  Gaul.

*  Comp.  Plut.  Mar.  26.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  341

it  seerns  to  have  obtained. The  absence  or  rarity CHAP.

VII.

of  ardent  spirits  is  not  sufficient  to  account  for  it,
inasmuch  as  unusual  or  superabundant  food  is
hardly  less  detrimental  to  the  soldier  than  intoxi-
cation, and  the  barbarian  armies  which  entered
Italy  frequently  melted  away  through  careless  and
indulgent  living.  But  the  natives  of  the  North
have  been  found  less  capable  of  enduring  the  rigour
of  a  severe  winter  than  men  born  in  a  more  hospi-
table climate.1  Reared  in  the  centre  of  the  tempe-
rate zone,  the  Italians  shrunk  from  neither  extreme
of  heat  or  cold.  Vigorous  in  frame,  and  elastic  in
constitution,  they  bore  the  standards  of  the  re-
public through  Asia  and  Africa  without  sickening  ;
while  at  this  day  the  French  are  consumed  by
thousands  in  Algeria,  and  fevers  decimate  the
British  regiments  in  the  East  and  West  Indies.2

In  the  field  the Gauls  were  almost destitute  Roman

of  tactics  or  artificial  resources. But  while  fire-  0

arms  have  furnished  ingenuity  and  discipline  with
irresistible  weapons,  the  barbarians  before  their
invention  were  much  more  nearly  matched  with
regular  soldiery  than  in  modern  times.  The  num-
bers and  weight  of  the  Gaulish  charge  could
hardly  be  resisted  by  the  firmest  battalions.  It
was  usual  to  employ  the  cavalry  to  bear  the  first
brunt  of  the  encounter;  but  even  these  could

1  It  is  a  well-known  remark  that  the  Italian  soldiers  in  Napoleon's.
Russian  campaign  suffered  less  from  the  cold  than  the  Germans.

2  The  compliment  which  Claudian  pays  to  the  grandfather  of  Ho-
norius  might  have  been  applied  to  themselves  by  many  of  the  Roman
legionaries  :

"  Ille  Caledoniis  posuit  qui  castra  pruinis,
Qui  medios  Libyse  sub  casside  pertulit  aestus."  —  Claud,  viii.  26.
z 3

342  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  seldom  do  more  than  slightly  check  and  retard
'  their  impetuous  rush.  After  exhausting  his  feeble
missiles,  the  legionary  could  only  fall  back  upon
the  hinder  ranks  for  support.  He  was  soon  pressed
into  the  closest  array  by  the  weight  of  accumu-
lating masses,  and  when  ordered  to  draw  his
sword,  could  no  longer  wield  it  with  freedom.
With  modern  infantry  the  closer  their  array  the
deadlier  is  the  fire  of  their  musketry,  the  steadier
the  advanced  points  of  their  bayonets.  In  such
an  emergency  the  long  pike  of  the  phalanx  was  a
formidable  protection  to  the  Macedonian  infantry ;
but  that  weapon  was  too  cumbrous  for  general
service,  and  never  adopted  by  the  active  and  in-
dependent Roman,  who  put  all  his  trust  in  his
sword.  In  such  cases  the  general  relied  upon  his
light  cavalry1,  whose  sudden  onset  and  no  less
rapid  retreat  confused  and  distracted  the  enemy,
and  constantly  broke  and  shivered  the  masses  with
which  he  came  to  the  charge.  The  great  peril  of
the  Eomans  in  the  battle  with  the  Nervii  arose
from  their  cavalry  being  unable  to  rally  after  their
first  repulse,  and  so  to  relieve  the  legions  from
the  increasing  pressure  of  the  Belgian  infantry.
Each  Roman  soldier  required  a  space  of  three  feet
on  each  side  of  him  for  the  free  movement  of  his
arms.  But  when  room  was  cleared  for  a  moment,
the  legion -immediately  extended  its  front  again
and  separated  its  battalions.  Then  each  man  was

1  There  was,  properly  speaking,  no  distinction  between  heavy  and
light  cavalry  in  the  Roman  armies  (Guischard,  Mem.  Mil.  iii.  42.),
but  the  equipment  of  that  service  would  bring  it  generally  under  the
latter  denomination,  according  to  our  notions.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  343

able  once  more  to  ply  his  sword,  singling  out  an CHAP.
adversary,  getting  within  his  guard1,  and  carving >IL
his  naked  body  with  point  or  edge  of  the  finest
temper.

While  the  rank  and  file  of  the  Koman  legion  Personal
were protected by  plates of  iron on the head,  oft™Ger-
breast, and shoulders, the Gauls were but im-  mans--
perfectly furnished with defensive armour, and
even  this  they  frequently  rejected  with  the  reckless
and ostentatious spirit of their nation.2 Ac-
cordingly, when  they  encountered  a  foe  who had
firmness  to  withstand  their  first  shock,  they  had
little chance of  coming  off  victorious  from the
combat of  man  with man. The  obstinacy  with
which  they  fought, and  the  courage  with  which
they  maintained  their  ground,  even  when  they  had
no  opportunity  of  returning  blow  for  blow,  only
served  to  swell  the  number  of  the  victims. The
great  disproportion,  indeed,  between  the  numbers

1  Compare  Polyb.  ii.  33.  :  2iWpa/ioj"r££  «£  rag  x"Pa£  T°v£  f-'tv  K«X-
roif  cnrpa.KTQVQ  tTroirjffav  'PwjttaTot,  d^Xofifvoi  TT}V  tie  StdpcrewQ  CIVTWV  fidxqv,

O  TTtp ISlOV kffTl TaXaTlKTJS  X|0£('a£, ^" T<^ p1lt>ap<3£  K.KVT1}\ia.  TO  £l'00t;  t\tlV.

Liv.  xxii.  46.  :  "  Gallis  gladii  prselongi  et  sine  mucronibus." Comp.
Plut.  Mar.  25.  :  MfyaXaT?  ixpwvro  ical  (Bapeiaig  paxaipatg.

2  Thierry  asserts  that  the  Gauls  long  resisted  the  use  of  defensive
armour  as  an  unworthy  innovation. I  find  no  express  authority  for
this  statement;  but  Livy  (xxii.  46.,  xxxviii.  21.)  represents  the  Gauls
as  fighting  naked,  and  stripping  themselves  for  the combat. In
the  time  of  Louis  XIV.  it  was  necessary  to  issue  repeated  ordinances
to  prevent  the  French  officers  from  throwing  off  their  armour  in  the
field. The  motive,  perhaps,  in  both  cases  was  partly  vaingloriousness
and  partly  laziness. Probably  the  custom  of  wearing  armour  among
the  Gauls  did  not  extend  beyond  the  nobles. Their  helmets,  generally
the  skins  of  animals'  heads,  their  corslets,  chainmail,  and  the  ornaments
with  which  they  covered  themselves,  are  described  by  Diodor.  Sic.  v.
30.  ;  Varro,  L.  L.  iv.  ;  Strabo  and  others. Compare  Cluvier,  Germ.
Ant.  i.

z 4

344  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, slain  in  these  battles  on  either  side  is  an  ordinary

VII

characteristic  of  ancient  warfare. In  modern  en-

gagements the  greater  part  of  the  carnage  is  caused
by  the  artillery,  which  may  frequently  be  served
with  nearly  equal  precision  and  effect  by  both
parties,  until  the  superiority  of  one  being  ascer-
tained, the  day  is  decided  by  the  general  advance
of  its  lines.  There  is  no  reason,  therefore,  to
doubt  that  the  victories  of  the  Romans  over  the
Gauls  were  gained  in  many  cases  with  the  trifling
loss  which  the  victors  themselves  acknowledged ;
at  the  same  time  it  is  evident  that  the  dead  of
the  enemy  are  generally  estimated  upon  mere
conjecture,  without  any  attempt  at  actual  enu-
meration.

campaign  When  Caesar  left  the  Further  Gaul  for  his  Cis-
GafblTn3  alpine  province,  he  directed  his  lieutenant  Sergius
Galba  to  occupy  the  territories  of  the  Nantuates,
Yeragri,  arid  Seduni,  with  the  twelfth  legion  and  a
body  of  horse.  This  tract  of  country  extended
from  the  lake  Lemanus  to  the  highest  chain  of
the  Alps,  comprehending  the  districts  of  Cha-
blais,  in  Savoy,  and  the  Yalais,  or  valley  of  the
upper  Rhone.  The  position  of  the  Seduni  may
still  be  traced  in  the  name  of  Sitten,  which  was
perhaps  the  site  of  their  principal  town.  Octo-
durus,  the  capital  of  the  Yeragri,  may  have  occu-
pied the  spot  where  stands  the  modern  town  of
Martigny,  for  it  was  considered  an  important
position  for  defending  the  Pennine  pass,  to  secure
which  seems  to  have  been  the  principal  object  of
this  expedition.  We  have  seen  that  the  ordinary
route  of  the  Roman  armies  into  Gaul  was  that  of

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  345

the  Via  Aurelia,  by  the  sea  coast,  sufficiently  CHAP.
direct  as  long  as  the  connexions  of  the  republic
beyond  the  Alps  were  limited  to  the  Province  and
the  cities  of  the  Mediterranean,  but  highly  cir-
cuitous and  inconvenient  for  operations  in  the
more  northern  parts  of  Gaul.  CaBsar  had  on  one
occasion  hazarded  the  passage  of  the  Cottian  Alps,
in  order  to  reach  Vienna  with  more  expedition ;
but  the  experiment  had  served  to  prove  the  in-
security of  such  a  route,  and  it  was  now  his  object
to  effect  an  easier  and  safer  line  of  communication.
The  pass  of  the  Great  St.  Bernard,  the  Alpis  Pen-
nina  of  the  Eoman  geographers,  was  already  fre-
quented for  the  purposes  of  traffic :  the  merchants,
probably,  bought  off  the  hostility  of  the  natives  by
the  payment  of  blackmail.  But  the  wild  moun-
taineers were  more  jealous  of  the  approach  of  the
Roman  armies  to  their  solitary  fastnesses,  and
were  disposed  to  dispute  with  them  every  inch  of
their  formidable  gorges.

Galba  seized  upon  Octodurus,  which  was  divided  He  occupies
into  two  parts,  either  by  the  Rhone  or  the  little  river  Octodurus»
Dranse.  One  quarter  of  the  town  he  abandoned  to
the  natives,  but  occupied  the  rest  with  his  own
forces,  and  proceeded  to  fortify  it  with  a  ditch  and
rampart.  Thus  securely  posted,  all  he  needed  was
provisions,  and  these  he  demanded  of  the  natives
by  way  of  tribute.  The  valley  in  which  the  town
lay  was  extremely  narrow,  and  closely  hemmed  in
by  lofty  and  barren  mountains,  so  as  to  produce
very  scanty  supplies.  Subsistence  for  an  army
could  only  be  procured  from  a  distance,  and  the
people  of  the  country  paid  little  regard  to  the

346

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  commands  of  an  intruder  whom  they  had  scarcely
'  seen.  Two  cohorts  were  despatched  to  forage,
when  the  Gauls,  taking  courage  from  the  reduced
number  of  the  garrison,  assembled  with  all  their
forces  on  the  neighbouring  heights,  and  harassed
it  by  repeated  sallies  from  their  fastnesses.  They
were  the  more  inflamed  against  the  invaders  be-
cause many  of  their  children  had  been  exacted
as  hostages.*  They  saw  too  that  the  pretence  of
opening  the  road  was  only  a  cover  to  ulterior
designs,  and  that  it  was  intended  to  retain  their
city  in  permanent  occupation.

but  is  The  Roman  general  became  seriously  alarmed

abandon  it at  these  hostile  demonstrations,  for  which  he  was
s" unprepared. He  had  not  yet  collected  sufficient

troops  from  stores  to  enable him  to  stand  a  siege,  nor  were

the  country.

his  entrenchments  completed.  He  called  a  coun-
cil of  war,  in  which  many  proposed  to  abandon
the  place  at  once,  and  cut  their  way,  as  they  best
might,  through  the  multitudes  augmenting  around
them.  But  the  opinion  prevailed  that  it  was  too
soon  yet  to  have  recourse  to  such  desperate  mea-
sures ;  retreat  should  be  reserved  for  the  last  ex-
tremity ;  art  and  discipline  were  meant  to  supply
the  place  of  efficient  numbers  and  full  preparation.
This  determination,  however,  only  cost  the  Romans
greater  loss,  for  it  was  soon  discovered  that  their
defences  were  not  sufficiently  strong  to  make  an
effective  resistance  to  the  numbers  and  energy  of
the  assailants,  who  kept  up  a  constant  and  mur-
derous discharge  of  missiles  upon  the  garrison,
while  they  filled  the  ditch  with  stones  and  faggots,
and  hacked  at  the  palisades  and  earthworks  with

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  347

pikes  and  axes.  Many  of  the  Romans  had  fallen,  CHAP.
and  the  defence  was  beginning  to  waver,  when
Sextius  Baculus  and  C.  Volusenus,  officers  of  ap-
proved courage,  pressed  in  the  strongest  terms  the
necessity  of  retreating.  Galba  yielded  to  their  de-
mands, and  the  suddenness  of  his  sally,  together
with  the  valour  of  his  legionaries,  as  soon  as  they
could  grapple  with  the  foe,  sufficed  to  throw  the
Gauls  into  confusion  and  drive  them  to  a  distance.
But  Galba,  considering  that  he  had  come  into  the
country  to  take  up  winter-quarters,  and  not  to
fight,  much  straitened  also  by  the  scantiness  of  his
supplies,  determined  to  return  at  once  into  the
Province,  and  setting  fire  to  his  camp,  effected  his
retreat  without  opposition  through  the  country  of
the  ISTantuates  to  the  frontier  of  the  Allobroges.
Such  is  the  excuse  which  Caasar  himself  gave  for
the  evident  failure  and  discomfiture  of  his  lieu-
tenant.1

Caesar, indeed, magnifies  the  check  which  the

barbarians  received  into  a  signal  defeat2,  and  enu-  north-west6
merates  it  among  the  triumphs  by  which  his  arms  ^^^
had  been  crowned, and  the  Gaulish nations  re-  B.C.  se.  '
duced  to  submission. This  boasted  pacification  of
Gaul  gave  him  the opportunity  of  visiting  Illy-
ricum,  the  further  extremity  of  the  vast  tract  en-
trusted to  his  care. Whatever  might  have  been
his  plans  in  that  quarter,  he had  not leisure  to
carry  them  into  effect. There  was  doubtless  much
room  for  military  exploits  among  the  fastnesses  of
that  country,  inhabited  by  a  barbarous  and  turbu-

1  Caes.  B.  G.  iii.  1—6. ;  Dion,  xxxix.  5. ;  Oros.  vi.  8.

2  Orosius  also  declares  that  the  Veragri  lost  thirty  thousand  men.

348  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  lent  population  ;  but  the  wars  of  Gaul  were  the
peace  of  Illyricum.  In  the  midst  of  his  fancied
security  there  burst  forth  a  wide- spread  sedition
throughout  the  lately  subjugated  tribes  of  Armorica,
while  the  aspect  of  affairs  in  other  parts  of  the
country  demanded  his  utmost  vigilance  and  activity.
P.  Crassus  was  at  the  head  of  a  legion  quartered
in  the  country  of  the  Andi.  Their  territory
was  not  capable  of  supplying  him,  and  he  des-
patched officers  into  the  neighbouring  districts
to  levy  the  requisite  contributions.  The  Unelli1,
CuriosolitaB,  and  more  especially  the  Veneti,  the
most  powerful  of  the  north-western  tribes,  were
subjected  to  these  demands.  The  last-named  people
were  celebrated  for  their  maritime  power.  They
held  many  tribes  of  the  coast  in  dependence,  and
presumed  upon  their  skill  and  prowess  in  a  mode
of  warfare  in  which  they  had  never  yet  measured
The  veneti  themselves  with  an  equal.  They  seized  the  persons
R^man™  of  Silius  and  Velarius,  the  Roman  officers,  threat-
officers,  ening  to  retain  them  as  guarantees  for  the  hostages
they  had  themselves  surrendered  to  the  proconsul.
At  their  instigation,  also,  other  tribes  laid  hands  on
Trebius  and  Tarasidius,  two  other  commissioners
from  the  Roman  quarters.  Having  persuaded  their
clients  and  dependents  to  make  common  cause
with  them,  they  sent  to  P.  Crassus,  demanding  the
restoration  of  their  hostages  in  exchange  for  the
officers  they  had  thus  captured.  Crassus  himself
was  not  strong  enough  to  avenge  this  insult,  but

1  This  reading  is  adopted  by  Mcebe  from  the  Greek  version  of  the
commentaries  and  the  editions  of  Aldus  and  Stephanus.  Oudendorp
reads  Esubios,  from  the  best  MSS. :  but  no  such  a  name  is  known.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  349

he announced  it to his general without delay. CHAP.
The  proconsul  hastened to the  scene  of  action.

He  determined  to  attack  the  Yeneti  on  their  own  casar  pre-
element  ;  for  their  fastnesses,  defended  by  creeks  atTa^Vmem
and  morasses,  were  hardly  accessible  from  the  land.  with  *

*  naval  force.

With  this  view  he  immediately  ordered  the  con-
struction of  a  flotilla  at  the  mouth  of  the  Loire.
The  rowers  of  the  Rhone  and  the  Mediterranean
were  collected  for  this  service  in  great  numbers.
He  exhorted  his  legionaries  to  embark,  and  de-
claimed to  them  against  the  perfidy  of  the  enemy,
who  had  violated  the  law  of  nations  in  seizing
the  persons  of  his  ambassadors,  as  he  chose  to
designate  the  captive  commissioners.  The  Veneti,
on  their  part,  made  active  preparations  to  meet
the  attack,  and  invoked  the  assistance  of  the
whole  seaboard  from  the  mouth  of  the  Loire  to
that  of  the  Rhine.  The  nations  were  ready  at  Their  ma-
their  call:  the  Osismii,  the  Lexovii,  the  Namnetes1,  p0™r,  and
the  Ambiliati,  the  Morini,  the  Diablintes,  the  Me-  "£l^!
napii,  all  joined  the  great  maritime  confederacy.
And  now  for  the  first  time  the  name  of  the  Bri-
tanni  appears  in  the  records  of  Roman  history,  for
the  Yeneti  drew  both  ships  and  men  from  the
opposite  coast  of  the  channel.2

The  rapidity  with  which  the  flame  of  sedition  c^sar  takes
spread  through  so  many  nations  and  such  an  ex-

tent  of  country  convinced  Csesar  how  fallacious  the  Belgians

.  ,  ,  and  Aquita-

was  his  reliance  on  the  submission  which  had  fol-  mans  join-
lowed  upon  his  last  campaign. It  was  necessary

1  Namnetes,  mod.  Nantes  ;  Ambiliati,  mod.  Lamballe,  Mcebe  in  Cces.
Diablintes  (Aulerci),  the  north-west  corner  of  Maine.

2  Cses.  B.  G.  \\i.  9.

350  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  not  only  to  face  the  enemy  in  arms,  but  to  redouble
'  his  vigilance  to  check  defection  in  other  quarters.1
He  sent  Labienus  with  some  squadrons  of  cavalry
into  the  country  of  the  Treviri,  the  centre  of  the
Belgian  tribes,  and  the  quarter  in  which  the  Ger-
mans might  attempt  to  cross  the  Rhine.  Crassus
he  deputed  to  prevent  any  junction  between  the
Aquitanians  and  the  insurgents.  Titurius  Sabi-
nus,  with  three  legions,  was  commissioned  to  cut
off  the  communication  between  the  eastern  and
western  limbs  of  the  confederacy,  and  check  the
progress  of  levies  among  the  Lexovii,  Unelli,  and
CuriosolitaB.  Lastly,  Decimus  Brutus  was  appointed
to  the  command  of  the  great  naval  armament  which
was  equipped  partly  from  the  newly -constructed
vessels,  and  partly  from  the  barks  of  the  Pictones
and  Santones,  the  only  coast-tribes  whom  the  pro-
consul had  been  able  to  retain  in  subjection.
This  fleet  received  orders  to  steer  for  the  shores  of
the  Veneti,  while  Caesar  advanced  at  the  head  of  a
"  large  army  by  land  to  the  same  point.
Mode  of  The  Veneti  placed  great  reliance  upon  the  cha-

ttel by  racter  of  their  fortified  positions.  Their  coasts
the  veneti.  were  studded  with  promontories  and  peninsulas,
which  the  tide  daily  severed  from  the  main  land2,
and  upon  these  isolated  projections  their  forts
were  generally  erected.  To  such  places  it  was
hardly  possible  to  lay  regular  siege.  The  Roman
tactics  required  the  advance  of  towers  to  the  walls ;

1  Cses.  B.  G.  in.  11.

2  Cses.  B.  G.  iii.  12. The  heppan,  or  stockades,  of  the  New  Zea-
landers  are  described  as  places  of  refuge  on  rocky  points  of  the  coast,
and  not  as  ordinary  abodes.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  351

and  the  recurring  tides  would  either  render  their  CHAP.
erection  impossible,  or  speedily  sweep  their  base-
ments away.  On  the  other  hand,  the  command  of
the  sea  enabled  the  garrisons  to  supply  themselves
at  pleasure  with  recruits  and  provisions.  If,  after
all,  the  besiegers  with  extreme  toil  pushed  moles
of  masonry  across  these  arms  of  the  sea,  and,  from
mounds  raised  to  the  level  of  the  walls,  were  pre-
paring to  pour  themselves  into  the  fortress,  even
then,  at  the  last  moment,  the  gallies  of  the  Yeneti
might  sweep  up  to  the  gates,  and  carry  off  in  an
instant  the  garrison  and  the  booty.  The  tem-
pestuous state  of  the  weather,  which  kept  the
Romans  to  their  anchorage  through  the  greater
part  of  the  summer,  enabled  the  Yeneti  to  retain
their  naval  superiority.  They  doubtless  owed
much  to  their  possession  of  the  ports  and  their
knowledge  of  the  coast,  yet  Ca3sar  seems  to  admit
the  inferiority  of  his  own  seamen  in  skill  and  bold-
ness. The  difference  in  the  mode  of  shipbuilding,
and  in  the  naval  tactics  adopted  by  the  parties  re-
spectively, seemed  to  balance  the  advantages  on
either  side.  The  Yeneti  used  vessels  with  flatter
bottoms  and  higher  sides  than  those  of  the  Ro-
mans 1 ;  they  seem  also  to  have  built  them  of
greater  strength,  as  men  who  had  ample  experi-
ence of  the  winds  and  waves  of  the  Atlantic.  On
the  other  hand,  their  sails  were  clumsy  and  made
of  skins ;  they  scarcely  availed  themselves  of  oars,
and  their  movements  were  much  slower  than  those
of  their  rivals.  But  when  once  the  two  came  in

1  Strabo  (iv.  4.)  follows  Caesar  in  his  account  of  this  people. See
also  Dion,  xxxix.  40 — 43.

352

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
VII.

The  Ro-
mans gain
a  great
naval  vic-
tory.

collision,  the  Venetian  vessel  was  so  firmly  com-
pacted as  to  withstand  the  stroke  of  the  Roman's
beak,  and  its  deck  so  high  as  to  place  its  com-
batants on  a  ground  of  vantage.

The  Romans  succeeded  indeed  in  capturing
several  fastnesses  of  the  Veneti,  but  the  whole
tribe  had  taken  to  the  water,  and  roamed  freely
from  strand  to  strand.  It  was  necessary  to
bring  the  campaign  to  an  issue  by  a  decisive  trial
of  naval  strength.  The  barbarians  mustered  not
fewer  than  two  hundred  and  twenty  galleys,  with
which  they  sailed  forth  from  the  mouth  of  the
Morbihan  to  meet  the  armament  of  Brutus.1  The
Roman  admiral  employed  long  poles  armed  with
hooks  to  cut  the  sheets  and  shrouds  of  the  enemy's
vessels.  Their  ponderous  sails  soon  brought  the
masts  by  the  board,  and  they  thus  became  un-
manageable. Others  were  grappled  and  dragged
out  into  the  open  sea,  where  they  were  exposed  to
the  repeated  shocks  of  the  Roman  rostra,  impelled
against  them  with  all  the  force  that  oars  could

1  If  the  principal  fortified  place  of  the  Veneti  was  the  modern
Vannes,  it  must  be  an  exception  to  the  choice  they  generally  made  of
sites  for  their  entrenchments.  The  local  traditions  assign  the  site  of
Caesar's  camp,  from  which  he  observed  the  seafight  between  Brutus
and  the  Veneti  (iii.  14  ),  to  a  spot  between  the  point  of  Quiberon  and
the  promontory  of  Rhuys  (Daru,  Hist.de  Bretagne,  i.  38.),  in  which  case
it  might  be  supposed  that  the  city  of  that  people  was  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood.  But  an  ingenious  essay  in  the  Memoires  de  la  Societe
des  Antiquaires,  ii.  325.  (an  1820),  seems  to  prove  that  the  city  in
question  lay  at  the  bottom  of  the  gulf  of  Morbihan.  A  N.E.  wind
would  have  been  favourable  both  to  the  course  of  the  Roman  fleet
from  the  mouth  of  the  Loire  and  to  that  of  the  Veneti  sallying  from
their  capacious  harbour  to  meet  them.  The  calm  which  ensued  in  the
middle  of  the  day  is  said  to  be  of  regular  occurrence  in  the  summer
after  a  N.E.  wind  in  the  morning.  The  combat  took  place  probably
off  the  town  of  Sarzeau.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  353

impart.  If  still  unpierced,  they  were  quickly  sur-  CHAP.
rounded  by  several  barks  at  once,  when  the  lighter-
armed  and  more  agile  Romans  soon  succeeded  in
boarding  and  capturing  them.  The  Gauls,  finding
themselves  unable  to  cope  with  these  various  modes
of  attack,  took  to  flight  and  spread  their  sails  to  the
wind.  But  a  sudden  calm  deprived  them  even  of
this  last  resource.  The  Romans,  moving  lightly
round  the  unwieldy  and  defenceless  masses,  assailed
them  one  by  one,  and  were  prevented  by  nightfall
alone  from  accomplishing  their  total  destruction.
The  loss  of  the  Veneti  was  overwhelming.  Their
whole  naval  force  had  been  collected  together.  It
bore  the  mass  of  their  youth,  their  nobility,  and
their  senate,  who  had  hastily  embarked  to  escape
from  the  Roman  army,  already  so  near  to  their
city  as  to  witness  the  naval  combat  from  the  shore.
The  remnant  hastened  to  make  their  submission  ;  submission

1.1  .  T  .  .  i  -i and  cruel

but they were not in a condition to demand  pumsii-
terms,  and  Cassar,  who  never  shrank  from  severity  ™**°f  the

when  his  interests  required  it,  put  the  survivors
of  the  senate  to  the  sword,  and  sold  the  people
into  slavery  ;  thus  signalizing,  according  to  the
recognized  usages  of  his  time,  his  vengeance
against  an  asserted  breach  of  the  law  of  nations.1

The  campaign  of  Sabinus  against  the  Unelli  and  The  tribes
their  neighbours  affords  us  some  insight  into  the

state  to  which  the  late  wars  had  reduced  the  north  ^ain  sub"

dued.

of  Gaul.  On  the  one  hand,  their  dread  of  Cassar  and
their  opinion  of  his  skill  and  fortune  were  such  that
the  nobles  and  senate  of  some  tribes  would  not  ven-

1  Caes.  B.  G.  iii.  16.  :  "  Quo  diligentius  in  reliquum  tempus  a  bar-
baris  jus  legatorum  conservaretur."

VOL.  I.  A  A

354  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, ture  to  second  the  popular  cry  for  war.1 The  people

rose  upon  their  chiefs  and  massacred  them. On

the  other,  the  country  was  filled  with  needy  and
desperate  outlaws,  men  who  had  lost  their  all,  or
of  fierce  and  untractable  characters,  ready  to  join
or  to  urge  any  daring  and  sanguinary  enterprize.
These  banditti  flocked  from  various  parts  of  Gaul
to  the  standard  of  a  people  who  had  shown  their
audacity  by  the  murder  of  their  leaders.  Law-
lessness attracted  lawlessness  ;  and  the  camp  of  the
TJnelli  was  filled  with  a  crowd  of  blood-thirsty
savages,  confident  in  their  own  prowess,  and  dis-
dainful of  restraint  and  counsel.  The  cautious
tactics  of  Sabinus,  who  refused,  as  an  inferior
officer,  to  commit  the  army  entrusted  to  him  to  a
general  engagement  without  the  express  sanction
of  his  commander,  raised  their  hopes  beyond  mea-
sure. He  calculated,  probably,  on  the  disastrous
effects  which  must  inevitably  follow  from  the  col-
lection of  these  bands  of  ruffians  in  a  common
cause,  and  was  awaiting  the  moment  when  they
would  rush  blindly  upon  their  own  ruin.  The  dis-
content, however,  of  his  own  soldiers  was  a  greater
embarrassment  to  him  than  the  numbers  or  the
ferocity  of  the  enemy,  and  he  was  compelled  to
precipitate  matters  by  sending  some  trusty  adhe-
rents into  their  camp,  with  instructions  to  repre-
sent his  inaction  as  the  result  of  fear,  and  to  pro-
mise them  an  easy  victory  over  a  disheartened  and
disorganized  multitude.  The  Unelli  fell  into  the
snare,  and  rushed  tumultuously  forth  to  assault
the  well-defended  camp  of  the  Romans.  Breath-

1  c^.  B.  G.  m.  17.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  355

less  and  exhausted  with  their  own  haste,  they  CHA.P.
made  but  a  feeble  attack.  The  Romans  repulsed
them  with  great  slaughter,  and  having  thrown
them  into  confusion,  hurling  the  first  ranks  back
upon  those  that  followed,  issued  calmly  from  their
entrenchments,  and  cut  them  down  with  little  re-
sistance. The  Gauls  thus  defeated  rushed  from
the  extreme  of  confidence  into  that  of  despair.
They  yielded  without  another  blow.

In  the  meanwhile  young  Crassus,  burning  for  campaign
distinction,  was  leading  his  troops  into  the  country
of  the  Aquitani1,  not  so  much,  apparently,  on
account  of  their  preparing  to  take  part  in  the
present  movement,  as  from  older  causes  of  enmity
between  them  and  the  republic.  The  attempts
which  the  Romans  had  hitherto  made  to  subju-
gate that  part  of  Gaul  had  been  unsuccessful.
Valerius  Praeconinus  had  been  slain  a  few  years
oefore,  with  the  loss  of  an  army,  and  Manilius,  the
proconsul,  had  been  driven  back  with  dishonour.
Crassus  drew  reinforcements  from  the  cities  of  the
Roman  province,  Tolosa,  Narbo,  and  Carcaso,  ever
ready  to  assist  in  extending  the  yoke  under  which
they  themselves  bent  to  the  neighbouring  tribes,
of  whose  liberty  they  were  jealous.  The  Sotiates2,
ancient  enemies  of  the  republic,  were  the  first
on  whom  he  fell.  This  people  had  learnt  the
Roman  art  of  war  from  the  conflicts  they  had
maintained  with  the  legions,  and  now  defended
their  fortress  with  mines  and  countermines,  which
their  practice  of  working  their  veins  of  copper  had

1  Cjes.  B.  G.  iii.  20.

2  Sotiates,  mod.  Atre  and  Sots. Mannert,  iv.  i.  137.

A A 2

356  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  given  them  skill  in  constructing.  But  the  steady
'  perseverance  of  the  Romans  prevailed,  and  the
Sotiates  submitted  to  purchase  their  lives  and  pro-
perty by  the  surrender  of  their  arms.  Their  king,
Adcantuannus,  refused  to  be  a  party  to  this  capi-
tulation. He  was  surrounded  by  a  handful  of
faithful  followers,  who,  according  to  a  custom  pre-
valent in  that  part  of  Gaul,  had  devoted  themselves
by  a  vow  to  his  personal  service.  They  bore  in
their  country  the  name  of  Soldurii1;  they  were
admitted  to  live  with  their  chief  on  terms  of  in-
timacy and  equality,  were  feasted  at  his  table,  and
shared  all  his  amusements  and  luxuries.  In  return
they  pledged  themselves  to  live  and  die  for  him,  to
defend  him  as  a  body-guard  in  battle,  and,  if  he  fell,
not  to  survive  him.  So  sacred  was  this  vow  held
that  no  one,  it  was  said,  was  ever  known  to  have
broken  it.  When  therefore  Adcantuannus  declared
his  determination  to  die  rather  than  surrender  like
the  rest  of  his  countrymen,  this  trusty  band  were
ready  to  rush  with  him  against  the  enemy,  and  sell
their  lives  as  dearly  as  possible.  But  being  easily
repulsed  by  the  superior  number  of  the  Romans,
the  barbarian  chieftain  repented  of  his  resolve,  and
begged  his  life  of  the  conqueror,  which  was  gene-
rously granted  him.

He  effects  From  this  tribe  the  Roman  general  advanced
ttoVofthat  aSa^ns^  the  Vocates  and  Tarusates2,  whose  re-
part  of Gaui.  sources  were  increased  by  the  assistance  afforded

1  Cses.  B.  G.  iii.  22. This  circumstance  is  referred  to  by  Atlienaeus
(vi.  54.),  quoting  Nic.  Damascenus,  who  renders  the  -word  Soldurius
by  tvx^ifjiaioc. Drumann,  iii.  269.  anmerk.

2  Vocates,  mod.  Bazadois :  Tarusates, mod.  Marsan. Manner tt
iv.  i.  133.  138.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  357

them  from  Spain,  and  their  confidence  confirmed  CHAP.
by  the  presence  and  counsel  of  many  officers  who
had  gained  their  military  experience  in  the  camp
of  Sertorius.  Their  tactics  therefore  were  just  the
reverse  of  those  which  their  countrymen  had
hitherto  employed.  They  fortified  an  encampment
after  the  Roman  fashion,  and  awaited  the  time
when  the  enemy  should  attack  them  at  a  disad-
vantage, or  retire  from  want  of  provisions.  Crassus
found  himself  compelled  to  risk  an  assault,  in
which  he  met  with  little  success.  But  the  Aqui-
tanians  had  neglected  to  provide  sufficiently  for
the  defence  of  the  gate  at  the  rear  of  their  camp,
and  this  omission  the  Romans  opportunely  dis-
covered. A  chosen  band  forced  their  way  through
the  opening  while  the  attention  of  the  defenders  was
occupied  in  another  direction,  and  by  this  season-
able diversion  the  position  of  the  besieged  was
mastered,  and  their  forces  routed.  The  flying
multitude  were  pursued  by  the  Roman  cavalry,
and  of  fifty  thousand  men  only  a  fourth  escaped  to
their  homes.  This  triumphant  success  was  imme-
diately followed  by  the  submission  of  the  greater
part  of  the  Aquitanian  tribes.  A  few  mountain-
eers alone  still  hesitated  to  yield1,  confiding  in
their  inaccessible  fastnesses  and  the  lateness  of  the
season.

The  submission  of  only  two  nations  now  re-
mained  to  complete  the  pacification  of  Gaul  for  the
second  time.2  The  Morini,  farthest  of  mankind,  as

1  Caes.  B.  G.  iii.  27. :  "  Paucae  ultimse  nationes."

2  Cses.  B.  G.  iii.  28.

A  A 3

358  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  Virgil  designates  them1,  occupied  the  coast  of  the
'  northern  ocean,  from  the  straits  to  the  mouth  of
the  Scheldt.  The  Meriapii  also  inhabited  a  land  of
woods  and  marshes  on  the  banks  of  the  lower
Meuse.  In  their  distant  and  little  envied  recesses
these  two  tribes  had  not  yet  experienced  the  keen-
ness of  the  Roman  sword ;  but  they  had  heard
enough  of  the  ill  success  of  their  brethren  to
shrink  from  open  combat  with  the  invaders,  and
trust  to  the  natural  defences  of  their  country,
covered  with  impenetrable  forests.  After  the  de-
feat of  the  Veneti,  the  summer  was  drawing  to  a
close ;  but  Caesar,  who  was  determined  to  inflict
chastisement  upon  every  nation,  however  remote,
which  had  dared  to  join  the  Northern  confederacy,
was  not  disposed  to  delay  this  crowning  campaign,
from  which  he  did  not  anticipate  much  risk  or
trouble.  The  people,  however,  hid  themselves  in
their  woods,  and  the  obstacles  which  their  country
presented  were  not  to  be  easily  overcome.  The
further  the  Romans  penetrated,  clearing  their  way
before  them  with  the  axe,  the  more  dense  became
the  obstacles  around  them,  and  the  less  probability
did  there  appear  of  reducing  the  natives  to  extre-
mity. Accordingly,  when  the  bad  season  began
to  set  in,  it  was  necessary  to  recal  the  soldiers
from  their  fruitless  labour,  and  thus,  at  the  close
of  Caesar's  third  campaign,  the  only  members  of
the  Gaulish  race  who  retained  their  liberty  were
the  mountain  tribes  of  the  Pyrenees  and  the  am-
phibious wanderers  of  the  Wahal  and  the  Scheldt.

1  Virg.  JEn.  viii.  fin.  :  "  Extremique  hominum  Morini."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  359

The  proconsul,  as  before,  imposed  the  burden  of CHAP.
maintaining  his  troops for  the  winter upon the
last  conquered  of  his  opponents,  the  Lexovii  and  Leaves  MS
Aulerci  \  while  he  himself,  as  in  the  winter  pre-
ceding,  departed  for  Italy.2

Italy.
1  In  Normandy  and  Maine.  2  Drumann,  iii.  270.

A  A 4

360  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  VIII.

THE  BANISHMENT  OF  CICERO  IS  FOLLOWED  BY  THE  CONFIS-
CATION OF  HIS  PROPERTY. HIS  HOUSE  ON  THE  PALATINE,

AND  HIS  TUSCULAN  VILLA. TRIUMPHANT  CAREER  OF  CLO-

DIUS. HE  REMOVES  CATO  FROM  ROME  UNDER  PRETENCE

OF  AN  HONOURABLE  MISSION  TO  DEPRIVE  THE  KING  OF

.  CYPRUS. CHARACTER  OF  M.  BRUTUS,  WHO  ACCOMPANIES

CATO. — CICERO'S  UNMANLY  COMPLAINTS. — EXERTIONS  OF  HIS

FRIENDS  IN  HIS  BEHALF HIS  WIFE  TERENTIA. ATTICUS  :

HORTENSIUS.  —  REACTION  IN  HIS  FAVOUR. CLODIUS  DISGUSTS

POMPEIUS. ELECTION  OF  CONSULS  FAVOURABLE  TO  CICERO.

—  HE  IS  RECALLED,  AND  IS  RECEIVED  IN  ITALY  WITH  AC-
CLAMATIONS. A.U.  696,  697,  B.C.  58,  57.

CHAP.  WHEN  Caesar  broke  up  his  camp  in  the  neighbour-
hood  of  Kome,  and  set  forth  upon  his  expedition
into  Gaul,  he  left  the  city  in  the  power  of  a  head-
strong  and  capricious  multitude,  which  obeyed  no
otn^r  leadership  than  that  of  the  tribune  Clodius.
The  terror  which  this  man  had  inspired  among
the  nobles  had  sufficed  to  drive  Cicero  into  exile.
The  late  consul  had  not  ventured  to  defend  himself
either  by  his  eloquence  or  by  the  arms  which  were
proffered  for  his  succour.  It  might  indeed  have
been  easy  to  assail  the  person  of  the  demagogue,
to  defy  the  clamorous  imputation  of  sacrilege,  and
to  crush  the  mutinous  spirit  of  the  mob  which
served  him.  But  he  had  himself  proclaimed  that
Cicero  must  either  perish  or  conquer  twice.1  It
was  evident  from  these  ominous  words  that  there

1  Cic.  pro  Sest.  19. :  "  Cum  quidem  in  concione  dixisset,  'Aut  mihi
semel  pereundum,  aut  bis  esse  vincenduin.'  "

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  361

was  another  and  greater  power  behind  ;  that  the CHAP.
consuls  would  step  forward  to  protect  or  avenge  the

tribune,  and,  at  the  last  moment,  would  be  sup-
ported by  the  triumvirs.1  In  the  eyes  of  the  mul-
titude, however,  Cicero  stood  self-condemned  by
his  sudden  flight  before  he  had  been  made  the
object  of  a  distinct  accusation.  How  many  diffi-
culties would  have  stood  in  the  way  of  a  legal
attack  upon  him  may  be  conceived  from  the
fictions  and  evasions  to  which  his  enemy  was  com-
pelled to  resort  in  order  to  obtain  his  condemnation
even  when  absent.  On  the  day  that  he  left  the
city,  Clodius  convened  the  people,  and  caused  his
client  Sextus  to  propose  a  resolution,  in  which  the
exiled  consular  was  denounced  by  name  as  the
author  of  the  death  of  sundry  citizens  without
form  of  law.  By  the  same  enactment  he  was  inter-
dicted from  fire  and  water,  and  it  was  forbidden
to  receive  or  harbour  him.  The  formula  even
declared,  in  its  short-sighted  malice,  that  the  ut-
most vengeance  of  the  law  should  be  executed
upon  any  one  who  should  propose  his  recal,  unless
the  victims  of  his  tyranny  should  first  return  to
life.2

In  order  to  carry  this  resolution  even  in  the  Difficulties
popular  assembly,  jealous  as  it  ordinarily  was  of  the
encroachments  of  the  senate,  and  now  excited  and
exasperated  against  it  by  artful  intriguers,  it  was
necessary  to  declare  the  decree,  by  which  Lentulus
and  his  associates  had  been  condemned,  a  forgery.3

1  This  view  is  set  forth  in  the  strongest  colours  in  the  speech  for
Sestius,  16—20.

2  "  Clodianorum  dux." Ascon.  in  Pison.  8. :  "  Sextus  Clodius  fa-
miliarissimus  P.  Clodii  et  operarum."

3  Cic.  pro  Dom.  19.

362  HISTOEY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  So  audacious  a  proposition  no  one  probably  would
have  ventured  to  assert  in  the  face  of  the  thunders
of  Cicero's  eloquence.  But  the  legality  of  the  enact-
ment proposed  by  Sextus  was  questionable  in  the
eyes  of  the  Roman  jurists  on  various  grounds,  all
of  which  the  orator  at  a  subsequent  period  trium-
phantly displayed.  In  the  first  place  it  was  a  privi-
legium,  a  law,  that  is,  directed  specifically  against
an  individual,  which  contravened  a  fundamental
principle  of  Roman  jurisprudence.  It  was  in  fact
nothing  less  than  a  proscription,  a  word  still  ter-
rible to  Roman  ears.1  The  terms  in  which  it  was
conceived  were  inconsistent  with  the  fact.  Sextus
Clodius  had  proposed  a  resolution  to  the  effect,  not
that  Cicero  "  shall  be  interdicted,"  but  that  he
"  has  been  interdicted  already;"  a  form  of  language
which  betrays  the  object  of  the  proposer  to  treat  the
condemnation  of  his  enemy  as  a  fact  already  ac-
complished by  the  previous  vote  of  the  people,  in-
stead of  being,  as  it  still  was,  at  the  moment  an
open  question.2  So  again,  when  Clodius  forbade
any  man  to  harbour  his  victim,  he  abstained  from
expressly  pronouncing  his  banishment,  which  he
might  fear  not  to  be  able  to  carry  in  all  the  naked
severity  of  the  term.3  It  was  only  by  the  blunder
of  Cicero's  friends,  who  sought  to  mitigate  the  sen-

1  A  privilegium  (lex  privo  homini  irrogata)  was  forbidden  by  the
leges  sacratae  and  by  the  twelve  tables. Abeken,  p.  118.  "  Qusero
enim  quid  sit  aliud  proscribere." Cic.  pro  Dom.  17. ;  comp.  Gell.
x.  20.

2  Cic.  pro  Dom.  18.  :  "Non  tulit  ut  interdicatur :  quid  ergo,  ut
interdictum  sit." This  interpretation  of  a  somewhat  obscure  passage
is  maintained  by  Drumann,  ii.  259.

3  Cic.  pro  Dom. 19,  20.: "Tulisti  de  me  ne  reciperer,  non  ut
exirem  ....  poena  est  qui  receperit,  ejectio  nusquam  est."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  363

tence  by  inserting  a  clause  to  limit  the  distance  of  CHAP.
his  banishment  to  four  hundred  miles  from  the
city,  that  the  brand  of  exile  was  legally  fixed  upon
him.1  And,  once  more,  the  accuser  had  not  ven-
tured to  instruct  the  censors  to  strike  off  the
criminal's  name  from  the  roll  of  the  senate,  an  in-
dignity which  had  always  formed  a  part  of  a  legal
sentence  of  outlawry.2

Nor  was  this  all.  A  majority  of  the  citizens  He  \vasnot
would  probably  have  secretly  applauded,  even  if  anylegfi^
they  durst  not  openly  support  any  one  of  their  Procedure-
members  who  should  have  ventured  to  declare  that
the  edict,  such  as  it  was,  was  carried,  not  by  the
unbiassed  voice  of  the  people,  but  by  a  faction
misled  by  manifest  falsehood  or  overcome  by  vio-
lence. There  were  many  thousands  of  the  Roman
people  who  could  never  have  consented  to  so  scan-
dalous an  outrage  upon  the  hero  of  the  equestrian
order.  So  many  symptoms  of  hesitation  and  self-
distrust  on  the  part  of  the  accuser  could  not  fail,
when  skilfully  handled  by  a  consummate  master
of  debate,  to  make  an  impression  upon  all  this
portion  of  the  assembly,  and  encourage  them  to
resist  the  dictation  of  a  demagogue  who  betrayed
such  a  want  of  confidence  in  his  own  cause.  And,
after  all,  it  might  be  argued  that  the  whole  of  the
tribune's  acts  were  essentially  invalid,  inasmuch  as
his  adoption  into  a  plebeian  house  was  liable  to  the
charge  of  informality  from  the  first.  Such  were

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  iii.  4. ;  Dion,  xxxviii.  17. ;  Plut.  Cic.  32. The  latter
writers  do  not  coincide  precisely  with  Cicero  in  their  statement  of  the
distance  prescribed.

2  Cic.  pro  Dom.  31

364

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,
VIII.

Demolition
of  Cicero's
houses.

some  of  the  positions  upon  which  the  orator  and
his  friends  might  have  maintained  their  ground.
He  required,  they  contended,  no  law  to  recal  him,
for  he  was  banished  by  no  legal  procedure.1

Severe  as  this  law  was  in  its  provisions,  it  was
not  so  formidable  as  it  appears.  In  the  licentious
temper  of  the  times,  no  one  cared  to  pay  much
respect  to  an  arbitrary  act  of  malice,  which  a  turn
in  the  wheel  of  fortune  might  at  any  moment  re-
verse. Possibly  Pompeius  or  Caesar  controlled  its
execution  from  a  distance,  and  let  it  be  under-
stood that  the  safety  of  the  exile  should  not  be
compromised,  that  his  friends  should  be  treated
with  forbearance,  and  the  crime  of  entertaining
him  in  his  banishment  connived  at.  Cicero  was
well  and  kindly  received  at  Brundisium,  in  Italy,
no  less  than  beyond  the  sea.  He  was  apprehensive
of  the  violence  of  his  enemy's  adherents;  but  he

1  The  nature  of  the  decree  of  Sextus  Clodius  is  to  be  gathered
principally  from  the  speeches  Pro  Domo  sua  and  Post  Reditum  ad  Qui-
rites.  It  is  well  known  that  the  four  orations  attributed  to  Cicero
upon  his  return  from  banishment  lie  under  suspicion  of  spuriousness.
Their  genuineness  was  first  questioned  by  Markland  in  the  middle  of
the  last  century,  assailed  still  more  vehemently  by  Wolf,  and  has
been  tacitly  surrendered  by  Orelli.  As  usual  in  such  cases,  it  is  far
easier  to  point  out  internal  grounds  of  suspicion  than  to  establish  a
plausible  theory  to  account  for  the  existence  of  the  speeches  them-
selves, on  the  supposition  of  their  being  spurious.  The  objections  to
them,  however,  seem  far  from  conclusive,  and  in  any  case  their  value
as  historical  documents  is  little  impeached  by  them.  It  is  known  that
Cicero  delivered  speeches  on  the  occasions  to  which  they  refer,  and  that
he  was  well  pleased  with  them  as  specimens  of  his  oratorical  powers  ;
we  may  conclude  therefore  that  they  were  published,  and  obtained
notoriety  in  Rome.  The  irnpugners  of  the  genuineness  of  the  exist-
ing speeches  allow  that  they  must  have  been  written,  as  rhetorical
exercises,  not  later  than  the  latter  years  of  Augustus,  being  evidently
the  same  as  those  upon  which  Asconius  commented.  It  is  clear,  there-
fore, that  if  they  are  not  Cicero's,  the  writer  must  have  had  the
originals  before  him,  and  kept  the  facts  and  details  distinctly  in  view.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  365

had  at  least  personally  nothing  to  fear  from  the  law  CHAP.
or  the  legitimate  enforcement  of  its  enactments.
The  sphere  of  Clodius's  power  was,  after  all,  con-
fined to  Rome.  Omnipotent  in  the  forum,  he  as-
cended the  Palatine  hill,  razed  the  orator's  dwel-
ling to  the  ground,  and  dedicated  a  portion  of  its
site  to  Liberty,  who  of  all  human  idols  seems  to
have  received  the  greatest  homage  from  successful
tyranny.  His  malicious  object  in  this  dedication
was  to  render  future  restitution  impossible.  The
consuls  divided  the  spoils  of  the  Palatine  house
and  the  villa  at  Tusculum,  the  favourite  retreat
of  the  statesman  and  philosopher.  The  tribune
seized  for  his  own  share  the  remnant  of  the  site
of  the  former,  which  he  had  left  unconsecrated
with  that  purpose,  and  attached  it  to  his  own
residence,  which  lay  contiguous.1

The  demolition  of  a  traitor's  house  was  one  of  Cicero's
the  modes  by  which  the  patriarchs  of  Roman  li-  fheupa°an
berty  had  striven  to  obliterate  the  memory  of  the  tine  hm-
most  odious  of  crimes. Such  had  been  the  fate  of
the  abodes  of  Spurius  Mselius  and  of  Manlius  in
early  times  :  at  a  later  period  the  infliction  of  this
indignity  savoured  rather  of  the  vindictiveness  of
faction  than  the sternness of  republican  virtue.
Cicero the oligarch could point  with unseemly
exultation  to  the  retribution  which  the  nobles  had
wreaked  upon  Vitruvius  Vaccus  and  Fulvius  Flac-
cus,  the  associates  of  the  Gracchi,  at  the  moment
that  he  was  inveighing  against  the  tyranny  of  the
cabal  which  had  in  turn  triumphed  over  himself.

1  Cic.  pro  Dom.  24.  44.,  pro  Sest.  24.,  post  Red.  in  Sen.  7.

2  All  these  cases  are  mentioned  in  the  Orat.  pro  Domo,  38.

2

366  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  The  house  of  the  orator  on  the  Palatine  was  the
most  conspicuous  memorial  of  the  deed  for  which
he  suffered.  After  his  victory  over  Catilina,  in
the  pride  of  his  heart  he  had  given  up  the  modest
dwelling  of  his  father  to  his  brother  Quintus,  and
had  bought  of  Crassus  a  more  splendid  mansion
for  himself,  in  the  fashionable  resort  of  the  highest
aristocracy.1  The  fortunate  consular  regarded  this
abode  with  peculiar  complacency.  Cicero,  the  pre-
server of  his  country,  he  said,  had  established  his
household  gods  on  the  hearthstone  which  had  been
laid  by  Drusus  the  demagogue.2  It  overlooked
the  forum  and  the  rostra,  which  had  been  the
foundation  of  his  glories.  It  was  conspicuous  in
the  eyes  of  the  citizens  ;  the  person  and  the  ac-
tions of  its  possessor  could  never  escape  their  ob-
servation and  memory.  But  the  fickle  multitude
might  retort  that  Cicero  the  tyrant  possessed  at
Tusculum  the  abode  which  had  been  occupied  by
Sulla  the  dictator3;  and  the  impulse  of  the  moment
was  gratified  by  the  dispersion  of  all  the  ornaments
and  trophies  which  had  fostered  the  pride  and  am-
bition of  one  whom  they  regarded  as  their  op-
pressor.

HIS  viiia  at  If  the  summit  of  the  Palatine  had  been  selected
to  keep  the  memory  of  its  occupant  ever  fresh  in
the  minds  of  his  countrymen,  his  villa  at  Tusculum

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  v.  6.,  pro  Dom.  37.

2  There  was  a  famous saying  connected  with  this  spot. When
Drusus  was  about  to  erect  his  house  there,  the  architect  proposed  a
plan  by  which  the  occupant  should  be  screened  from  the  curious
eyes  of  his  neighbours. "  Rather  build  it,"  replied  the  patriot,  "  so
that  every  action  of  my  life  may  be  seen  by  every  one." Veil.  ii.  14.

3  Plin.  H.  N.  xxii.  6.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  367

was  his  chosen  spot  for  retirement  and  study.  CHAP.
Here,  also,  though  too  far  removed  from  Eome  to
be  himself  an  object  of  observation,  his  porticoes
opened  upon  the  full  view  of  his  beloved  city,  from
which  he  could  never  long  bear  to  take  off  his  eyes.
From  the  hill  on  which  this  villa  stood  the  spec-
tator surveyed  a  wide  and  various  prospect,  rich
at  once  in  natural  beauty  and  historic  associations.
The  plain  at  his  feet  was  the  battle-field  of  the
Koman  kings  and  of  the  infant  commonwealth ;
it  was  strown  with  the  marble  sepulchres  of
patricians  and  consulars  ;  across  it  stretched  the
long  straight  lines  of  the  military  ways  which
transported  the  ensigns  of  conquest  to  Parthia
and  Arabia.  On  the  right,  over  meadow  and  wood-
land, lucid  with  rivulets,  he  beheld  the  white  turrets
of  Tibur,  ^Esulse,  Prserieste,  strung  like  a  row  of
pearls  on  the  bosom  of  the  Sabine  mountains ;  on
the  left,  the  glistening  waves  of  Alba  sunk  in  their
green  crater,  the  towering  cone  of  the  Latian  Jupi-
ter, the  oaks  of  Aricia  and  the  pines  of  Laurentum,
and  the  sea  bearing  sails  of  every  nation  to  the
strand  of  Ostia.  Before  him  lay  far  outspread  the
mighty  City,  mistress  of  the  world,  gleaming  in
the  sun  with  its  panoply  of  roofs,  and  flashing
brightness  into  the  blue  vault  above  it.1  The

1  The  effect  must  have  been  far  more  striking  in  the  time of
Cicero  than  at  present,  from  the  greater  size  of  the  city,  and  its  ex-
tension to  the  south  of  the  Capitoline. When  the  houses  came  to  be
crusted  with  marble  and  the  roofs  of  the  temples  to  be  gilded,  the
brightness  it  threw  into  the  air  must  have  been  exceedingly  splendid.
Rutilius,  in  the  fifth  century,  gives  us  a  glimpse  of  it  (Itin.  i.  193.)  :
"  Nee  locus  ille  mihi  cognoscitur  indice  fumo
Qui  dominas  arces  et  caput  orbis  habet .  .  .

368  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

ancient  city  presented  few  towers,  spires,  or  domes,
such  as  now  arrest  the  eye  from  a  distant  emi-
nence ;  but  the  hills  within  its  walls  were  more
distinctly  marked,  and  the  statues  of  its  gods
exalted  on  pillars,  or  soaring  above  the  peaks
of  its  innumerable  temples,  seemed  an  army  of
immortals  arrayed  in  defence  of  their  eternal
abodes.1  From  the  bank  of  Lake  Regillus  to  the
gates  of  Tusculum  the  acclivity  was  studded  with
the  pleasure-houses  of  the  noblest  families  of  Rome.
The  pages  of  Cicero  commemorate  the  villas  of
Balbus,  of  Brutus,  of  Julius  Cassar;  of  Catulus,
Metellus,  Crassus,  and  Pompeius;  of  Gabinius,
Lucullus,  Lentulus,  and  Varro.2  Accordingly,  the
retreat  of  the  literary  statesman  gazed  upon  the

Sed  coeli  plaga  candidior,  tractusque  serenus

Signat  septenis  culmina  clara  jugis.
Illic  perpetui  Soles,  atque  ipse  videtur

Quern  sibi  Roma  facit  purior  esse  dies."

1  Silius's  Vision  of  Hannibal  in  his  camp  on  the  Alban  Mount,  a
conception  worthy  of  an  abler  hand,  may  very  possibly  have  been
suggested  by the  view of  Rome  from  this  locality. Sil. Punic.
xii.  707.  :

"  En  age,  namque  oculis  amota  nube  parumper
Cernere  cuncta  dabo,  surgit  qua  celsus  ad  auras,
Adspice,  mentis  apex,  vocitata  Palatia  Regi
Parrhasio  plena  tenet  et  resonante  pharetra,
Intenditque  arcum  et  pugnas  meditatur  Apollo.
At  qua  vicinis  tendit  se  collibus  altse
Molis  Aventinus,  viden'  ut  Latonia  virgo
Accensas  quatiat  Pleghethontis  gurgite  taedas,
Exsertos  avide  pugnae  nudata  lacertos.
Parte  alia  cerne  ut  ssevis  Gradivus  in  armis
Implerit  dictum  proprio  de  nomine  campum.
Hinc  Janus  movet  arma  manu,  movet  inde  Quirinus,
Quisque  suo  de  colle  Deus  .  . .  ."

2  Orelli,  Onomast.  Tidlianum ;  comp.  Strab.  v.  3.  §  12.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  369

centre  of  his  clearest  interests,  and  was  surrounded  CHAP.
by  the  haunts  of  his  friends  and  rivals.  It  was
here  that,  at  a  later  period,  when  his  fortunes  were
re-established,  he  composed  some  of  the  most  ab-
stract of  his  philosophical  speculations 1 ;  but  even
these  too  partook  of  the  air  of  the  city  and  the  tone
of  practical  life ;  the  interlocutors  of  his  dialogues
were  the  same  men  whom  he  had  just  left  behind
at  Rome,  or  whom  he  might  encounter  among  the
shady  walks  around  him2 ;  the  subject  of  their
conversations  never  wandered  so  far  from  their
daily  concerns  as  not  to  admit  of  constant  appli-
cation to  the  times  and  illustration  from  them.

Clodius  had  taken  his  measures  well.  He  relied
with  confidence  on  the  support  of  the  consuls,  who,
eager  to  reap  the  fruits  of  their  office  in  the  spoil
of  the  wealthiest  provinces,  cared  for  no  odium  and
foresaw  no  danger  in  maintaining  the  influence  of
the  man  who  had  promised  to  stand  their  friend
with  the  people.  The  adherents  of  the  orator,
whose  most  generous  supporters  had  thronged  to
the  Capitol  from  the  provincial  towns  of  Italy,  left
the  city  in  disgust  when  their  favourite  shrank
from  the  contest,  so  that  the  forum  was  easily  filled
or  overawed  by  the  tribune's  armed  rabble.  On
the  same  day  that  the  decree  was  fulminated
against  Cicero,  Clodius  brought  forward  another
proposition  for  bestowing  the  province  of  Syria

1  The  Tusculan  villa  is  the  spot  in  which  Cicero  laid  the  scene  of
his  dialogue  de  Divinatione  and  the  Tuscidana  Disputationes,  and  it
was  there,  we  may  presume,  that  he  composed  them.

2  Cicero  even  complains  that  his  villa  lay  a  little  out  of  the  road :
"  Devium  rolg  cnravrwai  et  habet  alia  SuaxprjaTa"  (ad  Alt.  vii.  5.).

VOL  I.  B  B

370  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, upon  Gabinius, and  Macedonia,  to  which  Acha3a
VIIL was  annexed, upon  Piso. This measure  was  in

He  assigns  direct  contravention  of  the  Lex  Semproriia  of  Caius
to°RsoCand  Gracchus1,  which  obliged  the  senate  to  assign  their
Gabinius.  future  provinces  to  the  new  consuls  before  their
election,  and  merely  allowed  the  candidates  a
choice  between  them.  But  the  popular  assembly
had  already  claimed  the  right  of  appointment ;  it
had  gained  a  signal  victory  over  the  senate  when
it  insisted  upon  giving  Gaul  and  Illyricum  to
Caesar ;  and  the  rival  body  having  once  succumbed
to  its  dictation,  had  not  now  the  courage  to  assert
its  privileges.  This  triumph  over  the  law  en-
couraged the  demagogue  to  indulge  in  still  further
licence.  The  authority  of  Piso  was  extended  over
several  cities  within  the  limits  of  his  province,  to
which  the  senate  had  guaranteed  their  freedom  and
exemption  from  the  Roman  administration.  Gabi-
nius received,  on  his  part,  full  powers  to  make  war
upon  any  of  the  foreign  potentates  whose  frontiers
bordered  upon  Syria,  upon  the  Arabians,  the  Per-
sians and  the  Babylonians.  Egypt  alone  was  not
included  in  the  list  of  states  against  which  he  was
at  liberty  to  lead  the  legions  of  the  republic.  But
Egypt,  it  will  appear,  was  precisely  the  point  of
attack  which  offered  the  greatest  temptation  to  the
ambition  or  cupidity  of  a  proconsul  in  the  East ;
and  it  was  not  to  be  expected  that  one  who  had
profited  so  much  by  successful  violence,  should
hesitate  to  grasp  at  the  only  fruit  which  was  for-
bidden him.
intrigue  to  There  was  yet  another  enemy  both  of  Clodius

1  Cic.  pro  Dom.  9.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  371

and  the  triumvirs,  the  inflexible  and  high-spirited CHAP.
Cato,  whom  it  was  essential  to  their  objects  to  re-
move  from the scene of their intrigues. The
means  which  they  adopted  for  this  purpose  were
craftily  contrived  to  undermine  his  influence  by
throwing suspicions  upon his integrity. Ptole-
maeus,  king  of  Cyprus,  was  the  younger  brother
of  Ptolenueus  Auletes,  who  occupied  the throne
of  Egypt. The  elder  had  been  acknowledged  as
the  ally  of  the  Roman  people ; the  younger  had
obtained  the complimentary  designation  of  their
friend.1 No evil  designs  were imputed  to  him,
no  reasons  even  of  political  expediency  could  be
alleged,  beyond  the  ready  pretence  that  he  abet-
ted  the depredations of  the pirates2,  to  give a
colour  to  the  demand  which  was  suddenly  made
upon  him  to  descend  from  his  throne. But  it  was  Proposed
well  known  that  he  had  accumulated  large  treasures,  ™*^ to
and  the  Roman  government,  under  the  guidance  of  ^oiemsw
two  unscrupulous  consuls,  proposed  to  deprive  him  Cyprus  of
of  his  kingdom  and  confiscate  his  possessions  to  the  domking"
service  of  the  state. A  Roman  officer  of  conspicu-
ous mark  and  dignity  was  to  be  sent  to  demand  the
surrender ;  the  edict  had  gone  forth,  and  no  other
discretion  was  left  to  the  instrument  of  the  republic
than  to  manage  the  affair  with  violence  or  mildness,

1  Cic.  pro  Sest.  26. ;  Schol.  Bob.  p.  301.  Orell.

2  Schol.  Bob.  1.  c. :  "  Quod  diceretur  ab  eo  piratas  adjuvari." Clo-
dius  had  a  personal  enmity  against  Ptolemaeus  ;  for  having  once  been
captured  by  the  pirates,  he  had  applied  to  him  to  obtain  a  sum  of
money  for  his  ransom. The  king,  it  seems,  sent  him  two  talents  for
the purpose,  and  Clodius  held  himself  affronted  by  the moderate
value  thus  set  upon  him. It  appears,  however,  that  the  pirates  them-
selves did not consider it adequate. App. B.  C. ii. 23. ; Dion,
xxxviii.  30.

B B 2

372  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, according  to  the  bent  of  his  own  disposition. Of
' all  the  principal  men  in  Rome  at  the  time,  it  might

be  thought  that  Cato  would  be  the  one  to  whom
the  execution  of  an  act  of  such  glaring  injustice
would  be  least  palatable.  It  is  probable  that  it  was
partly  on  this  very  account  that  he  was  selected  to
enforce  it.  It  was  rightly  calculated  in  the  councils
of  the  dominant  cabal  that  his  principles  of  strict
obedience  to  the  will  of  the  state  would  not  allow
him  to  decline  the  commission :  but  it  was  hoped
that  the  acceptance  of  so  ignoble  an  office  under
the  direction  of  the  enemies  of  his  party  would
tend  to  lower  his  estimation  among  them.  It  was
surmised  that  the  handling  of  such  a  mass  of
treasure  might  have  some  effect  in  corrupting
even  his  sturdy  morality  ;  at  least,  that  it  would
furnish  a  pretext  for  blackening  his  character.
The  tribune  accordingly  brought  forward  a  roga-
tion to  this  effect,  which  he  fortified  by  producing
Caesar's  written  approval.  Pompeius  was  well
pleased  for  his  own  part,  that  the  odium  which,
from  the  extraordinary  commissions  with  which  he
had  been  charged,  pressed  sometimes  with  no  ordi-
nary weight  upon  himself,  should  be  lightened  by
sharing  it  with  a  principal  leader  of  that  very
party  which  had  most  vehemently  opposed  his  own
schemes  of  aggrandizement.  He  considered  it  a
master-stroke  of  policy  thus  to  stop  the  clamours
of  his  fiercest  enemy,  and  readily  joined  the  tri-
bune in  urging  the  adoption  of  the  rogation  and
the  appointment  of  Cato  as  the  commissioner.
TWS  com-  Cato's  apologists  indeed  averred  that  Clodius  sent
thmltnuJLi  to  nim  m  tne  nrst  instance,  and  used  the  softest

Cato.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  373

and  most  flattering  persuasions  to  induce  him  to  CHAP.
accept  the  service.  Many,  he  said,  of  the  most
distinguished  personages  of  the  state  were  already
soliciting  it ;  but  it  was  for  Cato  he  wished  to
reserve  it,  as  the  most  honest  and  incorruptible
of  all,  and  therefore  the  fittest  to  discharge  so
delicate  a  trust.  But  Cato  immediately  perceived
that  the  offer  was  meant,  not  as  a  favour,  but  as
an  insult  and  a  snare,  and  rejected  it  indignantly.
The  tone  of  Clodius  instantly  changed  from  coax-
ing to  menace,  and,  presenting  himself  before  the
assembly,  he  obtained  a  decree  for  the  appointment
of  the  refractory  patriot.  He  assigned  him,  they
said,  neither  ship,  nor  attendants,  nor  military
force;  he  purposely  gave  the  enterprize  every
chance  of  failure.1  He  further  caused  another
service  of  no  less  injustice  to  be  annexed  to  the
first,  the  restoration  to  their  city  of  certain  persons
whom  the  free  state  of  Byzantium  had  expelled
for  sedition  and  breach  of  the  public  peace.2  This
political  pluralism  was  always  peculiarly  hateful
to  the  cupidity  of  the  Eoman  nobles,  though  they
disguised  their  selfish  feelings  under  the  pretence
of  jealousy  for  the  purity  of  the  constitution.

The  appointment,  however,  had  its  charms  even  He  executes
for  Cato.  It  conferred  great  distinction  upon  a  deration™0*
public  man,  who  had  served  as  vet  no  higher  fnd  strict

r  '  °  integrity.

offices  than  those  of  quaestor  and  tribune,  and  who

1  This  account  is  given  by  Plutarch {Cat.  Min.  34.). Cato  at-
tained the  object  of  his  mission  without  the  employment  of  force  ;  but
it  is  not  likely  that  he  was  really  left  without  the  means. Cicero  says  :
"  Si  quis  jus  suum  defenderet  Catonem  bello  gerendo  praefecisti
Dom.  8).

2  Cic.  pro  Dom.  20.

B B 3

374  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP  was  now  elevated  to  the  rank  of  praetor  for  the
purpose  of  executing  this  double  commission  with
suitable  splendour.1  It  would  seem,  moreover,
from  the  advice  which  Cato  had  given  to  Cicero,
that  he  thought  it  hopeless  at  the  time  to  with-
stand the  combination  of  tyrants,  and  was  not
unwilling  himself  to  embrace  a  specious  retirement,
until  brighter  prospects  should  open  upon  his
party.  Having  accepted  the  commission,  he  seems
tp  have  discharged  it  with  as  much  forbearance  as
its  nature  admitted.2  He  did  not  even  enter  into
the  presence  of  the  unfortunate  king ;  perhaps  he
was  ashamed  to  transact  so  foul  a  business  in
person.  Remaining  himself  at  Ehodes,  he  sent
Canidius,  a  private  friend,  to  deliver  the  decree  of
the  Roman  people,  and  hold  out  to  the  injured
monarch  the  promise  of  a  lucrative  and  honourable
compensation  in  the  priesthood  of  the  Paphian
Venus.  PtolemaBus  made  no  attempt  at  resistance;
but  his  spirit  was  too  proud  to  descend  to  a  private
station,  or  receive  a  favour  from  the  hands  of
treacherous  enemies.  Fortunately  for  Cato,  as
Plutarch  remarks3,  he  preferred  to  submit  to  a
voluntary  death.  His  vacant  throne  was  imme-
diately overturned,  his  subjects  placed  under  the
rule  of  a  Roman  governor,  and  the  fatal  treasures
which  he  had  amassed  poured  with  the  strictest
fidelity  into  the  coffers  of  the  state.4  It  would  be

1  Veil.  ii.  45. :  "  P.  Clodius  sub  honorificentissimo  minister!!  titulo
Catonem  a  republica  relegavit."

2  Pint.  Cat.  Min.  35.

3  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  36. :  'O  tie  iv  Kvirpot  Hro\tpato£  evrvxiq  fivi  rov
Karwvoe  iavrov  ^apfJidicoii;  cnrsicrtive.

4  Gate's  probity  was  always  ostentatious ;  comp.  Veil.  ii.  45.  and

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  375

well  for  the  character  of  the  most  celebrated  model  CHAP.
of  republican  virtue  if  the  narrative  of  this  event
could  stop  here;  but  it  must  be  remarked  that
Cato,  having  thus  performed  what  he  might  con-
sider no  more  than  his  duty  as  a  citizen,  so  far
from  protesting  afterwards  against  the  injustice  of
the  decree,  seems  rather  to  have  prided  himself
upon  his  mission,  as  redounding  to  his  honour  no
less  than  to  his  advancement.  As  Clodius  had
probably  foreseen,  he  became  the  defender  of  the
acts  of  his  patron's  tribunate.  He  not  only  repu-
diated the  excuses  which  Cicero  afterwards  sug-
gested for  his  submission,  but  openly  withstood  the
attempts  of  the  orator,  after  his  return  from  banish-
ment, to  fasten  a  stigma  upon  the  administration
of  his  baffled  persecutor.1  Nor  was  his  zeal  in
defence  of  the  author  of  his  appointment  weakened
even  by  the  insult  which  Clodius  cast  upon  him,
by  questioning  the  correctness  of  the  accounts  he
rendered  to  the  people,  and  hinting  that  he  had
abused  his  trust.  This  must  have  been  the  more
offensive  to  Cato,  as  the  minute  and  even  morose
strictness  with  which  he  had  made  his  inventories
and  effected  his  sales  had  already  disgusted  and
irritated  his  personal  followers.  That  there  was
something  pedantic  in  his  dealings,  and  matter  for

Plut.  Cat.  Min.  39.  As  he  sailed  up  the  Tiber  with  his  treasures,
the  consuls  and  principal  people  came  out  in  a  procession  to  meet
him  ;  but  he  would  not  pause  even  to  greet  them  till  he  had  deposited
his  charge  in  the  treasury.  He  returned  from  his  mission  A.U.  698,
viraTsve  de  &i\i7nro£.  Plut.  I.  c.  Appian  makes  an  unaccountable
mistake  in  saying  that  he  did  not  actually  proceed  to  discharge  his  com-
mission till  the  consulship  of  Pompeius,  A.U.  702.  App.  B.  C.  ii.  23.
i  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  40.

B B 4

376  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, not unreasonable  ridicule,  may  be  inferred  from

VIII

' Cassar  having  made  them  one  of  his  principal

topics  of  raillery  in  the  satire  upon  his  opponent,
which  he  published  long  afterwards  under  the  title
of  Anticato.1

The  King While  the  king  of  Cyprus  was  suffering  under

of  Egypt  ? . J  r

applies  for  the  lawless  domination  of  a  foreign  government,
ventlonof  h*8  brother  Auletes2  was  experiencing  the  penalty
the  republic.  of  j^g  own  tyranny  in  the  rebellion  of  his  indignant
subjects.  Expelled  from  the  palace  of  his  ancestors
in  Alexandria,  he  bethought  himself  of  the  ne-
cessities of  the  rival  statesmen  of  Rome,  and  deter-
mined to  offer  to  their  cupidity  the  temptation  of
interference  with  the  affairs  of  his  country.  On
his  way  to  Italy  he  sought  an  interview  with  Cato.
The  coarse  and  haughty  Roman  treated  the  royal
petitioner  with  contemptuous  indelicacy,  while  the
supple  Egyptian  submitted  to  the  indignity  without
a  murmur.3  Nevertheless,  the  advice  of  the  cyni-
cal republican,  who  was  anxious  to  avert  another
extraordinary  commission,  with  all  the  cabals  and
fatal  dissensions  to  which  it  would  give  rise,  was
sound  and  friendly;  but  the  banished  monarch,
with  all  his  professions  of  obsequiousness,  had  not
the  sense  to  follow  it.  Cato  pointed  out  to  him

1  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  36.  Compare  the  anecdote  in  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.
19.:  "Non  sere  captus  nee  arte,  unam  solummodo  Zenonis  statuam
Cypria  in  expeditione  non  vendidit  Cato,  sed  quia  philosophi  erat;  ut
obiter  hoc  quoque  noscatur  tarn  inane  exemplum."

8  This  Ptolemaeus  acquired  his  surname  from  his  shameless  appear-
ance in  public  as  a  flute-player.  Strab.  xvii.  1.  :  OVK  oim/et  awrtXtlv
ayvvaq  tv  TOIQ  fiaaiKfioiQ.

3  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  35.  :  'O  Se  K«TU>J/  trvyxavf.  p.(v  wv  rort  Tripi  Kot\iag
KaOapcnv  .  .  .  .  o)£  d'  r|\6f^'1  OUT'  aTravri^oag,  ourt  t/7re£uvaerr&ffi  .  .  K.  T.  X.
But  such  coarseness  of  manners  has  been  paralleled  in  comparatively
recent  times.  See  Wraxall's  Historical  Memoirs,  i.  p.  252.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  377

the insults to which he would be exposed in CHAP.
waiting  upon the plots  and  counterplots of  the

Koman  forum,  the  bribes  that  would  be  exacted
from  him  on  every  side,  the  adjournment  of  his
hopes,  the  exhaustion  of  his  resources,  finally,  per-
haps, a  success  more  perilous  to  him  than  failure.
He  recommended  him  to  return  to  Egypt  and
make  the  best  terms  he  could  with  his  rebellious
subjects ;  and  the  monarch,  who  disregarded  the
advice,  was  said  to  have  afterwards  expressed  his
admiration  of  its  prophetic  wisdom.

Cato  was  accompanied on  his  mission by  his  catoaccom-
nephew,  M.  Brutus,  a  young  man  of  noble  birth,  of  Emission
high  and  ambitious  aspirations,  but  whose  public  nephew
career  had  hitherto  been  confined  to  serving  as  M-  Junius

r*  .  /. n •

lieutenant  to  Lsesar  in  his  government  of  bpain.
The  important  part  which  he  was  destined  to  act
in  the  closing  scenes  of  the  Roman  republic,  and
the  peculiar  celebrity  attached  to  his  name,  make
us  the  more  anxious  to  investigate  the  minuter
actions  of  his  life,  and  acquire  a  complete  view  of
his  character.  He  was  the  son  of  a  father  of  the
same  name,  who  had  been  a  prominent  supporter
of  the  Marian  party,  and  finally  lost  his  life  by
rashly  joining  in  the  enterprize  of  Lepidus.1  »  His
mother  Servilia  was  half-sister  to  M.  Cato2,  and

1  Plut. Brut.  4. Niebuhr {Lectures  »n  Roman  History, 1.  48.)
denies  that  this  M.  Junius  Brutus  was  father  of  the  tyrannicide. But
compare  Orelli,  Onomast.  Tullian.  in  voc.

2  Servilia  was married first  to M.  Junius Brutus, secondly  to
D.  Junius  Silanus. She  was  senior  by  many  years  to  M.  Cato. "  Ser-
vilia apud  Catonem  maternam  obtinebat  auctoritatem." Ascon.  in
Scaur,  p.  19. The  Servilii  claimed  descent  from  Servilius  Ahala,  the
slayer  of  Sp.  Maelius,  as  the  Junii  from  Brutus,  the  founder  of  the
republic,  so  that  the  blood  of  the  two  most  celebrated  assertors  of
liberty  met  in  the  person  of  the  future  tyrannicide.

378  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, appears  to  have  been  a  woman  of  strong  character
and  more  than  usual  attainments. So  far  she  was

worthy  of  her  distinguished  relative ;  but  the  voice
of  the  public  circulated  the  most  scandalous  ru-
mours against  her,  as  the  favourite  mistress  of
Csesar,  the  instrument  of  her  own  daughter's  dis-
honour, the  venal  recipient  of  the  spoils  of  con-
quest.1 The  shocking  suspicion,  however,  that
Brutus  became  the  murderer  of  the  man  to  whom
he  owed  his  existence  is  a  mere  invention  of  the
Roman  anecdotists.2  He  was  born  A.  u.  669,  only
fifteen  years  later  than  Caesar  himself.  But  Cae-
sar's intimacy  with  Servilia  was  no  doubt  a  prin-
cipal cause  of  the  marked  favour  and  indulgence
with  which  he  distinguished  her  son.

Hischa-  Tne  elder Brutus being cut  off  prematurely,

racter.  when  his  son  was  only  eight  years  of  age,  the
care  of  his  education  fortunately  passed  from  the
hands  of  an  intriguing  mother  into  those  of  his
uncle  Cato  ;  and  the  youth  became  early  initiated
in  the  maxims  of  the  Stoic  philosophy,  and  learned
to  regard  his  preceptor,  whose  daughter  Portia  he
married,  as  the  purest  model  of  practical  and  theo-
retical virtue.  But,  together  with  many  honour-
able and  noble  sentiments,  he  imbibed  also  from
him  that  morose  strictness  in  the  exaction  as  well
as  the  discharge  of  legal  obligations,  which,  while
it  is  often  mistaken  for  a  guarantee  of  probity,  is
not  incompatible  with  considerable  laxity  of  prin-
ciple. Accordingly,  we  find  that  while,  on  the  one
hand,  he  made  no  use  of  the  powers  of  a  Roman

1  Suet.  Jul.  50.,  and  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  2.

2  Plut.  Brut.  5.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  379

officer  in  a  province  to  extort  by  fraud  or  violence  CHAP.
the  objects  of  his  cupidity,  he  was,  on  the  other,
not  the  less  unscrupulous  in  demanding  exorbitant
interest  for  loans  advanced  to  the  natives,  and
insisting  upon  its  payment  with  rigid  pertinacity.
His  infamous  transactions  with  the  magistrates  of
Salamis  in  Cyprus,  as  also  with  Ariobarzanes,
king  of  Cappadocia,  are  detailed  in  Cicero's  cor-
respondence with  Atticus.  It  was  some  years
after  his  residence  in  the  island,  that  he  commis-
sioned a  person  of  the  name  of  Scaptius  to  collect
his  debts  with  their  accumulated  interest.  He
allowed  his  agent  to  insist  upon  the  most  question-
able interpretations  of  the  law,  and  to  enforce  a
rate  of  interest  beyond  what  Cicero  considered
either  legal  or  equitable.  Scaptius,  in  his  zeal  for
his  employer,  obtained  the  services  of  a  troop  of
horse,  with  which  he  shut  up  the  Salaminian  sena-
tors in  their  house  of  assembly  till  five  of  them
died  of  starvation,  being  really  unable  to  liquidate
the  sum  required.1  The  bitter  reflections  which
Cicero  makes  upon  the  conduct  of  Brutus  mark
the  strong  contrast  between  the  tried  and  practical
friend  of  virtue  and  the  pedantic  aspirant  to  philo-
sophic renown.

But neither, indeed, were the weaknesses of  cicero's
Cicero's character to be controlled  by  the  sage  complaints
lessons  he  had  imbibed. He  lingered  in  his  pro-  inexile-
gress  through  Italy  to  the  coast  of  the  Adriatic,
as  if  still  indulging  a  hope  that  the  passions  of  his
partizans,  whom  he  had  left  the  city  rather  than
excite  to  arms,  might  rise  upon  his  departure  in

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  v.  21.,  vi.  1.

380  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  uncontrollable  fervour  only  to  be  appeased  by  his
immediate  recal.  But  the  senate  cowered  under
the  blow  ;  the  populace  of  Rome  was  devoted  to
the  audacity  and  good-fortune  of  Clodius ;  the
states  and  cities  of  Italy,  with  many  of  which  the
fugitive  had  ingratiated  himself  during  his  long
forensic  career,  dared  not  even  raise  their  voices
in  behalf  of  the  leader  of  a  broken  and  dispirited
party.  When  at  last  he  summoned  resolution  to
cross  the  sea  to  Epirus,  it  was  with  a  burst  of
anger  and  despair,  which  reveals  not  less  of  pique
and  disappointment  than  of  genuine  sorrow.  The
character  of  this  illustrious  exile  is  fully  and  cu-
riously developed  to  us  in  the  very  complete  col-
lection we  possess  of  his  letters  at  this  period.
They  exhibit  the  writhings  of  a  mind  which  wreaks
upon  friends  the  torments  of  self-dissatisfaction.
The  writer  begins  early  to  think  he  has  made  a
false  step,  and  to  throw  the  blame  upon  those  who
advised,  or  at  least  did  not  actively  dissuade  him
from  it.1  "  Unprecedented,"  he  exclaims  to  Atticus,
"  as  my  calamity  is,  nevertheless  I  am  not  so  much
affected  by  that  as  by  a  sense  of  the  error  I  have
committed;  for  now,  indeed,  you  perceive  by
whose  wickedness  I  have  been  betrayed."  In  these
words  he  seems  to  point  more  particularly  to  Hor-
tensius,  whom  he  might  fancy  to  be  jealous  of  him
as  a  rival  in  eloquence  ;  but  in  other  places  he  in-
volves his  friends  generally  in  one  common  accu-
sation :  "  Those  to  whom  I  believed  my  safety  was
dearest  have  treated  me  as  the  most  cruel  of
enemies ;  when  they  saw  me  despond  only  a  little,

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  iii.  8.  and  foil.,  ad  Qu.  Fr.  i.  3.  and  foil.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  381

they  played  upon  my  fears,  and  urged  me  to  my  CHAP.
ruin."  He  does  not  spare  Atticus  himself,  even
while  heaping  upon  him  the  strongest  assurances
of  confidence.  At  length  he  works  himself  to  such
a  pitch  of  irritation  as  to  discuss  the  question  of
suicide,  and  so  arrays  his  arguments  as  to  leave  his
friends  under  some  apprehension  lest  his  troubles
should  be  brought  to  a  violent  consummation.1  It
is  not  to  be  wondered  that  they  expressed  their
doubts  among  themselves  of  the  soundness  of  the
sufferer's  intellect.2  But,  without  imputing  to  him
any  intentional  deception,  it  must  be  allowed  that
Cicero  had  indulged  as  a  pleader  and  declaimer  in
the  vice  of  exaggeration,  to  such  a  degree  as  to
have  little  power  of  looking  calmly  upon  things
which  excited  his  feelings,  at  least  of  expressing
himself  upon  them  with  clearness  and  moderation.
He  does  himself  much  injustice,  probably,  in  the
over-charged  picture  he  has  drawn  of  his  own  im-
becility. He  might  think  to  move  the  commisera-
tion of  his  contemporaries  by  magnifying  his  own
infirmities,  but  he  has  well  nigh  lost  by  it  the  re-
spect of  posterity.  Some  portion  at  least  of  the
complaints  he  lavishes  upon  his  own  wrongs  might
well  have  been  spared  for  a  more  frequent  and
prominent  expression  of  concern  at  the  degradation
of  his  party  and  country.

Meanwhile,  the  friends  of  the  unfortunate  exile,  Exertions  of
far from resenting his unjust suspicions, were
stirring  anxiously  in  his  behalf. Cato,  indeed,  as

Atticus.

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  iii.  9.,  ad  Qu.  Fr.  i.  3.

2  Cic.  ad  Att.  iii.  13. :  "  Scribis  te  audire  me  etiam  mentis  errore
ex  dolore  affici."

382  HISTOEY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  we  have  seen,  was  absent  upon  a  distant  mission,
'  and  Lucullus  had  relapsed,  after  a  short  interval  of
activity,  into  the  easy  indolence  to  which  he  had
long  surrendered  himself.  But  Quintus,  the  ora-
tor's brother,  had  returned  from  Asia,  where  he
had  been  charged  with  the  government  of  the  pro-
vince, and  was  conferring  with  Atticus,  Horten-
sius,  and  the  tribune  Ninnius  at  Eome.  The
political  history  of  the  times  makes  little  mention
of  T.  Pomponius  Atticus,  however  familiar  his
name  is  to  scholars,  from  the  confidential  inter-
course with  which  Cicero  honoured  him.  Yet
he  was  a  man  of  good  descent,  of  ample  fortune,
and  of  literary  attainments 1 ;  one  who  mixed  freely
in  the  society  of  the  statesmen  of  the  day,  and
was  the  friend  of  some  of  the  most  active  among
them.  A  follower,  by  natural  disposition  as  well
as  from  reflection,  of  the  philosophy  of  Epicurus,
he  made  it  his  deliberate  study  to  carry  its  prin-
ciples thoroughly  into  practice.  In  the  most  stirring
and  turbulent  age  of  the  republic,  he  abstained
from  all  political  action2:  though  closely  con-
nected with  the  oligarchy,  he  belonged  properly  to
no  party ;  nor  would  he  undertake  the  discharge
of  any  functions,  civil  or  political.  He  refused  even
the  safe  and  easy  dignities  which  the  governors  of
the  provinces  could  bestow  upon  the  friends  who
followed  in  their  retinue ;  nor  would  he  make
use  of  his  abilities  and  attainments  in  the  career  of

1  He  wrote  an  epitome  of  Roman  history,  a  history  of  Cicero's  con-
sulship in  Greek,  and  drew  up  genealogical  tables  of  the  principal
Roman  families. Cic.  ad  Att.  xii.  23.,  ii.  1. ;  Nepos,  Aft.  8.

2  Nepos,  Att.  6.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  383

an  advocate,  to  which  every  Roman  gentleman  was CHAP.

I,  TT  C  J

in  a  manner  born.  He  never  preferred  an  accu-
sation  against  any  one  himself,  although  an  im-
peachment was  the  most  ordinary  road  to  notoriety;
nor  would  he  lend  the  weight  of  his  interest  to  the
public  spirit  or  malice  of  a  friend.  He  never  en-
tered into  a  lawsuit.  Having  friends  of  all  parties,
it  was  impossible  but  that  the  chances  of  fortune
must  often  reduce  some  of  them  to  a  position  in
which  to  treat  them  kindly  might  have  been
dangerous,  or  at  least  troublesome.  Atticus  re-
lieved Cicero,  and  afterwards  Brutus,  in  the  time
of  their  distress,  with  ample  assistance  in  money l ;
but  he  succeeded  in  divesting  his  sympathy  of  any
political  colour,  and  escaped  the  animadversion  of
their  enemies.  This  indeed  was  in  later  life,  when
his  character  for  neutrality  was  well  established ;
and  it  deserves  to  be  remarked,  that  the  factions
of  Rome  were  always  extremely  tolerant  of  neutral
parties.  At  an  earlier  period,  however,  the  fact  of
his  connexion  by  blood  with  P.  Sulpicius  subjected
him  to  the  jealousy  of  China's  followers,  and  com-
pelled him  to  leave  Rome  and  seek  an  asylum  at
Athens.2  There  he  continued  to  reside  for  many
years,  and  it  was  from  his  known  partiality  for
that  place  and  its  people  that  he  derived  the
surname  by  which  he  is  familiarly  known.  The
leisure  which  Atticus  obtained  by  this  renunciation
of  all  public  occupation  he  devoted  principally  to
literature  and  matters  of  taste.  But  he  had  also  a
keen  eye  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  though  far
from  illiberal  in  his  use  of  it.  He  inherited  an

1  Nepos,  Att.  4.  8.  2  Nepos,  Alt.  2.

384  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  ample  fortune,  and  employed  all  the  opportunities
'  of  his  time  to  lay  it  out  to  the  best  advantage.
He  possessed  large  families  of  slaves,  whom  he
educated  to  enhance  their  value ;  he  lent  money
on  the  most  approved  securities,  especially  to  the
corporations  which  farmed  the  revenues;  and  we
read  of  his  purchasing  a  troop  of  gladiators  in
order  to  let  them  out  to  magistrates  for  public
games.1  The  friend  of  Sulla,  of  Cicero,  of  Brutus,
and  of  Agrippa,  Atticus  lived  through  several
generations  of  Roman  statesmen.  At  the  age  of
seventy-seven  he  was  attacked  by  an  incurable
disease,  and  then,  true  to  his  principles,  he  sub-
mitted to  voluntary  death  by  abstinence,  rather
than  encounter  the  only  ill  for  which  his  philo-
sophy could  furnish  no  remedy.  He  died  in  the
year  of  the  city  722.

character  of  We  have  already  acquired  some  knowledge  of
•Hortensms.  Q  jjortensius,  in  reviewing  the  character  of  the
more  refined  and  luxurious  class  of  the  Roman
nobility.2  Born  eight  years  before  Cicero,  and
entering  the  arena  of  the  forum  at  the  age  of
nineteen,  his  florid  rhetoric  and  graceful  delivery
had  already  established  his  fame  before  the  period
of  Sulla's  ascendancy.  At  the  first  introduction
of  his  future  rival  into  public  life  he  was  in  com-
plete possession  of  the  ear  of  the  judges.  Attached
as  he  was  to  the  cause  of  the  oligarchy,  he  con-
tinued from  that  time  to  exercise  his  talents  chiefly

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  4. ;  Nepos,  Att.  13.

2  An  extremely  elegant  and  lively  account  of  Hortensius  is  given
by  Dunlop  in  his  Hist,  of  Rom.  Literature,  ii.  222.  foil. The  redun-
dant and  florid  character  of  his  eloquence  is  criticized  at  length  by
Cicero  (Brutus,  94,  95.).

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  385

in  defence  of  the  nobles  of  his  party  who  were  CHAP.
accused  of  provincial  malversation.  He  pleaded
before  favourable  tribunals ;  and  it  was  this  cir-
cumstance that  contributed  more  perhaps  than  his
eloquence  to  his  repeated  successes.  The  prose-
cution of  Verres,  in  which  he  was  retained  by  the
defendant  against  the  rising  genius  of  Cicero,  first
shook  the  supremacy  of  this  champion  of  the  bar.
But  Hortensius  felt  no  remorse  at  reflecting  that
the  immense  wealth  which  his  abilities  procured
for  him  was  for  the  most  part  derived  from  the
plunder  of  the  provinces.  Though  unstained  by
glaring  vices,  his  career  was  equally  unmarked  by
any  elevation  of  view  or  the  development  of  any
generous  sentiments.  Accomplished  as  he  was,  he
made  no  progress  in  the  affections  of  the  simpler
mind  of  Cicero.  After  passing  through  the  usual
succession  of  public  offices,  he  obtained  the  con-
sulship in  the  year  684.  His  ambition  was  thence-
forth satisfied,  and  he  made  no  effort  to  retain  the
high  position  he  had  acquired.  The  example  of
his  indolence  and  luxury  made  him  rather  a
burden  than  a  support  to  the  sinking  cause  which
he  still  nominally  maintained,  and  he  gradually
lost  the  esteem  both  of  Cato1  and  of  Cicero.
The  latter  lived  indeed  to  retract  the  insinuations
he  had  thrown  out  against  him  for  want  of  fidelity
to  himself2;  but  if  he  failed  to  the  last  in  ex-
hibiting any  cordiality  towards  him,  we  may  feel

1  Aristocrat  though  he  was,  Hortensius  was  held  in  little  favour  by
the  later  admirers  of  Cato.  Perhaps  it  was  natural  to  contrast  two
such  dissimilar  characters.  Comp.  Lucan,  ii.  329.:

"  Quondam  virgo  toris  melioris  juncta  mariti."
*  Cic.pro  Sest.  16—19.
VOL. I.  C  C

386  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, that  he  had  better  grounds  for  his  coldness  than
the  mere  remnant  of  professional  jealousy.

political  The  first  duty  of  the exile's  real  friends  un-

doubtedly  was  to  provide  for*the  security  of  his
and  w^e  an(^  famity>  whom,  in  his  uncertainty  regarding

sequent his  own  movements,  he  had  left  behind  at  Rome.

time"  of m This  was  a  sufficient  reason  for  Atticus  to  neglect

revolution,  hjg  friend's  entreaties  to  meet  him  at  Brundisium
or  in  Epirus,  where  an  interview  could  have
been  of  no  service  to  his  true  interests.  Not
indeed  that  there  was  much  actual  danger  to  a
woman  abandoned  by  her  legitimate  protector,
even  in  the  midst  of  his  political  enemies.  The
Roman  women  in  the  olden  times  had  been  edu-
cated on  a  system  which  disabled  them  from  taking
any  part  in  politics.  Their  sphere  was  merely
domestic,  and  their  minds  remained  undeveloped
for  any  moral  or  intellectual  purpose.  With  the
increase^  of  civilization  the  manners  of  antiquity
relaxed  ;  the  Roman  matrons,  the  Cornelias,  the
Portias,  and  Aurelias,  became  not  unfrequently
the  counsellors  of  their  husbands  and  the  in-
structors of  their  children  ;  but  it  was  only  the
looser  sort,  the  Fulvias  and  Clodias,  who  mixed  in
the  political  intrigues  of  their  gallants.  The  idea
still  remained  rooted  in  the  Roman  mind  that  the
wife  was  the  dependent,  almost  the  slave,  of  the  pater
familias,  and  could  occupy  no  place  in  the  arena  of
public  life.  Hence  it  was  that,  amidst  .the  revolu-
tions and  proscriptions  of  the  civil  wars,  the  females
of  a  family  were  never  subjected  to  the  persecutions
in  which  their  husbands  and  brothers  were  involved.
The  mother  of  Sertorius  remained  unmolested  in

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  387

Rome  throughout  the  wars  which  the  republic  CHAP.
waged  against  her  son.  After  the  death  of  Caius
Gracchus,  Cornelia  retired  no  further  than  to  Mi-
senum,  and  lived  there  in  the  enjoyment  of  a  large
fortune  and  the  society  of  the  most  distinguished
men1,  while  the  son  of  Fulvius,  a  youth  of  only
fifteen  years,  was  involved  in  the  fate  of  his
father.2  Nevertheless,  the  situation  of  Terentia,
the  wife  of  Cicero,  was  one  which  demanded
the  solicitude  of  his  friends.  The  confiscation
of  her  husband's  fortune  reduced  her  at  once  to
poverty.  She  was  a  woman  of  high  spirit,  and  High  spirit
acted  with  fortitude  and  decision.  We  have  a  w«^Te."
letter  of  Cicero's,  in  which  he  entreats  her  not  to  rentia*
dispose  of  a  small  estate,  which  was  her  own  pro-
perty, by  which  means  she  was  preparing  to  pro-
vide for  the  immediate  necessities  of  the  family.
He  represents  the  injury  that  she  will  thus  inflict
upon  their  son,  and  counsels  her  to  trust  to  the
benevolence  of  Atticus  and  the  pious  attention  of
Piso,  their  son-in-law.3  In  a  short  time  ample
provision  was  made  for  the  wants  of  the  family ;
and  Terentia  combined  with  her  husband's  friends
in  watching  the  tides  of  public  opinion,  and  working
in  private  for  his  restoration.

The  vices and insolence  of  Clodius  were  be-

1  It  may  be  remarked,  as  an  exception  to  this  contemptuous  gene-
rosity, that  Licinia,  the  wife  of  C.  Gracchus,  was  deprived  of  her
dowry. Merimee,  i.  81.  note.

2  Plut.  C.  Gracch.  17.  19. ;  Veil.  ii.  7.

3  Cic.  ad  Div.  xiv.  1,2.:  "  Quod  ad  me  scribis  te  vicum  venditu-
ram,  quid,  obsecro  te,  me  miserum,  quid  futurum  est  ?  .  .  .  .  per  for-
tunas  miseras  vide  ne  puerum  perditum  perdamus  ....  obsecro  te,
mea  vita,  quod  ad  sumtum  attinet,  sine  alios,  qui  possunt,  si  modo
volunt,  sustinere."

c  c 2

388  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, ginning  already  to  contribute  to  the  advancement

of  Cicero's  cause  ;  by  the  one  the  affections  of  the

people  were  in  some  degree  alienated  from  his
enemy,  by  the  other  even  Pompeius  felt  himself
at  last  aggrieved.  The  exile  had  meanwhile  re-
tired to  Thessalonica.  Southern  Greece,  to  which
he  would  more  willingly  have  betaken  himself,  was
infested  by  several  of  Catilina's  adherents,  who  had
taken  up  their  abode  there,  and  among  whom  he
deemed  it  unsafe  to  venture  his  person.1  But  when
the  year  was  about  to  expire,  and  Piso,  the  late
consul,  was  preparing  to  visit  Macedonia,  his  al-
lotted province,  the  fugitive  entertained  no  less
apprehension  from  the  proximity  of  so  bitter  an
enemy.  The  country  began  already  to  fill  with
the  troops  and  officers  of  the  new  proconsul2,  by
whom  any  violence  done  to  the  banished  man
might  be  regarded  with  favour.  Cicero  felt  it
necessary  to  expedite  his  departure,  and  he  deter-
mined, by  approaching  nearer  to  Italy,  to  give  an
evidence  of  his  own  courage,  and  animate  the  ex-
ertions of  his  friends.  Accordingly,  he  took  up
his  residence  at  Dyrrhachium,  although  it  was
within  the  prescribed  limits  of  four  hundred
miles  from  Rome,  and  lay  on  the  high  road  to
Macedonia.  He  had  numerous  partizans  in  Epi-
rus.3  The  magistrates  and  people  were  favourably
disposed  towards  him  and  jealous  of  their  liberty.4

1  Cic.  pro  Plane.  41.  2  Cic.  ad  Att.  iii.  22.

3  Cic.  ad  Div.  xiv.  1.:  "  Dyrrliaehium  veni  quod  et  libera  civitas
est,  et  in  me  officiosa  et  proxima  Italise." Comp.  Ep.  3. :  "  civitas  hsec
semper  a  me  defensa  est."

4  Pliny  (H.  N.  iii.  23.)  calls  Dyrrhachium  a  Roman  colony,  but  the

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  389

He  was  confident  both  of  their  will  and  power  to  CHAP.
protect  him  ;  so  much  had  an  individual  to  fear
from  illegal  violence,  in  the  lawless  condition  both
of  Eome  and  the  provinces ;  so  much  might  he
hope,  even  in  opposition  to  the  law,  from  personal
and  private  favour;  such,  in  short,  was  the  weakness
of  the  central  executive  power  under  the  system  of
municipal  government  which  formed  the  basis  of
the  Roman  polity.

The  elections  for  the  ensuing  year  proved  favour-
able  to  the  prospect  of  a  reversal  of  the  decrees
against  Cicero.  This  was  principally  owing  to  the
change  in  Pompeius's  disposition  towards  Clodius.
When  the  victorious  general  returned  from  the
East,  he  brought  with  him  a  son  of  Tigranes,  king
of  Armenia,  whom  he  kept  in  the  custody  of  Flavius,
one  of  the  praetors,  as  a  hostage  for  the  good  faith
of  his  father.  The  tribune  had  obtained  possession
of  this  youth's  person  by  fraud,  and  refused  to
deliver  him  up  on  the  praetor's  demand.  Soon
afterwards  he  accepted  a  bribe  from  the  Armenian
monarch,  and  sent  him  home.  Flavius  hastened
out  of  the  city  with  a  body  of  armed  men  to  inter-
cept the  young  man's  escape;  but  he  was  met  at  the
fourth  milestone  by  the  tribune  accompanied  also
by  a  number  of  his  partizans.1  A  combat  ensued,  in

great  importance  of  the  place  as  an  emporium  of  commerce  had  given,
it  probably  the  means  of  claiming  a  more  independent  position.
Under  its  ancient  name  of  Epidamnus  it  had  been  famous  for  its  hos-
pitality to  strangers,  from  whence  it  may  have  derived  its  appellation
(sc.  i-Tci^tiv).  See  Perizon.  ad  JElian.  V.  H.  xiii.  16.  There  was
a  popular  story  that  the  Romans  changed  the  name  to  Dyrrhachium
(sc.  dvs  and  p//xia),  "  Ominis  causa,  quasi  in  dainnum  ituri."  Mel.
ii.  2.

1  Dion,  xxxviii.  30.

c  c 3

390  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS

CHAP, which  Clodius  was  successful,  killing  several  of  his
opponents,  and  among  them  one  Papirius,  a  knight,

violence  of  a  publicanus,  and  a  friend  of  Pompeius.1  Thus
the  tribune.  outrage(j  an(j  insulted,  the  great  man  withdrew  his
countenance  from  his  upstart  creature,  and  de-
termined to  thwart  him  in  every  way.  It  was
reported  indeed  that  Clodius  had  contrived  a  plot
to  assassinate  the  triumvir.  All  the  circumstances
requisite  to  substantiate  the  report  were  vouched
for :  one  of  the  tribune's  slaves  was  seized  at  Pom-
peius's  door ;  he  had  a  dagger  upon  him  ;  he  con-
fessed that  he  had  been  placed  there  by  his  master
to  commit  the  murder.2  This  suspicion,  coupled
with  the  violence  of  the  rnob  which  surrounded  the
tribune's  person,  induced  Pompeius  to  retire  from
public  view  and  confine  himself  to  his  own  house.
Even  there  he  was  assailed  by  the  populace,  and  in
the  riot  which  ensued  the  consul  Piso  openly  took
part  with  Clodius.  Pompeius  succeeded  in  de-
taching the  other  consul  Gabinius  from  him,  and
by  exerting  all  his  influence,  joined  probably  to
that  of  Caasar,  who  was  also  induced  to  withdraw
Election  of  his  countenance  from  the  demagogue3,  he  obtained
fMendiy  to  the  election  to  the  consulship  of  Lentulus  Spinther,
a  deci(jed  friend  to  Cicero,  and  of  Metellus  Nepos,

1  Cic.  pro  Mil.  14. ;  Ascon.  in  loc.

2  C'ic.pro  Sest  32.  ;  Plut.  Pomp.  49.

3  Cic.  ad  Att.  iii.  15.,  written  in  the  middle  of  August :  "  Varronis
sermo  facit expectationem  Caesaris." Soon afterwards Sestius,  a
private  friend  of  Cicero,  whom  he  defended  subsequently  in  the  ener-
getic speech  from  which  so  much  of  our  knowledge  of  these  events  is
drawn,  made  a  journey  into  Gaul  on  purpose  to  confer  with  the  pro-
consul, and  obtain  his  approval  of  the  exile's  recal,  though  coupled
apparently  with  some  conditions  or  expressions  unpalatable  to  him
(pro  Sest.  32.).

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  391

an  adherent  of  his  own,  whose  personal  enmity  to CHAP.
the  exile  he  could  check  and  modify. The  new VIIL
tribunes  also  were  now  for  the  most  part  favour-
able to  the  cause  of  Cicero  and  of  the  senate.

The  consuls  commenced  their  career  by  moving  Progress  of
the  question  of  the  orator's  recal.  They  were  T^0™£
baffled  in  the  first  instance  by  the  veto  of  Serranus,  cipdius  and
one  of  the  tribunes.1  A  second  attempt  ended  in
a  furious  and  bloody  tumult  excited  by  Clodius,
and  carried  through  by  the  armed  clients  and  paid
adherents  by  whom  he  was  constantly  attended.
Koine  was  given  up  for  a  season  to  mere  violence.
Clodius,  blind  with  rage,  set  fire  with  his  own
hands  to  the  temple  of  the  Nymphs,  and  consumed
the  registers  of  the  censorship  ;  he  attacked  the
houses  of  the  principal  nobles,  and  filled  the  forum
with  the  corpses  of  the  slain.  Such  a  scene  had
not  been  witnessed  within  the  walls  since  the
contest  of  Cinna  and  Octavius.2  At  last  Annius
Milo,  on  the  part  of  the  senate,  collected  a  body  of
gladiators  under  arms,  and  paraded  the  streets  to
prevent  the  assemblage  of  his  opponent's  followers  ;
nor  did  the  gravest  of  the  nobility  scruple  to
acknowledge  his  assistance,  and  applaud  his  spirit
in  undertaking  their  defence  at  his  own  private
charge.3

The  senate  had  now  made  up  its  mind  to  proceed  cicero  is
to  any  extremity. It  issued  a  decree,  inviting  the
Italian  citizens  to  come  to  the  defence  of  the  com-

1  Cic.  pro  Sest.  34.  2  Cic.  pro  Sest.  35—38.

3  Cic.  de  Off.\\.  17.:  "Honor!  summo  nuper  nostro  Miloni  fuit
qui  gladiatoribus  emptis  reipublica;  causa  omnes  P.  Clodii  conatus
furoresque  compressit."

c  c 4

to  Home.

392  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  monwealth,  and  overawe  the  urban  population.1
Rome  was  straightway  filled  with  the  adherents  of
Cicero  and  his  party  ;  while  every  city,  it  was  said,
throughout  the  Peninsula,  hastened  to  testify  by
some  public  act  or  monument  its  regard  for  the
saviour  of  his  country,  the  patron  of  so  many  states
and  towns  of  Italy.  Nevertheless,  the  forms  of  the
constitution  gave  such  obstructive  power  to  resolute
and  unscrupulous  men,  that  Clodius  still  contrived
to  suspend  for  several  months  the  carrying  of  a
law  for  his  restoration.  The  refractory  tribunes,
through  whose  vetos  he  acted,  for  he  had  ceased  to
belong  to  the  college  himself,  saw  themselves  gra-
dually deserted  by  all  their  principal  supporters,
and  were  at  last  bought  off  or  wearied  out  by  the
inflexible  determination  of  the  senate.  It  was  not,
however,  till  August  that  the  law  was  finally
passed2,  and  early  in  September  the  exile  reap-
peared in  the  city,  after  an  absence  of  sixteen
months.  He  had  advanced  almost  in  a  triumphal
procession  through  the  length  of  the  Appian  way  :
Italy,  it  was  said,  had  borne  him  on  her  shoulders,
and  carried  him  into  Rome.  He  was  received  on
the  Capitol  with  such  acclamations  as  had  rarely
fallen  to  the  lot  of  the  greatest  conquerors3  ;  happy
above  his  patron  Pompeius  in  the  fortune  which,
by  unmerited  reverses,  had  already  revealed  the
vanity  of  the  applause  which  greeted  him.

1  Cic.  post  Red.  in  Sen.  9.,  pro  Sest.  60.  :  "  Ut  literis  consularibus
ex  senatus  consulto  cuncta  ex  Italia  omnes  qui  rem  publ.  salvara  esse
vellent  convocarentur."

2  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  1.,  prid.  non.  Sext.  i.  e.  Aug.  4. The Roman
people  never  voted  with  such  unanimity  as  on  this  occasion. Plut.
Cic.  33.  : Kai Atytrat fj.r}dt-jroTt fiijdiv tK Toaaurn^ 6^o(ppoavrr}Q liri-

rov

3  Cic.  post  Red.  in  Sen.  15.,  pro  Se&t.  63.,  in  Pison.  22.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  393

CHAP.  IX.

POMPEIUS OBTAINS AN EXTRAORDINARY COMMISSION FOR SUP-
PLYING THE CITY. APPLICATION OF THE KING OF EGYPT

TO  BE  RESTORED  TO  HIS  THRONE.  —  INTRIGUES  OF  THE  NOBLES
IN  RELATION  TO  IT. VIOLENCE  OF  CLODIUS. — THE  TRIUM-
VIRS CONFER  TOGETHER  AT  LUCCA. POMPEIUS  AND  CRASSUS

ELECTED  CONSULS  IN  SPITE  OF  THE  OPPOSITION  OF  THE  NOBLES.
— SPAIN  AND  SYRIA  DECREED  TO  THEM,  AND  CESAR'S  COMMAND
PROLONGED  FOR  A  SECOND  TERM  OF  FIVE  YEARS. — POMPEIUS*

THEATRE AND SHOWS. HE  REMAINS  IN  ITALY,  AND  GOVERNS

HIS PROVINCE BY LEGATES. — CICERO RECONCILED WITH

CRASSUS.  —  GABIN1US RESTORES THE KING OF EGYPT. HE

IS  IMPEACHED,  ATTACKED  BY  CICERO,  BUT  ACQUITTED  :  AGAIN
ACCUSED  ON  ANOTHER  CHARGE,  DEFENDED  BY  CICERO,  BUT
CONDEMNED  AND  BANISHED. CICERO  COURTS  THE  TRI-
UMVIRS.  CORRUPT  PROCEEDINGS  OF  THE  CANDIDATES  FOR

THE  CONSULSHIP. — PARALYSIS  OF  THE  CONSTITUTION. DEATH

OF  JULIA,  AND  REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  POLITICAL  IMPORT-
ANCE OF  THAT  EVENT  (A.  U.  697 700,  B.C.  58 — 54).

THE  wealth  and  influence  of  the  aristocracy  might CHAP.
have  succumbed  in  a  contest  with  the  representa-
tive of  the  mob  of  Rome,  but  it  had  armed  itself  APPoint-
with  weapons  from  his  own  workshop,  and  turned  pompefus
the  arts  of  the  demagogue  against  himself. The  t0^ extra-
nobles  had  adroitly  availed  themselves  of  the  oc-  commission
currence  of  a  scarcity,  perhaps  they  had  contrived  v°isionhig
it,  to  inflame  the  passions  of  the  multitude  against  g^tcity'
the  champion  they  had  deemed  omnipotent. On  the  A- u-  697.
very  day  upon  which  the  law  was  passed  in  favour  of
Cicero's  recal,  a  sudden  fall  was  remarked  in  the  price
of  corn. The  partizans  of  the  banished  man  hailed

394  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  this  circumstance  as  a  manifest  token  of  the  Divine
approbation.1  True  it  was  that  the  markets  rose
again  almost  immediately ;  but  Cicero  had  the  tact
to  draw  advantage  in  another  way  from  this  reverse
also.2  Being  now  reinstated  in  his  position,  and,  to
a  certain  extent,  in  the  influence  he  had  formerly
enjoyed  in  the  counsels  of  the  nobility,  he  seized
this  opportunity  for  advancing  his  interests,  by
proposing  the  appointment  of  Pompeius  to  an  ex-
traordinary commission  for  provisioning  the  city.
This  was  a  recurrence  to  the  principle  of  the  Ga-
binian  and  Manilian  laws,  both  of  which  the
leading  champions  of  the  senate  had  resisted  and
denounced.  But  the  republic  had  now  become
familiarized  with  these  monopolies  of  power,  which
so  lately  had  shaken  it  with  alarm.  It  conceded,
for  the  third  time,  indefinite  and  arbitrary  autho-
rity to  an  individual,  whose  influence  in  the  state
was  already  greater  than  that  of  any  of  his  com-
petitors, perhaps  even  than  that  of  the  state  itself.
It  gave  him  licence  to  demand  supplies  from  any
part  of  its  dominions,  at  prices  to  be  fixed  at  his
own  discretion3 ;  and  to  enable  him  to  carry  out  his
it  invested  him  with  the  command  of

1  Cic.  pro  Dom.  5,  6.

2  Dion,  xxxix.  9. ;  App.  B.  C.  ii.  18. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  49. The  Clo-
dian  party  took  this  opportunity  of  throwing  the  blame  of  this  rise
upon  Cicero,  whose  friends  had  filled  the  city  with  strangers  to  effect
his  recal. Cicero  was  thus  driven  to  promote  Pompeius's  interests  in
his  own  defence. Clodius  thereupon  attacked  Pompeius  as  the  real
author  of  the  famine. Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  3. We  may  believe  with
Drurnann,  that  it  was  the  latter  who  caused  an  artificial  scarcity,  with
the  view  of  extorting  an  extraordinary  employment.

3  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  1. :  "  Legem  consules  conscripserunt  quo  Pompeio
per  quinquennium  omnis  potestag  rei  frumentarise  toto  orbe  daretur."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  395

troops  and  every  other  resource  he  might  deem  CHAP.
necessary.  He  received  the  sole  appointment  to
fifteen  commissionerships,  posts  of  lucre  and  dignity
coveted  by  the  principal  men  of  Rome.  Cicero
himself  accepted  one,  though  he  does  not  appear  to
have  taken  any  part  in  the  administration  of  the
affair.1  The  populace,  looking  to  this  measure  for
its  immediate  relief,  was  clamorous  in  its  favour,
and  the  senate  made  no  decided  opposition.2  The
appointment  was  decreed  for  a  term  of  five  years ;
and  its  secret  opponents  were  contented  with  dis-
countenancing certain  extravagant  provisions  which
Messius,  a  flatterer  of  Pompeius,  proposed  to  annex
to  it.  The  triumvir  found  himself  compelled  to
disclaim  any  wish  for  the  dictatorial  power  in  the
provinces,  which  his  creature's  rogation  would  have
conferred  upon  him3,  and  the  bill  passed  the  popular
assembly  in  a  less  obnoxious  form  than  might  have
been  apprehended  from  the  strength  of  his  party
and  the  reckless  impatience  of  the  multitude.

The  senate  was  determined  to  follow  up  with  Hostile  at-
energy  its  victory  over  the  public  enemy.  That  Jh" senate
august  body  had  listened  to  the  speeches  of  Cicero
on  his  return  with  commiseration,  the  people  with
shame  and  contrition.  All  possible  reparation  was
to  be  made  to  the  injured  patriot.  The  site  of  his

1  Quintus  Cicero  was  employed  by  Pompeius  in  the  execution  of
the  office  (Cic.  pro  Scaur.  2.  39.). Drumann  supposes  that  Marcus
resigned  his  commissionership  in  favour  of  his^brother. (Gesch.  Roms.
iv.  511.).

2  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  1.:  "  Senatus  frequens  et  omnes  consulares  nihil
Pompeio  postulanti  negarunt."

3  Cic.  I.  c

396  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  house  on  the  Palatine  was  restored  to  him,  cleared
of  the  new  buildings  which  Clodius  had  begun  to
erect  upon  it,  and  released  from  the  consequences
of  the  act  of  consecration,  which  was  now  disre-
garded as  informal.1  Sums  of  money  were  also  voted
to  him  in  compensation  for  his  pecuniary  losses.2
The  next  object  was  to  institute  proceedings  against
the  demagogue  for  the  violence  and  illegality  of
his  conduct.  The  validity  of  his  original  election
to  the  tribuneship  he  had  so  abused  might  be
brought  into  question,  for  high  authorities  pro-
nounced the  mode  of  his  adoption  into  a  plebeian
house  illegitimate.  To  establish  this  point  would
be  to  cut  up  the  very  roots  of  his  power,  by  the
summary  reversal  of  all  his  official  acts.  But  it
would  be  difficult  to  carry  so  sweeping  a  censure
in  the  teeth  of  the  various  methods  of  obstruction
which  a  crafty  opponent  could  employ  in  his  de-
fence. While  Cicero  urged  on  the  prosecution,  and
Cato,  lately  returned  from  Cyprus,  stood  forward
to  repel  it,  the  movements  of  the  body  of  the  senate
were  languid  arid  distracted,  and  the  apprehensions
excited  by  the  rnob  which  filled  the  streets  and
menaced  the  assembly  deterred  it  from  pressing

1  Cicero,  in  his  speech  Pro  Domo  apud  Pantifices,  states  the  reasons
why  the  act  of  consecration  should  be  pronounced  invalid. The  col-
lege of  priests  would  go  no  further  than  to  declare  that  if  the  circum-
stances were  such  as  he  represented,  the  act  would  be  vitiated ;  but
the  senate  was  satisfied  with  this  qualified  sentence,  and  proceeded  to
vote  accordingly.

2  The  compensation  for  the  Palatine  house  was  fixed  at  HS.  vicies,
something  less  than  18,OOOZ.  of  our  money,  valuing  the  sestertium  at
81.  17s.  \d.  (Smith's  Rom.  Antiq.),  that  of  the  Tusculan  quingentis
millibus,  or  nearly  4,500/.,  of  the  Formian  at  half  that  sum  :  "Certe
valde  illiberaliter." Cic.  ad  Alt.  iv.  2.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  397

the  matter  to  a  decision.1  It  was  soon  found,  indeed, CHAP.
that  the  pursuit  of  a  common  enemy  was  not  a
matter  of  interest  sufficiently  intense  to  subdue  the
private  jealousies  of  a  triumphant  faction. The  it  is  di-
king of  Egypt,  Ptolemseus  Auletes,  of  whose  suit
to  the  Roman  people  mention  has  been  already
made,  had  now  arrived  in  the  city,  and  was  be-  the  King  °
sieging  the doors  of  the  principal  nobility  with  restoration*
applications  to  befriend  him. A  new  and  most  tohis

1  L  f  t  kingdom.

important  commission  was  in  view ;  to  whomsoever
it  fell,  it  would  confer  upon  him  an  increase  of
personal  dignity,  as  the  Romans  phrased  it;  it
would  extend  his  influence  among  the  lower  orders,
which  still  looked  upon  the  honours  and  titles  of
illustrious  families  as  claims  to  their  support  and
suffrages.  Moreover,  in  the  discharge  of  such  offices,
there  was  much  store  of  treasure  to  be  acquired,
outfit  and  salary,  presents  and  bribes  to  be  hoarded
in  the  coffers  of  the  family,  or  distributed  among
friends  or  opponents.  Such  a  commission  would
require  a  military  force  for  its  execution,  and  thus
confer  power,  and  influence,  and  the  means  of  pro-
viding for  dependents.  For  a  moment  all  other
affairs  of  party  were  abandoned,  and  political  leaders
rushed  together  into  the  arena  to  compete  for  this
brilliant  preferment.  In  the  first  instance,  the  con-
suls of  the  year  were  authorized,  by  their  exalted
position,  to  propose  that  the  commission  should
devolve  upon  one  of  themselves,  upon  him  who
should  obtain  by  lot  the  province  of  Cilicia,  which
lay  so  opportunely  for  an  expedition  to  Egypt.
Cilicia  fell  to  Lentulus,  Spain  to  Metellus.  Len-

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  1.

398  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  tulus  was  preparing  to  set  out  for  his  province,

'  when  one  of  the  tribunes,  C.  Cato,  produced  an

The  sibyl-  alleged  oracle  from  the  Sibylline  verses,  to  the  effect

prohibits  that  the  king  must  not  be  restored  "  with  a  multi-

tude  ;"  a  phrase  which  seemed  to  prohibit  the
ence.  employment  of  an  armed  force.  The  power  of
levying  an  army  was  one  of  the  principal  advantages
which  the  commission  held  forth  ;  but  the  influence
of  Rome  in  Egypt  was  so  great  that  the  object,  it
might  be  presumed,  could  be  easily  effected  by  the
representations  even  of  an  unarmed  ambassador.
The  oracle  was  doubtless  a  forgery  for  political
objects:  but  the  people  were  swayed  blindly  by
superstitious  terrors,  and  no  one  ventured  to  trifle
with  their  prejudices.  Cicero,  even  in  a  familiar
letter,  speaks  of  the  Divine  interference  with  bated
breath.  In  the  senate  it  was  generally  deemed  an
opportune  fiction;  and,  in  the  discussions  which
took  place  regarding  it,  no  one  seems  to  have
thought  proper  to  question  its  genuineness.1  The
prediction  appears  indeed  to  have  sunk  deeply  into
the  minds  of  the  nation  ;  the  fate  of  Pompeius,
when  he  was  afterwards  murdered  on  the  shore  of
Egypt,  was  attributed  to  his  neglect  of  its  warning,
in  venturing  merely  to  land  upon  the  beach  and
seek  an  asylum  for  his  broken  army.2

Great  heats Lentulus  did  not  wait  till  the  question  regarding
bytahe°com-  the  commission  was  settled,  but  departed  for  his

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  i.  1.,  in  a  letter  to  Lentulus.

2  Lucan.  viii.  824. :

"  Haud  equidem  immerito  Cumanae  carmine  vatis
Cautum,  ne  Nili  Pelusia  tangeret  ora
Hesperius  miles,  ripasque  restate  tumentes."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  399

province  as  soon  as  he  had  descended  from  the CHAP.
consul's  chair. It  was  there  that  he  awaited  the

result  of  these  deliberations.  In  accordance  with  petition  of
the  provisions  of  the  bill  which  had  already  re-  ^^les
ceived  the  requisite  sanctions,  Cicero  would  have  commission,
consented  to  his  retaining  the  commission,  but  B.C.  56.
would  have  withheld  from  him  the  much-coveted
military  force.  Others  considered  the  whole  matter
as  open  to  fresh  discussion.  Crassus  proposed  the
appointment  of  three  legates.  Bibulus  required
that  the  three  should  be  personages  of  inferior
dignity.  Volcatius  and  Afranius,  friends  of  Pom-
peius, and  others  who  were  won  over  by  the  in-
trigues of  the  royal  petitioner1,  would  have  con-
ferred the  office  on  the  great  commander  alone.
Servilius,  one  of  the  gravest  and  noblest  of  the
senate,  declared  the  commission  altogether  inex-
pedient.2 Thus  split  into  various  sections,  the
senate  exposed  itself  again  to  the  attacks  of  its
bitterest  enemy.  Clodius  succeeded  in  obtaining
the  a3dileship,  while  his  friends,  affecting  to  sup-
port the  proposal  of  Crassus  as  adverse  to  Pom-
peius,  used  every  endeavour  to  widen  the  breach
between  the  two  triumvirs.3  The  latter,  regardless

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  1.  c. :  "  Regis  causa  si  qui  sunt  qui  velint,  qui  pauci
sunt,  omnes  rem  ad  Porapeium  deferunt." The  Egyptian  king  em-
ployed intrigue  and  corruption,  and  even  violence  to  effect  his  object.
He  caused  the  ambassadors  whom  the  Alexandrians  sent  to  confront
him  at  Rome  to  be  waylaid  and  murdered  on  their  route. Dion,  xxxix.
13.;  Strab.  xvii.  1.

2  Cic.  /.  c.

3  Cic.  ad  Qv.  Fr.  ii.  3. :  "  Who  is  it  that  starves  the  people  ?  "
exclaimed  Clodius. "  Pompeius  !  "  shouted  his  followers. "  Who
wants  to  go  to  Alexandria  ?  " "  Pompeius !  "  they  shouted  again.
"  Whom  do  you  wish  to  send  ?  " "  Crassus  !  "

400  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  of  their  common  interest,  could  no  longer  dis-
'  semble  their  mutual  jealousy.  Pompeius  openly  ac-
cused his  colleague  of  designs  against  his  life,  while
Crassus  thwarted  with  vigilant  activity  every  scheme
for  his  rival's  aggrandizement.  Obscure  as  were
the  sources  of  the  power  which  Crassus  wielded,
every  day  proved  how  deeply  it  was  seated,  and
how  great  was  the  weight  of  the  moneyed  class  by
which  he  was  principally  supported.  The  result
of  a  series  of  petty  intrigues  gradually  narrowed
the  contest  to  one  between  Pompeius  and  Lentulus,
but  the  increasing  violence  of  the  popular  dema-
gogues made  a  decision  impossible.

violence  The  city  became  once  more  a  prey  to  internal
and  Miio.s  tumults.  The  nobles  began  to  collect  their  re-
tainers from  the  country  to  protect  their  champion
Milo.1  The  Clodians,  unable  to  repel  force  by
force,  appealed  in  their  turn  to  the  tribunals,  and
impeached  him  without  success.  The  tribune  p.
Cato,  however,  persisted  in  harassing  the  senate
with  factious  motions  before  the  popular  assembly.
The  statue  of  Jupiter  on  the  summit  of  the  Alban
Hill  was  struck  by  lightning2,  a  portent  which  ex-
cited a  general  panic,  and  raised  a  cry  for  rescind-
ing the  appointment  of  Lentulus.8  A  bill  was  even
proposed  to  recal  him  from  his  province4  ;  but  the

1  Cic.  1.  c. :  "  Operas  autem  suas  Clodius  eonfirmat. Manns  ad
Quirinalia  paratur  :  in  eo  multo  sumus  superiores  ipsius  copiis. Sed
magna  manus  ex  Piceno  et  Gallico  exspectatur  ut  etiam  Catonis
rogationibus  de  Milone  et  Lentulo  resistamus."

2  Dion,  xxxix.  15. This  was  in  January,  or  early  in  February,
A.U.  698.

3  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  3.

4  Cic.  I.  c. ;  ad  Div.  i.  5. ;  "  C.  Cato  legem  promulgavit  de  imperio
Lentulo  abrogando."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  401

consuls  interfered  by  taking  the  auspices  on  the CHAP.
days  of  meeting,  and thus  vitiated the  proceed-
ings.1 The  wheels  of  the  constitution  were  locked.
Clodius  had  secured  himself  for  the  present  from  P

1  . .  is  anxious

the  danger  of  judicial  impeachment  by  obtaining  toobtamthe
his  election  to  the  aedileship.  The  influence  which
he  still  continued  to  wield  at  this  crisis,  bankrupt  as
he  was  in  character,  and  destitute  of  the  ordinary
resources  of  great  party  leaders,  must  be  referred  to
the  secret  support  he  received  from  personages  of
more  importance  than  himself.  Pompeius  indeed
had  cast  him  off  in  a  fit  of  spleen  ;  yet  the  ends  for
which  the  triumvir  was  working  were  such  as
could  only  be  realized  through  the  confusion  to
which  the  demagogue's  proceedings  were  tending.
The  senate  had  shown  more  resolution  than  he
expected;  the  state  was  not  yet  ripe  for  falling
quietly  under  his  domination.  He  now  bitterly
regretted  having  divested  himself  of  his  military
command;  the  charge  of  provisioning  the  city  had
been  denuded  of  that  which  constituted  its  greatest
charm,  the  authority  to  levy  troops.  The  senate
had  outwitted  him  by  a  specious  gift,  which  added
much  to  his  unpopularity,  and  little  to  his
strength.  The  subsequent  prospect  of  a  com-
mand in  Egypt  had  been  frustrated.  There  was
only  one  way  left  to  recover  the  position  which  he
had  relinquished,  and  that  lay  through  the  consul-
ship. The  elections  were  the  door,  but  the  senate
kept  the  key.  The  consuls  for  the  year  which  had  The  consuls

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  ii.  6.  :  "  Consul  ....  dies  comitiales  exemit  omnes.
C.  Cat.o  concionatus  est,  comitia  haberi  non  siturum,  si  sibi  cum  populo
agendi  dies  essent  exempt!."

VOL.  I.  D  I)

402

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
IX.

vigorously
oppose  his
views.

Critical  po-
sition of
Caesar  under
a  threat  of
recal  from
his  pro-
vince.

just  commenced  were  men  of  more  than  common
resolution ;  such  at  least  was  Lentulus  Marcellinus,
and  his  superior  force  of  character  carried  Marcius
Philippus,  his  colleague,  along  with  him.1  These
were  not  the  men  to  surrender  the  advantage
which  their  party  had  gained  by  the  reversal  of
Clodius's  infamous  law ;  on  the  contrary,  they  were
already  putting  forward,  as  a  candidate  for  the
next  consulship,  L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus,  a  bro-
ther-in-law of  M.  Cato,  and  inspired  by  his  con-
nexion, if  not  by  his  own  nature,  with  a  deep
hatred  of  the  triumvirs.  Domitius  openly  de-
clared that  his  first  act  in  office  should  be  to  pro-
pose Cassar's  recal  from  his  province,  and  he  was
actuated  no  doubt  by  a  similar  spirit  of  hostility
towards  his  allies.  The  danger  indeed  touched
CaBsar  much  more  nearly  than  either  of  his  asso-
ciates ;  for  to  him  the  deprivation  of  his  com-
mand would  be  something  much  more  serious  than
the  temporary  frustration  of  his  ambitious  projects.
It  would  be  no  less  than  a  summons  to  appear
before  his  enemies  at  Rome,  unarmed  and  defence-
less. Banishment  or  even  death  awaited  him,  in
all  probability,  the  moment  that  he  should  descend
from  power.  Indeed,  Caasar's  position  was  exceed-
ingly critical.  The  reversal  of  the  sentence  on
Cicero  came  too  soon  for  his  policy.  He  had
assented  to  it  with  reluctance.  It  had  been  ex-
torted from  him  by  the  impatience  of  Pompeius  ;
for  he  had  doubtless  looked  to  the  continuance  of
Clodius's  ascendancy  until  he  could  obtain  certain

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  6. :  "  Consul  est  egregius  Lentulus,  non  im-
pediente  collega."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  403

further  concessions  from  the  terrified  senate.  He  CHAP.
had  hoped  by  means  of  this  instrument  on  the
tribunitian  bench  to  have  driven  the  nobles  to
consent  to  an  extension  of  his  term  of  command,
with  ampler  powers  and  more  abundant  resources.
All  this  was  absolutely  necessary  for  the  full  de-
velopment of  his  design  to  raise  himself  to  a
position  in  which  he  might  defy  his  enemies  ;  and
in  this  view  he  continued,  we  must  imagine,  to
support  Olodius  even  after  Pompeius  had  with-
drawn his  countenance  from  him.

The  proconsul  of  Gaul  was  never  more  actively  csesar  ar-
engaged  than  during  the intervals between the

campaigns  by  which  his  attention  was  for  the  time  is  wai*ed

j  upon  by

engrossed. After  the  apparent  submission  of  the  great  num-
Transalpine  nations  in  the  autumn  of  697,  he  had  mtors  ami
betaken  himself  to  the  Hither  province,  where  he  kmgbts-
had  two  objects  in  view  ;  the  first,  and  the  more
ostensible,  was to convene  the  provincial  assem-
bly, through which he regulated the internal
affairs  of  his  central  government,  and  more  par-
ticularly provided for the maintenance and re-
cruiting of  his  forces; the  second  was  to  confer
with  the  friends  whom  he  had  left  in  the  city,  who
flocked  to  him  at  Lucca1,  bringing  in  their  train
political  agents of  every  shade of  party, spies,
enemies,  and  admirers. Consulars  and  officials  of
every  grade  thronged  the  narrow  streets  of  a  pro-
vincial watering-place. A  hundred  and  twenty

1  Lucca,  according  to  the  ancient  orthography,  Luca,  was  on  the
frontier  of  Liguria,  which  was  comprehended  in  the  province  of
Gallia  Cisalpina.  It  was  first  included  in  Etruria  by  Augustus.
Mannert,  G.  der  G.  und  E.  ix.  i.  391.;  Suet.  Jul.  24.:  "In  urbem
provinciae  suse  Lucam."

D  D 2

404  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP lictors  might  be  counted  at  the  proconsul's  door,
' while  two  hundred  personages  of  senatorial  rank,
nearly  one  half  of  the  order,  paid  their  court  at  his
levees.1

Effects  of  The  genius  of  the  popular  champion  was  never
unequal  to  the  opportunities  which  fortune  pre-
sented to  him,  and  seemed  now  to  shine  the  more
brilliantly  from  the  pinnacle  of  glory  which  he
had  attained.  If  he  practised  every  artifice  to
acquire  or  retain  the  affections  of  all  classes,  it
was  to  ensure  an  abundant  return  of  gratitude,
and  acquiescence  in  the  demands  he  meditated.
While  he  dazzled  them  with  the  lustre  of  his
splendid  achievements,  and  tempered  with  kind-
ness and  affability  the  haughtiness  of  military  com-
mand, he  secured  an  indemnity  for  the  boldness
with  which  he  had  multiplied  his  legions  beyond
the  limits  fixed  by  the  government,  and  fortified
his  position  against  the  malevolence  of  a  future
consul.  In  lavishing  upon  his  flatterers  the  spoils
of  his  successful  wars2,  he  was  preparing  to  dip  his
hands  in  the  public  treasury,  for  the  payment  of
the  armies3  he  had  led  to  victory.  These  ma-
noeuvres were  crowned  with  a  large  measure  of
success.  Senators  and  knights  returned  to  Rome,
their  ears  tingling  with  his  compliments,  their
hands  overflowing  with  his  benefactions.  The
spendthrift  extolled  his  generosity;  the  prudent

1  Plut.  CtBS.  21.;  App.  B.  C.  ii.  17. In  the  winter  of  697-698.

2  See the instance of  C.  Rabirius Postumus, whose necessities
Caesar  relieved,  in  the  speech  of  Cicero,  pro  Rob.  Post.  15,  16. The
effects  of  Gallic  gold  became  more  evident  at  a  later  period.

3  Dion,  xxxix.  25.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  405

admired  his  dexterity  ;  the  best  and  gravest  bowed CHAP.
beneath  the  ascendancy  of  his  character,  and  clung '
fondly  to  the  hope  that  he  might  still  save  the
republic.

The  enmity  between  Pompeius  and  Crassus  was

virs

felt  by  Caesar,  who  had  so  much  use  to  make  of  at  Lucca

both,  to  be  highly  disadvantageous  to  his  interests,
He  was  anxious  to  effect  a  reconciliation  between  in  concert-
them  before  he  left  Italy  to  resume  the  command
of  his  armies.  He  obtained  interviews  with  them
separately,  with  Crassus  at  Ravenna,  afterwards
with  Pompeius  at  Lucca,  where  he  eventually  suc-
ceeded in  bringing  them  together.1  The  winter
had  passed,  and  he  had  not  yet  torn  himself  from
the  scene  of  his  intrigues,  when  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  month  of  April  he  was  assailed  by  a
direct  attack  on  the  part  of  the  oligarchs.  The
onset  was  led  by  Cicero  himself.  The  orator,  after
the  first  outburst  of  vanity  and  exultation,  had
learnt  to  take  a  juster  view  of  his  own  position.
The  man  who  could  be  so  easily  overthrown  could
not  reasonably  aspire  to  lead  a  party.  The  nobles
shrunk  from  his  assumption  of  their  championship.
The  sneering  tone  in  which  he  continues  to  speak
of  them  may  lead  us  to  infer  that  he  felt  the
disparagement  which  they  cast  upon  him.  But  he
bowed  to  circumstances.  Through  the  first  three
months  of  the  year  he  displayed  himself  very  little
on  the  stage  of  public  affairs2  ;  indeed  the  confusion
was  such  that  there  was  little  room  for  him  to

1  Suet.  Jul  24.

2  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  6.  :  "  Quo  me  libentivts  a  curia  et  ab  omni  parte
rei  publicae  subtraho."

D D 3

406  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  appear.  But  suddenly,  in  the  beginning  of  April,
he  startled  the  city  by  stepping  prominently  for-
ward, and  attacking  Caesar's  law  for  the  division  of
lands  in  Campania.1  The  government  had  recently
been  obliged  to  place  a  large  sum,  forty  millions  of
sesterces,  at  the  disposal  of  its  high  commissioner
for  the  provisionment  of  the  city.  The  treasury  was
drained,  and  it  was  easy  to  assert  that  there  were
no  means  forthcoming  for  the  purchase  of  lands,
according  to  the  tenor  of  the  late  agrarian  enact-
ment. Cicero,  in  an  extraordinary  access  of  courage,
proposed  that  the  law  should  be  altogether  repealed ;
and  the  senate,  admiring  and  exulting,  received
the  motion  with  such  acclamations  as  were  oftener
heard  in  a  popular  assembly  than  in  the  deliberations
of  so  august  a  council.2  It  was  resolved  that  the
matter  should  stand  over  for  solemn  discussion  on
an  appointed  day  in  the  following  month.3  The
interview  of  the  triumvirs  was  devoted  to  tracing
the  line  of  their  policy  with  reference  to  this  hostile
demonstration.  In  the  first  place,  it  was  determined
that  all  jealousies  between  the  associates  must  give
way  to  the  defence  of  their  common  interests.
The  election  of  Domitius  must  be  defeated,  and
Caesar  urged  his  colleagues  to  present  themselves  as
candidates  in  opposition  to  him.4  If  successful,  he

1  The  question  of  a  repeal  had  already  been  mooted  by  the  tribune
Lupus  in  the  December  preceding,  but  Marcellinus  had  thought  it
prudent  not  to  discuss  it  during  a  temporary  absence  of  Pompeius.
Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  1.

2  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  5. :  "  Clamore  prope  concionali."

3  Cic.  ad  Div.  i.  9. :  "  Non.  April,  mihi  est  Senatus  assensus  ut  de
agro  Campano  frequenti  Senatu  id.  Mai.  referretur."

4  Suet.  Jul.  24.  :  "  Sed  cum  L.  Domitius  consulatus  candidatus
palam  minaretur, consulem  se effecturum quod praetor  nequisset,

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  407

depended  on  the  covenants  between  them  to  secure  CHAP.
him  in  his  position,  and  to  enlarge  his  powers  to
the  extent  he  might  deem  requisite  for  his  purposes.
If  the  senate  should  persist  in  preventing  the
people  from  assembling,  he  was  confident  that  it
must  ultimately  be  tired  out,  or  frightened  from
its  course  by  the  fear  of  a  dictatorship.  In  the
mean  time  Pompeius  should  use  every  endeavour
to  detach  Cicero  from  the  enemy,  and  assist  in
procuring  the  prolongation  of  Caesar's  command,
together  with  the  other  indulgences  which  he  re-
quired.

The  proconsul  now  hastened  across  the  Alps.  Cicero's
Pompeius  passed  over  to  Sardinia,  where  he  met  conduct-In
his  legate  Q.  Cicero,  whom  he  chose  to  consider,  ^"^^
upon  his  acceptance  of  a  post  under  him,  as  a  and  attach.

•T n  r i  • -i ,1 * -i-i •'  1 AT  ing  himself

pledge  for  his  brothers  allegiance.  JNo  sooner  tothetri-
had  the  orator  delivered  his  speech  against  Caesar's  umvirs-
agrarian  law  than  he  had  hastened  to  pay  a  visit
to  Pompeius,  who  was  on  the  point  of  leaving
Kome  for  Sardinia,  with  the  hope  of  eliciting
from  him  some  tokens  of  approbation.  But  the
crafty  dissembler  was  impenetrably  reserved2 ;  he
did  not  even  mention  that  he  expected  to  meet
Caesar  at  Lucca  on  his  way.  Cicero  probably
augured  no  good  from  his  taciturnity.  He  had
already  revolved  in  his  mind  the  rashness  of  the
move  he  had  made ;  he  had  balanced  the  disastrous
consequences  of  a  breach  with  the  triumvirs  against

adempturumque  ei  exercitus,  Crassum  Pompeiumque  in  urbem  pro-
vinciae  suse  Lucam  extractos  compulit,  ut  detrudendi  Domitii  causa
alterum  consulatum  peterent."

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  i.  9.  2  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  G.

D D 4

408

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
IX.

Cicero's
speech  de
Provinces
Consulari-
bus :  he
defends
Caesar  and
Pompeius,
and  re-
venges him-
self upon
Piso  and
Gabinius.

the  slender  support  which  he  could  expect  from
the  weak  and  wavering  faction  to  which  he  had
renewed  his  devotion,  fie  was  relieved  perhaps
from  a  weight  of  anxiety  when  he  received  letters
from  his  brother  expostulating  with  him  on  his
hostility  to  Csesar,  arguing  the  policy  and  wisdom
of  concession,  and  still  assuring  him  that  the  trium-
virs, though  offended,  were  not  implacable.  We
discover  immediately  an  entire  change  in  the  tone
of  the  orator's  correspondence.1  He  abandons  re-
sentfully the  cause  of  the  oligarchs,  against  whose
faithlessness  and  frivolity  he  lashes  himself  into
indignation.  They  no  longer  love  him,  he  says,
and  he  must  now  transfer  his  regard  to  others
who  do.  He  paints  to  himself  in  glowing  colours
the  merits  of  the  great  chiefs  of  the  republic,  and
argues  from  the  maxims  of  the  philosophers  of  old
that  the  simple  citizen  should  conform  his  views  to
those  of  the  best  and  noblest.  He  deprecates  the
charge  of  inconstancy  in  tones  which  seem  to
admit  its  justice,  and  finally  resigns  himself  in
despair  to  the  irresistible  current  of  circumstances.
Cicero  indeed  was  spared  the  disgrace  of  refuting
in  May  the  arguments  which  he  had  alleged  against
Caesar's  law  in  the  month  preceding.  The  senate,
abandoned  by  its  orator,  allowed  the  matter  to
drop.  But  when  he  next  appeared  in  the  arena  of
public  discussion,  it  was  to  pronounce  a  laboured
panegyric  upon  the  very  man  against  whom  he
had  so  lately  led  the  ranks  of  the  opposition.  Be-

1  Compare  Cicero's  letters,  ad  Att.  iv.  5.,  ad  Div.  i.  7.,  and  more
particularly  that  to  Lentulus  ad  Div.  i.  9.,  in  which  he  reviews  his  po-
litical course  at  this  period.

IX.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  409

fore  proceeding  to  the  election  of  consuls,  the  nobles  CHAP.
bethought  them  of  the  Sempronian  law,  according
to  which  the  consular  provinces  were  to  be  assigned
before  the  day  of  election.  Little  regard,  as  we
have  seen,  had  been  paid  to  an  enactment  so
opposed  to  the  rapid  and  fluctuating  combinations
of  the  politics  of  the  day ;  but  it  might  be  made  an
instrument  for  assailing  an  enemy,  and  it  was  well
remembered  that  Caesar  had  received  his  three
provinces  in  utter  defiance  of  it.  It  was  now  pro-
posed, not  only  to  enforce  it,  but  to  give  it  even
a  retrospective  effect.1  All  the  speakers,  except
Servilius,  had  declared  themselves  in  favour  of
depriving  the  proconsul  of  one  or  more  of  the
governments  he  held  together,  when  Cicero  stepped
forward  in  his  defence,  with  a  speech  of  peculiar
dignity  and  spirit.  He  pointed  out  with  just
enthusiasm  the  extent  and  rapidity  of  Caesar's
conquests ;  how  he  had  broken  the  Helvetians,
repulsed  the  Germans,  received  submission  and
hostages  from  every  state  of  Gaul.  He  insisted  on
the  policy  of  allowing  him  to  complete  and  con-
solidate the  work  he  had  thus  successfully  begun  ;
a  work  which  should  relieve  Rome  thenceforward
froYn  all  her  anxious  dread  of  Gaulish  invasion.
By  an  artful  panegyric  on  Pompeius,  the  victor  of
the  East,  he  insinuated  the  importance  of  fostering
the  genius  of  an  ambitious  rival.  He  claimed  it

1  Cic.  Orat.  de  Provinciis  Consularibus ;  ad  Div.  i.  9.  This  speech
was  probably  delivered  in  May  (comp.  ad  Div.  i.  7.),  when  Cicero
alludes  to  the  discussion  in  a  letter  to  Lentulus,  though  he  seems  to
be  withheld  by  shame  from  mentioning  the  part  he  took  in  it  himself :
"  Quod  eo  ad  te  brevius  scribo,  quia  me  status  hie  reipublicae  non
delectat."  Abeken,  p.  153.

410  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, as  a  merit  that  he  had  prevailed  on  the  senate  to
_______  increase  the  number  of  Caesar's  lieutenants,  and  to

grant  him  those  pecuniary  supplies  which  the
war  demanded  1  ;  and  he  contended  that  those  acts
must  be  consistently  crowned  by  repelling  with  in-
dignation the  blow  now  aimed  at  the  proconsul.
The  arguments  of  the  orator,  backed  by  the  in-
fluence of  the  triumvirs,  averted  the  impending
decree.  But  Cicero  had  not  let  slip  +he  opportu-
nity for  revenging  himself  on  the  cor;  -as  who  had
consented  to  his  banishment.  He  shcr  ?d  with  his
usual  felicity  how  strongly  the  Set-  ,'onian  law
condemned  the  appointment  of  Piso  and  Gabinius
to  Macedonia  and  Syria,  and  he  even  succeeded  in
effecting  their  recal.2

The  consuls  But  with  whatever  gravity  and  decorum  the
election  of  senate  might  continue  its  discussions,  in  anticipation
cessorTtm  °f  ^ne  ^ue  election  of  magistrates,  there  were  forces

^  d°ors  beyond  its  control,  which  had  arrayed
their  offices,  themselves  in  so  hostile  an  attitude,  that  it  could
not  venture  to  invoke  the  decision  of  the  comitia.
Pompeius  and  Crassus  were  canvassing  the  tribes  ;
the  demagogues  of  the  forum,  in  secret  league  with
them3,  were  stirring  up  the  passions  of  the  populace,
and  urging  them  to  reject  the  nominee  of  the
oligarchy.  "When  it  became  manifest  that  Domitius

1  Dion,  xxxix.  25.

2  Ascon.  in  Pison.  arg.  p.  2.  :  "  Revocati  ....  ex  provinciis  Piso  et
Gabinius." The  latter,  however,  did  not  relinquish  his  government
till  M.  Crassus  came  to  supersede  him,  A.U.  700. Piso  was  sum-
moned  home  without  delay, and  his  province  handed  over  to  the
praetor  Q.  Ancharius. Cic.  in  Pis.  36.

3  Dion,  xxxix.  29.  : KXwt>io£  de  lv  roi$r<^  niTcnrr\c>i)GaQ  avOi£
H.ofjun']lovt  K.  r.  X.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  411

could  not  succeed,  the  senate,  under  the  daring  CHAP.
guidance  of  Marcellinus,  determined  at  least  to  '
prevent  the  election  of  any  other  candidate.  Day
after  day  the  consuls  persisted  in  forbidding  the
tribes  to  assemble.  There  still  existed  sufficient
reverence  for  the  forms  of  the  constitution  to
ensure  respect  even  to  this  stretch  of  prerogative.
The  election  of  magistrates  was  so  closely  bound
up  with  the  observances  of  the  state  religion,  that
no  appointment  could  command  the  regard  even
of  its  own  authors  which  was  not  sanctioned  by
the  ordinary  modes  of  procedure.  Indeed,  the
obstinacy  with  which  Marcellinus  maintained  a
struggle  which  could  only  increase  the  confusion
of  affairs  earned  him  the  acclamations  even  of  the
fickle  populace.  He  replied  to  their  insensate
shouts  by  solemnly  warning  them  that  a  time  was
coming  when  even  their  voices  should  be  no  longer
free.1  He  wished,  perhaps,  to  prepare  their  minds
for  that  final  appeal  to  arms  which  the  nobles  had
been  long  revolving  in  their  wild  and  fluctuating
counsels.  But  the  consuls  knew  that  their  power
was  on  the  point  of  expiring  with  the  close  of  the
current  year,  and  that  it  would  be  impossible  ulti-
mately to  resist  the  usurpation  with  which  the
commonwealth  was  threatened.  They  abstained
during  the  remainder  of  their  term  from  all  the
duties  of  their  office.  They  neither  relinquished
the  mourning  in  which  they  had  clad  themselves,
nor  attended  the  popular  spectacles,  nor  feasted  in
the  Capitol  on  Jove's  solemn  day,  nor  celebrated
the  great  Latin  festival  on  the  Alban  mount,  but

i  Val.  Max.  vi.  2.  6.

412  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, continued  to  conduct  themselves  in  every  thing  as
' men  under  constraint,  and  magistrates  deprived  of
their  legitimate  power.1

As  soon  as  the  curule  chairs  had  become  vacant,
the  triumvirs  reappeared  on  the  stage.  With  the
assistance  of  C.  Cato  and  the  other  tribunes  devoted

ship  by  to  them,  they  convened  the  people,  and  enacted  a
A.U.  699,  shadow  of  the  forms  of  election.  They  resorted  to
violence  and  bribery  with  equal  recklessness  ;  but
it  was  not  till  young  Crassus  arrived  from  Gaul
with  a  detachment  of  Caesar's  veterans,  to  carry  his
father's  election,  that  the  nobles  finally  gave  way.
Domitius  himself  had  doggedly  interposed  as  a
rival  candidate,  and  only  retired  from  the  contest
when  his  attendant  had  been  slain  at  his  side.2
The  new  consuls,  Pompeius  and  Crassus,  having
obtained  their  own  elections  by  violating  every
principle  of  justice  and  law,  proceeded  to  employ
similar  means  to  secure  the  other  principal  offices
for  creatures  on  whom  they  could  rely.3  M.  Cato,
who  was  a  candidate  for  the  praetor  ship,  was  mor-
tified by  a  contemptuous  rejection,  which  the  cha-
racter of  Yatinius,  the  rival  to  whom  the  all-
powerful  consuls  postponed  him,  rendered  the  more
insulting.4  Nor  indeed  did  the  sworn  defenders  of

1  Dion,  xxxix.  30.

2  Dion,  xxxix.  31. ;  App.  B.  C.  ii.  17.

3  Two  only  of  the  new  tribunes,  C.  Ateius  Capito,  and  P.  Aquilius
Gallus,  were  hostile  to  them. Dion,  xxxix.  32.

4  Liv.  Epit.  cv. ;  Val.  Max.  vii.  5.  :  "  Comitiorum  maximum  cri-
men  ....  proxima  dementiae suffragia  ....  quern honorem Catoni
denegaverant  Vatinio  dare  coacti  sunt." This  striking  perversion  of
justice  was  remembered  four  centuries  later  :  comp.  Mamert.  Graf.
Act.  ad  Julian,  c.  19. :  "  Unde  factum  est  ut  majores  nostri  viderent
Vatinios  designatos  et  repulses  Catones."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  413

the public tranquillity carry their  point in all CHAP.

cases  without bloodshed. But  quiet  was even-

tually  restored  ;  they  were  feared  for  their  vigour,
if  not  respected,  and  Rome  settled  down  for  a  time
in  exhaustion  and  disgust  under  the  tyranny  of
her  new  rulers.

When  Pompeius  looked  back  upon  his  own
career,  from  the  time  of  his  return  from  Asia  in
the  enjoyment  of  unexampled  glory,  and  with  the
prospect  of  exerting  almost  boundless  influence,  he  and
could  not  fail  to  observe  that  he  had  fallen  from  change  of
the  summit  of  dignity  which  he  then  occupied,  and  policy*
that  his  rival  Caesar  was  threatening  to  outclimb
him  at  no  distant  day.  He  might  remark  how
different  had  been  the  course  they  had  respectively
pursued.  The  one  had  awaited  in  proud  inac-
tion the  offer  of  fresh  honours  and  powers  ;  the
other  had  seized  and  secured  them  with  his  own
hands.  The  one  had  studied  to  increase  the  con-
fusion of  public  affairs,  by  balancing  faction
against  faction ;  the  other  had  attached  himself,
without  wavering,  to  the  party  with  which  he  was
hereditarily  connected.  The  one  had  hoped  that
the  necessities  of  the  state  would  at  last  combine
all  men  in  the  common  policy  of  elevating  him  to
the  dictatorship ;  the  other  had  applied  himself
steadily  to  the  task  of  reducing  his  opponents  to
insignificance,  and  throwing  the  creation  of  a  su-
preme ruler  into  the  hands  of  his  own  devoted
adherents.  Pompeius  seems  to  have  now  deter-
mined to  alter  his  previous  course,  and  imitate  that
of  the  younger  statesman,  by  some  bolder  and  more
hazardous  steps,  such  as  he  had  not  shrunk  from

414

HISTORY OE THE ROMANS

CHAP.
IX.

Law  of  Tre-
bonius  for
conferring
provinces
on  Pom-
peius  and
Crassus.
Jealousy  of
Caesar's  ad-
herents.

himself  in  earlier  times,  when  his  position  was  still
to  be  won.  It  was  with  this  view  that  he  grasped
at  the  consulship,  and  obtained  it  by  means  which
the  nobles  could  never  forgive.  He  wanted,  as  we
have  seen,  to  secure  the  reversion  of  a  province,
and  to  place  himself  again  at  the  head  of  an  army.
A  short  experience  of  civil  affairs  had  sufficed  to
teach  him  that  the  profession  of  his  early  choice,  in
which  he  had  been  invincible,  was  the  most  natural
to  him,  as  well  as  the  most  available  for  his  pur-
poses. As  a  military  chieftain,  he  might  enact
again  the  crowning  triumphs  of  his  master  Sulla,
whom  he  had  imitated  in  the  outset  of  his  career
with  such  fidelity  and  success.  But  the  toils  in
which  Caasar  had  entangled  him,  by  the  connexion
which  he  had  so  dexterously  formed  with  him,
confined  his  movements  on  every  side,  and  dis-
abled him  from  the  free  use  of  the  victory  which
he  had  gained.

The  consuls  began  their  career  with  an  outward
show  of  moderation,  affecting  to  be  content  with
their  brilliant  position,  and  to  look  for  no  ulterior
advantages.  But  C.  Trebonius,  one  of  their  allies
in  the  tribunate,  came  forward  in  their  service,
and,  no  doubt,  at  their  own  suggestion,  with  a
proposal  that  the  governments  of  Spain  and  Syria
should  be  conferred  upon  them  respectively,  at
the  expiration  of  their  year  of  office,  for  a  term  of
five  years,  together  with  extensive  powers  for
making  war  and  levying  armies.1  The  friends

1  Liv.  Epit.  cv.  ;  Dion,  xxxix.  33.  :
awai  ical  TOIV  TroXir&v  KCII  TWV  Gvp,[j,d%a)v
TrpoQ  OVQ  av  (3ov\rj9w<n

rt  ocroig  av
oXt/jiov  «ai  tipT)VTjv

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  415

of  Cassar  were  immediately  roused.  It  was  the  CHAP.
great  object  of  their  patron  to  obtain  a  renewal  of
the  lease  of  his  own  proconsulate.  His  original  term
was  now  only  in  the  course  of  its  fourth  year,  but
his  plans  required  several  more  for  their  full  develop-
ment. Gaul,  once  conquered,  had  risen  again  in
arms ;  Germany  and  Britain  loomed  obscurely  in
the  distance ;  the  mere  proximity  of  freedom  fur-
nished a  dangerous  example  to  unsettled  and  dis-
contented subjects.  The  excuse  was  plausible ;
but  it  was  only  a  pretence  ;  the  real  objects  of  the
proconsul  were  not  such  as  could  be  revealed  in  the
Roman  forum.  Accordingly,  the  partizans  of  Caesar,
zealous  for  their  patron's  advancement,  and  not
less  so  for  their  own  private  interests,  declared  that
they  would  not  suffer  such  an  augmentation  of  the
dignity  of  Pompeius  and  Crassus,  without  securing
an  equivalent  for  the  absent  triumvir.  The  consuls
were  obliged  reluctantly  to  recede  from  their  own
exclusive  pretensions,  and  it  was  signified  to  Tre-
bonius,  as  their  wish,  that  he  should  propose  another
law  for  the  prolongation  of  Caesar's  command  also.1

If  the  statesmen  of  Rome  were  disgusted  at  the  Law  for  the
arrogant ambition of consuls who had thrust
themselves  unbidden  into  the  seats  they  occupied,
they  were  still more  alarmed  at  the  favour  de-  for  five
manded  from  the  other  quarter. They  could  not  Sby't
fail to foresee that it  would  build  up  from  its  senatorial

•*•  party.

foundations  such  a  power  as  had  never  before  over-
shadowed the  commonwealth  ;  for  it  was  manifest
that  these  latter  years  of  Caesar's  government

1  App.  B.  C.  ii.  18. ;  Veil.  ii.  46. :  "  Csesari  lege,  quam  Pompeius
ad  populum  tulit,  prorogates  in  idem  spatium  temporis  provinciae."

416  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, would  consolidate  his  influence  over  his  soldiers,

IX

'  by  weaning  them  from  the  habits  and  prejudices
of  citizens,  and  teaching  them  to  centre  all  their
feelings  of  duty  and  obedience  in  their  leader
alone.  No  sooner,  therefore,  were  these  motions
made,  than  the  nobles  arrayed  themselves  for
another  struggle.  It  was  not,  however,  Lucul-
lus,  and  Servilius,.  and  Cicero  that  now  appeared,
as  formerly,  in  the  van.  M.  Cato,  the  prestige  of
whose  gravity  had  been  almost  worn  away  by  daily
collision  with  violence  and  vulgarity,  and  Favonius,
a  party  brawler,  rather  than  a  political  champion,
were  the  most  active  leaders  of  the  oligarchy.
Ateius  and  Aquilius,  in  their  capacity  of  tribunes,
were  willing  to  throw  over  them  the  bruised  and
battered  shield  of  their  official  dignity.  But,  under
the  guidance  of  such  men  as  these,  the  cause  was
in  danger  of  being  rendered  ridiculous.  Favonius,
being  limited  to  an  harangue  of  a  single  hour,  con-
sumed the  whole  of  it  in  remonstrating  against
the  shortness  of  the  time  allotted  him.  Cato,  to
whom  a  double  space  was  conceded,  launched  forth
into  a  general  invective  against  the  conduct  of  his
opponents,  tracking  their  violence  and  treachery
through  the  whole  sequence  of  political  events,  so
that  his  time  also  was  exhausted  before  he  had
arrived  at  the  real  point  of  discussion.1  Such  were
the  infirmities  of  the  men  to  whose  discretion  the
indolence  or  despair  of  the  nobles  had  now  con-
signed their  party.

The  law  is Thus  was  the  whole  day  consumed  before  Tre-
popuiarby bonius  and  his  allies,  on  the  tribunitian  bench,  had

1  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  43. ;  Dion,  xxxix.  34.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  417

any  opportunity  of  delivering  their  opinions ;  for CHAP
it  was  the  custom,  derived  from  simpler  times,  to IX'

allow  private  persons  to  take  the  precedence  in  violence,
discussion,  that  they  might  not  be  unduly  biassed  A' u'  699'
by  the  superior  authority  of  those  who  spoke  from
official  seats.  Cato  had  so  far  gained  an  advantage,
that,  at  such  a  turbulent  epoch,  when  it  might
truly  be  said  that  none  could  tell  what  a  day
might  bring  forth,  to  put  off  a  decision  even  for  a
few  hours  was  at  least  to  open  a  new  page  in  the
chapter  of  accidents.  Aquilius,  fearing  now  that
the  exasperation  of  his  opponents  might  induce
them  to  resort  to  violence  to  prevent  his  appear-
ance in  the  forum  on  the  morrow,  passed  the  night
in  one  of  the  curias  on  the  spot.  But  his  ingenuity
was  of  little  avail.  Trebonius  caused  the  doors  of
the  building  to  be  blocked  up,  and  kept  his  col-
league in  durance  through  the  greater  part  of  the
ensuing  day.  At  the  same  time,  he  obstructed
the  passages  which  led  to  the  forum,  and  excluded
with  a  high  hand  Ateius,  Cato,  Favonius,  and  all
the  most  notable  men  of  their  party.  Some  of
them,  indeed,  contrived  to  slip  unobserved  into  the
assembly,  while  others  forced  their  way  into  the
inclosure  over  the  heads  of  the  crowd.  Cato  and
Ateius  were  lifted  upon  men's  shoulders,  and  from
that  unsteady  elevation  the  voice  of  the  tribune
was  heard  above  the  din,  proclaiming  that  the
auspices  had  been  taken,  that  the  proceedings  were
illegal,  and  the  assembly  formally  dissolved.  He
was  answered  by  the  brandishing  of  clubs,  and
showers  of  stones ;  swords  and  daggers  were  drawn
in  the  affray,  and  the  friends  of  the  senatorial

VOL.  I.  E  E

418  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, party  were driven from  the  arena, not  without
' bloodshed.1 Such  were  the  tumultuary  proceed-
ings by  which  the  triumvirs  secured  the  popular
ratification  of  their  schemes.

Disastrous  In  such  scenes  as  these,  the  consuls  themselves
of  did  not  scruple  to  take  part  openly.  Not  long  before,
^  ^ne  Action  of  sediles,  the  robe  of  Pompeius  had
peius.  been  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  a  victim  of  popu-
lar ferocity.  This  accident  was  eventually  attended
by  the  most  fatal  consequences.2  On  his  return
home,  the  consul  was  met  at  his  door  by  his
wife  Julia,  who  had  heard  of  the  fray,  and  was
hastening  to  welcome  her  husband  on  his  safe  ar-
rival. The  youthful  matron,  devotedly  attached
to  her  spouse,  and  far  advanced  in  pregnancy,  was
so  much  alarmed  at  the  sight,  that  she  was  seized
with  premature  labour.  The  event  gave  a  shock
to  her  constitution,  from  which,  as  will  appear,  she
never  afterwards  recovered.

The  populace,  who  delighted  in  thwarting  the

ingratiate  senate  and  mobbing  its  champions,  had  nevertheless
?™popu-lth  no  sympathy  for  the  chieftains  who  had  now  con-
lace.  His  descen(lecl  to  become  their  leaders.  It  was  in  vain

magnificent

theatre.  that  Pompeius  studied  to  ingratiate  himself  with
them,  as  Caesar  had  done  before  him,  by  the  magni-
ficence of  his  public  shows.  The  splendour,  indeed,
even  of  Caesar's  aedileship  was  eclipsed  by  the  open-
ing of  his  rival's  gorgeous  theatre,  the  first  edifice
of  the  kind  which  was  built  of  stone,  and  designed
for  permanence.3  In  the  circuit  of  its  walls,  it

1  Plut.  L  c.,  Pomp.  52.,  Crass.  15.  ;  Dion,  xxxix.  35,  36.

2  Plut.  Pomp.  53.

3  Dion,  xxxix.  38.  :  u>  Kal  vvv  \afjL7rpvvo/j.t9a, Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  20.  :

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  419

could  accommodate  forty  thousand  spectators,  CHAP.
no  small  portion  of  the  resident  population  of
Rome ;  and  he  adorned  it  with  a  profusion  of
gold,  marble,  and  precious  stones,  such  as  the
Western  world  had  never  before  witnessed.  That
so  extravagant  an  expenditure  might  not  seem  to
have  been  lavished  entirely  upon  a  work  of  mere
luxury,  he  attached  to  it  a  temple  dedicated  to
Venus  the  Conqueror,  so  placed  that  the  seats  of
the  theatre  might  serve  as  a  flight  of  stairs  to  the
sacred  edifice.  The  ceremony  of  consecration  was
attended  with  a  display  of  music,  with  chariot  races,
and  all  the  games  of  the  palaestra.1  In  the  course
of  five  successive  days,  five  hundred  lions  were
sent  forth  to  be  hunted  and  slaughtered  in  the
arena.  Eighteen  elephants  were  made  to  fight  with
trained  bands  of  gladiators ;  but  the  populace  was
seized  with  a  fit  of  unusual  sensibility,  and  the
cries  and  agonies  of  these  half-reasoning  animals
damped  even  the  excitement  of  such  a  spectacle
with  pity  and  disgust.2  Some  even  professed  to

"  Quippe  erant  qui  Cn.  Pompeiuin  Incusatum  a  senioribus  ferrent,
quod  mansuram  theatri  sedem  posuisset :  nam  antea  subitariis  gradibus
et  scena  in  tempus  structa  ludos  edi  solitos,  vel,  si  vetustiora  repetas,
stantem  populum  spectavisse."  The  founder  was  supposed  to  regard
none  of  his  exploits  with  more  complacency  than  the  erection  of  this
magnificent  edifice.  Luc.  i.  133. :  "  Plausuque  sui  gaudere  theatri,"
vii.  10. :

"  Nam  Pompeiani  visus  sibi  sede  theatri

Innumeram  effigiem  Komanse  cernere  plebis  ;

Attollique  suum  laetis  ad  sidera  nomen

Vocibus,  et  plausu  cuneos  certare  sonantes."

The  sentiments  of  the  ancients  on  this  building  are  collected,  and  its
later  history  related  by  Drumann,  iv.  521.

1  Dion.  1.  c. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  52.  ;  Cic.  de Off.  ii.  16.;  Plin.  H.  N.
xxxvi.  24.

2  Cic.  ad  Div.  vii.  1.; Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  7.: "  Tanto dolore, ut

E  E 2

420  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, interpret  the  miserable  wailmgs  of  the  victims,  and
affirmed  that  they  appealed  to  the  generosity  and

justice  of  the  Roman  people,  having  only  been  in-
duced to  leave  their  native  shores  on  assurances  of
safety,  which  their  captors  had  confirmed  to  them
by  oath.1  After  all,  the  great  man's  detractors
averred,  the  liberality  was  not  Pompeius's  own.2
The  building  had  been  raised  by  the  taste  and
spirit  of  Demetrius,  one  of  his  freedmen,  who  had
thus  devoted  to  the  entertainment  of  the  public
the  treasures  he  had  accumulated  in  following  his
patron's  fortunes.  He  had  modestly  given  to  it
the  name  of  Pompeius,  to  screen  from  the  invidious
gaze  of  the  citizens  the  enormous  amount  of  his
own  private  gains.

He  remains Whatever  remnant  of  gratitude, however,  the

and  governs  Romans  might  feel  towards  their  consul,  after  the

b^biTIe006  e^*or^s  ne  hRd  made  to  amuse  them,  they  were  dis-

gates. satisfied  both  with  him  and  with  themselves,  when

they  beheld  the  legions  which  he  and  his  colleague

had  hastened  to  levy  in  pursuance  of  their  late

decree. The  tribunes  attempted  even  to  revoke

the  sanction  under  which  they  had  been  raised,

but  the  speedy  preparations  of  Crassus  to  set  forth

on his meditated expedition, and the apparent

moderation  of  Pompeius,  who  despatched  his  troops

to  Spain,  that  their  presence  in  the  neighbourhood

of  the city  might  afford no  cause  for  jealousy,

populus  flens  universus  consurgeret,  dirasque  Pompeio  quas  ille  mox
luit  imprecaretur."

1  The  credit  of  this  statement  must  be  appropriated  to  Dion  ex-
clusively.

2  Dion.  /.  c.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  421

soon  engaged  them  to  relax  from  their  hostility.  CHAP.
Pompeius  himself  determined  not  to  quit  the  centre
of  affairs;  the  functions  with  which  he  had  been
invested  as  controller  of  provisions  gave  him  a
ready  excuse  l  ;  and  he  proposed,  for  the  first  time
since  the  institution  of  the  republic,  to  govern  his
province  through  his  lieutenants  alone.

During  their  consulship,  Pompeius  and  Crassus  Enactment
had  turned  some  portion  of  their  attention,  though

without  much  energy  or  decision,  to  the  enactment  and.a  pe~

Py  cuniary

of  sumptuary  laws  ;  a  proceeding  which  always  qualification
flatters  the  envious  feelings  of  the  middle  classes,  ofjudex.  °(
and  which  met  at  Rome  with  the  cold  approbation
of  the  better-informed  even  among  the  highest.
But  in  this  policy  they  were  speedily  defeated  by
the  selfishness  of  the  nobles,  particularly  of  Hor-
tensius2,  and  they  were  easily  induced  to  desist
from  a  project,  undertaken  probably  more  for  the
sake  of  appearances  than  from  any  zeal  in  the
cause  of  antique  simplicity.  They  succeeded,  how-
ever, in  establishing  a  pecuniary  qualification  for
the  office  of  judex3,  instead  of  the  merely  arbitrary
selection  from  the  privileged  orders,  the  senators,
knights,  and  aerarian  tribunes,  which  had  prevailed
since  the  enactment  of  the  Aurelian  law.4  This
reform,  also,  had  a  specious  appearance,  inasmuch

1  Dion,  xxxix.  39.  ;  Plut.  Pomp.  53. The  good-natured  philoso-
pher attributes  Pompeius's  stay  at  Rome  solely  to  his  affection  for
his  wife.

2  Dion,  xxxix.  37.

3  Cic.  Philipp.  i.  8.  ;  Ascon.  in  Cic.  Pison.  94.  :  "  Pompeius  in  consu-
latu  secundo  ....  promulgavit  ut  amplissimo  ex  censu,  ex  centuriis
aliter  quam  antea  lecti  judices,  aeque  tainen  ex  illis  tribus  ordinibus
res  judicarent." Comp.  Fischer,  Rom.  Zeittafeln,  p.  247.

4  A.U.  684,  B.C.  70.

E  E 3

422  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, as  it  tended  to  confine  a  post  of  much  responsibility
and temptation  to  the  classes  which,  from  their

affluent  or  easy  circumstances,  might  be  deemed
sufficiently  free  from  the  ordinary  incitements  to
cupidity.  In  reality,  however,  in  the  frightful
state  of  the  reigning  immorality,  its  consequence
was  probably  no  other  than  to  enhance  the  price  of
judicial  favour.  But  Crassus  was  eminently  stu-
dious of  outward  decorum,  and  such,  no  doubt,
was  the  character  which  the  measure  seemed  at  first
sight  to  bear.  On  the  other  hand,  it  was  a  direct
boon  to  the  moneyed  interest ;  it  raised  wealth
above  birth,  and  virtue,  and  education ;  it  tended
to  hasten  the  consummation  of  social  corruption,
when  poverty  is  branded  as  a  crime,  and  money
alone  supposed  to  embrace  every  object  of  respect,
political  The  overwhelming  preponderance  of  the  trium-

cicero?  tis  v'irs  ™  tae  scales  of  power  reduced  Cicero  to  a
connexion state  of  political  inactivity. He  studied  to  secure

with  the  . \ .  J

triumvirs,  the  friendship,  or,  in  other  words,  the  protection
both  of  Caesar  and  Pompeius,  while  at  the  same  time
^e  snran^  from  joining  systematically  in  the  de-
fence of  their  policy,  the  only  condition  on  which
they  would  freely  impart  it.  On  the  one  hand,  he
writes  with  great  satisfaction  of  the  visit  with
which  Pompeius  had  honoured  his  retirement,  not
unmixed,  however,  with  serious  misgivings  as  to
the  sincerity  of  his  friendly  expressions1;  on  the
other,  he  pays  his  court  assiduously  to  the  pro-
consul in  Gaul,  through  his  brother  Quintus,  who
had  accepted  the  post  of  legatus  there,  and  other
officers  in  the  army.  He  submits  his  poetical

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  9.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  423

compositions  to  the  judgment  of  the  accomplished  CHAP.
captain,  and  is  highly  delighted  with  the  compli-
ments which  he  receives  in  return.1  He  hints  that
he  is  engaged  on  a  poem  in  celebration  of  Csesar's
invasion  of  Britain,  which  now  occupied  public  at-
tention ;  he  applies  to  his  brother  for  the  facts  ;
the  form,  he  says,  shall  be  supplied  by  his  own
genius.2  But  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Cicero
was  really  attached  both  to  the  one  and  the  other,
to  Caesar  more  especially,  who  seems  never  to  have
made  a  personal  enemy  or  lost  a  friend.  Cicero
made  no  advances  towards  Crassus,  whose  person
and  character  he  always  regarded  with  aversion,  and
he  could  not  put  on  the  guise  of  affection  where  his
feelings  were  of  a  nature  directly  opposite.  The
other  triumvirs,  indeed,  constantly  strove  to  effect
a  better  understanding  between  him  and  their
colleague,  and  their  efforts  were  strongly  seconded
by  the  mutual  regard  of  the  orator  and  the  younger
Crassus.  But  the  enmity  of  many  years,  as  Cicero
himself  confesses,  burst  forth  in  a  violent  altercation
between  himself  and  Crassus  in  the  senate,  just
before  the  departure  of  the  latter  for  his  province,
and  this  open  rupture  was  with  difficulty  skinned
over  at  the  last  moment  to  meet  the  public  eye.3
The  stress  which  the  triumvirs  laid  upon  the  mere
appearance  of  a  reconciliation  may  have  flattered

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  16.  2  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  15.

3  Cic.  ad  Div.  i.  9. :  "  Crassus,  ut  quasi  testata  populo  Rom.  esset
nostra  gratia,  poene  a  meis  laribus  est  in  provinciam  profectus."  The
reconciliation  was  attested  by  a  supper,  at  which  the  parties  met  in
the  gardens  of  Crassipes,  who  had  lately  married  the  orator's  daughter
Tullia :  "  Quum  mini  condixisset,  caenavit  apud  me  in  mei  generi
Crassipedis  hortis."

£ £ 4

424

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
IX.

His  mental
resources.

Cicero's  self-importance ;  but  the  advice  of  his
friend  Atticus  was  probably  the  wisest  that  could
be  offered,  in  urging  him,  at  this  crisis,  to  abandon
political  life.  From  the  termination  of  the  affair  of
Catilina,  his  part  was,  in  fact,  concluded.  His  tri-
umphant return  from  banishment  formed  an  appro-
priate drop-scene  to  the  noble  drama  of  which  he
had  been  the  hero.  But,  in  the  midst  of  all  his
cares,  the  disappointment  of  his  ambition,  the  in-
gratitude of  one  set  of  friends,  and  the  insincerity
of  another,  embittered  as  they  were  by  his  constant
apprehensions  for  the  welfare  of  his  country,  he
still  filled  every  vacant  moment  with  the  recreations
of  literature  and  philosophy.1  His  doors  stood  al-
ways open  to  any  friend  who  would  contribute  a
speculation  or  a  criticism  to  his  overflowing  stores
of  thought.  His  mind,  irritable,  perplexed,  and
desponding  in  public  matters,  recovered,  in  these
healthier  engagements,  its  calmness,  its  dignity,
and  its  strength.  In  philosophy,  he  kept  his  aim
before  him  with  a  steadiness  which  it  had  been  well
for  his  fame  if  he  could  have  imparted  to  his  poli-
tical career ;  or  rather,  the  same  disposition  to
balance  and  temporize,  which  wrecked  his  fortunes
as  a  statesman,  fitted  him  to  hear  all  parties  and
weigh  all  theoretical  opinions,  and,  if  not  to  dis-
cover speculative  truth,  to  limit  on  all  sides  the
encroachments  of  error.2

1  It  was  in  the  course  of  this  year  that  Cicero  wrote,  or  at  least
completed  his  dialogue  de  Oratore,  the  most  elaborate  and  interesting
perhaps  of  his  works. Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  13.  16.,  ad  Div.  i.  9.

2  A  story  was  told  of  Cicero  (Plut.  Cic.  5.),  that  in  his  youth  he
consulted  the  oracle  at  Delphi  how  he  might  acquire  fame,  and  that
he  received  in  answer  the  prudent  advice,  to  make  the  bent  of  his

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  425

Meanwhile,  the  statesmen  of  Rome, unable  to CHAP.
adjust  their  rival  pretensions  to  restore  the  king  of
Egypt  to  his  throne,  had  allowed  the  affair  to  fall

into  abeyance. We  have  seen  that  Lentulus  Spin-  Gab°inLf  m
ther  had  gone  to  his  province  of  Cilicia,  in  the  ex-  ^ngt°^rn"
pectation  of  receiving  full  powers  from  the  govern-  Syria,
ment  to  carry  that  measure  into  execution,  according  698.'
to  the  tenor  of  the  bill  which  he  had  himself  pro-
posed. When  the  complete  ratification  of  his  com-
mission was  withheld,  and  the  subject  reopened  for
competition and intrigue, Cicero undertook to
watch  over the  interests  of  his friend the late
consul,  and  continued  to  amuse  him  with  hopes  of
eventually  bringing  the  matter  to  a  favourable  issue.
But  in  the  meanwhile  the  affair,  which  had  lingered
so  long  at  Rome  and  had  become  at  last  forgotten
in  the  hurry  of  more  momentous  agitations,  was
settled  at  once  by  a  daring  and  unscrupulous  hand.
Gabinius  had  succeeded,  on  the  expiration  of  his  He  resolves
consulship  at  the  end  of  the  year  696,  to  the  pro-
consular  government  of  Syria. We  meet  with  no
trace  of  any  special  enactment  by  which  that  office  ofEgyPt.
was  assured  to  him  for  any  longer  period  than  the
ordinary  term  of  one  year; nevertheless,  he  oc-
cupied the  government  through  the  space  of  two
years  complete,  and  did  not  quit  it,  even  after  his
formal  recal  upon  Cicero's  motion,  till  towards  the
end  of  699,  when  Crassus  was  preparing  to  super-
sede him.1 The  aggressive  and  tyrannical  cha-

own  genius,  and  not  the  estimation  of  the  world,  the  guide  of  his
life.  This  pleasing  fiction  expresses  the  judgment  of  posterity  upon
his  character.

1  The  laws  of  Sulla,  always  adapted  to  enhance  the  influence  of

426  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  racter  which  distinguished  the  conduct  of  the
'  Eoman  proconsuls,  both  towards  their  own  subjects
and  foreigners,  was  carried  out  by  Gabinius  with
systematic  energy.  With  regard  to  Judea  he
adopted  the  policy  which  Pompeius  had  bequeathed
to  the  governors  of  the  province  of  Syria,  and  main-
tained by  a  military  force  the  authority  of  Hyrcanus
against  the  family  of  his  brother  Aristobulus.  The
restlessness  of  the  Arabs  on  his  frontiers  might
demand  his  vigilance  and  activity,  and  excuse  the
attacks  which  he  made  upon  the  neighbouring
tribes.  Some  trifling  successes  which  he  obtained
in  these  enterprizes  acquired  for  him  the  title  of
Imperator  from  his  soldiers.1  But  when  he  applied
to  the  senate  for  a  supplicatio,  in  honour  apparently
of  his  exploits  on  one  of  these  expeditions,  the
nobles  showed  their  dislike  to  him,  and  their  stifled
resentment  towards  his  patron  Pompeius,  by  meeting
his  demand  with  a  contemptuous  refusal.2  Such
an  affront,  it  was  said,  had  never  before  been  cast
upon  a  proconsul,  and  it  served  rather  to  excite
than  to  check  his  ambition  and  audacity.  He  next
proposed  to  restore  Mithridates  to  the  throne  of
Parthia,  from  which  he  had  been  ejected  by  his
brother  Orodes.  But  at  the  same  time  he  was

the  senate,  permitted  the  proconsul  to  remain  in  his  province,  after
the  expiration  of  the  year,  until  he  was  superseded  by  a  successor
(Drumann,  ii.  190.).  Cicero,  in  a  letter  to  Lentulus  (ad  Div.  i.  9.),
suggests  to  him  that  he  is  not  authorized  to  leave  Cilicia  before  the
arrival  of  a  new  proconsul  with  full  powers.

1  It  seems  that  Gabinius  suffered  some  ignominious  losses  in  these
campaigns. Cic.  pro  Sest.  33. :  "  Neque  equitatum  in  Syria  et  co-
hortes  optimas  perdidissemus."

2  Cic.  Philipp.  xiv.  9.,  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  8. :  "  Id.  Maiis  senatus  frequens
divinus  fuit  in  supplicatione  Gabinio  deneganda."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  427

besieged  by  the  importunities  of  Ptolemseus  Au- CHAP.
letes,  who  had  retired  in  disgust  from  the  doors  of
his  patrons  in  Rome,  and  the  offer  of  a  direct  bribe
induced  Gabinius  to  adopt  in  preference  the  cause
of  the  Egyptian.1

The  population  of  Alexandria,  which  gave  law  Berenice,
to  Egypt,  was  headstrong  and  rebellious,  and  always

required  to  be  caioled  into  submission  to  its  sove-  rei?nsin.

*  Alexandria.

reigns.  It  had  expelled  Ptolemseus  from  his  throne,
and  bestowed  the  vacant  seat  upon  his  daughter
Berenice.  When  the  exiled  monarch  betook  him-
self to  Rome,  and  petitioned  the  senate  to  restore
him  to  the  dignity  which  had  been  solemnly  assured
to  him  by  the  declaration  of  friendship  and  alliance
on  the  part  of  the  republic2,  the  Alexandrians
sought  to  strengthen  themselves  against  the  im-
pending danger.  They  invited  Seleucus,  a  scion
of  the  dynasty  which  had  lately  reigned  in  Syria,
to  partake  the  throne  and  bed  of  their  young  queen.
But  both  the  people  and  the  sovereign  seem  to
have  been  soon  dissatisfied  with  this  alliance,  and
the  unfortunate  prince  was  strangled  by  the  orders
of  his  consort.  Another  competitor  for  the  pre-
carious distinction  was  found  in  the  person  of

1  His  cause  was  recommended  to  Gabinius  by  letters  from  Pom-
peius  himself. Dion,  xxxix.  56.

2  Caesar  had  asserted  that  the  kingdom  of  Egypt  had  been  be-
queathed to  the  Roman  people  by  Alexander  I.  (see  above,  p.  122.).
That  sovereign  had  left  one  daughter,  Berenice,  and  two  illegitimate
sons,  afterwards  kings  of  Egypt  and  Cyprus. The  daughter  died,
and  Auletes,  the  elder  of  the  brothers,  experienced  great  difficulty  in
establishing  his  claim  to  the  succession. The  jealousy  of  the  senate
saved  him  from  the  aggression  meditated  by  Caesar,  and  he  spent
6000  talents  in  winning  over  the  nobles  whom  he  principally  feared.
Suet.  Jul.  54.;  Dion.  xxx.  12.;  Pint.  Cas.  48.

428  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. Archelaus,  who  is  stated  to  have  been  the  son  of

IX

one  of  the  generals  of  Mithridates,  but  who  pre-
tended to  be  the  offspring  of  the  great  king  himself,
and  professed  to  wield  the  influence  of  that  vene-
rated name.  It  seems  that  Gabinius  had  obtained
possession  of  this  man  at  an  earlier  period,  and
had  purposely  allowed  him  to  escape1,  in  order  to
embroil  the  Egyptian  court  still  more  with  the
government  of  Rome,  and  give  a  colour  to  the
violence  he  meditated  in  direct  opposition  to  the
decree  of  the  seriate.

Upon  the  arrival  of  the  proconsul  with  his  legions,
bringing  Ptolemaeus  in  his  train,  the  Egyptians  did

aahu  hterhis  no^  nes^ate  to  rise  in  arms  to  defend  their  inde-
to  death.  pendence  and  the  sovereign  of  their  choice.  But
resistance  was  fruitless.  The  Alexandrian  populace,
however  violent  and  reckless  of  their  lives  in  tumults
and  seditions,  were  not  fit  subjects  for  military
discipline,  and  formed  a  contemptible  soldiery.2
Gabinius  entered  the  city  after  one  or  two  skir-
mishes, and  effected  the  revolution  to  which  he
had  pledged  himself.  Ptolemaeus  reascended  his
throne,  and  his  first  act  was  to  put  his  daughter  to
death,  to  gratify  his  vengeance  or  ensure  his  safety,
and  the  next,  to  massacre  the  noblest  and  richest
of  her  adherents,  in  order  to  amass  the  enormous

1  Dion  (xxxix.  57.)  mentions  the  fact  of  this  connivance.

2  Comp.  Dion's  remarks on the  character  of  the  Alexandrians
(xxxix.  58.),  and  Ammian.  xxii.  11.  :  "In  civitate  quae  suopte  motu
et  ubi  causae  non  suppetunt,  seditionibus  crebris  agitatur  et  turbu-
lentis,  ut  oraculorum  quoque  loquitur  fides  ;  "  where  Valesius  adduces
other passages from  the ecclesiastical historians. Compare also
Vopiscus  in  Saturn.  7.  ;  Dion  Chrys.  Orat.  xxxii.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  429

sum  which  he  had  guaranteed  as  the  price  of  his CHAP.
restoration.1  '

A  small  portion  only  of  this  Egyptian  gold  found  superstu
its  way  into  the  private  coffers  of  Gabinius,  since  aiarms  of
he  was  compelled  to  expend  the  greater  part  of  it  fttl|[JJJJ11
in  buying  impunity  for  his  daring  violation  of  the
law.  He  dared  not  even  send  an  account  of  the
transaction  to  his  government,  much  less  advance
any  claim  to  public  honours.  But  the  proconsul's
share  in  the  restoration  of  the  fugitive  monarch
was  too  notorious  to  escape  detection ;  nor  was  this
the  only  part  of  his  administration  which  called
aloud  for  judicial  inquiry.  The  Syrians  complained
of  the  effects  of  his  absence  from  his  province.
They  had  been  exposed  to  the  molestation  of  the
brigands  of  the  mountains  and  the  desert ;  the
publicani  had  been  unable  to  collect  the  revenues ;
and  the  youthful  Sisenna,  the  proconsul's  son,
whom  he  had  left  behind  as  his  representative,  had
proved  himself  wholly  unequal  to  so  arduous  a
post.  There  were  not  wanting  personal  enemies
of  Gabinius  to  excite  the  indignation  and  super-
stition of  the  Roman  people  against  him.  They
wielded  with  fatal  effect  the  terrors  of  the  Sibylline
oracle.  To  awaken  the  fears  of  the  multitude  was
to  exasperate  their  anger.

As  long  as  Pompeius  and  Crassus  retained  the  Gabinius  is
consular  office  they  threw  the  shield  of  their  in-  i^hjprl
fluence  over  the  proconsul.  The  one  was  his  po-  vince  by

Crassus.

1  This  sum  is  stated  at  ten  thousand  talents,  above  two  millions  of
our  money.  In  such  a  matter  we  may  readily  suspect  exaggeration.
The  celebrated  wealth  of  Crassus,  at  the  highest  computation  (Plin.
H.  N.  xxxiii.  47.)  was  not  more  than  about  eight  thousand  three
hundred  talents.

430  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  litical  as  he  had  formerly  been  his  military  leader,
'  and  could  not  now  afford  to  dispense  with  his
support ;  the  other,  it  was  said,  was  won  over  to
his  cause  by  a  share  in  the  spoils  of  his  government.1
Gabinius  was  allowed  to  remain  unmolested  in
Syria ;  but  the  approach  of  Crassus  as  his  successor
in  the  administration  of  that  province  robbed  him
of  this  retreat,  and  obliged  him  to  take  measures
for  meeting  his  enemies  in  Eome.  The  intrigues
of  the  triumvirs  had  prevented  the  election  of  new
consuls  till  the  close  of  the  year.  It  was  not  till
December  that  the  perseverance  of  the  nobles  at
last  prevailed.  The  comitia  were  held,  and  Domitius
obtained  the  long-sought  for  object  of  his  ambition.
But  the  triumph  of  his  friends  was  damped  by  the
selection  of  Appius  Claudius  as  his  colleague,  which
threatened  to  counteract  the  schemes  of  aggression
and  revenge  which  they  meditated.  Appius  was
the  brother  of  P.  Clodius,  the  infamous  tribune.
He  was  closely  connected  with  Pompeius  by  the
marriage  of  his  daughter  with  a  son  of  the  triumvir,
and  though  he  appears  to  have  been  on  this  account
regarded  with  more  consideration  by  Cicero,  he  was
generally  disliked  and  feared  by  the  senatorial
party.  His  career  was  distinguished  even  in  that
ire  is  corrupt  age  by  its  unblushing  venality.  Though
withaim-ed  professing  to  second  the  policy  of  Pompeius,  he
peachment.  began  his  consulship  by  joining  his  colleague  in
threatening  to  impeach  Gabinius3;  not  so  much  from

1  Dion,  xxxix.  60.

2  L.  Domitius  Ahenobarbus  and  Appius  Claudius  Pulcher  consuls,
A.U.  700.

3  Such  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  apparently  corrupt  passage,
Dion,  xxxix.  60.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  431

a  wish  to  rival  his  brother  as  a  demagogue,  as  with  CHAP.
the  hope  of  extorting  from  the  proconsul,  by  way  _  '
of  bribe,  a  portion  of  the  treasures,  the  fame  of
Avhich  was  already  bruited  far  and  wide.1  But
Gabinius  easily  divined  his  views,  and  doubtless
found  means  to  soften  his  hostility.  Though  ejected
from  the  place  of  honour  in  Syria,  he  still  continued
to  linger  in  the  province,  from  whence  he  distri-
buted bribes  among  his  friends  and  enemies  at
Rome,  and  opposed  the  demand  of  a  triumph  to
the  charges  of  mal- administration  suspended  over
him.2  His  conduct  was  first  brought  indirectly  in  A.  u.  700,
question  in  February,  when  the  citizens  of  Tyre
complained  before  the  senate  of  the  ill  treatment
they  had  suffered  from  the  publicani  of  his  province.
On  this  occasion  Domitius  eagerly  displayed  his  ill-
will  to  the  late  proconsul,  by  administering  a  rebuke
to  the  publicani  for  the  honours  they  had  paid
him  upon  his  surrender  of  office.  But  we  may
trace  the  effect  of  the  Egyptian  gold  in  the  conduct
of  Appius,  who  now  stretched  his  authority  to

1  Another  instance  of  the  cupidity  of  Appius  appears  in  his  pro-
ceedings respecting  Antiochus,  king  of  Commagene. This  district,  on
the  right  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  formed  a  small  dependent  sove-
reignty. Antiochus,  its  ruler,  had  received  from  Caesar,  during  his
consulship,  permission  to  wear  the  Roman  toga,  and  was  now  petition-
ing the  senate  to  confirm  this  honourable  distinction,  which  had  been
disregarded,  perhaps,  by  the  neighbouring  proconsuls, Lentulus  or
Gabinius. Appius  had  received  presents  to  induce  him  to  regard  this
suit  with  favour. Cicero  attacked  and  ridiculed  the  pretensions  of
the  kingling,  apparently  from  mere  levity,  for  it  could  not  have  been
part  of  his  deliberate  policy  to  insult  the  obscurest  of  Caesar's  clients.
Appius  did  every  thing  in  his  power  to  conciliate  the  orator,  fearing
that  if  the  dependent  kings  should  be  deterred  from  suing  to  the
Roman  statesmen,  it  would  dry  up  a  most  lucrative  source  of  emolu-
ment. Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  12.

2  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  in.  2.

432  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, prevent the assembling of  the popular  coinitia,
' before  which  the  tribunes  had  determined  to  bring
forward  a  direct  accusation.1 The  affair  still  lin-
gered until  the  arrival  of  the  culprit  himself,  which
he  had  put  off  to  the  latest  moment.

He  returns  Notwithstanding  the  means  which  Gabinius  had
impeached3  taken  to  gain  to  his  interests  the  principal  men  of
of  m^est?  *ne  C^J  *ke  reception  he  encountered,  upon  his
but  acquit-  appearance  in  September  before  the  walls,  was  so
cold  and  disheartening  that  he  did  not  venture  to
make  a  public  entry.  For  it  was  not  only  the
faction  of  the  senate  which  had  vowed  his  disgrace
and  ruin ;  the  popular  feeling,  worked  upon  through
its  superstitious  terrors,  had  set  decisively  against
him.  Accordingly,  he  slunk  within  the  gates  pri-
vately and  by  night,  and  even  then  delayed  for
several  days  to  render  to  the  senate  the  official
account  of  his  administration.  He  was  treated
with  haughtiness  and  harshness  by  the  members  of
the  assembly.  Cicero  attacked  him  with  acrimony,
and  so  provoked  him,  that  he  retorted  by  taunting
his  assailant  with  the  disgrace  of  his  exile.  But
things  had  changed  since  Gabinius  had  left  Rome.
The  senate,  instead  of  cowering  under  the  blows
directed  against  its  champion,  as  in  the  triumphant
days  of  the  Clodian  tribunate,  rose  to  a  man  in  his
defence,  and  crowded  around  him,  showering  upon
him  expressions  of  applause  and  gratitude  with  all
the  enthusiasm  of  the  period  of  his  consulship.
The  influence  of  Pompeius,  indeed,  was  interposed
to  screen  Gabinius  from  their  exasperation;  but
more  than  one  accusation  was  impending  over  him,

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  13.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  433

and  L.  Lentulus  was  first  appointed  to  bring  him  CHAP.
to  trial  on  the  charge  of  majestas,  or  treason
against  the  state.  The  act  of  a  military  officer
who  made  war  without  the  express  order  of  the
government  was  a  treasonable  violation  of  the
majesty  of  the  republic ;  but  the  crime  of  Ga-
binius  was  of  an  aggravated  character,  for  he  had
assailed  Egypt  in  direct  contravention  of  his  orders.
He  defended  himself  on  the  plea,  that,  notwith-
standing the  decree  which  had  been  issued  to  forbid
the  restoration  of  Ptolemaeus,  another  law  had
passed  the  popular  assembly  by  which  it  had  been
expressly  enjoined.1  Whether  any  tumultuary
proceedings  of  Clodius  had  really  taken  place  to
give  a  colour  to  this  line  of  defence,  or  whether
Gabinius  relied  upon  a  forgery  (for  it  is  not  im-
possible that  even  the  public  instruments  of  the
state  might  have  been  falsified2),  or  whether  the
plea  rested  merely  upon  an  audacious  fiction,  the
senate  refused  to  lend  any  countenance  to  it.  But
the  opposition  of  Cicero  had  already  cooled  down,
the  judges  had  been  successfully  tampered  with,
and,  in  spite  of  the  hostility  professed  at  least  by
both  of  the  consuls,  and  the  imprecations  of  the
multitude,  the  criminal  was  acquitted  upon  the
main  charge,  and  the  response  of  the  Sibyl  was
evasively  interpreted  to  refer  to  altogether  different
circumstances.  The  people,  however,  were  not  so
easily  satisfied,  and  the  occurrence  of  a  violent

1  Cic.  pro  Edbir.  Post.  8.

2  Cic.  de  Leg.  iii.  20. ;  comp.  Drumarm,  iii.  55. A  flagrant  in-
stance of  the  kind  is  mentioned  in  Cic.  ad  Att.  iy.  18.

VOL.  I.  F  F

434  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, inundation  of  the  Tiber1  armed  their  superstition
' with  new  arguments  against  the  victim  who  had
not  yet  escaped  them.

A  second  charge  was  still  pending  against  the

extortion  proconsul  for  corruption  and  extortion2,  but,  tri-
vernment  umphaiit  upon  the  former  issue,  he  was  not  much
defended  concerned  about  the  other.  He  felt  how  well  his
but  con-  '  gold  had  served  him  among  the  venal  and  corrupt,
while,  strange  to  say,  the  most  high-minded  of  his
enemies,  Cicero,  had  been  induced  by  Pompeius  to
undertake  his  defence.  The  triumvir  himself,  who
had  been  absent  from  the  neighbourhood  of  the
city  during  the  first  trial,  engaged  to  be  close  at
hand  and  redouble  all  his  efforts  to  save  him.
But  it  was  these  very  efforts,  to  all  appearance,
that  lost  him  his  cause.  It  was  intolerable  to
hear  Cicero  maintaining,  at  the  beck  of  the  great
triumvir,  the  assertion  of  the  Alexandrian  wit-
nesses, that  Gabinius  had  received  no  bribe  from
the  king  of  Egypt,  when  the  fact  was  so  notorious,
that  the  same  orator,  in  the  very  next  cause  that
he  pleads,  admits  it  without  hesitation.3  Indeed,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Cicero's  character
suffered  very  severely  in  the  estimation  of  his
friends  on  this  occasion4:  his  own  account  of  the
affair  gives  no  plausible  excuse  for  this  incon-

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  iii.  7.  :  "  Cadit  in  absolutionem  Gabinii." Dion.
xxxix.  61.

2  The  corruption  consisted  in  his  accepting  a  sum  of  money  from
Ptolemaeus  as  the  price  of  his  restoration  :  besides  this  he  was  accused
of  having  extorted  four  millions  of  sesterces  from  the  provincials.
Dion,  xxxix.  55.

3  Cic.  pro  Rabir.  Post.  12.

4  Dion,  xxxix.  63.  :  ware  KCII  IK  TOVTOV  TO  rov  ai>TO[j,6\ov
TrXfUv  ol  av£,T]9rjvai.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  435

sistency. It  was  idle  to  boast  of  his  placability, CHAP.
when  he  admits  that  the  reconciliation  was  effected

by  the  instances  of  the  triumvir,  whom  it  was
evident  he  dared  not  disoblige.1  His  accepting
from  Pompeius  a  lieutenancy  in  Spain  almost  at
the  same  moment2  was  both  indiscreet  and  inde-
cent. Nor  were  the  judges  better  pleased,  per-
haps, at  the  officious  interference  of  Cassar,  from
whom  Cicero  produced  a  letter  strongly  urging  the
acquittal  of  the  accused.  To  the  surprize  of  both
his  friends  and  enemies,  to  the  amazement  pro-
bably of  himself,  the  trial  ended  with  the  condem-
nation of  Gabinius,  and  he  was  compelled  to  retire
into  banishment.3  His  property  was  confiscated  to
the  state,  in  liquidation  of  the  fine  which  the  judges
proportioned  to  the  amount  of  his  acquisitions.4

Cicero's  political  allies  felt  themselves  aggrieved  cicero  at-
by  the  open  defection  from  their  views,  which  his  ^Cfhte0s  J ™"
defence  of  Gabinius  manifested. It  was  evident,  tr{um™rs>

7 and  affects

indeed,  throughout  the  course  of  this  year,  that  he  s^nt  cor-
had  abandoned  all  hope  of  maintaining  the  ground  towai^s
which  they  had  assumed  in  opposition  to  the  tri-  c
umvirs,  and  that  his  aim,  if  not  confined  to  the
conservation  of  his  own personal interests, was
directed to  the  infusion  of  more  patriotic  senti-
ments into  the  breasts  of  those  in  whom  all  sub-
stantial power  seemed  now  to  be  lodged. He  had

1  Cic.  pro  Rabir.  Post.  12. :  "  Neque  me  vero  pcenitet,  mortales  ini-
micitias,  sempiternas  amicitias  habere."

2  This  lieutenancy  did  not  require  his  presence  in  the  province,
but provided  him  with  an  honourable retreat, together with  the
means  of  making  a  fortune,  iu  case  he  should  ever  feel  it  expedient
to  leave  Rome  for  a  time. Cic.  ad  Die.  vii.  5.

3  Dion,  xxxix.  63.  ' 4  Cic.  pro  Rabir.  Post.  4.

F  F 2

436  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  stood  forward  in  the  winter  as  the  defender  of
Crassus,  against  an  attempt  on  the  part  of  the
nobles  to  obtain  his  recal,  almost  before  he  had  yet
reached  his  province.  Assuredly  the  sentiments
which  he  expresses  in  a  letter  addressed  to  the
proconsul  of  Syria  upon  this  occasion1,  if  they
were  such  as  he  publicly  asserted  at  the  time,  were
calculated  to  surprise  and  disgust  those  who  had
known  the  bitterness  of  the  enmity  recently  sub-
sisting between  them.  He  declared  that  his  own
good- will  towards  the  triumvir  had  been  constant
from  the  first ;  he  was  confident  that  this  sympathy
had  been  reciprocal ;  their  mutual  regard  had  been
made  the  sport  of  false  and  pernicious  associates.
He  repudiated  the  idea  that  his  present  defence
of  Crassus's  character  and  conduct  had  been  the
effect  of  any  new  conviction  ;  he  had  always  watched
his  career  with  admiration,  and  studied  to  pro-
mote the  closest  intimacy  between  them.  This
was  said,  it  must  be  remembered,  in  the  face  of
their  notorious  jealousies  and  repeated  quarrels.
Cicero  himself  had  been  the  first  to  insult  Crassus,
by  giving  all  the  glory  of  the  destruction  of  Spar-
tacus  to  his  rival ;  he  had  deeply  offended  him  by
allowing  any  suspicion  to  rest  upon  him  with  regard
to  his  supposed  participation  in  the  councils  of
Catilina.  On  the  other  hand,  the  machinations
of  Clodius  against  the  dignity  of  the  orator  had
been  covertly  encouraged  by  Crassus,  no  less  than
by  the  other  triumvirs ;  and  when  we  consider  how
little  there  was  in  the  character  of  the  sordid
money-maker  to  attract  or  dazzle  a  mind  like

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  v.  8.  (Febr.  A.U.  700).

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  437

Cicero's,  it  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  his  for- CHAP.
gi  veness  of  him  was  as  sincere  as  it  may  have  been
of  Caesar,  or  even  of  Pompeius.

But  the  orator  continued  to  act  systematically  cicerode-
upon  the  policy  he  had  laid  down  for  himself  in  S^f8"
conciliating  the  triumvirs  in  succession.  He  made  vatinius»

0  <  the  crea-

use  of  his  brother  Quintus,  who,  we  have  seen,  was  tures  of
now  serving  as  a  lieutenant  to  Caesar,  and  of  his  of^ponT
friend  Trebatius,  who  was  occupied  with  civil  em-  peius<
ployments  in  his  suite,  to  ingratiate  himself  with
the  proconsul  of  Gaul.1 He  offered  his  services  as
a  pleader  to  defend  Messius,  another  of  Caesar's
lieutenants, who  left his  general's camp at the
summons  of  the  senate  to  take his trial.2 Va-
tinius  also,  an  adherent  both  of  Caesar  and  Pom-
peius, who through  their united influence had
obtained  the  praetorship to  the  exclusion  of  M.
Cato,  and  was  now  exerting  all  the  influence  of  the
tribunate  in  their  behalf,  found  a  defender  in  Cicero,
when  accused  of  bribery  by  the  senatorial  party.
The  laboured  defence  of  his  conduct  in  this  par-  His  apology
ticular instance, which the orator addresses to  present  line
Lentulus  in  Cilicia,  shows  that  it  was  one  of  his  ofconduct-
acts  which  rankled  most  deeply  in  the  breasts  of
the  nobility. Stung  to  the  quick  by  the  charges
of  desertion which his friends now cast upon
him,  Cicero  at  last  turns  indignantly  upon  them.
"  Granted,"  he  says,  "  that  Vatinius  is  the  profli-
gate and  the  traitor  whom  you  describe ;  granted
that  I  have  myself  assailed  him  publicly  as  such,

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  13.  15.,  ad  Div.  (sc.  Trebatium),  viL  6—8.

2  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  15. He  was  attacked  by  the  anti-Cajsarian  party  :
"  Servilius  edixit  ut  adesset." The  charge  is  not  specified.

r  F 3

438  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, though  more  for  the  sake  of  exalting  the  virtues  of
Cato  than  of  denouncing  the  vices  of  his  rival ;  yet

by  the
enormous

it  is  not  for  you,  chiefs  of  the  senate,  to  taunt  me
with  caressing  a  creature  whom  I  despise,  seeing
what  infamous  wretches  you  have  repeatedly  re-
commended to  my  patronage,  what  encomiums  you
have  heaped  upon  them,  what  falsehoods  you  have
put  in  my  mouth  to  grace  my  defence  of  them."1
The  power r^ne  authority  of  the  nobles  as  a  class  had  been
of  the  nobles  completely  undermined,  not  only  by  the  attacks  of

as  a  class  is  '  J  .

overawed  Csesar  and  the  more  covert  machinations  of  Pom-
peius,  but  also  by  the  silent  change  of  circum-
stances>  and  the  transfer  of  wealth  and  power  into

in  the  state,  private  hands.  The  violence  which  had  been  done
to  such  a  statesman  as  Catulus,  and  the  disre-
spect with  which  Bibulus,  Lentulus,  and  others
had  been  treated,  had  tended  to  accustom  the  people
to  ridicule  pretensions  which  had  no  solid  foun-
dation in  physical  force.  The  troops  of  the  re-
public all  but  avowed  that  their  obedience  was
given  to  their  generals  rather  than  to  the  state,
and  the  nobility  dared  not  appeal  to  them  for  the
support  of  established  institutions.  They  were
compelled  to  trust  to  the  irregular  levies  of  their
more  headstrong  partizans,  such  as  Milo,  thereby
encouraging  the  increasing  contempt  for  law  and
order.  They  made  a  desperate  effort  to  maintain
their  influence  by  wholesale  corruption.  They
placed  their  reliance  upon  their  immense  patronage,
on  the  spoil  of  the  provinces,  the  leasing  of  the
revenues,  the  sale  of  justice  in  the  public  tribunals.
But  the  proconsuls,  who  had  originally  been  sent

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  (sc.  Lentulum,  Sept.  A.  u.  700)  i.  9.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  439

to  the  provinces  to  break  their  fall  from  the  highest  CHAP.
office  of  the  state,  now  returned,  year  by  year,  from
their  governments  with  wealth  too  great  for  a
private  station,  with  ambition  whetted  by  conquest
or  plunder,  and  with  a  retinue  of  followers  enriched
in  their  service,  and  devoted  to  their  interest  in
defiance  of  patriotic  or  party  ties.  Lastly,  they  tried
direct  bribery,  in  buying  the  suffrages  of  the  po-
pular assemblies,  or  of  the  judges  in  political  trials  ;
but  in  this  field  also  they  were  met  by  the  enor-
mous resources  of  private  speculators,  who  outbid
them  in  largesses,  and  still  more  in  promises.  The
unbridled  licentiousness  of  individuals  had  still  an
advantage  over  the  most  unscrupulous  govern-
ment.

The  proceedings  of  the  consular  candidates  for  corrupt
the  year  701 afforded  an  instance  of  this  licen-  ^^T
tiousness  beyond  all  former  example. The  struggle  sular  candi-

"  e  dates  for

was  carried  on  without  intermission  through  the  the  year
latter  half  of  the  year,  the  competitors  themselves
contriving  every  possible  means  of  delay,  in  the
hope  of  thwarting  each  other's  interests  or  pro-
moting their  own.  Pompeius  beheld  the  postpone-
ment of  the  elections  with  ill- disguised  satisfaction,
and  secretly  fomented  the  general  confusion.1  The
candidates  were  four  in  number,  Memmius,  Do-
rriitius  Calvinus,  ^Emilius  Scaurus,  and  Valerius
Messala.  The  first  two  formed  a  coalition,  and  made
an  engagement  with  the  actual  consuls  to  procure
for  them,  if  elected,  whatever  provinces  they  de-
sired as  the  price  of  their  influence.  They  had

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  15.:  "Pompeius  freurit,  queritur,  Scauro  studet;
sed  utrum  fronte  an  mente  dubitatur."

F  F 4

440

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
IX.

The  senate

bring  them
to  trial.

witnesses,  two  of  them  consulars  and  three  augurs,
already  suborned  to  swear  that  they  had  been
present,  the  former  when  the  senate  made  the
requisite  decree,  the  latter  when  the  same  was
ratified  by  the  act  of  the  popular  assembly.1  But
Pompeius,  anxious  to  break  up  an  alliance  which
threatened  to  carry  every  thing  before  it,  found
means  to  induce  Memmius  to  disclose  this  infamous
transaction,  and,  when  he  had  thus  ruinously  com-
promised his  associates,  to  abandon  his  own  views
and  adopt  the  policy  of  the  triumvirs.2  The
senate,  more  mortified  than  disgusted,  was  com-
pelled to  institute  an  inquiry  into  the  affair.  It
adopted  a  mode  of  procedure  which  was  termed  a
Silent  Judgment,  the  nature  of  which  was  that  the
sentence  was  not  to  be  pronounced  till  after  the
election  had  taken  place.  But  this  manoeuvre,  by
which  the  nobles  hoped  to  save  appearances,  at  the
same  time  that  they  secured  the  election  which  it
was  their  object  to  hasten,  proved  unsuccessful.
Q.  Scawola,  one  of  the  tribunes,  acting  not  in  the
interests  of  Pompeius,  but  with  the  approbation,
according  to  Cicero,  of  the  best  and  most  upright
men  of  the  day3,  had  no  faith  in  the  justice  either
of  the  senatorial  decision  or  of  the  tribunals  before
which  all  the  candidates  were  now  cited  by  several

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  iv.  15. :  "  Cum  Memmio  consules  Domitium  conjunx-
erunt  qua  pactione  epistolae  committere  non  audeo  (comp.  iv.  18.).

2  He  expected  that  Pompeius,  as  dictator,  would  give  him  the
consulship  through  the  recommendation  of  Caesar. Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  iii.
2.,  ad  Att.  iv.  18.

3  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  iii.  3. :  "  Comitiorum  quotidie  singuli  dies  tolluntur
obnuntiationibus,  magna  voluntate  bonorum."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  441

prosecutors1  to  answer  for  their  notorious  bribery.  CHAP.
The  prerogative  century,  which  gave  the  first  vote
at  the  election,  and  the  example  of  which,  it  seems,
might  be  relied  upon  to  carry  with  it  the  voices  of
the  rest2,  had  been  bought,  it  was  said,  at  the  price
of  ten  millions  of  sesterces.  In  order  to  meet  this
enormous  profusion,  the  candidates  borrowed  of  the
capitalists  in  the  most  reckless  manner.  The  in-
terest which  money  fetched,  on  so  unprecedented  a
demand,  rose  at  once  from  four  per  cent,  a  rate  suf-
ficiently exorbitant,  to  eight  per  cent  per  month.
ScaBvola  interposed  to  prevent  any  assembly  of  the  The  eiec-
comitia  for  the  election  of  consuls,  and  the  year  tionsare

•/  stopped  by

passed  without  the  appointment  of  any  chief  ma-  the  inter.'
gistrates  for  that  which  was  to  follow.  a  tribune.

Nothing  could  be  more  favourable  to  the  views  Death  of
of  Pompeius,  according  to  all  human  calculation,  ^m 6
than  the  paralysis  which  was  thus  gradually  stealing  the  y
over  the  vital  powers  of  the  constitution. Some
great  measure  of  state  reform  seemed  evidently  to
be  required,  and  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  no
less  than  the  well-known  practice  of  the  common-
wealth, pointed  to  the  selection  of  a  single  person-
age, the  foremost  in  the  state,  a  man  of  approved
judgment  and  courage, a  man of  acknowledged
popularity,  to  whom  so  responsible  a  charge  should

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  iii.  2. :  "  De  ambitu  postulati  sunt  omnes  qui
consulatum  petunt." Comp.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  15,  16.,  ad  Att.  iv.  15.

2  The  prerogative  century  was  chosen  by  lot  from  the  hundred  and
ninety-three  which  constituted  the  whole  number,  to  give  its  decision
first. The  peculiar  influence  which  it  exercised  over  the  rest  is  re-
ferred to  by  Cicero  {pro  Plane.  20.)  :  "  Centuria  prserogativa  tantum
habet  auctoritatis,  ut  nemo  unquam  prior  earn  tulerit  quin  renuntiatus
sit." I  am  quite  unable  to  explain  this  startling  assertion.

442  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  be  freely  confided.  But  while  the  progress  of  events,
as  far  as  they  were  susceptible  of  being  directed  or
moulded  by  dexterity  and  cunning,  was  thus  quietly
developing  the  cherished  policy  of  the  triumvir,
other  incidents  beyond  his  control  were  preparing
the  way  for  new  combinations,  never  yet  forecast  in
his  counsels,  and  fatal  to  all  his  calculations.  It
was  in  the  year  699,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,
that  a  sudden  alarm  gave  a  shock  to  his  wife's
nerves,  which  brought  on  premature  labour,  and
broke  the  strength  of  her  constitution.  In  the
summer  of  the  year  700 l  she  died  in  childbed,  nor
did  the  infant  survive  to  perpetuate  the  union  of
the  Pompeian  and  Julian  houses.2  The  Romans
long  turned  with  fond  regret  to  the  memory  of  one
who  might  have  mediated  between  the  father  and
his  son-in-law,  and  assuaged  the  personal  rivalry
which  overthrew  their  national  liberties.  The  sor-
row which  broods  over  its  object  and  plays  with  its
own  moody  fancies,  remembered  the  old  legend  of
the  Sabine  women,  who  saved  the  state  by  rushing

1  The  date  may  be  fixed  approximately  from  a  passage  in  Cic.  ad
Qu.  Fr.  iii.  1.  5.  He  received  a  letter  from  Caesar  in  Britain  on  the
xi.  Kal.  Oct.,  in  which  allusion  was  made  to  the  death  of  his  daughter.
Now  xi.  Kal.  Oct.  =  Sept.  20.  A.  u.  700  of  the  unreformed  calendar
=  Aug.  25.  B.C.  54.  A  letter  might  travel,  it  appears,  between
Britain  and  Rome  in  20  days.  Accordingly,  Julia  must  have  died  at
least  40  days  before  Caesar's  letter  above  mentioned  could  reach  Cicero,
that  is,  not  later  than  Aug.  9,  A.U.  700,  or  July  16,  B.C.  54.  Plu-
tarch is  evidently  wrong  in  saying  that  the  news  reached  Caesar  im-
mediately upon  his  return,  Kara\a/j.€dvet  ypajujuara  ^XXovra  dia.7r\tlv
TrpoQ  avTov  (Cces.  23.) ;  but  it  is  on  his  authority,  I  conceive,  that
Fischer  states  that  Julia  died  in  September  (Rom.  Zeitt.).  It  may  be
well  to  remind  the  reader  that  in  the  unreformed  calendar  August
(Sextilis)  had  29  days,  and  September  a  like  number.

Plut.  Cces.  23.,  Pomp.  53. ;  Val.  Max.  iv,  6.  4. ;  Liv.  Epit.  cvi.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  443

between  the  armed  ranks  of  their  fathers  and  CHAP.
their  husbands.1  But  it  is  the  natural  order  of  IX'
things  for  parents  to  acquiesce  in  the  wills  of  their
children,  and  yield  with  the  dignity  of  age  to  the
more  passionate  decisions  of  youth.  In  this  case  all
such  feelings  were  reversed.  The  father  was  the
younger  in  years,  and  still  more  so  in  position  ;
the  passion  and  spirit  of  movement  were  his :  the
husband  could  yield  the  more  easily  and  the  more
gracefully  of  the  two.  The  only  result  we  can
contemplate  from  the  prolonged  existence  and
fruitfulness  of  this  ill-fated  union  is  that  Pom-
peius  would  have  gradually  succumbed  under
Caesar's  superior  influence,  instead  of  throwing
himself  repentantly,  when  once  released  from  the
rash  connexion,  into  the  arms  of  the  aristocracy
he  had  outraged.  As  it  was,  the  union  of  Pom-
peius  with  Julia  lasted  long  enough  to  furnish  us
with  more  pleasing  ideas  of  his  character  than  we
obtain  from  the  observation  of  any  other  part  of
his  career.  The  ferocity  of  his  earlier  years,  how-
ever much  it  was  tempered  by  the  prosperity  of
his  middle  age,  would  hardly  have  allowed  us  to
suppose  him  so  amiable  in  domestic  life,  as  appears
in  the  account  the  historians  give  of  his  inter-
course with  Julia.  Though  celebrated  for  her
beauty  as  well  as  her  accomplishments,  and  younger
than  her  husband  by  twenty- three  years,  she  de-

1  Yell.  ii.  47. :  "Concordise  pignus  Julia." Lucan.  i.  114. :

"  Quod  si  tibi  fata  dedissent
Majores  in  luce  moras,  tu  sola  furentem
Inde  virum  poteras,  atque  hinc  retinere  parentem  ;
Armatasque  maims  excusso  jungere  ferro,
Ut  generos  soceris  medise  junxere  Sabinae."

444  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  voted  herself  to  him  with  rare  affection,  while  his
attachment  to  her  was  engrossing  even  to  weakness.
Whether  the  populace  was  moved  by  this  rare
example  of  conjugal  fidelity  to  signalize  it  with
unusual  distinctions,  or  whether  it  only  seized  the
opportunity  to  display  its  devotion  to  its  hero
Caesar,  it  would  not  allow  the  bereaved  husband
the  consolation  of  retaining  the  ashes  of  Julia  in
his  Alban  villa,  where  he  probably  destined  his
own  to  repose,  but  insisted  upon  honouring  her
remains  with  a  public  funeral  in  the  Field  of
Mars.1

1  Plut.  Pomp.  53.  The  consul  Domitius  attempted  to  prevent  this
tribute  of  regard  to  the  deceased,  which  he  evidently  considered  was
meant  to  reflect  honour  upon  her  father  ;  but  the  people  were  not  to
be  controlled  even  by  the  interdict  of  the  tribunes.  Dion,  xxxix.  64.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  445

CHAP.  X.

OESAR'S  FOURTH  CAMPAIGN,  A.U.  699. — INVASION  OF  BELGIUM

BY GERMAN TRIBES.  —  CAESAR DRIVES THEM BEYOND THE
RHINE.  —  CROSSES  THAT  RIVER, AND  CHASTISES  THE  SICAMBRI.

HE  INVADES  BRITAIN.  —  CAESAR'S  FIFTH  CAMPAIGN,  A.U.  700.

HE  INVADES  BRITAIN  A  SECOND  TIME  WITH  LARGER  FORCES.

—  CROSSES THE THAMES, AND DEFEATS CASSIVELLAUNUS.

RECEIVES HOSTAGES AND TRIBUTE, AND RETIRES. REVOLT

OF THE GAULS. — DESTRUCTION  OF  TWO  LEGIONS  IN  BELGIUM.

COURAGEOUS RESISTANCE OF Q.  CICERO.  —  CESAR'S SIXTH

CAMPAIGN, A.U.  701. HE  MAKES  AN  INCURSION  BEYOND  THE

RHINE. DESTRUCTION OF THE EBURONES. DEFENCE OF

ADUATUCA. — PACIFICATION OF BELGIUM.

THE Gauls lay prostrate at Cesar's feet ; the CHAP.
flower  of  almost  every  people  had  fallen  in  the _**

Gaul  at  the
commence-

vain  attempt  to  maintain  its  liberty ;  the  national  state  of
assemblies  were  terrified  by  the  frightful  punish-
ments which  the  conqueror  had ^  inflicted  upon
them,  and  their  counsels  were  guided  or  dis-
tracted by  Roman  agents  established  throughout
their  cities.1  Moreover,  the  mutual  enmities  of
their  tribes  prevented  much  intercourse  and  dis-
cussion among  them,  and  the  four  great  divisions
into  which  the  country  was  split,  the  Belgian,  the
Aquitanian,  and  those  of  which  the  .ZEdui  and  the
Veneti  respectively  took  the  lead,  maintained  little
sympathy  with  one  another.  But  it  is  not  to  be
supposed  that  any  of  them  were  content  with  their
position  or  satisfied  with  their  new  masters.  No

1  Cses.  B.  G.  vii.  5.

446

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

Movement

CHAP,  one  was  more  fully  aware  of  the  hollo  wness  of
__  their  submission  than  Caesar  himself.  They  were
anxiously  watching  an  opportunity  for  shaking  off
the  yoke  ;  but  instead  of  entering  frankly  into  a
national  confederation  for  their  common  object,
they  were  waiting,  each  in  sullen  silence,  for  the
chances  that  might  occur  in  their  favour.

Meanwhile,  the  Menapii  had  little  time  to  exult
m  the  withdrawal  of  the  Roman  legions.  A  new
Tenctheri.  enemy  suddenly  assailed  them  from  an  opposite
quarter.  The  Usipetes  and  Tenctheri  were  two
German  tribes  situated  on  the  lower  course  of  the
Rhine,  to  the  north  and  south  of  the  Lippe  re-
spectively.1 For  some  time  past  they  had  been
hard  pressed  by  the  Suevi,  who,  as  we  have  seen,
were  at  this  time  pursuing  a  victorious  career,  in
which  they  had  extended  their  dominions  from  the
Hercynian  forest  to  the  frontier  of  Gaul2,  and  had
only  been  checked  within  that  territory  by  the
invincible  prowess  of  the  Roman  armies  under
their  distinguished  commander.  Confined  in  that
direction,  they  now  turned  northward,  and  the
tribes  above-mentioned  were  soon  reduced  to  the
last  extremity  of  barbarian  races,  that  of  migrating
in  a  body,  and  occupying  new  settlements  by
force  of  arms.3  Accordingly,  they  fell  upon  the
Menapii  beyond  the  Rhine  in  a  mass  estimated  at

1  Moeb.  in  Cas.  iv.  1.  ;  Mannert,  iii.  153.  ;  Zeuss,  90.

2  The  seats  of  the  Suevi  in  the  time  of  Cassar  lay  principally  in  the
interior  of  Germany,  to  the  east  of  the  Sicambri  and  Ubii,  bordering
on  the  Hercynian  forest,  which  separated  them  from  the  Cherusci.
(Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  10.) They  are  sometimes  represented  as  a  single  tribe,
sometimes  as  a  collection  of  tribes. (Tac.  Germ.  38.) The  Chatti  and
Hermunduri  of  Tacitus  seem  to  share  their  territory  at  a  later  period.

3  Caas.  B.  G.  iv.  4.  ;  Dion,  xxxix.  47,  48.  ;  Oros.  vi.  20,  21.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  447

four  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  souls.  The  CHAP.
Menapii  fled  precipitately  from  their  seats  on  the
right  bank  of  that  river,  and  sought  refuge  with
their  kinsmen  established  on  the  Gaulish  side.
Thus  united,  the  whole  tribe  presented  a  bolder
front  to  the  invaders,  and  defended  the  passage  of
the  broad  and  rapid  stream  with  energy  and  suc-
cess. The  Suevi  had  next  recourse  to  stratagem.
They  retired  to  a  distance,  enticed  the  fugitives  to
recross  the  river,  in  order  to  return  to  their
former  homes ;  then,  suddenly  wheeling  round,
they  attacked  and  slaughtered  them,  and  effected
their  passage  in  the  same  barks  in  which  the  others
had  just  arrived.  The  Germans  were  once  more
established  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Rhine.  At  any
other  time,  almost  the  whole  of  Gaul  from  the
north  to  the  south  might  have  been  roused  to  meet
and  repulse  its  hereditary  enemies.  Even  the
ancient  kinsmen  of  the  invaders  in  Belgium  might
have  leapt  forth  to  defend  their  adopted  country.
But  at  that  moment  far  different  views  occupied
the  minds  of  the  Gaulish  people.  On  the  one
hand,  those  who  crouched  the  most  supinely  under
the  Roman  yoke  began  already  to  entertain  with-
out abhorrence  the  fatal  reasoning  that  the  Romans,
being  now  masters  of  the  country,  were  responsible
for  its  defence.  On  the  other,  a  still  greater  num-
ber were  indifferent  to  an  invasion  which  could
have  no  worse  consequence  to  Gaul  than  that  of
giving  it  a  change  of  rulers.  But  still  there  were
not  a  few  who  hoped  that  the  impending  contest
might  weaken  both  the  rival  powers,  and  thus  offer
an  opportunity  of  eventual  triumph  to  the  national

448  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, cause. Such  were  the  secret  hopes  of  many  who
' now  flocked to Caesar's  standard,  and filled his

camp  with  brave  but  faithless  auxiliaries.

The  proconsul  left  Lucca  in  all  haste,  before  his
usual  time  of  departure,  when  he  learnt  from  his
tribes.  legates  the  state  of  affairs1,  and  that  some  Gaulish
tribes  had  even  invited  the  invaders  into  Belgium,
and  offered  to  receive  them  as  friends  and  deliverers.
It  was  still  midwinter  when  he  crossed  the  difficult
passes  of  the  Alps,  convened  a  general  assembly  of
the  states,  and,  dissembling  his  acquaintance  with
their  sentiments  or  acts,  laid  before  them  the
position  of  their  country  as  a  matter  of  national
concern.  They  decreed  him  all  the  supplies  and
reinforcements  he  demanded,  and  with  his  new
recruits  he  marched  straight  to  the  point  at  which
the  Usipetes  and  Tenctheri  were  assembled.  They
had  crossed  the  Rhine,  and  were  now  spreading
themselves  along  the  valley  of  the  Meuse,  pene-
trating far  to  the  south  of  the  Menapian  territories
into  those  of  their  German  kinsmen,  the  Eburones
and  Condrusi,  on  the  frontiers  of  Luxemburg.  The
success  with  which  their  enterprize  had  thus  far
been  crowned  raised  their  spirits  and  imparted  to
their  language  a  vain-glorious  tone  little  in  ac-
cordance with  their  condition  as  a  defeated  and
fugitive  horde.  They  sent  deputies  to  the  Roman
general,  offering  him  his  choice  of  peace  or  war.
It  was  the  custom,  they  said,  of  their  nation  never
to  decline  the  combat  with  an  enemy  who  chal-
lenged them :  however,  they  had  gained  their  im-
mediate object ;  they  had  found  the  settlements

1  OSES.  B.  G.  iv.  6.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  449

they  sought ;  with  the  Romans  they  had  no  quarrel ;  CHAP.
they  were  content  to  remain  upon  the  soil  they  '
had  seized ;  all  they  claimed  was  the  right  to  do
so  unmolested.  They  proclaimed  aloud  the  valour
by  which  these  acquisitions  had  been  so  rapidly
made,  and  ended  by  declaring  that  they  yielded  in
strength  and  bravery  to  no  nation  under  the  sun,
excepting  only  the  Suevi,  whom  the  gods  them-
selves could  not  withstand.1  Caasar  replied,  as
was  his  wont,  by  claiming  it  as  the  province  and
duty  of  a  Roman  proconsul  to  protect  the  Gauls
against  all  external  enemies.  He  would  hold  no
intercourse  or  discussion  with  any  foreign  nation
while  it  occupied  an  inch  of  Gallic  soil.  With
what  face  could  they,  who  were  unable  to  main-
tain their  own  possessions,  presume  to  assert  a
right  to  those  of  others  ?  He  condescended  to
point  out  to  them  that  at  this  moment  the  Ubii,
another  Rhenish  tribe,  were  in  want  of  allies  to
defend  them  against  the  encroachments  of  the
Suevi;  a  lateral  movement  would  bring  them  to
the  spot  in  a  few  days  or  hours ;  he  would  not
oppose  their  recrossing  the  river  peaceably,  and
establishing  themselves  in  that  district  as  a  gar-
rison against  the  advance  of  their  common  enemies.
He  further  promised  to  obtain  the  consent  of  the
Ubii  to  this  arrangement.

The  first  object  of  Caesar's  policy  at  this  moment  csesar  con-
was  to  convince  the  Gauls  that  they  were  perfectly  theGermw
secure  from  foreign  invasion  under  the  powerful  invaders-
protection  of  Rome. To  effect  this  it  was  necessary
to  assume  a  tone  of  the  loftiest  defiance  towards

1  Cses.  B.  G.  iv.  7.
VOL.  I.  G  G

450  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  Germans,  and  to  be  fully  prepared  to  act  in
'  accordance  with  it.  But  he  had  before  him  a  for-
midable enemy  ;  the  desperate  valour  of  barbarian
armies  had  too  often  broken  the  legions  to  allow  a
prudent  general  to  risk  a  mortal  combat  with  them
without  absolute  necessity,  and  the  Germans  were
still  regarded  by  the  Koman  soldier  with  more
than  usual  apprehension.  It  was  far  wiser  to  con-
solidate the  forces  of  the  opponents  of  the  Suevi
beyond  the  Rhine,  than  ultimately  to  aid  the  views
of  that  encroaching  power  by  desolating  and  de-
populating the  frontiers.  The  moderation  which
Caesar  displayed,  supported  as  it  was  by  his  known
character  for  uncompromising  resolution,  cooled
the  fervid  audacity  of  the  German  orators.  They
agreed  to  lay  his  proposals  before  the  council  of
their  tribe,  and  contented  themselves  with  requiring
that  he,  on  his  part,  should  suspend  his  advance
for  three  days,  until  an  answer  could  be  returned.
But  Caesar  sternly  refused  even  this  short  respite.
He  knew  that  a  part  of  the  enemy's  cavalry  had
been  detached  to  make  a  foray  in  the  country  of
the  Ambivariti,  and  was  resolved  to  allow  no  time
for  their  return,  if  the  matter  should  come  to
blows.1  He  continued  his  march,  and  arrived
within  twelve  miles  of  the  barbarian  quarters,
when  the  deputies  hastily  returned,  in  vain  en-
treated him  to  halt,  and  could  only  obtain  from
him  a  promise  that  he  would  restrain  his  cavalry,
already  in  advance,  from  commencing  hostilities  on
that  day.  The  deputies  pressed  for  a  truce  for
three  days,  that  a  communication  might  be  made

1  Caes.  B.  G.  iv.  9.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  451

to  the  Ubii ;  but  this  request  he  looked  upon  as  an  CHAP.
evasion.  Four  miles  further  on  he  expected  to  find
water,  and  there  he  had  determined  to  pitch  his
camp,  and  no  remonstrances  could  induce  him  to
swerve  from  this  resolution.  Finally,  he  required
a  more  numerous  deputation  of  the  German  chief-
tains to  meet  him  on  the  morrow  at  that  spot.  At
the  same  time  he  sent  orders  to  the  officers  in  com-
mand of  his  cavalry  to  abstain  from  hostilities,  and,
even  if  attacked,  to  make  no  reprisals  until  he
should  come  up  with  them.

According  to  Caesar's  narrative  of  these  trans-  Great  battle
actions,  it  would  appear  that  the  German  cavalry  J^SiSd
posted  in  advance  of  their  camp,  as  soon  as  Germans:

x  ±i  total  rout

they  perceived  the  Roman  squadrons  approaching,  of  the  latter,
charged  them  without  regard  to  the  truce  which
had  been  thus  concluded.1  The  number  of  the
Germans  he  states  at  eight  hundred,  the  rest  of
their  horse  being  absent  foraging.  That  of  the
Romans,  or  rather  of  the  Gaulish  auxiliaries,
amounted  to  five  thousand.  Relying  on  the  faith
of  the  treaty,  they  were  totally  unprepared  for  the
onset,  and  easily  thrown  into  confusion  even  by  a
handful  of  assailants.  Defending  themselves  feebly
and  partially  they  suffered  a  loss  of  seventy-four
men,  and  were  routed  and  pursued  as  far  as  the
head  of  the  advancing  columns  of  the  main  army.
Cassar,  highly  indignant  at  this  flagrant  violation
of  the  truce,  determined  to  take  a  signal  vengeance
on  its  perpetrators.  He  would  no  longer  consent
to  an  instant's  delay,  which  he  was  now  convinced
was  only  held  out  as  a  lure  to  entrap  him.  He

i  Cses.  B.  G.  iv.  12.
G  G 2

452  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  was  aware,  moreover,  how  injurious  an  effect  the
_____  report  of  this  check,  however  slight,  would  have
upon  his  Gaulish  auxiliaries  and  upon  the  nations
in  his  rear.  Betrayed  himself,  he  scrupled  not,  for
the  safety  of  his  army  and  the  province,  to  requite
the  barbarians  with  treachery  deeper  and  more  de-
structive than  their  own.  Accordingly,  when,  the
next  morning,  the  German  deputation,  consisting
of  a  large  number  of  their  chieftains,  met  him  with
protestations  of  regret  for  the  occurrence  of  the
day  before,  and  with  disclaimers  of  their  error  or
their  guilt,  he  threw  them  at  once  into  irons,  and
gave  orders  for  immediate  advance  against  the
enemy,  unprepared  for  combat  and  deprived  of
their  commanders.  The  Germans,  thus  taken  by
surprize,  had  not  time  even  to  form  their  rude
array.  They  could  only  protract  an  ineffectual
resistance  by  rallying  about  their  waggons.  They
sent  off  their  women  and  children  in  all  haste,  in
the  hope  that  they  at  least  might  escape  the  fury
of  an  enemy  whom  they  despaired  of  overcoming.
But  Caesar,  perceiving  this  movement,  ordered  his
cavalry  to  pursue  and  attack  the  unarmed  fugitives,
and  as  there  were  but  few  German  horse  to  oppose
them,  his  directions  were  carried  into  effect  with
ease  and  with  ruthless  ferocity.  At  the  sight  of
this  carnage  the  barbarians  lost  all  heart,  broke
their  ranks,  and  betook  themselves  to  flight.  Their
rear  being  occupied  by  the  Eoman  cavalry,  it
would  seem  that  they  must  have  escaped  from  the
field  on  their  left  flank,  on  which  side  the  Rhine
lay,  apparently  at  no  great  distance.  Their  flight
was  arrested  by  that  deep  and  rapid  stream  at

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  453

point  of  its  confluence  with  another,  the  Meuse,  CHAP.
according  to  Caesar's  text,  but  more  probably  the
Moselle.1  Here  a  rally  took  place,  but  only  for  an
instant ;  in  another  moment  the  multitude  plunged
headlong  into  the  waters,  and  were  swept  away  by
the  wintry  flood.  The  Romans  had  only  a  few
men  wounded,  not  one  was  killed.  The  great  mass
of  the  Germans,  not  less  probably  than  one  hundred
and  eighty  thousand  in  number,  perished  altogether.
To  the  captive  deputation  the  conqueror  behaved
with  contemptuous  clemency.  He  granted  them
leave  to  depart ;  but  they  dreaded  the  enmity  of
the  Gauls,  whom  they  had  injured  and  insulted,
and  preferred  remaining  in  the  Roman  camp.

Cgesar  sent  the  news  of  this  signal  triumph  to  Treachery
Rome,  and  the  senate,  after  reading  his  despatch,
decreed  with  acclamation  a  supplicatio,  or  national

thanksgiving  to  the  gods. Cato  rose  indignantlv

+ ^ u f i * u  "i.  he  should

to  deprecate  the  bestowal  01  such  honours  on  an  be  delivered

occasion  so  unworthy. He  denounced  the  conduct

to  the
enemy.

1  There  is  great  difficulty  in  fixing  the  site  of  this  battle.  Caesar's
text  undoubtedly  speaks  of  the  confluence  of  the  Rhine  and  Meuse
(Mosa)  ;  but  the  Germans,  it  will  be  remembered,  only  required  three
days  to  send  a  message  to  the  Ubii  (on  the  right  bank  of  the  Rhine,
between  Cologne  and  Coblenz),  and  receive  their  deliberate  answer,
which  is  quite  inconsistent  with  swch  an  explanation.  They  had
penetrated  at  least  to  the  frontiers  of  the  Treviri,  according  to  Caesar
and  Dion  (xxxix.  47.),  and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  they
made  any  retreat  before  the  advance  of  the  Romans.  Cluverius
thought  that  we  should  read  Mosella  for  Mosa ;  and,  notwithstanding
Mannert's  criticism,  I  am  disposed  to  believe  either  that  our  text  is
in  fault,  or  that  the  author  of  the  Commentaries  committed  a  slip  of
memory.  Mannert  allows  that  the  junction  of  the  Meuse  and  Wahal
took  place  at  the  same  spot  formerly  as  it  does  now,  only  eighty  miles
from  the  sea  (n.  i.  192.).  The  country  in  that  neighbourhood  was  at
this  time  quite  inaccessible  to  the  Romans.

G  G 3

454  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  of  Caesar  as  perfidious  and  degrading  to  the  Roman
name.  He  described  his  treatment  of  the  Ger-
mans as  a  violation  of  the  pledged  faith  of  the  re-
public, and  proposed  rather  a  national  humiliation
to  avert  the  wrath  of  heaven,  and  to  prove  to  the
barbarians  that  the  Romans  disowned  treachery  in
their  generals  even  when  successful.  He  declared
that  Caesar  ought  to  be  given  up  to  the  Germans
in  expiation  of  the  national  crime.  Examples  of
such  a  course  were  not  altogether  wanting.  At
least  two  instances  of  the  kind  could  be  mentioned  :
the  one  when  Q.  Fabius  and  Cn.  Apronius  were
delivered  over  to  the  Apolloniatae  for  having  slain
their  ambassadors1;  the  other,  when  L.  Minucius
and  L.  Manlius  were  surrendered  to  the  Cartha-
ginians in  atonement  for  a  similar  crime.2  But
however  it  might  have  been  in  the  sterner  days
of  the  republic,  it  was  neither  to  the  public  virtue
of  the  senate  nor  to  its  religious  feelings  that  such
an  appeal  could  at  this  period  be  seriously  ad-
dressed. A  few  of  the  proconsul's  personal  enemies,
who  had  all  Cato's  bitterness  without  his  singleness
of  purpose,  might  applaud  and  stimulate  his  frantic
violence ;  but  a  reasonable  view  of  the  transaction
might  combine  with  a  sense  of  general  or  private
interest  to  prevent  the  great  majority  of  the-  as-
sembly from  being  led  away  by  so  extravagant  a
misrepresentation  of  justice.

credibility A  fair  consideration  of  the  real  facts  of  the  case
of  Caesar's coul(J  not  certainly  be  expected  from  statesmen  so

own  ac-
count.

1  Liv.  Epit.  xv. ;  Dion.  Excerpt.  Vales.  43. ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  6.  5.
*  Liv.  xxxviii.  42. ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  6.  3. ;  comp.  Cic.  pro  Ccec.  34.
"  Ut  religione  solvatur  civitas  civis  Romanus  traditur."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  455

blinded  by  political  animosity.1  At  all  events,  as  CHAP.
regards  the  internal  probability  of  Caesar's  account
of  the  transaction,  by  which  the  first  infraction  of
the  treaty  is  imputed  to  the  Germans,  there  seems
no  reason  to  dispute  it  on  the  ground  that  their
number  was  so  much  the  smaller.  The  cavalry
opposed  to  them  was  Gaulish,  and  its  indisposition
to  the  cause  in  which  it  was  engaged  might  be
presumed  upon.  It  was  also  unprepared  on  the
faith  of  the  treaty.  The  event  proved  that  the
calculation  of  the  Germans  was  not  incorrect.  The
larger  squadron  retreated  in  confusion  before  the
lesser.  Such  could  not  have  been  the  case  had
the  Gallo-Romans  been  the  first  to  attack  with  such
superior  force.  The  charge  therefore  of  deliberate
perfidy  on  Caesar's  part  seems  to  be  groundless.  That
he  was  well  pleased  to  make  use  of  his  enemies'
crime,  which  a  slight  explanation  might  have  suffi-
ciently atoned  for,  cannot  be  denied.  He  might
fairly  have  exacted  harder  terms  in  consideration
of  it ;  but  his  time  was  precious  and  his  situation
precarious.  He  allowed  himself  an  extreme  measure
of  retaliation ;  and  if  he  reaped  the  advantage,  he
certainly  lost  all  the  glory  of  the  engagement  which
followed.

Various  migratory  hordes  had  crossed  the  Rhine  c*esar  pro.
before  the  Usipetes  and  Tenctheri,  and  whether  make  In  in-
they  had  established  themselves  on  the  Gallic  soil,
or  had  perished in their  wanderings, faint and
vague  had  been  the  rumours  of  their  fate  which
had  reached  the  ears  of  those  they  had  left  be-

i  The  story  is  alluded  to  by  Suetonius  (Jul.  25.),  and  more  dis-
tinctly mentioned  by  Plutarch  (Cces.  22.).

G  G 4

456  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS

CHAP. hind. But  Cassar  was  determined  that  the  German
_._  people  should  know  what  had  become  of  this  last

swarm  of  invaders,  how  the  two  tribes  had  fallen
in  one  great  day  of  slaughter,  and  who  were  the
fatal  enemies  who  had  thus  cut  short  their  career.
His  authority  in  Gaul  depended  in  no  slight  de-
gree upon  his  checking  the  roving  spirit  of  the  free
men  beyond  the  Ehine,  and  convincing  the  dis-
contented within  that  boundary  that  the  arm  of
the  republic  was  long  enough  to  reach  their  most
distant  auxiliaries,  The  pretext  which  he  puts
forward  himself  for  his  incursion  into  Germany,
that  of  pursuing  the  wretched  remnant  of  the
Usipetes,  the  cavalry  which  had  been  absent  from
the  battle,  seems  hardly  worthy  of  consideration.
Nor  is  it  much  more  to  the  purpose  that  the  Ubii
are  said  to  have  solicited  his  assistance  against
the  Suevi.  It  was  the  business  of  a  Koman  pro-
consul always  to  put  forth  a  legitimate  pretext  for
an  act  of  aggression ;  but  the  real  motive  was  often
kept  in  the  back  ground,  and  doubtless  Csesar  on
the  present  occasion  had  further  and  deeper  views,
when  he  resolved  to  cross  the  frontier  and  show
himself  in  all  the  majesty  of  Roman  military  array
to  the  proud  warriors  before  whom  the  tribes  of
the  Ehine  were  trembling.1

His  short He  first  required  the  Sicambri  to  deliver  up  the

beTnlThe fugitives  who  had  just  eluded  his  grasp. They

Rhine. replied  with  firmness  that  as  he  denied  the  right

of  the  Germans  to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  Gaul,

they  for  their  part  were  prepared  to  dispute  his

authority  over  a  people  of  their  own  nation. This

1  Cses.  B.  G.  iv.  16.

UNDER THE EMP1KE.  457

was  a  sufficient  pretext  for  taking  umbrage,  and  CHAP.
Csesar  gave  orders  to  effect  the  passage  of  the  river.
He  chose  a  spot  near  the  present  town  of  Neuwied1,
a  few  miles  below  Coblenz,  where  the  banks  of  the
river  present  a  space  of  level  ground  on  both  sides,
and  there  he  built  a  bridge,  partly  for  greater  secu-
rity, partly  perhaps  to  impress  the  natives  with  a
higher  sense  of  the  dignity  and  power  of  the  re-
public. The  stream  was  broad  and  rapid,  and  the
engineers  applied  all  their  skill  and  ingenuity,
under  his  special  directions,  to  construct  a  solid
edifice.  The  work  was  completed  in  the  short
space  of  ten  days.2  But  after  all  this  labour,  Caesar
made  no  further  use  of  it  than  to  transport  his
army  over  and  back  again,  after  he  had  spent  a
few  weeks  in  ravaging  the  country  of  the  Sicambri,
and  showing  himself  as  a  friend  and  ally  to  the

1  This  was  the  spot  where  Augustus  afterwards  constructed  a  stone
bridge,  the  foundations  of  which  are  said  to  be  still  visible. It  cor-
responds with  the  situation  of  the  Ubii. Supposing  the  recent  battle
to  have  taken  place  near  the  confluence  of  the  Rhine  and  Moselle,  we
might  expect  Caesar  to  follow  up  his  victory  by  crossing  the  river,  in
the  immediate  neighbourhood. For  these  reasons  I  have  preferred
the  locality  mentioned  in  the  text. Some  indeed  have  supposed  from
the  statement  of  Florus  (iii.  18.)  that  he  crossed  the  Moselle  as  well
as  the  Rhine  in  his  first  expedition  against  the  Germans,  that  his  first
passage  of  the  latter  river  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bingen. But
this  will  not  correspond  with  the  position  of  the  Ubii  or  Sicambri,
which  certainly  lay  more  to  the  north. It  is  more  likely  that  Florus
imagined  him  to  have  crossed  the  Moselle  from  the  right  bank. See
Mannert,  n.  i.  256.

2  Cses.  B.  G.  iv.  17. ;  Plut.  Cces.  22. The  author  of  the  Precis  des
Guerres  de  Cesar,  p.  61.,  compares  this  bridge  with  that  which  Ber-
trand  threw  across  the  Danube  near  Vienna  for  Napoleon  in  1809.
He  shows  the  great  superiority  of  the  modern  engineers,  both  as  re-
gards the  difficulty  of  the  undertaking,  and  the  speed  with  which  it
was  completed. Napoleon's  bridge  required  ten  times  the  amount  of
labour,  and  was  finished  in  only  twice  the  number  of  days. This
author  supposes  Caesar  to  have  crossed  at  Cologne.

458  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  Ubii.  The  Suevi,  indeed,  collected  in  large  num-
•'  bers,  and  prepared  for  battle.  The  proconsul,
however,  was  satisfied  with  the  demonstration  he
had  made,  and  took  no  measures  to  bring  on  an
engagement.  When  he  again  reached  the  left
bank  he  broke  down  his  bridge,  and  hastened
away  to  engage  in  another  enterprize  of  a  similar
nature,  and  probably  with  similar  political  views.1
This  was  no  other  than  the  famous  invasion  of
Britain,  an  enterprize  to  which  we  owe  our  first  in-
troduction into  the  history  of  Europe  and  of  the
world.

Caesar  m-  The  campaigns  of  Caesar  in  Belgium  could  not
the'ch™  °  fail  to  make  him  acquainted  with  the  existence  and
condTtiondof  cnaracter  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  great  island
the  Britons,  which  lay  within  sight  of  its  coasts.  It  was  indeed
from  their  allies  on  the  opposite  shore  that  his
enemies  had  drawn  no  inconsiderable  resources.
Questioned  as  to  the  relations  subsisting  between
themselves  and  the  natives  of  Britain,  they  asserted
that  many  of  their  own  race  had  emigrated  from
Gaul  during  the  preceding  century,  and  established
themselves  beyond  the  white  cliffs  just  visible  in
the  horizon.  They  spoke  of  a  population  be-
lieved by  them  to  be  aboriginal,  upon  whom  they
had  intruded  themselves,  and  in  whose  seats  they
had  gradually  fixed  their  abodes.2  This  primitive
people  they  described  as  peculiarly  rude  and  bar-
barous in  their  social  habits.3  They  were  almost
destitute  of  clothing,  and  took  a  grotesque  pleasure

1  Caesar  was  the  first  Roman  who  crossed  the  Rhine. Suet.  JuL  25. ;
Dion,  xxxix.  50.

2  Os.  B.  G.  v.  12.  3  c^.  B.  G.  v.  14.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  459

in  painting  or  tattooing  their  bodies  with  blue  CHAP.
woad.1  They  admitted  a  regulated  community  of
women.  They  lived  almost  entirely  on  milk  and
flesh,  the  toil  or  skill  required  even  for  fishing  was
distasteful  to  them2 ;  and  dwelling  apart,  or  con-
gregating in  a  few  hovels,  with  a  wooden  stockade
round  them,  and  screened  by  forests,  mountains,  or
morasses,  they  possessed  nothing  which  could  de-
serve the  name  of  a  city.3  It  was  in  the  interior
or  north  of  the  country  apparently  that  the  rudest
tribes  used  the  scythed  chariot  in  war.  Caesar,  who
never  penetrated  very  far  from  the  coast,  does  not
seem  to  have  met  with  it.  We  may  conclude  that
the  earliest  known  inhabitants  of  the  island  were
akin  to  the  Gaelic  division  of  the  Celtic  family,  and
that  its  possession  was  disputed  with  them  from  a
very  remote  period  by  the  subsequent  intrusion  of
the  Kymry.4  The  latter  brought  with  them,  besides
the  language  and  the  physiological  characteristics
which  still  remain  so  strongly  marked  in  a  part  of
the  island,  the  Druidical  religion,  which  has  already
been  described.  It  was  perhaps  the  fixed  and  exclu-
sive qualities  belonging  to  an  insular  institution
which  gave  the  British  Druidism  so  great  an  as-
cendancy among  the  Gaulish  tribes,  and  caused

1  Caesar  says,  "  Omnes  se  Britanni  vitro  inficiunt ; "  if  this  is  meant
to  extend  to  the  Belgian  tribes  in  Britain,  we  must  suppose  the  custom
to  have  been  partially  adopted  by  them  in  imitation  of  their  ruder
neighbours. Solinus  says,  "  Regionem  partim  tenent  barbari  quibus
per  artifices  plagarum  figuras  jam  inde  a  pueris  variae  animalium  effi-
gies incorporantur"  (c.  25.).

2  Dion.  Ixxvi.  12. A  fatal  characteristic  of  their  Gaelic  descend-
ants even  at  this  day.

3  Cses.  B.  G.  v.  21. ;  Strab.  iv.

4  See  Thierry,  Gaidois,  Introd.  p.  xci.

460

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
X.

Their
proximity
to  Gaul
dangerous
to  the  se-
curity of
the  Roman
conquest.

them  to  regard  it  as  the  purest  expression  of  their
sublime  theology.  The  Belgians,  who  were  the
latest  settlers  on  the  British  shore,  seem  to  have
been  easily  reclaimed  from  the  wild  habits  of  their
forest  life  by  the  civilizing  influences  of  the  coast
and  a  navigable  river.  Caesar  remarks  that  the
inhabitants  of  the  corner  nearest  to  Gaul  were  the
farthest  advanced  in  social  cultivation,  and  the
extraordinary  rapidity  with  which  the  eastern
ports  sprang  into  commercial  celebrity  discovers  a
natural  aptitude  in  the  race  which  their  subse-
quent history  has  so  fully  confirmed.

A  close  connexion  was  maintained  between  the
Belgian  tribes  located  in  the  island  and  the  kins-
men whom  they  had  left  behind.1  Some  of  the
kings  of  the  continental  states  still  claimed  a  kind
of  sovereignty  over  the  emigrants  beyond  the  sea.
Caesar  complained  that  his  enemies  in  Gaul  had
frequently  received  succour  from  an  invisible  arm
stretched  forth  to  them  from  these  remote  colonies.
The  example  of  freedom  and  this  expression  of
sympathy  were,  at  all  events,  dangerous  to  the
tranquillity  of  his  new  conquests.  It  seemed  a
measure  of  political  importance  to  strike  a  blow  at
a  people  who  might  be  supposed  to  plume  them-
selves on  their  insular  security,  and  to  carry,  at
least,  the  terror  of  the  Koman  arms  across  the
barrier  which  Nature  herself  had  raised  against
them.  A  century  earlier  a  proconsular  army  had

.!  Caesar  informs  us  that  several  of  the  British  states  derived  their
name  and  origin  from  Gaulish,  especially  the  Belgian  tribes  (B.  G.
v.  12.).  Ptolemy  mentions  the  names  of  the  Parisii,  Atrebates,  Belgae,
Menapii.  The  Parisii  were  Belgian,  in  Strabo's  extended  signification
of  the  term,  but  not  in  Caesar's.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  461

turned  back  with  reverence  or  dismay  from  the CHAP.
shores  of  the  Atlantic. They  had  reached,  it  was  __^___
surmised, the  verge  of  the  habitable  world,  and
profanely  approached  the  frontiers  of  night  and
oblivion. But  the  era,  the  legions,  and  the  temper
of  Caesar  were  alike  inaccessible  to  such  feelings,
arid  the  billows  of  the  Western  Ocean inspired
them  with  ambition  rather  than  with  awe.1

After  recrossing  the  Rhine,  the  proconsul  fixed
his  quarters  on  the  coast  of  the  Morini  ;  for  it  was

only  in  the  remoter  districts  that  this  tribe  could  Britain-
maintain  its  independence,  and  the  mere  rumour
of  his  intended  invasion  of  the  island  raised  among
them  such  a  notion  of  his  boldness  and  power,
that  they  hastened,  for  the  most  part,  at  once  to
make  a  voluntary  submission.2  The  Roman  ge-
neral was  well  pleased  to  receive  them  into  favour,
and  obtain  from  them  the  assistance  and  informa-
tion of  which  he  stood  in  need.  He  spent  some
weeks  in  collecting  his  naval  armaments,  sent  an
officer  named  Yolusenus  to  explore  the  opposite
coast,  and  commissioned  Conimius,  a  chieftain  on
whom  he  had  conferred  the  sovereignty  of  the
Atrebates,  to  repair  to  his  friends  and  kinsmen  in
the  island,  and  represent  to  them  in  proper  colours

1  "  Decimus Brutus aliquanto latius Celticos Lusitanosque et
omnes Gallaeciffi populos, formidatumque  militibus flumen  Oblivi-
onis  (comp.  Liv.  Epit.  Iv.)  ;  peragratoque  victor  Oceani  litore,  non
prius  signa  convertit,  quam  cadentem  in  maria  solem,  obrutumque
aquis  ignem  non  sine  quodam  sacrilegii  metu  et  horrore  deprehendit."
Floras,  ii.  17. The  Romans  ridiculed  Csesar's  vanity  in  dignifying
the  shallow  straits  with  the  name  of  the  Ocean. Lucan.  ii.  571.

"  Oceanumque  vocans  incerti  stagna  profundi
Territa  qusesitis  ostendit  terga  Britannis."

2  Cges.  B.  G.iv.  21,22.

462

HISTOBY OF THE KOMANS

CHAP.
X.

He  crosses
the  straits
of  Dover.

the  magnitude  of  the  Roman,  power,  and  the  ne-
cessity of  alliance  or  submission.  The  rumour  of
his  preparations  had  already  alarmed  the  Belgians
in  the  south  of  Britain,  and  various  embassies
from  them  reached  his  camp,  with  the  offer  of
hostages  for  their  good- will  and  fidelity.

The  season  had  already  advanced  too  far  to
allow  the  Roman  general  to  contemplate  the  con-
quest of  any  part  of  the  island  in  this  campaign,  if
indeed  he  entertained  any  such  ulterior  view.  His
object  was  to  obtain  a  personal  acquaintance  with
the  country,  its  chiefs,  and  people,  to  thrust  him-
self in  some  way  into  their  affairs,  and  establish
such  relations  with  them  as  might  afford  a  con-
venient pretext  for  further  interference  at  some
future  time.  It  seemed  sufficient  for  his  imme-
diate designs  to  collect  a  force  of  two  legions  and  a
few  hundred  cavalry.  The  former  were  destined
to  embark  in  eighty  transports  at  the  Portus  Itius1,

1  The  point  on  the  French  coast  from  which  Csesar  sailed  has  not
been  determined  with  certainty.  We  may  pass  over  the  unconscion-
able nationality  of  some  Flemish  writers  (see  Bast,  Antiq.  Rom.  Gaul.
p.  264.) ;  but  Boulogne,  Ambleteuse,  Witsand,  and  Calais,  still  contend
for  the  honour.  It  was  not  Calais,  because  Cassar  would  not  in  that
case  surely  have  sent  his  cavalry  further  to  the  east  to  make  the  pas-
sage. Boulogne,  which  became  at  a  later  period  the  usual  place  of
embarkation  for  Britain,  was  known  by  another  name,  Gessoriacum.
There  is  probably  an  error  of  east  for  west,  where  Ptolemy  places  this
spot  east  of  the  "IKIOV  attpov.  (See  Mannert,  IT.  i.  186.)  The  question
seems  therefore  to  be  narrowed  to  the  two  ports  of  Ambleteuse  and
Witsand.  In  deciding  between  them  we  may  be  guided  partly  by  the
similarity  of  the  names  Iccius,  or  Itius,  and  Witsand,  and  partly  by
the  fact  that  in  the  middle  ages  Witsand  was  the  port  from  which  the
passage  was  commonly  made.  (See  Ducange  on  Joinville's  Memoirs,
diss.  xxvi.)  Both  are  equally  distant  from  the  nearest  point  of  the
British  coast.  When  Csesar  computes  the  length  of  the  passage  at  30
miles,  which  is  more  than  the  distance  from  shore  to  shore,  he  may

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  463

the  latter  at  a  spot  eight  miles  further  to  the  east.  CHAP.
The  embarkation  of  both  divisions  was  to  take  '
place  simultaneously,  on  the  morning  of  the  26th  B.C.  55.
of  August,  soon  after  midnight,  during  the  third
watch.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  commence-
ment of  the  flood-tide,  which  runs  along  the
French  and  the  opposite  coast  in  a  north-easterly
direction.  The  proconsul  embarked  with  the  in-
fantry, and  proceeding  very  slowly,  possibly  that
he  might  fall  in  with  the  cavalry  transports,  found
himself  at  ten  in  the  morning  off  the  cliffs  of
Dover.  The  expected  squadron,  however,  was
detained  by  wind,  or  some  accident,  and  the  spot
itself  offering  some  impediments,  the  invader  de-
termined to  seek  another  landing-place.  The  sea
is  described  here  as  running  up  into  the  land  by  a
narrow  creek  overhung  by  heights,  which  com-
pletely commanded  every  approach1,  and  were
already  crowded  with  the  natives  in  arms.  Ac-
cordingly, after  waiting  through  the  greater  part
of  the  day  for  the  arrival  of  his  cavalry,  the  pro-
consul took  the  opportunity  of  the  next  flood-tide,
together  with  a  favourable  wind,  to  coast  along
towards  the  north,  for  a  distance  of  seven  or  eight

measure  from  his  starting-place  to  his  landing-place,  viz.  Deal.  The
"IKIOJ;  atcpov  is  probably  Cap  Grisnez.  See  Walckenaer,  G.  des  G.  ii.
268.  With  regard  to  the  orthography  of  the  Roman  name,  the
MSS.  of  Csesar  read  Itius,  those  of  Ptolemy  "IKIOV.  The  form  Iccius
is  a  corruption  of  later  writers.  Bast,  I.  c.

i  Cses.  B.  G.  iv.  23.  His  expressions  evidently  describe  a  creek  or
estuary,  and  cannot  refer  to  the  promontory  of  the  South  Foreland.
There  is  an  ancient  tradition  at  Dover  that  the  sea  formerly  ran
five  or  six  miles  up  into  the  land  there.  Acad.  Sci.  et  Bell.  Lett,  de
Bruxclks,  iii.  1.  (1770),  quoted  by  Bast,  Antiq.  Rom.  et  Gaul.

464  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, miles,  which  brought  him  to  the  open  beach  of
x' Walmer  or  Deal.1

The  RO-  The  movements  of  the  Koman  squadron  were

ttidrMnd^ closely  watched  by  the  Britons  from  the  heights,
in£-  and  by  the  time  it  had  arrived  at  the  spot  where

its  leader  proposed  to  draw  up  his  vessels,  the
beach  was  lined  with  an  imposing  array  of  warriors
in  their  chariots,  prepared  to  dispute  his  landing.
The  sea  was  too  shallow  to  admit  of  the  larger
vessels  approaching  the  land,  and  the  barbarians
rushed  into  the  water  to  reach  their  invaders.
The  war-galleys  which  drew  less  water  were
ordered  to  the  flanks  to  dispel  the  host  of  assail-
ants, and  when  they  opened  their  batteries  of  mis-
siles the  Britons  were  thrown  into  disorder.  The

1  Cass.  1.  c.  :  "  Ventum  et  sestum  nactus  secundum."  It  has  been
much  disputed  whether  the  spot  at  which  Cassar  landed  lay  to  the
east  or  west  of  Dover,  at  Deal  or  at  Hytlie  ;  but  a  close  examination
of  his  language  seems  to  settle  the  question  decisively.  He  came  to
Britain  a  little  before  the  end  of  summer  (exigua  parte  asstatis  re-
liqua),  and  left  it  before  the  equinox.  From  Halley  s  calculations
(see  Phil.  Trans.  No.  193.)  it  is  ascertained  that  there  were  two
full  moons  in  August,  of  the  year  B.C.  55,  on  the  1st  at  noon,
and  on  the  30th  at  midnight.  The  latter  then  must  have  been  that
which  Caesar  noticed  on  the  fourth  night  after  his  arrival  (c.  29.).
If  the  tide  was  at  its  height  at  midnight  (30th — 31st),  it  must  have
been  so  about  8  p.  m.  on  the  26th.  Accordingly,  the  tide  began  to
flow  on  the  afternoon  of  the  26th  at  2,  and  this  must  have  been  the
tide  with  which  Caesar  left  his  moorings  off  Dover.  As  the  flood-tide
flows  to  the  northward,  such  must  have  been  the  direction  which  he
took,  and  a  run  of  seven  or  eight  miles  would  bring  him  precisely  to
the  flat  beach  of  Deal  or  Walmer.  The  only  reason  for  believing
him  to  have  taken  the  opposite  course  is  the  expression  of  Dion,  xxxix.
51. :  ~oi)£  Trpofff^i^avTaQ  ci  f£  TO.  revayr)  airo^aivovn  VIKIIGCIQ,  where  Tfvayi]
is  supposed  to  indicate  such  marshes  as  are  found  between  Hythe  and
Romney,  but  not  on  the  other  side.  The  word  may,  however,  mean
the  soft  beach  washed  by  the  tide.  Dion  also  says  that  he  sailed  round
a  promontory,  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  notion  of  his  going
westward.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  465

Romans,  however,  in  the  confusion  incident  to  a CHAP.
mode  of  fighting  with  which they  were  not  fa- x'
miliar, showed little alacrity in attacking the
enemy, until the standard-bearer of  the tenth
legion leapt  with  his  eagle  into  the  waves,  and
summoned  his  comrades  to  the  rescue.1 Excited
by  the  danger  of  their  adored  ensign,  the  soldiers
threw  themselves  into  the  water,  repulsed  the  bar-
barians, and  made  good  their  landing. The  fame
of  CaBsar  and  his  legions  had  gone  before  him,  and
when  the  Britons  found  themselves  engaged  hand
to  hand  with  the  conquerors  of  Gaul,  their  courage
deserted them. But the Romans, destitute as
they  were  of  cavalry,  might  have  suffered  severely
from  the  vigorous attack  of  chariots and  horse-
men ;  and,  however  feeble  was  the  resistance  op-
posed to  their  landing,  they  were  not  in  a  con-
dition to  pursue,  but  hastened  to  secure  the  spot
on  which  they  had  planted  themselves  by  throw-
ing up  their  usual  earthworks. Before,  however,
even these first defences were completed there
arrived an embassy  from  the  Britons,  with  the
offer  of  hostages  and  the  humblest  protestations  of
submission. Commius,  who  had  been  seized  and
thrown  into  chains  when  he  ventured  to  set  foot
in  the  island,  was  restored  with  many  excuses  to
liberty. The  Roman  general  complained  of  the
hostile  reception  he  had  met  with, after  having
been  waited  upon  in  Gaul  with  offers  of  friendship
and  alliance;  but  he  agreed  to  accept  the  over-
tures now  proffered,  together  with  the  promised
hostages.

1  Caes.  B.  G.  iv.  25—27.
VOL.  I.  H  H

466

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.

high  tide,

But  whether  the  Britons  were  sincere  or  not  in
the  first  terror  of  defeat,  an  accident  which  befel
Their  fleet  the  foreign  armament  gave  them  courage  to  change
their  policy  and  break  their  faith.  The  Roman
cavalry,  sailing  at  last  on  the  fourth  day  after  their
leader's  departure,  were  driven  back  by  the  vio-
lence of  the  wind.  As  their  course  lay  towards
the  north-west,  the  gentle  breeze  with  which  they
had  hoped  to  effect  their  landing  came  probably
from  an  easterly  quarter.  Before  they  had  reached
the  Downs  the  wind  freshened  to  a  gale,  and  their
vessels  were  rendered  unmanageable.  Some  of
them,  indeed,  succeeded  in  recovering  the  coast  of
Gaul,  but  others  were  carried  through  the  straits,
far  to  the  west,  and  narrowly  escaped  being  cast
away  on  distant  points  of  the  British  coast.1  At
midnight  the  tide  rose  with  the  full  moon  and  the
violence  of  the  east  wind,  to  an  unusual  height,
such  as  the  Romans,  with  their  imperfect  experi-
ence of  those  seas,  had  never  witnessed.  The
war-vessels  drawn  up  on  the  beach  were  covered
with  the  waves,  and  dashed  in  pieces,  while  the
transports  which  rode  at  anchor  were  torn  from
their  moorings  and  hurled  against  the  coast  and
one  another.

Thus  the  fleet  was  rendered  almost  useless,  nor
had  the  little  army  the  proper  means  for  repairing
the  damage.  Moreover,  there  was  no  store  of  corn
in  the  camp  to  maintain  it  through  the  winter.
The  Britons,  who  had  noticed  the  smallness  of  the
Roman  force,  and  its  want  of  supplies,  now  began
to  entertain  hopes  of  cutting  off  the  enemy  by

1  Ca3s.  S.  G.  iv.  28.

The  Roman

the  Britons.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  467

famine,  presuming  that  the  entire  loss  of  an  army  CHAP.
with  its  general  would  discourage  the  Romans
from  repeating  the  enterprize.  But  they  did
not  execute  their  plans  skilfully.  They  made  a
sudden  attack  upon  the  seventh  legion,  which
had  been  sent  out  to  forage,  but  was  not  yet
beyond  the  reach  of  assistance  from  the  camp.
Caesar  rushed  forth  to  rescue  it,  and  drove  off  the
assailants  with  brilliant  success ;  but  his  experi-
ence of  the  treachery  of  the  enemy,  and  the  peril
to  which  he  was  now  daily  exposed,  made  him  the
more  anxious  to  withdraw  from  the  island  without
delay.  The  equinox  was  also  fast  approaching,
and  the  tempestuous  weather  with  which  it  is  ge-
nerally accompanied.  He  thought  himself,  doubt-
less, extremely  fortunate  in  receiving  a  further
offer  of  repentance  and  submission  from  the  va-
cillating barbarians.  He  contented  himself  with
imposing  upon  them  double  the  number  of  hostages
which  they  had  originally  offered.  Since  the  night
of  the  storm  he  had  been  sedulously  occupied  in
refitting  his  vessels,  destroying,  for  the  want  of
fresh  materials,  those  which  were  the  most  da-
maged, in  order  to  repair  the  rest.  He  sailed  soon  Returns  to
after  midnight  some  days  before  the  equinox,  that
is  to  say,  about  three  weeks  from  the  time  of  his
landing,  taking  the  ebb-tide,  which  would  then
serve  to  carry  him  down  the  coast,  and  thence
across  into  Gaul.  Two  vessels  which  could  not
make  the  appointed  port  were  borne  further  down
the  channel  by  the  current.1

i  Oses.  13.  G.  iv.  36.  :  "  Paulo  infra  delates  sunt " On  reaching  the
coast  of  Gaul,  the  crews  of  these  vessels  were  attacked  by  the  Morini,

II H 2

468

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
X.

Trans-
actions of
the  re-
mainder of
the  year.
Caesar  goes
into  Illyri-
cum.

On  his  return  from  Britain,  Caesar  commissioned
Sabinus  and  Cotta  to  make  an  incursion  into  the
country  of  the  Menapii,  which  proved  more  success-
ful than  that  of  the  year  preceding,  the  dryness
of  faQ  season  having  rendered  the  morasses  acces-
sible.  At  the  same  time,  Labienus  chastised  the
Morini,  who  had  risen  in  arms  against  the  crews  of
the  dispersed  vessels.  The  Britons,  as  soon  as
they  learnt  that  the  Roman  commander  had  left
their  shores,  neglected,  with  the  exception  of  only
two  of  their  tribes,  to  send  the  promised  hostages.1
But  his  countrymen  received  the  news  of  his  suc-
cesses with  acclamation,  and  particularly  that  of
his  attack  upon  an  unknown  island,  an  exploit  of
heroic  daring  which  struck  their  imaginations,
while  it  inflamed  their  cupidity  with  the  hopes  of
new  and  incalculable  plunder.2  The  avaricious
dreams  of  the  Romans  ascribed  hoards  of  plate
and  jewels  to  the  rudest  barbarians  of  the  ancient
world.  Britain  was  reported  to  be  rich  in  mines,
at  least  of  the  inferior  metals.  Above  all,  the  pearls
of  the  Rutupian  coast  were  celebrated  for  their
supposed  abundance  and  splendour,  and  were  an
object  of  especial  desire.3  The  breastplate  set

and  were  within  immediate  reach  of  the  main  body,  which  had  already
disembarked.  They  came  to  shore  therefore  probably  near  Ambleteuse
or  Boulogne.

1  Cses.  B.  C.  iv.  38.

*  Dion,  xxxiv.  53.  After  disparaging  the  enterprize  as  unsuccess-
ful he  adds:  TOVT^  yap  ical  avrog  ia^vp^Q  i(T6p,vuvtTo,  /cat  o't  otKoi'Pw/mToi
Sravi*.aaT<Z£  sutyaXvvovTO,  K.  r.  A.

3  Suet.  Jul.  47. :  "  Britanniam  petiisse  spe  margaritarum,  quarum
amplitudinem  conferentem,"  &c.  Yet  Pliny  confesses  that  the  pearls
of  Britain  were,  after  all,  "  parvi  et  decolores  "  (//.  N.  ix.  57.),  and
Tacitus  adds :  "  Gignit  oceanus  margarita  sed  subfusca  et  livpitia  "
(Agric.  12.).

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  469

with  these  costly  brilliants,  which  the  conqueror  CHAP.
afterwards  dedicated  to  Venus  Genetrix,  the  patron-
ess and  mother  of  his  race,  was  no  less  agreeable
to  the  eyes  of  the  young  nobility  than  to  those  of
the  goddess  herself.  A  supplication  of  twenty  days
was  decreed  in  his  honour,  while  he  hastened,  as
usual,  to  the  frontier  of  his  province  to  confer  with
his  friends  from  Rome.  Early,  however,  in  the
next  year,  he  found  time  to  visit  the  further  district
of  his  province,  Illyricum,  beset  by  predatory  hordes,
which  had  crossed  the  upper  waters  of  the  Save
and  Drave,  and  penetrated  its  Alpine  boundary.1
The  name  of  Julius  is  impressed  upon  many  spots
in  this  vicinity:  the  Carnian  Alps  here  take  the
appellation  of  Julian  ;  a  town  immediately  at  their
feet  was  denominated  Julium  Carnicum ;  and  Forum
Julii,  still  surviving  in  the  modern  Friuli,  lay  at
no  great  distance,  near  the  head  of  the  Adriatic.
It  is  not,  however,  to  the  great  conqueror  that
these  appellations  can  be  traced ;  for  he  could  not
possibly  have  crossed  the  Alps  in  the  winter
season,  and  carried  the  sword  into  the  native
valleys  of  the  Pirustae  in  the  Tyrol ;  nor  did  he
remain  long  enough  in  the  neighbourhood  to  found
cities  or  colonies.2

1  Caes._jB.  G.  v.  1. ;  comp.  Mannert,  iii.  547.

2  The  origin  of  these  names  remains  in  obscurity :  see  Mannert,
v.  546.,  who  supposes  Forum  Julii  to  have  been  founded  by  one  of
the  Caesarian  family  in  a  later  generation,  and  the  Alps  to  have  re-
ceived their  local  designation  from  the  city. The  epithet  Julian  is
first  given  to  these  mountains  by  Tacitus,  Hist.  iii.  8. Livy,  who
speaks  of  the  locality,  makes  no  mention  of  such  a  name. Ammianus
(xxxvi.  16.)  says  :  "  Usque  ad  radices  Alpium  Juliarum  quas  Venetas
appellavit  antiquitas." The  Julian  Alps  known  at  this  period  were
those  afterwards  denominated  Cottian. See  above,  p.  290.

H H 3

470  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. Meanwhile,  great  preparations  were  in  progress
x' in  the  ports  and  camps  of  northern  Gaul for  a

Great  pre-  second  invasion  of  Britain  with  a  more  powerful
forfs^cond  force-  Six  hundred  transports  were  built,  of  a
invasion  of  construction  adapted  to  the  shallow  coasts  and

Britain  m

the  spring,  short  chopping  waves  of  the  channel.  The  whole
x'.c'  54.  '  armament  was  appointed  to  assemble  at  the  Portus

?  an(i  Caesar  made  use  of  this  short  interval  to
menace  the  Treviri,  with  whom  he  was  incensed
on  account  of  their  neglecting  to  attend  the  general
meeting  of  the  states,  and  intriguing  with  the
Suevi.  Two  of  their  chieftains,  Cingetorix  and
Indutiomarus,  were  mutually  aspiring  to  the  su-
preme power.  On  the  approach  of  the  Eoman
army,  the  former  hastened  to  make  his  submission  ;
the  latter,  thus  anticipated,  rashly  collected  his
troops  and  adherents.  But  soon  repenting  of  this
over.t  act,  he  sued  for  pardon,  which  Caesar  was
easily  persuaded  to  bestow.  To  Cingetorix,  how-
ever, he  displayed  much  greater  favour,  taking  his
part,  and  conciliating  to  his  views  the  principal
men  of  the  state.  The  Treviri  returned  to  their
obedience  ;  but  the  ambition  of  Indutiomarus  was
turned  to  bitter  though  suppressed  hostility.1
intrigues  of  This  affair  being  despatched,  the  whole  disposable
force  of  ftiQ  proconsul  was  assembled  at  the  Portus
Itius.2  He  was  attended  by  a  body  of  four  thousand
Gaulish  horse,  officered  by  the  flower  of  the  native
nobility,  whom  Caesar  proposed  to  carry  with  him,
not  less  as  hostages  for  the  tranquillity  of  their
country,  the  state  of  which  was  becoming  daily

'  Caes.  B.  G.  v.  3,  4.  2  C£es>  ^  Gt  v<  5>

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  471

more  critical,  than  for  the  benefit  of  their  military  CHAP.
services.  Among  them  was  Dunmorix,  the  JMuan,
of  whose  good  faith  Csesar  was  justly  distrustful,
and  who  kept  his  countrymen  in  alarm  by  vaunting
that  the  proconsul  had  promised  to  confer  upon  him
the  sovereignty  of  their  nation.  He  was  anxious  to
escape  from  accompanying  the  expedition,  hoping^
if  left  behind,  to  find  an  opportunity  of  forwarding
his  private  projects  of  ambition.  He  studied  to
awaken  the  fears  of  his  fellow-chiefs,  representing
to  them  that  the  conqueror,  not  venturing  to  put
them  to  death  in  the  presence  of  the  Gaulish
nation,  sought  to  get  rid  of  them  in  this  distant  ex-
pedition. The  prevalence  of  north-west  winds  inter-
posed a  delay  of  several  days,  of  which  the  JMuan
made  all  the  use  in  his  power.  At  last,  when  the  He  escapes
order  for  embarking  was  given,  he  secretly  escaped,  camp,*^
with  a  few  followers,  from  the  camp.  Caesar  im-  Pursued

7  *  and  slain.

mediately  despatched  a  chosen  party  of  cavalry  to
recapture  the  fugitive,  dead  or  alive.  He  was
overtaken,  and  the  Gauls,  who  hated  him  no  less
than  their  Eoman  tyrants,  massacred  him  on  the
spot.1  His  attendants  made  no  difficulty  in  re-
turning to  the  Roman  quarters.

The  spring  had  not  yet  passed,  when  the  Roman  Caesar  lands
armament  sailed  for  Britain. It  consisted  of  five  JjJJjfJp.
legions,  and  a  proportionate  number  of  cavalry,  the  position.
importance  of  which  force  had  been  fully  demon-
strated in  the  late  expedition. Three  legions  were
left  under  Labienus,  to  provide  for  the  security  of
the  conquered  country. The  armament  effected  its

Gas.  B.  (7.  v.  7
ii  11 4

472  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  landing  without  opposition  at  the  same  spot  as  in
'  the  preceding  summer1;  and  Caesar,  leaving  ten
cohorts  and  three  hundred  horse,  to  protect  his
naval  station,  repaired  with  the  main  body  of  his
army  to  a  place  in  the  neighbourhood,  where  he
constructed  a  camp  for  permanent  occupation.
This  was  the  foundation,  in  all  probability,  of  the
celebrated  station  of  Rutupiae,  or  Elchborough.
The  ruins  of  its  gigantic  defences,  together  with
those  at  Caistor,  and  the  still  more  perfect  remains
of  Garianonium,  or  Burghcastle,  attest  to  this  day
the  extent  and  solidity  of  the  Eoman  military
works  in  our  island.  The  Britons  still  declined  to
make  any  opposition  to  the  invaders ;  and  it  was
not  till  the  army  had  advanced  to  the  banks  of  the
Stour,  twelve  miles  distant  from  its  encampment,
that  it  found  an  enemy  drawn  up  in  array  to  dis-
pute its  further  progress.  But  it  was  not  on  the
slow  and  narrow  stream  of  a  petty  river  that  the
Britons  placed  their  reliance  ;  they  had  a  camp  of
their  own  peculiar  construction,  a  space  cleared  in
the  centre  of  a  wood,  and  defended  by  the  trunks
of  trees,  to  which  they  retreated  on  the  first  re-
pulse, and  whence  it  was  difficult  to  dislodge  them.
When  this  was  at  last  effected,  Caesar  did  not  ven-
ture to  pursue  the  rapid  flight  of  their  horsemen
and  chariots  in  a  country  of  which  he  was  wholly
ignorant.  An  accident,  which  had  again  befallen
his  fleet,  suddenly  recalled  him.  A  storm,  as  in
the  preceding  expedition,  had  severely  injured  his

1  Caes.  B.  G.  v.  8. ;  Dion.  xl.  1 . The  pretext  for  the  invasion  was
the  refusal  of  the  Britons  to  send  the  stipulated  number  of  hostages.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  473

vessels. It  took  several  days  of  incessant  labour CHAP.
to  repair  the  damage,  and  then,  at  last,  it  was  de-
termined to  draw  up  the  whole  armament  on  shore,
and  to  extend  and  strengthen  the  fortifications  by
which  it  was  defended  on  the  land  side. Caesar
again  advanced,  arid  again  encountered  the  natives
at  the  passage  of  the  river. Amidst  their  internal
dissensions  (for  such  seem  to  have  prevailed  among
them  to  a  greater  extent  than  even  among  their
neighbours  on  the  continent),  the  Britons  had  come
to  the  resolution  of  trusting  the  general  conduct  of
their  defence  to  one  of  their  principal  chieftains.
His  name  was  Cassivellaunus  x,  and  he  ruled  over  The  Britons
the  Trinobantes,  the  people  of  Middlesex,  Hertford,  l™^*t
and  Essex. The  British  method  of  nVhtino;  was  launus'

'  make  a

almost  wholly  on  horseback  or  from  chariots.  The  brave  re-
dexterity  with  which  the  barbarians  managed  these  s
ponderous  vehicles,  the  weight  of  their  onset,  and
the  rapidity  of  their  retreat,  baffled  through  the
day  the  bravery  and  discipline  of  the  invaders.
The  Roman  lines  were  shaken  by  repeated  charges  ;
the  pilum  stretched  many  a  chieftain  on  the  plain,
but  his  steeds  and  empty  car  came  bounding
against  the  wall  of  steel.  Repulsed,  the  flying
squadrons  were  quickly  beyond  the  reach  of  pur-
suit; the  Gaulish  cavalry  were  languid  and  in-
active ;  it  was  by  the  steady  endurance  of  the
veteran  infantry  that  victory  was  at  last  secured.
The  Britons  lost  the  bravest  of  their  combatants,

1  This  was  the  Roman  orthography. Dion  writes  it
approaching  nearer  to  what  was  probably  the  real  pronunciation,  Cas-
wallon  or  Cadwallon.

474

HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
X.

They  de-
fend the
line  of  the
Thames.

Caesar's
partial  suc-

and  their  cumbrous  materials  of  war.  From  that
day  the  Britons  never  ventured  again  to  attack
Cassar's  legions  in  regular  battle,  but  scattered
themselves  through  the  country,  in  the  hope  of
wearing  out  his  strength  by  repeated  and  desultory
skirmishes.

Cassar,  however,  kept  his  men  well  together,  and
refrained  from  partial  engagements,  while  he
inarched  boldly  into  the  heart  of  the  country,  to
the  banks  of  the  Thames,  behind  which  Cassivel-
launus  had  retreated.  It  was  necessary,  in  order
to  ford  the  river,  to  ascend  above  the  highest  point
which  the  tide  reaches ;  and  the  very  spot  where
the  passage  was  made  may  be  conjectured  with
some  confidence  from  early  and  constant  tradition.
A  place  known  by  the  name  of  Coway  Stakes,  near
the  mouth  of  the  Wey,  is  supposed  to  have  derived
its  appellation  from  the  palisades  with  which  the
Britons  obstructed  the  bed  and  bank  of  the
Thames1,  the  remains  of  which  were  still  visible,
according  to  the  testimony  of  Bede,  in  the  eighth
century.2  This  spot  accords  also  sufficiently  well
with  the  distance  of  eighty  miles  from  the  sea,  at
which  Ca3sar  places  the  frontier  of  Cassivellaun's
dominions.3

The  swimming  and  fording  of  rivers  were  among

1  CJES.  B.  G.  v.  18. ;  Dion.  xl.  3.

2  Bede,  Hist,  of  Brit.  i. 2. This  indeed is  not  very  credible.
Compare  Camden's  Britannia,  "  Surrey." He  states  the  depth  of  the
water  at  that  spot  to  be  generally  about  six  feet. Caesar's  passage  was
made  in  the  middle  of  summer,  and  the  season  was  remarkable  for  its
drought :  "  Eo  anno  frumentum  in  Gallia  propter  siccitates  angustius
provenerat." Caes.  B.  G.  v.  24.

3  Cses.  B.  G.v,  11.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  475

the  regular  exercises  of  the  Roman  legionary.  CHAP.
Though  immersed  up  to  his  chin  in  water,  he  was
expert  in  plying  his  hatchet  against  the  stakes  cesses  in
which  opposed  his  progress,  while  he  held  his  I
buckler  over  his  head  not  less  steadily  than  on
dry  land.  From  behind  him  a  constant  storm  of
stones  and  darts  was  impelled  against  the  enemy
from  the  engines  which  always  accompanied  the
Roman  armies.1  The  natives  were  driven  from
their  position,  and  Cassar  marched  upon  the  capital
of  the  Trinobantes,  which  lay  at  no  great  dis-
tance.2 In  the  meanwhile  that  nation,  over  which
Cassivellaunus  had  usurped  authority  by  the  mur-
der of  its  king  Immanuentius,  was  disposed  to
treat  with  the  conqueror  and  abandon  the  tyrant
to  his  fate.  The  Trinobantes  presented  Mandu-
bratius,  the  son  of  their  late  sovereign,  to  Csesar
as  the  chieftain  whom  they  wished  to  reign  over
them ;  and  the  youthful  claimant  of  the  throne
had  already  gained  the  confidence  of  the  Roman
general  by  placing  himself  under  his  protection  in
Gaul.  This  example  was  followed  by  several
other  states,  enumerated  under  the  names  of  Ce-
nimagni,  Segontiaci,  AncalitaB  and  Bibroci,  occu-
pying apparently  the  counties  of  Berks  and  Buck-
ingham, and  the  neighbourhood  of  Henley  and

1  Polyaenus  {Stratagem,  viii.  23.  5.)  says  that  the  Britons  were  ter-
rified by  Caesar's  making  use  of  an  elephant  in  this  attack.

2  We  may  conjecture  that  this  was  Verulamium  or  St.  Alban's,  the
site  in  after  times  of  a  great  Roman  colony.  If  it  had  been  Londinium,
which  was  a  place  of  considerable  commercial  importance  only  an
hundred  years  later  (Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  33.),  we  should  doubtless  have
been  informed  that  it  lay  on  the  bank  of  the  river.

476

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

into

CHAP.  Bray.1  The  British  chief,  reduced  to  his  single
stronghold,  defended  himself  with  the  natural  for-
tifications of  forest  and  morass  which  surrounded
his  so-called  city.  He  excited  the  people  of  Can-
tium,  or  Kent,  to  make  an  attack  on  the  naval
camp  of  the  invaders  ;  but  while  they  were  re-
pulsed with  loss  and  discomfiture,  he  was  obliged
himself  to  escape  from  the  fastness  which  he  could
He  accepts  no  longer  maintain.  Reduced  to  extremity,  he
sued  for  peace,  wrhich  he  obtained  by  the  surrender
°^  ^s  usurPec^  sovereignty,  and  the  promise  of
hostages  and  tribute  from  the  various  states  which
he  had  combined  against  the  Romans.2  Caesar
was  anxious  to  return  to  Gaul,  where  rumours  of
projected  insurrection  were  more  rife  than  ever.3
He  retained  no  territory  in  Britain,  nor  left  any
stronghold  or  garrison  ;  and  when  he  quitted  its
shore,  with  the  nugatory  assurance  of  a  trifling
tribute,  he  must  have  felt  himself  baffled  in  his
enterprize.  Even  the  hopes  of  plunder  were  totally
unfulfilled.  Cicero,  who  corresponded,  as  we  have
seen,  with  his  brother  Quintus,  serving  under  the
proconsul  in  his  British  campaign,  tells  us  that

1  Camden,  Britannia  ;  Moebe,  Cas.  in  loc.

*  Cses.  B.  G.  v.  22.

3  Such  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  Cicero's  expression  in  a  letter
to  Trebatius  (ad  Div.  vii.  6.),  who  remained  in  Gaul,  at  Samarobriva,
declining  to  accompany  the  expedition  into  Britain  :  "  Quanquam  vos
nunc  istic  satis  calere  audio."  Or  does  it  merely  refer  to  the  great
heat  of  the  summer  already  noticed?  There  had  been  an  extremely
hot  season  at  Rome  also  :  "  Ex  magnis  caloribus,  non  enim  memini
majores.".  .  .  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  iii.  1.,  written  in  Sept.,  700.  But  Ceesar
was  evidently  in  great  haste  to  leave  Britain  ;  see  c.  23.  Comp.  Dion.
xl.  45.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  477

there  was  nothing  to  be  obtained  from  the  poverty  CHAP.
of  the  natives.  ~No  silver  plate  was  to  be  extorted  '
from  them,  nor  booty  of  any  kind  to  be  acquired,
except  perhaps  slaves ;  and  these  were  not  of  the
refined  and  educated  class,  such  as  the  conquests
of  Lucullus  and  Pompeius  had  poured  into  Rome
from  Asia,  ingenious  artizans  or  professors  of  lite-
rature and  music,  but  the  rough  uncouth  children
of  woods  and  mountains,  whom  their  masters
would  be  ashamed  to  employ  beyond  the  limits  of
some  distant  farm.1

These  short  campaigns  against  the  Germans  and  General
Britons sufficed to occupy the  intervals during  disaffection
which  Ca3sar  was  watching  the  conflict  of  parties  m  Gauh
in Rome ; they  maintained his  troops  in active
exercise, afforded pretences for multiplying  his
legions,  and  fostered  the  cupidity  or  ambition  of
his  officers. But  the  eyes  of  the  proconsul  con-
tinued steadily turned towards Italy, and he
omitted  no  opportunity  of  betaking  himself  to  the
frontier  of  his  province  to  obtain  a  nearer  view  of
the  transactions  of  the  capital. However,  on  his

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  16. :  "  Etiam  illud  jam  cognitum  est,  neque  ar-
genti  scripulum  esse  in  ilia  insula,  neque  ullam  spem  praedae  nisi  ex
mancipiis :  ex  quibus  nullos  puto  te  literis  aut  musicis  erudites  ex-
spectare."  So  also  to  Trebatius  (ad  Div.  vii.  7.)  :  "  In  Britannia  nihil
esse  audio  neque  auri  neque  argenti.  Id  si  ita  est,  essedum  aliquod
suadeo  capias,  et  ad  nos  quaraprimum  recurras."  This  hope  of  plunder
is  a  favourite  topic  in  his  correspondence.  Again  to  Trebatius,  vi.
16.:  "Balbus  mihi  confirmavit  te  divitem  futurum.  Id  utrum  Ro-
mano more  locutus  sit,  bene  nummatum  te  futurum,  an  quomodo
Stoici  dicunt,  omnes  esse  divites  qui  coelo  et  terra  frui  possint,  postea
videro."  In  Plutarch's  life  (Cces.  23.)  Caesar  is  said,  KaKtZaai  TOVQ  TTC-
XepiovQ  p,a\Xov.  r]  TOVQ  iSiovg  bjfaXrjaai,  ovdtv  yap  OTL  Kai  Xa&tv  r]V  d£iov

478  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  second  return  from  Britain,  it  was  obvious  that  his
__  recent  conquests  were  on  the  brink  of  imminent
peril,  and  that  his  presence  throughout  the  winter
was  indispensable  to  their  security.  The  assembly
of  the  Gaulish  states  was  convened  at  Samaro-
briva  (Amiens),  and  Caesar  employed,  according
to  his  system,  the  authority  of  the  deputies  among
their  own  tribes  to  give  a  colour  of  national  will  to
the  decrees  which  in  reality  issued  from  his  own
mouth  alone.  The  council  was  dissolved  before
the  end  of  autumn,  and  its  members  returned  each
to  his  own  city,  bearing  with  him  the  mandates  of
the  conqueror,  by  which  the  internal  polity  of  the
province  was  regulated,  and  new  contributions,
both  of  money  and  men,  were  assessed.  Unpa-
latable as  these  requisitions  were  to  the  proud  and
jealous  chieftains  of  Gaul,  circumstances  contributed
at  the  moment  to  give  a  greater  chance  of  success
to  a  concerted  attack  upon  the  enemy  from  whom
The  Roman  they  emanated.  The  summer  had  been  one  of  ex-
cessive  drought,  and  it  was  found  impossible  to

over  too maintain  the  areat  mass  of  the  Roman  forces  in

wide  a  sur-  3

face.  one  locality. Accordingly, the  eight  legions of

which  they  consisted  were  distributed  principally
through  the  country  of  the  Belgians,  among  the
Morini,  the  Nervii,  the  Eemi,  the  Treviri,  and
the  Eburones,  in  small  divisions  and  under  various
commanders.1  It  is  probable  that  the  Gauls  cal-
culated on  the  proconsul's  usual  departure  to  Italy,
and  standing  more  in  awe  of  him  personally  than
of  all  his  lieutenants,  proposed  to  delay  their

1  Cses.  B.  G.  v.  24.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  479

general  attack  on  the  winter  quarters  of  the  le-  CHAP.
gions  until  his  back  should  be  turned.1  But  al-
though compelled  to  risk  it,  he  was  aware  of  the
danger  of  dividing  his  forces,  and  stationed  himself
at  Samarobriva,  a  central  post,  whence  he  could
conveniently  combine  the  direction  both  of  mili-
tary and  civil  affairs.2

The  first  indication  of  the  insurrectionary  spirit  nevoit  of
about  to  break  forth  throughout  the  north  of  Gaul  gians.e "
was  an  isolated  act  of  violence  on  the  part  of
the  Carnutes,  who  suddenly  massacred  Tasgetius,
the  chieftain  appointed  by  the  Koman  government
to  exercise  sovereignty  in  their  state.3  That  it
was  a  public  and  not  a  private  act  of  vengeance
appeared  from  the  complicity  of  the  magistrates
and  other  influential  men  of  the  tribe.  The  Car-
nutes, however,  were  not  in  a  condition  to  defend
their  deed,  and  the  speedy  arrival  of  a  legion  with
orders  to  take  up  its  winter-quarters  among  them,
repressed  any  further  movement,  on  their  part,
against  the  Eoinan  power.  The  affair  was  judi-
cially investigated,  and  the  guilty  parties  were

1  Ca?sar gives  us  to  infer  that  he  had  no  intention  of  quitting
Northern  Gaul  during  the  winter  :  "  Si  ipse  ....  in  Gallia  morari
constituit"  (v.  25.). Dion  (xl.  8.)  maintains  that  he  was  on  his  way
into  Italy  when  recalled  by  the  perilous  posture  of  his  affairs,  and  this
account  would  seem  to  be  confirmed  by  the  ignorance  of  his  officers
whether  he  was  in  Gaul  or  not :  see  below.

2  Caesar  seems  anxious  to  extenuate  the  extent  to  which  he  dis-
persed his  forces,  where  he  says  that  all  his  divisions,  except  that
quartered  among  the  Essui  in  Normandy,  where  there  was  no  appre-
hension of  disturbance,  were  posted  within  a  distance  of  a  hundred
miles. But  the  distance  from  Aduatuca  to  the  frontiers  of  the  Bel-
lovaci  (c.  46.)  is  little  less  than  two  hundred  miles.

3  C*s.  B.  G,  v.  25.

480  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  sent  to  the  proconsul  for  punishment.  Meanwhile,
_  "  however,  a  vast  conspiracy  was  ripening  in  the
craft  and  north  of  Belgium.1  Ambiorix,  a  youthful  leader
AmWorix.  of  the  Eburones,  obtained  the  honour  of  striking
the  first  blow,  in  which  he  displayed  no  less  craft
than  courage.  He  had  been  treated  with  much
favour  by  the  Romans,  and  had  acquired  no  small
share  of  their  confidence.  That  he  should  be  the
first  to  attack  those  who  called  themselves  his
benefactors,  caused  equal  surprize  and  concern.
Nor  were  the  Romans  taken  unprepared.  The
assault  which  he  conducted  against  the  camp  of
Sabinus  and  Cotta  was  repulsed  without  difficulty.
Thus  baffled,  Ambiorix  requested  a  conference
with  his  opponents,  in  which  he  declared  himself
to  be  a  genuine  friend  of  the  Romans,  but  com-
pelled by  the  violence  of  his  own  people  to  head
an  attack  upon  them.  The  tribe  itself,  he  as-
serted, was  only  acting  under  similar  compulsion,
for  it  was  unable  to  resist  the  power  of  the  great
Gaulish  confederacy,  which  had  been  long  pre-
paring, and  was  now  in  the  act  of  executing,  a
simultaneous  assault  upon  all  the  Roman  quarters.
In  two  days  a  large  body  of  Germans  would  arrive
to  reinforce  the  assailants.  He  ended  by  entreating
the  Roman  officers  to  evacuate  their  camp  while
there  yet  was  time,  and  consult,  not  their  own
safety  only,  but  the  general  good,  by  seeking  a
junction  with  one  of  the  other  divisions  of  their
army,  the  nearest  of  which,  that  of  Q.  Cicero,  was
fifty  miles  distant.2

1  Besides  Csesar,  Dion.  xl.  5—11.;  Plut.  Cas.  24.

2  Cses.  B.  G.  v.  27. ;  Dion.  xl.  5,  6. This  writer  follows  the  Com-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  481

Long  and  anxious  was  the  consultation  which CHAP.
took place in the Roman  quarters. Cotta and

Sabinus differed in opinion ; the one was for  The
maintaining  the  post  at  all  hazards,  the  other  for  J
falling  back  upon  Cicero's  legion. Strange  to  say,
Sabinus  could  urge  in  behalf  of  the  latter  course
that  it  was  uncertain  whether  Caasar  was  himself
in  Gaul,  or  whether  he  had  departed  for  Italy. The
news  of  the  rash  violence  of  the Carnutes  was
appealed  to  as  a  proof  that  the  vigilant  control  of
the proconsul must have been withdrawn ; the
sudden  defection  of  the  Eburones  was  supposed  to
confirm this presumption. It seems incredible
that  Caesar  should  really  have  left  his  officers  in
uncertainty  on  a  matter  of  such  primary  importance
for the  direction  of  their  conduct, and  we are
compelled  to  imagine  that  such  doubts  were  ex-
pressed merely  for  the  purpose  of  giving  a  colour
to  a  disgraceful  and  cowardly  proceeding. Cotta
finally  yielded  to  his  colleague's  representations,
and  it  was  resolved  to  effect  a  retreat. On  their
march  the two legions  fell into an ambuscade,
notwithstanding  the  friendly  assurances  in  which
they  had  been  tempted  to  confide. Surrounded  in
a  narrow  valley  they  were  compelled  to  abandon
their  baggage,  and  under  the  direction  of  Cotta
(for  Sabinus  had  lost  all  presence  of  mind),  ranged
themselves  in  a  circle  to  maintain  to  the  last  a
desperate struggle with their destroyers. This

mentaries  of  Csesar  very  closely,  and  it  is  important  to  remark  that
they  still  formed  the  text-book  for  this  period  of  history  after  an  in-
terval of  250  years.  It  may  be  inferred  also  that  the  charges  of
treachery  which  Caesar  makes  against  the  Gauls  had  not  been  dis-
credited by  subsequent  authorities.
VOL.  I.  II

482  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  manoeuvre,  effective  as  it  had  often  proved  in  saving
'  the  armies  of  the  republic  in  the  most  dire  ex-
tremities, was  on  this  occasion  of  no  avail.  After
repulsing  repeated  attacks,  the  Eomans  succumbed
at  last,  under  the  constant  shower  of  missiles  by
which  they  were  harassed  from  every  side.  Sa-
binus,  while  attempting  to  discuss  the  forms  of  a
capitulation,  was  treacherously  slain ;  and  Cotta,
who  had  refused  to  parley  with  an  armed  enemy,
met  a  more  honourable  death  in  the  front  of  his
slender  ranks.  The  Roman  army  was  almost  en-
tirely destroyed  ;  the  few  that  escaped  through  the
forests  in  the  darkness  of  the  night  were  merely
stragglers,  without  baggage,  arms,  or  ensigns.1
Attack  upon  This  destruction  of  two  complete  legions  with
Q>  Cl  their  generals  was  the  signal  for  a  wide- spread  de-

camp.

fection  throughout  central  Belgium.  The  Eburones,
Nervii,  and  Aduatuci  were  reinforced  by  numerous
but  less  conspicuous  tribes.  Ambiorix,  able  and
energetic,  and  crowned  with  the  glory  of  a  triumph
which  reminded  men  of  the  ancient  days  of  Gaulish
renown,  was  the  soul  of  the  confederacy.  He
marched  immediately  upon  the  camp  of  Q.  Cicero,
whose  single  legion  was  quartered  in  the  Nervian
territory.  Letters  were  despatched  from  the  camp
to  Caesar,  but  these  were  intercepted,  and  for  many
days  the  proconsul  was  left  in  entire  ignorance  of
the  movements  of  the  enemy,  and  the  dangers  to
which  his  troops  were  exposed.

character  The  correspondence  of  the  orator,  M.  Cicero,
represents  him  throughout  in  the  light  of  an
adviser,  almost  of  a  tutor  or  guardian  to  his

1  Caes.  B.  O.  v.  37. ;  Dion.  /.  c.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  483

younger  brother  Quintus,  and  the  character  of  the  CHAP.
latter  has  been  overshadowed  by  the  greater  cele-
brity and  higher  merits  of  the  former.  But
Q.  Cicero,  though  he  cannot  aspire  to  be  numbered
in  the  first  class  of  the  statesmen  of  his  day,  holds
nevertheless  a  prominent  place  among  the  men  of
average  services  and  abilities,  who  contributed  to
stamp  the  national  character  upon  the  Koman
administration  at  home  and  abroad.  Rising  upon
the  wave  of  his  brother's  fortunes,  and  supported
by  his  own  talents  and  good  conduct,  he  had
served  some  offices  of  high  distinction  in  the  state.
Passing  through  the  ordinary  course  of  official
dignities,  he  had  arrived  at  the  pra3torship,  in
which  he  was  colleague  to  Csesar  in  the  year  692.
From  thence  he  had  succeeded  to  the  propra3tor-
ship  of  the  Lesser  Asia,  where  his  term  of  office
was  prolonged  to  a  second,  and  again  to  a  third
year,  principally  at  the  instance  of  M.  Cicero *,  who
found  his  services  eminently  useful  in  carrying
out  his  own  policy  in  favour  of  the  equestrian
order,  and  also  in  conciliating  the  affections  of  the
provincials  by  justice  and  moderation.  Brilliant
abilities  could  have  little  scope  in  a  province  so
peaceful,  and  in  the  midst  of  a  society  so  thoroughly
moulded  and  matured;  but  it  was  no  slight  merit
in  Quintus,  it  might  be  of  no  small  advantage  to
the  reforming  party  to  which  he  belonged,  if  it

1  This  appears  from  M.  Cicero's  remarkable  letter  to  his  brother,
numbered  ad  Qu.  Fr.  i.  1.,  which,  besides  the  light  it  throws  on
Quintus's  character,  is  interesting  as  containing  a  formal  exposition,
evidently  intended  for  the  public  eye,  of  the  duties  of  a  provincial
governor.

i  i 2

484  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, could  be  truly  said  of  him  that,  in  a  province  so

" full  of  allurements  to  a  man  of  elegance  and  taste,

he  had  refrained  his  hand  from  the  undue  acqui-
sition of  a  single  monument  of  art.1  After  quitting
this  province  with  the  liveliest  demonstrations  of
regard  from  the  people,  Q.  Cicero  had  assisted
Pompeius  in  executing  his  great  commission  for
supplying  the  city  with  corn ;  he  had  then  at-
tached himself  to  Cassar,  and  engaged  to  serve
under  him  in  Gaul,  and  had  made  the  best  use  of
his  opportunities  in  advancing  his  brother's  in-
terests with  his  new  patron.  He  was  from  the
first  an  ardent  admirer  of  Caesar's  character.  When
the  senate  decreed  the  capital  punishment  of  the
Catilinarian  conspirators,  he  had  voted  with  the
Marian  leader  for  a  more  lenient  sentence2,  and
now,  when  the  fortunes  of  his  general  were
trembling  in  the  balance,  and  the  ascendancy  of
the  republic  in  Gaul  was  perilled  in  his  person,  he
sustained  the  attack  of  the  enemy  with  a  constancy
and  courage  as  great  as  had  ever  been  displayed
HIS  resolute  by  a  Roman  officer.  The  merit  of  his  defence  is
lce'  heightened  by  the  infirm  state  of  his  health  at  the
time.3  His  magnanimous  general  was  fully  sen-
sible of  his  deserts,  and  recorded  it  in  a  few  simple
words,  such  as  form  the  most  suitable  monument
of  his  own  exploits.  Nor  must  we  forget  that  the
lieutenant  of  Caesar  was  in  his  turn  supported  by

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  i.  1,  2. :  "  Prasclarum  est  autem  summo  cum  im-
perio  fuisse  in  Asia  triennium,  sic,  ut  nullum  te  signum,  nulla  pictura,
nullum  vas,  nulla  vestis,  nullum  mancipium,  nulla  forma  cujusquam,
nulla  conditio  pecunia3,  quibus  rebus  abundat  ista  provincia,  ab  summa
integritate  continentiaque  deduxerit."

2  Suet.  Jul.  14.  s  C*es.  B.  G.  v.  40.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  485

troops  whose  courage  and  endurance  were  never  CHAP.
exceeded.  The  romantic  rivalry  of  Pulfio  and  Va-
renus  seems  to  elicit  a  spark  of  fire  from  the  coldest
of  all  military  narratives.  When  the  besieged  legion
was  at  last  relieved  by  the  triumphant  arrival  of
the  proconsul  in  person,  it  was  found  that  not  one
man  in  ten  had  escaped  without  a  wound.  The
Gauls  had  made  no  small  progress  in  learning  and
applying  the  Roman  methods  of  attack.1  They
had  surrounded  the  camp  with  a  ditch  and  rampart,
they  had  propelled  their  towers  to  the  foot  of  the
wall,  had  reduced  all  the  interior  to  ashes  by  their
inflammable  missiles,  and  had  succeeded  for  many
days  in  cutting  off  all  communication  between  the
besieged  and  the  nearest  quarters.  They  kept  all
the  Roman  detachments  in  such  constant  alarm,
that  Labienus  dared  not  venture  from  his  post,
and  CaBsar  was  obliged  to  leave  a  legion  at  Sama-
robriva  to  protect  the  treasure,  magazines,  and
public  documents.  The  proconsul  could  muster  no
more  than  two  legions  to  lead  against  the  enemy,
and  these  were  reduced  to  a  meagre  remnant  of
seven  thousand  men.  He  had  no  other  means  of
apprising  the  besieged  of  his  approach  but  by
sending  a  messenger  with  a  letter  attached  to  a
javelin,  which  he  was  to  fling  into  the  camp  if  he
could  come  within  distance.  The  letter  was  written
in  Greek,  or  Greek  letters,  to  baffle  the  enemy  in
case  it  should  be  intercepted.2  The  javelin  stuck

1  Cges.  B.  G.  v.  42. ;  Dion.  xl.  7. ;  Oros.  vi.  10.

2  See  above,  p.  300. Dion  in  mentioning  this  circumstance  remarks
that  Csesar's  usual  mode  of  secret  communication  was  by  the  use  of
each  fourth  letter  from  the  one  intended  (xl.  9.).

i  i 3

486  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, in  one  of  the  towers  of  the  wall, and  was  not

' discovered  till  the  next  day. By  this  time  the

speedy  arrival  of  succour  was  announced  by  the

smoke  of  the  burning  villages  which  marked  the

progress  of  the  exasperated  Romans. The  Gauls

broke up from their lines and inarched, sixty

thousand strong, to confront the enemy. But

even  then  Caesar  was  obliged  to  disguise  the  slender

amount  of  his  forces,  before  he  could  induce  his

and  is  saved  opponents  to  hazard  an  attack. A  vigorous  re-

by  Caesar's  , " .  111.

arrival.  sistance  broke  their  onset  and  put  them  to  the
rout,  and  thus  Quintus  Cicero  with  his  little  band,
harassed  and  weakened  as  it  had  been,  was  saved
from  the  fate  which  had  overtaken  his  colleagues.1

Caesar  re-  The  news  of  their  common  disaster  soon  reached
the  various  armies  of  the  confederates,  and  they
disappeared  in  a  moment  from  the  astonished  eyes

winter.  of  the  Roman  generals.  Indutiornarus  retreated
from  before  the  camp  of  Labienus,  and  sought  an
asylum  among  the  Treviri.  The  hosts  of  the
Armorican  states,  which  were  threatening  Roscius
in  the  country  of  the  Essui,  and  had  arrived  within
eight  miles  of  his  position,  dispersed  without  a
blow.  The  proconsul  collected  three  legions  around
Samarobriva,  and  took  up  his  station  there  again
for  the  rest  of  the  winter,  fully  occupied  with
watching  the  affairs  of  Belgium.  Excepting  the
Remi  and  the  JEdui,  who  had  devoted  themselves
without  reserve  to  the  interests  of  the  republic,
there  was  hardly  a  state  to  which  grave  suspicions
of  disaffection  did  not  attach.  Slow  and  timid  as

i  These  events  are  detailed  at  great  length,  Caes.  B.  G.  v.  42—52.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  487

the  Gauls  were  in  the  beginning  of  a  movement,  CHAP.
from  their  want  of  mutual  communication  and
reliance,  yet,  once  begun,  all  were  ready  to  join  it
with  heart  and  hand,  and  the  open  defection  of  two
nations  whose  valour  they  were  most  accustomed
to  respect,  exasperated  their  resolution  and  em-
bittered their  defiance,  in  proportion  as  it  heightened
the  danger  of  their  cause.

In  this  critical  position  of  their  affairs,  the  de-  The
fenders  of  Gaulish  liberty  had  now  recourse  to  the  '

aid  of  the  barbarians  beyond  the  Ehine. But  the  death  o

followers  of  Ariovistus  had  been  disheartened  by

^ breaks  up

the  disasters  they  had  already  experienced  in  col-
lision  with  the  Roman  arms,  and  the  fate  of  the
Usipetes  and  their  allies,  together  with  the  subse-
quent invasion  of  their  own  soil,  had  terrified  the
rest  of  the  Germans.  No  assistance  could  be  ob-
tained from  that  quarter.1  But,  notwithstanding
this  disappointment,  Indutiomarus  persisted  in
moving  the  Gauls  to  revolt.  He  had  acquired
great  personal  influence  throughout  their  tribes  by
the  friends  he  had  attached  to  himself  by  gifts  and
promises.  He  now  stept  boldly  forward,  claimed
the  leadership  of  the  whole  confederacy,  and  con-
vened an  armed  council  of  their  chiefs.  The  severity
of  the  national  institutions  demanded,  it  is  said,
that  whoever  was  last  to  attend  such  a  summons
should  be  publicly  put  to  death  with  tortures  and
infamy.  In  this  assembly  Indutiomarus  de-
nounced his  rival  Cingetorix  as  the  enemy  of  the
common  cause,  and  the  latter  was  not  slow  to

1  Cses.  B.  O.  v.  55.
i  i 4

488  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  avenge  himself  by  divulging  the  schemes  of  his
accuser  -to  Labienus.  It  was  against  Labienus
himself  that  the  first  outbreak  was  directed.  A
numerous  host  of  Gaulish  cavalry  careered  round
his  works,  taunting  his  soldiers  with  insults  arid
menaces.  But  the  legate,  forewarned,  had  formed
his  plan  of  defence.  He  suffered  the  enemy  to
exhaust  their  energies  by  a  long  and  fruitless  en-
deavour to  draw  him  forth  to  an  engagement,
and  it  was  not  till  he  had  collected  all  the  aux-
iliary forces  within  reach,  and  thoroughly  wearied
his  assailants,  that  he  threw  open  his  gates  and
gave  the  signal  for  a  sally.  He  issued  strict
orders  that  the  person  of  Indutiomarus  himself
should  be  the  object  of  every  soldier's  aim.  He
forbade  them  to  engage  in  person  with  any  one
of  the  enemy,  until  the  leader  had  been  taken  and
slain.  The  Gauls  offered  little  resistance  to  this
vigorous  onslaught,  and  Indutiomarus  was  over-
taken in  crossing  a  ford.  His  death  completed
the  easy  victory  of  the  Romans ;  the  Nervii  and
Eburones  fled  precipitately  to  their  homes,  and
the  confederacy  rapidly  dissolved.1

The  close  of  the  year  brought  a  short  period  of
respite to the Roman soldiery, but  the  winter
levies  for months  were  hardly  less  full  of  solicitude  to  their

his  sixth  .  *

campaign, officers,  especially  to  Ca3sar,  who  now  clearly  saw

B.C.  53. ' that  he  had  before  him  the  task of  completely

reconquering  the  country.2 It  was  necessary  to

recruit  his  diminished  forces  by  extensive  levies.

1  Cses.  B.  G.  v.  58.

2  Cses.  S.  G.  vi.  1. :  "  Multis  ac  causis  majorcm  Galliac  motum  cx-
pcctans."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  489

Orders  were  issued  for  raising  two  fresh  legions, CHAP.
and  the  proconsul  obtained  a  third  as  a  loan  from

Pompeius1,  who  did  not  hesitate  to  transfer  to  and  borrows
him  a  portion  of  the  forces  which  the  republic
had  assigned  to  himself.  This  legion,  numbered  pcius-
the  First,  had  indeed  been  levied  in  Cisalpine
Gaul  by  a  special  decree  of  the  senate,  and  might
seem  therefore  to  belong  of  right  rather  to  Ca3sar
than  to  his  rival.  But  that  Pompeius  should  have
thus  consented  to  strengthen  the  hands  of  a  com-
petitor of  whom  he  had  long  been  jealous,  shows
how  strong  he  must  have  felt  himself  in  the  exercise
of  the  new  powers  he  had  obtained  on  the  ex-
piration of  his  consulship,  and  the  reliance  he
must  have  placed  on  the  friends  and  adherents
with  whom  he  had  doubtless  officered  the  new
legion.  The  transaction  shows  also  in  a  striking
manner  how  independent  the  principal  chiefs  of
the  commonwealth  felt  themselves  to  be,  when  they
ventured  thus  to  lend  and  borrow  troops  among
themselves,  without  even  consulting,  as  far  as  ap-
pears, the  superior  authorities  of  the  state.2

Ca3sar's  levies  proceeded  rapidly,  and  it  was  his
policy  as  well  as  his  pride  to  show  how  speedily
Eome  could  restore  her  military  losses,  and  pour  MenaPu»

j+ *,  -,  m  and  crosse

legion  after  legion  into  the  field. The  Belgian  the  Rhine,
tribes  were  actively  engaged  in  forming  alliances

1  Cses.  B.  G.  L  c. ;  comp.  Dion.  xl.  65. Plutarch's  error,  who  speaks
of  two  legions  as  thus  lent,  is  explained  by  Moebe,  in  Cess.  L  c.

2  See  Caesar's  simple  account  of  the  transaction  (I.  c.). We  shall
find  that  a  few  years  later,  when  the  struggle  was  about  to  commence
between  Caesar  and  Pompeius,  the  latter  demanded  his  legion  to  be
restored  to  him,  and  the  other  made  no  attempt  to  retain  it  (B.  G.
viii.  54.)  ;  Plut,  Cces.  29. ;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  29.

490  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  among  themselves  ;  the  Cisrhenane  Germans  united
x>  heartily  with  them ;  the  Senones  and  others  openly
refused  obedience  to  their  foreign  masters  ;  every
thing  portended  a  general  insurrection  in  the  north-
east of  Gaul,  when  Csesar,  before  the  winter  had
yet  passed,  anticipated  the  approaching  movement
by  pouring  four  legions  into  the  country  of  the
Nervii.  A  few  rapid  marches  and  energetic  pro-
clamations daunted  successively  the  spirit  of  these
people,  of  the  Senones,  the  Carnutes,  and  others.
But  it  was  the  Treviri  who  constituted  the  main
strength  of  the  disaffected,  and  the  loss  of  all  these
auxiliaries  was  supplied  by  the  assistance  of  various
German  tribes,  and  of  the  Menapii  and  Eburones,
who  united  their  fortunes  with  them,  and  distracted
the  attention  of  the  Koman  generals.  While  Caesar
pursued  the  Menapii  into  their  fastnesses,  Labienus
overcame  the  Treviri  in  a  battle  to  which  he  enticed
them  by  a  feigned  retreat.  Cassar  reached  the
Rhine  and  crossed  it  by  a  bridge,  which  he  con-
structed at  some  distance  above  the  spot  of  his
former  passage.1  Finding,  however,  that  the  Suevi
had  retired  to  a  distance,  and  hidden  themselves  in
the  dense  Hercynian  forests,  he  desisted  from  any
attempt  to  pursue  them,  and  was  satisfied  with
leaving  a  garrison  at  the  head  of  the  bridge,  of
which  he  cut  down  the  portion  which  abutted  on
the  right  bank  of  the  river.2  He  then  turned  his
forces  upon  the  centre  of  the  Belgian  confederacy.
His  lieutenant  Basilus,  at  the  head  of  the  cavalry,
made  a  bold  dash  at  the  person  of  Ambiorix,  who

1  Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  9.  ;  Dion.  xl.  32.

2  COBS.  B.  G  vi.  29. ;  Dion.  xl.  32.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  491

narrowly  escaped  the  unexpected  attack,  and  was  CHAP.
compelled  to  break  up  his  plans  for  the  campaign,
and  recommend  his  troops  to  consult  their  safety
by  dispersion.  The  Segni  and  Condrusi,  Germanic
tribes,  sent  in  their  submission,  with  loud  assertions
of  the  constancy  with  which  they  had  refused  to
aid  the  confederates.  The  conqueror  was  not  un-
willing to  accept  their  excuses.

But  in  the  midst  of  these  successes  the  conduct  He  offers
of  the  war  still  presented  great  difficulties. The

Eburones,  in  whose  stronghold,  Aduatuca,  the  pro-  rones  to  the

IT-,  A i  v i i i  •  i neighbour-

COnSUl  had  now  established  his  quarters,  possessed  ing  tribes.
no  other  fortresses.  They  could  not  be  reached  in
any  vital  part.  Conquest  and  even  desolation
seemed  to  make  no  permanent  impression  upon  a
tribe  of  hunters  and  foresters.  Once  more  was  the
Roman  general  compelled  to  scatter  his  forces  in
various  directions.  The  Menapii,  lately  reduced,
were  again  in  arms,  and  it  required  the  presence  of
three  legions  under  Labienus  to  check  their  ad-
venturous reprisals.  Q.  Cicero  was  left  with  one
legion  to  maintain  possession  of  Aduatuca,  while
three  others  were  entrusted  to  C.  Trebonius,  with
orders  to  devastate  the  country  round,  and  pre-
vent the  nearer  approach  of  the  enemy.  Ca3sar
himself  issued  forth  in  quest  of  Ambiorix,  in  whose
death  or  capture  he  took  the  greatest  interest.  As
long  as  large  bodies  of  troops  kept  together,  they
were  sufficiently  secure  from  the  isolated  attacks  of
the  barbarians  ;  but  as  soon  as  they  ventured  to
pursue  or  plunder,  they  were  exposed  to  be  cut  off
in  detail  in  a  country  which  was  no  other  than  one
great  ambuscade.  It  was  in  these  straits  that

492  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  Cassar  determined  to  employ  the  last  resource  of  an
'  unscrupulous  invader.  He  circulated  a  proclama-
tion through  the  neighbouring  states,  declaring  the
Eburones  traitors  to  Rome  and  outlaws  from  the
human  race,  offering  at  the  same  time  their  lives
and  their  goods  as  a  common  prey  to  any  one  who
would  venture  to  take  them.1  This  was  enough  to
call  forth  all  the  tribes  which  cherished  any  jealousy
of  that  ill-fated  people,  and  every  man  who  had
any  private  quarrel  to  avenge,  to  wreak  their  fury
'under  the  protection  of  Rome.  It  put  arms  into
the  hands  of  every  adventurer,  whether  Gaulish
or  German,  who  might  choose  to  enrich  himself
by  rapine  and  murder.  Such,  it  seems,  was  the
state  of  mutual  hostility  in  which  the  Gaulish
tribes  dwelt  among  one  another,  that  an  announce-
ment of  this  kind  sufficed  to  break  all  the  late-
cemented  ties  of  interest  and  friendship,  and  to
enlist  overwhelming  multitudes  in  the  work  of  de-
struction. The  Eburones,  it  must  be  remembered,
were  an  alien  people,  descendants  of  the  Cimbri
and  Teutones  of  old.  There  was  less  sympathy
perhaps  with  them  among  the  neighbouring  races
than  if  they  had  been  people  of  pure  Gaulish  blood.
The  measure  was  completely  successful.  The  pro-
consul's summons  was  welcomed  with  savage
alacrity.  The  Gauls  rushed  headlong  upon  their
victims,  who  are  not  likely  to  have  perished  with-
out a  desperate  struggle  for  life  or  revenge.  But

1  Cses.  B.  G.  vi.  34. :  "  Cassar  ad  finitimas  civitates  nuncios  dimittit,
ad  se  evocat,  spe  praedae,  ad  diripiendos  Eburones,  ut  potius  in  sylvis
Gallorum  vita  quam  legionarius  miles  periclitetur :  simul  ut,  magna
nmltitudine  circumfusa,  pro  tali  facinore  stirps  ac  nomen  civitutis
tollatur."  Dion,  xl,  32.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  493

from  whatever  quarter  it  flowed,  it  was  the  blood CHAP.
of  enemies,  and  the  Romans  looked  on  coolly  and '
securely  while  the  ranks  of  the  assailants  were
thinned,  and  while  the  whole  clan  of  the  Eburones
was butchered  and their very  name  obliterated
from  the  map  of  Gaul.

Modern  warfare  rarely  presents  such frightful  Reflections
scenes as  must  have  marked  the  annihilation  of  act°ofseve-
the  Eburones; nor  did the  Eomans  often  allow  rity*
themselves  to  display  such  terrible examples of
their  vengeance. The transaction  we  have  just
related has accordingly  been  employed,  and  not
unnaturally,  to  affix  an  indelible  blot  upon  Caesar's
character. Yet we know that his countrymen
uniformly  represented  him  as  humane,  and even
indulgent  to  every  enemy,  domestic  or  barbarian :
and  it  becomes  the  historian's  duty  to  contemplate
this  act  from  a  Roman  point  of  view,  whence  alone
can  be  obtained a  just  conception  of  the  great
captain's  motives  and  conduct  on  this  occasion.

There  was  no  greater  national  boast  of  the  The  laws
Romans  than  the  indignation  with  which  they  understood
professed  to  view  political  treachery.  In  their
public  transactions,  especially  in  the  field,  they  did
undoubtedly  abstain  from  it  with  more  self-denial
than  other  conquering  nations.  The  strong  repro-
bation with  which  they  visited  the  few  commanders,
such  as  Ca^pio  and  Papirius,  who  had  notoriously
violated  this  maxim  of  the  state,  stands  forth  in
marked  contrast  with  the  sharnelessness  with  which
successful  perfidy  has  been  defended,  or  even  ex-
tolled,  by  national  writers  in  all  ages  of  the  world.

494  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  view  they  habitually
'  took  of  all  foreign  nations  as  liostes,  or  enemies,
could  not  fail  to  sharpen  their  aggressive  pro-
pensities. Their  religion  required  a  specious  pre-
text for  declaring  war  even  against  an  enemy ;
but  the  sensitive  pride  of  the  republic  disdained
the  idea  of  allowing  the  rights  of  any  other  state
to  clash  with  its  own,  and  there  was  practically
no  appeal  to  a  law  of  nations.  Moreover,  the
Romans  persisted  in  regarding  the  rude  and  igno-
rant enemies  with  whom  they  so  often  contended
as  not  less  responsible  for  the  exact  observance  of
their  agreements,  by  whatever  compulsion  they
might  have  been  extorted,  than  themselves,  endued
as  they  were  by  education  with  higher  intelligence.
The  slightest  infraction  of  a  treaty  was  held,  as  in
the  case  of  the  Veneti,  to  put  the  transgressors
beyond  the  pale  of  humanity.  No  punishment
was  reputed  too  severe  if  the  extreme  of  severity
seemed  but  expedient.1  The  infliction  of  pain  and
death  never  disturbed  the  complacency  of  a  Roman
general  in  the  discharge  of  what  he  deemed  his
duty  to  the  state.  Death  was  the  element  in
which  he  seemed  himself  to  move,  whether  at  home
or  abroad,  in  the  struggles  of  the  forum  almost  as
much  as  in  the  contests  of  the  battle-field.  From
his  infancy  he  was  schooled  to  habitual  indifference
to  his  own  life ;  and  if  he  thought  as  lightly  of  that
of  his  enemy,  he  can  hardly  be  accused  of  holding
it  in  greater  contempt.  Such  was  the  inevitable
consequence  of  the  state  of  perpetual  war  abroad

1  Heyne,  Opusc.  iv.  480. :  "  De  bellis  internecinis."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  495

and  danger  at  home  in  which  the  Roman  lived, CHAP.
nor  is  it  to  be  attributed  to  any  peculiar  ferocity  of
character.

In  the  present case  certain  treaties  had  been
forced  upon  the  Eburones  and  had  been  violated

by  them. They had overreached Sabinus and  humane

fiL  -i-iii  •  than  the

Ootta,  and  employed  treachery  to  entice  them  to  barbarians.
their  destruction.  It  seemed  necessary  to  do  some-
thing which  should  thoroughly  awe  the  neigh-
bouring states  and  bring  the  war  to  a  decision,
and  the  maxims  of  military  policy  presented  no
obstacle  to  the  vengeance  which  was  inflicted  upon
them.  But  it  was  the  Gauls  themselves  who  as-
sembled to  destroy  their  own  friends  and  allies.
The  prospect  of  plunder  overcame  every  feeling  of
sympathy,  and  even  of  permanent  advantage.1
Where  such  was  the  case  we  may  imagine  how
utterly  uncontrolled  by  principles  of  any  kind  their
ordinary  warfare  must  have  been.  Much  as  the
Romans  abused  their  pretensions  to  moral  and  in-
tellectual cultivation,  yet  they  were  still,  what  they
professed  to  be,  a  civilized  nation;  and  wherever
they  went,  whether  in  peace  or  war,  they  softened
the  habits  of  the  barbarians  among  whom  they
established  themselves.2  The  conquests  of  the  re-

i  The  mutual  distrust  of  the  Gaulish  tribes  appears  in  their  custom
of  taking  hostages  from  one  another  whenever  they  formed  treaties  of
alliance,  &c.  Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  2.

*  It  may  be  observed  that,  however  shocking  the  conduct  of  civi-
lized armies  has  often  been,  it  has  been  almost  always  better  than  that
of  the  barbarians  themselves.  It  is  some  slight  consolation  to  humanity
to  believe  that  the  atrocities  perpetrated  by  the  French  in  Algeria,
and  even  by  the  Spaniards  in  America,  were  a  shade  lighter  than
those  which  the  natives  were  in  the  habit  of  practising  upon  one
another.

496  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, public  were,  on  the  whole,  a  career  of  human  im-

' provement,  and  were  carried  on  by  methods  more

humane  and  more  conducive  to  the  progress  of

mankind  than those  which  they  superseded  and

obliterated. There  would  be  little  inducement  to

write  their  history  were  it  otherwise.

A  body  of When  Caesar  left  Aduatuca  in  pursuit  of  Am-

Germans  t  *•

crosses  the biorix,  directing  his  course  to  the  northern  confines
plunder  the  of  the  great  forest  of  Arduenna,  between  the  lower

an(j  ^  Meuse,  he  assured  Cicero  that  he
'  would  return  within  seven  days. In  the  mean-
while the  plunderers  had  commenced  their  work  of
destruction  against  the  Eburones,  and  among  them
a  small  body  of  Germans  had  been  allured  across
the  Rhine  by  the  hope  of  booty.1 They  effected
their  passage  on  rafts,  avoiding  the  Roman  bridge
and  garrison,  first  tasted  their  prey  on  the  northern
border  of  the  Eburon  territory,  then  penetrated
further  into  the  forests,  until  they  arrived  in  the
vicinity  of  the  Roman  quarters  at  Aduatuca. They
inquired  after  the  much  -dreaded  name  of  Caesar,
and  when  they  heard  that  he  was  absent,  lent  no
unwilling  ear  to  the  bold  suggestions  of  an  Eburon
captive. "  In three hours," he  said, "  you  can
reach  Aduatuca  ;  poor  and  scanty  is  the  plunder
you  have  obtained  from  my  country  ;  the  further
you advance the less  will you glean from the
leavings  of  our  neighbours'  rapacity  ; but  in  the
camp  of  Cicero  are  all  the  stores  of  the  proconsul,
all his  resources  for  the campaign, and  all the
booty  he  has  swept  within  his  net. The  garrison
is  too  slender  even  to  man  the  walls  which  sur-

'  Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  35.

UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  497

round,  but  cannot  protect,  all  this  wealth." The CHAP.
Germans embraced the adventure  with  alacrity,
and  the  Eburon  rejoiced  in  the  certain  destruction
of  the  one  or  the  other  of  his  enemies.

The  garrison  of  Aduatuca  was,  indeed,  by  no  and
means  so  slender  as  had  been  represented,  out-
numbering  very  considerably  the  handful  of  Ger-
mans  who  had  thus  undertaken  to  surprise  and  Aduatuca,
destroy  it.  We  may  suppose,  however,  that  the
latter  had  been  swelled  to  much  greater  numbers
on  their  route,  and  at  the  moment  of  their  sudden
appearance  before  the  gates  of  the  encampment
five  cohorts  of  the  legion  were  absent  foraging  at  a
short  distance.  The  seventh  day  had  passed,  no
news  of  the  proconsul  had  arrived,  there  was  a
pressing  want  of  provisions  in  the  camp,  and  no
appearance  of  any  enemy  in  the  neighbourhood.
Nevertheless,  Cicero's  incautiousness  in  thus  re-
ducing his  strength  proved  almost  fatal  to  him.
The  attack  of  the  Germans  was  so  sudden,  the
defence  so  feeble  (for  the  walls  were  manned  in  a
great  measure  by  the  sick  and  wounded)  that  the
place  was  on  the  point  of  being  carried  by  a
coup-de-main.  The  five  cohorts  returned  from
foraging;  but  the  enemy  had  placed  himself  be-
tween them  and  the  camp,  and,  despising  the
smallness  of  their  numbers,  reckoned  upon  an  easy
victory.  The  Romans,  moreover,  were  for  the
most  part  new  levies,  being  a  portion  of  the  arma-
ment which  had  been  raised  that  winter  in  Italy.
They  had  been  officered,  however,  by  the  pro-
motion  of  picked  men  from  the  other  legions,  and

VOL.  I.  K  K

498  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  were  now  saved  by  the  unfailing  discipline  and
'  presence  of  mind  of  the  centurions.  They  were
instructed  to  form  immediately  the  cuneus  or
wedge,  and  so  rush  with  all  their  force  upon  the
opposing  ranks.  Their  weight  and  steadiness  bore
down  all  resistance,  and  the  moving  mass  burst
through  the  crowd  of  barbarians  till  it  reached
the  gates  of  the  camp,  which  were  speedily  opened

but  are  dis-  to  it.  Thus  baffled,  the  Germans  lost  heart,  and
made  the  best  of  their  way  homewards,  with  as
much  of  their  booty  as  the  time  and  their  own
fears  would  allow  them  to  secure  :  for  Caesar  was
now  close  upon  their  rear,  and  they  were  much
more  ready  to  believe  in  his  approach  than  the
Romans  themselves,  who  had  given  themselves  up
to  despair,  convinced  that  nothing  but  his  defeat
and  death  could  have  brought  the  Germans  so
suddenly  upon  them.1

cacsar  leaves  Caesar,  indeed,  had  been  unsuccessful  in  the
principal  object  of  his  late  expedition,  the  capture

of  huUsixth  or  slaughter  of  Ambiorix.  He  set  out  once  more
campaign,  and  ravaged  all  the  districts  through  which  he
passed  with  fire  and  sword  ;  but  still  the  wily
Eburon  was  able  to  elude  his  pursuit.  In  vain
did  the  captives  of  each  day's  skirmish  declare,
when  brought  into  the  presence  of  the  proconsul,
that  they  had  but  just  seen  the  fugitive,  that  he
must  still  be  close  at  hand,  that  he  was  defenceless
and  alone,  or  attended  at  most  by  a  mere  handful
of  followers  ;  for  the  rewards  with  which  the  Ko-
mans  urged  his  people  to  betray  him  rendered  his
person  everywhere  insecure.  As  the  season  drew

1  Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  35—41.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  499

to  a  close,  and  no  enemy  appeared  any  longer  in  CHAP.
the  field,  the  labours  of  the  campaign  came  at  last
to  an  end.  Caesar  convened  the  general  assembly
at  Durocortorum,  and  occupied  it  with  an  inquiry
into  the  guilt  of  the  Senones  and  Carnutes  ;  but
he  treated  those  people  with  unexpected  mildness,
and  was  satisfied  with  the  sacrifice  of  a  single
victim.  He  stationed  two  legions  in  the  country
of  the  Treviri,  two  among  the  Lingones,  but  con-
centrated the  remaining  six  at  Agendicum,  in  the
territory  of  the  Senones.1  Having  made  these  dis-
positions, he  no  longer  hesitated  to  take  the  road
for  Italy,  intending  to  hold  the  assembly  of  the
Cisalpine  states,  and  take  at  the  same  time  a
nearer  survey  of  the  affairs  of  Rome,  where  events
had  occurred  of  the  utmost  importance  towards
the  further  development  of  his  cherished  schemes.

Caesar  was  still  occupied  with  his  second  inva-  The  death
sion  of  Britain  when  he  was  apprised  by  letters  it,

from  Rome  of  the  death  of  Julia.2  The  natural  imP°rtance-
expression  of  his  affliction  is  lightly  touched  upon
in  Cicero's  correspondence  with  his  brother3,  and
the  fortitude  with  which  he  bore  it,  returning
within  three  days  to  the  discharge  of  his  public
duties,  is  recorded  in  glowing  terms  by  a  more
pedantic  philosopher.4  He  subdued  his  grief,  says

1  Cses.  B.  G.  vi.  44.

2  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  in.  1.  17.  25. Compare  and  correct  Plut.  Cces.
23.

3  Cic.  /.  c.  :  "  O  me  solicitum,  quantum  ego  dolui  in  Caesaris  suavis-
simis  literis  !  "

4  Senec.  Consol.  ad  Marc.  14.: "  Intra  tertium  diem  imperatoria
obiit  munia,  et  tarn  cito  dolorem  vicit  quam  omnia  solebat."

K  K 2

500  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CETAP. Seneca,  with  the  same  expedition  with  which  he
' subdued  his  enemies. It  may  be  doubted  whether

the  change  which  this  event  effected  in  his  rela-
tions with  Pompeius,  and  the  prospect  of  a  speedier
rupture  between  them,  enhanced  his  domestic
affliction,  as  that  writer  would  have  us  suppose1;
but  if  it  broke  up  his  plans,  and  rendered  their
accomplishment  still  more  uncertain  and  preca-
rious, it  must  have  added  a  heavy  burden  to  his
.  political  cares.  On  the  eve,  however,  of  his  next
return  to  Italy,  another  event  of  more  momentous
public  concern  conspired  with  his  recent  loss  to  per-
plex and  overcast  his  schemes.  Our  next  chapter
will  record  the  expedition  of  Crassus  into  Asia,  and
The  deaths  its  fatal  termination.  The  triple  league  was  dis-
solved  by  the  death  of  the  triumvir,  whose  peculiar
position  in  the  state,  as  well  as  his  personal  quali-
ties, had  fitted  him  to  hold  the  balance  between
his  more  aspiring  colleagues ;  or  constituted  him,
in  the  language  of  the  poet,  the  isthmus  which  for-
bade the  collision  of  two  encroaching  oceans.2  If
any  thing  more  was  wanted  to  withdraw  all  re-
straint from  the  angry  passions  of  the  rival  chief-
tains, it  was  supplied  by  the  removal  of  Clodius
from  the  scene,  the  news  of  which  event  also  greeted
Cassar  immediately  upon  his  arrival  at  the  frontier
of  his  province.3  The  circumstances  which  attended

1  Senec.  /.  c. :  "  In  oculis  erat Cn.  Pompeius,  non  aequo  laturus
animo  quenquam  alium  esse  in  republica  magnum."

2  Lucan,  i.  100. :

" Qualiter  undas

Qui  secat  et  geminum  gracilis  mare  separat  isthmus,"  &c.

3  Cees.  B.  G.  vii.  1. :  "Ibi  cognoscit  de  Clodii  caede."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  501

it  compelled  the  senate  to  throw  all  its  power  into  CHAP.
the  hands  of  Pompeius ;  and  the  reconciliation  of
their  recent  jealousies,  hollow  as  it  was,  destroyed
whatever  yet  remained  of  confidence  and  good  faith
between  the  leader  of  the  oligarchy  and  the  cham-
pion of  the  popular  cause.

K K 3

502

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  XL

STATE OP THE PARTHIAN MONARCHY.  —  CRASSUS MEDITATES
AN EXPEDITION AGAINST THE PARTHIANS.  —  FIRST INVASION,

A.U.  700. SECOND INVASION, A.U.  701. HE IS DECEIVED

BY THE PARTHIANS, AND MISLED BY HIS GUIDES. FATAL

ENGAGEMENT BEYOND CHARRH^E. —  DEATH OF THE YOUNGER

CRASSUS. CRASSUS ENTICED INTO  A  CONFERENCE  AND  SLAIN

IN  A  FRAY. — HIS  REMAINS  INSULTED.— AN  INTERREGNUM  AT
ROME.  —  POMPEIUS  PREVAILS  ON  THE  TRIBUNES  TO  ALLOW

THE ELECTION OF CONSULS.  —  ASSASSINATION OF CLOD1US.

DISTURBANCES  IN  THE  CITY.  — POMPEIUS  APPOINTED  SOLE
CONSUL  FOR  THE  YEAR  702 TRIAL  OF  MILO.  —  THE  PRO-
CEEDINGS OF  THE  FORUM  CONTROLLED  BY  AN  ARMED  FORCE.

CHAP. BEFORE  we  revert  to  the  contemplation  of  the  pro-
tracted death-struggle  of  Eoman  independence,  we

Rise  of  the  must  turn  aside  to  follow  the  Parthian  expedition
monarchy.  °f  Crassus,  one  of  the  most  romantic  episodes  in
the  history  of  the  martial  republic,  conspicuous  for
the  most  wanton  aggression  and  the  most  signal
chastisement  by  which  her  bloody  annals  are  dis-
tinguished. The  province  of  Syria  offered  brilliant
opportunities  to  the  ambition  or  avarice  of  a  Roman
proconsul.  Its  wealth,  comparatively  untouched
by  earlier  conquerors,  was  the  accumulation  of
centuries  of  commercial  splendour.  Its  frontiers
were  limited  by  the  dominions  of  the  tributary
sovereigns  of  Cappadocia  and  Palestine,  who  flou-
rished under  the  shadow  of  Roman  protection.  Be-
yond them  lay  the  kingdoms  of  Armenia,  placed
also  in  a  state  of  dubious  dependence  on  the  re-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  503

public,  and  of  Egypt,  whose  freedom  at  the  moment CHAP.

was  trembling  in  the  balance. To  the  east  stretched  '__

the  vast  extent  of  the  Parthian  empire,  with  which
Rome  had  never  yet  measured  her  strength.  The
region  from  which  the  once  mighty  name  of  the
Parthians  took  its  rise  is  an  insignificant  tract  of
country  watered  by  the  river  Ochus,  the  modern
Tedjen,  near  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  the
Caspian  Sea.  On  the  north  a  sandy  desert  se-
parates it  from  the  Oxus  and  the  modern  city  of
Khiva ;  on  the  south  it  is  hemmed  in  by  the  great
mountain  chain  which  connects  the  Caucasus  of
the  west  with  the  Hindoo  Khoosh,  or  Caucasus  of
the  East.  This  district  had  formed  the  most
northern  possession  of  the  Macedonian  empire ;
but,  upon  the  partition  of  the  various  provinces
after  the  death  of  Alexander,  none  of  the  Greek
generals  ventured  to  occupy  a  throne  in  so  remote
and  barbarous  a  region.  Parthia  fell  into  the
hands  of  a  chief  of  native  extraction,  though
known  by  the  Greek  name  of  Stasanor ;  but  it
continued  in  a  state  of  precarious  dependence  on
the  sovereigns  of  the  Macedonian  line,  who  held
their  court  in  Susa.  The  power  of  the  European
dynasties  was  weakened  by  their  quarrels  with
one  another ;  and  both  the  Parthians  and  the  Bac-
trians  shook  off  the  yoke  in  the  second  century
before  our  era.  Arsaces,  the  founder  of  a  race  of
Parthian  kings,  was  a  man  of  obscure  origin ;  the
conquest  of  Hyrcania  extended  his  possessions  to
the  Caspian  ;  and  when  his  vigorous  chivalry  crossed
the  Caucasus  and  came  in  contact  with  the  nations
to  the  south,  the  successors  of  Alexander  were

K K 4

504  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  unable  to  withstand  them,  and  the  whole  of  the
XL  provinces  between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Indus
fell  in  the  fourth  generation  under  the  sway  of
the  Parthian  Mithridates.  This  powerful  tyrant
was  succeeded  by  a  son  who,  after  some  brilliant
triumphs  over  the  Greeks  in  Syria,  was  defeated
and  slain  by  a  horde  of  invading  Scythians.  The
attention  of  his  successors,  as  far  as  they  could
spare  it  from  their  intestine  divisions  and  family
intrigues,  was  principally  occupied  with  checking
the  progress  of  these  depredators,  and  supporting
the  power  of  Armenia  on  their  north-western
frontier,  which  formed  a  bulwark  against  future
invasion  from  that  quarter.1

The  Par-  For  his  abode  the  Parthian  sovereign  selected
Seleucia  on  the  Tigris,  from  among  the  royal  resi-
dences of  the  empire  he  had  overthrown.  Scarcely
emerged  from  the  tent  of  his  fathers,  he  at  once
established  himself  in  all  the  pomp  of  the  ancient
dynasties  which  had  successively  held  the  sceptre
of  Central  Asia.  He  adopted  from  the  Assyrians
the  slothful  luxury  of  the  priest-kings  of  the  line
of  Belus;  he  surrounded  himself  with  slaves,  eu-
nuchs, and  concubines ;  dressed  more  like  a  woman
than  a  man2,  and  revelled  in  the  charms  of  odours,
wine,  and  music.  From  the  example  of  the  Medes,
he  assumed  the  licence  of  intermarrying  with  the
nearest  members  of  his  own  family,  a  barbarous

1  This  history  is  concisely  detailed  by  Justin,  xli.  4,  5.

*  See  Plutarch's  description  of  Surenas  (c.  24.)  :  ivrpippaoi  irpoo-
MTTOV  Kcd  KOfuriQ  SiaKpiffei,  and  comp.  C.  32.  :  iaQfjra  (3ap€apiKrjv  yvvaiK^g
it'dvG.  The  flowing  dress  which  the  Greeks  supposed  to  be  feminine
was  originally  sacerdotal,  but  its  effect  must  have  been  to  encourage
indolence  and  cowardice.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  505

device  for  limiting  the  claimants  to  the  succession.  CHAP.
Nor  was  he  less  easily  seduced  by  the  more  intellec-
tual, but  hardly  less  enervating,  refinements  which
the  Greeks  had  introduced  into  Asia.  An  exotic
literature  and  a  gaudy  theatre  flourished  at  Se-
leucia  under  the  royal  patronage ;  the  ritual  cere-
monies of  the  most  graceful  of  superstitions  were
too  closely  interwoven  with  the  forms  of  the
Grecian  drama  not  to  follow  in  its  train.  The
court  of  Seleucia  presented  a  motley  combination
of  the  manners  of  different  ages  and  countries,  only
to  be  paralleled,  perhaps,  in  the  semi- European
fashions  of  Petersburgh  and  Moscow.  But  the
monarch  was  surrounded  and  his  throne  upheld  by
the  faithful  arms  of  a  warlike  nobility,  among  whom
these  refinements  had  not  penetrated  so  deeply.
For  them  he  had  changed  the  satrapies  of  Persia
and  the  governments  of  Alexander  into  dependent
fiefs.  When  he  put  forth  his  whole  strength  for
conquest  or  defence,  he  could  call  upon  the  services
of  eighteen  vitaxae,  or  vassal  kings.1  Every  petty
chieftain  summoned  his  retainers  to  his  side,  who
preserved  at  least  in  the  field  the  habits  of  their
nomade  ancestors,  clad  themselves  in  their  scaly
armour,  and  bounded  upon  their  horses,  equipped
with  the  bow  and  arrow,  equally  deadly  in  the
charge  or  the  retreat.2

1  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Fall,  c.  8. ;  Malcolm,  Hist,  of  Persia,  i.  c.  7.

2  The  Parthian  forces  consisted  principally  of  cavalry, and  both
men  and  horses  were  clad  in  chain  or  scale  armour. Justin,  xli.  2.
These  accoutrements  became  an  object  of  terror  to  the  Romans  after
their  defeat  under  Crassus,  and  formed  the  burden  of  many  popular
descriptions. (See  Propertius,  Martial,  and  the  poets  generally.) It
is  hardly  credible  that  the  Parthian  horsemen  thus  equipped  could

506  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.  The  countenance  which  the  Parthian  monarch

~YT

'  extended  to the  manners  and  usages  introduced

The  dynasty  by  his  immediate  predecessors  into  the  regions
saddle  ot>-  beyond  the  Euphrates  was  doubtless  galling  to
noxious  to  the  Spjrjt  Of  the  native  race,  and  rendered  him

its  Persian

subjects.  '  particularly  obnoxious  to  the  priestly  caste,  who
worshipped  the  element  of  fire  in  its  visible  foun-
tain in  the  heavens.  It  was  to  this  hostility,
perhaps,  that  the  dynasty  of  Arsaces  owes  the
obscurity  which  envelopes  its  history  in  the  native
annals.  Ferdousi,  the  poetical  historian  of  Persia,
passes  it  over  almost  in  silence ;  and  other  Oriental
authorities,  while  they  curtail  its  duration  by  two
or  more  centuries,  deny  the  foreign  extraction  of
the  founder.1  This  opinion  has  met  with  sup-
porters among  European  scholars  ;  but  the  passage

have  had  great  rapidity  of  movement ;  and  the  Armenian  cavalry,
similarly  armed,  was  defeated  and  destroyed  with  ease  by  Lucullus  at
Tigranocerta.  (Plut.  Luc.  28.)  But  their  attacks  were  formidable  to
the  Roman  legionary,  unless  well  furnished  with  archers,  slingers,  and
cavalry  on  his  wings.  In  the  later  periods  of  the  empire  the  Romans
adopted  this  mode  of  equipment,  rather  perhaps  for  show  than  for
service.  (Claudian,  in  Rufin.  ii.  360.)  But  the  same  kind  of  defen-
sive armour,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  associate  with  the  name  of
the  Parthians,  has  been  very  extensively  used  in  various  parts  of  the
world.  The  figures  thus  clad  on  the  Column  of  Trajan  represent  Sar-
matians :  comp.  Tac.  Hist.  i.  79.;  Ammian.  xvii.  12.;  Pausan.  i.  21.
The  Georgians  and  Circassians  use  it  habitually  at  the  present  day,
and  it  was  adopted  from  them  by  their  descendants,  the  Mamelukes  of
Egypt.  Major  Denham  discovered  a  people  in  Bornou  whose  king
was  attended  by  a  body-guard  of  horsemen  in  chain-mail.  Their
horses,  he  says,  were  small,  but  moved  with  rapidity.  Denham
and  Clapperton 's  First  Journey,  p.  62 — 64.  His  drawings  are  pre-
cisely similar  to  the  specimens  of  Afghan  or  Belooche  chain-mail,
which  may  be  seen  in  Sir  Samuel  Meyrick's  collection  at  Goodrich
Court.  The  chain-mail  of  the  crusaders  with  which  we  are  familiar
was  more  complete  and  heavier  than  any  other.

1  Malcolm's  Hist,  of  Persia,  I.  c. Arsaces  is  known  to  the  native
writers  by  the  name  of  Ashk.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  507

of  Strabo,  on  which  they  rely,  may  be  safely  pro- CHAP.
nounced corrupt1, and there is no ground for
supposing  that  the  Arsacida3  formed  an  exception
to  the  destiny  which  has  so  repeatedly  subjected
Persia  to  the  sway  of  foreign  masters.2

Meanwhile,  the  progress  of  the  Roman  arms  in  crassus  sets
the  East  had  brought  them  into  immediate  contact
with  the  Parthian  outposts,  and  the  line  of  the  Eu-
phrates  became  through  a  part  of  its  course  the
recognized  boundary  of  the  two  dominions.  The
Roman  province  of  Syria  extended  from  the  south-
eastern extremity  of  Asia  Minor  or  the  Gulf  of
Issus,  to  the  Libanus,  the  northern  limit  of  Pa-
lestine. It  was  governed,  as  we  have  seen,  directly
from  Rome,  while  the  territories  immediately  bor-
dering upon  it  were  allowed  to  retain  their  own
laws,  and  were  subjected  to  the  rule  of  native
sovereigns  appointed  by  the  republic.  The  large
force  which  it  was  necessary  to  maintain  in  a  po-
sition of  such  importance,  and  its  distance  from  the
seat  of  government,  invested  the  proconsul  of  Syria

1  Strabo  alone  of  the  ancient  writers  seems  to  identify  the  Parthians
with  the  Carduchi  (xvi.  1.)  ;  but  the  reading  HapOvaiw  is  rejected
by  Groskurd,  who,  with  Tzschukke,  Koray,  and  Wesseling,  would  read
ropSvfiiw. The  Carduchi,  or  Kurds,  had  their  central  seats  about  the
sources  of  the  river  Tigris,  but  extended  also  into  the  plains  of  Adia-
bene. Xenophon  (Andb.  iii.  5.  16.)  describes  them  as  only  nominally
dependent  on  the  kings  of  Persia  in  his  time. Their  nomade  habits
and  love  of  horses  (Kinneir,  Geographical  Memoir  of  Persia,  p.  143.)
are  too  common characteristics  of  an  analogous  state  of  society  to
establish  any  identity  between  them  and  the  Parthians. Undoubtedly,
however, there  was an early  connexion between the Armenians,
Parthians,  Medes,  and  Persians,  derived  from  their  common  Caucasian
origin,  and  so  far  both  theories  may  be  reconciled.

2  The  dynasty  of  the  Arsacidse  was  overthrown  in  the  third  century
by  Ardshir,  or  Artaxerxes,  the  first  of  the  Sassanida3,  a  native  race
which  reigned  till  the  conquest  of  the  Saracens  in  the  seventh.

508  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  with  almost  irresponsible  power.  Gabinius  was
'  nearly  the  first  to  whom  this  charge  had  been
intrusted  since  the  political  settlement  established
throughout  these  regions  by  Pompeius.  He  had
gone  to  his  province  full  of  schemes  of  warfare  and
plunder.  He  had  quarrelled  with  the  Parthians,
who  had  hitherto  cultivated  amicable  relations  with
their  formidable  neighbours,  and  conducted  them-
selves towards  her  officers  with  the  respectful
frankness  of  a  brave  and  independent  people.  He
had  gone  so  far  as  to  threaten  them  with  invasion,
but  had  been  diverted  from  his  purpose  by  the
superior  temptation  of  restoring  Ptolemaeus  Auletes
to  the  throne  of  Egypt.  It  was  this  capricious
project  of  Gabinius  to  signalize  himself  by  a  war
with  Parthia  that  inflamed  the  vanity  of  Crassus.
The  success  of  the  new  proconsul  in  military  aiFairs
had  hitherto  been  equivocal ;  up  to  this  period  he
had  not  appeared  to  affect  the  character  of  a  great
general.  But  the  renown  of  Pompeius  and  Caesar
had  long  rankled  in  his  bosom ;  he  resolved  to
rival,  and  he  hoped  to  excel,  them ;  sentiments  of
military  ambition,  which  were  supposed  never  to
have  found  a  place  in  his  cautious  and  sober  dispo-
sition, now  broke  forth  in  expressions  of  the  wildest
arrogance.  He  talked  to  his  friends  with  puerile
arrogance  of  the  exploits  he  would  perform ;  he
would  not  limit  his  enterprizes  to  Syria  or  even
Parthia ;  the  victories  of  Lucullus  over  Tigranes,
of  Pompeius  over  Mithridates,  he  ridiculed  as
trifling ;  while  he  proclaimed  his  own  resolution  to
subdue  the  Bactrians  and  the  Indians,  and  penetrate,
like  another  Alexander,  to  the  ocean  which  sur-

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  509

rounds  the  Continent.1  Caesar,  always  on  the  CHAP.
watch  for  the  errors  of  his  associates,  wrote  to  him
from  Gaul  to  stimulate  his  ambition  and  his
hopes.2  We  may  suppose  that  the  advice  of  the
conqueror  of  the  West  would  be  of  no  less  auda-
cious a  character  than  that  which  had  so  often
signalized  his  actions,  and  that  he  urged  Crassus
to  put  the  widest  interpretation  upon  the  licence  to
make  war  or  peace  which  Trebonius  had  obtained
for  him.  It  was  indeed  too  late  to  quarrel  with
the  proconsul  of  Syria  for  proposing  to  exercise  a
power  which  had  been  formally  conceded  to  him  ;
nevertheless,  the  statesmen  of  the  republic  were  re-
luctant to  throw  themselves  at  the  feet  of  another
military  despot,  and  the  disclosure  of  his  warlike
resolves  caused  general  alarm  and  discontent  among
them.  In  order  to  evade  the  effect  of  their  dis-
couragement or  remonstrances,  Crassus  pushed  on
his  preparations,  and  set  out  upon  his  journey
some  weeks  before  his  consulship  expired.3  The
tribune  Ateius,  a  partizan  of  the  nobles,  unable  to
detain  him  by  a  legal  enactment,  met  him  at  the
gate  of  the  city,  and  holding  in  one  hand  a  brazier
of  burning  coals,  and  casting  incense  into  it  with
the  other,  invoked  the  curse  of  heaven  upon  the
enterprize  and  its  leader,  and  devoted  him,  in  the

1  Plut.  Crass.  16.  2  Plut.  I  c.

3  He  left  Rome  just  before  the  middle  of  November,  according  to
the  unreformed  calendar  (Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  13),  the  Roman  year  at  this
period  being  just  fifteen  days  in  advance  of  the  real  time.  He  pro-
bably crossed  from  Brundisium  about  a  fortnight  later,  when  his
armament  was  assailed  by  violent  stormy  weather.  Plut.  Crass.  17. ;
comp.  Drumann,  iv.  96.  Plutarch  contradicts  himself  in  Pomp.  52.,
where  he  says  that  Crassus  did  not  leave  Rome  till  the  beginning  of
the  following  year.

510  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  face  of  his  country,  and  in  the  solemn  words  of  the
ancient. formularies,  to  the  infernal  gods.1  A  fear-
ful importance  was  attached  by  popular  superstition
to  a  tribune's  curse,  and  the  minds  of  the  soldiery
were  not  less  affected  by  it  than  those  of  the  people.
As  might  be  expected,  the  door  was  at  once  opened
to  the  invention  of  every  kind  of  evil  omen  which
fear  or  malice  could  suggest.  Many  were  reported
at  the  time,  more  probably  were  imagined  after
the  catastrophe  which  they  seemed  to  portend.  A
story  related  by  Cicero  retains  an  antiquarian  in-
terest, which  may  warrant  its  repetition.  While
the  troops  were  assembled  at  Brundisium,  a  man
was  heard  calling  his  figs  in  the  street,  "Cauneas"
"Cauneas;"  his  long  and  drawling  accents  were
fancifully  interpreted  into  the  fatal  warning,  "  Cave
ne  eas,"  "Beware  of  going."2  The  loss  of  several
vessels,  in  the  passage  to  Dyrrhachium,  with  troops
on  board,  was  a  more  serious  misadventure.  But
the  journey  through  Macedonia  and  the  Lesser
Asia,  with  all  its  cheering  sights  and  pleasant
resting-places,  revived  the  equanimity  of  the  sol-
diers, and  Crassus  himself  was  full  of  confidence
and  arrogant  levity.  Deiotarus,  king  of  Galatia,
an  aged  and  faithful  ally  of  the  Koman  people,

1  Plut.  Crass.  16.;  Dion,  xxxix.  39.;  Flor.  iii.  11.  3.,  where  the
name  Metellus  is  a  mistake. The  nobles  affected  to  be  displeased
with  the  extravagant  zeal  of  their  friend. But  Cicero,  in  a  letter  to
Atticus  (iv.  13.),  contrasts  the  slender  attendance  of  friends  and  well-
wishers  at  Crassus's  departure  with  the  enthusiasm  which  was  mani-
fested when  -ZEmilius  Paullus  left  the  city  to  undertake  the  war  against
Perseus,  king  of  Macedonia.

2  Cic.  de  Divin.  ii.  40. Probably  the  sound  was  "  Caf'neas."

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  511

was  building  a  city  in  the  route  of  the  proconsul. CHAP.
Crassus  mocked  at  him  for  undertaking  such  an
enterprize  in  his  old  age. "And  thou,  too,"  re-
turned the  veteran,  "  art  far  advanced  in  years  to
lead  an  expedition  against  the  Parthians."1

The  Roman,  indeed,  did  not  delay  an  instant
in  making  his  first  campaign.  He  crossed  the
Euphrates,  and  accepted  the  submission  of  some  and  gains

TIT  •  s-\  -i  i »  -I.T some  trifling

towns  in  Mesopotamia.  One  place,  before  which  successes.
a  party  of  his  troops  had  met  with  a  check,  he
stormed  and  ransacked,  and  was  well  pleased  to
receive,  for  so  trifling  an  exploit,  the  acclamations
of  his  army  and  the  appellation  of  Imperator.  But
he  was  soon  satisfied  with  his  success,  and,  in-
stead of  pushing  forward  upon  the  centre  of  the
enemy's  power,  returned  indolently  to  his  pro-
vince ;  thus  allowing  the  Parthians,  irritated  but
not  seriously  injured,  to  complete  their  prepa-
rations for  repelling  a  second  attack.  The  rule  of
an  upstart  race  of  barbarians  fretted  the  pride  of
the  great  old-world  cities  of  Seleucia  and  Babylon.
The  first  object  of  an  invader,  according  to  the
military  critics  of  antiquity,  should  have  been  to
present  himself  before  their  walls,  and  proclaim
himself  the  deliverer  of  voluptuous  civilization
from  the  yoke  of  the  rude  mountaineers.2  During

1  Crassus  was  sixty  years  of  age,  and  his  appearance  was  still  older.
Plut.  Crass.  17.;  App.  Hist.  Rer.  Parth. This  work  cannot  be  con-
sidered genuine,  and  is  almost  a  verbal  transcript  of  Plutarch.

2  Plut.  Crass.  27. :  Ba£uXwvoc  mal  SfXfv/caac,  dvfffitvMV  an  TOIQ  TldpQoiQ

Dion.  xl.  13. :  rciJV  yap  MaKf<5oi/wr  ical  TWV  dXXwv  TIJJV  avaTpa-
fffyiffiv  'EXXijvutv  O.TTOIKOI TroXXor, (3i<p d^Oofjitvoi^ jcai t£  TOVQ
we  Kai  <f>i\t\\r]vas  7ro\\d  tX7ri'£ovTtc,  o

512  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  remainder  of  the  year,  the  seven-hundredth
'  from  the  foundation  of  the  city,  Crassus  occupied
himself  with  the  civil  affairs  of  his  province,  with
the  extortion,  that  is,  and  accumulation  of  treasure.
In  the  pursuit  of  his  object  he  committed  various
acts  of  sacrilege,  to  the  horror  of  the  natives,  who
carefully  registered  the  omens  which  portended  the
vengeance  of  the  gods.1  He  was  joined  by  his  son,
the  gallant  lieutenant  of  Caesar,  with  a  body  of  one
thousand  cavalry  from  Gaul,  a  present  from  the
one  triumvir  to  the  other.  The  most  experienced
of  his  officers  was  C.  Cassius  Longinus,  a  soldier  of
approved  skill  and  courage,  the  same  who  became
celebrated  in  after  years  as  a  principal  actor  in
Caesar's  assassination.  Thus  supported,  with  an
army  duly  disciplined  and  equipped,  he  continued
to  indulge  in  sanguine  confidence  regarding  the
result  of  the  campaign  which  he  projected  for  the
following  year.  The  character  of  the  Parthian
warfare,  which  became  so  terrible  to  the  Eomans,
was  as  yet  little  known  to  them ;  but  the  Persian
arrow,  it  was  remembered,  had  been  no  match  for
the  Macedonian  Sarissa.  The  mail-clad  horsemen
of  Parthia  were  not  distinguished  from  the  loose-
garbed  and  effeminate  human  herds  which  Xerxes
had  driven  with  whips  before  him,  which  Agesilaus
had  scattered  with  a  handful  of  Spartan  infantry,

1  Crassus  seized  without  remorse  the  treasures  amassed  in  the
temple  of  Derceto  or  Atargatis,  in  Hierapolis.  (Plut.  Crass.  27. ;
Strab.  xvi.  1.  4.)  He  made  a  journey  to  Jerusalem  on  purpose  to
rifle  the  temple.  Its  wealth  was  computed  at  ten  thousand  talents.
Eleazar  the  high-priest  tried  to  save  it  by  the  offer  of  a  costly  bribe.
Crassus  took  the  bribe  and  the  treasure  both.  Joseph.  Antiq.  xiv.
7.  1.,  J9.  JW.  i.  7,  8.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  513

or  which  Alexander  had  chased  from  the  Hellespont CHAP.
to  the  Hyphasis.1

While  Crassus  was  collecting  his  forces  from  Embassy  of
their  winter  quarters,  Orodes,  the  king  of  the
Parthian s,  sent  ambassadors  to  complain  of  the
sudden  aggression  upon  his  territories,  or,  more  A.U.  701.
properly,  upon  those  of  Abgarus,  king  of  Osrhoene,
a  dependency  of  the  Seleucian  crown.  But  their
commission  was  not  so  much  to  negotiate  with  the
Roman  proconsul  as  to  defy  him.  The  Parthian  s
seem  to  have  been  informed  of  the  dislike  with
which  the  proceedings  of  Crassus  were  viewed  by
the  Roman  senate.  An  attempt  had  lately  been
made  in  that  assembly  to  obtain  the  proconsul's
recal  from  his  province,  which  was  foiled  by  the
interference  of  Pompeius,  seconded  by  a  speech
from  Cicero.2  The  Parthians  affected  to  draw  a
distinction  between  the  republic  and  the  marauder
who  had  insulted  them.  With  the  former,  they

1  Compare  the  speech  of  Lentulus  in  Lucan's  poem  (viii.  331.  &c.),
which  seems  to  express  a  revival  of  the  contemptuous  and  unfounded
prejudices  of  the  Romans,  after  the  defeat  of  Crassus  had  been  effaced
from  their  recollection :

"  Illic  et  laxas  vestes  et  fluxa  virorum

Velamenta  vides."  ....

The  bow  was  stigmatized  as  a  cowardly  and  effeminate  weapon  com-
pared with  the  sword  :

"  Ensis  habet  vires,  et  gens  quascunque  virorum  est

Bella  gerit  gladiis."  ....
One  disadvantage  it  had :

"  Nam  Medos  praelia  prima ^
Exarmant,  vacuaeque  jubent  remeare  pharetrae."
No  Roman  would  have  escaped  from  the  field  of  Charrhse  if  the  Par-
thians could  have  maintained  a  close  blockade  of  the  exhausted  le-
gions.

2  Cic.  ad  Div.  v.  8.

VOL.  I.  L  L

514  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  said,  they  were  prepared  to  wage  war  to  extremity,
if  challenged  to  the  field  ;  but  if  the  enterprize
were  merely  the  personal  act  of  the  old  man
before  them,  they  would  not  condescend  to  harm
a  hair  of  his  head,  but  would  contemptuously
send  him  back  the  garrisons  which  he  had  left
beyond  the  Euphrates.  Crassus  retorted  with  the
usual  taunt  of  inexperienced  commanders;  he
would  discuss  these  matters  in  their  capital.
Wagises,  an  aged  Parthian,  pointed  to  the  smooth
palm  of  his  hands,  and  said  that  hair  should  sooner
grow  there  than  the  Romans  ever  see  Seleucia.1
Advice  of  The  confidence  which  these  expressions  indicated

"  was  n°t  belied  by  the  power  and  resolution  with
thf  conduct  whicn  ft  was  backed.  Some  of  the  Roman  de-
of  the  cam-  tachments  stationed  beyond  the  Euphrates  were
soon  compelled  to  abandon  their  posts,  and  came
flying  into  the  camp.  They  described  the  vigorous
character  of  the  enemy  who  had  assailed  them,
the  deadliness  of  his  assault,  the  fruitlessness  of
pursuing  him,  the  unerring  aim  of  his  arrows,  the
impenetrability  of  his  armour.  The  Parthians
were  evidently  a  people  of  a  very  different  cha-
racter from  the  Armenians  and  Cappadocians.
whom  Lucullus  had  so  easily  routed.  These  reports
caused  much  uneasiness  in  the  Roman  quarters,
and  Cassius  thus  early  warned  his  leader  of  the
perils  of  the  enterprize  he  was  about  to  undertake.
But  Crassus  gave  no  heed  to  the  warning.  Arta-
bazes,  the  king  of  Armenia,  came  into  his  presence
with  the  offer  of  all  the  resources  of  his  country.
He  promised  the  assistance  of  ten  thousand  cavalry

1  Plut.  Crass.  18.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  515

equipped  in  complete  armour,  and  of  thirty  thou-  CHAP.
sand  infantry ;  at  the  same  time  he  strongly  urged
him  to  direct  his  march  through  his  own  friendly
territories,  well  supplied  with  water  and  provisions,
and  abounding  in  hills  and  streams,  which  would
baffle  the  dreaded  manoeuvres  of  the  Parthian
horsemen.1  By  this  route  he  would  reach  the
upper  waters  of  the  Tigris,  from  whence  he  might
descend  to  Seleucia  through  a  fertile  and  practi-
cable country.  But  Crassus,  though  well  pleased
with  the  zeal  of  his  ally,  would  brook  no  delay,
nor  adopt  a  circuitous  line  of  march ;  moreover
he  represented  that  he  had  still  some  troops  left  in
occupation  of  outposts  beyond  the  Euphrates,  and
these  he  was  hastening  to  support.

The  writers  from  whom  we  derive  our  accounts  Different
of  the  campaign  that  followed,  lived  at  least  two  tottTcSS
centuries  after  the  date  of  the  events  they  relate:  ?faninvad-

9  ' ing  army.

and  even  if  the  sources  from  which  they  drew  their
materials  were  trustworthy  and  accurate,  they  may
very  probably  have  confused  and  disfigured  their
statements  from  their  own  want  of  critical  spirit.
Accordingly,  their  narratives  correspond  very  im-
perfectly with  the  geography  of  the  country  through

1  Comp.  Lucan.  I.  c. :

"  Parthus  per  Medica  rura,
Sarmaticos  inter  campos,  effusaque  piano
Tigridis  arva  solo,  nulli  superabilis  hosti  est
Libertate  fuga? :  sed  non,  ubi  terra  tumebit,
Aspera  conscendet  montis  juga,  nee  per  opacas
Bella  geret  latebras,  incerto  debilis  arcu  :
Nee  franget  nando  violent!  vorticis  amnem."  .  .  .

Yet  the  Parthians  came  originally  from  a  hilly  country,  and  the  mail-
clad  cavalry  of  Armenia,  as  well  as the modern Belooches, were  „
accustomed  to  mountain  warfare.

i,  i, 2

516  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  which  they  profess  to  guide  us.  The  district  of
Osrhoene,  which  comprehends  undoubtedly  the
whole  of  the  route  we  wish  to  trace,  was  confined
on  the  north  by  the  line  of  the  Mons  Masius,  or
Karahjah  Dag,  running  directly  east  and  west
from  the  Tigris  to  the  Euphrates,  in  the  parallel  of
Samosata.  The  latter  of  these  rivers  bounds  it  to
the  west  and  south,  as  far  as  its  confluence  with
the  Chaboras,  which  may  be  considered  as  the
eastern  limit  of  the  district.  The  great  highway
from  Asia  Minor  to  the  cities  of  Persia  lay  through
the  town  of  Zeugma,  on  the  Euphrates,  which  de-
rived its  name  from  the  bridge  by  which  the  op-
posite banks  were  there  connected,  and  which,  in
Rome's  most  prosperous  times,  when  she  granted
terms  to  the  prostrate  empires  of  the  East,  was
complimented  with  the  pompous  title  of  the  Route
of  Peace.1  The  modern  village  of  Roum  Kale
(the  Roman  castle)  still  marks  its  site,  but  the
caravans  now  cross  the  river  a  few  miles  lower
down,  at  Birs.  From  Zeugma  a  military  way  was
directed  due  east  to  Edessa,  the  modern  Orfa,  the
Ur  of  Scripture,  where  the  king  of  Osrhoene  held
his  court.  At  a  later  period  this  position  became,
in  the  hands  of  the  Romans,  the  key  of  Parthia
and  Armenia.  From  hence  the  road  branched
into  two  lines :  the  one  continued  in  an  easterly
direction  to  Nisibis  and  Nineveh,  on  the  Tigris,

'  Stat.  Sylv.  iii.  2. 137.  :  "  Zeugma  Latinae  Pacis  iter."  The  bridge
was  originally  constructed  for  the  transport  of  Alexander's  army
across  the  Euphrates.  Dion.  xl.  17.;  Kinneir,  Geographical  Memoir,
316.  The  Euphrates  there  is  deep  and  rapid,  and  about  130  yards
broad.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  517

and  here  was  the  point  of  departure  either  for  CHAP.
Seleucia  or  Ecbatana ;  the  other  struck  more
southward,  ran  through  Charrhae,  then  turned  due
south,  skirting  the  little  stream  Balissus,  till  it
reached  the  Euphrates  at  Nicephorium.  From  this
point  it  was  carried  on  nearly  parallel  to  the  banks
of  that  river,  and  at  last  terminated  at  Seleucia,
after  crossing  the  narrowest  part  of  the  isthmus
which  separates  the  Euphrates  from  the  Tigris.
These  highways  were  the  work  of  a  later  age,
when  the  power  of  Rome  was  established  through
the  whole  of  Mesopotamia,  but  they  were  laid  out
in  all  probability  in  the  line  of  the  much  more
ancient  routes  which  were  in  use  in  the  time  of
Crassus.  It  was  along  one  or  other  of  these  lines,
therefore,  that  we  should  expect  to  trace  the  march
of  the  invading  army.  In  later  times  Trajan
entered  Parthia  by  the  northern,  and  Julian  by  the
southern  route1;  but  Crassus,  according  to  our
historians,  followed  neither.  We  have  no  choice
but  to  consider  the  main  incidents  of  their  narrative
correct,  and  we  must  be  content  with  remarking,
as  we  pass,  the  minor  inconsistencies  by  which  it
is  encumbered.

The  proconsul  had  collected  his  troops  together,  Discourage,
seven  legions  strong,  at  Zeugma. Once  more  the  [
superstition  of  the  soldiers  was  busy  in  collecting  armv-
omens  of  disaster. Thunders  and  lightnings,  with

1  Mannert,  v.  2.  p.  200. ;  Francke,  GescJi.  Trajans,  p.  277. ;  Am-
mian.  xxiii.  3.  D'Anville's  work  on  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  is  of
great  service  in  tracing  the  ancient  geography,  but  his  map  is  ex-
tremely incorrect  as  regards  the  course  of  the  former  river.  That
which  is  appended  to  Kinneir's  Journey  through  Armenia,  §*c.,  seems
much  more  trustworthy.

L L 3

518  HISTORY OF THIS ROMANS

CHAP,  tempests  of  wind  and  rain,  gave  a  general  presage
'  of  ill-success.1  The  bridge  broke  under  the  weight
of  the  army  and  its  baggage,  at  which  the  troops
were  much  disheartened.  But  the  actions  of  their
leader  and  the  expressions  wrhich  fell  from  him
were  peculiarly  significant  and  unlucky.  Crassus,
intending  to  return  from  the  conquests  he  anti-
cipated by  the  route  of  Armenia,  paid  no  at-
tention to  the  calamity,  and  uttered  the  uncon-
scious prophecy,  that  none  of  his  soldiers  would
want  that  bridge  again.  So,  too,  in  sacrificing,  he
let  the  sacred  fragments  of  the  victim  fall  from  his
hand.  Instead  of  hastening  to  recover  them,  and
avert  the  omen  by  appropriate  formulas,  he  only
smiled,  and  remarked  with  levity,  "  See  the  infir-
mity of  age  !  " 2

As  soon  as  the  Roman  army  had  reached  the
kft  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  it  proceeded,  if  we  are
correctly  informed,  not  to  take  the  road  to  Edessa,
but  to  skirt  the  river  for  some  way  down.3  If  the
object  of  the  general  had  been  to  give  countenance
and  support  to  garrisons  stationed  along  its  course,
as,  for  instance,  at  Barbalissus  and  Nicephorium,  it
would  seem  that  that  object  might  have  been  at-
tained much  more  easily  by  approaching  the  river
at  the  spot  nearest  to  Antioch,  his  original  point  of

1  The  Euphrates  is  subject  to  violent  hurricanes. It  was  in  one  of
these  that  Captain  Chesney's  vessel  was  lost  on  his  expedition  to
explore  the  navigation  of  that  river. Long's  Notes  on  Plutarch.

2  Plut.  Crass.  19- :  TOIOVTOV  TO  jiipaq.

3  The  force  which  crossed  the  Euphrates  amounted  to  seven  legions,
with  about  four  thousand  cavalry,  and  as  many  light-armed  troops.
Plut.  Crass.  20. Appian  (B.  C.  iii.  18.)  raises  the  number  to  100,000
men,  and  Florus  to  eleven  legions  (iii.  11.).

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  519

departure,  without  making  so  unnecessary  a  cir- CHAP.
cuit. There  could  have  been  no  difficulty  in  throw-
ing a  bridge  of  boats  across  it  at  either  of  those
places. The  counsel  of  Artabazes  having  been  al-
together disregarded,  the  skill  and  experience  of
Cassius  now  suggested  the  most  feasible  plan  which
remained  for  the  campaign. He  recommended  his
leader  to  keep  along  the  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  by
which  means  he  could  ensure  a  constant  supply  of
provisions  from  the  flotilla  which  was  in  readiness
to  accompany  him,  and  prevent  the  possibility  of
being  surrounded. At  the  same  time  he  advised
him  to  move  slowly  and  with  circumspection,  not
to  trust to  the rumours  which  flowed  into  the
camp  of  the  disappearance  and  meditated  flight  of
the  Parthians,  but  to  keep  under  the  shelter  of
some  of  his  fortified  posts  till  the plans  of  the
enemy  could  be  fully  ascertained. The  fact  was,
as  he  anticipated,  that  they  were  prepared  to  act
on  the  defensive,  and  did  not  choose  to  meet  the
invaders  in  a  pitched  battle  on  equal  terms. It  Their  stra-
was  their  object  to  lead  the  Roman  army  into  the  SLuhe
sandy plains which intervene between the two  enemy-
rivers,  and  there  hang  loosely  upon  their  skirts,
till heat, fatigue, and  want  should do  half  the
work  of  the  sword. They  found  an  instrument
fitted  for  their  design  in  the  person  of  Abgarus1,
the  Osrhoenian,  who  attended  upon  the  march  of

1  He  is  called  by  Dion  Atiyapoc,  i.  e.  Abgarus ;  by  the  Pseudo-Ap-
pian," Aicgapog,  in  which  we  may,  perhaps,  recognize  the  modern  Akhbar.
This  word  is  said  to  be  a  royal  title,  signifying  "  great."  Several  of
the  name  are  mentioned  in  this  and  the  following  century  as  kings  of
Edessa.  Plutarch  gives  this  personage  the  name  of  Ariamnes ;  he
also  uses  the  form  'Ypwdqs  for  Orodes.

L- L, 4

520  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  the  Roman  legions,  and  wormed  himself  into  the
'  confidence  of  their  leader  by  specious  professions
of  gratitude  for  the  favours  he  had  received  from
Pornpeius.  He  assured  the  proconsul  that  Orodes,
despairing  of  the  defence  of  his  country,  had  left
surenas,the  two  of  his  satraps,  Surenas  and  Sillaces,  to  make
general.  a  show  of  resistance,  while  he  was  himself  in  full
retreat  for  Scythia  or  Hyrcania,  carrying  off  with
him  all  the  treasures  he  could  hastily  remove.
Any  appearance,  he  said,  of  hesitation  on  the  part
of  the  Romans  might  restore  him  to  confidence,
but  a  sudden  and  direct  march  upon  Seleucia
would  at  the  moment  meet  with  no  effectual  oppo-
sition. In  fact,  whether  through  fear  of  the  Ro-
mans, or  to  show  his  contempt  for  them  in  the
most  striking  manner,  Orodes  had  undertaken
himself  to  chastise  the  insolence  of  their  Armenian
ally,  leaving  the  brunt  of  the  invasion  to  be  sus-
tained by  his  satraps.  But  this  division  of  his
forces  was  calculated  to  lull  the  enemy  into  secu-
rity, and  entice  him  into  a  perilous  movement,
where  the  nature  of  the  country  and  climate  would
arm  the  Parthians  with  irresistible  weapons.  Su-
renas  ranked  next  to  the  king  in  birth,  wealth,  and
distinction.1  He  was  the  most  eminent  of  his  na-
tion for  valour  and  abilities,  nor  had  he  an  equal
in  strength  and  beauty  of  person.  He  went  forth,
whether  in  peace  or  war,  with  an  equipage  of  one
thousand  camels,  and  his  wives  and  concubines  fol-
lowed him  in  a  train  of  two  hundred  chariots.  His
body-guard  consisted  of  one  thousand  horsemen  in

1  Plut.  Crass.  21.  24. It  seems  probable  that  Surenas,  like  Abgarus,
was  a  title,  and  not  an  appellative.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  521

mail,  and  a  still  greater  number  of  light-armed.  CHAP.
His  rank  and  relationship  to  the  throne  entitled
him  to  place  the  diadem  on  the  head  of  the  sove-
reign. It  was  to  him  that  Orodes  owed  his  re-
storation to  the  supreme  power,  from  which  he
had  been  formerly  expelled  by  his  own  subjects.
Surenas  had  reconquered  Seleucia  by  his  own  per-
sonal valour,  and  though  not  yet  thirty  years  of
age,  he  added  to  all  these  claims  to  honour  the
reputation  of  the  highest  wisdom  in  council  and
craft  in  the  face  of  the  enemy.

It  seems  that  Abgarus  had  no  difficulty  in  per-  The  Roman
suading the infatuated Roman to abandon the  mSV

line  of  the  Euphrates,  and  strike  into  the  plains  thetr/fh-
.  ...  ery af  At)-

which  separate  it  from  the  Tigris,  in  the  face  of  gams.

this  formidable  opponent.  The  general  character
of  the  country  from  Zeugma  to  the  Chaboras  is
both  level  and  sandy,  but  its  barrenness  is  relieved
by  numerous  patches  of  cultivated  and  abundantly
fertile  soil.  Nor  are  there  wanting  both  streams
and  wells  to  supply  it  with  water.  There  seems,
therefore,  to  be  no  serious  impediment  to  the  pro-
gress either  of  a  caravan  or  an  army  as  far  as  the
river  Chaboras,  beyond  which  lies  the  great  desert
of  Sinjar.1  It  is  very  improbable  that  the  army  of
Crassus  ever  penetrated  into  this  further  region,
and  we  cannot  resist  the  suspicion  that  the  com-
mon traditions,  upon  which  the  historians  relied,
ascribed  to  its  march  far  greater  difficulties  and
privations  than  it  really  encountered.  Soon  after

1  This  is  the  great  desert  of  Mesopotamia,  which  Strabo  describes
as  lying  beyond  the  Chaboras  (xvi.  1.).

522  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, leaving the river side, it is said, the country
lost  every  appearance  of  habitation  and  fertility.

Boundless  tracts  of  light  moving  sand  presented
themselves  to  the  eye,  without  shade  or  water,
undulating  like  the  waves  of  the  sea.  The  heat
was  intense,  and  the  spirits  of  the  soldiers  sank
under  the  daily  repetition  of  fatigue  without  re-
freshment. Artabazes,  harassed  by  the  attack  of
Orodes,  sent  to  excuse  himself  from  despatching
the  promised  reinforcements,  and  intreated  the
Roman  general  to  turn  his  course  in  the  direction
of  Armenia.  Crassus  denounced  the  unfortunate
prince  as  a  traitor,  and  threatened  him  with  the
vengeance  of  the  republic  as  soon  as  he  should
have  leisure  to  execute  it.  His  conduct  to  Cassius
was  marked  with  contemptuous  disregard,  and  the
officers,  who  foresaw  the  perils  into  which  they
were  hurrying,  had  no  other  resource  than  to
wreak  their  ill-humour  in  bitter  reproaches  against
Abgarus,  who  retorted  with  the  coolest  assurance,
asking  if  they  had  expected  to  make  a  holiday
excursion  among  shady  groves  and  fountains,  in  a
country  of  baths  and  hostelries,  like  their  own
Campania.  At  last,  on  pretence  of  executing
some  secret  services,  he  quitted  the  Roman  camp,
and  escaped  from  the  hands  of  the  enemy  whom
he  had  entrapped  into  the  desert.1

^  ^s  evident  from  this  account  of  Plutarch  that
ke considers the expedition to have proceeded

ties  respect-  A  r

ing  the  line  several  days'  march  from  the  point  where  it  left

march!SU the  beaten  route  to  the  next  locality  which he

mentions,  the  passage  of  the  river  Balissus. It

1  Plut.  Crass.  22.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  523

was  here  that  Crassus  was  informed  by  the  piquets CHAP.
which  he  had  sent  forward  that  the  Parthians  were
collected  in  front of  him  in  much  greater  force
than  he  had  been led  to  expect. If  this,  then,
was  the  extreme  limit  of  his  onward  progress,  he
had  not  left  the  Euphrates  above  fifty  miles  in  a
straight  line  behind  him  ;  he  had  not  set  foot  in
the  sandy  desert at all ; nor  had  he  given any
indication  that  he  meant  to  pursue  a  route  through
the  centre  of  Mesopotamia, for  at  this  point he
had  riot  abandoned  the  highway  that  leads  from
Edessa  to  Nicephorium  and  Seleucia. We  must
either  make  up  our  minds  to  consider  the  whole
account  we  have  received  of  Crassus's  errors  and
misconduct  as  unworthy  of  credit,  and  the  charges
against  him  unproved,  or  we  must  apply  a  cor-
rection to  Plutarch's  geography,  and  believe  that
he  should  have  pointed  out,  not  the  Balissus,  but
one  of  the  branches,  probably  the  more  western,  of
the  Chaboras,  for  the  spot  where  the  army  prepared
for  combat. However  this  may  be,  we  now  find
Crassus  taken  by  surprize,  and  his  army  thrown  at
once  into  confusion. Hasty  preparations  were  made
to  meet  the  enemy ;  the  order  of  battle  was  a  deep
square  of  four  fronts,  with  twelve  cohorts  on  each
side,  supported  by  a  body  of  cavalry  not  only  on
the  flanks,  but  also  in  front  and  rear. A  moment
only  was  allowed  for  refreshment  on  the  bank  of
the  streamlet,  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  most  ex-
perienced officers,  who  recommended  a  halt  and  an
encampment  for  the  night. The  troops  pushed  on
till  they  came  in  sight  of  the  advancing  columns
of  the  Parthian  cavalry. The  enemy  had  adopted

524  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, measures  to  conceal  their  numbers  till  the  Romans

XI

'  had  come  close  upon  them.  When  the  whole  of  their
forces  were  revealed,  with  their  sweeping  clouds
of  cavalry,  glittering,  man  and  horse,  in  brilliant
armour,  their  banners  waving  with  silk  and  gold,
and  the  loud  clang  of  their  kettle-drums  uttering
discordant  music  to  European  ears1,  the  Romans
were  appalled  at  the  sudden  discovery  both  of  their
The  Roman  numbers  and  resolution.  Nevertheless,  wearied

and  Par-  -. ,  ,  ,  .  ,

thianarmies  and  breathless  as  they  were,  tney  were  compelled
immediately  to  accept  the  proffered  combat.  The
shower  of  arrows  with  which  the  Parthians  began
the  fray  pierced  the  armour  of  the  legionary
through  and  through.  It  nailed  his  buckler  to  his
arm,  and  his  feet  to  the  ground.  Thus  far  indeed
he  suffered  no  worse  than  the  ordinary  peril  to
which  he  was  exposed  from  the  first  discharge  of
the  skirmishers  at  the  commencement  of  a  battle,
except  that  the  Parthian  arrow  was  a  missile  of  un-
usual strength  and  sharpness.  But  the  Parthian
bowman  was  mounted,  and  the  Roman  foot -soldier
in  vain  attempted  to  close  with  him.  He  could  shoot
as  well  in  the  retreat  as  the  charge,  and  the  onset  of
infantry  threw  him  into  no  confusion,  and  afforded
not  an  instant's  relief.  His  quiver  was  no  sooner
exhausted  than  he  repaired  to  his  camels  in  the
rear,  and  quickly  reappeared  with  his  stock  re-
plenished. Crassus  perceived  that  it  was  necessary
to  employ  his  cavalry  to  disperse  the  enemy,  but

1  Compare  Flor.  iii.  11.  8.,  and  Plut.  Crass.  24.  Milton  (Parad.
Regained,  iii.)  has  amassed  from  the  historians  and  grouped  with
poetic  brilliance  the  characteristics  of  Parthian  warfare  :

"  He  look'd  and  saw  what  numbers  numberless,"  &c.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  525

their  numbers  were  miserably  inadequate  to  such  CHAP.
a  service.  He  gave  his  son  Publius  orders  to
charge,  and  the  gallant  young  soldier  obeyed  with
too  eager  alacrity.  The  Parthians  gave  way,  and
led  him  on  till  they  had  withdrawn  him  far  from  the
support  of  the  main  body,  when  they  wheeled  about,
surrounded  and  easily  overpowered  his  scanty  squad-
rons. Young  Crassus  fought  with  resolution  to  the  Death  of
last,  and  when  every  hope  of  victory  or  rescue
had  vanished,  caused  himself  to  be  slain  by  his
shield-bearer.  The  father  had  been  flattering  him-  mans-
self  that  the  field  so  suddenly  cleared  by  his  son's
impetuous  charge  was  already  his  own.  He  was
awakened  from  his  dream  by  the  return  of  the
Parthians,  shouting  aloud  in  triumphant  exultation,
and  brandishing  the  head  of  their  victim  on  a
pike.  Crassus  stifled  his  grief  and  horror,  and
attempted  with  a  violent  effort  to  discharge  his
functions  as  a  general.  He  hurried  from  cohort
to  cohort,  uttering  such  customary  words  of  en-
couragement as  his  despair  or  his  sorrow  allowed.
The  death  of  Publius,  he  said,  was  the  loss  of  a  son
to  his  father,  but  only  of  a  citizen  to  the  re-
public. But  spiritless  himself,  he  was  incapable  of
infusing  spirit.  The  Parthians  continued  through-
out the  day  to  harass  the  Roman  army  by  a  repe-
tition of  their  usual  mano3uvres.  It  was  not  till
nightfall  that  they  allowed  them  any  respite.  Not
being  accustomed  to  construct  camps,  they  never
passed  the  night  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood
of  an  enemy,  but  retired  to  a  distance,  leaving  the
Romans  to  make  what  use  they  could  of  the  few
hours  which  would  intervene  before  their  reap-

526  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP  pearance.  Crassus  himself,  overwhelmed  with  grief
XL  arid  mortification,  if  not  with  fear,  was  incapable
of  suggesting  any  counsel  or  adopting  any  resolu-
tion. Cassius  and  the  other  officers  promptly  set
him  aside,  and  took  upon  themselves  to  give  the
necessary  orders.  They  determined  to  retreat  with-
out a  moment's  delay.  Compelled  to  leave  behind
them  the  wounded,  these  unfortunate  victims,  hope-
less of  receiving  quarter,  uttered  such  piercing
shrieks  as  reached  the  ears  of  the  Parthian  spies,
who  guessed  the  cause  and  reported  it.  Imme-
diately the  horsemen  sprang  to  their  saddles,  and
speedily  overtook  the  retiring  legions.  But  it  would
seem  that  their  horses,  after  a  long  day's  service,
were  unable  to  keep  pace  with  the  headlong  rush  of
They  take  desperate  men.  News  of  the  disaster  was  speedily
conveyed  to  Charrhae,  and  the  Roman  garrison
which  was  there  stationed  issued  forth  to  succour
and  rescue  the  remnant  of  the  flying  army,  which
it  conducted  to  an  asylum  of  rest  and  safety.  The
Parthians  contented  themselves  with  the  plunder
of  the  camp  and  the  slaughter  of  the  wounded,
together  with  all  the  stragglers  they  could  intercept,
to  the  number  of  several  thousands.1

A  report  was  spread  in  the  Parthian  cantonments
that  Crassus  and  the  principal  leaders  had  aban-
doned the  routed  arrny  and  effected  their  escape.
Surenas  was  especially  anxious  to  seize  the  person
of  the  proconsul,  for,  according  to  Oriental  notions,
the  death  or  captivity  of  the  leader  was  generally
considered  decisive  of  the  war.  Accordingly,  he
would  have  pushed  forward  in  pursuit,  and  left  the

1  Plut.  Crass.  27. ;  Dion.  xl.  25,;  Flor.  iii.  11.  8.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  527

fugitives  behind  him  in  Charrhae,  had  he  not  ob- CHAP.
tained  by  a  stratagem  the  information  he  sought.
Having  ascertained  that  Crassus  was  within  the
walls, he  collected  his  forces  and  determined  to
beleaguer  the  place. But  the  Parthian  tactics  were
not  adapted  either  to  the  siege  or  the  blockade.
The  Romans,  distrusting  their  slight  fortifications,  or
unprovided  with  the  means  of  subsistence,  or  more
than  ever  anxious  to  get  within  their  own  frontier,
escaped  from  the  fortress  by  night. Each  officer  The  Roman
seems  to  have  been  allowed  to  make  the  best  of  do^chall"
his  way  with  his  own  division  ; no  attempt  was  ^hae' and .

*  3  .  disperses  m

made  to  conduct  the  retreat  in  concert.  Cassius  several  ai-
succeeded  in  crossing  the  Euphrates  with  a  small
body  of  horse  ;  Octavius,  with  a  larger  division,
reached  the  outskirts  of  the  Armenian  hills,  and
was  almost  beyond  pursuit,  when  the  imminent
danger  to  which  the  proconsul  was  exposed  behind
him,  induced  him  to  quit  his  vantage-ground,  and
descend  to  save  or  perish  with  his  general.  The
Parthians  had  come  up  with  Crassus,  and  were
pressing  closely  both  upon  his  rear  and  flanks.
Yet  a  few  hours  more,  and  the  shades  of  evening
would  receive  him  within  the  mountain  fastnesses,
among  which  the  cavalry  of  his  pursuers  would
cease  to  be  formidable.  Surenas  beheld  his  prey
on  the  point  of  eluding  his  grasp;  courage  and
audacity  could  hardly  secure  it,  cunning  and
treachery  might  yet  prevail.  He  allowed  some  of
his  prisoners  to  escape,  after  duly  preparing  them
for  his  purpose,  by  discoursing  in  their  presence  of
the  goodness  and  placability  of  Orodes,  and  assuring
them  that  the  Parthians  would  be  satisfied  with

528  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS

CHAP, fair  and  reasonable  terms  of  accommodation. At  the
' same  time  he  sent  messengers  to  Crassus  to  propose

stratagem  a  capitulation.  The  escaped  prisoners  repaired  to
to  engage*3  the  camp  of  their  countrymen,  and  spread  among
crassus  in  a  tnem  their  own  conviction  of  the  good  faith  and

conference.

moderation  of  the  enemy.  Crassus  had  the  sense
to  distrust  their  representations ;  but  the  army
became  clamorous,  and  began  to  threaten  violence,
shaking  their  arms  in  a  tumultuary  manner.  The
proconsul  believed  himself  compelled  to  yield,
though  not  without  protesting  to  his  officers  that
he  was  coerced  by  the  insubordination  of  his  own
soldiers,  the  summit  of  disgrace  to  a  Koman  com-
mander. The  Parthian  chieftain  made  the  fairest
professions,  and  arranged  that  the  meeting  between
them  should  take  place  in  the  company  of  a  few
chosen  officers  on  each  side.  The  Koman  im-
perator,  attended  by  his  staff,  all  disarmed  and
dismounted,  approached  his  conqueror.  Crassus
was  received  at  first  with  the  highest  demonstra-
tions of  respect,  and  Surenas,  according  to  the
Parthian  custom,  ordered  a  horse  with  golden
housings  to  be  brought  forward  for  his  use.  The
proconsul  would  have  sent  for  his  own  charger,
but  the  Parthian  offered  him  one  of  his  own  in
the  name  of  Orodes  the  king.  The  feeble  and
bewildered  old  man  was  lifted  abruptly  into  the
saddle,  and  the  Parthian  grooms  began  to  goad
the  steed  and  urge  him  towards  the  enemy.  The
attendants  of  Crassus  vainly  endeavoured  to  arrest
his  doom.  Octavius  and  another  officer  named
Petronius  seized  the  reins,  while  others  attempted
to  cut  them.  Confusion  ensued,  and  blows  were

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  529

interchanged. Octavius  seized  a  Parthian's  sword. CHAP.

Yr

and  slew  one  of  the  grooms,  but  was  immediately  '

cut  down  by  a  blow  from  behind. In  the  fray  A  fray
Crassus  himself  received  a  mortal  wound  from  the  cl^sus  and
hand  of  a  Parthian  named  Pomaxaithras. Such  ^f!!"3,

are  killed.

was  the  most  credible  account  of  the  matter,  but
nothing  certain  was  known.  Others  of  the  Romans
fell  also  in  the  scuffle ;  the  remainder  escaped  to
the  army,  and  the  Parthians  now  suffered  the  fugi-
tives to  make  their  way  unmolested  to  the  hills.
Many,  indeed,  surrendered  to  Surenas,  who  assured
them  that  the  death  of  their  general  was  the  termi-
nation of  hostilities.  We  do  not  hear  that  they  re-
ceived any  ill-treatment ;  though,  from  the  temper
in  which,  as  we  shall  see,  the  remains  of  Crassus
were  insulted,  we  cannot  suppose  that  they  met
with  the  respect  due  to  honourable  captives.  De-
tained for  years  among  their  foreign  captors,  they
ended  with  adopting  their  customs  and  manners,
intermarried  with  the  families  of  the  barbarians,
and  renounced  the  country  of  their  Roman  an-
cestors.1 It  was  calculated  that  twenty  thousand
men  perished  in  this  calamitous  expedition,  and
that  half  that  number  were  made  prisoners.

The  victor  sent  the  head  and  hand  of  Crassus  to
Orodes :  but  he  would  have  been  better  pleased  to

1  Hor.  Od.  iii.  5.  5. :

"  Milesne  Crassi  conjuge  barbara
Turpis  maritus  vixit,"  &c.

And  according  to  Velleius  ii.  82.  and  Florus  iv.  10.  M.  Antonius,
in  his  campaign  of  A.U.  718,  found  prisoners  from  the  army  of  Crassus
in  the  Parthian  service.  Compare  Justin  xlii.  5.  The  day  of  Crassus' s
death,  vi.  Id.  Jun.  or  June  8,  is  fixed  by  Ovid,  Fast.  vi.  465.  See
Fischer,  p.  253.

VOL.  I.  MM

530  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP, have  conducted  his  prisoner  alive  into  the  royal
" presence, as  he  is  said to have promised. He

with  amused  his  soldiers,  and  gratified  his  own  vanity,
by  the  performance  of  a  ceremony  in  mockery  of  a
Roman  triumph.  The  proconsul  was  represented
by  one  of  the  captives,  who  was  supposed  to  bear
some  personal  resemblance  to  him.  The  substitute
was  tawdrily  arrayed  in  female  garments,  and  com-
pelled to  answer  to  the  title  of  Imperator,  with
which  his  fellow-prisoners  were  ordered  to  address
him.  The  voluptuous  and  dissipated  habits  at-
tributed to  Crassus  and  his  officers  were  made
subjects  of  scornful  ridicule,  and  the  licentious
books  which  were  found  in  the  Roman  tents  were
paraded  with  a  mockery  of  indignation.1  It  seems
that  the  Parthians  were  well  pleased  to  offer  such
a  spectacle  to  their  effeminate  Greek  subjects  ;  but
they,  on  their  part,  failed  to  draw  the  inference
which  their  masters  intended,  and  thought  it  in-
consistent in  Surenas  to  deride  the  licentiousness
of  the  Romans,  when  he  was  himself  accompanied
to  the  field  by  his  battalion  of  concubines,  and  re-
joiced in  the  lewd  music  and  dancing  of  a  train
of  slaves,  and  when  the  throne  of  the  ArsacidaB
was  so  often  filled  by  the  offspring  of  strange  and
disgraceful  alliances.  They  compared,  indeed,  his
array  to  the  figure  of  a  viper,  bristling  in  front
with  its  armed  warriors  and  horses,  but  disgusting
and  squalid  behind,  with  its  train  of  women,  with
their  timbrels,  and  songs,  and  bacchanalian  orgies.2

1  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  Crassus  himself  was  unstained
with  the  grosser  vices  of  his  class  :  "  Vir  caetera  sanctissimus,  immu-
nisque  voluptatibus." Veil.  ii.  46.

2  Plut.  Crass.  32.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  531

While  these events  were in progress, Orodes CHAP.

came  to  terms  with  the  Armenian  Artabazes,  and

accepted  the  hand  of  his  daughter  for  his  own  son  indignities
Pacorus.  This  auspicious  union  received  new  lustre  jJ^nSw
from  the  triumph  of  Surenas.  The  festivals  with  of  Crassu3-
which  it  was  celebrated  were  fashioned  upon  Grecian
models,  so  soon  had  the  rude  descendants  of  Ar-
saces  resigned  themselves  to  the  fascinating  lux-
uries of  their  serni- Hellenic  capital.  Orodes  was
well  skilled  in  the  language  and  literature  of  Greece  ;
Artabazes  even  composed  tragedies  after  the  Gre-
cian model,  and  wrote  historical  works  in  that
tongue.  When  the  head  of  Crassus  was  brought
to  the  door  of  the  banquetting  hall,  a  Greek  actor
from  Tralles  began  to  recite  appropriate  verses
from  the  Bacchanals  of  Euripides ;  when  the  bloody
trophy  was  thrown  at  the  feet  of  the  assembled
guests,  he  seized  it  in  his  hands,  and  enacted  with
it  the  frenzy  of  Agave  and  the  mutilation  of  Pen-
theus.  The  story  that  molten  gold  was  poured
into  the  mouth  of  the  avaricious  Roman  is  not
mentioned  by  Plutarch,  from  whom  we  receive
such  minute  details  of  the  insults  practised  on  his
remains.  But  the  testimony  of  an  earlier  writer
shows  that  it  was  already  currently  reported1,  nor
is  there  any  improbability  in  the  circumstance  to
induce  us  to  disbelieve  it.

Such  was  the  end  of  the  unfortunate  triumvir.  Reflections
It  was  many  years  since  a  Roman  proconsul  had  thus  deathof  the

1  Floms,  iii.  11.11.,  at  the  end  of  Trajan's  reign,  about  one  hun-
dred and  seventy  years  after  the  event.  The  commentators  on  this
passage  have  collected  several  analogous  stories  from  Appian,  Pliny,
Justin,  Zosimus,  and  more  modern  writers.

M M 2

532

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
XI.

Crassi,  the
father  and
son.

A.  u.  701.
B.C.  53.
Interreg-
num :  the
tribunes
prevent  the
election  of
consuls.

miserably  perished  at  the  head  of  an  army  which
he  had  led  to  destruction.  The  names  of  Charrhae
and  Canna3  were  blended  together  on  the  bloodiest
page  of  the  national  annals.  The  fate  of  the
general  was  held  up  by  poets  and  historians  as  a
beacon  for  the  warning  of  ambitious  statesmen,
and  possibly  his  errors  were  magnified  to  screen
the  want  of  conduct  and  discipline  in  the  licen-
tious armies  of  the  East.  Not  a  single  voice  has
been  raised  through  all  ages  in  lamentation  over
his  untimely  death,  except  in  so  far  as  it  tended  to
precipitate  the  confusion  of  his  country's  aifairs,
and  the  overthrow  of  her  constitution.  But  the
son  deserves  at  least  to  be  exempted  from  the  piti-
less scorn  which  clings  for  ever  to  the  name  of  the
father,  and  to  be  honoured  as  the  gallant  Lausus
of  Roman  history.1  Enough  that  his  memory  has
found  a  shrine  in  the  pages  of  the  philosopher
whom  he  most  revered,  and  of  the  commander
whom  he  strove  to  imitate.2

The  year  701  opened  at  Rome  with  an  inter-
regnum, and  thus  a  great  step  was  made  in  the
direction  in  which  the  intrigues  of  Pompeius
pointed.  The  interreges  were  assigned  by  a  com-

'  Virg.  JEn.  x.  811.:

"  Quo  moriture  mis,  majoraque  viribus  audes  ?
Fallit  te  incautum  pietas  tua."

2  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  9. :  "  P.  Crassus,  adolescens  nostri  studiosis-
simus."  Ad  Div.  v.  8. :  "  Hoc  magis  sum  Public  deditus  quod  me
maxime  sicut  alterum  parentem  et  observat  et  diligit."  Ad  Div.  xiii.
16.  :  "  P.  Crassum  ex  omni  nobilitate  adolescentem  dilexi  plurimum."
Compare  Brut.  81. :  "Erat  cum  institutus  optime  turn  etiam  perfecte
planeque  eruditus ;  ineratque  et  ingenium  satis  acre,  et  orationis  non
inelegans  copia  ;  praetereaque  sine  arrogantia  gravis  esse  videbatur  et
sine  segnitia  verecundus."  See  also  Cses.  B.  G.  i.  52.,  ii.  34.,  iii.  7.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  533

mittee  consisting  of  the  patrician  members  of  the  CHAP.
senate.1  Each  in  turn  held  the  office  for  five  days
only;  and  the  principal  object  of  their  appointment
was  understood  to  be  that  they  might  summon
and  preside  over  the  comitia  for  the  election  of
consuls.  They  discharged,  however,  in  the  mean-
while, the  general  functions  of  the  chief  magistrates.
But  a  power  so  limited  in  duration  was  merely
nominal.  The  executive  was  paralysed,  and  almost
every  one  was  interested  in  devising  means  to  ter-
minate so  disastrous  an  interruption  to  the  ordi-
nary course  of  affairs.  The  cry  for  a  dictatorship
rose  more  and  more  loud  above  the  murmurs  of
personal  and  party  interests,  for  such  were  the  ap-
pointed means  which  the  institutions  of  Rome
provided  for  cutting  the  knot,  when  the  compli-
cation of  political  affairs  seemed  to  defy  disen-
tanglement. Pompeius  affected  indifference,  and
pretended  to  keep  aloof  from  the  confusion,  but  his
creatures  were  labouring  actively  in  his  behalf.
The  nobles  were  full  of  apprehension  and  anxiety.
Cato  unravelled  and  denounced  the  plot  against  the
liberties  of  the  commonwealth  ;  Cicero  was  silent.2
In  the  mean  time  the  tribunes,  or  some  at  least  of
their  number,  continued  to  play  into  the  hands  of
the  triumvir,  by  obstinately  opposing  all  attempts
to  assemble  the  comitia.  In  former  times,  the
appointment  of  interreges  had  been  an  object  of
traditional  jealousy  to  the  protectors  of  the  plebs,
inasmuch  as  the  constitution  allowed  the  plebeians

1  Ascon.  arg.  in  Milon.  init.

2  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  iii.  9. :  "  Ego  quiesco."

M  M 3

534  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  no  share  in  their  election.1  But  now  they  not  only
'  acquiesced  in  that  temporary  arrangement,  but
seemed  resolved  to  perpetuate  it,  until  the  senate
should  be  compelled  to  resort  to  the  creation  of  an
irresponsible  ruler.  The  nobles,  however,  held  out
with  more  than  usual  firmness,  and  even  took  the
vigorous  step  of  imprisoning  one  of  the  tribunes,
Q.  Pompeius  Rufus,  a  grandson  of  Sulla,  whose
hostile  proceedings  were  the  most  violent.  To
put  this  bold  stroke  in  execution,  they  were  enabled
to  employ  the  strong  arm  of  the  triumvir  himself.
In  the  absence  of  consuls  and  praetors,  the  tribunes,
who,  since  the  abrogation  of  Sulla's  enactments,
had  been  constantly  encroaching  upon  the  functions
of  the  other  magistrates,  undertook  almost  the
entire  management  of  the  affairs  of  the  city.  Even
Pompeius  was  offended  at  their  insolent  usurpations.
The  absence  of  his  colleagues,  and  the  disruption
of  the  peculiar  ties  which  bound  him  to  Caesar2,
gave  a  freer  scope  to  the  aristocratic  prejudices
of  his  youth.  He  was  already  revolving  in  his
mind  the  expediency  of  returning  to  his  former  alli-
ances, when  he  consented  to  become  the  instrument
of  the  senate  in  thus  chastising  tribunitian  dicta-
tion.3  He  waited  for  the  most  graceful  opportunity

1  Liv.  iv.  43.  :  "  Coire  patricios  tribuni  prohibebant."

2  Pompeius  was  the  more  free  to  act  without  deferring  to  Caesar  at
this  moment  because  he  had  just  lent  him  one  of  his  own  proconsular
legions. Caes.  S.  G.  vi.  1.  ;  Dion.  xl.  65. Plutarch  (Cats.  25.)  says
two,  but  this  is  an  error.

3  But  such  a  violation  of  the  sacred  person  of  the  tribune  must
have  been  an  act  of  flagrant  illegality,  and  we  look  in  vain  for  any
further  explanation  of  the  circumstances. The  story  is  told  by  Dion.
xl.  45.

at  length

UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  535

for  offering  his  mediation,  and  interfered  at  last  to CHAP.
bring  the  matter  to  a  decision,  by  prevailing  on  his  _  _
own  friends  to  give  way,  and  consent  to  the  election  interposes,
of  consuls.1 The  ostensible  causes  of  its  postpone
ment  had  vanished,  and  the  ground  being  cleared,
it  was  only  decent  in  one  so  studious  of  appearances
to  prepare  the  foundation  of  a  new  edifice. The
Silent  Judgment  which  the  senate  had  instituted
upon  the  conduct  of  the  several  candidates  had
been  put  off  on  various  excuses,  till  the  public  had
ceased  to  be  interested  in  its  prosecution  ;  the  com-
petitors stood  with  erect  front  before  the  people
whose  suffrages they  demanded  ; Cicero himself
had  defended  and  obtained  the  acquittal  of  -ZEmilius
Scaurus  ;  perjury  and  corruption  raised  their  heads
triumphantly  ; and it might be expected with
reason that no  public man  would  ever  be  con-
demned again,  except  upon  a  charge  of  murder.2
The  election  fell  upon  Cn.  Domitius  Calvinus  and  in  the
M.  Valerius  Messala, who at last entered upon  montlfo
their  office  in  the  seventh  month  of  the  year.3  tbe  year-

Although  the  blow  had  thus  been  averted  for  a  General
moment,  yet  the  opinion  was  rapidly  gaining  ground,

in  the  midst  of  these  dissensions,  that  affairs  were  sity  of  a

-,...,  ,  ,.  dictator.

tending  irresistibly  to  the  creation  of  a  dictator.

1  Plut.  Pomp.  54.  :  aifcaOelc  lircpfXyOii. Dion.  xl.  46. This  writer
is  incorrect  in  saying  that  the  dictatorship  was  offered  to  Pompeius  :
the  offer  was  proposed  by  Luceius  Hirrus,  one  of  the  tribunes,  but
the  question  was  never  formally  entertained. Among  other  sugges-
tions of  the  tribunes,  one  was  to  return  to  the  government  by  military
tribunes,  a  board  of  several  members. Perhaps  it  was  this  that  in-
duced Pompeius  to  take  the  part  of  the  senate.

2  This  was  Cicero's  own  remark  at  the  beginning  of  these  proceed-
ings (ad  Att.  iv.  16.)-

3  Dion.  xl.  45.

M M 4

536  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP. The  powers  of  the  state  could  not  long  exist  by
the  mere  counteraction  and  collision  of  one  with

another.  The  strength  of  its  materials  was  too
sorely  tried.  *  The  genuine  patriotism  and  singleness
of  purpose  through  which  alone,  and  by  no  nice
adjustment  of  its  functions  and  forces,  the  machine
of  government  had  in  reality  been  in  ancient  times
preserved,  were  found  to  have  given  way  altogether
under  the  unceasing  pressure  to  which  they  were
now  subjected.  The  constitution  of  the  common-
wealth stood  in  need  of  an  organic  change ;  the
exorbitant  power  of  individuals  could  only  be
balanced  by  conferring  a  corresponding  share  of
political  importance  on  the  wealth  and  intelligence
of  a  lower  class.  Probably  the  establishment  of  a
permanent  military  police,  such  as  that  which  the
emperors  afterwards  maintained  in  the  city,  was
absolutely  necessary  to  secure  the  freedom  of  coun-
cils and  elections;  yet  the  hand  to  which  this
force  was  intrusted  could  hardly  fail  to  establish  a
monarchical  domination.

it  is  only  What  was  it  then  that  still  retarded  a  consum-
th^recoi^7  mation  which  seemed  so  imminent  ?  It  would  appear
lection  of  faat  Cicero  and  the  more  moderate  politicians  whom

the  pro-  t *

scriptions  he  represented  would  have  acquiesced  in  the  tem-
porary appointment  of  a  dictator,  according  to  the
old  traditional  policy  of  the  state,  as  at  least  a
necessary  evil,  and  fondly  blinded  themselves  to
the  danger  of  its  being  rendered  perpetual.  The
knights  and  others  of  the  middle  class  would
doubtless  expect  the  energy  of  an  irresponsible
governor  to  overflow  in  measures  for  the  elevation
of  their  own  order.  The  multitude,  always  apt  to

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  537

applaud  a  striking  change,  had  no  longer  that  ap- CHAP.

prehension  of  a  dictator  which he  was  wont  to  '_

inspire  when  he  was  the  instrument  of  the  patri-
cians for  overruling  the  insolence  of  the  tribunes.
Even  the  nobles  might  have  remembered  that  the
last  dictatorship  had  been  the  work  of  their  own
hands,  and  all  its  measures  directed  to  their  own
aggrandizement.  Pompeius,  however  much  he  had
wavered  in  their  cause,  was  still  the  pupil,  the
follower,  the  admirer  of  Sulla,  the  heir  to  his  fame,
to  his  army,  to  his  political  career.  Besides,  the
cautious  decorum  with  which  he  had  conducted
himself  for  many  years  had  given  him  the  reputa-
tion, however  unmerited  it  might  be,  of  being  a
man  of  moderate  and  humane  disposition,  and  one
who  might  be  expected  to  make  a  mild,  perhaps  a
bloodless  use  of  absolute  authority.  Nevertheless,
it  was  from  the  nobles  that  the  opposition  to  this
appointment  principally  came.  The  proscriptions
of  Sulla  and  Marius  had  made  an  indelible  im-
pression on  the  minds  of  the  next  succeeding
generation.  The  dream  of  blood  still  flitted  before
their  unclosed  eyes;  the  name  of  dictator  was
indissolubly  connected  with  the  idea  of  unim-
aginable horrors.1  The  life  of  a  citizen  was  still
sacred  in  the  eyes  of  the  conquerors  and  butchers
of  the  world.  Could  a  Pompeius  bear  rule  in  a
state  in  which  a  CaBsar  was  a  subject  ?  Unless  the
one  were  massacred,  the  other  must  be  overthrown.
Murder  would  succeed  to  murder,  revolution  would
breed  revolution.  The  door  to  violence  being  once

1  Dion.  xl.  45.  :  irpoQ  yap rt)v TOV SvXXou  uftorifra tfJiiaovv

538  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP,  opened  could  never  be  shut  against  the  torrents  of
blood  that  would  dash  through  it.  The  conviction
was  forced  upon  them  that  the  question  was  not
that  of  the  appointment  of  a  temporary  dictator,
but  of  a  succession  of  tyrants.

selfishness  The  weight  of  these  sentiments  and  reasonings
ness  of  "he  was  reinforced  by  the  ponderous  mass  of  selfish
oligarchy,  voluptuousness,  which,  with  no  extended  view  of
ulterior  consequences,  would  not  consent  to  relin-
quish or  abridge  its  gratifications  at  the  bidding  of
a  social  reformer.  No  aristocracy  was  ever  more
short-sighted  at  the  crisis  of  its  fate  than  the  once
glorious  patriciate  of  Rome.  It  clung  desperately
to  its  privileges,  not  from  a  fond  regard  to  their
antiquity,  or  their  connexion  with  any  social  or
religious  prejudices  ;  it  did  not  invoke  the  specious
watchwords  of  patriotism,  or  philosophy,  or  utility;
it  took  up  its  ground  upon  the  enactments  which
Sulla  had  made  to  enhance  its  own  wealth  and
power,  and  depress  those  of  its  rivals,  and  disputed
it  with  its  assailants  inch  by  inch.  Without  a
policy  and  without  a  leader  the  nobles  went  stagger-
ing onward  in  their  blind  conflict  with  the  forces
arrayed  against  them,  and  Pompeius,  not  daring  to
take  the  single  step  which  still  remained  between
him  and  the  post  he  coveted,  left  every  thing  a
prey  to  suspense  and  confusion.  At  last  the  force
of  circumstances  had  thrust  the  prize  even  to  his
feet ;  he  gazed  at  it  and  sighed  over  it,  but  did  not
stoop  to  take  it  up.

Tran  uii  "^c  aPP°in^men^  °f  consuls  had  no  effect  in
iity  not  re-  restoring  public  order.  The  senate  indeed  passed
one  decree,  ostensibly  of  considerable  importance,

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  539

which  forbade  the  consuls  and  praetors  to  assume  CHAP.
the  government  of  a  province  till  the  fifth  year
from  the  expiration  of  their  office  in  the  city.1  It  ment  of
was  hoped,  perhaps,  that  this  limitation  would  consuls-
materially  check  the  eagerness  of  the  candidates.
The  enactment,  indeed,  seems  to  have  been  really
salutary,  and,  as  such,  it  was  judiciously  revived
and  confirmed  in  more  tranquil  times  by  Augustus.2
This,  however,  was  the  only  measure  of  reform
that  could  be  carried.  The  consuls  and  senate
clad  themselves  publicly  in  mourning3  when  they
found  that,  as  in  previous  years,  it  was  impossible
to  effect  the  election  of  the  ordinary  magistrates.
Among  the  various  candidates,  Milo  sued  for  the
consulship  and  Clodius  for  the  praetorship :  the
violence  of  the  one  and  the  intriguing  spirit  of
the  other  rendered  any  decision  more  than  ever
unattainable.  The  new  year  opened,  like  the  pre-
ceding, with  an  interregnum.  It  was  speedily
distinguished  from  its  predecessor  by  a  flagrant
crime  and  its  long  train  of  consequences.  In  the  A.U.  702.
middle  of  January  it  happened  that  Milo  was
travelling  along  the  Appian  Way.  He  was  ac-
companied in  his  carriage  by  his  wife,  a  large  re-
tinue of  servants  was  in  attendance  upon  him,  and
he  was  followed,  as  was  generally  his  custom,  by
a  troop  of  gladiators.  The  object  of  his  journey
was  at  least  ostensibly  peaceful,  since  he  was  on
his  way  to  perform  one  of  the  ceremonies  attached
to  his  municipal  dictatorship  at  Lanuvium.  At
a  few  miles7  distance  from  the  city  he  was  met
by  Clodius,  who  was  on  horseback,  with  a  small

1  Dion.  xl.  46.  2  Dion.  liii.  14.  3  Dion.  xl.  46.

540

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
XL

Affray
between
Clodius
and  Milo

Clodius
slain :

Riot  and
conflagra-
tion in  the
city.

company  of  armed  attendants.  Such  modes  of  tra-
velling were  not  unusually  adopted  for  the  sake
of  security  even  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome ;
but  the  lives  of  men  in  the  position  of  Milo  and
Clodius  were  never  safe  from  sudden  violence,  and
their  journeying  with  military  escorts  could  be  no
proof  that  their  designs  were  sinister,  and  that  the
meeting  was  on  either  side  premeditated.  Cicero,
in  his  defence  of  Milo,  lays  great  stress  on  the  na-
ture of  his  retinue,  which  he  adduces  as  a  proof  that
he  had  no  intention  of  waylaying  his  enemy,  while,
on  the  other  hand,  he  tries  to  fasten  a  suspicion  of
the  kind  on  Clodius.

However  this  may  be,  a  quarrel  ensued  between
the  servants  on  each  side ;  blows  were  exchanged,
and  Clodius  himself,  wounded  in  the  scuffle,  took
refuge  in  a  tavern  by  the  road  side.  The  fury  of
Milo  was  ungovernable.  Violence  once  committed,
he  resolved  to  carry  it  through.  He  attacked  the
house,  caused  his  enemy  to  be  dragged  from  his
concealment,  and  slain.  The  corpse  lay  in  the
road,  till  it  was  picked  up  by  a  passing  friend,  and
brought  to  Rome.  The  adherents  of  the  murdered
man  exposed  it  to  the  view  of  the  populace,  who
worked  themselves  into  frenzy  at  the  sight.  A  riot
ensued  ;  benches,  books,  and  papers  were  snatched
from  the  curia  in  which  the  senate  was  wont  to
assemble,  and  the  tumultuary  pyre  involved  part
of  the  forum  in  its  conflagration.1  The  house  of

1  Dion.  xl.  49. ;  App.  B.  C.  ii.  21. ;  Ascon.  arg.  in  Milan. :  "  Quo
igne  et  ipsa  quoque  curia  flagravit,  et  item  Porcia  basilica,  quae  erat
ei  adjuncta,  ambusta  est."  The  burning  of  the  Curia  Hostilia  and  the
adjoining  buildings  cleared  the  space  for  the  improvements  intro-

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  541

Milo  and  that  of  the  interrex  M.  Lepidus  were  CHAP.
attacked,  but  the  assailants  were  received  with
coolness  and  determination,  and  repulsed  with
bloodshed.  So  great  was  the  popular  clamour
against  the  murderer  that  he  dared  not  at  first  sub-
mit himself  to  trial.  He  was  preparing  to  with-
draw into  voluntary  banishment  ;  but  his  friends
rallied  about  him  ;  the  violence  of  the  Clodians
worked  some  reaction  of  opinion  in  his  favour  x,  and
a  majority  of  the  tribunes  was  known  to  be  generally
favourable  to  his  party.  He  was  encouraged  to
remain  in  the  city  and  try  the  effect  of  wholesale
bribery,  by  distributing  a  largess  among  the  poorer
citizens.2  But  riot  succeeded  to  riot,  and  the  popu-
lace refused  even  to  listen  to  the  excuses  which  the
culprit  pleaded  in  his  defence.  The  senate,  crippled
in  its  executive  branch,  felt  its  authority  defied  by
both  parties,  whom  it  could  neither  mediate  be-
tween nor  confront  before  an  equitable  tribunal.

It  adopted  the  expedient  of  nominating  a  com-  A

mission,  consisting  of  the  interrex,  the  tribunes,  pointed"  for

and  Pompeius,  to  whom  it  intrusted  conjointly  the  $^10trialT°hfe

solemn  charge  of  providing  for  the  safety  of  the  substance

state. Pompeius  was  allowed  to  collect  a  military  ?atorshipC"

force  to  overawe  the  turbulent  multitude. The
substance  of  the  dictatorship  was  thus  thrust  into  hands-
his  hands  ;  for  what  authority  could  his  colleagues
exert  against  the  commander  of  an  army  at  the

duced  afterwards  by  Cassar. There  was  another  great  fire  in  the
year  703,  in  the  western  part  of  the  forum. Oros.  vi.  13.

1  Ascon.  /.  c. :  "Incendium  curiae  majorem  aliquanto  indignationem
civitatis  moverat  quam  Clodii  caedes."

2  Appian.  B,  C.  ii.  22.

542

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAP.
XL

He  is  de-
clared sole
consul,
A.  u.  702.
B.C.  52.

The  trial
ofMilo:  in-
timidation
of  his  ad-
vocates.

gates,  or  even  in  the  forum  ?  Still,  however,  the
title  was  withheld ;  some  secret  intrigues  prevailed
to  thwart  the  cherished  wish ;  still  Pompeius  hesi-
tated to  demand  it.  Caesar  had  by  this  time  arrived
at  Lucca,  and  was  intently  watching  the  crisis.1
His  immediate  vicinity  gave  a  new  stimulus  to  the
efforts  of  his  partizans,  and  honours  were  lavishly
decreed  him  in  acknowledgment  of  his  late  victories.
So  close  at  hand,  the  senate  was  apprehensive  of
his  not  only  resenting  the  elevation  of  his  rival  to
an  avowed  dictatorship,  but  of  his  claiming  a  share
in  the  consular  dignity  for  himself.  Accordingly,
with  the  sanction  of  Cato  and  Bibulus,  the  nobles
invented  a  middle  way  to  reconcile  the  conflicting
pretensions  of  the  jealous  allies,  by  refusing  Pom-
peius the  dictatorship,  but  decreeing  his  appoint-
ment as  sole  consul.2  Pompeius  himself  was  absent
from  the  city;  but  the  public  appearance  of  the
candidate  was  dispensed  with ;  the  suffrages  of  the
tribes  were  not  solicited;  it  is  even  doubtful
whether  any  of  the  forms  of  popular  election  were
gone  through.

The  trial  of  Milo  was  the  principal  object  for
which  these  irregularities  were  committed,  for  it
required  extraordinary  measures  to  give  effect  to
judicial  proceedings  in  such  a  case.  The  character
of  the  accused  and  the  influence  which  he  exerted,

1  Caes.  B.  G.  vi.  ult. :  "  Ibi  cognoscit  de  Clodii  caede.

8  Dion.  xl.  50.  :  r<£  IIo/*7n;iy  TI}V  vira.Tiiavy  &<rrt  fj.r}  diKTctTupa  avrov
\fxQfjvai,  leal  nov(f)  ye,  'Iva  fit}  6  Kaiaap  O.VT$  auvdpZy,  dovrtg.  Appian.
B.  C.  ii.  23. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  54. ;  Liv.  JBpit.  cvii. :  "  Cnaeus  Pompeius
a  senatu  consul  tertium  factus  est,  absens  et  solus,  quod  nulli  alii  un-
quam  contigit."  To  crown  this  series  of  irregularities  it  must  be  re-
membered that  he  was  at  the  same  time  proconsul.

UNDER THE EMPIRE.  543

combined  with  the  ostentatious  lawlessness  of  his CHAP.
enemies  to  make  a  fair  decision  hopeless. It  was  '_

the  part  of  a  vigorous  magistrate  at  least  to  repress
violence,  and  for  this  purpose  the  consul  did  not
hesitate  to  fill  the  avenues  to  the  forum,  and  even
the  steps  and  porticoes  of  the  temples  which  sur-
rounded it,  with  files  of  soldiers1,  a  spectacle
hitherto  unprecedented  to  Koman  eyes.  Cicero,
on  rising  to  defend  the  criminal,  was  assailed  with
such  cries  and  menaces  from  the  populace  as  almost
to  make  him  quail  from  the  attempt.  The  sight
of  the  consul's  military  dispositions  was  too  novel
and  alarming  to  reassure  him.  He  hurried  through  Muo  goes
his  speech,  abashed  and  dispirited ;  his  client  lost  {J^^f^
his  cause,  and  was  condemned  to  banishment.2  It  cicero  pro

.  i  .  i  ,-,  ,,  -. Milone.

was  on  returning  to  his  own  house  that  he  collected
himself  to  a  sense  of  the  glorious  opportunity  he
had  lost,  and  sate  down  to  compose  the  magnificent
oration  which  has  descended  to  posterity  as  his  de-
fence of  Milo.3  The  orator  had  executed  a  splendid

1  Plut.  Cic.  34. ;  Schol.  Bob.  in  Milan,  p.  276. ;  Lucan.  i.  319. :

"  Quis  castra  timenti

Nescit  mixta  foro,  gladii  cum  triste  minantes
Judicium  insolita  trepidum  cinxere  corona."

2  The  judges,  according  to  a  new  enactment  of  Pompeius,  were
selected  by  lot  to  the  number  of  eighty-one :  this  number  was  reduced
by  challenge  on  either  side  to  fifty-one. On  this  occasion  their  votes
were  given  in  the  following  proportions  :  Senatores  condemnaverunt
xii.,  absolverunt  vi. Equites  condemnaverunt  xiii.,  absolverunt  iv.
Tribuni  aerarii  condemnaverunt  xiii.,  absolverunt  iii. Ascon.  p.  53.

Immediately  after  his  conviction  on  the  charge  de  vi,  Milo  was
accused  of  ambitus,  and  condemned  in  his  absence.  He  was  again
accused  de  sodalitiis,  of  conspiracy,  and  condemned  a  third  time.

3  Dion.  xl.  54. :  XP°VV ""o^' vanpov  /cat Kara GXO\^V  avaQapa^aaQ
typafy. The  writer  of  the  Scholia  Bobiensia  mentions  that  in  his
time  the  original  speech  was  existing :  "  Existit  alius  praterea  liber

544  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS UNDER THE EMPIRE.

;CHAP.  declamation,  and  his  vanity  prompted  him  to  send
it  to  his  client  at  Massilia.  The  exile  perused  it,
and  replied  that  he  esteemed  himself  fortunate  that
so  convincing  a  speech  had  not  actually  been
delivered,  "else,"  he  said,  H/I  should  not  be  now
enjoying  the  exquisite  mullets  of  this  place;"  a
reply  which  may  perhaps  have  passed  with  Cicero
as  a  pleasant  jest,  but  which,  as  Dion  shrewdly
remarks,  must  have  been  meant  as  a  bitter  sarcasm
on  the  timidity  of  the  orator  in  the  forurn  and  his
vanity  in  the  closet.1

actorum  pro  Milone,  in  quo  omnia  interrupta  et  impolita  et  rudia,
plena  denique  maximi  terroris  agnoscas." This  must  have  been  the
"  report "  of  the  speech  inserted  perhaps  in  the  Acta  Diurna. See
Leclerc's  dissertation,  Journaux  Publics  chez  les  Jtomains.
1  Dion.  xl.  54.-

END OF THE FIRST  VOLUME.

LONDON :

SPOTTISWOODES  and  SHAW,
New-street-  Square.

DG
276
M5
v.l

Merivale,  Charles

A  history  of  the  Roman i
under  the  empire

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
