UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA
AT LOS  ANGELES

IJBltAR

ANGELES,  CAU

THE

ROMANS UNDER THE EMPIRE

VOL.  n.

WORKS BY  CHARLES MERIVALE, D.D.

SOMF.TIMK DEAX OP KI,Y.

HISTORY  of  the  ROMANS  under  the  EMPIRE.
With  Maps.  8  vols.  Crown  8vo.  3s.  6rf.  each.

The  FALL  of  the  ROMAN  REPUBLIC;  a  History
of  the  Last  Century  of  the  Commonwealth.  With  Maps.
Fcp.  8vo.  7s.  6d.

The  ROMAN  TRIUMVIRATES.  With  Map.  Fcp.  8vo.
2s.  6rf.  (Epochs  of  Ancient  History.)

GENERAL  HISTORY  OF  ROME  from  the  Founda-
dation  of  the  City  to  the  Fall  of  Augustulus,  B.C.  763—
A.D.  476.  With  5  Maps.  Crown  8vo.  7*.  6rf.

SCHOOL  HISTORY  of  ROME.  Abridged  from  Dean
MERIVALE'S  General  History  of  Rome,  with  the  sanction  of  the
Author,  by  C.  PULLER,  M.A.  With  13  Maps.  Fcp.  8vo.  3.«.  6d.

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.  39  Paternoster  Row,
London,  New  York,  and  Bombay.

HISTORY

ROMANS  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE

11Y TIIK VKKY RKV.

CHARLES MERIVALE, D.C.L.

LATE DEAN OF  ELY

IN EIGHT VOLUMES

VOL.  II.

NEW IMPRESSION

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
NEW YORK AND BOMBAY

CONTENTS

OF

THE SECOND VOLUME.

N$  CHAPTER  XI.

TABU

{State  of  the  Parthian  Monarchy — Crassus  meditates  an  ex-
pedition against  the  Parthians — First  Invasion,  A.U.  700 —
Second  Invasion,  A.U.  701 — He  is  deceived  by  the  Par-
thians, and  misled  by  his  guides  —  Fatal  engagement
beyond  Carrhae — Death  of  the  younger  Crassus — Crassus
enticed  into  a  conference  and  slain  in  a  fray — His  remains
insulted — An  Interregnum  at  Koine — Pompeius  prevails

ft  on  the  Tribunes  to  allow  the  election  of  Consuls — Assassi-
nation of  Clodius — Disturbances  in  the  City — Pompeius

«  appointed  sole  Consul  for  the  year  702 — Trial  of  Milo —
The  proceedings  of  the  Forum  controlled  by  an  armed

force ----------  I

*>>

CHAPTER  XII.

~t>

Caesar  a  seventh  campaign  in  Gaul,  A.U.  702,  B.C.  52 — Ver-
cingetorix  effects  a  coalition  between  the  Belgians  and
Arvernians — Caesar  takes  Genabiun  and  Avaricum — Wise
and  spirited  policy  of  Vercingetorix — Siege  of  Gergovia —
Revolt  of  the  JEdui — Caesar  compelled  to  raise  the  siege:
he  effects  a  junction  with  Labienus  in  Belgium,  and  retreats
towards  the  province — He  obtains  a  victory,  and  blockades
the  Gaulish  army — Great  operations  before  Alesia  —
Triumph  of  the  Romans,  and  submission  of  Vercingetorix
— Caesar's  eighth  campaign,  A.U.  703,  B.C.  51 — Partial
insurrections  in  the  north,  west,  and  centre  of  Gaul — Cap-
ture of  Uxclloilumim — The  cont|tiest  of  Gaul  completed  -  30

245239

VI  CONTENTS OF

CHAPTER  XIII.

PASS

Pompeius,  as  sole  consul,  undertakes  the  reform  of  abuses-.
his  ill  success:  he  connects  himself  again  with  the  oligarchy
by  espousing  the  daughter  of  Scipio — Csesar  intrigues  to
obtain  the  consulship  before  relinquishing  his  province —
Cicero  accepts  the  government  of  Cilicia:  his  civil  and
military  administration — The  nobles  seek  to  deprive  Caesar
of  his  command — M.  Marcellus  insults  him  by  the  harsh
punishment  of  a  Transpadane  Gaul — Pompeius  falls  sick
— Rejoicings  for  his  recovery — Cassar  conciliates  the  Gauls
— Strength  and  composition  of  his  army:  his  popularity  \vith
the  soldiers — Character  of  the  younger  Curio ;  his  devotion
to  Caesar's  interests — Caesar  received  with  acclamations  in
Cisalpine  Gaul — He  fixes  his  quarters  at  Ravenna — He
offers  a  compromise  with  the  Senate,  which  it  refuses,  and
requires  him  to  resign  his  command — The  tribunes  inter-
pose, are  menaced  with  violence,  and  thereupon  fly  to
Cazsar's  camp.  (A.U.  702 — 704,  B.C.  52 — 50.'  75

CHAPTER  XIV.

The  consuls  prepare  to  withstand  Caesar's  claims  by  force —
Caesar  crosses  the  Rubicon — Consternation  of  his  enemies
— They  abandon  Rome,  and  rally  round  Pompeius  in  Cam-
pania— Caesar  advances  triumphantly — The  senate  affects
to  negotiate — Pompeius  falls  back  upon  Luceria — Domitius
makes  a  stand  at  Corfinium:  is  betrayed  and  delivered  up
by  his  soldiers:  pardoned  by  Caesar — Effect  of  Caesar's
clemency — Pompeius  is  besieged  by  Caesar  in  Brundisium
— Escapes  across  the  sea  with  his  troops,  the  consuls  and
the  senate — Explanation  of  the  apparent  pusillanimity  of
his  conduct.  (Jan. — March  A.U.  705,  B.C.  49.)  -  -  .23

CHAPTER  XV.

Ca»ar  repairs  to  Rome  and  convenes  the  Senate — His  mode-
ration and  clemency — He  plunders  the  Temple  of  Saturn
— He  proceeds  to  attack  the  Pompeian  armies  in  Spain —
Domitius  encourages  the  Massilians  to  shut  their  gates
against  him — He  leaves  a  force  to  besiege  their  city,  and
crosses  the  Pyrenees — The  Pompeian  lieutenants  occupy
Ilerda — Military  operations  before  that  place — Overflow  of
the  Sicoris  and  peril  of  Caesar  —  Brutus  gains  a  naval
advantage  over  the  Massiliaus — The  Pompeians  compelled

THE SECOND VOLUME.  Vll

PAG  I

to  eyacnate  Ilerda — Farther  military  operations,  ending  in
the  capitulation  of  the  Pompeian  armies.  (A.  D.  705,  B.  c.
49.) 1<J4

CHAPTER  XVI.

Siege  and  capture  of  Massilia — Caesar  receives  the  submis-
sion of  Varro,  and  establishes  his  power  throughout  the
Spanish  provinces — Campaign  of  Curio  in  Africa:  his
defeat  and  death — Disaster  to  Caesar's  forces  in  Illyricum
— Administration  of  Rome  byLepidus  and  M.  Antonius —
Caesar  is  created  Dictator  in  his  absence — He  quells  a
mutiny  among  his  troops  at  Placentia,  and  hastens  to  Rome
— His  financial  and  political  measures — He  is  elected  Consul,
and  resigns  the  dictatorship — Prepares  to  follow  Pompeius
across  the  sea — Advantages  of  his  position  compared  with
that  of  his  adversaries.  ( A. o.  705,  B.C.  49.)  -  -  -  203

CHAPTER  XVIL

The  Senatorial  party  assemble  at  Thessalonica — Review  of
their  forces  and  position — Caesar  crosses  over  to  Epirus —
Pompeins  throws  himself  before  Dyrrhachium — Maritime
operations  of  Bibulus:  his  mortification  and  death — Sedi-
tion in  Italy,  and  death  of  Caelius — Antonins  crosses  over
to  Epirus  with  reinforcements — Caesar  blockades  Pompeius
within  his  lines — Operations  in  Macedonia  and  Greece —
Appius  Claudius  consults  the  oracle  of  Delphi — Caesar  is
baffled  in  his  attack  on  Pompeius,  and  withdraws  into
Thessaly — Pompeius  follows,  and  effects  a  junction  with
Scipio — Gives  battle  at  Pharsalia — Rout  of  the  Senatorial
forces — Flight  of  Pompeius:  death  of  Domitius:  surrender
of  M.  Brutus.  (Jan. — Aug.  A.D.  706,  B.C.  48.)  -  -  239

CHAPTER  XVIII.

Pompeius  seeks  refuge  in  Egypt — Treacherous  policy  of  the
advisers  of  King  Ptolemseus — Pompeius  is  enticed  from
his  vessel  and  murdered — The  fugitives  from  Pharsalia  re-
assemble at  Dyrrhachium  and  Corcyra — Cicero  withdraws
from  the  contest — Scipio  assumes  the  command — Caesar
follows  in  pursuit  of  Pompeius:  receives  the  submission  of
C.  Cassins:  reaches  Egypt,  and  pays  honour  to  the  head
of  Pompeius — Undertakes  to  settle  the  affairs  of  the  king-
dom—Fascinations of  Cleopatra -Discontent  of  the  Alex-

VOL. II.  a

(Till  CONTENTS OF

andrians:  they  rise  against  Caasar  and  blockade  him  in  the
palace  —  The  Alexandrian  war :  intrigues,  defeat  and
death  of  Ptolemaeus— Caesar  places  Cleopatra  on  his  throne
— Pharnaces  attacks  the  allies  of  the  Republic,  and  defeats
Calvinus — Caesar  marches  against  him:  he  is  routed  at  the
battle  of  Zela,  and  slain — Arrogance  of  the  conqueror.
(A.U.  706,  707,  R  c.  48,  47.) 298

CHAPTER  XIX.

Character  of  Caesar's  policy  in  Rome — He  assumes  the  Dic-
tatorship for  the  third  time — He  quells  a  mutiny  among
his  soldiers — The  Senatorial  party  collect  their  forces  in
Africa — Cato  lands  at  Gyrene,  crosses  the  Libyan  Desert,
and  joins  the  forces  of  Scipio  at  Utica — Campaign  in  Africa
decided  by  the  victory  of  Caesar  at  Thapsus — Dispersion
of  the  republican  forces,  and  death  of  their  principal
leaders — Cato  undertakes  to  defend  Utica — His  adherents
abandon  the  contest — He  commits  suicide — The  Dictator-
ship for  ten  years  and  other  distinctions  showered  upon
Caesar — On  his  return  to  Rome  he  celebrates  four  triumphs,
and  gratifies  the  people  with  shows  and  largesses — Dedi-
cation of  the  Julian  Forum — The  war  renewed  by  Cnaeus
Pompeius  in  Spain — He  is  supported  by  Caesar's  discon-
tented soldiers  —  Csesar's  final  campaign,  and  decisive
victory  at  Munda — Of  all  the  Senatorial  leaders  Sextus
alone  remains  in  arms — Disturbances  in  Syria.  (Sept.  A.U.
707— April,  A.U.  709,  B.C.  47—45.)  336

CHAPTER  XX.

Csesar's  legislation :  his  sumptuary  laws :  increase  of  the  num-
ber of  the  Senate:  limitation  of  the  term  of  provincial
governments :  extension  of  the  franchise  :  distribution  of
lands  to  the  veterans :  measures  for  multiplying  the  free
population  of  Italy:  assignment  of  the  Judicia  to  the
Senators  and  Knights,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  ^rarian
Tribunes:  repression  of  crimes  of  violence,  and  abolition  of
the  clubs — Caesar  contemplates  the  establishment  of  ;i
uniform  system  of  administration :  he  proposes  to  compile
a  code  of  laws,  and  to  execute  a  complete  map  of  the  Empire
— Caesar's  patronage  of  literature:  his  reform  of  the  calen-
dar: his  reforms  are  viewed  with  jealousy  by  the  nobles:
he  is  accused  of  pride  and  arrogance — The  demeanour  of

THE SECOND VOLUME.

PAQK

Cleopatra  tends  to  make  him  unpopular;  at  the  same  time
he  is  flattered  and  his  clemency  extolled — He  disbands  his
soldiers,  and  relies  on  the  favour  of  the  citizens  -  -  385

CHAPTER  XXI.

Tranquillity  of  Borne  during  Caesar's  absence  in  Spain —
Character  of  his  principal  friends:  Balbus,  Oppius,  Matins,
Hirtius — Their  Epicurean  principles  —  Caesar  himself  a
freethinker,  but  addicted  to  superstition — His  return  to
Rome,  and  last  triumph — Harsh  treatment  of  Laberius —
Honours  and  dignities  showered  upon  Caesar — He  receives
the  appellation  of  Pater  Patrice,  and  the  prcenomen  Impera-
toris:  is  elected  Consul  for  ten  years,  and  created  Dictator
for  life,  &c. — His  magnificent  schemes  for  works  of  public
utility — He  manifests  symptoms  of  intolerable  pride —
Caesar's  urbanity  of  character — He  visits  Cicero  at  his  villa
— Cicero  exhorts  him  to  make  war  on  the  Parthians — He
prepares  to  set  out  on  an  expedition  of  foreign  conquest,
and  appoints  magistrates  for  the  interval  of  his  intended
absence — Caesar  appears  to  covet  the  title  of  King — The
people  express  their  disapprobation —  He  refuses  the  diadem
— A  conspiracy  is  formed  against  his  life  by  men  of  both
parties  in  the  state — They  place  Brutus  at  their  head —
Assassination  of  Caesar  on  the  Ides  of  March,  beneach  the
statue  of  Pompeius.  (A.U.  709 — March  710,  B.C.  45,  44.)  -  415

MAPS.

MAP OF HlSPANIA .  .  1 rr> i_  , . .  ,  .,

[  To  be  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the
MAP  OF  PHAKSALJA  . .

.

HISTORY

ROMANS  UNDEK  THE  EMPIEE.

CHAPTER  XI.

State  of  the  Parthian  Monarchy. — Crassus  meditates  an  expedition
against  the  Parthians. — First  Invasion,  A.U.  700. — Second  Inva-
sion, A.D.  701. — He  is  deceived  by  the  Parthians,  and  misled  by
his  guides. — Fatal  engagement  beyond  CarrhsD — Death  of  the
younger  Crassus.  —  Crassus  enticed  into  a  conference  and  slain
in  a  fray — His  remains  insulted. — An  Interregnum  at  Rome.
— Pompeius  prevails  on  the  Tribunes  to  allow  the  election  of
Consuls. — Assassination  of  Clodius. — Disturbances  in  the  City. —
Pompeius  appointed  sole  Consul  for  the  year  702. — Trial  of
Milo. — The  proceedings  of  the  Forum  controlled  by  an  armed
force.

BEFORE  we  revert  to  the  contemplation  of  the  pro-
tracted death-struggle  of  Roman  indepen-

.  ,  r  ,, r,. Rise  of  the

dence,  we  must  turn  aside  to  follow  the  Parthian
Parthian  expedition  of  Crassus,  one  of  the
most  romantic  episodes  in  the  history  of  the  martial
republic,  conspicuous  for  the  most  wanton  aggression
and  the  most  signal  chastisement  by  which  her  bloody
annals  are  distinguished.  The  province  of  Syria
offered  brilliant  opportunities  to  the  ambition  or
avarice  of  a  Roman  proconsul.  Its  wealth,  compara-
tively untouched  by  earlier  conquerors,  was  the  accu-
mulation of  centuries  of  commercial  splendour.  Its
frontiers  were  limited  by  the  dominions  of  the  tribu-
tary sovereigns  of  Cappadocia  and  Palestine,  who
flourished  under  the  shadow  of  Roman  protection.
Beyond  them  lay  the  kingdoms  of  Armenia,  placed

VOL.  II.  B

2  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XT.

also  in  a  state  of  dubious  dependence  on  the  republic,
and  of  Egypt,  whose  freedom  at  the  moment  was
trembling  in  the  balance.  To  the  east  stretched  the
vast  extent  of  the  Parthian  empire,  with  which  Rome
had  never  yet  measured  her  strength.  The  region  from
which  the  once  mighty  name  of  the  Parthians  took
its  rise  is  an  insignificant  tract  of  country  watered  by
the  river  Ochus,  the  modern  Tedjen,  near  the  south-
eastern extremity  of  the  Caspian  Sea.  On  the  north
a  sandy  desert  separates  it  from  the  Oxus  and  the
modern  city  of  Khiva ;  on  the  south  it  is  hemmed  in
by  the  great  mountain  chain  which  connects  the
Caucasus  of  the  west  with  the  Hindoo  Khoosh,  or
Caucasus  of  the  east.  This  district  had  formed  the
most  northern  possession  of  the  Macedonian  empire  ;
but,  upon  the  partition  of  the  various  provinces  after
the  death  of  Alexander,  none  of  his  Greek  generals
aspired  to  occupy  a  throne  in  so  remote  and  barba-
rous a  region.  Parthia  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  chief
of  native  extraction,  though  known  by  the  Greek
name  of  Stasanor :  but  it  continued  in  a  state  of  pre-
carious dependence  on  the  sovereigns  of  the  Mace-
donian line,  who  held  their  court  in  Susa.  The  power
of  the  European  dynasties  was  weakened  by  their
quarrels  with  one  another ;  and  both  the  Parthians
and  the  Bactrians  shook  off  the  yoke  in  the  third
century  before  our  era.  Arsaces,  the  founder  of  a
race  of  Parthian  kings,  was  a  man  of  obscure  origin ;
the  conquest  of  Hyrcania  extended  his  possessions  to
the  Caspian ;  and  when  his  vigorous  chivalry  crossed
the  Caucasus  and  came  in  contact  with  the  nations  to
the  south,  the  successors  of  Alexander  were  unable
to  withstand  them,  and  the  whole  of  the  provinces
between  the  Euphrates  and  the  Indus  fell  in  the
fourth  generation  under  the  sway  of  the  Parthian
Mithridates.  Thie  powerful  tyrant  was  succeeded  by
a  son  who,  after  some  brilliant  triumphs  over  the
Greeks  in  Syria,  was  defeated  and  slain  by  a  horde  of

CH.  XT.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  3

invading  Scythians.  The  attention  of  his  successors,
as  far  as  they  could  spare  it  from  their  intestine
divisions  and  family  intrigues,  was  principally  occu-
pied with  checking  the  progress  of  these  depredators,
and  supporting  the  power  of  Armenia  on  their  north-
western frontier,  which  formed  a  bulwark  against
future  invasion  from  that  quarter. '

For his abode the  Parthian sovereign selected
Seleucia  on  the  Tigris, from among:  the

,  .  ,  » f  , , ,°  The  Parthian

royal  residences  ot  the  empire  he  had  over-  court  at
thrown.  Scarcely  emerged  from  the  tent
of  his  fathers,  he  at  once  established  himself  in  all  the
pomp  of  the  ancient  dynasties  which  had  successively
held  the  sceptre  of  Central  Asia.  He  adopted  from
the  Assyrians  the  slothful  luxury  of  the  priest-kings
of  the  line  of  Bel  us ;  he  surrounded  himself  with
slaves,  eunuchs,  and  concubines ;  dressed  more  like
a  woman  than  a  man 2,  and  revelled  in  the  charms  of
odours,  wine,  and  music.  From  the  example  of  the
Medes,  he  assumed  the  licence  of  intermarrying  with
the  nearest  members  of  his  own  family,  a  barbarous
device  for  limiting  the  claimants  to  the  succession.
Nor  was  he  less  easily  seduced  by  the  more  intellec-
tual, but  hardly  less  enervating,  refinements  which
the  Greeks  had  introduced  into  Asia.  An  exotic
literature  and  a  gaudy  theatre  flourished  at  Seleucia
under  the  royal  patronage :  the  ritual  ceremonies  of
the  most  graceful  of  superstitions  were  too  closely
interwoven  with  the  forms  of  the  Grecian  drama  not
to  follow  in  its  train.  The  court  of  Seleucia  presented  a
motley  combination  of  the  manners  of  different  ages
and  countries,  only  to  be  paralleled,  perhaps,  in  the

1  This  history  is  concisely  detailed  by  Justin,  xli.  4,  5.

2  See  Plutarch's  description  of  Surenas  (c.  24.): Ivrplp/juuii  iepo<r-
uirov  Kdl  K&H.T\S  Siaxpicrft,  and  comp  c 32. :  laQriTa.  &ap§a.piKT)v  ywatKbs
«V5uy. The  flowing  dress  which  the  Greeks  supposed  to  be  feminine
was  originally  sacerdotal,  but  its  effect  must  have  been  to  encourage
indolence  and  cowardice.

n  2

4  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xi.

semi-European  fashions  of  Petersburgh  and  Moscow.
But  the  monarch  was  surrounded  and  his  throne
upheld  by  the  faithful  arms  of  a  warlike  nobility,
among  whom  these  refinements  had  not  penetrated
so  deeply.  For  them  he  had  changed  the  satrapies
of  Persia  and  the  governments  of  Alexander  into
dependent  fiefs.  When  he  put  forth  his  whole
strength  for  conquest  or  defence,  he  could  call  upon
the  services  of  eighteen  vitaxae,  or  vassal  kings.1
Every  petty  chieftain  summoned  his  retainers  to  his
side,  who  preserved  at  least  in  the  field  the  habits  of
their  nomade  ancestors,  clad  themselves  in  their  scaly
armour,  and  bounded  upon  their  horses,  equipped
with  the  bow  and  arrow,  equally  deadly  in  the  charge
or  the  retreat. -

'  Gibbon,  Decline  and  Fall,  c.  8.;  Malcolm,  Hist,  of  Persia,  \.  c.  7.

z  The  Parthian  forces  consisted  principally  of  cavalry,  and  both
men  and  horses  were  clad  in  chain  or  scale  armour.  Justin,  xli.  2.
These  accoutrements  became  an  object  of  terror  to  the  Romans  after
their  defeat  under  Crassus,  and  formed  the  burden  of  many  popular
descriptions.  (See  Propertius,  Martial,  and  the  poets  generally.)  It
is  hardly  credible  that  the  Parthian  horsemen  thus  equipped  could
have  had  great  rapidity  of  movement ;  and  the  Armenian  cavalry,
similarly  armed,  was  defeated  and  destroyed  with  ease  by  Lucullus
at  Tigranocerta.  (Plut.  Luc.  28.)  But  their  attacks  were  formidable
to  the  Roman  legionary,  unless  well  furnished  with  archers,  slingers,
and  cavalry  on  his  wings.  In  the  later  periods  of  the  empire  the
Romans  adopted  this  mode  of  equipment,  rather  perhaps  for  show
than  for  service.  (Claudian,  in  Rvfin.  ii.  360.)  But  the  same  kind
of  defensive  armour,  which  we  are  accustomed  to  associate  with  the
name  of  the  Parthians,  has  been  very  extensively  used  in  various
parts  of  the  world.  The  figures  thus  clad  on  the  Column  of  Trajan
represent  Sarmatians :  comp.  Tac.  Hist.  i.  79. ;  Ammian.  xvii.
12.:  Pausan.  i.  21.  The  Georgians  and  Circassians  use  it  habi-
tually at  the  present  day,  and  it  was  adopted  from  them  by  their
descendants,  the  Mamelukes  of  Egypt.  Major  Denham  discovered
a  people  in  Bornou  whose  king  was  attended  by  a  body-guard  of
horsemen  in  chain-mail.  Their  horses,  he  says,  were  small,  but
moved  with  rapidity.  Denham  and  Clapperton's  First  Journey,
p.  62 — 64.  His  drawings  are  precisely  similar  to  the  specimens  of
Afghan  or  Beloochee  chain-mail,  which  may  be  seen  in  Sir  Samuel
Mey  rick's  collection  at  Goodrich  Court.  The  chain -mail  of  the
crusaders  with  which  we  are  familiar  was  more  complete  and  heavier
than  any  other

CH.  Xt.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  5

The  countenance  which  the  Parthian  monarch  ex-
tended to  the  manners  and  usages  intro-  Thedyn»ity
duced  by  his  immediate  predecessors  into  dVa'ob^o"-
the  regions  beyond  the  Euphrates  was  p^i^n'Jib-
doubtless  galling  to  the  spirit  of  the  native  ject*'
race,  and  rendered  him  particularly  obnoxious  to  the
priestly  caste,  who  worshipped  the  element  of  fire  in
its  visible  fountain  in  the  heavens.  It  was  to  this
hostility,  perhaps,  that  the  dynasty  of  Arsaces  owes
the  obscurity  which  envelopes  its  history  in  the  native
annals.  Ferdousi,  the  poetical  historian  of  Persia,
passes  it  over  almost  in  silence ;  and  other  Oriental
authorities,  while  they  curtail  its  duration  by  two  or
more  centuries,  deny  the  foreign  extraction  of  the
founder.1  This  opinion  has  met  with  supporters
among  European  scholars  ;  but  the  passage  of  Strabo,
on  which  they  rely,  may  be  safely  pronounced  cor-
rupt2, and  there  is  no  ground  for  supposing  that  the
Arsacidse  formed  an  exception  to  the  destiny  which
has  so  repeatedly  subjected  Persia  to  the  sway  of
foreign  masters.3

1  Malcolm's  Hist,  of  Persia,  I.  c. Arsaces  is  known  to  the  native
writers  by  the  name  of  Ashk.

*  Strabo  alone  of  the  ancient  writers  seems  to  identify  the  Parthians
with  the  Carduchi  (xvi.  I.);  but  the  reading  napOvaiwv  is  rejected  by
Groskurd,  who,  with  Tzschukke,  Koray  and  Wesseling,  would  read
rnptiuaiuv. The  Carduchi,  or  Kurds,  had  their  central  seats  about
the  sources  of  the  river  Tigris,  but  extended  also  into  the  plains  of
Adiabene. Xenophon  (Anab.  iii. 5.  16.)  describes  them  as  only
nominally  dependent  on  the  kings  of  Persia  in  his  time. Their
nomade  habits  and  love  of  horses  (Kinneir,  Geographical  Memoir  of
Persia,  p. 143.)  are  too  common  characteristics  of  an  analogous
state  of  society  to  establish  any  identity  between  them  and the
Parthians. Undoubtedly,  however,  there  was  an  early  connexion
between the  Armenians,  Parthians, Medes  and  Persians,  derived
from  their  common  Caucasian  origin,  and  so  far  both  theories  may
be  reconciled.

*  The  dynasty  of the  Arsacidae was overthrown in the third
century  by  Ardshir,  or  Artaxerxes, the first  of  the  Sa-ssanida-,  u
native  race  which  reigned  till  the  conquest  of  the  Saracens  in  the
seventh.

&  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  ctt.  xl.

The  progress  of  the  Roman  arms  in  the  east  had
eras*™  seta  brought  them  at  lengtn  into  immediate  con-
goveframent  in  tact  with  the  Parthian  outposts,  and  the  line
fiu.'  699.  °f  the  Euphrates  became  through  a  part  of  its
course  the  recognised  boundary  of  the  two
dominions.  The  Roman  province  of  Syria  extended
from  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  Asia  Minor,  or
the  Grulf  of  Issus,  to  the  Libanus,  the  northern  limit
of  Palestine.  It  was  governed,  as  we  have  seen,  di-
rectly from  Rome,  while  the  territories  immediately
bordering  upon  it  were  allowed  to  retain  their  own
laws,  and  were  subjected  to  the  rule  of  native  sove-
reigns appointed  by  the  republic.  The  large  force
which  it  was  necessary  to  maintain  in  a  position  of
such  importance,  and  its  distance  from  the  seat  of
government,  invested  the  proconsul  of  Syria  with
almost  irresponsible  power.  Grabinius  was  nearly
the  first  to  whom  this  charge  had  been  intrusted
since  the  political  settlement  established  throughout
these  regions  by  Pompeius.  He  had  gone  to  his  pro-
vince full  of  schemes  of  warfare  and  plunder.  He
had  quarrelled  with  the  Parthians,  who  had  hitherto
cultivated  amicable  relations  with  their  formidable
neighbours,  and  conducted  themselves  towards  her
officers  with  the  respectful  frankness  of  a  brave  and
independent  people.  He  had  gone  so  far  as  to
threaten  them  with  invasion,  but  had  been  diverted
from  his  purpose  by  the  superior  temptation  of  re-
storing Ptolemaeus  Auletes  to  the  throne  of  Egypt.
It  was  this  capricious  project  of  Gabinius  to  signalize
himself  by  a  war  with  Parthia  that  inflamed  the
vanity  of  Crassus.  The  success  of  the  new  proconsul
in  military  affairs  had  hitherto  been  equivocal ;  up
to  this  period  he  had  not  appeared  to  affect  the  cha-
racter of  a  great  general.  But  the  renown  of  Pom-
peius and  Ca?sar  had  long  rankled  in  his  bosom ;  he
resolved  to  rival,  and  he  hoped  to  excel,  them ;  sen-
timents of  military  ambition,  which  were  supposed

».0.699-B,c.55.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  7

never  to  have  found  a  place  in  his  cautious  and  sober
disposition,  now  broke  forth  in  expressions  of  the
wildest  arrogance.  He  talked  to  his  friends  with
puerile  presumption  of  the  exploits  he  would  per-
form ;  he  would  not  limit  his  enterprises  to  Syria  or
even  Parthia ;  the  victories  of  Lucullus  over  Tigranes,
of  Pompeius  over  Mithridates,  he  ridiculed  as  tri-
fling ;  while  he  proclaimed  his  own  resolution  to
subdue  the  Bactrians  and  the  Indians,  and  penetrate,
like  another  Alexander,  to  the  ocean  which  surrounds
the  Continent. '  Caesar,  always  on  the  watch  for  the
errors  of  his  associates,  wrote  to  him  from  Gaul  to
stimulate  his  ambition  and  feed  his  hopes. 2  We  may
suppose  that  the  advice  of  the  conqueror  of  the  west
would  be  no  less  audacious  in  character  than  that
which  had  so  often  marked  his  actions,  and  that  he
urged  Crassus  to  put  the  widest  interpretation  upon
tho  licence  to  make  war  or  peace  which  Trebonius
had  obtained  for  him.  It  was  indeed  too  late  to
quarrel  with  the  proconsul  of  Syria  for  proposing  to
exercise  a  power  which  had  been  formally  conceded
to  him ;  nevertheless,  the  statesmen  of  the  republic
were  reluctant  to  throw  themselves  at  the  feet  of
another  military  despot,  and  the  disclosure  of  his
warlike  resolves  caused  general  alarm  and  discontent
among  them.  In  order  to  evade  the  effect  of  their
discouragement  or  remonstrances,  Crassus  pushed  on
his  preparations,  and  commenced  his  journey  some
weeks  before  his  consulship  expired.3  It  was  re-
solved to  appeal  to  the  feelings  of  the  people  by

1  Plut.  Crass.  16.  2  Plut.  I.e.

*  He  left  Rome  just  before  the  middle  of  November,  according  to
the  unreformed  calendar  (Cic.  ad  Att  iv.  13.),  the  Roman  year  at
this  period  being  just  fifteen  days  in  advance  of  the  real  time.  He
probably  crossed  from  Brundisium  about  a  foitnight  later,  when  his
armament  was  assailed  by  violent  stormy  weather.  Plut.  Crass.  17.;
comp.  Drumann,  iv.  96.  Plutarch  contradicts  himself  in  Pomp.  52.,
where  he  savs  that  Crassus  did  not  leave  Rome  till  the  beginning
of  the  following  year.

8  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XI.

denouncing  his  meditated  aggression  as  unprovoked
and  impious.  The  tribune  Ateius  met  him  at  the
gate  of  the  city,  and  holding  in  one  hand  a  brazier
of  burning  coals,  and  casting  incense  into  it  with
the  other,  invoked  the  curse  of  heaven  upon  the  en-
terprise and  its  leader,  and  devoted  him,  in  the  face
of  his  country,  and  in  the  solemn  words  of  the  ancient
formularies,  to  the  infernal  gods.1  The  tribune's
curse  awakened  a  sense  of  justice,  or  at  least  a  feel-
ing of  superstition,  among  the  citizens,  by  which  the
soldiers  themselves  were  not  unaffected.  Eemorse
and  fear  conspired  to  imagine,  nor  did  malice  fail
perhaps  to  invent  omens  and  prodigies  of  direful  im-
port, and  many  such  were  doubtless  reported  after
the  catastrophe  they  might  be  supposed  to  have  por-
tended. A  story  related  by  Cicero  is  curious,  at
least  in  a  philological  point  of  view,  for  the  glimpse
it  gives  us  of  the  Latin  pronunciation.  While  the
troops  were  assembled  at  Brundisium,  a  man  was
heard  calling  his  figs  in  the  street,  Cauneas,  Cau-
neas ;  his  long  and  drawling  accents  were  fancifully
interpreted  into  the  fatal  warning,  Cave  ne  eas,  Be-
ware of  goiny.*  The  loss  of  several  vessels,  in  the
passage  to  Dyrrhachium,  with  troops  on  board,  was
a  more  serious  misadventure.  But  the  journey
through  Macedonia  and  the  Lesser  Asia,  with  all
its  cheering  sights  and  pleasant  resting-places,  re-
vived the  equanimity  of  the  soldiers,  and  Crassus
himself  was  full  of  confidence  and  arrogant  levity.
Deiotarus,  king  of  Galatia,  an  aged  and  faithful  ally
of  the  Eoman  people,  was  building  a  city  in  the

*  Plut,  Crass.  16.;  Dion,  xxxix.  39  ;  Flor.  iii.  11.  3.,  where  the
name  Metellus  is  a  mistake. The  nobles  affected  to  be  displeased
with  the  extravagant  zeal  of  their  friend. But  Cicero,  in  a  letter  to
Atticus  (iv.  13.),  contrasts  the slender  attendance  of  friends  and
well-wishers  at  Crassus's  departure  with  the  enthusiasm  which  was
manifested  when  ./Emilias  Paullus  left  the  city  to  undertake  the  war
against  Perseus,  king  of  Macedonia.

*  Cic.  de  Divin.  ii.  40. Probably  the  sound  was  Caf'neas.

A.P.700-B.C.54.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  9

route  of  the  proconsul.  Crassua  mocked  him  for
undertaking  such  an  enterprise  in  his  old  age.
And  thou,  too,  returned  the  veteran,  art  far  ad-
vanced in  years  to  lead  an  expedition  against  the
Parthians. l

The  Roman,  indeed,  did  not  delay  an  instant  in
making  his  first  campaign. He  crossed  the
Euphrates,  and  accepted  the  submission  of  th"Eu'ph^t"!

,,  _  ,  ,  «nd  gains  some

some  towns  in  Mesopotamia.  One  place,  be-  trying  mo-
fore  which  a  party  of  his  troops  had  met  with  *  *•  joo,
a  check,  he  stormed  and  ransacked,  and
was  well  pleased  to  receive  for  so  trifling  an  exploit
the  acclamations  of  his  army  and  the  appellation  of
Imperator.  But  he  was  soon  satisfied  with  his  suc-
cess, and  instead  of  pushing  forward  upon  the  centre
of  the  enemy's  power,  returned  indolently  to  his  pro-
vince, thus  allowing  the  Parthians,  irritated  but  not
seriously  injured,  to  complete  their  preparations  for
repelling  a  second  attack.  The  rule  of  an  upstart
race  of  barbarians  fretted  the  pride  of  the  great  old-
world  cities  of  Seleucia  and  Babylon.  The  first  object
of  an  invader  according  to  the  military  critics  of  an-
tiquity should  have  been  to  present  himself  before
their  walls,  and  proclaim  himself  the  deliverer  of
voluptuous  civilization  from  the  yoke  of  the  rude
mountaineers.2  During  the  remainder  of  the  year,
the  seven-hundredth  from  the  foundation  of  the  city,
Crassus  occupied  himself  with  the  civil  affairs  of  his
province,  or  rather  with  the  extortion  and  accumula-
tion of  treasure.  In  the  pursuit  of  his  object  he
committed  various  acts  of  sacrilege,  to  the  horror  of
the  natives,  who  carefully  registered  the  omens  which

1  Crassus  was  sixty  years  of  age,  and  his  appearance  was  still
older.  Piut,  Crass.  17.;  App.  Hist.  Rtr.  Parth.  This  work  cannot
be  considered  genuine,  and  is  almost  a  verbal  transcript  of  Plutarch.

*  Plut.  Crass.  27.:  Ba§uA«5i'oj  «-a!  SeAfUKeta?, 5v<rntviav  &ei  roisndpOon
ir6\f(av.  Dion,  xl.  13.:  -raivyap  MaKf86vii>v  KO!  ruv  &\\cav  T&V  ffvtrrpa-
Ttvaavrtav  ff$i<Tit>  'E\\Tjvit>v  &TTOIKOI  iroAAol,  /3<?  a.x06fj.(yoi,  «al  fs  TOVS
'Pa>p.aiovs  us  Kal  <pi\i\\rjvas  iroAAek  eAirt^byrej,  oux  oKovvius  nf9iffrtu>To.

10  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XI.

portended  the  vengeance  of  the  gods.1  He  was  joined
by  his  son,  the  gallant  lieutenant  of  Csesar,  with  a
body  of  one  thousand  cavalry  from  Gaul,  a  present
from  the  one  triumvir  to  the  other.  The  most  ex-
perienced of  his  officers  was  C.  Cassius  Longinus,  a
soldier  of  approved  skill  and  courage.  Thus  sup-
ported, with  an  army  duly  disciplined  and  equipped,
he  continued  to  indulge  in  sanguine  confidence  re-
garding the  result  of  the  campaign  which  he  projected
for  the  following  year.  The  character  of  the  Parthian
warfare,  which  became  so  terrible  to  the  Komans,  was
as  yet  little  known  to  them ;  but  the  Persian  arrow,
they  might  remember,  had  been  no  match  for  the
Macedonian  sarissa.  They  had  not  yet  learned  to
distinguish  the  mail-clad  horsemen  of  Parthia  from
the  loose-garbed  and  effeminate  human  herds  which
Xerxes  had  driven  with  whips  before  him,  which
Agesilaus  had  scattered  with  a  handful  of  Spartan
infantry,  or  which  Alexander  had  chased  from  the
Hellespont  to  the  Hyphasis.*

1  Crassus  seized  without  remorse  the  treasures  amassed  in  the
temple  of  Derceto  or  Atargatis,  in  Hierapolis. (Plut.  Crass.  27.;
Strab.  xvi.  1.  4.) He  made  a  journey  to  Jerusalem  on  purpose  to
rifle  the  temple. Its  wealth  was  computed  at  ten  thousand  talents.
Eleazar  the  high-priest  tried  to  save  it  by  the  offer  of  a  costly  bribe.
Crassus  took  the  bribe  and  the  treasure  both. Joseph.  Antiq.  xiv.
7.  1.,  B.  Jud.  i.  7.  8.

2  Compare  the  speech  of  Lentulus  in  Lucan's  poem  (viii.  331.  &c.),
which  seems  to  express  a  revival  of  the  contemptuous  and  unfounded
prejudices  of  the  Romans,  after  the  defeat  of  Crassus  had  been  effaced
from  their  recollection:

"  Illic  et  laxas  vestes  et  fluxa  virorum

Velamcnta  vides." ....

The  bow  was  stigmatized  as  a  cowardly  and  effeminate  weapon  com-
pared with  the  sword:

"  Ensis  habet  vires,  et  gens  qusecunque  virorum  est

Bella  gerit  gladiis."  ....
One  disadvantage  it  had:

"  Nam  Medos  praelia  prima
Exarmant,  vacutcque  jubent  remeare  pharetrae."
No  Roman  would have  escaped  from  the  field  of  Carrhae  if  the

A  IT.701-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  11

While  Crassus  was  collecting  his  forces  from  their
winter  quarters,  Orodes,  the  king  of  the  Embassy  of
Parthians,  sent  ambassadors  to  complain  of  ^f^luS"'
the  sudden  aggression  upon  his  territories,  or,  *a"™;,
more  properly,  upon  those  of  Abgarus,  king  B-  c-  53-
of  Osrhoene,  a  dependency  of  the  Seleucian  crown.  But
their  commission  was  not  so  much  to  negotiate  with
the  Koman  proconsul  as  to  defy  him.  The  Parthians
seem  to  have  been  informed  of  the  dislike  with  which
the  proceedings  of  Crassus  were  viewed  by  the  Roman
senate.  An  attempt  had  lately  been  made  in  that
assembly  to  obtain  the  proconsul's  recal  from  his
province,  which  was  foiled  by  the  interference  of
Pompeius,  seconded  by  a  speech  from  Cicero.1  The
Parthians  affected  to  draw  a  distinction  between  the
republic  herself  and  the  marauder  who  had  insulted
them.  With  the  former,  they  said,  they  were  pre-
pared to  wage  war  to  extremity,  if  challenged  to  the
field  ;  but  if  the  enterprise  were  merely  the  personal
act  of  the  old  man  before  them,  they  would  not  con-
descend to  harm  a  hair  of  his  head,  but  would  con-
temptuously send  him  back  the  garrisons  he  had
left  beyond  the  Euphrates.  Crassus  retorted  with
the  usual  taunt  of  inexperienced  commanders;  he
would  discuss  these  matters  in  their  capital.  Wagises,
an  aged  Parthian,  pointed  to  the  smooth  palm  of  his
hand,  and  said  that  hair  should  sooner  grow  there
than  the  Romans  ever  see  Seleucia.2

The  confidence  these  expressions  indicated  was  not
belied  by  the  power  and  resolution  with  Adviceof
which  it  was  backed. Some  of  the  Roman  £j$iSi-
detachments stationed beyond the Eu-  £$£?, !$?«,.
phrates  were  soon  compelled  to abandon  <Mn>f"«n-
their  posts,  and  came  flying  into  the  camp. They
described  the  vigorous  character  of  the  enemy  who

Parthians  could  have  maintained  a  close  blockade  of  the  exhausted
legions.

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  T.  8.  *  Plut.  Crats.  18.

12  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xi.

had  assailed  them,  the  deadliness  of  his  assault,  the
fruitlessness  of  pursuing  him,  the  unerring  aim  of
his  arrows,  the  impenetrability  of  his  armour.  The
Parthians  were  evidently  a  people  very  different  in
character  from  the  Armenians  and  Cappadocians,
whom  Lucullus  had  so  easily  routed.  These  reports
caused  much  uneasiness  in  the  Roman  quarters,  and
Cassius  thus  early  warned  his  leader  of  the  perils  of
the  enterprise  he  was  about  to  undertake.  But
Crassus  gave  no  heed  to  the  warning.  Artabazes,
the  king  of  Armenia,  came  into  his  presence  with
the  offer  of  all  the  resources  of  his  country.  He
promised  the  assistance  of  ten  thousand  cavalry
equipped  in  complete  armour,  and  of  thirty  thou-
sand infantry ;  at  the  same  time  he  strongly  urged
him  to  direct  his  march  through  his  own  friendly
territories,  well  supplied  with  water  and  provisions,
and  abounding  in  hills  and  streams,  which  would
baffle  the  dreaded  manoeuvres  of  the  Parthian  horse-
men.1 By  this  route  he  would  reach  the  upper
waters  of  the  Tigris,  from  whence  he  might  descend
to  Seleucia  through  a  fertile  and  practicable  country.
But  Crassus,  though  well  pleased  with  the  zeal  of  his
ally,  would  brook  no  delay,  nor  adopt  a  circuitous
line  of  march :  moreover  he  represented  that  he  had
still  some  troops  left  in  occupation  of  outposts  be-
yond the  Euphrates,  and  these  he  was  hastening  to
support.

'  Comp.  Lucan,  /.  c.:

"  Parthus  per  Medica  rura,
Sarmaticos  inter  campos,  effusaque  piano
Tigridis  arva  solo,  nulli  supcrabilis  hosti  est
Libertate  fugaa:  scd  non,  ubi  terra  tumebit,
Aspera  conscendet  mentis  juga,  nee  per  opacas
Bella  geret  latebras,  incerto  debilis  arcu:
Nee  franget  narulo  violent!  vorticis  amnem."  . .
Yet  the  Parthians  came  originally  from  a  hilly  country,  anil  the
mail-clad cavalry  of  Armenia,  as  well  as  the  modern  Belooches,
were  accustomed  to  mountain  warfare.

A.D.701-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  13

The  writers  from  whom  we  derive  our  accounts  of
the  campaign  that  followed,  lived  at  least
two  centuries  after  the  date  of  the  events  rouu^opento
they  relate ;  and  even  if  the  sources  from  aneinvidTng
which  they  drew  their  materials  were  trust-
worthy and  accurate,  they  may  very  probably  have
confused  and  disfigured  their  statements  from  their
own  want  of  critical  spirit.  Accordingly,  their  nar-
ratives correspond  very  imperfectly  with  the  geo-
graphy of  the  country  through  which  they  profess  to
guide  us.  The  district  of  Osrhoene,  which  compre-
hends undoubtedly  the  whole  of  the  route  we  wish
to  trace,  was  confined  on  the  north  by  the  line  of  the
Mons  Masius,  or  Karahjah  Dag,  running  directly
east  and  west  from  the  Tigris  to  the  Euphrates,  in
the  parallel  of  Samosata.  The  latter  of  these  rivers
bounds  it  to  the  west  and  south,  as  far  as  its  conflu-
ence with  the  Chaboras,  which  may  be  considered  as
the  eastern  limit  of  the  district.  The  great  highway
from  Asia  Minor  to  the  cities  of  Persia  lay  through
the  town  of  Zeugma,  on  the  Euphrates,  which  de-
rived its  name  from  the  bridge  by  which  the  opposite
banks  were  there  connected,  and  which,  in  Rome's
most  prosperous  times,  when  she  granted  terms  to
the  prostrate  empires  of  the  East,  was  complimented
with  the  pompous  title  of  the  Route  of  Peace.1  The
modern  village  of  Roum  Kale  (the  Roman  castle)
still  marks  its  site,  but  the  caravans  now  cross  the
river  a  few  miles  lower  down  at  Birs.  From  Zeugma
a  military  way  was  directed  due  east  to  Edessa,  the
modern  Orfa,  the  Ur  of  Scripture,  where  the  king  of
Osrhoene  held  his  court.  At  a  later  period  this  posi-

1  Stat.  Sylv.  Hi.  2.  137.:  "  Zeugma  Latins  Pacis  iter."  The  bridge
was  originally  constructed  for  the  transport  of  Alexander's  aruiy
across  the  Euphrates.  Dion,  xl.  17.;  Kinneir,  Geographical  Memoir,
316.  The  Euphrates  there  is  deep  and  rapid  and  about  130  yards
broad.

14  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XI.

tion  became,  in  the  hands  of  the  Romans,  the  key  of
Parthia  and  Armenia.  From  hence  the  road  branched
into  two  lines :  the  one  continued  in  an  easterly  di-
rection to  Nisibis  and  Nineveh,  on  the  Tigris,  and
here  was  the  point  of  departure  either  for  Seleucia  or
Ecbatana ;  the  other  struck  more  southward,  ran
through  Carrhae,  then  turned  due  south,  skirting  the
little  stream  Balissus,  till  it  reached  the  Euphrates
at  Nicephorium.  From  this  point  it  was  carried  on
nearly  parallel  to  the  banks  of  that  river,  and  at  last
terminated  at  Seleucia,  after  crossing  the  narrowest
part  of  the  isthmus  which  separates  the  Euphrates
from  the  Tigris.  These  highways  were  the  work  of  a
later  age,  when  the  power  of  Rome  was  established
through  the  whole  of  Mesopotamia ;  but  they  were
laid  out,  in  all  probability,  in  the  line  of  the  much
more  ancient  routes  frequented  in  the  time  of  Crassus.
It  was  along  one  or  other  of  these  lines,  therefore,
that  we  should  expect  to  trace  the  march  of  the
invading  army.  In  later  times  Trajan  entered
Parthia  by  the  northern,  and  Julian  by  the  southern
route1;  but  Crassus,  according  to  our  historians,
followed  neither.  We  have  no  choice,  but  to  con-
sider the  main  incidents  of  their  narrative  correct,
and  we  must  be  content  with  remarking,  as  we
pass,  the  minor  inconsistencies  by  which  it  is  en-
cumbered.

The  proconsul  had  collected  his  troops  together,
seven  legions  strong,  at Zeugma. Once

Diicourage-  ,, °  ....  r .-,  11-

mentofthe more  the  superstition  ot  the  soldiers  was

Roman  army. ,  , . l  .  .

busy in discovering  omens ot disaster.
Thunders  and  lightnings,  with  tempests  of  wind  and

1  Mannert,  v.  2.  p.  200.;  Francke,  Gesch.  Trojans,  p.  277.;  Am-
mian.  xxiii.  3.  D'Anville's  work  on  the  Euphrates  and  Tigris  is  of
great  service  in  tracing  the  ancient  geography,  hut  his  map  is  ex-
tremely incorrect  as  regards  the  course  of  the  former  river.  That
which  is  appended  to  Kinneir's  Journey  through  Anwnia,,  fyc.,  seems
much  more  trustworthy.

A.C.701  -B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  15

rain,  gave  a  gloomy  presage  of  ill-success.1  The
bridge  Lroke  under  the  weight  of  the  army  and  its
baggage,  at  which  the  troops  were  much  disheartened.
But  the  actions  of  their  leader  and  the  expressions
which  fell  from  him  were  peculiarly  significant  and
unlucky.  Crassus,  intending  to  return  from  the
conquests  he  anticipated  by  the  route  of  Armenia,
paid  no  attention  to  the  calamity,  and  uttered  the
unconscious  prophecy,  that  none  of  his  soldiers  would
want  that  bridge  again.  So,  too,  in  sacrificing,  he
let  the  sacred  fragments  of  the  victim  fall  from  his
hand.  Instead  of  hastening  to  recover  them,  and
avert  the  omen  by  appropriate  formulas,  he  only
smiled,  and  remarked  with  levity,  See  the  infirmity
of  age !  2

As  soon  as  the  Roman  army  had  reached  the  left
bank  of  the  Euphrates,  it  proceeded,  if  we

,-. f  f  , *  , '  , Preparation!

are  correctly  informed,  not  to  take  the  of  the  Par-
road  to  Edessa,  but  to  skirt  the  river  for
some  way  down.3  If  the  object  of  the  general  had
been  to  give  confidence  and  support  to  garrisons
stationed  along  its  course,  as,  for  instance,  at  Barba-
lissus  and  Nicephorium,  that  object,  it  would  seem,
might  have  been  more  readily  attained  by  approaching
the  river  at  the  spot  nearest  to  Antioch,  his  original
point  of  departure,  without  making  a  circuit  so  in-
convenient There  could  have  been  no  difficulty  in
throwing  a  bridge  of  boats  across  the  stream  at  either
of  those  places.  The  counsel  of  Artabazes  having
been  altogether  disregarded,  the  skill  and  experience
of  Cassius  now  suggested  the  most  feasible  alternative,

1  The  Euphrates  is  subject  to  violent  hurricanes. It  was  in  one  of
these  that  Captain  Chesney's  vessel  was  lost  on  his  expedition  to
explore  the  navigation  of  that  river.

2  Plut.  Crass.  19. :  TOIOVTOV  rb  yfjpay.

*  The  force  which  crossed  the  Euphrates  amounted  to  seven
legions  with  about  four  thousand  cavalry,  and  as  many  light-armed
troops.  Plut.  Crass.  20.  Appian  (B.  C.  iii.  18.)  raises  the  number
to  100,000  men,  and  Floras  to  eleven  legions  (iii.  11.).

16  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XI.

the  plan  of  the  campaign.  Cassius  recommended  his
leader  to  keep  along  the  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  by
which  means  he  could  ensure  a  constant  supply  of
provisions  from  the  flotilla  which  was  in  readiness  to
accompany  him,  and  secure  himself  against  being
surrounded.  At  the  same  time  he  advised  him  to
move  slowly  and  wit!  circumspection,  not  to  trust
to  the  rumours  which  flowed  into  the  camp  of  the
disappearance  and  meditated  flight  of  the  Parthians,
but  to  keep  under  the  shelter  of  some  of  his  fortified
posts  till  the  plans  of  the  enemy  could  be  fully
ascertained.  The  fact  was,  as  Cassius  anticipated,
that  the  Parthians  designed  to  maintain  the  defensive,
and  did  not  choose  to  meet  the  invaders  in  a  pitched
battle  on  equal  terms.  It  was  their  object  to  lead
the  Koman  army  into  the  sandy  plains  which

Their  strata- .  J  . r  -t  .-,

gem  to  mislead  intervene  between  the  two  rivers,  and  there

hang  loosely  upon  their  skirts,  till  heat,

fatigue  and  want  should  anticipate  the  work  of  the

sword. They  found  an  instrument  for  their  design

in  Abgarus1,  the  Osrhoenian,  who  attended  the  march

of  the  Roman  legions,  and  wormed  himself  into  their

leader's  confidence  by  specious  professions  of  gratitude

for  the  favours  he  had  received  from  Pompeius. He

assured  the  proconsul  that  Orodes,  despairing  of  the

defence  of  his  country,  had  left  two  of  his  satraps,

Stirenas  and  Sillaces,  to  make  a  show  ot

arthian resistance,  while he was  himself  in full

retreat  for  Scythia  or  Hyrcania, carrying

off  with  him  all  the  treasures  he  could  hastily  remove.

Any  appearance,  he  said,  of  hesitation  on  the  part  of

the  Romans  might  restore  his  confidence,  but  a  sudden

1  He  is  called  by  Dion  ASyapot,  i.e.  Abgarus;  by  the  Pseudo-Ap-
pian,  "AicSapos,  in  which  we  may,  perhaps,  recognise  the  modern
Akhbar.  This  word  is  said  to  be  a  royal  title,  signifying  "  great."
Several  of  the  name  are  mentioned  in  this  and  the  following  centuiy
as  kings  of  Edessa.  Plutarch  gives  this  peisonage  the  name  of
Ariamnes;  he  also  uses  the  form  "TpwSrjs  for  Orodes.

i.CJ.70!-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  17

and  direct  march  upon  Seleucia  would  at  the  moment
meet  with  no  effectual  opposition.  In  fact,  whether
through  fear  of  the  Eoraans,  or  to  show  his  contempt
for  them  in  the  most  striking  manner,  Orodes  had
undertaken  himself  to  chastise  the  insolence  of  their
Armenian  ally,  leaving  the  brunt  of  the  invasion  to
be  sustained  by  his  satraps.  But  this  division  of  his
forces  was  calculated  to  lull  the  enemy  into  security,
and  entice  him  to  a  perilous  movement,  where  the
nature  of  the  country  and  climate  would  arm  the
Parthians  with  irresistible  weapons.  Surenas  ranked
next  to  the  king  in  birth,  wealth  and  distinction.1
He  was  the  most  eminent  of  his  nation  for  valour  and
abilities,  nor  had  he  an  equal  in  strength  and  beauty
of  person.  He  went  forth,  whether  in  peace  or  war,
with  an  equipage  of  one  thousand  camels,  and  his
wives  and  concubines  followed  him  in  a  train  of  two
hundred  chariots.  His  body-guard  consisted  of  one
thousand  horsemen  in  mail,  and  a  still  greater
number  of  light-armed.  His  rank  and  relationship
to  the  throne  entitled  him  to  place  the  diadem  on  the
head  of  the  sovereign.  It  was  to  him  that  Orodes
owed  his  restoration  to  the  supreme  power,  from
which  he  had  been  formerly  expelled  by  his  own
subjects.  Surenas  had  reconquered  Seleucia  by  his
own  personal  valour,  and  though  not  yet  thirty
years  of  age,  he  added  to  all  these  claims  to  honour
the  reputation  of  the  highest  wisdom  in  council  and
craft  in  the  face  of  the  enemy.

Abgarus,  it  seems,  found  no  difficulty  in  persuad-
ing the  infatuated  Roman  to  abandon  the  The  Roman
line  of  the  Euphrates,  and  strike  into  £™Li8utch-d
the  plains  which  separate  it  from  the  eryofAb«°ru'-
Tigris,  in  the  face  of  this  formidable  opponent.  The
general  character  of  the  country  from  Zeugma  to  the

1  Pint.  Crasx.  21.  24. It  seems  probable  that  Surenas,  like
garus,  was  a  title,  and  not  an  appellative.
VOL. II.  C

18  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XL

Chaboras  is  both  level  and  sandy,  but  its  barrenness
is  relieved  by  patches  of  cultivated  and  abundantly
fertile  soil.  Nor  are  there  wanting  both  streams
and  wells  to  supply  it  with  water.  There  seems,
therefore,  to  be  no  serious  impediment  to  the  pro-
gress either  of  a  caravan  or  an  army  as  far  as  the
river  Chaboras,  beyond  which  lies  the  great  desert
of  Sinjar.1  It  is  highly  improbable  that  the  army
of  Crassus  ever  penetrated  into  this  further  region,
and  we  cannot  resist  the  suspicion  that  the  common
traditions,  upon  which  the  historians  relied,  ascribed
to  its  march  far  greater  difficulties  and  privations
than  it  really  encountered.  Soon  after  leaving  the
river  side,  it  is  said,  the  country  lost  every  appear-
ance of  habitation  and  fertility.  Boundless  tracts  of
light  moving  sand  presented  themselves  to  the  eye,
without  shade  or  water,  undulating  like  the  waves  of
the  sea.  The  heat  was  intense,  and  the  spirits  of  the
soldiers  sank  under  the  daily  repetition  of  fatigue
without  refreshment.  Artabazes,  harassed  by  the
attack  of  Orodes,  excused  himself  from  despatching
the  promised  reinforcements,  and  entreated  the  Ro-
man general  to  turn  his  course  in  the  direction  of
Armenia.  Crassus  denounced  the  unfortunate  prince
as  a  traitor,  and  threatened  him  with  the  vengeance
of  the  republic  as  soon  as  he  should  have  leisure  to
execute  it.  His  conduct  to  Cassius  was  marked  with
contemptuous  disregard,  and  the  officers,  who  fore-
saw the  perils  into  which  they  were  hurrying,  had  no
other  resource  than  to  wreak  their  ill-humour  in
bitter  reproaches  against  Abgarus,  who  retorted  with
the  coolest  assurance,  asking  if  they  had  expected  to
make  a  holiday  excursion  among  shady  groves  and
fountains,  in  a  country  of  baths  and  hostelries,  like
their  own  Campania.  At  last,  on  pretence  of  exe-
cuting some  secret  services  he  quitted  the  Roman

1  This  is  the  great  desert  of  Mesopotamia,  which  Strabo  describes
as  lying  beyond  the  Chaboras  (xvi.  1.).

A.U.701-B.C.53.  UNDEll THE EMPIRE.  19

camp,  and  escaped  from  the  hands  of  the  eiiemj
whom  he  had  entrapped  into  the  desert.1

It  is  evident  from  this  account  of  Plutarch  that  lie
considers  the  expedition  to  have  proceeded  Geographical

, , ,  t_f  • .  difficulties  re-

several  days  march  irom  the  point  where  «pectmgthe
it  left  the  beaten  route  to  the  next  locality  •"''»  march,
which  he  mentions,  the  passage  of  the  river  Balissus.
It  was  here  that  Crassus  was  informed  by  the  piquets
which  he  had  sent  forward  that  the  Parthians  were
collected  in  his  front  in  much  greater  force  than  he
had  been  led  to  expect.  If  this,  then,  was  the  ex-
treme limit  of  his  onward  progress,  he  had  not  left
the  Euphrates  above  fifty  miles  in  a  straight  line
behind  him ;  he  had  not  set  foot  in  the  sandy  desert  at
all ;  nor  had  he  given  any  indication  that  he  meant
to  pursue  a  route  through  the  centre  of  Mesopota-
mia, for  at  this  point  he  had  not  abandoned  the
highway  that  leads  from  Edessa  to  Nicephorium  and
Seleucia.  We  must  either  consent  to  regard  the
whole  account  we  have  received  of  Crassus's  errors
and  misconduct  as  unworthy  of  credit,  and  the
charges  against  him  unproved,  or  we  must  apply  a
correction  to  Plutarch's  geography,  and  believe  that
he  should  have  pointed  out,  not  the  Balissus,  but
one  of  the  branches,  probably  the  more  western,  of
the  Chaboras,  for  the  spot  where  the  army  prepared
for  combat.  However  this  may  be,  we  now  find
Crassus  taken  by  surprise,  and  his  army  thrown  at
once  into  confusion.  Hasty  preparations  were  made
to  meet  the  ei  emy ;  the  order  of  battle  was  a  deep
square  of  four  fronts,  with  twelve  cohorts  on  each
side,  supported  by  a  body  of  cavalry  not  only  on  the
flanks,  but  also  in  front  and  rear.  A  moment  only
was  allowed  for  refreshment  on  the  bank  of  the
rivulet,  contrary  to  the  advice  of  the  most  experi-
enced officers,  who  recommended  a  halt  and  an  en-

1  Plut.  Crass.  2-2.
C  2

20  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  Cfl.  XI.

campinent  for  the  night.  The  troops  pushed  on  till
they  came  in  sight  of  the  advancing  columns  of  the
Parthian  cavalry.  The  enemy  had  adopted  measures
to  conceal  their  numbers  till  the  Komans  had  come
close  upon  them.  When  the  whole  of  their  forces
were  revealed,  with  their  sweeping  clouds  of  cavalry,
glittering,  man  and  horse,  in  brilliant  armour,  their
banners  waving  with  silk  and  gold,  and  the  loud
clang  of  their  kettle-drums  uttering  discordant  music
to  European  ears1,  the  Eomans  were  appalled  at  the
sudden  discovery  both  of  their  numbers  aiid  resolu-
tion. Nevertheless,  wearied  and  breathless

The  Roman  ,  ,  1 1 i •

and  Parthian as  they  were,  they  were  compelled  imme-

armies  engage. . . .  J  -pr

diately  to  accept  the  pronered  combat.
The  shower  of  arrows  with  which  the  Parthians  began
the  fray  pierced  the  armour  of  the  legionary  through
and  through.  It  nailed  his  buckler  to  his  arm,  and
his  feet  to  the  ground.  Thus  far,  indeed,  he  suffered
DO  worse  than  the  ordinary  peril  to  which  he  was
exposed  from  the  first  discharge  of  the  skirmishers
at  the  commencement  of  a  battle,  except  that  the
Parthian  arrow  was  a  missile  of  unusual  strength  and
sharpness.  But  the  Parthian  bowman  was  mounted,
and  the  Eoman  foot-soldier  in  vain  attempted  to  close
with  him.  He  could  shoot  as  well  in  the  retreat  as
the  charge,  and  the  onset  of  infantry  threw  him  into
no  confusion,  and  afforded  not  an  instant's  relief.
His  quiver  was  no  sooner  exhausted  than  he  repaired
to  his  camels  in  the  rear,  and  quickly  reappeared
with  his  stock  replenished.  Crassus  perceived  the
necessity  of  employing  his  cavalry  to  disperse  the
enemy,  but  their  numbers  were  inadequate  to  such
a  service.  He  directed  his  son  Publius  to  charge,
and  the  gallant  young  soldier  obeyed  with  too  eager

1  Compare  Flor.  iii.  11.  8.,  and  Plut  Crass.  24.  Milton  (Farad,
Regained,  iii.)  has  amassed  from  the  historians  and  grouped  with
poetic  brilliance  the  charareristics  of  Parthian  warfare:

"  He  look'd  and  saw  what  numbers  numberless,"  &c.

4..U.701-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE-  21

alacrity.  The  Parthians  gave  way,  and  led  him  on
till  they  had  withdrawn  him  far  from  the  support
of  the  main  body,  when  they  wheeled  about,  sur-
rounded and  easily  overpowered  his  scanty  squadrons.
Young  Crassus  fought  with  resolution  to  the  last,  and
when  every  hope  of  victory  or  rescue  had  vanished,
caused  himself  to  be  slain  by  his  shield-  Death  of  the
bearer.  The  father  had  been  nattering  £^S,r££t
himself  that  the  field  so  suddenly  cleared  *«••*
by  his  son's  impetuous  charge  was  already  his  own.
He  was  awakened  from  his  dream  by  the  return
of  the  Parthians,  shouting  aloud  in  triumphant
exultation,  and  brandishing  the  head  of  their  victim
on  a  pike.  Crassus  stifled  his  grief  and  horror
with  an  effort  of  despair.  He  hurried  from  cohort
to  cohort,  uttering  such  customary  words  of  en-
couragement as  his  alarm  or  sorrow  allowed.  The
death  of  Publius,  he  said,  was  the  loss  of  a  son  to
his  father,  but  only  of  a  citizen  to  the  republic.
But  spiritless  himself,  he  was  incapable  of  infusing
spirit.  The  Parthians  continued  throughout  the  day
to  harass  the  Koman  army  by  a  repetition  of  their
usual  manosuvres.  It  was  not  till  nightfall  that  they
allowed  them  any  respite.  Not  being  accustomed  to
construct  camps,  they  never  passed  the  night  in  the
immediate  neighbourhood  of  an  enemy,  but  retired
to  a  distance,  leaving  the  Eomans  to  make  what  use
they  could  of  the  few  hours  which  would  intervene
before  their  reappearance.  Crassus  himself,  over-
whelmed with  grief  and  mortification,  if  not  with
fear,  was  incapable  of  suggesting  any  counsel  or
adopting  any  resolution.  Cassius  and  the  other  offi-
cers promptly  set  him  aside,  and  took  upon  them-
selves to  give  the  necessary  orders.  They  determined
to  retreat  without  a  moment's  delay.  Compelled  to
leave  behind  them  the  wounded,  these  unfortunate
victims,  hopeless  of  receiving  quarter,  uttered  such
piercing  shrieks  as  to  reach  the  ears  of  the  Parthian

22  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xi.

spies,  -who  guessed  the  cause  and  reported  it.  Im-
mediately the  horsemen  sprang  to  their  saddles,  and
speedily  overtook  the  retiring  legions.  But  it  would
seem  that  their  horses,  after  a  long  day's  service,
were  unable  to  keep  pace  with  the  headlong  rush
They  take  re-  °f  desperate  men.  News  of  the  disaster
fugeincarrh*.  wag  gpee(jiiy  conveyed  to  Carrhae,  and  the
Eoman  garrison  which  was  there  stationed  issued
forth  to  succour  and  rescue  the  remnant  of  the  flying
army,  which  it  conducted  to  an  asylum  of  rest  and
safety.  The  Parthians  contented  themselves  with
the  plunder  of  the  camp  and  the  slaughter  of  the
wounded,  together  with  all  the  stragglers  they  could
intercept,  to  the  number  of  several  thousands.1

A  report  was  spread  in  the  Parthian  cantonments
that  Crassus  and  the  principal  leaders  had  abandoned
the  routed  army  and  effected  their  escape.  Surenas
was  especially  anxious  to  seize  the  person  of  the  pro-
consul, for,  according  to  Oriental  notions,  the  death
or  captivity  of  the  leader  was  generally  considered
decisive  of  the  war.  Accordingly,  he  would  have
pushed  forward  in  pursuit,  and  left  the  fugitives
behind  him  in  Carrhae,  had  he  not  obtained  by  a
stratagem  the  information  he  sought.  Having  ascer-
tained that  Crassus  was  within  the  walls,  he  collected
his  forces  and  determined  to  beleaguer  the  place.
But  the  Parthian  tactics  were  not  adapted  either  to
the  siege  or  the  blockade.  The  Romans,  distrusting
their  slight  fortifications,  or  unprovided  with  the
means  of  subsistence,  or  more  than  ever  anxious  to
get  within  their  own  frontier,  escaped  from  the  for-
The  Roman  tress  by  night.  Each  officer  seems  to  have
So™9ycabr?hi,  been  allowed  to  make  the  best  of  his  way
?n  MYeVaYSl-  with  his  own  division ;  no  attempt  was  made
to  conduct  the  retreat  in  concert.  Cassius
succeeded  in  crossing  the  Euphrates  with  a  small

1  Plut.  Crest.  27.;  Dion,  xl.  25.; Flor.  iii.  11.  8.

A.C.701-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMl'IRE.  23

body  of  horse ;  Octavius,  with  a  larger  division,
reached  the  outskirts  of  the  Armenian  hills,  and  was
almost  beyond  pursuit,  when  the  imminent  danger  to
which  the  proconsul  was  exposed  behind  him  induced
him  to  quit  his  vantage-ground,  and  descend  to  save
or  perish  with  his  general.  The  Parthians  had  come
up  with  Crassus,  and  were  pressing  closely  both  upon
his  rear  and  flanks.  Yet  a  few  hours  more,  and  the
shades  of  evening  would  receive  him  within  the  moun-
tain fastnesses,  among  which  the  cavalry  of  his  pur-
suers would  cease  to  be  formidable.  Surenas  beheld
his  prey  on  the  point  of  eluding  his  grasp ;  courage
and  audacity  could  hardly  secure  it,  cunning  and
treachery  might  yet  prevail.  He  allowed  some  of
his  prisoners  to  escape,  after  duly  preparing  them
for  his  purpose,  by  discoursing  in  their  presence  of
the  goodness  and  placability  of  Orodes,  and  assuring
them  that  the  Parthians  would  be  satisfied  with  fair
and  reasonable  terms  of  accommodation.  At  the
same  time  he  sent  messengers  to  Crassus  stratagem  of
to  propose  a  capitulation.  The  escaped  fngagTcrassu.
prisoners  repaired  to  the  camp  of  their  in  conference-
countrymen,  and  spread  among  them  their  own
conviction  of  the  good  faith  and  moderation  of  the
enemy.  Crassus  had  the  sense  to  distrust  their
representations  ;  but  the  army  became  clamorous,  and
began  to  threaten  violence,  shaking  their  arms  in  a
tumultuary  manner.  The  proconsul  believed  himself
compelled  to  yield,  though  not  without  protesting  to
his  officers  that  he  was  coerced  by  the  insubordi-
nation of  his  own  soldiers,  the  greatest  disgrace  that
could  befal  an  imperator.  The  Parthian  chieftain
made  the  fairest  professions,  and  arranged  that  the
meeting  between  them  should  take  place  in  the
company  of  a  few  chosen  officers  on  each  side.  The
Roman  imperator  approached,  attended  by  his  staff,
but  all,  it  would  appear,  disarmed  and  dismounted.
Crassus  was  received  at  first  with  the  highest  demon-

24  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xi.

strations  of  respect,  and  Surenas,  according  to  the
Parthian  custom,  ordered  a  horse  with  golden  housings
to  be  brought  forward  for  his  use.  The  proconsul
would  have  sent  for  his  own  charger,  but  the  Parthian
offered  him  one  of  his  own  in  the  name  of  Orodes
the  king.  The  feeble  and  bewildered  old  man  was
lifted  abruptly  into  the  saddle,  and  the  Parthian
grooms  began  to  goad  the  steed  and  urge  him  towards
the  enemy.  The  attendants  of  Crassus  vainly  en-
deavoured to  arrest  his  doom.  Octavius  and  another
officer  named  Petronius  seized  the  reins,  while  others
attempted  to  cut  them.  Confusion  ensued,  and  blows
were  interchanged.  Octavius  seized  a  Parthian's
sword,  and  slew  one  of  the  grooms,  but  was  imme-
diately cut  down  by  a  blow  from  behind.  In  the
A  fray  ensue..  ^ra  Crassus  himself  received  a  mortal

wound  from  the  hand  of  a  Parthian  named
Pomaxaithras.  Such  was  the  most  credible
account  of  the  matter,  but  nothing  certain  was  known.
Others  of  the  Eomans  fell  also  in  the  scuffle  ;  the
remainder  escaped  to  the  army,  and  the  Parthians
now  suffered  the  fugitives  to  make  their  way  unmo-
lested to  the  hills.  Many,  indeed,  surrendered  to
Surenas,  who  assured  them  that  with  the  death  of
their  general  hostilities  should  cease.  We  do  not
hear  that  they  received  any  ill-treatment  ;  though,
from  the  temper  in  which,  as  we  shall  see,  the  remains
of  Crassus  were  insulted,  we  cannot  suppose  that  they
met  with  the  respect  due  to  honourable  captives.
Detained  for  years  among  their  foreign  captors,  they
ended  with  adopting  their  customs  and  manners,
intermarried  with  the  families  of  the  barbarians,  and
renounced  the  country  of  their  ancestors.1  It  was

1  Hor.  Od.  iii.  5.  5.  :

"  Milesnc  Crassi  conjuge  barbara

Turpis  maritus  vixit,"  &c.

And according  to  Velleius  ii.  82.  and  Floras  iv.  10.  M.  Antonius,
in  his  campaign  of  A.U.  718,  found  prisoners  from  the  army  of  Crassus

A.U.701-B.C.58.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  25

calculated  that  twenty  thousand  men  perished  in  this
calamitous  expedition,  and  that  half  that  number
were  made  prisoners.

The  victor  sent  the  head  and  hand  of  Crassus  to
Orodes ;  but  he  would  have  been  better  The  pftrthjaiu
pleased  to  have  conducted  his  prisoner  alive  ,Th"c"t8hwith
into  the  royal  presence,  as  he  is  said  to  have  ot-Vm^k0'6
promised.  He  amused  his  soldiers,  and  triumPh-
gratified  his  own  vanity,  by  the  performance  of  a
ceremony  in  mockery  of  a  Eoman  triumph.  The
proconsul  was  represented  by  one  of  the  captives,  who
was  supposed  to  bear  some  personal  resemblance  to
him.  The  substitute  was  tawdrily  arrayed  in  female
garments,  and  compelled  to  answer  to  the  title  of
Imperator,  with  which  his  fellow-prisoners  were
ordered  to  address  him.  The  voluptuous  and  dissi-
pated habits  attributed  to  Crassus  and  his  officers  were
made  subjects  of  scornful  ridicule,  and  the  licentious
books  which  were  found  in  the  Eoman  tents  were
paraded  with  a  mockery  of  indignation.1  It  seems
that  the  Parthians  were  well  pleased  to  offer  such
a  spectacle  to  their  effeminate  Greek  subjects  :  but
they,  on  their  part,  failed  to  draw  the  inference
which  their  masters  intended,  and  thought  it  incon-
sistent in  Surenas  to  deride  the  licentiousness  of  the
Eomans,  when  he  was  himself  accompanied  to  the
field  by  his  battalion  of  concubines,  and  rejoiced  in
the  lewd  music  and  dancing  of  a  train  of  slaves,  and
when  the  throne  of  the  Arsacidae  was  so  often  filled
by  the  offspring  of  strange  and  disgraceful  alliances.
They  compared,  indeed,  his  array  to  the  figure  of  a
viper,  bristling  in  front  with  its  armed  warriors  and

in  the  Parthian  service.  Compare  Justin,  xlii.  5.  ThedayofCrassus's
death,  vi.  Id.  Jun.  or  June  8,  is  fixed  by  Ovid,  Fast.  vi.  465.  See
Fischer,  p  253.

1  It  should  be  observed,  however,  that  Crassus  himself  was  un-
stained with  the  grosser  vices  of  his  class:  "  Vir  coetera  sanctissimiiR,
immunisque  volnptatibns."  Veil.  ii.  46.

26  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XI.

horses,  but  disgusting  and  squalid  behind,  with  its
train  of  women,  with  their  timbrels,  and  songs,  and
bacchanalian  orgies.1

While  these  events  were  in  progress,  Orodes  came
indignities  to  terms  with  the  Armenian  Artabazes,  and
mnTfnsof'16  accepted  the  hand  of  his  daughter  for  his
c^us.  own  gon  pacorus.  This  auspicious  union
received  new  lustre  from  the  triumph  of  Surenas.
The  festivals  with  which  it  was  celebrated  were
fashioned  upon  Grecian  models ;  so  soon  had  the  rude
descendants  of  Arsaces  resigned  themselves  to  the
fascinating  luxuries  of  their  semi-Hellenic  capital.
Orodes  was  well  skilled  in  the  language  and  literature
of  Greece ;  Artabazes  even  composed  tragedies  after
the  Grecian  model,  and  wrote  historical  works  in  that
tongue.  When  the  head  of  Crassus  was  brought  to
the  door  of  the  banqueting  hall,  a  Greek  actor  from
Tralles  began  to  recite  appropriate  verses  from  the
Bacchanals  of  Euripides;  when  the  bloody  trophy
was  thrown  at  the  feet  of  the  assembled  guests,  he
seized  it  in  his  hands,  and  enacted  with  it  the  frenzy
of  Agave  and  the  mutilation  of  Pentheus.  The  story
that  molten  gold  was  poured  into  the  mouth  of  the
avaricious  Roman  is  not  mentioned  by  Plutarch,
from  whom  we  receive  such  minute  details  of  the
insults  practised  on  his  remains.  But  the  testimony
of  an  earlier  writer  shows  that  it  was  already  currently
reported2,  nor  is  there  any  improbability  in  the  cir-
cumstance to  induce  us  to  disbelieve  it.

Such  was  the  end  of  the  unfortunate  triumvir.  It
Reflections  on  was  many  years  since  a  Roman  proconsul
the  cmlsi.fhe  had  thus  miserably  perished  at  the  head  of
father  and  son.  an  armv  which  he  had  led  to  destruction.

1  Pint.  Crass.  32.

1  Florus,  iii.  11.  11.,  at  the  end  of  Trajan's  reign,  about  one
hundred  and  seventy  years  after  the  event.  The  commentators  on
this  passage  have  collected  several  analogous  stories  from  Appian,
Pliny,  Justin,  Zosimus,  and  more  modern  writers.

A.D  rOl-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  27

The  names  of  Carrhse  and  Cannae  were  coupled
together  on  the  bloodiest  page  of  the  national  annals.
The  fate  of  the  general  was  held  up  by  poets  and
historians  as  a  beacon  for  the  warning  of  ambitious
statesmen,  and  possibly  his  errors  were  magnified
to  screen  the  want  of  conduct  and  discipline  in  the
licentious  armies  of  the  east.  Not  a  single  voice  has
been  raised  through  all  ages  in  lamentation  over  his
untimely  death,  except  in  so  far  as  it  tended  to  pre-
cipitate the  confusion  of  his  country's  affairs,  and  the
overthrow  of  her  constitution.  But  the  son  deserves
at  least  to  be  exempted  from  the  pitiless  scorn  which
clings  for  ever  to  the  name  of  the  father,  and  to  be
honoured  as  the  gallant  Lausus  of  Roman  history.1
Enough  that  his  memory  has  found  a  shrine  in  the
pages  of  the  philosopher  whom  he  most  revered,  and
of  the  commander  whom  he  strove  to  imitate.'2

At  Rome  the  year  701  had  opened  with  an  inter-
regnum, which  was  itself  an  important  step

• Al. J- j.-  •  1  • l. a.u • A •  f A.  U.701,

in  the  direction  in  which  the  intrigues  ot  B.C. 53.

-P.  .  .  .  _.,  .  Interregnum :

rompeius pointed. Ihe mterreges were  the  tribunes

•  J l  -J.J.  • A-  r  it. prevent  the

assigned  by  a  committee  consisting  of  the  election  of

75 •  i  r  AU  L 1 r> 1. •  consul..

patrician  members  ot  the  senate/  Each  m-
terrex  in  turn  held  the  office  for  five  days  only;  and
the  principal  object  of  their  appointment  was  under-
stood to  be  that  they  might  summon  and  preside  over
the  comitia  for  the  election  of  consuls.  They  dis-
charged, however,  in  the  meantime,  the  general  func-

1  Virg.  Mn.  x.  811.:

"  Quo  moriture  ruis,  mnjoraque  viribus  audes?
Fallit  te  incautum  pictas  tua."

*  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  ii.  9. :  "  P.  Crassus,  adolescens  nostri  studiosis
simus." Ad  Div.  v.  8. :  "  Hoc  magis  sum  Publio  deditus  quod  me
niaxime  sicut  alterum  parentem  etobservat  et  diligit."  Ad  Div.  xiii.
16.:  "P.  Crassum  ex omni  nobilitate  adolescentem dilexi  plurimum."
Compare  Brut.  81.:  "Erat  cum  institutus  optime  turn  etiam  pcrfecte
planeque  eruditus;  ineratque  et  ingenium  satis  acre,  et  orationis non
inelegans  copia;  pnetereaque  sine  arrogantin  gravis  esse  videbatur  ct
sine  segnitia  verecundtis." See  also  Caes.  B.O.  i.  52.,  ii.  34.,  iii.  7.

*  Ascon.  ary.  in  Milan,  init.

28  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  SB.  XL

tions  of  the  chief  magistrates.  But  a  power  so  limited
in  duration  was  merely  nominal.  The  executive  was
paralysed,  and  almost  every  one  was  interested  in
devising  means  to  terminate  so  disastrous  an  inter-
ruption to  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs.  The  cry  for
a  dictatorship  rose  more  and  more  loud  above  the
murmurs  of  personal  and  party  interests,  for  it  was
only  by  the  creation  of  a  supreme  autocrat  that  the
free-state  had  provided  for  disentangling  the  most
desperate  complications  of  her  affairs.  Pompeius
affected  indifference,  and  pretended  to  keep  aloof  from
the  confusion,  but  his  creatures  were  labouring  actively
in  his  behalf.  The  nobles  were  full  of  apprehension
and  anxiety.  Cato  unravelled  and  denounced  the  plot
against  the  liberties  of  the  commonwealth  ;  Cicero  was
silent.1  In  the  meantime  the  tribunes,  or  some  at
least  of  their  number,  continued  to  play  into  the
hands  of  the  triumvir,  by  obstinately  opposing  all  at-
tempts to  assemble  the  comitia.  In  former  times,  the
appointment  of  interreges  had  been  an  object  of  tra-
ditional jealousy  to  the  protectors  of  the  plebs,  inas-
much as  the  constitution  allowed  the  plebeians  no
share  in  their  election.2  But  now  they  not  only
acquiesced  in  that  temporary  arrangement,  but  seemed
resolved  to  perpetuate  it,  until  the  senate  should  be
compelled  to  resort  to  the  creation  of  an  irresponsible
ruler.  The  nobles,  however,  held  out  with  more  than
usual  firmness,  and  even  took  the  vigorous  step  of  im-
prisoning one  of  the  tribunes,  Q.  Pompeius  Eufus,  a
grandson  of  Sulla,  whose  hostile  proceedings  were  the
most  violent.  To  put  this  bold  stroke  in  execution,
they  were  enabled  to  employ  the  strong  arm  of  the
triumvir  himself.  In  the  absence  of  consuls  and
praetors,  the  tribunes,  who  since  the  abrogation  of
Sulla's  enactmentB,  had  been  constantly  encroaching

1  Cic.  ad  Qu.  Fr.  iii.  9. "  Ego  quiesco. "

•  Liv.  iv.  43. :  "  Coire  patricios  tribuni  prohibcbant."

A.U.701-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  29

upon  the  functions  of  the  other  magistrates,  under-
took almost  the  entire  management  of  the  affairs  of
the  city.  Even  Pompeius  was  offended  at  their  in-
solent usurpations.  The  absence  of  his  colleagues,
and  the  disruption  of  the  peculiar  ties  which  bound
him  to  Caesar1,  gave  a  freer  scope  to  the  aristocratic
prejudices  of  his  youth.  He  was  already  revolving  in
his  mind  the  expediency  of  returning  to  his  former
alliances,  when  he  consented  to  become  the  instru-
ment of  the  senate  in  thus  chastising  tribunitian
dictation.2  He  waited  for  the  most  graceful

. „  ~, .  ••  .  j . , .  , Pompeius  at

opportunity  tor  offering  his  mediation,  and  iengti.  inter-
interfered  at  last  to  bring  the  matter  to  a  aonMii«t
decision,  by  prevailing  on  his  own  friends
to  give  way,  and  consent  to  the  election  of  consuls.3
The  ostensible  causes  of  its  postponement  had  van-
ished, and  the  ground  being  cleared,  it  was  only  decent
in one so  studious  of  appearances  to  prepare the
foundation  of  a  new  edifice. The  Silent  Judgment
which  the  senate  had  instituted  upon  the  conduct  of  the
several  candidates  had  been  put  off  on  various  excuses,
till  the  public  had  ceased  to  be  interested  in  its  pro-
secution ;  the  competitors  stood  with  erect  front  before
the  people  whose  suffrages  they  demanded ;  Cicero
himself  had  defended  and  obtained  the  acquittal  of

1  Pompeius  was  the  more  free  to  act  without  deferring  to  Caesar  at
this  moment  because  he  had  just  lent  him  one  of  his  own  proconsulai
legions. Cses.  B.G.  vi.  1.;  Dion,  xl.  65. Plutarch  (Cces.  25.)  says
two,  but  this  is  an  error.

2  But  such  a  violation  of  the  sacred  person  of  the  tribune  must
have  been  an  act  of  flagrant  illegality,  and  we  look  in  vain  for  any
further  explanation  of  the  circumstances. The  story  is  told  by  Dion,
xl  45.

3  Plut.  Pomp.  54. :  alSfo-Bfls  eVe^A^flTj. Dion,  xl.  46. This  writer
is  incorrect  in  saying  that  the  dictatorship  was  offered  to  Pompeius:
the  offer  was  proposed  by  Lucceius  Hirrus,  one  of  the  tribunes,  but
the  question  was  never  formally  entertained. Among  other  sugges-
tions of  the  tribunes  one  was  to  return  to  the  government  by  military
tribunes,  a  board  of  several  members. Perhaps  it  was  this  that  in-
duced 1'omi  tins  to  take  the  part  of  the  senate-

30  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XI.

Scaurus  ;  perjury  and  corruption  raised  their
heads  triumphantly  ;  and  it  might  be  expected  with
reason  that  no  public  man  would  ever  be  condemned

again,  except  upon  a  charge  of  murder.1

in  the  seventh _i^  i j.-  r 11  r\ f% -i-  n 1

month  of  the  The  election  tell  upon  Cn.  Domitms  Cal-
vinus  and  M.  Valerius  Messala,  who  at  last
entered  upon  their  office  in  the  seventh  month  of  the
year.2

Although  the-  blow  had  thus  been  averted  for  a
General  moment,  yet  the  opinion  was  rapidly  gain-
necelsi"y°ofhae  mg  ground,  in  the  midst  of  these  dissen-
sions, that  affairs  were  tending  irresistibly
to  the  creation  of  a  dictator.  The  powers  of  the
state  could  not  long  exist  by  the  mere  counteraction
and  collision  of  one  with  another.  The  strength  of
their  materials  was  too  sorely  tried.  The  genuine
patriotism  and  singleness  of  purpose  through  which
alone,  and  by  no  nice  adj  ustment  of  its  functions  and
forces,  the  machine  of  government  had  in  reality
been  in  ancient  times  preserved,  were  found  to  have
given  way  altogether.  The  constitution  of  the  com-
monwealth stood  in  need  of  an  organic  change  ;  the
exorbitant  power  of  individuals  could  only  be  ba-
lanced by  conferring  an  adequate  share  of  political
importance  on  the  wealth  and  intelligence  of  a  lower
class.  Probably  the  establishment  of  a  permanent
military  police,  such  as  that  which  the  emperors  after-
wards maintained  in  the  city,  was  absolutely  neces-
sary to  secure  the  freedom  of  councils  and  elections  ;
yet  the  hand  to  which  this  force  was  intrusted  could
hardly  fail  to  establish  a  monarchical  domination.

What  was  it  then  that  still  retarded  a  consumma-
iti.  only  re-  tion  which  seemed  so  imminent  ?  It  would
recofiecbtTonhcof  appear  that  Cicero  and  the  more  moderate
110^™  SUH"».  politicians  whom  he  represented  would  have

1  This  was  Cicero's  own  remark  at  the  beginning  of  these  proceed-
ings (ad  Ait.  iv.  16.").
a  Dion,  xl.  45

A.U.701-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  31

acquiesced  in  the  temporary  appointment  of  a  dic-
tator, according  to  the  old  traditional  policy  of  the
state,  as  at  least  a  necessary  evil,  fondly  blinding
themselves  to  the  risk  of  its  becoming  perpetual.
The  knights  and  others  of  the  middle  class  would
doubtless  expect  the  vigour  of  an  irresponsible
governor  to  overflow  in  measures  for  the  elevation  of
their  own  order.  The  multitude,  always  apt  to  ap-
plaud a  striking  change,  had  no  longer  that  appre-
hension of  a  dictator  which  he  was  wont  to  inspire
when  he  was  the  instrument  of  the  patricians  for
overruling  the  insolence  of  the  tribunes.  Even  the
nobles  might  have  remembered  that  the  last  dictator-
ship had  been  the  creation  of  their  own  hands,  and
all  its  measures  directed  to  their  own  aggrandise-
ment. Pompeius,  however  much  he  had  wavered  in
their  cause,  was  still  the  pupil,  the  follower,  the
admirer  of  Sulla,  the  heir  to  his  fame,  to  his  army,
to  his  political  career.  Besides,  the  cautious  decorum
with  which  he  had  conducted  himself  for  many  years
had  secured  him  the  reputation,  however  unmerited,
of  moderation  and  humanity,  and  he  might  be  ex-
pected to  make  a  mild,  perhaps  a  bloodless  use  of
absolute  authority.  Nevertheless,  it  was  from  the
nobles  that  the  opposition  to  this  appointment  princi-
pally came.  The  proscriptions  of  Sulla  and  Marius
had  made  an  indelible  impression  on  the  minds  of
the  generation  next  succeeding.  The  dream  of  blood
still  flitted  before  their  unclosed  eyes ;  the  name  of
dictator  was  indissolubly  connected  with  the  idea  of
unimaginable  horrors.1  The  life  of  a  citizen  was
still  sacred  in  the  eyes  of  the  conquerors  and  butchers
of  the  world.  Could  a  Pompeius  bear  rule  in  a  state
in  which  a  Caesar  was  a  subject?  Unless  the  one
were  massacred,  the  other  must  be  overthrown.

1  Dion,  xl.  45.:  iriibs  yap  T^V  rou StJAAou  «!UOT>/TO  t^'iaovv  iravrti

32  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  n.

Murder  would  succeed  to  murder,  revolution  would
breed  revolution.  The  door  to  violence  being  once
opened  could  never  be  shut  against  the  torrents  of
blood  that  would  dash  through  it.  The  conviction
was  forced  upon  them  that  the  question  was  not  that
of  the  appointment  of  a  temporary  dictator,  but  of
a  succession  of  tyrants.

The  weight  of  these  sentiments  and  reasonings  was
reinforced  by  the  ponderous  mass  of  selfish

Selfishness  and  ,  i • i  -11  L 3 j

blindness  of voluptuousness, which,  with  no extended

the  oligarchy. -PI,-  U

view  ot  ulterior  consequences,  would  not
consent  to  relinquish  or  abridge  its  gratifications  at
the  bidding  of  a  social  reformer.  No  aristocracy  was
ever  more  short-sighted  at  the  crisis  of  its  fate  than
the  once  glorious  patriciate  of  Eome.  It  clung  des-
perately to  its  privileges,  not  from  a  fond  regard  to
their  antiquity,  or  their  connexion  with  any  social  or
religious  prejudices ;  disdained  to  invoke  the  watch-
words of  patriotism  or  utility ;  it  took  up  its  ground
upon  the  enactments 'which  Sulla  had  made  to  en-
hance its  own  wealth  and  power  and  depress  those  of
its  rivals,  and  contended  with  its  assailants  upon
purely  selfish  considerations.  Without  a  policy  and
without  a  leader  the  nobles  went  staggering  onward
in  their  blind  conflict  with  the  forces  arrayed  against
them,  and  Pompeius,  not  daring  to  take  the  single
step  which  still  remained  between  him  and  the
post  he  coveted,  left  everything  a  prey  to  sus-
pense and  confusion.  At  last  the  force  of  circum-
stances had  thrust  the  prize  even  to  his  feet;  he
gazed  at  it  and  sighed  over  it,  but  did  not  stoop  to
take  it  up.

The  appointment  of  consuls  had  no  effect  in  re-
storing public  order. The  senate  indeed

Tranquillity  ,  ., ,  „  .  ,

notrcitoredby  passed  one  decree,  ostensibly  ot  consider-

meiu'of able  importance,  which  forbade  the  consuls

and  praetors  to  assume  the  government  of  a

province  till  the  fifth  year  from  the  expiration  of

A.C.701-B.C.53.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  33

their  office  in  the  city.1  It  was  hoped,  perhaps,  that
this  limitation  would  materially  check  the  eagerness
of  the  candidates.2  This,  however,  was  the  only
measure  of  reform  that  could  be  carried.  The  con-
suls and  senate  clad  themselves  publicly  in  ^,v.702t
mourning3  when  they  found  that,  as  in  pre-  B-c-5i!-
vious  years,  it  was  impossible  to  effect  the  election  of
the  ordinary  magistrates.  Among  the  various  candi-
dates, Milo  sued  for  the  consulship  and  Clodius  for
the  praetorship  :  the  violence  of  the  one  and  the  in-
triguing spirit  of  the  other  rendered  any  decision
more  than  ever  unattainable.  The  new  year  opened,
like  the  preceding,  with  an  interregnum.  It  was
speedily  distinguished  from  its  predecessor  by  a  fla-
grant crime  and  its  long  train  of  consequences.  In
the  middle  of  January  it  happened  that  Milo  was
travelling  along  the  Appian  Way.  He  was  accom-
panied in  his  carriage  by  his  wife,  a  large  retinue  of
servants  was  in  attendance  upon  him,  and  he  was
followed,  according  to  his  wont,  by  a  troop  of  gladia-
tors. The  object  of  his  journey  was  at  least  osten-
sibly peaceful,  since  he  was  on  his  way  to  perform
certain  ceremonies  attached  to  his  municipal  dicta-
torship at  Lanuvium.  At  a  few  miles'  distance  from
the  city  he  was  met  by  Clodius,  who  was  on  horse-
back, with  a  small  company  of  armed  attendants.
Such  modes  of  travelling  were  not  unusually  adopted
for  the  sake  of  security  even  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Rome;  but  the  lives  of  men  in  the  position  of
Milo  and  Clodius  were  never  safe  from  sudden  vio-
lence, and  their  journeying  with  military  escorts
could  be  no  proof  that  their  designs  were  sinister,  or
that  the  meeting  was  on  either  side  premeditated.
Cicero,  in  his  defence  of  Milo,  lays  great  stress  on

1  Dion,  xl.  46.

*  This  judicious  enactment  we  shall  find  revived  under  ihe  imperial
system  of  Aogustus. Dion,  liii.  14.

1  Dion,  xl.  45.
VOL.  II.  D

34  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CM.  XT.

*

the  nature  of  his  retinue,  which  he  adduces  in  proof
that  he  had  no  intention  of  waylaying  his  enemy,
while,  on  the  other  hand,  he  tries  to  fasten  a  suspi-
cion of  the  kind  on  Clodius.

However  this  may  be,  a  quarrel  ensued  between
Affrav  the  servants  on  each  side ;  blows  were  ex-

aodie£nand changed,  and  Clodius  himself,  wounded  in

the  scuffle,  took  refuge  in  a  tavern  by  the
road-side.  The  fury  of  Milo  was  ungovernable.
Violence  once  committed,  he  resolved  to  carry  it

through. He  attacked  the  house,  caused

Clodius  olain :  '  ,

his  enemy  to  be  dragged  from  his  conceal-
ment, and  slain.  The  corpse  lay  in  the  road,  till  it
was  picked  up  by  a  passing  friend,  and  brought  to
Rome.  The  adherents  of  the  murdered  man  exposed
it  to  the  view  of  the  populace,  who  worked  them-
selves into  frenzy  at  the  sight.  A  riot

Riot  and  con-  , ,  *  , .  ,  °

nagration  in  ensued ;  benches,  books  and  papers  were
snatched  from  the  curia  in  which  the
senate  was  wont  to  assemble,  and  the  tumultuary
pyre  involved  part  of  the  forum  in  its  conflagra-
tion.1 The  house  of  Milo  and  that  of  the  interrex
M.  Lepidus  were  attacked,  but  the  assailants  were
received  with  coolness  and  determination,  and  re-
pulsed with  bloodshed.  So  great  was  the  popular
clamour  against  the  murderer,  that  he  dared  not  at
first  submit  himself  to  trial.  He  was  preparing  to
withdraw  into  voluntary  exile  ;  but  his  friends  rallied
about  him  ;  the  violence  of  the  Clodians  worked  some
reaction  of  opinion  in  his  favour8,  and  a  majority  of

1  Dion,  xl.  49. ;  App.  B.  C.  ii.  21. ;  Ascon.  arg.  in  Milan.:  "  Quo
igne  et  ipsa  quoque  curia  flagravit,  et  item  Porcia  basilica,  quao  erat
ei  adjuncta,  ambusta  est."  The  burning  of  the  Caria  Hostilia  and
the  adjoining  buildings  cleared  the  space  for  the  improvements  intro-
duced afterwards  by  Caesar.  There  was  another  great  fire  in  the
year  703.  in  the  western  part  of  the  forum,  that  is,  nearly  on  the
same  spot.  Oros.  vi.  13.

*  Ascon.  L  c. :  "Incendium  curiae  majorem  ali^uanto  indignationein
civitatis  moverat  ouam  Clodii  csedes."

A.n.:02-n.c.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  35

the  tribunes  was  known  to  be  generally  favourable  to
his  party.  He  was  encouraged  to  remain  in  the  city
and  try  the  effect  of  wholesale  bribery,  by  distri-
buting a  largess  among  the  poorer  citizens.1  But
riot  succeeded  to  riot,  and  the  populace  refused  even
to  listen  to  the  excuses  which  the  culprit  pleaded  in
his  defence.  The  senate,  crippled  in  its  executive
branch,  felt  its  authority  defied  by  both  parties,
whom  it  could  neither  mediate  between  nor  confront
before  an  equitable  tribunal.  It  adopted

..  ,.  ,,  • ,•  • •  A  commission

the  expedient  ot  nominating  a  commission,  appointed  fur

. .T  ~ ,, . .  ,? . .,  I the  trial  of

consisting  ot  the  interrex,  the  tribunes  and  MHO.  The
Pompeius,  to  whom  it  intrusted  conjointly  tk»dietator-

,  -  ...  ,J  J ship  thrust

the  solemn  charge  ot  providing  tor  the  intopompeius-
safety  of  the  state.  Pompeius  was  allowed
to  collect  a  military  force  to  overawe  the  turbu-
lent multitude.  The  substance  of  the  dictatorship
was  thus  thrust  into  his  hands ;  for  what  authority
could  his  colleagues  exert  against  the  commander
of  an  army  at  the  gates,  or  even  in  the  forum?
Still,  however,  the  title  was  withheld ;  some  secret
intrigues  prevailed  to  thwart  the  cherished  wish ;
still  Pompeius  hesitated  to  demand  it.  Caesar  had
by  this  time  arrived  at  Lucca,  and  was  intently
watching  the  crisis.2  His  immediate  vicinity  gave
a  new  stimulus  to  the  efforts  of  his  partisans,  and
honours  were  lavishly  decreed  him  in  acknowledg-
ment of  his  late  victories.  So  close  at  hand,  the
senate  was  apprehensive  of  his  not  only  resenting
the  elevation  of  his  rival  to  an  avowed  dic-
tatorship, but  claiming  a  share  in  the  consular
dignity  for  himself.  Accordingly,  with  the  sanction
of  Cato  and  Bibulus,  the  nobles  invented  a  middle
way  to  reconcile  the  conflicting  pretensions  of  the
jealous  allies,  by  refusing  Pompeius  the  dictator-

1  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  22.

*  Caps,  B.  G.  vi.  ult. :  "  Ibi  cognoscit  de  Clodii  csede."
u 2

36  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XL

ship,  but  decreeing  his  appointment  as  sole  consul.1
He  ii  declared  Pompeius  himself  was  absent  from  the
?.  C.?"™1'  city  5  but  tne  public  appearance  of  the
candidate  was  dispensed  with ;  the  suf-
frages of  the  tribes  were  not  solicited ;  it  is  even
doubtful  whether  any  forms  of  popular  election  were
maintained.

The  trial  of  Milo  was  the  principal  object  for
The  trial  of  which  these  irregularities  were  committed,
dat'ion Irfhu"  f°r  it  required  extraordinary  measures  to
advocate..  g^ye  effec^  to  judicial  proceedings  in  such
a  case.  The  character  of  the  accused  and  the  in-
fluence which  he  exerted,  combined  with  the  osten-
tatious lawlessness  of  his  enemies  to  make  a  fair
decision  hopeless.  It  was  the  part  of  a  vigorous
magistrate  at  least  to  repress  violence,  and  for  this
purpose  the  consul  did  not  hesitate  to  fill  the  avenues
to  the  forum,  and  even  the  steps  and  porticoes  of  the
temples  which  surrounded  it,  with  files  of  soldiers',
a  spectacle  never  before  witnessed  by  Roman  eyes.
Cicero,  on  rising  to  defend  the  criminal,  was  assailed
with  such  cries  and  menaces  from  the  populace  as
almost  to  make  him  quail  from  the  attempt.  The
sight  of  the  consul's  military  dispositions  was  too

1  Dion,  xl.  50.  :  T$  flofjarrjiifi  r^v  inraTeiav.  Siart  ^  SiKrdrtapa  avrbv
\tx&fjvcu,  tol  i*6vq>  yt,  "va  ^  6  Kcuaap  avrqj  ffwdpfy,  $6rrfS. Appian,
B.  C.  ii.  23.;  Plut.  Pomp.  54.;  Liv.  Epit.  cvii.:  "  Cnseus  Pompeins
a  senatu  consul  tertiam  factus  est,  absens  et  solas,  quod  nulli  alii
ntiquam  comigit." To  crown  this  series  of  irregularities  it  must  be
remembered  that  he  was  at  the  same  time  proconsul. On  all  these
accounts  Brutus  branded this  appointment  as  a  dictatorship,  the
assignment of irresponsible  power  by  an irresponsible authority.
Qnintil. Inst.  ix. 3.  95. "  quale apnd  Brutum de dictatura Cn.
Pompeii."

2  Pint.  Cic.  34.;  Schol.  Bob.  in  Milan,  p.  276.;  Lucan.i.  319.:

"  Quis  castra  timenti

Nescit  mixta  foro,  gladii  cum  triste  minantes
Judicium  insolita  trepidum  cinxere  corona,
Atque  auso  medias  perrumpere  mi  lite  leges
Pompeiana  reum  clau?erunt  signa  Milonem  ?"

A,0.702-b.c.52. UNDEll THE EMPIRE.  37

novel  and  alarming  to  reassure  Mm.  He  hurried
through  his  speech,  abashed  and  dispirited  :  Milo  goei  into
his  client  lost  his  cause,  and  was  condemned  "  cei'cero^reofc
to  banishment.1  On  returning  to  his  own  Milone-
house  Cicero  recovered  to  a  sense  of  the  glorious
opportunity  he  had  lost,  and  sate  down  to  compose
the  magnificent  oration  which  has  descended  to
posterity  as  his  defence  of  Milo.2  The  orator  had
executed  a  splendid  declamation,  and  his  vanity
prompted  him  to  send  it  to  his  client  at  Massilia.
The  exile  perused  it,  and  replied  that  he  esteemed
himself  fortunate  that  so  convincing  a  speech  had
not  actually  been  delivered,  else,  he  said,  I  should
not  now  be  enjoying  the  delicious  mullets  of  this
place ;  a  reply  which  may  perhaps  have  passed  with
Cicero  as  a  pleasant  jest,  but  which,  as  Dion  shrewdly
remarks,  must  have  been  meant  as  a  bitter  sarcasm
on  the  timidity  of  the  orator  in  the  forum  and  his
vanity  in  the  closet.3

1  The  judges,  according  to  a  new  enactment  of  Pompeius,  were
selected  by  lot  to  the  number  of  eighty-one:  this  number  was  re-
duced by  challenge  on  either  side  to  fifty-one.  On  this  occasion
their  votes  were  given  in  the  following  proportions:  "  Senatores  con-
demnaverunt  xii.,  absolverunt  vi.  Equites  condemnaverunt  xiii.,
absolverunt  iv.  Tribuni  aerarii  condemnaverunt  xiii.,  absolverunt  iii."
Ascon.  p.  53.

Immediately  after  his  conviction  on  the  charge  de  vi,  Milo  was
accused  of  ambitus,  and  condemned  in  his  absence.  He  was  again
accused  de  sodalitiis,  of  conspiracy,  and  condemned  a  third  time.

*  Dion, xl. 54. :  XP°VV  iro^'  vwrfpov  Kal  Kara  o\o\)}v  ai'adapa-ijcras
eypatyf. The  writer  of  the  Scholia  Bobiensia  mentions  that  in  his
time  the  original  speech  was  existing:  "  Existit  alius  praeterea  liber
actorum  pro  Milone,  in  quo  omnia  interrupta  et  hnpolita  et  rudia,
plena  deniquc  inaximi  terroris  agnoscas." This  must  have  been  the
"  report  "  of  the  speech  inserted  perhaps  in  the  Acta  Diurna. See
Leclerc's  dissertation,  Journaux  Publics  rhez  IKS  Eomainn.

*  Dion,  xl.  54.

•'

38  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAPTER  XII.

Ctesar's  Seventh  Campaign  in  Gaul,  A.O.  702,  B.C.  52. — Vcrcinge-
torix  effects  a  coalition  between  the  Belgians  and  Arvernians.
— Csesar  takes  Gcnabnm  and  Avaricnm.  —  Wise  and  spirited
policy  of  Vercinjretorix.  —  Siege  of  Gergovia,  —  Revolt  of  the
jEdui.  —  Caesar  compelled  to  raise  the  siege  :  He  effects  a
junction  with  Labicnus  in  Belgium  and  retreats  towards  the
Province.  —  He  obtains  a  victory,  and  blockades  the  Gaulish
Army.  —  Great  operations  before  Alesia.  —  Triumph  of  the
Romans,  and  submission  of  Vercin<retorix.  — Csesar's  Eighth
Campaign,  A.c.  703,  BC.  51.— Partial  insurrections  in  the  North,
West,  and  Centre  of  Gaul.  —  Capture  of  Uxellodunum.  —  The
conquest  of  Gaul  completed.

WE  have  seen  the  death  of  Crassus  begin  to  beai

A.C.  702,  fruit  in  the  mutual  alienation  of  the  sur-

'2.'icnient  viving  members  of  the  triple  league,  and  in

red'  the  renewed  approximation  of  Pompeius  to

,Ute.of  Gaul. the  party  frQm ^fo^  fo ha(J been gQ 1()ng

estranged.  During  the  winter,  Caesar,  from  his  retreat
at  Lucca,  had  been  a  close  observer  of  this  change
in  the  political  game,  precipitated  as  it  bad  been  by
the  proceedings  consequent  upon  the  murder  of
Clodius.  The  sole  consul  had  undertaken  to  main-
tain the  position  of  the  Roman  oligarchy  by  an  ex-
tensive conscription  throughout  Italy.  At  the  decree
of  the  great  council  of  the  nobles,  the  youth  of  the
peninsula  were  marshalled  in  arms ;  the  Etrurians,
the  Marsians,  the  Samnites,  and  the  Umbrians
were  sworn  to  defend  the  senate  and  people1  of
Rome  under  the  auspices  of  the  new  Sulla.  It  re-

1  C«es.  B  G.  vii.  1.:  "  De  seriatus  consulto  certior  factas  ut  omnes
juniores  Italiae  conjurarent,"  where  conjurare  is  a  military  term  for
simul  jurare.

A.C.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  39

mained  to  be  seen  whether  the  old  allies  of  Marius
would  prove  a  source  of  strength  or  of  weakness  to
the  enemy  who  had  ventured  to  invoke  their  aid.
At  a  crisis  of  such  intense  interest  it  was,  we  may
imagine,  from  no  patriotic  motives,  nor  from  a  stern
sense  of  duty  to  his  country,  that  Csesar  again  with-
drew from  the  focus  of  action  and  intrigue  to  the
obscure  banishment  of  a  distant  province.  While  he
remained  unarmed  within  reach  of  the  city,  even
his  personal  safety  was  at  the  mercy  of  his  enemies.
With  less  patience  and  self-control  he  might  have
been  excited  by  the  adverse  turn  of  circumstances  to
make  a  premature  appeal  to  the  chances  of  war.
He  might  have  called  at  once  upon  his  own  devoted
legions;  he  might  have  thrown  himself  upon  the
generous  impulses  of  his  friends  in  the  city;  even
the  new  Pompeian  levies  he  might  have  summoned
in  the  names  of  Marius  and  Drusus,  of  Pompsedius
and  Telesinus.  But  his  resources  were  yet  only  half
developed ;  the  Gauls  were  hostile  and  still  unbroken.
The  conquest  must  be  thoroughly  completed  before
they  could  be  bent  to  his  ulterior  purposes,  and  made
to  serve  as  wiling  instruments  in  his  meditated
career.  The  proconsul,  in  fact,  now  regarded  the
magnificent  country  subjected  to  his  rule  not  merely
as  a  great  province  which  he  had  attached  to  the
empire,  but  rather  as  a  private  estate  to  be  organized
for  the  furtherance  of  his  own  designs.  As  such,  he
made  it,  in  the  first  place,  the  nursery  of  his  army,
levying  fresh  Roman  legions  within  its  limits,  with-
out regard  to  the  authority  of  the  senate,  and  with-
out recourse  to  the  national  treasury.  With  the
same  view  he  quartered  his  friends  and  partisans
upon  the  conquered  land,  establishing  them  in  per-
manent employments  throughout  the  province,  and
effecting,  through  their  agency,  a  systematic  develop-
ment of  its  resources.  The  subjugated  and  allied
states  he  treated  with  studious  forbearance,  such  as

40  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xit.

they  seldom experienced  from  other  commanders:

he  endowed  their  faithful  cities  with  privileges,  and

encouraged  their  commerce,  which  already  flourished

in  the  south  under  his  equitable  administration.

But  a  closer  view  of  Caesar's  policy  in  Gaul,  with

its  principles  and  results,  must  be  reserved

di88positlmeof for  another  opportunity :  it  is  sufficient  for

the  Gaulish  ,  r. , .  ,1  j- ,, j-

democracies the  present  to  indicate  thus  tar  the  direc-

towardshim. . A  .  i  • i •, i  mi 1.1

tion  m  which  it  lay.  Ihe  barbarians  were
easily  seduced  by  these  caresses.  They  solicited
with  ardour  the  honour  of  enrolment  in  the  Julian
gens.1  The  parts  of  the  country  where  the  old
aristocratic  rule  had  been  most  impaired  were  those
which  submitted  with  least  reluctance  to  the  Koman
domination.  Wherever  the  people  had  an  influential
voice  in  the  direction  of  affairs,  they  showed  them-
selves generally  willing  to  accept  a  yoke  which
promised  personal  security,  equal  burdens,  and  all
the  enervating  indulgences  which  Eome  lavished
upon  her  obedient  subjects.  Brief  and  inglorious
had  been  the  flourishing  period  of  Gaulish  democracy.
On  the  other  hand,  it  was  the  chieftains  principally
who  were  impatient  of  the  conquest  Wherever  the
power  of  this  class  was  great,  as  in  the  recent  un-
civilized communities  of  Belgium,  the  flames  of
insurrection  might  be  repressed,  but  were  not  extin-
guished. It  was  from  this  indomitable  spirit  of
resistance  to  their  conqueror,  not  less  than  from  their
acknowledged  character  among  their  own  country-
men, that  the  Belgians  merited  the  testimony  Caesar
bore  them,  as  the  most  warlike  people  of  Gaul.
Even  among  the  Arvernians  the  sentiments  of  clan-

1  In  the  later  history  of  the  Empire,  we  shall  meet  with  an  Africa-
nus,  an  Agricola,  a  Classicus,  a  Florus,  an  Indus,  a  Sacrovir,  a  Sa-
binus,  and  several  others,  all  of  Gaulish  extraction,  and  bearing  the
gentile  name  of  Julius.  It  was,  however,  to  Augustus,  no  doubt,
that  many  families  owed  their  introduction  into  the  Julian  house,  as
he  also  gave  to  some  of  his  colonies  the  designation  of  Julia,  in
honour  of  his  adoptive  parent.

A.0.702-B.C.5S.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  41

ship  were  not  extinct,  and  the  gallant  appeals  of
Vercingetorix  could  still  sway  the  feelings  of  the
multitude,  in  spite  of  the  decision  of  their  as-
semblies, and  the  maturer  judgment  of  the  nation
itself.

But  upon  those  parts  of  Gaul  in  which  the  resist-
ance had been  vigorous, and where  the
yoke  of  conquest  was  still  shaken  by  re-  the  treasures
peated  revolts,  the  hand  of  the  proconsul  H*»hV"

i  mi  c j.1  i • fL •  dependants.

lay  heavy.  The  estates  of  the  chieftains,  »n<i  decorat«
the  ornaments  of  the  cities,  the  hoarded
treasures  of  the  temples,  were  distributed  without
remorse  among  his  friends  and  officers.  All  that  he
could  withhold  from  their  insatiable  appetite  he  re-
served to  defray  his  own  lavish  expenditure  in  Kome,
to  bribe  the  nobles  with  money,  and  cajole  the  mul-
titude with  public  benefactions.  The  triumvirs  had
vied  with  one  another  in  courting  popular  applause
by  pomp  and  munificence.  Caesar  determined  to
eclipse  the  theatre  of  Pompeius  by  buildings  of
greater  splendour  or  utility.  The  spoils  of  the  Gauls
were  employed  to  adorn  and  enlarge  the  forum,  in
which  their  victorious  ancestors  had  encamped  ;  and
the  remains  of  the  Julian  basilica,  on  the  one  side,
and  the  contemporary  edifice  of  ^Emilius  on  the
other,  still  indicate  to  antiquaries  the  limits  of  that
venerable  enclosure.1

1  Stat.  Sylv.  i.  1.29.:

"  At  laterum  passus  hinc  Julia  tecta  tuentur,
Illinc  belligeri  stiblimis  regia  Patilli."

Cicero  (ad  Alt.  iv.  16.)  says  that  Oppius  and  himself  were  em-
ployed as  friends  of  Csesar  to  purchase  and  lay  out  a  space  on  one
side  of  the  forum,  which  they  effected  at  a  cost  of  60,000,000  ses-
terccs.  by  clearing  away  a  great  many  private  dwellings.  The  Curia
and  Basilica  Julia,  which  occupied  part  of  this  site,  were  not  begun
till  some  years  l.ucr  (sec  the  chronological  tables  in  Bunsen's
Bcssftreibung  Rams').  Caesar  gave  orders  at  the  same  time  for  re-
building of  marble  the  Septa,  or  polling-booths  in  the  Campus
Martins,  and  surrounding  them  with  an  arcade  a  mile  in  length.

42  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XH.

The  magnificent  results  thus  brought  before  their
eyes  furnished  the  Eomans  with  a  vivid
u.cupeop°eno°f  idea  of  the  magnitude  of  the  labour  by
c££r'*Yic-  which  they  had  been  achieved.  Nothing
in  their  history  could  be  remembered  equal
to  them,  nothing  certainly  in  the  recorded  transactions
between  Rome  and  Graul,  fertile  as  they  had  been  to
the  republic  in  disastrous  defeats  and  ineffective
victories.  Marius,  said  the  popular  orator,  divested
the  deluge  of  the  Gauls  in  Italy,  but  he  never  pene-
trated into  their  abodes,  he  never  subdued  their
cities.  Ccesar  has  not  only  repulsed  the  Gauls,  he  has
conquered  them.  The  Alps  were  once  the  banker
between  Italy  and  the  barbarians;  the  gods  had
placed  them  therefor  that  very  purpose,  for  by  them
alone  was  Home  protected  through  the  perils  of  her
infancy.  Now  let  them  sink  and  welcome:  from
the  Alps  to  the  ocean  Rome  has  henceforth  no  enemy
to  fear.1

In  the  midst,  however,  of  these  rhetorical  flourishes,
it  so  happened  that  the  Gauls  also,  on  their

TheGanl.  .  ,  r . , ,  , .

flatter  them-  side,  conceived  that  their  cause  was  on  the
rt^ved  hopes  eve  of  triumph.  They  had  heard  of  the

of  recovering  „  i • .  •  i , T»  ri

their  in-  coniusion  which  reigned  at  Rome,  ot  the
levies  of  the  jroutb  of  Italy,  and  the  appa-
rent imminence  of  intestine  war.  They  were  per-
suaded that  Caesar  was  retained  beyond  the  Alps  by
the  urgency  of  public  affairs.8  They  hoped  to  be
forgotten  by  Eome,  at  least  for  a  moment,  and
determined  to  make  the  most  of  the  brief  respite
which  might  never  again  recur.  Ten  legions  indeed
remained  in  their  country;  but  Caesar  was  absent.
It  was  the  general  himself,  they  said,  who  had  con-

Cic.  I.  c.  L.  ^milius  Faulus  was  quarter  of  Macedonia,  praetor
A.U.  701,  and  finally  became  consul  A.u.  7u4,  with  C.  Marcellus.

1  Cic.  de  Prov.  Consul.  13,  14.

sC»s.  Z?.G.  vii.l.:  "  Addunt  ipsi  et  affingunt  rumoribus  Galli
quod  res  poscere  videbatur,  retineri  urbano  motu  Ctesurem."

*.r.702-B.c.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  43

q tiered  them,  and  not  his  army.  The  proconsul  bad
previously  tried  the  experiment  of  dispersing  his
forces  through  a  great  extent  of  territory,  and  had
suffered  severe  losses  in  consequence.  This  winter
he  concentrated  them  more  closely  together ;  but  the
tribes  which  were  not  awed  by  their  immediate
presence  were  able  to  carry  on  their  intrigues  the
more  securely,  and  succeeded  in  organizing  another
general  revolt ;  while  he  was  obliged  to  trust  to  the
fidelity  of  the  ^Edui  and  Arverni.  even  for  the  trans-
mission of  his  couriers  and  despatches  between  the
head  quarters  of  his  army  and  his  own  winter  resi-
dence within  the  Alps.  The  Gauls,  indeed,  were  not
without  hopes  of  intercepting  him  on  his  return
alone,  or  with  a  slender  escort.  But  the  levies  which
Pompeius  was  making  in  Italy,  by  the  authority  of  the
senate,  furnished  him  with  an  excuse  for  strength-
ening his  own  armaments,  and  he  employed  the
period  of  his  absence  from  Gaul  in  collecting  troops
for  the  fresh  campaign  he  anticipated.1

The  execution  of  Acco  furnished  a  lively  subject
of  complaint  at  the  secret  meetings  which  Ti1Cyf0nnan
the  Gaulish  chieftains  convened  in  their  "d'crac^um""
distant  fastnesses  2  to  plan  measures  of  re-  ofVeS™"-*1
volt.  Such,  they  remarked  to  one  another,  torix-
might  be  the  fate  of  any  one  among  them.  Who,
then,  would  venture  to  strike  the  first  blow  in  a
matter  which  equally  concerned  all  ?  To  the  state
which  should  be  the  first  to  rise  in  arms,  promise*
were  held  out  of  national  gratitude  and  reward.
The  Carnutes  accepted  the  post  of  honour ;  they  only
required  that  the  rest  should  pledge  themselves  by  an
oath  of  more  than  usual  solemnity  to  join  in  the
enterprise ;  for  their  meetings  were  too  hurried  and
private  to  admit  of  the  usual  precaution  of  exchanging

1  C«s.  B.  G.  I.  c.

1  Cses.  I  c.:  "  Indictis  inter  sc  principes  Gallise  conciliis  sylvestritmg
uc  remotis  locis."

44  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xn.

hostages  for  each  other's  good  faith.1  The  leaders  of
the  Carnutes,  Cotuatus  and  Conetodimus,  are  de-
scribed by  Caesar  as  men  of  violent  and  desperate
character ;  assuredly  they  plunged  their  people  into
the  war  with  more  vehemence  than  reflection.  But
the  first  shock  of  the  barbarians  was  sudden  and
irresistible.  They  threw  themselves  upon  the  Koman
settlers  in  Genabum,  who  were  driving  their  usual
trade  of  money-lending,  and  made  an  indiscriminate
massacre  of  them.  Still  more  important  was  the
defection  of  the  Arverni,  who  were  excited  to  arms
against  the  will  of  their  government  by  Vercinge-
torix,  a  son  of  the  ambitious  Celtillus,  whose  life  had
been  forfeited  a  few  years  before  for  the  crime  of
aspiring  to  the  sovereignty.8  Expelled  from  Ger-
govia,  their  capital,  the  young  warrior  roamed  the
mountain  tracts  of  the  Cantal  and  the  Puy  de  Dome,
to  this  day  the  rudest  fastnesses  of  Gallic  indepen-
dence, inflaming  young  and  old  by  his  generous
eloquence,  until  they  were  roused  to  expel  in  its
turn  the  government  which  resisted  the  movement,
and  greeted  their  champion  with  the  title  of  king.
Presently  the  Senones,  the  Parisii,  the  Pictones,  the
Cadurci,  the  Turones,  Aulerci,  Lemovices  and  Audi,
all  the  tribes  of  the  Mid  Seine  and  the  Lower  Loire,
with  many  others,  joined  in  one  loud  cry  of  defiance
to  the  oppressor.  They  unanimously  saluted  Ver-
cingetorix  as  their  leader,  and  submitted  to  the  levies
of  men,  money  and  arms  which  he  imposed  upon

1  Cos.  B.  G.  vii.  2. :  "  Quoniam  in  presentia  de  obsidibus  intet
secavere  uon  possint,  ne  res  efferatur."

*  Cses.  B.  G.  vii.  4.  Cingetorix,  Vercingetorix,  and  other  Gaulish
names,  may  possibly  be  analysed  into  several  Celtic  words,  and  the
compound,  in  each  case,  may  be  an  official  designation,  such  as
captain,  general,  generalissimo  (Thierry,  Gaulois,\\\.  86.)-  1°  the
same  manner  the  name  Arminius  may  be  the  German  Heermann  or
general.  But  Heermann  (Hermann)  is  a  well-known  surname,  and
the  same  mny  hare  been  the  case  with  these  Celtic  appellatives
also.

4.0.702 -B.C. 52.  UNDER THE EMHRE.  45

them  severally.  He  knew  the  people  he  had  to  deal
with,  how  fitfully  the  military  spirit  kindled  and
subsided  among  them,  how  strangely  gallantry  and
meanness  were  blended  in  their  composition.  His
rule  was  one  of  terror  and  severity.  Any  appearance
of  supineness  in  the  cause  was  avenged  with  flames
and  tortures.  The  loss  of  an  eye  or  an  ear  was  his
lightest  punishment  for  trifling  offences.1

It  was  to  be  apprehended  that  the  treachery  of  the
Arverni,  who  had  hitherto  kept  their  faith  ClMar.,  energy
inviolate,  would  be  followed  by  that  of  the  and  deci8ion-
^Edui,  in  whose  power  it  lay  to  close  the  only  route
which  remained  open  for  Caesar  to  communicate  with
his  army.  This  was  the  point  to  which  the  views  of
the  Gaulish  leader  were  in  the  first  instance  directed,
and  it  required  the  utmost  decision  and  rapidity  on
the  proconsul's  part  to  frustrate  them.  It  was  now
the  depth  of  winter.2  The  Cevennes,  which  rise  to
their  highest  elevation  at  the  point  where  they  form
the  common  frontier  of  the  Province  and  the  Arver-
nian  territory,  were  thickly  covered  with  snow,  and
at  such  a  season  were  regarded  as  an  impassable  bar-
rier.3 But  Caesar,  who  had  just  crossed  the  Alps,  was

1  So  nnder  Napoleon's  regime  in  France,  the  most  searching
severity  wa<  necessary  to  raise  and  keep  together  an  army,  which  in
the  field  was  full  of  enthusiasm  and  self-devotion.

*  Owing  to  the  confusion  of  the  Roman  calendar  at  this  period,
which  will  be  explained  in  a  subsequent  chapter,  the  Kalends  of
January  for  the  year  A.U.  702  fell  on  the  23d  Nov.  of  the  year
preceding,  according  to  tliu  true  reckoning.  (Ideler,  Chronol.  ii.
116.)  Pompeius  assumed  the  consulship  v.  Kal.  Mart,  or  Feb.  25.
( Ascon.  in  Milan.'),  corresponding  with  the  middle  of  January.  This
was  the  time  of  Caesar's  return  to  Gaul :  "  Cum  jam  ille  urhanas  res
virtute  Cn.  Pompeii  commodiorem  in  statum  pervenisse  intelligent "
(B.  G.  vii.  6.).

'  Comp.  Plut.  CCES.  25.:  r6re  tie  \d^uvos  upa,  -rrdyot  iroTii/jLwv  Kal
vuperdis  airoKfKpvfj.fj.ei'Oi  Spvfiol.  Kal  iriSia  xc<M<W0'?  ^^f^fJf-vaa^fva.,
Kal  TTTJ  fjitv  a.TfKfj.apTot  ^i6vo^  aTpmrol,  frfj  8e  5t  f\wt>  Kal  pfvudriav  irapa-
rptiroutvcav  a.ffd<pfia  TroAATj  TTJS  iropflas,  ita.VTa.Tta.aiv  t'S^KOvv  avfiti^tipTfra
Kalffapt  ra  rtav  a.<pi<Tra.^vuiv  irotfiv.  Lucan  evidently  refers  to  this

46  FIISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xn.

not  to  be  deterred  by  a  less  formidable  rampart.1
He  forced  his  way  across  them  with  such  troops  as
he  had  with  him,  including  his  new  levies.2  By  this
movement  he  distracted  the  attention  of  Vercinge-
torix,  who  was  at  that  moment  soliciting  the  alliance
of  some  neighbouring  states,  and  called  him  back  to
the  defence  of  his  astonished  countrymen.  Caesar  left
Decimus  Brutus  in  a  secure  position  to  harass  and
occupy  the  enemy,  while  he  hastened  himself  back
again  across  the  mountains  to  Vienna,  the  capital  of
the  Province,  collected  there  some  more  troops,  and
took  the  road  through  the  country  of  the^Edui  to  the
quarters  of  his  legions  among  the  Lingones.3

Thus,  by  extraordinary  exertions  and  rapid  rnove-
He  reaches  the  ments,  which  are  often  calculated  to  terrify
2r^yt!™a°dVu'  an  enemy  more  than  the  most  brilliant  deeds
TO^y  of  the  of  arms,  Caesar  placed  himself  again  at  the
uk£uce'ia-nd  head  of  his  forces,  assembled  in  a  formidable
mass  from  their  scattered  cantonments.  The
leader  of  the  Gaulish  confederacy,  reeking  from  the
massacres  of  Grenabum,  was  menacing  Gorgobina,  the
capital  of  the  Boii.  These  people,  a  remnant,  as  has  been

exploit,  where  he  describes  the  Cevennes  as  snowy  mountains,
i.  434 :

"  Qua  montibus  ardua  stimmis
Gens  habitat  cana  pendentes  rape  Gehennas."
1  Silius  (iv.  745.)  says  of  Hannibal  crossing  the  Apennines :

"  Prior  cxtiogui  labique  videtur
Gloria,  post  Alpes  si  stetur  montibus  ullis."

*  Caes.  vii.  8.:  "  Discussa  nive  sex  in  altitudinem  pedum  atque  !ta
viis  patefactis  summo  labore  ad  fines  Anrernoram  pervenit."

3  Caes.  B.  G.  vii.  9.:  "In  Lingones  contendit  ubi  duae  legiones
hiemabant."  We  may  conjecture  the  spot  to  be  that  of  the  Roman
station  of  Andematunum,  afterwards  Lingones,  now  Langres.  This
town  stands  on  a  hill  rising  from  a  central  plateau,  and  its  elevation
is  said  to  be  the  highest  of  any  in  France:  perhaps  it  may  be  identified
with  the  station  alluded  to  by  Lucan  (i.  397.):

"  Castraque  quae  Vogt-si  curvam  super  ardua  rupem

Pugnaces  pictis  cohibebant  Lingonas  armis."

The  hills  from  which  the  Marne,  Meuse,  and  Saone  take  their  rise
were  comprehended  under  the  general  name  of  Vogesus.

i.r.702-n.C.r,2.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  47

before  mentioned,  of  the  Helvetic  migration,  had  been
settled  in  this  district  by  Csesar,  and  placed  under  the
patronage  of  the  ^Edui.  To  attack  them  was  in  fact  to
assail  the  fidelity  of  the  more  powerful  nation,  which,
it  was  hoped,  might  be  induced  by  the  danger  of  its
clients  to  join  in  the  general  defection  from  Rome.
Anxious  to  avert  this  risk,  Caesar  rushed  to  the  de-
fence of  the  Boii,  although  the  season  of  the  year  and
the  scarcity  of  provisions  presented  serious  obstacles
to  the  movements  of  an  army.  His  first  object  was
to  march  upon  Genabum,  the  possession  of  which
place  would  intercept  the  communication  of  the  nor-
thern and  southern  states  of  the  confederacy ;  while
he  justly  expected  that  the  first  rumour  of  his  attack
would  draw  off  Vercingetorix  from  the  siege  of  Gor-
gobina.1  With  his  usual  celerity  he  advanced  to  the
walls  before  the  defenders  were  apprised  of  his  move-
ments. The  meditated  assault  was  only  postponed
for  the  moment  by  the  late  hour  of  his  arrival.  But
the  Gauls  within,  astounded  at  the  unexpected  appa-
rition of  their  restless  enemy,  were  preparing  to
evacuate  the  town  by  the  bridge  which  crosses  the
Loire.  As  soon  as  the  news  reached  him  that  they
were  about  to  elude  pursuit,  he  led  his  troops,  already
on  the  watch  for  the  signal,  to  attack  the  walls.  Fire
was  applied  to  the  gates,  and  an  entrance  easily
effected,  since  no  resistance  was  offered.  The  flying
multitude,  impeded  by  the  darkness  of  the  night  and
the  narrowness  of  the  bridge,  were  captured  almost
without  a  blow.  The  exertions  of  the  soldiery  de-
manded a  soldier's  reward,  while  the  treachery  of  the
inhabitants  gave  it  a  sufficient,  or  at  least  a  plausible,
pretext.  Csesar  abandoned  the  place  to  fire  and

1  Genabum,  or  Genabus,  is  the  modern  Orleans.  Gorgobina,
sometimes  written  Gergovia,  of  the  Boii,  is  to  be  distinguished  from
Gergovia  of  the  Arverni.  The  Boii  occupied  a  portion  of  the
iEduan  territory  between  the  Loire  and  Allier.  The  site  of  their
capital  is  undetermined ;  but  Napoleon  III.  (Hist,  de  Ccesar,  ii.  p.  248
note)  suggests  for  it  the  modern  village  of  S.  Parize  dc  Chatel.

48  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xn.

sword;  the  whole  of  the  plunder  v.as  distributed
among  the  captors.1

The  proconsul  immediately  crossed  the  Loire  and
vertingetoru  entered  the  country  of  the  Bituriges.  He
cfa'liTsto"16  took  a  fortress  named  Noviodunum,  defeated
pi'anlVwJi-  a  detachment  of  Arvernian  cavalry,  chiefly
lare-  through  the  prowess  of  some  German  horse,

and  proceeded  to  lay  siege  to  Avaricum,  the  capital
of  the  tribe,  a  fortification  of  great  size  and  strength,
known  in  modern  times  by  the  name  of  Bourges.2
Vercingetorix,  though  not  dispirited  by  these  succes-
sive disasters,  now  saw  the  necessity  of  changing  the
plan  of  operations,  in  which  his  countrymen  had  so
long  blindly  confided.  He  assured  them  that  the
fatal  termination  of  every  encounter  between  the
Gauls  and  the  Eomans  was  no  reproach  upon  their
valour ;  that  no  walls  could  withstand  the  skill  of  the
Romans  in  engineering,  no  array  maintain  itself  in
the  field  against  such  weapons  and  such  discipline.
But  he  reminded  them  that  through  the  winter  and
early  spring  the  soil  on  which  the  enemy  trod  could
furnish  him  with  no  provisions.  He  must  disperse
his  troops  among  the  villages  and  fortresses,  and  seize
for  his  subsistence  the  stores  there  collected.  Let
there  be  no  more  attempts  then,  he  said,  to  defy  him
in  the  open  field ;  let  him  rather  be  followed  in  detail
into  every  corner  where  he  roamed  for  sustenance  ;
above  all,  let  the  towns  which  served  him  for  magazines
be  destroyed  by  the  hands  of  the  inhabitants  them-
selves. The  effect  of  such  a  mode  of  resistance  must
be  his  speedy  and  disgraceful  retreat,  and  with  it  the
restoration  of  liberty  to  central  Gaul,  and  to  every

1  Napoleon  (L  c.)  maintains  that  the  Genabum  of  Caesar's  time
*as  not  at  Orleans,  but  at  Gien,  and  was  afterwards  removed  to  the
lower  site.  He  argues  chiefly  from  the  circuitousness  of  Caesar's
route  from  Agedincum  (Sens),  his  point  of  departure.  But  if  the  only
bridge  was  at  Genabum,  it  might  be  no  loss  of  time  to  go  round  by
Orleans.  Noviodunum  of  the  Bituriges  may  very  well  be  Sancerre.
(1866.)

*  As  with  many  other  Gaulish  towns,  the  original  name  became

A.0.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  49

other  state  that  should  have  the  spirit  to  make  similar
sacrifices. !

The  assembled  council  of  Graulish  states  assented
gallantly to this proposal. In one  day

J  c .  f iU T>-x •  They  consent

twenty  fortresses  of  the  Bituriges  were  to  destroy
levelled  to  the  ground,  and  similar  havoc
was  made  throughout  the  territories  of  the  i  «
allies.  But  when  the  fate  of  Avaricum  itself  °
came  to  be  discussed,  whether  it  should  be  defended  or
destroyed,  the  Bituriges  could  hold  out  no  longer.
Their  deputies  threw  themselves  at  the  feet  of  the
assembled  Grauls,  and  interceded  with  piteous  cries
for  the  preservation  of  their  beautiful  and,  as  they
deemed,  impregnable  city.  The  hearts  of  the  chief-
tains were  moved  to  compassion.  Vercingetorix  at
first  sternly  resisted  representations  which  he  knew
to  be  delusive.  But  when  the  rest  gave  way,  he  at
last  yielded  to  the  general  clamour,  and  consented
that  the  place  should  be  maintained  and  an  ample
force  assigned  for  its  defence.

The  site  of  Avaricum  was  admirably  calculated  for
defence. It  stood  on  a  hill,  and  a  narrow

, .  .  ,  Avaricum

causeway  between  a  river  and  a  morass  captured  by
afforded  the  only  approach  to  it.2  These
natural  advantages  had  been  improved  by  art,  and
the  devoted  garrison  now  proceeded  to  strengthen
their  defences  within  the  walls.  The  combined  exer-
tions of  the  Roman  legions  were  applied  to  draw
lines  of  circumvallation  around  them,  while  the
principal  force  of  the  Gaulish  league  watched  these
operations  at  a  short  distance,  and  cut  off  the  sup-
plies destined  by  the  Boii  and  JEdm  for  the  hostile
camp.  While  the  Bituriges  within  their  city  were
hard  pressed  by  the  machinery  which  the  Roman
engineers  directed  against  their  walls,  the  forces  of
the  proconsul,  on  their  side,  were  harassed  by  the

exchanged  for  that  of  the  people,  i.  e.  Bituriges,  and  thence  the
modern  Bourges  and  the  name  of  the  province  Berri.

1  Cues.  B.  G.  vii.  20.  *  Cscs.  B.  G.  vii.  17  :  Dion,  xl.  34.

VOL.  II.  E

50  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  Ctt.  xtl.

fatigues  of  the  siege  and  the  scarcity  of  provisions.
Caesar  is  lavish  of  praise  in  speaking  of  the  forti-
tude with  which  his  soldiers  bore  their  privations :
they  refused  to  allow  him  to  raise  the  siege;  and
when  he  at  last  led  them  against  the  enemy's  army,
and  finding  it  too  strongly  posted  for  an  attack,  with-
drew them  again  within  their  lines,  they  submitted
to  the  disappointment,  and  betook  themselves  once
more  without  a  murmur  to  the  tedious  operations  of
the  blockade.  The  skill  of  the  assailants  at  length
triumphed  over  the  bravery  of  the  defenders.  The
walls  were  approached  by  towers  at  various  points,
and  mounds  constructed  against  which  the  com
bustible  missiles  of  the  besieged  were  unavailing.
Finally,  a  desperate  sally  was  repulsed,  and  then,  at
last,  the  constancy  of  the  Bituriges  began  to  fail.
Taking  advantage  of  a  moment  when  the  watch  on  the
walls  had  relaxed  its  vigilance,  Caesar  marshalled  his
legions  behind  his  works1,  and  poured  them  suddenly
against  the  opposing  ramparts.  They  gained  the
summit  of  the  walls,  which  the  defenders  abandoned
without  a  blow,  rallying,  however,  in  the  middle  of
the  town,  in  such  hasty  array  as  the  emergency  would
allow.  A  bloody  struggle  ensued  ;  both  parties  were
numerous,  and,  still  burning  to  avenge  the  massacre
of  their  countrymen  at  Genabum,  the  assailants  gave
no  quarter.  The  Gauls  were  routed  and  exterminated,
their  women  and  children  mercilessly  slaughtered,
and  the  great  central  city  of  Gaul  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  conquerors  without  affording  a  single  captive
for  their  triumph.2

The  influence  of  the  champion  of  Gaulish  inde-

vercingetorix pendence,  far  from  declining,  rather  gained

Sura^e'rfthe  strength by this disaster,  for he could

represent  that  the  defence  of  Avaricum  had

thwarted  the  policy  he so warmly  recommended,

1  Caes. B.  G.  vii.  27.:  "  Legiones  intra  vineas  in occulto  expe-
dite." 2  Oa>s  B.  G.  vii.  22—28.

A.U.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  51

and  to  which,  in  that  single  instance,  the  allies  had
refused  to  accede.  He  now  instructed  his  followers,
abandoning  their  regular  fortresses,  to  defend  them-
selves with  temporary  works,  according  to  the  Koman
practice,  which  the  Gauls  had  never  before  adopted.
Nor  were  the  rest  of  the  tribes  discouraged  :  many
reinforcements  arrived,  notwithstanding  the  great
losses  the  cause  had  sustained ;  the  numbers  of  the
confederates  were  recruited  by  new  levies,  and  the
Komaus  found  their  enemy  no  less  formidable  than
before  in  actual  strength,  and  much  more  so  in  ex-
perience and  confidence.

Hitherto  the  ./Edui  had  acted  with  great  indecision.
They  had  refused  assistance  to  the  Bituriges
when  that unfortunate people, urged to  co^duc^'o^the
revolt  by  the Arvernians, had solicited  <u»wii.

,1 >  ,.  ,  T I ,1  . among  them  .

their  protection  to  enable  them  to  remain  interference  of
faithful  to  Eome.  This  refusal,  veiled  by  a
flimsy  pretext,  had  thrown  the  Bituriges  into  the  arms
of  the  confederates,  and  had  brought  upon  them  the
destruction  of  their  capital.  The  attack  of  Vercinge-
torix  upon  the  Boii  was  intended  to  force  the  ^Edui
to  a  declaration  of  their  sentiments ;  but  Caesar's
sudden  diversion  on  the  north  withdrew  the  enemy,
and  relieved  them  from  this  pressure.  On  the  other
hand,  the  proconsul  complained  that  the  provisions
and  stores  he  required  came  slowly  and  scantily  to
his  camp,  until  the  capture  of  Avaricum  gave  him
abundant  supplies.  The  counsels  of  the  yEdui  vacil-
lated through  internal  divisions.  At  the  commence-
ment of  the  spring  they  held  their  annual  election  of
a  vergobret,  and  then  these  dissensions  came  to  a  head.
While  a  faction  among  the  chiefs  tried  to  thrust  into
the  office  a  noble  of  the  name  of  Cotus,  who,  as
brother  of  the  late  vergobret,  was  by  the  law  excluded
from  it,  the  priests,  at  the  head  of  the  dominant
party,  selected  a  youth  of  birth  and  distinction,  named
in  the  Roman  version  of  his  Gaulish  appellation

E 2

52  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  all.

Convictolitans.  The  rival  candidates  appealed  to
Caesar,  and  consented  to  abide  by  his  decision.  The
popular  party  he  probably  considered  the  most  favour-
able to  his  own  policy,  and  their  appointment  he
accordingly  confirmed.1  But,  having  performed  this
act  of  friendly  interference, he  demanded  his  reward:
he  required  the  nation  to  co-operate  vigorously  with
him,  and  to  furnish  him  with  a  contingent  of  ten
thousand  men.

Having  imposed  these  orders  upon  his  clients,
Csesar  proceeded  to  divide  his  Koman
the'coimtry  of  forces  into  two  armies.  He  placed  four
and  lays'^ege  legions  under  the  command  of  Labienus,
whom  he  charged  to  take  up  his  quarters
in  the  country  of  the  Senones,  and  from  thence  main-
tain the  obedience  of  the  central  states ;  with  the  re-
maining six  he  crossed  from  the  Loire  to  the  Allier,
intending  to  make  his  way  to  Gergovia  of  the  Arverni.
His  vigilant  enemy  was  not  off  his  guard.  Vercinge-
torix  had  broken  the  bridges,  and  was  guarding  the
fords  of  the  latter  river.  If  the  energy  of  both  com-
manders was  equal,  the  skill  of  the  Koman  was
superior.  By  a  feigned  movement  he  drew  off  his
adversary's  attention,  and  speedily  restored  the
means  of  crosring.  Caesar's  camp  was  always  fur-
nished with  implements  and  workmen,  and  he  owed
much  of  his  success  to  the  skill  of  his  engineers.  He
transported  his  army  across  the  Allier  with  his  usual
celerity;  and  Vercingetorix,  surprised  to  find  his
flank  thus  suddenly  turned,  cautiously  and  firmly
declined  a  general  engagement.  Caesar  held  his
course  along  the  left  bank  of  the  Allier  towards  Ger-
govia,  the  enemy  retreating  with  no  less  steadiness

1  There  is  some  obscurity  in  Ctesar's  account  of  this  transaction
(vii.  33.):  "  Intermissis  magistratibus  "  I  understand,  with  Hotoman,
to  refer  to  the  law  that  two  individuals  of  the  same  family  should
not  succeed  one  another  in  the  supreme  magistracy.

A.U.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  53

before  him.1  He  arrived  before  the  ramparts  on  the
fifth  day,  but  was  foiled  in  his  turn  by  finding  on
inspection  that  the  place  was  too  strong  in  situation
and  defences  to  be  captured  by  assault.  It  was  im-
possible to  form  a  regular  siege  until  the  necessary
provision  for  the  troops  had  been  collected  and  for-
warded to  the  camp.  He  contented  himself  for  the
moment  with  a  successful  attack  upon  an  important
position  in  the  neighbourhood,  carrying  it  by  a  bold
and  skilful  movement  in  the  night.2

Meanwhile,  Convictolitans,  the  vergobret of  the

i,  had  resolved  to  betray  the  patron  to  ThejE(iui
whom  he  owed  his  appointment,  and  to  "cre't^Ro-
precipitate  his  country  into  war  with  the  ^"e'dudld1
Komans.  He  took  his  measures  with  Lita-  and  ParUoned-
vicus,  the  commander  of  the  levies  which  his  nation
had  consented  to  send  to  Csesar,  and  planned  a
scheme  for  deceiving  the  soldiers,  and  hurrying  the
people  blindly  into  revolt.  In  the  midst  of  their
march  Litavicus  suddenly  caused  his  men  to  halt,
and  brought  forward  certain  persons  whom  he  had
instructed  to  announce  that  the  proconsul  had  just
put  his  ^Eduau  hostages  to  the  sword,  and  reserved
the  same  fate  for  the  -very  troops  who  were  at  that
moment  marching  into  his  toils.3  The  stratagem
succeeded;  the  JEduans,  seized  with  indignation,
slew  all  the  Romans  within  their  reach,  and  Litavicus
transmitted  the  news  to  Bibracte,  with  representa-
tions calculated  to  inflame  the  passions  of  the  nation,

1  The  site  of  Gergovia  of  the  Arverni  is  supposed  to  be  a  liill
near  the  Allier,  four  miles  south  of  the  modern  Clermont  Ferraud
in  Auvergne.  The  Koniiins  seem  to  have  neglected  Gergovia,  and
to  have  founded  the  neighbouring  city,  to  which  they  gave  the
name  Augustouemetuin.  The  Roman  city  became  known  after-
wards as  Civitas  Arveruorum,  in  the  middle  ages,  Arverna,  and
then,  from  the  situation  of  its  castle,  clarus  mons,  Clermout.  See
d'Anville,  Notice  de  la  Gaule,  in  voc. ,  Mannert,  n.  i.  131.  Comp.
Napoleon,  Hist,  de  Ccesar,  ii.  p.  268.

-  Cu;s.  B.  G.  vii.  34—36.

1  Cses.  B.  G.  vii.  38. :  Dion.  xl.  37.

54  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xu

and  strengthen  the  hands  of  Convictolitans  by  com-
mitting it  irrevocably  to  the  Gaulish  cause.  A
massacre  of  the  Eoman  settlers  ensued,  as  "the  ordi-
nary preliminary  of  revolt.  At  this  moment,  the
^Eduans  in  the  proconsul's  camp,  the  same  whom
he  was  represented  to  have  murdered,  were  contriving
a  plot  for  his  destruction.  The  feebleness  of  one  of
the  conspirators  revealed  the  danger,  and  Caesar
marched  forth  with  his  usual  decision  to  meet  the
troops  of  Litavicus,  while  they  were  still  awaiting
fresh  orders  from  Bibracte.  Instead  of  attacking  and
crushing  them  by  force  of  arms,  he  showed  them  the
persons  of  their  countrymen,  whose  supposed  assassi-
nation had  excited  them  to  revolt.  Overwhelmed
with  surprise  and  terror,  Litavicus  threw  himself  on
the  proconsul's  mercy.  The  soldiers  disowned  the
authority  of  their  general;  the  general  disclaimed
the  acts  of  his  goverment;  every  one  hastened  to
plead  for  himself,  and  to  make  the  most  abject  pro-
fessions of  obedience  for  the  future.1  With  these
professions  Caesar  was  forced  to  be  content.  The
adherence  of  the  ^Edui  was  of  too  much  importance
to  allow  him  to  indulge  in  vengeance,  or  even  in
just  retribution  for  the  murder  of  his  countrymen.
He  led  back  the  contingent  of  Litavicus  to  his  camp
before  Grergovia,  where  his  presence  was  required  to
revive  the  courage  of  the  division  he  had  left  be-
hind, which  had  repelled  one  attack  from  Ver-
cingetorix,  and  was  in  immediate  apprehension  of
another.

It  seemed,  indeed, notwithstanding  this  success,
that  heavy  clouds  were  gathering  around

Engagement ~  ,  J . .  „  °

before  the Caesar  s  position. He  was  aware  that  the

g^i^csesur yEdui  still  meditated  defection,  the  more  so

as  they  could  not  persuade  themselves  that

he  would  persist  in his  clemency  when  the  danger

1  Cses.  B.  G.  vii.  38—44.

A.P.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  55

of  the  moment  was  passed.  They  held  the  key  of
the  road  which  led  to  his  legions  at  Agedincum,
and  the  situation  of  his  forces,  thus  separated  by  a
wide  tract  of  hostile  country,  was  eminently  pre-
carious. He  pressed  forward  to  Gergovia ;  but  with
no  hope  of  forcing  the  Gaulish  leader  to  a  battle,  or
making  any  important  impression  upon  the  centre  of
the  confederacy.  He  was  only  anxious  to  perform
some  creditable  feat  of  arms,  and  then  withdraw  his
forces  northward  without  the  appearance  of  a  check.1
Vercingetorix  had  posted  his  army  midway  on  the
declivity,  at  the  summit  of  which  the  city  stood,  and
he  had  imitated  so  well  the  science  of  his  enemies  in
surrounding  his  position  with  fortifications  that  he
could  not  be  compelled  to  fight.  He  had  also  taken
possession  of  several  elevated  spots  in  the  neighbour-
hood, from  which  he  commanded  the  Eoman  camp
in  every  direction.  Frequent  skirmishes  took  place
between  the  cavalry  on  both  sides ;  and  CaBsar  gained
a  momentary  advantage  by  deceiving  the  enemy  with
a  feigned  movement,  and  inveigling  him  to  a  dis-
tance from  his  encampment.  The  bulk  of  the  Koman
forces  advanced  boldly  up  the  hill,  penetrated  the
almost  deserted  lines,  and  found  themselves,  breath-
less and  astonished  at  their  success,  beneath  the  walls
of  the  town.  The  Gauls  within  were  struck  with
panic  at  this  sudden  apparition.  A  cry  arose  among
the  unarmed  population  that  the  scenes  of  Avaricum
were  about  to  be  repeated ;  the  women  threw  their
ornaments  and  treasures  over  the  walls ;  some  even
leaped  into  the  arms  of  the  assailants,  hoping  to  earn
their  mercy  by  precipitate  submission.  Meanwhile,
Caesar,  satisfied  with  the  achievement  of  the  day,
gave  the  signal  for  retreat.  He  had  no  intention  of
making  a  serious  attack  upon  Gergovia,  which  he
could  not  hope  to  take,  still  less  to  keep  if  taken.

1  C«s-  B.  G.  vii.  44,

66  HISTORY OF THE ROMA.NS  CH.  XTl.

But  the  ardour  of  his  soldiers  had  led  them  too  far ;
the  hasty  return  of  the  Gaulish  army  placed  them  be-
tween two  enemies.  But  for  the  prodigious  exertions
of  the  tenth  legion,  which,  under  Caesar's  immediate
command,  hung  on  the  rear  and  flanks  of  Vercinge-
torix,  they  would  have  been  crushed  between  the
pressure  of  stone  walls  and  overwhelming  numbers.
The  struggle  was  long  and  dubious ;  the  several  divi-
sions of  both  armies  seemed  inextricably  entangled
with  one  another ;  the  unequal  combat  of  horse  with
foot,  of  the  light  with  the  heavy-armed,  of  one  above
with  another  below,  of  one  behind  a  wall  ur  a  hedge
with  another  exposed  and  defenceless,  all  contributed
to  the  uncertainty  of  the  issue  and  rapid  fluctuations
of  success.  The  Roman  general  was  at  last  enabled
to  draw  off  his  troops  with  ill-concealed  precipita-
tion. So  great  was  their  loss,  so  dire  their  discou-
ragement, that  it  was  only  to  save  the  appearance  of
a  rout  that  Caesar  postponed  his  retreat  for  two  days.
The  Grauls  abandoned  themselves  to  the  full  intoxi-
cation of  a  success  beyond  their  most  sanguine  hopes.
Even  the  Roman  writers  enumerated  this  among
the  few  instances  in  which  their  illustrious  hero  was
worsted.1  Caesar  himself  passes  it  lightly  over;  nor
certainly  was  his  defeat  of  such  extent  or  character
as  would  have  done  him  serious  injury  under  other
circumstances  than  those  in  which  he  actually
stood.3

1  Suet.  Jul.  25. :  "  Per  tot  successus  ter  nee  amplius  adversum
casum  expertus:  in  Britannia  classe  vi  tempestatis  prope  absunita  ;
et  in  Gallia  ad  Gergoviam  legionc  fusa  ;  et  in  Germanorum  h'nihus
Titurio  et  Aurunculeio  legatis  per  insidias  ca;sis."

4  Cses.  vii.  52,  53.  Dion  (xl.  36.)  takes  the  same  view.  Cresar
takes  care  to  mention  that  he  gained  the  advantage  in  two  cavalry
skirmishes  before  he  abandoned  his  quarters.  On  the  other  hand,
Orosius  says  that  he  lost  a  large  part  of  his  army,  which  was  cer-
tainly not  the  case.  Oros.  vi.  11.  This  author,  however,  is  very
ill-informed.  He  confounds  Genabum  with  Avaricum,and  Gergovia
with  Alesia.  Florus  (iii.  10.)  makes  the  same  mistake.

A.U.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  57

But  the  delay  of  only  two  days  threw  a  serious
obstacle  in  Caesar's  way. The  y£dui,  vacil-

i .  .  j  ,  i  ,  CiEsar  retreats

latmg and inconstant, harassed as they  to  his  quarter*

i ,, . , .  ,  i- ....  f in  Belgium.

were  by  the  intrigues  and  solicitations  of
Convictolitans  and  Litavicus,  yielded  at  once  to  their
persuasions,  on  the  news  of  their  allies'  disaster.
Their  previous  indecision  gave  place  to  the  most
vehement  activity.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  people
knew  no  bounds ;  they  exhibited  it  by  the  sacrifice,
not  of  such  wretched  villages  or  towns  as  the  Bitu-
riges  had  committed  to  the  flames,  but  of  Noviodu-
num  itself,  the  second  city  in  their  rich  and  flourish
ing  country,  the  mart  of  commerce,  the  centre  of
communications,  the  magazine  and  arsenal  of  the
deserted  foreigners.1  Their  first  act  was  to  slaughter
the  Roman  traders  and  sqjourners  in  the  city ;  they
next  demolished  the  bridge  over  the  Loire,  for  which
they  knew  Caesar  would  make,  and  then  consum-
mated the  awful  catastrophe  of  patriotism  and  devo-
tion. Caesar  had  now  broken  up  from  before  Grer-
govia.  He  crossed  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Allier,
entered  the  country  of  the  Boii,  only  less  exhausted
and  barren  than  that  of  the  Bituriges  on  the  left,  and
traversed  the  strip  of  land  which  separates  the  parallel
channels  of  the  Allier  and  Loire.  He  arrived  in
front  of  Noviodunum  in  time  to  hear  the  last  crash
of  the  sinking  bridge,  and  see  the  devouring  flames
rise  triumphantly  beyond  it.  His  army  was  exhausted
by  its  rapid  march ;  it  was  straitened  for  supplies ;
the  waters  of  the  rivers  were  swollen  with  the  first
melting  of  the  snows,  and  the  ordinary  fords  had
become  impassable.  Before  him  lay  a  powerful  peo-
ple, long  ripening,  as  he  knew,  for  rebellion,  the  first
signal  of  whose  avowed  defection  he  beheld  in  the
flaming  masses  before  him.  The  alternative  of  turn-
ing southward  and  retreating  into  the  Province  was

1  Noviodunum,  the  modern  Nevers.

58  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xn.

opposed  by  many  considerations.  The  roads  were
difficult,  and  the  passage  of  the  Cevennes  would  cost
much  time ;  moreover,  besides  the  disgrace  of  thus
skulking  from  the  enemy,  it  would  leave  Labienus
in  a  position  of  extreme  peril.  In  this  emergency
he  did  not  hesitate  for  a  moment.  To  consume  a
single  day  in  building  a  bridge  would  have  been
a  fatal  delay.  But  a  spot  was  discovered  where  the
Loire  could  be  forded  by  wading  to  the  armpits ;
the  soldiers  could  carry  their  weapons  above  their
heads.  The  stream  was  strong  and  rapid,  but  the
cavalry  were  ranged  above,  and  broke  the  current
for  the  infantry  below.  If  the  JEdui  had  made  the
best  of  the  occasion,  they  might  have  defended  the
bank  of  the  river  against  the  Romans  with  great  ad-
vantage. But  Caesar  carried  everything  before  him
by  the  terror  of  his  name.  He  now  supplied  him-
self with  provisions  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Novio-
dunum,  and  thence  continued  his  march  unmolested
until  he  effected  his  junction  with  his  lieutenant,
who  came  forth,  at  his  summons,  from  Agedincum  to
meet  him.1

This  well-combined  operation  revived  the  drooping
spirits  of  the  Roman  legions. The  forces

Successful  "~  , .  j  °, .

operations  of of  Labienus  had  engaged  in  a  campaign

Labienu..  . .. » °  • Ul  •

against  the  Parisu  and  some  neighbouring
states,  in  which  their  success  had  at  first  been  dubious.
The  growing  enthusiasm  of  the  Grauls  was  constantly
pouring  fresh  hosts  into  the  field ;  almost  every  day
brought  the  news  of  further  defections.  The  issue  of
the  siege  of  Gergovia  was  rapidly  communicated  to
the  tribes  in  the  north.  The  revolt  of  the  ^Edui  was
made  known  to  them  at  the  same  moment.  It  was
generally  believed  that  the  baffled  invader  had  turned

1  Cses.  B.  G.  vii.  55,  56.  Agedincum  is  generally  supposed  to  be
the  modern  Sens.  See  d'Anville,  Mannert,  Walckenaer.  An  essay
in  the  Mem.  Soc.  Antiq.  de  France  (ii.  397.)  maintains  the  opinion
•»f  the  earlier  critics  in  favour  of  Provins.

A.0.702-H.C.5-2.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  59

his  back  upon  Gaul,  and  was  hastening  to  seek  an
asylum  in  the  Province.  This  accumulation  of  suc-
cesses had  inspired  the  opponents  of  Labienus  with
overweening  presumption.  They  had  no  leader  of
consummate  caution  and  experience,  like  Vercin-
getorix,  to  head  them ;  their  king  Camologenus  was
unable  to  control  their  anxiety  for  instant  battle*
Once  more  engaged  man  to  man  in  the  open  field,
the  Koraans  gained  a  complete  victory,  and  this
triumph  counterbalanced  in  their  minds  all  the  dis-
asters of  the  campaign  hitherto.1  Labienus  could
now  receive  his  general  with  troops  elated  with  victory
and  flushed  with  plunder,  in  quarters  abounding  with
stores  and  provisions,  and  in  the  centre  of  a  tract  of
country  where  the  hydra  of  revolt  lay  stunned  and
prostrate.  Perhaps  it  was  from  that  moment  that
the  lieutenant  began  to  measure  himself  with  his
general,  and  to  murmur  secretly  at  standing  second
to  a  leader  whose  disgrace  he  boasted  of  having
turned  into  a  triumph.

The  tranquillity  thus  temporarily  restored  in  the
north  afforded  indeed  a  respite  of  great  im-

,  1» 1  TT u J Great  prepara-

portance  to  the  proconsuls  plans.  He  had  turn,  on  both
assembled  all  his  ten  legions,  nor  had  their
complements  been  much  diminished  by  the  checks
they  had  hitherto  sustained.  But  his  cavalry  had
suffered  very  severely,  and  he  was  precluded  from
the  possibility  of  drawing  recruits  from  the  Province.
He  turned  his  eyes  towards  Germany,  and  the  pro-
mise of  pay  and  booty  allured  to  his  standard  several
bauds  of  horse,  together  with  the  light -armed  runners,
who  were  accustomed  to  combat  by  their  side.  But
the  horses  of  the  Germans  were  unequal  to  those  of
Gaul,  and  Caesar  did  not  hesitate  to  dismount  himself
and  his  officers  to  furnish  them  with  chargers  of
better  quality.'2  Meanwhile,  the  confederates  re-

1  Cses.  B.  G.  vii.  57—62.  '  Cses.  B.  G.  vii.  66.

60  HISTORY OF TEE ROMANS  CH.  xu.

ceived  the  ^Eduans  into  their  alliance  with  open
arms.  Whatever  distrust  they  might  be  disposed  to
entertain  towards  a  people  who  had  betrayed  their
countrymen  in  the  first  instance,  and  deceived  them
more  than  once  since,  every  suspicion  must  vanish
before  such  devotion  to  the  cause  as  that  which  all
their  public  acts  now  displayed.  They  had  sur-
rendered their  ancient  claim  to  precedency  among
the  Gaulish  states,  and  relinquished  the  command  of
the  combined  armies  to  the  brave  Arvenian.  Having
seized  at  Noviodunum  the  Gaulish  hostages  whom
Caesar  kept  there  in  honourable  custody,  they  made
use  of  them  to  confirm  the  fidelity  of  some  tribes,  and
to  stimulate  the  sluggishness  of  others.  So  success-
fully did  they  wield  this  instrument  of  coercion,  that
when  the  general  assembly  met  at  Bibracte,  there
were  only  three  states,  it  was  said,  from  whom  no
deputies  arrived.  These  were  the  Remi,  the  Lin-
geries and  the  Treviri :  the  first  had  been  uniformly
devoted  to  Rome ;  the  second  were  controlled  by  the
presence  or  proximity  of  the  Roman  armies  ;  the  third
had  suffered .  severely  in  previous  struggles,  and  as
they  had  been  left  to  defend  themselves  without  as-
sistance from  the  states  of  Southern  Gaul,  so  they  did
not  now  choose  to  form  a  combination  with  them.1

While  Vercingetorix  was  preparing  to  march  in
casar  retreats  quest  of  Caesar  with  an  overwhelming  force,
tfo™rdftghem  ne  did  not  neglect  ulterior  measures.  He
province.  gen£  &  division  of  his  troops  to  organize  a
diversion  against  the  Romans  in  the  Narbonensis,
by  a  combination  of  force  and  intrigue.  With  tin-
Allobroges  he  adopted  a  similar  course ;  though  he
could  not  persuade  them  to  unite  their  arms  with  his,
they  took  measures  to  defend  the  points  at  which  the
upper  Rhone  could  be  crossed,  so  as  to  anticipate  any
attempt  the  proconsul  might  make  to  regain  the

1  Cses.  B.  G.  viL  63,  (A.

A.C.703-B.C.S2.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  61

Province  in  that  direction.1  They  rightly  conjec-
tured the  plan  which  Caesar's  necessities  would  cause
him  to  adopt.  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  remain
in  his  actual  position,  having  lost  all  communication
with  the  south :  but  his  united  forces  were  formid-
able, from  their  numbers  as  well  as  their  valour,  and
he  might  presume  on  cutting  his  way  to  the  Province
through  all  opposition.  What  were  his  ulterior  views
he  gives  us  no  intimation ;  but  he  left  no  troops  in
garrison  behind  him  ;  nothing  but  the  terror  of  his
name  and  the  deep  discouragement  inflicted  by  so
many  triumphant  campaigns.  He  conducted  hia
march  without  hurry  or  confusion,  and  seemed  to
court  rather  than  avoid  the  attack  of  the  enemy.
But  he  abandoned  the  direct  route  through  the  ter-
ritory of  the  ^Edui,  and  repaired  to  the  left  bank  of
the  Saone,  expecting  perhaps  to  experience  from  the
Sequani  less  organized  and  effective  resistance.

Vercingetorix  came  up  with  the  Eoman  army  in
the  high  country  of  the  Upper  Saone  ;  but,  A  great  battle
adhering  still  to  his  old  tactics,  delayed  an  ™Tdl«^£
engagement.  For  some  days  he  followed  of  ClB9ar-
its  movements  at  a  short  distance ;  possibly  he  dis-
trusted the  power  of  the  Allobroges  to  check  it  on
the  Rhone  ;  possibly  the  ardour  of  the  Gallic  chief-
tains was  too  impetuous  to  be  withstood.  In  an  evil
hour,  trembling  lest  his  enemy  should  at  length
escape  him,  he,  too,  was  carried  away  by  the  vain
confidence  of  the  national  character,  and  gave  the
signal  for  battle.2  Never,  indeed,  was  the  chivalrous
spirit  of  a  gallant  people  more  thoroughly  awakened.
The  chiefs  engaged  themselves  by  mutual  oaths  not
to  return  from  the  field  till  they  had  twice  ridden
through  the  enemy's  ranks.  Cavalry  was  the  force
in  which  the  Romans  were  most  deficient,  and  in
which  the  Gauls  most  boasted  of  their  strength  ;  for

1  C»s.  B.  G.  vii.  65.  *  Cues.  B.  G.  vii.  67.

62  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xn.

their  horsemen  belonged  to  the  class  of  the  rich  and
noble,  better  armed  and  equipped,  and  inspired
with  a  more  martial  spirit  than  the  multitudes  which
followed  them  to  the  field  on  foot.  Caesar,  always
found  at  the  point  where  the  danger  was  greatest,
was  this  day  engaged  with  the  cavalry,  as  in  his  great
battle  with  the  Nervians  he  had  done  the  duty  of  a
legionary.  At  one  moment  he  was  so  nearly  captured
that  his  sword  was  wrested  from  him,  and  remained  in
the  hands  of  his  enemies.1  The  Arvernians  caused
it  to  be  suspended  in  one  of  their  temples,  and  of  all
military  trophies  this  assuredly  was  the  noblest.

The  steady  Roman  and  the  impetuous  Gaul  were
The  Gauu  are  well  matched  in  the  desperate  struggle  of
defeated.  tkat  day.  At  length  a  dexterous  move-
ment of  the  German  squadrons  checked  the  hot
onset  of  the  Gaulish  horse,  and  gave  the  legionaries
room  to  open  their  lines  and  charge  in  their  turn.
The  unwieldy  masses  of  the  barbarian  infantry  had
not  yet  learnt  to  face  this  formidable  shock.  The
men,  hastily  imagining  that  they  were  outflanked,
lost  their  presence  of  mind,  broke  their  ranks,  and
fled  precipitately.  Their  careful  leader  had  provided
a  retreat  for  them  in  three  camps  which  he  had  forti-
fied in  the  rear.  The  Gauls  rallied,  but  it  was  only
for  a  moment ;  many  of  their  principal  chieftains  had
been  slain  or  taken ;  the  panic  became  more  than
ever  irretrievable ;  and  Vercingetorix  was  compelled
to  abandon  the  defence  of  his  position,  and  guide
the  flying  multitudes  to  the  neighbouring  city  of
Alesia.  Here,  besides  the  enclosure  of  the  place
itself,  situated  on  the  level  summit  of  a  high  es-
carped hill,  a  large  camp  had  also  been  constructed
and  fortified  with  every  appliance  of  art  for  the  re-
ception of  eighty  thousand  men.2

1 Plut CCES.  26.

1  Cses.  13.  G.  vii.  69.  Alesia  is  supposed  to  be  the  modern
Alise  Sainte-Reine,  to  the  west  of  Dijon.  Mannert,  n.  i.  175.  So
fciso  Napoleon,  Hist,  de  Caesar,  ii.  p.  299.

A.t.702-B.c.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  63

Thus  failed  the  rash  attempt  to  bring  the  retreat-
ing lion  to  bay.  But  even  though  the  Boidresoiu-
battle  was  lost,  the  cause  might  have  been  !o°auackati"
maintained  by  recurrence  to  the  harassing  ^"ified'camp
system  in  which  the  Gauls  had  hitherto,  atAle"ia-
with  one  exception,  so  steadfastly  persevered.  If
their  vast  forces  had  been  dispersed  or  drawn  out
of  Caesar's  immediate  reach,  and  the  country  wasted
around  him,  he  would  not,  we  may  presume,  have  ven-
tured to  protract  an  indecisive  warfare  under  pressure
of  the  circumstances  which  urged  him  to  seek  the
Koman  frontiers.  The  victory  he  had  gained  would
in  that  case  have  been  destitute  of  any  decisive
result.  But  the  fatal  mistake  of  assembling  the
whole  Gaulish  army  in  one  spot,  and  there  tying  it,
as  it  were,  to  the  stake,  offered  an  opportunity  for  a
daring  and  decisive  exploit.  Few  strokes  in  warfare
have  been  more  prompt  and  bold  than  the  last  Csesar
now  made  in  his  retreat,  and  his  turning  to  attack
the  enemy  and  terminate  the  struggle  at  a  blow.  At
this  moment  Caesar  risked  every  thing ;  all  the  plans
of  conquest  which  he  had  established  and  matured
in  Gaul ;  all  the  schemes  of  ulterior  aggrandisement
over  which  he  had  so  long  brooded ;  his  life,  his  repu-
tation, all  were  hazarded  at  this  eventful  crisis.  For
if  he  now  escaped  into  the  Province,  he  might  hope
to  organise  a  future  invasion ;  another  series  of  cam-
paigns might  restore  him  to  that  supremacy  which
he  had  just  forfeited  beyond  the  Rhone ;  or  he  might
leave  the  unfinished  task  to  a  successor,  and  hasten
himself  to  retrieve  his  fortunes  by  some  popular  act
of  audacity  in  Rome.  But  he  saw  the  whole,  flower
and  strength  of  Gaul  self-cooped  in  a  single  encamp-
ment, and  determined  to  abide  his  attack.  He  had
thoroughly  calculated  his  own  strength.  He  was  at
the  head  of  a  larger  force  than  he  had  ever  mustered
before ;  and  he  collected  his  energies  for  one  decisive
struggle,  with  just  confidence  in  a  crowning  success.

64  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xtt

The  preparations  which  Caesar  made  to  carry  out
He  form,  a  his  resolve  were  on  a  scale  proportioned  to
Ration  o?"  its  grandeur.  He  formed  a  line  of  circum-
botharmie*.  vallation  round  the  whole  of  the  enemy's
works,  thus  blockading  in  one  sweep  both  the  camp
and  the  city,  an  army  of  eighty  thousand  men,  and  the
population  of  the  place  swelled  with  an  innumerable
crowd  of  fugitives.  The  exultation  they  had  felt  at
their  late  triumphs,  and  their  indignation  at  their
recent  reverses ;  the  taste  of  blood  they  had  obtained
in  the  massacres  of  Grenabum  and  Avaricum;  their
horror  at  the  slaughter  of  their  countrymen  at  Novio-
dunum  and  Bibracte  ;  all  they  had  done  and  all  they
had  suffered,  had  combined  to  harden  the  minds  of
the  legionaries,  and  divest  both  men  and  officers  of  the
common  feelings  of  humanity.  The  Grauls,  too,  had
had  their  moments  of  triumph  and  exasperation,  of
vengeance  and  despair ;  the  same  causes  had  pro-
duced on  them  no  less  frightful  effects ;  the  nerves  of
both  parties  were  strung  to  the  uttermost,  and  both
were  equally  prepared  for  every  extreme  of  infliction
or  endurance.

If  it  was  with  these  feelings  that  the  two  armies
Ti.eRomani  faced  each  other  from  behind  their  breast-
cavafryfu»kiir"a  works,  the  events  of  the  siege  daily  added
p£9hthebie£k-  to  them  fresh  bitterness.  Vercingetorix,
taion!ofthTa"  discovering  the  fault  he  had  committed,
made  an  attempt  to  break  the  Eoman  lines
by  means  of  his  cavalry.  But  here  again  the  Ger-
mans turned  the  fortune  of  the  day,  and  the  Grauls,
beaten  back  with  loss  into  their  entrenchments,
suffered  sore  discouragement.  Their  leader  felt
increasing  alarm.  He  knew  how  rapid  must  be  the
progress  of  scarcity  in  such  a  host  as  was  cooped  up
with  him,  which  he  dared  not  again  lead  forth  to
combat.  He  dismissed  a  great  part  of  his  horse,
with  the  commission  to  scour  the  country  far  and
near,  and  summon  tribes  and  cities  to  his  assistance.

A.P.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  65

But  this  could  not  be  done  effectively  in  the  short
period  during  which  he  might  hope  to  maintain  his
post;  as  the  operations  of  the  enemy  were  pressed
more  resolutely  and  decisively,  it  became  necessary
to  repel  the  approach  of  famine  by  extraordinary
measures.  The  Gaulish  chieftains  were  animated
with  the  most  desperate  resolution;  it  was  delibe-
rately proposed  to  sanction  the  killing  and  eating
of  human  beings.  For  the  present,  indeed,  this
horrible  counsel  was  rejected.  But  another  alter-
native, hardly  less  shocking,  was  adopted :  all  the
non-military  population  which  had  crowded  within
the  lines,  the  women  and  children,  the  sick  and
the  aged,  were  expelled  from  the  city  and  the  en-
trenchments. The  Roman  general  was  unrelenting ;
he  too  was  steeled  in  this  last  struggle  against  every
ordinary  feeling  of  humanity,  and  he  ordered  the
helpless  multitude  to  be  driven  back  upon  their
countrymen  with  showers  of  stones  and  darts.  Be-
tween the  trenches  of  their  friends  and  the  bristling
ranks  of  their  enemies,  the  miserable  victims  perished
by  wounds  or  hunger.1

The  Roman  general,  apprehending  the  arrival  of
the  enemy's  succours,  had  not  only  com-
pleted a  line  of  circumvallation  in  front  of  m*MKy*£
the  Gaulish  fortifications,  but  had  strongly  a?myinuthe
entrenched  himself  in  the  rear  also. The  v"*  an<Pdis-
con  federate states had hastened to  send
reinforcements  to  Vercingetorix ;  they  had  not  waited
for  the  tardy  result  of  a  general  levy,  which  it  would
have  required  time  to  arm  and  equip,  but  had  fur-
nished each  a  contingent  as  far  as  their  means  allowed
them. A  numerous army  was thus speedily  col-
lected round  the  circuit  of  the  Roman  entrenchments,
and  a  ray  of  hope  gleamed  upon  the  ramparts  of
Alesia,  when  the  signal  was  given  for  a  simultaneous

•  CMS.  B.  G.  vii.  78.
VOL. II.  F

66  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xn.

advance  upon  the  invaders  both  from  within  and
from  without  their  lines.  The  Romans  had  furnished
their  fortifications  with  every  implement  of  defence,
in  which  art  they  were  not  less  skilful  than  in  that
of  attack.  Pressed  as  they  were  by  a  great  supe-
riority of  numbers,  and  scattered  themselves  along
lines  of  immense  extent,  their  activity  and  science
supplied  every  deficiency;  and,  though  the  danger
was  imminent,  they  eventually  succeeded  in  repel-
ling every  assault.  The  conflict,  indeed,  was  re-
peated from  day  to  day,  but  always  with  the  same
result.  The  assailants  from  within,  animated  by
despair,  renewed  the  attack  with  unabated  vigour;
but  those  without,  whether  worse  armed  or  led  by  less
experienced  generals,  or  unnerved  by  the  means  of
escape  always  open  to  them,  gave  way  before  the
sallies  of  the  besieged  Romans,  and  at  last  broke  up
their  camp  and  retreated  in  disorder.

The  result  of  the  original  blockade  was  now  inevi-
vercingetorix  table.  It  could  only  remain  a  question
hta*if  AH*  with  the  Gauls,  whether  they  should  die
country.  with  arms  in  their  hands,  or  yield  them-
selves to  the  vengeance  of  the  exasperated  enemy.
Then,  at  last,  did  Vercingetorix  come  forward  and
offer  to  give  himself  up  as  a  ransom  for  the  blood  of
the  Gaulish  nation.  If  conquered  in  the  open  field,
no  terms,  he  knew,  would  be  granted  to  the  com-
batants or  their  country;  but  if  they  capitulated,
even  at  the  last  moment,  some  conditions  might,
perhaps,  be  extorted  from  the  prudence,  if  not  the
clemency,  of  the  conqueror.  The  wrath  of  the  pro-
consul might,  he  hoped,  be  appeased  by  a  splendid
sacrifice.  This,  indeed,  had  not  been  a  contest  be-
tween rival  nations  ;  according  to  the  maxims  of  the
republic,  the  confederation  of  Gaul  was  a  rebellious
conspiracy.  Vercingetorix  himself  had  at  one  time
cringed  under  the  power  of  the  intruding  govern-
ment ;  he  was  known  personally  to  Caesar ;  he  had

A.0.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  67

received  favours  from  him ;  and  he  was  marked  out
for  signal  vengeance  for  what  was  denominated  his
treason,  not  less  than  for  his  bitter  hostility  to  Rome.
The  ancient  superstition  of  many  nations  declared
that  the  self-devotion  of  the  chief  is  accepted  by  the
gods  as  an  atonement  for  the  people ;  and  Vercinge-
torix,  who  had  been  the  principal  instigator  as  well
as  the  most  conspicuous  leader  of  the  revolt,  now
claimed  the  honour  of  being  its  last  victim.

The  Gauls  were  touched  with  their  hero's  ge
nerosity.  Before  accepting  his  magnani-
mous offer  they  sent  a  deputation  to  Caesar  Mm*™ e
to  negotiate  the  terms  of  a  capitulation.
The  answer  was  stern  and  ominous.  It  demanded
the  surrender  of  their  chiefs,  the  delivery  of  their
arms,  the  submission  of  the  whole  multitude  to  the
discretion  of  the  Roman  general.  Vercingetorix,
with  all  the  gallant  gaiety  of  his  nation,  clad  himself
in  his  most  splendid  armour,  and  mounted  his  noblest
charger.  Caesar  had  drawn  up  his  troops  in  front  of
the  lines,  and  had  seated  himself  to  receive  his  cap-
tives. The  Gaul  caused  the  gates  of  his  encampment
to  be  thrown  wide,  and  galloped  forth  into  the  open
space,  in  the  attitude  of  a  warrior  charging.  Having
approached  close  to  the  proconsul's  chair,  he  dexter-
ously wheeled  round,  and  again  returning  to  the
same  spot  sprang  to  the  ground  and  laid  his  arms  at
the  feet  of  the  conqueror.  The  army  was  touched
with  a  sense  of  admiration  akin  to  compassion,  but
Caesar  himself  remained  cold  and  unmoved.1

The  Roman  general  had  now  broken  the  neck  of
resistance. Whatever  further  delay  there  Hanhnewof
might  be  in  the  complete  pacification  of  ^ef'f^or
Gaul,  a  judicious  mixture  of  forbearance  Vercinsetori*-
and  severity  would  disarm  it  of  all  danger. It  was
his  habit  to  calculate  every  movement,  nor  at  this

1  C»s.  B.  G.  vii.  89.;  Dion,  xl.  4].; Plut.  Cat.  41.;  Flor.  in.  10.
p ?

68  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  OH.  xu.

crisis  of  his  fortunes  did  he  allow  himself  to  yield  to
any  impulse  of  impolitic  magnanimity.  To  gratify
the  Roman  populace  he  reserved  the  champion  of
Gaul  to  grace  his  future  triumph.  To  appease  the
cupidity  of  his  soldiers  he  allotted  to  each  of  them
one  of  his  captives  as  a  slave.  All  the  Arvernians
and  ^Eduans  among  them  he  liberated,  with  the
view  of  winning  back  their  countrymen  to  their
former  state  of  submission.  We  read  of  no  punish-
ment being  inflicted  upon  the  other  Gaulish  chief-
tains, and  we  may  hope  that  an  occasion  which  casts
a  deep  shade  upon  Caesar's  character  for  generosity
did  not  at  least  tarnish  it  with  the  stain  of  vindictive-
ness.  Nevertheless,  the  worst  remains  to  be  told.
At  the  spot  where  the  triumphal  car  turned  to  the
left  to  commence  the  winding  ascent  of  the  Capi-
toline  hill,  another  path  led  in  a  contrary  direction
to  the  state  prison  in  the  rock.  The  noble  captives
who  had  thus  far  followed  the  wheels  of  the  con-
queror were  here  removed  from  the  procession,  and
put  to  death  in  the  fatal  dungeon  at  the  same  mo-
ment that  he  entered  the  temple  of  Jupiter.  Such
had  been  the  custom  of  the  republic  from  the  times
of  its  original  barbarism ;  hallowed  by  antiquity  and
nerhaps  by  superstition,  the  progress  of  refinement
nad  not  availed  to  soften  it ;  and  thus  the  brave  Ver-
cingetorix  ultimately  suffered  death  after  six  years  of
confinement.1

1  Dion,  xl.  41. :  a\\'  eitOvs  tv  Seir/xoTs  etiricre,  <cal  4s  TO  tiriviKia,  /ueret
TOVTO  wffj^as  airtKrttve.  In  the  same  manner  C.  Pontius,  the
Samnite  general,  was  sacrificed  at  the  triumph  of  Q.  Fabius  Gurges,
A.U.  464.  Jugurtha  was  cast  into  prison  and  starved  to  death,  A.u.
650.  But  Perseus  and  other  conquered  enemies  were  released.
Compare  Cicero  (ii.  in  Verr.  v.  30.):  "  At  etiam  qui  triumphant
eoque  diutius  vivos  hostium  duces  servant,  ut  his  per  triumphum
ductis  pulcherrimum  spectaculum  fructumque  victorise  populus
Bomanus  percipere  possit  ;  tamen  quum  de  foro  in  Capitolium
currum  fiectere  incipinnt,  illos  duci  in  carcerem  jubent  ;  idemque
dies  et  victoribus  imperil  et  victis  vitse  finem  facit."  It  should  be
remarked,  however,  that  Dion  Cassius  is  the  only  authority  for  this

».u.703-B.c.5i.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  69

The  lenient  policy  which  the  proconsul  now
adopted  towards  the  Arvernians  and  the  A.p.703,
-iEcluans  seems  to  have  been  eminently  sue-  B-°-51'
cessful.  The  governing  class  in  tboth  these  states
had  in  fact  been  driven  into  the  war  against  Furtherdi.-
their  own  inclination ;  the  elevation  of  Ver-  puarru  ofoaui.
cingetorix  to  supreme  command  had  been  i^T^tei8hth
a  source  of  much  bitter  jealousy  to  the  campaign-
chieftains  in  both  tribes,  and  they  submitted  again
to  the  Koman  yoke  quietly,  perhaps  even  grate-
fully. The  spirit  of  resistance,  however,  was  not
quelled  in  other  parts  of  Gaul.  For  the  most  part,
indeed,  the  better  organized  governments  declined  a
hopeless  and  ruinous  struggle;  but  wherever  the
influence  of  any  single  chief  was  preeminent,  or
where,  as  among  the  Carnutes,  the  authority  of  the
Druids  was  all-powerful,  the  smouldering  flames
found  fuel  among  a  restless  and  harassed  population,
and  new  armies  continued  to  spring  up  in  inex-
haustible abundance.  From  the  absence  of  a  pre-
siding spirit,  they  relapsed  indeed  into  the  same
want  of  unity  and  concert  which  had  paralysed  their
early  efforts  at  defence.1  Caesar  flew  from  state  to
state  with  the  extraordinary  activity  which  always
distinguished  him.  He  crushed  the  Bituriges  by  an

fact,  and  that  his  charges  of  cruelty  against  Caesar,  where  he  can  be
confronted  with  the  statements  of  others,  are  frequently  disproved.

1  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  1.  In  the  eighth  book  of  the  Commentaries
on  the  Gallic  war  we  have  no  longer  Caesar  himself  as  our  guide.
Suetonius  attributes  it  to  one  of  his  officers,  Aulus  Hirtius  («/«/.  56.).
The  style  is  formed  on  the  model  of  Caesar's,  but  is  inferior  to  it
both  in  elegance  and  clearness.  But,  like  the  preceding  books,  it  is
the  work  of  an  eyewitness,  and  seems  to  be  equally  trustworthy.
In  this  place  the  author  gives  as  a  reason  for  the  desultory  warfare
into  which  the  Gauls  relapsed  after  the  loss  of  Vcrcingetorix,  their
despair  of  overthrowing  the  enemy  in  a  general  engagement,  and
their  hope  of  wearing  out  his  troops  by  attacking  them  in  detail.
It  is  more  probable  that  the  loss  of  the  only  leader  who  had  erer
succeeded  in  uniting  them  in  a  common  enterprise  was  ir-
reparable.

70  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xn.

incursion  into  their  territory  in  the  depth  of  winter. l
No  sooner  had  he  regained  his  quarters  than  he
rushed  forth  again  upon  the  Carnutes,  scattered  all
opposition,  and  drove  the  disaffected  beyond  their
own  frontiers  to  take  refuge  under  the  standards  of
the  Belgians.2

It  was  indeed  in  this  quarter  of  Gaul,  which  had
taken  less  part  in  the  exhausting  campaigns

Caesar  defeats „ , , r  ,  , 3 .

and  accept, of  the  last  two  years,  that  the  resistance  to

the  submission . ,-.  • j  j /y

of  ti.e  Beiio-  the  Komans  was  most  organized  and  effec-
tive. On  the  one  hand,  the  Bellovaci  and
Suessiones  combined  together,  and  having  no  fortified
towns  to  tempt  them  to  defy  the  military  science  of
their  enemy,  assembled  in  vast  numbers  in  a  posi-
tion of  peculiar  natural  strength,  a  hill  enclosed  in
thick  forests,  and  surrounded  by  impassable  swamps.
On  the  other,  the  Treviri,  always  proud  to  stand
alone,  defied  the  foreigner  to  set  foot  in  their  terri-
tory. Caesar  undertook  the  reduction  of  the  first  of
these  opponents,  and  deputed  to  Labienus  that  of
the  second.  He  threw  causeways  across  the  swamps,
drew  long  lines  of  entrenchment  before  the  face  of
the  enemy,  drove  them  from  one  position  to  another
to  avoid  his  circumvallations  and  the  fate  of  the  vic-
tims of  Alesia,  and  at  last  compelled  them  to  join  in
a  general  combat,  the  crisis  by  which  every  Gaulish
campaign  was  finally  decided.  Thoroughly  beaten
and  routed,  with  the  loss  of  Correus,  their  king,  and
a  vast  number  of  their  fighting  population,  the  Bel-
lovaci hastened  to  excuse  their  revolt,  under  the
plea  that  the  senate  could  not  resist  the  influence
which  their  sovereign  possessed  with  the  multitude.
This  excuse  was  probably  not  altogether  false ;  but
it  suited  Caesar  to  rebuke  it  sternly,  at  the  same  time

1  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  2. He  began  his  march  the  last  day  of  the
year  702  :  "  Pridie  Kal.  Jan.  ab  oppido  Bibracte  proficiscitur."
*  Auct.  B.  G.  viiL  3—6.

A.U.703-B.C.51.  UNDER tHE EMPIRE.  71

that  he  made  a  show  of  clemency,  by  sparing  the
nation  which  he  had  so  effectually  humbled.1

Nor  had  Labienus  in  the  mean  time  been  less  suc-
cessful in  defeating  the  forces  of  the  Tre-  TiieTreviri
viri* ;  so  that  the  campaign  in  Belgium  was  i^  £uloncs
speedily  reduced  to  the  irregular  warfare  ofrhVp*Iton°es
for  which  the  country  was  so  well  adapted.  quelled-
Commius.  the  Atrebate,  at  the  head  of  a  band  of
German  cavalry,  whom  he  maintained  by  the  plunder
of  Koman  convoys  or  stations,  was  constantly  flitting
from  place  to  place.  Ambiorix  continued  to  stimu-
late the  zeal  of  the  small  remnant  of  the  Eburones,
till  they  were  finally  exterminated  by  a  second  mas-
sacre. In  the  west  of  Gaul,  amidst  loud  notes  of
preparation  for  a  general  rising  against  the  .Romans,
an  important  diversion  was  made  in  their  favour  by
the  adhesion  to  them  of  Duratius,  one  of  the  prin-
cipal chiefs  of  the  Pictones.3  He  seized  and  occupied
Lemonum,  the  capital  of  their  country,  and,  by  so
doing,  kept  both  the  Andi  and  the  Armoricans  in
check.  The  neighbouring  tribes  assembled  in  great
force  to  reduce  him  by  a  siege ;  all  the  troops  the
Komans  could  spare  were  sent  to  his  assistance  ;  and
the  result  of  a  great  battle  fought  on  the  banks  of  the
Loire,  was  the  total  rout  of  the  confederate  army.

Upon  the  dispersion  of  this  multitude,  a  small
band  once  more  rallied  under  the  standard  Reduction  of
of  a  chieftain  named  Drappes.4  The  Eo-  Sfg^SSE1
mans  branded  them  as  a  handful  of  robbers,  »h'tronshold-
fugitives,  and  slaves,  united  only  by  the  hope  of
plunder,  and  unworthy  of  the  common  rights  of  war.
This  little  troop  crossed  the  country  hastily  to  the
southward,  and  prepared  to  attack  the  north-western
frontier  of  the  Province,  in  expectation  of  sympathy
and  aid  from  various  quarters,  and  especially  from

1  Auct.  B.  G.  viii 6- -22.  •  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  25.

'  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  26.  *  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  80.

72  HISTOKf OF THE ROMANS  en.  xn.

Aquitania.  But  the  speedy  arrival  of  two  legions  in
pursuit  forced  them  to  abandon  this  bold  enterprise,
and  shut  themselves  up  in  the  strong  fortress  of  Uxel-
lodunum.1  Here  they  made  a  desperate  resistance  ;
Caesar  himself  hastened  from  the  north  to  conduct
the  siege,  the  last  important  operation  that  now  re-
mained to  be  performed ;  and  with  the  reduction  of
this  stronghold,  the  conquest  of  Gaul  may  be  said  to
have  been  completed.2

The  proconsul,  whose  policy  it  now  became  to
soothe  by  forbearance  the  passions  of  the
chieftains  and  regularly  organized  states  ot
Finaiadfi£-  Gaul,  made  a  severe  example  of  the  rabble
captured  in  Uxellodunum.  He  did  not
put  them  to  death,  nor  sell  them  into  slavery ;  in
either  case  their  persons  would  vanish  from  the  sight
of  their  countrymen,  and  their  example  be  speedily
forgotten.  As  a  more  permanent  memorial  of  their
crimes,  and  the  condign  judgment  which  had  over-
taken them,  he  cut  off  their  right  hands,  and  threw
them  thus  mutilated  upon  the  compassion  of  their
neighbours.  Gutruatus,  a  rebellious  chieftain  among
the  Carnutes,  he  sacrificed  to  the  importunate  de-
mands of  his  soldiers.  In  making  these  terrible  ex-
amples, his  historian  coolly  remarks,  he  well  knew
his  own  reputation  for  clemency,  and  was  satisfied
that  no  one  would  suspect  him  of  personal  cruelty.3
Commius,  the  champion  of  the  Atrebates,  whose  ro-
mantic adventures  invest  him  with  a  greater  interest
than  most  of  his  fellow-chieftains,  was  allowed  to
surrender  himself  upon  honourable  terms.  Labienus
had  acted  towards  him  with  signal  perfidy.  Pre-

1  Uxellodunum,  le  Puy,  or  Puech  d'UsolJe,  in  the  Quercy,  depart-
ment du  Lot. Thierry,  Gavlois,  iii.  195.;  d'Anville.

2  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  43. Pint.  Cces.  75.

1  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  38.  44. :  "  Csesar  quum  suam  lenitatem  cogni-
tam  omnibus  sciret,  neque  vereretur,  ne  quid  crudelitate  naturae
videretur  asperius  fecisse,"  &c.

4.C.703-B.C.51.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  73

tending  that  the  repeated  rebellion  of  the  Gaulish
chieftain  justified  any  treachery  on  the  part  of  his
enemies,  he  had  sent  Volusenus  to  meet  him  in  an
amicable  conference,  and  to  seize  the  opportunity  of
assassinating  him.1  Struck  on  the  head  and  almost
stunned,  the  Gaul  was  saved  by  the  promptitude  of
his  attendants.  Partly  through  apprehension  and
partly  through  indignation,  he  never  ceased  to  regard
the  Komans  with  peculiar  horror,  and  determined
never  again  to  meet  one  on  terms  of  peace.  The
same  Volusenus  was  afterwards  employed  to  pursue
the  Atrebate  from  fastness  to  fastness :  the  excite-
ment of  the  chase  was  added  to  the  bitterness  of  their
mutual  hatred.  Comrnius,  constantly  reduced  to  the
utmost  straits,  still  succeeded  in  eluding  his  pursuer ;
but  Volusenus  at  length  approached  his  prey  incau-
tiously ;  the  hunted  chieftain  turned  at  bay,  and
pierced  his  enemy  through  the  thigh.2  M.  Antonius,
who  was  now  commanding  in  Belgium,  was  anxious
to  bring  these  hostilities  to  an  end ;  and,  both  parties
being  equally  tired  of  the  unprofitable  contest,  over-
tures of  reconciliation  were  made  and  accepted,  Com-
mius  only  stipulating  that,  in  the  amicable  arrange-
ment of  the  conditions,  he  should  never  be  personally
brought  into  the  presence  of  a  Eoman.8

The  last  book  of  the  Commentaries  on  the  Gallic
war,  which  have  so  long  guided  us,  is  sup-  Picture9  from
plied  by  the  pen  of  one  of  the  proconsul's  £lte?scofnthe
officers;  nor  is it likely, from the cha-  GauVwal'r^11
racter  of  the  record  which Caesar  himself  duced>
has  left,  that  if  he  had  completed  the  work  with  his
own hand, he would have chosen to  gratify  our
curiosity  with  any  general  delineation  of  the  state  of
the  province  at  the  conclusion  of  his  eight  years'
labour. A  writer  of  a  much  later  age  has  thought

Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  23.  *  Auct  B.  G.  viii.  48.

3  Auct.  B.  G.  L  c.

74  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  xn.

fit  to  embellish  a  feeble  narrative  with  a  picture
which  might  have  struck  our  imagination  more  had
the  colours  been  less  elaborate.  Let  the  reader
conceive,  says  Orosius1,  the  languid  and  bloodless
figure  of  Gaul,  just  escaped  from  a  burning  fever
and  inflammation  of  her  vital  parts ;  let  him  re-
mark how  thin  and  pale  she  is,  how  helpless  and
nerveless  she  lies  ;  how  she  fears  even  to  move  a
limb  lest  she  should  bring  on  a  worse  relapse  ;  for
the  Roman  army  rushed  upon  her  as  a  plague
stronger  than  the  strongest  patient,  which  rages  the
more,  the  more  resistance  it  encounters.  The  thirst
that  consumed  her  was  her  impatience  at  the  de-
mand for  pledges  of  her  perpetual  servitude ;  liberty
was  the  sweet  cold  draught  for  which  she  burned ;
she  raved  for  the  waters  ivhich  were  stolen  /ram
her.  Or  let  him  turn  to  a  passage  of  a  very  different
character,  the  cold  and  dry  enumeration  of  Plutarch,
which  seems  to  bear  the  impress  of  the  very  words
of  Caesar  himself 2 :  He  took  more  than  eight  hun-
dred cities  by  storm,  worsted  three  hundred  nations,
and  encountered,  at  different  times,  three  millions
of  enemies,  of  whom  he  slew  one  million  in  action,
and  made  prisoners  of  an  equal  number.  Which-
ever of  these  two  records  be  thought  the  most  im-
pressive, the  reader  will  feel  that  enough  has  been
said  to  account  for  the  long  prostration  of  the  ener-
gies of  Gaul  from  this  time  forward,  and  for  the
almost  passive  endurance  with  which  it  submitted
to  the  establishment  and  development  of  the  pro-
vincial administration.

1  Oros.  vi.  12.;  comp.  Thierry,  Gaulois,  iii.  206.
*  Pint.  Cas.  15.

A.P.702-H.C.5S.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  76

CHAPTER  XIII.

Pompeius,  as  sole  consul,  undertakes  the  reform  of  abuses :  his
ill  success  :  he  connects  himself  again  with  the  oligarchy  by
espousing  the  daughter  of  Scipio. — Caesar  intrigues  to  obtain  the
consulship  before  relinquishing  his  province.  —  Cicero  accepts  the
government  of  Cilicia :  his  civil  and  military  administration. —
The  nobles  seek  to  deprive  Caesar  of  his  command. — M.  Mar-
cellus  insults  him  by  the  harsh  punishment  of  a  transpadane
Gaul. — Pompeius  falls  sick. — Rejoicings  for  his  recovery. — Caesar
Conciliates  the  Gauls. — Strength  and  composition  of  his  army  :
his  popularity  with  the  soldiers. — Character  of  the  younger  Curio:
his  devotion  to  Csesar's  interests. — Caesar  received  with  accla-
mations in  Cisalpine  Gaul.  —  He  n'xes  his  quarters  at  Ravenna. —
He  offers  a  compromise  with  the  senate,  which  it  refuses,  and
requires  him  to  resign  his  command. — The  tribunes  interpose,
are  menaced  with  violence,  and  thereupon  fly  to  Caasar's  camp. —
A.U.  702—704,  B.C.  52—50.

WHEN Pompeius entered upon  his office as  sole
consul, he  submitted  his  reputation  as  a

, . i  rT.  . Comparison  of

statesman  to  a  crowning  trial.  His  posi-  pomP«m.  and
tionwasin  substance  that  of  a  dictator,  but  A"i7.702.
without  the  odium  of  the  name.  But,  in
return  for  the,  irresponsible  power  which  formed  the
peculiar  feature  of  this  extraordinary  charge,  no  less
was  expected  from  him  than  to  direct  the  stream  of
public  affairs  back  into  the  old  channels  which  it
had  deserted,  to  repair  the  youth  and  vigour  of  a
decaying  commonwealth,  and  to  restore  the  spirit  of
a  constitution  which  seemed  only  to  survive  in  forms
and  traditions.  The  work  of  Sulla  was  the  model
which  the  nobles  thrust  under  his  eyes,  still  cherish-
ing the  vain  hope  that  he  possessed  the  genius  no
less  than  the  desire  to  restore  an  oligarchical  supre-
macy which  the  march  of  events  had  rendered
impossible.  But  if  the  champion  tJiey  had  sum-

76  HISTOBY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xill.

moned  to  their  side  was  ambitious  of  wielding  the
power  of  his  early  patron,  his  motives  were  merely
personal  and  selfish.  The  dictator,  indeed,  had
thrown  himself  in  implicit  faith  upon  the  principles
of  his  faction.  The  ascendency  of  his  class  was  the
object  to  which  his  career  was  devoted ;  he  was  no
less  ready  to  become  the  martyr  than  the  champion
of  his  political  creed.  As  the  spirit  of  the  two  men
differed,  so  did  the  comprehensiveness  of  their  views,
and  the  vigour  of  their  execution.  If  Sulla  was
blinded  by  his  original  prejudices  to  the  real  evils  of
his  times  and  their  true  remedies,  he  at  least  felt  and
acknowledged  the  responsibility  which  he  assumed.
He  placed  his  object  steadily  before  him,  and  cut
out  a  complete  constitution,  such  as  it  was,  with  two
or  three  rough  strokes  of  the  chisel.  It  was  the  work
of  a  master,  complete,  consistent,  fulfilling  its  idea.
But  Pompeius,  on  the  contrary,  was  satisfied  with
the  tentative  palliation  of  a  few  prominent  abuses ;
he  probed  nothing  to  the  bottom ;  he  removed  some
scandals  for  the  moment,  but  made  no  attempt  to
reach  the  sources  of  evil.  In  one  respect  only  the
dictator  and  the  sole  consul  acted  alike ;  neither  the
one  nor  the  other  submitted  to  the  trammels  to
which  they  had  subjected  their  countrymen.  Sulla,
in  his  zeal  for  social  reformation,  had  enacted  new
and  severe  laws  against  violence,  immorality,  and
extravagance ;  but  in  his  own  person  he  was  noto-
rious for  the  indulgence  of  prodigal  tastes  and  licen-
tious passions. l  The  correctives  which  Pompeius
applied  to  social  abuses  were  subtler  in  their  cha-
racter; but  he,  too,  scrupulous  as  he  was  in  all
matter*  of  public  decorum,  could  not  restrain  him-
self from  the  violation  of  his  own  laws  for  transient
political  purposes.8

1  Duruy,  Hist,  des  Rom.  ii.  297.

2  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  28. :  "  Turn  Cn.  Pompeius  tertium  consul,  corri-
gendis  moribus  delectus, et  gravior  remediis  quam  clelicta  eraiit,

*  U.702-B.C.52.  D.NDER THE EMPIRE.  77

The  methods  which  the  consul  devised  to  protect
the  political  tribunals  from  undue  influence

f  . i  ,1  rrn  1  Reforms  intro-

were  frivolous  m  the  extreme.  The  selec-  *^d JJj
tion  which  he  is  said  to  have  made  from  the
three  privileged  orders  of  the  persons  who  might  be
chosen  by  lot  to  exercise  the  functions  of  judges  may
have  purified  the  bench  from  the  neediest  and  most
openly  profligate  of  its  members;  but  the  vices  of
venality  and  partiality  were  common  to  the  noblest
and  the  most  abject,  and  it  was  not  by  merely
removing  the  scum  from  the  surface  that  the  foun-
tains of  justice  could  be  really  cleansed.  The  limi-
tation of  the  number  of  advocates,  and  the  restriction
of  the  speech  of  the  accuser  to  two  and  of  the  defen-
dant to  three  hours,  were  trifling  reforms  in  pro-
cedure ;  but  the  latter  at  least  deserves  notice  from
the  importance  subsequently  attached  to  it  as  forming
an  epoch  in  the  eloquence  of  the  bar1 ;  and  it  may
undoubtedly  be  regarded  as  a  symptom  of  the  desire  of
wise  and  thoughtful  men  to  diminish  the  undue  weight
of  rhetorical  appeals  to  the  passions.  It  had  been
moreover  a  common  artifice  to  overawe  the  judges
by  bringing  forward  the  testimonies  and  protestations
of  distinguished  men  in  favour  of  the  accused.  A
letter  of  Caesar  or  Pompeius  expressing  his  regard  for
the  culprit,  his  assurance  of  his  innocence  and  wishes
for  his  success,  might  be  read  in  open  court  with  no
little  effect  upon  the  interested  parties  in  whose  hands
the  decision  lay.2  This  was  another  instrument  in

suarumque  legum  auctor  idem  atque  subversor,  quae  armis  tuebatur
armis  amisit."  It  is  curious  to  observe  the  aristocrat  of  so  late  an
age  still  clinging  to  the  conviction  that  the  evils  of  the  times  were
not  so  great  as  Pompeius  chose  to  represent  them,  and  that  he
betrayed  his  party  by  the  extent  to  which  he  carried  his  reforms.

1  Auctoi  de  Cans.  Corr.  Eloq.  38. Cicero  himself  seems  to  have
thought  the  restriction  reasonable  and  convenient  (Brut.  94.).

2  Asconius  in  his  Commentary  on  Cicero's  pleading  for  Scaurus
(A.U.  700)  cites,  apparently  from  the  documents of  the  trial,  the
names  of  the  personages who used  their influence  in  this way:
"  Laudaverunt  Scaurum  consulates  novem.  L.  Piso,  L.  Volcatius,

78  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

the  machinery  of  corruption  which  the  consul  con-
sidered a  fitting  object  of  his  specious  reforms.  But
trifling  as  these  matters  were  in  themselves,  they
combined  to  assist  in  breaking  down  the  rude  inde-
pendence of  the  judicial  system,  in  which  the  judges
and  the  advocates  had  played  into  each  other's  hands,
in  defiance  both  of  the  government  and  of  popular
clamour.  Notwithstanding  the  partial  reforms  which
had  been  effected  since  the  time  of  Sulla,  the
qucBstiones  perpetuce  were  still  the  stronghold  of
aristocratic  monopoly.  Every  attempt,  however
superficial,  to  amend  them,  contributed  to  reveal  the
unfairness  of  their  operation.  Degraded  in  the  public
estimation,  they  lost  their  ancient  hold  on  the  feel-
ings of  the  citizens,  and  the  intrusion  of  armed
soldiers  at  Milo's  trial,  though  adapted  only  to  the
convenience  of  the  moment,  and  with  no  ulterior
designs,  was  in  fact  a  significant  intimation  that  the
ascendency  of  the  nobles  had  fallen  for  ever  under
the  military  domination  of  generals  and  dictators.
It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Pompeius  was
acting:  in  these  proceedings  with  far-sighted

Hit  conduct  at .  r,  ...

the  head  of treachery  towards  the  party with whose

interests he  had  connected  himself. He

considered  his  own  exalted  position  to  rest  mainly

upon  public  opinion,  and,  in  the  discharge  of  his

Q.  Metellus  Nepos,  M.  Perperna,  L.  Philippus,  M.  Cicero,  Q.  Hor-
tensius,  P.  Servilius  Isauricus  pater,  Cn.  Pompeius  Magnus.  Horum
magna  pars  per  tabellas  laudaverunt  qui  aberant,  inter  quos  Pom-
peius quoque;  nam  quod  crat  pro  consule,  extra  urbem  morabatur.
Unus  prseterea  adolescens  laudavit,  frater  ejus,  Faustus  Cornelius,
Sullae  films.  Is  in  laudatione  multa  humiliter  et  cum  lacrymis
locutus  non  minus  audientes  permovit,  quam  Scaurus  ipse  permo-
verat.  Ad  genua  judicum,  cum  sententiae  ferrentur,  bifariam  se
diviserunt  qui  pro  eo  rogabant :  ab  uno  latere  Scaurus  ipse,  et
M'.  Glabrio,  sororis  filius,  et  Paulus,  et  P.  Lcntulus,  Lentuli  Nigri
Flaminis  filius,  et  L.  ^Emilius  Buca  filius  et  C.  Memmius,  Fausta
natus,  supplicaverunt;  ex  altera  parte  Sulla  Faustus  frater  Scauri,
et  T.  Annius  Milo,  et  T.  Peducseus,  et  C.  Cato,  et  M.  Octavius
Lenas  Curtianus."

A.IT.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  79

functions  as  state  reformer,  his  object  was  to  main-
tain the  influence  of  the  senate,  as  the  inveterate
enemy  of  his  own  rival  Cassar,  just  so  far  as  he  could
do  so  without  sacrificing  his  own  popularity.  He  would
have  been  content  with  the  praise  due  to  the  specious
palliatives  which  he  had  devised  for  long-condemned
abuses,  and  neither  aspired  nor  expected  to  lay  the
foundations  of  a  new  political  system.  He  persuaded
his  friends  that  the  desertion  of  Milo,  of  whose  popu-
larity with  his  party  and  unreserved  devotion  to
them  he  was  jealous,  was  a  necessary  sacrifice  to
appearances.1  But  having  made  this  specious  con-
cession to  the  demands  of  outraged  law,  the  consul
was  anxious  to  exhibit  the  impartiality  of  his  justice,
and  now  encouraged  proceedings  against  the  friends
of  Clodius  who  were  implicated  in  the  disturbance.2
Even  among  the  nobles  indeed  Milo  had  made  many
enemies  ;  the  historian  Sallustius  resented  a  private
affront,  and  had  been  one  of  the  loudest  in  clamouring
for  his  condemnation.3  He  had  kept  clear,  however,
of  any  act  which  could  involve  him  in  the  guilt  of
sedition.  Sextus  Clodius,  less  prudent  or  less  for-
tunate, was  accused  and  condemned  for  the  breach  of
the  public  peace ;  and  as  soon  as  their  year  of  office
expired,  the  tribunes  Pompeius  Eufus  and  Munatius
Plancus,  both  highly  connected  and  adherents  of
the  senate,  were  brought  nevertheless  to  the  bar  of
justice.  The  reformer  took  no  step  to  avert  the
punishment  of  the  first  of  these ;  but  for  the  other
he  condescended  to  write  a  letter  to  be  read  before
the  judges,  thus  using  his  influence  precisely  in  the

1  Pompeius  pretended  to  believe  that  Milo  had  plotted  against  his
life. Ascon.  in  Milan.  67.;  Veil.  ii.  47.:  "  Milonem  renm  non  magis
invidia  facti  quam  Pompeii  damnavit  voluntas."

2  Dion,  xl.  55.:  5ia  r^v  TOV  ftovXfvrripiov  inirpriffiv.

1  Ascot,  in  Milan.  Gellius  (xvii.  18.),  on  the  authority  of  Varro,
tells  the  story  of  Sallust  having  been  discovered  by  Milo  in  adultery
with  his  wife,  and  severely  chastised.

80  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

way  which  his  own  enactments  expressly  forbade. j
This  indecorous  proceeding  gave  deep  offence.  It
was  a  manifest  breach  of  the  law  as  well  as  a  gross
act  of  partiality.  Cato  denounced  it  with  all  the
weight  of  his  blameless  reputation.2  The  accused
thereupon  excepted  against  him  as  one  of  his  judges;
but  though  his  challenge  was  admitted,  he  was  not-
withstanding condemned  by  a  majority  of  voices.  In
this  suddenly  awakened  zeal  for  purity  and  fair
play,  the  criminals  who  excepted  against  Cato  were
generally  condemned,  so  strong  a  presumption  of
guilt  did  it  seem  to  shrink  from  the  sentence  of  a
judge  whose  integrity  stood  so  high  in  public  estima-
tion.3 The  year  of  Pompeius's  consulship  was  dis-
tinguished by  the  multitude  of  cases  in  which  the
conduct  of  men  of  all  shades  of  political  opinion  was
submitted  to  judicial  scrutiny.  He  passed  a  law  to
compel  the  prosecution  of  all  the  charges  of  bribery
with  which  the  various  candidates  for  office  since  the
year  699  had  been  menaced.4  A  curious  provision
was  adopted  to  stimulate  the  flagging  zeal  of  the
accusers.  The  culprit  who  was  suffering  himself
under  conviction  for  a  similar  crime  might  obtain
remission  of  his  own  penalty  by  conducting  to  a  suc-
cessful issue  a  charge  against  another.6

1  Dion,  xl.  52.  55. ;  Plut  Pomp.  55.

2  Val.  Max.  n.  2.  5. :  "  Huic  facto  persona  admirationem  ademit .
nam  quse  in  alio  audacia  videretur  in  Catone  fiducia  cognoscitur."

»  Plut.  /.  f .,  Cat.  Mm.  48. ;  Dion,  /.  c.

4  Pint  Cat.  Min.  48.  This  was  the  year  of  Pompeius's  second
consulship.  Appian  (B.  C.  ii.  23.)  makes  the  retrospective  operation
of  this  act  extend  to  his  first  consulship  in  684.  Caesar's  friends  are
said  to  have  complained  of  the  indignity  of  bringing  their  patron's
consulship  (695)  within  the  period  thus  stigmatized  for  its  corrup-
tion, and  possibly  the  limit  was  contracted  on  this  account  Hoeck,
ROmische  Geschichte,  i.  149.

*  This  privilege  continued  under  the  emperors,  and  tended  to  mul-
tiply the  number  of  delators.  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  7. :  **  Sed  Minucius  et
Servseus  damr-sti  indicibus  accessere."

4.TJ.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  81

It  seems,  however,  that  the  alliance  of  Pompeius
with  the  senate,  and  the  alienation  from
Caesar  which  all  his  proceedings  attested,  Sti™"™*"
gave  new  life  and  strength  to  the  functions  $££?**"
of  government.  Not  only  did  the  consul
arm  himself  to  enforce  the  execution  of  the  laws,  but
he  provided,  by  a  salutary  measure,  against  their
violation,  in  forbidding  the  citizens  to  carry  weapons
within  the  walls.1  The  riddance  which  had  been
made  both  of  Milo  and  Clodius,  together  with  many
of  their  noisiest  adherents,  freed  the  forum  from  the
tumultuary  bands  by  which  public  business  had  been
so  long  impeded.  The  tribunes  learned  to  be  more
cautious  in  their  opposition,  and  the  people,  no
longer  caressed  or  menaced  by  rival  demagogues,
became  good-humoured  and  manageable.  Such  was
the  early  promise  of  the  military  tyranny  which  the
consul  and  senate  had  virtually  introduced  into  the
city.  The  consul's  success  was  obtained  by  favour
perhaps  not  less  than  by  the  display  of  force.  The
commission  he  had  received  for  provisioning  the  city
gave  him  the  opportunity  and  the  means  of  distri-
buting grain  to  the  populace.  This  usage,  which
had  originated  in  the  legislation  of  C.  Gracchus 2,  had
been  turned  to  the  maintenance  of  the  senatorial
ascendency  by  the  astute  policy  of  Cato.  Under  his
direction  it  had  served  to  soothe  the  irritation  of  the
people  on  the  defeat  of  the  Catilinarians.3  Fatal  as
it  eventually  proved  to  their  liberties,  and  even  to
their  prosperity,  it  conciliated  them  at  the  time  to
the  governments  which  fed  them,  and  became  a
shield  in  the  hands  of  the  oligarchy  against  the

1  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  39.  If  the  words  are  to  be  taken  literally,
he  forbade  even  the  keeping  of  arms :  "  Magni  Pompeii  in  tertio
consulatu  exstat  edictum,  in  tumaltu  necis  Clodian*e,  prohibentis
ulluin  telum  esse  in  urbe."

*  Cic.  pro  Seat.  48

•  Plut.  Cat.  Mitt.  26. ;  see  Hocck,  R.  G.  I  1.12.
VOL.  II.  Gt

82  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

attacks  of  demagogues,  which  they  could  not  refrain
from  using,  notwithstanding  the  warnings  of  Cicero
and  the  more  far-sighted  of  their  statesmen.1

Nevertheless,  Pompeius  was  not  unconscious  of
Pompeiu.,  di.-  the  hollow  and  unsubstantial  nature  of  the
reforms  he  had  devised.  The  permanence
of  the  little  good  he  had  effected  could
oligarchy.  OEjv  ^Q  assured  by  the  military  power  on
which  it  was  really  based.  A  few  months  must
reveal  the  imposture,  and  the  termination  of  his
extraordinary  office  would  be  hailed  as  the  dethrone-
ment of  a  tyrant.  Great  as  were  his  abilities  in  the
conduct  of  affairs,  and  free  as  he  was  from  the
passions  which  so  frequently  cloud  the  judgment  of
statesmen,  untrammelled  by  avarice  or  sensuality,
with  few  personal  hatreds  or  partialities,  nevertheless
his  character  exerted  no  ascendency  over  others.
Always  artful,  he  had  no  ingenuity  in  concealing  his
artifice.  He  was  suspected  by  all  men,  and  he  could
impose  upon  none.  His  moral  nature  was  as  repul-
sive to  those  who  came  in  contact  with  him  as  that
of  his  great  rival  was  attractive.  He  felt  that  his
sole  consulship  was  after  all  a  failure,  and  he  hastened
to  throw  off  the  responsibility  of  ineffectual  power.
Upon  the  dissolution  of  his  connexion  with  Caesar  by
the  death  of  Julia,  he  had  determined  to  retrace  his
steps,  and  ally  himself,  by  another  marriage,  with  the
heads  of  the  oligarchy.  He  offered  his
neiia,  and  r  hand  to  Cornelia,  the  widow  of  the  younger
'  Crassus3,  whose  father,  Q.  Caecilius  Metellus

ith  hinwelf

w  r\ • •  i~ .  i  i i  •  r

in  the  consul- fecipio,  was  one  of  the  leading  members  ot

, J  ,  „ ,

the senate, and a sworn enemy of the

•hip.

1  Cic.  /.  c.,  ad  Alt.  i.  16. :  "  Ilia  coneionalis  hirudo  zerarii  misera  ac
jejuna  plebecula."

*  Appian,  ii.  25.;  Dion,  xl.  51.;  Plut.  Pomp.  55.,  who. gives  a
pleasing  account  of  her  character  and  accomplishments.  The  warm
praises  which  Lucan  lavishes  upon  her  are  a  testimony  to  the  tradi-
tional prejudices  of  the  nobility  in  her  favour.

A.U.702-B.C.52.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  83

Marian  faction.  He  now  seized  the  opportunity  of
cementing  this  interested  alliance  by  associating  his
new  father-in-law  with  himself  in  the  consulship  for
the  latter  half  of  the  year.  The  people,  if  indeed
they  were  consulted  in  the  matter,  made  no  difficulty
in  accepting  his  nomination,  and  the  senate  was
pleased  with  an  act  of  condescension  to  its  wishes,
though  it  probably  despised  the  weakness  which  die-
tated  it.1

But  in  this  proceeding,  also,  Pompeius  betrayed
the  same  disregard  for  the  provisions  of  his  Hi8incon-
own  general  policy  which  we  have  before  ar'bi*'ary Un-
remarked. Scipio  was  himself  one  of  those  f^4.nd  un~
over  whom,  as  a  recent  candidate  for  the  towardsC(B8ar-
consulship,  a  charge  of  bribery  was  impending ;  and
it  required  the  consul's  interference  to  avert  the  con-
sequences of  a  prosecution  which  his  own  enactment
had  encouraged.  Another  instance  of  the  reformer's
inconsistency  was  still  more  flagrant,  and  served  to
crown  the  impatience  of  the  people,  who  acknow-
ledged in  after  times  that  Csesar's  subsequent  treason
was  provoked  by  the  lawlessness  of  his  rival.  It
will  be  remembered  that  the  consuls  of  the  preceding
year  had  obtained  the  enactment  of  a  law  whereby
the  curule  magistrates  were  forbidden  to  take  a
province  till  after  the  lapse  of  five  years  from  the
termination  of  their  office.  It  does  not  appear
whether  the  framers  of  this  restriction  had  any  other
object  in  view  than  to  check  the  inordinate  ambition
of  the  aspirants  to  wealth  and  power;  but  when
Pompeius,  in  the  exercise  of  his  sovereign  authority,
renewed  and  confirmed  ita,  his  purpose  was  to  deter
Caesar  from  suing  for  the  consulship.  The  position
of  Caesar's  game  was  so  critical,  that  he  was  compelled

1  In  divesting  his  sole  consulship  of  its  exclusive  character  at  the
end  of  six  months,  Pompeius  seems  to  have  acknowledged that  it
was  a  dictatorship  in  disguise.

2  Dion,  xl.  56.

a  2

84  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm

to  keep  his  enemies  in  check  at  every  move ;  if  he
once  allowed  the  lead  to  be  taken  from  him  he  was
lost.  As  long  as  he  was  at  the  head  of  an  army  in
Graul,  he  could  despise  the  impotent  clamour  of  the
oligarchy  :  if  he  could  obtain  the  consulship  without
previously  laying  down  his  command,  he  might  then
enter  the  city  and  return  to  civil  life  with  security.
From  the  curule  chair  he  might  descend  once  more
to  the  proconsular  camp,  and  place  himself  again  at
the  head  of  the  armies  of  his  country.  But  the
interval  which  was  now  appointed  to  elapse  between
the  two  offices  which  were  essential  to  his  safety
seemed  to  threaten  him  with  certain  destruction.
Pompeius  could  not  indeed  suppose  that  so  bold  and
skilful  a  statesman  would  resign  himself  without  a
struggle  to  the  prosecutions  with  which  his  enemies
threatened  him,  as  soon  as  they  could  get  him  within
their  toils;  but  he  calculated  on  his  precipitating
himself  into  a  revolt  against  the  state,  and  dash-
ing himself  with  senseless  desperation  against  the
senate,  the  veterans  and  the  conqueror  of  Mithridates.
Thus,  presumptuously  confident  in  his  superior  re-
sources, he  was  unconscious  of  the  moral  force  with
which  he  furnished  his  rival,  when,  in  the  face  of
this  very  enactment,  he  retained  his  own  proconsular
appointment,  and  even  caused  it  to  be  prolonged  to
him  for  another  period  of  five  years.1

The  senate,  however,  exulted  in  the  advance  it  had
critical  poai-  made,  and  believed  that  its  path  was  now
tionofca»ar.  clear  before  ^  an(j  that  its  mortal  enemy

must  soon  fall  into  its  hands.  Cassar,  on  his  part,  in
the  midst  of  the  overwhelming  cares  and  perils  of
war,  kept  his  eye  intently  fixed  upon  the  progress  of
affairs  in  the  city,  and  saw  that  his  only  hope  now  lay
in  the  errors  of  his  antagonists.  His  term  of  govern-
ment was  approaching  its  close,  while  his  opponents
»

1  Dion,  xl.  56.

A.U.702-B.C.52.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  85

were  eagerly  pressing  to  have  it  cut  short  at  once.
At  the  moment  of  its  expiration,  as  soon  as  he  should
become  once  more  a  private  citizen,  denuded  of  troops
and  employments,  a  charge  of  malversation  would
undoubtedly  be  preferred  against  him.  The  conduct
of  his  proconsular  government  would  be  subjected  to
invidious  scrutiny,  the  daring  acts  of  his  consulship
would  be  denounced  and  punished.1  He  could  expect
neither  justice  nor  mercy  from  the  powers  whose  posi-
tion in  the  cityseemed  now  impregnable.  But  could  he
only  obtain  the  consulship,  he  had  yet  another  stroke
to  make,  in  spite  of  the  restriction  which  his  enemies
had  so  craftily  devised.  He  might  employ  his  year
of  office  in  reviving  the  spirits  of  his  own  party,  in
recovering  the  affections  of  the  people,  which  had
cooled,  apparently,  during  his  long  absence,  in  infus-
ing fresh  vigour  into  the  tribunes,  in  forming  new
alliances,  and  breaking  the  phalanx  of  his  enemies  by
the  numerous  modes  of  corruption  in  which  he  was  so
well  versed.  As  a  last  resource,  he  might  flee  from
the  city  like  Lepidus  or  Catilina,  and  raise  his  voice
from  the  Alps  to  the  veterans  of  either  Gaul.  Though
better  aware  of  the  strength  of  his  resources  than  his
contemptuous  enemies,  yet  it  is  evident  that  he  felt
the  extreme  rashness  of  throwing  off  his  allegiance  to
the  state  while  he  had  yet  no  plausible  excuse  for  it,
and  that  he  did  not  decide  upon  that  course  till  he
had  no  other  alternative,  nor  till  his  enemies  had  re-
vealed to  the  world  the  injustice  of  their  conduct,  and
to  himself  the  weakness  of  their  counsels.

Such  then  were  the  prognostications  which  Caesar
drew  from  the  conduct  of  his  adversaries  in

,i •  •  p  i  , . He  in  trip  ues  to

their  enjoyment  or  power ;  such  were  his  be  permuted
resources,  and  such  his  hopes. Nor  did  he  tSI  cSnsu°uhip

i , ,  TT. ,.  while  still

delay  to  act. Mis  nrst  counter  move  was  to  absent  from

f i • e  • i  ,  i  .the  city.

employ  some  of  his  friends  among  the  tri-
1  Suet.  Jul.  so.

86  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  X11I

bunes  to  submit  a  law  to  the  people,  authorizing  him
to  sue  for  the  consulship  without  being  present  in  the
city  ;  that  is,  without  laying  down  his  command  pre-
viously. From  a  comparison  of  the  various  conflict-
ing accounts,  the  confusion  of  which  throws  great
uncertainty  upon  a  point  of  considerable  interest,  we
may  conjecture  that  this  authorization  was  meant
to  be  a  special  exception  in  Caesar's  case  to  the  general
provisions  of  the  existing  law,  by  which  the  candi-
date's presence  Was  required  ;  a  law  which,  as  we  have
seen,  had  frequently  been  dispensed  with  in  similar
instances  ;  and  further,  that  Pompeius,  jealous  of  the
tribunes'  interference,  took  the  matter  out  of  their
hands,  with  the  promise  to  settle  it  by  a  declaratory
enactment,  in  which  the  existing  law  should  be  con-
firmed with  some  provision  for  special  exemptions.
This  enactment,  it  seems,  had  passed  ;  it  had  been
engraven  in  the  usual  way  on  a  brazen  tablet,  and
actually  deposited  in  the  public  offices,  before  Caesar's
friends  observed  that  the  promised  exception  in  his
favour  had  not  been  distinctly  made.  A  great  clamour
was  raised,  and  Pompeius  was  obliged  to  come  for-
ward and  acknowledge  that  an  oversight  had  been
committed.  The  error  was  relucta-ntly  corrected,  by
the  insertion  of  the  name  required  ;  but  the  transac-
tion could  only  add  to  the  imputations  of  treachery
and  inconstancy  under  which  the  consul  already
suffered  with  either  party.1

1  The  authorities  are  strangely  contradictory  :  —

1.  Cic.  ad  Alt.  viii.  3.  says:  "Pompeius  contendit.ut  decem  tribuni
plebis  ferrent  ut  absentis  ratio  haberetur,  quod  idem  ipse  sanxit  lege
qnadam  sun."

2.  Appian,  ii.  25.: rovs  5« &rift.dpxovs  tireurev  (<5  Ka«rop)  flariyi\ffa-
ffOcu  v6/j.ov  .  —  Kal  rovff  inrorfivovTos  en  TOW  riojMnjiou  /cat  ovSev  avrti-

3.  Dion  (xl.  56.)  speaks  of  the  law  as  entirely  the  work  of  Pom-
peius, and  says  that  the  provisions  for  exemption  were  so  large  as
to  render  it  nugatory.

4.  Suet.  Jul  28.  :  "  Acciderat  ut  Pompeius  legem  de  jure  magis-
tratuum  lerens,  eo  capite  quo  a  petitione  honorum  absentes  submo-

A.u.702-n.c.52. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  87

The  tenor  of  Scipio's  administration  of  office  was
quiet  and  unobtrusive. The  only  measure

.,  ,  . .  .  i r j.1 Scipio  restore!

attributed  to  him  was  the  repeal  ot  the  the  authority
popular  Clodian  enactment  which  had  de-
prived the  censors  of  one  of  their  most  important
functions,  the  power  of  degrading  unworthy  members
of  the  senatorial  order.  But  the  temper  of  the  times
was  unfavourable  to  such  delegation  of  irresponsible
power  even  to  an  ancient  and  venerated  magistracy.
Private  character  was  no  longer  confided  in  as  a
guarantee  for  the  honourable  discharge  of  a  public
trust.  As  long  as  the  censor  was  prohibited  by  law
from  noting  the  infamy  of  his  fellow  citizens,  his
office  might  seem  indeed  shorn  of  its  former  lustre ;
but  he  was  exempt  himself  from  the  jealousies  which
so  invidious  a  duty  must  otherwise  have  heaped  upon
him.  But  when  the  restriction  was  removed,  he  had
no  longer  an  excuse  for  inaction;  all  connivance
at  vice  was  construed  into  fear  of  offending  the
powerful ;  the  reputation  of  the  censor  and  of  his
office  sank  together,  and  no  man  with  any  regard
to  his  character  coveted  from  henceforth  a  position
which  had  once  been  the  most  honourable  in  the
state.1

The  consuls  were  succeeded  in  the  year  703  by  M.
Claudius  Marcellus  and  Servius  Sulpicius
Rufus  without  disturbance  or  impediment.  thTye«703.
They  both belonged  to  the  party  of  the  Mareeliu,  ind

1  •  j.l_ r  • i. J u Servius  Sul-

oligarchy  : the former was animated by  picms  Kufu»  i

1- v. i'l-i  n  il  defeat  of  Cato.

peculiar  hostility  to  Caesar ;  the  other  was

a  man  of  whom  the  nobles  were  justly  proud,  on

account  of  his  great  reputation  as  a  jurist.2 Their

vebat,  ne  Csesarem  quidem  exciperet,  per  oblivionem  ;  ac  mox  lege
jam  in  ses  incisa,  et  in  asrarium  condita,  corrigeret  errorem."

1  Dion,  xl.  57.

2Cic./»ro  Mtiren,  10,  11,  12.,  Uiut,  41.  j  GelL  vi.  12.  &o.  ;  Quintil.
x.  1.

88  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

influence  with  Pompeius  was  such  as  to  secure  their
x.u.703,  election  against  Cato,  who  had  declared
himself  also  a  candidate,  but  whose  inde-
pendence of  character  was  feared  by  the  men  in
power.  The  candidates,  it  is  said,  abstained  from
bribery ;  authority  and  intimidation  may  have  served
instead.  But  the  successful  suitors  for  the  suffrages
of  the  tribes  had  put  on  the  garb  of  flattery  and  con-
descension; to  which  Cato,  who  maintained  all  the
stiffness  of  the  antique  virtue,  refused  to  bend.1  His
impracticable  purism  sustained  a  fatal  defeat,  and  he
determined  from  thenceforth  to  decline  all  further
competition  for  public  honours,  by  which  conduct  he
inflicted,  probably,  a  serious  injury  upon  his  unfortu-
nate country,  which  stood  so  much  in  need  of  honesty
among  its  rulers.

The  position  which  Cicero  had  lost  as  a  political
leader  might  be  compensated  to  the  state

Cicero's  ac- , ,  °. .  ,  . , . . , .

tivity  in  by  the  activity  and  success  with  which  he
applied  himself  to  the  business  of  a  pleader
in  political  causes.  For  some  years  there  was,  per-
haps, no  cause  of  importance  in  which  his  eloquence
was  not  put  in  requisition  for  the  accusation  or  the
defence ;  and  his  name  grew  more  and  more  illustri-
ous, both  for  the  brilliancy  and  the  effectiveness  of  his
harangues.  On  the  one  hand,  he  defended  and  saved
Saufeius,  a  friend  and  associate  of  Milo2;  on  the
other,  he  did  not  shrink  from  accusing  Munatius
Plancus3,  at  the  risk  of  offending  Pompeius.  Nor
did  he  quail  before  the  threat  of  a  public  impeach-
ment himself :  once  released  from  the  persecution  of
Clodius,  who  seems  to  have  had  a  greater  mastery
over  his  courage  than  any  other  of  his  enemies,  his
confidence  in  his  own  powers  was  unabashed,  and  he
defied  the  malice  of  the  world.  Cicero  seems  indeed

1  Dion,  xl.  58.  2  Areon.  in  Milan,  p.  54.

1  Dion,  xl.  55.;  Cic.  ad  Div.  vii.  2.

A.U.703-B.C.51.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  89

to  have  recovered,  in  these  congenial  occupations,
some  portion  of  his  earlier  spirits  and  nuatta<-M-
sanguine  temper.  Though  in  his  private  ^bo^r0'
correspondence  he  still  expressed  himself  in  hlm-
despair  for  his  country's  destinies,  yet  that  lie  did  in
fact  retain  hopes  of  better  days  appears  from  the  in-
terest he  continued  to  take  in  those,  among  the  rising
generation,  who  seemed  to  give  the  greatest  promise
of  goodness  and  wisdom.1  Such  seems  to  have  been
his  opinion  more  particularly  of  the  younger  Curio,
the  son  of  Scribonius,  whom  the  experienced  states-
man delighted  in  educating,  to  fill  hereafter,  as  he
fondly  imagined,  the  highest  places  in  the  state,  to
the  advantage  of  the  commonwealth.8  Yet  this  was
the  young  patrician  whom  Vettius,  as  we  have  seen,  had
implicated  in  the  alleged  conspiracy  against  the  tri-
umvirs, and  against  whom  Cicero  himself  had  uttered
expressions  of  no  little  bitterness :  we  cannot  doubt
that  his  early  years  were  stained  by  the  worst  vices
of  his  time,  such  as,  in  a  more  sober  period  at  least,
would  have  left  little  room  for  auguring  from  him
a  more  useful  and  honourable  manhood.  But  in
those  times  of  sudden  change,  the  dissipation  of  youth
might  yet  give  place  to  better  counsels  and  the  grow-
ing strength  of  a  manly  character :  the  abilities  of
Curio  were  brilliant,  and  his  disposition  had  some
natural  bias  towards  the  good;  his  recent  quffistorship
of  Asia  had  opened  his  mind  to  larger  views  of  in-
terest and  duty,  and  his  sphere  of  action  was  expanded

1  Abeken  (Cicero  in  sein.  Brief, p.  186.). It  was  in  this year
that  he  wrote  the  treatise  de  Legibus. Fischer,  Riim. Zeittafeln,
p.  260.

2  The  family  of  Curio  was  distinguished  for  its  talents.  Plin.  H.  N.
vii.  41.:  "  Una  familia  Curionum,  in  qua  tres  continua  serie  oratores
exstiterunt." Schol.  Bob.  in Clodian.  et  Curion.  p.  330.  ed.  Orell. :
"  Tres  illis  temporibus  Curiones  illustri  nomine  exstiterunt,  atque  ita
in  libris  adhuc  feruntur:  Curio  avus,  qui  Servinm  Fulvium inccsti
ream  defendit,  et  hie,  C.  Curio  pater  qui  P.  Clodio  affuit,  et  tertius
ille  Curio  tribnnitius,"  &«.

90  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xut

by  the  death  of  his  father,  a  man  of  considerable  in-
fluence among  his  order.  Cicero  exerted  himself  to
the  utmost  to  develop  the  latent  seeds  of  good  in  hia
favourite  and  pupil ;  and  it  would  seem  that  the
young  man  had  already  made  some  return  for  this
care,  by  the  zeal  with  which  he  had  served  his  monitor
in  the  affair  of  Clodius.1

Cicero  obtained  an  honourable  reward  for  the
cicero  obuin.  courage  he  had  recently  displayed,  in  the
co!te^'°fthe  acquisition  of  the  place  in  the  College  of
Augur..  Augurs  rendered  vacant  by  the  death  of
Publius  Crassus.3  Hortensius  proposed  and  Pom-
peius  lent  his  countenance  to  this  appointment3,  and
the  only  drawback  to  the  complacency  of  the  success-
ful candidate  was  the  obscurity  of  his  competitor
Hirrus.  The  office  itself  he  considered  one  of  the
most  dignified  which  a  citizen  could  enjoy4 ;  and  his
vanity  could  plume  itself  on  unsubstantial  dignities,
when  real  power  eluded  his  grasp.  But  the  law  of
Pompeius,  which  restricted  the  administration  of  the
provinces  to  such  magistrates  as  had  completed  their
term  of  office  five  years  previously,  left  a  gap  in  the
ordinary  succession  to  these  governments,  which  could
only  be  filled  by  invoking  the  services  of  the  consuls
and  praetors  of  past  years,  who  had  already  served,
or,  perhaps,  had  declined  to  serve  at  a  distance  from
Rome.  Among  the  number  of  the  latter  was  Cicero,
whom  the  alluring  temptations  of  the  proconsulate
had  never  yet  induced  to  abandon  that  position  in  the
city  which  he  considered  the  only  proper  sphere  for
Accept,  with  the  exercise  of  his  accomplishments.  Nor
ro^^entof  was  be  less  reluctant  now  to  accept  the
commission  which  was  thus,  in  a  manner,
forced  upon  him.  He  saw  more  clearly,  perhaps,
than  others,  though  few  were  altogether  blind  to  it,

1  See  Cicero's  Letter  to  Curio,  ad  Div.  ii.  1.

«  Plut.  Cic.  36  »  Cic.  Brut.  1.  4  Cic.  de  Legg.  ii.  12,

i.tj,?03-fl.c.5l.  tNDER  THE EMPIRE.  91

the  imminence  of  a  decisive  struggle  between  the
leaders  of  party;  he  was  slackening  in  his  atten-
tions to  Ceesar,  and  attaching  himself  more  closely  to
the  culminating  fortunes  of  his  rival ;  and  he  flattered
himself,  perhaps,  that  his  own  presence  might  supply
the  deficiency  of  public  virtue  which  he  still  mourn-
fully remarked  in  his  patron's  counsels.  But  to
obey  the  call  of  the  commonwealth  was  the  point  of
honour  with  the  Koman  statesman ;  and  when  Syria
and  Cilicia  were  assigned  to  himself  and  Bibulus,  the
latter  was  the  province  which  fell  by  lot  to  his  hands.1
The  province  of  Cilicia  was  of  considerable  extent,
and  of  no  less  military  importance.  It  state  of
comprehended,  besides  the  narrow  district  CiUcia-
between  the  Taurus  and  the  sea  to  which  the  appel-
lation more  properly  belonged,  the  countries  of
Pisidia,  Pamphylia,  Isauria  and  Lycaonia,  together
with  the  three  districts  of  Southern  Phrygia,  dis-
tinguished by  the  names  of  their  respective  capitals,
Laodicea,  Cibyra  and  Apamea.4  To  these  was  added
the  neighbouring  island  of  Cyprus.  From  the  moment
that  he  reached  the  frontiers  of  his  government  the
new  proconsul  was  called  upon  to  exercise  the  military
functions,  so  foreign  to  his  habits  and  education,  which
the  republic  imposed  upon  the  rulers  of  her  subjects,
no  less  than  the  administration  of  her  laws.  In
Lycaonia  he  met  his  army,  which  ought  to  have  con-
sisted of  two  legions,  but  was  reduced  in  numbers  by
the  absence  of  some  cohorts.8  It  was  necessary  to
advance  without  an  instant's  delay  to  the  eastern
extremity  of  the  province,  in  order  to  check  the  inso-
lence of  the  Parthians,  who  were  threatening  an
irruption  into  the  Roman  territory,  nor  less  to  control
the  disaffection  of  the  king  of  Armenia,  who,  as  we
have  seen,  had  lately  formed  a  family  alliance  with

1  Plut.  L  c.  *  Cic.  ad  Div.  xiii.  07.

*  Cic.  ad  Div.  iii.  6.

92  HISTORY 0* THE ROMANS  C

the  victors  of  Carrhae.  Cicero  stationed  himself  at
Cibystra  at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus.1  This  place  was
within  the  frontiers  of  the  dependent  kingdom  of
Cappadocia,  where  Ariobarzanes  II.  occupied  the
throne  upon  which  his  father  had  been  placed  by  the
Romans.  A  conspiracy  against  him  was  on  the
point  of  breaking  out,  and  it  was  only  by  the  presence
of  the  proconsul  and  his  legions  that  it  was  repressed  ;
but  the  king  was  with  difficulty  able  to  maintain
himself  against  the  rebellious  spirit  of  his  subjects,
fostered,  no  doubt,  by  the  intrigues  of  his  Parthian
neighbours.  Cicero  could  not  afford  to  detach  any
troops  for  the  defence  of  his  capital  or  person ;  the
terror  of  the  Roman  name  was  all  the  assistance  he
could  lend  him ;  but  this  was  sufficient  to  check  the
apprehended  revolt.  The  smallness  of  the  military
force  which  was  assigned  for  the  support  of  the
dependent  sovereigns,  for  repressing  the  discontent
of  the  provincials  themselves,  for  overawing  the
predatory  tribes  of  Isauria,  for  withstanding  the  en-
croachments of  the  Parthians  or  Armenians,  cannot
fail  to  move  our  astonishment.  It  is  calculated  cer-
tainly to  impress  us  with  an  exalted  notion  of  the
moral  influence  exercised  over  the  provinces  by  the
vigour  of  the  Roman  administration,  and  the  more
so  at  a  moment  when  a  large  army  had  so  recently
been  lost  almost  within  sight  of  the  frontiers.  It
must  be  remembered,  however,  that  Cicero  himself
complains  of  the  inadequacy  of  his  forces ;  and  his
friend  Caelius  accuses  the  uniform  misconduct  of  the
senate  in  leaving  its  generals  in  the  provinces  miser-
ably ill-provided  for  the  services  they  had  to  perform.2
Caesar  and  Pompeius  were  already  draining  the  ordi-
nary resources  of  the  state,  and  diverting  the  flower
of  the  Roman  youth  into  their  own  camps.  The  pro-

J  Cic.  ad  AtL  v.  18.

*  Cic.  ad  Alt.  v 18.,  and  Cselius  to  Cicero,  ad  Du\  viii.  5

4.U.70S-B.C.51.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  93

consul  was  obliged  to  make  a  levy  of  Roman  citizens
in  his  province,  while  he  trusted  to  the  goodwill  of
Deiotarus,  the  king  of  Galatia,  to  double  his  num-
bers with  auxiliary  troops.  But  the  expedient  of
enlistment  did  not  answer  his  wishes ;  the  number  of
the  Romans  in  those  parts  was  small,  and  they  were
reluctant  to  quit  their  lucrative  employments  for  the
perils  of  military  service.  Bibulus,  who  made  the
same  complaint  in  his  government  of  Syria,  relin-
quished the  attempt  as  wholly  unprofitable.1

The  apprehensions  of  a  Parthian invasion  which
the  proconsul  of  Cilicia  entertained, were
relieved  by the high spirit  with which  »ion»^rgth^

n  •  T  •  J C J -i. • O •  -il. P»rth'an«

Cassius  Longmus  defied  it  in  Syria  with  checked  by

Ctxssius

the  remnant  of  the  army  of  Crassus.2  After
his  general's  fatal  discomfiture,  Cassius  had  retired  to
Antioch,  resolving  to  provide  for  the  safety  as  well  as
the  internal  administration  of  the  province  until  he
should  be  superseded  by  the  arrival  of  a  new  pro-
consul. In  the  preceding  year  he  had  repulsed  some
Parthian  squadrons  which  had  ventured  to  cross  the
frontiers  of  the  Roman  territory.  While  Cicero  was
still  advancing  leisurely  from  Rome  to  assume  his
command  in  Cilicia,  Pacorus,  the  son  of  Orodes,
appeared  again  with  larger  forces,  and  in  a  more
determined  attitude,  almost  before  the  walls  of  the
Syrian  capital.  Cicero  claims  the  merit  of  having
emboldened  Cassius  by  his  proximity  to  bring  the
enemy  to  a  decisive  engagement ;  but  a  comparison
of  dates  clearly  shows  that  the  victory  which  the  latter
now  obtained  was  some  weeks  previous  to  Cicero's
arrival  at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus.3  Nor  did  Bibulus

1  See  Cicero's  complaints  in  an  official  despatch  to  the  consuls  and
senate  (ad  Div.  xv.  1.).

2Liv.  Epit.  cviii.;  Dion,  xl.  29,  30.;  Veil.  ii.  46.;  Joseph.  Ant.
Jud.  xiv.  7.

8  Fischer,  Rom.  Zeittafeln,  p.  '260.;  comp.  Cic.  ad  AU.  v.  20.
with  nd  Div.  xv.  4

94  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH XIII.

appear  in  time  to  reap  any  share  in  his  lieutenant's
laurels.  The  Parthians  seem  to  have  been  sufficiently
discouraged  by  their  successive  defeats  ;  they  refrained
from  any  further  demonstrations  of  hostility  ;  and  to
pursue  them  into  their  own  country  demanded  greater
forces,  and  perhaps  bolder  leaders,  than  the  Eoman
power  in  the  east  could  at  that  moment  furnish.  Ac-
cordingly, the  new  proconsul  abstained  from  the  pro-
secution of  any  military  enterprise  against  the  enemy ;
but  he  kept  a  watchful  eye  upon  their  affairs,  and
fomented  a  family  quarrel  in  the  Parthian  court,
which  resulted  in  the  revolt  of  Pacorus  against  his
father.1

The  citizens  of  Eome  seem  to  have  derived  some
amusement  from  contemplating;  the  novel

Military  ex- .  .  ., , .  rr, , .?

pioitsand situation  of their  peaceful  philosopher,  in

civil  admi- ,  i i  r  •

nistration  of  the  heart  of  a  country  swarming  with  ban-
ditti and  half-reclaimed  pirates,  and  with
clouds  of  Parthian  cavalry  rolling  in  his  front.  But
Cicero  was  ably  supported  by  his  brother  and  other
officers ;  and  when  the  more  serious  danger  had
passed  away,  he  was  far  from  shrinking  from  the
safer  though  less  glorious  warfare  which  the  state  of
his  province  demanded.  He  chastised  the  marauders
of  the  mountains  in  more  than  one  expedition2 ;  his
soldiers  complimented  him  with  the  title  of  Imperator,
and  the  senate  rewarded  him  with  the  honour  of  a
Supplication.3  For  his  own  part  he  was  so  much
dazzled  by  his  own  exploits  as  to  fix  his  heart  on  the
distinction  of  a  triumph.4  Indeed  we  may  reasonably
feel  at  a  loss  whether  most  to  admire  the  ability  of
the  man  who  could  thus  acquit  himself  with  credit  iu

1  Dion,  xl.  30.

*  See Cicero's  official  despatch (ad  Die.  xv.  4.)j comp.  Plut.
Cic.  36.

*  Cselius  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  viii.  1 1 .).

4  Cic.  ad  Ait.  vi.  6.:  "  Arnicorum  literse  me  ad  triumphum  vocant."
Comp.  ad  Ati,  vii.  1.,  ad  Div.  xv.  6.

A.0.703-B.C.51.  UNDER TUB EMPIRE.  95

a  career  so  alien  from  the  studies  of  his  life,  the  ex-
cellence of  the  training  which  enabled  his  countrymen
ordinarily  to  exchange  without  disadvantage  the  gown
for  the  breastplate,  the  forum  for  the  camp,  or  again,
the  perfection  of  the  military  system,  which  seemed
to  require  no  more  than  good  sense  and  firmness  in
the  general  to  insure  the  success  of  his  arms.  Nor
did  the  moderation  and  wisdom  of  Cicero's  civil
administration  belie  the  lessons  of  public  virtue  of
which  he  had  been  so  conspicuous  a  teacher.  On  the
one  hand,  we  may  be  assured  that  the  man  who  re-
sisted the  importunities  of  M.  Brutus,  seconded  by
the  instances  of  his  own  personal  friends1,  would
exercise  a  wholesome  severity  in  checking  the  ex-
tortion of  less  distinguished  and  less  powerful  subor-
dinates ;  on  the  other,  we  learn  that  the  expenses  of
the  government  were  reduced  to  a  scale  of  the  most
scrupulous  economy2,  and  that  a  troop  of  disappointed
parasites  groaned  over  the  ample  surplus  which  was
poured  into  the  national  coffers.3

Meanwhile,  the  consulship  of  Sulpicius  and  M.
Marcellus was attended with continued

•11 -j. • J.-L -j.  mi.  • 1  i- State  of  parties

tranquillity  in  the  city. The  rival  parties  during  the

• , ,1  i i •  i_ ii  J i consulship  of

were  intently  watching  each  other,  and  cal-  suipicmsand

i ,  •  i •  -^i i  ii  i  M-  Marcelliu.

culating  their  next  moves  with  breathless  A.I-.TOS,
anxiety,  and  it  seemed  agreed  that  the  game
should  be  played  out  by  an  effort  of  skill  and  cool-
ness. The  commencement  of  Caesar's  proconsulate
dated  from  the  first  of  January  696,  and  the  original
provisions  of  the  Vatinian  law  had  been  extended,
by  the  good  offices  of  Trebonius,  to  a  second  term  of
five  years,  commencing  from  the  beginning  of  701.
Accordingly,  in  the  middle  of  703  his  government
had  still  two  years  and  a  half  to  run. At  this  mo-

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  v.  21  ,  vi.  1  —3. See  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  333.
1  Cic.  ad  Ait.  v.  16. ;  comp.  Plat.  /.  c.

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  vii.  1.:  '•Ingemuit  nostra  cohors  crane  illud  put  mis
distribui  sibi  oportere."

96  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xllt

inent  the  wars  of  Gaul,  as  we  have  seen,  were  almost
brought  to  a  close ;  but  the  remainder  of  the  term
he  might  still  advantageously  employ  in  consolidating
his  influence  both  in  the  province  and  among  the
needy  politicians  of  the  capital.  The  senate  had
just  carried  the  election  of  two  of  its  partizans,  L.
JEmilius  Paulus  and  C.  Claudius  Marcellus,  who  were
to  enter  upon  the  consulship  at  the  commencement
of  the  ensuing  year.  It  was  for  a  still  distant  vacancy
that  Caesar  reserved  his  pretensions.  During  the
interval  he  remained  entrenched,  as  it  were,  behind
the  provisions  of  the  law  which  had  been  extorted
from  Pompeius,  and  depended  on  the  exertions  of
his  party  to  carry  his  election  in  the  city  while  he
still  retained  the  command  of  his  legions  in  Gaul.
Among  the  nobles,  indeed,  there  were  not  a  few  who
felt  the  obligation  to  respect  so  recent  and  clear  an
enactment.  Others,  less  scrupulous  perhaps  on  this
point,  were  still  unwilling  to  strip  him  of  his  power
while  his  rival,  of  whom  they  were  hardly  less  jealous,
continued  to  wield  the  military  government  of  Spain
Cato  himself,  exasperated  at  the  slight  he  had  sus-
tained from  the  creatures  of  Pompeius,  would  will
ingly  have  pulled  down  both  the  rivals  together  from
their  proud  elevation.  But  M.  Marcellus  and  the
more  violent  section  of  the  party  were  for  pushing
their  attack  upon  the  popular  leader  without  dis-
guise, and  disregarded  all  further  considerations.
The  consul  audaciouslv  proposed  that  Cse-

Renewed  in-  ,  i i  j i_  i  i

triguesfor  sar  s  term  should  be  cut  short  at  once  by
Cffisar'ofSus  the  appointment  of  a  successor.  Pompeius
masked  the  approaches  by  which  he  hoped
to  storm  his  rival's  position  by  assurances  of  his  im-
plicit deference  to  the  will  of  the  senate,  at  the  same
time  that  he  affected  moderation,  and  interrupted  its
deliberations  by  absenting  himself  from  the  city  when
it  was  proposed  to  bring  the  matter  to  a  solemn  de-
bate. At  this  moment  all  eyes  were  turned  towards

4..B.703-B.C.M.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  97

the  tribunitian  bench,  where  some  were  known  to  be
devoted  to  Csesar,  and  determined  to  exercise  their
fatal  veto  in  any  case  of  direct  attack  upon  his  rights.
A  correspondent  of  Cicero  reveals  to  us  the

f V  -i.i_ !_• i_ j.1  1 j.'  £  The  younger

feelings  with  which  the  election  or  younsr  cuno  elected

n •  AU A -u  i.  •  j j u tribune-

Curio  to  the  tnbuneship  was  regarded  by
the  nobles.  Already  it  was  surmised  that  one  so
giddy  in  temper,  and  so  needy  as  he  was  known  to
be,  might  easily  be  corrupted  by  the  arts  of  the  most
accomplished  of  intriguers ;  but  they  trusted  in  a
slight  which  he  was  said  to  have  received  from  Csesar,
and  still  clung  to  the  hope  that  he  would  continue
faithful  to  the  policy  of  his  family  and  friends.1  They
declared  boldly  that  if  any  tribune  protested  against
the  removal  of  the  proconsul  of  Graul,  they  had  par-
tisans on  the  same  bench  pledged  to  frustrate  the
appointment  of  a  successor  to  any  one  of  the  pro-
vincial governors,  and  thus  bring  matters  to  a
crisis  which  would  demand  the  intervention  of  a
dictator.3

At  length,  on  the  last  day  of  September,  M.  Mar-
cellus came forward and  proposed  that,

Decree  of  M

on  the  first  of  March  ensuing,  the  consuls  Magnus
who  should  have  then  entered  upon  office  alignment  of
should  proceed  to  the  usual  assignment  of  aim^ddTrectiy
the  provinces  of  the  republic.3 The  first  two
months  of  the  year  were  appropriated  to  the  reception
of  foreign  ambassadors  and  the  regulation  of  external
affairs. The first of March was apparently  the
ordinary  day  for  assigning  the  provinces,  the  most
important business connected with the internal

1  Caelius  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  viii. 4.): "  Curio  .  .  .  nihil  consilio
facit,  incutit  multis  magnum  metum,  sed  ut  spero  et  volo  et  ut  se
fert  ipse,  bonos  et  senatum  malet ....  quod  cum  Csesar . . valde
contempsit."

2  Cselius  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  viii.  5.).
'  Ad  Div.  viii.  9.

VOL.  II.  H

98  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

economy  of  the  state.1  Marcellus  had  made  no
express  mention  of  Caesar's  province  ;  but  it  was  well
known  that  he  was  in  reality  aimed  at,  and  a  second
decree  was  fulminated  against  any  tribune  who  should
venture  to  impede  the  proceedings  of  the  senate.  It
was  further  provided  that  the  claims  of  Caesar's
veterans  should  be  taken  into  immediate  consider-
ation ;  and  it  was  evidently  hoped  that  they  might
thus  be  seduced  from  their  allegiance  to  their  be-
loved commander.  Three  tribunes  protested,  not-
withstanding, and  even  Sulpicius  expressed

disapproved i_- j  •  i r i_  •  11  »

by  the  mo- his  disapproval  ot  his  colleague  s  proposi-

derate  party, .  . .  „ ,  j-j

but  supported  tion ;  but  the  majority  ot  the  senate  did  not
hesitate  to  confirm  it,  and  Pompeius  inti-
mated with  solemnity  that  obedience  to  the  senate  was
the  first  duty  of  a  citizen.  Hitherto,  he  said,  he  could
not  have  interfered  to  abridge  Caesar's  term  of  govern-
ment, but  now  his  scruples  vanished.  What  then
would  he  do,  asked  Marcellus,  if  the  tribunes  should
interpose,  and  forbid  the  law  for  assigning  his
provi/nces  to  a  successor  ? — It  would  make  no  dif-
ference, he  replied,  whether  Ccesar  refused  to  obey
the  senate  himself,  or  prompted  his  creatures  to  do
so. — And  what,  urged  another,  if  Ccesar  should
persist  in  suing  for  the  consulship,  and  refuse
to  abdicate  his  command  ? —  What,  he  returned,  if
my  son  should  raise  his  stick  against  me!z  These
words  were  not  regarded  as  sufficiently  explicit.
They  might,  indeed,  imply  a  contempt  for  the  restless
intriguer  too  great  to  condescend  to  so  monstrous  a
supposition;  but,  whatever  language  Pompeius  might
hold,  his  intentions  were  never  free  from  suspicion ;
and  on  this  occasion  there  were  not  wanting  some

1  Com  pare  Cic.  de  Prov.  Cons.  15.:  "  Ex  Kal.  denique  ei  Marti  is
nascetur  repente  provincia."  Perhaps  this  was  a  provision  of  the
Sempronian  law  for  the  assignment  of  consular  provinces  before  the
consul's  election.

*  Caelius  to  Cicero,  I.  c.

4.U.70S-B.C.51.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  99

to  surmise  that  he  had  still  a  private  understand-
ing with  the  common  enemy.  Caesar  appears  to
have  remonstrated  against  the  injustice  Casar  offera  to
of  the  proceeding,  and  even,  if  we  may  ^n"^e
believe  the  testimony  of  one  writer,  to  and  iuyricnm-
have  offered  to  resign  the  Transalpine  and  Illyrian
provinces,  retaining  only  the  Cisalpine.1  But  the
senate  gave  no  heed  to  him.  Exasperated  to  a
pitch  of  unusual  warmth,  he  could  no  longer  refrain
from  intimating  his  resolution  to  preserve  himself,  if
necessary,  by  an  appeal  to  arms.  When  the  news
was  conveyed  to  him  of  the  determination  at  which
the  senate  had  thus  arrived  to  deprive  him  of  his
government  on  the  appointed  day,  he  laid  his  hand
on  his  sword  and  exclaimed,  This,  then,  shall  keep  it*
It  still  remained  to  be  seen  whether  these  bold
assailants  would  have  the  courage  to  abide  M<  Marc<.Hu.
by  this  resolution  when  the  time  came  to  by'themfaSt-
put  them  to  the  proof.  It  was,  perhaps,  SSif.^™
the  object  of  a  section  at  least  of  the  party  Gaul-
to  anticipate  the  risk  of  failure  by  driving  the  popular
leader  at  once  to  violence.  Such  seems  to  have  been
the  aim  of  a  brutal  insult  with  which  the  consul  Mar-
cellus  now  provoked  him.  Caesar  had  constituted
himself  the  patron  of  the  Transpadane  Gauls,  and
among  other  acts  by  which  he  had  confirmed  his
interests  in  that  country,  he  had  founded  a  colony  at
Novum  Comum.  The  Transpadanes  had  already  ob-
tained the  Latin  franchise  from  the  republic  through
the  influence  of  Pompeius  Strabo3;  a  privilege

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  25. It  may  be  suspected  that  Appian  antici-
pates in  this  place  an  offer  of  the  kind,  which  Caesar  undoubtedly
made  at  a  later  period.

2  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  26. Plutarch,  however,  attributes  this  sally  to
one  of  his  soldiers.

1  Strab.  v.  1.  6.:  Ascon.  in  Pisonian.  p.  3.  ed.Orell.  Novum  Comum

was  the  name  given  to  Comum,  now  Como,  when  Cassar  founded  a

second  colony  there. Drumann  thinks  that  as  the  first  colony  of

Pompeiug  Rtrabo  received  the  jus  Latii,  the  second  had  the  complete

•  I

100  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.

which,  as  is  well  known,  conferred  upon  all  who  had
held  a  provincial  magistracy  the  full  rights  of  Roman
citizenship.  Scourging  was  a  punishment  from  which
a  Roman  citizen,  in  the  fullest  sense,  was  legally
exempt.  This  immunity  was  considered  as  a  distinc-
tion, and  guarded  with  jealousy.  Marcellus  caused
a  freeman  of  Novum  Comum  to  be  seized,  upon  some
pretence,  and  beaten  with  rods.  The  man,  it  appears,
had  not  served  a  magistracy l ;  he  could  not  legally
claim  exemption ;  but  the  act  was  not  the  less  offen-
sive to  the  patron  of  his  countrymen,  who  felt  that  it
was  intended  to  disparage  his  influence.  Cicero's
good  sense  and  moderation  denounced  it  as  an  act  of
wanton  hostility  towards  one  who  deserved  at  least
h  onourable  regard  from  every  citizen  of  the  republic.
The  indignity  was  redoubled,  when  the  consul  bade
the  man  go  and  show  his  scars  to  the  patron  who  was
powerless  to  relieve  him.

It  is  not  improbable  that  the  precarious  position
supposed  peni  iQ  which  the  proconsul  was  at  this  time
posFtk^n  supposed  to  be,  may  have  inspired  his  ene-
mies with  courage  to  hurl  this  insult  at  his
head.  It  was  reported  at  Eome  that  his  cavalry  had
been  destroyed  in  a  disastrous  engagement :  that  the
seventh  legion  had  suffered  a  severe  defeat ;  that  in  his

Roman  franchise.  There  is  no  authority  for  such  a  supposition,  and
it  can  only  be  adopted  with  the  idea  that  it  is  required  for  the  point
of  the  story  before  us.  But  the  act  of  Marcellus  was  sufficiently  irri-
tating to  Caesar,  without  supposing  a  direct  violation  or  denial  of  a
citizen's  privileges.

1  Such  are  Cicero's  express  words  :  "  Marcellus  foede  de  Comensi:
etsiille  magistratum  non  gesserat,  erat  tamen  Transpadanus"  (ad  Alt.
v.  11.).  Appian  (ii.  26.)  and  also  Plutarch  (Goes.  29.)  assert  the
contrary,  but  Cicero's  authority  is  of  course  to  be  preferred.  He  goes
on  to  complain  of  the  act  as  disrespectful  to  Pompeius,  whose  father
had  given  the  jus  Latii  to  the  Transpadanes.  It  could  hardly  be
represented  as  such,  if  Marcellus  had  merely  denied  Csesar's  power  to
confer  a  higher  right  than  had  been  conceded  to  his  predecessor.
Middleton,  1  observe,  makes  bad  Latin  of  the  passage,  reading gesserit
fit  should  be  gessis&et)  for  gesserat,  in  a  futile  attempt  to  reconcile  it
with  Appian  and  Plutarch.

A.TJ.704-B.C.50.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  101

expedition  against  the  Bellovaci  he  had  been  cut  off
with  a  small  detachment  from  the  rest  of  his  forces  :
whispers  as  to  his  fate  were  circulating  in  the  ranks
of  the  nobility ;  Domitius  put  his  finger  to  his  lips
with  a  significant  look  which  our  informant  declines
to  interpret.1  But  Pompeius  at  least  had  more  con-
fidence in  his  rival's  ability  to  extricate  himself  from
his  difficulties.  When  Marcellus  proceeded  still  fur-
ther, and  proposed  to  send  the  proconsul's  successors
into  his  provinces,  even  before  the  time  appointed,
he  interfered  with  expressions  of  moderation  and
respect  for  so  noble  a  champion  of  the  common-
wealth.2 At  the  same  time,  however,  he  insisted,
without  disguise,  that  the  senate  should  take  up  the
matter  in  due  season,  and  assume  the  right  of
deciding  peremptorily  upon  his  claims.

The  termination  of  the  conquest  of  Gaul  found
the work  of  pacification already  far ad-  C.-CMI'S  mim

, _,  !•  r  n  •• 11 and  concilia-

vanced. 1  he  policy  ot  Caesar  was  essentially  tory  treat-

,.„.  ,,  , J c ,.  .J mentofthe

different  trom  that  or  his  predecessors  in  oauis.
provincial  administration. The  provinces  on  either
side  of  the  Alps  had  been  bound  to  the  car  of  the
republic by  the iron links of  arms  and  colonies.
Large  tracts  of  land  had  been  wrested  from  the  con-
quered  people, and conferred upon such Roman
citizens  as  would exchange for foreign  A.r.704.
plunder  the  security  of  their  own  homes,  Ba5°-
and  maintain  the  outposts  of  the  empire  in  the  midst
of  prostrate enemies. The military spirit which
animated  these  colonists,  their  discipline,  intelligence

1  Cic  ad Dlv.  viii.  1. Ca»lius  writes  to  Cicero,  in  Cilicia,  on  the  first
of  June: "  Quod  ad  Caesarem  crebri  et  non  belli  de  eo  rumores  sed
susurratores  duntaxat  veniunt:  alius  equitem  perdidisse,  quod.opinor,
factum  est :  alius  septirnam  legionem  vapulasse;  ipsum  apud  Bello-
vacos  circumsederi,  interclusum  ab reliquo  exercitu :  neque  adhuc
certi  (juicquam  est,  neque  hac  inceita  tamen  vulgo  jactantur  :  sed  inter
paucos,  quos  tu  nosti,  palam  secreto  narrantur  : at  Domitius,  —  quuni
mantis  ados  npposuit — "

2  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  26.

102  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

and  valour,  sufficed  to  overawe  the  natives  almost
without  the  presence  of  regular  troops.  But  such  a
system  could  not  possibly  be  extended  to  the  vast
territories  which  the  state  was  now  suddenly  invited
to  organize.  For  was  it  Caesar's  wish  to  bring  Rome
thus,  as  it  were,  into  the  provinces  ;  his  object  was,
on  the  contrary,  to  approach  the  Gaulish  provincials
to  Rome,  to  give  them  an  interest  and  a  pride  in  the
city  of  their  conquerors.  The  first  step  towards
making  citizens  of  the  Gauls  was  to  render  the
Roman  yoke  as  light  as  possible.  Accordingly  Caesar
established  no  colonies  throughout  the  vast  region
which  he  added  to  the  empire.  The  form  of  a
province  which  he  gave  to  it  was  little  more  than
nominal.  As  Cisalpine  Gaul  was  distinguished  by
the  title  of  Togata,  the  gowned,  to  indicate  its
peaceful  character  and  approximation  to  the  manners
of  the  city,  so  the  Province,  otherwise  called  the
Narbonensis,  was  contrasted  with  it  by  the  epithet
Braccata,  or  trousered,  from  the  uncouth  habiliments
of  its  people.  So,  also,  to  the  whole  of  the  immense
country  between  the  Rhone,  the  Ocean  and  the
Rhine,  the  acquisition  of  Caesar  himself,  another
term  of  distinction  was  applied,  and  it  was  called
Comata,  from  the  long  wild  hair  of  its  native  barba-
rians. But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  conqueror  allowed
the  appearance  at  least  of  their  original  freedom  to
most  of  the  states  within  these  limits.  He  was  not
afraid  to  trust  the  most  spirited  of  the  Gallic  tribes
with  this  flattering  boon.  Not  only  the  Arverni,  the
^Edui,  the  Bituriges,  but  even  the  fierce  and  intrac-
table Treviri,  were  indulged  with  the  name  of  free
states.1  They  had  their  own  magistrates,  senates
and  deliberations,  guided  no  doubt  by  Roman  agents;
and,  as  we  hear  in  later  times,  that  the  subjects  of
discussion  were  appointed  by  the  government,  and

1 Cas.  B.C.  iii.  59. ;  Plin.  H.N.  iv.  31.  S3

1.V.704-B.C.60.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  103

the  topics  and  arguments  of  the  speakers  strictly
controlled1,  so  it  is  probable  that  Caesar  did  not  cease
to  exercise  jealous  vigilance  over  the  assemblies  he
permitted  to  exist.  Other  states  were  taken  into  the
alliance  of  the  victorious  republic.2  The  tribute
which  the  provincials  paid  was  softened  by  the  name
of  military  contribution3,  and  that  it  might  not  press
heavily  upon  them,  the  annual  sum  was  definitely
fixed  at  the  moderate  amount  of  forty  millions  of
sesterces.4  Upon  both  cities  and  chiefs  he  showered
a  profusion  of  honours  and  more  substantial  benefits.6
But,  after  all,  the  manner  of  the  magnanimous
Roman  won  as  many  hearts  as  his  benefactions.
When  he  saw  his  own  sword  suspended,  as  has  been
mentioned,  in  the  temple  of  its  Arvernian  captors,  he
refused  to  reclaim  it,  saying,  with  a  gracious  smile,
that  the  offering  was  sacred.6

Caesar,  indeed,  had  another  enemy  in  the  southern
part  of  his  province,  the  Pompeian  faction,

i  i •  j  J_T_ 1 1 /~i i ii  Heconciliatea

whom  he  ieared  more  than  the  (jauls  them-  the  adherents

•,  , . ,  j  .of  the  senate

selves,  and  it  was  in  order  to  strengthen  m  the  pro-

viuce

himself  against  these  that  he  paid  his  court
to  the  nations  which  he  had  subdued.  The  strong-
hold of  this  party  lay  in  the  Narbonensis,  where
Pompeius  had  established  the  base  of  his  operations
against  Sertorius,  and  which  he  had  filled  with  his
legionaries  and  dependents.  Narbo  Martins,  the
principal  city  in  the  west  of  the  province,  was  devoted

1 Tac.  Ann.  iii.  43.;  Ukert,  Geog.  der  Gr.  und  Rom.  iii.  255.

"  Tac.  Germ.  29.

»  Suet.  Jul.  25.;  Thierry,  Gaulms,  iii.  211.

4  Computing  the  sestertius  at  2d.  and  a  fraction,  this  sum  will  re-
present about  350,0007.  of  our  money.

4  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  49.:  "  Itaquu  honorifice  civitates  appellando,
principes  maximis  praemiis  afficiendo."  Dion's  account,  indeed,  is
not  so  favourable:  -rovs  fj.ev  haTTfivwffe,  rovs  5e  rjnepuxre  (xl.  43.).

8  Pint.  Cees.  26.  :  Itpov  riyovfj.fvos.  The  writer  evidently  attributes
this  generosity  to  a  feeling  of  superstition.

104  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  xin.

to  the  interests  of  the  chief  of  the  nobles ;  nor  was
Massilia  less  attached  to  the  cause  of  the  Roman
aristocracy,  to  which  it  had  looked  for  alliance  and
protection  during  the  period  of  its  struggle  with  the
neighbouring  tribes.  The  presence  of  Marius  in
those  regions  for  a  period  of  some  years,  had,  indeed,
introduced  relations  with  the  party  of  which  he  was
the  victorious  champion ;  and  when  that  party  had
been  trampled  down  by  Sulla  in  Italy,  many  of  its
proscribed  adherents  had  taken  refuge  in  the  Gaulish
province.  It  was  there  that  Lepidus  had  hoped  to
muster  allies  for  his  futile  attack  upon  the  Roman
oligarchy;  it  was  from  thence  that  Perperna  had
brought  powerful  reinforcements  to  Sertorius  in
Spain  ;  but  after  the  triumph  of  Pompeius  the  south
of  Gaul  was  reorganized  as  a  dependency  of  the  as-
cendant class  by  a  system  of  cruel  confiscations  and
proscriptions.  Milo  selected  Massilia  for  his  place
of  retreat,  as  being  a  stronghold  of  his  order.  For
the  same  reason,  perhaps,  Catilina  pretended  to  go
into  banishment  there,  as  a  pledge  to  the  senate  that
he  had  no  views  opposed  to  their  interests.  Pompeius,
after  his  return  to  Rome,  had  still  continued  in  fact
to  govern  the  Province,  through  the  agency  of  Fon-
teius  and  other  proconsuls,  up  to  the  moment  of
Caesar's  arrival.  But  the  new  governor  was  intently
occupied  in  undoing  the  work  of  his  predecessors.
He  exerted  himself  to  recover  the  favour  of  the
Massilians  by  doubling  the  benefits  his  rival  had
already  conferred  upon  them.  He  extended  the
limits  of  their  territory,  and  increased  the  tributes
they  derived  from  it.1  The  project,  at  least,  of
building  a  city  and  forming  a  naval  station  at  Forum
Julii  may  be  attributed  to  Cffisar,  though  it  is  un-

1  Cses.  B.  C.  i.  35.  :  '•  Bello  victos  Salyas  attrilmit,  vectigaliaque
auxit."  The  Massilians  acknowledged  that  they  had  rer-eived  paria
beneficia  from  Caesar  and  Pompeius.

A.U.704-B.C.50. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  105

certain  whether  he  actually  completed  it.1  With  the
ulterior  designs  he  had  in  view  he  could  not  follow
the  example  of  Sulla  and  Pompeius  in  disbanding
his  veterans,  and  establishing  them  in  colonies
throughout  the  country ;  but  we  heax  of  the  settle-
ment of  a  division  of  the  tenth  legion  at  Narbo,  of
the  sixth  at  Arelate,  of  the  seventh  at  Biterrae,  of  the
eighth  at  Antipolis 2 ;  and  it  is  probable  that  he  made
at  least  the  commencement  of  an  assignment  of  lands
at  those  places,  which  was  afterwards  completed  by
Augustus.

If  the  clemency  which  the  Gaulish  cities  experi-
enced at  his  hands  should  fail  to  procure  csesarat-

., .  .  • ,1  i  •,! laches  to  him-

their  acquiescence  in  the  ascendency  with  self  the

,. r n  J*  military  spirit

which  Home  seemed  to  be  content,  the  pro-  om.eGauis.
consul  adopted  other  means  to  deprive  them  of  the
power  of  contesting  it.  He  placed  himself  at  the
head  of  the  military  spirit  of  the  people,  and  con-
verted the  flower  of  their  youth  into  one  great  Eoman
army.  The  legions  with  which  he  had  composition
effected  the  reduction  of  the  country  had  <* hu  Ie8t01"-
been  principally  of  Gaulish  blood  and  language ;  the
republic  had  furnished  him  with  no  Italian  troops.3
The  tenth  legion  was  raised  by  Pomptinus  in  the
Transalpine  province  to  combat  the  Allobroges.  The
seventh,  eighth  and  ninth,  which  Caesar  found  in  the
Cisalpine,  were  probably  the  levies  of  Metellus  in
that  region,  when  he  was  commissioned  to  close  the
Alps  against  the  retreat  of  Catilina.4  The  eleventh

1 D'Atmlle, Notice  sur  hi  Gaule,  in  toe.

z  Mela,  ii.  5.;  PI  in.  H.N,  iii.  4. ;  Ukert,  Geoy.  der.  Gr.  vnd  Rom. ;
Guiscbard,  Mem.  Milit.  iii.  1 6.

1  Guiscliard,  Mem.  Milit.  iii.  §  2.

4  Auct.  B.C.  viii.  8.  :  "  Tres  veterrimre  Icgiones. "  Tin- legions
which  Pompeius  maintained  in  Spain  bore  tlie  numbers  one  to  six.
The  numbers  were  given  according  to  the  date  of  conscription;  but
even  at  this  early  period  the  armies  of  the  east  and  west  had  no
reference  to  each  other,  and  the  legions  of  Syiia  were  numbered  in-
dependently of  those  of  Spain  and  Gaul.  Guiscliard,  L  c.

106  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xiu.

and  twelfth  were  the  proconsul's  hasty  conscription
in  his  province  at  the  commencement  of  his  first
campaign.  The  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  were  raised
from  the  same  countries  to  oppose  the  great  confede-
racy of  the  Belgians.  Of  these,  the  latter  had  been
cut  to  pieces  by  the  Eburones  l ;  but  another  four-
teenth and  a  fifteenth  also  were  afterwards  levied  in
the  Gaulish  provinces.  Even  the  legion  which  Pom-
peius  had  lent  to  his  rival  had  been  raised  by  him  in
the  Cisalpine,  by  the  order  of  the  senate.  Only  a
small  portion  of  these  soldiers  could  have  been  of
genuine  Roman  or  Italian  extraction,  with  the  full
franchise  of  the  city ;  they  were  levied,  no  doubt,  from
the  native  population  of  the  numerous  states  which
had  been  endowed  with  the  Latin  rights.2  It  was
contrary  to  the  first  rule  of  military  service  to  admit
mere  aliens  into  the  ranks  of  the  Roman  legion,  or  to
form  supplemental  legions  of  the  unenfranchised  pro-
vincials. But  each  of  these  divisions  was  attended
by  an  unlimited  number  of  cohorts3,  which,  under
the  name  of  auxilia,  were  equipped,  for  the  most
part,  in  the  same  manner  as  itself,  and  placed  under
the  same  discipline  and  command.  The  common
dangers  and  glories  of  a  few  campaigns  side  by  side
had  rendered  the  Gaulish  auxiliary  no  less  efficient
than  the  legionary  himself.  Caesar  surrounded  him-
self with  a  large  force  of  this  kind,  and  swept  into  its
ranks  a  great  number  of  the  men  of  note  and  in-
fluence in  their  respective  cities.4  One  entire  legion,
indeed,  he  did  not  scruple  to  compose  of  Gauls  alone ;

1  Two  legions  arc  said to  have  been  destroyed  on  that  occasion  ;
probably  there  remained  enough  of  them  to  be  drafted  into  a  single
legion.

2  Sigon.  de  Jur.  Ant.  ItaL  iii.  2.,  de  JUT.  Prov.  i.  6.

*  The  thirty-second  cohort  of  the  second  legion  is  mentioned  on  a
medal.  Harduin.  ad  Plin.  iii.  4.

4  Ca»s.  B.C.  i.  39:  "  Nominatim  ex  omnibus  ci vital ibus  nobilis-
simo  et  fortissimo  quoque  evocato."

A.TJ.704--B.C.50. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  107

and  of  all  his  audacious  innovations,  none,  perhaps,
jarred  more  upon  the  prejudices  of  his  countrymen.
But  in  so  doing  he  was  carrying  out  his  policy  of
amalgamation  ;  and  he  acted  on  the  same  principle,
when,  at  a  later  period,  he  gave  to  this  whole  body
the  Koman  franchise.  The  soldiers  who  csmr-s
composed  this  legion  were  distinguished  ^  nSnlld
by  a  helmet  with  the  figure  of  a  lark  or  a  Alauda-
tuft  of  its  plumage  on  the  crest,  from  whence  it  de-
rived its  name  Alauda.1  The  Gauls  admired  the
spirit  and  vivacity  of  the  bird,  and  rejoiced  in  the
omen.  Fond  of  the  excitement  of  a  military  life,  vain
of  the  consideration  attached  to  the  profession  of
arms,  proud  of  themselves  and  of  their  leaders,  they
found  united  in  Caesar's  service  all  the  charms  which
most  attracted  them.  No  captain  ever  knew  better
how  to  win  the  personal  affection  of  his  soldiers,
while  he  commanded  their  respect.  The  general
severity  of  his  discipline  enhanced  the  favour  of  his
indulgence.  Even  the  studied  appearance  of  caprice,
and  the  rudeness  which  he  could  mingle  seasonably
with  his  refined  accomplishments,  hit  the  humour  of
the  camp,  and  delighted  the  fancy  of  his  followers.2
Accordingly,  he  enjoyed  popularity  among  his  troops
such  as  seldom  fell  to  the  lot  of  the  Koman  generals,
who  maintained  discipline  by  the  terror  of  punishment
alone.  Throughout  his  Gaulish  campaigns  there  was
no  single  instance  of  an  open  act  of  insubordination  ;
even  the  raw  recruits  of  his  earliest  campaign  quailed
at  the  first  words  of  his  rebuke.  The  self-devotion
manifested  in  moments  of  peril  by  men  and  officers
astonished  even  the  ample  experience  of  the  Eomans.
It  was  impossible  to  make  his  soldiers,  when  captured,

1 Suet.  Jul.  24. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xi.  44.  ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  xvi.  8. ;  cotnp.
Druinann,  iii.  235

*  Suet.  Jul.  65.  and  foil. ,  where  he  gives  several  instances  of  the
kind.

108  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Mil.

turn  their  arms  against  him  ;  and  the  toils  and  priva-
tions they  endured  in  their  marches  and  sieges  more
appalled  the  enemy  than  even  their  well-known  bravery
in  the  field.1  This  was  the  secret  of  their  repeated
triumphs  over  numbers  and  every  other  advantage  ;
the  renown  they  hence  acquired  charmed  away  the
malice  or  patriotism  of  the  Gauls,  and  precipitated
them  once  more  upon  Italy,  under  the  banners  of
their  conqueror.

Through the favour of  the  senate,  though  not
without  the misgivings of some  at  least

Character  and ., ,,  n c. •!. • /-^ • i. j

conduct  of  c.  ot  the  party,  C.  fecribomus  Curio  had  suc-

curio.  ceeded  in  obtaining  the  tribuneship. He

A.u.7<M,  had  been  noted, not  long  before,  as  one

L.jbaiiiu  of  the  most  rabid partisans of the oli-

c.aciaudius  garchy ;  but his character  was unstable ;

Marcellus. °.  J. ' , n.  ,  '

his  friend  Cicero  was  absent ;  above  all,
his  resources  were,  as  was  well  known,  exhausted
by  profligacy  and  profusion.  The  Pompeians  stu-
died to  defame  with  the  name  of  corruption  every
expression  of  sentiment  adverse  to  their  patron's
ascendency,  and  doubtless  the  Gaulish  gold  had
flowed  like  a  stream  of  molten  metal  into  every  cor-
ner of  the  city.  The  guilt  of  Curio,  even  at  the
time,  admitted  of  no  disproof ;  at  the  present  day  it
would  be  idle  to  attempt  to  allay  the  prevalent  suspi-
cion.2 There  was  nothing,  however,  in  his  proceed-
ings which  might  not  admit  of  a  more  favourable
construction.  There  were  others  besides  himself  who
insisted  that  equal  measure  should  be  dealt  to  Csesar
and  Pompeius.  Curio  proposed  that  both  the  rivals
should  lay  down  their  arms  simultaneously,  and  thus

1  Suet.  Jul.  I.  c.

*  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  26.;  Dion,  xl.  60.  VelU-ius,  however,  who  is
generally  very  temperate  and  judicious  in  regard  to  charges  of  this
kind,  declines  to  express  an  opinion.  "  Id  gratis  an  accepto  US.
centies  fecerit,  ut  accepimus,  in  medio  relinquprnus."

A.TJ.704-B.C.50. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  109

restore  the  senate  to  its  legitimate  supremacy.  The
nobles  embraced  his  views  with  alacrity.  When  C.
Marcellus,  the  consul,  moved,  on  the  first  of  March,
that  Caesar  should  be  disarmed  by  the  appointment
of  a  successor,  the  tribune  interposed  his  amendment,
and  obtained  on  a  division  the  overwhelming  majo-
rity of  three  hundred  and  seventy  to  twenty-two.  The
people  whose  affections  he  had  already  secured  by  the
promise  of  measures  to  relieve  them  from  the  charge
of  their  own  subsistence,  as  well  as  from  the  ordinary
burdens  of  civil  government ! ,  eagerly  applauded
him,  and  strewed  the  ground  before  him  with  flowers,
as  before  an  athlete  returning  victorious  from  the
arena.2  Pompeius  was  absent  at  the  moment,  and
this  discomfiture  stunned  him.  He  hastened  to  ap-
pear in  the  senate,  and  there  made  specious  profes-
sions of  his  willingness  to  obey  the  recent  vote,  and
expressed  will  of  the  assembly.  But  Ccesar,  he  in-
terposed, is  my  friend  and  connexion ;  I  know  that
his  wishes  are  for  retirement  and  peace  ;  his  eyes  are
turned  towards  the  city,  where  his  name  is  held  in
such  deserved  honour,  where  nothing  awaits  him  but
congratulations  and  triumphs.  Let  us  at  once  invite
him  among  us  by  decreeing  him  a  successor ;  I  have
given  my  promise  to  do  my  part  hereafter  towards
the  pacification  of  all  jealousies  and  troubles.3  It
was  not  difficult  to  penetrate  this  flimsy  disguise,
and  Curio  insisted  more  loudly  than  ever  that,  unless

1  Callus  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  viii.  6.);  "  Levissime transfugit  ad
populum  et  prae  Caesare  loqui  ccepit  ;  legemque  viariam,  non  dissi-
milem agrariae Rulli ct alimentariam, quae  jubet  aediles metiri,
jactavit." Comp.  Cic.  ad  Att.  vi. 1.  25.:  "Vedius  venit  mihi  ob-
viain  cum  duobus  essedis  et  rheda  equis  juncta  et  lection  et  familia
magna : pro qua, si Curio  legem  pertulerit, HS. centcna  pendat
oecesse  est."

2  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  27.; Plut.  Pomp.  a8.  ;  CW  3O.
9  Appian, B.C.  ii.  28,

110  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

Doth  the  rivals  obeyed  at  once  and  together,  both
should  equally  be  declared  enemies  of  the  republic.
Pompeius  retired,  baffled  and  indignant  ;  yet  he
could  afford  to  smile  at  the  threat,  for  the  senate
had  not  a  legion  within  a  thousand  miles  of  Eome,
and  it  could  not  put  down  either  Caesar  or  himself
without  the  assistance  of  the  one  against  the  other.
This  it  felt,  and  eventually  shrank  from  a  decision  :
the  tribune  broke  up  the  assembly.1  One  decree,
The  senate  indeed,  it  passed,  possibly  from  the  very
poqmpeein8  and  sense  of  its  defenceless  state,  and  to  this  it
rfu?erto)i1eur'  t°ok  care  to  give  an  external  semblance
legion.  0£  justice.  It  commanded  each  of  the
proconsuls  to  surrender  one  legion  for  the  ser-
vice of  the  commonwealth  in  Syria,  where  it  was
proposed  to  muster  a  large  force  to  oppose  the  Par-
thians.  Then  it  was  that  Pompeius  had  the  assurance
to  demand  back  from  Caesar  the  legion  which  he  had
lent  him  three  years  before,  in  addition  to  that
which  he  was  required  to  furnish  to  the  senate.
Nor  did  Caesar  hesitate  to  accede  to  either  requisi-
tion.2 He  was  assured  that  the  soldiers  would  not
soon  forget  the  general  who  had  covered  them  with
immortal  glory,  and  he  confirmed  their  fidelity  by  a
present  of  a  thousand  sesterces  to  each.3  The  Par-
thian war  was  a  mere  pretext ;  as  soon  as  the  legions
arrived,  the  senate  quartered  them  at  Capua,  and
flattered  itself  for  a  moment  that  it  could  now  hold
the  balance  between  the  rivals  with  a  firm  and  fear-
less hand.

The  cause  of  Caesar,  however,  was  not  left  solely

1  Appian,  I  c.  29.  ;  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  53.  :  "Senatus  frequc'iis  in
alia  omnia  abut."  Caelius  in  a  letter  to  Cicero  uses  precisely  the
same  words.

*  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  54. :  "  Neque  obscure has  diue legiones  uni
Caesaridetrahuntur, " Com  p.  Appian  and  Dion.

*  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  9.9.

A.D.704-B.C.50. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  Ill

to  the  defence  of  the  eloquent  but  profligate  Curio.
Sulpicius  also  had  lent  the  whole  weight  of  xppina
his  authority  among  his  order  to  the  interests  Kims  "08meT,f

,.  i-i-  jit  i TI-< •!• the  senatorial

ot  equal  justice,  and  the  consul  /hmilms  party  by  me
Paulus,  who  built,  with  the  price,  it  was  said,  which  he  ex-
of  his  treachery ',  the  basilica  which  has  censorship.1
immortalized  his  name,  aided  in  thwarting  the  Pom-
peians  at  every  step.  But  the  blindness  of  his  enemies
worked  better  for  the  advantage  of  Caesar  than  any
exertions  of  his  friends.  Appius  Claudius,  one  of  the
censors,  was  a  furious  partisan  of  Pompeius,  and  he
deemed  that  he  served  the  interests  of  the  oligarchy
by  rigorously  purifying  the  list  of  the  senate.  He
instituted  a  severe  examination  into  the  revenues,  the
extraction,  and  the  personal  merits  of  its  members,
and  pounced  with  instinctive  sagacity  upon  the
knights,  freedmen,  or  impoverished  nobles,  whose
exclusion  he  thought  would  benefit  his  own  party.
But  he  only  confirmed  and  embittered  the  Caesarean
partialities  of  his  victims.  Among  others,  he  pro-
scribed Sallust,  the  historian,  on  a  charge  of  profli-
gacy, which,  as  far  as  it  went,  was  no  doubt  fully
established.  But  the  insulted  rhetorician  considered
himself  no  worse  than  those  around  him,  and  revenged
himself  by  openly  devoting  himself  to  the  cause  of
the  enemy.2  If  his  hand  was  not  strong,  nor  his
purse  heavy,  there  were  other  means  he  could  use  in
the  service  of  his  new  patron,  and  he  has  covered  the
Roman  aristocracy  with  eternal  infamy  in  a  series  of
pungent  satires  under  the  garb  of  history.3

1 He  received  fifteen  hundred  talents  according  to  Plutarch,  Cat.
29.  ; Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  26.  ;  ccmp.  Suet.  Jul.  29.  ;  Cic.  ad  Alt.  vi.  3.

*  Dion,  xl.  63.

*  Little  is  recorded,  and  that  little  is  not  undisputed,  of  the  private
life  of  Sallust. The  spurious  Declamatia  in  Sallustium  describes  him,
probably not  incorrectly,  as living  from hand  to  mouth,  scraping
means  together  by  the  basest  methods,  to  squander  them  again  in  the
pursuit  of  office  or  pleasure. At *  later period  he  obtained  a  pro-

112  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

It  was  of  more  importance  to  sacrifice,  if  possible,
the  busy  demagogue  himself,  and  Appiua

Atx>rtlve  at-  ij \.  n •

tempt  to  ex- would have noted Curio  among the  un

pelCurlofrom  , i_ j  i i  •  11  T T>- /-«

the  senate, worthy,  had  not  his  colleague  L.  Fiso,  Cae-

Marcellusand  , ~J  '  . ,  ,  ,^» .  ,  .  ' .

the  oligarchs  sar  s  tather-in-law,  though  timid  in  opposing
"onions  tor  the  party  to  which  he  was  generally  at-

support.  r J . , ,  .  J

tached,  resisted  this  extreme  proceeding.
Appius  contented  himself  with  gravely  pronouncing
the  unworthiness  of  the  tribute  in  the  senate,  and
the  tribune  retorted  by  tearing  his  robes,  in  token  of
the  insult  done  to  his  sacred  office.1  The  consul,  C.
Marcellus,  was  not  daunted  by  this  demonstration,
but  put  the  question  of  his  rejection  to  the  vote  of
the  assembly.  Curio  defended  himself  with  address,
and  affected  moderation ;  the  senate  faltered,  and  re-
frained from  sanctioning  his  expulsion.  Stung  with
vexation,  the  nobles  clothed  themselves  in  mourning,
and  made  all  the  parade  of  a  great  national  calamity.2
They  attended  their  champion  Marcellus  to  the
suburban  retreat  to  which  under  the  plea  of  his  pro-
consular command  Pompeius  had  retired.  They
there  thrust  upon  him  the  guardianship  of  the  city,
and  placed  at  his  disposal  the  two  legions  at  Capua.3
The  cautious  statesman  required  that  this  charge
should  be  confirmed  to  him  by  the  sanction  of  the
consuls  designated  for  the  ensuing  year.  These  were
C.  Claudius  Marcellus,4  a  brother  of  M.  Marcellus,
the  consul  of  the  year  703,  and  L.  Cornelius  Lentulus

vincial  government  in  Africa,  and  there  amassed  by  extortion  the
enormous  wealth  for  which  he  became  notorious  to  posterity.  This
circumstance  may  serve  to  illustrate  Horace's  address  to  the  historian's
grand-nephew :

"  Latins  regnes  avidum  domando
Spiritum,  quam  si  Libyam  remotis
Gadibus  jungas  et  uterque  Poenus

Serviat  uni." Hor.  Od.  ii.  2.  9.
1 Dion,  xl.  64.  2  Plut.  Pomp.  59.

8  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  31.;  Dion,  xl.  64.
4  He  was  cousin  to  C.  Claudius  Marcellus,  the  consul  of  704,

A.U.704-B.C.50. UNDER TI1E EMPIRE.  113

Crus.  They  both  expressed  their  full  concurrence  in
the  voice  of  their  party1,  and  promised  their  future
support  to  its  chosen  protector.  It  was  vainly  hoped,
from  the  reports  which  were  said  to  come  from  Cae-
sar's camp,  that  the  proconsul's  army  would  refuse  to
fight  for  him,  and  even  that  he  might  be  overpowered
and  destroyed  by  the  indignation  of  his  own  troops.8
Pompeius  was  still  blindly  persuaded  that  his  own
position  was  unassailable,  and  when  pressed  to  make
further  levies,  contemptuously  rejected  the  advice.
/  have  only  to  stamp  with  my  foot,  he  said,  when
the  occasion  requires,  to  raise  legions  from  the  soil
of  Italy.3

Such  is  the  infatuation  which  seems  generally  to
attend  the  counsels  of  a  proud  and  digni-  infatuation
fied  aristocracy  assailed  by  a  revolutionary  oligarchs.
leader.  Wrapped  in  their  own  tranquil  composure,
they  fail  to  take  account  of  the  contagiousness  of  an
aggressive  and  lawless  spirit.  They  make  no  due
allowance  for  the  restlessness  of  troops  who  have  been
debauched  by  a  long  career  of  plunder  and  power.
They  calculate  on  the  mere  instruments  of  a  selfish
leader  being  at  last  dissatisfied  with  their  own  unequal
share  in  the  combination,  and  on  their  willingness  to
secure  their  gains  by  turning  against  him.  But  the
genius  of  the  successful  adventurer  is  chiefly  shown  in
the  ascendency  he  gains  over  his  adherents,  filling
them  with  his  own  hopes,  moulding  them  to  his
own  feelings,  and  imbuing  them  with  the  sense  of
actually  partaking  in  his  triumphs.  This  transcen-
dent operation  of  mind  upon  mind  can  only  be  fully
understood  by  the  same  genius  which  can  exert  it.

At this crisis, while the more wary  pompein8
among  the  nobles  might  still  distrust  their  Neapolis  at
ability to resist the enemy  whom the  A-u-ro4-
more  violent  were  driving  to  desperation,  an  incident

1 Dion,  xl.  66. * Plut.  C<z*.  29,,  Pomp.  57. » Plut.Pomp.  57
VOL II.  I

114  HlSTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xili.

occuiTcd  which  served  to  confirm  their  uncertain
hopes,  and  raised  them  to  the  highest  pitch  of  teme-
rity. The  health  of  Pompeius  was  far  from  robust :
he  was  wont  to  suffer  periodically  from  the  autumnal
fevers,  which  appear  in  all  ages  to  have  been  the
bane  of  the  Tyrrhenian  coast.  In  the  summer  of
the  year  704  he  was  prostrated  by  severe  sickness  at
Neapolis,  and  his  life  was  for  a  time  despaired  of.
He  had  now  reached  the  culminating  point  of  his
political  career,  and,  having  enjoyed,  and  still  more,
having  surrendered  the  sole  consulship,  there  re-
mained nothing  within  the  sphere  of  the  laws  which
could  increase  his  reputation  either  for  power  or
moderation.  The  only  legitimate  boon  which  for-
tune might  still  bestow  upon  her  favourite  was  an
honoured  and  tranquil  old  age ;  but  the  storms  which
were  gathering  in  the  horizon  forbade  the  hope  of  so
happy  a  consummation.  At  such  a  moment,  said
the  Eoman  moralists,  the  gods,  in  their  foresight,
offered  to  remove  the  great  Pompeius  beyond  the
sphere  of  human  change ;  but  the  cities  and  the
nations  interposed  with  prayer,  and  preserved  their
beloved  hero  for  defeat  and  decapitation.1  The
people  of  Neapolis  and  Puteoli  were  the  first  to  make
a  public  demonstration  of  grief  and  despair.  Vows
and  sacrifices  were  offered  for  the  sick  man's  re-
covery. He  was  saved,  and  the  same  people  ex-
pressed their  delight  with  festivals  and  dances,
Enthusiasm  and  crowned  their  heads  with  chaplets.
on'K-"1"18  These,  indeed,  Cicero  might  have  said,
were  only  Greeks8;  but  the  reserved
and  sober  Italians  were  no  less  ardent  in  theiv
adulation.  The  roads  were  thronged  ;  the  villages

1  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  i.  ,<55.,  from  whence  the  celebrated  lines  of  Juvenal
(x.  283.)  are  taken  :  "  Fortuna  ipsius  et  Urbis  Servatum  victo  caput
abstulit;"  a  sentence  of  most pregnant brevity. Comp.  also  Veil,
ii.  48.;  Senec.  Cons,  ad  Marc 20.;  Liy.  ix.  17.

2  Cic.  I.e.  :  "Coronati  Neapolitani  fueruut,  nimirum  ctiatn Puteo-
lani  :  ineptum  sane negotium  et  Gracculum."

A.0.704-B.C.50. UNDER THE EMPIRE,  115

were  crowded  HKC  cities ;  the  harbours  could  not
contain  the  vessels  which  brought  strangers  from
beyond  the  sea  to  salute  the  popular  idol  as  he  was
transported  slowly  from  place  to  place  on  his  way  to
Rome.  Pompeius  from  his  litter  contemplated  this
movement  of  the  people  with  lively  satisfaction ;  he
regarded  it  as  a  crowning  proof  of  the  depth  to  which
his  influence  had  penetrated,  as  a  gauge  of  the  in-
exhaustible resources  of  his  popularity.  Rooted  on
a  foundation  so  broad  and  immovable,  what  should
he  fear  from  Csesar  or  Cesar's  veterans  ?  There  was
no  one  at  his  ear  to  whisper  how  hollow  these  demon-
strations were,  to  foretell  that  Italy  would  surrender
to  his  rival  without  a  blow,  and  that  the  voices  now
loudest  in  the  accents  of  devotion  to  him  would  wel-
come the  conqueror  of  Gaul  with  no  less  fervent
acclamations.  But  what,  exclaimed  a  shrewder
observer,  are  the  prospects  of  a  party  whose  cham-
pion falls  dangerously  sick  at  least  once  a  year  ?  l

Having  ascertained  the  security  of  his  conquests
by  a  residence  beyond  the  Alps  through  the  onsar-s

J. ,  .  J ~ ,,.  -, *  , triumphant

winter  and  spring  ot  this  year,  Cassar  set  reception  in

,  J  the  Cisalpine

out  in  the  summer  to  make  a  tour  of  in-  province.

,.  ,, r,- t •  •  o TT- A.F.  704,

spection  in  the  Cisalpine  province.2  His  B.C.  so.
immediate  object  was  to  solicit  the  suffrages  of  the
Roman  citizens  in  these  regions  in  favour  of  his
quaestor,  M.  Antonius,  who  was  a  candidate  for  a
vacant  seat  in  the  College  of  Augurs.  The  zeal
with  which  this  accomplished  officer  had  seconded
his  operations  in  Gaul,  as  well  as  his  intrigues  in  the
city,  merited  the  proconsul's  warm  support ;  at  the
same  time  he  was  aware  that  the  nobles  had  deter-
mined to  sacrifice  Antonius  to  their  hatred  of  him-
self. When  he  learned,  before  his  arrival  on  the  Po,
that  the  suit  of  his  adherent  had  been  crowned  with

1 Cic.  ad  Att. viii.  2. : "  In unius  liominis  quotannis  periculose
Kgrotantis  anima  positas  omnes  spes  nostras  habotnus."

*  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  50.

i  2

116  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XI  a.

success1,  he  did  not  discontinue  his  journey.  With
his  eye  steadily  fixed  on  the  consulship,  though  still
in  the  distance,  he  wished  to  make  the  first  essay  of
his  popularity,  as  the  conqueror  of  Gaul,  among  the
municipia  and  colonies  to  which  his  deeds  were  most
familiar.  Nor  was  he  disappointed  in  his  anticipa-
tions of  the  esteem  in  which  he  was  held  among
them.  Wherever  he  went  the  roads  were  crowded
with  enthusiastic  admirers.  The  gates  of  the  cities
were  opened  with  acclamations,  or  crowned  with
triumphal  chaplets ;  victims  were  sacrificed  in  token
of  thanksgiving  for  his  success  and  safety ;  the  popu-
lace was  feasted  in  every  market-place,  as  if  in  anti-
cipation" of  the  solemn  triumph  which  he  had  so
gloriously  earned.  The  rich  spared  no  profusion  in
honour  of  what  he  had  done ;  the  needy  thronged
around  him  in  hopes  of  what  he  might  yet  do.
Having  thus  traversed  the  whole  of  the  Cisalpine
province,  and  ascertained  the  place  he  held  in  the
affections  of  its  people,  he  returned  to  his  quarters
at  Nemetocenna8,  and  assembled  all  his  forces  for  a
grand  review.  All  eyes  were  turned  towards  Italy  ;
the  progress  of  hostilities  between  the  rival  parties
was  confessed  to  the  world,  and  the  army,

Enthusiasm  „  ,  . .  '  , .

•fowar's confident  in its prowess, devoted to its

general,  regardless  of  its  moral  ties  to  a

city  which  it  only  knew  by  name,  awaited  with  eager

1  Antonius  was  elected to  the  seat in  the College of Augurs
vacated  by  the  death of Hortensius,  which  took place  in  April
Caelius  to  Cicero  (ad  Din.  viii.  13.)  ;  comp.  Cic.  ad  Alt.  vi.  2.;  and
see  Fischer,  Rdm.  Zeittafeln. The  nobles  put  forward  L.  Doruitius
Ahenobarbus  to  contest  the  honour,  but  Curio's  influence  with  the
tribes  secured  the  success  of  Caesar's  nominee. The  election  took
place  in  the  summer :  see  Caelius  to  Cicero :  (ad  Div.  viii.  14.)

Velleius  (ii.  49.)  speaks  in  glowing  language  of  the  good  for-
tune of  Hortensius  and  Lucullus  in  dying  before  the  breaking  out
of  the  civil  war.  The  latter  had  died  soon  after  Cicero's  return
from  exile.  Comp.  Cic.  de  Prow.  Consul.  9.

2  Nemetocenna,  the Nemetacum of  the Itineraries,  afterwards
Atrebates,  modern  Arras. D'Auville,  in  voc.

t.P.704-u.C.60.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  117

expectation  the  first  signal  to  advance.  Thus  meeting
for  the  first  time  altogether,  and  recounting  their
several  exploits,  the  legions  burned  with  hardly  con-
trollable excitement.  But  the  time  was  not  yet  come.
Their  ardour  was  tempered  to  the  proper  point  by
promises  and  flattery,  and  their  attention  was  amused
by  moving  from  place  to  place,  for  the  alleged  con-
venience of  abundant  or  healthy  quarters.  Mean-
while, Caesar  deputed  Labienus  to  administer  the
Cisalpine  province,  as  a  faithful  friend  on  whom  he
could  rely  for  advancing  the  interests  which  he  had
already  excited  there  in  his  favour.  Rumours  did
not  fail  to  reach  him  of  the  attempts  his  enemies
were  making  to  shake  the  allegiance  of  his  well  tried
lieutenant  as  well  as  of  his  soldiery ;  but  these  he
despised  or  disbelieved.  He  boldly  asserted  the
justice  of  his  claims  as  a  future  candidate  for  the
consulship,  under  the  sanction  of  the  privilege  ac-
corded to  him,  and  he  maintained,  with  specious  con-
fidence, that  the  senate  would  not  dare  the  flagrant
iniquity  of  depriving  him  of  his  command.1

Towards  the  close  of  the  year  the  proconsul  with-
drew once  more  into  Italy,  and  stationed  Cojsar  8tationa
himself  at  Ravenna,  with  a  single  legion,  $"?„"*'
the  thirteenth,  for  his  immediate  protec-  SlSS'uSf'
tion.2 The  rest  of  his  troops  were  divided  ielf*
in winter quarters between the JEduan and the
Belgian  territories. He  had  been  thus  far  secured
from  a  hostile  vote  of  the  senate  by  the  ability  with
which  Curio  had  maintained  his  interests,  and  the
election of Antonius and Q. Cassius Longinus,
another  of  his  friends3,  to  the  tribunate  for  the  en-
suing year  seemed  to  furnish  him  with  the  legitimate
means  of  prolonging  his  defence. But  the  act  of
the  consul  in  delivering  to  Pompeius  the  guardian-

1  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  51,  52.  2  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  54.

1  Quintus  was  brother  to  Caius  Cassias.

118  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

ship  of  the  city  was  in  fact  a  declaration  of  war.
How  long  would  the  safeguard  of  the  laws  be  ex-
tended to  one  who  was  thus  all  but  openly  denounced
as  a  public  enemy  ?  Curio's  term  of  office  was  on
the  point  of  expiring,  and  his  personal  safety  also
was  compromised.  The  tribune  made  a  last  appeal
to  the  people  ;  he  proclaimed  aloud  that  justice  was
violated,  that  the  reign  of  law  was  over,  that  a  mili-
tary domination  reigned  in  the  city;  he  entreated
the  citizens  to  resist  this  tyranny,  as  their  fathers
had  done  before  them,  by  refusing  military  service1 ;
and  when  he  had  made  this  final  effort  he  suddenly
left  the  city,  and  betook  himself  without  a  moment's
delay  to  the  camp  at  Kavenna2,  as  the  only  asylum
of  persecuted  innocence.

Poinpeius, meanwhile,  was  content  to  retain  in

its  scabbard  the  sword  which  the  consul
dissatisfied3  had  offered  to  him.  His  conduct  was  in-
*iu9's°™  comprehensible  to  his  fiery  adherents.  He

shunned  the  councils  of  the  nobles,  and
kept  aloof  from  the  city,  pleading  the  state  of  his
health  or  his  military  command  as  an  excuse  for
moving  from  place  to  place,  while  he  left  his  party
to  maintain  without  a  leader  the  wordy  contests  of
the  forum  and  the  curia.  They  complained  of  his
apparent  inactivity  in  the  bitterest  language.3  But
he  gave  no  heed  to  their  dissatisfaction,  nor  deigned
to  reply  to  the  still  fiercer  denunciations  of  his  whole
career,  from  his  first  appearance  in  public  life,  with
which  Antonius  commenced  his  term  of  tribunitian
licence.1*  It  was  just  at  this  time  that  Cicero  re-
turned from  Asia,  where  his  correspondents  had
flattered  him  to  the  last  with  hopes  of  peace,  and

1  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  31.  *  Dion,  xl  66.

s  Cic.  ad  Att.  vii.  5.:  "  Quos  ego  equites  Rom.,  quos  senatores
vidi!  qui  acerrime  quum  caetera  turn  hoc  iter  Pompeii  vituperarent."

4  Cic.  ad  Att.  vii.  8.:  "  Antonii  concionem  .  ...  in  qua  erat  accu-
satio  Pompeii  usque  a  toga  pura,"  &c.

A.U.701-B.C  50.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  119

indulged  him  in  the  idea  of  claiming  a  triumph.
His  services,  indeed,  though  not  splendid  or  striking,
were  fully  adequate  to  sustain  such  a  claim1  ;  and  it
might  be  supposed  that  the  nobles  would  have  been
glad  to  attach  another  imperator  firmly  to  their  side
by  the  gratification  of  a  fair  ambition.  But  either
his  views  were  not  sufficiently  decided  for  the  satis-
faction of  the  party  generally,  or  private  jealousies
prevailed  over  the  common  interests  of  the  class.
Even  Cato  urged  formal  objections  with  more  than
his  usual  stiffness  2 :  but  whatever  might  have  been
the  result  under  other  circumstances,  the  impend-
ing crisis  occupied  men's  minds  to  the  exclusion  of
all  other  business,  and  the  claim  was  put  aside  for
a  future  opportunity  of  discussion,  which  never
arrived.

Cicero  appeared  in  Italy  in  the  military  garb,  at-
tended by  his  lictors  with  laurelled  fasces.

TT  1J  j.u  -j.  1  I. Cicero's  return

He  could  not enter the city, where he  toit«iy.jan.
would  fain  have  thrown  himself  at  once  sic.'*).'
into  the  current  of  affairs  ;  but  he  was  im-  c?c8ia«dim
perfectly  informed of the real state of  E^ceSSm
things,  and  his  views  regarding  them  were
unsettled. He  repaired  immediately  to  Pompeius  at
his  Alban  villa,  and  was  received  with  an  appearance
of  cordiality,  and  encouraged  to  persist  in  his  suit
for the much-coveted honour.3 At the  He  confers
same  time  Pompeius advised  him  not  to  ^h^uteo1?
embark  in  the discussions  of  the senate,  Rffai"'
if  it  should  be convened  outside  the  walls,  osten-
sibly lest he  should get entangled in a quarrel
with the tribunes, and so prejudice his chance

1  Abeken  {Cicero  in  sein.  Brief,  p.  242.)  shows  that  Cicero's  claim
was  reasonable.  Lentulus  had  enjoyed  a  triumph  for  precisely
«imilar  exploits  in  the  same  province.  Cic.  ad  Att.  v.  21.  4.

1  Cato  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  xv.  5.).  He  had  resisted  the  claim  of
Appius  Pulcher  to  a  triumph  from  the  same  province.

*  Cic.  ad  Att.  vii.  4.,  and  comp.  foil.

120  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xm.

of  success;  but  in  reality,  perhaps,  lest  he  should
attempt  to  mediate  between  parties  and  inter-
fere for  the  re-establishment  of  concord.  Cicero,
he  knew,  was  still  in  correspondence  with  Caesar,  and
the  Gallic  proconsul's  letters  breathed  nothing  but
sentiments  of  moderation  and  public  virtue.  Cicero
himself  could  hardly  be  persuaded  that  a  rupture  was
inevitable ;  but  his  cherished  hopes  were  overborne
by  the  honour  of  Pompeius's  confidence,  and  he  re-
signed himself  to  the  general  conviction  of  his  order,
that  the  power  of  Caesar  must  be  controlled  by  force.
He  unburdened  his  feelings  to  Atticus  in  unavailable
lamentations  over  the  infatuation  of  his  party  in
allowing  that  power  to  grow  through  nine  years  of
victory,  when  it  might  have  been  crushed  in  its  germ.
In  the  position  which  he  was  about  to  assume,  of
actual  aggressor  in  a  civil  war,  Caesar  felt

CffiBBT  Bgfi(|g  *  OO

cuno  to  Rome  the  immense  advantage  of  having  appear-

withtheoffer  . ,  . „  °TT  ., j3  ,  .rr .„

ofacompro-  ances  in  his  favour.  He  availed  himself,
therefore,  of  every  opening  which  the  vio-
lence of  his  enemies  gave  him  for  representing  the
justice  of  his  claims  and  the  innocence  of  his  designs
in  the  mildest  language.  He  prevailed  on  Curio  to
return  to  Rome  at  the  opening  of  the  new  year  as
the  bearer  of  a  message  of  peace.1  He  offered  to
surrender  at  once  the  Transalpine  province,  together
with  all  the  troops  by  which  its  submission  was  se-
cured ;  he  requested  no  more  than  permission  to
retain  the  Cisalpine  and  Illyricum,  with  the  moderate
force  of  two  legions.2  He  must  have  been  aware  that
the  passions  of  his  enemies  had  been  lashed  into
such  fury  that  they  would  lend  no  ear  to  any  compro-
mise ;  they  were  resolved  that  Caesar  should  not  be
consul  again ;  the  bitterness  of  his  quaestor  Antonius
in  the  tribuneship  warned  them  of  what  they  might

1  Cffis.  B.  C.  i.  1.;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  32.;  Dion,  xli.  I.
*  Auct.  B.  G.  viii.  in  tin.

A.U.704-B.C.50.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  121

expect  from  the  proconsul  himself  in  a  still  higher
place.1  But  the  conditions  which  Csesar  offered  were
a  specious  bait  for  the  acclamations  of  the  people,
and  the  consuls  were  very  unwilling  to  suffer  them
to  be  publicly  known,  while  Curio  and  Antonius  took
care  to  communicate  them  to  the  world,  at  the  same
time  that  they  laid  them  before  the  senate.2

In  the  debate  which  followed  the  consuls  diverted
the  discussion  to  the  question  of  the  general  Thesenate
safety.  They  denounced  Caesar's  imputed  J^TJSd*"-'1
designs  as  treason  undisguised.  The  ordi-  J£^hlrto
nary  powers  of  the  commonwealth,  said  command-
Lentulus,  are  paralysed ;  for  once  let  forms  give  way
to  wholesome  violence.3  Nothing  remained,  he  urged,
but  that  Caesar  should  surrender  his  command  on  a
day  to  be  appointed  by  the  senate,  and  come  as  a
private  citizen  and  sue  in  the  regular  course  for  the
suffrages  of  the  tribes.  The  indulgence  which  had
before  been  granted  him  in  this  particular  must  bow
to  the  public  necessity.  It  was  in  vain  that  voices
were  still  raised  for  delay,  some  urging  that  their
party  was  not  yet  armed ;  others,  that  if  Pompeius
would  depart  for  his  distant  province  all  would  be
well 4 ;  there  would  be  no  danger  of  collision  between
the  electric  clouds  which  were  about  to  set  the  world
in  a  blaze.  The  decree  was  put  to  the  vote ;

-.  , .  .  . The  tribunes

the  tribunes  in  Caesars  interest,  Antomus  interpose, hut
and  Q.  Cassius,  interposed,  on  the  ground
of  the  privilege  already  accorded  him  by  the  people ;
but  their  objection  was  overruled,  and  the  decree
was  passed  triumphantly.5 The  tribunes protested

1  This  was  the  remark  of  Pompeius  himself  to  Cicero. Cic.  ad
Alt.  vii.  8.

*  Gas.  B.  C.  i.  1. ;  Dion,  xli.  1. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  59.,  Cat.  30.
•Caesar  says  (B.  C.'\.  5.):  "  Aguntur  omnia  raptim  atque  tur-

bate."

«  Cses.  B.  C.  i.  2.

*  The  vote  ultimately  was  almost  unanimous. Dion,  xli.  2. This
rapid  fluctuation  of  majorities  marks  the  habitual  deference  of  the

122  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xin.

against  its  illegality,  and  proclaimed  aloud  that  they
were  coerced  in  the  exercise  of  their  official  functions.
Their  opponents  retorted  by  once  more  declaring  the
state  in  danger,  and  by  putting  on,  as  a  sign  of  alarm,
the  black  robes  of  national  mourning.  The  consuls
felt  that  they  had  already  passed  the  limits  of  law,
and  nothing  now  remained  for  them  but  to  carry
out  their  violence  with  a  high  hand.  The  senate
was  again  convened  to  determine  what  punishment
should  be  inflicted  upon  the  refractory  tribunes ;  and
when  it  was  intimated  to  them  that  they  would  be
expelled  from  the  council-hall  by  force1,  they  wrapped
themselves  hastily  in  pretended  disguise  and  fled,
They  leave  together  with  Curio,  as  if  for  their  lives.
repair1  The  act  of  leaving  the  city  was  in  itself  a
char's  camp,  declaration  that  they  threw  up  their  out-
raged and  defenceless  office,  for  the  tribune  was  for-
bidden to  step  outside  the  walls  during  his  term  of
service.  Arrayed  in  all  the  dignity  of  violated  inde-
pendence, they  knew  that  they  should  be  eagerly
received  in  the  proconsul's  quarters,  and  paraded
throughout  his  camp  as  the  cause  and  justification  of
war.

Roman  assemblies  to  the  opinions  of  their  leaders,  which  is  equally
conspicuous  in  the  proceedings  of  the  senate  and  of  the  centuries.

1  C«es.  B.  C.  i.  5.:  "  De  sua  salute  septimo  die  (Jan.  7.)  cogitare
coguntur. "  Dion,  xli.  3. :  &  AeiroCAos  inre£t\6f'iv  ff<f>tffi  irapjjWire.
Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  33.:  ticiKtvov  rots  &,u<pl  rbv  'AVTWVIOV  fKffrrjycu  TOV
trvveSpiou,  fjd\  rt  Kcd  SijfjictpxovvTfs  o/j.o>s  irdOoitv  a.roiruTfpoi'.  Liiv.
Eplt.  civ. :  "  Urbe  pulei."  The  tribunes  quitted  Rome  on  the  night
of  Jan.  6 — 7.  — Nov.  18—19  of  the  corrected  calendar.

A..U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  123

CHAPTEE  XIV.

The  consuls  prepare  to  withstand  Caesar's  claims  by  force. — Caesar
crosses  the  Rubicon.  —  Consternation  of  his  enemies.  —  They
abandon  Rome,  and  rally  sound  Pompcius  in  Campania.  —  Caesar
advances  triumphantly. — The  senate  affects  to  negotiate. — Pom-
peius  falls  back  upon  Luceria. — Domitias  makes  a  stand  at  Cor-
finium:  is  betrayed  and  delivered  up  by  his  soldiers  :  pardoned
by  Caesar. —  Effect  of  Caesar's  clemency. —  Pompeius  is  besieged
by  Caesar  in  Brundisium. — Escapes  across  the  sea  with  his  troops,
the  consuls  and  the  senate. — Explanation  of  the  apparent  pusil-
lanimity of  his  conduct.  (Jan. — March  A.u.  705,  B.C.  49.)

As  long  as  the  claims  which  Caesar  advanced  were
supported  by  champions  invested  with  the  Suoceg,  of  the
prerogatives  of  the  Tribunitian  office,  the  mfalureiof
senate,  composed  of  men  of  every  party  l1'6^"^'
and  various  shades  of  opinion,  had  acted,  B-°  49-
as  we  have  seen,  with  extreme  vacillation. Though
it  had  permitted  itself  to  be  swayed  violently  from
one  extreme decision to another,  at the  bidding
of  its  most  resolute  and  turbulent  members,  yet  it
had  shown,  at  least  on  many  occasions,  a  disposition
to  treat  both  the  rival  leaders  with  equal  justice. .
But  the  abrupt  departure  of  the  tribunes,  compelled,
as  they  proclaimed,  by  the  ascendency  of  the  most
violent  section  of  the  oligarchical  faction,  changed  at
once  the  position  of  parties,  and  decided  the  place  of
the  wavering  and  neutral. If  any  voice  was  now
raised for negotiation or even reflection, it  was
drowned  by  the  din  of  applause  which  hailed  the
indignant  reclamations  of  Scipio,  Lentulus  and  Cato.1
From  this  moment  the  staunchest  of  the  proconsul's

>  Caes.  B.  C.  i.  3,  4.

124  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  en.  xiv.

adherents  in  the  senate  were  reduced  to  silence.  If
the  sacred  office  had  failed  to  protect  the  tribunes,
what  should  divert  the  violence  of  the  consuls  from
the  head  of  a  private  partisan  ?  The  law  had  de-
clared itself  against  Caesar  in  the  person  of  its  chief
organs,  the  authorities  and  great  council  of  the  state ;
and  the  Marian  party,  the  strength  of  which  certainly
did  not  lie  in  the  eminence  of  its  leaders  in  the  city,
had  neither  the  courage  nor  the  power  to  defy  it.
At  the  same  time,  as  might  be  expected,  and  as
doubtless  was  calculated,  the  success  of  violent  mea-
sures swept  along  the  more  moderate  councillors,
such  as  Cicero,  in  the  wake  of  the  triumphant  leaders
of  their  common  party.  Even  those  who  had  obsti-
nately maintained  a  neutral  position,  such  as  Cato,
those  who  detested  and  feared  both  the  rival  chiefs
equally,  found  themselves  reduced  to  the  necessity  of
embracing  the  side  on  which  the  state  had  declared
itself.  In  supporting  Pompeius  at  the  head  of  the
republic  they  were  compelled  to  concede  to  him  all
his  claims,  and  that  entire  independence  of  law  and
constitutional  practice  which  Csesar  had  so  plausibly
contrasted  with  the  severe  treatment  he  had  himself
received.

Accordingly,  when  the  consuls  convened  the  senate
The  consuls for  the  day  succeeding:  the  flight  of  the

review  their

forces, mthe  tribunes,  they  invited  Pompeius  to  attend
their  deliberations,  which  were  held  out-
side the  walls  of  the  city  in  the  temple  of  Bellona.1
Lentulus  was  roused  to  action  by  the  pressure  of  his
debts,  the  prospect  of  military  command,  and  the
lavish  bribes  administered  to  him  by  eastern  poten-
tates, impatient  for  the  commencement  of  anarchy.
He  boasted  among  his  friends  that  a  second  Cornelius
was  destined  to  resume  the  pre-eminence  of  Sulla.
Seipio,  as  the  father-in-law  of  the  general,  expected

1  C«8.  B.  C.  i.  6.;  Dion,  xli.  8. ;  Appian,  B.  C.  il  34.

A.P.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  125

at  least  to  share  his  distinctions.  Pompeius  himself
was  impelled  to  the  arbitrament  of  arms  by  the  con-
sciousness of  his  own  equivocal  position  as  the  pro-
consul of  a  province  at  the  head  of  an  army  in  Italy.
The  nobles  were  charmed  at  the  echo  of  their  bold
defiance,  and  were  determined  not  to  relax  the  vigour
of  their  policy  at  the  moment  when  it  had  gained
the  ascendant.  They  listened  with  satisfaction  to
the  sanguine  calculations  their  leader  made  of  the
forces  at  his  disposal.  Ten  legions  he  had  under
arms ;  seven  of  these,  indeed,  were  in  Spain,  where
one  had  been  lately  levied,  in  addition  to  those
which  the  senate  had  assigned  to  the  proconsul ;  one
only  he  had  in  immediate  attendance  upon  his  orders
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Rome,  and  two  more  were
stationed  at  Capua,  being  the  same  which  the  govern-
ment had  lately  extorted  from  Cffisar  at  his  bidding.
But  his  strength  lay  not  so  much,  he  affirmed,  in  the
magnitude  of  the  preparations  he  had  made,  as  in
the  expectations  on  which  he  might  confidently  rely.
A  vast  portion  of  the  soil  of  Italy  had  been  parcelled
out  among  the  veterans  of  Sulla,  and  every  motive
of  gratitude  and  interest  would  still  attach  both  them
and  their  descendants  to  the  party  which  inherited
the  dictator's  principles  and  obligations.  It  was  on
the  temper  of  his  rival's  forces,  however,  that  Pom-
peius chiefly  relied  for  the  triumphant  issue  of  a
struggle  he  had  determined  to  provoke.  The  con-
querors of  Graul,  it  was  said,  were  wearied  with  war,
satiated  with  plunder,  discontented  with  their  restless
general,  dismayed  at  the  prospect  of  raising  their
hands  against  their  beloved  country.8  It  is  not  im-
probable that  notions  of  this  kind  were  disseminated
by  members  of  the  great  families  of  whom  Caesar
kept  so  many  about  his  own  person  throughout  his
campaigns.  Certain  of  these  might  be  in  corres-

1  C»s.  B.  C.  L  4.  *  Cajs.  B.  C.  L  6.;  Pint.  Pomp,  57.

126  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  JCTT,

pondence  with  his  enemies,  and  not  disinclined  to
betray  him,  at  least  if  his  affairs  should  seem  despe-
rate. Some  doubtless  who,  up  to  this  time,  had  been
most  distinguished  in  foreign  fields,  declined  to  follow
his  banners  in  the  unnatural  contest  of  civil  war.
Among  his  chief  lieutenants  there  was  one  at  least
who  was  on  the  point  of  abandoning  his  camp,  and
arraying  himself  in  arms  on  the  other  side.  So
strong  was  the  conviction  upon  this  point  entertained
in  the  circles  of  the  senatorial  party,  that  few  of  them
believed  that  Caesar  would  really  venture  to  throw
away  the  scabbard.  But  there  was  no  more  fatal
mistake  throughout  their  proceedings  than  their
confidence  in  the  existence  of  general  disaffection  to
their  leader  among  the  officers  and  soldiers  of  the
Gallic  legions.

The  senate,  though  far  from  expecting  the  actual

collision  of  arms,  decreed  its  war-measures
fhe^pro^clf  with  ostentatious  energy.  Orders  were
of\hVwanaetes.  issued  for  the  immediate  levy  of  fresh

troops ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  so  secure
did  it  feel  of  its  position  and  resources  that  it  made
no  provision  for  bringing  over  the  large  division  of
its  forces  quartered  in  Spain.  It  was  presumed,
indeed,  that  Caesar  could  not  venture  to  withdraw
his  army  of  occupation  from  the  conquered  provinces
of  Gaul,  and  the  Iberian  legions  might  be  left  to
menace  the  garrisons  which,  if  he  invaded  Italy,  he
must  leave  behind  him  in  the  west.1  In  the  assign-
ment of  provinces  which  was  made  at  the  same
sitting  of  the  senate,  no  respect  was  paid  to  the
regulations  which  had  been  so  recently  sanctioned
by  its  own  decree.  The  enactment  which  required
an  interval  of  five  years  between  the  discharge  of

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  xvi.  12.:  "Putabamus  ilium  mctuere,  si  ad  urbeni
ire  coepisset,  ne  Gallias  amitteret,  quas  ambas  habet  inimicissimas
praeter  Transpadanos  :  ex  Ilispaniaque  sex  Icgioiies  ct  magna
auxilia  habet  a  tergo."

A.r.705-B.c.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  12?

office  in  the  city  and  the  assumption  of  a  provincial
government  was  utterly  disregarded.  Scipio,  the
consul  of  the  year  702,  received  Syria,  the  most  im-
portant military  command  in  the  East.  L.  Domitius
Ahenobarbus  was  selected  to  be  Caesar's  successor  in
the  Further  Gaul,  a  province  which  had  heretofore
been  generally  reserved  for  the  most  devoted  parti-
sans of  the  oligarchy.  The  Cisalpine  Gaul,  one  of
Caesar's  principal  strongholds,  was  confided  to  Con-
sidius  ;  Sicily,  Sardinia,  and  Africa,  the  three  grana-
ries of  the  city,  were  entrusted  to  the  vigilance  of
Cato,  Cotta,  and  Tuber o.  Cilicia,  which  secured  the
alliance  of  the  dependent  kings  of  Asia  Minor,  was
placed  under  the  control  of  P.  Sestius.  A  trifling
and  inglorious  charge,  that  of  the  Campanian  coast,
satisfied  the  demands  of  Cicero.  He  was  extremely
unwilling  to  leave  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of
Kome,  where  he  conceived  that  his  real  sphere
of  usefulness  lay.1  Cato  was  no  less  reluctant  to
relinquish  the  contests  of  the  forum,  in  the  danger
and  excitement  of  which  he  delighted,  for  the  grave
responsibility  of  arming  in  a  civil  contest.  He  would
have  resisted  every  entreaty  or  menace  of  Pompeius,
but  the  voice  of  the  consuls  spoke  to  him  with  an
authority  which  he  could  not  withstand,  and  his
issuming  an  active  share  in  the  war  measures  of  the
senate  gave  the  stamp  of  justice  to  its  cause  in  the
eyes  at  least  of  an  admiring  posterity.2

The  personages  who  were  selected for  these  im-
portant charges  were  for  the  most  part  dis-  Men  and
tinguished  as  the  boldest  and  haughtiest  E^u™*11
champions  of  aristocratic  ascendency. Mar-  "i""""0""-
cius  Philippus,  a  near  connexion  of  Caesar,  and  M.
Marcellus,  who had  given offence by  his prudent

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  xvi.  11,  12.,  ad  Alt.  vii.  14.
7  Pint.  Cat.  Min.  53.;  Lucan,  i.  128.:

"  Viotrix  causa  Deis  placuit,  sed  victa  Catoni."

128  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIV

advice  not  to  rush  into  war,  at  least  until  preparation
was  fully  made,  were  passed  over  in  the  distribution
of  provinces,  though  both  were  entitled  to  them
from  their  consular  dignity.1  The  appeal  to  the
people  for  the  Lex  Curiata,  by  which  alone  the  pro-
consul received  legitimate  authority  for  the  levy  of
troops,  was  omitted  in  all  these  appointments  as  a
superfluous  condescension  to  the  privileges  of  the
commonalty.  The  treasury  was  freely  opened  to  the
requisitions  of  the  generalissimo  of  the  republic,  and
not  in  Rome  only,  but  throughout  Italy  contribu-
tions were  extorted,  and  even  the  temples  plundered,
to  expedite  the  collection  of  the  materials  of  war
which  had  been  so  long  neglected.2

These  measures  were  the  vigorous,  or  rather  the

feverish  work  of  a  single  day. It  was  not

hawJgues  his by  Curio  and  the  fugitive  tribunes,  who  had

ciaTSsMs  pro~  left  the  city  the  preceding  night,  that  the

wrongs.  J  ri j j £  t.

news  of  the  nobles  defiance  was  brought
to  Caesar's  camp.  The  couriers  who  set  out  from
Rome  one  evening  later  with  the  account  of  the  next
day's  debate  seem  to  have  outstripped  the  progress
of  the  private  party;  and  it  was  upon  the  receipt
of  the  intelligence  which  they  brought  to  Ravenna,
if  we  are  to  believe  Caesar's  apologetic  statement,
that  he  first  determined  to  draw  the  sword.3  He
did  not  fall  in  with  Curio,  as  we  shall  see,  till  some
days  later,  and  one  stage  nearer  to  Rome.  Doubt-

1  Caes.  B.  C.  L  6.:  "Philippus  et  Marcellus  private  consilio  prae-
tereuntur."

2  Caes.  /.  c. : "  Tota Italia dilectus  habentur,  anna  imperantur,
pecunite a municipiis  exiguntur,  e  fanis tolluntur,  omnia divina
humanaque jura  penniscentur." Comp. Dion, xli. 6. ; Appian,
L'.  C.  ii.  34.

1  Cxs.  B.  C.  i.  7. :  "  Quibus  rebus  cognitis,"  that  is,  the  resolu-
tions of  the  senate  for  the  division  of  provinces,  by  which  he
was  himself  superseded,  Caesar  harangued  his  soldiers  :  it  was  not
till  some  days  later  that  he  met  the  tribunes  at  Ariminum  (c.  8.).
But  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  notices  cf  date  here  are
purposely  confused.

A..U.705-B.C.49.  UNDEfi THE EMPIRE.  129

less  he  had  calculated  every  step  beforehand :  his
arrangements  were  made,  his  preparations  complete,
nor  did  he  at  the  last  moment  waver.  It  was  appa-
rently on  the  eleventh  of  January,  as  soon  as  the
news  reached  him,  that  he  assembled  and  harangued
the  thirteenth  legion,  which  was  all  the  force  he  had
with  him  at  Ravenna.1  The  statement  of  his  claims
and  wrongs  was  received  by  the  soldiers  with  expres-
sions of  the  warmest  indignation ;  though  he  did  not
even  yet  indicate  publicly  the  course  he  had  deter-
mined to  adopt,  he  felt  the  pulse  of  his  followers,  and
satisfied  himself  once  more  of  their  devotion  to  him.
The  officers  were  attached  to  him  from  love,  hope
and  gratitude,  and  the  great  mass  of  the  common
soldiers,  of  provincial  or  foreign  birth,  had  no  sym-
pathy with  the  country  whose  name  only  they  bore.
He  had  already  doubled  their  pay2  while  yet  in  com-
parative poverty;  what  might  they  not  expect  from
his  munificence  when  the  riches  of  the  world  should
lie  at  his  disposal  ?

The  city  of  Ravenna,  at  which  Caesar  had  fixed  the
quarters  of  his  scanty  band,  though  lying  C(E8ar  prepare,
out  of  the  direct  line  of  the  ^milian  way,  iu1"1"16

1  Caes.  B.  C.  I  7. Appian  (B.  C.  ii.  32.)  says  that  Curio  reached
Rome  in  three  days  from  Ravenna. We  must  suppose  that  couriers
left  Rome with  the  news  of  the  debate  which took  place  in  the
senate  on  the  following  day,  in  the  evening of the  7tb,  and  ar-
rived at Ravenna  within  a  similar  period. Caesar's address to
the  soldiers  could  hardly  be  later  than  the  next  day,  that  is,  the
llth:  yet  it  does  not  appear  that  he  crossed  the  Rubicon before
the  night  of  the  15th — 16th,  if  we  may  depend  upon  the  accuracy
of  Plutarch's  calculation  of  60  days  from  thence  to  the  taking  of
Brundisium.

2  Suet.  Jul.  26.  : "  Legionibus  stipendium  in  perpetuum  dupli-
cavit." He does not  state the exact  time, but  mentions this
among  the  various  artifices  by  which  Caesar  attached  different  classes
of  the  citizens  to  his  rising  fortunes. The  legionary's  pay  in  the
time  of  Polybius  was  two  obols,  equivalent  in  round  numbers  to
five  ases  (Polyb.  vL  39.). Tacitus  (Ann.  i.  17.)  mentions  ten  asea
as  the  ordinary  stipendium  in  his  day. See  the  note  on  Suet.  /.  e.
ed.  Baumgarten-Crusius,  from  Lipsius  and  Gronoviua.

"VOL.  TT.  K

130  HISTORY OF THE BOMANS  CH.  MT.

the  principal  communication  between  .Italy  and
Cisalpine  Gaul,  was  the  chief  military  station  of  that
province.  It  was  connected  with  this  main  trunk
by  a  secondary  route,  which  branched  off  from  Ari-
minum,  and  skirted  the  coast  of  the  Adriatic,  pass-
ing through  Ravenna  to  Aquileia.  About  ten  miles
from  Ariminum,  and  twice  that  distance  from  Ra-
venna, the  frontier  of  Italy  and  Graul  was  traced  by
the  stream  of  the  Rubicon.1  This  little  river,  red
with  the  drainage  of  the  peat  mosses  from  which  it
descends,2  is  formed  by  the  union  of  three  mountain
torrents,  and  is  nearly  dry  in  the  summer,  like  most
of  the  watercourses  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Apen-
nines. In  the  month  of  November  the  winter  flood
might  present  a  barrier  more  worthy  of  the  important
position  which  it  once  occupied3;  but  the  northern
frontier  of  Italy  had  long  been  secure  from  invasion,
and  the  channel  was  spanned  by  a  bridge  of  no  great
dimensions.4  Caesar  seems  to  have  made  his  last
arrangements  in  secret,  and  concealed  his  design  till
the  moment  he  had  fixed  for  its  accomplishment.
On  the  morning  of  the  fifteenth  he  sent  forward
some  cohorts  to  the  river,  while  he  remained  himself
at  Ravenna,  and  assisted  at  a  public  spectacle  througn-
out  the  day.  He  invited  company  to  his  table,  and
entertained  them  with  his  usual  ease  and  affability.
It  was  not  till  sunset  that  he  made  an  excuse  for  a
brief  absence,  and  then,  mounting  a  car  yoked  with
mules,  hired  from  a  mill  in  the  vicinity,  hastened
with  only  a  few  attendants  to  overtake  his  soldiers
at  the  appointed  spot.  In  his  anxiety  to  avoid  the
risk  of  being  encountered  and  his  movements  di-

1  Suet.  Jul.  31.;  Plut.  Cox.  20.

4  Lucan,  i.  214. :  "  Puniceus  Rubicon."  The  name  of  the  stream
is  evidently  derived  from  its  colour.

1  The  loth  of  January,  A.U.  705,  corresponded  with  Nov.  27.  B.C
50;  Fischer,  R.  Z.

4  Suetonius  (/.c.)  calls  it  ponticulus.

A.U.70.5-B.C.49.  DflDEE THE EMPIRE.  131

vulged,  he  left  the  high  road,  and  soon  lost  his  way
in  the  bye-paths  of  the  country.  One  after  another
the  torches  of  his  party  became  extinguished,  and
he  was  left  in  total  darkness.  It  was  only  by  taking
a  peasant  for  a  guide  and  alighting  from  his  vehicle
that  he  at  last  reached  his  destination.1

The  ancients  amused  themselves  with  picturing
the  guilty  hesitation  with  which  the  first  me  passage  of
of  a  line  of  despots  stood,  as  they  imagined,  theKubico»-
on  the  brink  of  the  fatal  river,  and  paused  for  an  in-
stant before  he  committed  the  irrevocable  act,  preg-
nant with  the  destinies  of  a  long  futurity.  Caesar,
indeed,  in  his  Commentaries,  makes  no  allusion  to
the  passage  of  the  Rubicon,  and,  at  the  moment  of
stepping  on  the  bridge,  his  mind  was  probably  ab-
sorbed in  the  arrangements  he  had  made  for  the
march  of  his  legions,  or  for  their  reception  by  his
friends  in  Ariminum.  We  may  feel  an  interest,  how-
ever, in  remarking  how  the  incident  was  coloured  by
the  imaginations  of  its  first  narrators;  and  the  old
tradition  recorded  by  Suetonius  is  too  picturesque
and  too  characteristic  of  the  Italian  cast  of  legend  to
be  passed  by  without  notice.  Even  now,  Caesar  had
said,  we  may  return ;  if  we  cross  the  bridge,  arms
must  decide  the  contest.  At  that  moment  of  suspense
there  appeared  suddenly  the  figure  of  a  youth,  re-
markable for  comeliness  and  stature,  playing  on  a
flute,  the  pastoral  emblem  of  peace  and  security.  The
shepherds  about  the  spot  mingled  with  the  soldiers,
and  straggled  towards  him,  captivated  by  his  simple
airs  ;  when,  with  a  violent  movement,  he  snatched  a
trumpet  from  one  of  the  military  band,  rushed  with
it  to  the  bank  of  the  river,  and  blowing  a  furious
blast  of  martial  music,  leaped  into  the  water,  and
disappeared  on  the  opposite  side.  Let  us  advance,
exclaimed  Caesar,  where  the  gods  direct,  and  our

1  Suet.  Jul  I.  c.;  Plut.  CCES.  32.
K 2

132  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xiv.

enemies  invite  us.  Be  the  die  cast.  The  soldiers
dashed  across  the  bridge  or  the  ford,  and,  giving  them
not  an  instant  for  reflection,  the  bold  invader  led
them  straight  to  Ariminuin,  entering  its  undefended
walls  with  the  first  break  of  dawn.1  It  was  there  that
he  met  Curio  and  the  fugitive  tribunes.  They  had
no  occasion  to  disclose  their  grievances.  While  they
had  lingered  on  their  way,  inflaming  perhaps  the  in-
dignation of  their  adherents  in  the  towns  through
which  they  passed,  by  the  recital  of  the  proceedings
in  Eome,  the  champion  of  the  commons  had  already
heard  the  story  of  their  wrongs,  and  had  taken  up
arms  ostensibly  to  avenge  their  violated  sanctity.

The  occupation  of  Ariminum  was  an  explicit  de-
conntemation  claration  of  war ;  but  Caesar  was  not  in  a
of  the  city.  condition  to  push  forward  immediately.
It  was  from  thence,  he  tells  us,  that  he  despatched
orders  for  the  movement  of  his  troops2 ;  one  legion,
the  twelfth,  reached  him  within  a  fortnight,  and  an-
other, the  eighth,  within  a  month  from  that  time.
These,  together  with  the  thirteenth  legion,  which  he
had  with  him,  were  the  forces  with  which  he  had  de-
termined to  confront  the  army  of  the  consuls;  for
Caesar  also  had  made  his  calculations  regarding  the
disposition  of  the  Italians,  and  the  fidelity  of  the
troops  opposed  to  him,  and  reckoned  upon  deriving
his  most  copious  resources  from  the  enemy's  own
camp.  Three  of  his  legions  were  led  to  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Narbo,  under  the  command  of  Fabius,
in  order  to  check  the  advance  of  the  Pompeian  lieu-

1  Suet.  Jul.  32. ;  comp.  Appian,  ii.  35. ;  Plut.  Cces.  32.  Lucan
(i.  186.)  introduces  on  this  occasion  the  apparition  of  the  goddess
Roma.  In  his  times,  it  should  be  remembered,  the  idea  of  Rome  as
a  living  abstraction  began  to  take  the  place  of  the  conceptions  of  the
popular  mythology.  The  famous  Prosopopoeia  of  the  Genius  of  the
Cape,  whom  Camoens  summons  to  address  the  Portuguese  navigators,
has  far  less  connexion  with  the  ideas  of  real  life.

*  Cses.  B.  C.  I  8.  ;  Lucan,  i.  396. :

"  Deseiuere  cavo  tentoria  fixa  Lemano,"  &c.

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER 1KB EMPIRE.  133

tenants  from  Spain.  The  remainder  of  his  forces
were  withdrawn  perhaps  gradually  from  their  winter-
quarters  and  concentrated  in  the  south  of  Gaul,  to
support  either  the  right  or  left  wing  of  his  position.
But  for  some  days  the  position  of  the  invader,  with  a
mere  handful  of  soldiers  about  him,  was  extremely
precarious.  Had  the  three  legions  of  Pompeius  been
arrayed  in  his  front,  and  led  against  him  by  officers  in
whom  they  confided,  a  prompt  attack  could  hardly  have
failed  to  destroy  him.  But  these  troops  were  divided
and  distant ;  perhaps  their  officers  knew,  what  at  least
was  carefully  concealed  from  the  public,  that  they
could  not  be  relied  on  ;  and  the  counsels  of  the  nobles
had  relapsed  once  more  into  feebleness  and  vacilla-
tion. They  had  indulged  in  incredulity  to  the  last,
and  the  news  that  Caesar  had  actually  crossed  the
frontier  came  upon  them  like  a  clap  of  thunder.  The
conqueror  of  the  northern  world  was  marching,  as  they
believed,  upon  them.  He  who  had  climbed  the  Alps
and  bridged  the  Khine  and  bestridden  the  ocean1,  was
daily,  so  the  rumour  ran,  achieving  his  twenty  miles
on  the  broad  and  solid  footing  of  their  own  military
way.  Nor  was  it  only  the  Caesar  of  the  Curia  and
the  Forum  who  was  rapidly  approaching  their  walls.
Bold  and  reckless  as  he  had  shown  himself  in  the
civic  contests  of  the  gown,  he  had  learnt  cruelty  by
habitual  shedding  of  blood  ;  he  had  become,  they
were  assured,  in  his  nine  years'  intercourse  with  the
barbarians,  more  ferocious  than  the  Gauls  themselves.
Even  hia  legions  were  not  of  pure  Roman  extraction,
but  filled  with  the  fiercest  warriors  of  the  races  he
had  subdued.2  The  name  of  the  half-clad  savages  of

1  Lucan,  i.  369.  :

"  Hsec  manus  ut  victum  post  tcrga  relinqueret  orbem
Oceani  tumidas  remo  compescuit  utidas,
Fregit  ct  Arctoo  spumantem  vortice  Rhenurn."
*  Lucan,  ii.  535. :

"  Gallicaper  gelida*  rabies  ctTunditur  Alpes."

134  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIV.

the  north  was  still  a  sound  of  panic  dread  to  the
populations  of  Italy.  The  Eomans  quailed  before  a
second  apparition  of  the  bearded  and  brawny  victors
of  the  day  of  Allia,  much  as  the  citizens  of  London
shuddered  at  the  approach  of  the  Highlanders,  the
shock  of  whose  charge  had  overthrown  horse  and  man
at  the  rout  of  Grladsmuir.  For  such,  they  believed,
were  the  followers  of  the  patrician  renegade,  who
were  even  now  thundering  down  the  Flaminian  Way,
bursting  through  the  denies  of  the  Apennines,  and
choking  the  valleys  of  the  Tiber  and  Nar  with  clouds
of  barbarian  cavalry.1

At  this  moment  Caesar,  as  we  have  seen,  was  wait-
The  chiefs  of  ing  with  only  a  few  cohorts  at  Ariminum
evirate6  f°r  tne  arrival  of  the  succours,  without
which,  bold  as  he  was,  even  he  would  have
deemed  it  madness  to  advance  against  the  city.  But
the  elements  of  his  strength  were  magnified  into
colossal  proportions  by  the  excited  imaginations  of
the  men  who,  only  a  week  before,  had  most  affected
to  despise  them.  They  counted  his  eleven  legions,
his  indefinite  resources  of  Gaulish  cavalry,  the  favour
of  the  Transpadanes,  the  zeal  of  the  city  mob,  the
fanatic  devotion  to  him  of  the  depraved  and  ruined
of  all  classes.  He  had  secured  the  favour  of  the  pub-
licani  by  his  successful  vindication  of  their  claims ;
the  money-lenders  were  dissatisfied  with  the  sump-
tuary reforms  which  Pompeius  had  encouraged ;  and,
lastly,  the  agriculturists  of  Italy  were  indifferent  to
the  empty  names  of  freedom  and  the  republic,  and
would  have  lent  their  weight  to  the  maintenance  of

1  Lucan  i  475  :

"  Qua  Nar  Tibcrino  illabitur  amm
Barbaricas  saevi  discurrereCa;saris  alas.
Ipsum  omnes  aquilas  collataque  signa  fercntem
Agminc  non  uno  densisque  incedere  castris.
Nee  qualeiu  meminere  vident ;  majorque  ferusque
Mcntibns  occurrit,  victoque  immanior  hostc  ''

A.TT.705  B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  135

a  kingly  tyranny,  if  only  they  could  avert  the  calami-
ties of  war.  In  the  midst  of  this  general  panic,  the
consuls  and  the  senate,  with  their  friends  and  ad-
herents, turned  anxiously  for  counsel  and  encourage-
ment to  Pompeius.  But  the  hero  had  withdrawn
from  the  neighbourhood  of  the  city  immediately  on
the  arrival  of  the  fatal  news.  He  imparted  his  views
and  plans  to  no  one.  He  had  an  interview  with
Cicero  at  Formiae  ;  but  the  orator,  irresolute  and  de-
sponding himself,  could  obtain  no  intimation  from
his  leader  of  the  tactics  by  which  he  meant  to  oppose
the  invader.  The  streets  of  Kome  were  crowded  with
an  agitated  multitude  of  all  ranks  and  classes.
Consulars  and  patricians  descended  from  the  steps  of
their  palaces  and  led  the  long  procession  of  fugitives
down  the  Appian  Way  to  Capua  and  the  south.1
Such  was  the  confusion  of  the  moment  that  the  rulers
of  the  state  left  the  city  without  removing  the  public
treasure  in  the  coffers  of  the  temple  of  Saturn.2
They  were  not  less  negligent  of  their  own  private
possessions,  all  of  which  they  abandoned  to  the  risk
of  pillage  by  the  mob,  even  before  the  public  enemy
should  arrive  to  seize  them.  Many  indeed  of  the
nobles  still  retained  their  blind  confidence  in  Pom-
peius, and  calculated  on  a  speedy  return,  as  the  result
of  some  deep-laid  schemes  which  they  supposed  him
to  have  planned  in  secret.  But  his  flight  operated  in
general  to  increase  the  terror,  and  no  sacrifice  was
thought  too  great  to  make  for  the  safety  of  their  bare
lives.

At  the  moment  when great  political principles
meet  in  decisive  conflict,  it  may  be  observed

.,  ,,  , . ,.  f ,,  ~ ,, Thecalumnie*

that the inclinations  ot trie  mass  oi  the  against  c«»r
honourable  and  well-intentioned,  who  con-  wen-tote"*

.  ,  ,.  ,  , tioned  men

statute perhaps generally the numerical  fromembrmc-

_j.u f  J • C  ing  his  cauae.

strength  of  a  party,  are  swayed  in  favour

1  Dion,  xli.  7,8.;  Lucan,  i.  486.;  comp.  Cic.  ad  Alt.  vii.  10—12.
*  Cic.  ad  Alt.  vii.  15 ;  Cues.  B  C.  i.  14.

136  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xiv.

of  the  side  which  seems  to  embrace  the  men  of
highest  renown  for  patriotism  and  probity.  It  is
much  easier  to  distinguish  who  are  the  most  honest
men,  than  to  discover  which  are  the  soundest  prin-
ciples ;  and  it  seems  safer  to  choose  the  side  which
boasts  of  philosophers  and  patriots  in  its  ranks  than
that  which  is  branded  as  the  refuge  of  spendthrifts
and  apostates.  It  was  with  an  instinctive  sense  of
this  bias  of  the  human  mind  that  the  nobles  had
studied  all  along  to  represent  the  followers  of  their
enemy's  fortunes  as  none  other  than  the  needy  and
rapacious,  the  scum  of  all  orders  of  the  community.
They  did  not  affect  to  insinuate  that  their  vileness
made  them  less  dangerous,  but  they  were  such,  they
maintained,  as  no  man  who  wished  to  keep  up  the
appearance  of  public  virtue  could  decently  associate
with.  We  may  remember  that  Csesar,  as  he  appeared
to  the  eyes  of  the  Roman  nobility  at  this  period  of
his  career,  was  an  adventurer  of  dissolute  manners
and  the  loosest  principles.  For  many  years  all  his  ac-
tions had  been  blackened  by  the  systematic  calumnies
with  which  he  was  assailed,  even  beyond  the  common
measure  which  fell  to  the  lot  of  contemporary  states-
men. It  required  more  than  usual  candour,  par-
ticularly in  his  avowed  enemies,  to  divest  the  mind
of  a  peculiar  prejudice  against  him.  Nevertheless,
his  conduct  as  a  statesman  and  warrior  in  his  foreign
governments  might  have  served  to  disabuse  public
opinion  of  its  grossest  errors  in  this  respect.  As-
suredly none  could  fairly  deny  that  he  had  formed
to  himself  friends  and  admirers  from  among  men  of
the  best  families,  and  the  highest  principles.  A
Cicero,  a  Crassus,  a  Brutus,  had  been  his  most  devoted
partisans.  The  connexions  of  his  own  family,  the
Caesars,  the  Pisos,  the  Marcii,  held  a  high  place  in
the  estimation  of  their  countrymen.  But,  in  spite
of  the  plainness  of  this  fact,  the  charge  was  constantly
reiterated ;  the  men  whom  the  arch-traitor  could

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  137

attach  to  himself  could  be  none,  it  was  insisted,  but
monsters  of  vice,  cruelty  and  profligacy.  The  lie
prevailed  by  repetition ;  and  the  waverers,  unable  to
see  clearly  for  themselves  through  the  cloud  of  in-
terested sophistry,  were  frightened,  if  not  convinced,
and  learned  to  shrink  with  horror  from  a  cause  which
was  thus  atrociously  misrepresented.  Cicero  himself,
of  all  men  the  most  easily  deceived  by  the  colouring
of  political  partisans,  was  deluded  by  this  clamour.
Much  as  he  hated  and  feared  the  nobles,  from  whose
victory  he  expected  nothing  but  violence  and  illegal
usurpation,  he  had  not  the  firmness  fairly  to  review
the  cause  and  objects  for  which  Csesar  was  in  arms.
If  the  invader's  personal  aim  was  self-aggrandizement,
the  same  was  at  least  equally  true  of  his  opponent.  If
Pompeius,  on  the  other  hand,  had  refrained  hitherto
from  acts  of  violence,  every  one  was  ready  to  acknow-
ledge that  he  was  deterred  by  no  principle ;  it  was
only  because  the  necessities  of  the  senate  had  com-
pelled it  to  throw  its  powers  unreservedly  into  his
hands.  The  event  of  the  impending  contest  would
undoubtedly  place  him,  if  successful,  in  the  position
he  had  long  coveted,  of  a  military  tyrant.  The  power
of  the  oligarchy,  upon  which  he  leaned,  hemmed  in
on  all  sides  by  the  encroachment  of  popular  influ-
ences, could  only  be  maintained  by  arms,  and  arms
could  not  fail  to  raise  their  bearer  to  the  despot's
throne.  But  Caesar's  success  would  not  be  confined
to  himself  personally  ;  it  would  be  the  triumph  of  the
classes  from  whose  fresh  blood  and  simple  habits  the
renovation  of  the  commonwealth  might  not  unreason-
ably be  expected.  The  Transpadanes,  for  instance,
claimed  the  boon  of  citizenship ;  and  setting  aside
blind  prejudices,  no  pretender  to  a  statesman's  fore-
sight could  deny  the  advantage  of  thus  converting
lukewarm  allies  into  zealous  members  of  the  com-
monwealth. The  principle  for  which  their  patron
contended  was  ripe  for  extension  to  other  communi-

138  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIT.

ties  similarly  circumstanced,  aud  it  was  apparent
that  a  vast  but  bloodless  revolution  might  be  effected
under  the  auspices  of  a  Marian  dictatorship.  The
interest  which  the  moneyed  classes  took  in  Caesar's  suc-
cess was  another  proof  that  the  victory  of  the  oligarchy
could  only  lead  to  more  hopeless  embarrassments,
while  that  of  the  popular  faction  might  establish  peace
upon  a  solid  foundation.1  The  native  races  of  Italy,
notwithstanding  all  the  intrigues  and  violence  of  the
long  ascendant  faction,  still  retained  their  old  sym-
pathy for  the  popular  side ;  and  they  too  had  claims
of  justice  which  they  had  long  despaired  of  urging
upon  the  dominant  oligarchy.  The  soil  on  which  the
forces  of  Pompeius  were  standing  was  mined  beneath
their  feet  So  far  from  his  being  able  to  raise  legions
by  stamping  on  the  ground,  the  first  call  of  the  old
general  upon  his  veterans  throughout  the  peninsula
was  answered,  as  we  shall  see,  by  the  open  defection
of  cities  and  colonies.  Surely  these  were  signs  of
the  times  upon  which  the  true  patriot  ought  to  have
meditated,  before  he  enlisted  on  the  side  against
which  was  arrayed  such  a  mass  of  interests  and  affec-
tions. It  is  not  the  province  of  the  historian  to  con-
demn or  absolve  the  great  names  of  humau  annals.
He  leaves  the  philosophic  moralist  to  denounce  crimes
or  errors,  upon  a  full  survey  of  the  character  and
position  of  the  men  and  their  times ;  but  it  is  his
business  to  distinguish,  in  analysing  the  causes  of
events,  between  the  personal  views  of  the  actors  in
revolutions  and  the  general  interests  which  their
conduct  subserved,  and  to  claim  for  their  deeds  the
sympathy  of  posterity  in  proportion  as  they  tended
to  the  benefit  of  mankind.  He  may  be  allowed  to

1  Cic.  ad.  Ait.  vii.  7.  §  5.,  written  xiii.  Kal.  Jun.  A.  u.  704. :  "An
publicanos  bonos  putas  qui  nunquam  firmi,  sed  mine  Caesari  sant
amicissimi  ?  an  foeneratores,  an  agricolas,  quibus  optatissimum  est
otium  ?  Nisi  eos  timere  putas  ne  sub  regno  sint,  qui  id  nunquam,
dummodo  otiosi  sint,  recusaruut."

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  139

lament  the  pettiness  of  the  statesmen  of  this  epoch,
and  the  narrow  idea  they  formed  of  public  interests
in  the  contest  between  Caesar  and  his  rival.  Above
all,  he  must  regret  that  a  man  to  whom  we  owe  so
much  affection  as  Cicero  should  have  been  deceived
by  a  selfish  and  hypocritical  outcry ;  for  Cicero  suc-
ceeded in  persuading  himself  .that  the  real  patriots
were  all  on  the  side  of  the  oligarchy,  and  that  it  was
his  duty  as  a  philosopher  to  follow,  not  the  truth,  but
the  true  men,  not  right  judgment,  but  honourable
sentiment.1

The  consuls  and  senate,  as  we  have  seen,  had  aban-
doned the  city  on  the  first  rumour  of  Cae-
sar's advance  to  Ariminum.  The  political  mistake  of  the
effects  of  this  rash  step  seem  to  have  been  abandoning
little  considered  by  them  ;  but,  in  fact,  in
the  view  of  the  great  mass  of  the  Eoman  people,  the
abandonment  of  the  city  was  equivalent  to  an  abdica-
tion of  all  legitimate  authority.2  Once  only,  in  the
history  of  the  nation,  had  a  Roman  imperator,  in  the
centre  of  his  camp,  assumed  to  represent  the  majesty
of  the  republic,  and  refused  to  obey  the  convention  of
a  coerced  and  beleaguered  senate.  But  the  example
of  Camillus  was  justified  by  his  success ;  and  it  was
only  in  the  expectation  of  a  speedy  and  triumphant
return  that  the  magistrates  of  Rome  could  hope  to
retain  their  authority  at  a  distance  from  the  Forum
and  the  Capitol.  Caesar  saw  how  fatal  a  blunder  his
opponents  had  committed.  A  great  change  had  taken
place  in  the  temper  of  the  people  since  the  last  civil
wars.  In  the  contest  of  Sulla  and  Marius  the  whole
population  was  divided  into  two  hostile  camps  ;  now

1  Cic.  adDiv.  xiv.  18.:  "  Illud  me  movet  quod  video  omnes  bonos
abesse  Roma."  Ad  Att.  vii.  20. :  ''  Ad  fugam  hortatur  atnicitia  Cnasi,
causa  bonorum,  turpitudo  conjungendi  cum  tyranno  "  (viii.  1.).

*  Comp.  Cic.  ad  Att.  vii.  11.:  "  Non  est  inquit  (Pompeius)  in
parietibus  respublica:  at  in  aris  et  focis:  fecit  idem  Themistocles
....  at  idem  Pericles  non  fecit  .  .  .  Nostri  olim,  urbe  reliqua  capta,
arceia  tamen  retinuenjnt."

140  HISTORY OF THE EOMANS  CH.  XTT.

the  great  mass  was  quiescent ;  its  predilections  were
not  strong  enough  to  rouse  it  to  vigorous  action  in
behalf  of  either.  Its  instinct  taught  it  that  another
civil  war  could  only  present  it  with  a  choice  of  mas-
ters. Whichever  of  the  rival  chieftains  first  occupied
Rome,  he  would  secure  the  acquiescence  and  apparent
approbation  of  the  citizens,  and  obtain  the  most  spe-
cious sanction  to  his  usurpation.

The  consuls  retired  along  the  Appian  Way  instead
Pompeiu.  °f  advancing  upon  the  Flaminian.  Such
c*°aVuf  oTder  was  their  first  false  step,  and  it  is  possible
to  gain  time.  fa^  ft  save(j  Csesar  from  immediate  destruc-
tion. Yet  he  could  not  venture  to  move  southward
without  reinforcements,  while  to  halt  at  the  first
moment  of  invasion  might  seem  a  sign  of  weak-
ness and  an  omen  of  discomfiture.  The  second  move
of  his  enemies  relieved  him  from  this  difficulty.
Pompeius  had  the  weakness  to  keep  up  the  farce  of
negotiations  by  sending  L.  Caesar,  a  young  kinsman
of  the  proconsul,  to  solicit  a  final  declaration  of  his
demands.1  To  complicate  the  matter  still  more,  and
give  further  pretence  for  procrastination,  the  young
ambassador  was  instructed  to  speak  particularly  of
the  good  feeling  of  Pompeius  towards  his  rival,  and
his  personal  wish  to  accommodate  matters  in  a  liberal
way ;  as  if  a  feud  so  ancient,  and  lately  grown  so
deadly  between  the  Marian  camp  and  the  Sullan,
could  be  resolved  into  an  affair  of  private  and  personal
jealousy.  Pompeius  indeed  had  his  own  reasons  for
wishing  to  gain  time  to  complete  the  preparations  he
contemplated  in  Italy  and  throughout  the  provinces ;
but  he  lost  by  delay  far  more  than  he  gained,  for  the
activity  of  his  rival  could  profit  more  by  an  hour
than  his  own  stately  movements  by  a  day.  To  these
overtures,  the  insincerity  of  which  was  too  obvious  to
deceive,  Caesar  replied  with  an  energetic  exposition
of  the  claims  he  had  repeatedly  advanced,  the  sum

1  Ctts.  B.C.  i.  8.

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE  141

of  which  was  his  demand  that  equal  measure  should
be  dealt  to  Pompeius  and  himself,  and  the  armies  of
each  imperator  disbanded  simultaneously.  Such  was
the  ultimatum  with  which  the  envoy  was  dismissed ;
and  this  was  the  moment  which  Labienus  seized  for
the  defection  which  he  had  been  meditating.1  ^^^  of
The  desertion  of  so  able  an  officer  at  this  Labieuu8-
juncture  seems  to  prove  how  precarious,  in  a  military
point  of  view,  the  position  of  his  leader  must  have
appeared.  But  Labienus  could  only  see  what  was
immediately  before  him  ;  he  could  not  appreciate  the
more  remote  resources  on  which  Caesar  calculated,  or
the  signs  of  distraction  and  imbecility  already  half
disclosed  by  his  opponents.  It  was  on  the  twenty-
second  of  January  that  the  fugitive  was  received  by
Pompeius  in  his  quarters  at  Teanum.2  Caesar  con-
temptuously sent  his  baggage  after  him3;  but  the
nobles  stomached  this  affront,  and  vied  with  each
other  in  hailing  the  accession  to  their  side  with  raptu-
rous anticipations  of  triumph.  Even  Cicero,  who
had  been  plunged  into  the  most  abject  despondency,
and  was  only  thinking  how  best  to  reconcile  his  posi-
tion as  a  leader  of  the  senatorial  party  with  the  means
of  recovering  the  favour  of  the  enemy,  now  broke
into  exulting  vituperation  of  the  new  Hannibal,  the
plunderer  of  Italy.4  He  was  well  pleased  to  think
that  his  commission  in  Campania  gave  him  the  rea-

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  vii.  11..  ad  Div.xiv.  14.:  "  Labienus  rem  meliorem
fecit.  Adjuvat  etiaru  Piso  quod  ab  urbe  discedit,  et  sceleris  con-
demnat  geuerum  suuiu."  Dion,  xli.  4.

*  Cic.  ad  Alt.  vii.  13. :  "Labienus  Teanum  venit,  a.d.  ix.  Kal.
Febr."  Jan.  22.  A.U.  705— Dec.  4.  B.C.  50.  All  the  dates  of  this
year  are  forty-seven  days  in  advance  of  the  real  time.  See  Fischer,
7?.  Z.  It  must  be  remembered  that  December  and  January,  before
the  Julian  correction,  had  only  29  days  each.  Drumann,  Billerbeck,
Arnold  and  others  make  this  day  the  24th.

1  Plut  Cces.  34.

4  Cic.  ad  Att.  I.  c. :  "  Utrum  de  Imperatore  populi  Romani  an  de
Hanuibale  loquituur  ?  O  hominem  amentein  et  miserum  qui  ne  uiu-
bram  quidem  uuquam  TOV  KO\OV  viderit  I "

142  HISTORY OF THE JROMANS  cB.  XIV.

diest  access  to  his  beloved  city ;  but  Cato  murmured

loudly  against  his  own  destination  to  Sicily,  at  a  time

when  all  eyes  were  turned  towards  Eome,  and  the

first  question  to  be  debated  in  the  senate  would  be

the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  Caesar's  submission.1

But  L.  Caesar  had  hardly  returned  to  head-quarters

before  the  news  arrived  of  further  aggres-

vrn"saanci sions  on  the  part  of  this  audacious  rebel.

takes  Iguvium, ~  ,  ,  ,  .

Arretium,  and  Caesar  s  advance  more  than  counterba-
lanced the  impression  made  by  his  lieu-
tenant's defection.  Three  great  roads  converged
upon  Ariminum  from  the  south.  One  led  from
Etruria  to  the  confines  of  the  Gallic  province,
through  the  passes  by  which  Brennus  had  penetrated
to  Clusium  ;  another,  the  famous  Way  of  Flaminius,
was  the  direct  route  from  Eome ;  a  third  led  from
Brundisium  and  the  southern  districts  of  the  penin-
sula, taking  the  line  of  the  Adriatic  coast  from
Ancona.  Arretium,  Iguvium,  and  Auximum  were
important  fortresses  for  the  defence  of  these  roads
respectively  against  an  invader  from  the  north.
Their  occupation  would  enable  Caesar  to  advance
upon  either  of  the  three  positions  which  the  enemy
might  adopt ;  for  Pompeius  might  either  concen-
trate his  forces  to  cover  Kome,  or  withdraw  to  the
right  towards  Brundisium  to  keep  open  his  commu-
nications with  the  eastern  provinces,  or  to  the  left  to
maintain  himself  at  Centumcella?,  while  he  recalled
to  his  standard  the  legions  in  Spain.  Caesar's  forces
were  still  limited  to  a  single  legion.  Antonius  with
five  cohorts  seized  upon  Arretium,  which  was  unde-
fended. At  the  same  moment  Thermus,  to  whom
the  senate  had  mtrusted  Iguvium  and  the  country  of
Umbria  which  it  covered,  first  abandoned  his  post,

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  vii.  i5. :  "  Cato  enim  ipse  jam  servire  quam  pug.
nare  mavult.  Sed  tamen  ait  se  in  senatu  adesse  velle  quum  de
conditionibus  agatur  ....  Ita  quod  maxime  opus  est  in  Siciliara  ire
non  curat;  qnod  metao  ne  obsit,  in  senatu  esse  vult."

A.U.705-B.C.40.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  143

rendered  untenable  by  the  disaffection  of  the  inha-
bitants, and  was  straightway  abandoned  by  his  own
soldiers  ;  Auximum,  meanwhile,  rose  against  Varus,
and  compelled  him  to  a  hasty  retreat,  while  it  opened
its  gates  to  Caesar  in  person.1

The  senate,  though  alarmed  and  irritated  at  the
progress  of  an  enemy  who  gave  his  oppo-
nents not  a  moment  to  breathe,  still in-  »ttcmpuagain
dulged the hope that he  would suffer

ors

himself  to  be  persuaded  to  withdraw  from  of  gladiato
the  places  he  had  occupied,  and  come  to
Rome,  after  disbanding  his  forces,  there  to  discuss,
as  a  private  citizen,  the  wrongs  of  which  he  com-
plained. This  was  still  the  only  condition  upon
which  the  consuls  would  condescend  to  treat,
and  it  was  with  corresponding  instructions  that  L.
Caesar  was  sent  a  second  time  to  the  quarters  of  the
invader.2  Meanwhile  the  levy  of  troops  on  the  part
of  the  senate  proceeded  slowly  and  with  little  success.
The  reluctance  of  the  Italians  to  enlist  became  alarm-
ingly apparent.  The  magistrates  of  the  towns
showed  the  strongest  disposition  to  hail  the  approach
of  Caesar's  troops  as  a  deliverance  from  the  tyranny
of  the  dominant  class.3  From  the  moment  that  the
consuls  left  Rome  there  was  no  further  prospect  of
enlisting  in  the  capital  for  the  service  of  the  state.4
Lentulus  would  have  stooped  to  a  measure  which
revolted  the  pride  of  his  associates.  He  proposed  to
draft  into  the  legions  of  the  republic  the  gladiators,
some  thousands  in  number,  whom  Cassar  kept  in
training  at  Capua.8  But  his  followers  remonstrated
BO  warmly  against  this  proposal,  which  was,  indeed,
highly  impolitic  as  well  as  illegal,  that  he  was  com-

'  OSES.  B.C.  i.  11—13.  2  Cses.  B.  C.  i.  10.

3  C«es.  B.C.  i.  15.  He  mentions  particularly  the  case  of  Cingulum,
a  town  on  which  Labienus  had  conferred  great  benefactions.

4  Gas.  B.C.  i.  14.  :  "  Dilectus  intra  urbem  mtermittuntnr."

144  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  Xtv.

pelled  to  relinquish  it.  It  was  a  difficult  matter,
however,  to  dispose  of  a  large  body  of  swordsmen,
skilful  and  well  armed,  and  accustomed  to  regard
Caesar  as  their  patron  ;  and  the  more  so  as  he  might
have  no  scruple  himself  in  employing  them  in  his
own  service.  The  numerous  legionary  force  which
would  be  requisite  for  controlling  them,  while  col-
lected in  one  spot,  could  not  possibly  be  spared,  for
such  a  service.  After  much  deliberation  it  was
resolved  to  distribute  them  in  small  parties  among
the  households  of  the  principal  nobles,  and  break
their  strength  and  spirit  by  dispersion.

Attius  Varus,  Thermus,  Lentulus  Spinther,  Faustus
Sulla,  and  Libo,  with  their  soldiers  oraban-

Pompeius  falls ,  , ,  ,  • r n

bock  upon  doned  by  them,  were  now  in  lull  retreat
from  Picenum  towards  Apulia.1  Pompeius
appointed  Larinum,  on  the  frontier  of  the  latter
province,  as  the  rallying  point  for  one  division  of  his
forces,  while  another  under  Domitius,  was  posted  in
advance  at  Corfinium,  there  to  collect  the  new  levies
from  the  centre  of  Italy.*  He  left  Teanum  in  Cam-
pania at  the  end  of  January  for  Larinum,  and  from
thence  despatched  pressing  orders  to  the  consuls  to
return  to  Koine,  and  carry  off  the  public  treasure
which  had  been  left  behind.3  The  want  of  money
was  felt  not  less  severely  than  that  of  men  ;  but  the
consuls  did  not  choose  to  risk  falling  into  Caesar's
hands  by  a  retrograde  movement,  and  refused  to  obey
their  general's  orders.  Pompeius  himself,  shocked
perhaps  at  the  arrival  of  his  lieutenants  from  Picenum
with  the  account  of  their  disasters  in  that  quarter,

1  Lucan,  ii.  461.  foil.

"  Gens  Etrusca  fuga  trepidi  nudata  Libonis,

Jusque  sui  pulso  jam  perdidit  Umbria  Thermo.

Nee  gerit  auspiciis  civilia  bella  paternis

Caesaris  audito  conversus  nomine  Sulla.

Varus  utadmotse  pulsarunt  Auximon  alas,"  &c.
» Cacs.  B.C.  i.  15.
'Cic.  ad  Alt.  vii.  21.,  writing  from  Cales,  a.d.  vi.  Id.  Feb. «  fob.  8.

A..U.705-B.C.49  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  145

fell  back  upon  Luceria;  and  it  was  now  evident
that  his  eyes  were  turned  towards  Brundisium,  and
that  he  contemplated  the  abandonment  of  Italy
altogether  rather  than  oppose  the  public  enemy  in
the  field.1  The  first  suspicion  of  this  intention  called
forth  from  his  partisans  a  storm  of  indignant  remon-
strance. Cowardice  or  treachery,  they  conceived,
alone  could  have  dictated  it,  and  the  bravest  of  their
leaders  broke  into  open  disobedience  to  the  com-
mands of  a  champion  of  whose  perfidy  they  were  now
convinced.

The  arrival  of the  twelfth  legion  having  given
Csesnr  the  means  of  acting  against  larger
forces,  he  advanced  upon  Corfinium  early  mS^a'stand

-n i  TT i Ji  i  it, at  Corfinium.

in  P  ebruary.  He  hardly  condescended  to
notice  the  terms  now  brought  by  his  kinsman  for  the
second  time,  for  every  succeeding  day  had  disclosed
to  him  the  weakness  of  the  enemy  and  the  increasing
strength  of  his  own  arms.  He  speedily  overran  Pice-
num,  taking  the  fortresses  of  Cingulum  and  Asculum,
on  his  way,  without  opposition.  But  before  Corfinium
the  Pompeian  forces  were  assembled  in  formidable
numbers,  and  were  commanded  by  an  officer  of  tried
conduct  and  firmness.  Domitius,  whose  zeal  in  the
cause  was  inflamed  by  his  recent  appointment  as
Caesar's  successor  in  the  Further  Graul,  was  deter-
mined to  make  a  stand  for  the  defence  of  Italy.1
He  hated  the  person  of  his  leader,  he  despised  his
policy,  and  his  command  to  retreat  he  threw  to  the
winds.  At  the  same  time  he  sent  pressing  messages
to  the  consular  camp,  urging  Pompeius  to  advance
to  his  assistance,  and  representing  the  smallness  of
the  enemy's  forces,  the  number  and  confidence  of
his  own.  At  Corfinium  and  in  the  neighbourhood

1  Cic.  ad  Ait.  vii.  23.,  writing  from  Formise,  iv.Id.Feb.  =  Feb.  10.

*Ca:s.  B.C.  i.  16.  foil.;  Dion,  xli.  10,  11.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  38.;
Lncan,  ii.  478.  foil.

VOL.  II.  L

146  HSTORY OF THE EOMANS  CH.  xiv.

he  had  assembled  thirty  cohorts:  of  these  many
indeed  were  raw  levies,  and  his  oldest  veterans  had
seen  perhaps  no  other  service  than  the  beleaguer-
ment  of  the  forum  during  Milo's  trial.1  But  Porn-
peius,  dismayed  at  the  repeated  defection  of  his  troops,
had  no  confidence  in  his  lieutenant's  assurances.
He  declared  that  he  could  not  in  prudence  advance
to  his  succour ;  that  in  the  present  temper  of  the
army  Italy  was  untenable,  and  that  to  hazard  a
general  engagement  with  Caesar  would  be  to  rush
upon  certain  ruin.

Domitius  was  not  to  be  discouraged  even  by  his

leader's  desertion  ;  but  the  disposition  he

ic^ucr/cor- made of his  troops was unskilful. He

isTSkyed0 weakened  his  force  by  trying  to  extend

into  his  hands.  .  a ,  - , £ ° . ,  ,

protection  to  oulmo  and  the  neighbouring
towns,  and  lost  one  division  after  another,  until  he
found  himself  blocked  up  in  Corfinium  by  an  enemy
whose  strength  and  audacity  were  increased  by  these
bloodless  successes.  A  third  legion,  the  eighth,  now
reached  Caesar's  quarters,  attended  by  twenty-two
cohorts  of  Gaulish  auxiliaries,  and  a  detachment  of
cavalry  from  Noricum.  The  siege  was  vigorously
pressed ;  for  the  delay  of  a  few  days  was  galling  to
him,  while  Pornpeius,  with  diminished  forces  and  fast
ebbing  courage,  was  evidently  preparing  to  escape
from  his  hands  by  flight  across  the  sea.  But  Cor-
finium could  not  be  left  behind  ;  and,  indeed,  it  was
a  prize  second  only  in  richness  and  importance  to
Luceria  or  Brundisium.  For  besides  the  military
stores  amassed  in  it,  and  the  vaunted  strength  of  its
numerous  garrison,  Domitius  had  received  into  his
citadel  many  of  the  knights  and  most  distinguished

1  Lucan  I.e. :

"  Tua  classica  servat
Oppositus  quondam  pollute  tiro  Miloni "

These recruits  were  the  levies  Pompcius  had  made  ostensibly  for
his  service  in  Spurn.

/LU.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  147

senators,  who  sought  refuge  from  the  invader  under
the  protection  of  a  favourite  leader.  Domitius  him-
self made  every  exertion  to  justify  their  confidence.
He  conducted  the  war  as  an  affair  of  personal  in-
terest, promising  his  soldiers  large  assignments  of
land  from  his  own  private  possessions,  after  the
manner  of  a  principal  rather  than  a  subordinate
lieutenant.1  But  his  exhortations  to  the  soldiery
were  at  first  coldly  received,  and  soon  slighted  alto-
gether. Disaffection  was  rife  within  the  walls  of
Corfinium,  as  before  at  Iguvium  and  Asculum.  The
heart  of  the  old  Italian  confederacy  throbbed  at  the
presence  of  Caesar  and  the  banners  of  Marius.  The
rumour  spread  that  Pompeius  dared  not  advance,
and  had  abandoned  his  followers  to  their  fate.
Secret  intercourse  was  held  with  the  besieger,  and
after  a  few  days  the  conspiracy  broke  out  into  open
mutiny,  the  troops  proclaiming  their  determination
to  surrender  the  place,  with  all  that  it  contained,
into  the  enemy's  hands.  The  nobles,  alarmed  for
their  lives,  could  obtain  no  other  indulgence  than
permission  to  make  terms  for  themselves  by  special
application  to  Caesar.  Lentulus  Spinther,  who  was
one  of  the  number,  acted  as  their  spokesman ;  and
he  rightly  conceived  that  to  expatiate  on  the  favours
he  had  formerly  experienced  was  the  surest  means  of
propitiating  a  generous  conqueror.  The  time  had
now  come  for  Caesar  to  dispel  the  fears  of  massacre
and  proscription  which  had  driven  a  large  proportion
of  the  senatorial  party  into  arms  against  him.2  His
reply  was  full  of  mildness  and  condescension;  he
apologized  for  the  necessity  in  which  he  was  placed
of  asserting  his  rights  by  an  act  of  violence  against
the  state,  while  he  insinuated,  emboldened  by  success,
that  his  opponents  were  a  factious  minority,  and  him-

1  Caes.  D.  C.  i.  17.;  Dion,  xli.  11.

2  CSES.  3  C.  I.  23.

L  2

148  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIT.

self  the  real  champion  of  freedom  and  the  common-
wealth.1

Domitius  expected  to  be  himself  marked  out  as
the  special  object  of  the  conqueror's  ven-

Caaar  grants  « -,  J  ,  . '  ,  ,

life  and  liberty  geance. Caesar  was  determined  to  render

toDomitim P.  , .  ..  .  . .  ._.

•nd  the  Pom-  him  a,  signal  instance  ot  his  clemency.  On
the  eve  of  surrender  the  Pompeian  leader
applied  to  his  physician  for  poison,  and  even,  it  was
said,  compelled  him  with  his  drawn  sword  to  ad-
minister a  potion.  But  the  draught  had  not  pro-
duced its  anticipated  effect,  when  he  was  informed
that  the  victor  was  disposed  not  only  to  spare  the
lives  of  bis  prisoners,  but  to  treat  them  with  marked
indulgence.  He  now,  in  the  most  abject  manner,
lamented  his  precipitation;  but  the  physician  had
deceived  him  with  a  narcotic,  and  he  lived  to  enjoy,
and  afterwards  abuse,  his  captor's  clemency.2  Caesar,
if  we  may  believe  his  own  direct  statement  in  con-
tradiction to  an  obscure  rumour  related  by  Cicero,
went  so  far  in  his  generosity  as  to  restore  to  Domi-
tius the  large  treasure  in  his  military  chest3;  an  act
which  is  rendered  credible  by  the  proconsul's  natural
wish  to  show  the  Roman  people  that  they  had  no
more  to  fear  from  his  want  of  money  than  from  his
thirst  for  blood.  He  then  pressed  his  prisoners  to
acknowledge  his  claims  and  share  in  the  brightening
prospects  of  his  enterprise.  This  offer  the  men  of
note  steadily  declined,  but  the  fresh  Italian  recruits
hailed  the  summons  with  enthusiasm,  and  speedily

1  Caesar  was  seven  days  before  Corfinium,  Feb.  14  -  21. :  "  Septcm
dies  ad  Corftniura  commoratur." Caes.  B.  C.  i.  33.

2  This  story  is  told  by  Suetonius,  Seneca,  Pliny  and  Plutarch-
See  Drumann,  iii.  22.

"  Caes.  B.  C.  i.  23.;  Cic.  ad  Atl.  viii.  14.  Appian  (B.  C.  ii.  39.)
confirms  Caesar's  statement.  Some  of  Csesar's  adherents  seem  not
to  have  admired  their  leader's  clemency.  See  the  letter  of  Cicero's
witty  correspondent  Cselius,  ad  Div.  viii.  15.  But  Caelius  was  per-
sonally hostile  to  Domitius  :  comp.  ad  Div.  viii.  12.

A.H.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  149

ranged themselves under the banner  which they
regarded  as  their  own.

The  effect  of  this  clemency,  hitherto  unexampled
in  the  civil  wars  of  the  Eomans,  became
immediately  apparent.  Cicero  bears  unwil-  •*«*•*«"•
ling  testimony  to  the  consummate  adroit-
ness of  the  enemy's  proceedings.1  He  had  killed
nobody,  he  had  taken  nothing  from  anybody;  if
he  proceeded  thus  he  would  become  the  object  of
universal  love  and  enthusiasm.  Such  was  the  feeling
springing  up  among  the  population  of  Campania;
the  people  of  the  country  towns  discoursed  with
Cicero  on  the  state  of  public  affairs  ;  and  he  saw  but
too  plainly  from  their  conversation  that  the  heart  of
Italy  was  estranged  from  the  consuls  and  senate :
peace  was  the  general  wish  even  among  those  who
had  no  Marian  predilections,  and  the  tranquil  posses-
sion of  property  outweighed  the  antiquated  names
of  law  and  liberty.2  And  then  the  philosopher  sighed
to  think  how  much  the  errors  and  vices  of  his  party
had  contributed  to  bring  about  this  state  of  political
indifference.

But,  in  truth,  the  conduct  of  Caesar  was  set  off  in
brighter  colours  from  its  contrast  with  the  It  offers  a
opposite  disposition  manifested  by  his  op-  S^lthe
ponents. The  senate  had  proclaimed  him  t^tTof  MS
a  public enemy,  and his adherents and  adTm"rie"-
followers  in  arms  were naturally included  in the
same  sentence. Nor  was  this  enough. At  the  mo-
ment of  leaving  Home,  it  determined,  at  the  instiga-
tion of  the  ferocious  Domitius,  to  drive  the  neutral
and  the  waverers  into  the  Pompeian  camp  by  terror.
It  declared  that  every  citizen  who  remained  behind
at  Eome  should  be  deemed  a  Caesarean,  and  thus

1  Cic.  ad  Alt  viii.  13.

J  Cic.  /.  c.:  "  Multum  mecum  municipales  homines  loquuntur,
mnltnm  rusticani.  Nihil  prorsus  aliud  curant,nisi  agros  nisi  villulaB
nisi  uumwulos  suos."

150  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIT.

provided  itself  with  a  pretext  for  the  extreme  mea-
sures against  the  city  which  it  seems  to  have  already
contemplated.1  Not  only  were  the  young  nobles
loud  in  their  denunciations  of  proscription  and  mas-
sacre; the  older  and  more  dignified  were  already
parcelling  out  among  themselves  in  imagination  the
spoils  of  the  commonwealth.  Pompeius  himself  had
the  name  of  Sulla  always  in  his  mouth  :  Sulla  could
do  this,  why  should  not  I  do  the  same?*  was  his
constant  argument.  To  propose  the  great  dictator
for  his  model  was  to  threaten  a  sanguinary  revolu-
tion and  a  thorough  reorganization  of  the  state.  It
was  surmised  with  inexpressible  alarm  and  disgust
that  Rome  had  been  abandoned  when  it  might  have
been  defended,  in  order  that  it  might  be  involved  in
Caesar's  guilt,  and,  when  the  day  of  vengeance  should
arrive,  be  subjected  to  all  the  horrors  of  a  war  of
reprisal,  to  famine  and  fire,  to  pillage  and  massacre.3
When  Domitius  refused,  or  was  no  longer  able,  to

obey  his  leader's  injunctions,  and  withdraw
n"  from Corfinium to the  head-quarters  at
cro,p8aover0into  Luceria,  Pompeius  saw  the  ruin  his  lieu-

tenant had  drawn  upon  himself,  and  felt
that  his  own  position  in  Italy  was  no  longer  tenable.
But  the  rashness  of  the  rear-guard  saved  the  main
body  of  the  retreating  column,  for  so  rapid  were
Caesar's  movements,  that  but  for  this  seven  days'
delay,  Pompeius  would  undoubtedly  have  been  over-
taken. He  now  sheltered  himself  in  Brundisium4,
and  charged  the  consuls  and  other  magistrates  to
accompany  him  across  the  sea.  When  this  command
reached  Cicero  in  Campania,  the  road  into  Apulia  was
no  longer  open.  Caesar  was  eager  to  recover  the
time  he  had  lost  before  Corfinium.  But  the  har-

re-

1  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  37.:  a.Trtt\-fitra.s  raits

2  Cic.  ad  Alt.  ix.  10.:  "  Sulla  potuit  :  ego  non  potero  ?"

8  Cic.  ad  Div.  iv.  14.,  ad  Alt.  viii.  11.,  ix.  7.  10,  1  1. See  below.
«  Cues.  B.  C.  5.  24,  25.

i. 17.705- B.C.49. DNDER THE EMPIRE.  151

bour  of  Brundisium  was  crowded  with  transports  and
vessels  of  every  description.  The  consuls  and  the
greater  part  of  their  army,  which  now  amounted  to
five  legions,  effected  their  embarkation,  and  were
already  far  on  their  way  across  the  Adriatic ;  but
Pompeius,  with  a  division  of  the  army,  still  lingered
in  the  town  when  Caesar's  advanced  guard  appeared
before  the  walls.  Intercepted  in  his  meditated  flight
by  the  celerity  of  these  movements,  Cicero  hesitated
to  take  ship  at  Naples  and  encounter  before  the  close
of  winter  the  dangers  of  the  straits  and  the  Ionian
sea.  Filled  with  dark  forebodings  as  to  the  designs
of  his  leader,  whose  abandonment  first  of  Eome  and
then  of  Italy  he  regarded  as  part  of  a  long  matured
scheme  for  the  destined  subjugation  of  his  country,
he  was  not  sorry,  perhaps,  that  circumstances  now
placed  a  barrier  between  them.  But  he  was  still
indisposed  to  anticipate  Caesar's  success,  as  well  as
indignant  at  his  rebellion  against  prescriptive  autho-
rities. In  his  sullen  retirement  at  Formiae  the  orator
was  plied  by  solicitations  and  flatteries  on  the  part  of
Caesar  himself  and  his  friends  Balbus  and  Oppius.
The  strongest  assurances  were  given  him  of  the  con-
queror's good  intentions  and  conservative  principles  ;
but  these  representations  failed  to  assuage  his  fears
or  lighten  his  melancholy,  and  he  continued  to  pour
his  griefs  and  distractions  into  the  ear  of  his  chief
adviser  Atticus.1

Caesar  arrived  before  Brundisium  on  the  ninth  of
March.2 The  forces  with  which  he  formed  ?ompelm  eT,_
the  siege  amounted  to  six  complete  legions,  ™uam%ndundi~
together  with  their  auxiliary  Gaulish  co-  S^^m
horts. Of  these  legions,  three  consisted  of  Italy<

1  See  particularly  Cic.  ad  Ait.  ix.  11 — 13.,  and  the  correspondence
of  Cicero  with  Caesar  and  his  partisans  therein  communicated.

Cic.  ad  Alt.  ix.  3.:  "Brat  hie  dies  vii.  Jd.  Mar.  quo  die  suspi-
cabamur  aut  pridie  Brundisium  venisse  Csesarurn."  So  Caspar,  in
Cic.  ad  Alt.  ix.  13  A.

152  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIV.

his  veterans ;  the  others  were  made  up  partly  of  new
levies  and  partly  of  the  Pompeians  whom  he  had
drafted  into  his  own  ranks.  But  these  did  not
include  the  battalions  he  had  recently  enrolled  at
Cornnium;  for  these  zealous  allies  had  been  de-
spatched in  all  haste  to  secure  the  possession  of
Sicily.  It  was  impossible  for  Pompeius  with  the
twenty  cohorts,  which  were  all  he  retained,  to  hold
the  place  against  this  overwhelming  force.  But  Caesar,
on  the  other  hand,  was  entirely  destitute  of  ships ;
the  sea  was  open,  and  the  transports  had  received
orders  to  return  and  bear  away  from  Brundisium  the
remnant  of  the  consular  army.  The  port  of  the  city  is
approached  by  a  narrow  passage  leading  from  an  outer
into  an  inner  basin !,  and  the  shore  on  either  side  of
this  passage  was  occupied  by  the  besiegers.  But  the
outlet  could  only  be  obstructed  by  the  erection  of
immense  earthworks,  and  Pompeius  trusted  to  the
depth  of  the  water  to  frustrate  or  delay  the  accom-
plishment of  so  great  an  undertaking.2  Full  of  this
confidence,  he  refused  to  listen  to  the  proposals  of
accommodation  which  Caesar  continued  to  offer.  He
declared  that  he  was  only  the  lieutenant  of  the  con-
suls, and  could  not  act  without  their  concurrence.
Caesar  sank  vessels  and  drove  piles  in  the  channel,
while  Pompeius  exerted  himself  to  impede  these
operations,  and  succeeded  in  keeping  it  open  for  the
transports,  which  in  due  time  made  their  appear-
ance.3 Upon  their  arrival,  the  troops  were  embarked
without  delay,  a  few  soldiers  being  left  on  the  walls

1  The  localities  are  carefully  described  by  Kcppel  Craven,  Tour
in  the  kingdom  of  Naples,  p  149.

*  Caesar  in  a  letter  to  Balbus,  communicated  to  Cicero  (ad  Att.  ix.
14.),  speaks  of  his  operations  before  Brundisium:  "  Pompeius  se
oppido  tenet.  Nos  ad  portas  castra  habemus.  Conamur  opus  mag-
num et  multorum  dierum  propter  altitudinem  maris.  Sed  tamen
nihil  est  quod  potius  faciamus.  Ab  utroque  portus  cornu  moles
jacirnus."

1  Caes.  B.  C.  i.  25.  28. ;  Dion,  xli.  1|.

\.U.705-B.C.-»9. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  153

to  deceive  the  enemy  with  a  show  of  resistance  to  the
last  moment.  The  streets  had  been  carefully  barri-
caded to  obstruct  his  progress  upon  first  entering  the
undefended  city.  But  the  inhabitants  were  eager  to
display  their  zeal  in  the  cause  of  a  triumphant  and
perhaps  irritated  conqueror,  and  guided  his  troops
with  alacrity  to  the  haven.  The  last  of  the  Pompeians
were  already  safe  on  board  ;  the  flotilla  glided  rapidly
down  the  harbour,  and  broke  through  every  obstruc-
tion at  the  outlet,  with  the  loss  of  only  two  vessels,
which  struck  against  the  head  of  the  embankment.
These  were  immediately  grappled  to  the  shore  with
irons,  boarded  by  the  enraged  Caesaveans,  and  theii
crews  cut  to  pieces.  This  was  the  first  blood  shed  in
the  civil  war.

Caesar  had  made  himself  master  of  Italy  in  sixty
days.1 Never,  perhaps,  was  so  great  a  con-

i £C j J  -Jl  J • j.l_ f  Rapidity  of

quest  enected  so  rapidly,  and  in  the  lace  c^nr's  suc-
of  antagonists  apparently  so  formidable.
Every  step  he  advanced  was  a  surprise  to  his
enemies ;  yet  at  each  step  they  predicted  more  con-
fidently his  approaching  discomfiture.  But  at  the
first  blast  of  his  trumpets  every  obstacle  fell  before
him,  and  the  march  of  his  legions  could  hardly  keep
up  with  the  retreat  of  his  boastful  adversaries.  The
consuls  abandoned  Eome  before  he  was  competent  to
approach  it ;  their  lieutenants,  deserted  by  their
troops,  plundered  of  their  treasure,  and  denuded  of

1  Pompeius  embarked  March  17  =  Jan.  25.  B.C.  49,  and  Caesar
entered  Brundisium  the  day  following.  Cic.  ad  Att.  ix.  19.  Plutarch
says  (Cffs.  35.):  yeyov&s  lv  ^uepais  el^/corra  iramjs  a.vaifuaT\  rrjs
'IroAias  Kvptos.  Assigning  twenty-nine  days  to  January,  and
twenty-eight  to  February,  the  sixty  days  would  extend  from  Jan.
16 — March  18,  inclusive.  If  this  calculation  is  to  be  taken  strictly,
the  passage  of  the  Rubicon  would  take  place  on  the  night  of  Jan.
15 — 16.;  but  I  am  inclined  to  place  it  a  few  days  earlier.  The
interval  between  the  flight  of  the  tribunes,  Jan.  6,  and  the  passage
of  the  Rubicon,  Jan.  15 — 16,  seems  too  long,  while  more  time
is  required  for  the  events  which  were  crowded  into  the  following
days.

154  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xiv

the  materials  of  war,  found  themselves  alone  and
defenceless  in  their  camps  before  the  invader  appeared
in  sight.  The  interest  which  Sulla  had  fostered  in
his  colonies  melted  away  like  a  dream ;  old  hopes
and  hatreds  revived  in  the  breasts  of  the  Italians ;
the  magistrates  of  every  city  flung  wide  their  gates,
and  hailed  the  Koman  traitor  as  their  hero  and
deliverer.1  The  captain,  second  only  to  Pompeius  in
the  camp  and  councils  of  the  senate,  was  dragged  a
prisoner  into  Caesar's  presence;  and  Pompeius  himself
retreated  from  one  position  to  another  without  a
single  attempt  to  rally,  and  finally  crept  out  of  the
country  like  a  hunted  fox.  All  this  time  the  nobles
indignation  of  had  been  growing  more  and  more  clamo-
th"  co°ndeuct  of  rous  to  be  led  against  the  invader ;  in  vain
pompeiu..  did  they  mutter  and  scowl,  and  heap  re-
proaches upon  their  chosen  champion.  He  was  not
to  be  diverted  from  his  plans,  whatever  they  might
be,  but  he  would  make  no  disclosure  of  them ;  to
their  remonstrances  he  coldly  replied  by  ordering  the
murmurers  to  follow  him  under  pain  of  proscription.
To  the  last  they  hoped  that  he  would  still  make  a
stand  on  the  sacred  soil  of  Italy;  when  he  finally
deceived  their  anticipations  and  wafted  the  last  band
of  his  military  followers  from  the  port  of  Brundisium,
confusion  and  despair  prompted  many  among  them
to  throw  themselves  upon  the  conqueror's  generosity.
The  Appian  Way  was  again  crowded  with  knights
and  senators  ;  but  this  time  their  faces  were  turned
towards  the  city.  Dragged  so  long  against  their  will
at  the  wheels  of  Pompeius'  chariot,  they  vowed
from  henceforth  to  renounce  the  war,  and  sought  the
protection  of  the  chief  who  alone  permitted  neutrality.2
Many  of  these  belonged,  no  doubt,  to  the  class  of

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  ix.  12,:  "  Municipia  vero  et  rnstici  Komani  ilium
(sc.  Pomp. )  metnunt,  hunc  adhnc  dilignnt."

*  Cio.  ad  Att.  ix.  8.  (March  6.):  "  Urbem  quidem  jam  refertara
esse  optimatium  audio  ....  Hinc  vero  vulgo  vadaut."

A.C.70&-B.C.49  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  155

indolent  and  selfish  voluptuaries,  who  had  been  be-
guiled into  a  momentary  relinquishment  of  their
pleasures  by  the  assurance  that  they  should  be  soon
reinstated  in  them  more  securely  and  triumphantly.
But  many  also  were  better  citizens,  who  foreboded
some  undefined  evil  to  the  state  from  the  apparent
treachery  of  Pompeius,  and  would  no  longer  lend
their  support  to  his  cause,  though  they  might  scruple
to  turn  their  arms  against  the  sacred  names  of  consuls
and  senate.  They  left  it  to  the  needy  and  reckless,
the  disappointed  adventurers  and  patrician  spend-
thrifts, to  cling  still  to  Pompeius'  fortunes,  and  gloat
over  their  visions  of  an  abolition  of  debts,  a  con-
fiscation of  properties,  and  a  reconstruction  of  the
government.  Whatever  stains  there  might  be  on  the
character  of  many  of  the  most  prominent  of  Caesar's
adherents,  it  was  now  fully  evident  that  the  leader  of
the  oligarchy  was  surrounded  by  a  crew  not  less
dissolute  and  unprincipled.

The  departure  of  the  more  moderate  and  high-
minded  of  his  partisans  was  witnessed,  we
may  presume,  by  Pompeius  with  no  great  o^thewcwt

,. J ,  • r i-  mu  i, J-i.i.1  -Ui. Policy  of  Pom-

dissatistaction. There  can  be  little  doubt  pem»  in  aban-

,  .  , , „ ,  ,  doning  Italy.

as  to  the  game  he  had  all  along  been
playing.  It  is  impossible  to  suppose  that  a  captain
so  consummate  and  a  statesman  so  experienced  should
have  let  the  cards  drop  from  his  hands,  as  he  had  done
throughout,  except  with  a  deliberate  policy.  Wheth  er
he  admitted  the  consuls  themselves  into  his  confidence
may  remain  uncertain ;  but  it  is  clear  that  he  deceived
to  the  last  the  main  body  of  his  adherents,  even
within  the  camp,  by  a  pretended  defence  of  Italy,
while  it  had  long  been  his  intention  to  surrender
every  post  successively,  and  make  his  exit  from  the
peninsula  as  fast  as,  with  a  decent  show  of  resistance,
he  could.1

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  ix  10.  : "  Hoc  turpe (de  fuga  cogitare)  Crocus
noster  biennio  ante  cojritavit."

156  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  JHV.

The  eastern  and  western  portions  of  the  empire

stood  to  each  other  in  peculiar  contrast,
brtnronthe  and  the  views  which  influenced  Porapeius
w^eTn^r-  at  this  crisis  may  be  traced  to  the  nature  of

the  resources  respectively  offered  by  them.

The  Italian  peninsula,  stretching  far  into
the  midland  sea,  divided  the  Roman  world  into
two  hemispheres,  rivals  for  the  regard  of  the  war-
rior and  statesman,  not  less  distinct  in  their  social
and  political  character  than  in  their  geographical
position.  The  contrast  between  them  was  more
strongly  marked  at  this  period  than  at  any  subsequent
era.  For  both  the  East  and  the  West  were  still  in-
stinct with  the  life  peculiar  to  each,  and  though  both
equally  within  the  reach  and  under  the  control  of  the
same  iron  arm,  were  nevertheless  as  completely  alien
from  one  another  in  their  principles,  interests  and
feelings,  as  if  they  bad  been  two  rival  empires  and
not  parts  and  provinces  of  the  same.

On  the  one  hand, the great  province  of  Spain

was  already more  thoroughly  Romanized

compiIteTy than  any  other  part  of  the dominions  of

",yeother  the  republic. Though  some  districts  were

not  yet  fully  subdued,  and  much  law-
lessness and  disaffection  still  existed  in  others,  yet
the  manners  of  the  conquering  people  had  been
introduced  from  an  early  period,  and  definitively
adopted  throughout  a  large  portion  of  the  country.
The  language  of  the  Italians  was  achieving  rapid
conquests  in  every  quarter,  and  consolidating  the
municipal  institutions  which  were  lavished  so  freely
upon  the  natives  in  no  other  part  of  the  empire.
These  results  had  been  rendered  permanent  by  the
influence  of  Sertorius,  who  had  taught  the  Iberians
to  regard  the  discipline  and  habits  of  their  foreign
masters  as  the  true  secret  of  their  irresistible  success.
The  subjugation  of  Spain  had  occupied  one  hundred
and  fifty  years  of  almost  constant  warfare.  Step  by

.I.C.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  157

step  had  Kome  made  her  way  into  the  heart  of  a
country,  in  which  every  mountain  and  desert  had
been  defended  with  the  same  inveterate  love  of  free-
dom. But  she  had  never  been  compelled  to  retreat
from  an  inch  of  ground  once  occupied,  and  the  roots
of  her  power  struck  the  deeper  into  the  soil  from  the
tempests  which  had  so  long  repressed  its  growth.
The  condition  of  the  native  races  had  been  one  of
unmitigated  barbarism ;  the  southern  and  western
coasts  alone  were  slightly  tinctured  with  the  spirit  of
Greek  and  Phoenician  culture.  But,  in  the  absence
of  civilization,  the  Iberians  had  no  social  institutions
which  could  retain  their  vitality  under  the  blight  of
a  foreign  conquest.  Innumerable  strongholds,  dig-
nified by  the  Roman  writers  with  the  name  of  cities,
had  been  razed  to  the  ground ;  the  elder  Cato  had
destroyed,  it  is  said,  not  less  than  three  hundred.1
Deprived  of  every  fastness,  except  those  which  the
nature  of  the  country  continued  to  offer  in  some
isolated  districts,  the  barbarians,  once  thoroughly
subdued,  had  no  retreat  in  which  to  cherish  the  rem-
nants of  their  nationality.  The  character  of  the
people  was,  however,  essentially  warlike,  and  this
temper  the  crafty  conquerors  did  not  suffer  to  fer-
ment in  inaction.  The  Iberian  peninsula  was  the
Switzerland  of  the  ancient  world.  Its  hardy  clans
had  for  ages  supplied  the  infantry  of  Carthage ;  they
had  defeated  the  Eomans  themselves  at  the  Trebia
and  Cannae,  and  had  enlisted  under  the  banners  of
Antiochus  for  a  second  invasion  of  Italy.  Accord-
ingly, the  rude  chieftains  whom  the  arts  of  peace
could  not  soften,  were  more  easily  broken  to  the
yoke  of  military  discipline.  It  was  in  Spain
that  the  Romans  first  adopted  from  their  rivals  the
practice  of  enlisting  hired  bands  of  their  foreign

1  See  Plutarch,  Polybius  and  Strabo,  referred  to  by  Mannert.  L
241.  ;  Liv.  xxviii.  l,xxxiv.  17.

158  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  «r

subjects.1  The  colonization  of  the  peninsula,  especially
in  the  south,  by  Roman  citizens,  had  been  carried  on
systematically,  and  the  admission  of  natives  to  the
Roman  franchise  had  been  more  liberal  there  than
in  most  of  the  provinces.  The  way  was  already
paved  for  the  much  larger  enfranchisement  which
followed  at  a  later  period.  Thus  it  was  that  at  the
opening  of  the  civil  wars  the  spirit  of  the  Iberian
provinces  was  more  thoroughly  Roman  than  any
other;  the  political  feelings  and  interests  of  the
people,  no  less  than  their  social  habits,  had  become
nearly  identified  with  those  of  the  dominant  race.
In  no  part  of  the  empire  beyond  Italy  itself  were  the
ancient  traditions  and  prejudices  of  patrician  and
plebeian  held  more  sacred.  Spain  was  rather  a
healthy  offshoot  from  the  parent  state  than  a  conquered
dependency.  Strong  in  her  indomitable  character
and  her  military  resources,  she  was  calculated  to  form
the  firmest  bulwark  of  the  republic  and  of  the  party
which  at  this  period  prevailed  in  its  counsels.

The  process  of  civilization in Spain had been

commenced  by  the  Scipios  and  Catos  of.
R^man8«°nti-  earlier  generations,  and  carried  on  by  a

Metellus  and  a  Pompeius.  The  colonists
and  the  natives  were  attached  to  the  senatorial  party
by  all  the  ties  which  the  policy  of  the  conquerors
could  devise.  We  have  seen  how  in  Gaul,  on  the
other  hand,  the  two  rival  factions  had  been  alter-
nately in  the  ascendant,  and  that  the  result  had  been
to  leave  the  old  province,  for  the  most  part,  Pom-
peian  in  feeling,  but  to  create  a  strong  Csesarean
interest  throughout  the  later  conquests.  The
genius  and  activity  of  Caesar  seemed  to  have  effected
in  nine  years  in  Gaul  beyond  the  Cevennes  the  moral
and  social  transformation  which  it  had  taken  a  cen-

1  Liv.  xxiv.  49. :  "  Mercenarium  militem  neminem  ante  quaui  turn
Ccltiberos  Romani  habuerunt."  This  was  in  the  second  Punic  war.
A.U.  539

A.C.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  159

tury  and  a  half  to  mature  in  the  Iberian  peninsula.
We  have  already  remarked  the  extent  to  which  the
conqueror  had  availed  himself  of  the  military  spirit
of  the  northern  nations  ;  how,  by  enlisting  the  chief-
tains under  his  banner,  he  had  so  far  gained  their
affections  as  to  be  able  to  leave  them  most  of  the
forms  at  least  of  their  ancient  freedom.  He  thus
succeeded  in  inspiring  both  their  warriors  and  their
magistrates  with  Roman  feelings,  and  the  desire  to
emulate  the  spirit  of  southern  civilization.  The
two  great  nations  of  the  west  were  thus  rendered
the  allies  of  the  republic,  rather  than  her  subjects.
Either  of  them  furnished  a  field  on  which  her
quarrels  might  be  fought  out,  in  the  midst  of  a
native  population  hardly  less  Csesarean  or  Pompeian
in  their  sympathies  than  the  conquering  race  itsel£

But  in  the  eastern  half  of  the  Roman  empire  the
ideas  of  the  dominant  people  had  received

, , ,  r  j  . ,  The  eastern

no such development, and no interest  provinces  in-

r  li • i-u  1  r  j-V,  'j. different  to  the

was  there  telt  in  the  quarrels  of  the  city,  principle  m-
The  earlier  and  finer  cultivation  of  the  East  civil  wn"and
still regarded  with contemptuous indif-  tttpwSwoc

r  °,  ir.Li.-r>  • J the  leaders.

ference  the  struggles  of  the  Roman  mind
to  obtain  an  ascendency  over  the  subject  races.
The  Greek  populations  were  at  this  period  almost
exhausted  by  war,  bad  government  and  the  decay
of  their  commercial  prosperity.  They  submitted
to  the  conqueror  with  an  apathy  from  which  no-
thing could  rouse  them,  and,  while  they  were
forced  to  cast  their  institutions  in  Italian  moulds,
refused  to  imbibe  any  portion  of  their  spirit.  But
beyond  the  Grecian  provinces  no  attempt  was  made
to  infuse  the  political  ideas  of  the  republic  into  the
dependent  or  tributary  kingdoms  on  the  frontier.
The  races  of  Asia  acquiesced  in  their  own  imme-
morial despotisms,  to  which  they  had  been  aban-
doned by  Sulla  and  Pompeius.  To  them  the  names
of  Liberty  and  Equality,  invoked  in  turn  by  each

160  HISTORY OF THE BOMANS  CH.  xiv.

of  tbe  Roman  factions,  were  unintelligible.  They
had  no  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  contests,
the  rumour  of  which  reached  them  across  so  many
seas  and  continents.  The  sympathies  of  the  Ori-
entals centred  always  in  men,  and  never  in  govern-
ments. A  Cyrus,  an  Alexander,  an  Arsaces,  com-
manded all  their  devotion ;  for  them  the  founda-
tions of  law  lay  in  the  bosom  of  the  autocrat.  If
summoned  to  take  up  arms  in  behalf  of  either  party,
it  was  upon  the  leader  alone  that  they  would  fix
their  eyes,  to  his  triumph  the  sphere  of  their  in-
terests would  be  limited.  The  accession  of  their
wealth  and  numbers  would  strengthen  the  hands
of  the  chief  even  against  his  own  followers ;  to  the
common  cause  a  victory  obtained  by  their  aid  might
be  not  less  dangerous  than  a  defeat.  Accordingly,
the  introduction  of  such  allies  into  a  civil  war
could  only  be  regarded  by  the  genuine  and  high-
minded  among  her  children,  as  an  insult  to  the
dignity  of  the  republic.1  The  party  chief  who
should  divest  himself  of  the  support  of  the  national
sentiment,  and  rally  around  his  standards  the  blind
obsequiousness  of  Egypt  and  Syria,  the  rude  de-
votion of  Colchis  and  Armenia2,  would  forfeit  the
repect  of  the  true  patriot  as  much  as  if  he  had  put
himself  at  the  head  of  a  foreign  invasion.

That  this,  however,  was  the  course  Pompeius  had
Pompeiiw  determined  to  adopt,  from  the  moment
at«fesirhhTld,f  tnat  ne  saw  tne  contest  with  his  rival
counfeV- to  inevitable,  seems  sufficiently  proved  by
aSth"rityhof  the  whole  tenor  of  his  subsequent  conduct,
the  ~n.te.  He  nated  the  Oiigarcny  of  which  he  was  the

1  The  true  Roman  sentiment  is  expressed  by  Lucan  (vii.  526.)  :

..."  Civilia  bella

Non  bene  barbaricis  unquam  commissa  catervis."
*  Cic.  ad  Att.  ix.  10  :  "  Getarum  et  Armenioram  et  Colchornm
copias  ad  earn adducere." ix. 11.  : "  Nuntiant ^Egyptum et
Arabian!  tvSalnova  et  yitffo*ora.ij.ia.v  cogitare." Dion,  xli.  13,

A.0.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  161

chief.  At  an  earlier  period,  while  placing  himself
ostensibly  at  its  head,  he  had  laboured  to  depress
and  degrade  it.  Jealous  of  the  rival  whom  in  self-
defence  it  had  raised  against  him  in  Cicero,  he  had
used  Caesar,  as  he  thought,  as  an  instrument  to  crush
this  attempt  to  control  him.  But  the  instrument  cut
the  workman's  hand.  The  next  turn  of  the  wheel  of
fortune  showed  him  in  close  alliance  with  this  same
party,  to  defend  themselves  against  a  common  ad-
versary. Pompeius,  however,  was  well  aware  that
these  hollow  friends  would  seize  the  moment  of
victory  to  effect  his  overthrow.  If  they  worsted
Csesar,  it  would  not  be  to  submit  once  more  to  him-
self. He  feared  the  hostile  influence  of  the  consuls
and  magistrates  in  a  camp  of  Roman  citizens,  and
felt  that,  in  the  event  of  a  struggle  with  them,  his
title  of  Imperator  would  not  weigh  against  theii
superior  claims  to  the  soldiers'  allegiance.  For  the
armies  of  which  he  was  now  the  nominal  leader  were
raised  within  the  bounds  of  Italy;  they  were  not
debauched  like  the  legions  of  Sulla,  of  Marius,  of
Caesar,  or  those  which  he  had  himself  led  from  Asia,
by  long  absence  from  the  city  and  habits  of  military
licence.  In  order  to  strengthen  his  own  exalted
position,  or  even  to  maintain  it  after  the  defeat  of
the  invader,  he  required  a  military  force  of  another
description.  It  was  necessary  that  his  anticipated
victory  should  be  gained,  not  on  the  soil  of  Italy
nor  by  the  hands  of  Lentulus  and  Domitius,  and  that
his  return  to  Eome  should  be  a  triumph  over  the
senate  no  less  than  over  Caesar.

Thus  only  can  we  account  for  Pompeius  having
made  no  arrangements  for  maintaininghim-  Wlth  thi,  view
self  at  Rome,  or  at  least  in  Italy,  while  there  u7yaannddondL
was  yet  time  to  have  brought  to  his  succour  ***"*'  s»"a-
the  legions  in  Spain ;  for  his  abandoning  Domitius
with  his  strong  detachment  in  the  face  of  so  inferior
an  enemy ;  and  above  all,  for  his  carrying  the  war  to

VOL.  II.  M

162  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en xiv.

the  East  instead  of  to  the  West,  when  compelled  to
escape  from  the  shores  of  the  Peninsula.1  It  was
in  Spain  that  the  great  strength  of  his  party  lay
after  it  was  expelled  from  the  hearths  of  the  re-
public ;  there  was  no  region  where  the  sacred  names
of  Rome  and  the  senate  could  meet  with  so  favour-
able a  response  in  the  breasts  of  the  provincials.
Twelve  legions  of  Roman  soldiers,  backed  by  the
resources  of  so  warlike  and  opulent  a  country,  might
be  matched  with  advantage  against  any  force  Caesar
could  bring  against  them  ;  and  it  was  more  probable
that  they  would  have  crossed  the  Pyrenees  to  engage
their  antagonists  in  southern  Gaul,  than  have  awaited
an  assault  within  their  own  limits.  In  the  mean-
time Scipio  would  have  brought  up  the  resources  of
the  east  and  all  that  could  be  spared  from  the  armies
of  the  Syrian  frontier,  and  the  two  ponderous  masses
might  have  met  in  Italy,  and  crushed  Caesar  between
them.

But  Pompeius  had  no  intention  of  sharing  his
He  exait,,  him-  victory  on  equal  terms  with  the  great  men
Jhiefirfhuhe  °f  his  party,  or  reinstating  in  their  ivory
££fai™dw.r  chairs  the  old  chiefs  of  the  aristocracy.
»«ai,iat  Rome.  There  was  now  no  disguise  as  to  his  de-
signs, no  doubt  as  to  the  attempt  he  would  make  to
obliterate  every  vestige  of  ancient  liberty.  Some,
indeed,  of  the  nobles  might  still  expect  to  impose  a
check  upon  him  by  their  presence  in  his  camp,  but
many  even  of  the  most  distinguished  among  them
were  already  corrupted  by  the  hope  of  plunder.  War
against  Italy,  war  against  Rome,  was  the  open  cry  of
the  most  daring  and  profligate.  We  will  starve  the
city  into  submission,  we  will  leave  not  a  tile  on  a

1  It  was  at  first  expected  that  Pompeius,  if  driven  from  Italy,  wonld
have  retired  into  Spain.  Cic.  ad  Alt.  vii.  18.:  "Tempori  parcamus,
cum  Pompeio  in  Hispaniam  eamus."  This  letter  was  written  Feb.  3.
Appian  B.C.  ii.  38.:  teal  Tapewncei/ijs  dx*v  &s  6p^ffuv  fan)  iror'  tu>  at
Xpf'tcu

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  163

house  throughout  the  country,  was  echoed  by  Pom-
peius  himself.1  Such  was  the  ominous  language
which  resounded  in  the  senatorial  camp  as  soon  as
it  was  pitched  in  Epirus,  and  the  opposite  shores
assumed  the  character  of  a  foreign  and  a  hostile
strand.  The  consuls  listened  to  it  without  a  mur-
mur, for  it  was  their  own  chosen  champion  who
avowed  it.  He  left  the  city,  says  Cicero,  not  because
he  could  not  defend  it,  and  Italy,  not  because  he  was
driven  out  of  it ;  but  this  was  his  design  from  the
beginning,  to  move  every  land  and  sea,  to  call  to
arms  the  kings  of  the  barbarians,  to  lead  savage
nations  into  Italy,  not  as  captives  but  as  con-
querors. He  is  determined  to  reign  like  SuUa,  as
a  king  over  his  subjects ;  and  many  there  are  who
applaud  this  atrocious  design?

1  Cic.  ad  Ait.  ix.  7. :  "  Pritnum  consilium  cst  suffocare  urbem  et
Italiam  fame,  deinde  vastarc  agros,  urere,  pecnniis  locupletum  non
abstinere  ....  Promitto  tibi,  si  valebit,  tegulam  ilium  in  Italia  nullam
relicturuni." Comp.  ad  Ait  xi.  6.,  ail  Div.  iv.  14.

2  Cic.  ad  Ait. viii. 11.;  comp. viii. 16.,  ix. 9.:  "  Mirandum  in
modum  Cnaeus  noster  Sullani  regni  similitudinem  concupivit. Ei'Suij
o-oi  \rx&!. Nihil  ille  unquam  minus  obscure  tulit."  ix.  10.:  "  Snlla-
turit  ejus  animus  et  proscriptnrit  diu."

164  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xv.

CHAPTER  XV.

Caesar  repairs  to  Rome  and  convenes  the  Senate.  —  His  moderation
and  clemency.  —  He  plunders  the  Temple  of  Saturn.  —  He  proceeds
to  attack  the  Pompeian  armies  in  Spain.  —  Domitius  encournges
the  Massilians  to  shut  their  gates  against  him.  —  He  leaves  a  force
to  besiege  their  city,  and  crosses  the  Pyrenees.  —  The  Pompeian
Lieutenants  occupy  Ilerda.  —  Military  operations  before  that  place.
—  Overflow  of  the  Sicoris  and  peril  of  Caesar.  —  Brutus  gains  a
naval  advantage  over  the  Massilians.  —  The  Pompeians  compelled  to
evacuate  Ilerda.  —  Further  military  operations,  ending  in  the
capitulation  of  the  Pompeian  armies.  A.U.  705,  B.C.  49.

now  occupied  without  an  antagonist  in  sight
A.u.705. the  centre  of  his  enemies'  position. Their
line  of  operations  was  fairly  cut  in  two.  and

The  consuls'  .^  .  ,  •>  .  . '

the  assailant  might  determine  at  his  leisure
i  a<f-reat  agamst  which  of  the  wings  of  their  army  he
vintage.  should  first  concentrate  bis  forces.  More-
over, he  found  himself  in  possession  of  the  hostile
camp,  well  stored  with  the  moral  and  material
resources  of  war,  and  thronged  with  deserters  from
their  flying  ranks.  Eome  threw  her  gates  wide
open  to  receive  him,  and  he  fully  appreciated  the
immense  advantage  in  a  civil  war  of  being  able  to
issue  his  mandates  from  the  centre  of  law  and  order.
He  was,  however,  entirely  unprovided  with  the
requisite  armaments  for  transporting  his  army  across
the  Adriatic;  nor,  in  any  case,  would  he  have
ventured  to  encounter  the  gigantic  resources  of  the
East  at  the  head  of  only  three  legions.  Another
grave  consideration  at  the  same  time  pressed  upon
him,  the  protection  of  Rome  and  Italy  from  the
scarcity  which  threatened  them,  so  long  as  Sardinia,
Sicily  and  Africa  were  held  by  Pompeian  lieu-
tenants.

A.C.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  165

Accordingly,  while  he  quartered  a  portion  of  his
forces  on  the  Apulian  coast  to  prevent  the

,  f  ,  . -  c.  . T ..  Heexpelithe

enemy  s  return1  or  the  exit  of  his  Italian  f™™e°^e
partisans,  he  sent  detachments  in  all  haste  |artinir«™d
to  effect  the  conquest  of  these  important
positions.  The  appearance  of  a  legion  off  the  coast
of  Sardinia  encouraged  the  natives  to  rise  in  arms
and  expel  the  garrison  placed  there  by  the  senate.2
Curio,  who  now  occupied  the  place  of  Labienus  in
his  leader's  confidence,  and  whose  zeal  and  ability
might  compensate  for  the  want  of  experience,
received  orders  to  wrest  Sicily  from  the  Pompeians,
and  from  thence  cross  over  the  sea,  and  contest  with
them  the  possession  of  Africa.3  The  island  was  held
for  the  senate  by  M.  Cato,  who  had  reluctantly
obeyed  its  command  to  defend  so  obscure  a  depen-
dency, for  his  services,  he  deemed,  could  be  better
employed  in  Italy,  or  wherever  the  consuls  might
pitch  their  camp.  Accordingly,  he  seems  to  have
made  little  preparation  for  the  ungrateful  task  of
arming  the  Sicilians  to  harass  his  beloved  city.  The
sudden  approach  of  the  Csesarean  forces,  consisting  of
four  legions4,  in  a  flotilla  of  unarmed  transports,
found  him  unable  to  cope  with  the  invasion,  and  the
news  of  the  abandonment  of  Italy  by  Pompeius  so
shocked  and  dismayed  him,  that  he  determined  to
shed  no  blood  in  a  desultory  and  provincial  skirmish.
He  was  satisfied  with  demanding  of  the  intruder
whether  it  was  by  the  decree  of  the  senate,  or  under
the  orders  of  the  people,  that  he  presumed  to
encroach  upon  the  province  of  an  independent

1  Cic.  ad  Ait.  ix.  15.:  "  Ille  (Caesar)  ut  ad  me  scripsit  legiones  sin-
gulas  posuit  Brundisii, Siponti, Tarenti. Clandere  mihi  videtur
maritimos  exitus:  et  tamen  ipse  Graeciam  spectare  potius  quam  Hi-
spanias."

2  Caw B.C.  \.  30.

*  Appian  (B.C.  ii.  40.)  supposes  Asinius  Pollio  to  have  been  first
in  command;  but  that  Curio  was  the  superior  appears  from  the
sequel.  4  Cos.  /.  c.

166  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xv.

governor.  The  Master  of  Italy  has  sent  me,  re-
turned the  Csesarean  lieutenant1,  and  Cato  bowed
to  the  insulting  summons,  relinquishing  the  island
without  a  blow,  and  seeking  the  head-quarters  of  the
consuls  beyond  the  sea.2

Meanwhile  Csesar,  on  his  part,  repaired  straight-
way to  Eome,  ingratiating  himself  at  every

Cesar  repairi  J  ,  ° „  »  ..  J,

inpenonto  step  with  men  oi  all  parties,  who  listened
with  admiration  and  favour  to  the  plausible
explanation  he  could  give  of  his  conduct,  as  well
as  to  his  gracious  promises  to  restore  security  and
order.  In  courteous  terms  he  invited  the  timid  and
the  wavering  to  meet  him  in  the  Capitol,  and  to  aid
him  with  their  counsel  on  the  affairs  of  the  common-
wealth. With  Cicero  he  had  a  personal  interview
at  Formise,  and  an  animated  conversation  ensued
between  them.  The  orator  had  already  been  re-
assured, by  the  correspondence  he  kept  up  with
friends  of  the  proconsul,  as  to  any  fears  he  might
entertain  for  his  own  person.  He  did  not  shrink
from  meeting  the  victorious  invader,  and  his  de-
meanour was  not  wanting  in  a  show  of  firmness  and
dignity.  Caesar  urged  with  all  the  fascination  of
his  polished  address  that  the  refusal  of  so  popu-
lar a  statesman  to  return  to  Eome  would  be  a
and»eekjan  cause  of  hesitation  to  others.  Anxious  as
a£roontheh  he  was  to  place  his  interests  under  the
shadow  of  legitimate  authority,  he  invited
the  senate  to  resume  its  functions  in  its  proper  seat,
and  tender  its  advice  to  its  faithful  soldier.3  But

1  Appian,  /.  c.

1  Cicero  (ad  Alt.  x.  12—16.)  speaks  with  a  good  deal  of  bitterness
of  the  apparent  pusillanimity  of  Cato's  behaviour:  "potuisse  certe
tenere  illam  provinciam  scio."  But  his  judgments  on  these  points
were  formed  with  the  utmost  levity.  Cato  left  Sicily  (Cic.  ad  Att.  x.
16.)  April  23,  A.U.  705,  which  corresponds  with  March  2,  B.C.  49. ;
comp.  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  41.;  Dion,  xli.  18.;  Plut.  Cato,  53.;  Oros.
vL  15.;  Flor.  iv.  2.  22.

*  Lucan,  i.  202. :

"  Csesar  ubique  tuus,  liceat  mode,  nanc  quoque,  miles."

A.U..705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  167

Cicero  resolutely  closed  his  ears  against  these
flattering  solicitations.  He  pleaded  his  personal  ob-
ligation to  Pompeius,  and  his  intimate  connexion
with  the  fugitive  party,  whose  threats  of  proscription
were  still  sounding  in  his  ears.  He  ventured  to
declare  that,  if  he  opened  his  mouth  in'  the  senate
house,  it  must  be  to  denounce  the  attack  which  Caesar
was  meditating  on  the  Pompeian  legions  in  Spain,
and  the  expected  transport  of  his  army  into  Greece,
in  defiance  of  those  whom  he  was  still  bound  to  con-
sider the  constituted  authorities  of  the  state.  Caesar
replied  abruptly  that  he  would  not  suffer  any  such
public  animadversions  upon  his  conduct ;  and  he  was
obliged,  at  last,  to  break  up  the  conference  with  the
cold  expression  of  a  hope  that  his  friend  would  re-
flect further  upon  the  matter.  To  this  Cicero
returned  a  civil  answer ;  and  so,  he  says,  much  to  his
relief,  the  interview  ended.1

Caesar  had  reached  Eome  by  the  first  of  April,  and
his  first  care  upon  arriving  there  was  to  ca»ar  con-
convene  a  council  which  should  represent  to  Kntle^ut
the  citizens  the  image  of  their  venerated  Studio^iy
senate.  Members  of  that  body  had  already  moderate-
returned  in  sufficient  numbers  to  give  the  appearance
of  a  legitimate  assembly  ;  the  absence  of  the  consuls,
by  whom  its  meetings  should  properly  have  been  con-
voked, was  supplied  by  the  tribunes,  Antonius  and
Cassius,  who  revived,  for  the  occasion,  the  obsolete
prerogatives  of  their  office.2 The  demeanour  of  the
conqueror  was  studiously  mild :  he  reiterated,  in  set
phrases,  the  complaints  he had  so repeatedly ad-

Comp.  also  vii.,  264  :

"  Non  mihi  res  agitur,  sed  vos  ut  libera  sitis

Turba  precor,  gentes  ut  jus  habeatis  in  omnes."
1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  ix.  18.  (iv.  Kal.  Apr.  i.e.  March  29.):  "Damnari  se
nostro  judicio,  tardiores  fore  reliquos  si  nos  non  venerimns,  dicere  . .  .
Turn  ille,  Ego  vero  ista  dici  nolo  .  .  .  Summa  fuit,  ut  ille  quasi  exitum
quaerens,  ut  deliberarem. Non  fuit  negandum. Ita  discessimus."
*  Drumann,  iii.  443.

168  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XV.

dressed  to  the  consuls  themselves.  He  proposed  the
opening  of  a  new  negotiation  ;  but  he  may  be  sus-
pected of  throwing  obstacles  himself  in  the  way  of
its  being  carried  into  effect.  It  may  be  true,  as  he
alleges,  that  it  was  difficult  to  find  persons  willing  to
bear  the  flag  of  truce  into  the  camp  of  Pompeius,
who  had  vowed  to  treat  even  the  neutral  as  enemies.  *
But  it  was  observed  that,  when  the  affair  dropped,
and  Piso,  Caesar's  father-in-law,  mooted  it  a  second
time,  he  received  a  rebuke  for  his  officious  inter-
ference.2

The  restoration  of  the  families  of  Sulla's  victims
His  difficulty  t°  their  civil  rights  was  a  measure  of  jus-
the'demalTd*,  tice  against  which  no  exception  could  fairly
or  his  8oidie».  be  ^^3  gut  the  adherents  of  the  party
now  in  the  ascendant  began  to  press  other  claims
which  could  not  be  so  easily  satisfied.  Caesar  had
taken  the  precaution  of  leaving  his  army  behind  him
when  he  entered  Kome.  His  soldiers  had  allowed
themselves  to  anticipate  enormous  plunder  from  the
conquest  of  Italy ;  and  he  could  not  venture  to
bring  them  within  reach  of  the  spoil  of  the  capital.
But  the  urban  populace  itself  demanded  a  reward
for  its  long-tried  devotion  to  his  cause,  and  its  mur-
murs at  the  prospect  of  disappointment  already
raised  again  the  hopes  of  his  enemies.4  Caesar  was
obliged  to  pay  the  price  of  his  popularity  in  solid

1  Cos.  B.C.  i.  33.:  "Pompeius  enim  discedens  ab  urbe  in  senatu
dixerat  eodem  se  habiturum  loco  qui  Romse  remansissent  et  qui  in
castris  Csesaris  fuissent."

*  Dion,  xli.  16.

*  Dion  (xli.  18.)  states  that  this  restoration  took  place  at  this  time;
but  Plutarch  (Cte*.  37.)  places  it  after  the  Spanish  war. I  think
with  Drumann  that  the  later  date  is  the  correct  one,  in  which  case  it
was  one  of  a  series  of  connected  measures. But  such  an  enactment
was  probably  talked  of  at  this  time,  and  the  legal  disqualifications
virtually  set  aside.

4  Cic.  ad  Att.  x.  8. :  "  Nullo  modo  posse,  video  stare  ilium  diutius
....  quippe  qui  floremissimus  ac  novus,  vi.,  vii.  diebus  ipsi  illi  egenti
ac  perditae  multitu4ini  in  odium  acerbissimun?  venerit."

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  169

coin ;  and  the  largess  he  promised  was  a  frank  con-
fession that  his  power  was  founded  on  the  will  of  the
multitude.  Caesar  had  already  pledged  himself  to
give  five  minae  to  each  of  his  soldiers  ' ;  he  now
proffered  three  hundred  sesterces  to  every  citizen.
The  fulfilment  of  these  engagements  would  have
greatly  embarrassed  him,  for  he  had  renounced  the
resources  of  proscription  and  confiscation  to  which
previous  conquerors  had  so  readily  resorted.  But
his  enemies,  in  the  haste  and  trepidation  with  which
they  had  abandoned  the  city,  had  neglected  the  pre-
caution of  removing  the  treasure  stored  under  the
Capitol  in  the  vaults  of  the  temple  of

o Z  m-L  •  j 1.  J  -a.  He  Plunders

Saturn.  This  sacred  hoard,  as  it  was  pom-  the  8ac«d
pously  denominated,  had  been  chiefly  t^"rofn
amassed  from  the  proceeds  of  a  duty  on  the
enfranchisement  of  slaves ;  but  a  portion  of  the
spoils  of  war  had  also  from  time  to  time  been  de-
posited there.  Once  only,  in  the  most  disastrous
crisis  of  the  Punic  wars,  had  a  quantity  of  gold,
amounting  to  four  thousand  pounds  in  weight,  been
thence  withdrawn  by  the  solemn  decree  of  the  senate ;
but,  in  later  times,  the  coffers  had  been  rifled,  both
by  the  elder  and  the  younger  Marius,  during  the
licence  of  civil  commotion.  Undoubtedly  the  consuls
Marcellus  and  Lentulus  would  not  have  spared  it,  if
in  the  general  panic  of  their  flight  from  Kome  they
had  had  presence  of  mind  to  forecast  the  consequences
of  their  pusillanimity.  Pompeius  had  required  them
to  retrace  their  steps  from  Campania,  for  the  pur-
pose of  retrieving  their  blunder  ;  but  it  was  then  too
late,  and  this  abandonment  of  the  public  treasure
was  one  of  the  faults  against  which  Cicero  had  most
bitterly  inveighed.  Caesar  easily  obtained  authority
from  his  subservient  senate  to  appropriate  these  re-
sources. One  voice  was  raised  against  the  proceeding,

'  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  47;  five  minae  may  =  2000  sestertii,  nearly=16A

170  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CK.  xv

that  of  a  tribune  named  Metellus,  a  bold  as  well  as
a  bitter  opponent  of  the  Marian  party,  whose  courage
at  least  may  deserve  honourable  record.  His  official
veto  on  the  decree  of  the  senate  was  contemptuously
disregarded ;  but  he  placed  himself  before  the  door
of  the  temple,  and  vehemently  protested  that  the
spoiler  should  not  enter  but  over  his  body.  He
sought  to  enlist  the  popular  feeling  on  his  side  by
appealing  to  a  cherished  tradition.  This  treasure,  it
was  devoutly  believed,  included  the  actual  ransom  of
the  city,  which  Brennus  had  carried  from  the  gates,
and  the  valour  of  Camillus  had  recovered.  A  solemn
curse  had  been  denounced,  it  was  added,  against  the
sacrilegious  hand  which  should  remove  it  for  any  pur-
pose whatsoever,  except  to  repel  a  Gallic  invasion.
The  fear  of  a  Gallic  invasion,  retorted  Cassar,  is  for
ever  at  an  end:  I  have  subdued  the  Gauls.1  Caesar's
anger  was  terrible,  and  Metellus  quailed  at  last  be-
fore the  menaces  of  one  whose  blows,  it  was  well
known,  were  swifter  than  his  words.  The  keys  had
been  carried  off  by  the  consuls,  and  the  door  was
broken  open  with  pickaxes.  This  violent  measure
was  undoubtedly  one  of  extreme  necessity,  otherwise
Caesar  would  not  have  risked  by  it  the  character  for
moderation  he  so  studiously  affected.  The  pretended
champion  of  tribunitian  inviolability  was  constrained
to  plead  the  exigency  of  civil  war,  in  excuse  for  the
violation  of  a  tribune's  dignity.2

The  nobles,  indeed,  had  relied  upon  these  con-

'  Pint.  Cceg.  35.;  App.  ii.  41.;  Dion,  xli.  27

2  Cic.  (ad  Att.  x.  8.)  says,  pertinently  enough:  "Qui  duarum  re-
rum  simulationem  tain  cito  amiserit,  raansuetudinis  in  Metello,
divitiarum  in  aerario."  Caesar  seems  to  have  carried  off  his  violence
with  a  sarcastic  taunt.  Plut.  Cats.  35.:  vafprjaids  yap  ou  5eirai
vo\e/j.os.  Lucan  (iii.  138.)  conveys  the  idea  even  more  pointedly:

"Non  usque  adeo  permiscuit  imis
Longus  summa  dies,  ut  non,  si  voce  Metelli
Serventur  leges,  malint  a  Coesare  tolli."

A.U.7C5-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  171

quered  Gauls  to  make  a  diversion  in  their  favour
When  Cicero  expresses  the  general  ex-  Manilla  *»..
pectation  that  the  invader  would  be  checked  fav™uVof  the
in  his  career  in  Italy  by  the  revolt  in  his  party1!'"
rear  of  the  provinces  he  had  only  half  pacified,  he
relies  neither  upon  his  devotion  to  the  state,  nor  his
care  for  his  own  glory,  to  stay  his  onward  progress.
But  a  revolt  in  Gaul  would  have  cut  off  the  sources
of  Caesar's  military  strength,  and  it  was  reasonable
to  calculate  that  he  would  rather  fall  back  upon  the
basis  of  his  operations,  than  throw  himself  headlong
into  the  centre  of  his  enemies  without  a  reserve  be-
hind. But  the  proconsul  had  so  effectually  con-
ciliated the  vanquished  barbarians,  that  his  absence
beyond  the  Alps  was  attended  by  no  hostile  move-
ment among  them  in  any  quarter.  It  was  not  from
the  Gauls  that  his  plans  experienced  any  interrup-
tion ;  but  the  jealous  government  of  the  Grecian
Massilia  seized  the  opportunity  to  display  its  sym-
pathy with  the  Pompeian  party,  with  which  a  series
of  senatorial  proconsuls  had  maintained  it  in  close
connexion.

The  victor's  genuine or  affected  generosity  had
conceded  to  the  captured  Domitius  both

i  •  p  i f i  rtii -i  •  •  j  i Domitius  be-

life  and  freedom. But  he,  burning  with  takes  himseir

11  IVL- 1 U  i. to  Massilia.

personal  as  well  as  political  hatred  against
his  conqueror,  was  neither  soothed  by  favours  nor
dismayed  by  discomfiture.  Indignant,  however,  at
the  coolness  with  which  his  leader  had  abandoned  him,
he  made  no  effort  to  join  the  consular  ranks.  He
disdained  even  to  communicate  with  his  friends  in
Epirus,  and  for  a  time  neither  party  knew  what  were
his  projects,  or  whither  he  had  repaired.1  But  while
the  Caesarean  troops  were  taking  possession  of  the
Italian  peninsula  from  north  to  south,  and  establish-
ing themselves  in  quarters  at  Brundisium  and  Ta-

1  Cie.  ad  Alt.  viii.  14.,  ix.  1.  3.

172  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XV.

rentum,  at  Ariminum  and  Placentia,  he  contrived
to  elude  observation  in  equipping  a  small  naval  ar-
mament at  Cosa  on  the  Etruscan  coast.1  From  this
point  he  opened  communications  with  Massilia,  and
as  soon  as  he  heard  that  the  little  Greek  republic
was  resolved  to  declare  its  adherence  to  the  senate,
he  sailed  without  hesitation  for  that  harbour  of  re-
fuge.2 He  could  not  fail  to  perceive  how  important
a  diversion  might  be  created  for  the  interests  of  his
party  by  securing  so  strong  and  opportune  a  position
in  the  enemy's  rear.  But  the  Province,  to  which,  in
a  military  point  of  view,  Massilia  was  the  key,  had
been  the  theatre  of  his  own  family  glories,  and  he
hoped,  by  force  or  favour,  to  acquire  actual  posses
sion  of  it,  as  the  government  to  which  he  was  right-
fully entitled  by  the  decree  of  the  senate.  The
liberty  which  Cassar  had  accorded  him  he  abused  for
objects  of  personal  ambition,  and  broke  his  faith  to
an  indulgent  rival,  not  from  devotion  to  his  party  01
the  state,  but  purely  from  motives  of  self-interest  and
cupidity.

We  have  seen  that  Caesar  had  not  the  means  of
ciesar  leave, following  the  flying  enemy  across  the  Adri
-  atic; but  a  few  days  had  sufficed  to  put
him.  at  the  head  of  the  senate  and  people  of
sp«in.  Rome,  to  recruit  his  military  chest  by  the

plunder  of  the  treasury,  and  thus  gather  into  his  hands
all  the  resources  his  enterprise  required.  He  was  not
content  to  act  on  the  defensive  in  Italy.  The  supine-
ness  and  apparent  timidity  of  his  adversaries  embold-
ened him  to  leave  the  city  almost  unprotected,  while
he  hastened  in  person  across  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees
to  crush  the  left  wing  of  their  forces  in  Spain.  He
was  confident  of  success.  The  character  of  the  gene-
rals opposed  to  him,  of  Afranius  at  least  and  Varro,
was  not  such  as  to  inspire  him  with  any  apprehension

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  ix.  6.  2  Cas.  B.C.  I  34.

A.r.7C5-B  c.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  173

of  defeat.  He  left,  as  he  said,  a  general  without  an
army,  to  attack  an  array  without  a  general.1  M.  An-
tonius  was  appointed  to  watch  over  his  patron's  inte-
rests in  Italy,  while  the  government  of  Rome  was
confided  to  M.  ^Emilius  Lepidus,  an  hereditary  op-
ponent of  the  oligarchy.2  Ca3sar  joined  three  legions
of  recruits  at  Arirninum3,  and  led  them  with  his
accustomed  celerity  across  the  Alps.  Under  the  walls
of  Massilia  he  met  his  lieutenant  Trebonius,  with
reinforcements  from  the  cantonments  in  the  north  of
Gaul.  In  the  course  of  this  rapid  march  he  first-
learned  the  resistance  he  might  expect  from  the
Massilians,  whose  harbour  and  naval  resources,  weak
as  he  was  in  that  arm,  were  of  the  greatest  import-
ance to  him.  Pompeius,  at  the  moment  of  his  flight
into  the  south  of  Italy,  had  had  the  presence  of  mind
to  bestow  a  parting  exhortation  on  the  agents  of  the
Greek  republic  in  Rome,  reminding  them  of  the  bene-
fits he  had  conferred  upon  their  state,  and  desiring
them  to  return  home,  and  confirm  the  dispositions  of
their  countrymen  in  his  favour.  The  Massilians,  in
consequence,  had  closed  their  gates,  amassed  supplies
of  every  kind,  and  purchased  the  services  of  the  neigh-
bouring tribes.  At  the  same  time  Caesar  received  in-
formation of  the  enterprise  upon  which  Domitius  was
bound ;  he  learned  also  that  Vibullius  Rufus,  another
of  the  liberated  captives  of  Corfinium,  had  been  sent
by  Pompeius  into  Spain,  to  convey  instructions  to  his
lieutenants  there.4

Immediately  on  his  arrival  the  proconsul  demanded

1  Suet.  Jul.  34. :  "  Professus  inter  suos  ire  se  ad  exercitnm  sine
dace,  et  inde  reversurum  ad  dncem  sine  exercittu"

*  Pint  Anton.  6.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  41. This  personage,  whose
name  will  be  conspicuous  on  our  pages  hereafter,  was  son  of  the
Lepidus  whose  insurrection  was  quelled  by  Catnlus  A.u.  677.

*  Oros.  vi.  15.;  comp.  Caes.  B  C.  i.  36.:  the  three  legions  he  men-
tions must  have  been  new  levies,  for  the  few  veterans  he  had  had  with
him  in  Italy  were  left  there  in  garrison,  or  transported  into  Sicily,
and  the  remaining  Gallic  legions  had  not  crossed  the  Alps.

1  Ca*  B.C.  i.  34.

174  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xv

an  interview  with  the  council of  fifteen  in whom

the  government  of  the Massilian  common-

fore*MaI3iia, wealth was vested. They proceeded to

which  shuti  it3  ,,  • ,  i i •  r*  t ,  i •  i •

gates  against confer  with  him  confidently  in his  camp,

him,  and  re-  , .  , . . . J  .  .

cemwDomi-  and  in  answer  to  his  invitation  to  acknow-
ledge the  authority  of  Italy  legitimately
pronounced  through  a  senate  in  Home,  rather  than
submit  to  the  dictation  of  a  private  citizen,  they
replied  that  the  republic,  as  they  understood,  was
divided  in  the  interests  of  a  Caesar  and  a  Pompeius,
to  both  of  whom  they  owed  great  public  benefits ;  and,
as  they  could  not  presume  to  decide  between  such
competitors,  they  conceived  it  their  duty  to  close
their  gates  equally  against  either.  But  no  sooner  had
they  left  the  proconsul's  presence  than  Domitius  ap-
peared with  his  little  squadron  at  the  mouth  of  the
harbour,  and  was  at  once  admitted  into  the  city  with
open  arms.1  A  bold  and  experienced  general  was  all
that  the  Massilians  needed  ;  arms,  money,  ships,  pro-
visions, they  possessed  in  abundance,  and  the  enthu-
siasm of  the  people  was  fully  equal  to  their  resources.
Csesar  was  intent  upon  his  expedition  into  Spain,
c«iar  leaves  where,  if  a  blow  was  to  be  struck,  it  must
£  reduces-  be  aimed  without  delay.  It  was  com-
hairtenslnto  monly  rumoured  that  Pompeius  intended
8pain-  to  embark  his  legions  in  Greece,  or  even  to

march  through  Mauretania,  to  reinforce  his  lieu-
tenants in  the  west.8  Time  was  more  valuable  to
Caesar  than  men.  He  preferred  leaving  three  legions
behind  him  to  conduct  the  siege  of  Massilia,  rathei
than  delay  his  advance  till  the  place  should  be  reduced

1  Cses.  B.C.  i.  34.  36.;  Cic.  ad  Alt.  ix.  6.

2  Gas.  B.C.  i.  39.  Another  report  indeed,  at  which  Cicero  eagerly
caught,  was  that  he  was  already  directing  his  course  through  Illyri-
cum  and  about  to  enter  Italy  by  the  route  of  the  Cisalpine  province,
but  this  Csesar  no  doubt  discredited. Cic.  ad  Alt.  x.  6.  (10  Kal.
Mui=22  April):  "Pompeium  pro  certo  habemus  per  Illyricum  pro-
ficisci  in Galliam." He writes  again May  3: "Pornpeium  cum
magnis  copiis  iter  in  Germaniam  per  Hlyricum  fecisse."

A.0.70S-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  175

to  submission.  He  gave  charge  for  the  equipment  of
a  fleet  to  assist  in  the  operations  against  the  town,
and  appointed  Trebonius  and  Decimus  Brutus  to  the
command  of  the  land  and  naval  force  respectively.
In  the  interval  which  these  hurried  arrangements  re-
quired, orders  were  despatched  to  C.  Fabius  to  move
from  Narbo  with  the  three  veteran  legions  there
under  his  command,  and  occupy  the  passes  of  the
Pyrenees ;  at  the  same  time  the  troops  still  quartered
in  remoter  parts  of  Gaul  were  directed  to  follow  as
rapidly  as  possible.  Auxiliary  cohorts  were  levied
throughout  Aquitania,  and  the  bravest  of  the  native
chieftains  enlisted  with  alacrity.  Pressed  for  money
to  conduct  these  operations,  Caesar  had  the  address  to
borrow  it  from  his  own  officers,  and  he  congratulated
himself  on  the  success  of  an  artifice  which  bound
them  to  his  cause  by  the  additional  tie  of  pecuniary
interest.

Eight  years  had  elapsed  since  the  senate  had  as-
signed the  province  of  Spain  together  with

A5 •  •  rA.  f i- ThePompeian

Atrica  to  Jrompems. ihe  course 01 his  lieutenant*.

...  * ,  * ,  • ,  , i Varro,  Afra-

mtrigues  nearer  home  had  not  permitted  mas,  and  Pe-

i  •  • T ••-,  •  i  i treins.

him  to  repair  thither  in  person,  but  he
had  taken  a  lively  interest  in  its  military  organ-
ization, foreseeing  the  importance  of  such  a  magazine
of  men  and  arms  in  the  event  of  a  civil  war.  The  re-
public had  previously  maintained  in  the  Peninsula  a
force  of  four  legions.  The  new  proconsul  withdrew
two  more  from  Africa  to  strengthen  this  armament,
and  these  six  brigades  composed  of  veteran  troops,
formed  together  the  finest  army  Eome  could  boast.
To  these  a  seventh  legion  was  added  by  the  enlist-
ment of  provincial  colonists,  and  the  entire  force
under  the  proconsul's  orders  was  augmented  by  the
contingents  of  the  allied  states  and  large  bodies  of
hired  auxiliaries.  The  Peninsula  was  divided  into
three  governments,  each  having  a  military  establish-
ment of  its  own.  In  the  northern  and  eastern  region

176  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XV.

the  consular  Afranius  commanded  with  three  legions.
Petreius  was  stationed  with  two  others  in  Lusitania,
a  district  which  comprised  the  recent  conquests  of
Caesar  in  his  prsetorship.  The  southern  province,
from  Castulo  on  the  Baetis  to  the  mouth  of  the  Anas,
the  politest  of  the  Koman  possessions  in  the  west,
was  appropriately  assigned  to  M.  Terentius  Varro,  one
of  the  most  consummate  specimens  of  Italian
culture.1  The  literary  genius  of  this  illustrious  man
was  the  most  universal  of  his  day :  his  knowledge  of
the  history  and  antiquities  of  his  country  remained
long  unrivalled ;  in  the  dignified  profession  of
philosophy  and  the  lighter  pursuits  of  poetry  he  ob-
tained an  honourable  distinction  among  his  contem-
poraries ;  while  his  proficiency  in  the  most  practically
useful  of  the  arts  was  evinced  by  his  treatise  on  rural
economy,  which  has  descended  to  modern  times.
For  military  command,  indeed,  he  seems  to  have
shown  little  aptitude ;  but  he,  in  fact,  alone  of  the
three  lieutenants  was  not  heartily  attached  to  his
general,  and  his  principal  care  was  to  contrive  to
appear  a  partisan  of  whichever  should  become  the
winning  side.  The  character  of  Afranius  is  already
known  to  us,  as  a  zealous  adherent  of  the  senate,
but  a  man  of  little  vigour  or  prudence  in  political
life.  As  an  officer,  however,  he  had  served  with
distinction  in  the  war  against  Sertorius,  and  had
gained  laurels  in  Asia  under  the  eye  of  Pompeius.
Petreius,  perhaps,  alone  of  the  three  was  worthy  of
the  conspicuous  post  he  was  called  upon  to  fill.  He
was  a  sturdy  veteran,  whose  unshaken  loyalty  and
courage  had  been  long  before  approved  in  the  de-
struction of  Catilina.2

1  Cses.  B.C.  i.  38.  There  seems  to  be  some  corruption  or  trans-
position in  the  text,  but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  the  writer's
meaning.

*  Sallust  speaks  of  him  as  even  at  that  time  a  veteran  of  thirty
years'  standing,  and  pays  a  high  tribute  to  his  experience  in  his  pro-
fession. (B.C.  59.,  see  above,  Vol.  I.  p.  129.)

A.P.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  177

As  soon  as  their  imperator's  orders  arrived  for  pre-
paring to  encounter  Caesar,  the  three  lieu-

j 1 1  .1  They  prepare

tenants  concerted  their  measures  together,  to  meet  casar
To  Afranius,  as  farthest  in  advance,  was
assigned  the  task  of  preventing,  il  possible,  the
threatened  irruption  into  the  Peninsula.  Petreius
undertook  to  summon  in  the  first  place  to  his
standard  the  hordes  of  savage  warriors  with  which
his  half-reclaimed  province  swarmed,  and  then  direct
his  march  with  all  speed  along  the  line  of  the  Durius
or  the  Tagus,  and  effect  a  junction  with  his  colleague
beyond  the  Iberus.  Meanwhile,  the  government  of
all  the  south  and  west  was  deputed  to  Varro,  who
retained  with  him  two  legions  to  keep  the  province  in
subjection,  and  constitute  a  reserve  for  future
emergencies.  The  force  thus  rapidly  concentrated
in  the  north  of  Spain  to  check  Caesar's  advance  con-
sisted of  five  veteran  legions  and  a  body  of  eighty
cohorts  of  auxiliaries,  amounting  in  all,  perhaps,  to
seventy  thousand  men.1

The  armies  of  the  Scipios  and  Catos,  in  former
times,  had  been  transported  to  Iberia  by  sea ;  but
the  conquest  of  the  southern  coasts  of  Gaul  had
gradually  extended  the  military  roads  of
the  republic  from  the  foot  of  the  Alps  to  aer<5Jthero^jr-
the  summit  of  the  Pyrenees,  and  from
thence  in  various  directions  across  the  whole  penin-
sula. Pompeius  had  devoted  himself,  in  the  war
with  Sertorius,  to  completing  the  communication
between  Gaul  and  the  western  dependencies  of  the
republic.  The  route  which  he  opened  led  from
Narbo,  through  Ruscino  and  Illiberis,  to  Ficaria,

1  Cses.  B.C.  i.  39.  These  auxiliaries  were  partly  heavy  armed
(scutatae),  partly  light  armed  (cetratae).  The  former  were  drawn
from  the  Hither,  the  latter  from  the  Farther  province.  The  proper
complement  of  the  legionary  cohort  was  600,  but  the  numbers  of
the  auxiliary  cohorts  seem  to  have  varied  considerably.  In  one
place  Caesar  makes  particular  mention  of  cohorts  of  600  men  (B.C.
iii.  4.).

VOL.  II.  N

178  HISTOTIY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XT.

Girona,  and  Barcino.1  This  is  precisely  the  line  of
the  modern  road  across  the  Col  de  Pertuis,  on  the
most  eastern  spur  of  the  Pyrenees.  At  the  highest
point  of  this  road  Pompeius  had  erected  the  trophy
which  long  continued  to  bear  his  name,  and  recorded
upon  a  triumphal  arch  his  achievements  in  the  west.
The  great  Eoman  way  from  Graul  skirted  the  coast
from  Barcelona  to  Tarragona,  and  thence  branched
out  in  two  directions  j  the  one  to  Lerida  and  the
north-west,  the  other  to  Tortosa,  Valencia  and  the
south.  In  modern  times,  the  French  armies  have
frequently  penetrated  into  Spain  by  the  route  of
Puycerda  and  Urguel,  along  the  valley  of  the  Segre a;
but  this  more  direct  line  was  not  adopted  by  the
Eomans.  The  Pompeian  generals,  therefore,  could
not  have  been  uncertain  as  to  the  direction  of  the
enemy's  advance,  and  with  ordinary  foresight  and
activity  they  might  doubtless  have  occupied  every
defensible  position  along  his  route.3  But  the  energy
of  Caesar  imparted  itself  to  his  lieutenants,  while  the
leaders  opposed  to  them  were  no  less  tardy  and  unde-
cided than  their  own  chief.  Fabius  pressed  forward
from  his  quarters  at  Narbo,  crossed  the  mountains
without  any  serious  resistance,  closed  the  ports  of
Emporiaa  and  Barcino  against  reinforcements  from
the  camp  of  Pompeius,  and,  taking  the  road  to  the
right  of  Tarraco,  reached  the  valley  of  the  Sicoris,
and  confronted  the  united  forces  of  Afranius  and
Petreius  before  Ilerda.4

1  The  modern Roussillon,  Elne?, Figueras,  Gerona, and Bar-
celona.

2  Guischard,  Mim.  Milit.  I.  28.

s  Livius  Salinator,  an  officer  of  Sertorius,  had  successfully  defended
this  pass  against  the  praetor,  C.  Annius.  Pint.  Sert.  7.  All  the  ships
Caesar  could  build  or  collect  were  employed  before  Massilia,  so  that
many  weeks  or  months  might  be  expected  to  elapse  before  he  could
throw  his  invading  armies  upon  the  coast.  Besides,  the  Pompeian
forces  in  Spain  were  sufficiently  numerous  to  occupy  all  the  ports  on
the  Mediterranean.

4  Cnes.  B.C.  i.  37. Ilerda,  mod.  Lerida;  Sicoris,  mod.  Scgre.

A.V.705-B.C.49. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  179

The  spirit  with  which  Fabius  pushed  forward  to
encounter  a  superior  enemy  was  the  first
omen  of  Caesar's  ultimate  success. A  se-  c»M?"."n-

j  ji  •  i • i i .1 popularity  in

con  a  was  the  supmeness,  and  indeed  the  Home  and
hardly  dissembled  treachery  of  Varro,  in
excusing  himself  from  joining  his  colleagues  in  the
north,  nor  even  sending  the  fleets  of  Gades  to  co-
operate with  them,  or  to  assist  the  defenders  of
Massilia.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  other  circum-
stances seemed  to  cloud  the  invader's  prospects.  The
resistance  of  the  Massilians,  beyond  all  hope  and  ex-
pectation, and  with  little  apparent  chance  of  success,
conveyed  to  the  friends  of  Pompeius  the  impression
that  they  had  stronger  grounds  of  confidence  than
such  as  were  generally  manifest,  and  their  example
served  to  confirm  many  waverers  in  Italy.  The
rumoured  unpopularity  of  Caesar  himself  with  the
mob  of  Rome,  and  the  supposed  disaffection  of  his
new  levies,  was  another  topic  of  mutual  encourage-
ment among  this  class  of  politicians.  The  gross  and
open  profligacy  of  the  leading  Caesareans,  if  we  are  to
believe  the  stories  current  regarding  it,  was  expected
to  alienate  the  favour  of  the  more  sober  citizens.  It
seemed  impossible  that  men  of  sense  could  acquiesce
in  a  domination  of  which,  however  specious  were  its
present  pretences  to  moderation,  a  speedy  lapse  into
tyranny  and  proscription  might  be  so  confidently  pre-
dicted. Intrigues  were  set  on  foot  for  raising  the
standard  of  the  senate  in  the  south  of  Italy.  These,
indeed,  proved  utterly  abortive;  it  was  not  likely
that  a  conspiracy  conducted  by  a  Cicero,  and  confided
to  an  Atticus,  should  succeed  in  the  face  of  such  men
as  Caesar  and  Antonius.1  But  it  was  with  an  uneasy
sense  of  his  increasing  difficulties,  and  of  the  necessity

1  See  Cicero's  letters,  ad  Alt.  x.  8,  9,  10,  15.  Antonius  would
not  have  been  puzzled  by  the  enigmatical  expressions  which  modern
critics  have  penetrated,  if  he  had  thought  it  worth  his  while  to  inter-
cept this  correspondence.

N  2

180  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XV.

of  obtaining  a  splendid  victory  for  the  maintenance
of  the  position  he  had  acquired,  that  Caesar  hastened  in
the  track  of  his  lieutenant,  and  brought  a  chosen  body-
guard of  nine-hundred  cavalry  to  reinforce  the  troops
collected  on  the  banks  of  the  Sicoris.  The  Caesarean
army  numbered  five  legions  l,  with  six  thousand  aux-
iliary infantry  and  as  many  cavalry,  besides  the  con-
tingent of  Aquitanian  mountaineers,  and  the  little
squadron  just  mentioned.  While  the  Pompeian
generals  were  securely  posted  beneath  the  defences
of  Ilerda,  Fabius  had  contented  himself  with  throw-
ing bridges  across  the  Sicoris,  and  establishing  com-
munications with  the  open  territory  on  both  sides  of
the  river.  A  sudden  inundation,  such  as  frequently
occurs  in  that  treacherous  stream,  had  broken  down
one  of  his  bridges,  and  placed  two  of  his  legions,  thus
cut  off  from  the  rest,  in  a  situation  of  imminent
danger.  Afranius  advanced  to  the  attack  and  Fabius
to  the  rescue  with  equal  promptitude  and  conduct.
The  Pompeian,  unwilling  to  risk  a  general  engage-
ment, retired  before  the  enemy's  reunited  forces,  and
both  parties  remained  watching  each  other,  when
Caesar  arrived  to  turn  the  fortune  of  the  campaign.
The  ensuing  manoeuvres  of  the  opposing  armies
are  replete  with  the  highest  interest.  Sel-

Qreat  interest ,  j  , . °., ,  . ,  - ,,

ofthiscam-  dom  do  we  read  in  the  history  of  the
nfi'm Jy  £oint  republic  of  equal  bodies  of  Roman  veterans
meeting  each  other  in  deadly  conflict,  with
equal  valour  and  resolution,  and  equally  under
the  command  of  experienced  generals.  The  good
fortune  by  which  the  details  of  these  strategic
operations  are  preserved  to  us  by  a  narrator  so  clear
and  accurate  as  Caesar  himself,  deserves  to  be  re-
marked ;  and  in  tracing  them  with  some  minuteness

'  Cses.  B.C.  i.  37.  Fabius  had  three  legions  at  Narbonne.  To
these  are  to  be  added  apparently  two  others  which  Trebonins  had
brought  from  the  north  of  Gaul  (quas  longius  hiemabant).  The
auxiliaries  are  enumerated  (c.  39.).  See  Guischard,  i.  50.

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  181

we  shall  gain  an  insight  into  the  art  of  war  as  prac-
tised by  the  most  military  of  nations  at  the  most
flourishing  period  of  its  arms.1

An  eminence  rising  abruptly  from  the  right  bank
of the Segre  was crowned  by  the  walls
of  the  ancient  Ilerda. 2 The  communica-  troche?  MS
tions  of  the  city  with  the  opposite  bank  of  ortlfe  Tnemy-s

.,  j i  , position.

the  river  were  secured  by  a  permanent
bridge  of  stone,  and  the  Pompeian  garrison  which
maintained  this  important  post  commanded  the  re-
sources of  the  wide  and  fertile  plain  which  it  sur-
veyed on  all  sides.  On  a  rival  summit,  at  the  dis-
tance of  less  than  half  a  mile  to  the  south,  Afranius
and  Petreius  had  taken  up  their  position  ;  for  a
Roman  army  of  several  legions  required  ample  space
for  its  accommodation,  and  the  generals  of  the  re-
public seldom  relinquished  the  array  and  discipline
of  the  camp  for  the  confused  and  straitened  quarters
of  a  city.  These  fortified  eminences,  though  uncon-
nected, appeared  sufficiently  near  for  mutual  sup-
port ;  but  between  them  the  ground  swelled  into  a
third  elevation,  and  this,  as  we  shall  see,  the  Pom-
peians  had  neglected  to  secure  by  military  defences.
Caesar  assumed  the  offensive  as  soon  as  he  arrived  at
the  scene  of  action.  He  advanced  in  battle  array  to
within  four  hundred  paces  of  the  enemy's  camp,
whence  it  was  his  aim  to  withdraw  him  by  offering
battle  in  the  plain  below.  But  his  antagonists  had
no  motive  for  accepting  the  decision  of  the  open  field.
They  sought  to  protract  operations  in  order  to  give
their  champion  time  for  completing  his  extensive  pre-

1  The  details  of  this  campaign  are  given  minutely  by  Caesar  (B.  C.
i.  40.  to  the  end),  nor  do  the  other  authorities  add  anything  of  im-
portance. I  have  availed  myself  largely  of  Guischard's  critical  re-
marks.

2  Compare  with  Cassar  Lucan's  description  (iv.  init.). The  poet
notices  the  position  of  Ilerda  on  the  Sicoris,  the  stone  bridge,  the  hill
on  which  Afranius  was  posted,  and  the  intervening  height  contested
by  the  two  parties.

182  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xv.

parations  in  the  East; and  accordingly,  being  well
supplied  with  provisions,  and  relying  on  the  resources
of  the  country  around  them,  they  persisted  in  refus-
ing the  proffered  challenge. For  the  convenience  of
space,  indeed,  or  to  encourage  their  troops  by  the
semblance  of  a  bolder  defiance,  they  drew  up  their
array  in  front  of  their  lines ;  but  even  there  they  were
too  securely  posted  for  Caesar  to  venture  an  attack.
He  was  unwilling,  however,  to  leave  their  movements
free  by  retiring  from  the  advanced  position  he  had
himself  taken  up  ;  he  proceeded,  accordingly,  to  exe-
cute the  bold  and  hazardous  operation  of  constructing
an  entrenched  camp  in  the  face  of  his  antagonists.
He  could  not  have  kept  his  ground  through  the  night
without  placing  his  men  behind  the  protection  of  a
fosse  or  rampart ;  but  while  the  two  first  lines  retained
their  arms  and  battle  array,  he  appointed  the  third  to
excavate  a  ditch  in  their  rear,  and  thus  imposed  upon
the  enemy,  who  believed  that  the  whole  force  was
equally  prepared  for  the  combat. Had  the  progress
of  these  latter  works  been  discovered,  the  Pompeians
might  have  charged  the  two  first  lines  with  advantage,
unsupported  as  they  were  at  the  moment  by  the  third.
It  was  thus  that  the  Nervians,  while  part  of  the  Eoman
troops  were  engaged  in  entrenching  their  camp,  had
made  their  attack,  so  sudden  and  so  nearly  successful.
Anxious  to  anticipate  such  a  sudden  attack  in  the
present  instance,  Caesar  was  satisBed  with  the  temporary
protection  of  a  fosse,  and  postponed  the  completion  of
the  rampart  behind  it  till  he  had  drawn  his  legions
within  their  unfinished  entrenchments. The  excava-
tion of  the  ditch  to  the  depth  of  fifteen  feet  was  ac-
complished  by the skilful  and laborious  veterans
before  nightfall. Caesar  was  now  enabled  to  complete
the  remaining  faces  of  his  camp  more  at  his  leisure.
Some  slight  attempts  were  made  by  Afranius  to  in-
terrupt the  progress  of  these  works,  but  Caesar  re-
pulsed  them  without  difficulty. Having  now  sur-

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  183

rounded  himself  with  a  fosse,  and  raised  a  subsidiary
rampart,  he  possessed  a  fortified  position  whence  to
watch  and  counteract  the  enemy's  movements.  At
the  same  time,  the  excellence  of  his  Gaulish  cavalry,
in  which  force  he  was  decidedly  superior  to  the  Pom-
peian  generals,  gave  him  the  means  of  supplying  him-
self with  provisions  from  the  fertile  plain  between  the
Sicoris  and  the  Cinga,  and  the  bridges  which  had  been
thrown  across  the  former  river  maintained  his  com-
munications with  the  country  through  which  he  had
advanced.

The  camp  which  Afranius  and  Petreius  occupied
was  situated,  as  has  been  said,  on  an  emin-
ence about  half  a  mile  distant  from  the  th'SuiT  °
citadel  of  Ilerda.1  In  the  level  space  be-
tween the  two  heights  was  one  spot  of  rising  ground
which  seemed  to  offer  a  favourable  point  for  inter-
cepting the  communication  between  the  two  fortifica-
tions. Could  Ca3sar  make  himself  master  of  this
spot,  he  might  cut  off  Afranius  not  only  from  Ilerda,
but  from  the  bridge  over  the  Sicoris,  and,  of  course,
from  the  country  beyond  it.  With  this  view  he  led
three  legions  out  of  his  camp,  and  ordered  a  band  of
picked  men  to  rush  forward  and  attempt  to  seize  the
hill.  The  three  lines  in  which  the  Roman  battle-
array  was  ordinarily  drawn  up  were  not  distinguished
at  this  period,  as  in  earlier  times,  by  different  equip-
ments and  a  corresponding  difference  of  name.  The
legionaries,  since  the  time  of  Marius  at  least,  were  all
armed  alike ;  but  the  first  line  was  generally  composed
of  the  men  of  the  most  approved  conduct  and  courage.
In  each  cohort  a  certain  number  of  the  best  men,
probably  about  one-fourth  of  the  whole  detachment,
was  assigned  as  a  guard  to  the  standard,  from  whence
they  derived  their  name  of  Antesignani.  In  a  general

1  Cusarsays.  300  paces,  i.e.  a  little  more  than  500  yards;  but  the
localities  are  clearly  distinguishable  at  the  present  day,  and  the  in-
terval is  undoubtedly  greater.

184  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xv.

action  these  men  were  collected  together  and  placed
in  the  first  line;  whenever  an  operation  was  to  be  ef-
fected which  demanded  superior  nerve  and  intrepidity,
it  was  to  these  that  it  was  confided.  Cassar  selected
the  standard-guard  of  one  of  his  legions  to  make  the
sudden  attack  he  now  directed.  Eapid  as  were  their
movements,  the  Afranians,  having  the  advantage  in
point  of  distance,  were  enabled  to  anticipate  them.
With  the  short  weapons  used  by  the  Eomans,  a  slight
superiority  of  ground  gave  a  decisive  advantage  in
personal  combats.  On  this  occasion  courage  and  dis-
cipline were  equal  on  both  sides,  and  the  Afraniaus
were  not  to  be  dislodged  by  the  most  vigorous  efforts.
Even  the  loose  mode  of  fighting  with  which  they  had
become  familiar  from  their  intercourse  with  the
natives  of  the  country,  gave  them  an  advantage  over
the  CaBsareans,  who  expected  to  encounter  opponents
whose  manoeuvres  would  be  precisely  like  their  own,
and  were  confused  by  the  agility  and  ease  with  which
their  adversaries  moved  around  them.  For  the  Eo-
man  legionaries  were  trained  to  keep  their  ranks  even
in  the  quickest  charge,  and  to  support  one  another
always  at  an  equal  interval  of  three  feet  They  rallied
close  around  their  standards,  which  it  was  their  point
of  honour  never  to  leave  whether  in  retreat  or  attack.
The  heavy  pressure  of  the  Gaulish  masses  had  com-
pelled Csesar's  troops  to  maintain  these  tactics  with
constancy  and  precision ;  whereas  the  legions  which
had  served  in  Spain  against  a  foe  of  a  different  cha-
racter, had  been  forced  to  depart  more  or  less  from
the  strictness  of  this  system,  and  had  learned  to  baffle
their  enemies  by  lighter  and  more  desultory  move-
ments.

The  discomfiture  of  this  chosen  body  was  retrieved
for  the  moment  by  the  charge  of  the  ninth  legion,
which  was  now  brought  up  to  its  relief.  These  fresh
troops  soon  checked  the  victorious  advance  of  the
Afranians,  hurled  them  back  in  confusion,  and  rushed

I.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  185

in  hot  pursuit  to  the  foot  of  the  hill  upon  which
Ilerda  stood.  It  was  under  the  walls,  or  within  the
gates,  that  the  retiring  Afranians  sought  refuge.
But  the  position  of  their  pursuers  was  one  of  great
peril,  for  the  acclivity  they  were  climbing  was  only
wide  enough  for  three  cohorts  in  line,  and  both  to
the  right  and  left  the  descent  was  extremely  pre-
cipitous. With  no  support  on  its  flanks,  and  with
all  the  disadvantage  of  inferior  ground,  the  ninth
legion  was  extremely  harassed  by  the  obstinate  re-
sistance here  opposed  to  it ;  it  offered  a  sure  mark
to  every  dart  hurled  from  above,  while  the  numbers
and  the  means  of  its  opponents  were  augmented  from
the  resources  of  the  town  in  their  rear.  Caesar  was
obliged  to  put  forth  his  whole  strength  to  drive  the
enemy  back  to  the  shelter  of  his  walls,  and  enable
the  assailants,  after  a  sharp  contest  of  five  hours,  to
withdraw  steadily  into  the  plain.  Their  retreat  was
effectually  covered  by  the  arrival  of  some  squadrons
of  cavalry,  which  had  succeeded  in  overcoming  the
difficulties  of  the  ground  on  either  side,  and  threw
themselves  at  the  last  moment  between  the  opposing
lines.

The  engagement  had  been  fought  with  such  alter-
nations of  success  that  each  party  claimed
the  victory.1 Caesar  himself  admits  that  he  ciaim."the  ad-

•i ,  ..  , .  rautage.

was  surprised  at  meeting  such  vigorous  re-
sistance from  troops  which  no  one,  he  says,  imagined
to  be  equal  to  his, own  veterans.  But  with  regard
to  the  number  slain  on  either  side,  his  language  is
suspiciously  ambiguous,  while  the  height  against
which  his  attack  was  in  the  first  instance  directed
remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Afranians,  who  now
proceeded  to  strengthen  it  with  military  defences.
A  later  historian,  who  seems  to  have  had  some  in-
dependent materials  for  his  account  of  these  opera-

1  Cses.  B.C  i.  47.

186  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XV.

tions,  does  not  hesitate  to  give  the  honour  of  the
day  to  the  soldiers  of  Afranius.1

The  check which Caesar thus  unexpectedly re-
ceived was  followed  by  another  disaster  for
*  UM  *•*•!• which  he  was  still  less  prepared. During

c££i'*Po*i- the  months  of  April  and  May  the  melting

tion-  r  J.-L.  r^-n

ot  the  snows  ot  the  .Pyrenees  causes  a  pe-
riodical inundation  of  the  rivers  which,  like  the
Sicoris,  descend  from  their  southern  flank.  The
waters  of  these  streams  swell  rapidly,  and  rush  on
such  occasions  with  excessive  violence.  Fabius's
bridge  was  carried  away  by  the  impetuous  torrent ;
but  Caesar  may  have  supposed  that,  when  this  in-
undation abated,  the  danger  was  over  for  the  year.
A  few  days  afterwards,  however,  it  being  now  six
weeks  after  the  equinox,  a  second  and  still  more
violent  flood  swept  away  both  the  bridge  which  had
been  rebuilt  and  the  other  higher  up  the  channel.
The  movements  of  Caesar's  army  were  thus  confined
between  the  streams  of  the  Sicoris  and  the  Cinga,
both  overflowing  their  banks  and  destitute  of  fords
or  'bridges.  The  only  communication  with  the
country  beyond  on  either  side  was  by  the  stone
bridge  of  Ilerda,  of  which  Afranius  had  possession.
The  base  of  the  triangle,  of  which  the  apex  is  the
confluence  of  these  rivers,  was  a  mountainous  and
impracticable  district,  affording  probably  little  sup-
port for  an  army,  and  access  even  to  this  must  have
been  seriously  impeded  in  time  of  flood  by  the  chan-
nels of  two  other  streams  which  intersect  the  plain.2
The  season  of  the  year  was  that  in  which  the  Jast

1  Dion,  xli.  20.  Lucan  (iv.  46.)  balances  the  result  with  great  in-
genuity :

"Sic  pedcs  ex  facili,  nulloque  urgente,  receptus:

Irritus  et  victor  subducto  Marte  pepcndit."

7  These  streams,  now  called  the  Noguera  Ribagorsana,  and  Palla-
resa,  are  not  mentioned  by  Caesar,  though  he  must  have  crossed  them
both  under  these  circumstances,  when  he  transported  his  coracles  in
waggons  to  the  spot  where  he  passed  the  Sicoris.  See  below

A.D.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EJll'IKE.  187

harvest  is  almost  exhausted,  while  the  new  crops  are
not  yet  ripe  for  the  sickle ;  the  whole  country  round
had  been  laid  under  contribution  by  Afranius,  and
the  light  Iberian  guerillas,  who  hovered  about  the
flanks  of  the  enemy's  position,  speedily  cleared  it  of
whatever  remained.  These  men  were  accustomed
to  cross  the  rivers  upon  inflated  skins,  which  they
carried  with  them  in  the  field  as  part  of  their  accou-
trements ;  so  that  while  Caesar's  legions  were  con-
fined to  the  narrow  and  barren  peninsula  on  which
they  stood,  they  were  liable  to  harassing  attacks  and
every  kind  of  annoyance  from  skirmishers  whom  to
pursue  was  fruitless.  An  attempt  to  rebuild  the
bridges  in  the  face  of  these  troublesome  opponents
was  frustrated  and  abandoned  in  despair.

Caesar  had  made  an  effort  to  re-establish  his  com-
munications with the highway  from the

T>  f -L.  J "I  i.'  Ce.«'«  rein-

Jryrenees,  for  he  was  in  daily  expectation  forcemenu  «•-

r • r  f  j.i j.  -L  A re<ted  on  the

of  reinforcements  from  that  quarter.  A  further  side  of
body  of  Gaulish  archers  and  horsemen  was
advancing  to  join  the  proconsul's  camp,  and  under
their  escort  the  deputies  of  various  states,  many  noble
Roman  youths,  the  sons  of  knights  and  senators,  and
some  also  of  Caesar's  superior  officers,  were  following
in  long  array,  with  an  ample  convoy  of  waggons  and
military  equipments.  The  Pompeian  generals  ob-
tained early  notice  of  their  approach,  and  made
preparations  for  attacking  them  as  soon  as  they
should  reach  the  margin  of  the  waters.  No  less  than
three  legions  with  a  detachment  of  cavalry  were  put
in  motion  for  this  service;  but  the  horsemen  were
sent  forward  in  advance,  and  the  Gaulish  cavalry,
notwithstanding  their  consternation  on  discovering
the  peril  in  which  Caesar  was  placed,  and  their  dis-
appointment at  being  prevented  from  joining  him,
went  forth  boldly  and  confidently  to  meet  them.  The
superiority  of  the  Gauls  in  cavalry  movements  kept
their  assailants  at  bay  until  the  legionaries  arrived  to

188  HISTOUY OF THE ROMANS  CH. xv.

their  support.  The  Grauls  now  retired  before  a  more
numerous  and  more  formidable  foe  ;  but  the  unarmed
multitude  which  had  come  under  their  escort  had
profited  by  the  few  hours  thus  gained  to  escape  with
their  baggage  into  the  mountainous  country,  and
Afranius  reaped  only  a  barren  victory,  instead  of  the
rich  and  important  capture  he  had  expected.  He
retired  in  all  haste  to  Ilerda,  the  defences  of  which
had  been  seriously  weakened  by  the  withdrawal  of
so  large  a  portion  of  his  army  upon  this  bootless  ex-
pedition. The  distress  to  which  the  enemy's  troops
were  by  this  time  reduced  still  flattered  him  with  the
The  Aframans  brightest  hopes  of  a  bloodless  victory.  Day
fiTtS^ipIc-  by  day  their  scanty  provisions  diminished
dj»£ii°ng  and  rose  to  a  more  enormous  price.  The
floods  continued  for  a  longer  period  than
ordinary :  yet  they  could  not  fail  to  abate  in  a  few
days,  and  Caesar's  disastrous  position  was  not,  like
that  of  the  garrison  of  a  besieged  town,  without  a
certainty  of  early  relief;  nevertheless  the  officers  of
the  Pompeian  army  filled  all  their  letters  to  their
friends  at  Rome  with  sanguine  prognostications  of
his  speedy  destruction.  The  patrons  of  their  cause
were  elated  with  expectations  which  they  had  not
ventured  to  indulge  since  their  champion's  flight
from  Italy,  and  thronged  the  house  of  Afranius  in  the
city,  anxious  to  demonstrate  to  his  family  their  in-
terest in  his  heroic  achievement.1

But  long  before  these  letters  had  reached  Rome
ciesar  restores  Caesar  had  extricated  himself  from  his  peril-
Srtira.°™y  the  OI18  situation  by  a  simple  expedient.  He
use  of  coracles.  constructe(i  a  number  of  boats  of  light

framework  covered  with skins,  after  the  model  of
the  coracles  which  he  had  seen  in  Britain.2 These

1  Caes.  B.C.  i.  53.;  Dion,  xli.  21.

2  Lucan  (iv.  134.)  compares  them  also  to  the  barks  used  by  the
Veneti  on  the  Po,  and  by  the  Egyptians on  the  Nile. Though
fenced,  according  to  the  description,  on  the  model  of  the  coracle,

i.TT.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  189

he  transported  on  waggons  to  the  spot  where  he
proposed  to  build  a  bridge,  twenty-two  miles  up
the  river.1  On  the  opposite  side  there  was  a  hill,
from  which  he  could  carry  on  his  works  without
molestation.  Accordingly,  he  commanded  a  detach-
ment to  cross  the  stream  in  his  frail  barks,  and  when
he  had  made  himself  master  of  this  position  and
fortified  it,  he  had  no  further  difficulty  in  restoring
his  communication  with  the  country  beyond  the
Sicoris,  and  replenishing  his  exhausted  magazines.
At  the  same  time  his  Gaulish  reinforcements  de-
scended from  their  retreat  in  the  hills  to  join  him,
and  a  successful  skirmish  with  some  of  the  enemy's
foraging  parties  assisted  in  restoring  confidence  to
his  soldiers.

At  the same moment  that Caesar effected  this
successful  movement,  he  received  the  news
of  a  victory  gained  by  his  navy  off  Mas-
silia.2  Domitius  had  persuaded  the  citizens
to  assume  the  offensive;  the  departure  of
the  great  captain  inspired  them  with  con-
fidence ; and, besides the superior number and
equipment  of  their  vessels, they relied upon the
valour  of  the  native  tribes  by  which  they  were  in  a
great  measure  manned. Accordingly,  they  issued
from  their  harbour,  and  sought  the  station  of  the
Caesarean  fleet  in front of  an island  opposite  its
mouth. The  ships  of  Brutus,  hastily  built  of  bad

these  vessels  were  of  considerable  size.  More  than  one  waggon
lashed  together  were  required  to  convey  each:  "Carris  junctis
devchit."  Oaes.  B.C.  i.  54.

1  At  this  spot,  a  few  miles  above  the  town  of  Balaguer,  the  river
is  confined  between  steep  hills. (Guischard,  M6m.  Mil.  ii.  2.) I
observe,  upon  inspection  of  the  Atlas  to  Suchet's  campaigns,  that  the
valley  of  the  river  is  thus  confined  for  several  miles  above  Balaguer.
The  name  of  a  village  called  Pons  may  tempt  us  to  fix  the  site  of
the  bridge  in  that  locality,  but  it  is  too  far  from  Lerida. I  think  it
was  more  probably  at  Alos,  immediately  opposite  to  which  there  is
a  hill  of  moderate  elevation.

2  Cffis.  B.  C.  i.  56-58.

j£ej£u>silian9

190  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XV.

materials,  and  less  skilfully  manoeuvred,  might  have
failed  to  force  them  to  an  engagement;  but  seek-
ing the  conflict  themselves,  and  joining  beak  to  beak
and  side  to  side,  they  threw  away  all  their  peculiar
advantages  and  reduced  the  contest  to  one  of  valour
and  discipline  only.  Here  indeed  the  Albici,  a
tribe  of  hardy  mountaineers,  whose  aid  they  had
secured,  did  them  good  service ;  but  these  warriors
were  not  a  match  for  the  picked  men  of  the  Eoman
legions,  with  whom  Brutus  had  manned  his  vessels.
The  result  was  that  the  Massilian  squadron  lost
nine  out  of  seventeen  vessels,  and  the  remainder
were  driven  with  shame  and  disorder  into  their
harbour.

These  tidings  were  not  confined  to  Caesar's  camp,

but  spread  rapidly  among  the  native  tribes
men't  ofthe  in  the  country  around,  and  combined,  with

the  conspicuous  restoration  of  Caesar's
fortunes  before  Ilerda,  to  dispose  them  to  enter  into
friendly  relations  with  him.1  And  at  the  same  time
it  became  evident  that  the  rumour  of  Pompeius's
advance  through  Mauretania  was  altogether  false.
The  troops  of  Afranius  and  his  colleague  were
dispirited  at  these  successive  disappointments  ;  their
cavalry  and  foraging  parties  became  daily  more
afraid  to  venture  near  the  squadrons  with  which
Caesar  was  now  overrunning  and  occupying  the
plain  ;  they  kept  close  under  the  walls  of  Ilerda,  and
contented  themselves  with  brief  nocturnal  expedi-
tions to  supply  their  necessities.

Afranius  and  Petreius  seem  themselves  to have

been  grievously  affected  by  these  disasters,
to  eevacurateare  Despairing  of  succour  from  their  leader,

and  alarmed  by  the  defection  of  the  native
tribes  around  them,  they  already  began  to  look
wistfully  towards  the  central  districts  of  Celtiberia,

1  C«s.  B.C.  i.  60.:  "  Magna  celeriter  commutatio  rcrum."

A..C.705-B.C.49. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  191

which  were  the  most  devotedly  attached  to  them,
and  where  they  might  hope  to  find  freer  scope  for
their  movements.  They  had  voluntarily  shut  them-
selves up  in  their  fastness  at  Ilerda ;  hut  the  enemy
was  now  manoeuvring  to  cut  off  their  retreat,  and
but  a  short  interval  remained  for  escaping  from  their
narrow  entrenchments  without  hazarding  the  general
engagement,  which  they  dreaded  more  than  any
other  alternative.  The  most  direct  route  to  the  west
or  south  was  guarded  by  Caesar's  camp ;  the  other
road  which  presented  itself  lay  across  the  bridge
over  the  Sicoris,  reaching  the  banks  of  the  Ebro
at  a  distance  of  twenty  miles,  at  a  spot  to  which
Csesar  gives  the  name  of  Octogesa.1  Caesar

0 .  , , , .  °  C«war'«  opera-

Was anxious to check their movements  tionitocrow

on  this  bank  ot  the  river  also;  but  the  prevent  their
bridge,  by  which  alone  he  could  communi-
cate with  it,  lay,  as  we  have  seen,  about  twenty-two
miles  above  Ilerda,  and  he  could  not  venture  to
divide  his  army  into  two  bodies  at  such  a  distance
from  each  other.  He  might  have  adopted  the  course
of  throwing  another  bridge  over  the  Sicoris  at  a
nearer  point,  at  least  he  does  not  in  his  narrative
state  any  reasons  to  show  that  this  was  impracticable
or  difficult.  But,  instead  of  this,  he  preferred  an
operation  of  a  different  kind.  At  a  short  distance

1  I  cannot  suppose  with  Maniurt  (i.  417.),  that  this  place  is  Me-
quinenza,  though  we  might  naturally  expect  that  so  commanding  a
position  would  have  attracted  the  attention  of  the  Romans.  Octogesa,
from  Caesar's  account,  must  certainly  have  been  on  the  left  bank  of
the  Sicoris ;  possibly  at  La  Granja,  as  Ukert  supposes,  following
Guischard.  I  think  that  it  lay  a  few  miles  lower  down,  where  the
present  road  from  Lerida  strikes  the  Ebro,  opposite  the  town  of  Flix.
This  situation  agrees  with  the  description  which  Csesar  gives  of  the
country  between  Ilerda  and  Octogesa,  first  several  miles  of  plain,  and
then  a  hilly  tract.  This  is  the  line  of  the  modern  road  to  Tortosa
and  Valentia,  and  there  is  an  antecedent  probability  that  it  follows  an
ancient  route.  I  have  examined  the  country  carefully  in  the  atlas  to
Sachet's  campaign  (1811-12),  -irhich  is  as  clear  as  a  model.  Napier
(Penins.  War,  iii.)  says  off-hand  that  Mequinenza  is  the  Octogesa  of
Caesar.

192  HISTORY OP  THE ROMANS  OH.  xv.

above  Ilerda  he  cut  several  ditches,  each  thirty  feet
in  breadth,  so  as  to  drain  off  the  waters  of  the  river
and  throw  them  behind  his  position,  until  the
stream  was  rendered  fordable  at  a  convenient  point.
The  waters  thus  carried  off  were  led  apparently  into
an  offset  of  the  Noguera,  which  runs  into  the  Segre
a  little  below  Lerida1,  and  the  operation  upon  which
the  whole  army  was  employed  (the  Eoman  legion-
aries being  thoroughly  trained  to  the  use  of  the
spade  and  pickaxe)  might  have  been  completed,
it  is  said,  in  the  space  of  ten  days.2  The  labour,
therefore,  was  not  greater  than  that  of  building
a  bridge,  while  it  required  no  materials.  As  soon
as  the  object  of  these  extraordinary  works  was  dis-
covered by  the  Pompeian  generals,  they  hastened
the  removal  from  Ilerda,  which  they  had  been
already  meditating.  Orders  had  been  previously
given  to  collect  boats  for  the  construction  of  a  bridge
over  the  Ebro  at  Octogesa,  and,  in  expectation  of
its  speedy  completion,  two  legions  were  transported
across  the  Sicoris  and  stationed  on  the  left  bank
behind  strong  entrenchments.

At  this  moment,  when  the  bridge  of  boats  was  an-
The  Afra-  nounced  to  be  almost  ready  for  the  escape
thrc«niran.  of  the  retreating  Pompeians,  the  ford  of
!-o™enpniith  the  Sicoris  was  declared  to  be  practic-
able for  the  cavalry  of  their  pursuers,  who
dashed  boldly  across  it.  But  the  water  reached  to

1  Caesar  does  not  say  this,  nor  does  he  say,  as  has  been  also  sup-
posed, that  he  conducted  these  waters  into  an  immense  reservoir
excavated  for  the  purpose.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  clearly  what
the  nature  of  the  operation  was.  It  seems  that  there  must  hare  been
a  considerable  depth  of  soil  to  cut  through  to  lead  these  trenches
behind  Ilerda  into  the  further  branch  of  the  Noguera.  Caesar's
words  are  simply  these  :  "  Nactus  idoneum  locum  fossas  peduna
triginta  in  latitudinem  complures  facere  instituit  quibus  partem  ali-
quam  Sicoris  averteret,  vadumque  in  eo  flumine  efficeret."  (.B.C.
i.  61.).

4  Guischard,  ii.  67.  foil.  The  length  of  the  cut  would  be  about
4000  toises.

A..D.705.B.C.49.  UNDER  THE EMflRfe.  193

the  armpits  of  the  legionaries,  and  its  rapidity  was
such  that  it  seemed  impossible  to  keep  their  footing.
There  was  no  resource  but  to  send  the  legions  round
by  the  circuitous  route  above  described,  and  leave  it
to  the  cavalry  to  harass  and  impede  the  retreat  of  the
enemy,  which  it  was  out  of  their  power  to  arrest.
Afranius  left  two  cohorts  in  Ilerda,  and  carried  all  the
rest  of  his  forces  across  the  river,  where  they  joined
the  two  legions  already  in  advance,  and  thus  pro-
ceeded on  their  way  to  Octogesa.  Caesar's  cavalry  con-
tinued to  act  with  great  effect  on  their  rear ;  its
operations  were  distinctly  visible  to  the  troops  en-
camped on  the  heights  on  the  other  side,  who  were
inflamed  with  admiration  of  the  conduct  of  their  more
fortunate  brethren,  and  stung  with  despair  at  seeing
the  enemy  thus  escaping  out  of  their  hands.  The
centurions  and  tribunes  rushed  tumultuously  to  their
general,  and  besought  him  in  the  name  of  the  legions
to  allow  them  to  throw  themselves  into  the  ford.
Caesar  himself  was  carried  away  by  the  contagion  of
their  ardour,  though  not  without  apprehension  for
the  result ;  he  contented  himself  with  leaving  the
weakest  of  the  men  behind  with  a  single  legion  to
protect  the  camp,  and  gave  the  rest  the  signal  to  ad-
vance. The  passage  was  at  length  effected.  The
precaution  had  been  taken  to  place  beasts  of  burden
in  line,  above  and  below,  in  the  one  case  to  break
the  force  of  the  current1,  in  the  other  to  rescue  such
as  should  be  swept  away  by  it ;  the  cavalry  also  as-
sisted in  picking  up  the  stragglers,  and  not  a  man

1  Lucan  describes  this  operation  at  the  passage  of  the  Rubicon  (i.
220.):

"Primus  in  obliquum  sonipes  opponitur  amnem,
Kxeepturus  aquas  ;  niolli  turn  caetera  rumpit
Turba  vado  fracti  faciles  jam  fluminis  undas."
The  line  of  beasts  below  would  also  slacken  the  stream  by  acting  as
a  dam  to  it,  but  it  would  increase  the  depth  proportionally. The
date  of  this  passage  of  the  Sicoris  is  assigned  by  Guischard  to  x.  Kal.
Sext.=Jul.  22. (Mem.  Mil.  iii.  193.),  which  corresponds  with  May
31  of  the  corrected  calendar.

VOL. II.  O

194  HISTOKT  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xv.

was  lost  The  retreating  Afranians  had  left  their  en-
campment in  the  first  dawn  of  morning;  but  such
was  the  alacrity  and  speed  of  the  Caesareans  that  they
came  up  with  them  in  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,
though  they  had  a  circuit  of  six  miles  to  make,  and
so  formidable  a  barrier  to  surmount.  But  the  retreat
of  the  fugitives  bad  been  checked  in  some  degree
by  the  enemy's  horsemen,  and,  deeming  themselves
secure  from  more  serious  interruption,  they  had  not
cared  to  make  any  special  exertion.  Their  circum-
stances, however,  were  now  altered.  Afranius  was
compelled  to  halt  and  draw  out  his  men  in  battle
array,  for  Caesar  was  advancing  in  three  lines,  as  if
prepared  to  demand  an  engagement.  The  pursuer
now  halted  in  his  turn  to  give  his  troops  rest  and
refreshment  before  drawing  their  swords.  Afra-
nius again  threw  his  lines  into  column,  and  hurried
forward,  till  the  enemy,  advancing  once  more,  and
pressing  closely  upon  him,  rendered  escape  impossible.
The  Pompeian  general  however  was  informed  that  at
a  distance  of  five  miles  a  tract  of  hilly  country  com-
menced, in  which  the  cavalry  of  his  pursuers  would
be  rendered  unavailing.  His  intention  was  now  to
secure  the  defiles  of  these  hills  with  forces  suffi-
cient to  arrest  the  progress  of  his  pursuers,  and  so
effect  his  retreat  with  the  bulk  of  his  army  to  the
Ebro  ;  and  in  this,  which  was  the  best  course  open  to
him,  he  might  have  succeeded  had  he  persisted  in
continuing  his  march  late  into  the  night,  which,  con-
sidering the  few  miles  he  had  yet  traversed,  required
no  extraordinary  effort.  But  other  counsels  prevailed ;
the  troops  pleaded  the  fatigues  of  a  day  of  marchiug
and  fighting,  and  the  salvation  of  the  republican  cause
in  Spam  was  postponed  to  the  morrow.  Meanwhile,
.Caesar,  on  his  part,  was  satisfied  with  the  feats  his
soldiers  had  performed  that  day,  and  he  took  up  his
position  on  the  nearest  eminence.  But  he  maintained
his  vigilance  through  the  silent  hours  of  gloom.

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  195

About  midnight  some  stragglers  from  the  Pompeian
camp  were  brought  to  his  quarters,  and  from  them  he
learned  that  his  opponents  were  preparing  to  evacuate
their  entrenchments  under  cover  of  the  darkness.  Im-
mediately the  Csesarean  trumpets  sounded  to  arms,
the  tents  were  struck,  baggage  piled,  arms  and  ac-
coutrements buckled  on  ;  and  the  uproar  of  a  camp
of  four  legions  breaking  up  announced  far  and  wide
that  their  general  was  on  the  alert,  and  ready  to  fol-
low hard  upon  the  track  of  the  fugitives.  Afranius
feared  to  risk  the  result  of  a  night  engagement,  to
which  he  might  be  compelled  in  the  narrow  passes  of
the  mountains,  and  countermanded  the  intended
movement.

The  next  day  was  passed  on  both  sides  in  examin-
ing the  nature  of  the  country  in  the  direction  in
which both  armies  were  equally  anxious  Ca,9ar  raakes
to  proceed. The  Pompeian  generals  held  mov^'to"*-
a  council,  in which  they determined to  £?„£<*  u,«
wait  for the morning to continue  their  enemy-
route,  that  they  might  at  least  have  the  advantage  of
daylight  to  repel  the  attacks  of the  enemy,  whose
vigilance they  could  not even  in darkness elude.
But  Ca3sar  turned  the  information  he  had  acquired
to  another  account. By  a  rapid  though  circuitous
march  he  saw  that  he  could  throw  himself  between
the  retreating  army  and  the  mountains. In  the  early
twilight  his  battalions  were  observed  to  issue  from
their  camp,  and  seemingly  to  retire  in  the  track  upon
which they  had  advanced the day before. The
Afranians  were  convinced  that  they  were  in  rapid
retreat  towards  Ilerda,  overcome  by  famine,  fatigue,
or  terror ;  but when  they  saw  the  dense  columns
wheel  suddenly  to  the  right '  and  sweep  along  the

1  Cses.  B.C.  i.  69. A  wheel  to  the  right  after  issuing  from  the

rear  of  the  camp  (contrariam  in  partem  iri  videbatur)  would  lead

them  to  the  east  of  Afranius's  camp,  which  would  thus  be  placed

between  them  and  the  Sicoris. The  loca  aspera  nnd  angustice  which

o  2

196  HISTORY OF THE BOMA.NS  CH.  xv.

verge  of  the  horizon  towards  the  quarter  whither
they  were  themselves  bound,  the  tactics  of  the  sup-
posed fugitives  and  at  the  same  time  their  own  im-
minent danger  became  apparent.

The  breaking  up  of  their  camp,  however,  caused
c^ar  brings  some  little  delay.  At  the  same  time  the
toeath™ki,an"  Caesarean  cavalry,  hanging  upon  the  flanks
suffJhi."0'  of  the  Afranians  as  they  formed  and  ad-
g^T^ith0  en~  vanced,  impeded  their  movements ;  so  that,
in  the  efforts  of  both  armies  to  gain  the
hills,  the  Cassareans  had  so  much  the  advantage  as  to
be  able  to  range  themselves  in  order  of  battle  at
their  foot,  and  effectually  block  up  the  road  to  Octo-
gesa.  An  eminence  in  the  plain  afforded  the  harassed
Afranians  a  position  where  at  least  they  could  recover
breath  and  consider  what  course  to  take.1  They  first
attempted  to  create  a  diversion  by  sending  a  body  of
the  light-armed  Spanish  auxiliaries  to  occupy  a  hill  on
the  flank  of  the  Cassareans  ;  but  the  terrible  Gaulish
cavalry  were  immediately  upon  them,  and  cut  them
off  to  a  man  in  sight  of  both  armies.  It  was  now
evident  that  the  Afranians,  dispirited  by  their  re-
verses, and  inferior  in  cavalry,  would  have  no  chance
against  their  assailants  in  the  open  plain.  The
Caesareans  were  confident  of  dislodging  them  from
the  slight  acclivity  on  which  they  had  taken  refuge  ;
and,  as  before,  the  centurions  and  tribunes  again  sur-
rounded their  general,  and  urged  him  with  almost
threatening  importunity  to  lead  them  to  combat.  But
Caesar  had  many  reasons  for  wishing  to  refrain  from
an  engagement  which  he  believed  to  be  superfluous  ;
for  the  enemy,  even  though  unassailed,  could  not

Cffiaar  mentions,  Guischard  supposes  to  be  a  defile  between  the  moun-
tains and  this  river.  I  think  it  describes  the  interior  of  the  tract
between  the  Sicoris  and  the  Iberus.

1  The  level  country  at  the  foot  of  the  hills  in  which  these  manoeuvres
took  place  is,  I  conceive,  the  tract  now  called  la  Gariga,  and  the
spot  on  which  Afranius  pitched  his  camp  may  be  that  of  the  village
of  Llardecans.

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  197

long  maintain  their  position  for  want  of  water,  but,
if  driven  to  despair,  might  still  cause  him  the  loss  of
many  of  his  bravest  troops.  Moreover,  it  accorded
with  his  policy  as  well  as  his  temper  to  avoid  the
effusion  of  Roman  blood,  whether  on  his  own  side  or
that  of  his  opponents.  And,  above  all,  perhaps  his
experience  in  Italy  assured  him  that  a  large  portion
of  the  men  now  arrayed  against  him  were,  in  their
hearts,  well  disposed  to  join  his  colours.  Accordingly,
he  steadily  rejected  the  demands  of  his  imperious
veterans,  though  in  doing  so  he  greatly  offended
them,  and  might  hear  them  muttering,  with  the
licence  to  which  they  had  been  long  accustomed,  that
another  time  fight  they  would  not  when  Caesar  ordered
them.1

The  Pompeian  generals,  meanwhile,  were  in  a  state
of  great  perplexity.  All  hope  of  crossing  communicl.
the  Ebro  was  abandoned ;  their  choice  of  ^"edV
an  asylum  now  lay  between  Ilerda  and  UuSn^ntha
Tarraco.  But  their  movements  were  closely  "pp08"6™1"1
watched,  and  circumscribed  by  the  squadrons  which
hovered  around  them.  No  handful  of  forage  nor  cup
of  water  could  they  procure  except  at  the  sword's
point.  The  parties  they  sent  out  for  supplies  were
attacked,  and  only  rescued  by  the  succour  of  fresh
battalions,  which,  in  their  turn,  required  to  be  sup-
ported by  others ;  so  that  a  large  portion  of  the
army  was  gradually  drawn  down  into  the  lower
ground.  The  generals  ordered  a  trench  and  rampart
to  be  constructed  from  the  hill  to  the  watering-place;
the  distance  was  great,  the  work  arduous,  and,  to
carry  it  through,  required  the  presence  and  encourage-
ment of  all  the  superior  officers.  Meanwhile,  the
soldiers  in  their  camp  were  left  almost  with  out  super-
intendence; the  Ca3sareans  straggled  up  to  their
entrenchments,  and  opened  communications  with

1  Gas  B.C.  i.  72.

198  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  x>.

such  friends  and  acquaintances  as  the  fortune  of  civil
war  had  arrayed  in  the  opposite  ranks.  By  degrees
this  distant  intercourse  ripened  into  familiarity  and
confidence ;  the  soldiers  of  either  party  mingled
freely  among  one  another  ;  and  the  enthusiasm  with
which  Caesar's  veterans  proclaimed  the  merits  of
their  commander  worked  surely  and  speedily  upon
the  indifference  of  the  Afranians.  The  rival  parties
soon  came  to  an  understanding.  The  only  stipula-
tion they  made  between  themselves  was,  that  the
lives  of  the  Pompeian  generals  should  be  guaranteed
them.  Even  Afranius'  own  son  was  forced  to  be
satisfied  with  this  assurance;  and,  upon  its  being
given,  the  legions  arrayed  under  his  standard  declared
themselves  content  to  surrender  to  a  merciful  and
munificent  enemy.1

The  report  of  these  important  transactions  brought
both  the  Pompeian  leaders  hastily  back  to  the  camp.
Petreius  inter-  Afranius  easily  acquiesced  in  an  arrange-
fyTnd'brtak*  raent  in  which  his  own  safety  had  been
clre between  carefully  provided  for;  but  Petreius,  a
them.  man  Of  ^erner  temper,  would  abandon

neither  his  reputation  nor  his  duty.  It  was  usual
for  the  general  to  have  a  body-guard  about  his
own  person,  distinct  from  the  maniples  of  the
legions.  That  of  Petreius  consisted  of  a  cohort  of
light  native  infantry,  a  small  squadron  of  cavalry,
and  a  number  of  private  friends  and  attendants,  who
formed  his  staff  or  acted  as  his  aides-de-camp.  With
these  men  who  remained  true  to  him,  he  rushed  im-
petuously to  the  rampart  at  which  the  soldiers  of  the
opposed  armies  were  holding  their  treasonable  con-
ferences, and  broke  up  their  meeting,  slaughtering
as  many  of  the  Caesareans  as  he  could  lay  hands  upon.
The  remnant,  collecting  hastily  together,  wrapped
their  cloaks  about  their  left  arms,  and  with  drawn

1  CSBS.  B.C.  I  74.

A.U.705  B.c.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  199

swords  fought  their  way  through  the  assailants  to
their  own  camp  hard  by.  Petreius  re-entered  his
entrenchments,  and  the  habits  of  discipline  resumed
their  sway.

Petreius  now  proposed  the  solemn  form  of  the
military  oath  not  to  desert  nor  betray  the  Fer0city  of
army  or  its  generals,  nor  to  hold  any  Petreiu§-
private  parley  with  the  enemy.  He  first  took  the
oath  himself,  then  tendered  it  to  his  colleagues ;
next  came  the  tribunes,  and  after  them  the  cen-
turions, and,  finally,  the  whole  body  of  the  legionaries,
century  by  century.  Strict  orders  were  immediately
issued  that  every  Caesarean  who  had  been  entertained
by  a  relative  or  friend  in  the  camp  should  be  brought
forth  and  slain ;  but  mercy  or  shame  interfered  to
frustrate  this  atrocious  command,  and  most  of  them
were  concealed  till  nightfall,  and  then  sent  privily
away.  Meanwhile,  the  conduct  of  Caesar  was  stu-
diously in  contrast  with  this  cruelty.1  He  carefully
inquired  for  all  the  Pompeians  who  had  strayed  into
his  camp,  and  offered  to  send  them  back  to  their
own  quarters  unharmed.  But  many  of  the  officers
were  already  so  charmed  with  bis  demeanour,  that
they  preferred  to  remain  in  his  service,  in  which  he
gave  them  their  old  rank,  or  even  promoted  them  to
a  higher.2

The  Afranians  were  now  reduced  to  great  distress
for  provisions,  and  at  the  same  time  were  cut  off
from  water.  It  was  resolved  to  direct  the  retreat
upon  Ilerda,  where  their  magazines  were

The  Afraniam

not yet exhausted, rather  than larraco,  are  compelled

.  . /  ,  ,. .  , ,  to  retrace  their

which  lay  at  a  greater  distance,  and  where  «t«p«  towards

i_  1 1  L j  V  j Ilerd*-

probably no  preparation  had  been  made

for  the  maintenance  of  so  large  a  force.  Caesar
pressed  closely  upon  them,  and  gave  them  no  oppor-
tunity of  supplying  themselves.  Constant  skirmishes

1  Suet.  JuL  75.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  43.
•  C»s.  B.C.  i.  76,  77.

200  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XT.

took  place  between  the  parties  detached  on  each  side
for  procuring  provisions  or  intercepting  them.  When
the  Afranians  pitched  their  tents  for  the  night  and
formed  their  entrenchments  near  the  river,  Caesar
determined  to  confine  them  to  the  spot,  and  prevent
them  from  reaching  the  water,  by  drawing  a  com-
plete line  of  circumvallation  around  them.  He  had
persevered  for  two  days  in  this  arduous  work,  which
was  already  nearly  completed,  when  the  Pompeian
leaders  felt  the  necessity  of  interrupting  it,  even  at
the  risk  of  provoking  the  enemy  to  a  decisive
combat.  But  Caesar  also  was  anxious  on  his  part
to  avoid  the  risk  and  bloodshed  of  a  general  en-
gagement with  an  opponent  whom  he  expected
to  reduce  ultimately  upon  much  easier  terms.  It
The  armies »«  was  only  the  mutinous  importunity  of  his

drawn  up  op-  ,,

positeeach  OWU  trOOBS,  to  all  appearance,  that  in-
other  in  battle  ,  11.  .  1  •  •  1  .,1

array.  duced  him  to  put  his  men  in  battle  array

and  confront  the  beleaguered  Afranians  in  the  at-
titude of  defiance.  The  mode  in  which  the  two
armies  were  drawn  up,  the  main  strength  of  each
consisting  equally  of  five  Eoman  legions,  shows  how
much  the  Caesarean  was  superior  in  efficiency.  The
five  legions  of  Afranius  were  ranged  in  two  lines,
each  numbering  twenty-five  cohorts,  instead  of  the
more  usual  array  of  three ;  for  the  cavalry  and  light-
armed  auxiliaries  were  of  so  little  value  that  the
general  extended  his  centre  to  the  utmost,  and  dis-
pensed altogether  with  wings  for  the  protection  of
his  flanks.  A  third  line  was  formed  of  the  native
auxiliaries,  and  their  leader  depended  for  his  reserve
upon  those  very  battalions  in  which  he  could  place
least  reliance.  Caesar,  on  the  other  hand,  disposed
his  forces  according  to  the  approved  system.  The
legions  were  arrayed  in  triple  line ;  four  cohorts  of
each  legion,  twenty  in  all,  formed  the  first,  three  of
each  the  second,  and  an  equal  number  the  third.
The  intervals  between  the  cohorts  were  occupied  by

A.H.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  201

the  light  troops,  the  bowmen  and  slingers,  and  the
flanks  were  protected  by  the  redoubtable  squadrons
of  Gaulish  horse.

But  the  day  passed  without  a  blow  being  struck.
The  Afranians  had  not  courage  to  begin  Thepompeian
the  attack,  while  their  opponent  checked  induced  to
the  ardour  of  his  own  forces.  The  next  caPitulate-
morning  the  retreating  army,  which  had  suc-
ceeded thus  far  in  keeping  Caesar's  lines  open,  made
a  demonstration  upon  the  side  of  the  river1,  with
the  desperate  intention  of  crossing  a  difficult  ford
in  the  face  of  an  active  enemy.  But  the  disposi-
tions Caesar  made  for  covering  the  spot  with  his
cavalry  soon  satisfied  Afranius  that  escape  in  this
direction  was  impossible.  The  moment  had  evidently
arrived  when  the  want  of  provisions  for  men  and
cattle,  the  discouragement  of  his  soldiers,  and  the
inferiority  of  his  strength,  demanded  the  unreserved
capitulation  which  his  adversary  had  so  long  anti-
cipated. The  terms  required  by  the  conqueror  were,
that  the  lieutenants  of  Pompeius  should  abandon  the
province,  laying  down  their  military  command,  and
therewith  disbanding  their  forces.  At  the  same  time
he  engaged  not  to  press  any  of  the  soldiers  into  his
own  service  against  their  inclinations.  To  those  who
had  families  and  possessions  in  the  country  he  gave
permission  to  remain  in  the  country;  the  rest  he
promised  to  escort  safely  to  the  frontiers  of  Italy,
and  there  release  them  from  their  military  engage-
ments. With  his  accustomed  policy  he  pledged
himself  also  to  abstain  from  any  harsh  treatment  of
their  officers.  Nor  did  he  fail  to  display  his  wonted
generosity,  in  satisfying  from  his  own  resources  the
demands  for  pay,  which  the  soldiers  were  clamorously

1  Coesar  gives  no  intimation  where  this  ford  was:  it  must  have  been
at  some  point  below  Ilerda,  and  by  this  time  the  floods  had  no  doubt
entirely  subsided.

202  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xv.

pressing  upon  their  unfortunate  generals.1  The
campaign  was  thus  brought  to  a  termination  at  the
end  of  forty  days2,  and  the  brilliant  success  which
Csesar  achieved  added  more  lustre  to  his  military
reputation  than  even  his  great  exploits  in  Gaul.
He  had  fairly  out-manoauvred  a  Roman  army,  not
inferior  to  his  own  in  strength,  not  indifferently  com-
manded, and  backed  by  all  the  strength  and  resources
of  the  country  in  which  it  was  engaged.  The  im-.
pregnable  position  of  Ilerda,  and  the  extraordinary
swelling  of  the  Sicoris,  had  contributed,  in  no  slight
degree,  to  the  difficulties  with  which  the  assailant
had  had  to  contend ;  and,  whether  we  look  to  the
splendour  of  the  victory  or  the  importance  of  the
result,  the  day  of  Caesar's  triumph  over  Afranius  and
Petreius  deserved  equally  to  be  marked  in  the
Imperial  calendar,  and  its  memory  celebrated,  in
after  ages,  by  a  festive  anniversary.3

1  Caes.  B.C.  i.  86,  87.

2  See  Curio's  speech  to  his  soldiers  (J5.  C.  ii.  32.).

3  Orelli  (Inscript.  ii.  396.)  gives  fragments  of  four  ancient  Kalen-
daria  which  record  this  circumstance:  e.  g.  "  Kal.  Capranicorum,  iiii.
Non. Sext.  ferise  quod  hoc  die  imp.  Caesar  Hispaniam  citeriorem.
vicit." The  same  day  was  the  anniversary  of  the  subsequent  defeat
of  Pharnaces. "  Kal.  Amitern.  iv.  Non.  Sext.  feriac,  quod  eo  die  C.
Cses.  C.F.  in  H[ispan.  citer.  et] quod  in  Ponto  eod.  die.  r[egem
Pharnacejm  devicit." The  trne  date  of  the  event  is  June  9,  B.C.  49.
See  Fischer.  H&mische

d.n.705-B.c.4».  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  203

CHAPTER  XVI.

Siege  and  capture  of  Massilia. — Caesar  receives  the  submission  of
Varro,  and  establishes  his  power  throughout  the  Spanish  pro-
vinces.— Campaign  of  Curio  in  Africa:  his  defeat  and  death. —
Disaster  to  Caesar's  forces  in  Illyricum. — Administration  of  Rome
by  Lepidus  and  M.  Antonius. — Caesar  is  created  Dictator  in  his
absence. — He  quells  a  mutiny  among  his  troops  at  Flacentia,
and  hastens  to  Rome. — His  financial  and  political  measures. —
He  is  elected  consul,  and  resigns  the  Dictatorship. —  Prepares  to
follow  Pompeius  across  the  sea. — Advantages  of  his  position
compared  with  that  of  his  adversaries.  A.C.  705,  B.C.  49.

WHILE  these  operations  were  in  progress  in  Spain,  the
success  which  D.Brutus  had  recently  obtained  A.v.703<
over  the  Massilian  fleet  had  given  the  be-  sit^on  of
siegers  a  superiority  at  sea,  and  Trebonius  M"ilia-
was  conducting  his  operations  against  the  city  by
land  with  every  resource  the  military  art  could
supply.  Mamurra,  the  chief  of  the  engineering
department,  had  merited  Caesar's  unbounded  favour
by  the  skill  he  displayed  in  his  profession.1  But  the
defenders  of  Massilia  were  provided,  on  their  part,
with  abundance  of  military  engines,  which  it  had
been  the  policy  of  the  state  to  provide  long  before-
hand for  such  an  emergency.  Accordingly,  both  the
attack  and  defence  of  their  city  exhibited  the  most
consummate  application  of  the  principles  and  re-
sources of  warfare  as  then  practised.2  The  Massilia

1  Catullus  speaks  of  tru  enormous  wealth  Mamurra  had  reaped
from  his  services  in  Gaul,  and  makes  it  the  ground  of  a  gross  charge
against  him  and  his  commander  (Carm.  Ivii.). Pliny  (H.  N.  xxxvi.
7.)  commemorates  his  profuse  magnificence.

2  The  power  of  the  engines  used  in  defence  of  a  city  may  be  esti-
mated from  Caesar's  statement,  that  the  beams  of  wood,  twelve  feet  in
length,  pointed  with  iron,  which  were  hurled  from  them,  pierced
through  four  successive  screens  of  wood-work,  behind  which  the

204  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvi.

of  antiquity  bore  out  little  resemblance,  even  in  its
external  features,  to  the  city  which  has  inherited  its
site  and  name.  Caesar  describes  it  as  washed  by  the
waters  of  the  sea  on  three  sides ;  but  the  port  which
then  bounded  it  on  the  south  is  now  surrounded  by
streets  and  houses.  The  French  antiquaries  assert
moreover  that  a  considerable  part  of  the  ancient  city
in  its  western  quarter  has  been  long  since  covered  by
the  encroachments  of  the  waves.  The  site  of  the
temple  of  Diana,  upon  which  the  modern  cathedral
stands,  was  originally  in  the  middle  of  the  city,  but
is  now  on  the  margin  of  the  sea.  The  lazaretto  occu-
pies the  eminence  on  the  north,  upon  which,  accord-
ing to  Caesar's  description,  the  citadel  stood  ;  and  the
side  on  which  alone  the  city  was  exposed  to  attack
from  the  land  stretched  from  the  base  of  this  rugged
elevation  to  the  innermost  angle  of  the  port,  along
the  line  probably  of  the  Cours  St.  Louis  and  the  Rue
Cannebiere,  which  are  now  in  their  turn  the  most
central  regions  in  the  whole  assemblage  of  buildings.
While  Trebonius  was  conducting  his  first  opera-
Rerait  of  a  tions  against  "the  city,  by  the  construction
g^eament  of  an  immense  rampart,  eighty  feet  in
to°therMaS-  height,  over  against  the  wall  on  the  land
siiians.  g^e  throughout  its  whole  length,  the  be-
sieged ventured  to  make  another  attempt  upon  the
element  in  which  they  were  wont  to  confide.1  L.
Nasidius  had  been  sent  by  Pompeius  with  a  squadron
of  sixteen  vessels  to  throw  succours  into  the  city.
He  had  directed  his  course  from  the  eastern  shores
of  the  Mediterranean,  through  the  straits  of  Mes-
sana,  either  unobserved  by  or  in  defiance  of  Curio,
the  Csesarean  commander  in  Sicily.  Indeed  he  had
ventured  to  enter  the  port  of  Messana,  and  cut

besiegers  sheltered  themselves  while  engaged  in filling  the  ditch
before  the  walls. Cses.  B.  C.  ii.  2. They  were  obliged  to  construct
these  vinece  of  solid  beams  a  foot  in  thickness.
1  Cses.  B.C  ii.  1—7.

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  205

out  one  vessel  from  the  dockyard.  From  thence
he  made  sail  for  the  shores  of  Gaul,  sending  forward
one  bark  from  his  squadron  to  convey  to  the  besieged
the  news  of  his  arrival,  and  to  exhort  them  to  sally
forth  with  their  whole  naval  force  and  join  him  off
Tauroentum,  a  port  and  fortress  at  a  little  distance
on  the  coast.  The  Massilians,  since  their  recent
defeat,  had  devoted  themselves  with  unwearied  energy
to  repairing  their  galleys,  and  arming  the  merchant
vessels  and  fishing  boats  with  which  their  harbour
swarmed.  They  were  not  disposed  to  shrink  from
making  a  second  experiment  of  their  prowess,  while
the  acclamations  of  the  unarmed  multitude,  of  their
women  and  old  men,  encouraged  them  to  strain
every  nerve  in  a  contest  in  which  their  pride  was  so
deeply  interested.  Nor  did  the  assailants,  who  had
multiplied  the  numerical  strength  of  their  armament
since  the  last  engagement,  and  were  prepared  to
decide  the  contest  on  the  broad  decks  of  their  rude
but  massive  fabrics,  decline  the  proffered  meeting.1
In  numbers,  however,  the  fleet  of  the  Massilians  still
preponderated;  the  praetorian  galley  of  Decimus2
was  attacked  at  the  same  moment  from  opposite
quarters  by  two  powerful  triremes,  which  dashed
towards  it  with  all  the  velocity  their  oars  could  im-
part. By  a  skilful  turn  of  the  rudder  the  Csesarean
steersman  extricated  his  vessel  from  both  the  assail-
ants at  the  instant  when  they  were  about  to  strike
her  on  either  side,  and  the  opposing  beaks  impinged
violently  against  each  other.  Thus  entangled  and
mutually  disabled  they  were  speedily  attacked,
boarded  and  destroyed.  The  Massilians  and  their
allies,  the  Albici,  are  admitted  to  have  fought  admir-
ably ;  but  Nasidius  gave  them  a  very  lukewarm

1  Lucan,  iii.  512.:

"  Sed  rudis  ct  qualis  procumbit  montibus  arbor,

Conseritur  stabilis  navalibus  area  bellis."
1  Lucan,  iii.  535. :  "  Bruti  prsetoria  puppis."

206  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS.  CH.  XVL

support,  As  soon  as  the  fortune  of  the  day  seemed
to  incline  towards  the  Caesareans,  he  quietly  withdrew
without  the  loss  of  a  single  vessel,  while  of  his  allies
thus  treacherously  deserted,  five  galleys  were  sunk
and  four  captured.  A  Eoman  officer  might  naturally
be  reluctant  to  exert  himself  in  behalf  of  Greeks,
whom  he  despised  or  hated,  against  the  bravest  and
most  illustrious  of  his  own  countrymen.  Nasidius
seems  indeed  to  have  had  further  orders  to  execute
on  the  coast  of  Spain,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that
Pompeius  had  strictly  charged  him  not  to  entangle
himself  too  closely  in  the  defence  of  a  city  to  which
he  attached  only  secondary  importance.  He  sailed
for  his  ultimate  destination  without  bidding  adieu  to
the  unfortunate  Massilians,  who  with  difficulty  and
in  diminished  numbers  escaped  into  their  harbour,
and  betook  themselves,  not  even  yet  dismayed,  to  the
defence  of  their  walls.  The  entrance  of  the  port  of
Massilia  is  so  narrow  that  a  chain  drawn  across  it
secured  it  from  the  attacks  of  the  victorious  squadron.
But  the  operations  which  Trebonius  was  sedulously
operations  directing  against  the  defences  of  the  city
MalSila :  on  the  land  side  were  such  as  no  artificial
ca'pituuiion  means  of  resistance  were  capable  of  effec-
ernydofretheh~  tually  withstanding.1  Indeed,  it  may  be
observed  that,  in  the  best  times  of  Roman
military  science,  the  means  of  attack  were  generally
much  superior  to  those  of  defence.  While  a  fortress
such  as  that  of  Ilerda,  perched  on  a  lofty  eminence,
with  a  steep  and  narrow  access,  was  justly  deemed
impregnable,  no  resources  or  skill  could  avail  to  pro-
tect a  city  which  stood  upon  comparatively  level
ground  against  the  assault  of  a  persevering  and
enterprising  besieger.  Such  was  the  site  of  Mas-
silia, which  had  been  chosen  rather  for  the  conve-
nience of  its  haven  than  the  natural  security  of  its
position.  Having  effected  the  complete  blockade  of

1  Cscs.  B.C.  ii.  8—14.

A.o  705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  207

the  city  by  means  of  the  gigantic  barricade  already
described  ',  Trebonius  proceeded  to  construct  a  tower
at  a  short  distance  from  the  point  in  the  wall  which
he  destined  for  his  attack.  This  tower  was  built  of
solid  brickwork,  and  so  covered  with  skins  and  mat-
tresses that  the  blows  of  the  enemy's  ponderous
missiles  fell  dead  upon  it,  while  other  contrivances
were  applied  to  guard  it  from  being  set  on  fire.
When  at  last  this  prodigious  edifice  overtopped  the
walls,  (a  work,  however,  which,  in  the  face  of  a  vigi-
lant enemy,  must  have  cost  much  time  and  many
lives,)  the  Massilians  could  no  longer  maintain  them-
selves on  the  summit  of  their  ramparts,  commanded
as  they  now  were  by  the  assailants  from  above.  The
next  step  on  the  part  of  the  besiegers  was  to  fill  up
the  fosse  under  the  protection  of  this  tower,  and
erect  close  to  the  walls  the  musculuis,  a  ponderous
and  well-compacted  roof  of  timber,  under  which  men
could  work  without  interruption,  picking  out  the
stones  with  crowbars,  and  undermining  with  manual
labour  the  bulwarks  of  the  city.  The  besiegers  had
thus  succeeded  in  shaking  one  of  the  towers  of  the
wall,  and  the  rampart  was  tottering  to  its  overthrow,
when  the  Massilians  hastened  to  anticipate,  by  a
timely  offer  of  capitulation,  the  moment  which  would
deliver  their  hearths  and  altars  to  a  furious  and
unbridled  soldiery.  Trebonius,  on  his  part,  had
received  strict  orders  to  abstain  from  storming  the
eity,  which  Caesar  was  reluctant  to  surrender  to  the
horrors  of  an  assault.  Accordingly,  he  was  willing
to  accord  honourable  terms  to  the  suppliant  republic.
His  soldiers,  indeed,  murmured  bitterly  at  being  dis-
appointed of  the  plunder  which  was  almost  in  their
grasp;  it  seems  doubtful  whether  they  would  have

1  Guischard,  in  his  M6m.  Militaires,  ii.,  has  an  elaborate  discussion
of  these  operations;  but  after  all  the  ingenuity  he  has  displayed  in
the  explanation  of  them,  there  still  remains  much  to  perplex  at  least
the  non-professional  student.

208  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  cH.  XVL

continued  to  observe  the  armistice  until  the  expected
arrival  of  the  Imperator  himself.  The  apprehension
of  their  uncontrollable  fury  may  have  driven  the
Massilians  to  violate  the  agreement  they  had  them-
selves solicited,  and  taking  advantage  of  the  confi-
dence reposed  in  them,  to  make  a  sudden  attack
upon  the  Roman  works,  and  give  them  to  the  flames.
But  this  conspicuous  instance  of  Grecian  perfidy
The  «ege  was  displayed  to  no  purpose.  Trebonius

resumed  his  operations  with  the  same  de-
termination and  on  an  ampler  scale  than  before.
The  original  barricade  had  been  constructed  princi-
pally of  timber,  and  the  conflagration  had  reduced  it
to  ruins.  He  now  repaired  it  with  earthworks  and
solid  masonry,  and  again  pushed  forward  his  covered
galleries  to  the  foot  of  the  walls.  Against  these  insi-
dious enemies  the  great  catapults  on  the  ramparts
were  of  no  avail,  for  they  were  calculated  to  hurl
their  missiles  to  a  distance,  and  their  range  could
not  be  adjusted  so  as  to  reach  an  object  immediately

below  them.1  Once  more  the  Massilians
siiians^ffer  despaired  of  defending  themselves,  and
uteaa  Ucond  ventured  to  tempt  the  forbearance  of  the

conqueror  by  a  second  offer  of  capitulation.

This  time,  indeed,  it  was  not  Trebonius  or  Brutus,

caaar  but  Caesar,  the  politic  and the  merciful,

establishes  . . .  in  .1  .-,

his  head  with  whom,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  they
cord-ibL*  had  to  treat.  The  return  to  the  camp
before  their  walls  of  the  great  captain  who  had
delivered  Italy  and  pacified  Spain,  may  both  have
cut  off  the  last  hope  of  escape,  and  at  the  same  time
have  held  forth  an  augury  of  pardon.  For,  after  the

1  Gas.  B.C.  ii.  16.:  "  Suorumque  tormentorum  usum  spatio  pro-
pinquitatis  interire."  This  obscure  expression  seems  to  be  explained
by  Lucan  (iii.  478.):

"  Nee  Grans  Jlecterejactuni,
Nee  facilis  labor  est  longinqua  ad  bella  parati
Tormenti  mutare  modum,  sed  pondere  solo
Contenti  nudis  evolvunt  saxa  laccrtis.**

A.C.705-B.C.49. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  209

capitulation  of  the  Pompeian  lieutenants  on  the
Sicoris,  Csesar  had  hastened  to  complete  the  reduc-
tion of  the  three  provinces  of  the  peninsula.  He
had  marched  directly  towards  the  south,  and  estab-
lished his  head-quarters  at  Corduba,  the  Iberian
capital,  whither  he  had  summoned  to  his  presence
the  representatives  of  all  the  states  and  cities  beyond
the  Pyrenees.  Here  the  favourable  sentiments  of
the  Further  Province  were  speedily  pronounced,  and
it  was  with  full  anticipation  of  the  general  concur-
rence of  the  native  and  colonial  cities  that  Caesar  had
postponed  his  return  to  finish  the  siege  of  Massilia.1
Nor  had  he  any  serious  opposition  to  fear  vacillating
from  M.  Varro.  That  officer  being  left  in  v^ro!"  °
command  of  the  two  districts  into  which  the  south  and
west  were  divided,  had  excused  himself  from  joining
the  camp  of  his  colleagues,  retaining  two  legions  at
his  side  to  ensure  the  submission  of  the  natives  and
the  fidelity  of  the  Roman  inhabitants.  In  the  first
instance,  he  had  allowed  himself  to  express  a  favour-
able opinion  both  of  the  cause  and  the  prospects  of
the  invader.  He  admitted  in  his  public  harangues
the  inclination  of  the  province  towards  Csesar  ;  but,
undecided  thus  far  as  to  his  own  course,  he  had  faintly
pleaded  the  duty  which  as  a  legatus  he  owed  to  his
imperator  Pompeius,  and  thus  allowed  himself  to
reconcile  the  maintenance  of  his  official  command
with  entire  neglect  of  the  active  exertions  demanded
by  the  emergency.  But  the  news  of  the  vigorous
resistance  of  Massilia,  of  the  junction  and  subsequent
successes  of  Afranius  and  Petreius,  together  with  the
assurances  he  received  of  the  firm  allegiance  of  the
Hither  Province,  all  these  circumstances,  coloured
and  magnified  by  the  sanguine  temper  of  Afranius  in
his  correspondence,  shook  his  resolution  of  neutrality.
He  now  affected  vast  eagerness  in  the  cause  of  the
senate,  and  adopted  active  measures  for  recruiting

1  C«s.  B.C.  ii.  17—21.
VOL.  II.  P

210  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xvr.

his  forces,  for  collecting  supplies  for  Massilia  and
equipping  a  naval  armament  for  the  conveyance
thither  of  men  and  stores.  He  did  not  scruple  to
wield,  in  the  interest  of  his  commander,  all  the
terrors  of  the  Roman  proconsulate,  imposing  arbitrary
contributions  upon  the  states  which  he  suspected  of
favouring  the  enemy,  and  abusing  the  forms  of  law
to  mulct  the  Roman  citizens  whose  disaffection  was
reported  to  him.  He  invaded  the  sanctuaries  of  the
(rods,  and  rifled  the  celebrated  temple  of  Hercules  at
Grades.  That  important  and  hostile  city  he  entrusted
to  C.  Grallonius,  a  tried  friend  of  Domitius,  with  a
garrison  of  six  cohorts.  At  the  same  time,  the  tone
which  he  assumed  in  speaking  of  Caesar  was  arro-
gant and  violent.  He  described  him  as  beaten  in
every  engagement,  and  hourly  abandoned  by  his
soldiers ;  nor  did  he  omit  the  solemn  ceremony  of
summoning  the  Roman  citizens  throughout  the  pro-
vince to  renew  the  military  oath  of  fidelity  to  their
rightful  proconsul.

But,  notwithstanding  all  this  pretended  display  of
The  province  zeal,  Yarro  was  still  cautious  of  openly
fe*antar  taking  the  field  against  the  general  whom
dEiedbv  ke  so  insolently  disparaged.  When  the
hi»«>idien,  actual  result  of  the  contest  in  the  north
renders.  was  disclosed,  he  proposed  to  shut  himself
up  with  his  two  legions  in  the  insular  fortress  of
Grades,  where,  supported  by  a  naval  force,  and  well
supplied  with  stores  and  provisions,  his  position,  he
deemed,  would  be  impregnable  till  the  proconsul
should  come  to  his  relief.  Csesar  was  already  ad-
vancing towards  Corduba;  he  had  pushed  forward
Q.  Cassius,  with  two  legions,  upon  Hispalis,  while
the  fame  of  his  victories  had  gone  before  him,  and
penetrated  to  the  remotest  quarters  of  the  Pom-
peians.  His  mandate  for  the  assembling  at  Corduba
of  the  Iberian  deputies  had  been  received  with  re-
spect and  obeyed  with  alacrity.  The  Graditanes,

A.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  211

indignant  at  the  desecration  of  their  temple,  had
already  tampered  with  the  tribunes  of  the  cohorts  in
garrison  among  them,  and  expelled  Gallonius  from
their  walls.  Varro  was  on  his  march  from  Hispalis,
the  seat  of  his  government,  to  the  more  secure  retreat
..of  Gades,  when  the  result  of  this  intrigue  was  an-
nounced to  him.  Immediately  one  of  his  legions
wheeled  about  before  his  face,  arid  returned  to  the
city  from  which  it  had  just  departed.  Without  a
general,  and  without  quarters  or  provisions,  the  sol-
diers abstained  from  any  act  of  violence,  and  quietly
rested  in  the  forum  and  under  the  colonnades  in  the
streets,  until  the  inhabitants,  admiring  their  boldness
and  perhaps  sympathizing  in  their  preference  for  the
expected  conqueror,  received  and  entertained  them
in  their  own  houses.  Varro  now  paused  and  attempted,
as  a  last  resource,  to  gain  the  walls  of  Italica ;  but
this  city  also  had  suddenly  declared  itself  against  the
senate,  and  refused  to  admit  him.  No  other  course
now  remained  but  to  acknowledge  the  ascendancy  of
the  victor  of  the  Sicoris,  and  proffer  a  timely  sur-
render ;  the  unfortunate  general  sought  to  make  a
merit  of  his  submission,  by  offering  to  bring  over
the  legion,  which,  in  fact,  he  could  no  longer  retain.1
Caressed  and  flattered  on  all  sides,  Caesar  received
the  submission  of  his  baffled  opponent  at  Corduba.
He  prescribed  complete  reparation  of  the  wrongs  in-
flicted upon  his  own  adherents,  remitted  Ca.,ar  ar_
the  contributions  which  had  been  levied  Sif"of°
upon  the  provincials,  and  commanded  at  ^{lito*1
least  to  be  restored  the  treasure  and  orna-  MmMilia-
mente  which  bad  been  carried  off  from  the  temple  at
Gades.  Nor  in  the  midst  of  all  this  liberality  did  he
hesitate  to  pardon  the  double-dealing  of  Varro,  and
to  treat  him  with  the  courtesy  due  to  his  character  as
a  scholar  rather  than  as  a  statesman  or  soldier.  The
three  provinces  were  combined  under  the  sole  go-

1  Cses.  B.  C.  ii.  20.
P 2

212  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  JTVI

vernment  of  Q.  Cassius,  who  had  formed  a  thorough
acquaintance  with  them  at  an  earlier  period,  while
serving  in  the  peninsula  as  quaestor  to  Pompeius.
Four  legions  were  left  behind  to  maintain  the  autho-
rity of  the  conqueror  in  the  west.  The  inhabitants
of  Grades  he  attached  to  himself  by  the  stronger  tie
of  gratitude ;  for  the  Eoman  franchise,  which  he
now  bestowed  upon  them,  more  than  counterbalanced
the  pecuniary  contributions  which,  notwithstanding
his  lavish  bounty  in  restoring  his  opponents'  plunder,
he  was  constrained  to  demand  for  the  support  of  his
armies.1  In  their  noble  haven  Caesar  took  possession
of  the  ships  his  predecessor  had  summoned  thither,
and  embarked  with  a  portion  of  his  troops  for  Tar-
raco ;  from  whence  he  pursued  his  journey  by  land
through  Narbo,  and  arrived,  finally,  at  Massilia  at
the  moment  when  that  city,  as  has  been  seen,  was
about  to  fall  into  his  hands.2

But  while  the  arms  of  Caesar,  wherever  he  was
state  of  the personally  engaged,  were  crowned  with  un-

pro»inceof  I  ^

Africa.  alloyed  success,  the  enterprises  he  was
obliged  to  entrust  to  his  lieutenants  were  less  uni-
formly prosperous.  The  obstinate  and  perfidious
resistance  of  the  Massilians,  indeed,  had  been  brought
to  a  close  by  the  perseverance  of  Brutus  and  Tre-
bonius,  and  both  the  islands  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia,
so  important  from  their  proximity  to  Rome  and  the
resources  with  which  they  abounded,  had  been
evacuated  by  the  garrisons  of  the  senate  rather  than

1  Cues.  B.  C.  ii.  21;  Liv.  Epit.  ex.:  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  43.;  Dion,
xli.  24.,  who  tells  a  frivolous  storj,  which  I  cannot  quote,  to  account
for  Caesar's  liberality  to  the  Gaditanes.

2  In  crossing  the  Pyrenees,  Caesar  passed  the  spot  where  Pompeius,
who  had  constructed  the  military  road  of  communication  between
Gaul  and  Spain,  had  erected  a  trophy  to  commemorate  his  achieve-
ments in  those  regions. It  need  not  be  said  that  he  abstained  from
destroying  it,  as  a  man  of  coarser  mind  would  certainly  have  done:
lie contented himself  with the indirect satire  of  placing  in its
vicinity  a much simpler  and  more  modest  memorial  of  himself.
Dion,  I.e.

A.U.706-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  213

conquered  by  Valerius  and  Curio.  Thus  the  whole
of  the  western  half  of  the  empire  had  fallen  from
the  hands  of  the  oligarchy,  excepting  only  the  pro*
vince  of  Africa,  destined  to  give  the  first  decided
check  to  Caesar's  triumphant  progress,  and  to  become,
at  a  later  period,  the  last  stronghold  of  the  common-
wealth and  its  genuine  defenders.  This  province
occupied  but  a  small  portion  of  the  coast  of  the
Mediterranean,  comprising  the  region  of  which  Car-
thage had  formerly  been  the  metropolis.  The  more
distant  regions  of  Mauretania  and  Numidia,  over
which  the  Punic  republic  had  extended  its  influence
rather  than  its  rule,  had  been  acknowledged  by  the
Romans  as  independent  kingdoms;  and  Juba,  the
sovereign  of  the  latter  country,  was  attached  to  the
interests  of  Pompeius,  and  hostile  to  those  of  Caesar,
on  distinct  personal  grounds.  To  the  for-  no.tility  of
mer  he  owed  his  throne,  having  received  of^imidL,
at  his  hands  the  succession  to  his  father  toCaislir-
Hiempsal ;  from  the  latter  he  had  experienced,  as
we  have  seen,  an  egregious  insult  on  presenting  him-
self as  a  suitor  before  the  Roman  senate.  It  hap-
pened, moreover,  that  Curio,  the  appointed  bearer  of
the  Caesarean  banner  to  the  shore  of  Africa,  had
attempted  to  injure  him  in  proposing,  as  tribune  of
the  people,  to  deprive  him  of  his  sovereignty  and
dispose  of  his  possessions  by  public  sale.1  There
could  be  no  doubt,  therefore,  that  the  fierce  and
vindictive  Numidian  would  bum  to  avenge  this  ill-
treatment  by  taking  part  with  Pompeius  against
their  common  enemy.  But  it  was  at  least  possible
that  prudence  might  interpose  to  check  the  appetite
for  revenge ;  it  might  be  presumed  that,  with  the
faithlessness  attributed  to  his  race,  he  would  hesitate
to  compromise  his  interests  on  the  score  of  ancient
obligations ;  while,  at  the  same  time,  the  unsettled
state  of  his  frontiers,  harassed  as  they  constantly

1  Dion,  xli.  41.;  Lucan,  iv.  690.

214  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xvi

were  by  the  marauding  tribes  of  the  interior,  might

paralyse  his  efforts,  or  at  least  retard  his  advance.

Such were probably  the  anticipations of  Curio

when  he  crossed  over  from  Sicily,  with  only

Africa',naVnadei two  of  the  four  legions  under  his  orders,  to

?uc"nser<£er expel  the  Pompeian  general  Attius  Varus,

the  Pompeians r  J j r  • A  XL_ •  x • 1

•nduheir  \vho  C9mmanded  a  force  m  Africa  certainly
not  inferior  in  numbers  to  his  own.  The
capital  of  the  Roman  province  was  the  famous  city
of  Utica,  which  had  succeeded,  upon  the  destruction
of  Carthage,  to  as  large  a  share  of  the  military  and
commercial  importance  of  the  elder  metropolis  as
was  deemed  consistent  with  a  state  of  dependence
and  subjection  to  Rome.  Varus  was  posted  before
the  walls  of  this  city,  from  whence  it  was  hardly
possible  for  so  small  a  force  as  his  adversary  possessed
to  dislodge  him.  But  he  was  deceived  by  the  idea
that  Curio's  legions,  composed  of  the  fickle  cohorts
of  Domitius,  were  not  disposed  to  stand  staunchly  by
him1 ;  he  was  irritated  also  at  some  trifling  successes
which  the  enemy  had  gained,  and  with  these  feelings
he  was  induced  to  offer  battle  in  another  position,
though  still  retaining  a  great  advantage  of  ground.
The  charge  of  Curio's  columns  across  a  deep  ravine
and  up  an  acclivity  so  steep  that  the  soldiers  required
mutual  assistance  to  mount  it,  spirited  and  brilliant
as  it  was,  could  not  have  been  executed  in  the  face
of  a  resolute  enemy.  But  Varus  acted  with  little
skill  or  bravery,  and  suffered  himself  to  be  deprived
of  all  the  advantage  of  his  new  position.  His  troops
were  routed  with  little  resistance,  and  fled  with  pre-
cipitation to  their  original  entrenchments.  Curio
pursued  them,  and  confidently  resolved  to  undertake
the  siege  of  Utica,  and  to  draw  lines  of  circumvalla-
tion,  after  the  example  of  his  great  master,  round
both  the  city  and  the  legions  encamped  in  front  of  it.
A  successful  affair  in  which  he  had  been  engaged

1  CKS.  B.  C.  ii.  28.;  Lucan,  iv.  695.

i.U.705-B.C.4*.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  215

with  aNumidian  squadron  encouraged  him  to  under-
rate the  power  of  his  enemy's  ally,  while  he  had
reason  to  believe  that  there  was  a  Ca3sarean  party  in
Utica  which  would  actively  co-operate  with  him  for
its  reduction.

Indeed,  it  would  appear  that  Varus  was  already  so
severely  pressed  by  the  clamours  and  threats  on  the  ad-
of  the  hostile  faction  within  the  city,  that  he  Juba? curio
was  on  the  point  of  capitulating,  when  in-  KmSif  m9

c  J i. l.- 1.1 i. T 1. th«  Cornelian

formation  was  conveyed  to  him  that  Juba  c*mP.
was  advancing  in  person  at  the  head  of  all  his  forces
to  his  succour.  The  Numidian  prince  had  adjusted
a  recent  quarrel  with  the  state  of  Leptis,  and  was
now  at  leisure  to  indulge  himself  with  taking  ven-
geance upon  his  ancient  enemies.  No  sooner  was
Curio  apprised  of  this  formidable  diversion  on  his
rear,  than  he  broke  up  from  his  lines  before  Utica,
and  hastened  to  occupy  a  well-known  military  posi-
tion on  the  coast  hard  by,  rendered  famous  and,  as  he
deemed,  auspicious  by  the  encampment  there  of
Scipio  Africanus.1  From  thence  he  sent  pressing
orders  to  Sicily  for  the  embarkation  of  the  two  legions
which  he  had  left  behind.  But,  in  the  meanwhile,  he
felt  secure  in  the  strength  of  his  position,  as  well  as
in  the  good  fortune  which  had  so  conspicuously
attended  it.

The  crafty  Numidian employed a stratagem  to
wile  the  enemy  from  his  entrenchments.  Heisen-
The  appearance  of  a  slender  detachment  of  acting,
the  barbarians  in  the  plain  beneath,  and  andsiain.
the  rumour  industriously  spread  that  Juba  had  in-
trusted the  relief  of  Utica  to  his  vizir  Sabura,  and

1  Caes.  B.  C.  ii.  24. :  "  Castra  Corneliana." Lucan,  iv.  661.:

"  Curio  laetatus,  tanquam  fortuna  locorum

Bella  gerat,  servetque  ducum  sibi  fata  priorum,"  &c.
Caesar  himself,  on  a  later  occasion,  humoured  the  superstitious  feel-
ings of  his  soldiers,  and  perhaps  indulged  his  own,  in  attaching  great
importance  to  the  mere  name  of  Corm  lius  in  Africa. See  below.

216  HISTOaY OF TFE ROMANS  CH.  xvi.

withdrawn  from  a  personal  share  in  the  campaign,
sufficed  to  impose  on  the  rash  and  high-spirited
Koman.  But  Juba,  meanwhile,  was  lurking  at  a
distance  of  only  six  miles,  to  support  the  advanced
posts,  upon  which  Curio  launched  himself  in  full
confidence  of  an  easy  victory.  Sabura  adopted  the
common  feint  of  retiring  before  the  enemy's  impe-
tuous charge,  till  their  ranks  were  broken  and  their
strength  nearly  exhausted.  When  at  last  he  turned
and  faced  them,  it  was  not  with  the  paltry  squadrons
whose  numbers  they  had  despised,  but  with  the  whole
strength  of  the  Numidian  monarchy,  its  clouds  of
native  cavalry,  its  troops  of  elephants,  its  auxiliary
infantry  from  Spain  and  Gaul;  for  the  barbarian
chieftain  was  no  less  afraid  of  his  own  subjects  than
of  an  enemy,  and  would  only  entrust  his  person  to  a
guard  of  European  mercenaries.  The  Romans  were
speedily  overpowered  by  the  multitudes  which  now
surrounded  them  on  every  side.  Fighting  with  their
wonted  constancy  and  valour,  they  could  at  least  sell
their  lives  dearly,  and  the  example  of  their  com-
mander, who  perceived  at  the  last  moment  his  fatal
mistake,  animated  them  in  the  struggle  and  consoled
them  in  their  fall.  The  gay,  licentious  braggart  of
the  forum  and  the  camp,  the  darling  of  Cicero,  the
counsellor  of  Caesar,  the  prime  mover  of  the  civil
wars ',  of  which  he  was  the  first  distinguished  victim,
crowned  a  career  of  inconsistencies  and  a  character
of  contradictions  by  dying  magnanimously  in  the
foremost  ranks  of  slaughter,  rather  than  seek  his  per-
sonal safety  after  losing  the  army  intrusted  to  him.8
In  vain, —  so  sang  the  dirge  of  the  Roman  oligarchy,
— in  vain  had  he  profaned  the  rostra  with  his  sedi-
tious eloquence,  and  waved  the  banner  of  democracy
from  the  tribunitian  citadel ;  in  vain  had  he  armed

1  Lacan,  ir.  819.:

"  Momentnmqiie  fuit  mutatus  Curio  rernm.**
»  Cas  B.  C.  ii.  82—42.

*.P.705-B.e.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  217

for  unnatural  duel  the  father  against  the  husband ;
he  fell  before  the  day  of  mortal  combat ;  the  issue  of
his  treason  was  veiled  from  his  eyes  :  the  gods,  who
failed  to  protect  the  state,  were  speedy  in  chastising
the  traitor.  Yet  he  too  had  many  noble  gifts ;  he
was  tainted  by  the  universal  corruption  :  even  his
foe's  malediction  turns  insensibly  to  praise.  Lucan
pronounces  upon  him  the  judgment  of  posterity  with
the  pathos  of  Virgil  and  the  sternness  of  Juvenal ;
and  his  name  stands  for  ever  conspicuous  among  the
short-lived  race  of  revolutionary  heroes.1

Asinius  Pollio  was  one  of  the  few  officers  who,  with
a  small  body  of  men,  were  able  to  make  capitulation
their escape from  the  general  massacre.  nantonL
A detachment had been left  in charge  Cffi9arean*-
of  the  camp  under  M.  Rufus ;  but  the  impossibility
of  holding  the  position  was  immediately  perceived,
and every  effort  was made to collect vessels for
embarking  this  miserable remnant  for  Sicily. In
the  hurry  and  confusion  with  which  the  crueityand
embarkation  was  conducted,  many  of  the  of  juba.
transports  were  sunk  with  all  on  board ; a  small
number  only  of  the  soldiers  got  clear  off;  the  rest,
deprived  of  their  last  chance  of  escape,  were  com-
pelled  to seek  terms  of  capitulation  from  Varus.
But  when  Juba  beheld  them  approaching  the  Eoman
encampment,  he  suddenly  fell  upon  them  with  the
ferocity  of  a  barbarian  conqueror,  claiming  the  right
to  deal  with  them  as  his  own  prisoners. Varus  re-
monstrated against  this proceeding,  having,  as  he
urged,  pledged  his  word  for  their  safety ;  but  Juba,
far  from  paying  any  regard  to  his  instances,  as  soon
as  he  had  seen  his  orders  executed,  rode  into  Utica
at  the  head  of  his  triumphant  army,  and  presumed

1  The  reflections  on  the  death  of  Curio  form  one  of  the  most  ani  •
mated  and  interesting  passages  in  the  revolutionary  epic.  Lucan,
iv.  799. :

"  Quid  nunc  rostra  tibi  prosunt  turbata,  forumque,
!Tnde  Tribunitia  plebeius  signifer,  arce,"  &c.

218  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvi.

to  dictate  arrangements  at  his  own  pleasure  for  the
government  of  the  Roman  colony.  To  the  greater
shame  of  the  republic,  it  was  said  that  several
senators,  of  whom  the  names  of  Ser.  Sulpicius  and
Licinius  Damasippus  are  especially  mentioned,  did
not  scruple  to  follow  in  his  train,  and  abet  this  act
of  audacious  presumption.  When  he  had  thus
settled  everything  by  his  own  royal  mandate,  he  re-
turned with  all  his  forces  into  Numidia.1

At  the  same  time  Caesar's  fortunes  were  assailed
cassar  sustains  ^  another  quarter  by  a  disaster  hardly
hihnnYviiM  less  signal.2  The  province  of  Illyricum,
offgt)?e?oM*  the  most  obscure  portion  of  the  immense
of  niyricum.  government  which  had  been  confided
to  him,  became  of  considerable  importance  to
his  interests,  now  that  his  opponents  had  placed  the
Adriatic  between  his  legions  and  their  own.  As
soon  as  he  should  have  secured  his  rear  by  the  sub-
jugation of  the  western  provinces,  he  meditated  the
passage  of  this  narrow  gulf.  It  was,  therefore,
essential  to  his  plans  to  strengthen  the  position  he
already  held  on  the  opposite  shore,  to  confirm  the
favour  of  the  natives  in  his  behalf,  and  to  establish
the  magazines  which  might  be  requisite  for  a  future
campaign  in  Dalmatia  or  Epirus;  though,  indeed,
he  may  have  justly  disregarded  as  visionary  the  pro-
ject attributed  to  Pompeius  by  some  of  his  most
sanguine  adherents,  of  marching  through  this  track-
less region  into  the  north  of  Italy.  Accordingly,  he
sent  C.  Antonius,  a  younger  brother  of  Marcus,  to
take  the  command  of  the  detachments  by  which  the
province  was  held,  and  commissioned  Dolabella3  to

1  Caes.  B.  C.  ii.  44.;  App.  B.  C.  ii.  46.

2  There  is  no  mention  of  this  event  in  Caesar's  Commentaries  on
the  civil  war. It  may  be  conjectured  that  the  second  book,  which  as
it  now  stands  is  disproportionately  short,  has  come  to  us  imperfect,
and  that  this,  together  with  some  subsequent  transactions,  was  re-
lated in  the  missing  portion.

1  This  was  Cicero's  son-in-law,  through  whose  influence  he  hoped

A.U.705-B.C.49. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  219

co-operate  with  him  by  sea  as  far  as  his  inferior
naval  equipments  would  permit.1  But  Bibulus,  who
commanded  the  naval  armaments  of  the  senate,  sent
a  superior  squadron  to  encounter  the  Csesarean
flotilla,  a  part  of  which  he  adroitly  entrapped  and
severely  handled.  Such  was  the  ferocity  of  M.
Octavius  and  L.  Scribonius  Libo,  the  senatorial
leaders,  such  at  least  was  it  reported  to  be,  that  the
Csesareans  despaired  of  receiving  quarter.  The  wild
resolution  of  the  tribune  Vulteius,  who  persuaded
the  crew  of  his  vessel  to  destroy  one  another  rather
than  fall  into  the  hands  of  so  ruthless  an  enemy,
was  remembered  in  after  times  as  a  splendid  instance
of  the  old  military  devotion.5  If  the  story  be  true,
it  gives  us  a  frightful  idea  of  the  recklessness  of  life
engendered  by  the  savage  warfare  of  the  times.
What  value  would  men  set  upon  the  lives  of  their
enemies  who  held  their  own  so  cheap?  But  how-
ever cold-blooded  the  cruelty  of  the  conquerors
generally  to  prisoners  who  refused  the  alternative
of  taking  service  under  them,  the  officers  of  the
senate  seem  on  this  occasion  to  have  exhibited  no
such  inveterate  hostility  to  the  captured  Csesareans.
C.  Antonius,  coming  to  the  relief  of  Dolabella,  was
defeated,  and  thereupon  entered  with  all  his  forces,

to  retain  the  favour  of  the  proconsul,  at  the  same  time  that  he  so  bit-
terly stigmatised  his  invasion  of  Italy  in  his  private  correspondence.

1  Florus  says  that  he  was  ordered  "fauces  Adriatici  maris  occu-
pare"  (iv.  2.);  but  this  was  quite  impossible,  seeing  the  acknow-
ledged naval  superiority  of  the  Pompeians. The  utmost  Dolabella
could  do  would  be  to  creep  along  the  coast  from  harbour  to  harbour,
and  try  to  preserve  Antonius's  communications  with  Italy.

2  Florus,  /.  c.;  Lucan,  iv.  474.  foil. The  poet's  gloomy  application
of  this  story  is  worth  remarking  as  an  illustration  of  the  sentiments
of  his  own  times,  when  suicide  was  contemplated  among  the  ordi-
nary contingencies  of  life:

"  Non  tamen  ignavae  post  hsec  exempla  virorum
Percipient  gentes  quam  sit  non  ardua  virtus
Scrvitium  fugisse  manu:  sed  regna  timentur
Ob  ferrum,  et  saevis  libertas  uritur  armis,
. Ignoratque  datos  ne  quisquam  serviat  enseg."

220  HISTORY  OP THE ROMANS  CH.  xvi.

estimated  by  one  writer  at  fifteen  cohorts,1  into  the
service  of  the  consuls.2

We  have  seen  that  Caesar,  on  his  departure  for
Admini-  Spain,  left  the  city  under  the  charge  of
f^pi'dus'in  Lepidus,  and  Italy  under  that  of  M.  An-
LdofyM.  tonius.  In  Rome  itself  the  members  of
itaiymu  the  nobility  who  had  remained,  or  had
lately  returned,  were  either  devoted  to  Caesar's  cause,  or
avowedly  neutral.  The  middle  class  of  citizens  was
also  generally  favourable  to  him  ;  it  was  only  the
licentious  and  versatile  mob  that  could  cause  any
anxiety  to  the  prefect  of  the  city.  But  this  mob
required  to  be  constantly  amused  and  humoured,
and  was  ready  at  any  moment  to  raise  clamours  in
the  theatres  and  other  public  places,  which  excited
the  hopes  of  the  Pompeians,  and  hindered  the  com-
plete tranquillization  of  men's  minds  throughout  the
country.  Beyond  Eome,  the  task  committed  to  M.
Antonius  was  more  difficult.  The  patrician  villas  of
the  Campanian  coast  were  crowded  by  illustrious
personages  openly  hostile  to  Caesar's  schemes,  and
only  deterred  from  uniting  themselves  with  his  rival
by  an  almost  equal  jealousy  of  his  designs,  and  still
more,  perhaps,  by  distrust  of  his  fortunes.3  Such
was  Cicero,  such  was  C.  Marcellus,  such  was  Servius

1  Oros.  vi.  15.  There  is  no  trace  of  any  force  of  such  magnitude
being  detached  from  Caesar's  armies  into  this  region,  and  it  seems
most  likely  that  Antonius's  troops  consisted  principally  of  the  local
militia  who  had  no  personal  attachment  to  the  proconsul.

*  Cses.  B.  C.  iii.  4.  and  10. In  the  latter  passage  the  reading  Cor-
cyra  seems  to  be  an  error  for  Coricta,  the  scene  of  this  event  men-
tioned by  Appian,  ii.  47. ;  Drumann,  i.  524.

*  These  men  persisted  in  amusing  themselves  with  the  vain  hope
that  Caesar's  soldiers  would  turn  against  him. Cicero  says  that  the
centurions  of  three  cohorts  stationed  at  Pompeii  came  to  him  at  his
Cumsean  villa  and  offered  to  deliver  the  city  to  him. Under  any
circumstances  he  was  prudent  in  declining  such  an  offer;  but  when
it  came  to  the  point  he  acknowledges  a  suspicion  that  it  was  made  in
bad  faith  with  the  view  of  entrapping  him. Cic.  ad  Alt.  x.  16. lie
adds:  "  Omnem  igitur  suspicionem  snstuli." He  is  painfully  appre-
hensive of  giving  any  cause  of  umbrage  to  the  men  in  pow«r.

A.C.705-B.C.49. UNDER THE EMPIKE.  221

Sulpicius,  all  of  them  men  of  distinguished  reputa-
tion both  from  their  personal  character,  and  from  the
high  magistracies  which  they  had  recently  filled.
While  these  statesmen  were  balancing,  as  ciceroand

,  i  j  ,1  e- .1 other  Pom-

we  have  already  seen  in  the  case  or  the  peian. ««
most  illustrious  of  the  number,  whether  leave  iuiy°
they  should  betake  themselves  to  the  senatorial
camp,  Antonius  received  his  master's  orders  to  pre-
vent any  personage  of  distinction  leaving  the  Penin-
sula at  all.  He  placed  all  their  movements  under
strict  observation,  while  at  the  same  time  he  care-
fully abstained  from  any  harsh  measures  of  restraint.
Cicero  communicated  to  Antonius  his  wish  to  leave
Italy  for  a  time,  and  seek  an  asylum  in  some  place,
such  as  Sicily,  where  he  might  hope  to  enjoy
dignified  leisure,  apart  from  the  disturbances  of  civil
strife.  Cato  was  still  master  of  the  island,  and
Cicero  did  not  anticipate  Curio's  attack  upon  it,
much  less  his  unresisted  conquest  of  it.  But
Antonius  pleaded  in  reply  the  strict  injunctions  of
his  superior  not  to  allow  any  one  of  so  exalted  a
class  to  evade  the  direct  superintendence  of  the
central  authority ;  at  the  same  time  he  dexterously
hinted  that  an  application  to  Caesar  himself  would
be  flattering  and  possibly  successful.

Cicero,  however,  was  not  deceived  as  to  the  real
meaning  of  this  polite  communication:  it  cicero-.

•>[•-,..  ».,  i -,  11 scurrilous

was,  ne  telt,  in  reality  as  arbitrary  and  de-  deciamnionj
cisive  as  the  formal  missives  by  which  the  Anwniui.
Spartan  ephors  cashiered  their  military  sovereigns.1
He  revenged  himself,  in  his correspondence with
Atticus,  by  puerile  declamations  against  the  prefect's
vices. He  represented  Antonius  as  making  his  pro-
gresses through  Italy  with  the  mime  Cytheris  at  his
side,  surrounded  by  his  lictors,  followed  by  a  train  of
panders  and  concubines,  nor  scrupling  to  introduce
his  own  wife  and  mother  into  the  same  odious  com-

1  Cic.  ad  Ait.  x.  10. :  "  Habes  anvr<i\-t\v  AOKWCIKI^."

222  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  r»i

pany1,  exciting  the  disgust  of  all  moderate  and
decent  men  by  his  profligate  manners  and  his  auda-
cious pride.  Claiming  his  descent  from  the  hero
Anton,  the  son  of  Hercules,  he  aped,  it  seems,  the
symbols  of  his  divine  progenitor,  to  whom  he;  was
supposed  to  bear  a  personal  resemblance.2  At  a
later  period,  at  least,  he  stamped  the  figure  of  the
Nemean  lion  on  his  coins3,  and  presented  himself
publicly  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  the  monarchs  of  the
forest.4  In  what  way  he  paraded  these  animals  at
this  time  does  not  clearly  appear,  but  Cicero  en-
courages his  correspondent  not  to  be  alarmed  at
Antonius's  lions.5  It  would  indeed  be  strange  if  a
licentious  and  arrogant  man,  such  as  the  tribune
undoubtedly  was,  should  have  exhibited  no  marks  of
bad  taste  and  selfish  indulgence  on  so  sudden  an
elevation.  But  the  colouring  of  his  calumniator  is
unworthy  of  our  confidence  ;  and  even  if  we  were  to
admit  every  thing  that  Cicero  says  against  him,  the
progress  of  Antonius  through  Italy  would  still  stand
in  luminous  contrast  to  the  devastating  march  of
most  of  its  previous  conquerors.

We  have  seen  that  the  defenders  of  Massilia  were

1  Comp.  ad  All.  x.  10.  with  Phil  ii.  24.  The  letter  in  which  these
circumstances  are  related  was  written  from  his  villa  at  Cumae,  at  the
very  time  that  he  was  in  correspondence  with  Antonius  and  Curio
about  the  course  which  it  would  be  prudent  for  him  to  take.  In  the
speech  he  expressly  says  that  he  was  not  in  Italy  (implying  that  he
was  already  in  the  camp  of  Pompeius)  at  the  time.  It  is  impossible
after  this  to  attach  any  special  weight  to  the  scandalous  imputations
he  throws  out  against  Antonius.

*  Plut.  Anton.  4.;  irpoffijv  5f  Kal  fiop<f>f}s  (\fv6eptov  d{tw^a,  Kal  iruywv
•m  OVK  aytw^s,  KCU  irAoTos  fifrdinrov,  Kal  ypvir6ni]s  ^uwrfjpos  e'SoKet  rols

*  Comp.  Eckhel,  Doclr.  Numm.  vi.  44.  This  figure  appears  on  a
coin  supposed  to  be  of  the  date  715  u.  c.  It  occurs  also  on  one
struck  by  Antonius  at  Lugdunum  in  Gaul,  a  city  which  was  much
attached  to  him.  Vaillant  supposes  that  its  modern  name  Lyon  is
derived  from  the  Antonian  symbol

4  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  21.

4  Cic  ad  Att.  x.  13.  :  "  Tu  ieones  Antonii  ne  pertimescas  cave."

i.\f.705-B.c.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  223

on  the  point  of  surrendering,  when  Caesar's  good  for-
tune brought  him  in  triumph  to  their  gates  Final  .ub-

.P  .  \_ .  i • •  miwion

mst in time  to  receive  their submission  ofMa«iiia.

•f  T TN  • ,  •  i  />  Escape  of

in  person.  L.  Domitius,  by  whose  herce  Domiuns.
hostility  they  had  been  animated  throughout  their
long  struggle,  contrived  by  slipping  out  of  the  haven
to  avoid  falling  a  second  time  into  the  hands  of
the  conqueror  whose  clemency  he  had  abused.  He
will  next  reappear  in  the  Pompeian  camp  at  Thessa-
lonica.  The  perfidy  of  the  Greeks  was  prudently
forgotten,  their  submission  graciously  accepted,  and
their  city  saved  from  pillage,  though  the  appetite  of
the  besiegers  was  whetted  by  perils  and  fatigues,  and
they  had  indulged  in  the  fullest  anticipation  of  mili-
tary licence.  The  surrender  of  all  their  munitions
of  war,  together  with  the  treasure  of  the  republic,
was  rigorously  enforced  :  and  if  the  inhabitants  were
allowed  the  enjoyment  of  their  own  laws  and  institu-
tions, they  were  effectually  deprived  of  the  means  of
defending  them.1

It  was  at  this  moment  that  Cffisar  received  intelli-
gence that  he  had  been  declared  dictator

'. -n  1.1  • -  r  .LI-  f  -+ Cxt>" createi1

at  Koine  by  the  appointment  ot  the  prefect  dictator  inhu
Lepidus.'2  The  creation  of  this  extraordi-
nary magistrate  was  an  expedient  recognized,  by
traditional  usage,  on  occasions  of  the  greatest  emer-
gency. In  the  earliest  ages  of  the  republic  the
appointment  was  exercised  by  the  consuls  at  the
command  or  with  the  consent  of  the  senate.3  The
people  had  no  voice  in  the  matter,  nor  were  the
peculiar  restrictions  under  which  the  office  was  held
adopted  with  any  view  to  their  protection.  The
appointment  of  a  dictator  was,  in  fact,  the  resource

1  CJES.  /?.  C.  ii.  22.;  Dion,  xli.  25.;  Liv.  Epit.  ex.

2  Caes.  B.  C.  ii.  21.

3  Arnold,  Hist,  of  Rome,  i. 144.: "One  of  the  consuls  received
the  name  of  the  person  to  be  declared  dictator  from  the  senate;  he
then  declared  him  dictator,  and  he  was  confirmed  and  received  the
iiuperium  by  a  vote  of  the  great  council  of  the  curiae."

224  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XVI.

which  the  nobles  reserved  to  themselves  whenever
the  ordinary  political  forms  were  insufficient  to  resist
the  demands  of  the  commons.  But  as  the  commons
grew  in  strength,  and  asserted  equal  privileges  with
the  nobles,  such  an  arbitrary  power  could  no  longer
be  safely  exercised.  The  senate  resorted  to  another
expedient  to  protect  itself,  whenever  its  privileges
seemed  threatened  with  imminent  peril.  On  such
occasions  it  passed  a  solemn  resolution,  declaring  the
state  in  danger,  and  investing  the  consuls  with
summary  powers  for  maintaining  the  public  safety.
Accordingly,  with  the  single  exception  of  Sulla's
appointment,  which  was  made  in  the  intoxication  of
an  overwhelming  triumph,  there  had  been  no  crea-
tion of  a  dictator  for  a  hundred  and  twenty  years.
Indeed  Sulla's  revival  of  this  unpopular  authority,
and  his  frightful  abuse  of  it,  had  concentrated  upon
it  the  whole  force  of  the  national  odium.  Pompeius
had  not  ventured  to  claim  it ;  he  had  contented  him-
self with  the  more  irregular  but  less  hateful  assump-
tion of  the  sole  consulship.  It  might  now  be  doubted
whether  the  people  would  endure  it,  even  when
exercised  by  their  own  champion,  and  ostensibly  for
their  own  interest.

The circumstances, however, which compelled
Caesar  to  run  the  hazard  of  thus  awakening

Caesar's  object .-, • i  f •, •  j,

in  seeking  the  the  lealousv ot his  own  adherents were

appointment  %.  •'_,.  ,  , ,  ,

at  this  time,  peculiar.  1  here  can  be  no  doubt  that
consular  he  had  himself  suggested  to  Lepidus  to

comitiaand  1,1  • ,  i  j •

obtain  the make  the  appointment ;  but,  in  doing  so,

consulship. ,  ,  '  , ,  \

he  had  not  yielded  to  the  indulgence  ol
puerile  vanity.  It  was  the  proper  function  of  the
consuls  for  the  current  year  to  convene  the  people
for  the  election  of  their  successors.  The  consulship
was  the  dignity  for  which  Ca3sar  had  long  contended.
The  exalted  position  he  occupied,  and  the  great  ser-
vices he  had  rendered  the  state,  gave  him  an  undeni-
able claim  to  the  fasces,  even  for  the  second  time,  upon

4.C.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  225

the  expiration  of  his  provincial  government.  For  this
he  had  quarrelled  with  the  party  of  the  optimates,
who  had  striven  by  every  kind  of  violence  and  in-
trigue to  thwart  him.  For  this  he  had  taken  up
arms  and  crossed  the  Eubicon ;  and  now,  having
driven  his  enemies  fairly  out  of  Italy,  he  was  ready,
he  declared,  to  present  himself  to  the  people  for
this,  and  this  only.  But  the  consuls  were  absent
from  the  city  ;  no  election  could  take  place  at  Eome ;
neither,  on  the  other  hand,  could  an  election  be
made  under  the  consular  auspices  elsewhere  than  at
Eome.  Lepidus,  indeed,  asserted  that  as  praetor  he
had  the  right  to  hold  the  consular  comitia.  But  an
outcry  was  raised  against  the  legality  of  this  claim ;
and  Cicero  argued  that  an  inferior  magistrate  could
not  rightly  preside  at  the  election  of  a  superior.1
Caesar  was  studious  to  preserve  appearances,  and,  on
this  occasion,  he  forbade  his  minister  to  perform  an
act  which  could  bear  even  a  colour  of  illegality.  It
was,  however,  of  great  importance  to  his  views  that
the  state  should  not  fall  under  an  interregnum.  The
office  of  the  interreges  was  to  supply  the  place  of  the
consuls  on  the  occurrence  of  an  unavoidable  vacancy,
until  such  time  as  a  formal  election  could  be  held
under  their  sanction.2  But  the  law  restricted  the
choice  of  interreges  to  the  patrician  houses,  and  in
that  class  there  was  so  much  jealousy  of  Caesar  that
under  their  authority  fresh  obstacles,  he  apprehended,
would  be  thrown  in  his  way.3  There  remained,
therefore,  only  one  other  feasible  course,  and  this
was  the  appointment  of  a  dictator,  in  whom  the  right
of  holding  the  consular  comitia  was  undeniably
vested.  If  such  a  sovereign  magistrate  was  to  be

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  ix.  9.:  "  Iste  omnium  turpissimus  et  sordidissimus
(Lepidus)  qni  consularia  comitia  a  prsetore  ait  haberi  posse."

s  It  was  by  an  interrex  that  Sulla  had  been  created  dictator. Cic.
ad  Att.  ix.  15.

'  Drumann,  iii.  475.;  Cic.  ad  Att.  ix.  9. ;  "  Permagni  cjus  interest
rem  ad  interregnum  non  venire."
VOL. II.  Q

226  HISTOttr OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XVL

appointed,  it  was  upon  Caesar  alone,  as  the  fore-
most man  in  the  state,  that  the  burden  and  the
dignity  could  alight.  He  accepted  the  office  as  the
only  means  of  arriving  at  the  consulship.  Never-
theless, it  was  still  a  question  whether,  in  the  absence
of  the  consuls,  the  praetor  had  strictly  the  right  to
make  this  nomination.  It  may  be  remembered,  in-
deed, that  the  first  dictator  was  appointed  at  a  period
when  there  was  no  distinction  between  the  functions
of  these  two  officers,  so  that  it  is  not  improbable  that
the  archives  of  the  early  republic  might  furnish  at
least  a  literal  precedent  for  such  a  proceeding.  There
seems,  however,  to  have  been  a  general  impression
that  there  was  some  irregularity  in  the  transaction,
though  the  historians  express  themselves  very  dif-
ferently upon  it.1  Under  such  circumstances,  it
must  have  been  a  matter  of  great  satisfaction  to
Caesar  that  the  intelligence  of  this  appointment
reached  him  at  a  moment  when  there  was  nothing
to  prevent  his  setting  off  immediately  for  Eome.
Delay  at  such  a  conjuncture  might  have  been  fatal ;
but  Spain  was  converted  to  his  side,  Gaul  vaunted
her  zeal  for  his  interests,  Massilia  was  pacified  and
crushed.  The  broad  beaten  track  of  the  Aurelian
Way  lay  before  him,  and  the  proconsul  crossed  the
Alps  with  the  expedition  of  a  courier.

Nevertheless,  there  remained  yet  another  labour  to
c»sar  queiu  be  overcome  before  he  could  reach  the  con-
among  his  summation  of  his  desires.  For  a  moment
piacentia.  the  very  foundation  of  all  his  power  seemed
crumbling  under  his  feet.  After  the  disappearance
of  the  senatorial  forces  from  the  shores  of  Italy,
Caesar,  as  we  have  seen,  had  stationed  a  portion  of
his  troops  in  the  southern  extremity  of  Apulia,  to

1  Flor.  iv.  2.  :  "  consnlem  se  ipse  fecit."  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  47.  :
Ktu  OATTOV  6  Srjfjuts  iretptK^s  rjpfiro  StKrarupa  otrre  TI  TTJS  0ou\rjs  \)rri<t>i-
(oftfVT]s,  uirre  irpox«ipoToHj<ra»'TOS  ip^oiTos.  Zonaras,  x.  8. :  aip«0ejj
5^  StKTtirciip  virb  TTJS  f3ou\ij$.

A.P.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  227

resist  any  sudden  attempt  of  the  fugitives  to  regain
the  land.  Another  and  apparently  a  larger  division l
had  been  quartered  at  Placentia,  in  the  valley  of  the
Po  as  a  central  point  between  Kome,  the  frontier  of
Gaul,  and  the  north-eastern  corner  of  the  Penin-
sula; in  which  latter  direction  it  was  just  possible
that  Pompeius  might  move  upon  his  flank,  if  he
were  worsted  in  Spain,  or  detained  under  the  walls
of  Massilia.  This  reserve  was  augmented  by  the
arrival  of  the  division,  consisting  of  one  or  more
legions,  which  had  been  detached  from  the  army  in
Spain  to  escort  the  Afranians  as  far  as  the  Var.  It
seems  probable  that  their  fidelity  to  their  leader  was
partly  corrupted  by  familiar  intercourse  with  their
fellow-citizens  who  had  so  recently  served  on  the
opposite  side.  We  have  already  seen  how  rapidly
the  sense  of  discipline  might  be  thus  undermined.
But  the  veterans  had  mortifications  of  their  own  to
brood  over.  Their  commander,  it  is  asserted,  had
never  yet  found  himself  in  a  position  to  give  his
promised  largess  of  five  minse  to  each  soldier.  He
had  also  withheld  from  them  a  prize  they  might
deem  not  less  legitimately  theirs,  in  forbidding  the
sack  of  cities  and  renouncing  the  confiscation  of
private  property.  The  news  of  his  having  shielded
Massilia  from  plunder  roused  the  soldiers  to  a  pitch
of  frenzy.  It  was  in  their  eyes  an  arrogant  inter-
ference with  the  rights  of  military  licence.  It  does
not  appear  how  far  the  spirit  of  insubordination  had
spread ;  the  ninth  legion,  however,  one  of  the  most
distinguished  in  the  Gallic  wars,  was  thoroughly  de-
moralized. Caesar  flew  to  the  spot,  and  his  presence
doubtless  restored  the  greater  number  to  a  sense  of
their  duty.  He  felt  that  he  was  supported,  and  the

1  Dion,  xli.  26.;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  47.;  Oros.  vi.  15.  Guischard
calculates  that  three  of  the  veteran  legions  were  quartered  at  Pla-
centia. Mem.  sur  I'Aimee  de  Cesar,  in  torn.  iii.  p.  62.  of  the  Mfrnoira
Militaires.

«<  2

228  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xvi.

bolder  the  front  he  assumed,  the  more  he  was  as-
sured would  that  support  be  confirmed.  He  addressed
the  mutineers  in  one  of  those  stirring  harangues
with  which,  like  most  great  commanders,  he  could
sway  their  affections  as  he  pleased.  At  first,  assum-
ing the  boundless  generosity  of  perfect  confidence,
he  declared  that  he  would  release  from  his  oath  who-
soever wished  to  retire.  But  when  the  disaffected
shouted  their  approbation  of  this  indulgence,  and  he
suddenly  changed  the  language  of  his  address  from
Romani,  or  soldien^s,  to  Quirites,  or  citizens,  shocked
and  abashed  the  multitude  shrank  before  him.1  Such
was  the  disparagement  implied  in  this  honourable
title,  according  to  the  ideas  of  a  brutalized  soldiery,
that  the  whole  current  of  their  fury  was  arrested  and
changed  by  one  magic  word.  They  were  now  as
eager  in  signifying  their  repentance,  as  before  in
testifying  their  dissatisfaction.  Caesar,  however,  was
not  to  be  won  too  easily.  He  proceeded  to  disband
the  entire  ninth  legion ;  but  at  their  urgent  entreaty,
and  upon  the  strongest  assurances  of  their  penitence,
he  contented  himself  with  making  some  severe  ex-
amples, according  to  the  laws  of  Eoman  discipline,
to  which,  sanguinary  as  they  were,  the  soldiers  were
passionately  attached.  He  required  one  hundred
and  twenty  of  the  most  violent  mutineers  to  be  de-
livered to  him,  and  selected  twelve  of  the  number
for  death.  When  he  discovered  that  one  of  these
had  been  unjustly  accused,  he  ordered  the  centurion
who  had  given  the  false  information  against  him  to
take  his  place.2

1  Lucan,  v.  358.:

"  Tradite  nostra  viris  ignavi  signa  Quirites."

Snet.  (JuZ.  70.)  tells  the  same  story  on  the  occasion  of  a  mutiny  of
the  tenth  legion  before  Rome  at  a  later  period.  See  also  Dion,  xlii.
53. ;  App.  B.  C.  ii.  92.  But  the  poet  ia  so  faithful  to  the  letter  of
history,  even  in  his  ornamental  details,  that  I  think  his  expressions
may  be  adopted  here.
*  Dion,  and  Appian,  II.  cc. ;  Suet,  Jul.  69,  The  account  of  this

A.0.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  229

When  we  consider  what  expectations  of  a  dictator's
rule  would  be  formed  by  the  various  parties  DifflcuuiM
and  conflicting  interests  of  the  republic,  we  {J^uS^i
cannot  fail  to  estimate  the  extreme  diflfi-  dicutor-
culty  of  Caesar's  position  upon  his  return.  He  was
now  for  the  first  time  summoned  to  carry  out  the
principles  which  he  had  inscribed  upon  his  banner
on  his  first  entrance  into  political  warfare.  He  was
called  upon  to  repudiate  those  which  his  enemies
and  his  extravagant  partisans  alike  imputed  to  him.
His  elevation  was  similar  to  that  of  Pompeius  in  his
sole  consulship;  but  it  was  not  easy  for  him  to
imitate  the  moderation  of  his  opponent  in  dealing
with  disputed  rights  and  reforming  social  abuses.
The  old  conservative  element  of  the  commonwealth,
upon  which  Pompeius  could  securely  lean  when  hard
pressed  by  the  revolutionists,  was  broken  to  pieces
by  the  flight  of  the  consuls  and  their  adherents.  On
the  other  hand,  the  arrogance  of  the  innovators  and
reformers,  of  those  who  would  sweep  away  the  foun-
dations of  social  confidence,  and  reconstitute  society
on  the  arbitrary  basis  of  financial  enactments,  was
flushed  by  success.  So  great  a  change  of  men  in  the
government  of  the  commonwealth  had  never  before
been  effected  without  a  loud  cry  for  blood  as  well  as
for  plunder :  the  old  animosities  of  class  and  party
had  never  before  been  allayed  except  by  the  mas-
sacre of  the  conquered.  It  remained  yet  to  be  seen
how  far  the  progress  of  society  had  modified  these
sanguinary  instincts ;  whether  the  recent  growth  of
a  middle  and  neutral  interest  of  capitalists  and  finan-
cial speculators  had  tended  to  assuage  the  violence  of
political  action ;  above  all,  whether  the  advance  of
civilization  had,  at  last,  brought  upon  the  stage  a
great  political  champion,  of  more  humane  and  philo-

transaction,  which  is  wanting  in  Caesar's  Commentaries,  would  have
been  found  in  the  portion  of  the  second  book,  which  is  supposed  to
be  missing.

230  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvi.

sophical  character  than  the  military  ruffians  of  an
earlier  generation.

We  have  seen  that  the  moneyed  interest  of  the
confldznce  capital  had  invoked  the  success  of  Caesar,
"rmnel'an'd'  *&  offering  the  fairest  prospect  of  that  per-
to'reshlt'the0"  rnanent  tranquillity,  which  it  prized  above
fl^tionand  any  P^ty  triumph.  The  political  excite-
wood.  ment  of  recent  years  had  benumbed  its

industry  with  anxiety  and  distrust.  But  it  was  well
known  that  the  victorious  champion  of  a  great  poli-
tical change  would  be  urged  by  a  large  class  among
his  adherents  to  combine  with  it  a  social  revolution
also.  The  general  abolition  of  private  debts  was  a
familiar  cry  which  had  long  swelled  the  chorus  of
popular  clamour  against  Sulla  and  the  optimates,
the  dictator  and  the  senate.  Accordingly,  the  class
of  creditors  showed  great  sagacity  in  the  confidence
which  they  placed  in  Caesar,  as  the  man  of  all  others
whose  moderation  would  reject,  and  whose  firmness
would  overcome,  such  a  pressure.  He  at  least,  they
were  assured,  had  never  adopted  the  language  of  the
Cinnas  and  Catilinas.  The  good  sense  with  which
he  had  kept  aloof  from  the  intrigues  of  recent  con-
spirators had  not  been  lost  upon  the  wary  observers
of  public  events.  The  respect  he  had  shown  for
private  property,  under  circumstances  of  great  temp-
tation, had  raised  an  exalted  opinion  of  his  good
faith  and  moral  courage.  His  influence  had  extended,
during  his  own  absence,  to  his  ministers  in  Eome
and  Italy  ;  whatever  were  their  faults  and  their  per-
sonal unpopularity,  Lepidus  and  Antonius  had  thus
far  scrupulously  adhered  to  the  principles  they  had
imbibed  from  him.  They  had  not  violated  public
faith,  they  had  respected  property,  they  had  refrained
from  blood.  On  the  other  hand,  many  who  really
wished  well  to  the  cause  of  the  nobles  durst  not
resort  to  their  camp,  where  proscription  or  at  least
confiscation  awaited  them  for  their  previous  delay.

\.U.705-B.C.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  231

At  Korae,  the  head-quarters  of  the  Cacsareans,  their
persons  were  secure,  and  even  their  adhesion,  with
few  exceptions,  unsolicited.  Conservatism  was  angry
and  revengeful,  Innovation  tolerant  and  placable;
the  striking  contrast  they  now  mutually  exhibited
was  an  efficient  agent  in  consolidating  Caesar's
victory.1

The  dictator  wielded  within  the  city  the  para-
mount authority  which,  in  the  case  of  the  jj«*|;'.'al
consul  whom  he  superseded,  was  jealously  measures.
limited  to  the  camp.  He  was  not  required  to  sur-
render the  command  of  his  army  on  entering  the
precincts  sacred  to  the  peaceful  gown.  In  the  lan-
guage of  the  poet,  he  combined  the  sword  with  the
axe,  the  eagles  of  the  imperator  with  the  rods  of  the
curule  magistrate.2  Caesar  could  now  appear  publicly
in  the  forum  for  the  first  time  since  his  appointment
to  the  government  of  Graul.  He  presented  himself
to  a  senate  of  his  own  adherents,  and  a  people  whose
favourite  he  had  ever  been,  after  an  absence  of  nearly
ten  years,  with  all  his  former  popularity,  and  with
more  than  the  promised  renown  of  his  early  career.
As  he  walked  over  the  ashes  of  the  Clodian  confla-
gration, among  the  rising  columns  of  his  destined
edifices,  Rome  might  fondly  hope  that  the  era  of
blood  and  fire  had  passed  away,  and  peace  revived  at
his  command  with  arts  and  opulence.  But  mean-
while, the  general  uncertainty  which  darkened  the
political  horizon  had  caused  a  wide-spread  repug-
nance to  the  discharge  of  pecuniary  obligations.  The
impression  had  long  prevailed,  that  the  time  was
coming  for  a  scramble  for  property.  Every  one  was

1  Suet.  Jul.  75.:  "  Denuntiante  Pompeio  pro  hostibus  se  habiturum
qui  reipublicae  defuissent,  ipse  medios  et  neutriiis  partis  suorum  sibi
uumero  futuros  pronuntiavit."

2  Lucan,  v.  387.:

"  Ne  ferri  jus  ullum  Caesar  abesset,
Ausonias  voluit  gladiis  miscerc  secures:
Addidit  et  fasces  aquilis."

232  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  xvi.

anxious  to  turn  his  effects  into  money,  and  to  keep
what  he  could  realize  in  his  own  coffers.  All  were
eager  to  sell,  few  to  buy.  The  creditors  became
harsher  in  exacting  their  dues,  as  the  difficulty  of
enforcing  their  claims  became  greater.  Their  mort-
gages sunk  in  value,  till  it  became  expedient  to  make
almost  any  sacrifice  to  secure  an  adjustment  with
their  debtors.  The  method  which  Caesar  adopted  for
compromising  the  respective  claims  of  the  two  classes,
was  to  estimate  these  obligations  according  to  the
scale  of  prices  at  a  period  antecedent  to  the  late
commotions,  when  money  circulated  freely  and  plenti-
fully, and  to  allow  debts  to  be  discharged  without  the
payment  of  the  accumulated  interest.1  The  debtor
was  thus  generally  relieved  from  a  liability  which  he
could  not  discharge,  while  the  creditor  sacrificed  a
portion  of  his  dues,  amounting,  however,  as  was
calculated,  to  not  more  than  one  fourth.2  As  an
expedient  for  reducing  prices  to  their  usual  level,
and  restoring  the  abundance  of  the  circulating
medium,  which  there  was  so  strong  a  disposition  to
hoard,  the  dictator  sanctioned  another  ordinance  of
an  arbitrary  kind.  He  limited  to  sixty  thousand
sesterces  the  amount  of  coin  which  the  citizen  might
retain  in  his  possession.3  But  as  this  provision,
vexatious  and  inquisitorial  as  it  was,  would  be  little
more  than  a  dead  letter,  unless  the  inmates  of  the
family  were  encouraged  to  denounce  the  violation  of
it,  the  multitude,  delighted  at  any  sumptuary  restric-
tion on  the  advantages  of  wealth,  demanded  that  the

1  Cses.  B.  C.  iii.  1.

*  Suet.  Jvl.  42.;  comp.  Plut.  Cats.  37.;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  48.

*  Dion,  xli.  38. Drumann  refers  to  a  similar  ordinance  of  the
emperor  Tiberius,  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  1 6. ;  Suet.,  Tib.  49. :  "  Der  Kaiser
dachte  nicht  an  das  allgemeine  Beste,  sondern  an  seine  Sicherheit:
ohne  Geld  konnte  man  sich  nicht  gegen  ihn  yerschworen  "  (iii.  472.
note). The  class  which  had  speculated  on  a  sweeping  abolition  of
debts  were  so  dissatisfied  with  Caesar's  moderation  that  many  of  them
withdrew  to  the  camp  of  the  senate  in  consequence. Sallust,  Orat.
ad  Caes.  ii.  2.

A.U.705  B.c.49.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  233

testimony  of  slaves  should  be  received  in  such  cases
against  their  masters.  Caesar,  however,  remained
steadfast  to  the  old  principles  of  Koman  law,  and
refused  to  sanction  so  dangerous  an  innovation.1

The  dictator's  next  measure  was  to  procure  the
recal  from  banishment  of  certain  personages  Amne8ty
who  had  been  proscribed  by  the  enactments  fhr^ctimi
of  his  adversaries.  These  penalties  had  °LPsX-"8''
been  inflicted,  for  the  most  part,  under  the  enactment'-
law  of  Pompeius  against  bribery  at  elections.  But
the  delinquents  had  been  zealous  in  proffering  their
services  to  the  armed  assailant  of  the  government  by
which  they  had  suffered ;  they  promised  to  become
useful  to  his  cause,  and  policy  prompted  him  to
satisfy  their  demands.  The  indignation  of  the  patri-
cian purists  knew  no  bounds.  While  Caesar  was  still
absent  in  Spain,  Antonius  had  held  out  the  expec-
tation of  such  an  act  of  grace,  and  the  sympathy  he
had  thus  expressed  for  the  victims  of  the  laws  was
branded  as  one  of  the  worst  of  his  enormities.  In
Cicero's  view,  such  an  act  would  fill  the  measure  of
Caesar's  iniquities.  Sulpicius  had  declared  that,  if
the  exiles  returned,  he  must  himself  go  into  exile.2
In  the  meanwhile  Caesar  had  abstained  from  receiving
these  applicants  into  his  ranks.  He  waited  till  their
recal  should  proceed  from  the  mouth  of  the  sovereign
people ;  and  he  now  suggested  to  certain  high  magis-
trates to  lay  a  proposition  to  that  effect  before  the
assembly.3  But  the  amnesty  was  extended  to  more
than  one  class  of  sufferers.  Grabinius  was  among
those  who  profited  by  it  to  return  to  Eome.  On  the
other  hand,  it  was  denied  to  Milo,  who  had  per-
haps made  himself  obnoxious  in  the  defence  of  Mas-
silia.4  It  must  be  allowed  that  this  exception  was  in

1  Dion,  1.  c.  *  Cic.  ad  Alt  x.  14.

3  Cses.  B.  C.  iii.  1.:  "Prwtoribus  tribunisque  plebis  rogationes  ad
populum  ferentibus."

4  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  48.

234  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xvi.

*

flagrant  contradiction  to  the  motive  which  the  dictator
himself  assigns  for  the  measure,  his  anxiety  to  reverse
legal  sentences  which  had  been  inflicted  at  a  period
when  the  tribunals  were  coerced  by  Pompeius's  mili-
tary force.  This  measure,  it  is  probable,  was  con-
nected with  another,  the  subject  of  which  had  at
least  been  broached  on  a  former  occasion,  the  re-
habilitation, namely,  of  the  descendants  of  Sulla's
victims.1

At  the  same  time  Caesar  accomplished  an  act,
fun  citizen-  the  policy  and  justice  of  which  he  had
on!the°T?an«-  recognised  at  a  much  earlier  period,
padane  oaui«.  an(j  Qf  which  his  own  interests  had  never
failed  to  remind  him :  this  was  the  conferring  the
Roman  franchise  upon  the  Transpadane  Gauls.-  His
connexion  with  this  people  had  been  of  long  dura-
tion, and  almost  at  his  first  outset  in  political  life
his  enemies  suspected  that  it  was  from  thence  he
was  to  draw  the  military  force  destined  to  support
the  imaginary  conspiracy  with  which  they  charged
him.3  We  have  seen  the  insolence  and  violence  with
which  this  connexion  had  been  resented  by  the  nobles,
in  the  treatment  of  the  proconsul's  clients  at  Novum
Comum.  But  the  elder  Curio,  a  high  authority
among  the  optimates,  had  allowed  the  abstract  justice
of  the  concession  for  which  Caesar  contended.  He
withstood  it  only  from  a  perverse  misapprehension  of
the  interests  of  the  commonwealth.4  The  time  had
now  arrived  when  every  obstacle  was  removed,  and
henceforward  the  freedom  of  the  city  was  bounded
only  by  the  Alps.

The  measures  which  Pompeius  appeared  to  con-

1  Pint.  Cats.  37. Dion,  as  we  have  seen,  places  it  before  the  cam-
paign in  Spain;  Velleius  (ii.  43.),  in  Csesar's  zedileship,  A.  u.  689;
but  this  is  certainly  an  error,  as  Cicero  had  maintained  the  exclusion
in  his  consulship.

2  Dion,  xli.  36.;  comp.  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  21.

3  Suet.  Jul  T>.

4  Cic.  de  Off.  iii.  32.;  Drumann,  iii.  447

A.P.706.-B.C.49. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  235

template  for  reducing  the  city  by  famine  had  been
thwarted  for  the  most  part  by  the  energy
and  success  of  Caesar's  lieutenants  in  Sar-
dinia  and  Sicily.  But  Africa  withheld  her
supplies,  and  the  produce  of  more  distant  Iiaaricl"-
shores  might  be  cut  off  by  the  cruisers  of  a  vigilant
enemy.  The  populace  of  Eome  began  to  suffer  from
this  pressure,  and  the  dictator  distributed  gratuitously
among  them  all  the  grain  he  could  collect.1  He
seems  to  have  indemnified  himself  for  these  extra-
ordinary expenses  by  levying  contributions  on  the
deposits  in  the  temples.2  The  people  easily  pardoned
these  depredations.  They  were  now  in  the  highest
good  humour.  Caesar  could  trust  his  fortunes  confi-
dently to  their  grateful  favour.3  Accordingly  he
proceeded,  without  further  delay,  to  convene  the  as-
sembly for  the  election  of  consuls,  and  presented
himself  as  a  candidate.  He  could  fairly  represent  to
the  people  that,  in  the  discharge  of  the  sovereign
magistracy  he  had  paid  unusual  deference  to  their
rights  as  legislators;  in  his  wish  to  make  his  dicta-
torship a  name  rather  than  a  reality,  he  had  abstained
from  the  appointment  of  a  master  of  the  horse.  He
now  encouraged  P.  Servilius  Isauricus  to  offer  him-
self for  the  other  chair,  and  no  one  ventured  to  solicit
the  suffrages  in  opposition  to  either.  The  election  of
the  other  magistrates  followed,  and  next  in  order  the
distribution  of  the  provincial  appointments.  Lepidus
received  the  Hither  Spain,  Q.  Cassius  retained  his
government  of  the  Further  province,  and  Decimus
Brutus  succeeded  to  that  of  Gaul  beyond  the  Alps.

The  last  month  of  the  Roman  calendar  had  now
arrived.4 Caesar  performed,  in  his  capacity  of  dictator,

1  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  48.  2  Dion,  xli.  39.

*  Lucan,  v.  384. :  M  Leetos  fecit  se  consule  fastos."
4  The  month  of  December,  A.  u.  705,  answered  to  October,  B.  c.  49.
Plntarch  and  Floras  forget  the  error  in  the  current  computation  of
time  when  they  state  that  Csesar  arrived  at  Brundisium  at  the  winter
solstice. See  Fischer,  R.  Z.  p.  273.

236  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XVI.

the  solemn  rites  of  the  great  Latin  festival  on
He  resigns  the  the  Alban  mount ;  and  thus,  at  the  mo-
•ndiqwin to  ment  of  drawing  his  sword,  he  proclaimed
Bru"|ishfm,  himself  in  the  face  of  gods  and  men  the
B!c.'*8. '  supreme  impersonation  of  the  laws.  It
was  by  this  ceremony  that  the  chief  magistrate  of
the  republic  was  wont  to  invoke  the  divine  favour
before  arming  to  encounter  the  national  foes ;  and
its  celebration  now  seemed  to  denounce  Pompeius,
with  his  Oriental  allies,  as  a  foreign  enemy.  As  soon
as  the  sacrifice  was  completed  the  dictator  abdicated
his  extraordinary  office,  only  eleven  days  after  he
had  entered  upon  it.1  He  had  already  summoned
his  veterans  to  attend  him  at  Brundisium,  and  he
went  forth  to  the  decisive  conflict  amidst  the  accla-
mations of  the  people;  but  their  applause  was
mingled  with  painful  presentiments,  and  at  the  last
moment  they  earnestly  entreated  him  to  bring  the
struggle  to  a  peaceful  termination.  Every  eye  was
bent  on  the  fatal  field,  where  legion  should  be
matched  against  legion,  pile  against  pile,  and  eagle
against  eagle.2  The  antagonists  had  assumed  an
attitude  of  personal  defiance ;  the  names  of  Senate
and  People  had  sunk  into  ominous  oblivion.  Caesar
and  Pompeius  were  now  the  exclusive  watchwords  of
the  contending  parties  ;  even  the  children  playing  in
the  streets  divided  themselves  into  Caesareans  and
Pompeians.3

The  judgment  and  ability  which  Caesar  manifested
comparison  of  throughout  these  proceedings  must  raise  his
n^Voccupfed  estimation  as  a  statesman  to  the  highest
^ofws™"1  pitch.  He  who  had  crossed  the  Eubicon
adversaries.  ^  foe  beginning  of  the  year,  in  defiance  of

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  2. ;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  48. ;  Plut.  Cas.  37.,  Zonar.
X.  8.

2  Lucan,  i.  6. :

"  Infestisque  obvia  signis
Signa,  pares  aquilas  et  pila  minantia  pilis."
*  Dion,  xli.  39.

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIIIE.  237

law  and  authority,  and  daringly  confronted  the  go-
vernment of  his  country,  backed  as  it  was  by  the
general  opinion  of  his  order,  had  now  completely
turned  against  his  opponents  the  current  of  public  feel-
ing. The  moral  victory  he  had  gained  over  them  was
even  more  complete  than  the  triumph  of  his  arms.
He  was  now  the  consul  of  the  republic,  legitimately
elected  and  duly  invested  with  full  powers.  Through-
out the  empire  there  were  vast  numbers  of  citizens
who  would  bow  implicitly  to  the  wielder  of  this
formal  authority.  There  were  many  cities  which
would  shut  their  gates  against  any  party  which
opposed  him,  without  asking  a  question  as  to  the
substantial  justice  of  its  cause.1  On  the  other  hand,
the  Pompeians  acknowledged  by  their  own  conduct
that  they  had  ceased  to  retain  the  government  of
Kome.  In  Epirus,  though  there  were  two  hundred
senators  in  their  camp,  they  dared  not  enact  a  law  or
hold  an  election,  or  confer  the  imperium.  They  had
neither  curies  nor  centuries,  nor  comitia;  and  the
consuls,  praetors,  and  quaestors,  who  had  sailed  from
the  shores  of  Italy,  sank  in  the  next  year  into  pro-
consuls, propraetors  and  proquaestors.2  The  repre-

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  12.:  "Uli  se  daturos  negare,  neque  portas  consuli
praeclnsuros,  neque  sibi  judicium  sumpturos  contra  atque  omnis  Italia
populusque  Romanus  judicavisset."

z  Dion,  xli.  43.  This  writer  gives  a  confused  account  of  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  Pompeians,  or  rather  the  proceedings  themselves
were  confused  and  inconsistent.  He  says  that  though,  as  some  affirm,
there  were  200  senators  in  the  camp,  together  with  the  consuls,  and
though  they  consecrated  a  spot  of  ground  for  taking  the  auspices
preliminary  to  an  election,  though  they  possessed  a  legitimate  sem-
blance of  the  Roman  people,  and  even  of  the  city  itself,  yet  they  did
not  proceed  to  make  any  election  of  public  magistrates,  because  the
consuls  had  not  proposed  a  lex  curiata.  The  proceedings  then  above
mentioned,  if  they  really  took  place,  were  a  mere  imposition :  the
Pompeian  chieftains  preferred  the  retention  of  their  military  com-
mands by  a  mere  change  of  title,  to  going  through  even  the  bare
forms  of  an  election.  Lucan  (v.  init.),  and  Appian  (ii.  50.),  pre-
serve the  popular  arguments  by  which  it  was  sought  to  give  a  con-
stitutional colour  to  these  informal  proceedings ;  but  the  alleged
precedent  of  Camillus  was  far  from  the  purpose.  It  is  probable  thtu

238  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvi.

sentative  of  the  people  had  become  the  guardian  of
precedent  and  order ;  while  the  champion  of  the
aristocracy  derived  his  unauthorized  prerogatives
from  the  suffrage  or  the  passions  of  a  turbulent
camp.  The  position  of  the  rivals  was  thus  exactly
reversed,  and  with  it,  in  the  eyes  of  a  nation  of
formalists,  the  right  seemed  to  be  reversed  also.

Caesar's  senate  was  not  less  numerous  than  his  rival's,  notwithstanding
the  sneer  of  the  poet:

"  Libyae  squalentibus  arvis
Corio  Cwsarei  cecidit  pars  magna  Senatns."

A.U.706-B.C.48. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  239

CHAPTER  XVII.

The  senatorial  party  assemble  at  Thessalonica. — Review  of  their
forces  and  position. — Caesar  crosses  over  to  Epirus. — Pompeius
throws  himself  before  Dyrrhachium. — Maritime  operations  of
Bibnlus:  his  mortification  and  death. — Sedition  in  Italy,  and
death  of  Caelius. — Antonius  crosses  over  to  Epirus  with  rein-
forcements.— Caesar  blockades  Pompeius  within  his  lines. —
Operations  in  Macedonia  and  Greece. — Appius  Claudius  consults
the  oradc  of  Delphi. — Caesar  is  baffled  in  his  attack  on  Pompeios,
and  withdraws  into  Thessaly. — Pompeius  follows,  and  effects  a
junction  with  Scipio. — Gives  battle  at  Pharsalia. — Rout  of  the
Senatorial  forces. — Flight  of  Pompeius  :  death  of  Domitius:
surrender  of  M.  Brutus  (Jan. — Aug.  A.U.  706,  B. c.  48.)

POMPEIUS  had  no  sooner  placed  the  sea  between  his

followers  and  the  cherished  soil  of  Italy,

than  he  began  to  develop  the  military  plans  of*™/*™

,  . , i i j i  j-I  i TT ofPompehu.

which  he  had  long  meditated  in  secret.  He
had  no  further  occasion  to  practise  reserve.  The
consuls  and  their  party  were  now  really  at  his  mercy ;
they  could  not  dispense  with  his  services,  for  once
removed  from  the  centre  of  government,  their  autho-
rity in  the  camp  was  merely  nominal.  The  rulers  of
the  allied  and  dependent  states  of  the  East  owed
their  thrones  to  the  conqueror  of  Mithridates.  While
only  distant  and  doubtful  rumours  had  reached  them
of  Caesar's  exploits  on  the  shores  of  the  Western
Ocean,  they  had  before  their  eyes  sensible  proofs  that
his  rival  was  the  greatest  captain  and  most  powerful
statesman  in  the  world.  Gratitude  and  fear  there-
fore equally  conspired  to  urge  them  to  obey  his
summons,  when  he  appointed  Thessalonica  for  the
rendezvous  of  his  forces.  Deiotarus  and  Dorilaus,
princes  of  Gralatia,  Rhascupolis  and  Sadala  of  Thrace,
Tarcondimotus  of  Cilicia,  Ariobarzanes  of  Cappa-
docia,  Antiochus  of  Commagene,  were  among  the

240  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  rm.

most  conspicuous  of  the  foreign  chieftains  who
flocked  to  his  standard.1  Each  of  them  was  attended
by  a  select  body  of  horsemen  from  his  own  country.
Among  the  Oriental  allies,  Caesar  enumerates  only
the  cavalry,  the  bowmen  and  the  slingers,  who  formed
the  ordinary  auxiliary  force  to  the  main  body  of  the
legionaries.2  But  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  most
of  the  tributary  states  and  sovereigns  of  the  east  fur-
nished also  large  contingents  of  foot-soldiers.  These,
however,  were  for  the  most  part  ill  equipped  and
worse  disciplined,  and  in  the  enumeration  of  com-
batants it  was  not  commonly  the  practice  of  the
Koman  military  writers  to  take  any  special  account,
of  them.3  The  senators  and  knights  served  also  in
large  numbers  on  horseback.  A  body  of  five  hundred
Eoman  cavalry,  which  had  been  left  at  Alexandria
by  Grabinius  to  maintain  or  watch  the  power  of
Ptolemaeus,  was  brought  by  Cn.  Pompeius,  the  tri-
umvir's eldest  son,  who  had  armed,  moreover,  eight
hundred  of  his  slaves  and  labourers  from  the  exten-
sive estates  belonging  to  his  family.  But  the  main
strength  of  the  army  consisted,  of  course,  in  the
legionary  infantry.  Five  legions  had  been  carried
over  from  Italy ;  a  sixth  was  formed  by  the  \mion  of
the  two  incomplete  divisions  which  Cato  had  com-
manded in  Sicily ;  a  seventh  was  raised  from  the
veterans  whom  Sulla,  Lucullus,  and  their  successors
had  settled  in  Macedonia  and  Crete ;  two  more  had

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  4.;  Veil.  ii.  51.

2  Caesar  computes  the  cavalry  at  7000,  the  slingers  and  bowmen
at  4000,  bearing  iu  each  case  an  unusually  large  proportion  to  the
legionary  infantry.

s  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  70.  Lucan  (vii.  360.)  dwells  emphatically  on
the  numbers  of  these  Oriental  allies,  and  compares  their  variety  to
the  forces  of  Cyrus,  Xerxes,  and  Agamemnon  (iii.  28-4.).  Not  to  in-
sist on  the  testimony  of  the  rhetorical  poet,  we  have  similar  evidence
in  Cicero's  letters;  and  Appian  says  plainly  %Qvtffi  re  iratrt  KO\  ffrpa
•nftois  teal  Paun\evo-i  K<XI  Swdffrais  Kal  w6\(fft  fypaipe  Kurd  trirouSi)j»  on
SiWiro  (KaffTos  els  rb>  ir6\tfwv  av^ffxiv  (B.C.  ii.  38.).  Such  troops
conld  not,  of  course,  be  opposed  to  Csesar's  veterans  in  the  field,  but
they  might  bo  serviceable  in  many  operations  of  war.

•  .U.706-B.C.4S.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  241

been  hastily  levied  by  Lentulus  among  the  citizens
of  the  republic  in  the  province  of  Asia.  The
strength  of  these  divisions  had  been  considerably
increased  by  the  addition  of  supplemental  or  auxiliary
cohorts  of  Achaians,  Boeotians,  Epirotes  and  Thessa-
lians.  Scipio,  who  had  gone  forth  to  his  appointed
province  of  Syria,  was  expected  to  return  with  the
two  legions  stationed  on  that  frontier.  The  name  of
Pompeius  might  be  deemed  sufficiently  terrible  to
curb  the  audacity  of  the  Parthians ;  but  Orodes  had
presumed  to  negotiate  for  the  cession  of  Syria  as  the
price  of  his  active  alliance,  and  Lucceius  Hirrus  was
despatched  on  a  mission  to  amuse  his  vanity  while
he  solicited  his  favours.1  To  these  forces  is  to  be
added  the  detachment  of  C.  Antonius  recently  cap-
tured by  Octavius.

These  armed  multitudes,  to  which  Caesar's  enume-
ration is  confined,  were  quite  as  large  as  Hi.naTmi
could  be  conveniently  supported  or  ma-  armamenu-
uoeuvred,  according  to  the  principles  and  habits  of
ancient  warfare.  Though  composed  partly  of  strange
and  discordant  elements,  partly  of  untrained  levies,
they  might  form,  in  the  hands  of  skilful  officers,  a
military  power  more  formidable  than  any  the  world
had  yet  seen.  Their  numbers  may  be  stated  very
moderately  at  eighty  or  ninety  thousand  men.2
Pompeius  employed  himself  in  exercising  them  to-
gether with  the  utmost  diligence.  He  condescended
to  go  through  the  severe  discipline  of  the  legionary  in
person,  hurling  the  pilum  and  brandishing  the  sword,
on  horseback  and  on  foot,  and  he  displayed,  it  was
said,  though  fifty-eight  years  of  age,  the  strength
and  ardour  of  a  young  recruit.3  At  the  same  time
every  exertion  was  made  to  collect  magazines  of

1  CJBS.  B.  C.  iii.  82. ;  Dion,  xli.  55.

2  Eleven  legions  might  amount  to  60,000  men. The  light  troops
and  cavalry  were  above  1 1,000. The  supplemental  cohorts  could
hardly  be  less  than  20,000  more.

•  Plut.  Pomp.  64.
VOL.  II.  K

242  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XVIT.

provisions  and  warlike  stores,  while  a  fleet  of  five
hundred  vessels  of  war,  and  an  infinite  number  of
transports,  contributed  by  every  naval  power  in  the
eastern  seas1,  was  placed  under  the  command  of
Bibulus,  and  divided  into  several  squadrons  to  watch
every  harbour  from  which  the  enemy  might  issue
forth,  or  at  which  he  might  attempt  to  make  good
his  landing.2

The  overwhelming  naval  force  which  Pompeius
Thenobiei  possessed  enabled  him  undoubtedly  to
Pompeii)*-,  throw  reinforcements  upon  any  coast  where

c»mp. High -  . .  f . , . J .

estimation his  interests  were  assailed  by  the  enemy.

in  which  T-»  i  11  11  • i  i

Domitiu.  is But  he  would  not  detach  a  single  vessel  or

held  among  .  °

them.  a  single  cohort  to  the  reliet  ot  his  provinces

or  his  legions.  He  required  all  his  adherents  to  seek
him  in  the  position  in  which  he  had  determined  to
abide  the  attack,  and  looked  on  with  apparent  apathy
while  his  best  generals  and  his  amplest  resources
were  torn  from  him.  Indeed  his  opponent's  libe-
rality restored  to  him  the  officers  whom  his  own
negligence  had  allowed  to  fall  into  their  hands.
Afranius  had  followed  the  example  of  Domitius  and
Vibullius,  in  turning  his  arms  once  more  against  the
conqueror  to  whom  he  owed  his  freedom.  The
menaces  of  the  senate  left  them,  perhaps,  no  choice
but  to  take  a  decided  part  on  the  one  side  or  the
other.  But  Pompeius  was  exceedingly  jealous  of  his
principal  officers,  especially  of  such  as  had  the  con-
fidence of  his  party.  Though  compelled  to  entrust
to  them  the  most  important  commands  in  his  army,

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  ix.  9.: "  Omnis  hsec  classis  Alexandria,  Colchis,
Tyro,  Sidone,  Arado,  Cypro,  Pamphylia,  Lycia,  Rhodo,  Chio,  By-
zantio,  Lesbo,  Smyrna,  Mileto,  Coo,  ad  intercludendos  commeatus
Italise  et  ad  oocupandas  frumentarias  provincias  comparator."

2  Cses.  B.  C.  iii.  5. Cic.  (ad  Att.  x.  8.),  in  one  of  his  fits  of  confi-
dence in  Pompeius's  preparations:  "  Cujus  omne  consilium  Themi-
stocleum  est. Existimat  enim  qni  mare  teneat,  eum necesse  esse
rerum  potiri.  Itaque  nunquam  id  egit,  ut  Hispanise  per  se  tenerentur:
nayalis  apparatus  ei  semper  antiquissima  cora  fait. Navigabit  igitnr.
quum  erit  tenipus,  maximis  cla«sibti8,  et  ad  Italiam  accedet."

4.D.706-B.C.4S.  TTXDER THE EMPIRE.  243

he  was  by  no  means  disposed  to  listen  to  their  coun-
sels. The  fortune  of  war  which  had  dislodged  the
partisans  of  the  senate  from  so  many  of  the  positions
they  had  undertaken  to  defend,  had  now  assembled
at  Thessalonica  all  the  great  leaders  of  the  aristo-
cratic faction.  Various  and  conflicting  as  were  their
opinions  on  the  state  of  affairs,  they  all  seemed  to
agree  in  their  dislike  and  distrust  of  the  champion
under  whom  they  were  forced  to  array  themselves.
It  was  with  great  reluctance  that  Domitius  resorted
to  Thessalonica  after  his  escape  from  Massilia.  His
leader's  desertion  of  him  at  Corfinium  still  rankled  in
his  bosom  ;  he  felt  that  it  was  only  by  his  own  gallant
self-devotion  that  the  consuls,  the  senate,  and  Pom-
peius  himself,  had  been  enabled  to  escape  from  Italy  ;
this  was  a  service  he  never  permitted  his  associates  to
forget,  nor  was  his  temper  such  as  to  brook  an
inferior  command.  But  he  found  himself  naturally
in  his  place  at  the  head  of  the  proudest  and  most
exclusive  section  of  the  nobles,  and  in  their  company
he  ridiculed  the  airs  of  sovereignty  assumed  by  Pom-
peius  among  the  petty  potentates  whom  he  had  sum-
moned to  his  standard.1

Cicero  also  had  found  his  way  to  the  head-quar-
ters of  his  friends. How  he  evaded the
vigilance  of  Antonius  does  not  appear. We

His  discontent

•il-J  f  T^ 1

must  suppose  that  he  withdrew  from  Italy  »n<i  m-t
with  the  consent,  if  not  the  express  per-
mission of  Caesar.  A  crafty  politician  might  foresee
that  the  presence  of  so  discontented  a  spirit  in  the
hostile  camp  would  furnish  it  with  the  seeds  of  dis-
sension rather  than  any  accession  of  strength.  From
the  moment  of  his  arrival  at  Thessalonica,  Cicero
seems  to  have  found  himself  ill  at  ease  under  the
control  of  a  military  chieftain.  His  tardy  arrival
was  made  a  subject  of  reproach  ;  the  absence  of
some  of  his  relatives  gave  colour  to  insinuations

1  Plut.  Pomp.  67.
R  2

244  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Tvn.

against  his  sincerity,  which  were  hardly  dispelled
even  by  the  devotion  to  the  cause  manifested  by  his
brother  Quintus,  who  abandoned  his  old  patron  and
general  for  the  sake  of  his  party.  But  Cicero  re-
venged himself  as  he  best  might  by  wreaking  many
a  bitter  jest  upon  the  apparent  imbecility  of  his
traducers.1  When  Pompeius  taunted  him  with  having
made  his  appearance  among  them  so  late,  How  can
I  be  said  to  have  come  late,  he  replied,  when  I  find
nothing  in  readiness  among  you  ?  He  was  striving
to  conceal  from  himself  how  little  satisfied  he  was
with  his  own  determination  to  cling  to  a  faction  from
which  he  could  expect  no  good  to  his  country.

The  despair  a  sensible  and  practical  statesman
cato  possesses  like  Cicero  felt  for  the  welfare  of  the  re-
inthVcouS  public,  even  in  the  event  of  the  party  with
of  ws  party,  which  he  acted  being  successful  in  the
struggle  to  preserve  its  ascendency,  shows  how  de-
spised and  powerless  was  that  small  but  honourable
section  of  which  Cato  and  Brutus  were  the  leaders.
Their  names  have,  indeed,  descended  to  us  surrounded
with  a  halo  of  glory,  for  they  were  the  purest  represen-
tatives of  a  cause  which  posterity  regarded  as  the
antagonist  of  the  tyranny  under  which  it  was  itself
suffering,  and  the  philosophical  creed  they  illustrated
by  their  life  and  practice  was  precisely  that  which
found  most  favour  with  the  generations  which  suc-
ceeded them.  But  it  is  evident  that  they  had  little
influence  upon  the  sentiments  of  their  own  contem-
poraries. Cato  had  acted  with  great  perverseness.
The  notion  of  arming  against  Caesar  he  had  from  the
first  denounced.  He  would  have  combated  him  in
the  forum.  He  delighted  in  the  confusion  of  the
popular  elections,  and  his  courage  never  rose  higher
than  when  he  found  himself  on  the  hustings,  raising
his  voice  above  the  clamour  of  the  multitude,  and

1  Plut.  Cic.  31.;  Macrob.  Saturn,  ii.  3.,  •vrhere  several  of  Cicero's
gibes  on  this  occasion  are  recorded.

V.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  245

defying  the  violence  of  tribunes  and  demagogues.  It
was  his  pride  to  shape  his  course  with  a  view  to  the  as-
sertion of  his  principles,  rather  than  the  attainment  of
their  triumph.  When  forced  to  follow  in  the  wake
of  the  senate,  he  continued  to  manifest  great  reluct-
ance to  taking  any  military  command.  The  govern-
ment of  Sicily  was  at  last  thrust  upon  him.  Pompeius,
no  doubt,  was  glad  to  be  quit  of  his  presence,  for  he
knew  that,  in  the  event  of  victory,  no  one  would  be
more  vigilant  in  circumscribing  his  authority  than
Cato.  But  his  precipitate  retreat  from  that  island,
contrary  to  every  expectation  of  friends  and  foes,  can
hardly  be  accounted  for,  except  as  the  indulgence  of
that  untractable  perversity  of  character  which  was
better  understood  by  his  contemporaries  than  by  their
posterity.  Nor  did  he  feel  any  shame  in  reappearing
in  the  camp  of  the  nobles,  where  he  seemed  to  be
wholly  unconscious  that  he  was  now  doubly  obnoxious,
both  as  an  impracticable  politician  and  an  imbecile
general.  On  one  point,  indeed,  his  dignified  humanity
shamed  the  ferocity  of  his  party  into  acquiescence  in
his  counsels.  At  his  instance  the  senate  passed  a
decree,  which  became,  however,  in  the  sequel  a  mere
empty  form,  that  no  city  should  be  sacked,  and  no
citizen  put  to  death,  unless  taken  with  arms  in  his
hands.1

But,  however  limited  the  influence  of  Cato  might
be  upon  the  adherents  of  the  same  cause,  it
was  at  least  all-powerful  with  his  nephew  M.  Brut™  t«
M.  Brutus. The  young  philosopher  had
never  forgotten  that  Pompeius  had  slain  his  father,
and,  devoted  as  he  was  by  family  and  temper  to  the
party  of  the  oligarchy,  he  had  nevertheless  sternly
abstained  from  joining  in  the  adulation  which  they
had  showered  upon  their  champion. But  now  his
haughty  reserve  was  overcome  by  the  claim  his  uncle

1  Plut.  Ponp.  65.,  Cat.  Mi*.  53,

246  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

made  upon  his  sense  of  public  duty.  He  offered  his
services  to  Pompeius.  Though  inclined  by  nature  to
study  and  peaceful  avocations  he  was  not  deficient  in
the  qualities  of  a  good  officer,  and  while  he  devoted
himself,  however  reluctantly,  to  the  business  he  had
undertaken,  he  seems  to  have  refrained  from  any  ex-
hibition of  restlessness  and  discontent.

Our  conception  of  the  character  of  Cato  would  be

incomplete  if  we  omitted  to  notice  a  domes  -
nuptiau  with  tic  incident  which  curiously  illustrates  it.

Cicero  had  left  his  wife  behind  him  at
Rome,  under  the  protection  of  his  son-in-law  Dola-
bella.  He  had  expressed,  indeed,  a  decent  sense  of
apprehension  at  what  might  befall  her,  thus  separated
from  a  husband,  whom  the  conqueror  might  be  dis-
posed to  regard  with  bitter  hostility ;  but,  undecided
as  he  was  in  respect  to  his  own  course,  he  thought  it
would  conduce  to  his  interests  to  show  such  ready
confidence  in  Caesar's  goodwill.  Pompeius,  on  the
other  hand,  who  had  already  transferred  to  his  new
wife  Cornelia  the  tender  affection  he  had  been  seen  to
bestow  upon  Julia,  seemed  to  distrust  the  security  of  his
own  camp  in  his  anxiety  for  her  safety,  and  had  sent  her
far  away  to  the  obscure  retreat  of  Lesbos.1  Cato,  how-
ever, on  his  part,  as  far  from  the  trickery  of  the  one,
as  from  the  timidity  of  the  other,  had  chosen  the  very
crisis  of  his  own  and  the  public  safety  to  marry,  or
rather  to  remarry  the  widow  of  Hortensius.  Marcia
had  already  been  espoused  to  him  at  an  earlier  period.
But  the  Roman  law  allowed  excessive  facility  of  di-
vorce; and  this  licence,  which  his  contemporaries
adopted  from  passion,  avarice,  or  caprice,  Cato  had
assumed  for  the  sake  of  gratifying,  not  himself,  but
his  friend.  Hortensius  was  childless ;  Marcia  had
proved  herself  fruitful ;  and  the  philosopher  gravely
transferred  the  mother  of  his  children  to  the  house-

1  Plut.  Pomp.  66.;  Dion,  xlii.  2.

A.0.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  247

hold  of  the  voluptuary.1  But  this  second  union,
after  answering  every  purpose  for  which  it  was  con-
tracted, had  been  dissolved  by  death  ;  and  the  matron,
however  faithful  she  had  proved  to  her  second  hus-
band, was  more  proud  of  the  name  of  her  first.2  She
proposed  that  they  should  be  reunited,  and  proved
the  genuineness  of  her  devotion  by  the  perils  which
she  sought  to  share.3  The  nuptials  were  solemn  and
private,  as  befitted  the  time  and  circumstances.4
Only  one  eye  was  deemed  worthy  of  witnessing  them :
Brutus  alone  might  attest  the  weakness  or  the
strength  of  Cato.5

Caesar  arrived  at  Brundisiuin  at  the  beginning  of
the  Roman  year,  and  he  had  probably  been

,  . '  , .-,1  _. .,, Ciesar  crosses

the  more  anxious  to  reach  the  coast  with-  overtoEpim.
out  loss  of  time,  as  the  season,  which  was
really  a  little  past  mid-autumn,  was  still  favourable
for  transporting  bis  army  across  the  sea.  He  had
summoned  twelve  legions  to  meet  him  at  the  place
of  embarkation,  but  their  numbers  were  far  from

1  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  '25. I  have  omitted  some  of  the  most  extraordi-
nary details  of  this  transaction. Caesar,  in  his  satire  which  he  de-
signated Anticato,  charged  the  philosopher  with  having  had  an  eye
to  the  great  wealth  which  Hortensius  had  left  to  his  widow  ;  but  we
may  trust,  perhaps,  to  Plutarch's  indignant  disclaimer:  Z/JMIOV  ydp
tirri T$  'Hpcue\(i fM\a.Kia.v ovfiSifciv «al Karriyopftv a.lo"XpoKfp$tiai>
Kdrcavos  (c.  52.).

2  Lucan,  ii.  343. :

"  Liceat  tumulo  scripsisse  Catonis
Marcia."

*  Lucan,  ii.  346  :

"  Non  me  Isetorum  sociam  rebusque  secundis
Accipis;  in  curas  venio  partemque  laborum.
Dii  mihi  castra  sequi."

It  seems,  however,  that  Cato  left  Marcia  in  Italy  to  superintend  his

domestic  affairs. Plut.  Lc.

*  Lucan,  ii.  365.:

"  Sicut  erat,  moesti  servans  lugubria  cultug.
Quoque  modo  natos  hoc  est  amplexa  maruum:
Non  soliti  luserc  sales,  nee  more  Sabino
Excepit  tristis  convicia  festa  maritus."

*  Lucan.  ii  371.:

"  Junguntur  taciti,  contentique  auspice  Bruto."

248  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

complete.  The  losses  of  so  many  campaigns  in  Gaul
and  Iberia,  and  latterly  the  fatigue  of  a  long  and
rapid  march  from  the  Ebro  to  the  Ionian  straits,
had  thinned  the  ranks  of  his  veterans,  while  the
troops  which  had  been  kept  in  quarters  on  the
Apulian  coast  had  suffered  from  its  autumnal  fevers,
and  were  weak  and  dispirited  through  sickness  and
inaction.1  All  the  vessels  that  could  be  collected  for
the  transport  of  these  forces  would  not  contain  more
than  fifteen  thousand  infantry  and  five  hundred
cavalry,  notwithstanding  that  the  baggage  was  left
behind ;  yet  this  small  number  comprised  the  com-
plements of  seven  legions.4  Before  embarking,  Cae-
sar harangued  his  soldiers,  declaring  that  he  was
now  demanding  of  them  the  last  sacrifice  he  should
have  to  require,  and  assuring  them  that  the  aban-
donment of  their  baggage  should  be  recompensed
by  rich  booty  and  a  munificent  largess.  They
replied  with  enthusiasm  that  his  orders  should  be
obeyed,  be  they  what  they  might.  On  the  second
day,  the  fifth  of  January,  the  expedition  came  safely
to  land,  near  a  place  called  Palaeste.3  The  pilots
had  selected  a  sheltered  beach  upon  which  their
vessels  could  be  run  with  safety,  though  surrounded
on  all  sides  by  the  dangerous  promontories  of  the
Ceraunian  mountains.  They  had  received  orders  to
avoid  the  harbours  on  the  coast,  which  were  all
understood  to  be  occupied  by  the  enemy:  but  the
construction  of  the  Eoman  galleys  gave  great  facili-
ties for  debarkation,  and  for  this  purpose  a  naval

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  2.:  "Multi  Gallicis  tot  bellis  defecerant,  longum-
qne iter ex Hispania  magnum numerum diminuerat, et gravis
autumnus  in  Apulia  circumque  Brundisium  omnem  exercitum  vale-
tudine  tentaverat."

2  Cajs.  B.C.  iii.  2—6.

*  Caes.  B.  C.  iii.  6.  The  reading  of  the  codices  is  Pharsalus  or
Pharsalia,  which  is  evidently  a  mistake  or  corruption.  Lucan  (iv.
460.)  supplies  the  name  adopted  in  the  text:

"Paliestinas  uncis  confixit  arenas."

1.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  249

armament  might  avail  itself  of  coves,  creeks,  and
sand-banks,  such  as  in  modern  times  are  only
accessible  to  the  light  craft  of  the  smuggler.

It cannot be supposed, however, that Caesar
trusted  entirely  to  fortune  in  thus  launch-

f  • j i  Tardy  activity

ing  upon  an  element  occupied  by  an  over-  <*.««  Pom-
whelming  naval  force.  While  completing
their  military  equipments  in  Macedonia,  his  ad-
versaries pretended  to  keep  him  at  bay  across  a
channel  forty  miles  in  width.  But  the  winter  was
advancing,  Caesar's  troops  were  scattered,  he  was
supposed  to  be  still  absent  himself  in  Spain ;  for  a
moment  the  vigilance  of  the  Pompeian  commanders
was  relaxed,  and  the  gates  of  the  East  were  left  un-
guarded. Caesar  was,  doubtless,  aware  that  Bibulus,
with  the  galleys,  an  hundred  and  ten  in  number,  which
he  retained  under  his  immediate  orders,  was  lying  in-
active at  Corcyra.  Nor  was  he  ignorant  that  another
hostile  squadron  was  stationed  at  Oricum,  at  no
great  distance  from  his  destined  landing-place.
Either  of  these  armaments  would  have  sufficed  to
destroy  his  defenceless  flotilla ;  but  the  police  of  the
seas  was  imperfectly  kept  by  the  naval  science  of  the
ancients ;  their  vessels  were  ill-adapted  for  cruising
through  variable  weather  ;  and  the  use  of  oars  acted
almost  like  steam  in  giving  wings  to  weakness,  and
baffling  the  vigilance  of  a  blockade.  Bibulus  was
deeply  mortified  at  an  exploit,  the  success  of  which
was  sure  to  be  attributed  to  his  own  remissness.
He  had  become  apprised  of  Caesar's  sudden  arrival
at  Brundisium  :  he  augured  the  lightning  speed  with
which  he  would  dash  across  the  straits,  and  he
hastened,  though  too  late,  to  intercept  him.  It  was
not,  however,  too  late  to  divide  the  invader's  forces,
and  make  it  impossible  either  for  a  second  detach-
ment to  cross  over,  or  for  the  first  to  return.  While  he
rushed  himself  to  sea,  he  had  sent  orders  to  all  his
officers  to  issue  simultaneously  from  their  stations  on

250  '  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

the  coast.  From  Corcyra  to  Salona  the  Ionian  gulf
was  swept  by  their  squadrons.  Caesar  on,  the  very
evening  of  his  landing  despatched  his  lieutenant
Fuh'us  Calenus  with  the  empty  transports  to  thread
the  hostile  armaments,  and  bring  over  his  remaining
forces  from  Brundisium.  But,  neglecting  to  take
advantage  of  the  night  breeze,  Calenus  was  descried
by  the  enemy,  and  thirty  of  the  returning  vessels
were  intercepted  and  burnt,  with  their  crews  on
board.  Octavius,  who  commanded  a  portion  of  the
Pompeian  fleet,  was  less  successful  in  an  attack  upon
Salona,  a  stronghold  of  Caesar's  in  Illyricum,  and
was  compelled  to  retreat  from  before  it  with  some
loss.  Bibulus  continued  to  keep  the  sea,  notwith-
standing the  approach  of  the  stormy  season,  and
although  Caesar's  operations  shut  him  out  from
nearly  every  port  on  the  coast  into  which  he  might
have  run  for  shelter.1

Pompeius  was  in  Macedonia,  and  had  hardly
Pompeius  received  information  of  his  rival's  unex-
Thlreafontea,  pected  landing  iu  Epirus,  while  Csesar  was
h"m«Sfbrfore  already  reducing  his  fortresses  and  dis-
Dyrrhachium.  persmg  j^g  garrisons.  The  citizens  of
Oricum  and  Apollonia  refused  to  shut  their
gates  against  the  consul  of  the  republic,  and  com-
pelled the  Pompeian  lieutenants,  Torquatus  and
Staberius,  to  withdraw  their  forces.  Several  other
towns  soon  followed  this  example,  and,  in  the  course
of  a  few  days,  the  states  of  Epirus  sent  a  formal
deputation  to  declare  their  submission  to  the  invader
who  bore  the  insignia  of  the  Koman  government.2
Pompeius  was  now  in  full  march  for  Dyrrhachium,
which  he  was  exceedingly  anxious  to  save  from  the
enemy.  The  news  of  his  repeated  disasters  met  him
at  each  successive  stage  of  his  advance,  and  such
terror  did  the  name  of  Caesar  strike  into  the  minds

1  Ca*.  B.C.  iii.  7—9.  *  Cos.  B.C.  iii.  12.

A.0.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  251

of  his  soldiers,  that  they  began  already  to  melt  away
from  him,  as  they  had  abandoned  his  lieutenants  in
Italy  the  year  before.  Drooping  and  straggling,
and  throwing  away  their  arms,  the  march  of  the
Pompeian  legions  began  to  assume  the  appearance
of  a  flight.  Labienus  came  forward  to  check  the
progress  of  desertion,  by  taking  the  solemn  military
oath  of  adherence  and  obedience  to  the  general.
The  formula  was  successively  tendered  to  the  princ*-
pal  officers,  to  the  tribunes,  to  the  centurions,  and
the  legionaries.  This  appeal  to  the  spirit  of  disci-
pline seems  to  have  revived  the  courage  of  the
soldiery.  Dyrrhachium  was  effectually  covered  by
the  lines  behind  which  the  Pompeians  now  en-
trenched themselves  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Apsus ;
while  Caesar,  finding  his  scanty  forces  insufficient  to
assail  them,  took  up  his  position  on  the  left  to  pro-
tect the  towns  in  his  rear  which  had  submitted  to
him,  and  there  resolved  to  pass  the  winter  under
canvas.

At  this  crisis,  attempts  were  still  made on  each
side  to  delude  the  other  by  negotiations.

r\  i  j ii_  j- .•  f TT'i i The  Pompeian

Caesar  employed  the  mediation  ot  Vibul-  adm^u  at-
lius,  the  Pompeian  officer  whom  he  had  present  the
twice  captured,  first  at  Corfinium,  and  c«.ar'«  lecond
again  in  Spain.  The  terms  which  he  of-
fered were  that  each  chieftain  should  disband  his
troops  simultaneously,  and  refer  the  adjustment  of
their  disputes  to  the  senate  and  people  ;  an  arrange-
ment which  had  by  this  time  become  more  than  ever
impracticable.  Caesar's  only  object  in  proposing  it
must  have  been  to  gain  time  for  the  arrival  of  rein-
forcements. On  the  other  hand,  Bibulus  and  his
colleague,  being  now  excluded  from  almost  every
point  of  the  coast,  and  severely  harassed  by  the
weather  and  want  of  necessaries  at  sea,  were  anxious
to  conclude  an  armistice  for  their  own  immediate  con-
venience. But  Caesar  understood  their  object,  and

252  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

though  Calenus  was  still  prevented  from  joining  him
with  the  expected  succours,  he  refused  to  listen  to
their  proposals.  Meanwhile,  the  fatigues  of  his  naval
campaign,  joined  to  his  excessive  mortification  at
Caesar  having  so  narrowly  escaped  him,  had  com-
pletely broken  the  health  of  the  Pompeian  com-
mander. He  fell  a  sacrifice  to  his  anxiety  to  redeem
his  character  for  vigilance  or  fidelity  with  the  party
which  had  entrusted  to  him  so  important  a  com-
mand.1 He  showed,  indeed,  ferocity  enough  to  satisfy
the  most  blood-thirsty  of  the  faction,  but  he  had  no
other  claim  on  their  approbation.  The  only  service
he  had  performed  was  to  disperse  his  vessels  up  and
down  the  coast  of  Epirus,  so  as  to  watch  every  creek
and  strand  upon  which  Caesar's  second  division  might
seek  to  effect  a  landing.  Caesar  himself  complained  that
Antonius,  whom  he  had  appointed  to  direct  the  opera-
tion, neglected  more  than  one  favourable  opportunity
of  making  the  passage.  He  might  have  made  a  feint
to  draw  off  the  enemy's  attention,  and  have  selected  a
point  for  running  on  shore  where  the  numbers  of  his
opponents  would  be  insufficient  to  cope  with  him.
Upon  the  death  of  Bibulus,  the  several  detachments
of  the  collective  fleet  seem  to  have  been  left  at  the
disposal  of  their  respective  commanders.  Pompeius
was  apparently  too  much  disconcerted  by  the  preca-
rious position  of  his  affairs  to  pay  due  attention  to
what  was  after  all  the  point  most  important  for  his
interests,  the  prevention  of  the  junction  of  Caesar's
two  divisions.  L.  Scribonius  Libo,  who  had  com-
manded under  Bibulus  a  detachment  of  fifty  ships,
now  took  upon  himself  to  act  with  this  force  inde-
pendently. He  quitted  the  coast  of  Epirus,  and,
crossing  the  straits,  established  a  blockade  of  Brun-
disium,  taking  possession  of  the  island  which  lay  at
the  entrance  of  the  harbour,  and  cruising  before  it

1  Caes.  B.C  in.  18.

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  253

with  a  force  which  alone  was  more  numerous  than
any  Antonius  could  bring  against  it.  One  great
difficulty  which  the  ancients  experienced  in  conduct-
ing operations  of  this  kind  lay  in  the  incapacity  of
their  vessels  for  sufficient  stowage  of  provisions  and
water.  They  were  unable  to  keep  the  sea  with  a  view
to  effectual  observation.  The  numerous  flotillas  which
still  lingered  along  the  shores  of  the  opposite  coast
could  not  have  been  better  employed  than  in  mini-
stering to  the  necessities  of  the  blockading  squadron.
But  Libo's  manoeuvre,  far  bolder  and  more  decisive
than  any  of  Bibulus,  or  even  of  Pompeius,  failed
from  the  want  of  co-operation.  He  was  deceived
indeed  with  the  idea  that  he  could  maintain  himself
by  the  possession  of  the  little  island  he  had  seized,
and  even  assured  Pompeius  that  he  might  withdraw
the  rest  of  his  fleet  into  port,  and  trust  to  him  alone
to  frustrate  the  passage  of  the  Csesareans.  Antonius,
however,  disposed  his  cavalry  skilfully  along  the  coast
to  prevent  any  of  Libo's  foragers  landing  in  quest  of
water  and  provisions,  and  the  Pompeian  was  com-
pelled at  last  to  abandon  his  position,  and  resort  once
more  to  the  same  feeble  and  inefficient  tactics  which
had  rendered  Bibulus  contemptible.1

Some  months  had  been  consumed  in  these  desul-
tory manoeuvres,  and  great  must  have  been

r\  » •  A-  i u •  L Jf  Intrigued  of

Caesars  impatience  at  being  prevented  trom  M.c»uusat
acting  more  boldly  by  the absence  of  so
large  a  portion  of  his  forces. While  in  this  state  of
suspense  and  comparative  inactivity,  his  anxiety  must
have  sorely  increased  on  hearing  of  the  progress  of
an  attempt  at  counter-revolution  in  Rome  and  Italy.
Cicero's correspondence has  preserved to us the
record  of  the  zeal  with  which  M.  Caelius  Rufus  had
advocated  Caesar's  cause  at  the  period  of  his  invading
Italy. He  had used  his  best  endeavours  to  cajole

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  23,24.

254  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

Cicero  into  acquiescence  in  the  proconsul's  views,  and
his  old  intimacy  with  his  correspondent,  and  the
terms  of  playful  familiarity  in  which  he  addressed
him,  pointed  him  out  as  the  likeliest  person  to  sway
that  vacillating  politician.1  Caelius  had  been  only  a
late  convert  to  Caesar's  party.  As  one  of  the  tribunes
in  the  time  of  Pompeius's  sole  consulship,  he  had
exerted  himself  in  defence  of  Milo,  and  had  asserted
on  that  occasion  the  principles  of  the  most  violent
section  of  the  oligarchs.  But  he  seems  to  have  been
won  over  to  the  popular  side  by  the  seductions  of
Curio,  whom  he  was  persuaded  to  accompany  on  the
famous  expedition  to  Caesar's  camp  at  Ariminum.
The  proconsul's  blandishments  may  have  completed
the  work  of  conversion ;  and  from  that  period,  as  we
have  seen,  Caelius  devoted  his  talents,  which  were  con-
siderable, to  the  establishment  of  the  new  order  of
things.  Cassar  had  rewarded  him  by  obtaining  for
him  the  election  to  the  praetorship,  second  in  dignity;
the  chair  of  the  praetor  of  the  city  was  occupied  at
the  same  time  by  C.  Trebonius,  whose  fidelity  had
been  longer  tried,  and  whose  services  were  un-
doubtedly more  conspicuous.  Caelius,  witty,  vain,
and  dissolute,  was  dissatisfied  with  this  post,  and
sought  to  raise  himself  to  higher  distinctions  by
studying  the  gratification  of  the  popular  wishes.2
He  declared  with  plausible  eloquence  that  Caesar'b
enactments  had  not  gone  far  enough  for  the  relief  of
the  needy  citizens.  He  promised  to  lend  all  the
sanction  of  his  office  to  any  debtor  who  should  appeal
against  the  decisions  of  his  colleague,  according  to  the
tenor  of  the  recent  enactments  for  the  adjustment  of
debts.  He  even  proposed  himself  a  new  law  for  the
greater  relief  of  the  debtor  by  the  spoliation  of  his
creditor.  The  multitude  were  well  pleased  with  these

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  viii.  15 — 17.,  comp.  ad  Dio.  ii.  Ifi.
1  Cffis.  B.C.  iii.  20,  21.;  Liv.  Epit.  cxi.;  Dion,  xlii.  23,  24.; Veil.
ii.  68.

4.tr.706-n.c.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  255

revolutionary  proceedings,  and  it  became  necessary
for  the  consul  and  higher  magistrates  at  once  to
resist  such  democratical  encroachments.  Cselius  was
hurried  forward  on  his  career  by  the  still  increasing
demands  of  the  passions  he  had  evoked.  Tumults
arose  in  the  city ;  the  consul  applied  to  the  senate  for
unusual  powers ;  it  was  decreed  that  Caelius  should  be
suspended  from  his  functions,  and  the  execution  of
this  decree  was  enforced  with  a  high  hand,  which
controlled  all  opposition,  and  drove  the  discomfited
demagogue  from  his  chair  of  office.  Baffled  in  his
schemes  and  unprepared  with  resources,  he  now  pro-
fessed his  intention  of  appealing  personally  to
Caesar,  and  under  this  pretence  he  left  the  city,  to
repair  the  web  of  his  intrigues  in  greater  security  at
a  distance.

Though  the  consul  had  been  able  to  maintain
the  peace  of  the  city  with  the  opportune  neatumputo
assistance  of  a  body  of  soldiers  which  was  rec«onnaJEa'>nst
passing  through  at  the  time  on  its  way  hTc^n/uncffdn
into  Gaul,  Caelius,  it  appears,  had  per-  withMll°-
suaded  himself  that  Caesar's  government  had  already
fallen  into  general  odium  there,  and  that,  with  the
exception  of  a  wretched  pack  of  money-lenders,
the  whole  population  was  prepared  to  rise  against
his  authority.  It  was  only  the  dread,  he  argued,
of  the  vengeance  which  Pompeius  had  vowed  to
wreak  upon  all  who  had  ever  submitted  to  his
rival,  that  caused  any  delay  in  effecting  a  counter-
revolution. New  views  of  ambition  began  to  open
upon  him.  Instead  of  inviting  Pompeius  to  has-
ten across  the  sea  and  recover  Italy  and  Eome,
while  his  enemy  would  be  detained  by  the  want
of  ships  from  following  him,  he  left  him  to
the  chances  of  an  encounter,  which,  from  his
knowledge  of  Caesar's  veterans,  he  believed  would
be  unfavourable,  if  not  fatal  to  him,  while  he
conceived  the  design  of  seizing  the  prize  him-

256  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn

self.1  Milo,  who,  as  the  only  political  exile  ex-
cepted  from  the  late  amnesty,  had  obvious  grounds
of  indignation  against  Caesar,  had  taken  advantage
of  the  disturbed  state  of  affairs  to  come  secretly
into  Italy,  and  call  to  his  standard  the  remnant  of
the  armed  bands  with  which  he  had  been  wont  to
domineer  over  the  factions  of  the  city.  Cselius  had
been  allowed  to  leave  Rome  unmolested,  and  was
already  engaged  in  secret  intrigues  with  this  rash
adventurer ;  but  the  consul  had  directed  one  of  the
tribunes  to  attend  upon  him  and  observe  his  move-
ments. His  resorting  to  Campania  roused  sus-
picion, and  he  was  summoned  back  to  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  city;  but  in  deference  to  his
noble  birth  and  the  high  office  which  he  still
claimed,  the  watch  which  was  kept  over  him  was
relaxed,  and  still  more  so,  perhaps,  after  the  speedy
defeat  of  Milo  before  Capua.  Cselius  effected  his
escape,  and  followed  the  traces  of  his  new  confede-
rate in  the  Lucanian  mountains.  Here  Milo  was
striving  to  kindle  heath  and  forest  with  the  flame
of  predatory  insurrection.  At  the  same  time  he
addressed  his  solicitations,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the
municipal  authorities  in  the  neighbouring  towns,
asserting  that  he  was  acting  under  the  direction  of
Pompeius  and  Bibulus,  while  he  held  out,  on  the
other,  to  the  needy  and  profligate  the  usual  pro-
mises of  a  revolutionary  agitator.  But  his  career
was  speedily  cut  short;  for  in  an  attempt  to  seize
the  town  of  Cosa  he  was  slain  by  the  blow  of  a
stone  hurled  from  the  walls.  Soon  afterwards
Cselius  entered  Thurii  unarmed ;  his  levity  prompted
him,  alone  and  defenceless,  to  make  another  effort;

1  See  a  letter  from  Caelius  to  Cicero,  written  apparently  at  the  mo-
ment of  his  leaving  Rome.  Cic.  ad  Div.  viii.  17.:  "Quod  si  timor
vcstra  crudelitatis  non  esset,  ejecti  jam  pridem  hinc  essemus.  Nam
hie  prater  foeneratores  paucos,  nee  homo  nee  ordo  quisquam  est,  nisi
1'ompeianus  ....  vestras  copias  non  novi:  nostri  valde  depugnare  et
facile  algere  et  esurire  consnerunt."

1.0.706-8.0.48. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  257

but  when  he  tried  to  corrupt  the  fidelity  of  some
Gaulish  and  Spanish  horse  whom  Caesar  had  sta-
tioned there,  they  turned  round  upon  him  with
indignation  and  slew  him.  With  the  death  of  the
two  chieftains  the  seeds  of  this  paltry  insurrection
were  scattered  to  the  winds.1

While  these  ineffectual  movements  in  the  interest
of  the  Optimates  were  in  progress  in  Italy, c»»»r  at-

,, .  .  ,'11 1  i  • i- temptatocroM

their  great  champion  still  kept  close  m  his  theAdriaticin

._ {_ , .  .  a  violent  tem-

quarters  at  Dyrrhachmm,  not  venturing  to  pe«.
trust  his  half-trained  forces  in  conflict  with  Caesar's
veterans.  The  withdrawal  of  Libo's  squadron  from
the  coast  of  Apulia  had  left  open  the  harbour  of
Brundisium.  Antonius  was  well  aware  of  his  com-
mander's impatience  to  combine  all  his  forces  to-
gether on  the  other  side  of  the  channel :  nor  was  he
or  the  other  officers  in  command  at  all  deficient  in-
zeal  to  perform  the  duty  expected  of  them.  But
once  baffled  in  their  attempt  to  effect  the  passage,
and  awed  perhaps  by  the  savage  vengeance  which
Bibulus  had  wreaked  upon  his  captives,  they  let  slip
more  than  one  opportunity  of  embarking  with  a
favourable  wind.  The  winter  was  now  nearly  over,
and  with  the  prevalence  of  milder  weather  the  Pom-
peian  squadrons  would  find  it  easier  to  keep  an
effectual  blockade.  Accordingly,  Caesar  sent  re-
peated messages,  urging  Antonius  to  put  to  sea  at
all  hazards.  He  represented  that  the  loss  of  the
vessels  was  of  little  consequence.  If  the  troops
could  only  be  run  ashore  any  where  on  the  beach,
it  mattered  not  that  the  ships  were  exposed  to  the
beating  of  the  surf,  or  liable  to  be  seized  by  the
enemy.2  It  is  related  that  in  a  transport  of  im-
patience, for  his  situation  was  now  becoming  every

1  Cscsar  and  Dion,  It.  cc.  The  story  is  told  with  some  discrepancy
by  these  two  writers.  The  narrative  of  the  latter  has  the  appear-
ance  of  greater  accuracy  in  detail.

1  Cos.  B.C.  iii.  25,

VOL.  II.  8

258  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

day  more  critical,  he  determined  to  hazard  the
passage  in  person,  and  that  too  in  the  face  of  a
violent  tempest.  This  daring  enterprise  he  was
obliged  to  conceal  from  his  own  soldiers,  and  in  a
private  vessel  of  only  twelve  oars  he  braved  the
chances  of  shipwreck  or  of  capture.  The  sailors,
however,  could  make  no  way  against  the  fury  of  the
winds  and  waves,  and  his  life  was  probably  saved
by  yielding  to  the  storm.  The  undertaking  was
bold  to  the  verge  of  rashness.  Caesar  himself,  it
must  be  observed,  does  not  mention  it,  and  we
may  suspect  that  the  circumstances  have  been  dis-
torted or  coloured  by  successive  rhetoricians,  with
the  wish  to  trace  throughout  the  exploits  of  the
most  successful  of  adventurers  that  implicit  re-
liance upon  fortune,  which  is  all  that  ordinary
men  can  discover  in  the  most  consummate  calcu-
lations of  the  statesman  or  the  warrior.  Perhaps
the  whole  story  was  invented  to  introduce  the
brilliant  apophthegm  which  Caesar  is  said  to  have
addressed  to  the  dismayed  sailors :  Fear  nothing ;
you  carry  Ccesar  and  his  fortunes.1

At  last  Antonius  embarked his forces,  the  men
Antomus and  officers  being  equally  clamorous  to  be

effects  the  pas-  . ,  mi  • A. j r r

sage  with  the  carried  across.  They  consisted  01  tour
legions  and  eight  hundred  cavalry.  The
south  wind,  with  which  he  sailed,  was  not  favourable
for  shaping  his  course  for  Oricum.  As  the  breeze
freshened,  his  vessels  were  wafted  considerably  to  the
northward,  and  passed  off  Apollonia  and  Dyrrha-
chium.2  They  were  descried  by  Coponius,  who  com-
manded a  Khodian  squadron  in  the  service  of  Pompeius
at  the  latter  port.  He  immediately  gave  them  chase,

1  Floras  is  the  first  to  tell  the  story,  and  records  this  celebrated
saying  (iv.  2.).  Appian  (ii.  57.),  Dion  (xli.  46.),  Plutarch  (CVcs.
38.),  repeat  all  the  circumstances  with  little  variation.  Lucan
(v.  577,  &c.)  amplifies  them  wi»h  some  of  his  wildest  hyperbole?.

*  Gas.  B.  C.  iii.  26.  foil

A.C.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  259

and  his  swift  war-vessels,  though  only  sixteen  in
number,  were  more  than  a  match  both  in  speed  and
strength  for  the  transports  in  which  the  Caesarean
legions  were  embarked.  The  wind,  however,  now
blew  so  strongly  as  to  enable  Antonius  to  keep  his
start  of  the  pursuer,  and  enter  the  haven  of  Nyrn-
phasum,  which  lay  some  hours'  sail  to  the  north  of
Dyrrhachium.  The  mouth  of  this  harbour  directly
faced  the  south,  and  if  it  was  easy  for  Antonius  to
make  it,  it  would  not  be  more  difficult  for  Coponius
to  follow.  But  the  wind  suddenly  shifted  to  the  south-
west, and  drove  the  Pompeian  vessels  with  violence
upon  the  coast.  Here  they  were  all  dashed  to  pieces,
their  crews  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy.
Caesar,  however,  treated  them  with  studied  kindness,
and  he  takes  care  to  inform  us  that  he  sent  them  safe
home  to  their  native  island,  from  which  they  had  been
summoned  to  maintain  a  cause  in  which  they  took
little  interest.  Very  different  was  the  fate  of  the
complement  of  one  of  Antonius's  vessels.  Two  ships
of  the  squadron  had  parted  company  with  the  main
body  in  the  night,  and  came  to  anchor  off  Lissus,
three  miles  to  the  south  of  Nymphaeum.  Here  Ota-
cilius  Crassus  commanded  for  Pompeius.  He  sur-
rounded them  with  a  swarm  of  boats  and  transports,
and  invited  them  to  surrender.  One  of  the  two,
which  carried  a  division  of  two  hundred  and  twenty
men  belonging  to  a  newly-raised  legion,  promptly
obeyed,  under  a  promise  that  the  men's  lives  should
be  spared.  But  the  Pompeian  officer  carried  out  the
system  of  his  colleagues  without  regard  to  mercy  or
good  faith,  and  caused  them  all  to  be  massacred.  The
complement  of  the  other,  which  was  a  battalion  of
veterans,  maintained  their  courage  in  the  last  ex-
tremity. Though  suffering  from  fatigue  and  sea-
sickness, and  entirely  ignorant  of  the  strength  of  their
enemies,  they  ran  their  ship  on  shore,  and  threw  up
a  hasty  entrenchment,  behind  which  they  repulsed

8 2

260  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XTU.

the  attack  of  the  Pompeians,  and  were  enabled  even-
tually to  escape  to  the  camp  of  the  main  body.  Cras-
sus  had  not  the  means  of  offering  any  resistance  to
the  large  force  now  collected  so  near  him.  He  re-
tired from  Lissus,  which  immediately  opened  its  gates
to  Antonius.  The  transports  were  sent  across  the
gulf  once  more  to  bring  over  a  detachment  which
was  still  expected,  and  Caesar  was  speedily  apprised  of
the  place  and  circumstances  of  his  lieutenant's  landing.
The  course  of  Antonius's  fleet  had  been  observed
,  by  both  armies  in  their  quarters  on  the

Manoeuvres  of fc»  _ .  ,. L  -  ,,

u.eho.tiie  Apsus.  Both  were  equally  eager  to  follow
it;  the  Pompeians  with  the  view  of  pro-
tecting Dyrrhachium,  the  Csesareans  in  the  hope  of
at  last  effecting  the  long-desired  junction  of  their
forces.  Pompeius,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,
was  able  to  move  without  delay,  while  his  enemy,  to
whom  the  stream  offered  a  considerable  impediment,
was  obliged  to  seek  a  ford  higher  up.  Pompeius
hoped  to  surprise  Antonius,  and  conducted  his  march
with  secrecy  as  well  as  speed  :  but  his  movements  were
discovered  to  the  new  comers  by  the  natives  of  the
country,  and  they  had  time  to  entrench  themselves,
while  they  sent  messengers  to  inform  their  general  of
their  arrival  and  position.  On  the  second  day  Caesar
made  his  appearance,  and  Pompeius,  not  venturing  to
expose  himself  at  the  same  time  to  an  attack  both  in
front  and  rear,  hastily  withdrew  to  a  place  called  As-
paragium ',  where  he  found  a  suitable  spot  to  establish
his  fortified  lines.

Even  when  his  forces  were  so  much  less  numerous,
cawar  block-  Caesar  had  been  eager  to  press  the  enemy  to
wlthinTr118  a  battle.  He  had  now  doubled  his  avail-
line,  at  Petra.  ^g  numbergj  and  had  succeeded  in  dis-
lodging Pompeius  from  the  position  he  had  selected
to  cover  Dyrrhachium,  so  that  he  had  every  reason

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  30.  The  locality  of  Asparag5um  is  not  accurately
known.  It  was  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Genusus,  and  within  one

A.T7.706-B.C.48.  UNDEn THE EMPIRE.  261

to  anticipate  compelling  him  soon  to  fight  at  a
much  greater  disadvantage.  With  this  view  he
followed  the  steps  of  the  retreating  army  until  he
arrived  before  their  new  encampment,  where  he  drew
out  his  legions  in  order  of  battle,  and  vainly  hoped
that  his  challenge  would  be  accepted.  But  Pompeius
kept  close  within  his  lines.  Caesar  again  broke  up
from  his  position,  and,  making  a  circuit  to  disguise
the  object  of  his  movement,  threw  himself  before  the
walls  of  Dyrrhachium  in  such  a  manner  as  to  cut  off
all  communication  between  the  city  and  the  camp  of
its  defenders.  Pompeius  had  attempted  to  anticipate
this  manoeuvre,  but  his  cautious  circumspection  was
baffled  by  the  activity  of  his  adversary's  move-
ments. Firmly  resolved  as  he  was  not  to  commit  his
half-trained  battalions  to  a  premature  engagement
with  their  veteran  enemy,  it  was  necessary  to  seize  a
position  in  the  neighbourhood,  lodged  securely  in
which  he  might  watch  their  operations  and  profit  by
circumstances.  A  cliff,  on  the  sea-coast,  distinguished
from  its  bold  projection  with  the  appellation  of  Petra
or  the  Rock1,  offered  a  favourable  post  for  the  de-
velopment of  these  defensive  tactics.  It  stood  at  a
short  distance  from  Dyrrhachium,  which  contained  the
stores  and  arsenals  of  the  republican  army  ;  it  pos-
sessed certain  natural  ad  vantages  for  defence,  and  the
anchorage  it  commanded  was  extensive  and  tolerably
sheltered.  At  this  spot  his  troops  might  rely  upon
the  supply  of  all  their  wants  from  the  sea2  ;  but,
secure  though  he  was  of  this  element,  Pompeius  made
himself  independent  of  distant  resources  by  drawing
military  lines  in  front  of  his  position,  fifteen  miles  in
length,  and  thus  inclosing  in  a  strong  entrenchment

day's  march  of  Dyrrhachium,  as  appears  from  Caesar,  B.  C.  iii.  76.
The  reading  (iii.  41.),  "in  Macedonian!,"  must  certainly  be  corrupt

1  Lucan,  vi.  16.:

"  Quemque  vocat  collem  Taulantius  incola  Petram. *

1  Plut.  Pomp.  65 :  vdm-a.  -xv*iv  &vtnot>  tlop.in}i<f.

262  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

a  large  tract  of  cultivated  soil.  To  these  limits,  how-
ever, his  bold  and  unwearied  assailant  now  determined
to  confine  him.  Caesar  planted  himself  firmly  in  front
of  the  Pompeian  position,  and  actually  carried  a
counter-rampart  parallel  to  the  whole  sweep  of  its
defences,  through  an  arc  not  less  than  seventeen  miles
in  length,  from  one  extreme  point  on  the  coast  to  the
other.  These  extraordinary  works  were  not  raised  on
either  side  without  frequent  skirmishes.  The  forces
of  Pompeius  were  the  most  numerous,  and  the  extent
of  his  works  was  less,  so  that  he  was  able  to  bring
greater  strength  to  bear  in  any  attacks  he  chose  to
make  upon  the  enemy.  He  was  also  superior  in  light
troops,  whose  services  were  eminently  useful  in  this
kind  of  engagement ;  and  his  success  in  these  desultory
conflicts  so  encouraged  him,  that  he  was  reported  to
have  declared  he  would  consent  to  forfeit  all  claim  to
military  skill  if  his  adversary  escaped  without  fatal
disaster  from  the  position  he  had  so  rashly  taken  up.
His  boast,  as  we  shall  see,  was  not  far  from  being
fully  accomplished.  Nevertheless,  Caesar,  though
sometimes  repulsed  from  the  positions  he  attempted
to^ seize,  and  much  harassed  and  impeded  in  the  pro-
gress of  his  operations,  completed  his  chain  of  towers
connected  with  ditch  and  rampart  from  shore  to
shore,  and  thus  presented  to  the  world  the  extraordi-
nary spectacle  of  a  superior  force,  commanded  by  the
most  experienced  general  of  the  age,  blockaded  in  the
centre  of  the  country  he  had  himself  chosen  for  the
campaign. l

As  the  crisis  of  the  great  contest  approaches,  we
become  naturally  more  anxious  to  assure

Character  and  ,  r« ,  i  /»  j i«.  r ii  ,•

authenticity ourselves  of  the  fidelity  of  the  narrative

of  the  Com- , „  ' f .  ..

th1nctwlieta? before  us. This  narrative  is  given  in  full

attributed" detail  in  the  Commentaries  of  the  principal

actor  in  the  events  themselves:  the  works  of

1  Caes. B.C.  iii.  42-44.;  Dion,  xli. 50.; Appian,  B.C.  ii. 61.5
Lucan,  vi.  29—63.

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  263

later  writers  add  nothing  to  the  particulars,  but  tend
generally  to  confirm  his  account.  Caesar's  history  of
the  Civil  War  has  indeed  come  down  to  us  incomplete  ;
the  text  in  several  places  is  very  corrupt ;  and  its
geographical  inaccuracies  are  many  and  palpable.
The  account  even  of  the  military  operations  is  occa-
sionally confused  and  inconsistent ;  but  perhaps  the
most  surprising  defect  of  the  work  is  its  want  of
breadth  and  largeness  of  view.  It  contains  no  gene-
ral survey  of  the  state  of  parties  and  affairs,  so  essen-
tial for  understanding  the  political  bearing  even  of
the  military  transactions ;  and  the  discovery  it  pro-
fesses to  make  of  the  author's  own  motives  and  objects
must  be  pronounced  for  the  most  part  frivolous  and
unworthy  of  the  occasion.  The  genuineness  of  the
work  is  nevertheless  generally  admitted.1  If  we  are
justly  disappointed  at  the  narrowness  of  the  sphere
over  which  the  writer's  observation  ranges,  compared

1  The  question  of  the  genuineness  of  the  first  seven  books  of  the
Commentaries  on  the  Gallic  and  the  three  books  on  the  Civil  War
seems  to  lie  in  a  narrow  compass.  The  ancients  understood  that
Caesar  wrote  commentaries  on  these  wars,  and  that  he  compiled
ephemerides,  or  memoranda,  of  his  military  actions  generally;  also
that  he  left  some  imperfect  notices  of  the  Alexandrian  and  African
campaigns,  which  were  reduced  to  the  form  of  commentaries  by
another  hand.  My  belief  is  that  the  Ephemeridcs  were  the  rough
notes  from  which  Caesar  himself  either  wrote,  or  dictated,  or  superin-
tended the  composition  of  the  Commentaries  on  the  Gallic  and  Civil
Wars,  and  that  the  same  notes  furnished  the  groundwork  for  the  sub-
sequent compilation  by  others  of  the  eighth  Gallic  book,  and  those  on
the  Alexandrian,  African,  and  perhaps  the  Spanish  campaigns.  But
that  the  seven  books  E.G.  and  three  B.C.  were  written  by  the  same
person  I  can  hardly  doubt.  The  style  and  still  more  the  character
of  the  two  works  seem  to  be  nearly  identical,  the  only  difference
being  such  as  one  might  expect,  that  the  latter  is  written  with  a
little  less  care  and  appearance  of  literary  ambition.  The  manifest
errors  it  contains  can  only  be  attributed  to  corruption  of  the  text.
To  suppose  that  Caesar  wrote  commentaries,  and  that  the  next
generation  suffered  them  to  be  entirely  lost  and  superseded  by  the
writings  of  any  other  person,  whether  the  genuine  memoirs  of  a  con-
temporary, or  either  the  acknowledged  compilation  or  the  fictitious
exercitation  of  a  later  age,  is  the  last  resource  of  the  morbid  scepticism
which  cannot  suffer  any  author  to  say  more  or  less  than  harmonises
with  its  own  gratuitous  canons  of  historical  criticism.

264  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  C

with  the  vast  extent  of  view  which  he  might  have
opened  to  us,  we  may,  on  the  other  hand,  esteem
ourselves  supremely  fortunate  in  the  possession  of  a
record  which  bears,  on  the  whole,  the  stamp  of  truth
and  candour  more  conspicuously  than  the  writings
perhaps  of  any  other  party  politician.  The  contem-
porary whose  impeachment  of  its  fidelity  has  had  the
greatest  weight  with  later  critics  was  notorious,  it
should  be  remembered,  for  trivial  and  perhaps  spite-
ful detraction.1  In  the  relation  of  minor  events  the
author,  it  may  be  conceded,  has  occasionally  used
some  artifice  to  disguise  his  failures,  but  seldom  or
never  to  enhance  the  merit  of  his  successes.  But  I  have
abstained  generally  from  questioning  the  accuracy
and  fairness  of  minute  details,  as  disagreeable  both  to
the  writer  and  the  reader  where  there  is  so  little  room
for  criticising  them  with  any  certainty.  In  some
places  I  have  tacitly  corrected  what  seemed  to  me
errors,  or  smoothed  over  apparent  inconsistencies ;
but  in  all  the  main  features  of  the  narrative  I  am
content  to  rely  on  the  authority  before  me,  leaving  it
to  the  reader's  own  judgment  to  supply  what  he
may  think  imperfect,  or  apply  a  corrective  to  what
may  appear  to  him  partial.2

1  C.  Asinius  Pollio,  one  of  Caesar's  officers,  who  wrote  a  history  of
the  civil  wars. For  his  remarks  on  Caesar,  Cicero,  Livy  and  Sallust,
see  Suet.  Jul.  56.,  III.  Gramm.  10.;  Quintil.  i.  5.  56.,  viii.  1.  3.,  xii.
1.  22.

2  Among  the  modern  works  which  have  lain  open  before  me  in
studying  the  events  of  the Civil  War,  has  been  that  of  the  late
lamented  Arnold,  who  wrote  the  biography  of  Julius  Csesar  for  the
Encycl.  Metropolitana. In  vigour  and  perspicuity  of  narrative  this
early  essay  is  not  inferior  to  the  more  mature  and  better  known
historical  compositions  of  its  distinguished  author ;  but  I  cannot  help
thinking  that,  at  a  later  period  of  his  life,  he  would  have  consider-
ably modified  the  moral  and  political  views  it  exhibits. I  detect
some  places  in  which  the  author's  prejudice  against  Cassar  seems  to
have  misled  him  in  the  statement  of  facts,  and  still  more  where  he
appears  to  me  to  have  unduly  disparaged  his  motives  and  exalted
those  of  his  opponents. But  on  a  question  of  pure  literary  criticism
any  opinion  of  Arnold's  must  be  of  very  great  weight,  and  I  much
regret  that  we  do  not  possess  the  deliberate  judgment  of  his  later

A.U.708-B.C.48.  UNDER THK EMPIRE.

The  manoeuvres  of  two  Eoman  armies  in  front
of  one  another  may  be  compared to  the
single  combats  of  the  mail-clad  knights  of  calculation,
the  Middle  Ages. Equal  strength,  arms  c^Irpunnea

.. 1 -11  • °  j  • ,  -.1  his  operation..

and  skill  might  render  victory  on  either
side  impossible.  When  every  artifice  had  been
exhausted  to  entice  the  one  or  the  other  into  a
false  move,  it  was  only  by  superior  patience  and
endurance  that  the  conflict  could  be  decided.
Such  might  seem  to  be  the  respective  position  of
the  enemies  now  confronting  each  other.  The  one
had  posted  himself  behind  his  impregnable  entrench-
ments (for  the  entrenchments  of  the  Roman  legionary
were  quite  impregnable  to  assailants  not  superior  in
numbers  or  military  art),  and  the  other  had  drawn  a
line  of  circumvallation  around  his  antagonist,  and
held  him  almost  a  prisoner  within  his  own  works.
If  the  one  army  was  superior  in  numbers,  this  ad-
vantage was  fully  counterbalanced  at  the  outset  by
its  inferior  discipline  and  self-confidence.  But  these
were  defects  which  Pompeius  relied  on  time  to  supply.
He  resolved  to  decline  a  battle,  and  the  longer  the
enemy  persevered  in  his  blockade,  the  more  certain
was  he  of  being  enabled  in  the  end  to  cope  with  him
successfully.1  Meanwhile,  he  abided  with  impassive
serenity  the  ultimate  victory  of  which  he  felt  assured
To  Caesar,  however,  the  advantage  was  direct  and

years  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the  Commentaries  on  the  Civil  War,
which  in  the  article  referred  to  he  appears  to  discredit  with  undue
precipitation.

1  The  Roman  officers  devoted  long  and  patient  attention  to  exer-
cising their  recruits  preparatory  to  leading  them  into  battle.  The
skill,  endurance,  and  confidence  of  the  individuals  were  much  more
important  in  ancient  warfare,  particularly  on  the  system  practised  by
the  Romans,  than  in  modern.  The  same  time  and  care  were  be-
stowed on  restoring  the  discipline  and  moral  feelings  of  an  army
which  had  been  dispirited  by  defeat.  Vegetius  (iii.  10.)  gives  mi-
nute  directions  for  the  requisite  exercises:  labour  in  the  trenches  wai
one  element  in  the  system.  It  was  long  remembered  as  a  maxim  of
Scipio  Africanus:  "Fodientes  luto  inquinari  debere  qui  madere  hos-
tium  sanguine  noluissent. "  Flor.  ii.  18.

266  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvii.

immediate,  of  standing  forth  in  the  eye  of  the  world
as  the  assailant  and  challenger  of  the  once  boastful
hero  who  now  seemed  to  shrink,  craven  and  crest-
fallen, behind  his  battlements.  This  attitude  of
defiance  was  in  itself  an  omen  of  success.  At  Eome
the  dictator's  friends  appealed  to  it  as  a  proof  of  his
intrinsic  superiority,  and  the  waverers  could  no  longer
gainsay  them.1  Close  at  hand  the  effect  was  still
more  signal.  Though  Epirus  was  the  theatre  which
Pompeius  had  himself  chosen  for  the  contest,  it  would
seem  that  his  hold  upon  the  favour  of  the  natives  was
by  no  means  strong.  Caesar,  far  from  his  own  proper
resources,  was  able  to  draw  largely  upon  the  goodwill
of  the  provincials,  many  of  whose  towns  had  sur-
rendered to  him  with  every  appearance  of  alacrity.
At  the  same  time  he  had  taken  measures  to  keep  in
check  the  armies  which  Pompeius  was  assembling  in
his  rear.  The  forces  of  Scipio  in  Macedonia  were
confronted  by  the  dictator's  lieutenants  with  an  ade-
quate armament,  and,  from  the  Ionian  shore  to  the
^Egean,  the  fear  or  favour  of  the  natives  was  con-
ciliated to  him,  for  the  most  part,  by  the  brilliancy  of
his  recent  combinations.  Precarious,  therefore,  as
his  position  was,  with  a  superior  army  in  front,  and
an  unsecured  country  in  the  rear,  his  game  was  played
on  a  masterly  calculation  of  the  chances  in  his  favour,
and  it  may  be  confidently  asserted  that  as  a  military
operation  it  deserved  success.

The first chance  which  entered  into the great

pompeius captain's  calculation  was  that  of  provoking

wTthin8hi*dily  the  enemy  to  engage  with  forces  as  yet

untrained  and  dispirited. In  this  he  was

disappointed. Pompeius  kept  himself  closely  within

1  See  a  letter  of  Dolabella  to  his  father-in-law,  Cicero  (Cic.  ad
Div.  ix.  9.),  urging  him  to  espouse  the  side  of  the  dictator,  written
just  at  this  time.  "  Animadvertis  Cn.  Pompeium  nee  uominis  sni
nee  rerum  gestarum  gloria,  neque  etiam  regum  atque  nationum
clientelis,  quas  ostentare  crebro  solebat,  esse  tutnm:  et  hoc  etiam,

A.P.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  267

his  lines,  while  the  blockading  army  was  suffering,
as  he  knew,  from  a  scarcity  of  provisions.  But  the
sturdy  veterans  had  often  lived  before,  and  fought
too,  on  worse  and  scantier  fare.1  They  threw  their
coarse,  unpalatable  loaves  into  the  quarters  of  the
Pompeians,  that  they  might  know  the  spirit  of  the
men  they  had  to  deal  with.  Meanwhile,  with  the
advance  of  spring  the  green  crops  began  to  ripen,
and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  Caesareans  in  their  general's
cause  warmed  still  more  at  the  prospect  of  greater
plenty  and  a  more  familiar  diet.  They  declared
they  would  gnaw  the  bark  from  the  trees  before  they
would  suffer  Pompeius  to  escape  out  of  their  hands.
Nor  was  the  condition  of  the  besieged  much  better.
Though  supplied  with  provisions  by  means  of  the
fleet,  they  were  in  great  want  of  water,  for  Caesar  had
dammed  up  or  turned  the  watercourses  which  ran
from  the  surrounding  heights  into  the  space  enclosed
by  his  lines,  and  the  Pompeians  were  driven  to  have
recourse  to  the  wells  which  they  sank  in  the  sands
and  marshes  of  the  sea-shore.2  At  the  last  extremity
Pompeius  might  no  doubt  have  effected  his  escape
on  board  his  vessels3 ;  but  in  so  doing  he  would  have
broken  up  all  his  plans,  he  would  have  incurred
infinite  disgrace,  and  his  vigilant  enemy  would  hardly
have  allowed  him  to  execute  such  a  movement  without

quod  infimo  cuiqne  contigit,  illi  non  posse  comingere,  ut  honeste
effugere  possit,  pulso  Italia,  amissis  Hispaniis,  capto  exercitu  veter-
ano,  circnmvallato  nunc  denique."

1  Duruy  (Hist,  des  Homains,  ii.  495.)  observes  on  this  occasion :
"  On  a  remarqne  que  nos  soldats  manquaient  de  vivres  quand  ils
gagnSrent  les  plus  belles  victoires  des  dernicres  guerres."

9  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  49.:  "Omnia  eniin  flmnitia  atque  omnes  rivosqui
ad  mare  pertinebant  Cassar  aut  averterat  aut  mngnis  operibus  ob-
struxerat."  The  latter  operation  is  hardly  conceivable;  besides  thut
within  so  wide  a  circuit  there  must  have  been  numerous  springs  and
streams,  as  Lncan,  only  too  magniloquently,  observes :

"  Flumina  tot  cursus  illinc  exorta  fatigant,
Illic  mersa,  suos."

1  See  Dolabella's  letter  to  Casar  (Cic.  ad  Dir.  ix.  9.).

268  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  en.  xvn

scaling  his  undefended  ramparts,  and  cutting  off  at
least  a  portion  of  his  followers.

It  is  remarkable,  however,  that  Pompeius,  whose
Pompeii™  fame  as  a  naval  conqueror  was  almost  equal
Sdlanu^el  to  his  military  reputation,  should  have
at  sea.  availed  himself  so  little  of  his  superiority  at

sea  throughout  this  campaign.  The  co-operation  of
land  and  sea  armaments  was  little  understood  by  the
Romans.  We  have  seen  how  ill  the  fleet  was  seconded
in  its  attempt  to  blockade  the  harbour  of  Brundisium;
and  now,  in  its  turn,  it  seems  to  have  contributed
very  inefficiently  to  the  support  of  the  land  forces
within  the  lines  of  Petra.  But  it  is  impossible  to
suppose  that  Caesar,  who  had  combined  his  land  and
sea  forces  so  skilfully  both  in  his  contest  with  the
Veneti  and  in  the  siege  of  Massilia,  would  have  made
so  little  use  of  this  important  arm  if  the  superiority
had  been  on  his  own  side.  As  it  was,  however,  the
little  flotilla  in  which  he  had  run  his  troops  over  was
completely  cut  off.  He  had  laid  it  up  at  Oricum,
where  he  caused  the  harbour  to  be  obstructed  by
sinking  a  vessel  in  its  mouth,  and  he  also  stationed
there  a  garrison  of  three  cohorts.  But  Cnaeus,  the
spirited  son  of  the  great  Pompeius,  made  a  dashing
attack  upon  this  stronghold,  cut  out  four  of  the
vessels,  and  burnt  the  rest.  After  this  exploit  he
made  an  attempt  upon  Lissus,  and  succeeded  in
entering  that  port  also  and  burning  a  number  of
transports  or  merchant  vessels,  but  was  repulsed
from  the  walls  by  the  bravery  of  the  citizens,  who
were  devoted  to  Caesar's  cause.1

A  naval  armament  which  required  a  military
casarestab-  guard  for  its  defence,  was  an  incumbrance
"imlonT^h  to  Caesar  rather  than  a  source  of  strength,
ifiy,11*^1"8"  and  probably  he  was  not  much  discomposed

'

Macedon'v

1  Caes.  B.  C.  iii.  39,  40.

A..C.706-B.C.48. UNDER THE EMPI11E.  269

entirely  upon  the  disposition  of  the  provinces  them-
selves for  the  means  of  supplying  his  army,  and,
if  requisite,  of  recruiting  it  It  was  necessary  to
detach  various  bodies  of  troops  to  secure  the  co-
operation of  the  natives  and  Roman  citizens,  and
counterwork  the  influence  which  the  enemy  might
still  exert  upon  them.  With  this  view  L.  Gas-
si  us  Longinus  led  the  twenty-seventh  legion,  with
two  hundred  cavalry,  into  Thessaly,  where  Caesar's
interests  were  maintained  by  a  strong  party  under  the
direction  of  a  young  patrician  of  the  highest  rank,
named  Petreius.  A  smaller  force  was  despatched  into
^Etolia,  under  C.  Calvisius  Sabinus,  to  provide  sup-
plies for  the  camp  before  Petra.  At  the  same  time
Cn.  Domitius  Calvinus  took  the  great  eastern  road
leading  across  the  Candavian  mountains  into  Mace-
donia, where  there  was  a  considerable  Caesarean
party,  which  had  already  invited  assistance  against
the  Pompeians.1  This  detachment  consisted  of  two
complete  legions  and  five  hundred  cavalry,  for  as
Macedonia  lay  in  the  direct  route  from  the  eastern
provinces,  it  was  in  this  region  that  the  advance  of
Scipio  required  to  be  arrested.

Scipio  was  zealous  in  the  cause  of  his  son-in-law,
nor was  there  any  one  of  the  senatorial
chiefs  whose  personal  interests  were  more  va'npce.awuh

i  T .  i j • •,  TT  his  legions

deeply  involved  in  its  success. He  was  a  f-om  Syria,
man  of  resolution,  also,  and  not  deficient  t"meein  A!>U

.,.,  , , .  ,.  Minor,  and

m  military  conduct ;  yet  his  proceedings  *Tive.  at  ia«i

J  -. ~ ,,J  .  in  Macedonia.

in  the  command  of  the  eastern  provinces
were  marked  by  great  want  of  activity.  He  with-
drew every  battalion  that  could  be  spared  from  the
frontiers  of  the  empire,  leaving  them  almost  unde-
fended in  the  presence  of  the  formidable  Parthians.
He  recruited  his  legions  among  the  provincials  of
Syria  and  Asia  Minor,  and  gradually  assembled  his

1  Cues.  B.C.  i\i.  34,  35.  65.

270  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvii.

whole  force  at  Pergamus,  in  Pbrygia,  where  he
established  his  head-quarters  for  some  months.  His
troops  were  for  the  most  part  fully  trained  to  war,  so
that  the  delay  in  his  movements  could  not  be  attri-
buted to  the  necessity  of  devoting  time  to  exercising
them.  Even  had  this  been  the  case,  he  might  have
led  them  into  Epirus,  and  thus  have  united  the  two
great  divisions  of  the  Pompeian  armies  before  Cae-
sar's arrival  on  the  coast.  He  may  have  pleaded,
perhaps,  in  excuse  for  his  neglect,  the  reluctance  of
the  eastern  legions  to  be  led  against  their  own  coun-
trymen, and  their  mortification  at  being  required  to
abandon  the  interests  of  the  republic  in  those  parts
to  the  mercy  of  an  insolent  enemy.  It  was  only  by
giving  up  to  them,  if  Caesar  may  be  believed,  the
plunder  of  various  cities  in  Asia,  that  the  proconsul
first  debauched  and  so  bound  them  to  his  service.1
But  it  is  more  probable  that  Scipio  was  intriguing  to
secure  his  influence  with  this  division  of  the  army,
to  enable  him  to  claim  a  share  in  the  command  of
the  combined  forces.  Accordingly,  he  proceeded  to
ingratiate  himself  with  his  soldiers  by  severe  ex-
actions upon  the  subject  provinces.  His  officers
were  clamorous  ;  they  declared,  not  untruly,  that  in
leaving  Rome  they  had  abandoned  their  personal
means  of  subsistence,  and  they  demanded  a  full
compensation  for  their  sacrifices  in  the  spoil  of  the
provinces  in  which  they  were  quartered.  Every
personage  of  rank  and  influence  was  propitiated  by
the  lucrative  government  of  some  city  or  district.
The  maintenance  of  a  large  and  licentious  army  in
the  midst  of  a  wealthy  and  feeble  population  may,
indeed,  suffice  to  tell  its  own  tale.  It  requires  no
statement  of  the  historian  to  convince  us  that  the
proconsul  himself,  his  retinue,  his  officers  and  his
soldiery,  vied  with  each  other  in  oppressing  the  un«

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  32.

A.0.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  271

fortunate  provincials.  Yet  Scipio  could  not  shake
off  the  yoke  of  military  obedience.  He  had  devoted
to  plunder  the  temple  of  Ephesus,  a  shrine  of  almost
unparalleled  wealth,  and  had  assembled  the  senators
and  principal  officers  upon  the  spot  to  apportion  the
treasures  among  them,  when  peremptory  orders
arrived  from  Pompeius  to  join  him  without  delay,1
The  despatch  contained,  perhaps,  bitter  reflections
upon  the  character  of  his  proceedings,  which  could
not  fail  to  excite  displeasure  and  alarm  in  the  more
politic  commander.  The  greedy  expectants  were
dismissed  ungratified,  and  the  temple  was  saved.
Scipio  now  summoned  his  troops  to  active  service.
He  crossed  the  Bosporus,  and  was  pursuing  the
great  road  westward,  which  led  through  Thessalonica
and  Pella,  when  he  learned  that  Calvinus  was  strongly
posted  in  his  front  in  the  valley  of  Haliacmon,  while,
at  the  same  time,  the  more  circuitous  route  through
Thessaly  was  occupied  with  a  smaller  detachment  by
Longmua.

His  advance  thus  intercepted,  Scipio  acted  with
great  vigour  and  promptitude. He  ap-

,  ....  - ,  .  Undecisive

proached  within  twenty  miles  of  his  oppo-  operations  m

•c -x-L ^i  p j^ i  /•  Macedonia.

nent,  as  it  with  the  purpose  of  fighting,
and  then,  leaving  only  a  handful  of  men  under
Favonius  to  amuse  him,  turned  sharply  to  the  left,
crossed  the  Haliacmon,  and  pushed  on  rapidly  over
the  mountain  frontier  of  Thessaly  to  cut  off  the
division  of  Longinus  before  it  could  receive
succour.2  But  Calvinus  was  quickly  apprised  of  his

1  Cue,.  B.C.  iii.  33.

2  Col.  Lcnke  supposes  Calvinus  to  have  been  posted  at  the  modern
Satista  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Haliacmon,  and  Scipio  to  have  crossed
that  river  at  Servia  (near  the  ancient  JEane  in  the  common  maps).
In  my  first  edition  I  had  described  the  opponents  as  meeting  near
Pella. I  see  now,  however,  the  improbability  of  Calvinus  advancing
so  fur  to  the  east,  and  I  also  infer  from  the  expression :  "  nnllo  in
loco Macedonia  moratus,"  that  Scipio  must  have  nearly  traversed
that  country  before  he  came  in  front  of  his  adversary. (1852.)

272  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

manoeuvre,  and,  knowing  that  Favonius  was  un
supported,  advanced  without  a  moment's  delay  to
attack  him.  Cassius  had  already  moved  in  retreat,
and  Scipio  dared  not  follow  him  and  leave  Favonius
in  such  apparent  jeopardy.  He  retraced  his  steps
with  reluctance,  and  rescued  his  lieutenant  at  the
moment  when  the  enemy  was  about  to  fall  upon
him.  But  with  all  his  forces  reunited  he  was  still
indisposed  to  meet  Domitius  in  the  field.  His  re-
tirement behind  entrenchments  was  hailed  by  his
opponents  as  nearly  equivalent  to  a  defeat,  for,  in
the  wavering  state  of  opinion  among  the  provincials,
the  party  which  maintained  the  most  confident  de-
meanour was  sure  to  carry  off  the  palm  of  popular
favour.  Some  skirmishes  ensued,  with  various  suc-
cess ;  but,  on  the  whole,  the  two  armies  continued
watching  each  other,  without  coming  to  any  decisive
action,  while  the  course  of  events  was  unfolding  far
more  important  results  under  the  immediate  eye
of  the  great  rivals.1

While  these  movements  were  in  progress,  how-
Appiu.  ever,  Caesar  had  detached  another  small
scu'fts  u.ue8ora""  division  under  Fufius  Calenus  to  promote
cie  of  Deipw.  j^g  interests  in  Achaia.2  The  senate  had
entrusted  that  province  to  Appius  Claudius,  whose
zeal  for  the  cause  of  the  nobles  was  by  no  means
equalled  either  by  his  judgment  or  activity.  He
abandoned  the  plain  duties  before  him  to  inquire
idly  into  the  secrets  of  futurity.  The  champion  of
antiquated  political  forms  took  counsel  at  the  shrine
of  an  effete  superstition.  The  oracle  of  Delphi  had
fallen  into  oblivion  or  contempt  in  the  general  decay
of  faith,  or  on  the  discovery  of  its  profligate  cor-
ruption. Whatever  credit  might  still  attach  to  their
pretensions  to  divine  inspiration,  its  hierophants
were  no  longer  the  confederates  or  the  creatures  of

1  Cres.  B.C.  in.  36—38.  :  Cess.  B.C.  iii.  55.

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER fHE EMPIRE  273

the  statesman.  They  were  roused  from  the  languid
enjoyment  of  ample  revenues  and  traditional  dignity
by  the  perilous  compliment  now  paid  to  their  obsolete
functions.  Alarmed  and  bewildered,  they  sought  to
disclaim  the  invidious  reponsibility  :  the  destinies  of
Rome,  they  said,  were  recorded  once  for  all  in  the
verses  of  the  Sybil :  tJie  conflagration  of  their  temple
by  the  Gauls  had  choked  the  cave  with  cinders,  and
stifled  the  voice  of  the  god :  he  who  spurned  from
his  shrine  the  profane  and  unrighteous,  found  none
to  address  in  these  degenerate  days.  But  all  these
evasions  were  vain.  Appius  demanded  the  event  of
the  war,  and  pertinaciously  claimed  a  reply.  The
priestess  took  her  seat  on  the  fatal  tripod,  inhaled
the  intoxicating  vapours,  and  at  last  delivered  the
response  which  her  prompters  deemed  the  most  likely
to  gratify  the  intruder :  Thou,  Appius,  hast  no  part
in  the  civil  wars :  thou  shalt  possess  the  hollow  of
Eub&a.  The  proconsul  was  satisfied.  He  deter-
mined to  abandon  all  active  measures  for  the  party
which  had  entrusted  the  province  to  him,  and  fondly
hoped  that,  in  retiring  to  the  deep  recesses  H«  delusion
of  the  Euripus,  where  the  sea  rushes  anddeath-
through  the  gorge  between  Aulis  and  Chalcis,  the
waves  of  civil  war  would  pass  by  him,  and  leave
him  in  undisturbed  possession  of  his  island  sove-
reignty. But  he  had  scarcely  reached  the  spot  when
he  was  seized  with  fever,  and  the  oracle  was  trium-
phantly fulfilled  by  his  death  and  burial  on  the  rock-
bound  shore.1  From  this  time  the  interests  of  the
nobles  met  with  no  fostering  care  through-  c«8aroccuPiei
out  the  province  of  Achaia;  and,  on  the  Achaia-
approach  of  Calenus,  the  Pompeians  found  them-
selves so  weak,  that  they  abandoned  all  Greece  north
of  the  isthmus,  and  contented  themselves  with  for-
tifying the  access  to  the  Peloponnesus  by  land,

1  Val.  Max.  i.  8. 10.  ;  Lucan,  v.  122.  foil.
VOL.  II.  X

274  HISTORY OF tHE ROMANS  CH.  xvil.

tlie  coast  being  secured  by  the  undisputed  supremacy
of  their  naval  armaments.  It  would  seem  that  by
this  time  Caesar  had  established  his  interests  on  a
solid  foundation  throughout  the  provinces  from
Epirus  to  Thrace,  and  from  Illyricum  to  the  Gulf
of  Corinth.  He  had  restored  the  balance  of  power
between  himself  and  his  rival  upon  the  very  theatre
of  war  which  the  latter  had  chosen,  and  which  he  had
had  a  whole  year  to  fortify  and  secure.

The  military  operations  which  were  conducted
operations  during  this  interval  before  the  walls  of
before  Peira.  petra  were  of  so  complicated  a  character
that,  in  the  absence  of  local  knowledge,  and  with
no  other  guide  than  the  Commentaries3  which
at  this  juncture  are  both  obscure  and  defective,  it
would  answer  no  purpose  to  attempt  to  describe
them  in  detail.  Skirmishes  were  constantly  occurring
throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the  lines.  Caesar
enumerates  the  occurrence  of  not  less  than  six  in  a
single  day ;  and  in  these  earlier  engagements  it  would
appear  that  the  advantage  generally  rested  with  his
own  side.  One  circumstance  which  he  mentions  in
regard  to  them  is  curious,  nor  does  there  seem  any
reason  to  suspect  him  of  misrepresenting  it.  It  was
found,  he  says,  after  a  series  of  these  petty  combats,
that  two  thousand  of  the  Pompeians  had  fallen,  while
of  his  own  men  only  twenty  had  been  killed  ;  on  the
other  hand,  of  those  engaged  in  a  certain  position  not
one  escaped  without  a  wound.  If  any  inference  can
be  drawn  from  so  remai'kable  a  disparity  of  loss,  it
would  seem  to  show  the  great  superiority  of  the
Csesareans  in  the  use  of  their  weapons,  and  is  a  striking
proof  of  the  advantage  which  the  well-trained  veteran
derived  from  his  superior  skill  in  the  warfare  of  those
times  But  if  these  repeated  engagements  gave
occasion  for  the  display  of  more  than  usual  valour
and  devotion  on  the  part  of  Csesar's  veterans,  and  one
of  them  could  exhibit  his  shield  pierced  in  one

..TT.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  275

hundred  and  twenty  places1,  they  served,  neverthe-
less, at  the  same  time  to  exercise  the  Pompeian
recruits  in  the  use  of  their  arms,  and  to  raise  them
gradually  to  a  'level  with  their  presumptuous  assail-
ants. There  was  one  part  of  Caesar's  works  which
had  not  been  completed.  He  was  conscious  that,
with  the  command  of  the  sea,  Pompeius  could  turn
his  besieger's  flank  and  attack  him  in  the  rear,  by
landing  troops  at  a  point  outside  his  own  lines.  To
provide  against  such  a  movement,  Cassar  drew  a
second  line  of  entrenchments  from  the  shore  parallel
to  his  principal  line,  leaving  a  certain  interval  be-
tween them,  and  of  such  a  length  that,  in  order  to
double  them,  the  assailant  would  have  to  penetrate
inland  a  considerable  distance  from  his  ships.2  But,
to  carry  out  this  mode  of  defence,  it  was  necessary  to
draw  a  transverse  line  along  the  coast  to  connect  the
first  rampart  with  the  second.  This  lateral  intrench-
ment  had  not  been  completed,  and,  accordingly,  there
remained  an  open  space  between  the  two  lines,  into
which  Pompeius  was  able  to  throw  a  body  of  men  from
his  vessels.  This  detachment  not  only  made  good  its
landing,  but  found  the  Caesareans  unprepared,  and
working  at  the  intrenchments  without  their  arms,
It  would  seem  that  Caesar's  numbers  were  not  ade-
quate, especially  after  their  late  reductions,  to  carry
out  works  of  such  immense  magnitude,  or  to  defend
them  when  completed.  In  this  quarter  his  troops
were  routed  and  thrown  into  confusion.  He  was
compelled  to  withdraw  them  from  the  ground  on
which  they  were  posted  and  content  himself  with  the
construction  of  a  new  encampment  to  confront  the
enemy,  who  had  thus  established  themselves  in  a

1  Cass.  B.C.  iii.  53.  This  was  the  centurion  Scseva,  whose  prowess,
as  recorded  by  Caesar,  Suetonius  and  Appian,  to  set  aside  the  hyper-
boles of  Lucan,  \vns  more  like  that  of  a  hero  of  romance  than  of  a
military  veteran,  according  to  modern  ideas.

*  CJTS-  B.  C.  iii.  63.

T  2

276  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

position  in  the  rear  of  his  trenches.  The  besiegers
were  much  disheartened  at  the  unexpected  vigour
which  their  opponents  had  exhibited,  and  their  gene-
ral strove  in  vain  to  rally  their  confidence.  He  was
himself  aware  that  his  position  was  lost  almost  be-
yond recovery,  for  the  connexion  between  the  different
parts  of  his  immense  lines  was  dislocated,  and  the
ground,  intersected  by  so  many  walls  and  trenches,
presented  serious  impediments  to  the  rapid  move-
ment and  concentration  of  his  forces.  His  eagle  eye
discerned  one  Pompeian  division  separated  from  the
Discomfiture  main  body  and  unsupported.  He  moved

with  a  very  superior  body  against  it ;  but
the  difficulties  of  the  ground  baffled  all  his  com-
binations ;  his  men,  dispirited  and  out  of  breath,
straggling  up  to  the  object  of  their  attack,  were
repulsed  with  steady  gallantry,  and,  when  a  larger
force  came  to  the  rescue  of  the  Pompeians,  were
completely  discomfited,  and  driven  back  in  confusion
to  their  lines.1

The rout  and  disorder  of  the  vanquished party

were  so complete, that Pompeius could

Triumph  of  ,.  . *. ' ,  •  T n- i ,

Pompeius-. only  imagine  that  their  rapid  flight  was  a

military  ikilL - .  •>  .15

temt  to  lure  him  on  to  incautious  pursuit.
He  abstained  from  pressing  his  advantage2 ;  indeed
the  impediments  of  the  ground  would  have  retarded
his  advance,  while  it  favoured  his  opponent's  well-
known  ability  in  rallying  his  broken  ranks.  He  had
gained,  indeed,  a  complete  victory,  for  it  was  now
impossible  for  Caesar  to  hold  his  position.  Pompeius
had  fully  carried  out  the  plans  he  had  in  view  from
the  first,  for  he  had  steadily  refused  to  be  drawn  pre-

1  CSKS.  B.C.  in.  69,  70.  ;  Frontin.  Stratagem,  iii.  17.  4.  ;  Orosius
(vi.  15.)  here  supplies  what  was  required  to  account  for  this  extra-
ordinary rout  of  the  Csesarean  veterans.

*  He  is  said  to  have  been  dissuaded  by  Labienus:  but  Csesnr  him-
ecif  was  reported  to  have  acknowledged  that  the  war  might  have
been  brought  to  a  close  that  day  if  the  enemy  had  known  how  to  use
his  victory.  Appian.  B.C.  ii.  62.

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  '277

maturely  into  a  decisive  engagement ;  he  had  trained
his  men  at  leisure,  and  had  at  last  thrown  them  upon
their  besiegers  with  equal  confidence  and  superior
numbers.  He  now  broke  triumphantly  through  the
toils  with  which  his  enemy  had  surrounded  him,  and
his  fortunes  seemed  to  emerge  with  all  their  former
brilliancy  from  the  cloud  which  so  lately  obscured  them.
When  Cato,  indeed,  beheld  the  bodies  of  a  thousand
citizens  extended  on  the  ground  he  covered  his  face
and  wept.1  But  with  this  single  exception,  both  the
general  and  his  officers  now  abandoned  themselves  to
unbounded  exultation.  All  the  nattering  £XUltatioI1
hopes  which  had  sustained  them  through  ^hi/pini-6
the  winter  of  soon  returning  to  Eome  to  zans>
satiate  their  vengeance  or  their  cupidity,  damped  as
they  had  been  by  the  course  events  had  recently
taken,  now  returned  in  their  original  freshness.
They  made  no  account  of  the  disadvantages  under
which  Cuesar  had  fought,  and  claimed  the  victory  as
the  reward  of  their  own  valour  and  conduct.  Pom-
peius  alone  had  any  apprehension  of  the  result  of  a
general  engagement,  to  which  his  adherents  now
looked  forward  with  impatience.  In  the  midst  ot
his  triumph  he  exhibited  signs  of  moderation  which
they  ascribed  only  to  pusillanimity.  He  accepted
indeed  the  title  of  Imperator  with  which  the  vic-
torious legions  saluted  him ;  but  on  this,  which  was
perhaps  the  first  occasion  of  that  honourable  distinc-
tion being  awarded  in  a  civil  war,  he  declined  to
adopt  the  usual  insignia  by  which  it  was  accompanied,
and  wreathed  neither  his  despatches  nor  his  fasces
with  laurel.  But  his  followers  had  no  such  scruples  :
their  leader  probably  had  not  the  power,  if  even  he
had  the  will,  to  restrain  them  in  the  display  of  their
arrogance  and  violence.  Labienus  was  particularly
anxious  to  distinguish  himself  among  his  new  friends.

1  Zonaras,  Annul  x.  8.

278'  HISTORY  OP THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

He  demanded  and  obtained  of  Pompeius  the  un-
fortunate men  who  had  been  made  prisoners  in  the
late  engagement.  Upbraiding  them  ironically  with
cowardice  and  desertion  of  their  ranks,  he  ordered
them  all  to  be  put  to  the  sword  in  the  presence  of  the
applauding  Pompeians.1

But  the  gain  of  a  victory  was  not  sufficient  to
counterbalance  the  loss  of  time  and  repu-
tation  which  Pompeius  had  submitted  to
undergo.  One  month  earlier  the  defeat  of
Caesar  would  have  been  his  destruction,  for  he  had
then  secured  no  friends  to  favour  him  in  his  retreat,
and  no  second  field  on  which  to  develope  the  re-
sources of  his  genius.  But  now  looking  calmly
around  him,  he  saw  that  it  was  necessary  to  withdraw
from  the  seaboard,  and  remove  the  war  to  a  wider
theatre  in  Macedonia  or  Thessaly.  There  he  could
unite  all  his  forces  and  reconstruct  the  plan  of  the
campaign.  With  unabated  alacrity  he  prepared  to
execute  this  new  project.  The  sick  were  sent  forward,
in  the  first  instance,  together  with  the  baggage,  under
the  escort  of  a  single  legion.  The  rest  of  the  army
left  the  camp  in  successive  detachments,  and  Caesar
himself,  having  confronted  his  victorious  enemy  to
the  last,  followed  his  advancing  legions  with  such
celerity,  as  to  overtake  and  combine  his  march  with
them.

The destination of the army,  in the first  in-
stance, was  Apollonia;  for  it  was  there  that
thevar'ioM168  Caesar  had  made  arrangements  for  the  care
memymay of  his  wounded,  and  there  lay  the  treasure
which  was amassed  for the pay of the
legionaries. From  thence  he  despatched  letters  of
exhortation  to  his  allies,  explaining  the  real  state  of
his  affairs,  while  he  advanced  detachments  to  occupy
the  most  important  points  on  the  sea-coast. His  first

1  Cxs.  B.C.  iii.  71  :  "  Interrogans,  solerentne  veterani  milites  fu-
gere,  in  omnium  conspectu  intcrricit."

A.U.706-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  279

anxiety  was  to  effect  a  junction  of  the  main  body  of
his  troops  with  Calvinus.1  He  calculated  that  if,  by
such  a  movement,  he  could  draw  Pompeius  from  bis
lines  at  Petra  to  protect  Scipio  from  the  combined
forces  of  the  Caesareans,  he  should  find  an  oppor-
tunity for  compelling  him  to  engage.  But  if  Pom-
peius should  avail  himself  of  the  retreat  of  his  anta-
gonist to  recross  the  Adriatic  2,  it  was  then  his  inten-
tion to  march  through  Illyricum  with  his  whole  army,
and  confront  the  enemy  in  Cisalpine  Graul,  if  not
before  Rome  itself.  If,  as  a  third  alternative,  Pom-
peius should  prefer  keeping  close  to  his  present
quarters,  and  forming  successively  the  sieges  of
Oricum,  Lissus  and  Apollonia,  in  order  to  cut  him
off  from  the  sea,  and  deprive  him  of  all  succour  from
Italy,  Caesar  then  contemplated  advancing  against
Scipio  in  Macedonia,  and  thus  forcing  the  generalis-
simo of  the  senate  to  hasten  to  his  colleague's
relief.

Caesar  sent  forward  despatches  to  notify  his  ap-
proach  to  Calvinus, and to convey  the

.  '  ,.  , .  .%  Caesar  effects  a

necessary instructions for his guidance,  junction  with

,y  . J  '  , . the  division  of

rsut  the  pompous  announcement  01  their  caivinuaon

i . i .1  i j  the  fronUen  of

victory which the conquerors had cir-  EPS™  »nd
i  i  j  • 11 j- j.- T_J •  j  TheMaly-

ciliated  in  all  directions,  had  so  imposed

upon  the  inhabitants  of  the  intervening  districts,
that  they  considered  the  baffled  cause  as  lost,  and
were  eager  to  conciliate  the  victors  by  intercept-
ing his  messengers.  Calvinus,  meanwhile,  after
keeping  his  ground  for  a  considerable  time  in  front
of  Scipio  on  the  Haliacmon,  bad  been  compelled  to
withdraw  by  the  want  of  provisions,  and  had  fallen
back  upon  the  road  to  Dyrrhachium,  as  far  as  Hera-
clea,  a  town  on  the  frontiers  of  Macedonia,  at  the
foot  of  the  Candavian  mountains.  He  supposed  that,

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  75.  foil.

1  This  was  the  advice  of  Afranius,  but  Pompeius  did  not  choose
to  withdraw  so  far  from  his  Eastern  allies. Appian,  B.C.  ii.  65.

280  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

in  making  this  retrograde  movement,  he  was  only
approaching  nearer  to  the  base  of  Caesar's  operations,
and  rendering  a  junction  with  him  more  sure,  what-
ever fortune  might  befal  his  general's  arms  in  Epirus.
But  Caesar,  by  the  circuit  he  was  compelled  to  make  in
order  to  visit  Apollonia,  had  abandoned  to  his  adver-
sary the  direct  route  into  Macedonia ;  and  this  was
the  line  upon  which  Pompeius  was  already  advancing,
the  noise  of  the  breaking  up  of  Caesar's  camp  having
advertised  him  of  his  sudden  retreat.  It  was  by
accident  only  that  Calvinus  became  apprised  of  the
danger  gathering  in  his  rear.  Certain  Allobrogians,
who  had  recently  deserted  from  Cassar  to  his  opponent
at  Petra,  happened  to  fall  in  with  the  scouts  sent  out
by  Calvinus  to  collect  information.  Though  now
arrayed  on  different  sides,  yet  from  old  habits  of
familiarity  they  did  not  scruple  to  enter  into  con-
verse with  one  another,  and  the  retreat  of  Caesar  in
one  direction,  together  with  the  advance  of  Pom-
peius on  the  other,  were  disclosed  just  in  time  to
allow  Calvinus  to  break  up  his  camp  and  set  out  in  a
southerly  direction  to  meet  his  general.  The  Pom-
peians  arrived  at  his  deserted  quarters  only  four  hours
after  he  had  quitted  them ;  but  he  was  already  be-
yond the  reach  of  pursuit,  and  the  two  great  divisions
of  the  Caesarean  army  effected  their  junction  at
^Eginium,  on  the  confines  of  Epirus  and  Thessaly.

From  this  point  Caesar  advanced  to  Gomphi,  a
ca^r  axes  his  town  which  had  lately  volunteered  to  place
queers mtne  itse]f  under  foe  banner  of  his  lieutenants,
Thessaiy.  ^^  which  now,  excited  by  the  exaggerated
report  of  his  disasters,  shut  its  gates  against  him,  and
sent  pressing  messages  both  to  Scipio  and  Pompeius
to  come  to  its  relief.  Scipio,  however,  had  withdrawn
as  far  as  Larissa,  and  Pompeius  had  not  yet  entered
Thessaly.  The  activity  of  Caesar's  operations  was
such  as  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  aid  being  ren-
dered to  the  devoted  city.  Arriving  before  the  walls

A.U.706- B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  281

in  the  morning,  he  had  prepared  all  the  requisite
works  and  machinery  for  the  assault  by  three  o'clock
in  the  afternoon,  and  carried  the  place  by  storm  the
same  evening.  To  reward  the  energy  of  his  soldiers,
and  at  the  same  time  to  inspire  a  salutary  sense  of
his  undiminished  power,  he  gave  up  the  town  to
pillage:  but  this  was  for  a  moment  only,  for  he  was
immediately  on  his  march  again,  and  appeared
straightway  before  Metropolis,  which  took  warning
by  the  fate  of  its  neighbour,  and  surrendered  without
a  blow.  All  the  towns  of  Thessaly,  except  Larissa,
followed  this  example  without  delay,  thus  giving
Cassar  complete  possession  of  the  broad  champaign
country  watered  by  the  Peneus  and  its  tributaries.
Throughout  this  fertile  region  the  corn  was  abun-
dant and  now  nearly  ripe.  Caesar  had  no  diffi-
culty in  maintaining  his  soldiers  there,  and  he  now
confined  his  movements  to  the  plain  southward
of  the  Enipeus,  deliberately  awaiting  the  expected
attack.1

Caesar  had  directed  his  advance  upon  the  route
which  traverses  the  southern  part  of  Thes-  Arrogance  Of
saly,  abandoning  any  attempt  to  prevent  chfe^VhUi*1
the  junction  of  the  two  main  divisions  of  ££'*»"  "^
the  enemy's  forces,  which,  when  thus  com-  5ealousies-
bined  at  Larissa,  formed  an  aggregate  of  imposing
magnitude.  Pompeius  now  condescended  or  was
compelled  to  share  with  his  father-in-law  the  honours
of  the  chief  command.  But  the  responsibility  still
attached  to  him  alone,  and  the  impatient  senators
felt  assured  that  he  purposely  protracted  the  war,  to
enjoy  the  supremacy  in  the  camp  which  must  be  re-
linquished in  the  city.2  Domitius  taunted  him  with

1  Appian  (B-  C  ii.  67.)  supposes  that  CfEsar  was  in  want  of  pro-
visions, and  that  Pompeius  wished  to  protract  the  campaign  in  order
to  profit  by  his  necessities:  but  it  appears  that  the  resources  of  a
larire  extent  of  country  were  now  at  his  command.

3  Pint.  Pomp.  67.,  Cas.  41.;  Appian,  I.e.

282  HISTORY  OF  THE KOMAN8.  CH.  xvn.

the  name  of  Agamemnon,  king  of  the  kings  before
Troy;  Favonius  only  exclaimed  with  a  sigh,  We  shall
not  eat  our  Jigs  this  year  either  at  Tusculum.  But
the  proud  array  of  the  combined  armies  inflamed
more  than  ever  the  hopes  of  their  order ;  their  nu-
merical superiority  to  Caesar  was  greater  now  than
even  at  Petra,  and  the  impatience  to  strike  the  blow
which  should  free  them  for  ever  from  his  harassing
persecution  became  universal  and  overwhelming.
The  chiefs  contended  openly  among  themselves  for
the  places  and  dignities  which  should  fall  to  their
lot  upon  Caesar's  destruction.  They  already  assigned
the  consuls  for  several  years  to  come ;  while  among
the  candidates  for  the  highest  offices,  Domitius,
Scipio  and  Lentulus  Spinther  were  most  clamorous
for  the  supreme  pontificate1,  Fannius  coveted  the
villa  of  Atticus,  and  Lentulus  Crus  laid  his  finger
on  the  house  of  Hortensius  and  the  gardens  of
Caesar.2  The  mutual  jealousy  of  these  competitors
led  to  intrigues  and  recriminations  which  loosened
the  bands  of  authority  and  discipline.  Attius  Kufus
came  forward  to  accuse  Afranius  of  deliberate  treach-
ery in  the  Spanish  campaign ;  L.  Hirrus,  a  man  of
some  note  in  the  party,  having  had  the  honour  of
competing  on  one  occasion  with  no  less  a  rival  than
Cicero,  being  absent  from  the  camp  on  a  mission  to
the  Parthians,  might  fear  to  be  thrust  altogether
aside  in  the  scramble  for  the  anticipated  dignities ;
and  Domitius  proposed  in  council  that  judgment  of
death  or  confiscation  should  be  passed  at  the  close
of  the  war  upon  every  member  of  the  senate  con-
victed of  the  crime  of  having  remained  at  Eome
during  the  struggle,  or  even  who,  after  joining  its

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  83.

2  Cic.  ad  Att.  xi.  6. If  this  is  correct,  it  would  seem  that  Marcia
did  not  bring  the  property  of  Hortensius  to  Cato  as  her  dowry  on
their  resumption  of  the  nuptial  relation,  and  therefore  there  was  pro-
bably no  second  marriage.

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  283

standard,  should  have  continued  a  spectator  rather
than  an  actor  in  its  ranks.1

It  is  possible  that  this  menace  pointed  among
others  at  Cicero,  who  may  have  advanced  Theirdu«atu-
claims  to  a  larger  share  in  the  contem-  c*CMr0o"»"onh-
plated  distribution  of  rewards  than  was  duct-
deemed  proportionate  to  his  actual  services.  He
had  been  present  in  the  camp  at  Petra,  and  had
freely  expressed  his  disgust  at  his  leader's  policy  in
allowing  himself  to  be  shut  up  in  so  dishonourable  a
position.  Cicero,  indeed,  was  one  of  the  few  sensible
men  who  had  deprecated  forcing  Pompeius  to  a  pre-
mature engagement ;  but  while  he  confessed  that  the
troops  of  the  republic  were  not  equal  in  training  to
their  adversary's  veterans,  he  had  persisted  in  urging
the  adoption  of  measures  still  more  certainly  ineffi-
cient, and  had  paraded  his  impracticable  notions  of
the  authority  and  dignity  of  the  senate  in  a  question
of  mere  military  means.2  At  last,  when  Pompeius
advanced  into  Thessaly,  he  pleaded  ill  health  as  an
excuse  for  remaining  behind3,  declining  at  the  same
time  all  public  command,  and  contenting  himself
with  sending  his  son  to  follow  the  fortunes  of  the  com-
mon cause.  The  proposition  of  Domitius,  if  carried
into  effect,  would  have  fallen  with  its  full  weight  upon
one  who  had  thus  offended  the  zealots  of  his  party.

At  length  Pompeius  moved  to  the  southward  from
Larissa  upon  the  road  to  Pharsalus,  which  TheoPpo.hig

c  J.-L T  f  • .  '*•  i. i  armies  take  up

forms  the  line  of  communication between  their  po«tjoni
Thessaly  and  Greece. The  city  of  Phar-  Ptamffir '
salus occupied a  rocky  eminence connected  with

1  Caes.  l.c.  This  is  fully  confirmed  by  Cicero.  Even  Atticus,  he
says,  was  among  the  proscribed :  and  further,  "  Omnes  qui  in  Itulia
manserant,  hostiunrnumero  habebantur."

*  Cic.  ad  Div.  iv.  7.:  -  Non  iis  rebus  pugnabamus  quibus  valere
poteramus,  consilio,  auctoritate,  causa,  qiue  erant  in  uobis  superiora;
sed  lacertis  et  viribns,  quibus  pares  non  fuimus."  He  used  similar
expressions  in  a  letter  to  Torqnatus  (Div.  vi.  l.).

1  Plut, Cic.  39. ;  Cic.  ad  Att.  xi.  4-

284  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

the  northern  spurs  of  the  chain  of  Othrys,  upon
the  verge  of  the  plain,  five  or  six  miles  in  width,
through  which  the  river  Enipeus  flows  in  a  broad
channel.  On  the  southern  side  of  this  level  expanse,
near  its  eastern  extremity,  rise  some  detached  hills  of
moderate  elevation,  upon  one  of  which  Pompeius  is
supposed  to  have  drawn  the  lines  of  his  encampment.
The  fortified  post  of  Pharsalus  itself  lay  at  no  great
distance  on  the  left ;  but  the  inhabitants,  who  had
submitted  to  Caesar's  requisitions  in  the  absence  of
his  adversary,  were  now  glad  to  shut  their  gates,  and
gazed,  perhaps  with  indifference,  upon  the  prepara-
tions which  were  making  to  decide  the  war  before
their  eyes.1  Almost  at  the  same  moment  Caesar
pitched  his  own  camp  in  the  centre  of  the  same  plain,
a  little  to  the  west  of  Pharsalus,  at  a  distance  of
thirty  stades,  or  about  four  Eoman  miles  from  that  of
his  opponent.2  Assured  of  the  revived  confidence  of
his  veterans,  he  was  anxious  to  draw  Pompeius  into

1  Two  cities  rose  successively  on  or  near  the  site  of  Pharsalus,  and
it  is  possible  that  at  the  period  of  the  battle  the  place  may  have  been
deserted.  If  so,  this  would  account  for  the  remarkable  fact  that
Cffisar  makes  no  mention  of  it,  and  also  for  its  playing  no  part  in  the
details  of  the  operations  conducted  so  close  to  it.  See  Ersch  und
Gruber's  Encyclopadie,  art.  "  Pharsalische  Schlacht,"  by  Eckermann.

8  I  have  endeavoured  to  comprise  in  the  text  all  the  marks  of  lo-
cality which  Caesar,  Appian,  and  Plutarch  furnish  for  understanding
the  battle  of  Pharsalia;  what  further  explanation  is  required  I  have
derived  from  Colonel  Leake's  account  in  his  Travels  in  Northern
Greece  (i.  445.,  iv.  477.),  and  I  have  to  acknowledge  his  kindness
in  elucidating  some  points  on  which  he  has  allowed  me  to  refer  to
him.  Dodwell  and  Clarke  traversed  the  plain,  but  their  observation
was  extremely  cursory,  and  their  statements,  in  some  respects,
strangely  conflicting.  The  lively  professor,  indeed,  acknowledges
that  he  trotted  across  it  in  a  thick  fog.  The  map  accompanying  my
second  edition  is  borrowed  from  Col.  Leake,  with  a  trifling  altera-
tion regarding  the  position  of  Caesar's  cavalry.  After  weighing
again  the  circumstances  of  the  battle,  I  am  inclined  to  leave  my
account  substantially  as  before.  I  ought,  however,  to  add,  that  the
difficulty  of  the  received  explanation  is  increased  by  the  use  of  the
word  rivus  for  the  stream  on  the  bank  of  which  the  armies  were
posted.  According  to  Caesar's  and  all  correct  usage,  this  term  is
ouly  applied  to  a  rivulet,  and  is  constantly  opposed  toJJumen,  a  river

A.U.706-B.C.48. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  285

a  general  engagement  in  the  open  country  between
them.  He  arrayed  bis  forces  at  first  in  front  of  his
own  encampment,  and  gradually  pushed  his  lines  still
nearer  to  the  enemy's  position.  But  though  Pom-
peius  caused  his  legions  to  deploy  day  by  day  on  the
slope  beneath  his  own  fortifications,  he  still  kept
them  on  superior  ground,  and  refused  to  descend  into
the  plain  and  confront  the  assailants  on  equal  terms.
The  result  of  some  cavalry  skirmishes  was  favourable
to  the  Caesareans,  and  showed  that  their  slender  squad-
rons, supported  by  picked  men  of  the  infantry,  trained
to  run  and  fight  between  their  ranks,  could  stand
without  flinching  the  onset  of  undisciplined  numbers.
The  nobles  were  irritated  at  these  petty  losses,  and
redoubled  their  pressing  solicitations  to  be  led  to
battle.  Still  Pompeius  refused  to  move.  Thus
baffled,  Caesar  was  preparing  to  shift  his  quarters,  and
entice  his  adversary  to  follow  him  into  another  part
of  the  country  where  the  supplies  were  less  exhausted,
and  where  his  vigilance  might  seize  some  opportunity
of  compelling  an  engagement.  The  movement  he
now  threatened  upon  Scotussa  would  have  ClMar
thrown  him  between  the  Pompeian  army  S^S'pL-
andthe  base  of  its  operations  at  Larissa,  peius><flauk-

of  breadth  and  volume,  such  as  the  Enipeus  must  be  after  the
junction  of  the  two  streams  which  meet  east  of  Pharsalus.  Kiepert's
map  gives  a  much  more  imposing  appearance  to  the  Enipeus  than
Col.  Leake's.  The  great  difficulty  of  Col.  Leake's  explanation  is
that,  from  the  position  he  assigns  to  the  Pompeian  force,  the  routed
army  must  have  turned  at  least  a  right  angle  in  its  flight  to  Larissa,
besides  crossing  the  broad  channel  of  the  Enipeus,  neither  of  which
circumstances  arc  alluded  to  by  the  authorities.  When  Pompeius
escaped  from  his  camp  through  the  Decuman  gate  he  must  have
fairly  turned  his  back  upon  the  retreat  which  he  is  understood  to
have  reached  before  Caesar's  rapid  arrival.  I  cannot  persuade
myself,  however,  that  the  localities  in  their  present  configuration
admit  of  any  other  hypothesis.  It  would  be  interesting  to  examine
them,  with  the  view  of  inquiring  whether  any  material  change  has
taken  place  in  the  course  of  the  Enipens  and  its  tributary  streams.
The  battle  of  Plassy  was  fought  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Hooghly,
which  now.  I  believe,  flows  over  its  site,  and  in  another  hundred
years  will  probably  hnve  transferred  it  totheright.

286  HISTORY OF IHE ROMANS  CH.  xvn,

and  was  calculated  to  rouse  it  from  its  wary  inaction.
It  was  the  morning  of  the  ninth  of  August ;  the
trumpets  had  already  sounded  to  march  in  the
Caesarean  encampment,  the  legionaries  had  buckled
on  their  arms  and  equipments,  and  the  camp-
followers  were  striking  the  tents,  when  news  ar-
rived that  the  Pompeians  had  advanced  a  little
beyond  their  ordinary  position  in  front  of  their  en-
trenchments, and  were  already  extending  their  long
columns  on  the  level  plain.1  Their  general  had

yielded  with  a  sigh  to  the  importunities  of
ot&Thlm  his  followers,  declaring  that  he  could  no

longer  command  and  must  submit  to  obey.2
During  the  interval  of  suspense  the  minds  of  both
the  great  leaders  had  been  agitated,  it  was  said,  by
melancholy  reflections  on  the  impending  crisis.  The
one  was  haunted  even  in  his  sleep  by  the  delusive
vision  of  his  splendid  theatre,  and  by  the  echoes  of
popular  applause  which  had  so  often  greeted  him
there.3  Even  Caesar  acknowledged  his  dejection  at
the  prospect  of  an  encounter,  which,  he  said,  what-
ever were  the  event,  would  be  the  commencement  of
many  evils.4  But  his  men  were  full  of  ardour ;
they  had  invoked  upon  themselves,  self-accused,  the
terrors  of  military  execution,  to  atone  for  their  pusil-

1  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  85. Aug.  9.  A.U. 706  =  June  6,  B  c.  48. The
day  is  recorded  in  the  Kalendar.  Amitern.  v.  Id.  Sext. :  "  Soli  Indi-
geti  in  colle  Quirinale  Fer(ise)  q(uod)  eo  d(ie)  C.  Caes.  C.  F.  Pharsali
devicit." Orelli,  Inscr.  ii.  p.  397  ;  Fischer,  Rdm.  Zeittaf. Lucan's
assertion  (vii.  410.),

"  Tempora  signavit  leviorum  Roma  malorum,

Hnnc  voluit  nescire  diem,"

has  perplexed  the  critics.  He  means  probably  that  the  anniversary
of  Pharsalia  waa  not  marked  in  the  calendar  as  a  dies  nefastus,  like
those  of  Allia  and  Cannae.

2  Caes.  B.C.  iii.  86.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  69.

*  Pint.  Cats.  42.;  Flor.  iv.  2.;  Lucan,  vii.  9.

4  Appiau,  B.C.  ii.  69.  The  widespread  presentiment  of  evil  re-
corded in  such  striking  language  by  Lucan  (vii.  187.)  may  be  re-
ferred, perhaps,  to  contemporary  tradition.  Comp.  Plut.  Can.  47. :
Dion,  xli.  61.;  GelL  xv.  18.

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  287

lanimity  in  the  disasters  before  Petra,  and  when  their
leader  had  recently  offered  to  wait  for  further  rein-
forcements, they  had  impatiently  demanded  to  be
pitted  against  the  enemy  unrecruited.1

The  arrangements  for  the  battle  were  of  the  sim-
plest kind.  The  plain  was  open,  without

, ,.  .  ',  Array  of  the

any  natural  features  to  give  an  advantage  contending
to  one  side  over  the  other ;  nor  did  either
army  seek  the  cover  of  artificial  defences.  The
contest  was  to  be  decided  by  downright  fighting  of
man  and  man.  The  rugged  banks  of  the  Enipeus
afforded  equal  protection  to  one  flank  of  either
army,  so  that  both  could  concentrate  the  whole  of
their  covering  squadrons  of  cavalry  and  light  troops
on  the  other.  Pompeius  ranged  his  legionary
force  so  as  to  rest  its  right  wing  on  the  river,
Scipio 2  commanding  in  the  centre,  Lentulus  on
the  right,  and  Domitius  on  the  left.  In  the  left
wing  also  the  general  himself  took  his  station,  at
least  at  the  commencement  of  the  encounter.3  The
cavalry,  on  which,  from  its  numbers  and  composi-
tion, as  well  as  from  the  level  nature  of  the
ground,  Pompeius  placed  his  principal  reliance,
was  stationed  at  the  extremity  of  the  left  wing.
The  days  had  long  gone  by  when  the  cavalry  of
a  Eoman  army  was  composed  of  the  knights  who
served  the  commonwealth  on  horseback.  In  later
times  that  force  had  been  furnished  entirely  by
the  foreign  auxiliaries,  while  the  more  distinguished
of  the  citizens  officered  the  legionary  infantry.
But  now  the  flower  of  the  Eoman  nobility  mounted
their  horses,  and  crowded  into  the  ranks/  forming,

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii 63.;  Pint.  Cats.  43.

2  Cajsar  docs  not  mention  the  Enipeus,  but  merely  says,  "  dcxtrum
cjus  conm  rivus  quidam  impeditis  ripis  immicbat."  B.C.  iii.  88.

*  Compare  the  statements  of  Caes.  I.e.  with  Plut.  Ctes.  44. ;  Appian,
B.  C.  ii.  76.  Lucan  places  Domitius  on  the  right.  It  is  probable
that  Pompeius  shifted  his  own  position  in  the  course  of  the  battle.

4  This  is  distinctly  stated  by  Frontinus,  Strateg.  iv.  7.  32.,  and  is
evidently  implied  in  Plutarch's  account  of  the  battle.

288  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvii.

no  doubt,  the  finest  body  of  cavalry  the  republic
had  ever  sent  into  the  field.  The  statement  which
Caesar  gives  of  the  numbers  arrayed  on  each  side
is  confirmed  by  Appian,  apparently  from  independent
sources.1  The  Pompeianarmy  consisted  of  a  legion-
ary force  of  one  hundred  and  ten  cohorts,  making  an
aggregate  of  forty-five  thousand  men,  while  the
cavalry  amounted  to  seven  thousand,  bearing  a  much
larger  proportion  to  the  whole  amount  than  was
usual  in  the  Roman  armies.  Two  thousand  picked
men  were  also  dispersed  through  the  ranks  of  the
infantry  to  animate  the  less  experienced  by  the  ex-
ample of  their  courage  and  discipline.  The  cavalry
was  supported  by  detachments  of  slingers  and  bow-
men, who  fought  intermixed  with  the  horses ;  and
there  were  also  several  squadrons  of  mounted  auxi-
liaries, principally  from  Pontus  and  Cappadocia.*
The  forces  of  the  allied  kings  and  states  which  the
senate  brought  also  into  the  field  must  have  been  ex-
ceedingly numerous3;  but  these  the  pride  of  the
Eoman  tacticians  seldom  condescended  to  compute,
and  Pompeius  himself  seems  to  have  had  little  confi-
dence in  their  assistance,  keeping  them  throughout
the  day  in  the  back  ground  where  they  only  served  to
encumber  the  field,  and  straiten  the  position  of  the
effective  combatants.  On  the  other  hand,  Caesar  had

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  70.

2  Lucan,  vii.  225.  :

"  Cappadocum  montana  cohors  et  largus  habenis

Ponticus  ibat  equcs."
But  he  places  them  quite  at  random,

"  Juxta  fluvios  et  stagna  undantis  Enipei."

No  doubt  they  were  posted  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  plain,  at  the
extreme  left  of  the  position.

1  Florus,  in  a  passage  apparently  corrupt,  seems  to  count  the  whole
numbers  engaged  on  both  sides  at  not  less  than  three  hundred  thou-
sand men.  This  is  undoubtedly  a  gross  exaggeration;  but  the  state-
ments of  Appian  (B.C.  ii.  70,  71.)  leave  no  doubt  that,  besides  the
Italian  forces,  as  he  calls  them,  there  were  large  bodies  of  allies  oa
both  sides,  and  especially  on  the  Porapeian.

A.C.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  289

eighty  legionary  cohorts  in  line,  so  much  reduced  by
the  losses  of  their  numerous  campaigns  as  to  amount
to  no  more  than  twenty-two  thousand  fighting  men ;
while  in  cavalry  he  was  exceedingly  weak,  having
only  one  thousand  horsemen  ;  but  these  were  a  well-
tried  body  of  Gaulish  veterans,  on  whom,  as  we  have
seen,  he  could  place  entire  dependence.  His  subsi-
diary forces  must  have  been  also  much  inferior  in
numbers  to  those  of  the  enemy.  Besides  Germans
and  Gauls,  he  was  attended  by  some  recent  levies
from  Greece  and  Thessaly.  But  the  work  of  the
day  was  to  be  performed  by  the  veteran  legionaries,
and  their  leader  knew  and  relied  on  the  spirit  which
linked  man  to  man  among  them  ;  for  every  private
seemed  to  feel  that  his  general's  eye  was  upon  himself
personally,  and  the  sentiment  with  which  the  centu-
rion Crastinus  greeted  him,  as  he  passed  along  the
ranks,  was  responded  to  by  one  and  all.  My  general,
he  exclaimed,  /  will  so  bear  myself  this  day,  that,
whether  I  survive  or  fall,  you  shall  have  cause  to
thank  me.  Crastinus  was  the  first  to  hurl  the
pilum,  and  commenced  the  fray.1

Such  was  the  eagerness  with  which  Caesar  ac-
cepted the  proffered  challenge,  that  he  ordered  the
works  of  his  camp  to  be  levelled  for  his  battalions
to  deploy  in  line  without  obstruction,  and  take  up
their  ground  instantaneously.2  With  forces  so  in-
ferior, and  posted  in  the  middle  of  an  open  plain,
he  was  well  assured  that  the  enemy  would  attempt

1  The  body  of  Crastinus  was  discovered  on  the  field,  the  face
pierced  with  a  sword  wound.  Caesar  accorded  to  it  peculiar  honours.
Plut.  Pomp.  71.;  Appian,  c.  82.  Lucan  has  a  bitter  imprecation
ogainst  him  (vii.  470.):

"  Di  tibi  non  mortem  quse  cunctis  pcena  paratur,

Sed  sensum  post  fata  fuse  dent,  Crastine,  morti."
*  Lucan,  vii.  326. :

"  Sternite  jam  vallum  fossasque  implete  ruina,

Exeat  ut  plenis  aciesnon  sparsa  maniplis."

Corap.  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  74.,  who,  however,  does  uot  understand  the
meaning  of  the  operation.

VOL.  II.  U

290  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH. XVII.

to  outflank  him.  Yet  he  could  not  venture  to  ex-
tend his  front.  He  retained  the  usual  battle  array,
drawing  up  his  legionary  cohorts  in  three  lines,  of
which  the  third  was  destined  to  act  as  a  reserve.
To  support  his  small  body  of  cavalry,  which  occu-
pied the  extreme  right  of  his  position,  he  stationed
in  their  rear  six  cohorts  taken  from  the  third  line,
disposing  their  front  obliquely  so  as  to  sustain  the
anticipated  movement  of  the  enemy  on  his  flank.1
He  took  up  his  own  position  with  the  tenth  legion
at  the  right  of  his  line,  to  encourage  the  cavalry
by  his  immediate  proximity,  and  to  share  with  his
favourite  battalions  the  post  of  greatest  danger  and
responsibility.

Pompeius,  as  was  expected,  directed  his  cavalry
B»uie  of  to  charge  and  turn  the  flank  of  the  opposite
Phareaiia.  ranks2 :  meanwhile  he  made  no  demon-
stration of  attack  with  his  infantry,  but  ordered  his
lines  to  await  the  onset  of  the  Caesareans  with-
out advancing,  according  to  the  usual  practice,  to
arrest  it  in  mid  career.  He  expected,  we  are  in-
Thecassarean.  formed,  that  the  assailants  would  be  ex-
pomllian  hausted  by  their  own  impetuosity,  and  fall
infantry,  ^^  confusion  on  meeting  the  steady  points
of  their  adversaries'  swords.  But  he  had  not  cal-
culated on  the  admirable  training  and  tact  of  the
practised  veterans.  When  they  saw  that  the  opposite
ranks  did  not  advance  to  meet  them,  they  drew  up

1  Lucan,  vii. 522.:

''  Tenet  obliquas  post  signa  cohortes."

This  seems  to  be  the  best  explanation  of  this  difficult  passage.  Comp.
Cses.  B.C.  iii.  89.

2  The  circumstances  of  the  battle  are  minutely  described  by  Caesar,
B.C.  iii.  92 — 95.,  and  his  narrative  is  fully  borne  out  by  Appian,
Plutarch,  and  Diou. Lncan  is  useful  for  illustration ;  but  none  of
the  historians  give  any  colour  to  the  statement  he  introduces  for  effect,
that  a  last  great  stand  was  made  in  the  centre  by  the  flower  of  the
Roman  nobility  (vii.  545.):

"  Ventura  erat  ad  robur  Magni  mediasque  catervas  .  . ,
Constitit  hie  bellum,  fortunaque  Csesaris  hiesit;
Jfon  illic  regum  auxiliis,"  &c.

A.U.716-B.C.4S.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  291

of  their  own  accord,  recovered  their  breath  and  their
order,  and  then  rushing  forward  again,  hurled  their
piles  at  a  distance  of  twenty  paces,  and  drew  their
swords  with  as  much  vigour  and  composure  as  their
antagonists  who  had  remained  stationary.  The
Pompeians,  on  the  other  hand,  crowded  by  their
own  numbers,  and  curbed  by  their  officers,  met  the
attack  with  none  of  the  animation  which  the  soldier
acquires  in  the  act  of  charging:  yet  they  fought
for  a  time  manfully,  and  a  bloody  encounter,  sword
to  sword,  took  place  along  the  opposing  lines.1  Per-
haps Pompeius's  motive  in  not  allowing  his  line
to  advance  was  to  draw  the  Caesareans  onwards,
and  so  throw  upon  their  rear  the  cavalry  which  was
beginning  to  operate  on  their  flank.  Against  this
manoeuvre  Caesar  had  provided,  to  the  best  of  his
means,  by  keeping  a  third  line  in  reserve ;  but  the
charge  of  the  Pompeian  cavalry  was  not,  as  it
happened,  sufficiently  successful  to  call  forth  the
application  of  this  resource.  It  had  brought,  how-
ever, its  overwhelming  weight  of  men  and  horses
to  bear  with  formidable  effect  upon  the  slender
Gaulish  squadrons.  Unable  to  sustain  the  shock,
they  had  given  way  before  it,  but  still  keeping  their
ranks  unbroken,  and  making  face  to  the  right  so
as  to  cover  as  much  as  possible  the  flank  of  the
infantry.  The  six  Caesarean  cohorts  which  had  been
drawn  up  obliquely  for  the  same  purpose  now
advanced  between  the  intervals  of  these
squadrons.  The  legionary,  well  armed,  "uS'Sruieir
active  and  expert,  was  generally  more  than
a  match  for  cavalry2 ;  for  the  horses  of  the  mounted

1  Lucan,  vii.  489.:

"  Sed  quota  pars  cladis  jaculis  ferroque  rolanti
Exacta  est  ?  odiis  solus  civilibus  ensis
Sufficit,  et  dextras  Romana  in  viscera  dncit."
*  The  Highlanders  who  routed  the  English  cavalry  at  Preston  Fans,
were  directed  to  strike  at  the  noses  of  the  horses,  which  wheeled  round
and  became  nnmanageable.  Comp.  Lucan,  vii.  528.,  where,  however,
u 2

292  HISTORY OF TTIK ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

squadrons  which  attended  the  Roman  armies  were
generally  small  and  light,  their  accoutrements
clumsy,  and  their  training  comparatively  defective.
The  appointments  of  the  Pompeians,  indeed,  were
more  than  usually  complete ;  their  cavaliers  were
armed  to  the  teeth,  and  if  their  conduct  and  disci-
pline were  inferior,  their  spirit  was  confident  and
high.  But  the  Caesareans,  intermingled  with  the
horses  of  their  Gaulish  allies,  who  returned  with
renewed  ardour  to  the  combat,  made  havoc  among
these  gallant  patricians.  Strike  at  their  faces,  was
the  order  which  passed  down  their  ranks;  and
whether  they  used  the  sword  or  the  pilum,  they
wasted  not  a  single  blow  on  the  mailed  panoply
of  their  adversaries,  but  thrust  at  their  faces  with
a  sure  and  vigorous  aim  that  disconcerted  the
bravest  of  the  Eoman  youth.1  The  Pompeian

he  seems  to  attribute  too  much  of  the  blame  of  discomfiture  to  the
cowardice  of  the  auxiliary  cavalry.  Floras  says:  "  Cohortes  tantum
in  effusos  equites  facere  impettim,  ut  illi  esse  pedites,  hi  venire  in
equis  videreritur."

1  Com  pare  Plutarch's  description  (Pomp.  71.).  Caesar's  well-known
command,  Miles,  faciem  feri,  was  explained  by  the  ancients  on  the
supposition  that  the  Pompeian  cavalry  being  composed  in  great  part
of  the  young  Roman  nobility,  the  surest  means  of  putting  such  cox-
combs to  flight  was  to  threaten  their  faces  with  disfigurement.  But
this  explanation  rests  on  no  good  authority,  nor  have  we  any  reason
to  doubt  the  gallantry  of  the  young  patricians  who  composed  this
force.  Germanicus  (Tac.  Ann.  ii.  15.)  ordered  his  soldiers,  on  en-
gaging the  Germans,  ora  ntucronibus  qvarere,  telling  them  at  the  same
time  not  to  be  discouraged  by  the  great  size  of  their  shields.  These
shields  covered  the  whole  body,  leaving  only  the  face  to  aim  at.  In
the  same  manner  the  Roman  cavaliers  were  thoroughly  armed,  and
the  soldiers  who  had  been  accustomed  to  engage  the  half-clad  Gauls
might  require  this  advice  on  meeting  an  enemy  so  differently  equipped.
Caesar's  command,  therefore,  was  just  such  as  an  officer  of  the  life-
guards at  Waterloo  might  have  addressed  to  his  men  before  they
encountered  the  French  cuirassiers ;  and  it  is  well-known  that
by  this  lunge  at  the  face  many  a  personal  combat  was  decided
on  that  day.

The  body  armour  of  the  Roman  consisted  generally  of  a  headpiece
and  cuirass ;  his  face  and  throat  were  bare,  and  the  belly  and  thighs
only  slightly  protected  by  a  loose  fringe  or  kilt.  The  sword-cut
could  hardly  take  effect  except  above  or  below  the  breast.  Accord-

A.C.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  293

squadrons  were  completely  broken,  and  driven  in
confusion  to  the  adjacent  hills,  while  the  light-
armed  auxiliaries,  no  longer  protected,  were  cut
to  pieces,  and  the  Csesareans,  flushed  with  vic-
tory, advanced  on  the  flank  and  rear  of  the  main
body.

Caesar  instantly  called  up  his  third  line,  and  made
a  general  advance  upon  the  opposing  bat-

. f?  , ji|  Bout  of  the

tahons,  already  shaken  by  the  first  charge  vompeian
they  had  sustained,  and  now  reeling  under  fllcut'oTpom-
the  sudden  blows  which  assailed  them  on
the  flank.  At  the  commencement  of  the  battle
he  had  ordered  his  men  to  confine  their  aim  to
the  Komans  opposed  to  them,  and  not  waste  their
strength  on  the  allies,  whose  slaughter  would  count
little  towards  deciding  the  event.1  But  as  soon
as  the  fortune  of  the  day  had  declared  in  his  favour,
he  commanded  them  to  abstain  from  the  blood
of  citizens,  and  devote  themselves  to  completing
their  victory  by  the  destruction  of  the  barbarians.8
The  hearts  of  the  Pompeian  legionaries  were  not  in
their  work.  As  each  Caesarean  confronted  an  oppo-
nent, he  communicated  to  him  the  order  he  had
received,  and  the  Pompeians  gladly  availed  them-
selves of  the  welcome  respite,  and  even  opened  their
ranks  to  let  the  victors  rush  upon  their  allies,
who  were  crowded  in  unavailable  masses  behind
them.  Among  these  almost  unresisting  multitudes  a
great  slaughter  took  place.  Pompeius  had  already

ingly,  a  sword-wound  is  generally  described  as  on  the  face  or  neck
(ore,  jugulo),  or  belly  (visceribus).  Struck  to  the  heart  is  a  phrase
unknown  to  the  Romans.

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  74.:  fxeo'^e  "''*'  M0*  ™v  'ITZMV  n&v<uv.

4  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  80. : a^avarftv  rtav  fyioeflcou/,  tirl  Sf  TOUJ  nvfj./j.d
XQVS  [i6vovs  x&)P6"') Ka^ To's ^ffffoiyueVots 7rpo(reirf\afov, irapaifo vmfi

aSeus fff-rdvat Si(K0fOvrfs Se OUTOUS ol rov Kaiffapos rovs

avundxovs  ov  Swa/J.(vovi  afTf'x*"'  brfpovv.  So  Florus,  "  Farce  civi-
bus."  Suet.  JuL  75.:  "  Acie  Pharsalica  proelamavit  ut  civibus
parceretur."  LUC-UI,  vii.  319.:

"  Civis  qui  fugerit  esto/

294  HISTOBY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn,

abandoned  the  field,  retiring  moodily  to  his  entrench-
ments at  the  first  inclination  of  fortune.  He  made
dispositions  indeed  for  the  defence  of  the  works ;
but  the  routed  battalions,  instead  of  rallying  to  man
the  ramparts,  fled  with  precipitation  past  them,  and
took  refuge  on  a  hill  at  a  little  distance.  The
discomfited  general,  alone  in  his  tent,  was  soon
roused  from  his  sullen  despondency  by  the  shouts
of  the  enemy  pressing  upon  his  outworks ;  exclaim-
ing with  peevish  impatience,  What,  assault  even
my  camp ! *  he  mounted  his  horse  and  galloped
with  a  handful  of  attendants  through  the  Decuman
or  hinder  gate.

The  conquerors  burst  into  the  encampment,  where
Cfesar  pursue*  they  found  every  preparation  made  for
the  fugitives,  celebrating  an  assured  victory.2  Tables
were  laid  for  the  banquet,  and  decked  with  splen-
did services  of  plate;  the  tents  of  Lentulus  and
others  were  already  embowered  in  ivy.  This  display
of  luxury  and  magnificence  astonished  and  tempted
the  rude  veterans ;  but,  before  they  could  address
themselves  to  the  spoil,  their  services  were  again
required  by  their  indefatigable  general,  and  such  was
their  devotion  to  him  that  they  consented,  at  his
earnest  entreaty,  to  leave  the  fruits  of  victory  un-
tasted  until  they  had  dislodged  the  routed  army
from  the  fastnesses  to  which  it  had  fled.  The  Pom-
peians  were  too  much  dispirited  to  make  any  resist-
ance. Shivered  once  more  at  the  first  onset,  they
poured  in  broken  masses  over  hill  and  plain.  But
Caesar  was  not  yet  satisfied.  Allowing  a  part  of  his
troops  only  to  return  to  the  camps,  he  led  four
legions  in  hot  pursuit  by  a  shorter  or  better  road,
and  drew  them  up  at  the  distance  of  six  miles  from
the  field  of  battle.3  The  fugitives,  finding  their  re-

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  81. ;  Plut.  Pomp.  72.

2  Gaes.  B.C.  iii.  97. ;  Plut.  I.e.

1  Ca»s.  l.c. :  "  Commodiore  itinere  Pompeianis  occurrere  coepit."

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  295

treat  intercepted,  halted  on  an  eminence  overhanging
a  stream.  Caesar  set  his  men  immediately  to  throw
up  entrenchments,  and  cut  off  their  approach  to  the
water.  This  last  labour  was  accomplished  before
nightfall ;  and  when  the  Pompeians  perceived  that
their  means  of  watering  were  intercepted,  they
listened  to  the  summons  of  the  heralds  who  required
their  surrender.  A  few  only  of  the  senators  escaped
in  the  darkness.

Early  on  the  morrow  the  fugitives  descended  from
their  position,  as  required,  and,  approach-

. f,  '  , , His  clemency

ing  in  the  attitude  of  suppliants,  demanded  to  the  van-

- -  rr ~  ,  , quiihed :

grace  of  the  conqueror.  Caesar  hastened  number  of
to  reassure  them  by  expatiating  on  the
lenity  which  had  marked  his  conduct  throughout  the
contest ;  nor  did  he  falsify  on  this  occasion  the  cha-
racter he  was  so  proud  to  claim.  The  battle  of
Pharsalia,  it  was  allowed  even  by  his  contemporaries,
was  honourably  distinguished  in  the  annals  of  civil
warfare;  from  the  close  of  the  day  no  more  blood
was  shed ;  the  fugitives  were  spared,  and  the  suppli-
ants received  mercy.1  Nor,  indeed,  was  the  carnage
of  the  combat  proportioned  to  its  results.  The
victors  lost  thirty  centurions,  and  two  hundred,  or,
as  the  highest  estimate  stated,  twelve  hundred
legionaries :  of  the  vanquished  there  fell  ten  senators,
forty  knights,  and  six  thousand  of  all  ranks.2  But

1  It  is  strange  that  Dion  should  make  a  statement  which  is  con-
tradicted by  every  other  writer.  He  says,  xli.  62. :  rwv  5£  5^
f)ov\fin<uv  TWV  Tf  tTnreo»>  Sffovs  p^v  ical  irp6r(p6v  irort  fl'prjKilis  rjXr^Kfi
airf'/creive.  On  the  other  hand,  we  read  in  (1.)  Caesar  himself,  i.  98.,
"Omnes  conservavit."  (2.)  Cic.  pro  Marcell.3.,  pro  Ligar.  6.:
"Quis  non  earn  victoriam  probet,  in  qua  Occident  nemo  nisi  arma-
tus?"  (3.)  Vellei,  ii.  52.:  "Nihil  ilia  victoria  mirabilius  ....  fnit,
quando  ncminem  nisi  acie  consumptum  patria  desideravit."  (4.)
Sueton.  Jul.  75. :  "  Nee  ulli  pcrisse  nisi  in  prselio  reperiuntur,"  with
three  exceptions  which  occurred  at  a  later  time.  (5.)  Florus,  iv.
2.  90.,  speaking  generally,  "  Reliqua  pax  incraenta,  pensatum  cle-
mentia  bellum,"  &c.

*  This  was  the  statement  of  Asinius  Pollio,  who  was  present  in  the
buttle.  Others  swelled  the  loss  of  the  Pompeians  to  25,000.  Appian.
B.  C.  ii.  82.

296  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvn.

this  return  does  not  include  the  loss  of  the  auxiliaries,
which,  at  least  on  the  Pompeian  side,  must  have  been
much  greater.  It  may  be  added  that  Caesar's  clemency
was  not  dictated  merely  by  policy.  He  mourned
over  the  destruction  of  so  many  brave  men,  even  at
the  moment  which  satiated  his  own  thirst  for  power
and  glory.  They  would  have  it  so,  he  exclaimed,  as
he  traversed  the  field  strewn  with  the  corpses  of  the
honoured  dead ;  after  all  my  exploits,  I  should  have
been  condemned  to  death  had  I  not  thrown  myself
upon  the  protection  of  my  soldiers.1  The  most
DomitiusBiain  distinguished  of  the  slain  was  L.  Domi-
in  the  punmit.  tiUS}  a  man  conspicuous  among  the  basest
of  his  class  for  treachery,  the  fiercest  for  ferocity,  and
the  most  rancorous  for  personal  malice.  He  was
cut  down  in  the  flight  by  Caesar's  cavalry.2  In  the
course  of  this  history,  we  shall  have  to  brand  the
name  of  Domitius  through  several  succeeding  genera-
tions as  the  symbol  of  falsehood,  cruelty  and  vindic-
tiveness.  We  may  lament  that  Lucan  condescended
to  embalm  the  memory  of  the  victim  of  Pharsalia  in
verses  of  more  than  usual  power  and  pathos ;  perhaps
they  were  meant  as  a  tribute  of  flattery,  however  un-
availing, to  his  detestable  descendant,  the  emperor
Nero.3

The  conqueror  was  satisfied  with  the  solid  fruits  of
victory,  without  claiming  the  title  of  impe-

M.  Brutus  sur-  L J  j j  , •  ,1

renders,  and  is  rator ;  he  demanded  no  triumph  nor  thanks-
taken  into  .  .  '  -  PI-

favour  by giving  irom a senate ot his own  parti-
zans  ;  a  piece  of  moderation  which,  however

1  Suet.  Jul.  30. :  "  Hoc  voluerunt  :  tantis  rebus  gestis  con-
demnatus  essem,  nisi  ab  exercitu  auxilium  petissem."  So  Plut.
Cats.  46.

*  Cicero  (Philipp.  ii.  29.)  seems  to  insinuate  that  he  was  slain  in
cold  blood  by  Antonius.
1  Lucan,  vii.  599. :

*  Mora  tamen  eminuit  clarorum  in  strage  virorum
Pugnacis  Domiti  . .  rictus  toties  a  C«sare,  salva
Libertate  perit;  tune  rnille  in  vulnera  laetus
Labitur,  et  venia  gaudet  caruisse  secunda."

A.IT.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  297

trifling  it  may  appear  in  our  eyes,  was  thought  wor-
thy of  being  recorded  to  his  honour  by  a  reluctant
panegyrist.1  He  bestowed  his  pardon  and  even  his
favour  upon  the  chiefs  of  the  opposite  party  who  of-
fered to  lay  down  their  arms.  Among  these  was  M.
Brutus,  who  had  escaped  from  the  field,  and  got  safely
into  Larissa ;  but,  hearing  of  his  leader's  flight,  and
despairing  of  the  cause,  he  had  voluntarily  tendered
his  submission.  Assuredly  this  conclusion  of  his
campaign  contrasts  mournfully  with  Lucan's  address
to  the  future  hero  of  the  republic.  Unennobled  by
honours  and  offices,  he  had  escaped,  in  the  mass  of
the  combatants,  the  deadliest  aim  of  the  Caesareans.
Yet  how  fatal  a  weapon  did  he  wield  I  He  is  bid  to
reserve  it  for  a  fitter  day  and  a  riper  victim.  The
foe  has  not  yet  scaled  the  tyrant's  citadel,  or  merited,
at  the  summit  of  all  human  power,  to  bow  to  the
sacrificial  steel. 2  Such  is  the  strain  of  the  poet ;  the
historian  quietly  assures  us  that  Caesar  learned  in  con-
fidential discourse  with  his  captive  the  direction  of
his  adversary's  flight ;  not,  perhaps,  that  Brutus  in-
tentionally betrayed  so  important  a  secret,  but  his
warmth  of  temperament  and  want  of  reserve  made  him
more  dangerous  as  a  friend  than  as  an  enemy.  Ad-
mitted to  familiarity  with  his  new  leader  (for  he  seems
to  have  placed  himself  at  once  freely  at  Caesar's  dis-
posal) he  exerted  his  influence  to  conciliate  him  to-
wards Cassius,  and,  at  a  later  period,  moderated  his
wrath  against  Deiotarus.  Caesar  generously  indulged
this  impetuous  zeal,  and  was  touched  by  its  openness,
however  little  it  was  tempered  by  prudence  or  reflec-
tion. As  for  this  young  man,  he  is  said  to  have
observed  of  him,  I  know  not  what  he  wills,  but  what-
ever he  does  will,  he  wills  with  energy. 3

1  Cic.  Philipp.  xiv.  8.;  Drumann,  iii.  516.

2  Lucan,  vii.  586.  seqq.:

"  Illic  plebeia  contectus  casside  vultus,

Ignotusque  hosti,  quod  ferrum.  Brute,  tencbas  ! "
Cic.  ad  Alt. xiv.  1.,  Plutarch,  tirut.  6.

298  HISTORY OP THE EOMANS

CHAPTER  XVIII.

Pompeius  seeks  refuge  in  Egypt. — Treacherous  policy  of  the  ad-
visers of  King  Ptolemaeus. — Pompeius  is  enticed  from  his  vessel
and  murdered. — The  fugitives  from  Pharsalia  reassemble  at  Dyr-
rhachium  and  Corcyra. — Cicero  withdraws  from  the  contest. —
Scipio  assumes  the  command. — Caesar  follows  in  pursuit  of  Pom-
peius: receives  the  submission  of  C.  Cassius  :  reaches  Egypt,  and
undertakes  to  settle  the  affairs  of  that  kingdom. — Fascinations  of
Cleopatra. — Discontent  of  the  Alexandrians  :  they  rise  against
Caesar,  and  blockade  him  in  the  palace. — The  Alexandrian  war:
intrigues,  defeat  and  death  of  Ptolemaeus. — Caesar  places  Cleo-
patra on  his  throne. — Pharnaces  attacks  the  allies  of  the  Republic,
and  defeats  Calvinus. — Csesar  marches  against  him:  he  is  routed
at  the  battle  of  Zela  and  slain. — Arrogance  of  the  conqueror,
A.TT.  706,  707.  B.C.  48,  47.

THE  remnant  of  the  vast  Pompeian  host  was  scattered

in  various  directions. No  reserve  had  been

e^S'to  the provided  on  the  battle  field,  nor  had  any

•ea-eoast:  he A  ,  .  .  , .  ,  . -  .  i_ >  j

takes  ship,  place  been  assigned  in  the  neighbourhood
for  rallying  in  the  event  of  disaster.  The
fiimiiy'de-  fleet  was  far  distant,  and  dispersed  on  various
uy ion  in  petty  enterprises.  Yet  the  resources  which
remained  to  so  great  a  party,  even  after  its
signal  defeat,  were  abundant  and  manifold.1  But
Pompeius  himself,  mortified  and  bewildered,  aban-
doned every  thing,  and  sought  only  to  save  his  own
life.  He  fled  through  Larissa,  declining  the  shelter
of  its  walls,  and,  penetrating  the  defiles  of  Tempe,
gained  the  Thessalian  shore  at  the  mouth  of  the
Peneus.2  Here  he  fell  in  with  a  merchant  vessel
lying  off  the  coast,  the  master  of  which  recognized

1  Lucan.  viii.  27».»

"  Sparsit  potius  Pharsalia  noetras
Quam  subvertit  opes."
*  Plut.  Pontp.  73

^.0.706-8.0.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  299

and  generously  offered  to  take  him  on  board,  together
with  Lentulus  Spinther,  Lentulus  Crus,  the  consul  of
the  preceding  year,  Favonius,  the  Galatian  chieftain,
Deiotarus,  and  a  few  more.  Pompeius  dismissed  the
slaves  who  had  hitherto  accompanied  him,  assuring
them  that  they  at  least  had  nothing  to  fear  from  the
conqueror :  it  was  to  the  loyalty  of  Favonius  that  he
owed  the  common  offices  of  menial  attendance.  The
master  of  the  vessel  undertook  to  carry  him  wherever
he  should  appoint.  Pompeius  merely  cast  anchor  off
Amphipolis,  in  Macedonia,  in  order  to  provide  him-
self with  a  sum  of  money,  and  then  steered  for  Lesbos,
where  his  wife  Cornelia,  and  his  younger  son,  Sextus,
were  also  received  on  board.  From  thence,  without
a  moment's  delay,  the  fugitives  proceeded  to  run
along  the  Asiatic  coast,  and  were  joined  in  their  pro-
gress by  another  vessel  with  a  few  more  adherents  of
the  ill-fated  cause.  Among  these  were  some  person-
ages of  rank  :  when  at  last  they  landed  on  the  shores
of  Cilicia,  a  miniature  senate  was  convened,  and  a
mock  deliberation  held  under  the  presidency  of  the
late  consul,  to  determine  what  course  should  finally
be  taken.  We  are  assured,  strange  as  it  may  appear,
that  the  wish  of  Pompeius  himself  was  to  seek  an
asylum  in  Parthia,  Whether  he  hoped  to  lead  the
murderers  of  Crassus  against  his  detested  rival,  or
only  to  watch  in  security  the  progress  of  events,  no-
thing can  show  more  strongly  than  such  a  project  the
state  of  abject  humiliation  to  which  he  was  reduced.1
Orodes  had  just  inflicted  another  insult  upon  the
majesty  of  the  republic  in  throwing  her  ambassador,
Hirrus,  into  chains,  because  Pompeius  had  refused  to
buy  his  alliance  by  the  surrender  of  Syria.  It  was  but
too  evident  that  his  consent  to  receive  Pompeius  him-
self must  be  obtained  by  submitting  to  still  greater
sacrifices.  But  to  these  affronts  Pompeius,  it  appears,

1  Dion  (xlii.  2.)  cannot  believe  it  possible  that  Pompeius  contem-
plated taking  refuge  in  1'arthia.

300  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvm.

could  have  submitted ;  the  arguments  which  induced
him  to  renounce  such  a  plan  were  drawn  from  the
danger  it  seemed  to  threaten  to  his  own  person,
or  at  least  to  the  honour  of  his  handsome  wife.1  The
next  alternative  which  suggested  itself  was  to  retire
into  Africa,  where  the  king  of  Numidia  had  proved
his  devotion  to  the  benefactor  to  whom  he  owed  his
sceptre,  by  his  signal  service  in  the  destruction  of
Curio.  In  Africa  two  legions  awaited  their  general's
arrival,  flushed  with  victory  and  devoted  to  his  party.
The  resources  of  the  province  were  immense :  it  of-
fered its  harbours  for  the  reception  of  his  magnificent
fleets ;  while,  separated  from  Europe  by  the  breadth
of  the  Mediterranean,  it  might  defy  Caesar  for  months
even  to  approach  it.  The  fatuity  of  Pompeius  in
deciding  against  the  course  which  held  out  so  flatter-
ing a  prospect  seems  indeed  inconceivable.  But  it
would  appear  that  he  still  looked  fondly  to  the  East
as  the  quarter  of  the  world  associated  with  his  greatest
triumphs,  and  where  the  prestige  of  his  name  had
taken,  as  he  imagined,  the  deepest  root.  Perhaps  he
wished  to  make  himself  at  all  events  independent  of
the  succour  of  his  own  countrymen.

The  king  whom  the  Roman  government  had  im-
posed upon  the  Egyptian  people  had  died

State  of  Egypt. *  TT \. J

Quarrel  be- three  years  previously. He  had  requited

tweenPtole- , „ J  £ .  11  • i  •  11  , •

cieoVtr'a  favour  of  the  republic  by  a  will 2  in

which  he  had  placed  his  kingdom  under  the
guardianship  of  Rome,  while  he  nominated  his  son
Dionysius,  or,  as  he  was  afterwards  called,  Ptolemasus
the  Twelfth,  and  his  daughter  Cleopatra,  both  under
age,  as  joint  successors  to  his  throne.  In  accord-
ance with  the  national  usages,  this  joint  authority
had  been  consolidated  by  the  marriage  of  the  brother
and  sister,  the  former  of  whom  was  seventeen  years
of  age,  and  the  latter  about  two  years  his  senior.

1  Plut.  Pomp.  76.;  Luoan,  viii.  412.;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  83

2  Oses.  B.C.  in.  108.

A.U.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE Elf  PIKE.  301

The  senate  had  appointed  Pompeius  guardian  of  the
kingdom,  and  possibly  the  authority  this  appointment
gave  him,  and  the  influence  he  already  exercised
through  it,  assisted  in  determining  his  choice  of  a
place  of  refuge.  But,  at  the  moment  of  his  arrival
off  the  shores  of  Egypt,  the  existing  government  was
less  than  ever  competent  to  extend  its  protection  to
so  dangerous  a  suppliant.  The  throne  had  become
an  object  of  contention  between  the  brother  and
sister.  Cleopatra  had  been  driven  from  Alexandria
by  a  popular  insurrection,  and  the  ministers  of  her
youthful  consort,  who  had  apparently  instigated  the
tumult,  took  advantage  of  its  success  to  exclude  her
from  her  share  in  the  sovereignty.  The  royal  child
was  directed  in  all  his  counsels  by  a  junta  consisting
of  Pothinus,  a  Greek  eunuch  of  the  court,  Theodotus,
a  rhetorician,  who  held  the  ostensible  office  of  pre-
ceptor to  the  sovereign,  and  Achillas,  an  officer  of  the
Egyptian  army.1  These  men  had  acquired  a  complete
ascendency  over  their  tender  charge,  and  they  used
their  influence  unscrupulously  for  the  furtherance  of
their  private  schemes.  They  had  stationed  Ptole-
maeus  at  the  head  of  his  troops  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Pelusium,  to  await  on  the  frontiers  of  the  king-
dom the  invasion  of  Cleopatra,  who  had  found  means
to  raise  a  military  force  for  the  assertion  of  her
rights.2  The  hostile  armies  were  arrayed  almost  in
sight  of  each  other  at  the  foot  of  the  Casian  hills,
when  Pompeius  appeared  off  the  coast  with  a  slender
flotilla  bearing  about  two  thousand  soldiers,  whom  he
had  collected  in  his  flight.  The  royal  ministers  hoped
to  exclude  the  republic,  in  the  state  of  anarchy  into
which  it  appeared  to  have  fallen,  from  the  inter-
ference it  had  so  long  exercised  in  the  affairs  of
Egypt ;  they  might  also  apprehend  that  the  new
comer,  if  admitted  within  their  confines,  would  rather

1  flat.  Pomp.  77.  Cuts.  B.C.  iii.  103

302  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH. XVITL

assist  the  injured  sister  than  confirm  the  usurpation
of  the  brother. Pompeius  sent  a  message
e" to  the  young  king,  requesting  the  favour  of
AteTadria, a  hospitable reception. His application

Crafty  polity  r.  •  J-  •  /L

of  the  king-,  gave  rise  to  anxious  discussion  m  the  royal
council.  If  any  of  the  king's  ministers
was  honest  and  bold  enough  to  insist  on  the  obliga-
tions of  good  faith  and  gratitude,  his  counsels  were
speedily  overruled  by  the  arguments  of  a  subtler
policy.  It  was  dangerous  to  expose  the  kingdom  to
the  wrath  of  Caesar  by  receiving  his  defeated  enemy ;
it  was  dangerous  to  reject  the  petition  of  a  suppliant
whom  the  fortune  of  war  might  yet  restore  to  power.
The  only  remaining  course,  which  seemed  to  avoid
every  danger,  and  combine  every  advantage,  was  to
invite  the  unfortunate  visitor  to  the  shore  and  at  once
make  away  with  him.  Such  a  crime  might  deserve
the  gratitude  of  the  conqueror,  since  it  would  effec-
tually cripple  and  distract  the  plans  of  his  adversaries.
Accordingly,  the  treacherous  counsel  was
invTted"o18  adopted.  A  small  fishing-boat  was  speedily
equipped,  and  Achillas,  with  a  few  attend-
ants, among  whom,  to  inspire  confidence  in  the  in-
tended victim,  were  Septimius,  an  old  comrade  in
arms,  and  another  Eoman  officer  named  Salvius,
proceeded  to  invite  Pompeius  into  the  royal  presence.1
The  meanness  of  the  vessel  assigned  to  convey  so
noble  a  passenger  was  excused  by  the  alleged  shal-
lowness  of  the  water  near  the  coast ;  but  it  was  really
so  contrived  to  exclude  a  retinue  sufficient  for  his
protection.  The  Eoman  officers,  indeed,  who  had
crowded  into  the  ship  from  which  their  chief  was
about  to  take  his  departure,  beheld  the  Egyptian
galleys  ranged  along  the  shore,  and  the  evident
falsehood  of  the  plea  awakened  their  worst  appre-
hensions. But  Pompeius,  prepared  to  dare  or  to

1  Cses.  B.C.  iji.  104.;  Plat.  Pomp.  78,  79.

A.U.706-li.C.4£.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  303

submit,  combated  their  fears,  and  repelled  their
entreaties  to  remain.  He  took  leave  of  his  friends
with  a  faint  smile,  repeating  the  words  of  the  poet :
He  who  repairs  to  a  tyrant  becomes  his  slave,  though
he  set  out  a  freeman.1  He  descended  into  the  fatal
bark.  The  distance  to  the  shore  was  considerable,
and  the  passage  was  made  in  painful  and  ominous
silence.  The  illustrious  fugitive  recognized  and
courteously  addressed  Septimius,  but  his  salutation
was  acknowledged  only  by  a  bow  without  a  word.
The  silence  continued,  and  Pompeius  took  up  a  roll
of  parchment  on  which  he  had  written  the  speech  he
proposed  to  address  to  the  king,  and  occupied  him-
self in  studying  it.  Meanwhile,  Cornelia  and  her
friends  watched  from  the  ship  the  progress  of  the
boat  with  the  deepest  anxiety,  and  when  the  king's
soldiers  and  attendants  were  seen  crowding  towards
the  point  where  Pompeius  appeared  about  to  land,
they  indulged  in  the  hope  that  he  would  yet  meet
with  an  honourable  reception.  But  at  the

,  -|-v  .  . i •  *n|l  treacher-

moment  when  Pompeius  was  taking  an  at-  cudy  mur-
tendant's  hand  to  help  himself  to  rise,
Septimius  approached  from  behind  and  struck  him
with  his  sword.  The  victim  knew  his  fate,  and,  with-
out attempting  to  struggle  against  it,  drew  his  toga
over  his  face  with  both  his  hands,  and  so  fell  mortally
wounded.  His  head  was  immediately  severed  from
his  body,  and  carried  away  as  a  proof  of  the  accom-
plishment of  the  bloody  order.  The  trunk  was
thrown  out  of  the  boat  and  abandoned  in  the
breakers.2  The  friends  of  the  murdered  man  beheld
the  deed  from  afar,  and,  uttering  a  shriek  of  horror,
hurried  away  from  the  Egyptian  galleys  which  were

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  85.;  Plut.  I.e. ;  Dion,  xlii.  4. The  lines  ana
from  a  play  of  Sophocles:

Sffris  ykp  us  Tupavvov  efj.TTopevtrau
Kfivov  '<rrl  Sov\os  K&V  i\fv6fpos
1  Pint.  Pomp.  79,  80.

304  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH. xvm.

already  moving  to  intercept  them.1  When  the  by-
standers had  satiated  their  curiosity  with  gazing  on
the  mangled  remains,  a  freedman  of  Pompeius,  who
alone  kept  watch  over  them,  drew  the  headless  corpse
from  the  water's  edge,  wiped  from  it  the  sand  and
brine,  and  wrapped  it  in  his  own  cloak.  The  wreck
of  a  small  fishing-boat  furnished  him  with  wood  2;
and  in  heaping  up  a  rude  and  hasty  pyre  he  was
aided  by  an  ancient  Roman  soldier  who  had  followed
his  patron's  banner  in  the  wars.  The  shadowy  pageant
of  the  Egyptian  monarchy,  its  king,  its  satellites
and  armies,  had  vanished  from  the  solitary  beach,
when  an  exile  and  a  menial  muttered  with  trembling
haste  the  last  farewell  to  the  "  Mighty  Victor  "  of  the
East,  the  "  Mighty  Lord  "  of  the  Imperial  Senate.
The  wretched  obsequies  were  allowed  to  pass  un-
heeded; but  when  Lentulus  Crus  landed
i,.uLeentuiu8  soon  afterwards  on  the  spot,  he  was  seized
and  put  to  death,  as  a  victim  second  only  in
importance  to  Pompeius  himself.

Thus  fell  the  illustrious  chief  whom  alone  of  all
their champions the Eomans had dis-

Reflections  on .  ., 11,1  iij«'  />  .  i /-*

the  death  of tmguished  by  the  appellation  of  the  Great,

Pompeius.  °  J

a  title  which  seemed  peculiarly  appro-
priate to  one  whose  rapid  conquests  in  Asia  could
only  be  paralleled  by  those  of  the  Macedonian
Alexander.3  His  fate  continued  to  point  a  moral  to
the  latest  period  of  the  Empire,  and  its  consumma-
tion deserved  to  be  regarded  as  the  most  tragic
incident  in  Eoman  history.4  He  had  earned  greater
popularity,  and  he  had  perhaps  surpassed  his  rivals
more  conspicuously,  than  any  Roman  before  him ;
and,  in  the  same  proportion,  his  fall  was  more  disas-

1  Lucan,  viii. 709.  720.  2  Lucan,  viii.  755.

*  Pompeins  himself  affected  this  comparison  from  an  early  period.
Comp.  Sallust,  Fr.  Hist.  iii.  32.:  "Cn.  Pompeius  a  prima  adolescentia,
sermone  fautorum  similem  fore  se  credens  Alexandra  regi,  facui
consultaque  ejus  qnidem  aemulns  erat."

*  Comp.  Veil.  ii.  58.

i..r.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  305

trous  and  his  end  more  miserable.  Yet  no  acute
observer,  we  might  suppose,  could  have  failed  to
predict  his  discomfiture;  for  every  move  he  had
made  for  many  years,  whether  in  politics  or  latterly
in  war,  had  been  a  manifest  blunder.  All  generals,
it  has  been  said,  make  mistakes,  and  he  is  the
greatest  who  makes  the  fewest ;  but  the  conduct  of
Pompeius  throughout  his  last  campaigns  had  been
a  series  of  mistakes,  against  which  the  renown  of
his  genius  can  scarcely  maintain  itself.  His  last  im-
perfect success  in  the  defence  of  Petra  he  owed
indeed  to  his  wariness  in  so  long  abstaining  from
offensive  operations :  but  this  delay,  which  he  had
himself  rendered  necessary  by  neglecting  to  secure
the  Iberian  veterans,  was  improved  by  his  adversary
no  less  than  by  himself.  No  partial  victory  could
compensate  for  the  alienation  of  friends,  the  en-
couragement of  enemies,  and  the  loss  of  that  pres-
tige of  invincibility  which  alone  had  thrown  Rome
and  the  provinces  at  his  feet.  Pompeius  checked
Caesar  in  attempting  an  impossibility;  but  the
attempt  itself,  though  unsuccessful,  was  ruinous  to
his  cause,  and  on  this  Caesar  had  calculated.  On
the  whole,  we  must  admit  the  justice  of  the  general
verdict,  that  the  great  Pompeius  was  enervated  by
his  early  triumphs  and  constant  prosperity.  We
have  seen  that  in  the  outset  of  his  career  he  pos-
sessed, with  the  fire  of  youth,  all  the  fiercest  and
most  vindictive  passions  of  his  times.  But  he  was
not  naturally  jealous,  and  when  arrived  at  the
serene  eminence  of  power,  his  vanity  easily  per-
suaded him  that  he  was  beyond  the  reach  of  com-
petition. He  treated  his  associates  and  colleagues
with  lofty  courtesy ;  to  his  spouses  he  even  displayed
a  certain  feminine  fondness;  but  while  his  con-
temporaries could  point  to  no  particular  instance
of  flagrant  incivism,  in  the  spoilt  child  of  revolu-
tions, it  cannot  be  denied  that  the  general  impression
VOL.  H.  x

306  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvin.

he  left  upon  them  was  one  of  deep  distrust  and
wide-spread  dissatisfaction.1  He  was  roused  from
his  dream  of  pre-eminence  to  repel  the  aggression
of  a  more  ardent  rival ;  and  it  was  truly  said  of  the
two  illustrious  competitors  for  power  that  Pompeius
could  bear  no  equal,  Caesar  no  superior.2  Pompeius
fell  at  the  close  of  his  fifty-eighth  year,  on  the
anniversary  of  his  triumph  over  the  greatest  but
Final  disposal  one  °^  n^s  opponents,  the  renowned  king
andUhon"£sns'  OI>  Pontus.3  His  ashes,  hastily  entombed
paid  to  them.  on  ^e  margin,  of  the  waves 4,  were  re-
moved, it  is  said,  at  a  later  period  by  the  pious

1  It  might  be  expected  that  the  memory  of  Pompeius  would  be
more  partially  estimated  under  the  tyranny  of  the  emperors. Yet
Lncan  paints  him  with  more  discrimination  than  any  other  of  his
characters. The  panegyric  of  Velleius  is  less  judicious ;  but  it  is
valuable  in  showing  the  liberty  of  speech  allowed  even  by  a  Tiberius.

Lucan,  ix.  190.  foil. :

"  Civis  obit,  multo  majoribus  impar
Nosse  modum  juris,  sed  in  hoc  tamen  utilis  sevo:
Cui  non  nulla  fuit  justi  reverentia,  si»!va
Libertate  potens,  et  solus  plebe  parata
Privatus  servire  sibi;  rectorque  senatus,
Sed  regnantis  erat:  nil  belli  jure  poposcit,
Quaeque  dari  voluit,  voluit  sibi  posse  negari .  .  .
Olim  vera  fides,  Sulla  Marioque  receptis.
Libertatis  obit;  Pompeio  rebus  ademto
Nunc  et  ficta  perit:  non  jam  regnare  pudebit,
Nee  color  imperil,  nee  frons  erit  ulla  Senatus. "
Velleius,  ii.  29. :  "  Innocentia  eximius,  sanctitate  prsecipuus,  elo-
quentia  medius,  potentiae  quae  honoris  causa  ad  eum  deferretur,  non
ut  ab  eo  occuparetur,  cupidissimus  ;  dux  belli  peritissimus ;  civis  in
toga,  nisi  ubi  vereretur  ne  quern  haberet  parem.  modestissimus  ;  ami-
citiarum  tenax,  in  offensis  exorabilis,  in  reconcilianda  gratia  fidelis-
simus,  in  accipienda  satisfactione  facillimus;  potentia  sua  nunquam,
aut  raro,  ad  impotentiam  usns ;  paene  omnium  vitiorum  expers,  nisi
numeraretur  inter  maxima  in  civitate  libera,  dominaque  gentium,  in-
dignari,  cum  omnes  cives  jure  haberet  pares,  quemquam  sequalem
dignitate  conspicere."

2  Lucan,  i.  1 25. :

"  Nee  quemquam  jam  ferre  potest,  Caesarve  priorem,

Pompeiusve  parem."
8  Dion,  xlii.  5.
4  Lncan,  viii.  797.:

"  Situs  est  qua  terra  cxtrema  refuse
Pendet  in  Oceano."

A.H.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  307

care  of  Cornelia,  and  enjoyed  their  final  rest  in
the  mausoleum  of  his  Alban  villa1,  the  ruins  of
which  are  pointed  out  at  this  day.  Such  is  the
statement  of  his  biographer  ;  but  the  poet  who  sings
his  funeral  dirge  knows  nothing  of  this  honourable
interment.  Lucan  bewails  the  disgrace  of  the  illus-
trious remains,  still  confined  to  their  wretched  hole
scratched  in  the  sand  2,  and  surmounted  by  a  frag-
ment of  stone  on  which  the  bare  name  of  Magnus
had  been  traced  with  a  burnt  brand.3  The  im-
perial dynasties  which  owed  their  elevation  to
the  victory  of  Pharsalia  had  no  interest  in  paying
honour  to  the  champion  of  the  commonwealth  ;
and  it  was  reserved  for  the  most  enlightened  and
the  most  humane  of  the  emperors,  at  a  distance  of
a  hundred  and  sixty  years,  to  raise  a  fitting  monu-
ment to  Pompeius  on  the  spot  where  his  body  had
been  burnt.4

The  nobles  betrayed  their  own  cause  at  Pharsalia
by  their  want  of  courage  and  self-devotion.

Tx • •  • Al. i T  J  A- 1

It  is  in  vain  that  Lucan  rounds  a  poetical  P
period  with  the  names  of  the  Lepidi,  the  Dyhachm
Metelli, the Corvini, and the Torquati,
whom  he  supposes  to  have  fallen  in  the  last  agony
of  the  defence5  :  of  all  the  great  chiefs  with  whom

1  Plut.  Pomp,  in  fin.
1  Lucan,  viii.  756.:

"  Exigua  trepidus  posuit  scrobe."
1  Lucan,  viii.  793.:

"  Hie  situs  est  Magnus."

4  Spartianus,  Hadrian.  7.; Dion,  Ixix. 11.; Appian, ii. 86.:
ftfirilfffv  Kal  (vptv  fir'  tftav  'Poi/ioiai'  &cun\fvs  'ASpiavbs  4trtSrifjuei>t  K.  T.  \.
The  emperor  offered  a  line  for  an  inscription  :  T<£  pools  /3pt6ovTt  ir6o"i)
c-iram  lirAero  rvfj.€ov. Anthol.  Gr.  ii.  286.
*  Lucan,  vii.  583.  :

"  Csedunt  Lepidos,  cseduntque  Metellos

Corvinosque  simul,  Torquaraque  nomina  legum."

A  similar  remark  has  been  made  on  the  battle  of  Waterloo. "  Ex-

cept Duhesme  and  Friant,  neither  of  whose  names  were  very  much

distinguished,  we  hear  of  no  general  officers  among  the  French  list  of

slain." Paul's  Letters  to  his  Kinsfolk,  p.  191.

x  '2

Cato  lead»  the

308  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvm.

we  are  familiar  as  leaders  in  the  Pompeian  camp,
Domitius  alone  perished  on  that  day,  and  even  he
was  killed  in  the  act  of  flying.1  The  fragments  of  the
mighty  ruin  were  scattered  far  away  from  the  scene  of
disaster.  Pompeius  and  a  few  adherents  fled,  as  we
have  seen,  in  one  direction  to  Larissa;  a  larger  num-
ber escaped  by  the  road  to  Illyricum,  and  met  again
within  the  walls  of  Dyrrhachium.  The  principal
reserve  of  the  Pompeian  forces  was  there  commanded
by  M.  Cato,  and  there  also  was  the  common  resort
of  the  wavering  and  dissatisfied,  such  as  Varro  and
Cicero,  who  wished  to  secure  their  own  safety  in
either  event.  The  fleets  of  the  republic,  under  Oc-
tavius  and  C.  Cassius,  still  swept  the  seas  trium-
phantly ;  the  latter  had  recently  burnt  thirty-five
Caesarean  vessels  in  the  harbour  of  Messana.  But
the  naval  commanders  were  well  aware  that  their
exploits  could  have  little  influence  on  the  event  of  a
contest  which  was  about  to  be  decided  by  the  whole
military  force  of  the  Eoman  world ;  and  forming  their
own  plans,  and  acting  for  the  most  part  indepen-
dently, they  began  more  and  more  to  waver  in  their
fidelity  to  the  common  cause.  As  soon  as  the  event
of  the  great  battle  became  known,  the  squadrons  of
the  allies  made  the  best  of  their  way  home,  while
some,  such  as  the  Ehodians,  attached  themselves
to  the  conqueror.  At  the  same  time  the  turbulence
of  the  soldiers  in  garrison  at  Dyrrhachium  broke
through  all  restraint.  They  plundered  the  maga-
zines and  burnt  the  transports  on  which  they  were
destined  to  be  conveyed  to  some  distant  theatre  of
protracted  warfare.  The  desertion  of  the  allies,  the
mutinous  spirit  of  the  troops,  and  the  report  of  the
numerous  adhesions  which  Caesar  was  daily  receiving
from  the  most  conspicuous  of  the  nobles,  convinced

1  Cses.  B.  C.  iii.  99.  Cicero  truculently  insinuates  that  Antonius
put  him  to  death  in  cold  blood  after  he  had  surrendered.  See  Philipp.
ii.  29.

A.D.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  309

Cato  that  the  last  hope  of  keeping  the  party  together,
and  maintaining  the  struggle  effectually,  depended
upon  the  fate  of  Pompeius  himself.  In  the  event  of
the  destruction  of  the  acknowledged  chief  of  the  se-
nate, he  only  contemplated  restoring  to  the  shores  of
Italy  the  troops  confided  to  him,  and  then  betaking
himself  to  retirement  from  public  affairs  in  some
remote  province.1  While  the  fatal  catastrophe  was
yet  unknown  he  withdrew  from  Dyrrhachium  to  Cor-
cyra,  where  the  head-quarters  of  the  naval  force  were
established ;  and  there  he  offered  to  surrender  his
command  to  Cicero  as  his  superior  in  rank.  But  the
consular  declined  the  perilous  honour,  and  refused  to
take  any  further  part  in  a  contest  which,  from  the
first,  had  inspired  him  with  distrust  and  remorse.
The  young  Cnseus  Pompeius  had  urged  the  exercise
of  summary  vengeance  upon  whosoever  should
threaten  defection-  at  such  a  crisis,  and  it  was  with
difficulty  he  was  restrained  from  using  personal
violence  against  Cicero,  when  he  declared  his  in-
tention of  embarking  at  once  for  Italy.2  The  re-
creant consular's  life  was  barely  saved  by  Cato's
vigorous  interference.  At  Corcyra  many  of  the
fugitives  from  the  field  of  battle  rejoined  their
confederates.  Among  them  were  Scipio  and  Afra-
nius,  the  former  of  whom  now  assumed  the  com-
mand of  their  combined  forces,  and  it  was  upon
him,  as  soon  as  the  fact  of  Pompeius's  death  was
ascertained,  that  the  leadership  of  the  party  most
naturally  devolved.3

Caesar  followed  up  his  success  at  Pharsalia  with
unabated  activity.  He  allowed  his  soldiers  C(B8ar  follow,
at  the  most  only  two  days'  repose  on  the  up  hu  victory-
scene  of  their  triumph,  and  amidst  the  spoils  they
had  acquired.4  His  care  was  divided  between  im-

1  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  55.  *  Flat.  Cic.  39.

3  Dion,  xlii.  10.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  87.

4  Appian,  B.C. ii.  88.:  avrbs  8' iwl -ry viicy  8t'o /u<" V*'?*1  *>|r
ttt,>fToAo>  Sifrpityf diW. Cu'sar  Limseii  declares that he  reached
Larissa  the  day  after  tlit/  buttle.

310  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  tn. xvni,

proving  the  victory  he  had  gained  in  the  east,  and
securing  his  acquisitions  in  the  west.  With  the
latter  view  he  ordered  Antcaius  to  return  to  Italy
with  a  large  part  of  his  forces,  and  watch  over  his
interests  in  that  quarter,  where  he  apprehended  that
some  of  the  beaten  faction  might  hazard  a  descent
upon  the  centre  of  his  resources.  He  also  required
his  lieutenant  Calenus  to  complete,  without  delay,
the  subjugation  of  southern  Greece.  Athens  had  not
submission  of  Je^>  opened  her  gates  to  him,  but  the  event
the^pe'io^n.  of  the  great  battle  determined  her  to  obey
nerafc  his  summons.  The  long  resistance  this

city  had  made  exposed  it,  by  the  usages  of  ancient
warfare,  to  the  conqueror's  vengeance;  but  Caesar
ordered  it  to  be  spared,  for  the  sake,  as  he  said,  of
its  illustrious  dead.1  The  Peloponnesus  was  now
speedily  evacuated  by  the  forces  of  the  republic,  and
Calenus  occupied  the  points  on  the  coast  where  he
anticipated  the  possibility  of  fresh  intrusion.  Scipio
had  landed  at  Patrae,  probably  to  receive  the  rem-
nant of  the  Pompeian  garrisons  in  that  province,  but
he  presently  abandoned  it,  and  stretched  his  sails  for
Africa.

Caesar  devoted  himself  to  the  pursuit  of  Pompeius
cie«r  puiue*  with  the  utmost  energy  and  impatience,
pompeiu..  Deing  anxious  not  merely  to  prevent  his
assembling  a  new  armament,  but  if  possible  to  secure
his  person.  He  pushed  forward  with  a  squadron  of
cavalry,  and  was  followed  by  a  single  legion.2  He
reached  Amphipolis  just  after  the  fugitive's  departure,
and,  taking  the  route  of  Asia  by  land,  crossed  the
Hellespont  with  a  few  small  vessels.  In  the  passage
he  fell  in  with  a  squadron  of  C.  Cassius,  who  had
been  despatched  to  the  Euxine  to  stimulate  or  co-
operate with  Pharnaces,  king  of  Pontus,  whose  pro-
mised succours  were  urgently  demanded.  It  was

1  Dion,  xlii.  14.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  88.
*  C»s.  B.C.  iii.  102.  106.

4.D.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  311

remarked  as  an  extraordinary  instance  of  the  good
fortune  ever  supposed  to  wait  upon  the  c.cas«iu.«ur-
mighty  conqueror,  that  the  mere  terror  of  wm.er'
his  name  induced  Cassius  to  surrender  his  galleys  to
a  few  fishing  boats.1  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
the  republican  commander  had  already  made  up  his
mind  to  change  bis  side,  when  accident  threw  this
favourable  opportunity  in  his  way.  As  a  man  of  in-
fluence and  authority,  as  well  as  an  able  soldier,  he
was  well  received  by  his  adopted  leader,  and  the
good  offices  attributed  to  Brutus  could  hardly  have
been  required  to  conciliate  to  him  the  favour  of  Caesar.
Having  now  arrived  on  the  Asiatic  coast,  Caesar  ad-
vanced more  leisurely.  He  had  received  in-  ClMar  arriTe,
formation  of  Pompeius's  flight  to  Egypt,  lnE«ypt-
and  was  aware  that,  if  the  suppliant  were  received
there,  he  could  not  be  dislodged  except  by  regular
military  operations.  He  was  content  therefore
to  await  the  arrival  of  ampler  succours,  and  em-
ployed himself  in  the  meanwhile  with  repairing  the
injuries  which  Scipio  was  accused  of  having  inflicted
upon  the  unfortunate  provincials.  He  earned  their
favourable  opinion  by  the  remission  of  taxes,  and  by
restraining  the  exactions  of  the  farmers  of  the  reve-
nue. 2  He  saved  a  second  time  from  spoliation  the
treasures  of  the  Ephesian  Diana,  which  Ampius,  an  ad-
herent of  the  opposite  party,  had  been  on  the  point
of  seizing.  These  benefits  he  accompanied  with  fur-
ther favours  and  distinctions,  and  then  handed  over
the  government  of  the  province  to  Calvinus,  to  whom

1  Suet.  Jul.  63.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  88.;  Dion,  xlii.  6.;  comp.  Cic.
ad  Div.  xv.  15.  Suetonias  and  Dion  attribute  this  adventure  to  Lu-
cius Cassius.  The  only  personage  we  know  of  that  name  was  a
brother  of  Caius,  one  who  has  already  been  mentioned  as  serving
in  Caesar's  army  before  the  battle  of  Pharsalia.  The  allusions,  how-
ever, which  Cicero  makes  to  C.  Cassius's  abandonment  of  the  republi-
can cause  (comp.  ad  Alt.  xi.  13.  15.)  are  hardly  consistent  with  his
being  engaged  in  this  occurrence,  and  I  have  great  doubts  as  to  the
genuineness  of  the  story.

*  Plut.  Cats.  48.

312  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvm.

he  entrusted  three  legions,  to  defend  it  against  Phar-
naces  and  the  other  Oriental  allies  of  the  senate.
Cassar  retained  only  two  legions  about  his  own  person,
and  those  so  much  reduced  in  number  as  to  contain
much  less  than  half  their  proper  complements.  The
whole  of  this  force  consisted  of  only  three  thousand
two  hundred  infantry,  and  eight  hundred  cavalry !,
and  with  these  he  sailed  without  hesitation  for  Egypt.
It  was  only  a  few  days  after  the  death  of  Pompeius
that  he  appeared  thus  attended  off  the  port  of  Alex-
andria. No  sooner  was  his  arrival  known  than  Theo-
dotus  hastened  to  meet  him  on  board  his  vessel,  and
brought  to  him  the  head  and  ring  of  his  murdered
rival.  The  latter  might  be  of  important  service  to
assure  the  wavering  of  the  event  which  had  occur-
red, and  Caesar  took  and  preserved  it  for  that  pur-
Hi,  horror  on  Pose  2  ?  Du^  from,  th  e  mangled  head  he  turned
htacfof'pom-  away  with  horror,  and  gave  orders,  with
p*1"8-  tears  in  his  eyes,  that  it  should  be  consumed

with  the  costliest  spices.3  The  ashes  he  caused
to  be  deposited  in  a  shrine  which  he  erected  to
the  avenging  Nemesis.4  The  murderers  were  con-
founded and  alarmed  at  the  feeling  he  exhibited,  nor
were  they  less  astonished,  perhaps,  at  the  perfect  con-
fidence with  which  he  disembarked  upon  their  coast,
and  claimed  with  his  handful  of  followers  to  settle
the  concerns  of  a  powerful  kingdom.

It  had  been  Caesar's  policy  to  spare  the  wealth  of
char's  object  the  provinces  which  he  wished  to  attach
fa  theelffa!rag  to  his  side,  and  his  system  was  directly  op-
of  Egypt.  posed  to  the  confiscation  of  his  enemies'
estates ;  but  his  want  of  money  was  urgent,  and
it  was  in  arranging  the  quarrels  of  a  dependent
kingdom  that  the  best  opportunity  might  be  found
for  exacting  it.  This  undoubtedly  was  the  strong

1  Gees B.C.  Hi.  106.  *  Dion,  xlii.  18.

3  Pint.  Pomp.  80. ;  Goes.  48.;  Lnc.  ix.  1091. 5  Val.  Max.  v.  1.  10.

*  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  90.

».r.706  B.c.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  313

motive  which  impelled  him  to  intrude  upon  the
affairs  of  a  jealous  people,  in  which  his  principal
designs  were  in  no  way  implicated. l  When  Auletes
came  to  Eome  to  negotiate  his  restoration  to  the
throne,  he  had  purchased  the  support  of  the  leaders
of  the  senate  by  the  most  lavish  bribes.  Caesar  him-
self had  received  the  promise  of  seventeen  millions
and  a  half  of  drachmas 2 ;  an  obligation  which  had
never  yet  been  discharged.  He  now  confined  his
demand  to  ten  millions,  but  sternly  rejected  the  re-
presentations of  Pothinus,  who  pleaded  for  a  longer
time  for  the  payment  of  so  large  a  sum.  But  even
at  the  moment  of  landing  Caesar  was  warned  of  the
difficulties  into  which  he  was  rushing.  His  military
force  was  contemptible;  it  was  upon  the  dignity  of
his  title  as  consul  of  the  republic  that  he  could  alone
rely.  Accordingly  he  entered  the  streets  of  Alexan-
dria with  all  the  insignia  of  his  office,  thereby  offend-
ing the  populace,  who  were  easily  persuaded  that  he
offered  an  intentional  insult  to  their  independence.3
A  riot  ensued,  in  which  many  of  the  Caesarean  sol-
diers lost  their  lives.  Caesar  felt  that  he  had  mistaken
the  character  of  the  nation,  and  underrated  their
jealousy  of  foreigners.  But  policy  would  not  allow
him  to  give  way.  He  boldly  summoned  the  rival
sovereigns  before  him,  and  offered  to  decide  their
disputes  in  the  name  of  the  republic.  Ptolemaeus
left  his  camp  at  Pelusium,  and  gave  Caesar  a  meet-
ing in  the  palace  of  Alexandria,  where  he  soon  found
himself  watched  and  detained  as  a  hostage.  Cleo-
patra had  already  implored  the  consul's

,. .  , J r. , , ,  HIS  am  inter-

mediation, and  now.  when  her  brother  or  viewwun

his ministers  obstructed  her  approach  to

his  presence,  she  caused  herself  to be  carried by

1  Flor.  iv.  2.  53.

2  Plut.  Cats.  48. This  sum  may  be  computed  in  round  number*
at  700.000/.

8  Cscs.  B.C.  iii.  106.J  Lucan,  x.  11.

314  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xviu.

stratagem  into  his  chamber.1  The  fame  of  Cleopatra's
beauty <1,  which  was  destined  to  become  second  only  to
Helen's  in  renown3,  was  already  bruited  widely  abroad.
She  had  been  seen  by  M.  Antonius  during  the  brief  in-
road of  Grabinius  into  Egypt ;  and  grave  legates  of
the  republic  had  brought  back  to  Kome  glowing  re-
ports of  the  girlish  charms  of  the  Lagide  princess.
She  was  indeed,  at  the  time  of  her  introduction  to
Caesar,  little  more  than  twenty  years  old,  and  her  wit
and  genius  were  yet  unknown.  Caesar  forthwith  un-
dertook the  championship  of  the  distressed  beauty,
for  it  suited  his  purpose  to  play  off  her  claims  against
the  haughty  minions  of  her  rival.  In  devoting  him-
self to  her  cause  he  did  not  deny  himself  the  reward
of  his  gallantry4;  but  while  he  indulged  in  the
luxuries  and  dissipations  of  the  most  sensual  of  capi-
tals5, he  kept  his  eye  steadily  fixed  on  his  main  object,
and  at  the  same  time  carefully  guarded  his  own  person
from  the  machinations  of  his  unscrupulous  enemies.
The  ministers  of  the  young  king  were  well  as-
c«e«ar'«  preca-  8ured  that  the  reconciliation  of  the  brother
riou.  podtioo.  and  sister  woui(i  be  the  signal  for  their

own  disgrace. They  employed  every  artifice  to  rouse
the  passions  of  a  jealous  populace,  and  alarmed  the

1  Plut.  CCES.  49.

1  Dion  (xlii.  54.}and  Plutarch  (Ant.  27.)  have  particularly  described
her  charms.  From  the  latter  we  learn  that  her  beauty  was  not  regu-
lar or  striking  at  first  sight :  avrb  fitv  Kaff  avrb  ?b  KO\\OS  ainrjs  ou
•KO.VV  SuairapdS^rjTOV,  ov5'  ofov  lKir\TJ£a.i  rovs  lS6vras,  atpriv  8'  ftxfv  i)
awSiairriffis  H^VKTOV.  Her  talents  were  fully  equal  to  the  fascination
of  her  appearance  and  manners.

3  Cleopatra  was  compared  with  Helen  not  only  for  her  beauty,  but
for  the  consequences  it  produced. Lucan,  x.  60.:

"  Quantum  impulit  Argos
Iliacasque  domos  facie  Spartana  nocenti,
Hesperios  auxit  tantuin  Cleopatra  furores."

4  Lucan,  x.  74.:

"  Sanguine  Thessalicae  cladis  perfusus  adulter

Admisit  Venerem  curis  et  miscuit  armis."
1  Lucan,  x.  109.  :

"  Explicuitque  suos  magno  Cleopatra  tumultu
Nondum  translates  Romana  in  soecula  luxus,"  &c.

A..0.706  n.c.48.  UNDER THE EMPIJIK.  315

fanaticism  of  priests  and  people  against  a  foreigner,
whom  they  accused  of  desecrating  their  holy  places,
of  eating  accursed  meats,  and  violating  their  most
cherished  usages.1  Caesar  had  despatched  an  urgent
message  to  Calvinus  to  hasten  to  his  succour  with  all
the  forces  he  could  muster.  But  while  waiting  for
the  arrival  of  reinforcements,  the  necessity  of  which
he  now  keenly  felt,  he  dissembled  his  apprehensions,
and  occupied  himself  in  public  with  the  society  of
Cleopatra,  or  in  conversation  with  the  Egyptian
sages,  and  inquiry  into  their  mysterious  lore.2  His
judgment  was  no  more  mastered  by  a  woman's
charms  than  by  the  fascinations  of  science  :  but  the
occupation  of  Alexandria  was  essential  to  his  plans,
and  he  assumed  the  air  of  curiosity  or  dissipation  to
veil  his  ulterior  designs.  With  this  view  he  visited
with  affected  interest  all  the  vaunted  wonders  of  the
city  of  the  Ptolemies3,  and  even  proposed,  it  was
said,  to  relinquish  his  schemes  of  ambition  to  discover
the  sources  of  the  Nile.4  At  the  first  outset  of  his
career  of  glory,  his  imagination  had  been  fired  at
Grades  by  the  sight  of  Alexander's  statue5;  now  that
the  highest  summit  of  power  was  within  his  reach,  he
descended  to  the  tomb  of  the  illustrious  conqueror,
and  mused  perhaps  on  the  vanity  of  vanities  beside
his  shrouded  remains.6

The  young  king,  though  kept  in  hardly  disguised

1  Dion,  xlii.  54.;  Lucan,  x.  158.:

"  Non  mandante  fame  multas  volucresque  ferasque

./Egypti  posuere  Decs."
1  See  Lucan's  beautiful  episode  (x.  181.):

"  Si  Cecropiura  sua  sacra  Platonem
Majorca  docuere  tui,  quis  dignior  unquam
Hoc  fuit  auditu,  mundique  capacior  hospcs?"  &c.
1  Frontinus  (i.  1.  5.)  mentions  this  conduct  of  Caesar  in  his  collec-
tion of  notable  stratagems.

4  Suet.  Jul.  52.:  Lucan,  x.  191.:

"  Spes  sit  mini  certa  videndi
Niliacos  fontes,  bellum  ciTile  relinquam."
6  Suet.  Jul.  7.
*  The  body  of  Alexander  was  embalmed,  and  the  mummy  pre-

316  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvnr.

captivity  within  the  walls  of  his  palace,  had  found
means  to  communicate  to  his  adherents  the  alarm
and  indignation  with  which  he  viewed  his  sister's

apparent  influence  over  the  foreign  intru-
jrians  rifean  der.  The  Macedonian  dynasty  which  had

reigned  for  nearly  three  centuries  in  Alex-
andria, was  not,  perhaps,  unpopular  with  its  Egyp-
tian subjects.  Though  the  descendants  of  Lagus
had  degenerated  from  the  genius  and  virtues  of  the
first  sovereigns  of  their  line,  their  sway  had  been
generally  mild  and  tolerant,  and  both  conquerors  and
conquered  reposed  in  equal  security  under  the  shadow
of  their  paternal  throne.  Achillas,  the  commander
of  the  king's  armies,  had  a  force  of  twenty  thousand
men,  consisting  principally  of  the  troops  which
Gabinius  had  employed  in  the  restoration  of  Auletes,
and  which  had  been  left  behind  for  his  protection.
These  men  had  for  the  most  part  formed  connexions
with  the  natives,  and  had  imbibed  their  sentiments
at  the  same  time  that  they  adopted  their  manners.
The  camp  was  filled,  moreover,  with  a  crowd  of
deserters  and  fugitive  slaves  from  all  parts  of  the
Roman  empire,  for  Alexandria  was  the  common
resort  of  profligate  and  desperate  men,  who  pur-
chased impunity  for  their  crimes  by  enlisting  in  the
king's  service.1  These  were  the  men  who  had  placed
Auletes  on  his  throne,  who  had  murdered  the  sons  of
the  Roman  legate  Gabinius,  and  expelled  Cleopatra
from  her  royal  inheritance.  They  were  the  reckless
agents  of  the  populace  of  Alexandria  in  each  capri-
cious mood  of  turbulence  or  loyalty.  They  were

served  in  a  glass  case.  See  Strabo,  xvii.  1.;  Lucan,  x.  20.;  Stat.
Sylv.  in.  3.  117.:

"  Due  ei  ad  JEmathios  manes,  ubi  belliger  urbis

Conditor  Hyblaeo  perfusus  nectare  durat."

The  sarcophagus  in  which  the  remains  were  inclosed,  if  tradition
speaks  tru.e,  is  now  in  the  British  Museum.

1  Cits.  B.C.  iii.  110.:  "  Fugitivisque  omnibus  nostris  certus  erat
Alexandria}  receptus  certaque  vitae  conditio,  ut  dato  nomine  nrlituui
esscnt  uumero."

A.TT.706-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.

now  prepared  to  join  in  the  general  outcry  against
the  intrusion  of  the  Romans,  and  encouraged  by  their
leader  and  Arsinoe,  their  sovereign's  younger  sister,
they  entered  the  city,  and  imparted  vigour  and  concen-
tration to  the  hostile  ebullitions  of  the  multitude.

Caesar  awaited  anxiously  his  expected  succours ;  in
the mean time  he  sought  to avert the

.  ...  , Caesar  fortifies

danger  by  concession,  and  while  he  himMinn
proposed  that  Ptolemaeus  and  Cleopatra
should  resume  their  joint  sovereignty,  he  consented  to
satisfy  the  claims  of  Arsinoe  by  surrendering  to  her,
together  with  another  younger  brother,  the  province
of  Cyprus.1  But  before  these  arrangements  were
completed,  the  discontent  of  the  Alexandrians  re-
vived with  more  alarming  violence.  A  skirmish
which  occurred  in  the  streets  between  the  Eoman  sol-
diers and  the  Egyptians  determined  Caesar  to  throw  off
all  disguise,  seize  the  royal  fleet,  and  give  it  to  the
flames.8  Thus  only  could  he  hope  to  keep  the  coasts
open  for  the  approach  of  his  reinforcements.  The
city  of  Alexandria  stretched  along  the  sea-shore,  and
its  port  was  formed  by  an  island  named  Pharos,
which  lay  over  against  it,  and  was  connected  with  the
mainland  in  the  middle  by  a  narrow  causeway  and
bridge.  This  island  was  occupied  by  the  villas  of
the  wealthy,  and  the  suburbs  of  the  great  city.  Its
position  enabled  it  to  command  the  entrances  of  the
double  port,  which  were  apparently  much  narrower
than  at  the  present  day.  As  a  military  position
therefore  it  was  invaluable,  and  while  the  tumult  was
raging  in  the  streets  Caesar  transported  into  it  a

1  Dion,  xlii.  35.

*  CSBS.  B.C.  iii.  111.  The  conflagration  reached  the  shore  and
consumed  a  large  portion  of  the  celebrated  library  of  the  Ptolemies.
Seneca  asserts  that  four  hundred  thousand  volumes  perished  (de
Tranquill.  9.).  The  resignation  he  expresses  under  the  loss,  "multo
satius  est  paucis  te  auctoribus  tradere  quam  errare  per  multos."  is
severely  rebuked  by  a  modern  devourer  of  large  libraries  (see  Gib-
bon, Decline  and  Fall,  ch.  li.)  Comp.  Dion,  xlii.  38.

318  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvm.

portion  of  his  troops,  and  seized  the  tower  or  fortress
which  secured  its  possession.1  At  the  same  time  he
continued  to  occupy  a  portion  of  the  palace  on  the
mainland,  which  commanded  the  communication  with
Pharos  by  the  causeway.  He  strengthened  its  de-
fences with  additional  works,  destroying  in  every
direction  the  private  houses  of  the  citizens,  which
being  built  entirely  of  stone,  even  to  the  floors  and
roofs,  furnished  him  with  abundant  materials  for
fresh  and  massive  constructions.  The  Egyptian
troops  set  to  work  with  no  less  energy  in  forming
triple  barricades  of  hewn  stone  at  the  entrance  of
every  street,  and  thus  entrenching  themselves  in  a
fortress  in  the  heart  of  their  city.2  They  looked
forward  already  to  the  arrival  of  winter,  and  were
convinced  that  the  enemy  must  fall  eventually  into
their  hands;  when  he  could  no  longer  derive  supplies
from  beyond  the  sea.

But  in  the  meanwhile  the  shade  of  Pompeius  began

to  be  avenged  on  his  murderers.  At  the
Pothiennnsnand  commencement  of  the  outbreak  Caesar  had

seized  the  person  of  Pothinus,  who  was  in
attendance  upon  the  young  king,  and  detecting  him
in  correspondence  with  Achillas  he  put  him  sum-
marily to  death.  Soon  after,  Arsinoe,  who  hoped  by

means  of  the  Egvptian  general  to  elevate

Ar$ino8pro- ,  •*-..»  r  i  i_

ciaimi  heraeif  hersclt  into  the  royal  seat,  having  cause  to
be  dissatisfied  with  his  conduct,  induced  her
confidant  Granymedes  to  assassinate  him. The  ad-
hesion of  the army  she secured by a munificent
largess,  appointed  (Janymedes  her  minister  and  lieu-
tenant, and,  assuming  the  diadem  of  her  ancestors,
caused  herself  to  be  proclaimed  sole  queen  of  Egypt.3
The  Alexandrians  pressed  the  blockade  with  per-
c»sarii tmacity. They  could  not  hope  to  dislodge
A\?xaanddr1ain ^e  enemy  by  force,  but  they  expected  to
reduce  him by  cutting off  his  means  of

1  Caes.  B.C.  Hi.  112.  *  A  net.  de  Bell.  Alexand  J,  2.

'  Auci.  de  Bell.  Ahx.  4. :  Dion,  xlii.  39.

•.U.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  319

subsistence.  A  contemporary  writer  describes  the
artificial  contrivances  by  which  the  population  of
Alexandria  obtained  their  constant  abundance  of
water.  Kain,  it  is  well  known,  rarely  falls  in  Egypt,
nor  were  there  living  springs  for  the  supply  of  foun-
tains. The  common  people,  indeed,  were  content
with  the  water  of  the  Nile  in  the  turbid  state  in
which  it  flows  through  their  slimy  plain ;  but  the
houses  of  the  wealthier  classes  were  supplied  by
means  of  subterranean  channels,  with  which  the
whole  city  was  mined,  and  through  which  the  stream
of  the  river  was  carried  into  reservoirs,  where  the
impure  sediment  was  deposited.  Such  of  these  chan-
nels as  led  to  the  parts  of  the  city  occupied  by  the
Romans  the  Alexandrians  obstructed,  so  as  to  pre-
vent the  river  from  flowing  into  them ;  they  then
filled  them  again  with  sea-water,  raised  by  hydraulic
machinery,  in  the  construction  of  which  they  were
eminently  expert.  This  operation  caused  at  first
great  consternation  among  the  Romans,  and  still
more  among  the  native  population  shut  up  within
their  defences.  But  its  effect  was  defeated  by  Caesar's
sagacity.  He  caused  his  soldiers  to  dig  pits  on  the
sandy  beach,  and  the  brackish  water  which  oozed  up
in  them  furnished  a  sufficient  supply,  not  altogether
unfit  for  drinking.1  At  the  same  time  the  arrival  of
a  legion  from  Asia,  with  a  convoy  of  provisions  and
military  stores,  at  a  point  a  little  to  the  west  of  the
city,  revived  the  courage  of  the  besieged,  and  restored
the  fortunes  of  their  commander.

1  When  the  English  besieged  Alexandria  in  1801,  they  cut  the
canal  which  supplied  it  with  water;  but  the  French  garrison  found  a
sufficient  quantity  in  the  tanks.  Water,  however,  might  have  been
procured  by  digging,  though  not  in  large  quantities  nor  very  good
Sir  R  Wilson's  Erped.  to  Egypt,  p.  215.  Caesar's  expedient  has
been  resorted  to  by  exploring  parties  on  the  coast  ol'  Australia.
See  for  instance  Eyre's  letter  to  the  Colonial  Secretary  of  Swan
River  in  the  Journal  of  the  GCOQT.  Soc.  xiii.  180.  Captain
Slarryat,  in  one  of  his  novels,  mentions  this  filtration  o<"  salt-
water by  percolation  through  sand  as  an  authentic,  though  little
known  fact

320  HISTORT OF THE ROMANS  C

The  Rhodian  vessels  which  had  betaken  them-
dEsarswimi  selves  to  Caesar's  side  -were  now  of  great
service  to  him  in  establishing  a  commu-
nication with  these  reinforcements.  The  islanders
of  Rhodes  had  succeeded  to  the  nautical  skill  of
Athens  and  Corinth,  and  were  among  the  most
expert  mariners  of  the  time.  Combined  with  the
small  flotilla  which  Caesar  had  brought  with  him,
and  the  ships  which  had  lately  arrived,  these  new
allies  presented  a  formidable  force.  The  Egyptians,
however,  though  the  royal  fleet  had  been  destroyed,
possessed  considerable  resources  for  the  equipment  of
a  naval  armament.  They  collected  from  every  quar-
ter all  the  vessels  they  could  muster,  and  hastily
constructed  others,  till  they  found  themselves  in  a
condition  to  dispute  once  more  the  approach  to  the
harbour.  Nor  were  they  less  vigorous  in  the  attack
they  made  upon  the  enemy's  defences  by  land.  The
crisis  of  danger  called  forth  all  Caesar's  energies  :  he
never  exposed  his  person  more  boldly,  or  encountered
more  imminent  peril.  At  one  moment  he  was  so
hard  pressed  as  to  be  forced  to  leap  from  his  vessel
into  the  sea,  and  swim  for  his  life,  carrying  his  most
valuable  papers  in  his  hand  above  the  water,  and
leaving  his  cloak  in  the  possession  of  the  assailants,
who  retained  it  as  a  trophy,  as  the  Arvernians  had  pre-
served his  sword.1

The  Egyptians  indeed  were  ultimately  worsted  in
every  encounter,  but  they  could  still  return

CSMO.T  restores  ~  , . . .  ,  ,  ,

ptoiemceiuto  to  the  attack  with  increased  numbers,  and
Caesar's  resources  were  so  straitened,  that  he
was  not  disinclined  to  listen  to  terms  of  accommoda-
tion, the  insincerity  of  which  was  transparent.  The
Alexandrian  populace  declared  themselves  weary  of
the  rule  of  their  young  princess,  and  disgusted  with
the  tyranny  of  G-anymedes.  Their  rightful  sovereign
once  restored  to  them,  they  would  unite  heartily  with

1  Dion,  xlii.  40.;  Suet.  Jal  64.

*.U.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  321

the  republic,  and  defy  the  fury  of  the  upstart  and
the  usurper.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  the  Roman
general  was  deceived  by  these  protestations  :  the  bad
faith  of  the  Alexandrians  was  already  proverbial  in
the  West.  But  he  expected  perhaps  that  the  rivalry
of  Ptolemseus  and  Arsinoe  would  create  dissension  in
their  camps  :  he  may  have  preferred  coping  with  the
young  king  in  open  war,  to  keeping  a  guard  over  him,
and  watching  the  intrigues  with  which  he  beguiled
his  captivity:  possibly  the  surrender  was  made  in
concession  to  a  pressure  he  could  not  resist,  and  was
adopted  as  a  means  of  gaining  time.  But  when
Ptolemseus  was  restored  to  his  subjects,  and  imme-
diately led  them  to  another  attack  upon  Caesar's
position,  the  soldiers  are  said  to  have  felt  no  little
satisfaction  at  the  reward  of  what  they  deemed  their
general's  weak  compliance.1

Cleopatra,  whose  blandishments  were  still  the  so-
lace of  the  Roman  general  throughout  his  Battle  of  th*
desperate  adventure,  rejoiced  to  see  her  deltk""? PU>-
brother  thus  treacherously  array  himself  in  lemxiu-
rash  hostility  to  her  protector.  The  toils  were
beginning  to  close  around  the  young  king.  Mith-
ridates  of  Pergamus,  an  adherent  in  whose  fidelity
and  conduct  Caesar  placed  great  reliance,  was  advanc-
ing with  the  reinforcements  he  had  been  commis-
sioned to  collect  in  Syria  and  the  adjacent  provinces.
He  reduced  Pelusium,  the  key  of  Egypt  by  land  as
Pharos  was  by  sea,  and  crossed  the  Nile  at  the  head
of  the  Delta,  routing  a  division  of  the  king's  troops
which  attempted  to  check  his  progress.  Ptolemaeus
led  forth  his  army  to  confront  the  new  invader,  and
was  immediately  followed  by  Caesar.  The  Romans
came  up  with  the  Egyptians,  crossed  the  river  in  the
face  of  their  superior  numbers,  and  attacked  them  in
their  entrenchments,  which,  from  their  acquaintance

1  Auct.  Bell.  Alex.  24.
VOL.  II.  Y

322  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvm.

with  military  art,  as  taught  both  by  the  Macedonians
and  the  Romans,  were  probably  not  deficient  in
scientific  construction.  But  the  shock  of  the  veterans
was  irresistible.  The  Egyptians  fled,  leaving  great
numbers  slaughtered  within  the  lines,  and  falling
into  their  own  trenches  in  confused  and  mangled
heaps.  The  fugitives  rushed  to  the  channel  of  the
Nile,  where  their  vessels  were  stationed,  and  crowded
into  them  without  order  or  measure.  One  of  them
in  which  Ptolemseus  had  himself  taken  refuge  was  thus
overladen  and  sank.1

This  signal  defeat,  and  still  more  the  death  of

their  unfortunate  sovereign,  reduced  the
drun.  Submit  defenders  of  the  monarchy  to  despair.  The
rei,tor^r'c7eo-  populace  of  Alexandria  issued  from  their

gates  to  meet  the  conqueror  in  the  attitude
of  suppliants,  and  with  the  religious  ceremonies  by
which  they  were  wont  to  deprecate  the  wrath  of
their  legitimate  rulers.  He  entered  the  city,  and
directed  his  course  through  the  principal  streets,
where  the  hostile  barricades  were  levelled  at  his
approach,  till  he  reached  the  quarters  in  which  his
own  garrison  was  stationed.  He  now  reconstituted
the  government  by  appointing  Cleopatra  to  the
sovereignty,  in  conjunction  with  another  younger
brother,  while  he  despatched  Arsinoe  under  custody
to  await  his  future  triumph  at  Rome.  The  throne
of  his  favourite  he  pretended  to  secure  by  leaving
a  Roman  force  in  Alexandria.  The  pride  of  the
republic  was  gratified  by  thus  advancing  another
step  towards  the  complete  subjugation  of  a  country
it  had  long  coveted.  Caesar  was  anxious  that  so
much  Roman  blood  as  had  been  shed  in  his  recent
campaigns  should  not  appear  to  have  sunk  into
the  earth,  and  borne  no  fruit  of  glory  and  advan-
tage to  the  state:  he  did  not  deem  it  expedient,

1  Auct.  Bell  Alex.  29—81.

A.U.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIKE.  323

however,  to  constitute  Egypt  a  province  of  the
empire,  and  transfer  it  from  the  hands  of  a  woman
and  a  child  to  some  warlike  and  ambitious  pro-
consul.1 The  whole  of  this  episode  in  his  eventful
history,  his  arrogant  dictation  to  the  rulers  of  a
foreign  people,  his  seizing  and  keeping  in  capti-
vity the  person  of  the  sovereign,  his  discharging
him  on  purpose  that  he  might  compromise  himself
by  engaging  in  direct  hostilities,  and  his  taking
advantage  of  his  death  to  settle  the  succession  and
intrude  a  foreign  army  upon  the  new  monarch,  form
altogether  a  pregnant  example  of  the  craft  and  un-
scrupulousness  of  Roman  ambition.2

But  in  their  deadly  contests  with  their  neighbours,
the  wolves  of  Italy  were  not  always  the
assailants.  The  dependent  monarchies  on
the  frontier  watched  the  intrigues  of  the  She
curia  and  the  forum,  and  profited  by  the
disasters  of  their  chiefs  and  parties.  The  discom-
fiture of  the  senate  let  loose  upon  the  republic  a
new  assailant,  the  son  of  its  most  inveterate  and
dangerous  foe.  Pharnaces,  to  whom  Pompeius  had
granted  the  kingdom  of  the  Bosporus,  in  reward  for
his  unnatural  treachery,  had  held  aloof  from  the
great  gathering  of  the  Eastern  auxiliaries  in  the  re-
publican camp.  C.  Cassius,  as  we  have  seen,  had
been  despatched,  before  the  event  of  the  contest
was  ascertained,  to  stimulate  his  flagging  zeal  in  his
patron's  cause.  But  when  the  event  of  Pharsalia  be-
came known  to  him,  he  augured  that  the  time  was
come  for  resuming  the  independent  attitude  of  his
illustrious  father,  and  wresting  the  ancient  patrimony
of  his  house  from  a  foreign  yoke.  He  first  made  a
descent  upon  the  Lesser  Armenia  and  Cappadocia,

1  Liv.  Epit.  cxii. :  "  Regnum  JEgypti  victor  Cleopatra  fratrique
ejns  minor! pennisit, veritus provinciam facere,  ne quandoque
riolentiorem  prassidem  nacta,  novarum  rerum  materia  esset."

2  Dion,  xlii.  44.

Y2

324  HISTORZ  OF  THE  ROMANS e

where  Deiotarus  and  Ariobarzanes  occupied  the  pre-
carious thrones  upon  which  Pompeius  had  seated
them.  At  the  moment  when  Calvinus  received  his
leader's  pressing  message  to  send  all  his  available
forces  to  his  aid  in  Egypt,  he  was  summoned  also  to
defend  these  petty  princes  whose  dominions  were  the
outworks  of  the  empire  itself.  Deiotarus  had  been
one  of  the  most  devoted  of  the  Pompeian  allies ;  but
he  had  recently  submitted  to  Caesar,  and  engaged  to
furnish  a  sum  of  money  for  the  demands  of  his
troops,  an  obligation  which  he  declared  it  would  be
impossible  for  him  to  discharge,  unless  protected  him-
self from  the  spoiler.  Calvinus,  while  requiring
Pharnaces  to  desist  from  insulting  the  majesty  of
Rome,  protested  that  he  held  the  honour  of  the  re-
public far  dearer  than  gold.  He  put  himself  in
motion  with  one  legion,  having  sent  two  to  Caesar,
and  he  was  joined  by  two  other  detachments  which
Deiotarus  had  equipped  and  trained  on  the  Roman
model,  and  by  an  equal  number  from  Cappadocia.
He  had  with  him  also  another  legion  recently  levied
in  Pontus,  so  that  his  force  was  such  as  might  justly
inspire  him  with  confidence.  Pharnaces  retreated
from  Cappadocia,  and  attempted  to  amuse  the  advan-
cing enemy  by  negotiations,  while  the  fate  of  Caesar
was  yet  in  the  balance.  But  Calvinus  pressed  upon
He  defeats  him,  and  demanded  a  battle.  The  conflict
t^ln'tcau""  resulted  in  the  complete  defeat  of  the
Roman  army,  with  the  loss  of  a  large  num-
ber of  knights  of  illustrious  family.  The  worsted
general  effected  an  orderly  retreat,  but  he  abandoned
both  Armenia  and  Cappadocia  to  the  invader,  and
the  province  of  Pontus  fell  again  for  a  moment  under
the  sway  of  the  dynasty  of  Mithridates.1

Caesar's  policy  required  him  to  postpone  the  pur-
riie  caesareans  suit of  his  own  personal  enemies  to  the

«uffer  reveries ,  **_'_«••  A*.  •  J  e ii.

in  niyrieum. duty  of chastising the invaders of  the

1  Auct.  Bell.  Alex.  34—40.;  App.  B.C.  ii.  91.;  Dion,  xlil  46.

A.U.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  325

empire.  The  partisans  of  the  old  broken  faction
which  still  called  itself  the  senate  and  people  of
Rome  were  gathering  head ;  and  the  difficulties
which  surrounded  their  adversary  in  a  remote  region,
together  with  other  misfortunes  which  befel  his
cause  in  various  quarters,  encouraged  many  who
had  thrown  away  their  swords  in  the  flight  from
Pharsalia  to  return  to  the  standards  of  Scipio  and
Labienus.  Caesar,  on  his  part,  even  in  the  moment
of  victory,  was  well  aware  that  the  strength  of  his
opponents  would  not  succumb  under  a  single  defeat ;
and  when  he  determined  himself  to  follow  in  the
track  of  Pompeius,  he  provided  against  the  revival
of  the  beaten  party  in  the  countries  which  had  wit-
nessed their  recent  disaster.  He  had  commissioned
his  lieutenant  Cornificius  to  hold  Illyricum  with  two
legions,  while  an  additional  force  of  new  recruits
was  summoned  from  Italy  to  support  him  in  that
province  and  secure  the  possession  of  Macedonia.
These  reinforcements  were  led  by  Gabinius,  the
profligate  adventurer  who  had  first  made  himself
notorious  by  his  base  subserviency  to  Pompeius,
and  who  now  threw  himself  without  a  blush  into
the  party  of  his  victorious  rival.  But  his  new  ser-
vice was  one  of  great  difficulty.  Octavius  still
rode  with  a  powerful  fleet  in  the  Adriatic;  and
though  he  had  failed  in  preventing  the  transit  of
Gabinius,  he  cut  him  off  from  further  communica-
tion with  Italy,  and  intercepted  his  supplies.  The
country  in  which  the  Csesarean  forces  were  moving
was  so  exhausted  by  the  support  of  immense  armies,
that  they  were  sorely  pressed  for  sustenance,  while,
from  their  want  of  military  stores,  they  could  make
no  impression  upon  the  strongholds  which  they
invested.  The  natives,  harassed  by  repeated  exac-
tions, and  emboldened  by  these  favourable  circum-
stances, rose  against  them  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Salona,  and  inflicted  severe  loss  on  their  feeble

326  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvm.

battalions. It  was  only  with  leaving  two  thousand

men  and  many  officers on  the  field  that

Gabini°«  early  Grabinius  could  effect  his  entrance  into  safe

quarters  at  Salona ;  cooped  up  for  months

in  that  fortress,  the  state  of  his  affairs  so  depressed

his  spirits  that  he  sickened  and  died. This  reverse,

however,  was  in  a  great  measure  retrieved

obtains" a  sue-  by  the  exploit  of  Vatinius,  who  attacked

the  fleet  of  Octavius  with  an  inferior  force,

and  obtained  such  an  advantage  over  it,  as  to  induce

its  gallant  commander  to  desist  from  cruising  in  the

narrow  seas,  and  betake  himself  first  to  the  coast  of

Greece,  and  eventually  to  Africa.

In  vain  had  Caesar  affected  moderation  in  his
treatment  of  the  provinces ;  his  lieutenants  either
did  not  understand  his  motives,  or  felt  no  interest
in  them.  The  common  vice  of  proconsular  extor-
tion had  well-nigh  overthrown  his  party  in
Spain.90  Spain,  almost  immediately  after  he  had

Misconduct  of _*  .-  ... j •.  f\ n •  T

char's  lieu-  himself  quitted  it.  Q.  Cassius  Longinus,
Q^casfmas  already  mentioned  as  one  of  the  pretended
patriots  who  fled  to  the  camp  at  Eavenna,
had  been  appointed  to  the  government  of  the  Fur-
ther Province.  This  man  had  formerly  served  as
quaestor  in  the  same  country  under  the  procon-
sulate of  Pompeius,  and  was  already  infamous  there
for  his  cruelty  and  rapacity.1  But  Caesar  could  not
refuse  to  reward  the  services  of  an  adherent  of  such
high  personal  distinction.  He  nearly  paid  dear
for  his  compliance.  Cassius  had  already  irritated  his
people  by  his  exactions,  when  directions  arrived
from  his  chief  to  transport  a  military  force  into
Africa,  in  order  to  curb  the  officious  zeal  of  Juba,
who  was  sending  aid  to  Pompeius  in  Macedonia.
The  propraetor  was  well  pleased  to  have  the  con-
duct of  an  operation  which  promised  to  open  a  fair

1  Auct.  Bell.  Alex.  49—64.;  Dion,  xlii.  15.  16.

*.tr.707-B.c.47 TINDER THE EMPIRE.  327

field  for  plunder.  He  made  his  preparations  on
a  large  scale,  and  his  fresh  demands  upon  the  re-
sources of  the  province  added,  doubtless,  to  the
odium  he  had  previously  incurred.  Certain  citizens
of  Italica  entered  into  a  conspiracy  against  his  per-
son. He  was  severely  wounded,  and  being  supposed
dead,  one  of  his  officers,  Laterensis,  prepared  to
assume  the  command,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  soldiers,
who  detested  their  general.  But  Cassius  surviving
the  blows  which  had  been  inflicted  upon  him,  such
was  the  discipline  of  the  legions  that  they  immedi-
ately returned  to  their  fidelity.  The  conspirators,
and  with  them  Laterensis,  who  was  also  implicated
in  their  abortive  deed,  were  delivered  up  and  put
to  death  with  torture.  The  news  of  the  victory  of
Pharsalia  which  now  arrived,  rendered  the  proposed
expedition  unnecessary;  but  Cassius  proceeded  to
indemnify  himself  for  his  disappointment  by  re-
doubling his  exactions  upon  the  people  subjected
to  his  rule.  The  passions  of  the  provincials  became
more  furiously  inflamed  than  ever.  The  legions  in
occupation  had  been  either  raised  or  recruited  in
the  province,  and  partook  fully  in  the  feelings  of
their  countrymen.  The  authority  of  the  propraetor
was  at  length  shaken  off,  and  his  quaestor  Marcellus
invited  by  acclamation  to  take  the  command.  Cas-
sius, who  retained  only  a  small  force  about  his  own
person,  now  called  to  his  support  both  Lepidus,  the
proconsul  of  the  Hither  Province,  and  Bogudes,
king  of  Mauretania,  while  he  fortified  himself  on  a
hill  over  against  the  city  of  Corduba.  Marcellus
boldly  summoned  him  to  surrender.  Lepidus  on
his  arrival  took  the  side  of  the  new  governor,  for
he  was  convinced  that  it  was  requisite  for  Caesar's
interests  that  his  lieutenant  should  atone  by  dis-
grace for  his  impolitic  extortions.  This  service
Caesar  at  a  later  period  acknowledged  with  mag-
nificent gratitude.  He  assigned  him  the  distinction

328  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvm.

of  a  triumph,  though  in  fact  he  had  fought  no
battle.1  But  Cassius  had  chosen  his  position  well,
and  might  not  have  been  easily  dislodged  from  it :
when,  however,  his  successor,  Trebonius,  arrived  in
the  province  at  the  commencement  of  the  following
year,  he  voluntarily  relinquished  his  hostile  atti-
tude. Being  allowed  to  retire  unmolested  with
his  ill-gotten  treasures,  he  took  ship  at  Malaca  for
Italy,  and  was  lost  in  a  storm  off  the  mouth  of  the
Iberus.  But  the  guilty  legions,  which  had  revolted
from  their  hateful  commander,  could  not  easily  be
persuaded  that  their  offence  admitted  of  pardon.
Uneasy  and  dissatisfied  with  their  own  conduct,  they
began  to  meditate  defection.  They  deputed  envoys
to  treat  secretly  with  Scipio  in  Africa.2  The  result
of  the  propraetor's  misconduct  was  yet  to  be  further
developed.

Caesar'  protracted  absence  from  the  capital  strongly
Theie.uuof  marked  the  confidence  he  felt  in  the  sta-
FharslVia"  and  bilitv  of  his  arrangements  there.  The

the  death  of - J.  r  fi- T»

pomp«iu.  ferocious  menaces  ot  the  .rompeians  against
Rome.  all  who  submitted  to  his  ascendency  had

tended  to  attach  firmly  to  him  the  great  mass  of
the  resident  citizens.  But  we  may  imagine  with  what
anxious  suspense  the  upper  classes  of  Eome  awaited
the  event  of  the  long  operations  in  Illyricum  and  Thes-
saly.  Servilius,  Caesar's  colleague  in  the  consulship,
exercised  paramount  authority  in  the  city.  He  watched
with  vigilance  every  indication  of  the  popular  feel-
ings, and  surrounded  every  suspected  enemy  with
secret  spies.  Every  courier  who  arrived  with  news
of  Caesar's  successes  was  received  with  spontaneous
or  forced  acclamations.  But  there  were  not  wanting
sinister  rumours  of  his  discomfiture,  which  many

1  Dion,  xliii.  1.

2  Dion,  xliii.  29. The  soldiers  who  proved  so  unfaithful  to  Caesar
were  mostly  Afranians,  who  had  been  drafted  into  the  victorioui
ranks. Comp.  Dion,  xliii,  3<5,

A..n.706-B.C.48. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  329

turbulent  spirits  in  the  great  focus  of  confusion
secretly  welcomed  and  disseminated.  The  report  of
the  victory  of  Pharsalia  announced  a  catastrophe  too
momentous  to  command  immediate  belief.  The
conqueror  himself  had  sent  no  official  notification  of
the  event  to  the  senate;  he  felt  it  unbecoming  to
offer  formal  congratulations  on  a  triumph  over  his
fellow  citi/ens.  But  as  soon  as  the  fact  was  sufficiently
established,  the  government  decreed  the  removal  of
the  statues  of  Pompeius  and  Sulla  from  the  open
space  which  they  occupied  with  kindred  effigies  in
front  of  the  rostra.  This  was  a  final  declaration  of
defiance,  not  towards  Pompeius  only,  but  towards  his
party,  the  recent  rulers  of  the  republic ;  and  many
still  feared  and  hesitated  when  they  surveyed  the
manifold  resources  of  the  great  Eoman  oligarchy,  and
mused  on  the  rapid  reverses  of  civil  warfare.  The
disasters  of  Marius  had  been  even  more  humiliating;
yet  Mariiis  had  returned  in  triumph  to  the  scene  of
his  former  greatness,  he  had  wreaked  an  awful  retri-
bution on  his  enemies,  and  had  died  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  yet  another  consulship.  The  rumours  of
Pompeius's  assassination  were  obstinately  discredited ;
but  the  most  incredulous  were  at  last  convinced  by
the  fatal  token  of  his  ring,  transmitted  by  Caesar  to
Rome.

From  this  moment  the  face  of  things  was  entirely
changed  ;  the  previous  hesitation  had  been

• J  L x- -J-A  it,  •  f Thewnute

inspired  by  timidity,  not  by  any  remains  of  and  people

•  >  jjr  -IT  h"P  honour,

love  for  the  murdered  hero. From  hence-  upon  ca*or ,

. ,  1  i  •  Oct.  A.  o.  706.

forth  every  scruple  about  paying  court  to
the  conqueror  vanished.  His  flatterers  multiplied  in
the  senate  and  the  forum,  and  they  only  vied  one
with  another  in  suggesting  new  honours  for  him.
Decrees  were  issued  investing  him  with  unbounded
authority  over  the  lives  and  fortunes  of  the  vanquished.
When  the  news  arrived  that  the  standard  of  the
republic  was  again  raisbd  in  Africa,  the  power  of

330  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvm.

making  war  and  peace  was  surrendered  to  his  sole  deci-
sion. A  semblance  of  legal  authority  was  thus  hastily
impressed  beforehand  upon  acts  on  which  their
absent  ruler  had  already  resolved.  Caesar
dictator  was  next  created  dictator  for  the  extra-
ordinary period  of  a  whole  year1 ;  whereupon
he  appointed  Antonius,  whom  he  had  sent  back  to
Italy,  his  master  of  the  horse.  Antonius  constantly
appeared  in  arms  in  the  city,  and  caused  both  offence
and  alarm  by  the  military  state  he  maintained.  But
the  insecurity  of  his  position  demanded  these  odious
intrigue  of  precautions.  A  popular  sedition  was  excited
r^r^dV  by  the  intrigues  of  Dolabella,  who  had  tried
Antoniu..  fo  jngratiate  himself  with  the  people  in  his
office  of  tribune  by  reviving  the  measures  of  spolia-
tion recently  projected  by  Caelius.2  He  found  him-
self thwarted,  as  always  happened  in  similar  cases,  by
a  rival  occupant  of  the  tribunitian  bench,  equally
unprincipled  and  equally  anxious  to  distinguish
himself  by  rushing  to  the  protection  of  the  menaced
interests.  Antonius,  already  incensed  against  the
innovator  on  personal  and  domestic  grounds,  was
compelled  to  interfere  with  a  military  force,  in  de-
fiance of  the  sanctity  of  the  much  abused  office,  and
vindicate  the  supremacy  of  the  dictator  and  the
senate  against  both  the  contending  parties.  He
acted  with  unflinching  rigour  against  the  excited
populace,  and  quelled  the  riot  with  the  slaughter  of
eight  hundred  citizens.3  His  armed  mediation  be-
tween the  demagogues  was  maintained,  however,
with  scrupulous  moderation.  He  abstained  from
putting  forth  his  strength  to  crush  their  noisy  preten-
sions, so  that  they  continued  from  time  to  time  to
disturb  the  tranquillity  of  the  city,  and  were  only

1  Caesar's  second  dictatorship  dates  from  October,  A.U.  706. See
Fischer,  Rom.Zeitt.  p.  282.

*  Dion,  xlii.  32.;  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xi.  12.;  Liv.  Epit.  cxiii.

•  Liv.  Lc.

A.U.707-B.C.47. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  331

lulled  by  the  periodical  rumours  of  Caesar's  approach.
As  soon  as  the  dictator  was  known  to  be  still  engaged
abroad,  they  constantly  broke  out  afresh ;  nor  did
they  finally  subside  till  his  actual  arrival  quelled  dis-
affection, and  awed  every  passion  to  obedience.1

Caesar  received  information  of  these  disturbances
when  already  on  his  march  from  Alexandria  DiSa<rectiim
to  confront  the  invaders  of  the  empire  on  ^f^'n
the  borders  of  Pontus.  Nor  were  these  Iuly-
civil  commotions  the  only  clouds  which  lowered  in
the  horizon  of  Italy.  A  spirit  of  insubordination  had
broken  out  once  more  among  the  legions.  The
twelfth  and  even  the  tenth,  on  whose  valour  their
general  had  so  long  implicitly  relied,  dared  openly  to
disobey  the  orders  of  their  officers.  These  two  legions
had  been  transported  across  the  sea  from  Macedonia,
and  were  now  quartered  in  Campania.  They  deman-
ded lands  and  largesses,  and  when  it  was  announced
that  they  were  required  to  pass  over  to  Sicily,  they
refused  again  to  quit  the  soil  to  which  they  looked
for  their  reward,  and  enter  upon  another  career
of  unrequited  service.2  But  even  this  alarming
intelligence  could  not  divert  Caesar  from  his  un-
dertaking, from  which  he  expected  to  reap  such
a  harvest  of  wealth  as  should  relieve  him  for  the
future  from  all  pecuniary  embarrassments.  He  con-
tented himself  with  despatching  orders  to  Antonius
to  reduce  the  mutineers  to  submission  by  threats  or
promises;  but  he  was  not  aware,  probably,  of  the
excesses  they  had  already  committed  in  stoning  the
officers  deputed  to  remonstrate  with  them.3  Mean-
while, his  own  advance  through  the  provinces  He  adTancee
of  Asia  resembled  a  triumphant  pageant  HiSS™i?r
The  Orientals  might  prostrate  themselves  ttnddefeat'
without  dishonour  before  the  conqueror  of

him  In  the
battle  of  Zcla

1  Dion,  xlii.  17—33.;  Plut.  Cas.  51.,  Anton.  9. *  Dion,  xlii.  5.
*  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xi.  21.:  "  Legio  xii.,  ad  quam  primum  Sulla  venit,
lapidibus  egUse  hominem  dicitur."

332  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XVHI

the  great  Pompeius,  whom  they  had  long  regarded
as  the  type  of  invincible  power.  Deiotarus  threw
himself  at  the  hero's  feet,  and  gave  utterance  to
the  most  abject  excuses  for  having  ventured  to
attend  upon  the  vanquished  leader.  He  confessed
that,  as  a  dependant  on  the  majesty  of  the  republic,
it  was  not  for  him  to  interfere  in  the  controversies  of
their  rival  factions,  but  simply  to  obey  the  ministers
of  her  power  on  his  own  frontier.  But  Caesar,  though
he  condescended  to  accept  this  submission,  replied
haughtily,  that  the  battle  of  Pharsalia  was  no  party
quarrel,  but  the  vindication  of  the  senate  and  the
consulate  against  rebels  and  traitors.  He  did  not,
however,  relax  for  a  moment  from  the  customary
rapidity  of  his  movements.  Pharnaces  was  struck
with  consternation.  The  crafty  Asiatic  was  well
aware  indeed  of  the  circumstances  of  Italy,  and  of
the  urgent  necessity  for  the  victor's  speedy  return
thither.  But  in  vain  did  he  seek  to  amuse  his  im-
patient adversary  by  negotiation.  Caesar  would  give
ear  to  no  trifling  messages :  he  pressed  resolutely
forward,  and  finally  reached  the  barbarian  host  at
the  town  of  Zela  in  Pontus.  Thus  brought  to  bay,
the  son  of  Mithridates  prepared  for  a  final  struggle,
on  the  same  field  on  which  his  father  had  worsted  the
detested  Romans  in  one  of  his  most  memorable  vic-
tories.1 A  bloody  battle  ensued2,  in  which  the  arms
of  the  republic  were  crowned  with  complete  success.
The  undisciplined  hordes  of  eastern  sovereigns,  once
broken  and  routed,  never  rallied  again.  Pharnaces
himself  escaped  from  the  field,  but  only  to  fall  in  an
obscure  conflict  with  a  neighbouring  potentate.3
His  kingdom  had  been  already  stripped  from  him  by

'  Appian,  B.  Mithr.  120

*  Kalendar.  Amitera.  Orell.  Inscr.  ii.  397.  •  "  iv.  Non.  Sext.  feria:
quod  eo  die  C.  Caesar  C.F.  ....  in  Ponto  regem  Phnrnacem  devicit
2  Aug.  707  =  20  Mai.  47.  A.c."

1  Appian,  B.  Mithr.  I.  c.;  Dion,  xlii.  47

A.C.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  333

a  decree  of  the  conqueror,  and  conferred  upon  the
chieftain  of  Pergamus1,  whose  services  in  Egypt  have
been  already  mentioned.

Caesar  allowed  himself  to  cast  only  one  distant
glance  towards  the  frontiers  of  Parthia,  and  CaMiar..
then  resolutely  turned  his  face  westward.  roSSStyhu"
Perhaps  he  was  even  then  revolving  in  his  ^ufouS?
mind  the  gigantic  schemes  of  Oriental  patra-
conquest  which  he  announced  at  a  later  period,  but
was  destined  never  to  undertake.  From  this  period,
however,  we  begin  to  trace  a  change  for  the  worse  in
his  character.  The  hero  whose  freedom  from  display
had  so  long  charmed  the  world  became  intoxicated
by  the  fumes  of  eastern  incense,  and  the  disposal  of
forfeited  crowns.  He  now  affected  to  admire  the
good  fortune  of  Pompeius,  whose  exalted  reputation
was  built  upon  the  defeat  of  the  servile  armies  of
Asia.2  The  rapidity  of  his  own  conquest  he  signalized,
we  are  told,  by  the  arrogant  bulletin,  which  has  passed
into  a  familiar  proverb,  /  came,  I  saw,  I  conquered.*
But  his  intercourse  with  Cleopatra  had  corrupted  the
proud  simplicity  of  the  Roman  statesman.  He
already  meditated  bringing  her  to  the  capital,  and
there  parading  her  in  the  face  of  his  countrymen  as
the  partner  of  the  honours  they  lavished  upon  himself.
The  state  of  feeling  among  the  Romans  regarding  the
intercourse  of  the  sexes  was  such  as  we  can  with
difficulty  appreciate.  Yet  we  shall  very  imperfectly
understand  the  position  and  character  of  their  greatest
men,  unless  we  seek  to  put  ourselves  in  their  place,
and  view  things  for  a  moment  with  their  eyes.
Marriage  among  the  Romans  was  hallowed  by  re-
ligious feelings,  but  such  marriage  only  as  a  strict

1  Dion,  xlii.  48.  *  Suet.  Jul.  35.;  App.  B.C.  ii.  91.

1  Plutarch  (C<es.  50.)  says  that  this  expression  was  used  in  a  letter
to  one  Amintius;  the  name  is  probably  a  mistake.  Suetonius  (Jul.
37.)  asserts  that  the  three  words  were  inscribed  on  a  banner,  and
carried  in  Caesar's  triumph.  Appian  and  Dion  refer  to  them  sa
notorious.

334  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xvin.

and  jealous  nationality  prescribed.  Concubinage,  on
the  other  hand,  was  tolerated,  licensed,  and  pro-
tected; but  even  such  concubinage,  in  acquiring  a
moral  sanction,  submitted  to  certain  implied  restric-
tions. Generally,  an  avowed  and  permanent  con-
nexion with  a  foreigner  was  regarded  as  shocking
and  degrading :  with  an  Oriental,  and  especially  an
Egyptian,  whose  laxity  of  manners  offended  Italian
notions  beyond  all  other  people,  it  seemed  monstrous
and  incestuous.  The  disgust  of  Europeans  in  the
middle  ages  at  the  union  of  a  noble  Christian  with  a
Jewish  damsel,  was  faint,  perhaps,  in  comparison
with  this  national  horror  among  the  Romans.  With
all  such  antipathies  of  race  Caesar  refused  to  sympa-
thize ;  such  antique  prejudices  he  trampled  under
foot ;  and  he  indulged  proudly,  perhaps  wantonly,  in
this  lofty  disregard  of  the  prepossessions  of  his  weaker
countrymen.  But  man  cannot  defy  mankind  with
impunity.  Caesar  chilled  the  applause  of  his  country-
men by  this  inhuman  contempt  for  their  cherished
sentiments.  He  converted  the  cordial  greetings
they  were  prepared  to  lavish  upon  him  into  the
hollow  flattery  of  fear.  Nor  was  this  the  only  injury
he  thus  inflicted  on  his  own  fame  and  fortunes.  If
the  sorceress  of  the  Nile  contributed  to  corrupt  her
admirer's  native  sense  and  humanity,  no  less  did  she
vitiate  his  taste  by  the  enchanted  cup  of  Canopic
luxury.  She  taught  him  to  despise  as  mean  and
homely  the  splendour  of  the  Circus  and  the  Capitol.
She  imbued  him  with  the  gorgeous  and  selfish
principles  of  Oriental  despotism,  and  debased  him  to
the  menial  adulation  of  slaves,  parasites  and  eunuchs.1
It  is  with  no  wish  to  heap  unmerited  obloquy  on  a
woman  whose  faults  were  those  of  her  birth  and
position,  that  history  brands  with  infamy  her  influence

1  Lucan,  x.  127. :

"Turn  famuke  mimeras  turbae,  populusque  minister  ....
Nee  non  infelix  ferro  mollita  juventos."

A.H.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  335

on  the  Eoraan  hero.  Regardless  of  her  personal
dignity,  and  indifferent  to  human  life,  she  maintained
herself  on  an  Oriental  throne  by  the  arts  of  an  Orien-
tal potentate.  The  course  of  her  chequered  career
will  display  to  us  hereafter  a  character  in  which
good  contended  with  evil,  Macedonian  magnanimity
with  Egyptian  suppleness.  But  in  this  place  it
becomes  us  to  remark  the  fatal  effect  of  a  connexion
of  disparagement,  by  which  Caesar  felt  himself  de-
graded in  the  eyes  of  his  own  countrymen.  If  from
henceforward  we  find  his  generosity  tinged  with
ostentation,  his  courage  with  arrogance,  his  resolution
with  harshness:  if  he  becomes  restless,  and  fretful,
and  impatient  of  contradiction ;  if  his  conduct  is
marked  with  contempt  for  mankind  rather  than  with
indulgence  to  their  weakness,  it  is  to  this  impure
source  that  the  melancholy  change  is  to  be  traced.

336  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAPTER  XIX.

Character  of  Caesar's  policy  in  Rome. — He  assumes  the  dictatorship
for  the  third  time. — He  quells  a  mutiny  among  his  soldiers. — The
senatorial  party  collect  their  forces  in  Africa. — Cato  lands  at
Oyrene,  crosses  the  Libyan  desert,  and  joins  the  forces  of  Scipio
at  Utica. — Campaign  in  Africa  decided  by  the  victory  of  Caesar  at
Thapsus. — Dispersion  of  the  Republican  forces,  and  death  of  their
principal  leaders. — Cato  undertakes  to  defend  Utica. — His  ad-
herents abandon  the  contest. — He  commits  suicide. — The  dictator-
ship for  ten  years  and  other  distinctions  showered  upon  Caesar. —
On  his  return  to  Rome  he  celebrates  four  triumphs,  and  gratifies
the  people  with  shows  and  largesses. — Dedication  of  the  Julian
Forum. — The  war  renewed  by  Cnaeus  Pompeius  in  Spain. — He  is
supported  by  Caesar's  discontented  soldiers. — Cassar's  final  cam-
paign, and  decisive  victory  at  Munda. — Of  all  the  senatorial
leaders  Sextus  alone  remains  in  arms. — Disturbances  in  Syria.
(Sept,  A.U.  707. — April,  A.U.  709.)

THE  dictator  landed  at  Tarentum  in  the  month  of
September,  of  the  year  707. He  arrived

Caesar  arrive* . i  . , ,  .,  _

in  itaiy.  The  laden  with  the  spoils  or  presents  or  eastern

nobles  make . .  .  , . ,  . . „

their  «ubmi«- cities  and  potentates : he  had  carried  oft

lion  to  him. .  ,  .  _,

in  every  quarter  the  treasures  which  had
been  contributed  for  his  rival's  use ;  and  to  punish
the  city  of  Tyre  for  its  devotion  to  the  Pom-
peian  family,  he  had  rifled  the  great  temple  of  Mel-
earth  or  Hercules,  not  inferior  in  fame  and  opulence
to  the  same  god's  most  western  shrine  at  Gades.1  He
accepted  golden  crowns,  a  decorous  expression  for
large  donatives  in  money,  from  the  chieftains  who
solicited  his  favour.  Two  things,  he  used  to  say,
were  needful  for  getting  and  keeping  power,  soldiers
and  money,  and  each  of  these  was  to  be  gained  by
means  of  the  other.  The  immense  sums  he  thus
amassed  were  destined  to  satisfy  the  demands  of  his

1  Dion,  xlii.  49.

A.C.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  337

veterans,  to  provide  for  the  expenses  of  bis  triumph,
and  to  amuse  the  populace  of  the  city  with  spec-
tacles, largesses  and  buildings,  on  a  scale  of  unex-
ampled magnificence.  In  reassuming  the  govern-
ment of  Italy,  Antonius  had  received  express  orders
to  prevent  any  followers  of  the  senate  from  landing
in  the  Peninsula.  Many  of  the  nobles  were  anxious
to  make  their  submission  to  the  new  government.
They  trusted  to  recover  thereby  their  houses  and
estates,  and  escape  the  proscription  and  confiscation
now  generally  apprehended.  But  Caesar,  in  the  un-
settled state  of  men's  minds  at  Rome,  could  not  admit
into  the  city  another  possible  element  of  discord.1
He  insisted  that  the  deserters  from  the  Pompeian
standard  should  repair  to  him  personally  at  Alexan-
dria ;  and  during  his  residence  in  Egypt  there  were
many  such  who  sought  him  in  his  quarters,  and
devoted  themselves  with  professions  of  zeal  to  his
service.  Cicero  alone,  whose  escape  from  Italy  had
apparently  been  connived  at  by  Antonius  at  an  earlier
period,  now  obtained  permission  to  establish  himself
at  Brundisium.2  Further  be  was  not  allowed  to  pro-
ceed, and  he  remained  there  for  many  months  in  a
state  of  great  perplexity  and  apprehension.  On  the  one
hand,  cut  off  from  the  enjoyment  of  his  estates,  and
debarred  the  exercise  of  his  talents  in  the  forum,  he
was  reduced,  together  no  doubt  with  many  others  of
the  proud  nobility  of  Rome,  to  considerable  pecu-
niary embarrassments3;  on  the  other,  he  had  the
mortification  to  learn  that  his  brother  Quintus,  who

'  Cic.  ad  Att.  xi.  7.:  "Ad  me  misit  Antouius  exemplum  Caesaris
ad  se  literarum,  in  quibus  erat,  se  audisse  Catonem  et  L.  Metellum
in  Italiam  venisse,  Koince  ut  essent  pal  am:  id  sibi  non  placere,  ne
qui  motus  ex  eo  fierent:  prohiberique  omnes  Italia  nisi  quorum  ipse
causam  cognovisset."

z  Cicero  urged  that  he  had  received  an  invitation  from  Dolabella
at  Antonius's  instigation:  he  goes  on  to  say,  "Turn  ille  edixit  ita
ut  me  exciperet  et  Laclium  nominatim.  Quod  sane  nollem.  Poterat
enim  sine  nomine  res  ipsa  excipi."

3  Cic.  ad  Att.  xi.  11.  13.
VOL. II.  Z

338  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  MX.

had  abandoned  his  general  and  patron  at  the  com-
mencement of  the  war,  had  now  thrown  himself  at
Caesar's  feet,  and  was  trying  to  regain  the  favour  he
had  forfeited  by  calumniating  his  more  scrupulous
relative.1  Still  shaken  by  every  breath  of  rumour,
which  at  one  moment  resounded  with  the  successes  of
the  conqueror  in  the  east,  and  echoed  at  the  next  the
vaunting  anticipations  of  the  republican  champion
in  Africa2,  the  vacillating  statesman  awaited  the
result  of  events  in  uneasy  seclusion.  But  when  he
heard  of  Caesar's  arrival  on  the  coastj  he  finally
yielded  to  the  impulse  to  which  he  had  been  long
inclined.  He  immediately  came  forward  in  hopes  of
being  the  first  to  greet  the  new  ruler  of  the  common-
wealth, while  Caesar  was  generously  desirous  of
sparing  him  the  humiliation  of  mingling  with  the
crowd  who  were  hastening  upon  the  same  business.3
Received  with  affability,  and  treated  with  a  show  of
confidence,  Cicero  retired  with  more  cheerfulness
than  he  had  long  experienced  to  the  shades  of  his
Tusculan  villa ;  and  whether  there  or  at  Rome,  his
placing  himself  under  the  protection  of  the  new
government  gave  it  some  colour  of  authority  in  the
eyes  of  his  clients  and  admirers.

The  conduct  of  his  own  friends  in  the  city  was  a

subiect  of  greater  anxiety  to  Caesar,  on  as-
ms firmness  ». -i-i  .11 -ij c fc • xi

in  protecting suming  his  place  at  the  head  of  affairs,  than

them  against ., .?•  p i  • j  •  IT

the  cupidity  of  the  intrigues  of  his  adversaries.  He  re-
buked the  turbulent  proceedings  of  Dola-
bella,  but  abstained  from  punishing  one  with  whose
services  he  could  not  well  dispense.  He  maintained
firmly  the  principles  of  his  own  recent  enactment

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xi.  8. :  "  Quintus  misit  filium  non  solum  sui  depreca-
torem  sed  etiam  oppugnatorera  mci"  (comp.  12 — 14.).

2  Cic.  ad  Ait.  xi.  10.  (xii.  KaL  Feb.  A.U.  707.):  "  DC  Africanis  re-
bus  longe  alia nobis, ac tu scripseras, nuntiantur. Nihil enim
firmius  esse  dicunt,  nib.il  paratius. Accedit  Hispania  ct  alienata
Italia  ;  lepionum  nee  vis  eadem  nee  voluntas;  urbana?  res  perdita;."

'  Pint.  Cic.  39.

A.U.707-B.C.47. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  339

regarding  the  debtors' claims1 ;  nor  co aid  they  dis-
pute the  fairness  of  an  arbitrator  who  replied  to
their  clamours  by  declaring  that  no  man  in  Rome
was  more  deeply  interested  in  the  terms  of  the  com-
promise than  himself.2  On  the  other  hand,  he
winked  at  the  private  irregularities  by  which  An-
tonius  had  disgraced  his  leader's  party  hardly  less
than  his  own  character ;  nor  would  he  listen  to  the
counsels  of  those  who  exhorted  him  to  issue  a  decree
of  proscription  against  his  enemies.  It  may  be
doubted  whether  his  sentence  of  confiscation  exten-
ded further  than  to  the  estates  of  Pompeius  himself
and  his  two  sons.3  In  making  these  examples,  he
probably  wished  to  stigmatize  the  family  of  his  per-
sonal rival  as  fomenters  of  a  mere  private  quarrel,
and  thus  to  distinguish  their  cause  from  that  of  a
great  national  party.  But  it  was  impossible  for  the
citizens,  when  they  saw  the  house  of  the  illustrious
Pompeius  on  the  Palatine  sold  for  Caesar's  own  profit,
not  to  attribute  such  an  action  to  cupidity  or  vin-
dictiveness.  Antonius,  with  his  usual  reckless  pro-
digality, outbade  every  competitor ;  but  he  was
surprised  and  offended  when  he  found  himself  com-
pelled to  pay  down  the  stipulated  price.4  He  deemed
that  his  services,  both  past  and  in  prospect,  might
command  the  trifling  indulgence  of  release  from
a  paltry  debt.  He  found,  however,  that  his  patron
was  in  earnest,  and  prudently  submitted  to  the
affront.

It  is  impossible  not  to  admire  the  lofty  idea  which

1  Dion's  apparent  statement  to  the  contrary  (xlii.  51.)  refers  un-
doubtedly to  the  compromise  which  Ciesar  effected between the
debtors  and  their  creditors  in  his  lirst  dictatorship. Drnmaun.  iii
567.,  anm.  67.

2  Dion,  xlii.  5O.

3  Cic.  de  Off.  i.  14.,  Tune.  i.  35.,  ad  Alt.  xi.  20  ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  a.
11.;  Dion  xl'ii.  50.

*  Cic.  Pkilipp.  ii.  25. The  authority  for  this  part  of  the  anecdote
is  surely  suspicious. That  the  estates  of  the  Pompeii  were  sold  and
purchased  partly  by  Antonius  is  stated  by  Dion,  xlv.  9.
Z  2

340  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIX.

Caesar  conceived  of  the  claims  and  duties  of  the  mo-
narchy he  sought  to  establish. He  felt  that

Cesar's  policy ,  • J  VJ  ij_J  •  •L-.L

in  securing  the  he  occupied  his  exalted  eminence  by  virtue
mra"f  a°n  of  his  acknowledged  superiority  to  all
around  him  in  strength  and  sagacity  of  cha-
racter. Obedience  he  demanded  as  submission,  not  to
bis  own  arbitrary  caprice,  but  to  the  principles  of
reason.  He  claimed  that  his  word  should  be  law,  as
the  recognised  expression  of  the  necessities  of  the  time.
It  was  because  they  had  become  obviously  inapplicable
to  existing  circumstances  that  the  formal  usages  of
the  commonwealth  were  made  to  give  way  to  the
hand  of  the  innovator.  When  Caesar  elevated  in-
dividuals to  civil  offices  before  the  legal  age,  he  as-
sumed that  the  old  checks  upon  precocious  ambition
or  popular  favouritism  were  no  longer  required.
In  widening  the  doors  of  admission  to  the  public
boards  and  corporations  *,  he  was  accommodating
them  to  the  increase  in  the  number  of  candidates
eligible  to  official  distinction.  If  he  replenished  the
senate  with  a  crowd  of  men  of  inferior  rank,  selected
from  the  most  distinguished  officers  of  his  army,  he
was  infusing  new  and  healthy  blood  into  a  body  de-
bilitated by  luxury,  and  deprived  by  the  recent  wars
of  a  large  portion  of  its  members.  In  making  his
•appointments  to  the  highest  offices  of  the  state,  in
which  the  people  hardly  sought  to  retain  even  a
nominal  share,  he  had  the  great  difficulty  of  all
usurpers  to  surmount,  to  satisfy  the  claims  of  his
adherents  without  destroying  the  dignity  and  useful-
ness of  the  offices  themselves.  Lepidus,  who  had
rendered  Caesar  a  great  service  by  his  promptness  in
securing  him  his  first  dictatorship,  was  gratified  with
the  proprastorship  in  Spain,  and  upon  his  return  was
allowed  the  honours  of  a  triumph,  though  he  had
performed  no  military  exploit,  and  acquired  no  tro«

1  Dion,  xlii.  51.

A.D.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  341

phies  except  the  presents  he  had  extorted  from  the
provincials. l  The  good  offices  of  Calenus  and  Va-
tinius  were  rewarded  with  the  enjoyment  of  the
consulship  for  the  three  months  of  the  year  which
remained  after  Caesar's  return  to  Rome.2  Sallustius,
the  historian,  had  a  strong  claim  upon  Cit-sar's  favour,
on  account  of  his  expulsion  from  the  senate  by  Appius
Claudius,  which  he  justly  attributed  to  his  political
rather  than  to  his  moral  delinquencies.  The  doors  of
that  assembly  were  again  opened  to  him  by  his  ap-
pointment to  the  praetorship.  But  if  the  ruler  of  the
commonwealth  condescended  in  some  instances  to
allow  the  claims  of  party  to  influence  his  favours,  he
felt  for  the  most  part  that  true  dignity  and  policy  re-
quired him  to  obliterate  any  such  distinctions,  and
make  all  men  feel  practically  that  they  stood  upon
the  same  level  of  common  inferiority,  and  of  depend-
ence upon  himself.  In  the  distribution  of  the  pro-
vinces, the  offices  which  the  candidates  had  previously
served,  and  even  the  ranks  in  which  they  had  stood
on  the  field  of  Pharsalia,  were  equally  disregarded.
Submission  to  the  new  government  was  the  only  con-
dition required  for  the  honour  of  sharing  in  its  emolu-
ments. Marcus  Brutus,  who  had  been  so  prominent
a  champion  of  the  senate,  received  an  equal  mark  of
confidence  with  Decinms,  who  had  served  Caesar  with
fidelity  and  success  throughout  the  Gallic  wars.  The
one  received  the  government  of  the  Cisalpine  Gaul,
the  other  that  of  the  province  beyond  the  mountains.
A  crowning  act  of  magnanimous  self-reliance  was  the
restoration  of  the  statues  both  of  Sulla  and  Pompeius3,
which  the  obsequious  Caesareans  had  overthrown  in
imitation  of  the  previous  examples  of  so  many  party
leaders  of  less  lofty  character.  But  if  the  new  hero

1  Dion,  xliii.  1.  *  Dion,  xlii.  55.

8  Suet.  Jill.  75.;  Plut.  Cic.  40.:  Itynj  7010  & KiKtptav, Sri  rainy  ry
fa  Kaicrap  TOIIS  fjifv Tio^TTjtov  VffTTjffj,  TOUJ  Sf  ainov  irfjyvuu  iv

342  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xix.

could  thus  defy  comparison  with  the  most  illustrious

of  the  dead,  much  more  did  he  feel  himself  exalted

above  all  living  competition.

Upon  his  return  to  Rome,  Caesar  caused  himself  to
be  created  dictator  for  the  third  time,  and
again  for  an  annual  term.  He  also  desig-

th!?d  "time : nated  himself  and  Lepidus  consuls  for  the

Oct.  A.C.  707.  _  r ,  -

ensuing  year.  But  it  deserves  to  be  re-
marked, that  he  now  described  himself  on  his  coins
as  dictator  for  the  second,  and  not  for  the  third  time.
He  thus  turned  men's  eyes  upon  himself  as  the
founder  of  a  new  order  of  things ;  for  the  first  ap-
pointment had  been  made  in  accordance  with  con-
stitutional precedent,  and  was  a  last  vestige  of  the
republic ;  while  those  which  succeeded  were  alto-
gether irregular,  and  betokened  the  establishment  of
a  new  monarchical  era.1  But  in  the  midst  of  these

dazzling  distinctions  the  demands  of  the
mutiny a'nTong  legions  in  Campania  caused  Caesar  the

his  soldiers.  ,.  .  . „

greatest  disquietude ;  tor  the  torces  ot  the
enemy  were  daily  augmenting  in  Africa,  and  it  was
incumbent  upon  him  to  go  forth  without  delay,  and
combat  them  on  another  field  of  battle.  Sallustius,
who  had  been  sent  to  quell  the  rising  mutiny,  was
driven  back  to  Rome  ignominiously.2  Two  senators
of  praetorian  rank,  Cosconius  and  Gralba,  had  been
slain  in  the  tumult.  The  refractory  legions,  imbued
with  the  blood  of  their  officers,  marched  in  frantic
excitement  to  the  gates  of  the  city,  and  pitched  their
tents  in  the  Campus  Martius.  Caesar  sent  once  more
to  inquire  the  causes  of  their  discontent,  but  they
replied  that  they  would  confer  only  with  himself  in
person.  All  the  military  force  he  had  in  attendance
upon  him  consisted  of  the  few  cohorts  with  which

1  See  Drumann,  iii.  565.  This  is  true  of  some  of  the  coins  of  this
date, on  which  we  read  "cos.  tert.  diet.  iter. ;"  but  others  are  inscribed
more  correctly.

1  Dion,  xlii.  52.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  92.

4.P.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  343

Antonius  had  recently  maintained  the  peace  of  the
city,  and  of  the  fidelity  even  of  these  he  was  doubt-
ful. He  relied  on  his  own  courage  to  save  him.
Without  betraying  any  symptoms  of  anxiety,  he  con-
fronted the  mutineers,  and  demanded  what  it  was
they  desired.  They  claimed  their  discharge  and  the
liquidation  of  their  long  arrears ;  if  required,  as  they
expected,  for  further  service,  their  swords  must  be
bought  by  an  extraordinary  largess.  But  Caesar  acted
over  again  the  part  which  had  succeeded  so  well  at
Placentia.  He  took  them  immediately  at  their  first
word:  they  had  claimed  their  discharge;  they  were
discharged.  The  composure  and  deliberateness
of  his  resolve  was  signified  in  the  word  Quirites,
by  which  he  addressed  them.1  The  legionaries
were  at  once  overcome  with  shame  and  confusion ;
the  veterans  of  the  Tenth  especially  felt  the  deepest
remorse  at  the  injustice  of  which  they  now  accused
themselves.  But  this  time  the  indignant  general
remained  cold  and  unmoved.  He  refused  to  lead
his  ancient  favourites  to  another  field  of  glory ;  he
only  permitted  them  to  follow  him,  and  exacted  of
their  officers  the  most  dangerous  services,  in  which
he  did  not  choose  to  sacrifice  the  men  whom  he
really  loved.  Nor  did  he  miss  the  opportunity  of  the
first  occurrence  of  a  breach  of  discipline  to  remind
its  authors  of  their  recent  misconduct,  and  to  dismiss
them  with  ignominy  from  his  ranks.2

The  chiefs  of  the  republican  party  who  had  met  at
Corcyra  soon  began  to  act  independently  of  g^plo  join,
each  other,  without  submitting  to  any  re-  }uabTi"d
cognized  leader  or  plan  of  operations.  While  Africa-
Scipio,  their  ostensible  head,  led  the  largest  division
of  their  forces  to  the  province  of  Africa,  to  effect  a

1  See  the  parallel  occurrence  above,  Vol  II.  p.  228.  It  seems  not
improbable  thai  Csesar  employed  the  same  mode  of  rebuking  his  re-
bellious soldiers  on  two  distinct  occasions..

s  Auct.  B.  Afric.  54.

344  HISTORY OF THE RWMANS  CH.  XIX.

junction  with  the  victorious  armies  of  Varus  and
Juba1,  Labienus  directed  his  course  farther  eastward,
and  made  an  attempt  to  possess  himself  of  Gyrene,
which,  however,  resisted  and  repulsed  him.  Cato

united  himself  with  Cnseus  Pompeius,  and
ingtoof°the  e^~  fell  in  at  Patrae  with  Petreius  and  Faustus
plfus  wo.**  Sulla.  Their  combined  squadrons  now
coast  of  crossed  from  the  shore  of  Greece  to  that

of  Africa,  with  the  intention  of  following
the  general  who  had  abandoned  them,  and  whom
their  last  accounts  represented  as  having  betaken
himself  to  Egypt.  But  when  they  met  the  flying
vessels  which  bore  Cornelia,  together  with  Sextus,
from  the  scene  of  her  husband's  murder2,  being
unaware  of  Caesar's  movements,  and  how  scanty
were  his  military  equipments,  they  turned  their  faces
from  the  east,  at  a  juncture  when  an  act  of  energy
and  boldness  might  have  retrieved  every  disaster.
Cnseus,  indeed,  urged  with  all  the  vehemence  of  his
character  a  desperate  attack  on  his  father's  murder-
ers3, but  he  was  overruled  by  the  cautious  prudence
of  Cato,  who  was  now  only  anxious  to  unite  together
in  one  spot  the  scattered  fragments  of  the  party.  The
Eoman  general  landed  his  little  army  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Gyrene,  and  demanded  admittance.  The
inhabitants  again  closed  their  gates,  but  they  had
more  respect  for  Cato  than  for  their  last  assailant,
and  yielded  on  the  first  demonstration  of  force.4
Cato  only  required  rest  and  provisions,  and  allowed
no  violence  to  be  exercised  against  them ;  a  rare  act
of  clemency  in  a  leader  of  the  republican  party  to-
wards a  town  which  had  made  any  show  of  resistance
to  its  authority.5

From  Gyrene  Cato  set  sail  to  the  westward. His

1  Plutarch,  Cat.  Min.  56.  ;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.

2  Lucan,  ix.  46.  3  Lucan,  ix.  150.  166.

4  Lucan,  ix.  297.;  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  56.

5  Cato  had  himself  sacked  the  town  of  Phycus  in  Crete  for  refusing
shelter  to  his  vessels. Lucan,  ix.  40.

A.n.70fi-B.C.48.  UNDER THE EMPIKK.  345

flotilla  seems  to  have  reached  the  Lesser  Syrtis  in
safety,  but  at  that  point  it  was  assailed  by

xU i_- l.  ^. CC J  -J l_l He  traverse!

a  tempest  by  which  it  sunered  considerably,  the  Libyan
and  it  was  not  deemed  prudent  to  coast
those  dangerous  shores  any  farther  in  the  boisterous
season  which  had  now  set  in.1  The  vessels  were  left
in  charge  of  Cnaeus,  to  await  more  favourable  weather
for  the  continuation  of  their  voyage.2  But  Cato  was
impatient  of  further  delay,  and,  having  laid  before
bis  followers  the  dangers  of  the  route  he  was  deter-
mined to  take,  put  himself  at  the  head  of  a  devoted
band,  and  led  the  way  into  the  depths  of  the  desert
which  skirts  the  head  of  the  Lesser  Syrtis.3  The
winter  was  about  to  commence,  and  his  march  was
fortunately  more  practicable  than  it  would  have  been
at  any  other  season  of  the  year.4  Nevertheless,  the
scarcity  of  water,  the  excessive  heat,  and,  it  is  added,
the  noxious  reptiles  by  which  some  districts  were
infested,  rendered  it  a  succession  of  unprecedented
hardships.  The  inhospitable  sands  stretched  for  a
distance  of  seven  days' journey.8  The  camel,  it  must

1  Lucan,  ix 320.  2  Lucan,  ix.  374. :

••  Haec  eadem  suadcbat  hyems  quae  clauserat  sequor."

1  Lucan  makes  Cato  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  lake  Tritoms,
that  is,  at  the  Lesser  Syrtis.  He  is  the  only  author  who  gives  any
local  details  of  this  expedition,  and  our  confidence  in  him  is  shaken
by  his  introducing  the  temple  of  Hammon  into  the  line  of  march.
See  Luc.  ix.  511.  seqq.  The  superstitious  character  of  Labienus  is
indeed  noticed  incidentally  by  Plutarch,  Cic.  38.:  Ao&Vou  Si
/uavreiais  rifflv  Icrxvp^o^tvov,  and  I  think  it  probable  that  the  curious
episode  in  the  Pharsalia,  in  which  Labienus  advises  Cato  to  consult
the  oracle  of  Jupiter  Hammon,  which  the  sage  refuses  to  do,  is
founded  upon  some  real  fact,  though  its  local  application  is  un-
doubtedly fictitious.

4  Lucan,  ix.  375.  Plutarch  says  the  same,  but  they  were  misled
perhaps  by  the  unreformed  calendar.  See  the  following  note.

*  This  is  Plutarch's  statement.  Lucan  makes  the  march  through
the  desert  occupy  two  whole  months  (ix.  940.):

"  Bis  positis  Phoebe  flammis,  bis  luce  recepta

Vidit  arenivagum  surgens  fugiensque  Catonem."
I  conclude  that  this  was  the  whole  time  from  Cyrene  to  Utica.  Pom-
oeius  was  killed Sept.  29. —July  24. Cato  must  have  landed  at

346  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xix.

be  remembered,  was  only  known  to  the  Romans  as  a
denizen  of  Bactria  and  Arabia1 ;  the  ocean  sands  of
the  African  continent  had  never  yet  been  navigated
by  these  ships  of  the  desert.2  Accordingly,  the  diffi-
culties and  privations  of  such  a  march  are  not  to  be
estimated  by  our  modern  experience.  Undoubtedly
it  deserves  to  be  commemorated  as  one  of  the  greatest
exploits  in  Eoman  military  history.  The  poet  of  the
republic  exalts  it  indeed  above  the  three  triumphal
processions  of  Pompeius,  above  the  victories  of  Marius
over  the  tyrant  of  Numidia.  He  turns  with  pardon-
able enthusiasm  from  the  deified  monsters,  the  Cali-
gulas  and  Neros  of  his  own  day,  to  hail  its  achiever
as  the  true  father  of  his  country,  the  only  worthy
object  of  a  freeman's  idolatry.3

The  arrival  of  Cato  and  his  gallant  band  at  the
Great  muster  head-quarters  of  the  republicans  at  Utica
clnhceh£f8uabtu"  was  followed  at  a  later  period  by  that  of
Cnaeus ;  and  in  the  course  of  the  next  year,
A.U.  707,  the  remains  of  the  great  host  of  Pharsalia
were  assembled,  with  many  additional  reinforcements,
under  the  banners  of  the  oligarchy.  These  forces
amounted  to  not  less  than  ten  complete  legions,  and
their  chiefs  relied  for  support  upon  the  whole  military

Gyrene  within  the  first  month  from  that  date,  and  left  it  probably
before  the  end  of  a  second.  The  two  following  months  would  in-
clude December  of  the  Roman  calendar,  September  or  October  of
the  real  time.  Strabo  (xvii.  3.  30.)  makes  the  time  thirty  days.

1  Plin.  H.  N.  viii.  26. Plutarch  says  that  Cato  employed  a  large
number  of  asses  to  carry  water.

2  That  is,  not  to  the  westward  of  Egypt. Pharaoh  had  camels;
and  the  Israelites,  on  their  coming  out  of  Egypt,  are  forbidden  to  eat
the  flesh  of  the  camel. Strabo  (xvii.  1.45.)  speaks  of  the  camels  of
Coptos  and  Berenice.

s  Lucan,  ix.  598  :

"  Hunc  ego  per  Syrtes  Libyaeque  extrema  triumphum
Ducere  maluerim,  quam  ter  Capitolia  curru
Scandere  Pompeii,  quam  frangere  colla  Jugurtliae.
Ecce  parens  verus  patriae,  dignissimus  aris
Roma  tuis,  per  quern  nunquam  jurare  pudebit;
Et  quern  si  steteris  unquam  cervice  soluta
Tune  olira  factura  Deum."

A.D.707-B.C.47.  TINDER THE EMPIRE.  347

resources  of  Juba1,  who  could  bring  one  hundred  and
twenty  elephants  into  the  field,  and  squadrons  of  light
cavalry,  wild  and  numberless  as  the  waves  of  the
stormy  Syrtis.  The  officers  began  to  brag  of  their
future  triumphs  in  almost  as  loud  a  strain  as  recently
at  Thessalonica.  Their  notes  of  confident  defiance
were  re-echoed  to  the  opposite  shores  of  Italy,  and
caused  fresh  dismay  to  the  time-servers,  who  had
abandoned  the  good  cause  on  the  event  of  its  first
discomfiture.  Strange,  indeed,  it  must  seem,  that
the  leaders  of  so  powerful  an  army  should  have  made
no  attempt  to  regain  their  footing  in  the  country  to
which  all  their  hopes  pointed,  and  which  lay  at  only
three  days'  sail  from  the  Gulf  of  Carthage.  It  is
possible  that  they  purposely  refrained  in  order  that
the  population  of  Eome  and  Italy  might  feel  the  full
effect  of  the  tyranny  or  anarchy  which  was  said  to
prevail  under  the  new  regime,  and  learn  from  bitter
experience  the  weight  of  the  yoke  to  which  they  had
submitted.  Expecting  to  see  the  colossus  which
Caesar  had  reared  fall  to  pieces  by  its  own  weight,  and
overwhelm  the  arch-traitor  in  its  ruins,  they  had
neglected  the  opportunity  of  crushing  him  in  Alex-
andria, no  less  than  the  means  of  intercepting  him
on  his  passage  from  Greece  to  Italy.  They  were
destitute,  we  may  suppose,  of  the  means  of  putting  a
large  army  readily  in  motion.  The  province  of  Africa
was  small,  nor  was  it  one  of  the  wealthiest  of  the
empire,  and  the  alliance  of  Numidia  was  too  im-
portant to  be  discarded  for  the  hope  of  plunder.
This  inaction  may  be  partly  accounted  for  also  by  the
jealousies  which  already  prevailed  among  the  chiefs
of  the  party.  Moreover,  Juba,  whom  both  Scipio
and  Varus  strove  by  every  means  to  attach  to  them-
selves respectively  in  their  rivalry  for  the  leadership,
was  doubtless  anxious  to  retain  the  Roman  forces

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  1.  19.

348  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  xix.

in  their  present  position,  both  for  his  own  security,
and  with  a  view  to  the  recompense  he  expected  for
his  aid,  if  the  power  of  the  enemy  should  be  over-
thrown on  the  shores  of  Africa.  Of  the  remnant  of
those  who  had  fought  at  Pharsalia  Scipio  stood  the
highest  in  rank  and  consideration  ;  he  could  boast  of
having  been  associated  in  command  with  Pompeius
himself.  But  Varus  was  proud  of  his  share  in  the  defeat
of  Curio,  and  declared  that,  as  legitimate  governor  of
the  African  province,  he  would  yield  the  supreme
authority  to  no  other  imperator  within  its  limits.  The
army,  indeed,  would  have  settled  the  dispute  by  con-
ferring the  first  place  on  Cato  by  acclamation ;  a  re-
markable tribute  to  the  personal  influence  of  one  who,
in  point  of  fact,  had  never  measured  his  sword  with
an  enemy  in  the  field.  But  that  noble-minded  man
felt  that  it  would  be  unbecoming  to  usurp  the  place  of
an  officer  of  higher  rank,  and  immediately  devolved
the  command  upon  Scipio  the  consular.1  The  name
of  Scipio  was  one  of  good  omen  for  a  campaign  in
Africa;  but  his  first  act  was  to  authorize  the  destruction
of  the  city  of  Utica,  at  the  instance  of  Juba,  who  was
jealous  of  its  power  and  splendour  as  the  rival  of  his
own  neighbouring  city  of  Zama,  and  represented  it
as  dangerous  to  the  republican  cause  from  the  dis-
affection imputed  to  its  inhabitants.2  Fortunately
Cato  possessed  sufficient  influence  to  save  it ;  but
Scipio  affected  to  make  him  responsible  for  its  good
behaviour,  and  was  glad  to  thrust  him  on  one  side,
by  giving  him  the  command  there,  while  he  shifted
the  quarters  of  his  own  army  to  the  neighbourhood  of
Adrumetum.3  Cato,  indeed,  was  obliged  to  adopt
vigorous  measures  of  precaution.  He  expelled  the
multitude  of  unarmed  inhabitants  from  the  city,
placing  them  within  entrenched  lines  outside  the

1  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  57.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  87.;  Dion,  xlii.  57.

*  Plut.,  Dion,  //.  cc.;  Liv.  Epit  cxiii.

3  Appian,  B.C.  ii-  95.;  Auct.  B.  Afr.  24.

A.U.707-B.C.47.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  349

gates,  under  the  guard  or  protection  of  a  body  of
soldiers.  The  senate,  an  object  of  just  suspicion,
he  placed  under  rigorous  confinement.1  We  feel  a
melancholy  pleasure  in  contemplating  the  brave
philosopher  busying  himself  in  the  collection  of
stores,  and  preparations  for  defence,  and  glad  to
devote  himself  to  any  dull  and  thankless  office  rather
than  draw  his  sword  against  his  countrymen  in  the
field ;  for  of  all  the  professed  defenders  of  Eoman
liberty,  he  alone  really  mourned  over  the  necessity
of  asserting  his  principles  by  arms.  From  the  first
outbreak  of  the  civil  war  he  had  refused  to  trim  his
venerable  locks,  or  shave  his  grizzled  beard ;  and
from  the  fatal  day  of  Pharsalia  he  had  persisted  in
sitting  at  his  frugal  repasts,  and  denied  himself  the
indulgence  of  reclining  on  a  couch.2  Nevertheless,
it  was  good  policy  to  remove  him  from  the  councils  of
the  party,  where  his  unbending  principles  must  have
proved  seriously  detrimental.  Cicero  might  harmlessly
whisper  into  a  private  ear  at  a  distance  his  mortification
at  the  deference  paid  to  a  barbarian  potentate  by  the
representatives  of  the  republic  3;  but  when  Cato,  at
the  head-quarters  of  the  allied  powers,  expressed  his
haughty  indignation,  he  was  sowing  the  seeds  of
certain  rupture.  It  was  related  that  when  Juba,
attending  a  council  of  officers,  presumed  to  seat
himself  between  Scipio  and  Cato,  the  latter  rose  and
walked  round  to  the  other  side,  to  preserve  the  place
of  honour  for  the  Koman  general.4  But  he  was  more
alert  in  striving  to  rouse  the  spirit  of  his  countrymen
for  the  last  struggle  than  any  of  his  colleagues  in
command.  He  encouraged  Cnaeus  to  make  a  diver-
sion in  the  west ;  for  in  Spain  the  provincials  were
still  believed  to  be  at  heart  Pompeian,  and  the

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  87.  f  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  i.  56.;  Lucan,  ii.  375.

1  Cic.  ad  Div. ix.  6.  to  Varro:  "Ad  bestiarum  auxilium  con-
fatrere,"  i.e.  the  Numidian  lions;  comp.  ad  Att.  xL  7.
4  Plut.  Cat.  Min.  57.

350  HISTORY OF THE EOMANS  CH.  xix.

Oaesarean  garrisons  were  known  to  be  wavering.
Cnseus  commenced  his  enterprise  with  an  attack  on
a  stronghold  of  the  king  of  Mauretania;  but  suf-
fering a  repulse  in  this  desultory  and  inglorious  war-
fare, he  withdrew  to  the  Balearic  islands,  and  there
rested  for  a  time  on  his  arms.1

The  sovereignty  of  the  great  tract  of  country
The  chiefs  of  known  by  the  name  of  Mauretania  was
divided  between  two  brothers,  Bogudes
and  Bocchus,  whose  father  had  deserved
well  of  the  unscrupulous  republic  by  be-
traying Jugurtha  into  its  hands.  These  chiefs
were  both  disposed  to  throw  themselves  into  Cae-
sar's arms,  out  of  jealousy  probably  of  the  rival
king  of  Numidia,  whose  influence  with  the  opposite
party  they  had  every  reason  to  fear.  Bocchus  was
prepared  to  take  an  active  part  on  the  side  of  his
ally,  and  his  military  power  was  the  more  respectable
from  his  having  engaged  in  his  service  a  Eoman
Adventure*  of  adventurer  named  P.  Sitius.  This  man
had  found  means  to  maintain  himself  at
the  head  of  a  band  of  outlaws  of  all  nations,  whose
swords  he  disposed  of  to  decide  the  quarrels  of  the
petty  chieftains  of  the  country.2  Sitius  was  a  native
of  Nuceria,  in  Italy,  and  had  acquired  some  notoriety
at  Rome  as  an  extensive  money-dealer,  in  which
capacity  he  had  established  intimate  relations  with
some  foreign  potentates,  and  especially  those  of
Mauretania.  It  was  surmised  that  losses  incurred  in
his  trade,  or  the  prodigality  which  had  more  than
kept  pace  with  its  profits,  had  tempted  him  to  con-
nect himself  with  the  revolutionary  visions  of  Cati-
lina ;  but  the  proof  against  him  had  failed,  and  his
connexion  with  P.  Sulla,  who  was  defended  against  a
similar  charge  by  Cicero,  obtained  him  the  distinc-

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  23.

2  The  history  of  Sitius  is  gathered  from  B.  Afr.  25. ;  Dion,  xliii.
3.;  Appian,  B.C.  iv.  54.;  Cic.  pro  Sulla,  20.;  Sallust,  B.C.  21.

A.J.707-B.C.47.  UNLER THE EMPIRE.  , 351

tion  of  a  panegyric  from  the  renowned  patriot.  It
seems,  however,  that  he  subsequently  fell  under  sen-
tence of  banishment  on  some  other  account.  He
collected  about  him  a  band  of  ruffians,  and  crossing
over  to  the  coast  of  Africa  was  ambitious  of  playing
a  more  distinguished  part  on  that  theatre  of  lawless
adventure.  Bocchus,  having  secured  this  man's  aid
in  the  diversion  he  meditated  in  Caesar's  favour,  pre-
pared to  make  an  inroad  into  Numidia,  and  draw  off
the  forces  of  Juba  for  the  defence  of  their  own  terri-
tories, as  soon  as  he  heard  of  the  arrival  of  the
dictator  in  the  Koman  province.  The  representative
of  Marius,  whose  name  had  been  so  illustrious  in
Africa,  might  depend  also  on  the  favour  of  a  portion
of  the  Roman  colonists ;  and  even  among  the  Gse-
tulians  and  Numidians  there  were  many  whose
fathers  had  won  distinctions  under  the  old  veteran's
standard,  and  who  bequeathed  to  their  descendants
a  faithful  remembrance  of  his  benefactions.1

A  whole  year  had  now  passed  in  a  state  of  com-
parative inaction  on  the  part  of  the  re-  casarieayes
publicans,  while  Caesar  was  quelling  the  u2dy»tad
resistance  of  the  Egyptians,  destroying  Afric*'
Pharnaces,  and  consolidating  his  power  in  Eome.
He  must  have  left  the  city  before  the  end  of
November,  707  ;  for  he  led  his  troops  through  the
whole  length  of  southern  Italy,  crossed  the  straits  of
Messina,  and  traversed  Sicily  to  Lilybaeum  at  its  west-
ern extremity,  arriving  there  soon  after  the  middle  of
December.2  So  rapid  indeed  had  been  his  march
that  he  had  not  allowed  a  single  day  of  rest  through-
out; and,  on  reaching  his  destination,  he  pitched  his
tent  on  the  sea-shore,  to  show  his  anxiety  to  sail
without  a  moment's  delay.  He  had  appointed  Lily-
baeum for  the  rendezvous  of  his  legions,  and  had
directed  that  all  the  war  and  transport  vessels  that

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  32.;  Dion,  xliii.  4.

»  Auct.  B.  Afr.  1.;  Appiau,  B.  C.  ii.  95.

352  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  XIX.

could  be  mustered  should  there  await  his  coming.
The  weather  continued  unfavourable  for  some  days  :
but  fresh  battalions  reached  him  in  the  interval,  and
a  force  of  six  legions  and  two  thousand  cavalry  was
in  attendance  upon  his  orders  when  he  gave  the
signal  for  embarkation.  He  sailed  himself  with  the
first  detachment  before  the  end  of  December  of  the
Roman  year,  that  is,  before  the  commencement  of
the  winter  season.  The  enemy  kept  no  look-out  to
intercept  him.  He  passed  Utica,  the  usual  place
of  landing  from  the  coast  of  Europe,  and  steering
southward,  disembarked  his  troops,  consisting  of  only
three  thousand  foot,  and  one  hundred  and  fifty  horse,
in  the  neighbourhood  of  Adrumetum,  which  was
occupied  by  C.  Considius  with  a  powerful  garrison.
Caesar  was  not  strong  enough  to  make  an  attack
upon  this  place ;  he  despatched  a  captive  under  a
flag  of  truce,  to  open  a  negotiation  with  the  com-
mander. But  when  Considius  demanded  in  whose
name  the  herald  appeared,  and  he  answered,  In  that
of  Ccesar  the  imperator,  There  is  no  imperator  in
Africa  but  Scipio,  replied  the  republican  officer,
and  inflicted  condign  punishment  upon  him  as  a
deserter.1  The  dictator  saw  that  so  vigorous  an
adversary  was  not  to  be  cajoled,  and  broke  up  from
his  camp,  amidst  the  desultory  attacks  of  the  Nu-
midian  skirmishers,  whom  however  he  repelled  in
a  brilliant  affair  of  cavalry.  He  was  favourably
received  by  the  inhabitants  of  Leptis,  and  invited
to  take  shelter  within  their  walls,  while  he  des-
patched messengers  to  expedite  the  conveyance  of
stores  and  recruits  from  Sardinia  and  the  neighbour-
ing provinces,  and  to  direct  the  course  of  the  second
detachment  of  his  legions,  which  had  been  scattered
by  adverse  winds.

But  while  these  reinforcements  came  slowly  in,

1  Aucu  £.  Afr.  4.

A.n.708- B.c.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  353

Caesar's  little  army  was  exposed  to  imminent  peril.
The  combined  forces  of  Scipio  and  Juba  Anengage-

i  - ],  .  >  i.ii ment  ensues.

moved rapidly  upon  them ; and,  in  the  m  which

- A, .  J  ... Cassar  is

course  ot  their  manceuvres  to  secure  their  worsted.
communications  with  the  sea,  they  found  them-
selves reduced  to  the  necessity  of  hazarding  a  general
engagement.  Caesar  had  with  him  at  this  time
thirty  cohorts  and  some  hundred  cavalry  and  archers ;
the  number  of  the  republicans  was  so  enormous  that
Labienus  could  boast  that  even  to  destroy  them  un-
resisting would  weary  out  the  puny  band  of  Cae-
sareans.  Labienus  and  Petreius  were  the  principal
leaders  of  the  attack,  which  was  confided  almost
entirely  to  the  Roman  and  Numidian  cavalry.  The
former  of  these  officers  made  himself  particularly
conspicuous,  fighting  in  the  thickest  of  the  conflict,
and  railing  in  bitter  language  at  the  Caesarean  le-
gionaries, to  whom  his  person  was  well  known.  The
Roman  veteran  was  proud  of  his  length  of  service,
the  experience,  valour  and  fidelity,  which  it  betok-
ened. No  sarcasm  was  more  biting  to  him  than
to  be  addressed  as  Tiro,  or  raw  recruit.  Who  are
you  ?  I  never  saw  you  before,  was  the  insulting  lan-
guage which  Labienus  addressed  to  his  old  com-
panions in  arms  as  he  thrust  his  lance  in  their  faces.
/  am  no  tiro,  replied  one  of  them,  but  a  veteran  of
the  Tenth,  hurling  his  ponderous  pilum  at  his  old
commander.  The  skilful  horseman  covered  himself
by  a  rapid  movement  of  his  steed,  which  received
the  blow  in  its  chest  and  fell  under  him.  But  the
valour  of  the  Tenth  was  unavailing;  the  pressure
of  the  enemy's  massive  squadrons  drove  the  men
close  together,  or,  in  Roman  military  phrase,  within
the  rails.  Hardly  able  to  use  their  arms  in  the
throng,  they  gazed  anxiously  around  in  search  of
their  commander,  while  they  moved  their  bodies  and
inclined  their  heads  to  avoid  the  shower  of  missiles.
By  a  great  effort  Caesar  threw  his  lines  into  a  wedge,

VOL.  II.  A  A

354  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xix

ranging  the  alternate  cohorts  back  to  back  and
separating  the  dense  array  of  the  enemy  in  the
centre.  The  combat  was  divided  into  two  parts  on
the  right  and  left;  but  Caesar  had  pierced  an
opening  for  retreat  to  his  camp,  and  was  glad  to
draw  off  his  men,  and  abandon  the  field  of  battle
to  the  republicans.1

Caesar  now  fortified  his  position  on  the  coast,  in
Theprovin-  connexion  with  the  town  and  harbour  of
Mms™ithld  Ruspina,  with  more  than  usual  care,  for
ninfmcewnts  he  felt  the  extreme  precariousness  of  his
position  while  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the
expected  supplies.  At  this  period,  however,  events
began  to  tell  in  his  favour,  both  in  the  advance  of
Sitius  and  the  Mauretanians  upon  the  Numidian  ca-
pital, Cirta,  which  drew  off  Juba  from  Scipio's  head-
quarters, and  also  by  the  growing  manifestations  of
feeling  in  his  favour  within  the  province.  Even  now,
distressed  and  harassed  as  he  was,  many  personages  of
rank  and  station  began  to  resort  to  him ;  the  harshness
of  the  proconsul's  administration  drove  the  noble  and
the  wealthy  to  his  camp.2  Caesar  published  their
complaints  in  his  appeals  to  the  rulers  of  the  neigh-
bouring provinces  for  supplies.  He  had  come  to
Africa,  he  declared,  to  save  the  natives  from  spolia-
tion, and  the  allies  from  utter  destruction ;  but  for
his  opportune  arrival  nothing  but  the  bare  soil
would  soon  be  left  them.  Four  more  legions  shortly
joined  him  from  beyond  the  sea,  and  provisions  with
all  kinds  of  military  stores  were  collected  in  abun-
dance, while  Scipio,  deprived  of  the  aid  of  his
Numidian  allies,  was  seeking  to  train  a  squadron
of  elephants  to  war,  by  a  series  of  mimic  com-
bats.

The  arrival  of  so  large  a  number  of  Caesar's
veterans  gave  a  decisive  inclination  to  the  scale  of

1  Auct.  B.  AJT.  15—18.  *  Aucu  B.  Afr.  2$.

A.U.708-B.C.4fi.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  355

fortune. The  legionaries  of  the  republican  army
were personally  no match  for  them,  and  c«sar  obtaim

.7  . ,  ....  i  »n  advantage

even  its  numerical  superiority  in  cavalry  overscipio
was  greatly  diminished,  while  the  terror  of  Caesar's
prowess  more  than  counterbalanced  any  other  ad-
vantage it  might  possess.  Scipio  felt  that  he  was
unfit  to  contend  with  such  an  adversary  in  the  field,
and  avoided  a  battle;  while  at  the  same  time  he
had  conceived  no  other  distinct  plan  of  opposition  to
him.  But  even  this  feeble  policy  was  disconcerted
by  the  rapidity  of  the  assailant's  movements.  A
month  had  scarcely  elapsed  from  his  first  landing
when  he  found  himself  in  a  condition  to  assume
offensive  operations.  He  surprised  Scipio's  position
near  Uzita,  and  forced  his  troops  to  an  engagement
from  which  they  did  not  escape  without  considerable
loss.  The  discomfited  general  could  only  revenge
himself  by  putting  to  the  sword  the  complements  of
two  of  Caesar's  transport  vessels,  which  were  cast
away  at  Thapsns,  and  on  the  island  ^Egimums.1

During  these  operations,  however,  the  diversion
on  the  side  of  Cirta  had  not  proved  so  inwienceof
important  as  had  been  anticipated.  Juba,  i^Hai116
after  making  his  observations  on  the  c*mp'
strength  of  the  invaders,  contented  himself  with  de-
puting the  defence  of  his  capital  to  Sabura,  while  he
returned  with  the  larger  part  of  his  forces,  to  share
in  person  the  fortunes  of  his  allies.  The  necessities
of  the  Roman  chiefs  compelled  them  to  submit
to  revolting  indignities  from  the  pride  of  their  pre-
sumptuous colleague.  He  took  upon  himself  to  for-
bid Scipio  the  use  of  the  Imperator's  purple  cloak,
which  he  declared  to  be  an  ensign  of  the  kingly
office  ;  and  restricted  him  to  the  white  colour  of  the
ordinary  toga.  When  the  barbarian  issued  his  royal
mandates  to  Roman  officers,  they  were  observed  to

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  46.
4  A  2

356  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xix.

be  more  punctually  obeyed  than  tbe  orders  of  the
general  himself.1  But  every  insult  was  borne  to
secure  the  aid  of  the  Numidian  cavalry,  which  Caesar
was  compelled  to  train  his  soldiers  to  baffle  by  a
peculiar  system  of  tactics.  They  were  discouraged
also  by  the  elephants,  which  their  horses  would  not
encounter.  Caesar  fetched  some  animals  of  the  kind
from  Italy,  on  purpose  to  familiarize  both  men  and
horses  with  the  sight  of  the  uncouth  creatures ;  and
it  was  found  that,  when  the  first  terror  of  novelty
was  overcome,  the  unwieldy  monsters  did  little
service  in  battle.2

Thus  prepared  for  a  decisive  struggle,  Caesar  long
The  hostile  tried  in  vain  to  draw  his  adversary  into
arrnie»  meet  a  genera]  engagement.  At  last,  on  the
Thap,u,.  fourth  of  April,  708,  he  issued  from  his
encampment  by  night  and  marched  sixteen  miles
to  Thapsus,  where  Virgilius  commanded  for  Scipio
with  a  considerable  force.3  When  his  determination
to  invest  this  place,  important  as  well  from  its  devo-
tion to  the  republican  cause  as  from  the  numbers  of
the  garrison  it  contained,  became  known,  Scipio  felt
the  necessity  of  making  an  effort  to  preserve  it.  He
summoned  resolution  to  follow  in  the  enemy's  track,
and  pitched  his  camp  over  against  him,  at  a  distance
of  eight  miles  from  the  town.  Caesar  had  profited,  in
the  meanwhile,  by  the  few  hours  by  which  he  had
outstripped  his  opponents.  There  was  only  one  route
by  which  they  could  communicate  with  the  place,
which  ran  along  a  narrow  strip  of  land,  enclosed  by
the  sea  on  one  side,  and  a  salt-water  lake  on  the
other.  This  isthmus  Caesar  had  secured  the  day  be-
fore Scipio's  arrival,  throwing  up  fortifications,  and
posting  a  strong  body  of  troops  behind  them.
Having  made  these  dispositions,  he  was  applying
himself  to  the  investment  of  the  city,  when  Scipio,

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  57.  -  Auct.  B.  Afr.  72

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  79. ;  Dion,  xliii.  7.

A.C.708-B.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  357

unable  to  torce  an  entrance  into  it,  contented  himself
with  taking  up  a  position  on  the  shore,  from  whence
he  might  observe  and  impede  the  works  of  the  be-
siegers. While  some  of  his  troops  were  employed  in
casting  up  the  entrenchments,  the  main  body  was
drawn  up  in  battle  array  for  their  protection.  Caesar
saw  that  the  moment  was  arrived ;  he  immediately
led  forth  his  own  troops  to  the  encounter,  leaving
two  legions  to  cover  the  works  already  commenced,
and,  at  the  same  time,  gave  orders  to  a  portion  of
his  fleet,  which  was  riding  off  the  shore,  to  divert
the  attention  of  the  enemy  by  threatening  to  land  a
detachment  in  their  rear.1

If  Caesar  felt  a  momentary  distrust  of  the  result
of  the  approaching  combat,  it  was  caused  by  Battle  of
the  consciousness  that  a  large  portion  of  his  Ip?^"8'
men  were  fresh  recruits,  who  had  never  en-  ^rib.0!
countered  an  enemy  before.  To  these  he  *•  "• 46>
pointed  out  the  sturdy  veterans  dispersed  through
their  ranks,  and  bade  them  emulate  the  fame  they
had  acquired,-  and  merit  similar  titles  and  rewards.
Some  symptoms  of  vacillation  on  the  part  of  their
opponents  gave  new  force  and  spirit  to  his  exhorta-
tions. Men  and  officers  crowded  round  their  general,
imploring  him  to  give  the  word  for  the  onset.  While
he  still  hesitated,  or  watched  his  opportunity,  check-
ing with  hand  and  voice  the  impatient  swaying  of  the
lines,  suddenly  the  blast  of  a  single  trumpet  burst
forth  on  the  right  wing.  The  impetuous  ferocity  of
the  Tenth  legion  could  no  longer  brook  restraint;
they  had  raised  the  signal  unbidden,  and  now  the
whole  army  rushed  forward  in  one  unbroken  body,
overpowering  the  resistance  of  their  officers.  Caesar,
when  he  beheld  rank  after  rank  pouring  by  him,
without  the  possibility  of  recal,  gave  the  word  Good
luck  to  his  attendants,  and  spurred  his  horse  to  the

1  Auct.  B.  AJr.  81.

358  HISTORY OJ? THE ROMANS  CM.  XIX

head  of  his  battalions.  The  combat  was  speedily
ca*ar  obtains  decided.  The  elephants,  thrown  into  con-
vicw£y.et<  fusion  by  the  first  discharge  of  stones  and
arrows,  turned  upon  the  ranks  they  were  placed
to  cover,  and  broke  in  pieces  their  array.  The
native  cavalry  were  dismayed  at  losing  their  accus-
tomed support,  and  were  the  first  to  abandon  the  field.
Scipio's  legionary  force  made  little  further  resistance;
their  camp  was  close  in  the  rear,  and  they  were  con-
tent to  seek  shelter  behind  the  entrenchments.  De-
serted by  their  officers,  they  looked  in  vain  for  a
leader  to  direct  the  defence  of  the  ramparts.  No
one  had  been  left  in  command  of  the  camp.  The
fugitives,  seized  with  panic  terror,  threw  away  their
arms  and  betook  themselves  to  the  Numidian  encamp-
ment near  at  hand.  But,  on  reaching  it,  they  found
it  already  in  the  hands  of  the  Csesareans.  They  now
withdrew  in  a  body  to  a  neighbouring  eminence,  and
held  out  their  bare  arms  and  empty  hands  in  sign  of
submission.  But  the  victorious  veterans  were  mad
with  fury  and  exultation ;  they  would  give  no  quarter
to  the  unresisting  multitude,  and  even  slew  some  of
their  own  comrades,  men  of  gentle  birth  and  nature,
lately  enlisted  at  Home,  and  uninitiated  in  their
brutal  habits,  in  resentment  at  the  attempt  to
curb  their  ferocity.  Caesar  beheld  the  transaction
with  horror ;  but  neither  entreaties  nor  commands
could  prevail  on  the  butchers  to  desist  from  their
carnage.1

This  sudden  and  complete  victory  cost  the  con-
DUpersionpf  querors  no  more  than  fifty  men.  Caesar
chief..  celebrated  it  by  a  grand  sacrifice  in  the

presence  of  the  army,  after  which  he  addressed
his  soldiers  with  encomiums  on  their  valour,  and  dis-
tributed a  largess  to  the  whole  of  his  veteran  forces,
with  special  rewards  to  the  most  deserving.  After  this,

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  85

A.0.7U4-B.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  359

leaving  considerable  detachments  to  conduct  the  siege
of  Thapsus  and  Thysdrus,  he  followed  up  the  first
report  of  his  success  by  appearing  before  the  walls
of  Utica.  The  destruction  or  rout  of  the  republican
army  in  the  late  battle  had  been  no  less  complete
than  at  Pharsalia.  And,  precisely  as  on  that  fatal
day,  the  chiefs  of  the  party  had  sought  each  his  own
safety  by  escaping  unattended  from  the  field.  As  the
fugitives  from  Pharsalia  had  made  no  attempt  to
rally  within  the  walls  of  Larissa,  so  for  the  most  part
the  remnant  of  the  slaughter  of  Thapsus  left  Utica
in  their  rear,  nor  looked  behind  them  till  they  had
gained  the  sea  or  the  recesses  of  Numidia.  Scipio,
with  a  few  officers  of  high  rank,  attempted  to  make
his  way  into  Spain ;  but  their  vessels  were  driven  by
stress  of  weather  to  the  harbour  of  Hippo,  where
Sitius,  who  had  routed  and  slain  Sabura,  had  sta-
tioned a  flotilla  of  much  greater  force.  The  un-
equal combat  ended  in  the  destruction  of  Death  of
the  flying  armament;  while  Scipio,  after  others.  n
exhibiting  pride  and  courage  worthy  of  a  Roman
imperator,  thrust  his  sword  into  his  side,  and
leaped  overboard.1  A  Damasippus  and  a  Torquatus
sank  ingloriously  with  the  vessels.

It  was  late  in  the  evening  of  the  eighth  of  April
when  Cato  received  information  at  Utica  Cato  ailimate,
of  the  result  of  the  battle.  The  next  *$£?£*• ia
morning  he  assembled  the  Roman  senators  defence-
and  knights,  together  with  the  three  hundred2,
in  the  temple  of  Jupiter.  By  this  time  the
news  of  the  overwhelming  disaster  had  spread  among

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  96.; Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  100.;  Liv.  Epit.  civ.  "P.

Scipio  in  nave  circumventus  honesUB  morfi  vocem  quoque  adjecit :
quaerentibns  enim  Imperatorem  hostibus  dixit,  Imperator  bene  se
habet."

2  These  "  three  hundred,"  according  to Plutarch,  were  Roman
citizens  engaged  in  commercial  and  monetary  transactions  in  Africa,
of  whom  Cato  formed  a  council  for  the  government  of  the  city.
Plut.  Cat.  Min.  59.

360  HIStORt OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xit

them.  With  surprise  and  admiration  they  beheld
the  calmness  of  their  general's  demeanour.  He
began  by  stating  that  he  had  summoned  them  to
deliberate  upon  affairs  of  grave  importance.1  Though
professing  himself  still  full  of  hope,  and  urging  every
one  to  nerve  his  courage  for  a  magnanimous  defence,
he  left  the  determination  of  their  conduct  to  their
own  decision.  For  himself,  he  would  not  exercise
his  military  authority  to  prevent  them  either  from
seeking  safety  by  flight,  or  even  opening  the  gates
to  the  enemy ;  but  if  they  were  determined  to  de-
fend the  liberty  of  Rome  to  the  last,  he  would  place
himself  at  their  head,  and  lead  them  against  the
enemy,  or  prolong  the  struggle  in  some  other  quar-
ter. He  read  the  list  of  men,  arms  and  stores  which
were  still  at  their  disposal;  and  the  example  of
his  calm  courage  was  so  effectual  that  they  resolved
on  the  spot  to  prepare  for  resistance,  and  began
manumitting  and  arming  their  slaves.  The  remnant
of  the  Roman  nobility  remained  firm  in  their  deter-
mination ;  their  blood  was  more  thoroughly  inflamed
against  the  enemy,  and  their  hopes  of  pardon  seemed
more  precarious.  But  the  three  hundred,  for  the
most  part  private  speculators,  men  who  had  no  per-
sonal quarrel  against  Caesar,  and  had  taken  no  part
in  the  contest  until  the  establishment  of  the  repub-
lican head-quarters  in  the  centre  of  their  peaceful
town  had  compelled  them  to  assume  the  attitude  of
political  partisans,  soon  relaxed  from  the  high-
wrought  enthusiasm  to  which  they  had  for  a  mo-
ment given  way.  The  few  days  which  followed
seemed  to  have  been  passed  in  mutual  intrigues
between  these  parties  and  the  natives  of
Utica,  each  fearful  of  being  betrayed  and
sacrificed  by  the  other.  Cato  felt  the  im-
possibility of  reducing  to  harmony  such  dis-
cordant elements.  The  last  duty  which  remained

»  Auc.t.  B.  Afr.  88.

I.C.708-1I.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  361

to  the  patriot  general  was  to  save  the  persons  of
all  Eoman  citizens  from  the  treachery  of  the  pro-
vincials, as  well  as  from  the  vengeance  of  the  con-
queror. When  it  was  announced  that  Caesar  was
advancing  at  the  head  of  the  merciless  legions
which  had  given  no  quarter  on  the  field  of  Thapsus,
Cato  closed  all  the  gates  except  that  which  led  to
the  sea,  and  urged  the  Eoman  senators  to  betake
themselves  to  the  ships  which  lay  ready  to  receive
them.  He  entreated  all  his  personal  friends  to
make  their  escape  in  the  same  manner,  but  about
securing  his  own  safety  he  said  nothing,  and  seemed
to  take  no  thought.  No  one  indeed  doubted  that
he  had  formed  his  own  resolution  to  die.  Finally,
he  consulted  with  L.  Caesar  on  the  terms  in  which
he  should  intercede  with  his  kinsman  on  behalf  of
the  three  hundred,  and  despatched  him  to  the  con-
queror's camp.  When  he  had  thus  dismissed  every
one,  excepting  his  own  son,  who  would  not  abandon
his  father,  and  one  or  two  friends  and  attendants,
with  whom  he  was  wont  to  take  his  meals  and  dis-
course or  declaim  on  subjects  of  sublime  specula-
tion, he  passed  the  evening  in  animated  conversa-
tion on  his  accustomed  themes,  and  harangued  with
more  than  usual  fervour  on  the  famous  paradox  of
the  Stoics,  that  the  good  man  alone  is  free,  and  all
the  bad  are  slaves.  His  companions  could  not  fail
to  guess  the  secret  purpose  over  which  he  was
brooding.  They  betrayed  their  anxiety  only  by
silent  gestures;  but  Cato,  observing  the  depression
of  their  spirits,  strove  to  reanimate  them  and  di-
vert their  thoughts  by  turning  the  conversation  to
topics  of  present  interest.

The  embarkation  was  at  this  moment  proceeding,
and Cato repeatedly inquired who had  Cato  commiu
already put out  to sea, and what were  euicide-
the  prospects of their voyage. Retiring to his
chamber  he  took  up  the  Dialogue  on  the  Soul,  in

362  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIX.

which  Plato  recorded  his  dying  master's  last  aspi-
rations after  immortality.  The  academy  might  be
justly  proud  of  the  homage  of  so  noble  a  disciple
of  the  Porch.  But  the  Stoic  could  dispense  with
the  consolations  of  any  other  school,  for  he  had
been  taught  to  believe  in  a  future  existence,  coeval
at  least  with  the  frame  of  a  perishable  universe.1
After  reading  for  some  time,  he  looked  up  and
observed  that  his  sword  had  been  removed.  In  the
irritation  of  the  moment  he  gave  way  to  a  burst
of  violence,  such  as  often  characterized  the  behaviour
of  the  Eoman  master  to  his  slaves:  calling  his
attendant  to  his  presence  he  struck  him  on  the
mouth,  bruising  his  own  hand  with  the  blow.  He
then  sent  for  his  son  and  friends,  and  rebuked
them  sharply  for  their  unworthy  precaution ;  as  t/,
he  said,  /  needed  a  sword  to  kill  myself,  and  might
not,  if  I  chose,  put  an  end  to  my  existence  by
dashing  my  head  against  the  wall,  or  merely  hold-
ing my  breath.  They  saw  that  it  was  vain  to  avert
the  blow  which  he  seemed  to  meditate,  and  re-
assured, perhaps,  for  the  moment  by  the  calmness
with  which  he  conversed,  they  restored  him  his
weapon,  and  at  his  earnest  desire  once  more  left
him  alone.  At  midnight,  still  anxious  about  those
who  were  departing,  he  sent  once  again  to  inquire
if  the  embarkation  was  completed.  The  messenger
returned  with  the  assurance  that  the  last  vessel  was
now  on  the  point  of  leaving  the  quay.  Thereupon
Cato  threw  himself  on  his  bed,  as  if  about  to  take
his  rest  for  the  night;  but  when  all  was  quiet,  he
seized  his  sword  and  thrust  it  into  his  stomach.
The  wound  was  not  immediately  mortal,  and  the
victim  rolled  groaning  on  the  floor.  The  noise  at

1  This  was  the  doctrine  of  Zeno  (comp.  Diog.  Laert.  vii.  156,
157.  Plutarch,  de  plac.  Philos.  iv.  7.);  Cicero's  raillery  is  unmerci-
ful (Tusc.  DL<*p.  i.  31.):  "  Stoici  vero  usnram  nobis  largiuntnr,  tan-
quaiu  cornicibus;  diu  mansuros  aiunt  aniinos;  semper,  negant."

4..C.708-B.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIItE.  363

once  summoned  his  anxious  attendants.  A  sur-
geon was  at  hand,  and  the  patient  was  unconscious
while  the  protruding  intestines  were  replaced,  and
the  gash  sewn  up.  But  on  coming  to  himself  he
repulsed  his  disconsolate  friends,  and  tearing  open
the  fatal  wound,  expired  with  the  same  dogged
resolution  which  had  distinguished  every  act  of  his
life.1

Such  was  the  proud  though  melancholy  end  of  the
gravest  philosopher Home had yet pro-

J il. £  f  1  T  X> V  Judgment  o(

duced:  the  first  ot  a  long  line  ot  heroes  the  ancients
of  the  robe,  whose  dignified  submission  to
an  adverse  fate  will  illustrate  the  pages  of  our
history  throughout  the  gloom  of  the  imperial
tyranny.  The  ancient  heathens  but  faintly  ques-
tioned the  sufferer's  right  to  escape  from  calamity
by  a  voluntary  death.  It  was  reserved  for  the  Chris-
tian moralists,  in  their  vindication  of  nobler  princi-
ples, to  impugn  the  act  which  has  rendered  Cato'
fame  immortal.2  The  creed  of  the  Stoic  taught
indeed  that  the  world  is  governed  by  a  moral
Intelligence,  and  from  such  premises  the  obvious
inference  is,  that  it  is  the  part  of  man  to  conform  to
its  behests,  and  fulfil  his  appointed  lot  whether  for
good  or  for  evil.  But  the  philosophy  which  exalted
man  to  a  certain  participation  in  the  nature  of  the
Deity3,  seemed  to  make  him  in  some  sort  the  arbiter
of  his  own  actions,  and  suicide,  in  Cato's  view,  might
be  no  other  than  the  accomplishment  of  a  self-
appointed  destiny.  The  wisest  of  the  heathens  never
understood  that  the  true  dignity  of  human  nature

Plut.  Cat.  Min.  58—70.;  Dion,  xliii.  10,  11.;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.
98,  99. ;  Auct.  B.  Afr.  88.

2  Cato's  suicide  is  applauded  by  Cicero,  Tusc.  i.  30.,  Off.  i.  31.,
and  Seneca,  Ep.  24.  67.  7 1.  95.  fin.,  104. See  also  de  Prov.  2. S.  Au-
gustine, on  the  contrary,  contrasts  it  with  the  genuine  heroism  of
Hegulus  (de  Civ.  Dei,  i.  24.).
1  Lucan,  ix.  564.:

"  Ille  deo  plenus  tacita  queui  mente  gerebut."

364  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  ca.  xix

consists  in  its  submission  to  a  higher  Existence;
that  its  only  hope  for  the  future  is  in  the  conscious-
ness of  its  imperfection  and  weakness  and  responsi-
bility here.

Cato  had  no  cause  to  despair  of  retaining  life  under
Deaths  of  jut>»  the  new  tyranny.  At  an  earlier  period  he
»nd Petreius:  j^  me(jitated,  in  such  a  contingency,  seek-
ing refuge  in  retirement  and  philosophy.  But  his
views  of  the  highest  (rood  had  deepened  and  sad-
dened with  the  fall  of  the  men  and  the  things  he  most
admired.  He  now  calmly  persuaded  himself  that
with  the  loss  of  free  action  the  end  of  his  existence
had  failed  of  its  accomplishment.  He  regarded  his
career  as  prematurely  closed,  and  assuredly  the  dignity
of  his  acquiescence  demands  our  respect  and  compas-
sion, if  not  the  principle  on  which  it  was  based.  Far
different  was  the  manner  in  which  the  rude  barbarian
Juba  and  the  coarse  soldier  Petreius  rushed  forward
to  meet  their  ends.  They  had  escaped  together  from
the  field  of  battle,  and  the  Numidian  offered  to  pro-
vide shelter  for  his  companion  in  one  of  his  own
strongholds.  The  Eoman  province  was  so  ill-disposed
towards  the  barbarian  chief,  that  he  was  obliged  to
hide  himself  by  day  in  the  most  secluded  villages,  and
roam  the  country  on  his  homeward  flight  during  the
hours  of  darkness.  In  this  way  he  reached  Zama,  hia>
second  capital,  where  his  wives  and  children,  together
with  his  most  valuable  treasures,  were  deposited.  This
place  he  had  taken  pains  to  fortify  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  war,  with  works  of  great  extent  and  magni-
tude. But  on  his  appearance  before  the  walls,  the  in-
habitants deliberately  shut  their  gates  against  him,  and
refused  to  admit  the  enemy  of  the  victorious  Roman.
Before  setting  out  on  his  last  expedition,  Juba  had
constructed  an  immense  pyre  in  the  centre  of  the  city,
declaring  his  intention,  if  fortune  went  ill  with  him,  of
heaping  upon  it  everything  he  held  most  dear  and  pre-
cious, together  with  the  murdered  bodies  of  the  prin-

4.U.708-B.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  365

cipal  citizens,  and  then  taking  his  own  place  on  the
summit,  and  consuming  the  whole  in  one  solemn
conflagration.  But  the  Numidians  had  no  sympathy
with  this  demonstration  of  their  sovereign's  despair,
and  resolved  not  to  admit  him  within  their  walls.
Juba,  having  tried  in  vain  every  kind  of  menace  and
entreaty,  to  which  no  reply  was  vouchsafed,  at  last
retired,  but  only  to  experience  a  similar  reception
in  every  other  quarter  to  which  he  resorted.  He  at
least  had  little  to  hope  from  the  clemency  which  the
victor  had  extended  to  his  conquered  countrymen.
His  companion,  hard  as  his  own  iron  corslet,  scorned
to  accept  it.  The  fugitives  supped  together,  and,
flushed  with  the  fumes  of  the  banquet,  challenged
each  other  to  mutual  slaughter.  They  were  but  un-
equally matched  :  the  old  veteran  was  soon  despatched
by  his  more  active  antagonist  ;  but  Juba  was  constant
in  his  resolution,  and  only  demanded  the  assistance
of  an  attendant  to  give  himself  the  last  fatal  stroke.1
Nor  was  the  fate  of  Considius,  of  Afranius,  and
Faustus  Sulla  less  disastrous.  The  first  of

these  had  abandoned  the  defence  of  Thys-  ArraS1™,  'ami
drus  at  the  approach  of  the  forces  which
Caesar  despatched  against  it,  and  attempted  to  make
his  escape  with  the  treasures  he  had  amassed
into  the  territories,  until  now  friendly,  of  the
Numidian  chieftains.  He  was  destroyed,  for  the
sake  of  his  hoarded  booty,  by  the  Gaetulians  who
accompanied  him  in  his  flight.  The  others  had  re-
tained the  command  of  a  squadron  of  Scipio's  cavalry,
and  after  burning  one  town  which  had  shut  its  gates
against  them,  had  made  a  desperate  attack  on  the
military  post  which  Cato  maintained  outside  the  walls
of  Utica,  to  wreak  an  unworthy  vengeance  on  the  Cae-
sarean  partisans  there  kept  in  custody.  Baffled  in
this  object,  they  had  made  their  way  into  Utica,  while

1  Auct.  B.  Afr.  91.  94.;  Appinn, B.C.  ii. 10O.;  Dion,  xliii.  8.,-
Senec.  </<•  Prov.  2.;  Flor.  iv.  2.  69.

366  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  OH.  xix.

Cato  still  commanded  there,  and  had  added  bitterness
to  his  last  days  by  the  violence  and  ferocity  of  their
behaviour.  From  thence  they  led  their  ruffians  along
the  coast  in  the  hope  of  finding  means  of  transporting
them  into  Spain.  But  on  their  way  they  fell  in  with
Sitius,  who  was  advancing  to  join  Caesar ;  their  men
were  routed  and  themselves  taken.  The  bands  of
the  Eoman  adventurer  carried  on  war  with  the  same
brutality  as  the  barbarians  among  whom  they  prac-
tised it.  The  captors  quarrelled  among  themselves ;
their  passions  were  inflamed,  perhaps,  in  the  distri-
bution of  the  prisoners  and  the  booty;  and  both
Afranius  and  Faustus  were  killed  in  the  fray  which
ensued.1  But  the  massacre  of  the  son  of  the  dictator
Sulla,  accidental  as  it  was,  or  at  least  unauthorized,
could  hardly  fail  of  being  charged  as  a  deliberate  act
upon  the  representative  of  Marius.

While  his  foes  were  thus  flying  and  falling,  Caesar
caesar  exact,  advanced  triumphantly  from  the  scene  of
fromth^Son-  his  last  exploit,  receiving  the  submission
quered  titiei.  of  ^he  towns  OIL  his  way,  carrying  off
the  stores  and  treasure  collected  for  his  enemies'
use,  and  leaving  garrisons  to  retain  them  in  fidelity.
As  he  drew  near  to  Utica  he  was  met  by  L.  Caesar,
whose  petition  for  mercy  seems  to  have  been  confined
to  his  own  person,  and  to  whom,  as  well  as  to  a  long
list  of  distinguished  nobles,  the  conqueror  extended
the  promise  of  his  protection.2  He  lamented  with
every  appearance  of  sincerity  that  Cato  had  robbed
him  of  the  pleasure  of  pardoning  one  who,  of  all  his
antagonists,  had  been  the  most  obstinate  in  his

1  Such  is  the  statement  of  the  author  of  the  book  de  Bella  Africano.
and  it  is  supported  by  Suetonius,  Jul.  75. Other  writers, Dion,
Floras,  Entropius,  and  Orosius,  countenance  the  notion  that  Cassar
caused  them  to  be  put  to  death.

2  Dion  (xliii.  12.)  gives  currency  to  a  report  that  Caesar  caused  his
kinsman  to  be  put  to  death  privily  some  time  afterwards. Such  a
story  need only  be  mentioned  to  put  the reader  on  his  guare}
against  the  historian's  inaccqracy.

4.P.708-B.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  367

opposition,  and  the  most  inveterate  in  his  hatred.
The  fatal  compliance  of  the  Utican  senators,  who.
not  content  with  obeying  his  enemies'  commands,
had  contributed  money  to  their  cause,  furnished  him
with  a  specious  pretence  for  rifling  their  coffers  of  the
treasures  he  now  most  urgently  needed.1  His  requisi-
tions amounted,  it  is  said,  to  two  hundred  millions
of  sesterces.  The  city  of  Thapsus  was  mulcted  in
two  millions,  and  the  company  of  Eoman  traders  in
three.  Adrumetum  paid  down  three  millions,  and
its  Koman  capitalists  five.  Leptis  and  Thysdrus  also
suffered  in  due  proportion.  A  grand  auction  was
held  at  Zama  for  the  sale  of  all  the  objects  of
Juba's  royal  state,  and  of  the  goods  of  the  Koman
citizens  who  had  borne  arms  under  the  tyrant's
orders.  Upon  the  people  who  had  so  boldly  defied
their  sovereign,  and  refused  him  admittance  within
their  walls,  honours  and  largesses  were  munificently
showered,  and  the  taxes  heretofore  demanded  for  the
royal  treasury  were  partially  remitted  by  the  collec-
tors of  the  republic.  But  the  country  of  Numidia
was  deprived  of  its  independence,  and  definitely  re-
duced to  the  form  of  a  province,  under  the  procon-

1  Appian  (B.C.  ii.  100.)  asserts  that  Caesar  caused  as  many  of  the
three  hundred  as  he  captured  to  be  put  to  death,  and  Dion  speaks
of  the  assassinations  he  privately  command-id.  Nicolaus  Damascenus
says  that  Caesar  was  very  implacable  towards  the  captives  of  the
African  war,  cr<f>6Spa  o\iyois  ruv  \TKOV  ta&vriav  alxuaXuruv  vvyyvovs,
Sib,  rb  TOIS  irporfpois  avrobs  p)]  ff€-Tta(ppovriffOai  iro\fnois.  His  kinsman
Octavius  with  great  difficulty  extorted  from  him  the  pardon  of  a
brother  of  his  friend  Agrippa.  Fragm.  xcix. :  trtpl  TTJS  Kai<rapos
bytoyris,  7.  Nevertheless,  I  see  no  reason  to  credit  statements  at
variance  with  the  direct  evidence  of  other  writers,  and  opposed  to
the  general  opinion  of  his  clemency  towards  his  countrymen  when
they  fell  into  his  power,  an  opinion  never  popularly  held  of  those
who  shed  Roman  blood  on  the  scaffold.  Appian  allows  that  Caesar
pardoned  Cato's  son,  and  restored  the  daughter  of  Pompeius,  the
wife  of  F.  Sulla,  with  her  two  children,  to  Cnseus ;  and  Dion  ac-
knowledges that  he  burnt  Scipio's  papers  unread,  and  exhibited
other  marks  of  moderation  and  generosity :  K alrot  ica.1  rbj>  KdruJt'o
iffiafffv  Hv  (xliii.  13.).

368  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIX.

sulate  of  Sallustius.1  The  rewarded  and  the  punished
acquiesced  equally  in  the  conqueror's  dispositions ;
the  submission  of  Africa  to  his  authority  was  from
thenceforth  complete.  The  Uticans  were  allowed  to
commemorate  with  a  funeral  and  a  statue  the  humane
and  noble  conduct  of  their  late  governor.

Caesar  settled  the  affairs  of  Africa  with  his  usual
c.esar  nui.  for  despatch,  and  sailed  from  Utica  on  the
SSlS'to"1"1  thirteenth  of  June.2  On  his  way  to  Italy,
he  stopped  at  Caralis,  in  Sardinia.  The
aid  which  the  island  had  afforded  to  his  adver-
saries furnished  him  with  a  decent  pretext  for
extorting  from  the  inhabitants  large  sums  of  money.
At  the  end  of  the  same  month  he  again  weighed
anchor ;  but  the  prevalence  of  easterly  winds  drove
him  repeatedly  to  shore,  and  he  at  last  reached  Rome
on  the  twenty-eighth  day  after  his  departure  from
the  Sardinian  capital.3  The  reports  he  received  at
this  time  of  the  revival  of  the  republican  cause  in
Spain  did  not  give  him  much  uneasiness.  Cnseus
had  been  detained  by  sickness  in  the  Baleares,  and
the  fugitives  from  the  field  of  Thapsus  had  been  al-
most all  cut  off  in  their  attempts  to  reach  the  point  to
which  their  last  hopes  were  directed.  The  legionaries
who  had  mutinied  against  Quintus  Cassius  were  still
either  dissatisfied  with  their  treatment  under  the
commander  who  had  superseded  him,  or  fearful  of
their  general's  vengeance  when  a  fitting  opportunity
should  arrive.  It  was  from  Caesar's  own  soldiers

1  Auct.  B.  Afr. 97. Dion,  xliii. 9.:  r$  SoAotxm'y,  \6y(?  fj.tv
&PXfit>,  fpyif  8e  Hyetv  -re  Kal  <p4ptiv,  tirerpefyf. The  same  historian  goes
on  to  describe  in  bitter  language  the  shameless  rapacity  of  the  pro-
consul, and  to  contrast  it  with  the  pretensions  to  purity  he  makes  in
his  histories.

2  June  13,  A.U.  708  =  April  14,  B.C.  46. Fischer,  Rom.  Zeittafcln.
*  Auct.  B.  Afr.  98. The  period  seems  extraordinary  for  so  short

a  distance,  and  the  author's  words  will  perhaps  bear  the  meaning,
that  it  is  to  be  computed  from  Caesar's  leaving,  not  Caralis,  but
Utica.  But  from  certain  notes  of  time  which  will  appear  below,  J
think  the  statement  in  the  text  is  correct.

A.C.708-B.C.46.  UNDER TUB EMPIRE.  369

that  the  invitation  had  gone  forth  to  the  republican
chiefs  to  renew  the  struggle  on  the  soil  of  Spain.
The  spirit  of  the  old  commonwealth  still  survived  in
many  of  the  towns  of  Baetica ;  promises  of  support
were  freely  given  ;  but  the  remnant  of  the  African
armament  was  contemptible  both  in  numbers  and
ability.  Of  all  the  haughty  nobles  who  had  ^^^  of
thronged  the  tent  of  Pompeius  at  Luceria  or  S'hT  to
Thessalonica,  not  one  with  a  name  known  8pain-
to  history  remained  in  arms,  except  Labienus  alone.
He  indeed  had  succeeded  in  making  his  escape  from
Africa,  in  company  with  Varus ;  but  the  insurgents
had  already  placed  themselves  under  the  command
of  Scapula  and  Aponius,  officers  of  their  own,  nor
would  they  suffer  themselves  to  be  transferred  from
them  to  any  other  except  the  son  of  the  great  Pom-
peius. The  extent  to  which  the  flame  of  insurrection
had  spread  was  probably  unknown  at  this  time  to
Caesar.  He  was  impatient  to  reap  at  last  the  fruit
of  so  much  bloodshed,  to  assume  the  powers  and
prerogatives  he  had  extorted,  and  to  work  out  the
principles  and  objects  of  so  many  years  of  anticipa-
tion. A  distant  and  contemptible  outbreak  might
be  subdued  without  meeting  it  in  person.  Accord-
ingly, C.  Didius,  an  officer  of  no  eminent  reputation,
was  sent  with  a  naval  and  military  force  to  the
succour  of  Trebonius,  whom,  however,  he  found
already  expelled  from  his  government  by  the  growing
force  of  the  new  movement.1

Meanwhile, Rome had sunk, during the con-
queror's  absence, into a state of  torpid  HonouTi
tranquillity. The  universal  conviction  that  0^7!  X°
the dictator's power  was  irresistible  had  ^"p'e  during
quelled  all  further  heavings  of  the  spirit  of  hi" absence-
discontent. Dolabella  had  been  gratified  with  a  com-
mand in  the  late  campaign ;  while  others,  in  whose

1  Dion,  xliii.  29.
VOL.  H.  B  B

370  HISTORY OF THE BOMANS  CH.  SIX.

fidelity  and  military  skill  the  usurper  could  rely,  had
been  left  behind  in  the  city  to  overawe  disaffection.
The  most  illustrious  of  the  nobility,  having  now  no
occasion  to  remain  at  Eome  for  the  sake  of  paying
court  to  a  jealous  ruler,  had  retired  generally  to  their
country  seats;  but  Cicero  seems  to  have  feared  giving
occasion  for  distrust  if  he  withdrew  himself  from  the
broad  eye  of  public  observation.1  He  occupied  him-
self, however,  in  his  philosophical  studies,  and  could
rejoice  that  he  had  never,  like  so  many  of  his  con-
temporaries, when  plunging  into  the  excitements  of
political  life,  abandoned  the  literary  pursuits  com-
mon to  them  in  youth.  While  he  still  regarded  the
contest  in  Africa  with  the  sentiments  of  a  true  re-
publican, he  confessed  with  a  sigh,  that  though  the
one  cause  was  assuredly  the  more  just,  yet  the  vic-
tory of  either  would  be  equally  disastrous.  He  pro-
bably held  aloof  from  the  proceedings  of  the  servile
senate,  which  occupied  itself  during  the  months  of
Cesar's  absence  in  devising  new  honours  for  his  ac-
ceptance. First  of  all  it  decreed  the  religious  cere-
mony of  a  thanksgiving  of  forty  days,  being  twice
the  term  to  which  the  compliance  of  popular  gra-
titude had  ever  previously  extended,  and  it  was  by
the  length  of  the  observance  that  the  honour  was
estimated.  Next  it  appointed  that  the  victor's
triumphal  car  should  be  drawn  by  horses  of  white,
the  sacred  colour,2  and  that  the  number  of  his

1  Cic.  ad.  Div.  ix.  2.  (to  Varro):  "  Quaeres  cur,  cum  haec  in  urhe
sint,  non  absim  quernadmodum  tu.  Nobis  stet  ilhul,  una  vivere  in
studiis  nostris,  a  quibus  antea  delectationem  modo  petebamus,  mine
vero  etiam  salutem."  Ibid.  6 :  "  Equidem  hos  tuos  Tusculanenses
dies  instar  esse  vitse  puto:  quod  nos  quoque  imitamur  ut  possu-
mus,  et  in  nostris  studiis  libentissime  conquiescimus. "  Ibid.  20.  :
"  Literis  me  involvo,  aut  scribo  aut  lego."  See  Fischer,  R.  Z.  In
the  autumn  of  this  year  (708),  i.e.  after  Caesar's  return  to  Rome,
Cicero  wrote  the  Laus  Catonis,  and  the  Brutus,  sive  de  claris
Oratoribus.

*  Dion,  xliii.  14.  Camillas  triumphed  with  white  horses  by  a
special  decree  of  the  senate.  But  this  unwonted  and  impious  flattery

A.TT.708-B.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  371

attendant  lictors  should  be  doubled.  He  was  to  be
requested  to  undertake  the  office  of  Censor  for  three
years,  under  a  new  title,  which  should  not  remind
the  citizens  too  closely  of  the  times  of  republican
liberty,  that  of  Prsefectus  morum,  or  regulator  of
manners.  The  changes  which  the  revolutionary
storm  had  effected  in  the  condition  of  so  many  of
the  citizens  justified  a  resort  to  the  old  constitutional
resource  for  purging  the  senate  of  scandalous  or  im-
poverished members,  and  infusing  new  blood  into  its
veins.  The  most  substantial,  however,  of  all  these
tributes  to  Caesar's  ascendency  was  the  decree  by
which  he  was  appointed  dictator  for  a  period  of  ten
years ;  for  thus  the  initiative  of  legal  measures  was
united  in  his  hands  with  the  command  of  the  legions
both  at  home  and  abroad.  Other  specious  honours,
in  the  taste  of  the  times,  were  accumulated  upon  him.
His  chair  was  to  be  placed  between  those  of  the
consuls  in  the  assembly  of  the  senate ;  he  was  to
preside  and  give  the  signal  in  the  games  of  the
circus;  and  his  figure  in  ivory  was  to  be  borne  in
procession  among  the  images  of  the  gods,  and  laid
up  in  the  Capitol,  opposite  the  seat  of  Jupiter  him-
self.1 A  statue  was  to  be  erected  to  him  in  bronze,
standing  upon  a  globe,  with  the  inscription,  Ccesar
the  demi-god.z  His  name  was  to  be  engraved  on  the
entablature  of  the  Capitol,  in  the  place  of  that  of
Catulus,  its  true  restorer.  The  historian  who  re-
counts these  honours,  assures  us  that  many  others
besides  these  were  offered;  he  has  only  omitted  to
specify  them  because  Caesar  did  not  think  fit  to
accept  them.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  to  what
lower  depth  of  obsequiousness  the  senate  could  have

conduced  to  his  fall.  Plut.  Carnil.  •  Aur.  Viet,  de  Fir.  Illust.  c.  23.
It  seems  not  to  have  been  repeated  till  this  occasion.

1  Dion,  xliii.  14.  The  thensa,  Gr.  Spjua,  was  properly  a  sort  of
litter  in  which  the  statues  of  the  gods  were  carried  in  certain  pro-
cessions.

*  Dion,;. c. ;  comp.  Servius  on  Virg.  Eel.  ix.  47.
B  B  2

372  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XIX.

descended,  or  what  higher  dignities  the  conqueror
would  have  rejected.

The  time  had  now  arrived  for  the  celebration  of
the  Grallic  triumph,  which  had  been  so  long

Celebration  ot  , T •£ '.  ,  °

Cesar-*  four  postponed.  In  the  interval,  the  imperator  s
**•*.'  victories  had  been  multiplied,  and  the  ranks
tij'une,'  of  his  veterans  had  been  recruited  by  fresh

B  C  46*

enlistments ;  so  that  every  soldier  who  had
shared  in  his  later  perils  and  successes,  demanded
the  reward  of  participating  in  his  honours.  Caesar
claimed  not  one,  but  four  triumphs :  the  first,  for
his  conquest  of  the  Gauls ;  the  second  for  his  defeat
of  Ptolemseus ;  another,  for  his  victory  over  Phar-
naces ;  and  the  last,  for  the  overthrow  of  Juba.  But
he  carefully  avoided  all  reference  to  what  were  in
reality  the  most  brilliant  of  his  achievements.  In
Spain  and  Thessaly  he  had  routed  the  disciplined
legions  of  his  own  countrymen ;  but  their  defeat
brought  no  accession  of  honour  or  territory  to  the
republic.  The  glory  it  reflected  on  the  victor  was
dubious  and  barren.1  The  four  triumphs  were  cele-
brated, with  intervals  of  a  few  days  between  each,
that  the  interest  of  the  public  might  not  pall  with
satiety.  The  first  procession  formed  in  the  Campus
Martins,  outside  the  walls  of  the  city.  It  defiled
through  the  triumphal  gate  at  the  foot  of  the  Capi-
toline  hill,  and  crossed  the  deep  hollow  of  the  Vela-
brum  and  Forum  Boarium,  on  its  way  to  the  Circus
Maxim  us,  which  occupied  the  valley  between  the
Palatine  and  Aventine.  In  passing  through  the
Velabrum,  the  chariot  in  which  the  imperator  stood,
happened  to  break  down ;  a  mischance  which  so
affected  him  that  he  never  afterwards,  it  is  said,
ascended  a  vehicle  without  repeating  a  charm.2  The
long  procession  wound  round  the  base  of  the  Palatine,

1  Comp.  Val.  Max.  ii.  8.  7.

*  Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  2.,  who  adds,  "  Id  quod  plerosqne  none  facere
scimus."

A.U.708-B.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  373

skirting  the  Aventine  arid  Caelian  hills,  to  the  point
where  the  arch  of  Constautine  now  stands.1  There
it  began  the  ascent  of  the  gentle  slope  which  sepa-
rates the  basin  of  the  Colosseum  from  that  of  the
Roman  forum.  It  followed  the  same  track  which
now  leads  under  the  arch  of  Titus,  paved  at  this  day
with  solid  masses  of  hewn  stone,  which  may  possibly
have  re-echoed  to  the  tramp  of  Caesar's  legions.  In-
clining a  little  to  the  right  at  the  point  where  it
gained  the  summit  of  the  ridge,  and  looked  down
upon  the  comitium  and  rostra,  in  the  direction  of  the
Capitol,  it  passed  before  the  spot  where  the  temple
of  Julius  was  afterwards  built ;  thence  it  skirted  the
right  side  of  the  forum,  under  the  arch  of  Fabius,
till  it  reached  the  point  just  beyond  the  existing
arch  of  Sever  us,  where  the  two  roads  branched  off,
the  one  to  the  Capitoline  temple,  the  other  to  the
Mamertine  prison.  Here  it  was  that  Caesar  took  the
route  of  triumph  to  the  left,  while  Vercingetorix  was
led  away  to  the  right,  and  strangled  in  the  subter-
ranean dungeon.  The  Gaulish  hero  doubtless  met
with  firmness  and  dignity  the  fate  to  which  he  had
so  long  been  doomed,  while  his  conqueror  was  ex-
hibiting a  melancholy  spectacle  of  human  infirmity,
crawling  up  the  steps  of  the  Capitol  on  his  knees,  to
avert,  by  an  act  of  childish  humiliation,  the  wrath
of  the  avenging  Nemesis.2  The  next  instance  of
similar  degradation  recorded  is  that  of  the  emperor
Claudius,  who,  being  corpulent  and  clumsy,  per-
formed the  ungraceful  feat  with  the  support  of  an
arm  on  either  side.3  The  practice  was  probably

1  I  abstain  from  tracing  more  minutely  the  route  of  the  triumphal
procession,  which  must  be  considered  as  still  open  to  discussion  ;
Becker's  views,  however,  seem  to  me  on  the  whole  nearly  conclusive.
See  his  Handbuch  der  RGm.  Alterthiimer,  i.  145.  foil.

-  Dion,  xliii.  21.  That  there  was,  however,  some  better  feeling
mixed  with  this  display  of  superstition  may  be  believed  from  the
fact  that  (Juisar  caused  the  blasphemous  inscription  on  his  statue  to
be  erased.  3  Dion,  Ix.  23.

374  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xix

of  no  unusual  occurrence,  and  was  deeply  rooted,
we  may  believe,  in  ancient  and  popular  prejudices.
A  remnant  of  it  still  exists,  and  may  be  witnessed
by  the  curious,  even  at  the  present  day,  on  the
steps  of  the  Araceli,  and  at  the  Santa  Scala  of  the
Lateran.

The  days  of  triumph  which  succeeded  passed  over
with uninterrupted good fortune. The

The  populace  ,  ^  „ ..o . , , ... e  . ,

amused  with populace  were  gratified  with  the  sight  ot  the

ipectacle..  £,  r  . '  A • •• 1 J  ,.•

Egyptian  pnncess,  Arsmoe,  led  as  a  captive
at  the  conqueror's  wheels ;  but  she  was  spared  the
fate  of  the  Gaulish  chieftain  out  of  favour  to  her
sister,  or  perhaps  out  of  pity  to  her  sex.  The  son  of
the  king  of  Numidia  who  followed  the  triumphal  car
was  also  spared,  and  lived  to  receive  back  his  father's
crown  from  Augustus.1  Though  Caesar  abstained
from  claiming  the  title  of  a  triumph  over  his  country-
men, he  did  not  scruple  to  parade  their  effigies  among
the  shows  of  the  procession.  The  figures  or  portraits
of  the  vanquished  chiefs  were  carried  on  litters,  and
represented  the  manner  of  their  deaths.  Scipio  was
seen  leaping  desperately  into  the  sea ;  Cato  plunging
the  sword  into  his  own  bowels ;  Juba  and  Petreius
engaged  in  mortal  duel ;  Lentulus  stabbed  by  the
Egyptian  assassin ;  Domitius  pierced  perhaps  in  the
back,  in  token  of  his  flight.  The  figure  of  Pompeius
alone  was  withheld,  for  fear  of  the  commiseration  it
might  excite  among  the  people  whose  favourite  he
had  so  lately  been.2  Nor,  as  it  was,  were  the  spec-
tators unmoved.  Upon  the  unfeeling  display  of

1  Plut. Caes.  55. While  he  remained  at  Home  he  received  an
education  in  Greek  literature,  and  became  a  respectable  historian  :
fMKapiondTijv  oAous  &\u><riv,  says  the  man  of  letters. Comp.  Strabo,
xvii.  3.

2  The  illustrious  citizens  thus  represented  were  not  only  those
who  by  their  alliance  with  the  barbarian  potentate  in  Africa  might
be supposed to have  forfeited  all  claim  to  the consideration of
their  countrymen. Duruy,  ii.  520. Appian  says  expressly  that  Pom-
peius alone was excepted of  all the chiefs of the republican
party.

A.0.708-B.C.46.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  375

Eoman  defeat  and  disaster  they  reflected  with  be-
coming sensibility.  But  the  pictures  of  Achillas  and
Pothinus  were  received  with  unmingled  acclamations,
and  loud  was  the  cry  of  scorn  at  the  exhibition  of
Pharnaces  flying  in  confusion  from  the  field.1  After
all,  the  most  impressive  part  of  the  ceremony  must
have  been  the  appearance  of  the  rude  veterans  whose
long  files  closed  the  procession.  With  what  ignorant
wonder  must  the  children  of  Gaul  and  Iberia,  of
Epirus  and  Africa,  have  gazed  at  the  splendour  of
the  city,  of  which  the  fame  resounded  in  their  native
cabins  !  What  contempt  must  they  have  felt  for  the
unarmed  multitudes  grinning  around  them !  How
reckless  must  they  have  been  of  the  dignity  of  the
consuls  and  senators,  they  who  claimed  the  licence
of  shouting  derisive  songs  in  the  ears  of  their  own
commander  !  Little  did  they  think  that  grave  his-
torians would  sum  up  their  coarse  camp  jokes  in
evidence  against  the  fame  of  their  illustrious  leader;
still  less  did  they  dream  of  the  new  power  which
the  military  class  was  thenceforth  to  constitute  in
the  state.  Home  in  fact  was  their  own  ;  but  it  was
a  secret  they  were  not  yet  to  discover.

The  satisfaction  of  his  armed  supporters,  however,
was  the  first  condition  on  which  the  supreme  j^ge.*,.  dif.
power  of  the  dictator  must  henceforth  be  SK^d1*
maintained  in  the  city.  It  was  a  matter,  feople-
indeed,  of  hardly  less  importance  to  secure  the
good  humour  of  the  urban  population.  While  the
soldiers  received  each  a  donative  of  twenty  thou-
sand sesterces,  the  claims  of  the  much  larger  mul-
titude of  the  free  citizens  were  not  undervalued
severally  at  four  hundred;  especially  as  they  received
the  additional  gratification  of  one  year's  remission  of

1  Appian, B.C.  ii. 101. Compare  a  similar  representation  in
Scipio*s  triumph  as  described  by  Silius  Italicus,  xvii.  ad  fin. :
"  Sed  non  ulla  magis  mentesque  oculosque  tenebat
Quam  visa  Hannibalis  campis  fugiemb  imago."

376  HISTORY OF THE BOMANS  CH.  XIX.

house-rent.1  It  does  not  appear  how  this  indulgence
differed  from  that  for  which  Cselius  and  Dolabella
had  raised  their  commotions ;  but  the  dictator  had
so  strenuously  resisted  every  attempt  to  set  aside  the
just  claims  of  creditors  on  all  previous  occasions,  that
it  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  in  this  case  he  gave  the
landlords  compensation  from  the  public  treasury.
The  mass  of  the  citizens  were  feasted  at  a  magnificent
banquet,  at  which  the  Chian  and  Falernian  wines,  the
choicest  produce  of  Greece  and  Italy,  flowed  freely
from  the  hogshead,  and  towards  which  six  thousand
lampreys,  the  most  exquisite  delicacy  of  the  Roman
epicure,  were  furnished  by  a  single  breeder.2  The
mighty  multitude  reclined  before  twenty-two  thou-
sand tables ;  each  table  having  its  three  couches,  and
each  couch,  we  may  suppose,  its  three  guests,  so  that
the  whole  number  feasted  may  have  amounted  to
nearly  two  hundred  thousand.3  When  Caesar  under-
took the  functions  of  his  censorship,  the  number  of
recipients  of  the  public  distributions  of  corn  was
estimated  at  three  hundred  and  twenty  thousand.
Upon  a  scrutiny  into  their  claims  as  genuine  and
resident  citizens,  he  was  enabled  to  strike  off  as  many
as  one  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  from  this  list.'4
Adding  to  the  remainder  of  the  senators  and  knights,
and  the  few  wealthy  individuals  who  might  have
scorned  to  partake  of  a  state  provision,  the  sum  will

1  Suet.  Jul. 38. The  sums  mentioned  are  equivalent  to  about
200/.  and  4l.  respectively.

2  Plin.  H.N.  xiv.  17.,  ix.  81.;  Varro,  R.R.  iii.  17.

*  Plutarch's words  (Cces. 65.)  are: e<m<£<ras in Surnvpiois  ical

SlffX'MotS  TplK\lVOlS  6/J.OV  ffVIJ.TTO.VTaS.

4  Suet.  Jul.  41.  Dion,  xliii.  21.  Undoubtedly  Suetonius's  words
will  bear  no  other  meaning:  "Ex  viginti  trecentisque  millibus  acci-
pientium  frumentum  e  publico  ad  centum  quinquaginta  retraxit."
Livy,  however,  is  supposed  to  have  given  a  different  account  (Epit.
cxv.):  "Recensum  egit  quo  censa  sunt  civium  capita  centum  quin-
quaginta millia,"  and  he  is  followed  by  Drnmann  and  others.  So
also  Plutarch.  This  is  very  probably  the  error  of  the  epitomizer,
afterwards  repeated  by  later  writers.  Dion  contents  himself  with
saying  that  the  nuiubur  was  reduced  by  about  one-half.

A.0.708-B.c.4f,.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  377

correspond  pretty  accurately  with  the  number  of  the
imperial  guests  as  above  computed.

The  public  shows  with  which  these  gratifications
were  accompanied,  were  carried  out  on  a

,  .-  ,  Exhibition  of

scale  oi  greater  magnificence  than  even  gia^atoriai
those  recently  exhibited  by  Pompeius.
There  was  nothing  in  which  the  magistrates  of  the
republic  vied  more  ostentatiously  with  one  another
than  in  the  number  of  wild  beasts  and  gladiators
which  they  brought  into  the  arena.  The  natural  taste
of  the  Italian  people  for  shows  and  mummery  de-
generated more  and  more  into  an  appetite  for  blood;
but  in  this,  as  in  every  other  respect,  it  was  Caesar's
ambition  to  outdo  his  predecessors,  and  the  extra-
ordinary ferocity  and  carnage  of  the  exhibitions
which  he  complacently  witnessed,  excited  a  shudder
even  in  the  brutal  multitude.1  The  combatants  in
the  games  of  the  circus  were  either  professional
gladiators,  who  sold  their  services  for  a  certain  term
of  years,  or  captives  taken  in  war,  or,  lastly,  public
criminals.  But  Caesar  was,  perhaps,  the  first  to
encourage  private  citizens  to  make  an  exhibition  of
their  skill  and  valour  in  these  mortal  combats.  He
allowed  several  men  of  equestrian  rank,  and  one  the
son  of  a  praetor,  to  demean  themselves  in  the  eyes  of
their  countrymen  by  this  exposure  to  the  public  gaze,
It  was  only  when  a  senator  named  Fulvius  Setinus
asked  permission  thus  to  prostitute  his  dignity,  that
the  dictator  was  at  last  roused  to  restrain  the  growing
degradation.

If  the  people  of  Rome  were  shocked  at  the  blood-
shed which  they  were  invited  to  applaud,
it  seems  that  they  were  offended  also  at  the  the  juiu"  °
vast  sums  which were  lavished  on  these
ostentatious  spectacles.2 They  would  have  preferred,
perhaps,  that  the  donative  to  themselves  should  have

1  Dion,  xliii.  24.  7  Dion,  /.  c.

378  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH,  xix

been  greater,  and  the  soldiers  even  exhibited  symp-
toms of  discontent  and  mutiny  in  consequence.  No
instance  of  Caesar's  profuse  expenditure  excited
greater  admiration  than  his  stretching  a  silken  awn-
ing over  the  heads  of  the  spectators  in  the  Circus.
This  beautiful  material  was  brought  only  from  the
farthest  extremity  of  India,  and  was  extremely  rare
and  precious  at  Rome  at  that  time.  Three  centuries
later  it  was  still  so  costly  that  a  Eoman  emperor
forbade  his  wife  the  luxury  of  a  dress  of  the  finest
silk  unmixed  with  a  baser  fabric.1  But  a  more
permanent  and  worthy  object  of  imperial  expenditure
was  the  gorgeous  forum  of  which  Caesar  had  long
since  laid  the  foundation  with  the  spoils  of  his  Gallic
wars.  Between  the  old  Roman  forum  and  the  foot
of  the  Quirinal,  he  caused  a  large  space  to  be  enclosed
with  rows  of  marble  corridors,  connecting  in  one  suite
halls  of  justice,  chambers  of  commerce,  and  arcades
for  public  recreation.  In  the  centre  was  erected  a
temple  to  Venus  the  ancestress,  the  patroness  for
whom  Caesar  had  woven  a  breastplate  of  British
pearls,2  and  whose  name  he  had  used  as  his  watch-
word on  the  days  of  his  greatest  victories.3  He  now
completed  the  series  of  his  triumphal  shows  by  the
dedication  of  this  favourite  work.4  It  remained  for
centuries  a  conspicuous  monument  of  the  fame  and
magnificence  of  the  first  of  the  Caesars.  His  successors

«  Vopisc.  Aurel.  45.  2  Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  57.

1  He  had  vowed  this  offering  to  the  goddess  on  the  morning  of
the  battle  of  Pharsalia.  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  102.

4  "  Kalend.  Pincian.  vi.  Kal.  Octob.  Veneri  Genetrici  in  foro
Cassar."  Orell.  Inscr.  ii.  399.  According  to  Dion  the  consecration
took  place  on  the  day  of  the  last  triumph :  this  then  was  the  26th
of  September,  A.C.  708.  The  series  of  triumphal  shows  was  com-
prehended in  a  period  of  one  month.  It  must  have  begun  there-
fore about  the  end  of  August,  and  the  preparations  having,  no
doubt,  been  made  before,  it  is  not  likely  that  Caesar  delayed
the  celebration  more  than  a  few  weeks  after  his  return  to  Italy.
This  consideration  seems  to  confirm  the  account  (p.  385.)  that  he
was  twenty-eight  days  in  his  passage  from  Caralis  to  Rome.

A.C.708-B.C.46.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  379

were  proud  to  cluster  new  arches  and  columns  by  its
side,  and  bestowed  their  names  upon  the  edifices  they
erected  in  connexion  with  it.  Finally,  Trajan  cut
through  the  depressed  ridge  which  joined  the  Capi-
toline  with  the  Quirinal,  and  impeded  the  further
extension  of  the  Imperial  forums.  The  level  space
thus  obtained  he  crowded  with  a  new  range  of  build-
ings, occupying  as  much  ground  as  the  united  works
of  his  predecessors  in  this  quarter.  To  the  magnitude
of  this  elevation  a  reference  is  made,  not  without
some  obscurity  of  expression,  in  the  inscription  on
the  pillar  which  bears  his  name.1

Our  review  of  the  dictator's  proceedings  in  the  dis-
charge of  his  civil  functions  must  be  postponed,  but
only  for  a  moment,  to  relate  the  short  episode  of  his
last  military  exploit.  The  despatches  of  his  lieuten-
ants in  Spain  represented  that  province  Therepubu-
as  rapidly  falling  into  the  hands  of  the  ST^sUin
republican  faction.  Varus  and  Labienus  anderCn<BUfc
had  escaped  from  Africa,  and  joined  the  standard
under  which  Scapula  marshalled  the  disaffected  le-
gions in  Spain.  Cnseus  Pompeius  had  also  issued
from  his  retreat  in  the  Balearic  Isles,  and  as  soon  as
he  appeared  in  their  camp  every  chief  of  the  oligarchy
waived  his  own  pretensions  to  the  command  in
deference  to  the  man  who  represented  the  fame  and
fortunes  of  their  late  leader.  Yet  Scapula  had  the
confidence  of  the  soldiers,  Labienus  was  an  officer  of
tried  ability  and  reputation,  and  Varus  had  at  least
held  the  highest  military  commands,  while  Cnaeus

1  The  inscription  on  the  base  of  the  column  runs :"....  ad  de-
clarandum  quanta;  altitudinis  mons  et  locus  tantis  operibus  sit  eges-
tus."  The  height  of  the  column  is  supposed  by  some  to  indicate,  not
indeed  the  elevation  of  the  ridge,  but  the  point  of  the  two  opposite
declivities  from  which  the  soil  was  scooped  away  to  form  a  level
in  the  centre.  The  column  is  130  feet  high,  while  the  summits
of  the  Capitoline  and  Quirinal  are  not  more  than  137  and  151
feet  respectively  above  the  level  of  the  Tiber.  Bunsen,  Beschreibung
ROMS,  i.  31.

380  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  xix.

himself  was  personally  unknown  to  the  legions  in
Spain,  and  his  only  achievement  in  war  had  been  a
dashing  naval  exploit.  So  cowed  by  its  repeated
reverses  was  the  spirit  of  the  old  Eoman  party,  which
had  revived  for  a  moment  in  Africa  with  vain  exulta-
tion at  finding  itself  relieved  from  the  ascendency
of  its  own  military  champion.  Cnseus,  on  his  part,
seems  to  have  regarded  the  renewed  contest  in  the
light  of  a  private  quarrel.  His  war-cry  was  not
Rome,  Liberty,  or  The  Senate,  but  Pietas,  Filial
duty.1  The  disaffection  among  Caesar's  soldiers  had
spread;  a  large  body  of  them  had  enrolled  them-
selves under  their  new  leaders ;  their  numbers  had
been  augmented  by  provincial  enlistments ;  even
elaves  had  been  drafted  into  the  ranks2 ;  while  the
cities  and  states  of  the  peninsula  lent  their  aid  more
or  less  openly  to  the  cause.  It  was  not  in  the  remoter
parts  of  the  province,  or  among  the  half  subdued
native  principalities,  but  in  the  centre  of  Roman
influence  and  civilization,  in  Corduba  itself,  that  the
standard  of  the  adventurers  was  unfurled.  Caesar  had
cmar'i  final  completed  the  ceremonies  of  his  quadruple

campaign  in  . J- ,  ,  j  i  j • .1

Spain,  decided  triumph,  and  was  deeply  engaged  in  the

by  the  victory  ,  in • ^ ^ f IP

of  Munda, arduous  task  01  legislation  for  tne  new  system

March  17,  to .  J

A.U.  709.  of  government  which  he  had  undertaken
to  raise,  when  he  found  it  necessary  to  postpone
every  other  occupation  to  meeting  his  enemies  once
more  in  arms.  So  uncertain  and  tedious  was  the
navigation  of  those  days,  that  he  may  have  chosen
the  land  route  across  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees,  for  the
sake  of  reaching  his  destination  with  greater  speed.3
The  details  of  the  campaign  into  which  he  immedi-

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  104.

-  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  103.

9  Appian  (1.  c. )  says  that  Caesar  arrived  in  Spain  from  Rome  in
twenty-seven  days  accompanied  by  a  part  of  his  army;  Suetonius
(Jul.  56.)  that  he  reached  the  Further  Province  in  twenty- four.
Strabo  seems  to  rely  on  the  same  authorities  as  Appian  (iii.  4.).  From
Home  to  Corduba  or  Obulco,  is  more  than  a  thousand  miles,  a  dis-

A.H.70S  B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  381

ately  plunged  are  given,  but  very  obscurely,  in  the
last  of  the  series  of  contemporary  memoirs  which  have
hitherto  been  our  guides  throughout  the  military  his-
tory of  the  period.  In  point  of  composition  it  betrays
less  literary  accomplishment  than  any  of  its  kindred
works.  The  rude  soldier  who  seems  to  have  been  its
author,  had  no  hesitation  in  recording  in  their  un-
disguised enormity  the  cruelties  which  disgraced  the
conduct  of  both  parties.  Caesar's  character  for  hu-
manity suffers  more  in  this  than  in  any  other  con-
temporary narrative  of  his  actions.  The  campaign
was,  indeed,  a  series  of  butcheries  on  either  side,  but
Cnseus,  was,  perhaps,  the  most  savagely  ferocious  of
all  the  captains  of  the  civil  wars.1  The  scenes  of  the
last  act  of  Eoman  liberty  were  laid  in  the  valley  of
the  Guadalquivir  and  the  defiles  of  the  Sierra  Blanca.
After  a  variety  of  desultory  movements,  of  which  we
obtain  from  the  narrative  only  an  indistinct  notion,
we  find  the  rival  armies  at  last  drawn  up  in  hostile
array  on  the  field  of  Munda.2  Caesar  was  this  time
superior  in  numbers,  and  especially  in  cavalry  3 ;  but
the  enemy  was  well  posted,  and  fought  well :  never,
it  is  said,  was  the  great  conqueror  brought  so  near  to
defeat  and  destruction.  He  exhibited,  as  on  other
critical  occasions,  all  the  personal  courage  of  a
private  soldier,  snatching  a  shield  from  one  of  the
legionaries,  and  rushing  within  ten  paces  of  the
enemy's  line,  where  he  was  exposed  to  the  aim  of  two
hundred  piles  and  javelins.  The  officers  were  the
first  to  dash  forward  to  protect  him  with  their  bodies ;
and  the  soldiers,  at  the  very  height  of  their  dismay,
were  recalled  to  themselves  by  this  splendid  example.

tance  which  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  an  army  to  accomplish  in  the
longest  of  these  periods.  The  author  of  the  Commentary  on  tlie
Spanish  War  is  contented  with  the  expression  "  celeri  festinatione,"
and  Dion  prudently  follows  him.

1  Comp.  a  letter  of  C.  Cassias  to  Cicero  (adDiv.  XT.  19.).

2  Mnnda,  the  modern  Monda  between  Ronda  and  Malaga.
*  A  net  Bell.  Hispan.  30.

382  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XTX.

When  the  battle  was  at  last  gained,  Caesar  is  said  to
have  remarked,  that  he  had  often  fought  for  victory,
but  never  before  for  his  life.1

Thirty  thousand  men  were  left  on  this  decisive

field,  and  among  them  Varus,  Labienus,  and
tbenpabuen  many  others  of  the  remnant  of  the  Roman
deathrofan  nobility.  Cnaeus  escaped  from  the  scene  of

his  disaster,  and  gained  the  coast  with  a
few  adherents.  He  had  taken  refuge  on  board  a
vessel,  and  was  in  the  act  of  putting  to  sea.  when
having  accidentally  entangled  his  foot  in  a  rope,  an
over-zealous  attendant,  in  attempting  to  extricate
him,  wounded  his  ankle  with  the  blow  of  a  hatchet.
He  was  now  compelled  to  land  again  for  the  sake
of  obtaining  surgical  assistance  :  his  retreat  was  dis-
covered by  his  pursuers,  and  he  was  forced  to  quit
it  and  betake  himself  to  the  forests.  Wearied  and
desperate  he  threw  himself  at  the  foot  of  a  tree,
where  he  was  speedily  overtaken,  and  killed  after  a
miserable  struggle.2  His  head,  with  those  of  his
colleagues  in  arms,  was  presented  to  the  conqueror ;
and  the  complete  defeat  and  ruin  of  the  adventurers
sextus  aione  was  tnus  publicly  notified.  Of  all  the
him«iafinin  leaders  of  the  senatorial  party,  Sextus

Pompeius  was  now  the  only  survivor.  He
had  made  his  escape  from  the  field  of  Munda,
and  had  sought  an  asylum  in  the  wildest  dis-
tricts of  the  Hither  Province.  He  had  nothing  to
hope  from  the  clemency  of  the  conqueror,  who  had
shown  unusual  bitterness  against  his  family  by  the
confiscation  of  their  patrimonial  estates,  and  was  now
preparing  to  celebrate  his  triumph  over  them  as

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  104.  The  battle  was  fought  on  the  17th  of
March  A.U.  709.:  "Ipsis  Liberalibus  fusi  fugatique  sunt  Pompeiani."
Anct.  B.  H.  31.  Ovid.  Fast.  iii.  713.;  "Tertia  post  Idus  lux  est
eeleberrima  Baccho;"  i.e.  the  third  day  inclusive;  the  Ides  was  the
15th  Kal.  Fames,  xvi.  Kal.  Apr.  Liber.  Libero  in  Ca  .  .  . .  Cassar
Hi^spaniam]  Orell.  Inscr.  ii.  p.  387.

"  Appian,  D.C.  ii.  105.;  Djon,  xliii.  40.;  Auct.  B.  Hisp.  39.

A. 0.709-8.0.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  383

foreigners  and  enemies  of  the  state.1  Thus  driven
to  despair,  he  infused  new  spirit  into  the  predatory
habits  of  the  tribes  among  whom  he  had  taken
refuge,  and  continued  to  defy  the  power  of  the  pro-
vincial authorities.  Caesar  occupied  himself  for  some
months  in  reconstituting  the  government  of  Spain,
taking  precautions  for  the  entire  subjugation  of  the
party  which  had  shown  such  vitality  in  that  quarter.
The  battle  of  Munda  was  fought  on  the  seventeenth
of  March,  but  the  dictator  was  not  at  liberty  to  return
to  Italy  till  September,  after  an  absence  of  ten
months.

The  hostile  attitude  of  the  last  of  the  Pompeii  in
Spain  was  not  the  only  exception  to  the  tran  -  Di.turbance9
quillity  which  prevailed  generally  through-  in  Syria<
out  the  empire.  In  G-aul  the  Bellovaci  had  risen  in
arms ;  but  this  movement  was  expeditiously  repressed
by  Decimus  Brutus,  the  proconsul  of  the  newly  con-
quered province.2  In  the  extreme  East,  however,
the  republican  party  still  continued  to  make  head,
under  the  leadership  of  Cascilius  Bassus.3  Their
champion  was  an  obscure  knight,  and  their  forces
were  insignificant,  consisting  principally  of  two  le-
gions which  Bassus  had  seduced  from  their  allegiance
to  Sextus  Caesar,  the  commander  to  whose  care  Syria
had  been  entrusted  by  his  kinsman.4  But  the  prox-
imity of  the  Parthians,  ever  on  the  watch  for  an
opportunity  to  wound  the  sides  of  their  great  rivals,
rendered  any  movement  in  this  quarter  formidable.
Sextus  Caesar  was  murdered  by  his  soldiers,  and
Bassus  took  possession  of  the  city  of  Apamea,  which,
with  the  assistance  of  the  national  enemies,  he  con-
tinued to  hold  against  the  petty  attempts  which  were

1  Appian,  /.  c.;  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xii.  37.;  Dion,  xlv.  10. ;  Strabo,  iii.

2  Liv.  Epit.  civ.

s  Liv.  l.c.;  Dion,  xlvii.  26.;  Strabo,  xvi.  2.;  Auct.  B.  Alex.  78
'  Auct.  B.  Alex.  66.

384  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xix.

made  to  dislodge  him.  The  dictator  kept  his  eye
upon  him,  and  already  meditated  his  destruction  :
but  for  the  present  he  was  content  to  leave  his
temerity  unpunished,  while  he  applied  himself  to  the
consolidation  of  his  power  by  bold  and  comprehensive
legislation  at  home.

A.n.709  B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  385

CHAPTEE  XX.

Coesar's  legislation:  His  sumptuary  laws  :  Increase  of  the  number  of
the  Senate:  Limitation  of  the  term  of  Provincial  Governments;
Extension  of  the  Franchise:  Distribution  of  lands  to  the  veterans:
Measures  for  multiplying  the  free  population  of  Italy :  Assignment
of  the  Judicia  to  the  senators  and  knights,  to  the  exclusion  of  the
-•Erarian  tribunes:  Repression  of  crimes  of  violence  and  abolition
of  the  clubs. — Caesar  contemplates  the  establishment  of  an  uniform
system  of  administration:  He  proposes  to  compile  a  code  of  laws,
and  to  execute  a  complete  map  of  the  Empire. — Caesar's  patronage
of  literature :  His  reform  of  the  Calendar:  His  reforms  are  viewed
with  jealousy  by  the  nobles:  He  is  accused  of  pride  and  arrogance.
— The  demeanour  of  Cleopatra  tends  to  make  him  unpopular;  at
the  same  time  he  is  flattered  and  his  clemency  extolled. — He  dis-
bands his  soldiers,  and  relies  on  the  favour  of  the  citizens.

WE  have  now  followed  the  career  of  Julius  Caesar
to  the  point  at  which  his  supremacy  is  Genertti  ^^
finally  established,  and  the  proud  defiance  cf4«-sPiergL-01
of  a  licentious  oligarchy  has  subsided  into  ^"oe.
the  murmur  of  a  broken  and  proscribed  B-c<45-
faction.  We  have  seen  him  commence  his  politi-
cal existence  with  the  assertion  of  the  popular
claims  identified  with  the  hero  of  his  own  house.
He  urged  them  with  a  fearless  vehemence,  in  which
it  is  impossible  to  mistake  the  sincerity  of  his  devo-
tion. The  first  steps  of  every  popular  champion  are
bold  and  decided.  At  the  outset  he  has  a  distinct
object  before  him ;  he  knows  whaf  his  grievances
are,  if  not  their  true  remedies.  He  may  delude
himself  as  he  proceeds  with  the  fancy  that  he  ia
reconstructing,  but  there  is  no  deception  about  the
fact  that  he  is  pulling  down.  His  days  and  years
are  marked  by  the  successive  demolition  of  real  and
substantial  things,  while  his  new  creations  are  per-
haps no  more  than  ideas.  Such,  however,  was
VOL.  ii.  c  c

386  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xx.

not  the  case  with  Caesar.  From  the  time,  indeed,  of
his  first  entry  into  public  life,  his  name  had  been
signalized  by  the  overthrow,  one  by  one,  of  the
strongholds  of  ancient  privilege,  and  in  the  ardour
of  the  attack,  straitened  in  his  means  and  controlled
in  his  natural  impulses,  he  had  little  opportunity
of  applying  himself  to  the  task  of  renovation.  Ac-
cordingly, when  the  ruins  of  the  past  began  to  be
cleared  away,  he  was  astonished  to  behold  how  great
was  the  gap  he  had  made.  The  solemn  question
now  urged  itself  upon  him,  how  this  desolate  space
was  to  be  again  filled  up ;  and  in  the  boldness  and
originality  of  his  views,  it  found  an  appropriate
solution.  But  the  work  to  be  performed  was  long,
and  the  time  granted  to  him  was  but  short;  we
shall  see  him,  however,  erect  more  than  one  durable
edifice  of  utility  and  justice,  and  bear  witness  to  his
planning  of  others  on  a  scale  still  more  magnificent,
while  many  vast  conceptions  were  obviously  floating
in  his  mind  of  which  he  was  not  even  permitted  to
shadow  forth  the  outline.  His  undisputed  tenure
of  power  lasted  hardly  more  than  one  year  and  a
half,  including  an  interval  of  ten  months'  absence
from  the  city.  It  was,  therefore,  impossible  that
his  ideas,  however  long  he  may  have  actually
brooded  over  them,  could  receive  their  complete
and  methodical  realization.  We  are  the  less  able  to
appreciate  with  accuracy  the  clearness  of  Caesar's
views,  and  the  process  of  their  development,  from
the  fact  of  there  existing  no  record  of  the  order  in
which  his  enactments  succeeded  one  another.  We
know  not  at  what  stage  his  legislation  was  interrupted
by  his  departure  for  Spain,  nor  have  we  the  means
of  judging  whether  his  reforms  gained  in  boldness
or  lost  in  impartial  justice,  when  his  power  seemed
secured  by  his  final  victory.  It  would  have  been
deeply  interesting  to  have  remarked  how  one  idea
may  have  germinated  in  many  new  directions  ;  how

A.U.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  38?

various  imperfect  measures  may  have  conduced  to
one  harmonious  result.  But  the  measures  them-
selves, confused  and  disjointed  as  is  the  form  in
which  they  present  themselves  to  us,  point  de-
cisively to  the  existence  in  their  author's  mind  of
a  comprehensive  plan  for  the  entire  reconstruction
of  the  national  polity.  The  general  principle  which
pervades  them  is  the  elevation  of  a  middle  class
of  citizens,  to  constitute  the  ultimate  source  of  all
political  authority.  The  ostensible  ruler  of  the  state
is  to  be  in  fact  the  creation  of  this  body,  its  favourite,
its  patron,  its  legislator  and  its  captain.  To  this
body  he  is  to  owe  his  political  existence.1  He  is
to  watch  over  the  maintenance  of  an  equilibrium
of  popular  forces,  checking  with  the  same  firm  hand
the  discontent  of  the  depressed  nobility,  and  the
encroachments  of  the  aspiring  rabble.  The  eternal
principles  of  rule  and  order  he  is  to  assert  as  sacred
and  immutable ;  but  he  is  to  be  himself  responsible
for  their  application  at  his  own  discretion  to  the
varying  wants  of  society.  This  idea  of  government
was  perfectly  new  to  the  ancient  world.  It  was  the
first  rude  conception  of  popular  monarchy,  the  phan-
tom of  philosophers  and  jurists,  which  has  been  so
often  shadowed  forth  in  theory,  but  never  per-
manently realized  in  practice.  The  event  indeed
proved  that  an  attempt  to  combine  the  discordant
elements  of  despotism  and  freedom2  could  avail  only
as  a  temporary  expedient,  under  favour  of  a  strong

1  In  Justinian's  view,  derived  by  constant  tradition  from  the
earliest  times  of  the  Imperial  monarchy,  the  people  are  the  fountain
of  power.  He  lays  it  down  as  the  first  principle  of  public  law:  "Quod
principi  placuit  Icgis  habet  vigorem,  quum  lege  regia  qua?  de  ejus
imperio  lata  est,  populus  ei  et  in  eum  omne  suum  imperium  et  po-
testatem  concessit."  Inst,  i.  ii.  6.  Comp.  Gai.  Inst.  i.  i.  5.  The  lei
regia  here  appealed  to  was,  as  we  shall  see  hereafter,  a  mere  fiction
of  the  jurists  to  account  for  the  existence  of  the  authority  which  they
found  established.

*  Tac  Agric.  3. :  "  Quanquam  Nerva  Caesar  res  olim  dissociabiles
miscuerit,  principatum  et  libertatem."
cc  2

388  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  XX.

popular  reaction  from  a  period  of  anarchy  and
suffering.  It  was  repeated,  as  we  shall  see,  under
these  conditions,  with  limited  and  transient  success,
by  Augustus  and  Nerva.  But  its  effect  was  either
to  exchange  the  sword  of  the  open  foe  for  the  daggei
of  the  assassin,  or  to  crush  all  independence  of
thought  and  speech,  and  congeal  in  stagnant  inaction
the  life-blood  of  the  nation.  If,  however,  it  con-
tained, in  execution,  the  seeds  of  premature  de-
generacy and  corruption,  the  humane  experiment
at  least  deserved,  and  did  not  fail  to  obtain,  the
sympathy  of  mankind.

The  pomp  of  four  triumphs,  the  spectacles  of  the
Reforms  theatre  and  the  circus,  the  unwonted  splen-
SKirit'of*  dour  of  the  decorations  lavished  on  the
dictator's  person,  were  merely  frivolous
expedients  for  amusing  the  people,  and  enhancing
the  popularity  and  dignity  of  their  favourite.  To
consolidate  the  power  he  had  acquired  on  the  firm
basis  of  the  national  affections  was  a  much  more
arduous  undertaking.  The  demands  of  the  age,  as
they  presented  themselves  to  Caesar's  mind,  may  be
summed  up  in  the  language  of  the  discourse  attri-
buted, though  with  little  authority,  to  the  historian
Sallust,  but  in  which  some  later  rhetorician  appears
at  least  to  have  embodied  the  sentiments  ascribed  to
antiquity  by  his  own  contemporaries.1  A  noble  ob-
ject of  ambition,  it  was  said,  lay  open  to  the  imperator
who  should  aspire  to  rule  over  the  Roman  people.
He  fouDd  them  bloated  and  corrupted  by  the  excess
of  luxury,  overwhelmed  with  debt  and  degraded  by
the  vices  which  debt  engenders.  The  nobles  were
selfish  and  cruel,  and  had  sought  in  a  civil  war  the
surest  refuge  from  their  creditors,  and  the  only  means

1  There  is  no  other  external  evidence  for  the  genuineness  of  these
Orationes  ad  C.  Ccesarem,  than  the  titles  of  the  MSS.  Their  style
has  little  in  common  with  that  of  the  historian;  and  the  freedom  with
which  they  speak  of  Caesar's  ascendency  as  a  regnum,  seems  to  me
inconsistent  with  the  language  of  the  times.

A.C.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  389

of  retrieving  their  fortunes.  But  this  faction  had  now
been  crushed  ;  let  the  seeds  of  such  passions  be  pre-
vented from  taking  root  again.  Let  luxury  be  re-
pressed by  sumptuary  laws  :  let  the  numbers  of  the
privileged  orders  be  increased,  let  the  rights  of  citi-
zenship be  extended  ;  let  colonies  be  planted  in  the
provinces ;  let  military  service  be  required  equally  of
all,  and  none  be  retained  under  their  standards  be-
yond a  reasonable  period.  Let  the  magistrates  and
judges  be  chosen  for  their  virtues  and  dignity,  and
not  merely  for  their  wealth.  It  would  be  vain  to  en-
trust the  working  of  such  reforms  as  these  to  a  com-
monwealth of  free  and  equal  citizens ;  but  the  im-
partial eye  of  a  supreme  ruler  may  watch  securely  over
their  execution,  and  neither  fear,  nor  favour,  nor
private  interest  interfere  to  clog  their  operation.1

These  counsels  represent,  no  doubt,  the  views  which
the  Eomans  themselves  entertained  regard-

,  i  ,.  .  i .  , ... i c  A  tingle  ruler

ing  the  most  urgent  ot  their  political  wants,  required  to

n  u J  J.U  • £ "U1  Ti-  effect  them.

Couched  as  they  are  in  feeble  generalities,
they  still  seem  to  point  with  sufficient  distinctness  to
the  kind  of  reforms  which  were  really  most  essential.
They  were  seconded  assuredly  by  the  cry  of  the  pro-
vinces, which  felt  themselves  entitled  to  make  their
interests  known  in  return  for  the  support  they  had
given  to  the  conqueror.  If  the  city  acknowledged  its
weakness  and  exhaustion,  and  declared  its  eagerness
to  receive  an  invigorating  supply  of  foreign  blood,
the  provincials  offered  for  the  honour  of  incorporation
their  best  and  noblest  families.  If  the  commonwealth
demanded  that  the  privileged  order  of  the  senate
should  be  enlarged  by  the  admission  of  new  members,
men  of  capacity  and  distinction,  Gaul,  Africa,  and
Spain  presented  their  sons  to  the  censor  as  soldiers
who  had  fought  for  the  new  government,  or  civilians

1  These  recommendations  may  be  compared  with  Cicero's  sugges-
tions (pro  MarceL  8.):  "  Constituenda  jndicia,  renovanda  fides,  com.
primenc|se  libidines,  propaganda  soboles."

390  HISTOKT OF THE ROMANS  en.  XX.

learned  in  the  laws  and  skilled  in  the  conduct  of
public  affairs.  Eome  had  groaned  under  the  severity
with  which  the  military  service  had  pressed  on*  the
diminished  ranks  of  her  citizens ;  they  had  endured
twenty,  or  thirty,  or  even  forty  campaigns,  and  the
state  had  persisted  in  declaring  that  it  could  not  afford
to  discharge  them.  But  every  frontier  of  the  empire
was  burning  to  enlist  its  hardy  warriors  under  the
Koman  eagle,  to  supply  the  places  of  the  Italian
husbandmen,  and  take  their  turn  in  the  dangers  and
emoluments  of  conquest.  And  if  the  jealous  demo-
cracy of  the  forum  could  behold  without  alarm  the
ascendency  of  the  man  from  whom  alone  it  could
expect  to  obtain  all  these  benefits,  much  less  would
the  subjects  of  the  republic  scruple  to  heap  honour
and  power  upon  him,  and  constitute  him  the  un-
controlled arbiter  of  their  destinies.  From  the
vigilant  superintendence  of  a  single  ruler  alone  could
they  hope  for  any  repression  of  the  tyranny  of  their
local  governors.  The  interests  of  the  sovereign
dynasty  would  be  naturally  opposed  to  the  elevation
of  rival  families  on  the  spoils  of  the  conquered.  The
provinces  might  even  hope  that  the  ruler  of  the  Ro-
man world  would  seek  to  counterbalance  the  authority
of  a  turbulent  and  jealous  capital,  by  favouring  the
competition  of  her  ancient  rivals  in  Greece  and  Africa.
Such  perhaps  were  the  vague  hopes  with  which  the
native  populations  of  the  East  and  West  had  uniformly
'ranged  themselves  on  Caesar's  side  throughout  his
campaigns  against  the  oligarchy.  They  now  joined
with  the  great  body  of  the  citizens  themselves  in
pressing  nearly  similar  suggestions  upon  him.

Caesar  was  not  appalled  by  the  magnitude  of  the
task  which  was  thus  thrust  upon  him. He
had  great  examples  before  him  in  the  pro-
jects of  Drusus,  and  the  legislation  of  his
own  relative,  who  had  carried  the  Julian  law  for  the
admission  of  the  Italians  to  the  franchise ;  nor  less

1.U.709-B.C.45. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  391

in  the  policy  of  Sertorius,  whose  wise  liberality  had
renewed  the  image  of  Rome  herself  on  the  shores  of
the  Iberian  peninsula. In  some  matters  of detail
he  had  also  the  experience  of  the  Pompeian  reforms
to  guide  him ;  these  were  at  least  safe  and  moderate,
and  might  conciliate  many  by  their  specious  pro-
priety. Among  the  first  of  the  dictator's  enactments
was  one  for  restricting  the  luxury  of  dress  and  the
table,  and  some  other  objects  of  ostentatious  prodi-
gality.1 The  ancient  legislators,  as is  well  known,
never  renounced  the  futile  hope  of  checking  private
extravagance  by  formal  decrees ;  but  though  experi-
ence had  uniformly  shown  the  futility  of  such  expe-
dients, it  may  still  be  urged  in  excuse  for  Caesar,  that
his  new  position  as  a  sovereign  ruler  placed  his  legis-
lation in  this  respect  on  a  different  footing  from  that
of  the  republican  arbiters  of  manners ;  for  he  could
continue  to  watch  over  the  execution  of  his  own  laws,
and  not  be  constrained  to  abandon  them,  as  soon  as
made,  to  the  superintendence  of  indifferent  or  hos-
tile successors. He  was  obliged  also  to  consider  that
the  censorship  of  manners  which he  virtually  dis-
charged was  invested  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  with
the  peculiar  function  of  checking  the  growth  of  aris-
tocratic  luxury,  and  the democracy  demanded,  at
least in this instance,  that  the traditions of  the
republic  should  be  respected. It  is  true  that  Caesar's
legislation  in  this  direction  only  added  another  to  the
long  list  of  similar  failures.  Nothing  but  his  own  pre-
sence in  the  city,  and  his  personal  vigilance,  could
secure  even  the  pretence  of  obedience  to it. His
mortification  at  this  result  seems  to  show  that  he  had
reposed  more  faith  in  the  expedient  than  we,  from
his  natural  sagacity,  might  have  expected. Doubt-
less the  real  object  he  had  in  view  was  not  so  much
to  control  vicious  extravagance,  as  to  break  down  the
pre-eminence  of  the  wealthiest  class. Other  means

1  Suet.  Jul.  43.;  comp.  Cic.  ad  Div.  vii.  26.,  ix.  15.,  ad  AH.  xiii.  7.

392  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xx.

offered  themselves  towards  this  end,  more  sure  in
their  operation  as  well  as  more  equitable  in  their
character.  The  restriction  of  the  term  of  provincial
governments  to  one  year  in  the  praetorian,  and  at  far-
thest to  two1  in  the  consular  provinces,  opened  the  door
to  these  lucrative  appointments  to  a  larger  number  of
candidates,  and  in  the  same  proportion  reduced  their
emoluments.  Caesar  could  combine  the  satisfaction
of  the  numerous  claims  which  were  urged  upon  him
with  a  further  development  of  his  policy.  He  was
glad  to  degrade  the  highest  offices  of  the  republic  by
distributing  its  honours  among  his  adherents  in  rapid
succession.  The  consuls,  at  his  instigation,  were
lie  abridges  elected  for  the  abridged  term  of  six,  three,
tarmrfeaoi  or  even  two  months.2  Yet  he  did  not  ven-
and'in^re^es  ture  to  recommend  a  foreigner  to  the  suf-

the  number .  _ ,  ,  i • i i  .-11

rfthe  senate,  trages  ot  the  people,  to  which  he  still  pre-
tended to  appeal  in  the  appointment  to  the  highest
magistracies.3  The  case  was  different  where  the
appointment  lay  solely  in  himself.  In  revising  the
list  of  the  senate  in  his  censorian  capacity,  he  raised
it  to  nine  hundred  in  number,  which  was  probably
nearly  double  what  it  had  been  in  recent  times.
When  we  consider  how  many  of  that  body  had  fallen
in  the  war,  or  were  still  self-banished  from  the  city,
besides  those  whom  Caesar,  by  the  exercise  of  his  spe-
cial functions,  removed  from  the  list  for  their  mis-
conduct or  their  poverty,  we  cannot  doubt  that  more
than  two-thirds  of  the  whole  number  were  new  im-
portations. Nor  were  these  elevated  for  the  most
part  from  other  classes  of  Eoman  citizens.  It  was
Caesar's  policy  to  place  his  allies  from  the  provinces
on  the  same  benches  with  the  proud  descendants  of

1  Cic.  Philipp.  i.  8. ;  Dion,  xliii.  25.

2  Dion  (xliii.  46.)  says,  even  for  a  few  days;  com  p.  Lucan,  v.  399.
*  Cornelius  Balbus,  the  first  foreigner  who  obtained  this  honour

(Plin.  H.N.  vii.  44.),  was  not  consul  till  the  year  714,  after  Caesar's
death.  Dion,  xlviii.  32.

I.C.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  393

their  father's  conquerors.  The  representative  of
many  an  old  patrician  house,  glorying  in  the
images  of  praetors,  consuls  and  imperators,  with
which  his  halls  were  crowded,  fancied  that  he  saw  in
the  new  senators  whose  Roman  toga  he  was  con-
strained to  honour,  the  same  uncouth  figures  which,
in  Gallic  kilt  or  trouser,  had  followed  the  victor's
car  and  graced  his  triumph.1

The  Romans  exercised  their  wit  upon  these  up-
start strangers  losing  themselves  amidst  the  communica-
forest  of  columns  which  thronged  the  pub-  R^m^Vrln-
lic  places  of  the  city,  and  placards  were  pro^nciau.
posted  recommending  no  good  citizen  to  guide  them
to  the  senate  house.1  But  wander  where  they  would
on  the  banks  of  the  Tiber,  the  Gaul  and  Syrian
might  see  their  own  Rhodanus  and  Orontes  mingling
with  its  turbid  waters.3  The  crowds  of  foreigners
whom  they  met  in  every  street  or  theatre  must  have
reminded  them  that  Rome  was  even  now,  in  some
sense,  invaded  by  the  barbarians.  When  Caesar  re-
duced the  claimants  of  the  public  corn  from  three
hundred  and  twenty  thousand  to  little  more  than
half  that  number,  we  must  suppose  that  a  great  por-
tion of  those  excluded  were  strangers  who  had  frau-
dulently represented  themselves  as  genuine  children
of  the  republic.  But  he  made  amends  to  these  dis-
appointed applicants  by  a  large  measure  of  enfran-
chisement. The  policy  was  wise  and  humane  by
which  he  declared  that  all  practitioners  of  medicine,
and  professors  of  science  and  liberal  knowledge,

1  Suetonius  (Jul. SO.)  quotes, among  other  jests  of  the  day,  a
popular  song:

"  Gallos  Caesar  in  triumphum  ducit,  idem  in  curiam.
Galli  braccas  deposuerunt,  latum  clavum  sumpserunt."

*  Snet  l.c. :  "Bonum  factum:  ne  quis  senatori  novo  curiam  mon-
strare  velit."

*  What  was  said  by  Juvenal  of  a  later  period  ( Sat.  iii.  62.),  was
almost  equally  appropriale  even  in  the  time  of  Caesar:

"  Syrusin  Tiberim  deduxit  Orontc*,"

394  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xx

should  receive  the  full  rights  of  Roman  citizenship.1
In  the  provinces,  though  his  steps  were  slow  and  un-
certain, he  marched  in  the  track  which  had  been
pointed  oul  by  the  founders  of  the  Marian  party.
The  freedom  of  the  city  was  conferred  upon  various
states  in  Gaul,  Spain,  and  possibly  in  other  provinces.
The  whole  legion  Alauda,  composed  of  Gaulish  mer-
cenaries, \*as  enlisted  in  the  ranks  of  the  common-
wealth by  communication  of  the  same  honourable
boon.2  It  seems  probable  that  Caesar  already  medi-
tated a  mueh  further  extension  of  this  salutary  prin-
ciple of  incorporation.  Sicily  was  selected  to  fur-
nish an  example  of  its  gradual  application,  if  it  be
true  that  a  project  for  conferring  upon  the  inhabitants
of  that  island  the  inferior  or  Latin  franchise,  was
found  among  the  dictator's  papers  at  his  death.3  He
had  no  more  confidential  agent  and  counsellor  than  a
Spanish  provincial,  Cornelius  Balbus,  by  whom  we
may  suppose  such  measures  would  be  suggested  or
promoted.  But  the  fate  of  Drusus  must  have  been
ever  before  the  eyes  of  the  Roman  statesman,  who
sought  to  amalgamate  the  conquering  with  the  con-
quered races.  Caesar  shrank  from  or  postponed  the
completion  of  his  own  liberal  views,  and  could  only
leave  behind  him  some  isolated  precedents  for  a  gene-
rous policy,  instead  of  working  out  the  principle
himself.

The  assignment  of  lands  to  the  veterans  was  a
measure  sanctioned  by  custom  and  repeated

Assignment , ,  n  i

of  land  to  the legal enactments. Caesar, however,  was

veterans.  .  .  . '

more  magnanimous  in  regard  to  this  than
Sulla.  He  despised  the  crafty  policy  of  planting  a
cluster  of  military  colonies  in  Italy,  so  as  to  form  a
camp  of  his  own  partisans  within  call  of  the  central

1  Suet.  Jul.  42. The  franchise  was  also  given  as  a  reward  for  lay-
ing out  money  in  improvements  such  as  building. Gai.  Inst.  i.  33.$
Thierry,  Gaule,  i.  75.

2  Suet.  Jul.  24.  s  Cic.  ad  Att.  xiv.  12.

A.tJ.709-B.e.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  395

government.  Some  territories  indeed,  here  and  there,
were  assigned  to  the  disbanded  legionaries  within  the
Peninsula,  but  they  were  neither  extensive,  nor
contiguous  to  one  another.1  There  were  no  tracts  of
public  domain  left  within  the  Alps  for  the  state  to
distribute  in  public  grants ;  there  had  been  compara-
tively little  confiscation  of  the  enemy's  estates ;  nor
does  it  appear  that  the  government  entered  into  the
market  to  buy  lands  for  the  purpose  of  so  distributing
them.  Undoubtedly  several  of  Pompeius's  most
obstinate  adherents,  the  malignants  of  the  oligarchic
faction,  had  suffered  spoliation  on  various  pretences.2
There  were,  we  may  suppose,  many  cases  of  particular
hardship,  some  of  gross  injustice.  But  the  voice  of
remonstrance  was  not  unheeded.  Cicero  could  plead
for  a  friend  or  a  client,  and  the  cry  he  raised  was
directed  rather  against  accidental  oversights  than
intentional  wrongs.3  Eespect  was  paid  to  the  rights
of  the  owners  of  lands,  even  where  they  lay  most
convenient  for  occupation,  and  the  veterans  were
generally  scattered  over  the  face  of  the  country,
instead  of  being  collected  together,  as  under  Sulla,  in
compact  masses.4  Not  more  than  six  insignificant
colonies  were  settled  in  Italy,  namely,  at  Bovianum,
Veii,  Aufidena,  Casilinurn,  Calatia  and  Lanuvium.5
But  as  many  as  eighty  thousand  Eoman  citizens  were
transplanted  to  found  new  cities  beyond  the  sea.

1  Suet.  Jul.  38. ;  Dion.  xlii.  64.

2  Varro's  villa  at  Casinum  had  been  confiscated  by  Antonius  (Cic.
Phil.  ii.  40.). Its  owner  had  abused  Caesar's  clemency  by  resorting
to  the  Pompeian  camp  in  Epirus  after  surrendering  himself  to  the
conqueror  in  Spain. Comp.  Cic.  de.  Div.  \.  32.,  and  Varr.  de  It.  R.
i.  4. Yet  Caesar  extended  his  pardon  to  him  a  second  time,  and
afterwards  conferred  further  favours  upon  him.

8  Cic.  ad  Div.  ix.  17.,  xiii.  8.

4  Compare  Tacitus's  account  of  the  ancient  mode  of  assigning  lands
{Ann.  xiv.  27):  "  Olim  universes  legiones  deducebantnr  cum  tribunis
et  centurionibus  et  sui  cujusque  ordinis  militibus,  ut  consensu  et  cari-
tate  rempublicam  efficerent."

*  Panvinius,  de  Imp.  Horn.  c.  xi.

396  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xx.

Carthage  and  Corinth  were  bidden  to  rise  once  more
from  their  ruins.1  It  was  a  bold  and  generous  under-
taking, to  restore  the  two  great  maritime  cities  of
the  western  world,  of  both  of  which  Eome  had  long
shown  herself  so  ignobly  jealous.

The  settlement  of  the  veterans  on  the  soil  of  Italy
Attempt,  to added  little  directly  to  the  population  of

counteract  the ,  . ,  *  .  ,. . .,

increase  of the  country,  and  the  experience  ot  similar

•lave  labour  i  .  •  •  i_ j

in  itaiy.  plantations  on  recent  occasions  had  assu-
redly proved  that  no  numerous  or  robust  progeny
was  likely  to  spring  from  a  stock  so  worn-out  and
enervated.2  But  the  centre  of  the  empire  had  been
more  exhausted  by  the  civil  wars  than  any  of  the
provinces.  The  rapid  disappearance  of  the  free
population  had  been  remarked  with  astonishment
and  dismay,  at  least  from  the  time  of  the  Gracchi.
If  the  numbers  actually  maintained  on  the  soil  of  the
Peninsula  had  not  diminished,  it  was  abundantly
certain  that  the  independent  native  races  had  given
way  almost  throughout  its  extent  to  a  constant  im-
portation of  slaves.  The  remedies  to  which  Cffisar
resorted  would  appear  as  frivolous  as  they  were
arbitrary,  were  we  not  allowed  to  surmise  that  they
were  no  more  than  the  first  imperfect  outlines  of  a
more  comprehensive  scheme.  He  prohibited  all
citizens  between  the  age  of  twenty  and  forty  from
remaining  abroad  more  than  three  years  together,
while,  as  a  matter  of  state  policy,  he  placed  more
special  restrictions  upon  the  movements  of  the  youths
of  senatorial  families.  He  required  also  that  the

1  Suet.  Jul.  42.;  Pint. Cos.  57.;  Dion,  xlii.  50.;  Strabo,  xvii.  3.
15.;  Pausan.  ii.  1,  2.

2  Compare  Tac.  l.c.:  "Veteran!  .  .  .  adscript!,  non  tamen  infre-
quentiae  locorum  subvenere  .  .  .  Neque  conjugiis  suscipiendis  neque
alendis  liberis  sueti  orbas  sineposteris  domos  relinquebant."  This  of
course  was  not  without  exceptions. Horace  speaks  of  "  Pueri  maguis
c  centurionibus  orti  "  (Saf.  i.  vi.  74.),  the  rustic  descendants  of  these
veteran  colonists,  and  Tacitus  gives  a  hint  of  the  same  kind  (Ann.  iij.
75.):  "  Ateius  ....  avo  centurione  Sullano."

A.C.7GU-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  397

owners  of  herds  and  flocks,  to  the  maintenance  of
which  large  tracts  of  Italy  were  exclusively  devoted,
should  employ  free  labour  to  the  extent  of  at  least
one-third  of  the  whole.1  Such  laws  could  only  be
executed  constantly  under  the  vigilant  superinten-
dence of  a  sovereign  ruler.  They  fell  in  fact  into
immediate  disuse,  or  rather  were  never  acted  upon
at  all.  They  served  no  other  purpose  at  the  time
but  to  evince  Caesar's  perception  of  one  of  the  fatal
tendencies  of  the  age,  to  which  the  eyes  of  most
statesmen  of  the  day  were  already  open.  In  one
particular  he  counteracted  a  certain  amount  of  good
which  his  rival  had  unconsciously  promoted.  Pom-
peius  had  distributed  corn  without  making  strict
inquiry  into  the  claims  of  the  recipients  to  citizenship.
This  was  found  indirectly  to  encourage  the  manu-
mission of  slaves,  who,  receiving  thereupon  a  share
of  the  public  largess,  became  less  onerous  to  their
masters  as  free  labourers  than  they  had  been  in  their
former  capacity.2  This  effect,  as  far  as  it  went,  was
doubtless  checked  by  Caesar's  fiscal  severity.  But  in
fact  the  great  cause  which  operated  to  stimulate  the
increase  of  slave-labour  was  the  burden  of  the  military
conscription,  which  fell  upon  the  free  classes  alone.
This  was  perceived  by  Caesar's  successors  in  the
supreme  power,  but  was  overlooked  apparently  by
himself.

Another  series  of  enactments,  however,  with  a
similar  view,  had  a  very  different  fortune.  The  ju,  trium
The  privileges  which  the  dictator  assigned  liberorum-
to  paternity  became  the  basis  of  much  subsequent
legislation,  and  established  certain  principles  in
Roman  jurisprudence  from  which  it  never  afterwards
departed.  The  relative  importance  which  was  at-
tached to  the  population  of  different  portions  of  the

1  Snet.  Jul.  42. Tnis  law  was  merely  the  revival  of  an  ancient
enactment  with  the  same  view. Appian,  B.  C.  i.  8.

2  Dion,  XXXLS,  24.

398  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xx.

empire  was  shown  by  a  graduated  scale.  The  father
of  a  family  of  three  legitimate  children  born  at  Rome,
of  four  in  Italy,  or  of  five  in  the  provinces,  enjoyed
exemption  from  certain  personal  charges.1  Caesar
knew,  it  seems,  the  weakness  of  either  sex.  If  he
encouraged  the  paternal  instincts  by  the  boon  of
immunity  from  taxation,  he  flattered  those  of  the
other  parent  by  an  appeal  to  female  vanity.  The
proudest  of  the  ancient  matrons  had  boasted  that  her
children  were  her  only  jewels ;  but  the  mothers  of
the  modern  Gracchi  might  glory  in  the  special  privi-
lege 'of  riding  in  litters,  dressing  in  purple,  and
wearing  collars  of  pearls.2

In  providing  for  the  due  execution  of  justice
Thejudicia  and  the  security  of  the  commonwealth,
the  senatorial  Caesar  was  compelled,  as  dictator,  to  re-

and  equestrian  .  f  ,  . . ' , . ,

orders.  verse  in  some  instances  the  policy  which

his  party  had  maintained.  He  restricted  the  orders
of  citizens,  from  which  the  judges  were  to  be
chosen,  to  the  senators  and  knights;  thus  exclud-
ing the  most  popular  of  the  classes  to  which  that
privilege  had  been  previously  extended,  that  of  the
serarian  tribunes.3  Whatever  were  the  precise  altera-
tions which  he  effected  in  the  law  of  treason,  they
seem,  at  least,  to  have  lain  in  the  direction  of  greater
strictness  and  severity.  The  same  was  undoubtedly
the  case  in  his  enactments  against  other  crimes  of
violence,  to  which  the  law  had  hitherto  shown  the
most  vicious  leniency.  Even  when  blood  was  shed,
as  in  a  party  scuffle  by  Milo,  the  Roman  citizen
claimed  the  privilege  of  withdrawing  into  banish-
ment before  trial.  The  lawless  excesses  into  which
faction  was  so  constantly  rushing,  invested  this  privi-

'  Aulus  Gellius  (Noct.  Att.  ii.  15.)  mentions  cases  in  which  pater-
nity and  the  number  of  children  gave  precedence.

2  Suet.  Jul.  43  ;  Euseb.  Cfiron.a.  1972.  referred  to  by  Thireaude
la  Malle,  Econ.  Polit.  des  Romains,  ii.  240.

'  Suet.  Jul.  41,  42.

A.IT.709-B.C.45. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  399

lege  with  especial  popularity.  But  Caesar,  though  he
did  not  venture  entirely  to  abrogate  it,  went  so  far  as
to  mulct  the  culprit  of  half  his  property,  and,  in  the
most  heinous  cases,  to  confiscate  the  whole.

The  settlement  of  the  veterans  on  the  land  averted
that  which  is  the  great  difficulty  govern-  Lawlessness  o»
ments  generally  have  to  contend  against  {Jerso^a? and
on  the  restoration  of  peace  after  a  long  ill8ecurity-
war.  There  were  no  disbanded  soldiers  left  to
roam  about  the  country,  unaccustomed  to  labour,  and
corrupted  in  morals.  The  lawlessness  of  the  times
was,  at  least,  not  aggravated  by  this  fertile  element
of  mischief.  Nevertheless,  the  effect  of  the  licence
of  civil  wars  must  have  been  to  increase  frightfully
the  insecurity  of  person  and  property.  The  institu-
tion of  slavery  was  a  temptation  to  at  least  one
odious  crime,  of  which  modern  times  have  little  ex-
perience, that  of  kidnapping.  The  factories  and
secluded  estates  of  the  great  proprietors  were  so  many
prisons  where  freemen  might  be  detained  in  galling
servitude  without  the  possibility  of  making  their
injuries  known.  Of  the  prevalence  and  publicity  of
assassination  some  idea  may  be  formed  from  a  single
allusion  in  the  literature  of  the  time.  Didactic
writers,  it  must  be  observed,  were  accustomed  to
throw  their  disquisitions  into  the  form  of  dialogues ;
and  it  was  generally  contrived  that,  in  each  division
of  the  work,  a  conversation  of  this  kind  should  be
brought  to  a  conclusion.  It  was  some  exercise  of
ingenuity  to  devise  easy  and  natural  means  of  break-
ing up  these  supposed  meetings  of  friends  for  philo-
sophical discussion.  In  the  first  book  of  Varro's
treatise  on  Husbandry,  the  interlocutors  of  the  dia-
logue meet  in  the  temple  of  Tellus.  When  they  have
said  as  much  as  the  author  thinks  fit,  he  finds  no
more  opportune  means  of  dissolving  the  party,  than
the  sudden  announcement  of  the  priest's  attendant,
that  his  master  has  just  been  killed  by  an  assassin  in

400  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xx.

a  public  place.  He  comes  to  invite  them  to  assist  at
the  obsequies  on  the  morrow.  They  express  them-
selves pleased  with  his  courteous  attention,  content
themselves  with  wafting  a  sigh  to  the  uncertainty  of
human  life  in  the  centre  of  Koman  civilization,  and
so  retire  to  their  homes.1

Another  salutary  though unpopular  reform  was

the  dissolution  of  the  collegia,  or  combina-
iv"the tions, which held so much  sway  in  the

capital,  overawing  the  independence  of  the
judges,  and  trampling  upon  the  execution  of  the
laws.  Caesar  herein  did  tardy  justice  to  the  prin-
ciples of  the  party  which  he  had  spent  his  life  in
combating,  and  overthrew  the  corner-stone  of  the
licentious  legislation  of  Clodius.  While  he  abolished
the  political  clubs,  however,  he  spared  the  original
trade-guilds,  upon  the  model  of  which  they  had  been
formed.  An  exception  was  also  made  in  favour  of
the  Jewish  residents  in  the  city,  who  were  permitted
to  form  an  organization  among  themselves  for  social
and  religious  purposes.2  The  feelings  of  that  people
had  been  peculiarly  outraged  by  the  profanation
Pompeius  had  inflicted  upon  their  temple.  Caesar,
on  the  contrary,  they  were  disposed  to  regard  as  their
avenger,  and,  during  his  campaign  in  Egypt,  they

1  Varro,  Jt. R.  i.  69.:  "Cum  hajcdiceret  Stolo,  venit  libertus  aedi-
tumi  ad  nos  flens,  et  rogat  ut  ignoscamus  quod  sitnus  retenti,  et  ut  ei
in  funus  postridie  prodeamus.  Omnes  consurgimus  ac  simul  ex-
clamamus,  Quid?  in  funus?  quod  funus?  quid  est  factum?  Ille  flens
narrat  ab  nescio  quo  percussum  cultello  concidisse,  quern  qui  essct,
animadvertere  in  turba  non  potuisse;  sed  tantummodo  exaudisse
vocem,  perperam  fecisse.  Ipse  cum  patronum  domum  sustulisset,  et
pueros  dimisisset  ut  modicum  requirerent  ac  mature  adducerent,  quod
potius  illud  administrasset  quam  ad  nos  venisset  sequum  sibi  esse
ignosci.  Nee  si  cum  servare  non  potuisset  qnin  non  multo  post  ani-
mam  efflaret,  tamen  putare  se  recte  fecisse.  Non  moleste  ferentes
descendimus  de  aede,  et  decasuhumanomagis  querentes  quam  admi-
rantes  id  Roma?  factum,  discedimus  omnes."  This  work  is  assigned
by  Schneider  (Comment,  de  Vit.  M.  Ter.  Varronis  in  Script.  R.K.
i.  225.)  to  the  year  A.U.  717,  only  eight  or  nine  years  after  Caesar's
legislation.

*  Joseph.  Antiq.  xiv.  10.  8.

A.C.709-B.C.45.  tHDER THE EMPIRE.  401

Lad  shown  themselves  remarkably  zealous  in  his
service.  In  return  he  accorded  to  them  various
privileges,  remitting,  among  other  things,  the  tribute
of  the  seventh  or  Sabbatical  year,  in  which  they
still  made  it  a  point  of  conscience  neither  to  sow  nor
to  reap.1

The  measures  of  reform  which  have  been  thus  far
enumerated,  refer,  for  the  most  part,  to  the
solution  of  immediate  practical  difficulties.  cormpi«u!  £«ie
In  the  removal  of  actual  and  pressing  evils
Caesar's  movements  were  rapid  and  decisive,  though
his  enactments  were  little  more  than  the  repetition  of
older  experiments.  On  the  other  hand,  when  he  had
leisure  to  look  further  into  the  future,  and  to  me-
ditate schemes  for  the  development  of  a  new  system
of  administration,  his  views,  as  far  as  we  are  enabled
to  trace  them,  were  more  liberal  and  original;  but
the  execution  of  them  was  unfortunately  postponed
to  pressing  necessities.  To  contemplate  the  empire
as  one  complete  whole,  to  sweep  away  anomalous
usages  and  traditions,  and  organize  it  under  a  single
uniform  system  of  administration,  was  a  conception
worthy  of  the  greatest  and  most  powerful  of  Roman
statesmen.  But  to  make  any  real  progress  in  so
vast  a  scheme  would  have  required  at  least  the
greater  part  of  one  life ;  one  or  two  vague  indi-
cations of  its  conception,  hastily  struck  out  in  the
course  of  a  few  months  of  feverish  excitement,  are
hardly  enough  perhaps  to  justify  us  in  attributing
to  their  author  any  fixed  purpose  in  this  respect,
or  maturity  of  view.  Cajsar  only  lived  long  enough
to  intimate  his  noble  design  of  reducing  to  one
harmonious  code  of  laws  the  inconsistent  decisions
of  preceding  centuries.2  The  science  of  the  law  was

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  xiv.  10.  6.

2  Suet.  Jul.  44.:  "  Destinabat  .  .  .  jus  civile  ad  certum  modum
redigcrc,  atque  ex  immensa  diff'usaque  Icgum  copia  optima  quaique
et  necessaria  in  paucissimos  conferre  libros."

VOL.  II.  D  D

402  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  cfi.  XX

a  mystery  which  the  nobles  had  retained  in  their  own
power.  They  had  claimed  to  be  its  sole  authorized
expositors  until  its  technicalities  were  divulged  by  a
treacherous  partisan.  During  the  last  century,  how-
ever, though  this  veil  had  been  in  a  great  measure
withdrawn,  the  whole  system  had  been  so  entangled
by  conflicting  precedents  and  the  independent  edicts
set  forth  by  the  praetors,  as  to  present  a  labyrinth  of
vexatious  confusion.  Cicero,  whose  natural  good  sense
appears  in  nothing  more  clearly  than  in  his  contempt
for  the  pedantry  of  the  jurisconsults  of  his  day,  had
conceived  the  idea  of  reducing  to  form  and  principle
the  most  anomalous  of  the  sciences.  A  treatise  on
this  subject,  even  by  such  a  master,  might  easily  be
forgotten  after  the  reform  it  advocated  had  been  actu-
ally effected ;  but  the  work  in  which  Cicero  first  paved
the  way  for  this  beneficent  undertaking  seems  to  have
survived,  though  known  perhaps  only  to  the  learned,
for  some  centuries  after  the  first  remodelling  of  the
Eoman  law.1  The  glory  of  effecting  this  reform  was
not  reserved  for  Csesar ;  he  could  only  point  out  to
the  succeeding  generation  the  importance  of  the
undertaking,  as  a  bold  step  in  the  direction  of  ad-
ministrative uniformity.

Precisely  the  same  may  be  said  of  another  project
which  the  Roman  people  owed  to  this  great

Of  a  complete  .  •  n  J i.

m»pofthe  creative  genius.  Caesar  proposed  to  execute
a  complete  map  of  the  empire  from  actual
survey.2  He  divided  the  whole  extent  of  the  Eoman
world  into  four  portions,  and  appointed  men  of  ap-
proved science  as  commissioners  to  examine  them
personally  throughout.  The  work  was  to  be  executed
in  the  most  minute  manner.  The  Roman  landsur-
veyors  had  long  been  familar  with  the  technical  pro-

1  This  work  of  Cicero  is  referred  to  by  Aulus  Gellius,  i.  22.

2  We  obtain  our  knowledge  of  this  fact  fr6m  the  preface  to  the
Cosmographia  of  ./Ethicus,  a  writer  of  the  fourth  century.  The  mea-
surement was  begun  B.C.  44.

A.C.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  403

cesses  by  which  the  inequalities  of  natural  limits  are
duly  measured  and  registered.  Throughout  Italy  and
in  many  of  the  provinces  every  estate  was  elaborately
marked  out  on  the  surface  of  the  soil,  and  its  extent
and  configuration  inscribed  on  tablets  of  brass  and
preserved  with  scrupulous  care.1  The  sages  of
Greece  had  begun  also  to  apply  the  knowledge  of
astronomy  to  the  measurement  of  the  globe.  The
age  was  ripe  for  a  great  achievement  in  the  science
of  geography,  and  the  systematic  way  in  which  it  was
carried  out,  together  with  the  long  period  of  thirty-
two  years  which  was  devoted  to  it,  is  a  guarantee
for  the  substantial  results  of  this  magnificent  under-
taking.2

One  of  the  brightest  features  in  the  dictator's  cha-
racter was  his  genuine  and  unaffected  love

(.-,,.  ' TT  !»•_.• Estsbluhment

ot  literature.  He  was  not  only  distin-  ofthe«r«t
guished  himself  as  an  orator,  a  grammarian,
an  historian  and  even  an  astronomer  ;  he  was  also  at-
tached to  literary  men  and  enjoyed  their  society.
His  institution  of  a  public  library,  not  offered  to  the
citizens  for  their  use,  but  surrendered  to  them  for
their  own  property,  was  a  novelty  in  the  career  of
civilization.  Ca3sar  paid  a  graceful  compliment  to
literature,  which  should  be  of  no  political  party,  by
assigning  to  the  veteran  antiquarian  Varro,  the  most
learned  of  the  Romans,  the  arrangement  and  care  of
these  intellectual  treasures.3

The  reform  of  the  calendar  was  a  vigorous  and

1  Consult  on  this  subject  Dureau  de  la  Malle,  Econ.  Pol.  dea Ro~
mains,  i.  166 — 207.

2  It  may  be  conjectured  that  the  chart  of  the world  which  M.
Agrippa  published,  and  which  is  referred  to  under  his  name  by  Pliny
(H.  N.  Hi.  3.),  was  in  fact  the  completed  undertaking  of  Caesar's
commissioner*.

3  Compare  Suet.  Jul.  44.,  and  Plin.  H.N.  vii.  31. The  former
tells  us  that  the  arrangement  of  Caesar's  collection  was  confided  to
Varro ;  the  latter,  that  Varro's  statue  was  placed  in  the  library  of
Asinius  Pollio,  to  whom  he  attributes  the  honour  of  setting  the  first
example  of  such  a  public institution. But Pollio's  library  was
formed,  he  says,  ex  manubiis, from  the  spoils  of  war,  and  Pollio's

i>  l>  2

404  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XX.

well-timed  effort  for  the  removal  of  a  gr^at  prac-
confusion  of  tical  abuse.1  The  Roman  year,  even  before
calendar  the  time  of  Caesar,  ought  to  have  equalled,  on
the  average,  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  days  and
six  hours ;  so  near  had  the  astronomers  even  of  the
period  assigned  to  the  reign  ofNuma  already  arrived
to  the  real  length  of  the  earth's  revolution  round  the
Eim.  This  year  had  been  calculated  on  a  basis  of
three  hundred  and  fifty-four  days,  with  the  interca-
lation of  a  month  of  twenty-two  and  twenty-three
days  alternately  every  second  year ;  but  another  day
had  been  added  to  the  three  hundred  and  fifty-four
to  make  an  odd  or  fortunate  number,  and,  to  com-
pensate for  this  superfluous  day,  the  number  of  in-
tercalations was  proportionally  diminished  by  a  very
intricate  process.2  The  simplicity  of  the  original  ar-
rangement being  thus  violated,  great  carelessness  had
soon  prevailed  in  making  the  requisite  corrections.
In  course  of  time  the  pontiffs,  to  whose  superior
knowledge  the  guardianship  of  the  national  calendar
had  been  entrusted,  had  shrouded  their  science  in  a
veil  of  religious  mystery,  and  began  to  turn  it  to
political  or  private  purposes.  They  commanded  the
intercalation  of  a  month  arbitrarily3,  when  it  suited
them  to  favour  some  partisan  who  desired  the  exten-
sion of  his  year  of  office,  or  the  postponement  of  the
day  on  which  his  debts  should  become  due.4  They

most  noted  exploits  were  of  a  later  date(A.u.  715,  in  Illyricutn).  It
seems  likely,  however,  that  the  statue  of  Varro  would  be  placed  in
the  library  which  he  had  himself  arranged ;  and  I  am  inclined  to
follow  the  account  of  Suetonius,  and  to  suppose  that  Pollio  only
made  additions  to  Caesar's  original  foundation.  It  may  be  remarked
that  the  first  Alexandrian  library,  though  open  to  the  public,  was
the  private  property  of  the  king.  So  was  Lucullus's  a  private  col-
lection. Plut.  Lvcull.  42.

1  Ideler,  Handb.  der Mathem. und Techn.  Chronologic,  ii. 117.
There  is  some  discrepancy  in  the  most  modern  observations  of  the
precise  length  of  the  solar  year.

2  Macrob.  Sat  i.  13. ;  Censorin.  de  Die  Natal.  20.

*  Censorin.  /.  c. ;  Plut.  Cats.  59

*  Censorin.  /.  c.\  Macrob.  Sat,  i.  14.;  Ammian,  xxvi.  1.;  Solin.  1.

A.U.709- H.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  405

abstained  from  the  requisite  insertion,  at  the  instance
of  some  provincial  governor  who  was  anxious  to  hasten
his  return  to  the  enjoyments  of  the  capital.1  This
control  over  the  length  of  the  civil  year,  as  well  as
the  power  of  proclaiming  the  days  on  which  business
might  or  might  not  be  transacted,  had  become  an
engine  of  state  in  the  hands  of  the  oligarchical  go-
vernment with  which  the  sacerdotal  functionaries
were  for  the  most  part  politically  connected.  Caesar
indeed  had  broken  down  in  his  own  person  the  barrier
which  had  been  systematically  raised  against  the  in-
trusion of  the  opposite  party  into  this  body.  The
supreme  pontificate  which  he  enjoyed  gave  him  the
legitimate  means  of  working  this  instrument  for  his
own  advantage.  But  he  felt  the  extreme  inconvenience
which  had  latterly  resulted  from  its  abuse.  The  griev-
ance had  indeed  become  intolerable.  In  the  dis-
tracted state  of  public  affairs,  and  amidst  conflicting
personal  interests,  the  pontiffs  had  abstained  from
making  any  intercalation  since  the  year  of  the  city
702,  and  had  even  then  left  the  civil  calendar  some
weeks  in  advance  of  the  real  time.  From  that  time
each  year  had  reckoned  only  three  hundred  and  fifty-
five  days,  and  the  civil  equinox  had  got  eighty  days
in  advance  of  the  astronomical.  The  consuls,  ac-
cordingly, who  entered  on  their  office  on  the  1st  of
January  of  the  year  708  of  the  city,  really  commenced
their  functions  on  the  13th  October,  B.  c.  47,  that  is,
eighteen  days  after  the  astronomical  equinox.  The
confusion  which  resulted  from  such  a  state  of  things
may  be  easily  imagined.  The  Roman  seasons  were
marked  by  appropriate  festivals  assigned  to  certain
fixed  days,  and  associated  with  the  religious  worship
of  the  people.  At  the  period  of  harvest  and  vintage,

1  As  Cicero,  for  instance,  in  his  government  of  Cilicia.  He  writes
to  his  friends  at  Rome  to  entreat  them  to  hinder  the  pontiffs  from
intercalating  in  that  year,  and  so  protracting  his  term  of  absence
(Ad  Att.  v  9.,  ad  Div.  vii.  2.,  viii.  6.)-

406  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xx.

for  instance,  certain  offerings  were  to  be  made  and
certain  divinities  thereby  propitiated.1  The  husband-
man was  obliged  to  reject  the  use  of  the  calendar
altogether,  and  to  depend  upon  his  own  rude  ob-
servations of  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  con-
stellations.

Caesar  had  acquired  a  competent  knowledge  of
Amount  of  the  science  of  astronomy,  in  which  the
""mpiution  duties  of  his  office  as  supreme  pontiff
gave  him  a  particular  interest.  He  com-
posed himself  a  treatise  upon  the  subject,  which
long  retained  its  value  as  a  technical  exposition.2
The  astronomers  of  Alexandria  were  considered  the
most  expert  of  their  time,  and  with  them  he  had
made  acquaintance  during  his  brief  and  busy  sojourn
in  the  palace  of  the  Ptolemies,  But  if  the  Alex-
andrians made  their  year  to  consist  of  three  hundred
and  sixty-five  days,  without  any  intercalation3,  their
error  was  out  of  all  proportion  greater  than  that  of
the  original  calendar  of  Numa.  It  is  more  probable
that  Caesar  took  this  latter  as  the  basis  of  his  own
calculations.  He  was  not  unaware  that  the  period
of  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  days  and  six  hours
exceeds,  in  a  slight  degree,  the  true  length  of  the
solar  year.  The  astronomer  Hipparchus4  had  calcu-
lated this  excess  as  constant  at  four  minutes  and
forty-eight  seconds,  and  Caesar,  or  his  adviser  Sosigenes,
was  no  doubt  acquainted  with  this  result.  But  if  the
excess  were  really  constant  and  not  greater  than  this,
it  would  make  the  difference  of  only  one  day  in  three

1  Suet.  Jul.  40:"Utnequemessium  ferise  sestati  neque  vindemiarum
auturano  competerent."

2  Macrob.  Saturn,  i.  16.,  where  the  writer  asserts  also  that  Caesar
derived  his  knowledge  from  the  Egyptians.

1  Censorin.  18.:  "  Nam  eorum  annus  civilis  solos  habet  dies  CCCLXV
sine  ullo  intercalari."  Ideler  shows  that  the  Egyptians  knew  of  the
increment  of  six  hours,  but  did  not  introduce  it  into  their  civil  year
till  B.C.  30.  Ideler,  ii.  118.

*  B.C  160,  or  thereabouts. See  Ideler,  Ijc.

i.tl.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  407

hundred  years,  and  this  amount  of  error  he  may  have
been  contented  to  neglect.  In  fact,  however,  the
more  accurate  observations  of  the  moderns  have  as-
certained that  the  excess  of  the  Julian  year  over  the
solar  progressively  increases;  that  at  the  present
time,  it  amounts  to  as  much  as  llm  22s,  while  at  the
commencement  of  the  Julian  era  it  was  only  llm  12$.
It  appears,  then,  on  taking  the  average  excess  between
that  era  and  the  present  time,  that  the  error  would
really  amount  to  as  much  as  one  day  in  each  hundred
and  thirty  years.  Csesar,  however,  was  satisfied  with
assigning  to  each  year  the  average  of  three  hundred
and  sixty-five  days  and  a  quarter,  by  the  regular
intercalation  of  one  day  in  every  fourth  year.  The
consequence  was  that  the  sum  of  the  trifling  incre-
ments of  each  successive  revolution  of  this  period
had  occasioned  a  loss  of  nearly  three  days  at  the  date
of  the  council  of  Nice,  A.  D.  325.  Accordingly,  in
that  year,  the  solar  equinox  was  found  to  fall  not  on  the
23rd  of  March,  as  in  45  B.  c.,  but  on  the  20th.  When
the  Komish  calendar  was  corrected  by  Pope  Gregory
XIII.  in  A.  D.  1582,  it  had  got  forward  as  much  as
thirteen  days.  That  pontiff  proceeded  to  cut  off  ten
of  these  superfluous  days,  and  so  restored  the  calendar
to  its  position  at  the  date  of  the  council  of  Nice.
This  alteration  has  since  been  adopted  throughout
the  Protestant  states  of  Europe,  with  an  adequate
provision  against  the  future  accumulation  of  error ;
but  there  still  remains  a  constant  difference  of  about
three  days  between  the  civil  and  the  astronomical
equinox.

The  basis  of  Caesar's  reform  was  that  the  com-
mencement of  the  new  era  should  coincide
with  the  first  new  moon  after  the  shortest  ot°Xr
day. In  order  to  make  the  year  of  the
city  709  thus  begin,  ninety  days  required  to  be  added
to  the  current  year. In  the  first  place  an  intercalary
month  of  twenty-three  days  was  inserted  in  its  proper

408  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  rx«

place  between  the  23rd  and  24th  of  February1,  and
at  the  end  of  November  two  new  months  were  added,
comprehending  sixty-seven  days,  or  rather  as  we  may
conjecture,  the  months  comprised  twenty-nine  and
thirty-one  days  respectively,  and  the  seven  supple-
mental days  were  counted  separately.  The  shortest
day  of  the  year  46  B.  c.  was  the  24th  of  December,
and  the  first  new  moon  fell  on  the  eighth  day  suc-
ceeding, from  which  accordingly  the  new  era  received
The  Julian  it*  date.2  The  period  which  was  marked  by
!^.7o».'  h  this  series  of  alterations  received  vulgarly
the  appellation  of  the  year  of  confusion ;
the  last  year  of  confusion  was  the  term  which  a
writer  of  a  late  date  more  significantly  applied  to  it.3
In  a  political  as  well  as  a  social  point  of  view  it  must
have  been  hailed  by  the  mass  of  the  people  as  the
commencement  of  a  new  era  of  steady  and  reasonable
government.  Even  the  discontented  could  not  raise
the  cry  so  popular  in  England  on  the  occasion  of  the
reformation  of  our  own  calendar  in  the  last  century,
Give  us  back  our  eleven  days.  Caesar,  on  the  con-
trary, had  given  them  ninety.  The  jests  which  they
did  level  at  this  wholesome  enactment  were  miser-
ably pointless.  When  some  one  observed  to  Cicero,
To-morrow  Lyra  rises,  Yes,  he  replied,  by  com-
mand.4

After  all,  the  most  salutary  of  the  dictator's  re-
forms were  embittered  to  the  minds  of  the  noblest
of  the  Romans  by  the  compulsion  with  which  they

1  In  our  ecclesiastical  calendar  the  intercalary  day  of  leap-year  is
still  inserted  at  this  place.

2  Ideler,  ii.  122.;  Servius  on  J£n.  vii.  720.:  "Proprie  sol  novus
est  octavo  Calend.  Januarias."

3  Macrob.  Sat.  i.  16.

4  Plat.  CCEX.  59.:  val  tic  SiaTefy/iaroi. The  edict,  in  fact,  reconsti-
tuted the  civil  limits  of  the  seasons  according  to  certain  phenomena
of  the  heavens. Thus  an  ancient  calendar  remarks  on  Aug. 11.:
"  Fidicula  occasu  suo  autumnum  inchoat  Csesari." We  can  detect
from  this  the  way  in  which  Cicero's  jest  may  possibly  have  been
spoiled  by  the  mistake  of  the  reporter.

A.U.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  409

were  attended.  Both  Caesar  and  his  familiar  friends
had  been  accustomed  to  express  openly  The  aicutol.
their  contempt  for  the  republic  as  a  name  i^fumV^egai
only,  and  not  a  reality,  a  title  without  form  8tate-
or  substance.1  The  name  of  king  was  alone  want-
ing to  complete  the  actual  tyranny  which  they  saw
gradually  closing  around  them.  The  despot  made
little  show  of  veiling  the  arbitrary  nature  of  his  pro-
ceedings. He  caused,  indeed,  the  decrees  he  issued
from  the  solitude  of  his  own  chamber  to  be  sub-
scribed with  the  names  of  the  senators  who  were
supposed  to  have  assisted  in  his  councils2 ;  but  so
flagrant  an  imposition  only  added  insult  to  the
injury.  Nothing  struck  the  Romans  more  forcibly
with  its  assumption  of  regal  state  than  the  difficulty
of  access  to  the  great  man.  Accustomed  as  the
nobles  were  to  the  most  perfect  external  equality,
and  the  easiest  intercourse  among  each  other,  their
indignation  rose  high  when  they  found  their  ap-
proach to  the  dictator  barred  by  a  crowd  of  atten-
dants, or  impeded  by  ceremonious  formalities.3  In
this,  however,  there  may  have  been  no  affectation  on
his  part ;  he  felt  the  unpopularity  of  such  a  position,
and  lamented  the  soreness  which  it  engendered
towards  him.  But  the  enormous  pressure  of  busi-
ness, however  rapid  was  his  despatch  of  it,  and  in
this  respect  he  had  an  extraordinary  facility,  made  it
necessary  to  restrict  the  times  and  means  of  claiming

1  Suet.  Jul.  77.;  coinp.  Cic.  ail  Alt.  x.  4.,  ad  Div.  ix.  i).

2  Cic.  ad  Div.  ix.  15. He  alludes,  perhaps,  to  a  single  instance  of
the  kind. Dion  attests  that  Caesar  generally  required  the  sanction  of
a  council  selected  from  the  senate,  or  of  the  whole  body,  to  his  decrees
(xliii.  27.).

J  Cic.  ad  Div.  vi.  13.  :  "  Magnis  occupationibus  ejus,  a  quo  omnia
petuntur,  aditus  ad  eum  difficiliores  fuerunt "  (comp.  vi.  14.,  iv.  57.).
Gesar  had  expressed  his  sense  of  the  unpopularity  he  incurred
from  the  necessary  inconvenience  he  caused  his  friends :  "  Ego
dubitem  quin  summo  in  odio  sim  quum  M.  Cicero  sedeat,  nee  suo
commodo  me  convenire  possit?"  Coinp.  ad  Att.  xiv.  1,2.;  Dru-
imum,  iii.  626.

410  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  x.\.

his  attention.  Thus  it  was  that  the  first  rudiments
of  an  Oriental  court  began  to  rise  in  the  centre  of
the  western  republics.  The  colours  of  this  imitation
cieopaira  °f  a  hateful  original  were  heightened  by
»isiuRome.  ^g  demeanour  of  Cleopatra,  who  followed
her  lover  to  Eome  at  his  invitation.1  She  came
with  the  younger  Ptolemseus,  who  now  shared  her
throne,  and  her  ostensible  object  was  to  negotiate  a
treaty  between  her  kingdom  and  the  commonwealth.
White  the  Egyptian  nation  was  formally  admitted
to  the  friendship  and  alliance  of  Eome,  its  sovereign
was  lodged  in  Caesar's  villa  on  the  other  side  of  the
Tiber,  and  the  statue  of  the  most  fascinating  of
women  was  erected  in  the  temple  of  the  Goddess  of
Love  and  Beauty.2  The  connexion  which  subsisted
between  her  and  the  dictator  was  unblushingly
avowed.  The  national  prejudice  against  the  fo-
reigner and  the  Egyptian  was  openly  outraged  and
insolently  disregarded ;  and  Cleopatra  was  encou-
raged to  proclaim  that  her  child,  whom  she  called
Cassation,  was  actually  the  son  of  her  Roman  ad-
mirer. A  tribune,  named  Helvius  Cinna,  ventured,
it  is  said,  to  assert  among  his  friends  his  intention
of  proposing  a  law,  with  the  dictator's  sanction,  to
enable  him  to  marry  more  wives  than  one,  for  the
sake  of  progeny,  and  to  disregard  in  his  choice  the
legitimate  qualification  of  Roman  descent.3  The
citizens,  however,  were  spared  this  last  insult  to
their  cherished  sentiments.  The  queen  of  Egypt
felt  bitterly  the  scorn  with  which  she  was  popularly

1  Dion,  xliii.  27. ;  Suet  Jul.  52.

2  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  102.

3  Suet.  I.e. ;  comp.  Dion,  xliv.  7. But  the  story  is  a  confused
one. The  words  of  Suetonius  ("  Cinna  .  .  .  confessus  est,  habuisse
se  legem,"  &c.)  imply  that  the  statement  was  made  after  Caesars
death,  as  was  the  case  with  regard  to  many  other  schemes  ascribed
to  him  ; but the  same  writer  also  tells  us  (c. 85.)  that  Helvius
Cinna  was  murdered in the fury  of  the  mob  immediately  after
the  funeral.

JLU.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  411

regarded  as  the  representative  of  an  effeminate  and
licentious  people.1  It  is  not  improbable  that  she
employed  her  fatal  influence  to  withdraw  her  lover
from  his  jealous  capital,  and  urged  him  to  schemes
of  Oriental  conquest  to  bring  him  more  completely
within  her  toils.  Meanwhile  the  haughtiness  of  her
demeanour  corresponded  with  the  splendid  anticipa-
tions in  which  she  indulged.2  She  held  a  court  in
the  suburbs  of  the  city,  at  which  the  adherents  ot
the  dictator's  policy  were  not  the  only  attendants.
Even  his  opponents  and  concealed  enemies  were
glad  to  bask  in  the  sunshine  of  her  smiles.  Cicero
himself,  the  moralist  and  the  patriot,  was  not  the
last  to  submit  to  the  blandishments  of  the  sorceress.
He  was  still  unable  to  shake  off  his  apprehensions
of  an  impending  proscription,  and  with  all  his  pro-
fessions of  personal  purity  he  was  not  scrupulous  as
to  the  character  of  those  whose  favour  or  resistance
he  required.  He  had  availed  himself  of  the  infi-
delity of  a  Fulvia;  he  now  flattered  the  vanity  of  a
Cleopatra.  The  desire  to  obtain  some  precious
manuscripts  and  works  of  art  from  Alexandria  was
the  excuse  he  made  for  presenting  himself  in  her
hall  of  reception.3  The  queen's  behaviour  to  him
was  exceedingly  gracious ;  she  promised  every  thing
he  desired,  and  charged  the  grammarian  Ammonius,
who  followed  in  her  suite,  to  remind  her  of  the
engagement.  But  Cicero  did  not  refrain  at  the
same  time  from  expressing  himself  with  great  bitter-
ness against  her  in  his  private  correspondence,  in

1  The  sensuality  of  Canopus  was  proverbial. Comp.  Propert.  iii.
11.  39.:

"Incesti  meretrix  regina  Canopi."
Juvenal,  vi.  84. :

"  Prodigia  et  mores  Urbis  damn  ante  Canopo."
1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xv. 15.: "  Superbiam  ipsius  Reginse,  quum  esset
trans  Tiberim  in  hortis,  commemorare  sine  maximo  dolore  non  pos-
sum."
3  Cic.  ic. :  "  Quae  omnia  erant  (piAo^uxyo  et  dignitatis  mew."

412  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xx.

which  he  seems  anxious  to  assure  Atticus  that  her
agent  Sara  was  only  admitted  once  into  his  house.
Lt  is  probable  that  Cleopatra  arrived  at  Rome  before
Caesar's  expedition  into  Spain1,  which  interrupted
and  perhaps  frustrated  her  intrigues.  But  she  con-
tinued to  reside  there  till  after  his  death,  as  will
appear  in  the  sequel.

The  flattery  of  the  nobles  was,  after  all,  pronounced
Adulation  of  iQ  a  louder  strain  than  their  discontent,
the  nobles.  Caesar  heard  himself  addressed  daily  in  the
senate  with  language  of  fulsome  adulation.  A  crowd
of  parasites  of  the  highest  education  and  the  most
polished  manners  imparted  grace  to  homage,  and
threw  a  charm  over  the  most  abject  obsequiousness.
Of  all  the  attributes  of  greatness  which  were  lavishly
ascribed  to  the  dictator,  none  was  more  celebrated  by
his  courtiers  than  his  clemency.  M.  Marcel  lus  had
retired  from  the  field  of  Pharsalia  to  Mitylene,  and
dared  not  even  solicit  the  favour  of  the  conqueror,
whom  his  fatal  insolence  to  the  Transpadanes  had
offended  beyond  the  hope  of  pardon.  But  his  friends
had  learned  not  to  despair.  They  plied  Caesar  with
piteous  appeals  to  his  generosity.  C.  Marcellus,  the
cousin  of  the  exile,  prostrated  himself  at  the  dictator's
feet,  and  a  crowd  of  the  noblest  of  the  Romans  fol-
lowed his  example.  The  question  of  his  recal  was
remitted  to  the  decision  of  the  senate  itself.  The
oration  which  Cicero  delivered  was  a  laboured  pane-
gyric upon  Caesar;  the  anticipated  pardon  of  Mar-
cellus was  exalted  above  the  greatest  of  his  actions ;
and  the  usurper  was  bid  to  rest  secure  in  the  grati-
tude of  the  nobles,  and  in  the  firm  conviction  of  the
nation  that  his  life  was  indispensable  for  the  main-
tenance of  order.2  Marcellus  was  accordingly  in-

1  According  to  the  order  of  events  as  related  by  Dion,  see  xliii.  27.

2  The  genuineness  of  the  Oratio  pro  Marcello  has  been  abandoned
without  due  consideration,  in  my  judgment,  by  many  modern  critics.
The  arguments  against  it  seem  to  mo  at  least  inconclusive,  and  I

4.D.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  413

vited  to  return  to  his  country ;  but  on  his  way  he
fell  under  the  dagger  of  an  assassin  at  Athens.  The
deed  was  undoubtedly  the  effect  of  some  private
enmity,  but  it  did  not  fail  to  be  for  some  time  cur-
rently ascribed  to  the  instigation  of  the  man  who  had
forgiven  him.  Cicero  made  a  speech  some  months
afterwards  in  favour  of  Ligarius,  against  whom,  on
account  of  the  pertinacity  of  his  opposition,  the
dictator  was  said  to  be  peculiarly  exasperated.  In
this  address,  the  orator  adopted  undoubtedly  a  bolder
tone  than  appears  in  the  oration  of  Marcellus.  But,
as  Csesar's  character  became  better  known,  the  most
timid  summoned  courage  to  affect  freedom  of  speech
in  his  presence.  The  fear  of  proscription  had  van-
ished, and  with  it  much  of  the  breathless  subservience
of  the  proud  Roman  nobility.

Caesar  indeed  felt  the  ground  firm  beneath  his  feet.
He  was conscious  that the real  strength  The  general

c At  !•  -i-L i_-  mi.  -LI feeling  of  the

of  the  nation  was  with  him.  Ine  nobles  nation
might  intrigue  against  him,  and  the  mob  c**ar'»  power,
of  the  city  might  be  ready  to  sell  itself  to  any  restless
adventurer ;  but  the  good  sense  of  the  middle  class  of
Rome,  backed  by  the  general  sympathy  of  the  Italians
and  the  enthusiastic  veneration  of  the  provinces,  con-
curred to  secure  the  foundations  of  his  power.  It
was  to  these  classes  only  that  he  felt  himself  respon-
sible for  the  exercise  of  his  delegated  authority.  Ac-
cordingly, he  disbanded  his  veterans,  or  despatched
the  legions  to  distant  quarters.  He  even  dismissed
a  band  of  Spanish  auxiliaries  whom  he  had  retained
about  him  for  a  time  as  a  chosen  body-guard.1  When
his  personal  friends  among  the  senators  and  knights
offered  to  arm  a  select  corps  of  their  own  number,  to
watch  over  the  safety  of  his  person,  he  waived  the

should  expect  the  work  of  a  rhetorician  composed  after  the  event
which  confuted  so  many  of  its  prognostications,  to  betray  some  con-
sciousness of  the  impending  catastrophe.
1  Suet.  Jul.  86.;  Appian, B.C.  ii.  109.

414  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xx.

honour  of  their  services,  in  the  confident  assurance
that  the  state  had  more  need  of  him  than  he  of  the
state.1  And  such  was  the  impression  of  its  general
beneficence  which  his  administration  had  created  in
almost  every  quarter,  that  he  might  fully  depend
upon  it  to  protect  him  at  least  from  any  public
enemy.  No  precaution  he  well  knew  could  gua-
rantee his  life  from  the  insidious  attack  of  the  private
assassin  :  but  he  declared  that  it  was  at  any  time
better  to  die  than  to  live  always  in  fear  of  dying.2

1  Plut.  Cces.  57.

2  Plut.  I.e.;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  108.: a^>J  8e  aur<£  <n  par  tear  IKUV  owe

)pfffKfro,  rp  5t  T»}J  rjytfiovias  virriptffin  ^6vrf,

A.C.7n9-n.r.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  415

CHAPTER  XXL

Tranquillity  of  Rome  during  Caesar's  absence  in  Spain. — Character  of
his  principal  friends:  Balbus,  Oppius,  Matius,  Hirtius. — Their
Epicurean  principles. — Caesar  himself  a  free  thinker,  but  addicted
to  superstition. —  His  return  to  Rome,  and  last  triumph. — Harsh
treatment  of  Laberius. — Honours  and  dignities  showered  upon
Caesar.— He  receives  the  appellation  of  Pater  Patriae,  and  the
praenomen  Imperatoris:  is  elected  Consul  for  ten  years,  and
created  Dictator  for  life,  etc. — His  magnificent  schemes  for  works
of  public  utility. — He  manifests  symptoms  of  intolerable  pride —
Czcsar's  urbanity  of  character. — He  visits  Cicero  at  his  villa. —
Cicero  exhorts  him  to  make  war  on  the  Parthians — He  prepares
to  set  out  on  an  expedition  of  foreign  conquest,  and  appoints  ma-
gistrates for  the  interval  of  his  intended  absence. — Caesar  appears
to  covet  the  title  of  king. — The  people  express  their  disapproba-
tion.— He  refuses  the  diadem. — A  conspiracy  is  formed  against
his  life  by  men  of  both  parties  in  the  state.  —They  place  Brutus  at
their  head. — Assassination  of  Caesar  on  the  Ides  of  March,  beneath
the  statue  of  Pompeius  (A.U.  709  -  March  710.  B.C.  45,  44.).

THE  prudent  mildness  with  which  the  government
was  administered  during  Caesar's  absence  state  of  Rome
in  Spain  had  maintained  perfect  tranquil-  »£*?,! e^*5" '
lity  in  Rome  during  a  period  of  unusual  Spai"-
anxiety. At  the  beginning  of  the  year  Caesar  had
been  elected  consul  for  the  fourth  time,  and  without
a  colleague. The  old republican office  of  praetor
had  been  also  dispensed  with. Lepidus,  as  master  of
the  horse  to  the  dictator,  convened  the  senate,  and
presided,  with  the  assistance  of  six  or  eight  prefects,
over  the  administration  of  affairs  in  the  city :  the
higher  magistracies  were  all  in  abeyance,  excepting
those  of  the  tribunes  of  the  people  and  the  aediles.
Caesar  had  prudently  taken  with  him  Dola-
bella,  and  had  invited  Antonius  also  to  ac-  Antouiu.
company  him. But  the latter smarted
under  the  blow  his  arrogance  and  cupidity  had  recently

4  1 6  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXI.

received  from  the  dictator,  and  refused  to  leave  Italy
in  his  train.1  It  does  not  appear  whether  he  was
entrusted  with  a  share  in  the  government,  but  his
mere  presence  in  Eome  was  enough  to  keep  alive  the
apprehensions  of  the  most  timid  of  the  malcontents,
who  still  foreboded  that  Caesar's  final  triumph  in
Spain  would  be  the  signal  for  dropping  the  mask  of
clemency,  and  plunging  into  a  career  of  confiscation
and  blood.

On  mature  reflection,  however,  Antonius  seems  to
have  felt  that  it  would  be  imprudent  to  indulge  in
animosity  towards  his  patron,  from  whose  generosity  he
was  anxious  to  obtain  the  honour  of  the  consulship.2
He  left  Rome  with  the  intention  of  overtaking  him.
Taking  the  route  to  Gaul,  he  did  not  proceed  further
than  Narbo,  from  whence,  pleading  the  insecurity  of
the  roads,  he  suddenly  returned.8  It  was  now  confi-
dently surmised  by  Cicero  that  he  came  with  autho-
rity to  execute  the  long  delayed  vengeance  of  the
conqueror.4  The  fact  seems  to  have  been  simply
that  having  lately  taken  to  wife  the  notorious  Fulvia,
who  had  been  left  a  widow  successively  by  Clodius
and  Curio,  he  thus  abridged  his  absence  out  of
passion  or  jealousy.5  He  possibly  may  have  had  some
apprehensions  lest  the  government  should  take  ad-
vantage of  his  absence  to  restore  to  their  owners,  or
sell  for  the  benefit  of  the  state,  the  estates  of  the
unfortunate  Pompeians,  which  he  had  contrived  to
grasp.6  Another  rumour  arose  that  he  had  heard  in
Gaul  of  Caesar's  defeat  and  death,  and  of  the  im-
pending restoration  of  the  republican  party.

Though  Lepidus  was  nominally  at  the  head  of  the
administration  of  affairs,  it  would  seem  that  his  in-

1  Antonius  abstained  from taking  part in Caesar's campaigns
either  in  Africa  or  Spain. Plut.  Anton.  10.;  Cic.  Philipp.  \\.  29.-
"Tarn  bonus  gladiator  rudem  tarn  cito  accepisti?"

2  Cic.  Philipp.  ii.  30.  *  Cic.  I  e.
*  Cic.  Philipp.  ii.  31..  ad  Att  xii.  19.

s  Pint.  l.c.  «  Cic.  ad  Att.  xiL  18.

A.C.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  417

fluence  was  less  regarded  than  that  of  others  among
his  colleagues.  The  wealth  and  dignity  of  The  dictator',
his  family,  his  descent  from  the  chief  who  £i™£a!
had  been  the  first  to  attempt  the  overthrow  ^p''1"8-
of  the  Sullan  ascendency,  the  favour  which  his  brother,
^milius  Paullus,  had  acquired  with  Caesar  by  his
well-timed  defection  from  the  ranks  of  the  Pom-
peians,  had  all  contributed  to  raise  him  nominally  to
the  first  place  among  the  dictator's  adherents,  and
elevated  him  eventually  to  a  position  of  still  greater
eminence.  But  it  was  through  the  channel  of  private
friendship  that  the  good  will  of  the  sovereign  of  the
Roman  world  was  to  be  conciliated,  and  it  was  those
who  enjoyed  his  personal  intimacy  and  confidence
who  were  felt  to  be  most  influential  in  the  distribu-
tion of  honours  and  favours.  It  may  serve  to  illus-
trate the  character  of  the  central  figure  itself  if  we
pass  rapidly  in  review  the  personages  who  were
grouped  most  closely  around  him.

Of  these  the  most  conspicuous  in  the  history  of
the  times  was  C.  Asinius  Pollio,  who  had  c.  A.iniU9
first  brought  himself  into  notice  by  assail-  Pouio<
ing  the  tribune  C.  Cato  for  his  violent  proceedings
in  favour  of  the  senate.  He  assumed  this  attitude
perhaps  in  the  first  instance  for  the  sake  of  notoriety
only;  but  from  that  moment  he  attached  himself
more  and  more  closely  to  Caesar.  He  attended  the
proconsul  in  some  of  his  campaigns  in  Gaul,  and
formed  one  of  the  scanty  band  of  devoted  followers
with  which  he  crossed  the  Eubicon.  When  Caesar  had
so  rapidly  traversed  and  conquered  Italy,  he  sent
Pollio  into  Sicily  and  Africa  as  lieutenant  to  Curio.
It  was  under  his  command  that  the  remnant  of  that
unfortunate  expedition  had  been  conveyed  home.
Throughout  the  campaigns  of  Epirus  and  Thessaly
he  served  by  the  side  of  his  patron,  and  was  present
at  the  battle  of  Pharsalia.  His  fidelity  and  talents
were  next  charged  with  the  administration  of  Caesar's

VOL, II,  E  T?

418  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi.

government  in  Home,  in  which  he  had  the  merit
of  opposing  Dolabella's  seditious  movement.1  He
served  again  in  a  military  capacity  both  in  Africa  and
Spain.  Pollio  was  one  of  the  most  finished  speci-
mens of  the  man  of  business  and  literature  combined.
His  great  work  on  the  history  of  his  own  times  was
the  result  of  the  leisure  of  his  latter  years.  He  strode
with  a  bold  and  firm  step  over  the  volcanic  ashes  of
the  civil  wars.2  Critical  in  his  judgment  and  impar-
tial in  his  sentiments,  he  reflected  no  less  severely  on
the  misrepresentations  of  Caesar's  personal  narrative,
than  on  the  exaggerations  of  Cicero's  invectives.  But
in  the  most  active  period  of  his  political  and  military
career  he  distinguished  himself  as  an  accomplished
orator,  and  put  forward  no  mean  pretensions  to
poetical  celebrity.  The  encomiums  of  Catullus  and
his  youthful  admirer  Horace  represent  his  character
to  us  in  an  amiable  light :  but  it  was  the  amiableness
of  a  practical  eclectic,  of  one  whose  good-humoured
selfishness  found  no  difficulty  in  accommodating
itself  to  the  tempers  and  habits  of  men  of  very  dif-
ferent principles.3  His  taste  was  refined  and  fasti-
dious :  the  style  even  of  Cicero  and  Livy  did  not
escape  his  animadversions.4  Subsequent  critics  re-
presented his  own  as  rough  and  jejune,  formed,  as  it
were,  rather  in  the  school  of  the  Appii  and  Menenii

1  Plat.  Anton.  9.
"Hor.  Od.il  I.  3.:

"  Incedis  per  ignes
Suppositos  cineri  doloso. "

This  work,  which  was  in  fact  a  history  of  the  Civil  Wars,  commenced
with  the  consulship  of  Afranius  and  Metellus,  A.U.  694,  that  is,  with
the  formation  of  the  triumvirate :

"  Motum  ex  Metello  consule  civicum."

1  His  popularity  in  society  may  be  estimated  from  the  fact  recorded
of  him  that  he  was  the  first  to  introduce  the  practice  of  an  author's
reciting  his  own  works  to  an  audience  of  private  acquaintance.
Senec.  Controv.  iv.  prsef.

4  Senec.  Suasor.  vi.  vii.;  Quintil.  Inslit.  Orat.  i.  5.  56.,  viii.  1.  3.  He
discovered  Patavinity,  or  the  provincialisms  of  Patavium,  in  the
language  of  the  great  historian,  who  was  born  there,

A.U.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  419

than of his more polished Augustan contempo-
raries.1

If  Pol  Ho  was  a  familiar  associate  of  Caesar,  Oppius
seems  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  confi-  c.opl.ius.
dential  of  his  friends.  It  was  to  him,  together  with
Balbus,  that  the  dictator  entrusted  the  management
of  his  private  affairs  ;  and  at  a  later  period  a  volume
of  letters  was  preserved,  in  which  he  had  corresponded
with  them  in  cypher,  probably  on  matters  of  the
most  domestic  and  personal  interest.2  The  high
favour  in  which  they  stood  with  their  patron  induced
Cicero  to  consult  them,  throughout  the  painful  strug-
gle he  made  to  secure  the  conqueror's  protection
without  attaching  himself  to  his  party.  When  the
topics  of  his  adulatory  addresses  were  in  their  judg-
ment ill-chosen,  he  consented  to  withdraw  or  remodel
them  accordingly.  The  character  of  Oppius  seems
to  have  been  warm  and  affectionate.  He  wrote  the
lives  of  many  distinguished  Eomans,  and  among
them  of  some  of  his  contemporaries,  and  even  of
Pompeius  himself;  but  in  these  his  partiality  for
Caesar  rendered  him  unworthy  of  confidence.3  A
pleasing  anecdote  is  related  of  Caesar  surrendering  to
him,  when  he  had  fallen  sick  on  a  journey,  the  only
room  in  the  hut  at  which  they  were  to  rest  for  the
night,  while  he  took  up  his  own  lodging  in  the  porch
outside.4  Such  is  the  influence  which  a  gentle  and
feminine  nature  often  exerts  over  a  sterner  character.
It  seems  probable  that  the  counsels  of  Oppius  con-
firmed Caesar's  natural  inclination  to  make  the  mildest
use  of  his  power,  and  certainly  he  became  the  channel
through  whom  assurances  of  pardon  and  favour  were
most  generally  conveyed.

L.  Cornelius  Balbus  was  a  not  less  intimate  asso-
ciate of  his  great  patron,  but  the  genuineness  of  his

1  Tac.  Dial,  de  Orat.  21.

2  Gell.  Noct.  Alt.  xvii.  9.  »  Plut.  Pomp.  10.
«  Plut.  Cats.  17.;  Suet.  Jul.  72.

420  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi.

attachment  is  not  equally  indisputable.  His  talents
u  cornea™  an(^  industry  were  devoted  through  life  to
B»ibus.  securing  his  own  advancement  and  main-
taining his  personal  safety,  and  his  career  proved  a
remarkable  instance  of  worldly  success.  Balbus  was
by  birth  a  provincial,  of  the  town  of  Gades,  in  Spain.
His  fellow-citizens  took  the  part  of  the  republic
against  Sertorius,  and  it  was  thus  that  he  found
means  of  recommending  himself  to  Pompeius.  From
the  champion  of  the  oligarchy  he  received  the
Roman  franchise,  and  upon  this  foundation  he  built
his  fortunes.  The  prospects  of  advancement  which
it  seemed  to  open  induced  him  to  remove  to  Rome,
where  he  cultivated  the  favour  of  his  first  patron  ;
but  another  star  was  rising  in  the  firmament,  and  he
did  not  neglect  at  the  same  time  to  attach  himself  to

o

Caesar.  While  the  outward  show  of  alliance  between
the  rival  leaders  still  subsisted,  his  new  civic  rights,
invidiously  impugned,  gained  the  advocacy  of  Pom-
peius, Crassus  and  Cicero.  Caesar,  however,  secured
at  last  his  entire  devotion  by  confiding  to  him,  in
conjunction  with  Oppius,  the  management  of  his
private  concerns.  The  spoils  of  the  Gallic  war  were
thus  dispensed  through  his  hands,  and  he  did  not  fail
to  profit  by  the  opportunity  to  amass  riches.  At  the
same  time  the  trust  which  he  exercised  at  Rome  en-
abled him  to  avoid  siding  with  either  party  in  the
field,  and  he  came  to  the  councils  of  the  conqueror
with  a  judgment  and  temper  undisturbed  by  the
passions  of  the  civil  wars.  His  position  in  the  court
of  the  dictator  now  became  highly  influential,  and
the  anxious  nobles  vied  with  one  another  in  solicit-
ing his  mediation.

But  the  most  disinterested  perhaps  of  all  Caesar's

c.  Matiiu associates  was  C.  Mat  u  s  Calvena ;  for  he

alone  abstained  from  taking  part  in  public

affairs,  and  derived  neither  wealth  nor  station  from

his  friend's  success. His  natural  predilections  were

A.tT.709  B.c.45.  UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  421

probably  on  the  side  of  the  senate,  but  the  ties  of
personal  attachment  were  stronger  with  him  than
any  political  preference.  He  asserted  the  justice  of
Caesar's  claims  in  the  most  perilous  crisis  of  his  life,
and  persevered  after  bis  death  in  defending  his
memory  against  every  detractor.  Nor  did  he  fail  to
use  all  his  influence,  which  was  justly  considerable,
in  saving  the  conquered.  The  line  of  conduct  pur-
sued by  one  so  honest  and  magnanimous  is  a  strong
proof  that  the  most  humane  and  reasonable  men  of
the  day,  though  they  might  scruple  to  put  their  own
hands  to  the  work  of  destruction,  were  satisfied  that
the  safety  of  the  commonwealth  demanded  the  over-
throw of  aristocratic  ascendency.

A. Hirtius  held  commands  under  Caesar in the
Gaulish  campaigns,  but  it  was  apparently  A.  Hirtius.
rather  as  a  negotiator,  or  in a  civil  capacity,  that
he  approved  himself  to  his  leader  as  a  zealous  and
able  auxiliary. His  literary  accomplishments,  which
doubtless  contributed  to raise  him  in  his  patron's
estimation,  are  known  to  us  by  the  last  book  of  the
Commentaries  on  the  Gallic  War,  in  which  he  appears
as  a  cold  but  correct  imitator  of  Caesar's  style. But
it  was  to  Hirtius  also  that  Caesar  confided  the  task  of
replying  to  a  work  which  Cicero  published  at  this
time  in  praise  of  Cato  ;  and  all  the  traits  we  discover
of  his  private  character,  his moderation, want of
ambition,  and  habits  of  kindly  intercourse  with  his
political  adversaries,  seem  to  point  him out  as  an
opponent  of  the  philosophical  no  less  than  the  poli-
tical sentiments  of  the  renowned  Stoic. Among  the
principal  adherents  of  the  usurper  the  tenets  Epicnre)in
of  Epicurus  seem  universally  to  have  pre-  c^'rV*
vailed. Vibius  Pansa,  another  of  Caesar's  bh^pan.!'"
friends  and  admirers,  was  noted  alike  for  c-c"»iu8-
his  amiable  temper  and  the  fashionable  indifference
of  his  speculative  creed  ;  for  at  this  time  every  man
of  education  in  Rome  professed a creed,  and felt

422  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  c«.  xxi.

himself  obliged  by  the  rules  of  good  society  to  pretend
to  some  consistency  between  his  creed  and  tiis  prac-
tice. Similar  sentiments  were  maintained  by  C.
Cassius,  and  no  doubt  the  great  principle  of  Epicu-
reanism, its  apathy  on  political  subjects,  served  to
reconcile  him  so  easily  to  the  change  of  government.
The  rigid  virtues  of  the  Stoics  had  found  little  favour
with  a  generation  to  which  corruption  and  tergiver-
sation had  become  so  notoriously  familiar.  The
sceptical  schools  of  the  Academy  were  too  restless
and  argumentative  for  men  to  whom  acquiescence  in
the  irresistible  march  of  events  had  assumed  the  form
of  a  policy.  But  the  dogmas  of  Epicurus,  while  they
indulged  political  indifference  and  made  time-serving
respectable,  were  also  easily  distorted  to  cloak  vice
and  voluptuousness ;  to  disclaim  the  inference  which
so  many  of  their  professors  drew  from  them  in  favour
of  licentiousness  both  of  action  and  principle  was  the
faint  and  hypocritical  endeavour  of  a  few  sanctimo-
nious pretenders.  The  spread  of  such  opinions  was
favoured  by  the  social  corruption  of  the  times,  and
by  the  exigencies  of  the  public  crisis.  The  miseries
of  civil  dissension  had  at  last  raised  a  general  cry  for
peace  at  any  price.  Rome  could  bear  the  long  ex-
haustion of  her  foreign  wars  without  a  murmur ;  for
they  brought  her  glory  and  lucre,  and  opened  bound-
less prospects  to  her  avarice  or  ambition.  But  the
civil  wars  were  destitute  of  every  charm.  The  prin-
ciples of  the  fashionable  philosophy  coincided  with
the  longings  of  the  multitude.  To  the  men  who
could  recommend  these  principles  by  the  brilliancy
of  their  personal  accomplishments  and  amiableness  of
their  tempers  the  favour  of  Caesar  most  naturally
inclined.  He  loved  the  sleek  in  person  and  easy  in
disposition ;  the  lean  and  eager-minded  were  those
he  instinctively  feared.1  The  philosophy  of  the  Gar-
den had  recently  been  raised  in  popularity  and
1  The  well-known  passage  in  Shakspeare's  Julius  Caxar  is  adapted

A.U.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  423

fashion  by  the  most  elaborate  work  that  had  ever
yet  issued  from  the  study  of  a  Koman  sage.  The
great  poem  of  Lucretius  on  the  Nature  of  Things
formed  an  era  both  in  the  literature  and  the  social
state  of  Home.  The  work  was  nobly  executed,  with
all  its  defects  of  argument,  and,  with  all  its  defects
of  feeling,  its  aim  was  noble  also.  It  opened  a  long
career  to  the  peaceful  triumphs  of  thought,  and
every  interest  it  excited  was  so  much  detracted  from
the  domain  of  evil  and  sanguinary  passions.  The
sublimest  of  the  Roman  poets  sighs  for  rest  from
war  as  heartily  as  from  the  terrors  of  superstition.
If  he  once  only  relaxes  from  his  hapless  abnegation
of  a  superintending  Providence,  it  is  in  his  pathetic
address  to  the  goddess,  power  or  principle,  which
associates  all  things  in  their  appointed  harmonies,  and
can  alone  effect  the  restoration  of  placid  peace  to  his
countrymen.1

Caesar  himself  professed  without  reserve  the  prin-
ciples of  the  unbelievers. The  supreme
pontiff  of  the  commonwealth,  the  head  of  aprofeMed86
the  college  whence  issued  the  decrees  which
declared  the  will  of  the  gods,  as  inferred  from  the  signs
of  the  heavens,  the  flight  of  birds  and  the  entrails  of
victims,  he  made  no  scruple  of  asserting  in  the  as-
sembled senate  that  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  the
recognised  foundation  of all  religion, was a  vain
chimera.2 Nor  did  he  hesitate  to  defy  the  omens
which  the  priests  were  especially  appointed  to  ob-
serve.3 He  decided  to  give  battle  at  Munda  in  de-
spite of  the  most  adverse  auspices,  when  the  sacrificers

from  Plutarch,  Anton,  11.:  fiT)  StSisWj  rovs  »ax*«s  TOVTOVS  ical  KOU^JTOJ,
aAAa  TOVS  wxpovs  Kal  \tTrrovs  ittfivovs.
1  Lucre t.  i.  1 — 41.:

"  Alma  Venus ....
....  petens  placidam  Romanis,  incluta,  pacem."

*  Sallust,  B.C.  50.

*  Suet.  Jul.  59. :  "  Nee  religione  quidem  ulla  a  quoquam  incepto
absterritus  unquam  vel  reta  datus  esu"

424  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXI.

assured  him  that  no  heart  was  found  in  the  victim.1
I  will  have  better  omens  when  I  choose,  was  the  scorn-
ful saying  with  which  he  reassured  his  veterans  on
another  similar  occasion.2  He  was  not  deterred  from
engaging  in  his  African  campaign  either  by  the  for-
tunate name  of  his  opponent  Scipio,  or  by  the  unfa-
vourable auspices  which  were  studiously  reported  to
him.3  Yet  Caesar,  freethinker  as  he  was,  could  not
escape  from  the  universal  thraldom  of  superstition  in
which  his  contemporaries  were  held.  We

His  addiction ,  , .  r , .  , .

tosupersti- have  seen  him  crawling  on  his  knees  up

lion.

the  steps  of  the  Capitoline  temple  to  ap-
pease the  Nemesis  which  frowns  upon  human  prospe-
rity. When  he  stumbled  at  landing  on  the  coast  of
Africa,  he  averted  the  evil  omen  with  happy  presence
of  mind,  looking  at  the  handful  of  soil  he  had
grasped  in  his  fall,  and  exclaiming,  Africa,  thou  art
mine!4  In  a  man  who  was  consistent  in  his  incre-
dulity this  might  be  deemed  a  trick  to  impose  on  the
soldiers'  imagination  ;  but  it  assumes  another  mean-
ing in  the  mouth  of  one  who  never  mounted  a  car-
riage without  muttering  a  private  charm.  Before
the  battle  of  Pharsalia,  Caesar  had  addressed  a  prayer
to  the  gods  whom  he  denied  in  the  senate,  and  de-
rided in  the  company  of  his  literary  friends.  He
appealed  to  the  divine  omens  when  he  was  about  to
pass  the  Eubicon.5  He  carried  about  with  him  in
Africa  a  certain  Cornelius  Salutio,  a  man  of  no  per-
sonal distinction,  to  neutralize,  as  he  hoped,  the  good
fortune  of  the  Cornelii  in  the  opposite  ranks.6

Caesar's  character  is  strongly  contrasted  with  those
of  some  later  and  spurious  imitators  by  the  gallant

1  Suet.  Jul.  77.;  comp.  Poljaen.  Strateg.  viii.  23.  32. The  same
prodigy occurred a  second time, and was equally disregarded.
Appian,  B.C.  ii.  152.;  Plin.  H.  N.  xi.  71.

2  Polysen.  /.  c.

3  Suet.  Jul.  59.;  Cic.  de  Div.  ii.  24.  4  Suet.  tc.

*  Suet.  Jul.  32.

•  Suet.  Jul.  59. ;  Hut.  Cas.  52.;  Dion,  xlii.  57.

A.I  .709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  425

confidence  with  which  he  left  his  actions  to  be  their
own  heralds,  never  deigning  to  anticipate  Ramouraand
by  a  single  day  the  effect  they  were  calcu-  "Ro^V10""
lated  to  produce  upon  his  friends  or  his  ail^nf-e0"" '
enemies.  In  modern  times  it  will  hardly  Spain'
be  credited  that  he  allowed  the  capital  to  remain
for  months  in  ignorance  of  his  proceedings  in  the
Spanish  campaign.  Confident  of  ultimate  success,
he  was  not  unwilling  that  some  mystery  should
hang  about  the  means  and  movements  which  con-
duced .to  it.1  If  he  had  any  affectation  about  him,
it  was  the  noble  one  of  concealing  the  details  of  his
operations,  and  bursting  suddenly  upon  the  world
with  a  victory  when  it  was  least  expected.  But  he
could  depend  upon  the  awe  which  his  mere  absence
inspired.  The  rumour  of  a  great  disaster  having
overtaken  him  found  only  a  few  fond  listeners ;  the
great  mass  of  the  citizens  remained  spell-bound  in
their  conviction  of  his  good  fortune;  and  when  the
despatch  at  last  arrived  which  announced  the  crown-
ing victory  of  Munda,  it  was  as  if  the  sun  had  shone
forth  from  an  eclipse,  and  relieved  them  from  anxiety
without  exciting  their  surprise.

It  was  the  eve  of  the  Parilia,  the  anniversary  of
the  foundation  of  the  city.2  A  rude  shep-  Tiding,  of  the
herds'  festival,  at  which  the  ordinary  pre-  j{^  ^rire
cautions  for  the  health  of  their  sheep  re-  at  Bome"
ceived  a  religious  sanction,  had  gradually  gathered
round  it  the  most  solemn  traditions  of  the  Eoman
people.  The  walls  of  Rome  had  been  cemented  with
blood.  The  stain  of  fratricide  could  never  be  entirely
wiped  away,  and  the  conscience  of  the  city  was  for
ever  haunted  by  the  recollection  of  its  original  guilt.
The  senate  received  the  announcement  of  Caesars

1  Compare  Lucan's  illustration  of  his  character  (v.  670.):

"  Desint  mihi  busta,  rogusque,
Dam  metuar  semper,  terrnquc  expecter  ab  omni."
1  The  Piirilia,  or  Palilia,  were  celebrated  on  the  21st  of  April

426  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi.

victory  just  in  time  to  decree  that  the  festival  of  the
morrow  should  be  celebrated  with  more  than  usual

solemnity.  The  conqueror  of  his  fellow-
incSl?"86  citizens,  it  declared,  deserved  the  honours

of  another  Romulus.  Thus  the  second
foundation  of  the  city  was  laid,  like  the  first,  in
brother's  blood.1  A  decree  immediately  followed  to
appoint  a  thanksgiving  for  fifty  days.  The  year  be-
fore Caesar  had  been  pronounced  a  demigod ;  now  a
statue  was  erected  to  him  inscribed,  To  the  Invincible
Deity,  and  placed  in  front  of  the  temple  of  Quirinus,
the  venerable  founder  of  the  Roman  nation.  Caesar
had  extended  the  limits  of  the  empire  both  in  Graul
and  Africa,  and  to  this,  the  highest  of  all  public
services,  a  special  honour  was  assigned,  though  it
had  been  rarely  conceded  even  to  the  greatest  con-
querors. Sulla  was  the  last  Roman  imperator  who
had  been  permitted  to  advance  the  pomoerium,  or
extend  the  bounds  of  the  city.  This  peculiar  distinc-
tion was  now  accorded  to  Caesar.2  The  bold  design
attributed  to  him  of  turning  the  Tiber  to  the  west
from  the  Mulvian  bridge,  and  enlarging  the  area  of
the  Campus  Martius,  seems  a  mere  wild  rumour  of
the  day.3  It  does  not  appear  whether  he  really
made  use  of  the  honourable  privilege  granted  to  him.
We  know  for  certain  that  he  did  not  extend  the  walls

1  Lucan,  i.  95.:

"Fraterno  primi  maduerunt  sanguine  muri."

*  Dion,  xliii.  50.;  Cell.  xiii.  14.  Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  23,  and
the  commentators.

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xiii.  30.:  "Sed  casu  sermo  a  Capitone  de  urbe  au-
genda.  A  ponte  Mulvio  Tiberim  duci  secundum  monies  Vaticanos:
campum  Martium  cosedificari:  ilium  autem  Campum  Vaticannm
fieri  quasi  Martium  campum."  The  project,  if  such  it  may  be  called,
seems  to  have  been  to  lead  the  Tiber  with  a  bold  sweep  to  the  foot  of
the  Vatican  hill,  and  so  back  to  its  old  channel  near  the  Pons  Trium-
phalis.  The  space  thus  added  to  the  Campus  Martius  would  have
remained  an  open  area  for  public  exercises,  while  the  actual  Campus
would  have  been  covered  with  buildings,  perhaps  inclosed  in  the
walls.

4.0.709-  B.C.-J5.  tNDER THE EMPIRE.  427

themselves,  but  it  is  possible  that  he  may  have  ad-
vanced the  sacred  limits  outside  them,  within  which
the  auspices  might  be  taken,  so  as  to  include  some
portion  of  the  Campus  Martins.

In  due  time  the  conqueror  himself  returned  to
Italy.  Faithful  to  the  prescriptions  of  the  CKttI  returi,,
republic  at  the  moment  that  he  was  tram-  ^i^TtwZ!
plmg  it  under  foot,  he  abstained  from  en-  1"t  triumPh-
tering  the  city  before  the  day  of  the  triumph  which
had  been  again  decreed  him.  This  last  victory  over
Roman  citizens  was  cloaked  under  the  specious  title
of  a  conquest  in  Spain  ',  and  a  similar  designation
was  given  to  the  triumphs  subsequently  granted  to
his  lieutenants  Fabius  and  Pedius.  On  this  occasion
Caesar  gratified  the  populace  with  a  show  and  a  festival
not  less  magnificent  than  in  the  year  preceding ;  the
most  remarkable  incident  in  the  ceremony  was  the
rehearsal  of  scenic  entertainments  in  a  variety  of
languages 2,  for  the  amusement,  not  of  the  Romans
alone,  but  of  the  multitude  of  foreigners  from  all
parts  of  the  world  who  had  followed  in  the  wake  of
the  conqueror's  victories.  To  the  eye  of  the  far-
sighted  statesman  this  might  justly  appear  the  greatest
step  that  had  ever  yet  been  taken  towards  the  fusion
of  mankind  into  one  nation.  But  the  Romans  in
general  gave  little  heed  to  this  and  similar  prognostics
of  social  revolution  ;  they  were  much  more  interested
in  the  singular  phenomenon  of  a  knight  named  La-
berius  appearing  on  the  stage  and  reciting  a  dramatic
composition  of  his  own.  The  profession  of  the  actor
was  one  from  which  the  Roman's  pride  revolted ;  he
considered  it  a  mark  of  degrading  frivolity  in  the
Athenian  so  to  cultivate  art  at  the  expense  of  dignity.3

1  Liv.  Epit.  cxvi.;  Veil.  ii.  56.

2  Suet.  Jul.  39. :  "  Ludos  .  .  .  per  omnium  lingaarum  histriones."
The  significance  of  this  as  well  as  many  others  of  Caesar's  measures
is  proved  by  their  imitation  by  Augustus. See  Suet.  OcL  43.

3  There  was  no  such  feeling  in  the  early  ages  of  the  republic,
as  is  elaborately  shown  by Macrobius,  Saturn,  ii. 10. It  is  pro-

428  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXI.

But  certainly  in  the  succeeding  generation  we  find  that
knights,  and  even  senators,  came  frequently  on  the
stage  of  their  own  accord,  till  it  became  necessary  to
make  decrees  to  interdict  the  practice.  Laberius,
it  is  said,  was  a  rude  assertor  of  republican  senti-
ments, and  Caesar  resolved  to  break  his  spirit  by
harshness.  He  requested  him  to  make  this  public
appearance,  and,  with  a  refinement  of  cruelty,  offered
him  apparently  a  large  sum  of  money,  that  he  might
seem  to  have  been  bribed  thus  to  degrade  himself.
The  request  of  the  master  of  the  Eoman  people  was
already  felt  to  be  a  command.  Laberius  went  through
his  task,  but  avenged  himself  by  introducing  into  it
some  pathetic  lines,  in  which  he  threw  on  his  insti-
gator all  the  infamy  of  the  act.1

More  honours  continued  still  to  be  heaped  upon
desar  receives  the  favourite  of  fortune.  A  decree  was
tilo6nofpfa1ther  passed  that  Caesar  should  receive  the  design-
withhThUe"rtry'  ation  of  father  of  his  country,  the  highest
compliment  a  really  free  state  could  ever
bestow  upon  a  citizen.2  A  second  conferred  upon
him  the  style  of  Imperator,  not  in  the  usual  way  as
an  appendage  to  his  other  names  and  titles,  implying
authority  over  the  soldiers,  but  as  a  constant  prefix
to  denote  a  permanent  and  more  general  application.3
His  person  was  invested  with  legal  sanctity,  like  that
of  the  tribunes  of  the  people,  the  consulship  was
assigned  to  him  for  ten  successive  years,  and,  to  crown
all,  the  office  of  dictator  was  confirmed  to  him  for
life.4  Other  distinctions,  which  in  modern  times
would  be  supposed  to  gratify  none  but  the  most  paltry

bable  that  the  Romans  first  conceived  their  dislike  of  the  actor's
profession  from  the  contempt  they  were  led  to  entertain  for  Greek
fashions.

1  Suet.  Jnl.  39. The  lines  are  preserved  by  Macrobius,  Sat.  ii.  7.

2  Suet.  Jul. 76.;  comp.  Appian,  B.C.  ii. 106.  ;  Dion,  xliv.  4.
Florus,  iv.  2.  91.;  Liv.  Epit.  cxvi.

'  Suet.  /.  c.;  Dion,  xliii.  44.

'  Suet.  I.e. ;  Pint.  Cces.  57.;  Dion,  xliii.  45.;  Appian,  /.  c.

A.U.709-B.C.45.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  429

vanity,  received  importance  from  the  place  they  held
in  the  estimation  of  the  people.  Such  were  the
triumphal  robes  which  Caesar  was  solemnly  authorized
to  wear  on  all  occasions  in  public,  and  the  crown  of
laurel,  which  it  was  said  was  peculiarly  acceptable  to
him  to  conceal  the  premature  loss  of  his  hair.1  The
right  of  coining  money  was  assigned  to  certain  of  the
higher  magistrates  of  the  republic,  and  the  noblest
names  of  the  nation  of  kings  have  thus  been  stamped
upon  the  most  durable  of  historic  monuments.  But
Caesar's  was  the  first  human  face  which  the  Eomans
allowed  to  be  impressed  upon  their  coinage.2  This
privilege,  which  has  since  become  one  of  the  most
distinctive  marks  of  regal  power,  was  followed  by
another  of  similar  significance.  Caesar  had  declined
the  offer  of  his  friends  to  form  a  body-guard  for  his
personal  protection ;  but  the  senate  adopted  the  sacred
formula  of  swearing  by  his  name,  and  bound  itself  by
a  solemn  oath  to  watch  over  his  safety.3  Like  most
men  who  have  risen  by  their  own  acts  to  a  great  and
unexpected  elevation,  Caesar  believed  in  destiny.  But
he  threw  himself  upon  it  with  a  resolution  and  un-
reserve which  no  other  perhaps  has  equalled.  At
every  step  of  his  ascent  to  power  he  was  ready  to  stake
his  life  upon  its  success,  to  become  the  Caesar  of  his
imagination  or  to  perish  ;  and  when  he  had  attained
the  object  of  his  aspirations  he  was  no  less  prepared
to  sacrifice  existence  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  all  its
charms.  Perhaps  it  was  this  consciousness  that  he
must  soon  perish,  and  that  his  work  must  perish  with
him,  that  unnerved  his  arm  for  the  execution  of  the
Herculean  task  of  reconstructing  the  commonwealth.
When  his  contemporaries  observed  the  contemptuous

1  Dion,  xliii.  43. ;  Suet.  Jul.  45. Baldness  was  opprobrious  among
the  Romans,  inasmuch  as  it  was  supposed  to  be  the  result  of  excess.
Comp.  Plin.  H.  N.  xi.  47.

2  Eckhtl,  Doctr.  Numm.  vi.  7. No  undoubted  coin  of  Ciesar  bears
his  head  before  the  year  u.c.  710.

'  Suet.  Jul.  84.  86,

430  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXT.

indifference  with  which,  living  in  the  midst  of  perils,
he  renounced  all  armed  protection,  nor  took  even  the
ordinary  precautions  for  the  care  of  his  health,  they
surmised  that  life  had  lost  its  interest  for  him,  and
had  already  lasted  as  long  as  he  felt  it  could  conduce
to  his  pleasure  or  glory.1  The  extravagant  visions  in
which  he  indulged  of  isolated  works  of  public  utility
seem  to  betray  the  restless  and  feverish  excitement
which  gradually  crept  over  him.  He  planned,  it  is
said,  the  emptying  of  the  lake  Fucinua,  the  draining
of  the  Pomptine  marshes,  the  construction  of  a  canal
from  Home  to  Tarracina  2,  of  a  new  road  across  the
Apennines,  and  of  a  magnificent  harbour  at  Ostia,  the
erection  of  a  superb  temple  to  Mars,  the  cutting  of
the  isthmus  of  Corinth 3 ;  while  at  the  same  time  his
mind  was  wandering  to  the  scenes  of  warfare  with
which  it  had  been  so  long  familiar,  and  new  visions
of  conquest  were  opening  before  him  in  grand  but
misty  proportions.4  Meanwhile  the  recklessness  of
his  humour  betrayed  itself  in  a  demeanour  more  and
more  haughty  and  contemptuous.  Sulla,  he  bluntly
said,  was  a  fool  for  resigning  the  dictatorship.5  But
nothing  offended  the  senators  more  bitterly  than  his
not  rising  from  his  seat  to  receive  them,  when  they
came  to  communicate  to  him  the  honours  they  had

1  Suet.  Jut.  86.

2  Mr.  Long,  in  his  Notes  on  Plutarch,  points  out  some  engineering
difficulties  which  would  oppose  such  a  project. Indeed,  the  fall  of
the  Tiber  from  Rome  to  the  sea  is  said  to  be  now  only  fifteen  feet,
and  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  that  the  bed  of  the  river  in its  course
through  the city is  not higher  at  the present  day than  it  was
eighteen hundred  years  ago. The  fall  tram  Rome  to  Tarracina
would  be  only  a  few  inches  to  the  mile,  and  a  slight  rise  of  the
sea  level  with  a  south-westerly  gale  would  overflow  the  Pomptine
marshes. The  Romans  were  not  sufficiently  skilful to  overcome
snch  obstacles.

1  Suet.  Jul.  44.;  Plut.  COBS.  58.;  Dion,  xliv.  5.

4  Suet.  Jul.  I.  c.

5  Suet.  Jul.  77.:  "  Sullam  nescisse  literas  qui  dictaturam  depo-
Buerit.'* The play  on words cannot  be  preserved  effectively  in
English.

*.u.709-B.c.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE  431

lavished  upon  him  in  his  absence.  It  was  to  the
upstart  foreigner  Balbus  that  they  were  willing  to
attribute  this  wanton  insult ;  the  Spaniard,  it  was
said,  had  plucked  Caesar  by  the  sleeve  when  he  was
about  to  rise  to  his  visitors,  and  bade  him  remember
that  he  was  their  master.1  The  Komans,  in  the  pro-
gress of  refinement  among  them,  were  very  strict
observers  of  social  etiquette.  Courteousness  in  its
members  one  among  another  is  the  very  essence  of  an
aristocracy.  Caesar  had  exacted  due  homage  to  him-
self with  scrupulous  precision.  When  his  chariot
passed  in  the  triumphal  procession  by  the  bench  oc-
cupied by  the  tribunes,  one  of  them,  by  name  Pontius
Aquila,  had  rudely  kept  his  seat  to  mark  his  inde-
pendence. The  dictator  remarked  bitterly  on  the
affront,  and  when  anyone  came  to  him  to  solicit  a
favour,  was  wont  to  say  ironically,  /  confer  it,  as  far
as  the  tribune  Pontius  will  suffer  me.*

Yet  this  pride  and  haughtiness,  the  fretful  indica-
tions of  a  mind  ill  at  ease  within  itself,  were  ca-sar;.
still  tempered by  gleams  of  the  polished  vui?«nci«'ro  ID

, ., r , . , / ? j- .•  • i j .1  his  villa  at

urbanity  which  had  distinguished  the  ac-  Puteoii.
complished  statesman  of  earlier  times.  The  true
Koman  gentleman  was  eminently  a  man  of  easy  and
conciliatory  manners,  of  unaffected  good  humour  and
literary  taste.  His  conversation  sparkled  with  the
most  refined  wit,  or  if  at  times  his  raillery  would
appear  rude  to  modern  ideas,  it  served  at  least  to
exercise  and  enliven  the  general  equanimity  of  his
temper.  The  practice  of  rhetorical  discussion  was
a  discipline  of  forbearance,  and  taught  men  more
genuine  respect  for  each  other's  characters,  as  it  gave
them  a  deeper  insight  into  them  than  the  vapid

1  Suet.  Jvl.78.;  Plut.  Cas.  60. ;  comp.  Dion,  xliv.  8.

1  Suet.  /.  c.  His  villa  at  Naples  was  confiscated  and  bestowed  by
the  dictator  on  his  favourite  Servilia.  Cic.  ad  Ait.  xiv.  21.  He
became  one  of  the  conspirators  against  Caesar's  life.  Dion,  xlvi.  38.;
Appian,  B.C.  ii.  113.

432  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXI.

generalities  of  our  polite  conversation.  Such  a  gentle-
man was  Caesar,  such  was  Cicero.  One  of  the  orators
letters  preserves  a  curious  record  of  the  visit  which
the  dictator  paid  him  at  the  end  of  December  in  this
year.  Cicero  had  recently  published  a  work  in  praise
of  Cato.1  We  may  conjecture  that  it  was  not  written
in  such  a  tone  as  would  really  offend  Caesar,  for  no
man.  as  has  been  shrewdly  observed,  was  more  easily
flattered  by  the  pretence  of  refusing  to  flatter  him.'J
But  Cicero  had  felt,  or  at  least  affected  to  feel,  some
apprehension  of  how  it  might  be  received.  He  had
consulted  Balbus  and  Oppius  as  to  the  effect  it  would
produce  upon  the  great  man.  He  might  smile  when
he  was  told  that  Hirtius  was  commissioned  to  reply  to
it ;  but  he  was  probably  both  flattered  and  reassured
when  he  found  that  Caesar  himself  had  found  leisure
in  Spain  to  write  a  laboured  invective  against  the
subject  of  his  encomiums.3  The  conqueror's  sword
he  could  neither  resist  nor  parry,  but  he  might  trust
to  his  address  to  appease  or  cajole  him  in  a  literary
controversy.  Cicero  was  residing  at  this  time  at  his
marine  villa  near  Puteoli.  Amidst  the  ruin  of  the
commonwealth,  and  the  overthrow  of  public  interests,
he  had  recently  catered  for  his  own  domestic  comforts
by  espousing  in  second  nuptials  a  maiden,  young,
wealthy,  and  high  born.  He  had  reasoned  himself,
with  the  assistance  of  his  friends4,  into  resignation
under  the  loss  of  his  darling  child  Tullia,  the  wife,

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xii.  4.

2  Shakspeare,  Julius  Cctsar,  act  ii.  sc.  1.

1  It  was  composed  in  two  books  or  orations,  which  obtained  the
name  of  Anti-Catones.  Cicero  says  with  reference  to  it :  "  Collegit
vitia  Catonis  sed  cum  maximis  Jaudibus  meis"  (ad  Alt.  xii.  40.).  He
proceeds,  "Itaque  misi  librum  ad  Muscam  ut  tuis  librariis  daret:  volo
enim  eum  tlivulgari."  Landor  (Imag.  Centers,  ii.  18.)  brands  this  as
"  the  worst  action  of  Cicero's  life."  It  is  little  extenuation  of  its
selfishness  to  say  that  Cato,  whose  weaknesses  he  was  so  willing  to
have  exposed  or  exaggerated  for  the  magnification  of  his  own  merits,
was  never  an  intimate  friend  of  Cicero.

*  See  the  elegant  letter  of  Sulpicius,  in  the  correspondence.  Cic.
ad  Div.  iv.  12.

A.C.709-B.C.45.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  433

though  latterly  divorced,  of  P.  Dolabella.  He  had
withdrawn  almost  entirely  from  public  affairs,  and
was  devoting  himself  to  his  favourite  studies,  when
Caesar,  who  had  been  visiting  at  the  house  of  his
kinsman  Philippus  in  the  immediate  neighbourhood,
invited  himself  to  dine  with  him.1  The  dictator,  on
this  occasion,  was  attended  by  a  guard  of  two  thousand
soldiers,  besides  many  friends  and  followers  of  various
ranks.  Cicero  was  much  perplexed  how  to  accommo-
date such  a  guest.  The  soldiers  were  encamped  on
the  estate,  but  tables  were  spread  in  several  rooms
for  the  more  distinguished  members  of  the  retinue.
Csesar  continued  transacting  business  with  Balbus  till
one  o'clock ;  he  then  walked  on  the  sea-shore,  arrived
at  his  host's  villa  at  two,  and  took  a  bath.  While  he
was  thus  refreshing  himself,  an  attendant  was  not
afraid  to  recite  for  his  amusement  a  scurrilous  epigram
against  him  by  the  fashionable  poet  Catullus.2  In
Eoman  society  such  verses  and  the  imputations  they
conveyed  for  the  most  part  excited  only  a  smile.
Satire  had  overreached  itself.  It  was  not  worth
while  to  punish  ribaldry  which  no  one  heeded.
Caesar  listened  without  emotion.  He  then  anointed
and  dressed,  and  took  his  place  at  the  table ;  and,
having  provided  beforehand  for  the  full  and  secure
indulgence  of  his  appetite,  eat  and  drank  heartily
and  cheerfully.3  Nor  was  the  dinner  a  bad  one,  adds
the  narrator,  with  complacency ;  and,  what  is  more,
it  was  seasoned  with  much  good  and  pleasant  con-
versation, to  his  own  share  in  which  he  evidently
looks  back  with  satisfaction.  Politics  were  shunned  :
the  subjects  discussed  were  wholly  literary.  The

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xiii.  52.

2  Catull.  xxix.  or  Ivii. The  author  of  the  disgusting  lampoon
apologized  afterwards,  and  was  pardoned. Suet.  Jul.  37.

*  Cic.  /.  c. :  "  futriicfiv  agebat.  itaque  edit  et  bibit  aStus  et  jucunde."
See  the  notes  of  Manutius  and  Schutz  in  explanation  of  this  custom
which  was  considered,  as  in  this  instance,  as  complimentary  to  the
host. Comp.  Cic.  pro  Deiot.  7. ;  Senec.  Consol.  uJ  Hdv,  9.
VOL.  II.  *  $

434  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi.

great  man  was  well  pleased,  and  showed  himself  to
be  so.

There  is  one  circumstance,  however,  in  Cicero's
relations  with  Caesar,  which  may  give  rise  to  some
cicero  writes  grave  speculations.  It  appears  that  the
c*8"retourging  former,  in  his  anxiety  to  pay  court  to  the
tHufbut""  conqueror  on  his  return  from  Spain,  ad-
withdraws  it.  (jresse(]  £O  hjm  an  elaborate  letter  of  praise
and  congratulation.  The  scruples  which  he  expressed
to  his  friend  Atticus,  and  the  excuses  he  made  to  him-
self for  his  apparent  subservience,  need  not  detain
us.  The  circumstance  most  important  for  us  to  ob-
serve is,  that  in  this  epistle  the  writer  urged  Caesar
to  avenge  the  commonwealth  by  conducting  an  ex-
pedition against  the  Parthians.  After  some  consul-
tation with  Balbus  and  Oppius,  Cicero  abstained
from  sending  what  he  had  written ;  his  advisers  had
recommended  him  to  expunge  the  suggestion  re-
lative to  Parthia,  and  he  became  dissatisfied  with
the  letter  altogether.1  The  indignity  under  which
the  commonwealth  still  laboured  while  the  ghost  of
Crassus  roamed  unavenged,  might  point  many  idle
appeals  to  public  sensibility.  Cicero  might  amuse
himself  with  painting  it  in  his  most  glowing  colours,
and  believe  that  he  was  leading  the  popular  senti-
ment, while  in  fact  he  was  only  obeying  the  sugges-
tion of  more  crafty  intriguers  than  himself.  For  to
arm  against  Parthia  would  be  to  suspend  the  progress
of  administrative  reform,  it  would  be  to  remove  Caesar
from  Rome,  the  citadel  of  his  strength,  and  entangle
him  in  an  adventure  of  no  ordinary  peril.  All  this
his  friends  immediately  perceived,  and  they  detected
perhaps  in  their  correspondent's  harangue  a  deep
plot  for  their  patron's  overthrow.  They  may  have
acquitted  Cicero  himself  of  any  evil  design.2  They

1  Cic.  ad  Ait.  xiii.  27.  30.

2  Cicero  acknowledges  to  his  correspondent  that  his  counsel  to
Caesar  was  a  mere  compliment:  "  Quidenim  aliucl  argumentum  epis-

A.O.TOg-B.C.^.  UNDER THE KM  PI  RE.  435

were  content  to  parry  the  fatal  counsel,  and  doubt-
less they  would  continue  to  employ  all  their  influence
in  diverting  Caesar  from  any  such  undertaking.  The
same  idea,  however,  was  now  continually  presented
to  him  from  various  quarters.  The  Roman  people,
it  was  affirmed,  were  deeply  interested  in  seeing  it
realized.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  Cleopatra,
disconcerted  by  the  haughtiness  of  her  admirer's  sub-
jects, would  lend  all  her  fascinations  to  a  scheme  for
withdrawing  him  into  the  East.  The  project  was
flattering  moreover  to  Caesar's  personal  ambition,  and
to  the  passion  for  war  which  exercised  undiminished
sway  over  him.  The  difficulties  of  the  task  of  civil
reform  were  becoming  more  and  more  arduous :  he
would  have  rejoiced  perhaps  in  any  excuse  for  tear-
ing himself  away  from  a  scene  where  his  views  were
thwarted  at  every  step ;  his  increasing  contempt  for
the  people  who  obstructed  while  they  flattered  him,
must  have  sometimes  tempted  him  to  abandon  his
schemes  for  their  welfare,  and  plunge  blindly  into  an
unknown  future.

The  plan  which  Caesar  was  now  meditating  had
assumed,  perhaps,  no  definite  shape  in  his  8<.iieme80f
own  mind. According  to  one  version  which  atwbmed  to
has  been  given  of  it,  he  proposed  to  direct  c"ss*1'
his  arms  in  the  first  instance  against  the  Dacians,
to  protect  Thrace,  and  even  Asia  Minor,  which  were
exposed  to  their  predatory  incursions,  and  proceed
from  thence into the  East. l Another and bolder
conception was  also  ascribed  to  him,  that  of  first
overwhelming the Parthians, and then returning
along  the  coasts  of  the  Euxine,  in  the  track  of  Pom-

tolse  nostne  nisi  KoAcucia  fuit?"  The  letter  was  not  sent;  but  Balbus
and  Oppius  probably  communicated  Cicero's  views  to  their  patron,
and  he  replied  that  he  would  not  leave  Rome  till  he  had  settled  the
government.  On  this  Cicero  remarks,  "  Idem  ego  suadebam  in  ilia
epistola;"  but  from  a  hint  which  follows,  it  would  appear  that  he
had  so  managed  as  to  suggest  a  different  course.
./«/.  44.

436  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi.

peius,  subduing  all  the  nations  between  the  Caucasus
and  the  Carpathian  mountains,  and  assailing  the
German  barbarians  in  the  rear.1  Both  one  and  the
other  of  these  supposed  schemes  is  coloured  appar-
ently by  the  ideas  of  a  later  generation.  But  that
Caesar  had  resolved  upon  some  extensive  project  of
conquest  in  the  East  admits  of  no  doubt.  So  long
accustomed  to  the  absolute  authority  of  the  procon-
sular camp,  and  the  immediate  accomplishment  of
every  political  and  military  conception,  the  delays
and  embarrassments  which  impeded  the  path  even  of
a  dictator  in  the  city  became  irksome  and  intolerable
to  him.  At  the  close  of  the  year  709,  he  issued
orders  to  his  legions  to  cross  the  Adriatic  and  as-
semble in  Illyricum,  there  to  await  his  arrival.  He
contemplated  an  absence  from  Italy  of  considerable
duration.  He  provided  beforehand  for  the  succession
of  consuls  and  praBtors  for  the  two  following  years.2
On  the  first  of  January  he  entered  upon

. . „  „  ,  , ,  . .  i-ii

his  tilth  consulship,  in  which  he  was  asso-

ciated with  M.  Antonius  :  at  the  same  time
he  obtained  the  designation  of  Hirtius  and  Pansa
for  the  year  711,  and  that  of  Decimus  Brutus  and
Munatius  Plancus  for  712.  Though  the  people  had
waived  the  right  of  suffrage  in  his  favour  for  a  period
of  ten  years,  he  considered  himself  precluded  from
wielding  the  consular  fasces  while  absent  from  the
spot  where  the  auspices  were  to  be  taken,  and  other
local  functions  to  be  exercised.  The  praetors  ap-
pointed for  the  year  710  were  sixteen  in  number,

1  Plut.  GOES.  58.

*  Drumann  (iii.  681.)  collects  the  authorities  principally  from
scattered  intimations  in  Cicero's  letters.  Suetonius  (Jul.  41.)  says
that  the  dictator  shared  the  right  of  appointing  the  higher  magis-
trates, except  the  consuls,  with  the  people.  These  latter  he  selected
without  any  foreign  intervention.  But  Dion  remarks  that  in  point
of  fact,  all  the  superior  offices  were  filled  at  his  recommendation,
though  the  ordinary  forms  of  popular  election  were  maintained.
Dion,  xliii.  47.  51.

A.0.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  437

and  among  them  were  M.  Brutus  and  C.  Cassius.
Lepidus,  who  had  accepted  the  government  of  the
Hither  Spain  and  Gallia  Xarbonensis,  was  replaced
in  the  mastership  of  the  horse  by  Domitius  Calvinus.
In  the  assignment  of  the  provinces,  which  was  no
longer  made  by  lot,  but  depended  upon  the  dictator's
sole  appointment,  conspicuous  men  of  either  party
were  favoured  almost  indiscriminately.  Asinius  Pol-
lio  received  the  charge  of  the  Further  Spain,  together
with  the  task  of  confronting  the  hostile  attempts  of
Sextus  Pompeius.  Among  the  other  proconsuls  and
propraetors  of  the  same  or  the  following  year  were
D.  Brutus,  Trebonius,  and  C.  Cassius,  whose  names
it  is  important  to  remark  on  this  occasion,  on  account
of  the  faithless  return  they  were  soon  to  make  for
the  confidence  now  reposed  in  them.

There  was  no  difficulty,  it  would  seem,  in  ef-
facing the  memory  of  Pompeius  from  the  Csraar
minds  of  his  late  adherents,  and  the  consti-  ££«££..
tutional  reforms  which  Caesar  carried  into  h" heir'
effect  were  so  moderate  and  reasonable  as  to  give
little  cause  of  serious  anger  to  the  party  he  had
beaten  in  the  field.  It  may  be  presumed,  however,
that  the  nobles  were  more  sensibly  offended  by  the
elevation  of  new  men  into  their  own  class.  It  is  true
that  many  of  them  might  have  cause  to  resent  the
establishment  of  a  new  system,  under  which  there
was  no  room  for  them  to  enjoy  the  preferments  they
had  been  wont  to  monopolize.  But  some  at  least  of
the  dictator's  most  bitter  enemies  had  not  even  these
personal  grounds  for  hostility  against  him.  The  real
motive  of  their  hatred,  in  almost  every  case,  was
no  other  than  wounded  vanity ;  accustomed  to  re-
gard all  of  their  own  class  as  their  equals,  and  the
most  conspicuous  of  every  other  as  their  inferiors,
the  nobles  were  indignant  at  seeing  one  man  rise  to
a  permanent  pre-eminence  among  them,  while  they
Hank  themselves  undistinguished  into  the  common

438  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xxi.

mass  of  the  citizens.  The  forms  of  the  constitution,
strained  as  they  had  been  to  recognise  the  establish-
ment of  the  dictatorship  for  life,  had  thrown  all  real
power  into  the  only  hands  which  at  the  time  were
competent  to  wield  it.  Yet  Caesar  himself  was  not
perhaps  satisfied  with  this  splendid  tribute  to  his
acknowledged  superiority.  If,  however,  he  really
longed  for  the  glittering  title  of  king,  which  some  at
least  of  his  adherents  were  willing  to  have  conferred
upon  him,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  he  was
seeking  to  gratify  his  vanity  by  the  assumption  of
an  empty  name.  Of  human  feelings  none  is  more
natural  than  that  which  prompts  a  man  to  seek  the
perpetuation  of  his  own  privileges  and  honours  after
death  in  the  person  of  his  heirs.  Caesar,  indeed,
had  no  legitimate  or  acknowledged  children.  The
person  nearest  to  him  in  blood  was  a  great-nephew.
Satisfied  with  the  talents  and  temper  the  young
man  exhibited,  it  was  to  him  that  he  looked  for  a
successor  to  his  name  and  station.  The  object  of
this  dangerous  favour  was  C.  Octavius,  whose  father
had  been  head  of  the  distinguished  house  whose  name
he  bore.  The  elder  Octavius  married  Atia,  a  daughter
of  Caesar's  younger  sister  Julia1,  but  had  died  when
his  only  son  had  scarcely  attained  the  age  of  four
years.  The  child  had  been  carefully  brought  up  under
the  care  of  the  mother  and  grandmother ;  bis  step-
father, L.  Marcius  Philippus,  had  watched  over  him
with  paternal  interest,  and  from  an  early  period
Julius  Caesar  himself  had  taken  a  share  in  his
education.  The  object  of  all  these  regards  had  been
born  in  the  year  691,  memorable  for  the  conspiracy
of  Catilina,  and  the  consulship  of  Cicero.  Accordingly,

1  Julia,  the  younger  of  the  dictator's  two  sisters,  was  married  to
M.  Atius  Balbus,  by  whom  she  had  a  daughter  Atia,  wife  of  C.  Octa-
vius, and  mother  of  the  future  Augustus.  She  died  A.U.  702  or  703,
and  her  grandson  pronounced  her  funeral  panegyric,  being  theii  in
Lis  twelfth  year.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THK EMPIRE.  439

he  was  now  in  his  nineteenth  year,  at  which  age
the  noble  youth  of  Home  had  generally  entered
already  upon  their  military  career.  But  the  extreme
delicacy  of  his  health  had  frequently  prevented  him
from  taking  part  in  his  great-uncle's  exploits.  From
this  cause  he  had  been  compelled  to  abstain  from
following  him  into  Spain  in  his  campaign  against
Afranius,  and  on  his  recent  expedition  in  that
quarter  had  been  an  eye-witness  of  only  a  few  of  his
operations.  Elated  by  the  distinction  with  which  he
was  treated  by  the  foremost  man  of  the  state,  the
young  Octavius  had  presumed  to  solicit  the  appoint-
ment to  the  mastership  of  the  horse  as  early  as  the
year  709.  But  the  dictator  considered  him  too
young  to  be  thrust  all  at  once  into  so  conspicuous  a
position,  and  refused  his  request.  Among  Caesars
reforms  he  had  made  no  attempt  to  fuse  the  two
ancient  orders  of  the  people  together.  On  the  con-
trary, he  studiously  kept  the  patrician  and  plebeian
houses  distinct,  and  confirmed  the  monopoly  of  certain
offices  which  the  former  possessed.  He  reserved  the
patrician  rank  as  a  sort  of  order  of  nobility,  for  the
reward  of  personages  whom  he  wished  to  honour.1
Accordingly,  it  was  a  conspicuous  mark  of  favour
when  he  caused  the  senate  to  raise  the  Octavian  house
to  the  superior  rank.  Caesar  now  directed  the  young
aspirant  to  resume  his  literary  studies  at  Apollonia
in  Illyricum  under  accomplished  teachers,  and  fa-
miliarize himself  at  the  same  time  with  the  exercises
and  habits  of  the  camp  which  was  there  established.
Conspicuous  for  the  graceful  beauty  of  his  mouth  and
chin,  the  expression  of  which  was  of  almost  feminine
delicacy,  and  not  less  for  the  breadth  of  his  command-
ing brow  and  the  expressive  lustre  of  his  eyes,  the
person  of  the  young  Octavius  was  well  calculated  to
engage  the  favour  of  the  legions,  and  to  become  the

1  The  same  policy  was  maintained  by  his  successors  in  the  supreme
power. Drumann,  iv.  254.

440  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi.

darling  of  the  most  devoted  Csesareans.  The  dictator
himself  might  rejoice  in  the  good  fortune  which  had
given  him  such  an  heir,  to  whom  to  bequeath,  if  fate
might  so  far  favour  him,  the  prize  for  which  he  had
done  and  suffered  so  much  ;  in  the  fond  hope  that
what  he  already  felt,  perhaps,  to  be  a  disappointment
to  himself  might  become  a  source  of  more  genuine
enjoyment  to  his  successor.

But  Caesar  might  have  had  another  motive  for  wish-
The  royai  mg  to  consolidate  the  power  he  had  obtained
b£ieof  here-  by  acquiring  a  title  which  he  might  trans-
™™£  mit  to  bis  posterity.  He  had  done  no  more
than  lay  the  first  foundations  of  the  great
edifice  whicb  he  contemplated  in  his  own  imagina
tion  ;  and  he  might  be  anxious  to  bequeath  its  com
pletion  to  one  whom  he  had  himself  bred  to  inherit
his  views  together  with  his  station.  The  title  of  dic-
tator had  never  descended  from  one  generation  to
another  ;  there  were  no  associations  connected  with
it  as  an  hereditary  office,  no  prestige  of  traditional
veneration  to  blind  men's  eyes  to  the  naked  usurpa-
tion of  supreme  power.  But  the  appellation  of  King
seemed  in  itself  to  legitimize  its  possessor's  claim
to  rule.  It  was  the  recognised  symbol  of  hereditary
sovereignty.  It  dazzled  men  by  its  brilliancy,  and
prevented  them  from  looking  too  curiously  into  the
fact  which  it  really  represented.  Caesar  might  con-
ceive that  it  was  only  under  the  shelter  of  this  illusion
that  the  successor  to  his  principles  of  administration
could  maintain  the  position  in  which  he  could  carry
them  into  effect.  But  even  if  he  was  conscious  of
cherishing  any  wish  for  the  title  of  King,  he  concealed
it  with  studious  care.  It  was  in  the  counsels  of  his
friends,  at  least,  that  the  idea  of  obtaining  it  appeared
to  originate  *  ;  and  it  was  perhaps  first  suggested  to

1  Dion  (xliv.  9)  says  of  Caesar's  friends  :  /ScwrtAt'o  avrbv
«ot iroAu rovro  roCvo/j.a  KCU  Kara fftpas Sif6pv\\ovv. Comp. Pint.
Brut.  9.  :  alfriot  6e  rovrwv  ol  Kaiffapos  KO\aKfS,  K.T.\.

A.r.710-B.c.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  441

them  by  the  craft  of  his  enemies,  who  sought  thereby
to  exasperate  the  nation  against  him.  While  there
were,  as  Caesar  well  knew,  a  hundred  poniards  ready
to  bury  themselves  in  his  bosom,  he  was  aware  that
they  were  restrained  by  the  consideration  that,  popular
as  he  still  was  with  the  army,  the  provinces,  and  the
mass  of  the  citizens,  his  assassination  might  only  be
the  signal  for  a  general  massacre  of  all  his  real  and
supposed  enemies.  It  required  a  series  of  dark  and
artful  intrigues  to  warp  the  affections  of  these  classes
from  the  person  of  the  dictator,  and  there  might
seem  no  readier  method  of  overthrowing  a  victorious
adversary  than  to  fasten  upon  him  the  charge  of
affecting  the  kingly  title.

However  this  may  be,  it  happened  that  one  morn-
ing a  laurel  garland,  with  a,  diadem  at-
tached, was  found  affixed  to  Caesar's  statue

before  the  rostra.  The  tribunes,  Marullus
and  Caesetius,  indignantly  tore  it  down,  and  punished
the  convicted  perpetrator  of  the  scandal,  pretending
that  they  were  acting  in  the  spirit  of  the  dictator's
own  sentiments.  The  populace,  it  was  observed,  ex-
pressed great  satisfaction  at  their  conduct,  and  saluted
them  with  the  title  of  the  new  Brutuses.1

Caesar  only  lamented  in  public,  as  on  the  deaths
of  Pompeius  and  Cato,  that  they  had  deprived  him
by  their  activity  of  the  opportunity  of  proving  his
loyalty  to  the  republic.  A  short  time  afterwards,  on
the  26th  of  January,  the  dictator  had  assisted  at  the
great  Latin  festival  on  the  Alban  mount,  preliminary
to  his  expedition  against  the  foreign  enemies  of  the
republic.  On  the  same  occasion  he  had  enjoyed  the
honours  of  an  ovation  decreed  to  him  by  the  senate  :
a  gratuitous  indulgence  to  his  passion  for  personal
display,  for  he  had  gained  no  new  victory  to  justify

1  Dion,  xliv.  9.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  108.;  comp.  Suet.  Jul.  79.;
and  Plot.  Cffs.  C].,  Anton.  12.,  whose  narratives  apply  in  part  to  a
different  occasion.

442  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi.

it.  The  most  sanguine  of  his  adherents  determined
to  take  this  opportunity  of  trying  the  temper  of  the
people  a  second  time,  when  their  enthusiasm  might
be  supposed  to  be  excited  by  beholding  their  cham-
pion in  his  highest  glory.  It  might  be  remembered
that  the  popular  chief  Saturninus,  on  the  last  occa-
sion on  which  the  fatal  title  had  been  bruited  in  the
ears  of  the  Eomans,  had  been  urged  by  his  own  ad-
herents to  assume  it.1  Accordingly,  officious  voices
were  hired  to  salute  him,  as  he  passed,  by  the  title
of  King.  But  as  they  dropped  one  by  one  into
silence,  no  others  were  heard  to  take  up  the  cry :  on
the  contrary,  a  low  and  stifled  murmur  sufficiently
indicated  the  disapprobation  of  the  people.  I  am
no  king,  but  Ccesar,  exclaimed  the  dictator  hastily.2
The  tribunes  seized  some  persons  who  had  joined  in
this  salutation,  and  threw  them  into  prison.  The  dic-
tator, however,  thought  fit  to  rebuke  them  for  their
superfluous  or  invidious  zeal,  in  which  he  detected  a
scheme  for  bringing  him  under  unjust  suspicions  :
he  played  upon  the  word  Brutus,  which  signifies  a
fool,  and  declared  that  they  well  deserved  the  name
they  were  so  proud  of,  if  they  supposed  he  was  un-
aware of  the  intrigue  to  which  they  had  lent  them-
selves. Nor  did  his  anger  confine  itself  to  these
sharp  words.  Helvius  Cinna,  indeed,  one  of  their
colleagues,  went  as  far  as  to  propose  that  they
should  be  punished  with  death;  but  Caesar  allowed
himself  to  be  appeased  by  their  deposition  from  their
offices.

Caesar's friends,  however,  were  not  yet satisfied

that  the  coveted  distinction  was  beyond  his

offer"  him  a reach. They  sought  to  familiarize  the  peo-

royal  diadem, ,  i 11  -Ii ,i_ -j  c  ij. v.

which  he  re- pie  gradually  with  the  idea  ot  royalty  by
suggesting  it  repeatedly  to  their  imagina-
tions. Perchance  the  sight  of  the  white  linen  band,

1  Floras,  iii.  16.

2  Dion,  xliv.  10.;  Suetonius  and  Plutarch,  //.  cc.

*.tJ.7lO-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  443

the  simple  badge  of  Oriental  sovereignty,  might  dis-
abuse them  of  their  horror  at  an  empty  name.  On
the  fifteenth  of  February,  the  day  of  the  Lupercalia,
Caesar  was  seated  in  his  golden  chair  before  the
rostra,  to  preside  over  the  solemn  ceremonies  of  that
popular  festival.1  The  Julian  flamens  were  elevated
to  the  same  rank  as  those  of  the  god  Lupercus,  or
Pan.  Antonius  the  consul  was  at  their  head,  and
next  to  the  dictator  occupied  the  most  conspicuous
place  in  the  eyes  of  the  multitude.  Possibly  the
novelty  of  the  sight  of  the  one  consul  stripped  to
his  skin,  with  only  a  narrow  girdle  round  his  loins,
waving  in  his  hand  the  thong  of  goat's-hide,  and
striking  with  it,  as  he  ran  rapidly  through  the  prin-
cipal streets,  the  women  who  presented  themselves  to
the  blow,  which  was  supposed  to  avert  sterility,  was
still  more  attractive  than  that  of  the  other  in  the
laurel  crown  and  triumphal  robes,  which  use  had
rendered  familiar.2  When  Antonius  had  run  his
course,  he  broke  through  the  admiring  multitude,
and  approached  the  seat  of  the  dictator.  He  drew
from  beneath  his  girdle  a  diadem,  and  made  as  if  he
would  offer  it  to  him,  exclaiming  that  it  was  the  gift
of  the  Roman  people.  The  action  was  hailed  by
some  clapping  of  hands ;  but  it  was  faint  and  brief,
and  easily  betrayed  that  it  was  preconcerted.  But
when  Caesar  put  away  from  him  the  proffered  gift,  a
much  louder  burst  of  genuine  applause  succeeded.
Antonius  offered  it  a  second  time,  again  there  was  a
slight  sound  of  applause,  and  again  on  Caesar's  rejec-
tion of  it  a  vehement  expression  of  satisfaction.  The
pulse  of  the  city  had  once  more  been  felt,  and  once
more  the  symptoms  had  proved  unfavourable.  /  am
not  a  king,  repeated  Caesar,  the  only  king  of  the
Romans  is  Jupiter.  He  ordered  the  diadem  to  be

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  109.,  and  the  authorities  above  cited.
1  Plut.  Anton.  12.;  Cic.  Philtpp.  ii.  34.  42.

444  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXT.

carried  to  the  Capitol  and  suspended  in  the  temple
of  the  god  as  a  trophy,  commemorative  of  the  gracious
offer  of  the  people  and  his  own  modest  refusal.  He
even  caused  it  to  be  inserted  in  the  fasti,  that  on  the
fifteenth  day  of  February  the  Komans  presented  a
diadem  to  Caesar,  and  Caesar  declined  it.1

Among  other  intrigues  to  keep  the  idea  of  the  royal
The  sibyiiine  title  constantly  before  the  people,  a  report
was  studiously  spread  that  the  Sibylline
books  declared  that  Parthia  could  be  con-
quered only  under  the  auspices  of  a  king.2
Whatever  had  been  the  origin  of  the  genuine  Sibylline
verses,  on  which  so  much  of  the  Roman  state  religion
was  grounded,  those  compositions,  it  was  acknow-
ledged, had  perished  in  the  Sullan  conflagration  of
the  Capitol.  The  oracles,  which  at  this  period  went
under  that  name,  were  supposed  to  be  fragments  col-
lected by  subsequent  research,  or  restored  from  me-
mory, to  replace  the  primitive  vaticinations.  What-
ever confidence  had  been  placed  by  the  people  in  the
original  documents,  neither  the  circumstances  of  the
case  nor  the  temper  of  the  times,  it  might  be  imagined,
would  allow  of  faith  being  reposed  in  their  modern  sub-
stitutes. When  the  government  ventured,  with  the
sanction  of  the  priests,  to  whom  they  were  entrusted,
to  produce  from  them  any  alleged  predictions  with
reference  to  the  policy  of  the  day,  the  manosuvre
might  have  been  presumed  transparent  to  the  mean-
est apprehension.  Yet  we  have  seen  the  nobles  once
before  shrink  from  offending  the  popular  belief  even

1  Compare  besides  the  authorities  above,  Liv.  Epit.  cxvi.;  Veil.  ii.
56.;  Zonar.  x.  11.;  Flor.  ir.  2.  91.  Nicolaus  of  Damascus,  a  pane-
gyrist of  the  Csesarean  house,  asserted  that  the  people  actually  saluted
Cassar  as  king,  and  conjured  him  to  accept  the  diadem.  Antoninp,
he  insinuated,  urged  him  to  make  himself  king  in  the  hope  of  being
named  his  heir.  See  the  recently  discovered  fragment  of  the  Vita
CCES.  Octav.  published  from  a  MS.  in  the  Escarial  by  Duebner  iii
Didot's  Fragm.  Hist.  Grcec.  (Nicol.  Dam.  /r.  ci.  §  20.).

*  Dion.  xliv.  15.;  Suet.  Jut.  79.;  Cic.  de  Divin.  ii.  54.

4.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  445

in  these  doubly  spurious  oracles ;  and  now  the  most
disastrous  consequences  were  anticipated  by  Caesar's
enemies  from  the  bare  rumour  of  such  a  prophecy
existing.  The  Quindecimviri,  or  college  of  fifteen
priests,  to  whose  care  the  sacred  deposit  was  com-
mitted l,  deliberately  examined  their  records,  and
affirmed  that  the  fact  was  so.  Upon  this  Caesar's
friends  proposed  to  obtain  a  decree  of  the  senate  to
confer  upon  the  dictator  the  title  and  authority  of
king  over  the  foreign  subjects  of  the  commonwealth 2:
it  could  be  easily  foreseen  that  such  a  step  would  carry
him  more  than  half  way  to  the  achievement  of  his
ultimate  design  of  becoming  king  of  the  citizens  also.
And  if  the  question  were  once  brought  formally  under
the  notice  of  the  senate,  it  would  be  impossible  for
the  malcontents  to  avoid  giving  expression  to  their
opinions.  They  must  array  themselves  decisively  in
opposition  to  their  master's  interests,  or  allow  their
silence  to  be  interpreted  into  consent.  The  appre-
hension of  being  reduced  to  this  dilemma  served
perhaps  to  hasten  the  catastrophe  which  had  been
long  in  contemplation  among  them.3

The  discontent  which  had  spread  through  the  ranks
of  the  Koman  nobility  was  founded,  as  we
have  seen,  rather  on  personal  envy  of  the  agahSc
dictator's  pre-eminence,  than  on  political  life-
hostility  to  his  measures.  His  unexampled  cle-
mency had  been  of  little  avail  to  disarm  such  a  feel-
ing as  this.  Even  if  he  had  resorted  to  the  bloody
policy  of  his  predecessors,  and  cut  off  by  proscription
every  leader  of  the  party  opposed  to  him,  he  would
have  been  not  the  more  safe  from  the  machinations
of  his  own  principal  adherents.4  Both  Antonius  and

1  Drumann,  ii.  498.  not.  72.,  iii.  692.  not.  41.

2  Appian,  B.C.  110.,  who  adds  that  Caesar  repressed  their  zeal.
1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  113.

4  Veil.  ii.  56. :  "Adjectis  etiam  consiliariis  caedis,  familiarissimis
omnium,  et  fortuna  partium  ejus  in  summura  evectis  fastigium."
Comp.  Suet.  Jul.  83.

146  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXI.

Dolabella  had  already  been  subjected  to  the  imputa-
tion of  plotting  against  their  patron's  life.1  But  a
much  more  extensive  conspiracy  had  now  been  formed
against  him ;  not  less  than  sixty,  or  even  eighty2,  per-
sons are  said  to  have  connected  themselves  with  it,
and  some  of  the  most  conspicuous  of  these  were  the
very  men  who  had  appeared  most  to  merit  Caesar's
confidence  by  a  long  course  of  faithful  services.  Every
party  leader  must  make  enemies,  when  he  comes
to  power,  of  many  of  his  ancient  adherents,  by  the
unavoidable  mortification  of  their  self-love.  Among
the  conspirators  against  Caesar's  life  were  some,  per-
haps, who  thought  themselves  inadequately  repaid
for  their  early  devotion  to  his  interests.  But  such
could  not  have  been  the  case  with  Decimus  Brutus,
who  had  recently  received  the  government  of  the
Transalpine  Graul,  who  had  been  latterly  appointed  to
the  Cisalpine,  and  who  was  already  designated  for  the
consul  of  a  future  year.  Such  could  not  have  been
the  case  with  Trebonius,  who  had  only  just  descended
from  the  ivory  chair,  and  was  about  to  assume  the
administration  of  a  province.  Another  of  Caesar's
favourite  officers,  who  now  became  a  traitor  to  him,
was  Minucius  Basilus ;  this  man  had  been  praetor  in
the  last  year,  but  Caesar  not  having  the  power  of  as-
signing to  him  a  province,  had  hoped  to  compensate
for  the  disappointment  by  a  grant  of  money.  Basilus,
it  is  said,  had  resolved,  in  his  mortification,  to  starve
himself  to  death.3  C.  Cassius  found  him  in  this  de-
sponding mood,  and  when  he  opened  to  him  the  plot
against  the  dictator's  life,  easily  persuaded  him  to  live

1  Cicero  (Philipp.  ii.  14)  asserts  it  as  notorious  that  Antonius  had
consulted  with  Trebonius  about  taking  Cassar's  life.  Such  a  charge,
however,  from  such  a  quarter,  does  not  deserve  much  attention.  The
charge  against  Dolabella  is  still  less  substantial.  Plut.  Anton.  11.  It
was  part  of  the  policy  of  Cassar's  enemies  to  raise  suspicions  in  his
mind  against  his  adherents.

*  More  than  eighty,  according  to  Nicolaus:  fr.  ci.  §  19.

1  Pion,  xliii.  47.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  113.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  447

for  vengeance.  Publius  Casca  had  been  recommended
by  the  dictator  to  a  seat  on  the  tribunitian  bench;  he,
it  is  said,  was  disappointed  at  not  rising  at  once  to  a
still  higher  office.  L.  Tillius  Cimber  had  also  been
recently  preferred  to  the  government  of  Bithynia.
This  man  indeed  might  entertain  a  private  grudge
against  the  dispenser  of  these  honours,  on  account  of
his  brother,  who  having  been  banished  from  the  city,
could  not  obtain  Caesar's  intervention  for  the  reversal
of  his  sentence.1  But  of  all  Caesar's  adherents  who
now  turned  against  him,  his  old  lieutenant  Serving
Galba,  to  whom  he  had  been  forced  to  refuse  the
consulship,  was  the  only  one,  perhaps,  who  had  failed
to  reap  riches  or  advancement  from  the  establishment
of  his  power.2

Even  the  chiefs  of  the  senatorian  party  who  had
arrayed  themselves  against  Caesar  in  the  character  of
field,  had  betrayed  no  reluctance  to  accept  a^oursofhthe
office  under  his  sway.  It  was  not  the  des-  con'plracy-
titute  or  the  disappointed  among  them,  but  those
whom  he  had  gratuitously  honoured  and  promoted,
who  at  last  raised  their  hands  for  his  destruction.
The  most  active  of  the  conspirators,  and  perhaps  the
original  author  of  the  design,  was  C.  Cassius,  who
had  recently  been  appointed  praetor.  In  this  dig-
nified magistracy  there  were  now  sixteen  associates;
.but  the  first  place  in  rank  and  importance,  the  war-
denship  of  the  city,  with  its  six  attendant  lictors,  had
been  contested  between  Cassius  and  Brutus,  and  it
was  in  favour  of  the  latter  that  Caesar  had  decided.3

1  Plut.  Brut.  17.;  Cas.  66.;  Appian,  /.  c.

2  Cic.  Philipp.  xiii.  16. ;  Suet.  Galb.  3.  The  testimony  of  Nicolans,
an  admirer  of  the  Caesarean  dynasty,  may  be  deemed  invalid  in  such
a  matter;  it  must  be  stated,  however,  that  that  writer  fully  confirms
the  general  opinion  of  the  unworthy  motives  which  influenced  the
chiefs  of  the  conspiracy,  while  he  allows  that  among  their  followers
there  were  some  honest  enthusiasts  swayed  by  the  authority  of  their
names. Nicoi.  Dam.  I.  c.

3  Pint.  Brut.  7.,  Cas.  62.

448  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXI.

The  rich  province  of  Syria,  however,  which  was  pro-
mised to  the  disappointed  suitor,  might  have  sufficed
to  obliterate  any  feelings  of  pique  at  this  repulse.
The  cry  of  liberty  and  the  republic,  which  was  in
the  mouths  of  all  the  conspirators,  could  have  little
real  influence  on  the  sentiments  of  Cassius,  whose
avowed  Epicurean  principles,  no  less  than  his  late
political  conduct,  might  vouch  for  his  indifference  t«
party.  He  had  been  known  to  express  the  utmost
horror  at  the  prospect  of  a  new  Pompeian  ascendency
under  the  championship  of  Cnaeus,  whom  he  branded,
at  least  in  his  correspondence  with  Cicero,  as  a  mon-
ster of  cruelty.1  But  he  was  by  nature  vain  and  vin-
dictive ;  his  temper  fluctuated  between  mean  subser-
vience and  rude  independence;  the  ascendency  which
Cassar's  unruffled  equanimity  exerted  over  him  em-
bittered his  selfish  spirit,  and,  in  his  passionate  resolve
to  overthrow,  at  all  hazards,  the  supremacy  which
galled  him,  he  seems  to  have  looked  no  further,  to
have  taken  no  precautions,  but  thrown  the  die  without
calculating  the  chances.

If  the  conspirators  and  their  principal  instigator
evinced  any  forethought,  it  was  in  seeking

Weakness  and r ,-, . '  .  . .  , .,  .. &

inconsistency tor  their  proiected  tyrannicide  the  sanction

of  BrutlM.  ,. ,  r- T>  A  ,  ,  •

oi  the  name  of  Brutus.  Atticus,  who,
amidst  the  public  commotions,  amused  himself  with
genealogical  studies,  had  flattered  M.  Junius  Brutus
by  tracing  his  descent  from  a  supposed  third  son  of
the  founder  of  the  republic,  whose  elder  brothers
perished,  as  was  well  known,  childless,  by  the  axe  of
the  lictor.2  Servilia,  the  mother  of  Brutus,  derived
her  lineage  from  the  renowned  Ahala,  whose  dagger
had  avenged  the  ambitious  projects  of  Spurius  Maelius.

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  xv.  19. He  wrote  to  Cicero,  A.TJ.  709:  "Malo  ve-
terem  et  clementem  dominum (Caesarem) habere  quam  novum  et
crudelem  (Cn.  Pomp.)."

2  Comp.  Corn.  Nepos,  Alt.  18.;  Plut.  Brut.  1. Cicero  maintains
this  popular  derivation of  his  hero  (Tusc.  Qu.  iv. 1.,  Phil.  i.  1.).
But  Plutarch  allows  that  its  accuracy  was  disputed.

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  449

But  so  far  from  inheriting  the  zeal  of  his  imputed
progenitor,  the  Brutus  of  the  expiring  republic  had
acquiesced  in  Caesar's  usurpation  with  less  apparent
reluctance  than  perhaps  any  other  member  of  the
Pompeian  party.  Despondent  in  her  hour  of  distress,
he  had  been  the  last  to  join,  the  earliest  to  desert,  the
unfurled  banner  of  the  republic.  After  Pharsalia  he
was  the  first  to  seek  refuge  in  the  camp  of  the  victor  ;
in  the  city  he  was  the  foremost  to  court  the  friend-
ship and  claim  the  confidence  of  the  dictator ;  he  was
zealous  in  serving  his  interests  by  the  discharge  of
important  offices ;  nor  did  he  blush  to  govern  Cisalpine
Gaul  for  Caesar  while  his  uncle  still  held  Utica  against
him.1  A  feeble  panegyric  of  the  sturdy  sage  whom
he  had  abandoned  while  he  affected  to  adopt  his
principles  and  emulate  his  practice,  seemed  to  Bru-
tus a  sufficient  tribute  to  his  virtues.  He  disparaged
the  merits  of  Cicero,  and  exalted  the  services  of  Cato
in  the  suppression  of  Catilina;  but  both  his  depre-
ciation and  his  praise  were  blown  to  the  winds  by
the  caustic  irony  of  Caesar's  reply.2  His  consort

1  Plutarch  assures  us  that  his  government  of  this  province  was  a
great  blessing  to  it :  eurvx'?  Ttvt  rrjs  &rapx'<"  ....  ical  riav  irpStrtifv
a.Tvxtifj.dra>i>  iroO\o  Kol  Tro.paij.vQia  Bpovros  fy. Caesar  was  exceedingly
gratified  at  witnessing  the  beneficial  results  of  his  administration.
Comp.  Cic.  Orat.  10.  34.

2  Cicero's  letters  to  Atticus,  in  which  this  subject  is  mentioned  (aa
Ait.  xii.  21.),  is  curious:  "Catonem  primum  sententiam  putat  (Brutus)
de  animadversione dixisse; quam omnes ante dixerant, praeter
Caesarem :  et  quum  ipsins  Csesaris  tarn  severa  fuerit,  qui  turn  praetorio
loco  dixerit,  consularium  putat  leniores  fuisse,  Catuli,  Servilii,  Lucul-
lornm,  Curionis,  Torquati,  Lepidi, Gellii,  Volcatii,  Figuli,  Cottae,
L.Caesaris,  C.  Pisonis,  etiam  M'.  Glabrionis,  Silani,  Murenae,  designa-
torura  consulum." Brutus,  it  seems,  sought  to  enhance  Cato's  merit
by  a  deliberate  falsification  of  history. Cicero  goes  on  to  explain
why  the  capital  sentence  was  ascribed  to  Cato's  advice,  namely,  be-
cause, though  the  whole  party  spoke  and  voted  for  it,  his  arguments
were  considered  the  most  forcible  and  effective. Middleton  (Life  of
Cicero)  supposes  that  it  was  from  Brutus's  account,  rather  than
Cicero's,  that  Sallust  drew  up  his  own  narrative. He  was  a  contem-
porary and  though  not  a  witness  of  the  scene,  be  required  no  written
record  to  remind  him  of  that  awful  debate.

VOL. II.  Q G

450  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi.

Claudia  he  had  divorced  to  espouse  the  philosopher's
daughter  Porcia,  a  woman  of  more  masculine  spirit
than  his  own.  But  thus  doubly  connected  with
strength  and  virtue,  Brutus  failed  nevertheless  to
acquire  the  firmness  which  nature  had  denied  him.
Although  in  his  habits  a  professed  student,  he  could
not  resolve  to  withdraw  to  the  shades  of  philosophy
from  the  fiery  glare  of  a  season  of  revolution.  The
thirst  of  lucre  still  beset  him;  the  victor  caressed  and
the  vanquished  courted  him ;  he  was  a  greater  man
to-day  than  yesterday,  and  the  path  of  official  dis-
tinction seemed  safe  and  flowery.  With  Brutus,  by
circumstances  a  revolutionary  partisan,  by  temper  a
sophist,  the  conspiracy  would  never  have  originated  ;
the  admission  of  his  inherent  weakness  is  the  fairest
extenuation  of  his  crime.  But  the  deaths  of  all  their
more  distinguished  leaders  had  elevated  him  to  undue
importance  among  the  remnant  of  his  party.  His
uncle's  renown  seemed  to  shed  its  light  upon  him,
and  he  was  supposed  to  inherit  the  political  spirit  of
the  hero  whose  disciple  he  had  avowed  himself  in
the  tranquil  walks  of  science.  The  name  of  Brutus
forced  its  possessor  into  prominence  as  soon  as  royalty
began  to  be  discussed.  The  Koman  people  were
neither  moralists  nor  genealogists,  but  they  had  im-
bibed from  the  traditions  of  four  hundred  and  fifty
years  an  unreflecting  horror  of  the  mere  title  of  king,
and  admiration  not  less  blind  for  the  name  of  the
first  of  the  Consuls.

The  weakness  of  Brutus's  character  may  be
He  H  cajoled  estimated  by  the  means  which  were  em-
irate™0" ployed  to  work  upon  him.  A  bit  of  paper
affixed  to  the  statue  of  the  ancient  hero  with  the
words,  Would  thou  wert  alive,  billets  thrust  into  hig
hand  inscribed,  Bi^utus,  thou  sleepest,  thou  art  no
Biiitus,  shook  the  soul  of  the  philosopher  to  its
centre.1  His  vanity  had  already  been  excited  by  a

1  Plut.  Brut.  9.,  CCES  62;  Dion,  xliv.  12

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  451

compliment  attributed  to  Caesar,  which  was  no  doubt
reported  to  him,  Brutus  only  waits  for  this  dry
skin J ;  implying  that  he  of  all  the  Eomans  was
the  most  capable  of  succeeding  to  pre-eminence.
Cassius,  who  was  brother-in-law  to  Brutus,  and
admitted  to  his  familiar  intimacy,  watched

. . ,  ~ , r , ,  .  ,•  and  induced

narrowly  the  enect  ot  these  incentives  to  ^i^Mume
his  ambition,  and  led  him  gradually  to  the  «™ng
point  at  which  he  could  venture  to  disclose
the  deed  which  was  in  contemplation.  Brutus,
adroitly  plied,  embraced  the  schemes  of  the  con-
spirators, and  assumed  the  place  of  chief  adviser,
which  was,  at  least  in  appearance,  tendered  to  him.
The  renewed  name  became  at  once  a  charm  of  magic
potency.  It  raised  the  sick  Ligarius  from  his  bed.2
A  pardoned  follower  of  Pompeius,  the  clemency  of
Caesar  rankled  in  his  bosom.  How  sad  for  Ligarius,
said  Brutus  to  him,  to  be  disabled  at  such  a  moment.
The  sick  man  raised  himself  on  his  elbow  and  re-
plied, If  thou  hast  any  project  worthy  of  Brutus,
behold,  I  am  well  again.  Ligarius  was  admitted  to
the  secret,  and  took  an  active  part  in  the  deed  which
followed.  We  learn  with  pleasure  that  the  con-
spirators did  not  venture  even  to  sound  Cicero.3
Favonius  withheld  his  countenance  from  them,  and
declared  that  it  was  better  to  acknowledge  a  master
than  to  plunge  again  into  the  miseries  of  civil  war.4
The  fatal  intrigue  was  now  ripening  to  its  execution.
As  long  as  Caesar  remained  at  Kome  his  fearless
demeanour  exposed  him  almost  undefended  to  the  dag-
gers of  assassins,  for  he  had  dismissed  the  guard  which
had  at  first  surrounded  him,  and  he  appeared  daily  in
the  forum  and  the  curia  with  no  other  attendance

1  Hut.  Brut.  8.,  C(£S.  /.  c.  *  Plut.  BruL  11.

1  Plut.  Ci'c.  17.:  oXA'  tSfurav  ol  HvSpts  avrov  r^v  tpvaiv,  is  cVSeo
r6\fj.-ns. Antonius,  indeed,  tried  to  fasten  the  charge  upon  him.  Cic.
lipp,  ii.  11.  12.,  ad  Div.  xii.  3.
1'lut.  Brut.  12.

452  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxi

than  that  of  friends  and  casual  suitors.  If  the  state-
ment is  correct  that  he  had  assembled  as  many  as
sixteen  legions  in  Illyricum,  he  must  have  sent  almost
every  disposable  soldier  out  of  Italy.1  But  from  the
moment  he  should  leave  the  city  and  assume  the  com-
mand of  his  armies,  his  security  would  be  guaranteed
by  the  fidelity  of  the  troops;  an  attack  upon  the
cherished  life  of  the  imperator  would  be  difficult  of
execution,  and  sure  of  prompt  punishment.  Once
intoxicated  with  the  splendour  of  royalty  in  the  pro-
vinces, he  would  never  consent  to  return  a  citizen
to  Eome.  He  had  promised,  it  was  said,  to  restore
the  ancient  towers  of  Ilium,  the  cradle  of  the  people
of  ^Eneas  and  Eomulus ;  possibly  he  might  transfer
thither  the  throne  which  the  proud  nobility  forbade
him  to  establish  in  the  Capitol.2  Or,  if  the  charms
of  Cleopatra  should  still  retain  their  power,  he  might
take  up  his  abode  in  Alexandria,  and  transfer  the
seat  of  empire  to  the  shrine  of  the  Macedonian  con-
o'ieror.

Caesar's  preparations  for  his  departure  were  almost
The  compira-  complete.  The  senate  was  convened  for  the
ezecSSir10  Mes  of  March,  the  fifteenth  day  of  the
design.  month,  and  at  that  meeting,  it  was  con-

fidently expected,  the  odious  proposition  would  be
openly  made  for  conferring  the  royal  name  and
power  on  the  dictator  in  the  provinces.  The  con-
spirators determined  to  make  their  attack  upon  him

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  110. The  same  writer,  however,  speaks  after-
wards of e legion  quartered  at  Home  in  the  island  of  the  Tiber
(c.  118.).

2  Suet.  Jul. 79.: "  Valida  fama  percrebruit.  miRraturum  Alex-
andriam  yel  Ilium,  translatis  simul  opibus  imperil." Lucan,  ix.  998. :

"  Restituam  populos,  grata  vice  incenia  reddent

Ausonidae  Phrygibus,  Romanaque  Pergama  surgent."
The  Ode  of  Horace  (Od.  in.  3.),  in  which  he  deprecates  a  transfer
of  the  seat  of  empire,  shows  how  deep  an  impression  this  rumour
had  made,  though  I  cannot  imagine  that  Augustus  could  have
seriously  contemplated  it,  or  that  Horace  would  have  so  earnestly
denounced  it,  if  he  had.  See  the  commentators  on  Horace,  I.e.

A.U.710-B.C.44. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  453

as  soon  as  he  should  enter  the  assembly.  Among
the  floating  stories  of  the  day  was  a  prediction  that
the  Ides  of  March  should  be  fatal  to  Caesar.  He  had
received,  it  appears,  intimations  from  more  than  one
quarter  of  the  danger  which  threatened  him  ;  but  he
resolutely  rejected  all  advice  to  guard  himself  against
it1,  relying,  as  he  declared,  implicitly  on  the  good
sense  or  gratitude  of  the  citizens.  It  had  long  been
the  fixed  principle  of  his  philosophy  that  the  only
way  to  enjoy  life  was  to  banish  the  fear  of  death.2
On  the  eve  of  the  fatal  day  he  was  entertained  by
Lepidus,  and  when,  in  the  course  of  conversation,
some  one  started  the  question,  What  kind  of  death
is  the  best?  it  was  remarked  that  he  cut  short  the
discussion  abruptly  with  the  reply,  That  which  is
least  expected.  The  constant  tradition  of  antiquity
declared  that,  among  many  prognostics  of  an  im-
pending catastrophe,  his  wife  had  revealed  to  him  in
the  morning  an  ominoiis  dream,  and  when  she  pre-
vailed upon  him  to  consult  the  sacrificers,  the  signs
of  the  victims  were  fearfully  inauspicious.3  Whether
his  own  superstitious  feelings  gained  the  ascendency,
or  whether  he  was  overcome  by  the  entreaties  of
Calpurnia,  he  consented  at  last  to  send  Antonius  to
dismiss  the  senate,  or  to  excuse  his  absence.  At  this
moment  Decimus  Brutus  came  to  attend  him  on  his
way  to  the  place  of  meeting.  On  hearing  the  dic-
tator's reluctant  avowal  of  his  scruples,  he  was  struck
with  consternation  at  the  prospect  of  the  victim's
escape  ;  for  the  conspirators  meanwhile  were  in  mo-
mentary apprehension  of  discovery.  Brutus  himself,

1  Suet.  Ju/.  86.

2  Plut.  C(£8.  58.;  Veil.  ii.  57. Certain  expressions  currently  at-
tributed to  Caesar  at  this  period  of  his  career,  ns  in  Cic.  pro  Marc.  9.,
"  Satis  diu  vel  naturae  vixi  vel  gloriae,"  have  been  supposed  to  indicate
that  he  was  dissatisfied  with  life,  and  reckless  of  the  perils  of  his
position.

3  Suetonius  (Jut.  81.)  relates  the  occurrence  of  various  prodigies.
Oomp.  Plutarch,  Cees.  63.;  Dion,  xliv.  17.

454  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XII,

tormented  by  fear  or  conscience,  had  failed  to  con-
ceal his  agitation  since  he  had  embarked  in  the
enterprise,  and  his  nervous  excitement  was  shamed
by  the  firmness  of  his  wife,  who  pierced  her  own
thigh  and  long  concealed  the  wound,  to  extract  his
secret  from  him  by  this  proof  of  her  self-control.1
With  Porcia  indeed  the  secret  of  the  tyrannicides
was  secure;  but  not  so  with  many  of  the  wild  un-
principled men  to  whom  it  had  been  confided ;  every
moment  of  delay  made  the  danger  of  its  divulgement
more  imminent.  Under  pretence  of  escorting  the  son
of  Cassius,  who  had  just  assumed  the  gown  of  man-
hood, the  conspirators  assembled  early,  and  proceeded
in  a  body  to  the  portico  before  the  theatre  of  Pom-
peius,  the  place  assigned  for  the  meeting  of  the  senate
being  a  hall  immediately  adjacent.2  It  had  never
been  the  ordinary  custom  of  the  Eomans  to  wear  arms
in  the  city,  and  when  the  commotions  of  Milo  and
Clodius  were  put  down,  a  special  enactment  had  been
introduced  to  check  such  a  practice,  which  seemed  to
be  creeping  in  through  the  licence  and  perilousness
of  the  times.  But  the  Koman  senator  carried  his
iron  stylus  in  a  little  case,  and  in  the  place  of  the
implement  of  writing  the  conspirators  had  furnished
themselves  each  with  a  dagger.  While  awaiting  the
arrival  of  the  dictator,  Brutus  and  Cassius  occupied
themselves  as  praetors  with  listening  to  casual  appli-
cations, and  the  freedom  with  which  the  former  ex-
pressed himself,  rebuking  those  who  boasted  that
Caesar  would  reverse  his  decisions,  was  especially
remarked.  But  as  the  morning  wore  on,  the  conspi-
rators were  exposed  to  redoubled  risks.  A  senator,
addressing  Casca  with  a  significant  smile,  said,  You
have  concealed  your  secret  from  me,  but  Brutus  has
revealed  it.  In  another  moment  Casca  would  have

1  Plut.  Brut.  13.

2  Suet.  Jul.  80. :  '•"  Senatus  idibus  Martii*  in  Pompeii  curiam  edic-
tus  est." Plut.  Brut.  U. ;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  115.

A.C.7  0-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  455

pressed  his  hand  and  communicated  the  design,  but
the  other  went  on  to  allude  to  his  meditated  com-
petition for  the  aedileship,  and  the  conspirator  saw
that  he  was  undiscovered.  Popilius  Laenas  whispered
to  Brutus,  What  you  have  in  hand  despatch  quickly,
and  was  immediately  lost  in  the  crowd.  It  was  never
known  to  what  he  referred,  but  the  conscious  assassins
were  disconcerted  and  alarmed.1

Meanwhile,  Decimus  Brutus  had  recovered  his
presence  of  mind.  He  saw  that  all  was  lost
unless  Caesar  could  be  brought  to  the  spot  u  finite"
where  the  ambush  awaited  him.  He  rallied
him  on  the  weakness  of  Calpurnia,  hinted  some
friendly  disparagement  of  the  hero's  own  resolution,
and  assured  him  that  so  favourable  a  moment  might
not  again  arrive  for  the  sanction  of  his  views  and
wishes  by  the  decree  of  the  subservient  senators.
Caesar  yielded,  and  quitted  his  house.  Hardly  had
he  turned  his  back  when  a  slave  besought  an  audience
of  Calpurnia,  declared  to  her  that  there  was  some
design  in  agitation  against  her  husband's  life,  and
desired  to  be  kept  in  confinement  till  the  event
should  prove  his  assertion.8  As  Caesar  proceeded
along  the  Forum  and  Velabrum  from  the  mansion  of
the  chief  pontiff  to  the  theatre  of  Pompeius,  more
than  one  person,  it  seems,  pressed  towards  him  to
warn  him  of  his  doom.  But  the  conspirators  to
whom  that  part  of  the  business  was  assigned  crowded
closely  about  him,  and  the  press  of  his  attendants
was  almost  too  great  to  allow  of  a  mere  stranger's
approach.  One  man,  indeed,  succeeded  in  thrusting
a  paper  into  his  band,  and  earnestly  exhorted  him  to
read  it  instantly.  It  was  supposed  tc  have  contained
a  distinct  announcement  of  the  impending  danger,
but  Caesar  was  accustomed  to  receive  petitions  in  this
•way,  and  paid  no  immediate  attention  to  it,  though

1  Plut.  Brut.  14-16.  *  Pint.  Cas.  64.

456  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xxi

he  had  it  still  rolled  up  in  his  hand  when  he  entered
the  senate  house.  As  he  was  borne  along  in  his  litter
(for  he  affected  sickness  to  countenance  the  excuse
which  Calpurnia  had  persuaded  him  to  send  to  the
senate)  he  observed  complacently  to  the  augur  Spu-
rinna,  who  had  foreboded  evil  on  that  fatal  day,  The
Ides  of  March  are  come ;  Fes,  muttered  the  sage,  but
not  yet  passed.1

At  the  moment  when  Caesar  descended  from  hia
Cesar  anaaa-  litter  at  the  door  of  the  hall,  Popilius
nated.  Laenas,  the  same  who  had  just  before  spoken
so  mysteriously  to  Brutus,  approached  him,  and  was
observed  to  enter  into  earnest  conversation  with  him.
The  conspirators  regarded  one  another,  and  mutually
revealed  their  despair  with  a  glance.  Cassius  and
others  were  grasping  their  daggers  beneath  their
robes;  their  last  resource  was  to  despatch  them-
selves. But  Brutus,  observing  that  the  manner  of
Popilius  was  that  of  one  supplicating  rather  than
warning,  restored  his  companions'  confidence  with
a  smile.2  Caesar  entered :  his  enemies  closed  in  a
dense  mass  around  him,  and  while  they  led  him  to
his  chair  kept  off  all  intruders.  Trebonius  was  spe-
cially charged  to  detain  Antonius  in  conversation  at
the  door.  Scarcely  was  the  victim  seated  when  Til-
lius  Cimber  approached  with  a  petition  for  his  bro-
ther's pardon.  The  others,  as  was  concerted,  joined
in  the  supplication,  grasping  his  hands  and  embracing
his  neck.  Caesar  at  first  put  them  gently  aside,  but,
as  they  became  more  importunate,  repelled  them  with
main  force.  Tillius  seized  his  toga  with  both  hands,
and  pulled  it  violently  over  his  arms.  Then  P.  Casca,
who  was  behind,  drew  a  weapon  and  grazed  his
shoulder  with  an  ill-directed  stroke.  Caesar  disen-
gaged one  hand  and  snatched  at  the  hilt,  shouting,

Suet.  Jul.  81.;  Dion,  xliv.  18.;  Val.  Max.  viii.  11.  2.
Plut.  Brut  16.

*.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDEK THE EMPIKE.  457

Cursed  Casca,  what  means  this  ?  Help,  cried  Casca
to  his  brother  Lucius,  and  at  the  same  moment  the
others  aimed  each  his  dagger  at  the  devoted  object
Caesar  for  an  instant  defended  himself,  and  even
wounded  one  of  the  assailants  with  his  stylus;  but  when
he  distinguished  Brutus  in  the  press,  and  saw  the  steel
flashing  in  his  hand  also,  What !  thou  too,  Brutus !
he  exclaimed1,  let  go  his  hold  of  Casca,  and  drawing
his  robe  over  his  face  made  no  further  resistance.  The
assassins  stabbed  him  through  and  through,  for  they
had  pledged  themselves,  one  and  all,  to  bathe  their
daggers  in  his  blood.  Brutus  himself  received  a
wound  in  their  eagerness  and  trepidation.  The  victim
reeled  a  few  paces,  propped  by  the  blows  he  received
on  every  side,  till  he  fell  dead  at  the  foot  of  Pompeius'
statue.2

1  Kol  av  -rtKvov,  is  the  expression  given  by  Dion  and  Suetonius.
Plutarch  only  says  that  on  seeing  Brutus's  dagger  Caesar  resisted  no
longer.  The  "  Et  tu,  Brute,"  with  which  we  are  familiar  from
Shakspeare,  has  no  classical  authority.  See  the  commentators  on
Julius  Ccesar.  But  some  such  exclamation  seems  natural;  while  the
allusion  to  the  pretended  parentage  of  the  assassin  has  an  air  of  later
invention.

*  Plut.  Caw.  66.,  Brut.  17.;  Suet.  JuL  82.;  Val.  Max.  iv.  5.  6.;
Dion,  xliv.  19.

EKD OJT THE SECOND VOLUME.

PKI5TKD BY

BPOTTISWOODE  AXD  CO.  LTD.,  NEW  STREET  SQUARE
LONDON

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  AT  LOS  ANGELES

THE  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below

Form  L-9-157n-2,'36

DG

276  Meriva^e  -

.~54h  History  of

1865  —  the

under  the

cop«3 empire.

Grad.  R.  R

m

1S50

1

H

A 000  361  909 s

±
