HANDBOUND
AT  Tim

UNIVr  KSITY  OF
TOKONTC)  PRIiSS

Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive

in  2009  with  funding  from

University  of  Toronto

Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/liistoryofromansuanin07meri

M

HISTORY

THE EOMANS

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

CHARLES  MERIVALE,  ED.,

I.ATB riLLOV or 8T. JOHX'* OOLLBOB, OAMBBIDOI.

flOM TBI rOCSTH LONDON EDITION.

WITH  A  COPIOUS  AKALTTICAL  DTDEIL

VOL.  vn.

NEW  YORK:
D. APPLETON AND COMPANY,

443 &  445  BROADWAY.

1865.

^^>fv^'^

I

CONTENTS

OF THE SEVENTH VOLUME.

CHAPTER  IX

ChuMter  of  the  PIitUii  or  Antonine  Era.— B^ittiMaa  aad  bhIbImnbm  tf  pMM  kf
Yespuian.— Ueactton  from  the  eztnraguiM  of  NMBt  tteML— YM^MiM'*
and  policy. — Onaus  and  flnaneial  meaaurM. — S*w  Fonun  aad  Tan^  «f  ]
Endowment  of  the  riietoricUna  and  t«Mhen  of  Utetmtore.— Hm  pfctlMiiptwa  aZ'
polled  from  Rome,  and  exeeatloB  of  HalrUlu  PrlMU.— DhmUUm  af  Hmnf*
Uuldeu  llouik-.— Batha  of  Tttaab— TIm  CnlMarniw  — Daatk  of  Ymprnkm,  ▲.  n.  t»:
A.  u.  88-2.— TituA  aaanmea  the  Empire.— RelatioM  of  Tltaa  witii  BanalM.— FavMr
with  which  he  wan  reglu^lt^d  by  the  Bomana. — Hla  fliath.  A.B.U:  A.ir.  8M;  aad
character.— Dettructlon  uf  Uerculanum  and  Pompeii,  aad  daatk  of  the  ddw  Pttay. —
A.0. 71-«1:  A-u.  S)M-8»1 Fl««T

CHAPTER  LXL

Domitian  emperor.— Hla  edneatloa  and  iliiiaii<n  Fitnil  tlitiiij  tt  tUa nIsb.— Gnb*
paigns  of  AgrlcoU  in  Britain,  a.  d.  T^SA:  a.  v.  ttl-ttT.— H«  to  iMil^  ftwt  tte
conquust  of  Caledonia.— Domitiaa'a  expedltioa  i^alaat  tha  Ckatti,  ▲.  bl  M:  a.  r.  WL
— Ue  claims  a  victory,  and  assumes  tlte  tltto  at  OanualewL- Vtoeil  i
commuuoemeut  of  confiscations. — OampaifBt  afaliat  tha  Sm
death  of  Kuscus.— Victory  of  Julianas.- Peace  with  the  rerlaM.  a.Bl  M:  A.V.  Ml.
—A  preu>nded  Nero.— Sneeeaaea  in  Afriea.— KeTolt  of  Aatonina,  a.  a.  W :  a.  v.  Ml —
Benewed  cruelties  and  alarma  of  DomitiaB.  ..... M

CHAPTER  LXn.

Internal  history  under  Domitian. — His  character,  and  atrength  of  the  OTldHwe  i^liat
it  — Ills  reign  an  epoch  of  reaction. — Ue  aflteta  to  be  a  raftnaar  «f  — ■■—  —
Measures  In  hunoor  of  the  Gods, — ProaeeatloB  of  »anhait»i  iiielala  Tain  of  Cor-
nelia.— Enforcement  of  the  laws  of  adultery. — T%b  BcMtlBtoa  Imw. — ^L«wa  «j^i'««*
mutilation. — Kestrictions  imposed  on  the  mlmea. — ^Deetee  fg*/i»f^  tbe  Oialdcana  and
philosophers,  a.  d.  89.— Economic  meaanrea.— Bestontion  of  the  CapltoL— Ascription
of  Divinity  to  Domitian.— Cult  of  Isis  and  Cybele.— Tribute  enforced  on  the  Jews.—
Death  of  Clemens,  and  alleged  peraeratioB  of  the  CIiristianB. — Domitian  as  a  gorein-

CONTENTS.

or,  administrator,  and  legislator. — He  countenances  delation. — Favonra  the  soldiers.—
Caresses  the  populace. — Spectacles. — The  Capitoline  and  Alban  contests.— Patronage
of  literature  repaid  by  flattery. — Domitian's  grim  humour. — The  Council  of  the  Tur-
bot,  and  funereal  banquet — Death  of  Agricola,  a.  d.  93 ;  with  suspicion  of  poison :
followed  by  proscription  of  senators,  and  second  edict  against  the  philosophers. —
Beign  of  terror. — Domitian's  personal  alarms. — He  is  assassinated  by  his  freedmen,
A.D.  96.— (a.  B.  81-96:  A.  IT.  884^849.') Page  98

CHAPTER  TiXTTT.

Accession  of  Kerva, — Reaction  against  the  tyranny  of  Domitian  moderated  by  the  clem-
ency of  Nerva. — The  Pra-torians  demand  the  punishment  of  Domitian's  assassins. —
■  Association  of  Trajan  in  the  Empire. — Death  of  Nerva,  a.  d.  98 :  a.  u.  851. — Origin
and  early  career  of  Trajan. — His  position  and  operations  on  the  Kbenish  frontier. —
Boman  fortifications  between  the  Rhine  and  Danube. — Trajan's  moderation  and  popu-
larity In  Rome.— Pliny's  Panegyric. — Expedition  against  the  Dacians,  a.  d.  101. — Tra-
jan crosses  the  Danube. — His  successes  and  triumph,  a.  d.  108. — Second  expedition,
A.  D.  104. — Bridge  over  the  Danube. — Conquest  and  annexation  of  Dacia. — The  Ul-
pian  Forum  and  Trajan's  Column  at  Rome. — Conquests  in  Arabia. — Trajan's  archi-
tectural works  in  the  city  and  the  provinces. — Vigilance,  splendour,  and  economy  of
his  administration.— His  personal  qualities,  countenance,  and  figure.— (a.  d.  96-116 :
AT.  849-868.) •  .  168

CHAPTER  LXrV.

Effect  of  the  Flavian  reaction  on  Roman  literature. — Comparison  of  Lucan  and  Silius
Italtcas :  of  Seneca  and  Qulntilian. — Pliny  the  Naturalist— Scholastic  training, — Ju-
Tenal  compared  with  Persius:  Statins  with  Ovid:  Martial  with  Horace. — The  His-
torians: Tacitus:  Ingenuity  of  hi«  plan. — His  prejudices  and  misrepresentations.—
Prevalence  of  biography. — Tacitus  and  Suetonius. — Uncritical  spirit  of  historical  com-
position.— Memoirs  and  correspondence. — Pliny  the  Younger. — Interest  attaching  to
bis  Letters. — Mntnal  approximation  of  the  philosophical  sects. — Prevalence  of  suicide.
—  Corellins.  —  Bilins.  —  Arria.  —  Corruption  of  society. — Military  manners.  —  Life
among  the  Intellltrcnt  nobles. — Spnrinna. — Pliny  the  Elder.- Pliny  tlio  Younger. —
Villas  of  the  nobility.— The  Laurentino  and  Tiiscan  of  Pliny  — Tlio  Surrentino  of
Pollias.— Decline  of  masculine  character  among  the  Roman8.—Exccption8.— Tacitus
and  Juvenal  masonllne  writers.'— Contrast  in  their  tempers.— I^st  champions  of  Ro-
man Ideas. 220

CHAPTER  LXV.

0«lMiil  expeetation  of  •  Deliverer  flkTonred  by  Augustus  and  Yospnstan.- Rovlyal  of
Jodatm  after  tbe  fcll  of  .lemiuilom.— The  schools  of  Tiberias.- Numbirs  of  the  Jews
lath*  Xut^>6e<lltlons  raised  and  suppressed.— Tbe  Christians  regarded  with  sus-
phdon  U  •  Jawtsh  sect.- Alleged  decrees  of  Nero  and  Domitinn.— IVritooution  in
Bithynia,  and  Ixlirrs  of  Pllnjr  and  Tniaa,  a.  n.  Ill :  a.  u.  864.— Mnrtynlom  of  Igna-
tius.—Tbe  Cbnrcb,  ilio  Canon,  and  Episcopacy,— Trajan's  expedition  Info  the  East
A.D.  114:  A.V.  60T.— Earthquake  at  AntloiBb,  a.d.  116,— Annexation  of  Armenia,—

CONTEXTS.  5

Tr^jan'a  eonqaests  beyond  the  Tigris.— Orertbrow  <tf  the  Parthi«ii  monarebj. — Trm-
Jan  Uoncbes  on  tbe  Pereian  Gul£— la  recalled  by  defection*  in  his  rear.— Hlc  111  Bue-
ceB8  before  Atrte.— He  rttumg  to  Aiitlocb.— Hi*  illneM  and  death  at  SeliBiia,  a.  d.  IIT :
A.  V.  670. — Bevolt  of  the  Jews  in  tbe  East :  In  Cyprus,  Cyrena,  iad  EgypL — Berolt
In  Palestine. — Akiba  and  Barcochebaa,  leaders  of  the  Jews. — flnppiaailnii  of  the  i«-
Tolt. — Foundation  of  tbe  colony  of  .£lia  Capitolina. — Final  aepantian  «tf  the  Chria-
tiansfromtho  JewB.— (A.D.  111-188:  A.  u.  b«-ti8«.)  .  .  . P^atTB

CHAPTER  LXVI.

Birth  and  parentage  of  Hadrian. — His  edncatioB  and  ■*^''*wpWf<mttiitt  — Hit  riaa  UMlar
Trajan's  guardianship.— His  alleged  adoption  and  neeeMioB. — Ha  afaaadoM  l^i||Hi'a
conquests  in  the  East.— His  campaign  in  Mc^la,  a.  d.  Ilfi  flnppmaaiw  of  •  «iNk«
splracy  against  him. — He  courts  tbe  senate  and  the  people. — Haditaa'a  flnt  pngnm,
— He  visits  Gaul,  Germany,  Bpain,  Mauretania,  confers  with  tha  Kluc  of  FMrtUa^
visits  Athens,  Bicliy  and  Carthage,  a.  d.  119-128. — Bla  seeood  profrMa:  ha  retidea  at
Athens,  Alexandria,  and  Antiocb :  Character  of  learning  and  aodety  at  theaa  dtiea
respectively.— He  revisits  Athena,  and  returns  finally  to  Rome,  a.  d.  125-lM. — Hla
buildings  at  Koine. — Adoption  of  Ceionius  Vents,  a.  o.  18S,  who  diM  pMmataralT.—
Adoption  of  Aurelius  Antoninus,  a.  p.  18H,  who  adopta  Annias  YwvaaBd  L  Ytfa
Infirmities  and  death  of  Hadrian,  a.  i>.  i;>>  — His  character  and  peraonal  appearaaea.—
A.  0.117-188:  A.  U.8T0-W1.)  .  .  .  .  tU

CHAPTER  XLVU.

Early  career  of  tbe  emi>eror  Antoninus  Pins.— Attitude  of  th«  BarfaartaMi— Tka  wall  of
Antoninus  in  Britain. — His  paternal  government  at  home. — Hla  iadajfaaea  to  tk*
Christians.— His  virtues  and  happlneaa. — Viees  of  tbe  empreaa  VknallBa.— Kariy
promise  of  M.  Aureliua— His  testimoiiy  to  the  Tirtnea  of  Anto^igM — Death  of  Aa-
toninus  Pius,  and  remarks  on  the  character  of  hia  epock — Barlow  of  tha  p«HH*i^
elements  of  Koman  society.— 1.  Tbe  populace  of  the  eltj. — IL  Tka  proTtaeiala. — Vto-

gress  of  uniformity. — Extension  of  tbe  frtuichiiie. — Uevelopmoat  of  tha  ciril  law.

8.  The  Senate : its  pride,  pretensions  and  imbecility.— 4.  Tha  pnstariaBB  and  the
legions. — Tbe  final  supremacy  of  the  soldiers  inevitable.— (a.  Ot.  U^IO :  a.  c.  601-

814.) m

CHAPTER  LXYUI.

M,  Anrellns  Antoninus  sole  emperor. — Asaociation  ci  Yeroa. — Disturtanees  abroad  and
calamities  at  home. — Verus  conducts  a  war  with  Parthia. — Joint  triumph  of  tha
emperors,  16& — Administration  of  Amvlius  at  Kome. — Inroads  of  tbe  Germana,
Scythians  and  Sarmatians  on  the  Northern  frontier. — PeatUaaea  spread  throng  the
Empire  by  the  legions  returning  from  Syria.— The  emperott  adTaBee  to  Aquileia,  167.
—They  cross  tbe  Alps,  168.— Return  and  death  of  Ycma,  16>. — Aurelius  on  the
Danube. — His  victory  over  tbe  Quadi,  174. — His  domeatie  troubles. — Unwortbinesa
of  bla  son  Commodus. — Licentiousness  of  bis  consort  Faustina. — Bevolt  and  death  of
Avidius  Cassius,  175.— Aurelius  in  tbe  East. — Ue  returns  to  Bome  and  triumphs  over

CONTENTS.

the  Sannatians,  176.— Repairs  again  to  the  Danube.— Ills  successes  over  the  Barba-
rians, and  death,  ISO.— Compared  with  Alfred  the  Great

Symptoms  of  decline  of  the  Empire.— 1.  Contraction  of  the  circnlation.— 2.  De-
crease In  population.— 8.  Effects  of  vice,  arising  from  slavery. — i.  Exhaustion  of
Italian  blood,  ideas,  and  principles. — 5.  Effect  of  pestilence  and  natural  disturbances.
—Revival  of  superstitious  observances  and  persecution  of  the  Christians.— The
"  Commentaries  "  of  M.  Aurelius.— Stoicism.— New  Platonism.— Revival  of  positive
beliet— Christianity.— Conclusion.— (A.  D.  161-180 :  A.  v.  914-993.)  . Page  450

HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

UNDER TEE  EMPIRE.

CHAPTER  LX.

A.  D.  n-81. A.  U.  824-834.

COaAJUCTKB  or  THK  rLAVIAM  OB  AMTOMINK  KKA. — SESTOftATION  AXO  MAmSK-
ANCB  or  PKACB  BY  TE8PA8IAN. — KKACTION  rBOM  THI  KXTRATAOAiiCX  Or
BSCXNT  TIMXS. — ^TSSPASIAN'S  HABITS  AND  rOUCY.^^mOl  AVD  nKAMCIAL
UXASCRKS. — NEW  rORUU  AND  TKMFIJC  Or  PKACI. — mtOWMBR  OT  THX
RUKlOKICIANa  AND  TKACHER8  Or  UTKEATVKK.— TBI  miLOaOnBM  KZRLUD
FROM  R011£,  AND  £X£CL'TION  OF  HKLVIOICS  nUSCnS. — ODfOUnOB  OT  XBM>'S
QOLDEN HOUSE. — BATHS Or TITC8. — THX CX>L088EU11. — DEATH  OF THTAgUH,

A.  D.  ?9,  A.  U.  832. — TITUS ASSUMES  THX  XHrUK. BXLATI0N8 Or  nTU8  WITB

BERENICE. — FAVOUR WITH  WHICH HX WAS UtOAJlDKD BT  THX ROMANS. — HIS

DEATH,  A.  D.  81,  A.  U.  834  ; AND CHARACTXK. DESTRUCTION OF  HKBCUI.ANUM

AND  POMPEII,  AND  DEATH  OP  THE  EUtER  PUNT.

WE  now  approach  a  period  of  Roman  history,  dis-
tinguished by  the  general  prosperity  of  the  admin-
istration, the  tranquil  obedience  of  the  people,  Th«  FUTian  or
and,  Avith  a  single  exception,  by  the  virtue  and  rfSdcSr^uman
public  spirit  of  the  rulers.  The  period  thus  fa-  ^***^-
vourably  characterized,  embraces  eight  reigns,  and  about  an
hundred  and  ten  years,  from  the  accession  of  Vespasian  to  the
death  of  M.  Aurelius.  It  has  been  usual,  indeed,  to  confine
this  famous  interval  of  good  government  within  narrower
^limits,  by  making  it  commence  after  the  death  of  Domitian ;

8  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  11.

and  it  has  been  generally  designated  by  the  name  of  the  An-
tonines,  the  last  two  of  the  emperors  it  includes.  But  both
the  limitation  and  the  designation  seem  to  me  inappropriate.
The  Antonines  thus  referred  to  occupy  in  fact  but  forty  years
of  this  period,  while  the  name  they  bore  was  perpetuated,  in
compliment  to  their  virtues,  through  several  ensuing  reigns ;
and  if  we  are  to  speak  of  an  Antonine  period  at  all,  we  ought
to  extend  it  to  the  death  of  Alexander  Severus.  On  the  other
hand,  the  era  of  peace  and  legal  government,  which  we  have
been  taught  to  associate  with  the  title  of  Antonine,  was  really
introduced  by  Vespasian ;  and  the  system  commenced  by  him
which  remained  in  force,  with  but  one  interruption,  above  a
century,  might  more  justly  and  more  intelligibly  be  styled
the  Flavian.  Though  founded  on  a  military  revolution,  this
system  was  marked  by  the  utmost  outward  deference  for  the
senate.  In  the  respect  they  showed  to  this  antique  image  of
aristocratic  authority,  Vespasian,  Trajan  and  the  Antonines
were  not  surpassed  by  Augustus  himself,  while  other  success-
ors of  Augustus  had  scarce  pretended  to  respect  it  at  all.
For  more  than  a  century  the  long  struggle  between  the  im-
perator  and  the  nobility,  between  the  army  and  the  senate,
the  sword  and  the  gown,  the  struggle  which  had  drained  the
life-blood  of  Rome  from  Marius  to  Nero,  slumbered  in  re-
pose. The  claims  of  the  contending  powers  seemed  to  be  re-
conciled; the  real  authority  remained,  no  doubt,  with  the
military  chief,  but  the  semblance  was  imparted  to  his  rivals
with  a  grace  and  a  show  of  liberality  which  cajoled  them
into  complacent  acquiescence.  After  the  death  of  Aurelius,
or,  more  properly,  with  the  accession  of  Septimius  Severus,
the  spell  was  once  more  broken,  the  veil  was  rent  asunder,
and  the  senate  could  never  again  be  deceived  into  a  belief  in
its  sovereign  authority.  One  or  two  faint  attempts  to  reas-
sert it  were  speedily  and  harshly  suppressed,  and  tlic  last
sparks  of  iudepondoncc  wore  finally  extinguished  in  the  ad-
ministrative revolution  of  Diocletian  and  Constantino.

It  is  not,  however,  in  the  pretended  government  by  the
senate,  a  mere  shadow  of  sovereignty,  that  the  peculiar  feat-

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  Q

ures  of  the  period  now  before  us  are  traced.  Of
the  eight  Ciesars  in  succession  from  Vespasian  5jlS"irtnMaf
downwards,  one  only  was  a  debauchee  and  a  ty-
rant ;  seven  were  men  of  sense  and  vigour,  able  rulers,  just
and  beneficent  administrators.  This  unexampled  series  of
good  princes  in  an  absolute  monarchy  has  been  regarded  as
a  fortunate  accident ;  but  it  is  not  fair  to  ascribe  it  to  acci-
dent only.  The  men  were  the  product  of  their  times,  and
were  legitimate  representatives  of  the  class  from  which  they
sprang,  the  military  aristocracy  of  the  empire.  With  the
single  exception  above  cited,  they  had  all  been  trained  from
youth  in  habits  of  discipline  and  the  discharge  of  public  du-
ties ;  they  had  learnt  to  obey  before  they  were  called  upon  to
govern  ;  a  training  which  seldom  failed,  under  the  stern  tra-
ditions of  Roman  education,  to  make  men  of  conduct  and
self-control.  At  the  same  time,  the  habits  of  their  age,  chas-
tened by  suffering,  and  sobered  from  the  debauches  of  the
youth  of  the  empire,  did  not  tempt  them,  as  their  predeces*
sors  had  been  tempted,  to  the  gross  extravagance  and  cynicism
which  disgraced  the  nobles  of  the  Julian  and  the  Claudian
court.  The  age  was  better,  as  we  shall  see,  and  the  men  who
represented  the  age  were  accordingly  better  also.

A  period  thus  marked  by  virtue  in  the  highest  places,  and
by  moderation  and  sobriety  in  the  ranks  beneath  is  naturally
deficient  in  incident. Still  more  is  the  Flavian
period deficient in historical records. Tran-  Mctattta
quillity  at  home  and  success,  for  the  most  part,
abroad,  can  furnish  few  events  of  stirring  interest,  and  few
Bharacters  attractive  or  instructive. Accident  has  deprived
IS  of  that  large  portion  of  Tacitus's  Histories  in  which  the
[career  of  V^espasian  and  his  sons  was  doubtless  narrated  in
the  fullest  detail. The  voluminous  recital  of  Dion  is  reduced,
llmost  at  the  same  moment,  to  a  meagre  abridgment ;  the  bi«
)graphies  of  Suetonius  become,  as  he  approaches  his  own
times,  unaccountably  slight  and  superficial. Although  the
jntury  before  us  was  prolific  in  historical  composition,  we
)S8es8  none  but  the  slightest  fragments  of  contemporary

10  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  U.  71.

narrative.  Our  materials  for  history  must  be  gathered
almost  wholly  from  indirect  sources  ;  from  letter- writers,  pan-
egyrists, satirists  and  philosophers;  from  the  scattered  inti-
mations of  coins  and  inscriptions,  or,  as  a  last  resource,  from
the  vague,  unfaithful  compilations  of  later  ages.  The  Fla-
vian or  Antonine  period  has  indeed  attracted  the  notice  of
many  modern  students,  and  has  been  eulogized  by  some  as  a
period  of  great  and  exceptionable  happiness  for  mankind.'
It  has  been  sketched  in  essays,  in  which  a  partial  collection
of  facts,  or  a  skilful  disposition  of  light  and  shade,  has  sufficed
to  give  to  it  precisely  those  features  and  characteristics
which  harmonized  with  the  writer's  previous  conception.  It
will  be  my  task  to  lay  before  the  reader  an  ample  narrative
of  the  events  recorded,  with  such  a  delineation  of  the  state  of
aflfairs  as  our  imperfect  information,  and  my  own  prescribed
limits,  will  allow.

If  the  triumph  over  Judea  was  celebrated,  as  we  may
conjecture,  soon  after  Titus's  return  from  the  East, — that  is,
_  in  the  middle  of  the  summer  of  824, — it  would

Vespasian

doses  the  tern- nearly  coincide  with the anniversary  of  Ves-

ple  of  Janus.  .  .  o i  i

pasian's  assumption  oi  the  purple  two  years  pre-
viously.' The  imperator  was  now  in  his  sixty-second  year ;
old  enough  to  feel  fatigued  by  a  long  ceremonial  in  which  he
took  personally  no  interest.  He  was  prouder,  we  may  be-
lieve, of  the  distinguished  son  who  shared  his  triumph,  than
of  the  acclamations  with  wliich  he  was  himself  saluted,  and
complained  of  his  own  weakness  in  accepting  in  his  old  age
honours  to  which  he  had  little  claim  from  his  origin,  and

'  I  need  scarcely  refer  the  reader  of  Roman  History  to  the  early  chapters
of  Gibbon's  History,  which  arc  animated  throughout  by  this  idea,  or  to  the
paragraph  headed  "general  felicity,"  near  the  end  of  ch.  2.,  in  which  it  is
moro  distinctly  indicated.  A  few  years  later  Hcgcwisch  worked  it  out,  with
ipedal  reference  to  Gibbon's  views,  in  a  formal  treatise,  ou  "  Tlio  Epoch  of
Boman  History  which  was  the  happiest  fur  the  Human  Race;"  by  which  he
does  not  mean  the  happiest  epoch  of  all  history,  an  extravagance  which  seems
to  have  been  n»HcrvetI  for  a  very  recent  cBsayist.

*  The  accession  is  dated,  it  will  be  remembered,  from  the  salutation  by  the
army  at  Ceosarca,  July  17.,  n.  c.  822,  a.  d.  69.

1

A.  U.  824,]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  H

which  he  so  little  coveted  as  the  reward  of  his  achievements.'
The  descent  of  the  victor  from  the  Capitol,  and  the  return  of
his  soldiers  to  their  quarters,  were  followed  by  the  solemn
announcement  of  peace  restored  to  the  empire.  The  new
Augustus  closed  once  more  the  temple  of  Janus,  which  had
stood  open  since  the  German  wars  of  the  first  princeps ;  or,
according  to  the  computation  of  the  christian  Orosius,  from
the  birth  of  Christ  to  the  overthrow  of  the  Jewish  people:  for
the  senate  had  refused  to  sanction  Nero^s  caprice  in  closing  it
on  his  precarious  accommodation  with  Parthia.'  Never  be-
fore had  this  solemn  act  addressed  the  feelings  of  the  citizens
so  directly ;  for  in  the  recent  season  of  war  they  had  been
made  to  taste  more  nearly  and  more  painfully  of  its  horrors
than  at  any  time  since  the  days  of  Alurius  and  Sulla.  They
luid  undergone  a  mutiny  of  their  legions,  a  revolt  in  their
provinces,  the  bitter  hostility  of  a  rival  nation  not  yet  broken
to  subjection ;  and  all  these  perils  had  been  enhanced  by  the
irruption  of  barbarian  hordes,  in  more  than  one  quarter,
within  their  frontiers.  But  these  troubles,  however  terrible,
were  counted  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  strife  of
Romans  against  Romans  within  the  limits  of  Italy,  even
within  the  walls  of  Rome  itself  For  a  moment,  the  emperor,
the  senate  and  every  other  authority,  had  fallen  beneath  the
heels  of  a  tumultuous  soldiery,  and  tlie  laws  had  succumbed  to
the  furious  violence  of  the  camp.  The  civilization  of  eight  cen-
turies had  lain  at  the  mercy  of  worse  than  barbarian  frenzy.
The  preservation  of  the  empire  from so  many  perils

'  Suet,  Vesp.  12. :  "  meritOTe  plecti  qui  triumphum,  quasi  aut  debitum  ma-
joribus  suis  aut  speratuni  unquaiu  sibi,  tarn  inepte  seuex  concupisset."  In  a
Bimilar  spirit  be  was  wont  to  jeer  at  tbe  folly  of  men  who  afiectod  the  Empire :
"  stultitiie  arguens,  qui  iguorarent  quanta  moles  moIeBtiaqae  imperio  inesse.''
Victor,  de  Ccesar.  9.

'^  Orosius,  vii.  3. ;  from  a  lost  passage  of  Tacitus :  "  sene  Augusto  Janus

patefactus usque  ad  Veepasiani duravit  imperium." The  frontier

wars  of  Rome  could  hardly  be  said  at  any  moment  to  have  entirely  ceased ;
but  the  transient  lull  of  hostilities  on  the  conclusion  of  peace  with  Parthia,
A.  D.  63,  just  before  the  outbreaks  on  the  Rhine  and  in  Palestine,  was  periiaps
as  complete  as  at  any  time  previous  or  subsequent

12  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  71.

around  it  and  within  it,  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  events
Trannniiiity  of  ^^  ®^^  histopy.  Yet  this  is  not  the  first  time
the  provinces,  ^hat  in  the  midst  of  local  rebellions  and  central
dissension,  the  great  bulk  of  the  provinces,  instead  of  rising
in  one  mass  against  their  conquerors,  had  remained  passive
under  a  yoke  which  it  might  seem  easy  to  shake  off  for  ever.
The  same  phenomenon  had  occurred  during  the  contests  of
Caesar  and  Pompeius,  and  again  when  the  whole  Roman
world  was  convulsed  by  the  struggle  of  Octavius  and  An-
tonius.  If  the  frantic  resistance  of  the  Jews  gave  birth  now
to  no  sympathetic  movements  among  the  subject  races  of  the
East ;  if  in  the  West  the  revolt  of  the  legions  excited  no
general  outbreak  of  the  nations  from  Avhich  they  had  chiefly
sprung ;  if  the  convention  of  the  states  of  Gaul  had  separated
with  a  resolution  to  stand  aloof  from  the  military  mutiny,
and  the  prospect  of  an  independent  sovereignty  had  roused
no  patriotic  feeling  among  the  descendants  of  Vercingetorix ;
the  Romans  themselves  might  ascribe  this  apathy  to  a  sense
of  the  solid  benefits  of  their  rule.  Such,  indeed,  is  the  ex-
planation to  which  Tacitus,  feeling  evidently  that  an  explana-
tion is  required,  himself  inclines :  nevertheless  we  must
remember  that  it  will  hardly  apply  to  the  circumstances  of
the  earlier  period,  when  the  character  of  the  Roman  sway
had  not  yet  made  itself  fully  felt.  We  must  bear  in  mind,
however,  the  great  deficiency  in  ancient  society  of  the  means
by  which  common  feeling  and  opinion  are  concentrated  and
diffused  through  large  tracts  of  country,  and  among  wide-
gpread  populations.  Tribes  and  races  were  then  more  sharp-
ly separated  from  each  other  in  thought,  speech  and  usage ;
the  centres  of  local  action  were  indefinitely  multiplied;  com-
munication was  tedious  or  uncertain ;  the  interchange  of
commerce  was  irregular  and  slender ;  the  continent  was  an
archipelago  of  insulated  communities,  in  which  men  were
separated  as  much  by  their  social  jealousies  as  by  the  natural
impediments  to  union  and  combination.  It  was  only  by  the
control  of  a  powerful  aristocracy  that  these  clans  could  at
any  time  be  moved  together. From  the  period  of  their  con-

A.U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  13

quest  it  had  been  the  policy  of  the  Romans  to  extinguish  the
authority  of  the  chiefs  throughout  the  provinces,  and  to  set
up  in  its  place  a  multitude  of  local  democracies,  weak  in
themselves,  full  of  domestic  jealousies  and  foreign  rivalries,
suspicious  of  every  appeal  to  a  common  sentiment,  looking
with  petty  exclusiveness  to  their  own  special  interests,  and
neglecting  more  and  more  even  the  imperfect  means  of  inter-
communication which  they  possessed.  Perhaps  the  Romans,
accustomed  themselves  to  the  contemplation  of  national  feel-
ings and  common  motives  of  action,  exaggerated  the  na-
tional character  of  the  resistance  made  to  their  arms  in  Gaul,
Spain,  Britain  and  Germany.  It  was  not  the  mere  illusion
of  vanity  that  induced  a  Cajsar  or  a  Tacitus  to  dignify  with
the  name  of  a  vast  nation  the  puny  eflforts  of  a  mere  clan  or
robber's  following.  At  all  events  we  may  be  sure  that  no
common  bond  of  feeling  or  interest  existed  in  any  of  those
great  provinces  at  the  end  of  the  first  century  of  the  em-
pire.'

Outside  the  bounds  of  Roman  dominion  there  was  still
less  opportunity  for  concerted  action.  The  barbarians  be-
yond the  Rhine  and  the  Danube,  on  the  shores  of
the  Euxine  or  the  Caspian,  always  restless  and  fcrdsBisp**-
generally  aggressive,  could  only  combine  under
the  precarious  authority  of  some  leader  of  unusual  qualities
or  fortune.  A  Maroboduus  or  a  Mithridates  might  have
made  himself  formidable  to  Rome  at  the  crisis  of  the  late
civil  commotions  :  but  the  Germans  had  been  skilfully  divid-
ed, the  Scythians  and  the  Dacians  had  not  yet  learnt  to
combine ;  a  single  detachment  in  Moesia  was  sufficient  to
strengthen  the  presidiary  legions,  and  assure  the  safety  of
the  northern  frontier.  The  Parthians,  more  vigilant,  more
politic,  more  united,  were  awed  by  their  recent  recollection

'  It  may  be  added  that  the  proTinoes  were  generally  disanned.  Juvenal's
rhetorical  exclamation :  "  spoliatid  anna  supersunt,"  is  hardly  true.  The  pro-
prietors, moreover,  were  held  in  check  by  their  own  slaves.  The  Jews  could
not  have  maintained  their  intemecinal  war  against  Rome,  had  not  their  social
system  been  very  different  in  this  respect  from  that  of  Gaul  or  Africa.

14  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  71.

of  Corbulo ;  and  they  too  had  their  own  troubles  at  this
moment  to  contend  with.  The  arms  of  Vologesus  were  oc-
cupied by  an  incursion  of  the  Alani,  who  were  pouring  east-
ward from  the  mouth  of  the  Tanais,  and  thundering  against
the  Caspian  gates.  Vologesus  had  proudly  offered  Vespa-
sian the  assistance  of  a  force  of  Parthian  cavalry :  but  no
sooner  was  the  imperator  seated  on  his  throne,  than  the
Parthian  found  it  convenient  to  ask  for  assistance  in  his
turn.  Vespasian,  who  had  haughtily  declined  foreign  aid  him-
self, was  at  liberty  to  reject  his  rival's  petition.^  He  had  no
taste  for  enterprise  or  adventure :  he  looked  forward  to  no
distant  schemes  of  policy ;  his  own  means  were  straitened,
and  the  resources  of  the  empire  crippled.  He  had  just  inau-
gurated an  era  of  peace,  and  the  tranquillity  of  the  state  was
as  dear  to  him  as  his  own.  Perhaps  his  greatest  difficulty
lay  in  resisting  the  solicitations  of  Domitian,  who  is  said  to
have  aspired  to  lead  an  ai-my  in  person,  and  to  have  impor-
tuned his  father  for  the  means  of  reaping  laurels  for  himself
The  joy  of  the  citizens  at  their  extraordinary  deliverance
is  strongly  marked  in  the  scanty  records  of  the  time  which
The  peace  of  havc  descended  to  us.  The  Peace  of  Vespasian
piati^dTy'the  "^^^^  Celebrated  by  a  new  bevy  of  poets  and  his-
Romans.  torians  not  less  loudly  than  the  Peace  of  Augus-

tus. A  new  era  of  happiness  and  prosperity  was  not  less
passionately  predicted.  Even  the  dry  prose  of  the  philoso-
pher Pliny  bursts  into  luxuriance  at  the  sight  of  the  divine
emperor  marching  with  his  sons  majestically  along  tJie  sacred
path  of  virttie  and  ben^cence^  trodden  by  the  chiefs  of  lio-
man  story.* The  medals  of  the  period  Avere  stamped  with

'  It  was  remarked  that  Vespasian  allowed  Vologesus  to  address  him  a  ^
letter,  with  the  superflcription,  "  ArHacce,  king  of  kings,  to  Flavins  Vcspasia-
nus,  pret'ting :  "  nml  oven  used  the  Humc  tcmiu  iu  his  reply,  without  assuniing
himself  the  iAii)oriul  titles. Dion,  Ixvi.  11.

•  Suet.  Dorn'il.  2. JoHei)h.  Jirll.  Jud.  vii.  7.  4. Dion,  Ixvi.  16. This  inci-
dent  is  referred  to  the  year  ir.  c.  828.,  a.  d.  7(5.  ■!

•  Plin.  IFi»t.  Kat.  ii.  7. :  "  Hac  procores  icrc  Ronmni ;  Imc  cwlesti  passu  ■!
cum  liberis  huih  vailit  maxinius  oninis  rovl  rector  Vcspasianus  Augustus,  fessia
rebus  subvenieiis." Com.  Aurel.  Victor,  ilc  Cwsar.  S). ;  "  Exsanguem  diu  fea-

I

A.U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  15

repeated  allusions  to  this  consummation  of  the  emperor's
fortune,  a  consummation  not  attained  by  unworthy  compli-
ances, but  dignified  by  the  restoration  of  domestic  freedom
!ind  the  overthrow  of  every  foreign  enemy.*  This  was  the
public  service  to  which  the  Flavian  dynasty  could  appeal,
and  it  covered  defects  in  title  which  would  have  startled  the
Romans  of  an  earlier  day.  The  family  of  the  divine  Julii,
divine  in  birth,  in  beauty,  and  in  genius,  was  replaced  by  a
brood  of  mere  plebeians,  adapted  neither  by  their  origin,  their
history,  nor  their  personal  characteristics,  to  engage  the
sympathies  of  a  superstitious  and  imaginative  people.  The
father,  the  first  of  his  name  who  had  risen  to  civil  honours,
had  only  been  known,  wliile  yet  a  subject,  as  the  plainest  of
citizens,  thrifty  and  penurious  in  his  habits,  mean  in  his  ad-
dress, homely  in  countenance  and  figure,  gifted  with  no  spark
of  enthusiasm  or  genius,  a  man  who  had  descended  from  the
highest  office  to  exercise  a  trade,  where  he  seemed  to  be  just
in  his  proper  sphere ;  and  in  accordance  with  tliis  character,
after  his  accession  to  power  ho  made  no  secret  of  his  con-
tempt for  the  flatterers  who  pretended  to  discover  an  heroic
origin  for  his  race.*  Of  the  sons,  the  elder,  though  rarely
seen  in  the  city,  had  been  shunned  there  as  a  dissolute  youth,
of  foreign  manners  and  inclinations ;  the  younger  was  only
too  notorious  for  his  frivolity  and  debaucheries.  But  Vespa-
sian and  Titus  had  deserved  well  of  the  republic  in  the  field ;

suiuque  terrarum  orbem  breri  refecit ; "  and  Q.  Curtius,  x.  9.,  if  we  may  as-
sign this  date  to  the  author  of  the  "  Life  of  Alexander."  Thoee  who  believe
that  the  Araiea  of  "  Germanicus  Csesar  "  is  the  work  of  Domitian,  will  also
compare  T.  16.:  "  Pax  tua,  tuque  adsis  nato  nunienque  secundea."  But,  £or
myself,  I  adhere  to  the  opinion  I  formerly  expressed,  that  the  "  Gennanicu3
CiBsar  "  of  the  Codd.  is  the  nephew  of  Tiberius.  Imbof  shows,  among  other
arguments,  that  Domitian  never  bears  this  title  among  his  contemporaries,  but
rather  that  of  "  Germanicus  Augustus." Imhof^  DomUitmtu^  p.  134.

'  Clinton,  Fast.  Bom.  I  59.  Eckhel,  Bod.  Xwnm.  Veti.  vL  S23-3S0.  See
the  legAids :  "  Roma  resurges :  "  "  Pax  orbis  terrarum : "  "  Paci  aetema  do-
mus  Yespasiani :  "  "  Assertor  libertatis  publicse  :  "  "  Signis  receptis,"  &c.

*  Suet.  Vesp.  12.:  "Conantes  quosdam  originem  FlaTi«  gentia  ad  condi-
tores  Reatinos  comitemque  Herculia  irrisit  ultro."

16  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  11.

they  had  saved  their  country  from  its  foes  :  and  even  Domi-
tian,  contemptible  as  he  was,  might  find  some  favour  with
the  citizens  as  the  defender  of  the  Capitol  against  a  new
Gaulish  invasion,  as  a  patriot  who  had  contended  for  the
honour  of  the  national  deities,  and  waged  the  wars  of  Jove}

But  in  fact  the  regard  in  which  the  new  dynasty  was
held,  rested  on  deeper  feelings  than  those  of  mere  personal
admiration.  The  temper  of  the  Romans  had  undergone  a
great  and  sudden  change.  The  voluptuous  luxuiy  of  the
early  empire  had  reached  its  climax  under  Nero,  and  the  na-
tion was  suffering  from  the  effects  of  its  indulgence.  It  was
sick  at  heart,  debilitated  and  remorseful.  The  rash  attempt
to  follow  their  sovereign  in  the  race  of  extravagance  had
overwhelmed  the  fortunes  of  his  wealthiest  courtiers ;  his
tyranny  had  crushed  the  most  powerful  nobles ;  the  confla-
gration of  the  city  had  destroyed  the  palaces  and  accumu-
lated treasures  of  many  of  the  chief  families  ;  disturbance  in
the  provinces  had  dried  up  the  sources  of  opulence,  which
had  been  wont  to  flow  with  unbroken  current  to  Rome  and
Italy.  The  vulgar  magnificence  of  ujjstart  freedmen  had
outraged  the  national  dignity,  and  put  prodigality  out  of
fashion.  When  Vespasian,  by  his  firmness  in  redressing  ex-
tortion abroad,  and  his  vigilance  in  checking  peculation  at
home,  enforced  the  moderation  recommended  by  his  own
conspicuous  example,  he  found  his  subjects  well  inclined  to
hail  the  new  era,  and  accept  with  satisfaction  the  restrictions

»  Statius,  Byh.  v.  8.  198. :

"  Et  Scnonum  furias  Latiee  sumsere  cohortes."
And  Thehaid.  i.  21. :

"  Aut  dcfcnsa  prius  vix  pubesccntibus  annis
Bella  Jovis."
Tbo  defence  of  the  Capitol  was  likened  to  the  wars  of  Jupiter  and  the  Titans.
At  a  much  later  period  we  meet  with  an  allusion  to  paintings  on  this  subject
on  the  walls  of  the  temple :  •

"  Juvat  infhi  tccta  Tonantis
Oemcro  Tarpeia  pcndontos  rupo  Gigantas."

Claudian,  uviU.  46.

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  1 7

lie  might  place  on  display  and  expenditure.  Possibly,  in-
deed, the  futility  of  sumptuary  enactments  had  been  discov-
ered ;  but  while  the  inquisitions  of  the  aediles  had  proved
always  ineffectual,  the  turn  given  to  social  manners  by  the
liabits  of  the  court  seems  to  have  been  both  immediate  and
lasting.  For  a  hundred  years,  says  Tacitug,  from  the  battle
of  Actium  to  the  reign  of  Galba,  the  refinements  of  the  table,
the  coarsest  and  most  pervading  form  of  luxury  among  the
Romans,  had  flourished  rankly ;  but  though  there  continued,
1)0  doubt,  to  occur  many  instances  of  gross  and  profuse  liv-
ing, the  period  of  the  worst  extravagance  now  passed  away,
never  to  return  in  its  pristine  licentiousness.*  One  happy
effect  of  the  late  bloody  conflicts  was  the  introduction  ofj
many  new  men  from  provincial  families  into  the  magistracy}
and  senate,  and  these  offshoots  of  a  ruder  stock  retained,  evei^
with  their  enhanced  fortunes,  much  of  the  simplicity  of  their
ancient  manners.  \Ye  may  remark  from  this  time  much
greater  moderation  in  the  tone  of  Roman  literature,  and
generally  more  decorum  of  thought  and  language,  than  in
the  age  preceding.  The  people  seem  to  have  become  sud-
denly sobered.  Their  most  cherished  delusions  had  been
dispelled  by  suffering.  We  meet  with  little  now  of  the
turgid  declamation,  of  which  we  have  heard  so  much,  on  the
grandeur  of  Rome,  the  immensity  of  her  conquests,  the  eter-
nity of  her  dominion.  Henceforth  instead  of  flaunting  con-
trasts between  the  fortune  of  the  empire  and  the  meanness
of  all  foreign  nations,  we  shall  find  the  greater  happiness  and
virtue  of  the  simple  barbarians  insinuated  or  even  asserted.
Arms  are  no  longer  exalted  as  the  legitimate  career  of  thq
citizen. Wealth  is  not  ostentatiously  worshipped as  the

'  Tac.  Anti.  iii.  55. :  "  Luxus  mensae p&ulatim  exolevere." Of

the  existence  of  the  two  Apicii,  each  the  model  of  luxurious  living  m  his  own
time  at  Rome,  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt.  The  first  lived  in  the  first
century  before  Christ,  the  second  in  the  first  century  aft«r.  It  is  to  the
second  that  most  of  our  notices  refer.  The  third,  who  is  wud  to  have  flour-
ished in  the  reign  of  Trajan,  i.  e.  the  second  century  of  our  era,  is  only  known
from  one  anecdote,  which  may  well  be  apocryphal,  of  Athenaeus.

VOL. VII. — 2

18  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  71.

highest  object  of  desire.  Luxury,  and  the  vices  which  at-
tend it,  are  denounced  as  sins,  not  merely  mocked  as  vulgar
affectations.  Obedience  is  held  not  less  honourable  than
command ;  domestic  habits  and  virtues  are  regarded  with
pleasure  and  esteem.  On  the  other  hand, — such  is  the  point
at  which  the  highest  philosophy  has  arrived, — the  true  Di-
vinity consists,  according  to  Pliny,  in  rendering  aid  as  a
mortal  to  fellow  mortals.  This  is  recognized,  at  least  among
the  most  intelligent,  as  the  actual  origin  of  mythological
romance  ;  and  such  as  this  is  the  godlike  career  of  the  august
Vespasian,  the  greatest  of  all  rulers  in  every  age  and  realm,
who  sustains  with  his  sons'  assistance  the  tottering  fabric  of
society.  This  is  the  career  of  immortal  glory,  the  only  im-
mortality, as  the  writer  plainly  intimates,  to  which  man  can
hope  to  attain,  however  natural  and  pious  the  custom  of  as-
cribing a  divine  eternity  to  the  great  benefactors  of  their
species.*  Even  the  court  poets  were  awed  to  measured  de-
cency by  the  quiet  sentiment  of  the  nation.  The  panegyric
of  Vespasian  by  Silius  Italicus,  the  ape  of  Virgil,  is  modelled
upon  that  of  Augustus  Caesar,  the  offspring  of  the  Gods  ;  but
it  hardly  yields  in  dignity  to  one  of  the  finest  passages  of
the  -^neid  while  it  repudiates  its  most  vicious  audacities.'

'  Sec  the  remarkable  passage  in  Pliny,  IFist.  Nat.  ii.  5.,  to  part  of  which  I
have  already  referred. "  Deus  est  mortali  juvare  mortalem,  et  ha^c  ad  seter-

nam  gloriam  via. Hac  proceres  icrc  Romani Die  est  vctustissimus

refercndi  bene  merentibus  gratiam  mos,  ut  tales  numinibus  ascribant. Quippo

et  omnium  aliorum  nomina  deorum ex  hominum  uata  sunt  meritis."

»  Silius,  iii.  694. :

"  Exin'  80  Curibua  virtm  coeleatis  ad  astra
EiTeret ....

nine  pater  ignotam  donabit  vincere  Thulen,
Inquo  CaledoniuH  primus  trnhct  agmina  lucos ;
Compeacct  ripis  Hiienum,  rcget  impiger  Afros,
ralmlfcramquo  scncx  bello  doniitabit  Idumcn ;
Neo  Stygis  iUo  lacus  viduataciuo  luniine  regna,
Scd  Suporum  sedcs,  noHtroH(iue  tencbit  honorcs."
I  need  not  repeat,  for  the  classical  reader,  the  corresponding  encomium  on  Au'
gustos,  jEnad,  vi.  798. :  *'  Augustus  Ceesar  Divwn  ffcnita"  Sic

A.U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  19

Yet  if  we  turn  from  the  acts  and  merits  of  Vespasian  to
the  lineaments  of  his  face  and  figure,  we  can  hardly  re-
frain from  smiling  at  the  enthusiasm  avowed  pewonaiiip.
for  him.  None  of  the  Roman  emperors  had  a  JSSTor  v^
countenance  prosaic  as  his ;  nor  do  the  artists  ?••••»•
wlio  were  occupied  upon  it,  seem  to  have  imagined  that
they  could  commend  themselves  to  their  patron  by  an
attempt  to  embellish  or  idealize  it.  The  monuments  of
Vespasian  represent  him  as  short  and  compact  in  figure,
with  a  thick  neck  and  broad  sensual  chin,  a  round  bald
liead,  small  restless  eyes.  Coarse  nose  and  lips,  a  forehead
deeply  wrinkled  with  fatigue  rather  than  with  thought,
and  his  whole  expression  that  of  uneasiness  and  effort.'  It
may  be  worth  remarking,  as  a  trait  of  manners,  that  the
biographer,  in  noticing  the  robustness  of  his  health,  sayg
that  he  took  no  further  care  of  it  than  to  rub  his  limbs  regu-
larly after  bathing,  and  interpose  one  day's  fast  in  the  course
uf  every  month.  His  ordinary  habit,  after  attaining  the
sovereignty,  was  to  be  awakened  before  the  customary  hour,
tliat  is,  before  dawn,  read  his  letters  and  despatches,  and
tlien  admit  his  friends  to  his  levee.  He  slipped  his  feet  into
sandals  without  assistance,  huddled  on  his  toga,  and  after
t lansacting  business,  drove  out  and  returned  for  his  siesta.*
His  repose  was  soothed  by  female  eareflaes;  but  at\er  the
death  of  his  legitimate  consort  he  was  content  to  renew  the
less  regular  union  he  had  previously  formed  with  a  freed-
woman  named  Coenis,  and  on  losing  her  also,  soon  after  his
accession  to  power,  made  thenceforth  no  other  permanent
connexion.* From  the  midday  retirement  he  proceeded  to

'  Suetonius  describes  him  with  a  few  graphic  touches :  "  statura  fuit  quad-
rata,  compactis  finuisque  membris,  rultu  Teluti  nitentia." Vmp.  20.

»  Suet.  Vesp.  21,  22.

'  CoMiis  was  a  freevlwoman  of  the  Claudian  family,  and  had  beoi  a  f»-
fourite  of  Antoiiia,  the  mother  of  Claudius.  With  her  Vespasian  formed  the
cornie^^ion  tolerated  by  Roman  law  imder  the  name  of  eoiUvbemium.  At  a
later  period  he  made  a  regular  marriage  with  a  Roman  matron,  by  whom  he
had  the  two  sons  who  succeeded  him. On  her  decease  he  recalled  Coenis  on

20  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOMANS  [A.  D.  71.

the  bath,  and  thence  to  snpper,  at  which  he  demeaned  him-
self with  the  affability  of  a  man  conscious  of  having  dis-
charged to  his  satisfaction  all  the  duties  of  the  day.  His
conversation  was  sprightly,  and  he  allowed  his  companions
almost  as  much  licence  in  raillery  as  he  assumed  for  himself;
but  his  humour  was  reputed  somewhat  low  by  the  polished
wits  of  the  courts  of  Nero  and  Otho.  Some  of  his  coarse
and  caustic  jests  are  recorded,  which  might  serve  to  illus-
trate the  manners  of  the  times,  were  they  fit  for  modem  ears.
One  perhaps  may  be  repeated,  which  is  characteristic  of  the
man,  and  has  attained  celebrity.  When  seized  with  his  last
illness  and  feeling  the  near  approach  of  dissolution,  Ah  !  he
whispered  to  his  attendants,  methinks  I  am  becoming  a
God.^

But  if  such  were  the  new  emperor's  relaxations,  he  was

thoroughly  in  earnest  in  matters  of  business. He  took  a

plain  soldier's  view  of  his  duty,  without  looking

A  census,  and \  -.  i  • i t .1  i

other  restore-  torward  as  a  statesman ;  but  m  the  daily  work
before  him  he  shrank  from  no  responsibility.  A
Koman  who  understood  the  office  of  censor  was  always  in
earnest.  It  involved  him  in  many  feuds  and  some  dangers.
Tiberius  had  been  too  cynical ;  Caius  too  reckless ;  Nero  too

the  former  terms,  the  law  not  admitting  of  union  by  confarreatio  or  by  as  ct
libra,  in  such  a  case.  Suet.  Ve*p. :  "  revocavit  in  contubcrnium."  Coenis  died
in  824, Dion,  Ixvi.  14.

'  Suet.  Ve»p.  23. :  "  Va;  I  puto  deus  fio."  The  popular  opinion  of  Vespa-
Bian's  amiable  qualities  is  preserved  in  the  romance  on  the  life  of  Apollonius
by  Philostratus,  but  the  anecdote  there  recorded  of  him  can  hardly  be  ac-
cepted as  history.  It  is  pretended  that  Vespasian,  conversing  with  the  phi-
losopher in  Egypt,  for  whom  he  felt  the  highest  reverence,  and  whose  guidance
he  solicited,  entreated  him  to  make  him  emperor :  ■ir6i7]c6v  rje,  l^r/,  (iaaiKa
(v.  27.).  "  I  have  already  done  so,"  replied  the  sage,  "  in  praying  the  Gods  to
give  us  for  emperor  a  just,  generous,  temperate,  old-fashioned  father  of  a  fam-
ily." "  0  Jupiter,"  returned  Vespasian,  "  may  I  govern  wise  men,  and  may
wise  men  govern  mo  I "  Then  turning  to  the  Egyptians,  he  said,  "  Draw  from
me  as  from  the  Nile : "  {('ipliaaaOe  wf  THel^.ov  kci/iov).  If  he  really  said  any-
thing like  this,  it  must  have  boon  in  a  moment  of  very  uimsual  eiitliusiiism.
It  is  i>o8Miblc,  indeed,  that  oven  VcspuU&Q's  insensibility  was  not  proof  against
the  iutoxiuation  of  tiattery  attending  upon  a  great  success.

A.U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  21

self-indulgent  to  accept  an  invidious  responsibility  for  the
sake  of  the  public  weal.  Augustus  had  assumed  it  from  pol-
icy, Claudius  in  pedantry  fortified  by  insensibility,  but  to
Vespasian  it  bore  the  form  of  an  act  of  military  discipline.
The  disorders  of  the  times  had  thinned  the  ranks  of  the
privileged  orders.  The  senate,  it  is  said,  had  been  reduced
to  two  hundred  members.'  Both  senators  and  knights  had
been  impoverished,  degraded  by  ignominious  compliance*,
blasted  by  popular  odium.  Illegitimate  pretenders  had
stepped  into  the  places  left  vacant  by  death  and  ruin.  Ve»^
l)asian  set  about  the  revision  of  the  lists,  after  ancient  preoe*
dent,  and  associated  his  son  Titus  with  himself  in  the  task.
The  elder  seems  indeed  to  have  conducted  himself  with  more
temper  than  the  younger  colleague ;  for  it  was  against  the
son  rather  than  the  father  that  the  murmurs  of  the  viotima
were  directed.  Vespasian's  deference  to  the  senate  contin-
ued after  his  demise  to  be  noted  as  the  great  merit  of  his  ad-
ministration ;  and  it  was  mentioned  to  his  honour  that  for
many  years  he  refused  to  accept  the  tribunitian  power,  and  ^
the  title  of  Father  of  his  country.*  Nor  would  he  have  es-
caped so  free  from  the  most  odious  charges  of  immorality,
lavished  at  all  times  on  the  personal  enemies  of  the  order,
had  he  rendered  himself  obnoxious  by  the  austerity  of  his
censures.  But  Titus,  on  the  other  hand,  is  branded  with  the
most  flagrant  imputations,  such  as,  having  circulated  at  first
privately,  in  angry  and  indignant  circles,  were  too  often  ad-
mitted without  ijroof,  but  without  hesitation,  among  the

'  Such  is  supposed  to  be  the  meaning  of  AureL  Victor,  de  Caaco'.  9,  "  leo-
tis  undique  optimis  viris  mille  gentes  oompoeitse,  cum  duoentaa  •gemme  repe-
risset."  He  has  just  l>een  speaking  of  the  senate.  But,  as  tbare  wen  aewtnX
individual  families,  and  of  course  many  persons  of  one  family  iu  tlie  Mune  gens
or  house,  at  the  same  time  members  of  the  senate,  the  phrase  would  not  be  s
correct  one.  Still  I  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  author  means  us  to  under-
stand that  the  whole  number  of  Roman  houses,  patrician  and  plebeian,  waa
reduced  to  200,  or  that  Vespasian  created  new  houses  to  such  an  eitent

*  Suet.  Vesp.  12.  Even  durmg  the  civil  war  he  relinquished  the  imperial
etiquette  of  causing  all  who  approached  him  to  be  searched  for  concealed
weapons.

22  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  71.

records  of  history.  The  inquisition  now  made  into  the  char-
acter, as  well  as  the  birth  and  means  of  the  Roman  nohles,
famished  no  doubt  an  opportunity  for  proscribing  many
persons  against  whom  the  Flavian  dynasty  might  harbour
ill-will.*  Titus,  we  are  told,  charged  with  the  defence  of  the
new  settlement  of  power,  did  not  scruple,  in  one  instance  at
least,  to  procure  the  assassination  of  an  enemy  to  his  family.
He  invited  a  hostile  senator,  the  Vitellian  general  Csecina,  to
supper,  and  caused  him  to  be  waylaid  on  leaving  his  pres-
ence, and  murdered.  The  proofs  of  the  victim's  complicity
in  a  plot  were  said  indeed  to  be  notorious ;  nevertheless  a
rumour  prevailed,  and  was  accepted  by  many  as  true,  that
his  real  offence  was  his  supposed  intimacy  with  Titus's  fa-
vourite Berenice.'

To  prop  the  tottering  and  almost  prostrate  commonwealth,
then  to  secure  and  adorn  it,  such  according  to  the  biographer
The  financial  ^f  the  Caesars  was  the  chief  care  of  Vespasian's
cai*™)Ucy  o^*  principatc.  Strict  discipline  must  be  restored  to
Vespasian.  ^jjg  camp ;  the  insolence  of  the  victors  must  be  re-
pressed; the  angry  restlessness  of  the  vanquished  must  Ibe
soothed.  Of  the  Vitellian  soldiers  the  greater  number  re-
ceived their  discharge,  sweetened,  no  doubt,  by  adequate
compensations ;  while  to  those  who  had  shared  his  victory
the  conqueror  extended  no  special  indulgence,  but  doled  out
their  legitimate  remuneration  slowly  and  grudgingly.  The
restriction  of  the  first  military  honours,  long  unworthily  lav-
ished, to  the  greatest  military  services,  caused  perhaps  mur-
murs which  have  left  their  echoes  in  the  record  of  our  history.*

'  Ycspasian  assumed  the  censorship  r. c. 825,  a.d.  72:  "intra  quadrien-
niam,"  says  Pliny,  writing  his  Seventh  Book  (iVo/.  IFist.  vii.  80).

»  Suot  Vetq).  8.,  Tit.  6.  Victor,  Epit.  10,  The  Ctecina  of  Suetonius  is
the  Allienus  of  Dion,  Ixvi,  16.,  whoso  criminal  intentions  are  admitted  by  that
writer.  Titus  is  accused  of  Iiaviiig  effected  the  destruction  of  other  su.spected
persona  by  Bending  his  creatures  into  public' places  with  instructions  to  call
loudly  for  their  punishment,  wliich  ho  protended  to  interpret  as  the  voice  and
declared  will  of  the  people.

•  VetpasUn  restored  their  dun  Hignificanco  to  the  triumphal  ornaments,
•ttoh  M  the  tuidoa  palmata,  which  Tiberius,  Claudius,  and  Neru  had  i)rostitutod

A.  U.  824,]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  28

The  frugal  temper  and  actual  poverty  of  the  emperor  were
lialf-disguised  by  an  affected  simplicity  of  manners ;  as  when
lie  rebuked  a  perfumed  candidate  with  a  gesture  of  disgust,
and  the  sharp  remark,  I  had  rather  you  had  smelt  of  garlic.
The  censorship  offered  an  opportunity  for  a  reconstitution  of
the  provinces  and  free  states,  many  of  which  were  dealt  with
according  to  their  political  deserts,  or  sacrificed  to  the  con-
venience of  the  treasury.  The  gift  of  Latin  rights  to  the
whole  of  Spain  was  a  tribute  to  the  memory  of  Galba,  and  to
the  support  his  enterprise  had  received  in  the  adhesion  of
the  Iberians.'  This  favour  to  the  western  provinces  was
balanced  by  severity  towards  other  portions  of  the  empire^
Achaia,  to  which  Nero  had  precipitately  granted  fi-eedom,
was  again  reduced,  on  pretence  of  an  insurrection,  to  the  con-
dition of  a  taxable  province ;  and  Lycia,  Rhodes,  Byzantium,
and  Samos,  were  deprived  also  of  their  autonomy.*  The  de-
pendent sovereignties  which  had  subsisted  up  this, time  in
Thrace,  Cilicia,  and  Commagene,  were  finally  absorbed  into
the  state,  and  enrolled  among  the  contributors  to  the  fiscus.*
Whatever  pretext  might  be  assigned  for  these  harsh  measures,
they  were  no  doubt  really  directed  by  financial  expediency.
Tlie  ditticulties  of  the  imperial  government  were  in  fact  tre-
mendous, and  the  charges  of  parsimony  or  avarice  which
have  been  made  against  this  emperor^  must  be  considered  in

to  men  of  inferior  claima  and  even  to  ciriluns. See  Marquardt  (Becker's
Hatidbuch  dtr  Alterth.  ill  2.  453.).
'  Plin.  IHiU.  Nat.  iii.  4.

'  Suet.  Vesp.  8.  14. ;  Pausanias,  viL  lY.,  after  mentiooing  Nero's  liberality
to  Greece :  ov  n^  'EAXtjai  re  e-eykvero  dvaa&at  tov  dupov  •  Oi/eoiraaiavov  yap
ha  "Slpcfva  ip^avroc,  eg  ift^'v'kiav  araacv  irpoi/x^tioavy  luH  afac  wrorcAf tf  re
^iQ  b  Oveairaaiavbg  elvai  ^puu,  xal  axoietv  iidXnxrev  ^t/tdvoc,  airofufia-
tfiUvai  (j>rj<yac  t>/v  i7.ev6epiav  to  'E^^^ucAv.  Comp.  Philostr.  lit.  ApoUoa.  v.
11.,  where  the  philosopher  is  said  to  have  expressed  his  indignation  to  the
aperor's  face.

Suet  1.  c. Josephus,  Bell.  Jud.  vii.  1.  1.,  refers  the  annexation  of  Com-
igene  to  the  year  a.  d.  72,  u.  c.  825,  when  the  King  Antiochus  was  brought
rith  his  son  to  Rome. Flaviopolis,  in  Cilicia,  commenced  its  era  with  the
lyear  74.

24  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  71.

reference  to  his  necessities.*  The  Flavian  dynasty  succeeded
to  the  inheritance  of  an  exhausted  population,  a  rapacious
soldiery,  and  an  empty  and  embarrassed  treasury.  The  Capi-
tol was  not  yet  completed,  and  probably  large  debts  re-
mained to  discharge  on  the  cost  of  its  reconstruction.  The
losses  of  the  civil  wars  had  been  severe  and  various.  Italy
had  been  devastated,  the  more  distant  provinces  had  been
drained.  Whole  cities  awaited  the  restoring  hand  of  the  em-
peror. Meanwhile  the  revenues  of  the  wealthiest  regions
had  been  embezzled  by  the  prefects,  or  diverted  into  the
camps.  Vespasian  not  only  suspended  the  dissipation  of  the
finances  in  the  mad  luxury  of  the  imperial  court,  and  in  the
construction  and  embellishment  of  the  imperial  palace ;  he
ordered  the  demolition  of  the  greater  part  at  least  of  Nero's
golden  house.  Nevertheless  there  were  other  heavy  expenses
which  he  could  not  refuse  to  assume.'  The  Capitol  was  to
be  rebuilt  with  a  magnificence  suited  to  the  age ;  the  temple
of  Peace,  the  pledge  of  his  policy,  was  to  be  erected ;  it  was
essential  perhaps  to  the  statibility  of  the  new  dynasty  to  ac-
knowledge the  principle  of  deifying  deceased  emperors,  and
the  shrine  of  Claudius,  vowed  to  him  by  Agrippina,  but
swept  away  by  his  successor,  was  to  be  restored :  at  the  same
time  the  amusement  of  the  citizens  must  not  be  neglected ;
and  the  erection  of  a,  great  amphitheatre  for  the  national
spectacles,  was  a  prudent  indulgence  to  the  passions  of  the
populace.  It  was  no  doubt  with  reference  to  the  manifold
expenses  by  whicli  he  found  himself  beset,  the  arrears  of  the
past,  and  the  anticipations  of  the  future,  of  which  but  a  por-

*  Tac.  Ilist.  ii.  5. :  "  prorsus,  si  avaritia  abesaet,  antiquis  ducibus  par."

•  Amonf^  the  incidental  carea  of  a  i)rincc  who  arrived  at  power  after  tho
diHordcrri  of  civil  war,  may  be  mentioned  tliat  of  rcplaeinp  the  arcliives  of  tlio
empire  whicli  had  been  lost  in  tho  sack  of  the  Capitol.  The  most  important
documents  of  Roman  history,  senatorial  decrees,  resolutions  of  the  people,
treaties  of  peace  and  alliance,  cnpTiven  on  brazen  tablets,  had  been  stored  up
in  that  sacred  receptacle,  and  were  consumed  in  its  conflagration.  Vespasian
cau4cd  them  all  to  be  re-cn((raved  from  the  best  sources  within  reach,  and  tho
collection  he  made  amounted  to  3UUU  pieces. Suet.  Veap.  8.

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  25

tion  has  here  been  indicated,  that  Vespasian  is  said  to  have
declared,  that  the  sum  of  forty  millions  of  cesterces  was  re-
quired to  maintain  the  commonwealth.'

The  inquisition  of  the  censorship,  extending  to  every  part
of  the  empire,  was  directed  to  settling  the  finances  on  a  solid
basis,  and  the  arrangements  above  noticed  were  intended  to
balance  the  public  revenues  and  expenditure.  ye»|,aguu'«
Besides  bringing  several  new  territories  witliin  ^1^*12^,2^
the  sphere  of  direct  taxation,  Vespasian  revived  "**^
various  imposts  wliich  Galba  in  the  first  fervour  of  liis  tri-
umph had  abolished,  and  also  added  new  ones.  He  enhanced
the  tributes  of  all  the  provinces,  and,  in  some  cases,  even
doubled  them.*  The  Roman  writers  on  land  have  left  us
some  curious  notices,  showing  how  minute  and  searching  was
the  assessment  now  made ;  and  they  add,  that  the  measures
for  raising  revenue  on  the  strips  of  public  domain  still  uuas-
signed  in  Italy,  but  illegitimately  occupied,  caused  commo*
tious  which  could  only  be  appeased  by  desisting  from  the
attempt.*  Many  trivial  particulars  of  the  Flavian  finance
are  added  by  the  historian,  who  could  often  see  in  the  reason-

'  Suet.  Vetp.  16.:  "Summa  erarii  fiscique  iaopia,  de  qua  testfficatafl  tit
initio  8tatim  principatus,  professus  quadringentieB  millies  opw  eaae  ut  respub-
lic-a  stai-e  posset."  This  sum  of  40,000  niilli<>nit  of  MSteroea,  or  820  Tn'Mipn*
sterling,  has  been  supposed  by  some  writefs  to  repcesoit  tlie  uinaal  revenue  or
expenditure  of  the  state.  Others,  «tartled  at  the  extnragaDoe  of  this  explana-
tion, have  proposed  to  alter  quadrmffe$Uie$  into  quadragies ;  L  e.  400  milliona,
or  32  millions  sterling.  So  violent  a  remedy  u  inadmissible ;  nor  need  we
8up]X)se  that  the  sum  represents  the  annual  revenue  of  the  state,  which  never
probably  came  under  one  head  at  alL  See  the  remarks  made  in  chapter  xxxlL
of  this  work.  Some  of  the  wide  conjectures  which  have  been  advanced,  as  to
the  amount  of  the  imperial  revenues,  are  collected  in  a  note  bj  llarqoardt
(Becker's  Ilaiulbiu-h,  ill  2.  213.).  Bureau  de  la  Malle's  section  correspmids
with  that  I  have  proposed  in  the  text  See  Hxm.  PoL  dm  Rommtu^  iL
405.  435.

*  Suet.  Vesp.  16.

*  Frontinus,  de  Colon,  ed.  Goes.  p.  146.  Aggenos,  de  Comtrwt.  Affrontm  :
Ilyginus,  de  Gener.  Conirov.  in  ScripL  Ra,  Agrar.  ed.  Lachmann,  pp.  81.  133.
See  Bureau  de  la  Malle,  iL  436.  Laboulaye,  DnAt  foncihre,  71.  Marquardt
(Becker's  Handb.,  iii.  1.  339.).

26  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  71.

able  policy  of  the  most  honest  of  the  Caesars  nothing  but  the
petty  parsimony  of  a  sordid  mind.  Vespasian  is  accused  of
making  small  gains  by  speculations ;  of  selling  offices  to  can-
didates and  pardons  to  criminals;  of  advancing  the  most
rapacious  prefects  to  the  most  opulent  prefectures,  that  they
might  have  more  to  disgorge  when  it  suited  him  to  condemn
them  for  extortion ;  finally,  of  inventing  new  and  even  dis-
gusting objects  of  taxation,  and  defending  himself,  according
to  the  well-known  anecdote,  by  remarking  that  the  coin
smelt  not  less  sweet  from  them.^  Nevertheless,  Suetonius
himself  bears  witness  to  many  instances  of  this  prince's  lib-
erality towards  all  classes  of  men  /  to  impoverished  senators
and  consulars,  to  afflicted  communities,  and  generally  to  the
professors  of  the  arts  and  sciences.  It  was  remarked,  as  an
instance  of  his  consideration  for  deserving  industry,  that  he
rejected  a  proposal  to  move  the  materials  for  his  buildings  by
improved  machinery,  declaring  that  he  must  he  suffered  to
feed  his  people.^

The  foundation  of  colonies  had  been,  heretofore,  the  or-
dinary mode  of  paying  off  the  discharged  veterans  of  the  civil
Foundation  of  wars,  and  though  Vespasian  does  not  seem  to
colonics.  have  made  any  new  establishments  of  this  kind,

the  number  of  older  colonies  he  reconstituted  shows  that  he
followed  the  policy  of  his  predecessors  in  relieving,  by  these
means,  his  over-burdened  finances.  Ostia,  at  the  mouth  of
the  Tiber,  Nola  and  Puteoli  in  the  wealthiest  region  of  Cam-
pania, Forum  Populi,  Reate,  and  other  places  in  the  districts
round  the  capital,  were  thus  recruited  with  a  new  stock ;
nor  need  wo  suppose  that,  as  in  the  assignments  of  Octavius,
the  actual  inhabitants  were  dispossessed  for  it.  This  is,  per-
haps, the  first  historical  fact  that  confirms  what  the  poets  had
already  indicated,  the  decrease  of  population  even  in  the  heart
of  Italy.* But  the  censors  must  have  revealed  the  token  of

'  Suet  1.  c Dion,  Ixvl.  14,

*  Suet.  Vetpaa.  18.:  "  pncfatus,  sinerot  se  plcbeculam  pasccrc."

*  Nero,  indeed,  hud  in  the  same  manner  restored  Antium  and  Tarcntunu
Tac  Ann.  xlr.  27.

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  27

this  ominous  movement  to  the  emperor,  and  thrown  a  gloom
over  his  prudent  efforts  to  restore  the  finances.*

The  colonist  sheathed  his  sword  when  he  put  his  hand  to
the  plough,  and  the  establishment  of  colonies  was  understood
as  a  pledge  of  the  restoration  of  peace.  Among
the  arcliitectural  works  with  which  Vespasian  tMoptoor
now  decorated  the  city,  one  of  the  most  promi-
nent was  the  forura  with  which  he  extended  the  line  of  clois-
tered areas  thrown  open  by  Julius  and  Augustus.  The  great
fire  had  cleared  a  site  for  these  new  constructions  at  the  back
of  the  Roman  forum.  As  the  works  of  his  great  predeces-
sors had  been  illustrated  by  the  shrines  of  Venus  and  Mars,  so
the  colonnades  of  Vespasian  ^were  arranged  to  embrace  the
new  temple  of  Peace,  a  bold  personification  of  the  aspirations
of  the  age,  unknown  to  the  Grecian  Olympus.  Tins  temple,
whicli  seems  to  have  been  of  unusual  size  and  splendour,  waa
embellished  with  the  spoils  of  the  Jewish  war,  and  works  of
art  from  other  countries  of  the  East.*  He  completed  the  de-
sign with  a  basilica,  in  which  he  invited  the  learned  of  all
professions  to  meet,  and  conduct  their  tranquil  discussions.*

'  Several  places  in  the  prorincM  may  be  added  to  the  liat  of  YeqpMUn's
colonies ;  Aventicum  ia  Gaul,  FlaTiobriga  in  Spain,  Derdtiui,  8bds  uid  FUri-
opolis  in  Thrace,  Ctesarea  in  Samaria,  and  another  FUvioptriia,  alreadj  OMO-
tioued,  in  Cilieia.  Comp.  Plin.  Hiat,  NcU.  ir.  18.  31.  34.,  and  inser^>tkMM.
Tyre,  Paphos,  Salami^,  and  other  places  in  the  East,  seem  to  hare  nedTed
favours  from  Vespasian  or  Titus,  which  they  acknowledged  by  oommemonU*
ing  the  auspicious  year,  Irof  veov  lepov,  on  their  coins.  Of  Tyre,  Q.  Curtiua,
whoso  work  has  been  generally  assigned  to  this  period,  says  (It.  4.) :  "  multis
ergo  easibus  defuneta,  et  post  excidium  renata,  nunc  tamen  longa  pace  cuncta
refovente,  sub  tutela  Romanse  mansuetudinis  acquiescit."  Bat  from  the  same
passage  Niebuhr  argues  that  the  writer  lived  in  the  time  of  Severus.  Comp.
Herodian,  iii.  9.  10. Ulpian,  in  the  IHgesl,  L  15.  1.

"  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  vii.  6.  7.  Plin.  Hut.  Xat.  xxir.  36,  ixxvL  24.  Henv
dian,  i.  44.  A  pictui-e  of  the  battle  of  Issus,  by  an  artist  of  Alexandria,  was
removed  by  Vespasian  and  suspended  in  the  temple  of  Peace.  Ptolemaus
apud  Phot.  (Sharpe's  Hl^.  of  Effifpt,  i.  307.).  Here  also  were  placed  several
works  of  art  which  Nero  had  seized  in  the  provinces  for  the  decoration  of  his
Golden  House. Plin.  //.  N.  xxxiv.  19.  24.

'  Gellius,  V.  21.,  xvi.  8. Galen,  de  Comp.  Me(Mc.  L See  Reimar'a  note  on

28  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  71.

Augustus  had  endowed  the  literature  of  this  time  with  the
collection  of  the  Palatine  library.  Vespasian  not  only  found-
ed a  library  in  his  forum,  but  was  the  first  of  the  Roman
sovereigns  to  institute  a  salaried  hierarchy  of  teachers.  Au-
Vespasian's  gustus  in  a  simpler  and  more  generous  age  had
!m;ntof°m°^'  Stimulated  genius  by  personal  condescension:
erature.  )j^^  ^j^g  Flavian  era  could  not  appreciate  the

delicacy  of  the  Augustan,  and  Vespasian  could  find  no
happier  means  of  patronizing  letters  than  by  handsome
wages  paid  quarterly.  Destitute  himself  of  learning  and
polite  accomplishments,  he  cannot  have  been  instigated
to  this  indulgence  by  any  just  appreciation  of  the  claims  of
literary  merit.^  Nevertheless,  the  measure  he  adopted  was
systematic,  munificent,  and  permanent.  Not  only  did  he
confer  presents  or  pensions  upon  poets  and  artists,  but  to  the
rhetoricians  and  grammarians,  both  Greek  and  Latin,  in  the
provinces  as  well  as  in  the  city,  he  assigned  an  annual  pay-
ment, varying  in  regular  gradations,  but  amounting  ordi-
narily to  a  liberal  stipend,  in  addition  to  their  pupils'  fees."
For  such  extensive  liberality,  so  new  to  the  policy  of  Rome,
there  must  have  been  a  strong  public  motive.  Amidst  all
the  brilliancy  of  the  late  reigns,  the  solid  education  of  the

Dion,  IxvL  16.  Upon  the  locality  of  this  temple  the  topographers  are  now
agreed.  For  a  long  time  the  great  ruins  which  bear  the  name  of  Constantine
were  mistaken  for  it

*  Aurellus  Victor  notices  as  an  important  fact,  that  hitherto  all  the  empe-
rors from  Augustus,  and  particularly  the  five  who  were  of  Cesarean  blood,  wore
men  of  literary  accomplishments  :  EpU.  8.  "  adco  Uteris  culti  atque  cloquentia
fuere  ut,  ni  cunctis  vitiis,  absque  Augusto,  nimii  forent,  profecto  texissent
modica  flagitia."

'  Suet.  Vesp.  18.:  "ingenia  et  artos  vcl  maximofovit:  primus  o  fisco  La-
tinis  GroBcisque  rhetoribus  annua  centcna  (800/.)  eonstituit."  Sec  farther
Schmidt,  "  J5«t/:-  und  OlaiibtrufrciheU  im  Istai  Jalirhunda-ty^  p.  440  foil.  The
rhetoricians  included  the  sophists  or  jjhilosophcrs.  Vespasian  extoiidcd  his
liberality  occasionally  to  pocta  and  artists :  "  pnestantissimos  pootus,  nccnon
et  artifices,  Cow  Veneris,  item  Collossl  rcfectorom,  insigni  oongiario  donavit."
He  made  a  present  of  600,000  ucsterccs  (4000/.)  to  Sidoius  Hussus,  tlie  "  tenuis
Solelus  *'  of  Juvenal.  Tacitus  Dial,  de  Oral.  0.,  who  calls  this  liberality  "  mira
•t  examia."

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE,  29

upper  ranks,  in  the  alarm  or  reckless  profusion  of  the  times,
had  been  grievously  neglected,  and  the  encouragement  given
by  Nero  to  trivial  accomplishments  had  weakened  the  foun-
dation of  the  Roman  character.  The  new  system  may  be  in-
terpreted as  an  attempt  to  restore  the  tone  of  society,  to
infuse  into  the  national  mind  liealthier  sentiments  and  aspira-
tions, in  harmony  with  its  sobered  view  of  material  enjoyment*.
At  the  same  time  the  emperor  was  not  blind  to  the  importance
of  attaching  the  Roman  youth  to  his  government,  and  gain-
ing the  direction  of  their  thoughts.  Hence,  perhaps,  the
jealousy  and  aversion  with  which  the  new  mode  of  public  in-
Htruction  was  regarded  by  such  a  writer  as  Tacitus,  the
depositary  of  pre-imperial  traditions.  It  was  not  the  publi-
city of  education  itself,  but  the  influence  assumed  over  it  by
the  government,  that  really  excited  the  odium  of  the  old
aristocracy.  They  felt,  too,  that  the  professors,  the  men  of
phrases  and  arguments,  would  soon  work  their  way  into  the
place  of  governors  and  magistrates,  and  supplant  the  proud
but  indolent  magnates  in  their  immemorial  privileges.  The
rhetorician  might  be  raised  to  the  consul's  seat  or  the  consul
might  descend  to  the  rhetorician's :  either  alternative  was
equally  distasteful  to  the  adherents  of  antique  prejudice  and
custom.  Quintilian,  the  teacher  of  youth  and  private  tutor  in
the  palace,  was  perhaps  the  first  pedagogue  that  obtained
the  consular  ornaments;  but  his  class  retained  to  the  last
the  advantages  they  now  acquired,  and  continued  to  scale
the  heights  of  oflice  from  the  modest  but  convenient  elevation
of  the  professor's  chair.  Moreover  the  grammarians  were
for  the  most  part  philosophers,  and  the  teachers  of  wisdom
and  morality,  the  avowed  critics  of  political  authority,  were
soothed  by  the  same  measures  which  converted  the  profess-
ors of  literature  into  instruments  of  government.  A  lasting
alliance  was  effected  between  the  preachers  of  ethics  and  the
guardians  of  the  public  peace,  the  absence  of  which  had
caused  many  collisions  in  the  reigns  of  earlier  emperors.  At
Rome,  at  Athens,  at  Antioch,  and  other  centres  of  intellectual
activity,  ideas  were  generally  enlisted  on  the  side  of  govern-

30  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  n.

ment.  The  experiment  of  the  Gi'eek  sovereigns  of  Egypt
was  applied  with  like  results  throughout  the  empire.  At
Alexandria  Vespasian  had  observed  and  meditated  on  the
policy  of  the  Ptolemies :  he  appreciated  the  caresses  and  flat-
teries he  there  received  from  grammarians  and  sophists ;  and
possibly  the  consciousness  of  his  own  deficiency  in  the  learn-
ing of  the  schools  enhanced  his  notion  of  its  political  im-
portance.

The  alliance,  I  have  said,  was  durable,  but  its  effect  was
not  immediately  complete.  Philosophy,  during  the  last  cen-
Measures  of  ^^^Ji  ^^^  been  a  school  of  political  opposition ;
^Inst'the  ^^^  though  the  common  voice  of  the  unlettered
philosophers,  populacc  hailed  the  Flavian  empire  as  a  blessing,
the  men  of  ideas  and  theories  refused,  at  least  for  one  gene-
ration, to  descend  from  the  heights  of  their  impracticable
dogmatism,  and  acknowledge  the  sovereignty  of  a  mild  auto-
crat as  the  sole  refuge  from  anarchy  and  barbarism.  The
temple  of  Peace  was  consecrated  in  the  year  828 ;  but  the
alliance  it  was  intended  to  cement  between  the  prince  and
the  philosophers  was  quickly  broken  by  intrigues  against  the
chief  of  the  state,  which  could  be  too  sui*ely  traced  to  men
of  character  and  influence.  Curiatius  Maternus,  a  distin-
guished orator,  the  favourite  of  the  old  aristocracy,  excited
the  jealousy  of  Vespasian's  government,  mild  and  liberal
though  it  professed  itself,  by  the  freedom  of  his  tragedies  on
Roman  subjects,  in  which  he  painted  the  fall  of  liberty.  In
a  later  reign  this  eccentricity  seems  to  have  proved  fatal  to
him.'  Ilelvidius  Priscus,  a  man  of  higher  fame,  whose  in-
temperate opposition  has  already  been  noticed,  continued  to
murmur  at  the  conduct  of  affairs ;  but  in  the  absence  of  de-
tails we  can  only  acquiesce  in  Dion's  judgment  on  his  princi-
ples. He  indulged  in  vain  and  aimless  allusions  to  liberty

'  Matcmua  is  one  of  tbo  principal  characters  in  the  dialogue  de  Oratoribus^
ascribed  to  Tacitiis.  See  capp.  2.  3.  11.  13.  Besides  a  Mcdca  and  a  Tliyestes,
he  wrote  a  Domitiut  and  a  Cato.  Some  critics  liold  him  to  be  tlio  author  of
the  Odavia  which  goes  under  the  name  of  8oncca.  Ho  is  supposed  to  be  the
Maternus  put  to  death  by  Domitian:  Dion,  IxvU.  12.

A.U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIBE.  81

and  the  free  state,  shades  of  the  past  to  which  no  public  man
pretended  to  give  a  substance,  fancying  that  on  him  had  de-
scended the  mantle  of  his  father-in-law,  the  reserved  and
prudent  Thrasea,  who,  on  the  contrary,  while  he  withdrew
from  political  life  under  the  tyranny  of  Nero,  professed  no
violent  opposition,  nor  would  ever  have  balanced  a  visionary
republic  against  the  wise  and  legitimate  principate  of  Ve^
pasian.'  It  is  the  penalty  of  power  that  inferior  minds  can-
not discriminate  between  tyranny  and  just  authority,  and  are
more  likely  to  revolt  against  an  indulgent  prince  than  an  un-
scrupulous despot.  Helvidius  indeed  was  exasperated  against
the  emperor  by  a  private  grudge,  and  the  penalty  he  at  last
paid  was  due  to  his  perverse  malignity.  Vespasian  long
bore  with  this  unprincipled  opposition,  which  distressed  and
mortified  him.  He  knew  himself  to  be  the  object  of  many
conspiracies,  encouraged  if  not  actually  fostered  by  the  mur-
murs of  such  orators  as  Helvidius.  He  was  engaged  on  a
great  experiment  in  maintaining  just  and  equitable  govern-
ment. The  threat  he  once  pronounced  after  listening  to  a
petulant  harangue,  Either  my  son  shall  succeed  me  or  I  will
have  no  successor^  implying  that  if  his  dynasty  was  rejected,
the  state  would  be  left  without  a  chief  at  all,  was  received
with  a  shudder  by  thousands  who  felt  that  the  empire  was  a
state  necessity.'  It  was  to  protect  the  state  no
less  than  himself  that  he  procured  a  decree  for  de*u»  <rf  Ud-
Ilelvidius's  exile,  and  followed  it  with  an  order  " ""

*  Such  at  least  waa  the  conduct  of  Thnaea  as  dej^eted  by  TacitoB. Koa

obscures  at  first  the  real  difference  between  the  two :  'EAov< J«)f  .  .  .  nyv  toS
QfMokov  ■Kap'pijaiav  o'v  avv  Kcup<f'  /ufwi/uvoc :  though  in  the  fragment  which
seems  to  be  rightly  appended  to  this  chapter,  he  plainly  contradicts  himself;
adding :  ^  yap  rov  Ooa-iov  yafi^po^  Koi  ^tjTurvv  ai-rav  iwAMTTero'  .iroAv  ff
avTov  tJiiapTave. Qpaaiag  fih>  yap  M  liepuvoc  uv  ovk  iipiaiuro  ewTi^,  Kai

ov6£v  fiev  01  ohi  £>q  v^piartxbv  IXsyev  ff  ovrov,  ovii  inparrev ovrof

rfi  Ove(nraaia%-<fi  ^x^ero,  mi  oin*  i6i^  obre  kv  t<^  Kotvt^  airrov  aveixero.  Dion,
Ixvi.  15.  Comp.  Suet  Ve*p.  15.

*  Dion,  I  c:  i/i^  /lev  vide  StaSi^ertu  ^  ovdeic  WAof.  It  is  possible,  how-
ever, that  the  expression  should  be  differently  interpreted.  Comp.  Victor,
Coes.  9. :  "  Simul  divinis  deditus,  quorum  vera  plerisque  n^otiis  compererat,
successore3,/idie6<i^  liberos  Titum  ac  Domitiahum  fore."

32  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  71.

for  Ms  death.  This  last  command  it  seems  he  either  did  not
mean  to  be  executed,  or  at  least  speedily  repented  of,  and
would  have  withdrawn ;  but  officious  courtiers  interposed  to
assure  him  that  it  was  too  late,  and  the  victim  had  already
suffered.'  Helvidius  was  the  only  martyr  the  philosophers
could  claim.  In  no  other  case  did  the  punishment  of  their
agitation  go  farther  than  banishment.  It  was  however  with
the  full  concurrence  of  public  feeling  that  the  emperor  re-
solved to  sweep  from  the  city  the  whole  sect  of  the  Stoics
and  Cynics.  Under  the  tyranny  of  Nero  these  men  had
been  silent,  even  if  they  had  not  joined  in  the  general  choi-us
of  adulation ;  but  the  indulgence  of  a  milder  system  warmed
them  till  they  hissed  and  stung.'  Vespasian  took  counsel
with  his  old  adviser  Mucianus,  who  held  the  offenders  in
equal  contempt  with  himself.  It  was  determined  to  revive,
for  the  immediate  safety  of  the  state,  the  obsolete  enactments
of  the  republic,  which  had  prosecuted  the  philosophers  for
the  remotest  tendencies  ascribed  to  tlieir  teaching.  All  pro-
fessors of  the  obnoxious  dogmas  were  required  to

Banishment  of  ,  , t tt , -t

the  Stoics  and Icavc  the  City  J  two  01  the  most  noted,  Hostilius
^°***  and  the  Cynic Demetrius, were  deported to

islands.  Secure  of  their  lives,  both  these  men  persisted  to
the  last  in  virulent  invectives  against  the  government.  But
Vespasian's  temper  was  proof  against  this  provocation.  I
will  not  hilly  he  said,  a  dog  that  larks  at  me.* A  special

'  The  precise  act  wliich  gave  occasion  to  this  order  is  not  mentioned,  nor
in  what  judicial  form  it  was  given.  Dion :  aal  'Ko'KKa  nparruv  IfielM  -kote
Siiaiv  avTuv  ditaeiv.  Suet, :  "  relegatum  prlmo,  dcinde  ct  intcrfici  jussum."
Ck>mp.  Plin,  £p.  iii.  11.  Tac.  Affric  46. :  "nostras  duxere  Hclvidium  in  car-
oerem  manus."

•  The  character  of  this  opposition  is  shown  in  the  anecdotes  mentioned  by
EpictetuH,  Dinaert.  i.  1.  2.  The  Scholiast  on  Juvenal,  iv.  68.,  gives  an  account
of  a  cerUiin  Talfurius,  which  shows  how  philosophy,  especially  that  of  the,
Porch,  waH  the  refuge  of  the  discontented  personages  whom  the  emperors  had
degraded  for  their  vices.  The  repeated  sneers  of  Juvenal  at  the  Stoics  and
Cynica  betray  the  popular  feeling  regarding  them  at  the  beginning  of  the  second
century.

•  Dion,  IxvL  18. Suet  Vctp.  16.

i

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  33

grace  was  accorded  to  MusoniuB  Rufus,  who  seems  to  have
been  honest  and  temperate.  He  was  excepted  by  name
from  the  common  proscription.  Whatever  might  be  his
political  theories,  he  knew  that  the  free  state  was  impossible,
and  refrained  from  flattering  the  illusions  of  a  frivolous
fanaticism.'

Nero's  golden  house  had  risen  like  an  exhalation,  and  like
an  exhalation  it  disappeared. The  masses  of  building  that

projected  forward  from  the  Palatine,  and  con- ^ ..^ ,

nected  the  mansions  of  the  earlier  Ctesars  with  Vmtf»p>Um
the  Esquiline  and  the  Caelian,  were  entirely  swept
away.**  The  colossus  alone,  which  had  stood  in  the  entrance
of  the  palace  from  the  Velia,  was  allowed  to  remain  erect ;
it  is  not  quite  certain,  however,  whether  it  was  removed
from  its  place  at  this  period.  The  head  indeed  of  Nero  was
stricken  off,  and  that  of  Titus  substituted  for  it.  The  con-
trast might  have  provoked  a  smile,  had  the  homely  features
of  the  elder  Flavins  replaced  the  divine  beauty  of  the  Ro-
man Apollo.  On  the  ridge  of  the  Velia,  at  the  summit  of
the  Sacred  Way,  were  laid  the  foundations  of  a  triumphal
arch,  which  was  completed  in  the  next  reign,  to  commemo-
rate the  conquest  of  Judea.  The  palatial  buildings,  com-
menced by  Nero,  on  the  Esquiline,  alter  being  occupied  for
a  time  by  Titus,  were  demolished,  or  converted  £,^tj<,n  ^
by  a  rapid  but  complete  transformation,  into  »»t^byTitM.
public  baths.  Our  antiquaries  can  even  now  trace  in  the
manner  of  their  construction  the  precipitation  with  which
the  change  was  effected  ;  the  chambers  of  the  thermae  being
erected  on  the  basement  of  the  previous  edifice,  which  still

*  When  even  Thrasea  had  peevishly  excUumed,  "  I  had  rather  be  killed  to-
day than  banished  to-morrow,"  Musoniua  reproved  him  in  the  beet  spirit  of  the
Stoics.  "  Should  you  not  rather  try  to  acquiesce  in  whatever  lot  beialls  you  ?  "
Epictet.  Disaert.  L  1.

*  Orosius,  indeed,  mentions  the  burning  of  the  golden  house  among  the
disasters  of  Trajan's  reign.  I  can  hardly  doubt  that  he  is  in  error.  The  im-
perial residence  was  henceforth  limited  to  the  Palatine.

VOL.  vu. — 3

34  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  fA.  D.  n.

presents  a  remnant  of  Nero's  original  work/  The  character
of  the  great  thermae  of  the  empire  has  already  been  described
under  the  principate  of  Augustus ;  but  the  bath-life  of  the
Romans  had  not  then  received  its  full  development.  Agrippa
had  accommodated  the  citizens  by  the  erection  of  a  multi-
tude of  baths  in  their  streets  ;  but  these  were  diminutive  in
size  and  limited  in  their  appliances.  The  same  great  bene-
factor had,  however,  constructed  public  baths  in  the  Campus
on  a  grander  scale,  adorned  with  halls  and  porticos,  and  the
Pantheon  itself  may  have  been  meant  for  a  vestibule  to  a
mass  of  buildings  of  proportionate  grandeur.  In  the  absence
of  any  corroborative  statement,  we  shall  hardly  assign  such
magnificence  to  the  baths  of  Agrippa.  They  seem,  however,
to  have  been  amplified  and  improved  by  Nero,  by  whose
name  they  were  afterwards  known,  and  whether  they  escaped
the  great  fires  of  their  region,  or  were  restored  after  confla-
gration, they  lasted  through  the  empire,  and  survived,  in-
deed, the  still  grander  creations  of  later  builders."  There
can  be  little  doubt,  however,  that  they  were  far  outshone  in
size,  in  convenience,  and  in  decoration  by  the  baths  of  Titus,
which  were  again  surpassed  by  those  of  Caracalla,  Diocle-
tian, and  Constantine.  The  erection  of  these  palaces  of  the
people  marks  an  era  in  our  history.  It  indicates  the  necessi-
ty which  the  government  began  to  feel  of  strengthening  its
intrinsic  weakness  by  pampeiing  an  indolent  but  restless
multitude.  The  monuments  of  the  Flavian  and  Antonine
age  show  how  much  the  emperors  now  leant  upon  their
favour  with  the  mass  of  the  citizens,  and  how  great  were

*  Suet,  77/.  7. :  "  Thcmiis  cclcritcr  exstructis."  Martial,  dc  Spedac.  2,,
indicates  tliat  the  baths  were  erected  on  the  site  of  Nero's  palace  or  gardens :

"  Hie  ubi  miraniur  velocla  muncra  thermas,

Abstulcrat  miseris  tceta  superbus  ager."

*  Tho  Tliermse  Neronianso  are  mentioned  as  in  use  by  Sidonius  Apollinaris
{Carrn.  xxiii.  4»B.)-  The  Aqua  Virj^o,  which  fed  them,  brouRht  into  the  city
over  the  Pincian  hill  by  A^rrippa,  continues  still  to  convey  water  to  Uonio.  The
other  acpu'ducts  which  supplied  the  baths  of  the  later  emperors,  had  been  cut
off,  or  had  fallen  into  disrepair,  in  the  course  of  tho  fifth  century.

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

35

the  sacrifices  they  made  to  content  and  amuse  them.  The
Therma3  of  Titus  comprised  every  convenience  Th«utiuof
and  every  luxury  for  the  residence  by  day  of  the  """^
great  potentate,  the  mob  of  Rome.  The  provbion  of  hot  and
cold  water,  of  tanks  and  fountains,  for  washing,  for  bathing,
and  for  steaming,  was  a  part  only  of  the  luxurious  appliances
with  which  they  were  furnished.  Partly  luder  cover,  and
partly  open  to  the  air,  they  offered  chambers  or  terraces  for
every  enjoyment  and  every  recreation.  Presented  to  the
populace  without  charge,  for  even  the  payment  of  the  small-
est copper  coin  which  had  been  required  under  the  republic
was  remitted  under  the  empire,  no  tax  whatever  was  put  on
the  full  enjoyment  of  their  attractions.  The  private  lodging
of  Caius  or  Titus  might  be  a  single  gloomy  chamber,  propped
against  a  temple  or  a  noble  mansion,  in  which  he  slept  in
contented  celibacy;  but  while  the  sun  was  in  the  heavens  he
lounged  in  the  halls  of  his  Castle  of  Indolence  ;  or  if  he  wan-
dered from  them  to  the  circus,  the  theatre,  or  the  campus,  he
returned  again  from  every  place  of  occasional  entertainment
to  take  his  ease  in  his  baths.'

After  all,  this  club-life  was  monotonous  and  might  be-
come dull.  Excitement  was  required  to  vary  it,  and  the
emperors  found  the  means  of  excitement  already  £,^eUoii  or  th«
furnished  by  the  institutions  of  an  earlier  age.  Coio^eoia.
It  only  remained  for  men,  in  their  care  for  their  clients*  in-
terests, to  enhance  these  means  and  extend  them. In  vain

*  To  the  passages  of  Seneca  and  Petronios,  indicated  in  an  earlier  refennee

to  the  subject  of  the  Roman  baths  (chap.  iXl.\  the  reader  may  add  the  8«th
Epistle  of  Seneca,  in  which  he  contrasts  their  splendour  and  luxury  in  his  day,
with  the  squalor  of  those  of  the  age  of  Scipio.  But  the  author's  rtyle  ia  too
declamatory  to  command  our  unreserved  reliance,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  see
where  the  rhetorician  is  describing  the  pubUc  baths,  and  where  the  privato
dissipation  of  voluptuous  nobles  and  freedmen.  The  Christian  writers,  who
denounced  in  the  strongest  terms  the  shows  and  theatres,  do  not  seem  to  have
preached  against  the  baths,  except  as  regarded  the  promiscuous  bathing  of  the
sexes,  which,  indeed,  was  forbidden  by  Hadrian,  ^lartian,  Uouir.  18.  See,
however,  one  vigorous  blow  at  them  in  Augustin :  de  CaUdaz,  rutfiftiM,  begin-
ning :  "  quamvis  insana  gaudia  non  sint  gaudia,"  &c.

36  '  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  71.

had  Cicero  and  Seneca  expressed  the  sentiments  of  men  of
feeling  in  rebuking  the  horrid  taste  for  the  shows  of  the
amphitheatre ;  statesmen  and  rulers  were  obliged  still  to  feign
an  interest  in  them.  Vespasian,  though  averse  to  shedding
the  blood  of  gladiators,  exhibited  combats  of  men  with
beasts.  Titus,  while  pretending  to  the  character  of  a  philos-
opher, actually  descended  into  the  arena  in  his  native  town
of  Reate,  and  contended  in  a  sham  fight  with  the  veteran,
Caecina.'  But  the  accession  of  the  Flavian  dynasty  was  sig-
nalized by  the  erection  of  the  most  magnificent  of  the  Roman
amphitheatres,  and  this  too  was  built  within  the  limits  of
the  vast  Neronian  palace,  and  probably  with  the  spoils  of
that  labyrinth  of  masonry.  "We  have  traced  already  the
origin  of  the  double  theatre,  the  best  adapted  in  form  to  the
shows  to  which  it  was  especially  devoted.  The  noble  edifice
of  Taurus  had  been  consumed  in  the  recent  conflagration,  and
no  other  of  the  kind  existed  at  this  time  at  Rome ;  for  one
which  Caius  had  commenced  had  been  demolished  by  his
successor.'  Nero  was  satisfied  with  the  longitudinal  ai'ca  of
the  circus,  in  which  he  could  display  his  skill  in  charioteex*-
ing ;  but  the  people  were  discontented,  perhaps,  at  the  in-
terruption to  their  fixvourite  entertainments,  for  whicli  the
circus,  obstructed  by  the  spina  which  ran  down  its  middle,
was  little  adapted.  The  tradition  was  still  remembered  that
Augustus  had  designed  the  erection  of.  such  a  building,  not
in  the  distant  quarter  of  the  Campus,  but  in  the  centre  of  the
city ;  and  had  he  executed  Jbis  design,  he  would  no  doubt
have  created  a  work  of  imposing  magnitude  and  splendour.
This  project  it  now  remained  for  Vespasian  to  realize,  and

*  Wc  have  been  often  reminded  of  the  disgust  of  all  true  Romans  at  tho
oitizenfl,  partictilnrly  if  of  birth  and  rank,  who  contended  with  the  gladiators  in
tho  public  hIiowh  ;  but  we  muHt  remember  that  there  was  always  one  rule  for
tho  citizen  at  Home,  and  another  abroad,  however  nigh.  Thrasea  was  not
blamed  for  Hinging  in  a  tragic  drama  at  I'atavium,  nor  Titus,  wo  may  believe,
for  pretending  to  fight  iu  the  oroua  at  lleato.  See  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  21.  Dion,
Ixvi.  16.

*  Buet  Califf.  21.

I

A.U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  37

every  motive  of  policy  urged  him  to  outshine,  in  bo  popular
an  undexlaking,  the  liberality  of  his  greatest  predecessor.*
The  spot  he  chose  for  the  site  was  in  the  hollow  between  the
Esquiline  and  Cajlian,  where  Nero  had  excavated  a  fish-tank
for  his  palace,  perhaps  the  lowest  level  within  the  city  walls ;
but  the  elevation  to  which  the  building  attained  overtopped
the  crests  of  the  surrounding  hills,  and  enabled  it,  in  the
words  of  a  very  sober  poet,  almost  to  look  down  upon  the
summit  of  the  Capitol.*  The  three  tiers  of  arches,  divided
by  columns  of  the  Doric,  the  Ionic,  and  the  Corinthian  orders,
rose  one  above  the  other ;  but  the  lowest  story  was  thus  in-
ferior in  height  to  either  of  those  above  it,  which  seems  to
detract  very  much  from  their  architectural  effect.  A  still
worse  defect  perhaps  is  to  be  found  in  the  lofty  wall  or  screen
of  masonry,  pierced  only  by  few  and  narrow  windows,  which
surmounts  the  light  and  airy  arcades  below.  Tliis  upper
tier  is  moreover  the  loftiest  of  the  four,  and  the  only  motive
1  can  imagine  for  the  stilted  height  to  which  it  is  raised,  is
tlie  necessity  of  giving  a  great  elevation  to  the  awning,
which  seems  to  have  been  drawn  across  the  ample  area,  and
wliich  must  have  sunk  considerably  ft*om  its  own  weight  in
the  middle.*

'  Suet.  Vetp.  9. :  "  fecit  et  nova  opera,  .  .  .  amphitheatnim  urbe  media,  vt

destinasse  conipererat  Augustum."
"  Martial,  de  Sped.  2. :

"  Hie  ubi  conspicui  veaerabilis  amphitheatri
Erigitur  moles,  stagna  Nerooia  erant."
Calpum.  Eel  vii,  23. :

"  Yidimus  ia  caelum  trabibus  spectacula  textia,
Surgere,  Tarpeium  prope  despectantia  culmen."
"  The  solidity  of  the  masonry  in  the  topmost  story  might  be  ntnfwnaij  ibr
the  support  of  the  wooden  framework  to  which  the  awning  was  attached.  In
the  lines  just  quoted  from  Calpurnius,  a  writer  reputed  to  be  of  the  age  of
Domitian,  we  see  an  allusion  to  some  sort  of  wooden  scaffolding  at  the  top  of
the  building,  and  such  a  scaffolding  is  said  to  have  been  consumed  in  the  fire
which  occurred  in  the  reign  of  Macrinus.  I  am  tempted  to  conjecture  that
such  was  the  original  construction,  when  the  edifice  was  first  opened  by  the
Flavian  emperors,  and  that  it  continued  so  to  the  date  of  the  fire  ;  the  upper

38  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  71.

The  height  of  this  celebrated  structure,  the  cornice  of
which  is  still  preserved  throughout  one  third  of  its  circuit,  is
Dimensions  of  ^^^^  ^^  ^^  1^^  ^^^^  •  ^^^  major  axis  of  its  elliptical
this  building,  circumference  measures  615,  the  minor  510  feet,
while  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  arena  itself  are  respec-
tively 281  and  176  feet.  Rows  of  seats  rise  concentrically  to
the  level  of  the  upper  story,  the  lowest  row,  or  podium,  be-
ing assigned  to  the  senators,  the  vestals,  and  the  emperor
with  his  personal  attendants.  Eighty-seven  thousand  spec-
tators were  accommodated  within  the  walls.  The  building
was  of  the  rich  and  warm  travertine  stone,  or  encrusted  with
marble ;  the  most  conspicuous  parts  shone  with  precious
gems  and  metals ;  a  gilded  network  protected  the  sitters  in
the  lowest  rows  from  the  chance  assaults  of  the  animals  be-
neath them,  and  the  precaution  was  taken  of  making  the
topmost  bar  to  turn  on  a  swivel,  so  as  to  revolve  at  a  slight
touch,  and  baffle  any  attempt  to  climb  by  it.*  We  are  natu-
rally disappointed  at  the  slight  notices  preserved  of  a  work
BO  magnificent,  which  was  justly  counted  among  the  wonders
of  the  Roman  world,  and  wliich  is  invested  in  our  eyes  with
a  special  interest  as  the  scene  of  so  many  Christian  martyr-
doms. The  eclogue  of  Calpurnius  seems  to  point  to  a  period
when  its  consecration  was  still  recent,  and  may  belong  to
the  age  of  the  last  Flavian  emperor.* The  name  of  Colosseum

Btory,  as  we  now  see  it,  being  an  addition  when  the  amphitheatre  was  restored.
Coins  of  Domitian,  indeed,  represent  the  building  with  its  present  architectural
features. But  if  such  was  the  original  design,  it  is  possible  that  it  may  not
have  been  completed  till  the  later  date.
'  Calpum.  Eclog,  vii.  47. :

"  Balteus  en !  gcmmis  en  I  illita  porticus  auro ;

Stemitur  adjunctis  ebur  admirabile  truncis,
Et  coit  in  rotulum,  tcrcti  qui  lubricus  axe
Impositos  subita  vcrtigine  fallcrct  ungues  : "  &c.
For  a  description  of  the  shows  of  the  amphitheatre,  sec  Cassiodor.  Variar.  T.
42. Calpurnius  notices  only  the  combats  of  wild  boasts.

'  An  attempt  has  been  made  by  the  recent  cilitor  Haupt,  to  place  this
author  in  the  age  of  Nero.  His  argimicnts  appear  to  mo  inconclusive.  The
uercnth  eclogue,  describing  the  amphitheatre,  ends  with  an  allusion  to  the

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  80

popularly  attached  to  it,  and  improperly  written  Coliseum,
first  occurs  in  the  works  of  our  countryman  Bede  in  the
seventh  century.  Its  origin  is  not  accurately  known,  and  is
referred  by  some  to  the  gigantic  size  of  the  building,  by
others,  with  more  probability,  to  the  colossus  of  Nero,  which
was  planted  before  its  entrance.  The  name  of  Flavian  was
dropped  perhaps  on  the  fall  of  the  dynasty  by  which  it  was
raised,  and  the  later  designation  may  have  come  into  use  as
early  as  the  age  of  the  Antonines.*

The  Colosseum  far  exceeds  in  its  dimensions  any  similar
structure  of  the  ancient  world ;  but  from  the  specimens  we
possess  of  the  Roman  amphitheatre,  we  may  con-
clude that  it  deviated  little  in  construction  from  **^ '
the  approved  models  of  the  age.  The  name  of  the  architect
to  whom  so  great  a  work  was  entrusted  has  not  come  down
to  us.  The  ancients  themselves  seem  to  have  regarded  this
name  as  a  matter  of  little  interest ;  nor,  in  fact  do  they  gen-
erally care  to  specify  the  authorship  of  their  most  illustrioos
buildings.  The  reason  is  obvious.  The  forms  of  ancient
art,  in  this  department,  were  almost  wholly  conventional,
and  the  limits  of  design  within  which  they  were  executed
gave  little  room  for  the  display  of  original  taste  and  special
character.  The  architect  of  the  Parthenon  or  the  Capitol
was  almost  equally  confined  to  the  pattern  of  his  own  timesw
To  a  lesser  extent  we  observe  the  same  peculiarity  in  regard
to  our  mediaeval  edifices,  the  designers  of  which,  if  in  some
cases  recorded,  are  seldom  put  prominently  forward,  and

emperor  of  the  day,  which  seems  to  point  much  better  to  Domitian :  "  Et
Martis  vultus  et  Apollinid  esse  putavi."  Comp.  Statius,  ^v.  v.  1.  14. :  "  Cui-
que  venit  juncto  mihi  semper  Apolline  Cseaar : "  and  L  L  18.

'  For  these  details  see  Becker's  Jidm.  Aherikvtmer,  L  682,  and  the  other
topographers.  Nibbj  is  said  to  have  giren  the  most  complete  description  of
the  Colosseum,  and  his  successors  have  borrowed  from  him  and  from  one
another.  The  measures  given  in  the  text  are  from  the  art,  "  AmphiUuatnun "
in  Smith's  Did.  of  Clcus.  Antiquities.  Becker  states  them  from  Melchiori,  at
167,  581,  481,  285,  182  respectively  in  Roman  feet,  which  are  to  the  English
as  11*649  :  12.  The  number  of  spectators  accommodated  is  ascertained  from
a  statement  in  the  XotUia.

40  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  71.

have  attained  little  celebrity.  It  is  only  in  periods  of  ecclec-
ticisra  and  renaissance,  wheii  the  taste  of  the  architect  has
wider  scope,  and  may  lead  the  age  instead  of  following  it,
that  interest  attaches  to  his  personal  merit.  Thus  it  is  that
the  Colosseum,  the  most  conspicuous  type  of  Roman  civili-
zation, the  monument  which  divides  the  admiration  of  stran-
gers in  modern  Rome  with  St.  Peter's  itself,  is  nameless  and
parentless,  while  every  stage  in  the  construction  of  the  great
Christian  temple,  the  creation  of  a  modern  revival,  is  tippro-
priated  with  jealous  care  to  its  special  claimant.  Yet  if
there  be  any  value  in  posthumous  celebrity,  to  be  popularly
known  as  the  creator  of  an  object  which  has  filled  the  eyes
and  engaged  the  sympathies  of  sixty  generations ;  which  has
been  the  famUiar  home  of  millions  of  our  species,  and  has
dwelt  in  the  memories  of  millions  more ;  in  which  the  recol-
lections of  a  dead  antiquity  have  so  long  centred,  and  which
has  become  the  most  visible  of  the  links  connecting  the  past
with  the  present ; — to  be  renowned  as  the  creator  of  such  an
object  should  be  a  crown  of  ambition  not  less  dazzling  than
the  fame  of  excellence  in  history  or  epic.

The  building  of  the  Colosseum  was  the  work  of  several
years,  nor  was  it  completed  and  consecrated  till  after  the
^ ^  -  ^ death  of  its  founder. The  reign  of  Vespasian,

Death  of  Ves-  ■,-,■,  .

PMi*n,  extending  over  one  decade,  passed  away  m  un-

A.  D.  79.  eventful  tranquillity,  ruffled  only  for  a  moment,
after  the  termination  of  the  Jewish  war,  by  one
or  two  abortive  attempts  at  usurpation,  which  were  firmly
quelled,  but  with  no  excessive  or  feverish  violence.  The
character  of  this  prince  is  sullied  by  no  unnecessary  severity,
unless  we  must  except  the  strange  story,  already  related,  of
Sabinus  and  Eponina.*  Ilis  administration  was  justly  re-
spected at  home,  and  feared  not  less  justly  abroad.  No  Ro-
man emperor  laboured  more  assiduously  in  the  path  of  honest,

'  Victor  B»y8  of  him  {JSpil.  0.) :  "  liujus  inter  coDtcra  bona  illutl  sin^ularo
fuit,  initnicitlofl  obliviHct ;  adco  ut  YitcUii,  lioHtis  8ui,  filinni  loi'U]>k'tisBinie  do-
tatam  splendidiiuiiino  conjungcret  viro.  Ferobat  paticutur  amioorum  motus,"
&c Comp.  de  Cceear.  9.  iuit.

A.  U.  824.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  41

frugal,  and  yet  liberal  government :  none  kept  the  military
establishments  of  the  state  on  a  more  imposing  footing,  or
maintained  a  firmer  attitude  of  defence  in  the  face  of  all  its
enemies.  At  the  age  of  seventy,  full  of  toils  and  honours,  he
was  called  at  last  to  his  rest  by  mere  natural  decay ;  but  his
death  was  perhaps  accelerated  by  the  immoderate  use  of  the
cold  springs  of  Cutiliae,  in  his  native  Sabine  country.*  Dur-
ing his  illness,  which  was  of  some  duration,  he  refused  to
relax  in  any  degree  from  the  routine  of  public  business,  and
when  obliged  to  keep  his  bed,  insisted  on  the  admission  even
of  strangers  to  his  presence.  In  the  crisis  of  his  disorder  he
demanded,  possibly  in  an  access  of  delirium,  to  be  raised  up-
right, exclaiming  that  an  Imperator  ought  to  die  standing ;
a  phrase  which,  whether  truly  ascribed  to  him  or  not,  may
fairly  represent  his  character,  as  the  soul  of  military  disci*
pline  and  official  formality,  armed  with  strong  endurance
and  unflinching  constancy.*  Though  we  find  it  impossible
to  feel  enthusiasm  for  the  plebeian  emperor,  the  head  of  the
Flavian  firm,  we  cannot  part  from  Vespasian  without  avow-
ing a  higher  regard  for  him  than  for  any  of  the  Ctesars  before
him,  the  great  Julius,  the  universal  exception,  alone  ex-
cepted.*

Vespasian,  with  admirable  prudence,  had  admitted  his

'  Cutiliu;,  on  the  Yelinus  near  Reate :  celebrated  for  ita  ooU  f*nfl"|  Stnh.
V. ;  Pliu.  //.  N.  iii.  12.,  and  for  a  floating  island  on  its  lake.  8«Dee.  JVol  QmmU
iii.  25.

*  Suet  Vcsp.  24.  Dion,  IxvL  17.  Victor,  EjAt.  9.:  "sanctus  omnia."
The  reign  of  Vespasian  extended  from  July  1,  822,  the  day  of  tlie  salutation,
to  his  death,  June  23,  832.  He  had  adopted  the  practice  of  holding  the  c<M»-
sulship  regularly  year  after  year,  decUning  it  once  only  during  his  residence  at
Rome.

'  Tacitus  characterizes  Vespasian  coldly  and  harshly :  "  prorsos  si  araritia
abessct,  antiquis  ducibus  par." — Hist.  ii.  5.  We  hare  seen  bow  nfinriwij
even  parsimony  might  be  to  his  position,  and  how  nobly  he  redeemed  it  bj
justice  and  moderation.  The  same  writer  also  speaks  of  him  as  the  only  em-
peror whose  character  was  improved  by  the  possession  of  power ;  which  se^ma
to  be  a  sneer  against  his  forced  submission  to  Nero's  tyranny.  But  again  I
must  repeat  that  Tacitus  too  often  makes  himself  the  mouthpiece  of  senatorian
prejudices.

42  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  79.

son  Titus,  the  darling  of  the  army  of  Judea,  to  a  share  of  the
Titus  assumes  imperial  power,  on  his  return  from  the  East.  "We
the  empire.  }iaYe  Seen  ho  w  large  a  share  the  younger  prince  took
in  the  duties  of  the  censorship,  and  we  are  assured  that  it  was  not
as  a  designated  successor,  nor  as  a  deputed  vicegerent,  that  he
was  associated  with  his  father  in  all  the  other  functions  of  sover-
eign rule.  The  historian  Dion  declares  accordingly  that  he
cannot  draw  a  line  between  the  termination  of  the  one  reign
and  the  commencement  of  the  other ;  and  I  will  follow  him
in  continuing  the  thread  of  my  narrative,  also  without  in-
terruption.^ The  younger  Flavins  was  born  at^  the  end  of
the  year  which  witnessed  the  assassination  of  Cains,  and  in  con-
sequence of  the  favour  in  which  his  father  was  held  in  the
palace,  he  had  been  introduced  as  a  child  into  the  coui*t  of
Claudius,  and  educated  with  the  infant  Britannicus."  An  as-
trologer whom  Narcissus  had  employed  to  cast  the  young
prince's  horoscope  had  ventured,  it  was  said,  to  predict  that
Britannicus  would  never  succeed  to  power,  but  that  Titus,  who
was  standing  by,  the  son  of  a  good  officer  now  beginning  to
be  noticed,  would  actually  attain  to  it.'  We  learn,  on  graver
authority,  that  when  Vespasian  sent  his  eldest  son  to  oifer  to
Galba  the  devotion  of  the  eastern  legions,  it  was  commonly
surmised  that  the  still  youthful  favourite  of  the  array  would
be  adopted  by  tlie  old  and  cliildless  emperor.*  Titus  had
now  served  with  distinction  both  in  Germany  and  Britain :
his  skill  in  martial  exercises  was  equalled  by  his  intellectual
accomplishments ;  his  conduct  and  prudence  in  affairs  gave
promise  of  a  statesman  and  administrator,  and  his  abilities
were  set  off  to  advantage  by  the  beauty  of  his  figure  and

'  Dion,  Ixt!.  17.  Comp.  Suet.  TU.  6. :  nequo  ex  co  dcstitit  participem  at-
que  etiam  tutorem  imperii  agere."

*  Death  of  Caligula,  Jan.  24,  a.  d.  41.  Birth  of  Titus,  Dec.  SO,  of  the
same  year.  Suet.  Tit.  1 . :  "  natus  est  tertio  kal.  Jan.  insigni  anno  Caiana
nece." Britannicus  waH  born  in  42.

*  Saet.  Tit.  2.,  confinncd  by  an  allusion  in  Tacitus,  Hi^,  ii.  1.:  "pnesaga
reaponaa."

*  Suet,  m  6. Tac.  JfuL  il  1. Comp.  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  iv.  0.  2.

A.  U.  832.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  43

countenance.'  But  beneath  the  reserved  and  measured
blandncss  of  the  Roman  popular  chief,  there  was  „  .
in  Titus  an  impulsive  enthusiasm,  fostered  by  his  ntn*  with
connexion  with  the  East,  and  warmed  perhaps  to
a  fervent  glow  by  his  romantic  attachment  to  a  Jewish  prin-
cess. He  was  the  lover  and  slave  of  Berenice,  the  sister  of
Agrippa ;  and  when,  on  hearing  of  the  movements  in  pro-
gress against  Galba,  he  turned  back  from  his  journey  west-
ward and  left  his  mission  unfulfilled,  it  was  surmised  that  his
vacillation  was  the  result  of  passion  rather  than  of  policy.
He  paused  to  visit  the  temple  of  the  Paphian  Venus.  The
goddess  was  worshipped  on  the  spot  were  she  emerged  from
the  waters  to  rule  mankind,  not  in  the  most  exquisite  of  hu-
man forms,  such  as  that  revealed  to  her  subjects  by  Apelles
and  Praxiteles,  but  under  a  rude  and  shapeless  emblem,  the
meaning  of  which,  for  ages  forgotten,  had  once  perhaps  been
comprehended  by  Tyrian  and  Sidonian  mariners.  Here  was
an  oracle  still  in  high  repute,  and  Titus  consulted  it  about
the  success  of  his  voyage  to  Syria.  Receiving  a  favourable
answer  on  this  point,  he  was  encouraged  to  inquire,  still  indi-
rectly, about  his  political  fortunes.  The  oracle  was  cautious,
and  veiled  its  reply  in  general  conventionalities.  But  the
priest  then  beckoned  him  into  an  inner  chamber,  and  there
disclosed  without  reserve  the  splendid  destiny  awaiting  him.
The  promise  of  power  was  indeed  a  deathblow  to  love.  The
Roman  chief  was  well  aware  that  his  countrymen  would  not
sufler  a  Jewish  concubine  to  usurp  the  place  of  Livia  and  Ag-

'  Besides  skill  in  music  and  Tersification,  it  is  spedallj  mentioned  that
Titus  was  a  rapid  short-hand  writer,  and  had,  moreover,  a  knack  of  imitating
the  writing  of  others,  so  that  he  used  to  say  of  himself  in  jest  that  he  might
have  made  an  expert  forger. Suet.  7^.  3. Victor.  £pU.  10. For  his  per-
sonal beauty  see  Tac.  //«/.  ii.  1.  v.  1.,  fully  confirmed  by  busts  and  medals.
For  his  eloquence  see  PUny's  preface ;  the  whole  tone  of  which  assumes  him
to  have  been  a  man  of  literary  accomplishments. Sil.  ItaL  iiL  603  :
"  Turn  juvenis  magno  pnecellens  robore  mentis
Excipiet  patriam  molem,  celsusque  feretur
^quatum  imperio  tollens  caput."

44  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  79.

rippina. But  Titus  accepted  his  fate. Venus  in  her  own
temple  yielded  the  palm  to  her  rival  Juno.

The  time,  however,  for  this  sacrifice  had  not  yet  arrived.
The  lover  was  first  to  be  the  instrument  for  the  destruction  of  his
Gentle  charac-  distress's  city  and  nation.  Our  accounts  repre-
tcr  of  Titus.  ggjj^;  g^Q  uncertainty  and  vacillation  in  the  conduct
of  Titus  before  Jerusalem  unlike  anything  we  read  of  in
other  portions  of  Roman  story.  We  call  his  treatment  of
the  enemy  barbarous,  yet  among  the  Romans,  and  possibly
among  the  Jews  themselves,  it  bore,  as  compared  with  many
familiar  examples,  the  character  of  unusual  clemency.  The
anxiety  he  manifested,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Josephus,
to  spare  the  people,  the  city,  and  above  all  the  temple  of  the
Jews,  strongly  contrasts  with  the  ruthless  ferocity  of  other
Roman  conquerors.  All  history  bears  witness  to  the  softness
and  almost  feminine  gentleness  of  his  disposition,  and  even
in  the  horrors  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem,  whether  from  super-
stition or  from  a  tenderer  feeling,  Titus  seems  to  have  de-
served the  character  thus  ascribed  to  him.*  The  mild  and
yielding  temper  with  which  he  is  painted,  appears  again  in
the  romance,  for  such  it  must  be  designated,  on  the  life  of
ApoUonius.  The  sophist  is  represented  as  conversing  with
him  at  Alexandria  with  the  utmost  freedom,  giving  him  ad-
vice how  to  conduct  himself  in  the  government,  recommend-
ing to  him  pedantic  counsellors  with  all  a  pedant's  assurance,
and  accepting  with  complacence  the  homage  of  the  young
philosopher  on  the  steps  of  the  throne.' Whatever  may  have

'  When  allowance  is  made  for  the  exaj^geration  of  which  Josephus  is  con-
victed, it  will  appear  that  the  severities  of  Titus  towards  the  Jews,  however
frightful,  fell  far  short  of  the  ordinary  atrocities  of  Roman  warfare.  The  efforts
he  made  to  save  the  city,  and  at  last  the  temple,  were  an  exception  to  the  gen-
eral rule  of  destruction  which  had  been  carried  out  against  Carthage,  Syracuse,
Corinth,  and  many  less  ccmspicuous  cai)ltals.  Rut  the  Roman  generals  were
often  moved  to  tears.  Thus  Marcellus  wept  over  Syracuse,  Scipio  .^ilmilianus
over  Carthage.  Paulus  Jilmilius  shed  tears  at  the  fate  of  Perseus.  Liv.  xxv.
24.,  xlv.  4.  Polyb.  xxxix.  fragm.  2.  Dubois-fiuchan,  Tacite  et  sou  sieclc,  ii.
288. :  "  Cct  inconc6vablo  melange  de  pitiu  et  d'intiexibilitd  est  tout  Romaiu."

•  I'bllostratUB  in  vil,  Apollon.  vl.  21),  foil.  vii.  8.

A.  U.  832.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  45

really  been  the  influence  of  Apollonius  over  him,  it  would
seem  that  Berenice  retained  his  heart  in  complete  subjection,
though  she  could  make  no  impression  on  his  judgment.
Titus  the  imperator  obeyed  the  commands  of  public  duty
to  the  letter.  He  overthrew  Jerusalem,  dispersed  the  Jews,
abolished  their  political  nationality,  and  absorbed  in  the  em-
pire the  realm  once  swayed  by  his  mistress  and  her  brother ;
but  he  still  knelt  as  a  lover  at  her  feet,  and  after  the  full  of
her  country  invited  her  to  visit  him  at  Rome,  lodged  her  in
the  imperial  palace,  and  acknowledged  her  publicly  as  his
favourite.  Wife,  in  the  Roman  sense,  she  could  not  be,  yet
to  men  in  private  stations  at  least,  to  men  of  all  degrees
anywhere  outside  the  walls  of  Rome,  the  law  allowed  and
society  tolerated  the  possession  of  a  foreign  consort.  The
Romans  winked  at  the  irregular  union  between  Vespasian
liimsclf  and  a  Grecian  concubine.  But  there  was  something
peculiary  hateful  to  them  in  the  character  of  the  Egyptian,
the  Syrian,  and  above  all  perhaps  at  this  period  the  Jewess ;
and  when  Titus  appeared  as  associate  emperor  in  the  city,
with  Berenice  by  his  side,  their  prejudices  rose  in  arms  against
the  scandal,  and  were  not  to  be  appeased  without  the  com-
plete sacrifice  of  the  connexion.  Titus  gave  way ;  the  lovers
reluctantly  bade  flirewell ;  and  Berenice  returned  desolately  to
her  desolate  country.'  After  the  death  of  Vespasian  she
once  more  visited  Rome  hoping  perhaps  that  her  former  ad-
mirer, now  sole  emperor,  might  exercise  his  independence  in
her  favour.  But  Titus  had  learnt  to  control  his  inclinations
ettectually,  and  among  the  many  proofs  he  gave  of  patriotism
in  the  possession  of  power,  was  the  firmness  with  which  he  re-
jected the  blandishments  of  the  foreign  enchantress.'

'  Suet.  Tit.  1. :  "  dimisit  invitus  invitara."  Dion  seems  to  place  this  sepa-
ration  in  828,  five  years  after  Titus's  return.  The  lady,  bom  in  781,  would
then  be  47  years  of  age.  Perhaps  we  need  not  take  Dion's  date  gtrictlj,  and
the  event  may  have  occurred  somewhat  earlier.

'  Dion,  Ixvi.  15,  18.  Titus  remained  henceforth  unmarried.  In  early  life
he  had  been  vmited  to  Arricidia  TertuUa,  of  an  equestrian  family,  and  on  her
death  he  had  espoused  Marcia  Fumilla,  who  bore  him  a  daughter,  to  whom  he

46  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  79.

The favour  with  which Titus  was  early  regarded  was
manifested  in  many  ways. The  Romans  specified  with  in-
terest the  spot  where  he  had  first  seen  the  light,

ravourwith  ,  •  i  .  °

which  Titus an  obscure  house  in  an  obscure  corner  of  the  city,

•was  regarded  •in  i

by  the  Eo- and  they  continued  lor  a  century  later  to  point

mans.  .  ,.  „  ,  _,  i-ii-i

it  out  as  a  relic  oi  ancient  Kome  which  had
escaped  the  fire  of  Xero,  and  the  other  fires  that  had  since
occurred.*  They  readily  accepted  as  a  fact  the  story,  which
can  be  shown  by  a  comparison  of  dates  to  be  groundless,
that  as  a  young  man  he  had  saved  his  father's  life  in  battle
with  the  Britons."  They  believed  that  he  had  been  present
at  the  banquet  at  which  Britannicus  was  poisoned,  and  had
even  tasted  of  the  fatal  cup,  to  which  they  ascribed  his  sub-
sequent weakness  of  health  and  premature  dissolution.  The
stories  of  dissipation  in  which  he  indulged  after  his  return  to
Rome,  and  the  scandal  he  brought  on  the  austere  manners
of  his  family,  elevated  by  merit  to  the  first  place  among  the
citizens,  might  have  caused  little  remark  but  for  the  severity
with  which  he  exercised  the  censorial  ofiice,  and  the  hostility
he  excited  among  the  knights  and  senators.*  At  all  events
the  nobler  elements  in  his  character  must  have  become  better
known  during  his  association  in  the  empire,  and  the  dislike
in  wliich  he  may  at  first  have  been  held,  was  undoubtedly
much  mitigated  before  the  death  of  his  father.* His  succes-

gave  the  imperial  but  ill-omened  name  of  Julia.  The  date  of  this  daughter's
birth  is  undetermined,  but  it  must  be  some  years  prior  to  her  father's  associa-
tion in  the  empire,  and  the  mother  seems  also  to  have  died  before  it.  Suet.
Ihmil.  22.

»  Suet  TU.  1.

'  Titus  was  bom  at  the  end  of  794 ;  see  a  preceding  note.  Vespasian's
great  cam])aign  in  Britain  was  in  797,  and  if  he  continued  for  some  time  longer
in  the  island,  he  must  have  returned  to  Rome  in  804,  the  year  of  his  consulship,
when  Titus  was  not  yet  ten  yeare  of  age.  It  is  not  likely,  out  of  favour  as  he
was  with  Agrippina,  that  Vespasian  ever  resumed  a  couiinund  in  Ihltuui.
'  •  Suet,  lit,  7. :  "  pnetcr  WBvitiam  suspecta  in  eo  ctiuni  luxuria  cnit  .  .  .

nee  minus  libido Suspecta  et  rapacitas  .  .  . dcnique  propalam  alium

Nerouum  ct  opinabantur  et  pnudicabant."

*  Suet  TU,  0. :  "  ut  non  temero  quis  tarn  advorso  rumoro,  magisquo  invitis

A.U.  832.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  47

bion  might  be  accepted  as  inevitable,  but  had  he  been  so  ex-
tremely unpopular  it  would  have  been  easy  to  insist  on  the
iissociation  of  his  brother  with  him ;  or  if  Domitian  were  even
more  offensive,  other  measures  might  have  been  adopted  to
control  his  authority,  and  make  him  feel  the  precariousness
of  his  power.  But  not  a  movement  was  made,  not  a  murmur
raised.  Titus  occupied  the  throne  alone.  Of  his  own  free
grace  he  declared  his  brother  the  partner  of  his  empire,  and
signified  that  he  would  appoint  him  his  successor ;  but  he  be-
trayed no  jealousy  of  the  nobles,  no  apprehension  of  their
discontent,  no  uneasy  consciousness  of  their  dislike.  The
frankness  with  which  he  treated  all  classes  of  his  subjects
shows  that  he  felt  himself  on  terms  of  confidence  with  them.
If  their  affection  to  him  had  ever  wavered,  he  speedily  re-
covered it,  and  maintained  it  without  interruption  to  the
end«

However  this  may  be,  the  short  biography  we  possess  of
this  emperor  is  henceforth  chiefly  occupied  with  the  praise  of
his  goodness  and  liberality. His  prosecution  of

the  hateful race of  delators  was unrelenting. th«»uir»^pe«
.  , o  . .  /. 1 /-, 1  both  of  the  ■».

Among  the  first  victims  01  the  Colosseum  were biesmndthe

the  wretches  who  had  been  driven  by  their  own
necessities  and  those  of  the  state,  to  inform  against  fiscal  de-
faulters in  the  higher  ranks.  They  were  seized,  bound,
scourged  in  the  amphitheatre,  sold  into  slavery,  or  banished
to  the  islands.'  Titus  took  from  no  man,  he  gave  to  all  pro-
fusely, he  made  a  point  of  never  sending  a  suitor  away  un-
satisfied. Ko  man,  he said,  in answer to a  prudential

omnibus,  transient  ad  principatum."  There  is  some  looflenees  in  this  last  ex-
pression, and  Suetonius  may  be  confounding  the  association  with  the  Bucoes*
sion.

'  Suet  7^.  8.  Titus  legislated  for  the  greater  security  of  the  subject  against
the  informers.  "  Vetuit  de  eadem  re  pluribus  legibus  agi,"  i.  e.  the  shifting
the  ground  of  action  from  one  law  to  another,  "  quaerique  de  cujusquam  de-
functorum  statu  ultra  certos  annos."  The  inheritance,  for  instance,  of  unmar-
ried men  fell  under  the  Papian  law  to  the  treasury,  and  it  waa  important  in  the
interest  of  the  government  to  ascertain  the  ciril  condition  of  the  deceased.

48  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  79.

remonstrance,  ought  to  leave  the  prince's  presence  disap-
pointed. Remembering  one  evening  at  supper  that  he  had
made  no  present  to  any  one  since  the  morning,  My  friends^
he  exclaimed,  I  have  lost  this  day.^  When  certain  nobles
were  detected  conspiring  against  him,  he  not  only  pardoned,
but  treated  them  with  peculiar  kindness ;  and  when  they  at-
tended him  in  the  amphitheatre,  gave  them  the  swords  of  the
gladiators  to  feel  their  edges,  thus  putting  his  life  unreservedly
in  their  power."  Towards  his  people  his  demeanour  was  bland
and  affable.  He  insisted  sometimes  on  abdicating  the  functions
of  umpire  in  the  shows  which  he  himself  exhibited,  and  left
it  to  them  to  determine  their  merits,  contenting  himself  with
the  part  of  a  private  spectator.  The  features  here  delineated
may  be  thought  perhaps  to  represent  the  general  type  of  a
popular  favourite.  But  the  point  to  remark  in  them  is  the
completeness  with  which  they  combine  the  champion  of  the
nobles  with  the  idol  of  the  multitude.  It  was  not  easy  to
maintain  the  privileges  and  cherish  the  self-respect  of  the  one
class,  and  at  the  same  time  to  humor  the  tastes  and  caprices
of  the  other.  Augustus  had  betrayed  his  weariness  at  the
entertainments  of  the  vulgar ;  Tiberius  had  shrunk  from  them
altogether.  Caius  and  Nero  had  abandoned  themselves  to
the  people,  and  forfeited  the  regard  of  the  nobles ;  the  at-
tempts of  Vespasian  to  conciliate  both  had  been  but  imper-
fectly successful.  Titus  was  the  first  who  seems  to  have
gained  equal  credit  on  either  side  ;  and  we  may  thus  account
for  tlic  pre-eminent  favour  he  enjoyed  with  his  countrymen,
which  they  declared  by  the  title,  extravagant  as  it  may  seem,
of  Delight  of  the  human  ra^e.*

'  Suet.  1.  c. :  "  Amici,  diem  pcrdidi ; "  a  phrase  which  has  obtained  higher
appreciation  than  it  seeniB,  wlicn  taken  with  tlie  context,  to  deserve.  It  is
repeated  by  Eutropiua  and  Victor ;  tlie  last  writer  calls  it,  "  divinum  et  cooleste."
See  also  Ausonius,  Uratiar.  Act.  in  Qratianum  Imp,

'  Suet.  TU.  9.  Victor.  Ep'U.  10.  This  story,  which  recurs  again  in  the
history  of  the  next  popular  cmi)cror,  may  be  regarded  as  mythical.

•  Suet.  ??/.  1.:  "  amor  ct  deliciro  generis  humaui,"  a  phrase  repeated  by
EutropiuK,  vii.  14.  AuBonius  considera  the  defects  of  Vespasian  a  foil  to  the
merits  of  his  successor:  "cujiis  nimia  parsimonia  et  austcritus  vix  ferenda  mi-
nim fecerat  ftlli  Icnitatom." Oratiar.  Act.  I.  c.

A.  U.  832.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  49

Titus  was  beloved  by  the  Romans,  and  those  the  Romans
loved  ever  died  young.  Fate  indeed  did  not  always  require
that  they  should  suffer;  but  the  career  of  Titus  Di„rter«ofth#
was  not  only  brief,  but  clouded  in  its  latter  years  «*««»«' Titu*.
by  a  series  of  public  disasters.  The  city  was  visited,  in  the
first  place,  by  a  terrible  conflagration,  which  raged  unchecked
for  three  days,  and  was  second  only  in  extent  to  that,  hardly
yet  repaired,  of  Nero.  The  Capitol  itself  fell  once  y,^  ^  £<^^
more  a  prey  to  the  flames.'  Again  Rome  suf-  '^  pe«tu«iM*.
fered  from  a  pestilence,  in  which,  if  we  may  •'-»-80.
credit  the  statement  of  a  late  authority,  ten  thousand  persons
perished  daily  for  some  time  together.*  The  great  eruption
of  Vesuvius,  which  overwhelmed  the  cities  of  Campania,  wa«
perhaps  more  alarming,  though  the  loss  it  inflicted  might  be
much  less  considerable.  The  incident,  as  is  well  known,  has
been  described  to  us  in  some  detail,  and  it  will  be  interesting
to  dwell  upon  it  before  we  close  the  brief  annals  of  this  reign.
A  less  popular  prince  might  have  been  accused  of  himself
setting  fire  to  the  city,  and  even  the  eruption  and  the  pesti^
lence  might  have  been  imputed  to  the  divine  vengeance  on
his  crimes.  But  in  this  case  the  Romans  were  willing  to
charge  the  national  suflerings  on  national  sins.  The  wrath
of  the  gods  required  no  doubt  a  signal  expiation,  and  the  ded-
ication of  the  Colosseum  gave  room  for  the  display  of  pious
magnificence  on  a  scale  hitherto  unrivalled.  A  battle  of
cranes  with  dwarfs  representing  the  Pigmies  was  Dedioitk»  of
a  fanciful  novelty,  and  might  afibrd  diversion  for  *^  coioMem*.

'  Suet.  7\t.  8.  Dion,  Ixvi.  24.  Originating,  apparently,  in  the  outskirts
of  the  Campua  Martins,  this  fire  injured,  rather  than  consumed,  the  Pantheon,
and  several  circumjacent  buildings.  It  then  took  a  southerly  direction,  to  fol-
low the  order  of  the  names  aa  given  by  Dion,  attacking  the  Diribitorium,  the
theatres  of  Balbus  and  Pompeius,  the  portico  of  Octavia,  and  finally  the  Capi-
tol. Tlie  S.  W.  summit  of  the  Capitoline  hill,  on  which,  as  I  believe,  the  tem-
ple stood,  immediately  overlooked  the  "  Octavian  edifices,"  and  would  thus  fall
exactly  within  the  line  of  the  conflagration.

*  This  extravagant  statement  is  given  in  the  Chronieon  of  Eusebius,  who,
however,  places  it  under  the  reign  of  Vespasian.  Suspicion  always  attaches  to
the  Christian  accounts  of  Pagan  calamities.

VOL.  VII. — 4

50  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.B.  80.

a  moment ;  there  were  combats  of  gladiators,  among  whom
women  were  included,  though  no  noble  matron  was  allowed
to  mingle  in  the  fray ;  and  the  capacity  of  the  vast  edifice  was
tested  by  the  slaughter  of  five  thousand  animals  within  its
circuit.  The  show  was  crowned  with  the  immission  of  water
into  the  arena,  and  with  a  sea  fight  representing  the  contest
of  the  Corinthians  and  Corcyraeans  related  by  Thucydides.
From  the  amphitheatre  the  spectators  were  invited  to  the
Naumachia  of  Augustus,  which  seems  to  have  afibrded  more
room  for  naval  evolutions,  and  here  the  siege  of  Syracuse  by
the  Athenians  was  still  more  vividly  portrayed.  These  exhi-
bitions endured  through  a  hundred  days,  and  terminated  in
a  scramble  for  tickets  entitling  the  gainer  to  rations  of  bread,
pork,  and  other  eatables.  The  generosity  of  the  most  ami-
able of  princess  was  the  theme  of  every  tongue,  and  the
echoes  of  his  praises  still  live  in  the  meagre  records  of  the
time  which  have  preserved  so  little  besides.  When  indeed
all  was  over,  Titus  himself  was  seen  to  weep,  perhaps  from
fatigue,  possibly  from  disgust  and  vexation ;  but  his  tears
were  interpreted  as  a  presentiment  of  his  death,  which  was
now  impending,  and  it  is  probable  that  he  was  already  suf-
fering from  a  decline  of  bodily  strength.  His  health  had
been  long  feeble.  He  had  tried  in  vain  all  the  remedies  sug-
gested by  the  physicians,  and  afterwards  by  the  priests.
With  superstitious  feelings  kindled  at  the  Eastern  altars,  he
sought  to  propitiate  heaven  by  strange  rites  and  sacrifices.
His  constitution,  perhaps  always  delicate,  possibly  injured  by
poison  imbibed  in  early  life,  was  said  to  be  weakened  by  the
immoderate  use  of  warm  baths ;  but  in  the  last  stage  of  his
disorder  he  desired  to  be  conveyed  to  the  Cutilian  springs,
where  his  father  had  sought  to  reinvigorate  liis  old  ago.
Titus  lamented  effeminately  the  premature  decease  he  too
surely  anticipated ;  and  opening  the  curtains  of  his  litter,
Dc»ih of Titu*.  h)okod  wistfully  at  the  lieavons,  exclaiming  that
gi  he  did  not  dcnerve  to  die.^  He  ex[)ired  on  the  13th
A.r.884. of  September,  81,  having  not  quite  completed  his

*  Suet.  TiL  10. :  "erlpi  nlbl  vltain  immcrcnti  "

A.  U.  833.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  5j

fortieth  year.  During  the  course  of  his  short  reign  of  two
years  and  two  months,  counting  from  the  death  of  Vespasian,
he  had  religiously  observed  the  principle  which  he  had  pro-
claimed on  accepting  the  chief  priesthood,  that  the  hands  of
the  gods'  first  minister  should  be  kept  free  from  any  stain  of
blood.*  No  senator,  no  citizen  fell  by  his  orders.  The
Romans  generously  affirmed  that  he  had  committed  no
crime,  and  had  discharged  every  duty.  When  he  declared
on  his  deathbed  that  there  was  but  one  thing  of  which  he  re-
pented, they  surmised  that  he  was  anxious  about  the  fate  of
his  countrymen  under  the  sway  of  his  brother,  and  accused
himself  of  weakness  in  refraining  from  the  punishment  of
Domitian's  repeated  intrigues  against  his  life.  Such  are  the
soft  and  gentle  traits  that  predominate  to  the  last  in  this
prince's  character,  a  temper  which  may  seem  amiable  at  the
outset  of  an  imperial  career,  and  raise  hopes  in  the  inexperi-
enced ;  but  which  must  be  regarded  with  distrust  and  even
with  apprehensioh  by  those  who  have  learnt  the  lessons  of
history.  Titus  inherited  from  his  prudent  parent  a  stable
throne  and  a  full  treasury:  had  he  lived  to  exhaust  the  treas-
ury,— and  his  brief  career  was  wantonly  improvident, — he
w  ould  soon  have  found  his  throne  shaken,  and  been  driven
to  acts  of  repression  and  tyranny  which  would  have  black-
t'ued  his  fame  with  posterity.  It  would  be  harsh  on  a  mere
uuess  at  future  possibilities,  to  liken  him  to  Nero,  from  whom
he  differed,  as  we  have  seen,  in  many  essential  features;
nevertheless  we  may  accede  to  the  judgment  which  was
finally  passed  on  him  by  his  countrymen,  and  which  settled
into  a  maxim  with  later  ages,  that  he  was  fortunate  in  the
briefness  of  his  power.*

The  virtuous  character  which  the  Romans  agreed  to  a»-

*  Suet  Tit.  9. :  "  periturum  se  potius  quam  perditurum  aflSrmans."  Vari-
ous conflicting  reports  of  the  cause  and  manner  of  this  prince's  death  are  given
by  Suetonius,  Dion,  Plutarch,  Victor,  Eusebius,  and  others,  and  are  collected
by  Reimar  in  a  note  to  Dion,  Ixvi.  26.

*  Ausonius,  Onto  Imperat. :  "  Titus  imperii  felix  breviate.*'  Comp.  Diou,
Ixvi,  18. :  raxa  av  £?.e/^f<f  e'lyl  trzi  /xaKp6v  ijie^iuKet,  on  evTvx'tft  n?^iovi  i)
apkrg  exp^oaro.

62  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  81.

cribe  to  Titus  has  not  been  impugned  by  the  compilers  of
Christian  tradition. The  conqueror  of  Jerusalem

view  of  Titns's  ,  . •  •  i i

character  taken had  learnt  perhaps  from  his  intercourse  with  the

bv  the  Chris- _,  . . ,.  ,.,,..

tians  and  the  iLastern  spiritualists  to  regard  with  religious  awe
the  great  events  in  which  he  had  borne  a  part,
and  to  conceive  of  himself  as  of  a  special  minister  of  the  di-
vine judgments.  As  such  he  was  hailed  without  hesitation
by  the  historian  Orosius,  who  expounds  the  course  of  Provi-
dence in  Roman  affairs  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Chris-
tians.* The  closing  of  Janus  on  the  fall  of  the  JeAvish  city,
appears  to  this  writer  a  counterpart  to  the  announcement  of
imivei-sal  peace  at  the  birth  of  Jesus.  He  passes  lightly  over
the  calamities  of  Titus's  reign,  the  fire,  the  pestilence,  and  the
volcanic  eruptions,  as  well  as  his  premature  decease,  all  which
had  he  lifted  a  hand  against  the  Christians,  would  have  been
branded  as  manifest  tokens  of  divine  vengeance."  But  with
the  JcAvs  it  was  far  otherwise.  By  them  the  memory  of  the
Flavian  princes  was  naturally  held  in  the  deepest  abhorrence.
They  asserted  that  Vespasian  commenced  a  cruel

Jewish  legend  '' .  ,  , .  « ,  ,

on  the  death persecution  01  the  presumed  lineage  oi  the  roval

ofTltUS.  IX •-!  mi  -1-  />,!-.  . •

David. Ihe  disasters  oi  the  doomed  principate
of  Titus  they  regarded  with  grim  exultation. They  gloated

•  Though  we  may  smile  at  the  confidence  with  which  Orosius  has  judged
the  divine  decrees,  we  must  signalize  him  as  the  first  secular  historian  who  di-
rected men's  views  to  the  providential  guidance  of  human  history,  an  inevitable
subject  of  Christian  speculation,  however  hazardous,  of  which  we  may  say,  like
the  science  of  the  mathematici,  "  et  vetabitur  semper  et  retinebitur."

'  Oros.  vii.  9.  Corap.  Eus<ib.  ITist.  Eccl.  iii.  12.  17.  A  late  Christian  his-
torian, of  inferior  authority,  Sulpicius  Scverus,  asserts  that  Titus  was  induced
to  destroy  the  Temple,  from  the  idea  that  it  was  the  centre  and  stronghold  of
the  Cimstian  faith,  Hhl.  Sacr.  ii.  44. ;  and  it  has  been  attempted  to  show  that
this  writer  took  his  information  from  the  lost  narrative  of  Tacitus.  Some  of
the  phrases  of  Suli»iciurt  may,  indeed,  remind  us  of  the  style  of  Tacitus  :  "  At
contra  alii  et  Titus  ipse  evcrtendum  tcm[)lum  imprimis  ccnscbant :  quo  plenius
JudiBorum  et  Clirlstianonnn  religio  toUerctur.  Quippe  has  religiones,  licet
contrarias  sibi,  iisdem  tamiMi  aiictoribus  profoctas  ;  Chrlstinnos  o\  Judiris  cx-
ttitiflfle ;  rwlirr  niMnta  nfirjxfin  fnrUr  prrUurain"  &c.  Hut  Sulpicius  is  a  mani-
feat  Imitator,  and  we  need  not  infer  from  such  au  apparent  rusemblauco  that  he
actually  copied  the  words  of  Taeitua

A.  U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  53

over  his  shattered  health,  which  they  attributed  to  divine  ven-
geance, and  inserted  among  their  legends  a  wild  account  of
the  nature  of  his  sufferings.  The  conqueror  of  Jerusalem,  they
said,  had  desecrated  the  Temple  of  tlie  Most  High  with  orgies
suited  to  the  shrine  of  the  Paphian  Venus.  He  had  pierced  the
veil  with  his  sword,  before  tearing  it  down  to  wrap  the
sacred  vessels,  and  transport  them  to  Rome.  Assailed  on  his
voyage  homeward,  and  nigh  to  perishing  by  tempest,  he  had
impiously  exclaimed.  The  god  of  the  Jews  who  drotened
Pharaoh  has  power  on  the  waters,  but  I  am  more  than  hit
match  on  land.  Jehovah  suffered  him  to  gain  the  shore,  and
there,  in  scorn  of  the  scomer,  sent  a  gnat  to  creep  into  his
nostrils  and  lodge  itself  in  his  brain.  For  seven  years  the
restless  insect  gnawed  the  vital  tissue.  One  day,  when  the
tortured  prince  passed  ])y  a  blacksmith's  forge,  the  thunders
of  the  hammer  seemed  to  startle  and  arrest  it.  Four  pieces
of  silver  daily  did  the  sufferer  give  to  have  the  noise  contin-
ued in  his  ear  without  ceasing.  At  the  end  of  thirty  miser-
able days  the  insect  became  accustomed  to  the  clang  and
resumed  his  ravages.  Phineas,  the  son  of  Erouba,  was
present  with  the  chief  nobles  of  Rome  at  the  death  of  the
emperor.  The  Jewish  witness  reported  that  the  head  of
the  deceased  was  opened,  and  the  creature  was  there  dis-
covered as  big  as  a  swallow,  with  a  brazen  beak  and  clawi
of  iron.'

Thus  it  is  that  the  disappearance  from  the  stage  of  life  of
a  weak,  though  perhaps  a  pleasing  unit  in  the  great  sum,  may
be  recorded  by  many  pens,  remembered  through
many  generations,  flttended  with  sighs  or  sneers HercuiwiuBa
of  millions,  if  fortune  has  placed  it  in  a  conspicu-
ous position. Almost  at  the  same  moment,  whole  hives  of
human  beings,  historic  cities,  monuments  of  the  arts  of  ages,
may  subside  into  annihilation,  and  pass,  almost  without  no-
tice, into  the  night  of  oblivion. Herculanum  and  Pompeii
vanished  from  before  the  eyes  of  Italy,  like  the  scenes  of  a
theatre,  and  their  awful  disappearance,  strange  to  say,  at-

'  Salvador,  from  the  Talmud  :  Domm,  Horn,  en  Judie,  U.  498.

54  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D,  81.

tracted  hardly  a  more  lasting  interest.  Yet,  the  disaster  it-
self was  one  of  the  most  signal  in  human  annals,  and  is  con-
nected with  circumstances  which  have  been  related  for  us  in
a  picturesque  and  striking  manner,  and  have  engaged  the
sympathies  of  many  readers  through  a  long  succession  of
ages.  The  same  eruption  of  Vesuvius  which  overwhelmed
the  cities  of  Campania,  scorched  and  stifled  the  great  natu-
ralist Pliny,  and  the  account  of  the  catastrophe  is  minutely
detailed  by  the  most  elegant  writer  of  the  day,  himself  part-
ly an  eye-witness.

"We  have  learnt  from  moralists  the  habit  of  contrasting

the  works  of  art  and  nature,  as  types  of  the  perishable  and

the  eternal. Yet  in  some  respects,  and  under

Changes  In  the  ,  .  \ n  i /•

physical  aspect ccrtam  couditious,  the  outward  framework  oi

of  Vesuvius  ,  .  .

and  the  Cam- nature  IS  not  Icss  liable  to  change  and  dissolution

panlan  coast.  ■,  ,  n  ■•  -  t i /^

than  that  oi  more  human  creations.  In  the  Co-
losseum, as  it  now  stands  before  us,  broken  down  through
one  half  of  its  circumference,  and  at  one  spot  almost  levelled
to  the  ground,  its  columns  and  architraves  ruined  or  defaced,
its  surface  ruffled  with  the  scars  of  time,  or  the  rank  foliage  of
a  wild  vegetation,  we  behold  no  more  than  the  wreck  of  the
glorious  amphitheatre  which  rose  in  complete  majesty  before
the  gaze  of  Vespasian  and  Pliny.  But  if  we  turn  our  eyes
to  the  great  features  of  the  Bay  of  Naples,  its  shores,  its
plains,  and  its  central  mountain,  we  may  remark  that  the
destruction  of  two  considerable  cities  was  one  of  the  least  of
the  changes  eifected  in  the  scene,  by  the  revival  of  volcanic
agency  which  dates  from  tliis  period,  in  the  region  of  Vesu-
vius. This  mountain  had  been  the  greatest  of  nature's  am-
phitheatres ;  the  ridge  of  its  truncated  cone  was  level,  like
the  cornice  of  the  Colosseum ;  its  sides,  steep  and  even,  were
adorned  with  the  fairest  of  nature's  handy  work,  with  forests
of  oak,  chestnut,  and  ilex  on  the  north,  with  vines,  cultivated
or  growing  wild  to  its  summit,  on  the  south.' The  interior

'  Strabo  (v.  4.  p.  247.)  dedcribee  the  fertility  of  tlic  slope  up  to  its  summit :
rb  bpoi  rb  Oveaaoi/tov,  hypolt  neptovKobftevov  n-ay/cdAoif,  ttTJ/v  rf/c  KopxMpijc-  aiiTt)
(T  inlrredoc  fiiv  iroXb  fiipoc  ioriv. The  forest  trees  of  the  region  have  been

A.  U.  834.J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  ^ 5

of  the  summit  was  more  or  less  depressed,  and  the  masses  of
igneous  formation,  and  broken  furrows  which  scarred  or
seamed  it,  betokened  to  thoughtful  observers  that  it  was  the
choked-up  crater  of  a  volcano  extinct  for  ages.'  The  erup-
tion of  the  year  19  effected,  possibly  at  one  blow,  the  ruin
of  this  amphitheatre,  such  as  it  has  taken  centuries  to  ac-
complish in  the  Flavian  Colosseum.  One  half  of  its  sides
have  been  completely  blown  away ;  the  remainder  has  been
abraded  and  lowered  almost  throughout ;  the  apex  alone,
now  known  by  the  name  of  Monte  di  Somma,  may  still  show
the  level  of  the  original  crater.  But  from  the  floor  of  this
amphitheatre  has  risen  another  cone,  which  has  almost  filled
it  with  its  accumulating  debris,  and  has  at  times  exceeded
the  height  of  Somma ;  much  as  if  a  larger  pyramid  than  that
of  Cestius  had  been  piled  on  the  arena  of  the  Colosseum.*
From  this  cone  torrents  of  molten  rocks,  and  showers  of
burning  cinders,  have  been  for  ages  ejected,  and  the  luxuriant
vegetation  of  the  mountain  slo|)e8  has  been  consumed  or
bui-ied  for  many  hundred  feet  from  the  summit.

The  peaceful  charms  of  Vesuvius,  such  as  they  appeared
to  the  eyes  of  Virgil  and  Tiberius,  have  been  transformed  to
terrible  majesty,  and  the  long  swelling  outline  of  the  fertile

found  to  spring  abundantly,  at  least  on  the  northern  side,  whenerer  the  ntoun-
tain  has  been  long  at  rest,  as  before  the  eruption  of  1611  ;  but  Martul  e«i»
Itratos  its  vineyards  in  his  time,  iv.  43. :  "  Hie  est  pampineis  riridis  modo
Vesvius  umbris,"  and  the  followers  of  Spartacus  escaped  from  the  crater  by
ropes  of  twisted  wild-vines. Plutarch,  Cr€ug.  10.

'  Strabo,  1.  c. ;  whose  description,  however,  does  not  favour  the  idea  of  a
deep  crater  at  that  period,  nor  indeed  does  Plutarch's  account  imply  it,  though
t)ften  cited  with  that  view.  Vitruvius,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  recognises  the
tradition  of  Vesuvius  as  a  volcano,  iL  6. :  "  non  minus  etiam  memoretur  anti-
quitus  crevisse  ardores  et  abundavisse  sub  Vesuvio  monte,  et  inde  evomuiaae
circa  agros  flammam." Comp.  Diodor.  Sic.  iv.  21.

*  Monte  di  Somma  is  8450  (French)  feet  high.  The  cone,  which  ia  known
by  the  name  of  Vesuvius,  has  been  recently  3700,  and  at  one  time  is  said  to
have  exceeded  4000.  It  was  reduced  by  the  eruption  of  1855  to  a  level  with
the  rival  summit,  and  it  has  been  stated  by  eye-witnesses  of  the  agitation  of
1861,  that  it  has  now  sunk  a  little  below  it.  Every  year,  in  fact,  in  modern
times,  has  produced  more  or  less  change  in  the  features  of  the  mountain.

56  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  79.

hill  has  been  broken  by  frowning  cliffs  and  jagged  pinnacles.*
Nor  are  the  changes  produced  on  the  plain  and  along  the
coast-line  less  signal  than  the  transformation  of  the  ancient
mountain.  The  Lucrine  •  lake  has  been  choked  by  the  uplift-
ing of  a  mighty  cone  from  its  abysses.  The  foundations  of
the  mole  of  Puteoli  have  been  sunk  many  feet  into  the  sea,
and  raised  again,  though  not  to  their  original  level.  Various
remains  of  Roman  buildings,  and  lines  of  road  along  the
shore,  may  be  now  spied  beneath  the  waters  ;  while  on  the
other  hand  long  strands  of  shingle  have  been  heaved  above
the  surface,  at  the  foot  of  hills  which  the  action  of  the  waves
had  once  scarped  into  precipitous  cliffs.  There  has  been  in
fact  first  a  subsidence,  and  again  a  raising  of  the  whole  coast ;
but  the  distance  at  which  the  ruins  of  Pompeii  now  lie  from
the  sea  which  once  washed  its  walls,  is  attributed  not  so
much  to  a  change  of  the  relative  levels  of  land  and  Avater,  as
to  the  accretion  of  volcanic  matter  from  Vesuvius.  Pompeii
itself  is  covered  with  a  mass  of  ashes  long  since  converted
into  mould,  and  rife  with  the  seeds  of  vegetation,  to  the
depth  of  about  fifteen  feet ;  but  Herculanum  after  suffering  a
like  catastrophe  has  since  been  more  than  once  overwhelmed
by  streams  of  lava,  which  have  gained  a  thickness  of  more
than  twice  as  many  yards.  From  such  data  we  may  imagine
how  entirely  the  face  of  the  country  has  been  changed  along
the  southern  base  of  the  mountain  which  has  been  so  great
an  agent  of  destruction  and  renovation.'

'  The  date  of  the  Argonautica  and  Punka  may  be  determined  from  allu-
sions to  fatal  activity  of  Vesuvius.  Valer.  Fl.  iii.  208.:  "muf^itor  anhelat
Veerlus;"  iv.  607. :  "  Sic  ubi  prorupti  tonuit  cum  forte  Vesevi  nespcriae  leto-
Va  apex."  Silius  Ital.  xvii.  694. :  "Evomuit  pastes  per  ssecula  Vesvius  igncs."
StatiuB  rocura  more  than  once  to  the  subject,  which  was  peculiarly  interesting
to  him  as  a  native  of  Neapolis. See  Syh.  iv.  4.  78.,  iv.  8.  4.,  v.  3.  206.

"  There  is  something  affecting  in  the  delight  with  which  Pliny  describes  the
charms  of  the  Campanian  coast  on  which  he  was  so  soon  to  perish  in  a  general
catastrophe.  See  UiU.  Nat.  iii.  9. :  "  hinc  felix  ilia  Campania  est.  Ab  hoc
sinu  incipiunt  vitifcri  colics  ct  ti<mulcntia  nobilis  succo  per  omnes  terras  inclj-to
....  hax  litora  culidis  funtibiis  rigantur  .  .  .  .  et  hoc  quoque  cerlamen  hu-
matia  voluplatit  tenuerc  Osci,  (JroBci,"  tic.

A.  p.  832.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIBE.  57

Sixteen  years  before  the  date  of  this  fatal  eruption,  the
])opulou8  town  of  Pompeii  had  been  afflicted  with  a  terrible
I'urthquake  :  but  tlie  language  both  of  Tacitus

^  '  « &  Pompeii  *t-

and  Seneca,  who  speak  of  it  as  swallowed  up  or  flieted  with  u
destroyed,  is  plainly  exaggerated.  The  remains
discovered  in  modern  times  attest  the  fact  of  a
convulsion  which  had  overturned  some  of  the  principal  build-
ings ;  but  all  the  ordinary  habitations  of  the  people  were
standing,  and  the  place  was  as  full  of  residents  as  ever,  en-
gaged in  their  usual  concerns,  when  the  final  catastrophe
overtook  it.'  Pompeii  was  a  maritime  city  at  the  mouth  of
the  river  Sarnus,  the  most  sheltered  recess  of  the  Neapolitan
Crater.  Its  origin  was  lost  in  antiquity,  and  the  tradition
that  it  was  founded  by  Hercules,  together  with  the  other
spot  which  bore  the  name  of  the  demigod,  was  derived  per-
haps from  the  warm  springs  with  which  the  region  abounded.
The  Greek  plantations  on  the  Campanian  coast  had  been
overrun  by  the  Oscans  and  Samnites ;  nevertheless  the  grace-
ful features  of  Grecian  civilization  were  still  everywhere  con-
spicuous, and  though  Pompei  received  a  Latin  name,  and
though  Sulla,  Augustus,  and  Xero  had  successively  endowed
it  with  Koman  colonists,  it  retained  the  manners  and  to  a
great  extent  the  language  of  the  settlers  from  beyond  the
sea.* The  accident  which  buried  this  provincial  city  under

-  There  is  a  discrepancy  of  one  year  in  the  date  of  the  earthquake  in  Seneca
and  Tacitus.  The  first,  who  was  a  contemporary,  places  it  in  the  coasulahip
of  Regains  and  Virginius  (v.c.  816.  a.  d.  63.);  the  other,  writing  six  years
later,  assigns  it  to  the  year  before.  We  may  admit  with  Brotier  the  poaaibility
of  the  shocks  having  commenced  in  the  one  year  and  terminated  in  the  next
Seneca,  however,  with  extraordinary  coolness,  speaks  of  the  entire  subsidence
■f  the  city:  "  Pompeios  celebrem  Campaniae  urbem,  ....  desedisae  terns
niotu,  Lucili  virorum  optime,  audivimus." — Xat.  Quaat.  vi.  1.  Tadtus  kis
strongly:  "et  motu  terrae  celebre  Campanise  oppidum,  Pompeii,  magna  ex
parte  proruit." — Ann.  xv.  22.  In  the  i/«<.  12.:  "  haustae  aut  obrutae  urbee:  "
in  the  one  case,  swallowed  up  in  streams  of  lava ;  in  the  other  overwhelmed
by  showers  of  ashes.

*  The  style  of  building  at  Pompeii  is  essentially  Greek,  but  such  aa  the
Romans  at  this  time  adopted  whenever  an  opportunity  occorred ;  on  the  other

68  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  79.

a  mass  of  cinders,  and  preserved  its  basement  at  least  invio-
late for  seventeen  centuries,  has  furnished  us  with  means,
which  we  should  vainly  seek  in  any  other  part  of  the  world,
of  comparing  modern  forms  of  life  with  those  of  the  mixed
Grseco-Romans  of  the  empire.

Into  these  details  this  is  not  the  place  to  enter ;  but  the

account  we  have  received  of  the  fatal  eruption  is  valuable  for

the  study  of  Roman  character,  as  well  as  for  its

The  great  erup- Q^rj^  intrinsic  interest. The  writer  is  the  younarer

tlon  of  V  08U-  •'  "

viuB  described Plinv,  the  ncphcw  of  the  ffreat  naturalist,  who

by  the  younger  ...

Hiny-  describes  it  in  two  well-known  letters.* The

elder  Pliny,  the  friend  and  devoted  servant  of
Vespasian  and  Titus,  at  this  time  commanded  the  imperial
fleet  at  Misenum,  and  divided  his  time  with  marvellous  assi-
duity between  the  discharge  of  official  duties,  and  the  accu-
mulation of  extraordinary  stores  of  knowledge.  Remarkable
for  his  industry  even  among  the  industrious  statesmen  of  his
country,  Pliny  had  served  the  commonwealth  at  home  and
abroad,  in  peace  and  war,  in  the  higliest  posts,  never  inter-
mitting throughout  his  career  the  habit  of  reading,  noting,
and  composing,  till,  notwithstanding  the  multifarious  busi-
ness in  which  he  had  been  immersed,  his  completed  works
and  his  collections  for  future  arrangement  had  tojrether
reached  an  extent  almost  appalling  to  the  imagination."  His
compositions  on  contemporary  history  seem  to  have  soon
fallen  into  oblivion,  and  we  possess  no  testimony  to  their
merits ;  but  the  great  work  by  whicli  we  know  him  became
the  recognised  repertory  of  all  the  accepted  facts  of  Nature,
and  its  utility  secured  its  preservation.  His  labour  in  col-
band,  the  Romans  imposed  on  their  Grecian  subjects  some  of  the  worst  of  their
own  fashions.  In  the  time  of  Nero,  Pompeii  was  deprived  of  its  public  shows
for  ten  years,  as  a  punislimcnt  for  an  affray  that  had  occurred  there  during  a
gladiatorial  exhibition. Tae.  Ann.  xiv.  17.

'  I'lin.  J'Jp.  vi.  Ifl,  20.

'  nin.  J'Jp.  iii.  !i.  The  contemporary,  or  nearly  contemporary,  histories
were  :  1.  A  life  of  I'omponius  Sccundus  ;  2.  A  continuation  of  the  history  of
Aufidiua  BasMUB  ;  3.  An  account  of  the  German  wars.

A.  U.  832.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  59

lecting  facts,  and  his  assiduity,  and  to  a  great  extent  skill,  in
arranging  them,  deserve  our  highest  admiration  ;  he  was  not
gifted,  however,  with  much  talent  for  observation,  still  less
does  he  deserve  from  his  powers  of  analysis  or  combination
to  be  ranked  with  his  master  Aristotle.  But  the  ardent
thirst  for  knowledge,  which  impelled  him  to  seek  the  scene
of  interest  and  danger,  might  have  done  honour  to  the  wisest
of  philosophers,  and  the  name  of  Pliny  will  ever  be  memorable
as  of  an  ancient  martyr  of  science.  Such  was  the  irony  of
fate,  that  while  the  most  illustrious  explorer  of  nature,  our
own  immortal  Bacon,  died  from  a  vulgar  cold  caught  in  the
ignoble  experiment  of  stuffing  a  fowl  with  snow,  his  prede-
cessor, far  his  inferior  in  genius  and  intelligence,  perished
gloriously  in  the  examination  of  a  grand  volcanic  phenome-
non.

On  the  24th  of  August  in  the  year  "79,  Pliny  was  residing
in  his  villa  on  the  Misenian  promontory,  which  lies  about
twenty  miles  in  a  direct  line  from  the  summit  of _ „

,  The  elder

Vesuvius,  conspicuous  across  the  gult  ol  >»  aples. Piiny  esamia**

•  -.  /.  .  • V 1  J ****  eruption.

His  attention  was  drawn  from  his  books  and  and  pcrUiiM  to
writings  to  a  cloud  of  unusual  form  and  charac-
ter, which  hung  over  the  mountain,  and  rose,  as  appeared  on
further  examination,  from  it,  spreading  out  from  a  slender
and  well-defined  stem,  like  the  figure  of  a  pinetree.'  Its
colour  changed  rapidly  from  black  to  white,  as  the  contents
of  the  ejected  mass  of  which  it  proved  to  be  composed,  were
earth  or  ashes.  The  admiral  ordered  his  Liburnian  cutter  to
be  manned,  and  casting  aside  his  papers  prepared  to  cross
the  Avater,  and  observe  the  phenomenon  nearer.  He  asked
his  nephew  to  accompany  him,  but  the  younger  student  was

'  Plin.  Ep.  vi.  16. :  "cujus  similitudinem  et  formam  iion  alia  magis  arbor,
quara  pinus,  expresserit  Nam  longissimo  velut  tninco  elata  in  altum,  quibus-
dam  ramis  diffundebatur ; "  t.  e.  with  a  vertical  stem  and  horizontal  head ;
such  as  the  phenomenon  has  often  been  described  by  subsequent  observers.
Scacchi,  however,  noted  a  difterent  appearance  in  the  eruption  of  1850 :  the
smoke  was  carried  off  in  a  long  horizontal  stream  at  a  small  elevation.  Roth,
Vasuv.,  p.  248.  (1887.)

60  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A,  0.79.

too  intent  on  the  volumes  before  him  to  prosecute  an  inquiry
into  the  operations  of  nature.^  Meanwhile,  intelligence  ar-
rived from  the  tenified  residents  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain.
They  implored  the  powerful  assistance  of  the  commander  of
the  fleet.  Pliny  directed  liis  largest  vessels  to  be  got  ready,
and  steered  to  the  point  nearest  to  the  danger.  As  he  ap-
proached the  shore  the  ashes  began  to  fall  thick  and  hot  upon
his  deck,  with  showers  of  glowing  stones.  A  shoal  formed
suddenly  beneath  his  keel,  and  impeded  his  progress.  Turn-
ing a  little  to  the  right,  he  came  to  land  at  Stabise,  at  the
dwelling  of  a  friend.  Here  he  restored  confidence  to  the
affi-ighted  occupants  by  the  calmness  of  his  demeanor,  while
he  insisted  on  taking  the  usual  refreshment  of  the  bath  and
supper,  and  conversed  with  easy  hilarity.  As  the  shades  of
evening  gathered,  the  brightness  of  the  flames  became  more
striking;  but  to  calm  the  panic  of  those  around  him,  the
philosopher  assured  them  that  they  arose  from  cottages  on
the  slope,  which  the  alarmed  rustics  had  abandoned  to  the
descending  flakes  of  fire.  He  then  took  his  customary  brief
night's  rest,  sleeping  composedly  as  usual ;  but  his  attendants
were  not  so  easily  tranquillized,  and  as  the  night  advanced,
the  continued  fall  of  aslies  within  the  courts  of  the  mansion
convinced  them  that  delay  would  make  escape  impossible.
They  roused  their  master,  together  with  the  friend  at  whose
house  he  was  resting,  and  hastily  debated  how  to  proceed.
By  this  time  the  soil  around  them  was  rocking  with  repeated
shocks  of  earthquake,  which  recalled  the  horrors  of  the  still
recent  catastrophe.  The  party  quitted  the  treacherous  shelter
of  the  house-roof,  and  sought  the  coast  in  hopes  of  finding
vessels  to  take  them  ofl*.  To  protect  themselves  from  the
thickening  cinders  they  tied  cushions  to  their  heads.  The
sky  was  darkened  by  the  ceaseless  shower,  and  they  groped
their  way  by  torcliliglit,  and  by  the  intermitting  flashes  from
the  mountain.' The  sea  was  agitated,  and  abandoned  by

'  Plin.  1.  c. :  "  rcspondi,  Btudoro  mo  mnllc  : — et  forte  ipse,  quod  acriberem^
detUrat.''^ The  apologoticul  whiHper  in  tho  liiHt  cIuuho  is  exquisite.

'  Tlic  at)heH,  oti  Dion  liad  been  informed,  were  waftod  not  only  to  Rome,

I

A.U.  832.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  61

every  bark,  Pliny,  wearied  or  j)erplexed,  now  stretched
himself  on  a  piece  of  sail-cloth,  and  refused  to  stir  farther,
while  on  the  bursting  forth  of  a  fiercer  blast  accompanied
with  sulphureous  gases,  his  companions,  all  but  two  body-
slaves,  fled  in  terror.  Some  who  looked  back  in  their  flight
affirmed  that  the  old  man  rose  once  with  the  help  of  his  at-
tendants, but  immediately  fell  again,  overpowered,  as  it
seemed,  with  the  deadly  vapours.  When  the  storm  abated
and  light  at  last  returned,  the  body  was  found  abandoned  on
the  spot ;  neither  the  skin  nor  the  cbathes  were  injured,  and
the  calm  expression  of  the  countenance  betokened  death  by
suffocation.

Such  is  the  account  the  younger  Pliny  gives  of  his  uncle's
death  from  hearsay.  In  another  letter  he  relates  the  circum-
stances which  he  himself  witnessed  from  his  safer

PompAll  and

post  at  Misenum,  and  as  might  be  expected  with HereoiMum

^  .  •bwidoBed  and

more  vividness  and  distmetness;'  and  allowance  ainMMt fbrgot-
must  be  made  for  the  vanity  and  frivolity  of  ex-
pression which  disfigure,  it  must  be  confessed,  the  dreadfiil
tale,  from  the  youth  of  the  narrator,  who  was  but  eighteen  at
the  time.  It  may  be  observed  that  his  remarks  give  no  indi-
cation of  the  streams  of  mud  or  lava,  which  form  generally
the  most  destructive  features  of  volcanic  convulsions.  The
projected  volume  of  solid  matter,  such  as  sand  and  ashes  in  a
state  of  ignition,  consumed,  as  we  have  seen,  all  the  habita-
tions of  man  on  which  it  lighted,  or  if  its  heat  was  a  little
abated  by  distance,  engulfed  them  under  a  ponderous  mass
of  dust  and  cinders. The  shower  was  wafted  perhaps  in

where  they  were  supposed  to  have  caused  the  pestilence  which  ensued,  but  to
Africa,  Syria,  and  Egypt.  Dion,  Levi.  23.  In  later  eruptions  they  hare  been
carried  to  Africa,  and  even  to  Constantinople.  Valerius  Flaocus,  a  ooatempt^
rary,  seizes  upon  this  incident  for  a  novel  simile,  comparing  it  to  the  rapid
flight  of  the  Harpies  (iv.  508.) :

"  Vix  dum  ignea  montem
Torsit  hyems,  jamque  Eoas  cinia  induit  urbes."
'  Plin.  Ep.  vi.  20. Both  this  and  the  other  letter  are  addressed  by  the
writer  to  his  friend  Tacitus,  with  a  view  to  the  account  of  his  own  times,  which
the  great  historian  was  then  compiling :  "  quo  verius  tradere  posteris  possis."

62  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  79.

various  directions  by  the  shifting  breezes ;  Herculanum  to
the  south-west,  and  Pompeii  to  the  south-east  of  the  moun-
tain were  completely  overwhelmed  by  it,  while  other  spots
between  them  and  around  them  escaped  almost  scatheless.
The  eruption  seems  to  have  been  preceded  by  some  premoni-
tory shocks,  and  it  is  evident  that  these  towns  were  in  a
great  measure  abandoned  at  the  moment  of  the  catastrophe ;
the  descent,  indeed,  of  the  falling  masses  was  not  too  sudden
and  precipitate  to  allow  the  people  to  fly  themselves,  and
remove  at  least  a  portion  of  their  effects.'  Some  attempts
seem  also  to  have  been  early  made  to  revisit  the  scene  of
desolation,  and  repair  the  damage  inflicted ;  but  fresh  heav-
ings  of  the  mountain,  and  repeated  showers  of  ashes,  continu-
ed to  baffle  the  survivors.  New  homes  were  found  ;  the  old
treasures  were  abandoned  when  the  spot  where  they  lay  could
no  longer  be  traced ;  and  in  the  lapse  of  two  or  three  genera-
tions the  careless  loungers  of  the  Campanian  coast  had  for-
gotten even  the  site  of  the  ruined  cities  beside  them.'

"  Diou  says  loosely  and  inaccurately,  Ixvi.  23. :  t6  re  'EpKovMvsov  ml
Ilofiv^ioTx:,  £V  ^edrpip  rov  6/ii?x)v  avT^g  Kodjjfihiov,  KaTkx<^e.  This  should  r^
fer  to  Pompeii ;  but  the  theatres  excavated  here  and  at  Herculanum  present
no  remains  of  a  burled  population.

*  Statins,  as  might  be  expected,  speaks  more  feelingly  of  the  calamity  than
any  of  the  few  other  writers  who  allude  to  it ;  but  even  he  is  ready,  within  ten
or  twelve  years,  to  consign  it  to  oblivion. Comp.  Sylv.  iv.  4.  81 :
"  Mira  fides :  credetne  virftm  ventura  propago.
Cum  segetcs  iterum,  cum  jam  hoec  deserta  virebunt,
Infra  urbcs  populosquc  premi,  proavitaque  toto
Rura  abiisse  mari ! Nee  dum  Icthale  minari
CesxU  aptxJ'^
The  emperor  Marcus  Aureliua  moralizes  on  the  subject  a  century  later :
Meditationet,  iv.  48. — 'Ewoelv  <rwex<^  n6aoi  fih>  larpol  anoTtihyf/Kaat  ....
ndaoi  6i  ^iMao^t  ....  irdaoi  6i  rbpawot  .  .  ,  Tr6aot  dk  irb^^eic  5/Uh,  Iv'
oirruc  elnu,  redv^Koai,  'E^iaj  Kal  Ilofimf/oi  Kal  'Hpd/cAavov  Kal  i?i?xu  Avaplff-
firiroi.

A.  U.  8S2.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  63

CHAPTER  LXI.

DOMITIAN EUPEROR. — HIS EDUCATION AND COARACTKR. — KXTERMAI, HI8TORT Of

THIS REIQN. CAMPAIGNS 0¥  AQRICOLA IN BRITAIN, A.  D.  78-84  : A.  U.  831-

837. — HE  IS  RECALLED  FROM  THE  CONQUEST  OF  CALEDONIA. — DOIUTIAN'B  BX-
PEDITION  AGAINST  THE  CHATTI,  A.  D.  84. :  U.  C.  837. — H>  CLAUUi  A  TICTOBT,
AND  ASSUMES  THE  TITLE  OF  GERMAMICU8. — ^FISCAL  mCUBITUa  AMD  COM-
HENCEMENT  OF  CONFISCATIONS.^-CAMPAIONS  AGAINST  THE  OACIAJI8. — ^DEFEAT
AND  DEATH  OF  FU8CUS. — VICTORY  OF  JULIANUS. — PEACE  WITH  THE  DACIANS,
A.  D. 90  : A.  U. 843. — a  pretended NERO. — SCOCESUS IN AFRICA. — UTOLT

OF  antonius,  a.  d.  93. :  a.  u.  846. — scnewzd  crusltub  and  alauis  ov

DOMITLAN.

IT  was  reported  that  Domitian  had  intrigued  against  his
father,  and  there  was  little  question  but  that  he  had
sought  to  supplant  his  brother.  Kumour  accused
hira  fui'ther  of  having  hastened  the  death  of  Titus,  •«ib«»  »*•«■-
by  causing  him,  in  an  access  of  his  mortal  fever,
to  be  immersed  in  a  bath  of  snow.*  Contemporary  history
affirmed  at  least  for  certain  that  he  quitted  his  brother's  bed-
side, while  life  was  yet  in  him,  and  hurried  to  Rome  to  seize
the  suffrage  of  the  praetorians,  and  secure  with  their  assistance
the  homage  of  the  senate.  Titus  indeed  had  already  declared
that  he  regarded  Domitian  as  the  partner  of  his  power,  and
had  continued,  even  under  the  greatest  provocation,  to  point
to  him  as  his  legitimate  successor.  It  was  in  vain,  however,
that  the  gentle  emperor  had  sought  the  love  and  gratitude
of  his  unworthy  brother.  Domitian  scowled  upon  him  with
ill-disguised  impatience  for  his  decease,  and  when,  at  last,  he
obtained  possession  of  the  throne,  declared  with  brutal  exul-
tation that  he  had  himself  bestowed  it  upon  his  father  and

*  I  presume  this  was  in  fact  the  same  vigorous  cold  water  treatment  which
had  saved  Augustus  and  killed  Marcellus.

fi4  HISTORr  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

brother,  and  now  received  back  his  own  gift  from  them.  He
discharged  the  formal  duty  of  pronouncing  the  funeral  ora-
tion, and  soliciting  the  consecration  of  Titus  ;  but  his  praises
were  cold  or  insidious,  and  the  people  were  little  satisfied
with  the  meed  of  honour  assigned  to  their  favourite.^

Titus  left,  as  we  have  seen,  no  male  descendant,  and  the

daughter  of  a  Roman  house  could  not  take  the  inheritance

of  her  father,  which  was  in  law  the  property  of

His  claims  su-  „ .,  \  -,  •  i i ,. i  •,•

perior  to  those the  family,  and  went  along  with  the  liability  to

of  the  daughter  . ., /..,.,  ,  ,.  ,

of  Titus,  or  of  maintain  the  tamily  rights,  and  periorm  the  prop-
er functions  of  a  citizen.  To  accept  the  office  of
princeps  or  imperator,  of  censor  or  pontiff,  was  not  more  im-
possible for  Julia  than  to  assume  the  chiefship  of  a  patrician
house.  Domitian,  the  deceased's  brother,  was  the  apparent
heir  to  the  estate,  and  therewith  presumptive  heir,  according
to  the  notions  of  the  time,  to  the  political  functions  with
which  the  deceased  had  been  invested.  It  might  require  in-
deed a  vote  of  the  senate  and  a  lex  curiata  to  confer  the  em-
pire formally  upon  him ;  but  subject  to  this  formality,  his
claim  might  be  considered  as  sufficiently  established.  The
natural  feelings  of  paternity,  however,  were  beginning  to
assert  themselves  against  the  long  descended  rules  of  law
and  primitive  usages.  Titus  was  anxious  for  his  daughter's
happiness  and  greatness.  With  his  Asiatic  training,  he  had
discarded,  no  doubt,  many  of  his  ancestral  prejudices,  and
the  son  of  the  plain  Sabine  burgher  had  felt  no  scruple  in
proposing  to  unite  liis  daughter  in  marriage  with  liis  own
brother.  Such  unions,  as  we  have  seen,  had  been  legitimized
by  Claudius,  but  they  had  not  been  sanctioned  by  public
opinion.  By  the  genuine  Roman  they  were  still  reputed
foreign,  oriental,  abominable.  Domitian  rejected  tlie  pro-
posal. True,  he  might  feel  that  his  claim  was  too  strong  to
require  any  subsidiary  support :  true,  he  was  enamoured  of
the  wife  of  a  senator  whom  he  required  to  repudiate  her  hus-

*  Comp.  Suet.  Doniit.  2. :  "  defimctuni  nnUo  piu'tcrqviani  consecrationis
honore  dignatua,  Bsopo  cUam  carpHit  obU(|uiri  orutionibus  ct  cdictis."  Dion,
Ixvii.  2. :  v&vra  rd  havriCtraTa  uv  iCoij?i£To  aKt/iTT6fievog,

A.  U.  834.J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  65

band  in  order  to  contract  nuptials  with  Iiimself. '  Neverthe-
less, a  purist  as  he  was  by  early  breeding,  and  a  reformer  as
he  afterwards  proved  himself,  and  uncontaminated  by  con-
tact with  the  licentious  East,  Domitian  shrank  perhaps  with
genuine  repugnance  from  the  questionable  arrangement  pro-
posed to  him.  Julia,  thus  repulsed,  was  united  to  her  father's
first  cousin,  Flavins  Sabinus,  and  this  man  might  feel  perhaps
aggrieved  that  the  splendid  inheritance  of -the  Caesars  should
pass  out  of  the  line  of  natural  descent,  or,  that  he  should  not
be  himself  adopted  by  his  father-in-law.  Hence  the  jealousy
with  which,  as  we  shall  see,  Domitian  continued  to  regard
liim;  and  hence,  perhaps,  the  intrigue  which  the  emperor
carried  on,  even  before  his  accession,  according  at  least  to
common  rumour,  with  the  niece  whom  he  had  refused  in
marriage,  but  whom  he  might  craftily  seek  to  attach  to  him-
self by  the  tie  of  an  irregular  connexion.*

The  personal  history  of  Domitian  indeed  has  been  made
the  sport  of  common  fame,  and  we  need  hardly  trouble  our-
selves to  analyse  it.  The  anecdotes  of  the  histo-  xTujiut  dinMr-
rians  are  put  together  with  little  judgment  or  S^*^^
consistency.  Suetonius,  for  instance,  assures  us  «*riywt»<rti«i
explicitly  that  the  advantages  of  his  distinguished  parentage,
born,  as  he  was,  in  the  very  year  of  his  father's  consulship,  were
wholly  lost  to  him,  and  while  Titus  enjoyed  a  liberal  educa-
tion, Domitian  was  entirely  neglected  in  consequence  of  the  ob-
scurity and  indigence  into  which  Vespasian  subsequently  fell.*

*  This  was  Domitia,  daughter  of  Corbulo,  and  wife  of  ^Elius  Lamia.  Suet
Domit.  22.  Dion,  Ixvi.  3.  Domitian  had  seduced  her  in  the  year  of  his  ad-
ministration with  Muciauus,  when  he  was  himself  but  nineteen  jears  of  ag<>,
and  had  soon  afterwards  married  her.  In  the  year  826  (hia  second  consulship,
Suet.  Domit.  3.  Clinton,  Fast.  Jiom.)  she  bore  him  a  son  who  died  in  infancy.
Domitian  continued  to  live  with  her,  with  one  interruption,  until  his  death.

'  This  connexion  began,  apparently,  as  soon  as  Julia  was  betrothed,  and
before  she  was  married  to  Sabinus.  Suet.  Domit.  22. :  "  fratris  filiam  adhuc
virginem,  oblatam  in  matrimonium  sibi,  quum  devinctua  Domitiae  nuptiis  per-
tinacissime  recusasset,  non  multo  post  alii  collocatam,  corrupit  ultro,  et  quidem
vivo  adhuc  Tito."

'  Suet.  Domit.  1. Domitian  was  bom  in  the  year  of  hia  father's  first

VOL.  VII. — 6

66  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  81,

While  Titus  found  honourable  employment  in  the  camp  and
rose  to  the  highest  commands,  his  brother,  we  are  told,  was
suffered  to  grow  up  uncared  for,  in  a  mean  corner  of  the  city,
and  in  such  wretched  poverty  as  to  be  driven  to  the  vilest
degradation  for  patronage  or  support.  But  even  the  same
writer's  casual  remark,  that  the  young  man,  when  fleeing
from  the  burning  Capitol,  took  refuge  in  the  house  of  a  fellow
student^  shows  that  this  account  is  not  to  be  lightly  credited.
Nor  is  the  reputation  he  subsequently  attained  for  literary
accomplishments,  however  much  it  may  have  been  enhanced
by  interested  flatterers,  consistent  with  such  abject  beginnings.
Even  the  patronage  he  pretended  at  least  to  extend  to  let-
ters, of  which  more  will  be  said  hereafter,  seems  to  evince  an
appreciation  of  literary  adulation  seldom  foimd  in  the  grossly
rude  and  ignorant.  His  mother  indeed  died  in  his  childhood,
and  his  father  may  have  been  frequently  absent  or  engaged ;
but  it  is  not  likely  that  the  nephew  of  a  personage  so  distin-
guished as  Sabinus  would  be  left  in  utter  destitution.  Domi-
tian,  we  may  presume,  received  and  profited  by  the  usual
instruction  in  grammar,  rhetoric  and  philosophy.  Possibly
he  enjoyed,  from  the  Sabine  traditions  of  his  house,  a  simpler
and  severer  training  than  usually  fell  to  the  lot  of  children
of  his  rank.  When  in  later  life  he  replaced  the  humble  ten-
ement in  which  he  first  saw  the  light,  with  a  temple  to  the
Flavian  family,  we  may  trace,  perhaps,  the  act  not  to  super-
stitious feelings  only  but  to  an  antique  sentiment  of  pious
aflfection."

consulship,  A.  v.  804  (Oct  24.),  and  was  therefore  ten  years  younger  than
Titus.

*  Suet  Domil.  1. Martial,  ix.  21. :

*'  Hie  stcterat  vcneranda  domus.  quro  pncstitit  orbi
Quod  Rhodus,  astrifcro  quod  pia  Crcta  polo."
The  birth-place  of  Donutinn,  and  cotiBcquently  the  site  of  the  temple  of  the
Flavian  family,  was  at  a  place  called  the  Milium  Punicum  iu  the  Sixth  Region,
denominated  Alta  Scmita,  which  included  the  Quirinal  and  some  of  the  densest
parts  of  the  Servian  city.  This  temple  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  that  of
Yetpaslan  in  the  Forum.

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  67

Our  authorities  delight  in  representing  the  younger  son  of
Vespasian  as  a  striking  contrast  to  the  elder,  the  darling  of
the  Roman  people. Yet  there  was  at  least  a

Compatiaoa

Strong  family  resemblance  between  them. Both between  tum

,  kod  DomitiAii.

were  constitutionally  impulsive  and  irritable;
both  took  with  feminine  facility  the  varnish  of  patrician  re-
finement; both  were  naturally  voluptuous  and  sensual,  and
surrendered  themselves  to  the  charms  of  Circe  and  the  Sirens.
Had  Titus  been  left  at  Rome  in  his  tender  years,  exposed  to
every  temptation,  and  denied  the  conduct  of  affairs  and  the
discipline  of  active  life,  these  propensities  would  have  at-
tained the  same  ascendancy  over  him  which  appeared  so
fatally  in  Domitian.  But  whether  from  the  misfortune  of  his
breeding,  or  from  his  natural  deficiencies,  the  character  of
the  younger  brother  presents,  on  the  whole,  but  a  pale  re-
flection of  that  of  the  elder.  That  which  is  generosity  in  the
one  becomes  mere  physical  sensibility  in  the  other.  Titus
pledged  himself  to  shed  no  human  blood  during  his  princi-
pate;  Domitian  proposed  to  forbid  the  sacrifice  of  oxen.'
The  one  could  be  cruel  from  policy  or  necessity,  the  other
from  mere  puerile  impatience.  Titus  wasted  Judea  with  fire
and  sword ;  Domitian  persecuted  the  flies,  and  made  a  soli-
tude of  his  chamber.*  The  deportment  of  the  elder  brother
was  sociable  and  kindly,  and  if  he  enjoyed  with  too  keen  a
zest  the  pleasures  of  his  station,  he  at  least  shared  them  ge-
nially with  his  companions.  Domitian  is  described  as  morose
and  solitary,  even  in  his  relaxations.  He  gave,  indeed,  the
banquets  prescribed  by  custom ;  but  they  were  joyless  and

'  Suet  Domii.  9. :  "  inter  initia  usque  adeo  ab  omoi  caede  abborruit,  ut
absente  adhuc  patre,  recordatus  Virgilii  versum,  Impia  qvmm  cmma  gmu  mt
epiilata  juvenctA,  edicere  destinarit  ne  boves  immolarentur."

'  Suet.  BoinU.  3. :  "  nee  quicquam  ampUus  quam  muscas  captare,  ac  stylo
pneacuto  configere."  When  it  was  asked,  "  Was  any  one  with  Domitian  •  "
"  Not  even  a  fly,"  answered  the  witty  Crispus  ("  Crispi  jucunda  senectus : "
Juv.  iv.  81.).  Comp.  Dion,  IxvL  9.  Victor.  FpU.  11.;  Cat.  11.  Comp.  Plin.
Fatieg.  48. :  "  non  adire  quisquam  non  alloqui  audebat,  teaebras  semper  secre-
tumque  captantem,  neo  unquam  ex  solitudine  sua  prodeuntem,  nisi  ut  aolitudi-
nem  faceret."

68  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

hurried,  irksome  both  to  the  host  and  to  his  guests.'  Titus,
again,  devoted  himself  nobly  to  sustain  his  father's  interests,
while  he  shared  his  fame ;  but  Domitian,  with  equal  ambition,
was  meanly  jealous  of  his  brother's  reputation,  and  anxious
to  snatch  laurels  in  which  his  kinsmen  should  have  no  part.
Frustrated  in  his  endeavours  to  emulate  their  military  glory,
he  might  pretend  to  occupy  himself  in  arts  and  letters ;  but
neither  the  pleasure  of  study,  nor  the  praise  of  flatterers,
could  really  soothe  his  wounded  vanity,  and  he  intrigued
against  them  living,  and  detracted  from  their  merits  when
dead.

But  the  stately  march  of  the  Roman  princes  has  too  long

occupied  the  stage  and  engrossed  our  whole  attention. A

new  scene  of  war  and  military  glory  may  here  be

Prosecution  of .  , ^  . . .  .,1^.-,

the  conquest  of  interpolated  in  the  imperial  drama,  and  remind  us

Britain.  „ .^  .  ^ , ,  . '. .

01  the  aggressive  attitude  which  m  its  vigorous
old  age  the  empire  still  retained  in  the  face  of  opposing  bar-
barism. The  Britannic  legions  had  been  little  moved  by  the
passion  of  the  civil  wars.  With  Galba,  at  least,  and  with
Otho,  they  had  no  personal  connexion ;  they  were  too  far  re-
moved from  the  centre  of  affairs  to  covet  the  spoils  of  Rome
and  Italy ;  and  above  all,  their  hands  and  minds  were  fully
occupied  with  the  toils  and  dangers  immediately  before  them.'
But  the  accession  of  a  great  military  chief  to  power  had
roused  the  pride  of  the  soldiers,  and  given  a  sudden  impetus
to  the  career  of  conquest.  Vespasian  might  regard  with  per-
sonal interest  the  complete  reduction  of  Britain  where  he  had
gained  his  own  earliest  distinctions.  The  Fourteenth  legion,
which  had  followed  Vitellius  to  Bedriacum,  had  been  sent

'  Suet  Demit.  21. :  "  lavabat  de  die  prandcbatque  ad  satietatem,"  i.  e.,  his
solitary  morning  meal  was  ample ;  but,  "  convivabatur,"  ho  supped  "  frcqucn-
tcr  ct  large,  sed  pnne  rapUm :  certc  non  ultra  solis  occasum ;  nee  postca  com-
isMbatur."

•  Tac.  Hut,  I.  9. :  "  In  Britannico  excrcitu  nihil  irarum.  Non  sane  alito
legionos,  per  omnes  bcllorum  civilium  niotus,  iunoccntiuR  cgcnnit :  sou,  quia
procul  et  Ooeano  dirisos;  sou  crcbris  cxpoditionibus  doctos  hostcin  potius
odlsse."

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  69

back,  flushed  with  victory  and  chafed  with  disap-
pointment,  to  its  quarters  in  the  island,  and  its '"cf:  Pet«>-
discontent  could  only  be  allayed  by  the  excite- iiu«,a.d.  6i.

•'  .  TreboUlM

ment  of  active  service.  But  since  the  removal  m*i1iihi«,
of  Suetonius  Paulinus,  the  prefects  of  the  British
province  had  been  directed  to  keep  the  sword,  if  possible,  in
the  scabbard.  Petronius  Turpilianus  had  been  satisfied  with
restoring  the  disturbed  districts  to  submission.  Trebellius
Maximus  had  mitigated  the  severity  of  the  proconsular  gov-
ernment, but  at  the  same  time  had  relaxed  the  ducipline  of
the  legions.  The  soldiers  pretended  that  he  was  immersed
in  the  care  of  amassing  a  fortune,  and  the  Twentieth  legion,
disdaining  his  control,  had  broken  out  in  mutiny,  at  the  in-
stigation of  its  chief,  and  driven  him  out  of  the  island.*  Tre-
bellius had  repaired  to  Rome,  where  Vitellius  was  clutching
at  the  purple ;  but  the  tottering  emperor  could  give  no  sup-
port. The  soldiers  rallied  together  for  their  own  security,
and  the  peace  of  the  province  did  not  suffer  by  the  paralysis
of  the  capital.  On  the  restoration  of  authority  at  Rome,
Vettius  Bolanus  was  sent  to  take  the  command,  and  their
recent  excesses  seem  to  have  been  prudently  overlooked.
With  equal  prudence  the  mutinous  legion  had  declared  itself
for  Vespasian,  and  the  Second,  which  he  had  himself  former-
ly commanded,  naturally  sided  with  him.*  Tacitus  affirms
that  the  new  governor  was  indolent  though  not  seditious ;  but
the  depression  of  one  chief  is  an  easy  artifice  for  exalting  his
successor,  and  I  am  tempted  in  this  instance  to  weigh  the
testimony  of  a  poet  against  that  of  an  historian.*  The
praises  of  Statins,  however  overstrained,  seem  at  least  to  in-
dicate that  Bolanus  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  his  movable
columns,  laid  out  his  camps,  erected  his  tribunals,  fought  bat-

i

*  Tac.  Ann.  \\v.  39. ;  Ifi^.  I  60.,  u.  65. ;  ./^fri^  16.

*  Tac.  Affric.  16. ;  Hist,  i.  60.

*  Tac.  Agric.  8. :  praeerat  tunc  BritannisB  Vettius  Bolanus,  placidius  quam
feroci  provincia  dignum  est. Comp.  16.

70  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOMANS

ties,  gained  victories,  and  dedicated  to  the  Gods  of  Rome
the  spoils  of  vanquished  enemies.'

Tacitus  might  have  remembered  that  it  was  impossible
to  undertake  any  extensive  operations  while  the  loyalty  of  the
legions  was  yet  unassured,  and  while,  from  the  want  of  rein-
forcements and  the  cessation  of  the  ordinary  levies,  their  num-
bers were  probably  incomplete.  C.  Julius  Agricola,  a  brave  and
able  officer,  but  as  yet  unknown  to  fame,  was  placed  at  the  head
of  the  mutinous  Twentieth,  the  head  quarters  of  which  were
at  Deva,  whence  it  kept  in  check  the  Brigantes  of  Yorkshire
on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Ordovices  of  North  Wales  on  the
other.'  The  recovery  of  this  corps  to  the  interests  of  Ves-
pasian secured  the  position  of  the  Romans  in  Britain.  Peti-
lius  Cerialis,  the  next  proconsul,  was  enabled  to

PetillusCeri-  J .  .  ' _ ,. „

alia,  A. D.  71. Carry  OH  oflensive  operations,  and  Julius  iron-

Jniius  Fronti- tinus,  who  followcd  him,  chastised  and  pacified

the  revolted  Silures. The  services  of  Agricola

coia,"corisui, wcro  rewarded'  by  promotion  to  the  government

consul  In  Mt- of  Aquitania,  from  whence,  in  less  than  three

A.  D.  78. years,  he  was  summoned  to  Rome,  and  elevated

^^' ■ to  the consulship. Vespasian  was anxious to

maintain  and  possibly  to  extend  his  possessions  in  Britain,

and  he  chose  this  distinguished  chief  as  the  best  instrument

for  controlling  the  legions  and  pacifying  the  natives.'

In  the  palmy  days  of  Rome  the  same  man  was  both  war-
rior and  statesman :  the  consul  led  the  Fathers  in  the  senate

»  Statius,  Sylv.  v.  2.  144.  foil. :

"  Hie  Buetus  dare  jura  parens  ;  hoc  cespite  turmas
AiTari  :  nitidas  Bpecuhis  castellaque  longe
Aspicis  ?  ille  dcdit,  cinxitque  hsec  moenia  fossa."

•  Agricola  belonged  to  the  colony  of  Forum  Julli  in  the  Narboncnsis.  Ho
waa  doubly  devoted  to  the  defence  of  the  new  Flavian  dynasty,  his  father  hav-
ing been  sacrificed  to  the  tyranny  of  Caius  Ctosar,  and  his  motlicr  slain  by  ma-
rauders from  tlio  fleet  of  Otlio. Ajric.  4.  7.

•  Tac.  Agric.  8.  9.  During  Iuh  consulHlnp  (a.  u.  830),  and  witli  this  greater
preferment  full  in  view,  Agricola  betrotlied  his  daughter  to  Tacitus,  who
appreciated  the  value  of  a  choice  which  Bccmcd  to  open  to  him  tho  highest
honours.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  71

house  and  their  sons  on  the  battle  field ;  but  with ._,_..

the  change  of  manners  a  new  theory  now  pre-  ^'^^/S^
vailed,  that  the  profession  of  arms  unfits  men  for  »mi  mmmmI
political  afiairs.  Many  think,  says  Tacitus,  that  a.  6.il,rk
the  military  character  lacks  subtlety  and  tact.
Camps  are  governed  hy  strong  toill  and  prompt  action  /  and
give  no  play  to  the  shrewdness  which  sways  the/orum,^  But
Agricola,  to  follow  the  portraiture  of  his  son-in-law,  disproved
this  theory,  or  served  to  confirm  it  l>y  one  notable  exception.
His  administration  in  peace  was  just  and  temperate,  and
showed  that  he  could  guide  the  men  of  the  gown  as  well  as
he  could  command  the  men  of  the  sword.  His  first  care  WM
to  gain  the  confidence  of  the  provincials  and  engage  them  to
embrace  the  arts  and  manners  of  their  conquerors.  He  pro-
posed the  dress  and  language  of  Rome  for  their  adoption,
and  taught  them,  with  more  success  than  any  of  his  prede-
cessors, to  admire  and  cultivate  the  luxuries  of  southern
civilization.  Meanwhile  the  flower  of  their  youth  was  draft-
ed oft*  to  recruit  the  forces  of  the  empire  in  distant  regions,
and  battalions  from  Gaul  and  Spain,  from  Thrace  and  Africa,
brought  over  to  furnish  auxiliaries  to  the  legions  in  Britain,
and  maintain  by  their  side  the  quarrels  of  the  empire.  Even
in  his  first  summer,  when  he  had  been  but  a  few  months  in
the  island,  and  when  none  even  of  his  own  officers  expected
active  service,  Agricola  led  his  forces  into  the  country  of  the
Ordovices,  in  whose  mountain  passes  the  war  of  independence
i^till  lingered,  drove  the  Britains  across  the  Menai  Straits,  and
pursued  them  into  Anglesey,  as  Suetonius  had  done  before
him,  by  boldly  crossing  the  boiling  current  in  the  face  of  the
enemy.  Another  summer  saw  him  advance  northward  into  the
territory  of  the  Brigantes,  and  complete  the  organization  of
the  district,  lately  reduced,  between  the  Humber  and  Tyne.
Struck  perhaps  with  the  natural  defences  of  the  line  from  the
Tyne  to  the  Solway,  where  the  island  seems  to  have  been

*  Tac.  A^e.  9. :  "  credunt  plerique  militaribus  ingeniis  subtilitatem  deeeee ;
quia  castrensis  jurisdictio  secura  et  obtusior,  ac  plura  manu  agena,  calliditatem
fori  non  exerceat."

fj2  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

broken,  as  it  were,  in  the  middle  and  soldered  unevenly  to-
gether, he  drew  a  chain  of  forts  from  sea  to  sea,  to  protect  the
reclaimed  subjects  of  the  Southern  valleys  from  the  untamed
barbarians  who  roamed  the  Cheviots  and  the  Pentlands.'

To  penetrate  the  stormy  wilds  of  Caledonia,  and  track  to

their  fastnesses  the  hordes  of  savages,  the  Ottadini,  Horestii,

and  Maeatfe,  who  flitted  among  them,  was  an  en-

Agricola  estab-  .  ,'  . ,  ='. _ '  , ,. ,

iishes  himself tcrpnse  which  promised  no  plunder  and  little

on  the  line  of  ,  mii-  /»t-»  •ii-

theTyneand  glory.  Ihc  Icgious  01  Komc,  With  their  expen-
sive equipments,  could  not  hope  even  to  support
themselves  on  the  bleak  mountain  sides,  unclaimed  by  men
and  abandoned  by  nature.  His  camps  on  the  Tyne  and  Irth-
ing  were  the  magazines  from  which  Agricola's  supplies  must
wholly  be  drawn ;  the  ordinary  term  of  a  provincial  prefec-
ture was  inadequate  to  a  long,  a  distant,  and  an  aimless
adventure.  But  Vespasian  had  yielded  to  the  ardour  of  his
favourite  lieutenant ;  ample  means  were  furnished,  and  ample
time  was  allowed.  In  the  third  year  of  his  command.  Agri-
cola  pushed  forward  along  the  eastern  coast,  and  making
good  with  roads  and  fortresses  every  inch  of  his  progress,
reached,  as  I  imagine,  the  Firth  of  Forth.' He

Reaches  the  , ,  . t ,  •  t i i  i  ^ -, i

Isthmus  be-  had  quitted  the  waist  and  had  here  reached  tlie
Forth  and  ucck  of  Britain,  the  point  where  the  two  seas  are

^  ^"  divided  by  an  isthmus  less  than  forty  miles  in

breadth.  Here  he  repeated  the  operations  of  the  preceding
winter,  planting  his  camps  and  stations  from  hill  to  hill,  and

*  Tac.  Agrie.  18-20^  The  first  and  eecond  campaigns  of  Agricola  occu-
pied the  summer  of  831,  832.  The  winters  were  employed — "  saluberrimis
consiliis  " — in  bending  the  minds  of  the  Britons  to  the  arts  of  peace.

'  Tac.  Agric.  22. :  "  tertius  expeditionum  annus  (833)  novas  gentes  ape-
ruit,  vastatis  usque  ad  Tanauniy  aestuario  nomcn  est,  nationibus."  This  is  the
true  reading  of  tlic  MSS.  for  which  7'aMm  (the  Tay)  was  substituted  by  Puteo-
lanus  from  a  marginal  gloss.  I  cannot  suppose  tliat  Agricola  crossed  the  Firth
of  Forth  in  this  campaign.  Wex,  in  his  edition  of  the  Agricola,  suggests  that
Tanaua  is  the  North  Tyne,  which  falls  into  the  Firth  near  Dunbar.  Tan,  as  is
well  known,  is  a  common  Celtic  appellative  for  running  water,  and  may  possi*
bly  be  applied  to  the  estuary  itself,  although  Bodotria  is  the  name  spccilically
assigned  to  the  river  Forth,  if  not  to  the  Firth  called  after  it.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  73

securing  a  new  belt  of  territory,  ninety  miles  across,  for  Ro-
man occupation.  The  natives,  scared  at  his  presence  and
fleeing  before  him,  were  thus  thrust,  in  the  language  of  Taci-
tus, as  it  were  into  another  island.  For  a  moment  the  empire
seemed  to  have  found  its  northern  limit.  Agricola  rested
through  the  next  summer,  occupied  in  the  organization  of  his
conquests,  and  employed  his  fifth  year  also  in  strengthening
his  position  between  the  two  isthmuses,  and  reducing  the
furthest  corners  of  the  province,  wlience  the  existence  of  a
new  realm  was  betrayed  to  him.  The  grassy  OomMiatigiit
plains  of  teeming  Ilibemia  offered  a  fairer  prey  S^j^^h^Bii
than  the  gray  mountains  which  frowned  upon  his  "^  o«u«*w«3r.
fresh  entrenchments,  and  all  their  wealth,  he  was  assured,
might  be  secured  by  the  valour  of  a  single  legion.  But  other
counsels  prevailed ;  Agricola  turned  from  the  Mull  of  Gallo-
way, and  Ireland,  so  the  fates  ordained,  was  left  to  her  fogs
and  feuds  for  eleven  more  centuries.'

The  Caledonians  had  resumed  their  courage  during  the
two  years'  inaction  of  the  invading  legions. In  the  year  836,
the  sixth  of  his  protracted  command,  Agricola, ftgHmih  pmn
understanding  that  they  were  collecting  their  SeTorS***
forces  to  make  a  combined  attack  upon  his  lines, x.xt.m.
ilctermined  to  surprise  them  by  a  rapid  incursion ^v.m$.
into  the  regions  beyond  the  Forth. The  necessities  of  his
own  armament  had  required  the  attendance  of  a  naval  force,
and  when  he  advanced  along  the  coasts  of  Fife,  he  drew  his
most  certain  supplies  from  the  vessels  which  moved  parallel
to  his  flank. The  rude  natives  might  be  amazed  at  the  move-
ments of  these  marine  monsters ;  nevertheless,  they  were  not
dismayed,  but  thrusting  themselves  between  his  advancing
columns  and  the  fortifications  in  the  rear,  threatened,  if  they
could  not  arrest  his  progress,  at  least  to  cut  off  his  retreat.
Agricola  marshalled  his  forces  in  three  brigades,  to  meet
them  at  various  points. The  Ninth  legion,  the  same  which
had  been  cut  up  by  Boadicea,  was  assailed  in  its  camp,  and

»  Tac.  Affrie.  22-24.,  a.  c.  8S4,  836.

74  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

only  saved  hj  the  vigour  of  the  division  led  hy  the  general
in  person.  The  object  of  the  campaign  was  gained  perhaps
by  the  discovery  of  a  tract  of  fertile  plains,  stretching  along
the  coast  for  many  miles,  and  the  invaders  might  return
within  their  lines  for  the  winter,  with  the  expectation  of  fix-
ing themselves  firmly  beyond  them  in  the  ensuing  summer.*

Roused  to  redoubled  exertions  by  the  assurance  that  the
flying  enemy  had  now  but  little  room  for  retreat,  surprised
Site  of  tho  ^^^  encouraged  by  the  attractive  character  of  the
wUhQaigMus.  lowlands,  which  continued  still  to  border  the
A  D  84  eastern  sea,  the  Romans  pushed  forward  in  a
A.  V.  887.  seventh  campaign,  and  at  last  brought  the  Cale-
donians to  bay  on  the  battle  field.  The  site  of  the  famous
struggle,  which,  described  in  the  vigorous  narrative  of  Taci-
tus, has  invested  with  equal  glory  the  names  of  both  Agri-
cola  and  Galgacus,  has  not  been  clearly  determined.  The
opinion  popularly  received  is  unusually  moderate.  The
imposing  remains  of  Roman  castrametation  at  Ardoch  in
Strathallan,  have  drawn  the  attention  of  the  native  antiqua-
ries, who  are  generally  content  to  suppose  that  the  invaders
did  not  actually  penetrate  more  than  ten  miles  beyond  Stir-
ling.* To  me  this  spot  seems  to  lie  too  far  inland,  if  we  may
suppose  at  least  that  the  legions  depended  on  their  fleet  for
almost  all  their  supplies.  I  should  presume  also,  that  in  this,
their  second  campaign  beyond  the  Forth,  they  pushed  their
successes  considerably  further  north.  The  fields  of  Fife  and
Angus  are  seamed  with  numerous  vestiges  of  Roman  entrench-
ments ;  and  though  these  may  in  fact  be  the  work  of  a  later
generation  of  invaders,  and  though,  as  far  as  I  can  discover,

•  Tac.  Affrie.  26-27.

'  TIjc  great  camp  ot  Ardocli  would  oontftin  about  30,000  men,  according  to
the  Polybian  arrangement;  but  if  Agricola  adopted  the  Bystcm  which  pro-
Tailod  certainly  under  Trajan,  and  which  was  probably  in  use  some  generations
earlier,  this  camp  would  accommodate  ftilly  07,000,  and  this  is  a  much  larger
nuiiii>er  than  his  force  can  havo  reached.  Ueiicc  it  may  bo  Buspei-tcd  that  this
camp  belongs  to  the  time  of  Soverus,  who  is  said  to  have  pcnotrntod  into  Cale-
donia with  a  much  larger  army.  See  Uoy,  Military  Avtiq.  p.  190.,  who,  how-
ever, BuppoMi  AgricoU  to  UBO  tho  Polybian  castrametation.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  fjs

there  is  nothing  in  the  character  of  the  entrenchments  them-
selves to  fix  them  to  the  first  rather  than  to  the  second  or
third  century,  I  am  still  inclined,  on  the  whole,  to  place  the
scene  in  question  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Forfar  or  Bre-
chin.*

The  speeches  put  into  the  mouths  of  the  rival  chiefs  are
among  the  finest  gems  of  Tacitean  eloquence,  and  express  the
contrast,  ever  present  to  the  philosophic  histo-
rian's  mind,  between  the  civilized  world  and  the  Owmptan*.
barbarian,  their  respective  hopes,  fears,  claims  a.d.  st
and  destinies.  Whether  or  not  he  had  enjoyed,
as  some  have  supposed,  an  opportunity  of  studying  this  con-
trast on  the  spot,  during  an  early  residence  on  the  Germanic
frontier,  his  instinct  seems,  at  least,  to  have  discovered  in  it
the  gei-m  of  an  impending  revolution  in  the  fortunes  of  his
own  countrymen.'  Nor  is  the  battle-piece  which  follows,
and  fitly  crowns  the  narrative  of  his  hero's  military  exploits,
less  celebrated  for  its  vigour  and  vividness.  To  us  it  is
chiefly  interesting  for  the  glimpse  it  reveals  of  Roman  tactics
at  this  period.  Agricola  had  with  him  probably  three  Roman
legions  ;  but  when  menaced  by  the  full  force  of  the  enemy,
he  prepares  to  meet  the  attack  with  his  auxiliary  cohorts  of
eight  thousand  men  in  the  centre,  and  his  auxiliary  squadrons
of  cavalry,  numbering  three  thousand,  on  the  flanks.  The
legions,  the  flower  of  the  whole  army,  are  drawn  up  before
the  camp,  far  in  the  rear ;  nor,  when  pressed  by  his  own  offi-
cers to  employ  them  in  the  field,  will  he  consent  to  expose
one  man  of  this  powerful  reserve  to  the  onset  of  the  barba-
rians. All  the  loss  and  danger  must  fall  upon  the  Batavians,

*  Tacitus  only  says,  "  ad  montem  Gramphan  pervenit."  Eren  the  word
Orampius,  from  which  the  modem  geographical  Dame  for  the  frontier  ridge  of
the  eastern  highlands  has  been  adopted,  seems  to  be  an  error.  The  beet  MSS.
are  said  to  give  G^raupius. Wex,  on  Agric.  29.,  and  Proleg.  p.  194.

■•'  Pliny,  Hiit.  Xat.  vii.  16,  mentions  a  Cornelius  Tacitus,  a  Roman  knight,
as  procurator  of  Gallia  Belgica,  who  has  been  vainly  surmised  to  be  the  his-
torian himself.  This,  however,  is  inconsistait  with  the  dates.  It  is  possible,
however,  that  the  procurator  may  have  been  the  historian's  father,  and  that
our  Tacitus  may  have  resided  as  a  child  in  the  provinces.

76  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  TJsipians,  the  Gauls  and  Spaniards ;  hut  when  the  day  is
won  hy  the  blood  of  her  subjects  it  is  Rome  that  reaps  the
profit,  and  the  legions  of  Rome  that  reap  the  glory,  and  ac-
quire the  titles  of  Mapcuiious  and  Invincible,  ApoUinean  and
Jfinervian.

This  battle  closed  Agricola's  seventh  campaign.' The
short  summer  was  past,  and  no  further  progress  could  be
A  D  84 made  by  land. But  the  complete  reduction  of
A.U.  88T. Caledonia  was  still  present  to  his  view,  and  he
meditated  fresh  plans  of  conquest  from  behind  his  entrench-
ments on  the  Forth  and  Clyde. Meanwhile,  he  directed  the
fleet  which  had  attended  him  to  advance  north-

Pretended  cIT"

cnmnavigation  ward  aloug  the  coast  from  headland  to  headland,
and  carry  the  terror  of  the  Roman  name  among
the  remotest  tribes,  while  it  procured  him  the  information  he
required  about  the  nature  and  resources  of  the  country.  The
Roman  mariners  now  for  the  first  time  entered  the  Pentland
Firth,  sui-veyed  and  counted  the  Orkney  islands,  and  gained
perhaps  a  glimpse  of  the  Shetlands.  They  ascertained  the
point  at  which  Britain  terminates  northward,  and  possibly
noted  the  great  deflection  of  the  coast  southward  from  Cape
Wrath.  Having  efiected  the  object  of  the  expedition,  they
returned,  as  I  cannot  doubt,  still  creeping  timidly,  as  was
their  wont,  from  headland  to  headland,  and  having  hugged
the  eastern  coast  from  Caithness  to  the  Firth  of  Forth,
were  finally  drawn  up  for  the  winter  on  the  beach  from  which
they  had  been  launched  at  the  commencement  of  the  season."

'  The  campaigns  of  ARricola  extend  from  78  (u.c.  881)  to  84  (u.c.  887)
inclusive.  The  battle  with  Galgncus  was  fought  in  the  seventh  year.  But
"octovta  annus  cat,"  says  Agricolii  in  liis  speech.  Some  critics  suspect  an
error  of  viir.  for  vii.  I  hardly  think  Tacitus  would  have  used  so  weak  an  ex-
ordium as  "  S<'ptiums  annus  est."  But  though  it  was  Agricola's  seventh,  it
might  bo  called  the  eighth  campaign  of  his  army ;  for  in  the  year  preceding
his  arrival,  Julius  Frontiiuis  had  led  an  expedition  against  the  Silures.
Affrif.  17.

'  The  account  I  have  ventured  to  give  of  this  remarkable  expedition  re-
quires some  justification. Tacitus  says  {A</ric  88.),  "Prmfecto  classis  ciroum-

vcbi  liritannium  pm<cepit et  simul  classis  sccunda  tempcstate  ac  fama

Trutulensem  portum  tenuit,  unde,  proximo  latere  Uritannicu  lecto  omni,  redio-

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  7^

The  best authorities,  Caesar  and Diodorus,  Pliny  and
Mela,  had  long  before  asserted  the  insular  character  of  Bri-
tain ;  but  the  Romans,  up  to  this  time,  had  had  a  very  im-
perfect conception  of  its  size  and  figure,  and  M'hen  the  legions,
advancing  northwards,  season  after  season,  saw  the  moun-
tain crests  of  Caledonia  still  rising  before  them,  and  the  ex-
pected limits  of  the  island  still  constantly  receding,  they
might  feel  some  distrust  of  their  geographical  information,
and  require  a  more  certain  assurance  of  the  fact  known  hith-
erto only  by  hearsay. The  demonstration  thus  obtained  was
itself  regarded  as  a  triumphant  achievement,  and  Agricola
was  celebrated  by  his  countrymen  as  an  explorer ^^
as  well  as  a  conqueror. But  before  the  fleet  had «»>•.
returned  to  its  winter  station,  the  decree  had  gone a.  d.  84.
forth  by  which  his  career  of  conquest  and  dis-

rat"  The  last  clauae  ia  crabbed  and  perhaps  corrupt.  Dion  (IitL  20.)  ■np*
poses  the  fleet  to  have  circumnavigated  the  whole  island,  and  such  has  been
the  usual  interpretation  of  modem  critics,  which  they  confirm  by  reference  to
Affric.  10.  and  28.  I  am  countenanced  by  Mannert  in  rejecting  this  interpre-
tation. In  c.  10.,  Tacitus,  referring  by  anticipation  to  this  TOjsge,  asjs,
speaking  of  the  projecting  part  of  Briuin,  which  is  called  diatiatdftij  Cal»
donian :  "  banc  oram  novissimi  maris  tunc  primum  RomtOft  claMb  dmn^
vecta  insulam  esse  Britanniam  aflSrmavit ; "  that  is,  oonfinBed  the  isAnBee
previously  drawn  from  the  character  of  the  southern  district.  It  is  uuieees-
sary,  therefore,  to  suppose  that  the  fleet  completed  the  circumnarigatirai  of  the
whole  island  on  this  occasion.  Again,  in  c.  28.,  our  author  relates  the  incident
of  certain  Usipians  in  the  service  of  Agricola  seizing  on  srane  ships  by  which,
"  circumvecti  Britanniam,"  they  were  at  last  wafted  to  the  coast  of  Friesland.
Here  the  circumstances  cannot  reasonably  admit  of  the  common  explanation.
"  Circumvehi,"  however,  does  not  necessarily  mean  to  be  earned  round ;  but
may  signify  simply  to  make  a  sweep,  or  to  be  wafted  from  pomt  to  point.  Thus,
Virgil  says :  "  circum  pictis  vehitur  sua  rura  phaselis."  See  sevenl  other  in-
stances in  Forcellini  under  "  circumveho,  circumvecto."  The  Usipians,  as  I
understand  it,  ran  down  the  east  coast  from  the  Forth,  till  they  came  opposite
to  Friesland.  The  "  portus  Trutulensis  "  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere.  The
critics  commonly  suppose  it  to  be  a  false  reading  for  "  Rutupensis."  But  the
fleet  which  attended  upon  Agricola  must  have  had  its  winter  haven  in  the
north,  and  nowhere  so  probably  as  in  the  Firth  of  Forth.  The  eipedition,
then,  according  to  my  view,  sailed  from  the  Forth  to  Cape  Wrath,  or  there-
abouts, and  returned  the  same  way  that  it  went,  having  skirted  all  the  neaarmt^
L  e.,  the  east  coast  of  Caledonia.

78  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  84.

covery  was  to  be  arrested,  and  the  great  proconsul  was  him-
self, in  obedience  to  his  letters  of  recall,  far  advanced  on  the
road  to  Italy.  Directed  to  transfer  his  authority  to  the  suc-
cessor assigned  to  him,  he  obeyed  without  hesitation,  for
Agricola  knew  how  to  obey  as  well  as  to  command/  Donii-
tian,  indeed,  according  to  a  popular  rumour,  was  apprehen-
sive lest  his  victorious  lieutenant,  at  the  head  of  a  province
which  respected,  and  an  army  which  idolized  him,  should  re-
fuse to  surrender  his  power,  and  challenge  his  imperator  to  a
conflict.  He  sent  a  freedman  to  him,  with  the  offer  of  the
government  of  Syria ;  charging  him  at  the  same  time  not  to
deliver  it  if  Agricola  should  have  already  relinquished  his
post  unbribed.  The  envoy  encountered  the  returning  gen-
eral in  mid-channel,  kept  the  letter  under  his  skirt,  and  restor-
ed it  unopened  to  his  master.'

The  bitter  charges  Tacitus  makes  against  Domitian,  the
envy  and  dissimulation  he  imputes  to  him  in  the  matter  of
jeaionsy  of  Agricola's  recall,  are  such  as  from  the  tyrant's
pated*to  Do-  known  character  we  may  readily  believe.  Yet,
mitian,  ^  better  and  abler  man  than  the  degenerate  son

of  Vespasian,  might  now  have  hastened,  not  from  jealousy,
but  with  a  wise  discretion,  to  bring  the  British  campaigns
to  a  close.  It  was  hardly  consistent  with  prudent  policy,
nor  would  it  have  been  permitted  in  the  sounder  ages  of
the  Republic,  any  more  than  of  the  Empire,  that  the  gov-
ernor of  a  distant  dependency  should  remain  for  many  years
in  command  of  all  its  resources,  Avith  the  entire  disposal  of
its  places  and  emoluments,  with  a  great  public  faction
growing  around  him,  and  threatening  to  force  liim  into
a  hostile  attitude.  No  proconsul  since  Coesar  had  waged
seven  years  of  warfare  in  any  province,  and  the  memory  of
Cajsar's  proconsulato  was  not  reassuring  either  to  the  senate

'  Tac.  Affirie.  8. :  "  viiiute  in  obsequendo  .  .  .  extra  invidiam,  nee  extra
gloriam  erat."

*  Tao.  Affru,  40. :  "  oredidero  plerique  .  .  .  the  verum  istud,  eive  ex
ingenlo  prinoipis  fiotum  ao  oompoBltum  est."

A.U.  837.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  ijg

or  the  emperor.'  Gennanicus  had  been  recalled  after  three
campaigns ;  the  hand  of  Corbulo  had  been  held  from  year  to
year  suspended.  Nor  were  the  results,  calmly  considered,
worth  the  hazard.  The  victories  of  Agricola  were  barren ;
his  conquests  were  merely  disappointments.  Never  before
were  such  efforts  made  for  so  trifling  an  object.  The  reduc-
tion of  the  whole  of  Caledonia  would  hardly  have  brought
one  gold  piece  into  the  imperial  treasury.  But  the  expeuae
was  enormous.  Britain  must  have  been  exhausted  by  the
requisitions  imposed  upon  her  for  the  supply  of  men  and  mu-
nitions ;  her  tribute  must  have  run  low ;  her  commerce  must
have  languished ;  the  progress  of  Roman  arts  and  manners
must  have  been  arrested  within  her  borders.  The  long  career
which  had  been  already  vouchsafed  to  Agricola  was  owing,
perhaps,  to  the  premature  death  of  his  first  patron,  Vespasian,
the  easy  indolence  of  Titus,  and  the  timidity  of  Domitian  on
his  first  accession  to  a  position  which  he  had  earned  by  no
merits  of  his  own.  But  in  the  third  year  of  his  reign,  the
emperor,  as  we  shall  see,  had  conducted  a  campaign  in  per-
son, and  Rome  acquiesced  in  his  claim  to  a  victory.  Tacitus
affirms  indeed  that  the  consciousness  of  his  own  failure  in
arms  made  him  the  more  jealous  of  a  genuine  hero.* To  me

*  Tiberius,  indeed,  could  say,  Ann.  iL  26. :  "se  noTies  a  diTO  Aogusto  in
Germaiiiam  missum  : "  but  these  missiona  were  not  ooMeeatfTe,  and  some  of
them  had  been  bloodless :  "  plura  consilio  quam  vi  ■ptattdme,"  Forcible  in
the  mouth  of  Tiberius,  the  arguments  here  advanced  would  be  still  more  forci-
ble in  that  of  Domitian.

*  Tac.  Agric.  89. :  "  inerat  oonsdentia  derisui  fuisse  naper  falsum  e  Ger^
mania  triumphiun,  emptis  per  commercla  quorum  habitus  et  crines  in  captiro-
nun  speciem  formarentur."  The  reader  will  observe  the  repetition  of  previous
insinuations  against  the  genuineness  of  the  spoils  of  Caligula.  I  am  compelled
to  express  some  doubt  of  the  statement  that  there  was  any  such  triumph  at
all  at  this  time.  Eusebius  in  his  Chronicle  records  one  oocaaion  of  triumph
only  under  Domitian  (ad  ann.  91) :  "  Domitianus  de  Dads  et  Germanis  trium-
phavit."  Suetonius  says  (c.  6.) :  "  de  Chattis  Dacisque  duplicem  triumphum
egit ; "  still  referring  to  a  single  occasion,  though  the  double  solemnity  may
have  occupied  two  consecutive  days.  The  Dacian  triumph,  which  undoubtedly
took  place,  as  we  shall  see,  a,  d.  91,  is  alone  referred  to  by  Dion,  and  there  is
no  trace  of  an  earlier  one  in  the  poets  Martial  and  Statins. Suetonius,  however.

80  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  84.

it  seems  more  probable  that  the  conviction  of  his  own  provr-
ess  first  gave  him  courage  to  check  the  aspiring  chief,  whom
he  naturally  apprehended  as  a  rival.  In  this,  however,  Do-
mitian  was  unjust  to  his  lieutenant.  Agricola  yielded  with
dignified  submission.  He  shrank  from  the  applause  which
the  people  would  have  lavished  upon  him ;  he  accepted,  in-
deed, respectfully,  the  triumphal  ornaments  proffered  by  his
master,  but  he  declined  all  further  advancement  or  employ-
ment, and  baffled  the  malice  of  his  enemies  by  the  studied
moderation  of  his  life  and  language  in  the  city.*  For  nine
years  he  continued  to  enjoy  this  prudent  retirement,  blessed
in  the  happiness  of  a  daughter  married  to  the  high-mindM
Tacitus,  whose  ardent  aspirations  for  an  impracticable  liberty
he  controlled  by  the  wisdom  of  his  counsels  and  the  living
force  of  his  example.*

The  mutual  relations  of  the  barbarian  hordes  beyond  the

Rhine  and  Danube,  which  began  from  the  second  century  to

disturb  the  pride,  to  shake  the  power,  and  at

Attitude  of  the ,  ,  ,  .  n ■,

German  tribes last  to threaten  the existence  oi  the  empire,

towards  Borne. ,,,  .,  •  c ^  -,  />

hardly  yet  require  the  attention  oi  the  reader  oi
Roman  history.  At  present,  while  the  great  peril  was  con-
cealed, and  no  anxiety  awakened,  we  may  look  from  the
Roman  point  of  view  on  the  Germans  and  Dacians,  whose
hostility  caused  as  yet  only  transient  and  occasional  annoy-
ance. Claudius  indeed,  on  the  recall  of  Corbulo,  had  drawn
within  the  Rhine  the  outposts  of  the  Germanian  province.
Conquest  was  forbidden,  and  the  eyes  of  the  Romans  were

mnst  be  in  error  when  he  says  (c.  18.) :  "  post  duos  triumphos  Germanici  nomine
aasumpto  ; "  for  the  title  Gcrmanicus  appears  on  the  coins  of  Domition  from
the  year  84  downwards.  Eckhcl,  vi.  878.  Tacitus  seems  to  have  been  misled
by  the  assumption  of  this  title  aller  the  campaign  of  84.

'  Tac.  Agric.  40. :  "  cultu  modicuB,  scrmoue  facilis,  uuo  atque  altcro  aml-
oorum  comitatus."

'  Tac.  Agric.  42.:  "non  contumacia,  ncquo  inani  jactationc  libertatis,
famam  fatumquo  prorocabat."  Compare  Corbulo  (Dubois  du  Guchan  Ihcitc  ct
ton  tilck,  ii.  387.).  The  merit  of  Agricola  appears  very  strongly  on  comparing
him  with  Corbulo,  who  could  not  keep  within  the  limits  prescribed  to  the  sub-
ject cither  of  a  moiurcby  or  of  a  republic.  Corbulo  might  have  become
another  Bulla  or  Marius.

A.  U,  837.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  gl

averted  from  the  prospect  of  future  aggrandisement  in  that
quarter.  If  the  internal  dissensions  of  the  natives  still  oper-
ated for  the  advancement  of  Roman  interests  among  them,
the  government  assiduously  disclaimed  all  intention  of  profit-
ing thereby.  It  received  petitions,  heard  complaints,  recom-
mended the  redress  of  wrongs  and  grievances,  and  even  arbi-
trated between  rival  aspirants  to  power  in  their  respective
communities,  but  it  effectually  checked  the  warlike  ardour
of  its  lieutenants,  the  most  restless  and  dangerous  class  of
its  subjects,  by  lavishing  the  triumphal  ornaments,  the  last
object  of  military  ambition,  on  the  chiefs  who  refrained  from
war,  and  directed  their  energies  to  works  of  peace  and  meas-
ures of  public  security.  To  build  a  road  or  dig  a  canal  might
entitle  the  Germanian  prefect  to  the  favour  and  honours  for-
merly reserved  for  a  brilliant  foray  or  a  gallant  victory.'  It
is  true  that  the  inactivity  thus  impressed  on  the  command
of  the  frontier  armies  encouraged  the  barbarians  to  insults
and  even  outrages  ;  'but  their  hasty  and  inconsiderate  attacks
were  easily  battled ;  their  delinquent  chiefs,  instead  of  being
punished  by  arms,  were  invited  to  carry  their  complaints  to
Rome,  and  there,  surrounded  by  all  the  glories  of  imperial
splendour,  learnt  to  estimate  the  power  of  the  conquering
race,  and  to  sigh  for  its  luxuries.  When  the  Frisian  envoys
belield  in  the  theatre  the  Allies  of  the  Homan  people  seated
next  to  the  Consuls  and  Senatoi's,  they  turned  away  from  the
games  and  shows  in  which  they  took  little  interest,  but  ex-
claimed that  among  the  spectators  of  the  games  there  were
no  friends  more  devoted  to  Rome  than  the  Germans,  and  in-
sisted on  receiving  a  place  among  the  most  favoured  nations.*

The  northern  frontier  of  the  empire  was  skirted  by  three
groups  of  barbarians :  on  the  Rhine  by  the  tribes  of  lower
Germany,  from  the  Frisii,  on  the  coast,  to  the Thwe  gxoapa
Chatti,  in  Nassau  and  Baden,  some  of  which, on  the  nofthefa
such  as  the  Cherusci  and  others,  were  well  dis- hUne'iho
posed  to  Rome,  while  the  Chatti  made  them- th^uur.*"*^
selves  obnoxious  by  the  eagerness  with  which lir.  ^t.

»  Tac.  Ann.  xl  18-20.  «  T«c  ^im*.  xiiL  14.

vol,  vn.— 6

82  HISTORY  or  THE  ROMANS  [A.D,  84.

they  seized  eveiy  safe  opportunity  of  aggression.  On
the  Danubius,  or  Upper  Danube,  the  Marcoraanni,  for-
merly the  subjects  of  Maroboduus,  still  retained  a  strong
and  settled  polity,  and  were  controlled  by  a  chief  named
Vannius,  who  was  able  to  maintain  a  durable  peace  with
Rome.  On  the  Ister,  or  Lower  Danube,  we  hear  of  the  rest-
less hostility  of  the  Moesians,  a  name  which  will  soon  give
way  to  that  of  the  more  famous  and  more  formidable  Da-
cians.  During  the  insurrection  of  Civilis,  the  Chatti  had
made  an  inroad  into  the  Roman  province,  and  attempted  to
seize  Moguntiacum.  At  the  same  period  Mucianus,  while
advancing  towards  Italy,  had  been  compelled  to  detach  a
force  to  repel  an  incursion  of  the  Moesians  into  Thrace.
Domitian  had  flown  to  defend  the  Rhine,  but  the  foe  had  al-
ready retreated,  and  it  was  not  thought  necessary  to  pursue
them.  Eager  to  distinguish  himself  as  a  warrior,  he  had  be-
sought his  father  to  intrust  him  with  another  command  on
the  frontiers ;  but  the  prudent  Vespasian  had  maintained  the
tranquil  policy  of  Claudius,  and  the  young  prince  was  doomed
to  remain  still  unlaurelled.  Upon  his  accession  to  power  his
vanity  was  free  to  indulge  itself. In  the  year  84

Domitian  leads  •'  ,  °  ''

an  expedition he  placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  forces  on  the
C^Iml  Rhine,  and  conducted  an  expedition  against  the

A.D,  84.  Chatti.  It  was  a  mere  summer  promenade,  in
which  the  enemy  resorted  to  their  old  tactics
of  retreat,  and  it  is  probable  that  no  great  engagement  took
place.  Yet,  the  contempt  with  which  the  campaign  is  treated
by  some  of  our  authorities  seems  hardly  justified.  One  mili-
tary writer,  attached  perhaps  to  the  emperor's  suite,  and
though  a  courtier  by  position,  a  man  wlio  at  least  liad  good
means  of  knowing  the  circumstances,  speaks  of  it  with  Avariii
but  not  overweening  applause.  Tlie  Germans  were  indeed
always  ready  to  accede  to  moderate  demands  of  slaves  or
tribute  exacte4  from  them  as  the  price  of  witlidrawal,  and
the  treaty  concluded  *Vitli  tlie  Chatti  by  Domitian  is  no
proof  of  a  brilliant  success.  Hut  tlie  weight  of  the  emperor's
sword  is  rather  to  be  traced  in  tlie  tranquillity  which  con-

A.  U.  837.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  gf

tinued  to  reign  in  this  quarter,  and  in  the  Romanized  popu-
lation spread  throughout  the  contiguous  districts,  which
enabled  Trajan,  a  few  years  later,  to  annex  them  permanently
to  the  empire.'

Domitian  hastened  back  to  Rome,  and  no  doubt  vaunted
his  prowess  to  the  utmost. The  people  applauded  ;  the  sol-
diers, gratified  with  an  addition  to  their  pay, DomitiM
shouted  behind  him  as  he  entered  the  city,  and Jjj^j^/il
shook their formidable weapons ; the poets Ji^'„f^G«tw
chanted  their  elaborate  compliments ;  here  and n**"**"*-
there  only  a  whisper  or  a  placard  hinted  that  the  victory
was  a  lie,  the  show  an  imposture,  the  captives  bought  or  bor-
rowed for  the  occasion.* Domitian  wanted  magnanimity  to
despise  these  cavils,  even  if  he  knew  them  to  be  undeserved.
But  he  now  felt  himself  strong  in  the  favour  of  the  army,
which  he  had  led  to  the  Capitol,  and  he  could  venture  to  re-
call the  brave  lieutenant  whose  exploits  transcended  his  own.
He  had  gained  a  victory  over  Agricola  and  his  other  cap-
tains, worth  many  victories  over  the  enemies  of  Rome. He
assumed  himself  the  surname  of  Germanicus ; he  imposed
this  designation  upon  the  month  of  September ; but  these
empty  titles  added  little  to  the  complacency  with  which  he
felt  that  he  was  now  the  Chief  of  his  own  armies,  now  an
Emperor  indeed.*

'  For  the  expedition  against  the  Cliatti,  see  Suet.  Domit.  6. ;  Dion,  Ixrii.  4.
These  writers  treat  it  with  the  utmost  contempt.  On  the  other  hand  comp.
Frontinus,  Stratagmt.  i.  1.  8.,  ii.  11.  7.;  Stat.  Sylv.  L  4.  89.,  iiL  3.  168.:
"  victis  parcontia  fcedera  Chattis."

'  See  a  preceding  note  on  the  triumph  erroneously,  aa  it  would  seeni,  a»
cribed  to  Domitian  by  Tacitus.  The  solemn  entry  of  the  emperor  into  Rome,
after  a  victorious  expedition,  might  bear  the  appearance,  and  perhaps  attain,
in  loose  language,  the  name  of  a  triumph,  without  having  any  legitimate  claim
to  it.  Pliny  refers  to  a  later  triumph  over  the  Dacians  (see  below)  when  he
contrasts  with  it  the  genuine  honours  of  Trajan  :  "accipiet  •Uquando  Gapito-
lium  uou  mimieos  currus,  nee  falsa  simulacra  victoriae;"  aee  Pamegifr.  1ft.  17.
The  imputation  of  fictitious  trophies  seems  to  have  been  u  common  as  it  was
easy.

'  Martial,  ix.  2. : "  Dum  Janus  hiemes,  Domitianus  auetumnos.
Augustus  annis  commodabit  sstates :

84  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A,  D.  84.

The  senate  next  decreed  that  Domitian  should  be  per-
petual censor,  and  encouraged  him  to  assume  the  consul-
ship year  after  year  successively.  He  had  now  repaired
the  damage  inflicted  on  the  Capitol  by  the  recent  fire,  and
completed  the  restoration  of  the  most  august  of  the  Roman
temples.  But  the  treasures  of  Vespasian  had  already  melted
away  in  the  hands  of  the  liberal  Titus  ;  costly  wars  and  bar-
ren triumphs  had  drained  perhaps  to  the  last  sesterce  the
Domitian  is  coffcrs  of  the  empire ;  the  day,  fatal  to  despots,
m^nev%^nd  ^^^  arrived,  when  the  revenues  of  the  state
series'of'con*  could  no  longer  meet  its  expenditure.  The  peace
flBcations.  which  Domitiau  had  patched  up  in  Germany,  and

imposed  upon  his  lieutenants  in  Britain,  might  relieve  the
military  chest  in  those  quarters,  but  the  increase  of  pay  which
the  soldiers  had  extorted  must  at  least  have  balanced  this  re-
duction. His  attempt  to  reduce  the  numbers  of  the  soldiery
produced  both  alarm  and  peril,  and  seems  to  have  been
abandoned  as  impolitic  or  impracticable.*  The  means  of
raising  fresh  supplies  for  his  personal  extravagance,  or  for
the  shows  and  largesses  which  the  people  unceasingly  de-
manded, were  unfortunately  too  obvious.  The  emperor
readily  listened  to  the  insinuations  of  his  freedmen  and  flat-
terers. The  noblest  and  wealthiest  of  his  subjects  were  de-
nounced as  disaffected  and  dangerous.  Already,  in  his  third
year  of  power,  Domitian  allowed  himself  to  be  seduced  into
the  path  of  proscriptions  and  confiscations,  and  the  senate
shuddered  at  the  apparation  of  a  new  Nero  or  Caligula.'

Dum  grandc  famuli  nomen  asseret  Rheni,
Gcnnanicarum  magna  lux  Calendamm."

The  assumption  of  this  title  was  already  known  on  the  Nile  in  December,
M  i^ppeara  from  an  inscription  scratched  on  the  statue  of  Memnon  :  "Sextus
Udniiu  Pudens  legionis  xxii.  xi.  knl.  Januarias  anno  IIII.  D(omini)  N(ostri)
Domitioni  OasMria  Aug.  Gcrmanici  audi  Mcnmoncm ; "  Orelli,  Jnacript.  i.  521.
The  fourth  year  of  Domitian  commenced  in  Sept.  84.

'  Huct.  Lomil  12.

*  Euaeb.  Chron.  ann.  2099,  Domitiani  8.  (from  Oct.  83) :  "  Domitianus
nobiles  multos  rolcgavit  ct  occidit." Clinton,  F.  R,  sub  ann.  84. Comp.

A.  U.  837.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  8§

The  people  witnessed  with  indifference  the  terror  of  the
great,  while  they  applauded  the  establishment  of  the  Capi-
toline  games,  which  were  founded,  in  fact,  on  the  ruins  of  the
most  illustrious  Roman  houses.*

The  prostration  of  the  imperial  finances  was  soon  appar-
ent in  the  inability  of  the  government  to  interfere  for  the
protection  of  its  clients  and  suppliants  in  Ger-
many.  Home  had  recently  given  a  prince  to  the  taim  tom  tw
Cherusci ;  but  the  nation  had  risen  against  a  mat  la  G«r-
nominee  bred  in  a  foreign  city,  the  son  of  a  chief
who  had  demeaned  himself  by  taking  the  name  of  Italicus,
and  they  had  thrown  themselves  upon  the  protection  of  the
Chatti.  In  another  quarter  the  Quadi  and  Marcomanni,  who
had  also  allowed  Rome  to  nominate  their  ruler,  found  them-
selves attacked  by  the  Lygii  and  Hermunduri,  tribes  of  the
interior.  They  appealed  to  the  emperor  for  support ;  but,
instead  of  armed  legions,  he  sent  them  a  deputation  of  a  hun-
dred knights  with  presents  and  promises.*  Domitian  well
understood  the  true  interest  of  his  government,  and  he  was
disposed  to  look  calmly  on  while  the  Germans  fought  out
among  themselves  their  private  quarrels.  Rome  had  sur-
rounded the  borders  of  her  empire  with  a  zone  of  half-
reclaimed  barbarians,  but  the  cries  of  these  dependents  for
assistance  revealed  the  existence  beyond  them  of  another
zone,  far  broader,  of  wholly  unbroken  communities  whoM
names  had  not  yet  been  bruited  in  Italy.  The  Hermandari
contended  with  the  Chatti  for  the  salt  mines  on  the  river
Saale,  in  the  very  heart  of  Germany :  the  Chamavi  and  An-
grivarii,  which  last  may  be  placed  in  the  district  of  Osnaburg,
attacked  the  Bructeri  on  the  Lippe, Sixty  thousand  of  this

Oros.  vii.  10. :  "  nobilissimos  e  Senatu  invidise  simul  et  prsedae  causa

Interfecit,"  &c.

*  Juvenal,  iv.  in  fin. :  "  Lamiarum  caede  madentL"  The  head  of  this
wealthy  house,  the  former  husband  of  Domitia,  was  sacrificed  about  this  period
to  the  cupidity  rather  than  to  the  jealousy  of  Domitian.

'  Dion,  kvii.  5. ;  Plin.  Hist.  JVo/.  iv.  25. :  "  regnum  Yannianam ;  "  from
Tannius,  king  of  the  Quadi  and  Marcomanni,  who  succeeded  throu^  Roman
influence  to  Marobouuus  and  Catualda.

86  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  84.

nation,  says  Tacitus  exultingly,  were  slain,  by  the  hands,  not
of  Romans,  but  of  their  own  countrymen,  for  the  benefit  of
the  Romans,  which  is  still,  more  gratifying  ^  and  the  tribe,
he  adds,  was  utterly  annihilated.  The  philosophic  historian
was  sanguine  in  his  patriotism.  The  name  of  the  Bructeri
reappears  at  intervals  in  the  annals  of  border  warfare,  and
even  in  the  fifth  century  retains  a  place  among  the  German
tribes  enumerated  by  Claudian,  all  of  whom,  no  doubt,
clutched  their  share  of  the  spoils  of  the  falling  empire.*

In  one  quarter  of  the  Northern  world,  however,  it  was  im-
possible to  retain  this  indifierent  attitude. Twice  already
have  the  Dacians  come  before  us  as  a  restless

Hostile  atti-  ,  ,  ,  , -. , t^  •  i

tude  of  the  people,  who  troubled  the  Roman  provmces  on  the
lower  Danube.  In  the  latter  years  of  Tiberius
they  had  burst  into  Pannonia,  and  the  weary  or  Timid  empe-
ror had  made  no  vigorous  effort  to  restrain  them.*^  Again,
in  the  heat  of  the  late  civil  wars,  they  had  watched  the  mo-
ment when  the  strength  of  the  legions  had  been  withdrawn
from  Mcesia,  and  crossing  the  frontier  stream,  had  swept  away
the  slender  outposts  of  the  empire,  and  threatened  to  storm
the  head  quarters  of  the  provincial  government.  The  fortu-
nate turn  of  Vespasian's  affairs  in  Italy  allowed  Mucianus  to
detach  one  legion,  the  Sixth,  from  the  forces  he  was  himself
bringing  up  from  the  East ;  and  with  this  brigade,  reinforced
shortly  afterwards  by  some  battalions  from  the  army  of  Vi-
tcUius,  Fonteius  Agrippare  covered  the  province,  and  drove
the  barbarians  beyond  the  Ister.' Dion  considers,  probably

'  "  Pulsu  Bructeris  et  pcnitus  excisis  viclnarum  consensu  nationum."  Tac.
Otrm.  88.  The  date  of  the  event  referred  to  is  not  given.  The  book  D«
Moribua  Otrm.  is  supposed  to  have  been  written  A.  d,  99,  the  third  year  of
Trajan.  In  tlic  early  part  of  thin  reign  Spurinna  is  said  to  have  gained  a
victory  over  the  Uructeri.  Plin.  A)),  ii.  6.  This  nation  finds  a  place  too  in
the  Pcutingor  Table  of  the  third  century.  Comp.  also  Claudian,  viii.  451. :
"accoU  sylvae  Kructerus  Ilercyniie."  Greenwood,  JJist.  of  the  (hTinans,  i.  178.
note.  Sec  also  IJede,  Jlisl.  licckit.  v.  10. :  "  Anticjui  Saxoncs  lioructuarii  .  .  .
paganis  adhuc  ritlbus  Hervientcs."

»  Suet.  Ort.  21.;  7VA.  41.

■  Taa  JVii^.  UL  46.

A.  U.  837.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  97

with  justice,  that  the  inhabitants  of  both  banks  of  the  Ister
were  homogeneous,  and  that  the  people  whom  the  Romans
designated  as  Dacians  were  known  to  the  Greeks  by  the  ap-
pellation of  Geta3.  Popularly,  however,  the  former  name  is
given  to  the  tribes  beyond  the  river,  the  latter  to  those  with-
in it ;  the  one  were  tlie  enemies  and  invaders,  the  others  the
subjects  and  provincials  of  the  empire.  Stretching  from  the
Theiss  to  the  Euxine,  these  tribes,  though  known  by  one  gen-
eric name,  formed  a  confederation  of  various  communities.
They  had  apparently  a  common  capital,  or  temple,  or  place
of  assembly  in  the  mountain  fastnesses  of  Transylvania,  from
whence  their  broad  territories  gently  sloped  in  every  direc-
tion ;'  and  the  chief  to  whom  they  gave  the  command  of  their
warlike  expeditions  was  distinguished  by  the  title,  rather
than  the  personal  appellation,  of  Decebalus,  or  the  Strength
of  the  Dacians.*

The  appellations,  indeed,  of  the  barbarian  chiefs  who  flit
from  time  to  time  across  the  stage  in  contest  with  the  Ro-
mans have  but  little  interest  for  us ;  for  we  can tw»ih.»».
assign  neither  distinctive  meaning  to  the  names, ggjg^,
nor  character  to  the  men  who  bore  them. It P'J*Jfv,
would  seem  that  the  headship  of  the  Dacian  tribes ^  "•  "*■**■•
was  relinquished  at  this  time  by  a  king  called  Daras  to  an-
other known  to  us  by  the  name  of  Diarpaneus,  and  it  is  possi-
ble that  this  last  Avas  the  same  whom  we  shall  meet  with
again  under  the  title  of  Decebalus,  in  long  sustained  conflict
with  a  later  emperor. In  the  first  year  of  Domitian,  this  war-

'  Of  the  locality  more  will  be  said  hereafter ;  but  the  allusions  in  Statiua
refer  to  the  custom  of  the  Dacians  as  known  in  Domitian's  time.  Theb.  L  20. :
"Et  conjurato  dejectos  vertice  Dacos  ;  "  Siflv.  i.  1.  7. :  "attoniti  vidit  domua
ardua  Daci ; "  ib.  80.  :  "  tu  tardum  in  foedera  montem  Longa  pace  domas ; "
iil  8.  169. :  "  Qmeque  suum  Dacis  donat  dementia  montem."

'  Leo,  the  great  Sanscrit  scholar,  explains  Decebalus  by  the  Skoscrit
Dh&vaka-bala,  Dacorum  robur,  and  Diurpaneus  by  Durp&na,  validam  mtrnttm
habens.  See  Imhof,  Domitianus,  p.  85.  Dr.  Latham  derives  the  Dacians  from
the  Scythians,  and  discovers  the  name  of  Decebalus  in  Dizabulus,  the  first
recorded  king  of  the  Turks.  Bergmann  {Les  Gita,  p.  40.)  refers  it  to  Dakhi-
valhus,  Scythian  words,  which  he  interprets  Faitcon  diurne.

88  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  86.

rior  had  ventured  to  cross  the  Danube  and  invade  the  MoDsian
province ;  he  routed  a  legion  with  the  loss  of  its  eagle,  slew
the  praetor  Oppius  Sabinus,  stormed  and  sacked  many  towns,
and  ravaged  the  Roman  territory  to  the  foot  of  the  Hsemus.
Strong  measures  were  required  to  recover  and  secure  the
province.  Numerous  levies  were  to  be  raised,  abundant
supplies  were  to  be  collected.  War  against  the  savage  races
of  the  Danube  could  not  be  made  self-supporting.  While
Domitian,  just  returned  from  his  dubious  successes  on  the
Rhine,  was  courting  the  applause  of  the  citizens  and  bribing
the  soldiers  to  fidelity,  his  preparations  for  a  second  expedi-
tion, more  important  and  more  dangerous  than  the  first,  were
being  urged  forward  in  Italy,  Illyricum,  and  Macedonia.  In
the  spring  of  86  all  was  ready  for  the  emperor's  descent  upon
the  scene  of  action  in  person.  He  dared  not  intrust  the  com-
mand of  his  forces  to  the  brave  captain  he  had  lately  humili-
ated ;  but  in  Cornelius  Fuscus,  prefect  of  the  prjetorians,  he
possessed  at  least  a  faithful  adherent  of  moderate  ability,
whom  he  could  place  at  the  head  of  his  armies  while  he  loi-
tered himself  in  indolence  at  a  frontier  station.  The  Dacian
chief  had  trained  his  followers  in  the  Roman  tactics,  and  ut-
terly despised  the  adversary  who  now  marched  against  him.
He  is  said  to  have  tauntingly  required,  as  the  price  of  peace,
a  poll-tax  on  the  head  of  every  Roman  citizen.  Nor  were
these  arrogant  pretensions  unsupported  by  valour  and  con-
duct in  the  field. Withdrawing  from  the  plains  of  Moesia  he

enticed  Fuscus  to  cross  the  Danube  and  follow
dMtb  of  Cor-  his  retreating  forces,  till  he  could  close  on  him
"*  "d.  8??"' with  advantage. The  operations  of  the  retreat

and  pursuit  may  have  occui^ied  some  time,  and
we  have  no  acquaintance  with  the  particulars;  but  they  end-
ed in  the  complete  defeat  and  rout  of  the  Romans,  with  the
loss  of  at  least  one  legion  and  eagle,  and  the  death  of  their
commander.*

'  Suet  Domll.  fl. ;  Juvpiinl,  iv.  112.;  Miirtiiil,  v!.  7«.  The  death  ofFiiacua
m»y  bo  placed  in  the  year  87  (840).  The  loss  of  the  Romans  was  sviijposed  to
have  been  rery  groat,  but  Tacitus,  In  relating  these  oTonta>  declared  that  it  was

A.  U.  889.]  UJfDER  THE  EMPIRE.  89

The  luxury  and  frivolity  in  which  Domitian  indulged  in
the  conduct  of  this  campaign  are  noted  by  the  unfriendly
liand  of  the  younger  Pliny.  It  was  particularly  asserted
that  he  caused  himself  to  be  towed  on  his  progress  up  or
down  the  great  rivers  of  Pannonia,  to  avoid  the  dissonant
noise  of  oars,'  However  this  may  be,  he  seems  to  have  taken
no  active  part  in  the  perils  of  the  expedition,  and  soon  quit-
ted it  for  Rome,  where  he  was  persecuting  the  senate  and  the
people,  while  his  lieutenant  was  penetrating  into  the  Dacian
fastnesses  and  perishing  sword  in  hand,*  The  dis-
grace  of  this  defeat  was,  however,  retrieved  by  a witwyt

considerable  victory  gained  in  a  subsequent  cam-
paign by  Julianus,  wlio  encountered  the  enemy  also  on  his
own  soil  at  a  place  named  TapjB,  the  site  of  which  is  not
ascertained.*  Decebalus,  it  is  said,  saved  himself  from  de-
struction by  the  stratagem  of  cutting  down  a  forest  to  the
height  of  the  human  figure,  and  clothing  the  stumps  of  the
trees  in  armour,  which  deterred  the  Romans  from  advancing
to  complete  their  victory,  Domitian  was  encouraged  perhaps
by  this  turn  of  fortune  to  leave  Rome  again  for  the  fi-ontiers,
and  even  to  advance  in  person  against  the  Marcomanni,  the
Quadi,  and  the  Sarmatians,*  These  tribes,  it  seems,  had
failed  to  furnish  Rome  with  the  supplies  she  had  demanded
of  them.  They  were  now  chastised  for  their  neglect.  Domi-
tian satisfied  himself  that  he  had  made  the  necessary  impres-

the  duty  of  a  good  citizen  to  conceal  the  numbers  of  the  slain.  The  lost  books
of  the  Iftstories  were  known  to  Orosius,  who  has  preearred  this  incident  (nL
10.) :  "Corn.  Tacitu3,  qui  banc  historiam  diligentissime  eontexuit,  de  reticendo
interfectonim  numero,  et  Sallustium  Crispum,  et  alios  auctore^  quam  plurimos
sanxisse,  et  seipsum  potissimum  elegisse  dicii."
'  Plin.  Paneff.  82. ;  Dion,  Ixvii.  6.

*  Oros.  vli.  10. :  "  cum  et  in  urbe  senatum  populumque  laniaret,  et  foris
male  ciix'umactum  exercitum  assidua  hostes  clade  oonficerent"  The  secular
games  followed  in  88,  and  this  was  perhaps  the  year  of  the  rictory  of  Julianus.

'  Julianus  (Titius,  Tertius  or  Tettius?)  had  been  mentioned  before  by
Tacitus  as  an  able  commander  in  Moesia. HuL  i.  79. ;  ii,  85. ;  iv.  39,  40.

*  These  names  indicate,  respectively,  the  tribes  of  the  modem  Bohemia,
Moravia,  and  North-Western  Hungary.

90  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  90.

sioTi ;  though  Tacitus  would  lead  us  to  believe  that  here  too
the  Roman  arms  met  with  some  bloody  reverses.^

Meanwhile  Julianus  continued  to  press  on  the  discomfited
enemy,  and  Decebalus,  we  are  assured,  made  many  applica-
Peace  with  the  t^ons  for  peacc  before  the  emperor  thought  fit  to
Dacians.  declare  the  terms  on  which  he  would  be  content

to  grant  it.  Such  perhaps  were  the  fictions  with  which  Ro-
mon  vanity  glossed  over  the  disgrace  of  consenting,  while
the  frontier  of  the  empire  received  no  extension,  to  make
presents,  or  more  truly,  to  pay  tribute  to  a  worsted  enemy.'
Still  deeper  was  the  disgrace,  though  little  felt  perhaps  at
the  time,  that  Decebalus  should  not  venture  to  put  himself
in  the  hands  of  the  Roman  emperor,  but  should  send  a  vassal
to  conduct  the  treaty  for  him.  Domitian  flattered  the  pride
of  the  soldiers  by  pretending  to  place  a  crown  on  the  head
of  this  envoy.'  He  then  sheathed  his  sword,  and  returned  as
a  victor  to  his  capital,  where  the  people  were  prepared,  as
before,  to  receive  him  with  acclamations,  the  poets  to  chant
his  glories,  the  senate  to  prostrate  itself  in  servile  assenta-
tion.* He  claimed  a  triumph  for  his  lieutenant's  victories
over  the  Dacians,  and  celebrated  conjointly  with  them  his
own  successes  in  Germany ;  but  for  the  more  doubtful  laurels
he  had  gained  in  Sarmatia,  he  was  content  to  demand  the  in-
ferior honour  of  an  ovation.*  He  decreed  that  October,  the
month  of  his  own  birth,  should  henceforth  be  styled  Domiti-

'  Tac.  Affric.  41.,  summing  up  the  disasters  of  Domitian's  reign:  "tot
ezercitus  in  Mopsia  Daciaquc  et  Germania  Pannoniaquo  .  .  .  ainissi."  So  Eu-
trop.  vii,  23. :  "  in  Sarmatia  legio  ejus  cum  ducc  interfecta."  Martial  combines
the  Sarmatian  with  the  Dacian  campaigns,  ix.  102 :

"  Comua  Sarmatici  tcr  perfida  contudit  Istri,
Sudantcm  Getieft  tor  nivc  lavit  equum."
»  Plin.  Panrff.  11,  12. ;  Dion,  Ixviii.  0.  0.

*  Dion,  Ixvil.  7. ;  Martial,  v.  ;{.

*  Thi!  pi-aco  with  tlie  DaciaiiH  was  concluded  in  December  90,  about  the
time  of  the  Saturnaliu :  (Jomp.  Martial,  vii.  KO,  91,  95.  (Imhof,  j).  05.),  and
Domitian  returned  to  Rome  in  Jan.  (II.  Martial,  viii.  8.  The  triumph  may  bo
placed  in  this  year,  in  the  conHulship  of  IJljiius  TroJanuH  and  Acilius  (ilabrio.

*  Euseb.  ad  ann.  91:  "DomitianuM  do  Daeis  ct  Gcrmauis  triumphavit"

A,  U.  843.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  91

anus.' He  erected  an  arch,  long  since  overthrown,  but  which
rivalled  in  its  day  the  Flavian  arch  on  the  Velia,  near  the
gate  of  Triumph  and  the  temple  of  Returning  Fortune.* The
city, — all  the  world,  says  Dion, — was  filled  with
statues  of  the  glorious  emperor,  and  the  Capitol »rch,  uid  other

1  T •  I  1 •  • -t \  monumenU  of

was  adorned  with  many  such  images  m  gilt  bronze. Domitiant
The  citizens,  anxious  to  possess  themselves of
such  brilliant  portraits  of  their  favourite  hero,  were  forbid-
den to  make  their  golden  statues  of  less  than  a  certain  speci-
fied weight. But  of  all  these  effigies  the  most EqaggtrUa
magnificent  was  the  equestrian  colossus  in  gilt eo'^^"^
bronze,  erected  in  the  centre  of  the  forura,  before  the  shrine
of  the  Flavian  family. Planted  on  a  lofty  pedestal,  from
which  las  head  might  be  said,  in  poetic  language,  to  pierce
the  sky,  and  shining  down  upon  the  glowing  roofs  of  halls
and  temples,  Domitian  sate  with  his  right  hand  advanced  in
the  attitude  of  command,  and  bearing  in  his  left  a  figure  of
Minerva,  his  sword  reposing  peacefiilly  in  its  scabbard,  while

Suet.  Domil.  6. :  "  de  Sarmatis  lauream  modo  Capitolino  Jori  intulit." Ct
Eutrop.  Tii.  23. ;  Martial,  viil  15. ;  Stat  £^.  iiL  3.  IftS.

"  Haac  eet  quae  viotis  paroentia  foedera  Chattia,
Qu8»que  suum  Daeis  donat  dementia  montem :
Quae  modo  Marcomanoa  post  horrida  bella  vagosqne
Sauromatas  Latio  non  est  dignata  triumpbo."

It  is  commonly  said  that  Domitian  assumed  the  title  of  Daeieus  in  addition
to  that  of  Germanicus.  The  former  title,  however,  does  not  appear  on  hia
coins,  as  is  the  case  with  the  latter  repeatedly,  from  84  downwards.  The  line
of  Juvenal,  vi.  205. :  "  Dacicus  et  scripto  radiat  Germanicus  auro,"  refers  more
probably  to  Trajan.  On  the  other  hand,  Martial's  eighth  book  is  dedicated
Imp.  Domitiano  Caea.  Aug.  Germ.  Dacico.

'  Suet.  Domit.  13.  September  13  was  the  date  of  his  aooessioo,  October  24
of  his  birth. Comp.  Macrob.  Saturn.  L  12. ;  Stat  Sylv.  iv.  1.  42.

"  Nondum  omnis  honornn
Annus  habet,  cupiuntque  (kcem  tua  nomina  tn&aaeE."

*  According  to  Suetonius,  Domitian  erected  so  many  Jani  (small  doable
arches)  and  other  arches  to  his  own  honour,  that  some  one  at  last  scratched
upon  them  the  word  apKel,  Enough !  For  the  triumphal  arch  and  the  adjacent
temple  see  a  spirited  epigram  of  Martial,  viii.  65.

92  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  91.

his  prancing  war-horse  trampled  on  the  forehead  of  the  cap-
tive Rhine.*  We  could  have  wished  that  the  gorgeous
verses  of  Statins  had  been  addressed  to  a  worthier  object,  and
one  which  might  have  deserved  a  longer  term  of  existence.
But  horse  and  rider  were  soon  rolled  in  the  dust,  and  our
notion  of  one  of  the  proudest  works  of  art  at  Rome  must  be
gathered  by  a  comparison  of  the  poet's  laboured  description
with  the  existing  statue  of  Aurelius,  to  which  it  seems  to
have  borne  a  remarkable  i*esemblance.'^

Our  historians  insinuate  that  the  glories  of  Domitian's
triumph  were,  after  all,  but  borrowed  plumes ;  that,  in  de-
fault of  the  srlitterinsr  spoils  which  had  been  so

Triumph  and  _ ,  , ^ . , , , n  -. , n

shows  of  Do-  oiten  borne  to  the  Capitol,  he  had  caused  the  tar-
niture  of  his  own  palaces  to  be  paraded  before
him ;  and  the  same  tradition  seems  to  be  preserved  in  the
sneer  of  Tacitus  at  the  pretended  cai^tivcs  from  the  Rhine.
This  is  a  mere  repetition  of  the  stories  afloat  on  the  occasion
of  Caligula's  mock  triumph,  and  history  which  repeats  itself
is  justly  suspected.  But,  however  scanty  Avere  the  trophies
of  the  Germanic  and  Dacic  wars,  the  people  demanded  shows

»  Statius,  Sylv.  1 1.

"  Quas  superimposito  moles  geminata  colosso
Stat  Latium  complexa  forum  ?  .  .  .  .
Ipse  autcm  pure  cclsum  caput  aere  septus

Tcmpla  supcrfulges  ?

Dextra  vetat  pugnas ;  loevam  Tritonia  virgo
Nan  gravat,  ct  sectoe  praetcndit  colla  Medusoa  .  .  .
It  tergo  dcmissa  chlamys :  latus  ense  quieto
Securum  .  .  .  vacuae  pro  oespite  ternB
• iErea  captivi  crincm  terit  ungula  Rheni."
Tho  statue  seems  to  have  been  raised  on  a  lofty  pedestal,  and  it  was  placed
on  the  site  of  tlit*  Curlian  pool  of  the  early  forum,  possibly  on  the  exact  spot
where  the  column  of  Phocas,  erected  five  centuries  later,  still  stands.

'  The  lines  above  selected  from  the  description  of  Statins  may  show  the
poioU  of  resemblance  and  diflfcrenco.  The  attitude  of  tho  two  riders  is  tho
■use;  in  both  the  right  band  is  advanced  unarmed.  From  the  ])ositi<>n  of  tho
left  liond  of  Aurc'liuH,  thoro  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  held  tlie  I'uliadium.  liut
Aurelius  has  no  sword  by  bis  side,  and  his  steed  does  not  appear  to  havo
trodden  on  a  captive  enemy.

A.  U.  844.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  .  OS

and  games  in  increasing  profusion,  and  the  emperor  was  com-
pelled to  plunder  his  own  subjects  to  satisfy  their  rapacity.
Large  gifts,  under  the  name  of  coronary  gold,  were  required
from  every  province  and  city,  to  bribe  the  soldiers  and  gorge
the  citizens.*  All  the  nobility  of  Rome  feasted  with  their
ruler  at  an  enormous  banquet.  The  victor  in  a  sterile  cam-
paign against  the  public  enemy  levied  his  exactions  on  nobles
and  provincials,  and  amidst  all  the  exultations  of  his  flatterers
indications  are  not  wanting,  that  the  despot  had  now  plung-
0  ed  with  little  restraint  into  a  systematic  career  of  violence
and  bloodshed.*

During  the  progress  of  these  distant  wars  Domitian  had
been  disturbed,  though  only  for  a  moment,  by  the  appearance
of  a  pretended  Nero,  who  threw  himself  on  the

...  . Appe*rmnee  of

support  of  the  king  of  Parthia,  if  he  was  not  in •  pretended
feet  set  up  by  the  Parthians  to  annoy  the  chief a.  d.  ».
of  the  rival  empire. This  event  occurred  per-
haps in  89,  when  the  forces  of  the  Roman  government  were
fully  occupied  with  their  operations  against  the  Dacians ;
nevertheless  Domitian  assumed  a  high  tone,  and  demanded
the  surrender  of  the  adventurer. War  was  threatened,  and
tlie  note  of  preparation  already  sounded. When  Tiridates
j)romptly  obeyed  the  summons,  the  court  poets  declared  that
their  master  had  conquered  the  Parthians,  and  chanted  their
paean  over  the  baffled  nations  of  the  East. The  Romans
were  at  last  disabused  of  the  imposture  regarding  their  late

'  The  triumph  was  an  opportunity  for  demanding  large  sums  from  the
provinces  under  the  name  of  "  aurum  coronarium."  Compare,  for  the  extor-
tion of  Domitian,  Plin.  Paneff.  17.  41.  The  great  banquet  is  celebrated  by
Martial,  viii.  60. :  "  Vescitur  omnia  equea  tecum,  populusqoe,  patreaque,  Et
capit  ambrosias  cum  duce  Roma  dapes ; "  and  by  Statius,  8j^.  vr.  2.,  who
speaks  of  himself  as  a  guest,  and  assures  us  that  this  immense  concourse  of
citizens, — "  Romuleos  proceres  trabeataque  Gsesar  Agmina  mille  simul  jtasit
discumbere  mensis," — was  entertained  under  the  roof  of  the  rast  imperial
palace ;  "  tantum  domino  minor."

'  Orosius,  L  c.  Domitian  seems  to  have  laid  his  hands  on  the  ftmds  of
public  institutions.  Frontinus,  </e  ^yu<K/««<.  118.  See  Marquardt,  (Becker's)
AUerthiim.  iiL  8.  p.  86.  note.

94  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  91.

tyrant,  whicli  had  so  long  floated  before  their  eyes  ;  but  the
fable  survived,  as  has  been  already  mentioned,  among  the
Jews  and  Christians,  for  many  generations  after  the  fall  of
the  Flavian  dynasty.*  A  revolt  among  the  Nasamones  in
Numidia,  caused  by  some  fiscal  oppression,  demanded  that
the  sword  of  Domitian  should  be  drawn  once  more  in  the
third  quarter  of  the  globe.  The  insurgents  stormed  a  Roman
camp,  made  themselves  drunk,  and  were  cut  in  pieces  by  the
praetor  Flaccus.  The  emperor  wrote  boastfully  to  the  senate
announcing,  in  the  haughty  language  of  divinity,  that  he  had
forbidden  the  Nasemones  to  exist}  Once  more  the  poets
profited  by  the  occasion :  once  more  Silius  emulated  the
lofty  flights  of  Virgil,  and  declared  that  to  his  patron,  as  to
Augustus,  the  tribes  of  Ganges  tendered  their  slackened
bows,  the  Bactrians  offered  their  emptied  quivers.  Again
the  exploits  of  a  Roman  emperor  were  likened  to  the  triumph-
ant progress  of  Hercules  and  Bacchus.  The  sources  of  the
Nile,  the  summits  of  Atlas,  were  at  last  surmounted  ;  the
sun  and  stars  were  left  behind  in  the  i)anting  race.'

The  Dacian  triumph,  and  the  acts  of  tyranny  which  accom-
panied it,  seem  to  have  been  quickly  followed  by  a  military

'  Reimar,  on  Dion,  Ixiv.  9.,  enumerates  the  false  Neros — 1.  A  slave  who
raised  a  sedition  in  Pontus,  and  was  slain  by  Asprenas  during  the  reign  of
Otho ;  Tac.  Hitt.  ii.  8. ;  Dion,  1.  c.  2.  A  man  whose  real  name  was  Terentiua
Maximus,  who  ai)pcarcd  also  in  Asia ;  Zonar.  xi.  18.  8.  The  pretender  of
whom  we  are  now  speaking,  mentioned  by  Suetonius,  Ner.  67.,  as  appearing
twenty  years  after  Nero's  death,  i.  e.  in  89.

*  Zonar.  AnncJ.  xi.  19. lHaoafiuvag  kx^Xvaa  elvat.

*  SiL  Ital.  Ui.  612. :

"  Iluic  laxos  arcus  olim  Gangctica  pubcs
Subniittet,  vacuu8(iuc  ostendent  Huctra  pharetras ;
Ilic  ct  ab  Arctoo  currus  agct  axe  per  urbcm,
Ducet  et  Eooa,  Haccho  cedente,  triumphos."
8tat  Biflv.  111.  164. :

"  Nunc  magnos  GricnB  dablt  triumphos.
Ibis  quo  vagtm  Hercules  ct  Evan
Ultra  nidcra,  flammcumciue  solem,
Et  Nili  caput  ct  uivcs  Atlautiti."

A.  U.  844.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  05

insurrection,  to  which  indeed  they  may  have  main- . .
Iv  conduced. When  an  obscure  soldier,  such  as tonio*  6»tun»i-

•^  not,

Vitellius  or  Vespasian,  revolted  against  the  reign-  a.  v.  w.
ing  emperor,  we  may  conclude  him  to  have  been
the  instrument  of  the  legions  or  their  officers  in  the  provinces
in  which  the  revolt  arose  ;  but  when,  as  in  some  less  conspic-
uous instances,  a  man  of  high  family  and  great  connexions
raised  the  standard  of  insurrection,  it  is  fair  to  mfer  that  he
was  instigated  by  sympathy  with  the  oppressed  class  to
which  he  personally  belonged,  and  rather  led  the  legions
than  was  impelled  by  them.  L.  Antonius  Saturninus  com-
manded the  Roman  forces  in  the  Upper  Germany,*  He  was
proud  of  his  descent,  in  which  he  united  two  of  the  great
houses  of  the  republic,  and  of  a  name  which  might  revive
recollections  both  of  a  powerful  triumvir  and  of  a  popular
tribune.*  lie  might  claim  respect  from  the  nobles  as  well  as
favour  from  the  people ;  and  when  the  cry  of  the  persecuted
senators  reached  him  on  his  prwtorial  tribunal,  he  might
deem  the  moment  propitious  for  opening  to  his  soldiers  the
Avay  to  Rome,  and  invoking,  at  the  same  time,  the  hallowed
associations  of  republican  freedom. He  intrigued  with  the

'  We  possess  no  continuous  narrative  of  Domitian's  reign.  The  epitome
of  Dion  is  peculiarly  meagre  and  confused,  and  in  it^  slight  notice  of  the  revolt
of  Antonius,  refers  its  date  to  "  about  the  time  "  of  Domitian's  triumph.  Clin-
ton  accordingly  places  it  in  91.  Imhof,  however,  shows  that  there  is  reason
for  fixing  it  as  late  as  93.  The  date  is  important,  inasmuch  as  all  the  authori-
ties concur  in  remarking  that  it  was  after  this  event  that  Domitian's  fears  im-
pelled him  to  the  cruelties  which  make  his  name  so  infamous.  See  Suet.
Domit.  10. ;  Dion,  kvii.  11. ;  Victor,  HpiL  11. ;  Comp.  Tac  Affrie.  43.

•  Martial,  iv.  11.:

"  Dum  nimium  vano  tumefactua  nomine  gaudes,
Et  Saturninum  te  miser  esse  pudet,
Impia  Parrhasi^  movisti  bella  sub  urs4,
Qualia  qui  Phariae  conjugis  arma  tulit"
If  we  regarded  Martial's  pieces  as  following  in  chronological  order,  we
might  put  this  event  as  far  back  as  88  with  Tillemont Victor  ascribes  the
revolt  of  Antonius  to  private  pique. Domitian  had  called  him  by  an  oppro-
brious term,  yet  one  which  seems  to  have  been  fully  bandied  about  among  the
loose  talkers  and  loose  livers  of  the  time :  "  se  svortum  vocari  dolebat"

OQ  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D,  93.

officers  of  his  two  legions, — such  was  the  amount  to  which,
since  the  recent  disturbances,  the  forces  on  the  Rhine  had
been  reduced, — and  the  title  of  Imperator  was  conferred  upon
him  with  acclamations.  Jealous  as  the  Caesars  had  long
been  of  their  lieutenants,  nevertheless,  in  still  greater  jealousy
of  the  soldiei*s,  they  had  placed  in  their  hands  the  pecuniary
means  of  waging  war  against  the  state  at  any  moment.  For,
in  order  to  retain  the  legionary  under  his  standards,  and  in-
sure his  fidelity,  it  was  a  rule  of  the  service  that  a  portion  of
his  pay, — as  much,  it  is  said,  as  one  half, — should  be  kept
back  as  a  reserved  fund,  till  the  period  of  his  discharge.
Even  the  donatives  so  often  lavished  upon  the  soldiers  were
thus  intercepted  on  their  way,  and  perhaps  in  the  same  pro-
portion.' A  large  sum  of  ready  money  was  thus  accumulated
in  the  military  chest ;  and  when  the  legions  bound  up  their
own  lives  and  fortunes  with  a  chief  who  promised  to  lead
them  to  plunder,  they  willingly  allowed  hun  to  lavish  this
convenient  hoard  on  the  requisite  preparations.  Antonius
expected  aid  at  the  same  time  from  the  German  bank  of  the
Rhine,  and  did  not  scruple,  it  seems,  to  call  into  the  field  the
natural  enemies  of  Rome.  The  danger  was  imminent,  and
Domitian,  who  was  not  timid  in  the  face  of  open  dangers,
prepared  as  on  former  occasions  to  lead  his  own  forces  against
his  adversary.  His  movements,  liowever,  were  anticipated
by  the  vigour  of  a  faithful  lieutenant.  Norbanus  attacked
Antonius  on  the  first  opening  of  spring,  when  the  sudden
thaw  of  ice  prevented  the  barbarians  from  hastening  across
the  Rhine  to  his  assistance.* The  rebel  chief  was  quickly

'  Suet.  Domit.  Y. :  "  fiduciam  ccssisse  ex  depositoram  summa  vidcbatur."
The  writer  represents  these  deposits  indeed  us  voluntary,  which  may  liave  been
partly  the  case ;  but  the  account  given  of  the  usual  practice  by  Vogctius,  de
Mil.  Jiom,  ii.  20.,  seems  to  offer  a  better  explanation  of  the  custom.

•  Suet.  Domit.  0.  The  victory,  according  to  the  marvellous  story  of  tha
day,  WM  known  at  Home  on  the  very  day  that  it  occurred  in  (iennany.  Sueto-
iduf  if  confinneil  by  riutarch,  yKinil.  25.  Similar  wonders  are  conunon  iu
Roman,  and,  indeed,  in  ail  history.  So  of  the  battle  of  I'harsuliii,  according  to
the  tradition  no  doidtt  faithfully  reported  by  Lucoii,  vii.  2U4. :  "  Speclari  e  toto
potult  Plianuilia  niundo."

A.  U.  846.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  97

routed  and  slain.  Norbanus  had  perhaps  personal  reasons
for  making  all  traces  of  the  conspiracy  disappear,  and  he
destroyed  the  papers  of  the  vanquished  before  the  emperor
could  demand  them.  Domitian  meanwhile  was  advancing
from  Rome  with  a  powerful  force,  dragging  with  him  many
senators,  old  as  well  as  young,  whom  he  dared  not  leave  be-
liind  him  in  the  capital.  Disappointed  of  full  youowt^by
information  about  his  concealed  enemies,  he  ex-  p«>«5HpUoM.
tended  all  the  more  widely  his  precautionary  severities,  and
sought  to  terrify  the  rebel's  friends  by  exhibiting  his  head
upon  the  Rostra.  Such  were  the  ghastly  scenes  with  which
the  proscriptions  of  the  olden  time  had  generally  commenced,
and  now  again  proscription  followed  ;  but  the  names  of  the
victims  were  forbidden  to  be  inscribed  on  the  public  records.'
Another  precaution  against  future  insurrections  was  to  for-
bid the  soldiers  keeping  more  than  1000  sesterces  in  deposit
at  their  standards  ;  the  surplus  of  their  accumulated  arrears
being  removed,  we  may  suppose,  to  some  central  quarters.
It  was  further  determined  that  henceforth  two  legions  should
never  occupy  the  same  winter  station  together.*

These  jealous  measures  show  how  deep  a  gloom  of  dis-
trust was  thickening  before  Domitian's  vision.  Hitherto  he
had  been  content  perhaps  to  indicate  to  the  dela-  Dj^taaMt  t».
tors  a  few  among  the  high  nobility,  who,  if  con-  '»*^««»«i»y-
demned  Avith  a  decent  show  of  judicial  process,  would  be  ac-
ceptable victims  offered  to  the  necessities  of  the  fiscus.  Now,
however,  a  feeling  more  potent  than  cupidity  seized  and
mastered  him.  In  dire  alarm  for  his  power  and  his  life,  he
saw  an  enemy  in  every  man  of  distinction  in  the  city  or  the
camps ;  and  the  short  career  which  yet  remained  to  hiin  be-
came one  continued  paroxysm  of  terrified  ferocity.*

'  Suet.  Domit.  10.  describes  the  torments  inflicted  on  the  culprits.  Dion,
Ixvii.  11. :  CKUAvae  a^c  ec  to  iiro/x\'7/fiaTa  ecrypaof/vcu.

*  Suet.  Domit.  7. :  "  Geminari  legionum  castra  prohibuit :  nee  plus  quam
mille  nuuimos  a  quoquam  ad  signa  deponi." 1C»00  sesterces— 8/.

'  Victor,  £])it.  11. :  "quo  per  Norbanum  Appium  acie  strato  Domitianus
longe  tetrior  in  omne  hominum  genus,  etiam  in  suos,  ferarum  more  grassaba-
tur."

VOL.  VII. — 7

98  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

CHAPTEK  LXII.

INTERNAL HISTORY UNDER DOHITIAN. — HIS CHARACTER, AND STRENGTH OF  THE

EVIDENCE AGAINST IT. HIS REIGN AN EPOCH OF REACTION. HE AFFECTS TO

BE  A  REFORMER  OF  MANNERS. MEASURES  IN  HONOUR  OF  THE  GODS. PROSE-
CUTION OF UNCHASTE VESTALS. FATE OF CORNELIA. ENFORCEMENT OF THE

LAWS OF ADULTERY. THE SCANTINIAN  LAW. LAWS AGAINST MUTILATION.

RESTRICTIONS  IMPOSED  ON THE  MIMES. DECREE  AGAINST THE CHALDEANS  AND

PHILOSOPHERS,  A.  D.  89. ECONOMIC  MEASURES. RESTORATION  OF  THE  CAPITOL.

ASCRIPTION OF DIVINITY TO DOMITIAN. CULT OF ISIS AND CYBELE. —

TRIBUTE  ENFORCED  ON  THE  JEWS. — DEATH  OF  CLEMENS,  AND  ALLEGED  PER-
SECUTION OF THE CHRISTIANS. — DOMITIAN AS A GOVERNOR, ADMINISTRATOR,

AND LEGISLATOR. HE COUNTENANCES DELATION. FAVOURS THE SOLDIERS.

CARESSES  THE  POPULACE. SPECTACLES. THE  CAPITOLINE  AND  ALBAN  CON-
TESTS.  PATRONAGE OF LITERATURE REPAID BY FLATTERY. DOMITIAN'S GRIM

HUMOUR. THE COUNCIL OF THE TURBOT, AND FUNERAL BANQUET. DEATH

OF  AGRICOLA,  A.  D.  93  :  WITH  SUSPICION  OF  POISON :  FOLLOWED  BY  PRO-
SCRIPTION OF  SENATORS,  AND  SECOND  EDICT  AGAINST  THE  PHILOSOPHERS. —
REIGN  OP  TERROR. — DOMITIAN'S  PERSONAL  ALARMS. — HE  IS  ASSASSINATED  BY
BIS FREEOMEN, A.  D. 96.

A.  D.  81-96. A.  u.  884-849.

SUCH  are  the  fragments  remaining  from  the  wreck  of  his-
tory, which  embrace  what  little  we  know  of  the  external
affairs  of  Rome  at  this  period.  Henceforth  avc  must  be  con-
tent to  work  with  these,  or  even  scantier  matorials.  ISIore
interest,  if  not  more  completeness,  may,  however,  be  given
to  our  sketch  of  the  Roman  interior,  by  scrutinizinc^  the

_  character  of  the  onipcror's  domestic  adiuiiiistra-

Tbe  ctunMstcr

of  Domiuan  tioii. It  liajipcus,  indeed,  that  the  ihtkoiuiI  char-

ropKMoU  that  .  .  .

ortbeKomuu  actcr  of  Domitian,  the  most  conspicuouH  fitjuro

oTtlMaff*.  1  ti

on  the  scene,  reflects  with  peculiar  fidelity  the

temper  of  the  age,  and  affords  a  key  to  much  of  its  history.

A.U.  884.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  9^

The  degeneracy  of  the  sons  of  Vespasian  paints  the  decline
of  the  Roman  people.  In  the  father  we  have  seen  a  type  of
the  armed  citizen  of  the  republic,  a  Sabine  by  birth  and  tem-
per, a  genuine  representative  of  that  middle-class  which  still
retained  the  stamp  of  rustic  simplicity,  so  long  associated  in
the  imagination  of  the  Italians  with  the  farmers  of  the  hills,
and  the  artisans  of  the  country  towns  of  Sabellia.  But  this
native  simplicity  had  seldom  been  proof  against  the  seductions
of  city  life.  Transplanted  from  their  cabins  in  the  mountains
to  the  pillared  halls  of  the  Quirinal  or  the  Carinse,  the  chil-
dren of  the  Apennines  were  sure  to  lose,  at  least  in  the  second
generation,  the  rough  coating  of  antique  manners  which  pre-
served their  moral  strength  and  hardihood,  and  to  adopt  the
vices  of  patrician  luxury,  together  with  its  lustre  and  refine-
ment. No  wonder  that,  bred  in  the  atmosphere  of  a  court,
the  sons  of  the  yeoman  of  Reate  should  quickly  cast  aside
the  conventional  restraints  of  their  homely  childhood.  In  an
earlier  and  manlier  age  the  transformation  would  have  been
no  unmixed  evil.  Civilization  ripens  the  growing  fruit,
though  it  corrupts  the  fallen  and  over  mellow.  The  sweets
of  polished  life  worked  like  poison  in  the  veins  of  the  plebe-
ian of  Rome's  silver  age,  substituting  feebleness  for  grace,
pliancy  for  urbanity,  vicious  propensities  for  elegant  tastes.
The  deterioration  was  more  marked  in  the  •younger  of  the
two  brothers,  inasmuch  as  he  was  tried  and  tempted  at  an
earlier  age ;  and  accordingly,  while  the  weakness  of  'Htaa
appeared  in  occasional  or  partial  defects,  that  of  Domitian
was  found  to  pervade  and  leaven  his  whole  character.  The
younger  Flavins  fell  at  once  into  that  moral  decrepitude  to
which  the  Roman  people  had  been  descending  through  many
generations.  With  some  kmdly,  and  even  generous  emo-
tions, not  Avholly  devoid  of  refined  tastes,  and  of  a  sound  in-
telligence, he  lacked  the  tenacity  of  fibre  which  strung  the
old  Roman  and  Sabine  fabric,  and  displayed  no  firm  deter-
mination, no  vigour  and  persistence  in  his  designs.  The
nerves  of  the  Roman  people  were  relaxed  by  ages  of  indulg-
ence ;  by  sensual  luxuries ;  by  moral  turpitudes ;  by  long

100  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

loss  of  self-respect ;  and  they  were  now  generally  unequal  to
any  sustained  exertion ;  unable  even  to  keep  long  in  view
any  arduous  and  noble  object.  The  contradictions  which
appear  in  the  career  of  the  prince  before  us  are  the  same  we
observe  in  the  people  generally.  Such  were  his  desire  for
military  distinction  combined  with  caprice  and  timidity  in
the  pursuit  of  it ;  his  literary  tastes  and  leanings,  associated
with  jealous  impatience  of  the  free  exercise  of  letters ;  his
Softness  and  effeminacy  of  disposition,  issuing  in  jealous  cru-
elty; his  love  of  law  and  discipline,  distorted  by  wanton
freaks  of  tyranny;  his  mixture  of  gloomy  austerity  with
childish  horse-play.'  From  this  conspicuous  example  we
may  learn  how  unfit  were  the  people  whom  he  represented
for  the  forms  of  self-government ;  how  impossible  self-gov-
ernment must  always  be  to  a  nation  which  has  corrupted  it-
self by  oppressive  violence,  by  licentious  dissipation,  and  by
a  tame  renunciation  of  the  rights  and  duties  of  political  life.

There  is  none  of  the  Caesars,  except  perhaps  Caius,  against
whom  the  evidence  of  history  is  so  uniform  and  consistent  as
The  evMeiico  *^®  younger  Flavins.  There  may  have  been  a  con-
S^tun  ^nTfopin  spiracy  out  of  court;  the  witnesses  may  have
and  consistent.  y^QQn  tampered  with  by  senatorial  agency.  No
doubt  it  is  the  duty  of  the  judge  to  lean  against  the  weiglit
of  testimony  so  suspiciously  hannonious.  But  as  long  as  ho
can  detect  no  flaw  in  tlie  chain  of  circumstance,  he  must
leave  the  case,  with  only  an  admonitory  caution,  to  the  de-
cision of  the  jury  rejiresented  by  the  judgment  and  conscience
of  succeeding  generations.  I  would  content  myself  with
recommending  all  the  consideration  that  can  be  fairly  allowed

'  Dion  describes  him  at  the  same  time  bold  and  passionate,  crafly  and  dis-
sembling :  iroXXd  /xiv  wf  aiajTrrbq  6^iu{  i/iniirTuv  rialv  i?.vfialveTo,  noXXd.  6i
Koi  Ik  napaoKehit  iKOKobpyei,  Ixvii.  1.  Tlic  tyrant  allowed  the  tyranta  his  pre-
decessors to  be  freely  lashed.  Thus  Stutius  siiys  of  Caligula  :  "  nee  proximus
haeres  Immltis  quanquam,  ct  furiis  agitutuH,  abegit."  Si/lv.  iii.  3.  70. ;  of  Nero
still  more  pointedly :  "  pallidumque  visa  nmtris  liunpadc  roHpicit  Noronem,"
aylv.  ii.  7.  IIH.  The  Genethliaeon  Lucani  m  a  coutinuud  protest  in  favour  of
the  victim  of  Nero's  cruelty. Comp.  also,  Si/lv.  v.  2.  83.

A.U.  8M.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  101

for  the  frightful  temptations  of  the  position.  The  abilities
of  Domitian  seem  to  nie  to  have  been  of  a  higher  order  than
they  are  generally  represented.  The  fulsome  eulogies  of
some  of  his  flatterers  have  perhaps  injured  the  reputation  of
the  man  who  was  at  least  weak  enough  to  tolerate  them.
When  we  east  an  eye  on  the  complex  system  of  administra-
tion which  embraced  the  vast  extent  of  the  empire,  and  trace
all  its  leading  threads  to  the  imperial  cabinet  on  tlie  Pala-
tine, and  to  the  hand  of  the  eager,  impulsive,  and  luxurious
child  of  fortune  there  installed,  we  must  admit  that  the  fact
of  such  a  machine  being  so  firmly  guided  for  so  many  years
is  itself  an  answer  to  much  of  the  ribald  scandal  which  con-
nects his  name  with  the  extreme  of  frivolity  and  licentious-
ness. The  defects  of  Domitian  as  a  governor  were  those  of
eccentricity  rather  than  feebleness,  his  ideas  were  crude  and
ill-conceived,  misapplications  of  accredited  theories,  political
anachronisms;  in  short,  the  errors  of  imperfect  education
struggling  in  its  meshes,  casting  about  here  and  there  for
advisers,  but  rejecting  the  control  of  favourites.  It  was  ob-
served of  Domitian  by  a  competent  critic  that  he  was  well
served  by  his  ministers ;  *  and  the  course  of  our  history  will
show  conclusively  that  of  all  the  Caesars  he  held  himself  most
free  from  their  control  and  dictation  ;  two  facts  which  speak
with  equal  force  for  the  good  sense  and  natural  ability  of  a
despot.

The  reign  of  Domitian  was  an  epoch  of  administrative
reaction,  such  as  repeatedly  occurred  in  the  history  both  of
the  Republic  and  the  Empire,  when  an  attempt  ^^
was  made,  or  at  least  affected,  to  recall  society  nig*  •»  «poek
to  ancient  principles  and  ideas.  There  is  some-
thing striking  in  these  repeated  struggles  of  the  state  con-
science, something  even  afl*ecting  in  the  anxiety  evinced  by
so  many  of  the  emperors,  by  some  who  were  personally
among  the  most  selfish  and  vicious  of  them,  for  the  amend-

'  Lamprid.  in  Alex.  Sever.  65. The  paseage  is  evidently  corrupt,  but  the
remark  seems  to  be  attributed  to  Trajan.

102  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

ment  of  public  morals,  and  the  restoration  of  a  golden  age
of  virtuous  simplicity.  It  was  the  general  tendency  of  Pa-
ganism to  look  backward  rather  than  forward ;  and  the  em-
perors, as  protectors  and  patrons  of  the  religious  sentiment
among  their  people,  which  had  no  hope  for  the  future,  in-
stinctively directed  its  regretful  yearnings  towards  the  past.
Doraitian  was,  moreover,  a  disciplinarian  by  birth  and
breeding.  The  early  household  training  of  the  Roman  citi-
Domition  af-  ^len  Still  made  itself  felt  in  liis  temper  and  bear-
tionoi^maw^^  ^^»5  howcvcr  Surprising  might  be  the  revolution
"*^^  in  the  circumstances  of  his  family. The  antique

severity  of  Sabellia  had  been  celebrated  from  primitive
times :  Vespasian  had  retained  on  the  throne  of  the  world
the  homely  manners  of  his  rude  stock.  The  sons,  especially
the  younger,  while  they  cast  off  the  manners,  retained  in  no
slight  degree  the  traditions  and  prejudices  of  their  fathers.
Domitian  was  not  deterred  by  any  sense  of  his  own  vices
from  the  attempt  to  reform  the  morals  of  his  countrymen.
He  had  forfeited  none  of  the  Sabine  faith  in  temperance  and
chastity,  by  his  personal  indulgence  in  the  grossest  excesses.
Less  subtle  than  Augustus,  less  an  imitator  than  Claudius,
his  projects  of  revival  sprang  with  more  genuine  impulse
from  his  own  heart,  than  those  of  either  of  his  predecessors.
He  had  no  need  of  the  sanctimonious  pretensions  which  cast
on  Augustus  the  taint,  or  at  least  the  suspicion  of  hypocrisy.
The  empire  whicli  the  first  princeps  founded  on  a  moral  sen-
timent was  now  firmly  fixed,  and  the  citizens  had  learnt  to
acquiesce  in  the  decay  of  manners  as  the  law  of  their  destiny.
Domitian's  attempts  at  reform  were  unquestionably  sincere  ;
he  had  no  political  interest  to  serve  by  alarming  the  national
conscience ;  but  his  measures  sprang  from  a  morbid  taste  for
potty  di8ci]>linc.  Nor  was  his  rigid  religionism  the  bastard
product  of  a  seared  heart  and  a  troubled  conscience ;  it  was
not  the  despairing  effort  of  the  startled  sinner  to  slake  the
furies  of  remorse  by  a  bloody  propitiation. It

poritroftbo was  rather  a  mixture  of  vanity  and  fanaticism
VMtel  Yuytni.

engendered  by  the  i)rophecie8  and  portents  which

A.  U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  108

had  heralded  the  elevation  of  his  house,  and  by  the  fortune
which  had  saved  him  in  the  crisis  of  a  godless  anarchy,  and
made  him  the  instrument  for  restoring  the  patrons  of  Rome
to  their  august  abodes.  Scarcely  was  Domitian  seated  on
his  throne  when  he  began  to  hold  his  inquest  as  chief  pontiff
on  the  iiregularities  imputed  to  certain  of  the  Sacred  Virgins.
The  fire  on  the  altar  of  Vesta,  the  mysterious  patroness  of
the  commonwealth,  had  been  tended  from  the  earliest  ages
by  a  college  of  pure  maidens,  devoted  to  the  solemn  duty  by
the  noblest  parents,  honoured  with  every  mark  of  outward
deference,  bound  by  the  most  awful  sanctions  to  preserve
their  virtue  unsullied  till  advancing  years  should  release
them  from  their  honourable  servitude.  To  such  purity,  such
sanctity,  the  mere  idea  of  death  was  repugnant.  The  culprit
for  whom  they  interceded  must  be  pardoned ;  the  criminal
on  whom  they  barely  cast  their  eyes  on  his  way  to  the  scaf'
fold,  must  be  exempted  from  the  penalty  of  his  delinquen-
cies. But  on  the  other  hand  the  punishment  of  guilt  in  one
so  honoured  must  be  signal ;  the  sinner  must  be  cut  off  from
the  laud  of  the  living,  and  hidden  away  from  the  sight  of  her
fellow-creatures.  The  blood  of  the  Manton  vestal  was  not  to
be  shed  by  man ;  the  sword  of  earthly  justice  must  not  fall
upon  her ;  a  higher  tribunal  demanded  a  more  solemn  and
appalling  sentence.  No  corpse  could  be  buried  in  the  city ;
but  in  placing  the  Vestal's  tomb  at  a  spot  within  the  walls
the  Romans  seemed  to  violate  no  legal  principle,  for  she  de-
scended alive  into  the  earth.^  The  horrid  rite  was  said  to
have  been  originally  sanctioned  by  Numa,  and  tradition  told
of  its  having  been  more  than  once  enacted  in  the  first  and
brightest  ages  of  the  republic.  But  though  amidst  the  relax-
ation of  later  manners,  the  sacred  ministers  of  the  pure  god-
dess were  less  than  ever  exempt  from  infirmity,  the  sacrifice
had  been  rarely  repeated,  and  for  more  than  two  centuries
wholly  disused.* It  was  generally  under  the  pressure  of  a

'  The  ritualists  explained  this  mode  of  execution  as  an  offering  to  Vesta,

who  was  identified  with  Tellus,  the  goddess  of  the  earth. Ovid.  FaM.  iv.  459.

*  The  case  of  Opimia  occurred  a.  r.  273 ;  that  of  Urbinia  284. Dion.  HaL

104  HISTORr  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

public  calamity,  such  as  a  pestilence,  or  the  occurrence  of
evil  omens,  that  the  priests  had  calmed  or  attempted  to  calm
the  terror  of  the  citizens  by  decreeing  this  fearful  expiation ;
and  a  victim  sought  with  such  a  purpose  was  sure  to  be
found.  Had  Nero  been  a  religious  reformer  he  would  doubt-
less have  required  the  sacrifice  of  a  Vestal  after  the  burning
of  the  city.  Fortunately  that  monster  of  cruelty  was  not
superstitious.  But  Rome  had  now  a  tyrant  who  was  cruel
and  superstitious  also.  And  with  his  superstition  was  min-
gled perhaps  some  feeling  of  spite  towards  his  father  and
brother,  with  whom  he  always  maintained  a  tacit  rivalry.
He  complained  that  his  predecessors  had  relaxed  from  the
old  prescriptions  of  religion,  and  had  neglected  the  due  pro-
pitiation of  the  national  divinities.  The  burning  of  the  Cap-
tol,  twice  repeated,  had  demanded  a  signal  expiation,  and
inqnisitton  Into  ^*^  such  expiation  had  been  made.  Domitian  in-
the\r  character,  quired  into  the  conduct  of  the  Sacred  Virgins ;
the  inquisition  was  carried  back  to  past  years ;  two  members
of  the  college  were  denounced,  examined,  and  convicted;
but  the  temper  of  the  age  was  supposed  to  be  averse  from
the  literal  execution  of  the  frightful  penalty,  and,  instead  of
being  buried  alive,  the  culprits  were  allowed  to  kill  them-
selves. Their  paramours,  who  might  liave  been  scourged  to
death  in  the  comitium,  were  graciously  permitted  to  retire
into  banishment.'  Domitian  had  been  personally  intent  on
a  prosecution  from  which  he  expected  great  glory  to  redound
on  his  administration ;  thus  far  public  opinion  was  undoubt-
edly with  him,  and  encouraged  him  to  proceed  in  his  inves-
tigations.'  A  third  victim,  named  Cornelia,  was  soon  brought

AtU.  Rom.  riii.  89.,  ix.  40.  Liry  mentions  the  sentence  against  Floronia  in
686,  whicb  she  seems  to  have  escaped  by  flight,  xxii.  67. :  and  a  still  later  in-
stance is  recorded  by  Dion  in  CIO. See  Reiniar  on  Dion,  Ixvii.  S.

•  Suet.  Donut,  8.  It  is  with  reference  to  these  cases  apparently  that  Do-
mitian boasted,  according  to  Dion,  of  his  clemency  in  not  exacting  the  full
penalty  of  the  law.  Dion,  Ivii.  8. :  ifyd^^ro  6r*  rdf  aeinapdhovc  (if  i/vSpufit"
vof  ov  nariipv^ev,  dXAd  AAAcjc  inroOviiaiaiv  iufkevae.

*  Even  ApoUonius  tlio  philosopcr,  in  the  biography  of  Pbilostratus,  seema

A.U.  884.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  105

before  hira,  whose  fate  is  recorded  in  a  letter  corneiu  boriad
of  the  younger  Pliny,  in  which  the  dreadful  de-  ■**'••
tails  of  these  barbarities  are  vividly  related.*  -^n-W-
Domitian,  advancing  from  horror  to  horror,  now  determined
to  exact  the  penalty  in  all  its  atrocity.  The  culprit  was  con-
demned and  duly  entombed  alive,  with  a  crust  and  a  flask
of  water,  in  a  vault  prepared  for  her.  The  narrator  is  moved
indeed  to  pity  in  his  account  of  the  poor  creature's  protesta-
tions of  innocence ;  yet  even  he  feels  more  keenly  the  arro-
gance of  the  chief  pontiff  in  summoning  his  priests  to  his  im-
perial villa  at  Alba,  instead  of  the  official  mansion  in  the
forum,  than  the  abominable  cruelty  of  the  sentence  itself
The  alleged  partner  of  the  crime,  a  Koman  knight,  WM
scourged  to  death,  protesting  his  innocence  also ;  a  praetorian,
named  Licinianus,  who  was  suspected  of  criminality  with
her,  but  against  whom  proof  seemed  to  fail,  was  induced  to
make  a  confession,  upon  which  his  escape  from  the  city  was
connived  at.  Domitian  feared  that  he  had  shown  too  great
eagerness  to  convict ;  and  on  the  culprit's  avowal  exclaimed
with  evident  satisfaction,  that  he  was  now  himself  acquitted.
Licinianus  was  allowed  to  remain  in  banishment,  and  some
portion  of  his  property  was  reserved  from  confiscation.  Such
however  was  the  sympathy  of  the  people  with  these  propi-
tiatory sacrifices,  that  even  after  Domitian's  fall,  the  virtu-
ous Nerva,  his  successor,  did  not  think  proper  to  recall  the
exile.*

The  zeal  of  Domitian  in  this  matter  v>'as  actuated  not  by
a  moral,  but  by  a  religious  feeling. lie  was  concerned  for

to  approve  of  the  emperor's  piooa  severity,  vu.  6. :  koI  /i/)v  Koi  X&yov  a^umfti-
vov  uc 7\.afnTpav KaOapaiv  elti  Ao/ieTiavdf  neirotiifievoc  r^f  Vuftaiuv

'EoTt'ac el  yap  xal  cv,  l^t/^  icadapdehic,  "HXUy  riiv  adixuv  f&iHJV

uv  naaa  i)  biKovftivri  fiEarr)  vvv.

•  Plin.  £p.  iv.  11.  Eusebius  gives  the  date  a.  d.  91.,  but  in  Ckron.  Fcueh.
the  event  stands  two  years  earlier. Clinton,  Fast.  Bom.  in  ann.  91.

'  Plin.  1.  c. :  "  exilium  molle  velut  pnemium  dedit  £x  quo  tamen  postea
-dementia  divi  Nervae  translatus  est  in  Siciliam,  ttbi  nunc  profiteiur"  He  sup.
ported  himself  by  teaching  rhetoric.

106  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81

_  the  maintenance  of  an  ancient  cult,  not  for  the

Domitian  en-  .  «  t i •

forces  the  laws preservation  of  personal  chastity. The  purity

ofadulterj'.  „ ,  ,  ,  ,  ,  t ,

oi  the  vestals  was  dear  to  the  gods,  and  the  sov-
ereign pleasure  of  the  gods  must  be  shielded  from  outrage
by  human  disobedience.  But  next  to  the  purity  of  the  Sa-
cred Virgins,  the  gods  fixed  the  seal  of  their  approval  on  the
purity  of  married  life,  when  it  had  once  been  consecrated  by
the  sanctions  of  certain  specific  ceremonies.  The  sole  object
of  the  laws  against  adultery,  prescribed  by  Augustus,  and
enforced  from  time  to  time  by  his  successors,  was  to  con-
ciliate the  divine  patrons  of  the  married  state,  and  we  must
not  confound  the  imperial  legislation  on  this  subject  with
the  attempts  of  later  rulers,  under  the  influence  of  Chris-
tian ideas,  to  repress  sins  of  incontinency  and  elevate  the
morals  of  society.  Amidst  the  degradation  of  manners  at
this  period,  the  citizens  themselves  seem  to  have  been  but
imperfectly  aware  of  their  master's  real  aim.  The  old  re-
ligious ideas  were  dissolving,  and  some  vague  moral  instincts
rising,  at  the  same  time,  into  greater  prominence  among
them,  while  their  ruler  was  personally  actuated  only  by  the
desire  of  reviving  the  old  ideas,  and  was  utterly  incapable
of  sympathy  with  the  new.  Tlie  sins  of  Domitian,  freely
cited  against  him  in  pasquinade  and  innuendo,  were  gross
moral  delinquencies ; '  but  he  was  a  blameless  worshipper  of
the  divinities  of  the  Capitol.  He  might  live  in  incestuous
intercourse  with  his  own  brother's  daughter  after  her  widow-
hood ;  but  he  had  stiffly  declined  to  marry  her  as  a  virgin,
and  contract  a  union  which,  though  sanctioned  by  a  recent
enactment,  Avas  fundamentally  opposed  to  the  principles  of
the  state  religion.  "When  he  upheld  and  enforced  the  law
of  adultery,  the  satirist  might  assert  that  such  new-fangled
strict ness  was  enough  to  terrify  the  licentious  deities  of
Olympus ;  Init  Mars  and  Venus  were  not  transgressors  of
the  Julian  law,  and  Vulcan  had  not  taken  his  celestial  spouse

'  Pliny,  1.  c.  Bcoflli  at  the  zeal  for  purity  of  a  judge,  vho  was  said  to  live  in
Incoat  with  hla  own  niece :  "  cum  ipnc  fratris  filiain  inccsto  ....  polluii^sct."
Comp.  Paneffi/r.  62.  63.

A.  U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  107

■with  the  holy  rites  of  confarreation.'  Even  Domitian's  felse
principles  were  better  than  none  at  all.  The  dawn  of  better
things,  however,  was  beginning  to  break,  and  the  heathens
were  feeling  their  way  with  doubt  and  hesitation  towards  it.
The  twelfth  of  the  Cajsars  was  the  last  of  the  reactionary
emperors  ;  from  hencefortli  their  attempts  at  moral  reforma-
tion began  to  look  forward  instead  of  backward  ;  they
made  their  appeal  to  the  moral  sense  of  man,  in  its  gradual
development,  not  to  the  effete  traditions  of  an  antique  the-
ology. The  enforcement  of  the  Julian  law  produced  the
punishment  of  some  culprits  of  distinction ;  the  crime  of
defamation  was  prosecuted  with  renewed  severity  against
both  men  and  women  of  the  highest  rank  ;  the  revival  of  the
Scantinian  enactments  against  a  disgusting  form
of  vice,  which  the  law,  much  to  its  honour,  had  of  the  s«*nu-
branded  from  ancient  times,  may  have  excited
still  further  surprise  and  indignation.*  It  is  true  that  in  the
later  years  of  the  republic  the  penalty  of  death  was  com-
muted in  these  cases  to  a  fine  of  only  a  thousand  sesterces,
and  the  crime  itself  M'as  limited  to  acts  of  incontinency  be-
tween Roman  citizens.  Here  too,  it  was  not  the  moral  tur-
pitude that  the  law  regarded,  but  solely  the  violation  of  a
political  enactment.  No  delinquency  was  imputed  to  the
stranger,  no  protection  was  thrown  over  the  slave.  The  ex-
cesses of  Domitian  himself,  which  he  allowed  his  court  poets
to  deck  with  their  choicest  verses,  were  no  violation  of  the
principle  M'hich  he  now  recalled  into  operation.'  The  subject
is  one  on  which  it  is  impossible  to  dwell ;  but  a  passing  allu-
sion may  suffice  to  explain  the  apparent  confusion  of  prudery
and  licentiousness  which  reigned  in  the  minds  of  the  Roman

*  Juvenal,  ii.  29.

"  Qualis  erat  buper  tragico  pollutus  adulter
Concubitu,  qui  turn  leges  revocabat  amaras
Omnibus,  atque  ipsis  Yeneri  Martique  timendas."

*  Suet.  Domit.  8. ;  Dion,  kvii.  12.

*  Statius,  Si/lv.  iii.  4.

108  HISTORY  OF  THE  KOMANS  [A.D.  81.

legislators. In  one  direction  indeed,  and  one

And  of  laws  °  .  .

against  mutiia-  Only,  Domitian  seems  to  have  deviated  from  his
tlon.  •''  .  . .  ,

usual  recurrence  to  ancient  prescriptions,  and  to

have  acted  on  the  motion  of  a  more  enlightened  moral  con-
science.* No  Roman  legislator  before  him  had  forbidden
the  detestable  practice  of  human  mutilation.  This  iniquity
had  been  from  early  times  the  opprobrium  of  the  East ;  and
so  much  had  men's  feelings  been  blunted  to  the  degradation
it  inflicted,  that  eunuchs  had  been  allowed  to  sit  upon  the
throne  of  Persia.*  So  abhorrent  however  had  it  been  to  the
manlier  sentiment  of  the  "West,  that  amid  all  the  abominations
to  which  the  Romans  had  debased  themselves,  here  at  least
they  had  maintained  the  rights  of  nature  and  humanity  long
after  the  more  effeminate  Greeks  had  cast  off  the  last  re-
straints of  self-respect.  The  custom  of  buying  young  slaves
thus  foully  treated  had  been  introduced  into  the  palace  from
the  example  of  the  Asiatic  courts,  probably  by  Caius,  the  first
imperial  imitator  of  Oriental  depravities  ;  but  Claudius,  with
his  habitual  recurrence  to  national  usage,  had  perhaps  resist-
ed it,  and  had  brought  some  impertinent  remarks  on  himself
by  his  regard  for  decorum  if  not  for  principle.  Under  Nero
the  fashion  had  again  flourished,  and  spread  from  the  palace
to  the  mansions  of  the  nobility. Seneca  declaims  with  petu-

'  The  insinuation  that  Domitian  had  no  other  motive  than  to  cast  a  reflec-
tion on  his  predecessor  seems  unreasonable.  Dion,  Ixvii.  2.  The  emperor's
contemporaries  may  be  suspected  of  flattery,  as  Martial,  vi.  2.,  and  elsewhere,
and  Statius,  Si/lv.  iv,  3.  13. ;  but  Ammianus  Marccllinus  expresses  the  deliber-
ate judgment  of  a  much  later  age:  "juvat  veterem  laudare  Domitianum,  qui
reoeptisaima  inclaruit  lege,  qua  miuaciter  intcrdixcrat  no  intra  temiinos  juris-
dictionia  Romansc  castniret  quiaquam  puerum,"  xviii.  4.

'  Plin.  JiitL  Nat.  xiii.  9.  Comp.  the  story  of  Bagoas,  Diod.  Sic.  xvii.  8.
Ammianus  Marccllinus,  xiv.  6.,  attributes  the  invention  to  Semiramis.  Comp.
Claudian,  in  Eutrop.  I.  889.  Pcriander  of  Corinth  was  tlie  first  to  introduce  it
into  Oreece,  Herod,  iii.  40.  And  it  was  from  Greece,  or  the  Greek  monarchies
in  Asia,  that  tho  Romans  no  dou))t  a<Ioi)ted  it,  though  they  were  pleased  to
impute  this  corruption  of  their  manners  to  their  intercourse  with  Farthia.
Claudian,  in  Euirop.  i.  4 1 R. :  "  Arsacio  postquatu  so  rcgia  fastu  Sustulit,  et
nottros  corruplt  Partiiia  mores."

i

A.U.  884.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  109

lance  rather  than  indignation  against  it ;  Pliny,  with  more
dignity,  is  silent  upon  the  odious  subject.*  In  the  writings  of
Martial,  Statins,  and  Juvenal,  it  becomes  obtrusively  promi-
nent. Domitian  himself  had  his  miserable  favourites,  and  the
custom  he  pretended  to  denounce  was  never  abandoned  in
the  high  places  of  the  empire  till  it  was  agam  forbidden  by
Christian  legislators.'

This  edict  was  intended  to  curb  the  shameless  luxury  of
the  great,  and  restore  the  modest  dignity  of  ancient  manners
among  the  senators  and  nobles.  In  order  to  „
brace  the  morals  of  the  lower  ranks,  our  reformer  nUaai  tb«
revived  the  laws  of  his  predecessors  against  the
instruments  of  more  vulgar  pleasures,  the  singers  and  dancero
of  the  theatres,  whose  contentions  or  rather  the  contentions  of
whose  patrons  and  partisans,  had  troubled  the  police  of  the  city
for  many  generations.  Augustus  had  issued  proclamations  to
control  these  noxious  artists,  and  Tiberius  had  banished  them
from  Rome.  They  were  denounced  to  the  guardian  of  public
virtue,  not  untruly,  as  corrupters  of  the  women  as  well  as  viola-
tors of  the  peace  of  the  city.  But  these  attempts  had  signally
failed.  Under  Nero  the  factions  of  the  theatre  and  the  circus
had  filled  the  streets  with  tumult  and  bloodshed.  The  mimes
found  no  doubt  a  protector  in  the  prince  of  mimes,  but  in
fact  the  passion  of  the  populace  for  these  performances  had
always  defeated  the  legislation  of  the  reformers.  Vespasian
seems  to  have  desisted  from  what  he  deemed  a  futile  proscrip-
tion. It  was  not  till  Domitian's  accession  to  power  that  an-
other serious  ettbrt  was  made  to  impose  a  check  on  these
disorders.  The  measures  of  this  prince  were  moderate,  and
perhaps  the  circumstances  of  the  times  favoured  his  inter-
ference. The  increasing  extent  and  frequency  of  the  shows
in  the  amphitheatres,  the  introduction  of  new  and  grosser

'  Senec.  Spuit.  96.  24. ;  Be  Brev.  VU.  12.  4.

*  The  edict  of  Domitian  was  repeated  in  later  times,  showing  that  the  prac-
tice was  not  eradicated.  See  the  Digest.  xlviiL  8.  384.  Comp.  also  Jiutin
Martyr,  Apol.  i.  29.  The  legislation  of  the  Christian  emperors  on  the  subject
is  reviewed  by  Wallon,  Ui^.  de  VEsdavage^  dr.,  Pt  iil  ch.  x.

110  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

forms  of  public  amusement,  may  have  weaned  the  populace
from  the  more  refined  diversions  of  dancing  and  singing.  To
the  smaller  class  who  still  retained  a  taste  for  art  and  elegance,
the  emperor  allowed  the  gratification  of  witnessing  the  ballet
in  their  private  houses,  and  he  was  satisfied  with  merely  for-
bidding such  performances  in  public*  From  this  time  the
regulations  against  the  mimes  were  alternately  enforced  and
suspended ;  but  no  such  scandal  seems  again  to  have  arisen
from  them  as  in  the  first  century  of  the  empire.  Domitian
had  also  his  personal  favourites  among  this  profession,  and
allowed  them  easy  access  to  his  person.  Such  was  Latinus,
who  boasted  that  his  manners  were  untainted  by  the  disso-
luteness common  to  his  associates,  and  that  he  was  a  player
only  upon  the  stage."  Such  too  was  Paris,  a  man  of  greater
note,  the  Roscius  of  the  empire,  who  seems  to  have  justified
the  imputation  cast  on  his  profession  of  corrupting  female
morals,  if  the  story  be  true  that  he  was  the  notorious  para-
mour of  Domitio,  and  was  at  last  waylaid  and  assassinated
in  the  streets,  on  that  account,  by  the  emperor's  orders.
Domitian  hardly  refrained,  in  the  first  access  of  passion,  from
inflicting  death  upon  his  consort  also.  As  a  noble  Roman  he
could  not  do  less  than  solemnly  divorce  her;  but  he  did  not
long  endure  the  separation,  and  presently  recalled  her  to  the
palace  pretending  that  the  people  required  it.* His  rage,

*  Suet  Domil.  7. :  "  intcrdixit  histrionibus  scenam,  intra  domum  quidera
cxcrcendi  artcm  jure  concesso."  On  the  other  hand,  he  added  two  factions,  the
golden  and  the  purple,  to  the  four  already  established  in  the  circus.  Suet.  1.  c. ;
Dion,  Ixvii.  4.

*  Suet.  DonuL  16. :  Martial,  1.  5.,  ix.  29.,  who  makes  him  say  of  himself:

"  Hola  scenicus  arte  feror :
Neo  potcrom  gratus  domino  sine  moribus  esse."
Latinufl,  however,  had  other  recommendations  to  imperial  favour,  if,  as  is  con-
jectured, he  was  the  tk-hitor  of  Juvenal,  i.  S5.,  vi.  44.

*  Dion,  Ixvii.  3. ;  Suet  Ihmit.  .'t.  Dion  mentions  the  divorce  under  the
year  83  (the  0th  connulship  of  Domitian),  and  the  date  of  so  solemn  an  aut
most  have  been  well  known.  Dut  this  was  at  least  ten  years  from  the  mitr*
rUge,  and  Domitian  was  supposed  to  have  ))ecn  long  carrying  on  his  intviv
OOune  with  Julia,  wiiicii  he  continued  after  receiving  his  wife  buck.

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  HI

however,  against  the  seducer  was  not  appeased  even  by  the
death  of  the  victim.  He  seized  and  chastised  the  unfortunate
player's  admirers,  when  they  assembled  on  the  spot  where  he
had  fallen,  and  strewed  it  with  flowers.  Some  indeed  ascribe
the  edict  against  the  mimes  to  this  personal  mortification ;  but
we  must  guard  ourselves  against  the  proneness  of  our  authori-
ties to  find  a  special  motive  for  every  occurrence  of  the  times.
The  prohibition  was  more  probably  part  of  the  settled  policy
already  noticed.  Thus  when  a  qua?storian  senator  ventured
to  appear  on  the  stage,  an  irregularity  against  which  Augui»-
tus,  as  we  have  seen,  had  so  earnestly  contended,  Domitian
revived  the  precedent  of  the  first  imperial  reformer,  and  ex-
pelled the  ofiender  from  the  illustrious  order.'

The  same  jealousy  with  which  the  government  had  bo
long  regarded  the  licentiousness  of  the  stage,  had  been  extend-
ed even  from  an  earlier  i)eriod,  to  the  Chaldieans
and  astrologers,  the  men  oi  occult  science,  who theMt«ao«ei«
agitated  society  with  visions  and  predictions,  and fh»n.
tilled  with  nefarious  intrigues  the  families  of  the a.  d.  m.
citizens. Every  interdict  on  players  and  dancers
was  accompained  with  a  proclamation  against  the  mathe-
matici. Vespasian's  practical  good  sense  had  tolerated  this
class  also ;  for  the  evil,  if  repressed  in  one  shape,  was  sure,
as  he  knew,  to  spring  up  in  another. The  diviners  indeed
deserved  some  favour  from  the  adventurer  whom  their  breath
had  seemed  to  waft  to  fortune. But  Domitian,  the  third  of
his  dynasty,  might  fear  every  portent  of  change,  which  to
him  could  only  be  a  change  from  good  to  evil. In  common
with  all  the  princes  who  succeeded  to  an-  hereditary  throne,
he  was  induced  to  regard  the  prophets  as  his  natural  ene-
mies.* It  is  impossible  to  say  to  what  extent  the  astrologers

'  Suet  Dotnil.  8. :  "  qusstorium  virum,  quod  gesticulandi  salUndique  stu.
dio  teneretur,  movit  senatu."  Dion,  IxviL  13.,  adds  the  name  Cgecilius  Rufinus.
I  presume  that  the  culprit  exhibited  himself  in  public.

*  TertuUian  pertinently  asks :  "  cui  autem  opus  est  perecrutari  super  Cae-
saris  salute,  nisi  a  quo  aliquid  adrersus  ilium  c<^tatur  vel  optatur  ?  "  Apo-
hg,  35. Seuec.  Ludus  in  Morle  Claud,  c.  3. :  "  mathematicos,  qui  ilium,  ex

112  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  81

and  tlie  philosophers  were  now  connected  together :  Apollo-
nius  of  Tyana,  for  instance,  one  of  the  greatest  moral  teachers
of  the  time,  appears  to  us,  even  in  the  pages  of  his  own  biog-
rapher, as  a  diviner  and  a  thaumaturge ;  it  is  possible,  however,
that  his  character  in  this  respect  is  misrepresented  by  the  in-
judicious admiration  of  a  less  intelligent  age.  But  enough
intimacy  subsisted,  doubtless,  between  the  two  classes  to
excite  the  jealousy  of  the  government,  and  to  induce  Domi-
tian  to  renew  his  father's  decrees  against  the  professors  of
Grecian  wisdom.  It  does  not  appear  indeed  that  he  was
more  stringent  in  his  measures  than  his  predecessor.  Tlie
expelled  philosophers  assembled  without  molestation  in  the
Campanian  villas  of  their  noble  patrons,  and  even  under  the
walls  of  the  city.^  Probably  some  special  exceptions  were
made,  and  a  more  distant  banishment  required  in  the  case  of
the  more  turbulent  or  more  notoriously  disaflfected.  A  much
greater  outcry  was  raised  against  the  illiberality  of  Domitian
than  against  that  of  his  father ;  but  whether  this  was  OAving
to  the  greater  severity  of  his  measures,  or  the  detestation  in
which  he  was  generally  held,  may  be  still  a  question.'

quo  princeps  factus  est,  omnibus  annis,  omnibus  mensibus  efferunt."  Comp.
Dubois  de  Guchan,  Tacite  et  son  siMe,  i.  615.

*  Pliny,  Hpist.  iii.  11.,  speaks  of  visiting  one  of  the  banished  philosophers
"  in  Suburbano."  "  Equidem  cum  esscnt  philosophi  ab  urbe  submoti,  fui  apud
ilium  in  Suburbano,  ct  quo  notabilius  hoc  periculosiusque  esset,  fui  Prsetor."
In  the  life  of  Apollonius,  vii.  11.,  Demetrius,  Apollonius,  and  others  are  repre-
sented as  discoursing,  during  this  period,  in  Cicero's  Cuma;an  villa :  "  Happy
insects,"  exclaimed  one  of  them,  on  hearing  the  grasshoppers  chirping,  "  that
can  sing  your  old  song,  free  from  the  jealousy  of  tyrants,  from  sensual  pas-
sions, from  envy,"  &c.  Yet  only  a  few  pages  before,  (c.  4.)  the  biographer
bud  represented  many  at  least  of  the  class  as  flying  to  Gaul,  Africa  and  the
deserts  of  Scythia  for  safety.

•  The  forcibU-feeble  satire  of  Sulpicia  supplies  a  fair  measure  of  the  im-
portance to  be  attached  to  this  act  of  the  government,  which  seems  to  have
been  much  exaggerated ;  as,  for  instance,  in  that  gush  of  laboured  rhetoric :

"  Die  mlhl  Calliope,  quidnam  pater  illo  deorum
Cogitat  y  ail  terras  et  palria  su'ouia  mutat,
Quosque  dedit  quondam  morientibiis  en])it  artesf
Noequo  jubct  tacitos,  ct  jam  rationis  cgenos,

A.U.  884.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  113

To  give  an  antique  colour  to  these  proceedings,  and  re-
mind the  citizens  of  the  long-accredited  principles  on  which
they  were  founded,  Domitian  had  assumed  from  „
an  early  period  the  office  of  censor,  which  he  con-  wime*  th«  «<•-
tinued  to  hold,  contrary  to  all  precedent,  through-  laMitatM  re-
out  the  remainder  of  his  reign/  By  repeated
enactments  he  endeavoured  to  drill  his  subjects,  at  least  with-
in the  city,  to  the  maintenance  of  external  decorum ;  he  reg-
ulated their  dress,  their  behaviour,  their  places  in  the  thea-
tres ;  he  attempted  to  preserve,  amidst  tlie  mass  of  nations
and  habits  fermenting  around  him,  an  image  of  the  ancient
republic,  whicli  should  attract  the  eye  both  of  gods  and  men,
and  engage  the  favour  of  the  one  and  the  reverence  of  the
other.  Such  were  the  points  to  M'hich,  as  we  have  repeatedly
seen,  the  attention  of  all  the  imperial  reformers  was  directed,
and  Domitian  may  have  had  a  personal  motive  to  quicken
his  zeal  from  the  wish  to  connect  himself,  as  the  representa-
tive of  a  new  dynasty,  with  the  traditions  of  the  families
which  had  ruled  by  right  divine  before  him.  But,  often  as
we  have  noticed  the  recurrence  of  measures  for  the  regulation
of  manners,  we  seldwn  meet  with  an  instance  of  legal  inter-
ference with  economical  interests.  The  government  of  Do-
mitian, however,  is  distinguished  by  a  sumptuary  edict  of
this  character,  which  cannot  fail  to  attract  observation.  It
gives  us  a  glimpse,  at  least,  of  the  attitude  assumed  by  the
state  towards  industry,  whether  as  its  patron  or  its  oppressor.
We  have  discovered  already  more  than  one  symptom  of  the
decay  of  wealth  among  the  nobles  of  Rome. This  decay  was

Non  aliter  quam  eum  primo  surreximus  sevo,
Glandibus  et  purse  nirsua  prooumbere  IjiuphaB  ?  "

The  specific  cases  of  punishment  were  those  of  declaimers  or  ooogpirers
agiunst  the  government,  such  as  M^ternus;  Dion,  Ixvii.  12.  Two  edicts  were
ibsued  in  89  and  93,  94.  Euseb.  Chron.,  Tac.  A^.  2.,  Dion,  IxriL  13.;  and
the  last  seems  to  have  followed  on  the  suppression  of  the  Antonian  revolt,

'  Suet.  Domit.  8. ;  Dion,  Ixvii.  4. :  Tifir/rtj^  dia.  jiiov  irpirro^  aal  /xovo^  Koi
IdiuTuv  Kal  axTTOKpardpuv  txeipoTovr/6^. Comp.  Statins,  Sylv.  iv.  3.  13. ;  Ma>
tial,  vL  4. :  "  Censor  maxime,  principumque  princeps."
YOU  rii. — 8

114  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  fA.D.  81.

undoubtedly  in  continual  progress,  and  was  now  plainly  ap-
parent in  portions  even  of  Italy.  In  the  great  towns  and  the
more  favoured  districts  of  the  coast  or  inland,  it  was  disguis-
A  decline  of  ^^  ^7  ^  ^^^^  display  of  borrowcd  magnificence,
to^bl^l'^ived  *^6  outlay  of  rent  or  tribute  from  every  quarter
In  Italy.  ^f  ^jjg  globe ;  and  the  government  had  sought

anxiously  to  conceal  it,  by  attracting  the  wealthiest  of  its
subjects  to  the  neighbourhood  of  the  capital,  and  fixing  them
with  their  liberal  expenditure  in  the  centre  of  the  empire.
Meanwhile  the  operation  of  natural  laws  was  constantly
working  in  a  contrary  direction.  The  wasteful  and  expensive
processes  of  slave  labour  were  devouring  the  capital  of  the
proprietors,  not  in  Italy  only,  but  in  all  the  seats  of  the  old-
est civilization,  especially  in  Greece,  and  the  lesser  Asia.
This  decline  was  at  the  same  time  hastened  by  the  demands
of  the  government  on  certain  provinces,  such  as  Africa,  Spain,
Gaul  and  Britain,  Avhere  the  productiveness  of  the  soil  was
generally  developed  by  the  hands  of  free  coloni.  According-
ly, not  in  Italy  only,  but  in  Greece  and  Asia,  the  production
of  corn  had  materially  diminished,  and  fertile  land  had  been
withdrawn  from  the  plough ;  but  in  its  place  many  a  ridge
of  barren  hill-side  had  been  scarped  and  terraced  for  the
vineyard.  Wine,  the  produce  hitherto  of  some  limited  dis-
tricts of  the  empire,  was  becoming  more  and  more  the  com-
mon beverage  of  the  whole  population  in  every  province,  and
demanded  an  ever-increasing  area  for  its  production.  It
would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  great  change  whicli  had  thus
occurred  in  the  economical  circumstances  of  different  parts
of  the  Roman  world,  was  the  natural  result  of  their  amalga-
mation in  one  body  politic,  and  the  nearly  uniform  system
of  law  and  impost  that  prevailed  throughout  it.  We  may
conclude  that  the  complaints  we  have  heard  of  the  decay  of
agriculture  were  only  partially  true,  and  do  not  fairly  repre-
sent the  actual  state  of  the  whole  empire.

It  was  not  to  be  expected,  however,  that  the  statesmen  of
Rome  should  take  a  broad  and  scientific  view  of  interests  so

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  115

widely  extended,  and  so  complex  in  their  nature,  Edict  ri««pert-
and  we  need  not  wonder  at  the  confusion  into  Swiar  Se**'*"
which  they  fell,  in  seeking  a  remedy  for  evils  of  •'^'
which  they  saw  neither  the  causes  nor  the  compensations,
nor,  indeed,  are  our  accounts  sufficiently  intelligent  or  explicit,
to  enable  us  to  understand  the  real  action  of  the  government,
still  less  to  penetrate  its  motives.  A  strange  story  is  report-
ed, on  the  trifling  authority  of  Philostratus  in  his  lile  of
Apollonius,  that  Domitian  forbade  the  cultivation  of  the  vine
in  the  Ionian  provinces,  because,  forsooth,  wine  excited  the
people  to  tumults  and  seditions.'  He  commanded,  not  only
that  no  more  vines  should  be  planted,  but  that  the  existing
plantations  should  be  rooted  up.  The  lonians,  it  is  added,
sent  a  deputation  to  Rome  to  plead  for  the  industry  by  which
they  subsisted,  and  the  sophist  Scopelianus,  whom  they  em-
ployed to  argue  for  them,  was  so  successful  that  the  decree
was  rescinded,  and  penalties  denounced  against  those  who
should  neglect  the  cultivation  of  the  vine  in  future.  It  seems
more  likely  that  this  edict  was  part  of  a  general  measure,
such  as  that  indicated  by  Suetonius,  by  which  the  emperor,
alarmed  at  the  increasing  dearth  of  corn  and  cheapness  of
wine,  prohibited  the  withdrawal  of  arable  land  from  the
plougli  in  Italy,  and  restricted  the  cultivation  of  the  vine
throughout  the  provinces  to  one  half  at  most  of  the  extent  to
which  it  had  been  developed.*  If  such  an  arbitrary  regula-
tion was  ever  seriously  meant  to  be  enforced,  it  is  plain  that
it  could  not  have  been  really  executed,  nor  could  the  emperor
himself  be  long  deceived  by  the  erroneous  principles  on  which
it  was  founded. He  soon  desisted  from  the  attempt. The

'  Philostr.  Vit.  Apoll  vl  42. :  comp.  ViL  SophitL  L  12.  To  thia  edict  and
to  that  which  enforced  the  Julian  law,  the  temperate  philosopher  declared  him-
sclf  equally  indifferent :  fi6voc  yap  avdpujruv  ovr'  aldoiuv  diofuu  oin*  olvov.
Vespasian,  according  to  Philostratus,  had  deprived  the  Greek  cities  of  their
autonomy  on  account  of  their  turbulence.

*  Suet.  Domit.  1. :  "  ne  quis  in  Italia  novellaret,  atque  in  provinciis  vineta
exciderentur,  relicta,  ubi  plurimum,  dimidia  parte :  nee  eisequi  rem  perseye-
ravit."

llg  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

remembrance  of  it  was  chiefly  preserved  by  the  pungent  epi-
gram of  Evenus,  which  declared  that  extirpate  the  vine  as  he
might,  there  should  still  remain  wine  enough  to  pour  a  liba-
tion on  the  imperial  victim.'  The  culture  of  the  vine  contin-
ued however  to  depend  on  the  favour  of  the  government.
Thus  we  read  at  a  later  period,  of  the  emperor  Probus  grant-
ing such  an  indulgence  to  certain  of  the  northern  provinces.'
The  senate  long  before,  expressly  for  the  advantage  of  the
Italian  vine-growers,  but  possibly  with  the  further  object  of
stimulating  the  growth  of  corn  in  its  dependencies,  proscrib-
ed the  cultivation  of  the  vine  throughout  the  transalpine
regions.'

As  regarded  the  observance  of  religious  forms,  Domitian

seems  to  have  felt  it  imcumbent  on  him  to  folloAV  closely  in

the  steps  of  Augustus. Thus  he  repeated,  as  we

Domltlan'8  .  ^  «  ,  n i />

buildings  in  have  sccu,  after  a  lapse  ot  only  lorty-one  years,
the  celebration  of  the  secular  games  by  Claudius,
pleading  perhaps  that  more  than  a  century  had  elapsed  since
that  solemn  ceremony  had  been  performed  by  the  founder  of
the  empire.* He  enacted  with  dignity  the  part  of  censor  and

'  I  cannot,  with  Bome  critics,  cite  the  line  quoted  above,  "  Glandibus  et
puHB  rursus  procumbere  lymphae,"  as  a  reference  to  this  edict.  The  epigram
of  Evenus  is  a  well-known  parody  on  an  older  couplet :

k4v  fie  ^dyij/g  M  ^l^av,  bfiug  tri  napno^pfjau
baaov  lirurKEiaai  Kaiaapi  0vofih(^. Anthol.  i.  97.  Jacobs.

*  Eutrop.  ir.  17. :  "  vincas  Gallos  et  Pannonios  habere  pcrmislt."  Vopiscus
in  Prob.  18.:  "  Gallia  omnibus  et  Hispanis  et  Britannis  hie  permisit  ut  vites
habcrcnt,  vinumque  conficcrent."

*  Cicero,  de  lirpubl,  iii.  9, :  "  nos  vero  justissimi  homines,  qui  transalpinas
gcntcs  olcam  et  vitcm  scrcro  non  sinimus,  quo  pluris  sint  nostra  oUvctii,  nos-
trtequo  vincae." It  is  evident  that  this  interdict  did  not  long  continue  in  force.

*  Suot.  Domit.  4.:  Ccnsorin.  de  Die  Nat.  17.:  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  11.  The
SMoUr  games  of  Domitinn  are  referred  to  his  fourteenth  consulship,  i.  e.,
X.  V,  C.  841.  Eckhcl,  vl.  384. ;  Clinton,  sub.  ann.  On  this  occasion  Tacitus
officiated  as  one  of  tl>o  college  of  Quiiidecimvirs.  He  was  also  Pru>tor  ut  the
time.  "Domitianus  odidit  ludos  Bwcularcs,  iisquo  intentius  afl'ui  saccrdotio
quindccimvirall  prasditus  ac  turn  projtor."  Conip.  .Hint,  i,  1.  "  (lignitutcm  uos-
trara  a  Vcspaslano  inchoatam,  a  Tito  auctam,  a  Domitiano  longius  proveotain
Don  abnuorlm.*'

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  II7

chief  pontiff,  and  visited  with  stern  reproof  every  appearance
of  disrespect  to  the  gods  and  their  temples.  When  one  of
his  own  freedmen  ventured  to  make  use  of  some  pieces  of
marble,  destined  for  re-building  the  Capitol,  for  a  monument
to  his  son,  he  caused  the  monument  to  be  destroyed,  and
flung  the  remains  of  the  buried  child  into  the  sea.'  The
wondrous  preservation  he  had  himself  experienced  in  the
sack  of  the  sacred  fane,  seems  to  have  sunk  deeply  into  his
mind,  and  fancying  himself  the  special  object  of  divine  pro-
tection, he  made  genuine  efforts  to  repay  the  obligation  with
lavish  expenditure.  It  was  his  privilege  to  retrieve  the  dis-
asters which  had  befallen  the  empire  under  a  father  and
brother  less  favoured  than  himself.  To  him  it  fell  to  com-
plete a  second  restoration  of  the  national  temple,  and  the
splendour  with  which  he  executed  the  blessed  work  far  ex-
ceeded the  modest  dignity  with  which  his  staid  predecessors
had  proposed  to  invest  the  edifice.  Plutarch  had  himself
seen  lying  at  Athens  columns  of  bright  Pentelic  marble,  of
exquisite  proportions,  which  were  brought  to  Rome,  and
there,  as  he  complains,  chiselled,  scraped  and  polished,  and
reduced  to  an  ungraceful  slenderness.  The  ornamentation
of  the  edifice  was  of  the  most  lavish  character.*  The  gilding
of  tlie  bronze  tiles  Avith  which  it  was  covered  was  the  gift  of
Domitian ;  the  estimate  we  have  received  of  its  amount,  even
if  we  include  in  it  the  gilding  of  the  bases  and  capitals  of  the
pillars,  and  of  the  inimmerable  statues  which  crowded  the
precincts,  exceeds  belief. ' But  the  restoration  of  the  Capi-

'  Suet  Bomii.  8.

*  Plutarch.  Poplie.  15.  ol  6h  idove^  .  .  .  ev  ry  Pcj/i^  nX^ivrt^  avOic
Kal  ava^vadhn-ec,  ob  roaovrov  iox"^  yXa^vplac  iaov  andleaav  avfifterpiac,  iripa
roil  Kah>v  SiaKevot  Kal  Xayapol  ^vhnt^.

'  Plutarch  assures  us  that  the  gilding,  ^  XP^'^'^^C,  amounted  to  12,000
talents,  which,  according  to  the  ordinary  computation  of  about  200/.  to  the
talent,  would  amount  to  2,400,000/.,  and  says  that  this  inmiense  sum  exceeded
any  private  fortune  at  Rome.  Stilicho,  at  the  b^iuning  of  the  fourth  cen-
tury, stripped  the  doors  of  some  of  their  gold  plating ;  and  Genseric,  in  the
sack  of  Rome,  455,  carried  off  further  spoils  from  the  Capitol ;  but  the  gild-
ing of  the  roof  continued  for  many  centuries  to  be  a  conspicuous  ornament  of

118  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

tol  was  not  the  only  monument  of  Domitian's  piety.  The
recent  fire  had  left  many  sacred  sites  desolate,  both  on  the
Capitoline  and  in  the  Campus.  Augustus  might  have  led  the
way ;  but  he  would  have  required  his  wealthy  nobles  to  fol-
low ;  and  many  of  them  would  have  competed  gallantly  with
him  in  the  display  of  patriotism  and  liberality.  Such  times
were  now  past.  The  shrunken  revenues  of  the  magnates  of
Rome  could  not  vie  with  the  fiscus  of  the  emperor,  nor  could
the  nobles  even  modestly  imitate  their  prince's  generosity.
Domitian  had  no  Agrippa,  no  Pollio,  no  Maecenas,  no  Taurus,
to  erect  temples  for  the  gods,  or  halls,  theatres,  and  baths  for
the  public.  The  universal  patron  was  Caesar.  Several  build-
ings, both  religious  and  secular,  were  restored  or  constructed
by  Domitian ;  among  them  a  temple  of  Minerva  in  the  Cam-
pus, and  another  in  the  Forum  Transitorium,  a  temple  of  Isis
and  Serapis,  to  which  we  may  add  a  restoration  or  repair  of
the  Pantheon.  The  Diribitorium,  the  great  hall  of  Agrippa,
which  boasted  a  roof  of  the  widest  span  in  the  ancient  world,
had  suffered  in  the  fire  of  Titus,  and  the  second  century  of
the  empire  lacked  skill  or  energy  to  cover  it  again.  ^  This,
however,  seems  to  have  been  the  only  instance  of  acknowl-
edged inferiority.  On  the  contrary,  from  this  time  forward
the  emperors  continued  to  adorn  the  city  with  new  works,
the  size  and  splendour  of  which  increased  with  every  genera-
tion; but  these  were  the  works  of  the  emperors  only.

But  with  all  his  zeal  for  the  honour  of  the  national  divini-
ties, the  chief  of  the  Roman  people  could  not  fail  to  remark
Ascription  of  t^*^  none  of  their  deities  was  so  present  to  their
Sai»ctw"to  minds  as  an  object  of  regard  and  veneration,  as
pomiumn.  ^]^q  pcrson  of  the  prince  himself,  their  august  pa-
tron and  protector. A  feeling  of  mysterious  awe  attached

the  citj,  and  contributed  to  give  her  the  name  "  Urbs  aurea,"  which  she  re-
tabed  late  into  the  middle  ages.  QregoroTius,  Oeach.  der  Stadt  Rom  im  Mitte-
laUer,  \.  41.

*  Dion,  IxT.  8. :  ^  de  oIkoc  /xiyiaroc  ruv  irundre  filav  bpo^^  ix^vruv'  vvv
yip  6ij,  Tjyf  ariy^t  ahrov  KadatpeOela^c,  6n  om  i/6iv^d^  aidcg  avarfjvat,  axav^S
karl.

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRB.  119

to  the  living  principle  which  seemed  to  animate  the  conduct
of  human  affairs  from  the  centre  to  the  circumference  of  the
empire,  and  this  feeling  was  easily  lost  in  religious  devotion
to  the  visible  chief  of  the  state.  Domitian  followed  the  bias
of  the  times  in  sanctioning  more  openly  than  hitherto  the
outward  expression  of  Cffisar-worship.  The  recognition  of
his  father  and  brother  as  divinities,  already  cordially  ac-
cepted, made  it  scarcely  possible  to  distinguish  the  nature
of  the  dead  and  the  living  members  of  the  same  celestial
house.  No  other  emperor  had  succeeded  to  an  actual  father
and  brother.  No  other  emperor  except  Titus  himself  had
even  descended  directly  from  a  deified  ancestor.'  Accord-
ingly the  notion  of  Domitian's  participation,  even  while  yet
alive,  in  the  divine  nature,  was  instinctively  admitted  by  the
vague  superstitious  feelings  of  the  people.  It  was  the  plea»*
ure,  and  still  more  the  interest  of  courtiers  and  parasites  to
foster  and  exaggerate  this  feeling;  but  even  Statius  and
Martial  generally  confine  themselves  to  oblique  insinuations,
and  leave  the  direct  inference  to  the  reader's  imagination.
Domitian  had  thronged  the  narrow  precincts  of  the  Capito-
line  hill  with  statues  of  himself,  which  thus  jostling  the  most
venerable  images  of  the  national  gods,  challenged  the  wor^
ship  of  the  devotees  of  Jupiter.  And  so  the  poets  contrived
to  mingle  the  idea  of  the  emperor  as  Ruler,  Father,  Tarpeian
and  Capitoline,  with  that  of  the  Greatest  and  Best  of  beings,
who  was  adored  under  the  same  appellations.  They  de-
scribed his  statues  as  eternal,  a  pretty  strong  intimation  that
he  was  eternal  himself.  They  styled  his  works,  his  exploits,
his  verses  divine,  a  pretty  clear  avowal  of  the  divinity  which
was  supposed  to  animate  their  author.*  Still  the  emperor
refrains  from  claiming  divine  honours.  While  he  allows
victims  to  be  slaughtered  before  his  statues,  and  even  the
beasts  which  were  driven  towards  the  temples  to  be  stopped
on  the  way  and  sacrificed  to  his  own  images,  while  he  raises

*  PUn.  Paneffyr. 11.:  "Vespasianum  Titus, Titum  Domitianus  (dicavit
OobIo)  ;  sed  ille  ut  Dei  filius,  hie  ut  frater  videretur."

*  Martial,  v.  5- :  "  Ad  Capitolini  ca>lestia  carmina  belli"

120  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  L-^.D.  81.

to  heaven  not  only  his  brother,  who  had  worn  the  purple,
but  his  infant  child,  who  had  attained  to  no  popular  venera-
tion, he  abstains  from  erecting  a  temple  to  himself,  or  placing
his  own  altar  by  the  side  of  the  altars  of  the  Flavian  divini-
ties.* If,  however,  it  was  only  under  the  veil  of  a  rhetorical
figure  that  the  citizens  might  claim  to  address  their  ruler  as
God,  they  professed  to  be  delighted  at  the  sense  and  natural
piety  of  strangers,  who  were  scared  by  no  conventional
scruples  from  the  simple  eflFusion  of  their  enthusiastic  adora-
tion." If  Domitian  is  not  a  god  in  the  abstract,  he  is  at  least
as  a  god  to  the  Romans.*  The  government  of  the  terrestrial
globe  is  a  delegation  from  the  Powers  of  Olympus  to  the
Power  of  Rome,  while  yet  he  lives  the  life  of  a  man  among
men.*  Domitian  and  his  consort  represent  to  Roman  eyes
the  Ausonian  Jupiter  and  Juno.'  The  object  of  all  this
flattery favoured the  illusion  with deliberate affectation.

*  Thus  Dion  expressly  declares  that  no  temple,  even  in  his  day,  had  been
raised  to  a  living  emperor  in  Rome  or  Italy,  to  no  emperor,  at  least,  "  of  any
consideration : "  ef  6-Koaovmiv  Myov  rivo^  a^iov,  as  if  to  exclude  Caligula.
Dion,  li.  20.  The  only  child  of  Domitian  (bom  A.  d.  82,  Euseb.  Chronic.\
which  died  in  infancy,  appears  on  coins  as  "  divus  Aug,  fil."  Comp.  Sil.  Ital.
iii.  629. :  "  Siderei  juxta  radiabunt  tempora  nati ; "  and  Stat.  Sylv.  i.  1.  9*7. :

"  Ibit  in  amplexus  natus,  fraterque,  paterque,
Et  aoror  ;  una  locum  cervix  dabit  omnibus  astrii  ;  "
from  which  it  would  appear  that  a  sister  had  been  canonized  also. Comp.  Suet.
Fesp.  3. :  Gruter,  ccclxvi.  4.

'  Martial,  v.  3.  on  the  adoration  of  the  Dacian  Degis.

*  Martial,  vii,  2.  :  '^'■nostn  mente  calens  Dei."  Quintil.  Insl.  Oral,  iv.
pnxBm.

♦  Statius,  Sylv.  v.  i.  87. :

"  Notat  ista  Dcus  qui  flcctit  habcnas
Orbis,  et  humanos  propior  Jove  digerit  actus."

•  StatiuB,  Sylv.  iii.  4.  18. :  "Jupiter  Ausonius,  paritcr  Romanque  Juno,"
Comp.  Martial,  ix.  87. :  "  I'hryx  puor  aUerim  gaudia  nota  Jovis."  Both  Au-
guHtufl  and  Tiberius  had  been  represented  in  statues  and  cameos  as  the  earthly
Jupiter.  See  Hongcz,  Icon,  liotn.  pi.  19,  22,  20.  MUllcr,  Bcnhniilcr  der
alien  Kvnti,  p.  47,  60.  Bo  Germanlcus  and  Agri|)pina  ui)p(>ur  in  ciinioo  us  Trl])-
tolemus  and  Ceres,  Livia  as  Cybele. Possibly  all  these  arc  provincial  symbol*

A.U,  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  121

When  lie  took  back  his  wife  after  the  divorce,  he  declared
that  he  had  restored  her,  not  to  his  pillow,  as  a  mortal  might
say,  but  to  his  sacred  cushion ;  he  encouraged  the  mob  of
the  theatres  to  hail  him  and  the  empress  as  Our  Lord  and
Lady ;  and,  finally,  he  suffered  his  procurator  to  style  him,
in  a  public  document.  Our  Lord  and  God.  The  daring
phrase  was  eagerly  caught  up  and  popularly  repeated.'

It  was,  no  doubt,  a  pleasant  conceit  of  Martial's,  that
when  Domitian  replaced  the  head  of  a  colossal  Hercules
with  his  own  celestial  countenance,  the  jealousy Dj^^mee*  to
of  Juno  was  at  last  appeased  by  the  happy  meta-  ^^JS'mWm-
morphosis. But  these  pretensions  to  divinity, ^«""y-
whether  received  in  earnest,  or  handled  in  joke,  led  naturally
to  a  terrible  consequence. Every  act  which  could  be  con-
strued into  disrespect  to  the  prince  became,  when  viewed
through  this  fatal  medium,  impiety  and  sacrilege. Thus,  an
unfortunate  citizen,  who  complained,  in  the  amphitheatre,
of  the  emperor's  partiality  to  one  of  the  combatants,  was
seized  and  thrown  into  the  arena  for  blasphemy.' The  case
is  all  the  worse,  if,  as  seems  too  probable,  the  common  feel-
ing of  the  spectators  assented  to  this  arbitrary  interpretation.
But  the  consciousness,  no  doubt,  of  their  self-degradation
made  the  Roman  people  as  jealous  of  one  another  as  M'as
their  master  of  them. The  slaves  of  Domitian  could  not
bear  that  any  of  their  fellow  men  should  walk  erect  and
independent. We  may  remark  how  differently  certain  creeds
and  cults  were  now  regarded,  on  which  the  popular  theology
might  be  expected  to  look  with  equal  jealousy. Isis  and
Cybele  became  henceforth  fully  naturalized  at cuitofiiu
Rome ;  they  were  accepted  as  allies  of  the  indi- SSfuSk»d«t
genous  divinities,  with  whom  they  were  content ^«>™«-
to  exercise  a  divided  sovereignty.* The  charges  of  effemi-

■  Suet  Domii.  13.  Comp,  Martial,  viii.  2.  6. ;  AureL  Victor,  Coa.  11. ;
Dion,  Ixvii.  13. ;  Eutrop.  vii.  23.

'  Suet.  Doniit.  10. :  Comp.  Zouar.  Ann.  iL  19. ;  yw^  tic  5t<  tvavriov  ukAvoc
avTov  anediaaTO  i<j>oi>ivd^.

*  The  worship  of  Isis  and  Serapis  was  established  about  this  period  at

122  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

nacy  and  vice,  once  so  justly  made  against  their  votaries,
were  at  least  tacitly  withdrawn.  But  the  freedom  and  inde-
pendence of  Judaism,  respected  by  a  manlier  age,
than  ever  of-  and  favourcd  by  more  magnanimous  Caesars,  re-
buked the  lifeless  superstitions  of  the  declining
empire,  and  offended  the  vanity  of  a  Domitian.  The  politi-
cal self-assertion  of  the  Jews  had  been  sufficiently  crushed,
at  least  for  a  season ;  the  nation  was,  to  all  appearance,
effectually  subdued ;  but  its  opinions  survived,  and  perme-
ated the  veins  and  arteries  even  of  Italy  herself.  With  the
destruction  of  their  temple  and  the  abolition  of  their  ritual
observances,  the  metaphysical  dogmas  of  the  Jews  would
appear  more  mysterious  than  ever  to  a  people  whose  religion
was  almost  wholly  absorbed  in  the  external  and  the  sensuous.
Jitdea,  says  Lucan,  adores  some  unknown,  undiscovered
deity  ;  but  fifty  years  later,  Juvenal  reproaches  the  followers
of  Moses  with  worshipping  nought  but  the  clouds  and  the
sky-god,  while  they  made  a  traffic  of  their  superstitious
dreams.*  In  the  time  of  Nero,  Seneca  could  say  of  them,
that,  though  conquered  they  gave  laws  to  their  conqueror  ;*
so  firmly  had  they  established  themselves  in  the  world's
capital,  80  deeply  had  they  impressed  their  ideas  on  every

Rome,  according  to  the  statement  of  Tcrtullian,  Apol.  6. ;  and  Gibbon  (c  2.)
naturally  Bupposes  that  it  owed  this  favour  to  the  gratitude  of  the  Flavian
family.  Hence  Statius  addresses  Isia  with  the  utmost  respect  as  Queen  of
Egypt  and  Goddess  of  the  East :

"  Isi,  Phoroneis  quondam  stabulata  sub  antris,

Nunc  reglna  Phari,  numenquo  Orientis  anheli,  ....

....  Marti  juvcnem,  Dea,  trade  Latino." — Syh,  iii.  2,  110.
But  the  emperor  Otho  had  already  patronized  this  foreign  cult,  and  had  publicly
conducted  its  ceremonies  in  the  linen  vestments  of  the  Isiac  priesthood. Suet,
OOm,  12.

*  Lucan,  li.  B92. : "  dedita  sacris  Incerti  Judoia  dei."
JuTonal,  xiv.  07. :  "  Nil  prsuter  nubes,  et  cooli  numen  adorant."

vi.  647. :  "  Qualiacunquo  voles  Judooi  somnia  vcndunt."

•  Scnoca,  In  a  fragment  quoted  by  S.  Augustin,  dc  Civ.  Dei,  vi.  11, :  "usque
eo  BCclcratiHRimse  gcntis  consuetudo  convaluit,  ut  per  omnes  jam  terras  recepta
■it :  victi  victoribus  leges  dedcrunt."

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  123

class  of  the  citizens,  such  a  demand  had  they  created  for  the
stimulus  they  could  administer  to  the  jaded  imaginations
of  both  women  and  men.  From  the  time  of  Caesar  down-
wards, the  Jews  had  thrust  themselves  into  every  Roman
society,  and  not  least  into  the  highest.  They  had  been
favoured  by  princes,  courted  by  princes'  freedmen ;  ministers
had  flattered  them,  matrons  had  caressed  them.  A  Jewish
potentate  had  moulded  the  character  of  the  em|>eror  Cuius ;
a  Jewish  princess  had  enslaved  the  passions  of  the  emperor
Titus ;  a  Jewish  dancer  had  enchanted  alike  the  empress,  the
senators,  and  the  populace.  Many  citizens  of  every  rank
had  more  or  less  openly  addicted  themselves  to  Jewish
usages  and  tenets,  and  when  a  Jewish  sect  ventured  to  trans-
fer its  obedience  from  the  law  of  Moses  to  the  Gos|k4  of
Jesus  Christ,  the  number  of  its  adherents  in  the  capital  of
the  empire  would  seem  to  have  embraced  Jews,  Greeks,  and
Romans  in  nearly  equal  proportions.

Between these two  branches  of  the  same stem  there
reigned  a  deep  antagonism,  in  which  the  government  and
the  mass  at  least  of  the  Roman  people  took  no
interest. When  the  jealousy  of  the  government tud«ofth«
was  excited  agamst  the  Jews,  mdignant  both  at ii»w«rd«j«-
their  turbulence  and  their  proselytizing  spirit, iKChriatiu-
they  might  involve  the  Christians  in  the  com- *
mon  charge,  or  might,  perhaps,  divert  it  from  themselvefl
upon  their  rivals. When,  however,  after  the  great  Jewish
war,  that  jealousy  was  converted  into  settled  hostility,  both
the  Jews  and  the  Christians  would  be  placed  under  the  same
ban,  and  if  the  sword  was  retained  in  its  scabbard,  they
would  be  sternly  forbidden  to  exercise  their  spiritual  infltt>
ence  upon  the  citizens  around  them,  or  receive  converts  from
the  national  religion  into  their  ranks. Their  ex- niod«r»t«dby
emption  at  this  pei'iod  from  actual  persecution ^JJirt^"*"'
might  be  secured  by  the  demand  that  was  made *«^»>°*«-
upon  them  for  tribute. Both  Jews  and  Christians,  undis-
tinguished by  the  Roman  government,  were  required  to  pay
the  double  drachma,  according  to  Vespasian's  enactment.

124  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS  L^-D.  81.

and  if  the  Christians  exclaimed  against  heing  thus  confound-
ed with  a  religion  Avliich  they  really  renounced,  those  at  least
among  them  who  were  of  Jewish  extraction  would  be  traced
by  the  national  token  of  circumcision.^  Suetonius  has  re-
corded an  instance  of  the  harshness  with  which  this  inqui-
sition was  enforced,  and  it  seems  possible  that  the  old  man
of  ninety,  who  was  required  to  uncover,  and  convicted  of
Judaism  in  spite  of  his  own  denial,  was  in  fact  a  Jewish
convert  to  Christianity.'

While,  however,  sectarians  of  Jewish  birth  were  tolerated
for  the  sake  of  their  contributions  to  the  treasury,  Domitian,
as  a  champion  of  religion,  affected  great  indignation  against
the  conversion  of  citizens  to  any  form  of  Jewish  manners
^  or  doctrine. When,  at  a  later  period,  the  Pa-

Charge  of  im-  .  '  .  .

piety  and  Jew- gau  couscrvativcs  sought  to  propitiate  the  gods

ish  manners  *'  ,  ,  , -,  ,  i  , ,  -,  ,

acainst  citizens  who  Seemed  to  abandon  them,  they  held  up  the
Christians  to  popular  odium  as  atheists;  but  this
was  a  charge  never  brought  specifically  against  the  Jews.'
Nevertheless,  both  Jews  and  Christians  might  be  branded  as
impious  in  the  Roman  sense,  that  is,  as  deniers  of  the  Roman

*  There  seema  to  be  a  reference  to  the  Christians  m  the  words  of  Suetonius,
Domit.  12.:  "  dcferebantur  qui  vel  improfessi  Judaicam  viverent  vitam,  vol
dissimulate  origine  imposita  gcnti  tributa  non  pepcndissent."  As  soon,  how-
ever, as  the  Christians  established  their  independence  of  Juddsm,  they  fell
under  tlie  ban  of  an  illicit  religion.

•  Suet  Domit.  1.  c. : "  pra;ter  cajtcros  Judaicus  fiscus  accrbissime  actus

est intcrfuisse  me  adolesceutulum  mcmini,  quum  a  procuratore,

frequentissimoque  concilio,  inspiccretur  nonagenarius  senex  an  circumsectua
esset"  The  tribute  of  the  6i6paxfiov  continued  in  force  in  the  third  century
(Origen,  JSp.  ad  A/ricanum) ;  nor  do  I  find  that  there  was  any  actual  persecu-
tion of  the  Jews  during  that  period.  There  exists  a  rescript  of  Antoninus  Pius
forbidding  a  Iloman  lady  to  bequeath  money  to  the  Jewish  Society  at  Aiitioch,
Cod.  Justin,  i.  9. ;  and  Severus,  after  a  revolt  in  Talestine,  issued  an  interdict
against  conversions,  apparently  in  the  East.

'  Milmun,  Jlint.  of  ChriMliauiti/,  ii.  01.  The  charge  of  "atheism"  was
brought  agulnst  the  Christians  in  the  third  century,  as  wo  road  in  Minuciua
Felix,  in  Tcrtulliun,  Origen,  and  Lucian.  No  such  accusation  is  advanced  by
Tacitus  or  I'liny.  It  was  the  last  refuge  of  declining  Paganism,  and  showed  a
fear  of  Chriatianity  which  had  never  been  excited  by  Judaism.

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  125

divinities,  and  as  tempting  men  to  >^athdraw  from  their  ser-
vice. This  charge  of  impiety  was,  it  seems,  now  advanced
against  many  persons  of  rank  in  the  city,  and  combined  with
that  of  neglecting  the  duties  of  a  citizen ;  and  to  this  was
added  the  kindred  charge  of  adopting  Jewish  manners.*
Whether  these  culprits  were  guilty  of  Judaism  or  of  Christi-
anity it  seems  impossible  to  determine.  If  I  lean  to  the
latter  interpretation,  it  is  because  Judaism  seems  to  have  lost
at  this  time  almost  all  its  attraction  in  Roman  eyes,  and,  as
the  creed  of  a  conquered  and  degraded  people,  lay  under  th©
ban  of  ill-success,  which,  with  Pagan  inquirers,  would  be
deemed  fatal  to  its  pretensions.*  Among  these  inquirers,
however,  there  would  be  some  accurate  knowledge  of  the
diflference  between  Judaism  and  Christianity,  and  while  the
government  and  the  historians  writing  from  official  record*
would  confound  them  carelessly  together,  I  can  believe  that
the  new  faith  was  at  this  time  making  real  progress  among
the  higher  ranks  of  society,  and  assuming  in  some  degree,  in
spite  of  the  disabilities  under  which  it  lay,  the  position  held
in  an  earlier  generation  by  the  old.

Nevertheless,  assuming  this  probability,  we  are  still  as
far  as  ever  from  fathoming  the  real  motives  of  the  tyrant
for  the  proscription  with  Avhich,  in  the  fifteenth praMrtptioa  of
year  of  his  reign,  he  visited  some  of  his  highest SS'thUdSw*,
nobles,  and  among  them  some  of  his  own  nearest ^  "•  •*•
kindred. The  first  charge  might  be  that  of  impiety  and
Judaism ;  but,  besides  these  crimes,  Acilius  Gla- ^^^^^^  qj^
brio,  lately  consul,  was  accused  of  the  high  mis- •*»*•
demeanor  of  having  fought  with  beasts  in  the  amphitheatre,
an  act  which  savours  little  of  a  Christian  or  even  of  a  Jew-
ish professor.* Flavins  Clemens  was  first  cousin  to  Domitian,

'  Dion,  Ixvii.  14. :  intivtyfifl  i^  afi^iv  tyO-tifia  ade&njroq^  if'  ^f  Koi  hXXoi
eg  ra  tuv  'lovSaion>  rfiri  e^oKi^^ovrec  iroXXoi  KareiiKaadrioav.

^  Of  the  contempt  into  which  Judaism  seems  to  have  fallen  at  this  time  at
Rome,  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  hereafter.

*  Dion,  L  c. :  rbv  6k  6tj  VkaJbpiuva  ....  Kor^vpijOivTa  rd  re  a?Jui  out
Koi  ol  ttoaXo*,  Kal  bri  kui  drjpioiQ  tftdxero,  KariicTetvcv.  Acilius  Glabrio,  the
younger  of  two  nobles  of  Domitian's  court,  was  consul,  a.  d.  93.

126  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  81.

being  the  son  of  Vespasian's  brother,  Sabinus,  and  was  mar-
ried to  Domitian's  niece,  Domitilla. He had

Flavins  Clem-  •,■,•■,• ■,  , ^  tx-

ens  and  Do-  stood  high  m  the  cmperor  s  favour.  His  two
sons,  who  had  received  the  auspicious  names  of
Yespasianus  and  Domitianus,  had  been  placed  by  the  em-
peror himself  under  the  tuition  of  the  favourite  rhetorician,
Quintilian,  and  were  destined,  as  all  believed,  to  the  imperial
succession.*  Suddenly  the  Romans  learnt,  with  consterna-
tion, that  this  illustrious  scion  of  the  reigning  family  was
arrested  and  convicted  of  the  crime  of  Judaizing,  to  which
was  added  a  vague  charge  of  withdrawing  from  the  civil,  or,
perhaps,  from  the  religious  duties  of  a  citizen.  Acilius  was
convicted  and  degraded  to  the  arena,  and,  when  he  came  oflf
victorious  in  the  combat,  ivas  sent  into  exile,  and  promptly
despatched  there.  Clemens  was  sentenced  at  once  to  death
and  executed ;  and  his  consort  was  banished  to  an  island.
Of  their  children  we  hear  no  further :  possibly  they  suffered
with  their  parents.  The  proscription  extended  to  many
other  personages  of  distinction,  wliose  names  are  not  re-
corded, who  seem  to  have  been  generally  banished,  and  who,
after  the  death  of  the  tyrant,  were  recalled  among  other  sur-
viving victims  by  his  successor."  This  proscription  took
place  about  eight  months  before  Domitian's  death,  at  a  period
when  he  was  tormented  by  the  utmost  jealousy  of  all  around,
and  when  liis  heart  was  hardened  to  acts  of  unparalleled
barbarity ;  *  and  it  seems  more  likely  that  it  was  counselled

'  Suet.  Domit.  16.  Quintil.  Inst.  Orat.  proccm.  iv. :  Suetonius  applies  to
Clemens  the  stigma,  "  contcmptissimoB  iucrtiaj,"  though  he  had  just  beeu  consul.
The  phrase  seems  to  refer  to  neglect  of  Roman  usages  and  social  prescriptions,
which  It  was  more  and  more  difficult  to  enforce  upon  the  higher  ranks  of
citizens.  It  is  apparently  the  same  as  the  "publica  circa  bonus  artcs  socordia"
of  Tacitus,  Annal.  xi.  16.,  and  is  not  to  be  restricted  to  the  evasion  of  political
duties.

•  Tertulliao  Btates  that  the  exiled  Christians  were  recalled  by  Domitian
hlnuelf,  Apolog.  6. ;  but  this  is  contradicted  by  Kusebius,  Eccl.  Jfist.  iii.  20.,
and  Boems  in  itself  improbable. Comp.  Oros.  vii.  11.

*  Tlie  exact  date  ia  thua  ascertained :  Clemens  was  consul,  a.  d.  06,  and
gave  his  name  to  the  year ;  but  Domitian  put  bim  to  death,  according  to  Sue>

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  127

by  abject  fear  for  his  own  person  or  power,  than  by  concern
for  the  religious  interests  of  the  state,  however  sincere  he
may  once  have  been  in  his  zeal  for  the  honour  of ,, ^

•'  -1  1  •! Alleged  pen»-

the  ffods. We  must  be  content  to  draw  the  veil cution  of  ui«
again  over  this  slight  and  dubious  glimpse  of  the
precarious state  of  the  Christians  under  Domitian,  which
has  been  too  hastily  dignified  with  tlu'  iiaine  of  a  persecu-
tion.*

If  Domitian  was  a  precisian  in  religiuus  affairs,  not  lew
did  he  carry  the  spirit  of  discipline  into  the  administration
of  the  laws. This  branch  of  government,  after  ^ , ,
excitins:  the  feverish  activity  of  Claudius,  had cour«g^tb6

"  "^  _^  .  delittora.

been  entirely  neglected  by  Nero,  and  Vespasian
was  to  the  last  too  much  of  a  blunt  soldier  to  undertake  a
duty  requiring  tact  and  subtilty.  Domitian  had  the  train-
ing of  a  civilian,  and  his  temper  was  inclined  to  chicane.
His  edicts  and  rescripts  were  issued  in  restless  haste,  and
seem  to  have  obtained  little  respect  from  posterity. But  his

tonius :  "  tantum  non  in  ipso  ejus  consulatu ; "  therefore,  immediately  after  the
termination  of  the  year,  or  at  the  commenoement  of  96.  Domitian  himself
perished  in  the  middle  of  September  of  that  year.

*  The  ecclesiustleal  tradition  of  St  John's  miraculooa  praMfration  from  tb«
boiling  oil  (Tertull.  de  Fnx»cript.  Hceret.  S6.)  has  no  historical  value,  though
we  may  give  full  credit  to  the  statement  of  Irenieus,  that  the  last  of  the  Apos-
tles was  living  almost  at  the  close  of  the  first  Chrii>tian  century.  The  Flavian
persecution  is  claimed  by  Tertullian,  Lactantius,  Orosius,  and  Eusebius ;  but
on  no  other  grounds  than  those  stated  in  tlie  text.  Buaebi—  givea,  indeed,
an  interesting  story  from  Hegesippus,  which  may  have  some  firandation  in  fact,
in  reference  to  the  inquiries  instituted  by  Vespasian,  and  continued,  no  doubt
by  his  successors,  into  all  Jewish  claims  to  the  royal  succession  of  David.  The
sons  of  Judas,  "  the  brother  of  our  Lord,"  were  called  before  Domitian.  He
demanded  whether  they  descended  from  Dand.  They  confessed  it.  Again
he  inquired  what  were  their  means.  They  declared  that  they  posseaaed  bat
9000  denarii,  and  a  few  acres  of  land.  They  showed  him  their  hands,  hard
with  daily  toil,  in  token  of  the  simple  industry  by  which  they  gained  their
living.  Once  more  the  emperor  asked,  what  was  the  meaning  of  Christ's
kingdom  ;  to  which  they  replied  that  it  was  not  of  this  world,  but  should  ap-
pear at  the  consummation  of  all  things.  Domitian,  it  is  said,  was  satisfied
with  these  answei-s,  and,  it  is  added,  put  a  stop  from  that  moment  to  the  perse-
cutions of  the  Christiana. Hist.  Ecd.  L  &

128  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

personal  diligence  almost  equalled  that  of  Claudius,  and  was,
no  doubt,  beneficial  to  his  people.  Nor  must  we  let  ourselves
speak  with  disrespect  of  the  vigilance,  however  often  ill-di-
rected, with  which  he  superintended  the  procedure  of  the
magistrates  in  Rome,  and  throughout  the  provinces.^  Never
were  so  many  bad  judges  and  corrupt  governors  brought  to
justice;  but  the  vigilance  of  the  prince  in  his  solitary  watch-
tower  would  have  availed  little,  had  he  not  employed  the
eyes  of  a  legion  of  informers.  At  the  commencement  of  his
principate,  Domitian  had  trodden  carefully  in  the  steps  of
his  predecessor  in  repudiating  and  proscribing  such  vile
services.  He  had  expressed  his  abhorrence  of  them  in  a
sentence  which  was  carefully  recorded  by  the  historians :
The  prince  who  does  not  repress  delation^  encourages  it}  But
the  necessities  of  his  own  policy  undermined  this  indignant
virtue.  The  same  ruler  who  punished  the  delators  of  Nero
fostered  a  similar  brood  without  scruple  in  his  own  interest.
The  distinction  between  the  delator  and  the  legitimate  ac-
cuser was  accurately  drawn,  and  it  will  be  well  to  bear  it  in
mind  to  understand  clearly  the  crime  so  often  urged  against
the  emperors.'  In  civil  cases,  particularly  in  those  relating
to  the  collection  of  the  public  dues,  the  government  em-
ployed its  own  servants  for  the  discovery  and  prosecution
of  defaulters.  It  was  the  business  of  the  advocatus  Jisci
thus  to  watch  over  the  interests  of  the  imperial  revenues.
But  the  officious  zeal  of  irregular  spies,  though  often  really
encouraged,  was  always  professedly  denounced,  and  such
information  given  by  slaves  against  their  masters  was  re-
pudiated with  especial  liorror.  In  criminal  cases  the  right
of  accusation  was  legally  restricted  to  certain  near  relations,
and  the  interference  of  a  mere  stranger  was  unautliorized
delation.  Tlic  legitimate  pursuer,  however,  might  cmi)loy
an  advocate,  who  stept  into  liis  place  and  became  his  repre-
sentative. The  provinces  miglit  thus  employ  a  patron  at

»  Suet  Domit.  8. ;  Victor,  Epit.  11.
'  Suet.  Domit.  0. ;  Comp.  Dion,  Ixvii.  1.
■  CM/u«tin.lx.  1.,  X.  11.

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  129

Rome  to  accuse,  in  their  name,  their  delinquent  prefect ;  or
the  senate  might  itself  appoint  an  advocate  or  accuser,  as
was  often  done  in  cases  of  public  crime,  particularly  in  cases
of  majesty.  But  the  senator  who,  unemployed  and  unap-
pointed,  came  forward  of  his  own  accord  to  accuse,  was
branded  as  a  delator,  and  was  deemed  to  transgress  law  and
usage,  as  well  as  to  violate  the  confidence  which  ought  to
reign  among  the  members  of  a  privileged  order.'  The  diffi-
culty in  which  the  emperors  were  placed  will  be  easily  seen.
Constrained  as  they  were  to  veil  the  extent  and  foundation
of  their  power,  and  to  court,  instead  of  demanding  the  obedi-
ence and  homage  of  their  subjects,  cases  constantly  occurred
in  which  it  was  essential  to  their  safety  that  their  supremacy
should  be  vindicated,  while  it  was  impossible  for  them  to
come  forward  openly  and  demand  protection  and  satisfaction.
Firmly  to  reject  the  proffered  assistance  of  the  voluntary  de-
lator required  an  amount  of  self-restraint  and  self-confidence
which  few  men  in  such  a  position  could  boast ;  least  of  all
one  who  was  conscious  of  his  own  demerits,  and  of  the  un-
popularity with  which  he  had  surrounded  himselll  With
conspirators  in  the  senate,  in  the  forum,  in  the  camp,  even  in
his  own  household,  with  a  whole  people  constantly  on  the
watch  for  the  evil  auguries  of  the  soothsayers,  the  mosl
trifling  marks  of  disrespect  might  cause  deep  uneasiness,
and  the  means  of  indirect  repression,  through  the  agency  of
the  delator,  must  be  accepted  as  a  necessary  weapon  of
defence.

But  the  necessity  for  the  use  of  this  fatal  weapon  grew
with  its  exercise. Domitian  seems,  of  all  the  emperors,  to
have  carried  it  furthest,  and  adopted  it  most  sys- ciyj^j^t^  ^
tematically. It  was  an  aggravation  rather  than *'»«^'«*««*'
an  extenuation  of  his  crime  that  he  seduced  into  his  service

'  Hence  the  use  of  the  phrase :  "  sponte  aocusasse  "  to  mark  the  enormity
of  the  delator.  Of  Silius  Italicus,  Pliny  says,  EjmM.  iii.  7. :  "  Ueserat  fiunam
suam  sub  Nerone ;  credebatur  sponte  aocusasse."  On  the  other  hand,  he  is
careful  to  let  his  correspondents  know  that  in  his  own  public  accusations  he
was  appointed  by  the  senate. Ep,  viL  33.

VOL VII. — 9

130  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

men  of  high  rank  and  character,  and  turned  the  senate  into
a  mob  of  rivals  for  the  disgrace  of  thus  basely  serving  him.
The  instruments  of  his  jealous  precaution  rose  in  a  gradu-
ated hierarchy.  The  knights  and  senators  trembled  before  a
Massa  Baebius,  a  Carus,  and  a  Latinus ;  but  these  delators
trembled  in  their  turn  before  the  prince  of  delators,  Memmius
Regulus,  and  courted  him,  not  always  successfully,  by  the
surrender  of  their  estates  or  their  mistresses.  A  school  of
high  prerogative  lawyers  speedily  arose  to  humour  the  em-
peror's legal  tastes,  and  to  invent  a  justification  for  every
sentence  it  might  please  him  to  pronounce.  Men  who  thus
prostituted  their  abilities  were  found  liable,  as  might  be
expected,  to  charges  of  gross  irregularity  in  their  own  con-
duct. Thus  Palfurius  Sura  was  accused  of  having  descended,
being  a  consular,  into  the  arena,  to  gratify  Nero  by  wrestling
with  a  female  athlete.  When,  however,  Vespasian  struck
his  name  from  the  roll  of  the  senate,  he  w^ent  over  to  the
Stoics,  set  up  for  an  austere  precisian,  and  a  professed  oppo-
nent of  the  imperial  government.*  Received  back  into  favour
by  Domitian,  he  employed  himself  as  readily  in  building  up
the  theory  of  imperial  prerogative.  The  men,  indeed,  who
did  this  kind  of  work  were  sycophants ;  nevertheless,  the
work  itself  was  seasonable.  It  was  time  that  the  reality  of
monarchy  should  be  stripped  of  its  disguises,  and  no  pretence
left  for  the  fitful  assertion  of  an  impracticable  idea  of  liberty.
The  long  enjoyment  of  good  and  temperate  government
which  followed,  was  probably  in  a  great  degree  owing  toHhe
naked  interpretation  of  imperial  power  put  forth  by  the
crown  lawyers  of  Domitian.  But  some  years  of  mutual  sus-
picion and  misunderstanding  were  still  to  be  endured  by
prince  and  j)eoplo  before  this  consummation  could  be  readied.
The  best  and  noblest  of  tlie  citizens  were  still  marked  out  as
the  prey  of  delators,  whoso  patron  connived  at  enormities

'  The  Btory  is  told  hv  tho  ftcholiant  on  Juvenal,  iv.  68. :
"Hi  quid  Palfurio,  Hi  trodiniuH  Amiillato,
Quicquid  conHpicuum  i)«liTuniquc  cat  jcquore  toto,
Ilos  fljicl  est,  ubicmuiue  natiit."

A-U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE. ,  131

which  bound  their  agents  more  closely  to  himself,  and  made
his  protection  more  necessary  to  them.  Tlie  haughty  nobles
quailed  in  silence  under  a  system  in  which  every  act,  every
word,  every  sigh  was  noted  against  them,  and  disgrace,  exile,
and  death  followed  upon  secret  whispers.  The  fears  of  Do-
mitian  increased  with  his  severities.  He  listened  to  the  tales
not  of  senators  and  consulars  only,  but  of  the  humblest  offi-
cials, and  even  of  private  soldiers.  Often,  says  £pictetu8,
was  the  citizen,  sitting  in  the  theatre,  entrapped  by  a  dis-
guised legionary  beside  him,  who  pretended  to  murmur
against  the  emperor,  till  he  had  led  his  unsuspecting  neigh-
bour to  confide  to  him  his  own  complaints,  and  then  skulked
away  to  denounce  him.'

The  government  of  Domitian  leant  more  and  more  on  the
soldiers.  Every  step  he  took  in  tyranny  required  to  be
secured  by  fresh  measures  of  force  and  cruelty.
But  the  guardians  of  the  imperial  tyranny  might  by  Domitian  to
at  any  moment  become  its  avengers.  It  was  ne-  '  ***
cessary  to  divide  the  officere  as  well  as  to  unite  the  soldiersw
Hence  the  jealousy  with  which  the  imperator  kept  his  best
lieutenants  unemployed,  or  entrusted  them  only  with  inferior
commands.  Hence,  perhaps,  his  practice  of  dividing  the  pre-
fecture of  the  city,  the  most  confidential  post  in  the  empire,
among  as  many  as  twelve  colleagues.*  The  legionaries,  how-
ever, found  themselves  humoured,  indulged,  and  pampered.
Of  reducing  their  number  for  the  sake  of  economy  there  was
no  further  mention.  They  stalked  along  the  streets  as  a
separate  and  favoured  class,  driving  the  herd  of  citizens  to
the  right  and  left  with  the  clang  of  their  boot-heels,  and  the
rattling  of  their  gaudy  accoutrements.  It  concerned  the  dig-
nity perhaps,  and  certainly  the  safety  of  the  emperor,  that
the  bravest  of  his  subjects  should  seem  also  the  most  hon-
oured, and  the  most  fortunate ;  so  that  elevated  by  privileges,
as  well  as  ornamental  distinctions,  above  the  unarmed  deni-

*  Epictctus,  Dissert,  iv.  13.

*  This  fact  is  stated  by  Lydus,  de  MoffiahratUnu,  I  49.,  IL  19. Imhof'i
DomUianut,  p.  100.

132  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D,  81.

zens  of  the  city,  they  might  share  at  least  with  their  chief
the  envy  and  hatred  of  the  people.'  To  gain  the  confidence
of  this  class  the  emperor  tore  himself  repeatedly  from  the
pleasures  of  the  capital,  and  pretended  to  share  their  toils  in
distant  campaigns.  In  Domitian  we  seem  first  to  return  to
that  early  condition  of  society  to  which  despotism  in  civilized
states  is  ever  tending,  when  the  chief  is  compelled  to  resume
the  command  of  his  armies  in  person,  and  make  himself  the
actual  leader  of  a  horde  of  organized  banditi.  The  position
to  which  this  emperor  was  first  called  was  accepted  with  in-
creasing unreserve  by  his  successors.  In  Rome  they  solem-
nized their  triumphs  ;  in  their  Campanian  villas  they  enjoyed
brief  snatches  of  repose ;  but  it  was  on  the  frontiers  more
and  more  that  they  reaped  the  laurels  which  attached  the
soldiers  to  their  persons,  and  from  the  camp  that  they  issued
more  and  more  the  decrees  by  which  they  ruled  the  world.

Meanwhile  the  mob  of  the  city  demanded  its  accustomed

indulgences  more  keenly  than  ever. Domitian  lavished  on

it  the  old  amusements  in  increased  profusion,  and

Domitian  ca- .  ,

reeseBthepopu-  invented  new.  h  rom  year  to  year  he  squandered
his  treasures  on  shows  and  entertainments.  His
costly  exhibitions  displayed  with  exaggerated  features  the
tasteless  extravagance  in  which  the  Romans  delighted.  Glad-
iators hewed  and  hacked  one  another ;  wild  beasts  tore  their
victims ;  chariots  raced  and  jostled  as  of  old ;  but  the  Flavian
amphitheatre  afforded  a  wider  arena  than  any  former  edifice,
and  the  shows  appropriated  to  it  were  enhanced  in  grandeur
and  extent.  The  citizens  shouted  with  admiration  at  a  sea-
fight  enacted  witliin  the  stone  enclosure,  the  vast  space  be-
neath them  being  flooded  for  the  occasion  from  the  tanks  or
fish-ponds  of  Nero's  gardens.*  Here,  too,  women  fought
with  women,  or  even  with  men;  an  army  of  dwarfs  was

'  JuTenal,  xvi.  in  fin.:  "duds  hoc  reforro  videtur."

*  Suet.  Domii.  4. ;  Comp.  Tit.  1.  Domitian  constructed  also  a  naumachia
by  the  ilde  of  the  Tiber :  h  koivu  tivi  ;fw/3/a,  saya  Dion,  Ixvii.  8.,  to  distin-
guish it  fVom  that  of  Augustua.

i

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  I33

marshalled  in  a  combat  against  cranes.'  Domitian  added
two  colours,  the  purple  and  the  golden,  to  the  four  factions
of  the  circus,  and  increased  the  number  of  the  chariots  that
dashed  in  tumultuous  fury  round  the  goal.  Ho  courted  j)opu-
larity  by  the  constancy  with  which  he  attended  these  exhibi-
tions, which  every  citizen  of  taste  and  refinement  had  long
pronounced  intolerably  vulgar;  but  he  preserved  his  own
dignity  with  more  self-respect  than  some  of  his  predecessors,
and  though  noted  for  exquisite  skill  in  some  manual  exercises,
he  never  deigned  to  exhibit  it  in  public,  or  purchase  applause
by  personal  degradation.*  Sometimes,  indeed,  his  caprice  or
imperiousness  broke  through  the  restraints  of  his  self-imposed
aftability.  On  the  occasion  of  a  sudden  storm  of  rain  he  re-
fused to  allow  the  veil  of  the  amphitheatre  to  be  drawn  over
the  spectators ;  and  once,  when  the  mob  of  the  circus  dis-
turbed him  by  their  clamour,  he  did  not  scruple  to  command
the  herald  to  call  them  to  silence,  a  bold  breach  of  etiquette
towards  the  majesty  of  the  people.*

While,  indeed,  the  brutal  or  senseless  amusements  of  fight-
ing and  racing  still  enchained  the  passions  of  the  populace,  a
more  elevated  taste  was  apparently  making  way
among  a  large  middle  class  of  citizens, ihe  mag- ot  Uie  o^dtot-

°  °  ° iiM  eonteaU  la

nates  of  the  city  put  some  check  on  the  extrava-  aiMtas  »<

gance  of  their  luxury,  and  their  clients  and  depend-
ents began  to  yearn  for  intellectual  recreations,  little  known
to  the  earlier  generations. The  moral  triumph  of  Greece  over
her  conquerors  was  complete  on  the  day  when  the  Roman

»  Stat,  Siflv.  i.  6-63. :

"  Stat  sexus  nidis  insciusque  ferri,
£t  pugnas  capit  improbus  viriles  ....
Casurseque  vagis  grues  rapinis
Mirantur  pumilos  ferociores."

Women  fighting  in  the  arena  had  been  seen  under  Nero. Ta&  Aim.  it.  32.

'  Suetonius  {Botnit.  19.)  mentions  some  extraordinary  instanoes  of  his  skill
with  the  bow,  which  he  would  sometimeB  exhibit  to  select  gueeta  in  his  AUmui
villa.

*  Dion,  IxviL  8. ;  1^'^,  6. :  tovto  d^  rd  tov  ^oftertavov  atu  ir^care.

134  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOMANS  [A.D.  81.

emperor  deigned  to  institute  quinquennial  contests  in  poetry,
eloquence,  and  music,  after  the  fashion  of  the  graceful  games
of  Hellas,  long  since  naturalized  in  the  Grecian  cities  of  Cam-
pania.^ But  Domitian  Avas  an  antiquarian,  and  he  required
a  precedent.  He  discovered  that  on  the  first  rebuilding  of
the  Capitol  by  Camillus,  the  senate  had  directed  their  pre-
server to  institute  dramatic  shows,  in  which  the  taking  of
Veil  held  a  prominent  place.*  Fortified  by  this  authority,
l)omitian  celebrated  his  own  restoration  of  the  national  tem-
ple with  games  on  the  Grecian  model,  such  as  Nero  had  ex-
hibited with  some  reserve  in  his  private  circus,  in  the  most
public  manner,  and  on  a  scale  of  unusual  magnificence.  On
the  summit  of  the  Capitoline  hill,  in  the  face  of  men  and  gods,
the  compositions  of  the  rival  candidates,  both  in  Greek  and
Latin,  were  cited,  and  the  victors  crowned  with  oak-leaves
in  gilded  metal.*  The  subjects  of  these  pieces  were  vari-
ous, but  we  may  believe  that  they  turned  for  the  most
part  on  the  praise  of  the  emperor  himself,  and  served,
more  or  less  directly,  for  his  glorification,  as  a  warrior,  a
poet,  a  ruler,  or  a  demigod.*  The  connexion  between  the
founder  of  the  prize  and  the  god  in  whose  honour  it  was
founded  was  touched,  no  doubt,  more  or  less  delicately  by
every  competitor.*  The  favourite  poets  and  orators  of  the
day  contended  eagerly  for  these  distinctions,  and  lamented,
when  they  failed  of  success,  the  harshness  or  ingratitude  of

*  Suet  Domit,  4.  Sturdy  Romans  still  continued  to  protest  against  these
Hellenic  corruptions,  and  even,  when  they  could,  to  put  them  down.  When
Rufinus  abolished  the  Gynmic  Games  at  Vienna,  Junius  Mauricus  exclaimed  in
the  senate,  "  Vellem  etiam  Romse  tolli  possent  1 " riiii.  Ep.  iv,  22.

*  Liv.  V.  60.  (a.  u.  c.  889) ;  Fcstus,  p.  822.

*  Consorin.  de  Die  Nat.  18.  (a.  u.  c.  889,  A.  D.  86,  Eckhel,  vi.  881.) ;  Stat.
Siflv.  iii.  6.:  "sanctoque  indutum  Cocsaris  auro."  Martial,  iv.  1,  6. :  "Perque
nianufl  tantas,  plurima  quercus  eat."

*  I'lin.  Paneg.  B4. :  "  Et  quis  jam  locus  miscne  adulationis  manobat  ignnrua,
cum  laudes  impenitorum  ludis  etiam  ct  comissationibus  cclcbrarcntur,  siiltaren-
tur,  atquo  in  omno  ludibrium  cflembiatis  vocibus,  modis,  gcstibus  fVangeP'
entur  ?  "

*  QuinUL  Jnd.  Oral,  iil  1.  4.

A.U.  834.]  Uin)ER  THE  EMPIRE.  135

the  patron  deity.'  The  transformation  of  Italian  Rome  into
a  Grecian  city  by  the  architects  of  Nero  was  crowned  by
this  truly  Grecian  solemnity,  which  seems  to  have  taken  root
in  the  habits  and  tastes  of  the  people,  and  exercised,  no  doubt,
great  influence  upon  them.  The  periodical  contests  of  the
Agon  Capitolinus  (for  even  the  name  they  bore  wa«  Greek)
continued  without  interruption  down  to  the  fifth  century;
the  solemn  consecration  to  the  muses  of  a  spot  known  for  so
many  ages  only  as  the  stronghold  of  national  force,  sank
deep  into  the  minds  of  successive  generations.  The  temple
and  the  citadel  have  vanished  in  storm  and  fire,  and  even
their  sites  have  become  the  battlefield  of  antiquaries ;  but  it
was  on  the  Capitolino  hill  that  the  song  of  Petrarch  was
crowned  in  history,  and  the  song  of  Corinna  in  romance.

At  the  Capitoline  games  Domitian  presided  in  person,  in
the  Grecian  costume,  which  it  had  hitherto  been  deemed
disgraceful  for  a  Roman to  assume  in  Rome,
wearing  also  on  his  head  a  new-fangled  coronet nerrsMhu
of  gold  adorned  with  figures  of  Jupiter,  Juno  and CSSm
Minerva :  the  flamens  of  Jupiter,  who  sate  by  his CaMmr  tx  Ua

., ,  , .  ^,.  [ .  i ^^ -AlbttTllU.

side,  bore  on  their  own  fillets  the  image  ot  the
emperor. The  first  of  the  Caesars  had  chosen  his  ancestress
Venus  for  his  patron  divinity;  Augustus  had  placed  himself
under  the  protection  of  Apollo;  Domitian  affected  to  believe
that  he  was  the  special  favourite  of  Miner^'a.* He  founded

'  Stat  Si/lv.  iiu  6.  87. :

"  Tu  cum  Capitolia  nostra
loficiata  lyrse,  saevum  iugratumque  dolebaa
Mecum  victa  Jovem."
▼.  8.  232. :

"  Et  fugit  gperatus  honos,  cum  lustra  parentis
Invida  Tarpeii  canerem."
Posterity  has  avenged  the  defeated  competitor  by  preserving  so  large  a  portion
of  his  verses,  while  it  has  let  even  the  names  of  his  rivals  perish.  Imhof  sup-
poses, not  unreasonably,  that  he  was  distanced,  not  in  poetry,  but  in  adulation.
"  Quintil.  List.  Oral.  x.  1.  91. :  familiare  nuraen  Minervw."  Suet.  Domit,
15.  Statius  and  Martial,  ^Miwtm.  In  token  of  his  devotion  to  this  goddesa
Domitian  is  said  to  have  demanded  to  be  chosen  Archon  of  Athens. Philostr.

136  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

annual  contests  in  her  honour  at  his  Alban  villa,  and  in  these,
too,  he  combined  poetry  and  rhetoric  with  musical  and  gym-
nic  exhibitions.  Statius,  who  failed  of  the  prize  on  the  Capi-
tol, was  thrice  crowned  at  Alba ;  but  he  seems  to  have  held
the  olive  chaplet  of  the  goddess  which  he  gained  in  less  es-
timation than  the  oaken  wreath  of  Jupiter  which  was  denied
him.*  Domitian's  vanity  was  better  employed  when  it  led
him  to  bestow  his  regards,  however  cold  and  stately,  on  men
of  letters ;  when  he  conferred  on  the  learned  and

His  patronage  .  A • m-  i

of  men  of  let- virtuous  Quintilian  the  ornaments  of  the  consul-
ian,  statins, ship,  and  made  him  tutor  to  his  youthful  kins-

Martial,  Tacl-  ,  ,  n  .  , ,  .  ,

tuB,  and  Pliny  men  ;  when  he  encouraged,  with  his  applause,
and  at  least  with  some  trifling  recognition  of
more  substantial  value,  the  genius  of  Statius  and  Martial.
Men  of  still  higher  character  or  position,  such  as  Tacitus  and
Pliny,  owed  to  his  discerning  patronage  their  early  advance-
ment in  public  life ;  though  they  and  others  might  pretend
at  a  later  period  to  have  shrunk  from  a  protection  which  de-
manded unworthy  adulation.  True  it  is,  perhaps,  that  no
business,  however  trifling,  was  transacted  in  the  senate  with-
out the  preface  of  a  fulsome  eulogy  on  the  prince.*  The  em-
peror's tame  lion,  or  mutilated  valet,  was  celebrated  with  no
less  fervid  eloquence  than  a  victory  over  the  foes  of  the  re-
public* The  repair  of  twenty  miles  of  pavement  on  the
well-worn  route  to  Puteoli  was  made  the  subject  of  an  ex-
tended panegyric,  while  the  Flavian  amphitheatre,  the  im-
mortal work  of  Vespasian  and  Titus,  to  which  Domitian  had
only  set  the  coping  stones,  extorted  from  the  courtliest  of
his  poets  the  tribute  of  but  pne  or  two  short  epigrams.*

Vtt.  A  poll.  viii.  10. He  assumed  her  efllpy  on  his  mediils  from  the  year  883,
Eckhel,  vi.  87S. Philostratus  affirms  that  he  pretended  to  be  her  son.

'  Suet  Domit,  4. ;  Stat  Sylv.  iil  2.  28. :  "ter  me  nitidis  Albana  fercntem
Serta  comis."

*  riin.  Paneg.  84. :  "  nihil  tam  Tulgare  tam  parvum  in  Scnatu  agebatur,  ut
non  laudibui  principum  ininiornrontur  (|uibuscunquo  censcndt  nccessitas  inci-
diMet"

'  But  i(ijy/v.  ii.  5. :  "Leo  iminstictiw  linpcratorifl  ;"  iii.  4. :  "ComaEarinL"

*  But  Bylv.  iv.  8. :  "Via  JJomitJiiuu." Marliul,  Dc  Upectac.  1.  2.

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  137

Domitian's  dubious  successes  in  the  field  furnished  a  theme  for
many  sounding  hyperboles.' But  the  men  of  letters  reserved,
as  might  be  expected,  their  most  laboured  encomiums  for  the
verses  or  speeches  to  which  their  princely  patron  himself
gave  utterance. To  him,  say  Silius,  t/ie  muses
shall  t/ismselves  hriyig  offerings^  and  Phcehus  s/uiU  luttery  or  the
marvel  at  a  song  more  potent  than  t/utt  which
stayed  the  Ilebrus,  and  uprooted  Hhodope*

Such  where  the  inordinate  compliments  which  could
please  the  ears  of  a  son  of  the  homely  Vespasian,  when,  con-
scious of  the  hatred  of  his  senators,  he  could  no  longer  soothe
his  apprehensions  by  the  vows  of  loyalty  extorted  from  them.
The  poor  poets  could  cause  him  no  anxiety. He  need  not

'  Martial,  ii.  2.,  v.  19.,  vii.  1-8.  SiL  Itol.  UL  608,  StaL  8i/h.  11,  oc
Theb.  i,  19. :

"  Buque  jugo  Rhenum,  bis  adactum  l^bus  Istnim
£t  oonjurato  dejectofl  Tertioe  Daoos."
•  SU.  Ital.  uL  618. :

"  Quiu  et  Romuleos  Buperabit  roce  nepotes
Quu  erit  el(X|uio  partum  decus :  huic  sua  Mohb
Sacra  fereut ;  meliorque  l.vra  cui  subiititit  IlebniS
Et  veiiit  Rhodoj)e,  Phcebo  miranda  loquetur."
Comp.  Quiutil.  Inst.  Oral.  x.  i.  91. :  "Hos  nominaTimua  quia  GennaaieoM
Augustum  ab  inetitutis  studiis  deflexit  cura  terrarum,  parumque  DU  Tunm  flit
esse  eum  maximum  poetarum,"  &e.  Valerius  Flaccus  specifies  a  poem  by
Domitian  ou  the  war  in  Judea  {Argon.  L  12.):  "Versam  proles  tua  pandat
Idumen,  Namque  potest,"  and  some  modem  critieB  ascribe  to  him,  I  think
erroneously,  the  translation  of  Aratus,  which  goes  under  the  name  of  Gennan-
icus  Caesar.  Quintilian,  in  the  preface  to  Iiut.  Orai.  iv.,  flatters  him  for  his
accomplishments  as  an  orator,  and  even  Suetonius  admits  them  to  some  extenC
It  is  difficult  to  say  how  far  Domitian  deserves  to  be  regarded  as  a  patron  of
literature.  The  seventh  satire  of  Juvenal  beginning,  "  Et  spes  et  ratio  studionun
in  CsDsare  tantum,"  is  probably  of  a  later  date.  Suetonius  speaks  in  the  most
disparaging  terms  of  his  personal  acquirements,  which  are  so  highly  lauded  by
the  authorities  above  cited.  He  allows,  however,  that  he  bestowed  pains  and
expense  in  restoring  the  treasures  of  the  great  libraries  destroyed  at  Rome  by
fire :  "  exemplaribus  undique  petitis  missisque  Alexandriam  qui  describerent
emendarentque."  Domit.  20.  His  favours  to  Statins  and  Martial  seem  to
have  been  but  slender.  Tacitus  only  allows  that  he  pretended  to  love  letters
and  poetry. Hiai.  iv.  in  fin.

I

138  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D,  81.

read  their  blessings  backwards,  and  interpret  their  notes  of
admiration  into  disguised  tokens  of  disgust.  To  them  he
could  allow  unlimited  licence  to  brand  the  memory  of  Nero,
to  sound  the  praises  of  Lucan,  who  had  plotted  against  a  ty-
rant, and  of  Thrasea,  whom  a  tyrant  had  sacrificed,  neglect-
ing in  their  favour  the  common  interest  of  tyrants  to  protect
the  memory  of  one  another.'  Even  in  the  last  moments  of
his  own  tyranny  he  clung  tenaciously  to  flatteries  such  as
had  hardly  been  lavished  on  the  opening  promise  of  his  pre-
decessor. On  the  kalends  of  January  95,  the  fifteenth  year
of  his  reign,  when  he  entered  on  his  seventeenth  consulship,
a  period  when  all  the  worst  features  of  his  character  had  been
brought  into  full  relief  by  the  terrors  of  the  Antonian  con-
spiracy, he  could  allow  the  humble  courtier  Statins  to  paint
in  glowing  colours  the  greetings  of  the  god  Janus,  the  patron
of  Roman  chronology.  Hail,  great  father  of  the  world,
about  to  inaugurate  with  me  the  ages!  Behold  the  fresh
splendour  of  our  temples!  Behold  the  aspiring  flames  of  our
festal  fires !  on  thee  the  constellations  of  my  lointer  rain  a
genial  warmth  !  . . . .  Augustus  bore  the  faeces  thirteen  times  /
hut  it  was  in  his  latter  years  that  he  first  began  to  deserve
them.  Thou,  still  in  thy  youth,  hast  already  transcended  thy
ancestors.  A  thousand  trophies  shalt  thou  gain  y  only  permit
them  to  be  triumphs  !  Yet  remaineth  Bactria  to  be  conquer-
ed: yet  remaineth  Babylon.  No  Indian  laurel  has  yet  been
laid  in  the  lap  of  Jupiter  :  the  Arabs,  the  Seres  Jcneel  not  yet
in  supplication. All  the  year  hath  not  yet  its  full  honours.

*  SUtlua,  8i/lv.  ii.  1.  100. :

"  Sic  et  tu  rabidi  nefas  tyranni
JuB8U8  pnEcipitcm  subire  lethem."
Martial,  vli.  21. :  "  lieu !  Nero  crudeliH  iiuUaque  invisior  umbra."
i.  9, :  "  magiii  Tliraseas  consuinmatique  CatoniH."
The  praises  of  Cuto  had  been  tolorutcd  by  Augxistus,  but  Poinpcius  and  the
whole  "Pharsallan  crowd"  receive  their  apotheosis  from  Statius  :
"  Qua  Pharsalia  turba  congrcgatur  ;
Et  tc  nobilo  canncn  insonantcm
Pompeii  coniituutur  et  Catoucs."

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  I39

Ten  months  still  wait  impatient  to  be  designated  by  thy
titles.^

Nero  had  his  social  hours,  and  the  temper  to  enjoy  them.
His  smile  was  attractive  ;  he  could  flatter  and  charm ;  he  had
companions  and  favourites,  possibly  friends  and
lovers.  But  the  genius  of  Domitian  was  always
solitary  and  morose ;  he  seems  to  have  had  no  per-
sonal intimacies ;  his  humour,  when  he  chose  to  unbend,  wa«
caustic  and  saturnine.  Shrewd  enough  to  take  an  accurate
measure  of  the  sycophants  around  him,  he  enjoyed  a  grim  sat^
isfaction  in  playing  on  their  fears.  If  you  only  talked  with
him  on  the  state  of  the  weather,  your  life  was  at  stake,  says  the
satirist,  and  you  felt  that  it  was  at  stake.*  In  the  depth  of  hb
disimulation  he  was  an  imitator  of  Tiberius  whom  he  profess-
ed to  make  his  model  both  in  his  measures  and  his  demeanour;
but  the  amusement  he  derived  from  dissembling  with  hb  vic-
tims was  all  his  own.  Of  the  feats  he  performed  in  disguising
his  cruel  intentions  from  the  wretches  he  was  about  to  sacri-
fice, some  ghastly  stories  were  circulated,  which  suffice  at
least  to  show  the  estimate  commonly  formed  of  him.*

The  incident  about  to  be  related  is  not  to  be  regarded  as
a  myth  invented  in  later  times  to  realize  the  popular  idea  of
Domitian's  moody  humour.  Though  narrated  by  ^^  eooaeii  rf
a  professed  satirist,  we  are  expressly  told  to  con-  de^todbV"
sider  it  as  a  veritable  history,  and  we  are  bound,  •''»'«»^
I  think,  to  accept  it  as  at  least  true  in  the  main.  If  indeed
we  admit  the  accuracy  of  everj'  particular,  it  presents  inter-
nal evidence  of  having  occurred  not  later  than  the  early  win-
ter of  the  year  84,  the  fourth  of  the  tyrant's  reign ;  and  as  it

'  Statius,  Syh.  ir.  1.  These  warlike  aspirations  are  very  like  those  at  the
beginning  of  Lucan's  poem ;  but  there  they  are  addressed  to  Rome  and  the
citizens,  here  to  the  emperor  alone.

*  Juvenal,  iv.  87. :

"  Cum  quo  de  pluviis  aut  aestibus  aut  nimboeo
Vere  locuturi  fatum  pendebat  amici."

*  Suet.  Domif.  11.;  Plin.  Paneg.  66.:  "quod  tam  infidum  mare  quam
blanditiie  principum  illorum  ?  "  etc.

140  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.81.

shows  the  insolence  of  Domitian  rather  than  his  barbarity,
the  meek  subservience  of  his  attendants  rather  than  their  ab-
ject terror,  it  may  appear  to  represent  one  of  the  earlier
scenes  of  his  career.'  About  the  end,  then,  of  the  year  84,
the  members  of  the  imperial  council,  the  select  associates
and  advisers, — not  the  favourites,  we  are  reminded,  of  the
prince,  but  rather  the  especial  objects  of  his  hate,  and  pale  as
all  might  see,  from  the  anxiety  ever  present  to  those  who
were  most  in  contact  with  him, — were  suddenly  required  to
repair  in  haste  to  their  master."  They  were,  it  seems,  eleven
in  number,  and  in  twice  or  thrice  as  many  verses  their  crimes
or  virtues  are  succinctly  traced  for  us  with  a  pen  of  cynical
sincerity.  One  after  another  pass  before  us,  Pegasus  the  pre-
fect— say  rather,  the  bailiff— of  the  city ;  for  what  is  Rome
but  the  emperor's  farm,  and  the  prefect  of  Rome,  but  his
manciple  ? '  Fuscus,  brave  and  voluptuous,  soon  to  leave  his
limbs  a  prey  to  the  Dacian  vultures ;  *  Crispus,  a  mild  and
genial  grey-beard,  who  has  long  owed  his  life  to  the  meek-
ness with  which  he  has  yielded  to  the  current,  and  shrunk
from  the  vain  assertion  of  independence ; "  the  Glabrios,  father

'  Juvenal,  iv.  85. :  "  Res  vera  agitur,"  Assuming,  as  I  say,  the  accuracy
of  details,  the  date  may  be  fixed  by  the  introduction  of  Fuscus  into  the  scene,
who  was  killed  in  Dacia  in  the  campaign  of  85,  or  at  least  quitted  Rome  for
the  frontiers  in  the  spring  of  that  year.  But  the  incident  took  place,  "jam
ccdente  pruinis  Auctumno,"  i.  e.,  at  the  beginning  of  winter ;  not  later,  there-
fore, than  November  84.  It  might  be  argued,  perhaps,  from  the  allusion  to
Britain  as  not  yet  pacified,  that  it  was  before  the  conclusion  of  Agricola's  war-
fare, and  accordingly  a  year,  or  even  two  years,  earlier.

*  Juvenal,  iv.  12. :  "  quos  oderat  ille."  Comp.  Tacitus  {HUt.  iv.  8.)  of  a
confidant  of  Nero,  who  confesses  :  "  uou  minus  sibi  anxiam  talcm  amicitiam
quom  aliis  cxilium."

*  From  the  scholiast  on  Juv.  iv.  76.,  and  from  some  notices  in  the  Corput
Jur.  Civil.,  wo  learn  that  Pegasus,  the  frcedman  of  Domitian  or  Vespasian,
obtained  the  consulship,  and  gave  his  name  to  certain  edicts  of  tiio  senate.  He
seems,  oven  by  the  satirist's  admission,  to  have  been  a  respectable  man.

*  Juv.  iv.  112.:

'•  Et  qui  vulturibus  scrvabat  viscera  Dacis
Fuscus,  marmoroa  meditatus  pnelia  villa."

*  Juv.  iv.  81.  Qulutilian  has  some  favourable  allusions  to  this  maa*a  wit
oud  temper.

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE,  141

and  son,  of  whom  the  elder  slunk  through  an  inglorious  exist-
ence in  pusillanimous  security,  the  younger  was  doomed  to
perish  iimocently  condemned  to  fight  with  beasts  in  the  are-
na;* the  blind  Catullus,  deadliest  of  delators,  with  whom
Domitian,  as  with  a  blind  and  aimless  weapon,  aimed  at  his
destined  victims  ;*  to  these  were  added  the  sly  Veiento,  the
fat  old  sycophant,  Montanus,  Crispinus  redolent  with  the
periumes  of  his  native  East,  the  vile  spy  Pompeius  who  slit
men's  throats  with  a  whisper,  and  Rubrius  the  perpetrator  of
some  crime  too  bad,  it  seems,  to  be  specified  even  in  that  day
of  evil  deeds  and  shameless  scandals.

Such  were  the  men  who  now  hurried  in  the  darkness
along  the  Appian  way,  and  met  at  midnight  in  the  vestibule
of  the  imperial  villa,  or  the  tyrant's  fortress,  which  crowned
the  long  slope  of  the  ascent  to  Alba.*  Anxiously  they  asked
each  other.  What  newsf  What  the  purport  of  their  unex-
pected summons?  What  foes  of  Home  had  broken  the
prince's  slumbers — the  Qhatti  or  the  Sicambri,  the  Hritons
or  t/ie  Dacians  f  While  they  were  yet  waiting  for  admission,
the  menials  of  the  palace  entered,  bearing  aloft  a  huge  turbot,
a  present  to  the  emperor,  which  they  had  the  mortification
of  seeing  introduced  into  his  presence,  while  the  doors  were
still  shut  against  themselves.  A  humble  fisherman  of  the
Upper  coast  had  found  the  monster  stranded  on  the  beach,

'  Juvenal,  ir.  94.  foil  The  younger  Acilius  Glabrio  hu  been  maitioiied
before.  Juvenal  insiuuates  that  his  descent  into  the  arena  was  a  fdnt  to  make
himself  despicable,  and  bo  protect  himself  from  the  emperor's  jesilousy,  and  is
compared  to  the  siumlated  folly  of  Brutus.

*  Of  Messalinus  Catullus  see  Plin.  Ep.  ir.  22.:  "qui  luminibus  orbatos
ingeuio  siebo  mala  csecitatis  addiderat ;  non  venerabatur,  non  erubeeod>at,  non
modcrabatur ;  qui  saepius  Domitiano,  non  secus  ac  tela,  quaa  et  ipsa  ccca  et
improvida  ferantur,  in  optimum  quemque  contorquebatur."

'  Juvenal,  iv.  145. :  "  quos  Albanam  dux  magnus  in  arcem  Traxerat"  The
site  of  this  villa,  which  belonged  orighially  to  Pompeius,  and  became  a  favour-
ite residence  of  the  emperors,  may  still  be  traced  on  the  slope  of  the  hill
covered  by  the  modem  Albano,  about  fourteen  miles  from  Rome.  A  detach-
ment of  praetorians  was  quartered  in  the  vicinity,  whence  the  term  arx  applied
to  the  palace  itself.

142  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  81.

beneath  the  fane  of  Venus  at  Aneona,  and  had  hurried  with
his  prize  across  the  Apennines,  to  receive  a  reward  for  so
rare  an  offering  to  the  imperial  table.  When  at  last  the
councillors  were  admitted,  the  question  reserved  for  their
deliberations  was  no  other  than  this,  whether  the  big  fish
should  be  cut  in  pieces,  or  served  up  whole  on  some  enormous
platter,  constructed  in  its  honour.  The  cabinet  was  no  doubt
sensibly  persuaded  that  the  question  allowed  at  least  of  no
delay,  and  with  due  expressions  of  surprise  and  admiration
voted  the  dish,  and  set  the  potter's  wheel  in  motion.  Such
is  the  outline  of  a  story  which  Juvenal  has  embellished
with  his  happiest  sallies,  abounding  with  illustrations  of
character  and  manners.  Could  we  believe  in  its  literal  truth,
we  might  regard  it  perhaps  as  the  most  curious  domestic
anecdote  of  antiquity ;  but  if  it  be  no  more  than  a  sport  of
wit,  and  a  bold  satirical  invention,  it  still  has  its  value  as  a
lively  representation  of  the  genius  of  the  times.^

There  was  a  time  when  Domitian  might  be  satisfied  with
indulging  his  cynical  contempt  for  his  creatures  by  merely
The  funereal  vcxiug  and  humiliating  them.  As  he  advanced
soriSed  by^  in  his  Career  of  tyranny  he  required  the  more
Dion. •  pungent  gratification  of  overwhelming  them  with

terror.  Such  an  anecdote  is  preserved  by  Dion,  and  the
narrative  of  the  historian  forms  a  fitting  pendant  to  that  of
the  satirist.  Having  once  made  a  great  feast  for  the  citizens^
he  proposed^  we  read,  to  follow  it  up  with  an  entertainment
to  a  select  number  of  the  highest  nobility.  He  fitted  up  an
apartment  all  in  black.  The  ceiling  was  blacky  the  walls
were  black,  the  pavement  was  black,  and  upon  it  loere  ranged
rows  of  bare  stone  seats,  black  also.  The  guests  were  intro*
duced  at  night  without  their  attendants,  and  each  might  see
at  the  head  of  his  couch  a  column  placed,  like  a  tombstone,
on  which  hia  own  name  was  graven,  with  the  cresset  lamp

*  Tho  reader  will  remember  the  "  Minerva's  shield  "  of  Vitollius,  and  svis-
poct  perhaps  that  thU  story,  notwitliHtiindiiiK  the  mock  gravity  of  tlie  author's
disclaimer,  is  funcifully  foinhincd  from  the  tradition  of  the  one  emperor's
gluttony,  and  tho  grim  humo\ir  of  tlie  otiier

A.U.  834.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  143

alove  it,  such  cis  is  suspended  in  the  tombs.  Presently  there
entered  a  troop  of  naked  boys,  blackened,  teho  danced  around
with  horrid  movements,  and  then  stood  still  before  them^
offering  them  the  fragments  of  food  wJiich  are  commonly
presented  to  the  dead.  The  guests  mere  paralyzed  with  terror,
expecting  at  every  moment  to  be  put  to  death  ;  and  the  more,
aJi  tJie  others  maintained  a  deep  silence,  as  though  they  were
dead  themselves,  and  Domitian  spake  of  things  pertaining  to
the  state  of  the  departed  only.  But  this  funereal  feast  was  not
destined  to  end  tragically.  Cresar  happened  to  be  in  a  sport-
ive mood,  and  when  he  had  sufficiently  enjoyed  his  jest,  and
had  sent  his  visitors  home  expecting  worse  to  follow,  he  bade
each  be  presented  with  the  silver  cup  and  platter  on  which
liis  dismal  supper  had  been  served,  and  with  the  slave,  now
neatly  washed  and  apparelled,  who  had  waited  upon  him.
Such,  said  the  populace,  was  the  Avay  in  which  it  pleased  the
emperor  to  solemnize  the  funereal  banquet  of  the  victims  of
liis  defeats  in  Dacia,  and  of  his  persecutions  in  the  city.'

Such  graceless  buflbouery  in  a  public  man  oftended  lioman
dignity  to  a  degree  we  can  scarcely  estimate.  It  was  no
empty  truism,  no  vapid  moralizing  on  the  part  of  iBdi«»tk»B  of
the  poet,  when  he  broke  oft*  abruptly  in  the  midst  {£1;^^^^^*
of  his  comio  relation,  to  exclaim  with  passionate  »»«-"k«'y-
indignation :  Setter  all  the^e  follies, — better  that  he  had  spent
in  this  despicable  child^s  play  all  the  hours  he  gave  to  the
slaughter  of  Home's  noblest  offspring,  unpunished  and  un-
requited. And  so  he  seems  to  clench  his  fist  and  grind  his
teeth  at  the  bald-pate  I^ero,  and  hails  his  destined  fall,  when
at  last  he  sliall  have  made  himself  a  terror,  not  to  his  nobles
only,  but  to  the  slaves  of  his  own  household.  But  at  this
period  the  best  blood  of  Rome  had  trickled  under  his  hand
in  a  few  intermittent  drops  only,  like  the  first  of  a  thunder
shoicer.  It  was  not  till  after  the  Antonian  conspiracy  that
the  stream  began  to  flow  in  a  copious  and  unceasing  torrent,

'  Dion,  Ixvii.  9.  From  this  allusion,  and  from  the  mention  of  the  feast
given  to  the  citizens,  we  may  fix  this  incident  to  the  period  of  Domitian's  Dacian
triumph,  a.  d.  91.

144  HISTORr  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  93.

and  the  signal  for  the  outburst  was,  perhaps,  the  death  of  the
bravest  of  the  Romans,  the  man  of  whom  Domitian  stood
most  in  awe,  whose  removal  might  seem  the  most  necessary
for  the  secure  exercise  of  his  cruelty.^

Since  his  recall  from  Britain,  the  conqueror  of  Galgacus
had  been  content  with  the  modest  dignity  of  a  private  sta-
Deathof  Agri-  tion,  in  whicli  he  enjoyed  the  respect  of  all  good
*^'a.  d.  98.  men,  and  might  feel  that  of  all  the  chiefs  of  the
and*rumour  of  ^I'^^i^s  there  was  nonc  to  whom,  had  the  prince's
poiBon.  jealousy  allowed  it,  the  contest  with  the  Dacians

and  Sarmatians  might  so  confidently  be  entrusted.  But  Do-
mitian had  plainly  intimated  that  he  dared  not  again  employ
him,  and  Agricola  had  discreetly  refrained  from  soliciting
employment.  If  he  was  named  for  an  important  government,
it  was  with  the  understanding  that  he  should  himself  decline
it ;  but  the  emperor  took  what  was  deemed  a  base  advantage
of  his  moderation,  in  withholding  the  salary  of  the  oflSce,
which,  it  seems,  ought  in  fairness  to  have  been  pressed  upon
him.  Domitian  knew  that  he  had  now  openly  mortified  a
gallant  and  popular  ofiicer,  and  he  began  to  hate  the  man  he
had  injured.  Such,  as  Tacitus  reminds  us,  is  a  common  in-
firmity of  our  nature ;  but  Domitian's  temper,  he  adds,  was
prone  to  take  ofience,  and  the  more  he  dissembled  the  more
was  he  implacable.  Yet  even  his  morose  and  sullen  humour
was  soothed  by  the  prudence  and  reserve  of  Agricola,  who
abstained  from  provoking  his  own  fate  by  a  vain  pretence  of
free-mouthed  patriotism.  Thus  he  continued  to  live  in  the
eyes  of  prince  and  people  down  to  the  year  93,  the  ninth
from  his  return  to  Rome ;  but  on  his  death,  which  occurred
at  that  critical  period,  the  rumour  spread  that  he  had  been
cut  ort"  by  poison,  l^or  myself,  adds  his  biograj^her,  I  know
nothing,  and  can  affirm  nothing.  This,  however,  I  can  say,
that  throughout  his  last  illness  the  emperor's  own  freedmen,
the  emperorh  own  physicians,  were  constant  in  their  visits  and
inquiries,  more  constant  than  courtly  etiquette  might  warrant,

'  Too.  Affric.  48.

A.  U.  846.]  [J^^)ER  THE  EMPIRE.  I45

whether  it  were  from  anxiety  or  from  eurio»ity  only.  The
day  he  died  his  last  moments  were  watched^  and  every  tymp-
torn  reported  by  set  couriers^  and  none  eould  believe  that  the
emperor  would  take  such  pains  to  get  the  Jlrtt  intimation  of
an  event  he  really  deprecated.  Nevertheless^  he  assumed  aU
the  outward  signs  of  grief  though  reckless  by  this  time  of
popular  hatred ;  for  it  was  easier  to  Domiitian  to  diuemble
his  joy  over  a  dead  enemy  than  his  fear  of  a  living  one.
7'hus  much,  at  least,  was' ascertained,  that  on  reading  Agri-
cold's  will,  in  which  he  found  himself  appointed  coheir  with
the  wife  and  daughter,  he  opeidy  avowed  his  satisfaction  at
the  honour  done  him,  and  at  the  esteem,  as  he  supposed,  thus
manifested  towards  hitn.  jSo  blind  was  he,  so  corrupted  hy
constant  flattery,  as  not  to  know  that  a  virtuous  prince  is
never  chosen  for  his  heir  by  a  virtuous  parent.*

We  have  been  too  much  accustomed  to  the  unproved  in-
sinuations of  foul  play  advanced  by  Tacitus  against  the
enemies  of  his  order  to  expect  from  him  any  cor-
roboration  for  charj^es  thus  brandished  in  the  oau*  impair
face  of  the  tormentor  of  the  senate.  We  can  iasuomS^
only  regard  them  as  a  manifesto  oi  defiance,  de-
livered indeed  long  after  the  tyrant's  fall,  and  addressed  to
an  audience  that  welcomed  every  censure,  and  applauded
every  surmise  against  him.  Yet,  there  is  a  fair  presumption
against  a  despot  to  whom  such  crimes  could  be  popularly
imputed.  Domitian  was  surely  not  incapable  of  poisoning
Agricola.  The  death  of  the  old  commander,  it  may  be  added,
was  singularly  opportune  to  the  emperor.  The  biographer,
indeed,  has  told  us  in  memorable  language,  that  the  sufferer
himself  was  fortunate  not  only  in  the  brilliancy  of  his  life,
but  in  the  seasonableness  of  his  decease.  Agricola,  he  ex-
claims, in  the  long  organ  peals  of  his  sounding  peroration,
Agricola  saw  not  the  curia  besieged,  and  the  senate  surround-
ed by  armed  men,  and  the  slaughter  of  so  many  consulars,  the

*  Tac.  Affric.  43.  Agricola  died  August  23,  a.  d.  93  (a.  v.  846^  »t  the  age
of  fifty-six.  Affric.  p.  44.  Dion  accepts  the  rumour  propagated  by  Tacitus,
and  ascribes  his  death  without  hesitation  to  poison.

VOL.  VII. — 10

146  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  93.

flight  or  exile  of  so  mxiny  noble  women,  from  one  fatal  pro-
scription. Hitherto,  lie  assures  us,  the  delators,  such  as
Carus  and  Catullus,  exercised  their  hideous  trade  in  the
secret  chambers  of  the  palace.  Not  till  after  Agricola's
death  did  they  venture  to  denounce  the  good,  the  noble,  the
wise,  in  public,  and  incited  senators  to  lay  hands  on  senators,
praetorians  on  consulars.'  It  was  opportune  for  Domitian
that  at  the  opening  of  this  sanguinary  career,  at  the  moment
when  his  terrors  had  been  frenzied  by  the  outbreak  of  the
Antonian  conspiracy,  and  his  only  safety  seemed  to  lie  in  the
swift  extermination  of  the  highest  and  the  noblest,  the  man
whom  of  all  others  he  raisht  have  thought  most  formidable,
should  be  suddenly  and  unexpectedly  removed.  Had  Agri-
cola  lived,  would  Domitian  have  dared  to  inaiigurate  his
reign  of  terror  ?  Had  Domitian  given  the  reign  to  his  sav-
age cruelty,  would  not  the  Senate  have  called  on  Agricola  to
deliver  it  ?

Such  considerations  may  still  make  us  hesitate  to  absolve

Domitian  from  the  crime  of  assassination. On  the  other

, hand,  we  must  observe  that  the  language,  both

Proscription  of „  rn •  t  t«'  •  » c »

the  best  and of  Tacitus  and  Plmv,  points  to  this  epoch  as  the

noblest  of  the  ^ e  ^ii^ii

Bcnators,  Commencement  oi  a  new  era  oi  blood,  and  leaves

us  under  the  impression  that  hitherto  the  despot's
tyranny  had  been  exhibited  in  only  occasional  excesses.  It
was  in  the  year  93  that  Pliny  filled  the  office  of  praetor;  but
he  did  not  succeed  to  the  consulship  till  a  later  period,  and
under  a  new  and  more  auspicious  reign.  Hitherto,  as  he  tells
us,  he  had  consented  to  be  advanced  in  his  public  career  by
the  archdissembler,  whose  wickedness  lie  had  not  fully  fa-
thomed ;  but  now,  when  Domitian  threw  oft*  the  mask,  and
openly  professed  a  hatred  of  all  good  men,  the  virtuous  aspi-
rant at  once  stopped  short." But  the  death  of  Agricola  was,

'  Tao.  Agric.  45. :  "  mox  nostne  duxcre  Helvidiem  in  carccrcm  inaniis ; "
Comp.  I'lin.  Ep.  ix.  13. :  "Inter  multw  Hcelcra  niultorum  nullum  atrooius  vido
batur  (juaiii  (juod  in  Honatu  Huimtor  seuutori,  pru3toriu8  consular!,  reo  judex
tnanuH  inluliKHet."

*  Plin.  I'aneg.  96. :  *'  curau  quondam  proveotus  ab  illo  insidiosissimo  prin-

A.U.  846.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  I47

as  it  were,  the  signal  for  the  proscription  of  the  most  eminent
Benators,  precisely  those  most  closely  connected  in  blood  and
feeling  with  Thrasea,  the  victim  of  Xero,  and  Helvidius,  the
victim  of  Vespasian.  Upon  them  and  others  the  fury  of  the
delators  was  let  loose,  and  charges,  on  grounds  for  the  most
])art  absurdly  frivolous,  were  advanced  in  the  senate.  Aru-
lenus  Husticus  and  Senecio  were  thus  hunted  to  death  for
writing  in  praise  of  these  noble  Stoics ;  a  son  of  Helvidius  for
appearing  to  reflect  on  Domitian's  conjugal  infidelities ;  Mifc-
ternus  for  the  crime  of  declaiming  against  tyrant*;  Cocceia-
nus  suflTered  for  having  kept  the  birthday  of  his  kinsman,  the
emperor  Otho ;  Pomponianus  on  the  still  more  trifling  pretext
that  he  set  up  in  his  house  a  map  of  the  world,  and  compiled
a  volume  of  royal  speeches  from  the  history  of  Livy;  Lucul-
lus,  formerly  prefect  in  Britain,  perished  for  giving  to  a
newly-invented  javelin  the  name  of  Lucullean.  And  lastly,
to  close  the  gloomy  list,  which  might  be  still  further  extend-
ed even  from  our  imperfect  records,  Flavins  Sabinus,  the  em-
peror's cousin,  suftered  ostensibly  on  no  graver  charge  than
the  mistake  of  a  herald  in  styling  him  imperator  instead  of
consul.  Meanwhile  Juventius  Celsus,  who  had  actually  con-
spired against  Domitian,  was  allowed  to  live,  on  his  under-
taking to  make  important  disclosures,  which  he  postponed
on  various  pretexts  till  the  emperor's  death  relieved  him  from
his  pledge.'

The  death  of  Agricola  was  also  followed  by  the  Moond
and  more  stringent  edict  against  the  pliilosophers,  a  persecu-
tion wliich  we  cannot  fail  to  connect  with  the geeo^edkt
judicial  murder  of  the  Stoics  in  the  senate,  the  |ig{|^^^
connexions  of  Thrasea  and  Helvidius. Domitian *•■••*■

cipe,  aiitequam  profiteretur  odium  bonorum  ;  postquam  profeesus  eet  subetitL**
But,  in  Ep.  iii.  11.,  he  says  that  ho  was  pnetor  in  the  year  in  which  the  philoso-
phers were  banished  (the  second  time,  a.  d.  93  extr.),  and  Hdvidius  and  others
put  to  death.  Up  to  tliis  year  then  Pliny  at  least  would  have  us  believe  that
Domitian's  conduct  had  not  been  flagrantly  tyrannicaL

'  Suet.  Domit.  10. ;  Dion,  Ixvii.  13.  Sabinus,  it  will  be  remembered,  was
the  husband  of  Julia,  and  Domitian  had  long  regarded  him  with  jealousy,  aa
affecting  imperial  airs :  "  indigne  ferens  albatos  et  ipsum  miuistros  habere,
proclamavit,  ovk  dyadlxv  iroXt/Kowariti." Suet  a  12.

148  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  94.

had  grounds,  no  doubt,  to  apprehend  an  understanding  be-
tween the  indignant  statesmen  of  the  curia  and  the  professors
of  wisdom  and  viitue  in  the  schools.  Both  held  the  same
language  and  used  the  same  watchwords ;  both  appealed  to
the  same  principles  and  the  same  living  examples ;  whether
the  Stoic  declaimed  his  liigh  political  doctrines  from  the
benches  of  the  assembly,  or  whether  he  fled  from  public
business  and  murmured  his  discontent  in  the  shades  of  do-
mestic privacy,  he  was  equally  an  object  of  suspicion  to  the
tyrant,  who  feared  open  hostility  in  the  one  case,  and  covert
intrigue  in  the  other.  While,  however,  the  politicians  were
put  cruelly  to  death,  the  rhetoricians  seem  to  have  been
treated  with  some  mildness.  If  we  may  believe  indeed  their
own  complaints,  they  were  driven  to  the  wildest  recesses  of
the  empire,  to  the  shores  of  Gaul,  the  sands  of  Libya,  and
the  steppes  of  Scythia.  But  Artemidorus,  son-in-law  of
Musonius,  was  removed,  as  Pliny  himself  informs  us,  no
further  than  to  a  suburban  villa,  while  many  teachers  of
philosophy,  on  throwing  off  their  gowns,  were  suffered  to  abide
unmolested  in  the  city.  Demetrius  was  able  to  conceal  him-
self within  the  limits  of  Italy ;  nor  is  it  clear  that  Dion  Chry-
sostomus  was  actually  relegated  to  the  Ister,  to  which  he
wandered  in  his  restless  migrations.*  Epictetus  set  up  his
professorial  chair  at  Nicopolis  in  Epirus.  Apollonius  of
Tyana,  who  had  been  convicted  of  treasonable  machinations
early  in  Doraitian's  reign,  had  been  allowed  to  settle  in  the
eastern  provinces,  and  was  still  haranguing,  agitating,  and
possibly  conspiring  in  the  pleasant  retreat  of  Ephesus.

Another,  and  yet  another  year  of  terrors  and  persecutions

followed,  till  the  jealousies  of  Domitian  were  crowned  by

the  measures  already  noticed  against  the  Jews

Rolfm  of  terror,  •'  ,  ? , •

•nd  laat  or  Christians. The  murder  ol  1  lavius  Clemens

months  of  Do-  i  i  i  <• i

mitun,  was  tlic  last,  and  perhaps  the  worst,  oi  the  atro-

cities of  this  reign. But  committed  as  he  now
was  to  a  struggle  for  life  against  all  that  was  virtuous  and

'  PhilOBtr.  Vit.  Apoll.  vii.  4.  10. ; TU.  Sophist,  i.  7.

A.U.  847.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  140

honest  among  men,  Domitian  Beem«  to  have  telt  at  last  that
the  time  for  intrigue  or  dissimulation  in  crime  was  past,  and
his  increasing  barbarity  did  not  scruple  to  evince  its  pleasure
in  the  actual  sight  of  the  suffering  it  inflicted.  Even  Nero,
it  was  said,  had  shrunk  from  witnessing  the  torments  of  his
victims,  but  Domitian  came  in  person  into  the  senate-house
to  watch  the  agonies  of  the  accused  and  the  suspected ;  he
personally  interrogated  them  when  arrested,  holding  their
chains  in  his  hands  for  his  own  security,  while  the  natural
redness  of  his  countenance  might  equally  disguise  the  glow
of  shame,  or  the  coolness  of  utter  shamelessness.*  If,  indeed,
his  victims'  pains  could  be  compensated  by  those  of  their
persecutor,  they  had  ample  revenge  in  the  fears  that  haunted
and  maddened  him.  The  dissimulation  he  had  practised
towards  them  was  a  tribute  to  the  terrors  they  continued  to
inflict  on  him.  Like  his  master  in  statecraft,  he  affected  to
cast  on  the  senate  the  odium  of  his  most  hateful  sentences,
and  sometimes  even  courted  popularity  by  pretending  to  re-
lax the  penalties  his  over-zealous  counsellors  had  recom-
mended.* But  the  very  adulation  of  the  senators  became  to
hun  a  source  of  solicitude  from  the  general  disgust  it  inspired.
Accordingly,  he  declined  with  nervous  eagerness  the  honours
they  continued  to  press  on  him,  and  he  fretfully  disclaimed
the  invidious  pomp  of  a  guard  of  knights.  Old  traditions  of
self-respect  might  still  linger  even  in  the  second  order  of
citizens,  and  disgust  them  with  an  act  of  bodily  service.  The
imperator  led  the  Romans  in  the  field,  but  the  prince  was

*  Tac.  Affrtc.  45. :  "  Nero  tuaea  Bubtraxit  oculos,  juasitque  scdam  dod
spectavit."  It  was  only  the  injury  to  Roman  nobles  that,  in  the  Tiew  of  Taci-
tus, deserved  the  name  of  "scelera,"  atrocities.  He  does  not  rqtreeent  Nero
us  withdrawing  from  the  sight  of  more  vulgar  suAriaga.  Comp.  the  expnMkn
which  follows  :  "  saevus  ille  vultus  et  rubor  quo  ae  oootn  pudorran  mnniebat,**
with  Suet.  Domit.  18. :  "commendari  se  verecundia  oris  sentiebat."  The  red-
ness was  natural,  not  factitious.  For  the  other  circumstances  mentioned  in  the
text  see  Dion,  Ixvii.  12.

*  Suet.  Domit.  11.  On  such  occasions  he  would  say:  "intelligent  m«
omnes  senatui  interfuisse."

150  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  95.

still  only  first  among  his  peers  in  the  city.'  Yet  neither
among  the  senators  nor  the  knights  was  there  spirit  enough
to  refrain  from  the  most  loathsome  excesses  of  servility ;  still
less  did  either  order  now  raise  a  hand  against  the  tyrant  who
reigned  over  them.  They  beheld  without  resistance  the
most  honoured  of  their  fellow-citizens  sacrified  for  the  crime
of  praising  the  illustrious  dead ;  they  beheld  their  writings
consumed  in  the  forum,  and  the  voice  of  the  Roman  people,
the  liberty  of  the  Roman  senate,  stifled,  as  it  were,  on  the
funeral  pyre ;  they  showed,  as  Tacitus,  himself  not  the  least
patient  among  them,  says,  a  remarkable  example  of  patience,
and  carried  subservience  to  its  utmost  limits,  as  their  ances-
tors had  carried  independence."  Instead  of  concerting  the
honourable  antagonism  of  a  Galba  or  a  Vespasian  in  the
camps,  they  left  it  to  the  freedmen  of  the  imperial  household
to  organize  assassination  in  the  palace.  Domitian,  red  with
the  blood  of  the  Lamiae,  reeking  from  the  slaughter  of  the
noblest  of  the  citizens,  fell  at  last  by  the  blow  of  a  miscreant's
dagger,  when  he  had  made  himself  formidable  to  his  own
menials.*

In  the  fifteenth  year  of  his  protracted  principate,  Domitian
had  arrested  the  prefects  of  the  palace  and  of  the  guard,  and

'  Suit.  Domii.  14.  When  Honorius  entered  Rome,  at  the  close  of  the  fourth
century,  hia  moderation  was  remarked  in  not  suffering  the  senators  to  walk
before  him.  The  emperor  had  gained  a  victory,  and  the  senate  were  willing
perhaps  to  treat  his  appearance  among  them  as  a  triumph,  in  which  case  such
deference  would  not  have  been  irregular.  But  he  recalled  them  to  a  juster  sense
of  the  circumstances,  and  of  the  real  traditions  of  the  state.  Claudian  some-
what enhances  his  merit  by  still  treating  his  entry  as  triumphal ;  vi.  Cons.
Honor.  649.

"  moderataque  laudant
Tempora,  quod  demons  aditu,  quod  pectorc,  soltis
Romanos  vctuit  rurrum  prtccedere  Putres."

■  Tac.  Affric.  2.

•  Juvenal,  iv.  ult.  Tlio  alluHion  to  the  Lnniiip  rcfora  to  the  death  of  jWius
Lamia,  who  indeed  nmy  hnvo  periHh(>d  ear1i(M-,  as  the  complaint  against  him
waa  a  laroaam  he  uttered  on  DomitianV  taking  his  wife  from  him,  which
occurred  earlj  In  the  reign  of  Vcsiiartian. Suet.  JJomit.  10.

A.  U.  848.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  151

Duigamd

could  no  longer  rely  on  those  most  closely  at-
tached to  his  personal  service.  He  could  now  SJUSS^'**'
hold  power  only  by  redoubled  terror,  and  by  the  a-biH.
suddenness  of  his  blows.  It  was  to  overwhelm  a.p.  m».
and  paralyse  the  intriguer  in  his  own  household  that  he  now
required  the  head  of  Epaphroditu8,the  freedman  who  had  Assist*
ed  Nero  in  his  suicide.'  This  man  had  been  banished  years
before  for  the  crime  of  killing  Ca-sar,  even  at  Caesar's  own  re-
quest. Domitian  would  cut  off  all  hope  of  life  even  in  exile
from  the  wretch  who  should  lay  hands  on  the  sacred  person.
But  the  sacrifice  was  unavailing.  He  could  now  p,^„j,-|^  ,^
free  himself  neither  from  men  nor  from  the  gods ;  •«>»«'»^
neither  from  the  sword  nor  the  elements.  Day  and  night  he
was  shaken  by  strange  fears.  Evil  omens  and  prodigies  mul-
tiplied. The  Chaldeans  were  impotent  to  console  him.  The
gods  by  visions  and  miracles  had  inaugurated  the  Flavian
dynasty :  the  gods,  as  the  worst  and  weakest  of  the  race
might  well  believe,  M'ere  now  manifestly  departing  from  the
Flavian  house.  It  was  said,  and  it  may  have  been  said  truly,
that  during  the  last  eight  months. of  Domitian's  reign  there
was  unusual  stir  in  the  atmosphere.  Never  since  the  days
preceding  the  first  Caesar's  fall  had  thunderstorms  been  so
frequent  or  appalling.  The  Capitol  was  struck  from  heaven.
The  Flavian  temple  had  been  scarred  by  lightning ;  the  bolts
which  fastened  the  emperor's  golden  statue  on  the  arch  of
triumph  were  torn  from  their  sockets.  Of  the  three  great
deities,  the  august  assessors  in  the  Capitol,  Minerva  was  re-
garded by  Domitian  as  his  special  patroness.  Her  image
stood  by  his  bedside :  his  customary  oath  was  by  her  divini-
ty. But  now  a  dream  apprised  him  that  the  guardian  of  his
person  was  disarmed  by  the  guardian  of  the  empire,  and  that
Jupiter  had  forbidden  his  daughter  to  protect  her  favourite
any  longer.  Scared  by  these  accumulated  horrors  he  lost  all
self-control,  and  petulantly  cried,  and  the  cry  was  itself  a

*  Suet.  DomiL  14. ;  Dion,  Ixril.  14.

162  HISTORY  OF  TflE  ROMANS  [A.D.  96.

portent:  Now  strike  Jove  whom  he  will !  ^  From  supernatu-
ral terrors  he  reverted  again  and  again  to  earthly  fears  and
suspicions.  Henceforward  the  tyrant  allowed  none  to  be
admitted  to  his  presence  without  being  previously  searched ;
and  he  caused  the  ends  of  the  corridor  in  which  he  took  exer-
cise to  be  lined  with  polished  marble,  to  reflect  the  image  of
any  one  beMnd  him."  At  the  same  time  he  inquired  anxious-
ly into  the  horoscope  of  every  chief  whom  he  might  fear  as
a  possible  rival  or  successor.  Many,  it  was  said,  he  caused
to  be  slain  on  the  intimations  thus  conveyed  to  him  of  sup-
posed danger.  Cocceius  Nerva,  the  senator  who  actually
succeeded  him,  was  only  suffered  to  live  because,  though  the
presage  of  his  destiny  might  excite  alarm,  Domitian  was
assured  by  an  astrologer,  in  whom  he  specially  confided,  that
he  was  doomed  to  die  very  shortly."  ISTerva's  career  was  in-
deed brief,  but  Domitian's  proved  still  briefer.  On  the  other
hand,  the  prince's  enemies  were  equally  busy.  The  battle  of
the  horoscopes  raged  without  and  within  the  palace.  Every
one  who  hated  and  feared  the  tyrant,  every  one  who  hoped  to
leap  into  his  place,  consulted  the  secrets  of  futurity.  The
ruler  was  really  in  danger  when  hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,
of  his  subjects  were  asking  how  long  he  was  to  live.  One
inquirer  who  imprudently  announced,  on  the  German  frontier,
the  moment  when  Domitian  should  perish  (a  prophecy  which
was  in  fact  punctually  fulfilled),  was  sent  in  chains  to  Rome,
interrogated,  and  sentenced.  At  the  last  moment  the  tyrant's
death  saved  him,  and  he  was  even  rewarded  with  a  present
from  the  successor.  Another,  it  seems,  had  uttered  a  similar
prediction  still  earlier.  Being  arrested  and  questioned,  he
had  sought  to  confirm  the  assurance  of  his  prophetic  powers
by  declaring  that  he  was  destined  himself  to  be  shortly  torn
in  pieces  by  dogs.  To  falsify  this  prognostication  the  crim-
ual  was  committed  to  the  flames;  but  the  rains decended

'  Suet  Domit.  15. ;  Dion,  Ixril.  US.

*  Suet.  Domii.  14. :  "parietea  lapido  phcngite  diatinxiU*' For  the  phengitos
{&irb  Tov  ^yyovc),  bco  nin.  Nitt,  Nat.  xxxvi.  22.

*  Dion,  IxTil  16.

A.U.  849.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  158

and  extinguished  thera,  and  the  dogs  after  alj  devoured  hia
body  as  it  lay  among  the  half-burnt  faggots.'

This  dismal  incident  was  related  to  Domitian  at  supper.
The  victim  of  superstition  had  long  since,  it  was  said,  pene-
trated futurity,  and  ascertained  too  surely  the  ^jmrihnirinM
year,  the  day,  the  hour  which  was  to  prove  fatal  2ee2S2^
to  him.  He  had  learnt  too  that  he  was  to  die  by  *'*'  ••**°**7-
the  sword.  Vespasian,  himself,  it  was  affirmed,  not  less
addicted  to  the  diviners  art  in  his  own  and  his  children's
interests,  had  ascertained  the  precise  destiny  which  awaited
his  son,  and  once,  when  the  young  Domitian  expressed  ap-
prehension of  some  mushrooms  at  table,  had  told  him  that  he
need  not  fear,  for  he  was  doomed  to  perish  by  steel,  not  by
poison.  The  omens  were  now  closing  about  the  victim,  and
his  terrors  became  more  importunate  and  overwhelming.
Something^  he  exclaimed,  is  about  to  happen^  which  men
shall  talk  of  all  the  world  over!  Drawing  a  drop  of  blood
from  a  pimple  on  his  forehead.  May  this  be  all/  he  added,
lie  had  fixed  on  the  fifth  hour  of  that  very  day  as  the  direful
period.  His  attendants,  to  reassure  him,  declared  that  the
hour  had  passed.  Embracing  the  flattering  tale  with  alacrity,
and  rushing  at  once  to  the  extreme  of  confidence,  he  an-
nounced that  the  danger  was  over,  and  that  he  would  bathe
and  dress  for  the  evening  repast.*  But  the  danger  was  just
then  ripening  within  the  walls  of  the  palace.  The  mysteries
there  enacted  few,  indeed,  could  penetrate,  and  the  account
of  Domitian's  fall  has  been  coloured  by  invention  and  fancy.
The  story  that  a  child,  whom  he  suflered  to  attend  in  his
private  chamber,  found  by  chance  the  tablets  which  he  placed
under  his  pillow,  and  that  the  empress,  on  inspecting  them,
and  finding  herself,  with  his  most  familiar  servants,  desig-
nated for  execution,  contrived  a  plot  for  his  assassination,  is
one  so  often  repeated  as  to  cause  great  suspicion.  But
neither  can  we  accept  the  version  of  Philostratus,  who  would
have  us  believe  that  the  murder  of  Domitian  was  the  deed

»  Suet.  Dion,  IL  cc  »  Suet  Domii.  16.  16.

154  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  96.

of  a  single  traitor,  a  freedman  of  Clemens,  named  Stephanus,
who,  indignant  at  his  patron's  death,  and  urged  to  fury  by
the  sentence  on  his  patron's  wife,  Domitilla,  rushed  alone
into  the  tyrant's  chamber,  diverted  his  attention  by  a  frivo-
lous pretence,  and  smote  him  with  the  sword  he  bore  con-
cealed in  his  sleeve.  It  is  more  likely  that  the  design,
however  it  originated,  was  common  to  several  of  the  house-
hold, and  that  means  were  taken  among  them  to  disarm  the
victim  and  baffle  his  cries  for  assistance.  Stephanus,  who  is
said  to  have  excelled  in  personal  strength,  may  have  been
employed  to  deal  the  blow ;  for  not  more,  perhaps,  than  one
attendant  would  be  admitted  at  once  into  the  presence.
Domitian  as-  Struck  in  the  groin,  but  not  mortally,  Domitian
sassinated.  snatchcd  at  his  own  weapon,  but  found  the  sword
removed  ffom  the  scabbard.  He  then  clutched  the  assassin's
dagger,  cutting  his  own  fingers  to  the  bone;  then  desi:)erately
thrust  the  bloody  talons  into  the  eyes  of  his  assailant,  and
beat  his  head  with  a  golden  goblet,  shrieking  all  the  time  for
help.  Thereupon  rushed  in  Parthenius,  Maximus,  and  others,
and  despatched  him  as  he  lay  writhing  on  the  pavement.^

That  the  actual  occurrence  of  great  events  is  at  times
revealed  by  divine  intuition  to  seers  and  prophets  at  a  dis-
The  act  ro-  taucc,  has  been  a  common  superstition.'  As  this
time'to'ApoU  catastrophc  was  portended  by  many  omens  be-
lonius.  forehand,  so,  according  to  the  story,  at  the  mo-

ment of  its  befalling  at  Rome,  the  sage  Apollonius,  tlie
philosopher  of  Tyana,  himself  a  reputed  wonder-worker,  had
mounted  an  eminence  in  Ephesus,  and  there  calling  the
people  around  him,  had  exclaimed  with  inspired  fervour.
Well  done,  /Stephanus  /  bravo,  Stephanus !  slay  the  murder-

'  Circumstuntiul  accounts  of  the  assassination  arc  given  by  both  Dion  and
Fhilostratuii,  which  difl'cr  principally  in  the  assertion  by  the  one  that  tho
attendants  rushed  in  at  tlicir  master's  cries,  and  slew  Stephanus  in  the  fray,
while  the  other  Bays  that  tlicy  liclped  to  kill  the  emperor.  This  latter  version
seems  to  correspond  with  tlie  slighter  notice  of  Suetonius.  See  Philostr.  Vil.
Apollon.  vlii.  26.;  Dion,  Ixvii.  18. ;  Suet.  Domil.  17.

*  Comp.  Lucan,  I'luiraal.  vii.  102. ;  Herod,  ix.  09.,  on  the  battle  of  Platsea.

A.U.  849.]  UNDER  THE  EMPmE.  155

er  !  Thou  hast  stricken;  thou  hast  wounded;  thou  htut
slain  !  And  this  is  true,  declares  the  historian  Dion,  this,
I  say,  is  true,  let  who  will  deny  it.  Dion's  account  is  identi-
cal with  that  of  the  biographer  Philostratus ;  but  from  this
earneBt  asseveration  it  may  be  inferred  tlmt  it  was  from  no
single  source,  and  no  partial  authority,  that  the  historian
himself  had  derived  it.  The  tradition,  whatever  else  may  be
its  value,  seems  at  least  to  point  to  a  wide-spread  animosity,
or  possibly  a  wide-spread  conspiracy,  against  the  tyrant
whose  crimes  after  all  were  mostly  confined  to  the  narrow
sphere  of  Rome,  and  who  may  not  unjustly  be  reputed  a
discreet  and  able  governor  of  the  provinces.  But  Domitian
had  made  himself  enemies  of  the  two  classes  who  posseMed
the  greatest  power  to  blacken  his  memory.  The  nobles,
whom  he  had  insulted  and  tormented,  poisoned,  no  doubt,
the  sources  of  history  at  Rome ;  and  the  philosophers,  whom
he  proscribed  in  the  capital,  spread  their  bitter  feelings
against  him  far  and  wide  throughout  the  empire.  I  can  only
repeat  what  I  have  said  before,  that  there  are  no  facts  to  set
against  the  overwhelming  testimony  by  which  Domitian  is
condemned;  but  the  moral  influence  of  the  philosophers  at
this  period  was  felt  in  every  quarter,  and  we  know  that  in
more  modern  times  a  prince  would  with  difficulty  obtain  a
hearing  from  posterity  who  had  given  mortal  offence  to  both
his  nobility  and  his  clergy.*

The  busts  and  coins  of  Domitian  concur  in  presenting  us
with  a  countenance  which  bears  a  strong  family  resemblance

to  those  of  the  elder  Flavii,  coarse  and  plebeian,

*  CoBtnatb*-

but  at  the  same  time  handsome,  and  not  without tw«e»tt>ejj<iw

marks  of  intellectual  power. He  appears  to  have *Bd  HmcSmM

been  vain  of  his  person,  and  to  have  suffered

much  vexation  from  the  baldness  which  his  countrymen  re-

'  Suet.  Domii.  17. :  "  occisus  est  quarto  decimo  KaL  Oct."  (Sept  18,  a.  n.
849,  A.  D.  96.)  Domitian  was  bom  Sept  24.  804,  and  oonmeDoed  his  reign
Sept.  13.  884  ;  he  perished,  therefore,  at  the  age  of  forty-five;  and  his  reign
numbered  fifteen  years  and  five  days. Comp.  Dion,  liviL  1 8.

156  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  96.

garded  as  a  serious  blemish.  By  one  indeed  who  affected
divinity  such  personal  defects  might  be  felt  as  real  disad-
vantages, and  the  affectation  of  divinity,  partly  from  vanity,
but  still  more  from  policy,  is  the  key  to  much  of  the  conduct
of  this  last  of  an  upstart  dynasty.  The  princes  who  inherited
imperial  power  are  all  marked  with  a  similar  impress.  Caius,
Nero,  and  Domitian,  were  strongly  influenced  by  the  necessi-
ty of  maintaining  the  charm  of  legitimacy,  in  default  of  a
personal  claim,  as  their  title  to  power.  The  right  of  Julius
and  Augustus  to  a  primacy  among  the  Romans,  if  not  strictly
definable,  was  generally  admitted  as  the  meed  of  genius,  or
beauty,  or  even  of  might.  It  was  the  will  of  the  gods,  veri-
fied by  manifest  desert,  and  placed  beyond  human  question.
Tiberius  was  the  chosen  of  Augustus ;  but  this  reflected  merit
he  was  anxious  to  fortify  by  the  sanction  of  the  senate,  the
representative  of  the  Roman  patriciate.  Galba  and  Vespa-
sian had  been  formally  elected  by  the  fathers,  and  their
patrons  had  sustained  their  choice  by  alleging,  in  token  of
their  fitness,  the  divine  descent  of  both  the  one  and  the  other.
These  were  the  emperors  of  the  senate ;  they  maintained  for
the  most  part  the  interests  of  the  order  in  its  struggles
against  popular  or  military  encroachment.  But  the  princes
who  were  born  in  the  purple  knew  that  the  principle  of  le-
gitimacy was  obnoxious  to  the  caste  which  pretended  to  the
right  of  election.  They  saw,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the
notion  of  hereditary  claim,  which  was  scarcely  recognized  by
the  old  Roman  law  in  cases  even  of  private  descent,  had
a  peculiar  charm  for  the  mixed  races  which  now  constituted
the  nation,  and  struck  a  chord  of  sympathy  wherever  the
artificial  rules  of  the  early  republic  were  unknown  or  forgot-
ten. Hence  the  legitimate  princes  instinctively  attached
themselves  to  the  people,  and  entered  on  a  career  of  mutual
jealousy  with  the  nobles,  which,  after  repeated  acts  of  re-
pression and  tyranny,  always  ended  in  their  overthrow  and
slaughter.  When  Suetonius  tells  us  that  Domitian  devoted
himself  to  studying  the  arts  of  Tiberius,  and  made  that  prince

A.  U.  849.]

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

157

his  model,  he  is  thinking  only,  I  believe,  of  the  deep  dissimu-
lation in  which  he  proved  so  apt  an  imitator ;  but  it  does  not
seem  that  the  later  emperor,  whose  general  policy  was  that
of  an  archaic  revival,  followed  in  other  respects  the  example
of  the  earlier,  who  was  a  hard  and  logical  materialist.

158  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  96.

CHAPTEE  LXIII.

ACCESSION  OF  NERVA. — REACTION  AGAINST  THE  TYRANNY  OF  DOMITIAN MODERATED

BY THE CLEMENCY OF NERTA. THE PRiETORIANS DEMAND THE PCNISHMENT

OF DOMITIAN's ASSASSINS. ASSOCIATION OF TRAJAN IN THE EMPIRE. DEATH

OF NERTA, A.  D. 98. A.  V. 851. ORIGIN AND EARLY CAREER OF  TRAJAN.

HIS POSITION AND OPERATIONS ON THE RHENISH FRONTIER. ROMAN FORTIFI-
CATIONS BETWEEN THE RHINE AND DANUBE. TRAJAN'S MODERATION AND

POPULARITY  IN  ROME. PLINY's  PANEGYRIC. EXPEDITION  AGANST  THE  DACIANS,

A.D. 101. ^TRAJAN CROSSES THE DANUBE. HIS SUCCESSES AND TRIUMPH,

A.  D. 103. SECOND EXPEDITION, A.  D. 104. BRIDGE OVER THE DANUBE.

CONQUEST AND ANNEXATION OF DACIA. THE ULPIAN FORUM AND TRAJAN'S

COLUMN  AT ROME.^-CONQUESTS  IN ARABIA. TRAJAN'S ARCHITECTURAL  WORKS

IN THE CITY AND THE PROVINCES. — VIGILANCE, SPLENDOUR, AND ECONOMY
OF HIS ADMINISTRATION. — HIS PERSONAL QUALITIES, COUNTENANCE, AND

FIGURE.— (a.  d.  96-115,  A.  u.  849-868.)

DOMITIAN  had  fallen  in  the  recesses  of  his  palace  hj  the
hands  of  his  own  private  attendants ;  but  no  sooner  was
the  blow  struck  than  it  appeared  how  wide  the

Cocceins  Ncrva  .  ii,/.i  •«

elected  em- conspiracy  had  reached,  how  far  the  conspirators'
senate.  plans  and  precautions  had  extended. The  chiefs

A.  i>.  96.  of  the  senate  had  evidently  consulted  together,
and  ascertained  among  themselves  the  man  on
whom  their  own  suffrages  could  be  united,  and  who  would
be  at  the  same  time  acceptable  to  the  military  power  en-
camped at  their  gates.  They  had  fixed  on  M.  Cocceius  Nerva,
a  man  well  versed  in  aifairs,  an  accomplished  speaker  and
writer,  and  whose  family  took  rank  among  the  official  no-
bility.' Though  he  had  attained  the  chief  magistracy,  he

'  Martial  addressing  him  when  a  private  citizen  speaks  favourably  of  his
literary  accomplishments  (viU.  70.,  ix.  27.),  and  says  that  Nero  stood  in  awe  of
his  poeUcal  genius.  He  was  twice  ConBul,  in  7 1  and  90.  £utropius  adds  that
be  was  "  noblUtatis  medlte."

A.U,  849.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  159

had  not  hitherto  been  eminent  in  public  life,  uor  could  he
pretend  to  superior  genius  or  striking  fitness  for  command  ;
his  birth  was  not  such  as  could  cast  a  shade  on  the  represent-
atives of  the  ancient  houses ;  his  character  was  not  of  the
severe  and  antique  cast  which  would  rebuke  the  laxity  of  his
voluptuous  courtiers  ;  self-indulgent  if  not  vicious  himself,  he
might  be  expected  to  tolerate  the  weaknesses  of  others,  while
his  age  and  intinuities  would  dispose  hira  to  study  his  own
ease  by  yielding  to  the  influences  around  him.'  The  senators
hoped  to  guide  him,  the  soldiers  could  hardly  fear  him ;  but
his  personal  appearance  was  agreeable  and  imposing,  and  in
the  charm  which  soonest  wins  and  retains  longest  the  admi-
ration of  the  j)opulace,  he  might  hope  to  rival  Augustus  and
Tiberius,  Nero  and  Titus.

Such  was  the  ideal  of  a  prince  conceived  at  this  epoch  by
the  Koman  nobles.*  The  moment  was  an  important  turning-
point  in  the  career  of  the  empire.  It  is  by  a  v,_-*--
mere  accident  indeed  that  the  series  of  imperial  wdpreiM-
biographies  compiled  by  Suetonius  closes  with
Domitian,  and  that  the  name  of  the  Ciesars  is  commonly
given,  by  way  of  eminence,  to  the  first  twelve  only  of  the
Roman  emperors.  The  title  of  Caesar  continued,  I  need
hardly  repeat,  to  be  api>lied  to  the  chief  of  the  state  from
age  to  age,  M'hile  tlie  actual  blood  of  the  first  of  the  number
was  exhausted,  as  we  have  seen,  in  Nero,  the  sixth  in  suc-
cession. Nevertheless,  the  death  of  Domitian  and  the  acces-
sion of  Nerva  form  a  marked  epoch  in  our  history,  on  which
we  shall  do  well  to  pause.  The  empire  now  enters  on  a  new
phase  of  its  existence.  Hitherto  the  idea  that  the  primacy
was  due  to  the  most  excellent  man  in  the  commonwealth,
which  easily  led  to  the  notion  of  the  emperor's  divine  char-
acter and  origin,  had,  except  in  the  transient  usurpations  of

'  Dion,  Ixviii.  1. ;  Victor,  Ctts.  13.,  charges  him  with  excess  in  wise.

*  No  doubt  it  might  be  said  of  Nerra,  as  was  said  before  of  Kso,  the  chief
of  the  conspiracy  against  Nero :  "  sed  procul  gravitas  morum  ....  idque
pluribus  probabatur,  qui  in  tanta  vitiorum  dulcedine  summum  imperium  non  re-
Btrictum  nee  perseverum  volimt."  Tac.  Ann.  xt.  48. Comp.  also  Tac  Hisi.  iL  37.

160  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  fA-D.  96.

Otho  and  Vitellius,  been  faithfully  preserved.  But  the  elec-
tion of  Nerva  was  avowedly  a  mere  matter  of  political  con-
venience. The  senate  at  last  was  master  of  the  situation,
and  it  rejected  pointedly  the  flimsy  notions  with  which  the
nation  had  so  long  sufiered  itself  to  be  amused.  Cocceius
Nerva  was  the  son  of  an  official,  the  grandson  of  a  jurist,  the
great  grandson  of  the  minister  of  Augustus.  His  ancestors
and  all  their  affinities,  for  several  generations,  were  well
known  to  the  senators,  and  they  were  very  sure  that  no  drop
of  celestial  ichor  had  ever  flowed  in  the  veins  of  any  one  of
them.  Though  the  family  had  been  settled  in  Italy  for  a
hundred  years,  it  was  known  to  have  come  over  from  Crete,
where  centuries  before  it  had  been  planted  by  an  Italian
progenitor.'  For  the  first  time  the  emperor  of  the  Romans
was  neither  a  Julius  nor  a  Claudius,  nor  a  Domitius,  nor
even  a  Flavins,  all  ancient  names  of  Latium  or  Sabellia ;  he
was  not  the  son  of  a  god,  nor  the  remotest  descendant  of  one ;
he  was  not  even  in  popular  acceptance  a  Roman  or  an  Italian,
but  a  provincial  by  origin.  The  pedants  of  a  later  age,  and
probably  the  pedants  of  that  age  itself,  remarked  apologet-
ically that  the  first  of  the  Tarquins,  the  best  and  wisest  of
the  Roman  kings,  had  been  not  a  Roman  but  an  Etruscan ;
and  they  added  truly  that  Rome  had  flourished  by  the  for-
eign virtues  she  had  grafted  upon  the  parent  stock.* But  it

'  Victor,  Ctea.  12. :  "quid  enim  Nerva  Cretensi  prudentius."  In  the  Epi-
tome he  is  styled  "  Namicnsis,"  and  this  word  some  of  the  commentators  would
restore  in  the  passage  above  cited.  There  is,  indeed,  no  other  authority  for
the  presumed  foreign  origin  of  Nerva ;  but  both  in  the  drsars  and  the  Epitome,
Victor  remarks  particularly  that  hitherto  all  the  emperors  were  either  Roman
by  origin  or  at  least  Italian,  as  Otho  and  Vespasian  :  "  hactenus  Roma;,  seu
per  Italiam  orti  impcrium  rexere :  hinc  advenso."  The  foreign  extraction  of
Nerva's  successors  generally  is  well  ascertained.  I  have  little  doubt,  therefore,
that  *'  CretcnBia  "  is  Victor's  word.

*  Victor,  Cat,  1.  (Comp.  Ejiit.  11.):  "piano  compertum  urbem  Romam
extemonim  virtuto  atque  insitivis  artibus  pnccique  crevissc."  ^fnrtial  has  two
brilliant  pancg3rrics  on  Nerva :  xi.  C,  xii.  C.  lie  compares  hhn  to  Numo,
bespeaks  for  him  the  reverence  of  the  old  Roman  heroes,  and  declares  finally
that  now  at  last,

"  Si  Cato  rcddatur,  Cwsarianus  erit."

A.U.  849.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  161

was  felt  on  all  hands  that  a  great  revolution  had  practically-
been  accomplished.  The  transition  from  Domitian  to  Xerva
may  be  compared  to  the  descent  in  our  own  history  from
James  to  William,  from  the  principle  of  divine  right  to  the
principle  of  compact  and  convention.

The  private  career  of  Nerva  had  been  that  of  his  class
generally.  His  disposition  was  naturally  good,  his  under-
standing excellent  and  well  cultivated,  his  morals

° .  ...  DoubtlU  tttl-

pliant ;  his  ambition,  if  such  he  had,  had  been  tuda  or  tiM  le-
kept  under  strict  control,  and,  satisfied  with  the
dignities  to  which  he  could  safely  aspire,  he  had  refrained
from  exciting  his  master's  jealousy.  He  had  thus  reached  in
safety  and  good  repute  the  ripe  age  of  sixty-five,  or,  accord-
ing to  some  accounts,  seventy  years.  But  Nerva  was  older
in  constitution  than  in  years ;  the  luxury  in  which  he  had
indulged  may  have  impaired  his  vital  forces,  and  he  now  suf-
fered perhaps  for  his  imprudence  by  excessive  weakness  of
digestion.  In  choosing  him  for  their  prince,  the  nobles,  too
timid  themselves  to  dispute  the  throne  with  Domitian,  may
have  looked  to  another  proximate  vacancy,  when  the  snooe**
sion  might  be  environed  with  fewer  perils.  The  prsetorians
seem  to  have  felt  no  regard  for  the  Flavian  dynasty,  which
had  never  condescended  to  humour  them.  The  legions  on
the  Danube,  to  whom  Domitian  was  personally  known,  and
whose  ofticers  were  of  his  direct  appointment,  murmured,
and  threatened  to  mutiny  at  his  fall ;  *  but  the  army  of  the
Rhine  was  controlled  by  a  brave  and  faithful  commander,
whose  influence  extended  perhaps  even  further  than  his  au-
thority ;  a  commander  whose  merits  should  have  gained  him
the  election  of  the  senate  without  a  competitor,  had  tran-
scendent merit  been  the  object  of  its  search.  It  remained  for
Nerva  to  ofter  soon  afterwards  a  share  in  the  supreme  power
to  the  man  to  whose  loyal  support  he  owed  no  doubt  his  own
tranquil  succession. We  shall  soon  arrive  at  the  association

*  Philostr.  lit  Sophist,  i.  7.,  where  the  soldiers  are  said  to  have  been
recalled  to  their  duty  by  the  persuasive  eloquence  of  the  sophist  Dion  Chrysos-
tomus.

vol.  TH. — 11

162  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  96.

of  Trajan  in  the  empire.  We  must  first  notice  the  circum-
stances of  alarm  and  perplexity  which  compelled  the  new
ruler,  whom  the  senate  and  army  had  just  chosen  with  ac-
clamations, to  strengthen  his  weak  hands  by  resorting  to  this
magnanimous  assistant.

Domitian's  body  lay  unheeded  on  his  chamber  floor,  till
it  was  removed  by  the  pious  care  of  his  nurse  Phyllis,  and
indienities  bome  On  a  common  bier  by  hired  hands  to  his
^^^Jlf^. suburban  villa  on  the  Latin  Way. From  thence

memory  of  Do-  J

mitian.  jjig  ashes  wcre  privily  conveyed  to  the  temple  of

the  Flavian  family,  and  placed  beside  those  of  his  niece
Julia.*  The  people,  who  witnessed  with  unconcern  the  trans-
fer of  power  to  a  new  dynasty,  took  no  interest  in  these
humble  obsequies,  which  the  nobles,  though  iully  resolved
that  the  third  of  the  Flavii  should  not  share  in  the  divine
honours  of  his  father  and  brother,  did  not  care  to  interrupt.
In  the  Curia  indeed  the  tyrant's  fall  was  hailed  with  tumultu-
ous rejoicings.  The  fathers  broke  out  in  execrations  and
contumelies  against  him,  placed  ladders  against  the  walls,
and  tore  down  his  images  and  trophies.  The  city  had  been
thronged  with  his  statues,  which  now  fell  in  the  general  pro-
scription ;  those  of  marble  were  ground  to  powder,  those  of
gold,  silver  and  bronze,  were  melted  down,  and  among  them
doubtless  the  noble  colossus  in  the  forum.  The  name  of  Do-
mitian  was  effaced  on  every  monument,  and  possibly  his  arch
of  triumph  overthrown,  as  well  as  the  Janus-arches  with
which  he  had  decorated  the  thoroughfares.*

»  Suet  Domii.  17. ;  Dion,  Ixvii,  18

*  Suet.  Domit.  23. ;  Plin.  Paneg.  62. ;  Dion,  Ixviii.  1.  Gruter  gives  several
inscriptioim  in  whicli  Domitian's  name  is  erased.  The  Senate  refused  to  enrol
their  latest  tyrant  among  the  national  divinities  ;  but  thoy  did  not  carry  their
rosentmcnt  to  tlie  memory  of  his  predecessors.  The  Flavian  temple  in  the
forum  was  allowed  to  stand,  and  perpetuate  the  cult  of  Vespasian  and  Titus  to
a  late  age.  It  was  burnt  and  again  restored  a  hundred  years  afterwards.
Poflliblj  the  dettrucUon  of  Domitian's  monuments  was  not  so  cunipletc  as  it  ia
repreaented;  at  leait  Procopius  derlares  tliat  he  saw  a  bronze  statue  of  this
prince  erect  in  his  own  day,  on  the  right  hand  of  the  ascent  to  the  Capitol  from
the  forum. Prooop.  Hud.  Arcan,  8.

A.U.  849.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  jgS

But  the  effervesence  of  popular  exultation  was  directed
to  more  important  objects. The  exiles  of  the  late  proscrip-
tion were  recalled  with  acclamation,  and  this  in- g^^,  ^  ^^
dulgence  embraced  the  philosophers  as  well  as ***'**•
the  political  sufferers.' There  arose  a  general  cry  against
the  instruments  of  the  tyrant's  cruelty,  and  vengeance  was
demanded  on  the  delators,  among  whom  were TtfMMniUm  «t
senators,  praetors,  and  consulars. Nerva,  discreet <*•••*•«•
and  mild,  would  have  been  content  with  staying  all  the  suits
then  in  progress,  with  reversing  all  sentences  in  force  against
Domitian's  victims,  and  compensating,  as  far  as  possible,
those  who  had  suffered ;  but  the  time-servers  who  had  crouch-
ed most  ignobly  under  the  late  tyranny  were  now  the  loud-
est in  invoking  punishment  on  its  ministers,  and  attacked
their  foes  with  a  violence  not  inferior  to  that  which  they  had
themselves  endured.* Those  who  had  no  personal  wrongs  to
avenge  resented  the  ill-treatment  of  friends  and  connexions.
Pliny,  who  had  risen  high  under  Domitian,  seized  the  occ»>
sion  to  distinguish  himself. His  vanity  does  not puny-,  ,tt»«k
allow  us  to  give  him  credit  for  disinterestedness. *•  <^ertn^
It  was  a  fine  opportunity,  so  he  himself  proclaims,  for  at-
tacking the  guilty,  for  avenging  the  innocent,  for  advancing
oneself. ' Of  all  the  enormities  of  the  tyrant's  creatures,  none,
he  says,  had  been  greater  than  that  of  Certus,  who  had  act-
ually laid  hands  in  the  Curia  on  the  noble  Helvidius. With
Helvidius  Pliny  was  connected  in  friendship,  and  they  had
common  friends  in  the  Fannias  and  Arrias,  the  noble  consorts
of  the  Pffituses  and  Thraseas. Pliny  assails  Certus  in  the

'  The  ecclesiastical  tradition  that  St  John  was  recalled  on  this  occasion
from  his  exile  in  Patmos  (Euseb.  JTitt.  JSW.  iil  20. ;  Oros.  vii.  11.)  seems  to
be  reflected  from  the  popular  recollection  of  this  recall  of  the  philosophers.
The  proscriptions  of  Domitian  and  the  rehabilitations  of  Nerra  refer  simply  to
Rome  or  Italy.

"  Plin.  Jip.  ix.  13.:  "ac  primis  quidem  diebus  rtdd'Uce  UbtrtatU  pro  sa
quisque  inimicos  sues  incondito  turbidoque  more  postulaverant,  simul  et  opre»>
serant."

'  Plin.  1.  c :  "  materiam  insectandi  nocentes,  miseros  vindicandi,  te  prO'
ferendV*

164  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  96.

senate ;  the  culprit  dares  not  appear ;  his  friends  in  vain  ex-
cuse or  intercede  for  him  in  the  face  of  the  indignant  fathers.
Nerva  refrains  indeed  from  moving  the  assembly  to  institute
a  process  against  him,  but  refuses  him  the  consulship,  and
even  supersedes  him  in  the  prtetorship.  Certus  dies  within
a  few  days;  of  mortification,  it  may  be  hoped;  for  thus
much  at  least  is  popularly  known,  that  the  image  of  Pliny,
sword  in  hand,  ever  floated  from  that  moment  before  him  in
his  disturbed  imagination.'  The  moderation  which  Nerva
prescribed  to  himself  in  regard  to  this  great  criminal  seems
to  have  marked  his  dealings  with  all  the  class,  and  the  vic-
tims of  the  delators  were  probably  little  satisfied  with  the
amount  of  favour  they  experienced  from  him.  They  had
yet  to  wait  for  a  prince  of  firmer  hand  or  harsher  character
for  the  full  revenge,  which  was  not  long  in  arriving.  Much,
however,  as  the  nobles  feared  the  treachery  and  falsehood  of
accusers  among  their  own  order,  they  lived  in  more  constant
Clemency  of  dread  of  the  denunciations  of  their  retainers.  It
Nerva.  ^jy-j^g  bailed  as  a  great  safeguard  of  their  lives  and

honour,  when  Nerva  once  more  forbade  the  admission  of  a
slave's  testimony  against  liis  master,  or  even  of  a  freedman
against  his  patron.*  The  edict  of  Titus  against  false  accusa-
tions was  revived  with  additional  penalties.  One  more  pledge
was  necessary  to  restore  the  entire  confidence  of  the  fathers.
Nerva  came  forward  of  his  own  accord,  and  vowed  that  no
member  of  the  order  should  suflfer  death  under  his  adminis-
tration. Then,  and  not  till  then,  could  Fronto,  a  distinguished
senator,  interpose  to  arrest  the  torrent  of  prosecution,  and
demand  a  general  amnesty.  It  is  ill,  he  said,  to  have  a
prince  under  lohom  no  one  may  do  anything  ;  hut  worse  to
have  one  who  lets  every  one  do  as  he  will.*

*  Plin.  1.  c. Ho  continucfl :  "  vcranc  hacc,  adfirmarc  non  ausim  ; interest
tamen  exempli  tit  vera  videnntur."

'  It  w  cfl|>ecially  mentioned  that  Norva  forbade  slaves  to  accuse  their  nias-
tcrH  of  "Jewish  mannern." Dion,  Ixviil.  1.

*  Dion,  1.  c. Uelinar  hclicveH  him  to  have  been  C.  Julius  Fronto,  and  consul
In  99  ;  Clinton  stjles  him  Cornelius,  and  places  his  consulship  in  100.

A.U.  849,]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  165

Such  free  speaking  in  the  august  presence  was  as  rare  as
the  clemency  to  which  it  pointed,  and  the  historian  who
relates  it  immediately  subjoins  the  remark,  that

,.•'-,,  ,  , ,  Nerv*'.  moder-

Nerva  was  weak m health and constitution, «ioo  miMied

. -. ,  ,  I with  timidity.

leaving  us  to  inter  that  there  was  some  want  oi
intellectual  and  moral  vigour  also  in  a  prince  who  could
listen  so  complacently  and  act  so  gently.  Such  indeed  was
Nerva's  timidity,  that  on  a  report  of  Domitian  being  yet
alive,  he  is  said  to  have  been  quite  unmanned,  and  only  sus-
tained through  the  crisis  by  the  resolution  of  his  immediate
attendants.'  However  this  may  be,  Ner>a  continued  to  act
throughout  his  brief  career  with  a  consistent  moderation,
which  was  founded,  we  may  hope,  on  principle.  He  forbade
statues  to  be  made  of  himself  in  the  precious  metals.  He
restored,  as  for  as  possible,  to  their  proper  owners  the  estates
and  fortunes  which  Domitian  had  conliscated.  He  divided
portions  of  land  among  needy  citizens  in  the  spirit  of  the
republican  legislation,  and  was  the  first  to  devise  a  scheme,
which  received  ample  development  under  his  successors,  for
relieving  the  poor  by  a  state  provision  for  their  children.*  To
meet  these  extraordinary  expenses  he  sold  great  masses  of
imperial  property,  the  accumulated  furniture  of  his  palaces,
vestments,  jewels,  and  pleasure-houses,  distributing  at  the
same  time  liberal  presents  among  his  friends.  The  more
sober  portion  of  the  citizens  were  not  displeased  at  his  re-
trenching the  expenditure  in  games  and  spectacles,  and  for-
bidding so  much  blood  to  be  shed  in  the  amphitheatre,  while
he  gratified  the  populace  by  allowing  the  return  of  the
mimes.*  He  owed  it  perhaps  to  the  briefness  of  his  tenure
of  power  that  he  was  enabled,  liked  Titus  before  him,  to
keep  his  vow  not  to  cause  the  death  of  a  senator,  and  the

»  Victor,  EpU.  12.

'  Dion,  Ixviii.  2.  Nerva  founded  or  restored  colonies  at  Scylacium  and
Verulae  in  Italy,  and  Sitifa  in  Mauretania.  Zumpt,  Comrn.  Ejngr.  L  399.
Victor,  Epit.  12.:  "pucUas  puerosque  natos  parentibus  egentibus  sumpta
publico  per  Italisa  oppida  ali  jussit"

'  Nerva  forbade  the  single  combats  of  the  Gladiators. Zonar.  xi.  20.

166  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  97.

favour  in  which  he  was  held  hy  the  nobles  shines  forth  in  the
famous  panegyric  of  their  spokesman  Tacitus,  that  he  recon-
ciled the  two  conflicting  political  principles,  the  authority
of  the  prince,  and  the  freedom  of  the  people.*  The  Romans
indeed  took  pleasure  in  comparing  him  with  the  virtuous  son
of  Vespasian,  and  the  story  told  of  Titus  that  he  put  swords
in  the  hands  of  suspected  conspirators,  to  show  his  just  con-
fidence in  his  own  merit,  was  now  repeated,  w^hether  truly
or  not,  of  Nerva.'  Nor  was  it  forgotten,  however,  that  this
good  ruler  took  care  to  confirm  the  best  measures  even  of  the
monster  Domitian,  and  particularly  the  edict  against  mutila-
tion.' On  reviewing  his  career,  Nerva  could  boast  with
justice  that  he  had  committed  no  act  which  should  prevent
him  from  abdicating,  if  he  thought  fit,  in  perfect  security.
Nevertheless  he  did  not  escape,  even  during  his  lifetime,
some  harsh  reflections  on  a  clemency  so  ill  appreciated.  One
evening  Mauricus,  just  returned  from  banishment,  was  sup-
ping with  him.  Among  the  guests  was  Veiento,  mentioned
above  among  the  vilest  of  Domitian's  creatures,  who  had
made  himself  bitter  enemies  by  his  zeal  in  denouncing  and
prosecuting  the  noblest  Romans.  The  conversation  fell  on
the  subject  of  Catullus,  then  lately  deceased,  whose  pander-
ing to  the  jealous  humours  of  Domitian  has  been  already
mentioned.  Were  Catullus  noio  alive,  said  Nerva,  what
would  his  fate  be  f  He  would  he  supping  with  us,  rejoined
the  free-spoken  Mauricus,  with  a  glance  at  the  odious  de-
lator.*

'  Tac.  Agrie.  8. :  "  rea  olim  diBSOciabiles  miscuerit,  principatum  et  liber-
Utem."

'  Dion,  Ixvili.  2.

•  Dion,  1.  c.  Nerva  is  said  to  have  forbidden  tiio  marriage  of  uncles  with
their  brotiicrH*  dmij^litors,  a  licentious  innovation  which  Doniitinn,  ns  wo  have
seen,  had  discountenanced.  All  the  tyrant's  legislation  would  probably  have
been  swept  away  had  not  his  boat  enactments  or  views  been  sustained  by  his
BucoeMor.

*  Plin.  Ep.  iv.  22.  For  the  cause  of  Domitian's  animosity  to  Junius  Mau-
ricui,  tee  Tac.  //iW.  iv.  40.,  and  for  hiH  banishment  Agric,  48.  He  was  brother
of  Aruknaa  KuBticus,  and  sutTua'd  in  the  proecription  of  the  year  08.

A.U.  850.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  167

On  the  whole  the  senators  were  well  satisfied  with  the

prince  they  had  set  up,  and  they  allowed  his  merits  to  be

blazoned  forth  without  a  breath  of  detraction. „

A Complweyof
The  name  of  Nerva  has  been  associated  m  after cwpaniiM  <w-

fe*t«<L

ages  with  the  mildness  of  age,  and  the  charra  of
paternal  government.*  Nevertheless  he  did  not  escape  the
penalty  of  his  station.  Plots  were  formed  against  him,  to
which  even  his  good  qualities,  connected  as  they  might  seem
to  be  witli  some  weakness  of  character,  may  have  partly  con-
duced. An  attempt  was  made  to  overthrow  him  by  a  certain
Calpurnius  Crassus,  who  boasted  his  descent  from  the  family
of  the  triumvir,  and  whose  haughty  temper,  though  controlled
by  the  firmer  hand  of  preceding  despots,  could  not  brook  the
supremacy  of  one  of  his  own  class,  no  more,  as  he  himself
professed,  than  the  first  of  the  senators.  This  conspiracy,
however,  was  easily  suppressed.  The  nobles  of  the  city,  even
liad  they  generally  wished  it,  had  long  lost  the  art  of  con-
spiring. It  would  seem  that  only  freedmen  and  soldiers
could  now  overthrow  an  emperor.  Nerva,  faithful  to  his
promise,  declined  to  take  the  life  of  his  enemy,  and  merely
banished  him  to  the  pleasant  retreat  of  Tarentum.*  But  a
greater  danger  beset  the  prince  of  the  senators  from  another
quarter.  When  the  nobles  were  satisfied  the  soldiers  were
generally  discontented.  Casperius  .^lianus,  pre-  jiuUay  of  the
feet  of  the  praetorians  under  the  last  emperor,  S^^j^d^mSd
Avhora  Nerva  had  allowed  to  retain  his  important  rf*^JSSSJ7*
post,  excited  the  guards  of  the  palace  against  his  •■••■■'^
too  generous  master,  and  encouraged  them  to  demand  the
blood  of  Domitian'  s  assassins.  No  inquiry,  it  seems,  had
been  made  into  the  act  which  had  freed  the  Romans  from
their  odious  yoke ;  the  perpetrators  of  the  deed  had  not  been
punished,  but  neither  had  they  been  rewarded.  It  was
enough  that  the  deed  was  done,  a  deed  of  bad  example  for
princes,  yet  such  as  both  the  prince  and  the  people  might
fairly  turn  to  their  own  advantage. Perhaps,  had  the  assas-

*  Auson.  Cos.  18. :  "Nerva  senex,  princeps  nomine,  mente  parens."
'  Dion,  Ixviii,  3. ;  Victor,  L  c.

IQQ  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  fA,  D.  97.

sins  been  citizens,  they  would  have  been  hailed  with  public
demonstrations  of  gratitude,  like  the  tyrannicides  of  earlier
days;  but  the  act  of  slaves  or  freedmen  was  decorously-
passed  over  in  silence.  Nerva,  however,  opposed  himself  to
this  threatened  violence  with  a  noble  courage.  He  bared  his
neck  to  the  praetorians,  whose  fury  he  had  no  means  of  resist-
ing, and  oflfered  himself  as  a  sacrifice  in  place  of  their  victims.
But  Casperius  was  master^  at  least  for  a  moment,  and  directed
the  slaughter,  without  form  of  trial,  of  Parthenius,  and  such
of  his  associates  as  could  be  arrested.'  When  the  deed  was
done,  nothing  remained  for  the  emperor  but  to  make  such
excuse  for  it  in  public  as  the  circumstances  admitted.  It
might  be  represented  as  the  hasty  explosion  of  mistaken
zeal,  of  extravagant  loyalty,  of  blind  devotion  to  the  military
sacrament.  To  the  new  emperor  and  to  his  well-wishers,  the
senate  and  people  of  Rome,  it  was  a  pledge  that  a  life  dear
to  the  interests  of  peace  and  freedom  should  be  well  protected
or  signally  avenged.  But,  whatever  he  might  say  in  public,
Nerva  felt  in  his  heart  the  disgrace  of  being  thus  controlled,
an  imperator  by  his  soldiers,  and  resolved,  if  he  could  not
punish  this  outbreak,  at  least  never  to  subject  himself  to  such
Nerva!  adopta  another.  He  addressed  a  letter  to  Ulpius  Tra-
uMdstes  b"m  janus,  then  commanding  on  the  Rhine,  offering
In  the  empire,  jjj^  j^  gj^arg  Jn  the  empire,  and  invoking  him,
according  to  the  story,  with  a  verse  of  Homer,  to  exact
retribution  in  arms  from  the  Greeks  for  the  tears  they  had
drawn  from  his  sovereign.*  Without  aAvaiting  a  reply,  Nerva
ascended  the  Capitol,  and  convening  the  citizens  before  the
temple  erf  Jupiter,  proclaimed  his  new  colleague  as  his  own
adopted  son,  witli  the  words,  I  hereby  adopt  M.  Ulpius
Nerva  Trqjanua:  may  the  gods  bless  therein  the  senate,  the

'  Dion,  L  c. ;  Victor,  £^.  24. :  "  sed  neglecto  principo  rcquisitos  jugulo-
vcre."  Plin.  Paneg.  6. :  "  magnum  illud  socciilo  dodocus  :  ma{:;imin  roip>d)licn9
vulnufl  iniprc88um  cat.  Imporator  ct«parcn8  generis  liuiiiuni  ubsessuH,  eu])tus,
Inclusus :  ablata  mitlsflimo  Bcnl  scrrandorum  homiiuim  potostaB."  It  must  bo
remembered  that  Plloy  uses  all  the  emperors  as  foils  to  bis  own  patron  Trnjan.

*  Dion,  L  0. :  vlatuxv  havaoX  i/ii  S&Kpva  aolai  (iiXeaat.

A.U.  850.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  169

people,  and  myself.  This  act  he  again  ratified  with  legal
solemnities  in  the  curia,'  the  nobles  admitting  without  demur
the  exercise  by  the  emperor  of  the  rights  common  to  every
father  of  a  Roman  family,  though  in  this  case  it  implied  no
less  than  a  pledge  of  the  imperial  succession.  Their  habitual
deference  to  legal  principles  could  not  have  blinded  them  to
the  political  disability  they  thus  practically  imposed  upon
themselves.  Henceforth,  the  power  of  adoption,  with  all  its
legitimate  consequences,  was  regularly  claimed  by  the  reign-
ing emperor,  and  after-ages  acknowledged  the  wisdom  with
which  for  generations  it  was  exercised.*  The  aged  emperor
was  thus  confirmed  on  his  throne.  The  turbulent  guards  of
the  city  trembled  before  the  legions  of  a  resolute  chief,  and
shrank  back  into  their  camp. Nerva  had  mated ^ ^ «„

^  Death  oTNer-

his  assailants :  but  his  own  game  was  now  nearly ▼«,
played  out,  and  he  enjoyed  but  a  short  breathing a.  d.  ml
space  of  ease  and  security  before  his  death,  which
happened  on  the  23d  of  January,  98,  after  a  reign  of  sixteen
months  and  a  few  days  only.

The  little  our  records  have  transmitted  to  us  of  the  life
and  qualities  of  Ner\'a  can  be  but  inadequately  supplied  by
the  testimony  of  busts  and  medals  to  his  per-
sonal  appearance ;  nevertheless  none  of  the  em- wmtwuot  tt
peroi's  is  more  vividly  characterized  in  the  effigies
which  remain  of  him. The  representations of  Ner>"a in
marble  are  numerous,  and  rank  among  the  most  interesting
monuments we possess of  this description. Among  the
treasures  of  antiquity  preserved  in  modem  Rome  none  sur-
passes, none  perhaps  equals,  in  force  and  dignity,  the  sitting
statue  of  this  emperor,  which  draws  all  eyes  in  the  Rotunda

'  Dion,  1.  c. The  adoption  took  place  in  October,  97.
*  Claudian,  xxviii.  417.:

"  Hie  illi  mansere  viri,  quos  mutua  virtiis

Legit,  et  in  nomen  Romanis  rebus  adoptana

Judicio  pulcram  seriem,  non  sanguine  duxit.

Hie  proles  atavum  deducens  ^Elia  Xervam,

Tanquillique  Pii,  bellatoresque  Seven."

170  "HISTORY  OF  THE  BOMANS  [A.D.  98

of  the  Vatican,  embodying  the  highest  ideal  of  the  Roman
magnate,  the  finished  warrior,  statesman,  and  gentleman  of
an  age  of  varied  training  and  wide  practical  experience.*
Such  a  figure  an  Englishman  might  claim  with  pride  as  the
eflSgy  of  a  governor-general  of  half  a  continent.  Unfortu-
nately, we  are  too  little  acquainted  with  the  original  to  pro-
nounce on  its  agreement  with  his  actual  character ;  and  we
could  wish  that  it  had  come  to  us  as  the  portrait  of  an  Agri-
cola, — of  one  whose  magnanimity  we  accept  on  trust  from
the  panegyric  of  Tacitus.  We  do  not  hear,  indeed,  of  Nerva
that  he  ever  commanded  in  the  provinces,  or  led  an  army
against  the  foes  of  the  empire ;  nor,  in  sooth,  can  he  be  ab-
solved from  the  charge  of  vices,  common  to  the  idle  and
luxurious  of  liis  rank  and  class,  which  in  better  and  healthier
times  would  argue  great  moral  degradation ;  yet,  if  we  really
contemplate  his  likeness  in  the  noble  figure  in  the  Vatican,
we  may  fairly  say  of  the  prince  as  the  historian  affirms  of
the  general:  you  might  easily  deem  him  good ;  you  would
•willingly  believe  him,  greats

Your  filial  love,  most  venerable  imperator,  m,ade  you  wish

your  succession  to  be  long  retarded  ^  but  the  gods  were  eager

to  advance  your  virtues  to  the  helm,  of  state,  which

Kcrva's  merit  , , "^ . ,  ,.  „,,.,.  -r

In  adopting  you  had  promised  to  direct.  This  being  so,  I
invoke  all  happiness  on  yourself  and  on  m,ankind,
as  befits  the  age  which  is  illustrated  by  your  name.  For  my
own  sake,  and  for  the  people's  sake,  I  pray  for  your  health  both
in  mind  and  body.* Such  is  the  form  of  congratulation  with

'  The  antiquity  of  this  remarkable  Btatue  is  acknowledged.  It  is  asserted,
however,  that  the  upper  and  lower  halves,  the  one  naked,  the  other  draped,
did  not  originally  belong  to  the  same  figure.  Meyer  on  Winckclmann,  Oeach.
der  KwuU,  lie,  xi.  lUich.  8.  Kap.

•  Tac.  Agrie.  44. :  "  (juod  si  habitum  quoque  ejus  posteri  noscere  volint,
decentior  quam  sublimiur  fuit;  nihil  mctus  in  vultu,  gratia  oris  suporcrat;
bonion  Tirum  facile  croderes,  magnum  llbcnter."  Comp.  Julian.  C^rmr. :
irapijXBev  M  robrotc  yfpuv  h^O^vat  KoXbc — Xi/iwei  yhp  lanv  8re  Kal  h  r^*
Y^p^  rb  iciXKoc — tvrvxtiv  irpgdraroc,  xP1f^'''^oai  SiKatdraroc.

'  Plin.  Bp.  X.  1.  ThlH  itt  the  finit  of  a  series  of  letters  which  embraces  the
oorretpondenoe  between  Pliny  and  Trajan,  and  gives  us  a  curious  insight  into
the  mannen  of  the  times,  and  tlio  relation  of  the  prince  to  his  people.

A.U.  851.]  UNDER  THE  ImPIBE.  171

which  Pliny  hails  the  consummation  of  his  friend's  greatness,
when  the  lately-adopted  son  and  associate  of  the  deceased
Nerva  was  acknowledged  by  the  seqate  and  people  as  his
legitimate  successor.  Nerva's  career  had  been  too  brief  to
ferfeit  the  hopes  entertained  of  his  clemency  and  discretion,
but  it  allowed  him  to  perform  the  one  act  by  which  he  is  dis-
tinguished among  the  Caesars,  the  act  by  which  he  earned
the  blessings  of  his  people,  and  secured  tlie  approbation  of  a
late  posterity.  The  choice  he  made  of  Trajan  for  his  asso-
ciate and  heir  was  full,  even  at  the  time,  of  happy  augury ;
and  when  he  was  suddenly  removed  but  a  few  months  later,
the  Romans  were  satisfied  with  the  prospect  he  bequeathed
them,  and  transferred  their  vows  of  allegiance,  without  a
murmur  or  a  misgiving,  to  one  whom  they  fiilly  believed  to
be  the  best  and  bravest  of  his  countrymen.  This  loyal  ac-
ceptance of  the  legitimate  consequences  of  their  own  act  was
creditable  to  the  sense  and  feeling  of  the  Roman  nobles ;  for
it  cannot  be  doubted  that,  had  Nerva  made  himself  an  ob-
ject of  detestation,  they  would  have  repudiated  his  adoption
as  easily  as  any  other  of  the  legal  acts  of  his  principate.
They  proceeded  to  mark  their  respect  and  gratitude  even
more  strongly,  by  reviving  in  his  favour  the  rite  of  deifica-
tion which  they  had  refused  to  Domitian.  To  such  a  distinc-
tion Nerva,  in  thieory  only  the  first  of  the  citizens,  could  have
no  such  pretensions  as  a  Julius,  or  even  a  Flavins.  But  the
inconsequence  of  the  proceeding  might  easily  be  overlooked,
especially  if  Trajan,  as  we  may  suppose,  himself  solicited  it.
The  act  itself  had  now  doubtless  lost  some  portion  of  its
earlier  significance,  and  henceforth  the  claims  of  deceased
princes  to  divinity  were  regarded  as  purely  political.

M.  Ulpius  Trajanus,  whose  conduct  in  the  purple  has
placed  him  in  the  foremost  rank  among  the  heroes  of  history,
is  little  known  to  us  before  his  elevation,  and  we o^j^  ^^^,
may  not  at  first  sight  perceive  the  grounds  of  the 1^^  ^^,
favour  in  which  he  was  already  held  by  his  con- **'  •^  '''^*'-
temporaries.' The  Ulpian  Gens,  to  which  he  was  attached,

*  Eutropius,  Tiii  2.,  alone  gives  him  the  additional  name  of  Crinitus :

172  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  98.

though  reputed  ancient,  was  obscure,  nor  had  it  contributed
a  single  name  to  the  Fasti.  But  the  Traian  Gens,  from  which
some  ancestor  of  the  emperor  had  passed  by  adoption  into
the  Ulpian,  was,  perhaps,  still  less  known ;  and  even  after
the  greatness  and  virtues  of  Trajan  had  drawn  attention  to
it,  historians  and  biographers  could  say  no  more  of  his  family
than  that  it  was  probably  transplanted  from  Italy  to  Spain,
when  Scipio  Africanus  founded  a  colony  at  Italica  on  the
Baetis.  The  Trajani  were  men  of  some  note  in  the  province,
which  gave  birth  to  many  personages  distinguished  after-
wards at  Rome.  Trajanus,  the  father  of  the  emperor,  and
Silius  Italicus,  the  consul  and  poet,  were  natives  of  the  same
colony,  and  nearly  contemporary  in  age;  but  their  career
was  different,  for  while  Silius,  a  man  of  fortune  and  literary
acquirements,  enjoyed  fame  and  fashion  in  the  capital,  his
fellow-citizen  devoted  himself  to  a  career  of  arms,  won  victo-
ries over  the  Parthians  and  the  Jews,  gained  the  triumphal
ornaments,  and  governed  provinces.  Trajanus  had  com-
manded the  Tenth  legion  at  the  bloody  storming  of  Joppa ; '
he  had  proved  himself  an  adroit  courtier  as  well  as  a  gallant
officer ;  and  having  advanced  in  due  time  to  the  consulship,
reached  the  summit  of  official  distinction  as  proconsul  of
Asia.  After  this  we  hear  no  more  of  him ;  but  there  seems
reason  to  believe  that  he  survived  his  son's  elevation  to  power,
and  received  from  him  after  death  the  honours  of  apotheosis."

perhaps  a  by-name  of  his  family  from  the  Turdetanian  fashion  of  wearing  their
hair  long.  The  name  is  not  recognized  on  the  monuments.  Wo  have  no  com-
plete biography  of  Trajan.  Notices  of  his  birth  and  early  career  are  foimd  in
Eutropius  and  Aurclius  Victor,  Cces.  13.,  JUpit.  13.  Dion  compressed  the  rcigna
of  Nerva  and  Trajan  into  a  single  book,  of  which  we  possess  an  imperfect  and
confused  epitome.  Pliny,  in  his  Ijcitera  and  Panegifricy  is  our  most  valuable
authority.  These  and  other  materials  had  long  since  been  put  together  by
TiUcmont  in  the  llidorti  of  the.  Emperors,  which  was  long  generally  acknowl-
odgt^M  the  beat  compilation  that  could  be  made.  But  recently  the  elaborate
work  of  Francke,  (Jtwhichte  IVajaut,  has  supplied  many  deliciencies  in  Tille-
mont,  and  the  chronology  of  tho  latter  year  of  this  reign  has  been  put  on  a
more  satiiifactory  footing.

*  J<mph.,BeU.Jud.m.n.

'  Plioy  in  hi*  PoMgyric  (a.  d.  100)  speaks  of  Trajan  the  father  as  then

A.U.  851.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE,--  173

Trajan,  the  son,  was  born,  according  to  the  most  probable
statement,  towards  the  end  of  the  year  53,  and,  accordingly,
on  his  accession  to  the  undivided  sovereignty,  had ^  ,

" ''  \  Eirly  carv>«T  of

reached  the  middle  of  his  forty-fifth  year.'  i  rom  tbe  emperor
early  youth  he  had  been  trained  in  the  camp  by
his  father's  side,  and  had  gained  the  love  and  confidence  of
the  legions,  among  which  he  had  waged  the  border  warfare
of  the  empire.  He  seems  to  have  risen  through  the  various
grades  of  the  service,  and  had  held  the  post  of  military  trib-
une for  ten  years,  in  which  he  had  become  familiar  with  all
the  methods  and  resource^  of  Roman  warfare,  and  had  learnt
the  names  of  oflicers  and  soldiei-s  in  many  distant  garriBons,
whose  bravery  and  whose  wounds  he  had  personally  wit-
nessed.* He  had  s^own  talents  for  administration,  as  well
as  for  war,  and  to  'his  personal  merits  alone  must  he  have
owed  his  periodical  recall  from  the  camp  to  occupy  the  chief
places  in  the  civil  government.  It  may  be  presumed  that  an
officer  who  was  deemed  qualified  to  become  pnetor  and  con-
sul, had  enjoyed  the  ordinary  advantages  of  training  in  rhet-
oric and  literature;  but  Trajan's  attainments  in  learning
were  slender,  and  modesty  or  discretion  led  him  to  conceal
deficiencies  rather  than  affect  accomplishments  l\e  did  not
possess.* His  elevation  to  the  consulship,  which  occurred  in

dead,  but  not  yet  deified  ;  the  interval,  we  may  suppose,  would  not  be  loog.
That  he  was  actually  "  consecrated  "  appears  from  a  medal  inscribed  :  "  Wti
Nerva  et  Trajanus  pater."

*  The  statements  of  Eutropius,  Victor,  and  Etisebius  Ttry  by  one  or  more
years.  Dion,  who  specifies  the  length  of  his  reign  and  day  of  his  death,  makes
him  4 1  at  his  accession.  But  as  PUny  assures  ua  that  he  served  in  his  father*!
Parthian  campaign,  which  can  hardly  be  placed  later  than  67,  be  must  have
been  then  at  least  14  years  of  age,  and,  therefore,  the  latest  date  we  can
assign  to  his  birth  would  be  53,  that  is,  44  years  before  his  adoption.

"  Plin.  Paneff.  15.

*  Victor,  Hpit.  13.:  "quum  ipse  parcae  esset  scientix,  moderatequA  elo-
quens."  Dion,  Ixviii.  1. :  '^ratdeiag  fiev  yap  OKpi/iovg,  bar/  kv  ?j6yoic,  ov  fi^itxe.
Comp.  Julian,  Coesar.  of  Trajan :  6  de  Koinep  Sivdfievo^  Xiyttv  virb  pgdvfiiac
....  ^eyyofievoc  fid?^.ov  ^  ?-iyuv.  An  epigram  in  the  Anthologia  is  ascribed
to  Trajan,  and  he  composed  commentaries  on  his  Wars  in  Dacia.  See  Reimar
on  Dion,  1.  c. The  story  that  he  was  instructed  by  Phitarch  may  be  rejected

174  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  98.

91,  may  have  seemed  even  beyond  his  deserts,  and  hence  the
story  which  obtained  currency,  at  least  at  a  later  period,  that
it  was  attended  with  omens  portending  his  own  accession  to
the  purple,  and  at  the  same  time  the  sudden  downfall  of  his
colleague  Glabrio.*  When  his  term  of  office  expired,  Trajan
succeeded  to  a  government  in  Spain,  which  he  afterwards
exchanged  for  a  command  in  the  lower  Germany.  The
tribes  beyond  the  Rhine  had  been  exasperated  rather  than
repressed  by  the  idle  campaigns  of  Doraitian,  and  required
for  their  control  a  firm  hand  and  an  experienced  eye.  Trajan,
His  discreet  whilc  faithful  to  his  imperator,  had  a  discreet  re-
™mmMde"r  on  g^^^  to  his  own  Interests  also.  He  plunged  into
the  Ehme.  ^q  aggressivc  Warfare,  but  was  satisfied  with  the
fame  of  vigilance  and  prudence  for  preserving  peace  on  the
frontiers."  By  such  self-restraint  he  escaped,  perhaps,  the
mortification  of  an  Agricola,  retained  his  post  throughout  the
latter  years  of  his  jealous  master,  and  reaped  the  fruits  of  his
temperate  reserve,  when  the  prince  of  the  senate  required
the  protection  of  his  best  officer  against  his  own  mutinous
guards.

When,  indeed,  Nerva  was  reduced  to  seek  this  protection,

his  choice  would  necessarily  lie  between  the  commanders  of

the  two  great  European  divisions  of  the  Roman

Accession  of  o  i

Trujan  to  the  forccs,  the  prefect  of  the  Rhenish,  and  the  prefect
of  the  Danubian  legions ;  for  the  chief  of  the
army  of  Syria  lay  at  too  great  a  distance  to  compete,  at  least
at  the  moment,  with  either  of  these  formidable  champions.
But  of  the  military  triumvirate  in  whose  hands  the  fate  of
Rome  now  actually  resided,  the  commander  on  the  Rhine  had
generally  the  most  decisive  influence ;  and  it  was  fortunate
for  tlie  feeble  emperor  that  he  possessed  at  this  juncture  in
liis  lieutenant  Trajan  the  most  devoted  as  well  as  the  bravest
of  partisans.  The  adoption  of  such  a  colleague  silenced  dis-
affection ;  the  few  remaining  months  of  Nerva's  reign  were

M  a  fiction,  founded,  perhaps,  on  the  favour  ho  undoubtedly  showed  to  that
philosopher.

'  Soot.  DomU.  12.  "  rihi.  Paneff.  14.

A.U.  851.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  175

passed  in  tranquillity  and  honour ;  and  even  the  praetorians

acquiesced  without  a  murmur  in  the  accession  of  the  valiant

captain  on  the  Rhine.

The  messengers  of  the  senate,  charged  with  the  vows  of

all  the  citizens,  found  Trajan  among  his  soldiers  at  Cologne,

and  there  announced  to  him  his  succession.' He

TMan  glTM
had  already  been  nominated  to  his  second  con- ptedcMior

'  modentioB.

sulship ;  he  now  assumed  all  the  great  functions
of  state  which  together  constituted  the  imperial  power.  He
replied  with  a  letter  to  the  senate,  in  which  he  promised,
after  his  father's  example,  that  no  magnate  of  their  order
should  suffer  capitally  during  his  reign ;  and  this  formal  an-
nouncement was  accepted  as  a  pledge  of  constitutional  gov-
ernment. Nor  was  it  an  empty  compliment.  It  implied  a
promise  to  conduct  affairs  in  a  spirit  of  moderation  ;  not  to
pamper  the  soldiers  or  the  people ;  not  to  scatter  the  public
treasures  in  needless  debauchery ;  not  to  create  a  dire  neces-
sity for  rapine,  which  must  mark  for  plunder  and  slaughter
the  wealthiest  and  noblest  of  the  citizens.  So  perfect  was
the  content  of  all  classes,  so  easily  did  the  wheels  of  admin-
istration move  in  the  capital,  that  the  new  emperor  was  not
required  even  to  hasten  to  Rome,  and  assume  the  reins  in
person.  He  had  conceived  a  system  of  government  different
from  that  of  any  of  his  predecessors.  Though  not  wanting
in  ability  for  the  direction  of  civil  affairs,  his  experience  and
his  tastes  were  chiefly  military.  Long  accustomed  to  the
life  of  the  camps,  he  had  been  debarred  by  his  master's  jeal-
ousy from  the  full  exercise  of  his  genius  for  war ;  but  he  had
laboured  iu  restoring  the  discipline  of  the  legions,  and  had
attached  them  personally  to  him,  even  while  forced  to  restrain
their  ardour  for  more  active  employment.  He  flattered  him-
self that  he  had  prepared  a  career  of  victory  by  the  perfection
to  which  he  had  brought  the  instrument  which  was  to  ac-
complish it.  Trajan  completed  the  fortification  of  the  Rhen-
ish frontier  by  the  establishment  of  colonies  and  military

'  Victor,  Epit.  13. : "  Hie  imperium  apud  Agrippinam  nobilem  Gallin
coloniam  accepit."

176  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  98.

posts. Nigh  to  the  ruined  leaguer  of  Castra  Vetera  he

planted  the  station  which  bore  for  centuries  the  name  of  Ulpia

Traiana. He  threw  a  bridge  across  the  Rhine  at

Tnjan's bridge ,^ r  ^  , ,  , °  ., t  t i

across  the  Mainz,  and  settled  a  colony  ten  miles  beyond  the

river,  possibly  at  Hochst,  and  another  further
south,  at  the  medicinal  springs  of  Baden  Baden.^  He  repair-
ed and  strengthened  the  lines  commenced  by  Drusus,  and  ex-
tended by  Tiberius,  which  ran  from  a  point  nearly  opposite
to  Bonn,  in  an  oblique  direction,  across  the  Taunus  district ;
and  he  contemplated  carrying  a  continuous  fosse  and  rampart
to  the  bank  of  the  Danube.  The  upper  waters  of  the  two
great  rivers  of  western  Europe  approach  very  near  to  each
other  in  the  Black  Forest,  where  the  Danube  has  its  source  ;
but  from  thence  they  rapidly  diverge  to  the  north  and  east
respectively.  The  wedge  of  land  between  them  had,  from
the  time  of  Caesar's  contest  with  the  Suevi,  been  abandoned
for  the  most  part  by  the  natives  to  a  slender  but  constant
immigration  of  Romanized  Gauls ;  and  these  new  occupants
gladly  compounded  for  the  protection  or  countenance  of  the
empire  by  a  tribute,  to  which  was  given  the  name  of  tenths."
The  AKri  De-  ^^^^  tract  thus  held  received  the  title  of  the  Agri
oumates.  Dccumatcs,  Qr  Tithe-land ;  but  we  have  no  record

of  it  in  history  till  we  hear  of  the  undertaking  of  Trajan,  who
is  supposed  to  have  commenced  at  least  the  long  fortified
lines  by  which  it  was  eventually  protected  tliroughout." Nor

'  The  "  munimcntum  Trajani"  (Ammian.  Marcell.  xvii.  1.),  about  ten  miles
from  MoRuntiacum,  seems  to  correspond  with  the  position  of  Hochst  Mannert.
Oeoff.  iii.  40:J. IJadcn  Daden  was  Aquae,  or  Aurelia  Aquensis.

*  Tuc.  Germ.  29. :  "  levissimus  quisquo  Gallorum  et  inopia  audax  dubiaa
posscssionis  solum  occu])avere.  Mox  liniite  acto  proniotisque  pra?sidiis,  sinus
Imperii  et  pars  provincia)  habcntur."  The  limes  here  is  not  a  boimdary  line,
but  a  road  from  the  ccnti-o  for  the  rapid  transmission  of  troops  to  the  frontier.

•  One  section  of  tliis  fortilication  (from  tlie  Wcstcrwald  across  the  Main  to
the  Altmiihl,  Niebuhr,  IjccI.  on  Rom.  Hist.  ii.  262.)  is  ascribed,  according  to
■omo  crilicH,  by  Frontinus  to  Domitian :  Slratagctn.  i.  3.  10.:  "Im])erator
OeMMir  DomiliunuH  Aug.  quum  (iennani  more  suo  c  saltibus  ct  obscuris  latebris
Hubindu  inipugnarent  nostros,  tutumcpie  regrussum  in  profunda  sylvarum  habo-
rent,  limitibus  per  centum  vigiuti  millia  passuum  actis,  non  nmtuvit  tantum

A.U.  851.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  177

can  we  determine  how  far  this  emperor  proceed-

m

ed  iu  the  accomplishment  of  this  design,  which nj«nt  or  *  noi-

in,.  ■,  p*rtft«intli«

was  prosecuted  by  his  next  successor,  and  com-  Khine  to  th«
pleted  perhaps,  or  restored  and  strengthened,  by
Probus,  a  century  and  a  half  later.  Of  this  great  work, —
the  greatness  of  which  lay,  however,  in  the  extent  and  vig-
our of  the  design  rather  than  in  the  massiveness  of  its  exe-
cution,— sufficient  vestiges  even  now  remain  to  trac«  it  from
river  to  river ;  but  these  vestiges  consist  at  most  of  faint
marks  of  a  mound  and  ditch,  which  seem  to  have  been
strengthened  by  a  palisade,  with  watchtowers  at  intervals,  but
to  have  been  nowhere  combined  with  a  wall  of  masonry.*
Nor,  if  Trajan  commenced  these  works,  can  the  date  of  his
share  in  them  be  ascertained ;  as,  however,  he  remained  but
one  year  on  the  Rhenish  frontier  after  his  accession,  and
never  returned  to  it,  we  may  conclude  that  his  stations  and
colonies,  and  military  lines,  were  planned,  at  least,  and  under-
taken while  he  was  yet  a  subject.

Having  thus  completed  his  arrangements  in  this  quarter,
Trajan  at  last  bent  his  steps  homeward,  and  made  his  entry
into  the  city  in  the  year  99.  He  had  received  ij^^  ^^^
the  Tribunitian  power  at  the  time  of  his  adop-  »<«>«.  a.  ». ».
tion ;  the  title  also  of  Germanicus,  together  with  the  name
of  his  father  Nerva,  had  been  bestowed  on  him  on  the  same
occasion.  The  consulship,  with  which  he  had  been  a  second
time  invested  while  the  late  emperor  was  still  living,  he  de-
clined to  claim  for  the  ensuing  year,  being  himself  absent
from  the  city,  from  respect,  perhaps,  to  the  ancient  usage ;
or  would  he  allow  the  senate  to  salute  him  as  Father  of  his

Btatum  belli,  sed  subjecit  ditioni  buab  hostes  quorum  refugia  nudarerat"  But
this  I  rather  interpret  of  a  road  driven  into  the  heart  of  a  country,  than  of  a
limitary  rampart.  So  Frontinus  again,  L  5.  10,:  "ab  altera  parte  limitem
agere  coppit,  tanquam  per  eum  erupturus."

'  The  line  of  "  Trajan's  wall "  has  been  carefully  examined  within  the  last
few  years  by  Mr.  Yates,  whose  interesting  account  of  it  I  hare  read,  if  I  am
not  mistaken,  in  a  recent  volume  of  TrantaUiofu  of  the  Archaeological
Institute.

VOL  vu. — 12

178  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  99.

country  till  he  had  presented  himself  to  the  citizens,  and
earned  the  endearing  appellation  by  his  courtesy  and  modera-
tion.' His  demeanour  as  well  as  his  actions  were  such  as
befitted  the  true  patriot  and  citizen,  and  excited  accordingly
the  warmest  enthusiasm.  Throughout  his  progress  from
Germany  he  abstained  from  the  demands  and  exactions
usually  made  even  on  subjects  and  provincials.  His  entry
into  Rome  was  a  moral  triumph.  Martial,  in  a  few  graphic
touches,  brings  vividly  before  us  the  man,  the  place,  and  the
people.'  Pliny  exerts  himself  to  describe  more  elaborately
the  extreme  condescension  and  affability  of  the  prince,  who
deigned  to  approach  the  home  of  law  and  freedom  on  foot,
unattended  by  guards,  distinguished  only  by  the  eminence
of  his  stature,  and  the  dignity  of  his  bearing ;  allowing  the
citizens  of  all  grades  to  throng  about  him ;  admitting  the
greetings  of  the  senators  on  his  return  as  emperoi*,  with  the
same  graciousness  with  which  he  had  accepted  them  when
he  went  forth  as  a  fellow-subject ;  addressing  even  the  knights
by  name;  paying  his  vows  to  his  country's  gods  in  the  Capi-
tol, and  entering  the  palace  of  the  Caesars  as  the  modest

'  Pliny,  Paneg.  20.,  declares,  with  headlong  adulation,  that  every  emperor
before  Trajan  had  assumed  this  title  without  hesitation  on  the  day  of  his
acifession.  We  know,  however,  that  Augustus  long  deferred  it ;  so  did  Tiberius
(Tac,  Ann.  i,  72.,  Suet.  Tib.  6*7.)  and  "Vespasian  (Suet.  Vesp.  12.).  Capitolinus,
indeed,  asserts  that  Pertlnax,  nearly  a  century  later,  was  the  first  of  the  empe-
rors who  assumed  it  at  once.
"  Martial,  x.  6. :

"  Felices  quibus  uma  dedit  spectare  coruscum
Solibus  Arctois  sidcribusque  ducem,"  &c.

But  this  is  in  anticipation  of  the  hero's  arrival,  for  which  the  poet  proceeds
to  offer  his  vows  in  the  next  epigram  :  "  Nympharum  pater  amniumque  Rhcne
....  Trajanum  populis  suis  ct  Urbi,  Tibris  te  dominus  rogat,  rcmittas."

Compare  the  verses  of  Claudian  on  Stilicho's  entry  into  Rome,  xxii.  397,
foil.  The  reader  should  be  warned  against  the  confusion  of  dates  in  the
arrangement  of  Martini's  pieces.  In  book  x.  epigrams  0,  7.,  and  probably  71.,
refer  to  Trajan  :  but  xi.  4,  5.,  though  uiscribcd  in  the  edition  to  Nerva  Tr^a-
nufl,  undoubtedly  to  Nerva.  In  book  xiL  epigram  6.  refers  to  the  earlier,  and
8.  to  tlio  later  emperor.

I

A.U.  852.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  179

owner  of  a  private  mansion.*  Nor  did  Trajan  stand  alone  in
this  exhibition  of  patriotic  decorum.  His  wife,  Plotina,  bore
herself  as  the  spouse  of  a  simple  senator ;  and  as  umMiMttj
she  mounted  the  stair  of  the  imperial  re^^idenoe,  wifcliSota^
turned  towards  the  multitude,  and  declared  that  •'•■••^•i***^
she  was  about  to  enter  it  with  the  same  equanimity  with
w^hich  she  should  wish  hereafter,  if  fate  so  required^  to  abaik-
don  it.*  Her  behaviour  tlirouf^hout  lier  husband^s  career
corresponded  with  this  commencement.  Nor  lets  magnani'
nious  was  the  conduct  of  Trajan's  sister,  Marciana,  who  in-
liabited  tlie  palace  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  empress,  and
assisted  her  in  maintaining  its  august  etiquette.  Trajan
himself  renewed  by  word  of  mouth  the  oath  he  had  before
made  in  writing,  that  he  would  never  harm  the  person  of  a
senator,  an  oath  which  he  continued  faithfully  to  respect.
But  he  was  not  unmindful  of  liis  parent's  adjuration,  and
sought  out  for  condign  punishment  the  mutineers  who  had
tranipled  on  Nerva's  weakness.  Such  was  his  confidence  in
his  authority  over  the  soldiers,  that  he  ventured  to  reduce
the  customary  donative  to  one-half  the  amount  to  which  his
predecessors  had  raised  it.  Not  a  murmur  was  heard  even
in  the  camp  of  the  pnetoriaus ;  and  when  he  handed  to  the
prefect  the  poniard  which  was  the  symbol  of  his  office,  he
could  boldly  say.  Use  this  for  me,  if  I  do  well;  if  ill,  against
me.*  We  have  seen  that  the  lenient  or  feeble  Nerva,  though
he  revived  the  edicts  of  Titus  against  the  delators,  had  failed
to  satisfy  the  fury  of  his  nobles  in  punishing  them.  Trajan
had  no  such  weakness,  and  showed  no  such  moderation.
Giving  the  rein  at  last  to  the  passions  of  the  sufferers,  he

'  Pliny,  Faiieff.  22,  folL : "  qui  dies  ille  quo  exspeetotM  dnidentMqva

urbem  ingressus  es  ?  .  .  .  .  gratum  erat  cunctis  quod  senatain  oscnlo  exdpenB,
ut  dioiissus  osculo  fueras,  kc.  ....  quod  latus  tuum  crederes  omnibus,"  ke.
"  Dion,  Ixviii.  5.

*  Dion,  Ixviii.  16. :  Victor,  Ccn.  13. This  fkmous  saying  was  remembered
in  the  last  decline  of  Rome,  and  alluded  to  by  Sidonius  ApoUinatis,  Carm.  6. :
"  Vix  habuit  mores  similes  cui,  teste  Senatu,
In  se  etiam  tractum  commiserat  UI{mu3  i

180  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  100.

executed  what,  according  to  Pliny's  account,  we  might  call  a
razzia  upon  the  remnant  of  the  culprits.  Pliny  describes  the
extraordinary  spectacle  of  a  number  of  these  people  dragged
in  chains  through  the  circus  before  the  assembled  citizens,
with  every  circumstance  of  deliberate  insult ;  and  when  the
most  obnoxious  had  been  selected  for  capital  punishment,  the
rest  were  shipped  for  exile  beyond  sea,  on  the  craziest  barks
in  the  stormiest  weather.*

The  famous  Panegyric^  an  impressive  monument  of  this
illustrious  reign,  which  seems  to  have  been  delivered  by
Trajan  receives  ^li^y?  ^^  cousul,  on  the  third  anniversary  of  Tra-
timus!**  °^  ^P'  jan's  Tribunitian  power,  not  only  celebrates  such
A  D  100  instances  of  his  magnanimity  and  justice,  but
A.  Tj.  853.  enumerates  also  many  wise  and  beneficent  meas-
ures he  had  already  carried  into  effect.  Our  review  of  these
may  be  deferred  till  we  can  comprise  the  whole  course  of  his
civil  administration,  which  was  soon  interrupted  by  a  long
interval  of  warlike  operations.  So  favourable,  however,  was
the  impression  Trajan  had  made  during  his  sojourn  in  the
city,  that  the  senate  decreed  him,  in  addition  to  the  other
titles  usually  borne  by  the  emperors,  the  ti'anscendent  appel-
lation of  Optimus,  or  the  Best."  Nor  was  this  a  merely  for-
mal compliment.  While  the  titles  of  Caesar  and  Augustus,
of  Magnus  and  Germanicus,  were  suffered  to  descend  from
sire  to  son,  no  other  emperor  was  honoured  with  the  special
appellation  of  Optimus  /  though  it  is  said  to  have  been  usual,

*  "Congcsti  sunt  in  navigia  raptim  conquisita,  ac  tempestatibus  deditl.
Abircnt,  A'.gerent  vastatas  delationibua  terras,  ac  si  quem  fluctus  ac  proccUiE
Bcopulis  reservassent,  hie  nuda  saxa  ct  inbospitale  litua  incolerct."  J'aneff.  S4.
KmiUr  Beverities  had  been  used  before  by  Titus  (Suet.  2'it.  8.,  sec  above),  but
the  wrongs  suataincd  had  been  less,  and  they  had  not  perhaps  been  celebrated
with  such  passionate  exultation.

•  Pliny,  Paneg.  2.  88.  It  has  been  remarked,  indeed,  that  the  title  "  Opti-
mus "  docs  not  appear  on  Tn^an's  coins  before  his  eleventh  year,  and  we  must
suppose  that,  though  formally  assigned  him  by  the  senate,  he  foreborc  for  a
time  to  usame  it.  Dion  (Ixviii.  28.)  refers  this  title  to  a  still  Inter  date.  lie
adds  that  Titian  was  more  proud  of  it  than  of  any  other,  as  a  compliment  to
his  character  rather  thou  to  his  ciploits.

A.U.  853.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  jgj

in  later  times,  for  the  senate,  on  the  accession  of  each  new
chief  of  the  republic,  to  exclaim,  as  tlie  highest  token  of  its
admiration,  that  he  was  more  fortunate  than  Augustus,  and
better  than  Trajan.'

But  the  flattery  of  the  senate,  even  in  the  polished  phrases
of  Pliny,  the  most  accomplished  of  his  order,  must  have  been
irksome  to  a  man  of  Trajan's  plain  sense.  AVe  rn^mai^kti*
can  well  believe  that  ho  soon  began  to  fret  under  Jg^^  ***  ^^
tlie  restraints  of  deference  to  a  society  by  which  ^  ^^  ,5,
he  must  have  been  frequently  mortified,  and  ^c.  s&i
longed  to  fling  himself  into  the  stir  and  movement  of  the
military  career.  Confined  for  many  years  within  the  de-
fences of  the  camp,  he  had  there  assiduously  prepared  all  the
machinery  of  aggressive  warfare,  and  he  was  now  anxious  to
go  and  prove  it.  In  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign  he  quitted
the  city  to  undertake  war  on  a  large  scale,  and  with  great
ends  in  view,  against  the  long-formidable  Dacians.'  The
motives  ascribed  to  him  are,  indignation  at  the  successes
which  these  barbarians  could  boast  in  their  previous  conflicts
with  the  empire,  and  disgust  at  the  payment  of  an  annual
tribute  to  which  Doraitian  is  said  to  have  consented.  But
these,  perhaps,  were  mere  pretences.  Confident  in  the  per-
fection of  the  instrument  he  now  wielded,  he  trusted  by  its
means  to  emulate  the  glories  of  a  Julius  or  an  Alexander.
The  legions  of  the  Rhine  also,  however  exact  their  discipline,
were  doubtless  burning  for  employment ;  those  on  the  Ister
were  turbulent  as  well  as  impatient.  The  founder  of  a  new
dynasty  could  hardly  depend  on  their  fidelity  without  hu-
mouring their  martial  instincts. TTe  must  consider,  too,  that

'  Eutrop.  viii.  6. :  "  hi\jua  tantum  memorise  delatuqt  est,  ut  usque  ad  no**
tram  aetatem  non  aliter  in  Senatu  principibus  acclamaretur,  quam,  felidor
Augusto  melior  Trajano ! "  One  of  Trajan's  most  popular  sayings  is  also  re-
corded by  this  writer :  "  talem  se  imperatorem  esse  priratis,  quales  esse  sibi
imperatores  privatus  optasset."

*  Clinton,  Fast.  Bom.  The  PoMgyric  of  Pliny  wa.s  delivered  in  the  autumn
preceding,  when  Trajan  was  designated  consul  for  the  fourth  time.  This  con-
sulship he  held  in  101.

182  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  101.

the  vast  and  increasing  expenses  of  a  military  government
required  to  be  maintained  by  extraordinary  means,  and  Tra-
jan may  have  launched  himself  against  the  foe  beyond  the
frontier  to  obviate  the  necessity  of  levying  fresh  contributions
on  his  own  subjects.  He  meant  that  his  wars  should  be  self-
supporting  ;  that  their  expenses  should  be  defrayed  by  the
conquered  enemy,  and  the  cupidity  of  the  soldiers  satisfied
with  the  plunder  of  foreigners.  The  Daeians,  though  in
name  barbarians,  seem  to  have  been  actually  possessors  of
considerable  wealth,  and  to  have  attained  to  a  certain  degree
of  social  refinement.  They  were  a  branch  of  the  Getae,  a
people  of  Avhom  it  was  remarked  that  they  stood  nearest  to
the  Greeks  in  their  natural  aptitude  for  civilization ;  *  and
besides  the  stores  they  accumulated  in  their  repeated  inroads
on  the  Greek  and  Roman  settlements,  their  country  abounded
in  mines  of  gold  and  silver,  as  well  as  of  iron.  Such  were
the  glittering  spoils  which  tempted  the  long-restrained  ardour
of  the  legionaries,  even  more  than  their  fertile  plains  and
illimitable  pastures.

The  Getae  and  the  Thracians,  of  cognate  origin,  occupied
the  region  of  Bulgaria  and  Roumelia,  and,  according  to  tra-
dition, the  Daeians  were  an  off-shoot  from  these

Oeograpblcal  .  .

position  of  the nations,  which crossed  the Ister,  overran the

l)ftclans.

Banat,  "Wallachia  and  Moldavia,  and  finally  fixed
its  strongholds  in  the  mountainous  district  of  Transylvania.
In  the  second  century  they  may  be  considered  as  occupying

the  broad  block  of  land  bounded  by  the  Theiss,
datory  Incur- the  Carpathians,  the  lower  Danube  or  Ister,  and

the  Pruth.  In  the  centre  of  this  region  rose  the
great  mountainous  tract  in  which  the  Maros  takes  its  rise,

'  Justin.  xxxiL  8. :  "  Dad  quoque  Boboles  Gctarum  sunt."  Dion,  Ixvii.  6. :
AoKOvc  Hi  airroiic  irpoaayopeiiu,  Larrep  irov  koI  avrol  iavrovc  nal  ol '  Fufialoi
(T^f  bt>o/i6iovoiv '  oiiK  &yvouv  bn  '  EA.X//V6W  rcvic  TiraQ  avrovc  Myoixrtv,  elf
bpOu(  the  KoX  p)  "KiyovrcQ.  Tho  patriotic  boasts  of  Jonmndos  {<k  lieb.  Oct.
L  6.)  leant  probably  on  «omc  foreign  autliority :  "uiule  ct  jimnc  oinniluis  bar-
baris  Oothi  Hnpionlioros  semper  oxstitcrunt,  Unecisquo  prone  consimiles."  See
Franckc,  Ueich.  IVajatu,  p.  71. Grcgorovius,  OachidUe  der  Stadt  Horn.  i.  462,

A.U.  854.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  183

and  the  basin  of  this  river,  almost  inclosed  by  a  eircamval-
lation  of  rugged  declivities,  contained  the  chief  cities  of  the
Dacian  people.  Here  was  the  residence  of  their  king,  here
they  stored  their  plunder ;  hither,  when  pressed  by  an  invad-
ing foe,  they  retreated,  and  generally  found  themselves  se-
cure. For  the  marshes  of  the  lower  Theiss  and  Maros  effect-
ually protected  them  on  the  west,  and  the  three  passes  of
the  Iron  Gate,  the  Volcan,  and  the  Rothenthurm,  were  easily
defensible  against  an  enemy  from  the  south.*  Hence  they
issued  in  mid-winter,  when  the  deep  alluvial  soil  of  the
Danubian  valley  was  indurated  by  frost,  and  the  great  river
itself  congealed,  or  choked  with  ice,  and  crossing  the  stream
at  a  season  when  the  Romans  had  desisted  from  their  sum-
mer expeditions,  and  quietly  piled  their  arms,  carried  tire  and
sword  into  the  defenceless  provinces.*  On  the  return  of  fine
weather,  the  Romans  armed  again,  and  defied  the  barbarians,
who  indeed  were  unable  to  stem  the  current  of  the  Danube :
but  if  they  sought  to  make  reprisals,  it  was  a  long  and  dif-
ficult task  even  for  Roman  engineers  to  bridge  a  stream  so
mighty,  and  the  Dacians  had  at  least  ample  time  to  betake
themselves  to  their  mountains.  The  attempts  of  Domitian's
generals  to  penetrate  into  the  strongholds  of  Decebalus  had
been  always  frustrated,  and  sometimes  with  loss  and  disgrace.
To  purchase  peace  by  tribute,  under  whatever  name  or  colour,
was  a  dishonourable  and  indeed  a  precarious  resource.  The
time  was  come  when  Rome,  with  a  well-appointed  army,  and
under  a  military  ruler,  could,  by  one  sustained  effort,  termin-

'  This  configuration  of  the  Dacian  territory  seems  to  explain  the
habit  of  describing  the  stronghold  of  the  nation  as  "Iheir  mountain."  Stot.
Si/lv.  iii.  3.  169. :  "  Quseque  suum  Dacis  donat  dementia  montem  ;"  L  1.  80. :
"  tu  tardum  in  foedera  montem  Longo  Marie  domas."  Tfub.  L  20. :  "  Et  con-
jurato  dejectos  vertice  DacoB."

*  The  "  conjuratus  Ister  "  of  Virgil  {Georff.  u.  497.)  is  explained  by  the
Scholiast  after  a  writer  named  Aufidius  Modestus,  from  the  custom  of  the  Da-
cians to  draw  water  from  the  Danube,  when  about  to  undertake  an  expedition,
and  swear  by  it  not  to  return  till  they  had  conquered.  Ukert,  Geoyr.  iiL  2.
p.  608.

184  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  101.

ate  this  state  of  suspense  and  suffering.  The  Roman  Pea6e
demanded  War  in  earnest.

Seven  legions  may  he  enumerated,  which,  together  with

their  auxiliaries,  with  ten  cohorts  of  praetorians,  and  a  force

of  Batavian  cavalry,  took  part  in  the  campaigns

The  first  Da-  ^  ^ .  .  , -r^ .  ,  ,

cian  campaign,  of  Irajan  agamst  the  Dacians,  though  we  cannot
A.D.  101.  safely  affirm  that  the  whole  of  this  mighty  arma-
ment was  employed  together  in  any  one  of  his
expeditions.'  Drawn  in  part  from  the  stations  permanently
located  on  the  Moesian  frontier,  in  part  from  the  military
reserves  in  Illyricum  and  Dalmatia,  in  part  also  from  the
great  army  established  on  the  Rhine,  a  force  of  sixty  or  per-
haps eighty  thousand  vetei'ans  was  mustered  on  the  banks  of
Trajan  de-  ^^^  Danube  and  the  Save.  Segestica,  the  mod-
save^and^  em  Sissck,  was  the  spot  selected  by  Trajan  for
MTOss^the*^*'  the  base  of  his  operations.  From  this  place,
Danube.  which  had  been long  the  common  arsenal  of

Moesia  and  Pannonia,  he  directed  his  munitions  of  war  to  be
floated  down  the  Save  to  its  confluence  with  the  greater
river.*  At  Singidunum  he  passed  in  review  the  legions  of
either  province,  led  his  united  forces  to  the  passage  of  the
Morava,  and  thence  a  few  miles  further  to  a  post  named
Viminacium,  the  modern  Kastolatz,  where  the  Danube,  flow-
ing with  a  broad  but  tranquil  stream,  offered  facilities  for  the
construction  of  a  bridge  of  boats.  Here  commence  the  high-
lands of  the  Danubian  valley,  the  southernmost  spurs  of  the
Carpathians  plunging  into  the  river  and  confronting  the  no
less  rugged  abutments  of  the  northern  spurs  of  the  Balkan.
The  stream,  confined  for  thirty  miles  between  these  precipi-

'  Francke  {Oetch.  TVcyans,  p.  96,  foil.)  traces  all  these  legions  from  inscrip-
tions and  other  records.  They  were  the  i.  Minervia,  tho  ii.  Acyutrix,  the  iv.,
v.,  vii.,  xi.,  and  xiii.

^  ThcHc  localiticH  arc  thuH  Hpocified  from  conjecture,  founded  on  the  known
direction  of  the  lines  of  road  in  thone  piirt.s,  and  the  indications  on  the  Trnjan
column,  which  represent  the  usHoinl)lin{^  of  the  army,  its  magazines  and  en-
campments, tho  crosHing  of  more  tlian  one  river,  and  other  details  of  its
march. Sco  tho  interpretation  in  Franclte's  Gciich.  Trajana,  p.  192,  folL

r

A.U.  854.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  185

tous  cliffs,  foams  in  a  furious  torrent,  exasperated  by  the
rocky  ledges  which  at  some  points  intercept  its  course  from
one  bank  to  the  other.  Again  the  river  expands  and  resumes
its  tranquil  majesty,  and  near  its  confluence  with  a  little
stream  called  now  the  Tjerna,  a  second  bridge  seems  to  have
been  also  thrown  across  it.  From  these  two  xheT*riou«
points  the  Danube  was  henceforth  regularly  J^i^[ii2,'rf**
crossed,  and  the  Romans  executed  roads  from  ^**^
both  the  one  and  the  other,  by  which  to  penetrate  into
Dacia.  The  more  western  route  led  into  the  Banat  by  the
valley  of  the  Theiss,  keeping  the  mountains  to  the  right ;  the
eastern  ascended  the  Tjerna,  having  the  mountains  on  the
left,  till,  on  a  sudden  change  in  their  direction,  it  w^as  re-
quired to  breast  them.  Having  surmounted  the  ridge,  it
descended  into  the  valley  of  the  Temes,  and  met  the  former
road  near  Karansebes,  at  the  junction  of  the  Temes  and
Bistra.  These  are  torrents  of  little  note;  but  the  gorge
of  the  Bistra,  through  which  a  way  was  afterwards  canned,
led  to  the  pass  most  properly  designated  the  Iron  Gate,  the
key  of  the  Maros  valley,  and  of  the  Dacian  mountain-land
which  surrounds  it.  Trajan's  anny  crossed  the  Danube  in
two  divisions  at  the  spots  above  indicated.  He  seems  him-
self to  have  taken  the  western  route ; '  but  the  two  divisions
met,  as  was  concerted,  and  forced  the  pass  together.  The
resistance  of  the  Dacians,  and  the  obstacles  presented  by
nature,  were  equally  overcome.  The  Roman  armies  alighted
in  the  heart  of  the  enemy's  country,  and  established  them-
selves in  the  royal  city  of  Zermizegethusa.*

'  The  stationa  on  this  route  (the  western)  are  giren  in  the  Peutinger  Table,
and,  by  a  curious  chance,  a  few  words  of  Trajan's  own  commentaries  on  this
war,  preserved  by  Priscian,  suffice  to  show  that  he  advanced  by  it.  The  frag-
ment runs :  "  inde  Berzobim,  deinde  Aixi,  processimus."  Comp,  Tab.  Pai^ttg. :
"  Bersovia  xii. ;  Ahitis  iii. ;  Caput  Bubuli  x. ;  Tivisco."  Francke,  GaA.  Tro-
jans, p.  106,  with  reference  to  Priscian,  IvL  ;  PuUch,  Aud.  Granun.  Lot.,  p.
682.

*  Dion,  Ixviii.  9.  "  Zermiz^ethusa,  L  e.,  Zarmi-tzeket-Kusa,  mansion  oou-
vert  de  peaux." Bergmann,  Lea  Giles,  p.  69.

186  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  102.

This  place,  which  became  the  seat  of  a  Roman  colony  and
acquired  the  name  of  Ulpia  Trajana,  can  be  clearly  identified
Trajan  encoun-  "^^ith  the  modcm  village  of  Varhely,  on  a  little
D^LbaiVr'^'^  stream  called  the  Strehl,  a  trilDutary  of  the  Maros.
A  D  102  Trajan  had  not  yet  penetrated  into  the  heart  of
A.  T.  855.  ^]jg  Pacian  stronghold,  and  the  barbarians  con-
tinued to  defend  themselves  with  obstinacy.  Their  chief,
who  bore  the  name  of  Decebalus,  though  we  cannot  affirm
that  he  was  the  same  who  twelve  years  before  had  proved  so
formidable  to  Domitian,  met  the  new  invader  with  not  less
valour  and  constancy.  A  people  called  the  Burri,  who  are
supposed  to  have  dwelt  about  the  sources  of  the  Theiss,  sent
a  message  to  the  imperator,  written,  it  was  said,  on  the  sur-
face of  a  large  fungus,  requiring  him  to  desist  from  his  attack
on  their  kinsmen ;  but  such  interference  was  contemptuously
disregarded.  Trajan  brought  the  enemy  at  last  to  bay,  and
in  a  great  battle  at  a  place  called  Tapte,  the  site  of  which  is
not  determined,  routed  them  with  much  slaughter.'  The  care
he  showed  for  his  wounded  soldiers  endeared  him  to  the
legions,  which  now  pushed  on  with  alacrity,  and  forced  their
way  into  the  inner  circle  of  hills  beyond  the  Maros,  in  which
the  Dacian  chief  resided.  Here  Decebalus  confessed  himself
worsted,  and  sued  for  peace.

Of  the  above  details,  slender  as  they  are,  little  is  derived
from  the  direct  records  of  history.  The  sculptures  of  Tra-
jan's column,  the  noblest  monument  of  Roman
campaitrn  pre-  warfare,  havc  been  ingeniously  interpreted  into
Trajan  column  a  coimectcd  narrative  of  events.  The  bridges  he
constructed,  the  fortresses  he  attacked,  the  camps
he  pitched,  the  enemies  he  routed,  are  here  indicated  in
regular  sequence. The  Romans  arc  distinguished  by  their

'  Dion,  Ixviii.  8.  Tupic  is  Iho  nanic  of  the  spot  where  Jiiruinus  defeated
the  Dacians  in  tiio  reij^i  of  Domitian.  The  traditions  of  the  country,  guided
pcrhapH  by  tlio  gucHHCH  of  the  nntiquurians,  point  to  a  place  called  Crossfeld
near  Thorda,  where  a  plain  is  nuid  Htiil  to  bear  the  name  of  Prat-Trajan.  This
Hpot  Bccm«  too  far  in  the  interior.  The  circumHtance  of  the  modern  appella-
tion in  of  no  real  value.

A.U.  855.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  197

well-known  arms  and  ensigns.  The  captives  they  take,  the
sacrifices  they  offer,  are  vividly  delineated.  The  Moorish
horsemen,  on  the  one  hand,  are  designated  by  ligh^clad
warriors  riding  without  reins ;  the  Rhoxolani,  on  the  other,
by  mounted  figures  decked  in  a  panoply  of  mail.  Trajan
himself  harangues,  directs,  offers  his  mantle  to  bind  the
wounds  of  his  soldiers,  takes  his  seat  on  the  tribunal,  or
stalks  under  an  arch  of  triumph.  The  submission  of  Deceba-
lus  is  represented  by  a  troop  of  envoys  bearing  the  sheepskin
cap,  wliich  expresses  their  rank  as  nobles,  and  prostrating
themselves  before  the  conqueror.  The  capitulation  seems  to
have  been  unconditional.  The  Dacians  delivered  up  their
arms,  surrendered  the  fugitives  and  deserters,  razed  their  re-
maining strongholds,  and  restored  the  eagle  lost  under
Fuscus.'  Decebalns  consented  to  form  an  alliance  with  the
Romans,  by  which  he  bound  himself  to  regard  their  friends
and  their  enemies  as  his  own,  and  to  abstain  from  enrolling
any  Roman  subject  in  his  armies ;  for  many  such,  it  seems,
he  had  entertained  in  his  serv  ice.  He  yielded  possession  to
the  victors  of  the  places  they  had  taken  by  arms.  Finally,
he  came  in  person,  and  paid  homage  to  the  emperor.  The
terms  thus  exacted  in  the  field  were  ratified  in  due  form  in
the  senate-house,  and  Trajan,  leaving  an  army  of  occupation
at  Zermizegethusa,  and  fortifying  various  posts  of  importance,
quitted  the  conquered  territory  and  again  presented  himself
to  the  exulting  citizens.*

The  victor's  return  to  Rome  was  solemnized  by  the  re-
ception of  Dacian  envoys  in  the  senate-house,  where  they  laid
down  their  arms,  and  joining  their  hands  in  the Tr«imn  returns
attitude  of  suppliants,  repeated their  master's ^^Xl"**
promise  of  submission,  and  solicited  the  favour j^b.i(i«.
and  protection  of  the  empire. Trajan  celebrated ^v.su,

*  Dloii,  Ixviii.  9.

*  Francke,  Gesck.  Trajang,  p.  118,  foil.  The  Moorish  cavalry  are  supposed
to  represent  a  detachment  of  auxiliaries  accompanying  the  Roman  army,  and
led  by  Lusius  Quietus,  a  Mauretanian  oflScer,  of  whom  we  shall  hear  more  in
the  sequel.

188  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  108.

a  triumph,  and  received  the  surname  of  Dacicus.  The  re-
joicings on  this  occasion  were  accompanied  by  magnificent
shows  of  gladiators,  which  were  congenial  to  his  martial
spirit ;  but  we  should  less  have  expected  the  rude  warrior  to
recall  the  dancers  to  the  theatre ;  still  less  that  a  personal
liking  for  one  of  these  performers  should  have  induced  him
to  this  unworthy  compliance.'  But  Trajan,  with  all  his
valour,  generosity,  and  self-command,  was  coarse  both  by
nature  and  habit,  and  his  vicious  tastes  were  not  confined  to
excess  in  wine.'*  His  self-respect  was  preserved  only  by  the
bluntness  of  his  moral  sense ;  and  so  far  it  was  fortunate  for
mankind,  who  profited  by  the  serenity  with  which  he  could
rise  from  indulgences  which  even  the  Romans  regarded  as
weaknesses,  to  the  firm  and  prudent  exercise  of  his  lofty
functions.  He  plunged  again  into  all  the  details  of  the  civil
administration,  and  while  he  devised  wise  and  liberal  meas-
ures, and  watched  over  their  execution,  he  attended  assidu-
ously on  the  tribunals,  and  was  seen  dispensing  justice  in

'  The  circumstances  of  this  triumph  arc  only  known  to  us  in  the  meagre
abridgment  of  Dion  (Ixviii.  10.). Statius,  the  court-poet  of  an  earlier  reign,
was  now  dead ;  Pliny  was  absent,  having  just  left  Rome  for  the  government  of
Bithynia  (a. d.  103. Clinton's  Fast.  Rom.)\ and  Martial  had  recently  re-
turned to  his  native  Bilbilis. The  twelfth  book  of  the  Epigrams  was  sent  to
Rome  from  Spain. In  xii.  8.  Martial  seems  to  allude  to  the  foreign  captives  or
envoys  who  attended  the  celebration  of  Trajan's  triumph :
*'  Parthorum  proceres,  ducesque  Serum,
Thraces,  Sauromatse,  Getae,  Britanni : "
and  in  xii.  16.  he  celebrates  the  emperor's  liberality  in  surrendering  to  publio
objects  the  splendid  furniture  of  the  palace :

"  Quicquid  Parrhasia  nitebat  aula,
Donatum  est  oculia,  deisque  uostris."

*  We  must  be  satisfied  with  Dion's  apology,  Ixviii.  Y. :  «AA'  e\  fih  in  rcAy-
Tuv  fi  a'loxp*^  ii  Kcucdv  ideSp&Kei  i)  irrendvOei,  kwriyopiav  hv  elxe '  vvv  6i  tov  ts
olvov  diaxdpuc  lirive  Kal  vf/^uv  f/v,  tv  re  tqIq  iraidiKolc  ovSiva  IXitTTtjae,  Tro-
jan's inebriety  is  noticed  by  Spartan  in  Iladr.  3.  Lamprid.  in  Alex.  Sev.  89.
Julian,  de  Casar, :  ovk  fjv  i(u  tov  dwdaOai  f)T/ropeiEiVf  vnh  6k  tt/c  ^ih)iroaiac
afi^'kijTepoQ  iavTov  iro?.X6Ki(  f/v.  Victor,  Cies.  13.:  "  vinolcntiam,  quo  vitio,
uti  Nerra  agebatur,  prudontla  mollivorat,  curari  vctana  jussa  post  longiorcs
opulas."

LO. me

A.  tJ.  856.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  180

person,  day  by  day,  in  the  forum  of  Augustus,  in  the  portico
of  Livia,  and  other  public  places. But  these  occupations

were  soon  interrupted  by  the  report  of  fresh  ag- ^

gressions  on  the  part  of  the  Dacians,  who  began,  ma^oMonk*
it  seems,  as  soon  as  the  conqueror's  back  was
turned,  to  break  the  treaty  in  many  ways,  by  collecting
arms,  receiving  deserters,  repairing  their  strongholds,  solicit-
ing alliances  with  neighbouring  tribes,  and  making  hostile
incursions  into  the  territories  of  the  friends  or  clients  of  the
empire.  They  ventured  to  cross  the  Theiss  and  attack  their
ancient  enemies  the  lazyges,  on  whom  Trajan  had  forbidden
them  to  make  reprisals.  Again  the  senate  declared  them
public  enemies,  and  exhorted  the  emperor  to  muster  all  the
forces  of  the  state,  and  reduce  them  to  complete  subjection.*

In  the  spring  of  the  year  104,  Trajan  repaired  again  to
his  army,  cantoned  along  the  course  of  the  lower  Danube,
and  held  ready  to  be  concentrated  at  his  call  on  Tr^)«i'B  Meood
any  point  to  which  he  chose  to  direct  it.  An  S^t^D^
unbroken  line  of  military  causeway,  stretching  *^^
from  the  Mayn  across  the  Odenwald  and  Black  Forest  to  the
Danube,  and  from  thence,  closely  hugging  the  right  bank  of
the  stream,  to  the  shores  of  the  Euxine,  is  ascribed  to  the
care  and  prudence  of  this  imperator,  and  was  doubtless  a
work  of  many  years'  labour.*  Trajan  was  the  first  apparently
of  the  emperors  who  recognized  the  homogeneity  of  the  bar^
barian  races  before  him,  foresaw  the  possibility  of  their  union,
and  felt  the  importance  of  concentrating  against  them  all  the
resources  of  the  empire.  The  facilities  afforded  by  these
means  of  communication  enabled  him  to  pour  the  frontier
legions  on  any  threatened  point,  and  even  to  spring  on  the

where  least  prepared  to  resist  him.  Of  this  enormous
work  some  traces  may  here  and  there  be  discovered;  but  the
line  is  marked  at  the  present  day  rather  by  names  of  posts
and  colonies  founded  along  it,  than  by  actual  remains  of

*  Dion,  Ixviii.  10.

•  Victor,  Cas.  13.:  "  iter  conditum  per  feras  gent«8,  quo  facile  ab  usque
Fontico  man  in  Galliam  permeatur."

190  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  lOt

turf  or  stone.  At  one  spot,  however,  the  gorge,  namely,  of
the  Danube  jiist  below  Orsova,  popularly  known  as  the  Iron
Gate,  the  mark  of  Trajan's  hand  may  be  discovered  in  a  scar
which  indents  for  some  miles  the  face  of  the  cliff,  forming  a
terrace  about  five  feet  in  width.  We  cannot  believe  that  the
way  was  actually  so  narrow,  but  additional  width  may  have
been  gained  by  a  wooden  gallery,  supported  on  a  projecting
framework.'  The  Roman  legionary  worked  well  with  spade
and  pickaxe ;  nor,  as  may  be  seen  on  the  Trajan  column,  was
he  less  familiar  with  the  use  of  the  carpenter's  tools ;  and  the
forests  of  Central  Europe  supplied  him  with  abundant  ma-
terials for  the  bridges,  the  palisades,  the  towers,  and  the
roadways  required  for  military  purposes.  The  road  which
thus  threaded  the  defile  of  the  Iron  Gate  was  probably  com-
pleted before  the  commencement  of  the  second  expedition,
and  the  emperor  who  had  already  secured  the  Banat,  and  the
nearest  pass  into  Transylvania,  seems  to  have  now  contem-
plated a  wider  circuit,  and  an  entrance  into  the  heart  of  the
enemy's  country  at  a  more  distant  point.  Besides  the  Dacian
Iron  Gate  already  mentioned,  which  we  must  be  careful  not
to  confound  with  the  Iron  Gate  of  the  Danube,  there  were
two  other  passes  further  eastward,  those  of  the  Volcan  and
the  Rothenthurm,  leading  out  ofWallachia.  The  last  and
most  distant  of  these  defiles  is  that  through  which  the  waters
of  the  Aluta  descend  into  the  Danube  valley;  afld  an
ancient  Roman  road  may  bo  traced  to  it  from  the  bank  of
the  Danube. With  this  road  the  vestiges  of  an

HemaloB  of  ,  .  .

bridges  at  oieii ancicut  bridge  over  the  great  river  at  Gieli  may

easily  be  connected ;  and  at  Gieli  our  antiquaries

were  wont  to  fix  the  spot  where  Trajan  planted  in  the  stream

the  vast  and  solid  pile  described  by  Dion. But  this  opinion

*  The  confltructlon  of  this  road  ia  described  by  Mr.  Taget  in  liis  Hungary
and  TVanaylvania,  ii.  123.  It  is  ascertained  to  bo  tlio  woik  of  Trajan  from
an  inscription  on  tlic  clifT  overlianging  tlie  road  ut  u  place  called  Ogradina.
The  inscription,  slightly  HuppHod  by  Aniett  in  a  nuiuoir  (Wein,  1850),  points
to  tlic  year  101.  (Trs^on,  trib.  pot.  iv.  cons,  iv.)  wliile  he  was  Gcnuanicus,  but
not  yet  Dadcus :  "  moutis  et  iluvii  aufractibus  superatis  viam  patcfecit."

A.U.  857.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  jgj

seems  to  be  refuted  by  a  modern  discovery.  A  little  below
Orsova  the  Danube  issues  from  the  Iron  Gate,  and  at  a
village  called  Severin,  where  it  expands  to  a  width  of  1300
yards,  the  foundations  of  piers,  corresponding  in  number
with  the  statement  of  the  historian,  have  been  seen  when  the
water  was  more  than  usually  low.  Here,  then,  as  is  now
generally  agreed,  stood  the  bridge  of  Trajan's
architect,  Apollodorus.'  The  passage  of  the  river  brt4g«  over  the
at  Severin  would  point  to  the  Volcan,  at  the
head  of  the  Schyl,  as  the  pass  through  which  Trajan  pene-
trated into  Dacia ;  but  in  this  direction,  it  seems,  there  are
no  vestiges  of  a  Roman  causeway,  whereas  such  a  road  un-
doubtedly led  from  Gieli  to  the  Hotheuthurm  by  the  line  of
the  Aluta.  The  question  does  not  appear  to  me  satisfactorily
settled;  but  the  correspondence  between  the  account  of
Dion  and  the  existing  indications  of  a  bridge  is  tolerably
close,  and  it  would  be  perhaps  excessive  caution  to  withhold
assent  from  the  opinion  now  commonly  received.*

It  seems  to  have  been  Trajan's  policy  to  establish  a  per-
manent connexion  between  the  opposite  banks,  so  that  the
Roman  forces  might  command  a  passage  at  all  juj^t^^,^^
seasons  without  delay  or  impediment.  The  foun-  T"^!**'*  Wd«e.
dations  he  laid  were  enormous  piles  of  masonry,  capable  of
bearing  the  greatest  weights,  and  resisting  the  utmost  press-
ure of  ice  or  water.  The  superstructure  was  probably  of
wood;  for  though  I  cannot  believe  the  statement  that  the
span  of  the  arches  was  170  Roman,  or  163  English  feet,  the
dimensions  were  undoubtedly  such  as  would  hardly  admit  of
solid  stonework.* The  vast  preparations  urged  hastily  for-

•  That  the  bridge  was  the  work  of  Apollodonia,  of  whom  more  hereafter,  is
stated  by  Procopius,  yEHif.  iv,  6.

»  Fiaucke,  p.  128,  129.,  seems  to  show  that  Gieli,  about  220  miks  below
Belgrade,  150  miles  below  Severin,  answers  to  the  conditions  required  in  every
respect,  except  its  distance  from  the  presumed  base  of  Trajan's  operations.
There  are  remains  there,  also,  of  piers  and  towers,  very  similar  to  those  at
Severin.

*  Dion's  measurements  are  150  Boman  feet  for  the  height  of  the  arches,

192  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  105.

ward,  fer  putting  an  effectual  curb  on  their  aggressions,
alarmed  the  Dacians,  and  several  tribes  seem  to  have  repeated
their  submission.  Decebalus  sought  to  avert  the  attack  by
another  capitulation.  But  the  demands  of  Trajan  were  now
BO  severe  and  peremptory,  that  the  bai'barian  was  driven  to
despair,  and  making  a  last  effort  for  independence,  assembled
all  his  vassals,  and  warned  them  that  the  defection  of  one
must  draw  down  ruin  upon  all,  for  the  Romans  were  deter-
mined to  complete  their  subjugation.  The  Dacian  was  brave
and  resolute ;  nor  need  we  doubt  that  he  was  cunning  also,
and  treacherous.  The  Romans  asserted  that  he  tried  to  repel
the  invasion  by  assassinating  their  commander.  His  emis-
sary gained  admission  to  the  presence  of  the  fearless  and
affable  imperator,  and  drew  a  dagger  upon  him.  Arrested
and  put  to  the  torture,  he  divulged  the  treachery  of  his
master.  Decebalus  then  resorted  to  another  device.  He
Device  of  De-  entrapped  Longinus,  a  distinguished  Roman  of-
toh? favourable  ficer,  and  required  him  to  disclose  the  plans  of
terms,  j^ig  imperator. The  Roman  gallantly  refused;

and  Decebalus  had  the  magnanimity  to  respect  his  courage,
and  to  release  liim  from  his  bonds.  He  retained  him,  how-
ever, as  a  hostage,  and  demanded  honourable  terms  of  peace
for  his  ransom.  The  Romans,  indeed,  pretended  that  he
ihsisted  on  the  evacuation  of  the  Dacian  soil  to  the  banks  of
the  Danube,  together  with  an  indemnity  for  the  expenses  of
the  war.  Whatever  were  the  terms  really  proposed,  Trajan,
much  as  lie  valued  his  officer,  could  not  assent  to  them.
Nothing  but  the  overthrow  of  Decebalus,  and  the  thorough
conquest  of  his  whole  realm,  would  now  satisfy  him.  He
Gmiiantry  of  returned,  however,  an  evasive  answer,  by  which
LonginuB.  ]^q  detcrrcd  the  enemy  from  slaying  his  prisoner.

170  for  the  span,  and  4770  for  the  entire  length  of  the  structure.  The  Roman
foot  h  to  the  English  as  11.6  to  12,  Paget's  estimate  of  8900  feet  for  the
.ength  would  be  more  than  BOO  feet  short  of  Dion's.  The  height,  according  to
Dion's  statement,  seems  to  me  incredible.  He  wns  himself  governor  of  I'an-
nonia  about  120  years  later,  but  the  bridge  had  been  overthrown  long  before.
The  piers,  of  course,  were  of  stone,  but  the  superstructure  must  have  been  of
wood,  which,  indeed,  is  borne  out  by  the  aculpturea  of  the  Trajan  column.

A.U.  858.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  I93

Longinus,  sensible  of  the  difficulty  in  which  his  leader  was
involved,  determined  to  relieve  him  by  his  own  voluntary
death.  Pretending  to  concert  a  reconciliation  between  the
two  chiefs,  he  sent  a  freedman  to  Trajan,  with  a  secret  mes-
sage, conjuring  him  to  prosecute  the  war  with  unflinching
vigour.  Meanwhile  he  had  got  possession  of  some  poison,
which,  as  soon  as  the  messenger  left  him,  he  swallowed.
When  Decebalus  discovered  that  he  had  been  cajoled,  he
demanded  the  surrender  of  the  freedman,  oftering  to  return
the  dead  body  in  exchange;  but  Trajan  magnanimously
refused  to  barter  the  living  for  the  dead,  and  the  Daciau's
revenge  was  frustrated.'

While  the  bridge  was  building  Trajan  was  preparing  the
plan  of  his  campaign,  collecting  hie  forces  and  magazines,
and  negotiating  with  the  neighbouring  tribes.

He  crossed  the  Danube  with  an  overwhelminsr i>M!UB«,aBd

de*th  of  DMA-
force,  and  extended  his  operations  orver  a  large  uiu,

tract  of  country,  constructing  roads  and  planting
fortifications,  to  form  a  secure  basis  for  the  complete  reduc-
tion of  the  Dacian  strongholds.  He  seems  to  have  struck
eastward,  as  for  at  least  as  the  Schyl  or  Aluta,  and  thence
to  have  ascended  to  the  Rothenthurm,  from  which  he  burst
with  irresistible  fury  on  the  valley  of  the  Maros.  Decebalus
was  wholly  unable  to  contend  with  him  in  the  field,  but  still
maintained  an  obstinate  but  aimless  and  ineflectual  defence
behmd  the  streams,  or  among  the  defiles  of  the  mountains,
till  he  was  finally  driven  into  the  heart  of  Transylvania.
Such  a  campaign  may  have  exercised  the  skill  of  the  Roman
general  and  his  officers,  and  given  scope  to  the  display  of
personal  valour  and  conduct  in  his  soldiers;  but  it  was  dis-
tinguished by  no  glorious  exploits  of  arms,  and  the  poem
which  Pliny  urges  his  friend  Caninius  to  consecrate  to  it,
must  have  been  overlaid  with  heavy  descriptions  of  mechan-
ical operations,  or  have  evaporated  in  a  cloud  of  dull  pane-
gyrics, but  for  the  devotion  of  Longinus  and  other  feats  of

'  Dion,  IxTiiL  12.
VOL.  VII. — 13

194  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  105.

personal  heroism,  such  as  were  never  wanting  in  the  Roman
armies.'  Trajan's  final  success  was  indeed  secured  by  the
defection  of  the  Sarmatians,  the  lazyges,  and  the  Burri,  from
the  common  cause  of  the  barbarians.  All  the  passes  were
now  in  the  hands  of  the  Romans,  and  the  central  regions  fell
step  by  step  into  their  possession.  The  hill  fort,  in  which  the
Dacian  chieftain  held  his  residence,  was  stormed  after  a
desperate  resistance,  and  Decebalus  fell  on  his  own  SAVord
amidst  the  ruins  of  his  capital.  The  nobles  of  the  conquered
land  followed  the  example  of  their  sovereign,  first  firing  their
houses,  and  then  handing  round  the  poisoned  bowl.  Such  is
the  scene  represented  on  the  column  at  Rome,  which  still
records  in  monumental  sculpture  the  chief  features  of  this
memorable  struggle.  The  head  of  Decebalus  was  sent  as  a
trophy  to  Rome,  a  downward  step  towards  barbarism,  which
marks  the  coarseness  of  feeling  engendered  in  the  frontier
camps  of  civilization.  Decebalus  had  concealed  his  treasures
under  a  heap  of  stones  in  the  bed  of  a  river,  the  stream  of
which  had  been  first  turned,  and  then  suffered  to  flow  again
over  it."  The  captives  employed  in  the  work  had  been  put
to  death  to  prevent  its  disclosure.  Nevertheless  the  secret
had  been  revealed  to  Trajan,  and  the  precious  hoards  thus
recovered  sufficed  to  reward  the  valour  of  the  veterans,  to
defray  the  expenses  of  the  war,  and  to  perpetuate  the  mem-
ory of  the  achievement  by  the  column  erected  in  a  new
forum  at  Rome.*

'  Pliny,  Epist.  viii.  1. :  "qiio9  tam  reccns,  tarn  copiosa,  tam  lata,  quae  deni-
que  tam  poetica  ct,  quanquam  in  verissimis  rebus,  tam  fabulosa  materia  ?  "
The  delineation  of  the  bridge  on  the  Trajan  column  is  followed  by  that  of
sieges  and  skirmishes,  rather  than  of  regular  battles.

'  Dion,  Ixviii.  14.,  calls  this  river  the  Sargetia  (the  Strehl),  on  which  Zer-
mizegcthusa  or  Varhely  stood.  But  this  valley  had  been  acquired  in  the  first
campaign,  and  the  Hpot  where  the  treasures  were  concealed  might  be  expected
to  he  more  remote.

*  A  part  of  Trajan's  spoil  waa  dedicated  to  Jupiter  Gasius.  Suidas  :  Kriaiof
Zev(  Ma  Tpalavbg  ivldr/Ke  Kpar^pac  apyvpovc,  aKpoOivia  rf/c  Kara  tuv  Teruv
vIkjk.  Hadrian  AimiBhod  the  votive  inscription  :  7,?n>i  t66  '  A'tvedd^^  Kaal<i)
Tpatavbc  tyakfta.  The  eecond  war  ended  in  106.  "  Trtyan.  imp.  v.  cons,  v."
See  the  medals.

A.U.  868.]  UNDER  THB  EMPIRE.  195

The  resistance  of  the  Dacians,  broken,  abandoned,  and
already  more  than  half  subdued,  ceased  with  the  death  of

their  chief. Trajan  had  determined  to  add  an- ^  . ^ ,

Other  wide  province  to  the  empire.  A  long  period  »» «*•  *«»  rf»
of  restless  aggressions,  checked  occasionally  and
chastised  with  bloody  severity,  followed  by  four  yean  of  war
carried  on  in  the  heart  of  the  country  with  all  the  barbarity  of
a  ruder  age  and  all  the  means  and  resources  of  the  im)>erial
civilization,  had  exhausted,  and,  as  it  would  seem,  nearly  de-
^  populated  the  whole  of  Dacia.  The  emperor  invited  settlers
P  from  all  parts  of  his  dominions,  and  repeopled  the  land  with  so
many  Roman  colonists, — with  colonists  at  least  of  Latin  race
and  speecli, — that  the  language  of  the  empire  became,  and  to
this  day  substantially  remains,  the  national  tongue  of  the  in-
habitants.' The  possession  of  the  territory  was  secured  by
the  foundation  of  four  colonies  at  Zermizegethusa,  Apulum,
Napuca,  and  Cema.*  The  extent  of  the  new  province,  which
was  bounded  by  the  Danube  on  the  south,  by  the  Theiss  on
the  west,  by  the  Carpathians  on  the  north,  was  not  perhaps
accurately  determined  amid  the  boundless  steppes  in  which
it  lost  itself  eastward.  Ptolemy  indeed  makes  the  Hierasras,
or  Pruth,  the  eastern  frontier ;  but  Koman  plantations,  and
possibly  military  stations,  also  reached  even  to  the  Dniester,

if

n  *  Eutrop.  viii.  8. :  "  ex  toto  orbe  Rom.  infinitw  eo  oc^mjib  hominum  tna»-

^»  tulerat,  ad  agros  et  urbes  colendaa.  Dacia  CBiai  diutunio  bello  Dec«b*li  Ttiii
^B  fuerat  exhausta."  Trajan  iutroduced  the  novd  principle  of  forbidding  the
^H  transplantatlou  of  citizens  from  Italy  ;  but  whether  before  or  after  the  founda-
^^Ltion  of  his  own  colonies  in  Dacia  does  not  appear.  Capitolinus  speaks  of  a
^^■ater  emperor  who  violated  this  rule  (if.  Aurel.  11.):  ^'Hispauiis  exhauetis,
^^Italica  allectione,  contra  Trajani  prsecepta,  rerecuude  oonsuluit"

"  The  first  of  these  was  officially  designated  CoL  Ulpia  Trajana,  and  may
be  traced,  from  inscriptions  and  other  remains,  at  Varhely.  Apulum  (CoL
Apulensis,  Ulpian.  IMff.  xv.  8.)  is  supposed  to  be  Karlsburg  in  the  upper  valley
of  the  Maros.  Napuca  is  identified  by  the  distances  in  the  Peutinger  Table
with  Maros-Vasarhely.  (Francke,  p.  173.)  Cema  or  Diema  (Ptolem.  iiL  8.
10.)  is  mentioned  as  a  colony  of  Trajan  by  Ulpian,  1.  c.  It  seems  to  hare  stood
on  the  Uttle  stream  which  bears  the  name  of  Tjema,  and  to  have  been  at  or
near  to  Mehadia,  long  celebrated  for  its  saline  baths.

196  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  107.

and  some  critics  have  imagined  that  the  Roman  occupation
was  propagated  as  far  as  the  Don/  The  narrow  strip  be-
tween the  Theiss  and  the  Danube,  from  which  the  Dacian
tribes  had  been  expelled  by  the  people  known  as  the  lazyges
Metanastae,  seems,  strange  as  it  may  appear,  to  have  been
never  included  in  any  Roman  province.*  It  was  no  doubt  a
tract  of  mere  swamp  and  jungle.  The  triple  division  of  the
Dacian  province  into  Ripensis,  Apulensis,  and  Alpensis,  refers
to  the  three  districts  of  Wallachia,  the  Banat  with  Transyl-
vania, and  the  upper  valley  of  the  Theiss,  or  the  hill  country
from  which  that  stream  descends.  Moesia  now  ceased  to  be
a  frontier  province ;  the  great  road  which  led  into  the  moun-
tains along  the  banks  of  the  Aluta  conveyed  the  presidiary
legions  from  the  stations  they  had  so  long  occupied  on  the
Danube  to  the  heart  of  Transylvania.  Nevertheless  Moesia
might  still  retain  its  importance,  as  a  base  of  operations,  if
force  should  ever  be  required  to  retain  the  conquered  Dacians
in  subjection,  and  Trajan  took  further  measures  to  secure  it  by
the  establishment  within  it  of  the  two  colonies  of  CEscus  and
Ratiaria  on  the  river-bank.*  He  built  also  the  town  of  Nico-
polis,  named  after  his  victories,  in  a  strong  position  on  the
slbpes  of  the  Haemus.  To  him  and  his  lieutenants  are  as-
cribed the  vestiges  of  Roman  causeways,  and  of  ramparts  and
trenches  long  supposed  to  be  Roman,  with  which  the  low-
lands of  Wallachia  and  the  Banat  are  still  deeply  scarred  ;
but  the  last  at  least,  whether  their  date  precede  or  follow  the
Roman  occupation,  are  now  generally  considered  to  be  the
works  of  the  barbarians.

'  Franckc,  p.  180.

'  The  geoj^rapliy  of  Dacia  \s  known  chiefly  from  a  chapter  in  Ptolemy
(iii.  8.),  to  wliich  a  few  notices  may  be  added  from  the  Augustan  Histories  and
the  InscriptionH.  See  Francke's  Oesch,  TV^jans,  and  Marquardt  (Becker's  i
Handb.  der  Alterth.  ili.  1.  108.).

*  Ratiaria  !h  placed  at  or  near  to  Widdin. (Escus  lay  considerably  further  j
cast. Tn\jun'H  Nicopolis  (N«(5rroX<f  Trepl  Alfiov,  Ptol.)  mentioned  by  Amm,
Marcell.  xxxi.  R.  16.  and  placed  by  Jomandcs  on  the  latra  (mod.  lantra),  is  not
to  bo  confounded  with  the  modem  Nicopolis  or  Nikup,  on  tiio  Danube. See
Franckc,  p.  160,

A.U.  860.]  UJTDEB  THB  EMPIRE.  197

Of  the  Dacian  province,  the  last  acquired  and  the  first
to  be  surrendered  of  the  Roman  possessions,  if  we  except
some  transient  occupations,  soon  to  be  commem-  ^^^  moon-
orated,  in  the  East,  not  many  traces  now  exist ;  53m*coi^
but  even  these  may  suffice  to  mark  the  moulding  '■•"*■
power  of  Roman  civilization,  which  imprewed  on  this  dis-
tant region  the  same  type  of  culture  which  we  recognise  in
Spain  and  Britain,  in  Africa  and  Asia.  The  conquests  of
Trajan  are  indelibly  engraved  on  coins  and  marbles,  while
the  accents  of  the  old  Roman  tongue  still  echo  in  the  valleys
of  Hungary  and  Wallachia ;  the  descendants  of  the  Daciaus
at  the  present  day  repudiate  the  appellation  of  Wallachs,  or
strangers,  and  still  claim  the  name  of  Rom^nL  Interesting,
however,  as  these  records  are  of  a  conquest  which  left  such
slight  and  transient  political  traces,  the  wars  of  Dacia  are
eminently  distinguished  by  their  sculptured  monument,  still
standing  in  its  pristine  majesty,  and  embalmed  in  the  glory
of  nearly  eighteen  centuries,  the  column  of  Trajan  at  Rome.
After  his  return  to  Rome,  and  the  celebration  of

Tn^)Mi'*  fomiB.

a  triumph,  with  spectacles  on  a  grander  scale
than  ever,  the  conqueror  of  Dacia  resolved  to  immortalize
the  memory  of  his  epoch,  by  the  construction  of  a  forum
which  should  surpass  in  extent  and  splendour  every  similar
work  of  the  Cffisars  before  him.'  The  emperors  from  Julius
downwards,  had  contributed  towards  opening  an  outlet  for
the  traffic  of  the  old  Roman  forum  into  the  Campus  Martins,
to  the  right  of  the  Capitoline.  But  this  eminence,  which  now
stands  out  disconnected  from  the  encircling  ridge  of  the
Roman  hills,  was,  down  to  this  period,  no  more  than  a  bold
projecting  spur  of  the  Quirinal,  and  the  slope  which  united
the  one  with  the  other  formed  a  barrier  to  the  advance  of  the
imperial  builders.  The  splendours  of  the  city,  and  the  splen-
dours of  the  Campus  beyond  it,  were  still  separated  by  a
narrow  isthmus,  thronged  perhaps  with  the  squalid  cabins

'  Dion,  IxTiii.  15.,  specifies  the  number  of  days  of  theae  ipcciadw,  Ti&,
123  ;  the  number  of  beasts  slain,  viz.,  11,000  ;  the  number  of  ^adiatms  who
fought,  viz.,  10,000. This  triumph  was  celebrated  a.  a  107,  a.  u.  860.

198  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  lOr.

of  tlie  poor,  and  surmounted  by  the  remains  of  the  Servian
wall  which  ran  along  its  summit.^  Step  by  step  the  earlier
emperors  had  approached  with  their  new  forums  to  the  foot
of  this  obstruction.  Domitian  was  the  first  to  contemplate
and  commence  its  removal."  Nerva  had  the  fortune  to  conse-
crate and  to  give  his  own  name  to  a  portion  of  his  predeces-
sor's construction ; '  but  Trajan  undertook  to  complete  the
bold  design,  and  the  genius  of  his  architect  triumphed  over
all  obstacles,  and  executed  a  work  which  exceeded  in  extent
and  splendour  any  previous  achievement  of  the  kind.  He
swept  away  every  building  on  the  site,  levelled  the  spot  on
which  they  had  stood,  and  laid  out  a  vast  area  of  columnar
galleries  connecting  halls  and  chambers  for  public  use  and
recreation.  The  new  forum  was  adorned  with
silica  and  tem- two  libraries.  One  for  Greek,  the  other  for  Roman

pie

volumes,  and  it  was  bounded  on  the  west  by  a
basilica  of  magnificent  dimensions.  Beyond  this  basilica,
and  within  the  limits  of  the  Campus,  the  same  architect  erect-
ed a  temple  for  the  worship  of  Trajan  himself;  but  this  work
belonged  probably  to  the  reign  of  Trajan's  successor,  and  no
doubt  the  Ulpian  forum,  with  all  its  adjuncts,  occupied  many
years  in  building.* The  area  was  adorned  with  numerous

'  The  fact  of  this  connection  between  the  Quirinal  and  the  Capitoline  seems
to  be  put  beyond  a  doubt  by  the  inscription  on  the  base  of  the  Trajan  column,
which  purports  to  have  been  erected  to  show  how  deep  was  the  excavation
made  for  tlie  area  of  the  forum  :  "  ad  dcclarandum  quantce  altitudinis  mons  et
locus  tantis  operibus  sit  egestus."  This  statement  is  confirmed  by  the  words
of  Dion,  Ixviii.  16.:  tf  iwidec^iv  tov  Kara  t//v  ayopav  ipyov  ndvroc  yap  tov
Xupiov  iKclvov  opeivov  fivrof,  KarioKaipe  tooovtov  baov  6  k'iuv  aviaxet,  nai  Tijv
hyopav  Ik  roirov  ■ntSivijv  KarEOKivacje  ;  but  it  seems  quite  inexplicable.

'  Victor,  Ca$.  13.:  "adhuc  Roma3  a  Domitiano  coepta  fora,  atque  alia
multa  plusquam  magnifica  coluit  ornavitque."

'  Hui't.  JJomil.  6. :  "  fonim,  quod  nunc  Nervic  vocatur."  This  forum  was
»l«o  CJilled  Tratmloriutn  or  J'ervium  ;  it  seems  imdoubtedly  to  have  been  bo-
gun  by  Domitian,  or,  rather,  by  Vespasian,  and  to  have  been  adorned  with
Domitiun's  teiiii)lc  of  Minerva  ;  ln'uce  "  J'alladium  forum."

*  A|)(>ll()d()ruH  is  spcciticd  as  tlio  architect  by  Dion,  Ixix.  '1.  The  authorities
for  the  description  «)f  the  fonmi,  &c.,  are  numerous,  and  have  hvvn  collected
by  the  topographers, tjoo  Becker,  p.  ii18,  foil. It  is  must  impiobablc  that

A.U.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPraE.  J99

Statues,  in  which  the  figure  of  Trajan  was  frequently  repeat-
ed, and  among  its  decorations  were  groups  in  bronze  or  mar-
ble representing  his  most  illustriouB  actions.  The  balustrades
and  cornices  of  the  whole  mass  of  buildings  flamed  with
gilded  images  of  arms  and  horses.  Here  stood  the  great
equestrian  statue  of  the  emperor ;  here  was  the  triumphal
arch  decreed  him  by  the  senate,  adorned  with  sculpture,
which  Constautine,  two  centuries  later,  transferred  without
a  blush  to  his  own,  a  barbarous  act  of  the  first  Christian  em-
peror, to  which  however  we  probably  owe  their  preserv  ation
to  this  day  from  still  more  barbarous  spoliation.'

Amidst  this  profusion  of  splendour,  the  great  object  to
which  the  eye  was  principally  directed  was  the  column,  which
rose  majestically  in  the  centre  of  the  foi-um  to  ivmian'icoi-
the  height  of  128  feet,  8culj)tured  from  the  base  '"'»*•
of  the  shaft  to  the  summit  with  the  story  of  the  Dacian  wars,
shining  in  every  volute  and  moulding  with  gold  and  pig-
ments, and  crowned  with  the  colossal  effigy  of  the  august
conqueror.*  The  Greek  and  Roman  artists  had  long  felt  the
want  of  some  device  for  breaking  the  horizontal  lines  so  prev-
alent in  their  architecture  ;  and  to  this  feeling  we  may  per-
haps attribute  the  erection  of  the  Egyptian  obelisks,  by
Augustus  and  others,  in  the  public  places  of  Rome. The

the  temple  of  Trajan  should  have  been  erected  during  his  lifetime,  and  Uie
place  it  occupied  beyond  the  basilica  seems  to  ghowa  that  it  was  a  later  adifi-
tion.  Trajan's  triumphal  arch  was  completed  or  decorated  by  Hadrian,  as
appears  from  a  figxire  of  Hadrian's  favourite  Antinous  on  one  of  the  medallioiM
which  have  been  transferred  from  it  to  the  arch  of  Constaotine.  Miiller,  3eiJt'
maler  dtr  Allen  Kunst,  p.  61.

'  The  subjects  of  these  bas-reliefs  show  that  they  belonged  to  Tnyan's
arch.  The  arch  of  Constantine  may  have  been  preserved  in  ages  of  Quistian
barbarism  by  respect  for  the  memory  of  the  great  Christian  onperor.  Yoidscas
(in  Prob.  2.)  speaks  of  the  books  of  Trajan's  libraries  as  removed  to  the  baths
of  Diocletian,  a  dangerous  locality  for  such  combustible  articles.  But  we
gather  from  Sidonius  Apollinaris  that  they  still  occupied  their  original  place  in
the  fifth  century.

*  The  column  is  referred  to  in  Gell.  liii.  24. ;  Pausan.  t.  12.  6, ;  Amm,
Karcell.  xvi.  11.  See  the  topographers,  &c.  For  the  fact  that  it  was  coloured,
see  Francke,  Gesch.  Traj.  p.  188.

200  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  107,

Greeks  seem  to  have  often  used  the  column  for  this  purpose ;  *
but  a  column,  the  emblem  of  supporting  power,  with  nothing
to  rest  upon  it,  however  graceful  in  itself,  must  have  seemed
to  lack  meaning,  which  the  urn  or  ball  by  which  it  was
sometimes  surmounted  would  hardly  supply.  But  the  statue
of  a  god  or  a  hero  imparted  at  least  a  moral  dignity  to  the
pillar,  on  which  it  might  seem  to  have  alighted  on  its  flight
from  heaven  to  earth,  or  from  earth  to  heaven.  The  propor-
tions of  the  Trajan  column  are  peculiarly  graceful;  the  com-
pact masses  of  stone,  nineteen  in  number,  of  which  the  whole
shaft  is  composed,  may  lead  us  to  admire  the  skill  employed
in  its  construction ;  but  the  most  interesting  feature  of  this
historic  monument  is  the  spiral  band  of  figures  which
throughout  encircles  it."  To  the  subjects  of  Trajan  himself
this  record  of  his  exploits  in  bold  relief  must  have  given
a  vivid  and  sufficient  idea  of  the  people,  the  places,  and  the
actions  indicated ;  even  to  us,  after  so  many  centuries,  they
furnish  a  correct  type  of  the  arms,  the  arts,  and  the  costume
both  of  the  Romans  and  barbarians,  which  we  should  vainly
seek  for  elsewhere.  The  Trajan  column  forms  a  notable
chapter  in  the  pictorial  history  of  Rome.

Nor  was  the  conquest  of  Dacia  the  only  triumph  of  the

Roman  arms  under  the  auspices  of  a  soldier-emperor. At

the  same  moment,  while  Traian  was  advancing

Acquisitions  of , .  . .  '  , ,  . ,.  ^  ,.

Cornelius  Pal-  the  frontiers  m  the  north,  his  lieutenant  Cornelius
Palma,  the  governor  of  Syria,  was  annexing  a
new  district  to  the  great  proconsulate  of  the  east.  The  ill«
defined  frontier  from  Damascus  to  the  Red  Sea  was  always
subject  to  attack  from  the  petty  half-nomade  chiefs,  who
flitted  from  tent  to  village  along  the  border  of  the  Arabian
desert.  The  principal  stations  of  the  tribes  who  caused  this
constant  annoyance  were  at  Gerasa,  Bostra,  Philadelphia,  and

'  Tlio  fonhlon  of  placing  statues  on  columns  was  adopted  from  the  Greeks.
See  PUny,  Jllri.  Nat.  xxxlv.  6.

*  The  statuo  of  Trojan  had  long  fallen  fVom  its  lofly  pedestal  when  it  was
replacctl  with  a  figure  of  St.  Potcr  by  Pope  Sixius  V.  Beneath  the  column  was
a  sepulchral  chamber,  designed  for  the  ashes  of  tlie  emperor.

A.U.  860,]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  201

Petra,  and  it  was  necessary  to  protect  the  eastern  slopes  of
the  Jordan  valley  by  the  complete  reduction  of  these  places.'
A  single  campaign,  conducted  with  energy  and  determination,
sufficed  perhaps  to  lodge  the  Roman  eagles  in  these  border
citadels,  from  whence  the  country  could  be  kept  in  permanent
subjection.  The  great  caravan  lines  between  the  Euphrates
and  the  Red  Sea  were  secured.  The  emporiums  of  Arabian
commerce  were  placed  under  the  authority  of  Roman  gov-
ernors, and  enjoyed  for  some  centuries  the  protection  of  Ro-
man garrisons.  Among  them  Petra  rose  to  peculiar  emi-
nence, and  the  remarkable  ruins  still  existing  on  its  site
attest  at  least  the  extent  of  its  population  and  the  splendour
of  its  architecture.  This  district,  which  was  one  of  the  latest
of  the  Roman  acquisitions,  continued  to  be  attached  to  the
empire  for  several  succeeding  centuries.*

The  ideas  of  the  great  conquering  people  were  still  dilat-
ing with  the  swelling  consciousness  of  their  power  and  mag-
nificence. The  vast  dimensions  of  Trajan's  architectural
erection  might  put  to  blush  the  imperial  builders  of  earlier
times.  The  Ulpian  forum,  with  all  its  accessories,  occupied
a  larger  space  than  those  of  Julius,  Augustus,  and  Ner\'a  to-
gether ;  while  the  open  area  of  the  old  Roman  forum  might
have  been  contained  within  the  precincts  of  the  Ulpian  basilica

*  Dion,  IxTiiL  14.,  whose  epitomator  dumiases  the  subject  in  a  aingle  mo>
tcuce.  Aiumian.  Maroell.  xir.  8. :  "  haac  quoque  ciritates  habet  inter  Of^iida
((Uffidam  ingcntes,  Bostram  et  Gierasam  et  Philadelphitun.  Hane,  prorinda
iinposito  nomine,  rectoreque,  attributo,  obtemperare  legibus  noetiu  Trajanus
compulit  imperator."  Damascus,  liitherto  subjected  nominally  to  the  rule  of  a
native  family,  which  bore  the  name  of  Aretas,  and  resided  in  Petra  (Joo^ih.
Antiq.  xiii.  15.  2. ;  S.  Paul,  2  Cor.  xi.  82.),  though  occupied  by  a  Roman
garrison  (Joseph.  Antiq.  xiv.  11.  7.),  was  now  formally  incorporated  in  the
Syrian  province.  Becker,  Handb.  der  Alterthiuner,  iii.  1.  183.  Eckhel,  Doetr.
Numm.  iii.  p.  880.

*  Dion,  Ixxv.  1.  2. ;  Eutrop.  viii.  18.  See  also  the  ^otUa  dign.  (Bedier,
Alterthiimer,  iiL  1.  203.)  The  people  of  Petra  and  Boatra  accepted  the  dat«
of  the  Roman  conquest  for  their  chronological  era.  Chron.  Poach.  L  p.  472. :
Herpaloi  teal  Boarp^ol  evTEvdev  tov^  coitwv  xP^^'°^  aptOfioi'ai,  L  e.  from
A.  D.  105.

202  HISTOEY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  107.

alone.* It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  no  account  of  it,  and
indeed  no  reference  to  it,  is  given  by  a  contempo-

Few  remaining  ,  ^^ -,

notices  of  the  rary  author.  But  JMartial,  who  has  supphed  us
with  many  hints,  at  least  of  the  architectual  glo-
ries of  Nero  and  Domitian,  had  retired  to  his  native  Bilbilis
before  the  commencement  of  the  works  in  which  the  grandi-
osity of  Spanish  taste  was  first  exemplified  in  marble ;  the
panegyric  of  Pliny  had  been  already  pronounced,  and  the
letters  comprised  in  his  collection  belong  to  an  earlier  date.*
Juvenal,  who  is  not  wholly  silent  on  other  buildings  of  Trajan,
has  no  allusion  to  the  forum  or  the  column ;  and  indeed  this
writer,  while  he  describes  life  at  Rome  in  almost  every  line
of  almost  all  his  satires,  is  strangely  deficient  in  topographical
notices.  Tacitus  resei'ved  a  work  on  the  Affairs  of  Trajan
for  the  solace  of  an  old  age  which  possibly  he  never  attained.
Since  the  fall  of  Domitian,  Suetonius  has  deserted  us,  and  the
era  at  which  we  are  now  arrived  stands  on  the  verge  of  a
great  chasm  in  Roman  literature.  At  a  much  later  period
we  get  occasional  glimpses  of  the  Ulpian  forum,  which  seems
to  have  long  retained  its  paramount  dignity  among  the  re-
mains of  ancient  magnificence.  It  was  here  that  the  empe-
rors long  sate  in  state,  attended  by  the  lictors  with  their
gilded  fasces  ;  and  here,  in  the  last  decline  or  revival  of  old
traditions,  when  there  were  no  longer  emperors  at  Rome,  the
consuls  continued  to  create  new  Quirites  by  manumission  on
the  kalends  of  January.* When  the  second  of  the  Christian

'  See  the  ichnography  of  this  series  of  buildings  in  Becltcr's  Handbuch,
taken  from  Canina'a  Indicazlone  Toporp^afica,  and  adopted  in  the  art.  "  Roma ;"
Bmith's  l^d.  of  Class.  Gfeoffrajthi/.

•  The  date  of  the  dedication  of  the  Trnjan  cohimn  is  inscribed  on  its  base,
and  answers  to  tlie  17tli  year  of  his  reign,  a.  v.  114.  The  latest  of  Pliny's
letters  that  can  be  dated  belongs  to  the  year  107,  but  the  period  of  his  death  is
unknown.

*  CUudian,  xxvUi.  646. :

"  desuetaque  cingit
Regius  auratis  fora  fascibus  Ulpia  lictor."
Bldon  Apull. :

"  ad  Ulpia  poscunt

To  fora  donabis  quos  libcrtato  Quiritos."

A.U.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  203

and  Byzantine  Caesars  visited  the  abandoned  capital,  he  was
struck  with  the  glories  of  this  spot,  which  even  then  had  no
rival  in  splendour  under  heaven.'  Even  its  decorations
seem  to  have  been  singularly  respected.  Five  hundred  years
after  the  Dacian  triumph,  when  Rome  had  been  taken  and
retaken  by  Goths,  Lombards,  and  Greeks,  and  had  suffered
from  earthquakes  and  inundations,  from  natural  decay  and
squalid  poverty,  more  than  even  from  the  violence  of  the
spoiler,  a  legend,  which  seems  not  wholly  groundless,  relates
how  Pope  Gregory  the  Great,  traveling  the  forum  of  Tra-
jan, was  struck  Avith  the  sight  of  a  group  in  bronze,  one  of
the  many  works  still  conspicuous  on  the  spot,  in  which  a
generous  action  of  its  imperial  founder  was  vividly  repre-
sented.*

The  Ulpian  forum,  however,  though  the  largest  and  the
most  interesting,  was  by  no  means  the  only  construction  of
this  emperor  at  Rome.  No  reign  perhaps  was  marked  by
more  extensive  alterations  and  additions  to  the

. . /.  i. 1 •  m .  .  1 Other  bulldingt

existing  features  oi  the  city. 1  raj  an  prolonged orTnuutiB
the  series  of  halls  and  porticos  which  decorated  ^'

the  Campus  Martins,  among  which  the  Pantheon  and  the
Julian  mausoleum  still  rose  preeminent  in  grandeur.  He
constructed  a  theatre  in  the  same  quarter,  which  was  re-
markable from  its  circular  shape ;  he  added  another  gymna-
sium and  another  odeum  to  the  places  of  the  kind  already
existing,  consecrated  to  the  display  of  Grecian  arts  and
accomplishments ;  he  gave  to  the  people  new  thermae,  the  site

*  See  the  account  of  the  visit  of  Constantius  in  Anunianus,  xtL  6. :  "  cum
ad  Trajani  forum  venisset,  singularem  sub  omni  cselo  structuram."  Cassiodor.
Varlar.  vii.  6. ;  Victor,  de  Jie<rion.  viii.

*  The  incident  is  related  by  the  biographers  of  Gr^ory,  John  and  Paul
Diaconus,  and  by  John  of  Salisbury,  De  curial.  moffis.  v.  8.  The  group  repre-
sented Trajan  dismounting  to  listen  to  a  female  petitioner,  who  would  not  be
put  off  with  a  distant  promise  of  an  audience  when  he  should  return  from  the
wars.  The  Pontiff,  it  is  added,  prayed  for  the  soul  of  the  righteous  heathen,
and  received  an  assurance  that  Trajan's  soul  should  be  released  from  Purgatory.
Comp.  Dante,  Pnrgat.  x.  73. ;  Farad,  rx.  40.  As  regards  the  female  petitioner,
Dion,  it  may  be  observed,  tells  the  story  of  Hadrian,  Ldx.  6,

204  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  lOr.

of  which  was  near  to  those  of  Titus,  if  indeed  they  were  not
actually  an  extension  of  the  Flavian  edifice.'  He  brought
the  waters  of  the  lake  Sabatinus  to  the  Janiculus,  thus  add-
ing a  tenth  to  the  nine  existing  aqueducts  of  the  city.*  There
seems  ground  for  supposing  that  he  completed  the  arch  of
Titus,  still  unfinished,  on  the  Velia.  The  Circus  Maximus
had  been  arranged  by  Julius  CsBsar  for  the  reception  of  the  whole
Roman  people,  with  a  lower  story  of  masonry,  and  wooden
galleries  above.  The  wood-work  had  been  swept  away  by
Kero's  fire ;  the  restoration  of  this  favourite  resort  had  been
conducted  by  succeeding  emperors;  but  Trajan  earned  popu-
larity by  enlarging  its  accommodation,  whereby  room  was
obtained  for  the  still  increasing  multitude  of  the  citizens.'
Wliile,  however,  the  magnificent  emperor  was  intent  on
raising  the  abode  of  the  Romans  to  the  level  of  their  fortunes,
inundations  and  earthquakes,  the  most  ancient  and  inveterate
of  her  foes,  were  making  havoc  of  many  of  her  noblest  build-
ings ;  the  fragments  still  remaining  of  Nero's  brilliant  palace
were  consumed  by  fire,  the  Pantheon  was  sti'icken  by  light-
ning, and  the  calamities  which  befell  the  mistress  of  the
world  might  point  a  moral  for  a  Christian  writer  of  a  much
later  date,  who  ascribed  them  to  the  judgment  of  God  on  a
persecutor  of  his  holy  religion.*

Of  this  hereafter.  The  princely  prodigality  of  Trajan's
taste  was  defrayed  by  the  plunder  or  tribute  of  conquered
Tr^an'8  orchi-  cnemics,  and  seems  to  have  laid  at  least  no  extra-
in'^thopTOv-''"'  ordinJ^ry  burdens  on  his  subjects.  His  rage  for
inccs.  building  had  the  further  merit  of  being  directed

for  the  most  part  to  works  of  public  interest  and  utility. He

'  Pausan.  1.  c.  '  Becker's  AltertJiumer,  i.  p.  706,

•  Plln.  Parug.  51.  Comp.  Dion,  Ixviii.  V.  The  text  of  Pliny  makes  the
additional  scats  only  6000,  which  seems  absurd.  Gtcsar  made  i-oom  for
260,000,  and  at  a  later  period  wo  read  of  386,000  or  even  486,000  spectators.
PoMibly  all  these  numbers  are  corrupt

*  Orosius,  vii.  12.  To  guard  against  these  disasters  Trajan  limited  the
height  of  privato  dwellings  to  sixty  feet,  or  ten  feet  below  the  maximum  allowed
by  Auguttui. Victor,  HpU.  13.

A.  U.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  205

built  for  the  gods,  the  senate,  and  the  people,  not  for  himself;
he  restored  the  temples,  enlarged  the  halls  and  places  of  pub-
lic resort ;  but  he  was  content  himself  with  the  palaces  of  his
predecessors.'  Not  in  Rome  only,  but  in  innumerable  places
throughout  Italy  and  the  provinces,  the  hand  of  Trajan  was
conspicuous  in  the  structures  he  executed,  some  of  which  still
attest  the  splendour  of  the  epoch,  and  the  large-minded  pa-
triotism of  their  author.  An  arch  at  Ancona  still  reminds  us
that  here  he  constructed  a  haven  for  his  navy  on  the  upper
sea ;  and  the  port  of  Civita  Vecchia  is  still  sheltered  by  the  mole
he  cast  into  the  waters  to  defend  the  roadstead  of  Centum-
cell*.*  The  bridge  over  the  Tagus  at  Alcantara  affirms,  by
an  inscription  still  legible  upon  it,  that  it  was  built  by  Julius  La-
cer,  one  of  Trajan's  favourite  architects,  though  the  cost  was  de-
frayed, according  to  the  same  interesting  record,  by  the  local
contributions  of  some  rich  and  spirited  communities.*  A
writer  three  centuries  later  declares  of  Trajan  that  he  built
the  world  over  ;  and  the  wide  diffusion  and  long  continuance
of  his  fame,  beyond  that  of  so  many  others  of  the  imperial
series,  may  be  partly  attributed  to  the  constant  recurrence  of
his  name  conspicuously  inscribed  on  the  most  solid  and  best
known  monuments  of  the  empire.* The  greatest  of  his  suc-

'  Pliny  even  praises  Tny'an  for  his  great  modaatkm  in  baildiog,  at
within  the  walls  of  Rome :  "  idem  tarn  parens  in  edlficando  quam  (fiUgOM  in
tuendo."  Paneg.  51. — But  the  Fauegyrim*,  it  mugt  be  remembered,  refiva
only  to  the  commencement  of  the  reign.

*  Pliny,  Epint.  tL  31.,  describes  the  port  of  Centumoellc  Comp.  eoina  in
Eckhel,  inscriptions  in  Gruter,  kc.  To  this,  according  to  the  adioliast,  JuTeoal
alludes,  xii.  75. :

*'  Tandem  intrat  positas  inclusa  per  sequora  m<de8,
Tyrrhenamque  Pharon,  porrectaque  brachia  rursum."

*  Francke,  Gesch.  TVajana,  p.  684.,  after  Gruter  and  others.  The  dimen-
sions of  this  work,  as  given  by  Brotier,  are :  height  200  feet,  length  670,  width
28 ;  arches  6,  each  of  80  feet  span :  all,  of  course,  in  Froteh  meamie.  Trajan
erected  bridges  also  over  the  Rhine,  the  Euphrates,  and  the  Tigris.

*  Eutrop.  viiL  2. :  "  orbem  terrarum  sedificans."  Several  coins  of  families,
e.  g.,  ^Emilia,  Cassia,  Cornelia  and  others,  attest  the  restoration  by  Trajan  of
temples  and  basilicas  erected  by  the  great  men  of  the  republic.  See  Brotier's
Tacitus  :  in  append.  chronoL  A.  v.  c.  856.

206  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  107.

cessors,  the  illustrious  Constantine,  full  of  admiration  for  his
genius,  and  touched  perhaps  with  some  envy  of  his  glory,
compared  him  pleasantly  to  a  wallflower,  which  clings
for  support  to  the  stones  on  which  it  flourishes  so  luxuri-
antly.^

The  care  of  this  wise  and  liberal  ruler  extended  from  the
harbours,  aqueducts,  and  bridges,  to  the  general  repair  of
„  the  highways  of  the  empire. Nor  was  it  only  as

Trajan's  vigl-  °  *' . ...  ,. . ,.  ,  .

lance  in  the the  restorcr  oi  military  discipline  or  the  reviver

administration  .  ^  ^  .

of  the  prov-  of  the  old  tradition  of  conquest,  that  he  took  m
charge  the  communications  which  were  originally
designed  chiefly  for  military  purposes."  He  was  the  great
improver,  though  not  the  inventor,  of  the  system  of  posts
upon  the  chief  roads,  which  formed  a  striking  feature  of
Roman  civilization  as  an  instrument  for  combining  the  re-
motest provinces  under  a  centralized  administration.'  The
extent  to  which  the  domestic  concerns  of  every  distant
municipium  were  subjected  to  the  prince's  supervision  is
curiously  pourtrayed  in  the  letters  of  Pliny,  who  appears,  as
governor  of  Bithynia,  to  have  felt  it  incumbent  on  him  to
consult  his  master  on  the  answer  he  should  return  to  every
petition  of  the  provincials,  whether  they  wanted  to  construct
an  aqueduct,  to  erect  a  gymnasium,  or  to  cover  a  common
sewer.* It  is  possible  indeed  that  the  courtly  prefect  may,

'  Victor,  Epit.  60. :  "  hie  (Constnntinus)  Trajanum  herbam  parieariam,  ob
titulos  multis  osdibus  inscriptos  appellare  solitus  erat"

*  The  roads  constructed  or  repaired  by  Trajan  are  carefully  enumerated  by
Francke,  pp.  577-683. ;  i.  c.  1.  on  the  northern  side  of  Italy  between  Auximum
and  Aquilcja  ;  2.  the  Appian  Way ;  3.  from  Bencventum  to  Brundisium  ;  4.
various  roads  in  Spain.  They  are  for  the  most  part  ascertained  from  inscrip-
tions.

•  Victor,  Cent.  13.;  "noscendis  ocyua  quao  ublque  o  republica  gcrcbantur
admota  medift  publici  cursus."  Comp.  I'lin.  Epht.  x.  64,  65.  The  Hy.stem  had
l)een  originally  set  up  by  Augustus  (Suet.  Odav.  4{t.),  as  has  been  mentioned
in  an  earlier  chapter.  The  minute  economy  of  its  administration  np])ears  in
divers  lettora  of  Pliny  to  Tn\jan,  in  which  ho  excuses  himself  for  what  might
be  considered  an  illegitimato  use  of  it,  x.  80,  31,  121,  122.  od.  Gicrig.

♦  PUn.  EpiMl.  X.  21.  22.  47.  48.  67.  61.  70-73.  98.  99.  (od.  Gicrig). We

A.  U.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  207

in  this  instance,  have  been  over  obsequious,  and  Trajan  him-
self seems  almost  to  resent  the  importunity  with  which  he
begs  to  have  an  architect  sent  him  from  Rome.  Are  there
no  such  artists  in  your  province  or  elsewhere  f  asks  the
emperor.  It  is  from  Greece  that  tJts  architects  come  to
Rome^  and  Greece  is  nearer  to  you  than  Italy.^  These
works,  whether  of  convenience  or  splendour,  were,  it  seems,
generally  constructed  by  the  governing  bodies  in  the  prov-
inces themselves,  and  by  local  taxation,  though  assLited  not
uncommonly  by  imperial  munificence.  Wealthy  citizens
might  continue,  as  of  old,  thus  to  gratify  their  own  vanity,
taste  or  generosity,  of  which  Pliny  is  himself  an  example ;
but  the  days  of  the  splendid  magnates,  who  pretended  to
rival  the  prince  in  their  lavish  expenditure;  had  passed  away,
and  it  was  upon  the  master  of  the  empire  and  proprietor  of
the  fisous,  that  the  burden  continued  more  and  more  to
fall."

While  the  chief  functionaries  of  the  state  subsided  into
mere  agents  of  police,  the  senate  itself,  even  under  the  most

may  be  surprised  at  the  miuutenesa  of  the  supenUion  exerdaed  bj  the  central
governraeut,  as  exemplified  in  theiie  records.  This  was,  however,  no  noTeltj  in
the  Roman  administration,  which  mider  the  free  state  was  at  least  equally
jealous  and  exacting.  See  an  anecdote  in  Yitruvius,  14.:  "in  Apulia
oppidum  Salpia  vetus  ....  ex  quo  ineolss  quotannis  t^rotando  labonntM
aliquando  pcrrenenmt  ad  M.  Uostilium,  eoque  publice  peteutes  impetravenm^
uti  his  idoneum  locum  ad  moenia  transl'ereuda  conquireret,  eUgeretque.  Tunc
is  moratus  non  est,  sed  statim,  rationibus  doctis^^ime  qwesitis,  secundum  mare
mercatus  est  possessionem  loco  salubri :  ab  senatuque  pop.  que  Rom.  petiit  ut
sineret  transferre  oppidum,"  &c.

*  Plin.  Epist.  X.  83,  34.  Whether  an  architect  was  to  be  sought  for  from
(Ireece  or  Rome,  it  shows  how  small  the  class  of  intelligent  artUts  must  have
been  throughout  the  empire,  that  a  province  like  Bithjnia,  which  contained
such  great  cities  as  Nicsea  and  Nicomedia,  was  obUged  to  look  so  Ikr  for  an
architect. See  the  remarks  of  Dubois-Guchan,  TaeUe  et  »oh  £Siek,  L  564.

'  Pliny's  munificence  was  on  a  small  scale,  as  befitted  the  modest  position
of  an  advocate  and  a  man  of  letters.  See  an  instance  in  Ep.  iv.  1.  Licinius
Sura,  a  wealthy  and  ambitious  noble,  built  a  gymnasium  for  the  Roman  people.
A  small  part  only  of  the  liberality  of  Herodes  Atticus,  of  whom  more  hereafter,
was  bestowed  on  the  Romans. Dion,  IxviiL  16.

208  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.107.

oblifi^inor  of  its  princes,  abdicated  its  duties,  and

■■ ,.  f .  ......  -, ^ -,  ■,. Trajan'seco-

left  to  him  the  initiative  m  every  work  oi  public  nomicai  meas-
interest.  The  emperor  had  become  the  sole  le-
gislator, the  sole  administrator,  the  sole  overseer  of  the  com-
monwealth, and  at  last  he  found  himself  almost  its  sole
benefactor  also.  A  mere  selfish  voluptuary  might  neglect
or  repudiate  this  duty,  but  a  prince  of  sense  and  honour
acknowledged  the  obligation  of  providing,  from  the  re-
sources placed  in  his  hands,  for  every  object  of  general
utility.  The  endowment  of  the  professors  of  learning  by
Vespasian  seems  to  have  been  made  from  the  fisc.  Domitian,
in  the  midst  of  his  necessities,  had  respected  this  allocation
of  the  imperial  treasures ;  but  his  own  liberality  was  prob-
ably confined  to  establishing  the  paltry  prizes  of  his  Capi-
toline  and  Alban  games.  The  ordinary  largesses  of  grain
by  which  the  citizen  of  the  lower  ranks  was  almost  wholly
supported,  had  been  extended  by  Augustus  to  infants,  and
the  munificence  of  successive  governments  had  added,  from
time  to  time,  the  condiments  of  wine,  oil,  and  bacon  to  the
produce  of  the  Egyptian  wheatfields ;  but  Nerva  seems  to
have  first  introduced  the  habit  of  providing  a
special  endowment  in  money  for  the  children  of  ^f '^fi^tn?"
the  poor,  and  more  particularly  for  orphans.
This  prince's  charity  was  casual  and  imperfect.  It  was  re-
served for  Trajan  to  expand  it  into  a  system,  and  establish  it
as  an  imperial  institution.  Of  the  origin  of  this  alimentation
there  is  no  trace.  We  can  only  imagine  the  motive  for  it  in
the  anxiety  so  long  manifested  by  government  for  the
increase  of  the  free  population,  and  its  wish  to  encourage
legitimate  wedlock.'  The  provision  itself  is  recorded  on
many  coins  of  Trajan  and  his  successors,  and  is  mentioned
generally  by  the  historians;  but  it  is  from  the  inscribed
tablet  of  Veleia  that  wo  derive  our  full  knowledge  of  its
extent  and  character.* If  we  may  venture  to  apply  to  Homo

'  Plin.  Paneg.  26. : "  Hi  subBidium  bcllorum,  omamentum  pads,  publicis
Bumptibus  aluntur  ....  ox  his  castra,  ex  his  tribus  rcplebantur."

*  For  the  ooinB  and  inscripdona  sco  Eckhcl  and  Gruter. The  tablet  referred

A.  U.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  209

and  to  Italy  generally  the  data  thus  acquired  with  regard  to
one  obscure  muuicipium,  it  would  seem  that  there  wm  a
graduated  scale  of  endowment  for  male  and  female  children,
for  legitimate  and  illegitimate,  sufficient  for  their  entire
maintenance,  and  that  the  whole  number  of  recipients
throughout  the  peninsula  might  amount  to  300,000.*  Thia
provision  was  continued  up  to  the  eighteenth  year  for  males,
and  to  the  fourteenth  for  females.  The  number  of  boys
thus  supported  would  seem  to  have  been  ten  times  that  of
girls;  and  though  the  care  of  the  government  might  naturally
be  directed  to  the  one  sex  more  than  to  the  other,  the  dia-
proportion  seems,  nevertheless,  to  jxjint  significantly  to  the
fact,  of  which  we  have  had  other  indications,  of  the  frequent
abandonment  of  female  children."  The  sums  by  which  this
system  was  maintained  were  advanced  doubtless  by  the
fiscus.  Loans  were  made  to  the  local  proprietors  for  the  cul-
tivation or  improvement  of  their  estates,  at  the  reduced  rate
of  five  per  cent.,  instead  of  the  twelve  per  cent.,  which  was
ordinarily  demanded.' The  tablet  of  Veleia  specifies  the

to  is  an  inscribod  plate  of  bronze,  found  in  the  neighbourhood  of  rkfwitk  in
the  year  1747,  from  which  the  character  of  the  institution  has  been  dodwcw!  by
the  teaming  and  ingenuity  of  Muratori,  MaflTei,  Gori  and  Temnoo.

'  Such  is  the  calculation  of  Francke  {GeteA.  TVdj^aiu,  p.  418.)  on  the  w>
sumption  that  the  number  relieved,  and  the  scale  of  n&eint  Vdeia  (indnA!^
Phicentia  and  Libuma),  may  be  taken  as  an  index  to  Uie  whole  of  Italj.  Bnt
lor  this  we  have  not  sufficient  warrant.  On  the  ecntrary,  we  might  pcthaps
infer  that  the  munificence  of  Trajan  was  local  rathw  than  univenal,  fiom  the
fact  that  Pliny  undertakes  to  establish  a  fund  for  the  relief  of  his  own  to«nn>
people  at  Comum  :  Hpi^.  vii.  18.  In  his  Pantffyrie  (cap.  28.)  PBny  ■pwjSf^
the  number  of  6000  infants  whom  Trajan  had  thus  endowed,  but  poesiblj  m
Rome  only  ;  but  this  refers  to  an  early  period  in  his  reign.

*  It  was  the  practice  of  a  special  class  of  dealers  to  rear  children  deeerted
by  their  parents,  in  order  to  sell  them  as  slaves.  The  trade  was  raeogniwd
and  regulated  by  law,  and  many  intricate  questions  arose  from  the  dehne  of
the  parents  to  their  children  in  after  life,  See  Pliny,  Epiat.  x.  74,  75.  Such
children  were  called  "  altellL"

'  Such  is  the  explanation  of  Hegewisch  and  his  transbtor  Solvet  {Epoque
laplits  heurewe,  kc.\  followed  by  Francke,  and  apparently  the  true  one.  Comp.
Dion,  kviiii.  6. :  <I>f  Koi  raic  ndJieat  rdig  iv  'IroXifi  irpdi  t^  tuv  iraidwv  rpo^
vol.  VII. — 14

210  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  107.

names  of  forty-six  such  proprietors,  with  the  sums  borrowed
by  each,  and  the  security  in  land  they  offered  for  them.  If
we  may  further  believe  that  the  emperor  engaged  not  to  call
in  the  principal,  the  liberality  of  the  government  would
amount  to  the  final  surrender  of  a  large  capital,  on  the
receipt  of  less  than  half  the  returns  that  might  have  been
fairly  exacted  for  it.  The  sum  thus  raised  annually  in  the
little  town  of  Veleia  might  amount  to  about  400^.  of  our
money,  which  was  not  insufficient  for  the  maintenance  of  300
poor  children ;  ^  but  if  the  above  explanation  of  the  transac-
tion be  correct,  it  would  seem  that  the  landowners  who
W^re  accommodated  on  such  easy  terms,  were  gainers  by  the
Unperial  benevolence  no  less  than  the  children  themselves.
The  isystem,  whatever  was  its  real  character,  took  firm  root,
and  iwas  carried  further  by  the  endowments  of  later  rulers.
We  lanst  regard  it,  on  the  whole,  as  an  indirect  attempt  to
make  the  provinces,  by  which  the  fiscus  was  supplied,  con-
tribute to  the  support  of  Italy.  Of  the  various  modes  by
which  this  end  had  been  sought,  the  alimentation  of  Trajan
was  the  most  specious ;  but  it  was  not  less  really  the  exaction
of  a  tribute,  such  as  Italy,  in  her  days  of  conquest,  had  been
wont  to  demand  openly ;  but  in  those  days  she  gave  at  least
her  own  blood  in  exchange  for  the  gold  of  the  provincials ;
now  she  had  ceased  even  to  recruit  the  legions.

The  legislation,  indeed,  of  this  popular  emperor  is  marked
generally  by  a  special  consideration  for  Italian  interests ;  and

this  circumstance  is  to  be  borne  in  mind,  when

Che  K»eoUi  ben- we  remark  the  acclamations  with  which  he  was

^' greeted  by  Pliny,  the  mouth-piece  of  the  nobility,

and  the  favour  in  which  he  was  held  by  the  later  generations,

no^Xa  ;(af)laaadat,  Kal  Toiiroic  thtpyeruv.  Tlmt  the  endowment  was  derived,
not  from  a  tux  on  the  proprietors,  but  in  a  certain  sense  from  tlie  imperial
treasury,  ajipean*  from  I'liny's  pliruso  "  alimenta  dc  tuo ; "  and  tliis  may  bo
reconciled  with  the  "  publico  sumptu  "  of  the  inscrii)tion8  by  reference  to  the
fiscuB,  the  private  treaHure  of  the  emperor  derived  from  public  sources.

'  Hec  Francke's  calculations,  p.  4 12. ; on  the  supposition  that  specie  was
worth  ten  times  its  present  value.

A.U.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  JH

who  referred  no  doubt  to  the  testimony  of  this  class  only.
Even  Trajan's  wide  experience,  his  acquaintance  and  personal
connexion  with  the  provinces,  failed  in  expanding  his  views
to  the  conception  of  himself  as  sovereijjn  of  the  whole  em-
pire. He  was  still  the  emperor  of  the  Romans,  perhaps,  in
this  sense,  the  last  emperor  of  the  Romans.  While  the
world  was  rapidly  assimilating  itself  to  a  single  ty|>e,  and
imbibing  tlie  idea  of  its  common  interests,  he  fixed  his  mind
on  the  narrow  notions  of  the  past,  and  tried  to  perpetuate
the  selfish  principle  of  monopoly  and  conquest.  His  meagre
and  futile  attempts,  indeed,  to  maintain  the  old  Italian  or
Roman  policy,  show  how  vain  was  now  the  endeavour  to
prop  the  prosperity  of  one  section  of  the  empire  by  the
sacrifice  of  the  rest,  even  though  that  section  was  the  sacred
soil  of  Italy  herself.  The  attempt  to  attach  the  wealth  of
the  world  to  a  single  spot,  by  requiring  the  candidates  for
})ublic  office  to  hold  one  third  of  their  landed  property  in
Italy,  was  a  futile  recurrence  to  obsolete  notions  misuited  to
the  genius  of  the  times.'  The  relaxations  Trajan  introduced
into  the  tax  on  successions,  to  which,  since  the  time  of  An-
Justus,  the  Romans  had  fully  reconciled  themselves,  were
designed  as  an  encouragement  to  undertake  citizenship,  a
boon  which  was  felt  at  this  period  to  be  of  doubtful  value,
but  about  which,  as  a  military  ruler,  he  was  doubly  anxious.
The  measures  by  which  he  secured  a  constant  supply  of
grain  from  the  provinces,  exempting  its  exportation  from  all
duties,  and  stimulating  the  growers  at  one  extremity  of  the
empire  to  relieve  the  deficiencies  of  another,  were  directed  to
the  maintenance  of  abundance  in  Rome  and  Italy.  Thus  on
the  casual  failure  of  the  harvest  in  Egypt,  her  empty  grana-

'  Plin.  Episi.  vi.  19. :  "patrimonii  tertiam  parton  eonferre  jussit  in  ea  qxuo
solo  contiuereDtur,  defonue  arbitratus,  ut  erat,  komortm  peHhtroa  nrbem  Itali-
;imque,  non  pro  patria  sed  pro  bospitio  aut  stabulo,  quasi  pengriBttitoai,  iMbere:'*
this  enactiiient  was,  in  strictness,  limited  to  tbe  candidatM fer  nM^tracies.
Tbe  proportion  was  relaxed  to  a  fourth  part  by  the  emperor  AntoninuB.
Capitol,  in  AiU&n.  11.

212  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  107.

ries  were  for  once  replenished  from  the  superfluous  stores  of
Gaul,  Spain,  or  Africa.*

In  other  particulars  also  which  interested  the  feelings  of
the  senatorial  class,  Trajan  recurred  to  the  principles  of
ancient  usage.  He  refrained  from  demanding  the  consulship
annually,  and  held  the  chief  magistracy  five  times  only
during  his  possession  of  power.  Whether  in  the  curule
chair,  or  on  the  benches  of  the  senators,  he  was  equally
moderate  in  language  and  demeanor,  recalling  to  the  minds
of  his  delighted  colleagues  the  days  of  republican  equality.
This  is  no  lord^  exclaimed  Martial ;  this  is  an  emperor^  and
the  most  just  of  senators.  You  command  us  to  be  free,  adds
Measures  for  PliDJ  j  ^^  ^^'^^  ^^  frce^  He  Studied  to  enhance
dignity  of°the^  their  sclf-rcspect,  by  scrupulously  abstaining
senate.  from  dictating  their  election  to  offices. K  ever

he  presumed  to  solicit  their  sufirages  in  favour  of  a  friend,
his  obsequious  manner  was  felt  as  a  compliment  not  less  per-
suasive than  a  command.  Did  this  unaccustomed  freedom
of  election  increase  the  ardour  of  competition,  he  provided
against  its  abuse  by  fresli  enactments  against  bribery;  he
protected  the  true  dignity  of  the  fathei's,  by  revoking  the
indulgence  formerly  allowed  of  voting  by  secret  ballot."
The  well-known  passage  in  which  Pliny  hails  the  return  of

'  Plin.  Paneg.  29-82. :  "  percrebuerat  antiquitus  urbem  nostram  nisi  opibus
^gypti  all  non  posse.  Supcrbiebat  vetosa  et  insolens  natio.  .  .  .  Rcfudimus
Nilo  suas  copiaa  .  .  .  discat  igitur  yEgyptus  non  aliracnta  sc  nobis  scd  tributa

praestare Actum  erat  dc  fjccundissima  gentc  si  libera  fuissct ;  pudcbat

sterilitatiH  insoliteo  .  .  .  cum  pariter  a  te  necessitatibus  ejus  pudorique  subvcn-
tum  est."

»  Martial,  x.  72. :

"  Non  est  hie  domlnus  sed  imperator,
Scd  justissimus  omnium  senator."

Pliny,  Paneg.  86. :  "  jubcs  esse  liboros ;  erimus."  In  this  speech  Pliny
rcpeatcflly  coiitrastM  tlie  titles  of  "  dominus  "  and  "  prlnceps."  When,  in  his
letters  from  liithynia,  he  addresses  Trajan  as  "  dominus,"  ho  speaks  as  a  mili-
tary offlcer  to  his  chief.  But  tho  word  was  already  used  as  a  courteous  saluta-
tion to  a  Hupcrior.

•  riin.  Epitl.  tL  19.,  UL  20.

A.tr.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  213

the  golden  age  of  publicity,  is  a  valuable  testimony  to  the
gentlemanlike  spirit  common,  we  may  believe,  to  his  class.

Trajan  too  had  pledged  himself  never  to  take  the  life  of  a
senator,  and  his  courage  was  equal  to  such  self-deniaL  Thus,
when  he  was  privily  informed  that  Licinius  Sura,
one  of  the  most  illustrious  ot  the  order,  was  con-  aee  »iMi  »eu-
spiring  against  him,  he  replied  by  allowing  Sura  s
surgeon  to  anoint  his  eyes,  and  employing  his  barber  to
shave  him.  Had  my  friend  conceived  designt  against  me,
he  said  next  day,  he  might  have  had  his  toish  yesterday.
But  all  those  about  him  were  not  equally  innocent.  Cal-
purnius  Crassus,  the  same  whom  Nerva  had  pardoned,  laid  a
plan  for  assassinating  him.  Trajan,  though  he  could  not
exonerate  the  culprit,  disdained  to  take  cognisance  of  the
crime,  and  left  to  the  senate  the  inquiry  and  the  sentence.
Thus  it  was  that  Crassus  suffered  death  at  the  hands  of  his
own  colleagues,  who  accepted  the  responsibility  of  an  act
which  seemed  necessary  for  their  hero's  safety.'

If  the  nobles  enjoyed  under  Trajan  all  the  liberty  they
desired,  and  at  least  as  much  as  they  could  use  to  general
advantage,  they  Avere  gratified,  moreover,  by  the  xi^m'bJmI-
jcalousy  with  which  their  ruler  controlled  the  2»3'tfiMiS«BH
classes  beneath  them.  The  privileged  orders  at  W"t*«»»-
Kome,  as  elsewhere,  regarded  with  apprehension  the  power
of  combination  possessed  by  the  traders,  the  artizans,  the
shopkeepers  of  the  city,  whose  more  active  cupidity  was
always  accumulating  wealth,  and  whose  ambition  prompted
them  to  tread  too  closely  on  the  he^ls  of  their  proud  and  list-
less superiors.  Hence  the  anxiety  of  the  senate  and  magis-
trates, even  under  the  free  state,  to  repress  the  union  of  the
lower  classes,  whether  in  the  shape  of  guilds,  of  clubs,  or  of
any  other  co-operative  societies.  The  danger  was  really  a
social  one  ;  but  it  was  the  policy  of  the  government  to  rep-
resent it  as  political;  and  the  shrewdest  of  the  emperors

^  Dion,  Ixviii.  15. Gomp.  Eutrop.  viiL  2. :  "ut  omni  ejus  state  unua  Saia>
tor  damnatus  sit,  atque  is  tamen  per  Senatum  ignorante  Trtyano."

214  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  107.

now  found  it  his  interest  to  humour  these  apprehensions,  and
to  affect  a  rooted  antipathy  to  all  social  combinations.  The
political  character  he  attributes  to  them  appears  in  the  word
factions,  hj  y^hich  he  describes  them.  The  horror  Trajan
affected,  or  really  felt,  in  regard  to  them  extended  into  the
provinces.  When  Pliny,  as  prefect  of  Bithynia,  proposed  to
enrol  an  association  of  workmen  at  Nicomedia  for  the  speed-
ier extinction  of  fires,  he  feels  it  necessary  not  only  to  con-
sult the  emperor  on  the  subject,  but  to  explain  the  precautions
he  would  take  to  prevent  abuse.  Trajan  absolutely  rejects
the  pi'oposal,  declaring  that  no  precautions  can  avail  to  pre-
vent such  associations  degenerating  into  dangerous  con-
spiracies.'

But  though  Trajan's  mind  did  not  rise  to  wide  and  liberal

views  for  the  advantage  of  the  provinces,  he  neglected  no

favourable  opportunity  for  the  benefit  of  particu-

ministration lar  localities. His  ears  were  always  open  to  the

combines  .  n  ■,  •  n  -,■,,,  „

splendour  with  suggestions  01  his  preiccts,  and  the  petitions  of
his  subjects.  His  hand  was  open  to  bestow  en-
dowments and  largesses,  to  relieve  public  calamities,  to
increase  public  enjoyments,  to  repjyr  the  ravages  of  earth-
quakes and  tempests,  to  construct  roads  and  canals,  theatres
and  aqueducts.  The  activity  displayed  throughout  the  em-
pire in  works  of  this  unj^roductive  nature,  shows  a  great
command  of  money,  an  abundant  currency,  easy  means  of
transacting  business,  ample  resources  of  labour,  and  well-de-
vised schemes  for  combining  and  unfolding  them.  Through-
out a  reign  of  nineteen  years  Trajan  was  enabled  to  abstain
from  any  new  and  oppressive  taxation,  while  he  refrained,
with  scrupulous  good  faith,  from  the  alternative  of  confisca-
tion and  proscription.  He  was  ashamed  of  his  predecessors'
accumulations,  of  their  houses  and  estates,  their  ornaments
and  furniture,  extorted  from  the  fears  of  their  miserable  sub-

'  I'lin.  KpUt.  X.  88,  86. :  "  quodcunqiic  notticn  ex  quacunquc  causa  dedcri-
mu«  lU,  qui  in  Idem  contnictl  fuerint,  lu'ticriir,  quamvis  brovis,  ficnt."  He  Roes
on  to  recommend  the  houHcholdcw  to  jirovidc  means  for  tlufir  own  protection
•gainit  fire,  "  ac,  bI  res  popoBccrit,  accurHu  populi  ad  Iioc  uti."

A.  U.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  215

jects,  offered  during  life  as  bribes  for  their  farour,  or  servilely
bequeathed  on  deathbeds.  He  made  a  noble  sacritice  of
these  ill-gotten  riches,  either  casting  them  to  his  friends,  or
devoting  the  produce  of  their  sale  to  works  of  utility  and
grandeur.*  Under  Trajan's  admirable  administration  judi-
cious economy  went  ever  hand  in  hand  with  genuine  magni-
ficence.

The  monuments  of  Roman  jurisprudence  contain  many
examples  of  Trajan's  legislation.  The  Meplies  he  addressed
Trajan's  legiB-  *^  ^^®  unccasing  questious  of  his  prefects  and
lation.  magistrates,  were  incorporated  in  the  laws  of  the

empire,  and  retained  their  force  for  many  generations.  The
subjects,  however,  to  which  they  relate  are  of  minor  interest,
and  illustrate  no  general  principle  to  recommend  them  to  the
notice  of  historical  students.*  The  legislator  qualified  him-
self for  the  task  of  propounding  or  applying  legal  principles,
by  assiduous  labour  in  the  administration  of  existing  law.
Trjvjan  exchanged  the  toils  of  war  for  the  labours  of  the
forum.  Like  the  great  statesmen  of  the  republic,  he  returned
from  the  camp  to  the  city  to  take  his  seat  daily  on  the  tribu-
nals, with  the  ablest  judges  for  his  assessors;  he  heard  appeals
from  the  highest  courts  throughout  his  dominions,  and  the
final  sentence  he  pronounced  assumed  the  validity  of  a  legal
enactment.  The  clemency  of  Trajan  was  as  conspicuous  as
his  love  of  justice,  and  to  him  is  ascribed  the  noble  sentiment
that  it  is  better  that  the  guilty  should  escape  than  the  inno-
cent suffer.* It  was  also  a  refinement  in  flattery,  not  uncom-

*  Plin.  Paneg.  60,  51.  This  writer  is  extraTagant  in  his  encomiums  on
the  alleviation  by  Trajan  of  the  legacy  duty  (vicesima  haereditatum)  paid  by
Koman  citizens.  The  class  that  profited  by  it  was  small,  but  they  were  Roman
citizens,  and  the  remission  was  made  by  the  fisc. Plin.  Paneg.  87.

'  See  the  enumeration  of  Senatusconsulta,  edicts,  rescripts,  &c.,  of  Tny'an
from  the  Digest  and  other  sources  in  Francke's  careful  work  Such  as  related
to  questions  between  patrons  and  clients  or  freedmen,  seem  to  have  been  con-
ceived in  the  interests  of  the  former  class.  C!omp.  Plin.  £j>.  x.  4. :  Martial.
X.  84.

*  Digest,  xlviii.  19.  5. :  "Satius  esse  impunitum  rdinqui  facinus  nocentia
quam  innocentem  damnare."

216  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  lOr.

monly  adopted,  to  request  the  emperor  to  undertake  the
hearing  in  the  first  instance.  Such  was  the  case  with  the
three  trials  which  Pliny  describes  in  one  of  his  letters,  when
Trajan  summoned  him  to  his  residence  at  Centumcellae.
What  more  delightful,  he  exclaims,  than  to  witness  the  prince's
justice,  gravity,  and  courtesy,  even  in  his  private  retirement,
where  his  virtues  are  generally  hidden  from  the  public  gaze  ?
The  first  was  the  case  of  Claudius  Aristo,  a  provincial  mag-
nate, who  pleaded  his  own  cause  triumphantly  against  a
calumnious  imputation  of  treason.  The  second  was  a  charge
of  adultery  committed  with  a  centurion  by  the  wife  of  a  mili-
tary tribune.  The  husband  had  laid  his  grievance  before  the
legatus,  but  the  provincial  magistrate  had  referred  it  to  the
imperator,  as  a  matter  of  camp  discipline,  and  Trajan  took
care,  in  giving  judgment,  to  let  it  be  understood  that  it  was
only  as  between  soldiers  that  he  took  cognisance  of  it.  The
third  was  a  complaint  of  the  presumptive  heirs  to  a  property
against  the  claimants  under  the  will.  They  had  addressed
themselves  to  the  emperor  while  he  was  absent  in  Dacia,  and
he  appointed  a  day  for  the  hearing  on  his  return.  One  of  the
defendants  was  a  fi*eedman  of  the  imperial  household,  and
when  the  plaintiffs,  who  apparently  had  no  real  case,  pre-
tended that  they  dared  not  enforce  their  claim  against  a
favourite  of  the  emperor's,  Trajan  magnanimously  replied,
that  Eurhythmus  Avas  not  a  Polycletus,  nor  was  he  a  Nero.*
It  is  clear  that,  whatever  might  be  the  legitimate  mode  of
procedure,  the  first  of  these  cases  was  referred  to  the  emperor
as  a  matter  specially  affecting  his  prerogative  as  chief  of  the
state ;  the  second,  as  has  been  said,  because  it  related  to  the
discipline  of  the  army;  and  the  third,  from  the  peculiar
claims  which  a  freedman  of  the  palace  might  be  suj)i)osed  to
have  on  the  prince's  interest.

The  justice,  the  modesty,  the  unwearied  ai)plication  of
Trajan,  were  deservedly  celebrated,  no  less  than  his  valour  in

'  Plin.  EpUL  vl.  81.

A.U.  860.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  217

war,  and  his  conduct  in  political  affairs;  but  a  Tr«i,n«, pq,.
great  part  of  his  amazing  popularity  was  owing,  ••***  s"^***-
no  doubt,  to  his  genial  demeanour,  and  to  the  affection
inspired  by  his  qualities  as  a  friend  and  associate.  The  im-
portance which  the  Romans  attached  to  the  personal  charac-
ter of  their  eminent  men,  has  generally  filled  their  biogra-
phies with  anecdotes  of  their  private  life.  The  prominence
given  by  the  establishment  of  monarchy  to  the  man  who
occupied  the  highest  place  among  them,  brought  thi«  ten-
dency into  still  stronger  relief.  It  is  to  be  regretted,  how-
ever, that  with  the  exception  of  his  next  predecessor,  Trajan
is  the  only  emperor  of  Avhom  there  survives  no  such  special
monograph.  Our  accounfof  his  exploits,  his  fortune  and  his
character,  must  be  taken  from  the  epitome  of  Dion's  slight
history,  or  pieced  imperfectly  together,  from  the  Panegyric
of  Pliny,  and  the  surer,  but  still  more  meagre  evidence  of
coins  and  monuments.  The  trifling  notices  in  the  compendi-
ous works  of  Victor  or  Eutropius  may  confirm  what  we  have
gleaned  from  these  sources,  but  hardly  add  another  fact  to  it.
Nevertheless,  Trajan  possesses  an  advantage  over  the  other
emperors,  in  the  remains  still  existing  of  his  correspondence
in  the  letters  of  Pliny,  which  bring  out  not  only  the  manners
of  the  times,  but  in  some  degree  the  character  of  the  prince
also,  and  bear  ample  testimony  to  his  minute  vigilance  and
unwearied  application,  his  anxiety  for  his  subjects'  well-being,
the  ease  with  which  he  conducted  his  intercourse  with  his
friends,  and  the  ease  with  which  he  inspired  them  in  return.'
Trajan's  letters  bespeak  the  polished  gentleman  no  less  than
the  statesman.  Such  too  is  the  common  tenour  of  all  our
evidence  on  this  head.  Trajan  was  fond  of  society,  and  of
educated  and  even  literary  society. He  was  proud  of  being

*  We  are  struck  in  perasing  this  correspondence  with  the  appar^t  abaeoea

it  beti-avs  of  general  principles  of  government  In  every  emergency  the  prefect
puts  a  direct  question  to  the  emperor.  The  emperor  replies  with  a  special
answer.  The  brevity,  point,  and  vigour  of  his  replies  bespeak  his  sense  and
judgment.  -The  last  letter  of  the  series,  in  which  he  grants  a  favour  to  his
correspondent,  is  a  graceful  instance  of  his  coortesj  as  well  as  his  klndnesa.

218  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  107.

known  to  associate  witli  the  learned,  and  felt  himself  compli-
mented when  he  bestowed  on  the  rhetorician  Dion  the  com-
pliment of  carrying  him  in  his  own  chariot.^  That  such
refinement  of  taste  Avas  not  incompatible  with  excess  in  the
indulgences  of  the  table,  was  the  fault  of  the  times,  and
more  particularly,  perhaps,  of  the  habits  of  camp  life,  to
which  he  had  been  so  much  accustomed.  Intemperance  was
always  a  Roman  vice,  and  though  Augustus  might  be  re-
markable for  his  sobriety,  it  would  be  wrong  to  infer  from
the  examples  of  Nerva,  Trajan,  and  his  next  successor,
Hadrian,  that  the  leaders  of  society  at  Rome  had  degenerated
in  the  second  century  from  those  of  the  first,  and  of  ages  still
earlier.  Sulla  and  Cato  the  Censor,  Julius  Caesar  and  Anto-
nius,  were  free  livers  in  all  respects,  and  only  less  notorious
for  their  excesses  at  table  than  Tiberius  and  Claudius,  inas-
much as  the  greatness  of  their  general  character  over-
shadowed their  littleness."

The  afiability  of  the  pi-ince,  and  the  freedom  with  which
he  exchanged with his  nobles  all  the  offices  of  ordinary
,  courtesy  and  hospitality,  bathing,  supping,  or

and  counte-  hunting  as  an  equal  in  their  company,  constituted
one  of  his  greatest  charms  in  the  eyes  of  a  jeal-
ous patriciate  which  had  seen  its  masters  too  often  engrossed
by  the  flatteries  of  freedmen,  and  still  viler  associates.  But
Trajan  enjoyed  also  the  distinction,  dear  in  Roman  eyes,  of
a  fine  figure  and  a  noble  countenance.  In  stature  he  exceed-
ed the  common  height,  and  on  public  occasions,  when  he

'  Philostr.  VU.  Sophist,  i.  7. :  rl  fin>  Myeig  ovk  ol6a,  ^iTiu  61:  oe  ug  ijxavr&v.
Comp.  Tlicmist.  Orat.  v.  on  the  philosophers  patronized  by  the  emperors.

'  For  the  evidence  of  Trajan's  intemperance  sec  Dion,  Ixviii.  7. ;  Victor,
Ccu.  13. ;  Epit.  13,  48. ;  Spartiun.  Iladr.  3. ;  Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  39. ;  Julian.
Casar^  p.  28. ;  and  conip.  Francke,  Ocsch.  2rajans,  p.  664. :  "  Wio  an  Philipp
Ton  Maccdonicn  und  seinem  Adel,  an  Alexander  M.  und  seiner  (Jcnoralen,  die
Uebcrtreibung  dcs  (JenuHses  bei  Bachanalien  gerii^t  wird,  soil  Trajan,  wie
Ncrva,  Hadrian  und  andcre  ZeltRenossen,  cincn  frohlichcn  Tnmk  geliebt  luiben,"
The  habitfl  of  I'hilip  and  Alexander  were  those  of  semi-barbarians  contrasted
with  the  poHHhud  self-restraint  of  the  Greeks,  but  the  Romans  had  never
adopted  the  Grecian  poliah  in  this  particular.

A.U.  860.J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  219

loved  to  walk  bareheaded  in  the  midst  of  the  senators,  his
grey  hairs  gleamed  conspicuously  above  the  crowd.  His
features,  as  we  may  trace  them  unmistakably  on  his  innu-
merable busts  and  medals,  were  regular,  and  his  face  was  the
last  of  the  imperial  series  that  retained  the  true  Roman  type,
not  in  the  aquiline  nose  only,  but  in  the  broad  and  low  fore-
head, the  angular  chin,  the  firm  compressed  lips,  and  gener-
ally in  the  stern  compactness  of  its  structure.'  The  thick
and  straight-cut  hair,  smoothed  over  the  brow  without  a  curl
or  a  parting,  marks  the  simplicity  of  the  man's  character,  in
a  voluptuous  age  which  delighted  in  the  culture  of  flowing
or  frizzled  locks.  But  the  most  interesting  characteristic  of
the  figure  I  have  so  vividly  before  me,  is  the  look  of  painful
thought,  >vhich  seems  to  indicate  a  constant  sense  of  over-
whelming responsibilities,  honourably  felt  and  bravely  borne,
yet,  notwithstanding  much  assumed  cheerfulness  and  self-
abandonment,  ever  irritating  the  nerves,  and  weighing  upon
the  conscience.

The  history  of  Trajan's  reign  is  now  brought  down  to  the
moment  of  his  last  departure  from  the  city.  A  short  interval
of  Eastern  warfare  still  remains  between  this  epoch  and  his
death ;  but  the  incidents  of  his  latter  years  belong  to  another
connexion  of  events,  and  it  will  be  convenient  here  to  close
the  summary  of  his  conduct  and  character.

*  Winckelmann  has  observed  that  generally  in  the  busts  of  Roman  emp«ws
the  lips  are  closed,  indicating  peculiar  rei>erve  and  dignity,  free  from  human
passions  and  emotions.  A  similar  feeling  may  be  tntced  in  the  earliest  Greek
statues,  but  it  was  not  retained  even  by  the  Greeks  in  their  represenution  of
divinities.  So  a  statue  of  Apollo  is  described  by  Propertius  (iL  23.) :
"  Hie  equidem  Phcebo  visus  mihi  pulchrior  ipeo
Marmoreus  tacita  carmen  hiare  Ivra."

220  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

CHAPTEE  LXIY.

EFFECT OF THE FLAVIAN REACTION ON ROMAN LITERATURE. — COMPARISON OF
LUCAN AND SILIUS ITALICUS  : OP SENECA AND QCINTILIAN. — PLINY THE

NATURALIST. SCHOLASTIC TRAINING. JUVENAL COMPARED WITH PERSIUS  !

STATIUS  WITH  OVID  :  MARTIAL  WITH  HORACE. — THE  HISTORIANS  :  TACITUS  :
INGENUITY  OF  HIS  PLAN. — HIS  PREJUDICES  AND  MISREPRESENTATIONS. — PREVA-
LENCE OF  BIOGRAPHY. — ^TACITUS  AND  SUETONIUS. — UNCRITICAL  SPIRIT  OF
HISTORICAL  COMPOSITION. — MEMOIRS  AND  CORRESPONDENCE. — PLINY  THE
YOUNGER. — INTEREST ATTACHING TO HIS LETTERS. — MUTUAI- APPROXIMATION

OF  THE PHILOSOPHICAL  SECTS. — PREVALENCE  OF  SUICIDE. CORELLIUS. — SILIUS.

ARRIA. CORRUPTION OF SOCIETY. MILITARY MANNERS. LIFE AMONG THE

INTELLIGENT NOBLES. SPURINNA. PLINY THE ELDER. PLINY THE YOUNGER.

VILLAS OF THE NOBILITY, THE LAURENTINE AND TUSCAN OF PLINY. THE

SURRENTINE  OF  POLLIUS. — DECLINE  OF  MASCULINE  CHARACTER  AMONG  THE
ROMANS. — EXCEPTIONS. — ^TACITUS  AND  JUVENAL  MASCULINE  WRITERS. CON-
TRAST  IN THEIR  TEMPERS. — LAST CTIAMPIONS OF ROMAN IDEAS.

OUR  latest  chapters  have  supplied  a  narrative  of  political
events,  illustrated  by  personal  anecdotes,  and  by  such

accounts  of  the  monuments  of  the  acre  as  misxht
Moral  aspect  of  .  ,  , . . „,?  *

the  Flavian  re- Bcrvc  to  animate  and  explain  it. We  may  now,

in  turn,  devote  a  special  section  to  the  moral  as-
pect of  Roman  society  during  the  period  thus  reviewed,  the
reigns,  namely,  of  Vespasian  and  his  two  sons,  of  Nerva  and
of  Trajan;  and,  in  so  doing,  wo  must  observe  again  how
strongly  tlie  Fhivian  period  is  marked  by  the  reaction  from
the  Bj)irit  of  the  Claudian  empire.  The  establishment  of  the
monarchy  liad  kindled,  as  we  have  seen,  the  imagination  of
the  Romans.  Hard,  selfish,  prosaic  as  they  naturally  were,
thoy  had  been  roused  to  eiilliusiasm  by  the  greatness  of
Julius,  the  Ibrtuno  of  Augustus,  the  wild  magnillcence  of
Oaius,  tho  grace  and  accomplishments  of  Nero. In  their

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  221

fond  admiration  of  the  glorious  objects  thus  presented  to
them,  they  had  invested  the  men  themselves  with  the  attri-
butes of  divinity,  their  government  with  a  halo  of  immortality.
They  Avere  persuaded  that  the  empire  itself,  under  the  rule
of  this  celestial  dynasty,  was  an  effluence  from  the  divine
regimen  of  the  world ;  and  they  consented  to  regard  the
freaks  of  caprice  and  madness  from  which,  as  from  the  dis-
turbances of  the  elements,  they  occasionally  suffered,  as  mys-
terious but  perhaps  necessary  evils.'  Meanwhile  they  rer-
elled  without  stint  or  misgiving  in  luxury,  extravagance,
and  every  vicious  indulgence.  No  shade  of  apprehension  for
the  future  had  yet  passed  over  the  festivals  and  orgies  in
which  wealth  and  greatness  rioted  among  them.  The  eter-
nity of  Rome,  and  the  immutability  of  her  fortunes,  were
supposed  to  be  established  in  the  decrees  of  fate.  Her  uni-
versal empire  was  the  theme  of  poets  and  declaimers;  and
the  idea  that  the  Latian  Jupiter  \\'txa  the  Lord  of  all  the
world,  which  he  held  as  it  were  in  trust  for  the  children  of
Itomulus,  was  impressed  without  doubt  or  question  on  the
minds  of  her  exulting  citizens.

The  monstrous  follies  of  Nero's  latter  years  had,  doubt-
less, more  effect  in  unsealing  men's  eyes  than  his  cruelties  or
extortions. His  dancing  and  singing  revolted „  ^
their  prejudices  more  than  his  proscriptions  and tb»  Omh«u
confiscations. Their  god  had  at  last  made  him-
self contemptible,  and  the  petulance  which  rebuked  the  wor-
shippers of  leeks  and  crocodiles  in  Kgypt,  was  startled  in  its
turn  by  the  vileness  of  the  human  idol  which  it  condescended
itself  to  worship. Nevertheless,  in  the  absence  of  any  for-
eign opinion  which  could  act  upon  the  sentiments  of  the  lio-
mans,  it  might  have  been  long  before  this  surprise  or  shame
was  roused  to  action. Even  Nero's  frivolities  would  never,

'  Luean,  Pharsal.  i.  37. :  "Scelera  ipsa  nefasque  Hac  mercede  placent."
The  Romans  had  doubtless  applied  to  their  own  case  the  same  reasoning  which
they  addi-cssed  to  their  subjects :  "quomodo  steriUtatem  aut  nimios  imbres,  et
ctetcra  natune  mala,  ita  luzum  vel  avaritiam  dominantium  tolerate."  Tac.
ITist.  iv.  74.

222  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

perhaps,  have  been  resented  in  arms  by  the  senate,  nor  by
the  classes  whose  feelings  the  senate  represented,  had  not  the
blow  been  first  struck  from  the  camps  in  the  provinces,  with-
in which  all  the  vigour,  and  most  of  the  prejudices,  of  old
Rome  had  taken  refuge.  The  conviction  which  flashed  upon
the  world  from  Galba's  Spanish  leaguer,  that  a  prince  could
be  created  elsewhere  than  at  Rome,  was  in  itself  a  revolu-
tion. The  ripening  tradition  of  a  hundred  years  was  in  an
instant  blighted.  The  quick  succession  of  pretenders  each
clothing  himself  for  a  moment  in  the  purple,  and  passing
swiftly  across  the  stage,  dissipated  what  remained  of  the
Caesarean  enthusiasm.  Vespasian  succeeded  to  a  realm  weary
of  illusion  and  disposed  to  obedience.

The  blindness  of  this  obedience  may  be  estimated  from
the  ease  with  which  men  conformed  to  the  example  of  their
Effect  of  this  "^^  ruler's  antique  and  homely  character.  The
tone"of°Eom^  ^^^^^  virtucs  of  the  founder  of  the  Flavian  dynas-
literature.  ^y  exposcd  moi'c  Strongly  than  ever  the  tinsel

brilliancy  of  Nero.  The  sobered  feeling  of  the  age  is  vividly
impressed  on  the  remains  of  its  literature.  The  writings  of
Comparison  of  ^^^  Flavian  period  present  little  of  the  lawless
Fiavknwri-*^  force  and  feverish  extravagance  which  so  gener-
**"•  ally  mark  the  Claudian. The  enthusiasm  of  the

Romans  had  been  quelled.  Their  compositions  are  now  sub-
jected to  more  careful  revision ;  they  aim  at  exactness  and
completeness ;  they  study  artistic  development.  They  ex-
hibit the  results  of  a  conscious  self-command,  and  already
betray  the  effects  of  the  new  system  of  academic  training
disseminated  through  the  schools  by  Vespasian.  The  contrast
between  the  style  of  the  two  eras,  so  little  removed  in  time,
but  BO  widely  separated  in  ideas  and  sentiments,  may  be
illustrated  by  a  comparison  of  parallel  Avriters.  Tims,  for
Lncnn  an<i  811-  i">*tance,  wc  may  set  Lucan  side  by  side  with
iuinaiious.  Silius  Italicus.  Both  were  men  of  affluence  and
noble  birth  ;  bolli  well  versed  in  the  liberal  knowledge  of'
tljeir  time ;  both  familiar  with  the  court,  the  one  Avith  that
of  Nero,  the  other  with  that  of  the  Flavian  emperors,  and

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  223

with  the  high-bred  society  that  flitted  through  it.  Their
fortunes,  indeed,  were  in  the  end  widely  diflferent.  The  death
of  the  one  was  precipitated  by  his  own  uncontrolled  but
generous  impetuosity,  while  Silius  cultivated  patience  under
the  sway  of  emperore,  bad  and  good,  indiflerently,  lived  in
safety  to  a  ripe  old  age,  in  the  enjoyment  of  every  civil  hon-
our, and  at  last  perished  by  his  own  act  and  will,  when  sated
with  life,  and  harassed  by  an  incurable  malady,  he  resolved
to  finish  his  career  by  abstinence,  and  resisted  the  dissuasions
of  his  friends  through  the  long-protracted  agony  of  a  the-
atrical exit.'  Both  devoted  themselves  to  poetical  compogi-
tion,  and  exulted  in  the  applause  of  their  contemporaries  not
less  than  in  the  hopes  of  an  endurmg  reputation.*  They
shared  a  kindred  taste,  also,  in  their  choice  of  themes ;  for
both  made  the  rare  selection  of  a  national  event  for  the  sub-
ject of  an  epic,  and  both  entered  on  their  tasks  in  the  spirit
of  rhetoricians  rather  than  of  poets.  But  their  mode  of  exe-
cution was  widely  diflferent.  Lucan,  with  less  imagination
and  less  invention  than  any  one  perhaps  of  the  great  masters
of  epic  song,  is  the  most  independent  and  self-sufticing  of
them  all.  lie  displays  throughout  a  daring  disregard  for
precedent  and  authority.  He  venerates  no  master;  he  fol-
lows no  model ;  he  had  never  studied,  one  is  almoft  tempted
to  imagine  that  he  had  never  read,  Virgil.  lie  seems  hardly
to  look  forward  from  one  of  his  cantos  to  another,  exhibits
no  unity  of  purpose,  sets  forth  no  moral,  proposes  to  us  no
hero.  Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  this  defiance  of  all  rules  and
traditions,  he  succeeds,  by  the  mere  force  of  vehemence  and
audacity,  in  persuading  us  to  admit  him  within  the  hallowed

'  Silius  was  actually  a  little  the  elder  of  the  two :  but  Lucan  died  a.  d.  65,
at  tlie  age  of  twenty-six  ;  Silius  was  living  nearly  forty  years  later,  and  com-
posed his  poem  under  Domitian,  at  least  twenty  years  after  the  date  of  the
Pharsalia.

'  The  contemporary  reputation  enjoyed  by  Lucan  is  shown  by  the  well-
known  line  of  Juvenal,  Sat.  viL  79. :  "  Contentus  fama  jaceat  Lucanus  in  hortis
Marmoreis."  The  estimation  in  which  Silius  was  held,  may  be  judged  from
several  compliments  paid  him  by  Martial  and  Pliny.

224  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

circle  of  the  master  spirits  of  poetry.  Silius,  on  the  contrary,
creeps,  while  Lucan  bounds,  and  almost  flies.  Silius  writes
with  all  the  principles  of  art  in  his  head,  and  all  the  works
of  the  great  models  ranged  in  order  round  his  desk.  His
tropes  and  similes  seem  to  he  selected  from  a  common-place
book,  and  he  seldom  ventures  to  describe  a  striking  incident,
without  invoking  the  rhythm  and  diction  of  the  singer  of
the  ^neid.*  But  even  the  sustained  and  agreeable  correct-
ness of  his  fifteen  thousand  verses  almost  deserves  our  admi-
ration, and  we  feel  that  such  a  poem  could  hardly  have  in-
herited the  immortality  which  is  so  large  a  share  of  fame,
had  not  its  editors,  its  transcribers,  and  its  readers,  regarded
it,  in  some  sense,  as  the  representative  of  an  epoch,  and  im-
portant for  its  just  conception."  For  Silius  does,  in  fact,
represent  to  us  the  refined,  the  highly  instructed,  the  now
tamed  and  sobered  patrician  of  the  Flavian  era,  to  whom  the
early  history  of  his  countrymen  was  a  fit  subject  for  ideal
description,  but  bore  no  practical  reference  to  the  circum-
stances around  him.  In  his  mind  politics  are  a  mere  blank.
He  neither  reflects  on  the  present  nor  regrets  the  past.  To
him  the  warriors  of  the  old  republic  are  no  longer  the  men
of  the  forum  and  the  capitol,  such  as  he  sees  before  his  own
eyes :  they  have  passed  into  the  twilight  of  myths  and  demi-
gods. To  him  Scipio  is  a  second  Hercules,  the  achiever  of
labours,  the  tamer  of  monsters,  the  umpire  of  the  divinities
of  Pleasure  and  Virtue.  Hannibal  is  an  ogre  or  giant  of
romance,  who  seems  to  vanish  at  the  catastrophe  of  tlie  story
in  a  tempest  of  flame  or  cloud.' But  the  listless  complacence

'  Pliny'a  criticism  on  Silius  Italicus,  "  scribebat  carmina  majore  cura  quam
Ingenio  "  {IJpiat.  iii.  1.),  may  be  taken  as  a  motto  for  the  literary  character  of
tbo  age.

•  It  Bhould  be  observed,  however,  that  the  poem  of  Silius  Italicus  seems  to
have  been  long  lost  to  the  ancients,  who  never  quote  it,  and  was  first  made
known  to  us  by  the  accidental  discovery  of  a  single  manuscript  in  the  fiilcenth
century. Biibr,  Oesch.  der  Riimwch.  lAkratur,  i.  266.

*  SU.  lUl.  XT.  20,  foil.  xvii.  614. :

"  Mihi  satquc  supcrquo
Ut  mo  Dardaniao  matrcs,  atquo  Italu  tellus,
Dum  vivara,  exspcctent,  neo  pacem  pcctoro  norint"

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  225

with  which  such  a  poem  as  the  Punica  must  have  been  writ-
ten and  perused,  and  the  faint  applause  its  recital  must  have
elicited,  plainly  reveal  to  us  the  spirit  of  moderation  and
mediocrity  which  had  succeeded,  in  the  high  places  of  Roman
society,  to  the  whirlwinds  of  passion  and  licentiousness.

A  similar  comparison  may  be  instituted  between  the  two
most  eminent  prose-writers  of  these  periods,  Seneca  and
Quintilian.  There  is  a  striking  correspondence
between  these  celebrated  men  in  many  particu-
lars. Both  were  Spaniards  by  origin,  and  were  bred,  we
may  suppose,  in  the  same  school  of  florid  rhetoric,  which  was
supposed  to  impart  a  peculiar  flavour  to  all  their  country-
men's compositions.  Each  was  attached  to  the  imi)erial
court  of  his  own  era ;  for  Quintilian,  after  a  first  transient
visit  to  Kome,  is  said  to  have  come  over  from  Spain  in  the
train  of  Galba,  and  became,  in  course  of  time,  the  favoured
tutor  of  Domitian's  nephews.  Both  were  raised  from  mod-
erate station  to  high  ofticial  rank  and  distinction.  As  regards
the  natural  bias  of  their  genius,  both  devoted  themselves  with
enthusiasm  to  the  instruction  of  their  age,  and  became  teach-
ers, or  rather  preachers,  of  the  doctrines  which  lay  nearest
to  their  hearts.  If  philosophy  was  the  religion  of  Seneca,
the  rights  and  duties  of  the  true  orator  were  held  in  no  less
sacred  estimation  by  Quintilian,  and  the  author  of  the  well-
known  Institution  of  a  Speaker  believed  that  he  was  train-
ing his  pupil  in  the  path  of  virtue,  while  equipping  him  for
a  public  career.'  But  with  these  points  of  analogy  between
them,  no  two  masters  of  Latin  speech  stand  in  more  marked
contrast  to  one  another  in  all  that  regards  the  acquired  quali-
ties of  taste  and  judgment.  In  his  stilted  truisms  or  trans-
parent paradoxes  Seneca  represents  an  age  of  overweening
presumption  and  pretence,  while  the  sound  sense  of  Quintil-
ian has  been  justly  admired  by  all  sober  critics. Following

'  This  feeling  may  be  traced  almost  throughout  Quintilian's  work ;  but  it  Is
distinctly  expressed  in  the  preface :  "  oratorem  autem  instituimus  ilium  per.
fectum,  qui  esse  nisi  vir  bonus  non  potest." . ..."  sit  orator  vir  talis,  qui
vere  sapiens  appellari  potest."
TOL TII. — 15

226  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

in  the  wake  of  a  period  abandoned  to  the  false  glitter  of
rhetorical  fancy,  Quintilian  sets  himself,  with  unerring  in-
stinct, to  correct  the  prevailing  theories  of  rhetorical  compo-
sition, and  restore  the  true  standard  of  taste.  His  judgment
is  independent  and  original.  Opposed  as  he  is  to  the  errors
of  his  time,  he  does  not  rush  back  precipitately  to  an  earlier
and  purer  age  for  his  models.  He  knows  of  no  perfect  age
of  oratory,  no  absolute  example  of  eloquence.  His  mind  is
open  to  excellence  in  any  quarter,  and  he  can  see  blemishes
in  every  school,  and  in  every  master  of  the  art.  None  per-
haps of  his  critical  canons  would  be  questioned  in  the  most
enlightened  age  of  rhetorical  criticism ;  nor  do  we  now  dis-
pute the  justice  of  any  sentence  pronounced  from  his  tribunal
on  the  heroes  of  ancient  literature.  If  indeed,  as  he  says
himself  of  oratory,  the  student  who  admii-es  Cicero  has  al-
ready advanced  far  in  the  art  of  which  Cicero  was  so  noble
an  ornament,  so  we  may  affinn,  that  to  appreciate  Quintilian's
judgments  is  to  have  mastered  the  theory  of  literary  compo-
sition.* It  would  have  been  impossible  for  the  age  of  Clau-
dius and  Nero  to  have  produced  a  work  so  tolerant,  so
temperate,  so  sage  as  the  Institution,  and  we  must  ac-
knowledge the  significance  of  the  revolution  it  denotes  in  the
taste  and  feeling  of  the  people.

It  may  be  presumed  that  Quintilian  represents  a  class  of
contemporary  critics,  and  that  his  careful  discrimination  of
Pliny  tho  natu-  *'^^  Tulcs  of  compositiou  was  strictly  in  the  fash-
""*'•  ion  of  his  day. But  we  know  individuals  only,

and  we  can  only  compare  together  individual  examples.  The
scientific  metliod  of  the  Romans  in  the  department  of  literary
criticism,  exemplified  in  this  grammarian,  contrasts  widely
with  their  vague  empiricism  in  natural  pliilosophy,  as  reflect-
ed in  tho  work  of  the  elder  Pliny.  In  point  of  time,  indeed,
Pliny  may  be  claimed  for  either  of  the  generations  we  are
now  considering ;  and  tho  contrast  before  us  is  not  so  niucli

*  Quintil.  Ind.  x.  1. 1 1 2. :  "  ille  ho  profccisse  Bciat  cui  Cicero  valde  placebit."
Oomp.  ^  125.  lib  uufuvourublc  judgnicut  of  ticnoco.

UNDER  THE  XMPIBE.  227

of  two  successive  epochs,  as  of  ordinary  traininaf  in  two  sev-
eral branches  of  knowledge.  It  is  only  to  the  moral  sciences
indeed,  as  taught  among  the  Romans,  that  the  term  training
can  be  fairly  applied.  In  natural  philosophy  they  were  left
to  picrk  up  knowledge  by  desultory  reading,  or  casual  obser-
vation, without  system  or  analytic  instruction  of  any  kind.
Even  the  extensive  professoriate  of  the  Flavian  and  later  emp
perors  comprised  no  chairs  for  the  teaching  of  mathematieii,
astronomy,  geography,  or  any  branch  of  natural  history.
The  crude  and  unwieldy  encyclopaedia  of  the  Natural  History
has  been  preserved,  in  all  probability,  by  its  being  the  only
great  repertory  of  facts  of  the  kind  to  which  the  inquirers  of
Western  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages  could  refer ;  and  this
happy  accident  has  revealed  to  us  the  remarkable  deficiency
of  Roman  civilization  in  this  particular.  Amassed  from  a
boundless  variety  of-  sources,  and  from  writers,  both  Greek
and  Latin,  of  every  degree  of  credit,  the  data  presented  by
Pliny  embrace  a  wonderful  amount  of  correct  observation
and  true  tradition;  but  the  assiduous  collector  seems  to  have
exercised  little  judgment,  and  depending  almost  wholly  on
books,  made  a  very  imperfect  use  of  his  own  eyes  and  experi-
ence. He  cares  not  to  discriminate  between  his  authorities;
he  does  not  compare,  digest,  select,  and  reject ;  he  simply  ac-
cumulates, till  his  judgment  becomes  paralysed,  as  it  were,
by  the  weight  imposed  upon  it.  Oppressed  with  the  immen-
sity and  multiformity  of  Nature,  the  stores  of  which  are  thus
unrolled  in  a  confused  and  shifting  scroll  before  him,  Pliny
does  not  demand  a  Purpose  and  a  Providence  to  maintain
the  harmony  which  he  fails  to  appreciate ;  he  denies  the  ex-
istence of  the  law  which  he  cannot  perceive,  and,  in  the  cra-
ven spirit  of  his  age,  takes  refuge  in  the  shadowy  dream-land
of  Pantheism  from  the  perplexity  in  which  his  own  empiri-
cism involves  him.  The  works  of  Nature  are  to  him  Nature
itself,  and  Nature  itself  is  the  God  of  Nature.'

'  Plin.  Htst.  Nat.  ii.  1.  foil. :  "Mundum  ....  numen  MM  eredi  par  est,
(etemuni,  immensum,  neque  genitum  neque  interiturum  unqoam  ....  Idem
rerum  naturae  opus,  et  rerum  ipsa  natura.  .  .  .  Solem  mundi  esse  totius  animnm

228  HISTORr  OF  THE  ROMANS

It  would  seem  that  the  establishmeBt  of  the  professorial
system  throughout  the  empire  by  Vespasian,  further  ampli-
fied by  his  successors,  helped  to  unfold  the  char-

The  poets  of  /  .  i • ,  . -,  t i.

scholastic  actcnstics  wc  remark  m  the  mind  and  literature

of  the  age  before  us.  The  compositions  of  the
Flavian  era,  it  will  be  readily  allowed,  are  impressed  with  the
features  of  accuracy  and  finish,  and  may  be  advantageously
compared,  in  this  respect,  with  the  loose  and  somewhat  aim-
less style  of  the  writers  of  the  age  preceding,  who  had  been
trained  by  the  declaimers  only.  Silius,  Statins,  and  Valerius
Flaccus  are  poets  of  the  School  and  the  Academy.  Tliey
have  imbibed  the  lessons  of  conventional  criticism  under
methodical  and  sensible  teachers,  men  of  Quintilian's  stamp ;
and  they  have  sought  and  won,  after  many  essays,  the  prizes
of  Alba  and  the  Capitol.  The  satires  of  Juvenal  are  more
definite  in  their  scope  than  those  of  Persius.  There  is  no
vagueness  of  aim,  no  mistiness  of  language,  about  the  Flavian
moralist,  the  academic  professor  of  virtue.  The  crimes  and
vices  he  denounces  are  pilloried  in  the  public  eye  ;  every  line
as  it  speeds  along,  flings  its  dart  of  contumely  upon  them ;
and  we  rise  from  perusing  any  one  of  his  pieces  (except  the
Sixteenth,  wliich  is  probably,  and  the  Fifteenth,  which  is
possibly  not  his  own)  with  the  feeling  that  there  is  not  a
verse  deficient,  nor  a  verse  redundant,  through-

Juvcnal  com-  •  x-i  i t n  /.  -r-. •  i  ^i

pared  with  I'tr- out  it. J?  or  the  deiccts  01  Persius,  youth  may  be

pleaded  in  excuse :  such,  however,  as  we  have

received  them,  his  poems  want  this  steadiness  of  aim ;  and  we

ac  planiua  mcntem  ;  hunc  principale  naturae  regimen  ac  numon  credere  licet.
.  .  .  Quisqiii.s  ont  Deus,  si  nioclo  est  alius,  et  quacunque  in  parte,  totus  est

BcnsuA,  totus  visus,  totus  auditus,  totus  aninii,  totus  sui Deus  est  nior-

tali  juvaro  mortaleni,  etc Invenit  tamcn . . . sibi  ipsa  mortalitas

nunien,  quotiiiuus  etiam  plana  do  Deo  conjcctatio  cssct.  Toto  quippc  nnnido
et  IocIh  omnibus,  ouinibus(|ue  horis  omnium  vocibus  Fortuna  sola  invocatur.
.  .  .  Para  alia  et  lianc  jJcUit,  astrcMiue  suo  eventus  assignat,  nascendi  lej^ibus.
....  Hcdcro  c<i'i)it  scntentia  ha-o,  paritcrquo  ct  eruditum  vulgus  et  rude  iji
cam  curwu  vadit.  .  .  .  Iniperfei'tiu  vero  in  liomine  natinm  pru^cipua  solatia  no
Deum  (|uidem  |)oh8»?  oniniu.  .  .  .  per  qua)  dcclaratur  liuud  dubio  neUurce polciV'
tia,  idquo  oma  quod  Deum  vocamuti."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE,  229

often  pause  in  reading  them  to  hesitate  and  reflect,  and  after
all  to  little  purpose,  in  order  to  grasp  Lis  object.  The
satires  of  Persius  are  the  natural  product  of  an  age  which
advanced  words  above  things,  and  urged  the  writer  to  seek
a  momentary  triumph  for  a  smart  or  sounding  phrase,  rather
than  give  lasting  satisfaction  to  his  readers  by  the  interest  of
a  sustained  argument.

Another  star  in  the  Flavian  constellation,  another  product
of  the  same  era,  is  the  brilliant  poet  Statius.  The  Academic
literature  of  Rome  was  a  refined  adaptation  of
the  Style  first  created  at  Alexandria  by  the  lee-  wuwiwiUi
turers  of  the  Museum  under  the  sunshine  of  court
patronage.  Antimachus,  whose  poem  on  the  war  of  Thebes
is  said  to  have  been  the  model  of  the  epic  of  Statius,  was  a
forerunner  of  the  Alexandrian  school ;  but,  in  taking  for  his
guide  this  ancient  master,  the  accomplished  Roman  allowed
himself  some  licence,  and  studied  superior  refinement.  The
chief  points  indeed  of  incident  and  character  in  a  theme  so
trite  had  become  arbitrarily  fixed,  and  the  Flavian  critics
would  hardly  8ufl*er  a  new  competitor  for  the  prize  of  excel-
lence to  depart  widely  from  his  formula.  Amidst  all  the
licentiousness  of  prevailing  unbelief,  the  mythology  of  the
poets  was  as  much  a  matter  of  conventional  treatment  as  the
sacred  painting  of  the  Middle  Ages ;  and  we  must  bear  in
mind,  that  much  in  their  mode  of  treatment  which  seems  to
us  vapid  and  jejune,  appeared  far  otherwise  to  a  generation
Avhich  saw  it  in  the  light  of  an  established  tradition.  As
regards  his  subject,  Statius  walks  in  fetters:  he  could  not
create  or  innovate.  Nevertheless,  there  is,  perhaps,  no
ancient  epic  so  perfect  in  form  and  argument  as  the  Thebaid.
Its  story  is  the  most  compact  of  all ;  its  incidents  and  charac-
ters, liowever  palely  delineated,  are  not  less  various  in  pro-
portion to  its  length  than  those  of  the  Iliad ;  its  unity  is  un-
doubtedly more  complete.  If  it  wants  the  central  figure
which  predominates  over  the  vicissitudes  of  the  -^neid,  it
presents  us  instead  with  a  grand  procession  of  Seven  Heroes
of  equal  fame  and  prowess,  in  all  the  sevenfold  blaze  of  their

230  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

legendary  glory.  But  the  versifier  of  a  cultivated  age  and  a
refined  society  cannot  impart  a  sustained  and  lofty  interest  to
a  story  purely  mythological;  and  the  contemporaries  of
Statins  felt,  we  may  helieve,  as  much  as  modern  readers,
that  it  was  not  for  the  story  that  his  poem  was  to  be  studied.
The  merits  of  this  admirable  poet  are  such  as  detract  from,
rather  than  enhance,  the  proper  charm  of  epic  song.  Statius
is  a  miniature-painter,  employed  by  the  freak  of  a  patron  or
from  some  peculiar  misapprehension  of  his  own  powers,  on  the
production  of  a  great  historic  picture.  Every  part,  every  line,
every  shade  is  touched  and  re-touched ;  approach  the  canvas
and  examine  it  with  glasses,  every  thread  and  hair  has  evi-
dently received  the  utmost  care,  and  taken  the  last  polish ;
but,  step  backwards,  and  embrace  the  whole  composition  in
one  gaze,  and  the  general  efiect  is  confused  from  want  of
breadth  and  largeness  of  treatment.

The  Thebaid  was  recited,  we  may  believe,  in  portions  to
connoisseurs  and  critics,  and  the  author  was  doubtless  misled
by  the  applause  which  naturally  was  excited  by  the  exquisite
finish  of  successive  periods.  A  genteel  mob  assembled  on
the  day  of  each  promised  performance,  and  the  youth  of  Italy
carried  off  the  fragments  in  their  memory,  and  repeated  them
to  the  admiring  circles  of  their  acquaintance.*  Assuredly
their  judgment  would  have  been  modified,  had  they  stayed
to  view  the  composition  in  its  full  proportions;  and  the
autlior  himself  would  have  done  more  justice  to  his  powers,
could  he  have  renounced  the  insidious  flatteries  of  his  age,
and  written  in  patience  and  solitude  for  immortality." The

'  Juvenal,  vii.  82. :

"  Curritur  ad  voccm  jucundam  et  carmen  amicse
Thcbaidos,  loetam  fecit  cum  Statius  urbem
Promisitqiic  diem."
Compare  the  aiithor's  flelfcongrntulations. Thcb.  xli.  in.  fin. :

"  Itala  jam  studio  discit  memoratquc  juveutus."
•  Thus  the  outline  of  the  description  of  the  death  of  Amphiaraus  ( Tlieb.  vii.
690-828.),  relieved  from  many  tinsel  ornaments  and  laboured  effectH,  is  one  of
the  noblest  flights  of  poetry ;  and  the  discovery  of  Adiillcs  uiiiong  the  duugh-

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  231

genius  of  Statius  may  bear  comparison  in  some  respects  with
that  of  Ovid,  while  the  contrast  which  strikes  us  at  once  in
the  perusal  of  their  works  is  just  such  as  would  result  from
the  different  character  of  their  times.  The  author  of  the
Thebaid,  the  Achilleid,  and  the  Sylvae  is  hardly  inferior  in
readiness  and  fertility  to  the  distinguished  singer  of  the
Metamorphoses,  the  Heroids,  and  the  Art  of  Love.  But
while  the  earlier  writer  is  suffered  by  the  taste  of  his  era  to
riot  in  the  wanton  indulgence  of  his  humour,  and  let  his  |ancy
love  with  loose  untrammelled  graces,  the  later  is  subjected
to  strict  curb  and  rein,  his  paces  are  those  of  the  man^e,  not
of  nature ;  all  is  art,  all  is  discipline  and  training ;  every
effect  is  exquisite  in  itself,  but  the  effort  is  too  apparent  in
the  author,  and  the  strain  on  the  mind  of  the  reader  too
fatiguing.  Ovid  lost  half  his  strength  by  his  licentious
exuberance ;  Statius  deprives  himself  of  his  real  vigour  by
swathing  his  own  limbs  in  bandages.  A  true  instinct  is
charmed  neither  by  the  splay  foot  of  the  mountain  )>easant
girl,  nor  by  the  tortured  limb  of  the  Chinese  lady  of  fashion.
Almost  every  group  of  three  or  four  lines  in  Statius  con-
stitutes in  itself  an  idea,  perhaps  a  conceit,  a  play  of  thought
or  of  words ;  it  fastens  itself  like  a  burr  on  the
memory :  such  is  the  distmctness  of  his  vision,  PMwd  wtu
such  the  elaborate  accuracy  of  his  touch.  The
epigram  is  the  crowning  result  of  this  elaborate  terseness  of
diction,  and  this  lucid  perception  of  the  aim  in  view.  The
verses  of  Martial  are  the  quintessence  of  the  Flavian  poetry.
The  fine  point  to  which  -he  sharpens  his  conceptions  is  the

ters  of  Lycomedes  {AdiiU.  ii.  200.),  though  a  little  OTerUid  with  worda,  mcbm
to  reach  the  summit  of  sublimity :

..."  cum  grande  tuba,  sic  jussus,  AgjriM

Insonuit

Illius  iutactsB  cecidere  a  pectore  Testes :

Jam  clypeus,  breviorque  nunut  eo$uymitmr  AaaU  ;

Mira  fides,  Ithacumque  humeris  excedere  visus,
Jitoluiuque  ducem  :  tantuni  subita  arma  calorque
Martius  horrenda  confundit  luce  Penates  .  .  .  ."

232  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMA]!*S

last  triumph  of  that  verbal  exactness  and  mechanical  inge-
nuity to  which  we  pay  a  tribute  of  hardly  less  admiration
in  Statius  and  Valerius  Flaccus.  The  careful  felicity  of
Horace  is  reproduced  in  Martial  under  tiie  form  which  most
aptly  befits  the  later  age  in  which  he  flourished.  The  lyrics
of  the  Augustan  period  are  characteristically  represented  by
the  epigrams  of  the  Flavian.  The  style  of  Martial  has  indeed
this  advantage  over  that  of  Horace,  that  he  goes  always
straight  to  his  point,  and  there  can  be  no  misconception  of
his  drift ;  while  Horace  seems  sometimes  to  wander  from  his
purpose,  to  lose  himself  and  leave  hold,  at  least  for  a  moment,
of  his  subject.  There  are  several  of  the  Odes,  the  exact
scope  of  which  the  critics  cannot  ascertain ;  the  leading  idea
is  sometimes  lost  at  the  outset,  and  unrecovered  to  the  end.^
As  regards  this  uncertainty  of  aim,  the  Eclogues  even  of  the
correct  and  self-possessed  Virgil  may  be  contrasted  with  the
Sylvae  of  Statius.  Among  the  thirty  poems  of  this  Flavian
collection,  there  is  none  about  the  scope  and  meaning  of
which  there  can  be  any  question ;  none  in  which  the  leading
idea  is  lost  or  overlaid  by  thick  springing  fancies;  while
more  than  one  of  the  Eclogues  remains  to  this  day  an  in-
soluble problem  to  the  interpreters."  This  again  may  bo
noted  as  a  direct  result  of  the  systematic  education,  the
academic  or  professorial  training,  of  the  Flavian  period.

In  the  department  of  poetical  composition  tliis  jirecision

of  aim  and  studied  completeness  of  execution  tend  to  prosaic

and positive results. They  lead  the  mind  to

ThohlHtorians , „  .it.  i

of  the  Fia\iau dwcU  ou  material  objects,  as  the  most  proper  for

accurate  delineation. Hence  the  poetry  of  the

Flavian  age is generally  limited  in  its  range,  and  refers

mostly  to  the  material  elements  of  the  civilization  which

'  Thua  wo  must  look  for  the  help  of  allegory  to  explain  Od.  i,  14, 16.,  iii.  4.
In  iii.  2,  8,  27  and  others — "  fortiir  equia  nuriga  " — the  poet  seems  to  lose  his
command  of  I'pgasus.  Tliis  carelessness  is  j)ossibly  studied,  and  may  pcrlxips
be  cffoctivo  according  to  the  proper  idea  of  ditliyranibica  ;  but  it  is  worth  while
to  contrast  it  with  the  neatness  and  precise  execution  of  Statius  or  Martial.

*  Bucb,  for  instance,  arc  the  first,  the  fourth,  and  tho  eighth  eclogue.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  233

lies  within  the  immediate  scope  of  its  vision.  If  it  ventures
to  unfold  to  an  unbelieving  age  the  mystic  lore  of  ancient
supematuralism,  it  invests  traditions  and  legends  with  the
hard  colouring  of  modem  actuality.  Tlie  nymphs  and  heroes
of  Statius  seem  copied  from  the  courtiers  of  the  Palatine;
the  Medea  of  Valerius  Flaccus  is  a  Virago  of  the  imperial
type,  a  Lollia  or  an  Agrippina.  In  history,  however,  which,
at  the  period  now  before  us,  has  outstripped  poetry  in  interest
and  value,  the  tendencies  of  the  age  produce  new  and  im-
portant consequences.  An  age  of  positive  thought  developes
legitimate  history.  The  historian  of  the  Flavian  era  is  no
longer  a  chronicler  or  a  romancer.  He  may  seek  perhaps  to
mould  the  truth  to  his  own  prejudices ;  but  he  is  not  a  mere
artist,  indifferent  to  truth  altogether.  He  is  a  philosopher,
and  recognizes  a  mission.  He  has  his  own  theories  of  society
and  politics ;  the  events  of  the  period  before  him  group
themselves  in  his  mind  in  certain  natural  combinations,  ac-
cording to  the  leading  idea  to  which  they  are  subordinated.
If  he  is  a  man  of  imagination,  he  paints  the  world  from  the
type  impressed  on  his  own  organs  of  vision.  Whether  or
not  the  facts  be  correctly  represented,  they  are  at  least  true
to  him ;  he  describes  what  he  sees,  or  really  fancies  that  he
sees.  AVorks  that  bear  this  stamp  of  imagination  are  im-
mortal. Their  details  may  be  inexact ;  the  genius  by  which
they  are  produced  may  be  uncritical;  but  their  general  effect
is  strong  and  vivid,  and  they  leave  a  mark  behind  them
which  cannot  be  effaced.  Appian  traces  the  an-  Apnim«  aai
nals  of  mankind  along  the  lines  by  which  the  ^^****^
vai-ious  races  and  countries  are  politically  connected  with
Rome.  In  Plutarch's  mind,  on  the  contrary,  history  is  the
painting  of  individual  character.  Each  writer  works  out  his
own  conception  in  wide  contrast  with  the  other ;  but  each
collects  and  marshals  his  facts  with  the  sole  object  of  illus-
trating it.

Livy,  indeed,  the  great  historian  of  the  Augustan  age,
writes  with  a  strong  and  vivid  perception  of  the  scenes  and

234  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS

„  ,  incidents  he  describes. The  men  whose  portraits

Tacitus  com-  n •

pared  with  dccorate  the  long  galleries  through  which  he
roams,  have  a  distinct  form  and  character  in  his
mind,  and  he  paints  truly  from  the  lineaments  before  him.
But  Livy's  was  not  an  age  of  speculation.  He  had  no  doc-
trine in  history  or  politics,  beyond  a  vague  conviction  of  the
greatness  and  invincibility  of  Rome,  and  an  assurance  of  her
triumphant  destiny.  Very  different  is  the  case  with  Livy's
great  rival,  Tacitus.  The  subtler  genius  of  the  later  period
is  reflected  on  the  pages  of  this  philosophic  theorist,  who
constructs  the  history  of  the  empire  with  reference  to  a
dominant  idea  in  his  own  mind.  The  object  of  Tacitus,
conceived  in  the  patrician  school  to  which  he  had  attached
himself,  is  to  show  that  the  supremacy  of  Rome,  the  final
cause  of  her  existence,  depends  on  the  preeminence  of  an
oligarchy,  with  which  all  her  glories  and  successes  are  closely
entwined.  He  regards  the  downfall  of  this  caste  under  the
Csesarean  usurpation  as  the  fruitful  source  of  the  degrada-
tions and  miseries  by  which  her  later  career  has  been  sullied.
The  empire  has  been  disgraced  by  tyranny,  by  profligacy,
and  base  compliances  at  home ;  by  defeats  and  humiliations
abroad.  The  free  spirit  of  the  optimate  has  been  repressed,
and  he  has  been  constrained  to  cringe,  and  flatter,  not  pa-
tricians only  of  equal  nobility  with  his  own,  but  the  meaner
offspring  of  the  lesser  houses ;  not  new  men  only,  and  un-
ennoblcd  Romans,  but  even  upstart  foreigners  and  enfran-
chised bondmen.  Great  national  disasters  have  indicated,
in  rapid  succession,  the  disgust  of  the  gods  at  the  degeneracy
of  their  chosen  favourites,  at  the  contempt  into  which  their
own  altars  have  fallen,  and  the  blasphemy  by  which  divine
honours  have  been  extended  to  the  vilest  of  mortals.  The
spirit  and  idea  of  Tacitus's  history  is  closely  represented  in
the  kindred  epic  of  Lucan,  which  only  expresses  more  bluntly
and  without  even  the  pretence  of  historic  impartiality,  as
was  natural  in  a  youth  and  a  poet,  the  feeling  of  indignant
TacituBond  dissatisfactiou  common  to  both.  But  Tacitus,
Lucun.  mature  in  years  and  cool  in  temper,  used  more

UNDER  THE  ElIPIBE.  ^^

discretion  in  the  handling  of  his  theory  than  the  reekloM
declaimer  of  live-and-twenty.  The  plan  of  Lueau*8  poem
entangles  him  in  the  causes  of  the  revolution  which  they
deplore  and  denounce  in  common ;  and  we  learn  from  some
of  the  wisest  as  well  as  the  most  eloquent  verses  in  the
Pharsalia^  that  the  revolution,  even  in  the  eyes  of  an  aristo-
crat, was  unavoidable ;  that  it  was  produced  by  the  crimes
and  excesses  of  that  very  period  of  aristocratic  domination
to  which  both  look  back  with  equal  regret ;  that  the  Roman
oligarchy  fell  by  its  own  vices,  vices  inherent  in  its  political
constitution,  as  well  as  by  the  strong  rebound  of  its  own
victories  and  triumphs.'  We  perceive  that  its  fall,  once
consummated,  was  final  and  irretrievable;  that  no  honour  or
generosity  in  a  Julius  or  an  Augustus,  no  martial  ardour  in
a  Tiberius,  no  discretion  in  a  Caius  or  a  Claudius,  no  dignity
in  a  Nero,  could  have  restored  the  vital  glow  of  a  divine
inspiration  which  had  fled  forever  with  the  Scipios  and  the
Gracchi.

It  was,  however,  an  error  in  Lucan  thus  to  lift  the  veil
from  the  licentiousness  of  the  era  he  affected  to  lament.
Tacitus,  with  more  skill  and  prudence,  draws  the  u^m^vt
eyes  of  his. audience  from  it  altogether.  The  hi»-  2tU»i^S'
torian  commences  his  review  of  Roman  affairs  ^*i«w«««7'
with  the  period  which  succeeds  the  revolution,  after  its  first
and  immediate  fruits  have  been  reaped,  and  the  benefits,  un-
deniable as  they  were,  which  it  in  the  first  instance  produced,
had  lost  some  of  their  original  brightness  in  his  countrymen's
memory.  The  Ca&sarean  usurpation  had  run  a  course  of  sixty
years, — years  of  unexampled  prosperity,  as  Tacitus  must  him-
self have  acknowledged,  had  he  set  them  fairly  before  his
eyes, — when  he  takes  up  the  thread  of  events,  and  devotes
the  labour  of  his  life  to  blazoning  the  disasters  which  have
never  ceased,  as  he  pretends,  to  flow  from  it.  He  confines
himself  to  the  decline  and  fall  of  the  system  which  had  now

'  Luean,  Pharsal.  L  84-182. : "  Tu  causa  malorum  Facta  tribus  dominu
commuuis  Roma  Et  concussa  fides  et  multis  utile  bellum."

236  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOMANS

indeed  passed  its  brief  and  fallacious  prime.  He  traces  the
failing  fortunes  of  the  republic  from  the  defeat  of  Varus,  and
the  gloom  diffused  over  the  city  in  the  last  days  of  Augus-
tus by  the  anticipation  of  a  younger  tyranny,  and  closes  his
gloomy  review  with  the  fall  of  the  last  of  the  despots,  the
mean,  the  cruel,  the  jealous  Domitian/  Thus  he  embraces
precisely  the  whole  period  of  disgrace  and  disaster  by  which
the  crimes  of  the  Cresars  were  chastised ;  nor  will  he  mar  the
completeness  of  this  picture  by  introducing  into  it  the  figures
of  those  regenators  of  the  empire  whom  he  himself  lived
afterwards  to  see,  the  record  of  whose  virtue  and  fortune  he
reserves  for  the  solace  of  his  old  age.'  His  narrative  of  the
civil  wars  which  followed  the  death  of  Nero,  and  of  the  three
Flavian  administrations,  was  the  first  written,  under  the
name  of  Histories ;  while  the  account  of  the  earlier  period,
known  by  the  title  of  Annals,  was  produced  subsequently.
The  work  which  treats  of  contemporary  affairs  is  more  full
in  detail  than  the  other,  but  we  may  believe  that  the  author
regarded  the  two  as  a  single  whole ;  and  it  is  possible  that
he  may  have  contemplated  them  himself  under  a  single  title.
The  unity  of  their  common  design,  as  a  lasting  record  of  the
Ctesarean  revolution  traced  to  its  distant  consequences,  would
have  been  marred  by  a  glowing  peroration  on  the  fame  and
prosperity  of  Trajan ;  nor  do  we  know  that  Tacitus  ever  actu-
ally accomplished  the  labour  of  love  which  he  anticipated  as  his
crowning  work.  Perhaps,  after  all,  he  felt  that  the  senatorial
government  of  his  patron  rested  on  no  solid  foundations,  and
shrank  at  tlie  last  moment  from  glorifying  the  merits  of  a
constitution  which  depended  on  tlie  moderation  of  its  chief
alone.  Yet  we  should  have  valued  as  the  noblest  of  legacies
a  temperate  and  candid  disquisition,  by  one  so  acute  and
eloquent,  on  the  state  of  society  which  rendered  Trajan's  rule

'  Tuc.  Ann.  \.  1. :  "consilium  milii  pauca  do  Augusto  et  extrema  tradcre,
mox  Tlbcrii  priiiciputuni  ct  cotcru."

•  Tac.  U'lHt.  i.  1. :  "quod  hI  vita  Buppcditct  prineipiitum  D.  Ncrvoo  et  im-
pcrium  Trujani,  uboriorcin  sccuriorcmquo  luatcriam,  scucctuti  scpoHui."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  237

the  best  then  possible,  and  made  the  existence  of  so  mach
good  so  lamentably  precarious.

In  the  absence  of  legal  checks  on  the  caprice  or  tyranny
of  the  ruler,  tlie  dagger  of  the  assassin,  or  at  best  the  revolt
of  the  legions,  had  been  the  last  hope  and  safe-  Prepo«e*d<«
guard  of  the  classes  obnoxious  to  his  jealousy.  Sfyo^^i^
The  moral  we  should  be  tempted,  at  first  sight,  ^
to  draw  from  the  history  of  Tacitus,  is  that  the  moderation
of  the  Flavian  empire  was  produced  at  last  by  the  repeated
examples  of  successful  intrigue  against  the  bad  emperors.  But
this  would  be  a  wrong  conclusion.  The  moderation  and
justice  of  tlie  virtuous  princes,  such  as  Vespasian  and  Trajan,
was  the  effect  of  their  personal  character,  combined  with
their  fortunate  circumstances.  Vespasian  was  honoured  for
his  military  prowess,  and  feared  for  his  military  firmness ;
but  the  simplicity  of  his  tastes  exempted  him  from  the  temp-
tation to  outshine  the  magnates  of  the  city,  and  his  frugal
habits  sustained  him  in  the  path  of  probity  and  uprightness;.
The  personal  modesty  of  Trajan  was  equal  to  that  of  his  pre-
decessor, and  for  the  brilliant  and  costly  monuments  with
which  he  loved  to  decorate  the  city  he  provided  by  foreign
conquests,  which,  at  the  same  time,  kept  his  soldiers  employ-
ed, and  engrossed  the  attention  of  his  most  restless  subjects.
He  resided,  moreover,  only  occasionally  in  the  capital,  and
was  preserved  by  his  martial  occupations  from  the  dangers
of  rivalry  in  show  or  popularity  with  the  scions  of  historic
families  at  Rome.  The  senators  felt  instinctively  that  their
best  security  lay  in  their  chiers  distant  engagements.  Hence
the  prepossession  of  Tacitus,  which  would  otherwise  seem
unworthy  of  him,  in  favour  of  military  renown.  We  have
remarked  his  sneers  at  the  peacefiil  disposition  ascribed  to
earlier  princes,  and  the  contrast  he  exultingly  indicates  be-
tween the  pusillanimity  of  Tiberius,  of  Claudius,  or  of  Xero,
and  the  victorious  ardour  of  his  own  patron.  It  was  but  too
true,  as  the  nobles  were  well  aware,  that  the  liberties  of
Rome,  the  preeminence,  more  properly,  of  the  Roman  opti-
mates,  was  only  maintained,  as  far  as  it  was  maintained  at

238  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

all,  under  any  of  the  emperors,  by  the  subjugation  of  the
foreigner,  and  the  overthrow  of  liberty  abroad.  Such  is  the
theory  carelessly  avowed  by  Lucan  ;  and  the  thoughtful  his-
torian, though  more  reticent  in  expression,  betrays  no  more
real  respect  for  the  dignity  and  common  rights  of  man  than
the  impetuous  declaimer  of  the  Pharsalia}

The  theory  of  Roman  politics  to  which  Tacitus  committed
himself  involved  him  in  two  sins  against  truth  and  candour.
Certain  charac- We  cannot  read  the  Annals  and  Histories  with

teristlcs  of  his  .  . .  ,  ,

unfairness  to care  and  impartiality  without  perceiving  that  the

the  earlier  pe-  i.  ./  x  n

riod.  author  often  allows  himself  to  repeat  anecdotes

which  he  knew  to  have  no  firm  foundation,  for  the  sake  of
illustrating  the  view  he  chooses  to  give  of  some  prominent
personages.  No  passage  in  the  Annals  exemplifies  more
strikingly  the  dissimulation  imputed  to  Tiberius,  than  the
reception  given  to  Sejanus's  suit  for  an  imperial  alliance.
Yet  the  narrative,  whatever  its  source,  is  highly  embellished,
if  not  wholly  fabricated.*  Tacitus  we  must  say  at  least,  gave
it  too  easy  credence,  and  flung  over  it  a  deeper  colour,  for
the  sake  of  the  dark  shade  it  casts  on  the  character  of  the
arch-dissembler.  Nor  is  this,  as  has  been  shown,  the  only
instance  of  his  disregard  for  truthfulness  in  subservience  to
the  demands  of  a  theory,  which  required  him  to  deepen  the
suspicions  attaching  to  the  character  of  so  many  of  the
Caesars.  Again  we  must  remark  the  artifice  by  which  the
crimes  and  vices  of  the  emperors  are  arrayed  in  evidence
against  the  imperial  government  itself,  and  denounced  as  sins
against  the  moral  sense  of  an  outraged  society.  Even  if  we
grant  that  there  is  no  exaggeration  in  these  hideous  pictures,
yet  we  must  not  allow  the  most  accomplished  of  painters  to

'  This  spirit  appears  in  many  passages  of  Lucan's  poem.  Compare  more
particularly  i.  8,  foil.  vii.  421,  foil.  It  is  betrayed  by  Tacitus  wherever  he
spcakrt  of  the  foreign  afluirs  of  the  empire,  and  of  her  contests  with  IJritons,
with  (iormans,  or  with  rartiiians.  The  "Life  of  Agricola"  is  animated  with  it
throughout,  nor  Is  it  banished  even  from  the  "  Germany,"  the  subject  of  which
afforded  a  j^acefid  opjjortunity  for  ronouncinp;  and  regretting  it.

'■■  Sec  above  in  clmj»t<T  xlv.  of  this  history  (Tac.  Ann,  iv.  Jilt,  40.).

UNDER  THE  EMPIKE.  239

disjruise  the  important  fact  that  such  horrors  belong  to  the
age  and  the  class,  and  not  to  the  individual  culprit  only.
The  barbarities  wreaked  by  Nero  and  Domitian  on  the  high-
born  nobles  of  Rome  were  but  the  ordinary  precautions  of
the  trembling  slaveholders  whose  lives  were  held  from  day
to  day  by  the  tenure  of  physical  repreauon  unrelentingly
exercised  against  their  own  bondmen.  The  existence  of
slavery,  and  the  lack  of  religious  and  moral  principle,  which
loosened  the  rivets  of  Pagan  society,  may  account  for  the
atrocities  commonly  imputed  to  the  inherent  viciousness  of
the  imperial  system,  or  to  the  pei-sonal  depravity  of  individ-
ual emperors.  Tacitus  himself  was  no  doubt  a  master  of
slaves,  and  his  writings  bear,  it  must  be  confessed,  the  im-
j)ress  of  a  rooted  disregard  for  the  rights  and  feelings  of  hu-
man nature,  apart  from  his  own  class  and  order,  such  m
might  naturally  be  engendered  by  the  social  atmosphere
around  him.  On  the  other  hand,  few  even  of  the  gravest
characters  of  our  history  were  exempt  from  turpitudes  which
have  heaped  especial  infamy  on  Tiberius  and  Nero.  Such
delinquencies  must  be  weighed  with  constant  reference  to  a
peculiar  standard  of  morals.  Even  the  mild  and  virtuous
Pliny  allows  himself  to  compose  verses  of  a  nature  which
would  indicate  among  us  the  most  shameless  indecency ;  and
the  list  of  names  by  which  he  excuses  himself  includes  a  large
number  of  the  tirst  citizens  of  the  free  state  as  well  as  of  the
empire.*

It  is  not  necessary,  however,  to  prove  that  both  the  cruel-
ty and  the  licentiousness  of  Roman  society  date  from  some

'  Pliny,  Epp.  iv.  14.,  t.  S.,  \ii.  4.  Such  indecendes,  nefttly  expraaed  In
verses  of  society,  after  tlie  manner  of  the  later  Greek  epigrammatiita,  mii^t  be
veiled  under  the  euphemism  oifacdus  or  "  elegant"  Comp.  "  tanw^g  ■obdoetis
facetus,"  Hor.  Sat.  i.  2.  26.,  and  the  use  of  the  word  in  Martial's  epigrams  on
Sulpicia,  X.  85.  38.  Although  Tacitus  himself  is  not  mentioned  by  Pliny
among  the  writers  of  such  "  Hendecasyllables,"  the  fragmentary  notice  of  Ful-
gentius  in  Mytkol.,  "  Com.  Tacitus  in  Ubro  facetiarum,"  may  throw  a  shade  of
suspicion  even  over  this  grave  philosopher.

240  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

His  satirical  hundred  years  before  the  establishment  of  the
ttM  o^Sr"**'  empire,  and  were  the  seeds  rather  than  the  fniit
*^*^-  of  the  imperial  despotism. A  more specious

charge  against  the  empire  is,  that  under  its  leaden  rule  little
scope  was  left  for  the  free  and  healthy  exercise  of  mind,  and
that  the  faculties  curbed  in  their  legitimate  exercise  expended
themselves  on  gross  material  interests.  Not  the  Histories
only,  but  all  the  other  works  of  Tacitus,  are  drawn  up  almost
in  the  form  of  indictments  against  his  own  age.  The  treatise
on  the  Decline  of  Eloquence  traces  some  of  the  worst  symp-
toms of  national  degeneracy,  not  only  to  the  change  in  the
laws,  the  work  of  chiefs  and  princes,  but  to  the  change  in
manners,  and  especially  in  education,  the  same  which  had
been  long  before  remarked  and  lamented  by  Horace.  The
Life  of  Agricola  is  a  satire  not  only  on  the  timid  and  jeal-
ous emperor,  but  on  the  indiscipline  of  the  legions,  the  in-
competency of  the  commanders,  the  apathy  and  sensuality  of
society,  with  all  which  the  great  captain  waged  distinguished
warfare.  The  Germany  presents  an  elaborate  contrast  be-
tween the  vices  of  a  polished  age  and  the  virtues  of  barbar-
ism. It  is  an  alarum  rung  in  the  ears  of  a  careless  generation,
more  solemn  and  impressive  in  its  tone,  more  interesting  from
its  details,  but  hardly  more  sound  than  Lucan's  rhetorical
outcry  on  his  countrymen's  disgust  at  poverty,  and  eager
greed  of  gold.  It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  philoso-
pher sliould  not  have  recognised,  any  more  than  the  poet,  the
regenerative  tendencies  of  his  age,  and  have  lent  them  no
support  from  his  name  and  influence.  The  aim  of  the  mere
satirist  is  always  profitless  and  generally  ill-directed.  Not
in  the  harsli  and  impracticable  dogmas  of  Stoicism,  nor
merely  in  the  lofty  aspirations  of  Christianity,  but  even  in
the  wise  preaching  of  schools  of  eclectic  moralists,  whom  we
shall  further  notice  hereafter,  lay  the  germs  of  renovation ;
and  we  shall  trace  in  anotlier  generation  the  action  of  a
Dion,  a  Plutarch,  an  Apollonius,  and  lament  that  we  cannot
add  to  the  list  of  Koman  reformers  the  illustrious  name  of
Tacitus.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  241

Such  is  the  unfairness  into  which  the  historian  is  betrayed,
in  attempting  to  uphold  the  paradox  that  the  corrupt  and
tottering  oligarchy  of  the  senate  under  Pompeius  _iM-_
and  Mile  was  the  noblest  and  strongest  of  govern-  of  Tadtau
ments,  and  the  not  more  defensible  paradox  that  Umi Umbm^
just  such  a  government  was  restored  under  the
auspices  of  Nerva  and  Trajan.  We  must  acknowledge,
indeed,  that  the  same  training  in  dialectic  subtleties  which
-urged  him  to  maintain  a  political  theory,  rendered  him  gener-
ally superior  to  the  rhetorical  declaimers  before  him.  In
philosophical  remark  Tacitus  is  more  profound  than  Cicero,
more  just  than  Seneca ;  while  none  would  pretend  to  compare
him  with  an  ingenious  sophist  like  Sallust.  Bom  in  the
reign  of  Claudius  or  Nero,  he  passed  his  early  years  in  the
gloomy  silence  of  an  age  of  terror,  and  the  posts  in  which  he
was  placed  by  Vespasian  and  retained  by  Domitian,  con-
strained him  still  to  control  the  utterance  of  the  indignant
patriotism  boiling  within  him.'  The  habit  of  looking  to  the
emperor  as  the  source  of  political  action,  natural  to  his  posi-
tion, would  give  to  his  account  of  public  affairs  a  biographical
rather  than  a  historical  character.  The  efforts,  easily  discern-
ible, which  he  makes  to  impart  to  it  a  more  general  interest
by  introducing  larger  disquisitions  on  manners,  and  some
statistical  details,  evince,  under  these  circumstances,  unusual
vigour  of  mind.  More  than  once,  indeed,  Tacitus  breaks
away,  not  from  the  palace  only,  but  from  the  capital,  to  de-
scribe the  condition  of  the  legions  on  the  frontier,  or  of  the
foreign  possessions  of  the  state. The  reader,  disgusted  with

•  Our  nearest  approximation  to  the  date  of  the  historian's  birth  is  deriTcd
from  a  passage  of  Pliny  the  younger,  £put.  v'u.  20.,  where  he  speaks  of  him-
self as  somewhat  the  junior  of  the  two.  Pliny  was  bom  in  63.  Tacitus
married  the  daughter  of  Agi-icola  about  the  year  17,  being  then  probably  not
less  than  twenty  one.  Of  his  oflBcial  career,  he  says,  at  the  beginning  of  the
Histories :  "  Mihi  Galba,  Otho,  ViteUius  nee  beneficio  nee  injuria  cogniti.  Dig-
nitatem nostram  a  Yespasiauo  inchoatam,  a  Tito  auctam,  a  Domltiano  longius
provectam  non  abnuerim."  He  was  absent  from  Rome  for  four  years  before
the  death  of  Agricola  in  93.  {Affric.  45.) ;  probably  in  office  in  the  provinces.
Nerva  made  him  consul  sufFect  in  97.

VOL.  VII. — 16

242  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  horrors  of  the  Caesarean  court,  glances  with  pleasure  at
Egypt  and  Palestine,  and  gains  a  new  insight  into  Roman
ideas,  from  the  views  of  an  intelligent  Roman  on  the  wonders
of  the  Nile-land,  or  the  superstitions  of  the  Jews.  But  these
digressions  are  rare,  and  we  regret  that  Tacitus  had  not  more
of  the  spirit  of  Herodotus,  or  that  his  notions  of  historical
composition  forbade  .him  to  range  more  freely  over  the  field
of  Roman  politics  abroad.  We  must  not  fail,  however,  to
give  him  full  credit  for  what  he  has  done  in  this  particular.
Writers  of  less  genius,  such  as  Suetonius  for  instance,  were
subdued  altogether  to  the  biographical  vein  by  the  circum-
stances of  the  times.  To  a  Roman  citizen,  especially  if  resi-
Historicai  im-  dent  in  Romc,  and  still  more  if  engaged,  however
pSfp"^  slightly,  in  the  conduct  of  affairs,  the  personal
Bonai  character,  character  of  the  reigning  prince,  with  all  the
anecdotes  which  might  serve  to  illustrate  it,  would  naturally
supersede  every  other  topic  of  interest.  Whether  in  the
senate  or  the  palace,  in  the  forum  or  the  circus,  the  Caesar
was  the  centre  of  observation.  The  general  welfare  of  the
empire,  and  the  particular  interests  of  cities  and  provinces,
would  hardly  divert  the  historian's  attention  for  a  moment
from  the  imperial  figure  in  the  foreground.  He  would  have
no  care  to  generalize  his  remarks  on  the  current  of  public
affairs.  To  him  the  Roman  empire  would  be  merely  Rome;
the  people  would  be  lost  in  their  ruler.  His  curiosity  would
be  confined  to  the  incidents  which  took  place  around  him  in
the  streets  and  temples  of  the  great  city ;  to  the  condition  of
noble  and  official  families ;  to  the  omens  reported  in  tlie  Capi-
tol, and  the  whispered  intrigues  of  the  palace. Hence  Sueto-

„ ^^  nius  seems  to  think  that  he  has  written  a  Roman

Henoethe  • ,  .

bioKraphieB  of Instory  in  his  series  of  lives  of  the  first  twelve

ply  tho  place  Ctcsars  ;  and  we  may  believe  that  his  work  was
far  more  generally  read  than  the  broader  lucu-
brations of  Tacitus,  from  tlie  fiict  that,  a  century  and  a  lialf
later,  an  emperor  who  deduced  his  lineage  from  the  historian,
provided  for  tho  annual  transcription  of  ten  coi)ies  of  his

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  248

writingg.'  Books  that  were  in  general  request  would  have
stood  in  no  need  of  such  patronage.  And  though  we  owe,
perliaps,  to  this  exceptional  care  the  descent  of  a  large  por-
tion of  this  author's  works  to  our  own  day,  we  still  have  to
regret  that  they  did  not  possess  enough  interest  for  the
generations  to  which  they  were  addressed,  to  be  preserved
entire  for  our  instruction.  On  the  other  hand,  the  CaBsaieaQ
lives  of  Suetonius  have  come  down  to  us  entire,  or  with  the
loss  of  one  or  two  pages  only ;  nor  have  they  ever,  perhaps,
wanted  some  curious  readers  throughout  the  long  course  of
seventeen  centuries.

It  is  plain,  from  the  date  of  his  birth,  that  Tacitus  must
have  enjoyed  opportunities  of  personal  communication  with
the  survivors  of  tlie  darkest  period  of  the  mon-  popuuritror
arcliy,  and  have  been  himself  a  witness  to  the  J^J^jJ^^J^a^
ghastly  profligacy  of  the  Xeronian  principate.  T'^J"-
His  lofty  style  and  thorough  command  of  language  bespeak
his  familiarity  with  men  of  rank  and  breeding,  and  though
his  bii-th  was  not  illustrious,  his  father  may  have  been  the
procurator  of  that  name  of  Lower  Germany  recorded  by  the
elder  Pliny.*  It  was  the  position  of  his  family,  rather  than
his  own  literary  merits,  that  led  him,  step  by  step,  through
the  career  of  office  to  the  consulship.  Under  Trajan  all  the
works  known  positively  to  be  his  were  composed.  Two  or
three  slight  notices  of  his  position  at  Rome,  and  his  fame
there,  are  preserved  in  the  letters  of  Pliny ;  *  but  whether  he
survived  the  chief  he  so  much  admired,  and  under  whose
patriotic  sway  he  ventured  to  prefer  his  charges  against  the
imperial  monarchy,  we  are  unable  to  determine.*  This  hap-
py reign  was  distinguished  by  the  prosecution  of  Domitian's
creatures,  and  of  the  wretches  who  had  disgraced  the  period

'  Vopiscus,  in  Tacit.  10.  •  PUn.  Hiti.  Nat.  tu.  16.

'  Plin.  Episl.  ii.  1.,  iv.  15.,  vii.  20.,  ix.  23.

*  Bahr,  Gesch.  der  Ram.  Liter.  iL  130.,  refers  to  the  ctitks  who  hare  veiw
tared  to  conjecture  that  Tacitus  survived  both  Pliny  and  Trajan,  and  Uved  to
the  middle  of  the  reign  of  Hadrian.  In  the  absence  of  any  authority  to  this
effect  I  think  it  unnecessary  to  examine  the  subject.

244  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROSIANS

of  blood  and  pride  now  closed  for  ever.  All  tongues  were
unloosed ;  domestic  archives  were  unlocked ;  history,  so  long
chained  or  gagged,  awoke  to  fi'eedom,  and  became  by  a  sud-
den reaction  the  common  utterance  of  the  age.*  As  might  be
expected,  there  was  no  more  ordinary  subject  of  historical
composition  at  this  time  than  that  which  gave  widest  scope
to  the  writers'  passions,  as  well  as  to  their  rhetorical  talent,
the  suiferings,  namely,  of  their  country.  Thus  C.  Fannius
wrotd  a  special  work  on  the  victims  of  Nero,  of  which  he
left  three  volumes  at  his  decease.'  Titinius  Capito  composed
an  account  of  the  Deaths  of  Famous  Men,  and  recited  each
melancholy  story  to  excited  listeners  among  their  children
and  friends.*  Such  publications  contributed  to  exasperate
recollections  already  too  painful  to  be  recorded  without
malice  or  prejudice ;  and  we  may  well  believe  that  the  hor-
rors of  the  baleful  period  so  recently  passed  away,  were
coloured  by  the  painters  with  more  than  their  genuine  black-
ness. If,  however,  the  historian  traced  the  narrative  of
earlier  events  not  from  contemporary  anecdote  merely,  but
from  published  sources,  he  was  bound  to  approach  them  with
caution  and  discrimination.  The  official  records  of  those
times  were  doubtless  extremely  meagre,  nor  would  they  be
the  less  open  to  suspicion  of  falsification  in  all  important
matters,  such  as  wars,  treaties,  and  alliances.  Tlie  incidents
of  private  oppression  and  sufiering,  which  fill  the  foremost
place  in  the  domestic  annals  we  possess  of  the  empire,  would

'  Plin.  Kpitit.  T.  8. :  "  suadcs  ut  historiam  scribam,  et  suades  non  solus :

multi  hoc  nic  Bicpe  inonuerant Historia  qiioquo  modo  scripta  dclectat."

VltruviuH  had  said  the  same  long  before :  *'  bistoriro  per  se  teneut  lectorcs."
ArehUed.  pnuf.  lib.  v.

•  Plin.  JCpid,  V,  5.  Nero  appeared  to  him  in  a  dream,  perused  the  three
bookfl  deliberately,  and  then  vanished.  The  author  presaged  from  this  vision
that  he  ohotdd  write  no  more  than  the  emperor  had  read.  He  died,  and  the
work  rcm&incil  unfinishcil.

•  Plin.  A/wrf.  viii.  12. :  "seribit  exitus,  illustrium  virorum,  in  iis  quorundam
inlhi  c»rij«ilmonm)."  They  referred  evidently  to  the  martyrdoms  of  recent
tyranny.  Capito  vcnoratcd  the  images  of  the  Bruti,  the  Cassii,  and  (lie  Oatos.
Epid.  1.  17.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  245

be  concealed  or  extenuated,  and  leave  the  fewest  traces  in
public  documents.  Accredited  history  of  these  times  there
was  none.  From  Augustus  to  Nero,  and  perhaps  later,  con-
temporary writers  had  shrunk  from  the  composition  of  his-
tory, or  their  works  had  been  seized  and  destroyed.  But  the
place  of  grave  and  responsible  authorities  had  been  supplied
by  a  mass  of  private  anecdotes,  repeated  from  mouth  to
mouth,  which  circulated  in  the  depths  of  domestic  privacy,
but  rarely  floated  to  the  surface,  while  they  gathered  form
and  consistence  in  the  ready  wit  and  prurient  imaginations
of  a  discontented  society.  Every  noble  family  had  its  own
dark  rumours,  its  own  versions  of  the  circumstances  attending
the  death  or  exile  of  its  most  honoured  members.  These
stories  tended  to  enhance  the  universal  horror  of  the  tyrant
in  whose  hands  the  issues  of  life  and  death  had  lain,  and  the
kindlier  reminiscences  of  his  friends  and  favourites  would  be
overborne  by  the  greater  number  and  vehemence  of  injurious
libels.  From  their  position,  from  their  temptations,  from
their  own  special  training,  or  want  of  training,  it  is  but
too  probable  that  Tiberius,  Caius,  Nero,  and  Domitian  were
really  monsters  of  profligacy  and  cruelty;  but  if  we  carefully
weigh  the  evidence  against  them,  it  is  still  a  question  how
much  of  it  could  be  fairly  admitted  in  a  court  of  justice.
Most  of  the  adverse  witnesses  are  manifestly  interested,  and
tlie  influences  under  wluch  Tacitus  more  especially  wrote,  u
an  admirer  of  Trajan,  a  partisan  of  the  great  houses,  a
theorist  and  a  satirist,  above  all,  perhaps,  as  an  artist  in
composition,  studious  of  eftects  in  rhetoric  and  painting,
were  hostile  to  candour  and  sobriety.  Roman  history  ended,
in  fact,  nearly  as  it  had  begun,  in  the  private  memorials  of
the  nobles,  adapted  to  declamatory  recitation  by  their  flat-
terers and  clients.

It  was  under  great  disadvantages,  as  regarded  his  ma-
terials, that  Tacitus  compiled  the  annals  of  the  Caesars ;  but
there  was  another  obstacle  to  a  true  portraiture  -vf^tofacriti-
of  the  times,  in  the  want  of  a  critical  spirit,  com-  Sl,J^'^t.
mon  to  his  age,  and  indeed  generally  prevalent *^

246  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

in  the  best  periods  of  Roman  literature.  The  Romans  "were
carefully  trained  to  precision  in  style ;  they  enjoyed  the  use
of  a  literary  language  which  acknowledged  but  one  dialect ;
the  inflexions  and  syntax  of  the  Latin  tongue  were  the  same,
wherever  spoken  by  men  of  education,  from  the  Tagus  to  the
Euphrates.  It  is  commonly  said,  indeed,  that  the  Latin  lan-
guage is  adapted  only  to  a  limited  range  of  subjects ;  but

there  is  surely  a  fallacy  in  this  remark. The  sub-
combined  with ,  .  ''  ,  ''  ...
acute  criticism jects  to  which  it  was  actually  applied  withm  the

on  grammar.  , .,  , ^  ,..,.,  ,,

classical  period  are  limited  in  number  and  charac-
ter, and,  accordingly,  classical  authority  is  wanting  for  forms
and  phrases  invented  in  the  later  times  to  meet  the  expansion
of  the  human  intellect :  but  with  due  allowance  for  such  ne-
cessary modifications,  it  may  be  said  of  Latin  that  no  vehicle
of  thought  has,  in  fact,  been  more  widely  or  variously  em-
ployed. Latin  has  been,  and  still  often  is,  adopted  as  the
means  of  communication  on  themes  of  moral  and  natural
science,  of  philosophy  and  religion,  of  mathematics  and  poe-
try, of  law,  history  and  oratory.'  All  these  subjects  and  oth-
ers may  still  be  treated,  and  still  are  sometimes  treated,  through-
out the  civilized  world,  in  that  comprehensive  dialect  which  was
spoken  by  Cicero  and  Tacitus,  which  has  never  ceased  to  be  read
and  written  for  2000  years.  It  combines  precision  with  terseness,
strength  with  grace,  expressiveness  with  fluency,  beyond,  as  I
believe,  any  other  language ;  and  it  was  upon  these  qualities,
accordingly,  that  the  minds  of  the  Romans  were  fixed,  and  to
the  attainment  of  these  their  eflbrts  were  directed.* They  be-

'  Oomp.  Cicero,  Dejin.  bon.  et  mal.  i.  8. :  "non  est  omnino  hie  doccndi
looiu :  Bed  ita  scntio,  Latiimm  linguam  non  modo  non  inopctn,  ut  vulgo  putant,
ted  locoplctiorem  ctiam  cesc  quam  Gnccam.  Quando  cnini  nobis,  vel  dicani
aut  oratoribuH  bonin,  aut  poctis,  poHtca  quidcm  quam  fuit  (^uod  iinitarentiir,
uUua  oratioDis  vel  copioso!  vel  elcgantis,  onintuH  dcfiiit  ?  "

*  Seneca  coDtraaUi  {Qmtol.  ad  Polyb.  21.)  tlio  force  of  tbo  Latin  \\\i\\  tlio
graeaftalneaa  of  the  Greek  language:  "quamdiu  stctcrit  aut  tat  into  linguie
potentia,  aut  QnocaB  gratia ; "  and  tlio  controHt  m  no  doubt  genoraliy  just.  It
may  be  obaenred,  Airtlicr,  timt  in  \nv>  tinut  tliu  full  elegance  of  Latin  had  not
yet  been  dereloped  by  tbo  writcra  of  the  Flavian  period.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  247

came,  almost  without  exception,  as  far  as  their  remains  allow
us  to  judge,  the  most  accurate  speakers  and  writers  of  any
people  in  the  world.  No  ingenuity  can  reduce  to  the  logic
of  syntax  all  the  eccentricities  of  ^schylus  and  Thucydides
among  the  Greeks,  while  of  the  best  of  our  own  classics  there
are  few  perhaps  that  do  not  abound  in  grammatical  solecifims.
But  the  acutest  criticism  can  hardly  detect  a  flaw  in  the
idioms  of  Cicero  or  Livy,  Virgil  or  Horace,  and  even  the  most
careless  of  the  Latin  poets  and  historians  can  rarely  be  con-
victed of  an  error  in  construction.  It  is  curious,  however,  to
obsei-ve  how  this  habitual  accuracy  deserted  the  Romans,
when  they  came  to  dwell  on  the  substance  of  things  instead
of  the  outward  modes  of  expression.  To  the  value  of  a  criti-
cal examination  of  facts  they  seem  to  have  been  almost  in-
sensible. Destitute  of  our  mechanical  means  of  verification
by  notes  and  references,  the  use  they  make  of  their  authorities
is  correspondingly  loose  and  trivial  The  historian,  who  was
not  required  to  guard  every  statement  by  clear  and  direct
testimonies,  was  easily  led  to  read  carelessly,  to  quote  from
memory,  and  at  random.  Conscious  that  he  oould  not  be  fol-
lowed to  his  sources,  and  convicted  of  misusing  them,  he
could  scarcely  resist  the  temptation  to  pervert  or  gloss  the
truth.  Falsehoods  advanced  for  the  credit  of  the  nation  or
of  particular  families,  met  with  ready  indulgence ;  the  habit
of  falsification  once  acquired,  could  not  be  kept  within  the
bounds  ostensibly  prescribed;  rhetorical  amplifications  slid
swiftly  into  direct  misstatements ;  the  reputation  of  a  great
name  gave  currency  to  a  lie ;  the  critics  of  the  age  of  Quin-
tilian,  the  great  age  of  Roman  criticism,  lynx-eyed  in  detect-
ing the  abuse  of  a  figure  of  rhetoric  or  grammar,  lacked  the
training  required  for  the  correction  of  an  error  in  fact,  or  for
weighing  evidence.  Roman  criticism  might  be  the  tact  of  a
spectator  in  the  circus,  but  it  was  not  the  acumen  of  a  judge
on  the  tribunal.

We  may  ascribe  perhaps  to  this  carelessness  in  regard  to
history,  the  undue  preference  of  the  Romans  for  biography.

248  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

The  sketch  indeed  of  an  individual  life  may  be

Tho  preference  .  .

of  the  Romans worked,  as  we  have  sometimes  seen  m  our  own

for  biography. ^ .  ,  , ^ t  . • ,  n ^

day,  into  the  most  elaborate  picture  oi  the  events,
characters,  and  manners  of  a  whole  generation.  But  a  taste
for  biography  is  much  more  commonly,  and  among  the  Ro-
mans it  seems  to  have  been  uniformly,  a  taste  for  mere  per-
sonal anecdote.  It  resulted  perhaps  universally  in  a  perver-
sion of  historical  truth,  a  distortion  of  shape  and  proportions,
if  not  an  absolute  misrepresentation  of  facts.  Biography,
however,  was  in  favour  with  the  Romans  from  the  dawn  of
their  literature,  and  in  the  Flavian  period  it  began  to  assume
a  predominance  over  every  other  form,  till  it  finally  super-
seded both  history  and  poetry.  The  last  remains  we  possess
of  classical  Latinity  are  the  biographies  of  the  later  emperors,
collected  under  the  title  of  the  Augustan  History.  But  the
chief  writer  of  this  class  belongs  to  the  period  now  before  us,

and  his  works  are  of  great  interest  and  value.
Lives  of  the The  lives  of  the  first  six  Ca3sars  by  Suetonius  con-

stitute  some  of  the  most  important  contributions
we  possess  to  our  collection  of  reputed  facts  in  history.  Those
of  the  six  which  followed  are  slighter  and  less  attractive,  the
descent  from  the  former  series  to  the  latter  showing  how
much  the  author  depended  on  written  sources,  and  how  much
he  was  at  a  loss  for  materials  when  he  approached  his  own
times,  the  account  of  which  was  still  chiefly  to  be  gathered
from  hearsay.  This  circumstance  is  important  for  estimating
the  value  of  his  book,  and  on  the  whole  it  enhances  our  idea
of  tlie  reliance  we  may  place  on  it.  But  the  biographical
form  of  composition  affords  too  much  temptation  to  tho  indo-
lence common  at  the  period,  and  to  the  love  of  eftect  not  less
common  ;  nor  docs  Suetonius  indeed  pretend  to  be  a  narrator
of  events.  lie  notes  the  salient  features  of  his  hero's  cliarac-
ter,  and  illustrates  them  with  an  abundance  of  amusing  and
striking  stories,  referring  only  incidentally  and  obliquely,  if
at  all,  to  tho  transactions  of  his  public  career.  Ilencc  tho
meagrencsB  of  the  details  that  cm  now  bo  given  of  the  Fla-
vian reigns,  compared  with  tho  Julian  and  Claudian,  in  which

Uin)ER  THE  EMPIRE.  249

we  can  use  the  capricious  portraiture  of  Suetonius  to  com-
plete the  regular  narratives  of  Tacitus  and  Dion.  Nor  is  it
in  the  connexion  of  historical  details  only  that  we  feel  the
slightness  of  our  materials.  The  biographers,  while  fixing
their  eyes  on  the  lineaments  of  their  proper  subject,  overlook
the  general  circumstances  and  tendencies  of  the  age.  Our
view  of  society  in  the  background  is  obstructed  by  the  bulk
of  the  imperial  person,  occupying  the  whole  field  of  vision.
The  Lives  of  the  Roman  biographers  are  wholly  deficient  in
these  comprehensive  pictures.  They  can,  indeed,  only  be  re-
garded as  heaps  of  crude  material  amassed  by  labourers  more
or  less  intelligent,  and  disposed  more  or  less  in  order  for
future  application  to  a  work  of  symmetry  and  grandeur.
But  the  master-builder  never  came,  and  the  materials,  thus
variously  collected,  have  been  for  the  most  part  dispersed
and  lost :  the  fragments  now  remaining  in  the  pages  of  Sue-
tonius and  his  successors,  as  well  as  in  Victor,  Xiphilin  and
Eutropius,  can  hardly  furnish  forth  a  mere  frame  or  outline
of  the  palace  of  imperial  history.

The  free  intercourse  between  men  of  equal  rank  which
characterized  the  republic,  continued  with  little  diminution
under  the  emperors.  The  sti*ength  of  the  im-
penal  system  resided  perhaps  m  the  fact,  that  i>ri»mt«e«r^
the  nobles,  the  dangerous  classes  of  the  capital,
who  might  have  nui-sed  an  explosive  spirit  of  discontent  in
private,  could  not  refrain,  notwithstanding  their  fear  of  spies
and  informers,  from  congregating  in  the  baths  and  theatres,
or  in  hardly  less  public  circles  at  home,  thus  betraying  their
habits  and  thoughts  without  disguise  to  the  jealous  master  who
watched  them.  The  spirit  of  biographical  narration  which
distinguishes  Roman  literature,  sprang,  no  doubt,  from  the  gre-
gariousness  of  Roman  life.  Reserved  and  self<?ont rolled  as
he  showed  himself  in  the  tribute  of  regard  or  reminiscence  he
inscribed  on  the  tomb  of  his  associate,  the  Roman  indulged
in  all  the  fulness  of  description  and  anecdote  in  the  volume
he  consecrated  to  his  glory.  Very  many  of  the  leading  men
at  Rome  wrote  their  own  lives. An  instinct  of  vanity,  the

250  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

outward  show  of  which  they  curbed  sedulously  in  themselves
and  ridiculed  in  others,  impelled  them  to  leave  a  minute
record  of  their  deeds,  coloured  as  they  themselves  wished,  for
posterity.  Their  longing  for  posthumous  fame  exceeded  even
their  anxiety  for  honour  or  power  during  life.  The  cynical
Sulla  could  relinquish  the  dictatorship,  hut  he  could  not
refrain  from  leaving  his  own  panegyric  behind  him.  On  the
whole,  the  chief  aim  of  Roman  literature  at  this  period  was
to  realize  the  image  and  character  of  the  men  who  belonged
to  it.  Biography  was  applicable  to  a  few  personages  of  dis-
tinction only ;  but  satire  and  epigram  were  at  hand  to  drag
the  most  obscure  to  light,  or  to  merge  every  personal  feature
in  general  pictures  of  society.  For  more  refined  tastes  satis-
faction might  be  provided  by  collecting  the  letters  of  men
who  had  filled  a  space  in  the  public  eye,  and  attracted  the
curiosity  of  their  own  circle. The  correspond-*!

The  letters  of  „•',  _,,  .  -,. , >

PHnythe  encc  oi  the  younger  Jrlmy  occupies,  accordmgly,

younger.  .  ,  .....

an  important  place  among  the  existing  documents
of  the  age. It  gives  the  fullest  and  fairest  portrait  we  pos-  -
sess  of  a  Roman  gentleman ;  nor  indeed  does  any  other  of
the  ancients  come  so  near  as  its  writer  to  our  conception  of
the  gentleman  in  mind,  breeding,  and  position.

Pliny  was  bom  of  an  honourable  stock,  belonging  to  the
old  Coecilian  house,  which  was  now  widely  extended. He

was  adopted  by  the  most  learned  of  public  men,

Acoonntof  .  ,  *^  _J^  ,

Pliny  the  his  unclc  Pliny  the  naturalist. Under  these

younger.  ausplccs  he  was  brought  up  in  all  the  learning  of

his  times,  to  which  he  assiduously  devoted  himself;  but  his
bent  was  rather  to  the  public  exercise  of  his  gifts  than  to  the
accumulation  of  learning  for  its  own  sake,  and  he  obtained
an  early  footing  on  the  ladder  of  office,  and  in  the  arena  of
forensic  activity. The  jurisconsult  might  still  retain,  at  least

•  Tho  name  of  0.  Plinius  Ca>ciliu8  Sccundus  betokens  a  change  in  family
nomenclature  wliich  became  cstabliHhcd  about  this  time.  At  on  curlier  period
wo  should  have  read  it  IMinlus  Cfficilinnns.  It  Bcems  that  tho  longer  form  in  —
anoB  had  now  become  ho  common  that  it  ceased  to  bo  employed  to  indicate
adoption.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  251

among  the  highest  class,  something  of  his  old  character  as  a
patron,  obliged  by  his  nobility ^  rather  than  a  hired  advocate.
Pliny  entered  with  zest  into  the  traditional  idea  of  this  hon-
ourable relation,  and  if  he  accepted  splendid  fees,  in  acknowl-
edgment of  his  services,  took  them  always  in  the  name  of
justice,  and  as  he  believed,  in  the  cause  of  equity.'  It  was"^
his  pride  to  emulate  the  great  pleaders  of  the  commonwealth,
in  the  defence  of  injured  provincials,  or  the  arraignment  of
delators ;  and  the  state  of  affairs  under  Nerva  and  Trajan
afforded  scope  for  the  exercise  of  this  honourable  ambition.'
He  succeeded  in  turn  to  the  chief  magistracies,  which  he  tried
in  vain  to  imagine  something  more  than  a  shadow  of  their
former  importance  ;  and  he  governed  the  province  of  Bithy-
nia  after  the  pattern  recommended  by  the  humane  protector
of  the  Sicilians,  the  accuser  of  the  tyrant  Verres.*  But  Pliny
emulated  liis  master  Cicero,  though  at  an  immeasurable  dis-
tance, in  the  pursuit  of  literature  also.  He  was  proud  to  be
known  as  the  friend  of  Tacitus,  and  was  elated  with  a  par-
donable vanity,  when  a  provincial  newly  arrived  conversing
with  him  by  chance  on  the  benches  of  the  Circus,  exclaimed:
Is  it  Tacitus  or  Plinitts  I  have  the  honour  of  ciddreuingf*

*  The  subject  of  the  advocate's  remuneration  has  been  treated  of  brfore.
I  will  repeat  here  that  the  clients  of  the  older  time  had  reaentod  tbe  payment
of  fees  to  their  patrons  as  savouring  too  much  of  a  tribute  from  the  pleba  to
the  patriciate.  (Liv.  xxxiv.  4.)  This  objection  had  been  eoBBnned  bj  tlie
Cincian  law  (a.  u.  549),  and  the  advocate  had  been  ftufaidden  to  aeeept  pre*
payment  for  his  services  :  but  neither  law  nor  custom  prerented  the  gratttode
of  the  client  from  overflowing  in  a  present  after  the  suit  was  over.  Sudi  was
the  theory  of  Roman  legal  practice  at  this  time,  and  the  prtetor  Licinius  Nqxw
insisted  on  enforcing  it.  An  amusing  letter  of  Pliny's  {Ejnd.  v.  21.)  describes
how  this  interference  was  canvassed. Trajan  confirmed  it  with  an  edict.

'  Plin.  Epist.  ii.  11,  12.,  iii.  9.,  iv.  9.  The  writer  dilates  upon  the  part  he
took  in  pleading  the  cause  of  the  Africans  against  Marius  Pri^oia,  and  the
Bseticans  against  Csecilius  Classicus,  and  again  in  defending  Julius  Baasna
against  the  accusation  of  the  Bithynians.

'  The  letter  in  which  Pliny  gives  advice  to  his  fiioid  about  the  govemmait
of  a  province  is  written  evidently  in  imitation  of  Cicero's  wdl-known  epistle  to
Quintus, Epkt.  viiL  24.

*  Plm.  Ep.  ix.  23.

252  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Pliny  may  at  this  time  have  been  favourably  known  already
as  the  author  of  the  Panegyric^  but  the  character  of  his
friend's  genius  had  not  yet  been  stamped  by  the  publication
of  the  Sistories  or  Annals.

The  glimses  Pliny  gives  us  of  his  aristocratic  correspond-
ents are  not  less  interesting  than  the  details  of  his  own  life
Pliny's  distin-  ^^^  habits.  From  him  we  learn  almost  all  we
Sdcowespond-  ^now  of  Tacitus,  who  seems  to  have  resided  in
®°**  lettered  leisure  in  the  city. Pliny  makes us

acquainted  with  Silius  Italicus,  the  refined  and  wealthy
versifier,  with  Passienus  Paulus,  an  imitator  of  his  ancestor
Propertius,  with  Caninius  E-ufus  who  sang  the  Dacian  warj
with  Pomponius  Saturninus,  distinguished  alike  in  history,
oratory  and  poetry ;  and  he  quotes  with  satisfaction  the
praises  of  himself  in  a  well-known  epigram  of  Martial,  whose
compliments  he  rewarded  with  a  present  on  his  return  to  his
native  Bilbilis.^  He  introduces  us  to  the  society  of  the
Greek  rhetoricians,  such  as  Euphrates,  Isoeus,  and  Artemido-
rus,  who  kept  themselves  decorously  in  the  background
among  the  men  of  letters  in  the  capital,  though  it  was  by
these  accomplished  strangers,  probably,  that  the  best  literary
circles  were  inspired,  and  by  them  that  the  arts  both  of  elo-
quent speaking  and  graceful  living  were  taught  and  recom-
mended.' But  second  only  to  theirs  was  the  influence  of  the
brave  and  noble  women,  the  Fannias  and  Arrias,  the  Corel-
lias,  the  Calpumias,  the  Celerinas,  the  Calvinas,  who  main-
tained in  a  degenerate  ago  the  antique  virtues  of  Roman
lut«T«atiiig  or  matronhood.*  Nor  are  tliere  wanting  in  Pliny's
jM«f«finllnr  sketches  of  character  descriptions  of  another
ofhitietton.  kind;  as  of  the  vanity  of  the  wretched  Rcgulus,
the  creature  of  Domitian,  suffered  by  Nerva's  lenity  to  parade

•  PUn.  EpUi,  1. 18.,  U.  8.,  iii.  Y.,  v.  17.,  ix.  22.  I  have  menUoned  a  few
only  of  tlic  literary  names  in  the  circle  of  Pliny's  acquaintance.  The  epigram
of  Martiul  on  I'liny  U  x.  19.  of  the  poet's  collection.  I'lin.  Fpist.  iii.  21.  The
whole  number  of  the  writer's  correspondents  is  not  less  than  113.

•  Plin.  Epid.  I  10.,  ii.  8.,  iii.  11.,  and  others.

•  Plin.  EpUL  ill.  11.  10.,  Iv.  17.,  vi.  24.,  vli.  11.  19.,  ix.  13.,  and  others.
Calpumi*  {limpid,  ir.  10.)  was  Pliny's  second  wife.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  253

his  ill-gotten  riches  among  better  men,  and  even  seek  by  vil-
lainous arts  to  increase  them ; '  of  the  attack  on  Lartius
Macedo  by  his  own  slaves,  and  the  terrible  vengeance  of  the
law  ;*  of  the  sentimental  dolphin  who  was  crossed  in  love  on
the  coast  of  Africa  ;  *  of  the  haunted  house  at  Athens,  curions
as  the  exact  counterpart  of  a  modern  ghost  story,  and  show-
ing how  in  ancient  as  in  modern  times,  the  instincts  of  super-
naturalism  emerged  from  the  prevalent  realism  of  the  day.*
But  none  perhaps  of  these  interesting  letters  are  so  valuable
for  the  insight  they  give  us  into  life  and  feelings  as  those
which  describe  the  writer's  country-seats ;  or  relate  how  the
accomplished  Vestricius  Spurinna  and  the  elder  Pliny  passed
their  time  in  composition  or  study,  or  how  he  himself  diver-
sified his  literary  leisure  with  rural  amusements.  Of  the  cor-
respondence with  Traian  I  have  already  spoken.
The  impression  these  letters  give  us  of  Pliny's  dence  with  Ti»-
character  is  extremely  favourable.  It  represents
him  a  man  of  ability  and  accomplishments,  of  honour  and
humanity,  kind  to  his  slaves,  considerate  towards  his  associ-
ates, of  genial  habits,  charmed  with  the  attractions  of  domestic
life,  of  moral  simplicity  and  picturesque  scenery,  liberal  in
his  tastes,  generous  in  feeling.  With  such  claims  on  our
regard  and  even  admiration,  we  may  excuse  the  extrava-
gance of  his  devotion  to  a  virtuous  prince,  and  his  readiness
to  flatter  those  whose  flattery  he  doubtless  expected  in
return.  Though  the  letters  which  thus  amiably  depict  him
were  published  by  himself,  and  many  of  them  written  with  a
view  to  publication,  they  enabled  us  to  appreciate  fairly
enough  the  writer's  claim  to  our  regard.

*  Plin.  Fpisi.  i.  5.,  ii.  20.,  iv.  2.,  vi.  2.

*  Plin.  Fpist.  iii.  14.  The  family  of  slaves  were  put  to  death  without  wait-
ing for  the  fatal  result  of  the  attack  which  did  not  follow  till  afterwards :
"  ipse  paucis  dicbus  segre  refociUatus  non  sine  ultionis  solatio  deoeflsit,  ita  Tiriis
vindicatus  ut  occisi  solent"

»  Plin.  Episi.  ix.  33.

*  Plin.  I/pisi.  vii.  27. :  "  velim  sdre,  esse  aliquid  phantasmata  .  . .  putes  :—
Ego  ut  esse  credam  in  primis  eo  ducor,  quod  audio  accidisse  Curtio  Rufo."

254  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Pliny's  letters  give  us  our  nearest  view  of  the  ideas  and
habits  of  the  Roman  aristocracy,  and  they  show  in  a  remark-
able manner  how  finely  the  speculative  opinions

Mntual  approx-  n i

imation  of  the of  the  day  wcre  actually  shaded  into  one  another.

sects  of  philoso- .^  "  -, r> ^  • •  „ ,

phy.  The  Stoics vVhen  wc  read  oi  the  antagonistic  tenets  of  the

and  Epicurians. ^ .  , _, .

btoics  and  Jbij)icureans,  and  hear,  not  from  poets
and  satirists  only,  but  from  grave  historians,  such  as  Tacitus,
of  the  strong  features  which  marked  their  consistent  profess-
ors, when  we  know  that  Vespasian  and  Domitian  issued
special  edicts  against  the  disciples  of  Chrysippus  and  Cato,
and  are  led  to  suppose  that  these  men  were  in  some  way
actively  hostile  to  the  government,  it  is  not  without  surprise
that  we  remark  in  the  pages  of  Pliny  now  before  us,  how
little  distinctive  there  seems  really  to  have  been  in  the  tem-
per and  notions  of  the  Stoics  compared  with  other  educated
citizens.  At  all  times,  under  every  form  of  government,  men
will  be  divided  into  those  who  take  life  seriously  and  try  to
follow  a  rule  and  embody  an  idea,  and  the  larger  number
who  swim  with  the  stream  and  merely  seek  to  extract  enjoy-
ment, without  too  great  an  effort,  from  the  position  in  which
they  find  themselves.  It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  in  the
darkest  ages,  and  under  the  worst  tyrants,  this  difierence  of
character  was  more  prominent,  and  did  actually  efiect  some
outward  severance  between  the  members  of  the  Roman
aristocracy ;  but  undoubtedly,  as  soon  as  the  pressure  of  per-
secution was  relaxed,  tlie  profession  of  Stoicism  dwindled
to  a  few  trifling  formalities,  and  it  was  again  by  natural
temper,  not  by  creeds  and  tenets,  that  men  were  distinguished
from  one  another.

The  letters  of  Pliny  abound  in  instances  of  self-murder,  a
practice  which  at  this  time  may  almost  be  dignified  with  the

name  of  a  national  usage.  Nothing,  however,
PpoT«lono«of  ,, ,  » ,  »'  '

nuicido  at  thi« wouul  DC  morc  crroncous  than  to  suppose  that

period.

tliirt  was  a  principle  of  the  Stoics,  or  was  the  dis-
tinguished practice  of  the  sect.  Suicide,  in  the  view  of  their
professed  teachers,  was  barely  excusable  in  the  last  resort,

UNDER  THE  EMPIBE.  256

when  there  plainly  remained  no  other  escape  from

.  Bnieiib  aat  ft

a  restraint  which  denied  to  man  the  object  of  his phmettUtt^a

existence.  Cato  persuaded  himself  tlxat  he  could
not  serve  his  own  moral  being  under  the  rule  of  a  despot ;
but  this  was  allowed,  even  on  his  own  principles,  to  be  a  per-
verse and  extravagant  view;  and  his  example,  effective  as  it
proved  in  gaining  imitators,  was  followed  by  the  KpicureAB
Cassius  as  devoutly  as  by  the  Stoic  Brutus.  From  that  time,
while  the  practice  of  self-immolation  became  more  and  more
frequent,  it  seems  to  have  been  more  commonly  afleoted  by
the  selfish  and  wilful  men  of  pleasure,  than  by  the  austere
votaries  of  virtue  under  whatever  nominal  profession.  But
the  true  and  consistent  disciples  of  the  Porch,  whether  they
protested  openly,  at  all  hazards,  against  the  tyranny  of  the
times,  or  constrained  themselves  to  the  public  service  in  sul-
len submission  to  it,  refused  to  flee  from  the  bondage  in  which
they  lay  by  the  subterfuge  of  the  coward  and  the  voluptuary.
We  need  not  pass  too  austere  a  judgment  on  the  sick  and
aged  who  thus  courted  present  relief  from  suffering,  and  even
made  their  escape  from  a  painful  existence  with  a  show  of
dignity  and  fortitude.  But  we  must  guard  ourselves  against
confounding  such  ordinary  mortals  with  the  genuine  patriots
and  sages,  who  proved  themselves  generally  superior  to  this
morbid  intemperance.  Pliny,  indeed,  betrays  a  certain  ad-
miration for  the  courage  of  these  persons,  many  of  whom
were  of  the  number  of  his  own  friends ;  but  we  may  believe
that  the  true  philosophers,  such  as  Comutus,  Thrasea  and
Helvidius,  would  have  held  them  in  little  honour.
The  fashion,  for  such  it  evidently  became,  was  m^'m^*
the  result  of  satiety  and  weariness,  or,  at  best,  of  *^"  ^m^T-
false  reasoning ;  but  the  fact  that  suicide  was  never  so  rife
as  under  the  beneficent  sway  of  Trajan,  shows  that  it  was  by
no  means  the  resource  of  political  indignation,  chafing  against
its  prison-bars,  which  it  has  been  so  commonly  represented.

Nor  is  it  the  habit  of  suicide  itself  that  marks  the  age  and
the  people  so  strikingly,  as  the  mode  in  which  it  is  accom-

256  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

plished,  the  publicity,  the  solemnity,  and  even
Coreiiins  the  ostcntation  that  attend  it. I  have  just  suf-

fered  a  great  loss,  writes  x^lmy :  my  friend  Co-
reUius  Utifus  is  dead,  and  by  his  own  act,  which  embitters  my
sorrow. No  death  is  so  much  to  be  lamented  as  one  that

comes  not  in  the  course  of  fate  or  nature Corellius,

indeed,  was  led  to  this  resolve  by  the  force  of  reason,  which
holds  with  philosophers  the  place  of  necessity,  although  he  had
m,any  motives  for  living,  a  sound  conscience,  a  high  reputor
tion  and  influence  /  not  to  mention  a  daughter,  a  wife,  a
grandson,  sisters,  and  true  friends  besides.  JBut  he  was  tor-
tured by  so  protracted  a  malady,  that  his  reasons  for  death
outweighed  all  these  advantages.  For  three  and  thirty  years,
as  I  have  heard  him  declare,  he  had  suffered  from  gout  in
the  feet.  The  disorder  was  hereditary  with  him.  .  .  .  In  the
vigour  of  life  he  had  checked  it  by  sobriety  and  restraint ;
when  it  grew  worse  with  increasing  years,  he  had  borne  it
with  fortitude  and  patience.  I  visited  him  one  day,  in  Do-
m,itian''s  time,  and  found  him  in  the  greatest  siffering  ;  for  the
disease  had  now  spread  from  the  feet  through  all  his  limbs.
Mis  slaves  quitted  the  room,  for  such  was  their  habit  when-
ever an  intimate  friend  came  to  see  him  /  and  such  was  Jiis
wife's  practice  also,  though  she  coidd  have  kept  any  secret.
After  casting  his  eyes  around,  he  said,  Why  do  you  suppose
it  is  that  I  continue  so  long  to  endure  these  torments  ?  I
would  survive  the  ruffian  just  one  day.  Had  his  body  been
as  strong  as  his  mind,  this  wish  he  would  have  effected  with
his  own  hand.  God  granted  it,  however,  and  when  he  felt
that  he  should  die  a  free  man,  he  burst  throtigh  all  the  lesser
ties  that  bound  him  to  life.  The  malady,  which  he  had  tried
so  long  to  relieve  by  temperance,  still  increased :  at  last  his
firmness  gave  way.  2\oo,  three,  jour  days  passed,  and  he  had
refused  all  food.  His  wife,  Hispidla,  sent  our  friend  Gemi-
nius  to  me,  with  the  melancholy  news  that  her  husband  had
resolved  to  die^  and  would  not  be  dissuaded  by  her  prayers  or
her  daughter's :  I  alone  could  prevail  upon  him.  I  flew  to
him. I  had  almost  reached  the  spot,  when  Atticus  met  me

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  257

from  niajmlla^  to  say  that  even  I  could  not  now  prevail^  so
fixed  had  become  hia  determination.  To  his  physician^  in-
deed^ on  food  being  offered  to  him,  he  had  said,  I  have  de-
cided ;  an  expression  which  makes  me  the  more  regret  him,
as  I  the  more  admire  him.  I  think  to  myself  What  afriend,
tohat  a  man  have  J  lost  I  He  had  completed,  indeed,  his
fiixty-seventh  year,  an  advanced  age  even  for  the  most  ro-
bust :  yes,  I  know  it.  He  has  escaped  from  his  long-pro-
tracted illness  :  I  know  it.  He  has  died,  leaving  his  dearest
friends  behind  him,  and  the  state,  which  was  still  dear  to  him,
in  prosperity.  This,  too,  I  know.  Neverthdess,  I  lament
his  death,  no  less  than  i/  he  were  young  and  vigorous  ;  J  la-
ment it — do  not  think  me  weak  in  saying  so— on  my  oimi
account.  For  I  have  lost,  yes,  I  have  lost  a  witness  of  my
own  life,  a  guide,  a  master.  In  short,  I  will  say  to  y<n$,  at
I  said  to  my  friend  Calvisivs,  I  fear  I  shall  myself  live  more
carelessly  for  the  future.'

Another  letter,  of  similar  character,  relates  to  the  death  of
Silius  Italicus,  the  patrician,  the  consular,  the  poet  and  man  of
letters.  Pliny  hears  that  this  noble  personage  had  /wmiim
starved  himselfin  his  villa  at  Neapolis.  The  cause  !««•>««.
of  his  death  was  ill  health  ;  for  he  suffered  from  an  incurable
tumour,  the  irksomeness  of  which  determined  him  to  haaten
his  end  with  unshaken  resolution.*  Of  another  distinguished
contemporary,  the  jurisconsult  Aristo,  the  same  writer  re-

*  Plin.  Bpist.  I  12.

*  Plin.  Epist.  iii.  1.  The  writer  Bpeaks  with  great  respect  rf  thia  man,
whose  habits  were  not  unlike  his  own.  But  Silius  had  incurred  the  charge  of
Bubservience  to  Nero :  "  Iseserat  famam  suam  sub  Nerone ;  credebatur  sponta
accusasse."  He  had  recovered  his  character  by  his  honest  bearing  under
Vitellius,  and  had  gained  approbation  for  his  conduct  in  the  govemmait  of
Asia  :  "  maculam  veteris  industriae  laudabili  otio  abluerat.  Fuit  inter  principes
civitatis  sine  potentia,  sine  invidia.  Salutabatur,  colebatur:  multumque  in
lectulo  jacens  cubiculo  semper,  non  ex  fortuna  frequent!,  doctissimis  sennonibus
dies  transigebat,  cum  a  scribendo  vacaret  Scribebat  carmina  majore  cura
quam  ingenio."  Here  Pliny  seems  to  refer  not  to  the  epic  poem  of  the
"  Punica,"  written  long  before,  but  to  the  copies  of  Terses  Sihua  was  in  the
habit  of  composing  in  his  old  age.

VOL.  Tll. — 11

258  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS

cords,  that  he  had  desired  him,  with  other  intimate  friends,
to  demand  of  the  physicians  whether  his  malady  was  really
incurable ;  for,  if  so,  he  would  manfully  terminate  his  own
existence.  "Were  there,  however,  any  reasonable  prospect  of
relief,  he  would  endure  it  with  fortitude,  however  obstinate
and  tedious ;  for  so  he  had  promised  his  wife  and  daughter ;
and  he  felt,  moreover,  under  an  obligation  to  his  friends,  not
to  frustrate  their  wishes  by  a  voluntary  death,  if  there  were
any  hope  for  him.  This,  says  Pliny,  I  consider,  more  than
usually  difficult  and  praiseworthy.  For  to  rush  upon  death
with  impetuosity  and  ardour  is  common  to  many ;  hut  to
deliberate  about  it,  and  discuss  the  arguments  for  it  and
against  it,  and  live  or  die  accordingly,  is  worthy  of  a  great
mind.  And  the  doctors,  it  seems,  do  give  us  hopes.  May  the
Gods  confirm  them,  and  relieve  me  at  least  from  this  anxiety,
which,  when  I  am  rid  of,  I  shall  return  to  my  Laurentine
villa,  to  my  papers  and  tablets  and  literary  leisure.^

The  resolution  of  the  men  was  rivalled  by  that  of  the

women  also,  and  was  supported  apparently,  in  either  case,

more  by  natural  force  of  character,  and  innate

Suicide  pre-  -, .  , ,  ...  , .

Tailed  among  daring,  than  by  any  trammg  in  speculative  phi-
losophy. The  illustrious  deed  of  Arria,  the  wife
of  Pajtus,  who,  when  her  husband  was  sentenced  for  conspir-
ing with  Scribonianus,  gave  herself  the  firat  blow,  and
handed  him  the  dagger,  with  the  words.  It  is  not  painful,
was,  it  seems,  no  act  of  sudden  impulse,  but  the  accomplish-
men  of  a  deliberate  resolution  ijot  to  survive  him.  While
his  fate  was  yet  doubtful,  she  had  intimated  this  intention  to
her  relatives,  and  they  had  tried  in  vain  to  dissuade  her.
To  Thrasea,  her  son-in-law,  who  had  asked  whether  she
would  wish  her  own  daughter  thus  to  sacrifice  herself  in  the
event  of  his  decease.  Yes,  assuredly,  she  had  replied,  if  she
sJiall  have  lived  as  long  and  as  well  with  you,  as  J  have  lived
with  my  Pcetus.  When  accordingly  they  kept  a  stricter
watch  over  hor,  to  prevent  the  execution  of  her  design,  she

•  Plin.  Fpitt.  i.  22.

UNDEB  THE  EMPIRE.

SM

had  told  them  that  their  precautions  were  fruitless.  Timi
make  rne  die  »hockingly^  she  had  said,  hu^  you  cannot  pretmU
my  dying :  and  therewith  she  had  leapt  from  her  seat,  aad
dashed  lier  head  violently  against  the  walL  Stunned  and
bruised,  she  exclaimed  on  recovering,  I  told  you  that  IvwtM
find  a  way  to  death,  however  painful,  if  you  refuaed  me  em
easy  one.*  Tlie  admiration  Pliny  expresses  for  this  fioroe*
minded  creature,  whose  memory  was  treasured  in  the  hearts
of  her  family,  shows  in  what  honour  the  soieide  even  of
women  was  held,  in  the  dislocation  of  the  true  moral  seme
among  the  Romans  of  the  period.*

Had  indeed  the  feeling  which  prompted  tiieee  aoiaof  self-
gacrifice  been  the  result  merely  of  speculative  opinions  about
virtue  and  duty,  it  would  have  caused  little  un-
easyness  to  the  tyrants.  But  indicating,  as  it  to wtekUaMT*
really  did,  a  contempt  of  Ufe,  and  recklessness  of  •p«a3SiT«'
personal  consequences,  it  might  alarm  them  with  "J******^
a  sensQ  of  their  own  insecurity.  Hence  the  distress  of  Tibe-
rius at  the  fatal  resolution  of  Cocceius  Nerva;  hence  the
visit,  the  enquiries,  the  intreaties  to  abstain  from  it,  and
lastly,  the  avowal  that  the  suicide  of  a  distinguished  guest
of  the  palace,  with  no  obvious  motive,  would  be  injurious  to
the  prince's  reputation.'  The  emperors  readilj  imagined
that  the  men  who  held  their  own  lives  in  so  little  estimation
might  at  any  moment  cast  them  on  the  die  of  revolt  or  as-
sassination, and  they  conceived  that  there  was  no  way  to
disarm  such  fanatical  hostility,  but  to  divert  it  from  the  ooa<
templation  of  high  and  generous  objects  by  the  grossest

'  Plin.  Epitt.  iiL  16,  Compare  another  notable  case  of  perrerted  principle
I  (vi.  24.).  A  couple  of  mature  years,  long  married,  dwelt  in  a  villa  on  the  banks
f  of  the  lake  Larius.  The  man  suffered  from  a  distressing  malady :  the  wife
I  assured  herself  that  it  was  mcurable,  told  him  that  there  waa  nothing  for  him
but  to  kill  hunself,  promised  that  she  would  not  desert  him,  tied  herself  to  him,
;  ftnd  tumbled  with  him  into  the  water.

*  A  painful  illustration  of  this  pronenees  to  suicide  in  women  occurs  in  the
L  case  of  Paulina  the  wife  of  Seneca. Tac.  Ann,  xv.  60.

•  Tacitus,  Attn.  vi. The  story  haa  beai  ah^dy  referred  to  in  chapter  xlvL
■  of  this  history.

260  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

dissipation.  This  was  the  snare  into  which  the  discontented
nobles  too  easily  fell.  They  escaped  from  the  fatigue  of
public  affairs,  which  had  lost  their  redeeming  interest,  in  a
round  of  sensual,  or  at  best  of  idle  pleasures,  and  cloaked
their  dereliction  of  duty  as  citizens  under  the  name  of  philoso-
phy, which  should  have  taught  them  another  lesson.  They
made  it  the  aim  of  their  lives  to  cultivate  inward  satisfac-
tion, a  good  conscience,  as  they  sententiously  entitled  it,  by
keeping  jealously  out  of  sight  those  worthy  ends  of  existence
which,  under  their  circumstances,  were  difficult,  perhaps  im-
possible to  attain.  Their  eclectic  philosophy,  whether  it
took  the  name  of  the  Porch,  the  Garden,  or  the  Academy,
was  generally  the  parade  of  rhetorical  axioms  on  the  uncer-
tainty or  vanity  of  life,  and  the  superiority  of  the  truly  wise
to  all  earthly  distresses,  such  as  vex  the  souls  of  ordinary
mortals.*

This  aping  of  the  ancient  wisdom  was  the  common  fashion
of  the  day  among  the  polished  classes  of  society;  but  it
voinptnons-  might  bc  Combined  with  almost  any  mode  of
nessof thr"*'  ^^^^^  ^^^^  ^^  ^^  many  cases  little  deserved  associ-
^^*'-  ation  with  it. The  increasing  splendour  of  the

shows  and  contests,  gymnastic  or  literary,  encouraged  by
the  patronage  of  the  prince  himself,  began  to  fascinate  the
Roman  magnate,  who  at  an  earlier  period  would  have  aban-
doned these  frivolous  enjoyments  to  the  Greeks,  their  invent-
ors and  introducers.'  Both  Pliny  and  Tacitus  attended  the
spectacles  of  the  circus,  which  Cicero  and  even  Seneca  would

>  Comp.  Statius,  Si/lv.  ii.  2.  129. :

"  No9  vilis  turba  caducis
Deservirc  bonis,  semperque  optare  parati,
Spargimur  in  casus ;  cclsa  tu  mentis  ab  arcc
Desplcifl  errantes,  humanaquc  gaiidia  ridca."
But  the  Bago,  who  thus  despised  all  worldly  gralifieatioiiH,  looked  down
upon  the  world  from  the  fairest  paradise  in  the  Surrontinc  lulls.
•  Lucan,  Phart.  vii.  210. :

"  Oralis  delectn  juvcntim
Oymnasiis  adorit,  studloque  ignava  palii'stnr."

i

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  261

have  regarded  as  a  weakness,  perhaps  as  a  disgrace.*  But
such  recreations  were  innocent  compared  with  the  gross
sensualities  in  which  the  great  too  often  indulged,  with  the
words  of  Plato  and  Chrysippus  on  their  lips."  The  pleasures
of  the  bath  and  table  attained  a  solemn  recognition  from  the
men  of  letters  and  philosophy.  The  reviyed  attractions  of
the  camp  and  military  service  exercised  also  a  marked  effect
on  the  forms  of  society.  The  coarse  licence  of  the  tent  or
the  trenches  penetrated  into  the  halls  and  gardens  of  the
Italian  noble.  Beneath  the  loose  flowing  garb  of  the  forum
a  moral  restraint  had  been  concealed,  which  was  completely
thrown  off  under  the  pressure  of  the  cuirass,  and  to  which,
after  a  long  period  of  indulgence  abroad,  it  was  diflicult
again  to  submit  at  home.  The  literature  of  the  j^^,  x^^  <,f
times  suggests  to  us  pictures  of  the  rude  pre-  JSptoJ^Ui*
sumption  of  tribunes  and  centui-ions,  who  cor-  *<*^^^'y-
rupted  the  tone  of  polite  society  in  which  they  affected  to
mingle  on  equal  terms.  Trajan  himself,  who  had  passed
most  of  his  days  among  soldiers,  had  his  carouses  and  boon
companions,  and  the  fashion  set  by  princes  has  more  influence
on  the  mass  of  their  subjects  than  the  example  of  recluse
philosophers.  From  this  period  we  discover  a  marked  de-
cline in  the  intellectual  character  of  the  Roman  people.
Though  the  names  of  historians,  poets,  and  orators  continue
to  abound  in  our  records,  they  become  little  better  than
empty  sounds  ;  for  their  works  have  almost  wholly  perished,
and  we  can  only  account  for  this  general  disappearance  by
the  trifling  estimation  they  retained  after  the  lapse  of  a  single
generation.  But  the  Flavian  period  still  did  honour  to  the
ennobling  influence  of  letters. The  extent  to  which  many  of

'  Plin.  Fpist.  is.  23. Tacitus  attended  the  Circensian  games. I  hare  re-
ferred ia  chapter  xli.  to  the  unfavourable  opinions  of  Cicero  {Tutc.  Disp.  iL  11.)
and  Seneca  {De  brev.  vit.  13.).
*  Juvenal  ii.  4. :

"  Quamquam  plena  omnia  gjpso
Chrysippi  invenies."
Comp.  Martial,  i.  25.,  vii.  58. QuintiL  JusHt,  OraL  prooem.  L

262  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  noblest  citizens  were  influenced  by  a  genuine  taste  for
acquiring  knowledge  is  striking  and  affecting.  It  shows  how
Btrongly,  in  default  of  the  highest  objects  of  human  interest,
of  religious  aspirations  and  political  ambition,  all  the  powers
of  the  mind  may  be  engrossed  by  any  subject  which  deals
with  thoughts  and  feelings  common  to  our  nature.  Thus  it
was  also  that  composition,  still  confined  as  strictly  as  ever  to
the  highest  ranks,  became  among  them  the  employment  of
many.  Though  the  greater  number  of  these  lordly  scribblers
may  never  have  given  their  productions  to  the  public,  nor
even  recited  them  to  their  own  acquaintances,  the  habit  of
reading,  extracting,  and  annotating  seems  to  have  spread
widely,  and  to  have  formed  a  regular  part  of  existence
throughout  a  distinguished  circle.

The  manner  in  which  Vestricius  Spurinna,  an  active  pub-
lic oflScer  in  the  prime  of  life,  a  diligent  student  in  old  age.
Habits  of  thei  Spent  the  days  of  his  dignified  retirement,  may
Md^inteuf^ent  ^^  notcd  as  an  example  of  the  habits  of  his  class.
^*]ef/^Ex-  IJcnoio  not  that  I  ever  passed  apleasanter  time,
Veltrichfs  ^^y^  Pliny,  than  lately  with  Spurinna  /  there  is

Spurinna.  indeed  HO  man  I  should  so  much  wish  to  resemble

i/n  my  own  old  age,  if  I  am  permitted  to  grow  old.  Nothing
can  he  finer  than  such  a  mode  of  life,  For  my  part,  Hike  a
well-ordered  course  of  life,  particularly  in  old  men,  just  as  I
admire  the  regidar  order  of  the  stars.  Some  amount  of  ir-
regularity and  even  of  confusion  is  riot  unbecoming  in  youth  /
lut  everything  should  be  regular  and  methodical  with  old  men,
who  are  too  late  for  labour,  and  in  whom  ambition  would  be
indecent.  This  regularity  Spurinna  strictly  observes,  and  his
occupations,  trifling  as  they  are  {trifling,  that  is,  were  they
not  performed  day  by  day  continually),  he  repeats  as  it  were
in  a  circle.  At  dawn  he  keeps  his  bed/  at  seven  fie  calls  for
his  slippers;  he  then  walks  just  three  miles,  exercising  his
mind  at  the  same  time  with  his  limbs.  If  friends  are  by,  he
discourses  seriously  with  them;  if  not,  he  hears  a  book  read ;
and  so  he  does  sometimes  even  when  friends  are  present,  if
it  be  not  disagreeable  to  them. He  then  seats  himself,  and

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  9^

more  reading  follow s,  or  more  conversation^  which  he  likes
better.  By  and  by  he  mounts  his  carriage^  taking  leith  him
his  wife,  a  most  admirable  woman ^  or  some  friend*^  as  my-
«^(^»  f^^  instance,  the  other  day.  What  anobhf  what  a  eharm-
ing  ttte-a-tStel  how  much  talk  of  amcimt  things;  what
deeds,  what  men  you  hear  off  what  nobie  precepts  you  im-
bibe, though  indeed  he  refrains  from  aU  appearance  of  teach-
ing.  Returning  from  a  seven-mile  drive^  hewaOesagetin  one
mile  ;  then  sits  down  or  reclines  with  the  stylus  in  hie  hamd.
For  he  composes  lyrical  pieces  with  eleganee  both  in  Chrtek
and  Latin.  Very  soft,  sweet  and  merry  ih$y  are^  and  their
charm  is  enhanced  by  the  decorum  of  the  writer's  own  habits.
When  the  hour  of  the  bath  is  announeed^  that  is,  at  two  in
summer,  at  three  in  winter,  he  strips  and  takes  a  turn  in  the
sun,  if  there  is  no  wind.  Then  he  uses  Urong  exercise  for  a
considerable  space  at  tennis ;  for  this  is  the  discipline  with
which  he  struggles  against  old  age.  After  the  bath  he  take*
his  place  at  table,  but  puts  o;^  sating  for  a  Hme,  Kstening  in
the  meanwhile  to  a  little  light  and  pleaeant  reading.  All
this  time  his  friends  are  free  to  do  as  he  doe^^  or  anything
else  they  please.  Supper  is  then  eerved^  elegant  and  moderate^
on  plain  but  ancient  silver,  Ms  usee  Corinthian  bronae*  too^
and  admires  without  being  foolishly  addicted  to  them.  Play-
ers are  often  introduced  between  the  courses,  thai  thepleamres
of  the  mind  may  give  a  relish  to  those  of  the  ptdate.  He
trenches  a  little  on  the  night,  even  in  summer;  but  no  one
finds  the  time  long,  such  are  his  kindness  and  urbanity
throughout.  Hence  now,  at  the  age  of  siaety-eeven,  he  both
hears  and  sees  perfectly  ;  hence  his  frame  is  active  and  vigor-
ous ;  he  has  nothing  but  old  age  to  remind  him  to  take  eare
of  himself.  .  .  .  Sitch,  he  adds,  is  the  mode  of  life  to  which
I  look  forward  for  myself ,  and  on  which  I  will  enter  with
delight,  as  soon  as  advancing  years  allow  me  to  effect  a  re-
treat. Meanwhile  lam  harassed  by  a  thousand  troubles^  in
which  Spurin7ia  is  my  consolation,  as  he  has  ever  been  my
example. lor  he  too,  as  long  as  it  becatne  him,  discharged

264  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

duties,  bore  offices,  governed  provinces  /  and  great  was  the
labour  by  which  he  earned  his  relaxation.^

Such  a  mode  of  life  was  probably  not  uncommon,  and  im-
plied no  special  devotion  to  literary  occupation. Of  the  true
man  of  letters  we  have  an  eminent  and  conspicu-

The  true  man  , . ,  ,  ^ _.., .  - ,  \  ^^

of  letters.  ous  example  in  the  elder  Jrlmy  ;  tor  the  public

functions  this  prodigy  of  assiduous  industry  dis-
charged did  not  prevent  him  from  reading  and  writing  more
unremittingly  and  more  copiously  than  perhaps  any  of  his
contemporaries.  Jle  was  a  man,  says  his  nephew  emphati-
cally, of  quick  parts,  of  incredible  industry,  and  the  least  pos-
sible sleep.'*  From  the  twenty-third  of  August  he  began  to
study  at  midnight,  and  through  the  winter  he  continued  to
rise  at  one,  or  at  the  latest  at  two  in  the  morning,  often  at
twelve.'  Before  daybreak  he  used  to  go  to  the  emperor  ;  for
he  too  worked  at  night.  Thence  he  betook  himself  to  his  offi-
cial duties.  On  returning  home  he  again  gave  what  time
remained  to  his  studies.  After  taking  food,  which  in  the
morning  was  light  and  digestible,  as  in  the  olden  time,  he
would  often  in  summer  recline  in  the  sun,  if  he  had  leisure.
A  book  teas  tJien  read  to  him,  on  which  he  made  notes,  or  ex-
tracted from  it.  He  read  nothing  he  did  not  extract  from.
For  lie  would  say  there  was  no  book  so  bad  you  could  not  get
some  good  from  it.  After  his  sunning  he  generally  took  a
cold  bath  ;  then  a  slight  repast,  and  a  very  little  sleep.  Then^
as  if  beginning  a  new  day,  he  studied  till  supper  tirrie.
During  supper  a  book  was  read,  and  notes  made  on  it  as  it
went  on.  J  remember  one  of  his  friends  once  stopping  the
reader,  who  had  pronounced  a  word  HI,  and  making  him  re-

'  Plin.  Ep.  iii.  1.

•  Comp.  the  elder  Pliny'a  account  of  himself,  Hiit.  Not.  prsof. :  "occupati
Bumufl  ofliciis,  subccHivisque  teinporibus  ista  curamus,  id  est  noctumis."  Sleep
lie  counted  among  the  infirmities  of  nature  :  "  profecto  enim  vita  vigilia  est."

•  Plin.  Epltt.  iii.  6. :  lucubrarc  Vulcanalibus  (x.  Kal.  Sept.  i.  e.  Aug.  23.)
inciplcbat,  non  auHpicandi  causa,  sod  Btudenti,  statim  a  noctc  raulta."  "  Lucu-
brarc "  is  to  study  by  torcli-liglit.  This  was  done  once  on  the  morning  of  the
Vulcanalia  "  auspicandi,  i.  c.  boni  ominis  causa,"  but  the  practice  not  usually
continued. Pliny  persevered.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  265

peat  it.  Did  you  not  understand  him?  said  my  uncle.  He
admitted  that  he  had.  Why  then  did  you  stop  him  ?  We
have  lost  ten  more  lines  by  this  interruption.  Such  a  mutt
was  he  of  Ilia  time.  Me  rose  from  mpper  in  nimmer  time  by
daylight  y  in  winter  before  seven  in  the  eveningy  as  regularly
as  if  constrained  by  law.  This  was  his  mode  of  life  in  the
midst  of  his  official  labours,  and  in  the  turmoil  of  the  city.
In  the  country  he  exempted  oidyhis  bathing  timsfirom  study.
I  mean  the  actual  use  of  the  bath  itself  for  while  he  was
being  rubbed  and  dried  fie  wotdd  listen  to  reading  or  himself
dictate.  In  travelling  he  considered  himself  free  from  every
other  care,  and  gave  himself  entirely  to  study.  He  kept  a
scribe  at  his  side  with  a  book  and  tablets,  whose  hands  in
winter  were  armed  with  gloves,  that  even  the  cold  weather
might  not  rob  him  of  a  moment ;  and  with  this  view  he  used
even  at  Home  to  be  carried  in  a  litter.  I  remember  his  re-
buking me  for  taking  a  walk.  You  might  have  managed,  he
said,  not  to  lose  those  hours.  Ihr  he  considered  all  time  last
which  was  not  given  to  study.  It  was  by  this  intense  appli'
cation  that  he  completed  so  great  a  number  of  books^  and  left
me  besides  a  hundred  and  sixty  volumes  of  lurtrdcts,  written
on  both  sides  of  the  leaf,  and  in  the  minutest  hand,  so  as  to
double  the  amount  .  .  .  Would  you  not  think,  on  remember-
ing how  much  he  read  and  wrote,  that  he  had  had  no  part  in
ajfairs,  nor  enjoyed  the  friendship  of  a  prince  f  And  again^
when  you  hear  how  much  time  he  devoted  to  business,  would
you  not  suppose  that  he  neither  read  nor  wrote  at  all?  .  .  It
makes  me  smile  when  people  call  me  studious,  for  idle  indeed
am  I  compared  with  him.

The  habits  indeed  of  the  younger  Pliny  admitted  of  a
greater  variety  of  interests,  and  the  practice  of  forensic  speak-
ing required  him  to  mix  more  freely*iu  society,
and  to  take  a  larger  share  in  the  ordinary  trans- Piiny  the  *
actions  of  life. During  part  of  the  year  he  re- ^**'"**'-
sided  at  Rome ;  for  some  months  annually  he  enjoyed  the
combination  of  town  and  country  in  his  suburban  villa  at
Laurentum,  whence  he  could  come  to  the  city  as  often  as

266  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS

business  required.  But  he  sometimes  indulged  himself  with
a  more  complete  change  of  scene  among  the  hills  of  Etruria,
or  on  the  banks  of  the  Larius,  in  his  own  native  region.*  In
the  country  he  led,  according  to  his  own  account,  rather
an  idle  life,  amusing  himself  Avith  field  sports ;  but  there  is
something  still  more  pleasing  in  the  kindly  feeling  with
which  he  interests  himself  in  the  concerns  of  his  neighbours
and  fellow-townsmen,  providing  for  the  maintenance  of  their
orphan  children,  erecting  a  temple  at  his  own  expense  in  a
country  village,  and  placing  in  the  sanctuary  of  his  own  na-
tive town  a  Corinthian  bronze,  too  choice  in  material  and
workmanship  for  his  own  modest  altar."  As  a  man  high  in
office,  and  a  popular  advocate,  he  had  acquired  large  means,
and  his  villas,  notwithstanding  the  professed  moderation  of
his  tastes  and  expenses,  were  on  a  scale  inferior  perhaps  to
few.  The  minute  descriptions  he  has  left  of  them  are  among
our  most  precious  documents ;  and  may  aid  in  completing
our  conceptions  of  Koman  domestic  life.

Magnificence  in  the  exterior  of  private  dwellings  is  gener-
ally a  late  product  of  civilization,  and  the  Greeks  and  Ro-
„ ,„  mans,  who  long  disregarded  it  entirely,  attached

Ma(?nlficence  , , ,  ,  .  .  r,^ ,

of  the  dwellings  to  the  last  but  a  secondary  mterest  to  it. To  the

of  the  nobility. „ ,

fa9ades  of  their  temples  they  gave  all  the  splen-
dour and  elegance  they  could  command,  for  the  temple  was  the
visible  token  of  the  deity,  and  the  homage  paid  him  by  his
worshippers  was  conducted  in  front  of  his  sanctuary,  while
the  interior  cell  in  which  his  image  was  shrouded  was  for
the  most  part  low,  dark,  and  narrow.  ]3ut  in  their  private
The  Roman  rosidcnccs  this  usagc  was  originally  I'eversed.
adwD^ff  the  -At  home  they  displayed  their  taste  and  luxury  in
thefr  tomplo^  ^'^^  dccorations  of  their  interiors,  while  in  their
of  thMr '"'*'^'*"^  exterior  character  they  regarded  convenience
dwellings. only. The  portico  was  indeed  a  necessary  ad-

'  Bcnidcs  hU  liourcntinum  and  TuBcum  and  at  least  two  scate  on  tho  lake
of  Como,  Pliny  poascsHcd  country  houses  at  Tusculum,  Prroneste  and  Tibur.
Kjmt.  V.  0.  48.

•  Plln.  Kpia.  Hi.  4.  6. ;  Iv.  1. ;  vii.  18. ;  x.  12. Oomp.  ix.  89.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  MT

junct  to  the  temple ;  its  noble  span  was  first  invented  for  use
rather  than  for  ornament,  to  shelter  the  worshippers  who
could  not  be  admitted  within  the  sanctuary,  and  this  neoee-
sity  produced  in  the  progress  of  the  art  the  most  striking  and
sumptuous  features  of  ancient  architecture.  But  the  grand
columnar  vestibule  was  not  required  for  the  dwelling-house,
and  accordingly  formed  no  part  in  the  ordinary  elevation
of  a  Roman  villa.  While,  on  the  other  hand,  the  temple  was
a  simple  edifice  of  limited  dimensions,  however  handsome  in
its  proportions,  the  patrician  palace  extended  over  an  indefi-
nite area,  and  comprized  an  endless  variety  of  parts,  which  it
would  have  taxed  the  genius  of  the  greatest  architects  to
combine  in  one  harmonious  design.  It  does  not  appear  in-
deed that  any  such  attempt  was  made.  The  „
palace  or  the  Caesars  was  the  creation  of  a  succes-  th«  iumom
sion  of  ambitious  builders,  who  threw  out  long
colonnades  in  various  directions,  connecting  hall  with  hall,
and  tower  with  tower,  without  plan  or  symmetry,  with  no
view  to  unity  of  appearance  or  architectural  proportion.
Such  was  the  Grolden  House  of  Nero ;  and  hence  the  fitness
of  the  common  comparison  of  a  palace  to  a  city,  a  comparison
sufficiently  just  among  the  Romans,  but  which  would  hardly
occur  under  our  modem  habits.  The  emperor  alone  could
command  so  vast  a  space  within  the  walls  of  the  capital ;
but  in  the  country  many  a  wealthy  citizen  indulged  his  ideas
of  comfort  and  magnificence  on  a  scale  perhaps  not  less  ex-
travagant, covering  broad  tracts  of  land  with  apartments  for
every  purpose  of  life,  connected  with  porticos  and  open  clois-
ters, and  enclosing  plots  of  garden  ground,  or  planted  at  the
end  of  marble  terraces  or  alleys  of  box  and  planes,  wherever
a  favourite  view  could  be  commanded,  whether  near  or  dis-
tant. The  Roman  villa,  in  the  later  acceptation  of  the  term,
the  luxurious  summer  retreat  rather  than  the  residence  on
the  farm  which  it  originally  signified,  was  placed  either  on
the  sea-shore  or  among  the  hills,  for  the  sake  of  coolness ;
and  its  arrangements  were  chiefly  devised  with  a  view  to

268  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Piiny'8  Lauren-  pcrsonal  comfort.  The  Laurentine  of  Pliny
tine  villa.  faced  the  Tyrrhene  sea,  and  extended  in  one

direction  only,  parallel  to  the  coast.  It  consisted  of  numer-
ous rooms,  of  various  forms  and  dimensions,  and  designed
for  various  uses,  united  by  open  galleries.  Most  of  these
chambers  commanded,  as'  may  be  supposed,  a  sea  view,  and
enjoyed  nearly  a  southern  aspect.  Some  were  circular,  and
looked  forth  in  all  directions ;  others  semi-circular,  and
screened  only  from  the  north;  others  again  excluded  the
prospect  of  the  water,  and  almost  its  noises ;  some  faced
west,  some  east,  to  be  used  at  different  seasons,  or  even
different  times  of  the  day.'  Behind  this  long  line  of
buildings,  the  outward  appearance  of  which  is  nowhere  indi-
cated, but  which  seems  in  no  part  to  have  risen  above  the
ground-floor,  lay  gardens,  terraces,  and  covered  ways  for
walking  and  riding ;  and  among  these  were  placed  also  some
detached  apartments,  such  as  we  might  call  summer-houses ;
while  still  further  in  the  rear  rose  the  primeval  pine-woods  of
the  Latian  coast,  which  supplied  the  baths  with  fuel,  and
formed  a  chief  recommendation  of  the  locality.  The  Tuscan
villa  of  the  same  proprietor  seems  to  have  been  more  ex-
pnny'8  Tuscan  tensivc,  and  even  more  elaborately  constructed.
villa.  Pliny's  description  of  it  is  remarkable  for  the

sense  it  shows  of  the  picturesque,  and  the  intimation  it  affords,
that  not  himself  only,  but  others  of  his  class,  partook  in  no
slight  degree  of  that  enjoyment  of  natural  scenery  which  is
the  special  boast  of  our  own  age  and  country.  Pliny  takes
great  pains  to  impress  on  his  correspondent  the  sylvan  beau-
ties of  the  spot,  the  wide  range  of  plain  and  meadow  stretch-
ing before  it  to  the  Tiber,  the  slope  of  leafy  hills  on  the
skirt  of  which  it  lay,  the  massy  amphitheatre  of  the  Apen-
nines behind  it ;  and  it  is  not  till  he  has  expatiated  with

'  ITume,  In  his  JUsaay  on  ilie  Populousncss  of  Ancient  JV^cUions,  remarked
that,  "  The  buildings  of  the  Romans  were  very  like  the  Chinese  houses  at  this
day,  where  each  apartment  is  separated  from  the  rest,  and  rises  no  higher  than
a  singlo  story ; "  a  description  which  has  been  amply  confirmed  by  tho  accounts
of  tho  imperial  summer  palace  beyond  tho  walls  of  Tckin.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  399

warmth  on  these  sentimental  attractions  that  he  refers  to  the
eligibility  of  the  site  for  its  material  conveniences,  the  abun-
dance of  wood,  the  fertility  of  the  soil,  the  seryiceablenees  of
the  river,  navigable  in  winter  and  spring  for  barges,  to  con-
vey its  produce  to  the  Roman  market.  The  account  of  the
edifice  itself  is  similar  to  that  of  the  Laurentinum,  though  even
more  complicated  in  its  details.  It  is  approached  by  a  long
portico,  leading  to  an  Atrium  or  central  hall,  such  as  form-
ed the  nucleus  of  the  town-residence ;  but  there  the  likeness
ends,  for  whereas  in  the  house  at  Rome  all  the  living-rooms
open  upon  the  atrium,  and  lie  compactly  arranged  within  the
four  outer  walls,  in  the  villa  almost  every  apartment  is  sub-
stantially independent  of  the  rest  and  only  slightly  connected
with  them  by  suites  of  open  galleries,  The  Tuscura  seems  to
have  abounded  also  in  gardens  and  plantations,  its  situation
being  better  adapted  for  such  luxuries  than  the  sea-shore.
But  neither  in  this  case  is  there  any  mention  of  the  exterior
appearance,  nor  any  hint  that  the  reader  might  be  expected
to  derive  pleasure  from  the  description  of  it.  It  is  evident
that  an  architectural  design  did  not  enter  into  the  ideas
either  of  Nero,  when  he  flaunted  over  Rome  with  his  palace
of  palaces,  or  of  the  elegant  master  of  the  patrician  villa  by
the  sea  or  on  the  hill-side.'

We  possess  another  description  of  a  villa,  less  particular
indeed,  but  hardly  less  vivid,  in  a  very  animated  poem  of
Statins.  The  pleasure-house  of  the  noble  Pollius  j^^  surrentine
occupied  the  finest  spot  for  such  a  luxury  that  ▼*"*  of  i^>uiu^
all  the  Roman  dominions  could  offer.'  It  stood  on  the  sum-
mit of  a  low  promontory,  immediately  west  of  the  little  town
of  Surrentum,  and  looked  in  a  northerly  direction  across  the
Campanian  Crater  to  Neapolis.  On  the  right  and  left  the
shore  was  indented  by  two  small  bays,  in  one  of  which  the

»  Plin.  Epist.  ii.  17.,  v.  6.

*  Statius,  Sylv.  ii.  2.  The  "  villa  Surrentina  of  Polliofl  "  may  be  compared
throughout  with  iii.  1.,  the  "  Hercules  Surrentinus,"  and  L  8.,  the  "  villa  Tibur-
tina  of  Yopiscus."  Comp.  also,  on  a  smaller  scale,  the  villa  on  the  Janiculum,
Martial,  iv.  64.,  and  ag^  x.  30.

270  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS

Stranger  who  came  by  sea  from  Naples, — such  is  the  poet's
description  of  his  own  arrival, — ran  his  hark  upon  the  beach.
On  the  margin  of  the  water  he  encountered  a  bath-house,
furnished  with  double  chambers  for  the  salt  element  and  the
fresh ;  for  at  this  point  a  stream,  descending  from  the  hills,
made  its  way  into  the  sea.'  A  little  fane  with  a  statue  of  Nep-
tune, fronted  and  defied  the  billows,  while  another  of  Hercu-
les faced  the  land,  and  seemed  to  guard  the  tranquil  retreat.*
Statins  climbed  the  hill,  under  the  shelter  of  a  colonnade,
which  led  direct  to  the  villa,  and  reminded  him  of  the  ancient
glories  of  the  covered  way  which  still  scaled  the  ascent  from
Lechseum  to  Corinth.  The  villa  itself  occupied  a  platform,
and  was  divided,  like  those  before  described,  into  a  long
series  of  chambers,  facing  the  bay  of  Naples,  and  command-
ing the  varied  line  of  coast  from  Stabise  to  Misenum,  with
the  island  clifis  of  Inarime  and  Prochyta.  Of  these  cham-
bers some  opened  to  the  south,  and  looked  landwards,  and
in  these  the  resonance  of  the  surges  was  never  heard.*  These
apartments,  and  the  terraces,  open  or  covered,  which  con-
nected them,  were  adorned  with  painting  and  sculpture  in
marble,  and  in  bronze  more  precious  than  gold,  the  eflSgies
of  warriors,  poets  and  philosophers. They  were  decorated,

*  Stat  Sj/lv.  iL  2. :

"  Gratia  prima  loci  gemina  testudine  fuoiant
Balnea,  et  e  terris  occurrit  dulcis  amaro
Nympha  mari."

*  Stat.  L  c. :  "  gaudet  gemino  sub  numine  portus.  Hie  scrvat  terras,  hio
BaeriB  flnctibns  obstat."  The  Greeks,  and  their  imitators  the  Romans,  studied
appropriateness  in  the  choice  of  statues  for  particular  localities.  Thus  Neptune
was  sailed  to  a  temple  or  grotto  on  the  sea-shore ;  Narcissus  to  a  fountain,  &c.
Paoaan,  il.  26.  4. ;  CalUstratus,  6.  The  people  of  Alabanda  committed  a  solo*
cism  in  tanto  when  they  placed  statues  of  advocates  in  their  gymnasium,  and
of  #re8tlcr«,  &c.,  in  their  forum.  Vitruv.  iii.  6. ;  see  I'euerbach,  Der  Vatican.
ApoUo,  p.  179.

*  Sue  L  c. :

"  HsBc  videt  Inarimen,  illi  Prochyta  aapera  parct  .  .  .
Hcc  polag!  clamore  fremunt,  h»c  tecta  sonoros
Ignorant  fluctus,  tcrr(C(iuo  silentia  maluut."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  271

moreover,  with  variegated  slabs,  much  loved  by  the  opulent
and  magnificent,  from  the  quarries  of  Egypt,  Libya  and
Phrygia.'  The  platform  occupied  by  the  house  and  its  pre-
cincts was  artificially  prepared  for  them  by  scarping  the
cliffs  and  levelling  the  inequalities  of  the  ground,  by  clearing
woods  in  one  place,  by  planting  groves  in  another,  till  the
whole  might  be  compared  to  the  creation  of  an  Amphion  or
an  Orpheus.*  This  much- laboured  site  was  sheltered  from
the  winds  which  eddied  from  the  land  by  the  mountain
range  here  projecting  from  the  Campanian  Apennines,  and
gradually  descending  to  the  promontory  of  Minerva.  The
slopes  were  planted  with  vines,  celebrated  for  their  strong
and  generous  produce,  and  were  lost  at  last  in  level  corn-
fields, which  extended  to  the  very  edge  of  the  waters,  and
glistened  in  the  sun  with  the  spray  of  the  billows.*

But  with  whatever  rapture  the  poet  expatiates  on  the
prospect  from  these  terraces  and  windows,  he  has  no  word  for
the  view  of  the  villa  itself  from  the  bay  or  land-  ooMide»mti«M
ing-place,  the  view  on  which  his  own  eye  would  SS«*K««!iita
naturally  rest  as  he  crossed  the  water  from  t>uu<iin«.  *«.
Neapolis.  In  a  modem  description  of  such  a  lordly  dwell-
ing, the  elevation  of  the  horjse  would  be  the  first  object  of
interest  to  the  spectator,  and  its  praise  the  most  acceptable
compliment  to  its  owner.  Such  is  the  antagonism  between
ancient  and  modern  feeling  on  these  subjects.  Our  noblest
palaces  are  often  purposely  placed  where  the  prospect  is
confined  to  the  depths  of  the  woods  attached  to  them.  We
complain  that  the  ancients  betray  little  sense  of  the  pictur-
esque in  landscape ;  but  with  us  too  it  is  but  a  recent
practice  to  give  our  houses  the  conunand  of  an  extensive

»  Stat  1.  c. :

"  Hie  Graiis  penitus  desecta  metallis.Saxa."

«  Stat  L  c.
•  Stat  L  c. ;

"  Et  tu  saxa  moves,  et  te  nemora  alta  sequmitur."

"  Quid  nunc  runs  opes,  pontoque  noTalia  dicam
Injecta,  et  madidaa  Baccheo  nectare  rapes."

272  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

survey  ;  our  fathers  rather  chose  secure  and  sheltered  spots
for  building,  and  delighted  more  in  the  palatial  front,  and
towering  elevation,  as  beheld  from  "without,  than  in  the
varied  scenes  of  nature  which  opened  on  the  spectator  from
within.  For  this  discrepancy  motives  might  readily  be  dis-
covered in  differences  of  climate  and  even  of  national  dispo-
sition. The  Romans  retained  to  the  last  a  certain  simplicity
of  taste  in  limiting  their  views  to  their  own  domestic  com-
fort and  enjoyment,  rather  than  soliciting  admiration  from
strangers.  In  their  dress  as  well  as  in  their  buildings,  in
the  general  tenor  of  their  social  habits,  they  attach  more  im-
portance to  personal  convenience  than  to  the  judgment  of
their  neighbours.  Fleeing  from  the  painful  glare  of  the
Italian  sun,  they  buried  themselves  in  vaults  beneath  the
ground,  where  no  other  eyes  could  witness  their  indulgences.
Such  are  the  chambers  still  remaining  beneath  the  surface  of
the  Palatine,  which  belonged,  as  is  thought,  to  the  imperial
residence ;  such  were  the  apartments,  deeply  sunk  in  the
basement  of  the  Baths  of  Titus,  whence  the  masterpieces  of
ancient  art  were  drawn  forth,  never  before  revealed  to  the
view  of  the  multitude.  The  Nymphsea,  or  bath-houses  of
the  emperors  and  nobles  on  the  margin  of  the  Alban  Lake,
were  sheltered  from  every  gaze,  though  doubtless  they  were
decorated  internally  with  splendour  and  voluptuousness.  In
quest  of  coolness  and  the  grateful  breeze,  the  patrician  thrust
his  villa  upon  the  bosom  of  the  lake  or  ocean,  and  remains
„ .  have  been  detected,  at  the  bottom  of  the  lucent

on  the  lako  of JN  cmi,  of  a  wooden  ship  or  raft  of  vast  dimen-
sions, whereon  Trajan,  or  possibly  Tiberius,  con-
structed a  retreat,  furnished  with  every  luxury,  and  supplied
by  pipes  with  the  living  waters  of  the  mountains.*

'  Miirclii  (Delia  Architectnra  MilHarf,  1690)  relates  how  ho  examined  with
the  diving  boU  tho  sunken  pulaco,  n.s  ho  calls  it,  in  the  lako  of  Ncmi.  Some
fragment*  have  boen  ralBed,  and  aro  now  preserved  in  tho  museuras  at  Rome.
There  it  no  apptrent  ground,  however,  for  his  conjecture  that  this  ptructure
wai  the  work  of  Triton.  The  oidy  traces  of  inscri|)tion  about  it  record  tho
name  of  Tiberion.  See  BroUor's  Notes  on  his  Supplemmt  to  Tadtm ;  and
Oell'f  Topography  of  RonUy  &o.,  IL  118.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  273

The  view  of  society  presented  to  us  in  the  pages  of  Pliny,
of  Statins,  and  even  of  Quintilian,  is  impressed  with  a  char-
acter of  feeble  elegance,  such  aB  we  commonly
connect  with  the  decline  of  a  refined  civilization, ctfr.nddi*-
The  voluptuous  indolence  in  which  generation Mileotfa^wM
after  generation  has  been  steeped,  Beems  at  last  •man*  the  eo-

to  enervate  the  fibre  of  the  nation ;  the  virtues
and  the  vices  of  a  decaying  society  betray  equally  the  de-
parture of  the  energy  and  elasticity  which  marked  its  lusty
maturity. The  age  produces  no  more  great  deeds,  nor  great
thoughts ;  its  very  crimes  are  stunted. The  men  must  be
measured  by  a  lower  standard,  yet  fewer  than  of  old  will  bo
found  to  rise  above  it. That  such  was  the  tendency  of  the
times  cannot  be  denied :  the  growth  of  human  nature  must
ever  be  dwarfed  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  sun  of  liberty.
The  tyranny  of  custom  and  fashion  was  more  eflfective,  per^
haps,  in  reducing  men  to  a  vulgar  equality  in  tastes,  habits,
and  opinions,  than  even  the  tyranny  of  a  despotic  adminis-
tration. The  progress  of  such  a  decline  ha<l  been  inevitable,
at  least  from  the  age  of  the  Scipios. But  the  movement  had
been  hitherto  slow,  and  we  must  not  be  led  by  fallacious
appearances  to  exaggerate  it. If  we  remark  the  absence  of
great  events  and  prominent  personages  from  the  epoch  before
us,  the  defect  may  partly  be  ascribed  to  the  meagreness  of
its  historical  remains. In  Trajan  himself,  in  Agricola,  in
Thrasea  and  Virginius,  we catch glimpses at
least  01  men,  who,  it  pamted  at  full  length  m  maniineM(rf
their  genuine  colours,  might  be  found  no  less eoi»,^<ioth-
interesting  specimens  of  human  nature  than  any *^
of  the  heroes  of  the  republic. What  is  lacking  however  in
history,  may  be  supplied  in  part  from  the  writings  of  two  at
least  among  the  most  conspicuous  of  our  public  teachers.
Tacitus  and  Juvenal  are  both  of  them  thoroughly
manly ;  they  are  hearty  in  their  loves  and  hates, TadtuTand
clear  in  their  perceptions,  vigorous  in  their  Ian- ^'"-^'
guage,  consistent  in  their  estimates  of  good  and evil,  as
men  might  be  who  lived  in  the  healthiest  and  most  bracing

VOL.  VII. — 18

274  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS

of  social  atmospheres.  The  strength  and  independence  of
their  minds  might  befit  the  early  manhood  of  a  people  des-
tined to  effect  great  moral  conquests.  The  errors,  even  of
Tacitus  and  Juvenal,  were  the  most  remote  from  those  of
social  decrepitude,  which  is  generally  marked  by  laxity  of
moral  judgment,  indifference  to  national  honour,  and  sickly
sentiment.  Of  the  estimation  in  which  the  historian  was
held  we  have  some  account  in  the  letters  of  Pliny ;  and
though  we  have  no  token  of  Juvenal's  reception  among  his
contemporaries,  we  know  that  even  within  the  classical
period  his  satires  became  the  theme  of  annotators  and  exposi-
tors. We  may  conclude  that  the  age  which  could  appreciate
writers  so  true  in  moral  feeling,  and  so  bold  in  expressing  it,
was  not  destitute  of  other  men  of  the  same  stamp,  men  both
of  energy  and  sensibility.  The  picture  of  society  they  drew
is  indeed  sufficiently  frightful ;  nor  can  we  question  its
general  fidelity.  But  the  criminals  they  lash  were  at  least
no  milksops  in  crime,  no  fribbles  in  vice.  Their  tyrants  and
hypocrites,  their  sensualists  and  parasites,  are  all  cast  in  the
strong  mould  of  the  Roman  free-state.  They  are  genuine
countiymen  of  Catilina  and  his  desperadoes,  of  Piso  and
Verres,  of  Fulvia  and  Sempronia.

Tacitus  and  Juvenal  may  bo  appropriately  compared  for
the  shrewdness  with  which  they  analyse  motives,  and  the
Comparinon  ficrccness  of  their  indignation,  though  the  one  is
tui  and^Juve-  compact,  Concentrated,  and  even  reserved  in  the
•"'•  expression  of  his  passion,  the  other  vehement,

copious  and  declamatory.  Both  have  the  same  definite  point
of  view,  as  Roman  moralists  and  patriots.  But,  of  the  two,
Tacitus  is  what  has  been  called  the  best  hater ;  he  is  the
blinder  in  his  prejudices,  the  least  various  in  his  synii)atlucs
with  human  nature.  Tacitus  is  an  instance  of  what  we  regret
sometimes  to  meet  with  among  men  of  ability  and  experience,
the  increase  with  advancing  years  of  bitterness,  narrowness.
The  bittcrncM  and  intQlcrancc.  Like  our  own  political  ])liihiso-
ereaMSMbo  plier  JJurkc,  lacitus  grows  more  aerul,  more
yoan,  niorbid  in  temper,  even  to  the  last. Little  as  we

UNDER  THE  EMPIBE.  275

know  of  his  life,  we  may  trace  the  deepening  shade
in  his  works,  though  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  he  had
not  even  the  excuse  of  personal  or  political  disappointment.
In  the  Dialogue  on  Oratory,  las  earliest  utterance,  he  dis-
plays a  just  sense  of  the  evil  tendencies  of  his  day ;  but  hia
rebuke  to  the  spirit  of  the  age  is  tempered  with  gentleness
and  reserve,  and  shows  at  least  a  disposition  to  appreciate
every  element  of  good.  But  these  sympathies  speedily
evaporate.  The  Agricola,  while  professedly  a  panegyric,  is
in  fact  a  scarcely  disguised  satire.  The  praises  of  the  hero
are  two-edged,  and  every  stroke  dealt  in  his  honour  recoils
Avith  a  back-handed  blow  on  the  necks  of  his  contemporaries.
The  Histories  abound  in  keen  discrimination  of  crimes  and
vices,  and  in  burning  sarcasms  on  wickedness  in  high  places ;
yet  even  in  the  Histories,  the  dark  picture  of  sin  and  suffer-
ing is  relieved  by  some  broader  views  of  incidents  and
manners ;  the  moralist  remembers  sometimes  that  he  is  a
historian,  and  seeks  to  delineate  in  its  salient  features  the
general  character  of  the  times.  But  the  Annals,  the  latest
of  the  author's  works,  the  most  mature  and  finished  of  his
productions,  is  almost  wholly  satire.  Tacitus  rarely  averts  his
eyes  from  the  centi'al  figure  of  monstrous  depravity,  around
which,  in  his  view,  all  society  is  grouped.  He  paints  the
age  all  Tiberius,  or  all  Nero.  Like  the  Roman  soldier
chained  to  his  own  prisoner,  he  finds  no  escape  from  the
horrors  he  has  undertaken  to  delineate.  He  enjoys  no  relief
liimself,  and  he  allows  none  to  the  reader.  His  hatred  of  sin
is  concentrated  in  hatred  of  the  sinner,  and  the  exasperation
into  which  he  has  worked  himself  against  the  tyrant  over-
flows at  last  in  bitterness  towards  the  age  with  which  he  has
identified  him.  Of  such  a  satire  no  good  can  come.  I  can-
not imagine  that  any  reader  of  the  Annals  was  ever  morally
the  better  for  the  perusal.  Many,  perhaps  have  been  made
worse,  confirmed,  it  may  be,  in  a  cynical  contempt  for  man-
kind, or  in  a  gloomy  despair  of  virtue.

Of  the  life  of  Juvenal,  on  the  other  hand,  we  know  per-
haps even  less  than  of  that  of  Tacitus. The  traditions  or

276  mSTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

That  of  Juve-  fancies  of  the  scholiasts  and  anonymous  Ijiogra-
nai  diminishes,  pjiers  Seem  to  be  wholly  untrustworthy/  But
if  we  may  take  the  order  in  which  the  Satires  are  delivered
to  us  as  the  actual  order  of  their  composition,  we  may  derive
from  them  a  pleasing  insight  into  the  author's  character.
We  may  trace  in  him,  with  the  advance  of  years,  a  fitting
progress  in  gentleness  and  humanity.  By  comparing  a  fcAV
passages  in  his  works,  we  may  fix  his  birth  in  the  year  69 ;
the  composition  of  his  first  Satire  must  have  been  after  100,
but  probably  not  long  after,  that  of  his  fifteenth  but  little
later  than  119.  Accordingly,  Juvenal  wrote  from  about  his
fortieth  to  his  sixtieth  year ;  and  if  we  compare  the  earlier
with  the  later  Satires,  we  find  a  change  of  style  and  senti-
ment aptly  corresponding  with  this  advance  in  age  and  ex-
perience. Thus  we  notice  the  fierceness  and  truculence  more
especially  of  the  first,  the  second,  the  fifth  and  sixth,  which
are  all  aggressive  onslaughts  on  the  worst  forms  of  Roman
wickedness.  The  third,  and  still  more  the  seventh,  betray  a
tone  of  querulous  disappointment,  as  of  a  man  who  had  failed
of  the  aim  of  his  life,  and  finds  himself,  when  past  the  middle
age,  outstripped  by  unworthy  competitors,  and  neglected  by
the  patrons  on  whom  he  had  just  or  imagined  claims.  But
in  the  eighth,  the  tenth,  and  the  thirteenth,  the  nobility  of
his  nature  reasserts  itself  He  is  no  longer  the  mere  assailant
of  vice,  still  less  is  he  a  murmurer  against  fortune :  he  seeks
to  exalt  virtue,  to  expound  the  true  dignity  of  human  nature,
to  shoAv  to  man  the  proper  objects  of  ambition,  to  vindicate

'  Tlie  statements  respecting  Juvenal's  life  and  fortunes  in  the  pretended
memoir  of  Suetonius,  the  notes  of  the  ancient  scholiast,  and  the  brief  refer-
ence of  Sidoniim  Ai»ollinaris,  seem  to  be  mere  fancies.  The  cardinal  date  is
that  in  ii<il.  xiii.  17.,  which  professes  to  have  been  written  sixty  years  after  the
ConsulHhip  of  l-'onteius,  the  poet's  birth  year.  Of  three  Fonteli  consuls  in  the
first  century,  I  cannot  doubt  that  C.  Capito  of  the  year  {59  is  here  intended.  I
presume  that  the  fln^t  nn<l  fourth  Satires  were  written  early  in  the  reign  of
Trajan;  the  thirteenth  in  119,  at  its  close;  nor  docs  there  seem  any  reason
why  the  Intervening  pieces  may  not  stand  in  the  order  of  their  composition.
The  fifteenth  was  also  written  tmder  Hadrian,  that  is  to  say  soon  aflor  the  con-
sulship of  Junius,  A.  I).  119. See  xv.  27.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  277

the  goodness  and  justice  of  a  divine  Providence.  The
eleventh,  twelfth,  and  fourteenth  advance  yet  a  step  further
in  the  course  of  a  good  man's  life.  They  paint  the  charms
of  simplicity  and  virtue ;  they  glorify  contentment  of  mind
and  friendship ;  they  set  hefore  us,  with  all  an  old  man's
gentleness,  the  reverence  due  to  infancy  and  innocence.  The
subject  of  the  fifteenth  is  a  special  one,  and  there  is  some
poverty  in  the  conception,  some  feebleness  in  the  execution
of  it ;  nevertheless,  it  breathes  the  true  spirit  of  humanity,
and  if  we  regard  it  as  the  last  of  the  author's  genuine  com-
positions, it  makes  a  worthy  completion  to  a  patriarch's  mis-
sion. The  satirist,  whose  aim  is  merely  negative  and  destruc-
tive, who  only  pulls  down  the  generous  ideas  of  virtue  with
which  youth  embarks  on  its  career,  is  simply  an  instrument
of  evil ;  and  if  his  pictures  of  vice  are  too  glowing,  too  true,
the  evil  is  so  much  the  greater;  but  if  he  pauses  in  his  course
to  reconstruct,  to  raise  again  our  hopes  of  virtue,  and  point
our  steps  towards  the  goal  of  religion  and  morality,  he  may
redeem  the  evil  tenfold.  The  later  satires  of  J«venal  more
n  than  compensate  for  the  earlier.  The  reader  who  studies
liim  with  this  clue  to  the  service  he  has  done  mankind,  will
^^haro,  I  doubt  not,  the  reverential  gratitude  with  which  I  am
wont  to  regard  him.

Tacitus  and  Juvenal  join  in  the  same  vigorous  protest
against  the  vices  of  their  age,  but  their  united  protest  against
the encroachment of  foreign  ideas  and  senti-  T»eitiw«nd
ments,  if  less  loudly  and  plainly  expressed,  is  in nent*^*o^the
lact  not  less  vigorous. With  these  illustrious '^i^^o^f
B|, names  closes  the  series  of  genuine  Roman  lit- »««»»» We^
HLerature; of that spontaneous  reflex of a nation's  mind
^Hpwhich  represents  its  principles and  traditions. The later
^Bwritcrs  in  the  Roman  tongue,  few,  and  for  the  most  part
^■trivial,  as  they  are,  must  be  regarded  as  imitators  of  a
^Hpast  from  which  they  have  become  really  dissevered,  if
they  are  anything  more  than  mere  compilers  and  antiqua-
rians. But  no  Roman writers are  more  thoroughly  con-
servative than  these  last  of  the  Romans. In  them  we  see

278  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  culmination  of  the  Flavian  reaction  against  the  threat-
ened disintegration  of  society  which,  checked  more  than  once
by  Sulla  and  Augustus,  had  still  advanced  stealthily  through
three  centuries.  Tacitus  and  Juvenal  are  more  wholly  Ro-
man than  even  Cicero  or  Virgil.  They  maintain  the  laws,
the  manners,  the  religion  of  their  fathers  with  more  decision
than  ever,  as  they  feel  more  than  ever  how  much  protection
is  required  for  them.  But  if  the  old  national  ideas  are  thus
held  by  some  champions  more  strictly  than  ever,  the  sphere
of  their  influence  has  no  doubt  become  even  narrower  than
of  yore.  Rome  has  dwindled,  in  this  respect,  into  a  provin-
cial town  in  the  centre  of  her  own  empire.  The  ideas  of
Athens  and  Alexandna,  of  Palestine  and  Asia  Minor,  exert
their  sway  all  around  her,  and  are  gaining  ground  within  her
Avails.  The  emperor  and  his  senators,  the  remnant  of  the
historic  families  of  the  city,  are  the  only  Romans  in  heart
and  feeling  now  left  in  the  empire.  Already  the  emperor
has  ceased  to  be  a  Roman  by  birth ;  he  will  soon  be  not  even
a  Roman  by  descent ;  he  will  repudiate  Roman  principles
with  the  scorn  of  ignorance,  jjerhaps  even  of  vanity ;  the  di-
vorce in  sentiment  between  the  emperor  and  his  nobles  will
throw  him  more  and  more  into  the  arms  of  the  soldiery,  and
end,  after  many  struggles,  in  his  open  remmciation  of  their
religion  and  their  liomc.  But  in  order  to  understand  the  im-
pending revolution,  we  must  noAV  turn  our  eyes  towards  the
Eastern  provinces,  in  which  we  shall  again  follow  the  foot-
steps of  Trajan,  the  last  years  of  whose  reign  were  spent  in
great  military  and  political  combinations  in  that  quarter.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE  210

CHAPTER  LXV.

GENERAL  EXPECTATION  OF  A  DELITERSR  rATOUKED  BY  ACOUSTCB  AND  TESTASLAN. —
KKTIVAL  OF  JUDAISM  AFTER  THE  FALL  OF  JSRCSALElf. — THE  SCHOOLS  OF  TI-
BERIAS.— NUMBERS OF TIIE JEWS IN TUE EAST. — SEDITIONS RAISED AXD  8CP-

PRESHKa — THE CHRISTIAKS REGARDED WITH  SUSPICION AS A JEWISH SECT.

ALLEGED  DECREES  OF  NERO  AND  DOMITIAN. — PERSECUTION  IS  BITOTKIA,  AND
LETTERS  OF  PLINY  AND  TRAJAN,  A.  D.  1 1 1  :  A.  C.  864. — UAKTTSOOlf  OF  IGNA-
TIUS.— THE  CHURCH,  THE  CANON,  AND  EPISCOPACY. — TRAJAN'S  KXPXDITION  INTO
THE EAST, A.  O.  114  : A.  V.  867. — EARTHQUAKE AT  ANTIOCH,  A-  D.  115. — All-

MEXATION OF ARMENIA. — ^TRAJAN'S CONQUESTS BEYOND THE TIGKIS. OnOl-

THROW  OF  TOE  PARTHIAN  MONARCHY. — TRAJAN  LAUNCHES  OH  THE  PCSSIAX
GULF. — IS  RECALLED  BY  DEFECTIONS  IN  BIS  REAR. — HIS  ILL  SUCCESS  BSVOU
ATRA. — HE  RETURNS  TO  ANTIOCH. — HIS  ILLNESS  AND  DEATH  AT  BELINUS,  A.  U.
117  : A.  U.  870. — REVOLT  OF  THE  JEWS  IN  THE  EAST : IN  CYPECS,  CTBKXS,  AND

EGYPT. — REVOLT IN PALESTINE. AKIBA AND BARCOCHKBA8, i»*w»« OT  THE

JEWS. — SUPPKESSION OF THE REVOLT. ^FOUNDATION OF  THl CObOXT  0»  JOJA

CAPITOLINA. — FINAL  SEPARATION  OF  THE CHEISTLANS FROM »B JKWSi. — (a.  O,

111-133:  A.  u.  864-886.)

AUGUSTUS  and  Vespasian,  with  their  train  of  bards,  au-
gurs, and  declaiiuers,  might  cling  in  hope  or  despair  to
the  past,  and  strive  to  bind  the  wheels  of  human  G«nep«i  ex-
thought  to  the  effete  traditions  of  the  CapitoL  K^*,^'
Authority  and  Genius  might  perhaps  combine  to  ^"^^(j  ve^
restrain  the  aspirations  of  faith  and  hope  within  p^"^
certain  limits  of  class  and  locality.  But  their  influence,  what-
ever the  halo  of  glory  with  which  it  is  encircled  in  our  minds,
was  confined  to  a  single  spot  and  a  small  society.  The
Avaves  of  opinion  and  sentiment  flowed  on,  fi-ee  and  uncon-
trolled, and  the  ideas  of  Rome,  conqueror  and  mistress  though
she  was,  were  left  stranded  on  the  shore.  "We  have  seen  the
wide  diffusion  of  the  Sibylline  prophecies,  pointing  towards

280  '  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

a  new  advent  or  development,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  and
that  emperor's  efforts  to  compel  the  anticipations  of  mankind
to  centre  and  terminate  in  himself.  We  have  remarked  the
ready  acquiescence  of  the  Roman  world  in  the  hope  that  each
succeeding  emperor  would  be  in  truth  its  expected  Preserver,
and  how  willingly  it  ascribed  divinity  to  the  lords  of  the
human  race.  The  fair  promise  of  Caius  and  Nero  was  hailed
with  insensate  acclamations;  but  Vespasian  issuing  from
Judea  and  Egypt,  seemed  more  literally  to  fulfil  the  presage
derived  from  the  Jewish  oracles.  The  claim  to  miraculous
powers,  thrust  on  him  even  against  his  will,  was  doubtless
the  effect  of  a  predetermination  among  his  flatterers  in  the
East  to  present  him  as  the  true  Messiah,  possibly  with  a  de-
sire of  eclipsing  the  claims  of  the  Messiah  of  the  Gospel.^
The  leaders  of  the  popular  movements  among  rude  nations
have  at  all  times  pretended  to  supernatural  powers.  Such
were  the  claims  of  Athenio  in  Sicily,  of  Scrtorius  in  Spain ;
yet  we  must  be  struck  by  the  urgency  Avith  which  such
claims  were  advanced  at  this  period  by  the  chiefs  of  every
people  with  whom  the  Romans  contended,  by  the  Jews,  the
Britons,  the  Gauls  and  the  Germans." The  earnestness  on

*  Champagny,  Home  et  la  Judee,  499. :  "  Vespasien  scmblo  avoir  iti
arrang^  par  les  historiens  pour  6trc  une  contrefa9on  du  Christ.  J6sus,  r^ali-
Bunt  la  proph6tie  do  Mich^e,  est  sorti  de  Bethleem  pour  dcvcnir  le  roi  pacifique
de  toutcs  les  nations :  Vespasien,  k  qui  on  applique  cotte  m6nie  propbdtie,  sort
do  Jud^  pour  6tro  le  dominateur  pacifique  d'un  empire  qui  s'appelait  Ic  monde.
J^us  fait  dcs  miracles ;  Vespasien  en  fera  &  son  tour.  Jusquc-li,  les  pr6tend-
U8  miracles  du  paganisme  se  faisaient  le  plus  souvent  sous  la  main  de  rhomme ;
rhommo  en  6tuit  lo  tcmoin,  l'interpr6te,  le  prOncur,  le  preparateur  cnchd  plutot
que  I'agcnt  direct  ct  librc ;  ici  il  n'en  sera  plus  aiiisi :  Jesus  gudrissnit  les  in-
firmcs,  VcHpasien  se  fcm  amencr  dcs  infinncs.  Le  plus  souvent,  dims  lo  pa-
ganisme, les  guerissons  pix^tenduea  merveillcuscs  s'op^raient  duns  un  songc  qui
indiquait  le  rcini-de  au  malado ;  aujourd'hui,  c'cst  I'l  un  m($dccin  surnaturel  que
le  Kongc  reuvcrra  le  niuludo.  Jesus  guerissait  un  avcugle  avec  sa  salive,  Ves-
pasien pnStendra  gu<jrir  un  aveugle  aveo  sa  salive.  J^sus  a  gueri  ira  puraly-
li(|uc,  VcMpasien  gtierira  \m  paruljti(iuc.  La  contrefa9on  est  cvidcntc."  I  be-
lieve the  remark  to  bo  a  just  one,  and,  if  bo,  it  shows  how  doop  an  impression
the  liiHtorical  prctenHionM  of  Christianity  had  already  made.

'  The  Druids  in  IJrltaln  waged  a  religious  war  against  the  Romans ;  Marl-

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  281

spiritual  questions  which  marked  the  epoch  before  us,  was
caused  perhaps,  in  no  slight  degree,  by  the  wide  dispersion
of  the  Jews,  who  displayed,  amidst  a  world  of  fellow-subjectg
and  exiles,  a  visible  token  of  the  sustaining  power  of  faith  or
fanaticism.  Nor  can  we  doubt  that  the  awakening  of  reason
and  conscience  then  apparent  even  in  pagan  societies,  waa
also  due,  as  in  the  corresponding  circumstances  of  our  own
times,  to  the  diffusion  of  peace,  comfort  and  security,  and  to
the  interchange  of  sentiment  which  followed  upon  unre-
stricted commerce.  Even  the  teachers  of  philosophy  and
religion  were  swayed  by  the  same  predominating  influence.
The  first  ages  of  Christianity  were  signalized  by  the  rapid
succession  of  prophets  or  wonder-workers,  who  assumed  a
sanction  for  their  opinions  in  their  immediate  connexion,  or
actual  identification,  with  the  Deity.  The  Roman  sword
might  still  retain  the  keenness  of  its  edge  in  the  contests  of
the  battle-field ;  but  the  narrow  and  simple  faith  of  the  Fo-
rum and  the  Capitol  was  powerless  against  the  wit  and  logic,
the  eloquence  and  fanaticism,  of  the  schools  and  synagogues.
These  claims  to  divine  powers  and  a  divine  mission  be-
came more  frequent  among  the  Jews  after  the  fall  of  their
holy  city. Their  morbid  superstition  received  a

.  ,- ,.  ,  ,  i. • •  Orefthrowof

Strong  impulse  Irom  the  overthrow  oi  their  tern-  a»J«wiah,a»d
pie,  the  cessation  of  their  most  solemn  rites,  and  Ow  ChriMtea
the  mutilation  of  their  ceremonial  system.  Juda-  ^^^
ism  was  distinguished  from  the  religious  of  Greece  and  Rome
by  its  strictly  local  character.  The  service  of  Jupiter  and
Juno,  Apollo  and  Hercules,  had  been  carried  by  the  Pagan
to  the  ends  of  the  world,  and  the  cult  of  the  Acropolis  or  the
Capitol  was  propagated  with  little  variation  from  its  metro-
politan type  throughout  the  colonies  of  Rome  and  Athens.
But  the  ritual  observances  of  Jewish  worship  were  confined
to  one  sacred  spot :  the  priesthood,  the  sacrifices,^  the  holy
days,  the  outward  tokens  of  the  ancient  covenant,  pertained

CU3  the  Gaul  aflected  divine  powers ;  the  priestesses  of  the  Germans,  Auiinia,
Ganna,  and  Yaleda,  assumed  the  direction  of  the  people  as  instinct  with  a
spiritual  authority.

282  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

to  the  ceremonial  of  the  Temple  and  to  no  other.  The  cele-
bration of  the  Passover  ceased  with  the  destruction  of  the
place  in  which  the  descendant  of  Aaron  offered  a  propitiation
once  a  year  for  the  sins  of  the  Jewish  people.  When  the
Temple  was  overthrown  and  the  Temple-service  abolished,
the  Mosaic  law  was  reduced  to  a  bare  lifeless  record,  and  the
historic  cult  of  Jehovah  collapsed.  The  ti*aditions  of  the
Levitical  system,  which  had  surv'ived  so  many  revolutions,
captivities  and  oppressions,  were  retained  henceforth  in  the
recollection  of  private  families  only,  in  domestic  observances,
in  fragmentary  usages ;  they  were  no  longer  embodied  in  a
public  ritual,  no  longer  guaranteed  by  a  recognized  succes-
sion of  interpreters,  nor  maintained  as  the  title-deeds  of  an
authorized  ministry.  The  continuity  of  the  Jewish  religion
was  sundered ;  the  distinction  of  tribes  and  families  was  lost ;
the  children  of  Eleazar  and  the  descendants  of  Levi  were
mingled  with  the  common  herd;  the  genealogies  so  long
preserved  were  lost  in  the  common  ruin,  and  the  threads  of
descent  could  never  be  recovered.  But,  meanwhile,  a  recent
offset  from  Judaism,  the  religion  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  was
at  hand  to  seize  the  vacant  inheritance  of  divine  protection,
and  to  offer  a  new  system,  flourishing  in  the  vigour  of  youth
and  hope,  to  the  despairing  votaries  of  the  old.  By  many  of
the  Jewish  people  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  this  compensa-
tion was  gratefully  accepted  as  an  unexpected  deliverance ;
but  the  mass  still  turned  from  it  with  bitterer  feelings  than
ever,  and  nursed  their  despair  with  more  fanatical  hatred
both  of  the  Romans  and  the  Christians.

Wliatevcr  allowance  we  make  for  the  exaggerations  of
Josci)lms,  it  would  seem  that  the  massacres  of  the  Jewish
EsubiinhmcDt  "^^^i  ^"^  ^^^^  expatriation  of  its  myriads  of  cap-
SL^uWi-  t'^'^'***  ^'"^  1^^  Palestine  in  a  state  of  desolation
''•''^  from  which  she  was  destined  never  thoroughly

to  recover.  The  artificial  culture  of  her  arid  slopes,  once  in-
terrupted, required  a  strong  national  spirit,  nourislied  with
youthful  hopoH  and  aHpirations,  to  retrieve  it.  Tlio  province
of  Judca  fell  under  the  emperor's  administration,  and  its  tolls

k

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  283

and  tributes  accinied  to  his  private  exdiequer.  Vespasian,
frugal  and  provident  by  temper,  lelt  an  interest  in  the  repar
tition  of  the  vacant  soil  among  a  new  tenantry ;  and  xmdei
his  superintendence  measures  were  taken  for  repeopling
the  territory  with  fresh  colonists.  But  Domitian  was  too
reckless  of  the  future,  even  in  respect  of  his  own  private  in
terests,  to  execute  the  plans  bequeathed  to  him,  and  during
his  government  the  patrimony  of  the  Jewish  people  was  left,
we  may  believe,  for  the  most  part  in  the  state  to  which  the
war  had  reduced  it.  On  tlie  hills  of  Zion  and  Moriah,  indeed,
and  on  other  sites  of  their  now  ruined  cities,  the  trembling
fugitives  gradually  reassembled,  and  crouched  among  the
ruins  of  their  fallen  palaces ;  but  the  habitations  they  here
slowly  raised  more  resembled  the  squalid  villages  of  the
Arabs  amid  the  remains  of  Petra  and  Palmyra,  than  the  seats
of  an  established  community.  It  was  at  Tiberias,  on  the
banks  of  the  celebrated  lake  which  bore  its  name,  that  the
remnant  of  the  Jewish  polity  again  took  root  for  a  season,
under  the  direction  of  a  new  school  of  religious  teaching.
The  priests  of  the  Temple,  and  the  Sanhedrim  which  had  met
in  its  holy  courts,  were  here  superseded  by  the  doctors  of  the
law,  the  rabbis,  who  interpreted  the  national  Scriptures  by
the  traditions  of  which  they  assumed  to  be  the  genuine  de-
positaries. Year  by  year  this  audacious  substitution  of  the
gloss  for  the  letter  acquired  form  and  consistency.  The  sim-
ple text  of  the  Law,  for  which  the  patriots  of  old

,,  ,,  1.11,  Tl>e  Law,  the

had  combated,  was  overlaid  by  the  comment-  MischB»,«iHi
ary  of  the  Mischna,  and  at  a  still  later  period,
the  text  of  the  Mischna  itself  was  in  like  manner  overlaid  by
the  commentary  of  the  Gemara.  The  degrees  of  estimation
in  which  these  successive  volumes  came  to  be  held  among  the
degenerate  descendants  of  Abraham  and  Moses  were  marked
by  the  popular  comparison  Avhich  likened  the  Bible  to  water,
the  Mischna  to  wine,  the  Gemara  to  hypocras  ;  or,  again,  the
first  to  salt,  the  second  to  pepper,  and  the  third  to  frankin-
cense. He  who  studies  the  Scripture,  it  was  said,  does  an
indifferent  action ;  he  who  devotes  himself  to  the  Mischna

284  HISTOET  OF  THE  ROMANS

does  a  good  action ;  but  he  wlio  learns  the  Gemara  deserves
the  most  glorious  of  rewards.^

The  sound  in  heart  among  the  Jews  were  no  doubt  now

rapidly  absorbed  into  the  gathering  mass  of  Christian  belief.

The  perpetuation  of  the  national  ideas  was  aban-

Dispersion  of^^  !«»

the  Jews  in  the doned  to  the  dreofs  and  oiiscourmffs  of  the  peo-

East  ,11  f  T  , , -^ ,

pie,  by  whom  they  were  thus  travestied  and
degraded.  The  race  which  could  feed  to  satiety  on  the  gross
fancies  of  the  Talmud,  after  banqueting  so  long  on  the  sub-
lime inspiration  of  the  Old  Testament,  deserved  the  long
eclipse  of  reason  and  imagination  which  was  about  to  envel-
ope it.  Nevertheless,  the  political  spirit  of  the  Jews  still  re-
tained its  fervid  vitality,  and  continued  to  animate  them  to
repeated  outbreaks  of  insensate  violence  against  the  power
with  which  it  was  hopeless  to  cope.  Dispossessed  of  their
ancestral  seats,  they  accepted  the  doom  of  national  disper-
sion, and  migrated  by  preference  to  the  regions  where  former
swarms  of  their  own  race  had  already  settled,  both  within
Their  nnmbera  ^^^  bcyond  the  limits  of  the  empire.  Multitudes
miaTtherrto-  *^^^^  transplanted  themselves  to  Egypt  and
Egyprcyprus,  ^ypJ'^^Sj  iior  fewer  perhaps  to"  Mesopotamia,
and  cyrene.  where  they  fell  under  the  sway  of  the  Parthian
monarch.  In  Egypt,  the  chronic  turbulence  of  the  Jewish
residents  was  increased  by  this  influx  from  the  old  country,
and  attempts  were  made  to  engage  the  whole  Jewish  popula-
tion of  the  African  coast  in  a  league  against  the  Romans.
Could  they  indeed  be  brought  to  act  in  concert,  tlieir  numbers
might  render  them  truly  formidable.  Even  before  the  sud-
den immigration  wliich  followed  on  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,
this  flourishing  commimity  had  often  turned  the  scale  in  the
contests  of  Alexandria  and  Cyrene.

The  promoters  of  the  movements  that  ensued  pretended,  as
usual,  to  a  divine  mission.  In  Alexandria  a  remnant  of  the
s.vnro  mciig-  ^calots,  who  had  escaped  from  the  slaughter  of
their  countrymen,  inflamed  the  minds  of  their
compatriots  with  ho2:)C8  of  a  special  intcference,

'  .See  tho  authoritica  in  Chaini)agtiy,  Jiome  et  Judie,  p.  640. Oomp.  SaU
vador.  il.  480.

i.';iilii!tt

\vjy\,\.

UM)ER  THE  EMPIKE.  285

and  raised  their  fanaticism  to  the  highest  pitch.  In
vain  did  the  more  sober  of  the  Jewish  population  protest
against  this  superstitious  frenzy ;  the  apprehensions  of  the
government  were  thoroughly  aroused,  and  Lupus,  the  prefect
of  the  province,  required  all  the  residents  of  Jewish  origin  to
attest  their  disavowal  of  these  seditious  aspirations  by  a
declaration  of  submission  to  Caesar  as  t'  '  -ter.  Such  a
vow  of  allegiance  sufficed  for  their  y  ; ; but  great

numbers,  impelled  by  a  furious  fanaticism,  sternly  refused  to
utter  the  words,  and  persisted  in  their  refusal  in  the  face  of
death  and  tortures.  The  courage  of  women,  and  even  of
children,  in  this  extremity,  were  worthy  of  the  heroic  age  of
the  nation.*  But  armed  resistance  was  either  not  attempted,
or  easily  put  down. The  Jewish  temple  erected

1 ,  • ^ .  Tx  ,. ,. .  . f  .  ClclBsofthe

by  tiie  priest  Onias  at  llehopolis,  with  the  sanction Jewiuh  tempi*

i .1 Ti. 1 .  :i •  .1  .  * •tUeUopoUt.

ot  the  1  tolemies,  during  the  persecution  of
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  the  only  temple  throughout  the  world
wliicliAvas  modelled  afterthe  pattern  of  the  national  sanctuary,
and  was  intended  to  serve  as  a  solitary  substitute  for  it,
was  now  turned,  like  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  into  a  place
of  defence,  and  for  a  moment  the  senseless  multitude  offered
defiance  to  their  enemies.  But  the  gates  M'ere  opened  at  the
first  summons,  and  the  government,  with  singular  forbearance,
Avas  content  with  expelling  the  Jews  from  the  spot,  and  for-
bidding them  to  meet  there  for  worshij).*  Even  the  custom-
ary assembling  in  the  synagogues  was  not  apparently  inter-
dicted; the  inquisition  that  followed  was  simply  political,
and  the  religion  of  the  rebel  race  was  not  proscribed.  So
again  at  Cyrene,  where  a  more  violent  outbreak  occurred,
the  Romans  still  spared  the  Jewish  worship.  They  per-
ceived, with  nnusual  sagacity,  that  it  was  easier  to  control
the  people  if  allowed  to  foster  their  mutual  sectarian  jealous-
ies, than  if  united  in  heart  and  mind  under  a  common  perse-

*  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  vii.  10.  1. :  naenjc  yap  lit'  dvrovf  paaavov  koJ  Jiv/oK
Tuv  aufiaruv  i-ztvorfikiar}^,  ef  Iv  tovto  fiAvov,  bnuQ  avrijv  Kaiaapa  ieairinfh
6fio?xy/ia<j<Ttv,  ovdelg  kvkduKev,  6v&  k/iiM.Jiaev  «TeIv.

*  Joseph.  Antiq.  sx.  10.  8. Bell,  Jud.  vii.  10.  3.

286  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS

Sedition  of cution. At  Cyrene  a  leader  named  Jonathan,
Cyrene^cire. ^^^  ^^^  countrymen  into  the desert,  with  the
A.  D.  65.  promise  of  Divine  protection,  but  the  movement

speedily  ended  in  mutual  charges  and  recriminations.  Some
of  the  chiefs  of  the  sedition  were  sent  to  Rome  by  the  gov-
ernor Catullus,  to  answer  for  their  turbulence,  and  seem  to
have  there  laid  accusations  against  their  countryman  Jose-
phus,  which  it  required  all  his  credit  with  Vespasian  and
Titus  to  baffle.'  But  at  Rome  the  Jews  were  perhaps  spe-
cially protected  by  the  contempt  into  which  they  had  fallen.
They  no  longer  occupied  the  high  places  of  the  city,  courted
by  men  and  women  of  noble  birth,  cherished  by  one  emperor,
and  feared  by  another.  They  slunk  from  the  public  sight  in
the  most  miserable  quarters,  and  scraped  together  a  liveli-
hood by  the  pettiest  traffic.  Their  position  in  society  is
marked  by  the  passing  sneers  of  Martial  and  Juvenal.*
Their  unchangeable  spiiit  of  isolation,  and  the  instinct  with
which  they  maintained  their  established  customs,  are  shown
even  in  the  places  they  chose  for  sepulture,  the  lonely  cat-
acombs, which  recalled  to  their  imaginations  the  caves  in
which  their  fathers  were  buried.*

Among  the  most  vicious  features  of  the  national  charac-
ter, and  that  which  contributed  above  any  other  to  unnerve
the  Jews  in  contest  with  their  enemies,  was  their  constant

'  JoBeph.  ^^^  Jud.v'ii.  11.  Jonathan  was  put  to  death  by  Vespasian.
This  is  our  nearest  approximation  to  the  date.

«  Juvenal,  iii.  14,  foil. ;  vi.  542,  foil. ;  xiv,  96,  foil.  Martial,  iv.  4.,  vii.  32.,
xi.  04.  We  have  already  noticed  the  ignorant  contempt  with  which  Tacitus
had  learnt  to  regard  them.

*  Acconling  to  the  most  accredited  theory  at  the  present  day,  the  catacombs
at  Rome  were  originally  excavated  or  adopted  by  the  Jews  for  their  place  of
sepulture.  Their  feelings  revolted  against  the  Roman  mode  of  burning  the
dead,  and  their  old  traditions  woidd  naturally  suggest  to  them  the  disposal  of
their  mortal  remains  in  caves  hewn  in  the  rock.  Jerusalem  itself  had  been
mined  by  passages  and  caverns,  but  these  were  used  for  reservoirs  or  maga-
zines; it  does  not  appear,  I  think,  that  they  were  api)ropriated  to  the  puqioso
of  BcpuUure.  The  CliriMliaiis  at  Rome  inherited  the  burying  places  of  their
predecessors  in  the  faith  of  Fulestiue.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  287

disposition  to  inflame  their  rulers  against  sects  and  parties
among  themselves,  with  which  they  had  domestic  diftereuces.
Their  political  enthusiasts,  the  Zealots  and  Sicarii,  could
postpone  every  desperate  scheme  of  national  resuscitation,  to
get  vengeance  on  the  Moderates,  or  llerodians,  of  whom  Jose*
phus,  as  we  have  seen,  was  a  conspicuous  leader,  i^auitioa
In  the  same  manner,  their  most  devout  religion-  JS^S^^chHlk**
ists  were  ready  at  any  moment  to  denounce  to  **"*■
prefects  and  governors  the  pious  followers  of  the  Christ
Jesus,  and  traduce  them  as  intriguers  against  the  publio
peace,  and  abandoned  to  the  grossest  impurities.  The  Ro-
mans, who  had  instituted  strict  inquiries  respecting  the  ex-
pectations of  a  Deliverer  so  fondly  cherished  among  the
Jewish  communities,  and  had  specially  prosecuted  all  who
pretended  to  descent  from  David,  were  induced  by  these
mancEuvres  to  examine  into  the  tenets  of  the  Christians,  so
far  as  related  to  the  person  of  Christ,  the  acknowledged
founder  of  their  sect ;  but  failing  to  discover  m  him  any  po-
litical character,  they  were  generally  satisfied  with  requiring
of  his  foUoAvers  the  same  bare  acknowledgment  of  the  empe-
ror's supremacy  as  of  their  Jewish  compatriots.  The  fonnula
which  was  proposed  to  the  Jews,  was  probably  identical
with  that  set  before  the  Christians.  They  were  required,  no
doubt,  to  to  call  Coesar  master.  The  immoralities  alleged
against  them  were  disbelieved,  or  contemptuously  disregard-
ed. The  traditions  of  the  Church,  which  point

to  a  general  persecution  of  the  believers  in  the or^Mutd

•  It'll  .1  -1 DoeolttaB.

Flavian  period,  cannot  be  lightly  set  aside,  and
to  this  extent  they  may  safely  be  credited,  though  the  asser-
tion of  a  special  decree  issued  by  Nero,  and  enforced  by  his
successors  against  them,  seems  too  improbable  to  be  admit-
ted without  stronger  evidence.  The  historical  traces  of  such
a  persecution  even  in  Rome  are  faint  and  indecisive ;  yet,
according  to  all  analogy,  it  was  only  in  Rome,  or  among
Roman  citizens  in  the  provinces,  that  the  central  government
would  interfere  to  prohibit  religious  usages,  however  strange^
and  technically  illicit. Xor  would  a  special  law  be  required

288  HISTOEY  OF  THE  ROMANS

for  the  suppression  of  a  dangerous  or  immoral  usage  in  tlie
provinces.  There  the  prsetor's  edict  would  arm  the  magis-
trate with  power  against  disturbers  of  peace  and  security ;
the  general  authority  that  magistrate  brought  from  Rome
entitled  him  to  protect  by  his  own  decree  the  public  tran-
qxiillity  or  decorum ;  and  even  if  a  certain  worship  was  pro-
scribed as  illicit  in  the  city,  it  might  still  rest  practically  ia
his  discretion  to  permit  or  to  prohibit  it  in  his  own  province.^
There  remains,  amidst  the  wreck  of  ancient  documents,
one  distinct  and  most  valuable  record  of  the  action  of  the
government  in  this  particular  at  a  distance  from

Pliny's  letter °  . , t.-  -i • i

to  Trajan  re- the  Capital. Bithynia,  the  province  referred  to,

specting  the  _,^.  r»4»  i»

Christiana  in  and  the  adjacent  parts  oi  Asia,  were  at  the  time
more  leavened  with  Christian  opinions  than  other
districts  of  the  empire.  For  in  these  regions  the  Jews,  who
had  followed  perhaps  the  Roman  spoilers  and  taxgatherers,
and  taken  the  land  in  mortgage  for  their  loans,  were  espe-
cially numerous,,  and  in  these  the  preaching  of  the  Apostles
had  been  eminently  successful;  here  also  the  old  Pagan
superstitions  had  been  long  undermined,  and  the  soil  was
favourable  for  the  growth  of  a  new  and  Adgorous  shoot  of
spiritual  life.  The  social  and  political  ferment  of  tlie  times
manifested  itself  here  above  most  places  by  yearnings  for
spiritual  illumination.  It  was  appohited,  moreover,  that  the
governor  of  Bithynia  in  the  early  years  of  Trajan  should  be
neither  one  of  the  ordinary  class  of  Roman  prefects,  indifter-
ent  alike  to  all  religious  manifestations,  and  indisposed  to
trouble  himself  with  inciuiries  about  them ;  nor,  on  tlie  other
hand,  a  sanguinary  bigot,  such  as  often  drew  the  sword  at
once  in  fear  or  liatred,  and  looked  to  no  other  means  of  re-
pressing odious  opinions.  The  younger  Pliny,  of  whom  we
liavo  already  heard  so  favourably,  was  vigilant  and  labori-
ouB,  and  his  personal  attachment  to  liis  master  rendered  him

'  Even  the  Christian  opologists,  who  assert  the  promulgation  of  a  law
against  their  sect  by  Nero,  speak  of  the  persecutions  as  occasional  and  locnl.
Buch  Is  the  complaint  of  Quadratns  mider  Iludrinn :  6ti  6//  tiveq  irovt/put  HvSpec
Tovg  J/lterfpov^  hox^'Siv  ImupuvTo, Kuscb.  J/ist,  Ecclcs,  iv.  8.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  289

more  than  commonly  anxious  to  put  down  any  movement
in  his  district  which  might  seem  prejudicial  to  the  interests
of  the  government.  But  he  was  at  the  same  time  kindly  in
<lisj)osition,  a  lover  of  justice,  desirous  of  acting  fairly  and
couBiderately.  He  made  it  a  point  of  conscience  to  govern
his  province  as  a  philosopher,  not  as  a  mere  soldier.'  He
was  resolved  to  suppress  all  political  enemies;  but  he  was
resolved  to  do  so  with  temper  and  moderation.  Hence  his
' ((jrrespondence  with  Trajan,  one  of  our  most  carious  monu-
ments of  antiquity,  contains  the  formal  justification  of  hia
acts  which  he  desired  to  leave  on  record.  From  these  letters
Ave  learn  all  that  can  really  bo  known  of  the  methods  of  the
Roman  government  in  regard  to  the  Christians.*

Thus  we  find  Pliny  speaking  of  the  Christians,  at  the
commencement  of  the  second  century,  as  a  well-known  class,
whose  name  requires  no  explanation,  and  of  the

,  T  1  i • 1  -1  1 TMnft  pro-

law  regardmg  them  as  sumciently  understood. c»e<ua«B

AVlien  certain  persons  were  brought  before  him, ^ri^aM.

charged  with  the  crime  of  being  Christians^  he

simply  demanded  whether  they  were  really  such,  and  on

their  acknowledging  the  designation,  and  persisting  a  Moond

and  third  time  in  the  confession,  he  ordered  them  to  be

capitally  punished.* If,  however,  they  were  Roman  citixens,

'  See  the  advice  he  gives  to  a  friend  who  is  about  to  aadertake  the  gOT-
crnnient  of  Asia. 3p.  viii,  24.

'  The  well-known  letter  of  Pliny  and  the  answer  of  Tri^jan  are  numbered  x.
96,  97.  in  Gierig's  edition,  to  which  I  have  referred  throughout  (vulg.  97,  98.).
Their  date  is  fixed  by  Clinton  to  a.  d.  104,  a.  v.  857,  the  seventh  year  of  Tra-
jan's reign ;  but  see  Greswell,  Suppl.  Ditaeri.  p.  200,  foil.,  where  the  chronol-
ogy of  Pliny's  letters  is  arranged,  and  his  proconsulship  assigned  to  111-113;
the  letter  in  question  to  112.  Mr.  Creswell  suggests  the  probability  that  Pliny,
of  whom  we  have  no  further  mention,  joined  Trajan  in  the  East,  and  perished
iu  the  earthquake  at  Antioch  in  115. See  below.

*  Plin.  Eplst.  X.  96.  3. :  "  perseverantes  duci  jussi."  He  thinks  it  necessary
to  excuse  this  severity  by  the  remark  that,  whatever  might  be  the  complexion
of  their  opinions,  the  obstinacy  of  the  persons  who  thus  maintained  them  in
defiance  of  the  government,  was  in  itself  deserving  of  punishment  Roman
citizens  were  sent  to  be  dealt  with  in  Rome.

VOL Tll. — 19

290  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

he  sent  them  to  Rome  for  trial.  He  consults  the  emperor
whether  this  is  the  proper  mode  of  proceeding,  which,  as  he
admits,  seems  rather  to  increase  the  number  of  the  denounced,
and  to  fan  the  flame  of  perverse  opposition  to  the  law/  On
the  other  hand,  the  measures  he  has  taken  of  his  own  accord
for  checking  the  informers,  and  forbidding  inquiry  to  be  made
into  the  profession  of  the  obnoxious  tenets,  have  been  speedily
attended  with  good  effects :  the  temples  have  become  more  fre-
quented, and  there  is  a  readier  sale  for  beasts  for  sacrifice.
Hence  it  appears  that  the  mere  profession  of  the  name  of  Chris
tian  had  been  once  ruled  to  be  capital  in  this  province ;  but  the
actual  execution  of  the  law  lay  in  the  governor's  discretion,  and
he,  if  considerate  and  conscientious,  or  if  the  affair  seemed  to
assume  unusual  importance,  would  refer  the  decision  to  the
emperor  himself.*  The  famous  persecution  of  the  Christians
in  Bithynia  was,  I  believe,  a  temporary  measure  of  precaution
against  disturbances  apprehended  by  the  local  government
from  the  spread  of  strange  and  suspected  usages  rather  than
doctrines,  which  seemed  connected  more  or  less  closely  with
the  disaffection  of  the  Jews.  The  danger  uppermost  in
Pliny's  mind  was  that  which  might  spring  from  a  political
combination.'  The  Christians  and  the  Jews  were  subjected,
as  we  have  seen,  to  a  similar  inquisition,  wherever  their

'  "  Mox  ipso  tractatu,  ut  fieri  volet,  diffundente  sc  criniine,  plures  species
incidcrant,"  1.  c.  4.  Persons  were  accused,  apparently  from  motives  of  private
Bpitc,  who  denied  at  once  that  they  were  or  ever  had  been  Christians,  and
Bacrifice<i  without  hesitation  before  the  imaj^es  of  the  gods  and  of  tlic  emperor.

'  Tiie  rcHcripts  of  the  emperors  addressed  to  the  governors  of  particular
provinces  did  not  apply  elsewhere  unless  specially  provided.  See  Trajan  to
Pliny,  EpiM.  \.  76. :  "  qutcstio  quae  pertinet  ad  eos  (jui  libori  nati,  cxpositi,
deinde  sublati  ....  satpe  traclata  est ;  nee  quidquam  invenitur  in  commenta-
riis  eorum  principum  (jui  ante  me  fuerunt,  quod  ad  omncs  prov'inclas  sit  consti-
tutum.  EplstoliB  Hunc  sunt  Domitiani  ad  Avidium  ....  (\\v3i  fortasne  debent
obBerrari :  Be<l  inter  ens  provincias  de  quibus  reseripsit  non  est  Uithyniiv."
Comp.  Epid.  x.  74.  on  the  same  subject :  "  recitabatur  edictum  quod  dicebatur
D.  AugUflU  ad  Annium,  ot  I).  VeH|)aHiani  ad  Lacedtcmonios,  ct  D.  Titi  ad
oosdcm,  dclndo  ad  AobsBoa,  etc."

'  riin.  KjiUt.  X.  96.  7. :  "  Bccundutn  mandata  tua  hctserias  csso  vctueram."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  291

numbers  rendered  them  objects  of  jealousy.  But  if  Jews  or
Christians  could  acquiesce  in  the  form  of  homage  to  the  em-
peror, neither  one  nor  the  other  could  offer  the  most  trifling
service  to  the  idols  of  paganism.'  With  respect  to  both
classes  of  recusants  the  government  employed  the  harshest
means  to  enfoi'ce  submission,  its  barbarity  increasing  with
the  defiance  it  encountered.  But  here  the  parallel  ends.
All  that  can  be  said  for  the  Jews  even  by  their  own  co-
religionists, in  this  cruel  trial,  is  that  they  suffered  with
dauntless  constancy,  and  bore  a  noble  testimony  to  their
faith.  But  upon  the  Christians,  now  at  the  threshold  of  their
long  career  of  manifold  temptations,  a  far  higher  eulogium
has  been  passed.  Their  witness  is  a  political  enemy,  their
judge  is  a  pagan  philosopher.  Pliny  allows  that  „,,  t^gt^ony
he  can  discover  no  crime,  not  even  the  crime  of  toUieirviruiafc
political  disaffection,  among  them:  their  meetings,  though
conducted  privately  and  before  daylight,  were  completely
innocent,  and  their  bloodless  ceremonial  confined  to  singing
hyums  to  the  Founder  of  their  faith,  as  a  Divine  Being,  and
to  binding  themselves  by  a  vow,  ratified  by  a  simple  meal  in
common,  not  to  rob,  nor  to  cheat,  nor  to  commit  adultery."
So  ancient  and  genuine  a  testimony  to  the  virtue  of  the  first
believers,  and  to  the  peculiar  graces  of  their  life  and  conver-
sation, is  justly  regarded  as  one  of  the  proudest  monuments

'  Thus  Pliny  requires  the  Christians  to  sacrifice  to  the  gods  and  the  genius
of  the  emperor :  "  cum  praeeunte  me  Deos  appellarent,  et  imaginj  tuae,  qiuun
propter  hoc  jusserom  cum  simulacris  numinum  adferri,  thure  ao  rino  suppUc*-
rent." Plin.  1.  c.  5.

^  Plin.  L  c.  T. :  "  adfirmabant  autem  bane  fuisse  sximmam  vel  culpae  earn,
vel  erroris,  quod  essent  soliti  stato  die  ante  lucem  convenire  cannenque  Christo,
quasi  Deo,  dieere  secum  invicem,  seque  sacramento  non  in  scelus  aliquod  ob-
stringere,  sed  no  fuita,  ne  latrocinia,  ue  adulteria  committerent,  ne  fidon  falle-
rent,  ne  depositum  abnegarent,  etc."  All  those  merits,  through  &eely  mo
knowledged,  weighed  as  nothing  with  so  zealous  a  courtier,  against  the  appa-
rent disregard,  not  of  the  gods  so  much  as  of  the  emperor.  Pliny  flattered
himself,  that  his  measures  against  these  innocent  meetings  wer«  effectual:
"  quod  ipsum  facere  desiisse  post  edictum  meum."

292  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

of  our  faith. The  letter  of  Pliny,  it  has  been  well  said,  is  the
first  Apology  for  Christianity.^

Nevertheless,  this  favourable  testimony  availed  little  to
protect  the  Christians  from  the  alarms  of  paganism.  Trajan
The  popular  indeed,  when  solicited  to  determine  how  they
oF^h^^r  poim-  should  be  treated,  was  satisfied  with  recommend-
cai  intrigues.  jj,g  mild  mcasurcs  in  a  tone  of  almost  contempt-
uous liberality.  He  directed  that  the  professors  of  the  pro-
scribed opinions  should  not  be  sought  for,  and  that  no
encouragement  should  be  given  to  the  informers,  who  were
generally  Jews.'  Still,  however,  if  malefactors  so  bold  and
perverse  should  be  brought  before  the  tribunals,  the  majesty
of  the  law  required  that  they  should  be  finnly  and  sternly
dealt  with.  The  courage  or  fanaticism  exhibited  by  these
sectarians  inflamed  the  temper  of  their  opponents,  while  even
superstition  might  combine  to  exasperate  the  pagans  against
the  new  enemies,  in  whose  zeal  and  purity  they  already  read
the  doom  of  their  hollow  pretensions. The  con-

Bnperetitlous  ...  „  .  -r-. i.

terrors  of  tho  fidcnt  anticipations  01  a  coming  Deliverer,  pro-
claimed from  the  Christian  pulpits,  seemed
connected  with  the  repeated  threats  of  Nero's  return  from
the  Euphrates,  and  the  intrigues  of  the  Parthian  court ;  wliile
the  recurring  conflagrations  of  the  City  and  the  Capitol,  the
fatal  eruption  of  Vesuvius,  and  renewed  activity  of  its  long
dormant  fires,  pointed  in  the  minds,  not  of  the  vulgar  only,
but  of  many  intelligent  thinkers,  to  a  near  fulfilment  of  the
Christian  prophecy,  that  the  world  itself  was  about  to  be
consumed  in  a  final  catastrophe.*

*  Wallon,  JHst.  de  VEaclavage  dam  VAntiquitS,  iil.  13.

*  Plln.  Jipitt.  X.  P7.  Triyan  carefully  limits  liia  decision  to  the  partictilar
ease  and  locality :  "  noquo  cnlm  in  univerHinn  itliqnid,  quod  qiuisi  cortiun  for-
mam  babeat,  constitui  potest."  Ho  requires  that  all  denunciations  of  Chris-
tiana should  bo  certified  with  tho  name  of  the  informer :  "  sine  auctorc  vcro
propoaiti  libelU  nullo  crimino  locum  habere  debent.  Nam  et  ])cssiini  exempli
Deo  noatri  laBOoU  eat"  It  is  very  rcmarka)>le  that  the  emperor  speaks  of  these
people  aa  if  he  bad  never  heard  of  them  before.  It  is  diflieult  to  suppose  that
be  regarded  them  In  any  otlicr  light  than  as  members  of  an  illegal  political  club.

*  There  ia  aomethlDg  atartUng  in  tho  modem  tone  of  sentiment  attested  by

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  2M

The  earliest  charge  against  the  believers  was  that  of  per-
verse and  anti-social  usages,  and  a  colour  was  given  to  their
proscription  by  the  want  of  legal  toleration  under  jiartyrdom  af
which  they  technically  laboured.  But  these  ij^* '1^^
frivolous  imputations  were  reinforced  by  the  ^  "•  ^^*'
fears  of  the  multitude,  who  referred  every  calamity  to  the
anger  of  the  national  divinities  insulted  by  their  pretended
impiety.  The  tradition  of  the  primitive  Church,  that  Igna-
tius, the  bishop  of  Antioch,  was  examined  in  that  city  by
Trajan  in  person,  and  condemned  by  him  to  a  martyr's  death,
coincides  with  the  account  of  an  earthquake  by  which  the
Eastern  capital  was  almost  destroyed  during  the  emperor'*
residence  in  Syria.  The  date  of  the  martyrdom  itself  is  indeed
a  matter  of  doubt  and  controversy ;  and  though  the  tradition
can  hardly  be  rejected,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  the
historical  evidence  for  it  is  imperfect  and  conflicting.'  The
authorities  unanimously  refer  the  event  to  a  period  when  it
can  be  shown  that  Trajan  was  still  in  the  West,  and  the
account  of  the  interview  between  the  emperor  and  the  bishop,
on  which  so  much  of  its  interest  depends,  rests,  it  must  be
allowed,  on  suspicious  testimony." But  however  this  may

Pliny  in  rt'ference  to  the  great  eruption :  "  multi  ad  Deos  muuis  tolkre,  ploraa
nunquam  jam  Di>os  ullos,  cetenMmque  illam  et  novimimmm  mrtow  Hmwrfa  inter*
prctantur."  £pist.  vi.  20.  The  appointed  destruction  of  the  worid  by  fire  was
a  tenet  of  the  fashionable  stoiciam  of  the  day.  Lucan,  TiL  8H. :  "  Conunmis
niundo  superest  rogua."

'  Euseb.  Hist.  Kxl  iil  86.  S.  Hieron.  De  viria  ilhutr.  16.  The  first  of
these  authorities  fixes  the  date  to  the  tenth  year  of  Trajan,  ▲,  D.  107.  The
second  to  the  eleventh,  a.  d.  108.  The  Marttfrium  8.  IgtuUn  {daoes  it  in  the
consulship  of  Sura  and  Senecio,  i.  e.  a.  d.  107.  It  is  now  generally  agreed  that
Trajan  did  not  go  to  the  East  earlier  than  114  (see  Francke,  Clinton,  and  Gres-
wellX  and  remained  there  till  the  time  of  his  death  in  1 17.  The  earthquake  at
Antioch  occurred  Jan.  115  (see  below),  during  the  consulsiiip  of  Messala  and
Pedo,  and  the  martyrdom  must  be  assigned  to  December  of  the  same  year.
Martyr,  c.  6.

'  We  need  not  enter  into  the  question  about  the  genuineness  of  the  epistles
ascribed  to  Ignatius.  The  authenticity  of  the  Martyrium,  or  Acta  Martyrii,  is
shaken  by  the  apparent  error  in  the  date.  The  later  Christian  writers  seem  to
have  followed  its  chronology  pretty  closely,  and  so  far  may  be  considered  to  at*

294  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

be,  the  barbarity  of  the  government  in  its  proscription  of
opinion,  and  the  meek  endurance  of  the  believers,  are  fully
established  on  the  unquestioned  evidence  of  Pliny ;  and  that
the  fanaticism  of  both  people  and  rulers  should  be  inflamed
against  them  by  the  occurrence  of  great  public  calamities  is
only  too  congenial  to  the  common  course  of  human  affairs/

On  ordinary  occasions,  however,  as  appears  from  Pliny's
memorable  despatches,  the  government  showed  some  con-
sideration for  the  unfortunate  sectaries,  and  made,

Development

of  the  Christian an  attempt  to  check  promiscuous  attacks  upon

Boclety.  .  ,  ,

them.  Meanwhile  other  enemies,  more  bitter
than  the  legitimate  guardians  of  the  state  and  the  state-
religion,  were  prompt  in  frustrating  these  merciful  inclina-
tions. As  the  Christian^  were  themselves  at  first  sectarians
innovating  on  the  national  creed  of  Judaism  till  they  were
cast  forth  from  its  bosom,  so  there  soon  appeared  within  the
pale  of  Christianity  a  strong  disposition  to  discover  fresh
modifications  of  Christian  doctrine,  and  provoke  expulsion
from  the  new  community.  The  Church  sought  to  convince
the  innovators  alternately  by  argument  and  authority ;  and
it  is  clear  fi-om  her  earliest  traditions  that  she  leant  to  the
second  of  these  means  at  least  as  readily  as  to  the  first.  Her
The  Church,  discipline  was  drawn  closer  by  the  stricter
fk:ript'u«°Md  organization  to  which  she  was  now  subjected:
EpiBcopocjr. ^jjg  decision  of  questions  of  doctrine  was  brought

test  ita  antiquity.  We  are  at  a  loss,  however,  to  account  for  the  bishop  being
sent  to  Buffer  martyrdom  at  Rome,  and  the  narrative  bears  on  its  face  a  strong
appearance  of  being  moulded  into  a  counterpart  to  the  last  voyage  of  St  Paid.
'  The  testimony  of  Ilegesippus,  the  primitive  historian  of  Christianity  (cited
by  EuHcbius,  IlUt.  Eccl.  iii.  82.)  to  the  martyrdom  of  Symcon,  bishop  of  .Tcni-
salcm,  under  Tr^an,  is  generally  admitted.  See  Milman,  7//*/.  of  Chrls/iaiilfi/,
ii.  160.  It  Bccms  that  the  martyr  was  stated  to  be  the  second  bishop  of  Jeru-
salem, James,  who  suffered  a.  d.  44,  having  been  the  first.  He  was  also  the
son  of  Geopas.  lie  was  prosecuted,  according  to  the  account,  as  one  of  the
royal  seed  of  David,  a  subject  of  inquisition,  as  we  have  seen,  under  Doniitian.
The  roartyrologistfl  insisted  upon  making  him  a  blood-relation  and  also  a
hearer  of  Clirist,  and  afli«orte<l  that  ho  was  a  hundred  and  twenty  years  old  at
the  time  of  IiIm  death.  The  year  of  the  martyrdom  is  not  specified,  but  it  was
in  the  prefecture  of  Atticun.  It  is  not  said  that  the  emperor  took  cognizance
of  tlic  case.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  295

to  a  more  definite  point  by  the  foiinal  ratification  of  a  Canon
of  Scripture,  and  the  interpretation  of  Holy  Writ  was  re-
ferred to  a  tradition,  the  keys  of  which  were  lodged  with  her
rulers,  the  bishops.  The  union  of  the  true  believers  was
maintained  by  the  test  of  sacramental  forms;  and  the  Church
assumed  the  proportions  of  a  visible  system,  manifest  to  the
world  without,  as  well  as  known  to  its  own  members.  The
power  of  excommunication  from  this  body,  assigned  to  the
bishops,  was  easily  suffered  to  take  the  place  of  reasoning
with  people,  against  whose  self-will  and  vanity  reasoning
would  have  little  availed.  The  dying  exhortations  of  Igna-
tius, purporting  to  be  addressed  to  the  various  churches
during  his  pilgrimage  from  the  imperial  tribunal  to  the
amphitheatre,  derive  their  force  and  interest  from  their  re-
iterated admonitions  to  obey  the  bishop,  and  eschew  doctrinal
error  by  holding  fast  the  traditions  preserved  by  the  Episco-
pate. It  is  clear  that  the  almost  open  announcement  of  this
social  organization,  this  spiritual  empire  in  the  centre  of  the
temporal,  must  have  roused  unbounded  jealousy  in  a  govern-
ment which  could  hardly  tolerate  a  committee  to  collect
subscriptions  for  building  an  aqueduct.  The  heretics  saw
their  advantage,  and  retorted  on  the  orthodox  by  denouncing
them  to  the  government,  and  still  more  fatally  by  exciting
the  passions  of  the  populace  against  them ; '  for  when  the
populace  cried  aloud  in  the  theatres  for  any  object  of  their
capricious  desires,  the  Roman  governor  was  bound,  by  the
prescriptions  of  ancient  usage,  to  give  it  them.  Hence  the
sanguinary  character  of  the  Roman  policy  towards  the  Chris-
tians even  at  this  early  stage,  and  the  mixture  with  it  of
popiilar  ferocity,  so  soon  outrunning  the  tardier  and  more

*  Pliny's  account  of  the  treatment  of  Christians  is  confirmed  by  Eusebius,
Hist.  Eccles.  iii.  33.,  with  the  addition  that  the  informations  agninst  th«n  were
often  laid  by  the  heretics.  For  the  history  of  these  persecutionB  he  refers,  be-
sides Pliny,  to  Tertullian,  and  evidently  has  the  Jfartyrivm  Ignatii,  and  some
of  the  epistles  of  Ignatius,  before  him.  For  the  martyrdom  of  Symeon  bishop
of  Jerusalem  he  refers  to  Hegesippus.

296  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

considerate  pace  at  which  the  government  was  of  itself  dis*
posed  to  move.*

The  Eastern  provinces,  at  this  juncture,  might  well  require

the  presence  of  the  emperor  in  person. A  new,  an  increasing,

and  apparently  a  dangerous  society,  was  striking

of  Trajan  In root,  and  Spreading  its  branches  abroad  beyond

the  East  de-  , Vi  -r  -,  i  -i  ,. .

manded  by  the the  ^gcan. its  members,  while  proiessmg  out-
state  of  affairs.  ,,,.  ,,i  .  ^-tt

ward  obedience  to  the  government,  avoided
public  offices,  secluded  themselves  from  the  mass  of  the  peo-
ple, held  and  disseminated  opinions  of  doubtful  import,  in
which  the  majesty  of  Caesar,  as  well  as  the  deity  of  Jupiter,
was  secretly  despised,  if  not  openly  abjured.  On  the  one
hand  there  was  the  peril  of  combination — for  the  Christians
were  even  more  closely  united  than  the  Jews — on  the  other,
there  was  the  peril  of  enthusiasm,  ever  hateful  and  suspicious
to  a  centralized  machine  of  administration.  From  city  to
city,  and  in  the  less  conspicuous  recesses  of  the  country  vil-
lages, sophists  and  hierophants,  conjurors  and  wonder-workers,
moved  by  stealth  or  openly,  and  sowed  the  elements  of  dis-
content and  disturbance.  The  Jews  had  repeatedly  proved
themselves  the  most  obstinate  opponents  of  the  Cjesars,  and
they  were  even  now  plainly  intent  on  foiTaing  fresh  combina-
tions :  the  Christians  appeared  to  share  the  obstinacy  of  the
Jews,  while  they  inflamed  it  with  a  new  and  still  more
fervent  fanaticism.  In  the  background  of  this  fermenting
mass  lay  the  formidable  power  of  the  Parthians,  ever  ready
to  harbour  exiles,  to  encourage  malcontents,  and  to  plot
against  the  interests  of  the  empire.  To  encounter  the  overt,
to  bring  to  light  the  hidden  dangers  of  the  time,  the  staff  of
proconsuls  and  procurators,  even  when  supported  by  the
legions,  was  insufficient. The  crisis  demanded  the  august

'  lloflbeiro  puto  this  habitual  policy  in  a  clear  light  in  speaking  on  this  sub-
ject :  Ik  rebuM  ChriaL  Haoc.  ii.  c.  xi,  note :  "  80ciata9  plcbis  postulationcs  rcji-
ccra  prtMides  non  audcbant,  no  scditioni  locum  faccrcnt :  dcindo  vctori  lloinan-
onim  jure  tlve  consuctudino  sic  coinparatinn  crat  .  .  .  .  ut  plcbs  quotics  ad
ludos  publioM  ....  convcnirot,  ab  Iinpcratoru  ac  pncsidibus  quia  vcllct  po*
tere  poiMt:  qua  pctiUonos  ropudiari  nullo  modo  potcrant"

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  29Y

presence  and  the  complete  autliority  of  the  master  of  both
the  soldiers  and  the  people  of  Rome.

It  was  not,  accordingly,  we  may  believe,  from  mere  rest-
less love  of  enterprise,  nor  from  the  ambition  so  often  present

to  the  mind  of  Roman  commanders,  of  rivalling

. lBt«ite«BM  af
the  great  Eastern  conquerors,  but  from  a  convio- th*  PwtktaM

tion  of  the  importance  of  the  crisis  to  the  welfare
of  the  empire,  tliat  Trajan  relinquished  the  ease  he  had  earned
by  his  Dacian  exploits,  and  plunged  again,  towards  the  close
of  his  career,  into  the  feverish  excitement  of  a  great  national
struggle.  But  the  ostensible  motive  of  the  war  on  which  he
now  entered  was  the  interference  of  the  Parthians  with  the
affairs  of  Armenia.  Vologesus,  as  we  have  seen,  had  accept-
ed the  terms  imposed  on  him  by  Nero,  and  had  been  perhaps
too  deeply  impressed  with  the  power  and  magnificence  he
had  witnessed  at  Rome  to  venture  to  tamper  with  them.
Tiridates,  king  of  Armenia,  continued  to  hold  his  crown  in
acknowledged  dependence  on  the  empire  of  the  West.
When,  however,  the  succession  to  the  Roman  purple  was  in
dispute,  Pacorus  II.,  the  son  and  successor  of  Vologesus,  did
not  scruple  to  take  open  part  with  a  pretender  to  th^  Arme-
nian throne.  The  object,  indeed,  of  his  favour  proved  un-
successful. Vespasian,  though  compelled  to  dissemble  while
his  own  fortunes  were  in  the  balance,  was  jealous  and  angry.
By  the  time  that  he  had  established  his  power  he  had  become
weary  of  fighting  ;  nor,  indeed,  was  the  position  of  affairs  at
home  favourable  to  an  arduous  and  expensive  struggle.
Titus  reposed  on  his  Judean  laurels,  and  could  afford  to
overlook  the  slight.  Domitian,  in  his  turn,  regarded  with
tlie  apathy  of  a  feeble  understanding  the  insults  of  so  distant
a  rival.  Pacorus  was  emboldened  by  impunity,  and  carried,
it  was  said,  his  defiance  so  far  as  to  foim  relations  with  De-
cebalus,  gathering  up  the  threads  of  alliance  which  had  con-
nected Mithridates  of  old  with  the  barbarian  chiefs  beyond
the  Tanais  and  Borysthenes.  He  seems,  however,  to  have
stood  in  awe  of  the  martial  character  of  Trajan,  and  to  have
refrained  from sending  aid  to  the  Dacian  prince  on  the

298  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Danube,  and  from  effecting  a  diversion  in  his  favour  by  an
attack  on  the  side  of  the  Euphrates.  His  movements  were
confined  to  redoubled  efforts  for  the  extension  of  the  Parthi-
an influence  over  Armenia.  After  the  death  of  Pacorus  his
brother  Chosroes  pursued  the  same  policy,  and  ventured  to
recommend  a  son  of  the  deceased  king  of  Parthia,  named
Exedares,  to  fill  the  vacant  throne  of  Tiri dates.  But  Trajan
had  now  completed  the  subjugation  of  Dacia,

Resisted  by  ^  , .^  ^  ^'' *=  . „ ,  .'

Tr^an.  and  was  at  leisure  to  demand  reparation  lor  this

insult.  Armenia,  he  declared,  was  the  vassal  of
Rome,  not  of  Parthia.  She  must  accept  her  kings  from  the
master  of  the  legions  which  had  so  often  sprang  from  the
Euphrates  to  the  Araxes,  and  given  proof  of  their  power  to
annex,  if  so  it  pleased  their  leaders,  the  whole  realm  to  the
empire.  Chosroes  was  alarmed  at  the  menaces  addressed  to
him,  and  still  more  at  the  promptitude  with  which  his  oppo-
nent rushed  towards  the  scene  of  action.  He  sent  envoys  to
meet  Trajan  at  Athens,  and  assured  him  that  he  had  already
compelled  Exedares,  whom  he  represented  as  equally  faithless
to  both  powers,  to  descend  from  the  throne.  At  the  same
time,  however,  he  presumed,  it  seems,  to  suggest  the  substi-
tution of  Parthamasiris,  another  son  of  Pacoinis,  for  the  un-
worthy Exedares,  only  asking  the  Roman  emperor  to  invest
him  with  the  diadem,  instead  of  bestowing  it  himself  It
appeared,  however,  that  Trajan  had  other  ends  in  view  than
to  settle  a  matter  of  ceremonial  with  the  king  of  Parthia.  He
was  resolved  to  establish  the  supremacy  of  Rome  throughout
the  East,  by  some  notable  exploits,  and,  old  though  he  now
was,  lie  would  not  suft'er  his  plans  to  be  frustrated  by  a
premature  accommodation.'  He  rejected  the  presents  with
which  Chosroes  had  accompanied  his  overtures,  and  deigned
to  make  no  other  re[)ly  to  his  ]»roposals  but  that  the  friend-
ship of  princes  should  be  estimated  by  deeds,  rather  than  by

'  Tho  ago  of  Tn^an  in  114  wub  sixty-two  years.  Julian,  C<ra.  p.  S28  a,  re-
fers to  bis  advanced  age  :  irpdc  Uapdvalovc  nplv  fih>  a6iKe'tadat  irap'  avruv  ovK
tf'dfjtrjv  Selv  xp^oOai  rote  bn^xttc  •  hStnovai  6i  iire^f/Wov,  ov6h>  vnd  rfjc  t^TuKiai
KuJivOeIc  •  Kalrot  6tS&truv  ftot  tuv  v6fiuv  rh  ft^  arpaTeleaOat.

A.  U.  868.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  299

words,  and  that,  when  he  arrived  himself  in  Syria,  he  would
act  as  befitted  the  occasion. With  these  ominous  worda  he
dismissed  the couitiers  of  Chosroes,  and con- t^j^.^^^
tinued  his  progress through  Asia  and  Cilicia, »*i*i*«*-
till  he  finally  arrived,  towards  the  close  of  the  year  114,  at
the  1  eadquarters  of  the  Roman  government  in  Antioch.'

While  awaiting  the  season  for  military  movements,  re-
storing the  strictness  of  military  discipline,  and  superintend-
ing the  details  of  the  civil  administration  of  the  Earthqu«k«»t
East,  a  calamity  occurred  which  might  have  ^"*i^
daunted  the  courage  of  a  less  resolute  ruler.  It  was  in  the
course  of  this  same  winter,  early  in  the  year  115,  according
to  the  most  exact  chronology,  that  the  splendid  capital  of
Syria  was  visited  by  an  earthquake,  one  of  the  most  disas-
trous apparently  of  all  the  similar  inflictions  from  which  that
luckless  city  has  periodically  suflered.  The  commotion  of
the  elements,  the  overthrow  of  edifices,  and  destruction  of
multitudes  of  people  in  the  ruins,  are  described  with  great
emphasis  by  Dion,  who  adds,  that  the  calamity  was  enhanced
by  the  presence  of  unusual  crowds  from  all  the  cities  of  the
East,  assembled  to  pay  homage  to  the  emperor,  or  to  take
part  in  his  expedition.  Among  the  victims  were  many  Ro-
mans of  distinction,  including  Pedo,  one  of  the  consuls  for
the  year,  who  had  just  entered  on  his  office.  Trajan  himself
only  escaped  by  creeping  through  a  window,  with  the  assist-
ance of  a  man  of  gigantic  stature,  who  was  evidently  sup-
posed to  have  been  some  divine  protector.  The  population
were  compelled  to  encamp,  in  that  inclement  season,  in  the
Circus,  while  Mount  Casius,  the  lofty  eminence  which  towers
above  the  city,  and  seems  almost  to  impend  over  it,  appeared,
to  their  excited  imaginations,  to  be  shaken  by  the  violence
of  the  repeated  shocks,  and  trembled  as  if  about  to  fall  and
overwhelm  the  remnants  of  the  ruin.*

'  Dion,  Ixviii.  11. Francke,  Getch.  TVaj.  p.  261,  foil Clinton,  Fad.  Rrnn.

'  Dion,  Ixviii.  25.  The  earthquake  at  Antioch  is  reckoned  by  Orosius,
along  with  other  calamities  of  the  same  nature,  as  a  divine  judgment  on  the
persecution  of  the  Christians. "  Terrse  motu  quatuor  urbes  Asia  subversae  .  .

300  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  115.

The  events  of  Trajan's  expedition  into  the  East,  the  most

brilliant  in  the  extent  and  rapidity  of  its  conquests  of  any

exploit  of  the  Roman  arms,  though  doomed  to

Trajan's  expe-  '■,  .  .,  ,_.,__

dition  into  Ar-  ommous  oDscuration  at  its  close,  may  be  divided,
brief  as  was  the  interval  it  embraced,  into  two
portions.  The  first  of  these  includes,  as  the  work  of  a  few
months  only,  the  annexation  of  Armenia  to  the  Roman  do-
minions, and  the  consolidation  of  the  Roman  power  through-
out the  regions  between  the  Euxine  and  the  Caspian,  the
Euphrates  and  the  Caucasus.  Our  authorities,  indeed,  are  here
confused  and  fragmentary,  and  it  is  only  as  a  choice  of  diffi-
culties that  we  accept  the  arrangement  and  chronology  which
seem  best  accredited.  The  commencement  of  the  year  115
was  no  doubt  occupied  with  preparations  for  a  great  military
progress,  and  the  emperor's  advance  must  have  been  retarded
by  the  disaster  at  Antioch.  But  the  legionaries,  whose  habits
of  endurance  had  been  relaxed  under  the  enervating  climate
of  Syria,  required  to  be  guided  with  a  strong  hand,  and
Trajan  did  not  hesitate  to  keep  the  field  through  the  summer
heats.*  As  he  advanced  from  the  Syrian  capital  to  the  Ar-
menian frontier,  he  received  the  petty  princes  of  the  regions
on  his  route,  and  accepted  their  homage  and  their  gifts  with
the  air  of  an  Oriental  potentate. Ascending  the  stream  of

et  Gnecorum  cmtatcs  duo  .  .  .  Tres  Galatise  civitatcs  eodem  terras  motu  di-
rutffi  .  .  .  Panthcou  Roma3  fulmino  concrematum."  We  can  easily  suppoao
that  the  Christians  were  conscious  that  the  persecutions  they  now  suffered  were
connected  with  these  portentous  disasters.  The  Pagans,  on  tlic  other  hand,
were  deeply  impressed  with  them,  as  judgments  requiring  peculiar  methods  of
expiation.  Thus  the  survivors  at  Antioch  erected  a  temple  in  their  beautiful
•nburb  of  Daphne  to  Zeus  the  iSaviour.  Francke,  Gesch.  Traj.  p.  208.,  frona
Malclas  and  Kustathius.  A  fresh  outbreak  of  the  Jews  in  Egypt  and  Cyrene
at  this  Juncture  may  perhaps  bo  also  referred  to  the  excitement  which  followed
on  tho  catastrophe  at  Antioch. Hee  Oros.  1.  c. Euseb.  IFist.  Jicd.  iv.  2.

'  The  indiaciplino  of  tho  Syrian  legions  and  tho  vigorous  measures  of  Tra<
Jan  are  painted  in  strong  coloura  by  Fronto,  Princip.  Hist  in  Opp,  Ined.  ii.
340. :  "  corruptissiml  voro  omnium  Syriutici  militcs,  seditiosl,  contumaccs,  apud
Bigna  infrequcntos  .  .  .  Tantam  militaris  disciplinae  labem  coercuit,  iudustria
sua  ad  militandum  cxemplo  proposita,"  eta

A.  U.  8«8.]  tfKDER  THE  EMPIRE.  801

the  Euphrates  from  the  Roman  outpost  at  Zeugma,  he  occu-
pied the  passages  of  that  river  at  Samosata  and  Elegia ;  and
here,  on  the  frontier  of  the  Greater  Armenia,  he  awaited  the
arrival  of  Parthamasiris,  whom  he  had  summoned  to  attend
him.'  The  pretender  to  the  throne  of  Armenia  affected  in«
dependence,  and  instead  of  appearing  in  person,  took  the
liberty  of  sending  envoys  to  confer  with  the  rival  chieflain.
Trajan  refused  to  admit  the  vassals  of  a  vassal  into  his  pres-
ence, and  Parthamasiris,  now  thoroughly  alarmed,  was  com-
pelled to  repair  himself  to  the  Roman  quarters.  DtgaiiM  b^
The  Parthian,  however,  though  no  match  for  a  {£25*5^1,  ttT
Roman  enemy  in  the  field,  was  a  bold  and  mag-  Jl^f^^o*'*'"
nanimous  adversary.  He  advanced  gallantly,  *i»»««^
with  a  small  retinue,  to  the  emperor's  tribunal  in  the  centre
of  the  camp.  Taking  the  diadem  from  his  own  brows  he
laid  it  at  Trajan's  feet ;  then,  drawing  himself  up,  he  stood
in  dignified  silence,  expecting  that  this  mute  submission
would  be  accepted  in  place  of  humiliating  declarations,  and
that  the  emblem  of  sovereignty  would  be  returned  to  him.
But  at  the  sight  of  this  expressive  act  of  homage  from  the
son  of  the  once  terrible  Pacorus,  the  whole  army  raised  a
shout  and  loudly  saluted  Trajan  as  Imperator,  and  victor  of
a  bloodless  field.  The  Parthian  was  startled  by  this  sudden
tumult,  and  apprehended  danger  to  his  person.  Turning
about  to  retire,  he  found  himself  surrounded  and  retreat  in-

'  Some  of  our  geographers  suppose  the  existence  of  two  places  (^  the  iuuii«
of  Elegia,  one  corresponding  to  a  modem  Dldjeh,  the  other  to  Iz-Oghlu.  I  find
the  latter  only  in  Kiepert's  elaborate  map  of  Asia  Minor,  placed  on  the  right
or  Roman  bank  of  the  Euphrates,  just  above  the  spot  where  the  river  falls  into
the  defiles  of  the  Taurus,  as  Samosata  stands  just  below  them.  Perhaps  this
spot  is  more  strictly  in  Cappadocia  than  in  the  Lesser  Armenia,  which  are  com-
monly represented  as  separated  by  the  stream  of  the  Tokhmah-Sir  ;  but  on  this
matter  we  have  no  precise  information.  In  Dion,  IxxL  2.,  a  Roman  force  is
said  to  be  cut  to  pieces,  a.  d.  162,  by  the  Parthians  at  Elegia  in  Armenia ;  and
this  Elegia  can  only  be  the  frontier  station  on  the  Euphrates,  as  Armenia  Ma-
jor, which  was  annexed  to  the  empire  in  116,  was  relinquished  a  few  years
later,  and  no  Roman  force  would  be  quartered  within  it  I  am  inclined,  there-
fore, to  believe  in  only  one  Elegia.

302  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.115.

tercepted.  He  once  more  confronted  the  emperor,  and  de-
manded a  private  interview,  that  any  degrading  concessions
required  of  him  might  at  least  be  made  out  of  the  sight  both
of  his  friends  and  his  enemies.  He  was  then  led,  courteously
as  it  would  seem  in  the  first  instance,  into  the  prsetorium;
but  the  tei'ms  he  offered  were  not  sufficient.  Trajan  used  no
forbearance  to  the  rival  now  in  his  power.  He  would  be
be  satisfied  with  no  less  than  the  cession  of  his  country,  and
even  this  capitulation  must  be  accompanied  with  galling  in-
dignities. The  emperor  again  ascended  his  tribunal,  and
Parthamasiris,  frustrated  in  a  second  attempt  to  escape,  was
now  led  as  a  captive  before  him,  and  required  to  pronounce
his  submission  in  public,  that  no  false  account  of  the  circum-
stances might  be  suffered  to  transpire.  The  Parthian,  in  this
extremity,  maintained  his  self-possession.  He  proudly  af-
firmed that  he  was  neither  captured  nor  conquered ;  but  had
come  of  his  own  accord,  as  Tiridates  had  come  to  Nero,  to
confer  on  equal  terms  with  a  generous  rival.  Trajan  curtly
replied,  with  the  effrontery  of  a  Paullus  or  a  Pompeius,  that
Armenia  was  a  Roman  dependency,  and  that  he  would  give
its  crown  to  none,  but  would  place  it  under  a  governor  from
Rome.  Parthamasiris  and  his  countrymen  were  then  di-
rected to  leave  the  camp,  but  a  Roman  squadron  was  given
him  as  an  escort,  to  prevent  his  communicating  with  the
native  chiefs  on  his  route  homewards.  His  Armenian  at-
tendants were,  however,  detained ;  for  they  were  now  pro-
nounced to  be  Roman  subjects,  and  to  owe  no  allegiance  to
the  foreign  intruder.*

Even  from  Dion's  account,  which  has  been  thus  repeated,
meagre  as  it  is,  we  arc  led  to  apprehend  tliat  Trajan's  con-

_ ^  duct  was  marked  with  a  contemptuous  disregard

TnMberona  , ^

■Untrhter  of of  tlio  treatment  due  to  a  fair  and  open  enemy.

r  rom  the  casual  expression,  indeed,  of  an  obscure

writer,  it  has  been  long  inferred  that  Parthamasiris  actually

perished;'  and  the  fragments  of  a  contemporary  liistory

Dion,  Ixviii.  18-20.
*  Eutrop.  viiL  ii. :  "  Parthamaairo  occiso,"  to  which  we  may  now  add  the

A.  U.  868.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  3O3

lately  discovered,  leave  no  doubt  of  the  fact,  that  the  dlBmis-
sal  of  Parthamasiris  was  only  a  feint,  and  that  the  emperor
took  care  to  have  him  again  arrested,  and  when  he  resisted
and  flew  to  arms,  caused  him  to  be  brutally  slain.  While  in
many  respects  the  public  morality  of  the  Romans  was  puri-
fied by  their  long  civilization,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that
in  the  treatment  of  their  foes  they  had  made  little  advance
either  in  clemency  or  good  faith.  But  this  sharp  and  sudden
blow  was  successfuL  Parthamasiris  may  have  had  no  firm
footing  in  the  country  over  which  he  had  usurped  domini<HL
The  Armenians,  finding  that  they  had  no  choice  but  betwecm
submission  to  Rome  or  to  Parthia,  may  have  preferred  the
rule  of  a  proconsul  to  that  of  a  satrap.  At  all  events,  they
yielded  without  a  blow.  The  Greater  and  the  Both  the  Ar-
Lesser  Armenia  were  now,  for  the  first  time,  an-  SSdtotie
nexed  to  the  empire,  and  reduced  to  the  form  of  k*""**  «»?•»•.
a  province.  The  Roman  standards  were  planted  on  the
shores  of  the  Caspian.  Araxes  chafed  in  vain  against  the
piei-8  of  a  Roman  bridge.  While  these  arrangements  were  in
progress  the  conqueror  turned  northward,  and  reached  the
hill-station  of  Satala  on  the  Lycus,  which  commanded  the
road  into  the  wild  districts  on  the  eastern  shores  of  the  Eux-
ine.  Here  he  received  the  homage  of  the  Heniochi,  and  gave
a  king  to  the  Albani.  Here  he  graciously  accepted  the  alli-
ance of  the  Iberi,  the  Sauromatte,  and  the  tribes  of  the  Cim-
merian Bosphorus.  He  might  hope,  perhaps,  to  close  the
sources  of  the  perennial  stream  of  Xomade  savagery  which
ever  broke  against  the  frontiers  of  his  Dacian  provinces.  But
the  Romans  were  pleased  to  hear  once  more  the  names  of  cli-
ents and  tributaries  over  whom  their  great  Pompeius  had
triumphed  in  the  good  old  days  of  conquest ;  and  they  ex-
claimed with  exultation,  that  under  the  bravest  of  her  em-
perors, Rome  agaiii  squared  at  the  world?

[  wpplemental  testimony  of  Cornelius  Fronto  {Princip.  Hltt.  p.  849.):  "  Trajano

csades  Parthamasiris  regis  supplicis  baud  satis  excusata;  tametsi  ultro  ille  vim
coeptans,  tumultu  orto,  merito  interfectus  est,  meliore  tamea  Romanorum  taxoA
impune  supplex  abisset,  quam  jure  supplicium  luisset"

'  Thus  I  venture  to  translate  the  pugilistic  metaphor  of  Rufus,  Breviar,

304  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  115.

The  subsequent  exploits  of  Trajan  were  compressed  with-
in a  very  short  space  of  time,  and  we  are  led  to  suppose  that
before  the  close  of  this  eventful  year,  he  launched

Further  acqni- ....  , .  .  i

BitionsinMeso-  his  victorious  Icgions  against  the  centre  of  the
Parthian  power.  The  direction  of  his  march  may
be  traced  perhaps  by  the  titles  of  the  princes  whose  submis-
sion he  successively  received.  At  the  head  of  these  was
Abgarus,  king  of  Edessa,  at  the  first  stage  on  the  road  which
crossed  Mesopotamia  from  Zeugma  to  Nineveh.  The  next
in  order  was  Sporaces,  phylarch,  as  he  is  called,  of  Anthe-
musia,  a  town  of  Macedonian  origin  on  the  river  Chaboras.
His  route  then  was  the  same  which  had  proved  fatal  to  Cras-
sus ;  but  Trajan  was  an  abler  captain  than  the  luckless  tri-
umvii*,  and  he  was  more  fortunate,  also,  in  having  a  less  able
enemy  to  contend  with.  The  Parthian  kings,  though  still
bold  in  language  and  haughty  in  their  pretensions,  were  at
this  time  broken  in  power ;  the  spirit  of  their  nation  was  well
nigh  exhausted,  and  their  realm  was  ready  to  fall  a  prey  to
any  resolute  assailant.  Trajan,  indeed,  won  his  way  by  in-
trigue as  much  as  by  the  power  of  his  arms.  His  interview
with  the  young  son  of  Abgarus,  in  which  he  afiected  to  pull
the  prince  playfully  by  the  ears,  exemplifies  the  trivialities  to
which  a  victorious  emperor  would  descend,  when  it  was  more
convenient  to  deceive  than  to  threaten  his  victim.  The  do-
minions of  these  petty  chiefs  were  not  less  surely  absorbed
in  the  new  provinces  which  the  invader  added  to  his  empire.
From  thence,  taking  advantage  of  the  feuds
the  TigriB,  Md Subsisting  between  the  Parthian  Chosroes  and

CTMtoS  the  now  i-»r  i-nr-  ^  •  n

proTinoe  of liis  vassals,  Manniis  and  31anisarus,  the  invader
AMyrU.  .  ....

pushed  on  to  Singara,  took  Nisibis,  bridged  the

Tigris,  and  in  spite  of  the  desultory  resistance  of  the  moun-

c.  21.:  "movit  Uoortoa."  Eutrop.  1.  c. :  "Armcniom  .  .  .  reccpit.  Albanis
rogcm  dcdit.  Ibcroniin  rcgcm  ct  Sauromatonim  ct  Hosporunonini,  Osdroono-
nun  ct  Colcliorum  lu  fldcm  reccpit,  Carducnos  ct  Mnrcomedos  occupiivit."
Comp.  Plin.  J'J!pi»t,  x.  18-15.  The  occupation  of  Siitala  is  mentioned  by  Dion,
Irviii.  10.,  but  the  order  of  CTcnt«  Ih,  oh  I  have  said,  much  confused  in  this
writer's  remains.

A.  U.  868.]  UXDER  THE  EMPIRE.  g05

tain  tribes  (for  the  Parthian  king  seems  to  have  led  no
army  to  oppose  liim),  planted  himself  firmly  in  the  region
of  Adiabene.'  The  resistance  of  the  Parthians  was  paralysed
by  intestine  divisions;  the  Romans  marched  triumphantly
from  station  to  station ;  and  before  the  end  of  the  year  Tra-
jan had  created  the  new  province  of  Assyria,  stretching
beyond  the  Tigris  to  the  mountain  ridge  of  Choatres  and
Zagrus,  and  including  the  modern  Kurdistan.  The  title  of
Parthicus  was  well  bestowed  on  the  achiever  of  so  splendid
a  conquest,  who  had  thus  won  for  the  City  of  the  West  the
sites  of  Alexander's  greatest  victories,  Arbela  and  Gaaga-
melu."

Trajan  passed  the  ensuing  winter  at  Nisibis  or  Edessa.
His  ardent  soul,  still  glowing  beneath  the  weight  of  years,
was  inflamed  with  the  prospect  of  easy  and  un- ^mm  4».
limited  conquests  in  remotest  Asia. From  the SSjj^^S^
Euphrates  to  the  Indus,  all  the  tribes  of  the  far  ^^'^^
East  were  fluttering  with  the  anticipation  of  his *^jj"i^(^
descent  upon  them.* Vast  preparations were ^v.hm.
made,  and  a  mighty  armament  was  wafted  in  the  spring  of
116  down  the  Euphrates,  and  the  flotilla  itself  transported
by  simple  machinery  across  the  neck  of  land  which  separates
the  Euphrates  from  the  Tigris,  in  order  to  arrive  at  Ctea>
phon.* This  great  city,  the  residence  of  the  Parthian  sultans,

'  Dion,  IxTiii.  26. :  imd  rd  iap  vmix^. I  can  hardly  reoondle  Ak  maril

.  of  time  with  the  circumstancea  detailed,  whether  we  suiq[)08e  the  paan^  </

the  Tigris  to  take  place  in  115  or  116. I  have  supposed  in  the  text  that

this  was  the  termination  of  the  campaign  of  115,  and  that  Tny'an  descended

the  Tigris  or  the  Euphrates  in  the  sprmg  of  the  following  year.

'  The  title  of  Parthicus  does  not  appear  on  Trajan's  medals  in  this  year
(116);  but  some  time  must  be  allowed  for  the  news  of  hia  last  exploits  to
reach  Rome.  On  the  conquest  of  Ctesiphon,  in  the  enaoing  year,  the  army
is  said  to  confirm  the  title,  as  though  it  had  been  already  giTen.  Diiui,  IxviiL
28. :  rf/v  iniiihiciv  tov  HapdiKov  k^e^Uxsaro.

'  Victor,  De  Ccesar.  13. :  "  Ad  ortum  Soils  cunct»  geatea  quae  inter  Indum
et  Euphratem  sunt  bello  concussse."

*  Dion,  kviil  28. :  virepeveyKuv  ra  nXoia  6?Jcolc,  i.  e.  on  rollers  covered
with  greased  skins.  Comp.  Hor.  Od.  L  4.  2.  The  canals  which  formerly  led
VOL.  TII. — 20

306  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  118.

at  once  opened  its  gates ;  the  army  saluted  tlieir  chief  as
Imperator,  and  confirmed  the  title  of  Parthicus.  The  inde-
pendence of  the  great  monarchy,  once  Rome's  only  rival,
seemed  for  a  moment  extinguished.  The  king  fled  into  the
interior  of  Media,  but  the  Roman  forces  under  Trajan's
lieutenants  pursued  him  as  far  as  Susa,  and  there  captured
his  daughter  and  his  golden  throne. Leaving

Trajan  launches  -r • ^ •  tt  ai  i  t

on  the  Persian  to  Lusms  Quietus,  to  J  uhus  Alexander,  and  to
Erucius  Clarus  the  complete  reduction  of  these
regions,  and  more  particularly  of  Seleucia  on  the  Tigris,  a
city  whose  Grecian  liberties  even  the  Parthian  monarchs  had
respected,  Trajan  descended  in  person  the  stream  of  the  now
united  rivers,  and  launched  his  bark  on  the  Persian  Gulf.
His  restless  imagination  was  not  yet  satisfied.  He  could  not
repress  the  puerile  ambition  of  emulating  the  first  European
conqueror  of  the  East,  and  leading  his  legions  to  the  ocean
on  which  the  triremes  of  Alexander  had  floated.  Seeing
a  vessel  laden  for  India,  and  about  to  sail,  he  exclaimed.
Were  I  yet  young ^  I  would  not  stop  till  I  too  had  reached
the  limits  of  the  Macedonian  conquest.^  But  the  hand  of
fate  was  already  upon  him,  and  had  he  really  breathed  so
wild  an  aspiration,  the  circumstances  of  the  realm  he  had
left  behind  him  must  have  speedily  dispelled  his  delusions.

from  the  Euphrates  to  the  Tigris  had  silted  up  under  the  negligent  govern-
mcnt  of  the  Parthians,  and  the  Euphrates  constantly  overflowing  its  banks
bad  converted  these  once  fertile  tracts  into  a  morass.  It  is  true,  as  Dion  re-
marks,  that  the  bed  of  this  river  is  higher  in  its  mid  course  than  that  of  the
Tigris;  but  by  skilful  cnginecruig,  a  portion  of  the  higher  stream  had  for-
merly been  conveyed  safely  into  the  lower.  Comp.  Arrian.  Anab.  Alex.  vii.  Y.
'  Dion,  livlii.  28. ;  Eutrop.  viii.  2. ;  Julian,  Ccea.  p.  22. :  i-TreSelKWEV  avrolg
t6  re  Teruciyv  Kal  rd  llapdtKdv  Tp6natov  yndro  di  rb  yypac,  wf  ovk  eTrtrpiipav
avT<f'  To'ic  HapOtKOic  npdy/iaatv  ine^eTSeiv.  Francke,  Oeach.  Trajans,  p.  289.
This  writer  plaoei  Tnjan'a  visit  to  the  Persian  Gulf  in  117.  If  tiiis  could  be
a(lmilte<l,  the  descent  of  the  Euphrates  might  be  assigned  to  the  spring  of
110;  but  it  teemB  to  mo  not  to  allow  time  enough  fur  the  return  to  Ctcsi-
phon  and  transactions  there  previous  to  the  journey  homeward.  See  below.
In  oUher  case  there  is  no  pretence  for  tlio  assumption  of  some  modems  that
Tn^an  launched  upon  the  Arabian  ocean.

A.U.  869.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  8O7

After  a  few  skii-mishes  with  the  tribes  on  the  coast,  the  news
of  defections  in  his  rear  caused  him  hastily  to  re-  uefeeUoBi  in
trace  his  steps.  Seleucia,  after  her  first  submis-  *»"  '*^
sion,  encouraged  perhaps  by  his  absence,  had  broken  out  in
rebellion,  and  overpowered  a  Roman  army.  The  city  was
stormed  by  Clarus  and  Alexander,  and  according  to  the  his-
torians burnt  to  the  ground ;  but  this,  there  is  reason  to
believe,  is  a  gross  exaggeration.  Trajan,  however,  was
undeceived.  He  confessed  that  the  complete  H««»««uto
annexation  of  these  distant  regions  to  the  empire  ff^******
was  impossible,  and  he  proceeded  to  set  up  a  **»  '•«*"».
puppet  of  his  own,  a  Parthian  of  royal  blood,  named  Partha-
maspates,  to  perpetuate,  under  Roman  control,  the  national
existence.  Repairing  to  Ctesiphon,  he  assembled  the  people
in  the  presence  of  his  army,  and  calling  the  new  candidate
before  him,  placed  the  diadem  on  his  head,  with  a  magnilo-
quent harangue  on  the  splendour  of  his  own  achievements.'

The  year  116  closed  with  this  pretended  settlement  of
Parthian  aflairs ;  but  troubles  were  gathering  about  the  con-
queror's path,  and  his  own  energies  were  beginning,  perhaps,
to  fail.  The  last  exploit  of  Trajan  was  not  a  movement  in
advance,  or  the  opening  of  another  vista  of  triumphs,  but  an
attempt,  not  wholly  successful,  to  quell  the  defection  of  re-
volted subjects.  The  little  fastness  of  Atra,  the  modern  El
Iladr,  on  the  road  from  Ctesiphon  to  Singara,  though  con-
temptible in  itself,  was  rendered  formidable  by  the  nature  of
the  country  in  which  it  stood,  a  desert  almost  destitute  of
water,  affording  neither  food  for  men  nor  fodder  for  horses.
The  natives  consecrated  this  city  to  the  Sun,  and  the  fierce
rays  of  that  potent  luminary  striking  on  a  dry  and  sandy
soil,  furnished  a  better  defence  than  armies  or  fortifications.
Trajan  could  approach  the  place  only  with  a  small  body  of
soldiers,  and  though  he  succeeded  in  breaching  in  the  walls,
he  was  unable  to  penetrate  them,  and  in  succouring  his  baf-
fled cohorts  he  was  himself  struck  by  an  arrow. A  thunder-

"  Dion,  Ixviii.  27-30.: The  progress  and successes  of  Trajan  may  be
traced  on  his  existing  medals. See  Eckhel  and  Francke,  kc

308  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  117.

storm  with  rain  and  hail  added  to  the  confusion  of  the
Romans ;  but  it  served,  at  least,  to  cover  their  retreat.  Their
food  and  drink  were  poisoned  with  swarms  of  noxious  in-
sects, and  the  chief  was  at  length  compelled  to  retire  before
the  last  and  least  formidable  of  his  opponents.*

Even  under  the  command  of  Trajan,  that  gallant  captain,
an  army  with  its  legate  had  been  cut  in  pieces,  and  the  vic-
torious emperor''s  return  was  neither  unmolested

General  revolt  • o

of  the  Jews nor  oloodUss. Such  IS  the  testimony  of  Fronto,

throughout  the  ,  i  •  ,  , -,.

East  no  lavourable  witness,  perhaps,  to  the  disasters

A.D.  m. which  clouded  the  termination  of  the  Parthian

A.  V.  870.  •  m .  .  ,

campaigns.  Irajan  was  now  anxious  to  make
his  way  to  Rome.  He  still  flattered  himself  that  he  had
effected  permanent  conquests,  and  that  the  realms  of  Arme-
nia, Mesopotamia,  and  Assyria  beyond  the  Tigris  would  con-
tinue, under  the  control  of  his  lieutenants,  a  lasting  trophy
of  the  Roman  Terminus.*  But  his  own  weakness  was  no
doubt  sensibly  increasing.  He  had  not  provided  for  the
succession,  and  with  his  habitual  deference  to  the  senate,  he
might  shrink  from  the  odium  of  making  an  appointment  ex-
cept in  their  presence,  or  with  their  concurrence.  Meanwhile,
within  the  borders  of  the  empire,  sympathetic  movements  of
revolt  responded  pulse  by  pulse  to  the  death  spasms  of  Arme-
nia and  of  Parthia. The  Jewish  insurrection,  so  long  impend-

'  Dion,  Ixviii.  31.  The  position  of  Atra  is  fixed  by  the  statement  of  Stcph.
Byzant.  (ex  Arrian.  xvii.  Parthic.).  'Arpai  7rd/Uf  fiera^v  'Ev^p&rov  Kal  Tl-
ypjjTtK. Francke,  p.  293.

*  Fronto,  Princip.  Jlist.  p.  838. :  "  sod  etiam  fortissimi  imperatoris  diictu
legatuB  cum  cxercitu  cocsus,  et  principis  ad  triumphura  dcccdcntis  haud(niaquam
secura  nee  incruenta  regressio."  It  will  be  understood  that  Fronto,  writing  un-
der  Tn^jan'B  Buccessor,  is  not  indisposed  to  point  out  the  circumstances  which
detract  from  the  great  conqueror's  unrivalled  merits.

•  IliifuH,  Jireviar.  14.:  "ad  cxtremum  sub  Trnjano  princlpo  rcgl  migoris
Anncniuo  diadcma  sublatum  est,  et  i)er  Trnjanum  Annenia,  Mesojiotamia,  As-
syria ct  Arabia  provinclro  factoo  sunt."  Kutrop.  viii.  8. :  "  Selcucium  et  Ctesl-
phontcm,  liabylonom  ot  Mouonioe,  vicit  ac  tcnuit :  usque  ad  Indite  fines  et
maro  rubnim  acocmit:  atquo  ibi  trcs  provincias  fecit,  Armenian),  Assyriam,
Mosoiiotnniiam."  Tac.  jinn.  i.  01.:  "Rom.  Imp.  quod  nunc  ad  marc  rubrum
patcBclt,"  I.  c.  the  Pcraian  Gulf.

A.  U.  870.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  3O9

ing,  had  burst  forth  in  several  quarters.  The  fall  of  Antioch
was  perhaps  a  signal  for  a  final  appeal  to  the  Deliverer  of
Israel.'  Once  more  the  children  of  Moses  and  David  believed
that  heaven  had  declared  for  them  by  outward  tokens,  and
that  their  long-destined  triumph  was  at  hand.  The  Jewish
population  of  Palestine  and  Syria  had  not  yet  recovered  from
its  exhaustion,  but  the  number  of  this  people  was  very  con-
siderable in  Cyprus,  lying  over  against  Antioch,  where
Augustus  had  granted  to  the  first  Herod  the  privilege  of
working  the  copper  mines,  whence  the  island  derived  its
name.  Tlus  rich  and  pleasant  territory  had  afforded  a  refuge
to  the  Jews  of  the  continent  through  three  generations  of
disturbance  and  alarm,  and  the  Hebrew  race  was  now  proba-
bly not  inferior  there  in  number  to  the  native  Syrians  or
Greeks.  On  the  first  outburst  of  a  Jewish  revolt,  the  whole
island  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  insurgents,  and  became  an
arsenal  and  a  rallying  point  for  the  insurrection,  which  soon
spread  over  Egypt,  Cyrene,  and  Mesopotamia.  The  leader
of  the  revolt  in  Cyprus  bore  the  name  of  Arte-
mion,  but  we  know  no  particulars  of  the  war  in  ouSKIirto
this  quarter,  except  that  240,000  of  the  native
population  are  said  to  have  fallen  victims  to  the  exterminat-
ing fury  of  the  insurgents.  When  the  rebellion  was  at  last
extinguished  in  blood,  the  Jews  were  forbidden  thenceforth
to  set  foot  on  the  island ;  and  even  if  driven  thither  by  stress
of  weather,  the  penalty  of  death  wa«i  mercilessly  enforced
against  them.'

'  Orosius  sums  up  the  great  features  of  this  wide-spread  uisurrectioD  in  a
few  vehement  sentences :  "  increilibili  deinde  motu  sub  uno  tempore  Judaei,
quasi  rabie  efferati,  per  diversas  terrarum  partes  exarserunt.  Nam  et  per  to.
tarn  Libyam  adversus  ineolas  atrocissima  bella  gesserunt :  qu»  adeo  time  inter-
fectis  eultoribus  desolata  est,  ut  nisi  postea  Hadrianus  imperator  collectas  aii<
unde  colonias  illuc  deduxisset,  vacua  penitus  terra,  abraso  habitatore,  mansis-
set.  ^•Egvptum  vero  totam  et  Cyrenen  et  Thebaida  cruentis  seditionibus  turb»>
verant.  In  Alexandria  autem  commisso  prselio  victi  et  attriti  sunt  In  Meso-
potamia quoque  rebellantibus  jussu  Imperatoris  bellum  illatum  est  Itaque
multa  millia  eorum  vasta  csede  deleta  simt  Salaminem  sane,  urb«n  Cypri,  in-
terfectis  omnibus  incoUs  deleverunt." Oros.  vii.  12.

*  Dion,  Ixviii.  32. The  historian's  father  was  governor  of  Cypms,  whidi

310  I  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOMANS  [A.D.  117.

Throughout  Mesopotamia  the  movements  of  disaffection
to  the  Roman  conquest  were  connected  with  this  Jewish  out-
break. Lusius Quietus,  the  best of  Trajan's
in  the  cyrenai- generals,  charged  with  the  task  of  completing
**"  the  reduction  of  the  new  province,  was  especially

enjoined  to  clear  it  of  this  element  of  perpetual  resistance.'
On  the  coast  of  Libya  the  contest  assumed  a  still  more  for-
midable character.  The  Jewish  population  of  the  Cyrenaica
outnumbered  the  natives,  and  the  fanaticism  which  had  been
aroused  by  the  pretended  mission  of  Jonathan  was  fanned
into  a  fiercer  flame  by  a  chief,  who  seems  to  have  borne  the
double  name  of  Andreas  Lucullus."  Here  the  insurgents
were  for  a  time  triumphant,  and  disgraced  their  success  by
the  cruelties  they  committed  on  the  surprised  and  over-
powered Cyrenians  ;  for  the  hostility  of  the  Jews  in  these
parts  was  directed  less  against  the  central  government  and
the  Roman  residents,  than  the  native  race  with  whom  they
always  dwelt  in  habits  of  mutual  animosity;  of  these  220,000
are  said  to  have  perished,  many  of  them  in  torments  inflicted
with  cannibal  ferocity.  After  every  allowance  for  the  ex-
aggeration usual  in  such  case,  there  seems  no  reason  to  ques-
tion the  genei-al  truth  of  these  charges  against  the  insurgents,
and  in  as  far  as  their  barbarity  was  wreaked  on  the  natives
rather  than  on  the  Romans,  the  excuse  of  despair,  and  even
of  revenge,  has  no  place.  From  Cyrene  the  flame  quickly
spread  to  Egypt.  The  prefect  Lupus  was  worsted  in  several
encounters,  and  shut  up  within  the  Avails  of  Alexandria,
where,  however,  he  indemnified  himself  for  his  losses  by  the
massacre  of  the  Jewish  residents.  His  position
was  still  precarious,  when  Martius  Turbo  came

wu  attached  to  the  province  of  Cilicia,  and  the  statement  in  the  text  seems  to
have  been  derived  from  npecial  Bourcos.

'  Dion,  Ixviii,  IVS. :  EuHcb.  Jlist.  Jiccl.  iv.  2. :  d  Ji  avroKpArup  iwoirrivaat
Kal  TWf  iv  iiecoiroTa/ii^  lowidtoix  ini&qatadai  rdii  ivrddi,  Aot'k/^  Kvf/T<t>  npo-
etra^ev  iiuuid&pat  rfn  inapxlag  alroht.

'  Dion  oalla  him  "  Andreas,"  and  Euscbius  "  Lucuos,"  which  may  bo  ren*
dared  by  "  LuouUus."

A.  U.  870. J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  811

from  Trajan  to  the  rescue,  and  the  frantic  resistance  of  the
rebels  was  at  last  overcome  after  a  protracted  resistance,  and
in  a  series  of  engagements.  The  historian  Appian,  in  speaks
ing  of  the  expiatory  chapel  which  was  dedicated  to  Pompeius
at  the  foot  of  Mount  Casius,  remarks  incidentally,  This  little
shrine  was  destroyed  in  our  own  time  by  the  Jetos^  in  the
internecine  war  which  Trajan  waged  against  them.*  8ach
was  the  fury  on  the  one  side,  such  the  vengeanoe  on  the
other.

The  report  of  these  internal  troubles  cast  a  deep  gloom
over  Trajan's  spirit. He  was  conscious  that  he had no
longer  the  strength  to  contend  in  person  against .^^^  petnnu
them,  and  it  was  no  doubt  with  bitter  sorrow <«A«uoeh.
that  he  took  leave  of  his  armies  at  Antioch,  and  handed  over
to  his  lieutenants  the  comrades  of  so  many  well-fought  fields.
As  the summer  advanced,  he  turned his  face
again  westward  ;  but  his  robust  constitution  had Ws  return  to
been  shattered  by  fatigue  ;  possibly  the  chagrin
of  his  last  repulse  had  aggravated  the  pestilential  vapour*
of  Atra?. According  to  some  accounts,  he  fancied  himself
sufiering  from  poison  ;  but  the  virus,  if  such  there  were,  wu
infused  into  his  system  by  the  air  and  the  climate,  not  by
the  hand  of  man. His  disorder  appears  to  liave  assumed  the
form  of  dropsy. He  became  rapidly  worse,  and  could  pro-
ceed no  further  than  Selinus  in  Cilicia,  where  he ^^^  ^. .  ^
expired  on  one  of  the  first  djiys  of  August. His *«»■■*
reign  extended  beyond  the  term  of  any  of  his  predecessors
since  Tiberius,  numbered  nineteen  years  and  a  half,  and  he
had  reached  the  age  of  sixty-five  years,  spent  in  almost  un-
interrupted activity. Trajan  was  the  first  of  the  Caesars
who  had  met  his  death  at  a  distance  from  Rome  and  Italy,
the  first  whose  life  had  been  cut  short  in  the  actual  service
of  his  country. Such  a  fate  deserved  to  be  signalized  by  an
extraordinary  distinction. The  charred  remains  of  the  great-

•  Salvador  refers  to  this  passage  {Bell.  Civ.  ii.  90.)  with  the  object  of  sig-
nalizing the  mercilessness  of  the  Romans  ;  but  this  is  the  device  of  an  advo-
cate, and  does  not  befit  the  impartiality  of  history.

312  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.117.

est  of  the  emperors  "vrere  conveyed  to  Rome,  and  suffered  to
repose  in  a  golden  urn,  at  the  foot  of  his  own  column,  within
the  precincts  of  the  city.*

But  the  thread  of  imperial  life  could  hardly  snap  without
a  jar  which  would  he  felt  throughout  the  whole  extent  of  the
Perils  of  the  empire.  Trajan,  like  Alexander,  had  been  cut
quet^oMhe  ^^  Suddenly  in  the  far  East,  and,  like  Alexander,
succession.  }jg  j^^d  left  no  avowcd  successor.  Several  of  his
generals  abroad  might  advance  nearly  equal  claims  to  the
sword  of  Trajan ;  some  of  the  senators  at  home  might  deem
themselves  not  unworthy  of  the  purple  of  Nerva.  On  every
side  there  was  an  army  or  a  faction  ready  to  devote  itself  to
the  service  of  its  favourite  or  its  champion.  The  provinces
lately  annexed  were  at  the  same  time  in  a  state  of  ominous
agitation  ;  along  one  half  of  the  frontiers,  Britons,  Germans,
and  Sarmatians  were  mustering  their  forces  for  invasion  ;  a
virulent  insurrection  was  still  glowing  throughout  a  large
portion  of  the  empire.  Nevertheless  the  compact  body  of
the  Roman  commouAvealth  was  still  held  firmly  together  by
its  inherent  self-attraction.  There  was  no  tendency  to  split
in  pieces,  as  in  the  ill-cemented  masses  of  the  Macedonian
conquest ;  and  the  presence  of  mind  of  a  clever  woman  was
well  employed  in  effecting  the  peaceful  transfer  of  power,
and  relieving  the  state  from  the  stress  of  disruption.

Of  the  accession  of  Publius  -^lius  Hadrianus  to  the  era-
TnOtn  fortn-  V^^^  >  ®^  ^^^^  mcans  by  which  it  was  effected ;  of
me^to/hi«"***  ^^^^  character  and  reputation  he  brought  with
d««th.  jjjiji  to  the  throne ;  of  the  first  measures  of  his

reign,  by  which  he  renounced  the  latest  conquests  of  his  pre-
decessor, while  he  put  forth  all  liis  power  to  retain  the  realms
bequeathed  him  from  an  earlier  period,  I  shall  speak  at  large
hereafter. It  will  be  well  to  return,  in  concluding  our  pres-

'  EutropiuK,  viii.  fi. :  "  boIub  omnium  intra  urbom  sepultus  est."  Tho  same
diflUncUon  had  been  aooordod  to  Julius  Caesar :  "ossa  cyua  collocata  iu  urna
•urea  in  foro  quod  Kdifloavit  sub  columna  sita  sunt"  Dion,  Ixix.  2. :  rd  6i
roi  TpoZavoC  beri  tv  rv'  kIovi  ahrov  KareHOi).  TIte  column  seems  to  stand
predfely  on  the  line  of  the  Servian  wall

A.  U.  870.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  3I3

ent  review  of  Eastern  affairs,  to  the  great  Jewish  insurrec-
tion, and  the  important  consequences  wliieh  followed  from
it.  Trajan  was  surely  fortunate  in  the  moment  of  his  death.
Vexed  as  he  doubtless  was,  by  the  frustration  of  his  grand
designs  for  incorporating  the  Parthian  monarchy  with  the
Konian,  and  fuliilling  the  idea  of  universal  empire  which  had
flitted  through  the  mind  of  Pompeius  or  Julius,  but  had  been
deliberately  rejected  by  Augustus  and  Vespasian,  his  proud
spirit  would  have  been  broken  indeed,  had  he  lived  to  wit-
ness the  difficulties  in  which  Kome  was  plunged  at  his  death,
the  spread  of  the  Jewish  revolt  in  Asia  and  Palestine,  the
aggressions  of  the  Moors,  the  Scythians,  and  the  Britons  at
the  most  distant  points  of  his  dominions.'  The  momentary
success  of  the  insurgents  of  Cyprus  and  Cyrene  had  prompted
a  general  assurance  that  the  conquering  race  was  no  longer
invincible,  and  the  last  great  triumphs  of  its  legions  were  fol-
lowed by  a  rebound  of  fortune  still  more  momentous.  The
first  act  of  the  new  reign  was  the  formal  relin-
quishment  of  the  new  provinces  beyond  the  Eu-  iinquirfie*  tke
phrates.'  The  Parthian  tottered  back  with  feeble  u-yond  the
step  to  his  accustomed  frontiers.  Arabia  was
left  unmolested ;  India  was  no  longer  menaced.  Armenia
found  herself  once  more  suspended  between  two  rival  em-
pires, of  which  the  one  was  too  weak  to  seize,  the  other  too
Aveak  to  retain  her.  All  the  forces  of  Rome  in  the  East  were
now  set  free  to  complete  the  suppression  of  the  Jewish  dis-
turbances. The  flames  of  insurrection  which  had  broken  oat

'  Spartian,  Hadrian.  6. :  "  deficicntibus  his  nationibua  quas  Trajanus  Bube-
gerat,  Mauri  lacessebant,  Sarmato  bellum  inferebant,  Britanni  teneri  eub  Ro-
mana  ditione  non  poteraut,  Jilgrptus  seditionibus  uigebator,  Lycia  deniqoe  ao
Pala?8tina  rebelles  animos  efferebant."

'  Spartian,  1.  c. :  "  quare  omnia  trans  Eupbratem  ac  Tigrim  reliquit,  ex&a-
plo  ut  dicebat  Catonis,  qui  Maccdonas  liberos  pronuntiayit  quia  teneri  non  po-
terant."  See  Livy,  xlv.  18.,  who  however  gives  a  different  account  of  the  mat-
ter. Of  Hadrian's  relinquishment  of  Dacia  I  shall  speak  later.  There  seems
no  reason  whatever  for  attributing  to  jealousy  of  Trajan  measures  which  were
imperatively  demanded  by  the  circumstances  of  the  times.  Comp.  Eutrop.
viii.  3. Fronto,  Frincip.  ITisl.  p.  244.

314  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS

in  SO  many  remote  quarters  were  concentrated,  and  burnt

more  fiercely  than  ever,  in  the  ancient  centre  of  the  Jewish

nationality. Martius  Turbo,  appointed  to  com-

Insnrrection  of  -■ . V.  i •  n  t , ^i

the  Jews  In mand  in  Palestme,  was  equally  amazed  at  the

Palestine.  j  ± ^

fanaticism  and  the  numbers  of  people  whose  faith
had  been  mocked,  whose  hopes  frustrated,  whose  young  men
had  been  decimated,  whose  old  men,  women  and  children,  had
been  enslaved  and  exiled.  Under  the  teaching  of  the  doctors
of  Tiberias  faith  had  been  cherished,  and  hope  had  revived.
Despised  and  unmolested  for  fifty  years,  a  new  generation
had  risen  from  the  soil  of  their  ancestors,  recruited  by  the
multitudes  who  flocked  homewards  year  by  year,  with  an
unextinguishable  love  of  country,  and  reinforced  by  the  fu-
gitives from  many  scenes  of  persecution,  all  animated  with  a
growing  conviction  that  the  last  struggle  of  their  race  was  at
hand,  to  be  contested  on  the  site  of  their  old  historic  tri-
umphs.

It  is  not  perhaps  wholly  fanciful  to  imagine  that  the  Jew-
ish leaders,  after  the  fall  of  their  city  and  temple,  and  the
The  Jewish  great  dispersiou  of  their  people,  deliberately  in-
^l^clhl\-^r'  vented  new  means  for  maintaining  their  cher-
jewbh^iMtoM  ished  nationality.  Their  conquerors,  as  they
at  Tiberias.  might  obscrvc,  wcrc  scattered,  like  themselves,
over  the  face  of  the  globe,  and  abode  wherever  they  con-
quered ;  but  the  laws,  the  manners,  and  the  traditions  of
Rome  were  presei-vcd  almost  intact  amidst  alien  races  by  the
consciousness  that  there  existed  a  visible  centre  of  their  na-
tion, the  source,  as  it  were,  to  which  they  might  repair  to
draw  tlie  waters  of  political  life.  But  the  dispersion  of  the
Jews  seemed  the  more  irremediable,  as  the  destruction  of
their  central  home  was  complete.  To  presei'vo  the  existence
of  their  nation  one  other  way  presented  itself.  In  their
sacred  books  they  retained  a  common  bond  of  laAV  and  doc-
trine, such  as  no  other  people  could  boast.  In  those  ven-
erated records  tliey  possessed,  whether  on  the  Tiber  or  the
Euphrates,  an  elixir  of  unrivalled  virtue.  With  a  sudden
revulsion  of  feeling,  the  popular  orators  and  captains  betook

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  31 5

themBelves  to  the  study  of  the  law,  its  history  and  antiquities,
its  actual  text  and  its  inner  meaning.  The  schools  of  Tibe-
rias resounded  with  debate  on  the  rival  principles  of  interpre-
tation, the  ancient  and  the  modem,  the  stricter  and  the  laxer,
known  respectively  by  the  names  of  their  teachers,  Scham-
mai  and  Ilillel.  The  doctors  decided  in  favour  of  the  more
accommodating  system,  by  which  the  stem  exclusiveoeM  of
the  original  letter  was  extenuated,  and  the  law  of  the  rode
tribes  of  Palestine  moulded  to  the  varied  taste  and  temper
of  a  cosmopolitan  society,  while  the  text  itself  was  embalmed
in  the  Masora,  an  elaborate  system  of  punctuation  and  nota-
tion, to  every  particle  of  which,  to  ensure  its  uncorrupted
preservation,  a  mystical  significance  was  attached.  By  this
curious  contrivance  the  letter  of  the  Law,  the  charter  of
Judaism,  was  sanctified  for  ever,  while  its  spirit  was  remod-
elled to  the  exigencies  of  the  present  or  the  future,  till  it
would  have  been  no  longer  recognised  by  its  authors,  or
even  by  very  recent  dis«iples.  To  this  new  leaming  of  tr»-
ditions  and  glosses  the  ardent  youth  of  the  nation  devoted
itself  with  a  fanaticism  not  less  vehement  than  that  which
had  fought  and  bled  half  a  century  before.  The  name  of  the
Rabbi  Akiba  is  preserved  as  a  type  of  the  hierophant  of  re--
stored  Judaism.  The  stories  respecting  him  are
best expounded as myths and figures. lie tcre^tkeKabU

reached,  it  was  said,  the  age  of  a  hundred  and
twenty  years,  the  period  assigned  in  the  sacred  records  to
his  prototype  the  lawgiver  Moses.  Like  David,  in  his  youth
he  kept  sheep  on  the  mountains;  like  Jacob,  he  served  a
master,  a  rich  citizen  of  Jerusalem,  for  Jerasalem  in  his  youth
was  still  standing.  His  master's  daughter  cast  the  eyes  of
affection  upon  him,  and  offered  him  a  secret  marriage ;  but
this  damsel  was  no  other  than  Jerosalem  itself,  so  often  im-
aged to  the  mind  of  the  Jewish  people  by  the  figure  of  a
maiden,  a  wife,  or  a  widow.  This  mystic  bride  required  him
to  repair  to  the  schools,  acquire  knowledge  and  wisdom,  sur-
round himself  with  disciples ;  and  such,  as  we  have  seen,  was
the  actual  policy  of  the  new  defenders  of  Judaism. The

316  HISTORY  OF  IHE  ROMANS

damsel  was  rebuked  by  her  indignant  father ;  but  when  after
the  lapse  of  twelve  years  Akiba  returned  to  claim  his  bride
with  twelve  thousand  scholars  at  his  heels,  he  overheard  her
replying,  that  long  as  he  had  been  absent  she  only  wished
him  to  prolong  his  stay  twice  over,  so  as  to  double  his
knowledge  ;  whereupon  he  returned  patiently  to  his  studies,
and  frequented  the  schools  twelve  years  longer.  Twice
twelve  years  thus  past,  he  returned  once  moi*e  with  twice
twelve  thousand  disciples,  and  then  his  wife  received  him
joyfully,  and  covered  as  she  was  with  rags,  an  outcast  and  a
beggar,  he  presented  her  to  his  astonished  followers  as  the
being  to  whom  he  owed  his  wisdom,  his  fame  and  his  fortune.
Such  were  the  legends  with  which  the  new  learning  was  con-
secrated to  the  defence  of  Jewish  nationality.'

The  concentration  of  the  Roman  forces  on  the  soil  of  Pal-
estine seems  to  have  repressed  for  a  season  all  overt  attempts
Barcochebas,  ^^  insurrcctiou.  The  Jewish  leaders  restrained
sterfapi^^inted  their  followcrs  from  action,  as  long  as  it  was  pos-
jTwI"^  "^  *^^  ^^^^^  t*^  ^^^^  their  spirit  with  hopes  only.  It  was
A.i>  181  "*^*  ^^^^  about  the  fourteenth  year  of  Hadrian's
A.r.  884.  reign  that  the  final  revolt  broke  out,  but  it  will
be  convenient  to  embrace  it  in  our  present  review  of  tlie  long
struggle  of  the  nation  throughout  the  regions  in  which  it
was  dispersed.  "When  the  Jews  of  Palestine  launched  forth
upon  the  war,  the  doctor  Akiba  gave  place  to  the  warrior
Barcochebas.  This  gallant  warrior,  the  last  of  the  national
heroes,  received  or  assumed  his  title,  the  Son  of  the  Star^
given  successively  to  several  leaders  of  the  Jewish  people,  in
token  of  the  fanatic  expectations  of  divine  deliverance  by
which  his  countrymen  did  not  yet  cease  to  be  animated."
Many  were  tlio  legends  wliich  declared  this  champion's
claims  to  the  leadership  of  the  national  cause.  His  size  and
strength  were  vaunted  as  more  than  human;  it  teas  the  arm
of  Oody  not  of  mariy  said  Hadrian, — when  he  saw  at  last  the

'  Salvador,  Domination  Romaine  en  JwUe,  ii.  647,  foil.
'  Tbo  alluaion  was  to  the  prophecy  of  Balaam,  Numbers,  xxiv.  17. :  Gomp.
Etuob.  Hiri,  Eed.  iv.  6.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  317

corpse  encircled  by  a  serpent,  that  could  alone  strike  down
the  giant.  Flame  and  smoke  were  seen  to  issue  from  his
lips  in  speaking,  a  portent  which  was  rationalized  centuries
later  into  a  mere  conjuror's  artifice.'  The  concourse  of  the
Jewish  nation  at  his  summons  was  symbolized,  with  a  curi-
ous reference  to  the  prevalent  idea  of  Israel  as  a  school  and
the  Law  as  a  master,  by  the  story  that  at  Bethar,  the  ap-
pointed rendezvous  and  last  stronghold  of  the  national  de-
fence, were  four  hundred  academies,  each  ruled  by  four
hundred  teachers,  each  teacher  boasting  a  class  of  four  hun-
dred pupils.  Akiba,  now  at  the  extreme  point  of  his  pro-
tracted existence,  like  Samuel  of  old,  nominated  the  new
David  to  the  chiefship  of  the  people.  He  girded  Barcochebas
with  the  sword  of  Jehovah,  placed  the  staff  ot  command  in
his  hand,  and  held  himself  the  stirrup  by  which  he  vaulted
into  the  saddle.*

The  last  revolt  of  the  Jewish  people  was  precipitated  ap-
parently by  the  increased  severity  of  the  measures  which  the
rebellion  under  Trajan  had  drawn  down. They jj^j^^^^
complained  that  Hadrian  had  enrolled  himself  as  i2hi?BM«>.
a  proselyte  of  the  Law,  and  were  doubly  incensed dwbM.
against  him  as  a  persecutor  and  a  renegade. This ▲.  o.  in.
assertion  indeed  may  have  no  foundation ;  on  the
other  hand,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  this  prince,  a  curious
explorer  of  religious  opinions,  had  sought  initiation  into  some
of  the  mysteries  of  the  Jewish  faith  and  ritual. But  however
this  may  be,  he  gave  them  mortal  offence  by  perceiving  the
clear  distinction  between  Judaism  and  Christianity,  and  by
forbidding  the  Jews  to  sojourn  in  the  town  Avhich  he  was
again  raising  on  the  ruins  of  Jerusalem,  while  he  allowed  free
access  to  their  rivals. He  is  said  to  have  even  prohibited
the  rite  of  circumcision,  by  which  they  jealously  maintained

'  The  statement  rests  on  the  authority  of  St.  Jerome,  who  derides  the  im-
posture with  fanatical  bitterness.  In  Ruffin.  iiL  (torn.  ir.  pars  2.  p.  466.  ed.
1706) ;  '•  ut  ille  Barcochebas  auctor  seditionis  Judaic^  stipulam  in  ore  sacceu-
sam  anhelitu  ventilabat,  ut  flammas  evomere  putaretur."

*  Salvador,  ii.  569. ;  with  citations  from  the  Talmud.

318  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS

their  separation  from  the  nations  of  the  West.  At  last,  when
they  rose  in  arms,  he  sent  his  best  Generals  against  them.
Tinnius  Rufus  was  long  baffled,  and  often  defeated;  but
Julius  Severus,  following  the  tactics  of  Vespasian,  constantly
refused  the  battle  they  offered  him,  and  reduced  their  strong-
holds in  succession  by  superior  discipline  and  resources.*
Barcochebas  struggled  with  the  obstinacy  of  despair.  Every
excess  of  cruelty  was  committed  on  both  sides,  and  it  is  well
perhaps  that  the  details  of  this  mortal  spasm  are  almost
wholly  lost  to  us.  The  later  Christian  writers,  while  they
allude  with  unseemly  exultation  to  the  overthrow  of  one  in-
veterate enemy  by  another,  who  proved  himself  in  the  end
not  less  inveterate,  affirmed  that  the  barbarities  of  the  Jew-
ish leader  were  mainly  directed  against  themselves.  On  such
interested  assertions  we  shall  place  little  reliance.  In  the
counter-narrative  of  the  Jews  even  the  name  of  Christian  is
contemptuously  disregarded.  It  relates,  however,  how  at  the
storming  of  Bethar,  when  Barcochebas  perished  in  the  field,
ten  of  the  most  learned  of  the  Rabbis  were  taken  and  put
cruelly  to  death,  while  Akiba,  reserved  to  expire  last,  and
torn  in  pieces  with  hot  pincers,  continued  to  attest  the  great
principle  of  the  Jewish  doctrine,  still  exclaiming  in  his  death
throes,  Jehovah  Erhad ; God  is  one.^

The  Jews  who  fell  in  these  their  latest  combats  are  counted
by  hundreds  of  thousands,  and  we  may  conclude  that  the
FonndBtion  of  Suppression  of  the  revolt  was  followed  by  san-
^Eiia  Capfto-'  guinary  proscriptions,  by  wholesale  captivity,  and
l^tlMlMht*  geiit>i'«il  banishment."  Tlic  dispersion  of  the  un-
jeroMicm!  **'  ''^ippy  race,  particularly  in  the  West,  was  now
A. »  188  complete  and  final.  The  sacred  soil  of  Jerusa-
A.ir.  888.  i^.„j  ^nfj  occupied  by  a  Roman  colony,  which
received  the  name  of  -^lia  Capitolina,  with  reference  to  the

'  Dion,  Ixix.  13,  A.  D.  132-136:  a.  u.  886-888. Hadrian,  10-19.

•  Halvador,  il.  577.

*  Dion  Bpedfifli  the  exact  number  of  tho  JcwiKh  ix^oplu  slain  in  battio  at
680,000,  while,  an  he  flays,  tho  multitudes  tliut  porishud  by  famine  and  pesti-
loDOO  exceeded  all  calculation. These  statements  are  probably  as  extravagant

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  319

emperor  who  founded  it,  and  to  the  supreme  God  of  the
pagan  mythology,  installed  on  the  desecrated  summitB  of
Zion  and  Moriah.  The  fane  of  Jupiter  was  erected  on  the
site  of  the  holy  Temple,  and  a  shrine  of  Venus  flaunted,  we
are  assured,  on  the  very  spot  hallowed  to  Christians  by  our
Lord^s  crucifixion.'  But  Hadrian  had  no  purpose  of  insulting
the  disciples  of  Jesus,  and  this  desecration,  if  the  tradition
be  true,  was  probably  accidental.  A  Jewish  legend  aflirms
that  the  figure  of  a  swine  was  sculptured,  in  bitter  mockery,
over  a  gate  of  the  new  city.  The  Jews  have  retorted  with
equal  scorn  that  the  efligy  of  the  unclean  animal,  which
represented  to  their  minds  every  low  and  bestial  appetite,
was  a  fitting  emblem  of  the  colony  and  its  founder,  of  the
lewd  worship  of  its  gods,  and  the  vile  propensities  of  its
emperor.*

The  fancy  of  later  Christian  writers,  that  Hadrian  re-
garded their  co-religionists  with  special  consideration,  seems
founded  on  a  misconception.  We  hear,  indeed,  jtaatetm^
of  the  graeiousuess  Avith  which  he  allowed  them,  chHaS^ftwai
among  other  sectarians,  to  defend  their  usages  *^«J«*»-
and  expound  their  doctrines  in  his  presence ;  and  doubtless
his  curiosity,  if  no  worthier  feeling,  was  moved  by  the  fiust,
which  he  fully  appreciated,  of  the  interest  they  excited  in
certain  quarters  of  the  empire.  But  there  is  no  evidence
that  his  favour  extended  further  than  to  the  recognition  of
their  independence  of  the  Jews,  from  whom  they  now  for-
mally separated  themselves,  and  the  discouragement  of  the
local  persecutions  to  which  they  were  occasionally  subjected-*

as  thoee  of  Josephos.  Dion  adds,  howerer,  a  singular  drcumstanee,  if  tme,
with  reference  to  the  losses  of  the  Romans,  namely,  that  in  his  dispatches  to
the  senate,  the  emperor  was  constrained  to  omit  the  usual  formula :  "  If  you
and  yours  are  well,  it  is  well ;  I  and  my  army  are  well" Dion,  bdx,  14.

'  This  last  fact,  for  which  we  are  referred  to  Epiphan.  De  mau.  14.,  is  al-
lowed to  be  doubtful  by  Gr^orovius,  Iladr.  p.  66.

*  Salvador,  ii.  683.

*  Orosius,  vii.  13.,  expresses  the  favourable  opinion  commonly  entertained
of  this  emperor  by  the  Christians,  on  the  ground  that  he  relieved  them  from
persecution,  and  avenged  them  on  the  cruel  Barcochebas :  "  praecepitque  ne  cui

320  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

So  far  the  higoted  hostility  of  their  enemies  was  overruled
at  last  in  their  favour.  In  another  way  they  learnt  to  profit
by  the  example  of  their  rivals.  From  the  recent  policy  of
the  Jews  they  might  understand  the  advantage  to  a  scattered
community,  without  a  local  centre  or  a  political  status,  of
erecting  in  a  volume  of  sacred  records  their  acknowledged
standard  of  faith  and  practice.  The  Scriptures  of  the  New
Testament,  like  the  Mischna  of  the  Jewish  Rabbis,  took  the
place  of  the  Holy  of  Holies  as  the  tabernacle  of  their  God,
and  the  pledge  of  their  union  with  Him.  The  canon  of  their
sacred  books,  however  casual  its  apparent  formation,  was
indeed  a  providential  development.  The  habitual  references
of  bishops  and  doctors  to  the  words  of  their  Founder,  and
the  writings  of  his  first  disciples,  guided  them  to  the  proper
sources  of  their  faith,  and  taught  them  justly  to  discriminate
the  genuine  from  the  spurious.  Meagre  as  are  the  remains
of  Christian  literature  of  the  second  century,  they  tend  to
confirm  our  assurance  that  the  Scriptures  of  the  New  Dispen-
sation were  known  and  recognized  as  divine  at  that  early
period,  and  that  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  future  mistress  of
the  world,  was  already  become  a  great  social  fact,  an  empire
within  the  empire.

Judseo  intrandi  Hierosolymam  esset  licentia,  Christianis  tantum  civitate  pcr-
miBsa."  On  the  other  hand  Sulp.  Severus  speaks  very  bitterly  of  Hadrian :
"  qua  terapcstate  Hadrianus,  cxistimans  se  Christianam  fidem  loci  injuria  pc-
remptunira,  ct  in  tcmplo  ac  loco  Dominicee  passionis  demonum  simulacra  con-
Btituit.  Et  quia  Christiani  ex  Judseia  potissimum  putabantur  (namquo  tuni
nicroHolymie  non  nisi  ex  circumcisiono  habebat  ecclesia  sacerdotem),  nulituni
cohortein  ciiHtodJas  in  pcrpctuum  agitare  jussit,  quro  Jmhcos  oinncs  Hierosoly-
mm  aditu  nrocrct. Quod  (luidom  ChristiantD  fidei  proficiebat,  quia  turn  peno

Mnnos  ChriHtuin  Deuin  tnh  oftscrvatione  legit  crcdebant Ita  turn  priniuni

XarouB  ex  gentibus  apud  nicrosolymam  cpiscopus  fuit."  Hist.  Sticr.  ii.  45.
Thta  iMt  fact  in  taken  from  EuHcbius,  who  gives  a  catalogue  of  the  twelve
bishopi,  all  of  the  circumcision,  who  had  previously  presided  over  the  church
at  Jcrusolom. Jrt$t.  Kcct,  1.  o.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  32I

CHAPTER  LXVI.

BIBTH  AND  PARENTAGE  OF  HADRIAN. — ^HW  EDUCATION  AND  AOOOMPLISmflNTS. —
HIS  RISE  UNDER  TRAJAN'S  GUARDIANSHIP. — HIS  ALLEGED  ADOFTIOM  AND  8U0*
CESSION. — HE  ABANDONS  TRAJAN'S  CONQUESTS  IN  THE  EAST. — HIS  CAMPAIGM
IN  M.£SIA,  A.  D.  118. — SUPPRESSION  OF  A  CONSPIRACY  AGAINST  HIM. — Oi
COURTS  THE  SENATE  AND  THE  PEOPLE. — HADRLiN'S  EIBST  FB0ORE8S. — HI
VISITS  GAUL,  GERICANT,  SPAIN,  IIAURETANIA,  CONFERS  WITH  THE  KINO  OF
FARTHIA,  TISITS  ATHENS,  SICILY,  AND  CARTHAGE,  A.  D.  119-123. — HIS  SEC-
OND PROGRESS  :  HE  RESIDES  AT  ATHENS,  ALEXANDRIA,  AND  ANTIOCH  :  CHAKAO-
TER  OF  LEARNING  AND  SOCIETY  AT  THESE  CITIES  BESPSCTITELY  :  BE  SETI8ITS
ATHENS,  AND RETURNS  FINALLY TO ROME,  A.  D.  125-134. — ^HIS BUILDINGS  AT

ROME. — ADOPTION OF  CEIONIUS TEBUS, A.  D.  135, WHO  DIES  FBEMATUBELT.

ADOPTION  OF  AUREUUS  ANTONINUS,  A.  D.  138,  WHO  ADOPTS  ANNIU8  TSRC8
AND  L.  TERUS. — INFIRMITUB  AND  OBATH  OF  HADUAN,  A.  D.  188. — HIS
CHARACTER  AND  PERSONAL  APPIARANCK. — (a.  a  117-188.' A.  U.  870-491.)

THE  family  of  the  man  who  had  now  attained  the  sover-
eignty of  the  Roman  people,  was  derived  from  the
obscure  municipality  of  Hadria  in  Picenum,  an Birth  and  p*.
offshoot  from  the  Etruscan  city  of  Cisalpine  Gaul  r^J*^*Hl!^
which  gave  its  name  to  the  Adriatic  sea.* Three  ^'■**^
centuries  earlier,  a  direct  ancestor  had  visited  Spain  in  the

We  arriTC,  with  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  at  the  stties  of  imperial  biogra-
liies  which  goes  under  the  name  of  the  Historia  Avguda,  The  writers,  six  in
number,  are  known  as  Spartianus,  Capitolinus,  Gallicanus,  Lampridius,  Trebel-
Bus  and  Yopiscus.  It  comprises,  with  one  short  interval,  an  account  of  the
nperors  from  the  death  of  Trajan  to  the  accession  of  Diocletian,  under  whom,
not  long  after,  the  several  pieces  seem  to  have  been  written.  Of  the  writers
llhemselvea  little  or  nothing  is  known,  nor  are  the  limits  of  their  respective
(authorship  in  all  cases  satisfactorily  determined.  Hence  Gibbon  preferred  to
XtMe  them  indiscriminately  under  the  common  title  of  the  Auguxtan  HUlory.
[Of  their  value  a  good  estimate  is  given  by  Professor  Ramsay  in  Smith's  I>io
\Uonary  Class.  Biograph.  They  follow  the  type  of  the  biographies  of  Suetonius,
VOL VII. — 21

322  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

armies  of  the  Scipios,  and  had  settled  in  the  Roman  colony
of  Italica,  where  his  descendants  continued  to  retain,  in  the
surname  of  Hadrianus,  a  memorial  of  the  place  whence  they
originally  sprang.  The  ^lian  Gens,  with  which  the  empe-
ror claimed  connexion,  was  an  ancient  stem,  which  had
thrown  off  many  illustrious  branches,  distinguished  in  the
records  of  the  plebeian  nobility  of  Rome.  But  the  pride  of
historic  descent  was  already  becoming  faint  among  the  Ro-
mans. The  new  men,  raised  by  imperial  favour  from  the
lowest  class  of  citizens,  and  even  from  the  ranks  of  foreign
freedmen,  or  thrown  up  by  the  mutations  of  fortune  from
their  decent  obscurity  in  the  provinces,  had  so  far  outnum-
bered the  remnant  of  really  ancient  families,  as  even  to  cast
a  slur  on  the  genuine  claims  of  birth  and  ancestral  dignity.
The  complacent  feelings  with  which  a  few  scions  of  the  old
aristocracy  might  still  regard  their  historic  origin,  must  have
been  sorely  lacerated  by  the  scorn  with  which  they  were
chastised  by  Juvenal.  In  branding  their  pretensions  as  weak
and  even  criminal,  he  spoke,  as  they  well  knew,  the  real  sen-
timents of  the  day.*  Accordingly  Hadrian's  flatterers  made
apparently  no  effort  to  prove,  by  forced  or  fancied  genealo-
gies, that  their  patron  deserved  by  his  birth  a  primacy  of
honour  among  liis  countrymen. They  were  content  that  he

and  we  may  perhaps  rely  upon  them  generally  for  their  account  of  the  salient
events  of  history,  and  their  views  of  character;  but  wc  must  guard  against
the  trifling  and  incredible  anecdotes  with  which  they  abound,  and  acknowledge
their  inferiority  in  credit  even  to  the  biographies  of  the  Cffisars.

'  Juvenal,  Sat.  viii. :  "  Rarus  enlm  ferme  scnsus  communis  in  ilia  Fortuna  .  .  .
miacrum  est  aliorum  incumbere  famea  .  .  .  ergo  cavebis.  £t  metues,  ne  tu
sis  Crcticus  aut  Camerinus,"

Tiic  satirist  expresses  the  common  sense  and  utilitariam  logic  of  his  day,
when  the  people  were  awakening  from  many  ancient  illusions,  the  belief  in
which,  nevcrthclcsH,  had  constituted  the  strength  of  the  nation.  Such  a  dia-
tribe as  his  eighth  salirc  is  a  startling  sign  of  the  age  of  transition  to  which  it
belongcHl.  We  cannot  imagine  its  being  written  even  a  century  earlier.  Ti-
berius, and  possibly  Augustus,  would  liuve  rejoiced  at  such  a  blow  ndininistercd
to  the  haughty  aristocracy,  which  they  flattered  and  cjyoled ;  but  the  times
were  not  then  ripe  for  it.  It  would  havo  been  equally  out  of  date  a  century
later.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  329

should  be  judged  by  his  personal  merits,  and  these,  M  it
proved,  were  unquestionably  such  as  could  be  little  enhanced
by  the  fairest  gifts  of  fortune.  It  is  enough,  then,  to  say
that  P.  ^lius  Hadrianus  was  the  son  of  Iladrianus  Afer,  a
first  cousin  of  Trajan.  His  mother  was  a  Domitia  Paulina
of  Gades.  His  grandfather  3farillinus  was  the  first  of  the
family  wlio  attained  the  dignity  of  a  senator,  and  his  sister
Paulina  was  united  to  a  man  of  great  distinction  at  Rome,
many  years  older  than  herself,  named  Servianus.  Hadrian
was  born  at  Rome,  Jan.  24,  a.  d.  76  (a.  u.  829),  in  the  seventh
consulship  of  Vespasian.'

Hadrian's  childhood  was  spent  probably  at  Rome,  amidst
the  high  society  of  the  capital ;  and  when  he  was  left  an
orphan  at  the  age  of  ten  years,  he  was  taken
under  the  guardianship  oi  1  rajan,  then  occupymg mhI  •«eom-
the  post  of  praetorian  prefect,  and  of  a  knight
of  good  family,  named  Attianus.* For  five  years  he  wag
placed  under  the  fashionable  teachers  of  letters  and  philoso-
phy  in Greece, and the success which  attended him  in
these  and  other  kindred  studies,  the  boast  of  the  city  of
Minerva,  gained  him  the  familiar  nickname  of  Grwculus.'

'  Spartian,  Hadrian,  i. It  will  be  oonveDient  to  the  reader  to  have  •  sy*
noptical  view  of  the  connexion  of  the  two  emperora.

Tn^anoB  (anu  Imp.  Tni.)

Hadrianus  |  i

Marillinus  (avuB  Imp.  Hadr.)  —  Ulpia  TraianoB  (ptter  Imp.

Domitia  —  Hadrianns  Afer  | |

Paulina  I (pater  Imp.  Hadr.)  lilareiaiia Tkaiavus

! I (Imp^)

I I  Matldia —  PlotiM

I I  I
Paulina HADUAinrfl  — Julia  SaUna
•^Servianus (Imp)

*  Spartian,  Hadr.  1.  c. :  Dion,  Ixix.  1.  The  MS&  fluctuate  betweoi  the
fltaraes  Attianus  and  Tatianus.

*  Spartian,  1.  c.  This  writer,  from  whose  confused  Btatnnents  w«  gather
|«ur  information  about  Hadrian's  early  career,  doea  not  expressly  say  that  ho
l^aa  educated  at  Athena :  "  quintodecimo  anno  ad  patriam  rediit ; "  by  which  I
I  understand  "  Rome,"  where  he  was  bom,  where  he  soon  after  this  period  filled

324  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Se  became  imbued^  we  are  assured,  with  the  true  spirit  of  the
Athenians,  and  not  only  acquired  their  language,  hut  rivalled
them,  in  all  their  special  accomplishments,  in  singing,  in
playing,  in  medicine,  in  mathematics,  in  p)ciinting  and  in
sculpture,  in  which  he  nearly  equalled  a  Polycletus  and  a
Euphranor.^  Sis  memory,  it  is  added,  was  prodigious,  his
application  incredible.  He  was  various  and  versatile  in  his
tastes;  his  interests  were  manifold  and  many-sided.  He
was  smart  in  attack,  and  ready  in  reply  with  argument,
abuse,  or  banter.  But  the  activity  of  his  body  equalled  that
of  his  mind,  and  besides  the  ordinary  training  in  arms  and
feats  of  agility  which  was  proper  to  his  age  and  position,  he
devoted  himself  with  ardour  to  the  toils  and  excitement  of
the  chase.  The  high  places  of  Roman  society  had  seen  no
such  universal  talents  since  those  of  the  incomparable  Julius,
and  Hadrian  might  rival,  moreover,  the  son  of  Venus  him-
self in  the  majestic  beauty  of  his  person,  and  the  gracefulness
of  his  manners.  We  know,  unfortunately,  too  little  of  his
real  character  to  judge  of  the  points  in  which  Ins  inferiority
actually  consisted,  and  why  it  is  that  the  first  of  the  Caesars
60  naturally  takes  his  place  in  the  highest  rank  of  genius,
while  the  cleverest  of  his  successors  is  hardly  set  above  the
second ;  but  this,  at  least,  we  may  observe,  that  the  mere
acquisition  of  manifold  knowledge  was  far  easier  in  the  time
of  Hadrian  than  at  tlie  earlier  epoch,  and  that  in  a  generation
of  intellectual  dwarfs,  a  moderate  stature  might  command
extravagant  admiration.  Yet  it  may  fairly  be  concluded
that  tlie  first  man  of  one  age  would  probably  have  made
himself  first  in  any  other,  and  the  rivalry  of  a  Cicero,  a

the  office  of  "  decemvir  litibus  dyudicandis."  Casaubon  thinks  it  refers  to
Italica,  the  home  of  his  family,  and  gravely  asks,  "  an  quia  lloinm  natiia  (jui-
dcm  nadrianus  scd  ItalictD  conccptus  V  "  If  Hadrian  so  returned  to  Rome  in
hlfl  flftcenth  year,  lie  must  have  been  educated  elsewhere,  and  therefore,  as  we
may  conclude,  in  Urccco.

'  Victor,  Epit.  28. :  "  proximo  PolyclctoB  et  Euphranoras."  In  the  text  I
have  extracted  only  a  specimen  of  the  long  list  of  excellences  enumerated  by
the  writer.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  325

Varro,  and  a  Sulpicius  might  have  elevated  Hadrian  to  the
acknowledged  preSminence  of  Julius  himself.

But  scholastic  training  and  academic  acquirements,  un-
accompanied by  active  life,  might  have  placed  a  pedant,  a
second  Claudius,  on  the  throne.  For  such  a  m  riwi.  iiwiw
completion  of  the  imperial  character  the  times  ^22?l?tfc«
afforded  Hadrian  the  widest  scope.  From  his  ««»o»w^
early  studies  he  was  summoned  to  a  civil  office  in  Rome,
under  the  eye  of  influential  patrons,  and  with  the  fairest
prospect  of  advancement.  His  industry  did  justice  to  his
abilities,  and  both  to  his  opportunities.  Meanwhile  his  guar-
dian Trajan  was  placed  in  high  command  on  the  frontiers,
and  Hadrian,  attached  perhaps  to  his  staff  or  cohorts,  served
in  Upper  Germany,  and  attained  the  rank  of  tribune  in  the
army  of  Pannonia.*  At  this  period,  that  is,  towards  the  end
of  Domitian's  reign,  while  the  rise  even  of  his  patron  was
beyond  the  reach  of  conjecture,  he  was  confirmed  by  a  sooth-
sayer in  the  presage  of  a  lofty  destiny,  which  had  been
already  discovered  for  him  at  his  birth.*  The  path  of  fortune
speedily  opened  to  him.  When  Trajan  was  adopted  by
Nerva  at  Rome,  the  army  on  the  Danube  deputed  Hadrian

*  Hadrian  was  a  tribune  of  the  Seocmd  Legio  A^jutrix,  which,  as  Dioo  in-
forms us,  was  stationed  in  Lower  Pannonia,  and  transferred  in  the  latter  jean
of  Domitian  to  Lower  Msesia.  Dion,  Ixv.  24. ;  Spartian,  Uadr.  2.  This  legion
had  been  levied  by  Vespasian,  together  with  the  Foorth  Flam  and  the  Sx-
teenth  Flavia  Flrma.  Dion,  L  c. ;  Tac.  Hitt.  iv.  68.  See  Marquardt  (Becker's
AUerthumer,  iii.  2.  p.  355.).  These  levies  were  employed  to  repress  the  in-
roads of  the  Sarmatians  and  the  menaces  of  the  Parthians.

*  According  to  the  story  repeated  by  Spartianus,  he  consulted  the  "  Soctei
Virgilianae,"  and  opened  the  mystic  volume  on  the  Unes —

"  Quis  procul  ille  autem  ramis  insignis  olim
Sacra  ferens  ?  nosco  crines  incanaque  menta
Regis  RomanL"

The  olive  typified  the  Athenian  accomplishments  of  Hadrian ;  the  beard,  not
usually  worn  at  this  time  by  the  Romans,  was  an  appendage  brought  also  from
Greece.  Ammianus  Marcellinus  (xxiL  12.)  repeats  a  strange  l^end  that  Ha-
drian caused  the  mouth  of  the  Delphic  cavern  to  be  closed  with  large  stones,
that  none  after  him  might  derive  from  the  oracle  the  expectation  of  empire.

326  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

to  convey  their  congratulations  to  the  new  Imperator  at  his
quarters  on  the  Rhine.  The  young  man  was  eager  to  exe-
cute so  agreeable  a  mission ;  but  his  brother-in-law  Servianus,
who,  it  seems,  had  already  spitefully  divulged  his  excesses
and  debts  to  his  guardian,  tried  hard  to  detain  him,  and
would  have  frustrated  it  by  getting  his  chariot  to  be  broken
on  the  way.  But  Hadrian  was  not  to  be  thus  baffled.  Leav-
ing his  disabled  vehicle  on  the  road,  and  continuing  his
journey  on  foot  without  a  moment's  delay,  till  he  could
obtain  the  means  of  more  expeditious  travelling,  he  siicceeded
in  outstripping  the  courier  sent  by  Servianus  to  anticipate
him.*  Trajan  received  him  cordially,  employed  and  trusted
him.  But  he  was  still  more  distinguished  by  the  favour  of
Plotina,  which  secured  him  Sabina,  the  daughter  of  Matidia,
in  marriage  ;  though  Trajan  himself,  it  was  said,  was  indis-
posed to  the  match,  which  might  seem  to  savour  too  much
of  a  political  adoption.  From  this  time,  however,  Hadrian's
advancement  became,  as  might  be  expected,  more  rapid.
A.D  101  Trajan,  now  sole  emperor,  and  in  his  fouith
A.U.  864.  consulship,  appointed  him  quaestor,  in  which
capacity  he  recited  the  prince's  messages  to  the  senate,  and
is  said  to  have  betrayed  but  an  imperfect  command  of  the
Roman  accent,  which  he  had  lost  by  almost  constant  ab-
sence from  the  city  since  his  childhood.  In  the  same  year
he  attended  the  emperor  in  the  first  Dacian  expedition,  and
he  was  wont  to  excuse  his  indulgence  in  wine  during  his
sojourn  in  the  camp  by  pretending  that  he  was  required  to
follow  his  general's  example.  After  attaining  the  dignity,
now  merely  nominal,  of  Tribune  of  the  Plebs,  he  was  en-
trusted in  the  second  Dacian  war  with  the  command  of  the
First  Minervian  legion,  and  his  services  were  acknowledged
by  the  present  of  a  diamond  ring,  which  Trajan  had  himself
received  from  Nerva.  This  he  complacently  regarded  as  a
pledge,  or  at  least  an  augury  of  the  imperial  succession.
The  fedileship  ho  was  allowed  to  waive  on  account  of  his

'  Sp«rtian,  Uadr,  I  a

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  S2f

military  employments ;  but  he  succeeded  in  due  course  to
the  praetorship,  again  repaired  to  the  provinces,  and  as  gov-
ernor of  Lower  Pannonia  checked  an  inroad  of  the  Sarmatians.
The  strictness  of  his  discipline,  and  the  fimineHs  of  his  civil
administration  here,  recommended  him  for  the  last  and  high-
est dignity  a  subject  could  attain,  and  during  Trajan's  resi-
dence iu  Rome  he  was  appointed  consul  suflFect.  To  the
emperor  and  his  consort  he  continued  constantly  to  attach
himself;  he  took  part  in  Trajan's  expedition  into  the  East,
and  through  the  interest  of  Plotina  received  the  prefecture
of  Syria.  He  was  finally  appointed  consul  a  ^p  in
second  time,  but  again  sufFect,  iu  the  year  117.  •^o- «•.
This  appointment  did  not  require  his  presence  in  Rome,  and
he  was  resident  at  Antioch  as  the  seat  of  his  government  at
the  moment  of  his  patron's  decease.*

Such  were  the  steps  in  the  career  of  honours  accomplished
by  this  fortunate  aspirant ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  remark
how  nearly  they  correspond  with  the  march  of  nuirianpnam
a  Lucullus  or  a  Cicero  in  the  free  state.  So  ^^^^^H^'^
faithfully  did  the  outward  form  of  the  Roman  **••»!**
government  in  the  ninth  century,  after  a  hundred  and  sixty
years  of  monarchy,  retain  the  impress  of  the  days  of  the
republic*  In  one,  however,  who  occupied  the  place  of  Ha-
drian about  the  emperor,  this  succession  of  honours  was
peculiarly  significant.  Sura,  Trajan's  chief  adviser,  could
distinctly  assure  him  that  he  was  destined  for  adoption,  and
all  Rome  began  to  designate  him  as  heir  to  the  empire,  the
nobles  vying  with  one  another  in  paying  court  to  him.  On
Sura's  death  he  found  himself  possessed  of  a  still  larger  share
of  his  prince's  confidence,  which  was  frivolously  ascribed  by
some  observers,  who  chose  to  overlook  the  natural  reasons
for  it,  to  the  good  service  he  rendered  him  in  composing  his

'  Spartian,  Hadr.  1.  c.

*  The  only  discrepancy  lay  in  the  innoTation  of  the  Buffect  consulship,  bat
outwartily  there  was  little  difference  in  Roman  eyes  between  the  honorary
ofiBce  of  one  or  two  months  and  the  annual  magistracy.  The  spirit  of  the  two
institutions  was  indeed  widely  at  variance.

328  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

speeches.  Still  more  maliciously  did  they  insinuate  that  he
stood  too  high  in  the  favour  of  Plotina ;  and  finally,  as  if
still  unsatisfied,  they  did  not  scruple  to  pretend  that  he  won
the  freedmen  of  the  palace  to  his  interests  by  the  basest  com-
pliances.* So  feeble  was  the  character  of  the  Romans  at  this
period;  such  the  petty  conceptions  they  now  commonly
entertained  of  the  springs  of  human  conduct.

Trajan  had  died  childless,  and  whatever  hopes  or  expec-
tations might  have  been  formed  in  any  quarter,  he  had
Emnonrs  about  adopted  no  heir,  nor  indicated  by  any  overt  act
the  succession.  ^  gucccssor  to  the  purple.  Sufiicient  as  he  had
felt  himself,  even  in  his  declining  years,  for  the  whole  weight
of  the  empire,  he  had  placed  no  colleague  at  his  side  to  train
him  for  independent  sovereignty.  About  the  future  succes-
sion there  were  as  many  rumours  as  there  were  interests.
The  senate  and  the  civilians  of  the  capital  leant  to  the  ex-
pectation that  their  prince  intended  to  nominate  Neratius
Priscus,  a  learned  jurist  and  an  experienced  administrator.
The  soldiers  whispered  the  name  of  Lusius  Quietus,  the
most  distinguished  of  their  captains,  who  would  have  been
as  acceptable  to  the  camps  as  Priscus  to  the  city.  But  Lu-
sius, though  he  had  commanded  Roman  annies,  though  he
had  been  raised  for  a  month  to  the  consulship,  and  now  gov-
erned a  province,  was  neither  a  citizen  nor  even  a  provincial
by  origin,  but  only  a  Moorish  chieftain,  who  had  volunteered
into  the  Roman  service  at  tlie  head  of  a  band  of  mercenaries.*
Such  an  adoption  would  have  been  an  outrage  on  the  senate,
with  which  Trajan  had  acted  in  hannony  throughout  his
reign,  and  to  which,  according  to  another  report,  he  proposed
to  leave  the  free  choice  of  its  future  ruler.  Some,  indeed,
surmised  that  as  ho  sought  to  follow  the  great  Alexander  in
his  military  career,  so  he  might  designedly  leave  the  empire
as  the  prize  of  the  worthiest :  but  such  speculators  forgot  that
while  the  senate  alone  claimed  the  legal  right  of  appoiut-

'  Bp«rtian,  Hadr.  8.  4. :  Dion,  Ixix.  1.

*  Little  weight  can  ho  attachod  to  the  intimation  of  Thcmistius  {Orat.  xvi.)
that  Tn^an  deilgned  thiH  man  for  liia  successor.

DNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  329

ment,  the  army  exercised  actaal  power,  and  that  it  wa«
perilous  to  leave  such  a  prize  to  be  contended  for  by  such
antagonists.  It  seems  more  likely  that  Trajan's  genuine  re-
spect for  his  council  made  him  hesitate ;  and  his  anxiety,
when  sensible  of  the  inroads  of  disease,  to  return  to  Rome,
may  indicate  a  wish  to  make  his  final  arrangements  in  con-
cert with  it.  But  the  moment  of  nomination  had  been  too
long  delayed.  In  the  last  hours  of  mortal  infirmity  the
master  of  the  Roman  world  might  be  no  longer  master  of  him-
self. He  might  become  the  sport  of  a  favourite  or  a  woman,
of  his  kinsman  or  his  consort.  It  is  true  that  in  the  person
of  Hadrian  almost  every  claim  was  united.  He  was  in  the
vigour  of  his  age,  of  fine  personal  appearance,  admirably
accomplished,  nor  untried  as  an  officer;  he  had  filled  the
highest  civil  posts,  and  occupied  at  the  moment  the  most
important  of  all  charges,  the  prefecture  of  Syria.  He  was
doubly  connected  with  Trajan,  as  his  cousin  in  blood,  and
his  niece's  husband.  Yet  all  these  claims  might  have  pleaded
in  vain  for  him  now,  as  hitherto,  but  for  the  favour  of  the
empress,  who  felt  the  liveliest  concern  in  a  question  which
80  nearly  touched  her  own  position  and  interests.  From  the
moment  that  Trajan  quitted  Antioch,  through  the  mournful
stages  of  the  journey  to  Selinus,  she  had  not  ceased  to  inter-
cede for  Hadrian's  adoption.  Such  influence,  thus  exerted,
under  whatever  motive,  might  easily  prevail  Thei*e  seems
no reason to  question  the assertion that  at .,. ^  ^

. • m .  . ,  . ,  Alleged  Mlop>

Plotmas  instigation  Traian,  almost  m  his  last oonofHa-

dflaa  bj  Ti^iaii

moments,  and  when  he  could  no  longer  hold  a <«  hia  deiuii-

bed.

)en  (if  it  be  true  that  his  name  was  actually  sub-
sribed  by  her  hand  to  the  instrument),  addressed  to  the
9nate  a  declaration  that  he  had  adopted  Hadrian,  subject
)nly  to  its  gracious  confirmation.  The  day  of  the  emperor's
lecease  is  not  accurately  known  ;  it  was  imagined  that  the
event  was  concealed  for  a  brief  interval  to  favour  Plotina's
Sontrivance.  On  the  9th  of  August,  we  are  told,  Hadrian
Bceived  at  Antioch  the  intelligence  of  his  adoption.  Two
lys  later  his  parent's  death  was  notified  to  him,  and  the

330  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

legions,  to  which  he  immediately  addressed  himself,  accepted
him  without  hesitation.  But  it  was  impossible  to  establish
beyond  cavil  the  genuineness  of  this  sudden  adoption,  and
Dion  could  cite  the  authority  of  his  own  father,  who  was  at
a  later  period  governor  of  Cilicia,  for  his  assertion  that  it
was  wholly  fictitious.  According  to  a  rumour  recorded  in
the  fourth  century,  Trajan  had  already  ceased  to  breathe,
when  Plotina  removed  the  body,  placed  a  confidential  ser-
vant on  the  couch,  drew  the  curtains  close,  and  summoned
witnesses  into  the  chamber,  who  heard  a  feeble  moan,  as  of
their  dying  master,  declaring  that  he  adopted  as  his  son,
and  nominated  as  his  successor,  his  trusty  and  well-beloved
kinsman,  Publius  JElius  Hadrianus.*

The  troops  at  Antioch  received  their  hero's  last  com-
mands with  respectful  acquiescence ;  but  the  insecurity  whicli
Hadrian  himself  felt  seems  to  be  marked  by  the

Hadrian's  sue-  .  .

cession  con- donativc,  of  twice  the  usual  amount,  with  which

Armed  by  the  ,  •  n ■,  n t, •  f-r • r-\ •

senate  and  the  he  hastened  to  gratiiy  them.''  Jiut  it  IjUsius  t^ui-
"™^"  etus  and  Martins  Turbo  had  higher  claims  on

their  regard,  as  military  leaders,  these  men  were  absent  at
the  moment  from  headquarters,  and  the  timely  liberality  of
Plotina's  favourite  carried  the  day  against  them.  Hadrian
was  equally  politic,  and  not  less  successful  in  his  overtures
to  the  senate.  To  that  body  he  professed  the  most  entire
deference,  excusing  himself  for  having  yielded  to  the  precipi-
tate greetings  of  the  soldiers,  whom  it  was  impossible,  he

'  Dion,  Uix.  1. ;  Spartian,  Hadr.  4. ;  Victor,  Ccea.  18.

'  Spariian,  Jladr.  R. :  "  ob  auspicia  imperii."  The  donative  to  the  soldiera
was  originally  a  gift  from  tlie  captured  booty  on  the  occasion  of  a  triumph.
Octavius,  after  the  battle  of  Mutlna,  presented  each  of  his  soldiers  with  10,000
H.  8.  or  about  80/.  Ho  gave  other  sums,  sometimes  larger,  sometimes  snuiller,
on  dlficront  occaaions.  CiUus  was  the  first  who  gave  a  donative  on  his  acccs-
aion  ;  thl«  waa  only  1000  H.  S.  or  81,  per  man.  Claudius  an<l  Nero  followed  Uiis
example,  increasing  the  sum  to  16,000  II.  S. ;  but  this  seems  to  have  been  con-
fined to  the  pmtoriana.  From  this  time  the  custom  was  regularly  adopted,  but
the  sum  given  is  not  generally  speclfled.  At  a  later  period  rertinux  gave
12,000  II.  8.  and  Julianus  20,000.  Marquardt  (Becker's  Altert/mmer),  111.  2.
p.  439  note.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  33 1

said,  to  leave  for  one  day  without  a  legitimate  imperator.
In  suing  for  a  confirmation  of  the  late  prince's  will,  and  of
the  wishes  of  the  legions,  he  vowed  that  he  would  assume  no
honours,  nor  suffer  them  to  be  decreed  him,  till  he  had  ap-
plied for  them  in  person  in  acknowledgment  of  actual  ser-
vices. Hitherto  it  had  been  customary  for  the  senate  to
confer  immediately  on  the  new  emperor  all  the  functions  and
titles  of  supreme  power.  But  at  intervals  only,  and  one  by
one,  would  Hadriatf  consent  to  accept  them,  and  the  title  of
Pater  Patrice^  the  highest  distinction  of  all,  he  refrained  from
adopting  till  a  much  later  period.  The  chiefs  of  the  civil
administration  were  won  over  by  this  show  of  deference,  and
became  ardent  supporters  of  a  throne  which  was  at  first  man-
ifestly unstable.  The  zeal  of  the  praetorian  prefects  whom
Hadrian  appointed,  his  former  guardian  Attianus,  and  a  man
of  tried  and  noble  character  named  Similis,  sufficed  to  protect
his  interests  during  his  absence  from  the  city,  and  he  was
enabled  to  give  proof  of  his  clemency  at  the  commencement
of  his  career  by  remitting  the  punishment  of  some  pretenders
to  the  empire.'  Meanwhile  Matidia  bore  the  remains  of
Trajan  in  a  golden  urn  to  Rome,  where  they  were  received
with  peculiar  distinction.  The  senate  admitted  Apou»eori«  rf
their  friend  and  patron  to  the  honours  of  apoth-  "^•^
eosis  without  hesitation,  and  his  successor  erected  a  temple
to  his  divinity  in  the  Ulpian  forum,  and  instituted  tfie  Par-
thian games  in  his  honour.*

Hadrian,  however,  had  no  intention  of  retaining  his  place
permanently  at  the  head  of  his  armies. His  most  anxious
care  at  the  outset  of  his  reign  was  to  dispose  his HadrfM  aim-
officers  and  legions  in  the  manner  most  condu- ^°' S^'*
cive  to his  own security. He  placed Catilius *^*  *^*-
Severus,  a  man  of  no  conspicuous  eminence,  in  the  prefecture
of  Syria ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  removed  Lusius  Quietus
from  his  important  command  in  the  East,  and  sent  him  to

*  Spartian,  Hadr.  5. :  "  tantum  clementue  habuit,  ut  cum  sub  primis  imperii
diebus  ab  Attiano  per  epistolas  esset  admonitus  ....  neminem  Isederet."

*  Spartian,  Hadr.  6. ;  Euseb.  Chron.

332  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  obscure  and  distant  government  of  Mauretania.  The
control  of  Palestine  was  entrusted  to  Martins  Turbo.  The
"withdrawal  of  the  Roman  forces  from  the  regions  occupied
by  Trajan  beyond  the  ancient  frontiers  was  a  measure  of
actual  necessity ;  and  the  notion  that  the  abandonment  of
these  recent  acquisitions  was  prompted  by  a  mean  jealousy  of
the  conqueror  may  be  discarded  as  wholly  gi'oundless.  The
conquests  of  Trajan  in  the  East  were  plainly  unsubstantial.
There  was  no  soil  beyond  the  Euphrates  in  which  Roman  in-
stitutions could  take  root,  while  the  expense  of  maintaining
them  would  have  been  utterly  exhausting.  But  Hadrian
was  also  sensible  of  the  danger  to  his  authority  from  the
ambition  of  military  chiefs  placed  there  in  unlimited  com-
mand of  men  and  money,  and  removed  by  the  enormous
distance  from  effectual  supervision  and  control.  On  all  these
grounds  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  his  discretion  in  recurring,
at  least  in  this  quarter,  to  the  deliberate  policy  of  Augustus,
and  confining  the  possessions  of  the  empire  within  their  nat-
iierepaiTflto  ^^^^  ^^  traditional  limits.*  The  execution  of
ceiebrafes^Tra-  t^esc  arrangements  may  have  occupied  the
jan'8  triumph,  remainder  of  the  year  117.  On  their  completion
Hadrian  removed  from  Antioch,  and  repaired  to  Rome.  The
senate  received  him  with  acclamations,  and  enjoined  him  to
celebrate  as  his  own  the  victory  of  Trajan  over  the  Par-
thians;  but  this  distinction  he  modestly  declined,  and  the
image  of  the  great  conqueror  was  borne  in  triumph  to  the
temple  of  Jupiter.  So  far  did  he  carry  his  moderation,  as  to
remit  to  Italy  entirely,  and  in  part  to  the  provinces  also,  the
gift  of  coronary  gold,  usually  presented  to  an  emperor  on  the
occasion  of  his  triumph.* Hadrian  had  come  indeed  to  Rome

*  Spartian,  I/atlr.  R.  Tlio  provinces  abandoned  by  Hadrian  were  Armenia,
Mesopotamia,  and  AHHjria.  Ho  still  retained  the  district  of  Tetra,  to  which
Tnijun  had  pjivcn  the  name  of  Arabia,

'  A.  (iclliuH,  V.  6.,  oxplainfl,  as  an  antiquary,  tho  meaninp;  of  the  "  aurum
coronarium."  At  ftntt  a  crown,  I.  o.,  wreaths  or  chaplots  of  laurel,  were  pre-
Hontcd.  This  simple  offering  was  afterwards  exchanged  for  similar  crowns  in
pure  gold. Finally  tho  crowns  were  commuted  for  a  sum  of  money. The  gift

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  883

laden  with  the  spoils  of  war,  and  the  large  Bams  at  hb  dis-
posal enabled  him  to  extend  his  liberality  with  well-cal-
culated profusion.  Tliroughout  the  provinces  administered
by  imperial  prefects  he  remitted  the  arrears  of  taxes  to  the
amount  of  seven  millions  of  our  money,  and  ostentatiously
burnt  the  records  of  the  debt  in  the  Ulpian  forum.'  At  the
same  time  he  relieved  the  local  officers  from  the  burden  of
maintaining  the  imperial  posts,  and  laid  the  charge  of  thia
important  department  on  the  fiscus.*  To  these  acts  of  mn-
nificence  was  added  the  dotation  of  noble  but  impoverished
families,  and  numerous  were  the  well-bom  Romans,  both
male  and  female,  who  were  enabled  by  this  bounty  to  main-
tain the  dignity  of  office,  or  the  decent  comfort  befitting
their  station. The  alimentation  of  poor  children,

- .  .  ■^  Alimentatioa

which  we  have  noticed  in  precedmg  reigns,  was  of  poor  chu-
extended  or  increased  by  fresh  endowments. At
a  later  period  the  authority  of  Hadrian  was  cited  for  the
definition  of  eighteen  years  in  males  and  fourteen  in  females,
as  the  age  to  which  this  liberality  should  be  extended.*

vas  originally  a  thank-offering  from  the  ocmqoered  and  qiared.  On  the  line
of  Virgil,  "  Dona  recognoscit  populonim,"  Serriua  remarks  that  thia  alludes  to
the  "  aurum  uorooarium."  See  more  on  the  Bobject  in  Becker's  AlUrtkimtr,
iii.  2.  211.

*  This  statement  is  founded  on  a  comparison  of  pamgfi  in  Dioo,  Ixiz.  8. :
Spartian,  Hadr.  1.,  an  inscription  in  Grater's  Thesauras,  and  other  eoUeetions,
and  a  coin  described  by  Spanheim,  Eckhel,  and  others.  There  are  certain  diffi-
culties connected  with  it  as  regards  the  time  and  the  circiunstanoes,  which  are
carefully  discussed  by  Gr^orovius,  Geteh.  Hadrians,  p.  17,  folL  The  sum  re-
mitted  is  stated  in  Roman  money  at  "  novies  millies  c«itena  millia  N."  The
arrears  were  for  a  period  of  sixteen  years,  and  the  date  of  the  transaction  was
the  second  consulship  of  Hadrian,  a.  d.  118.

"  It  must  be  understood,  however,  that  at  this  period  there  was  no  dear
distinction  between  the  Fiscus  and  the  ..Erarium.  The  emperor  had  fiill  com-
mand over  the  treasury  of  the  senatorial  provinces,  as  he  had  over  the  ap-
pointment of  their  officers.  Dion,  liil  16.  22. ;  Hegewisdi,  Jilomi.  Ammsm,
p.  183.

'  Spartian,  Hadrian.  7. :  "  pueris  ac  puellis,  quibus  etiam  Trajanus  alimenta
detulerat,  incrementum  liberahtatis  adjecit."  From  a  notice  in  the  DigesL,
xxxiv.  1.  14.,  it  would  seem  that  this  increment  was  an  extension  of  the  age  of

334  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Throughout  the  reign  of  Hadrian  the  series  of  events
must  be  arranged,  in  a  great  degree,  from  conjecture. We

may  suppose  that  he  was  detained  for  some
this  reign  mi- months  at  least  in  the  East  after  the  death  of

Trajan,  and  that  his  progress  towards  Italy,
when  he  at  last  set  out,  was  retarded  by  the  arrangements
which  it  was  requisite  to  make  in  the  provinces  through
which  he  joui-neyed.  If  he  reached  Rome  about  the  begin-
ning of  the  year  118,  his  first  residence  in  the  city  could  not
have  been  prolonged  beyond  a  few  months,  and  a  career  of
liberality  on  which  he  entered  was  interrupted  by  the  cam-
paign which  he  found  it  necessary  to  undertake  in  person  in
the  ensuing  spring.  The  moment  of  his  accession,  as  we
have  seen,  was  clouded  with  public  anxiety.  Besides  the
disturbances  in  the  East,  the  peace  of  the  empire  seems  to

have  been harassed  by obscure outbreaks  in

Danger  on  the  .  .  ^

frontieni  of  Maurctania :  the  Caledonians  m  the  north  of
Britain,  and  Britain  wcrc  assaiUng  the  outposts  of  the  Roman
power  in  that  distant  island,  and  in  another
quarter,  equally  remote  from  the  Atlas  and  the  Cheviotes,
from  the  Nile  and  the  Euphrates,  the  wild  Sarmatian  horse-
men were  threatening  to  swim  the  frontier  streams  of  Dacia
and  Moesia.  The  conquest  of  Trajan  beyond  the  Danube,
fortified,  garrisoned  and  colonized,  offered  an  important  bul-
wark against  the  rising  tides  of  nomadic  barbarism  ever
beating  on  the  outworks  of  Roman  civilization.  Thrust  forth
into  the  heart  of  Europe,  between  Sarmatians  on  the  east  and
Sarmatians  on  the  west,  the  province  of  Dacia  required  to  be
strongly  supported  and  firmly  attached  to  the  body  of  the
empire  against  which  it  leaned.  The  genius,  indeed,  of  the
Dacians  seems  to  liave  been  peculiarly  favourable  to  this

the  rccipicntA :  "  ut  pucri  ad  xviiL,  pueUas  ad  xiv.  annum  alantur."  It  was  af-
firtnod  by  Hadrian's  detractors  tliat  for  all  hia  measures  which  lie  feared  would
be  unpopular,  ho  pretended  to  have  express  directions  from  Trnjaii ;  among
these  were  the  abandonment  of  the  castcTn  ])roviiiceH,  and  the  demolition,  as  it
would  Mem,  of  the  theatre  which  Triton  had  himself  commenced  iu  the  Camp-
us Martius. Bpartian,  Hadrian,  0.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  335

alliance ;  for  nowhere,  as  has  been  said,  did  the  ideas  and
language  of  the  conquerors  strike  root  more  rapidly  or  fix
themselves  more  permanently.  Iloman  citizens  had  already
poured  into  the  fertile  plains  of  Hungary  and  Transylvania,
and  not  only  a  multitude  of  Roman  lives,  but  masses  of  Ko-
man  wealth  and  manifold  interests,  were  protected  by  the
constant  presence  of  a  large  military  force.  But  even  Trajan
had  not  disdained  the  precaution,  before  adopted  by  Domitian
and  Vespasian,  of  purchasing  peace  from  the  barbarians  by
gifts  and  subsidies.  It  had  already  become  a  practice  on  the
frontiers  to  keep  some  of  the  neighbouring  chiefs  in  pay,  in
order  to  restrain  their  hostility  to  Rome,  and  foster  their
mutual  jealousies.  The  aggressions  of  the  Rox-  Aggwidont  or
olani  on  the  Pruth  or  Dniester  were  caused,  it  ^*  k«w»*^
seems,  by  a  reduction  of  the  tribute  which  they  had  hitherto
received.'  Swarms  of  horsemen  crossed  the  rivers  and  swept
over  the  plains,  and  though  they  could  not  stand  the  charge
of  the  Roman  soldiery,  nor  make  dispositions  for  the  perma-
nent occupation  of  Roman  territory,  they  spread  terror  and
confusion  among  the  defenceless  inhabitants,  and  plundered
their  homesteads  with  impunity.  The  alarm  reached  Rome
itself,  and  Hadrian  paused  in  the  midst  of  his  ad-

'  ^  Hadrian  UkM

niinistrative  measures  to  put  himself  at  the  head  the  fl«id
of  his  forces,  and  prepare  to  take  the  field.  Large
masses  of  troops  were  directed  to  the  Msesian  frontier,  and
Rome  saw  once  more  her  prince  go  forth  to  distant  warfare,
the  toils  and  perils  of  which  were  magnified  by  distance  and
obscurity.  His  back  was  no  sooner  turned  than  jealousies
ranklmg  against  him  broke  out  in  a  formidable  conspiracy.
When  Hadrian  commenced  his  career  at  Rome  with  such
ostentatious  generosity,  he  was  anxious  to  disarm  the  foes,
disguised  but  not  unknown,  who  clustered  around  him.  Lu-
sius  Quietus,  Cornelius  Palma,  Nigrinus  and  Celsus,  the
chiefs  of  the  army  or  the  senate,  all  felt  equally  mortified  by

*  Spartian,  Hadr.  6. :  "  cum  rege  Roxolononun,  qui  de  imminu6»  $6patdS»
qnerebatur,  cognito  negotio  pacem  composuit"

336  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  elevation  to  which  their  former  comrade  had  attained,
which  they  ascribed  neither  to  his  merits,  nor  his  connexion
with  their  old  master,  but  to  a  paltry  intrigue.  Our  record
of  the  affair  is  indeed  confused  and  inconsistent.  One  ac-
count stated  that  it  was  plotted  to  cut  off  the  emperor  in
hunting  ;  another  that  Nigrinus  purposed  to  kill  him  while

sacrificing.  The  assassination  was  to  be  ef-
againsthim  fectcd  during  his  absence  from  Italy;  but  it
Buppres  e  ^^^  .^  Italy  that  the  reported  conspirators  were

seized,  at  four  different  spots;  they  were  condemned  and
put  to  death  by  direction  of  the  senate,  and  Hadrian,  who
had  given  the  now  customary  promise  never  to  exact  the
blood  of  a  senator,  could  declare  that  their  execution  was
without  his  orders,  and  against  his  wish.'  But  whatever
were  the  actual  circumstances  of  this  event,  we  may  conjec-
ture that  Hadrian's  return  was  accelerated  by  it.  Instead
of  plunging  at  the  head  of  his  troops  into  a  career  of  fresh
conquests,  as  his  subjects  may  have  anticipated,  he  refrained
even  from  chastising  the  insults  of  the  enemy,  and  was  satis-
fied with  repeating  and  perhaps  increasing  the  bribes  of  his

predecessors.'* The  Iloxolani  were  induced  to

The  Boxolanl ^ .  .  ,  . , .

Induced  to  re- retire  oncc  more  within  their  own  lines,  only  to

tire.

break  out  again  at  the  next  favourable  opportu-
nity. But  Hadrian  secured  the  tranquillity  of  Dacia,  at  least
for  a  season,  by  placing  in  command  there  his  trustiest  officer,
Martius  Turbo,  with  extraordinary  powers.  The  province
continued  to  be  held  as  an  integral  portion  of  the  empire
through  many  reigns,  and  we  are  at  a  loss  to  account  for  the
iiadrinn'ii  oi-  conunon  Statement  of  the  historians,  that  Ila-
o7^»bLndoniDg°  drian  contemplated  its  abandonment,  not  so  much
^^""^  from  the  difficulty  of  keeping  it,  as  from  a  i)etty

'  Hpartian,  Hadr.  7.  This  conspiracy  may  be  dated  a.  n.  119,  in  Hadrian's
third  consulship. Euseb.  Vhron.

'  Spartian,  &c.  Haulr.  0.  The  Roxolani  lay  to  the  east  of  Dacia ;  the  Sar-
matians  are  mentioned  Iwtli  to  the  caflt  and  to  the  west  The  lazygcs  (on  the
Tliciss),  who  wanted  to  trade  wltli  the  Itoxolani,  sought  a  passage  tiirough  Da-
da.  Dion,  Ixxi.  10.  It  is  said  of  the  emperor  Aurelius:  i^f/Kev  avrolQ  irptig
rove  'Po(o?Avov(  (Jtd  lift  Aox/of  knifilywaOai.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  337

jealousy  of  Trajan.'  Dion,  indeed,  declares  circumstantially
that  he  destroyed  the  bridge  over  the  Danube,  to  prevent
the  barbarians  from  crossing  into  MsDsia ;  and  Dion  had  un-
doubtedly the  means  of  ascertaining  the  truth,  if  he  cared  to
employ  them.  But  my  acquaintance  with  this  historian  does
not  lead  me  to  balance  his  word  in  such  a  case  against  the
great  improbability  which  lies  on  the  face  of  the  story.*

Hadrian  returned  to  Rome,  pleased  at  least  with  the  clear
sweep  which  had  been  made  of  all  his  rivals,  and  well  satis-
fied with  the  zeal  the  senate  had  shown  in  his  h^^j^iu,  „oort«
behalf;  yet  not  without  apprehension  of  the  »^ •«»•»«•
grudge  that  might  be  felt  against  him  for  the  shedding  of
BO  much  noble  blood.  The  removal  of  Attianus  and  Similis
from  the  prsetorian  prefecture  may  have  been  meant  to  mark
his  pretended  displeasure  at  this  sacrifice.  Both  of  them
were  tiusty  and  able  servants.  The  simple  honesty  of
Similis  was  deemed  worthy  of  special  remembrance  by  the
historians.  Doubtless  the  sudden  disgrace  of  men  so  highly
recommended  helped  to  stamp  on  Hadrian  a  character  for
ingratitude  and  envy.*  He  repeated  the  assurance  he  had
already  given,  that  henceforth  the  life  of  a  senator  should  be
ever  sacred  in  his  eyes.  The  tokens  of  deference  he  showed
to  the  order,  the  marked  favour  he  bestowed  on  its  most
distinguished  members,  and  the  various  popular  decrees  he
issued,  may  probably  be  traced  to  this  period,  and  to  the
anxiety  he  felt  at  this  moment  to  conciliate  the  nobles  of  the
city. The  emperor^  we  read,  deigned  to  admit  the  best  of  the

'  Eutrop.  viii.  6  :  "  qui  Trajani  gloria  iQTidens  statim  proTineias  ties  reli-
quit  quas  Trajanus  addiderat  (see  above) ;  .  .  .  .  idem  de  Dacia  faccre  cona-
tum  amici  detemierunt"

*  Dion,  Ixviii.  13. :  a^lXe  rifv  eniiro^i  KoraaKev^v.  But  this  is  not  con-
finne<l  by  Eutropius,  from  whom  we  may  infer  that  Hadrian  was  deterred  from
abandoning  the  province  by  the  claims  of  the  Roman  settlers  on  his  protec-
tion ;  viii.  6.  An  inscription,  said  to  have  been  discovered  at  Varhely,  goes  so
far  as  to  ascribe  the  conquest  of  the  province  to  Hadrian.  "  Imp.  .  .  .  Ha-
driano  ....  cujus  virtute  Dacia  impcrio  addita  felix  est"  Gruter,  249. ;
Gregorovius,  p.  22. Eckhel  seems  to  doubt  its  genuineness,  vL  494.

'  Spartian,  Hadrian.  9. Dion,  Ixix.  19,
VOL. TII. —  22

338  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

senators  freely  to  his  private  society.  He  repudiated  the
games  of  the  circus  voted  in  his  honour,  excepting  those  on
his  own  birthday  only,  and  often  declared  in  the  Curia  that
he  would  so  govern  the  commonwealth  that  it  shoxdd  know
that  it  belonged  to  the  people,  and  not  to  himself.  As  he
made  himself  consul  thrice,  so  he  advanced  several  person-
ages to  a  third  consulship;  but  the  number  to  whom  he
granted  a  second  was  very  considerable.  Sis  own  third  con-
sulship he  held  for  four  months  only,  and  in  that  time  sate
often  in  judgment.  He  always  attended  the  regular  meetings
of  the  senate  whether  within  or  without  the  city.  .  He  cher'
ished  highly  the  dignity  of  the  order,  m,aking  new  members
with  difficulty ;  so  m,uch  so,  that  when  he  thus  advanced  At-
tianus,  who  was  already  prefect  of  the  praetorians,  and  enjoy-
ed the  triumphal  ornaments y  he  showed  that  there  was  no
higher  eminence  to  which  he  could  exalt  him.  He  suffered
not  the  knights  to  try  the  causes  of  senators,  unless  he  were
himself  present  /  no,  nor  even  then.  For  it  had  been  the  cus-
tom for  the  prince  to  take  counsel  with  both  senators  and
knights  in  such  cases,  and  to  deliver  judgment  after  deliber-
ating with  them  all  in  common.  Finally,  Hadrian  expressed
his  detestation  of  princes  who  paid  the  senate  less  deference
than  he  showed  himself.  To  JServiamis,  his  sister'*s  husband,
whom  he  treated  with  such  reverence  as  always  to  meet  him
when  he  issued  from  his  chamber  in  the  nnoming,  he  gave
a  third  consulship,  unasked,  taking  care  that  it  should  not
coincide  with  his  own,  that  Servianus  might  never  be  required
and  the  popu-  '^  speak  second  in  debate.^  This  respect  for  the
*•**•  security  and  dignity  of  the  Roman  magnates  was

confirmed,  as  far  as  laws  could  confirm  it,  by  a  decree  that
the  estates  of  criminals  should  no  longer  accrue  to  the  im-
perial fiscus,  but  to  the  public  treasury.  Hadrian  thus  wise-
ly put  himself  beyond  the  reach  of  temptation,  beyond  the
suspicion  of  interest.  The  affluence  lie  inherited  from  his
father's  conquests  ho  maintained  by  his  own  discreet  econo-

'  Spartion,  Hadr.  8.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  339

my ;  for  his  expenditure,  though  ample  and  liberal  as  be-
came him,  seems  to  have  been  extravagant  in  no  particular;
even  his  buildings,  however  splendid  and  costly,  were  lees
various  and  less  numerous  than  those  of  Trajan.  On  great
occasions  the  shows  Avith  which  he  favoured  the  populace
were  conceived  on  a  scale  of  unbounded  magnificence.  It  is
remarked  that  he  exhibited  combats  of  gladiators  for  six  days
in  succession,  and  gave  a  birthday  massacre  of  a  thousand
wild  beasts ;  but  such  banquets  of  blood  and  treasure  wera
apparently  not  repeated,  and  on  the  whole  the  attitude  he
assumed  towards  the  people  at  their  amusements  was  stem
and  reserved,  rather  than  criminally  indulgent.*

Such  were  the  arts,  easy  to  princes,  by  which  Hadrian  laid
the  basis  of  his  power  in  the  regard  of  the  soldiers,  the  no-
bles, and  the  great  body  of  the  people.  Succeed-  H»drUB'i  pop-
ing to  the  most  beloved  of  nders,  with  an  obe-  «»i«* ««»«»«.
dient  army,  a  contented  nobility,  and  a  well-stored  treasury,
his  position  was  doubtless  more  than  usually  favourable.
Nevertheless  the  temper  and  abilities  he  brought  to  the  task
were  also  admirably  fitted  for  it.  We  may  remark  how  lit-
tle the  consolidation  of  the  monarchy  had  yet  tended  to
separate  the  master  from  his  subjects,  and  fix  barriers
of  etiquette  between  them.  The  intercourse  of  Trajan  with
his  friend  Pliny,  though  disfigured  by  the  extravagant  forms
of  salutation  adopted  by  the  inferior,  was  substantially  that
of  two  companions  in  arts  and  arms  in  the  time  of  the  repub-
lic ;  it  was  less  distant  perhaps  than  that  which  had  obtained
between  the  proconsul  in  his  province  and  the  favoured  sub-
altern of  his  cohort.  But  Hadrian  was  distin-
guished, even  beyond  his  predecessor,  by  the  miiauijMi-
geniality  of  his  temperament.  Versed  in  all  the  "*^  *"^*
knowledge  of  his  era,  he  placed  himself  on  an  intimate  foot-
ing with  the  ablest  teachers  and  practitioners,  and  divided

*  Spartian,  in  Hadrian.  Y,  8.  The  birthday  here  specified  was  probably
that  which  fell  in  the  year  119,  after  Hadrian's  return  from  Msesia.  The  anni-
versary  was  the  4th  of  January,  when  he  had  just  accepted  his  third  consul-
ship.

340  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

his  smiles  equally  between  senators  like  Fronto,  and  freed-
men  such  as  Favorinus  the  rhetorician,  and  the  architect
Apollodorus.  He  condescended,  indeed,  to  enter  into  compe-
tition with  the  professors  of  eloquence  and  the  fine  arts  ;  but
here,  though  he  did  not  require,  like  Nero,  that  his  rivals
should  yield  him  the  palm,  he  could  not  always  control  the
irritability  of  his  genius.  It  was  well  for  those  who  could
allow  themselves  to  be  worsted,  and  disguise  at  the  same
time  the  tameness  of  their  surrender,  as  in  the  case  of  Favor-
inus, who,  according  to  the  well-known  story,  yielded  a
strong  position  to  his  imperial  antagonist,  and  replied  to  the
inquiry  of  a  surprised  bystander,  why  he  defended  himself  so
feebly^  that  it  is  ill  arguing  with  the  master  of  thirty  legions}
Other  opponents,  however,  were  less  obliging.  Hadrian,  it  is
said,  continued  after  his  accession  to  retain  a  grudge  against
Apollodorus  for  having  derided  his  early  efforts  in  painting.
He  was  bent  on  proving  himself  a  greater  architect  than  the
master  of  the  art.  When  about  to  constiaict  his  magnificent
temple  of  Rome  and  Venus,  he  produced  a  design  of  his  own,
and  showed  it  with  proud  satisfaction  to  Apollodorus.  The
creator  of  the  Trajan  column  remarked  witli  a  sneer  that  the
deities,  if  they  rose  from  their  seats,  must  thrust  their  heads
through  the  ceiling.  The  emperor,  we  are  assured,  could  not
forgive  this  banter,  which  was  at  least  unbecoming ;  but  we
need  hardly  take  to  the  letter  the  statement  that  he  put  liis
critic  to  death  for  it.*  Towards  the  close  of  his  career,  in-
deed, Hadrian  became,  as  we  shall  see,  captious  and  jealous
of  those  around  him ;  but  such  cold-blooded  barbarity  is  lit-
tle in  accordance  with  his  usual  temper. To  his  many  ac-

'  Spartian,  Hcuh.  16.  This  phlegmatic  philosopher  used  to  pique  himself
on  three  parudoxcfl  of  fortune :  Tak&vriQ  £)v  E/l^Tvifev,  evvov^og  £)V  ftoix^iac
KplveaOat,  ftaaiT^l  dia^tpeaOai  koX  !^yv.  Thilostr,  VU.  Sophist,  i,  8,  For  other
anecdotes  of  the  same  kind  about  Hadrian  sec  this  writer  also,  Vit.  Sophist,
i.  22.

'  Dion,  Ixix.  4. :  kuI  uhre  ti)v  ipyt/v  oire  ri/v  Xhivr/v  Kdreax^'y  "^'^'  i4i6vEV-
oev  airrdv.  The  n>a<lcr  who  has  attended  to  the  character  of  this  writer's
ptatemcnt«  throughout  this  hiHtory  will  bo  always  ready  to  allow  for  his  malig-
nant credulity.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  341

complishments  he  added,  on  the  whole,  an  affability  rarely
seen  in  the  Roman  princes,  such  as  may  remind  us  of  the  best
days  of  the  republic,  when  the  demeanour  of  the  noble
toward  his  client  was  marked  with  peculiar  courtesy  and
forbearance,  secured  by  tlie  general  sobriety  of  his  manners
and  the  refined  dignity  of  his  breeding.

Hadrian's  third  consulship  commenced  with  the  year  119,
and  he  retained  it  for  four  months,  in  which  interval  he  re-
turned from  his  Sarmatian  expedition,  amused  „^^^
and  flattered  the  senators  in  the  city,  and  pre-

pared for  more  extended  movements. From  this  mmHtm-

aaalniad  wttk

period  the  only  history  of  this  emperor,  and  of  iatkafnr-
his  times,  is  the  record,  confused  and  imperfect
both  in  dates  and  circumstances,  of  his  journeys  through
every  province  of  his  empire,  broken  only  by  occasional  so-
journs at  his  provincial  capitals,  till  he  finally  settled  for  hu
last  few  years  at  Rome.  It  was  hb  object,  partly  from
policy,  but  more  perhaps  from  the  restless  curiosity  of  his
disposition,  to  inspect  every  corner  of  his  dominions,  to  ex-
amine in  person  its  state  and  resources,  to  make  himself
acquainted  with  its  wants  and  capabilities,  and  with  the  ad-
ministrative processes  applied  to  it.  Curious  also  about  the
character  of  men,  he  studied  on  the  spot  the  temper,  the
abilities,  the  views  and  feelings  of  the  multitude  of  officials
with  whom  he  had  ordinarily  to  correspond  at  a  distance,
upon  whom  he  had  to  impress  his  own  views  of  government,
to  whom  he  had  to  declare  his  pleasure  by  the  rescripts  which
became  thenceforth  the  laws  of  the  empire.  There  is  some-
thing sublime  in  the  magnitude  of  the  task  he  thus  imposed
on  himself;  nor  are  the  zeal  and  constancy  with  which  he
pursued  it  less  extraordinary.  If  other  chiefs  of  wide-spread
empires  have  begun  with  the  same  bold  and  generous  concep-
tion of  their  duty,  it  may  be  doubted  whether  any  have  so
persevered  through  a  period  of  twenty  years.

It  may  be  observed,  moreover,  that  there  was  something
in  the  carriage  required  of  a  Roman  Imperator  little  consist-

342  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

„ ,  etit  "with  such  active  and  pryinsj  curiosity. The

His  assiduity  . .  i j o  j

In  performing diffnitv  of  his  mihtary  character  was hedcced

the  duties  of  a  ,  , ^  ,. .  t ,  •■  . , i

military  chief, rouud  Dv  formauties  and  decorums,  on  which  the

and  in  main-  .  -  t . i

taining  disci-  hastc  and  excitement  oi  the  traveller  and  sight-
seer would  rudely  infringe.  Yet  among  the
merits  which  the  historians  recognise  in  Hadrian,  was  one
which  they  could  have  learnt  only  from  his  officers  and
soldiers,  his  assiduity  in  performing  the  duties  of  a  com-
mander. Hadrian,  it  was  allowed,  maintained  in  its  ftiU
vigour  the  discipline  of  Trajan.  He  was  constantly  seen,
throughout  his  progresses,  at  the  head  of  his  legions,  some-
times on  horseback,  but  more  commonly  on  foot,  marching
steadily  with  them  twenty  miles  a  day,  and  always  bare-
headed ;  for  if  the  Roman  soldier  was  permitted  to  relieve
himself  on  march  of  the  weight  of  his  helmet,  he  might  not
replace  it  with  the  effeminate  covering  of  a  cap  or  bonnet.
He  inspected  day  by  day  the  camps  and  lines  of  his  garrisons,
examined  their  arms  and  machines  of  war,  their  tents,  huts,
and  hospitals,  as  well  as  their  clothes  and  rations,  tasting
himself  their  black  bread,  their  lard  and  cheese,  their  sour
wine  or  vinegar.  These  attentions  ingratiated  him  with  the
soldiers,  and  made  them  tolerant  of  his  severe  demands  on
their  patience  and  activity.  He  constantly  passed  his  troops
in  review,  and  encouraged  them  by  his  own  example  to  sub-
mit to  the  ever-recurring  drill  which  was  necessary  to  main-
tain their  efficiency.  He  restored  or  enforced  the  regulations
of  the  tacticians,  and,  while  he  sedulously  avoided  war  on  the
frontiers,  kept  all  his  legions  in  a  state  of  prci)aredness  for
war.  With  tliis  view  he  strictly  repressed  tlie  indulgences
both  of  men  and  officers,  in  respect  to  dwellings,  furniture,
and  equipments,  and  cut  oflf  the  luxurious  appliances  with
which  they  sought  to  relieve  the  hardships  or  tedium  of  tlieir
protracted  exile.  An  important  testimony  to  the  value  of
his  exertions  is  borne  by  the  historian  Dion,  who,  writing  at
least  eiglity  years  later,  says  that  the  rules  established  by
Hadrian  remained  in  force  down  to  his  own  days.'

'  Dion,  Ixlx.  9. Comp.  Bpartian,  in  Hadrian.  10. Vegetius,  a  writer  of

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  84S

Even  before  his  elevation  to  power,  Hadrian's  active
career  had  led  him  into  most  of  the  provinces.  The  regions
of  the  North-west  were  among  those  with  which  -^j^,^^
he  was  least  acquainted,  and  in  these  his  presence  gy»^totofl«d
was  more  especially  required  to  maintain  the
authority  of  the  conquerors.  On  quitting  Rome  he  directed
his  course  through  Gaul,  and  reached  the  Germanic  provinces
on  the  Rhine,  where  he  showed  himself  to  the  barbarians
from  the  ramparts  of  Moguntiacum  or  Colouia.  He  $et  a
king  over  the  Germans,  says  Spartianus,  with  exceMive  and
indeed  culpable  brevity ;  but  the  oracle  admits  neither  of
expansion  nor  explanation.'  We  are  wholly  ignorant  of  the
attitude  assumed  by  the  German  tribes  towards  Rome  at
this  moment,  and  of  their  relations  to  one  another.  We  can
oidy  suppose  that  the  chief  whom  Hadrian  established  on  his
throne  was  pledged,  and  possibly  subsidized,  to  restrain  the
nations  that  bordered  on  the  rampart  of  Trajan ;  and  we
may  believe  that,  not  trusting  entirely  to  this  safeguard,  the
emperor  prolonged  or  strengthened  that  great  barrier.  His
care,  indeed,  extended  to  the  whole  line  of  the  German  fron-
tier. The  foundation  of  a  colony  at  Juvavium,  or  Salzburg,
which  received  the  name  of  Forum  Hadriani,  attests  the
vigilance  Avhich  directed  his  view  from  the  Rhine  to  the
Salza,  and  the  taste,  I  would  willingly  add,  which  selected
for  a  town  to  bear  his  name,  the  most  enchanting  site  in
central  Europe.

From  Gaul  Hadrian  passed  over  into  Britain. Of  the
movements  in  that  province  which  required  his  presence  we
have  no  account ;  but  since  Trajan's  death  an
outbreak  of  some  importance  had  occurred ;  for unuin,
m  the  cursory  allusion  to  it  which  alone  remams

the  fourth  century,  says  (L  27.) :  "  praeterea  et  vetus  consuetudo  pennansit,  et
D.  Augusti  utque  Hadriani  constitutionibus  pnecavetur,  ut  ter  in  mense  tarn
equites  quam  pedites  educantur  ambulatum."  This  tension  of  discipline  seems
to  be  commemorated  on  the  coins  of  Hadrian  which  bear  the  l^end  Jiaeiplm.
Aug.  Eckhel,  Doctr.  Numm.  vi.  608.  Victor  remarks  more  generally :  "  oflS-
cia  publica  et  palatina,  nee  non  militiae,  in  earn  forman  statuit  quae  paucis  per
Constantinum  immutatis  hodie  perseverant"  Epit.  28.
*  Spartian,  Iladr.  12. :  "  Germanis  regem  constituic"

344  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

the  losses  of  Rome  from  the  Britons  are  placed  in  the  same
line  with  those  she  suflfered  from  the  Jews.'  The  conquest
of  the  southern  portion  of  the  island  had  been  effected,  as  we
have  seen,  with  rapidity,  though  not  unchequered  by  reverses.
Commenced  by  Plautius  and  Ostorius,  confirmed  by  Sue-
tonius, and  consolidated  by  Agricola,  it  had  been  accepted
from  henceforth  without  an  audible  murmur  by  the  natives,
who  indemnified  themselves  for  their  evil  fortune,  if  evil  it
was,  by  cultivating  the  arts  of  their  conquerors,  and  declin-
ing to  renew  an  unavailing  struggle.  Tlie  rapid  advance  of
Roman  civilization  astonished  the  Romans  themselves.  They
pictured  the  furthest  Orkneys  prostrate  before  them,  and
Shetland  inviting  a  southern  sophist  to  instruct  her  in  pol-
ished letters.'  In  no  part  of  their  dominions,  however,  had
the  happy  results  of  peace  and  security  shown  themselves  in
fairer  colours.  The  building  of  cities,  the  cultivation  of  the
land,  the  construction  of  roads,  the  erection  of  neat  or  volup-
tuous pleasure-houses,  had  converted  the  lair  of  Ccesar's
painted  savages  into  an  Italian  garden. Already

Flourishing  f  J  •  1  •  1, J 1  J-

state  of  the  the  Warm  and  mineral  springs  had  been  dis-
covered, which  still  draw  our  health-seekers  to
Bath  and  Clifton,  to  Cheltenham  and  Matlock ;  the  tin,  cop-
per, and  silver  ores  of  Devon  had  been  worked  with  method
and  perseverance ;  the  iron  of  Gloucestershire  and  Sussex,
the  lead  of  Yorkshire,  Derbyshire  and  Salop,  the  coal  of
Wales,  Staffordshire  and  Durham,  had  all  been  brouglit  into
requisition,  to  supply  the  most  essential  wants  of  a  thriv-
ing population,  and  to  pour  their  surplus  into  the  imperial

'  Fronto,  fragm.  de  hell.  Parth.  822. :  "quid,  aro  vestro  Hadriano  imperium
obUncntc,  quantum  militum  a  Judseis,  quantum  a  Britannia  cn>sum  1 "

•  Juvenal,  ii,  in  Jin. :  "arma  quidera  ultra  Litora  Juvcrnic  promovimua  et
modo  captos  Orcadaa;"  xv.  112.:  "Dc  conducondo  loquitur  jam  rhotoro
Tlmle."  Martial,  vii.  10.  :  "Dicitur  ct  noHtros  cautarc  Uritiinuia  versus."
TacitUH,  a  graver  authority,  npeaks  not  less  pointedly  {Affric.  21.) :  "jam  vero
principum  Alios  Hhcralibus  artibua  orudiro,  et  inffenia  Britaimonim  sUuUia  Gal«
lonim  antcfcrrc,  ut  qui  modo  linguam  Romanom  abiuiobant,  cI(M]uontium  con«
cuplsccrent."

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  345

treasury.'  Britain  had  her  own  potteries  and  glass-houses ;
she  grew  large  quantities  of  grain  adapted  to  her  climate,
and  exported  corn  and  cattle,  as  well  as  handsome  slaves,
to  the  markets  of  the  continent.  Xo  Roman  province  was
more  self-supporting,  or  more  capable,  as  she  proved,  at  least
for  a  moment,  at  a  later  period,  of  asserting  her  independence.
All  this  material  progress  had  been  made  with  little  direct
instruction  or  aid  from  her  conquerors  ;  for  Britain  contained,
as  far  as  we  know,  but  one,  or  at  most  three  colonies  of  Ro-
man citizens  ;  *  her  invaders  were  still  encamped  on  her  soil
as  soldiers  in  arms,  and  had  not  yet  laid  down  their  swords
to  assume  the  implements  of  peace.  Meanwhile  the  greatest
sphere  of  British  energy  and  activity  seems  to  have  lain  in
the  northern  rather  than  in  the  southern  parts  of  England.
Cornwall  and  Devonshire,  and  even  Kent  and  Sussex,  were
left  in  great  measure  under  the  dominion  of  the  primeval
forest,  while  Eboracum  or  York  seems  to  have  been  the  chief
city  of  the  province,  and  the  resources  of  the  country  round
it  to  have  been  most  thoroughly  explored  and  utilized. A

'  Ptolemy,  writing  in  the  age  of  Hadrian,  gives  a  list  of  fiftr  towna  in
Southern  Britain.  Coins  of  the  early  emperora  from  Claudius  downwards  have
been  found  in  various  localities.  Inscriptions  on  pigs  of  lead,  4c.,  refer  to  the
reigns  of  Claudius,  Vespasian  and  Domitian.  The  account  of  our  island  in  the
text  is  taken  from  my  general  readuig  on  the  subject,  and  I  think  it  will  be
fully  borne  out  by  Mr.  Wright's  excellent  "  Handbook  of  Briuin,"  to  which  be
gives  tlie  title  of  "  The  Kelt,  the  Roman,  and  the  Saxon."  The  greatest  tUtna
of  original  information  on  the  subject  of  Roman-British  arduMdogjr  may  be
found  in  the  Collectanea  Aniiqua  of  Mr.  Roach  Smith,  and  in  Dr.  Bruce's  interat-
ing  work  on  the  Roman  Wall.

'  The  only  colony  in  the  proper  sense  of  wliich  we  can  speak  with  certainty
is  that  of  Claudius  at  Camulodunum  (Colchester).  Isca  Silurum  (Caerieon),
and  Deva  (Chester),  are  also  enumerated  by  the  antiquaries  as  permanent  mili-
tary stations,  and  possibly  are  found  so  entitled  on  inscriptions.  There  is  said
to  be  the  authority  of  an  inscribed  stone  for  Glevum  (Gloucester)  also ;  and
Lincoln  is  sometimes  added  to  the  list  from  the  name  only.  The  pretender
Richard  of  Cirencester  adds  Londiuium  (London),  Rutupiae  (Richborough),
Aquffi  Soils  (Bath),  and  Camboricum  (Cambridge).  This  statement  is  of  no
authority.  Londiuium  and  Veralamium  were  municipia  in  the  time  of  Tacitus,
and  so  probably  was  Eboracum.

346  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Stimulus,  no  doubt,  was  given  in  this  quarter  to  productions
of  all  kinds  by  the  presence  of  the  local  government,  and  of
the  legions  which  maintained  it.  Eboracum  was  the  seat  of
the  prefect  with  his  official  staff,  and  the  ministers  of  his
luxury,  while  Londiniuni  was  still  a  mere  resort  of  traders.*
The  northern  limit  of  the  province  was  as  yet  impei'fectly
Limit  of  Eo-  defined.  Agricola's  chain  of  forts  between  the
tion  in'the"^'  Clyde  and  Forth  was  held  by  the  most  advanced
North.  battalions ;  but  while  many  Roman  settlers  had

planted  themselves  beyond  the  Cheviots,  and  even  beyond
the  Forth,  the  camps  he  had  previously  traced  between  the
Tyne  and  Sol  way  formed  a  stronger  bulwark ;  and  this  lower
line  of  fortifications  commanded  more  respect  than  the  upper
from  the  roaming  tribes  of  Caledonia,  ever  on  the  watch  to
harry  the  homesteads  of  the  intruders.  The  line  of  the  Tyne
formed  practically  the  limit  of  Roman  civilization,  and  the
settlers  who  dwelt  within  range  of  the  barbarians,  constantly
subject  to  attacks,  and  ever  appealing  to  the  prefect  for  pro-
tection, had  recently  suffered,  as  I  imagine,  from  an  assault
of  more  than  ordinary  ferocity,  and  had  engaged  the  presi-
diary  coliorts  in  a  bootless  and  calamitous  campaign.  The
time  was  come  when  it  was  necessary  to  specify  more  accu-
rately the  limits  within  which  the  protection  of  Rome  could
be  fairly  required  and  substantially  afforded.

In  the  absence  of  historical  statements  we  can  only  con-

'  Aroonp  the  innumerable  remains  of  Roman  villas  discovered  in  this  island,
there  ifl  none,  I  believe,  that  has  revealed  by  a  fragment  of  inscription  the
name  and  (fuality  of  its  owner.  We  do  not  know  whether  the  Roman  civilian
of  fortune  was  in  the  habit  of  making  his  residence  in  the  country  districts.
Our  Roman  villua  seem  to  have  been  generally  placed  in  the  vicinity  of  military
Btations,  and  may  have  been  the  pleasure-houses  of  the  officers.  The  designs
of  their  mosaics,  as  far  as  they  have  been  discovered,  are  said  to  be  limited  to
two  BubjccUi,  that  of  Neptune  and  the  marine  divinities,  and  that  of  Orpheus;
the  one  being  an  allusion  to  our  insular  position,  the  other  to  the  j)rogrcss  of
civilization  among  us.  The  subject  of  Orpheus  is  specially  appropriated  to
cating-rooins.  Tin?  Ilonuin  bnn<nict,  with  its  music,  its  recitations,  and  the
balli  which  pn-ceded  it,  was  a  type  of  the  highest  advance  in  social  cultivation:
"CiiMlibiis  ct  victu  fiiMJo  dctcrruit  OrphcuB." Ilor.  Ara.  Poet.  892.

A.  U.  872.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  347

jecture  that  Hadrian  took  his  survey  of  the  state  of  the  Brit-
ish province  from  Eboracum,  and  that  he  crossed

1 m  •  11  1 ^..  Fortification  of

the  1  yne  m  person  at  the  spot  where  the  ^iian  the  upper  isth-
bridge  was  constructed,  which  gave  its  name  to  Tyne aaitM-
the  military  post  by  which  he  secured  it.*  Of  *'''
his  further  progress  northward  there  is  no  trace  perhaps  r^
maining;  but  it  is  not  improbable  that  he  extended  his  per-
sonal exploration  to  the  Frith  of  Forth,  before  he  finally
determined  to  place  the  bulwark  of  the  empire  on  the  lower
isthmus.  The  neck  of  land  which  separates  the  Solway  from
the  German  Ocean  is  about  sixty  miles  in  width,  and  is  sin-
gularly well  adapted  for  the  site  of  a  defensive  barrier.  The
Tyne  and  Irthing  flowing  in  opposite  directions,  east  and
west,  through  deep  valleys,  present  in  themselves  no  trifling
obstacles  to  a  barbarian  foe,  and  the  tract  of  land  which
separates  and  screens  their  sources  is  lofty  and  precipitous
towards  the  north.  The  base  of  this  mountain  ridge  was
then  lost  also  for  the  most  part  in  swamps,  and  wherever  the
cliff"  was  broken  by  rugged  defiles,  access  to  them  was  ob-
structed by  dense  forests.  This  advantageous  position  had
been  seized  by  Agricola,  and  though  his  enemies  impelled
him  further  northward,  he  did  not  neglect  to  secure  it  as  a
base  of  operations,  by  the  construction  of  numerous  forts,  or
entrenched  camps,  which  he  placed  generally  on  the  southern
slope  of  his  mountain  ramparts.  These  posts  were  connected
by  a  military  way,  and  in  them  the  reserves  of  the  presidiary
force  were  permanently  collected,  while  a  few  cohorts  were
advanced  to  the  extreme  boundary  of  the  province  on  the
upper  isthmus  of  Clyde  and  Forth.  Hadrian  determined  to
follow  out  on  this  spot  the  same  discreet  and  moderate  policy
he  had  established  elsewhere.  "Without  formally  withdraw-
ing his  outposts,  or  denuding  of  all  protection  the  provin-
cials, who  had  settled  under  their  wing,  he  drew  from  the
Tyne  to  the  Solway  the  ostensible  frontier  of  his  dominions.

'  Pons  Mil  of  the  "  Notitia  Impoii "  is  amply  identified  with  Newcastle*
on-Tyne  by  inscriptions.

ft

348  HISTORY  OF  THE  KOMANS  [A.  D.  119.

He  connected  the  camps  of  Agricola  with  a  fosse  and  pal-
isaded rampai-t  of  earth,  adding  subsidiary  entrenchments,  so
as  to  strengthen  the  work  with  a  fortified  station  at  every
fourth  or  fifth  mile.^  The  execution  of  this  stupendous
undertaking  may  have  occupied  the  troops  and  their  native
assistants  for  several  years ;  but  the  chiefs  of  the  empire  re-
garded it  as  so  important  for  the  security  of  the  province,
that  they  continued  from  time  to  time  to  supply  additional
defences. Severus,  two  generations  later,  may

Works  of  Ha- ,  -,  i  ,  ,  \  -,.

drian,  of  Seve- be  supposcd  to  havo  thrown  up  the  second  Ime

rus,  and  of  the «,  ,  i  ■ ■,  ■,•, ^  ■,  n

age  of  Theo-  01  carthworks,  which  runs  parallel  to  those  oi
Hadrian,  and  is  evidently  formed  to  support
them ;  and  finally  the  stupendous  wall  of  solid  masonry,  of
which  some  fragmentary  sections  still  remain,  running  as  an
exterior  bulwark  a  few  yards  to  the  northward  from  end  to
end,  may  be  ascribed,  as  I  venture  to  think,  most  probably,
neither  to  Hadrian  nor  Severus,  but  to  the  age  of  Thcodosius
and  Stilicho.*  Meanwhile  the  camps  which  Agricola  had
planted  on  the  bleak  rocks  and  moors  of  Northumbria,  bud-
ded, in  the  course  of  ages,  into  little  towns,  fenced  with  stone
walls,  adorned  with  lialls  and  temples,  and  on  their  monu-
ments were  engraved  the  names  of  prefects  and  centurions,
as  well  as  of  all  the  gods  and  goddesses  of  the  cosmopolitan
Olympus  of  the  second  and  third  centuries.  We  know  from
written  records  that  the  troops  by  which  these  strongholds
were  occupied  represented  from  twenty  to  thirty  distinct
nations. Along  this  line  of  mutual  communication  Gauls

*  Spartinn,  Hadr.  11.  :  "murura  per  octoginta  millia  passuum  primus
(luxtt,  (jui  harbaroH  Ilomanosque  dividcret."  By  "mums"  I  undrstand  tho
earthen  rampart  which  still  exists,  and  may  bo  traced  over  a  great  part  of  this
line.  Conip.  tho  same  author's  account  in  c.  12.  of  the  usual  clinracter  of
Hadrian's  prcsidiury  works :  "perea  tempora  et  alius  frequenter  in  plurimia
lociH  in  quihus  burhari  non  fluminibus  sed  limitibus  dividuntur,  stipitibus  mag-
nis  in  moduni  muralis  s('|)is  funditus  jactis  atquo  connexis,  barbaros  separavit."

*  This  in  not  the  place  to  enter  into  tho  reasoning  with  which  I  have  BUg-
gefltc<l  this  solution  in  the  (^KirOrl;/  Jirrima  for  Jan.  1 860.  The  texts  of  Dion
and  the  Augustan  History,  which  are  cited  to  prove  the  stono  wall  to  be  the
work  of  Hadrian  or  Hi^venis,  may  very  well  refer  to  the  earthen  ramparts  only.

A.  U.  872.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  349

and  Germans,  Thracians  and  Iberians,  Moors  and  Syrians,
held  the  frontiers  of  the  Roman  empire  against  the  Caledo-
nian Britons.  Here  some  thirty  languages  resounded  from
as  many  camps ;  but  the  sonorous  speech  of  Latium,  not
much  degraded  from  the  tone  still  preser^'ed  on  its  native
soil,  ever  maintained  its  supremacy  as  the  language  of  com-
mand and  of  every  official  and  public  document.  On  this
narrow  strip  of  land  we  may  read  an  epitome  of  the  historj'
of  the  Romans  under  the  Empire :  for  myself,  I  feel  that  all
I  have  read  and  written  on  this  wide  and  varied  subject,  is
condensed,  as  it  were,  in  the  picture  I  realize,  from  a  few
stones  and  earthworks,  of  their  occupation  of  our  northern
marches.*

By  this  formidable  barrier  the  incursions  of  the  Caledo-
nians were  effectually  restrained,  and  the  support  of  the
large  force  which  held  it  encouraged  the  Roman  settlers  to
plant  themselves  on  every  eligible  spot  throughout  the  low-
lands even  beyond  it.  Though  the  region  which  HadriM  in
stretches  between  the  two  isthmuses  was  not  *^^no  ija
yet  incorporated  in  the  Roman  dominions,  or  re-  *•  «?•  sw, ««.
duced  to  the  form  of  a  province,  the  immigrants  from  the
south  felt  sufficiently  secure  in  the  protection  of  Hadriau^s
lines  below,  and  Agricola's  forts  above  them.  Four  legions
continued  to  occupy  the  possessions  of  the  empire  in  the
island,  and  the  equanimity  with  which  the  southern  Britons
bore  the  yoke  might  allow  a  large  portion  of  their  force  to
encamp  in  front  of  the  barbarians  on  the  Tyne  and  Clyde.
The  duration  of  Hadrian's  residence  hardly  admits  of  conjec-
ture ;  it  would  seem,  however,  from  a  very  enigmatical  state-
ment of  Spartianus,  that  he  brought  over  the  empress  to
Britain,  and  probably  established  his  court  there  for  the  win-

'  Though  I  hesitate  to  accept  Dr.  Brace's  oonclosions  as  to  the  origin  and
author  of  the  Wall,  I  feel  not  the  less  how  deeply  the  studenta  o€  history  are
indebted  to  the  ability  with  which  he  has  investigated  the  renuuns  ocmnected
with  this  subject,  and  produced  in  his  instructive  monograph  a  vivid  picture  of
the  Roman  domination  in  Britain,  which  is  in  fact  a  type  of  that  domination
throughout  the  provinces.

350  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS

ter  of  119-120.  The  terms  on  which  he  lived  with  Sabina
were  never  cordial ;  he  scarcely  refrained,  it  is  said,  from
putting  her  to  death,  and  declared  at  least  that,  had  he  been
in  a  private  station,  he  would  have  divorced  her ;  and  she
reciprocated  this  dislike,  if  not  with  acts  of  infidelity,  with
expressions  of  bitter  hatred.  Nevertheless,  she  seems  to
have  been  the  companion  of  his  journeys,  not  in  Britain  only,
but  elsewhere ;  and  it  was  during  her  sojourn  here  with  him
that  he  disgraced  his  prefect  Septicius  Clarus,  and  his  sec-
retary Suetonius  Tranquillus,  for  showing  her  disrespect.'
That  she  had,  indeed,  much  cause  to  complain  of  his  vicious
indulgences,  must  be  freely  admitted.  His  detractors  as-
serted that  in  the  gratification  of  his  passions  he  disregarded
the  ties  of  friendship  also ;  while  his  jealousy  or  curiosity  led
him  to  violate  the  common  rules  of  honour,  in  prying  into
private  correspondence.'

From  Britain  the  emperor  directed  his  progress  to  the
South-west. In the course  of  a second  journey  through
Gaul,  he  commanded,  among  other  acts  of  mu-
Spain,  nificence  and  splendour,  the  erection  of  a  basili-

ca at  Nemausus,  in  honour  of  his  benefactress,
Plotina,  who  seems  to  have  died  at  this  period.'  The  next
step  in  his  pilgrimage  brought  him  into  Spain,  which  he

'  Septicius  had  succeeded  to  Attianus  as  prefect  of  the  praetorians ;  but
during  the  emperor's  travels  hi?  place  was  not  at  the  palace,  but  at  the  pr8&-
torium,  whether  in  the  camp  or  elsewhere.  Suetonius  is  the  same  to  whoso
valuable  biography  of  the  first  twelve  Cajsars  we  are  so  much  indebted.  As  the
disgraced  minister  of  Iladriun  we  can  easily  imagine  that  he  gave  currency  to
the  worst  stories  against  him.  The  account,  liowever,  of  Spartian  is,  as  I  have
Mid  in  the  text,  very  enigmatical :  *'  qui  apud  Sabinam  uxorem,  hiJKssu  ejus,
fiuniliarius  se  tunc  egerant  quara  roverentia  domus  aulicso  postulabat."

•  Bpartian,  II(ulr.  1.  c.

*  Of  this  busllica  there  are  no  remains.  Tlie  famous  temple  or  Maison
ctinie  ia  of  a  later  date.  Wo  do  not  know  of  any  connexion  Ix'twci'ii  riotiiia
and  the  town  of  NcmausuH.  Possibly  she  may  have  attondod  llathiaii  in  nonio
part  of  his  journeys,  and  liavc  dieil  tliore.  But  Ncniausus  was  tho  native  place
of  Uie  Cunily  of  Antoninus,  whom  Hadrian  aflerwards  adopted,  and  whom  ho
had  adrancod  in  this  year  (120)  to  tiio  conHuiship.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  351

probably  reached  by  sea,  effecting  his  landing  at  Tarraco,
where  he  passed  the  ensuing  winter.'  Here  lie  convened  an
assembly  of  the  Iberian  states,  not  to  deliberate,  but  to  re-
ceive from  his  own  mouth  the  imperial  decrees  regarding
military  enlistment.  The  provincials,  it  seems,  but  more
particularly  the  colonists  from  Rome  and  Italy,  had  ventured
to  resist  the  usual  levy  of  men  for  service ;  but  the  emperor's
measures,  urged  with  caution  and  judgment,  overcame  their
opposition.  An  instance  of  Hadrian's  good  sense  and  temper
is  here  cited.  While  walking  one  day  in  the  gartlen  of  his
host's  abode,  a  slave  suddenly  ran  upon  him  with  a  drawn
sword.  The  man  was  seized,  and  was  found  on  examination
to  be  insane.  The  emperor,  who  had  shown  the  utmost
presence  of  mind,  insisted  that  he  should  not  be  punished,
and  handed  him  over  to  the  physicians.  At  Tarraco  he  re-
stored the  temple  of  Augustus ;  but  his  services  to  the  prov-
ince were  no  doubt  more  important  and  extensive,  and  we
find  upon  his  medals,  struck  in  this  country,  the  legend  which
indeed  accompanies  him  throughout  his  imperial  progresses,
the  Mestorer  of  Spain.  Though  he  did  not  care  to  visit  his
own  birtliplaee  on  the  banks  of  the  Baetis,  he  enriched  it  with
presents  and  endowments.

Mauretania  had  never  yet  been  honoured  with  the  pres-
ence of  a  Roman  emperor.  Hadrian  crossed  the  Mediterra-
nean, and  occupied  himself  in  person  with  tran-  Hensiuiun-
quillizing  disturbances  which  had  broken  out  in  »««»b1^
that  remote  dependency,  connected  perhaps  with  the  treason-
able intrigues  of  Lusius.  The  movement,  whatever  its  origin
or  nature,  was  deemed  by  the  senate  of  sufficient  importance
to  be  signalized  by  a  Supplication.*

A  much  longer  stride  bore  him  next  to  the  opposite  ex-
tremity of  the  empire ;  and  it  is  with  some  surprise  and  per-

'  This,  as  I  imagine,  was  the  winter  of  120-121 ;  but  neither  Clinton  Ttat
Gregorovius  ventures  to  determine  the  date.

*  Spartian,  I/adrian.  12. :  "motus  Maurorum  compresffitet  a  senatu  suppli-
cationes  emeruit"  The  title  of  ReHortr  of  Mauretania,  which  appears  on  hia
coins,  may  refer  to  the  revived  security  of  the  Roman  colonists.

352  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Hadrian  on  the  plexity  that  we  hear  of  his  suddenly  appearing
^^^  "^  on  the  borders  of  Parthia.  The  policy  of  Chos-
^reto Ath7na,  ^^^^'  ^*  seems,  was  dubious,  and  the  state  of  the
A.I).  12-2, 128.  eastern  provinces  was  at  this  moment  precarious.
An  effort  was  required  to  confirm  the  rival  monarch  in  his
alliance,  and  Hadrian,  averse  even  to  a  mere  demonstration
of  force,  sought  to  secure  his  influence  in  a  personal  inter-
view.' The  result  seems  to  have  fully  justified  the  judgment
which  dictated  this  proceeding.  The  Parthian  desisted  from
any  attempt  to  embroil  the  dominions  of  the  Roman  poten-
tate, and  the  two  empires  continued  throughout  the  reign  of
Hadrian  on  terms  of  peace  and  mutual  forbearance.  From
Syria  the  emperor  returned  homeward  through  the  province
of  Asia  Minor,  and  touched  at  some  islands  in  the  ^gean,
on  his  route  to  Athens.  At  the  Grecian  capital  he  made  a
more  lengthened  sojourn,  commencing  new  edifices  for  its
decoration,  and  presiding  at  its  festivals,'  But  Rome  was
still  the  goal  of  his  long  and  circuitous  progress,

Returns  to  *  *  ,  •  ?  i

Eome,  and and  hither  he  once  more  bent  his  steps,  with  but

vUltsSlclljr  ,  . . ^. .,  ^, .

and  Carthage,  one  short  digression  to  visit  Sicily,  and  witness  a
sunrise  from  the  summit  of  Etna.  From  Rome,
however,  he  crossed  the  sea  to  Carthage,  and  conferred  many
benefits  on  the  province  of  Africa.  The  people  there  be-
stowed on  him  the  usual  compliments  in  return,  and  ascribed
to  his  auspicious  advent  the  copious  fall  of  rain,  which  at  last,
after  a  five  years'  interval,  bedewed  their  arid  country.*
From  Africa  he  retraced  his  voyage  to  Rome.

None  perhaps  of  our  princes,  says  Spartian  at  this  juno-
tarc,  ever  traversed  so  rapidly  so  large  a  portion  oftheicorld.
Hadrian  seems  to  have  generally  alternated  a
oDd  pn«re«m period  of  residence  in  winter  with  another,  per-
haps a  longer  period,  of  locomotion  in  the  sum-

'  Spartian,  in  Hadrian,  12. :  "bellum  Parthicum  per  idem  tcmpus  in  motu
tantuiii  fuit ;  idqtio  Iladriani  collociuio  roprcssuni  est."

"  At  AUicna  Hadrian  may  have  pasHod  tlio  winter  of  122-123.  Clinton,
from  KuHcb.  Chronieon.

'  Kpartian,  Hadrian.  1 3.  22. :  *'  post  quinquennium  pluit ;  atquo  idoo  ab
Africauis  diloctui  cat"

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  353

mer.  The  visit  to  Africa  may  fill  the  interval  between
two  winters  passed  in  Rome.  The  chronologists  at  least  as-
sure us  that  he  was  at  Athens  in  the  year  125,  on  his  way,
as  Ave  are  informed  by  Spartian,  to  the  East.'  This  was  the
commencement  of  what  is  generally  designated  as  Hadrian's
Second  Progress,  which  embraced  the  greater  part  of  his
subsequent  reign,  and  included  more  than  one  long  residence
at  Athens,  with  sojourns  of  some  duration  at  Antioch  and
Alexandria.  It  was  not  till  the  year  134  that  he  retamed
finally  to  Rome,  and  it  seems  impossible  to  reduce  to  consecu-
tive order  our  meagre  notices  of  these  various  peregrinations.
The  most  interesting  incidents  in  this  career  re-  „
fer  to  his  abode  at  Athens  and  Alexandria.  We  »t  Aiexandru
have  sufficient  authority  to  fix  his  residence  in
the  Egyptian  capital  to  the  year  131,  and  I  imagine  that,
down  to  the  year  preceding,  he  was  for  the  most  part  domi-
ciled in  his  favourite  Athens.  The  events  of  the  Jewish  wars
carried  him  probably  to  Syria  in  132,  and  from  thence,  as  we
may  infer,  he  conducted  his  second  negotiations  with  Parthia,
and  there  invited  the  attendance  of  the  chiefs  of  the  Armenian
border-land.  He  was  unquestionably  at  Athens  once  more
at  the  end  of  133,  and  there  passed  one  winter,  and  his  final
return  to  Italy,  which  he  seems  never  again  to  have  quitted,
may  thus  be  assigned,  as  before  said,  to  the  year  134.  But
the  political  events  of  this  period  are  either  insignificant,  or
have  been  already  anticipated ;  and  we  may  take  this  oppor-
tunity to  cast  an  eye  on  the  moral  and  social  spectacles  pre-
sented by  the  great  cities  of  Athens  and  Alexandria,  the
rival  universities  of  the  Roman  world.

However  numerous  and  magnificent  were  the  buildings

1  Clinton  from  Eusebius.  Spartian,  Hadrian.  13.  1  suppose  the  winters
123-124,  124-125  to  have  been  passed  at  Rome :  the  second  being  subsequent
to  the  return  from  Africa.  I  must  allow,  however,  that  Spartian  says :  "  cum
post  Africam  Romam  redissct  ^atim  ad  Orientem  profectus  per  Athenas  iter
fecit."  The  word  "statim"  may  indeed  mean,  "as  soon  as  ever  the  next
season  for  travelling  arrived."  But  the  chronology  of  Euseb  us  would  allow  of
Hadrian  passing  this  winter,  124-125,  at  Athens.
VOL.  VII. — 23

864  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

of  Trajan,  he  must  yield  the  palm,  with  every  other  imperial
Works  of  Ha-  huilder,  to  Hadrian,  who  possessed  the  taste,  and
embellishment  ^^^  acquired  even  the  technical  knowledge  of
of  Athens.  ^u  architect,  and  enjoyed,  as  no  architect  be-
fore or  since,  the  means  and  opportunity  of  executing  his
own  favourite  conceptions.  In  Greece,  as  elsewhere,  the
works  by  which  this  prince  obtained  the  title  of  Restorer,
were  not  confined  to  political  and  social  improvements,  but
referred  more  commonly  to  the  creation  of  solid  and  material
monuments,  to  the  erection  of  aqueducts  and  baths,  temples
and  libraries,  and  the  disposition  of  streets,  squares,  and  pub-
lic places.  The  ancient  city  of  Pericles  had  suffered  for  ages
a  gradual  decline  in  wealth  and  population.  The  sack  under
Sulla  was  a  blow  from  which  a  community  in  decay,  sus-
tained by  no  provincial  dependencies,  could  with  difficulty
recover ;  and  it  was  only  the  peculiar  advantage  it  possessed,
as  the  home  of  arts  and  learning,  and  the  object  of  special
solicitude  and  veneration  to  liberal  minds,  that  enabled  the
seat  of  the  Muses  to  retain  its  place  at  the  head  of  Academic
institutions.  But  the  halls  and  temples  which  had  adorned
the  free  state  with  the  purest  models  of  architectural  embel-
lishment still  towered  above  the  city  and  the  plain  in  their
graceful  forms  and  noble  proportions;  though  repeatedly
despoiled  of  more  portable  works  of  art,  not  the  temples  and
halls  only,  but  the  streets  and  forums  still  glistened  with  ex-
quisite figures  in  brass  or  marble ;  the  shapely  block  of  the
Theseium  was  rooted  in  the  soil  of  which  it  seems  even  now
a  natural  product,  and  the  figure  of  protecting  Pallas  still
stood,  where  it  stands  no  longer,  on  the  steadfast  throne  of
the  Acropolis.' In  better  times,  besides  its  public  buildings,

'  The  account  of  Puusanlas,  a  few  yeare  later,  shows  how  Athens  then
abounded  in  ancient  temples  and  works  of  art.  Whatever  may  have  been  the
spoliations  of  the  old  Roman  pn)consul.s,  and  at  a  later  period  of  Nero,  wo  may
observe  that  this  writer  spocifies  many  works  of  Phidias,  Praxiteles,  and  other
illustrious  artists,  as  still  visible  at  Athens.  Most  of  these,  however,  were  of
marble,  only  one  or  two  of  gold  or  silver.  The  cupidity  of  the  conquerors  had
boon  tempted  by  the  precious  matt^rial  ruther  than  the  precious  workmanship.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  355

Athens  was  noted  for  the  splendour  of  many  private  dwell-
ings :  the  well-known  features  of  the  Roman  mansion,  with
its  sumptuous  array  of  central  court  and  surrounding  dwell-
ing-rooms, were  modelled,  with  allowance  for  the  difference
of  eastern  and  western  manners,  on  the  type  of  the  Grecian
and  Athenian.  The  Eupatridae  of  Athens,  indeed,  had  never
rivalled  the  Roman  patricians  in  the  splendour  of  their  lodg-
ing, as  they  had  never  equalled  them  in  wealth,  and  the  num-
ber of  the  rich  among  the  inhabitants  of  the  Grecian  city
was  doubtless  much  smaller  than  at  Rome.  The  poorer
classes  at  Athens  were  not  the  clients  of  the  wealthy,  and
their  humble  tenements  were  not,  I  suppose,  clustered  around
the  walls  of  the  noble  mansion,  but  stood  each  apart  in  all
their  poverty  and  nakedness.  Nor  wag  tlie  meanness  of  each
separate  cabin  carried  off,  as  at  Rome,  by  the  aggregation
of  house  upon  house,  for  they  were  generally  of  a  single
floor,  and  it  was  only  in  their  material, — for  no  material  at
Athens  was  readier  than  stone  or  even  marble, — that  they
t  vcelled  the  most  squalid  den  of  the  Roman  proletary.  The
(I reeks  were,  moreover,  a  far  less  cleanly  people  than  the
Romans,  and  as  they  paid  little  regard  to  their  personal  ab-
lutions, they  held,  it  may  be  presumed,  in  still  less  honour
the  neatness  of  their  dwellings  and  their  streets.*  We  must
picture  Athens  to  ourselves,  at  this  period,  as  a  dirty  city  in
decay :  we  must  imagine  the  combination  of  a  site  of  unri-
valled magnificence,  of  mingled  slope  and  level,  formed  by
nature  for  enhancing  to  the  utmost  the  graces  and  harmonies
of  constructive  art,  with  a  throng  of  mouldering  fanes  and
neglected  mansions,  which  alternated,  along  its  straggling

'  See  Dr.  Smith's  excellent  article  on  "Athens"  in  the  Diet  of  Clam.
Geography,  with  his  references  to  Aristophanes,  Dicaearchus,  and  especially  to
Strabo,  v.  p.  235.  Rain-water  was  probably  collected  in  tanks,  and  the  lime-
stone rock  on  which  Athens  is  situated,  was  apparently  perforated  with  chan-
nels which  brought  supplies  from  more  distant  reservoirs  and  fountains.  The
dust  of  the  modem  city  is  described  as  intolerable.  Hadrian  constructed  the
only  aqueduct.  There  were  three  or  four  springs  in  the  city,  but  one  only,  that
of  Callirrhoe,  was  drinkable,  and  this  for  a  population  computed  by  Bockh,
under  the  free  state,  at  180,000 ! FM.  J5»n.  of  At/teru,  i.  56.

356  HISTORY  OF  THE  BOMANS

avenues,  with  low  and  squalid  cabins,  scarcely  raised  above
the  filth  and  rottenness  accumulated  around  them ;  on  which
every  rent  and  stain  of  time  was  rendered  painfully  con-
spicuous by  a  sun  of  unclouded  splendour,  except  when  ob-
scured by  whirlwinds  of  dust  generated  on  the  bare  lime-
stone rock,  treeless,  grassless,  and  waterless/  Hadrian  may
have  done  for  Athens  what  Nero  did  for  Rome,  in  recon-
structing large  portions  of  the  city  in  the  open  and  luxurious
style  of  Antioch  and  Ephesus.  One  quarter,  which  he  either
wholly  rebuilt,  or  so  beautified  that  it  might  pass  for  his
own  building,  received,  at  least  in  popular  language,  the  des-
ignation of  Hadrianopolis ;  and  on  the  gate  which  led  into
it  from  the  ancient  city  were  inscriptions  purporting  to  dis-
tinguish the  town  of  Theseus  from  the  town  of  Hadrian.*
He  may  have  repaired  and  cleansed  the  public  buildings ;
but  the  barbaric  intermixture  of  splendour  and  squalor
which  characterizes  a  declining  community,  could  hardly  be
effaced  by  the  most  liberal  encouragement  to  monumental
magnificence.  Temples  of  Zeus  and  Here  rose  at  his  com-
mand in  connexion  with  the  names  of  the  emperor  and
the  empress,  and  another  fane,  inscribed  to  All  the  Gods,
may  have  been  designed  to  emulate  the  Roman  Pantheon.*

'  It  13  fortunate,  perhaps,  that  nothing  is  told  us  of  the  drainage  of  Athens ;
no  great  city  was  ever  so  badly  placed  for  due  abstersion  by  natural  outfall.
The  brook  Ilissus  was  a  mere  open  sewer  which  stagnated  in  a  marsh.  No
wonder  that  the  poets  ovoid  all  allusion  to  it.  Statins,  only,  says  of  it  most
heedlessly :  "  Ilissus  multa  purgavit  lumina  lympha."  Theb.  viii.  cxtr.  Even
Socrates  took  his  friend  to  its  banks  above  the  city. Plato,  Phcedr.  init.

*  The  arch  is  still  existing,  and  is  reputed  to  have  great  architectural  merit.
The  inscriptions  are :  ai  (V  eta'  'ASpiavov  kovx^  OrjatuQ  TrdAtf,  on  the  one  side :
al  6'  eta'  'AOf/vai  O^aiuc  f)  np'iv  irdTug  on  the  other.  Gruter,  Jnscript.  p.  1078.
1. Grcgorovius,  Getch.  Iladr.  p.  206.

•  Pausnn.  Att'ir.  18.  9.  'Xiptavbc  6i  KareoKevdaaro  fih  Koi  &22xi  'Adtp>al-
otf,  vabv  'Hpof,  Kal  Awf  llave^X^lov,  Kal  deolg  toi(  naatv  lepbv  koivSv  ....

A6^vcu  fihi  olirtjr  iirii  rov  ■KoTJfiov  KaKuOelaat  tov  'Vufialtjv  avQiQ  'A^ptavov
fiaatMiovTor  ffvOijaav.  At  Athens  and  elsewhere  this  emperor  is  said  to  have
erected  temples  without  any  image  of  a  god.  It  was  believed  that  he  meant
tlicm  to  bo  dodicateil  to  himself.  At  a  later  period  the  Ciuistians  imagined
that  lie  had  intendml  tliem  fur  the  pure  worship  of  Jesus. Lampridus  in  Alex.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  357

But  of  all  these  gorgeous  structures  none  was  so-iilostrious
as  the  Olympieum,  the  great  national  temple  of  the  Hellenic
Jupiter,  coramenced  on  a  scale  far  transcending  any  raonn-
ment  of  Greek  or  Roman  piety  by  the  aspiring  genios  of
Pisistratus.  The  work  had  languished  through  the  age«  of
Atlieuiau  independence.  Tlxe  bold  conception  wan  revived
by  the  usurper  Epiphanes;  and  the  temple,  profaned  and
rifled  by  the  brutal  violence  of  Sulla,  was  restored  and  car-
ried a  stage  nearer  to  completion  by  Augustus,  aided  by  the
contributions  of  eastern  potentates.*  Still  the  Olympieum
stood  a  colossal  fragment,  embracing  within  the  limits  of  its
columned  precincts  an  area  of  two  hundred  yards  square,  in
which  it  precisely  corresponded  with  the  Temple  of  Jerusa-
lem. But  the  fane  itself  far  exceeded  in  magnitude  its  east-
ern rival,  its  dimensions  being  171  feet  in  width  and  354  in
depth,  while  its  columns  rose  to  the  enormous  height  of  60
feet  and  upwards.  Such  at  least  was  the  design,  still  unfin-
ished, which  Hadrian  undertook  to  complete,  in  its  full  pro-
portions. Among  the  decorations  of  this  marvellous  edifice,
in  which  sculpture,  painting,  and  gilding  bore  a  part,  were
numerous  statues  of  the  imperial  builder  himself,  placed  as
votive  oflTerings  by  states  and  sovereigns.  But  the  king  of
gods  and  men  occupied  the  cell  in  a  glorious  image  of  gold
and  ivory,  which  emulated  the  masterpiece  of  Phidias  at
Olympia.  This  combination  of  materials  may  seem  grotesque
to  our  uneducated  eyes  ;  but  the  Greeks  had  cultivated  their
taste  in  the  application  of  colour  to  statuary,  and  they  had
learnt  to  estimate,  perhaps  not  xmduly,  the  beauty  of  the  soft
warm  tint  which  the  glowing  metal  may  cast  over  ihe  paler
substance.*

Sever.  41.  It  is  most  likely  that  these  ideu  were  foanded  vaertij  on
casual  or  temporary  omission.  According  to  Sputiao,  bowerer,  Hadriui  aet
up  an  altar  to  his  own  divinity  at  Athens,  and  in  Asia  at  Uasi  be  did  not  aero*
pie  to  build  himself  temples. Spartian,  Hadr.  13.

*  See  above,  ch.  xxxiiL

*  Pausan.  Attk.  18.  6,  1. The  painting  of  statues,  and  the  mixture  of
metals  used  for  them,  had  often  a  conventional  meaning. Thus  Pliny,  iiiiv.

358  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

Vehement  was  the  gratitude  of  the  Athenians  for  the  ac-
complishment of  a  work  which  placed  their  city  once  more
The  Athenians  ^^  ^  Summit  of  architectural  splendour ;  but  there
^Ih  the^tttie  "^^'^s  little  that  they  could  offer  in  return  to  the
of  oiympius.  master  of  the  Roman  world.  The  title  of  Archon,
by  which  their  first  municipal  officer  was  still  designated,
whose  functions  were  religious  rather  than  political,  carried
with  it  only  the  charm  of  its  antique  associations.  Such  as  it
was,  however,  it  seems  to  have  been  tendered  to  Hadrian  at  a
much  earlier  time,  when  as  a  mere  private  visitor,  yet  uncon-
nected with  the  reigning  family,  he  had  displayed  his  interest
in  Athens  by  devoting  himself  to  her  special  studies.  The
style  of  Oiympius,  which  they  now  appended  to  his  name  on
coins  and  marbles,  bore  a  direct  reference  to  the  munificence
with  which  he  had  lodged  the  lord  of  heaven  in  the  most
sumptuous  of  earthly  habitations ;  but  it  conveyed,  no  doubt,
an  indirect  compliment  of  another  kind ;  for  Pericles,  the
greatest  of  their  historic  heroes,  had  been  styled  Olympian,
for  the  thunders  of  his  eloquence,  and  the  overwhelming
Athens  the  powcr  he  wicldcd  in  the  state.  Athens  still  main-
^y  o?thrKo-  tained  her  preeminence  as  the  mistress  of  elo-
man  world.  qucncc  and  learning.  Athens  was  the  ancient
classic  university  of  the  civilized  world.  The  splendour  of
an  individual  reputation  might  suffice  to  found  an  academy
at  other  places  of  educational  resort ;  the  disciples  of  a  popu-
lar rhetorician  or  philosopher  might  maintain  for  two  or
more  generations  the  school  of  which  he  had  laid  the  foun-
dations ;  but  the  ephemeral  brilliancy  of  Rhodes,  Tarsus  or
IlalicarnasBUS,  was  lost  in  the  constant  and  steady  light
which  had  beamed  for  five  centuries  from  the  halls  of  Plato
and  Aristotle. "While  hundreds  of  erudite  professors  of  every

40.,  8«y9  of  a  certain  artist :  *'  bbs  ferrumque  miscuit,  ut  nibiginc  ejus  per  nito-
rem  oris  relucentc  cxprimcretur  vorccundioB  rubor."  Sec  on  this  subject  Fener-
bach,  (kr  Vatican.  Apollo,  p.  181,  foil.  The  reflection  of  gold  on  ivory  im-
parteil  a  wnnu  tint,  nml  the  appearance  of  a  supernatural  body ;  at  least  such
waH  the  umlerstandinn  Itetween  Ibo  artist  and  the  more  enlightened  of  the  wor-
•hippent.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  359

art,  and  of  all  learning,  wandered  from  the  centre  of  ancient
discipline  to  instruct  in  their  own  homes  the  patrician  youth
of  Italy  and  the  provinces,  mankind  still  recognised  in  un-
diminished force  the  necessity  of  a  course  of  study  at  Athens
itself,  to  equip  the  complete  scholar  and  gentleman,  the  most
accomplished  product  of  intellectual  training.'

The  instruction,  however,  imparted  in  these  venerable
scats  was  of  a  highly  conventional  character.  None  but  a
weak  enthusiast  here  and  there  maintained  with  c«««*rr»tiTe
the  fervour  of  genuine  belief  the  tenets  of  any  J^J^J2*««»t7
one  of  tlie  philosophic  sects,  each  of  which  had  «'AtheM.
reigned  in  turn,  or  had  contended  with  rival  claims  in  the
schools  of  Athens.  On  every  side  it  was  tacitly  acknowl-
edged that  the  limits  of  each  specific  dogma  had  been  reached,
and  that  either  all  must  be  abandoned  together  as  shadowy
and  baseless,  or  each  be  allowed  to  hold  its  authority  un-
questioned within  its  own  province.  To  admit  the  first
alternative  would  have  been  treason  to  the  sovereignty  of
the  human  understanding,  an  insult  to  the  memory  of  the
mighty  dead ;  but  the  second  was  well  adapted  to  recom-
mend itself  to  an  age  still  devoted  to  study,  still  curious
about  psychological  laws,  but  which  despaired  of  arriving  at
conclusive  results  in  any  direction.  The  broad  principle  that
all  ancient  doctrines  were  true  enough  to  be  taught,  was  the
charter  of  the  great  Grecian  university.  Accordingly,  all
such  doctrines  were  admitted  to  the  rights  of  domicile  in  it ;
all  were  established,  and  endowed  with  public  salaries  or  by
private  liberality ;  all  were  allowed  to  be  equally  important
for  the  education  of  the  ripe  and  perfect  scholar ; and  the

*  Aules  Gellius,  writing  at  Athens  about  this  time,  gires  a  glimp«e  ooea-
sionally  of  the  habits  of  the  young  men  who  met  for  study  at  Athens.  His  ac-
count is  perhaps  rather  satirical.  See  the  description  of  the  supper  pven  by
the  philosopher  Taurus  (Xoct.  Ati.  \\.  13.) ;  and  of  the  way  in  which  the  stu-
dents kept  the  Saturnalia :  "  quaerebautur  autem  res  hiyusmodi :  aut  sententia
poetsB  veteris  lepide  obscura,  non  anxie ;  aut  historic  antiquioris  requisitio ;
aut  decreti  cujuspiam  ex  philosophia  perperam  invulgati ;  aut  captionis  sophist-
icse  solutio ;  aut  inopinati  rariorisve  verbi  indagatio." xriiL  2.

860  HISTORF  OF  THE  ROMANS

teachers  of  all  lived  together  in  a  state  of  conventional  an-
tagonism not  incompatible  with  entire  social  harmony,  and
almost  jovial  good  fellowship.  Academics  and  Pei'ipatetics,
Stoics  and  Epicureans,  Pyrrhonists  and  Cynics  disputed  to-
gether, or  thundered  one  against  another  simultaneously
through  the  morning,  and  hathed,  dined,  and  joked  in  com-
pany with  easy  indifference  all  the  evening.  Of  new  opin-
ions, of  real  inquiries,  of  exclusive  enthusiasm  they  were  all
perhaps  equally  jealous ;  but  Athens  was  eminently  a  con-
servative University,  and  the  men  who  yearned  for  actual
truth,  and  still  dreamed,  if  it  was  but  a  dream,  that  after  six
hundred  years  of  free  speculation,  the  truth  had  been  ever
missed,  but  might  yet  be  discovered,  did  not  generally  repair
to  the  Academus  or  Lyceum  in  search  of  it.

If,  however,  the  matter  of  this  scholastic  teaching  was  so
little  regarded,  if  it  was  understood  that  there  was  nothing
The  profeB8or-  ^^w  to  bc  Said  for  Acadcmism  or  Peripateticism,
tebfishcTar  ^^^^  conviction  and  persuasion  on  the  most  vener-
Athens.  q^Iq  gubjects  of  aucicnt  debate  were  altogether

out  of  date,  the  manner  of  teaching  and  expounding  seemed
to  be  thought  worthy  of  more  serious  attention  than  ever.
The  language,  the  style,  even  the  gesture  and  demeanour  of
the  lecturer,  attracted  hearers  who  would  have  paid  little  heed
to  vehement  assertions  of  the  truth  and  soundness  of  his
principles.  To  imbue  the  disciple  with  the  idiom  of  the  best
Attic  literature,  was  now  considered  essential  to  a  liberal
education ;  and  the  writings  of  this  age,  which  emanated
from  the  schools  of  Greece,  are  coloured  by  a  direct  and  not
unsuccessful  imitation  of  Xenophon  and  his  contemporaries.
In  expounding  the  arts  of  composition  there  may  liave  been
more  originality.  Had  the  masters  of  rhetoric  of  a  more
geiiial  era  taken  equal  pains  with  their  successors  in  the  sec-
ond century  to  mould  the  forms  of  speecli  and  writhig,  we
should  scarcely  have  lost  all  traces  of  their  labours,  while  we
retain  the  teclinical  j)reoepts  of  ITennogonos,  illustrated  by
the  laboured  exercitations  of  Dion,  IVIaxinnis  and  Aristides.
The  name  of  Sophist  had  long  recovered  from  whatever

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  36 1

obloquy  had  been  cast  on  it  by  Socrates,  and  was  extended
to  embrace  the  doctors  and  professors  in  all  branches  of  liter-
ary acquirement.  The  nobility  of  Rome  thronged  to  listen
to  their  eloquence ;  crowds  not  of  scholarf  and  neophytes
only,  but  of  mature  and  accomplished  men  of  the  world,
attended  upon  their  lectures,  admired  and  discussed  their  re
spective  merits,  attached  themselves  to  their  classes,  knd
caught  up  their  watchwords,  though  no  germ  of  truth  per-
Imps  had  been  discovered  or  suggested  by  them  through  the
long  period  of  their  sovereignty.  For  half  a  century  these
lecturers  had  been  salaried  by  the  imperial  treasury,  and
though  the  academic  system  had  not  yet  attained  its  full
development,  we  may  speak  even  now  of  the  established
hierarchy  of  the  sophists  at  Athens,  the  chief  of  whom  occu-
pied what  was  called  by  way  of  eminence  t?ie  throne  of  the
university.  Of  the  three  principal  chairs,  those  of  Sophistics
or  Rhetoric,  of  Politics  and  Philosophy,  that  of  Sophistics
took  the  first  rank,  and  was  endowed  with  a  stipend  of
10,000  drachma?,  equivalent  perhaps  to  500/.  ; '  but  the
stipend  was  probably  the  least  part  of  the  emoluments  of  a
place  which  commanded  the  whole  market  of  private  tuition.
One  Chrestus  declined  a  recommendation  for  it  to  the  em|)e-
ror,  in  whose  patronage  it  lay,  saying  in  his  affected  way,
The  myriad  males  not  the  man  ;  but  in  fact  he  was  the  well-
feed  tutor  of  a  hundred  private  pupils,  a  position  which  no
imperial  liberality,  then  or  since,  could  easily  improve.  The
throne,  however,  possessed  the  advantage  of  being  a  place
for  life.  Philagrus,  who  once  ascended  it,  may  have  won
the  eminence  by  the  vigour  and  vehemence  of  his  character :
he  had  been  known  to  box  the  ears  of  an  inattentive  listener.
But  the  mild  Aspasius,  who  lounged  indolently  on  his  cush-
ions to  old  age,  and  cared  not,  while  he  drew  his  stipend,
whether  his  audience  listened  or  not,  was  reproached  by

'  Philostratus,  Vit.  Sophist.  iL  2.  20.  Comp.  Lucian,  Eunuch.  8.  Philos-
tratus  elsewhere  seems  to  state  one  talent,  25/.,  as  the  salary  of  the  7roA/T«6f
■&p6voi  at  Athens,  which  I  do  not  understand.  Vil.  Soph.  n.  20.  Tatian
{Apol.  p.  70.)  mentions  the  sum  of  600  aurei,  or  guineas.

362  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

public  opinion  for  not  resigning  a  distinction  of  whicli  he
proved  himself  unworthy.'

The  fashion  of  playing  at  oratory  by  sham  contests  on
factitious  subjects  enjoyed  a  marvellous  vitality  in  the  ancient
The  sophists  at  world.  At  Rome  the  genuine  contests  of  the
d^ct'er  of  forum  were  replaced  by  the  exercises  not  wholly
their  teaching,  unreal  of  the  Imperial  bar;  in  many  modem
states  the  absence  of  political  discussion  has  been  partly  com-
pensated by  the  sphere  of  influence  allotted  to  the  pulpit ;
but  it  is  one  of  the  problems  of  social  history  to  account  for
the  interest  so  long  felt  or  feigned  in  the  schools  of  ancient
Greece,  for  the  mere  shadows  of  thought  and  speculation
by  which  they  were  occupied.  The  facile  eloquence  of  the
sophists  seems  to  have  been  exercised  equally  in  the  illustra-
tion of  philosophical  tenets,  and  in  the  discussion  of  themes
for  declamation.  The  clever  and  learned  personages  enu-
merated in  long  succession  by  Philostratus  in  his  Lives  of
the  most  distinguished  of  the  class,  who  were  the  admiration
of  Athens  and  all  Hellas  for  more  than  a  century,  are  cele-
brated by  him  rather  for  their  rhetorical  poAvers  than  for
their  skill  in  the  exposition  of  dogmas,  though  their  philo-
sophical science  seems  to  be  taken  for  granted.  His  pane-
gyric, enlivened  as  it  often  is  by  anecdotes  of  wit  and  char-
acter, fails  for  the  most  part  to  convey  to  us  distinct  personal
conceptions  ;  nevertheless  the  general  character  of  the  class
is  portrayed  with  much  vividness.  Born  in  various  cities  of
Greece  and  Asia,  and  generally  gravitating  to  Athens  as
their  natural  Jiomc,  it  is  curious  to  observe  how  many  of
them  were  related  to  the  Roman  aristocracy,  and  could  boast

'  Fhilostr.  Vit.  Sopliigt.  ii.  8.  83.  Marquardt  in  Becker's  AUcrt/iiimer,  iii.  2.
p.  87.,  haa  collected  in  a  note  the  principal  passages  which  relate  to  the  endow-
ment of  learned  men  by  Vespasian  and  his  successors.  Of  Hadrian,  Spartian
Bays  cxprcHKly,  c.  16. :  "  omncs  profossorcs  et  honoravit  et  divitcs  fecit  .  .  .
dootorea  qid  profession!  suoo  inhabiles  vidobantur,  ditatos  honoratosque  a  pro*
feisione  dimisit."  The  liberality  of  Hiidrian  seems  to  have  been  further  cx<
tended  by  Antoninus  Ilus  and  Alexander  8evcru3.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  863

a  connexion  with  senators  and  consulars.  Such
was  tlie  case  with  Polemon,  to  whom  Trajan
granted  the  privilege  of  exemption  from  taxes,  an  exemption
extended  by  Hadrian  to  his  posterity ;  whom  his  own  country-
men at  Smyrna  so  praised  and  flattered,  that  he  could  ven-
ture to  say  to  the  Athenians,  You  have  some  credit,  gentlemen,
for  being  intelligent  hearers  ;  cMomo  me  to  test  your  eapaeUy  ;
who  was  so  eloquent  that  the  eloquent  Herodea  dared  not
speak  after  him ;  but  who  dying  at  the  age  of  fifty-six,  which
in  other  professions  might  be  considered  old,  was  reputed  a
mere  youth  in  sophistry,  for  the  sophist  continues  learning
to  the  last,  and  storing  up  the  fruits  of  exercise  and  experi-
ence.* Such  was  the  great  Herodes  himself,  de-  H«i»4e«Attl-
scended  on  the  one  side  from  Roman  consulars,  •"••
on  the  other  from  the  mythic  -^acidse,  the  inheritor  of
immense  riches,  which  he  used  so  well,  that  Plutus,  it  was
said,  thougli  blind  with  others,  opened  wide  his  eyes  when  he
showered  blessings  on  this  general's  favourite ;  who  found  a
treasure,  which  Avhen  he  declared  to  Nerva  it  was  more  than
he  could  use,  the  emperor  in  his  boundless  confidence  bade
him  then  abuse  ;  who  receiveti  the  name  of  Atticus  not  only
for  his  love  to  Athens,  like  the  Roman  Pomponius,  but  for
the  endowments  he  had  heaped  upon  it,  and  the  buildings  he
had  erected  ;  but  who  was  so  devoted  to  rhetorical  study,  so
anxious  for  success  in  art,  that  being  deputed  to  address  the
emperor  for  his  favourite  city,  and  unfortunately  breaking
down  from  nenousness,  he  rushed  to  the  river  bank — so  ran
the  story — to  drown  himself*

The  vanity  and  frivolity  of  these  masters  of  word-fence
have  often  been  depicted,  and  the  most  salient  features  of

'  Philostr.  Vtt.  Sophist,  i.  25.  On  the  occasion  of  the  dedication  of  the
Olympieum,  Polemo  ascended  the  steps  of  the  portico  and  made  an  enthusias
tic  harangue  to  the  people :  6  6i  uantp  ki60et,  ffrijaa^  Totf  b^da^.fwv^  tin  rdf
fidri  ■KapiaTafikvaQ  evvdia^,  iiTcu^iJKev  iavTov  t(^  Wy^,  Kal  airo  nyc  KpffirWog  rdv
ve&  6uMx0ri  KolXa  koI  ^avfidata,  irpoolfuov  iroiovfievoq  tov  /^yov,  rb  ftij  adeei
T7)v  Tvepl  avTov  Sp/tii/v  yeviadai  ol. Vit.  Sophia.  L  3.

•  Philostr.  Vit.  Sophist.  iL  1.

364  History  of  the  Romans

The  phiioso-  their  life  and  conversation  may  easily  bo  made  to
Forian  Hu-*'  appear  more  ridiculous  than  they  really  were,
tarch.  They  have  had  the  misfortune,  however,  of  being

most  particularly  described  to  us  by  a  generation  even  more
frivolous  than  their  own,  and  we  must  not  accept  without
reserve  the  character  of  the  men  and  their  system  as  por-
trayed by  the  pencil  of  Philostratus.  The  remains  of  Plu-
tarch's voluminous  writings  show  that  he  rose  far  above  the
level  of  the  Polemon  or  Herodes  of  our  biographer.  He  was
at  least  an  earnest  believer  in  his  own  creed,  and  conscien-
tious in  the  practice  of  the  virtues  he  commended.  In  the
reign  of  Domitian,  and  almost  under  the  shadow  of  Dorai-
tian's  palace,  the  sage  of  Charonea  lectured  to  a  Roman
audience  on  the  highest  ends  of  life,  and  the  true  measure  of
happiness  and  goodness.  His  teaching  had  for  the  most  part
a  direct  moral  object,  with  little  tendency  to  speculative
refinements.  He  cared  not  for  the  name  of  any  sect  or  leader,
but  pleaded  the  cause  of  moral  beauty  in  the  interest  of  truth
only.  What  his  precepts  wanted  in  authority  was  abun-
dantly supplied  by  the  examples  with  which  his  wide  histori-
cal knowledge  could  illustrate  them.  Plutarch's  Parallel
Lives  are  eminently  philosophy  teaching  by  example.  And
in  estimating  the  moral  aspect  of  the  times,  and  the  influence
of  the  teachei's,  we  must  not  fail  to  remark  the  soundness  of
this  writer's  moral  judgments  as  displayed  throughout  his
compositions.  There  is  no  work  perhaps  of  antiquity  that
Christian  parents  can  put  so  securely  into  the  hands  of  their
children  ;  the  Christian  statesman  may  draw  lessons  from  it
in  wisdom,  and  the  Christian  moralist  in  virtue.  The  work
is,  in  another  point  of  view,  a  curious  monument  of  its  epocli.
The  author's  object  was  to  draw  a  fair  and  friendly  com-
parison between  the  Greeks  and  the  Romans,  his  own  country-
men and  tlio  foreigner  ;  between  the  conquered  and  the
conquerors,  the  8i)oil(Ml  and  tlie  spoilers,  the  slaves  and  tlio
masters  ;  between  men  wliom  other  censors  would  have  ever
delighted  to  contrast  as  the  spiritual  Hellene  and  the  brutal
Italian,  or  again  as  llie  cringing  Grajculus  and  the  lofty

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  365

Romulides.  Yet,  throughout  this  long  series  of  lives,  this
glittering  array  of  virtues  and  vices,  personal  and  national,
there  is  no  word,  I  think,  of  subservience  or  flattery,  of  scorn
or  vanity,  of  humiliation  or  triumph,  to  mark  the  position  of
the  writer  in  the  face  of  his  Koman  rulers.  Whether  we
consider  the  book  as  addressed  to  the  Greeks  or  to  the  Ro-
mans, the  absence  of  any  such  indications  of  feeling  is  un-
doubtedly remarkable.  To  me  it  seems  most  honourable
both  to  the  one  people  and  to  the  other;  moreover,  it  is
invaluable  for  the  insight  it  gives  us  into  the  prevalent  senti-
ment of  the  unity  of  all  races  and  classes  under  a  common
dispensation.

Of  the  celebrated  sophist,  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  the  most
illustrious  preacher  of  this  dispensation,  little  can  safely  be
advanced,  inasmuch  as  all  our  knowledge  of  him  Apoiionimor
comes  through  the  distorting  medium  of  the  Tyaaa.
romance,  miscalled  his  life,  by  Philostratus.  The  remarks
which  would  naturally  be  challenged  by  that  singular  per-
formance belong  to  the  liistorian  of  the  third  century  rather
than  of  the  second.  All  that  can  here  be  properly  said  of  its
hero  is,  that  he  deserves  notice  as  the  first  perhaps  of  those
itinerant  homilists  who  began,  from  the  Flavian  period,  to
go  about  proclaiming  moral  truths,  collecting  groups  of  hear-
ers, and  sowing  the  seed  of  spiritual  wisdom  and  knowledge
on  every  soil  that  could  receive  it.  It  was  by  the  first  Chris-
tian teachers  that  the  example  of  this  predication  was  set ;
and  the  effect  produced  on  thoughtful  spirits  by  the  conspic-
uous career  of  St.  Paul  and  his  associates  is  evinced,  to  my
apprehension,  by  the  self-imposed  mission  of  Apollonius  in
the  second,  and  of  Dion  in  the  third  generation  after  them.

Of  the  life,  the  conduct,  and  the  specific  teaching  of  Dion
Chrysostomus,  so  called  by  his  contemporaries  for  his  emi-
nent eloquence,  we  possess  details  on  which  we

,  ,  .  Dion  PruMBns,

can  rely,  whence  we  may  learn  what  service  a  sumamed
high-minded  sophist  might  perform  in  the  inter-
ests of  morality.* In  his  younger  days,  while  yet  a  mere

*  Philostr.  Vit.  Sopliigi.  i.  Y. :  Aiuva  6k  rbv  Tlpvadlov  ovk  oif  brt  xpV  ^p*^
cemelv  dia  rijv  ef  iravra  aoer/jv. 'AuaWeiag  yao  Kioac  iv,  rb  tov  ?^yov.

366  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

rhetorician,  this  man  had  come  to  Rome  from  his  birthplace
Prusa,  and  had  attached  himself  to  a  distinguished  person-
age, possibly  to  Flavius  Clemens,  in  whose  fall  he  became
himself  involved.  Domitian  threatened  him  with  death,  and
he  fled,  taking  with  him,  by  the  advice  of  the  Delphic  oracle,
only  two  books,  one  of  Plato  and  one  of  Demosthenes.'  He
retired  to  a  Grecian  colony  on  the  frontier  of  the  empire ;  but
even  amid  the  marshes  of  the  Getae  he  deemed  it  prudent  to
forego  his  real  name,  and  disguise  himself  in  rags,  and  some-
times apparently  to  plunge  into  deeper  concealment  on  the
banks  of  the  Borysthenes.  At  the  moment,  however,  of
Domitian's  death,  Dion  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a  Ro-
man encampment  on  the  Danube,  and  here,  when  the  soldiers
resented  their  emperor's  assassination  and  murmured  at  the
reported  accession  of  Nerva,  he  harangued  them  with  irresist-
ible eloquence,  and  secured  their  adhesion  to  the  elect  of  the
senate."  Nerva  received  him  with  open  arms.  Under  this
prince  and  his  successor  he  recovered  more  than  his  former
estimation,  and  became  a  prime  favourite  with  Trajan,  who
often  invited  him  to  his  table,  and  cari-ied  him  in  his  chariot,
and  was  wont,  according  to  the  story,  to  reply  to  his  most
charming  discourses,  I  admire  you  exceedingly^  hut  I  donH
pretend  to  understand  a  word  you  say.  It  would  seem  that
in  the  haunts  of  civilized  and  educated  men,  the  common-
places of  philosophy,  with  wliich  the  sophist  was  abundantly
furnished,  passed  current  for  wisdom  and  truth ;  but  it  was
among  the  ruder  sons  of  nature  on  the  borders  of  the  Scythian
wilderness  that,  on  being  earnestly  questioned,  the  emptiness
of  such  rhetorical  flourishes  flashed  upon  him,  and  he  set
himself  to  examine  his  own  conscience  and  spiritual  belief.
The  result  was  the  abandonment  of  the  word-war  of  the  dog-

*  Dion  Chrys.  Orat.  xlii.  xlvi.  The  terms  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  patron
with  whom  he  wuh  involved  arc  remarlcable,  and  aeem  to  indicate  that  it  was  a
case  of  Huffi-rinf;  for  opinion :  6i^  ravra  anoOavdvTOQ  6i'  h  rro^otf  kuI  ax^^^
iraoiv  IMkci  fiaKt'ipuK.

*  PlilloHtr.  1.  c.  wlio  quotes  from  Ilomer :  Avrdp  6  yvfiviiOr]  })aKiuv  TToMfirp-ic
'OSvaaeii^,

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  367

matists,  and  the  embrace  of  the  Bimple  morality  of  Socrates,
as  the  only  man  among  the  ancients  whose  homely  sense
could  grapple  with  the  problems  of  human  nature,  or  satisfy
the  inquiries  of  an  awakened  intelligence.*  The  effect  of  this
discovery  upon  the  pagan  philosopher  may  be  likened  to  that
of  religious  conversion  on  the  Christian  disciple.  Henceforth
IJion  devoted  himself  to  the  practice  of  virtue,  and  preached
the  duties  which  he  practised.  He  expounded  not  the  met-
aphysics of  Zeno  or  Epicurus,  but  their  moral  maxims ;  dif-
fused the  knowledge  of  divine  law  and  Providence,  taught
moderation  to  the  haughty,  patience  to  the  impetuous,  resig-
nation to  the  afflicted.  To  Trajan  on  the  throne  he  set  forth
the  beauty  of  justice  and  the  true  dignity  of  power;  to  the
turbulent  mobs  of  the  Italian  cities  he  sliowed  how  the  order
of  nature,  the  appointed  course  of  the  sun  and  stars,  might
enforce  the  duty  of  obedience;  the  fantastic  and  drunken
crowds  of  Alexandria  he  rebuked  for  their  levity  and  intem-
})erance  ;  he  startled  the  vanity  of  the  Athenians  by  expos-
ing the  worthlessness  of  their  rhetoric  and  sophistics.  He
illustrated  with  sense  and  humanity  the  well-known  paradox
of  the  Stoics  that  the  good  man  alone  is  free,  and  used  it  as
a  text  for  preaching  forbearance  towards  the  slave.*  Dion
and  others  like  him  have  been  called  the  popular  preachers
of  natural  religion,  and  the  improved  tone  of  society  at  this
period,  of  which  we  have  discovered  many  traces,  may  in
part  be  justly  ascribed  to  the  religious  enthusiasm  with  which
they  discharged  their  self-appointed  office.  The  name  of
Chrysostora  may  have  already  reminded  us  of  the  most  illus-
trious of  the  ancient  Christian  orators,  and  his  speeches,  of
which  a  large  number  are  preser\'ed,  may  be  compared,  with
little  disadvantage,  with  the  sermons  of  the  bbhop  of  Con-
stantinople, for  their  warm  appeals  both  to  the  heart  and  the
conscience  of  their  hearers.*

*  Dion  Chrys.  Orat.  xiii.

'  Dion  Chrys.  Orat.  xiv.  p.  233. ;  xr.  p.  238,  folL  See  Walloo,  rEkbm^
dans  VAntiqulle,  iii.  34.

'  Dion  Chrysostom  is  well  described,  and  not  perbaps  too  hl^y  estimated,
by  M.  Martha,  in  the  Revue  CorUemporaine,  Paris,  1857.

368  HISTORY  OF  THE  KOJLANS

But  the  foundation  of  morality,  as  laid  by  the  sophists,

could  rest  only  on  the  judgments  of  the  conscience,  and  its

dim  and  fluctuating  ideas  of  goodness  and  holi-

The  Christian  » a ,  i  i  ,

teachers  and  ness.  At  Athens,  as  elsewhere  throughout  the
empire,  there  were  other  teachers  at  work  who
pleaded  the  direct  constraint  of  authoritative  dogmas.
They  appealed  at  once  to  men's  hopes  and  fears,  by  the  doc-
trine of  a  resurrection  and  a  future  retribution.  This  was
the  creed  preached  of  old  on  Mars's  hill  by  Saul  of  Tarsus,
as  the  divine  complement  to  the  ethics  of  Zeno  and  Epicurus.
This  was  the  keystone  required  to  bind  together  the  broad
arch  of  principles  which  spanned  the  duties  of  mankind.  In
Athens,  the  home  of  argument  and  logic,  the  faith  of  Christ
could  not  be  propounded  as  a  bare  ceremonial  law  ;  it  must
be  set  forth  as  a  metaphysical  creed ;  and  as  such  it  attracted
some  at  least  among  the  philosophers  themselves,  and  carried
off  men  of  learning  and  acumen  from  the  shadowy  illusions
of  the  Lyceum  and  the  Academus.  The  Christian  apologists
of  the  second  centuiy,  such  as  Justin  and  others,  converts
themselves  from  the  Gentile  philosophy,  excited  the  interest
and  admiration  of  their  hearers  by  plunging  them  into  the
mysteries  of  their  new  faith,  and  especially  the  deepest  of  all
mysteries,  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  If  the  wisdom  of  the
world  was  repelled  by  the  story  of  Christ's  lumiiliation  and
sufferings,  it  was  attracted,  on  the  other  hand,  by  the  prom-
ise revealed  at  his  resurrection,  and  this  cardinal  dogma  be-
came the  stronghold  of  the  new  faith  in  its  contests  with  the
Gentile  moralists.  The  presence  of  the  emperor  in  Athens,
and  the  curiosity  with  which  he  surveyed  all  the  conflicts  of
human  opinion,  encouraged  the  Christian  teachers  to  address
him  as  a  tnith-sceker  himself,  and  to  defend  their  own  bold
and  novel  creed  against  the  reasonings,  the  sneers,  and  the
violence  of  tlieir  antagonists.  Though  devoted  from  early
liabit  to  the  ancient  formulas  of  Grecian  wisdom,  and  generally
content  to  roam  from  tlie  lialls  of  one  familiar  toaclier  to
those  of  another,  Hadrian  was  nevertlieloss  inquisitive  and
restless  by  nature,  and  the  vague  aspirations  suggested  to

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  369

him  at  his  initiation  into  the  mysteries  at  Eleusis, — for  he  had
pried  into  the  deepest  mysteries  of  the  heathen „^^j^^..
world, — could  not  fail  to  arouse  him  to  the  preten-  •««»  of  the
sions  of  a  creed  which  was  founded  directly  on
the  doctrine  of  Immortality.* It  must  be  remembered,  more-
over, that  Christianity,  which  even  at  Rome  assumed  to  un-
instructed  eyes  the  appearance  of  a  Greek  speculation,  at
Athens,  the  very  centre  of  Greece,  seemed  to  emanate  directly
from  the  schools. Accordingly  Hadrian  listened  graciously
to  the  apologies  of  Quadratus  and  Aristides,  who  appeared
perhaps  before  him  in  the  actual  garb  of  philosophers ;  *  and
the  mildness  he  exercised  towards  the  believers  may  not  un-
reasonably be  ascribed  to  the  influence  of  their  reputed  learn-
ing and  wisdom.*

'  Spartian,  Hadr.  13.;  Euseb.  Chron.  a.  122.  This  emperor's  curioeity,
particularly  in  religious  matters,  is  affirmed  by  a  consensus  of  authority.  Ter-
tullian,  Apol,  5. :  "  curiositatum  omnium  explorator."  Euseb.  JJitt.  Eed.  v.  6. :
irdvra  rd  ireplepya  iroXvKpayfwvuv.  Julian,  m  Ctmar.:  iroXvwpayiuviiv  ra
aiT6'p})T]Ta.  Like  many  of  the  Romans  he  demeaned  himself  rery  differently  in
Rome  and  in  the  provinces  ;  hence  it  could  be  said  of  him  at  Rome,  notwitb-
standiug  the  character  he  then  bore  abroad :  '^  sacra  Romana  diligentiasime  co-
ravit,  peregrina  contempsit."

*  Justin  the  Martyr,  whose  apologies  were  addressed  to  Hadrian's  iiioee»
sors,  expressly  states  of  himself  that  he  continued  after  liifi  coDTerrion  to  wear
the  philosopher's  habit.  {Dial,  atm  Tryph.  iuit.)  Aristides  wss  also  •  ooi^
vert  fi-um  the  heathen  philosophy,  but  the  same,  howeror  probable,  esnnot  be
said  with  confidence  of  Quadratus,  who  is  only  known  to  us  as  the  bishop  of
Athens.  See  Euseb,  //«/.  Ecdet.  iv.  23.  S.  Hieron.  De  Fir.  Ubulr.  19,  20.
The  only  existing  fragment  of  Quadratus  asserts  in  the  boldest  m^myiy  tba
miracles  of  resurrection :  ol  •depaTrevdevrec,  ol  dvcordvrcf  «  vexpijv.  •  Comptn
Routh,  Beliq.  Sacr.  i.  71. Milman,  Hisl.  of  ChristiaHitif^  ii.  163.  not^

'  From  Justin  Martyr,  Apol.  1.  66.,  and  Euseb.  H.  E.  iv.  8,  9.,  we  leam
that  Hadrian,  in  answer  to  Minucius  Fundanus,  prefect  of  Asia,  directed  him  to
keep  strictly  to  the  law  in  his  treatment  of  the  Christians,  and  not  to  yield  to
popular  clamour  against  them.  It  would  seem  that  since  Trajan's  rescript  the
law  had  shaped  itself  into  a  more  definite  form ;  still  the  mode  and  extent  of
executing  it  appears  to  have  been  left  generally  to  the  discretion  of  the  local
authorities.  It  is  strange,  however,  and  shows  how  little  we  really  know  of  the
Roman  procedure,  to  find  the  Christian  apologist  Melito  addressing  Hadrian's
successors  with  the  assertion  that  the  persecution  of  the  disciples  in  Asia  in
TOL.  VII. — 24

370  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS

But  Athens  was on  the  whole  the  great conservative

University  of  the  Roman  world,  and  the  noble  youths  who

flocked  to  it  for  the  teachinsj  of  the  sophists,  im-

Hadrian  dis- ,  „ ,  . .  ,  ,,,.,«,

satisfied  with DiDcd  a  couvictiou  that  the  whole  circle  oi  learn-

the  cons^rvft*

tive  spirit  of  iug  had  been  there  described,  and  no  further  dis-
coveries in  ethics  or  metaphysics  remained  to
reward  industry  or  genius.  At  Athens  the  spirit  of  inquiry
was  restrained  by  the  influence  of  great  names  and  long  re-
vered associations.  Thence  the  student  returned  to  Rome
with  his  ears  closed  against  all  novel  opinions,  full  of  en-
thusiasm for  the  past,  satisfied  with  the  assurance  that  the
existing  generation,  if  there  was  no  new  truth  for  it  to  dis-
cover, was  blest  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  accumulated  discov-
eries of  ages.  Though  bred  himself  in  the  school  of  self-
complacency,  and  fitted  by  his  powers  of  acquisition  to
master  all  the  knowledge  which  Athens  had  stamped  with
her  sanction,  Hadrian  was  not  so  easily  contented.  From
temper,  from  experience,  and  from  the  freshness  of  intellect
which  he  nourished  by  constant  movement,  he  still  retained
an  interest  in  every  pretension  to  novelty,  and  traced  with
undiminished  zest  all  the  eccentricities  of  the  human  mind.'
He  crossed  over  from  Athens  to  Alexandria,  and

He  crosses  over .  t  ,  .  m, -n

to  Alexandria, there  a  ncw  sccnc  Opened  upon  him. Ihe  Eigyp-
tian  capital  bore,  like  that  of  Greece,  the  charac-
ter of  a  University. Thither  also  the  youth  of  every  province
flocked  to  attend  the  lectures  of  another  tribe  of  sophists ;

his  time  is  something  quite  new :  rb  yap  ol>6e  ir6nore  yev6/ievov  vvv  di^Kerai  rb
Ti)V  Beooefiuv  ykvoQ  kcuvoIc  tXawS/iEVov  ddyfiaai  Kara  rijv  'Aaiav.  Euseb.  Eccl.
HuL  iv.  26,

'  It  was  from  liis  own  love  of  eccentricity  that  ho  pretended  to  prefer  Cato
to  Cicero,  Eniiius  to  Virgil,  Antimachus  to  Homer,  Spartian,  JIadr.  16,  In
compliment  to  thJH  funey  an  Alexandrian  poet  composed  24  books  of  a  work  to
wliich  ho  gave  the  name  of  Anti-IIomcrus,  Orion  ventured  on  the  tour  dc  force
of  haranguing  Iiim  in  a  Latin  ])ane^yric,  a  task  to  wliicli  few  (ireoks  would
have  been  equal.  Hadrian  repaid  these  flatteries  by  writing  a  long  poem  in
Greek,  In  praise  of  Alexandria  and  its  founder.  "  Cum  his  profossoribus  ct
philoBophis  libria  vel  cannlnibus  invioem  editis  sospo  ccrtavit,"  Hpartian,  c,  16.
Hadrian's  visit  to  Alexandria  may  bo  dated  a.  d.  ISO,  181.  Gregorovius,  p.  89.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  871

and  there  too  professors  of  every  science  were  maintained  at
the  public  expense,  or  by  endowments  which  had  existed
from  the  era  of  the  Ptolemies.  The  academic  ubend  nd  la-
life  of  Alexandria,  such  as  it  had  already  con-  SlnSu*  u
tinned  for  four  centuries,  was  cast  nearly  in  the  ^!j,^'uX'er.
type  with  which  our  modem  ideas  are  most  '''y-
familiar.  The  Museum  was  an  assemblage  of  lecture  rooms,
private  chambers,  common  halls,  and  libraries,  in  which  the
professors  dined,  studied  and  disputed  together,  the  envy
and  admiration  of  a  hundred  generations  of  pupils.'  The
Brucheum  was  a  similar  institution  affiliated  to  the  Museum.
The  emperor  Claudius  had  endowed  a  separate  college  in
which  his  own  histories  were  appointed  to  form  a  substantial
part  of  the  course  of  instruction.  The  Temple  of  Serapis
accommodated  the  remains  of  the  Ptolema?an  library  which
had  escaped  from  Caesar's  fire.  There  it  continued  to  receive
large  additions,  which  made  it  once  more,  in  the  decline  of
the  empire,  the  great  storehouse  of  ancient  learning.  But
Alexandria  was  the  University  of  progress.  Tliough  the
city  of  the  great  Macedonian  had  now  existed  for  near  five
hundred  years,  its  ripe  age  was  not  encircled  with  the  antique
associations  which  rendered  Athens  peculiarly  venerable.
Alexandria  had  no  mythology  and  no  legendary  poetry.  She
had  not  grown  through  the  obscurity  of  immemorial  ages ;
she  was  a  creation  of  historic  times.  From  the  first  her
career  had  been  marked  out  for  her  by  the  fiat  of  her  found-
er; slie  had  been  devoted  originally  to  the  material  pursuits
of  commerce ;  and  now  in  her  maturity,  she  was  an  empo-
rium for  the  interchange  of  ideas  and  speculations  along
with  the  products  of  various  climes  and  industries.  Alexan-
dria Avas  accustomed  to  welcome  novelty  in  thought  as  well
as  in  arts  and  manufactures.  With  her  discovery  was  at  a
premium ; and  even  ethics  and  metaphysics  had  their  ex-

-  Strabo,  xvii.  1.  Philostr.  Vit.  Sophia.  L  22.  AmmUn.  MarcelL  xxiL  16.:
**  diuturnum  praestantium  hominum  domicilium."  For  the  public  libraries  of
Athens  and  Alexandria  see  A.  Gellius,  vi.  17.  There  is  a  full  account  of  Alex-
andria, the  Serapeum,  the  Brucheum,  the  libraries,  &c.,  in  Ammianus,  L  c.

372  HISTOBY  OF  THE  ROMANS

changeable  value  among  the  curious  of  all  nations,  who  met
at  the  junction  of  three  continents ;  for  her  ships  were  the
feelers  with  which  she  touched  on  Greece  and  Italy,  while
her  site  was  debateable  land  between  Africa  and  Asia.^
Through  Alexandria  ran  the  current  of  Eastern  thought
which  now  set  most  strongly  westward.  The  Greek  philoso-
phy domiciled  in  the  capital  of  the  Ptolemies  was  stirred  to
its  depths  by  converging  streams  from  Syria,  Persia  and
India.  Judaism  and  Christianity  were  established  side  by
side  with  the  gross  idolatry  of  the  Copts,  and  the  elemental
worship  of  the  Saba3ans.  The  fantastic  theosophy  of  the
Gnostics,  of  which  the  local  and  the  spiritual  filiation  are
equally  unknown  to  us,  exercised  an  unacknowledged  influ-
ence wherever  the  human  mind  was  deeply  moved  by  the
problems  of  man's  relation  to  the  Deity.  Into  this  new  world
of  conflicting  opinions  Hadrian  threw  himself  with  vehemence
and  ardour.  He  made  himself  at  home  in  the  discussions  of
the  Alexandrian  schools,  and  was  more  entertained  than  en-
lightened by  the  wayward  imaginations  which  they  paraded
before  him.  The  impression  made  upon  him  is  discovered
from  a  letter  in  which  he  describes  to  Servianus  the  intellec-
tual aspect  of  the  place.'  I  am,  now  heeomefuUy  acqiiainted^
he  says,  with  that  Egypt  which  you  extol  so  highly.  J  have
found  the  people  vain,  fickle  and  shifting  with  every  breath

'  The  isthmus  of  Suez  or  the  stream  of  the  Nile  have  generally  been  speci-
fied as  the  boundary  of  the  two  continents :  but  in  Cresar's  time  the  line  of  de-
markation  was  supposed  popularly  to  run  through  the  centre  of  the  city  of
Alexandria.  Da  BeU.  Alex.  14, :  prrodicant  partem  esse  Alexandriae  dimidiam
AfridB."

*  Tlie  genuineness  of  the  letter  may  be  questioned  on  the  ground  of  Venis
being  mentioned  as  Hadrian's  son.  It  would  appear  from  Spartian  that  this
prince  was  not  adopted  till  the  year  185.  On  "the  other  hand,  it  is  not  abso-
lutely necessary  to  conclude  that  the  letter  was  written  from  Alexandria  at  the
time  of  Hadrian's  visit  in  131.  Hut  tJic  importance  attached  to  the  Ciiristinna
and  the  intcrost  ahown  in  them,  not  to  mention  the  premature  degeneracy  im-
puted to  them,  seem  to  mo  to  throw  much  doubt  upon  it.  Tiic  letter  is  not  re-
corded by  Hadrian's  biographer  F>partiamis,  but  occurs  incidentally  in  the  life
of  a  later  emporor  by  Vopiscus. V'U.  tiatumin.  c.  8.

UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  373

of  opinion.  Those  who  worship  Serapis  are  in  faiOt  (jhri»-
tiana ;  and  they  who  call  themselves  Christian  bishop*  art
actually  worahippers  of  Serapis.  There  is  no  chief  of  a  Jew'
ish  synagogue^  no  Samaritan^  no  Christian  bishop^  toho  is
not  an  astrologer ^  a  fortunerteUer  and  a  conjuror.  Thepatri-
arch  himself,  when  he  comes  to  Egypt,  is  compelled  by  one
2)arty  to  worship  Serapis,  by  tJie  other  Christ.  Then,  after  a
digression  on  tlie  busy  and  restless  character  of  the  people,
he  continues :  They  have  but  one  God  (alluding  to  their  idol
atry  of  lucre) — him  Christians,  Jews  and  Gentiles  worship
all  alike.^  The  ardour  of  the  Alexandrians  in  the  pursuit  of
wealth  is  thus  pungently  satirized,  and  we  can  understand
how  the  bustle  of  a  great  commercial  emporium  would  sur-
prise an  observer  accustomed  to  the  dignified  somnolence  of
an  old-fashioned  city  like  Athens ;  but  the  sneer  thus  loosely
hazarded  against  the  opinions  current  among  them  may  re-
quire some  closer  consideration.

It  must  strike  us  with  surprise  that  the  philosophic  em-
peror, a  smatterer  in  all  knowledge,  and  a  spy  upon  all  opin-
ions, should  direct  his  remarks,  not  to  the  state utowrttokwi
of  Gentile  philosophj',  but  to  that  of  Jewish  and jg^^J^Itt?
Christian  belief. Possibly,  if  we  knew  the  oc-  j^JUjJ^"'  *•
casion  of  this  letter,  which,  from  certain  allusions  ***■**•■*
it  contains,  must  belong  to  a  date  some  years  Jater  than
Hadrian's  actual  visit,  the  explanation  of  this  circumstance
might  be  more  apparent ;  but  taking  the  document  as  it  liea

*  Such  is  the  explauation  usually  given  of  this  allusion  to  the  One  God;
according  to  the  reading :  "  unus  illia  deua  est.  Hunc  Christiani,"  &c  See
Milman,  IBst.  of  Christianity,  iL  166.  But  the  passage  is  probably  corrupt.
One  MS.  gives :  "  unus  illis  deus  nullus  est  Hunc,"  &c,  which  Mr.  Sharpe,
Hist,  of  £ffifpt,  ii,  168.,  follows,  rendering  it :  "  Their  one  God  is  nothing.
Christians,  Jews  and  all  nations  worship  him ; "  referring  to  the  prevalent  mono-
theism among  the  Oriental  sects  at  Alexandria.  Serapis  combined  more  than
one  divinity  in  his  ovra  person :  'H?M)g,  ^Qpog,  'Ocipig,  'Ava^,  \i6vxxjoq,  'An67^
luv.  Euseb.  Prcep.  Evmg.  iii.  15,  16. :  "  Hence  arose  the  opinion  which
seems  to  have  been  given  to  Hadrian,  that  the  Egyptians  had  only  one  God,
and  his  mistake  in  thinkmg  that  the  worshippers  of  Serapis  were  Christians."
Sharpe,  Hist,  of  Egypt,  iL  168.

374  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS;  [A.D.  131.

before  us,  we  must  conclude  thai  the  phenomena  of  Judaism
and  Christianity  constituted,  even  at  this  period,  the  most
salient  features  of  the  intellectual  movement  at  Alexandria.
The  sophists  of  the  Museum,  whether  standing  on  the  old
■ways,  and  proclaiming  the  tenets  of  the  old  Greek  philoso-
phy, or  whether  busied  in  contriving  the  eclectic  system
which  has  assumed  a  place  in  mental  history  under  the  name
of  the  New  Platonism,  attracted  less  remark  from  a  curious
but  intelligent  observer,  than  the  professors  of  a  religious
doctrine,  Jewish  or  Christian.  Hadrian,  indeed,  cosmopolite
though  he  was  in  tastes  and  habits,  could  not  transcend  the
limits  prescribed  by  his  birth  and  training.  He  discovered
in  the  views  of  the  Alexandrians  a  tendency  to  Oriental,  and
even  to  Jewish  ideas,  which  revolted  rather  than  attracted
him.  The  Gnostic  theories  of  the  Divine  Nature  with  which
they  were  impregnated  would  be  to  him  strange  and  prepos-
terous, while  the  seriousness  they  affected,  and  the  positive
belief  they  required,  would  be  felt  as  a  burden  by  one  who
was  accustomed  to  regard  all  philosophy  as  a  mere  playing
with  truth.  Hadrian,  however,  mingled  freely  with  the
sages  and  professors  of  the  Egyjitian  capital ;  he  conversed,
debated,  and  banqueted  with  them;  accepted  from  them  the
Bame  flattery,  and  dispensed  to  them  in  return  the  same  lib-
erality which  had  marked  his  intercourse  with  the  rival  uni-
versity. Here,  too,  he  increased  the  salaries  of  the  public
teachers,  and  encouraged  the  youth  of  the  empire  to  make
literatux'c  their  business.  We  may  believe  that  he  extended
his  protection  to  the  preachers  of  Christianity  also,  and  helped
to  raise  them  to  the  high  place  they  long  held  among  the
learned  at  Alexandria.  The  praises  of  the  early  Church  were
not  ill  bestowed  on  tlie  prince  to  whom  we  may  thus  bo  in-
debted for  the  liberal  piety  of  Clement  and  Origen.  Here,
as  at  Athens,  lie  left  abundant  tokens  of  his  munificence,  in
tljc  erection  of  useful  and  noble  buildings,  and  in  the  recon-
struct ion  of  a  quarter  of  the  city,  liut  tlie  mob  of  Alexan-
dria liad  been  always  notorious  for  turbulence  and  iiulocility.
The  fanaticism  of  the  Coptic  race  was  hero  stimulated  by

A-U.  884.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  375

political  jealousy.  In  the  rural  districts  a  dispute  about  the
genuineness  of  an  Apis  had  recently  goaded  it  to  bloody  con-
flict, and  the  religious  dissensions  of  Ombi  and  Tentyra  had
been  polluted  by  actual  cannibalism.*  In  the  city,  however,
the  rivalry  of  the  Copts  and  Jews,  together  with  their  mutual
hatred  of  the  dominant  Greek  race,  had  engendered  chronic
disaffection  and  resistance  to  all  legal  authority.  In  vain  had
the  Roman  government  forbidden  its  citizens  to  reside  in
Egypt,  and  excite  by  their  arrogance  or  cupidity  the  suBoep-
tibilities  of  the  native  population.  In  vain  was  the  independ-
ence of  the  proudest  of  cities  more  tenderly  handled  than
that  of  any  other  in  the  empire.  The  rabble  of  the  streets,
who  controlled  the  local  administration,  despised  every  title
or  dignity :  they  insulted  the  emperor  himself  as  recklessly
as  they  would  have  hooted  a  Greek  sophist  or  a  Jewish  rabbi
When  Hadrian's  favourite  Antinous  was  drowned  d^o,  ^  ^^
iu  the  Nile,  a  misfortune  with  wliich  all  the  world  ^j^^wST
that  pretended  to  self-respect  affected  a  decent  -^  "•  "*•
sympathy,  the  Alexandrians  alone  made  a  mock  of  their
ruler's  weakness,  and  the  letter  above  cited  seems  to  have
been  written  under  the  actual  smart  of  their  unfeeling  ribald-
ry.* I  have  given  these  people^  Hadrian  said,  everything

'  Spartianus,  Hadr.  12.,  refers  to  a  riot  at  Alexandria  on  the  subject  of  the
Apis :  "  Alexaudriua  ^editiuue  turbatus,  qiue  nata  est  ob  Apin,  qui  com  reper>
tus  esset  post  multos  aiiDos  turbas  inter  populoa  crearit,  apud  quem  deberet  kv
cai-i  ommbud  studiosc  certantibus."  The  best  account  of  the  A[MS  is  in  Am-
mian.  Marcell.  x\iL  14.  Of  the  respect  with  wliieh  Hadrian  woald  alTect  to
approach  tho  subject  we  may  surmise  from  what  lias  been  already  said  of  bim,
Augustus  had  treated  the  bull-god  with  contempt ;  earher  emperors  had  wan-
tonly slain  him.  But  Germanicus  consulted  his  oracle,  and  Titus  had  paid  him
honour.  The  bloody  quarrel  of  Ombi  and  Tentyra  is  the  theme  of  Juvenal's
Sat.  XV.,  and  is  referred  with  most  probabiUty  to  the  year  119,  the  third  of
Hadrian,  from  the  words,  "  quae  nuper  consule  Junio,"  xv.  27.

^  Dion,  kix.  11.;  Spartian,  Hadr.  14.  Hadrian  seems  to  hare  said  that
Antinous  fell  by  accident  into  the  water.  Other  accounts,  however,  asserted
that  he  drowned  himself  voluntarily  in  obedience  to  an  oracle  which  demanded,
for  the  life  of  the  emperor,  the  sacrifice  of  the  object  dearest  to  him.  How-
ever this  may  be,  Hadrian  lamented  his  death  with  extravagant  weakness,  pro-
claimed his  divinity  to  the  jeering  Egyptian^i,  and  consecrated  a  temple  in  his

376  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.131.

they  asJcedfor.  I  have  confirmed  all  their  ancient  privileges,
and  added  new,  which  they  could  not  help  acknowledging  in
my  presence.  But  no  sooner  had  I  turned  my  hack  than  they
lavished  every  hind  of  insult  on  m,y  son  Yerus,  and  m,y
friend  Antinous.  I  wish  them,  no  worse,  he  added  in  his
bantering  tone,  than  that  they  should  feed  on  their  own
chickens ;  and  how  foully  they  hatch  thsm  lam  ashamed  to
say.'

The  character  of  the  Alexandrians  is  painted  in  one  of  the

most  interesting  of  Dion's  orations,  which  is  also  curious  as  a

specimen  of  the  lay-preaching  of  a  converted

Ingratitude  of f  . .  -, ^ ,  -,  •  ^ n ■^

the  Aiexan-  rhctorician,  and  of  the  extent  to  whicli  freedom
of  speech  was  allowed  in  lashing  the  follies  of
the  sovereign  people."  The  sophist's  charges  against  them
relate  to  their  vanity  and  frivolity,  their  extravagant  devo-
tion to  public  amusements,  singing,  playing,  and  racing,  and
also  to  the  bloody  conflicts  in  which  their  amusements  too
often  resulted.  But  Dion  visited  Alexandria  before  the  time
of  Hadrian,  and  could  not  resent  as  it  deserved  the  ingrati-
tude the  people  manifested  towards  a  gracious  prince,  from
whom,  though  parts  of  his  conduct  might  provoke  a  smile,
they  had  experienced  only  unmerited  kindness.  Hadrian  did
not  condescend  to  take  vengeance  on  his  persecutors :  two

honour.  He  gave  the  oame  of  Besantinoopolis  to  the  city  m  which  he  was
worshipped  in  conjunction  with  an  obscure  divinity  named  Bcsa.  Deification
in  Egypt  assumed  the  form  of  identification  with  a  recognised  divinity,  Oii-
gen,  edit.  Celaum,  iii. ;  Euseb.  Jlist,  Eccl.  iv.  8.;  Sharpe,  IFid.  F^ypt,  ii,  101.
The  late  discoveries  in  hieroglyphics  have  shown  tliat  tlic  obelisk  on  the  Mouto
Pincio  at  Rome  was  dedicated  to  the  memory  of  Autinoiis  in  the  joint  names
of  Iladriun  and  Sabina. Smyth,  Roman  Medals,  p.  110.

'  VojjiscuM,  1.  c. :  "  quos  qucniadmodum  ftccundaut  pudct  dicere."  Aris-
totle had  not  shrunk  from  mentioning  how  the  Egyptians  hatched  their  fowls'
cggB  in  dung.  Casaubon,  in  loc.  Besides  the  apparent  anachronism  of  the
oUusion  to  Verus,  it  may  bo  said  that  neither  the  matter  nor  the  stylo  of  this
letter  in  such  aa  we  should  expect  from  an  imperial  correspondent.  Vopiscus
professes  to  take  it  from  the  volumes  of  Thlcgon,  a  freedman  of  Hadrian.

•  Dion  Chrys.  Orat.  xxxli.  Amminn.  MarccU.  xxii.  0.  8[)euk8  more  particu-
larly of  their  litigious  and  (luarrolHome  tcmiier :  "  yl'^gyptii  genus  homiuum
controyenom,  et  Msuotudino  pcri)lexius  Utigaudi  semper  lajtissimum,"  etc.

I

A.  U,  884.]  U^^)EB  THE  EMPIRE.  377

generations  later  an  emperor  of  a  different  stamp  washed  out
indignities  not  more  crying  in  a  sanguinary  massacre.'  The
mild  philosoplier  who  now  commanded  tlie  thirty  Icgioni*
shook  off  the  dust  of  the  turbid  city  from  his  feet,  and  made
a  pilgrimage,  as  a  peaceful  antiquarian,  to  the  wonders  of  old
Tliel>e8.  The  name  of  Hadrian  does  not  now  appear  among
the  rude  inscriptions  which  can  be  still  decyphered  on  the
Egyptian  monuments;  but  some  Greek  lines  scratched  on
the  legs  of  the  broken  statue  of  Mcmuon,  show  that  Sabina,
at  least,  visited  that  mysterious  fragment,  and  heard  the
music  which  issued  from  it  at  sunrise.*  Hadrian  ascended
likewise  the  Casian  Mount,  crowned  with  a  celebrated  temple
of  Jupiter,  and  restored  the  chapel  of  Pompeius  at  its  foot,
which  had  been  recently  overthrown  by  the  Jews.  His  taste
and  piety  were  further  attested  by  a  short  and  pithy  epigram
on  the  uncertainty  of  fortune,  which  he  caused  to  be  in-
scribed upon  it.*

If  Hadrian  was  dissatisfied  with  the  people  of  Alexandria,
ho  was  disgusted  and  incensed  with  the  inhabitants  of  Anti-

*  Herodian,  iv.  16,  17.

'  The  iuscriptiou  is  given  by  Eckhel,  tL  490.,  and  numj  oUien :

icn>d{  Tag  deiag  ilt/tvovoc  §  ia/uvof :  k.  t.  X.

The  date,  which  is  specified  in  it,  may  be  fixed  to  131  or  even  ISO,  quite  at  the
commencement  of  Hadrian's  residence  in  Egypt,  if  not  a  little  before  hid  ani-
val.  The  statue  was  at  this  time  lymg  in  iragmrats,  and  the  sounds  were  sup-
posed to  issue  from  the  broken  pieces,  31r.  Sharpe  considers  the  marvel  a
direct  imposture.  For  the  fondness  of  the  Romans  for  visiting  antiquitieB,
which  has  been  referred  to  before,  see  Epictetus,  IHtsfrt.  L  6. :  etc  W.iynriaw
(ih>  anoSr/fiecTe,  tv  EiSf/re  rd  Ipyov  tov  ^idiov,  ndl  drvj^i^/za  iKoaroQ  vfiitv  oUrat
rd  avioTdpTjToc  tovtuv  aTTodaveJv.

'  Dion,  Ixix.  11. :  "  r^  vao'ic  ^pidovrt  tzdarj  avavig  br'XeTo  ti//,3ov.  Comp.
Spartian,  Umlr.  14. :  Appan,  Bell  Civ.  ii.  96.  The  historian,  or  his  epitomizer,
brmgs  Hadrian  from  Greece,  through  Judea  to  Mount  Casius,  on  his  way  into
Egypt.  I  suppose  hun,  on  the  contrary,  to  have  entered  Judea  from  Egypt,
where  he  promulgated  the  decrees  which  produced  the  Jewish  insurrection  in
132.  But  the  exact  sequence  of  his  movements  must  be  considered  as  very
uncertain.

878  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  132.

Hadrian  visits  och.  This  city,  the  third  in  population  and  im-
m^nst'ed'^th*  portance  of  the  empire,  the  capital  of  the  once
Toiuptuiul-™^  powerful  kings  of  Syria,  and  honoured  for  now
"®^^-  nearly  two  centuries  by  the  residence  of  the  Ro-

man proconsul,  who  approached  nearest  in  rank  and  power
to  the  emperor  himself,  was  abandoned,  beyond  any  of  the
great  centres  of  wealth  and  luxury,  to  the  indolent  enjoy-
ment of  voluptuous  ease.  The  Antiochians  made  no  preten-
sions to  learning  or  philosophy,  but  they  were  addicted  to
vile  and  vicious  superstitions,  in  which  the  simple  ideas  of  a
remote  antiquity  were  corrupted  into  gross  licentiousness,
and  deformed  by  the  impurest  orgies.  Placed  in  the  centre
of  a  rich  and  populous  region,  and  on  the  highway  which
united  the  East  and  West  with  the  South,  they  offered  a
mart  for  the  productions  of  many  realms,  and  their  city  was
the  resort  of  tradets  as  well  as  idlers  from  the  three  conti-
nents. The  unrivalled  beauty  of  its  situation,  a  fertile  plain
watered  by  an  abundant  river,  visited  by  breezes  from  the
sea  at  fifteen  miles'  distance,  and  sheltered  from  fiercer  winds
by  a  lofty  table  mountain  in  its  rear,  presented  an  alluring
place  of  residence,  and  made  Antioch  the  favourite  retreat  of
the  idle  and  self-indulgent.  The  attractions  of  its  suburb,
named  Daphne  from  the  laurel  groves  which  encircled  the
fane  of  Apollo,  were  famous  throughout  the  West,  and  often
proved  the  Capua  of  tlie  Roman  legions.  The  remoteness  of
this  Eastern  capital  from  Rome,  and  the  fatal  tliough  un-
avoidable policy,  by  which  the  legionaries  and  their  chiefs,
togetlicr  with  the  concourse  of  the  prefect's  civil  attendants,
were  suffered  to  remain  for  many  years  together  in  so  luxu-
rious a  banishment,  emboldened  the  Italians  to  cast  off  the
restraints  of  national  decorum,  and  yield  to  the  fascinations
of  the  Syrian  Circe,  who  floated  the  austere  habits  of  the
West  with  keen-edged  satire  or  boisterous  ridicule.  Again
and  again  the  emperors  called  tlicm  to  arms  to  chastise  the
Jew,  to  protect  the  Armenian,  or  to  threaten  the  Parthian ;
but  every  interval  of  tranquillity  relaxed  the  bonds  of  disciiv
lino,  and  tlio  Syrian  proconsul  Avas  less  formidable  to  the

A.  U.  885.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  379

prince  at  Rome  when  at  the  head  of  the  soldiers  in  the  field,
than  when  he  winked  at  their  irregularities  and  debauched
them  at  head-quarters.  The  frequent  occurrence  of  disas-
trous earthquakes,  contributed  perhaps  to  make  the  people
reckless  in  their  manner  of  life,  and  disposed  them  to  enjoy
the  passing  hour,  and  drown  in  tumultuous  excitement  the
fears  of  imi^ending  danger.

Hadrian  had  been  known  to  the  Antiochians  while  still  a
subject.  Doubtless  they  had  made  sport  with
their  usual  levity  of  the  weak  points  in  his  char-  brthcAatiocb-
acter,  which  were  sufficiently  obvious.  They
knew  the  circumstances  under  which  he  had  succeeded  to
the  purple,  and  many  a  ribald  joke  had  passed  among  them
touching  the  favour  to  which  he  was  surmised  to  have  owed
it.  Though  surrounded  on  his  next  appearance  in  their  city
with  the  terrors  of  sovereign  power,  they  still  could  not  con-
trol their  bantering  humour,  and  as  an  emperor  and  a  philos-
opher he  was  perhaps  equally  offended  at  the  frivolity  of  a
people  who  had  no  sense  of  dignity  themselves,  nor  could
respect  the  dignity  of  others.  Among  the  names  of  princes
who  illustrated  this  spot  with  their  buildings,  that  of  Ha-
drian, the  universal  builder,  finds  no  place.  On  the  contra-
ry, he  took  from  it  some  of  its  cherished  privileges,  and  sub-
jected it  to  the  supremacy  of  the  provincial  seaport  of
Tyre.>

Such  are  the  incidents  connected  with  Hadrian's  sojourn
in  the  principal  cities  of  his  wide  dominions. There  would
be  no  advantage  in  specifying  all  the  places  of  H«d,tai«»-
less  importance  which  he  visited  in  the  course  of  ^JJSTttoS^
his  unwearied  peregrinations. Many  of  them  are ^^  **'~*-

'  Eckhel,  Doctr.  Numm.  iii.  297.  Spartian,  Iladr.  14. :  "  Antiochenses  ita
odio  hubuit  ut  Syriam  a  Phoenice  separare  voluerit,  ne  tot  civitatum  metropolis
Antiochia  diceretur."  At  a  lat«r  period  the  emperors  found  it  necessary  to  re-
move  the  head-quarters  of  tlieir  army  from  so  corrupt  a  locality.  Procopiua
{Bell.  Pers.  i.  17.)  speaks  of  it  as  entirely  denuded  of  soldiers :  »J  <J/)  d^AajcT<Jf
re  Kol  CTpaTi6Tuv  epri/i6g  icrrr  ov  yap  a^.lov  ovdivoc  ri^  Tai-ntc  ^riH^  5r<  ftif
iravT/yvpeuv  re  Kal  rptxp^g  fiiXet,  koi  r^g  ev  Bedrpoig  aei  irpdc  aXXt/Xnvg  ^Ojo-
veiKiac.

380  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  132.

incidentally  mentioned  by  the  historians  and  biographers ;
others  are  notified  by  the  legends  of  his  coinage,  in  which  he
appears  as  the  Hestorer  of  above  thirteen  places  or  provinces,
a  title  which  seems  to  imply  a  personal  visit,  accompanied
by  some  eminent  benefaction/  He  erected  temples  at  Smyr-
na and  Cyzicus,  buried  in  the  Rhaeteum  on  the  plain  of  Troy
some  colossal  bones,  supposed  to  be  those  of  Ajax,  and
founded  in  Bithynia  a  town  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of
Hadrianothera,  in  commemoration  of  a  successful  hunting-
match.*  On  the  frontiers  of  Armenia  he  received  the  homage
of  the  petty  chiefs  who  infested  the  confines  of  the  empire,
and  impressed  on  Pharasmanes,  the  king  of  the  Alani,  a  due
sense  of  Roman  power  and  dignity,  by  clothing  his  gladia-
tors, by  way  of  mockery,  in  the  gilded  vestments  with  which
that  simple  potentate  had  sought  to  purchase  his  favour.'
At  the  same  time  he  gratified  the  Parthian  Chosroes,  who
had  resumed  his  ancestral  seat  on  the  Euphrates,  by  restoring
to  him  his  daughter  made  captive  by  Trajan.  He  promised
also,  it  is  said,  to  send  back  to  him  the  golden  throne  which
the  conqueror  had  carried  ofi"  from  Susa ;  but  this  magnani-
mous restitution  was  never  actually  made.*  These  overtures
of  reconciliation  may  have  been  timed  to  divert  that  still
powerful  monarch  from  assisting  the  Jews  in  the  great  strug-
gle which  broke  out  in  Palestine  in  132,  as  soon  as  Hadrian's
presence  was  withdrawn  from  the  neighbourhood.

I  have  not  attempted  to  follow  Hadrian's  steps  accurately.

The  scattered  hints  received  from  our  authorities  have  been

Hodrian  onco Variously  pieced  by  the  critics,  and  do  not  admit,

AUicnS!**"'^* perhaps,  of  confident  manipulation. I  presume,

A.  D.  188, 184. however,  that  he  passed  through  Syria  in  132,  and

'  See  Eckhel,  vl.  487,  foil.  The  countries  or  cities  thus  mentioned  are
Ach^B,  Africa,  Anibia,  IMtliynia,  GuUia,  Ilispania,  Italia,  Libya,  Macedonia,
Maurctania,  Nicomcdia,  Phrygia,  Sicilia.  Hadrian  travelled  with  a  company
of  architects  and  artificers,  ordered  after  the  fashion  of  a  legion  of  soldiers :
**  id  epedmen  l(^ODum  militarium  .  .  .  .  iu  cohortea  ceuturiaverat."  Victor,
/^.  28.

•  Dion,  Ixix.  10. ;  Rpartian,  Hadr.  20.

•  Dion,  Ixioc  1ft.;  Spartiau,  Jladr.  la.  IT.  *  Spartian,  Hadr.  13.

at

A.P.1S1

A.U.  885.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE,  381

after  some  further  wanderings  in  the  Eastern  provinces,  re-
turned for  the  last  time  to  Athens,  and  there  spent  the  win-
ter of  133-134.  At  Athens  he  might  witness  the  completion
of  his  buildings,  and  enjoy  once  more,  with  the  greater  lest
from  the  comparison  with  Alexandria  and  Antioch,  the  man-
ners and  conversation  of  his  favourite  residence.  But  Rome,
after  all,  the  centre  of  business  and  of  duty,  was  the  place  to
which  the  imperial  pilgrimages  gravitated.  Wherever  else
ambition,  cupidity,  or  thirst  of  knowledge  and  adventure
might  call  him,  during  his  years  of  activity,  it  was  at  Rome,
or  within  sight  of  Rome,  that  every  genuine  Roman  wished
to  retire  in  declining  age,  and  compose  himself  for  the  last
journey  to  the  resting-place  of  his  ancestors.  Hadrian  had
already  reached  old  age,  and  had  governed  the  Andt«toMi«p
empire  sixteen  years ;  hb  health  too  was  much  ^J,S?
debilitated,  and  ho  had  no  reasonable  prospect  of
lengthened  days,  when,  in  134,  he  took  up  his  residence  in
his  capital,  and  ceased  from  his  restless  wanderings.  Here,
however,  he  continued  to  employ  himself  with  unabated  in-
dustry. He  established  a  university  at  Rome,  ^^^^^^^^^^^^
under  the  name  of  the  Atheuaium,  after  the  type  of  tii«  a^-
of  the  cherished  city  whence  it  derived  its  name,
and  he  endowed  its  professors  on  a  scale  befitting  its  metro-
politan character.'  The  throne  of  rhetoric  at  Rome  took
precedence  of  all  its  rivals,  both  in  rank  and  emolument.
But  the  liberal  sciences  were  exotics  in  Italy,  and  produced
no  popular  teachers  and  no  celebrated  schools.  The  activity
of  the  Roman  mind  was  running  towards  law  and  jurispru-
dence ;  but  this  was  a  practical  subject  which  formed  no  part
of  the  speculations  to  which  the  career  of  academic  study
was  prescriptively  confined.  While  philosophy  and  rhetoric
were  stationary  or  retrogressive,  the  principles  of  law  were  rap-
idly advancing,  and  Hadrian  was  himself  unconscious  of  the  so-

*  Philostr.  Vit.  Sophist,  ii.  10,  8.  Victor,  Ccet.  14. :  "  ita  Graeconim  more
....  gymnasia,  doctoresque  curare  occoepit,  adeo  quidem  ut  etiam  ludum  in-
genuarum  artium  quod  Athenieum  vocaut,  constitueret ;  atque  initia  Cereria
Libeneque,  quje  Eleusinia  dicitur,  Atheniensium  modo  Roma  percoleret."

382  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  134.

cial  transformation  which  was  ah-eady  taking  shape  under  his
auspices.  At  Rome  we  behold  in  him  the  busy  and  earnest
administrator,  surveying  from  the  centre  of  his  vast  domin-
ions the  character  and  conduct  of  his  subordinates,  keeping
all  his  instruments  well  in  hand,  assiduous  in  selecting  the
best  agents,  and  strict  in  requiring  an  account  of  their  agency,
putting  to  use  the  local  and  personal  knowledge  acquired  by
so  many  years  of  travel  and  inspection. Amidst

Hadrian's  ,  ,  •' •' .  _ „  \ .

buildings  at  this  uuccasing  rouud  01  occupation,  it  was  his  re-
creation to  behold  the  glorious  buildings  still
rising  at  his  command  in  every  quarter  of  the  city.  It  is  al-
most wearisome  to  turn  again  and  again  to  the  subject  of
the  imperial  alxjhitecture,  which  has  formed  a  feature  in
the  narrative  of  almost  every  reign  in  succession  ;  but  we  are
bound  to  remark  that  the  edifices  of  Hadrian  at  Rome  sur-
passed in  magnificence  all  the  works  of  his  predecessors.*
His  temple  of  Rome  and  Yenus,  with  its  double  cells,  placed
fantastically  back  to  back,  was  at  once  the  largest  in  size  and
Temple  of  the  most  Splendid  in  its  features  of  the  religious
nus.  edifices  of  the  capital. Raised  on  a  lofty  base-

ment on  the  eastern  slope  of  the  Velia,  and  looking  down
into  the  hollow  in  wliich  the  Colosseum  was  injudiciously
placed,  it  might  command  even  more  remark  and  admiration
than  that  masterpiece  of  imperial  grandeur. The

Mausoicam  or _  .  .

MoicB  ua- Mausoleum  which  Hadrian  had  created  for  him-

drionl.

self  on  the  further  bank  of  the  Tiber  far  outshone
the  tomb  of  Augustus,  which  it  nearly  confronted ;  of  the
size  and  dignity  which  characterized  this  work  of  Egyptian
massiveness,  wo  may  gain  a  conception  from  the  existing  re-
mains ;  but  it  requires  an  eflfort  of  imagination  to  transform

*  Spartiftii,  Iladr.  19.,  gives  a  long  enumeration  of  these  works.  It  was  ro-
marked  tbut  Hadrian  niodently  reiVtiincd  from  inscribing  bis  name  upon  any
ono  of  tbora,  except  tbc  tcniplo  lie  dedicated  to  Triyan.  Among  other  under-
takings bo  cmjjloyed  an  arcliitoct  named  Decrianus  to  remove  the  colossus  of
Nero,  the  face  of  which  had  been  altered  into  a  Sol,  from  its  place  on  the  slope
of  the  Velia  to  another  site.  llv.  does  not  seem  to  have  accomplished  the  der
ligQ  of  ApoUodorun  to  erect  a  compaulou  statue  of  Luua.

A.U.  887.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  383

the  scarred  and  Bhapeless  bulk  before  us  into  the  graceful  pile
Avhich  rose  column  upon  column,  surmounted  by  a  gilded
dome  of  span  almost  unrivalled,  and  terminating  in  the
Ktatue  of  the  beatified  builder,  whose  remains  reposed  below.
The  Mole  of  Hadrian  was,  next  to  the  Colosseum,  the  most
distinguished  specimen  of  the  style  of  architecture  which  wo
designate  as  Roman,  whencesoever  really  derived ;  which  by
raising  tier  upon  tier  of  external  decorations,  after  the  num-
ber of  stories  required  within,  adapted  to  civil  and  domestic
j)urposes  the  monumental  grandeur  of  the  Grecian.  Besides
these  and  other  erections  of  his  own,  Hadrian  is  noted  as  the
restorer  of  many  famous  buildings  of  an  earlier  date,  such  as
the  Septa,  the  Pantheon,  the  temple  of  Augustus,  and  the
baths  of  Agrippa.  But  his  services  in  these  cases  may  have
been  but  slight.  However  liable  Rome  was  to  sufler  from
fires,  earthquakes  and  inundations,  we  can  hardly  suppose
that  these  structures,  most  of  which  had  been  repaired  by
Titus  or  Domitiau,  could  already  require  again  extensive
renovation.*

Hitherto,  Hadrian  had  been  able  to  follow  the  policy
which  had  before  recommended  itself  to  his  predecessor,  of
shunning,  by  long  absence  from  the  city,  collision H»driMi
with  his  jealous  nobility. At  the  same  time  he JJI^^J^l,
had  skifuUy  avoided  the  alternative  which  alone m*^^*^'^^
had  presented  itself  to  Trajan's  mind. He  had ^o.iis.
kept  the  legions  in  good  humour  without  indulging  them
in  the  exhausting  amusement  of  perpetual  warfare.' When,

'  The  Tiburtine  yilla  of  Hadrian  is  entirely  destroyed.  Its  site  is  said  to
be  ascertained,  and  its  limits,  eight  miles  in  circuit,  may  perhaps  be  tr&eed.  It
embraced,  besides  the  residence  and  quarters  for  the  guard,  buildings  modelled
on  the  Lyceum  and  Academy,  the  colonnade  called  Poecile,  the  Prytaneum,  &c.,
at  Athens,  a  Canopus  which  may  have  represented  some  edifice  at  Alexandria.
In  its  gai'dens  was  a  space  laid  out  after  the  fashion  of  the  vale  of  Tempe,  a
Tartarus,  and  perhaps,  on  the  other  hand,  Elysian  Helds,  Spartian,  Hadr.  26. ;
Victor,  Cces.  14,

*  Spartian,  Hadr.  21.:  "  expeditiones  sub  eo  graves  nulUe  fuerunt;  bella
etiam  silentio  ptene  transacta."  At  the  same  time  the  writer  adds :  "  a  militi-
bus,  propter  curam  exercitus  nimiam,  multum  amatus  est,  simul  quod  in  eoe

384  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  135.

however,  he  finally  took  xip  his  residence  in  Rome  or  his  vil-
las in  the  vicinity,  the  prince  of  the  senate,  the  first  citizen
as  he  proclaimed  of  the  republic,  found  himself  the  mark  of
an  envious  aristocracy,  encouraged  by  his  condescension  to
fancy  themselves  really  his  equals,  and  disposed,  at  the  first
sign  of  his  health  failing,  to  intrigue  against  him.  The  suc-
cessor of  Trajan  and  Nerva  had  vowed  never  to  put  a  senator
to  death ;  and  the  only  instance  in  which  this  hope  had  been
hitherto  disappointed,  was  excused  by  the  precipitation  of
the  senate  itself.  But  such  a  restriction  could  not  possibly
be  maintained,  if  the  emperor's  person  was  to  be  exposed  to
the  machinations  of  senatorial  ambition.  Nor  was  Hadrian's
good-nature  proof  against  the  irritation  caused  by  increasing
infirmities.*  Sensible  of  his  own  weakness,  and  anxious  to
the  last  to  keep  faith  with  his  subjects,  he  detennined,  hav-
ing no  child  of  his  own,  to  choose  a  colleague,  and  adopt  an
heir  and  a  successor,  as  the  best  security  for  his  own  peace,
the  most  direct  check  on  the  irregular  aspirations  of  his
nobles.  But  the  empire,  as  it  would  seem,  was  singularly
deficient  in  men  of  eminence  befitting  such  an  elevation.  I
do  not  lay  much  stress  upon  the  charge  of  jealousy  made
against  him,  for  rejecting  the  presumed  claims  of  personages
so  obscure  as  Terentius  Gentianus  and  Pla3torius  Nepos."
Nor,  in  our  ignorance  of  the  circumstances,  need  we  dAvell
on  the  strange  intimation,  that  he  was  so  jealous  of  the  pre-
tensions of  his  brother-in-law  Servianus,  then  ninety  years  of
age,  as  to  put  him  to  death  on  a  frivolous  pretext,  in  defiance

UberaliBsimus  fuit."  Victor  relates  (Epit.  14.)  that  Hadrian  used  to  boast  that
he  had  gained  more  for  the  empire  in  peace,  by  the  skilful  use  of  bribes  to  for-
eign potentatcH,  than  his  predecessors  by  war ;  but  Spartian,  o.  11.,  gives  a  dif-
ferent colour  to  these  pretensions :  "  Regibus  multis  plurimum  detulit ;  a  plo
risque  veto  ctiam  ])accin  redemit ;  a  nonnullis  contcmptus  est."

*  Of  this  good-nature  several  instances,  some  of  them  eccentric  enough,  are
recorded:  but  Buch  anecdotes  seem  hardly  worth  repeating.  See,  however,
Spartian,  Jfadr.  16,  17.  20.  The  trial  of  wit  between  the  emperor  and  the
poet  FloniH  in  the  vcrscfl,  "  Ego  nolo  Cwsar  esse,  etc.,"  is  well  known.

'  A.  Plnstorlus  Nepos  Is  only  known  to  us  as  a  commander  in  IJritain,  from
the  variouR  iDScrlpUons  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Roman  wall.

A.U.  888.]  UNDER  THE  EMPraE.  385

of  every  obligation.  It  is  said,  indeed,  that  many  other  mag-
nates were  sacrificed  at  the  same  time,  some  by  judicial  sen-
tences, others  by  assassination.*  At  this  period,  also,  the
empress  Sabina  died ;  and  as  her  dislike  of  him  was  well
known,  and  it  was  even  rumoured  that  she  had  taken  pre-
cautions against  conception,  lest  the  world  should  be  afflicted
by  such  another  monster,  it  became  currently  reported  that
she  was  taken  off  by  poison.*  All  these  charges  may  be  al-
lowed to  stand  or  fall  together ;  the  last  is  expressly  discred-
itod  by  a  far  from  friendly  historian.  Nor  am  I  inclined  to
pay  much  regard  to  the  insinuation,  that  his  choice  of  a  suc-
cessor was  finally  determined  by  mere  unworthy  favouritism.
L.  Ccionius  Commodus  Verus  was  a  young  noble  of  high
birth  and  family  distinction ;  but  the  Romans  refused  to
allow  him  any  personal  merit,  and  affirmed  that  his  adoption
and  appointment  were  made  in  opposition  to  the  universal
feeling,  and  required  to  be  purchased,  as  it  were,  of  the
people  and  soldiers  by  largesses,  donatives  and  shows.*  Such
liberalities,  it  is  enough  to  say,  would  follow  the  designation
of  an  heir  to  the  empire  as  a  matter  of  long-established
usage.

The  descriptions  we  have  received  of  this  child  of  fortune
seem  meant  to  reproduce  the  traditional  features  of  the  most
cijaracterof  notcd  voluptuaries.  They  represent,  however,
Verus.  ^  certain  fantastic  finery  of  manners,  to  which  it

would  be  difficult  to  find  an  exact  parallel.  The  habits  of
Verus  combined  the  effeminacy  of  Maecenas  with  the  dis-
soluteness of  Otho,  and  the  extravagance  of  Petronius;  but
he  possessed  neither  the  shrewdness  of  the  first,  the  courage
of  the  second,  nor  the  genial  though  reckless  gaiety  we  attrib-

*  Spartian,  Hadr.  23.

'  Victor,  Epit.  14.  Spartian  mentions  the  rumour  as  "  fabula  dati  Teneni,"
a  phrase  he  would  hardly  have  used  if  he  wished  to  accredit  it.  Victor  adds  a
report  hardly  less  to  the  emperor's  discredit,  if  true,  which  is  very  doubtful,
that  she  killed  herself  in  disgust  at  his  ill-treatment,  "  prope  servilibus  injuriis."

'  Spartian,  1.  c. :  "  adoptavit  C«ionium  Commodum  Verum  invitis  onmibuB,
eumque,  Mmxa  Venim  Caesarem  appellaTit." Dion,  liii.  17. :  Kaiaapa  aKi-

TOL.  vu. — 25

386  HISTORY  OF  1  HE  ROMANS  [A.D.  185.

ute  to  the  last  of  these  voluptu^iries.  The  few  anecdotes
recorded  of  him  give  a  picture  of  the  times,  if  not  of  the
actual  man, — of  their  emasculate  dissipation  and  indolent
elegance, — not  unimportant  to  our  historical  review.  Thus
Verus,  we  are  told,  recommended  himself  to  the  emperor  by
the  invention  of  a  pasty  which  became  the  favourite  dish  at
the  imperial  table.'  He  was  wont  to  take  his  mid-day  rest,
with  his  concubines,  on  an  ample  couch  enclosed  in  mosquito-
nets,  stuffed  with  rose-leaves,  and  strewn  with  a  coverlet  of
woven  lilies,  amusing  himself  with  the  perusal  of  Ovid's  most
licentious  compositions.  He  equipped  his  pages  as  Cupids,
with  wings  on  their  shoulders,  and  made  them  run  on  his
errands  with  a  speed  which  human  muscles  could  not  main-
tain, till  they  dropped.  When  his  spouse  complained  of  his
infidelities,  he  gaily  bade  her  understand  that  wife  is  a  term
of  honour,  not  of  pleasure.'  This  despised  matron,  however,
is  said  to  have  borne  him  several  children,  who  lived  to  en-
joy and  prolong  the  honour  and  fortunes  of  the  family.  It
was  added,  even  by  those  who  so  described  him,  that  if  there
was  nothing  to  praise,  there  was  also  little  to  reprove  in  him,
and  that  he  might  be  regarded  as  at  least  a  tolerable  ruler.
The  historian  allows,  indeed,  that  in  addition  to  the  grace
and  beauty  of  his  person,  Verus  was  dignified  in  countenance
and  impressive  in  his  delivery,  besides  being  a  good  composer
of  verses.  We  may  suspect  some  false  colouring  in  this  de-
lineation, and  that  Hadrian's  choice  was  more  judicious  and
more  honourable  than  it  is  represented.  The  office  of  prtctor,
to  wliicli  Verus  had  been  previously  appointed,  required
under  a  vigilant  master  both  industry  and  capacity;  and

'  Spartian,  uEliva  Verut,  6. :  "  tetrapharmacum  sou  potius  pontaplmrma-
cum,  quo  postca  semper  Iladrionua  est  uhua,  ipso  dicitur  ropcrit^se."  lltulriaii's
fondneM  for  the  ploaaurcs  of  tlic  table  is  mentioned  among  other  of  liis  Umtca
or  accompllahmcnts  by  Fronto  (De  Fcriis  AhneniiUnUf  8.),  "  orbis  terninim  non
rcgcndi  tantum  sed  etlam  perambulnndi  diligentem,  modulorum  tanicn  ct  tlbi-
cinum  Htiidio  doTinctum  fuittso  Bolmuo,  ot  pnetcrca  prandiorum  opiinoinim  cso-
rem  optimuin  fuisse."

'  Hpartian,  1.  c. :  "  uxor  enim  dignitatis  nomcn  est,  non  voluptatis."  Our
language  can  hardly  rival  liore  the  compactness  of  the  Latiu.

A.U.  888.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  387

after  his  adoption,  this  pretended  minion  of  the  court  was
sent  to  take  the  emperor's  place  at  the  head  of  the  Panno-
nian  legions,  on  the  most  exposed  of  the  frontiers.  Here  too
he  had  occasion  to  exert  his  prowess  in  the  field,  and  ob-
tained from  the  same  historian  the  praise  of  a  respectable,  if
not  a  brilliant  commander.  The  sentiment  with  which  in
his  first  hours  of  weakness  he  is  said  to  have  courted  death —
that  an  emperor  should  die  in  health  and  not  in  sickness —
deserves  to  be  recorded  in  his  honour.*  The  expression  of
his  numerous  busts  is  manly  as  well  as  handsome,  and  indi-
cates intelligence,  frankness,  and  liberality,  far  removed  from
the  common  type  of  Roman  beauty,  in  which  regularity  of
feature  and  noble  bearing  scarcely  redeem  the  hard,  stem,
and  narrow  character  which  plainly  underlies  them.  The
portraits  of  Trajan  and  of  Verus  seem  to  belong  to  climes,
ages  and  races  far  removed  from  one  another.

But,  after  all,  the  wisdom  of  the  choice  was  not  tested  by
actual  results. The  health  of  the  new  Caesar  began  to  fail

soon  after  his  adoption;  and  when  it  was  ob- hi» !>rem*tar«
served  that  he  had  not  strength  to  wield  the  ****^n^  ^^

isnrei
death,

A.  D.

arms  of  the  imperator,  Hadrian  is  said  to  have  ^v.t»\.
exclaimed  with  bitterness,  that  he  had  spent  his  money  to  no
purpose,  and  leant  on  a  rotten  wall,  which  could  not  bear
the  weight  of  the  republic  or  even  his  own.*  These  harsh
words  were  carried  to  the  sick  man's,  ear  and  aggravated
his  disorder.  The  oflicious  talebearer  was  disgraced;  but
this  reparation  was  of  no  avail,  and  the  invalid  expired  on
the  calends  of  January  138,  in  the  third  year  of  his  feeble
sovereignty.  Hadrian  would  not  suffer  the  holiday  of  the
new  year  to  be  profaned  by  tokens  of  public  sorrow.  For
Verus  the  portals  of  the  colossal  mausoleum  for  the  first  time
opened;  but  his  surviving  colleague  felt  his  own  end  ap-

*  Spartian,  Ver.  6. :  "  saepe  dicens,  sanum  principem  mori  debere,  non
debilem."

"  Spartian,  1.  c. :  "  ter  millies  perdidimus  .  ,  .  siquidem  satis  in  caducum
parietem  incubuimus."

388  HISTORY  OF  THE  KOMANS  [A.D.  138.

proaching,  and  became  more  anxious  than  ever  to  provide  for
the  peaceful  transmission  of  power  after  his  decease.*

It  was  cited,  indeed,  as  a  mark  of  Hadrian's  heartlessness,

or  levity,  that  when  urged  after  Verus's  death  to  make  a

fresh  adoption  without  delay,  he  replied  that  he

Hadrian  -, , t ,.  -, ■,  •  i •  i  -i -vt

chooses  for  his had  already  lormed  his  resolution  while  Verus

successor  T.  .n  t •  tt  t t  i

Aureiius  Anto-  was  Still  living.  He  Commanded  numerous  busts
and  statues  of  his  favourite,  directed  the  senate  to
proclaim  his  divinity,  and  allowed  temples  to  be  raised  to
him  in  various  places.  But  after  a  brief  interval  he  called
the  most  illustrious  senators  to  his  bedside  in  the  Tiburtine
villa,  and  announced  that  his  choice  of  a  successor  had  fallen
on  T.  Aureiius  Antoninus,  a  man  of  mature  age  and  approved
abilities,  who  seems  to  have  been  universally  ac-

and  requires  ■,  ■,  a i  t  ■%  ti-t

him  to  adopt ccptablc. At  the  same  that  he  made  this  adop-

M.  Annius  Ve- ._  . ^  ,  .  ,  iimt

rns  and  L.  Ve-  tion,  he  required  his  new  son,  who  was  also  child-
less, to  nominate  heirs ;  indicating  to  him  for  this
preferment  Marcus  Annius  Verus,  his  own  sister's  son,  and
Lucius  Verus  the  son  of  Ids  deceased  colleague,  the  one  at
the  time  a  youth  of  seventeen,  the  other  a  mere  child,  and
both  already  favourites  with  him.'  Yet  the  clioice  of  the
elder  was  undoubtedly  detennined  by  tlie  promise  of  his
staid  yet  generous  character ;  and  if,  in  regard  to  the  younger,
Hadrian  yielded  to  a  natural  preference,  he  might  ftxirly  hope
the  best  from  an  amiable  infant  to  be  trained  under  a  parent

'  The  uncertain  character  of  the  imperial  succession  is  strongly  marked  in
the  instance  of  Verus.  It  is  nowhere  said  that  he  was  associated  in  the  em-
pire, as  Trajan  had  been  associated  by  Nerva,  or  Piso  by  Galba.  Spartian
says  of  him  significantly :  "  qui  primus  tantum  Caesaris  nomcn  accepit."  Ha-
drian honoured  him,  "  imperatorio  funere ; "  but  the  biographer  again  ro-
marks :  "  ncque  quidciuam  de  regia  nisi  mortis  habuit  dignitatem."  Nevcrtlie-
less  JElius  Yonu  has  always  been  enumerated  In  the  imperial  series  both  by
ancients  and  modems.

'  Bpartian,  JIadr.  24. ;  Ver.  7.  He  excused  tlie  adoption  of  the  younger
of  these  with  tlic  kindly  expression:  "habcat  rcspublica  quodcunquo  do  Vero ; "
which,  as  the  writer  remarks,  Is  opposed  to  the  notion  ])ut  forth  by  somo
tliat  ho  repented  of  the  favour  he  had  shown  to  the  father.  Conip.  Dion,
Ixix.  21.

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  339

and  a  brother  of  approved  virtue.  He  had  now  done  his
best  for  the  future  welfare  of  the  empire,  and  tormented  by
maladies  beyond  the  reach  of  medicine,  and  conscious  that
his  days  were  numbered,  the  sense  of  having  well  discharged
his  greatest  duty  as  a  prince  may  have  aftbrded  him  relief  and
consolation.  That  he  gave  way  under  a  painful
disorder  to  excessive  irritation,  and  even  put  in-  laiinuitiMaad
nocent  persons  to  death  from  caprice  and  vexa-  ""^

tion,  is  charged  against  him  by  historians  whose  ill-nature  or
incapacity  is  sufficiently  apparent.'  But  it  became  the  duty
of  the  gentle  Antoninus  to  soothe  his  bursts  of  passion,  and
shelter  those  they  might  threaten  to  overwhelm ;  and  the
gratitude  of  the  senators  or  courtiei-s  doubtless  prompted
thorn,  to  exaggerate  the  beneficial  influence  of  their  patron.
The  sufferings  of  the  sick  man,  we  are  assured,  were  most
acute.  Despairing  of  medical  relief,  he  resorted  to  the  arts
of  the  magicians ;  but  the  imprecation  of  Servianus  was  ful-
filled, and  in  his  agony  his  last  wish  was  for  death,  yet  he
was  unable  to  die."  Given  over  by  the  physicians,  and
vainly  tended  by  astrologera  and  diviners,  he  implored  his
own  attendants  to  put  him  out  of  pain  by  the  sword  or
poison.  To  one  of  his  slaves,  a  barbarian  from  beyond  the
Danube,  he  pointed  out  the  exact  spot,  which  he  had  ascer-
tainetl  and  marked  on  his  breast,  where  the  heart  could  be
reached  most  promptly  and  certainly;  but  the  fierce  swords-
man fled  in  horror  from  his  presence.  It  is  said  that  he  even
swallowed  in  his  despair  substances  which  he  knew  to  be
deleterious. At  last  his  powers  trave  wav,  and  1

he  expired,  worn  out  by  a  long  disease,  which a.  a.  isi.
seems  to  have  been  dropsical.* Among  his  last ^^'
words,  delivered  perhaps  in  a  brief  interval  of  ease,  was  a
playful  address  to  his  departing  spirit,  which  if  it  has  attain-
ed more  success  than  it  deserves  as  a  philosophic  utterance,

»  Spartian,  Hadr.  23.  25. :  Victor,  C«w.  14. ;  JSpt/.  28.

"  Dion,  Ixix.  27.,  IxxvL  Y.

»  Dion,  Ixix.  22. :  Spartian,  Hadr.  24.

390  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS  [A.D.  138.

betrays  at  least  no  sign  of  the  gloomy  terror  or  remorse
which  haunt,  no  doubt,  the  deathbeds  of  tyrants/

Hadrian  died  on  the  tenth  day  of  July,  a.d.  138  (a.it.  891),
having  lived  about  sixty-two  years  and  a  half,  and  reigned
Estimate  of  his  twenty-one  years  wanting  one  month.  There  is
character.  none  of  the  emperors  about  whom  we  are  so

much  disappointed  in  the  scantiness  and  questionable  char-
acter of  our  materials .  for  estimating  him.  We  must  ac-
knowledge, indeed,  a  general  consistency  in  the  impression
conveyed  by  Dion,  Spartian,  and  the  still  briefer  epitomists.
All  indicate,  more  or  less  clearly,  the  conflicting  elements  in
his  varied  character,  his  earnestness  and  his  levity,  his  zeal
for  knowledge  and  frivolity  in  appreciating  it,  his  patient
endurance  and  restless  excitability,  his  generosity  and  his
vanity,  his  peevishness  and  his  good-nature,  his  admiration
of  genius,  and  at  the  same  time  his  jealousy  of  it.'  Such
contradictions  may  possibly  be  reconciled  by  considering  the
circumstances  of  the  times,  and  the  manifold  interests  of  a
complicated  civilization  combined  with  the  absence  of  a  con-
trolling principle  and  a  guiding  object. Not  in Hadrian

'  Spartian,  Hadr.  25.  Tlie  biographer  treats  these  famous  verses  very
lightly.  He  adds  :  "  tales  autcra,  nee  multo  meliores,  fecit  et  Gnecos."  To  me
the  force  and  character  of  this  simple  ejaculation  consist  in  its  abruptness,
brevity,  and  uncouthncss,  like  the  verses  we  make  in  a  delirious  dream.  Pol-
ished and  paraphrased  by  modem  translators,  it  becomes  a  trifling  common-
place, hardly  worthy  of  the  considerable  poets  who  have  exercised  their  talents
upon  it.

"  Animuk,  vagula,  blandula, Soul  of  mine,  pretty  one,  flitting  one,
Hospcs  comesque  corporis. Guest  and  partner  of  my  clay,
Qua)  nunc  abibis  in  loca, — Whither  wilt  thou  hie  away, —
Pallidula,  rigida,  nudula — Pallid  one,  rigid  one,  naked  one —
Ncc,  ut  soles,  dabis  jocos  ?  " Never  to  play  again,  never  to  play  ?
*  Thus  Spartian  describes  him  {Hadr.  10.)  as,  "sevcrus,  lajtus;  comis,
gravis ;  luscivus,  cunctutor ;  tvnax,  libcralis  ....  sasvus,  clcmcns ; ot  sem-
per In  omnibus  varius." Victor  (Ajpj/.  H.)  says:  "varlus,  multiplex,  multi-
formis ;  ad  vitia  attpio  virtutes  quasi  arbiter  genitus,  impotum  mentis  quodara
artiflcio  regcns,  ingeuium  iiividuin,  tristc,  lascivum,  et  ad  ostentationciu  uui  in*
•olenB,  calllde  tcgebat ;  contiiicntiam,  facilitatcm,  clomontiam  simulans,  contra*
quo  (Hiilnnilang  ardorom  glorin  quo  flagrabut."

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  39I

only,  but  in  all  the  eminent  men  of  his  time,  Trajan  himself
being  no  exception,  we  miss  that  unity  of  aim  and  complete
subordination  of  all  the  faculties  to  a  ruling  idea,  which  exalt
the  man  of  talent  into  the  man  of  genius.  Nevertheless,  if
this  be  true  of  emperors  and  statesmen,  still  more  is  it  true
of  the  lesser  men  who  related  the  incidents  of  their  careers,
and  criticized  their  characters.  We  may  fairly  doabt
whether  the  compilers  of  the  meagre  abridgments  which
contain  all  we  know  of  them,  could  understand  the  greatness
of  any  really  great  men,  if  such  in  their  own  day  there  were.
Dion  Cassius,  if  we  may  connect  with  his  name  the  fragments
preserved  by  the  manipulations  of  Xipliilin,  may  have  ac-
quired an  idea  of  Ciesar  and  Cicero  not  wholly  unworthy  of
their  merit,  from  the  better  writers  whom  he  could  consult
about  them ;  but  where  left  to  his  own  observation,  or  to  the
estimate  of  persons  nearly  contemporary  with  himself,  he
may  have  completely  failed  to  rise  to  the  true  height  of  the
object  before  him.  Of  the  feeble  biographer  Spartianus,  it
may  not  be  unjust  to  affirm  that  he  would  have  spoilt  even
better  materials  than  the  best  that  lay  within  his  reach.
For  my  own  part  I  am  dissatisfied  with  the  portraiture  we
have  received  of  Hadrian.  I  cannot  think  that  we  have  the
real  man  before  us.  I  imagine  that  he  was  really  greater
than  he  is  represented,  and  that  many  of  the  stories  to
his  disparagement  have  been  invented  or  coloured.  But
I  can  only  refer  this  impression  to  what  I  remark  of  the
character  of  his  administration,  in  which  he  undoubtedly
reconciled  with  eminent  success  things  liitherto  found  irre-^
concileable ;  a  contented  army  and  a  peaceful  frontier ;  an  ¥
abundant  treasury  and  a  lavish  expenditure ;  a  free  senate
and  a  stable  monarchy ;  and  all  this  without  the  lustre  of  a  I
great  military  reputation,  the  foil  of  an  odious  predecessor,  \
or  disgust  at  recent  civil  commotions.  But  the  merit  of  Ha-
drian is  above  all  conspicuous  in  the  decision  with  which,  the
first  of  Roman  statesmen,  he  conceived  the  idea  of  governing
the  world  as  one  homogeneous  empire.  Suddenly,  but  once
for  all,  he  discarded  even  in  theory  the  tradition  of  a  Roman

392  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  13S.

municipality,  as  the  master  and  possessor  of  all  the  soil  of  the
provinces.  He  recognised  in  theory  both  conquerors  and
conquered  as  one  people,  while  he  left  their  practical  equali-
zation to  the  gradual  and  spontaneous  influences  which  were
plainly  working  thereto.  He  visited  every  corner  of  his  do-
minions, and  greeted  in  person  every  race  among  his  subjects,
making  no  distinction  between  Roman  and  Briton,  African
and  Syrian.  The  title  of  citizen  might  still  remain,  and  cer-
tain fiscal  immunities,  though  balanced  by  countervailing
burdens,  continue  to  maintain  its  nominal  preeminence ;  but
substantially  there  was  now  little  difference  between  the
status  of  the  Roman  and  his  subjects ;  and  even  that  little
was  vanishing  of  its  own  accord,  and  wanted  only  a  stroke
of  the  pen  to  erase  it  in  due  time  from  the  statute-book.
But  though  thus  liberal  in  his  own  ideas,  the  prince  of  the
senate  had  still  to  humour  the  prejudices  of  his  nobles.  He
must  not  suffer  the  Roman  to  degrade  himself  in  his  own
eyes  by  indulging  unworthy  indolence.  Accordingly,  Ha-
drian discarded  the  freedmen  of  the  palace,  the  instruments
whom  his  predecessors  had  thrust  between  themselves  and
the  honourable  industry  of  the  knights  ;  he  rivalled  Augustus
himself  iu  the  reverence  he  paid  to  the  toga,  the  symbol  of
Roman  majesty,  and  required  the  senators  and  knights  al-
ways to  wear  it  in  public.  It  seems  that  upon  the  citizens
generally  this  staid  observance  could  no  longer  be  enforced.'
On  the  whole,  I  am  disposed  to  regard  the  reign  of  Ha-
drian as  the  best  of  the  imperial  scries,  marked  by  endeavours
%  The  roiim  of  ^*  rcfonn  and  improvement  in  every  department
i,o"t'if"tho*jni-  ®^  administration  in  all  quarters  of  the  empire.
pcrui  Btriii*.  ipjjQ  character  of  the  ruler  was  mild  and  consid-
erate, far-seeing  and  widely  observant,  while  the  ebullitions
of  passion  which  clouded  his  closing  career  were  confined
at  least  to  the  small  circle  of  his  connexions  and  associates.

'  Spartian,  Iladr.  21,  22.  When  ho  saw  a  slavo  of  h'm  own  wa1kin<>:  as  an
equal  between  two  Mnatora,  ho  ordered  hig  cars  to  bo  boxed,  and  ibrbude  him
to  oonvcrso  with  personages  who  might  at  any  thno  bocomo  his  masters.

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  393

Ilis  defects  and  vices  were  those  of  his  time,  and  he  was  in-
deed altogether  the  fullest  representative  of  his  time,  the
complete  and  crowning  product,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  of
the  crowning  age  of  Roman  civilization.  His  HUBfowMd
person  and  countenance,  wliich  we  have  unusual  «**"»»""■««»
means  of  figuring  to  ourselves  from  the  number  of  his  basts,
statues  and  medals,  corresponded  well  with  his  character.
With  Hadrian  the  Roman  type  of  features  begins  to  disap-
pear, Hadrian  is  neither  Greek  nor  Roman ;  he  is  of  no  race
nor  country ;  but  rather  what  we  might  deem  the  final  result
of  a  blending  of  many  breeds  and  the  purest  elements.  He
reminds  us  more  than  any  Roman  before  him,  of  what  we
proudly  style  the  thorough  English  gentleman,  with  shapely
trunk  and  limbs,  and  well-set  head,  no  prominent  features,
no  salient  expression,  but  a  general  air  of  refinement  and
blood,  combined  with  spirit  and  intelligence.  His  face  and
figure  are  both  eminently  handsome,  though  inclining  to
breadth  and  bulk.  lib  countenance  expresses  ability  rather
than  genius,  lively  rather  than  deep  feelings,  wide  and  gen-
eral sympathies  rather  than  concentrated  thought  or  fixed
enthusiasm.  The  sensual  predominates  in  him  over  the  ideal,
the  flesh  over  the  spirit ;  he  is  an  administrator  rather  tlian  a
statesman,  a  man  of  taste  rather  than  a  philosopher.  A  cas-
ual observer  would  perhaps  hardly  notice  that  Hadrian  is  the
fix-st  of  the  Romans  whose  bust  is  distinguished  with  a  beard.*
Hitherto,  though  the  arrangement  of  the  hair  varies  from  one
generation  to  another,  or  follows  the  personal  taste  of  the
wearer,  every  public  man  at  Rome  scrupulously  shaved  his
checks,  lip  and  chin.  But  Hadrian  Atticized  as  well  as  phil-
osophized, and  he  might  reasonably  incline  to  cherish  the
natural  appendage  which  betokened  both  the  Grecian  and
the  sophist.  Some,  indeed,  whispered  that  he  suffered  hair
to  grow  on  his  chin,  to  conceal  a  physical  blemish ;  but  this

*  Spartian,  Hadr.  26. :  "  statura  fuit  ppocera,  forma  comptus,  fleio  ad  peo-
tinem  capillo,  promissa  barba,  ut  vulnera  quae  in  facie  naturalia  erant
tegeret"

394  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

explanation  seems  far-fetched,  and  the  fashion  set  by  Hadrian
and  adopted  generally  by  his  sxiccessors,  seems  rather  to  in-
dicate a  change  in  the  feelings  of  the  people,  and  their  incli-
nation to  disregard  the  special  distinction  of  race  in  deference
to  views  more  enlightened  and  geniaL

A.  D.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  395

CHAPTER  LXYII.

£ARLT  CAREER  OF  THE  EMPEROR  AMTOKINCS  nCS. — ATTITCDK  OT  TBB  BABBA-
RIAMS. — THE  WALL  OF  ANTONINUS  IN  BRITAIN. — HIS  PATSBBAI.  OOTUWXliT
AT  HOME. — HIS  INDCLGENCK  TO  THB  CHRISTIANS. — BIS  TIBtVU  AMD  Hkftl-
NESS. — VICES  OF  THK  EMPRESS  FAUSTUfA. — KABLT  PROMISE  OF  K.  AUBBUVS.
HIS  TESTIMONY  TO  THE  VIRTUES  OF  ANTONINUS. — ^DEATH  OF  AXTOHDirg  PICS,
AND  REMARKS  ON  THE  CHARACTER  OF  HIS  EPOCH. — fiETIXW  Ot  THB  POLITICAL
ELEMENTS OF ROMAN BOCIETT. — 1. THE POPULACE OF THB CITT. — 2.  THE

PROVINCIALS. — PROGRESS OF  UNIFORMITT. — EXTENSION OF  THB  fKANCHISE.

DEVELOPMENT OF  THE CIVIL  LAW. 3. THE  SENATE; ITS  PRIDE, PRETENSIONS

AKD IMBECILITT. 4. THE PILSTORIANS AND THE LEGIONS. — ^THE FINAL  8C«

PREMACT OF  THE  SOLDIERS INEVITABLE. — (a.  D.  138-161  : A.  U.  891-914.)

THE  adopted  son  of  Hadrian  was  in  the  maturity  of  his
fifty-second  year,  when  he  was  admitted  to  a  Bhai*e  in
the  sovereign  power.  After  the  fashion  then  K«in««  md  ti-
prevalent  in  the  noblest  families,  he  combined  in  ^^-^^f^.
his  own  person  the  gentile  names  of  several  an-  ^^^^  ^*^
cestors.  His  style  at  fiiU  length  had  been  Titus  Aurelius
Fulvius  Boionius  Arrius  Antoninus,  which  he  now  exchanged
for  that  of  Titus  jElius  Hadrianus  Antoninus,  to  which  he
added  at  once  the  titular  designation  of  Augustus  and  Caesar,
and  soon  after  his  accession,  as  we  shall  presently  notice,  that
of  Pius.  The  name  of  Aurelius  Fulvus  had  been  borne  by
his  father  and  grandfather,  both  of  whom  had  been  consuls,
and  whose  family  was  sprung  from  Nemausus  in  Gaul.'  His
mother  was  an  Arria,  and  both  an  Arrius  and  a  Boionius  had
been  among  his  maternal  ancestors.* He  was  married  to  an

*  Capitol.  Anion.  P.  1. The  emperor  was  bom  at  Danuvium,  and  educated
at  Lorium,  in  Etruria,  which  became  his  favourite  residence.

*  Capitol.  1.  c. :  "  avus  matemus  Arrius  Antoninus,  homo  sanctua,  et  qui
Nervam  miseratus  esset,  quod  imperare  ccepisset."

396  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

Annia  Galena  Faustina,  by  whom  he  had  had  four  children,
two  sons  and  two  daughters ;  the  sons  had  died  young  be-
fore his  advancement,  and  of  one  of  the  daughters  we  have
no  further  account.  The  other,  however,  named  Annia  Faus-
tina, he  united  to  the  young  Aurelius,  her  cousin,  whom  at
Hadrian's  instance  her  father  had  himself  adopted.  But  of
all  his  names  the  most  interesting  is  that  of  Antoninus,  which
he  first  introduced  to  the  distinguished  place  it  occupies  in
Roman  annals,  the  origin  of  which  however  we  can  trace  no
further.  Fourteen  emperors  passed  away  before  this  desig-
nation, sanctified  by  the  noblest  associations,  was  suffered  to
disappear  from  the  imperial  style.*  So  deep  was  the  impres-
sion made  on  the  Romans  by  the  virtues  of  the  two  illustri-
ous princes,  who  assumed  the  sovereignty  at  the  death  of
Hadrian  with  the  acclamations  of  the  senate  and  people,  and
the  loyal  consent  of  the  legions.  The  demise  indeed  of  their
late  jealous  master  was  felt  as  a  relief  by  the  nobles  in  the
city.  They  pretended  to  have  trembled  for  their  lives  and
fortunes  during  the  pangs  of  his  last  illness,  and  in  their  zeal
to  do  honour  to  his  successor,  muttered  a  refusal  to  grant  him
the  apotheosis  which  had  been  hitherto  denied  only  to  the
most  hateful  of  tyrants.  Antoninus  meanwhile  removed  the
body  from  Baia)  to  Rome,  and  entombed  it  in  the  gorgeous
mausoleum  long  prepared  for  its  reception.  When

He  receives  o  r r  r

the  surname  of the  scnators  obscrvcd  the  respect  with  which  he

was  disposed  to  treat  it,  they  discovered  another

mode  of  flattery,  declaring  that  he  had  rescued  many  of  their

*  Capitol,  in  Opilio  Macrin.  3. :  "  cnimvcro  Pius  primus,  Marcus  sccundus,
Verua  tcrtius,  Commodus  quartus,  quintus  Caracallus,  scxtus  Geta,  acptimua
DiadumcnuH,  octavua  ndiopabalus  Antonini  fucro."  Tlicsc  eight  princes  are
enumerated  to  sliow  the  Ailfilment  of  a  certain  prediction ;  but  others,  sucli  aa
Pcrtinax,  Jiillanus,  SoveruH,  and  Macrinus  himself,  might  be  added.  Alexan-
der SovcniH  thuH  addrcHsed  the  senate :  "  Antoninonim  nomen,  vel  jam  numen
potiufl,  quale  fuerit,  mcminit  vostra  dementia."  The  senate  replied  :  "  vicisti
vltlo,  viclHtl  crimtna  :  Antonini  nomen  ornavisti."  Hut  Alexander  persisted  in
declining  the  name,  as  not  belonging  to  his  family.  The  senate  would  have
called  him  Magnun,  and  at  last  forced  upon  him  tho  title  of  Augustus.  Lorn-
pridius  in  Alex.  Sev.  «.  (k.  i..  222,  a.  v.  076.)

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  397

order  from  Hadrian's  death-warrants,  and  on  this  account,  or
as  others  said,  in  acknowledgment  of  liis  dutiful  affection  for
his  unworthy  parent,  decreed  him  the  surname  of  Pius;  a
surname  eagerly  repeated  by  the  gratitude  of  his  country-
men, and  destined  to  become  the  most  distinctive  of  all  his
appellations.*  The  opposition  to  Hadrian's  consecration  was
now  withdrawn  ;  his  temple  rose  in  due  time  at  Rome,  and
an  order  of  flamens  was  appointed  to  serve  for  ever  at  his
altar.

In  noble  simplicity  of  character,  and  devotion  to  the  good
of  the  state  they  were  invited  to  govern,  the  two  Antonines
deserve  to  be  classed  together.  For  three  and  „,  .
.twenty  years  they  sate  side  by  side  m  public,  rc«r»BdchM«©-
and  were  nominally  colleagues  in  the  empire :
but  while  the  elder  governed  by  virtue  of  his  mature  age
and  tried  abilities,  the  younger  trained  himself  reverently
after  his  parent's  example,  with  assiduous  and  painful  self-
examination.  Though  vying  with  one  another  in  their  noble
qualities  and  the  excellence  of  their  administration,  in  their
temper  and  education  there  was  a  marked  difference.  Aureliua
became,  by  study,  reflection,  and  self-exercise,  the  most  con-
summate product  of  the  ancient  philosophy,  while  Pius  is  a
singular  instance  of  an  accomplished  Roman  contenting  him-
self with  the  practice  of  virtue,  and  genuine  disregarding  the
questions  of  the  schools.  From  his  early  years  Antoninus
had  been  engaged  in  the  active  discharge  of  oflicial  duties.
ISpruug  from  a  race  of  curule  magistrates,  he  had  been  bred

the  traditional  maxims  of  official  life,  and  had  become

'  The  origin  of  this  title  is  variously  explained :  1.  becaose  Anttminas  sop*
orted  his  infirm  parent  in  the  senate ;  '2.  because  he  sared  eertain  Benators,  as
Ifnentioncd  in  the  text ;  3.  because  of  the  honours  he  extorted  from  the  nobka
for  his  predecessor ;  4.  because  he  had  taken  measures  to  prevent  his  suicide ;
5.  because  of  the  general  clemency  and  goodness  of  his  own  character.  We
may  observe  that  the  title  first  appears  on  the  coins  of  Antoninus  immediately
after  the  death  of  Hadrian  ;  and  that  the  festival  he  instituted  in  honour  of
Hadrian  was  specially  designated  "  Pialia."  Artemidonis,  writing  in  Greek,
calls  it  daifieta. Eckhel,  Docir.  Kunuit.  viL  36.

398  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

qualified  for  distinction  himself  by  long  training  in  the  career
of  honours  under  an  able  and  vigilant  emperor.  Thence  he
had  succeeded  to  the  government  of  a  province.  He  had
been  appointed  one  of  the  four  consulars  to  whom  the  ad-
ministration of  Italy  was  confided,  and  had  finally  been  raised
to  the  prefecture  of  Asia  before  Hadrian's  experienced  eye
fixed  on  him,  as  the  fittest  man  in  the  empire  to  lighten  his
own  burdens,  and  conduct  the  machine  he  had  put  in  good
working  gear  by  his  long  labours.^  Antoninus,  however,
though  himself  a  simple  man  of  business,  could  respect  spec-
ulation in  others,  and  encouraged  his  adopted  son  to  employ
his  leisure,  while  yet  young,  in  examining  the  bases  of  wis-
dom and  virtue  under  the  ablest  teachers.

Alone  of  all  the  chiefs  of  the  empire,  Antoninus  has  had
the  fortune  to  escape  the  animadversion  of  the  historian  Dion.
Unanimous  Rcduccd  as  wc  are  at  this  period  to  the  meagre
antiqm°ty^to  his  epitomc  of  Xiphiliu,  the  book  which  was  devoted
^^"^^  to  the  narrative  of  this  reign  had  perished,  save

a  few  brief  sentences,  even  before  the  time  of  the  abbrevia-
tor ;  and  instead  of  the  harsh  and  captious  commentary  with
which  Dion  reviewed  the  career  of  the  emperors,  we  have
only  the  flowing  panegyric  of  Capitolinus,  which  if  devoid
of  critical  sagacity,  is  free  at  least  from  tlie  vice  of  ill-nature.
The  brief  notices  of  Antoninus  found  elsewhere,  as  in  the
abridgments  of  Victor  and  Eutropius,  seem  to  have  been  de-
rived from  kindred  sources  with  those  of  the  biographer,
while  tliC  Christian  Orosius  concurs  in  the  unvaried  strain  of
panegyric ;  for  of  all  the  princes  of  this  age  Antoninus  alone
was  free  from  the  sin  of  persecution.  It  is  a  relief  indeed
from  the  chequered  tissues  of  splendid  virtues  and  degrading
vices,  to  meet  once  at  least,  in  the  course  of  our  long  review,
with  a  character  of  unstained  goodness,  with  one  man  fault-
less as  far  as  wo  can  trace  him,  in  act  and  intention,  and  yet
not  wanting  in  manly  sense  and  vigour.  Trajan  governed
tho  empire  from  tho  camp  and  the  frontiers ;  Hadrian  from

'  (>'apitol,  AtU<m,  P.  8.

A,U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  399

the  provinces  and  the  schools;  Antoninus  devoted  himself
entirely  to  Rome,  and  during  his  long  reign  of  nearly  a
quarter  of  a  century  never  absented  himself  for  a  day  from
the  city  or  its  near  environs.  He  had  seen  that  even  the
peaceful  progress  of  the  emperor  through  the  provinces,  how-
ever personally  frugal,  became  an  occasion  of  severe  exac-
tions.* But  the  genuine  moderation  of  this  practical  sage
enabled  him  to  maintain  throughout  his  career  unbroken
harmony  between  the  prince  and  the  senate.  He  made  on
his  accession  the  customary  declaration,  that  none  of  the
order  should  suffer  death  by  his  sentence;  a  declaration
which  pledged  him  to  moderation  and  economy,  that  he
might  not  be  constrained  to  recruit  his  finances  by  confisca-
t  ion.  This  promise  he  kept  faithfully  to  the  end.  We  hear
indeed  of  more  than  one  conspirator  against  him ;  but  of
tliese  Attilius  was  proscribed  without  his  concurrence  by  the
j^enate  ;  Priscianus  slew  himself,  and  the  emperor  forbade  in-
quiry to  bo  made  for  his  accomplices.  It  would  be  small
satisfaction,  he  said,  to  learn  by  such  investigations  that  he
was  hated  by  a  number  of  his  fellow  citizens.*  Once  only,
in  the  case  of  a  parricide,  he  sentenced  a  noble  culprit  to
confinement  on  a  desert  island,  where  nature  herself  would,
as  he  said,  justly  forbid  him  to  exbt.*  While  however  all  the
public  establishments  were  maintained  on  the  most  frugal
scale,  he  was  munificent  in  his  gifts  and  largesses.  He  ao-
([uitted  the  promises  of  Hadrian  at  his  adoption,  completed
many  of  his  predecessor's  buildings,  and  remitted  the  coro-
nary gold  expected  on  his  accession,  to  the  Italians  entirely,
to  the  extent  of  one  half  to  the  provincials.*  When  the
treasury,  which  he  received  full  from  Hadrian,  became  at

*  Capitol.  Atiion.  P.  7. :  "  gravem  esse  proTiocialibus  comitatum  principis
etiam  nimis  parci."

*  Capitol.  1.  c.  Victor,  Epit.  15.  The  particulars  of  these  conspiracies
have  not  reached  us.  AttiUus  bore  the  surname  of  Tatianus  or  Attianus ;  from
which  we  may  conjecture  that  he  waa  connected  with  Hadrian's  guardian,  and
therefore  himself  a  relative  of  the  late  ruler.

'  Capitol,  c.  8.  «  CapitoL  c.  4.

400  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

last  empty,  he  replenished  it  by  the  sale  of  the  imperial  fur-
niture.*

But  the  reign  of  three-and-twenty  years  on  which  the

pious  Antonine  was  now  entering,  was  not  destined  to  the

enioyment  of  unruffled  tranquillity. The  troubled

Threatened  dis-  „ ■, n  -  o

turbanceson State  01  the  ironticrs  was  a  source  oi  constant

the  frontiers.  . ,  ,  ,  •.^  • .-i

anxiety  and  expense ;  and  even  withm  them  some
elements  of  disturbance  still  required  the  establishments  of
the  empire  to  be  maintained  in  full  vigour.  The  Jews,  so
often  quelled,  and  so  ruthlessly  doAvn-trampled,  chafed  and
murmured,  both  in  Achaia  and  Egypt ;  the  nomades  of  the
Atlas  ventured  again  to  encroach  on  the  zone  of  cultivation
which  was  only  won  from  the  sands  by  constant  labour,  and
secured  by  an  armed  occupation.  The  Dacians  did  not
quietly  resign  themselves  to  the  yoke ;  and  the  Alani,  a
name  which  had  recently  become  formidable,  were  ever
prowling  along  the  bank  of  the  Ister,  or  in  front  of  Trajan's
ramparts,  watching  an  opportunity  of  bursting  into  Mcesia.
Of  the  operations  conducted  against  these  various  enemies
no  accounts  have  been  transmitted  to  us.  Incessant  and
harassing  as  the  warfare  may  have  been,  it  led  to  no
triumphs,  and  probably  to  no  decisive  victories.  The  mild
and  peaceful  prince,  who  proclaimed  that  it  was  better  to
save  a  single  citizen  than  to  slay  a  tliousand  enemies,  follow-
ed perhaps  the  example  of  his  predecessors  in  purchasing  the
„ „  . . forbearance  of  the  invaders.' In  Britain,  how-

Thewallof  An-  » t n- t^  -i  •

toniniu  bo-  ever,  we  learn  that  the  prefect,  Lolhus  U I'bicus,
Clyde  and  aft,er  chastising  a  revolt  of  the  Brigantes,  oar-
ried  his  arms  beyond  the  frontier,  and  com-
pleted the  defences  of  Agricola  with  a  continuous  rampart
of  earth  from  the  Clyde  to  the  Forth.' The  Roman  occupa-

'  Cupltol.  c.  7.

*  Tlii»  Bcntiincnt,  it  flccnuB,  wos  ascribed  to  one  of  the  Scipios,  but  it  docs
not  appear  on  what  authority.  Capitol.  Anton.  P.  0. :  "  ut  Scipiouis  sentcn-
tiam  frcquunturit,  qua  illo  dicobat,  mallu  bo  unum  civcm  scrvaro  quam  millo
hoHtcH  ocfldurc."

'  Tho  colui  of  Autouinufl  bear  Imp.  II.  in  tho  year  180 ;  and  this  title  waa

A.U.  691.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  401

tion  was  now  definitively  extended  to  the  upper  isthmus,
wliile  its  outworks  were  puslied  perhaps  in  some  directions
still  further.  The  district  between  the  walls  of  Hadrian  and
Antoninus  was  rapidly  filled  with  monuments  of  southern
civilization.  The  spirit  of  colonization  and  enteq)ri8e  seems,
at  least  in  this  quarter,  to  have  been  as  active  now  as  at  any
previous  period.  But  the  reason  why,  wherever  the  limits
of  Roman  power  extended,  the  subjects  of  Rome  continually
advanced  a  little  further,  is  to  be  found  in  the  ardent  desire
of  the  provincials  to  escape  from  the  pressure  of  their
local  burdens,  Avithout  placing  themselves  beyond  reach  of
assistance,  or  cutting  off  the  means  of  a  timely  retreat.'

On  the  whole  the  historians  describe  the  external  policy
of  Antoninus  as  singularly  successful. The  authority  of  the
empire  was  raised  to  its  highest  pitch,  and  ac-
knowledged  by  the  most  distant  nations. Rome, extenui  DoUejr

°  ■'  .of  Antoninu.

under  the  most  peaceful  of  her  princes,  imposed

a  king  upon  the  Lazi,  who  dwelt  beyond  the

Phusis. She  withheld  the  Parthian  sultan  from  attacking

Armenia,  .by  the  terror  of  a  proclamation  alone,  while  she

refused  to  restore  the  celebrated  throne  captured  by  Trajan,

and  so  often  redemanded.* She  determined  the  quarrels  of

probably  assumed  for  some  successes  orer  the  Caledonians.  Clintoa  in  ann.
He  was  one  of  tlie  few  emperors  down  to  this  period  who  nerer  eddmted  a
triumph.  Victor,  Cies.  15. :  "  nisi  forte  triumphorum  expertem  BO0(Mrdiae  Tide-
tur :  quwl  longe  secus  est."

*  The  ichnography  of  the  wall  of  Antoninus  is  delineated  and  deaeribed  in
Stuart's  Caledonia  Bomana,  and  the  few  inscriptions  collected.  Tbe  remains
are  far  less  than  those  of  the  lower  isthmus,  and  haTe  suffered  considerably
since  the  time  of  Roy's  survey.  The  portion  best  preserved  is  about  a  mile  in
length  near  I'olwarth,  where  the  rampart  has  been  protected  by  a  pUntatioo.
I  presume  that  Falkirk,  which  stands  on  the  line,  is  the  church  on  the  Pfalz  or
Pale.  There  is  said  to  be  no  vestige  of  a  stone  rampart  From  the  absence
of  later  inscriptions,  the  defence  of  the  wall  seems  to  have  been  relinquished
at  an  early  period,  but  coins  have  been  found  along  it  of  the  date  of  Kocletian
and  Constantino.

^  Capitol.  Anion.  P.  9. On  a  medal  of  Antoninus  Rus  we  find  the  le-
gend :  "  Rex  Armenis  datus,"  but  to  the  event  itself  we  have  no  other  clue.
Another  has:  "Rex  Quadis  datus," Smyth,  Roman  Medals,  p.  119.
VOL.  TII. — 26

402  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

various  eastern  rulers  with  their  rivals  or  subjects.  She  ap-
peased the  differences  between  Greeks  and  Scythians  on  the
shores  of  the  Cimmerian  peninsula,  and  on  the  banks  of  the
great  Sarmatian  rivers.  Appian  declares  that  he  had  seen
at  this  time  at  Rome  the  envoys  of  barbarian  tribes,  who
had  offered  to  place  themselves  under  the  yoke  of  the  mighty
conquerors,  but  whose  allegiance  had  been  quietly  declined.'
"While  the  counsel  of  Augustus,  not  to  extend  the  limits  of
the  empire,  sank  deeper  than  ever  into  the  minds  of  states-
men, the  tendency  of  the  vast  body  to  attract  smaller  bodies
to  itself  was  still  in  force,  and  required  stedfast  self-control
to  resist  it.  The  reign  of  Antoninus  gave  rise  to  more  than
one  signal  monument  of  the  size  and  unity  of  the  empire  in
its  greatest  permanent  extension.  The  great  work  of  Clau-
dius Ptolemaeus,  if  founded  on  the  principles  of  Hipparchus,
Eratosthenes,  and  Marinus,  deserved,  from  its  extensive  ob- '
serrations  and  systematic  arrangement,  to  become  the  stand-
ard work  on  mathematical  geography.*  The  Itinerary,  des-
ignated by  the  name  of  Antoninus,  describes  the  course  of
the  highways,  and  the  distances  of  every  station,  from  tlie
Wall  of  Hadrian  to  the  Cataracts  of  the  Nile ; '  while  the
Periplus  of  the  Euxine,  and  tliat  of  the  Erythraean  Sea,  as-
cribed to  Arrian,  show  the  relations  of  Roman  commerce  and
navigation  with  coasts  and  colonies  even  beyond  the  limits
of  Roman  sovereignty.

The  list  of  tlie  emperors  is  not  wanting  in  names  of  men
who  deserved  well  of  mankind  for  their  benevolence  and

'  Appian,  procem.  c.  1.  Covap.  Victor,  HpU.  15. :  "  quin  ctiam  Indi,  Bao-
triani,  Iljrcani  logatos  miacrc,  justitia  tanti  impcratoris  compcrta."

•  The  liititudcH  and  lonj,atn(lc8  of  Marinus  of  Tyre  were  adapted  to  a  plane
projection  of  tlii'  eurlli'H  surfaec. Ptolemy  applied  tliein  to  tlie  sphere.

•  The  "  Itinemriuni  Antonini  "  may  be  ho  called  from  Antoninus  Pius,  from
bi«  iiuccc00or  AureliuB  Antoninus,  or  from  Antoninus  Caraealla.  Tlie  worlt  un-
derwent, no  doubt,  many  reviHionn  at  diflerent  opocliH,  Tliat  on  which  our
editions  are  founded  NecniH  to  have  b(!en  as  late  as  Diocletian.  Sec  Itiner.  An-
ton,, cd.  Partlicy :  projf.  p.  vi,  Tlio  Itinerary  of  Jerusalem  is  doubtless  a  later
work,  though  complied  from  ancient  sources.

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  403

wisdom : we can discern, perhaps, takin^r a

.  PtternalgoT-

wider  view  of  their  policy  than  was  possible  for  emmentof  An-
their  contemporaries,  indications  among  tliem  ot

I  genuine  love  of  clemency  and  justice,  which  their  historians
have  failed  to  notice.  But  the  consent  of  antiquity  plainly
declares  that  Antoninus  was  the  first,  and  saving  his  col-
league and  successor  Aurelius,  the  only  one  of  them  who  de-
voted himself  to  the  task  of  government  with  a  single  view
to  tlic  happiness  of  his  people.  Throughout  the  meagre  no-
tices of  his  career  which  alone  remain  to  U8,  w^e  discover  no
trace  of  a  selfish  thought  or  passion,  none  of  carelessness  or
]»recipitation,  none  of  pride  or  even  of  pardonable  vanity.
Every  step,  every  act,  seems  to  have  been  weighed  by  a
!i:ood  heart  carefully  directed  to  a  definite  end.  It  had  been
said  in  praise  of  Augustus,  that  he  was  the  Paterfamilias  of
the  whole  empire:  but  the  head  of  a  Koman  family  was  at
l)est  a  beneficent  despot,  standing  aloof,  in  haughty  dignity,
from  the  caresses  of  wife  and  children,  and  exacting  obe-
dience from  their  fear  rather  than  their  affection;  while
among  his  slaves  he  was  a  tyrant,  self-willed  alike  in  kind-
ness and  in  cruelty.  Antoninus  was  the  father  of  his  sub-
jects in  a  different  sense.'  The  time  had  come  when,  both
in  the  state  and  in  the  family,  the  sense  of  mutual  rights  and

obligations  made  itself  felt.  The  rule  of  an  Autonine  over  Ro-
mans and  provincials,  freemen  and  slaves,  could  be  less  un-
equal and  partial  than  that  of  an  Augustus,  both  from  the
nearer  approach  of  all  classes  to  equality,  and  from  the
higher  elevation  of  the  emperor  above  all.  Formerly  it  was
the  highest  praise  of  a  just  ruler  that  he  controlled  the  in-
justice of  his  officers,  and  repressed  their  wanton  exactions.
Xow  the  procurators  of  the  fiscus  could  be  specially  directed
to  exercise  moderation  in  extorting  even  their  legitimate
dues,  to  spare  the  needy,  to  indulge  the  unfortunate ;  and
they  were  required  to  render  strict  account  of  their  proceed-
ings. Every  complaint  against  the  powerfiil  found  ready

*  Victor,  Epil.  15.:  "quas  incredibili  diligentia  ad  speciem  optimi  patria
familias  exsequebatur."

404  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

attention.  The  informers  who  lived  by  denouncing  default-
ers to  the  treasury,  a  class  whom  it  had  once  been  necessary
to  foster,  could  now  be  firmly  repressed;  the  revenues  were
to  be  collected  fairly  and  openly,  or  not  collected  at  all.
Antoninus  took  no  pleasure  in  gain  derived  from  the  suffer-
ings of  his  people.  The  salaries  of  idle  and  inefficient  officers
were  reduced,  while  by  allowing  good  governors  to  remain
many  years  in  their  posts,  he  abated  at  least  the  first  access
of  their  cupidity.*  But  Antoninus  sought  to  acquaint  him-
self with  the  condition  and  resources  of  all  his  subjects,  and
mastered  the  intricacies  of  fiscal  science,  as  then  understood.
His  judicious  economy  might  give  offence  to  some  who  could
not  appreciate  its  rare  merit,  and  hence  arose  perhaps  the
only  invidious  epithet  that  was  ever  applied  to  him."  Once
for  all,  on  attaining  the  sovereign  power  he  set  a  noble  ex-
ample of  disinterestedness  in  surrendering  his  private  fortune
to  the  uses  of  the  state.'

Simple,  however,  and  moderate  as  Antoninus  showed  him-
self in  his  personal  tastes,  the  splendour  of  the  imperial  au-
His  munifi-  thority  suffered  no  diminution  in  his  hands.  His
?n^*Md  lifgu-  largesses  to  the  people,  and  his  shows  in  the  cir-
lation.  (.^,g^  fully  maintained  the  scale  of  magnificence  to

which  they  had  been  raised  by  the  rivalry  of  previous  sov-
A  D  147.  ereigns.  The  secular  games  with  which  he  cele-
A.C.  900.  brated  the  nine-hundredth  anniversary  of  the
city  were  wortliy  of  the  solemn  occasion.*  Antoninus  con-
tinued to  adorn  Rome.  To  him  are  due  the  completion  of
Hadrian's  mausoleum,  and  the  erection  of  a  graceful  column,
tliougli  inferior  in  lieight  to  Trajan's  or  to  tliat  raised  after-
wards by  Aurelius ;  lie  is  believed  to  have  built  also  the
amphitheatre  at  Nisnics  and  the  aqueduct  of  tlie  Pont-du-

*  Capitol.  Anltni.  P.  B.

*  XiphiUn  (Dion,  Ixx.  JJ.)  Bays  lio  wa«  called  Kv/uvonpurr^c,  or  pea-splitter
(oomp.  Zonuir.  xil.  1.),  rarcrring,  probably,  to  the  raillery  of  Silenus  in  Julian's
"Cbiftrs."

»  Capitol.  Anton.  P.  8.

*  Victor,  Coi.  16. :  "  cclcbrato  maguiiicc  urbia  uongcutcsimo."

A.  U.  891.J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  405

Gard,  the  noblest  monument  of  Roman  grandeur  beyond  the
Alps,*  He  extended  and  improved  the  academic  system,  the
most  marked  characteristic  of  the  Flavian  administration,
with  the  feelini?,  not  of  a  pedant,  but  of  a  liberal  and  accora-
plislied  gentleman.'  His  long  and  tranquil  reign  was  farther
illustrated  by  the  progress  of  legal  science,  Antoninus  being
himself  active  in  dispensing  justice,  and  gathering  about
liim  many  expert  jurisconsults,  among  whom  the  names  of
Ummidius  Verus,  Salvius  Valens,  Volusius  Montanus,  Ulpius
Marcellus,  and  Javolenus  are  specially  recorded.  The  con-
tributions of  this  emperor  to  the  imperial  code  are  known  to
us  in  two  or  throe  instances  only,  all  marked  by  their  leaning
to  principles  of  equity  and  humanity.  In  wisdom,  in  science,
and  in  temper  he  equally  deserved  to  be  designated  the
Numa  of  imperial  Rome.* But  the  great  merit

r. ,  .  ,  ,  .  . .  .  , Hl8  Indul^nee

oi  this  paternal  ruler  was  the  activity  with  tothechji»-
whicli  he  interposed  for  the  protection  of  the
Christians.  The  proclamations  he  addressed  to  the  Laris-
saeans,  the  Thessalonicans,  the  Athenians,  and  to  the  Greeks
generally,  are  specially  mentioned,  in  which  he  proclaimed
and  guarded  the  indulgence  already  nominally  accorded  to
the  believers  by  Trajan  and  Hadrian.*

'  A  fuller  but  not  a  complete  list  of  these  structures  is  giren  by  Capitoli-
nus,  c.  8.  The  column  is  interesting  from  the  sculpture  on  the  base,  which
represents  the  apotheosis  of  Antoninus  and  Faustina.  Tlie  emperor,  seated
between  the  wings  of  his  Genius,  or  his  own  soul,  ascends  to  hearen,  preaerr-
ing  the  unruffled  comiwsure  which  distinguished  him  upon  earth.

^  Autoniuus  composed  his  own  harangues,  which  was  not,  it  seems,  the  caae
with  all  his  predecessors.  Several  of  these  were  still  extant  at  the  time  of  his
biographer. Capitol.  AtUon.  JP.  11.

*  Capitol.  Aidon.  P.  2.  Victor,  Ejnt.  15.  Eutrop.  Bretnar.  tUL  8.  Kon,
Ixx.  6. :  oiTOf  6  ^aaiXev^  'Avruvlvoc  iptaroc  fjv  koI  ftd?.una  THovfig  xari  rd
T^f  i)yefioviaQ  ofioidrfMirov  i^toc  7rapa6dX?^a6at,  nadanep  rf/)  'Vufii^u^  TfMlavdc
Sxpdij  iTapaK?.r/moc.

*  Euseb.  Hist  Eccl.  iv,  13.  26.  Dion,  Ixx.  3.  We  may  perhaps  connect
these  addresses  to  the  Grecian  communities  with  the  Jewish  distmrbances  in
that  quarter.  The  Jews  followed,  no  doubt,  their  old  habit  of  attacliing  the
Christians,  and  throwing  the  blame  of  the  disorders  on  them.  Antoninus  en-
forced the  rule  that  inquisition  should  not  be  made  into  Christian  tenets.  Oroa.

406  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  133.

If  we  turn  to  the  private  character  of  this  estimable  ruler,
we  find  it  marked  with  a  dignified  tenderness  which  is  inter-
esting as  a  token  of  the  period. The  harshness

singular  happi-  ^  .,.,,.  .  ,

ness  of  Antoui-  of  the  Komans  m  their  public  transactions,  and
the  rigid  sternness  with  Avhich  they  acted  in
political  life,  are  strangely  contrasted,  throughout  their  his-
tory, with  the  features  of  gentleness  and  kindness  which
meet  us  in  their  private  behaviour.  But  at  no  period  was
this  contrast  more  marked  than  under  the  early  emperors,
and  no  portion  of  their  literature  exhibits  so  many  traits  of
domestic  goodness  as  that  which  belonged  to  the  age  of  Nero
and  Domitian,  and  embraces  the  pages  of  Seneca  and  the
younger  Pliny.  At  last  the  element  of  feminine  gentleness
which  underlay  the  rough  exterior  of  many  a  Roman  war-
rior, which  gleams  on  the  surface  in  Virgil,  Horace,  and
Ovid,  and  may  be  described  beneath  the  rougher  lineaments
of  Lucan  and  Persius,  Quintilian  and  Juvenal,  which  lurks
under  the  grim  reserve  even  of  Tacitus,  and  the  ill-veiled
melancholy  of  Statins  and  Martial,  ascends  the  throne  of  the
world  in  the  person  of  Antonine  the  Pious.  The  characteris-
tic of  this  virtuous  prince  is  cheerfulness.  Doubtless  he
would  have  been  less  at  ease  had  he  been  more  of  a  philoso-
pher. ]Jut  his  happy  temperament  seems  to  have  exempted
him  from  the  painful  questionings  which  beset  the  men  of  his
time  who  tliought  as  deeply  as  they  felt.  He  was  content
with  the  policy  of  his  epoch,  content  with  its  society,  content
with  its  religion  ;  he  was  satisfied  with  the  present,  not  anx-
ious about  the  future ;  while  the  goodness  of  his  heart  and
his  naturnl  rectitude  withlield  him  from  the  selfish  indul-

vii.  14.:  ".JiiHliniiH  i)liiloso])lms  lihniin  pro  ('liristiana  roligione  coinjiositum
Antonino  tradiilit,  lM'iiifniiiiii(|Uo  cum  orpa  Cliristiimos  fecit."  Novcrtlu'less
AntonintiM  wbb  not  Imliircroiil,  like  lliidrian,  to  the  ivli^jioii  of  tlio  sinto.  An
cxiHlinn  inHcripUon  celi'lufttiH  Ii'ih  rc^^unl  for  tlu>  oatiiblisliwl  corenioniul :  " ojv
llnio  niaxim(M|Uo  iirincijii,  ct  cum  Huiiiina  l)fiiif:;nitat(>  juHtirtsinu),  ob  insigiieni
crga  ciiTeinonlnM  piiblioajt  curain  ao  n-ligioneiii."  Eckhel,  J)oc(r,  Niiimn.  vii,
2n.  Tho  coinH  of  AntoulniM  abound  in  rclorcnccfi  to  tho  oldest  Roman  my
tbology.

A.  U.  89J.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  407

gences  which  leave  a  sting  behind  them.  He  possessed  the
principles  of  the  Epicnrean  with  the  practice  of  the  Stoic ;
and  this  union  constitutes  perhaps  the  fairest  compound  that
Heathenism  could  supply.  Antoninus  was  apparently  the
happiest  man  of  whom  heathen  liistory  makes  mention ;  and
I  can  well  believe  that  he  effected  more  good  than  any
other.

The  attainment  of  power  had  wrought  a  marked  change
in  almost  all  the  earlier  Caesars ;  in  some  for  the  better,  but
generally  for  the  worse.  In  Antoninus  it  made
no  change  at  all.  Such  as  he  had  been,  kind,  Mr  roiHnrw
modest  and  dignified,  as  a  senator,  such  he  con-  ui«e  is  prtv^*
tinned  to  be  as  emperor.  He  bore  huuself  in  all
respects  towards  his  inferiors  as  he  had  formerly  wished  his
superiors  to  bear  themselves  towards  him.  If  he  demanded
an  aj)pointment  or  other  advantage  for  a  friend,  he  never
allowed  himself  to  dispense  with  the  forms  of  law  and  cus-
tom. With  his  associates  he  lived  on  the  same  terms  as  ever.
Ho  assembled  them  at  his  table,  or  presented  himself  at  theirs,
and  rejoiced  especially  in  their  company  at  the  genial  cere-
monies of  the  vintage.  He  stooped  easily,  say  his  biograph-
ers, from  the  imperial  summit  to  the  level  of  civil  life,  and
cheerfully  endured  the  raillery  current  in  the  polite  circles
of  the  city.'  Preceding  emperors,  indeed,  had  mixed  on
equal  terms  with  their  nobles;  Antoninus  was  patient  with
the  populace,  and  treated  their  ill  temper  with  forbearance.
On  the  occasion  of  a  dearth  in  the  city,  the  people  assailed
him  with  stones  ;  but  he  only  applied  himself  the  more  assid-
uously to  supply  their  wants,  and  studied  to  explain  to  them
the  measures  he  had  adopted  in  their  behalf.  When  prefect
of  Asia,  he  had  once  resorted  to  the  splendid  dwelling  of
Polemon  the  wealthy  sophist.  The  owner  was  absent.  On
his  return  he  was  offended,  such  was  his  arrogance,  at  the
freedom  taken  by  the  governor,  and  insisted  on  his  great  but
unbidden  guest  vacating  his  apartments,  and  going  forth  at

*  Capitol.  Anton.  P.  6. :  "  imperatorium  fastigium  ad  eummam  civilitatem
deduxit ; "  and  adds,  "  unde  plus  crevit."  Comp.  the  anecdote  of  Omullus,
c.  11.

408  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  138.

midnight  to  seek  another  lodging.  Polemon  was  a  favourite
with  Hadrian,  and  the  emperor,  though  vexed  perhaps  at  his
impertinence,  was  anxious  to  protect  him  after  his  own
death  from  the  consequences  of  a  quarrel  with  his  future  sov-
ereign. Accordingly,  he  inserted  in  his  will  a  statement  that
his  choice  of  Antoninus  had  been  actually  made  at  the  so-
phist's suggestion.  Antoninus  could  not  be  deceived  by  this
advice ;  nevertheless  he  acted  as  if  he  believed  it,  and  heaped
his  favours  on  the  fortunate  Polemon.  When  at  last  the
sophist  presented  himself  at  Rome,  the  new  emperor  com-
manded that  he  should  be  accommodated  with  lodgings,
insisting  archly  that  no  one  should  venture  to  remove  liim.
An  actor  complained,  soon  afterwards,  that  Polemon,  when
presiding  at  the  Olympic  games,  had  once  driven  him  off  the
stage.  At  what  hour  ?  demanded  Antoninus.  At  midday.
Ah!  replied  he,  he  expelled  me  from  his  house  at  midnight.^
In  the  absence  of  public  memorials,  the  whole  interest  of
this  epoch  must  centre  in  the  person  and  family  of  the  prince.
Domestic  lifo  ■^^^'  ^hall  wc  regret  to  rest  for  a  moment  on  the
of  Antoninus,  character  of  one  so  blameless  and  attractive,  and
to  picture  to  ourselves  the  master  of  the  Roman  world  in  the
bosom  of  his  private  connexions.  Antoninus  resided,  as  we
have  seen,  wholly  in  Rome  or  his  neighbouring  villas,  of
which  Lorium  on  the  Etruscan  coast,  and  Lanuvium,  his  own
birthplace,  among  the  Alban  hills,  seem  to  have  been  his
favourites,  llis  mode  of  life  was  simple  and  abstemious ;
his  robe  was  woven  by  the  handmaids  of  liis  own  consort.
But  Faustina  was  unfortunately  no  Lucretia,  and  the  vices
of  this  licentious  woman  infused  perhaps  the  only  drop  of
gall  in  the  cup  of  her  husband.  Yet  Antoninus  did  not  allow
himself  to  resent,  or  appear  even  to  notice  the  scandal  she
LiocntiouB  brought  on  an  establishment  of  antique  severity.*
°*'^!f^'.*-*'."  Faustina  was  the  sister  of  iElius  Verus,  and  had
••»»•  been  married  to  Antoninus  before  his  adoption.

'  rhiloHt.  ViL  SophUt.  I.  26.

*  Capitol,  jlnltm.  J'.  3. :  "  ilc  h«\ju8  uxorc  miilta  dicta  fiuiit  ob  nimiara  libcr-
toUitn  ct  vivcuUi  fM'iliiiii.'tii,  ((um  illo  cum  auimi  doloro  comprcssit."

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  409

TUis  adoption,  indeed,  he  may  have  at  least  partly  owed  to
the  aftection  Hadrian  naturally  bore  to  the  sister  of  his  lost
favourite ;  and  it  was  the  consciousness,  perhaps,  of  this  ob-
ligation that  induced  the  injured  husband  to  wink  at  her  ir-
regularies.  On  assuming  the  purple,  ho  obtained  for  her  the
title  of  Augusta;  he  gave  the  name  of  Faustinian  to  the  en-
dowments he  made  for  the  support  of  female  orphans ;  and
on  her  death,  which  happened  in  141,  only  three  yeai-s  after
his  accession,  he  raised  a  temple  in  her  honour,  the  remains
of  which,  bearing  his  own  name  conjointly  with
hers,  still  form  a  striking  object  in  the  Roman  eooiMntioB.
forum.'  Games  were  celebrated  in  honour  of  her  a-d.  141.
apotheosis,  and  her  image  was  borne  among  those
of  the  national  divinities.  The  coinage  on  which  her  name
is  perj^etuated  is  still  unusually  abundant,  and  is  generally
marked  with  devices  asserting  her  eternal  godhead.  After
the  decease  of  his  children's  mother,  Antoninus  refrained
from  introducing  another  matron  into  his  house  on  the  foot-
ing of  legitunate  marriage,  and  contented  himself,  after  the
fasliion  of  the  most  discreet  and  dignified  Romans,  with  the
inferior  union  known  to  their  jurisprudence  by  the  now  de-
graded title  of  concubinage.*

Both  the  sons  of  Antoninus  and  Faustina  seem,  as  has
been  said,  to  have  died  before  Hadrian's  demise.  On  their
parent's  adoption,  it  had  been  arranged  that  his  livriagerf
daughter,  the  younger  Faustina,  should  be  be-  f^S^r*^
trothed  to  Commodus  Verus,  the  child  whom  he  "*^
was  required  himself  to  adopt  together  with  M.  Aurelius,
while  Aurelius  was  to  take  in  marriage  a  daughter  of  the
elder  Yerus. But  the  younger  Yerus  was  but  seven  years

*  The  inscription  recording  the  names  of  the  emperor  and  empress  Is  still
legible :  "  Divo  Antonino  et  Divse  Faustinae  ex  S.  C."  CapitoL  Atilon.  F.  6. :
"  tertio  anno  imperii  sui  Faustinam  uxorem  pordidit,  quaj  a  seuatu  consecrata
est,  delatis  circensibus  atque  templo."

"  The  regard  of  Antoninus  for  the  imworthy  Faustina  is  further  attested  by
an  expression  in  a  letter  to  the  rhetorician  Fronto :  "  mallem  mehercule  Gyaria
cmn  ilia  quam  sine  ilia  in  Palatio  vivere." Fronton.  JEpiat.  L  2.

410  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

of  ago,  while  Aurelius  had  attained  to  seventeen.  The  char-
acter of  the  one  was  as  yet  at  least  undetermined,  while  the
other  had  already  given  excellent  promise,  and  was  daily  ad-
vancing in  every  virtue.*  Accordingly,  Antoninus,  making
the  immature  age  of  Verus  his  excuse,  did  not  hesitate  so  far
to  violate  Hadrian's  intentions  as  to  give  Faustina  to  Aure-
lius. The  union  was  solemnized,  but  not  perhaps  without
some  years'  interval ;  for  the  births  from  this  marriage,  of
which  there  were  several,  date  from  a  somewhat  later  period.
Meanwhile  the  young  Caesars  grew  up  to  manhood,  and
the  paternal  care  of  Antoninus  was  not  unrewarded  with  re-
Eariy  years  o^^'^  ^o  either.  Vcrus  was  of  a  light  impressible
M.'^A^eHus "'  character,  easily  moulded  to  good  or  evil,  and
Antoninus.  tliough  he  exhibited  none  of  the  qualities  de-
manded of  a  ruler,  he  seems  at  least  to  have  shown  as  yet  no
proneness  to  vice.  But  Aurelius,  on  the  other  hand,  fulfilled
with  advancing  years  every  hope  and  wish  the  fondest  and
wisest  of  parents  could  have  cherished.  He  engaged  in  all
the  athletic  and  martial  exercises  which  befitted  a  youth  of
family ;  but  his  own  temper,  and  still  more  perhaps  some
weakness  of  constitution,  and  lack  of  animal  spirits,  disposed
him  by  preference  to  study.' To  the  cares  of  public  admin-

*  The  opinion  Hadrian  already  formed  of  his  simplicity  and  integrity  is
marked  by  the  appellation  of  "  Verissimus  "  instead  of  Veras,  which  he  phiy-
fuUy  bestowed  upon  him.  Capitol,  in  M.  Anton.  Philosoph.  1.  It  must  be  re-
membered that  the  young  Aurelius  bore  also  the  name  of  Verus.  The  biog-
rapher distinguishca  the  two  Antonines  by  the  titles  of  "  Pius  "  and  "  Philos-
ophuB."  Other  writers  generally  designate  the  second  by  his  adoptive  name
of  '•  Aurelius,"  or  by  his  pnunomen  "  Marcus."

•  llolh  the  Cajsars  seem  to  have  had  similar  advantages  of  education.
The  nanu'H  of  their  numerous  teachers  arc  carefully  roeordod.  Of  Aurelius  it
is  said  :  "  usus  est  nuigistris  ad  prima  elementa  Euphrauore  litorntore,  ot  Ge-
rolno  coniusdo,  muHico  Androiu<,  codeni(|UC  geometra:  quibus  onuuhus,  ut  dis-
ciplinaruni  auetoriljtis,  plurimum  detulit.  llsus  pncterea  grammaticis,  &c.  .  .  .
uiiUH  est  oratoriburi,  kv,  ,  .  .  uhus  est  ctiam  Commodo  magistro  .  .  .  usus  est
ct  Apolloiiio  (/'halcodonio,  Stoico  philos()i)ho.  .  .  .  Audivit  ct  Sextum  Cha3ro-
Dcnscm,  riutarchl  nepotem,  kc.  Htuduit  et  juri  audiens,  &c.  .  .  .  frcqucntavit
ot  dci;lainjitonnn  Bchohis,"  ko.  Capitol,  ^f.  Anton.  PhU.  2,  3.  Of  the  teachers
of  VcruH  tt  list  nearly  as  long  and  varioiis  Is  given. Vcr.  2.

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  411

istration  he  devoted  his  patient  attention ;  but  his  heart  was
in  the  libraries  of  ancient  wisdom,  or  with  its  best  living  ex-
positors ;  for  these  he  reserved  the  hours  borrowed  from
sleep  or  recreation ;  and  throughout  his  father's  reign,  he
never,  it  is  said,  was  tempted  to  quit  his  closet  at  Rome  but
for  two  nights.'  The  time  was  coming  when  the  pale  student
of  the  Palatine  would  be  required  to  pass  his  days  in  the
saddle  and  his  nights  under  canvas,  on  the  wildest  frontiers
of  the  empire ;  but  however  ill  his  training  might  be  adapted
to  harden  his  frame  against  fatigue  and  inclement  seasons,
the  lessons  of  patience  and  endurance  he  learnt  from  his  mas^
tors,  imbibed  by  a  congenial  spirit,  sufficed  to  fortify  him  in
the  career  to  which  duty  called  hiuL  Disposed  by  his  own
loving  temper  to  reverence  parental  authority,  he  was  an-
imated by  the  approbation  of  a  father  whom  he  could  justly
admire.  When,  many  years  after  his  accession  to  complete
sovereignty,  he  reviewed  in  an  address  to  his  conscience,  his
own  principles  and  conduct,  he  could  refer  them  with  affec-
tion and  gratitude  to  that  model  of  all  human  excellence.
Though  himself  an  ardent  lover  of  speculative  philosophy,  he
had  wisely  sought  a  practical  director  in  the  conduct  of  af-
fairs, and  he  seems  to  acknowledge  that  the  virtues  of  Anto-
ninus had  served  him  better  than  even  the  doctrines  of  Zeno.
After  enumerating  his  special  obligations  to  his  ancestors,
his  friends,  and  his  instructors,  for  their  good  advice  or  pre-
cious examples,  he  concludes  with  an  encomium  on  his  im-
perial parent,  on  which,  lingering  as  we  fondly  do  over  this
brightest  type  of  heathen  excellence,  we  shall  willingly
dAvell  yet  another  moment: — In  my  father  I
noticed  mildness  of  manners  and  nrmnes*  of  ot  hia  adopuve
resolution,  contempt  of  vain  glory,  industry  in
business,  accessibility  to  all  who  had  counsel  to  give  on  public
matters,  and  care  in  allowing  to  every  one  his  due  share  of
consideration. He  knew  when  to  relax,  as  well  as  when  to

'  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  Plul.  7. It  was  mentioned  as  a  token  of  his  derotion
to  philosophy,  that  he  attended  the  school  of  the  teacher  ApoUonius  even  aftw

his  elevation  to  the  purple.

412  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.138.

labour  ^  he  taught  me  to  forbear  from  licentious  indulgences  j
to  conduct  myself  as  an  equal  among  equals  /  to  lay  on  my
friends  no  burden  of  servility ;  neither  changing  them  cor
priciously^  nor  passionately  addicting  myself  to  any.  From
him  I  learnt  to  acquiesce  in  every  fortune,  and  bear  myself
calmly  and  serenely  /  to  exercise  foresight  in  p'^blic  affairs,
and  not  to  be  above  examining  the  smallest  matters  /  to  rise
superior  to  vulgar  acclamations,  and  despise  vulgar  reprehen-
sion ;  to  worship  the  gods  without  superstition,  and  serve
m,ankind  without  ambition:  in  all  things  to  be  sober  and
steadfast,  not  led  away  by  idle  novelties  y  to  be  content  with
little,  enjoying  in  moderation  the  comforts  within  my  reach,
but  never  repining  at  their  absence.  Moreover,  from  him  I
learnt  to  be  no  sophist,  no  schoolman,  no  mere  dreaming
bookworm  /  but  apt,  active,  practical,  and  a  man  of  the
world ;  yet,  at  the  same  time,  to  give  due  honour  to  true  philos-
ophers /  to  be  neat  in  person,  cheerful  in  demeanour,  regular
in  exercise,  and  thus  to  rid  myself  of  the  need  of  medicine
and  physicians.  Again,  to  concede  without  a  grudge  their
preeminence  to  all  who  specially  excel  in  legal  or  any  other
knowledge  ;  to  act  in  all  things  after  the  usage  of  our  ances-
tors, yet  without  pedantry.  .  .  .  My  father  was  ever  prudent
and  moderate  ;  he  neither  indulged  in  private  buildings,  nor
in  excessive  largesses,  or  extravagant  shows  to  the  people.  lie
looked  to  his  duty  only,  not  to  the  opinion  that  might  be
formed  of  him.  He  was  temperate  in  the  use  of  baths,  modest
in  dress,  indifferent  to  the  beauty  of  his  slaves  and  furniture.
Such,  I  say,  was  the  whole  character  of  his  life  and  man-
ners :  nothing  harsh,  nothing  excessive,  nothing  rude,  nothing
which  betokened  roughness  and  violence.  It  might  be  said
of  him,  as  of  Socrates,  that  he  could  both  abstain  from  and
enjoy  the  things  xchich  men  in  general  can  neither  abstain
from  at  all,  nor  enjoy  without  excess.^

Such  is  the  portrait  of  this  paragon  of  liummiity,  drawn

'  M.  Aurcl.  CommcrUariorum,  i.  10.  Tho  proper  title  of  the  volume,  which
I  tburi  (IcHignato  for  convenience,  and  wliicli  ia  Honietimefl  cited  as  McdUationca,
or  De  Vila  lua,  is  tuv  rif  edvrdv :  "  au  address  to  himself."

A.U.  861.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  413

by  one  who  knew  him,  and  drawn,  as  it  appears,  without
exaggeration.  The  testimony  of  Aurelius  may  rtgn^of  An-
well  be  credited,  confirmed  as  it  is  by  the  con-  «>'»iJ»'»  "«>^
current  voice  of  Xiphilin,  Orosius,  Victor,  and  Capitolinus.
These  moral  excellences  were  set  off  by  a  noble  figure  and
expression :  the  numerous  busts  and  medals  of  Antoninus
agree  in  representing  him  as  one  of  the  finest  in  personal  ap-
pearance of  tlie  whole  line  of  Caesars.*  Rome  enjoyed  the
blessing  of  his  administration  for  the  long  period  of  twenty-
three  years,  and  at  the  ripe  age  of  seventy-four  he  was  carried
off  at  Lorium  by  gastric  fever.*  Feeling  his  end  approach-
ing, he  confirmed  in  the  presence  of  his  chief  officers  the
clioice  he  had  made  of  Aurelius  for  his  successor.  To  this
object  of  love  and  hope  he  recommended  the  care  of  his
daugliter  and  of  the  state ;  then,  divesting  himself  of  the  en-
signs of  sovereignty,  he  commanded  the  golden  image  of
Fortune,  which  the  emperors  set  up  in  their  inner  chamber,
to  be  transported  to  the  apartment  of  his  designated  heir.
In  the  delirium  which  followed,  the  good  old  man  was  heard
to  mutter  about  the  welfare  of  the  republic;  and  j,,,  eompoMre
in  the  moments  of  returning  sense  which  preced-  ^  ******^
ed  liis  decease,  gave  to  the  tribune  of  his  guard  the  watch-
word. Equanimity.*

This  anecdote  indeed  may  well  have  been  the  invention
of  a  later  period,  so  aptly  does  it  correspond  not  only  with
the  traditional  character  of  the  man  to  whom  it

Tlie  epoch  of

is  asci'ibed,  but  with  the  temper  of  the  epoch  it-  Autoninua

,„,.,.,  „ ^ \.  ^ .  Plua.

ill,  which  m  the  eyes  oi  succeedmg  generations

'  Victor,  Epii.  15. :  "  vultu  sereno  et  pulcro,  procerus  membra,  decenter
validus."

"  Antoninus  Pius  was  associated  in  the  empire  Feb.  138 :  he  succeeded  to
Hadrian  July  10,  138,  and  died  March  7,  161 ;  accordingly  he  reigned  from  the
first  date  twenty-three  years  and  alwut  one  month,  from  the  second,  twenty-
two  years  and  nearly  eight  months.  Hia  age  was  74  years,  5  months,  16  days.
Clinton,  Fast.  Rom.  ann.  161 ;  but  the  statements  of  our  authorities  do  not  ex-
actly correspond  with  one  another.

»  Capitol.  Anton.  P.  12.;  M.  Anion.  Phllos.  1.

414  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

he  represented.*  Equanimity  of  mind,  composure  of  de-
meanour, were  the  distinguishing  traits  of  the  good  Antoni-
nus ;  and  they  seem  to  have  been  the  result  of  his  well-
balanced  nature,  rather  than  the  product  of  education  and
reflection,'  As  regards  the  period  also  which  he  illustrated
by  his  virtues,  tliere  now  occurs  a  pause  in  the  life  of  the
Roman  people,  from  the  momentary  equilibiium  of  conflict-
ing forces.  The  turbulent  career  of  Roman  affairs  may  be
likened  to  the  stream  beginning  as  a  mountain-torrent  in  con-
stant  uproar  and  irritation,  gradually  gaining  the  compact
energy  of  a  river,  majestic  in  its  collected  force,  but  ready  to
boil  into  fury  if  impeded  by  a  sudden  obstacle,  widening  at
last  and  deepening  into  a  placid  lake,  in  which  the  eye  can
scarce  detect  the  direction  of  the  current.  But  the  mightiest
rivers,  after  expanding  into  such  inland  seas,  are  sometimes
again  abruptly  straitened  by  encroaching  cliffs  and  ledges,
and  their  languid  serenity,  so  much  admired  and  trusted,
proves  only  the  torrent'^s  stillness  ere  it  dash  below.  So  it  was
with  the  empire  of  the  Caesars.  The  reign  of  the  elder  An-
tonine  was  like  the  Erie  of  the  great  St.  Lawrence ;  and  Avhen
his  successor  received  the  fatal  sceptre,  the  fitful  stream  was
already  rushing  with  resistless  though  yet  imruflied  rapidity
to  the  verge  of  the  Niagara,  in  which  its  repose  and  dignity
were  to  be  engulfed.*

'  Thus  similar  storios  of  the  last  words  of  later  emperors,  the  "  laboremus  "
of  Scvenis,  the  *'  militemus  "  of  Pcrtinax,  seem  to  have  a  mythic  significance.
'  Victor,  C(ta.  16.:  '*  ndco  oequalis,  probisciuc  moribus,  utl  plane  docucrit,
noquc  jugi  pace,  ac  lon{;o  otio  absoluta  ingcnia  corrumpi."

Tljo  Holentuity  of  his  consecration  seems  to  have  called  forth  a  genuine  cn-
thusiaflm.  C'npitol.  vl;i/o«.  7',  in  fin. :  "a  senatu  divus  cht  appellatus  cunctis
oertatim  adnitentibus,  cuiu  omnes  ejus  pietatem,  clementiam,  iugenium,  sancti-
moniam  luudurent"

'  Thus  Stulius  also  describca  a  pause  in  the  career  of  the  "  headlong  Anio."
Sifh.lS.  20:

•'  Ipso  Anicn  (nuranda  fides),  infraque  superquo
f^xouH,  hie  luiiiiduni  rubiom  spumosaque  ponit
Murinuru ;  ecu  plucidi  veiitus  turbnrc  Vopisci
l'iorioH(iuo  dies,  ct  hai)ente3  cannina  somnos."

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  415

To  this  extreme  verge  I  am  about  to  lead  the  reader  be-
fore I  commit  him  to  the  care  of  a  firmer  and  more  expe-
rienced guide,  who  may  teach  him  to  look  into jj^^,^^  ^  ^j^
the  abyss  without  dismay  or  dizziness. But  be-  poitticai  ek-

'11 1 1  • mtnts  or  Ko-

fore  commencing  my  final  chai)ter  I  will  ask  him mm  iwciety  at

" •'  *  .  thU  period.

to  pause  for  a  moment  with  me,  and  review  rap-
idly the  chief  elements  of  political  society  at  this  eveutful
epoch.

I.  The  world  could  not  be  governed  by  the  local  munici-
pality of  an  Italian  city.  Dindy  conscious  of  the  necessity
of  unfolding  wider  principles,  Augustus  had  in-  j  ,j^  ^^,
vented  his  abortive  scheme  for  the  representation  i»««o'««ettr-
(if  more  remote  communities.  The  failure  of  this  feeble
attempt  to  invigorate  the  popular  assembly  was  followed  by
the  suppression  of  the  assembly  itself  under  Tiberius.  The
trifling  part  henceforth  conceded  to  the  people  in  ratifying
the  legislation  of  their  rulei-s  hardly  deserves  consideration.
The  real  value  of  the  urban  suftrage  had  lain  in  the  import-
ance it  gave  the  electors  in  the  eyes  of  candidates ;  and  for
this  and  the  substantial  advantages  it  secured  them,  the  ple-
beian had  accepted  the  toils  and  risks  of  military  sen'ice.
But  from  the  moment  when  the  suffrage  was  taken  from  him
he  declined  enlistment.  He  flung  away  his  sword  at  the
^ame  time  that  he  surrendered  his  privileges.'  This  volun-
tary disarming  was  not  unpleasing  to  the  emperors.  The
unnmons  of  the  city,  forming  a  great  national  guard  under
officers  of  their  own  election,  as  in  the  free  state,  would  have
effectually  controlled  the  j)rinceps  and  the  imperator,  until
at  least  they  had  mutually  destroyed  one  another.  Unarmed
as  they  now  were,  they  might  raise  disturbances  and  sedi-
tions, but  they  could  not  overthrow  governments.  We  have
seen  the  anxiety  with  which  the  emperors  provided  for  their
support  and  amusement,  and  how  they  winked  at  the  fac-

'  There  was  a  partial  review  of  the  comitia  under  Trajan.  Plin.  Paneg.
63.  77.  If  his  military  schemes  required  him  to  levy  soldiers  in  the  city,  he
might  seek  to  compensate  the  citizens  by  infusing  a  little  more  vigour  into  the
old  machinery  of  the  Campus  Martins.

416  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

tions  of  the  theatre  and  circus,  as  a  vent  for  popular  caprice.
Claudius  and  even  the  virtuous  Antoninus  were  pelted  in  the
forum,  and  meekly  endured  the  insult.  Nero  despised  the
murmurs  of  the  senate,  so  long  as  he  could  command  the  ac-
clamations of  the  mob.  Nevertheless  we  must  not  suppose
that  the  mass  of  the  citizens  at  Rome  exercised  any  real
political  influence.  A  prince  who  was  firm  in  the  sup-
port of  the  senate  or  the  legions  had  no  cause  to  fear  them,
Tiberius,  the  most  cautious  of  the  Cajsars,  who  had  been  fain
to  restore  to  the  people  a  favourite  statue  which  he  had  re-
moved from  the  baths  to  his  own  palace,  did  not  hesitate  to
require  the  prompt  suppression  of  a  tumult,  and  to  reprimand
the  magistrates  who  had  weakly  succumbed  to  it.*  Caius,
Domitian,  and  others  indulged  their  moody  cruelty  towards
all  classes  indiscriminately.  Hadrian  rebuked  the  mob  with
haughty  dignity. The  masses  of  the  free  popu-

Contemptinto . . '' ^  . ''  ^  ,.  . ,i i i i  >n,

which  they  had  latiou  wcrc  in  fact  politically  helpless.  Ihey
were  detached  from  the  nobles,  their  natural  lead-
ers, by  the  habits  of  mutual  independence  and  distrust  which
their  princes  had  fostered  in  both  classes.  Steeped  in  sloth-
fulness  and  poverty  they  had  neither  intelligence  nor  re-
sources. Mingled  and  confounded  with  the  crowd  of  enfran-
chised slaves  of  foreign  origin  and  ideas,  they  had  lost  the
traditions  of  race,  which  had  formerly  bound  the  Roman
citizens  together,  and  gave  them  confidence  in  one  another.
Disarmed,  disorganized,  and  untrained,  it  was  impossible  for
them  to  act  against  the  moral  weight  of  the  wealthy  and  the
noble,  still  more  against  the  sword  and  spear  of  the  legion-
aries and  prtetorians.  They  had  now  ceased  altogether  to
be  counted  among  the  political  forces  of  the  empire.  We
may  dismiss  them  henceforth  from  our  consideration.

II.  If  we  now  extend  our  view  from  the  mass  of  the  citi-
zens within  the  walls  of  the  capital  to  the  mucli  larger  mass
of  citizens  beyond  them,  wo  shall  meet  with  an
tion  of  [ho" object  of  greater  interest,  if  not  of  more  real  })o-
^'  ***■ litical  importance. The  emperors  seem  for  the
'  Tac  Ann,  vi.  18. IMiii.  //«/.  Xa(.  xxxlv.  19,  0.

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  41 7

most  part  to  have  worked  deliberately  in  favour  of  their  for-
eign sulyects,  enlarging  the  sphere  of  Roman  citizenship,  and
generalizing  the  principles  of  Roman  jurisprudence.  They
had  not  the  genius,  nor  perhaps  the  wish,  to  create  a  new
constitution  for  the  empire  ;  but  taking  the  Roman  munici-
pality for  their  model,  they  contrived  by  a  series  of  labori-
ous experiments  to  apply  its  principles  to  the  inferior  noe^
The  freeman  of  the  imperial  commonwealth,  though  long  de-
prived of  his  legislative  and  elective  privileges,  was  distin-
guished from  the  stranger  within  the  same  borders  by  ex-
emption from  certain  fiscal  burdens,  and  subjection  to  a
special  code  of  laws.  The  internal  history  of  the  empire,
obscure  as  it  is,  turns  chiefly  on  the  extension  of  the  Ro-
man franchise  in  the  provinces.

Roman  citizenship  had  its  drawbacks  as  well  as  its  ad-
vantages. When  after  a  desperate  struggle  the  franchise
was  conceded  to  the  states  of  Italy,  it  was  discovered,  with
surprise,  that  the  boon  was  after  all  but  little
relished,  and  was  m  fact  wholly  declined  by  large the  Boman
numbers  of  the  people  who  had  just  made  it  the
watchword  of  a  sangumary  struggle. The  Social  War  had
been  really  fought  for  the  chiefs  of  the  Italians,  not  for  the
people. The leaders  of  the  confederates  contended  for  a
share  in  the  emoluments  of  foreign  conquest. They  expect-
ed that  the  franchise  would  raise  them  to  the rank  of
knights  or  senators  of  the  conquering  state,  to  the  control
of  her  revenues,  or  the  command  of  her  armies. But  the
mass  of  their  followers  submitted  blindly  to  their  guidance,
and  when  at  last  they  opened  their  eyes  on  the  morrow  of
their  victory,  were  appalled  at  the  prospect  of  the  burdens
and  obligations  which  would  now  fall  to  their  share. The
Roman  franchise  was  a  severe  discipline. The  laws  and  usages
under  which  the  child  of  Quirinus  lived  from  his  era- itah,^gi,i  s
die  to  his  grave,  were  hardly  endurable  even  by *^  veMUons.
those  who  were  inured  to  them  by  life-long  habit,  and  he
was  glad  and  anxious  to  escape  from  them,  even  with  the
sacrifice  of  conscience  and  self-respect. Every  citizen,  in-
voL.  vii. — 27

418  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  138.

deed,  so  far  as  he  was  the  occupier  of  Roman  or  Quiritary
soil,  which  from  henceforth  comprehended  the  whole  of
Italy,  enjoyed  exemption  from  the  tribute  or  rentcharge  due
to  the  state  as  the  supreme  owner  of  provincial  territory.
But  on  the  other  hand  he  became  liable  not  only  to  the  mili-
tary conscriptions,  but  to  the  code  of  civil  law,  which,  in
many  respects,  as  in  regard  to  family  and  marriage,  to  con-
tracts, and  the  transfer  of  property,  was  framed  in  a  harsh
and  formal  spirit,  revolting  to  a  people  trained  in  a  laxer
system,  or  accustomed  at  least  to  other  ways  and  notions.
Of  the  laws  of  the  Etruscans  and  Samnites  we  know  indeed
nothing :  possibly  they  were  not  less  severe  and  stringent
than  those  of  Rome ;  but  these  nations  had  at  least  grown
up  under  them,  and  their  prejudices  now  rebelled  against  the
artificial  customs  of  the  city  on  the  Tiber,  which  none  but
Roman  patricians  could  expound  to  them.  The  Romans
were  little  disposed  to  make  concessions,  and  smooth  the  as-
perities which  repelled  their  new  associates  ;  and  accordingly
enfranchisement,  though  ultimately  inevitable,  was  a  work
of  time,  and  the  result  of  mutual  intercourse.

The  great  experiment  of  the  consolidation  of  Italy,  thus
partially  successful,  was  never  repeated  on  a  large  scale.
While  the  necessities  of  the  state,  or  the  interests  of  party
leaders  demanded  the  admission  of  entire  communities  to  the
QoiritaiT  pro-  rights  of  intermarriage  and  commerce,  with  eligi-
embraldnlfcx-  hility  to  the  suffrage,  which  were  all  comprehcnd-
theCd-uT  ^^  ^"  ^^^^  ^°°"  ®^  *'^^  ■'^^^^^  franchise,  little  dispo-
Sren^^'&e  sition  was  shown  to  bestow  on  strangers  the  full
emperon.  privileges of Quiritary proprietorship, which

gave  not  merely  the  empty  title  of  the  suffrage,  but  tlio
precious  immunity  from  tribute  or  land-tax.  Accordingly,
while  Pompeius,  Ca3Har,  Augustus  and  others  extended  the
Latin  rights  to  many  provincial  communities,  they  were
careful  to  give  the  full  Roman  qualification  to  persons  only.'

'  Such  wu  thoir  gononl  practice.  No  doubt  there  were  exceptions.  Dion,
in  tpeaking  of  OsDaor's  proceedings,  indicates  tlio  diflfurcut  Iciuds  and  values  of
bla  boons :  iduxe  ftiv  x^P*^  f^^  hrtT^iav,  iroXtrelav  ri  rtat,  kqI  d^^vf  &not-

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  419

Of  such  persons,  indeed,  large  numbers  were  admitted  to
citizenship  by  the  emperors.  The  full  rights  of  Rome  were
conferred  on  the  Transalpine  Gauls  by  Claudius,  and  the
Latin  rights  on  the  Spaniards  by  Vespasian  ;  but  it  was  with
much  reserve  that  any  portions  of  territory  beyond  Italy
were  enfranchised,  and  rendered  Italic  or  Quiritary  soil,  and
thus  endowed  with  a  special  immunity.'  Thus  the  state  re-
tained a  grasp  on  the  land  with  its  fiscal  liabilities,  while  it
reaped  a  distinct  fiscal  advantage  from  every  personal  en-
franchisement. Augustus,  as  we  have  seen,  had  j^  j,,,^  j,.
ventured  to  lay  a  personal  tax  on  the  citizens  in  ^wSSSm.***
the  shape  of  a  legacy-duty,  to  counterbalance  ""rtiiMimiit
their  immunity  from  tribute.  This  tax  was  no  more  than  a
twentieth,  and  from  it  direct  descendants  were  exempted.
Nevertheless  certain  peculiarities  in  Roman  society  might
make  such  a  duty  more  productive  than  from  modem  expe-
rience we  should  expect.  The  exemptions  on  the  ground  of
Imeal  descent  would  be  comparatively  few,  for  the  wealthy
noble  was  scandalously  averse  to  the  forms  of  legitimate  mar-
riage :  it  gratified  his  vanity,  moreover,  to  inscribe  on  his
testament  the  names  of  the  great  people  he  numbered  among
his  friends.  Beset  through  his  declining  years  by  the  legacy-
hunters,  one  of  the  minor  pests  of  the  Roman  society,  he
might  too  often  divert  his  posthumous  liberality  from  hia
next  of  kin,  or  even  from  his  children,  if  such  he  had,  to  mere
aliens  and  strangers.  Whatever  was  the  amount  of  this  tax,
it  had  the  recommendation  of  being  direct,  and  easily  levied
under  the  strict  administration  of  Roman  law ;  and  accord-
ingly the  readiness  with  which  the  emperors  imparted  citizen-
ship is  explained  by  their  eagerness  to  grasp  this  tempting

Koi'c  TL)V  'Yufiaiuv  vofiO^eadai  \  xliiL  39.  So  also  in  some  cases  Augustus.
Suet  Oct.  47. :  "  civitates  merita  erga  pop.  Rom.  allegantes  immunitate  Td
civitate  donavit."  Vespasian  gave  the  Jus  Italicum  to  Stobi,  a  town  in  Mace-
douia. Pliii.  Hist  Nat.  iv.  10. See  Spanheim,  Orb.  Rom,  p.  153.

*  The  origin  of  the  Jus  Italicum  is  ascribed  to  Augtistus  by  A.  Zumpt,  fol-
lowed by  Marquardt  (Becker's  Rcetn.  Alterih.  iii.  1.  264.).  He  transplanted  the
citizens  displaced  by  his  veterans  to  the  provinces,  and  there  endowed  their
territories  with  the  immunities  of  Italy.

420  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

booty.  Though  strongly  opposed  in  the  first  instance,  we
do  not  find  that  the  legacy-duty  caused  audible  murmurs
among  the  people  when  they  had  become  accustomed  to  it.
It  was  counted,  however,  among  Trajan's  merits  that  he  re-
laxed in  some  degree  its  stringency.  Great  numbers  had
gained  their  footing  as  Roman  citizens  by  serving  magistra-
cies in  the  Latin  towns ;  but  the  Roman  rights  to  which  they
had  attained  were  still  so  far  incomplete,  that  they  had  no
power  of  deriving  an  imtaxed  inheritance  from  their  own
parents ;  for  their  parents  still  remained  under  the  Latin  dis-
abilities. Hence  the  value  of  citizenship,  thus  burdened  and
circumscribed,  was  held  in  question  by  the  Latins.*  Nerva
and  Trajan  decreed  that  these  New  Citizens,  as  they  were
designated,  who  thus  came,  as  it  was  called,  through  Latium,
should  be  put  on  the  same  advantageous  footing  as  the  old
and  genuine  class.  In  so  doing  they  made  doubtless  some
sacrifice,  though  not  perhaps  an  important  one,  of  revenue.
The  merit  of  the  emperor,  however,  was  esteemed  so  much  the
greater,  inasmuch  as  the  legacy-duty  was  paid  to  the  fiscus,
and  not  to  the  public  treasury,  and  was  devoted — such  at
least  was  the  destination  assigned  it  by  Augustus — to  the
maintenance  of  the  imperial  armies.

It  was  the  fiscus,  as  we  see,  that  gained  by  the  succession
tax ;  but  at  the  same  time  tlje  serarium  lost  by  the  exemption
CouBUntdegro-  from  land  tax  conferred  upon  Italic  soil.  The
chmwter  of*  ^^'^*  ^^  wlucli  this  immunity  was  extended  can-
^p?nthe**°  ^^^  ^®  estimated.  It  seems,  however,  to  h£tve
provinces. been  confined,  beyond  the  Alps,  to  specific  dis-

*  PUn.  Pomeg.  8Y.  Comp.  Spanhcim,  Orb.  Rom.  p.  189. :  "  adeo  ut  non
baberent  II  jara  cojjfnationis,  nisi  rcscriptis  ad  earn  rem  a  principe  eeorsira  ac-
oeptiB;  Bed  ({uniulo  filius  Buccedebat  patri,  8uccedel)at  tanquam  cxtraiunis
bsres,  fM>luta  bioreditatia  yiocsima.  Nerra,  amplificato  co  jure,  matroni  in  libc-
rorutn  bnrediUto,  et  TidBslm  liberos  ao  filium  in  parentis  bonis  ca  imnumitato
pcrfnii  voluit.  Tnjanui  vcro  id  bcnefleium  in  tantmn  aiixit  nt  sicut  patris
filiuri,  ila  in  fllU  barediUte  pater  inuminis  essot :  tuiii  ut  frnter,  nvus,  avia,  nep-
Ua,  nopoe,  et  invioeoi  absque  diminutinno  vieesiino)  liiuredes  esse  pnssent ;  dc-
niquo  exllcii  bicredltatot  ad  quoHetuiiiuc  lueredes  pertinerent,  ininiunes  itidcm
fedt."

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE/  421

tricts  appertaining  to  the  colonies,  and  possibly  in  a  few
cases  to  municipia,  and  never  to  have  been  communicated  to
a  Avhole  province,  or  indeed  to  the  lands  of  mere  peregrini.^
The  places  thus  endowed  were  such  only  as  were  inhabited
by  Romans  or  Latins,  by  persons,  that  is,  either  possessing
the  full  franchise,  or  enjoying  the  capacity  of  acquiring  it.
But  citizenBhip  in  the  provinces  must  have  been  in  a  state  of
constant  deterioration ;  for  the  genuine  Roman  could  not
form  a  legitimate  marriage  except  with  a  woman  of  his  own
political  status ;  and  as  these  must  have  been  few  in  the
provinces  compared  with  the  men,  unions  of  dbparagement
must  have  been  habitually  contracted,  the  offspring  of  which
could  not  succeed  to  all  their  father's  privileges.  The  popu-
lation of  the  colonia  must  thus  have  generally  become  in
two  or  three  generations  Romans  of  a  degenerate  legal  type ;
though  they  seem  to  have  still  retained,  by  some  explained
fiction,  the  name  of  citizens,  and  to  have  enjoyed  some  con-
ventional superiority  over  the  peregrini.

Accordingly,  while  the  Italic  exemption  was  imparted  to
none  who  were  not  already  citizens,  and  therefore  liable,  for
the  most  part,  to  the  tax  on  succession,  the  cit-
izeuHhip  with  its  attendant  taxabihty  was  be-  ttoii  of  dUMs-
stowed  on  many  who  enjoyed  no  Italic  exemp-  ft^  popoktka
tiou  to  set  off  against  it. It  became  the  obvious  **"

interest  of  the  government  to  extend  the  one,  and  to  limit
the  other.  The  earlier  emperors  had,  indeed,  exercised  a
jealous  reserve  in  popularizing  the  Roman  privileges;  but
from  Claudius  downwards  they  seem  to  have  vied  with  one
another  in  the  facility  with  which  they  conferred  them  as
a  boon,  or  imposed  them  as  a  burden.* The  burden  indeed

*  A  few  municipia  in  Spain  and  elsewhere  may  probablj  be  enumerated
among  the  civitatis  juris  Italici. Spanheim,  Orb.  Rom.  p.  151,  153.

'  The  practice  of  purchasing  Qvitas  was  undoubtedly  common  under
Claudius,  and  the  price  was  at  first  high ;  but  afterwards  the  emperor's  freed-
men  sold  it  for  a  trifle  to  stimulate  the  demand.  Dion,  be.  17.  Galba  made  a
great  favour  of  bestowing  it  Otho  lavished  it  on  the  whole  nation  of  the
Lingones. Suet  Gdb.  8. Tac.  HiU.  L  78.

422  HrSTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  138.

might  be  but  trifling.  Direct  succession  was  exempt  from
the  ^uty,  the  smallest  successions  were  relieved  from  it,  and
the  chance  of  an  ample  legacy  from  a  stranger  might  hardly
enter  into  the  calculations  of  the  candidates  for  citizenship.
But,  on  the  other  hand,  we  can  hardly  comprehend  in  what
the  boon  could  generally  consist,  except  to  persons  resident
in  or  near  to  Rome,  who  might  hope  to  share  in  the  honours
and  offices,  the  distributions  and  largesses,  reserved  for  Ro-
man citizens.  When  Pliny  is  reduced  to  specify  respect  or
love  for  the  commonwealth  as  the  ruling  motive  of  such  ap-
plications, he  would  seem  to  be  really  screening  from  view
some  baser  or  more  worldly  inducement.'  We  must  presume
that  the  resident  in  provinces  acquired  by  citizenship  some
superiority  over  his  fellow-countrymen.  But,  however  this
may  be,  great  anxiety  seems  to  have  been  felt  among  large
classes  to  obtain  enrolment  in  the  ranks  of  Rome.  The  soli-
citations of  Pliny  to  Trajan  in  the  interest  of  his  personal
friends  and  clients,  represent  doubtless  the  pressure  which
was  actually  exerted  on  the  empei'or  from  every  side."  Ha-
drian was  besieged  as  closely  and  as  constantly  as  his  pre-
decessor. The  benefactions  of  this  prince  to  the  provinces
are  signalized  in  general  terms  by  Dion ;  and  Spailian  as-
sures MS  that  he  conferred  the  Latin  right  on  several  commu-
nities, while  he  remitted  tribute  to  others ;  an  indulgence
which  may  perhaps  imply  the  concession  of  the  Jus  Italicum.*
^  Antoninus  Pius  is  also  celebrated  on  medals  as  a

Decree  of  An- -,--,.,.  /. .  .  i ,  .  , -rr -, •

toninnsCan- Multiplier  of  Citizens , but  neither  Hadrian,  as
hastily  affirmed  by  St.  Chrysostom,  nor  his  next

'  Plln.  Paneg,  37. :  "  invcniobantur  tainen  quibus  tantus  amor  iiominis
jUMtri  inesset,  ut  Komanam  civitatcm  non  viccsimss  modo  scd  ctiam  aflinitatia
diunno  bene  oomponB&tam  putarent ;  sod  lis  maxime  debebat  gratuito  contin-
gen  a  qulbot  tarn  magno  sMtimabatur."

'  PUn.  EpkL,  X.  4.  and  8.  The  writer  Bolicits  Civitas  for  his  physician
Ilarpocraa,  an  Egyptian.  I  presume  tliat  liad  this  man  been  resident  at  Rome,
ho  would  hare  obtained  the  fVancbise  under  the  ancient  decree  of  Julius  Ctesar,
by  which  the  professors  of  bis  and  other  sciences  wore  thus  favoured.  Suet,
Jul.  42.

*  Dion,  Ixix.  S. Spartlan,  Iladr.  21.

*  Sponiieim,  Orbit.  Jiom.  p.  160.,  refers  to  a  modal  of  Antoninus  in  Goltz's

i

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPffiE.  423

Buccessor,  as  has  been  inferred  from  a  confusion  of  names,
was  the  author  of  the  decree  by  which  the  Koman  franchise
was  finally  communicated  to  all  the  subjects  of  the  empire.'
Whatever  the  progress  of  enfranchisement  may  have  been,
this  famous  consummation  was  not  eftected  till  fifty  years
aft;er  our  present  date,  by  the  act  of  Antoninus  Caracalla.'

This  gradual  approximation  of  the  free  races  of  the  em-
pire to  a  common  status  was  the  most  marked  symptom  of
progress  towards  unity.  The  advances  Hadrian  _^^  - ^^
made  to  his  subjects  by  rendering  himself  acoes-  mab*utwtHt
sible  to  them  at  their  own  doors,  were  answered
by  a  corresponding  advance  on  their  part,  in  the  willingness
with  which  they  accepted  proffers  of  citizenship,  notwith-
standing the  drawbacks  attaching  to  it.  The  requirements
of  the  treasury  were  now  working  in  the  same  direction  in
other  quarters,  to  enforce  the  principles  of  administrative
uniformity.  The  distinction  between  the  Imperial  and  Sen-
atorial provinces  was  still  formally  maintained ;  but  the  em-
perors assumed  more  direct  power  over  the  provinces  of  the
senate,  with  a  view  to  assimilate  legal  procedure  and  taxation
generally  throughout  the  empire.  While  several  communi-
ties were  still  sufi'ered  to  retain  the  boon  of  autonomy,  the
choice  of  their  own  magistrates,  and  the  use  of  their  own  in-
ternal regulations,  the  privilege,  not  less  dear  to  freemen,  of
self-taxation  was,  perhaps,  wholly  withdrawn  from  them.
The  new  name,  which  we  may  render  by  controller^  of  the
officer  now  appointed  by  the  emperor  to  over-rule  such  local
administrations,  seems  to  imply  new  functions,  and  these  un-
doubtedly related  to  the  levy  of  tolls  and  contributions.*

Thesaurus,  with  the  legend  "  ampliatori  cmum,"  and  to  an  inscription.  Grater,
ecccviii.  1.

'  S.  Chrysost  in  Ad.  Apogl.  xrv. :  airb  ASpiavov  ^aal  navrac  dvat  'Tufuu-
ovf  •  rd  yap  ndXaiov  ovx  o!)TtJC. See  Spanheim,  Orb.  Rom.  p.  162.

'  Dion.  Ixxvii.  9.  Digest,  i.  5,  de  statu  hominum,  §  17.  Spanheim,  OrfAt
Rom.  p.  196.  The  reign  of  Caracalla  dates  211-217.  The  object  of  the  con-
stitution, it  is  agreed,  was  simply  fiscaL

*  Pliny  speaks  of  an  extraordinary  commissioner,  "  legatus  August!,"  who
was  sent  "  ad  ordhiandum  statum  liberarum  civitatum." Epist.  viiL  24. Ck>mp.

424  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROJIAXS  [A.  D.  138

With  the  assimilation  of  the  subjects'  fiscal  burdens  kept
pace  the  assimilation  of  the  law  and  procedure  by  which
The  civil  law  of  ^^  ^^^  protected  or  coerced.  The  civil  laws  of
f "Ticadon^to'  Ro^ie,  like  her  political  institutions,  had  grown
questions  be- •^p  with  the  Commonwealth  itself,  and  applied

tween  foreign- i-  '  rr

«^  from  the  first  in  strictness  to  the  mutual  relations

of  citizens  only.  The  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables,  the  written
code  of  the  Republic,  defined  the  rights  of  the  Quirites,  the
obligations  of  Quiritary  property,  and  the  mode  of  litigation
in  regard  to  them.  The  Heplies  of  the  learned  patricians,
who  devoted  themselves  to  expounding  the  law  to  their  ple-
beian clients,  referred  to  the  interpretation  of  principles  curtly
set  forth  in  the  written .  code,  and  their  application  to  the
suits  of  Romans  against  Romans ;  but  they  must  have  been
soon  extended  to  the  solution  of  questions  arising  out  of  the
dealings  of  citizens  with  sojourners,  and  even  of  sojourners
with  one  another.  As  regarded  the  tenure  of  property  and
modes  of  succession,  the  rules  of  Quiritary  possession  were
clearly  inapplicable  to  provincial  estates,  and  on  these  sub-
jects, as  well  as  some  others,  the  common  sense  of  the  juris-
consults was  directed  to  modifying  Roman  principles,  and
gradually  ventilating  more  general  methods,  under  the  title
of  the  Jus  Gentium^  or  Law  Universal.  Tlius  for  instance
the  Patria  Potestas,  or  rights  of  fathers  over  their  children,
was  specially  confined  to  full  citizens.  The  Roman  jurists
boasted  that  in  no  other  community  were  sucli  excessive
powers  granted  to  the  father  as  in  theirs ;  but  they  did  not
attempt  to  extend  these  powers  to  their  subjects.  When,
therefore,  at  Rome  or  in  tlie  provinces,  questions  of  parental
riglit  in  the  case  of  foreigners  came  before  thcni,  tliey  Avero
reduced  to  look  for  some  other  rule  of  decision  either  in  the
recognised  law  of  the  applicants'  own  country,  or  hi  default

Pllny'B  own  position  nt  Apanicn,  x.  92.  Under  Hadrian  Claudius  Hcrodcs  was
6top6urr)t^  "controller,"  of  the  froo  states  of  Atticn.  Philostr.  Vit.  JSophid.  i.
266.  The  same  olHccr  scoins  to  bear  elsewhere  the  title  of  Xoymrz/f,  "  ao-
COuntaut;"  and  trom  thin  dct)ignatlon  wo  should  infer  that  his  figiutiouB  wero
ohiefljr  fiscal. Bee  liecker's  AUerlhiimer  (Marciuardt),  iii.  1.  Hi.

A-  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  425

of  tliis,  in  such  a  law  as  they  could  themselves  ijivent  and
apply  in  accordance  with  their  own  sense  of  simple  justice.

When,  however,  all  Italy  became  Quiritary  soil,  and  the
Italians  generally  had  accepted  the  status  of  Koman  citizens,
fewer  cases  of  conflicting  principle  would  occur  Anommioo*  r»-
in  the  courts  of  the  city-pra)tor,  and  there  might  jiH^-fvUe'iSd
have  been  no  incongruity  in  enforcing  there  the  {{^"Sa**
civil  law  in  all  its  strictness.  But  in  fact,  the  '»•»'«  «»■
ideas  of  the  Romans  had  mellowed  with  their  fortunes,  and
they  had  become  anxious  to  soften  the  harshest  features,  and
expand  the  narrowest  views  of  their  law,  after  coming  in
contact  with  the  riper  and  milder  notions  of  Greeks  and  Asi-
atics. Slow  and  obscure  was  the  process  by  which  the  stiff
lines  of  the  Decemviral  code  were  rounded  into  the  flowing
lineaments  of  Justinian's  Institutes.  On  the  progress  which
had  been  made  in  this  direction  in  the  last  stage  of  the  repub-
lic, when  the  status  of  citizen  and  subject  was  still  strongly
defined  and  contrasted,  much  light  is  thrown  in  the  writings
of  Cicero ;  but  three  centuries  pass  before  the  sun  again  rises
in  the  Institutes  of  Gains,  and  then  the  distinction  of  citizen
and  subject  has  become  nearly  obliterated.*  At  the  period
we  are  now  considering,  the  two  conditions  were  dissolving
into  one  another ;  but  what  were  the  relations  of  the  law  of
the  Roman  and  the  law  of  the  foreigner,  or  what  the  charac-
ter and  application  of  the  Jus  Gentium  or  universal  law,
which  seems  to  have  moderated  between  them,  we  can  but
faintly  conjecture.'

'  Gaius,  however,  still  retains  the  former  distinction  of  dvee  R<»uani,  I^r
tini  and  Deditioii. Iiistit.  i.  3.

*  The  distinction  between  the  Jus  Civile  and  Jus  Gentium  is  stated  by
Gains  near  the  beginning  of  the  tliird  century.  Indit.  11,1.  (cited  in  the  Di-
gest L  1.  9.):  "omnes  populi  qui  legibus  et  moribus  reguntur,  partim  suo  {mto-
prio  partim  commuui  omnium  hominum  jure  utuntur.  Nam  quod  quisque  popu-
lua  ipse  sibi  jus  constituit,  id  ipsius  proprium  est,  vocaturque  jus  civile,  qua^
jus  proprium  ipsius  civitatis :  quod  vero  natiu^is  ratio  inter  omnes  homines
constituit,  id  apud  omnes  populos  perseque  custoditur,  vocaturque  jus  gentium,
quasi  quo  jure  omnes  gentes  utuntur.  Populos  itaque  Rom.  partim  suo  proprio,
partim  communi  omnium  hominum  jure  utitur."

426  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  188.

The  great  instrument  by  which  the  assimilation  of  law
was  conducted  was  the  Jiis  Honorarium^  or  official  edict  of
TheJnsHono-  the  chicf  judicial  magistrates  of  Rome/  Year
Perpetual  Edict  ^7  7^^^  ^^®  pi'setors  and  sediles,  on  commencing
of  the  pnetor.  their  term  of  office,  published  the  formula  by
which  they  proposed  to  regulate  their  administration  of  jus-
tice. This  edict,  originally  inscribed  on  a  whited  tablet,  and
suspended  in  a  public  place,  must  have  been,  in  the  first  in-
stance, a  short  and  simple  document,  setting  forth  the  recog-
nised sources  of  the  written,  with  some  leading  principles  of
unwritten  law  and  procedure.  We  may  suppose  that  in
later  times,  when  the  accumulation  of  laws,  decisions  and  in-
terpretations had  become  excessive,  the  edict  directed  the
reader  to  the  accredited  legal  experts  whom  the  judge  pro-
fessed to  adopt  as  his  guides.  In  the  existing  conflict  of  law
and  usage,  the  litigant  would  require  direction  as  to  the
course  the  bench  proposed  to  follow,  and  the  bench  would  be
glad  to  shelter  itself  under  established  precedents  and  au-
thorities.' While  in  the  city  two  praitors  dis-

The  provincial  , , ■•  i  •,>•■,  t

edict  of  the  peuscd  the  law,  the  one  to  the  citizens,  the  other
to  foreign  residents,  the  prefect  in  the  provinces
administered  justice  to  both  classes,  and  hence  the  Provincial
Edict  which  he  promulgated  was  founded  from  an  early  date
on  a  fusion  of  Roman  and  foreign  principles.  We  may  sup-
pose, indeed,  that  in  the  refined  communities  of  the  East,

'  Digest,  i.  1.  Y.  from  Papinian:  "jus  pratorium  est  quod  praetores  intro-
daxcrunt,  adjuvandi  vel  eupplendi  vel  corrigendi  juris  civilis  gratria,  propter
utilitatom  publicam ;  quod  et  honorarium  dicitiur,  ad  honorem  prsetorum  sic
nominatum." Comp.  Dig.  i.  1.  2.  10.

•  The  Edict  was  called  •' perpctuum,"  as  destined  to  be  in  force  tbrotigh  the
pnetor'a  year  of  office.  Dion,  xxxvi.  23.  ITeinecc.  Antiqti.  Horn.  Jurispr.  i.  2.
28.  Under  Hadrian  Salvius  Julianus  is  specified  ns  buving  compiled  (coinpo-
Bult)  a  "  perpetual  edict."  Eutrop.  viii.  0.  Tbis  conipiliilion  is  rofcnod  to  by
Juatininn,  and  Heoms  to  have  been  soinetinies  known  us  the  "  PMiet  of  Ha-
drian." The  nature  of  this  edict  la  oi)en  to  (pipstion ;  tberc  seems,  however,
no  reaaon  to  auiJixmo  thut  it  constituted  a  complete  or  jjermanent  code ;  nor
baa  Hadrian  any  claim  to  be  regarded  ns  n  great  Roniun  legislator.  Hugo,
HisL  Droil.  Jiom.  §  31 1. I  refer  to  the  French  translation.

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  427

familiar  with  the  philosophy  of  jurisprudence,  the  prefect  al-
lowed full  weight  to  the  local  law,  and  subjected  his  own
notions,  derived  from  the  Roman  forum,  to  considerable  mod-
ification. Among  the  ruder  populations  of  the  West,  how-
ever, there  would  be  less  occasion  for  such  accommodation,
and  the  magistrate  would  inflict  Quiritary  law  on  the  Gauls
and  Britons  in  almost  all  its  stringency.  In  either  ease  the
provincial  edict  would  refer,  perhaps,  solely  to  the  cases
which  came  under  the  cognisance  of  the  prefect  himself.'

This  high  officer  belonged  to  the  class  of  Roman  nobility,
of  which  every  member  was  supposed  to  be  generally  ac-
quainted with  legal  principles,  though  he  might  Method*  mi
in  few  instances  have  acquired  a  special  legal  K^^Jj^^ta
education.  He  came  to  his  important  post  with  "*•  p*«t1i>m«.
a  multiplicity  of  functions  to  perform,  and  with  little  or  no
practical  experience  of  the  law  which  he  was  required  to  ad-
minister. Under  these  circumstances  he  was  not  expected
to  act  wholly  for  himself.  The  prefect  having  set  forth  his
programme,  with  the  aid,  doubtless,  of  professional  advisers,
summoned  learned  assessors  to  his  aid,  or  appointed  judges
in  each  particular  case  before  him.  To  facilitate  the  ends  of
justice,  he  made  a  circuit  through  the  chief  towns  of  his  prov-
ince, assembling  in  each  the  conventus  of  the  district,  and
selecting  from  among  the  delegates  persons  whom  he  deemed
fit  to  hear  causes  in  his  name.  These  select  judges  were  not
permitted  to  decline  the  office ;  and  indeed  it  was  chiefly  in
order  to  supply  the  prefect  with  such  assistance,  that  the  con-
ventus was  summoned.  It  appears  also  that  these  judges
were  chosen  from  Roman  citizens  or  from  provincials  accord-
ing as  the  suitors  desired  to  be  ruled  by  Roman  law,  or  by
the  special  customs  of  their  own  province.  In  important
cases  the  prefect  might  refer  his  suitors  to  the  emperor  at
Rome ;  and  he  was  assisted  by  several  deputies  or  substi-
tutes, to  whom,  at  least  in  private  cases,  he  might  remit  his

*  See  Pliny's  letter  {Epigi.  i.  74.),  where  he  consults  Trajan  on  a  point  re-
garding which  he  finds  that  there  exists  no  general  law  for  the  empire,  nor  one
for  his  own  province. Trajan  makes  a  special  decree  for  the  occasion.

428  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

jurisdiction ;  and  these  deputies  also,  being  often  untrained
J.U  legal  science,  obtained  the  aid  of  professional  assessors.*  ^

The  jurisdiction  of  the  prefect  extended  to  criminal  as

■well  as  civil  causes. The  trial  was  coruiucted  publicly  in  the

forum  of  the  provincial  capital. The  iudges,

Relations  of  ,  . ,  ^  /.,.-,  ,  /»

Roman  and  "who  satc  by  the  prciect  s  side,  were  chosen  irom
the  ranks  of  the  provincials,  and  these  gave  to
the  accused  the  benefit  in  some  degree  of  judgment  by  his
own  countrymen.  There  seems  to  be  no  mention  in  the
Codes  of  any  courts  of  first  instance  but  such  as  were  com-
missioned by  the  prefect :  we  can  hardly  doubt,  however,
that  the  police  of  the  villages,  the  adjudication  of  small
debts  and  other  cases  of  petty  wrong,  must  have  been  left  to
the  summary  jurisdiction  of  native  authorities,  at  least  in
the  remoter  districts.  Beneath  the  action  of  Roman  courts
and  procedure  there  must  have  long  existed  a  native  law  and
native  usage,  which  only  gradually  gave  way  to  the  exten-
sion of  Roman  machinery." It  must  be  remembered  that  our

'  Sigonius  De  jure  provinc.  iL,  in  Grsev.  Tliesaur.  torn,  ii.  The  great  source
of  our  knowledge  of  these  matters  in  the  pre-imperial  period  is  the  Verrine
orations.  I  cannot  quit  this  subject  without  acknowledging  the  advantage  I
have  derived  from  Mr.  Maine's  interesting  volume  on  "  Ancient  Law,"  and  still
more,  perhaps,  from  personal  intercourse  with  him,

'  The  administration  of  law  in  the  Roman  provinces  has  been  well  illus-
trated from  that  in  British  India  in  some  papers  in  the  Bombay  Quarterly  Mag.
1868,  attributed  to  Sir  Erskine  PeiTy.  Our  provinces  have  been  divided  into
two  classes,  the  Regulation  and  the  Non-Regulation.  The  latter  class  comprisea
generally  the  latest  acquisitions,  in  which  there  has  been  less  opportunity  for
amending  the  native  organization  according  to  British  ideas.  Here,  as  under
the  Roman  system,  tlie  judicial  and  executive  functions  are  lodged  for  the  most
part  in  the  same  bands,  subject  to  the  general  control  of  the  central  govern-
ment. The  Judges  arc  not  lawyers  by  profession.  They  have  been  trained  as
fiacal  or  military  ofBcorB,  and  when  deputed  to  sit  on  the  tribunals,  thoy  re(iuiro
the  aid  of  asaeaaoni,  mostly  naUvcs,  whom,  however,  they  have  full  authority  to
OTemile.  This,  it  is  said,  is  the  system,  rude  and  wrongful  as  it  seems  to  us,
which  most  recommends  itself  to  the  native  mind,  accustomed  as  it  is  to  bow
to  power,  and  Insensible  to  the  principles  of  sciontifio  jurisprudi'iico.  But  since
attention  at  home  has  Iseen  called  to  tlie  duties  of  a  con(piering  race,  we  have
felt  our  obligation  to  give  our  subjects  a  better  system  than  their  own,  and  raise

A.  U.  891.]  UNT)ER  THE  EMPIRE.  429

existing  documents  inform  us  only  of  the  state  of  the  civil
law  after  the  whole  empire  had  been  reduced  to  a  homoge-
neous mass :  it  may  be  presumed,  however,  that  the  princi-
ples of  uniformity  had  gained  no  such  ascendancy  in  the  pe-
riod which  we  are  now  considering.  Among  the  various
races  which  obeyed  the  imperial  sword,  various  in  temper  as
well  as  in  condition,  we  may  suppose  that  these  principles
were  variously  appreciated ;  that  the  Gauls  and  (iermans
advanced  in  them  more  dubiously  and  slowly  than  the
Greeks  and  Asiatics.  The  intervention  of  technical  forms,
and  of  the  class  of  agents  appropriate  to  them,  was  resented
as  a  grievance  by  the  subjects  of  Varus;  just  as  in  many
parts  of  India,  at  this  day,  the  character  of  judge  and  ruler
is  held  to  be  identical,  and  any  attempt  to  separate  their
functions  is  distasteful  and  liable  to  misconstruction.  The
education  of  the  world  in  the  principles  of  a  sound  jurispru-
dence was  the  most  wonderful  work  of  the  Roman  conquer-
ors. It  was  complete  ;  it  was  universal ;  and  in  permanence
it  has  far  outlasted,  at  least  in  its  distant  results,  the  dura-
tion of  the  empire  itself.

But,  unfortunately,  education  in  jurisprudence  is  not  edu-

their  intelligence  to  appreciate  it  Accordingly,  the  gre«ter  part  of  oar  pOMca
sions  have  been  put  "  for  the  last  sixty  or  seventy  years  "  under  Regulation.
The  judicial  and  executive  are  completely  separated.  The  judges  of  the  So-
preme  Court  are  sent  out  from  England,  appointed  by  the  Crown,  and  ait  as  a
court  of  appeal  in  the  capitals  of  the  Presidencies ;  beneath  than  are  a  dis-
tinct class  of  English  judges,  dispersed  throughout  the  country  stations,  trained
by  practice  if  not  by  technical  education,  to  administer  an  imperfect  code  of
native  law,  tempered  by  English  principles,  and  the  application  of  their  own
good  sense ;  and  finally  there  is  a  large  establishment  of  native  oflBcers,  who
dispense  justice  in  the  native  fashion,  after  the  native  laws  and  customs,  subject
only  to  appeals  to  the  European  courts  above  them.  This  system,  however,  as
described  ten  years  ago,  is  undergoing  constant  modification,  and  the  impend-
ing promulgation  of  a  Code,  applying  to  both  natives  and  Europeans,  will  com-
plete the  analogy  between  our  judicial  organization  and  that  of  the  provinces
of  the  Lower  Empire ;  except  that  the  emperors  seem  to  the  last  to  have  with-
held from  their  subjects  the  boon,  indispensable  we  should  deem  it,  of  a  Su-
preme Court  independent  of  the  resident  executive,  and  responsible  to  the  sov-
ereign only.

430  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

cation  in  freedom ;  generally  speaking  it  is  much  tjie  reverse.
Decline  of  pnb- The  most  Comprehensive,  exact  and  logical  codes,

lie  spirit  com- „  ^ . . ^  ^  \ ,  . * ,  '

cident  with  the  from  J ustmian  downwards,  have  been  the  actual
Jurisprudence,  badges  of  national  servitude  and  degradation.
The  disgust  of  the  Germans  at  the  niceties  of  Roman  law
and  procedure  was  the  instinct  of  freemen,  looking  to  broad
practical  results,  and  despising  the  intellectual  attractions  of
form  and  harmony.  The  development  of  an  exact  and  philo-
sophical jurisprudence  in  the  empire  kept  pace  with  the  de-
cline of  public  spirit,  and  the  decay  of  self-respect  and  self-
assertion.  The  body-politic  became  an  admirable  machine,
but  life  and  soul  were  wanting  to  it.  Such  was  the  languor
that  was  stealing  over  Roman  society  at  the  period  of  its
greatest  brilliancy,  and  its  highest  culture.  Such  was  the
stagnation  which,  in  spite  of  material  and  even  moral  im-
provement on  all  sides ;  in  spite  of  culminating  science,
of  wide-spread  art,  of  milder  manners  and  expanding  hu-
manity ;  in  spite  even  of  spiritual  yearning,  was  beginning
to  paralyse  the  Roman  world  in  the  age  of  the  Antonines.
The  channel,  indeed,  sloped  so  gradually,  that  the  direction
of  the  current  was  hardly  perceptible  so  long  as  nothing
occurred  to  break  and  agitate  it.  But  its  downward  course
was  made  fully  apparent  on  the  first  political  catastrophe.
The  disasters  of  the  reign  of  Aurelius,  to  be  presently  re-
lated, revealed  to  all  observers  the  weakness  of  the  empire,
and  showed  but  too  plainly  that  it  possessed  no  vital  power
of  rebound  and  recovery.

Meanwhile  even  the  outward  unifoi-mity  impressed  on  the
Roman  world  had  no  effect  in  creating  a  nation. The  por-
tions of  tlic  mighty  structure  have  been  compared

Uniformity  ^  .  , t^ ,  •  x. t  \  •  ^

without  amfti-  to  mosaic  work.  Jiach  provmce,  each  district,
**°"  ''°*  almost  every  town  was  distinct  from  all  the  rest,

and  at  first  not  only  distinct  but  diflcrcnt,  like  the  several
pieces  of  a  variegated  tessellation,  such  as  adorned  the  palace
of  a  prince  or  senator.* Ultimately  they  were  reduced  to  a

'  DuboiB-Gucban,  TacUe  et  ton  SUdt,  I  667.

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  43I

single  type ;  they  were  all  of  one  shape,  size  and  colour,  like
the  flooring  of  a  plebeian  cottage ;  but  still  they  remained
separate  and  distinct  one  from  another.  There  was  uniform-
ity without  amalgamation.  In  an  earlier  chapter  I  have
shown  how  the  various  districts  of  each  province  were  pur-
posely estranged  and  kept  apart ;  how  the  system  of  local
organization  worked  in  making  each  dependent  upon  Rome,
but  all  mutually  independent.  Hence  the  mass  of  the  em-
peror's subjects  could  form  no  political  body  to  act  spontane-
ously for  his  interests.  They  were  moved  as  counters  by  the
hands  of  a  central  government,  and  employed,  often  blindly
and  ignorantly,  for  the  creation,  or  at  least  for  the  extortion
of  material  wealth.  The  producers  of  the  empire  were  sub-
jected to  the  control  and  fiscal  manipulation  of  Roman
officials,  and  these  officials  were  still,  as  in  earlier  times,  the
magnates  of  the  capital,  the  knights,  the  nobles,  and  espe-
cially the  senators  of  Rome.

III.  The  position  of  the  nobility  and  the  senate  has  been
reviewed  more  than  once  in  this  work,  at  several  crises  of
our  history. Let  us  once  more  turn  our  eyoa
upon  it,  as  it  stood  in  the  age  of  the  Flavians  and  LdnowSy!*
the  Antouines,  under  the  fostering  care  of  its  im-
perial patrons. If  Vespasian,  Trajan,  Hadrian,  Antoninus
are  the  most  virtuous,  the  most  able,  the  most  successful  of
the  Caesars,  the  secret,  as  our  authorities  insinuate,  of  their
eminence  lay  in  the  favour  in  which  they  held  the  most
august  order  of  the  citizens. It  is  by  senators,  or  by  the
clients  of  senators,  that  our  history  has  been  entirely  written;
it  will  be  interesting  to  examine  what  was  the  real  amount
of  the  influence  or  power  thus  conferred  upon  the  body  which
has  so  warmly  acknowledged  it.

The  old  traditions  of  the  free  state,  which  confined  to
senators  the  curule  and  other  high  magistracies,  were  still
religiously  maintained. It  was  only  to  the  new
classes  of  office,  directly  attached  to  the  imperial  wWch  MTe  »
service,  such  as  the  prefecture  of  the  city,  and  com- po^ce  to  th*
mand  in  the  praetorium  or  the  palace,  that  knights **

432  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  138.

and  inferior  citizens  could  be  appointed.  These  posts  were
indeed  lucrative  and  important,  and  the  nobles  deeply
grudged  the  good  fortune  of  the  upstarts  who  obtained  them ;
but  they  were  regarded  as  emanating  from  the  prince's  mere
caprice,  as  pertaining  to  his  personal  affairs,  as  touching
closely  upon  menial  service,  and  the  magnates  could  pretend
at  least  to  despise  them.  The  consuls  indeed  were  themselves
nominated  directly  by  the  emperor :  ^  but  the  consulship  was
still  illustrious  for  its  name  and  traditions,  and

Dignity  of  the  , ,  ,,.,.,  ,

consulship. not  only  the  consulship  which  gave  name  to  the

Inferior  magls-  "^  i  i  n  i  t •

trates  elected  year,  Dut  the  Supplemental  and  honorary  distinc-
tion which  bore  the  name  only,  continued  to  be
an  object  of  the  highest  ambition.^  Even  the  empty  badge
of  the  consular  ornaments,  now  lavishly  bestowed,  was
prized  and  sought  for.  The  prrotors,  lediles  and  quffistors  en-
joyed a  show  at  least  of  free  election  by  the  senate  ;  and  this
distinction  may  have  tended  to  enhance  their  credit.  The
enactments  regarding  the  mode  of  voting  at  these  elections,
at  one  time  open,  at  another  secret,  show  that  some  real  im-
portance attached  to  them.'  At  the  beginning  of  Trajan's
reign  the  practice  of  open  suffrage  was  in  use.  Old  men  in
Pliny's  time  remembered  the  gravity  with  which  this  digni-
fied procedure  had  been  invested,  and  their  testimony,  we
must  suppose,  referred  to  the  practice  under  Claudius  or
Nero.  Each  candidate  was  required  to  declare  the  grounds
of  hie  pretensions  in  tlie  face  of  the  senate.  lie  recounted  his
life  and  actions,  his  offices  and  his  honours ;  his  friends  were
summoned  to  attest  his  merits. They  spoke  briefly,  and  the

'  Tn^an,  indeed,  is  said  to  have  remitted  tliesc  elections  to  the  senate.  Plin.
Paneg.  65. :  "  Consulcs  fecit  qu6s  vos  elcgeratis."

'  Tlio  HubBtitution  of  cohhuIs  for  a  part  of  the  year  was  an  irregularity  in-
troduced by  the  first  Crosar.  Augustus  adopted  and  systoinatizod  it.  It  seems
that  down  to  the  time  of  VeH|)a8ian  the  term  of  ollicc  was  ordinarily  six
months.  From  Vespasian  to  Hadrian  it  was  reduced  to  four  months,  and  the
Antonincs  limited  it  to  three.  Tliis  rule  is  said  to  have  been  ascertained  by
IJorghesl,  the  great  epigrapiiist  of  San  Marino,  lately  deceased.  Sec  Noel  dea
Vergers,  /iiwai  ntr  M.  Aurile,  p.  ao.

'  riio.  ^attL  ill  20.,  iv.  20.

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  433

fathers  listened  with  censorial  gravity.  But  in  later  times
this  usage  had  degenerated  into  a  contest  of  loudness,  vehe-
mence and  impudence;  the  claimants  trusted  more  to  en-
treaties than  to  merit,  more  doubtless  to  bribery  than  to
either.  Trajan  enacted  laws  to  check  bribery ; '  but  the  sen-
ate, impatient  at  the  confusion  which  prevailed  in  its
elections,  insisted  with  one  voice  on  striking  at  the  root  of
these  evils  by  resorting  to  the  secret  ballot,  whicli  was  re-
commended by  the  usage  of  the  republic,  and  had  found  pa-
trons among  the  highest  authorities  of  the  free  state.*  Amid
the  fierce  selfishness,  however,  of  the  falling  Republic,  the
ballot  had  been  found  intolerable  ;  in  the  feebler  corruption
of  the  Empire  some  of  its  minor  inconveniences  soon  called
lor  reprehension.  Pliny,  who  had  been  among  the  first  to
invoke  it,  was  no  less  prompt  to  complain  of  it.  TJie
electors  inscribed  trifling  and  even  ribald  jokes  on  their  bal-
lots. The  insulted  senators  had  no  remedy  but  to  solicit  the
prince's  anger  against  the  unknown  delinquents.  But  proba-
bly, Pliny  adds,  the  delinquents  themselves  were  among  the
loudest  iu  pretending  indignation.  What  can  you  expect  in
private  life  from,  one  who  icill  act  so  scandaiously  in  ag^rave
matter  ;  who  will  dare  to  joke  and  banter  in  the  senate  f  The
had  man  cares  not  what  he  does, for^  Who  will  know  it?
He  asks  for  his  ticket,  he  takes  his  stt/his,  he  puts  down  his
head,  he  cares  for  no  man,  he  has  no  respect  for  himself.  .  .
i  .  Our  vices  are  too  potent  for  our  remedies.*  This  vehe-
mence is  indeed  somewhat  beyond  the  occasion,  and  seems
to  reflect  on  the  political  capacity  of  the  writer  who  allows
himself  to  indulge  in  it.  The  interest  of  the  account  lies
chiefly  in  the  view  it  gives  us  of  the  importance  still  attached
to  the  appointment  to  senatorial  offices.

»  Plin.  Epust.  vi.  19.

*  Cicero,  in  the  speech  De  Leg.  Agrar.  i.  2.,  had  called  the  ballot,  "  vindex
tacit«e  libertatis."  This  was  the  sentiment  he  thought  fit  to  express  on  a  popu-
lar occasion ;  but  his  philosophical  view  of  the  subject  was  difiFerenL  See  De
Leg.  iii.  6. :  "  tabella  vitiosum  occultabat  suflFragium."

*  PUn.  Epid.  iv.  25.

vol*,  vu. — 28

434  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

Yet  the  consulship  was  in  fact  a  mere  pageant :  the  prae-
tors and  aediles  were  simply  the  ministers  of  the  imperial
lesjislation. But  the  Augustan  division  of  the

Government  of  .  ,

the  provinces  provinces  between  the  emperor  and  the  senate
still  existed.  The  assignment  of  the  various  pre-
fectures was  almost  the  same  as  that  established  by  the
founder  of  the  empire.  The  senate  still  governed  the  interior
provinces  by  proconsuls  chosen  from  its  own  order.  Each
of  these  magistrates  was  endowed  with  a  competent  salary,
and  extensive  patronage,  which  he  distributed  among  the
friends  of  his  own  colleagues.  These  advantages  were  indeed
enjoyed  in  subjection  to  the  caprice  of  the  emperor,  who  often
interfered  to  annul  the  senatorial  appointment,  to  retain  a
favourite  at  his  post  beyond  the  legitimate  period,  or  events
assume  for  a  time  the  government  of  the  province  itself.  Nor
were  the  chiefs  of  the  state  unwilling  to  listen  to  complaints
against  the  senatorial  officers.  The  oppressed  might  submit
their  wrongs  to  the  very  body  from  which  their  oppressors
had  been  selected,  and  the  senate  was  compelled  to  hearken
to  them,  and  even  to  assign  them  the  advocates  whom  they
demanded.*  The  Roman  people,  in  the  person  of  their  im-
perial tribune,  presided  at  the  trial  of  extortionate  procon-
suls, and  listened  with  favour  to  declamations  fashioned  on
the  model  of  the  Verrine  orations.  Pliny  speaks  with  com-
placency of  his  engagement  to  tlie  provincials  of  Africa  and
Bretica,  to  prosecute  the  governors  from  whose  tyranny  they
had  suffered,  and  he  quickened  the  justice  of  the  senatorial
tribunal  by  statements  of  the  violence  practised  upon  Roman
citizens.  Cu'cilius,  a  consular,  one  of  tlie  delinquents,  with-
drew himself  from  judgment  by  suicide,  andMarius  Priscus

'  riin.  Ep'mt.  ii.  11.;  iv.  4.:  x.  10.  Pliny  and  Tacitus  were  appointed
(JuMt)  to  plead  for  the  AfricniiH,  by  a  Henatus-conHultum.  The  trial  of  Marina
took  place  a.  p.  100,  at  tlic  lieninniiig  of  Triyan's  roi}?n.  Pliny  accused  Itebius
Mawa  In  93,  under  Doinitian.  Tac.  Atjric.  45.  On  other  occasions  ho
appeared  for  tho  defence,  as  in  tlie  case  of  Julius  liassus,  and  Yarcnus.
SJAmL  Ti.  29.

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  435

was  sentenced  to  fine  and  banishment.*  The  fathers  were
not  suffered  to  regard  themselves  as  above  the  law ;  nor  do
they  seem  to  liave  unduly  resented  the  vigour  with  which
even  their  patrons  among  the  emperoi-s  brought  the  moat
criminal  among  them  to  the  bar  of  public  opinion.

Notwithstanding  its  manifest  weakness,  however,  the
senate,  dazzled  by  the  splendour  of  its  reputed  dignity,  con-
tinued to  cherish  the traditions  of  its  ancient ^ , ,

The  pride  of

power. The  feeling  which  anmiated  it  has  been the  i^^juw

*  .  ,  UUkintAijUMi  bT

preserved  in  the  most  glowing  pages  of  the  most  lumHrMMd
eloquent  of  the  Romans ;  the  national  imagina-
tion, which  elsewhere  displays  itself  in  various  forms  of  |)oet-
ical  invention,  seems  at  Home  to  have  brooded  on  the  past
glories  of  the  great  national  council.  The  senate,  in  its  cul-
minating period,  had  been  an  oligarchy  of  which  all  the  mem-
bers were  equal  The  action  of  each  was  subjected  to  con-
ventional rules.  Every  step,  tone,  or  look  in  the  assembly
was  governed  by  the  usage  of  centuries,  and  by  prejudices
founded  in  the  national  veneration  for  antiquity.  The  con-
script fathers  were  trained  like  soldiers  to  obey  the  word  of
comiuand,  delivered  by  their  officers  in  the  tone  of  persuasion,
and  they  moved  from  one  side  of  the  curia  to  the  other,
cheered  or  voted,  in  deference  to  signs  understood  among
them,  with  a  precision  which  might  be  envied  by  the  tacti-
cians of  a  British  parliament.  The  chiefs  of  factions  had
well-defined  positions  ;  the  prince,  the  consuls,  the  tribunes,
the  consulars  all  exercised  a  direct  sway  within  their  own
sphere,  more  like  the  authority  of  colonels  or  centurions,  than
the  precarious  influence  of  our  greatest  party  leaders.  Hence
the  senate,  whatever  personal  independence  its  members
might  claim,  had  long  been  subjected,  as  a  body,  to  almost

*  Plin.  11.  cc.  Juvenal,  i,  47. ;  ylii.  25.  120.,  who,  however,  insuiiULtes  that
the  victims  of  these  energetic  proceedings,  like  Milo  at  Massilia,  had  little
reason  to  bewail  their  sufferings :  "  Exul  ab  octava  Marius  bibit :  et  fruitur  Dis
Iratis ;  at  tu,  victrix  provincia,  ploras."  Juvenal  seems  also  to  indicate  the
frequency  of  such  accusations  at  this  period ;  but  the  names  of  Pansa  and
Natta,  which  he  introduces,  are  supposed  to  be  fictitious.

436  HISTORY  OF  THE  KOMANS  [A.D.  138.

despotic  command.  In  tranquil  times,  when  the  supremacy
of  the  nobles  was  uncontested,  it  might  respect  as  its  patron
a  Scipio  or  a  Catulus  ;  but  in  periods  of  excitement,  when  its
prerogatives  were  assailed,  when  the  knights  were  demand-
ing a  share  in  its  monopolies,  or  the  provincials  clamouring
for  equal  justice,  a  Sulla  or  Pompeius  was  the  champion  to
whom  it  turned,  and  it  was  troubled  by  no  apprehension  of
the  sword  under  wliich  it  placed  itself.  It  might  have
shrunk  indeed  from  the  prospect  of  this  armed  sway  being
indefinitely  prolonged ;  but  Sulla  had  voluntarily  abdicated,
Pompeius  had  consented  to  exchange  his  authority  in  the
city  for  empire  in  the  provinces ;  the  fortune  of  the  republic,
or  its  own,  possibly  in  the  last  resort  the  daggers  of  tyran-
nicides, might  abridge  the  date  of  too  protracted  a  sov-
ereignty.

Such  was  the  senatorial  theory  of  constitutional  govern-
ment; as  such  it  was  understood  by  Lucan  and  Tacitus.
They  asked  only,  did  the  existing  imperial  sys-
triumphs  over tcm  Correspond  with  the  spirit  of  this  theory  ?

the  freodmen.  .  .  ,  ,

was  the  emperor  a  prince  or  a  tyrant ;  tlie  elect
of  the  senate,  or  a  military  usui-per  ?  Was  he  the  champion  of
the  nobles  in  the  face  of  the  legions,  the  people  and  the  prov-
inces ;  or  was  lie  a  mere  selfish  upstart,  using  all  classes  for
his  own  greed  or  ambition  ?  In  descent,  in  character,  in  per-
son, did  his  prec'minence  betoken  the  choice  and  favour  of
the  Gods  ?  If  such  were  his  claims,  the  usage  of  a  century
and  a  half  might  reconcile  the  sturdiest  republicans  to  the
principle  of  a  life-tenure.  Augustus  had  humoured  their
scruples  by  the  show  of  periodical  resignation  and  reappoint-
ment ;  but  this  farce  was  not  repeated  by  his  successors ;
from  VcBpasiun  to  Antoninus,  the  best  and  most  honoured  of
the  CiDsarK  ])ret ended  to  no  such  overstrained  moderation.*
Though  tlu!  chiefs  of  the  state  still  retained  the  tribunitian  'J

•  The  cmpcrow  who  relgnod  long  enough  continued  to  celebrate  "  Dccen-
nulin,"  and  to  nlriko  nicdulM,  on  the  cMMiclusioii  of  eiich  tenth  year  of  their
priiici|)ut4>.  ThuM  we  have  cohiH  of  AntoninuH  I'iuB  with  the  legend,  "primi
dMenimlcfl ; "  othvra  with,  "  vot.  roI.  deceini.  ii."

A.U,  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  437

power,  and  counted  the  years  of  their  reign  from  the  day  that
they  acquired  it,  the  functions  it  symbolized  had  lost  in  the
second  century  all  political  meaning.  The  struggle  between
Rome  and  Italy,  between  Italy  and  the  provincee,  between
the  senators  and  the  knights,  the  struggle  for  the  Judicia  and
the  emoluments  of  office  abroad,  had  all  passed  away.  The
senate  retained  indeed,  as  we  have  seen,  some  political  ad-
vantages ;  but  it  was  a  senate  so  often  renewed  by  fresh  in-
fusions, so  freely  percolated  by  the  blood  of  the  lower  classes,
that  the  old  jealousies  had  lost  their  force,  and  the  feuds  of
the  republic  had  been  pacified.  Against  one  class  only  of
their  fellow-subjects,  the  freedmen,  especially  those  of  the  im-
perial household,  did  the  senate  cherish  a  grudge ;  a  class
small  in  number,  but  formidable  from  its  wealth,  from  its
favour  with  their  common  master,  from  its  opportunities  of
intruding  into  places  of  trust  and  power.  Against  this  class
it  still  held  a  hostile  attitude;  it  assailed  it  with  ridicule,
with  defiance,  with  appeals  to  the  prejudices  of  the  people
and  the  fears  of  the  prince ;  and  when  it  gained  at  last  the
prince's  ear,  there  was  no  claim  it  so  strongly  urged,  as  that
his  freedmen  should  be  discountenanced  and  their  influence
abated.  This  was  the  single  triumph  which  the  senate  ob-
tained from  Vespasian  and  Trajan  ;  and  for  this  it  lavbhed
on  them  its  loudest  praises,  and  vowed  that  the  days  of  equal-
ity and  liberty  had  once  more  returned.  The  secular  contest
of  the  Patres  and  the  Plebs,of  the  Optimates  and  the  Tribunes,
finally  died  away  in  the  disgrace  of  a  score  or  two  of  upstart
foreigners.'

Nor  must  we  overlook  the  merit  of  the  Flavian  Caesars,
and  especially  of  Trajan,  in  the  eyes  of  the  senators,  as  re-
vivers of  the  old  traditions  of  conquest. The The  nobles  ft-
Romans  as  a  nation had gloried in victories ^^r^^'
and  triumphs; but  the  nobles  had  lived  upon S^J*^^n^
them. The  wealth  and  consideration  of  the  old *^^  plunder.

'  Hadrian  was  the  first  to  employ  Roman  knights  in  his  private  service  in
the  place  of  freedmen.  Spartian,  Hacfr.  22. ;  and  this  innovation  was  grad-
ually formed  into  a  system,  and  remained  in  use  beyond  the  time  of  Constao-

438  HISTORY  OF  1  HE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138

historic  houses  had  depended  on  their  opportunities  of  com-
mand, of  plunder,  of  administrative  office.  The  peace  of  the
empire  had  reduced  the  nobles  in  this  respect  to  the  level  of
private  citizens.  Hence  their  deep  disgust  at  the  imperial
system.  They  were  never  tired,  never  ashamed  of  flouting
the  weakness  and  cowardice  of  the  princes  who  refused  to
launch  them  against  the  foreigner  on  the  frontier.  Vespa-
sian earned  their  sympathy  by  his  warlike  career  before  he
sheathed  his  sword ;  and  his  closing  the  temple  of  Janus  be-
tokened the  cessation  of  civil  rather  than  of  foreign  warfare.
The  extension  of  the  empire  in  Britain  was  continued  through-
out his  reign.  Domitian  added  a  new  province  beyond  the
Solway,  and  attempted  at  least  to  acquire  fresh  territories  on
the  Danube.  The  acquisitions  of  Trajan  exalted  him  in  the
eyes  of  his  senatorial  flatterers  to  the  rank  of  a  Pompeius  or
a  Ciesar.  But  the  old  policy  of  the  republic,  the  policy  of
the  senate  in  its  era  of  ascendancy,  then  revived  for  a  season,
could  not  be  perpetuated.  Hadrian  found  it  necessary,  like
Augustus,  to  draw  in  his  outposts,  and  Hadrian  like  Augus-
tus in  his  latter  years,  or  like  Tiberius  the  imitator  of  Augus-
tus, became  an  object  of  pique  and  discontent  to  the  senators,
and  suffered  in  character  from  their  unscrupulous  animosity.
These  passions  were  at  last  calmed  down  in  the  languid
trance  of  the  reign  of  Antoninus.

The  emperor's  freedmen  had  been  special  objects  of  jeal-
ousy because  they  intercepted  the  influence  in  his  counsels
The  council  or  which  the  Senate  claimed  for  its  own.  Augustus
empciir'f  the  ^'^*^  instituted  a  council  or  cabinet  of  fifteen,  com-
•nd  Audito-"'  prising  the  consuls  and  chief  functionaries,  with
rinm.  wlioni  he  prepared  his  measures,  and  to  wliom  he

partly  opened  the  secrets  of  his  })olicy.  Under  the  Claudii
this  intimacy  liad  been  doubtless  obstructed  by  the  personal
interest  of  Sejanus  and  Macro,  of  Pallas  and  Narcissus.  But
Domitian,  who  amidst  all  liis  vices  retained  at  least  no  fa-
tine.  Victor,  £pU.  14.:  "offlcia  Banc  publica  et  palatino,  ncc  non  militioe,  in
earn  fomuun  Btatuit,  qum  paucls  a  Constantino  immutatis  liodie  perseveruiit."

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  439

vourite  and  kept  his  freedmen  in  check,  the  council  recovered
some  portion  of  its  authority:  even  tlie  burlesque  debate  of
the  turbot  shows  that  functions  which  could  be  so  caricatured
were  not  wholly  in  abeyance.  The  couucil  or  Consistorium,
as  it  came  to  be  designated,  continued  to  gaiu  in  dignity ;
while  other  advisers,  taken  also  from  the  liighest  nobility,
iormed,  under  the  name  of  the  Auditorium,  a  bench  of  awoM
ors  in  the  emperor's  court  of  justice.'  Bound  to  their  prince
])y  honours  and  dotations,  assured  by  his  solemn  promiie
that  he  would  allownoneof  their  blood  to  be  shed  judicially,
i'uvoured  by  his  personal  intercourse,  distiuguished  not  only
by  their  garb  and  trappings,  but  by  the  sounding  title  of
Clarissimi,  flattered  with  the  declaration  made  by  Hadrian
when  he  introduced  into  their  order  his  pra'torian  prefect,
that  he  could  bestow  on  his  choicest  friend  no  higher  dignity,
the  senators  did  not  push  their  affectation  of  independence
to  acts  of  defiance  or  rivalry." The  panegyric

which  Pliny  pronounced  on  Trajan's  early  prom- KyrtewTn-

ise hazarded  the  boldest utterances of  which

they  were  now  capable. On  assuming  his  oflice  as  consul

-  Marquardt  points  out  that  knights  and  othen  below  the  nuik  of
were  admitted  into  the  council,  at  least  in  the  time  of  Hadrian,  and  9Mm»,
but  hardly  on  sufficient  groundci,  that  the  couucil  ceased  to  be  an  «'^Mwff<  of
the  senate.  Comp.  Spartian,  Hadr.  22. :  ^  caosM  ....  Hreqnaiter  aa^nt,
adhibitis  consilio  consulibus  atque  preetoribus,  tt  op<JMM  »mahfHmi.**  c.  8. :
"  optimoa  quosque  de  senatu  in  contubemium  impentoris  m^jfiitatii  MfacirU
....  erat  enim  tunc  mos  ut,  quam  princeps  causas  c«>gno«ceret  el  amotom  d
equites  Horn,  in  consilium  voearet."  But  of  these  last  it  is  said,  c.  18.:  "qoos
tamen  senatus  omnis  probasset."  Passages  are  cited  from  Dion,  Ixxx.  1.  He-
rodian,  vi.  1.  Lamprid.  Alat.  Sev.  15,  16.,  which  show  that  er&x  at  a  later
period  the  composition  of  this  cabinet  was  easentially  s^iatoriaL

*  Spartian,  Hadr.  8.  The  members  of  the  Consistorium  reodred  nlaries
amountmg  apparently  to  60,000  or  100,000  sesterces,  ^4 80/.  or  800t  Ordli,
Imcript.  2648,  cited  by  Marquardt  (Becker's  AUerlh.  ilL  2.  87,  note  10).  The
term  "  Clarissimi,"  as  a  specific  designation  of  the  senators,  may  have  come
into  use  somewhat  later;  but  Pliny  {Epist.  iL  11.;  vL  29.  88.;  Pcmtg.  90.)
qualifies  the  proceedings  of  the  illustrious  order  as  "  clarae,"  and  its  dignity  a«
"  claritas."

440  HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  138.

Extent  to  suffect  in  September  100,  tlie  orator,  according

dui'^es^nfree-  ^®  custom,  addressed  the  prince  in  a  set  speech
dom  of  speech,  j^efore  the  fathers.  Such  harangues  had  been
hitherto  confined  to  the  single  topic  of  thanks  for  the  honour
to  which  the  speaker  had  been  raised.  But  Pliny  took  a
higher  flight.  Trajan  had  but  recently  returned  from  the
provinces.  His  life  had  been  past  mostly  in  the  camps ;  he
had  hardly  yet  confronted  the  august  assembly  since  his  elec-
tion. The  object  of  the  speech  is  apparently  to  show  the
entire  harmony  which  exists  between  the  conduct  of  the  new
Caesar  and  the  vows  of  his  senate.*  Trajan  is  presumed  to
enact  the  part  of  the  perfect  ruler.  He  fulfils  every  condition
which  the  best  of  the  Romans  would  require  of  the  chief  to
whom  they  pay  willing  obedience.  He  was  not  designated
for  adoption  by  Nerva  to  gratify  an  empress.  He  was  chosen
from  among  the  citizens  as  the  best  and  worthiest.  He  who
was  to  rule  over  all  should  be  selected  from  the  midst  of  all.
Nor  though  a  genuine  imperator,  Avas  Trajan  made  emperor
by  the  army.  He  was  chosen  by  the  chosen  of  the  senate,
and  with  the  consent  of  the  senate  itself.  The  orator  pro-
ceeds to  set  forth  the  civil  merits  of  his  hero  ;  his  moderation,
in  not  multiplying  his  consulships  ;  his  just  appreciation  of
desert  in  bestowing  the  fasces  a  third  time  on  the  most  dis-
tinguished of  the  senators ;  his  noble  indignation  against  the
delators;  his  abolition  of  the  laws  of  Majesty ;  his  indulgence
to  the  people,  his  generosity  to  the  senate  and  nobles.  On
the  first  day  of  his  consulship  Trajan  had  invited  the  fathers
to  resume  their  liberty,  to  undertake  with  him  the  care  of  the
empire,  to  watch  over  the  public  weal,  to  gird  themselves
manfully  to  their  task.  Such  indeed  had  been  the  language
of  other  princes  also ;  but  none  had  ventured  to  take  them  at
their  word.  It  was  not  so  now.  Thee^  says  Pliny,  xce  fol-
low^ without  fear,  without  hesitation. Thou  commandest  us

'  See  the  Burotnary  of  the  Panegyrims  in  Gierig's  edition,  Dispulatio,  p.
xviii. ;  or  in  the  work  itnolf,  cc.  1-6. ;  26-48. ;  44-46. ;  81-88,  &c.  It  liad
nut  boon  ho  fonuurly :  "  odorut  quoa  nos  amaremus,  Bed  ct  nod  quoa  illc."
I'lin.  J'aMff.  62.

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  44]^

to  he  free  :  we  will  he  free.  Thou  requirest  us  to  expres*  our
wishes  and  opinions :  we  will  express  them.^  Intoxicated  by-
such  condesceusions,  he  allows  the  scuate  to  assume  a  toue  of
independence,  and  almost  of  condescension  also.  Though  the
emperor  has  stood  before  the  consul  seated  to  take  the  oath
of  allegiance  to  the  state;  though  iK-rfect  civil  equality  haH
been  attained  between  prince  and  people ;  though  the  magi»>
trates  are  now  free  to  act  as  they  acted  when  no  emperor  ex-
isted ;  though  the  Gods  have  been  solemnly  invoked  to  pre-
serve the  chief  of  the  state  as  long  as  he  is  faithful  to  his
duties,  and  no  longer ;  nevertheless  the  senate,  he  protestn,
will  continue  to  pay  honour  where  honour  is  due,  and  will
not  risk  its  security  by  rudely  stretching  its  acknowledged
authority.*  The  contrast  is  amusing  between  the  oratoFs
profession  of  independence  and  his  anxiety  not  to  offend  by
it ;  but  the  senate  supplied  the  best  commentary  on  its
spokesman's  language  by  its  zeal  in  protecting  the  person  of
the  emperor,  and  anticipating  his  sentence  on  every  conspir-
ator against  him.

IV.  Xevertheless  the  love  of  raillery  and  complaining
which  gained  on  the  Roman  character  as  it  lost  its  self-respect
and  vigour,  might  annoy  even  the  most  popular
piinces;  and  we  have  seen  that  both  Trajan  and imttrnTSt
Hadrian  resided  for  the  most  part  away  from  the
city,  and  drew  their  breath  more  freely  at  a  distance  from
the  Curia. The  rival  power  which  balanced  the  senate,  and
divided  Avith  it  their  jealous  vigilance,  was  the  Army. Be-
tween these  forces  a  certain  antagonism  had  always  existed.

'  riin.  Fatieff.  66.

''  Pliiu  Faneff.  44,  64,  68,  93.  Comp.  Duboi»^uchan,  TatHe  tt  mm  SMe,
i.  17.  The  consul,  speaking  solemnly  in  the  name  of  the  saiate,  repudiates  the
use  of  the  term  "  dominus,"  as  applied  to  the  emperor,  Paneg.  2,  and  in^sts
on  the  proper  difference  between  "  dominatlo  "  and  "  principatus,"  c.  45.  But
in  his  official  letters  the  same  wnier  does  not  hesitate  to  address  Trajan  as
"  domiuus."  Epkt.  x.  2,  4,  5,  &c.  So  also  in  the  ''  D.  Hadrian!  Sententis  et
EpistoUse,"  i^Corp.  Juris.  AtUe-juttin,  p.  202.  ed.  Boecking)  the  emperor  is
constantly  addressed  by  petitioners  as  "  dominus  imperator."

442  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  138.

Theprtetorian  When  Augustiis  fouTid  himself  at  the  head  of
rpTotertSrto^  forty  leglons,  it  was  difficult  to  reassure  the  coun-
^inst^Sl^ie-  ^^^  which  lay  helplessly  at  his  mercy.  The  es-
gions.  tablishment  of  a  body-guard,  to  watch  over  the

prince's  safety,  and  keep  peace  at  the  same  time  in  the  city,
was  a  concession  to  these  natural  apprehensions.  The  legions
were  disbanded,  or  dismissed  to  the  Rhine  and  Danube,  and
the  praetorians,  a  small  and  select  brigade,  humoured  by  high
pay  and  many  indulgences,  took  their  place  under  the  walls
of  Rome.  The  citizen  still  resumed  the  toga  when  he  entered
the  gates,  and  the  armed  auxiliary  was  excluded  not  from
the  city  only  but  from  the  whole  of  Italy.  In  the  second
century  the  prsetorian  cohorts  were  recruited  from  the  penin-
sula, which  thenceforth  was  exempted  from  the  military  con-
its  decline  and  scription.  The  senate  might  still  flatter  itself
**"•  that  this  formidable  body  was  unconnected  at

least  with  the  regular  army;  that  it  was,  no  foreign  force,
like  the  legions  recruited  in  the  remotest  provinces,  menacing
the  rights  of  the  citizens,  and  freedom  of  debate :  but  a  gen-
uine militia,  chosen  from  the  citizens  themselves,  in  whose
feelings  it  participated,  and  whose  privileges  it  protected
SAVord  in  hand.  The  numbers,  favour  and  consideration  of
the  preetorians  continued  to  advance,  till  the  emperors  re-
sorted more  frequently  to  the  camps,  and  made  themselves
more  eminently  the  chiefs  of  the  army.  From  that  time  the
importance  of  the  city-guard  declined.  Trajan  paid  little
regard  to  this  domestic  force,  and  gave  no  special  confidence
to  its  prefects.  At  a  later  period  Severus,  a  champion  of  the
legions,  both  affronted  and  chastised  it.  It  was  finally  abol-
ished at  the  reconstruction  of  the  empire,  and  the  avowed
establishment  of  military  goveniment  by  Constantine.

The  regular  anny  contiimed  to  occupy  its  stations  gen-
erally in  the  frontier  provinces,  where  it  was  retained  under
__  the  direct  control  of  the  emperor. With  him

Tho  rognlu*  ,  ,

•nny  a  tncroo-  rcstod  the  appointment  of  its  officers,  the  distribu-
tiAry  body.  •  *»  •

tion  of  its  several  corps,  and  the  regulation  of  its

discipline. Tlio  transformation  of  the  legions  from  a  national

A.  U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIBE.  443

militia  to  a  paid  soldiery,  though  long  consummated  in  fact,
liad  liardly  yet  been  accepted  in  principle,  and  the  burdens
Avhicli  might  be  imposed  on  every  citixen  on  the  ground  of
natural  duty,  were  repudiated  by  mercenaries  who  bargained
for  their  services.  Hence  the  soldiers  of  Til>eriu«  and  Trajan
chafed  under  the  harsh  restraints  of  the  ancient  serA'ice,  and
insisted  on  their  pay,  their  i)ension8,  their  privilege«,  which
they  regarded  as  alleviations  of  senitude.  Every-  y^..t«^  ^
where  the  officers  connived  at  a  relaxation  of  **"*>****
1  heir  discipline,  and  the  emperors  had  no  harder  or  more  in-
\  idious  task  than  to  brace  it  again,  when  they  had  become
(lomoraliKed.  It  was  easier  to  soothe  their  mur-  Emoiamenu of
murs  Ijy  largesses,  and  the  other  emoluments  of  "fv'**-
the  service,  which  it  was  the  study  of  Nero  and  Domitian  to
invent.*  The  soldier  was  withdrawn  from  the  ranks  of  cit-
izenship, taught  to  regard  himself  as  a  member  of  a  separate
commonwealth,  and  invested  with  all  the  outward  badges  of
a  distinct  and  favoured  class.  He  was  relieved  from  the  re-
strictions which  retained  the  son  of  a  Roman  family  under
the  legal  power  of  his  father,  and  forbade  him  to  devise  prop-
erty by  will.  The  soldier  was  specially  licensed  to  hold
])roperty  and  to  bequeath  it,  and  unmarried  and  childless  as
lie  was,  he  might  enjoy  the  satisfaction  of  being  caressed  by
his  own  parent  for  the  sake  of  it.*  He  was  removed,  more-
over, from  the  jurisdiction  of  the  civil  courts;  he  settled  dis-
putes with  his  comrades  before  the  tribunal  of  his  own  oflfi-

(  *  The  pnemia  militise,"  besides  ornaments  and  badges,  were  a  pension  to
Teterans,  allotments  of  land,  immunity  from  certain  taxes,  eitiienahip  in  the
case  of  auxiliaries.  We  posset?s  many  specimens  of  the  form  ol  these  di»>
charges,  or  "  tabula;  honesUe  missionis,"  thus,  for  instance :  "  Ser.  Galb*  inpe-
rator  ....  veteranis  qui  militaverunt  in  leg.  L  Adjutr.  honestam  iniiwioimn
et  ciritatera  dedit."  See  Marquardt  (Bedier's  Btam,  Aktrtk.  iil  a.  432.)
"  Comp.  Juv.  xvi.  51. :

"  Solis  prseterea  testandi  militibus  jus  Vivo  patre  dator."
Comp.  List.  ii.  12. :  "  quod  quidem  jus  initio  tantum  militantibus  datum  est  tarn
auctoritate  d.  Augusti,  quam  Nervae,  nee  non  optimi  imperatoris  Trajani ;  pos-
tca  vero  subscriptione  d.  Hadriani  etiam  dimissis  militia,  id  est  reteranis,  con-
cessum."

444  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

cers,  and  even  the  civilian  whom  he  had  insulted  was  obliged
to  appeal  against  him  to  the  partial  ears  of  the  legatus  or
centurion.*  The  awe  in  which  these  privileges  caused  him
to  be  held  by  the  quailing  provincials,  was  more  valuable
perhaps  than  the  privileges  themselves.  He  found  that  if  he
had  bartered  away  blood  and  strength,  his  elevation  in  social
rank  had  more  than  repaid  him.

It  was  fitting  that  the  legion,  the  instrument  by  which
the  empire  had  been  acquired,  should  continue  to  exist  as  one
Permanence  of  ^^  ^^^  most  permanent  and  unvaried  institutions.
tion*o?theie-  ^^^  account  already  given  of  it  under  Augustus
^°°-  and  Nero  applies  in  almost  every  particular  to

the  age  of  Antoninus.  Its  arms  and  accoutrements,  its  tac-
tics and  training,  its  personal  composition,  remained  as  of
old.  The  extension  of  the  provinces  required  some  addition
to  the  number  of  legions,  which,  accordingly,  we  find  in-
creased from  twenty-five  to  thirty ;  but  the  complement  of
each,  and  its  due  proportion  of  auxiliaries,  was  unchanged."

'  Juvenal,  1.  c.

'  Marquardt  (Becker's  Hcem.  Alierth.  ili.  2.  356.)  gives  a  list  of  the  legions
from  a  column  preserved  in  the  Vatican  Museum  of  the  date  of  M.  Aurelius.
See  Gruter,  513.  3. ;  Orelli,  3368,  corrected  by  Borghesi,  which  it  may  be  well
to  subjoin.

3  in  Britain :  ii.  Augusta, vi.  Victrix. xx.  Valeria  Victrix.

2  in  Germ.  sup. :  viii.  Aug. xxii.  Primigenia.

2  in  Germ.  inf. :  i.  Minervia. xxx.  Ulpia.

3  in  Pannon.  sup. :  i.  Adjutrix. x.  Gemina. xiv.  Gremina.

1  in  Pannon.  inf. :  ii.  Adjutrix.

2  in  Mse.^ia  sup. :  iv.  Flavia. vii.  Claudia.

4  in  Maesis  inf.  and  Dacia  :  i.  Italica. v.  Macedonica. xi.  Claudia. xiiL

Gemina.
2  in  Cappadocia :  xii.  Fulminata. xv.  Apollinaris.

1  in  Ph(Dnice :  iii.  Gallica.

2  in  Syria  :  iv.  Scythica.  xvi.  Jlavia.
2  in  Judoa :  vi.  Pcrrata.  x.  Fretensis.
1  in  Arabia :  iii.  Cyronaica.

1  in  Africa  :  iii.  Augusta.
1  in  Kgypt:  ii.  Trajuna,
1  in  IliHpania :  vii.  (icmina.
1  in  \oricum :  ii.  Italica.
1  iu  Uhiotia :  iii.  Italica.

A.U.  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIKE.  445

The  rule  which  required  apparently  the  legatus,  or  brigadier,
to  he  a  senator,  wliile  the  tribune,  or  colonel,  was  sometimes
taken  from  the  knights,  seems  to  indicate  a  concession  to  the
jealousy  of  the  imperial  councillors.  The  most  important
innovation  we  discover  relates  to  the  system  of  castrameta-
tion,  as  set  forth  by  Hyginus  in  the  time  of  Trajan.  A  com-
parison of  the  Polybian  and  the  Hyginian  camps  gbows  that
the  space  required  by  an  army  at  the  later  era  waa  lew  than
lialf  of  that  which  was  allotted  at  the  earlier;  and  we  con-
cludo  that  the  soldiers  of  the  empire  chose  rather  to  be
c  rowded  into  a  narrow  space  than  execute  the  laborious
works  to  which  the  stricter  obedience  or  hardier  sinews  of
the  republican  militia  submitted.'

The  habit  of  constructing  not  fortified  camps  only,  as  of
old,  but  long  lines  of  entrenchment  for  permanent  defence,
of  which  wo  have  met  with  such  striking  instan- „ ^ , ,„

"  S^ttom  of  mill'-

lis,  lias  commonly  been  branded  as  a  symptom  ury defenee—
of  declining  courage. Yet  the  armies  of  the  re- wotCt*

lat«d  teU,  uid

public  were  trained  to  wield  the  spade  alternately  bMt«rtan  mer-
with  the  pilum,  and  seem  never  to  have  despised
the  shelter  of  the  mound  and  fosse.  We  may  remember  the
earthworks  of  Caesar  on  the  banks  of  the  Rhone,  and  before
tlie  Poinpeian  camp  at  Petra  ;  and  the  fortified  lines  which
traversed  the  heart  of  Germany  were  begun  by  Drusus  and
Tiberius.  In  the  defensive  positions  which  the  Romans  now
assumed  on  their  own  frontiers,  they  could  not  dispense  with
the  protection  of  strong  places,  at  convenient  distances,  and
tlieir  connecting  these  posts  with  continuous  lines  was  surely
no  proof  of  cowardice.  The  system,  indeed,  of  frontier  de-
fences was  now  carried  out  more  elaborately. The  marches

*  See  the  two  systems  explained  by  General  Roy,  MU.  Antiq.  m  Seodeuul,  p.
186.  It  appears  that  the  space  required  for  19,000  men  under  the  Sdpk»  suf-
ficed to  accommodate  50,000  imder  Trajan.  The  general  diaraeteristic  of  the
Hyginian  camp  is  its  oblong  shape,  the  Polybian  being  properlT  square.  But
both  Hirtius  {Bell.  Alex.  80.)  and  Vegetius  (i.  23.^  at  an  interval  of  four  cen-
turies, tell  us  that  Roman  camps  were  often  circular,  semicircular,  or  triangular,
according  to  the  requirements  of  the  ground.

446  HISTORY  OF  THE  R0MA2JS  [A,  D.  138.

of  the  empire  assumed  the  character  of  a  military  occupation.
Their  garrisons  were  permanently  established ;  every  camp  '.
"was  converted  into  a  castle,  enclosed  in  embattled  walls  of
stone,  and  furnished  with  the  ordinary  conveniences  of  civil
life.  The  surrounding  tracts  were  assigned  to  the  veterans,
or  to  bands  of  warlike  barbarians  invited  from  beyond  the
frontiers.  Certain  battalions  were  specially  exempted  from
camp-duty,  and  lodged  as  a  local  militia  in  the  neighbouring
districts.  Bound  to  appear  in  arms  at  the  first  summons,
they  enjoyed  the  use  of  cattle,  slaves  and  implements,  sup-
plied them  by  the  state.^  The  hiring  of  barbarian  mercena-
ries, which  became  daily  a  more  important  element  in  the
military  policy  of  the  empire,  had  not  been  unknown  to  the
republic,  and  was  adopted  in  turn  by  every  imperator.*  But
undoubtedly  the  system  was  carried  further  under  Trajan  and
his  successors  than  before.  Not  bands  of  mercenary  war-
riors only,  but  tribes  and  kingdoms  were  taken  into  pay.
The  Marcomanni,  the  Astingi,  the  Jazyges  learnt  side  by
side  with  the  Romans,  the  tactics  which  they  could  employ,
when  occasion  served,  against  them.  The  cupidity  of  their
chiefs  was  inflamed  by  the  touch  of  Roman  gold  ;  and  thus,
step  by  step,  was  introduced  the  unworthy  policy,  fiital  as  it
finally  proved,  of  paying  a  disguised  tribute  as  the  price  not
only  of  active  defence,  but  even  of  abstinence  from  attack.
In  their  love  of  gold,  the  barbarians  might  vie  with  their

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiil.  64. :  "  agros  vacuos  et  militum  usui  sepositos."  The  vet-
erans settled  on  these  frontier  lands  were  afterwards  called  "  liraitanei  milites,
ripenses,  riparienscs." Codex  Theod.  vii.  22.  8.  ;  Cod.  Justin,  xi.  59.  8.

'  In  the  course  of  this  history  we  have  remarked  on  the  settlements  of
OtBsar  and  Agrippa  on  the  Rhine.  So  also  Tiberius,  Dion,  liv.  36. ;  Suet.  Tib.
9. ;  Tac  Ann.  ii.  63,  An  earlier  instance  of  the  kind  occurs  in  Livy,  xl.  34.
88.  For  a  later  instance,  see  Vopiscus  in  Prob.  14,  15.  M.  Antoninus,  after
succeeding  to  Piu«,  nuule  many  such  settlements  in  Dacia,  Tannonia,  Mtesia,
and  even  in  lUily.  Hut  he  desisted  from  introducing  the  barbarians  within  the
Alps,  in  conHo<|uence  of  some  disturbances  at  Ravenna.  Dion,  Ixxi.  11.  Koi
avTuv  kv  Vafiivvi)  rivi^  o'lKorvrec  tvEUTipiaav  ....  Kal  6ia  rovf  ovKhl  ^f
rifv  'Ira'Kiav  ovSiva  tuv  fiapjMpuv  ia//yayev,  &?M koI  Toiig  izpoaipiyfiivovc

A.  U,  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  447

more  polished  patrons,  but  they  could  hardly  exceed  them.
The  cupidity  of  the  legions  was  still,  as  in  the  •nMaamnn
more  exciting  periods  of  civil  war,  the  principle  CnawjiSi
to  which  their  leaders  could  most  safely  appeal.  ^^rf'tS
The  plunder  of  an  enemy  is  sweet  to  every  sol-  •"W»«y-
diery  ;  but  the  Roman  retained  to  the  last  the  national  taste
for  compassing  and  hoarding  petty  lucre  by  thrift  and  usury,
as  well  as  manual  labour.  The  solid  coin  he  received  for  hi»
military  pay  was  invaluable  for  investment  at  a  time  when
even  the  wealthy  lived  chiefly  on  the  produce  of  their  farms;
und  if  the  means  of  investment  were  not  at  hand,  he  commit*
ted  it  as  a  precious  deposit  to  the  soil,  often  not  to  be  brought
to  light  again  before  the  lapse  of  many  centuries.  The  do-
natives, given  in  sums  varying  from  ten  to  a  hundred  pounds
of  our  money,  required  at  every  accession,  and  every  anniver-
sary of  an  accession,  might  be  regarded  as  a  regular  advance
c)u  the  soldier's  ordinary  pay.  These  sums,  large  as  they
were,  might  be  fairly  set  off  against  the  expense  of  constant
war  on  the  enemy,  or  the  scandal  of  plunder  and  free  quar-
tere  among  the  provincials.  Let  us  not  grudge  the  Ctesars
the  credit  of  maintaining  their  legionary  hordes  with  so  little
injury  to  their  subjects,  and  on  the  whole  with  so  little  ag-
gression on  their  neighbours.  AVhen  compelled  to  wage  war
beyond  the  frontiers,  they  were  nervously  solicitous  that
their  wars  should  be  brief  as  well  as  triiuiphant.  To  gratify
the  restlessness  of  the  soldiers  sometimes  might  be  necessary ;
but  it  was  most  important  not  to  excite  the  ambition  of  the
officers.  The  imperator,  and  he  alone,  though  long  absent
from  the  camps,  must  be  regarded  as  the  chief  of  the  legions,
tlie  source  of  honour,  the  patron  of  desert,  the  tutelary  genius
whose  auspices  led  to  victory.  Hence  the  custom  of  requir-
ing the  soldiers,  through  all  their  ranks,  to  take  the  military
oath  at  the  commencement  of  every  year.  In  nothing  was
the  contrast  more  marked  between  Trajan  and  Domitian,
than  in  the  temper  with  which  each  awaited  the  announce-
ment that  this  ceremony  had  been  completed.  To  the  one^
says  Pliny,  the  day  was  happy  and  serene,  which  cast  over

448  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  138.

the  other  a  cloud  of  anxiety.  The  had  princes  full  of  restless
terror,  and  underrating  even  the  patience  of  their  subjects,
looked  out  on  all  sides  for  the  messengers  of  the  public  servi-
tude. Did  rivers,  snows  or  tempests,  retard  the  tidings,
straightway  they  apprehended  the  worst  that  they  deserved ;
they  feared  everybody  without  distinction  ;  for  bad  princes
see  their  own  successors  in  all  who  are  better  than  themselves,
and  therefore  tJiey  have  reason  to  fear  everybody.  But  Tror
Jan's  security  was  disturbed  neither  by  the  delay  of  his  mes-
sengers, nor  by  their  tidings.  He  knows  that  the  oath  to  him,
is  everywhere  being  taken,  for  he  too  has  pledged  himself  by
oath  to  all  the  citizens.^

The  balance  thus  adjusted  between  the  senate,  the  praeto-
rians, and  the  legions  was  precarious  and  temporary.  It  was
The  emperors  i^i  fact  a  compromisc  of  pretensions  and  forces
champions^  of  which  required  for  its  security  wisdom  and  tem-
the  sMate^*^  P®^  "^  *^®  chicf  of  the  State,  unreserved  surrender
powercd^by  the  ^^  ambition  in  the  nobles,  and  the  continued  in-
eoidiers.  activity  of  the  armies  on  the  frontier. So  long

indeed  as  the  prince  retained  his  place  in  the  city,  the  guards
who  surrounded  his  person  had  the  power  to  make  or  un-
}nake  him  ;  but  few  as  they  were  in  number,  and  subject  to
his  constant  care  and  vigilance,  he  had,  generally,  ample
means  of  attaching  or  controlling  them.  But  circumstances
were  in  progress  which  compelled  him  at  no  distant  date  to
quit  the  curia  and  the  praetorian  camp,  and  throw  himself
into  the  lines  on  the  Rhine  and  Danube.  A  preponderating
influence  was  thus  given  to  the  army  both  in  the  choice  of
the  ruler  and  the  mode  of  government.  The  champion  of  the
soldiers  bocaine  the  terror  of  the  senate,  which  he  seldom
met  but  to  oppress  or  chastise  it.  His  own  perilous  eminence
was  only  retained  by  pampering  the  multitude  of  his  mas-
ters, cither  by  constant  wars,  or  by  plunder  and  confiscation.
Once  or  twice  tlie  seiuite,  maddened  by  wrongs  and  insults,
ventured  to  oi)poBo  to  a  baseborn  Thracian  or  Illyrian,  in-

- '  Plin.  Pawg.  68.

A.  U,  891.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIBE.  449

vested  by  the  soldiers  with  the  imperial  purple,  a  chief  of  its
own  rank,  and  its  own  appointment ;  but  strength  was  wanting
to  its  pretensions,  and  the  elect  of  the  nobles  soon  fell  before  the
favourite  of  the  army.  Had  the  empire  remained  unassailed
iVoni  without,  it  is  possible  that,  under  a  succession  of  pru-
dent princes,  the  compromise  of  the  Flavian  era  might  have
been  maintained  indefinitely ;  but  its  wealth  waa  too  tempt-
ing, the  weakness  of  its  inanimate  bulk  too  apparent ;  the  cu-
pidity and  the  confidence  of  the  barbarians  waxed  together;
and  the  great  onset  they  made  on  it  in  the  latter  yean  of
Aurelius,  rendered  the  decline  of  the  constitutional  monarchy
into  a  pure  military  despotism  both  inevitable  and  rapid.

vot,  Tii. — 29

450  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS  [A.D.  161.

CHAPTER  LXYIII.

U. AURELIUS ANTONINUS SOLE EMPEROR. — ASSOCIATION OF VERUS. — DISTCRB-

ANCES ABROAD AND CALAMITIES AT HOME. VERUS CONDUCTS A WAR WITH

PARTHIA. JOINT TRIUMPH OF THE EMPERORS, 166. — ADMINISTRATION OF AU-

RELIUS AT ROME. INROADS OF THE GERMANS, SCYTHIANS AND SARMATIANS

ON  THE  NORTHERN  FRONTIER. — PESTILENCE  SPREAD  THROUGH  THE  EMPIRE  BY
THE  LEGIONS  RETURNING  FROM  SYRIA. — THE  EMPERORS  ADVANCE  TO  AQUI-
LEIA, 167. — ^THEY CROSS THE ALPS, 168. — RETURN AND DEATH OP  VERUS,

169. — AURELIUS ON THE DANUBE. HIS VICTORY OVER THE QUADI, 174. —

HIS  DOMESTIC  TROUBLES. — UNWORTHINESS  OF  HIS  SON  COMMODUS. — LICEN-
TIOUSNESS  OF  HIS CONSORT FAUSTINA. — REVOLT AND  DEATH OF AVIDIUS CAS-

SIUS, 175. AURELIUS IN THE EAST. ^HE RETURNS TO ROME AND TRIUMPHS

OVER  THE  SARMATIANS,  176. — REPAIRS  AGAIN  TO  THE  DANUBE.^ — HIS  SUC-
CESSES  OVER THE BARBARIANS, AND DEATH, 180. COMPARED  WITH ALFRED

THE GREAT,

SYMPTOMS OF  DECLINE OF  THE EMPIRE. — 1. CONTRACTION OF  THE CIRCU-
LATION.— 2. DECREASE IN POPULATION. — 3. EFFECTS OF VICE, ARISING FROM

SLAVERY. 4. EXHAUSTION OF ITALIAN BLOOD, IDEAS, AND PRINCIPLES. —

6.  EFFECT  OF  PESTILENCE  AND  NATURAL  DISTURBANCES. — REVIVAL  OP  SUPER-
STITIOUB  OBSERVANCES  AND  PERSECUTION  OF  THE  CHRISTIANS. — ^THK  "  MEDI-
TATIONS "  OF  M.  AURELIUS. — STOICISM. — NEW  PLATONISM. — REVIVAL  OP  POSI-
TIVK  BKLOEr. — CHRISTIANITY. — CONCLUSION. — (a.  D.  161-180:  A.  U.  914-933.)

OF  all  the  CoDsars  whose  names  are  enshrined  in  the  page
of  history,  or  whose  features  are  preserved  to  us  in  tlio
The  utotuo  of  repositorics  of  art,  one  alone  seems  still  to  haunt
tL'cMDpido-'*"  *^®  eternal  city  in  the  place  and  the  posture  most
«"•*■  familiar  to  him  in  life. In  the  equestrian  statue

of  Marcus  Aurolitis,  which  crowns  the  platform  of  the  Cam-
pidoglio,  imperial  Koine  lives  again.* Of  all  her  consecrated

'  This  noblo  figure  of  bronze,  originally  gilded,  was  extracted  from  i\w.  ruins
of  the  Forum  in  1187,  and  placed  before  the  Latcran  palace  by  Clement  III.

i

A.  U.  914.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  451

sites  it  is  to  this  that  the  classical  pilgrim  should  most  de-
voutly repair ;  this  of  all  the  monuments  of  Roman  antiquity
most  justly  challenges  his  veneration.  For  in  this  figure  we
behold  an  emperor,  of  all  the  line  the  noblest  and  the  dear-
est, such  as  he  actually  appeared ;  we  realize  in  one  august
exemplar  the  character  and  image  of  the  rulers  of  the  world.
We  stand  here  face  to  face  with  a  representative  of  the
Scipios  and  Ca}sars,  with  a  model  of  the  heroes  of  Tacitus
aud  Livy.  Our  other  Romans  are  effigies  of  the  closet  and
the  museum ;  this  alone  is  a  man  of  the  streets,  the  forum,
and  the  Capitol.  Such  special  prominence  is  well  reserved,
amidst  the  wreck  of  ages,  for  liira  whom  historians  combine
to  honour  as  the  worthiest  of  the  Roman  people.

The  habits  of  mind  which  Aurelius  had  cultivated  during
the  period  of  his  probation,  were  little  fitted,  perhaps,  to
liive  him  a  foresight  of  the  troubles  now  impend-

Auivliiu  (

iiig. In  presiding  on  the  tribunals,  m  gmding omIj-mk
the  deliberations  of  the  senate,  in  receiving  em-  withhim«einn

, .  ,  . .  .  » I 3 *•»•  empire.

bassies  and  appomtnig  magistrates,  he  had
shrunk  from  no  fatigue  or  responsibility ;  but  the  distaste  he
tx pressed  from  the  first  for  his  political  eminence,  continued
no  doubt  to  the  end  ;  his  heart  was  still  with  his  chosen  stu-
dies, and  with  the  sophists  aud  rhetoricians  who  aided  him
in  them.'  Hadrian  in  mere  gaiety  of  heart,  turned  the  prince
into  an  academician,  but  it  was  with  genuine  reluctance,  and
under  a  strong  sense  of  duty,  that  Aurelius  converted  the
academician  into  the  prince.  But  the  hope  that  his  peculiar
training  might  render  him  a  model  to  sovereigns,  the  recol-

under  the  name  of  Constantine,  a  misnomer  to  which  it  owes  perhaps  its  pre*-
ervation.  In  1533  it  waa  removed  to  the  Capitol,  where  it  now  stands.  Its
base  is  supposed  to  have  been  recently  discovered  between  the  arch  of  Sevems
and  the  milliary  column.  It  may  have  nearly  replaced  the  equestrian  statue  of
Domitian,  to  which  it  seems  to  have  bome  a  resemblance  in  the  attitude  of  the
rider. See  above,  Chapter  Ixii.

*  Capitol.  31.  Anton.  Phil.  5.:  "ubi  se  compcrit  ab  Hadriano  adoptatum^
magis  est  deterritus  quam  lastatus  ....  cumque  ab  eo  domestici  quaererent,
cur  tristis  in  adoptionem  regiam  transiret  ?  disputavit,  quae  mala  in  se  contine-
i-et  imperium."

452  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS  [A.D.  161.

lection  of  the  splendid  fallacy  of  Plato,  that  states  would
surely  flourish,  were  but  their  philosophers  princes,  or  were
but  their  princes  philosophers,  sustained  him  in  his  arduous
and  unwelcome  task,  and  contributed  to  his  success  in  it.*
Though  little  aware,  as  yet,  of  the  unparalleled  demands
which  the  exigency  of  public  affairs  would  actually  make
upon  his  energies,  he  showed  at  the  moment  of  his  accession
that  he  had  completed  a  conquest  over  himself  Although,
at  Hadrian's  express  direction,  the  young  Yerus  had  been
adopted  together  with  him  by  Antoninus,  their  parent  had
resolved,  from  the  first,  to  treat  them  on  an  unequal  footing.
He  had  given  his  own  daughter  to  Aurelius ;  he  had  associ-
ated him  in  the  government,  and  bestowed  on  him  his  confi-
dence as  his  destined  successor.  To  Yerus  he  had  shown  no
such  special  marks  of  favour.  He  had  scrutinized  the  child's
character,  in  which  no  training  availed  to  correct  disorders
inherited  from  a  weak  and  dissolute  sire ;  and  even  when
Yerus  attained  to  manhood,  Antoninus  would  not  suffer  him
to  participate  in  the  duties  of  sovereignty.  He  seems  to
have  placed  the  youth  in  no  public  post  whatever ;  but  sure-
ly a  man  so  good  and  just  would  not  thus  have  slighted  his
ward,  had  he  not  been  convinced  that  his  foults  were  incor-
rigible.* Accordingly,  in  nominating  a  successor,  he  seems
to  have  passed  over  Yerus  altogether.  But  Aurelius  had  no
such  confidence  in  his  own  superiority.  He  suffered  his
affection,  at  least,  to  persuade  him  that  he  could  guide  his
brother's  steps  and  cover  his  deficiencies.  When  the  sen-
ate hailed  him  with  acclamations  as  the  natural  heir  and
successor  to  their  deceased  favourite,  he  caused  all  his  own
honours  and  offices  to  be  communicated  to  Yerus,  giving  him
the  title  of  Augustus  as  well  as  of  Cajsar ;  so  that  now,  for

'  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  Phil.  27.:  "sontentia  Platonis  semper  in  ore  fuit:
florcro  civitatcs,  si  aut  ])hil()H()])hi  iiiiperarcnt,  aut  impcratoresphilosopliarontur."
Comp.  Plato,  Da  Republ.  v.  IH,  referred  to  by  Cicero,  ad  Qu,  fratr.  i.  1.  10.
Victor  quotes  the  aentimcnt  on  tiiat  of  liie  elder  Antoninua.

*  OapitoL  in  Ver.  imp.  3. :  "  diu  uutoiu  ct  privatus  fuit,  ct  ca  lionoriiieentia
oaroit  qua  Maroua  omabatur."

J

I

A.  U.  9U.J  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  453

the  first  time,  two  August!  sate  together  in  the  purple,  and
the  legends  of  the  coinage  celebrated  their  mutual  concord
or  joint  liberality.'  Aurelius  henceforth  contented  himself
with  the  legitimate  prerogative  of  seniority  and  the  natural
ascendancy  of  a  nobler  and  stronger  character;  nor  did
Verus,  whose  slight  and  perhaps  vicious  temper  was  not  de-
void of  affection,  unduly  resent  the  superiority  thus  gently
asserted.  The  elder  emperor  assumed,  indeed,  somewhat  of
the  parental  relation  towards  his  younger  colleague,  betroth-
ed to  him  his  daughter  Lucilla,  and  directed  him  to  bear  the
adoptive  names  of  Lucius  Aurelius  Antoninus  Verus  Commo-
dus.  After  transacting  the  requisite  ceremonies  in  the  sen-
ate, both  princes  repaired  together  to  the  prtetorian  camp,
and  obtained  the  sanction  of  the  soldiers  to  their  installation,
with  a  promise  of  20,000  sesterces  to  each  of  the  guards,  and
a  proportionate  largess  to  the  legionaries.

This  liberal  oflor  was  no  doubt  promptly  redeemed. The
treasury  was  full,  and  at  the  critical  moment  of  the  transfer
of  power  the  chief  with  money  in  hand  com-
manded  all  suffrages. Already  the  emperors  ontiwfron-
were  troubled  with  the  report  of  an  insurrection
of  Iberians  in  Lusitania,  and  of  an  irruption  of  Moors  in-
to Spain.* The  Chatti  broke  ijito  Gaul  and  Rhstia,  count-
ing, perhaps,  on the unsteady  attitude of  the provincial
rulers ;  and  in  Britain  we  are  assured  that  the  prefect  Statins
Priscus  was  offered  the  purple  by  his  soldiers,  and  hardly
suffered  to  decline  it.* Aurelius,  with  prudence  and  moder-

'  Capitol.  1.  c. :  "  sibique  consortem  fecit,  cum  illi  soli  senatus  d«tulisset
imperium."  Eutrop.  viii.  6. :  "  turn  primum  Rom.  resp.  duobus  ,  .  .  paruit ;
cum  usque  ad  eos  singulos  semper  habuisset  Augustos."

'  Eutrop.  viii.  8,  of  the  elder  Antoninus :  "  a^rarium  opulentum  reliquit.**
'  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  Phil.  8.  The  conduct  of  Priscus,  unnoticed  by  the
earlier  historians,  is  recorded  from  some  other  sources  by  Constantine  Porphyr-
ogenitus  :  art  6"  iv  Bpcrawia  arpaTtijTac  TlpiaKov  vvnarpa-niyov  t'tXovro  aiTO-
Kparopa-  6  Se  napyryaaTo.  Noel  des  Vergers,  Eaaai  gur  M.  AvriU,  p.  29.  The
successive  posts  held  by  Priscus  are  specified  in  an  inscription  found  at  Rome,
which  may  have  been  engraved  on  the  base  of  a  statue.
^ *  Capitol.  M.  AjUoti.  Phil.  21,  22.

464  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  161.

ation,  contented  himself  with  recalling  his  rival,  and  gave
him  another  command  in  Syria,  where  his  military  talents
might  be  serviceably  employed.  Calpurnius  Agricola,  who
was  sent  to  replace  him,  diverted  the  minds  of  the  legion-
aries by  a  well-timed  attack  on  the  Caledonians ;  but  his  ob-
ject was  perhaps  gained  when  he  had  led  forth  his  men  from
their  camps,  and  the  total  absence  of  inscriptions  of  this  date
on  the  line  of  the  Antonine  w^all  seems  to  show  that  the  Ro-
man arms  were  not  now  seriously  occupied  on  the  frontier  of
the  British  province.^

The  commander  of  the  forces  in  Syria  was  always  formid-
able to  the  emperor  at  Rome,  especially  at  the  moment  of  a
venis  asBumes  "^^  acccssion.  When  we  hear  that  on  the  death
onhnoreTs^in  of  Antoninus  war  broke  out  on  the  eastern
Syria.  frontier,  we  may  guess  that  the  new  rulers  hoped

to  anticipate  revolt  by  an  aggressive  movement.  But  the
mutual  jealousy  of  the  Romans  and  Parthians,  ever  on  the
watch  to  baffle  each  otlier  in  the  affairs  of  Armenia,  was
ready  at  all  times  to  burst  into  a  flame ;  and  the  last
thoughts  of  Antoninus,  embittered  by  the  misconduct  of  his
royal  clients,  may  have  been  clouded  with  apprehensions  of
an  outbreak  in  this  quarter,  as  soon  as  his  own  firm  hand
should  be  withdrawn.'  There  was  serious  prospect  of  war
in  the  East.  It  was  deemed  prudent  for  one  at  least  of  the
emperors  to  assume  command  there  in  person,  and  Aurelius
deputed  to  his  colleague  the  care  of  this  enterprise,  in  which,
with  chosen  generals  at  his  side,  he  might  gain  distinctions,
while  his  frivolity  and  weakness  would  be  removed  at  least
from  the  gaze  of  the  citizens.  Nor,  indeed,  was.  tlie  charge
Aurelius  retained  for  himself  at  liome  lighter  or  less  in\port-
ant.

*  Sttiart,  Culr<l(nii(i  liiimaua  ;  Noel  dos  Vor|j;orfl,  Eitsai  sur  M.  Aurck,  p.  63.
The  name  of  CalpiiniiuH  Agricola  occura  on  the  lower  wall.  Gruter,  Iimavpt.
86,  1. ;  Orcll.  JnscrljU.  iii.  15801.

'  TliuH  CapltollnuM  reports,  in  ni)pnreiit  eontradietion  to  other  statements,
that  on  his  death-bed  Antouinua  "  nihil  aliiid  quani  dc  regibus  quibus  irasce*
batur  locutiui  est."

A.  U.  914.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  455

Though  the  eagles  had  retreated  from  the  Tigris  to  the
Euphrates,  the  chiefs  who  had  seen  how  irresistible  was  their
swoop,  and  how  terrible  their  fury,  had  not  ven-
tured  to  follow  them  to  their  uests,  and  assail  Rome  in  the
them  in  their  own  fastnesses.  But  the  Partliians
seized  the  moment  of  a  change  in  the  succession  for  a  side
blow.  Another  Vologesus,  who  had  had  no  personal  expe-
rience of  the  Roman  valour,  revived  the  claims  of  his  nation
over  Armenia.  The  legions  were  summoned  to  assert  the
influence  of  the  empire :  but  the  legions  were  enervated  by
long  peace  and  luxury ;  discipline  had  been  shattered ;  and
neither  the  soldiers  nor  their  oflScers  were  fit  to  contend
against  a  vigorous  foe  in  a  difficult  country.*  The  Roman
arms  met  with  a  series  of  reverses.  Their  defeat  at  Elegia
was  severe  enough  to  recall  the  disasters  of  Charrse  and  the
Teutoburg.  Severianus,  prefect  of  Cappadocia,  deceived  by
a  pretended  prophet,  was  slain,  with  the  total  rout  of  a
legion.*  Meanwhile,  Aurelius  had  accompanied  his  colleague
into  Campania,  and  there  bade  him  speed  on  his  mission  to
the  East ;  but  Vorus  had  loitered  on  the  way,  and  was  still
wasting  liis  time  in  Apulia,  while  the  authority  of  the  empire
was  imperilled  on  the  frontiers.  Fortunately,  ,,_,,,^,,
liome  still  possessed  in  the  East  a  captain  of  the N>J«Bdid tIo- '

. .  tori««.

ancient  stamp.  The  valour  of  Avidius  Cassius
cliecked  the  advance  of  the  victors,  and  turned  the  tide  of  vic-
tory. The  whole  force  of  the  empire  was  placed  at  once  in
his  hands.  Verus  reached  the  province,  but  took  no  active
part  in  the  campaigns  that  followed.  The  peace  which  he
languidly  offered  was  disdainfully  refused.*  While,  how-
ever, the  young  prince  amused  himself  at  Antioch  and  Daphne,

'  Fronto,  I^ist.  (ii.  193.),  draws  a  picture  of  the  degeneraoj  of  the  Syrian
army.

'  Lucian,  in  Alexandro,  e.  27.  The  leader  of  the  Parthians  is  here  called
Othryadcs,  a  mistake  for  Osroes,  or  Chosroes.  Comp.  Lucian,  Quomodo  HitL
sit  conscrib.  c.  21.  Dion,  Ixxi.  2.,  describes  the  Parthians  as  the  assailants.
The  Romans  were  defeated,  as  of  old,  by  the  use  of  the  bow.

*  Fronto,  however,  turns  this  transaction  mto  a  subject  of  panegyric  (iL  341.):

456  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS  [A.D.  161.

or  fretted  at  the  ribald  jokes  of  the  populace,  Cassius  led  his  le-
gions once  more  to  the  Tigris,  took  the  capitals  of  the  Parthian
monarchy,  sacked  Seleucia,  and  burnt  the  royal  palace  at  Ctesi-
phon.^  The  conquests  of  Trajan  were  suddenly  recovered ;  the
glory  of  the  Roman  arms  was  vindicated  ;  the  confidence  of  the
soldiers  was  re-established.  Statins  Priscus,  who  succeeded  to
the  command  in  Cappadocia,  reoccupied  Artaxata.  Furius
Satuminus,  Claudius  Fronto,  Martins  Verus,  Julius  Marcia-
nus,  and  Pontius  ^lianus,  the  chiefs  of  the  victorious  army,
shed  a  halo  of  renown  over  the  last  splendid  successes  of  the
empire.*

Nor  did  these  gallant  warriors  want  for  pens  to  celebrate
their  exploits.  The  excitement  caused  by  this  sudden  revi-
These  actions  "^^1  ^^  ^^^  ^^^  Romau  prowcss  sccms  to  have
the^hutories  of  kindled  the  imagination  of  the  men  of  letters,  and
the  time.  transformed  the  herd  of  grammarians,  anecdotists

and  rhetoricians  into  military  historians."  All,  however,  that
we  know  of  their  compositions,  in  which  they  signalized  -the
renown  of  Verus  and  Cassius,  is  unfortunately  confined  to
the  sarcastic  criticism  of  a  contemporary  satirist.  Lucian
requires  us  to  believe  that  the  narratives  of  these  pretended
Livys  and  Sallusts  were  mere  clumsy  romances,  and  that  the
few  real  facts  they  recorded  were  overlaid  with  fictions,  or

"  litcras  ultro  dcdenit  bclluin,  ei  vcUet,  couditionibus  poneret.  Dum  oblatam
paccm  spcroit  barbarus,  male  mulcatus  est."

*  Dion,  1.  c.  Capitol.  Anion.  Phil.  9.  Vcr.  8.  Lucian  refers  to  the  se-
Tcrity  of  this  contest,  and  the  great  battles  fought  at  Europus  and  Sura,  on  the
Euphrates.  Cassius  entered  Babylon.  The  names  of  five  legions,  and  of  de-
tachments from  various  others,  which  served  in  this  war,  may  be  recovered
from  medals  and  inscriptions. Noel  des  Vergers,  Jiissai,  p.  57.

'  These  names  may  be  traced  in  various  inscriptions,  and  also  in  liuoian's
satire.  Tlic  Chinese  writers  make  mention  of  a  pi-etended  Konian  embassy,
referred  to  this  period,  from  a  chief  designated  as  Antum  (Antoninus).  Noel
del  Vergen,  p.  68.

•  Lucian,  Quomodo  IFut.  »U  eonacrib.  Of  this  swarm  of  historians  we  re-
cover the  namea  of  Calpumianus  of  Tompeiopolis,  of  Callimorphus,  surgeon  to
a  legion,  of  Antiochianus,  of  Demetrius  of  Sugaleasus,  and  of  Asiuius  Quadra-
tuf . Noel  dc8  Vcrgor«,  p.  62.

A.U.  914.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  457

distorted  by  rhetorical  flourishes.  The  work  which  Fronto,
the  preceptor  of  Verus  and  Aurelius,  consecrated  to  this  in-
teresting subject,  has  escaped  the  reflections  of  Lucian  :  pos-
sibly it  was  not  composed  till  after  the  publication  of  the
treatise  On  the  Art  of  Writing  Ilistory.  The  introduction
alone  remains.  Its  merit  is  trifling,  and  may  cause  us  to
wonder  at  the  excessive  reputation  enjoyed  in  his  own  day
l>y  its  author ;  nor  can  we  doubt  that  its  affected  verbiage
was  devoted  to  covering  all  the  defects,  and  enhancing  all  the
merits  of  the  imperial  hero.  Posterity  at  least  was  not  de-
ceived by  it.  The  common  voice  of  later  writers  declared
that  Verus  proved  wholly  incompetent  to  direct  the  affairs
over  which  ho  nominally  presided,  while  some  insinuated,
that,  intoxicated  by  his  lieutenants'  successes,  he  dreamt
tliat  he  could  govern  the  empire  alone,  and  actually  intrigued
to  overthrow  his  colleague  and  patron.'

After  a  struggle  of  five  years,  Vologesus,  driven  from  his
capital  and  overmatched  in  every  quarter,  was  compelled  to
sue  for  peace. The  cession  of  Mesopotaniia  was .  . ^
demanded  and  enforced. Once  only  during  the rfAimfUutana
l)rogress  of  hostilities  had  Verus  quitted  his  vo-
luptuous retreat,  when  he  retraced  his  steps  asfiir  as  Ephesus
to  receive  his  aftianced  bride,  and  prevent,  as  was  surmised,
the  further  advance  of  his  father-in-law  within  his  dominions.
On  the  conclusion  of  i>eace  in  166  he  hastened
back  to  Rome,  where  Aurelius  received  him  with
open  arms,  and  threw  a  veil  over  his  want  of  personal  prow-
ess by  conducting  a  joint  triumph  with  him,* The  two
emperors  assumed  the  titles  of  Parthicus,  Armeniacus,  and
Medicus,  though  Aurelius  refused,  at  first,  a  share  in  honours
for  which  he  had  not  personally  contended.* Verus,  ashamed

'  Fronto,  Be  Princip.  Eist.  (ii.  837.)  Verus,  in  one  of  hia  letters,  entreats
yronto  to  write  the  history  of  this  war,  ofleriug  to  send  him  the  neeesaary  ma-
terials. The  actual  account,  as  far  as  our  fragments  extend,  is  a  cnrious  paral-
lel between  Trajan  and  Verus,  iu  which  the  palm  is  openly  given  to  the  latter.

"  CapitoL  Anion.  Phil.  12.

'  Of  these  and  several  triumphal  designations  Medicus  alone,  it  is  sud,

458  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMAN'S  [A.  D.  166.

perhaps  of  his  own  demerits,  pressed  these  honours  upon  him,
and  at  last  overcame  his  reserve.  Which  of  the  two  heroes,
asked  the  courtly  Fronto,  ought  we  most  to  admired

It  has  been  said  that  the  cares  of'  empire  at  home,  with
which  Aurelius  specially  chai'ged  himself,  were  not  less  grave
M.  Aurelius  at  tlian  thosc  on  the  frontier.  After  attending  his
Eome.  colleague  into  Campania,  he  had  returned  to  ap-

ply all  his  resources  to  the  relief  of  the  city,  which  was  suf-
His  deference  Bering  from  inundations  and  scarcity.  Casting
to  the  senate,  asidc  his  books,  to  which  he  had  little  leisure
again  to  apply  himself,  and  bidding  farewell  to  the  benches
of  the  rhetoricians,  which  he  had  so  long  frequented,  he  took
the  affaii's  of  state  and  the  wisest  counsellors  of  the  sen-
ate to  his  bosom.  He  increased  in  various  ways  the  employ-
ments and  the  consideration  of  the  illustrious  order.  The
appellate  jurisdiction  of  this  supreme  court  was  extended  by
him,  particularly  in  cases  in  which  the  prince's  own  interests
were  concerned.  Hadrian  had  superseded  the  functions  of
the  old  municipal  officers  of  Italy,  the  duumvirs,  aediles,  and
dictators  of  Samnium  and  Etruria,  by  the  appointment  of
four  juridici  of  consular  rank.'  But  this  institution  was  again
revised  by  Aurelius,  wlio  oftered  the  high  and  lucrative  dis-
tinction to  a  larger  class  by  extending  it  to  prnotors  also.'
Beneath  these  superior  officers  was  a  larger  class  of  curators,
who  discharged  judicial  functions  in  the  several  burghs  of
Italy,  and  these  were  now  to  be  selected  from  the  whole  body
of  tlie  senators.  Aurelius  was  constant  in  liis  attendance  in  the
curin,  even  when  he  had  no  measures  of  his  own  to  propose.
When  he  had  a  lidotion  to  make  to  the  fathers  he  would
come,  even  from  tlie  distance  of  a  Campanian  villa,  in  person,

never  occurs  in  nieilalH  or  iascriptions,  to  avoid,  perhaps,  a  possible  misinter-
pretation.

«  Spartlan,  Hadrian.  19. Capitol.  Anion.  Fhil.  11.

*  Tlius  wo  road  in  an  inscription  of  C.  Corneliua  Thrallus,  "  juridioua  per
Flaminiam  et  Uinl)riam,"  wlio  in  pniirted  l>y  tlie  jiooplc  of  Arlniinum  "ob  exi-
iniam  modoralionem,  et  in  Htcrililuto  annono)  lii))or!osani  ridein."  From  this
mention  of  a  Hcarclly  Noel  dos  Verj^ors  (/iJ(«ai,  46.)  suppoHCH  that  tlio  institu-
tion may  be  referred  to  tlio  first  year  of  Aurelius,  a  very  precarious  conclusion.

A.  U.  919.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  459

rather  than  introduce  it  by  the  moutli  of  his  qusestor.  Xor
did  lie  fail  to  attend  the  comitia  of  the  senate,  at  which  the
jjrince's  direct  appointments  were  still  formally  ratified,  and
which,  it  seems,  were  tedious  solemnities,  often  protracted
far  into  the  night.  Yet  he  would  never  quit  the  assembly
before  the  consul  pronounced  the  venerable  formula :  Con-
.script  fathers  we  no  longer  detain  you.  The  respect  thus
paid  it  was  acknowledged  ])y  the  gratitude  of  the  body,  and
:i  full  meed  of  praise  accorded  him  by  his  historians.  It  was
taken  as  a  further  compliment  that  when  he  wished  to  grat-
ify a  friend  with  the  choicest  of  boons,  iustead  of  giving  him
slaves  or  ornaments,  he  conferred  on  him  the  rank  of  senator.
None  of  the  virtuous  chiefs  of  Rome  showed  more  deference
to  the  senate.'

The  merits  of  this  excellent  emperor  consisted,  however,
not  so  much  in  the  vigour  of  his  own  acts,  or  the  breadth  and
iustness  of  his  views,  as  in  the  choice  of  good
ministers  and  able  instruments.  Amidst  the  ex-  choice  of  mia-
haustion  and  lassitude  of  the  great  families  at  this
era  of  luxurious  security,  it  was  not  in  their  ranks  that  he
could  find  men  of  shrewdness  and  energy  to  repair  or  sustain
the  machine  of  empire.  The  ministers  of  Aureiius  were
chosen  from  the  teachers  of  his  own  favourite  philosophy ;
they  were  accomplished  speakers,  and  at  the  same  time  men
of  sense  and  practical  ability.  Such,  we  may  believe,  was
Junius  Rusticus, —  Our  friend  the  prefect^ — as  he  is  addressed
by  his  patron  in  a  rescript  of  The  divine  brothers^  who,  after
being  twice  consul,  commanded  for  many  years  in  the  city,
and  is  supposed  to  have  passed  sentence  from  his  tribunal  on
Justin,  the  Christian  martyr.*  The  prefecture  of  the  city,  it
seems,  was  now  only  given  to  persons  who  had  been  twice
consul;  an  ample  guarantee,  in  the  eyes  of  the  senators,
against  the  rash  and  careless  favouritism  of  the  earlier  C»-

>  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  Phil.  10,  11.

'  Themistius,  Orat.  13,  17.  Digest,  ilii.  1.  8.:  "ex  rescripto  divorum  fra-
trum,"  i.  e.  Aureiius  and  Verus.  M.  AureL  Comment  L  7.  Dion,  LuL  36.
The  manjrdom  of  Justin  is  placed  between  165  and  168.

460  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMAXS  [A.D.166.

sars.  Cornelius  Fronto,  another  rhetorician,  had  attained
the  consulship  as  far  Ijack  as  the  reign  of  Hadrian,  but  de-
clined office  in  the  provinces.  He  continued  in  his  old  age
to  attend  and  advise  his  imperial  pupil,  who  treated  him  with
the  highest  consideration.^  The  names,  moreover,  of  Salvius
Julianus,  the  Jurist,  of  Helvius  Pertinax,  himself  afterwards
a  virtuous  but  unfortunate  emperor,  of  Catilius  Severus,  Va-
lerius Asiaticus,  Martins  Verus,  and  other  persons  of  high
public  character,  are  recorded  in  the  list  of  prefects,  as  men
on  whom  Aurelius  justly  bestowed  his  esteem  and  con-
fidence.*

During  the  last  years  of  the  Parthian  expedition,  the
government  had  been  disquieted  by  despatches  from  both
the  Upper  and  Lower  Danube,  announcing  re-
barbarians peated  inroads  of  the  barbarians  along  the  whole
Danubian  fron- coursc  of  the  river. Aurelius  felt  that  Rome  was

tier

not  strong  enough,  at  least  at  the  moment,  to
wage  two  great  wars  simultaneously.  He  had  directed  his
officers  to  connive,  to  bribe,  to  temporize,  till  the  renewal  of
peace  in  the  East  should  leave  a  numerous  army  of  veterans
free  for  other  service.  The  honours  with  which  the  emperors
were  greeted,  the  triumph  they  celebrated,  the  victories  they
proclaimed  on  the  return  of  Verus,  disguised  to  the  populace
the  deep  anxiety  of  their  statesmen,  who  seem  to  have  been
struck  now  suddenly,  and  for  the  first  time,  by  apprehensions
of  decline  at  the  centre  of  the  empire,  and  of  increase  of
power  in  its  assailants  on  the  frontiers.  Aurelius  was  evi-
Apprehonsions  <lpntly  mucli  depressed ;  Verus  continued  careless
Bnp«nenc"»''of  *^"^  inscnsiblc  as  ever.  The  younger  Crosar
YenM.  flung  himself  into  the  dissipations  of  his  villa  on

'  The  discovery  of  the  remains  of  Fronto,  consisting  of  a  large  number  of
letters  bctwt*en  him  and  IiIh  pujills  Aurelius  and  Venis,  togctlicr  witli  a  slictch
of  conti'iiiporury  liiHtory,  J'r'nicipia  hktoriw,  and  some  niiscoliiineous  f Vaf^iionts,
lias  lowered  rather  tlian  raised  the  rei)utation  of  the  man  wlio  in  liis  own  day
was  considered  a  iccond  Cicero.  His  liiwtory  is  a  vapid  ])anegyrio,  liis  letters
idle  prattle.  lie  was,  perhaps,  very  old  at  tlic  time  of  writing  them;  but  at
best  tlicy  cast  a  fatal  shade  over  tlio  literary  eharaeter  of  the  age.

•  Noel  dcs  Vergem,  JQwai,  &c.,  p.  64.,  ft-om  Borghesl's  recent  investigations
among  the  inscription*.

I

A.  U.  919.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  401

the  Clodian  Way,  and  among  his  boon  companiong  paraded
the  trophies  of  his  campaigns,  liis  trcjops  of  buffoons  and
players,  dancers  and  conjurors,  and  ail  the  vilest  spawn  of
the  Orontes.*

But  these  obnoxious  instruments  of  dissipation  were  not
the  most  fatal  gift  the  East  had  now  conferred  upon  her
conquerors.  The  army  of  Syria,  which  accom-  p^gtH^^^
pauied  Verus  into  Italy,  was  deeply  infected  JfJ^i^oot  the
with  the  germs  of  a  strange  and  deadly  pesti-  JiI!f,5*i7Jto22«
lence,  contracted  in  the  marshes  or  sands  of  3Ieso-  **^  **•  ^^*^
potamia.  In  every  toMu  it  traversed  it  disseminated  the  in«
fection.*  In  Rome,  the  number  of  victims  amounted  to  many
thousands.  The  virulence  of  the  disease  was  no  doubt  in-
creased by  the  long-continued  scarcity,  and  the  general  mis-
ery of  the  people.  Superstitious  fears  demanded  a  crime  and
a  victim.  The  crime  was  discovered  in  the  treachery  em-
ployed, as  it  was  averred,  by  Avidius  Cassius,  in  the  sack  of
Seleucia ;  and  thence,  according  to  report,  the  seeds  of  plague
were  scattered  far  and  wide  on  the  opening  of  a  coffer  in  the
temple  of  Apollo.*  Cassius,  indeed,  waa  too  powerful  to  be
sacrificed  to  a  popular  outcry.  We  may  conjecture,  how-
ever, that  the  tierce  hostility  to  the  Christians  which  now
suddenly  blazed  forth  was  due  to  these  panic  alarms.  Not
among  the  Christians  only,  but  through  the  ranks  of  Pagan

*  Capitolinu8  ( Ver.  4.)  compares  the  yioea  of  Venis  to  the  mad  frealu  of
Caius,  the  low  buffoonery  of  Nero,  and  the  tasteless  gluttony  of  ViteUius :
"  amavit  et  aurigas,  prasmo  favens.  Gladiatorum  etiam  frequentius  pugnas  in
convivio  habuit."  Aurelius  groaned  over  dissipation  which  he  deemed  extrav-
agant and  vicious :  "  post  convivium  lusum  est  tesseris  usque  ad  lucem."

*  Capitol.  Ver.  8. :  "  fuit  ejus  fati  ut  in  eas  provincias,  per  qoas  rediit,  Ro-
mam  usque,  luem  secum  deferre  videretur."

'  Capitol.  1.  c. :  "  nata  fcrtur  postilentia  in  Babylonia,  ubi  de  templo  Apol-
linis  ex  arcula  aurea,  quam  miles  forte  inciderat,  spiritus  pestilens  evasit,  atque
inde  Parthos  orbemque  complesse."  The  statement  is  repeated  by  Ammianus
Marcellinus,  xxiii.  6.  24.,  with  the  variation  that  the  effluvium  proceeded  from
a  narrow  chink  or  crevice  in  the  temples.  The  fatal  effects  of  subterranean
gases  were  often  the  subject  of  wondering  remark  to  the  ancients.  See  ApuL
de  munfiloy  p.  729.,  and  the  commentators  on  Amm.  Marcell.  t«  loc.

462  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  166.

society  also,  prophecies  of  the  world's  impending  conflagra-
tion were  boldly  advanced,  and  eagerly  credited.  Misery  and
terror,  terror  and  imposture,  went  as  usual  hand  in  hand.  Pre-
tenders trifled  with  the  popular  agony  for  gain  or  notoriety.
One  man  asserted  that  the  secular  fire  would  descend  at  the
moment  when,  casting  himself  from  a  tree  in  the  Campus
Martius,  he  should  be  seen  transformed  into  a  stork.  He
leapt  from  the  tree,  and  let  a  stork  fly  from  his  bosom ;  but
the  trick  was  discovered,  and  forgiven,  with  a  pensive  sigh,
by  the  gentle  Aurelius.'  The  emperor's  philosophical  tenets,
however  inconsistent  with  a  genuine  belief,  recommended  a
reverential  observance  of  established  cults ;  and  the  enthu-
siasm of  so  tender  a  spirit  was  itself  akin  to  superstition.
He  was  fain  to  invoke  in  aid  of  the  commonwealth  all  the
rites  and  formulas  of  pagan  religion.  He  summoned  to  Rome
the  ministers  of  every  deity,  foreign  as  well  as  national,  per-
formed a  solemn  lustration  of  the  city,  and  delayed  his  de-
parture for  the  war  till  he  had  celebrated  a  lectisternium
seven  days  successively.*  Meanwhile,  the  bodies  of  the  dead
were  too  numerous  to  be  tended  with  the  usual  ceremonies.
Carts  and  waggons  were  employed  to  convey  them  to  their
place  of  sepulture.  Not  the  vulgar  herd  of  the  Suburra  only,
the  usual  victims  of  a  pestilence,  were  stricken,  but  many  of
the  highest  rank  also  suffered.  Aurelius  marked  the  national
character  of  the  calamity  by  according  to  small  as  well  as
great  the  melancholy  tribute  of  a  public  burial. The  plague

»  CapitoL  M.  Anion.  Phil.  13,

•  The  sacrifices  which  Aurelius  made  on  this  occasion  were  remembered
two  centuries  hiter ;  and  when  Julian  offered  similar  propitiations  to  the  na-
tional divinities  before  engaging  in  his  Parthian  expedition,  he  was  reminded
of  the  epigram  current  in  the  days  of  his  predecessor.  Cf.  Ammian.  Marc
xxT.  4. :

ol  /?(Jfc  ol  T^evKol  H&pKcp  r^  Kalaapi  ;faip«v  •
hv  6i  ail  viicf/mic  afifitg  anuMfieda.
But  the  same  venerable  Jest  Iiad  already  been  applied  to  Augustus. Sencc.  de
bmefic.  iii.  27. :  "  Kufus,  vir  ordinis  senatorii,  inter  caE>nam  oiitaverat,  nc  Cicsar
salvus  redirct  ex  peregrinutiono  quam  parabat ;  et  acyccerat,  idem  omnes  et
tauros  ct  vitulos  optare."

A-U.  919.]  UNDER  THE  EMPraE.  403

diverged  in  every  direction  from  the  line  along  which  it  had
been  carried.  It  spread  from  cast  to  west,  to  the  right  and
to  the  left,  with  such  virulence,  that  one  writer,  at  least,  has
ventured  to  affirm  that  more  than  half  the  population,  and
almost  all  the  soldiers,  perished.'  Orosius  may  be  credited
in  his  fearful  account  of  this  visitation,  though,  with  the  nat-
ural feeling  of  his  co-religionists,  he  ascribes  it  to  the  per-
secution of  the  Christians,  which  he  says  had  already  broken
out  in  Asia  and  Gaul.*  The  plague,  he  says,  extended
through  many  provinces,  and  so  devastated  the  whole  of
Italy,  that  villas,  toMns,  and  lands  were  everywhere  left
without  inhabitant  or  cultivator,  and  fell  to  ruin,  or  relapsed
into  wildernesses.  It  is  affirmed,  too,  he  adds,  as  if  from  ac-
credited records,  that  the  legions  in  their  winter  quarters
were  so  reduced  that  it  was  impossible  to  wage  the  Marco-
mannic  war  without  raising  a  new  army,  wliieli  detained
Aurelius  three  years  at  Camuntum.*

It  Avas  in  167,  in  the  depth  of  this  sore  altiictiou,  that  the
emperors  went  forth  together;  for  Aurelius  scrupled  either
to  send  Verus  to  the  war  without  him,  or  to  cmnp^i-n,,;
leave  him  in  the  city.  The  legions  followed,  '•^•
drooping  with  sickness  and  despondency ;  reports  from  the
scene  of  warfare  were  terrific.  The  audacity  of  the  assail-
ants, their  numbers  and  organization,  the  alarm  of  the  pro-
vincials, the  falling  in  of  the  outposts,  and  defeat  of  frontier
cohorts,  combined  to  show  that  the  crisis  was  of  no  common
kind,  and  wouM  task  nil  the  energies  of  the  state,  all  the  en-

'  Eutrop.  viii.  12. :  "  ut  Romte  ac  per  Italiam  provincLasqui;  maxima  homU
num  pars,  militum  omnes  fere  eopiae  lauguore  defecerint."  AmmuiL  Marceil.
L  c. :  "  ab  ipsis  Perearum  fiuibus  adusque  Rhenum  et  Galliaa."

'  Oros.  vii.  15. :  "  seeuta  est  lues."  Unfortunately,  we  cannot  detennine
the  year  of  the  martyrdom  of  Justm,  which  Tillemont  puts  in  168,  two  years
»fter  the  breaking  oul  of  the  pestilence.  Clinton,  however,  assigns  the  martyr-
dom of  Polycarp  to  166. Greswell,  Suppl.  DitaniaHotu,  p.  247,  folL  to  164

*  Oros.  1.  c. :  "  delectu  militum  quern  triennio  jugiter  apud  Camuntum  M.
Antoninus  habuit."

464  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  167.

erojies  of  its  rulers/ But  Aurelius  was  as  yet

The  emperors  ....  ,  .  i  .  ,  ,

advance  to  untried  in  war :  to  his  subjects  he  was  known  at
best  as  a  laborious  administrator  of  domestic  af-
fairs ;  while  Yerus  had  only  shown  himself  abroad  to  earn
general  contempt.  The  citizens  were  not  reassured  by  their
departure ;  and  it  was  hardly  to  be  expected  that  the  bar-
barians would  be  terrified  by  their  arrival.  But  the  name
of  Imperator  still  commanded  the  respect  of  the  nations.
When  the  emperors  reached  Aquileia,  they  heard  that  the
Marcomanni  had  already  recrossed  the  Danube,  and  the
Quadi,  who  had  lately  lost  their  own  king,  offered  to  accept
a  ruler  from  the  Romans.  Verus,  flushed  with  this  first  suc-
cess, and  already  weary  of  a  campaign  which  placed  him
under  the  eye  of  an  austere  colleague,  proposed  at  once  to
return ;  but  Aurelius,  assuming  the  rights  of  an  elder  and
superior,  forbade  him  to  leave  the  camp.*  The  retreat,  how-
ever, of  the  barbarians,  allowed  both  the  brothers  to  retrace
their  steps  before  the  winter,  and  in  the  absence  of  all  notes
of  time  in  our  brief  and  meagre  histories,  the  legend  of  a
medal,  and  the  casual  notice  of  a  statute,  may  serve  to  show
that  Aurelius  was  in  Rome  at  the  end  of  107,  and  the  begin-
ning of  the  following  year.

Meanwhile  every  effort  was  made  to  recruit  the  legions,
to  reinforce  the  garrisons,  to  collect  arms  and  munitions  of
Second  cam-  ^^^'  W^^h  the  retum  of  the  military  season,  the
v^fP^  emperors  exchanged  the  toga  for  the  sagum,  and

once  more  revisited  their  camj^s.  But  their  levies  were  not
yet  completed,  the  heart  of  the  empire  was  stricken  with
languor,  and  its  limbs  shook  and  withered.  It  was  necessary
to  enrol  tlie  slaves  for  service,  as  in  the  crisis  of  the  Funic
invasion,  and  after  the  overthrow  of  Verus.'  The  mustering
of  the  forces  at  Aquileia  served  to  concentrate  the  fatal  sick-

'  Tho  Quadl  and  Marcomanni,  it  socms,  had  penetrated  into  Italy,  hud
Backed  Opitcrgimii,  and  even  laid  Bicgo  to  Aquileia.  Aniniian,  MarcelU
xxix.  6.

"  CapitoL  K  Anion,  PfuL  14.

*  CupitoL  M.  Anton.  PfUl.  21.

A.  U.  920.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  465

ness  wliich  had  abated  none  of  its  virulence,  and  with  which
the  skill  of  Galen,  the  great  physician,  who  was  Bummoned
to  head-quarters,  was  unable  to  contend.' The
emperors,  indeed,  now  crossed  the  Julian  Alps, J^'SriapiL
and  presented  themselves  in  Illyricum,  where
they  provided  for  the  defence  of  Italy,  instead  of  striking  at
the  advancing  power  of  the  enemy. Again  Verus  urged  his
colleague  to  return. Baffled  by  a  foe  more  invincible  than
the  barbarians,  they  again  suspended  their  operations,  and
retraced  their  steps. They  journeyed  amicably  in  the  same
litter,  the  elder  still  striving  to  screen  the  weaknesses  of  the
younger; but  the  days  of  Verus  were  already  numbered;
8liattered  by  fatigue  and  anxiety,  if  not  by  dis- ftetanuO.
.sipatiou,  he  fell  sick  on  the  road,  and  expired  at «*«•"»«»' Ven*.
Altinum  in  Venetia.*

The  decease  of  an  unworthy  associate  was  a  relief  to  the
Hurvivor.  Aurelius  could  bear  his  own  troubles  more  easily
when  no  longer  required  to  urge  a  reluctant  col-  ^^  j^  j^
league,  whom  he  would  not  abandon  to  con-  ^v.tia.
tempt.  He  desired  the  senate  to  decree  a  consecration;
nevertheless,  he  did  not  fail  to  assure  it  that  the  victories
over  the  Parthians  had  been  gained  by  his  own  politic  dis-
positions, not  by  the  skill  or  courage  of  the  stripling  whom
he  proposed  to  deify.  But  the  perils  of  the  state  now  im-
pressed him  more  deeply  than  ever.  His  gentle  nature  was
harrowed  by  the  misery  around  him,  inflicted  by  a  Power
with  which  it  seemed  even  impious  to  contend.  The  weight
of  empire  w  as  too  heavy  a  burden  for  the  sensitive  student ;
yet  of  all  the  Romans,  none  bore  it  more  manfully. He

*  Galeu  was  specially  charged  with  the  care  of  Commodug,  the  young  son
of  Aurelius  (bom  a.  d.  161),  with  whom  he  soon  left  the  camp  for  Rome,  and
there  occupied  hunself  in  the  composition  of  his  voluminous  medical  treatises.

"  Capitol.  1.  c.  Ver.  9.  M.  AiUon.  Ptid.  14. :  "  Lucius  apoplexia  correp-
tus  periit."  This  writer  rejects,  with  honest  indignation,  the  fable  that  Aure-
lius caused  his  brother  to  be  poisoned :  "  nemo  est  principum  quem  non  gravis
fama  perstringat.  .  .  .  nota  est  fabula  quam  Marci  non  capit  vita  ....  sed
hoc  nefas  est  de  Marco  putari  ....  totam  purgatam  confutatamque  respui-
mus."

VOL.  VII. — 30

466  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  1T4.

plunged  into  the  struggle  with  the  barbarians  as  a  refuge
from  graver  apprehensions ;  yet  when  he  could  steal  an  hour
from  affairs  for  study  or  meditation,  he  still  patiently  re-
viewed the  dogmas  of  philosophy,  or  examined  his  own  heart
and  conscience  by  abstract  and  eternal  principles.  The  con-
test with  the  assailants  was  long  and  dubious.  It  is  repre-
sented as  a  simultaneous,  and  even  a  combined  attack,  of  all
the  races  on  the  northern  frontier,  who  may  be  ranged  under
the  three  national  divisions  of  Germans,  Scythians,  and  Sar-
matians ;  though  we  may  question  the  fact  of  an  actual
league  among  tribes  so  many,  so  various,  and  so  distant.*

Aurelius  seems  to  have  mustered  his  legions  at  Carnun-
tum,  the  centre  of  the  menaced  line  of  defence,  but  his  hand
,,  . „  was  long  restrained  by  the  weakness  of  his  forces.

M.  Anrelius  on  ^  .

the  Danube.  Nor,  With  all  liis  devotiou  to  duty,  did  this  gal-
A.  D.  174.  lant  prince  possess  the  vigour  or  the  genius  of  a
great  commander.*  He  cast  himself  on  the  ad-
vice of  his  officers,  and  even  of  his  nobles,  and  was  wont  to
pretend  that  it  better  became  him  to  follow  the  counsel  of
many,  than  to  compel  all  to  submit  to  his  sole  direction."
This  indulgence  they  seem  to  have  repaid  by  complaining  of
his  severity,  and  carping  at  his  studies ;  but  the  war  with
the  Marcomanni  cost  the  lives  of  many  of  tlieir  number,  and
the  Ulpian  Forum  was  crowded  with  statues  erected  in  their

•  From  Dion,  Ixxi.  12.,  and  Capitolinus,  3f.  AtUon.  Phil.  22.,  m-c  get  the
names  of  the  Marcomanni,  Quadi,  Narisci,  and  Ilermunduri  (Gernmn) ;  the
Latringi,  Bori,  Jazyges,  Astingi,  Ck>tmi,  Dancrigi  (Sanuatinn) ;  the  Victovales,
Boaibefl,  Sioobates,  Roxoloni,  BastamaB,  roucini,  Alaui,  and  Costoboci  (Soytli-
ian).  See  Green wootl,  Iligt.  of  tJie  Oennaiu,  i.  176.,  who  remarks  on  the  im-
probability of  these  nationn  having  formed  a  common  confederacy.

'  Aureliufl  ppeakH  diHparagingly  of  his  own  natural  genius :  tliis  may  bo
modeflty,  but  it  agrees  with  tlio  idea  I  form  of  1dm.  Comment,  v.  B. :  Spifih.
mrd  oov  ovx  Ixovoi  davftdaat.  larw  dA.Xa  hepa  7ro/Ua,  f<j>  uv  ovk  ^^t<f  eiirelv^
ov  yAp  irt^vKa.  tu'tva  ohv  naptxov.

*  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  I'hil.  22.  Avidius  Gosslus  complained  of  his  neglect-
ing the  empire  fur  his  b(M)krt :  "  M.  Antonimw  j)hilosophiitur,  ct  (juicrit  do  clo»
mentla,  et  de  animiM,  vt  do  honesto  ut  juHto ;  uec  Buntit  pro  rcpublica."  Vul<
catius  Gallicaoua,  in  Awd.  Can,  14.

A.U.  927.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  467

honour  by  their  master.*  Even  through  the  winter  were
the  Romans  compelled  to  confront  a  foe,  who  chose  the  sea-
son of  frost  and  ice  for  his  inroads.  They  fought  more  than
once  on  the  bosom  of  the  frozen  Danube,  when  they  could
only  keep  their  footing  by  placing  their  shields  beneath
them.'  At  other  times  the  campaign  was  carried  on  during
the  greatest  heats*  of  summer.  The  Quadi  surrounded  and
reduced  them  to  straits  by  cutting  off  their  supply  of  water.
A  sudden  storm,  Avhich  filled  the  Roman  camp  with  a  season-
able rainfall,  while  the  enemy  was  disordered  by
violent  lightnings,  was  regarded  as  miraculous, victory  over

.  .  .  «  T^  .'the  ituadL

and  ascribed  to  the  mcantations  of  an  Egyptian
luagician,  to  the  prayers  of  a  legion  of  Christians,
or  to  the  favour  of  Jove  towards  the  best  of  mortals,  accord-
ing to  the  various  prejudices  of  different  observers.* The
(juestion  itself  would  hardly  be  worth  ail  allusion,  but  for  the
pertinacity  with  which  it  was  once  debated,  and  the  import-

'  Capitol  1.  c.  The  barbarians  seem  to  have  poietimted  into  the  prorinoM
in  various  quarters.  Pertinax,  afterwards  emptor,  Buooeeded  in  driving  then
out  of  Rhsetia  and  Norieum.  Capitol  Pertin.  8.  Dion,  IxxL  3.  The  praMDOe
of  a  great  number  of  le<!^ons  along  the  Danubian  frontier  m  attested  by  in-
scriptions. Noel  des  Vergers,  JSmm,  we  p.  77,  foil

*  Dion,  Ixvi.  7.

'  See  the  account  of  the  event  as  given  by  Dion,  with  the  critidsin  of  the
Christian  Xiphilinus ;  and  compare  the  famous  lines  of  Claudian :  "ChaldsM
\  ago  seu  carmina  ritu  Annavere  Deos,  seu,  quod  reor,  omne  Touantis  Obee-
(luium  Marci  mores  potuere  mereri."  xxviii.  349.  Capitol  M.  AiUon.  Phil.
'1\. :  "  fulineu  de  coelo  precibus  suis  contra  hostium  machinamentum  extorait,
Buis  pluvia  impetrata."  Tertullian,  from  whom  the  church-writers  seem  to  have
taken  the  idea  of  a  Christian  miracle,  declares  that  letters  of  Aurelius  to  that
eflect  were  in  existence.  Apolog.  5.  (cf.  ad  Scap.  4.).  Euseb.  Hist.  Ecd.  v.  5.,
says  merely  Myog  Ix^i.  Orosius,  vii.  15. :  "  exstare  dicontur."  Eusebius  re-
fers to  a  certain  Apolliuaris  for  (he  statement  that  the  emperor  gave  to  the  le-
gion the  name  of  "  J^ilminata,"  in  attestation  of  the  Christian  miracle ;  but  it
is  enough  to  suy  that  there  was  a  legion  already  so  called  under  Trajan.  Of
recent  writers  Mr.  Fvnes  Clinton  has  given  a  full  collection  of  the  authoritie*.
(Appendix  to  Fiut.  Horn.  p.  24.)  Professor  Blunt,  of  Cambridge,  the  latest
defender  of  Patristic  miracles,  has  abandoned  this  one,  which  will  hardly  be
maintained  after  his  rejection,  by  any  English  Protestant  divine.  See  Lectures
on  the  MjU.  of  the  Chwreh,  p.  295.

468  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  0.175.

ance  even  recently  assigned  to  it.  But,  however  insignificant
the  discussion  may  now  appear,  an  interest  will  still  attach
to  the  event,  as  long  hs  the  sculptures  on  the  column  of
Aurelius,  which  still  adorns  the  principal  avenue  of  modern
Rome,  presents  to  us  the  figure  of  the  Olympian  Jupiter  cast-
ing from  the  open  heavens  his  beneficent  rain-flood,  and  his
appalling  thunderbolts.

But  the  victory  thus  signally  gained  was  chequered  by
many  reverses.  The  arms  of  Rome,  however  successful  in
Troubiesof  Au-  ^^^  field,  wcrc  impeded  by  the  climate  and  the
tfc'as^'wen'M  ^^^^^  ^y  t^6  wide  spaces  to  be  traversed,  and  the
public.  ubiquity  of  the  enemy. Aurelius  was  retained

in  the  north  through  several  summers  ;  the  treaties  he  made
with  his  adversaries  were  repeatedly  broken  by  them  again,
and  the  peace  which  was  to  secure  him  a  triumph  slipped
constantly  from  his  hand.  To  the  public  troubles  which
encompassed  him  were  added  domestic  calamities.  Of  the
two  sons,  in  whom  he  might  hope  to  find  a  comfort  and  sup-
port in  his  old  age,  a  blessing  to  which  none  of  his  prede-
Prematnre ccssors  could  loolc  siiicc  Ycspasiau,  Auuius,  the

deaths  of  his  n  ^  ,, . , .  .  «

children.  elder,  fell  sick  in  early  youth,  and  died  after  a

long  decline ;  Commodus,  the  younger,  though  placed  under
the  charge  of  the  sage  and  gentle  Fronto,  displayed,  from  the
Erii  nature  of  ^^'8^,  au  cvil  naturc.  A  daughter  named  Faus-
commodus.  ^^jj^.^  jjp^  j^jg^  j^  opening  girlhood.  The  father's
tenderness  for  liis  children  is  attested  in  a  letter  to  Fronto,
which  agreeably  delineates  his  amiable  character.'  His  re-
gard for  their  motlier  was  tender  even  to  weakness,  if  at  least
she  was  as  unwortliy  of  a  husband's  confidence  as  some  his-
torians liHve  represented  her ;  yet  even  from  liis  most  inti-
mate friend  lie  disguised  his  ve.vation  at  the  ])roofs  lie  re-
Infldniuyof  t'civcd  of  her  infidelity.  Her  guilt,  indeed,  he  is
Kauntina.  f^^\^\  ^^  havc  acknowledged  and  deplored ;  but  he

refused  to  disinisR  her,  pleading,  as  was  rej^orted  in  excuse,  that
if  he  divorced  liis  wife  he  ought  also  to  surrender  the  empire

*  Fronton.  EpuU.  (1.  p.  288,  269.)

A.  U.  928.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  469

her  dowry.*  Even  at  the  commencement  of  their  union,
while  Aurelius  was  occupied  with  affairs  at  Rome,  or  plunged
in  his  studies  in  the  recesses  of  the  palace,  Faustina,  in  the
voluptuous  villas  of  Campania,  rejected  the  restraints  of
matronhood  with  flagrant  indecency.*  iSuch  is  the  account
which  has  received  general  credence ;  but*  allowance  must  be
made  for  the  ribaldry  of  contemporary  anecdote,  and  for  the
hatred  of  the  next  generation  towards  the  mother  of  the  ty-
rant Commodus.  The  insinuation  that  this  son  was  the  base
born  child  of  a  gladiator,  suggested,  perhaps,  by  his  passion
for  the  shows  of  the  arena,  is  belied  by  Frouto's  warm  asser-'
tion  of  his  likeness  to  Aurelius,  and  by  the  testimony  of  ex-
isting coins  which  strikingly  confirms  it.

Nor  can  we  aflirm  with  confidence  another  charge  against
Faustina,  of  still  graver  public  importance.  The  health  of
Aurelius  caused  her  much  anxiety ;  for  Commo-

Tr««ioii  of

dus  was  frivolous  and  inexperienced,  and  among ArJdiiu  cm-

, .  ^  .  r  .  , •»"«.

the  military  chiefs  now  rising to  eminence,  she

gaw  perhaps  more  than  one  who  might  snatch  at  the  purple
on  his  decease.  Aurelius  was  not  perhaps  originally  sickly ;
in  his  youth  he  had  enjoyed  all  martial  and  athletic  exer-
cises ;  but  his  devotion  to  study,  according  to  Dion,  had  early
weakened  his  health,  and  the  fatigue  and  cares  of  his  pain-
ful position  may  have  aggravated  Qvery  morbid  symptom.
Faustina  had  accompanied  her  husband  during  his  campaigns.
After  the  rout  of  the  Quadi,  when  the  Army  selected  him
as  Imperator,  they  proclaimed  her  Mother  of  the  Camps*
She  was  on  the  spot,  and  from  personal  observations  she  was
convinced  that  he  had  not  long  to  live.  She  addressed  her-
self, so  it  was  asserted,  to  Avidius  Cassius,  assured  him  that
the  throne  would  presently  be  vacant,  and  incited  him  to  as-

*  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  PhiL  19. :  "  duisse/irftir,  si  uxorem  dimittimus,  red-
damus  et  dotem." Coiup.  3.  29. It  should  be  obeenred  that  no  such  charges
are  brought  against  Faustina  by  Dion.
. '  Fronton.  EpisL  (ii.  p.  52,  54.) :  "  tarn  simili  facie  at  nihil  sit  hoc  simlli
umilius."

»  Capitol.  M.  Anton,  PMl.  26. Dion,  IxxL  10.

470  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  175.

sume  the  purple  at  the  head  of  his  legions,  with  the  promise
of  her  support,  and  the  offer  of  her  hand/  She  hoped  thus
to  preserve  her  own  position,  and  secure  a  throne,  at  least  in
reversion,  for  her  son.  Cassius,  a  descendant  of  the  tyranni-
cide, professed  hereditary  hatred  to  tyrants,  and  was  wont
to  lament  that  the  republic  could  not  be  rid  of  one  Imperator
but  by  the  hand  of  another.*  Even  in  his  youth  he  had  har-
boured the  idea  of  overthrowing  the  elder  Antoninus,  but
his  impetuosity  had  been  checked  and  disguised  by  a  prudent
and  loyal  father.  Verus  had  conceived  just  fears  of  his  am-
bition, and  had  warned  Axarelius  against  him.  Aurelius  had
replied,  in  the  tone  of  stoical  fatalism,  that  no  prince  ever
hilled  his  successor,  and  had  added,  repeating  the  sentiment
of  Hadrian,  How  wretched  is  the  lot  of  riders,  ichose  fears  of
treason  are  never  credited  till  they  have  fallen  by  it !  *  He
refused  to  adopt  any  precautions,  and  was  content  to  leave
the  Syrian  prefecture  in  the  hands  of  one  whom  he  knew
to  be  brave  and  able,  and  a  bulwark  of  the  ancient  disci-
pline ;  one  who,  in  a  luxurious  age  and  a  voluptuous  capital,
affected  the  character  of  a  Marius,  and  put  to  death  without
mercy  the  officer  who,  without  orders  to  fight,  had  gained
him  a  victory ;  who  finally  had  quelled  a  mutiny  by  throw-
ing himself  unarmed  into  the  ranks,  and  inviting  the  soldiers

'  Dion,  Ixxi.  22,  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  Phil  24. :  "  ut  quidam  volunt."  Vul-
catius  Gallicanus,  Avid.  Cass.  7.:  "ut  quidam  dicunt"  It  is  admitted  that,
according  to  another  rumour,  this  story  was  a  pretence  of  Cassius,  to  persuade
his  soldiers  that  he  liad  certain  information  of  the  emperor's  death.  Gallieanus
teUa  us  that  lie  takes  the  accouut  from  the  history  of  Marius  Maximus,  but  ex-
pressly says  that  he  does  not  believe  in  the  alleged  guilt  of  Faustina.  Tiie  rea-
son, indeed,  whicli  he  gives,  that  her  letters  exist,  in  which  she  urged  her  hus-
band to  pimhih  the  rcbclliou  with  severity,  is  not  very  conclusive.  See  cc.  9,
10,  11.

'  AvidiuH  rJassius  claimed  descent  from  C.  Cassius,  who  had  held  tlio  Syrian
prefecture.  His  father  was  a  (Jreek,  a  rhetorician  of  Cynlius,  named  Heliodo-
rus,  who  liad  become  prefect  of  Egypt.

*  Gallieanus,  Avid.  Com.  2.:  "quod  ovus  tuus  Hadrianus  dixerit;

ejus  autcm  exemplum  ponoro,  quam  Domitiani,  qui  hoc  primus  dixisso  fcrtur,
maiul."

A.  U.  928.]  UNDER  TUE  EMPIRE.  471

to  slay  liim  if  they  dared/  Such  was  the  man  who  Budden-
ly  announced  at  Antioch  that  Aurelius  was  dead,  assumed
the  title  of  emperor,  and  having  received  the  ensigns  of  sov-
ereignty from  a  trusty  adherent,  whom  he  named  his  praeto-
rian prefect,  invited  the  legions  to  sanction  his  usurpation.
But  violent  and  headstrong  as  he  was,  he  had  failed  in  his
calculations.  The  legions  detested  him ;  they  rose  at  onoe
against  him  and  slew  him  on  the  spot,  without  awaitr
iug  the  order  of  the  emperor.  The  report,  meanwhile,  of  his
defection  reached  Rome,  and  the  senate  boldly  proclaimed
him  a  public  enemy  ;  but  its  courage  rapidly  evaporated  on
tlie  rumour  that  he  was  in  full  march  for  Italy,  prepared,  in
the  emperor's  absence,  to  take  dire  vengeance  for  the  insult,
and  give  up  the  city  to  plunder.  The  head  of  the  traitor
was  conveyed  to  Aurelius,  who  beheld  it  with  pity  and  con-
cern.* W/iat  would  fie  have  done  to  you  had  he  conquered/
exclaimed  the  bystanders.  The  sage  calmly  appealed  to  his
own  piety  and  virtue,  and  showed  that  all  the  princes  who
had  perished  violently  before  him,  had  fallen  by  their  own
deserts.*  lie  entreated  the  senate,  to  whom  he  left  the  pun-
ishment of  this  public  crime,  to  deal  mercifully  with  the
guilty,  requestmg  that  no  member  at  least  of  their  order
should  suffer  under  his  rule.  The  family  of  the  traitor  he
caused  to  be  spared,  and  even  generously  provided  for  them,
and  a  few  centurions  only  were  sacrificed  to  the  exigencies
of  military  discipline.* The  senate,  arao'ng  whom  Cassias

*  Gallic,  c.  4. :  "  meruit  timeri  quia  non  timuit,"  an  allusioa  to  Lucan,  t.
81Y.  Capitol.  Anion,  Phil.  21. :  "  cum  per  Eg)-ptum  Bucolici  milites  graria
multa  fecissent,  per  Avidium  Cassium  retusi  sunt"

'''  Capitol.  M.  Anion.  Phil.  26. :  "  doluit  denique  Cagsinm  exstinctum,  dioena,
voluisse  se  sine  senatorio  sanguine  imperium  transigere."

'  Gallic.  Avid.  Cass.  8. :  "  non  sic  Deos  coluimus,  nee  aic  Tinmua,  ut  ille
nos  vinceret.  .  .  .  meruiase  Neronem,  meruisse  Caligulam ;  Othonem  et  Vitel-
lium  nee  imperare  voluisse."  Galba's  avarice  he  regarded  as  a  public  crime.
The  old  story  of  burning  the  papers  of  the  criminal,  that  his  accomplices  might
not  be  known,  is  repeated  of  M.  Aurelius  by  Ammianus  Marcellinus,  xxL  16.

*  The  letters  between  AureUus,  Faustina,  and  the  senate  on  this  subject,
are  very  interesting,  and  seem  to  be  genuine. The  children  of  Avidius  Castas

472  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  175.

may  have  had  some  half  concealed  accomplices,  was  delight-
ed at  a  clemency  by  which  it  personally  benefited,  and  pour-
ed forth  its  praise  and  gratitude  in  broken  exclamations : —
0  pious  Antonine  j  the  gods  preserve  thee  !  0  Clement  An-
tonine,  the  gods  preserve  thee  ! — thou  mightest  and  wouldest
not/ — we  have  done  what  we  should  do! — may  Commodus
have  his  legitimate  sovereignty  ! — confirm  thou  thy  own  off-
spring /  make  our  children  safe  and  happy/ — violence  can-
not harm  good  government/ — the  tribunitian  power  for
Commodus/ — thy  presence  and  protection  for  Commodus /
— hail  to  thy  philosophy,  to  thy  patience,  to  thy  learning,  to
thy  nobility ,  to  thy  innocence/ — thou  conquerest  thy  foes ^
thou  overcomest  thy  adversaries/  The  gods  protect  thee/
and  so  on,  all  speaking  together.'

The  news  of  the  defection  of  Cassius  had  reached  Aure-
lias  on  the  Danube. He  summoned  his  son,  now  in  his  fif-
teenth year,  to  his  side,  invested  him  with  the

Aurelins  re-  *;  iii-t..  y.7

pairs  to  the  robc  01  mauhood,  styled  him  I'rmce  of  the
Youth,  and  designated  him  for  the  consulship.
Having  thus  defied  the  assault  upon  his  dynasty,  he  went  for-
ward to  ci'ush  it.  Before  he  reached  Syria  the  enemy  had
fallen ;  but  Aurelius  was  occupied  for  some  months  in  making
dispositions  for  the  future. During  his  progress

Death  of  Faus-  ^  .  »  r ti

tina.  he  lost  Faustuia,  who  died  suddenly  at  Halala,

at  the  foot  of  the  Taurus.  Faitliful  to  the  last
to  the  unfaithful,  he  desired  the  senate  to  decree  her  divine
honours ;  he  gave  her  name  to  the  place  of  her  decease,  and
built  Ikt  there  a  temple ;  he  established,  moreover,  a  new
foundation  of  Faustinian  orphan  girls.' Aurelius  had  never

were  allowed  to  retain  ix  portion  of  their  patrimony,  and  were  admitted  to  pnb-
lic  office.  Commodiirt,  however,  on  hia  accession,  caused  them  "  all  to  be
burnt  alive."  (iuUic.  At<id.  Cam.  13.  In  consequence  of  this  attempted  revolt
in  Syria,  AureliuH  ordained  that  in  futin-e  no  officer  should  hold  the  prefecture
of  the  province  in  which  he  had  been  liorii. Dion,  Ixxi.  81.

'  (Jallic.  Avid,  Ciwi.  lit.  The  date  of  the  insurrection  of  Avidius  Cassius
ifl  fixed  by  Clinton  to  the  year  175.

•  Capitol.  M.  Antmi.  J'hU.  '2«. Dion,  hxi.  20. Some  tiuid  that  she  killed

A.  U.  928.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  473

Ijefore  visited  the  East.  He  examined  with  great  interest
the  most  renowned  seats  of  ancient  wisdom,  and  favoured
them  with  tokens  of  his  munificence.*  Repairing  from  An-
tiocli  to  Alexandria,  Avhere  Cassius  had  gained  support,  he
not  only  pardoned  all  oftences,  but  condescended  to  act  the
part  of  a  private  citizen,  frequenting  the  temples,  schools,
and  lecture-rooms  in  the  garb  of  a  philosopher.  On  his  voy-
age homeward  he  lingered  also  for  a  time  at  Athens,  and,  to
l/rove  hirmelf  without  «m,  in  the  true  spirit  of  the  Stoic  re-
ligion, caused  himself  to  be  initiated  in  the  mysteries.*  In
the  autumn  of  176  he  finally  reached  Italy,  landing  at  Bruu-
disium,  where  he  laid  aside  the  military  cloak  and  ensigns,
and  entered  the  city  in  the  robe  of  peace.  The  senate  de-
creed  him  a  triumi)h  over  the  Sarmatians,  in Triumph  over

^ Uie  Sartu*UaiUL

wliieh  the  young  Commodus  was  also  assocmted. a.i>.  it«.
An  arch  was  erected  in  the  Cairipus  on  the  Flaminian  Way,
which  was  standing  till  modem  times :  some  bas-reliefs  have
been  saved  from  the  ruin,  which  represent  the  apotheosis  of
I'austina. Aurelius sits below, gazing with  ^^  Antoniiia
itiection  on  his  consort,  wafted  upwards  on  the  «»'«»™«-
wings  of  a  spirit. The  graceful  column,  banded  like  that  of
Trajan  with  spiral  sculpture,  ou  which  his  exploits  are  re-
corded, still  seems  to  follow  her  ascent  to  heaven. It  was
crowned  with  the  statue  of  the  emperor,  who  deserved  to
share  witli  Trajan  the  title  of  the  Best ;  and  for  many  centuries
these  two  noblest  products  of  heathen  culture,  in  the  realms

herself  for  fear  of  her  complicity  with  Cassiua  being  dLsooTered ;  othen  that
she  dieil  of  an  attack  of  gout.

*  Capitol.  1.  c.  I  do  not  know  how  else  to  interpret  "  apud  multas  (Orien-
tales  provincias)  philosophise  vestigia  rehquit."  Philot^tratus  in  the  Zowt  tdb
some  anecdotes  of  Aurelius  and  the  sophists,  and  also  mentioiu  that  he  wu
obligeil  to  pmiish  the  incorrigible  Antiochians  by  iutenlictiiig  for  a  time  their
spectacles.

"  Capitol,  c.  27. :  "  ut  se  innocentem  probaret."  Aurelius,  according  to
Dion,  Ixxi.  31.,  instituted  salaried  teachers  of  all  sciences  at  Athens,  "  for  peo-
ple of  all  nations  ; "  naaiv  avdpirKoiq  dtdoff/caAoif  kizl  naarj^  Uyov  irourfe/af
fiiadov  erijaiov  (^povraq,  which  seems  to  indicate  the  establishment  of  lectiiree
in  various  languages. If  so,  it  was  no  doubt  a  novelty.

474  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  176.

respectively  of  action  and  reflection,  occupied  the  preSmi-
nent  elevation  which  Christian  piety  has  since  assigned  to
St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul.'

Shows  and  largesses,  as  usual,  followed,  some  administra-
tive measures  were  promulgated,  Commodus  was  associated
Renewal  of  war  ^^  t^®  Tribunitian  Power,  and  married  with
matia*M  and  modcst  Solemnities.  But  the  chief  of  the  empire
Marcomanni.  could  not  resume  his  place  in  the  senate  and  the
palace.  The  Sarmatians  had  been  triumphed  over ;  never-
theless, they  rose  again,  or  continued  still  in  anns.  The
Marcomanni,  the  Hermunduri,  the  Quadi,  were  easily  tempted
to  resume  them.'*  The  eflforts  of  the  last  ten  years  must  be
repeated,  with  failing  confidence  and  diminished  strength,
against  a  foe  more  experienced,  and  perhaps  even  more  au-
dacious. Aurelius  again  girded  on  his  armour.

AnrelinB  again  .

leaves  Komo  and  required  his  son  to  attend  upon  him.  He
tiers,  and  gains  hurled  a  blood-staiucd  javelin  before  the  temple
of  Bellona  as  a  defiance  and  proclamation  of  war,
and  went  forth  to  confront  the  enemy.*  For  three  years  he
continued  to  prosecute  his  sad  and  painful  task,  to  exhaust
his  own  vigour,  and  the  vigour  of  the  empire,  in  a  struggle
in  which  ultimate  success  might  well  seem  hopeless.  He
gained  at  least  one  considerable  success  by  the  hands  of  his
lieutenant  Patemus,  and  was  hailed  Imperator  for  the  tenth
time  by  the  soldiers.  The  historians,  indeed,  affirm  that  the
crowning  victory  was  in  sight,  and  that  another  year  would
have  sufficed  to  reduce  these  restless  foes  to  entire  subjec-

•  That  this  column  was  originally  surmounted  by  a  statue  of  the  emperor
appears  from  the  medals.  This  statue  had  long  fallen,  when  Pope  Sixtus  V.  re-
placed it  in  1689  by  a  figure  of  the  Apostle  Paul. Uunsen's  Jio)n.  iii.  3.  p.  330.

'  Auri'liuH  had  roipiired  the  Murconianni  to  remove  to  a  distance  of  38
■tadia  from  the  bunk  of  the  Danube,  a  very  trifling  demand,  and  appointed
fixed  days  and  places  for  tlicir  intorooursc  witli  the  Romans.  The  lazyges  and
Quadi  consented  to  restore  tiieir  captives.  The  fonner  sent  l)ack  as  many  as
100,000;  tho  latter  notoriously  neglected  to  obsen'o  this  condition.  Dion,
Ixxi.  16,  16.

■  Dion.  Ixxl.  33.,  adding,  <jf  ye  Kal  ruv  avyyevofihuv  avT<t>'  ^Kovaa.  Tho
Bolcmnity  was  apparently  already  anti(|tiated.

A.U.  929.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  475

tion.' This,  however,  is  quite  incredilile. A  decisive  victory
might  have  compelled  them  to  offer  tribute,  but  probably  no
victory  would  have  insured  their  paying  it. Nor,  indeed,
was  any  such  victory  now  to  be  gained,  and,  instead  of  their
tribute  being  paid  to  the  Romans,  the  great  Sannatian  war
was  concluded  by  a  peace  opportunely  bought by  Rome.
This final disgrace Aurelius did  not  live  himself  to wit-
ness. His  weakly  frame  sank  at  last  under  its Dt^hofii.
fatigues,  and  he  was  still,  perhaps,  buoyed  up ^"^''Jj^ea.
by  hopes destined never  to  be  accomplished, ^  ■•••••
when  he  was  rescued  from  impending  disappointment  by  %
fever,  which  carried  him  off  in  his  camp  at  Vindobona.*

The  despondency  wliich  had  seized  on  the  gentle  em-
])eror'8  spirits  is  strongly  marked  in  the  circumstances  of  his
last  hours. While  anticipating  his  own  decease
Avith  satisiaction,  and  even  with  eagerness,  he  re- the  d<i«th  «r
warded  himself  as  only  a  fellow-traveller  on  the
common  road  of  life  with  all  around  him,  and  took  leave  of
his  friends  as  one  who  was  but  just  preceding  them. If  he
regarded  the  condition  of  public  affairs,  the  prospect  of  his
son  succeeding  him  was  not  such  as  to  console  him ;  for  he

'  Capitol.  M.  Anion.  Phil.  I.  c. ;  Dion,  1.  c.

'  At  Vindobona  (Vienna),  acfording  to  Victor;  at  SSnnium,  according  to
Tortullian,  Apol.  25.  He  seem^  to  have  believed  himself  that  his  dkorder  was
natural,  for,  as  is  said,  he  desired  his  son  to  leave  him  that  he  might  aroid  the
risk  of  infection.  Almost  his  last  words  were  a  request  to  his  attendaats  not
to  grieve  for  him,  but  to  turn  their  thoughts  to  the  still  prevailing  peadkOM^
and  to  their  common  perils.  He  even  hastened  his  own  end  by  abetaining  from
food.  Dion,  however,  affirms  for  certain,  that,  though  sick,  he  was  actually
cut  off  by  poison,  administered  by  the  physicians  in  his  son's  interest :  oi'x
vnb  TTJi  v6aov  ^  kuI  t6t£  evdm/aev,  a?2'  iird  ruv  larpuv,  uf  eyit  aa^iJc  ^xottra,
Tu'  Kofift66<f}  xapt^ofiivuv.  The  story  may  stand  or  fall  with  our  general  opin-
ion of  Dion's  veracity.  I  am  sorry  to  take  leave  of  an  author  on  whom  I  have
had  to  lean  so  often  and  so  long,  with  the  expression  of  my  distrust  in  his
sources  of  secret  history.  From  the  first  he  shows  a  disposition  to  seize  on  the
most  flagrant  imputations  conveyed  by  his  authorities,  and  as  he  approaches
his  own  times  these  authorities  are  often  mere  private  anecdotists.  Capitoli-
nus,  who  referred  to  Marius  Maximus  and  to  published  histories,  says  nothing
of  this  pretended  crime,  nor  does  Herodian.

476  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  180.

could  not  hide  from  himself  that  Commodus  was  vicious,
cruel,  and  illiterate.'  The  indulgence  he  had  shown  to  his
consort's  irregularities  might  be  pardoned  by  the  state,  to
which  they  were  of  little  moment ;  but  his  weakness  in  leav-
ing to  his  graceless  offspring  the  command  of  a  world-wide
empire  must  reflect  more  strongly  on  his  memory.  He  may
have  judged,  indeed,  that  the  danger  to  the  state  from  a  bad
prince  was  less  than  the  danger  from  a  disputed  succession,
especially  in  the  face  of  the  disasters  accumulating  around  it.
On  his  death-bed  he  warned  his  son  not  to  underrate  the
peril  from  the  barbarians,  who,  if  at  the  moment  worsted  and
discouraged,  would  soon  revive,  and  return  again  to  the  as-
sault witl^  increasing  vigour.  And  so  he  left  the  laws  of  in-
heritance, as  now  ordinarily  received,  to  take  their  course,
indicating  his  will  that  Commodus  should  succeed  him  by
the  simple  form  of  recommending  him  to  the  care  of  his  ofti-
cers,  and  to  the  favour  of  the  immortal  gods.  On  the  seventh
day  of  his  illness  he  admitted  none  but  his  unworthy  son  to
his  chamber,  and  after  a  few  words  dismissed  him,  covered
his  head  for  sleep,  and  passed  away  alone  and  untended.
Born  on  the  20th  of  April,  121,  and  dying  on  the  iVth  of
March,  180,  he  had  almost  completed  his  fifty-ninth  year.
His  career  had  been  divided  into  three  nearly  equal  portions:
the  first,  to  his  association  in  the  empire  with  Antoninus ;
the  second,  to  his  accession  to  complete  sovereignty;  the
third,  from  thence  to  liis  decease.  The  first  was  the  season
of  his  general  education,  the  second  that  of  his  training  for
empire,  in  the  last  he  exercised  power  uncontrolled.  In  each
ho  had  acquitted  liimself  well,  in  each  he  had  gained  himself
love  and  admiration ;  but  the  earlier  periods  Were  eminently
prosperous  and  happy ;  the  crowning  period  was  a  time  of
trial,  of  peril,  fatigue,  distress  and  apprehension. Historical

'  Capitol.  M.  Anton.  Phil.  28. :  "  fcrtur  filium  mori  voluissc,  cum  cum  talcm
viderct  futuruni,  qualiH  cx8titit  post  ejus  mortem ;  no,  ut  ipse  (iicclmt,  similis  No-
roni,  CttliKulsD,  ct  Domitiutio  onset."  HIh  last  words,  addrosscil  to  the  eeuturion
of  the  watch,  according  to  Zonoras  (xii.  2),  were,  "  Turn  to  the  rising  ami,  for
I  am  setting."

A.  U.  933.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  477

j)arallt'l8  between  men  of  different  times  and  circumstances
are  very  apt  to  mislead  us,  yet  I  cannot  refrain  from  indicat-
ing the  comparison,  which  might  be  drawn  with  unusual
jireeision,  between  the  wise,  the  virtuous,  the  much-suffering
Aurelius,  and  our  own  great  and  good  king  Alfred.  Both
arrived  early  and  unexpectedly  to  power;  both  m  Aureiiu*
found  their  people  harassed  by  the  attacks  of  im-  2*S^*"*
])ortunate  enemies;  they  assumed  M'ith  tirmness  *^'"**-
the  attitude  of  resistance  and  defence,  and  gained  many  vic-
tories in  the  field,  though  neither  could  fail  to  acknowledge
the  unequal  conditions  of  the  struggle.  Both  found  them-
selves at  the  head  of  a  weak  and  degenerate  society,  whose
hour  of  dissolution  had  well-nigh  struck.  Nevertheless,  they
( ontended  manfully  in  its  behalf,  and  strove  to  infuse  their
own  gallant  spirit  into  a  people  little  worthy  of  their  cham-
})ionship.  But  Aurelius  and  Alfred  were  not  warriors  only.
They  were  men  of  letters  by  natural  predilection  and  early
liabit ;  they  were  legislators,  administrators,  and  philoso-
pliers,  with  this  difference,  that  the  first  came  at  the  end  of  a
long  course  of  civilized  government,  the  second  almost  at  its
beginning  ;  the  first  at  the  mournful  close  of  one  period  of
mental  speculation,  the  second  at  the  fresh  and  hopeful  com-
mencement of  another.  The  one  strove  to  elevate  the  chaiac-
ttr  of  his  subjects  by  the  example  of  his  own  scrupulous
si'lf-examinatiou ;  the  other  by  precepts  of  obedience  to  an
external  revelation.  But  both  were,  from  their  early  days,
weak  in  body,  and  little  fit  to  cope  with  the  appalling  fatigues
of  their  jjosition ;  both,  if  I  mistake  not,  were  sick  at  heart,
and  felt  that  their  task  was  beyond  their  power,  and  quitted
life  prematurely,  with  little  reluctance.  In  one  respect,  how-
ever, their  lot  was  different.  The  fortunes  of  the  people  of
our  English  Alfred,  after  a  brief  and  distant  period  of  obscu-
ration, have  ever  increased  in  power  and  brightness,  like  the
sun  ascending  to  its  meridian.  The  decline  of  which  Aurelius
was  the  melancholy  witness  was  irremediable  and  final,  and
liis  pale  solitary  star  was  the  last  apparent  in  the  Konian  fir-
mament.

478  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  180.

The  circumstances  of  the  empire  might  indeed  well  in-
spire profound  anxiety  in  the  breast  of  one  to  whom  its  main-
tenance was  confided. Hitherto  we  have  seen

The  barbarian , „  .  ., , .  -, ■,

DOW  stronger  the  frontiers  assailed  in  many  quarters,  and  the
weaker  than  of  energies  of  the  bravcst  princes  tasked  in  their
defence.  But  these  attacks  have  been  local  and
desultory.  The  Chatti  on  the  Rhine,  the  Marcomanni  on  the
Upper,  the  Sarmatians  on  the  Lower  Danube,  the  Roxolani
on  the  shores  of  the  Euxine,  have  often  assailed  and  vexed
the  provinces,  but  separately  and  at  different  times ;  Aure-
lius  had  to  make  head  against  all  these  enemies  at  once.  The
unity  of  the  empire  imparted  a  germ  of  union  to  its
assailants.  Hence  no  champion  of  Rome  had  so  hard  a  task ;
hence  Aurelius,  far  from  making  permanent  conquests  beyond
his  frontiers,  stood  everywhere  on  the  defensive,  and  con-
fronted the  foe  by  his  lieutenants  in  Gaul,  Pannonia,  Dacia
or  Moesia,  while  he  planted  himself  commonly  in  the  centre
of  his  line  of  stations,  at  Carnuntum,  Vindobona,  or  Sirmium ;
hence  his  wars  were  protracted  through  a  period  of  tAvelve
years,  and  though  his  partial  victories  gained  him  ten  times
the  title  of  Imperator,  none  was  sufficiently  decisive  to  break
the  forces  banded  against  him.  The  momentary  submission
of  one  tribe  or  another  led  to  no  general  result ;  notwithstand-
ing his  own  sanguine  hopes,  and  the  fond  persuasion  of  his
countrymen,  his  last  campaign  saw  the  subjugation  of  Scy-
thia  and  the  safety  of  the  empire  still  distant  and  doubtful.
The  barbarians  were  stronger  at  this  crisis  than  ever,  strong
in  unity,  stronger  in  arms  and  tactics,  stronger  possibly  in
numbers.  Neither  to  Marius,  we  may  believe,  nor  to  Ger-
manicus,  nor  to  Trajan,  would  they  now  have  yielded  as
heretofore.  But  the  empire  was  at  least  as  much  weaker.
The  symptoms  of  decline,  indeed,  were  as  yet  hardly  manifest
to  common  observation ;  under  ordijiary  circumstances  they
might  still  have  eluded  the  notice  even  of  statesmen ;  but  in
the  stress  of  a  great  calamity  they  became  manifest  to  all.
The  chief  of  the  state  was  deeply  impressed  with  them.
Against  anxiety  and  apprehension  he  struggled  as  a  matter

A.  U.  938.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  479

of  duty,  but  the  effort  was  sore  and  hopeless ;  and  from  the
anticipation  of  disasters  beyond  his  control  he  escaped,  when
possible,  to  pensive  meditations  on  his  own  moral  nature,
which  at  least  might  lie  within  it.

The  brilliancy  of  the  city,  and  the  great  provincial  cap-
itals, the  magnificence  of  their  shows  and  entertainments,  still
lemained,  perhaps,  undimraed.  Tlie  dignity  of  ^ymfiomtot
the  temples  and  palaces  of  Greece  and  Kome  ^jSKj^U^
stood,  even  in  their  best  days,  in  marked  con-  SS^Ir^
trast  with  the  discomfort  and  squalor  of  their  S^JJ^S^dtan.
lanes  and  cabins.  The  spacious  avenues  of  Nero  "5«ii»^«^
concealed  perhaps  more  miserable  habitations  *'™-
than  might  be  seen  in  the  narrow  streets  of  Augustus;  but
as  yet  we  hear  no  distinct  murnmrs  of  poverty  among  the
j)opulace.  The  causes,  indeed,  were  already  at  work  which,
in  the  second  or  third  generation,  reduced  the  people  of  the
towns  to  pauperism,  and  made  the  public  ser\'ice  an  intolera-
ble burden ;  the  decline,  namely,  of  agriculture  and  com-
merce, the  isolation  of  the  towns,  the  disappearance  of  the
precious  metals,  the  return  of  society  to  a  state  of  barter,  in
Avhich  every  petty  community  strove  to  live  on  its  own  ina-
mediate  produce.  Such,  at  a  later  period,  was  the  condition
of  the  empire,  as  revealed  in  the  codes  of  the  fourth  century.
These  symptoms  were  doubtless  strongly  developed  in  the
third,  but  we  have  at  least  no  evidence  of  them  in  the  second.
We  may  reasonably  suppose,  indeed,  that  there  was  a  grad-
ual, though  slow,  diminution  in  the  amount  of  gold  and  silver
in  circulation.  The  result  would  be  felt  first  in  the  provinces,
and  latest  in  the  cities  and  Rome  itself,  but  assuredly  it  was
already  in  progress.  Tavo  texts  of  Pliny  assert  the  constant
drain  of  specie  to  the  East ;  and  the  assertion  is  confirmed  by
the  circumstances  of  the  case ;  for  the  Indians,  and  the  nations
beyond  India,  who  transmitted  to  the  West  their  silks  and
spices,  cared  little  for  the  wines  and  oils  of  Europe,  still  less
for  the  manufoctures  in  wool  and  leather  which  formed  the
staples  of  commerce  in  the  Mediterranean.' There  was  still

*  Plin.  HiA  ^^a^.  vl  26.,  xil  41. The  sums  are  Btoted  at  400,000/.  ao-
Bually  to  India,  and  800.000/.  to  the  East  generally.

480  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMAKS  [A.D.  180.

a  great,  perhaps  an  increasing  demand,  for  these  metals  in
works  of  art  and  ornament,  and  much  was  consumed  in  daily
use,  much  withdrawn  from  circulation  and  eventually  lost  by
the  thriftless  habit  of  hoarding.  But  the  supply  from  the
mines  of  Thrace,  Spain,  aiid  Germany  was  probably  declin-
ing, for  it  was  extracted  by  forced  labour,  the  most  expen-
sive, the  most  harassing,  and  the  most  precarious.  The
difficulty  of  maintaining  the  yield  of  the  precious  metals  is
marked  in  the  severe  regulations  of  the  later  emperors,  and
is  further  attested  by  the  progressive  debasement  of  the  cur-
rency.'

Not  more  precise  is  our  infoi-mation  respecting  the  move-
ment of  the  population,  which  was  also  at  this  period  on  the
Decrease  in  the  "^^rgc  of  decline.  To  the  partial  complaints  of
population,  such  a  decline  in  Italy,  miittered,  as  they  gen-
erally were,  by  the  poets  or  satirists,  I  have  hitherto  paid
little  heed.  In  statements  of  this  kind  there  is  generally
much  false  sentiment,  some  angry  misrepresentation.  The
«nd  Bubstitn-  Substitution  of  slave  for  free  labour  in  many  parts
forfreciabmir  ^^  Italy,  may  have  had  the  appearance  of  a  de-
the  number  of  c\^^^  ^^  population,  whilc  it  actually  indicated  no
slaves.  more  than  a  movement  and  transfer. It  was

more  important,  however,  in  the  future  it  foreshadowed  than
in  the  present  reality.  The  slave  population  was  not  repro-
ductive ;  it  was  only  kept  at  its  level  by  fresh  drafts  from
abroad.  Whenever  the  supply  should  be  cut  off,  the  residue
would  rai)idly  dwindle.  This  supply  was  maintained  partly
by  successful  wars,  but  still  more  by  a  regular  and  organized
traffic.  Tlie  slaves  from  the  North  might  be  exchanged  for
Italian  manufactures  and  produce ;  but  the  vendors  from
many  parts,  such  as  Arabia  and  Ethiopia,  central  Africa,  and
even  Caj)padocia  and  otlicr  districts  of  Asia  Minor,  would
take,  I  BuppoBC,  nothing  but  specie.  With  the  contraction
of  the  currency,  llic  trade  would  languisli,  and  under  this
depressiou  a  cdunlry  like  Italy,  which  was  almost  wholly

'  Cod.  Jimliu.  xi.  g  7.  4,  7. Akennnu's  lioman  Coins,  p.  xiv.

A.U.  933.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  481

Blocked  by  importation,  would  become  quickly  depopulated.
Still  more,  on  the  decline  of  the  slave  population,  there  would
loUow  a  decline  of  production,  a  decline  in  the  means  of  the
proprietors,  a  decline  in  the  condition  of  the  free  classes,  and
consequently  in  their  numbers  also.  That  such  a  decline
was  actually  felt  under  the  Flavian  emperors,  appears  in  the
sudden  adoption  of  the  policy  of  alimentation,  or  public  aid
to  impoverished  freemen.*

Nor  was  it  in  this  way  only  that  slavery  tended  to  the
decline  of  population.  Slavery  in  ancient,  and  doubtless  in
all, times,  was  a  hot-bed  of  vice  and  seltish  indul-  Effecu  or  rit»,
<^ence,  enervating  the  spirit  and  vital  forces  of  Sw^SISSSoa
mankind,  discouraging  legitimate  marriage,  and  "'  •••▼•nr-
enticing  to  promiscuous  and  barren  concubinage.  The  fruit
of  such  hateful  unions,  if  fruit  there  were,  or  could  be,  en-
<j;aged  little  regard  from  their  selfish  fathers,  and  both  law
lud  usage  continued  to  sanction  the  exposure  of  infants,  from
which  the  female  sex  undoubtedly  suffered  most.*  The  losses
of  Italy  from  this  horrid  practice  were  probably  the  greatest ;
but  the  provinces  also  lost  proportionably  ;  the  imitation  of
Koman  habits  was  rife  on  the  remotest  frontiers;  the  con-
(juests  of  the  empire  were  consolidated  by  the  attractions  of
Roman  indulgence  and  sensuality ;  slavery  threw  discredit

*  We  have  seen  that  M.  Aureliua  mstituted  a  new  fouudation  of  thia  kind
in  honour  of  Faustina.  Ills  bad  successor  seized  upon  these  and  similar  fundu
Pertiuax  found  the  alimentations  nine  years  in  arrear,  and  at  the  same  time
such  a  deficit  in  his  treasury,  that  it  was  impossible  to  revive  them.  CapitoL
Fertin.  9.  They  were  restored,  however,  or  replaced  by  new  foondatiopg,  in
more  favourable  times. Lamprid.  Alex.  Sev.  67.

*  I  have  touched  on  this  subject  in  Chapter  XLk  It  is  not  neoeasary  to  re-
fer to  texts  for  the  commonness  of  infanticide  among  the  andoits.  Tadtas
specifics  the  Jews  and  the  Germans  as  remarkable  exceptions.  (BtMt.  t.  8. ;
Germ.  19.)  That  the  practice  was  still  in  use  in  the  third  century  appears  from
the  Diffeti,  xxviii.  2. ;  nor  was  it  forbidden,  even  by  the  Christian  emperors,  be-
fore Valcntinian.  That  such  was  the  fate  of  female  oftener  than  of  male  chil-
dren may  be  easily  supposed.  So  Terence,  Heaut.  iv.  1.12.  "  Meministin'  me
gravidam,  et  mihi  te  maximo  opere  edicere,  Si  puellam  parerem,  nolle  tolli  ?  "
and  Apuleius,  Mdam.  x.  p.  722. ;  Tertulliau,  Ad.  Not.  15.  See  C.  G.  Zumpt,
Brevolkerung  in  Alterthuni,  p.  TO.

VOL.  VII. — 31

482  HISTORY  OF  THE  EOMANS  [A.D,  180.

on  all  manual  labour,  and  engendered  a  false  sentiment  of
honour,  which  constrained  the  poorer  classes  of  freemen  to
dependence  and  celibacy ;  vice  and  idleness  went  hand  in
hand,  and  combined  to  stunt  the  moral  and  physical  growth
of  the  Roman  citizen,  leaving  his  weak  and  morbid  frame  ex-
posed in  an  unequal  contest  to  the  fatal  influences  of  his  cli-
mate.*

If,  however,  the  actual  amount  of  population  in  Italy  and
other  metropolitan  districts  had  but  lately  begun  sensibly  to
decline,  for  some  generations  it  had  been  recruited  mainly
from  a  foreign  stock,  and  was  mingled  with  the  refuse  of
every  nation,  civilized  and  barbarian."  Slaves,  freedmen,
clients  of  the  rich  and  powerful,  had  glided  by  adoption  into
the  Roman  gentes,  the  names  of  which  still  retained  a  falla-
cious air  of  antiquity,  while  their  members  had  lost  the  feel-
ings and  principles  which  originally  signalized  them.  As
late  as  the  time  of  the  younger  Pliny,  we  find  the  gentile
names  of  the  republic  still  common,  though  many  of  them
have  ceased  to  recur  on  the  roll  of  the  great  magistracies,
where  they  have  been  supplanted  by  others,  hitherto  obscure
or  unknown  ;  but  the  surnames  of  Pliny's  friends  and  corre-
spondents, which  distinguish  the  family  from  the  house,  are
in  numerous  instances  strange  to  us,  and  often  grotesque
and  barbarous. The  gradual  exhaustion  of  the  true  Roman

'  riin.  Hial.  Nat.  iii.  24.,  seems  to  intimate  that,  in  his  opinion,  there  was  a
great  decline  of  population  in  Italy  since  the  time  when  (in  the  third  century,
B.  c.)  she  hud  armed  700,000  foot  and  70,000  horse.  Plutarch,  De  Defect.
Ora.  c.  8.,  says  that  Greece,  in/ his  day,  maintained  only  3,000  hoplitcs.  Such
statements  arc  fallacious.  We  may  observe  that  in  the  heat  of  the  great  Eu-
ropean war,  at  the  beginning  of  this  century.  Great  Britain  had  a  force  of
800,000  men  of  all  anus  and  services,  while  ten  years  ago,  being  a  time  of  pro-
found peace,  she  had  not,  perhaps,  a  (juartcr  of  that  number,  yet  her  popula-
tion had  nearly  doubled.  There  seems,  however,  to  be  direct  evidence  that
parts  both  of  Greece  and  Italy  had  much  declined  even  in  the  second  century.

*  There  can  be  no  ipieslion  of  the  fact,  though  the  texts  referring  to  it  bear
a  rhetorical  complexion.  See,  for  instance,  Seneca,  Ad  Hclv.  5. :  "  vidcbis  ma-
Jorem  partem  esse,  quto  rclictis  scdibus  suis  vcncrit  in  maximam  quidem  ct
pulcherrimam  urbem,  non  tamen  suam."

A.  C.  933.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  483

blood  had  been  already  marked  and  deplored  under  Claudius,
and  there  can  be  no  doubt,  though  niaterialfi  are  wanting  for
tracing  it,  that  the  flux  continued  to  gather  force  through
succeeding  generations.'

The  decay  of  moral  principles  which  hastened  the  disinte*
gration  of  Roman  society  was  compensated  by  no  new  dia*
coveries  in  material  cultivation.  The  idea  of  itauurfm*.
( ivilization  common  to  the  Greeks  and  Romans  2iittai53ilS
was  the  highest  development  of  the  bodily  fao-  «'▼"'«•**«»•
ulties,  together  with  the  imagination ;  but  in  exploring  the
agencies  of  the  natural  world,  and  turning  its  forces  to  the
use  of  man,  the  progress  soon  reached  its  limits.  The  Greeki
and  Romans  were  almost  equally  unsteady  in  tracuig  the
laws  of  physical  phenomena,  which  they  empirically  ob-
served, and  analysing  the  elements  of  the  world  around
them.  Their  advance  in  applied  science  stopped  short  with
the  principles  of  mechanics,  in  which  they  doubtless  attained
great  practical  proficiency.  Roman  engineering,  especially,
deserves  the  admiration  even  of  our  own  times.  But  the
ancients  invented  no  instrument  for  advancing  the  science  of
astronomy;  they  remained  profoundly  ignorant  of  the  mys-
teries of  chemistry ;  their  medicine,  notwithstanding  the
careful  diagnosis  of  Hippocrates  and  Galen,  could  not  free
itself  from  connexion  with  the  most  trivial  superstitions.
The  Greeks  speculated  deeply  in  etliics  and  politics;  the  Ro-
mans were  intelligent  students  of  legal  theory  and  proce-

'  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  27. :  "  plurimis  equitum,  plerisque  senatoribus  non  aliunde
originem  trahi."  Zumpt,  Breviiikerung  im  AUerthutn,  p.  87.,  Buspecta  that
Tacitus  himself  was  of  servile  origin.  I  observe  above  forty  surnames  in  Pliny's
letters  which  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  OnomasticMi  to  Cicero.  Of  these
there  are  three  classes  ou  which  I  should  fix  as  probably  incUcating  servile  ori-
gin: 1.  Greek;  as  Archippus,  Apolluiaris,  Aristo,  Eumolpus,  Polyatnus,  Thrv
sea :  2.  National ;  as  Africus,  Hispanus,  Macedo,  Mauricus,  Sardus :  3.  Names
of  quality  or  circumstance,  as  Genialis,  Prsesens,  Restitutus,  Robustus,  Pudens,
Rusticus,  Tacitus,  Tiro,  Tranquillus.  Statins,  according  to  Funcciua,  De  ling.
Lai.  V.  197.,  is  a  servile  name,  "a  stando."  I  have  before  remarked  how
many  of  tlie  sophists  at  Athens  and  elsewhere  claimed  connexion  with  noble
Roman  famihes. They  were  freedmen  and  clients  of  Roman  hooaes.

484  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  180.

dure ;  but  neither  could  discover  from  these  elementary
sciences  the  compound  ideas  of  public  economy.  Their  piin-
ciples  of  commerce  and  finance  were  to  the  last  rude  and  un-
philosophical.  They  made  little  advance,  at  the  height  of
their  prosperity  and  knowledge,  in  the  economy  of  labour
and  productioil ;  they  made  no  provision  for  the  support  of
the  increasing  numbers  to  which  the  human  race,  under  the
operation  of  natural  laws,  ought  to  have  attained.  We  read
of  no  improvements  in  the  common  processes  of  agriculture,
none  even  in  the  familiar  mode  of  grinding  corn,  none  in  the
extraction  and  smelting  of  ores,  none  in  the  art  of  navigation.
Even  in  war,  to  which  they  so  ardently  devoted  themselves,
we  find  the  helmet  and  cuirass,  the  sword,  spear,  and  buck-
ler, identical  in  character  and  almost  in  form,  from  the  siege
of  Troy  to  the  sack  of  Rome.  Changes  in  tactics  and  disci-
pline were  slight  and  casual,  compelled  rather  by  some
change  in  circumstances  than  spontaneous  or  scientific.  The
ancient  world  had,  in  short,  no  versatility,  no  power  of
adaptation  to  meet  the  varying  wants  of  its  outward  con-
dition. Its  ideas  were  not  equal  to  the  extension  of  its  ma-
terial dominion. A  little  soul  was  lodged  in  a  vast  body.

The  Egyptian  civilization,  the  Hindoo,  the  Chinese,  as
well  as  the  Greek  and  Roman,  have  all  had  their  natural
The  decline  of  liniits,  at  whicli  their  vitality  was  necessarily
M^S^datcs""  arrested.  Possibly  all  civilizations  are  subject
wuMho'Ke-*  ^^  ^  similar  law,  though  some  may  have  a
public.  wider scope  and a  more  enduring  force  than

others ;  or  possibly  there  may  be  a  real  salt  of  society  in
the  principle  of  intelligent  freedom,  which  has  first  learnt
to  control  itself,  that  it  may  desei-ve  to  escape  from  the  con-
trol of  external  forces.  But  Roman  society,  at  least,  was
animated  by  no  such  principle.  At  no  period  witliiu  the
sphere  of  historic  records  was  the  commonwealth  of  Rome
anytliing  but  an  oligarchy  of  warriors  and  slave-owners,  who
indemnified  theiuHclves  for  tlic  restraint  inij)0scd  on  them  by
their  equals  in  the  forum  by  aggression  abroad  and  tyranny
in  their  households. The  causes  of  its  decline  seem  to  have

A.  U,  933.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE,  485

little  connexion  with  the  form  of  government  established  in
the  first  and  second  centuries.  They  were  in  full  operation
before  the  fall  of  the  Republic,  though  their  baneful  effects
Avere  disguised  and  perhaps  retarded  by  outward  successe*,
by  extended  conquests,  and  increasing  supplies  of  tribute  or
plunder.  The  general  decline  of  population  throughout  the
ancient  world  may  be  dated  even  from  the  second  century
before  our  era.  The  last  age  of  the  Kepublic  was  perhaps
the  period  of  the  most  rapid  exhaustion  of  the  human
race ;  but  its  dissolution  was  arrested  under  Augustus,  when
the  population  recovered  for  a  time  in  some  quarters  of  the
empire,  and  remained  at  least  stationary  in  others.  The
curse  of  slavery  could  not  but  make  itself  felt  again,  and  de-
manded the  destined  catastrophe.  Whatever  evil  we  ascribe
to  the  despotism  of  the  Caesars,  we  must  remark  that  it  was
Slavery  that  rendered  political  freedom  and  constitutional
government  impossible.  Slavery  fostered  in  Rome,  as  pre-
viously at  Athens,  the  spirit  of  selfishness  and  sensuality,  of
lawlessness  and  insolence,  which  cannot  consist  with  political
equality,  with  political  justice,  with  political  moderation.
The  tyranny  of  the  emperors  was,  as  I  have  elsewhere  ob-
served, only  the  tyrtiuny  of  every  noble  extended  and  inten-
sified. The  empire  became  no  more  than  an  ergastulum  or
barracoon  on  a  vast  scale,  commensurate  with  the  dominions
of  the  greatest  of  Roman  slaveholders.  It  is  vain  to  imagine
that  a  people  can  be  tyrants  in  private  life,  and  long  escape
subjection  to  a  common  tyrant  in  public.  It  was  more  than
they  could  expect,  more,  indeed,  than  they  deserved,  if  they
found  in  Augustus,  at  least,  and  Vespasian,  in  Trajan  and
Hadrian,  in  Antoninus  and  Aurelius,  masters  who  sought
spontaneously  to  divest  themselves  of  the  most  terrible  at-
tributes of  their  boundless  autocracy.

We  have  noticed  already  the  pestilence  which  befell  Italy
and  many  of  the  provinces  in  the  reign  of  Aurelius. There
is  reason to believe  that  this  scourge was  no  The  effect  of
common  disorder,  that  it  was  of  a  type  new  at Mher^n^rawi
least  in  the  West,  and  that,  as  a  new  morbific now"^rn^-*
agent,  its  ravages  were  more  lasting,  as  well  as ^^  *"*^

486  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  180.

more  severe,  than  those  of  an  ordinary  sickness.  This
plague,  for  it  seems  to  merit  the  specific  name,  was  oh-
served  by  the  great  physician  Galen,  to  whom  it  appeared
as  a  new  and  startling  phenomenon.*  He  has  given  some
account  of  its  symptoms,  and,  though  its  course  and  action
are  little  known  to  us,  there  seems  ground  for  believing  that
it  formed  an  era  in  ancient  medicine.  At  another  time,  when
the  stamina  of  ancient  life  were  healthier  and  stronger,  such
a  visitation  might  possibly  have  come  and  gone,  and,  how-
ever fatal  at  the  moment,  have  left  no  lasting  traces ;  but
periods  seem  to  occur  in  national  existence  when  there  is  no
constitutional  power  of  rallying  under  casual  disorders.''  The
sickness  which  in  the  youth  of  the  commonwealth  would
have  dispelled  its  morbid  humours  and  fortified  its  system,
may  have  proved  fatal  to  its  advancing  years,  and  precipi-
tated a  hale  old  age  into  palsied  decrepitude.  The  vital
powers  of  the  empire  possessed  no  elasticity;  every  blow
now  told  upon  it  with  increasing  force ;  the  blows  it  slowly
or  impatiently  returned  were  given  by  the  hands  of  hired
barbarians,  not  by  the  strength  of  its  own  right  arm.  Not
sickness  alone,  but  famines,  earthquakes,  and  conflagrations,
fell  in  rapid  succession  upon  the  capital  and  the  provinces.*

•  I  haye  not  seen  Prof.  Hecker's  Commerdatio  de  Peste  AtUoniniana,  1835,
in  which  the  little  that  is  known  of  this  plague  is  said  to  be  collected  and  ex-
amined. Zunipt  refers  to  the  description  of  the  symptoms  by  Galen :  "  Pus-
tules appeared  on  the  body,  accompanied  with  inward  heat  and  putrid  breath,
with  hoarseness  and  cough.  If  the  impostumes  broke  there  was  a  chance  for
the  patient's  life,  but  if  not,  ho  was  certain  to  die.  Diarrhoea  set  in,  and  was
the  surest  token  of  death." — Bevblkerung  im  AKerihum,  p.  85.  note.

•  Niebuhr  has  expressed  the  opinion  that  "  the  ancient  world  never  recov-
ered from  the  blow  inflicted  upon  it  by  the  plague  which  visited  it  in  the  reign
of  M.  Aurelius."  {Lectures  on  Roman  Jfiat.  ii.  282.)  His  comparison  of  its
effects  to  tlioHc  of  the  groat  plague  at  Athena  may  bo  fanciful,  to  those  of  the
lilack  Death  of  the  middle  ages  more  fanciful  still.  The  apparent  degeneracy
of  English  society  after  the  i)lague  of  London  might  have  served  him  for  an-
other illustration.  Hut  society  soon  recovers  from  such  calamities,  if  its  con-
stitution is  sound.  It  ia  in  the  decay  of  nations  that  such  blows  form  real  his-
torical epochs.

•  Zumpt,  Stand  der  Bevdlkcrunff,  p.  84.,  gives  a  long  list  of  earthquakes,

A.  U.  983,]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  487

Such  casualties  may  have  occurred  at  other  periods  not  less
frequently  or  disastrously ;  but  these  were  obser^'ed,  while
the  others  passed  unnoticed,  because  the  courage  of  the  na-
tion was  now  broken  no  less  than  its  physical  vigour,  and,
distressed  and  terrified,  it  beheld  in  every  natural  disorder
the  stroke  of  fate,  the  token  of  its  destined  dissolution.

Nor  indeed  was  the  alarm  unfounded. These  transient
faintings  and  sicknesses  were  too  truly  the  symptoma  of  ap-
proaching collapse. The  long  line  of  the  north-  „«—»■**
ern  frontier,  from  Odessus  to  the  island  of  the SSTWr*-
Butavi, was skirted by a  fringe  of  fire,  and  teirt^tk*  tar-
through  the  lurid  glare  loomed  the  wrathful  faces
of  myriads,  Gennans,  Scythians,  and  Sarmatians,  all  armed
for  the  onslaught  in  sympathy  or  concert. To  buy  off  the
attack  with  bribes  and  blackmail ;  to  deaden  the  shock  by
introducing  other  barbarians  M'ithin  the  borders,  on  whom
the  first  blow  might  fall,  and  possibly  be  repelled ;  to  recruit
the  stricken  remnant  of  the  legions  with  strangers,  slaves,
and  the  refuse  of  the  streets  ;  such  were  the  resources  of  the
coward,  the  crafty,  or  the  desperate;  but  little  trust  was
placed,  perhaps, in  any  of  them. The  people _ .^  -
were  smitten  with  an  access  of  superstitious  de-  pMitttiMu«i>-
votion;  they  breathed  fresh  warmth  into  their
ancient  ceremonies,  and  fanned  to  brighter  flame  their  slum-
bering altar-fires ;  they  sought  again  the  long-derided  oracles,
and  revolved  prophetic scrolls  with  trembling  eagerness;
they  raised  new  shrines  to  every  deity  whose  power  might
temper  for  their  preservation  the  air  and  the  water,  the  sun-
shine or  the  moonshine.  *  They  sacrificed  many  hecatombs ;  but

famines,  and  pestilences,  fr«m  Augustus  downwards. The  plague  of  Aorelius

had  a  second  outbreak  under  Commodus  (Dion,  IxxiL  14.),  in  which  2,000  died
in  Rome  daily.  Another  pestilence,  more  general  and  more  terrible,  is  recorded
about  260. See  particularly  Zosimus,  i.  26.,  and  Euseb.  Hid.  Eed.  viL  21.

'  The  moral  eftect  of  these  visitations  in  the  middle  of  the  third  century  is
marketl  by  the  revival  worship  of  all  the  deities  supposed  to  have  salutary  in-
fluence in  such  cases,  as  of  Apollo,  Juno,  Diana,  Mars,  MCTCury,  Liber,  Nep-
tune, Vulcan,  Hercules,  and  j£sculapius. This  may  be  traced  on  medals  firom

488  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  180.

the  blood  of  bulls  and  lambs  no  longer  reassured  the  fainting
heart  of  the  worshippers ;  under  the  Republic  Gauls  and
Greeks  had  been  buried  alive  in  the  comitium  in  moments  of
public  calamity ;  and  in  the  age  of  Aurelius  victims  were
sought  among  members,  not  of  a  foreign  nation,  but  of  a  hos-
Persecution  of  *^^®  faith.  The  first  persecution  of  the  Christians
the  Christians,  under  ]S"ero  I  have  ascribed  to  popular  indigna-
tion at  the  unruly  temper  of  the  Jews,  with  whom  they  were
at  first  confounded,  and  by  whom  they  were  discovered  and
denounced.  The  procedure,  once  established  against  them
in  the  capital  on  a  special  occasion,  was  extended  abroad  by
zealous  officials,  and  inflamed  by  the  stubborn  and  mutinous
spirit  which  seemed  alone  to  animate  them.  Trajan  treated
Christianity  as  a  breach  of  state  discipline ;  but  Hadrian,  less
of  a  martinet  and  more  of  a  speculative  thinker,  controlled  in
part  the  assiduity  of  the  proconsular  courts-martial.  Antoni-
nus, at  peace  with  himself  and  with  all  the  world,  entertained
no  jealousy  or  anger  towards  these  harmless  sectaries,  and  was
willing  to  allay  the  exasperation  which  the  troubles  of  the
provinces  engendered  against  them.  But  Aurelius  regarded
the  crime  of  Christianity,  the  crime  of  refusing  to  worship
the  gods,  not  as  an  outbreak  of  turbulence  and  disobedience,
but  as  an  insult  to  the  majesty  of  the  national  divinities,  and
the  preeminence  of  the  national  cult.  As  a  philosopher  he
cherished  himself  no  faith  in  the  deities  of  the  Capitol ; '  but,

the  emperor  Gallus.  Eckhel,  Doetr.  Xumm.  vii.  867,  foil. ;  Zumpt,  p.  86.  The
worship  of  ./Esculapius  appears  to  have  spread  at  this  period,  particularly  in
Asia  Minor.  It  \a  frequently  noticed  by  Aristides,  Celaus,  and  Apuleius.  Jus-
tin Martyr  renuirks  that  tlio  miracles  of  Jesus  Christ  were  compared  to  the
wonderful  works  of  the  (Jod  of  healing.  (Apol.  i.  34.)  The  era  is  also
marked  by  tlie  appearance  of  pretenders  to  miraculous  healing  powers  ;  new
and  myHtcriouH  reincilicH  came  into  repute;  experiments  wore  made  on  the  ner-
vous system  like  tliowe  we  cull  nu'snierie,  all  calculated  to  enhance  the  idea  of
a  divine  interference  in  the  healing  of  diseases.  See  Greswell,  p.  814.,  whose
explanation  of  these  circmnstaneeH,  as  mere  rivalry  with  the  Christian  miracles,
seems  to  mo  inadequate.

'  See,  for  Instanoc,  M.  Anton.  Commeni.  v.  8. :  6irol6v  i<m  rb  XeySfievov
bri  awira^ev  6  Aaiikfytrioc  rotry  lirnaalav^  f)  ilwxpohivalav,  ^  &wTTo6ijalttv  •

A.  U.  933.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  489

as  emperor,  he  paid  not  the  less  respect  to  the  fabled  objects
of  vulgar  adoration ;  nor  could  he  excuse  the  horror  with
which  the  Christians  shrank  from  joining  formally  in  a  ser-
vice which  the  chief  of  the  state  deemed  innocent  and  deco-
rous/ These  august  shadows  had  ner\ed  the  arms  of  a  line
of  heroes;  these  potent  names  had  swayed  the  imperator  in
t  lie  field  and  the  consul  in  the  senate-house.  They  existed
:it  least  in  the  realities  they  had  effected ;  in  the  deeds  they
had  produced,  in  the  resolutions  they  had  inspired.  Under
their  influence  the  empire  had  waxed  and  flourished;  the  act-
ual crisis  of  her  fortunes  was  not  the  moment  to  test  their
\  alue  by  a  wanton  defiance.  The  firmness  of  the  Chrbtians
^eemed  to  Aurelius  strange  and  unnatural.  He  scanned  it  aa
a  marvel  before  he  i-esented  it  as  a  crime.*  In  another  gen-
eration the  emperors  will  cease  to  reason  or  reflect  on  the
l)lienemenon  at  all.  The  increasing  disasters  of  the  state
will  seem  to  them,  as  they  seemed  already  to  the  multitude,
a  proof  of  the  anger  of  the  gods  against  the  most  formidable
tnemies  of  Olympus.*

The  extent  to  which  this  persecution  was  carried  under
Aurelius  is  shown  by  records  fully  entitled  to  our  reliance,
whence  we  learn  that  many  professors  of  the  faith,  of  every
condition  and  of  either  sex,  were  put  cruelly  to  death  both
in  the  East  and  West.  Of  these  victims  Melito,  Martyrdoms
bishop  of  Sardis,  and  Poly  carp,  bishop  of  Smyrna,  ^"p^a^;
were  the  most  distinguished ;  but  the  martyrdom •a<iBJ»>«UM-

Toiovrdv  iari  Kal  rd,  awlra^ev  ToiT<,i  ij  tuv  b?.uv  ^vai(  v6aov,  9  jt^poffiv,  ^
ano^o^J/v.

•  Thus  Seneca,  as  quoted  by  Augustin,  De  CivUate  Dei,  tL  10. :  "  memineiv
mus  cultum  ejus  niagis  ad  morem  quam  ad  rem  pertinere."

*  M.  Anton.  Comment,  xi.  8. :  /^z)  Kara  fi?^  itapaTo^tv,  (if  ol  Xpurruivoi.

'  During  the  ages  of  persecution  the  Clu-istian  apologists  very  naturally  set
themselves  to  show  that  the  calamities  of  the  empire  were  radi  as  had  occurred
l»ofore,  and  could  not  be  ascribed  to  the  new  religion.  So  Amobius,  Adv.
(rmies,  i.  4. :  "  quando  est  humanum  genus  aquarum  diluviis  interemptum  V  non
ante  uos  ?  quando  mundus  incensus  in  favillas  et  cineres  dissolutus  est  ?  non
ante  uos  ?  quando  urbcs  amplissimae  marinis  coopertse  sunt  fluctibus  ?  non
ante  nos  ?  quando  cum  feris  bella,  et  prtelia  cum  leonibus  gesta  sunt !  non  ante
nos?"

490  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  180,

of  Pothinus,  Ponticus  and  Blandina,  at  Lyons,  has  been  com-
memorated by  the  Church  with  no  less  affectionate  devotion/
The  rescripts  of  Trajan  and  Hadrian,  which  forbade  the
Christians  to  be  sought  out,  and  menaced  their  accusers  with
punishment,  were  abrogated  or  at  least  tacitly  disregarded
by  terrified  fanatics.  The  activity,  indeed,  of  the  persecution
seems  to  have  relaxed  towards  the  close  of  this  reign ;  but,
this  was  owing  rather  to  the  emperor's  apparent  successes,
^  and  to  the  reviving  confidence  of  his  subjects,  than  to  the  re-
morse or  compassion  of  either.*

Of  the  feelings  and  character  of  the  imperial  philosopher

a  deeply-interesting  portraiture  is  left  us  in  the  memorials  of

his  private  meditations. Amidst  the  toils  and

The  "Medita-  n  -nr

tions"  or  terrors  of  the  Marcomannic  war,  m  the  camp  or

"Commenta-  .  iti,»it-xi

ries"ofM.  An- the  military  station,  on  the  banks  oi  the  Danube

relias,

or  the  slopes  of  the  Carpathians,  Aurelius  snatch-
ed a  few  hours  from  his  labors  to  question  his  conscience  on
the  discharge  of  his  duties,  to  confirm  himself  in  the  precepts
of  philosophy,  to  fortify  his  soul  against  the  troubles  of  the
world,  and  the  dread  of  death.*  The  records  of  this  self-ex-
amination extend  to  twelve  books,  each  containing  numerous
remarks  or  maxims,  generally  unconnected,  involving  mani-
fold repetitions,  and  presenting  thoughts  of  very  different
value ;  but  all  tending  to  establish  the  broad  principles  of
the  Stoic  philosophy,  as  then  taught  and  understood.  Aure-
lius had  imbibed  the  learning  of  Rusticus,  of  Sextus  the  son

*  Eusob.  Ilisf.  Eccl  V.  1-5.  Sulp.  Sever,  ii.  46.  St.  Jerome,  Catal,  Script.
C.  85. Ruinart,  Ada  Martyrum  sinccra.

'  Thiit  flucli  Wns  the  early  Christian  tradition  appears  from  Tcrtullian's
etatcmcnt,  that  Aurtlius  checked  the  persecution  of  the  Christians  after  the
BUCCCRS  of  their  prayers  against  the  Quadi,  and  from  a  letter  ascribed  to  him
algo  favourable  to  them,  which  is  appended  to  the  Apology  of  Justin.  We
may  fairly  credit  the  tnulition,  while  we  question  the  authenticity  of  the  facts
on  which  it  pretends  to  rest.

•  It  was  with  a  bitter  sigh,  no  doitbt,  that  Aurelius  constrained  himself  to
believe  and  aflinu  tliut  no  state  of  life  is  so  favoural)Ie  for  philosophy  as
empire.  Commmt.  xi.  7. ;  nfjc  ivapyic  ■KpoaTcinTEi  rb  fiij  e'lvai  liXlifv  ftiot
irrdOeatv  e'l^  rb  ^iXoao^lv  oiruc  imr^deiov,  if  rair^  h  ^  vvv  i>v  rvyx^veit.

A.  U.  933.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  491

of  Plutarch,  and  of  Apollonius,  of  whom  we  have  no  special
knowledge;  but  of  the  sage  Epictetus,  whom  he  most  studied
and  admired,  some  remains  have  been  collected  by  which  his
own  position  among  the  best  and  wisest  of  the  ancients  is  es-
tablished, and  which  disclose  the  true  basis  of  the  imperial
philosophy.  The  point  of  interest  in  these  works  is  the  place
they  hold  between  the  teaching  of  the  earlier  philosophers
and  that  of  the  revivalists  of  the  third  century.  The  time
had  come  for  a  strong  reaction  towards  positive
belief.  The  Heathen  mythology  had  drawn  with  ▼«»  of  pori-
it  in  its  fall  the  principles  even  of  natural  re-
ligion. But  this  decline  had  reached  its  limits.  In  default
of  a  better  system,  mythology  itself  might  again  rear  its
head.  We  have  already  noticed  symptoms,  faint  and  tran-
sient perhaps,  of  such  an  impending  restoration.  Even  had
the  revelation  of  Christianity  not  been  made,  the  Nemesis  of
unbelief  Avould  doubtless  have  raised  some  objects  on  the
surface  of  the  whelming  waters,  were  they  but  straws,  to
clutch  at ;  and  the  abortive  efforts  of  Augustus  and  Domitian
towards  a  ritualistic  revival,  show  the  direction  in  which  the
tide  of  opinion  or  sentiment  was  setting.  But,  already  in  the
second  century,  the  positive  teaching  of  the  Chrbtians  had
reanimated  religious  speculation  beyond  its  immediate  circle,
and  we  may  trace  in  Epictetus  and  his  imperial  admirer  the
eflects  of  a  moral  movement  which  it  will  not  be  unjust  to
ascribe,  at  least  in  part,  to  the  influence  of  St.  Paul  and  his
Master.  Both  Epictetus  and  Aurelius  recognise  fiilly  the
personal  existence  of  Deity :  neither  the  concrete  divinities
of  Heathen  legend,  on  the  one  hand,  nor  any  single  and  infi-
nite existence  on  the  other,  but  rather  a  multitude  of  abstract
essences,  the  nature  and  distinctions  of  which  are  wholly  be-
yond the  scope  of  human  definition.*  This  cordial  belief  in
God  as  a  moral  Intelligence,  is  a  step  decidedly  in  advance

'  Thus  Comment,  iii.  13. :  oh  yap  avdpimtviv  rt  &vev  r^  eiri  ra  Otia  owa-
iro<j>opdg  ev  npdieic.  v.  7.  on  the  duty  of  simple  prayer  to  the  gods.  vL  10. :
(T£/3w,  Kai  ei-oradc),  koI  da'plxj  rtp  diotKovvri •  L  e.  proridence.  vi.  23. :  i^'
anaai  J»)  6eovi  iiriKo^v, vi.  29. :  aldov  Oeoii.

492  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS  [A.  D.  180.

of  Seneca,  and  amounts,  indeed,  almost  to  a  negation  of  the
fundamental  article  of  the  older  Porch,  the  preeminence  of  a
blind  and  soulless  Fate,  There  is  some  advance,  indeed,  in
Aurelius  beyond  Epictetus ;  the  pupil  is  wiser  than  his  mas-
ter, and  seems  to  arrive  at  a  genuine  conviction  of  a  moral
Providence.  Nevertheless,  on  one  important  point,  both  the
one  and  the  other  have  fallen  behind  Seneca.  Their  hold  of
the  doctrine  of  a  future  life  appears  even  fainter  than  his.
Epictetus,  indeed,  hardly  ventures  to  regard  it  at  all ;  Aurelius,
more  hopefUl,  more  loving,  more  ardent,  seems  to  cherish  the
fond  aspiration,  though  he  dares  not  assert  it  as  a  dogma.*
But  for  this  apparent  falling-off  a  sufficient  reason  may  be
assigned.  The  later  Stoics  had  attained  a  clearer  idea  of  the
personality  of  God,  with  a  higher  conception  of  His  great-
ness and  purity.  They  could  not  rest  in  the  pantheism  of  an
eai'lier  age  ;  immortality  in  their  view,  must  be  personal  and
individual,  if  it  exist  at  all.  But  the  temper  of  the  age,  as
of  every  age  of  declining  civilization,  was  deeply  infected
with  the  principles  of  materialism ;  it  required  faith  in  the
specific  dogma  of  the  Christian  Resurrection  to  allay  its  fe-
verish distrust  in  a  future  state  of  being.  In  the  next  centu-
ry, the  melloAV  Stoicism  of  these  amiable  enthusiasts  was  sup-
planted, in  turn,  by  the  New  Platonism,  which  advanced
from  the  faint  apprehension  of  a  personal  deity  to  a  grasp  of
his  attributes  and  nature ;  which  embraced  a  distinct  belief
in  the  emanation  of  the  soul  from  him  and  yearned  for  re-
union witli  him.  The  errors  of  the  Alexandrian  School,  fan-
tastic as  they  were,  served  to  prepare  mankind  for  the  recep-
tion of  the  Gospel.  Tims  it  was  that  Philosophy  and  Re-
ligion at  last  united  on  the  solid  gi'ound  of  an  intelligent
faith  in  God.  On  this  ground  was  raised  the  structure  of  the
Athanasian  theology.  The  clouds  and  fogbanks  of  Plotinus
and  Porpliyry,  of  Julian  and  J^ibanius,  were  replaced  by  the
enduring  fabric  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Christian  Trinity.
Few  books  leave  a  profounder  impression  of  melancholy

•  Comp.  Commeni,  iv.  32.,  v.  13.,  vi.  15.  28.,  viii.  58.,  x.  28.

A.  U.  933.]  UlfDEB  THE  EMPIRE.  493

than  the  Commentaries  of  the  good  Aurelius.  With  our
knowledge  of  the  circumstances  under  which  Metaaehoiy
they  were  compiled,  the  pangs  of  society  around  SjSSStottaLif"
him,  the  vexations  he  personally  suffered,  and  2^^?^^'.
the  lack  of  spiritual  hope  to  which  his  own  doo-  ^^^
trines  condemned  him,  it  is  sad  rather  than  cheering  to  note
the  stern  self-repression  which  forbids,  throughout  these  pri-
vate meditations,  the  utterance  of  a  single  complaint,  the
lieaving  of  a  single  sigh.  One  strong  burst  of  natural  feeling
would  be  a  relief  to  the  reader,  as  it  would  have  been  doubt-
less to  the  writer  himself.  One  passionate  reference  to  the
troubles  of  the  empire,  and  the  sufferings  of  the  people,  or  to
his  own  endurance,  with  its  transient  gleams  of  success  and
hopes  of  triumph,  would  have  imparted  a  more  general  in-
terest to  reflections  which  now  address  themselves  only
liore  and  there  to  a  few  abstract  reasoners.'  But  no !  the
imperial  theorist  will  live  and  die  a  martyr  to  his  theory.
The  Christians  in  the  arena  of  Lugdunum  suffered,  perhaps,
no  greater  torments.  Xor  was  the  temper  of  Aurelius  natu-
rally hard  and  unbending.  It  was,  on  the  contrary,  almost
feminine  in  its  softness.  He  imbibed  his  religious  feelings
from  his  mother,  his  views  of  morals  and  philosophy  from  his
teachers ;  he  was  like  wax  in  the  hands  of  those  he  loved,
and  he  loved  all  who  showed  love  towards  him,  and  some
even  who  should  have  loved  liim,  but  did  not.'  In  his  pub-
lic career  he  betrayed  a  little  weakness  ;  in  his  domestic  re-
lations his  infirmity  was  stUl  more  conspicuous.  Even  his  med-
itations, with  their  anxious  and  importunate  scruples,  seem  to
betray  some  want  of  decision,  some  littleness  of  view  and  pur-
pose. We  must  smile  at  the  fervour  with  which  the  wisest

'  The  "  Commentaries  "  abound,  however,  in  noble  reflections  cm  the  du-
ties of  the  ruler  towards  his  people.  Comp.  vL  29. :  /ii)  airoKtuaap^dyc,  /«)
j3a(j>tj^. vii.  36. :  (iaathKov,  ev  fuv  nparretv,  kokuq  6i  aKOvetv. vL  54. :  to  r^

*  M.  Anton.  Comment,  i.  8. :  izapd  Ttji  f^VP^  ^0  Oeom^ic.  His  special  ob-
ligations to  each  of  his  teachers,  Diognetus,  Rosticus,  Seitus  of  Chseronea,
Apollonius,  &c.,  are  acknowledged  in  turn.

494  HISTORY  OP  THE  ROMANS  [A.D.  180.

of  princes  exhorts  himself  to  rise  betimes  in  the  morning.^
To  fix  deeply  in  the  mind  the  conviction  of  the  vanity  of
earthly  things,  is  a  hard  lesson  for  all :  it  was  hard  even  for
the  slave  Epictetus,  harder,  surely,  for  the  emperor  Aurelius.
It  is  hard  for  a  Christian,  much  harder  for  a  Pagan ;  hard  for
those  who  look  for  substantial  glories  hereafter ;  hardest  of
all  for  such  as  have  no  hope  beyond  the  grave,  or,  if  they
dare  to  cherish  their  yearning  in  secret,  are  forbidden  by
their  theories  to  give  it  utterance.  Nevertheless,  the  con-
stant recurrence  of  this  theme  in  the  work  before  us,  and  the
variety  of  argument  and  illustration  with  which  it  is  en-
forced, disclose  a  weakness  which  cannot  be  wholly  overlook-
ed.* He  who  would  exact  from  himself  and  us  so  high  a
standard  of  purity  and  self-renunciation,  while  he  limits  us
so  strictly  to  the  resources  of  our  own  strength  and  virtue,-
discarding  all  the  aid  of  a  higher  power,  which  even  the
Heathen  passionately  demanded,  should  have  been  himself
stronger,  firmer,  and  more  self-supporting.

Yet  once  more,  in  justice  to  this  paragon  of  Heathen  ex-
cellence, let  us  remember  that  Aurelius  represents  the  decrep-
Generai  hope-  itude  of  his  era.  He  is  hopeless  because  the  age
dety*^^t  thir'  i^  hopeless.  He  cannot  rise  beyond  the  sphere
*"'•  of  ideas  around  him. The  heathen  world  looked

for  no  renovation  of  a  society  which  was  visibly  perishing
before  its  face.  The  idea  of  constant  advance  of  mankind
towards  perfection  had  never  fonned  an  element  in  its  aspi-
rations ;  and  now,  when  the  popular  notion  of  its  degenera-
tion was  actually  realized,  it  accepted  its  apparent  destiny
without  a  murmur.  Even  the  Christians  could  with  difficulty
surmount  these  desponding  anticipations.  To  them,  also,  the
decline  of  society  was  fully  manifest ;  nor  did  they  regard
the  diffusion  of  religious  truth  as  a  means  of  cure  and  resto-
ration. The  believed  that  the  Deity  would  take  up  His
abode  in  the  soul  of  the  earnest  Christian ;  they  were  con-

*  M.  Anton.  Comment,  v.  1. :  bpfipov  brav  ivaSicvuc  k^eyelprf^  irpdxcipov
laru^  bn  iirl  avOp6nov  kytlpofiat.

»  Comment,  lil  5.,  iv.  8.  82.  88,,  v.  88.,  vi.  13.  15.  84.,  x.  28.

A.  U.  933.]  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  495

vinced  of  the  power  of  attaining  personally  the  closest  union
with  the  Spirit  of  God ;  they  gloried  in  the  assurance  of  a
future  exaltation  to  the  mansion  of  their  Father  in  heaven,
through  the  strength  which  He  alone  could  iurnish,  or  the
change  which  He  alone  could  work  in  them.  And  this  as-
surance, warmly  embraced,  might  render  them  cheerful  and
even  triumphant  amidst  the  public  calamities,  and  in  their
own  pains  and  martyrdoms.  But  they  expected  no  general
revival  of  society  through  the  purer  morality  of  the  Gospel ;
no  fructifying  of  the  blessed  seed  in  the  bosom  of  an  effete
civilization.  For  such  a  progress  and  result  no  time,  as  they
anticipated,  would  be  allowed,  for  the  end  of  the  world  ap-
peared to  be  at  hand ;  the  outward  frame  of  law  and  order
Avas  only  upheld,  in  their  view,  by  the  continued  existence
of  the  empire ;  stricken  and  shaken  as  that  framework  was,
it  could  not  long  endure,  and  on  its  fall  would  follow  the
dissolution  of  the  divine  creation,  the  conflagration  of  the
universe,  the  end  of  all  things.  To  Justin  and  Tertullian,  to
Origen  and  Arnobius,  a  revelation  of  the  impending  estab-
lishment of  Christianity  would  have  seemed  as  strange  and
incredible  as  to  Aurelius  hiin.

In  my  first  chapter  I  indicated  this  momentous  revolution
:is  the  period  to  which  I  purposed  to  conduct  my  history  of
the  Romans  under  the  Empire.  I  had  hoped  to
tutwine  with  my  relation  of  events,  and  my  re-
view of  literature  and  manners,  an  account  of  the  change  of
opinion  by  which  a  positive  belief  in  religious  dogmas  wa»
evolved  from  the  chaos  of  doubt,  or  rose  upon  the  ruins  of
baffled  incredulity;  to  trace  the  progress  of  this  moral  trans-
formation from  the  day  when  the  High  Priest  of  Jupiter,  the
Head  of  the  Roman  hierarchy,  the  chief  interpreter  of  divine
things  to  the  Pagan  conscience,  declared  before  the  assembled
senators  that  immortality  was  a  dream,  and  future  Retribu-
tion a  fable,  to  that  when  the  Emperor,  the  Chief  of  the
State,  the  Head  of  the  newly  established  Church  of  the
Christians,  presided  over  a  general  council  of  bishops,  and

496  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS.  [A.  D.  180.

affirmed  at  its  bidding  the  transcendent  mystery  of  a  Triune
Deity.  But  I  have  learnt  by  a  trial  of  many  years  to  dis-
trust my  qualifications  for  so  grave  a  task.  And  other  cares
impede  me,  other  duties  warn  me  to  desist.  I  have  now
reached  the  point  at  which  the  narrative  of  my  great  prede-
cessor Gibbon  commences,  and  much  as  I  regret  that  the
crisis  should  be  unfolded  to  the  English  reader  by  one  who,
unhappy  in  his  school  and  in  his  masters,  in  his  moral  views
and  spiritual  training,  approached  it,  with  all  his  mighty
powers,  under  a  cloud  of  ignoble  prejudices,  I  forbear  myself
from  entering  the  lists  in  which  he  has  long  stalked  alone
and  unchallenged.  The  work  I  now  ofier  as  completed,  em-
braces what  may  be  loosely  designated  the  constitutional
period  of  the  Roman  monarchy,  extending  from  the  graceful
primacy  of  Pompeius  to  the  barbarian  despotism  of  the  son
of  Aurelius.  That  it  should  be  permanently  accepted  as  the
English  History  of  the  Tipper  Empire,  is  more  than  I  venture
to  anticipate ;  but  I  shall  not  regret  its  being  in  due  season
supplanted,  if  I  lead  a  successor  of  firmer  grasp  and  wider
vision  to  sift  our  records  in  a  critical  and  independent  spirit.

INDEX

HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMASS  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

ABGARUS,  king  of  Osrboene,  his  tr««ch-
erou8  CUUU&C-I  t^  Crassus,  1.  42*2. Kb-
capes  to  the  I'urthlan  camp,  423.

Ab^urus,  king  of  Kdessa,  submits  to  Tnjan,
vii.  31M.

\i,ii,  „,.  ..ii,i,.irchyot  v.  269.
lys,  iii.  78.
.xecutlon  of,  ii.  12.
.:.,.....,  .,.Aa  bv  mistake  for  Agrlppina,
vi.  101.

Achaia,  extent  of  the  Roman  Province  of;
i.  84.  Tlie  government  ot^  assigned  by  i*.
('lodias  tu  Pi8o,805.  Under  Appius  Cmu-
dius,  ii.  217.  •ccupiej  by  Ciesar,  «!«.
Greece  projuT  aiul  ilu-  i>l:iiiil-..  uoi  made
a  province  |..  -:ir,

iv.  119. li~  l.y

Strabo,  1VJ.  . >  -  to

the  senate,  IVJ.  Ua  livcduui  urucluimed
by  Nero,  vi.  270.  Aguiu  reduced  to  a
province  bv  Viv-ii.i>i.iii.  \  ii.  ■.'  i.

Aehillas, miii'  -  XII.,  in-

vlti-sPoiuiii  -'-W.  Car-

ries rouipciii  ^S  C:lJ.ir.

25,S. AssasbiuuU.;

Acilius  Glabrlo,  ex-r
lighting  in the ;ii  ,^
Kxiled  bv  Domitlau  fur  JuJaiam  ur  t'iiiis-
tiuuity,  126.

Aeri«tusi  Nero's  agent  for  plundering  Greece
and  Asia  v(  their  works  of  art,  vi.  142.

Acta  diurna,  or  public  journals,  iv.  330.  Bur-
lesqued in  the  .'^atiricou  of  Petronius,  3;il.

Acte,  Nero's  mistress,  vi.  89,  9t.  Warns
him  against  Agrlppina,  9S.  Assists  at  his
obsequies,  2S9.

Actian  games,  foundation  of  the.  ilL  258.

Actiuiu,  the,  or  temple  of  Apollo,  iii.  24Si.
Position  of  Autouius  at,  24S.  The  battle
of  .Vetium,  2.'>2.  Results  produced  bv  this
battle,  2M.  Date  of  the  battle,  257.  foun-
dation of  the  city  of  Nicoiwlis  at  Actium,
257.

Adcantuannus,  king  of  the  Sotiatea,  snbmits
to  P.  Clodius,  i.  296.

Ad  Fines,  or  Avigiiana,  the  boundary  of
Italy  at,  iv.  8S.

Addon,  governor  of  Artaglra,  treacherously
■wounds  Oaius  Ciesar,  iv.  21S.

Adminius,  king  of  the  Trinobantes,  solicits

VOL.  vn. — 'Si

Caios  Cesar  for  •  sh«r«  of  tbe  kliigdaiii
orCunobelliiuB,TL19. Detalaad  at  SiaBM,

A  held  br  OoaaidliMeir  th«  n-

290. Bum  ezsetad  br  Omv

/.■n«,aoi
A  taken  br  tha  CImbcl

.'. AlUesorthoKarril,

-  _ o C»mr,  97«-S8L At-

tiiek  H,  Ctuoro'*  oamp,  8M. Th«tt  hoad-

quarters  ooeupled  bv  Cmmr,  and  attained

bv  the  Germans,  400-408.

Adultery,  ancient  Roman  pawtrtBiMt  tar,

v.  151 Disgraceful  method  of  "Mnlaffftf

impunity,  154, 155. Tiberina'a  odiBt,  oloa-

Ing  this  means  of  retreat,  155. Th«  law*

of  adultery  enforced by  Domitian,  rlL

108.

^dllea.  the,  nader  the  emntra,  liL  401.

JCdui,  hMMMired  br  the  BoaiaBS  with  the

title  of  brothen,  L  19T  meU,  914 Their

asoeudeney  in  Gaol,  S8& Threateaed  bjr

the  Bequaai  and  Arrerml,  iUL Defeated

bv  the  ^equaui  and  SoeTLiSi. Support-

The  Beiretii  march

t  itoty,  »4T,  »4a Their

Boii,238;  it  15. Ke-

Buuii: their  ■. L 255. Their

fidelity  to  1.
sions  and  \
Roman  set!
ed.  21. Ri^

Labieuus,  ii'.

11.  Their  divl-

Maseaere the

ed,  and  pardon-

.'«. Defeated  by

uiency  to  them.

84. Revolt  until r  .1  alius  SaeroTlr,  V.  168.

Suppressed  by  r^illus,  IS'S,  186.
.£glna,  its  condition  under  Angnstna,  ir.

857.
^Egitna,  Ligurian  town  of;  sacked,  L  19&.
^F.lian  law  repealed,  L  179.
oElia  Petina,  imuried  to  and  diroreed  by

Claudius,  V.  399. Narcissus  reoommencu

tlii  ir  ri  marriage,  4.S7,  443.
.1 >  : 111,  Jerusalem  occupied  by  the

ly  ot,  viL  818.
.i  : .nan  laws  repealed  by  Clodius,

i.  179.
.£iius  Gallns,  his expedition  against  the

ArabUns,  iv.  97-100.
^£lius  SatuminuB,  Hung  from  the  Tarpeian

rock  for  a  iiboi  on  Tiberius,  v.  188.

498

INDEX.

-ilmilian  Gardens  (the  residence  of  Tigelli-
nusX  breaking  out  of  the  flro  of  Eome  in
them  a  second  time,  vi.  130.

"^neid"  of  Virgil,  Iv.  443.  The  glorifica-
tion of  the  Komans  and  of  Augustus,  443.
The  religious  idea  which  pervades  it,  443.
Its  vindication  of  monarchy,  444.  Augus-
tus shadowed  forth  in  .lEneas,  446.

.^rarium,  the  public,  and  the  flscus  of  the
emperor,  ill.  425.

.£thiopian8,  the,  invade  Egypt,  and  are  re-
pulsed by  Petronius,  iv.  102.

Aler. See  Domitius.

A&anlus,  L.,  Pompeian,  elected  consul,  i.
160.  Cicero's  opinion  of  him,  161.  Wishes
to  confer  on  Pompeius  the  legation  to
Egypt,  829.  CoDsar's  opinion  of  him  as  a
general,  11.  128.  His  civil  and  military
capacitv,  181.  His  campaign  in  Spain,
185.  ills  camp  near  llerda,  137.  Checks
CsDsar,  139.  Prepares  to  retreat  from  ller-
da, 144.  Retreats,  and  is  closely  followed
by  Cirsar,  145.  The  two  armies  drawn  up
in  battle  array,  152.  Capitulates  to  Caesar,
153.  Re-joins  Pompeius,  190.  Suspected
by  the  Pompeians,  225.  Joins  Cato  at
Corcyroe,  251. His  death,  802,  808.

Afranius  Potitns,  devotes  his  life  for  the  re-
covery of  the  emperor  Caius,  v.  218.

Africa,  province  of,  placed  under  the  care
of  Tubero,  11.  80.  State  of  the  province  in
B.  c.  44, 164.  Campaign  of  Curio,  165-167.
Assigned  to  Augustus,  iii.  138.  Held  by
Lepidus,  178, 184.  Committed  by  Augus-
tus to  Statilius  Taurus,  20S.  Constituted
by  Augustus  a  senatorian  province,  Iv.  92.
Its  corn-trade,  wealth,  and  tranquillity,  92.
Population  of  the  province  in  the  time  of
Augustu.s,  842.  Its  state  In  A.  d.  17,  v.  66.
Exploits  of  Tacfarinas,  66.  Wh6  Is  de-
feated by  Kurius  CamilluB,  57.  Fresh  In-
cursions of  Tacfarinas,  166.  Two  legions
Btationed  In,  142.

Agamemnon,  a  nlcknaino  of  Pompeius,  ii.

Agatbc,  withdrawn  from  the  suprvmacy  of
MbssUIo,  iv.  74.

Agendlcum,  legions  stationed  by  Cffisor  at,
1.405.

Agerlnua,  announeos  to  Nero  Agripplna's
escape  fW>m  drowning,  vi.  102.

Agon  Capltollnus,  (|ulu(iuennlal  contests  in
muHlo,  poetry,  un<l  ('lo<|uence,  Instituted
by  Dotiiltiiin,  vil.  18.1-186.

Agranu,  In  Arabia,  taken  by  the  Romans  un-
der .EIluK  (tullus,  Iv.  90.

Agrarian  laws  of  the  ( inicchi,  I.  25.  Strength
derived  by  tlio  stafe  IVoin  tlieno  concos-
sloMH,  27.  The  ngnirian  law  of  Servlllus
UulluR,  100.  Attenipts  of  Poin|H'lus  to
obtain  iin  a;..'rai'!.in  law  for  Ills  votonmH,
160. ■  -1.111,171. ThoBgni-

Han  ''llllI^  III.  52.

AgrI  I '  I  I,  under  Augustus,

Iv.  17% I  vll.  176.

Agrlcolo,  ('  luinilM  the  xxth  le-

gion III Ci  .'I. (iovernit  Aigiil-

Unlii.  '.'I i: iiKul.  70. Hetrotim

hlH  .I.M  l.l.  r  I-  1  .'  ilMH,  70  iiott>  •■".  Illft
oani|>.iii.'ij>>iii  liriiaiM.  VI.  Kklubllitheshlm-
wlf  ou  Uio  T>au  ouU  tktlway,  Ii,  78. Bat-

tle of  the  Grampians,  78-75.  His  intend-
ed circumnavigation  of  Britain,  77.  Re-
called by  Domitian,  who  is  jealous  of  him,
77,  78.  Has  triumphal  honours,  and  re-
tires from  public  life,  80.  Compared  with
Corbulo,  SO.  His  death  ascribed  to  Domi-
tian, 144, 145.

Agricola,  Calpumius,  appointed  to  the  com-
mand in  Britain,  vii.  454.  Attacks  the
Caledonians,  454.

Agrippa,  M.  Yipsanius,  his  origin  and  early
career,  iii.  211-214.  Supports  Augustus
from  the  first,  56.  His  destiny  predicted,
60.  Prosecutes  Cassius  for  the  murder  of
Cwsar,  138.  At  Philippi,  218.  At  Peru-
sia,  179.  Advances  to  confront  Antonius,
182.  His  victories  in  Aquitania,  196.
Constructs  the  Julian  Haven,  196,  197.
Defeats  a  Pompeian  fleet,  199.  Com-
pletely defeats  Sextus  Pompeius,  201, 246.
His  R'dileship,  234,  285.  Commands  a
squadron  for  Octavius'  fleet  at  the  battle
of  Actium,  246,  251.  Entrusted  with  the
government  of  Rome  during  the  absence
of  Octavius,  259.  A  "coruTean  banner"
conferred  on  him  by  Octavius,  816.  Said
to  have  urged  Augustus  to  resign  his
power,  824,  iv.  128.  lioverns  Rome  during
the  retirement  of  Augustus,  iii.  868.  Quells
a  revolt  in  Aqiiitania,  iv.  70.  Consul  and
censor  with  Octavius,  Iii.  828,  829.  Com-
pletely reduces  Spain,  iv.  67,  68.  Marries
Alarcella,  iii.  831.  iv.  127.  Governor  of
IJome,  ill.  337.  His  Pantheon,  889.  Tlio
presumptive  successor  to  Augustus,  889,
840.  His  military  roads  In  Gaul,  iv.
80.  Less  popular  than  ^lai-cellus,  128.
Sent  by  Augustus  on  a  mission  to  the
East,  129,  162.  Marries  Julia,  1?M.  His
uneasy  relations  with  Augustus.  186.  His
children  by  Julia,  186.  Represses  an
outbreak  of  the  Cautabrlaus,  137.  Tri-
bune, 140.  Uis  sons  adopted  bv  Augustus,
155.  Visited  in  Syria  by  I'lerod,  who
leads  him  through  Judea,  162.  Settles
the  affairs  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Ros-
phorus,  163.  Favors  granted  by  him  to
the  Jews,  164.  Uis  harsh  treatment  of
the  llienses,  164.  Returns  to  Rome,  and
decliues  a  triumph,  165.  His  last  cam-
paign In  Pannonia,  165.  His  death  and
character,  166,  167.  His  family,  169.
Com|)letion  of  the  hall  of  Agrip|>a,  192.
His  "Orbis  Plctus,"  or  map  of  the  world,
111.  422 ;  Iv.  328. His  baths  at  Rome,  vll.

85.

Agrippa  Postumus,  youngest  child  of  M
Agrippa  and  Julliu  his  birth,  Iv.  169.
Adopted  Into  the  .luUan  family  bv  Au-
gustus, 220.  Ills  mental  ami  liodily  <lo-
feets,  252.  Ranlshed  to  Planasia,  'I^A.
Reported  visit  of  Augustus  to  him,  281,
282.  Put  to  death  ou  the  accession  of  Ti-
berius, v.  II.

Agrippa,  Clemens  the  false,  v,  87,  88.

Agrl|iiia,  son  of  liereuluo.  *S'««  Herod
Agrippa.

Agrlpiiina,  daughter  of  Agrippa  and  Julia,
nnirrie<l  to  Geriiutnlcus,  Iv.  256,  279;  v.
ita.  Her  masculine  spirit,  v.  22,  iM,  17H.
Awakous  Tiborlus's  Jealousy  by  lur  ad-

i

INDEX.

499

dress  to  the  legionaries,  84,  36. Her  nu-
merous family,  25. Accompanies  Cier-
mauicus  to  the  East,  61. Plancina's  ri-
valry, 61. Dying  charge  of  Germaiiicus
to  her,  67. (Joiiu-s  to  iiome  with  his  re-
mains, T6. I'raiKCS  and  acclamations  lav-
ished on  her  and  her  children  by  the  peo-
ple, 76. Knmity  of  Tiberius  and  Sejanus
to  her,  179. Her  ruin  plotted  by  Sejanui.
190. Quarrel with Tiberiu^ 191 192.
Suspicious  against  her  Instilled  by  Seja-
nus,  2()9. Tiberius  complains  of  li.r  u>
the  senate,  214. She  is  ban
(latcria, 215, 216. Btiirv.-
Her  remains  excluded  ftui
leuai of the  Ca'sars, but  ^ub3cllUcIitly
honorably  iutern-d  by  Cains,  'SUS.
AL'ii|i|iina, daughter of Ciermaulcus and
ina,  married  (1)  to  Crispus  Pas-
vL  66; (2)  to  L.  Doraltlua,  by
i  ^he  has  Nero,  v.  260;  vl.  65. Ex-
il^a  l.y  Cains,  v.  851. Uecalled  bv  Clau-
ilins,  JiO:!.  HTO,  407. Her  son  Lucius  l)o-
liiitins  (Nero), -l-.'i. 11.  r  Ami  «iih  Mis-
-alina,  42:1. l;.
"(  Claudius  :;-
vn. Her  ui.i

bitlon and  artilice^  -|:JT. iiclrclbb Oc-
tavla  to  Nero,  and  gains  over  Vitelllua,
488,  442. Her  marriage  with  Claudius,
440. KfCalls Seneca fW)m exile, 44i
Causes  the  death  of  Lollia,  and  the  exile
of  Calpurnia,  448. I'allas,  her  paramour,
4  W. (  onits  the  army,  and  founds  CoIopU
A^;rli.|iiiuii~is,  445. '.\tfecls  to  be  •  part-
n<r  iu  ilic  iiupire,  446. Hrr  inoroailng
iullucnci',  44S,  451. I'roe.i
lUinniitiou  of  Statilius  Ta
furthiT  triuiii|itis.  l.'v". 1,;
a:r.iiu.-i !  1,

4.v>. r

UIVS  I'.i,  ,!.,,.

i-ut  at  tlir  ivhiliitiun  oi  iik-  IUiii,->h  cap-
tives at  liouie,  87.  Her  education  ot  Nero,
vi.  50.  Appoints  Burrhus  and  Seneca  bla
tutors,  M.  Contests  with  the  svnate  for
inlhit  nee  over  her  son,  68,  64.  Her  arro-
g;inei',  07.  Sem-ca  and  Ilurrhug  combine
again.-it  her,  tW.  She  quarrels  with  Acte,
69.  Di.-igrace  of  Pallas,  and  alarm  and
menaces  of  Agrippina,  72.  Her  dissension
with  Nero,  and  spirited  defence  of  herself,
7S-M.  The  ehai-ges  against  her  declared
unfoundi-d,  !<1.  Detested  by  the  Komans,
i'S.  Intrigues  of  Poppiea  against  her,  99.
Uetlivs  from  court,  100.  Failure  of  an
iilenipt  to  destroy  her,  101.  Her  murder
iiid  burial,  UV2-ltML

>iba,  the  rabbi,  his  typical  character,  vii.
:  15.  Nominates  liarcochebas  to  the  chief-
ship  of  the  Jewish  people,  817.  His  cruel
death,  818.

Aluiida,  Ca'sar's  Gaulish  legion  so  named,
ii.  70.

Alba,  house  of  Pompeius  at,  L  1S3;  iL  79.
Sides  with  Augustus,  iii.  98.

Albanl,  the,  submit  to  Tnyan,  viL  808.

Albici,  the,  aid  the  Massilians  against  the
Ctesariana,  ii.  143, 157.

AUiiuus,  his  attempt  on  Spain,  and  death,
vi.  840.

AlbncilU,  wife  ot  8*tHo%  cneoUd  for  ma-

Jettaa,  V.  JM8.-
Alcutara,  Trajan't  Md«>  at,  riL  KM.
AleaU.  its  aite,  siega,  UM  eapturo  hf  CMar,

Alexander  the  Great,  )a»  itatiie  at  Oadaa,  L
lOi. Answer  ot  the  Gaulish  chieflalna  U>
him,  228. Hia  tomb  at  Alexandria  visited
by  Oiar,  iL  257. And  by  Angustaa,  iiL
2s0. Uennanicua  ooaiMred  to  nlm,  v.  4W.
.\lexander,  son  of  Antuiuiu  and  Cleopatra,
til.'  kiugdoma  of  Armenia.  Parthi^  and
lAsigned  by  Antonius  to,  ilL  ItM.
i.  d  to  Jotape,  daughter  of  the  king
I.  2;S7.
A.  rial,  pi«flMt  of  Egjrpt,  d*-

i'aaiaB,Ti.MI. IW  aaiMaid
II  ■lude«,4il.

Alexaudi-r,  t>oa  ot  Atiaiobiiliu,  eairled  br
PompeiuB  to  KoBM,  UL  2M.  Put  to
death,  8U1.
Alexander,  son  of  Herod  the  Great,  iftnt  c  d
to  llUrtv,  iv.  168.  Put  to  death  by  hia
tatlu  r.  -lU.

u^«,  take*  part  la  the  redB»-

i,  vii.  mi,  807.

the  Alexandriana  gire  law

to  l^ilgvpt,  i.  860. Tiie  Alexaadriaaa  tan-

temptible  aa  a  aoldierT,  851. OoidUet  b*-

tween  them  and  Cteaar'a  aoUkn,  IL  IBOl

Their  ell  - Blae  acalaat  OMar,

aoa. A\  e  Ecrpiki  flc«t  and,

accldi'i.  lUTubraiy.iM.  Bnb-

istoOMV.MH

I  'oalaaatAIn-

'  v(.»ctavius,2M.  AWi—a w
4111,880.  OapriTadorttB
iivUegea  by  Aacuataa,  ttO.
.itws  a  third  part  of  the  poMlatioa,  aSQi
Cum -fleets  of  Alexaadita,  (r.  n&  Tba
Jews  at  Alexandria  '^fwi^H  by  tlM  B»>
tivea,  y.  8ia  And  by  th«  Booiaa  gor-
emor  ATiiloa  naMa^tlA.  CaaaaqiMBt
riot  and  disgrace  of  rUeeaa,  UL  Dia-
turbanoes  caused  1^  a  ranaaBt  of  tha
Zealots  tmu  ifrmnslnM.  tU.  186.  Tha
city  visited  by  Hadrian,  838.  Ctiaraeter
of  its  univers:  m

of  the  peopl.  •<>

him,  87a,  370.  - : u-

tlon  on  the  Akxauarians,'  376.

Aliens,  liomao,  compreheacioa  ot,  tm  the
state,  i.  23.

Aliso,  a  Koman  station  near  the  Bhiaa,
erected  by  Dmsoa,  iv.  182.  Yams  Ikila  to
reach  it,  274.  Abandoned  by  lu  gairlaon,
274. Its  position,  27&  noU  >.

Alledius,  proposes  to  leg^iae  the  martii^
of  uncle  and  nie<>e,  t.  440.

Allia,  a  name  of  evil  omen,  L  189.

AUobroges,  intercourse  of  the  Catilinarian
conspirators  with  the,  L  1 19.  Defeated  by
Fabiua,  196.  Absorbed  into  OU  J'rorinc*,
196,  Send  envoys  to  Home  and  reveal
Catilina's  oflers  to  Cioero,  209,  210.  Be-
sist  and  are  subdued.  210.  Their  terri-
tory, 214.  Geneva  their  frontier-town,
241.  The  Helvetii  determine  to  force
their  way  tlirough  the  territory  of  the
Allobrogea,  241. Defeated  by  Pomptinus,

500

INDEX

241.  Compelled  by  Cfesar  to  fhmish  pro-
visions to  the  Helvetii,  253.  Their  en-
deavors to  prevent  Caesar  from  crossing
the  Rhone,  ii.  27.

Almo,  the  river,  the  "  mother  of  the  gods "
of  the  Gauls,  vl,  84.

Alpinuliis,  Julius,  the  Helvetian  chle^  put
to  death  by  Valens,  vi.  823.

Alps,  operations  of  Augustus  for  securing
the  passes  of  the,  iv.  86.  The  Pennine
Alps,  i.  287,

Amblani,  a  Belgian  tribe,  joins  the  confed-
eracy against  the  Romans,  I  267.  Submit
to  Ciesar,  271.

Ambiliatl,  the,  join  a  maritime  confederacy
against  Cassar,  1.  290.

Amt)iorix,  chief  of  the  Eburones,  i.  892.  At-
tacks the  Romans,  392.  His  courage  and
craft,  892.  Destroys  two  legions,  398.
Surrounds  Q.  Cicero's  camp,  894.  His  do-
feat  and  escape,  399.  Ca>sar  issues  forth
in  quest  of  him  400.  Eludes  Cwsar,  404.
Leads  the  remnant  of  the  Eburones,  ii.  86.

Ambrones,  the,  destroyed  by  Marius,  i.  204.

Ampbipolis,  camp  of  the  triumvirs  at,  iii.
IW.

Amphitheatre,  the,  of  the  Romans.  See
Circus.

Ampins,  prevented  by  CsES-or  from  robbing
the  temple  of  Ephesus,  ii.  253.

Amyntxis,  minister  and  general  of  Deiota-
rus,  receives  the  throne  of  Piaidia  from
Antonlus,  iii.  190.  Abandons  Antonius
and  joins  the  Cresarians.  249.  Deserts  the
Bcnalorian  party  for  Antonius.  Iv.  110.
Confirmed  in  his  kingdom  by  Augustus,
110.

Ananas,  or  Annas,  high  priest  of  Jerusalem,
a  chief  of  the  Herodlans,  vi.  429.  Insulted
and  menaced  by  the  Zealots,  448.  Mur-
dered by  them,  449.

Ancalita-,'a  Urltiah  tribe,  submit  to  Ctesar,
L888.

Ancestors,  wax  effigies  of,  of  distinguished
Bomans,  iv.  19.

Ancona,  Trajan's  arch  at,  vll.  200.

Ancyra,  moniinient  of  Augustus  at,  Ir.  284,

And'l,  ft  tribe  of  (iaul.s,  compelled  to  submit
to  the  Huinans,  L  2^2,  289.  Revolt  of;
suppr(<BS<'<l,  v.  16S.

AD{ru>!«4>y,  rout  of  the  Drnlds  by  Suetonius
PuulllMus  in,  vl.  42.

AnlciuH  «>r«!iill8,  proposes  a  temple  to  Nero,
vl.  152. Put  to  death  by  him,  162.

AnIoctuN,  Nero'H  coininan'der  of  the  lloet  at
iiliiii,  vl.  101,  1<»2.  Prctend.s  an  intrigue
Mlni'Mum,unilertiiken  the  murder  of  Agrip-
wlth  (^clavlis  123.

Annitliii,  pruitor,  bis  proscription  and  death,
III.  144.

AnnalU  lex.  III.  130.

Annlo,  CInna'it  wjilow,  divorced  by  PIso,  1, 03.

Annit>an  fntiiily,  nilniMl  (o  the  cunHulatu  liy
the  t'li-mirii,  vi.  'I'A  notf.^

Antvln^  nuiipiM'lcd  1)V  Nero,  ns  n  friend  of
AgrlpplnuX  vl.  2«!l'.

Aniiit'MMiN  Kori  of  AriHtoliuluH,  unrrlod  by
l'otii|H'lus  on  n  liontittfe  to  Itoine,  III.  21I'.).
InvadeH  I'nIi'Ktine  witli  tlic  aid  oftlie  Par-
thllin^  DWI.  lieeiinirn  inaiitiT  of  •lerui>:i-
lum,  WA,  Kxpciited  by  Anl4)iilus  with
uousuni  atrocity,  »i)5.

Antimachns,  taken  by  Statins  as  his  model,
vii.  229.

Antinous,  Hadrian's  favourite,  his  death,  vii.
875.

Antioch,  description  of,  iv.  861.  Second  to
Alexandria  alone  in  its  grandeur  and
population,  862.  The  great  earthquake  at,
vii.  299.  Hadrian's  visit  to  Antioch,  378
"Which  disgusts  him  with  its  frivolity  and
licentiousness,  878.  Hadrian  insulted  by
the  citizens,  879.

Antiochus,  king  of  Commagcne,  sues  for
permission  to  wear  the  Roman  toga,  i.
853.  Joins  Pompcius  in  the  civil  war,  11.
188.  Besieged  in  Saniosata  by  Ventidius
and  afterv.-ards  Antonius,  iii.  192.  Put  to
death,  iv.  113.

Antiochus,  restored  by  Claudius  to  his  king-
dom of  Commagcue,  v.  379.  Supports
Vespasian,  vi.  850.

Antiochus  Asiaticus,  king  of  Syria,  dethron-
ed by  Pompeius,  i.  138.

Antiochus  Epiphanos,  his  attempts  to  Hel-
lenize  the  Jews,  iii.  290.  His  buildings  at
Athens,  iv.  856.

Antipatcr,  the  Idumean,  appointed  by  Pom-
peius, minister  of  Hyrcanus,  iii,  299.  His
ascendency  in  Palestine,  801.

Antipater,  son  of  Herod  the  Great,  put  to
death  by  his  father,  iv.  216.

Antipolis  (Antibes),  besieged  by  the  Ligm-i-
ans,  iv.  195.  Taken  from  the  supremacy
of  Massilia,  iv.  74.

Antistia  divorced  by  Pompeius  at  Sulla's
command,  i.  93.

Antistius,  propra'tor  in  Spain,  i.  102.

Antistlus,  pruitor,  exiled  for  lampooning
Nero,  vi.  115, 116.

Antistius,  T,  ioins  Scxtus  Pompeius,  but
finally  abandons  him,  iii.  204.

Antistius  Labro. See  Labro.

Antonia,  mother  of  Gorinanlcus,  divulges
the  conspiracv  of  Sejanus  against  the
life  of  Tiberius,  v.  223.  Distinctions  con-
ferred upon  her  by  the  emperor  Caius,
290.

Antonia,  daughter  of  Claudius  by  JRWa  Pe-
tiua,  her  maiTiago  with  Cnasus  Pompeius
Magnus,  v.  899.

Antonino  column  at  Rome,  described,  vll.
478.

Antonino  period  of  Roman  history.  Its  char-
acter, vll.  7.  Improperly  limited  to  the
reigns  of  Plus  and  Aufelius,  it  should
coininenco  with  Vespa.Hlan  and  extend  to
the  death  of  Alexander  Severus,  8.

Antoninus,  T.  Aurolliis,  chosen  by  Hadrian
for  his  successor,  vii.  388.  Required  l)y
Hadrian  to  adopt  M.  Annlus  N  ems  and
],.  Veru.s,  »S8.  His  family  immes,  395.
His  surname  of  Plus,  397.  His  early
career  and  ehamcter.  31)8.  Utianliiioii.-i
testimony  of  antiiiulty  to  his  virtues  39S,
400.  Tniiibles  in  nis  reign  from  tiie  .lews,
Dael,  Alanl,  Hrlton.s,  Ac.,  400.  Ills  pali'V-
niil  governuKMit,  buildings,  ami  liiwn,  402,
4115.  Ills  Induigeneo  to  the  Clirlslliins,
his  mildness,  and  dom<'Klle  life,  405  408.
Marries  his  <laughter  Paustina  to  M,  Au
relltis,  HlHl,  4011.  Numerous  busts  and
medals  of  hlin,  412.  Ills  composure  In
death  and  last  watchword,  413 lipoeh

i

INDEX.

501

of  Antoninus  Burvoyetl,  413,  449.  Wall  of
Antouiiius,  vii.  402.  The  itinerary  of  An-
toninus, 400.  Cflebrated  j  urlHCOUSiUts
who  tlourished  in  his  reij^u,  405.

.Vutonitis,  Cuius,  btcoiues  (x>n6ul,  la  con-
junction with  Cicero,  i.  116.

iViitouiuiis,  Cunieallii,  decree  of^  commoni-
cates  the  Koiuun  franchise  to  all  subjects
of  the  empire,  vii.  423.

Antonius  Priuiu3,  leads  Vespasian's  forces
into  Italy,  vi.  3.%  UisreKards  the  orders
of  Vetipusiau  and  Muciauiis.  357.  Defeats
the  Vitellians  at  Uedriacuin,  357.  Per-
mits, if  he  does  not  command,  the  sack
and  burning  of  Cremona,  358.  Crosses
the  Atiennines  and  offers  terms  to  Vitelll-
us,  3o2.  Marches  aloni^  the  Flaminlan
Koad  to  the  ^utes  of  Uome,  and  storms
the  city  and  the  l*ra.'torlan  camp,  3(59,  370.
('lalins  the  slaves  and  furniture  of  the
palace,  and  sets  up  Domltian  as  Ca>sar,
873.  Prutorian  iusicnia  conferred  on
him,  but  he  is  checliea  by  Muciauus,  374,
377. Coolly  treati!d  by  \  espasian,  8Si

Antonius  .Mu'sa  applies  the  water-cure  buc-
cessfuiiy  in  the  ease  of  Augustus,  but  un-
successfully in  that  ofMarcellus,  Iv.  181.

Antonius,  C,  uncle  of  the  triumvir,  iui-
peuched  by  Ca-sar,  i.  9(5.  Consul  with
Cicero,  115.  Suspected  of  privity  to  Cat-
Ulna's  desijrns,  iUl.  His  tardy  move-
ments against  Cutilina,  131.

Antonius,  C,  youufier  brother  of  (ho  trium-
vir, commands  the  ( '  s  in  11-
lyricum,  ii.  Itil).  l)i :  s  over
with  all  his  forces  ini-  of  the
consuls,  170.  His  deiaeiiiiuiii  added  to
the  Pompeian  forces,  1>9.  Becomes  prae-
tor, ill.  18  «o/«t-,  31.  Declaration  of  Oo-
tavius  made  before  him,  61.  Shut  up  in
.Vpol  Ionia  by  IJrutus.  109.  Taken  by  Bru-
tus, who  spares  his  life,  15**.

Antonius,  Juliii>.  '  ^ '^^ trium-

vir, married  i  '  i of  Oc-

taviii,  iii. -271  u  .  1. Put

to  death  by  Ahu'umus  mi-  uuiii;uiug  with
<1ulia  and  for  treason,  'ill.  Ills  name  not
erased  from  the  Fasti,  'il'3.

Antonius,  Lucius,  brother  of  the  triumvir,
tribune,  ill.  18  not»''^  31.  His  atrrarlim
law,  52.  Left  by  his  brother  to  watch
Mutina,  117.  Becomes  consul  In  b.c.  41,
178.  Kises  against  tX-taviuSs  178.  As-
sumes the  surname  of  Pletas,  178.  Eflfects
a  combination  against  Augustus,  179.  Is
blockaded  in  Perusia,  capitulates,  and  is
spared,  179,  l!>0.

Antonius,  M.,  son  of  Antonius  and  Fulvla,
put  to  death.  111.  271.

Antonius,  M.,  Caesar's  officer  In  Bel-
^'ium,  il.  38.  Quwstor,  76.  Elected
to  a  seat  in  the  College  of  Aug^urs,
7G.  And  tribune,  78.  Flees  to  Bavenna,
S2.  Convokes  a  meeting  of  the  senate,
123.  In  churtio  of  Italy,  128, 170,  ISO,  182.
Kefuses  to  allow  Cic<'ro  to  leave  Italy,  171.
Cicero's  scurrilous  declamations  against
him,  173.  Charged  bv  C*sar  with  tardi-
ness, 199.  Prevents  fjbo  from  obtaining
supplies,  200.  Crosses  the  Adriatic  with
the  second  division,  204.  Appointed  mas-
ter of  the  horse  to  Caesar,  270. Bepresses

the  intrigues  of  Dolabellik  STOl. His  pri-
vate irregularities,  279. PorehMM  Pom-

p,iufs li.)UM-  <.a  I  lie  Palatine.  279. Uis
r,  -  Mv-

e..;  ., , ,  l-m,»Tl.

Said  to  iLive  uuuA^iircU  a^puust  him,  8T4.
Ills  flight  after  Ccmt's  dMth,  UL  7.  Ob-
tains Caesar's  pa|H-rs  and  tr«aMire«,  and
combines  with '■  W 8«ilM  the

public  treasui  .<■•  •  niMltBC

of  the  senate,  1  ~  .>yathepMBl«

to  overawe  the  senate,  ii.  Obtaiu  the
ratiUcation  of  UsMr'a  uf»,  «t-»l.  Hia
able  use  of  hia  pwittOB,  i7-«l  Enter-
tains the  oonspirator  Oaaalu  Ml  Ii«a*-
sures  the  senate  of  hia  modantJaa,  44.
Accpi^  DoIabeUs  aa  Ua  «oU«i«ii«  la  the
e  ' Uis  ftaneral  orauoa  orer

(  Abolishea  the  dictatorahlii,

4. 1  I' Uupoatur  Herophiloa to

death,  4>.i.  lirgins  to  uae  the  autburitir  of
Ca-sar's  papers  fur  his  own  enda,  SOl  Hia
connection  with  tla-  forg«riea  of  Faberlna,
61. Si'  -Mual  safety  by  meana

of  a  bo  :  Obtains  a  new  aa-

signmi  n  in  Campania  to  the

Veterans,  .-!.  11  i>  interview  with  Oeta-
vlus,  62.  Obtains  Syria  for  DuUbella  and
Macedouii  for  hiiifclf,  «».  HW  intriguea
to  get  l!i  Brutus,

and  the  I 'irthlan

war,  7^.  .  -,iriani<,

T9.  Hi
ylua,  7'.'
chaiwe  '

pu^uu^  I  ~.:. Inveigiis

against  <  .  85i. Be^Iea

toCieei  -7. Hia  qnar^

rel  with  »»ciaviu<.  »;•.  liis  severitiea  at
Urundisium,  89.  Uetums  to  Bome  and
complains  of  Octavius  to  the  senate,  fi.

Abandoned  by  two  of  his  legioaa.  who  go

Vepara*  to  axMl

Decimus  Brutus  from  the  <_'tgriptBe, »  WL

over  to  Octavius,  9i Prep

Cicero's secot:  '
phUippioa,  94,
In  MnHna,  loi

to -•'■• ■

"fh

Hiii:i 111 'iui.im nt. -lu.fii.ii-.  a i.;|.i> n»

Cicero's  invectives,  and  Cicero's  rejoinder,
115.  Ena-affes  the  forces  of  Pansa  at  Fo-
rum Ctrt" '■• i''- ' ''—i.;-^ ••■- V'.-i,

123. ,1

witho.  1

ofthe^.v.

with  Octavius  and  I
tlon,  139,  140. Fix.-

of  Cicero  on  th-  1' -  y

and  that  of  hi-  s

C*ssiu3  at  I'!  ••

body  of  Brut!.  :-

takes  the  subiu-  .

inces,  172. Hi- .  r,

173.  His  flr>t  ■  .  :  _  ,  ..  .  ,  ...a:
follows  her  to  '. :  \  .  ;  ...  17o,  ITii.  In-
trigues with  ?•  \  -  r  ■'  ius  and  Doml-
tius  against  Ocu\i_=,  1?2.  Death  of  his
wife  Fulvla,  1*2.  His  marriage  with  Oc-
tavia,  183. The  eastern  provinces  and  the

502

INDEX.

Parthian  war  assigned  to  him,  185.  Leaves
Eorne  for  the  East,  ISO.  Passes  the  win-
ter in  Athens,  190.  His  extravagant  be-
haviour there,  190.  Appears  off  Brundi-
sium  with  three  hundred  sail,  but  forbid-
den bv  Oetavius  to  land,  19T.  Furnishes
Octavius  with  a  hundred  and  thirty  ships,
197.  The  triumvirate  renewed  for  a  sec-
ond period  of  five  years,  197.  Leaves
Octavia  in  Italv,  198.  His  renewed  inti-
macy with  Cleopatra,  211.  219,  220.  His
first  expedition  to  Parthia,"  221.  En-
ters Media  Atropatene,  221.  His  disaster-
OQS  retreat,  222.  Keturns  to  Cleopatriv,
22.3.  Prepares  for  another  expedition
against  the  Parthians,  228.  Men  and
money  brought  by  his  wife  Octavin,  224.
Antonius  refuses  to  see  her,  224.  His
triumph  at  Alexandria,  and  extravagant
conduct  there,  225, 229.  His  amicable  re-
lations with  Octavius,  233.  His  final  rup-
ture with  Octovius,  2.36.  Their  angry  re-
criminations, 236.  Courts  the  alliance  of
the  king  of  Parthia,  286.  Winters  at
Samos  with  Cleopatra,  238.  Receives  the
fugitive  consuls,  and  proclaims  himself
their  protector,  240,  241.  Divorces  Octa-
via, 241,  248.  Deserted  by  Plancus  and
Titius,  who  divulge  the  contents  of  his
will,  241.  Indignation  of  the  Romans
against  him,  242.  His  preparation  for
war,  244.  His  armaments  compared  with
those  of  Octavius,  24.5.  His  strong  posi-
tion at  Actium,  247,  248.  Prepares  to  en-
gage the  Octavians,  248.  Defection  among
his  ofticers  and  allies,  249.  Determines,
by  Cleopatra's  advice,  to  withdraw  to
Eg)'pt,  250.  His  flight  with  Cleopatra  to
Alexandria,  25.5.  Surrender  of  his  army
to  Octavius,  256.  Refused  adniission  Into
Parwtonium,  260.  His  despair  and  revels
at  Alexandria,  262,  263.  Tho  society  of
"Inimitable  Livers," 262.  ChallengesOc-
taTla^  264.  Mortally  wounds  himself  on
the  false  report  of  Cleopatra's  death,  and
expires  in  her  arms,  26.\  His  royal  obse-
quies and  rliamet  er,  274, 275.  The  "  Loves
of  Antony  and  Cleopatra,"  276,  276.  His
conduct  111  Palestine,  3().S-!i06.

▲ntonlus  Saturninus,  commander  of  tho
IcgionH  In  I'pper  (iermany,  revolts  affainst
Domltlan,  Is  routed,  and  slain,  vli.  96,  07.

Antyllus,  eldest  son  of  M.  Antonius  and
Fulvlii,  put  to  death.  Hi.  271.

Appanien,  city  of.  taken  by  O.  RassuA,  II.
8IK,  Its  condition  In  the  'time  of  Augus-
tus, Iv.  JtOO.  Inlured  by  an  earthnuuke,  v.
iCti. Its  cause  pliMKli-d  by  young  Nero,  4M.

ApatlirluK,  a  dancer,  a  fttvoiirlto  of  Ponpa'a,
vl.  206.

Aplcata.  wife  of  Hejnnus,  discloses  to  Tlbe-
ritii  tbu  story  of  thu  murder  ol  Drusun,  v

Apis,  onolo  of,  connultetl  by  Clennonlcus,  v.
flA.

Apoooloorntoala,  "the  Pumklninoatlon,"
B«neoi*i  Mtire  on  Clundhis,  v.  4Ail.

AlNillii,  worship  of,  In  liaitl,  under  the  nami^
of  lli'leufH,  I.  22H.  Temple  of,  of  August  UH,
on  the  I'aJnlluo  hill,  Iv.  24.  Silence  of  hin
omrle  lit  iMlphI  flHcrllH'd  to  tlin  wlokod-
nuM  of  the  Neroninn  age,  vl.  lOT.

Apollodorus,  the  architect,  and  tho  emperor
Hadrian,  story  of,  vii.  840.

Apollonia,  Ca?sar  at,  iL  222,  iii.  109.

Apollonius  of  Tyana,  a  diviner  and  thauma-
turge, vii.  112.  Convicted  of  machinations
against  Domitian,  and  resides  at  Ephesus,
148.  Assassination  of  Domitian  revealed
to  him,  164.  The  life  or  romance  of  Apol-
lonius by  Philostratus,  365.

Apologists,  the  Christian  of  the  second  cen-
tury, vii.  368.

Aponius,  commands  the  republican  insur-
gents in  Spain,  ii.  305.

Appian,  "  The  Queen  of  'Ways,"  described,
Iv.  368,369.

Appian,  the  historian,  compared  with  Plu-
tarch, vii.  233.

Appius  Claudius,  brother  of  P.  Clodins,
elected  consul,  i.  353.  His  venality  and
rigour  as  censor,  ii.  73.  Endeavours  to
expel  Curio  the  younger  from  the  senate,
74.  Consults  tho  oracle  at  Delphi,  217.
His  death,  218.

Appius  Silanus,  head  of  the  Jnnian  house,
destroyed  by  Messalin.o,  v.  408.

Appnlcius,  tribune  of  the  people,  defends
Cicero  iii.  116. Elected  consul,  866.

Apuleia  lex  de  Majestate,  v.  116.

Apulela  Varilia,  granddaughter  of  Octavia,
found  guilty  of  adultery  and  banished,  v.
129.

Apnleius,  S.,  obtains  the  last  triumph  over
the  Iberians,  iv.  65.

Apulian  mountains,  character  of  tho  shop-
nerds  of  the,  t.  61,  note.

Aqua  Maicia,  description  of  the,  Iv.  865,
869.

Aquw  Sextine  (Aix),  discovery  of  the  medi-
cinal springs  at,  and  foundation  of  tho
Roman  citv,  i.  196.  The  Tcutones  de-
feated by  Marius  near,  204.

Aqueducts,  seven  at  Rome  in  the  reign  of
Augustus,  iv.  865.  Appia,  869.  Crabra,
Sas.  879. Mareil^  865,  869.  vi.  260.

Aqulllus,  tribune,  supports  the  opponents  of
Ciesar,  i.  84)j.

Aqnlllus,  how  put  to  death  by  MIthridates,
1.  m  note.

Aqninus,  M.,  loins  tho  conspirators  in  tho
capitol,  ill.  12.

Aqultani.  origin  of  the,  i.  218.  Their  dwell-
ing-place, 218.  Submit  to  the  Romans.
206,  296.  Revolt,  but  chastised  by  Agrlp-
p^  iv.  70.

Aouitania,  existing  monuments  of  Druldism
In,  1.  224. ('anipaign  of  P.  Crassus  in,  29.\

Arabia,  expedition  of  yKllus  Oallus  Into,  iv.
07.  ('onquests  in,  by  Coriielhis  I'alina,
vll.  201.  Its  commercial  emporia  long
attwhed  to  the  empire,  201.

Arabs,  the,  chastised  l>y  (iablnius,  i.  350.

Arar  (Saone)  river,  i.  2'46.

Archelaus,  a  competitor  for  the  hand  of
Hereiilce,  queen  of  Egypt,  I.  851.

Archelaus,  made  king  of  Cappadocia,  by
Marcus  Anloiihis,  iv.  HI.  His  donilnlous
CMilurged  bv  .\uguslus,  112.  Founds  the
Ciippiuloclau  Sehasle,  112.  Ills  death  at
Rome,  v.  51.  His  kingdom  formed  Into  a
Koiimn  provlnee,  51,  269.

An-hi'liiiis,  son  of  Herod  the  Oreat,  has  tho
kliigilom  ofiludea,  with  Samaria  and  Idu>

INDEX.

603

mea,  v.  269.  Discontented  with  bis  por-
tiou,  269.  His  disgrace  and  banishment,
27t".

Architect  II ro,  domestic,  of  the  Romans,  Iv.
890.  Materials  of  which  their  houses  were
constriictcil,  b'.H).  Their  style  of  temple
an  hi  ltd  lire,  891.  The  tw'o  classes  of
(iwolliiiirs.  the  domus  and  the  Insube,  891.
Th..  iii;iiisions  of  the  nobles,  8»2.  The
c:il)ii)s  of  till-  poorer  citizens,  892.

Anhieiiiia.  fore>l  of,  i.  4(>3.

Ariluiiiii:u  a  Uaiilish  deity;  Identified  with
iJiaiia,  iv.  84.

Arecomicl,  a  Belglo  tribe,  their  teMtory,  L
227.

AreiuH,  the  Alexandrian  philosopher,  accom-
panies Octaviiis  in  his  entry  Into  Alexan-
dria, iil.  2(50.

A  relate,  or  Arelas  (ArlesX  legions  stationed
at,  ii.  6s.

Arouaciiiu  (Arnhelm?X  on  the  old  Bhlae,
vi.  409.

Arglletura,  the  grore  o^  Inhabited  by  Mil-
zans,  iv.  3(^2.

Arlmlnum,  its  occupation  by  CKsar,  a  decla-
ration of  war,  11.  91.  The  three  great  con-
veri,'ing  roads  to  it,  100.  Cilveu  up  to  the
soldiers  by  the  Triumvirs,  ill.  140.

Ariobarzanes  II.,  king  of  Oap{>adocia,  pro-
tected by  Cicero,  ii.  55.  An  ally  of  Pom-
peius,  188.  (Submits  to  Ca>sar,"265.  His
kiugiiom  seized  by  Pharnaees,  265.

Ariovlstus,  king  of  the  Suevl,  Invited  Into
(taul  by  the  Sequanl,  1.  232-284. Solicits
the  alllaiiee  of Kome,  and  receives  the
title  of  "  »lend  and  Ally."  236. Demands
lands  from  t''-  -^ ■  "'■" ills  tyran-
ny over  tlu '  s  Cmear'i
terms,  25(i. 26a De-
feated and  ev>......  ..v.;  w  viv,..>  the  £hiue,

261.

Aristides,  his  a]>ology  for  the  GhriatfaBi  re-
ceived by  Hadrian,  viL  869.

Aristo,  Claudius,  case  ot,  vil.  21ft.

Aristo,  T.,  the  jurisconsult,  cause*  of  bit
suicide,  vil.  2&S.

Arislobulus,  younsrer  brother  of  Hvrcanns,
assumes  the  title  of  king,  L  189.  beposed
by  I'onipeius,  139.

Arlstobulus,  son  of  Ilvrcanus,  the  first  to
assume  the  title  of  king  in  Judea,  iil.  i!9S.
IJroujiht  to  Komo  by  Pompeius,  2t»2.
Poisoned,  301.

Aristobulus,  brother  of  Marlamne,  drowned
by  HeriKl's  contrivance.  111.  806.

Aristobulus,  son  of  lierotl,  his  liberty  ob-
tained bv  his  father,  iv.  162.  Put  to  death
bv  his  father,  216.  Ills  children  In  Borne,
v!  276.

Aristocracy,  general  result  of  the  struggle
between" democracy  and,  V.  96.  The  bal-
ance trimmed  by  the  tact  of  Augustus,
98.  More  logical  character  of  the  policv
of  Tacitus,  98.

Armenia,  war  of  Lncullus  with,  1.  417.  At-
tacked by  M.  Autonlus,  iii.  225.  Part  of
it  ceded  "to  Parthia,  ill.  237.  Under  the
protection  of  Home,  iv.  117.  Aflairs  of
Armenia  in  b.  c.  6-1,  213.  And  in  a.d.  IS,
V.  63.  Keceives  a  king  from  Germanicus,
63.  Its  condition  at  the  close  of  the  reign
of  Augustus,  2158. Invaded  by  the  Par-

tblona,  and  defoided  by  Corbalo,  tL  SftBi
Its  kiJig,  Tiridat««,  does  hoauige  to  Nero,
SOSrvTi.  a»T.  Interferenee  at  the  Par-
thlans  with  Armenia,  WT.  Dedared  by
Trajan  the  vaaaal  of  Kom^^  »&  Tra-
in's expedition  Intoi,  800.  Botk  the  Ar-
menia! annexed  to  the  Bonaa  MOBire,
aOO,  Wa  Relinqniahed  by  Hadriw,  tU.
Protected  from  Parthia  by  AntoBiBoa
Ptua,401.  BoTlTBl  or  the  Parthian  elaima,
457.  Beaeaed  by  the  g«aeraU  oT  M.  An-
reliua,  who  mnmnr  the  title  of  Armenl-
caa,  457.
Armlnlus,  the  Chemaeaa,  adneateit  at  Borne,
iv.  til.  Devotee  hlmaelf  to  the  liberation
of  Oermany,  2T1.  Deetrora  Varna  and
three  legion*,  272-^74.  Beriafcea  Bagaatca,
V.  82.  Attacked  bv  the  Boiaiaa  nader
Germanicus,  88.  Ills  onauoeeaaAiI  attaek
on  C»eina,  84.  IIU  parley  with  hla
brother  FUvlua,  Sa  IWeated  by  Oer-
manleoa,  41, 4)1.  Hia  war  with  the  BneTi
and  Maroomanni,  fiS,  M.  Dafeata  Ifaro-
bodau^  M. His  death  and  eharaeter.  Oft.

InbaMtanU  ot,  L

trlbea,aBd  their

'  Borthera  euaat

' but  Main

rtedTWl

Pletoii,a

i  liiv  Lugdnnen-

'.d  by  CamiUuA,  L

Armori'"
217. •

affliii.

of t.,i

rebel  :.
Held  i:
87.  Ii
sis,  i\

Arms,  iu,
189.

Armv ;  the  command  of  the  natlMial  amy
retained  by  the  noblea,  L  Ml  AboUtkiB
of  the  {wtrtiertT  qualificatloB  of  reemit^
67  not*.  Keadlnees  of  the  settled  reterana
of  Sulla  for  tumult  and  revolt,  8&,  Paaie
in  Oeaar'i  army  in  Gaol,  S5T.  Compoal-
tioB  of  Omh^  leflMM,  aci  Compariaaa
betweea  Bowi  ami  Qaola  aa  aoldiafa,
96a.  The  Bomaa  method  of  fi|^tlM;iSi.
Compoaltkia of  OaMK^  leciawLUTtt^ «.
Mnttny  tmoag  hla  aoldieta  at  Plaeantia,
iT>i  r.r.r„|  traiaiac of  the  Bomaa  aot-
I'he  Bontan  body  annoqr,  SSSl
>  of  Oeaar'a  Teteraaa  in  Oun-

i -  ->■' TI.M  "intlny  qoelled,  «8aL

Dm-ay  uf  in  :>lin»  amonc  the
Eoman.s  4^'  .try  oath  oi  obe-
dience takeu  -, ,«  r..r  »<  j/Hiier^l  of

the  armies,  iii.  Sol.  t-'  -f  a
Roman  standing  army.  •  m-
peror's  body-guar<l  :»i.  !  _  _:  the
city,  412.  Pay  an  '  -crvioe  of
the  legionaries,  41 1  >f  the  im-
perial military  estaL .- iia. Limits

of  military  t^riee  deierwiued  by  Aogns-
tua,  ir.  161.  TVoopa  and  fortifleations  by
whieh  the  Pax  Ituuuna  was  secured,  345.
Dlsi"  US  in  Pannonia,

V.  1^.  1  the  mutiny,  19.

Mut;  s  on  the  Rhine,

SO. «.  Stations

of  th  142. The

urba'  143. The

dist-ij  islymain-

taiiu  'US  at  the

presi'.  .40. Mode

of  r.ii>.  ._  ,  :  ;  \  .A  of  the  iL^'ionaries  and
of  the  !  !•  I  •  T  .11  cohorts,  257,258. Atti-

504

INDEX.

tude  of  the  legions  and  their  chiefs  in  the
provinces  at  the  commencement  of  the
reign  of  Galba,  296.  Discharge  of  the
prsetoriang  and  disposal  of  the  Othonian
legions  by  Vltellus,  343.  Military  disturb-
ance at'Tlcinum,  344.  Keumbodinient
of  the  prietorian  and  nrban  guards,  354.
Mutiny  on  the  Rhine,  and  break-up  of  a
Koman  army,  398.  Pavonr  shown  by
Domitlan  to  the  army,  vli.  131.  Doubtful
attitade  of  the  legions  at  the  accession  of
Nerva,  161.  The  "tone  of  society  corrupted
bv  the  soldiery  in  the  reign  of  Trajan,  261.
■fhe  discipline  of  the  army  maintained  by
Hadrian,  342.  State  of  the  pruitorians  and
of  the  regular  army  during  the  Flavian
era,  442.  Mercenary  character  of  the  reg-
ular army,  443. Kelaxation  of  discipline,

443.  Emoluments  of  service,  443.  Per-
manence of  the  constitution  of  the  legion,

444.  Roman  system  of  defence,  "445.
Anxiety  of  the  emperors  generally  to  re-
I)res3  the  military  si>irit  of  the  soldiery,
447.  The  emperors  the  champions  of  tlio
army,  and  the  senate  finally  overpowered
by  the  soldiers,  448.  Pestilence  spread  by
the  army  on  its  return  from  the  East,  461.

Arecomici,  akin  to  the  lJelga>,  i.  227.

-iVrretium,  seized  by  M.  Antonius  for  Ca'Siu-,
ii.  100. Held  for  Augustus,  iii.  93.

Arria,  the  elder,  and  Pastus,  story  of,  v.  411 ;
vi.  172.

Arria,  the  younger,  her  suicide,  vi.  172 ;  vii.
896. Commended  by  Pliny,  258.

Arria,  mother  of  AL  Antonius,  vii.  896.

Arruntius,  L.,  designated  bv  Augustus  as  a
possible  competitor  for  the  empire,  v.  10.
His  history  and  death,  242,  244.

Arsoces,  founder  of  a  race  of  Parthian  kings,
1  40a

Arsacidae,  foundation  of  the  dynasty  of  the,
1.  408.  Obnoxious  to  their  Persian  sub-
jects, 410.

Arsinoo,  sister  of  Cleopatra,  aspires  to  the
throne,  IL  268-260.  Induces  Ganymedcs
to  assassinate  Achillas,  2€0.  Taken  pris-
oner bv  Cii'sar,  268.  Ix'd  in  triumph  by
hira,  810.  Put  to  death  by  Antonius,  111.
175, 176.

Artabnnus,  seizes  the  throne  of  Armenia,
v.  2CH.  C<)miK^lk'<l  to  lloo  Into  Hyrcania,
but  siibM'Huently  n-stored,  268.

ArtslNizcii,  or  ArtaVasdes,  king  of  Armenia,
his  advice  to  CniKSiis  slighted,  I.  417,  420.
Attacked  iiy  OriHlcH,  kingof  Parthla,422.
Denouiicfd'by  Cni.snus  a.s  a  traitor,  422.
('omi'H  to  tcriiis  with  Oroilcs,  429.  Ills
(liiughtor  nuirrli'H  tlio  Partliliin  i'acorus,
420.  DlwilVictod  to  iconic,  II.  55.  Deserts
AntonhiH  In  Mcilln,  III.  221.  Revenge
planned  by  AntoiiliiH,  22."!.  HurrenderR  to
Antonius,  and  led  In  clialnHtliroiigli  Alex-
andria, 225.  Put  t<>  di'iith  by  C'l('oi)atni,
2(V).

Artavnndi'N,  king  of  Meilln  Atropnteno,  bo-
sleged  In  PninniNt  by  Antonius,  III.  222.
Reconolleil  witli  Antoiihin,  228.  ObtalnH
f^oin  liirn  a  Kharo  of  Ariiicnla.  and  fur-
ulshi'H  lilin  with  ciiviilry,  287.  Ills  dnugli-
titr  Jotupii  lu'trotJK'il  to  Alexander,  sun  of
AntonhiM  and  ('leopnlra,  2:17.

Artaxatn,  luiiiltul  of  Medio,  on  tbo  Arazct,

iii.  225.  Burnt  by  Corbulo,  vi.  265.  Taken
by  Statius  Priscus,  vli.  456.

jVrtaxias,  son  of  the  .iVrmcnian  Artavasdes,
massacres  all  the  Romans  in  his  kingdom^
iv.  IIT.  Puts  himself  under  the  protec-
tion of  Parthla,  and  murdered  by  his  sub-
jects, 117.

Artemidorus,  the  philosopher,  banished,
vii.  148.

Artemion,  leads  a  sanguinary  revolt  of  the
Jews  in  Cyprus,  vii.  309.

Artemis,  temple  of,  at  Ephesus,  its  privi-
leges of  sanctuary,  iv.  106.

Arulenus  Rusticus  Imnted  to  death,  vii.  147.

Arverni,  the,  defeated  by  Fabius  Afaximus,
i.  196.  Treated  with  consideration,  197.
The  head  of  the  great  confederation  of  the
Galli,  214.  Their  dwelling-place,  214.
Lose  their  ascendency,  233, 216.  Join  the
league  of  Vercipgetori.x,  ii.  13.  invasion
of  their  territory"  by  Caesar,  16, 19.  Sus-
pends Ciesar's  sword  in  one  of  their  tem-
ples, but  are  defeated  by  him,  28,  29.
Arvernian  prisoners .  liberated  by  Caesar,
84.

Arx,  the,  or  citadel,  of  Rome,  iv.  376.

Ascalon,  its  Greek  writers,  iii.  294.

Asciburgium,  taken  by  Civilis,  vi.  895.

Asconius  Labeo,  Kero's  guardian,  vi.  84.

Asculum,  taken  by  Ciesar,  ii.  103.

Asia,  province  of,  134.  The  political  organi-
zation of  the  region  of  Lower  Asia,  iv.  IW.
This  province  the  earliest  acquisition  of
the  republic  east  of  the  Jllgean,  105,  Its
extent,  division  into  regions  and  conven-
tus,  105.  Arrangements  of  Augustus  for
Its  government,  106.  Its  vassid  kings,
and  tlieir  subservience  to  the  chiefs  of  tlie
Roman  state,  109.  Population  of  the
Roman  provinces  of  Asia,  841.  State  of
the  cities  of  Asia,  Greek  and  Macedonia,
In  the  time  of  Aiigustus,  860-;^62.  Eleven
cities  of  Asia  contend  for  tlio  honor  of
making  Tiberius  their  tutelar  divinity,
V.  198.

Aslaticus,  fi-eedman  of  Yitellhis,  vl.  854.
CrucKled,  876.

Aslaticus  Valerius. See  Valerius.

Aslnius  Galliis,  son  of  Asinlus  Polllo,  desig-
nated by  Augustus  as  a  possible  compet-
itor for  the  empire,  v.  10.  His  question
to  Tiberius  in  the  senate,  16.  IMarriea
VIpaanta,  the  divorced  wife  of  Tiberius,
217. Cruelly  treated  by  Tiberius,  21S.

Asinlus  Gallus,  son  ef  the  above,  his  abortive
attempt  on  tho  life  of  Claudius,  v.  411
vofe  '■■.

Aslnius  Polllo. f!e6  Polllo.

Asmonean  family,  cut  off  )>y  Herod,  ill.  805.

Aspaslus,  the  sophist,  his  teaching  at  Athens,
vli.  861.

Asnrenas  prevents  Armlnlus  from  crossing
the  Rhine,  Iv.  275.

As.ia.Hslnatlon,  iirevalenco  and  p\d)llelty  of,
In  Italy.  II.  882.

Assyria,  tho  new  ju'ovlnco  of,  erented  by
Trajan,  vli.  805.  Abaiuloned  by  Hadrian,
»82  not«  I.

Astnnt,  «  maritime  resldonoo  of  Cieero,  III.
!«.

AsturcB,  t  BpaniBh  tribo,  i.  15^

AstATto,  tho  Syrian  godclcss,  worshipped  at

INDEX.

505

Rome,  vl.  200.  Her  rites  described,  20-2.
Ifonored  and  then  condemned  by  Nero,
•25<).

\strologer8  expelled  from  Italy  bv  Tiberius,
V.  149.  And  by  Vitellius,  vi.  Hii.  Uomi-
tiuu'ii  e^iictH  against  them,  vii.  lU.

Asylum,  rijflit  of,  limited  bv  Tiberius,  v.  151.

Ateins,  tribune,  i.  841  Violence  of  bis
colleague,  Trebonius,  343.  Ills  impreca-
tions ui>on  Crassus  us  ho  quits  Koiue,
413.

Athena'um,  the,  established  by  Hadrian  at
Itome,  vii.  8bl.

Alliens,  submits  to  the  Ca'sarians  under  the
Caleuus,  ii.  iM.  E-vtravagant  liehavlour
of  M.  Aiitonius  at,  ill.  lUO.  Mulcted  of  its
privili'pcs  by  Auffustus,  iv.  103.  Its  con-
dition in  the  time  of  Autrustus,  854.  Its
inhabitants  dibut-cd  in  blood,  854.  Ita
urehitfctiinil  !-i>l<ii(lour,  85(5.  Its  univer-
sity, proiVsrioitt,  and  jjliilosophers,  867.
NfVo  hhriuks  irom  visiting  it,  vL  2T8.
Vi>iti-d  and  onibi-lllfhcd  by  Hadrian,  vii.
852,  &'>4.  Its  ajiiR'araiice  and  contrast  of
its  public  and  private  buildings  in  the
time  of  Iladi-iau,  855.  The  uuivi-rsity  of
the  I!omau  world,  ".'>>!.  Conservative
character  of  its  uiiiv  Its  pro-

lV^^ioIlal system >'  '. The

sopliists  aiid their  i  1. The

I'liri.stians  at  Atheiir',  ;;to.  Dissatisfaction
of  Hadrian  with  the  conservative  spirit
of  the  university,  870.

Alia,  her  letters  to  her  son  Octavius.  IIL  55.

Aii-a,  citv  of  the  sun,  unsuccessfully  be-
sieged by  Trajan,  vii.  307,  80a

Auvl'atcs.  a  lulgiun  tribe,  join  the  confede-
ral \  a/  ;iii  t  the  Komans, i.  24)7.  Defeated
l.\ ras.vi-,  ^74.

Altianiis.  gtiai.r  .T  "  'ai. viL824.  Ap-
poiutcil  [>r,i  I  ^il.

A  Ulcus,  T.  I'oi:!  iiaracter,  I.  815,

AtiiUus,  the  "KU'ctra"  ot,  performed  at
t'a-sar's  funeral,  iii.  87.

Attillus,  a  senator  who  consnlred  against
Antoninus  Vius,  condemned  by  the  senate,
vii.  899.

Allius  Varus,  a  Pompeian,  ii.  103.

Aitius  Kufus  accuses  Afraulus  of  treachery
in  !«pain,  ii.  225.

Aituarii,  a  German  tribe,  submit  to  Tibe-
rius, iv.  237.

Aiulasius,  his  plot  to  carry  off  Agrippa  Post-
humus  and  Julia  from  their  places  of
exile,  iv.  266.

Auditorium,  the,  of  the  emperor,  described,
vii.  4sa

Autldena,  settlement  of  the  Koman  colony
of;  ii.  328,  829.

.\ugurv,  Etruscan,  ii.  895.  The  science
cultivated  by  the  Romans,  895,  896.  Du-
ties of  the  augurs,  iii.  871.

Augusta  l*r!Vioritt  (Aosta),  military  colony
of,  louiuled  bv  Augustus  at,  iv.  89.  His
triumphal  nrcK  at,  89.

Augusta  Trevirorum  (Treves^  colony  of;
founded  by  Galba,  vi.  387.

Augusta  Viiideiicorum  (Augsburg),  founda-
tion of;  iv.  177.

Augusta,  the  title  ot,  conferred  on  Livia,
v.  13.

Augustales,  a  college  of  priests  eslaMi?hed

in  honor  of  Augustus,  iv.  VJ.
Augustalia,  est^ljlii>bmt.-ut  of  the  festival  of

the,  iii.  860.
Augustus  (at  fint  Octavius),  eon  of  C.  Oc-
tavius and  .^tia.  and  niece  (^JuUiuC«sar,
1  Mis  edueatloaeaperln-

1  r,  by  hJa  •tep-nther,

I  .  ?,  ana  by  CMar.  who

1.  a<J7. Hla  deUeate  health
beauty,  MB. Beat  to  Apol-
1  :cum  to  proaeeule  bl)  atu-

'  ion  rank,  ££8.

I  hi*  principal
i.  s,lSi.  Keturna
to  Italy  ou  the  ucwa  ui  CaMi'a  death,
claims  his  inheritanee,  aad  mrom  the
unme  of  ('.  hdius  C»iar  OttavlMU,  ML
Is  warn.  I  by  the  TCtenna,  and
makcb  uipnialoB  on  Ctoaris
57,  58.  I  uie,  W.  ECtet  of  Um*
omeus  which  tuv  said  to  hare  aecooipa'
nieil  his  career,  C9,  60.  Coufta  the  wtnina,
and  |.ledees  himself  to  dlrcharge  C«aar^

.utouBa,

\.  Ncritaaea,

62, liaises  t!  1  iiays  Onoar^

legaciea,  Ci. i  aaow*  roved

bv  Csr-sar  to \  Ancestreaa,  WL

II  and  is
I  ae  and
1  adopt-

\ ' :\lU leirl'-'IIS

imeuta,  t>3. Alba  dt-
I  Liis  party  infres-'e*.  i»:<.

erii  s misiaKi-n es''
Offers to defeuii
against Antonius,
t'  " "

1

-eiiaie  a.ii
:s  as  a  put:
ijole  him v

na,  it6. Complaints  of  1
him,  127. All  hope  from

bv  Cic  - '■'- '

bv  th.
sfiip.  I

li.ia,

■larvs

Hc-

:,.,.»,.,.... ..ith

lim,  13». The

Ions  Cicero to

Auvi.u.u-N i. .-. Mt-. i.^jjouses Clodla,

daughter  of  P:  t.  lodins  and Fulvia,  140.

His  lenity  in  lavoorable  contrast  with  hia

506

INDEX.

colleagues'  corruption  or  crneltv,  154.
Resigns  the  consulship  to  Yentidius,  156.
Arms  against  Sextus  Pompeius,  but  finds
himself  unable  to  cope  with  him  at  sea,

161.  Joins  Antonius  in  the  East,  161.
His  sickness  at  Dyrraehium,  162.  His
camp  at  Phillppi  stormed  by  Brntus,  167.
Retires  to  Italy  after  the  victory  at  Philip-
pi,  171.  Confiscates  lands  in  Italy  to
satisfy  the  legionaries,  176.  Combination
formc"d  by  L.  Antonius  against  him,  179.
Recalls  Salvidionus  from  Spain  with  six
legions,  179.  Besieges  Perusia,  180.  Idle
report  of  his  offering  three  hundred  pris-
oners at  Perusia  to  the  shade  of  Caesar,
ISO.  His  apprehension  of  another  civil
war,  182.  The  soldiers  compel  him  and
Antonius  to  come  to  an  accommodation,

162.  Divorces  Clodia  and  marries  8cri-
bonia,  18.3.  Gives  his  sister  in  marriage
to  Antonius,  18-3.  Treaty  of  Misenum,
between  Sextus  Pompeius  and  the  Trium-
virs, 187.  Octavins  repairs  to  Gaul,  189.
Renewal  of  the  war  with  Sextus  Pom-
peius, 192.  Misfortunes  of  Octavius  at
sea,  194,  198,  200.  Treaty  of  Tarentum,
and  renewal  of  the  triumvirate  for  five
years,  197.  End  of  the  naval  war  with
Sextua,  201.  Octavius  defeats  Lepidus,
but  spares  his  life,  203.  Becomes  the  head
of  the  CsBsariaa  or  Marian  interest,  206.
His  increasing  popularity,  207.  Restores
order  at  Rome,  207.  Hisministers  Agrip-
pa,  Mmcenas,  and  Messala,  211-217.  His
matrimonial  alliances,  217.  Divorces  Scri-
bonia  and  marries  Livia  Drusilla,  217,
218.  His  popularity  in  Rome,  2,32.  His
campaigns  against  the  Salassians,  Pan-
nonians  and  Dalmatians  restore  his  mili-
tary reputation,  232, 233.  His  amicable  re-
lations with  AntoniiiF,  2-33.  Their  rup-
ture and  mutual  recriminations,  230.  Oc-
tavius declares  w.ar  against  Cleopatra,  242.
Ills  preparations,  244.  Assumes  the  con-
Rulshlp  with  his  friend  Messala,  and  re-
Blgns  the  triumvirate,  244.  His  arma-
ments compared  with  those  of  Antonius,
245.  Crosses  the  Ionian  gulf,  2J6.  Takes
Corcym,  247.  I..eads  a  »(Miadron  at  the
bottle  of  Actlnm,  '2!il.  The  victory  at
Actliun  B8  described  by  the  Augustan
poets,  '25)1.  NIcopolls  founded  by  Octa-
vlnn  In  romnjoinoratlon  of  It,  2.''>7.  His
treatment  of  the  cantlves  of  Actlum,  2f)7.
I.4indK  In  Kgypl.  263.  Kefuses  the  chal-
lenge of  Antonius  to  single  combat,  26^1.
KnterH  Alcvnnilria,  266.  His  Interview
with  Cleopalni.  267,  26X.  Puts  tJn'sarlon
nml  oihi-rn  to  death,  but  thenceforward  Is
rcinarkulile  for  clemency.  270-272.  Ke-
duei'K  Kgypt  to  the  form  of  a  iirovlnee  un-
der his  own  direct  control,  270.  Visits  the
lorab  of  Alexander,  but  declines  seeing
the  ri'inalns  of  the  Ptolemies,  280,  2S|.
ftrttles  the  nirnlm  of  Pitrthia  ami  •Indent,
9HI.  Conllrms  Herod  in  his  kingdom,
807.  Tacitus'*  n'vlew  of  the  poHltion  of
Ocfuvliis  after  the  clone  of  the  civil  wars,
810.  PntK  I,(>|ildiiN.  Kon  of  the  e\-trliim-
vlr,  to  death,  HI2.  Kntem  on  his  tlflli  con-
Hulnhlp  In  Aoln,  HIM.  His  reception  in
Itoine,818. HlH  triple  triumph,  1)14. Ills

dedication  of  temples,  games  and  spec-
tacles, and  opening  of  the  Julian  basilica,
814,  315.  Divine  honours  paid  to  him,
819.  Closes  the  temple  of  Janus,  821.
Surveys  his  position,  823.  Pretended
debate  between  him  and  Agrippa  and
Mjecenas  whether  ho  should  resign  the
supreme  power,  323.  Assumes  the  prefix
of  Imperator,  declines  the  title  but  ac-
cepts the  substance  of  the  censorship,  and
revises  the  senatorian  roll,  324-327  ;  iv.
141.  Regarded  as  the  fountain  of  honour,
ill.  327.  Takes  a  census  of  the  Roman
people,  328.  Agi-ippa,  his  colleague  in  the
censorship,  confers  on  Octavius  the  title
of  Princeps,  329.  His  liberal  and  mag-
nanimous conduct,  329,  880.  Consecrates
the  temple  of  Apollo  on  the  Palatine,  830.
Repetition  of  liis  offer  to  lay  down  the
Imperium,  831-833.  Resumes  it  for  ten
years  (Decennium  I.)  with  proconsular
power,  and  divides  the  provinces  between
himself  and  the  senate,  834.  Takes  the
title  of  AcGUSTtrs,  835.  His  reasons  for
preferring  it  to  that  of  Quirinus,  Romulus,
or  any  recognized  designation  of  sovereign
rule, 885. Quits  Rome and  visits the

Provinces,  836.  Released  by  the  senate
■om  the  provisions  of  the  Lex  Oincia  de
Jfuneribiis,  .337,  888.  His  relations  re-
leased from  those  of  the  Lex  a>inaHfi,S88.
Question  of  the  succession  during  his
dangerous  sickness  in  Spain,  838.  Delivers
his  signet  ring  to  Agrippa,  841.  Recovers,
declines  the  consulship,  and  accepts  the

fwtestoK  fribnnitia,  341.  Review  of  the
mperlal  government  as  organized  by
him,  843-?5S.  Importance  of  the  title
Princeps  Semifii'i  to  .Vugustus,  85.3.  His
numerous  eonsulshi|)S,  35S,  3,")0.  Declines
the  office  after  b.  c.  23, 3r>l).  Receives  pro-
consular authority  thmiighout  tlui  em-
pire, and  the  poteKtan  trihioiithi  for  life,
859-861.  Import  of  these  functions,  362 ;
iv.  162.  Conspiracies  of  Murena  and
Cirplo  against  his  life,  HI.  867.  He  retires
ana  refuses  to  return  to  Rome  for  a  time,
867;  iv.  170.  Accepts  tho  potextirn  oon-
sii/arin,  ill.  869;  iv.  174.  And  the  su-
preme pontificate,  iil.  871.  The  name  of
the  month  Sextills  changed  to  th.it  of
Augustus,  373  ;  iv.  190.  Legislative  and
iudlcial  functions  of  .Vugustus  examined,
his  edicts,  rescripts,  and  constitutions,  iil.
876-878.  The  import  of  the  term  leffihiiK
soltttun  and  Le.r  h'e(/i(i,  379-.'iS2.  Perpet-
uation of  the  title  of  Ca-.^ar,  3S:t,  384.  Re-
view of  the  Imperial  admliiislration,  885.
Augustus  affects  to  maintain  the  estima-
tion of  Roman  citizenship,  390.  Main-
tains the  dignity  of  the  senatorian  order,
893.  Revives  t\w  otllee  of  prefect  of  the
city,  402;  I  v.  1)5.  His  bodv-guard,  city-
garrison,  and  rifiilcH  or  tin'  wiileh,  Hi.
412,  413.  His  mllitiiry  estal>lislnnenl,4l5.
His  navy,  416.  Cliaraeler  of  his  sover-
eignty, 426-129.  Monarchy  manifestly  in-
(llspenHiible  in  his  Ihne,  428.  Atteiniits
to  revive  a  religious  feeling  among  llie
Ronnins,  Iv.  lK-27.  Ills  restoration  of  (Ik-
temples,  24.  His  laws  for  enforcing  mar-
riage, 38. His  regulations  for the  dis-

INDEX.

507

tlnctlon  of  classes,  41.  His  restrictionB
on  tUu  inanumission'of  slaves,  42.  His
jurisprudence,  4;i  Kevlew  of  his  nolicy,
44-47.  ContrratulaU'S  himself  on  tno  ae-
comiiilsliinent  of  his  patriotic  schemes,
47.  Moderation  in  his  personal  habits,
5<)-52.  His  demeanor  at  the  theatre  and
circus,  68.  Kceeives  the  title  of  Pater
Patrhr,  fi^\  147,  '201*.  His  organization  of
the  provinces,  6tt,  et  xeq.  Paelfles  the
province  of  Spain,  62.  His  military  opera-
tions and  sickness,  63.  His  policy  In  the
or;;anization  of  (Jaul,  Tl.  His  encamp-
ments on  the  left  bank  of  the  Khiue,  81.
Discountenances  the  Druids,  83.  Intro-
duces the  liouian  polytheism  Into  (iauL
84.  Worshipped  bv  tlie  (iauKs,  h4.  Satis-
tied  with  the  promise  of  tribute  trom  the
Britons,  85.  l*r<>frre.s.s  of  the  lEoman  arms
Jn  Md'sia  and  Thrace,  69.  Gives  the  klug-
dom  of  Mauretania  to  Juba,  king  of  Numl-
dla,  91.  His  organization  of  the  province
of  Africa,  92.  And  of  the  C'vrenaica,  93.
Sends  an  expedition  against  tLe  Arabians,
97.  lieleases  the  Kthlopians  from  an  an-
nual tribute,  lil3.  His  progress  In  the
Kust,  KkS.  Metes  compensation  or  retri-
bution to  the  cities  of  Asia,  KMi.  lioturns
to  iSamos,  117.  Account  of  the  members
of  the  Osarlan  family,  124  128.  Bends
Agrippa  on  a  mission  to  the  Kast,  129.
Augustus's  Illness  and  recovery.  129,  18(1.
Again  accepts  the  tribuuitian  i)ower,  1811,
I'ronounces  the  funeral  oration  of  M.v-
cellus,  188.  His  uneasy  relations  with
Agrlppa,  184-187.  Keturns  to  Kome,  18.S.
His  liglslation,  141.  Accepts  the  Im-
l>eriuni  for  live  vears,  142.  His  Ludi
StrcidareK,  142.  t'onnally  Institutes  the
prefecture  ot  the  city,  14t\  And  of
a  "  Council  of  State."  14*!.  Studious
moderation  of  bis  denuanour.  147.  Free-
dom of  his  counsellor  ^  U9.
Augustus  represents  co:  \l.i--
cenas  progress,  151.  A'  lits
Cains  and  Lucius,  the  sons  of  A_i;rii.pa  by
Julia,  155.  In  Gaul,  summoned  i>y  the
disjister  of  Lolllus,  and  the  oppressions  of
Licinus,  15()-15>i.  Receives  the  submission
of  the  Cantabrlans,  161.  Keturns  to  IJome,
161.  ISecomes  chief  pontitf  on  the  death
of  Lepidus,  165.  Pronounces  the  fttneral
oration  over  the-bo<lv  of  Agrlppa,  U>6.  i
Begins  the  custom  ot  sitting  one  day  in  1
the  year  in  the  garb  of  a  mendicant,  1S4.  !
Supposed  cause  of  this  observance,  184.
Pronounces  the  f\meral  oration  over  ^X•-
tavla,  1S6.  And  over  Drusus  Nero,  1S6.
Third  decennial  term  of  the  Imperium,
188.  Takes  up  his  residence  at  Lugdu-
num,  188.  His  treachery  to  the  German
host.iges  there,  lt>9.  His  atfoction  for  his
daughter  Julia,  202.  Education  of  Cains
and  Lucius,  205.  Introduces  Caius  to  the
peopUs  208.  His  indignation  at  the  dis-
covery of  his  daughter  and  gran^ldaughter
Julia's  profligacv,  210,  257.  Deaths  of
Lucius  and  Ouus  Ciesar,  217,  219.  His
book  of  letters  addressed  to  his  ptindson
Caius,  219.  Kecalls  and  adopts  Tllierlus,
and  invests  him  with  the  tribuuitian  power
for  five  years,  221. His  continued  labours,

321.  Conspiracy  of  Cinna,  222.  Clemency
of  Augustus,  224.  Kericetions  on  the
Btorv,  226.  Private  lifti  and  habits  of
Augustus,  226-228.  His  tiiste  and  litirary
Btyle,  22H.  Addicted  to  puik  r^tition,  •.':io.
His  L'oo.l  liiimour  and  gt-uilrness,  2;-;i.
!  I  in  the  pro5<-cuiioii  of  tlie

i.inv,  241. His  alarm  at  tli^-
•  he  Wnnoulaii  and  Dalmatian

war, 24'!. Banishes .\grippa I'o-tuum-.
252,  25;l His family solilude and in-
creasing cares.  2f>5- I'rtsh conspiraciis
against him, 256. Bani>hrs his grand-
daughter Julia,  257. And  Ovid.  257-2"i.'.
His  distress  at  tl»e  loss  of  \  arns  and  his
legions,  278. His  spirited  conduct,  iT.'-
278. lU'giua  to  retire from public  life,
27;". Ill- r.  |.ort.  ■!  \  i-)t to  AL-riiiiia  Port-
-  last  ccM-
;Mt«,  2Vt
' '  vnnum,

261,  285. Uia  Ui!  t  almne^»

wlui  whleh  Iteeont  .;p|>rodcU

of  dMtb,  286. Com  .utervat

Astura,  2S«.  His  la£l  mumeuu,  8S&  'Bis
death,  2^8.  Etfeet  of  •neeesa  npoB  iki»
character.  2^0.  HU  enthiuiaBm  ukI  be-
I  iiiitv.  289. CoBeiadiiut

ife,  290. PaiMtyrieof
I  -'Jl  note*. His  iMilaee

on  tl  !l,  87a His  will,  y.  18,

14. II  lie  counsels,  14. Fu-

lui-al  iccj him, 15, Com-

I  '-.IS,  162.

A  -  enrolled

A  !  .1  of  Au^'ustus"  (An-

iged  from  Bibrsete  to,
I  .ry  m«tropoUs  of  Gaul,

82. The  School  foanded  there  bjr  Aoj^s-
tus,  81 Kevolt  oT  the  Osals  iL  t.  149,
ITO. One  of  the  centre*  of  Draidlam,  tL
10.
An^stnt,  the  name  of  the  month  Bextllis

changed  to.  IIL  878;  It.  IWl
A  lio  tribe,  1981. OompeUed  to

sir's  soldiers,  »T,iL  18.
\  /SMPersiiis.

A  s  his  eampaigiis  In  ftitaio,

^  i  92-88. Honoai«d  with  the
ip'i'r-4?!- Story  of  his  wife,

A  stustothe  pr»-

i.
AurdJa,  ino'ti.r  of  Ca-sar,  8  matron  of  the
ancient  stamp,  I.  147,  818.  iBstmets  him
in  the  rudiments  of  the  Bonuui  tonrne,
vl.  57.
Aurelian  Road,  the  route  of  the  Roman  ar-
mief  into  Canl.  I.  287.  Extefided  under  the
name ■  i' ^m  Cisalpine  to  Trans-

alpin
Ann  li  '  ■  of  Julius  Ctesar,  his

libutins; the judicia
•-■-,  kiiigfata,  and  msrian

Aurciuis  I'uivus.  lather  and  grandfather  of
Antoninus  Pius,  vii.  895.

Aureiius,  M.  Antoninus  (bom  M.  Annins
VerusV,  son  of  Hadrian's  sister,  adopted
bv  Antoninus  Pins,  vii.  889.  Marries
A'nnia  Faustina,  896-409. His  early  years

508

INDEX.

and  promise,  410.  His  personal  appear-
ance, 451.  Associates  Veriis  in  tlie  em-
pire, 431.  Disturbances  in  his  reign,  453.
iJeverses  in  the  East,  455.  Triumphs
■with  Verus,  457.  His  deference  to  the
senate,  and  wise  choice  of  ministers,  45S-

460.  Alarmed  at  the  inroads  of  the  bar-
barians on  the  Danube,  460.  Depopula-
tion of  the  empire  by  the  pestis  Antonina,

461,  4C2.  His  wars  with  the  Quadi  and
Mareomanni,  464,  465.  Sole  emperor  on
the  death  of  Verus,  466.  His  victory  over
the  Quadi  on  the  Danube,  466,  467."  His
domestic  troubles,  468,469.  His  generous
behaviour  to  Avidius  Cassius,  469-471.
Repairs  to  SjTiii,  472.  At  Alexandria,
473  Death  of  "Faustina,  472.  His  triumph
over  the  Sarmatians,  473.  His  last  expe-
dition against  the  Mareomanni,  his  vic-
tory, illness,  and  death,  474,  475.  Keflec-
tions  on  his  death,  476.  Compared  with
Alfred  the  Great,  477.  Symptoms  of  de-
cline throughout  the  empire  at  this  time,
479.  Decrease  In  population,  480.  Ef-
fects of  slavery,  481.  His  probable  mo-
tives for  persecuting  the  Christians,  488.
His  "Meditations"  or  "Commentaries,"
their  melancholy  tone,  490-495.  His  statue
on  the  Campidoglio,  450.

Autroniiis,  the  consul,  convicted  of  bribery,

i.  114. Joins  Catilina's  conspiracy,  116,

117.
Anximnm,  declares  for,  and  is  occupied  by,

Casar,  ii.  100, 101.
Avaricum,  capital  of  tho  Arvemi,  besieged

and  taken  by  Cwsar,  Ii.  16-18. Spared  by

Vercingetorix,  17.
Aventine  Hill,  contrast  between  it  and  tho

Palatine,  as  sites  for  a  city,  i.  18. Distinct

troxn  tho  other  seven  hills  of  Rome,  iv.

869.  Described,  878.  Ravaged  by  the  great

Are  of  Rome,  vi.  181.
Avemns,  Lake,  navigable  canal  from  It  to

Rome,  projected  by  Nero,  vl.  141.
Avidius  Casnius. See  Cassius.
Avillus Klaccus,  jjrefect of  Egypt See

Flaccas.

Eif;TICA,  a  BCDatorian  province,  Its  Bohools
an<l  learned  men,  iv.  68.
]Jai»%  life  of  tho  Romans  at,  Iv.  8ft4. Coius's

brldx<i  of  bouts  across  the  bay,  v.  882.
Ralbu^  I*  ComelUi!>,  Ca'sar's friend  and
steward,  his  rise,  po.sltlon,  and  character,
II.  850,  851. licriises  a  token  of  respect  to
AugUHlUH,  Iv,  161,

Ilulhus.  OctavluB,  Joins  tho  conspirators  after
(.'u'sar'n  murder,  HI,  12,

Bnrcochobnjt,  ihu  tlewtHh  lender,  legends
rospcrtlng  liini,  vll.  816.  Nominated  to
tho  chll•flilIll^lll|.  of  llie  Jewish  people,
817. \\U  li  the  Romans,  de-

feat, and  '

UuhIIus,  L  Ni  I.  iiiiht  of  Ciesarln

Ooul,  I.  44XI, .1.  1  iniey  ugidnst

Cvaar'* life,  11. :  Ktier  to,  on

CwMT't  MaMslii  '. Killed  by

his  own  slavos,  180,

lS•ssu^  Co'Clllus,  a  Pompolun,  malntnliis
tho  «4matoriAn  causo  In  Hyrln,  II.  81H,  III,
OH,  Tukei  tbo  city  of  Apninen,  II,  IIIH.
nil  loldlura  go  over  to  Cnissus,  111.  lOU,

159.  Dismissed  unpunished  by  Cassius,
159.

Bassus,  Cesellius,  his  pretended  discovery
of  the  treasures  of  Dido,  vi.  154.

Bassus,  Eoinan  governor  at  Alexandria,  v.
311.

Batavi,  the,  serve  as  cavalry  in  the  Roman
armies,  Iv.  266.  Their  island  described,
vi.  885.  Their  skill  in  riding  and  swim-
ming on  horseback,  and  their  usefulness
as  auxiliaries,  885.  Their  revolt  under
Claudius  Civilis,  their  chief,  386  et  seq.
The  island  occupied  by  the  Romans,  410.

Baths,  fondness  of  the  Romans  for,  iv.  419.
Baths  of  Miecenas  and  Agripi)a,  and  man-
ners at  them,  419.

Baths  of  Titus,  vii.  82-84.  Of  Nero,  88  note.
Of  Caracalla,  Diocletian,  and  Constantine,
88.

Batiatns,  escape  of  his  gladiators  at  Capua,
i.  50.

Bato,  the  Dalmatian,  heads  a  revolt  against
the  Romans,  but  is  defeated  by  Ca-cina,
iv.  247. His  answer  to  Tiberius,  255.

Bato,  the  Pannonian  chief,  attemi)ts  to  carry
the  post  of  Sirmium,  iv.  247.  Betrays  his
colleague  Pinnes,  and  chased  by  the  Ro-
mans from  post  to  post,  255.

Bedriacum,  first  battle  at,  vi.  884.  Second,
857. Vitellius's  brutality  on  tho  field,  845.

Belenns,  the  Gallic  Apollo,  i.  224.  Ad-
mitted to  the  citizenship  of  tho  Roman
Olympus,  iv.  84.

Belga',  difference  in  Ctesar's  and  Strabo's
account  of  them,  i.  215,  Typo  of  the  Bel-
gw,  217.  The  Belgians  ancl  Cells  inter-
mixed with  Teutonic  tribes,  225.  Their
character  and  mode  of  life,  226.  Some  of
their  tribes  penetrate  into  tho  south  of
Gaul,  220.  Combine  against  Rome,  and
are  defeated,  267-270.  Submit  to  Cwsar,
281.  Their  territories  invaded  by  the
(icrmaus,  866.  The  latest  settlers  in
Britain,  877.  Revolt  of  tho  Belgians,  891.
Besiege  Q.  Cicero,  894.  And  T.  l.abienus,
but  their  confederacy  dissolved.  897,  898.
Revolt  of  tho  Belga>,  but  siipjjressed,  v,
168.  Dissatisfaction  of  tho  Belgio  tribes,
vl.  887.

Belisaiia,  a  Gaulish  deity.  Identified  with
Minerva,  iv.  84.

Belllenus,  his  house  burnt  at  Ciesar's  fune-
ral, iil,  42,

BellovacI,  a  Belgian  tribe,  joins  the  confed-
eracy against  the  Itomans,  I.  267.  Their
relations  with  Brilaiu  and  submission  to
Ca'sar,  271.  Defeated  and  submit  again  to
Casar,  II.  86.  An  iiisiinvetldn  of,  re-
pressed by  D.  Brutus,  818.  Reduced  by
Brutus,  Iv.  70,

Benevenlum,  given  up  to  tho  soldiers  by
Augustus,  Iil.  140.

Berenice,  daughter  of  Ptolenuvus  Auletcs,
placed  on  tlui  thi"<)n(»  of  ICgypt  by  the
jtopulace  of  Alexandria,  I.  Jlfx),  Married
to  Seleucus,  but  slrangU's  him,  851.  Put
to  tiealh  by  her  father,  852.

Berenice,  rn'otlier  of  Herod  Agrlj)pa,  at
Rome,  with  her  elilldren,  v.  276.

Berenice,  (|ueen  of  Clinlels.  Intrigues  with
YespuNlan,  vl.  800,  Married  to  her  undo
Hurode^  410.

INDEX.

509

Berenice,  sister  of  Agrippa,  her  relations  to
Titus  and  dismissal  by  him,  vL  419,486;
vii.  4;},45.

IJcricus,  a  British  chieftain,  applies  to  Clau-
dius for  aid,  vL  20.  The  Verio  of  the
British  coins  (*),  20  note  K

Birytiis  (Beyrout),  colony  of,  founded  by
Aftrippa,  Iv.  162  7U>te  K

Bessi,  a  Thraciau  tribe,  plundered  by  M.
Brutus,  iii.  158.

Bi'siiu  joins  Catilina's  conspiracy,  L  118.

Bctliar,  the  last  stronghold  of  the  Jews,  vU.
817.  Stormed  and  taken  by  Julius  8eve-
ru8,  81 H.

Betuus  Chilo,hls  pretensions  to  the  empire,
vl.  21)5.

Bibr.u'te,  or  Bibrax  (Antun),  Its  freedom  and  \
cimimorce,  1.  220. Capital  of  the  ^£dul  i
(Hoini).  214,  250,  26S. Ca-sar  In, 250. Be-  ,
siefjed  by  tlie  Suessiones  and  Belg*,  2()8.
tiaulish  t'onffdcracy  assembles  at,  IL  27.
Its  name  changed  to'Angustodunum,  Iv.  7S.  :

liibroci,  a  British  tribe,  submit  to  Ca-sar,  L  ,
888.

liibulus,  L.,  surrenders  to  Antonlus,  HI.  172.

Bibulus,  M.  t'alpurnius,  ujdile,  1.  1U8. Pra--
tor,  l;U. Consul,  17it. With  Ca>;ir.  vio-
lently opposed to  his  n
172-173. Ills  opinion  on  1
ers  to  Egypt,  82^,  851). \
ing  Hompelus  sole  consul,  -1  >>. I'iiki'Ii-
sul  of  Syria,  11.  54. Commands  the  sena-
torian  tfeet,  UK),  189. Prevents  the  uas-
sago of  the Cwsarlans,  196, 197. Ills
di-ath,  198.

liilbiiis.  Martial's  native  city,  vtl.  202.

Bioirraphy.  lloiuaii  ;  ! :

luorr  |i!..i.'|-:llillir:il ■

I'n  tVrcuii'  (if  iIk- 1.

248. The  biographiis  of  ^utt^-ulus,  24o-

248.  I

liiterra",  Koraan  colony  In  Gaul,  1.  208,  818. |

liithynious,  proprator  of  Sicily,  surrenders
toSextus  I'oinpilus,  ill.  160."

Bitliyuia,  attempts  of  Mithridates  to  gain  \
possession  of,  1.  42,  Oovemed  by  Cim-
Der,  ill.  81.  Ceded  to  Komo  by  Nico-
medes,  Iv.  105.  Kxtended  by  Pomi>«ius,
and  governed  by  pro-consuls  under  the
empire,  105,  lOti.  Pliny's  aduiluistr.ilioa,
vii.  214,  289.  The  number  of  Christians
In  Bithvuia,  and  Pliny's  proceedings
against  them,  289-291.

Biturigess  their  league  with  Dumnoris  and
the  Helvetii,  L  250.  Invasion  of  their
country  by  Ca'sar,  IL  1(5.  "Who  besieges
and  lakes  their  capital  citv,  Avaricum,
16-18.

Bituitus,  or  Bittus,  king  of  the  Arvemi,
sent  a  prisoner  to  Rome,  t  19&  His  bar-
baric splendour,  214  note  ''.

Bla-sus,  Junius,  mutiny  of  the  legions  under
his  command  in  Pannonla,  v.  IS.  The
mutiny  quelled  bv  Drusus,  19.  Blsesus
chosen  proconsul  oi  Africa,  167.  Punished
as  a  friend  of  Sejanus,  229.  Poisoned  by
Viteliius,  vi.  858.

Boadicea,  queen  of  the  Icenl,  indignities  to
which  she  and  her  children  were  sub-
jected, vi.  44.  Sacks  the  Boman  colony  of
Camulodunum,  46t  Defeated  bv  Sueto-
nius, 48,  49. Commits  suicide,  4&.

BooehiUL  Unc  of  llsnretanta,  nrepares  to
aid  the  OomtUiu,  U.  28». HU death,

iiLssa.

Bodufnatos,  dilefUin  ut  the  Kerril,  oppoaed
to  Ovsar,  L  978.

Bodunl, »  Britidi  tribe,  Mibaiit  to  th*  Bo-
mans,  ri.  S8.

Boeudes,  king  of  Manretania,  U.  t».

Boil,  dereuteiT  at  the  VadiiiioBian  Lake,  1.
191. ^'  '.•  banks  of  the  Danube,

193. I  he  -Kdol,  805; U.  1\

Allow  II  In  Uaul,  L  253. At-

tacked by  Ihe  liauls,  11.  IS.

Bolanua,  Yettioa,  bU  prefretnre  of  Britain,
vii.  '*>.

B  ..fthe,l«8T.

i:  mystertea  o^  proftned  by

r.

iug  of  the  TriumTira  at,  UL
I  leads  for  the  distreaMd  U-
v.  4*2.
tion  and  eoat  o^  In  Borne.

\-rIppa's aettkment of  the
L'dom  of  the.  It.  WL
us,  T.  880.
:ii  of  the  Somaa  eolenjr

lutlum,  principal fortress  of  the
..1.  surrenders  to  Cvsar,  L  8T1.

I  .  d  by  Drasns,  ir.  160,

J,  187.

ill  :  of  Augustas  described,

iv.  oj'-.

Brlgandum,  in  Gallcia.  redacted  by  Oa«ar,  L
ivt.

itants  a(  L  ttT.  First
aau  bistort;  SM,  Ae-
ae  GaulB,8T&.  Caaar't
first  iiivifiou  or  Britain,  STT-88L  His
fleet  iqjaT«d  by  a  hi^  tide,  889.  Bis
array  harassed  or  the  Britoaa,  881  Be-
turns  to  Gaul,  SkCJ.  Exaltatioa  at  Konia
at  his  British  expedition.  888.  The  mines
and  pearls  of  Britain,  883.  Cseaar's  prep-
arations for  a  second  invasion,  984.  Hla
binding  8S«.  Kesistanee  ot  the  BrltMia
under  Cassirelannaa,  88T.  Cesar's  bm^
tial  saeoessea,  and  r«tam  to  Gaul,  888,
889.  Augostus  contented  with  a  promise
of  tribute  from  Britain,  It.  63,  8ft,  The
V.  ■  ■  •  ■ 1  of  Calus,  T.  854. And

I  he  Komans  tealaaa  of
vi.  l«. RehitleM  of
iiiii.i.u  \vi;.  ■ '" '^-  -  '■-■  of

the  south  a:  in-

age  of  Cuii  of

Southern  }'•  res

to  Invade  it.  '  lU-

tlus  and  A  .:'ly

do  not  cro-  .  -o «. laudiiis

enters Bri;  .  uies the  I'rino-

bantes,  24.  ,.iratar  and tri-

umphs at  Kuuie.  2c>.  'i  espssiau  In  West
Britain;  submission  of  the  Ke^  and
Icenl,  28.  Campaign  of  Osterins  scapula,
28i  Camulodunum  '-•■•  '  '  ""  '!'  -nple
of  Claudius  :  the  i  82.

Distinction  betwe  'im

and  the  lioman  n/t^.-. ..,,.  i,v..,i  ai.J  de-
feat of  the  Silures,  83.  The  liritons  con-
tinue to  resist; the  Silures  defeat  the

510

INDEX.

Bomans,  89.  Tho  Eoman  province  of  I
Britain,  and  stiitions  of  the  legions,  40.
Discontent  and  insurrection  of  tie  Iceni,
44  They  sack  Camulodiinum,  45.  The
Iceni  defeated  and  the  insurrection  sup-
pressed, 48-60.  Rapid  progress  of  civili-
zation in  Britain,  51.  Prosecution  of  the
conquest  under  Domitian,  vii.  OS.  Suc-
cessive prefects,  69.  Campaigns  of  Agri-
cola,  71-TO.  Enormous  expense  of  the
conquest,  77.  Discovery  of  the  insular
character  of  Britain,  77.  Hadrian's  pro-
gress in  Britain,  843.  Flom-ishing  state  of
the  province,  848-345.  Fortifications  be-
tween the  Tyne  and  the  Solway,  846.  The
■walls  of  Hadrian  and  of  Severus,  and  the
works  of  tho  age  of  Theodosius  and
Stilicho,  348.  Completion  of  the  wall  of
Antoninus,  401.  Disturbances  in  Britain
in  the  reign  of  M.  Aurelius,  453.

Britannicus  (Tiberius  Claudius  Germani-
cus),  son  of  Claudius  and  Messalina  v.  413.
Takes  a  part  in  the  "  Game  of  Troy,"  421.
Agrippina's  enmity  to  him,  423, 443.  Pre-
vented from  seeing  his  father,  483.  Com-
miserated by  the  Koman  people,  445.  De-
tained within  the  palace  while  Nero  is
proclaimed,  458.  Poisoned  by  Nero,  vL
i4. His  funeral,  76.

Brittany,  immigrations  of  the  Kymry  Into,
i.  216.

Bructeri,  a  German  tribe,  submit  to  Tiberi-
us, iv.  287.  Defeated  by  Caecina,  v.  83.
destroyed,  vii.  86.

Brimdisium,  occupied  by  Pompeius,  ii.  107.
Beseiged  by  Ciesar,  and  evacuated  by
Pompeius,  108. 109.  Occupied  by  Caisar,
185,  195.  Threatened  by  Antonlns,  iil.
182. Conclusion  of  the  peace  of,  182, 188.

Brutus,  M.  Junius,  father  of  the  tjTannicide,
an  adherent  of  Lei)idus,  i.  49,  50,  811.
Slain  by  Pompeius,  311 ;  ii.  193.

Brutus,  Decimus,  his  services  in  Caesar's
Uallio  wars,  i.  264.  Commands  a  naval
armament  against  tho  Veneti,  291,  292.
Harasses  VcrelngetorLt,  II.  14.  Commands
Cn-sar'b  fleet  at  the  seigc  of  Massiliu,  130.
ni»  naval  victory,  142, 148,  l.W.  His  sec-
ond cngageiucnt,  157.  Kecclves  tho  pro-
consulship  of  (iaul  beyond  the  Alps,  184,
881.  AfliTwurds  of  the  ('Isalplne,  whero
he  represses  an  insurrection,  318.  Con-
sul-deslunato,  3(1,5,  ifotns  tho  couspirncy
amlnst  Ca>8nr,  374.  Determines  Oiesiu-  to
attend  tho  meeting  of  the  senatu  on  tho
Ides  of  .March,  3S1-3H3.  His  gladiators  n
body-guard  for  tho  conspirators.  Hi.  8, 18.
Tbo  most  ncllve  and  self-possessed  of  the
OODSplratoni,  10,  26.  Appointed  to  tho
(^vummcnt  of  (U.milplnu  (iuul,  31.  Named
in  Cn>sar's  will  !W.  Promised  a  libera  le-
goi>->  I'l-  N<  A ntonluR,  and  assumes  tho
gi.  :  Clsalplno  Gaul,  66. An-

toi  IS  to  wrest  tho  province

fruii AwiiltN  attack,  and  pre-

nuri'ii  lo  itiaiiiUihi  Ills  pottlllon.  U'l.  Hliiits
Jtimst'lf  up  In  .Mullnit,  nud  Is  beslegiMl  by
AutonluM.  101.  Knvoys  sont  to  lilm  by
the  senate,  J07.  Union  of  tlio  ronMils
with  Ootavlus  for lils  relief,  115.  Kellev.d
by  tb«  retreat  of  tbo  Autonlnns,  12<<,  But
oannot  punuo  thorn  for  want  of  cavalry

and  money,  125.  Crosses  tho  Alps,  and
joins  Plancus  with  ten  legions,  127.  Ke-
crosses  the  Alps,  and  is  deserted  by  his
soldiers,  135. Taken  and  slain,  136.

Brutus,  M,  Junius,  Ccesar's  lieutenant  in
Spain,-  accompanies  his  uncle  Cato  to  Cy-
prus, i.  811,  His  family  and  character,
812,813;  ii,  376.  Idle  rumour  of  his  being
Ciesar's  son  by  Servilia,  1.  312.  Ilis  devo-
tion to  Cato,  ii.  193.  Joins  the  Pompeians
at  Thessalonlca,  193.  Surrenders  after
Pharsalia,  and  is  t,iken  into  Caesar's  favour,
289,  Ca}sar's  remark  on  him,  240,  Ap-
pointed praetor,  366,  Governs  Cisalpine
Gaul,  281,  His  weakness  and  inconsist-
ency, 876,  His  panegyric  of  Cato,  877,
Divorces  Claudia,  and  marries  Porcia,  Oa-
to's  daughter,  377,  Induced  to  lead  the
conspiracy  against  Cicsar,  878.  The  "  Ides
of  March,"  8S3.  His  speech  to  the  people,
ill.  9.  Kefuses  to  put  Antonius  to  death.
12.  His  mistaken  views,  13.  Harangues
tho  people,  but  is  coldly  received,  18.
Eeturns  to  the  Capitol,  18,  28.  Again  har-
angues tho  people,  28,  29.  Character  of
his  oratory,  80.  Appointed  to  the  gov-
ernment of  Muccdoni.T,  81.  Overrules
Cassius  in  his  opposition  to  the  public
funeral  of  Cffsar,  32.  His  house  attacked,
he  flies  from  liome,  41,  42.  Keturns  to
Kome,  but  shrinks  from  public  affairs,  65.
Escapes  to  Lanuvium,  60.  Lingers  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Kome,  67.  Deprived  of
his  government  of  Macedonia  by  Anto-
nius, and  appointed  to  the  ehiu-ge"  of  pro-
viding corn  for  tho  city,  69.  His  inter-
view with  Cicero,  at  Antium,  70.  His
vacillation,  71.  E.vhibits  the  Ludi  Apoli-
nares,  as  city  pra>tor,  78.  Obtains  leave
of  absence  from  Kome,  81.  (Juits  Italy
for  tho  East,  94.  Acknowledged  by  Hor-
tensiuB  as  his  successor  in  Mncedonla,
109.  Shuts  up  C.  Antonius  in  Apollonia,
109.  I'rosecuted  by  Cornitlcius  for  tho
murder  of  Caesar,  and  eoudomned,  l!?3.
Seizes  the  government  of  Macedonia,  IJJS.
Defeats  C.  Antonius,  but  spares  lils  life,
153.  Exorcises  his  troops  in  Macedonia,
and  coins  money  with"  his  owa  elllsry,
159.  Musters  eiirht  lotions,  159.  Joins
Cassius  atPhilippI,  161.  "Kel)uked  by  Cas-
sius, 165.  Storms  tlie  camp  of  Ootavlus,
167.  Compelled  to  light  a  secon<l  time  by
his  soldiers,  is  defeated,  and  kills  himself,
169.

Building,  considerations  on  tho  taste  of  tho
Komans  In,  &c..  vii.  271.

Burdo,  Julius,  oliiof  of  tho  galleys,  rescued
by  Vltelllus,  vl.321.

Burrhus,  Afranlus,  pnctorlan  prefect,  v.  449.
Introduces  Nero  to  tho  guards,  458,  vl.
02,  His  alllanco  with  Heueca,  6S,  Their
influence  on  Nero,  70,  73,  Susiieeted  by
Nero,  80,  Keassures  him,  80,  The  "  Quin-
quennium Neronis,"  tlio  work  of  llurrhus
and  Seneca,  84,  04.  They  uphold  the
senate,  91.  Uncertain  whether  Burrhus
assented  to  the  murder  of  Agrlppliia,  102,
106.  Ills  death,  and  Usefl'ect  on  tho  jjosl-
tloii  ofHeneel^  117,  118,

Byxautlum  denrlved  by  Vespiislan  of  Its
autonomy,  vIl  28.

INDEX.

511

i^KCINA,  ALLIKNUS.  ur-'. .  •>

Mjizo  the  empirf,  vi.  :ils.  v

<ialba  to  the  cuiniiiuiid  of i  .  ■^.

His  march  over  the  (Jreat  St,  jMiii:irtl,
■  '>£i.  Takes  Aveiiticum,  and  puts  to  death
tlio  Helvetian  chief,  Julius  Alpinulus,
'-'■i.  In  tlie  Cisalpine,  3;11.  IJepulsed  be-
•re  I'lacentia,  H'Vi.  Awaits  the  arrival
"1  Valeus,  aa'ji.  Throws  a  bridge  across
the  I'o,  a!i4.  Permits  his  troops  to  plun-
der the  Italian  cities,  iiSd.  Meets  Vitelllus
:it  Liigduuum,  Mi).  Ho  and  Valens  the
real  irovernors  of  Uome,  iJM.  Sent  to  the
north  of  Ualy,35«.  Suspected  of  treach-
ery, and  jealous  of  Valens,  860.  His  feeble
•induct  resented  by  the  soldiers,  8*7.
'  onteuds  In  a  sham  fight  with  Titus.  viL

\ ' '  a  the  I'bine,  mastery

. by the mutinous

.  -  the  IJructeri,  33.

i.rus  A  , uieats  the  I'auuonian

;  iio,  Iv.  247. Intercepted  by  the

i.tns  on  his  march  from  Mu;sia  to

II  'iirmanicua,  2&L

uin  Hill,  the,  described,  Iv.  877.  Great
10  on  the,  V.  2iii.

iiiis,  his  dancing  accomplishments,  1.  84.
ins,  liiifus  M.,  advocates  the  cause  of
i.s;ir,  il.  'Jiti, His intrigues,  insurrec-

li .11,  :l!il| :' ■'; ■■■" -JKi.

.i|'i '.  i  .1  conspiracy  against

il..  iii.  .  iii.  367;  iv.  134.

I'io,  1-^^1,11111.-.  .1,1... ted  by  the  Clmbrl,
-.JltiJ. t,rives  Tolosa  up  to  plunder,  i«7.

n  si,  a  (ienuau  tribe,  i,  2i5. Join  the

irl ■...)... — . ■>.;-

i  4a

juomen,  L  91,

lie,  iii.  333.
ir,  Cuius  Julius.  L  90.

;„l,-„!,<l-.-i-." Vvi.l. M..-i

111.-

-hip  of
ondve-

lK^-,ol 1... ...

liis  wii'o  t'lirui  I
la,  i)3. Com:.

>iized  by  Curu :...._ .. I i-

:  lives  the  patrou:>;;e  of  iho  p<^>pular  cause,
'>.  Learns  the  tirst  rudiments  of  warflwe
.a  the  siej^'e  of  Mytilene,  95.  Abstains
from  joining;  the  movement  of  Lepidus,  9ti.
Undertakes  the  imiK-aehment  of  Dolabel-
h\,  96.  And  of  C.  Antouius,  uncle  of  the
triumvir,  96.  Studies  rhetoric  at  Ehodes,
97.  Captured  by  Cilician  pirates,  9S.  His
vengeance,  9S.  "Enters  the  arena  of  pub-
lic honours,  99.  Pushed  forward  by  the
zealous  etforts  of  his  party,  100.  "  Ap-
pointed to  the  military  tribuneship,  100.
I  •  iiumeneement  of  his  intercourse  with
,  impeius,  UK).  Obtains  the  rthabilita-
lion  of  his  wifi-'s  brother,  Cornelius  Cin-
Uit,  and  other  Marian  exiles,  101.  Style  of
his  oratory,  101.  l*ronounces  a  fUneral
oratiou  in'  honour  of  his  aunt  Julia,  101.
Deties  the  law  of  Sulla,  in  exhibiting  the
bust  of  Marius,  101, 104.  Delivers  a  fune-
ral oration  over  his  wife  Cornelia,  101,
note  1.  Serves  the  office  of  quiestor  in
Spain, 10*1. Uis industry and vigour

there,  103.  Becomes  ledile,  103.  Ma^-
uifloenoe  of  his  shows  and  entertain-
ments, Vi^  Connects  himself  by  mar-
ri.t.  '.  Ctmil V  of  Pompeius,  108.
]i  If  against  the  attacks  of
i  I*res»cs  the  claims  of  the
r.  ..... ^j^  ^^_

Ji  cct  of

Ih. .■  .. C»-

sars  preceeam^  a^a.  nir,  in

the  proMriptlon,  loi.  : i'.-.--

trial  of  thf  wnator  i:  !•

eatea  C.  i'  ' '

tbeoffi'.

deavoiir-

InC-'

tl,

fi.
A
Sp.i,.i.  ..... i.

liA. Obtains
Craaeus,  IM.
enemies  •  •■'  ■
jugates
the  Ta.:

ol

Catu
Uis

a  I ,..M  .  ■

nameufCa^siu-

The  cabal  of  1

sua,  1C0. Ck^kii

poaes  aa  agraii

Into  priaoD,  bt.

violent  contest  \ —

ries  his  law  tiirougii  >

173. Plot  to  assassii

peius,  174. Obtains  t

the  two  Gauls  and

years,  175. His  si^t■

Pompeius,  176. M  .^

■not«''. Takes

17& Makes  f i :

181. Uisaccu

gers  in  the  uei-

besrinniug  of  i

leaves  Italv,  u:.

£hoQe,24i. i'

eroaaing  the  i

ereaaes  his  le\

the  territory  of

theTignrini  ai.

ftises  to  negoti.i  ^ ="■

Spares  the  life  of  Dumiiorii,  :^J. Ku-

gages  the  Helvetii  in  adeci^ve  battle,  and

.  Horn
I. In-

1  into

512

INDEX.

entirely  defeats  them,  251 .  Compels  thftm
to  return  to  their  own  country,  253.  Es-
pouses the  cause  of  the  Gauls  against  the
Suevl,  255.  Proposes  terms,  which  are
refused  by  Ariovlstus,  255.  Commences
hostilities,  257.  Arrests  a  panic  in  his
army,  257,  258.  His  fruitless  conference
witli  Ariovistus,  258,  259.  Defeats  the
8uevi,  and  compels  them  to  cross  the
Rhine,  261.  Winters  in  the  Hither  Gaul,
262.  Composition  of  his  legions,  263.
Military  reputation  acquired  by  his  troops,
2tU.  List  of  his  officers,  264  «ote '.  Hur-
ries back  to  Gaul,  268.  Takes  the  Eemi
tmder  Roman  protection,  268.  Com-
mencement of  the  second  campaign  in
Gaul,  263.  Defeats  the  Belgians  with
great  slaughter,  270.  Reduces  the  Sues-
siones  and  Bellovaci,  270,  271.  Marches
against  the  Nervii  and  their  allies,  272.
His  camp  carried  by  storm  by  the  Nervii,

274,  275. Imminent  danger  of  his  army,

275.  Routs  the  Nervii  and  almost  de-
stroys their  nation,  277.  Sends  P.  Crassus
to  compel  submission  from  the  tribes  on
the  north-west  of  Gaul,  281.  Winters
again  in  Italy,  282.  Returns  to  Gaul,  and
hastens  to  attack  the  Vonetl  with  a  naval
force,  290.  Victory  of  the  Romans  over
the  Veneti,  292.  Oa>sar  chastises  the  Mo-
rini  and  Menapii,  297.  Leaves  his  army
In  winter  quarters  and  returns  to  Italy,
297.  His  critical  position  under  a  threat
of  recall  from  his  province,  SJ^l.  Arrives
at  Lucca,  and  is  waited  upon  by  great
numbers  of  senators  and  knights,  832.
Kffocls  of  his  bribery  and  caresses,  833.
Meeting  of  the  triumvirs  at  Lucca,  883.
Ciesar  defended  by  Cicero  in  his  speech
"  (le  Propinciis  ConDiilarihus^''  8;16.
Jealousy of  Cicsar's adherents nt the

fasslng  of  the  law  of  C.  'Jrebonius,  841.
,aw  for  the  prolongation  of  Crcsar's  com-
mand opposed  by  the  senate,  but  cjirrled
by  popular  violence,  342,  343.  Death  of
his  daiitrhter  .Tulim  wife  of  Pompelus,  802.
His  fourth  C4)inpaign,  86.\  Meets  the
invading  tribes  of  the  Usipetes  and  the
Tcnctheri,  867.  Confers  with  the  inva-
ders, 808,  Defeats  the  Germans  ne.ir  the
Rhine,  871.  Treachery  imputed  to  him
In  the  senate,  872.  Cato  proposes  ho
nhould  1(0  (lellvere<l  lo  the  enemy,  872.
CredlMlltv  of  tJu'sar's  aeroiint  of  the  cam-

finljfn,  37'2,  873.  I'roposes  to  make  nn
HcutNlon  Into  Oermnnv,  373.  His  bridge
acniBii  the  line  near  Coblent/.,  874.  In-
oulren  Into  the  elmnieter  and  condition  of
tno  lirUons,  875.  I'repares  to  Invade  Bri-
tain, a7H.  (IroHses  the  Klnilts  to  Dover,
»79,  Kir.Tt*  n  lnn<llntr,  HH(».  Hln  fleet  In-
Jiir*'!  by  n  higli  tide,  3S|,  IHh  army  har-
oii»«'d  bv  the  HrllonK,  3S'J.  RetuniB  to
(iani  before  the  ei|iiliio\',  3S;|.  DeHpatehes
Halilnim  and  Colla  lo  nnike  an  liieiirKloii
Into  the  eoiintrv  of  the  Meniipll,  3N8.
Goex  Into  lllvrlruin,  8H1,  Hetllen  tlio
nlfiilm  of  the  1'revlrl,  »h|.  ]||h  pre|inra-
tloim  forn  Kecoml  liiviinlon  of  llrllalii, 3s:),
In  which  he  liindit  ngiilii,  3s6.  Kormn  his
futiiotm  catnnnt  Uiituiii.e,  or  Rlehhorongh,
880, DafDiiu  tbo  Urltons  under  Camilvu-

lannus,  887.  Accepts  their  promise  of
tribute  and  returns  to  Gaul,  3S0.  Dis-
tributes his  forces  over  too  wide  a  surface,
891.  Stations  himself  at  Samarobriva,  891,
896.  Revolt  of  the  Belgians,  391.  Two
of  his  legions  destroyed  by  the  Eburones,
893.  Relieves  Q.  Cicero,  806.  Remains
in  the  north  of  Gaul  diu-ing  the  winter,
896.  Makes  gi'cat  additionallevies  for  his
sixth  campaign,  and  borrows  a  legion
from  Pompelus.  398.  Chastises  the  Trc-
viri  and  Menapii.  and  crosses  the  Rhino,
899.  Oflfers  the  plunder  of  the  Eburones
to  the  neighbouring  tribes,  400.  His  un-
successful pursuit  of  Ambiorix,  400,  404.
Convenes  the  general  assembly  at  Duro-
cortorum,  and  leaves  Gaul  for  It.aly,  405.
His  alliance  with  Pompeius  dissolved  by
the  death  of  Julia,  437.  Arrives  at  Luccji,
and  watches  the  progress  of  events  at
Rome,  437 ;  ii.  7.  Ills  seventh  campaign
in  Gaul,  7.  His  lenient  policy  towanls  the
conquered  states  of  Gaul,  8.  Favourable
disposition  of  the  Gaulish  democracies
towards  him,  9.  Lavishes  the  treasures
of  the  republic  on  his  dependants  and  in
decorating  Rome,  10.  Exultation  of  the
people  at  his  victories,  11.  Formation  of
a  Gaulish  confederacy  under  Vercingcto-
rix,  12.  Caesar's  energy  and  decision  in
meeting  the  danger.  14.  Besieges  and
takes  Avarieum,  17, 18.  Enters  tfie  coun-
try of  tlic  Arverni  and  lays  siege  to  Gcr-
goviii,  20.  Defeated  there,  23.  Fords  the
Loire,  25.  Joins  Labienus  at  Agendicuin,
25.  His  personal  danger  in  a  battle  with
the  Gauls,  28.  Compels  Verciiigetorix  to
surrender  himself,  33.  His  eighth  and
last  campaign,  35.  Crushes  the  JJiturigos,
85.  Defeats  and  accepts  the  submission
of  the  Bellovaci  and  Buessionos,  86.  Re-
duces Uxellodunum  and  lin.ally  pacifies
Gaul,  87.  His  severity  to  tlio  captured
Gauls,  87.  irnfalrncss  of  Pompeius  to-
wards him,  48.  His  critical  i)osition,  48,
49.  Intrigues  to  bo  permitted  to  stand
for  the  consulship  while  still  absent  fi-oni
the  city,  49.  Endeavours  of  liis  oiuinies
to  deprive  him  of  his  consulsliip,  59.
Pompelus  sunports  a  decree  of  M.  Mar-
cellus  aimed  directly  at  Civsar,  60.  Cu'sitr
otters  to  resign  tlie 'Transali)ine  and  llly-
ricuin,  61.  In.>*ulted  by  M.  Marcellus,  (il.
His  supi)(>sod  i)erll  in  (laul,  6;!.  His  mild
and  eonellialory  treatment  of  the  (iauls,
65.  Conciliates  the  adherents  of  the  sen-
ate in  the  province,  67.  Attaches  to
himself  the  military  spirit  of  the  (iauls,
08.  Oomposltlon  of"  his  legions,  OS.  Sur-
renders one  of  his  legions  at  the  demand
of  the  senate,  73.  His  trinm])hiint  recep-
tion In  the  Cisali>lne  i)rovlnee,  70.  En-
thusiasm of  his  veteniiis,  77.  Leaves
Labienus  to  administer  the  <  lsali>lno  prov-
ince, 77.  Stations  liimseir  at  Ravenna,
whither  Curio  betakes  himself.  "7,  7a
Heiids  Curio  to  Rome  with  the  oiler  of  a
compromise,  80.  Refusal  of  his  otl'ers  by
the  Senate,  who  recjulre  him  to  resign  his
commaixl,  81.  Preparations  of  the  con-
muIh  to  oppose  (!tt'8ar's  measures  by  force,
8a. The  cunsiilR  review  their  forces,  84.

INDEX.

518

Ctesar  haran^^es  his  troops,  proclalnas  bis
wroiifTB,  and  jirepan-H  to  iuvado  Italy,  8ti,
89.  Crosses  the  iiuljicon,  91.  Occupies
Ariininuui,  91.  Ktlect  of  the  calumnies
ajraiiist  him,  94.  Poinpelus  negotiates
Willi  him  to  gain  time,  9S.  Defection  of
I^iliienus,  99.  Citsar  a^lvances  and  takes
Iffiivjiiiii,  Arretiiim,  and  Aiiximam,  100.
His  band  of  gladiators  at  Capua  broken
up,  1U2.  Overruns  J'ieenum,  and  takes  the
forces  of  Cingiilum  and  Asculuni,  1(13.
IJeleaguers  Cortinluni,  which  is  betrayed
into  his  hands,  104.  (irants  life  and
liberty  to  Domitliis  and  the  Pompeian
leaders,  10^  106.  EtTects  of  this  clemen-
cy, 106.  Besieges  Ponipeius  in  lirun-
dlsium,  108.  Hapidity  of  his  success,  110.
Expels  the  forces.of  the  senate  from  Sar-
dinia and  Bicily,  1'21.  Kepairs  in  p<'rson
to  Koine,  122.  Has  an  interview  with
Cicero  on  the  way,  122.  Convenes  a  sen-
ate, supi)orted  by  the  tribunes  Antonius
and  Cussius,  128.  His  studious  modera-
tion, 128.  Ills  difflculty  in  satisfying  the
demands  of  his  soldiers,  124.  f  lundera
the  sacred  treasure  in  the  temple  of  Saturn,
12S.  Leaves  Koine  to  attack  the  Pom-
peians  in  8paiu,  127.  Ix-aves  his  lieuten-
ants to  reduce  Massilia  and  hastens  into
Bpain,  129. His  arrangements,  180. l*re-

fiarations  of  the  Pom|ieians  to  meet  him
n  the  fleld,  181. Cu'sar  follows  his  lieu-
tenant Fabius  to  the  valley  of  the  Sicoris,
134. Kntrenches  his  camp  in  front  of  the
enemy's  position,  185. ilanteuvres  of  the
hostile  armies,  137. Each  side  claims  the
advantage, 139. Ca-sar's  pu^iIh]ll  )i<  ni-
iiied  in  by  a  sudden  rise  of  i '
His  reiuforcements  rest  on  t '
of  the  river,  141. Ke3tore>
cations  by  the  use  of  corn,
lieutenant  1).  Brutus,  gain.-  .  r

the  Massiliaus  at  sea,  148. i'  is

of  the  .Vf^nians  to  evacuate  llcnU  144.
Cwsar's  operations  to  jirevent  their  re-
treat, 144.  Makes  a  feint,  and  moves  to
intercept  the  man-h  of  the  enemy,  148.
Comes  up  with  the  AtVunians,  but  refuses
to  eiigiige  them,  148.  Communications
opened  between  the  soldiers  in  the  opjK)-
8ite  ranks,  l.M).  This  intercourse  broken
oft  by  Setreius,  151.  The  armies  drawn
up  in  front  of  each  other  in  battle  array,
152.  Capitulation  of  the  Pompehin  lieuten-
ants, 152.  Cicsar's  generosity  to  them,
158.  Establishes  his  headquarters  at  Cor-
duba,  16(».  Keceives  the  submission  of
Yarro,  102.  Arranges  the  affairs  of  Spain,
and  reiKiirs  to  Massllia,  1(58.  Causes  of
the  hostility  of  Juba,  King  of  Kumidia,
to  Ca-sar,  164.  Curio  and  the  Ca>sarian3
in  Africa  defeated  hy  Juba,  166, 167.  Sus-
tains a  heavy  loss  iii  a  naval  engagement
off  lllyricuni,  169.  Keceives  the  submis-
sion of  the  Massiliaus,  178.  Created  dic-
t:itor  in  his  absence  from  Kome,  173.  His
olijoct  in  seeking  the  appointment  at  this
time,  174.  (juells  a  mutiny  among  his
soldiers  at  Placentia,  176.  Difficulties  of
his  position  as  dictiitor,  178.  Confldence
reposed  in  his  determination  to  resist  the
cry  for  conilscatioa  and  blood,  179. Hla

VOL.  Til. — 33

flnADdAl  measures,  180.  His  amnestr
to  the  victims  of  Pomf>eiu»  and  Sulla  g
proscriptions,  1V2.  Obtains  fu'l  citizen-
ship  for  the  Transpadaue  <iaulss  isi.
Elected  consul  with  1*.  Srr\-ilius  Isauri-
cuA,  184.  Kesigus  the  dicutorship  and
repairs  to  bU  annv  at  Bruaduittu,  l«>3i,
19S.  CoDipariioii  or  bU  potitkw  with  that
of  bl«  adverMrie*,  ItOi  Ooaaea  oT«r  to
Epiru^  !»&.  Land*  at  Ffelcata,  19&,
Heada  Fiiilua  Ckleana  lor  the  rMnalader
of  his  troopa,  19T.  Attanpt  at  cowitar
revolution  in  Borne  and  Italr,  SOQ.  At-
tempts to  eroaa  the  Adriatie  UArMant
tempest,  dU8.  Hla  manoMTiwa  to  join  the
second  dlrtaion  uider  Antonloa,  1M.
Blockades  Pompeiua  within  hU  lines  at

Petra.  iOT. tiharaeter  and  authenticitr  of
-  on  the  UvU  War,"

th.

J08.  Kariewartbe
!i  Ommt  planned  Ua

ujjv.„. i.»uibllahea  eonunnnlcn-

tiuua  with  ^tulte,  ThsMaly,  and  Mnea-
doiila,  213.  Oeeapiea  Aehala,  Sia  Hi*
diseomflture.  MO.  Move*  towarda  Thrsa-
saly,  tii.  Anticipates -the  Tariona  plana
the  enemy  mar  adopt,  Ui.  KflMta  a
Junction  with  the  iiivlsioaafChMwMaB
tbefW)ii-  IS  and  Theaaaltr  ttL

Fixes  ii  I  the  plain  of  TlM*-

saly,  224.  ._  -^  the  town  ot  OomU

to  i>illa^e,  iUk  iUeeives  the  sabnlawMi
ofMetropoUa,tM.  The  battle  oTPbHW-
lU  and  defeat  of  Pomiieius.  «n-SaO.
Cwaar's  demency  to  V  : -•1,287-

940. Takes  M.  Bru'  lavour,

239. Follows  up  his  .1. Pnr-

inndaLlBA.  Cmui^U  C  DiMlM
ndar  Ua  iaat,  SML AiHtw  te

231. 964.  Hla  hoarcr  «■  bakaUinf
thcL:;MlarPoapeina,854.  Hlaol^eettn
interfering  in  the  aflUra  ei  Ksjpt,  iM.
His  ilrat  inteniew  with  daopnlm,  9e&,
HU  pr«cariona  poaitioa,  9iML  Blalac  of
the  Alezandriaaa  afatnat  him,  9B&  Boms
the  Eerptiaa  fleet,'^.  PnU  Fttthlnna  to
deathTMOi.  Bloekaded  at  Alexandria,  9«L
CwnpeUed  to  awlm  (tar  hU  ttfti.  9CL  Ke-
stores  Ptolemena  to  hia  ml|}eeta,  9tl
Ar  I'tolenwna,  9Ml Joined  by

M  Aug  of  Perffamna,  and  de-

f. . I  .us  at  the  bntUe  of  the  Nile,

262,  263.  Miscondnet  of  C»«ar^  lieuten-
ant in  Spain,  Q.  Uaaatna  Longlnna,  267.
Yi^lanc«  of  hia  eoUeaco*  BmtUIus  in
Bomei,  940.  Honowa  heaped  npoa  Ocaar
by  the  people,  9M.  Oeated  dietatar  fer
one  year,  870.  Appotnta  Antonina  hia
master  of  the  hone,  270.  THaatlnftlftn  of
his  Veterans  in  Italy,  271.  Adranosa  to
encounter  Pharnaces,  and  defeats  him  in
the  battle  of  Zela,  271,  973.  Comption  of
character  bv  his  Interooorae  with  Cleopa-
tra, 278.  Arrives  at  liome,  2T<L  Submis-
sion of  the  nobles  to  him,  277.  His  firm-
ness in  protecting  them  ajr^insl  the
cupidity  of  his  own  party,  27s  Confis-
cates tte  estates  of  Pompeius  and  of  his
two  sons,  279.  His  policy  iu  securing  the
services  of  men  of  all  parties,  279.  Ee-
atorea  the  atatnea  of  Snila  and  Pompeins,
98L Aaaomea  the  dictatorship  for the

514

INDEX.

third  time,  2S1.  Designates  himself  and
Lepidus  consuls,  281.  Quells  a  mutiny
among  his  soldiers,  2S2.  Leaves  Italy  and
lands  in  Africa,  290.  Repulsed  at  Adru-
metum,  291.  Keceived  at  Leptis,  hut
worsted  in  an  engagement,  291.  Obtains
an  advantage  over  Scipio,  293.  Invests
Thapsus,  294.  Defeats  Scipio  at  the  bat-
tle of  Thapsus,  295.  Exacts  large  sums
from  the  conquered  cities,  303.  Sails  for
Sardinia  and  enforces  payment  of  a  large
sum  from  the  inhabitants,  804.  Reaches
Rome,  805.  Honours  showered  upon  him
during  his  absence,  806.  Appointed  dic-
tator for  ten  years,  307.  Celebration  of
his  four  triumphs,  808. Distributes  lar-

f esses  to  the  soldiers  and  .people,  311.
Ixhibits  gladiatorial  shows,  312.  Defeats
the  republicans  at  the  battle  of  Mundi,
816, 317.  General  view  of  the  spirit  of  his
legislation,  319.  His  sumptuary  laws,
824.  Abridges  the  consuls'  term  of  office
arbitrarily,  and  increases  the  number  of
the  senate,  325.  Communicates  the  Ro-
man franchise  to  the  provincials,  826.
Assigns  lands  to  the  veterans,  828.  At-
tempts to  counteract  the  increase  of  slave
labour  in  Italy,  829.  The  jii^trium  libero-
rum,  380.  Confines  the  judicia  to  the  sena-
torial and  equestrian  orders,  881.  Dis-
solves the  collegia,  838.  His  favour  to
the  Jews,  388.  His  project  of  a  complete
code  of  laws,  and  of  a  complete  map  of  the
empire,  38;i,  834  Establishes  the  first
public  library  in  Rome,  385.  Reforms
the  calendar,  389.  Begins  to  assume  re-
gal state,  840.  Visit  of  Cleopatra  to
Rome,  841.  Her  son  Ca'sarian.  841.
Csesar  8  conduct  and  iidulation  of  tne  no-
bles, 842,  Z^i.  The  general  feeling  of  the
nation  favourable  to  his  power,  844.
Tranquillitv  of  Rome  during  his  absence
In  Siialn,  346.  His  personal  friends,  84a
Their  Knlcurean  tenets,  862.  Himself  a
professed  unbeliever,  8£4.  His  addiction
to  superstition,  8M.  News  of  the  victory  of
Munuii  reaches  Rome,  355.  Decrees  passed
In  his  honour,  S5i>.  Returns  to  Rome,
and  celebrates  his  last  triumph,  857.  Re-
ceives the  appellation  of  father  of  his
'  country  and  other  honours,  858.  Oticnds
the  Benntors,  860.  Ca'sar's  urbanity,  861.
Visits  Cicero  at  Puteoll,  861.  Schemes  of
OonqucKt  attriliute<l  to  him,  8&1.  Ills  \\{i\\
consulship,  :{65.  Adopts  C.  Octavius  as
his  heir,  8<i6.  SaluUd  bv  the  title  of  king,
870.  Reloits  n  royal  diadem  otTered  to
htm  by  AutonluH,  871.  I'roposnl  to  obtain
•  decree  conferring  upon  him  Uio  tltioof
Unit  of  the  foreign  subjects  of  the  com-
monwealth. 878.  Kormation  of  a  con-
•plrMX  BKuinitt  Ills  life,  3T8.  Preparations
of  the  ooniplmtors  to  execute  their  design,
880.  Ca-sor  unteni  the  senate  hoiis«>,  >IK2.
AlMMlnatod,  H88, 8H4.  Reflections  on  his
death,  8tl0.  <iudK>nent  of  the  anetenls  on
his  aiMMlnation,  8h6.  Ills  perH<in,  rharac-
tor,  and  abilities,  iMH-mm.  His  body  ciu--
riod  to  bis  poiitltlcat  inunslon.  III.  1(1,  HIn
papen  and  treuniin'R  removed  to  the  house
of  AntonluB,  lA.  UU  will,  82,  Ilia  nub-
ile fUnrrul,  86. IIU  apothvusls,  00. Place

of  his  cremation,  315.  His  assumption  of
the  prcenomen  imperatoriis,  348.  His
usurpation  of  the  office  of  consul,  858.
Contrast  between  the  position  of  Csesar
and  Pompeius  with  respect  to  the  su-
preme power,  427.

Csesar,  Caius,  son  of  Agrippa  and  Julia,
adopts  by  Augustus,  iv.  155.  Introduced
to  public  life,  190,  192.  His  education,
205.  Assumes  the  gown  of  manhood,  208.
Receives  the  title  of  prince  of  the  Roman
youth,  209.  Sent  to  the  East,  213.  His
interview  with  Tiberius  at  Samos,  214
Confirms  Herod's  will,  215.  Denounces
Lollius,  217.  Compels  Phraates  the  Par-
thian to  submit  to  Rome,  217,  218.
Wounded  at  Artigira,  218.  His  illness
and  death  at  Limyra,  218,  219.

Csosar,  Caius  [Caligula],  affection  of  his
undo  Drusus  for  him,  v.  166.  Pronounces
the  funeral  oration  over  the  body  of  the
empress  Livia,  211.  Retained  by  Tiberius
about  his  own  person  at  Caprew.  216,  236.
Advanced  to  the  priesthood  by  Tiberius,
221,  Married  to  a  daughter  of  M.  Junius
Silanus,  236,  252.  Advanced  to  the  quws-
torship,  249. His birth  and childhood

Eassed  in  the  Rhenish  camp,  251.  Kamed
y  Tiberius  joint  heir  with  his  grandson
Gemellus,  251).  Remark  .of  Pasiennus  on
his  character,  252.  Death  of  his  wife,  252.
Macro's  ascendancy  over  him,  252.  His
intrigues  with  Ennia  and  prophecy  of
Tiberius,  255.  Influence  of  Herod  Agrip-
pa over  him,  277-281.  Unsound  in  body
and  mind,  282.  Conducts  the  obsequies
of  Tiberius,  287.  His  nickname  of  CaXx-
gula,  286  note '.  His  accession  and  liberal
conduct,  2SS.  His  first  consulship,  his
devotion  to  business,  and  dissipation,  292-
296.  Despafr  of  the  people  at  his  sickness
at  Rome  and  in  the  i)rovinc^s,  296,  296.
Corrupted  by  flattery,  298.  Puts  Tiberius
Gemellus  to  death,  298.  His  degraded
manners  and  personal  appearance,  298,  299.
His  gladiatorial  sliows,  800.  Puts  Alacro
and  Ennia  to  death,  801.  His  rapid  suc-
cession of  executions  and  confiscations,
804  His  despair  at  the  death  of  his  sister
Dnisllla,  804.  Mivrries,  and  shortly  after
repudiates,  Lollia  Paulina,  30(),  Distrib-
utes crowns  and  sceptres  to  foreign  ajipli-
cants,  807.  His  statues  intruded  into
Jewish  synagogues,  811.  Claims  divine
worship,  '312.  Ills  claim  resented  witli
indignation  bv  the  Jews,  815.  His  inter-
view with  Pnilo  and  the  Alexandrian
Jews,  816-319.  Deflelency  of  our  mate-
rials for  the  history  of  Chains,  320.  How
Tacitus  would  have  ])aiiited  llie  Kniperor
Caius,  822.  Possibly  luisriprosented,  828.
His  earlv  disatlvantages, 82)i-;i2(>.  Strange
story  of  the  i)rle8thood  of  the  Arlclon
Diana,  326.  Caius  imbibes  a  notion  of  his
own  superior  imture,  828.  His  colossal
eoneeptlons  in  pul)lle  works:  Ills  ])alaco,
his  viaduct  across  the  Velabruni,  an<l  his
bridge  across  the  Hay  of  Mala-,  820-885.
All'eets  to  be  an  orator,  387.  Ills  spite
against  the  luHlgnia  of  (lie  nobles,  ;<87.
Really  believes  himself  divine,  838.  Ills
bantering  humour  und  persecution  of  the

INDEX.

515

noble!),  840-343.  MuMCre  U  tk*  exiled
uobk's,  44  i.  His  nspopalar  Uxattion,  8i4.
His  welt-kuown  exclftuutlon  respecting
the  Ilouian  people,  845.  His  exwdition
ai^aiuBt  the  Ueriuuns,  346-34S.  His  im-
periiil  auction  at  Lugdununi,  849.  Dis-
covery of  a  conspinifv  in  tlaul;  Caius's
Bistero  disj^raced  and  Lepidus  and  G»tu-
licus  executed.  861).  His  marrlaKe  witli
Mllonia  Ca-soula,  352.  Assumes  s  tliird
cunsulsliip.  and  resigns  on  tlie  twelfth
day,  862.  Puts  Ptolema'us  of  Maurutania
to  death,  353.  His  "British  expedition,"
854.  Avows  himself  a  tyrant,  858.  De-
tection of  a  conspiracy  as^ainst  him,  389.
His  crowning  act  of  extravagance,  800.
Consiiiracy  of  Cassius  ChtureSLMl.  As-
sassinated by  Chierea,  862.  Uia  ubes
honoured  bv  his  sistcni,  363.

Catsur,  L.  Julius,  the  consul,  his  conoesston
of  tlic  franchise  to  the  Italians,!.  91.  no^*.
gits  with  his  kinsman  Julius  on  the  trial
of  Uabiriua,  107.  Shrinks  tVom  declaring
Antoulus  a  public  enemy,  ill.  lOT.  Pro-
scribed by  the  triumvirs,  140.

CsBsar,  L.  (son  of  the  last)  sent  by  Pompelus
to  lu-^rotiit.  with  Ca-'sar,  iL  9S, Pardoned

C^.

lulius,  son  of  Agriopa  and

I  by  .Vujru«tus,  iv.  iKV His

217. 1  1, -^JO.

Caisar,  S.  .eaar,  IL

318. M  ..lua,  818.

1"'  t^ lliToll, III.  ■■*1'-'.

.  louudutiun  of  the  city  Ol,  by  Herod,

1,  reputed  son  of  C*sar  and  Cleo-
li.  342;  iii.  83.  Proclaimed  joint
.  Ii  of  Kgypt  by  Antouius,  tli. Pat

1(1  lUath  bv  Augustus,  271.

I'.esars,  Lives  of  the,"  of  Suetonius,  tU.

■-'4s.
(  .1 ii'  I.  Mll'iula,  married  to  the  emperor

I  . J. His  affection  for  her,8U.

II  ; . .,.:,. ;u6.

(.  .1  -  :-,  il^iNius  L.,  tribune,  removes  the
-iiLiiid  and  diadem  fh)m  Ciesar's  statue,
[;.  ..!>.  Brutus  demands  his  recall  from
liuuishmeut,  iiL  1^

lieta  sacked  by  the  Cilician  pirates,  L  47
iioU.

<.  alatia,  settlement  of  the  Eoman  colony  of^
ii.  329.

Calendar,  the  Roman,  oonfUsion  ot,  iL  836.
Amount  of  error  in  the  computation  of
time,  33a lieformed  by  Caesar,  889.

(.  .ilenus,  Fuflus,  a  CiesarianL,  sent  by  Oasar
to  Brundisium,  ii  197.  Commands  In
Achaia,  ilri\  es  the  Pompeians  ftom  that
pn)vinco,  ii.  217.  Compels  Athens  to  sub-
mit to  Ca'sar,  and  occupies  the  Pelopon-
nesus, 252.  Consul  b.c  47,  2S0.  His  pro-
posal to  treat  with  Antouius,  iiL  102, 104.
Opposes  Cicero's  motion  to  declare  XL
Antouius  an  enemy  of  the  state,  107.
Supports  Antoniu8,"Hl.  And  promises
aid  to  L.  Antonius,  179. His  death,  161.

Caletes,  a  Belgian  tribe,  join  the  confederacy
against  the  Bomans,  L  267.

Oaligak. A«  Omht,  OsloiL

Oallaiel,  •  Sputab  trlb^  L  Iflft.

Callistna,  fre«diiuui  oi  CUna,  eoiupires
ai^st  him,  T.  aiW.

Calpomia,  duster  ti  L.  CUpmlM  Ptoa.
married  toOMwr,  L  ITC  IUmItw  ker
husband's  dead  bod^,  ill.  14  S«morM
his  treasure  and  papers  to  the  hou*  of
Antonloa,  1&

Oalpomiu  IhBillr,  tiMhr  pHd*  ud  Mlito*
Bta»totheCtaMrto^T;». ^ ^

Oalponliu  CkMMa,eaMalrMicilMt  Mora
ud  is  banished,  rli.  ICl.

Calreaa,  O.  Madiu,  hi*  ftieadrttp  with
Cesar,  iL  851.

Cfelvlnus,  bU  war*  i^slMt  th*  Voeoatli,  L
19<L

CalTinui,  On.  Domltiiia,  oobmI  !■  >.o.  aS.  L
488,  484. OommMsda  the  OwssrtMH  U
MaoedoBia,814,  814,  an. Fom*  r  '—
tion  with  CcMT  in  ThreaMly,  tHL

Maoedoni^^aii  81«,  %\t. ratms  a  Joae-

iCcMT  in  ThreaMl/.tHL Mm-

moned  br  him  to  Alaxai^dfk,  «ML At-

tacks and  la  dafcatsii  by  nMraMaa,  SA
Named  maatnr  of  the  bono,  MC

Oalviaiua  8abinu> '  .iidath«

tans  In  .Atoli.i  'kM

of  a  fleet  for  >  IM.

by  the  Pompeians  unuer  MuaeiaatM^lMb

Camels  of  Baotria  and  Arabia.  tL  W(L Hot
known  la  AlHea,waat  Vt  EcTPt.  >*  t^
rCsBMr.ML
the Gaullah  dileftaia,  paU  D.
to  death,  iU.  18&

Lauiuius,  Furius,  proeoasnl  of  AfHea.  de-
feaU  Tadhrlaaa,  t.  ST.  Clalma  th«  hrOB-
ours  of  a  eonqneror,  5T.

Oampania,  admittwl  to  the  I^tta  I
L  MTlMnoiiial  eltiea, «(  saakod  bf  I  .
taeuB,Sl.  The  dstama  of  tha  OHapaaiaB
coast  placed  la  tha  teada  of  ClaiM,  tt.  M.
lABda  la  CamjBwla  aaataMd  ta  tha  T«la>
xaBi,ia&l  TW  IMTaf  tha  Itimias  «■
the  Campaaiaa  eoaat.  It.  MS.  KaTa^ed
br  atonas  aad  paatUaaaa^  tI.  IML

Campa,  IMIiM,  of  tha  Bamaaa,  YlL  MiV.

Car '  *— ■?S(.lT.  ««.

C^.  n«^«harMllaU«rtha.lr.

Cai..;.;^  :u»uua,  daaaribed,  Ir.  WS-SSt.
Athletic  eonieata  la  tha,  4iai

Campus  Kandioa,  battle  aJT  the,  L  Ml

^•.^...,A  ■■ii-^-,a,aQMillAdeit]r,ldMttilled
t>» ;  Iv.  84.

C..  British  elty  ot,  tL  17. De-

u ....  .  .  .  ...c  Trinobantes,  M. Taken  by

Ciaudms,  ta.  Kuundation  nt  tha  military
colony  of  Camulodunum,  W.  laaoHL-
ration  of  the  worship  of  Claodiaa  la,  S3.
Sacked  by  the  leeni,  4&

Camulogenos,  klnir  of  the  uBdoi,  defeated  by
the  RoDsans,  iL  241.

Candace,  queen  of  .£thiopa,  her  troopa
routed  by  Petrouius,  iv.  105.  Her  high
spirit,  lU^  Sends  envoys  to  Augustus,
who  releases  her  fiiom  tribute,  10&.

CangL  a  tribe  in  OarnarTOBshire,  attadcad

lU  vi.  -iS.

renders  u>  Ocuvius,  ;id6.
him,  27i

ian  officer,  da-
::9.  Commands
'.iiun,254.  Snr-
Put  to  death  by

516

INDEX.

Caninefates,  a  German  tribe,  submit  to
Tiberius,  iv.  237,  266.  Join  the  revolt  of
Civilis,  vi.  88T,  408.

Oantabri,  the,  in  the  north  of  Spain,  i  155.
Sabdued  by  Augustus,  iv.  89, 161.  And
by  Agrrippa,  137.

Canntius,  the  tribune,  denounces  M.  Anto-
nius,  iiL  90.

Capitation  tax,  the,  ili.  420.

Oapito,  C.  Ateius,  on  the  crime  of  construc-
tive majesty,  v.  127.  Demands  the  re-
vival of  charges  of  majesty  In  the  reign
of  Nero,  vi.  115.

Capito  Cossutianus,  a  delator,  brings  charges
against  Thrasea,  vi.  167, 168.

Capito,  Titinius,  his  account  of  the  "  Deaths
of  Famous  Men,"  vii.  244.

Capitol,  the,  seized  by  L.  Satuminus,  i.  107.
Recovered,  107.  Burnt  in  the  time  of
Sulla,  135i  Restored  and  dedicated  by
Catulns,  135,136.  Again  burnt  in  the  civil
wars,  136;  vL  866.  Description  of  the
capitolium  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  iv.
871).  Decree  for  its  restoration,  vi.  874,
878.  Restored  by  Vespasian,  vii.  26.
Burnt  in  the  reign  of  Titus,  49.  Restored
by  Domitian,  117.

Capitoline  contests,  established  by  Domi-
tian, viL  133.

Capitoline  Hill,  the,  described,  iv.  375.

Cappadocia,  attempts  of  Mithridates  to  gain
possession  of,  l  42.  On  the  death  of
Archelans,  annexed  to  the  Roman  Em-
pire, V.  51.  269.

Capreae,  island  of,  retirement  of  Tiberius  in,
V.  208. Description  of.  204.

Capua,  proposal  for  droning  colonies  to,  i.
110.  Opp<)8edby  Cicero,  110,  111.  Cicsar's
band  of  gladiators  at,  broken  up  by  the
senate^  117.

Caroctacus,  opposes  Aulus  Plantins,  and  is
worsted,  vi.  22.  Heads  the  Silurcs^  29.
nis  last  battle  and  defeat  85  tt  nea.
Brought  lH>fore  Claudius  at  Rome,  v.  446;
vl.  87.  His  upcech  to  the  emperor,  87.
His  life  SfMjred.  8a

Carl>o,  PapiniR,  (leffated  by  the  migrating
(Mmbrl  and  Tcutom-H,  i.  201.

Caria,  ItH  connection  with  Rhodes,  iv.  107.

Camuntum,  importance  of  the  station  of,  Iv.
245.

Comutes,  a  Oalllc  tribe,  1.  281.  Comnellod
to  submit  to  the  Romans,  282.  AfunltT
the  chli'fUiin  TiiKgetliis,  891.  Revolt
•ffalDHt  IComc.  II.  12.  All-|)owerfnl  author-
ity of  the  Druids  among  them.  85.

Carrhii',  Roiiiaii  giirrison  at,  1.  425.  Bosiegod
by  8ll^•nll^  42n.

OurlnuK,  ('.,  <-li<iH<>n  ronsnl,  III.  156.  Gains  a
victory  over  the  Morlnl,  iv.  70.

Ourlniut  HccuiidiiH,  omi  of  Nero's  agents
In  Dtunderlng  Asia  Minor  and  Ciroece,  vl.

Oirthaff^  Tllltod  by  the  Kmperor  Hadrian,

Oartinnuidna.  cblefialn  of  the  Hilur<>^  be-
tnys  Oktmuous  to  the  IConinns,  vl.  Hd,
Kxpellod  by  her  sntiJeotH,  and  rciteuod  by
DIdliiH,  110.

Ouco,  I'ulilliis,  Joins  the  ronnplrnry  ognlnit
CiiiMU-,  IL  1174. Thutlmt  to  strike  at  Uai-

Casilinum,  settlement  of  the  colony  ot  IL
828,  829.

Casperius,  .lElianus,  praetorian  prefect,  mu-
tinies against  Nerva,vii.  167.

Cassinius,  defeated  by  Spartacus,  i.  51.

Cassius,  Avidius,  his  victory  over  the  Par-
thians,  vii.  45.').  Popularly  charged  with
having  caused  the  plague  of  a.  n.  166, 461.
His  treason  against  Anrelius,  469.  Slain
by  the  legions^ 471.

Cassius,  C,  commands  a  Pompeian  fleet,  ii.
250.  Destroys  a  Caesarian  fleet,  260.  Sur-
renders to  Ca'sar,  25;i  His  Ei)icurean
tenets,  362.  Appointed  prsetor,  366.  Joins
the  conspiracy  against  Ca'sar's  life,  874.
His  character,  375.  His  talents  as  a
statesman  and  general,  iii.  26.  Enter-
tained by  Antonius,  30.  Obtains  the  gov-
ernment of  Syria,  81.  In  Rome  on  the
arrival  of  Octavius,  64.  Shrinks  from
public  aifairs,  and  escapes  to  Lanuvium,
66.  'Lingers  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Rome,  67.  His  interview  with  Cicero  at
Antium,  70.  Obtains  leave  of  absence
from  Rome,  81.  Quits  Italy  for  the  East,
94.  Gathers  together  an  imposing  force,
109.  Gains  some  advantage  in  Syria,  109.
Attacks  Dolabella  in  Ljiodicea,  arid  causes
him  to  commit  suicide,  128.  Prosecuted
by  Agrippa  for  the  murder  of  Ca'sar,
and  condemned,  188.  Becomes  undis-
puted master  of  Svria,  169.  His  forces,
169.  Chastises  Rhodes.  161.  TTnitcswith
Brutus  at  Philippi,  162.  Rebukes  Brutus,
165. Defeated  by  Antoniu.s.  ]t>7.

Cassius  Chierea,  forms  a  eons])iracj'  against
the  life  of  the  em])eror  t'aiiis,  v.  861.
Honours  decreed  him  by  the  senate,  860.
Executed  by  Claudius,  8V)9.

Cassius  Longinus,  ]..,  leads  a  Ciesarian  army
Into  Thessaly,  IL  214.

Cassius  Longinns,  Q.,  serves  tmder  Crassus
in  Parthia,  1.  417.  Warns  his  leader  of  his
perilous  position,  417.  Suggests  the  plan
of  tlio  campaign,  420.  Takes  ui)oii  him-
self to  give  orders,  426.  Checks  the  ag-
gressions of  the  Piu-tbians,  ii.  56i  Elected,
tribune,  78.  Flees  to  Ravenna,  82.  Con-
vokes a  meeting  of  the  senate,  128.  Placed
by  Ca>sar  over  the  three  provinces  of  the
Spanish  Peninsula,  ii.  1(>8.  Itecolves  the
province  of  Furtlior  Spain,  184,  267.  His
misconduct  there,  267.  Attempt  to  as-
sassinate him,  267.  Puts  Ijiterensls  and
the  conspirators  to  death,  207.  His  death,
268.

Ca.Hsiiis  Pannensis,  the  last  survivor  of  Cie-
sar's  murderers,  in  arms  against  the  tri-
umvirate. III.  178.  Clings  to  S.  Pompeius,
but  Anally  abandons  lilm,  204.  Put  to
death  bv  ()ctavliis,  272.

Cassius  Longinus,  husband  of  Dmsilla,
v.  249.  His  nivrrow  escape  IVom  death,
862.

ChssIus  Soverus,  his  writings  suppressed  by
the  senate,  but  restored  to  circulation  by
('alus  Ciesiu",  v.  289.

OnssluB  Joins  Catillna's  eonspimev.  I.  116.
Defeated  and  slain  by  the  Cii'nl>ri  and
Teutones,  808.

C••slll^  C,  proscribed  by  Noro,  vl.  167.

OassluB I./onglnuB, entruppud by Deco-

INDEX.

517

balus,  vil.  192. His  gallantry  and  death,
19;i.

Cassivellaunus,  king  of  the  Trlnobantes,  de-
feated by  Ca.'8ar,  1.  857.  Abandoned  by
hi»  isubjucts  and  allies,  he  sues  fur  tH'aoe,
8S9.

Casticus,  a  prince  of  the  Sequani,  won  over
by  Orgctorix  the  Helvetian,  I.  vS89.

Castra  \  etera  (supposed  to  be  Xanten  near
Cloves),  a  stiitiou  i)lanted  by  Drusus  on
the  Lower  Rhine,  vi.  S90.  Menimius  Lu-
pereus  takes  refiipe  there,  8SK).  And  is
le;i(;iiered  by  Chilis,  892.  Capitulation
to,  and  treacherous  massacre  of  the  gar-
rison by  Civilis,  401.  Defeat  of  Clvllls
and  the  Germans  by  Ctrealls  before  Ve-
tera, 4(18.

Catacombs,  theory  respecting  their  original
tenants,  vil.  286  noU  '.

Catilina.  L.  Sorglua,  his  character,  1.  114,
lli\ Falls  in  his  suit  for  the  consulship,
116. Protiifracy  of  his  aims,  116. His  a»-
sociutes  and  partisans,  116. Iteftosea  to
agree  to  a  new  insurrection  of  slaves  and
criminals,  llT. Discovery  and  suppres-
sion of  his  conspiracy,  117. Condeuina-
tiou  of  his  associates  to  death,  122. His
letter  to  Catulus  from  Etrurla,  180. Puts
himself  at  the  head  of the insurgents
tlui>, IJI. His defeat  and  death,  182.
\  i-n  by  the  deputies  of  the
1  liome,  In  making  known
. .S  '^lt>.

Cuto,  llie  tciijur,  I,  80,  81.  Warns  his  eotu-
trvmeu  a^'aiust  the  fatal  influenoe  of
Greek  literature,  il.  208.

Cato,  C,  tribune,  produces  an  - >  !-

line  oracle resi)ecling  Ktryji
asses  the  senate,  880. l^o>.  -  i-

shlp,  339.

Cato,  .M.  Porcius,  his  early  career  and  char-
acter, 1.  79-81.  Obtains  a  monthly  al-
lowance of  com  for  the  people,  125.  His
speech  on  the  Catlliuarlan  conspiracy,
125.  Irritates  the  equites  on  the  subject
i)f  the  publicani  in  the  Kast,  125.  His  mo-
rosity,  126.  Advocates  the  Stoic  philoso-
l)hy,  133.  His  natural  good  humour,  1*4.
IJeVoines  tribune,  134.  His  contest  with
Motellus  Nepos,  141, 142.  His  opjwsition
to  Clodius,  148-151.  Rejects  an  alliance
witli  PomiK'ius.  165.  Supp»»rts  Bibulus,
168.  Opposes  Ca'sar's  agrarian  bill,  and
arrestee!  \>y  Ctesar's  lictors,  172.  KefUses
to  swear  oWdience  to  the  bill,  173.  Im-
plicated by  Vettlus  In  an  assassination
plot,  174.  AVarnstho  senate  against  Pom-
I)eius,  176.  Intrigue  for  removing  him
from  Rome,  806.  Compelled  to  execute  a
eonimisslon  for  depriving  Ptolems'us  of
Cyprus  of  his  kingdom,  307,  808.  Exe-
cutes It  with  moderation,  and  defends  the
acts  of  Clodius,  807,  827.  Treats  Ptole-
maus  with  contempt,  811.  .\ccompanied
on  his  mission  by  M.  Junius  Brutus,  811.
l''nsuecessful  candidate  lor  the  pnetor-
i^liip,  389,  358,  Oi)pose8  the  bill  for  pro-
lan-'.ition  of  Ca'sar's  command  In  Gaul,
otJ.  ;!43.  Propos«>s  that  Cai'sar  should  be
delh  ored  to  the  OaiUs,  872,  Supports  the
nobles  In  refusing  the  dictati>rship  to
Pumpeius,  48S. An  unsuccessful  candi-

date for  the  oonsnlship.  U.  01.  His  nen-
tnU  poaiUon  in  regard  to  Pompeius  and

OBMr,  M »■ i-'ed  to  gOTem  t>iclly,

8«. Buii  ytoOn1o,ULm

PoMMty  uoe  aiBMctlM  Pom-

peiana,  i.;..  .-..^.mu  at  M.  Brataa  to
him,  198.  His  weoad  mairiago  with  Mar-
cia,  194.  Leada  th«  Ponpelaa  turoe*  from
Dvrrachiam  to  CoreyrK,  tSO.  Bare*  Cie»-
ro^s  life,  261.  UnltM  himMlf  with  Cn.
PomiH'iua  the  T0(uis«r,  and  rroww  oT«r
to  Africa.  888.  Marciw*  aeroM  the  LrMan
deMirt,  iM.  Oeouplea  UtfeiL  m-aSi,
EndMTOorc  to  Mittnat<  tba  Bomana  In
Utiea  to  defenee,  »t.  CommlU  aateide,
899.  Jadgmeat  of  th«  aacieBU  apoB  this
act,80a

Cato,  Mareua,  ton  otlL  Fvntaa,  Ua  d«Ul
at  Philippi,  ill.  l«a

Catullinus.  Sextidiua,  choacn  conaol  In  tba
room  of  Sejauus,  v.  281.

Catullus,  Valerlua,  hi*  eplgranu  oa  CaMr,
il.  862,  889.

Catulus,  Q.  Lutatioa,  his  charaeter,  L  M,
Fur  many  year*  pHnctpt  of  the  leiMto,
60,  T8;  ik  858.  ^Mumim  tlM  gnat  o/
extraordinary  powera  to  Pompeius  bv  tha
Gabinian  and  Manillan  la<
Attacks  Ca-sar  for  rfStorii;.
trophies  and  statue  In  the  t.i.
Is  a  candidate  for  the  othcc  ut  I'uiiiitex
Maximus,  offers  to  buy  off  Ca-sar,  but  is
defeated  by  him,  118.  Urges  Cioero  to
ladnde  Cieaar  and  th«  Marian  leadera
among  the  Catillnariaa  oonapiratora,  180L
CaUUna's  letter  to  Catulua,  ISO.  Cteau'a
attempt  to  deprive  Catnlus  uf  the  hoaoor
of  inscribing  nis  name  on  the  Capitol  he
had  restored,  ISO.  Cteaar  defeated,  IML
His  test  at  the  judges  appointed  to  try
Clodlas,  152.  His  death,  17a  acero's
character  uf  him,  170.

Cell!  , ,  d on  Nero's

Cvl!  iians  to,  at  the

time  of  the  Gracchi,  iv.  37.  Laws  for  en-
forclnf  marriage,  88L  Penalties  of  c«U-
bacy,  39.

Cel~  -i  against  Hadrian,  and  pnt

!■  .>id.

Cell  onquest  and  rapid  assimi-

lation to  ilio  Roman  type,  1.  155.  Their
origin!,  212.

Ceuotaphium  Pisanum,  to  the  memory  of
Calus  and  Lucius  Ca  -

Censor,  the  office  o^  r.  ulna,  L

78. Eo<tonitiou  of  •  of  the

ii.  0»J, Sup-

1.

Ce:  -  taken  by  Oc-

tavius.  111.  «-.'T.  « •!  i..irt  oriJaul  taken  by
Augustus,  iv.  73.  Ot  the  people,  in  a.d.
14,  iv.  2s8,  307.  Distinction  between  the
e«n«ut  and  the  pr<^mio,  885t  826.  Ac-
cnrato  Information  poaaessed  by  the  Ro-
mans on  the  sii>itfct  of  nmalation,  829.
.\;  .!e  or  the  population

o  -  of  Claudius,  V.  88«.

Cei  e,  L361.

Cereiui?.  Ituiius,  etimmands  the  6th  le-
gion in  Britain,  vi.  46.  Routed  br  the
Iceni,  46l Cotmuands  a  squadron  of  Ihorse

518

INDEX.

for  the  Flavians,  and  checked  outside
Kome,  86S.  Sent  to  oppose  Civniis  in
Gaul,  403.  Enters  Mo^untlacum,  defeats
the  Treviri,  and  at  Troves  reasons  with
the  mutineers,  405.  His  operations  in  the
country  of  the  Treviri,  407.  Kouts  the
Germans  and  destroys  their  camp,  408.
Defeats  Civilis,  403.  "  His  want  of  vifti-
lance,  409.  Treats  with  Civilis,  410.  His
government  of  Britain,  vii.  70.

Cerialis  conspires  asrainst  Caius,  v.  869.

Certns,  Pliny's  attack  on,  vii.  168.

Cestius  Gallus,  governor  of  Syria,  his  disas-
trous expedition  against  Jerusalem,  vi.
427.

Cethegus,  joins  Catilina's  conspiracy,  i.  116.

Chaerea. See  Cassias.

Chariot  races,  iv.  414.  In  the  time  of  the
emperor  Caius,  v.  300.

Charonitse,  or  Orcini,  origin  of  the  name,
iii.  52.

Chatti,  a  German  tribe,  overcome  by  Ger-
manicus,  and  their  stronghold  destroyed,
V.  81.  Punished  by  Galba,  877.  And  by
Domitian,  vii.  82.

Chauci,  the,  admitted  into  alliance  with
Rome,  Iv.  266.  Punished  by  Corbulo,
V.  377;  VL14.

Cherusci,  a  German  tribe,  submit  to  Ceesar,
Iv.  237.  Their  war  with  the  Marcomanni,
V.  54.  A  king  (Italicus)  given  to  them  by
Claudius,  vi.  13.

Chian  wines,  Iv.  816.

Chorographical  surveys  In  use  at  Eome,
Iv.  825.

Chosroes,  king  of  Parthla,  his  interference
In  the  affairs  of  Armenia,  vii.  298.  His
presents  rejected  by  Trajan,  298.  His
feuds  with  his  vassals,  8(H.  Kscapos  from
Trajan's  lieutenants  into  Media,  806.  Cap-
ture of  his  daughter,  and  of  liis  golden
throne,  806.  Itestoration  of  his  daughter,
8S0.

Ohrostus,  the  sophist,  his  answer  to  Hadrian,
vll.  861.

Christ,  date  of  His  birth,  iv.  847.

Christians ;  first  persecution  of  the  persons
"to  whom  the  vulgar  gave  the  name  of
Christians,"  vL  184.  The  first  Christians
In  Kome,  210.  Toleration  allowed  them
bjr  the  ((ovemment,  218.  Story  of  Pom-
ponla  Om'clna,  215.  Outburst  of  (he  per-
secution In  Komo,  216.  Dillleillty  of
•ocountlng  for  this  supposed  p<-rso('iition
of  the  Christians,  217.  tnirlsttanity  little
noticed  in  Komo  iMiforo,  and  for  some
time  after,  Nero,  219.  Question  as  to  the
persons  desl^cnnted  ('hrlstlans,  220.  Con-
jocturt-  of  Glblton,  221.  Sug^jestlon  of
•nuthcr  vli'w,  221.  (JmiTiil  religious  tol-
eration under  Nero,  228.  Uelleetlons  on
the  depmvod  monilltv  of  the  age,  226,
Christianity  omgenlnf  to  certain  moral
tendencies  of  (he  age,  221).  1'he  Christians
retll*  from  •leruMili'm  shortly  before  the
■iega,4MI.  Hostile  attitude  of  IKunlllan
toward*  Chrintlunlty,  vll.  128.  Alleged
pWMOntton  under  lilin,  127.  Overthrow
of  tlM  Jewish  niid  nueeesniou  of  tlit^  Clirls-
tiaa  dUmtniuttlon,  291.  luijulsKlon  Into
the  tmeU  of  (he  ChrUtlnnH,  UhI.  Allegeil
lof  Neruand  I>i>mltlnn,2s7,  Pliny's

letter  to  Trajan  respecting  the  Christians
in  Bithynia,  288.  Pliny's  proceedings
against  them  there,  289.  His  testimony
to  their  virtues,  291.  Popular  apprehen-
sion of  their  political  intrigues,  292.  Su-
perstitious terrors  of  the  people,  292.
The  martyrdom  of  St.  Ignatius,  293.  De-
velopment of  the  Christian  society,  294.
The  Church,  the  Canon  of  Scripture,  and
Episcopacy,  295.  Final  separation  of  the
Christians  from  the  Jews,  819.  The
Christian  teachers  and  apologists  of  the
second  century  a.d.,  868.  Hadrian's  tol-
eration of  the  Christian  faith,  and  interest
taken  by  him  in  the  dogmatic  teaching  of
the  Christians,  369,  378.  Indulgence  of
Antoninus  Pins  to  them,  405.  Persecution
of  them  under  M.  Aurelius,  488.  Early
martyrs,  489.

Christs,  false,  or  brigands,  in  Judea,  vi.  420.

Oibvra,  state  of,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,
iv.  862.

Cicero,  M.  Tullius,  engaged  on  the  prosecu-
tion of  Verres,  i.  71.  His  services  engaged
in  transferring  a  share  of  the  judicia  to
the  knights,  72.  His  early  career,  75-77.
Impeaches  Verres,  71.  Acts  with  Pom-
peius  and  Crassus,  72.  Defends  Fonteius,
73,  208.  Defends  Kabirius,  lOS.  Eftects
of  foreign  learning  on  his  skill  and  ex-
perience, 97.  Opposes  the  agrarian  law
of  Rullns,  111.  Defends  C.  Calpumius
Piso,  112.  The  Catilinarian  conspiracy,
117-124.  Becomes  consul,  116.  Prevents
the  murder  of  Caesar,  124.  Inclines  to  the
senatorial  onler,  125.  Defends  the  consul
Murena,  138.  Ills  popularity,  141,  150.
Addressed  as  "Father  of  hi's  country,"
141.  .Joins  In  the  outery  against  Clodius,
148.  Crassus'  paneirvric  upon  the  conduct
of  Cicero,  150.  His  speeeh  in  the  Flamin-
lan  Circus,  150.  Makes  an  Iniplaeable
enemy  of  Clodiu.s,  15,S.  His  views  of  the
proposed  agrarian  law  of  the  tribune
Flavins,  101.  Cajoled  by  Pompeius,  166.
Opposes  the  ri'storatlon  of  the  collegia,
178.  Danger  of  his  position,  ISO.  Rejects
Od'Sar's  friendly  overtures,  ISl.  Appeals
to  the  compassion  of  the  people,  182.  And
to  Ponn)elus  and  the  consuls,  188.  Goes
Into  exile,  186.  t'onsldemtions  on  his
banlahment  and  eonllsratlon  of  his  iirop-
ertv,  298-805.  His  uninaiilv  ooinplalnts
In  exile,  8|.%  Exertions  of  Ills  IVIends  In
his  behalf,  815.  High  spirit  of  his  wife
Tert-ntla,  819.  Takes  uj)  his  residence  at
Dyrruchlum,  819.  His  return  to  Rome,
828.  Attacks  Cu'Siir's  law  forthe  divislou
of  lands  In  Canipatiiii,!J;!4.  .Vttaches  him-
self to  the  trliiiuvlra,  385.  His  speeeh
"(/<!  /'roriiiriix  ('(i;iaii//((/v7>i/«,"887. His

K>lllleal  iiositlon  and  mental  resources,
,7,  84a  His  hatred  of  Crassus,  84S.
Attacks  Gabinliis,  85r).  Defends  him,
8.'i7.  Affects  cordiality  towards  Cra.nsus,
857.  Ajiologlzes  for  his  eoniluct  In
Hiipportliig  the  triumvirs,  858.  His
speecii  "  Pro  Afllone,"  489.  His  activity
In  ploa<llng,  II.  52.  His  uttjuiinient  to  the
younger  (  urio,  52.  Elected  auger,  fiil.
Governs  Cilieia.  M-57.  His  military  ex-
ploits and  civil  ndministratlon,  57. Bo-

INDEX.

519

turnB  to  Italy.  79. Claims  a  triumph,  79.
Confers  with"  I'ompoius  on  the  state  of  af-
fairs, 79. Put  in  chartfo  of  the  Canipanian
coast,  b6. His  Interview  with  Pompi-ius
at  Foriniw,  98. Hesitates  between  t  'a-sar
and  I'oiniK'ius,  95. llis  fears  and  melan-
choly,  108. llis interview with  Ca-sar
at  Formiu-,  Iti. Forbidden  to  leave  Italy,
171. llis  scurrility  to  Antonius,  172. Ar-
rives in  the  I'oiripeian  camp,  191. l)is-
hatistUction  of  the  nobles  with  him,  'jt\i6.
Withdraws  from  the  contest,  261. His  life
threatened  l)y  vouns;  Pompeius,  i'tl. Al-
lowed to  establish  hiins«'lf  at  Uruudislum,
277. Well  received  by  Ca-sar,  27S. Con-
ceives the  idea  of  a  complete  code  of  Uwb,
384.  Courts  and  Is  offended  bv  CleoiMtrA,
848. His  speech  -  J'ro  Maredlo,^  841
And  for  Ligariiis,  844. Visited  by  Oaeaar
at  Puteoli,  8(tl. Ills  letter  to  Cieaar  on
the  Invasion  of  Parthia,  8ti3. A  ptirtisan
of  liberal innovation,  his  pure  moralitv,
416. Joins  Urutus  and  thecou.spiralors  in
the  Capitol,  iii.  11. Urges  them  to  as-
sume the  government,  18. .Advocates  the
ratitlcation  of  Cusjir's  acts,  24,  26. Disap-
proves of  the  si)ceeh  of  Brutus,  29. Ap-
peal of  the  false  Marias  to  him.  and  his
Ironical  reply,  48. Ketlrcs  to  Puteoli,  49,
64. His  alarm  at  the  a$rrarlan  law  of  \^
Antonius.  58. His  behaviour  to  DolaWlla,
6,V His  first  Interview  with  (Vtavius,  5S.
llis  efforts  to  form  a  conservative  jMirty,
ft4. His  interview  with  the  libetators  at
Antium,  7(1,  71. Joins  Brutus,  74. HU
melancholy  ant  id  imt  Ions  and  irresolutiou ;
comjjoses  "  his  treatises on "Old  Age,"
"  Frleudbhip,"  "  Glory,"  and  •*  Fate,"  75-
77. Embarks  for  (ireec«%  but  returns  to
Koine,  ^2-M. Delivers  bis  first  Philippic,
8t). llis activity  and spirit,  W. lom-
l)Oses  his  second'  Philippic,  lt.\ His  mis-
tik.ii  i-tiMi  it<-  of  (Vtavius,  97. Composes
In- ■  Ir.  iti-i- i.n -Moral  Duties."  Kb. Kf-
IVri pro.liuid  by  the  publication  of  the
secoiul  Philiiuiic,  99. His  iK>sitiou  in  the
commonwealth,  99. The  third  and  fourth
Philippics,  IIK). Kntbushism  of  the i>eo-
ple,  100. Opposes  netrotiation  with  An-
tonius, 102. Composi's  his  lifth  Philippic,
102. His  glowing  i>anegyric  on  t>ctaviu8,
108. llanmgues  the  people  in  his  sixth
Philippic, 1*U. Is  himself the govern-
ment, UKi. Indignant  at  the  treatment  of
the  senatorian  envoys  by  Antonius,  107.
His  eighth  Philii.pic,  107. Proposes a
monument  to  Sulplcius,  lOS. Causes  the
senate to proclaim l>olabella a public
enemv.  111. His  twelfth  Philippic.  118.
Named  one  of  a  deputation  to  Antonius,
and  accedes,  but  subsequently  recoils,  113.
Replies  of  A  utonius  imd  Cicero's  rejoinder.
115. In  the  consuls'  absence  he  assumes
the  lead  in  the  city,  116. Enthusiasm  of
the  citizens  towards  him,  120. His  four-
teenth and  last  Philippic,  120. Abandons
all  hope  of  t)ctavius,  12S. His  sarcasm  on
Octavius's demand  for the consulship,
130. Abandoned  to  piMScrii)tion  by  Octa-
vius,  189-141. Doomed  to  massacre,  141.
His  proscription  and  flight,  144,  145. His
Tacillatiou,  arrest,  and death,  146, 147.

EeiUetJons  on  his  dMtli  aid  flhaneter,
148-158.

CiPP„>  \|  .i/,.1  of  SI.  Cleero  aad  Terentla,
<,'  V  ioM  to  Brutiu,  ilL  172. In

:.i  !ie  triamrln,  ire.

Ci.  i.roihwof  IL  ToUlot,  his

under  Omw,  L  iM.
II  in Alia,  >IA. Ap-

]>  iier  fur  ptoriaioolaf

I'  tenfronBar-

ci  AeeepU  tk«

|.  in  .^nttln,MT,

;i  ■  rriiory

'  ~  ehar-

lievod  by  Ofce..  'i

In  Adoatuoa.  ;
(Hmuans  wh"
ports  his  br<<'
ment  of  Clllci
but  endea\"
by  calii'
•cribed
to  Uoui'
146, 14(1
Cilicia,govemni
lus  Spiuther,
of,  accepted  »\
M.  t*Ule  of  I
M.  Plac.d  1,
ii.  86.  •
190.  1
AAirs

pell
Cilnli

..r,  275.  Pro-
146k  Keturnt
is  murdered,

.  lot  to  Lentn-
ITcHonsulshlp
I  ie«r(»,  il.
~  period,
Seatlua,
'mOy  iiL
IV.  108.
t  irat«  and
of  AuKustus,  109.  i>efiir«  of  the  inlMblt-
anU  of  the  autonomooa  dlatrteli  of  01IM»
to  be  Iliac,  d  under  the  domiBloacf  Kom^
\  whole abaorted Into  the

1  V,  TiL88.

Cii  s  their  orisla,  L  4& Their

exploits,  45-48. Bopprecaed  b]r  Qm.  Potn-
lus,4& Their  eaptOMorOMar,  Ml
Ii,  the  rojal  hooie  of  Airetlvm,  deeUiM
of  their  ftortunea,  iiL  i\i.
Cimber, L. Tilliua,  joins  the waplfey
agalnat  Osar's  life,  iL  iKSi. Obtehia  the
government  of  Bilhrnia,  UL  XL
Cimbri,  the  origin  and  great  nali^ratioa  ti,  L
19s. Defeat the Kooums  and otcriui.
Ganl,  but  destroyed  at  VereellK,  M1-9IM.
Cincetortx,  chieftain  of  the  TreTlri,  tkyom-
ed  \>j  Cesar,  L  284. Denoonoed  bjr  In-
dutlomarua,  898i.
C^na,  Cneus  Corneliass  conspirea  a^nat
Augustus,  Iv.  223. Pardoned  and  raiaed
to  the  consulship,  'Ht. The  atorjr  exam-
li:etl,  226.
Ciuna,  Cornolins.  hi«  rehabllitatlMl  obtalBcd
by  his  '  ■;«•  Ca-sar,  1.101. lAj*

down  I  insignia,  IiL  1& Pnts

on  his  I  ^  ~.  and  Is  maltreated  by

the  ptiiuuaee.  ZV.
Cinua,  Helvios,  his  insulting  propoaal  re-
specting Ca-sar,  IL  »42. Tom  to  pieeea  at
(  •' ml,  ill.  42.

Ci:  the  Italians  for  the  games  of

V.  414.  Extent  of  the  Circus
Ma  Minus,  iv.  403.  The  clrcns  described.
414.  Chariot  races,  414.  Exhibition  of
wild  beasts,  416.  Ghtdiatorial  combats,
416.  Sentiments  of  antiquity  on  these
bloody  sjiectacles,  416.  The  circus  in  the
time  of  the  emperor  Caius,  v.  294,  300. Of

620

INDEX.

aaudius,  894.  And  of  Nero,  vi.  126.  Who
drives  his  chariot  in  the  Circus  Maximus,
126.  Erection  of  the  Colosseum,  iv.  413;
vii.  86.

Cirta,  capital  of  Numidia,  threatened  by  the
Manretanians,  ii.  292.

Cities,  the  great,  of  the  Roman  empire,  and
Grecian  cities  in  Italy,  iv.  850-865.

Citizenship,  Koman,  iii.  890.  Augustus  af-
fects to  maintain  the  estimation  of,  890.
Number  of  citizens  in  a.  v.  767,  iv.  807.

Civil  law. See  Law.

Clvllis,  CLiudius,  chief  of  the  Batavl,
snatched  from  the  fliry  of  the  legionaries,
vl.  321.  Injured  by  the  Eomans,  886.
Excites  the  Gaulish  states  to  revolt,  888.
Defeats  Mummins  Lupercus  in  the  island
of  the  Batavi,  889.  Beleaguers  the  station
of  Castra  Vetera,  392, 894.  Envoys  to  him
from  Vespasian,  895.  Takes  Aseiburgium
and  attacks  Vocula,  but  retreats  with
heavy  loss,  896.  His  success,  and  antici-
pations of  Gaulish  emancipation,  899.
Communicates  with  the  auxiliaries  in  the
Bomon  camp,  400.  Massacres  the  garrison
of  Vetera,  401.  Seeks  to  form  a  German
kingdom  at  Colonia  Agrippinensi?,  401.
Courts  Veleda,  the  Batavian  prophetesis,
402.  Cooperates  with  Classicus,  406.  His
wife  and  children  in  the  hands  of  the
Bomnns,  408.  Defeated  before  Castra
Vetera,  408.  Crosses  the  Rhine,  and  en-
ters the  territories  of  his  allies,  the  Chauei
and  Frisii,  409.  Treats  with  the  Romans,
410. His  end  nnknown,  411.

Civit)\  Vecchia,  Trajan's  wall  at,  vil.  205.

Clarus,  Erucias,  assists  in  reducing  Soloucia,
vil.  806,  807.

Clarissiml,  the,  described,  vli.  439.

Classes,  distinction  of;  in  the  Roman  em-
pire, iv.  802.  Citizens,  subjects,  and  allies,
802.  Slaves,  802.  Distinctions  of  condi-
tion in  the  provinces,  806.  Independent
communities  gradually  reduced  to  subjec-
tion, 806.  Numbers  of  the  citizens,  807.
Indirect  effect  of  slavery  in  combining  the
various  classes  of  mon  together,  809.  See
Romans.

'Classicus,  a  Gaulish  officer  of  Trevlrl,  enters
into  a  conspiracy  to  llborato  Gaul,  vl,  899.
Takes  ViKMila's  llfi>,  400.  Endeavours  to
corrupt  Ccri'alls,  40(1.

Classiclaniis,  prociinitor.  In  Britain,  com-
plains to  Nero  of  Suetonius  I'nulinus,  who
18  removed  in  consequence,  vl.  50.

Claudia  rulrlini,  founil  guilty  of  adultery
and  mujestaH.  v.  191.

Claudia,  or  Cluudilln,  niarrlod  to  Calus
Ca-Bor  (Caligula),  v.  2)10,  252.  Her  death,
8ft2.

Claudia,  Infiinf  daughter  of  the  emperor
CI  li.loned,  v.  mi9.

Cl.iii  .if  Ciinietacus,  vl.  iW.

tniiN'  : i\  Ian  writers  coiu])iu-od,  vil.

222.

ClaudluK,  Appltis,  <>l»ote<l  ci>nMul,  1. 85:<.  His
uiililuRhing  venality,  !!.')!<,  tlW.  KutruHted
by  the  HeliHte  with  I  lie  priivlnee  of  .Aelialii,
il.  217.  ConMiltH  the  iinteje  lit  Delphi,
Itl7. Illo  delUHlon  IIUil  ileiilh,  2lH.

Ctaii<lluii(TllH'riiiit(!lituilluN  DruniiK),  Ills  lu-
llrinltles  of  health  and  uiidenitiiiidltiK,  v.

248.  His  early  life,  t.  248,  872.  Asso-
ciated by  the  emperor  Cnius  with  himself
in  the  consulship,  290.  His  extraordinary
industry  in  literary  labor,  874,  875.  Cir-
cumstances of  his  accession  to  the  empire,
866.  The  senate  accepts  the  choice  of
the  prmtorians,  368.  His  moderation  and
good  intentions,  369,  370.  Takes  Augus-
tus for  his  model,  377.  His  military  enter-
prises and  conduct  of  foreign  aft'airs  and
of  the  colonies,  378,  379.  Maintains  the
dignity,  and  revises  the  list,  of  the  senate,
88'i  Opens  it  to  provincial  families,  and
especially  to  Gaulish  nobles,  883.  Revises
the  lists  "of  the  knights,  885.  His  censor-
ship, 886.  His  measures  for  the  conser-
vation of  religion,  887.  His  administra-
tion of  justice,  888, 419.  His  public  works,
890.  The  new  haven  at  Ostia,  391.  Drains
Lake  Fucinus,  892.  His  shows  and  pro-
visions for  the  amusement  of  the  people,
893.  His  intemperance,  896.  The  history
of  the  wives  of  the  princeps  becomes  that
of  the  principate  in  his  reign,  896.  His
wives,  898.  Inducnce  of  Messalina,  and
regimen  of  froedmen,  400.  Claudius  their
tool,  406.  He  recalls  the  Bisters  of  Caius
from  exile,  and  banishes  S^eneca,  406.
Conflicting  statements  of  his  weakness
and  good  sense,  409-411.  Vinicianus  and
others  conspire  against  him,  409.  Strange
inconsistency  in  the  accounts  of  his  con-
duct, 411.  His  expedition  to  Britain,  418.
His  son,  surnanied  liritannicns,  418.  His
diligence  in  administering  the  laws,  418.
His  secular  games,  421.  Marriage  of  Mes-
salina with  Silius  perhaps  instigated  by
Claudius  from  a  superstitious  motive, 427.
His  alarm,  4.'i0.  .And  last  meeting  with
Mossalluo,  433.  His  vacillation  atiout  her
sentence,  484.  Intrigues  for  supplying  a
successor  to  Messalina,  *J6.  Claudius
marries  Agrippina,440.  Adopts  Domitius
Nero,  444.  Attacked  by  the  people  in  the
forum,  449.  His  measures  for  promoting
morality  and  good  order,  44i).  ICxtends
the  jirivilegcs  of  the  knights,  -151.  His
remark  on  the  crimes  and  imnishment  of
his  wives,  454.  His  decline,  456.  Poi-
soned by  Agrlpplna,  450.  Kstimuto  of  his
chanicter,  459,  460.  Senecji's  adoration
and  abuse  of  Cluiidius,  460-466.  History
of  his  Invasion  and  conquest  of  southern
Britain,  vl.  8  et  wy.  Cluuilius  by  birth  a
Gaul,  S.  His  libend  jiolicy  towards  tho
Guuls,  0.  His  proscription' of  Druldlsin,
12.  Gives  a  king  to  the  Cheruscans,  18.
I'repares  to  invade  Britain,  20.  Orders
Auliis  I'lautius  to  invade  the  islatiil,  20.
Takes  the  command  In  persftu,  and  defeats
the  Trlnobantes,  24,  25.  Trliiniphs  at
Rome,  25.  Ills  cleineucy  to  t'aractncus,
87.  Ills  funeral  oration"  proiKuineed  by
Nero,  (1ft.  Who  consecrates  a  teniiilo  to
bini,  84.

Clemens,  tho  pretended  Agrlppa  I'osthu-
mus,  his  lulventures,  v.  8H,

Clemens,  Klavlut«,  accused  of  Judalzlng  and
put  to  death,  vli.  126.

Cleopatra,  daughter  of  rtoleiiiieus  Auletes,
liiint  heir  to  the  crown  of  Kgviit  with  her
bi-other  rtoleuneus  XII.,  II.  248. Driven

INDEX.

521

ftom  Alexandria,  244.  Her  quarrels  with
her  brother,  244.  Her  first  interview  with
CcBsar,  25<5.  Kest(»red  to  the  throne  by
bini,  250.  Her  evil  influence  on  Ctesar,
273-275.  Visits  Kotne,  where  she  makes
him  unpopular,  and  offends  Cicero,  Ji41-
848.  Hlt  (lisappoiutuieut  at  the  result  of
Ca'sar's  will,  iii.  38.  Quits Kome, 88.  Her
first  meeting  at  Tarsus  with  Antonius,
who  follows  her  to  Alexandria,  175.  Their
intimacy,  brolien  by  his  marriage  with
Octavia,  renewed,  219.  Her  twins  by  An-
tonius, 220.  Roman  provinces  assigned
by  Aiitonius  to  her  and  her  children,  226.
iter  ambitious  views,  227.  Her  or^es,
228,  229.  At  Samos,  288;  Octavius  de-
clares war  against  her,  288.  Induces  An-
tonius to  decide  the  war  at  sea,  245.  Of-
fends his  orticers,  247.  Counsels  Autonias
to  return  to  Kjjvpt,  250.  Their  flight  Irom
Actium,  252.  lier  severities  to  the  Alex-
andrians anil  to  Artavasdes,  and  prepara-
tions for  escape,  2(50,  261.  Her  plans  dis-
concerted, 2t)l.  Adopts  measures  of  de-
fence, and  negotiates  with  Octaviua,  261.
Her  revelries  and  despair,  262.  Hopes  to
make  an  impression  on  the  heart  of  Oc-
taviiis,  264.  Spreads  a  report  of  her  own
death,  265.  Her  interview  with  the  dving
Antonius,  265.  Talc^en  prisoner  by  l*ro-
cuieius,  266.  Her  interview  with  Oeta-
vius,  and  suicide,  267,  268.  Manner  of
her  death  imciTtain,  270.  Her  elllgy
borne  in  triumph,  270.  The  "  Loves  of
Antony  and  Cleopatra,"  275.  Cleopatra
malces  atlvauces  to  Herod,  which  ho  re-
jects, 807.

Cleopatra  Belene,  daughter  of  M.  Antonius
imd  Cleopatra,  endowed  by  her  father
^vith  the  sovereignty  of  Cvrene,  Ui  824
.Marries  the  younger  Juba,  Iv.  91.

(.'livus  Asyli,  iv.  377.

Clivus  Capitoliuus,  iv.  377.

Clodla,  daughter  of  P.  Clotlius  and  Fulvia,
married  to  Octavius,  iil.  140,  217.  Di-
vorced by  Dctavius,  188,  217.

Clodius,  C,  defeated  by  Spartacus,  I.  60,61.

Clodius,  P.,  his  charge  of  malversation
against  Catilina,  1.  llX  His  early  life  and
character,  145.  His  Intrigue  with  Pom-
peia,  wife  of  Ca'sar,  146.  Profanes  the
mysteries  of  Bona  l)ea,  146-14S.  Failure
of"  the  proceedings  against  him,  151,  152.
He  meditates  vengeance  against  the  no-
bles, Cicero  especially,  158.  Elected  a
tribune  of  the  people,  177.  Clodius's
acts;  repeals  the  .^Eliau  and  FuflaUvlaws,
177-179.  Drives  Cicero  into  exile,  1*4,
298.  Kazes  Cicero's  house  on  the  Pala-
tine, and  plunders  his  Tusculan  villa,
299-8l>2.  His  triumphant  career,  305.
Assigns  pn>vinces  to  Pisa  and  Oabinius,
805.  His  intrigue  for  removing  Cato  from
Rome,  806.  Reaction  against  Clodius,  321.
His  increasing  violence,  321.  Opposed  by
Milo,  822.  Hostile  attitude  of  the  senate
towaxils  him,  826.  Becomes  OHlile,  829.
Renewal  of  his  contests  with  Milo,  880.
Cast  otf  by  Pompeius,  330.  Csmdidate  for
the  pnetorship,  485.  His  encoimter  with
Milo  on  the  Appian  way,  and  death,  436.

Clodius,  Sextus,  his  resolution  denouncing

Cicero,  L  299, 300.  Pnnisbed  fbr  »  bi«Mh
of  tlu)  peace,  ii.  44.  His  recall  from  Iwn-
ishment  pro|>osed  b\'  Autunina,  UL  M,  la
arms  again-t  rs,  178.

Cuidus  Seized  ju  piratM,  L  4T

note, ijtate  '  ..luo  of  Auguatua,

Iv.  360.

Cociteianoa,  put  to  d«ath  by  Doiaitiaa,  TiL

i!i  Tok«,  L

iill "

147

.iweL

(  .Ui,-  uf  tiic  ^•■£>:^^  vaiaal  of

the  name  of  Ttb<^aa  CUih

ColeUesur,  culony  o(  founded  by  Claudiaa,

V.  879.
CmIK  -,  >.  ur  -uilds  of  trades,  in  Borne,  1 177.

i  Clodius,  17<i Diaaolvod  by

C'  l>ineusis(ColoKBe)  founded  by

Agnppiua,'v.  879,  446.  OTiiis  aeeka  to
found  a  German  toverel^ty  at  Colooia,
vL  4tll.

Colonies  of  All.  ( 'landiua,  r.  879 ;

vi.  81. Chui  i:oinaneolonjr  In

ISiit.iiii.  ^!1.  -l.a^ian  in  Lati-

I  of  ihe  de-

2fi.

C  .  piratea,  L

47  /i.-rc.

Colosseum,  erection  and  description  of  thA,
vii.  36-k». Dedication  ot,  by  Titus,  66.

Comet,  accounted  the  precursor  of  Nero'a
fall,  vi.  143.

Couiiti;i,  the,  ;i!...!i..,hed  by  Tiberiua,  T.  IT.
I  -1. Ele«ti«ll  of

Hiwer  of  legiatak
I  .uil  juriadictioB,

lo7.  Traij.-ferred  to  the  seuate,  and  tlkenee
to  the  emperor,  113,  Bestond  for  a  time
by  Caligula,  r.  889.

Cummagene,  k  inborn  Preaent*

ed  by  Augustus  ti>  1  Mithri-

dates,  113. Desin  of;  to  be

under the >';  v, t. &L

Placed  uudi !  >f  a  pro-

pra'tor,  269. i ■  ::  as  to  An-

tiochus,  379.  l>eprived  of  Us  autonomy
by  \espasiaa,  vii.  21.

Commerce,  the.  of  the  Mediterranean,  ir.
313.  Umited  character  of  ancient,  81.7
Security  of  nuu-itime  commerce  under  the
Empire,  8S1.

Commius^  the  Atrebate,  sent  by  Caesar  to
Britain,  i.  879.  Made  prisoner,  but  re-
leased by  the  Britons,  3S1.  His  romajttio
adventures  and  hatred  of  the  Romans,  it
86L  Perflily  of  Labieuus  to  him,  8&,  Sur-
renders himself  to  CafSar  upon  honourable
terms,  3*>.

Communi,  an  Alpine  tribe,  d^eated  by  P.
Silius,  iv.  160.

Comum,  Novum,  colony  at,  founded  by
Ca-sar,  it  62.

Couan  Meriadec;  obtains  a  aorereignty  in
Brittany,  i.  217  note  '.

Concord,  temple  o^  meeting  of  the  senate  in
the,  i.  121.

Concubinage  among  the  Romans,  IL  273.

Condrusi,  a  German  tribe,  join  the  Bel^ie
confederacy,  i.  267. Submit  to  Cas6ar,40aL

522

INDEX.

Conetodonns,  a  Ganlish  chieftain,  attacks
the  Komans,  11. 12.

Congentiatus,  son  of  Bitultus,  prince  of  the
Arvernians,  1. 196.

Consentia  besieged  by  Sextus  Pompeiua,
ill.  182.

Considius  Longus,  C,  holds  Adrnmetnm  for
the  republicans,  IL  290.  Killed  by  the
GKtulians,  802.

CJonsidius,  appointed  to  the  government  of
Cisalpine  Gaul,  ii.  86.

CJonsistorium,  the,  of  the  emperors,  de-
scribed, vii.  4458.

C!on8tltutioni8  principls,  lii.  878.

Consuls,  their  term  of  office  abridged  by
Caesar,  il  825.  Institution  of  the  office  of,
Hi.  344.  The  consul  iniperator  only  in
the  field,  845.  Lays  aside  the  ensigns  of
command  on  entering  the  city,  except
only  in  the  case  of  a  triumph,  845,  846.
The  consulship  imder  the  republic,  856.
The  office  usurped  by  Julius  Ciesar,  858.
Numerous  and  successive  consulships  of
Octavius,  863.  Events  which  led  to  con-
ferring on  Augustus  the  "potestas  con-
sularis,"  865.  Position  of  the  consuls
under  the  empire,  899.  The  appointment
of  the  consuls  by  the  people  aholishcd  by
Tiberius,  v.  17.  State  of  the  consulship
In  the  Flavian  era,  vii  432.

Convictolitans  elected  vergobret  of  the
./Edul,  ii.  19.  Betrays  his  patron  Cajsar,
1121.

Coponius,  C,  commands  a  squadron  of  Rho-
aians  in  the  service  of  Pompeius,  ii.  204.

Coracles,  built  after  the  British  model  by
Cicsar  in  Spain,  Ii.  142.

Corbnlo,  Domitius,  his  successes  over  the
Chauct,  v.  877;  vL  14.  His  campaign  in
Germany,  14.  His  canal  fW)m  the  Maas
to  the  lihlne,  15.  His  campaigns  in  Ar-
menia, 265.  Places  Tigranes  on  the
throne,  26.5.  His  vigorous  measures  In
.Tndea,  424.  Is  formidable  to  Nero,  268
272.  Summoned  bv  Nero  to  Greeci>,  an<l
destroys  htraself,  2f2.

Corcrra,  taken  by  Uctavius  from  the  Anto-
Dlans,  iti.  247.

Cordnha,  Cipsar  at,  tl.  160.

Corclllus  UIl^^8,  I'llny's  account  of  hie  sui-
cide, quoted,  vll.  25ii.

Corflnium,  Domltlutt,  defeated  by  Caesar  at,
II.  104.

Corinth,  condition  of,  at  the  time  of  Angus-
tu^  Iv.  852,  H53.  Nero's  proposed  canal
throuuh  tlu«  lsthmu^  vl.  271.

Com-llcclR  of  the  Mediterranean  and  Boman
trotllc  In  corn,  Iv.  813.  Itojulclngs  in
Eirypt  on  the  arrival  of  the  KgyptUn
com-tloot,  814.

Cornelia,  wife  of  ('irmir,  onlercd  by  Bulla  to
bo  divorwd,  I.  93.  Tln'  commiiMd  dlsro-
Knrdod  by  hrr  liunbiind,  93.  Ilcr  fuuerul
oration  pninoimci-d  bv  t'lrwir,  Kii  ««//<'.

Cornelia,  the  vestal  virgin,  burled  iillve,
vll.  m\

Cornelia,  daughter  of  Sripio,  married  to  Pom-
peius, II.  4T.  Honl  for  Benurlty  to  U'hIhih,
108.  WItneSMJR  the  niunlcr  of  her  hus-
band,  240.

Comineluii,  I*,  prosecutes  Brutus  for  the
murder  of  CoMr,  ill.  138. ('oininuiuU  a

corps  for  Octavius  in  Sicily,  200.  His  gal-
lant retreat  to  Mylw,  200.

Corniflcius,  Q.,  the  younger,  sent  by  Casar
to  hold  lllyricum,  ii.  266.

Comutus,  tutor  of  Persius,  friend  of  the
Senecas,  vi.  233.

Correspondence  of  the  Romans,  collection  of
private,  vii.  249.  The  letters  of  the  younger
Pliny,  250.

Correus,  king  of  the  Bellovaci,  defeated  and
killed,  ii.  86.

Corsica,  under  the  Romans,  i.  83;  iv.  128.
Population  of,  under  the  empire,  340.
Sitles  with  Otho  against  Vitellius,  vi.  881.

Cos,  the  emperor  Claudius  pleads  for  the
boon  of  immunity  to,  v.  453.

Cosconius,  a  senator,  killed  by  Csesar's  mu-
tinous soldiers,  ii  282.

Cotta,  Aurelius,  his  conquests  in  Gaul,  i
117.  Serves  under  C»sar,  264.  Sent  with
Sabinus  to  chastise  the  Menapii,  882.
Attacked  by  the  Ebnrones  under  Ambio-
rix,  392. ICilled  in  an  ambuscade,  393.

Cotta,  entrusted  by  the  senate  with  the  care
of  Sardinia,  ii.  8(5.

Cottius,  king  of  the  Cottlan  Alps,  his  treaty
with  Augustus,  iv.  87,  88.

Cotuatus,  a  chieftain  of  the  Carnutes,  revolts
against  the  liomans,  ii.  12.

Council  of  State  instituted  by  Augustus,  iv.
146.  The  consistorium  or  auditorium,
vii.  489.

Cowav  Stakes,  supposed  origin  of  the  name
of  tlie,  1.  387.

Crassus,  Calpurniu,'?,  lavs  a  plan  for  assassi-
nating Tnijan,  vii.  21!!. Put  to  death,  213.

Crassus,  Otacilius,  in  the  service  of  Pom-
peius, 11.  205.  >Iassacre8  a  detachment  of
Ca'sarians,  205.  An  adherent  of  L.  An-
tonius,  iil.  181.  Conitnands  an  immeoso
armament  of  Antonians,  245.

Crassus,  M.  Liciniua,  appointed  to  continue
the  >var  against  Spartjieus,  1.  51.  Crushes
the  iusurrection,  52.  Ilis  banquet  to  the
citizens,  .v.'.  His  character,  66.  Ills  name
proverbial  as  the  "  richest  of  the  Uonuins,"
o7.  Modes  in  which  ho  made  his  money,
67.  Unites  with  Pompeius  in  transferring
a  share  in  the  judicia  to  the  knights,  72.
Supports  the  Manillan  Bill,  "5, 103.  The
nobles  seek  to  involve  him  In  the  charge
of  conspiring  with  C!ltllinl^  114, 119.  His
spoliation  of  the  temi)lo  of  Jerusalem,  139
note  '^,  HI.  300.  His  panegyric  ui)on  tho
conduct  of  ('Icero,  I.  1.50.  Joins  with
Pompeius  and  Ciesar  In  the  first  triumvi-
rate, 168.  Supports  ('K'sar  in  his  claim
for,  tho  proconsulshlp  of  the  (iauls  and
Illvrlcum,  176.  His  enmity  with  Pom-
peius, but  reconciled  bv  t'a'sar  at  Lucca,
888.  Elected  consul  with  Pompeius,  8)19.
Their  turl)ulent  election,  ;W9.  Bill  of
TrIbonluH  for  giving  the  province  of  Syria
to  (Vassus,  842.  Hatred  of  Crassus  and
(Mcero,  848.  Their  hollow  reeoiu'lllutlou,
848.  Succeeds  (Sabinus  in  (he  goveriiiueut
of  Syria,  858.  Sets  out  for  his  government,
411.  Imprecations  of  Afelus  upon  him  as
he quits Rome, 413, t'rosses the ICu-

Jhrates,  an<l  pilns  some  trltllug  successes,
14. ('■omiiiltH  various  acts  of  sacrilege,
414. Embassy  of  tlie  Parthlans,  and  mu<

INDEX.

623

tual  defiance,  416.  Advice  of  Caselus  and
Artabazes  ri-),'ar<llng  the  conduct  of  the
campalf^i),  417.  Different  routes  open  to
him,  4i7.  Discouragement  of  his  army,
419.  Misled  by  tlie  treacliery  of  Abtfanis,
kiuK  of  Osrhoeue,  422.  (Jeo?raphical  dif-
ficulties of  Crussus's  lino  of  march,  423.
Kngages  the  Parthian  army,4-it.  Death
of  his  son,  424.  Takes  reftige  in  Carrhu',
425.  Abandons  Carrha',  420.  Dispersion
of  his  army,  426.  Btrata^rem  of  f'urenas
to  enf,'af;e  him  in  conference,  in  which  he
Is  murdered.  427.  His  standards  restored
by  the  Parthiaus  to  Aujjrustus,  Iv.  118.
Indignities  olfert^d  to  his  remains,  1.  429.
ISeflectious  on  the  death  of  the  Crasai,
tiither  and  son,  430.

Crassus,  C'alpurnius,  consitires  against  Ner^
va,  and  l>anished.  vii.  167.

Crassus,  P.,  son  of  the  triumvir,  his  mllit*ry
education  under  Ca'sar,  L  264.  Sent  by
him  to  demand  the  suinnisslon  of  the
north-western  tribes  of  tjaul,  2S1.  Com-
mands a  legion  quartered  among  the  Andl,
289.  Deputed  by  Oa-sar  to  prevent  the
Aquitaiiians  from  Joining  tne  (ianlish
Insurgents,  291.  His  campaign  In  Aqui-
tania,  2«A  Kffects  its  reduction,  297.
His  death  in  the  Parthian  war,  425.  The
"Lausus"  of  Koman  History,  430.  His
virtues,  430  note  '■'.

Crastinua,  the  centurion,  his  Bpe«ch  to
Ca-sar  at  Pharsalia,  ii.  232.

Cremona,  given  by  Octavius  to  bis  legion-
arleriL  iii.  177.  Sacked  and  burnt  by  the
Flavians,  vi.  3.'^.

Crerautius  Cord  ite4

by  clients  >'!  kes

his  judges  I  \  ,\  s

himself.  ISi lli-
copies  of  them  pre^
permits  them  to  In

Crete,  rt-duced  by  g. M.i
140. Importance  of  Crt' 1 1
140. Annexed  to  the  (.'\ :
tellus,  Iv.  93.

Criminal  jurisdiction  of  the  people  and  of
the  Senate, v. 107. Ovorriddon  bv tbe
fi.ved  tribunals,  107. Thr  ,
red  from  the  people  to  i
Cognizance  of  charges  lu
lOS. The  senate  under  the iinjiire  tie-
comes  the  chief  court  of  criminal  juris-
diction, 109. Paramount  jurisdiction  of
the  emperor  himself,  109.

Crispinus,  Kufus,  proscribed,  vL  182.  His
death,  162.

Crispus,  Q.,  places  himself  under  the  orders
of  Ca.ssius,  iii.  109.

Crixus,  one  of  the  leaders  in  the  revolt  un-
der Spartacuss  1.  51  not«.

Crowns,  naval,  of  the  Komans,  iM.  218.

Ctesiphon,  city  of,  taken  by  Trajan,  vlL  805.
The  i>alace  of,  burnt  by*  Avidius  Priscos,
455.

Cum«,  battle  between  the  C«esarianB  and
Pompeians  in  the  bay  of,  liL  194.

Cumanua,  procurator  of  .ludea,  rising  of  the
Jews  iu  his  time,  vL421.

Cunobelinus,  king  of  the  Trinobantes,  coin-
age of,  vi.  17.  His  power  in  southern  and
eastern  Britain,  IS.

Cario,  tumWy  oC  IL  Ml

Curio.  C.  Scriboaina,  the  elder,  dtocloeee  to
Pompeius  the  ]riot  tt  Tettlu,  L  VIA.  Al-
lows the  justiee  of  eaaeedtav  the  ricftt  of
citizenship  on  tlie  TruMMuie  Geila,  U.
ISJ.

Curio,  C.  ^criboBioe.  the  yooMer,  iBTee
Ca-sar,  L  124.  lupUcated  In  the  aeeliM-
tion  of  Vettiaa,  174 ;  II.  88.  Cieero'e  Bole-
taken  opinion  it,  ead  ettaehfleeBt  to  hln,
53.  His  chareeter,  (M.  Eleeted  triboaa,
09.  His  chareeter  ead  eoMliiet,TL  Ooee
over  to  Cwear.  TL  Hie  raeeenrea  oa  Ob-
ear's  behall  TS,  Attenpte  to  expel  kfaa
from  the  tenet*,  f  4  Belakee  himeeir  to
Ca«ar  at  BereBae,  T&  le  aeat  bf  Oaar
with  an  offer  of  oompromlie  to  Boaie,  Stt.
Hisaeoond  flMittoCeMur,M,8a  Tikee
the  place  of  LabieBne  In  Oveer'a  eeail-
dence,  and  expels  the  aeBeteriaB  troooe
from  Sardinia  and  SleUr,  191,  1«<.  1&
camiiaign,  defeat,  and  death  In  AMea,
165-167.

Cnrio,  son  of  the  trlbone,  pat  to  death  by
Augustiu,  ill.  8S&

Curiosolitie,  the,  compelled  to  submit  to
till-  Ilomans.  1.  481.

(  <s  unfooaded

'  raciee,  eWnea  eonpnoettded

s  under  the  empire,  UL  Hi.
lip  ot,  among  the  Boooaaa,  vL
tie  ciut  ot,  natunliied  at

200. The
viL121.
Cjmioa,  banishment  of  the,  from  Bome^  tIL

89.
Crpnu,  tta  important  poeltloii,  rU. MtL
sanguinary  outbreak  of  the  Jewe  luider
;i'9.
sanguinary  rerolt  of  the  Jews

pt  of  lAbienna  on,  IL  tm

itee  to  Cato,  98a. GIveB  by

his  danghter  Cleopatni  Se-

)t in,  iii.  226. Description  of  the  Cvren-

aioa  in  the  time  of  Anntstua,  It.  M.  Popu-

lati  m  of  Cyrene  at  Uiis  time,  848. In-

I'tion  of  the  Jews  in  Cyrene,  rik

-  dejirived  of  its  fre«<dom  by  Au-
^'ustus,  ir.  106.  Its  commerce  in  the  time
of  that  emi>eror,  360.

D

ACIAKS,  their  L-

Kome, vii. S6.
Ister  by  Foiitehi?  \
people" as  tl
campaign  a.
cus  and  are  •
Send  an  envo\  to  l
90. Their  first %
Their  wealth  and  i . .

le  acalBSt

yoadtiM

Theeame

Domltian^B

:. Defeat  Fne-

iu!ianna,88,99.

'  for  peace,

ujan,  18L

-'. Their

: '  ' ' "ver  mints, j*j. Iheir  geo-
-ition,  1S2. Their  predatory
.  .  -2. :«ue  for  peace,  deliver  up

tiKir  ;iriii<.  and  send  envovs  to  Pome,
1S7.  Their  second  war  with  Home,  and
defeat,  1S9,  ll»t>.  Dacia  becomes  a  Koman
province,  200.  Monuments  of  its  con-
querors, 200.  Martins  Turbo  placed  in
command  by  Hadrian,  833.

524

INDEX.

Dalmatians,  revolt  of  the,  quelled  by  Tibe-
rius, iv.  187.  Causes  of  a  subsequent
rising  of  the,  246.  Subdued  by  Germani-
cus,  254.  I^umbcr  of  legions  stationed  in
Dalmatia  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  v.  142.

Dancing  amongst  tho'Eom'ans,  i.  84.

Danube,  Koraan  fortresses  on  the  banks  of^
the,  iv.  177.

Deceatse,  a  Lignrian  tribe,  marked  out  for
Roman  vengeance,  i.  195.

Decebalus,  perhaps  the  same  as  Diurpaneus,

•  king  of  the  Dacians,  vii.  87.  Meaning  of
the  title,  87  note  -.  Forms  relations  with
Pacorus  II.,  king  of  Parthia,  297.  Con-
cludes peace  with  Domitian,  89,  90.  His
residence  at  Zermizegethusa,  186.  Kouted
by  Trajan,  186.  Sues  for  peace,  and  forms
an  alliance  with  the  Romans,  187.  Yields
up  his  forts  and  goes  to  Rome,  187.  En-
traps Oassius  Longinus  and  demands
Seace  as  the  price  of  his  liberty,  192.  His
efeat  and  death,  193.  Discovery  of  his
buried  treasure,  194.

Decianus,  Catus,  procurator  in  Britain,  vi
44.

Decidius  Saxa,  commands  a  division  of  the
triumvirs'  forces  in  Macedonia,  iii.  161.
Slain  by  Q.  Labienus  in  Asia  Minor,  191.

Declamation,  habits  o^  of  the  Romans,  iv.
430 ;  vi.  182.  The  schools  of  the  rhetori-
cians, iv.  432.  M.  Annrous  Seneca,  the
rhetorician,  433.  Conventional  rules  for
the  dcclaimers,  484.

Dediticli,  the,  of  the  Roman  provincial
population,  i.  85.

Deiotarus,  king  of  Galatia,  his  reply  to
Crassus,  i.  414.  Cicero  applies  to  him  for
auxiliaries,  il.  56.  Takes  the  side  of  Pom-
pcius  in  the  civil  war,  187.  Accompanies
him  In  his  flight,  242.  Submits  to  Ca-sar
and  brings  aid  to  Calvinus,  265, 272.  Offers
to  assist  the  liberators  under  Cassius,  Hi.
109.

Detoloms,  king  of  Galatia,  son  of  the  fore-

folng,  dezerts  Antonius  for  Octavius,  ili.
19.

Deiotarus  Philadelphns,  king  of  Paphla-
Konia,  favoured  by  Augustus,  iv.41.

Delation,  Delators,  original  Import  of  the
word,  v.  130.  Augustus  institutes  the
ofHce  of  public  informer,  131.  Passion  of
the  Romans  for  accusation,  132.  Delators
enooaraged  by  Tiberius,  186.  Proposal
of  M.  Lepidns  fordiininitthing  the  rewards
of  the  delators,  181.  Tit)orlu8  checks  de-
lation, 182.  Its  progress,  201.  Not  em-
ployed by  Cuius,  804.  Motliod  adopted
by  iho  MMiate  fur  checking  delation,  420.
Domltlan's  onrounigouient  of  delators,
vlL  127.  Chonicter  of  his  delators,  129.
Mummiua  Rvguliis.  the  prince  of  dela-
tors, 180.  The  deiatoni  prosecuted  by
Ncrva,  108.

Delllus,  Q.,  an  Antonlno  oflloer,  goes  over
toOctavins,ill.  i2M.

Delos,  state  oi;  lo  ibo  time  of  Augustas,  iv.
868.

Delphi,  oracle  of,  In  the  time  of  Otcsar,  It.
217. CoiisuUed  \>y  Nero,  vl.  277.

Detuelrlus  IVctMlinan  of  I'Diiipclns,  erects
the  Pompotun  Th«iitre,  I.  3-15.

Demetrloa,  the  Cyulc,  present  iit  the  death

of  Thrasea,  t1.  173.  Banished  by  Vespa-
sian, vii.  32.

Democracy,  general  result  of  the  struggle
between  the  aristocracy  and,  v.  96.  Tbe
balance  trimmed  by  the  tact  of  Augustus,
97.  More  logical  character  of  the  policy
of  Tiberius,  97.

Derceto,  or  Atargatis,  treasures  of  the  tem-
ple of,  seized  by  Crassus,  i.  415  note  '.

Diablintes,  the,  join  a  maritime  confederacy
against  the  Romans,  i.  290.

Diana,  the  Arician,  strange  story  of  the
priesthood  of,  v.  326.

Didius  sent  to  Britain  by  Claudius,  vi.  88.
Retains  without  extending  the  Roman
possessions  in  Britain,  88,  89.

Didius,  C,  sent  by  Cresar  to  the  succour  of
Trebonius  in  Spain,  ii.  806.

Dido,  queen  of  Carthage,  pretended  dis-
covery of  her  treasures,  vi.  154.

Dion  Cassius,  his  estimate  of  the  character
of  Hadrian,  vii.  891.

Dion  Chrysostomus,  his  remarks  on  the
uncertainty  of  Roman  history  from  the
establishment  of  the  empire  quoted,  iv.
57.  His  wanderings,  vii  148.  Account
of  his  history  and  writings,  805.  His
"  Oration  on  the  Alexandrians,"  876.

Dionysius  the  circumnavigatoi',  accompanies
Caius  Ca>sar  to  the  East,  iv.  214.

Diribitorium,  or  Hall  of  Agrippa,  remains
roofless,  vii.  118.

Divico,  the  Helvetian  chieftain,  his  inter-
view with  Cffisar,  i.  248.

Divine  service  among  the  Romans,  cere-
monies of,  vi.  200.

DIvitiacns,  vergobret  of  the  JEdui,  solicits
the  aid  of  Rome,  i.  285.  His  chanieter,
235.  His  intimacy  with  Crosar  and  Cicero
in  Rome,  i.  285.  Successfully  intercedes
with  Caisiu-  for  his  brother  Diimnorix,  250.
Sets  forth  the  oppressions  of  the  Sncvi,
255.  His  usefulness  In  the  hands  of  the
Romans,  266.  Assists  Ca'sar  in  his  second
campaign  in  Gaul,  270.  At  his  interces-
sion Ctt'sar  pardons  the  BcUovaci,  271.
Never  acquires  the  use  of  the  Latin  idiom,
iv.  81.

Dolabella,  Cn.  Cornelius,  Impeached  by
Ciesar  for  malversation  in  his  province  of
Macedonia,  i.  96.

Dolabella,  P.,  son-in-law  of  Cicero,  com-
mands the  Cajsarian  naval  forces  off  Illy-
ricum,  II.  109.  Defeated  by  BIbulus,  170.
His  intrigues  repressed  bv  Antonius,  270.
Itebuked  by  Ca>siir,  278.  "Gratlllea  with  a
command  In  Aft-ica,  806.  Taken  by  C'lesar
with  him  Into  Spain,  847.  Dcatli  of  his
divorced  wife  Tullla,  862.  Said  to  have
conspired  against  Ciesar's  life,  874.  Joins
the  conspirators  after  Ca'Sar's  murder,  ill.
16.  Appi'ws  In  the  senate  with  the  consular
fasces,  20.  Accepted  by  Antonius  as  his
colleague  In  the  consulship,  46.  Applaiul-
ed  by  the  nobles  for  his  zeal  In  suppress-
ing tlie  Cu'sarlan  outbreaks,  54.  The  gov-
ernment of  Syria  obtained  by  Antonius  for
bin),  69,  7H.  "Proceeds  towards  Syria,  94.
Seizes  and  nuu'ders  Trebonius,  110.  I'ro-
clainied  an  enenivof  the  slate.lll.  Driv-
en to  eoniinlt  sufcitle  at  Eaodleea.  128.

Dolabella,  proconsul  of  AlVlea,  pacllles  his

INDEX.

525

prorinc*.  v.  185. JoinB  the  prosecution
ajjruiust  his  kiuKinan  Q,  Varus,  'Ml.

Domains,  the  public,  as  a  source  of  revenue,
iiL  419.

Domitla  J^ptda,  Nero's  aunt,  usually  called
LepiUa,  wife  of  Valerius  MessaU  and
mother  of  Messalina,  has  the  ohart^e  of
Nero  during  his  mother's  banishment ;
her  rivalry  with  Agrippina,  who  makes
Claudius  put  her  to  death,  vL  55.

Domititi,  eouBort  of  Domitian,  her  Intripue
with  the  miuie  Paris,  vii.  110.  Divorced,
but  taken  back,  111.

Domitian,  son  of  VesjMBian,  vi.  84Sb  Takes
refuge  in  the  Capitol,  864,  ;^f.-<.  Titlo  of
Ca'Sar  conferred  on  hiin  '

traders ; lufluence  of  A :
878, 874. Kaised  to  th< ,
Joins  the  forces  in  (iaul,  4' l : : -
IJome,  410. His  vices, > - k ■  .
supplant  his  brother  Till- i -  ..■■'  ■  --  ■  :
education,  and  teui|i<r.  \  ii.  I- >  '- i:  ■ -
Agricola, 77,  7s. 1  <  ,  ;- ;,i; .  \|.  .  t \
against  the  Chatti,  aii.i  ..--uia.  ~  u..  1...1:..
of  (iernianicus, ^a. iitcri-cd  jKri>ciu:il
censor,  88. His  cunti^catiuus,  t>4. His
war  with  the  Dacians,  hW. Hi!<  triumi'h.
90. His triumphal ard.
92,  !)8. Appearance  of  a
98. IJevolt  of  Antoniu-
Domitian's  terror  and  criuui.
character  representative  of  th.
Evidence  against  him,  100. AlK
matiun  of  manners,  102. His  zeai  lur  me
purity  of  the  vestal  Tir^nB,  103. UU  en-
forcement of  the  law  of  adultery,  of  the
Hcantiniau  law,  and  of  the  laws  against
mutilation,  lOtS,  107. His  edicts  against
the  mimes,  astrologers,  and  pliilosophero,
109-112. Assumes  the censorship,  and
Institutes  refuriiKS  118. His  t-dict  resi>eet-
Ing  the  cultivation  of  the  vine,  115. HU
buildings,  117. AsiTiption  of  divine  hon-
ours, 119, 120. Disrespect  to  the  emperor
treated  as  blasphemv,  121. Proscription
of  Jews  and  Christians,  125,  2*>7. Kn-
courages  delators,  12S. Favours  the  army
and  the  i»<)pulace,  181. His  quinquen-
nial contests  in  poetry,  eloquence,  and
music  (Agon  Oapitolinus),  138-135. Takes
Minerva  tVir  his  guardian,  185. Patronizes
men  of letters,  186. His  dissimulation
and  miKKliiiess,  189-148. Accused  of  poi-
soning Agricola,  145. His  proscription  of
nobles,  and  banishment  ot  philosophers,
14fr-14a His  "  reign  of  terror,"  149. His
danger  and  alarm,  150. Omens  previous
to  his  death,  151. Assassinated,  154. In-
dignities heaped  on  his  memory,  lt>2.

Doniitii,  Nen>'s  ancestors,  family  character
of  the,  vi.  52-56.

Domitilla,  Domitian's  niece,  banished  on  a
charge  of  Judaism,  vll.  126.

Domitius,  consul,  his  treachery  to  Bituitua,
i.  196.

Domitius,  L.,  Ahenobarhus,  Implicated  bv
Vettius  In  a  false  charge  of  conspiracy,  L
176.  Put  forwanl  for  the  consulship,  881.
OpiK>se3  the  iirst  triumvirate,  881.  Can-
didate for  the  consulship,  and  defeated,
886,  883.  Elected,  853.  Kebukes  Gabi-
nlus'  publican!  for  e^stortlona,  363. Ap-

pointed Ckmi** wic«e«eor In Further
(iauL,  U. 64. Oceapiett Corlluluui, 102,
108. Besiegred,  suirendera,  and  is  gen-
erously treated  br  Cmv,  104-](M. Hit
ferocity,  lOT,  IIT. IMi»«i«  MaMilk,  18T,
129,141 EfpeM,m. Join*  Pvoipeiiu,
and  U  held  inilA«0ttm»itmamaiig  the
noblei,  IWL AjptaM  to  bi>MM»  Pwttfex
Maximma,  and  yropof  ■>■♦— w  at  death
against  all  aeBaum  wk0  did  Bol  Ma  Faaa-
peiu^n•,»T. OoauMBda  tha  laft  vlK
at  the  battle  oT  Fhanalia,  IMi SWa  in
the  pnranit,  INi,  KML Ula  pnii«  bf  La-
can,m
DomitluB  Af?r.  the  orator,  a  delator,  proaa-
Varaa,  Y.  SOL Hia  ora>
IIUdaatk,41iiM<«>.
>  inaa,  a raiidhlala  lor
ux,  t.  am. Elaalad  eoaaat  ia
moBth  oTtho  jroMi  4il Uaa-
una  toOMar.uTaM. Mala-
Mieaa  vaaamaat  tatha  laaiaa
T9. Joiaa  Aataaiaa  iwrfaat
-.'. Bewaaf I  aaaaal, aad lafcaa
MonlDa,aB&  Abaadoaa  Bei«,
to  AatoBhia,  MflL Bla  1'  *

.s,  sou  or  tba
gloaa  la  Oermaar,  It.
ais,CB.  AbeaeiMrMia,  OHRlaa  .A«t»-
I  ma,  da(ixbt«r  ot  Gatnaakoa,  t. SAl
His  son  N«ro  (m«  Vao). Hla  alataa  Mt
up  in  the  aenata,  tL  Mb

Domitius,  Ca.,  Oorbakk  rrmaiaaili  tta  1»-
gions  in  the  Eaat,  udar  N«l«,  it  ISL

DoriUus,  priaee  or  Oaiatla,talUc  tte  rida  of
Porapelna  in  the  cItII  war.  IL  18T,  188.

Drappea,  a  Gaulish  ehieftain,  attaeka  tba
provlneea,  U.  91.  Shuts  himself  up  ia
UxeUoduanm,  8T.  Compelled  to  anirui-
dartoOMsMT.

Drvidkai,  iareatioa  «t,  daiaMd  bjr  tba
JLjTorj  oT  IMtain,  L  ttl.  Tha  aaactlac-
^lea  ct  tba  wbola  ot  tha  GaUle  tribee,
m  KaaeatiaUr  Oriaatol  ehsraetcr  ot
theDmldi«alsy8tMB,ttl  Kxlstli«BMa-
numeato  at  Brai^sas  ia  Gaol,  tM.  All-
powerftil  aotborttr  of  tha  Draida  aasaag
theCanintea,ILa&  Tba  Dmida  dtaeoan-
tenane«d  br  AngastuBi  tr.  88.  TMr  dla-
content,  8%  Our  aeaBt7  kaowMIca  of
Druldism,  vL  9.  Dlacnat  and  ■waplrtnii
with  which  it  was  refarded  bf  aa  Bo-
mana,  10.  Its  eentraa,  templea,  ritoa,  and
ceremonies.  1"  iv.^.^»....f  v.v  AwHtai^
Tiberius,  an  -  taliaman,
^the  serpei:  at  of  tba
Druids  to  \  ..ti,.!,  of
them  and  of  to-

nius  Paullii.  I.u-

<■■'"  ""  '*'-  I'; ...- „.  .... -mi-

!  >rujd8  In  A.D.  te,  899.

D:  .; .; liter  of  Uermanictts;  mairiea

e  assius  Longlana,  t.  390,  Mb  And  a^aia
to  M.  Lepidua,  800,  Faaatoe  of  hw  broth-
er Calus  for  her,  and  extrsragnnt  grief  at
her  death,  805.

Drusilla,  daughter  of  Herod  Agrlppa,  vi
419.  Married  to  the  prince  of  Emesa,  but
carried  off  by  Felix,  proenrator  of  Jadea,
428.

526

INDEX.

Drusus,  son  of  Germanicus  and  Agrippina,
affection  of  his  cousin  Drusus  for  him,  v.
166.  Commended  by  Tiberius  to  the  sen-
ate, 177.  Lays  himself  open  to  the  mach-
inations of  Sejanus,  203.  Retained  by
Tiberius  at  Caprese,  216.  His  disgrace
obtained  by  Sejanus,  216.  Sent  to  Kome
and  placed  under  arrest,  216.  Order  to
Macro  respecting  him,  22.S.  His  horrible
suflferings  and  death,  236, 237.

Drusus,  a  pretender,  arrested  and  executed,
V.  285.

Dmsus,  younger  son  of  Tiberius  Drusus
and  Livia,  iii.  218  note  •.  His  war  with
the  Khnctians,  Brenni,  and  Genauni,  iv.
160.  His  character,  173.  Administers
the  Gaulish  provinces,  174.  Consecrates
an  altar  to  Augustus  at  Lugdunum,  176.
Invades  Germany  by  sea  and  land,  178.
His  canal  between  the  Khine  and  Lake
rievus  (Zuyder  Zee),  179.  Failure  of  his
first  expedition,  180.  His  second  cam-
paign, ISO.  Erects  the  fort  of  Aliso  on
the  Lippe,  181.  Obtains  an  ovation,  181.
His  third  campaign  and  death,  184.  Mon-
ument to  him  at  Moguntiacum,  185.  His
remains  brought  to  Kome,  186.  Keceived
by  Augustus,  who  pronounces  his  funeral
oration  and  places  his  ashes  in  the  Mau-
soleum Augusti,  186.  His  campaigns  par-
tially unsuccessful,  but  permanent  in
their  results,  186, 187.

Drusus,  Tiberius  Claudius,  youngest  son  of
the  preceding. See  Claudius.

Drusus,  son  of  Tiberius  and  Vipsania,  intro-
duced by  his  father  to  the  citizens  in  the
foruni,  Iv.  236.  l*ronounces  the  funeral
oration  over  the  body  of  Augustus,  v.  15.
Date  of  his  birth  uncertain,  23.  Sent  to
quell  the  meeting  of  the  I'annonian  legions,
19.  Sent  to  Illyricuui,  52.  Lives  in  amity
with  Germanicus,  5:3.  Klfccts  the  ruin  of
Maroboduus,  54.  His  wife  Llvilla  has  two
Bons  at  a  birth,  73.  Meets  the  funeral
procession  of  Germanicus,  73.  His  blunt
demeanour,  78.  Consul  with  \\\a  father
Tiberius,  164.  His  character,  166.  The
tribunltlan  power  conferred  on  him  in
conlunctlon  with  his  father,  171.  Machi-
nations of  .Sejanus  against  him ;  their  mu-
tual hostility,  175.  I'oisoned  by  Sejanus
and  Llvilla,  I7(>.

Drusus,  son  of  Claudius,  v.  899.

DuccDorll,  duties  of  the.  111.  401.

Dumnorix,  the  ^Kduan,  succeeds  bis  brother
Divitlacus  as  verKobret,  I.  289.  "Won  over
by  the  Helvetian  Org.torlx,  2;t9,  245.  His
life  siMkrol  by  ('ii'i«ir,  250.  Cciuimauds  the
auxllWy  cavalry  under  Ca'sar,  251.  His
restlcM  Intrigues,  268,  !Jn'>.  His  death,
886.

DumB,or  DIurpanous,  rhlif  of  the  Dacians,
perhaps  the  suniu  us  Decebnius,  vll.  87.
iS^  Decobniu*.

DunitiuK,  a  chief  of  the  I'lctones,  holds  the
city  of  lA'inonuni  for  the  iConiani*,  II.  86.

Durocurtorum,  annt'inbly  of  (iaullsh  tribes
coiivt'iii'il  by  Ca-Har  ul,  I.  405.

J)ii  mil  rill  jiiriliiflliiiitii,  1,  107  ni>U\

Dymicliluin,  Clccru'*  renldi-iice  at,  1.  H19.
lti»  liiiiMirliinco  nil  n  pliwo  of  commerce,
820.

EARTHENWARE  of  the  ancients,  Iv.  817.
Earthquake,  destroys  twelve  cities  of
Lesser  Asia,  v.  146.  One  in  Rome  in  A.ir.
800,  449.  Pompeii  partly  destroyed  by
one,  vii.  57.  The  great  earthquake  at  An-
tioch  in  a.d.  115,  299.

Eboracum,  or  York,  importance  of,  at  the
time  of  the  Roman  dominion,  vii.  845.

Eburones,  their  country  overrun  by  the
Cimbri  and  Tentones,  i.  202.  Their  char-
acter in  the  time  of  Ca?sar,  225.  Join  the
confederacy  against  the  Romans,  267.
Destroy  two  Roman  legions,  893.  Attack
Q.  Cicero's  camp,  894.  Routed  by  Cajsar,
896.

"  Eclogues "  of  Tirgil,  remarks  on  the,  iv.
440.

Edcssa,  city  of,  capital  of  the  kingdom  of
Osrhoene,  i.  418.

Edicts  of  Augustus,  iii.  877.  Character  of
the  perpetual  edicts  of  the  praetors,  vii.
426.  And  of  the  provincial  edicts  of  the
prefects,  426.

Education,  system  of,  of  the  Romans,  inde-
pendent ot  priests  or  magistrates,  vi.  180.
Its  extent  and  liberality,  ISO.  High  train-
ing of  public  men  at  Rome  under  the  free
state,  181.  Kot  materially  lower  under
the  empire,  181.  Declamation,  182.  Free-
dom of  writing,  183.  Liberality  of  Vespa-
sian, vii.  28.

Egnatius  Rufus,  charged  with  conspiracy
against  the  life  of  Aiigustus,  iv.  187.

Egyi)t,  claims  of  the  Roman  republic  to  the
Kingdom  of,  i.  105.  Aiiplication  of  Ptole-
nia'us  Auletes,  king  of  Egyj)t,  for  restora-
tion to  his  kingdom,  327.  Competition  of
Roman  nobles  for  the  commission  to  settle
Egyptian  affairs,  828.  Accession  of  Ptole-
ma'us  XII.  and  his  sister  Cleopatra,  11.243.
Their  quarrels,  244.  Ca'sar's  arrival  in
Egypt,  2r)3.  Object  of  his  interference  in
the  alfairs  of  this  country,  254.  The  bat-
tle of  the  Nile,  263.  The  Ptolemies  per-
mitted by  the  Romans  to  reign  in  Egypt,
Hi.  278.  Reduced  by  Octavius  to  the  form
of  a  province  under  his  own  control,  279.
Resources  of  Egypt  under  the  last  ot  the
Ptolemies,  280.  i'ir.st  [lolitical  intercourse
of  the  Romans  with  JCgypt,  iv.  94.  Its
rapid  reduction  bv  them,' 94.  Neglect  of
the  resources  an<f  dil'ences  of  Egypt  by
the  later  Ptoloniios,  Kil.  Improvements
of  the  pnl'i  rl  IVtronius,  102.  Who  defends
the  i>ri)vhu(^  IVoni  an  attack  of  the  Ethio-
pians, 102.  yElius  (iallus  appointed  pre-
fect, 103.  The  corn-fleets  of  Egypt,  815.
Population  of  Egypt  at  the  time  of  Au-
gustus, 842.  Egyptian  rites  in  Romesup-
l)res8e(l  by  Tiberius,  v.  IM;  vl.  202.  Ex-
ploration of  the  country  900  miles  above
Syeno  in  the  reign  of  Nero,  vl.  268.  Severe
measures  against  the  Jews  In  Egypt,  vll.
284.  Jewish  insurrection  in  the  reign  of
Trajan,  809-Ull.

Kleazar,  a  chief  of  tlio  Zealots  In  Jerusalem,
vl.  429.  His  revolutionary  proceedings,
44S.  Occupies  the  Inner  enclosure  of  the
Temple,  449. AssasHlimted,  ■\!>^).

Elements.  Syrian  worship  of  tlie,  attractive
to  the  lower  order  of  women  at  Komo,
vl.  199.

INDEX.

527

Elephants,  use  of,  In  battle  In  Africa,  li.  293.
llonuur  of  riding  an  elephant  in  Kome,
Hi.  iiOO.
Enuia,  wife  ut  Macro,  and  mljJtresa  of  Oalua
Ca-ftiir, V. 2M. Goinoelled  by  Caius  to
destroy  hiTailf,  ;{02,  S&i.
Ennlua,  (J.,  intnxluceb  the  poetry  of  Gre«oe

into  IJoiiie,  ii.  4<>2.
Euuius,  a  kiiixht,  denounced  for  conTertins
an  iuia^e  of  the  euiperor  into  plate  for  hiil
table,  aud  aoquilteil,  v.  I'il.
KphoBUS,  temple  of, iiluinlereil  by  Bcipto^
li.  215. Saved  bv  '  i  a  Moood

Bpollation,  2o3. "1 1  MiatropoUa

of  Lower  Aula,  I V.  1" i  i  iheaacred

precincts  of  the  teuii.U-  at  \  :iriou8  periuda,
106. State  of  Kphesutf  In  the  time  of  Au-
gui>tuii,8t>(>.
Eplcadus,  his  oonsplraey  to  carry  ofif  Agrippta
Posthumus  and  Julia  from  their  phices  of
(■\il.-,  Iv.  '.',"><!.
i;  woman,  active  In

.. Arrested,  14T.
II  ..,  IW.

Ejii'  t.  tiis teaches  at Mcopoliil  In  Kplnu,

vii.  14a.
Epicureanism,  great  principle  of,  H.  8.W. Its
fatal  influence  u|x>ii '  '  Mth

aud  luoi-uls,  401. *  icu-

reaus  in  the  time  yn  ,
Epidumuua, an andeut  uuuk- oi  l»Nrnicuium,

i.  a-.'O.
EiilLT.mw,  T^ttn,  vH.  281.
'I  111  the  Kuxine"  of  Ovid,  r«-

u,  V.  462.
1  us  of  the,  111.  8T1.

I  !i,  establishment  of  the,  IL  MO.

1  1,  the,  i.  IV,  iv.  870,  8T5. Gar-

tiias  on  the.  1&'».

' lOiL De-
leased by
abat«,10B.
..  iiu  ^3»not4K
lis  against  Borne,
ri«  bv  the  Gaols,
•"■V CoallUoa
litea,  Um-
1. Dettet
.  ,N. ...... >.u.,  191. The

rulini;  idea  of  the  Etruscan  institutions,
IL  394. luterual  corruption  of  the  Etruft-
cans,  398.
Euhcmerua,  the  'lepa  'Avaypai^ri  ot,  trans-
lated Into  Latin  by  Enniu^  IL  402.
E-xeilaress  son  of  Pactorus  IL,  king  of  Par-
thia,  placed  on  the  throne  of  Armenia,  tIL
29S. Dethroned  by  his  uncle  Chosroes,
298.
Excise  duties  under  the  empire,  ilL  4dl

FABEKinS,  one  (tf  Cesar's  secretaries,  his
forgeries,  ill.  51.

Fabicius,  C,  ordered  by  C«Mar  to  occupy
the  j>asses  of  the  Pj-renees,  iL  130.  liis
spirited  advance  to  the  valley  of  the
Sicoris,  133. Granted  a  triumph,  85T.

Fabiua  Maximus,  defeats  the  Allobroges  and
Arverni,  1.  196,  Chosen  prineept  of  the
senate,  iii.  353.

Fabius  Masimus,  his  death,  iv.  281

Fabiiu  Sauga,  patron  of  the  Allobrogea,  per-

Eiiiuiiii.iii>.  i:.
fealed  by  I
Augustus  li
Etna,  erupti.'
Elrusi-uus,  til
i.  lUO.  Ills  .
lUO.  IVrli.l
of  the  Etru
briaus,  au.l
of  the  couli

suades  them  to  reveal  Catiliua's  conspi-
racy to  Cicero,  L  210.

Fadus,  Cuspius,  the  lirst  procurator  of  J  udea,
TL420.

Falanius,  a  knixfat,  ebsied  wttk  eoMtraeMT*
tr«Mou,  v.lii.

raaaliM,  CL,  ooreU  tke  tW*  at  Altteas,  iL
UB. JolBS  Sextiu  PompslM.  bat  AmU/

hliii,ULL  _

raanloa,  C,  his  work  on  the  Tktims  of  H«ra,
the  "KidtMOedMwai  siit  BehfsHwiiBi.''
VU.SM,

rannloa,  hk  paper  mMiufcntwy  la  Rmm,
ir.  81<  note

"  Fasti "  or  Orld,  rvHoU  «■  Om.  It.  4ai

Faustina,  Annta,  dMM^ter  of  AmtamlmaM
Plus,  married  to  M-AareUiu,  ril.  IK^M-
UerinfldeU^,4«. awdaath,4Tl

Faustina,  AuOa  OiOerla,  wlto  oT  Ataato—
IMus,  ril.  SML  Her  Ueaatloae  elMnelw,
409. Her  eadowmeato  tat  atpbaas,  4ML

Faustos  Balls,  son  oT  tko  dletetor;  Ma*
Cato  at  Patna,  U.  iai  Slaia  la  JMut,
808, 80S.

FaTonina,  C  leads  tha  oUcsrehr  aRalaat
Onaar,  L  842.  Joiaa  tha  eaaaidraUifa  in
the  Ckpitol,  UL  li.

nroBloa,  M.,  "CMo'a  shadow,*  L  lAL  Op-
poses the  pvatoaaatiiia  of  CMai*a  earn*
mand,  84&  fVimmaads  a  dataehiaeat  at
the  Pompeiaa  armjr  la  Ms^iedonta,  U.  UC
His  remark  oa  the  protnetioa  of  the  war,
225.  Aeeompaaiea  Pompeiaa  In  his  dlght,
Mi. Joins thaJ^eraUm, iU. la, TO.

Favorinus,  the  fhatorieiaa,  aad  the  eaaparor
Hadrian,  stMT  o£  TtL  84IIL

Felix,  broker  of  Fallaa,  proeoiator  of  Jadea,
v.  451 ;  tL  90C  not*  *  4:Ul,  4M.  Compara-
tive tiaaqnilll^  of  the  eoontrx  dorins  hla
govennaeat,  4». His  eareer,  4S1

raataa  BaAM,  pnatofiaa  Drafeet,  tL  U&  ▲
Mead  of  An^HdaaX  &  IWkaspaitia
Inao'a  eoB^faaer,  1481  Hia  trwehsry  aad
eoiideBiation,  lA.

FeatlTala,  Mered,  admlnlatiadaa  of  tha,  tU.
STL

FestaiL  Poialaa,  hla  goTsm—at  of  Jadsa,

ndoBK,  lUl  of  aa  ampUthaatia  at,  t.  ML

Finaaoeo of  Borne, iiL41T.  Ot^aetaofpab-
Ue  expendltnre  ander  the  ooauaoavaalth,
41T.  And  under  tlie  emj^ra,  41T.  Soaieea
of  revenue,  410-42a  Taxea,  4M.  Tha
public  a^rarium  and  the  emperor^  flaeaa,
425,

Fires  in  aneleat  Boom,  It.  40T;  tL  IM.
Great  Are  on  the  Oslian  hULT.«)L  Tho
Great  Fire  In  the  reign  of  Kero,  vL  1S8-
137.  The  flie  In  the  reign  of  TUna,  tIL
50.

Flrmuss  Plotios,  cboeen  prefbet  of  the  prw-
torians,  viL  Sli.  His  proposal  to  Otbo,
88&

Fi.i.'iw  ,.f  rh,i  emperor,  and  the  public  Kra-

enoe  derired  from,  iii  428.
Ms^  Koman  Gotemor  at  Alex-
Jews,  and  eaosea  a  riot,
-loe,  811.
._  ,  .is  war*  against  the  Baljrl,

auiu

V.  31
Flaccui,

L196,
Flaocus,  yerria^  his  school  in  Borne,  rL  9&

628

INDEX.

Flaminian  Circus,  speeches  of  Pompeius,  1
Crassus,  and  Cicero  delivered  in  the,  i.
150.
Flaminian  Way,  li.  100 ;  Iv.  886.
Flaminius  wounded  by  the  Ligurians,  1. 195.
Flavian  or  Antonine  period  of  Eoman  his-
tory, character  of  the,  vii.  T. Moral  aspect
of  the  Flavian  reaction,  220. Effect  of  this
reaction  on  the  tone  of  Koman  literature,
222.
Flavins,  the  renegade  brother  of  Arminius,
y.  88. Their  parlev  across  the  Weser,  88.
His  son  Italicus  ma'de  king  of  the  Cherusci,
vL13.
Flavins  put  to  death  by  Bomitian,  for  his
Judaism  or  Christianity,  his  sons  educated
by  Quintilian,  vii.  126.
Flavins,  the  tribune,  his  agrarian  bill,  i.  160.
Throws  the  consul  Metellus  into  prison,
162.
Flavus  Snbrius,  claims  the  honour  of  assas-
sinating Nero,  vi.  146.
Flevus,  Lake  (Zuyder  Zee),  canal  of  Drusus

from,  to  the  Rhine,  iv.  179.
Florus, Gessius, appointed  procurator of
Judea, vi.  425. Sends  to  Jerusalem a
force  which  capitulates  and  is  massacred,
426. The  governor  of  Syria,  Cestius  Cal-
lus, defeated  before  the  city,  426. Death
of  Florus  in  consequence,  42T.
Florus, Julius,  the  Gaul, heads  a  revolt
against  the  Romans,  v.  107. Defeated,  ho
falls  upon  his  sword,  168.
Fonteius, proconsul in Transalpine; de-
fended by  Cicero  against  the  complaints  of
the  Gauls,  i.  78. Impeached  for  malver-
sation, and  defended  by  Cicero,  208.
Fonteius  Capito.  commander  of  Lower  Ger-
manv,  claims  the empire,  vi. 266. His
death,  295.
Fonteius  Agrlppa  expeU  the  Dacians  from

Masla,  vH.  86.
Foreigners,  antipathy  of  the  Romans  to,  i.  19.
Forests,  revenue  derived  from,  ill.  428.
Fortresses  of  the  Romans  in  the  provinces,

Til.  44.'5.
Forum  Boarium  described,  iv.  884.
Forum  (iallorum,  battle  between  the  Re-
publicans and  Antonians  at,  ilL  117.
Forum  Hudriani,  colony  of.  founded,  vll.  843.
Fornm  Julii,  foimdutlon  of  the,  II.  68.  Dedi-
cation of  liif.  818.
Forum  Jnlli,  jiinctionof  the  forces  of  An-

tontus  anil  Lepidus  at,  111.  126.
Forum  Roiiianiim  described,  iv.  880. Its
ciilarKcment  and decoration, 882. The
forum  of  the  (^n'sars,  883. Assnsainatlon
of  the  Kmporor  ( ialba  In  the,  vl.  811. The
now  forum  of  the  lOmperor  Vespasian,  vll.
27. The  eqiieslrlan  culoBSUB  oiDomltlau
In  the  forum,  91.
F'Tum,  the  Ulplau,  account  of  the,  vll  201.
Franchise,  Ijilln. <SV«  Latin  Kranchlso.
Fr<(!(lnifn,  wealth  of.  under  the  republic,  Iv.
158. Keiflinen  of the freedinc^n tmder
ClandluH,  v.  402. Triumoh  of  the  sena-
tors over  the  freodmen,  vll.  480.
Frlsll, the,  compelled  to  become  nllloi  of
the  Romans  under  DrusK  Iv.  IM,  800.
Join  the  revolt  under  CIvHIh,  vl.  8s7.
Frontinut,  Julius,  hUgovvrumunlofUrltalo,
TlL  70.

Fronto,  Cornelius,  attends  M.  Aurelius  as  an
adviser,  vii.  460.

Fucinus,  Lake,  drained  by  Claudius,  v.  892.
Spectacle  of  a  sea-fight  on  the  lake,  895.

Fulian  law  repealed,  i.  179.

Fulcinius  Trio,  obtrudes  himself  into  the
prosecution  of  Cn.  Piso,  v.  79,  82.  Ac-
cuses Libo  Drusus,  90.

Fulvia,  wife  successively  of  P.  Clodlus,  the
younger  Curio,  and  M.  Antonius,  ii.  847.
Her  daughter  Clodia  married  to  Octavlus,
iii.  141.  Her  fiendish  influence  over  An-
tonius, 155.  Her  ferocity  towards  Cicero's
remains,  148.  Incites  L.  Antonius  to  rise
against  Octavlus,  178.  Flies  to  Athens,
181. Dies  at  Sicyon,  182.

Furius  Camillus. /See  Camillus.

Fuscus,  Cornelius,  pra?torian  prefect,  routed
and  slain  in  the  Dacian  war,  vii.  88, 140.

GABINIUS,  A.,  author  of  the  Lex  Gabinia,
investing  Pompeius  with  the  command
of  the  Mediterranean  coasts,  1.  74,  176.
His  dancing,  '  84.  Elected  consul,  176.
His  scornful  treatment  of  Cicero,  188.
Clodlus  assigns  to  him  the  province  of
Syria.  805,  806.  Detached  from  Clodlus
by  Pompeius,  321.  Attacked  by  Cicero
in  his  speech  de  Provineiis  Consulari-
bns,  337.  Recalled  in  consequence,  887.
His  transactions  in  Syria,  849.  Resolves
to  restore  Ptolemajus  Auletcs  to  tlio
throne  of  Egypt,  849.  Supports  llyrcanus
in  Judea,  an(l  chastises  the  Arabs,  8.50.
Obtains  the  title  of  Imperator,  but  is  re-
fused a  supplication,  850.  Restores  Ptole-
majus  Aulotes,  352 ;  ii.  ISS.  Succeeded
by  Crassus,  853.  Threatened  with  im-
peachment by  L.  Domitius.  853.  Im-
peached and  acquitted,  854-856.  Accused
of  extortion  in  Syria  and  defended  bv
Cicero,  condemned  and  banished,  856.
Returns  to  Rome,  ii.  182.  Joins  Csesar,
266.  His  death  at  Salona,  266.
Gadara,  its  contributions  to  Greek  science,

ill.  294.
Gades  the  temple  of  Ilercnlcs  at,  rifled  by
Varro,  11.  161. Entrusted  to  the  care  of
C.  Oallonius,  161. (Jallonius  driven  out
by  the  citizens,  162. Upon  whom the
Latin  franchise  Is  conferred by  Cicsar,
108.
Galatia,  colonization  of,  1.  188. Taken  by-
Augustus  and  formed  Into  a  province,  iv.
110.
Gael,  the,  contrasted  with  the  Kymry,  1.

217-219.
Gallia  CiMlplna,  I.  82.  Regarded  with  jeal-
ousy by  the  Romans,  82.  The  government
of,  coveted,  85.
Oall)a,  Sorvlus  Snip.,  entrusted  by  the  sen-
ate with  the  command  In  Gaul,  v.  854,
Confirmed  In  Ids  command  by  ClaudiusL
878.  His  lUnilly  and  character;  ofl'ered
the  empire  on  the  diatli  of  Caius,  vl. 27!l.
Prediction  of  Augustus  that  lie  will  lio
emperor, 280.  Deelared  linpirator  by  his
Boldlers,  281.  Aceiptod  by  the  senate,
898.  Ili»  severltv  and  unpojiularlty  on
cnterlne  Rome,  205.  Assumes  the  consul-
ship, 800. Adopts  PiBo  as  hli  oollcoguu,

INDEX.

529

298. Rf'fuscs  his  soldiers  a  donative.  801.

Otteiuls  tiic-  Jtoiimiis  liv  K|»:iriii;.'  Ti^'iUinuu,

iUyi. His  parsiiiioiiy.  "ill-'. (  Hi;)  coiisnlre*

ajrainst  him,  ;iO<).  \h  ~  solalers,

307. His  irrcsolui]  :j<»ft-«10.

His  chanietiT  as  a  i  m.!  Koman

^..!.lil•l■,  312. Founds  tli.-  cilony  of  Au-

Lii-i.i  iVevirorutii  on  the  Moselle,  837.

;.!t  1 -^.Tvliis,  a  Ca-sarean  officer  In  Gaul,

i itnpai^n  in  the  V&Iais,  i.  284. TakM

I' liirus,  capital  of  the  VewigTl,  887. HU

:iiid  retreat  inlo  the  prorinee,  889.

M,  killed  by  Cajsar'*  mutinoiu

I  Vltellius,  left  with  her  ehll-
.: :.( Inline,  vi.  330,  810  no/«  I. Her
in..  ;.  nillon  in  iirosmrity,  348.
.a!,  n  iiiuM,  Ron  of  I'lbo  Lieintanug,  put  to
•i  ' M  itianus.  vl.  87(1.

:  litis,  consul  at  the  death  of

spa--i,iii  111  tiiiiiiio.  -ij:!

1  He  ueienee

of  the  country  entrusted to  JoMphlU,
130.
C.illioM.  Junius  (the  Gallio  of  AcU  xrill.

1-'),  vi.  162  iiote  I.
li  illoiilns.  <•..  entrusted  by  Yarro  with  the
■' ' -.  ii.  161.

Ilia  expedition  against  the
'.•7-101. Apiwlnted  by  Au-

L'  --.^  i  I, .  .t  .if  r.'vrt.  lOi.

(laiiii-. A-iiii'i-. Ill  !k 1 by Aniaatas

:ii ,'  Uir  r. .in;..  ::!,.!■  ;'or  empire, T.  10.

M  .ni>-s  \  ipsaiii-.i,  tbe  divorved  wife  of
'I'll.'  rius ;  his  long  Imprlbonuient,  and  ex-
.r,iii,,n,  217.

'  ■ •• ^. ,5«<«  Cestlus.

IS  refuses  to  admit  Antonioa

I  urn,  iiL  263. Appointed  by

wii.iMu:^ lo the  government  of Egypt,

27t). Jeulousy  of  Auguhtus  of  him,  hiB

literary  character,  disgrace,  and  suicide,

I  HerenniuB, sent by Ilprdeoniua

-t  the  revolt<Hl  legions  and  beaten,

^ ..  ..;U. Beaten  by  his  soldiers,  898. KUl-

iwl  by  them,  8aa

lUus^  Nonius,  legatus  in  the  Spanish  war,

i  V.  62. Defeats  the  Trevirl,  70.

lUus,  Publius,  interdicted  fire  and  water

by  Nero,  vi.  l.V.».
. lines  of  chance,  Augustus's  fondneas  for,

iv.  228.
■  lines,  quinquennial,  of  Neapolls,  lv.868.
I imcs  ot'The  circus. See  tlrcus.
1. .:;.'.- --assinates  Achillas  the  Egyp-

ii 1  il, ii. 260. His tyranny In

AUx.ai.lii.i.  .>&>.
tianiens  ol  Mieeenas,  on  theEsqnilinc  UlU,

iv.  lOa The  i.wdens  of  Rome,  109.
(.iauls,  riimotirs  of  their  commotions  in  B.C.

60,  i.  162.  Their  early  conquests  in  Europe

and  Asia.  Is7. Their  coalition  with  the

Italians,  190. Defeated  at  Sentinum,  191.

Coalesce  with  Hannibal,  192. Cisalpine

tiatil  i-ednced  to  a  province  of  Rome,  192.

Destroy  Placentia,  under  Haiidlcar,  192.

Transalpine  Gaul  forme<l  into  a  province,

196. Overrun  by  the  Cimbri  and  Teu-

TOL.  vn. — 34

toDM,  Ml.  Oppwiad  bf  the  Bomaaa,
the  TruiaalpliiM  aide  with  the  MariaM,
tor.  TbeeiMMiiieatorGMtladlatlBetepi-
■ode  in  Bomaa  hiatory,  811.  SooroM  of
Its  ethnolonr,  and  qiwdniple  dtrMoa  of
iUrseea,818.  OriKin  of  the  UmUs  Brepw,
813.  Nation*  forming  the  n«at«oaMM»-
tlon  of  the  Galli.  211.  Th*lr  4lT«riMi  M*
the  Gael  and  K  vn:rr,  phr8lo)of1aU|y  tto*
ttBgnlaked,  2:  mana  «r

vAUkMmcti  r«tt(i«u

Mam,  W.  '  y  bi>«

tntod  is  the  le  Brigle

tr1bea.88T. K  >>e  OmIs

and  Oeimai: -  iil  chai'

aeteraii'  .  &a

to  pa\  ■  c-

toiy  o  to

C»«ar  A

Delhi  I  he

state  •  '  .'u,

i.aredia
.: Oidl-
•loGsnl,
z-M. ~  Oeaar't

ftKITth.  ritoTdi*-

•ir««ti'...  It  QBder

ladMiooiaru-  ' the

Mmnanittii  lo-

— ■«■  ftToi.i  9.

Vealth  eft  the  tiams. ill, riBiter  luem-

•elvea  with  rerlTed  hope*  of  raettvtftaf
their  independeiieei,  IL.  fttA  dlatn^
uieeii,  11-uL  Their  teimatlem  tt  am  n.-
twilTe  vrnttimaty  uder  XanlatatmU,
IS.  Ohufe  thair  atam  at  watftra,  ami
dactrortkdrtovBi^ll^JT.  AreMteM.
».  llMlr  eunp  at  Alaata  hnkoi  m,  t^
ML  Pwthw  d&aitMMMi, aii.  riMap*-'
dAeatloB  et  GmI,  aad  r«««lto  at  Cmam*a
0«lUewar,a«.  Pletww  Jhwi  th«  aaciMt
writan  ot  tha  atato  ta  whkh  Oaid  waa

redaeed,  n._  Cman^  eamnmataaj  trcat-
aaatimeaU  im  Gaol,  114.  FaOci

meat  oT  tha  Ga«la,M

obuined  b]r  OMar  ftir  tha  Ttammaima
6aaIa,188L  Aftdra  of  Qanl  after  t£a  fl^
departure  of  O^ar,  It.  «. Faelteattaa

of  the  *  ••" -■  ^  the  Treiiri,  and  tk»

Moriii  '  irah  treatsMBt  of  tha

Gauls  iuniTirate,  Tl. FoUnr

of  Au^......c  ...  ...V  ornitlsatloB  afGaal,

72.  Oi]gauirauon  ot  the  ptorhMia  Bar-
bonensia,  78.  The  proTiaela  LacdaaaB-
sis,  7Si.  Extent  to  which  atiKroTfnuwt
was  accorded  to  the  GaaUaa  atatea,  TC
Functions  of  their  popular  aaaembUea,  79.
Political  importance  of  tha  miUtarx  roada,
79.  Progreea  of  KooMa  ctrUtaatloa  ia
Gaul,  sa.  The  Drvida  dlaeooBteBaaead
by  Augustus,  S3.  latrodiietieo  of  the
Koman  polrthelam,  M.  Woraliip  of  Au-
gustus in  Gaal,  M.  DiaeoateBt  of  the
Druids,  85.  Operationa  for  securing  the
passes  of  the  Alpa,  S7.  The  Gauls  in-
duced by  Dnisna  to  erect  an  altar  to  Aa-
sri^tn-.  i'l.i  i:,)nie  nr  I  ii!?dunum.  iv.  175.
'n  and  beyond
in  Gaul  in  a.i>u,

1.. .... . -  .iius.169. SUU

of  Gaul  at  the  elo«e  Jl'  iIm  reign  of  Tibe-
rius, 2(^ The  eaicer  of  honours  opened

630

INDEX.

to  the  Gauls  by  Claudius,  384 ;  vi.  9.  Dis-
affection spread  among  the  Gaulish  states
by  Civilis,  367.  Triumphant  anticipations
of  the  revolted  Gauls,  399.  Fresh  forces
directed  upon  Gaul  by  Mucianus  and  Do-
mitian,  403.  Neglect  of  the  Gauls  to  de-
fend the  entrance  to  their  coimtry,  404.
Beasoned  with  by  Cerealis,  406.  Extinc-
tion of  the  national  spirit  among  them,
413.  Journey  of  Hadrian  into  Gaul,  vii.
843,

Gellius,  consul,  defeated  by  Spartacus,  i.  51.
Deposed  from  his  command,  51.

Gemara,  the,  .estimation  in  ■which  it  was
held  in  the  Jewish  schools,  vii.  283.

Genabum,  massacre  of  the  Bomans  by  the
Gauls  at,  ii.  12.  Taken  by'  Caisar  and
abandoned  to  fire  and  sword,  16.

Qenauni,  the,  defeated  by  Drusus,  iv.  160.

Geneva,  the  frontier  town  of  the  Allobroges,
L,  241.

"  Georgics  "  of  Virgil,  iv.  440.  Their  moral
grandeur,  441.

Gergovia,  menaced  by  Vercingetorix,  ii.  15.
Cwsar  defeated  at,  23.

Germanicus,  sou  of  Drusus,  adopted  into
the  Julian  familv,  iv.  221,  His  games  in
honour  of  his  father,  250.  Entrusted  with
the  command  of  the  new  levies  sent  into
Pannonia,  251.  His  high  promise  and
tlrst  successes,  254.  His  complete  subiu-
gation  of  the  rebels  in  the  province  be-
tween the  Adriatic  and  the  Danube,  265.
Marries  Agrippina.  granddaughter  of  Au-

fustus,  256,  279.  Honours  granted  to  liim
y  Augustus,  265.  In  the  camp  of  his
undo  Tiberius,  in  Germany,  277.  Be-
comes consul,  278.  Birth  of  Ills  son  Caius,
279. Bccommended  by  Augustus  to  tlie

£rotection  of  the  senate,  279.  His  popu-
irltv,  2S2.  Suppresses  a  mutiny  of  the
legions  on  tlie  Bhino,  v.  21,  22.  Sketch  of
his  character,  23.  Jealousy  of  Tiberius  of
the  popularity  of  Germanicus,  26.  Ger-
manicus leads  the  legions  across  the
Bhlne,  80.  His  operations  in  a.d.  15,  81.
The  title  of  Imperator  conferred  on  liim,
82.  Bevisits  the  scene  of  the  slaughter  of
Vorus,  82.  Attacks  Arminius  In  an  un-
decided engagement,  84.  His  misfortune
on  bis  return  by  sea,  8.5.  Murmurs  of  the
emperor  at  the  slender  results  of  the  Ger-
man cjimpaigns,  86.  Third  campaign  of
Oennanlcus  in  a.d.  16,  87.  Confi-onts  the
Ocrman  forces  on  the  Wesor,  88.  (Jains  a
great  vh'tory  over  them,  40.  Beturns
wain  unprosperous,  4.').  Berovers  the
Variun  eagles,  -14.  Beealled  by  the  em-
peror to  BoMie,  47.  His  triumph,  48.
Bent  on  a  mlsHlon  to  the  Kast,  50.  His
tnvoU  In  the  Kant,  57.  Insolence  of  the
new  proconsul  of  Syria,  Vn.  ('alpurnlus
Pieo,  to  hini,  (lit.  (icrnianleus  crowns
Zeno  klngof  Anncniu.  flii.  VIhIIs  Kgypt,
64.  DIspicuAure  of  his  uncle  Tiberius,  05.
ButuniK  to  Syria,  0<l.  His  regulations
and  aliiMtlntmentM  overruled  In  his  ab-
fencii  liy  1'Iho,  06.  HIn  lllnens, 66.  ('liarges
I'Uo  and  lils  wlf'i  I'lauclna  with  liavlug

SolHonud hliM,  07. Ills duiitli,  07. 1{«-
oxlon* on hlH chumcler, <H Kondlv
Oom|>arud  to  Aluxaador the Ureal, (ii).

Suspicions  of  his  having  been  poisoned,
69.  Indecent  exultation  of  Piso  at  his
death,  70.  Sympathy  of  the  Bomans  for
him,  72,  Demonstrations  of  grief  on  his
death,  78.  Arrival  of  his  remains  in  Bome,
73.  Funeral  honours  paid  them  by  the
people,  74.  Beserved  demeanour  of  Tibe-
rius and  Livia  on  the  occasion,  74  Fate
of  his  family,  214.
Germany,  invaded  by  Drusus,  iv.  178.  Fail-
ure of  his  first  campaign,  180.  His  sec-
ond expedition,  181.  Campaigns  of  Tibe-
rius, 189,  237-240.  Expeditions  of  Domi-
tius,  and  of  Vinicius,  237.  Hesitation  of
Augustus  in  the  prosecution  of  the  con-
quest of  Germany,  241.  Final  subjugation
of  Germany  to  the  Eoman  yoke,  266.
Fancied  security  of  the  Boman  adminis-
tration in  Germany,  267.  Varus  appointed
to  the  command  of  the  legions  in  Ger-
many, 269.  Bloodless  campaign  of  Tibe-
rius in  A.D.  11,  277.  Political  characteris-
tics of  the  people  of  Germany,  295.  The
Bhine  crossed  by  Germanicus",  v.  30.  His
operations  in  a.d.  15,  31. And  in  a.d.  16,

87.  The  Germans,  under  Arminius,  de-
feated in  a  great  battle,  40.  Their  resist-
ance gradually  crumbles  away,  264  Meet-
ing of  the  legions  in  Upper  (iermany,  vi.
298.  Bevolt  of  the  Germans  under  Civilis,
885,  et  seq  Attitude  of  the  German  tribes
towards  Borne  at  the  commencement  of
the  reign  of  Domitian,  vii.  80.  Journey
of  Hadrian  into  Germany,  343.  iSee  aho
Teutones.

Gteta>,  their  capacity  for  civilization ;  of  cog-
nate origin  with  the  Daciaus,  vii.  182.

Glabrio,  Aolllus,  lately  consul,  accused  of
lighting  with  wild  beasts,  viL  126,  174.
Exiled,  126.

Gladiators  of  Batiatus,  i  50.-  Their  revolt
imder  Spartacus,  50.  Their  defeat,  and
death  of  their  leader,  52.  Ca'sar's  band  at
Capua  broken  up  by  the  senate,  ii.  101.
Oii'sar's  exliibition  of  gladiatorial  shows,
812.  Bloodiness  of  Caius's  gladiatorial
shows,  V.  300.  Those  of  Claiulius,  894
Outbreak  of  gladiators  at  Prioneste,vi.l43.

Gold,  uses  of,  amongst  the  Greeks  and  Bo-
mans, iv.  817.

Golden  house  of  Nero,  iv.  185.  The  greater
iiart  demolished  by  Vespasian,  vlL 28,

88,  267.

Gomphl,  city  of,  sacked  by  Ca<8ar,  11.  224.
Government,  the  imperial,  formed  by  the

combination  of  several  distinct  republican

prerogatives,  iii.  848. Their  eliaracter  and

nmctions,  844,  et  seq. Alliance  of  i>liilos-

ophy  with  government  at  Borne,  vi.  188.
Governments  of  the  ancients: — 1.  Parthla

and  the  East: the  si>lrit  of  monarchical

rule,  Iv.  295. 2.  Gennany  and  the  North;

the spirit of i)ersoiial liberty,  295. 8.

Greece  and  Bome  in  the  West;'  the  spirit

of  iiiuiilelpiil  government,  296.
Gracelil,  agrarian  laws  of  the,  1.  26.
Oraeelius, Scmm'oulus, panunour of the

elder  Julia,  slain by  order  of  Tiberius,

V.  29.
Gra'clnus  Laco,  captain  of  the  urban  police,

asHlsts  Macro  in  tlio  arrest  of  Sejanus,  v.

224-220.

INDEX.

531

>  le  of  the,  between  A^ooIa

.  vlL  75.
i  IS.  iirn-tor  of  liithvnia,  ac-

.ll~ 111  ijl.  ii.-.,' in lllc  ;i.\U.  it

iil»y. J)iMiivaii(lfallof  tb.  '  '11,

an I'atal iurtiienot! of ■  !iy

of  thi' (irtfks  upon  I '  '.h

and  iiioials  of  thi-  i'  -

Hiial  ittVctsof  Gn-.l.  ;  d

to  a  sniull  cluHS,  41ti. liil!  kS

on Roman  literature,  417  "f

the  llelli-nlc  L-lcmeut  amon.  , .la-

tlon  of  I'aU'stini-,  IIL  8W.  (irerk  ooloni-
zution  in  I'aU-stine,  898.  Genenl  dif-
fusion of  tb«  (in-elc  UnroAge  In  Western
Asia,  21)4.  Influence  oT  Greek  civilisation
upon  Jewish  Ideaa,  205.  Political  oharac-
teristies  of  Greece,  ir.  99<L  Uses  of  gold
and  silver  in  Greeo;,  81T.  State  of  the
cities  of  Greece  under  Auifustua,  SdO,
et  neq.  The  freedom  of  Grecfc  [irorlalined
by  Nero,  vL  270. Ills  pro i  iijj

t^rouKh the Isthmus oi  71.

PlinKiorR  Greece  of  her  uioi,  -.it,

J7' \  J  .  ■  1  leduced  to  a  pro\  nice  tjy  >  e»-

I  its  prevalence  in  the  east-

re,  and  it«  gen-

in  eonneetioii

\  II.  '.ioii.

s,  or  colleges,  in  Boom,  re-
Hliua,  i.  im Tr^an'i  Jeal-
ousy ui  guilds  or  trade  comblnationa,  tU.
213."

HADRIANUS  AFER,  father  of  the  em-
peror Hadrian,  vii.  823.
lla(lruinu!<, l^iblius  J:;iiua,  his birth  and
! " "'  ii.  821. t^noptical  view  of
11  with  Tr^Jaa,  US  iMfai.
i.  11  and  accompllMioiMita,  MB.

i.i~i>, iiuui-f  'I'rajn!:"  ■ -—to,  to  ih»

consulship,  22^. M.  i,daBfk-

t.T  of  Matiaia,  82(1. .  ..signaud

' •  • -1 iinplre,  o.i. i.iiiuMurs  aboat
a  at  the  death  of  I'nOuL.  888.
i:  1 to  have  lieen  adopted  by

iiijjii  im  ills  death  '  ■ '  ■■•"'  Conflrma-
tlon  of  his  sucoe8^i  uate  and

the army,  880. 1:  Tn^an's

conqiiests  beyond  u^  i.L.i..i.atea,  881.
llt'pairs  to  Kome,  and  celebrates  Tr^jtut's
triuiupli,  832.  His  endowments  fbr  the
iiliiueutation  of  poor  children,  838.  Un-
ctrtainty  of  the  dates  of  his  rel^  881
l>unjjer8  fh)in  the  frontiers  of  Manretania,
Dacia,  and  Britain,  834.  Hadrian's  cam-
paiiTU  iu  Mtt-si;j,  335.  Sup^iression  of  a
conspiracy  formed  against  hiui  during  his
absence,  386.  His  alleged  intention  of
abandoning  Dacia,  836.  Courts  the  sen-
ate, 837.  His  popular  manners,  389.  His
occasional  jealousy  and  envy,  339.  Un-
dertakes to  make  himself  personally  ac-
quainted with  all  the  provinces,  341.  "  His
assiduity  in  performing  the  duties  of  a
luilitarv  ehieC  and  iu  maintaining  disci-
pline, 342. His  progress  iuto  Gaul  and

0«niaB7,S4S.  Aadlato  BritelB,Sa-SI0.
Tenna  am.  which  he  Uved  with  SaMna,
80a  Yiatta  Spaio,  aad  ereeU  a  baitflka
at  Nemaiuiia,  ia  hoMr  of  PlottM,  MOl
VlaiU  and  traaqulUliM  Maantaalat  ML
And  Farthta,)ia)L  Hla  igtowm  ■>  AAmmi.
Saa.  Cetwaa  to  Kome,  mA  vWto  SMIjr
and  0■Hh«^  sot.  Hia  iinwit  jMffWi)
ttl  Hia  miMeaee  at  llaiMifti  Md
MIL  Hia  wotks  te  tte  wahri-
or  Atheu.  tU.  Sea«lla4  hf
the  AtbcBtaM  with  tkal"  '
SSt  iBltlatadlateth*!
Mti  TekntM
DlfMtiaaad  wMk  th«  iumm  latJTe
Milrit  of  AtheML  tTQ.  Onmm  over  to
Aks«Ddria,sn.  HIaaeeoMrtrf  theAto-
andriaaa,  878.  Intenet  takaa  fey  hiB  In
the  dooMtle  teMshiM  of  Oe  J<nra  taA
CtelatlaM,  Vn.  D«2k  oT  hto  ihvonlte,
AattBooa,  STS.  BU  Tiait  to  Tkabes  «n.
And  to  Antioeh,  whieh  dii«wU  him  with
its  MvoUty  and  vofatpCMMMH^  Sia
ContiBnea his  ..^ » --.

&

ikstitlaorOlrB^u,
he  ■yslariei  at  Ben-
th«Ohria(iao  Wth,

Miaor,  8Tt.  Onee  bmm  wvtatti  Alhaa%
aad  take*  ap  Us  iMMeM*  at  IUnm,  8U.
KstabUahealhe  Hlhei—  at  BeasevWL

His  bnUdlBCS  la  the  iitjr.  aai
tat  a  sufeeesaor  I*  GMoalae  Ooi
Veraa.  881.  rremstaw  death  oT  Veraai
86T.  Hadrian  ehneeea  te  hie  WBiiMir
T.  Anrallaa  Aatsalana,  aad  reqalNe  hhB
to  adopt  M.  Aanioa  y«r«a  aad  I*  V«t«%
881.  ma  laawiash^  lafciaMea  and  IhHs>.
tlon,  888.  His  death,  M*.  —Haiiii  «r
his  ehaiaeter,  880.  Sis  ntai  the  heater
tiie  imperial  serlea,  881  Hk  flyan  aad
eotrntenaBee,  888L

Haaaibal.  UaQaoUsh  aoxUiariea,  L IM.

Heleaa,  eneea  of  AdJalw^ae,  eoaTctted  to

JBdllaBI,Tl.tfL

HeUopalla,eleatMor  the  Jewish  temple  at,

HeUna,  a  ftesdmaa  ef  Her^govetas  Keaae
doflac  Nero's  abaaaee  ia  Queeee,  ri.  tNL

Helved  their  pianai^hiae  tat  a  mtleael
emifmltea,!.  lOTlML  MA.  Their  tcari-
totr,  U4  Their  aaaAesa  la  the  tlase  •t
aeeer,88a  Their  >«allaeaaaea.«&  Sm-
braoe  in  their  Icmbo  tte  KaaracL  tiM
TnUinci,  and  thel^tehrirf.  888.  their
eholee  between  two  rentes  lata  GaaL  iML
That  elMaMi  nmte,  ML  FMTeatea  by
Gcear  ttom  crasstac  the  Khoae  at  GeaeTa,
M4.  Adopt  the  oUier  roate  oa  the  liAX
bank  of  the  Ebooe,  M&,  The  Tlgand  de-
feated by  Ceear,  94T.  OTertnres  ti  the
HelTetianstoOKsar,M&  March  Orna^
the  country  of  the  .Adnl,  M8.  Sagaged
by  C»8ar  in  a  dedslTe  battle,  end  eatlnly
def^ted,  85L  Compelled  to  retaiB  to
their  own  country,  258,

Helvidius  Priscu&,  his  braTcrr,  tL  181
Charged  with  derelictioa  of  his  aeaatoiM
duties,  ITL  Hia  poaiahmMit,  1T9l  Fro*
)ees  the  restotauon  of  ^e  Gapitol,  8T4
w  inr.'iniw.rate  oppodtlon  to  Vespaslaa,
deatl^  va  81.

II  ompeUed  to  submit  to  Tia-

Herculaiium,  swaUowed  up  by
lava,  TiL  &a,  M.

?rfn

632

INDEX.

Hermnndnri,  a  tribe  of  Interior  Germany,
transplanted  into  the  vacant  seats  of  tlie
Marcomanni,  iv.  237.  Attiick  the  Quadi
and  Marcomanni,  and  contest  with  the
Chatti  the  salt  mines  on  the  8aale,  vii.  85.

Herod  the  Great,  son  of  Antipater  the  Idu-
mean,  obtains  the  liingdom  of  Judea,  iii.
190.  Governs  Galilee,  under  the  protec-
tion of  Sextus  Ca-sar,  801,  808.  The  na-
tional spirit  roused  against  him,  302.  Re-
mark of  Sameas,  or  Shammai,  respecting
him,  802.  Confirmed  by  Cassius  in  the
government  of  Coele-Sj-ria,  803.  Pays
court  to  Antonins,  and  marries  Mariamne,
803,  804.  Keceives  the  kingdom  of  Judea,
805.  Cuts  off  the  Asmonean  princes,  805.
Rejects  the  advances  of  Cleopatra,  807.
Confirmed  in  his  kingdom  by  Octavius,
282,  807.  His  love  and  jealousy  of  Ma-
riamne, 80S.  Causes  her  to  be  murdered,
803.  His  remorse  at  her  death,  808.  His
public  works  in  Jerusalem  and  obse-
quiousness to  Rome,  309.  Favoured  by
Agrippa,  iv.  113.  Additions  made  to  his
territory  by  Augustus,  114.  Guaranteed
from  interference  of  the  governor  of  Syria,
114.  Visits  Agrippa  in  Syria,  162.  His
sons  Aristobulus  and  Alexander,  162.
Leads  Agrippa  through  Judea,  163.  His
death,  215.  His  will  confirmed  by  Caius
Cajsar,  216.  Division  of  his  kingdom
among  his  sons,  v.  269.  His  family  at
Rome,  274.

Herod  Antipas,  son  of  Herod  the  Great,
tetrarch  of  Galilca  with  Per»a,  v.  269.
Marries  Hcrodias,  and  has  the  sovereignty
of  Samaria  given  to  him,  277,  278.  fian-
ished,  812.

Herod  Agrippa,  a  younger  son  of  Herod  the
Great,  supports  Vespasian,  vi.  850.

Herod  Agrippa,  son  of  Aristobulus,  educated
at  Rome,  v.  276.  Attaches  himself  to
CaiuB  CsBsar,  whom  he  inspires  with  love
for  Eastern  customs  and  despotism,  277-
280.  Arrested  by  Tiberius,  but  released
on  the  accession  of  Caius,  283.  The  sov-
ereignty of  a  part  of  Palestine  given  to
him  by  the  emjieror  Cains,  802l  Quits
Kome  for  Galilee,  80$.  Causes  disturb-
ances at  Ak'.xandria,  809.  Has  Bamaria
added  to  his  dominions,  812.  Pleads  for
the  Jews  with  ('alus,  811),  Buries  Caius,
866.  Aids  Claudius  in  obtaining  the  em-
pire, 867.  Judea  mldud  to  his  kingdom,
880.  Ills  popularity  with  the  Jews,  880.
HIh  death  at  Casurca,  8sl.  His  four  chll-
dnn,  417.

Herod  Agrippa,  son  of  the  i)reeedlng,  kept
in  honourable  ctislody  at  Rome,  v.  881 ;
vl.  419.  lias  thi^  sovereignty  of  part  of
Palestine  given  hlin  by  (^luiidlus,  428.
Employed  iih  a  spy  upon  the  Jews  in  Jo-
rusalcni,424.

He^o(le^  king  of  Chalcis,  vl.  419.

llenxled  AttleUH,  liU  wealth,  eloniience,  and
inttnltleencc  at  AtlicMH,  vll.  808.  Alleged
cuUHe  of  his  death,  8ni.

}Ieru<lluH,  ilauKliler  of  Aristobulus,  forsakes
ber  liiiHlmnd  PhllljipuH.and  niarrlosllerod
Antlpus,  v.  277,  2i».  Hliarus  Heroil's  exile
Toluntarlly,  H12.

"  Herolds  "  of  Ovid,  remarks  on  the,  iv.  402.

Herophilus,  or  Amatius,  asserts  his  descent
ftom  Marius,  iii  48.  Banished  from  Rome
by  Cwsar,  48.  Put  to  death  by  M.  Anto-
nius,  49.

Hesus,  the  Gallic  Mars,  i.  223;  iv.  84.

Hirrus,  Lucceius,  an  unsuccessful  candidate
for  a  place  in  the  college  of  augurs,  ii.  53.
Sent  by  Pompeius  on  a  mission  to  Parthia,
189.  His  fears  of  being  thrust  aside,  226.
Thrown  into  chains  by  the  king  of  Parthia,
242.

Hirtius,  A.,  a  friend  of  Ctesar,  author  of  the
seventh  book  of  the  commentaries  on  the
Gallic  war,  ii.  852.  Designated  consul  for
A.v.  711,  865;  iu.  82, 105.  Marches  to  the
Cisalpine,  105.  Attacks  Antouius,  108.
Slain  in  an  engagement  before  Mutina,  119.

"Historia  Augusta,"  the  series  of  the  impe-
perial  biographies  known  by  the  name  of
the,  vii.  821  note  '.

Historians  of  the  Flavian  age,  examination
of  their  works,  vii  238.  The  writings  of
Tacitus  more  biographical  than  historical,
241.  Historical  importance  of  the  prince's
personal  character,  242.  Hence  the  biog-
raphies of  Suetonius  supply  the  place  of
history,  242.  Popularity  of  historical
writing  under  Trajan,  243.  Want  of  a
critical  spirit  in  historical  writing  com-
bined with  acute  criticism  on  grammar,
245.  Preference  of  the  Romans  for  biog-
raphy to  history,  246.

Horace,  Q.,  Flaccus,  entrusted  by  Bnitus
with  a  command  in  Macedonia,  iii.  158.
Renounces  the  profession  of  arms,  172.
Confiscation  of  his  patrimoiiv,  177.  Re-
stored to  his  estates  through  Maecenas,  216.
His  description  of  the  battle  of  Aetium,
254.  His  hymn  for  the  Ludi  Seculares,
875.  His  political  mission,  iv.  449.
Sketch  of  his  cai'eer,  452.  Nature  of  his
connection  with  Augustus  and  Mitccnas,
452.  His  pretensions  to  religious  senti-
ment, 455.  Employed  to  recommend
moderation  and  contontmcut  to  the  rest-
less nobles,  456.  His  dissatisfiction  in  his
later  years,  455.  Compared  with  Martial,
vii.  282.

Hordeonius  Flaccus,  appointed  consular  le-
gatus  of  the  legions  in  lli)per  Germany,
vl.  8ia  Deceived  by  Civilis,  389.  Sends
Mummius  Luperous  against  Civilis,  8s9.
Wbodefonls  (li,'  KdiiiMiis,  JiilO.  Yiilds  to
the  (IciiKiiicI .  oi  til,'  r.Mliiviaii  cohorts;  his
irresiilulidii,  ^ilU.  (  i.iupolli'd  by  his  sol-
diers to  yield  the  conmiand  of  his  army
to  Vocula,  398.  'J'hrown  into  chains  by
his  soldiers,  and  released  by  Voculii,  393.
Requires  bis  soldiers  to  take  the  oath  to
Vespasian,  3!).\ Murdered  by  them,  398.

Hortalns,  grandson  of  llortenslus  the  orator,
petitions  the  senate  as  a  i>aui)er,  and  is  re-
fused relief  by  Tiberius,  v.  113,  114.

Ilortensia,  daughter  of  lUu-tenslus,  her
speech  before  the  triumvirs, iii  IK^iiote",

Hortenslus,  ti.,  his  voluptuous  retlnenients,
1.83-85.  Ills  ebaraeter,  817.  His  death,
11.  76  notfi''.  Ills  widow  Marcia  married
to  (.'ato,  194.

Houses  of  the  Romans,  described,  iv.  890-
893.  Miignineenec  of  the  (iNYelliiigs  of  the
nobility,  vii  267.

INDEX.

533

Ilyrcanus,  John,  replaced  In  the  high  prlegt-
hood  by  Poujpeius,  L  139.  Supborted
against  the  family  of  Aristobulus  by  the
proconsul  Oabiuius,  350.  Connect8  nlin-
Bolf  with  tlio  8adduce«8,  or  anti-nttdon&l
party,  iil.  29-i.  Supported  by  Poinpeiiut,
299.  Huuimons  Herod  before  the  Sanhe-
drim, 80-i. Murdered  by  llerod,  307.

TUKU[,'gubml88ion  of  the,  to  Trajan,  tIL
803.

Iberia,  See  Spain.  Origin  of  the  name,
i.  451  note.

Iccni,  a  British  tribe,  their  dwellinK-plaee,
vi.  18.  Their  Jealousy  of  the  riiii.itciutea,
19. Their  cowardly  subi  11  '''m-

tlus,  2-i. Defeated  l)y  <>  la,

29. Their discontent an  l  nun

under  IJoadicea,  43,  44.  DciVated,  and
their  revolt  finally  suppressed,  4!5,  60.

Ifrnatius.  his  martyrdom  at  Antioch,  viL298.
I'nr,  ritinty  as  to  its  date,  294  His
t|ii-iii-.  '-';ii  note '.

l-iiviiiui  i.ikon  by  Cseaar,  IL  100.

'Ixiof  (Upov,  the,  of  Ptolemy,  1.  8T9  note  <,

Ilerda,  a  fortress  and  mai;azlne  of  the  Pom-
peiaiis  in  Spain,  il.  154.  Defended  by
AlV.nihi-  ii.MiuBt  Caesar,  13S.

lliiLiii,  A.'i  i{i|i:t's  liarsh  treatment  of  the
iHoiilo  iii;  iv.  164.  Nero  pleads  for  it,  v.
452.

lUvricum,  Roman  province  o^  Its  extent,
i.  33.  Visit  of  CVsar  to,  3^  State  oC  in
the  time  of  Cu-sar,  iv.  120.  Its  dimensions
enlarged  by  Augustus,  120.  Kevoit  of  the
lUyriaus,  and  its  causes,  248.

ImiK'rium,  til.  .1  import,  iiL  S44.

Iho  consul !  ly  in  the  field,

845. The  eh-  uuand  laid  aside

on  entering  the  eitv,  e\eipt  in  case  of  a
triumph,  315,  340.  '  The  pruetiusular  Im-
iieritim,  its  privileges  and  growtli,*44,MT.
'■  Imperator,"  as  a  praeuomeii.  assumed  by
Oa'sar,  34S.  The  proconsular  imiK'rium
of  the  second  triuiiiv  ir.it..  .'il','.  PivKvas
by  which  the  sovei.  Uo-

man people were  •>ia

them  and  transl'eri.  \v\it

to  the  emperor  hiiii>.  U',  v.  ;'-.  UT.  Su-
premacy of  the  eni{)erx.)r  in  election,  legis-
lation, and  jurisdiction,  112.  Control  of
the  empen>r  over  the  senate  through  the
powers  of  the  censorship,  113.  And
through  the  law  of  majestas,  114.  Ilis
authority  in  matters  or  national  usage,
441.  Characteristics  of  the  imiK'rial  tyr-
anny, vi.  1T4.  Its  acts  generally  shrouded
in  comparative  privacy,  lT5t  Uistorlcal
importance  of  the  prince's  personal  char-
acter, vii.  242.

India,  envoys  fh)ra,  sent  to  Augustas  in
Spain,  iv.  "Otl  And  itova.  the  kings  Pan-
dion  and  Poras,  IIS.

Indus,  Julius,  a  Qaul,  sides  with  the  Bo-
mans,  V.  16S.

ludutiomarus,  chieftain  of  the  Trevlri,  sub-
mits to  Ca-sar,  i.  335.  Retreats  ttmn  be-
fore the  camp  of  Labienus,  39S.  His  death,
89S.

Infanticide,  and  exposure  of  children,  prac-
tice of,  among  the  Itomans,  iv.  400;  y.  166
note  2.

Inguiomeras,  a  Oermaa,  kit  deAeiio^  T.  SL
Engaged  with  Armutw  afdart  tM  Ko-
mana,41.

Insobrea,  the,  tBt^acitod  bj  the  Komaas,  L
19L

InteneffMi  dntiM  of  tk«,  L  4ML

Inondauons  at  Bome,  Ir.  4Ml

Isea  Damnloram  (Kxet«r)  tL  tT  not*  >.

Isoa  Bilnnun,  tL  40««(«  >.

Isis,  warship  vt,  at  EoM*  wfc—aad  with
Jadalam,  and  prahlbttad  bf  Tibaftaa,  t.
l&O;  tL  Wi.  Tempi*  <<  at  B4mb^  r»-
stored  hj  Domltlao,  rlL  IISL  Worahlp  at,
naturalised  at  Kome,  Iil.

Italicus,  nephew  of  Aniilnlaa,  (ivea  askliic
to  the  (Aenuei,  r.  Ill  Hia  dlaswiriMii
with  his  people,  14.

Italy,  arlstooratle  aatare  of  th*  ■>■>!■■  vt
the  towns  oI;LM.  Thabeialma  to  tho
Latin  franehise  and  rwslstiBee  of  the  Ba>-
mans,  27.  The  Boetel  War.  IT.  IMmph
of  the  Kooaans,  bat  ereatnal  eoBnessioa  tt
the  Italian  claims,  Hi.  OUgareUeal  raas-
tion  under  Sulla,  and  aseeodaaqr  ol  the
exclusive  or  Koman  pollejr,  81,  a.  Ai^
quiescence  of  the  Italians  in  Bnlla's  settle-
ment, 82.  The  booBdarlea  of  llal/.tt.
The  Italians  eoaeiUated  by  their  eoniire-
hension  in  the  Bomaa  state,  4*.  iWy
lend  no  ooontenaaoe  to  the  aMvemeats  or
Lepldus  and  Bratus,  4i>.  AknB  of  tha
Bomans  at  the  diminution  of  tho  ft«a
lK>puI.^iiou  of  Italy,  56.  ImmicnttaM  of
>  ito  Italy,  18a,  1(Ml Hotren

\  hrul  proseriptkHU  throa|^
150.  L«Bds  nniiflsrated  gy
satisfy  the  l^iooarlea,  ITT.
finally  restared,  184.  Th*
I  [  Italy  at  Ad  VIbm,  It.  W.

Stiite  of  the  oeninsula  at  the  begfaudac  of
the  reign  or  Augustus.  lU.  whojnio-
noanoea  the  Yar  the  bonndaiy  of  Italy

and  GauL  lH
etrelea,  lli.  MatMseat  of  Folybina  r»-
ni4inc  the  popolatloaof  Italy,  MH  In-
nnnoes  from  eUmato  and  phyileal  feat-
urea,ns.  Baala  Ibr  an amoslmata  eal-
oolatioa  of  the  population,  ML  TliepoMi-
hUkw  of  Italy  eompwrvd  with  that  of  tho
proTlneea,  M&  Greek  cities  in  Italy,
803.  The  police  of  Italy,  v.  148.  The
••  of  Italy  under  Tiberius,  14a
i'  the  soothsayers,  149.  The
ily  plimdered  by  the  Vitel-
ii:iiis,  VI  :>ji). '  Decrease  in  the  iK^HilatlcMi
of  Italy  in  the  reign  of  Vespashn,  tIL  M.
.\nd  decline  of  wealth  in  the  reign  of  Do-
luitiao,  114.  Trajan's  measores  fur  the
special  benetit  of  Italy,  211.

Itinerary  system  of  the  Bomans  in  GanI,  iv.
bO.  that  of  Antoninus,  viL  402.  And  of
Jerasalem,  408.

Itius,  Portus,  Cssar's  foree  for  the  snbjoga-
tion  of  Britain  assembled  at,  L  3SS.

JAMES,  first  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  his
martyrdom,  tIL  iM  not*.
Janiculum,  the  white  signal  flag  on  the,  1.
lOS. Struck  bv  MeteUuBL  lOa The  Jani-
culan  quarter  aescrlbed,  iv.  8^
Janus,  temple  otiiL  820. Shut  by  OctaTlns,
321. Andby  YeHiaaian,Yai<X

634

INDEX.

Japydes,  the,  defeated  hy  Octavius,  iii.  283.

Javolenus,  celebrated  jurisconsult,  vii.  405.

Jerusalem,  the  temple-citadel  of,  taken  by
Pompelus,  i.  139.  John  Hyrcanua  re-
placed in  the  high- priesthood,  139.  The
Holy  of  Holies  profaned  by  Pompeius,
139.  Spoliation  of  the  Temple  by  Cras-
sus,  189  noW^,  415  note  ^.  Splendour  of
the  city  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius,  v.  279.
And  magnificence  of  its  sovereigns,  280.
The  emperor  Caius's  statue  ordered  to  be
set  up  In  the  Holy  of  Holies,  316.  Solemn
entry  of  Herod  Agrippa  into  Jerusalem,

880.  The  two  contending  factions,  3S0,

881.  Tumults  in  Jerusalem  under  the
first  Koman  procurators  controlled  by  the
prudence  of  the  Sanhedrim,  vi.  421.  Herod
Agrippa,  the  tetrarch,  employed  as  a  spy
npon  the  Jews,  424.  The  Zealots,  or
party  of  independence,  425,  428.  Their
Sicarii,  or  secret  assassins,  425.  A  Ro-
man detachment  in  the  city  compelled  to
capitulate,  and  massacred,  426.  Defeat
of  Cestius  Gallus  before  the  city,  427.
Origin  of  the  Jews  and  Jerusalem,  accord-
ing to  Tacitus,  441.  Religious  sentiment
among  the  Jews  at  this  period,  445.  Rev-
olutionary proceedings  of  the  Zealots  in
Jerusalem,  447.  They  massacre  the  mod-
erate party  and  assume  the  government,

448.  In  three  factions,  occupy  the  city,

449.  Topography  of  Jerusalem,  450.  Titus
conducts  an  army  against  the  city,  454.
Operations  of  the  siege,  455,  et  seq.
Forcing  of  the  outer  wall,  456.  The  popu-
lation overawed  by  the  resolution  of  the
Zealots  to  defend  the  city  to  the  last,  466.
Lines  of  eircumvallatiori  drawn  by  Titus
round  the  city,  457.  Distress  of  the  citi-
zens, 458,  467.  Famine  and  portents,  458.
The  Christians  retire  from  the  city,  460.
The  fortress  Antonia  tiken,  460.  Destruc-
tion of  the  Temple,  46:3,  464.  The  Upper
City  defended  by  the  Zealots,  406.  Dis-
solution of  order  and  discipline  among
the  besieged,  467.  Destruction  of  the
Upper  City,  468.  Conclusion  of  the  war,
471.  The  Jewish  trophies  on  the  arch  of
Tltns,  472.  Foundation  of  the  colony  of
MWu  Capitolina  and  desecration  of  the
holy  t)lace8,  vll.  808,  809.

Jews,  tnoeo  of  Rome  favoured  by  Cmsar,  ii.
888;  lil.  2S4;  vi.  204.  Their  sorrow  and
resentment  at  his  murder,  Iii.  41,  284.
The  Jews  of  AIexnndrl^^  231,  2S4.  Their
character  In  foreign  lands,  iii.  288.  Their
dispi'rsion  and  settleincnt  in  the  Roman
emi)lri',  In  (ircerc,  in  llabylon  and  vKthi-
opla,  2*^!^^.  Tlii'lr  synagogue  in  Rome,
284.  Form  a  third  part  of  the  population
of  All  \aiiilil:i.  2S6.  Tlirlr  lirosclytlzlng
Bcli  Korm a natloua*! eon-

ffiji  liout  the  three  contliionlH,

2^7  WMOHH  of  tlu'lr  llniilH  the

tnulii  cauBr.  of  their  dispersion,  2>i-<.  (Jreck
and  Jewish  cmlgnitlon  coinnared,  28^,
Atteiniitd  of  AntlochiiH  Kplplianen  to
Hellinl/.e  tliem,  290.  Kceovery  of  tlieir
Indepenilonce  under  the  Maccjibocs.  292.
Their  llrst  treaty  with  Rome,  292.  Inflii-
encti  of  (ireek  civilization  on  Jewlith
tdvait,  292,  'MTi. First  antngonlnro  of  the

Pharisees  and  Sadducees,  295,  296.  In-
terference of  the  Romans  in  Jewish  af-
fairs, 299.  Pompeius  decides  between
the  claims  of  Hyrcanus  and  Aristobulus,
299.  Resistance  of  Jews  to  the  Romans,
and  commencement  of  the  struggle  be-
tween them,  300.  Scaurus,  Gabinius,
Crassus,  and  Cffisar,  in  Palestine,  300.
Ascendancy  of  the  Herods,  the  family  of
Antipater  the  Idumcan,  301.  The  national
spirit  roused  against  them,  802.  Herod
the  Great  receives  the  kingdom  of  Judea
from  Antonius,  305.  Favours  granted  by
Agrippa  to  the  Jews,  iv.  164.  The  Jews
in  Rome  patronized  by  the  first  Cajsars,
vi.  204  Their  turbulence  at  Rome,  206.
Proscribed  and  banished  by  Tiberius,  v.
150 ;  vi.  207.  Confounded  with  the  wor-
shippers of  Isis,  V,  150;  vi.  207.  At  feud
with  the  Egyptians,  v.  310.  Divided
abroad  and  at  "home  with  factions,  vi.  208.
Spiritual  pride  of  the  Jewish  freedmcn  in
Rome,  209.  Their  reception  of  Christian-
ity, 210.  Special  applicability  of  St.  Paul's
teaching  to  the  Roman  Jews  and  prose-
lytes, 210.  The  claim  of  Caius  to  divine
worship  resented  with  indigTiation  by  the
Jews,  V.  315.  Mission  of  Philo  the  Jew
to  the  emperor.  316.  The  emperor's
statue  ordered  to  be  set  up  in  the  temple
of  Jerusalem,  310.  Caius's  interview  with
the  Alexandrian  and  Jewish  envoys  in  the
gardens  of  Maecenas,  317.  Tone  of  Inter-
course among  the  Jews,  vi.  417.  The
great  rising  of  the  Jews  against  the  Ro-
mans, 41S,  et  seq.  Attitude  of  the  Jews
in  the  West  and  in  the  East,  418.  Sources
of  the  history  of  the  Jews  misappreciated
by  Tacitus,  4;J9.  His  strange  misrepre-
sentation of  them  and  of  their  religion,  441.
Vigour  of  religious  sentiment  among  the
Jews  at  the  time  of  Josephus,  445.  The
Jews,  in  the  view  of  Christians,  judi-
cially abandoned  to  their  selfish  passions,
446.  Their  imi>ortanco  at  Rome,  vil.  122,
123.  Their  dispersion  in  the  East,  284.
Their  numbers  in  Mesopotamia,  and  their
turbulence  In  Egypt,  Cyi)rus,  and  Oyrene,
284.  Severe  measures  taken  against  them
In  Egypt,  284.  Closing  of  the  temple  at
Heliopolis,  286.  Sedition  of  Jonathan  at
Cyrene,  286  Contempt  into  which  the
Jews  at  Rome  had  fallen  at  this  time,  286.
General  revolt  of  the  Jews  throughout
the  East  in  the  reign  of  Trajan,  80a
Atrocities  ])erpetrated  by  the  insurg(>nts,
809,  310.  Insurrortlon  of  the  Jews  in
Palestine,  814.  Preservation  of  the  Jew-
ish nationality  by  the  teaehing  of  the  Jew-
l,sh  doctors  at  Tiberias,  314.  Typical
character  of  the  Rabbi  Akiba,  315.  Riir-
eoeliebas  appointed  Jewish  leader  in  I'al-
esliiie,  316.  Final  defeat  and  (H.-ipersion
of  the  .lews  under  Rarcoehebas,  318.  Fi-
nal separation  of  the  Christians  from  tho
Jews.  319.
John  of  Giseain,  a  chief  of  tho  Zealots  in
Joruhalem,  vl.  420.  Ills  character  as  <lrawn
bv  Josephus,  4i)8.  Ills  connnand  in  thu
CUV  during  the  great  siege,  449.  Takes
relugo  under  ground, 467.  JIls  life  spared,
470.

IHDBX.

535

Jonathan  of  Cj^rene,  hto  Mdltlon,  rU.  ttC

Put  to  death,  2S6  not**.

Jotapata,  Btory  of  the  ai«M  and  oaptnre  o£
vl.  488.  —or

Jopi>a,  taken  and  destroyed  by  the  Roauuu,
vi.  486.

Jooephus,  the  bistoiian,  his  a4*connt  ot  the
emperor  Tiberius,  v.  265,  2S6.  AcoouDt
of,  vl.  480.  In  coinmand  In  Galilee,  480.
Number  of  troops  under  bis  eoinmand,
4.S2.  Harassed  by  the  Zealota,  483.  l)e-
ftiils  Jiitapata,  and  is  captun-il  Ipv  the  Ko-
II:  n,- ;,; Favoured  I''  >.  48S.

'  It'  name  of  'i  48&,

I  :..  J  i.\  Tiiun  (..  •■'•  ■ - I.J  the

>  ,i';4ed  bv  hla  OOOB-

.S»d«L481,

.luiM.  -'lUrdbyOeMrat

lioiii.,!.  I A  ■  .>-sar,  iLlM.

Attacks  a.  ..,  167. Ul«

cruilu  I..  lfi>. HU

-':'  ".^

All  ' 1 :  •■;,•  de-

Mi  ;  ;'  ..I  I'liea,  ■2>7.  Attacked  by
i:o  I.  ;  .'^i).  DefeaU  Cmar,  991.  De-
irii  i~  1. 1~  capital,  Cirta,8M.  Uia  inaolenoe
ill  the  seuatorian  oatup,  808w  Ills  death,
8(11,  8u-i.
Juba,  the  younper,  spared  by  Oarwir.  11.  810.

In-.

iiit.il  kill
hi  II

t.i-  ..| Am.  :'
ctiunt  of  t!
the  Kast,  i  v
to  death  l.\ •
Judaism,  arriv  11 1  oi
tlie  idea  of  the I
tial  dojfma  of,  vi.
ism  oll'l■Il^i^e  t>'
,le\vi>ll Ull'llt.-. 1
man  im!'!.-;  .-m ,i
U\.i:'
of 1
tal.'
b>r
the  '
mil.,,
ism, .

I ■,  \i.t'US-

if-'h-

>  ac-

!  (  allis  C'asar  to

II,  Ptolenuboa  put

>PprMistlBc

.  UM  «MeD-

iu«f  Jnds-

i  1  lai The

lioBitflto-

■  saeeeMUm
.  »L £*-

iiooto  St  Tl-

i.aw.  lue  Miaehaa,  uid

lutere«t  takes  by  Do-

matic  teaehlng  of  Jnda-

Judeii,  its  relations  to  Kome,  ilL  8^  Ably
ctiverned  bv  Herod  the  Great,  80ft.  Vl»-
ited  bv  Agrippa,  Iv.  162.  Given  to  hla  son
Archelaus,  v.  2(>9.  Insurrection  in,  M9.
Crushed  by  Varus,  270.  The  kingdom  an-
nexed to  the  Koman  emire,  2T0 ;  vi.  26S,
420.  Government  of  the  procurator  Pon-
tius Pilatus.  V.  270,  271.  Condition  of  Ju-
dea  under  Koman  dominion,  272.  Given
to  HertKl  Agrippa,  3s0.  lieverts  to  Rome,
8S1.  Titus  charged  with  the  conduct  of
atfairs  in  Judea,  vL  861.  Judea  in  the  ma-
turity of  its  powers,  415.  Its  material
prosi>erity,  and  antique  simplicity  of  man-
ners, 417.  Resistance  of  the  brijbrands  or
false  Christs,  420.  Insurrection  in  Gali-
lee, put  down  by  Quadratus,  prefect  of
Syria,  422.  Comparative  tninquillity  of
Judea  during  the  govemnunt  of  Felix,
423.  Tumults  in  Jerusalem,  421,  et  nf^t/.
Vespasian  appointed  to  conduct  operations
in  Judea,  42*.  The  two  contending  fac-
tions, Zealots  and  Herodians,  and  their

Ant  obentioBi
4M.  Mllltwf
JoMpbna  In

4K,  m. YtmatlmH
'  MaiMt^telUee^

a  jsdM,  481

la  0«IUae,  «M.

m.  or

Mtf*  ud  c»ptai«  ti  Jotaaata,  4A Of
jMpa,  Ol or  TaMriaTaBrTuielMMi,
4nrn»*tMm  tt  rttmm,m. Sai^ai.
1aa  dwtigfta  Miiialator
4ML DattraatlMiTSwa.

•ioa  of  hoatiUtlM
the

aflkavarteJadM,

•fa  paeoBlaiT  faalttea-
tlMi  IbrtkaoAMoClitf.  TkatadieM
«ad«r  tka  wifkw^  m,  ML

JadaMBt,  Bilaat,  tka  owda  «f  aroMdan  m
Mlled,  L  SO.

Jndieta,  thMMtaNd  to  tka  MMto  kr  BcUa,
laa.  If  t)nm«ltai  yattlaB^y tad wiiau-
tluB,e».  PMBMiaa  aaltaa  vlik  OaMM
aadClawo  ia  fawiiibntiw  a  ate*  «C  tka
Jndieia  froat  Ike  aablM  ta  tlM  tal^t^  TL
I)iatribBtloa  «f  tlM  Jodkla  I
ate,  the  kalshta,  aad  the  i

loa

Jnlla,  anat  of  Cmmr,  aad  widow  of  Mwlaa,
her  Ameral  otatioa  proaoaaeed  bv  CtMV,
L  101.

Julia,  the  Tooager  of  OBaai^  ilitira  aMr-
rled  to  Balboa,  ILMT  »«<•>.  HerAumi
oration  proaooaead  by  Aaiaata^  MT
noti '.

Julia,  daughter  of  OB«ar,  aanted  to  Poaa-
peius  L  ITC  Ohuo  of  her
hu.  Her  dMtk,  ao.  Bw  obaaaaiaa
the  field  of  Mara,  MA.  E»et  «r  her
death  on  tho  alliueo  of  Foaipataa  hmI
OMar.^QDi.

Jalla,dMfbt«r  of  A^aatoa  aad
data  after  bttth.  It.  1»1  m(«  i.
(1)  to  Marealloa,  ItT:  (S)  to  A«iteM,  U5;
(t)toTlberiBarira,iWL  UercUSmbr
Afrina,  IML  Aeoonapaalea  her  kaakaaia
to  tkiSaat,  1«1  Botralhed  to  TihMtaa,
in.  llaiTied  to  hiaLin. IMl  AJbtttea
har,fML  B«r boaaly^ao-
Be

of  AwnMtaatoher.fML Vt

eompuahoieala,  aad  kTWea.  1
diMtderty  Ittb,  dtatHMTwd

hvn  aUbaaiilHa  la  her  fctbaA  wffl,  ▼.  11
Bar  dtatb  at  BbtwtauB, ».

JnMa,  graaddaa^ter  of  Aagaataa,  daa^t«r
of  Aerlppa  and  JuUa,  BMRled  to  L-  .£iiu-
Una  Paulu^  Ir.  %M.  Baaiahed  by  her
■randAitber,  257.  Spedally  exan^d
A^m  ahariaa  hi*  prcMMrty,  ▼.  lai  Her
death  la  the  lalaad  of  TriiMraa,  Ua

Julia,  dani^ter  of  Tttaa,  tIL  M.
!  Julia,  dao^ter  of  Qennaaknw,  mafTfaid  to
I Vinlcius,  r.  MS. Beealled  tram  baaieh-
ment  bv  Claadina,  bat  i^aia  biatabtil.  40T.
Her  death,  407.

Julia,  daughter  of  Droens  and  Lirllla,  mar-
ried (It  to  Nero  Germanicus;  (2)  to  £u-
bellus  Blandos,  t.  aSO.
{  Julian  basilica  at  BoBBC^  taaagvrated  by  Oe-
tavius,  iii.  814.

Julian  haven,  the,  emstraeted  by  A^ppa,
iii.  196.  Nero's  pcopoeed  canal' from  it  to
Rome,  vL  14L

Julianua,  his  sneceeses  over  the  Dacian£,
viL  f».

Julii,  fiuuily  of  the.  L  91  noU.

636

INDEX.

Jallos,  Jnlus,  the  name,  in  Eoman  history,
i91.

Julius,  the  month,  the  name  of  Quintilis
changed  to,  iii.  65,  73,  874.

Julius  Alpinulus,  the  Helvetian  chief,  put  to
death  by  Caecina,  vi.  823.

Junta  Claudilla,  married  to  Caius  Cscsar,  v.
236,  252. Her  death,  252.

Junia  Silana,  wife  of  C.  Silius.  Her  feud
with  Agrippina,  vi.  79.  Herbanishmeut,  81.

Junia  Tertia,  or  Tertulla,  her  mother,  iii.  72.
Eibald  story  of  her,  72.  Her  illustrious
obsequies,  v.  173.

Junius,  the  name  of  the  month,  changed  to
Germanicus,  vi.  159.

Junius  BloBSus. See  Blsesus.

Junius  Novatus,  partisan  of  Agrippa  Postu-
mus,  his  attack  on  Augustus,  v.  122.

Junius  Priscus,  his  wealth  and  execution,  v.
842.

Junius  Eusticus,  prefect  of  Eome,  vii.  459.
Supposed  to  have  passed  sentence  on  Jus-
tin, 459.

Jupiter  Capitolinns  struck  by  lightning,  L
330.  Temple  of,  iv.  376.  That  of  Jupiter
Feretrius,  377.

Jurisconsults,  celebrated,  in  the  reign  of  An-
toninus Pius,  viu  403.

Jus  Gentium  and  Jus  Civile,  anomalous  re-
lations of  the,  in  the  Flavian  era,  vii.  425.
Gaius's  stiitement  of  the  distinction  be-
tween them,  425.

Jus  Honorarium,  character  of  the,  vii.  426.

Justin  the  Martyr,  his  apologies  for  the
Christians,  vii.  369  note  '■'.  His  judge,  Ju-
nius Eusticus,  459.

Jus  trium  liberorum,  the,  ii.  380.

Juvavium,  foundation  of  a  colony  by  Ha-
drian at,  vii.  843.

Juvenal,  the  "Council  of  the  Turbot*' de-
scribed by,  vii.  140.  His  satires  com-
pared with  those  of  Perslus,  229.  His
manliness,  273.  Compared  with  Tacitus,
274  Dltfereuco  iu  the  tone  of  his  earlier
and  later  writings,  270.  Considered  as  a
cham|)ion  of  Eoman  ideas,  278.

Juvenalla,  the  festival  of  the,  instituted  by
Nero,  vi.  107, 108.

Juventlus  Culsus  conspires  against  Domi-
tlan,  but  pardoned  on  condition  of  taming
delator,  viL  147.

KIDNAPPING,  prevalence  of;  In  Italy,
II.  882.
KntghtH,  their  moral  superiority  to  the  sen-
ators, I.  54.  A  reform  In  favour  of  the
Muostrian  order  undertaken  by  Pompeius,
70i  Who  unites  with  Crassus  and  Cicero,
In  transferring  a  share  in  the  judlcia  to
them,  72.  Mortilled  niul  irritated  by  Cato,
125,  Occupation  ami  <listiiiction  of  the
knights,  Hi.  897.  The  liittit  of  the  knights
rovlsod  by  Cloudlus,  v.  Hs,'>.  And  their
privileges  oxtondud  by  him,  457.

T  ABKO,  Q.  ANTISTIUS,  oommlU  Buioldo

1j at  PhilippI,  IIL  no.

Loborius,  Ueoltnuo,  oompolled  by  Ca<8ar  to
appear  on  the  itaM,  IL  UM.

Lablenut,  Q,.  son  or  Tltua,  ontort  tho  Par-
thian Mrvioe,  his  suooetMa  In  Aala,  arro-
ganoo,  and  death,  lU.  191,  IM.

Labienus,  T.,  the  ablest  of  Caisar's  officers  in
Gaul,  i.  246,  264.  Left  in  command  in
Gaul,  262.  At  the  battle  with  the  Ncrvii,
277,  279.  Stationed  in  the  country  of  the
Treviri,  291.  Chastises  the  Morini,  383.
Attacked  by  and  repulses  the  Gauls,  397.
Defeats  the  Treviri,  899.  Checks  the
Menapii,  401.  His  success  in  the  .^Eduan
war,  ii.  26,  36.  Puts  down  a  revolt  of  the
Treviri,  36.  His  perfidy  to  Commius,  38.
Caesar's  legatus  in  the  Cisalpine,  77.  His
defection  from  Ciesar,  99.  Checks  deser-
tion in  the  Pompeian  army,  193.  His
cruelty  to  Caisarian  prisoners,  221.  His
attempt  on  Cyrenc,  2S3.  Defeats  Caesar,
292.  Escapes  Irom  Thapsus,  805.  Falls
at  Munda,  817.

Labienus,  T.,  his  freedom  as  a  writer  of  his-
tory, iv.  436.  His  writings  suppressed  by
the  senate,  but  restored  to  circulation  by
Caius,  V.  289.

Laco,Corneliiis,  an  adherent  of  Galba,  vi.  294.

Lamia,  ^Elius,  detained  by  Tiberius  from
his  government  of  Syria,  vi.  262.

Lamia,  ^lius,  deprived  of  his  wife  and  slain
by  Domitian,  vii.  150.

Lands  assigned  by  Caesar  to  his  veterans,
ii.  328.  Eoman  mode  of  measuring  land,
iv.  39,  40.

Land-tax,  the  Eoman  proprietors  of  public
domains  released  from  payment  of,  i.  56.
Quiritary  proprietorship,  embracing  ex-
emption from  the  land-tax,  reluctantly
given  by  the  emperors,  vii.  418.

Language,  varieties  of,  spoken  in  the  Eoman
empire,  iv.  801.

Lanuvium,  birth-place  and  residence  of
Antoninus  Pius,  vii.  395  note.

Laodicea,  state  of,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,
iv.  360.

Lares,  popular  worship  of  tlic,  restored  by
Augustus,  iv.  25.  The  worship  combined
with  that  of  Augustus  himself,  26.

Latorensis,  L.  Juventius,  second  in  com-
mand in  Further  Spain,  ii.  267.  Put  to
death  by  Cassius,  267.

Laterensis,  M.  Jiiventlus,  lieutenant  of
Piancus,  commits  suicide,  ill.  126.

Latin,  the  official  language  of  the  whole
Itomon  empire,  Iv.  298.  Prevalence  of
the  Latin  language  in  tho  western  prov-
inces, 300.  Comprehensiveness,  strength,
&c,  of  the  Latin  language,  vii.  '246.

Latin  franchise,  the,  1.  28.  Claims  of  tho
Italian  allies  to  tho,  27.  Eventual  con-
cession of  tho  privilege  to  tho  Itiiliau
claimants,  28.  Law  of  L.  Julius  Ciosur
for  admitting  them,  01  note''.  Tlie  frim-
chlse  communicated  by  Cii'sar  to  tho  pro-
vincials, II.  826.  Estende<l  by  the  manu-
ralasion  of  slaves,  Iv.  808.  (trimted  by
Vespasian  to  Spain,  vll.  2;!.  Extension  of
the  franchise  In  tho  reign  of  Antoninus
Plus,  417.  Its  bardshi])  and  vexations,
418.  Quiritary  i)n)prietorsliip,  418.  im-
position of  tlio  legacy  duly  on  personal
onfraneliisemont,  419.  Constant  degrada-
tion of  tlie  clianioter  of  tho  Koiuan  citi-
zenship In  tho  i)rovinceH,  420.  Dnuiual
Exten.Hlon  of  c'itix<>nsiiip  to  all  tlio  free
population  of  tlio  empire,  421,  Decree  of
Autoulus  Carooallo,  4i28,

INDEX.

537

Liitinus,  the  mime,  his  arrogonoe  aod  favonr

with  Doinltiau,  vll.  110.
Ivatobriffi.  the,  join  the  llclvitii.  i.  -.MO.
Laws,  CaL-sars  jirojert  of  a  r

11.8*1 Lttriblativeund  I

oflho  si-iiatc-  iiiiil  t!if  i>> '!

,,,.  , .,..,,  . ,  Au-

■U

Mil  I I. .  .  ■;. - I

Mi»coiu*;i)ii(/u  ol'  !
lutii*,  379. The  /■

tutiuiial  fLiiicti..ji-

i'alluro  of  llic  luil  la\t.-

questions  betwcea for.

Aiioiiialoiis  i-i  l.iii.iii  of  I.'.
Ill,-  .1  , .  I II,

■|1..-  .  ■  .  .■ ,

,,r-  !L  I

cllh

ll„-|.

I'.M-iiin-,
Legacy  dut> ,

enftinthiiM-ii
Li'frions,  |ki\

nil. I. I'

!  ui  with
liO. Unl-

ilie,  ou  penoiwl

•  .>,rv!(v  of  the,
..•ut

111' I .  -tH-

ti..ii^  :i-i.

No !  . Is

<lilV:i  r.«>-

toriaii  t'le
l.-^ions  sir,
rius,  144. l:

i^'*. rerilia:

the  lo({iou,  vii.  444. List  of  tlie  K-^'ious
Hud  their  btatlona  in  the  relief  Aunllu*,
444  mo/*".
Li'.u'islation,  power  of^  in  tho  peo|lla  and
si'iiate,  but  subsequently  in  the  emperor,

V. 101.

Leiiumum,  capital  city  of  the  Pietoaea,
taken  by  Duratius  and  held  fur  the  £»•
maus,  IL  3(5.

Leiitulus,  P.  Cornelias,  Sura,  oonsnl,  de-
feated by  Spartacus,  i.  51.  Deposed  from
his  command,  51.  Joins  CatlliBa's  eon-
gpiraoy ,  116.  iVofHises  a  new  InaoireeUon
of  slavis  and  eriuiiuala,  117.

Lentulus,  C'li.  C'orui-liua,  appointed  to  the
revived  otUco  of  censor,  L  73.

Lentulus  Cms,  L.  Cornelius,  elected  ooasnl,
iL  75.  Uis  chances  of  advautaees  from
anarchy,  84.  Covets  the  bouse  otHarten-
sius  and  the  ganlens  of  Oeaar,  92Sk  Mur-
dered in  K<;yi>t,  24d.

Lentulus  Gietulicus,  commander  of  the  le-
gions on  the  Upper  Uhlne,  delies  Tiberius,
V.  •^66,  84S. I'tit  to  death  by  Caius,  350.

Lentulus  Mar.  "'■  ■  '  ted  consul,  i.  381.
Kesists  the  •  ^  successor,  888.

Lentulus  Spi;  1 consul,  L  823.

The  >  .  «.  uieia  &lls  by  lot  to

him.  ^  for  his  prorinoe,  82S,

Ketri  ar,  ii.  103. Aspires  to

the  oiiue  oi  luimiex  Maxlmus,  325.  His
position  at  the  battle  of  Pharsalia,  230.
Joins  the  conspirators  lu  the  Capitol,iil.  12.

ited  gov«*Mr  of
.:^  irS,  in,M

Leplda,  fband  galttf  of  adallMX  aad  poiaoa-

iac,T.  lan.

Lemda.  Domllla,  mntktr  ol  WimmHbj.
ut  at  Wr  toagfcfi  tmtK  ▼.  «>&
h«M  or  tk«  TMIMUI  Man,  rt  St.

>uuud  Kuiltr  «r  tNMM  aM  anwitod,

Lei.idui.  M. ftalWi,  gnat  gwt  gaail-
r  of  the  triumrtr,  ux  Ximm  pruaapa,

M.  .Emilioa,  Ua  attaaapto  to  i«t1t«
IMTty,  L  4»,  At Hi*  4(*at

1  jnillaa,  tatttrex  Li  B.a  H^
IMT  tha  OodteB  aaolk,  L

kiftaa  to
ruidiilea  of  Caiaar,  IMl  Baealraa
roTlMa  or  Hltkar  (taala,  IM.  Mt.
d  tha  hoaow  or  a  tttuaph.  ta«.
eouol  far  tjx  tf,  tfiT  HIa
•a  or  Komt  aa  mutm  «t  tka
Hia  n^rartwr  aa  **OMai'a
frieu4"  »id.  AeeeBta  tha  goT«taa»eat  of
HJthar  Bpaia  aad^Uia  Mai«aMBaia.aM,
In  Boom  at  tka  ttaa  af  Oaaai^  aaaaaataa-
tioii,UI.&  BiMortaAataalHiM^UkSL
His  poaitioB,  Ul  Bmnmm'
with  an  aimad  ftma,  Ml
Antoaiustathaibr«aB,Sa,M.  Hlai
to  the  p«>opl^  KL  iMpattiMt  to
against  tho  luantofa,  but  aotertalM
Brutiia,aai  IteehaatoBp^ML  Uifaa
the  aeaata  to  treat  with  ABtoiUwL  111  Sta-
tioned In  TmaaalnlBB  Gaol,  aad  aeerotl/
:  IS,  1»1  AatMlM  lolu  him.
vited  br  CMarioa  to  ooonbiae
uilUL  Nefotiatea  with  Oe-
tavius,  i::^  OoBfcwoa  or  OotaTlii^  Ab-
toniaa,  and  Lapldaa,  aad  fsRaatiaa  oT  tha
aeeoad  tIilUBTtnt^  UL  Daaigiiated
eoMol  fcr  a.a  4i,  US-  Saitouaaa
Gaal  aad  toaia  allotted  to  Ubb,1WL  Oaa-
aeaU  to  the  proaeriptlaa  or  hla  hrather
PMUaaJBmiUaa,14a  Eaten  Seaaa  with
hia  eoUMKoea,  1«L  Apaatatad  eaaaal.
B.a  43,  in.  HU  triooM^  aad  aapaaa-
larity,  15^  Convelied  by  hla  eollM^ia
to  Btfrrender  the  eommaad  la  Itaihr.HMl
Africa  aaaisned  to  him,  ITS,  1S&  bAih
to  join  OctaTiu^  IM.  Aaalatt  OetiTlaa
in  his  war  with  Seztaa  Pampoina,  IM^
201.  DeserU  to  the  F«aipeiaaa,aad  eoai-
bines  with  them  anlaat  Oetnrtaa,  MS,
Abandoned  by  hla  aaUlan,  M.  Suhaaita
toOcUviua,wh«BpanahialMh,tti^  Da-
prired  of  hla  ahara  oT  the  triamrlrate,
§0&  BetalaatheolBeeorFoaUfexMaxi-
ma^Ma,iOlL Hla  death,  Ir.  !«&

Lepldus,  BOB  of  the  triomrir,  eoaaidraa
a^rainst  AvgoMtat,  and  ia  put  to  death  by
him.  UL  SUL

Lepidus,  M.  ■<iM«tHii«,  named  by  Angnstos
as  a  poaaibte  eompetitor  fix  the  empire,  y.
10.  Deil»d8  (X  Pisoi,  80.  His  propoiaal
for  diminishing  the  rewards  of  the  dela-
tors, 1^1.  His  nobiU^  and  intlnenee,  3431
Married  to  DnuUb,  dMsfater  of  German-
ieoa,  but  resiftna  lier  to  Cains,  305.  Put  to
death  by  Otius,  350.

Ladtian  wines,  iv.  Sid.

538

INDEX.

Leuce,  Come,  town  of,  in  Arabia,  iy.  98, 100
note  I.

Lexovii,  the,  compelled  to  submit  to  the
Komans,  i.  281.  Joins  a  maritime  con-
federacy against  the  Eomans,  291.  Com-
pelled to  maintain  Ca>sar's  soldiers.  297.

Libels,  conduct  of  Augustus  and  Tiberius
with  respect  to,  v.  122.  And  of  Nero,  vi.
114.

Llbo,  Drusus,  his  intrigues  against  Tiberius
and  suicide,  v.  89.

Libo,  L.  Scribonius,  takes  the  command  of
the  Pompeian  fleet,  ii.  199.  Blockades
Brnndisium,  199.  Mediates  between  Oc-
tavius  and  Sextus  Pompeius,  iii.  187.
Clings  to  Bextus,  but  finally  abandons
him,  204,

Library  of  Lucullus,  i.  83.  Of  Octavia,
founded  by  her  brother  Octavius,  iii.  285.
Of  Pollio,  supposed  to  be  purchased  by
the  fruits  of  his  Illyrian  campaign,  ii.  836
note  1 ;  iii.  235.  The  firstpublic  library  in
Bome  established  by  Caisar,  ii.  885.  The
Alexandrian  Library  accidentally  burnt
by  Cffisar,  259. Libraries  of  Trajan,  vlL

Liburni,  the,  defeated  by  Octavius,  iii.  232.

Licinian  rogations,  enactment  of  the,  i.  25.

Licinianus,  the  pra;torian,  his  banishment
vii.  105.

Licinius  Damaslppus,  abets  Juba,  king  of
Numidia,  in  his  insolence,  ii.  IfiS.

Licinus,  his  early  life,  iv.  157.  His  tyranny
as  procurator  of  Gaul,  157.  His  adroit  ex-
culpation of  himself  to  Augustus,  158.
His  tomb,  158.

Ligarius,  Q.,  Cicero's  speech  for,  ii.  344.
Joins  the  conspiracy  against  Cu;sar's  life,
879.

Ligtiriona,  their  hostility  to  the  Massilians,
\.  194.  Besiege  Antipolis  and  NicKa,  195.
Defeated  by  the  Komans,  and  their  terri-
tory given  to  the  Massilians,  196.  Origin
of  the  Ligurians,  21.S,  Their  final  subju-
gation etfi'Cted  by  Augustus,  iv.  87.

Limyro,  Calus  C'lesar  dies  at,  iv.  219.

Llngones,  a  Ctallic  tribe,  refuse  to  allow  a
niuaffe  to  the  fugitive  Hclvctii,  i.  252.
Two  legions  stationed  iu  the  country  of
the,  40ft.

Liaciu,  the  vergobret  of  the  vEdul,  discovers
the  treuchory  of  Vumnorlx  to  Ctcsar,  1.
246.

LltaTieus.  commander  of  the  .£duan  levies
under  Ca'sor,  revolts,  IL  21.  Pardoned,
21.

Lltenituro  of  the  liomans,  Influence  of  that
of  the  Creeks  on  this  H-  417.  Nievus  and
Lucilius  the  ehamplons  <>f  the  old  Itomaii
Ittoruture,  418.  Iinitatlvo  character  of
Koman  lltonitnre,  421.  (ienenil  purity
and  tcrscnuRR  of  style  In  the  Augus-
tan wrltcm,  Iv.  4:15,  "  Tlllus  LIvliis  mid
hii  hlntory,  4««.  Virgil,  439.  Honiee,
449.  452.  ProiKTtliis,  455.  Tll.tillim,  4(1(».
Ovid,  402,  l)eelln<'  and  nupjin'SHlon  of
Ilteratiire  In  tho  reign  of  'I'lbiTliiH,  v.
261;  vl.  l«l.  No  nHtricilon  on  writing
among  the  Komans,  1h)I.  'I'lilHliidiilgeno'
aoc<ipi<><l  in  eompensntlon  fur  rcnirlctlon
in  iiiihllrntlon,  D'X.  Consldomtlon  of  the
extent  of  the  cloM  of  roodon,  184. Prices

of  the  books  in  Eome,  185.  Facilities  at-
tending the  composition  and  multiplica-
tion of  books,  180.  Characteristics  of  the
popular  literature  of  the  time,  186.  Fash-
ion of  historical  composition,  187.  Extra-
ordinary activity  of  the  elder  Pliny,  167.
Discouragement  of  contemporary  history,
188.  Vespasian's  liberal  endowment  of
lirerature,  vii.  28.  Effect  of  the  Flavian
reaction  on  the  tone  of  Koman  literature,
222.  Comparison  of  Claudian  and  Flavian
writers,  222  et  i^eq.  Poets  of  the  Flavian
age,  223.  The  historians  of  the  same  pe-
riod, 283.  Preference  of  the  Komans  for
biography  to  history,  248.  Collection  of
private  correspondence,  250.  Pliny's  ac-
count of  the  true  man  of  letters — the  elder
Pliny,  264.

Livia  Drusilla,  wife  of  Tiberius  ClaudiuSj
and  mother  of  Tiberius  the  emperor  and
Drusus,  carried  off  and  married  by  Octa-
vius, iii.  218 ;  iv.  124  Her  early  history,
manners,  and  character,  iv.  124,  125.
Jealous  of  Octavia,  129.  L'^rges  the  mar-
riage of  Julia  with  Tiberius,  170.  Sus-
pected of  hastening  the  end  of  Caius  and
Lucius  Ciesar,  219.  Secures  the  succes-
sion for  Tiberius,  221.  Believed  to  have
counselled  Augustus  to  clemency  in  Cin-
na's  case,  223.  Her  intrigues  against
Aerippa  Posthumus,  253.  Summons
Tiberius  to  the  death-bed  of  Augustus,
287;  V.  9.  Conceals  the  emperor's  de-
cease until  his  arrival,  10.  Adopted  into
the  Julian  family  witli  the  title  of  Au-
gustii,  18.  Perhaps  instructs  i'laneina  to
thwart  Agrippina,  61.  Believed  accessory
to  the  death  of  Gernianicus,  72.  Does  not
appear  at  his  Aineral,  74.  Screens  Plau-
cma,  86.  Her  secret  intlucneo  over  Tibe-
rius, 92.  The  tcmttio  voted  to  her  by  the
provincials,  186.  Her  death  and  char-
acter, 210,  211.  Her  friends  persecuted
by  Tiberius,  216.

Livia,  or  LlviUa,  sister  of  Germanlcus  and
wife  of  Drusus,  brings  forth  twin  chil-
dren, V.  73.  Intrigues  with  Sejanus  and
poisons  her  husband,  176,  Sejanus  de-
mands her  in'marriage,  186.  Atliimced  to
him,  219.  With  Tiberius  at  Caprea-,  222.
Her  guilt  established,  she  is  starved  to
death,  231.

Llvla,  sister  of  the  emperor  Caius,  Impli-
cated in  a  con»])iracy  against  her  brother,
v.  350.  Banished,  851.  Kecalled  from
banishment,  3t')3.

Livv,  eliaracter  of  his  history,  iv.  457.  Call-
ed by  Augustus  "a  Pompeian,"  4.'I7.  As-
sists the  studies  of  Claudius,  437.  Services
perfonned  by  him  for  his  eountrynien,
438,  I^oss  sustained  by  us  tliroiigli  tlio
dlsai)i>earanee  of  the  latter  decndes,  437.
Ills  "  Dliilngiu's."  lits.  Fiviiiients  the
rhetorical  selio()ls,43(».  His  history  com-
manded by  Caius  to  bo  removed  from
the  llliraries,  v.  H38.  His  works  comimred
with  those  of  Tacitus,  vll.  233.

Locusta,  Uio  professor  of  poisoning,  v.  450;
vl.  28^

Loltia  Paiilinn,  the  richest  woman  In  Kome,
Pllny'd  nccount  of  her,  v.  307.  Wife  of  V.
MommluB ICegulus,  307. Espoused  and

INDEX.

639

shortly  afterwards  repudiated  by  OaioB
Ctesar,  BUT.  Banished  bv  Claudias  with
the  loBS  of  her  fortune,  443.

LolUus,  M.,  elected  to  the  consulship,  IIL
86S.  Deft-atiMl  in  tJaul,  iv.  16«.  Accom-
panies Cains  ('a-:ir  into  the  East,  214.  De-
noiMKvil  liv  (';iiiis  Casar,  217.  His  death,
•JIT. KatliVr  <.f  LoUia  Paulina,  v.  *>6.

Lollius  Urliicus,  (leleuts  the  Brlgantes,  and
builds  the  wail  of  Antoninus  in  North
Britain,  vU.  4O0.

Loudinium  In  the  lime  of  Claudius,  vt  IT.
Backed  by  the  Icenl,  47.  In  the  time  rf
Hadrian,  vii.  846.

Lorlum,  residence  of  Antoninus  Plus  at,  vlL
40^^.

Lucunu«,  M.,  Annteua,  takes  part  in  Plso's
conspiracy  against  Nero,  vi.  14fi.  Paid  to  i
have  betrayed  his  niotlier,  149.  Put  to  I
death,  14t).  His  earlv  coiiiiiiiments  to  I
Nero,  l.Vi,  230.  Kx'auiinatiou  of  his  <
"i'harsalia"  as  a  history  of  mind  and
opinion of  the jn-riod. '  vW^-'i44. Cliar-

acterlstics  of  Lu(
rariea,  2i)->.  Hi.s
tiou,  241. Hi.')  all

IcnowledL'e.  •^^■>.

■Jl:l

-■■ip

iiia-
dlc

pa-

la."

■-'Ji;  \  ii.  -'-'1.  <'o!ii;.i!  Ital-
ic ui,  vii. -J  Ja, -J;;  i. Ai.'l  x> .,  :a5-

243.

Luc«a,  levees  of  Ca-s'ii i;. n  ■  C  L  582.

Luoceius,  L.,  the  hbtjii.i;i,  ^.jjj  for  t.he  con-
sulship, 1.  168.

Lucilius,  C,  a  champion  of  th«  old  Koman

litenitor.- ii tl'.t
Lueill  ,

Lucri  ;

tiir.
Luen  ;

ther . -
Lucul'.iis,  A

Jews  in  til
Liiculliis.  1..

4t. M

oial

his  <•  ■

with  thoso  ol'  liis  sii'-

His  character,  (m. I

•  M.  Anre-
Ml  the  Ka-

tiy  Augustus  to

volt  of  th«

:  in  Asia,  L
J  rdorm  the  prorln-
44. SupersMed  In
His views  coiiii>ared
-  4i
the
use  he  ni.ade  of  it,  -^i.  '■ :  -  the

honour  of  a  triumph,  110. luuijitie  of
Memmius  with the  wife  of LucuUus's
brother,  161. LucuUus's  life  in  danger,
178. His  advice  to  Cicero,  1S5.
Lucullus,  Marcus,  his  invasion  of  Itoeia,

Iv.  90.
Lucullus,  formerly  prefect' of  Britain,  put  to

death,  vii  147.
Ludi  Apollinares exhibited in Borne  by

Brutus,  ill.  73.
Ludi  tSa-culares  of  Augustus,  ilL  875;  iv.

142-145. Of  Claudius,  v.  421.
Lu<li  Maximi  of  Nero,  vL  111.
Luicdiineiisis.  the  provlncia,  organization  ot,

bv  Auirustus,  iv.  75.
Lu^duuuin,  touuiled  by  Plancus,  iv.  75  Its
site,  groat  roiids  from  it  to  the  Atlantic
and  Britisii  Channel,  its  we.tlth,  popula-
tion, and  importance  as  a  colony,  76.  The
commercial  centre  of  the  Gauls,  76.  The
imperial  residence  of  Lugdunum,  76. Its

iniDt,7S.  lU  riMUirtaal  Mboola,  88.  Altar
dedicat«d  to  Aagiiim  and  Boom  by  the
Oanla  at  Locdanam,  It.  1T&  Impwial
anctlon  of  (Miu  at  Lagduam,  t.  8tf .

Lnperealia,  rerlTMl  bf  Aacnataa,  til.  8T9>.

Lapercua. S»4  Memmlaa.

Lapu^  OM  of  tlM  aawiilMi  of  OtimM,  |nt  to
death,  T.  M».

Lupus,  pnfeet  of  EcTpt,  hla  §•▼««  bmm-
urea  Malnat  tlM  Jew*  la  kia  pftyrtaee,  Tli.
WO.  Woratod  la  MTtfal  aoeoaatan  with
them,  811.

LnsitaBla,  OMar*a  eoaqneat  at  thadMiteta
o<;  north  of  the  Tmiu,  i  ie<i

Luaina  Qaletaa,  a  lloariak  eaptela  of  Mer-
cenaries, entmeted  by  Tr^aa  wMk  a  ean-
mand  in  the  Eaat,  riL  Mi  Qaalli  a  re-
volt of  the  Jews  in  Misnpiftarta.  Ua
Ui^  by  his  aoldlera  to  dlMMrta  the  •■•
pire  with  Hadrian,  888.  B«it  bjr  Oadriaa
to  Mauretaala,  881.  Bis  iatrHtuaa  aad
death,  8M.

Lutorius  Priseaa.d«MMBfledbr  Hatwlaalbr
his  veraea  oa  tae  aappoaed  death  at  Dni-
aua,  and  exeeated  by  the  seaatajjr.  IM,

Lyda,  antoaooKNU  atatea  at,  \r.  109.  Oam-
p^naated  by  Ancostaa,  lOSw  I>epriTod  of
Its  autonomy,  tIl  88.

Lydia,  deetmetloa  ot  twalre  cfUea  of;  by  an
'earthquake,  t.  14&

MACEDONLk,  Bomaa  prmrlaee  oC  MttMt
of  the,  L  88.  The  forerament  ot,  eor-
etod,  8&  Aaained  by  Clodius  to  Plao,
80Bi Belaedby&titaa,  ill  15K.

Maaer,  CledlBa,  eommaadcr  in  AMea,  dataaa
the  empba,  tL  aSi. His  death,  9KV.

liaera,  Sertartaa,  appelated  eaptata  of  tike
Pnetortaa  gvaraa,  aad  oitraned  bf  T8>e-
rius  with  the  aireat  of  BeJaaaa,  t.  ttt.
Diatiaetloaa  heaped  npoa  Maero  bjr  the
ettlaeaa,  888.  Beeotnea  almoat  aa  ommx-
looa  aa  Setaana,  MS.  Pat  to  death  by
order  of  BMaaaa,  801

Mccenaa,  C  OUatBa,  applied  to  by  PoIUo  OB
Ylrgirs  behalf  UL  ITT.  Drawa  ap  the
treaty  of  Bnuidlalant,  188.  Seaewa  ae-
gotiations  betweea  Augnataa  aad  Aato-
nlus,  1»5.  Hla  origin  aad  career,  U4-814L
His  freedom  as  counsellor  to  Aaguatoa,  iv.
149.  Hlsea-  ; '.  The repreaenta-

tive  of  pt\>.  '-  first  mintatier  of

the  empire.  i |ioUtical  inflnenee

aa  patron  of  1  iten\t  ure,  158,  Hia  domestic
troubles,  154.  Prescriptkm  of  Antonius
Mnsa  for  hia  sleeplsaaataa,  IM.  Hia
death,  IM.  Hia  maaners  aad  eharaeter,
IM.  Gauaes  of  hia  repatatioa  with  poa-
terity,195L

Maesia,  first  invaded  by  M.  T  \.  90.

Annexed by  Tiljeri'us ■  .90.

Be  volt  in,  extinguished  .  188l

Condition  of'  at  the  end  uf  the  reign  of
Tiberius,  v.  8CT.  Seenred  by  Tniian,  tIL
19a n.idriaa'a  eampaign  in,  va  m

\!  .  u's  bridge  at,  viL  105.

line  of  the  month,  changed  to
i.  l.W.

r.  ita  origin,  T.  115. Dis-

/Acrfecfaa  and  perdutl-

.  n  of  Ib^JeataB  owaiposed

540

INDEX.

of  the  Lex  Apnleia,  Lex  Yaria,  Lex  Cor-
nelia, and  Lex  Julia  de  Majestate.  115-118.
Definition  of  it  by  the  Julian  law,  US.
Few  trials  for  majestas  under  Augustus,

119.  Its  application  extended  by'  Tibe-
rius to  pasquinades  and  abusive  words,

120,  121.  Constructive  majestas,  125.
Cases  of  Falanius  and  Kubrius,  125.
Cases  of  Granius  Marcellus,  Ennius,  and
others,  125-129.  Extravagances  of  the
law,  187.  Nero's  temperate  proceedings  in
cases  of  majesty,  vi.  114.

Mallins,  C,  an  adherent  of  Catilina,  i.  131.
Eaises  the  standard  of  revolt  in  Etruria,
181. Declared  an  enemy  of  the  state,  131.

Mamurra,  chief  of  Caesar's  engineering  de-
partment, his  slvill  and  wealth,  ii.  155.
His  house  on  the  Crelian  hill,  iv.  87S.

Mancipi,  and  necmancipi,  in  the  old  Koman
law  of  property,  ii.  413.

Manilius,  the  author  of  the  Manilian  law,
conferring  absolute  power  in  the  East
upon  Pompeius,  i.  75.

Manilius,  his  poem  on  astronomy  and  astrol-
ogy, not  mentioned  by  any  ancient  writer,
V.  262.  Period  in  which  he  flourished,
263  note.

Manlius,  his  conquests  in  Gaul,  i.  197.  De-
feated by  the  Cimbri.  203.

Mantua,  confiscation  of,  by  Octavius,  to  sat-
isfy the  legionaries,  iii.  177.

Marble,  trade  In,  among  the  ancients,  iv.  318.

Marcella,  sister  of  Octavius,  married  to  M.
Agrippa,  iii.  331;  iv.  127.  Divorced  by
him,  135.  Married  to  Julius  Antonius,
iii.  271  note  > ;  iv.  136, 188  note.

Marcellus,  M.  Claudius,  elected  consul,  ii.
51.  His  hostility  to  Cicsar,  51.  His  de-
cree about  the  assignment  of  provinces
aimed  at  CKsar,  60.  Whom  he  insults  by
ill  treatment  of  a  Transpadane  Gaul,  61.
Ketires  to  Mytilene,  848.  Endeavors  to
obtain  his  recall  to  Rome,  844.  Cicero's
oration  "pro  Marcello,"  844.  Ho  is  re-
called, but  assassinated  at  Athens,  344.

Marcellus,  first  husband  of  Octavia,  iii.  188.

Marcellus,  M.,  son  of  Octavia,  betrothed  to
the  daughter  of  rtextus  Pompeius,  ill.  188,
217.  Marries  Julia,  daughter  of  Augustus
Iv.  128.  Designated  iL'dile,  and  released
from  the  "Lex  Annalls,"  ill.  838;  iv.  128.
More  popular  than  Agrippa,  128.  His  111-
ncM  and  <leath  at  Bain-,  131, 132.  His  ob-
sequies, 132.  First  tenant  of  the  Manso-
ieuiit  AiigUBli,  13:).  liis  death  imnutcd  to
Livia,  liJa.  The  "'I'heatrum  Marcolll,"
188.  ni»  fiinenil  oration  pronounced  by
AuiniHtus,  188.  Vlrgll'd  verses  his  Imper-
lehuhle  monument,  188.

Marcellus,  (ininlus,  accused  of  oonstructire
trooDon,  v.  125.

Mnrcellua,C.  Claudius,  elected  codbuL  II.  68,
75.  ApiiealM  to  CiDsar's  generosity  on
behalf  of  his  brother,  844.

Miircellns  Kprliiit,  a  noted  delator^!.  168.
Ills  dceliiinatlon  aoallut  PntUB  Throaea,
171. His  rowordi,  1T9.

Miiri-la,  widow  of  ilortonslus,  niarrlod  to
(.'iito,  11.  1V4.

Mareitt  Fiirnlllo,  wife  of  TllM».  vll.  40.

Murclitna,  Trujan'ii  sister,  her  inngnanimtty,
vll.  179.

Marcius  Hex,  his  conquests  in  Gaul,  i.  197.

Marcomanni,  the,  transplant  themselves
from  the  sources  of  the  Danube  into  Bo-
hemia, iv.  287,  242.  Formation  of  the
kingdom  of  Maroboduus,  242,  243.  Cam-
paign of  Tiberius  against  them,  245.  Their
war  with  the  Cherusci,  v.  53.  Wars  of  M.
Aurelius  with  them,  vii.  464,  474.

Mariamne,  the  Asmonian  princess,  married
to  Herod  the  Great,  iii.  304.  His  love  and
jealousy  of  her,  308.  Put  to  death  by
him,  80a

Mariamne,  daughter  of  Herod  Agrippa,  vl.
419.

Marian,  or  popular  party,  at  Eome,  their
claims  the  weak  point  in  the  body  politic,
1.  87.  The  Marian  party  represented  by
Caesar,  90.  Who  obtains  the  rehabilitation
of  several  of  them,  101.  The  trophies  of
Marius  restored  by  Ca3sar,  104.  Weapons
of  the  Marian  party  in  Caisar's  hands,
106, 108.

Marillinus,  grandfather  of  Hadrian,  first  sen-
ator of  the  Hadrian  branch  of  the  ^lian
family,  vii.  323.

Marius,  his  proscriptions  and  massacres,  i.
81.  His  death,  31.  His  bust  boldly
exhibited  by  Ciesar,  101.  His  trophies
restored  by  C^sai-,  105.  His  victory  at
Aquaj  SextiaB,  204.  And  at  Vercellie,
206.

Maria,  the  younger,  his  ofi'er  to  the  Sam-
nites,  i.  81.

Marius  Priscus  condemned  to  banishment
for  malversation  in  Africa,  vii.  4iJ4.

Marobnduus,  or  Marbod,  formation  of  his
kingdom  in  southern  Germany,  iv.  348.
His  army,  243.  Compared  to  Pyrrlius  and
Antiochus,  244.  Campaign  of  Tiberius
against  him,  245.  Occupies  the  land  of
the  Boil,  founds  a  kingdom  there,  and
trains  his  army  after  the  Roman  model,
248,  244;  v.  53.  Accepts  terms  of  peace
from  Tiberius,  iv.  245.  Refuses  to  join
the  Cheruscous,  275.  His  dominions  in-
vaded by  the  Cherusci,  who  defeat  him,
v.  63,  54.  Driven  by  Cutualda  across  the
Danube,  54.  Granted  shelter  within  the
Roman  dominions,  54.  Dies  at  Ravenna,
65.

Marriage  amongst  the  Romans,  ii.  273,  409.
Remarks  on  the  principle  of  Roman  mar-
riage, iv.  80.  Marriage  fallen  into  dis-
favour and  desuetude,  82.  Influence  of
the  freedwomen,  88.  Servitude  of  mar-
ried women,  34.  Struggles  of  tlie  wonu'n
against  it,  85.  The  Oppian  and  Noconian
laws,  86.  Legislation  of  the  republic  for
enforcing  marriage,  80.  Penalties  of  celi-
bacy ana  rewanls  of  marriage,  89.

Mars  the  Avenger,  temple  to,  vowed  by
Augustus,  iv.  'i4.  116.

Morsi,  a  German  tribe,  severely  handled  by
Gcrnianlcus,  v.  80.

Martial,  patronized  by  Domltlan,  vll.  180.
Ills  works  exandnca  and  compared  with
those  of  lloi-ace,  282.

Martina,  the  poisoner,  a  creature  of  Planol-
nl^  V.  (5i».  79. Her  (loath,  79.

MartluH  Turbo,  governor  of  Palestine,  vIL
814,  882.  Relievos  Lupus  in  Alexandria,
811, UIb  amazement  at  the  fanaticism

DTDEX.

541

of  tho  Ji-wB,  814,  App<jlnted  by  Iladriaa
governor  of  I'alf  stin';,  881.  And  In  com-
mand  in  Dacia,  ;5;16.

MarulluH,  C  K|iidu<i,  tribune,  tears  down
the  crown  from  ("jesar'g  statue,  IL  870.
Ills  recall  from  banishment  demanded  by
CsBsar,  ill.  18.

Massa  Ha'bius,  a  delator,  vlL  180.

Maslntba,  a  Numidian  prince,  protected  by
Cffisar,  1.  1-14.

Massilia,  foundation  of  the  city  of,  I  19a
lt8  i>obltlon  anil  rosoiiro.p,  l!i-l.  Kr(  quent
attat-ksof  Ui. I  '; ' trl-

tory  of  the I  la»-

siliauii,  1U5.  :  ibe

liomun  arislorrai)  ,  ii.  liT.  Hi-ilarts  Itself
in  lavour  of  the'  Pompeian  party,  liML
IJifeuded  by  DoniitiuK.  T.'T.  1-.M>,  145.  Be-
sit'tfi-d  on  land  b.\ ; '  " •  t>e»

by  D.  Brutus  for  i  \-«t

(iffeated by  Hrutu-  i  of

the  city  at  this  tiiii.-.  i."^x  l.'xj.  i  ik-  im-
nii-use  rampart  of  Trebonius  on  the  laud
Bide.  1&6.  Ffl^nud  capitulation  and  tre«ch-
ery  of  the  besieged,  159.  The  tieg*  re-
sumed, 159.  Its  tiual  submission  tad
treatment  at  tlie  bands  of  the  CeMriuu,
173;  iv.  73.  Withdrawal  of  its  depend-
ents Antijiolis  and  A{,'uLbe,  74.  Its  lite-
rary emineriee,  82.

yix^nix  iIm.  .l.-nitud,  vii.  816.

M.iiri.i  -  (  .!  .■  i>,  jH>et,  his  tra^edlea,
^  I  '  1  r  .1  to  death  for  decUlmlng
I. IS,  HI.

M  astrolo^ra,  and Chaldeans,

-t,  vH.  111.

M  >  '.  >  I'.' y  daughter  Bablna  married  to
II  i.hi  HI,  \ii.  8:M.  Bears  Trajan's  remains
to  i:..ii„-,  ;W7.

Maiiu--.  i'H'bar's  firiend,  eontribntes  towards
t!i.  t  \|K>nse  of  the  shows  In  boaour  of
(  .1  >.ir,  lit  63.

Mattium,  the  s--  ■  '  "  f  the  Cliattl,  de-
stroyed by  < .  .31.

Maiirotania,  tl.  .  of  the  kins  ot,

attat'ked  h\  i  n.  i  oi.ii.nus  IL  2**.  Con-
stituted a  Ijoman  province  by  OetaTlna,
Hi.  235.  The  kinguom  piven  "by  Ango*-
tus  to  Juba,  Iv.  91 ;  v.  142.  Disturbances
in,  in  the  reitrn  of  Hadrian,  viL  334.  Hon-
oured with  tk  visit  of  the  emperor  Ha-
drian, 851.

Maurloiis,  hia  jest  at  Yelento,  the  delator,
vil.  16&

>' ' '^T  Moles  Hadrlani,  deMribed,

>  ne  invaded  by  Antonins,  who

iv.v.l  to  retreat,  iiL  242.

Miic.irili,  or  Hercules,  temple  ot,  at  Tyre,
l.liiiMkri'd  by  Casar,  ii.  •27&,

Mnliierraneiin  Sea,  the  centre  of  the  Koman
empire,  iv.  811.  The  navigation  of  the
ancients  on  this  sea,  81'2.  Kome  the  em-
porium of  its  commerce,  813.  Staples  of
commerce,  814.  Spices,  &c,  ftvm  the
East,  315.  Paper  from  Egypt,  815.  Wool-
lens and  wine,  316.

Mela,  Annteus,  proscribed,  vi.  162.  His
character  aud  death,  lt>S.

Melito,  Bishop  of  Sardis,  his  martvrdom,
vit  490.

Memmlus,  C,  his  intrigue  with  LncuIIuB''8

brotbei'i  wife,  L  KL A  eudldate  fbr

Um  eoBcalaUp,  MQL
MenuBioa,  P.,  Befnliu,  eoaml,  unaU  8«|to-

nna,  y.  iUL CooiMiled  br  CaiM  to  di-

voree  his  wife.  Lalb  FanllM,  MT.
MemmlBa  Bagnlaa,  tho  nriaee  of  delatort,

raiM.
MeiniM»,tlMroatl,TU.aniM««*. TWted

bjr  the  tmpfem  Babina,  STT.
" iMhrBek

■■■■■■■tW.
Join  the  Veaeti  la  a  BMilttBa  ooaMna-

MenapU,  a  tribe  ot  tha  Belm,  L  ttl

the  -irnfrlTTitt-i  ^[ahut  tas  Ki

Joia

tUa,aM,

tion,  S9a  AttenpU  of  Ommt  |e
theukWr.  CoBBelledbrtbeOenMaata
eraaa  the  BUae,  Ml  gablaua  and  CMIa
■ent  by  Oaiaar  tato  their  eoaatiT,  MS.
Chastised  by  xhem.  Ml  Aad  tmOm  ^
CMar,8M. Checked  by  LableMMML

Meaecratea,  Fompeiaa  adairaL  diteU  Clal-
Tiains  ia  tb«  bay  uT  CnnueTui.  IM.  Ula
dMth,  194.

M  ilie  Pnmpelaa  adaUial,  ama

l>eina  to  laiaB  tba  triuBTva,
i  ries  oTcr  to  Aofaataa  a  iaet
\t  Kii  laree  legkaa OB  board, IML  nahnrd
bjr  Aatonlos  as  a  aiaTe,  1M.  I*>wtapa  tka
lleaas  of  Uoraee,  IM  mtU  •.  Botaiaa  to
the  standard  of  Bextaa,  bat  betrays  kla
trast  a  aeeoad  tiaae,  IM.

Mesopotamia,  aoeeeaaea  of  Draaaoa  in,  414.
Great  aombera  of  Jews  la,  M8L  Aaaexed
to  the  enipire  by  Tra)aB,  tIL  Ml
reetloB  or  the  Jewa  la  MeaMtoUmlai
8ia  Quelled  by  Loalas  Qatetaa,  UA.'
BelinquUhed  by  Iladriaa,  ni^  ML  Ceded
to  Kome,  459.

MeeeaU  iUgvr,  M.  Yalcriaa,  elected  eoMal,
L  14&  Takes  an  aetlTe  part  la  the  pna»-
cntloa  of  Clodias,  1481

Meaaala,  M.  Yaleriaa,  a  eaadi^te  tor  tU
eoBaalaUpi,  L  Ml  Elected  eoMal.  4H.
8nhiniUtoABtoalaa,iii.lT&  Qaaauads
aa  armr  fbr  OetaTiaa,  Ml  Ahaadaaatho
aeaatonaa  caaaa,  teaakes  Aatotfaa  far
OctarlBS,  cnmniaada  la  the  war  sgaiail
Sextos  PoBDBeiaa,  aad  deftata  tka  ■-■ — '.
811  Ml  MeaaaUtheflratAMaataaito-
feet  or  the  dty,  4M ;  ir.  141  DmMedby
the  eeaata  to  offer  the  title  of  "PMer
I>atri«"  to  Aagaataa,  ML  Earaa  a  tri-
umph orer  Gau  oa  the  banks  of  the
Adour,  TO.  Besigrns  his  prefecture  of
Kome,  14&  Patron  of  llbullus  and  liter-
ary men,  460.

Mesaala,  Valerias,  Barbatns,  fether  of  the
empress  Measallna,  r.  401

Meaaaaa,  aaTsl  llj^t  la  the  kaiboar  «C  it
901 Plnndcred  by  two  aniiea  ia  ene

night,  iiL  aoa.

Mesealina,  wifb  of  Claudida,  mother  of  BH-
tannicus  and  Octavia,  her  character  and
influence,  t.  4tXM02.  Her  favourites,
Narcissus  and  Polybiua,  411.  Her  pas-
Ki.,T,  ('..r  M'..-- ter,  a  Saucer,  414.  Destroys
-iaticus,  416l  Klatteied  by
". Her  hatred  of  Afrrippina.

i^ -uiour  with  Silius,  425i. And

warriagv  with  him,  427.  incredibility
and  examination  of  the  story,  427-4^.
The  fk^edmen  combine  against  her.  4^
Her  nuptial  orgies,  481.  Her  mietinc
with  Claudius,  481 Her  death,  484-181

542

INDEX.

Messius,  C,  a  Caesarian,  defended  by  Cicero,
i.  35S.

"  Metamorphoses  "  of  Ovid,  remarks  on  the,
iv.  463.

Metellus  Celer,  the  prsctor,  sent  to  watch
the  movements  of  Catilina,  i.  132.  Pre-
vents him  from  crossing  the  Apennines
in  Gaul,  132.  His  letter  of  remonstrance
to  Cicero,  142.  Elected  consul,  160.
Thrown  into  prison  by  the  tribune  Fla-
vins, 162.  His  hostility  to  Pompeius,
161,  162,  166.  Compelled  to  swear  obe-
dience to  CKsar's  agrarian  law,  1T3.

Metellus  Creticus,  L.  CiBcilius,  attempts
to  prevent  Caesar  from  robbing  the  treas-
ury of  Kome,  it  125.

Metellus  Nepos,  his  government  of  Spain,  i.
39.  Strikes  the  signal  flag  on  the  Janicu-
lum,  108.  Elected  a  tribune,  134.  Com-
bines with  Cffisar  in  harassing  the  nobles.
141.  His  violence,  142.  Deprived  of  his
tribuneship  by  the  senate,  148.  Flies  to
the  camp  of  Pompeius,  143.  Elected  con-
sul, 822.

Metellus  Creticus,  Q.,  honoured  with  a  tri-
umph, 1.  140.

Metellus  Plus,  tribute  imposed  npon  Spain
by,  1. 15T.

Miletus,  city  of,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  Iv.
360.

Milo,  Annius,  opposes  Clodius  with  a  btmd
of  gladiators,  i.  322.  Renewal  of  his  con-
tests with  Clodius,  330,  859.  A  candidate
for  the  consulship,  435.  His  encounter
with  Clodius  on  the  Appian  way,  trial,
and  exile,  4!i6-439.  His  answer  to  Cicero,
439.  His  quarrel  with  Sallustius,  il.  44.
Excluded  from  the  amnesty  granted  by
Ciesar,  182.  Joins  Ca^lius  "in  an  insur-
rection against  Cicsar  in  Italy,  202.  De-
feated before  Capua  and  slain  at  Cosa,
202.

MUichus,  freedman  of  Scicvinus,  discloses
Piso's  plot,  vl.  148,  149.  His  rewards,
161.

MlmoB,  Domltian's  measures  against  the,
vll.  109.

Minerva,  temple  of,  dedicated  by  Octavins,
HI.  814.  Kcstored  by  Domltlan,  vll.  118.
His  chosen  patroness,  IBl.

Mlnucianus,  huitband  or  Julio,  aspires  to  the
empire,  v.  868.

Mines,  revenue  derived  from,  111.  428.

Mlschna,  estimation  In  which  tho  com-
mentary of  tho,  was  held  by  tho  Jews,  viL
288.

MIscDum,  harbour  of,  visited  by  the  Clll-
clan  plraten,  I.  47  note.  Villas  of  tho  Ko-
maus  on  tlie  hulglits  of,  I  v.  808.  Pliny's
villa  at,  vll.  51.

Mlsenum,  treaty  of,  III.  187.

MItbraa,  the  Tyrlau  Hercules  sncrlflcod  to,

by  tho  Clllclaii  plnitcH,  I.  48.
MltlirldatoH,  king  of  I'ontus,  his  contests
with  JJomo,  I.  84.  Haughty  njocllon  of
Ills  propo.Hod  ulllaiu-e  with  Scrtorlus,  40,
Ills  cuuHu  viewed  witli  favour  by  j)ri)-
vlnclals  In  the  Kast,  42.  Ills  cimnicter,
48.  Ills  (reatinoiit  of  Aqulllus,  42  iioti>.
defi'ale<l  by  Hulla,'14,  Again  appciirs  In
tlu)  Held,  U.  Dcfoatod  l.v  Pompeius.  45,
180. Matures  ii  now  cotuoliiutlon  ugatnst

Eome,  13T. Destroys  himself  on  the  re-
volt of  his  son  Pharnaces,  188.

Mithridates,  his  claims  to  the  throne  of
Parthia,  1.  350.

Mithridates,  king  of  Pergamus,  marches  to
the  assistance  of  Ca-sar  in  Egypt,  ii.  262.
Reduces  Pelusium  and  routs  Ptolmaius's
troops,  262.  At  the  battle  of  the  Nile,
263.

Mithridates,  king  of  Commagene,  Iv.  118.

Mithridates,  receives  the  kingdom  of  the
Bosphorus  from  Claudius,  v.  3S0.

Moguntiacum  (Mentz),  the  capital  of  Upper
Germany,  vi,  389.  Monument  to  tho
honour  of  Drussus  at,iv.  185.  Attacked
by  the  Germans,  but  saved  by  the  4th
and  45th  legions,  vi.  398.  Attempt  of  the
Chatti  to  seize  it,  vii.  82.  Trajan's  bridge
at,  177.

Molo,  the  rhetorician  of  Rhodes,  instructs
Cicsarand  Cicero,  i.  97,  note  '.

Mona,  rout  of  the  Druids  in,  vi.  4i.

Monaices,  the  Parthian,  taken  into  favour
by  Antonius,  ill.  221.

Monarchy  manifestly  indispensable  to  the
Romans  in  the  time  of  Augustus,  ill.  428.
The  Roman  conception  of  constitutional
monarchy,  iv.  7.  The  prospect  of  mon-
archy not  discouraging  to  the  Romans,
48.

Montanus  Curtius,  charged  by  Nero  with  a
dereliction  of  senatorial  duties,  vi,  171.
His  punishment,  172.

Morini,  a  Belgic  tribe,  i.  226.  Joins  the  con-
federation against  the  Romans,  276.  Join
also  a  maritime  confederation,  290.  Ca;-
sar's  attempts  to  chastise  them,  297.
Punished  by  Labienus,  888.  Defeated  by
C.  Carrinas,  iv.  70.

Mucia,  wife  of  Pompeius,  divorced  by  him,
1.160.

Mucianus,  Lncianus,  made  proconsul  of
Syria  by  Nero,  vi.  296.  Espouses  tho
cause  of  Vespasian,  849.  Advances  from
Berytus  wcstwiu-d,  851.  Rebukes  the
haste  of  Antonius  Primus,  357.  Con-
firms the  offers  of  Antonius  to  MtoUius,
362.  Enters  Rome ;  his  stron;;  mwisuros
there,  376,  377.  Puts  to  doiith  the  son  of
Vltellius,  and  stays  the  defection  of  the
legions  in  Gaul,  381,  382.  Sends  reinforce-
ments into  Gaul,  402.

Mull  of  Gallowav,  Agrlcola's  view  of  Ire-
land trom  the,  vii.  73.

Mummlus  Lupercus,  commander  in  Lower
(iermanv,  sent  against  CiviUs,  vl.  889.
Driven  by  (.'ivlll.s  from  tho  Island  of  tlio
Batiivl  Into  Ciistra  Vl•tor.^  389.  Besieged
In  Castra  Vetera,  892.  Sent  captive  to  tho
prophetess  Veleda,  but  slaughtered  on  tho
way  to  Llppo,  402.

Mundo,  battle  of,  Ii.  816, 817.

MunduB,  Declus,  and  Paulino,  story  of,  vl.
202.

Miircus,  L.  Statins,  joins  tho  conspirators
after  (Jamar's  murder,  111.  12.  Places  him-
self un<li'r  tho  orders  of  Cassius,  109.
Commands  the  renubllcan  fleets,  101.  Cuts
i)lf  two  trluinvlral  legions,  168.

Miirena,  L.  I.lcinlus,  Ills  unsuccessful  at-
t('mi)ls  to  reduce  tho  Cillclnu  pirates.  1,
48, Elected  consul,  188. Prosooutod  uu-

INDEX.

548

successfully for  bribery  by Bulpiclus,

I  iireiia,  Lioiiiius,  joins  a  conspiracy  against
tlu!  life  of  Aii;.'io,tiis,  ili.  867;  Iv.  1*4.
lusciuii,  il]<,  All  \;iii(lriaii,  vil.  871.
l^l^ollill^  KiiPir^  liuruiigues  the  Flavians,  t1.
!|>ted from conscription by
i,  82.

children, Domitian's l»w
I.  vii.  107.

1).  Brutus  besieged  by Antonliu

101. AtU'uipts  of  the  consuls  Hlr-

iii.l I'aiiia  to  relieve  hiiu,  115-119.

I'.i'i. ' I  tv.'t'u  the  republicans  and  Anto-

hi;iii>  I..  l..n-,  ItiSL

Mylii',  heud-quurters  of  the  Coaarean  fleet
at,  iii.  -iUl.  Defeat  of  the  PompeUu  at,
IW.

MytUene,  sie^  of,  1.  9&,

V.T:viT'-.  iho  champion  of  earix  Bobbmi

A li: . .,  ii.  419.

N  Mil I  ~ ..  join  a  maritime  ooalMeraey
■A^:r.,~'.  ' •  -.ir,  i.'im.

Nil.  M ^  Koiiian  colony  at,  1.  83, 19T.
1 1  '  >  the  interests  of  the  lioman

ii.  ti7.

ilie  stronghold  of  the  Pom-
i  ic.  il.  67. Aii'.;nstns"9  orsranlm-

iiou  Ml  t!u- proviiK  li  ' '  '74

Niu-oissus,  freedmuu  iU-

dius,  V.  4M. His  ^^  I'li.

Ai-.Miii|ili--lie8  the  null  oi  .iiS,

411-,. lii  I.  :ii.'lie  with  Me^,-  .,lt-

t.r.'.l I  V \  itelliiis, 41-  ..ust

^'  ;ui-iK.n,

-.  to  re-
ue  uf  his
1  aodPal-

la8,4'Xi. ill

ill O'.IUI, V!

v^rionariee
Nardaaua

N  >  vx>lt  and
aooua,  tU.

Is'asidius,  L.,  sent  by  Pompeiaa  to  relleTe
the  Massiiians,  IL  166, 157.

Nutund  philosophy,  aci^uaintanoe  of  the
Komaus  with,  vii.  2*27.

Nauloehus,  naval  victory  of  Agrippa  oft,  ilL
•201,  246.

Nauiu.ichla  of  Auspistus  at  Rome,  Iv.  8^5t

N;kv  ligation  of  the  aucient8,and  the  rate  of
tnivolllns:  by  sea,  iv.  812.

Navy.  th-.  lit"  AuffustuSs  iii.  416.  Mutiny
ot''Vit^■lliu^■s  tleet  at  Misenum,  vL861.

Xi'apolis,  descriptiou  of,  in  the  time  of  Au-
1,'ustus,  iv.  868.

Niiimusus,  the  native  place  of  the  family
of  Antoninus  IMus,  vii.  850  note  *.  Ha-
drian eieets  a  basilica  at,  in  honour  of
Plotiua,  SM.

'N'eiiii,  tluiitlng  palace  on  the  lake  o(  viL
272.

Ni>ra  Come,  town  ot,  in  Arabia,  iv.  100.

Ixeratius  I'riscua,  desir»?d  by  the  senate  as
Tnyan's  successor,  vii.  328.

Nero,  son  of  Oermanicus,  affection  of  hia
cousin  Drusus  for  hiin,  v.  16«x  Intro-
duced by  Tiberius  to  the  senate,  177.
Spies  set  by  Sejanus  to  watch  him,  203.

Tiberina  eoraplaina  to  the  aeaate  of  Um,
214.  Banlahed  to  the  talaod  of  Pootta,
216.

Nero,  DniMU  Tlberliu,  ftther  of  the  empe-
ror Tiberina,  lidea  vlth  L.  AataalM  to  &>e
war  uf  Pcraaia,  UL  17a

Nero  (Lueliu  Donltlae  AheMobariMU),
at  tea  yean  of  Me  appeals  to  th«
'•Game  uf  Tray."  t.  m,  Betrothed
to  OcurU,  daaghter  ef  OtowUM  (wd  Ma»-
•alina,  iSi,  441  Biaem.  the  pMlniepher.
apuoiitt«d  hie  latar.  4A.  WMdaeai  to
pubUe  dtattoetfama.  Ut.  Comee  tmmt4
as  the  adToeato  of  poMlar  mee— wi^  dML
Married  to  OeUTta«%  Batotadi

4a». Family  ehametar  of  hie  ■■Beatata,
the  DomiOl,  tL  fit. Ills  p«<aiMi«a,  flft.
MlsfortnnFB  of  his  earijr  retf%  ML PariU
I  htoi,  U.  ItnwiU  fbr
:  the  »■■«■>  tihetrtar,
'roBosaeee  the  Auenl
oruiio  :ius,  63. FaTnawMi

lmpr>  his  flnit  speech  tetke

■«naiv  iigue  with  the  flnai*

woman  Acie,  aj.  Uia  mdaal  mcnm  to
▼ioe,  TO.  Seneea's  pmlae  tt  Xmn  alMB-
enrv.  Tl.  Alarm  SM  aeM«M  «f  J^t^
I  \Vroeauaes  Brit^Alaaa  to  be

Beneeaaimaat  mektackka
ik  the  aeaatei,  TL  DivWaB
iniwieu  .>iero  tod  U>  mnthar, WL  The
charKea  amlnat  her  daelMed  nwftwded,
81.  Uls^aaolnte  aaaMainta,UL  CMi-
seerates  a  t^nple  to  CkttitaiLaad  obtatoa
a  sutue  for  his  Ihther  DomUtaa,  i>4  Fa-
Tourable  eharaelerlitiee  ef  Hero's  ««riy
goverameat,  84.  liberality  «i  hia  flaaa-
oU  meesarea,  Sd.  Propoaee  to  ahellah
the  aetsM^wMo,  ST.  Eramlnatloa  of  wkrt
this  proMMal  really  Importa,  8&,  Hera'a
poUoygiTeaiatMhettoB  tethese— t^tt
No  toqaliy  Mide  tote  the  brtcalwMes
of  htomrlTate  Hfe,n.  Ite  "Qala^wa.
atom  Benaia,*  a&, Nero's  peaetoa  far

P(»BMBahtoa,fT.  If  aiders]
1«L  Hisbf^al  behaTioar  tahareofpse,
104.  Attempto  to  Jaatifr  Uataelf  ta  the
aeaate,  101  Hia  Mnaphal  entry  toto
Kome,  lOd.  Qiatiflaa  the  popalaea  with
shows,  lOT. laiUtotea  tte  JaTeaeUa.  laa

I>«««end*  apoa  tha  a^e,  lOa laalltatea

1,  10«L ffla  laaeaslbUlty  to

in«;  oanseaof  thia,lUL HU

i-vjeeediafta  to  easaeof  meieety

I VM— -"--^ Fefiius  Bofbs

BubeUins  Pfaui-

'  Aemth.  lam,  Ul.

i-a,

by

.  .1.  ihe

.  sence at

ilace  and

,.^ .^chauchery

tiim,  127. The

d  by  the  popu-

Nero  the  first

:ia,at  Eome,184,

dine  of  the  city,

.... „ . . Nertfs  palaee,  or

golden  hou»«,  liia. Uis  exactions  and  ooa-
fiscations  required  to  delHiy  his  ezpenaea,

1  ,....
Hepii
122.

perse

lis,

vi  1

544

INDEX.

141.  Discontent  of  the  nobles  ■who  form
a  conspiracy,  and  place  Piso  at  their  head,
145.  Plans  and  names  of  the  conspirators,
145, 146.  Discovery  of  the  plot,  and  pun-
ishment of  the  conspirators,  149,  LW.
Nero's  performance  in  the  theatre,  155.
Death  of  Popptea,  156.  Her  eulogy  pro-
nounced by  Nero,  156.  Who  proscribes
C.  Cassias  and  L.  Sllanus,  157.  Puts  Lu-
cius Vetus  and  his  family  to  death,  158.
Destroys  Paetus  Thrasea  and  Barca  Sora-
nus,  166  et  seq.  General  religious  tolera-
tion in  his  reign,  223.  His  government
supported  by  the  voluptuousness  and
cruelty  of  the  age,  225.  His  figure  and
dress,  246.  His  vanity  and  love  of  admi-
ration, 247.  Vulgar  ideas  of  magnificence ;
■wants  the  imaginative  power  of  Caius
Caesar,  248.  His  disregard  of  decorum,
250.  His  superstition,  250.  His  favourites
Helius,  Tigellinus,  Doryphorus,  and
Sporus  despised  and  shunned  by  the
upper  classes,  251.  His  impiety  in  bath-
ing in  the  basin  of  the  Aqua  Marcia,
250.  His  cruelties  capricious,  not  politic,
like  those  of  Tiberius.  252.  His  proscrip-
tions of  the  senate,  252.  His  visit  to  the
East  in  a.d.  66,  268.  Probable  object  of
his  visit,  268.  His  progress  through
Greece  described,  269.  His  triumphs  at
the  Grecian  games,  269.  Proclaims  the
freedom  of  Achaia,  270.  Projects  cutting
through  the  isthmus  of  Corinth,  but  aban-
dons the  design,  271.  Political  motive  of
the  visit ;  jealousy  of  Corbulo,  271.  Puts
Corbulo  to  death,  272.  Shrinks  from  visit-
ing Athens  and  from  initiation  into  the
mysteries  of  Eleusis,  273.  "Why  the  Ko-
mans  were  indignant  at  his  acting  and
singing.  274.  Plunders  Greece  of  her
monuments  of  art,  275.  Entrusts  Konie
to  the  care  of  Helius  during  his  absence,
276.  Ills  triumphal  entry  into  Kome,  277.
Discontent  in  the  provinces,  279.  Yir-
pinius,  Vlndox,  and  Galba,  Macer,  and
Konteius  conspire  against  him,  279-282.
His  vaccinating  humour  on  hearing  of  the
conspiracy,  28;i.  His  last  hours  and  death,
285-287.  Kxpoctation  of  his  return  among
both  ]{omans  and  Christians,  289,  290.
Measure!*  for  the  punishment  of  his  fa-
vourites, 302.

Nero,  a  i>n!tendlng.  In  Domltlan's  reign,
Bupportc-d  by  the  Parthians,  vl.  290 ;  vll.
110.

Ncronla.  games  Instituted  by  Nero,  vi.  109.

Ncrva,  M.  Cocxc-lus,  nc^otlatos  terms  of  an
arrangement  between  OctaviuB  and  An-
tonias.  Hi.  l8.^

NervB,  Si.  Coccelus,  accompanies  Tiberius
on  quitting  Hiiinc,  v.  195.  Ills  reputation
na  a  lawyer,  2-JI.  VhImIv  dl.tsuaded  ft-om
BDlclde  by  'i'llxrlus,  242;"  vll.  2:.9.

Nerva,  .M.  ("occcIuh,  Hon  <>f  tlie  preceding,
conduetN  nn  imiulry  Into  the  eoiiHpiniry
of  Pino,  vl.  151.  Ucwurded  with  a  triumph-
al statue,  151,

Ncrva,  M.  Cocci'lus,  hln  life  Mved  by  a  su-
perstition of  Dorultlun,  vll.  152.  i^locteil
emperor  by  tlio  lUMmte,  158,  His  origin,
lift*,  and  clianict«r,  159,  lOU.  UecalU  the
exiioi,  and  protaoatM  tbo  delaiorH,  103.

His  clemency,  164  His  qualities  miscon-
strued, 106.  His  moderation  mingled
,  with  timidity,  165.  Conspiracy  of  Cal-
pumius  Crassus,  vii.  167.  Mutiny  of  the
praetorians,  167.  Nerva  gives  way  to  their
demands,  but  immediately  adopts  Trajan
for  his  partner,  168.  His  death,  169.  His
personal  appearance,  169.  His  wisdom  in
adopting  Trajan,  171.

Nervii,  a  Belgic  tribe,  i.  226.  Join  a  con-
federacy against  the  liomans,  267.  Sur-
prise Cajsar's  camp,  274.

Nicsea  besieged  by  the  Ligurians,  i.  195.

Nicomedes,  king  of  Bithynia,  cedes  his  do-
minions to  Home,  iv.  105.

Nicopolis,  the  Actian,  site  of,  iii.  248,  2.57.

Nicopolis,  the  Egyptian,  founded,  iii.  281.

Nigidius,  the  astrologer,  his  prophecy  re-
specting Octavius,  iii.  60.

Nigrinus,  put  to  death  by  the  senate  for
^conspiring  against  Hadrian,  vii.  3.36.

Nile,  battle  of  the,  ii.  262,  263.  The  canal
from  to  the  lied  Sea  repaired  by  Petro-
nius,  iv.  101.  Exploration  of  the  country
900  miles  above  Syeno  in  the  time  of  Nero,
vi.  268,

Nisibis  taken  by  Trajan,  vii.  804.

Nismes,  amphitheatre  at,  built,  vii.  404.

Norbanus,  commands  a  division  of  the
triumvirs'  forces  in  Macedonia,  iii.  161,

Noricans,  the,  defeated  bv  P.  Silius,  iv.  160.

Normandy,  tribes  of,  subdued  by  the  Ko-
mans,  i.  294.

Noviodunum  (Nevers),  capital  of  the  Sues-
siones,  besieged  and  taken  by  Ca>sar,  i.  270,
271 ;  ii.  16. Destroyed  by  the  Gauls,  24.

Novius,  the  qua»stor,  his  punishment,  1. 144.

Numidia  reduced  by  Ca.>sar  to  the  form  of  a
province,  ii.  804. '

Nyraphoa,  bath  houses  on  the  margin  of  the
Alban  lake,  vii.  272.

Nymphidius  Sabinus,  prefect  of  the  prceto-
rlans,  deserts  Nero,  vi.  2S.5.  Offers  to  sup-
port Galba,  293.  His  offer  rejected,  294
His  attempt  to  seize  the  empire,  294
Killed  by  the  praitorlans,  295.

OBELISK,  the  first.  Introduced  into  Eu-
rope, iv.  25.

Obodes,  king  of  the  Nabatha?an  Arabs,  iv.
97, 114

Obultronius,  his  pretensions  to  the  empire,
vl.  295.

Octavia,  own  sister  of  Octavius,  and  wife  (1)
of  Mai'cellus  and  (2)  of  M.  Antonius,  ill.
183.  Her  virtues,  186.  Her  son,  M.  Mar-
cellus,  188.  Winters  with  Antonius  at
Athens  U.V.  715-716),  190.  Lett  witli  hor
brother  oy  Antonius  as  a  pledge  of  amity,
198.  Brings  men  and  money  to  Antonius,
but  is  commanded  to  remain  at  Atliens,
224.  Kotiirns  to  Home,  224.  Her  recep-
tion there,  224.  Takes  eliarge  of  her  own
and  Eulvla's  children  by  Antonius,  224.
Divorced  by  Antonius,  241,  2-13.  Kespoot
paid  liy  Augustus  to  her,  Iv.  92.  Her
son  Murcellusiimrrlcd  to  .lulla,  heryoung-
cr  daugliter  Marcella  to  Agrlppa,  127.
Kegard  entertained  l>v  the  Itoiiians  for
her,  128,  Virgil's  lines  on  the  death  of
her  son  Marcellus  recited  to  her,  li!3.  Her
death,  182. Kxtniordtnary  hououra  paid

INDEX.

545

to  her  memory,  183. Her  elder  daughter
Murcella  iiiarric"!  to  Julius  Antonius,  ill.

•^Tl  ,iul^  1  r ii-.  Dili.  1-:^  /,./^•  I.

.11-

liuil to  liiui,  40i Jlor  liUi,  Luiiahmoat
anil  .U-atb,  vL  W^^ViX

(l.-t:iviiis.  C. .v»-  Au.'ii^dis.

ii,-i  ,',  ii)-.  -  T'  •  -  '  ^var

:>s, :;G(J. CoiupcUcd Lu nail

■al  of  the  Veragrl,  t  28T.
■ 11. a,  287.

luuders  of  the  reroltad

i  ui  UoLui;. ,jfe«  Patricians.

iim,  the,  at  Athuna,  oouipluted  by
.  in,  vil.  857.

4!  Ill  Tuut.vra,  the  bloody  quarrel  ol^
'W
'  1^,  the  consul,  defeats  the  Ligoriana,

<>  I .  0.,afriendofC»sar'a,IiUoharaeter,

11. .1','.  S.V).
dn:  'W  .  ih.ir.ir'iT  of  Uoman,  IL  438.

orSi-  |'.h':ii-.  .'1-  :i,  ij.  of  the  world,  of  AsHp*

[.;..  '.:1. ill : \\. >-'•(.

I  'i .  or  CbaroDiut!,  origin  of  tlie  name,

II  III,  wife  of  Ciu  Piso,  dlrar«ed,  ••-
|w  i-ti,  and  repudiated  by  Oilua  Ciraar,
\.  ii'iT.

I' rl\-,  a  clii.ftain  of  the  Helvetii,  his
Ilia  intrigues  and  sud-

■'i!:v  romphlns  of  the

I.../,.-,  kill.  .ad

illUI

I  >  and  is

,111  -'i).

1 1 •  at  to  the

le  eonfed-

Cilician

[I'lMiis,  1.  4i  Holt,  luc  luw  liaven  of
C'lamlius,  v.  891.

Ostorius  Scapula,  hi8  campaigns  in  Britain,
vi.  2S,  tt  Kcij.  Konnds  the  colony  of  I'amu-
lodunuui,  80.  Defeats  C'aractacus,  35.
His  death,  38.  His  son  destroyed  by
Nero,  161.

i)iho,  Salvlus,  companion  of  Nero's  youth,
vi.  69.  Husband  of  Poppn-a,  97.  Oovern*
I,ii.<itani;i  ten  years.  97,  Hi'-'  '  >  ...i.-...,  f^>f
(i.u'i,  J-.'. Mortitied  !■  'pt-

i:i_' I'i-  '.  he  asi>ires  to  ;  >i-i3.

laiiiiKis  with  the  soldim .-.-.■ ..  ...-vStO
the  pnetorian  eaiup,  Sod.  Proclaimed
cm[>«Tt>r  by  the  guiu^ls,  and  lea«ls  them  to
the  Porum,  8tt9,  310.  Gallia  assassinated,
311.  Otho  hailed  as  Olho-Nero  by  the
jiopulace,  8U\  Threatened  with  a  rival  in
Yitellius,  31^  Vitellius  marches  south-
wiu-d  to  contest  the  empire,  321,  ft  »eq.
Otho  offers  terms,  but  prepares  for  war,

VOL.  VII. — 35

824.  Hla  pxrfKvntmX  eoadlWitoty  to  tba
MBataandtb«praviaiMa,8ML  The  senate
Mupeoted  of  IrcadMnr  to  him,  S4T.  Ue
maeu  daas«r  BUMlmlraBd  ably,  WSL
DlstnuU  hla  oOean,  WtL Throw*  off

hit  dlaaolato  habits  aod  wehos  at  the
head  of  hla  traona,  M(L'  QpcntloM  oT
hU  flaH  OB  th«  Llgwtea  Miaa^SM. At

,  Piaeaatia  a^  Ba^taeiun.  m  Dafeatad
at  BadriMUB,  !•&  DeeUaaa  to  kmw
the  ooalaM.  «Ml  aMba  hiuaalA  tU,  9KI.
MotirMtehto  tBUda,  MT.

Ovid,  baolahaMBt  tt.  It.  »1.  Bpeculattwi
on  iU  CMiaa,  SSS-MO.  CharMtor  oT  hU
poetrr.  908.  Aa  tniHator  oT  Farthaaina,
Ml  Surer  of  hto|MMBM,4a»-M\  Suf-
fered to  laBgaUh  in  exile  bjr  Tiberioa,  v.
».  Hia  daath,  ir.  4Clk  OMaptrad  with
titeUoa,  vU  tH.

Oxybll,  a  ligniiaB  tvOM,  «ariud  o«t  far
Soman  reBgeanee,  i.  19&

PACONinS AGSIPPINU8  chargad  br
Nero  with  derellotlun  of  hia  aanatariri

dntles,  vL  ITL HU  mulahiaeBt,  ITi
Paeorua  L,  klB((  of  Parthla,  mantoa  a  daogh-

terofArtabas«a,L4A Defeated  by  Cbs>

alaa,a6«. lavadea  Syria,  iU.l»L Slala.

IN.
Paoonu  IL,  Ung  of  FkrtUa,  Ua  iBtcftatsMa

with  Armenia,  tU.  VU Fonaa  ralatlau

with  Deeebaloa,  WT. Hla  death,  iML
PKmani,  a  Belgie  tiiba,  L  Vb, Mm  tU

confiederaey  formed  i^ainat  tba  tm—i^

MT.
PkbIus  Postumat,  eommaader  ot  the  lad

legion  ' "  ' ' .  his  eowardtee,  tL  dfc

C(MBIi  .'.

Pa^lua,  t  .irosted  with  the  i

masd  111  LapiKuioeia  and  Galatla,  vL  MT.

Twoof  hU  ttnar '

■Meea.klnc«fPl
the  emperor,  MT.

sa  IsalOM  taiua  l>y  Volu-
klncflf  nvStTMl. Keealledby

Pattna  Thraae^ iSsaThraaaa.

Bklaees  of  tlie  amperoia,  thehr  vaat  extsat,
vlL  MT.  The  Oeldaa  Hoose  of  M«m^  tL
las :  vlL  88,  MT. The  loatlBC  palaaa  on

thelskeofKem!,«T9L

IV '  ' '  'v  the  Ifniaana  aa

7. Ooatraat  be-

ae  aa  siteafora

ciM',  1^. Af^um-imiou  VI  Cloflra^a  hoaae  on

the,  30d. Temple  of  Apailo  bailt  br

Au?n»tii»  on  tlie.iv.  SSi Oeaorlptioa  of

;-  .1 ---le  of  AagB»tua,8T(>.

1  -ilom  ot,  eoafefred  npea  Her-

Imporeriahed  by  ita
i-r-.  ;^,'.  IV-cnIiaritT  of  Itt  _
iv.sition,  •.'->9.  Its  liability  to
from  its  eoutigunitloB,  8ei9.  riogreea  and
extent  of  the  UeU^nio  dement  amoM  ita
popnhUlaa,*!  Aatmoalw  of  the  ftar-
iseeaaBdaaddiMeea,»(IC«M.  The  Phari-
sees the  popular  pvty,  MT.  Dtvision  ot
Palestine  between  the  sons  of  Herod  the
Great,  v.  M>. Serolt  of  the  Jews in

Pale?! i"  '*-"  ~  i- r  Trajan,  vii.  80T-

814  nder  the  control

of  M

Palfuruij  - ,  - — ... ... Vespasian  trom

the  Benatoriau  roU,  and  turns  Stoic  and
sycophant  under  Domitian,  viL  180.

646

INDEX.

Pallas,  freedman  of  ClaTulius,  v.  404  His
wealth,  405.  Extravagantly  flattered  by
L.  Vitellius,  417.  Takes  part  against
Messalina.  429.  Sujiports  Agrippina,  437.
Becomes  the  paramour  of  Agrippina,  443.
His  pretendwi  vigour  and  its  reward,  450.
Protects  his  brother  Eelix  against  the
Jews,  450.  His  intrigue  with  Agrippina,
465 ;  vi.  64.  Becomes  obnoxious  to  Nero,
vL  &4.  And  is  disgraced,  72.  Acquitted,
81. Put  to  death  by  Nero,  125.

Palma,  Cornelius,  governor  of  Syria,  his
conquests  in  Arabia,  vii.  200.  Sentenced
to  death  by  the  senate  for  intriguing
against  Hadrian,  335.

Pandateria,  Julia  banished  by  Augustus  to,
Iv.  211.

Pandion,  an  Indian  king,  sends  an  embassy
to  Augustus,  iv.  118.

Pannoni'ans,  the,  defeated  by  Octavius,  iii.
283.  By  P.  Silius,  iv.  160.  AndbvAgrip-
pa,  166.  Eesume  arms,  170.  Tiberius
sent  against  them.  170.  Subjugated  by
Tiberius,  187.  Fresh  revolt  of,  in  a.d.  6,
245,246.  Defeated  by  Ciecina.  247.  Final-
ly subjugated  by  Tiberius,  254.  Discon-
tent of  the  legions  in  Pannonla,  v.  18.
Drnsus  sent  to  quell  the  mutinj',  19.
Number  of  legions  stationed  in  Pannonla
In  the  time  of  Tiberius,  142.

Fansa,  Vibius,  a  friend  of  Cffisar,  his  Epi-
curean tenets,  11.  352.  Designated  consul
for  A.V.  711,  865;  iii.  82.  His  indolence,
105.  Joins  his  colleague  Hirtius  in  the
Cisalpine,  118.  Unites  with  Hirtius  and
Octavius  to  relieve  Declmus  in  Mutina,
115.  Mortally  wounded  at  Forum  Gal-
lorum,  169. His  death  at  Bononia,  125.

Pantheon,  building  of  the,  iii.  889.  Kestored
by  Domitian,  vii.  118.

Pantomimes  of  the  Komans,  iv.  411.

Paper  imported  into  Home  from  Egypt,  iv.
815. Manufacture  of,  at  Rome,  816.

Papirius,  u  knight,  killed  by  Clodius,  i
821.

Paplns,  the  tribune,  his  law  de  peregrlnis,
1 105.

Ponctonium  shuts  Its  gates  against  Anto-
niuH,  iii.  260.

Parental  authority  among  the  Pomons,  11.
410.

Paris,  the  mime,  put  to  death  by  Domitian
for  his  Intrigue  with  Domltia,  vii.  110.

Parks  and  ganleiis  of  tlio  Komans,  iv.  409.

Porthainaslrls,  son  of  Pacorus,  king  of  Par-
tbld,  proposed  by  (ihosroes  as  a  candidate
for  the  Armenian  crown,  vll.  '29S.  Lays
'hlsdlodom  at  'I'mjan's  feet ;  his  dlgnlt)o<l
conduct  in  return  for  indignities  otfered
hlin,  and  treacherous  slaughter,  viL  801-
808.

Parthamaspntex,  jjlaccd  by  Trajan  on  the
throne  of  I'urtlila,  vll.  807.  Crowned  by
Tnijan  at  ('tunl|thon,«07.

Parthtn,  rise  of  the  inonanrliy  of,  1. 407.  Ar-
Buces,  40S.  Tlin  I'lirthlaii  court  at  Seleu-
cla,  409.  Parthian  soldlcra  and  their
•qulnment,  400  note »,  Tno  dynasty  of
the  ArHJii'Idii'  obnoxlouH  to  Itn  IVrslan  sub-
ject*, 410.  Iiivaitlon  of  I'lirthin  by  CrnH-
SUH,  414.  PropanitlonN  of  the  Parthlans,
4!i0. Thoir  slrutngeui  to  mislead  the  ene-

my, 420,  421.  Their  general  Surenas,  421.
Engage  tlie  Romans,  424.  Compel  the
Romans  to  retreat,  425.  Entice  Cnissus
and  his  statT  into  a  conference,  and  mur-
der them,  427.  Amuse  their  subjects  with
the  spectacle  of  a  mock  triumph,  428.
Threaten  an  irruption  into,  Roman  terri-
tory, ii.  65.  Cicero  marches  against  them,
56.  Their  aggressions  checked  by  Cas-
sius,  66.  Declaration  of  tlie  Sibylline  ora-
cles that  Parthia  can  only  be  conquered
by  a  king,  467.  Expedition  of  Ventidius
in  Parthia,  iii.  190, 192.  Adventures  of  Q.
Labionns  in  Parthia,  190.  Preparations  of
Antonius  for  war  with  Orodes,  190.  In-
vasion of  the  Parthians  in  Syria,  192.  De-
feated with  the  loss  of  their  generals,  192.
First  campaign  of  Antonius  against  them,
221.  His  disastrous  retreat,  222.  The  al-
liance of  the  king  of  Partliia  courted  by
Antonius,  237.  Parthian  affairs  settled  by
Octavius,  281 ;  iv.  115.  Condition  of  Par-
thia at  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Au-
gustus, 115.  AVho  compels  the  restora-
tion of  the  standards  of  Crassus,  116.  Po-
litical characteristics  of  the  Parthians,
295.  State  of  Parthia  in  a.d.  17,  v.  51.
Interference  of  Parthia  %vith  Armenia,  vii.
297.  This  interference  resisted  by  Tra-
jan, 298.  Internal  dissensions  in  Parthia,
which  is  invaded  by  Trajan,  305.  The
Parthians  subdued  by  Trajan,  806.  Who
consents  to  restore  the  kingdom  to  a  nom-
inal sovereignty,  807.  Visited  by  Hadrian,
who  arranges  terms  of  peace  and  mutual
forbearance,  352.  Victories  of  Avidius
Cassius  over  the  Parthians,  455.

Parthian  games  instituted  in  honour  of  Tra-
jan, vii.  381.

Passienus,  his  remark  on  Caligula,  v.  252.

Parthenius  of  Nica>a,  brought  captive  to
Rome  during  the  Mithridalic  "War,  iv.  462.
Gallas  and  Virgil  among  his  disciples:
Imitated  by  Ovid  and  admired  by  Tibe-
rius, 462.

Paternus,  lieutenant  of  M.  Aurelius,  his  vic-
tory over  the  barbarians,  vii.  474.

Patiscus,  joins  the  conspirators  after  Ceesar''s
murder,  ill.  12.

Pittria  car  ere,  what  the  Romans  meant  by,
V.  196.

Patricians  and  plebeians,  struggle  between
the,  1.  22.  The  contest  tnuisferred  to  the
richer  and  poorer  classes,  24.  The  Lici-
nian  rogations  and  theagnirian  laws  of  the
Oracchi,  20.  Triumph  of  tlio  popular
piu-tv,  29.  Reaction  In  favotir  of  the  oli-
garchy under  Siill.a,  81.  Corruption  of  tho
j)rovluclal  governors,  86.  Moral  siiperlor-
Ity  of  the  knights  to  tlie  senators,  54.
Position  and  policy  of  tlio  senatorial
party  upon  the  deiilh  of  Sullii,  69.  Com-
position of  tlu^  ollican^liy,  01.  Origin  of
tlio  patricians,  and  llicir  illvlsion  into  fam-
ilies, 01.  Nature  of  the  education  of  tho
lioman  nobles,  01  note.  In  wlrit  nobility
properlv  consisted,  ti2.  The  number  of
tho  senate  tlxed  by  Sulla  at  600,  62.  Tho
great  otUees  of  state  sliared  by  only  a  few
hoiisus.  08,  (i4.  ('hanieter  of  the  principal
ollgaiclilenl  leaders,  64.  Character  of  tho
uoblus  us  n  class,  bl. Their  ostentation

INDEX.

647

o.„l.,l,-.»

vi|i. -. '  .'m«BL  681

) .  ,■.,,<:.

1  " ^,85. Th*

sn-talned

\\  "

i.gth

oi  '

'Ian-

j.'.i ■  .  ■

. aiJon

of  tilt; uuLlis al tliu rcaluruUuU uf  tlM

trophies

of  Marius, 104. Their  retall*-

tloh,  Id.V

AS'.al.oiis  uf  the  i">puUr  partf

In  <

' Dcttnie-

tioi.

he  nobl«^

U.H

CeflH  and

<■)■

; ct^ii^plrmey,  119.
\-M. Vlolenee  of

!■>•

n  -

lit  of  tlu-  iHK)pIe,

l-'i.

lleia,

1-';

de-

■  !:•■

n»r-

:.--

Ncpoa,  141.

■Il'

i  \.rum,  148.

(  ,1  -

N  who  are

('..111

148. At-

t.!;

ru  the  pro-

Iiiiii;

.  ount.  14T,

1 1~. 1  .

i. .  1  ',:..:!  i  !  . .;iji.'>  uL'sinat

« I.Mlil;-. 1

.'.I. ll,.  ir  \i.i|..iit .-..lit.  M with

('a-,w. r

1  ■  .  ■  .!■■- .  .  i; ,[: ' ■■ forced

11]'.  i

the

Al:..

"lea

i'. :

Mt Of

'

>  lea  abaB-

I'ower  u  a

Hi'

lati-,  SS9. Their

M-h

~s  In  the  erialt  of

til.  ■■

ilianoe  of  the  oii-

V  the  conaol  Cn.  Pooi-

~  itiaflkctloB  of  the  boUm

:  Pompelua,  7S. Prepare

'  u  Kir'a  meaanrea  hy  force,  Ml

>Nb8-8fi. AailsB  the  worlneaa

rs  of  the  senate,  ««. Their  to-

1'.

il ..f  IlalT  by
r  to  Votu-

'>;:aaee,  to-

.  na,  tM.

1 .

>  iu«ra,  SML

M

1  ■

<  leaar,  iTT.
m. DeoWoB  of

I  ■  .

^  murderen,  UL

!  hv  the  modera-

tioii  i>i  Amiiinus,  ; • ^  ■

IMitrioian

caste,  iv

adoption.

•i<>. l!

houses  at

t' ,m-

})ire,  21.
nousi's,  i

l: ian

Lies

tog  ilmmtm*  tt  flw  elaM  to  tka  kMw

paKoTt
UuMat

of  tka  n%B  «r  Kat«,  IM, lonorar-
MBt  «f  tfca  aU  IubIUm  at  tka

111  Kdin.-  ilrscru

in  iU  lu''  U's  mode  of  passing  a  day.

His  I  i,.-iiifss  in the  inoruin?.  A-iV.

iiiiililav fii'Sta,  i-iri. Hi- ■■

fleld  o?  Mars,  42'i. His

jKT,  423. Horace  empK  .

to  recommend  mtxleraii

ment  to  the  restless  nobles,  456.

licentiousness  as  a  class,  v.  *W

the  cmiH'ror  Cuius  aiewin-*  •' '■

&!'. llis  hanterins  hui

alic  persecution  of  thi :

the  patrician  eilucation  ia  im  .i

of  the  Christian  era,  vi.  otS.

^up-

>tU8
ilent-  I
Their
Spite  of
i-'nia,  i
•cm-  I

of  !

utury  I
V  icious  moral  '

MttoMOT

teaewri
itatetaw  tk«  «KBitT  «r

tha  OmMm  QMan,  1U. Birt
waalth  of  tha  maar  ekaaaa,  am
■MMBNB  far  ■laiBtotBtM  tk«  i
tiM  aaaat^  tVL  tit. CofMlaa  aTtlM
tooTtbaaMM  ratort  ■!  latiMtoi

habiU

BBMMt  tka  BaUa^Mft  MMiriinaaa  af
ttatrAweUtacaTwr.  Kertow af  tka  peai.
tkNtoTtbe  ■ahliw  to  tha  af*  aTtkaria-
▼iaBa,4Sl,  ^aaiL
Paal,  St^  apodal  a>plfaiaMII^<#l<»  taaeii.
Ibc  to  the  Jewt  aii  pNaamas  at  Base,
Tieio.  Hto  Kpitto  to  igltBWiiViaJ
tndlttaa  «r  Wa  talanovw  wkk  BHikaa
or  Braeea,  tti,  tit. Hla  toapataaMaaM  at

KMBa,tUL 8atatiaattar,tl& MarraT
hUretua  t^mddaaftallM ~

MS.

training  of  the  young  nobles,  61. Grow-

PanUtona,  Bnataataa,  kia  tn«tBtita  to  Mt-
ain,  Ti  ^  «<  aafk  Kaworai  ftoM  Ms
eoBUBABd,  Ml

Paula*.  Jiillaa,pat  to  tetk  ft*  toaabovil.
BattoiLTLm

Paulna,  L.  J^Uina,  el«>c«e4  eoBaal,  IL  ML
Proacribed  by  the  triBmrta,  ML  Md

Paulna,  L.  JCiBiUwi,  groi  aijlliw  at  LmI-
dna,  mairlca  Jilto  BaaMMgktar  of  Ab«
raatoa.  Ir.  iML llMilik«iB»  oT  kto  vtft^

ftx  RoaMBB,  or  idea  ti  BBlTfroal  peaoi^  tr.
UL  TVoopa  aad  IbrtlllcattoBa  bT  wUek
thla  peaeo  waa  aaoored.  M4  war  of
optoloB  aUoBtlr  feaeratod  beawtk  tka
aohkea  of  the  BoaaB  paaee,  M7.

Pearia  oT  tka  eoaat  oT  Bii%tato,L  tm.

Padtaa.  <i,  B  triBaMk  pwued  t^  tt.  aST.
neotad  eaBBBl  vttk  OetorlM,  BL  IIS.
Nottoa  «r  ktoa.  ttl  Propaaaa  a  kOl  fer
tka  oaBdaauHttoa  of  OMar*a  aMrdHwai
tM,  IVopoaaa  tke  raatarattoa  to  Ikvaw
rf  ABtoatoaaBdUpMa^W.  Altoyalka
foanaf  tkacMaMM,!^  IMMaaMaB^.
Ma.

Pada  AMaaiTB— %  Ua  poaoi  oa  Praaaa'a
tzpadlttoa  totoOMiBaay.  ir.  180  moU  >.

Pato,  ooaaaL  laat  to  tka  aaitkaaaka  at  Ab-
ttookTrUTSM.

Fafiaaa,  pre*et  oftka  oitjaMar  DaaaMiBB,
Til.  1401

T-.  Ma  pruflt«ate  eammtl«,  UL  1«L

m  taken  by  Mlthridataa,  kiiw  of
;aa,a«&L

1-ent-a  redoeed  by  VeapaaiaB,  tL  4at,  4aa.

PtmmBai  axacoou  of  AatoBtaa  ia,  UL  in,

" 'ugoftiieEvxiBaaBdKrTtknBaBaeaa,
>«dtoAitaB.Tfl.4ML
ua,  compelled  by  Ua  aeldtera  to  take
loem  OTMT  to  Sertorioa,  L  W.  '  Aaaaaai-
BBtea  Bertorioa,  aad  takee  eommaDd  of
the  reTohed  Iberiaaa,  48. Defeated  by
f-  "  -  - ioa,  aad  pat  to  death,  4^
1  uftheAraaeid»iB,1.4ia

)  s,  papil  of  the  atoie  Coraatna,

u» y.iv :WKt writiIMp^TL  Stt,  £M. OOBl-

[lared  with  JuvenaL  SML
Penisia,  L.  Antouiua  beaieaed  by  Oetarlna

in,  Ui  liA). Famtoe  in,  1>«. Cspitulatea,

ISO. Deetroyed  by  fire,  180.
Pestilence  apccad  by  an  anny  on  its  way

548

INDEX,

from  the  East,  vii.  461.  Its  disastrous
eflfects  on  the  empire,  4S6.  .

Petra,  Pompeius  blockaded  within  his  lines,
by  Caesar  at,  ii.  206.  Operations  before,
21S.

Petra,  the  rock-hewn  city,  chief  emporium
of  the  eastern  trade  with  Kome,  iv.  95.
Acquu-ed  by  the  llomans,  \'ii.  201.

Petreius,  M.,  defeats  and  destroys  Catilina
and  his  army,  i.  132.  Opposes  the  arrest
of  M.  Cato,  172.  Legatus  of  Pompeius  in
Spain,  ii.  180.  His  campaign  and  fero-
city, 132-154.  Joins  the  defeated  Pom-
peians  at  Patraj,  2S3.  Defeats  Caisar  in
Numidia,  291. Slain  by  Juba,  802.

Petronius  Arbiter,  authorship  of  the  "  Sati-
ricon  "  of,  ri.  164.

Petronius,  C,  prefect  of  Egypt,  his  improve-
ments in  the  province,  iv.  102.  Which  he
defends  from  an  attack  of  the  Ethiopians,
102.

Petronius,  C,  governor  of  Bithynia,  pro-
scribed, vi.  162.  His  character  and  death,
168.  _

Petronius,  Roman  governor  of  Judea,  order-
ed to  put  up  a  statue  of  Cains  in  the  tem-
ple of  Jerusalem,  v.  316,819.

Petronius  Turpilianus,  his  prefecture  In
Britain,  vii.  69.

Phsdrus,  the  fabulist,  supposed  to  have
been  a  freedman  of  Tiberius,  v.  262.
His  writings  unnoticed  for  four  centuries,
262.

Phagita,  Cornelius,  seizes  Cajsar,  i.  94  note  ".

Phaon,  freedman  of  Nero,  vi.  2S6.

Pharasmanes,  king  of  the  Alanl,  Hadrian's
treatment  of,  vii.  880.

Pharisees,  their  tenacitv  of  the  Law  and  na-
tional ideas,  iii.  295.  Their  antagonism  with
the  Sadducees,  295.  But  the  Sadducees
the  popular  party  in  Palestine,  297.

Pharnaces  of  Pontus,  revolts  against  his
father  Mitliridiites,  i.  13S.  His  treason
rewarded  with  the  kingdom  of  the  Bos-
porus, 138.  Attempts  to  recover  his
father's  empire,  ii.  2(U.  Defeats  Civsar's
lieutenant  Calvlnus,  265.  But  defeated  by
Cifsar  at  Zela,  272. His  death,  272.

Pharos,  the  islan<l  of,  the  key  of  Egypt
bv  sea,  11.  259.  Occupied  by  Csesar,  259,
263.

Phar-wlia,  position  of  the  armies  of  Cirsar
and  HiiiiiihIus  in  the  plain  of,  il.  227.  De-
feat of  INdupelus  at,  236.  "  Pharsalia,"
the,  of  Liican,  vl.  243:  vii.  223.

Philadelphia,  king  of  Papliliigonlo,  nn  An-
tunlan,  goes  over  to  tlio  Octavlans,  Hi.
249.

Phllagrus,  the  Rophlst,  professor  at  Athens,
vll.  361.

Phlllpple  oratlonn,  the,  of  Cicero,  analyzed,
111.  hft-no.

PhlllppI,  baltle  of.  111.  162-169.

I'liillitpuA,  Mari'liis,  lilii  llHli-ponds,  I.  8-1.
Elected  run.'^ill,  H3I.  (hwn  Into  mourning
and  refused  to  perforin  his  <lutin»,  IMIU.
Hasband  of  Allu,  and  Htep-father  of  Oetii-
vluM,  II.  367;  III.  f>l,li\  Sent  by  the  »e-
unto  to  treat  with  Antotilim,  lOII.

Phlllimus,  nou  of  Herod  tlui  (Ironl,  married
U)  lil«  niccu  IIiTudluB,  v.  ST7.  Itopudiatod
by  bis  wife,  277.

Philo  Judiens,  his  mission  to  Cains  CTsar,
V.  816.  His  account  of  the  interview  with
the  emperor  in  the  gardens  of  Miecenas,
818, 319.

Philogonus,  betrays  Cicero  to  his  assassins,
iii.  147.

Philopator,  king  of  Cilicia,  dethroned  by
Augustus,  iv.  109.

Philosophy  and  philosophers ;  alliance  of
philosophers  at  Kome,  with  religion  and
government,  vi.  18S.  Attitude  of  opposi-
tion to  government  first  assumed  by  the
Stoics  under  the  empire,  1S9.  Seneca's
political  and  moral  teaching,  231.  The
philosophy  of  the  Stoics,  238.  No  politi-
cal philosophy  in  the  writings  of  Persius,
234.  Lucan's  "  Pharsalia,"  235.  His  views
of  philosophy,  240.  Measures  of  Vespa-
sian against  the  philosophers,  vii.  30.
Helvidius  Prisons  the  only  martyr  to
philosophy,  81.  Domitian's  edicts  against
the  philosophers.  111,  148.  ^lutual  ap-
proximation of  the  sects  of  philosophy  in
the  time  of  Trajan,  254.  The  Stoics  and
Epicureans,  254.  Character  of  the  profes-
sorial system  established  at  the  Univer-
sity of  Athens,  360-362.

Philostratus,  his  life  of  Apollonius  unworthy
of  credit,  vii.  365.

Phoenicia,  its  submission  to  Pompeius,  i.
138.

Phraates,  becomes  king  of  Parthia,  iii.  220.
Overthrown  by  Tiridates,  and  has  an  asy-
lum granted  him  by  Octavius,  2S1.

Phyllis,  Domitian's  nurse,  her  fidelity  to  his
remains,  vii.  162.

Pialia,  establishment  of  the  festival  of  the,
vii.  897,  note  i.  *

Pictones,  a  Gallic  tribe,  L  215.  Eovolt  of
the,  put  down,  ii.  37.

Pilatiis,  Pontius,  procurator  of  .Tuda>a,  his
government,  recall,  and  banishment,  v.
270,  271.

Pinarius  refuses  to  admit  Antonius  into
Para^tonlum,  iii.  200.  Hands  over  his
command  to  Cornelius  Oallus,  263.

Pincian  Hill,  the,  described,  iv.  887.

Pindarus,  freedman  of  Casslus,  whom  ho
kills,  ill.  107.

Pinnes,  the  Illyrian  chief,  his  revolt,  iv.
247. Betraj'Od  to  the  Uonians,  255.

Pinites,  Cillcian,  origin  of  the,  1.  45.  Causes
of  their  prosi)erlty,  46.  lieducod  by  Pom-
peius, 48.

Mrusta?,  the,  of  the  Tyrol,  i.  8S4.

IMsldia,  given  by  Antonius  to  Amyntas,  iii.
190.

Piso,  C.  Calpurnlus,  charges  preferred
against  him  by  Caesar,  t.  112.  Implicated
in  the  oonspinvcy  of  Catilina,  114.  His
death,  115.

Plso,  L.  CalpurnluR.  his  daughter  maiTled
to  Cu'sar,  1. 177.  Elected  consul,  177.  His
trontmentof  Cicero,  1S3.  Clodius  a.s.slgns
liliii  the  provinces  of  Macedonia  and
Achala,  305.  Takes  part  wllli  Clodius
ftgiiliist  I'ompeiuH,  821.  Hl.s  recall  olitaln-
ed  by  (Mcoro,  337.  Demands  a  ]>ublio
funeral  for  Cii'sar,  111.  28.  Chief  mourner,
37.  His  hirious  invective  against  Auto-
nluit  In  the  Senate,  H2,  Bent  by  the  senate
to  treat  with  Antonius,  104.

INDEX.

549

Plso,  Cn.  Calpurntns,  appointed  bv  Tibe-
rius povernor  of  Hvrla.  v.  «1. Hif  pride,

i::-.  •  •.■■•'-  ■ ■  ;[,tlOII

the

V  «4.

death  of  (ierumnicuB,  70.  «
povprnmont  of  Syria,  71.  II
ii:  -' r  -.71.  Coiiipelk-d  by  '
iiiious  to  return  to
',  i..  TtberiiiB,  77 II i -

J...llln\ It) It«Iv. "-  f' •

fenct',  79,  N). 1).
cina, he  coinniii

llie
kted
wife.

l*i9o, Cn. Calpurnlua, hl8 wife OrestllU

Viii"  " '■'■■■  '■•■'■■•  fniptror  t'aiua,  V.

■  '■•'.  r  tiv  (.'laudiua,  and

r  vf.  l-ia. Heads  a

. ;  ..,.u,  14.\

1': >  '  I  ui  the  last,  pattode«th

h\ ■  :t7&

I'i-  ,  I  ,...„i,>  c.ii.,.  ..,>,!«  eoi.

!  uted

I  .lop-

liuii ,., c- \ the

et-uate,  SOI. Munlerrd  liy  Olhu,  8J1.

PitMi,  L.,  cousin  of  the  la6t,*put  to  death,  vL
377.

Plso,  L.,  estin^ruifhes  an  iusurreetloD  in
Thrace  and  MH'sia,  iv.  Ibti.  l>efe]>d«  Cn.
l*iso  charged  with  inunler,  v.  80.  Prefect
of  the  city  and  chief  (Kintiiff,  his  character,
245.

Plso,  IhipiuR,  o,.!isiil  liis  behaviour  In  the
affair  of  H

Phu-entia, >:  the  Oauls  «u>d«r

Hamilcar,  1  .  1.  d  for  Otho.  rt  Sfti.
I"nsucce&6full>  altiukcd  by  the  Yitelliaaa,
88i

Plaeidius,  lientenant  of  Vesposian,  repulsed
at  Jotapata,  vi.  434.

Planasia,  Agrippa  Postumns  banished  to,iv.
•253.

Plancina,  daughter  of  Munatins  Planctis,
wife  of  Cn.  Piso,  v.  61.  Her  (k-iendship
with  I.ivia  Augusta,  Ol.  '1  lu-  rival  of
A.'!'!.!'!!  1,  (>1. Iler  arr  vt  in

S\i'  1.  iJ, Included  in  n  of

bi  f  hu>i  .,ii'!  I'l'  h-.i\iiiL  ;-iiian-

icus,  tiy. -  -c  tVom  his,

&1. IVot.  • Uut  at  last

condeuuii  - i

Plancus,  Ml  r  of

justice,  ii.  ■  Cse-

sar,  StWS. »  il,  lU.

93,  105,  lu'.i.  Cro--.-.cb  tlie  l;ho!ie,  but
shrinks  fruin  attacking  Antouius,  126.
Joined  by  l>ecimus  IJrutus,  127.  Ap-
pointed consul,  triumphs,  aiid  denaaniis
the  proscrii>tion  of  his  brother,  157.  Fails
to  relieve  L.  Autonius  in  Perusia,  1T9.
Flees  with  Fulvla  to  Athens,  ISl.  In
SyriiV,  idS.  Death  of  Sextus  Pompelus
ascribed  to  him,  205. Ills  buffooneries  in

Alexandite,  tS8l Pssutts  Aatmliu,  aad

dimlaea  Us  will,  ML rotuda  Locdn.

nana, It.  TSl
Plaotla  UrpilaBtlli,  BsanrM  to  CUndlda,  r.

m9. KepodteUdteadnlterr.aW.
"' MaBBaAia.UsaMiittoMBlafMrdswMted

IBMB^tT.Wl

11  BylTaua,  tVbmtmf*  tnatmmt  ot,
>.  ii>4.

Ptstwiaas  ud  paWrtsM.  atncglt  Mveea
th«,LSL  TMnmBkaftlwiMipidir  party.
ML  Bcacttoa  ta  krow  of  tks  oHcveiijr
iudMr8Blla,«l,ML

Pteutaa,  tak«a  nnmmwfl  of  tba  remaaat  of

•• P '-' In  UlrtoWB.  UL  WH

isandUsl^lM^tei.
■>  txUmmlUmmi  Hlawty
.»..,. .J,  ... .... Bk  4mA  ftwB dM

MTiptiaa  o(  Vesarima,  tU.  H  »•  Wmj
eoBddared  as  a  natural  jMlnimaliMv  ttk
Account  of  him,  and  of  ils  aois  m  Wt,
as  Kiven  br  hit  UMJbtw.ttL

Pliny  the  yon^w.^  daaeripttf  of  tka
rrvat  eruptloa  of  Ycawinl  tIL  tiS-tl.
Patronised  br  Domltlaa,  IM.  HIa  eoa-
eulshln,  14«.  His  attaek  oa  Cettnt,  iU.
Uia  •^  PuiccyTta  on  Tntaa,"  tIL  1W,4ML
Aoeoont  of  klm,  hi»  frtenda,  and  eww
spoBdenta,  SSO,  9M.  UU  mod*  of  Hfti,
MSl  His  iMirentlBO  and  Tnseaa  vlttaa
doMsribed,  9M,  Ml.  HU  letter  to  TMaa
respeotlnx  his  proeeedlBca  afalaat  tko
Christiana,  SSSL  UU  toa^aoBT  ta  tkeir
Tirtuea,  991, 4M.

Plotina.  wife  of  TMaa,  her  msg— lilty,
vlL  ITC  rsTOora  BadrtaBTm,  later-
cedes  with  Tr^;^  Ibr  tho  atetioa  uf
Hadrian  as  hla  suecsasw,  «8lL  HwAeath,
8Sa  Tho  BaslUen  cNotod  by  Badrtea  at
Nemaoaos  to  her  hoaoar,  SBC

Plutarch,  his  phlloaophieai  aad  histotteal
worfca,  leetares  aad  opiaktaa,  tIL  tM,  MO.
Compared  with  Appiaa,  am

Foeta,  Bomaa,  of  srtinlairte  tntelsa;,  tU.

Poleaao^  fctac  of  Poataa  aad  the  Bsipawst

ftToared  h^ aUcatfaa,  It.  IIL
Pidemo,  reeMTea  the  thmae  of  COida  from

Antonius,  UL  IMi

Poleino,  crowned  kln^  of  Armenia  by  Ger-
manicns,  t.  M.

Polemon,  the  sophist,  azemptad  ft«a  taxea
bvl'r^Jan.Tll.MK.  Tte  fcroarita  af  Ha-
drian, Ma  CSiaraetar  of  hk  doqaeace,
and  death,  MS.  Hla  mdeaeea  to  Anto-
nius l^iuss  40&

Police  of  Italy  in  the  relra  of  Tiberius,
T.  148.

Poll-tax,  the,  ill  421.

PoUio,  C.  A&inius,  his  eseute  Ihwa  the  mas-
sacreoftheBomaaabyJnba,lL16eL  His
tj^UOtd  detiMtioB  of  Ck«ar,  iOtl.  His
senrioes  and  ekaraeter  aa  a  personal  friend
of  Cueear,  S4SL  Be««ire«  tne  firoTinee  of
Further  Spain,  8M.  Left  to  8upp>r«M  a
revolt  under  Bextns  Pompeius,  ilL  7Sl
Commands  for  the  republic  in  ^|>ain,  109,
124.  Shrinks  &<om  attacking  Antonins
and  Lepidus,  13&  Appointed  to  eom-
mand  in  the  Transpadane  proriseo  for
Antonius.  177.  Countenances  the  enter-
prise of  L.  Antonins,  179. Bnperseded  in

560

INDEX.

the  Cisalpine  by  Alfenns  Varus,  181.  Ne-
gotiates terras  between  Antonius  and
Octavius,  1S3.  Devotes  himself  to  stu-
dious indolence,  217.  His  library,  founded
for  the  use  of  the  citizens,  235.  E.vcu8ed
from  arming  against  his  friend  Antonius,
249.

Pollius,  Statins's  description  of  the  Surren-
tine  villa  of.  vii.  269.

Polybius,  the  freedman  of  Augustus,  v.  403.

Polybius,  a  freedman  of  Claudius,  v.  404.
A  friend  of  Seneca,  banished  by  Messalina,
424.  Seneca's  "  Consolatio  ad  Polybium,"
461.

Polycarp,  bishop  of  Smyrna,  his  martyrdom,
vii.  490.

Polycletus,  freedman  of  Vitellius,  vi.  854.

Pompeia,  married  to  Csesar,  1.  113  noteK
Divorced  by  him  for  her  intrigue  with
Clodlus,  152.  Torture  of  her  slave  Abra,
152.

Pompeii,  city  of^  its  destruction,  first  by  an
earthquake,  and  secondly  by  the  lava  of
Vesuvius,  vii.  07.  Diflferent  accounts  of
the  event,  57,  59.

Pompeii,  family  of  the,  traditions  connected
with  the  fallof  the,  iii.  205.

Pompeiopolis,  the  name  of  Soli  changed  to,
i.  48.

Pompelus,  Btrabo,  father  of  Cn.  Pompeius,
1.  08.  Gives  the  Jus  Latii  to  the  Tninspa-
danes,  11.  62.  His  interview  with  Scato,
iii.  113.

Pompeius,  Cntcus,  Magnus,  his  contest  with
Scrtorius  iu  Spain,  i.  40.  Saved  from
total  rout  by  Metellus,  40.  Quells  the
revolt  of  the  Iberians,  42,  69.  Entrusted
with  the  war  with  Mithridates,  45.  Ke-
dnccs  the  Cilician  pirates,  48.  Assists  in
crushing  the  revolt  of  Spartacus,  52.  His
early  history,  GS-70.  His  policy,  70.
Unites  with  "Crassus  and  Cicero  in  trans-
ferring the  Judicia  to  the  knights,  72.
Powers  conferred  on  him  by  the  Gabinian
and  Manilian  Laws,  74.  Ills  war  with
Mithridates  78,  186.  Commencement  of
his  intercourse  with  Cu-^ar,  100.  Bus-
pocted  by  the  nobles,  184.  Conquers
Tlgranes,  137.  Desists  from  the  ])ursuit
of  Mlthrldntes,  187.  Settles  the  afViiirs
of  S>Tia  and  Palestine.  13.^  139.  Decides
between  the  claims  of  Hyrciinusand  Arls-
tobuhlH  to  the  throne  of  Judea,  iii.  299.
IVopanitlons  of  the  nobles  against  designs
Ininuted  to  him,  1.  140.  Kelurns  to  Italy,
ana  dlnbanda  lils  army,  149.  Pesen-ed
towardN  tho  wnate  iiiid  Cicero,  150.
Presws  the  senate  to  nitlf^'  his  acts,  158.
Ills  triumph,  15\  The  llrst  Koman  repre-
iMnteil  by  a  naked  Ktntue,  159  note  '>.  His
demandii  for  an  n;.'r:irliin  law,  160.  In-
trigues for  his  <iwn  ii(.'t.'ntiidi/ement,  158-
KVl.  DIvorceH  his  wile  Mucin,  160.  His
wenknens,  dlshlinulntlon,  and  overtures
to  Cu'Hiir,  103-160.  The  nominal  head  of
tho  llrnt  trluinvlrnte,  16k.  C<>nH)ilntr.v
nlh-eed  by  Veltlim  a^fnluKt  Ills  wife,  174.
Oders  ills  hnnd  to.hilln,  CieKar'sdiniKliter,
170,  The  seiinte  warned  liy  Ciilci  iiKalnnl
bim,  176.  IMs  loliavlour  to  Cleero,  182-
1H4,  Itedures  the  OiiuIh  to  milijeetlon,
1211. nil)  vlllu  at  Tiiittiiihiin,  305. Turns

against  Clodlus,  and  assists  in  the  recill
of  Cicero,  321,  322.  His  commission  for
provisioning  Pome,  324.  His  dissension
with  Crassus,  329.  His  anxiety  to  obtain
the  consulship,  330.  Opposed  by  the
existing  consuls,  331.  Keconciled  to
Crassus  by  Caesar's  intervention,  383.  De-
fended by  Cicero,  8;37.  Elected  consul,
889.  Changes  his  policy,  840.  Spain
assigned  to  him,  341.  His  danger  at  an
election,  344.  Seeks  to  ingratiate  himself
with  the  populace,  344.  His  thcitre.  844.
Governs  Spain  while  remaining  in  Kome,
846.  His  fresh  dissensions  with  Crassus,
848.  Eomehts  the  consular  electoral  con-
fusions, 860.  Death  of  his  wife  Julia,  862.
His  connection  with  Ca'sar  weakened  by
this  event,  362,  868,  405.  Lends  a  legion
to  Cifsar  for  his  sixth  campaign,  898.  Ke-
tums  to  his  aristocratic  opinions,  puts  an
end  to  the  inteiregnum,  and  procures  the
election  of  the  consuls,  432.  The  sub-
stance of  the  dictatorship  thrust  into  his
hands,  487.  Declared  sole  consul  and  pre-
sides at  the  trial  of  Milo,  438.  Compared
with  Sulla,  ii.  40.  His  reforms,  conduct
at  the  head  of  alfairs,  and  salut.nry  admin-
istration, 42-46.  Courts  the  oligarchy,
marries  Cornelia,  and  takes  her -father
Scipio  for  his  colleague  in  the  consul-
ship, 47.  His  inconsistent  and  arbitrary
conduct,  and  unfairness  to  Ca'sar,  4t.
His  double  dealing  with  regard  to  Ca>-
sar's  petition  for  the  consulship,  48.
Supports  the  decree  of  :M.  Marcellus,
aimed  directly  against  Casnr,  60.  His
sickness  at  is'eapolis,  68.  Grief  of  the
Italians,  aud  enthusiasm  at  his  recovery,
64.  Peciuired  by  the  senate  to  surrender  a
legion,  19.  Demands  a  legion  from  Ca>sar,
72.  Nominated  guardian  of  tlie  city,  74.
His  Idle  boast,  75.  His  inaction,  i\na  in-
terview with  Cicero,  79.  His  equivocal
position  and  military  force,  84.  Petires
from  Pome  on  the  news  of  Ca'sar's  passage
of  tho  Itubicon  and  conceals  his  plans,  93.
Hasan  interview  with  Cicero  at  Formia",
93.  His  want  of  i^rinciple,  95.  His  nego-
tiations with  Cu'sar.  98.  Joined  by  La-
bienus  at  Tcannm,  99.  Palis  back  upon
Luceria,  102.  Petreats  to  Prundisium
and  prepares  to  cross  over  to  ICpinis,  lo7.
Q\iits  Italy,  108.  Indipiatlon  of  the  Jio-
bles  at  his  conduct,  and  probable  motives
for  it,  lil-117.  Proclaims  war  against
Pome,  118.  Preparations  of  his  lieutenants
In  Spain  to  meet  Ca'sar,  13J1.  I'oniiieius's
road  across  the  Pyrenees,  132.  Sends  L,
Nasldlus  wllh a  ll.It  to  Massilia,  156.  His
position  coiiiiiar(<l  Willi  that  of  Tasar, IMt.
ICuunieralion  of  lilsloiTes,  I.S7-IS9.  Moves
from  Thc't^aloiiiea,  and  l'<jniiB  lines  before
Dyrrhaeliiiiiii,  19S.  Dlflodjjcd,  but  takes
JiorIiIoii  at  Peira,  wlnre  he  is  blockaded
liy  Ca'snr,  206.  ^lalntains  his  (;rouiid  and
gains  a<Iyanlage8  at  sea,  212,  213,  Defeats
the  Clasarlans  before  PeIra,  21S-220.
Triuini.h  of  his  military  skill,  220.  Kxul-
tallou  and  vl<>leiu'<'  of  his  ])artl»in8,  221.
Accepts  the  title  of  Imperator,  but  declines
a  general  engagement,  221.  Compelled
by hiM  partl/ans  to follow  Cu'sar into

INDEX.

551

Thessaly,  225-227. His  position  In  the

plain  of  Piiarsalia,  227. Offers  battle,  22».

Jiuut(  il and  flies, 235,  2S6. E8Cai>€8  to

til-  ^.  I  I  .cist,  embarks,  and  takes  up  his

uii'.-  ('.iiiiilia  and  his  son  Scxtiis  at  I,(-<-

bos,  24.i. iieijuests  an  a-

dria,  is  invited  to  land.  .

murdered, 244-2-tO. l;.

death,  247. Final  disposiii  oi  uis  r^muiii.-.,

219.

Poinpelus,  Cnspus,  son  of  Kfagnos,  brinjfs
reinforcements  to  his  father  troia  A.lex-
andrla,  ii.  1S8.  His  exploits  at  sea,  213.
His  violenoe  to  Cicero  at  Corcyra,  2.M.
His  estates  confiscated  by  Cwsar,  27S>.
Joins  Cato,  and  is  left  in  charge  of  the
I'ompeiau  fleet  in  the  Loswr  Syrtls,  2S3,
2-4.  Ur^ed  by  Oato  to  !  '  •'  ■  ar  lu
Siialn, is repulsed in  and

takes  refuge  in the 11,  . 'J^S.

Sick  in  the  Baleares,  .m.i.  iuko  the
command  of  the  I'ompelans  in  Si>ain,  315.
Views  the  contest  as  a  private  quarrel,
815.  Is  defeated  at  .Muuda  by  Citsur,
overtaken,  and  slain,  316,  317.

Pompeius,  t^.,  Kufus,  tribune,  grandson  of
Hulla,  his  iluughter  Pompeia  married  to
Cii'sur,  i.  103  note '.  Imprisoned  by  the
senate,  431.  Brought  to  the  bar  of  justice,
11.  44.

Ponii)elu8  Sestus,  son  of  Ma^us,  ac«omi)a-
nies  his  father  from  Pharsalia,  ii.  242.  Ilis
estate  conttscjite<l  by  CUesar,  279.  Flies
with  Cornelia  to  .Vfrii-a,  2'>3.  t^ole  sur-
vivor of  the  senaloriau  leaders,  817.  Asi-
nlus  Pollio  sent  a;^iii~'  '■'■"  '^'''V  His
strui;:;l<-  against  the  ('a  ants

in S|)ain, iil. IS. His  ; the

south  of Siwiii,  75. A  • the

command  of the  re^n.  129.

IJaiseS  the  standard  ot  ;  edo-

nla,  145. Seizes  upon  ^  i  ~''

Octavius  arms  ajrainst
Salvidienus,  lt!l. Hi>
in  the  islands,  ITU.  Join-
tX'tavius,lyi. Hovers!
Lucania  and  Apuliii,  1~
as  drawn  by  Velleius,
overtures  from  tlio  triir
ted  into  partnership  m

treatv of  Misenum,  1ST.  i; .-.  -. ,

193.  ■  Defeats  Octiwius,  iy4.  But  does
not  proilt  by  his  victory,  195,  Again  de-
feats Octavius,  200.  Routed  by  Agrlppa,
and  escaiK'S  into  the  East,  201.  His  sub-
seuuent  career,  capture  by  the  Antouians,
and  death,  203-205.

Poini)onia  Onectna,  an  early  Christian,  story
of.  vi.  215.

Poinponianus  put  to  death  by  Domitlan,
vii.  147.

Pons  ^Elii  (Xewcastle-on-Tj-ne),  >il.  847.

Pont  du  Oard,  construction  of  the  aqueduct
of  the,  vii.  405.

Ponticus,  his  martyrdom  at  Lyons,  viL
33i

Pontifex  Maximua,  Ca?sar  elected  to  the
otfloe  of,  i.  113.  Importance  of  the  su-
preme pontmcate,  iii.  371.  The  pontiflces,
epulones,  quindeoemvirs,  and  augurs,  3T1.
Auffustus  pontiff,  3T1.

Pontiffs,  college  of,  duties  of  the,  iU.  871.

PontiuB  AqolU,  hla  ndtamt  to  Obmt,  U.

H«l

r  "".tui. /StePUahu.

.  loB  ti,  KlreB  by  Antonios  to  »

..roMM,  ifl.  IM.

i>ut«  OlMra  to  dMtlLUL  147.

a,  her  «ioBa«wittoii  with  VftlaHiu  Asto-

.T.  41«. OoouBlta  Miefata,  41T.

1 1'lpaa  Babina,  wtfs  (l)  of  Uatm  Oi^^o^

(2)  oTOtho,  vL  »7. Bwbautr.dMrMtar,

and  intrigue  with  MMt\  91 KnafMtmtM

him againtt A^rippiiui,  tt. DMauMto

(X-tavius'  death,  m iUniM  Vitro,  1)0.

Her  death  and  (Uvlae  howmn  paid  hor.

156.  dofik

Popoiatioa  of  BosM,  MMnto  retara*  oL

lilOi'.ir.nt. or tka aaplra, aUL Of

Italy,  «»^aM. Ortheiii«TiMM.M0-H&.

Ancient  and  iBad«ra  popolatlas  tt  th«

Konum domlnkma  eoaipawd,  ML  SM.

Approximat*  Mtlmato  or  the  pwwuattoi

of  Home : 1.  From  the  area  ot  Om  «I^,

894. And  eztrat  of  tha  aabortia,  IN. IL

From  the  recorded  number  of  b(HiMa,Wi

8.  l'>om  the  number  of  redpieaU  of  gntat,

899. Exageerationa  of  aooent  and  BMd-

em  auth<mtiM,  40L The  drewiitafiaa

of  Rome  do  Bot  admit  of  a  Terr  krf*  pq^

uktion,4<Ml  The  popoiatioa  of  tha  Bn—

provineea  in  the  relga  of  Aatoainu  Plaik

TiL  417. Deereaae  of  the  poDalatloa,  and

its  eansea,  at  the  death  of  M.  Anrelta^

4sl. iS^alaoCeT''""

Porcla,  wifb  of  -M  70. Her

courafwandrea*':  -athofher

husbs"'1 ">< < ^. de,  170.

Porus.  '.  :u^  MUHia  an  embaaay  to

Au.

PoBidu; ^  -.^  ..avebin  Gral,  L  812.

FOat  ayatviu  o(  the  Boaaaa  Maptoa,  It.  Ml
Poatnmaa,  helpa  to  defkar  the  oxpeaM  of
thA  showa  in  hoaoar  of  Oaaar,  til.  ML
:a8  tribaaltla,  th^oa■ter•d  OB  ▲*(••-
tVir  lifti.  llLlk

')<  th«  Greek  enaaeh,  waiwaellnr  of
^XU.ot  Egypt,  U.UL Fat  to
.  *aar,!M0.
:2  martyrd<Hn  at  Lyoaa,  tIL  490l

'^i,  capital  of  Media  Atropatone,  be-
ared by  AntoniuB,  iil.  tiL
Pru  ueste,  outbreak  of  the  riadiatora  at,

vL  14&

Pnetorian  oohorta,  eatahtlahmeat  of  tib^  iii.

1 412. Number  of,  in  the  time  of  TIberina,

I V.  142. The  prtetttrian  eamp  eatabliioed

I by  Bejanus,  173. GaiTjr  off  Clandiaa  to

t&eir  camp  and  swear  aUegiasee  to  liim,

I 867. The  pra-toriuu  recruited  in  Italy,

1 vl.  2.'iT. Till  ir i>av and i>rivilei;es.  25S.

j Pn-i.  irder

I Ga.  .1  by

I Vit.  .lens,

j 854. Th<:ir  caaip  stu;:  ;i  by

I the  Flavians,  870. Ori_  i  the

j pnetorian  gtiard,  Tii.  44. .  n-  and

fall,  442.

Praetors,  position  and  duties  of  the,  under

the  eiuiiife.  iii.  400. Character  of  their

I pen  vii.  426.

Prasu-  f  the  Iceni,  submits  to

: Horn.  ilis  deatli,44. Indignities

552

INDEX.

to  which  his  wife  and  children  were  sub-
mitted, 44.

Prefect  ol  the  city,  his  duties  under  the
empire,  iii.  402.  Formal  institution  of  the
prefecture  of  the  city,  iv.  145.

Prefects  of  the  provinces,  character  of  their
edicts,  vii.  426.

Priscianus,  conspires  against  Antoninus
Pius,  and  slays  himself,  vii.  S99.

Priscus,  Lutorius,  found  guilty  of  construct-
ive treason,  and  executed,  v.  126.

Priscus,  prefect  of  the  prsitorians,  his  suicide,
vi.  376.

Proculus,  Scribonius,  killed  in  the  senate
house,  V.  360.

Proculus,  put  ta  death  by  Nero,  vi.  273.

Proculus,  Licinius,  chosen  prefect  of  the
pnctorians,  vi.  812.

Princeps  senatus,  original  import  and  privi-
leges of  the,  iii.  852.  Its  signification  ex-
tended under  the  emperors,  855.

Procillns,  C.  Valerius,  thrown  into  chains
b)'  Ariovistus,  L  259  note  K  Kecovered,
262.

Proconsuls,  their  government  of  the  prov-
inces, and  enormous  patronage,  i.  35.  TIio
proconsular  imperium,  its  privileges  aud
growth,  iii.  846, 347.  Payment  of  the  pro-
consuls under  the  empire,  407.  Office  of
proconsul  at  the  same  period,  407.  Inde-
pendent position  of  the,  vi.  259.  Their
government,  260.

Profcssio,  the,  defined,  Iv.  826.

Propertius,  his  losses  by  confiscation,  iii.
177;  iv.  459.  His  description  of  the  bat-
tle of  Actlum,  Iii.  254.  Patronized  by
Ma?cena8,  Iv.  459.  His  versification,  460.
An  unskilful  flatterer,  460.

Property,  original  Roman  law  of,  il.  412.
Alfected  by  the  decisions  of  the  pm'tors,
413.  Oradiially  modified  by  the  princi-
ples of  natural  reason,  414.  Ta.KCS  on  the
succession  of  property  under  the  empire,
111.424.

ProBcriptions,  the  first,  decreed  by  law,  I.

81.  Those  of  Sulla,  54.  Horror  of  the
liomans  of  the  proscriptions  of  Sulla,  484.
Those  of  the  second  triumvlnite,  lil  189.
Of  Domltian,  vii.  97, 146.

Protogenes.  tlu'  delator,  v.  860.

Province,  the  Koinnn  possessions  so  called,
1.  83. 197.  Il.s  Importonce,  197.  I^jinds  in
the  Provlucc  demanded  by  the  Clmbrl  and
Teutone-j,  202.  Oi)pre8sion  of  the  Prov-
ince, 207.

Provinces,  the  Koman ;  Onllla  Clsalplnn,  1.

82.  Sicily.  82.  Hardlnla  and  Corsica,  82.
Hiiain,  the  I'rovlm-o,  Narlio,  and  Tolosa,  82.
Tlie  i)rovln<'e«  lieyiind  the  Adriatic,  82.
l{<'lutlon  of  Die  nrovinclals  to  lionie,  34.
((overntnent  of  the  iirovlnces.  85.  Fiscal
oppreMiuDK  of  the  rnnni'rs  of  the  reve-
nues, 86.  Wrongs  and  dl»eontent»  of  tlie
provlneiain,  86.  Hrealvlng  out  of  their
illM'ontent  In  various  (piarters,  37.  At-
tempts of  LiiculInN  to  reform  llie  provin-
cial admlnlnlnitlon,  44.  The  Province  at-
tacked bv  the  (iaullsh  chief  Drappes,  11.
87.  Deelnres  In  favour  of  <'<esar,  162.
Municipal  InslltutlonH  In  the  iirovlnces,
III.  41U. Division  of  tlio  provinces  Into

imperial  and  senatorial,  410.  Organiza-
tion of  the  provinces  by  Augustus,  iv.  60.
Tiberius's  administration,  v.  144.  Their
condition  in  the  time  of  Nero,  vi.  257.  In-
dependent position  of  the  proconsuls  In
the  provinces,  259.  State  of  the  provinces
and  attitudes  of  the  legions  and  their
chiefs  at  the  accession  of  Galba,  296.  Ee-
volts  in  the  early  part  of  the  reign  of
Vespasian,  3S4,  et  neq.  Settled  tranquil-
lity in  the  Antonine  era,  vii.  12.  Trajan's
architectural  works,  204.  His  vigilance  in
the  administration  of  the  provinces,  206.
His  journeys  through  the  provinces,  841.
Threatened  disturbances  on  the  frontiers
in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Antoninus
Pius,  400.  Population  of  the  provinces  in
the  reign  of  Antoninus  Pius,  416.  Con-
stant degradation  of  the  character  of  Ro-
man citizenship  in  the  provinces,  420.
Character  of  the  edicts  of  the  prefects,
427.  Methods  and  principles  of  law  pro-
cedure, 427.  Relations  of  Roman  and  na-
tive usage,  428.  Government  of  the  prov-
inces \>y  senators,  484.

Ptoleniicus  Apion,  sun-enders  the  Cyrenaica
to  the  Romans,  iv.  93.

Ptolema>us  XI.,  king  of  Egypt,  rebellion  of
his  subjects,  i.  310.  Applies  lor  the  inter-
vention of  Rome,  810,  327.  Cato's  advice
to  him,  311.  Resolution  of  Gabinius  to
restore  him  to  bis  throne,  349.  The  va-
cant throne  bestowed  bv  the  population  of
Alexandria  upon  his  daughter  Berenice,
850.  Restored  by  Gabinius,  352.  Puts
Berenice  to  death,  352.  Leaves  his  king-
dom under the guardianship  of  Rome,

243.  His  revenue,  iii.  2S0.
Ptolema'us  XII.,  king  of  Egypt,  succeeds

with  his  sister  Cleopatra  to  the  throne,  iu

244.  Their  quarrels,  244.  His  treachery
to  Pompeius,  244,  245.  Summoned  by
Ca'sar  to  Alexandria,  25.'5.  Kent  in  cus-
to<ly  there,  255.  Restored  to  his  subjects
by  Ca'Siu-,  262.  Tnmiediately  leads  an  at-
tack upon  Cit'sar's  ])ositioii,  262.  I  )efeated
and  drowned  at  the  battle  of  tlie  Nile,  263.

Ptolenueus  XlII.,  visits  Rome  witli  his  sis-
ter Cleopatra,  ii.  841. His  doatli.  iii.  176.

Ptolemiuus,  son  of  Antonlus  and  Cleopatra,
Roman  provinces  assigned  by  Antonius
to,  iii.  226.

Ptolenueus,  son  of  Juba,  king  of  Mnuretn-
nla,  put  to  death  by  the  emperor  Cains,  v.
8M.

Ptolemanis,  CHauditis,  his  great  work  on
geography,  vii.  402.

Ptolenueus,  king  of  ("yprus,  deprived  of  his
kingdom,  i.  807-.309.

I'ulilleanI,  or  farmers  of  the  ])ubllc  revenue,
their  oiiprcsslons  in  the  jirovinces,  1.87.
Attempts  of  Liicullus  to  reform  their
abuses,  44.

Piilillcola,  L.  Oelllus,  appointed  to  the  re-
vived olliee  of  censor,  i.  78.

Puteoll,  vLslt  of  Cu'sar  to  Cicero,  at,  II.  361.

Pyrenees,  military  road  of  Pompeius  across
"the,  II.  182.

Pythodorls,  queen  of  Pontus  and  the  Bos-
phorus,  her  nblUties,  Iv.  111.  Miirrles
ArokrlouB,  king  of  CapiMidocla,  111.

INDEX.

553

(}

UADI,  wars  of  M.  AurtlluB  with  the,  tIL
4<Vi,  44W-408.

'■•  tiis,  bihhop  of  Athens,  his  apology
•  ■ Christians  received  by  Hadrian,

<,  V.

the.  under  the  empire,  iii.  401.

-•• i..,.iv...i  tv iii.  42J*.

who  ubtuiiK  '
29. 186. II

(  month,  its  name  dunged  to

.,..,78,874.

(  il  hill,  the,  i.  ItN In  the  time  of  An-

. us,  iv.  87.\
ijuu  .Uiiy  i>roprietor8hlp,  embracing  exemp-

tiuii  I'foiu  the  land-tax.  reluctantly  given

by  the  emperors,  vli.  418.

RAIUKIUS,  the  senator,  prosecution  oi;  L
107.

l;:iur:i,i.  ill,-,  ioiii  tl],-  H.hiliL  i.  HlO.

U.  .i-irrs,  statistical,  of  the  empire,  iv.  836-

K.ffiii,  a  British  trlt>e,  their  dwelling-place,
vi.  IS. In  IVieudly  relation  with  the  Ko-

iiiaiif,  21.  •J'<.

l:,  l!^  .  ■  ^  i:.:,,

u  . !  V . :

Aii.i  lUe

)>ini  .nk-

lii.ii  ■']  .  i.op.

ii!,.r  «..i -hill  oi'  till' LuJis,  :iJ. \';u-ieties
oi iiliL'h.ii in the Koiuan  empire,  804.
'llio \ulL'.ir notion i.f ;i .U'l\. v. -^Sl.
Measims  taten  l.>  >
servatiou  of the ■
Alliance  of  phil<».

Kouie,  vi.  1Sj>. f^lu!c>,  auJ  ^l^.!ci;Ul,  li.
401 ;  vl  ISW. The  revival  of  reli^aon  un-
der Augustus  to  a  f-Ti-at  extent  a  f:inuine
movement,  liiB. Position  of  the  Ifomau
relijrion  in  n-hititm  to  the  suiKTSlitions  of  I
Gaul  and  Syria  rcspeetivtl>.  iO!>. Anh;!
of  the  time  for  the  ap,  !
Idea  of  the  Divine  Vi>
dojrma  of  Judaism,  '2113. <
toleration  in  Kome  imder  N\r<>,  •-'■^o. sto-
icism and  Christianity,  282.

Remi,  a  lU-ltrian  trilr.  tluir  pi'^er,  L  26&
Taken  under  lioiii  ibyCwsar.

'26S. Their  capit.i  >ieped  by

the conledeiate I  - Devote

themselves  to  Koman  inti  r<  sts,  397.

Rescripts  and  constitutions  of  Auetistus,  iiL
378.

Revenue.  Roman,  mo<le  of  drawing  the,  1.
86.  fiscal  oppressions,  87.  Attempts  of
Lucullus  to  reform  the  abuses  of  the  pub-

lican!.'44. Objects of public ex|)endi<

ture  under  the  commonwealth,  iii.  41T.

Vi,,l.  r  tir. .-Mipire,  41\ !»«un-ts  of  reve-

[lublic  doiiiainis  411». 2.  The

I. 8.  The mpilatio, 42<'.

l. .; ,— .iment  of  the  rtrvcjiue,  4il.

Iiev«*M  drrlved  bom  miM*  ui4  4«sr-
riM,tft.  From  Mit wofkcllakMftM, and
IbrcM.  «&  CutMM  aad  «x<Im.  4Mb
Tuea  oa  tb«  wrnwMlnii  at  v*9fM%f  and
enfranehlMOMBt  <f  iIot*^  tfi. n»B^

li.-  .•  niriuiii  u4  th«  MBpcfW's  BtOM,  48ft,

]:  r  ftjmldabb  poiMa^  tr.  UH

\-y  Dntm,  IMl
I  i  brace  jotna  FiMipej  is  Um

Cleerd'a  ehaneter  of

'7. TlMachMlaartlM

rhcturkiuut  Ui  Umua,  It.  4tl.

Kbine,  Buman  chain  of  tetrsaaea  «•  tka,  hr.

17S. Canal  of  Dniaaa  froca  Ika  KUm  io

Lake  Flevua,  1T». ExtMMkNi  of  tka  K^

man  toverament  between  tka  KUaa  ami

the  KUk-.  2<.'.. The  frwtlers  oTlba  K«-

num  . '  «  tKNiBdad  hy  tka  Kktaa^

V.  4.'  r  l««iaM  ataMa«a4  am

tiie  i  limt  at  AwgiuHaaad

enparar  CUoa  OB  Ifca

unuBcriea  tbera,  MT.

.  r  tka  BhlBe  at  IMaa,

:  art  fk«iB  the  Bhtma  to

ill  of  the  people  «<U.
^t>l. tliiuitiacd  by  the  republkana,  UL
161.  Onee  mlstreaa  oTthe  aea,  Iv.  lOT.  B*-
markable  for  Its  poor  law,  its  arseaala,
and  it*  lehools  of  philoeophr,  lOT. De-
{Nrived  of  its  antoBony,  tIL  A
Riiads.  militarv,  of  Afrippa,  thfoegh  GanL
r  the  Alpa,  m. Koada  and
lltng  by  hBd  in  thetiaMoT
21-m Deaeriptlaa  ot  tha
roads  appruaeUac  Sana,  »A Tha  Ap-
pian  way  deaoibad,  M8,  MIL Tto  Fla-
mlnian  Way,  86«.
Borne,  the  eiij  at,  local  fcatsrea  at  ttaarl-
gUal  MrthpfaMe,  L  leL lu  adaputlea  as  a
sLelttr  to  crime  and  raplae,  1& Katlva
^11 Tlwirk*-
ruoJea  betweea
!ana,il,tt. Tb«
c.  it^it truufiferred  to the  finer and
poorer  elaaaea,  84. nwiriatary  eaaet-
mcnts:  the  UcinlaB  roguloBa  and  agra-
rian laws  ot  the  Gracehi,  8!li. Caaeaaaiaa
of  the  Latin  franchise  to  the  ItaUaa  aHieik
'2'-:. Triumph  uf  the  popular  party  as
c  oontemponnaoaa  with  the  edkan-
iient  of  ^  ItaUana,  89,  Ml OUgar-
i  reaetlOB  under  Bulla,  and  aseend-
ui.^y  of  the  exdnatve  or  Boman  pollcr,
81. '  Comblnatiaaa  of  the  foea  and  sud-
iects  (if l^ome againat her power,  88.
Thn  ;  - irtacns  and  bis  follow-

ers, .' .  H  of  the  govemmeat  at

hon^.  venality and violenee

T  the  elections,  M Dissoluta
!'  the  naaa  of  the  free  urban
.  'lA. Moral  snperiority  of  the
kiilL-tit?  t.)  the  Senators.  5l Growth  of  a
middle  class,  ."4. Lr^l  ritrhts  ot  the  Bo-
man  eitizen,  ^.5. Claims  of  the  pruvin-

554

INDEX.

cials  to  comprehension,  66.  Gradual  en-
lightenment of  lioinan  statesmen,  5T.  Ten-
dency towards  a  general  fusion  of  races,
5".  Contemporaneous  manifestation  of
Christianity  and  monarchy,  5S,  Develop-
ment of  the  idea  of  unity,  5S.  llevolt  of
the  citizens  under  L.  "Saturninus,  107.
State  of  ])artie8  in  Kome  immediately
after  the  conspiracy  of  Catiline,  126.  Ori-
(jin  of  the  rapid  transition  of  the  taste  of
the  citizens  from  simplicity  to  liuiury,
159,  160.  First  transaction  of  the  Ro-
mans hcyond  the  Alps.  193.  Comparison
between 'the  Komans  and  Gauls  in  a  mili-
tary point  of  view,  282,  233.  View  of  the
citj-  from  Tusculum  in  the  time  of  Cicero,
804.  Political  nullity  of  the  Eoman  wo-
men and  their  consequent  security  in
times  of  revolution,  318.  Riots  of  Clodius
and  Milo,  322.  Pompeius  appointed  to  an
extraordinary  commission  for  provision-
ing the  city,  324,  Corrupt  state  of  tlie  citv
in  the  year  v.c.  701,  860.  The  laws  o"f
war  as  understood  by  the  Romans,  402.
Interregnum:  the  tribunes  prevent  the
election  of  consuls,  431.  Consuls  elected
in  the  seventh  month  of  the  year,  432,  433.
General  opinion  of  the  necessity  of  a  dic-
tator, 488.  Riot  and  conflagration  in  the
city  on  the  death  of  Clodins,  436.  Ca'sar's
Bpleddid  buildings  at  Rome,  ii.  10.  Exul-
tation of  the  people  at  Ciusar's  victories,
10,11.  State  of  parties  at  Rome  during
the  consulship  of  M.  Claudius  Marccllus
and  8.  8ulpiciu8  Rufus,  58.  Consterna-
tion of  the  city  at  Cassar's  passage  of  the
Kubicon,  91.  Tlie  citv  evacuated  by  the
senate,  94.  War  against  Rome  declared
by  Potnpeius,  122.  C*sar  repairs  to  Rome
in  person,  118.  And  plunders  the  sacred
treasure  in  the  temi)Ie  of  8aturn,  125.
Administration  of  M.  I^enidus  in  the  city,
170.  Announcement  at  Rome  of  the  bat-
tle of  I'liarsalia  and  the  deatli  of  I'oin-
pcius,  269.  Celebration  of  Ca'sar's  four
triumphs,  808.  Dedication  of  the  Julian
forum,  818.  Tranqiiilltty  of  the  eltv
dnrin^  Ca-sar's  aliseneo  In  Spain,  84d.
KumourH  and  anticipations,  355.  Arrival
of  tidings  of  tlio  victory  of  Mtmda,  856.
Decrees  pnMed  in  Ca'sar's  Iionour,  850.
IIIh  luHt  trliimpli,  857.  Adoption  of  the
Ktrumrnn  iniititutlons  by  the  citizens,  805.
CharactiT  of  tUo  people,  897.  Tlie  Etrns-
oin  dlKclpllne  gnidually  suptilanteil  bv
the  civillMition  oftlie  (ireel(s,m)9.  Intni-
ductlon  of  fi-ee-llitnlctng  at  Rome,  -UH.
Harmony  of  fK'e-tliiiilcing  witli  tlie  spirit
of  the  OKe,  4(^.  Fatal  inllueneu  of  Orien-
tal su|>e^^titi<■n^  4ii5.  Austere  |irlnelples
of  the  old  Roumn  law  of  fnnillv,  408.
Marriage.  4i)9.  Parental  uuthorily,  410.
Original  law  of  iiropcrtv,  412. Tlie  belie-

flcliil  enWlHoftire.k  ipjiil I'liv  c.Millned

to  n  itniidl  elnnf<,  416. Ii  fici^Hiit

Kome.  416. lnllnen<  ii Ro-

man llt<nitiire,  417. I'  i\,422.

Decay  of  military  dl^ri|.liii, , IJ';. (  ..i-
niptlon  of  the  gi'Ueralr*,  426. ('iiiint.  i  i ,
tloii  (if  thn  cIll/.i-nH  on  tbi-  ilnilli  ..r  i . i,
IIL  7. OcoQpatton  of  llou\<
UMMiu,  9. Ilii gurdeun

Tiber  bequeathed  to  the  people,  84.  Scene
in  the  city  at  the  funeral  of  Cwsar,  36-43.
Cicsarean  outbreaks  in  the  city,  and  the
consul  Dolabella's  treatment  of  them,  63,
54.  The  shows  exhibited  by  Octavius,  63.
Exhii)ition  of  the  Ludi  Apollinares  by
Brutus,  73.  Ettect  produced  at  Kome  by
Cicero's  second  pliilippic,  99.  Horrors
produced  by  the  proscription  imder  the
second  triumvirate,  1-13.  Famine  prices
in  B.C.  40, 186.  The  triumvirs  assailed  in
the  Via  Sacra,  187.  Rejoicings  in  the  city
on  the  termination  of  the  civil  w.<irs,  189.
Order  restored  in  the  city  by  Octavius,
210.  Patrolled  for  the  first  time  by  a  noc-
turnal police,  211,  Decorations  of  Agrip-
pa  during  his  wdileship,  234.  State  of  the
city  during  the  absence  of  Octavius  in  tlie
East,  811.  A  census  of  the  Roman  people
taken  by  Octavius,  328.  The  temple  of
Apollo  on  the  Palatine  hill  consecrated  by
him,  sua.  Building  of  the  Pantheon,  339.
Events  which  led  to  conferring  on  Au-
gustus the  potextiiB  conj<vl<tri.%  365.  Le-
gislative and  judicial  functions  of  the  Ro-
man people  under  the  republic,  376.  And
under  the  empire,  386.  The  people  de-
prived of  the  election  of  their  magistrates,
8s8.  Importance  attached  to  the  due  sup-
ply of  grain  to  the  city,  390.  Disastrous
policy  of  free  distribution  of  corn,  891.
Functions  of  the  senate  under  the  repub-
lic, 892.  And  of  the  knights,  397.  Position
and  functions  of  the  executive  officers
under  the  empire,  399-112.  Kstablish-
mciit  of  a  stanaing  army,  411.  The  navy
of  Augustus,  416.  Objects  of  public  ex-
penditure under  the  commonwealth,  417.
Under  the  empire,  418.  The  public  reve-
nue under  the  commonwealtli  and  under
the  empire,  417-420.  Restonition  of  the
temples  of  Augustus,  iv.  24.  And  of  the
popular  worshii)  of  the  Lares,  2.').  Wor-
ship of  the  god  Terminus,  27.  System  of
augural  limitation  and  the  conseeration
of  boundaries  28.  Marriage  among  the
Romans,  30-40.  Regulations  of  .Augustus
for  the  distinction  of  classes,  41.  II  is  re-
strictions on  the  manumission  of  slaves,
42.  The  prospect  of  nionarehy  not  dis-
conraglng  to  tlio  Romans,  49.  Fondness
of  the  neople  for  tlie  games  of  the  circus,
64.  Tno  people  felicitate  thenu'selves  on
the  signs  of  general  peace  and  prosperity,
64.  Considerations  on  the  source  of  Ro-
man history  at  this  period,  57.  Erection
of  the  mau.soleum  of  .Vngustus.  132.  And
of  the  theatre  .>f  Mareellns,  1!W.  State  of
affairs  at  Rome  during  the  absence  of  .Vn-
gustus In  the  KjisI,  137.  ICnthuslasiii  on
the  return  of  Agu.stiis,  188.  Ills  J.udl
Ha'culares ,  142.  Institution  of  the  pre-
fecture of  the  elty,  14."i.  The  history  of
Itome  assumes  the  character  of  a  domes-
tic drama,  197.  The  gardens  of  Mu'cenas
on  tlu^  KsciulUne  hill,  19s.  The  .Vceursed
Flehl,  1119,  ('(UisternuMon  at  Home  on
till'  outbreak  of  the  1'annonlans,  l>nlnia>
liiiiK,  \(%.  24S.  Htate  of  all'alrs  In  the  cltV
nl  this  period,  219.  Discontent  of  tlio
iiopulaeo  manifested  In  many  ways,  210.
(lootl  humour  restored  by  the  giiines  of

INDEX.

555

Tiberius,  250. State  of  popular  feeling  at  ,
the  time  of the baniBDinent of Ovid,  ■
264. Temple  of Coneoril dedicated  by  >
'J'iberius,  'I'd. The ct-nsus  of  the  year
7(i7  (a.  v.  14),  2n2. Itome  the  emporium
of  the  coiiimorce  of  the  Mediterranean
Bca,  313. And  the  centre  of  communi-  ,
cations  by  land,  821. Survey  of  the  city,  I
as  compared  with  other  cities  of  the  em-  |
pire.  y5<),  et  xeij. The  life  of  the  Komans  \
ou  the  Ciimimnian  coast,  Sfti Approaches  ;
to  the  city,  8<». The  r<jads,  805. The  >
ar|ueiliictg,  8(56. Solitude  of  the  country  I
round  Kome,  8fi(S. Tombs  hy  the  road-
side, ;!fi7. The  Via  Apjda,  86f. Entrance
into Home,  869. The  seven hills,  869.  ]
The  I'alatlne,  870. Its  temples  and  pstrl-  ,
ciiin  retiidences.  872-876. I'ho  Quiriual,  [
Viminal,  and Esquiline  hills,  875. The  |
Arx  and  ('apitolium,876. The  temple  of  ]
Jupiter Tari>elus, or Capitolinus, 876.  \
The  C'llvuB  Asvll  and  Cllviis  Capitolinus,  i
877. The  Ave'ntine  hill,  87S. The  Great  :
Circus,  879. 'i'he  walls  of  Servius,  879.
The  valleys  of  Kome,  88tl. The  Forum  \
Itoiiianum,  3b0-8*2. The  Arpiletum  and
Suliurni,  3'^2. The  Forum  of  the  Ca'sars,
8s^. Mhe Vehihrum, 8,Si The Forum
Uoariuiii,  384. 'I'hc 'I'ranstllHriiietiuartrr,
8S4. 'ihe Campus Martius,  8-^. The
I'inciau  hill,  ;is7. The  population  of  the
city  ehietly  elusti-rod  ii:  tlio  lower  parts  of
the  city,  88>S. Style  of  doineRtie  architec-
ture,  SSO. The  'temples,  891. The two
clashes  of  dwellin<;s — the  domuH  and  the
inxuhr,  892. The  mansion-  ■■'  'i'- t...i.i..c

892.  The  cabins  of  the |

893.  Approximate  ebtiuKs
lationof  i:t>me.  8<M. 1.  li

the  city,  894. Exteut  of  tl  ■<!.

2.  Frtuu  the  r«eordetl  nui  s,

89S. 8.  From  the  numb.  1  .>f

prain,  899. Exag;,'erutioM  J

modern  auth'irities  on tli  .  ■!.

The  circumst:M>.  .^  .'f  !', m luit

of  a  very  lar  'i,  4oa. Ul'e  in

Itome,  405.  .:  of  the  streets,

405. Trade- . in them, 40&

Cn'wds  of  louiififio  and  gazers,  407.  In-
teiTuption  to  tniHic  and  paucity  of  thor-
oughtiux'S,  4il7.  Demolition  of  houses,  407.
Fires,  407.  Inundations.  40Sk  Places  of
recreation  for  the  citizens:  I'arks  and
ganlens,  409.  Theatrical  exhibitions,  410.
Pantomime,  410.  Spectacles,  411.  The
amphitheatre,  412.  The  circus,  414.  Char-
iot nices,  414.  Exhibition  of  wild  beasts^
415.  Gladiatorial  combats,  41&.  Senti-
ments of  antiquity  on  these  bloody  spec-
tacles. 416.  Fondness  of  the  Ikomans  for
the  bath,  and  manners  in  them,  419.  The
day  of  a  lloman  noble,  421.  Coarseness  of
the  luxury  of  the  Ifoman  table,  425.  Cus-
tom of  recitation,  42S.  Habits  of  decla-
mation, 480.  The  schools  of  the  rhetori-
cians, 482.  The  urban  and  pnetorian
piuirds  in  the  time  of  Tiberius,  v.  148.
SuppresBion  of  the  Egyptian  and  Jewish
rites  in  Kome  by  Tiberius,  150.  His  limi-
tation of  the  right  of  asylum,  151.  Flagrant
dissipation  of  the  times,  152.  Despair  of
Tiberius  of  checking It  by  sumptuary

enactments,  198. riiiiiiiilimiiiiM  of  botb

tf■Kf^.  154. Tb«  imetorteii  eainp  actab-

1!  ' ' ■ -  ■■  174 lu  lit*  ami  di-

I  e tmpccor  Tlberlna

i 'iaaatroiuoeeiuTuieea

lenwDt,  90Q. ConlU-

i.  u  bill,  ML Prci«i«M

iJkuioB  at  Bone  oo

I  ■jiuiuiii.tST. Ko  tnwM  at

I  ga  oftttctlM  vMbto  UMBf

iML Butid  MMOMllaB  <N

iA<<  1...  M>^  ..i.d  eonflmtOoM of  tlM«Bp»-
ror  Caius,  8U4.  CoIocmI  MWOCiltiaM  uf
this  emperor's  buildincaaiM  •rulUetusl
extravaganee*,  Sitt.  UU  •qnedneU,  tS».
His  Imperial  valaea,  Sao.  Hia  bridfw
across  tb«  Vclafanim,  881.  Tba  liratta  of
the  i)om«riutn  ••'•  ■.-•  'i  br  ClaodlBa, STT.
Public  work^  9a MeMorea

ofthisemp«i  u8emeiit  of  tbo

citizens,  8S<a i ......  »l  BemC la  A.V.

boo,  449.  Failure  uf  tiw  iMiraat  la  tb«
pru\  luces,  and  bread  riota  la  the  city.iM.
Ineriusing  «.xtr"»  m.-;i,....  .>f  the  ahova  la
the  time  of  N.  '°.  Hlaprcacaee

at  home  <U  -  popobee  and

senate.  126. 1 ..^baoeberf  pab-

lielv  encouraged  by  him,  IHI.  The  great
trv  at  llomu,  l£et.  UebuUdiac  of  the  eltj,
185.  E\'->i"i">'  "f  ^'  "■■>'  i.m1«'-«  orgmtdea
house.  '  ' >f  Borne

rarage'  .ee,  160.

The  i.i  :  :-  the  dtl-

lena,  IV  uaa  poUee  r nawmlTay

act  pr<  Freedon  oftbaagbt

»......,'  .  ..^17».  BjrateoiafedaM-

i  ut  uf  urieata  or  auuriatiatea,
re  of  the  Bnaaaaa,  iS,  tt  ttg.

J. -. phUoet^y  at  Boaae  wita

Ml%Ma  aad  goveranieat,  ISbL  Atttaet-
IreaeM  of  atoMaai  to  the  aoUect  cbane-
itn  at  Borne,  IM.  Poeitioa  of  the  re-
Uxkn  of  Borne  in  relatioa  to  the  aaper-
^tioaa  of  Gaul  and  Syria  re^teetivelT,
ItK^. The-  SvriAU  worshiii  of  the  eleateBta

I  :i  to  the

1  uie.  2l«.

1  -i-

tiou  >•
Jews

\  ' ■■.-
27ti.
easine
the 1.

tol 1.'.

And  n

cltv -

the F

871. 1

Flavii.!  -

of  the  Siliute  U'T \

Capitol,  874.  Stron-

in  the  city,  876. 1  ■

of  the

NI  ucianus

A  the  new

556

INDEX.

Capitol,  37S.  Architectural  -vrorks  of  the
emperor  Vespasian,  vii.  2T.  Demolition
of  Nero's  golden  honse,  24,  83.  Erection
of  the  arch  of  I'itus,  83.  And  of  Titus's
baths,  83.  Erection  of  the  Colosseum,  86.
Fire  and  pestilence  at  Home  in  the  reign
of  Titus,  49.  Dedication  of  the  Colosseum,
60.  Triumphal  and  other  monuments  of
Domitiau's  successes,  91.  His  equestrian
colossus  in  the  Forum,  91,  92.  His  build-
ings in  Konie,  117.  The  Cult  of  Isis  and
Cybele  natiu-alized,  121.  The  populace  of
the  city  caressed  l)y  Domitian,  132.  The
reign  of  terror,  and  last  months  of  this
emperor,  149.  Trajan's  column,  197,  199.
His  libraries,  basilica,  and  temple,  198.
The  Ulpian  Forum,  201.  Other  buildings
of  Trajan  in  the  city,  203.  The  catacombs,
286  note  \  Magnificence  of  the  shows  of
Hadrian,  339.  His  establishment  of  the
Athenivum.  381.  His  buildings  in  the
city,  882.  The  temple  of  Komo  and  Venus,
882.  The  Mausoleum  or  Moles  Hadriani,
882.  Buildings  of  Antoninus  Pius,  404.
Keview  of  the  political  elements  of  Roman
society  during  the  reign  of  Antoninus
Plus,  415.  The  populace  of  the  city,  415.
The  Antonine  colunm,  474.
Kome,  empire  of^  etfect  of  the  plunder  of
temples  in  the  civil  wars  upon  the  circu-
lation of  money  throughout  the,  iil.  316.
Reflection  of  the  Komans  and  their  master
(Augustus)  upon  their  position  towards
each  other,  821.  The  public  revenue  under
the  empire,  416-424.  General  tendency  of
recent  events  towards  monarchy,  425,  429.
Character  of  the  sovereignty  of  Augustus,
429.  Harmonious  action  of  the  elements
of  power  under  the  imperial  r6glmc,  430.
Conception  of  tlio  Komans  of  constitntional
monarchy,  iv.  7.  Indifference  of  the  pub-
lic raind  on  political  questions,  11.  Deg-
radation of  Koman  sentiments  by  the
mixture  of  races,  12.  Expansion  of  the
primitive  Ideal  of  Komnn  life,  15.  Signs
of  material  decav,  16.  The  fundamentil
principle  of  the  lioman  religion  still  sur-
viving, 17.  Its  invlgoratlon  undertaken
by  Augustus,  17.  The  patrician  class,  its
conservation  and  relldous  functions,  19-
28.  Unity  of  the  Uoman  cmjilre,  292.
The  three  famllleH  of  nations  In  the  E.ast,
West,  ond  North,  294.  Their  jiolltlcal
chftracterlstlcs  rontnicted,  295.  The  Har-
bariiui  races  of  the  West,  297.  Elements
of  vorlety  within  the  Konian  empire,  298.
I.  Vnrli^t'ics  of  language,  29"^.  Liitln  tlio
official  language  of  the  whole  empire,  29!^
l*revolenco  of  <ireek  In  the  eastern  prov-
inces, 209.  I'reponilerance  of  Ijilhi  In  the
Wesl.rii iiiuvlneen. 800. II. Vorletlcs

of  r  Their  local  tndopondenoo,

«0.  'tlonorolusei,»04. Citi-

zen .  lid  nllle8,804. Blove^  8(H.

Dinlliirtloii.siif  cotiilltlon  In  the  itrovlnros,
8<)4.  Indipeixli'til  riiunniiMJIIeHgnidiially
reduced  to  Hubjeclloii,  nii5.  ,')()<;.  NuinlH>rs
of  the  cltlr-eim,  Uil7.  Exteiinlon  of  the
fhincliino  liy  lli<>  nialiiiiiilKHloti  of  slaves,
808.  Indirect  effect  of  dl.ivery  In  combln-
intf  the  various  classes  of  men  together,
810. Elements  of  unity  In  the  Homan

empire,  811.  Italy  the  centre  cf  the
Mediterranean  Sea,  and  the  Mediterranean
Sea  the  centre  of  the  empire,  392.  Kome
the  emporium  of  the  commerce  of  the
Mediterranean,  313.  Staples  of  commerce
in  the  Mediterranean,  814.  Uses  of  gold
and  silver  among  the  Komans,  317.  Ef-
fect of  commerce  in  giving  unity  to  the
empire,  818.  Security  of  maritime  com-
merce under  the  empire,  320.  Kome  the
centre  of  communications  by  land,  821.
The  orbis  pictus,  or  map  of  the  empire,
iil.  422 ;  iv.  823.  Chorographical  surveys,
825.  The  census  and  the  professio,  325.
Statistical  registers  of  the  empire,  826.
The  Broviarium  Imperii  of  Augustus,  828.
Information  possessed  by  the  Komans  on
the  subject  of  population,  829.  The  Acts,
or  Journal,  of  the  State,  831.  Inquiry
into  the  population  of  the  empire,  832.
The  population  of  Italy,  382-839.  The
population  of  Italy  compared  with  that
of  the  provinces,  340-342.  Ancient  and
modern  population  of  the  Roman  domin-
ions compared,  343.  A  view  of  the  aggre-
gate population  advances  the  idea  of  unity,
843.  The  Pax  Komaua,  or  idea  of  universal
peace,  344.  Trooits  and  fortifications  by
which  this  peace  was  secured,  345.  Ac-
quiescence of  the  sulijeet  nations,  840.
"war  of  opinion  silently  generated  beneath
the  surface  of  the  Roman  peace,  847.  Sur-
vey of  the  great  cities  of  the  Roman  em-
pire, 349-103.  The  frontiers  of  the  empire
linally  bounded  by  the  Rhine,  v.  45.  Pas-
sion of  the  Romans  for  aecu.sation,  132.
The  want  under  the  empire  of  great  and
Interesting  topics  for  iloquenee,  l'{8.
Consolidation  of  the  Roman  dominion
under  Tiberius,  139.  AVho  follows  the
advice  of  Augustus  in  not  extending  the
limits  of  Roman  sovereigntv,  140.  Sta-
tions pf  the  legions  under  'i'iberius,  142.
Question  of  the  succession  to  the  empire
In  the  latter  yearsof  Tiberius,  246.  Death
of  Tiberius,  258.  General  state  of  peace
and  security  iu  the  provinces  during  his
reign,  265,  et  sen.  Phllo's  testimony  to
this  fact,  quoted,  296.  Extravagant  luxury
of  the  table  in  the  time  of  tlie  emperor
Calus,  8)36.  Population  of  tlio  Roman
empire  In  a.u.  800,  386.  Inlluenco  of
women  In  the  government  for  the  first
time,  898.  General  purity  and  terseness
of  style  of  the  Augustanwrlters,  Iv.  485.
Titus  Llvlus,  436.  Virgil,  439.  Horace,
449,452.  Attempts  of  .\ugustu8  to  cor-
rect the  deterioration  of  manners  among
his  courtiers,  450.  I»ropertlu.s,  45s.  Ti-
buUus,  4('^).  Ovid,  462.  The  authority
of  the  emperor  laul  senate  over  matters
of  national  usage,  v.  4-11.  Htnte  of  i)atrl-
clan  education  at  the  beginning  of  I  lie
Christian  era,  vl.  56.  Nero's  prono.'^al
to  abolish  the  vectlgalla  considered,  87,
tt  net/.  Melancholy  retlectlons  of  Ta-
citus on  his  task  as  a'  historian,  160.  Edu-
cation of  the  Romans  under  the  emjilre,
IHI,  182.  The  government  of  Nero  suji-
porled  by  the  voluiitiujusness  and  cruelly
of  the  age,  225.  Retlectlons  on  the  de-
praved morality  of  the  age,  226. Counter-

INDEX.

557

acting,  principles  of  virtue,  227. Condi-
tion of  the  Koman  senate  under  the  Clau-
dlun Ctt'Sars,  252. Impoverishment  of
the  old  families  at  this  ja-riod,  2M. But
general  increase  of  wealth  in  the  upm-r
classes,  254. The  commonalty  divldeil
Into  two  classes :  1.  The  cliints  of  the  old
nobility,  255. 2.  The  patronless  prole-
taries ; the  lazzuroni  of  ancient home,
255. Condition  of the  i)rovinclal9,  257.
Preparations  of Otho  and  Vitelliua  for
civil  war,  823. Character  of  the  Flavian
or  Antonine  period  of  IComan  history,  vii.
7. The period deticient in records,  'J.
'I'ho  temple  of  Janus  shut  by  Vespasian,
10. Tranquillity  of  tho provinces, 12.
Attitude  of  the  German  tribes  towards
llome,  8<). Three  groups  of  biirbariaus  on
thi!  northern  frontier,  on  the  Khine,  the
Danube,  ami  the Ister,  >Sl,  82. Internal
historv  of  l)oniillan"s  administration,  98.
A  decline  of  wtallli  pen-eptible  in  Italy,
118. Trajan's  vitrilance  in  the  administrii-
tii>n  of  the  j)rovineis,  2(t6. Prevalence  of
suicide  in  the  time  of  Tiajan,  vll.  21&
A'oluptuousness and coarseness of the
l)eriod,  2(>(). 'I'ho  tone  of  society  corrupted
liv  the  soUlierv,  21)1. Ma;.'uilici-iice  ol  the
dwillinKSof  tJie  n.ibles,  2()7. I'lineipleof
decorating' the  extiriiir  of  l!oman  tempUs,
but  tho  Interior  of  their  dwellings,  207.
Considenitionson  the  taste  of  the  Komans
in  buiUlini.',  271. Decline  of  eneiy:y  and
ilis:ipp.:il-:ili.-,-  ..f  s-.li.-iit !'.  atiir.  s  <4 cluir-
aet.-r anion.- the I;. .man-, ■^'■>. lixrrp-
tiniial  niaiilinc-ss  of  Tnijaii.  A.'iircila,  and
olluis, 274. tieneral e.xpeetaliua of a
deli>erer  favoured  bv  Augustus  and  Ves-
pasian,  279. Perils '..f tlu- .  lui.iiv iUi.l
<|iu'stion  of  the  sun -
Tnijan,  812,  82S. '1;
work  of  Claudius  I'
Itinerary  of  Antoninus,  1U2. l;L\iiw ol
the  epoch  of Antoninus Pius,  418-45'J.
I'lipulation  of  the  provlncis  in  thi-  ii  i.-:i.
41(i. Extension  or  the  ll.n
417-121. l*rogre88  of  the  .
uniformity,  423,  tt  »eq. 1  '<
spirit  in  the  empire  coinci.li  ut  \\\n\  the
perfection  of  jurisprudence,  480. Disturb-
ances on  the  iVontiers  in  the  reign  of  M.
Aurelius,  458. Inroads  of  the  luirbarians
along  the  whole  Damibian  frontier,  4t"ii>.
The empire depopulated by  tho jientU
Anton  ilia,  461-4ti8.  I'ompanitive  strength
of  the  barbarians  and  the  empire  at  the
death  of  M.  Aundlus,  477. Symptoms  of
decline  of  the  empire,  479. Contraction
of  monetary  transactions  from  the  dimi-
nution  of  the  circulating  medium,  479.
Decrease  in  the  population,  and  substitu-
tion of  slave  for  free  labour,  4>0. Effects
of  vice  tlowing  from  the  institution  of
slaverv.  4S1. Limits  of  material  improve-
ment "  in  ancient  civilization,  4S3. The
decline  of  IJoman  civilization  dates  ftom
before the  republic,  4>4. Disastrous  ef-
fects of  the  pestilence  and  other  national
disturbances,  4S6. Desperate  expedients
for  resisting  the  attacks  of  the  barbarians,
4-^7. Kevlval  of  superstitious  observances,
487. Persecution  of  tho  Christians,  4&i

Eeaction  in  IkTour  <rf  positive  belief  491
General  hopelessness  of  society  at  this
period,  494.
Eoxolaui,  a«n«s«l<HU  of  the,  in  Dacia,  viL
385.  Hadrian  takes  the  Ilild  against
tii.  Ml  ;u:.'. Induced  to  retire  within  their

Ki:'

Ku;-, --.

i.  iiMi.

1 1ll,  wNat-gntX-tnaOmm  oT
tended  eoBsplreejr  to  imlse
rone,  tL  T». Put  to  deeth

^9. Craesed  br  Cesar,  91.

;!h  by  Nero,  vL  2T».
-,  the  tribone,  his  ftuia

'  city,  ooloolaed  by  the  Bo-

hborougfa,  C»iar*s  eemp  at.

CAIiAZlt'S.  oracle  of.  ill.  «0.

^  Irian,  TiL  aM. OniU

1  aooompankis  him  on

1,^  1  !>e  I»«feet  Claras  and

thu'se-erjiaurv  Sui-touius  dligrseed  (brdto*
respect  to  her,  350. Visits  ThebeSt  8TT.

ll.r  diath.  Sn\

8tii. 1

Blain,  ;
Sabinus,  >

s«-ribed  by  tL
Sabinus,  Juliu^.

all- Caul.  \!.

ills,  his  pretensions  to  the

Vespasian's  iMer  brother,

vL  812.

-  camp,

.1  Kome,

;u llic Capilol,  861

:i  i.f  Domltlan,  p»o-
!.  147.
■  iracy  to  liber-

1  bv  the  Se-

ti-mpt-
1  by  the

.nder  C»sar  in

•he  l^nilll.?94.

■:-hd

mil.-  MiieiiU-.  v.  .'JiTy.

Sabiuus,  the  prefect,  declares  foe  Titellhu,
vi.  &i9.

Sabura,  Juba's  general,  charged  with  the  de-
fence of  Cirta,  iL  293.  Kouted  and  slain
bv  <itius,  21>&

Ba'  .  an,  in  Eome,  IL  414

S;.  -.  the  Druid  warrior,  heeds  a

1  J^dui,  T.  16& Hla  defeat

ana  dialli.  1U>.

Sadala  of  Thrace,  Joins  Pompeios  in  the
civil  war,  ii.  ISSw

Sadduceea,  their  origin,  opinions,  and  poli-
tics, iii.  a9«-89&  Support  John  UjTca-
nus,  29^.

Sa ■ ■ '■':-:  plebeian  families  to

S T.rm,  iiL405. Official

pavuieui  oi s-i;u-ies under  the  empire,

Salassi,  war  of  Octavios  against  the,  lit  8a.

658

INDEX.

Their  dwelling-place,  iv.  87.  Varro's
treochery  and  destruction  of  the  whole
tribe.  S9.

Sallustius,  the  historian,  his  quarrel  with
Milo,  ii.  44.  Proscribed  by  the  censor
Appius  Claudius,  73.  His  pungent  sa-
tires, 74  Restored  to  the  senate  by
Ctesar,  280.  Kepulsed  by  the  mutinous
soldiers  in  Camjiania,  252.  Appointed
proconsul  of  Numidia,  804.

Salluvii,  territory  of  the,  taken  by  the  Ro-
mans, i.  196.

Salt-works,  revenue  derived  from,  iii.  423.

Salvianus,  banished  by  Tiberius,  v.  184.

Balvidienus  placed  in  command  of  a  fleet  by
Octavius,  iii.  161.  Defeated  by  Sextus
Pompeins,  161.  Recalled  from  Spain  by
Octavius,  179.

Salvius,  the  tribune,  murdered,  iii.  143.

Salyi,  wars  of  Fulvius  Flaccus  against  the,
1."  196.

Samarobriva  (Amiens),  a  city  of  the  Belgfe,
i.  226.  Assembly  of  Gaulish  tribes  at,
890. Cfpsar  at,  891.  896.

Sameas,  or  Shammai,  his  remark  respecting
the  career  of  Herod  the  Great,  iii.  802.

Samnites,  the,  defeated  at  Sentinum,  i.  191.

Bamninm  admitted  to  the  Latin  franchise,
i.  24. .

Samos  seized  by  the  Cilician  pirates,  i.  48.
Deprived  of  its  autonomy  by  Vespasian,
•V1L28.

Samosata,  capital  of  Commagene,  besieged
by  Ventidius,  iii.  192.

Santonos,  a  Gallic  tribe,  i.  215.

Saragossa,  the  ancient  Cipsar- Augusta,  iv.66.

Sardinia,  supply  of  grain  from,  to  Rome,  i.
88.  The  government  of,  entrusted  to
Cotta,  ii.  86.  Declares  for  Ca:>8ar,  121.
State  of  the  island  in  the  time  of  Augus-
tus, Iv.  128.  Its  population  at  tho  com-
mencement of  tlie  eninire,  840.  Four
thousand  Jews  banished  from  Rome  to
Sardinia  by  Tiberius,  v.  150.

Sarmatians,  triumph  of  M.  AureliuB  over
the,  vil.  473. Renewal  of  tho  war,  474.

Baaemo,  his  contribution  towards  tho  cx-
TVRDSo  of  the  shows  In  honor  of  Ctvsar,  iii.

Satala,  on  tho  Lyons,  occupied  by  Trajan,

vll.  808,  804.
BatrluA  SiTiindns  reveals  to  Antonia  tho

conspiracy  of  Sejanns,  v.  228.
Saturn,  temple  of,  in  the  ("iipltol,  tho  treas-
ury of  Rome  iilundored  by  Ciesar,  II.  124.
Satumlnu^  C.  Sentiao,  elected  consul,  ill.

8«a Supprcsiit's  a  riot  In  tho  city,  iv.  187.

•Totua  Tiberius  ainlnst  tho  Murcumunui,

245.
Saturnlnus,  T<.,  beada  a  revolt  In  Rome,  i.

KMJ. Killed,  107.
Stttumluua,  L.  Antonlns. See  Antoniua  Sa-

tumlnuK.
Sauniinnta*,  aubtnleston  of  the,  to  Trajan,

vil.  8U8.
Bcnivo,  the  alnve,  klllit  L.  PntnmlnH^  1. 107.
Sca-Tlnua,conHplreii  with  rimi  ngnlnnt  Nero,

vl.  147. DliuloHfs  llie  plot,  140.
BcH'Vola,  MucliiH,  III*  answer  to  Bulplclus,  Iv.

48.
Bcapvoln.  Q.,  tribune,  I.  ilfil, Stops  tho  rlec-

tioui  fur  oonauls  by  his  Intervention,  801.

Scantinian  law,  enforced  by  Domitian.vli.
107.

Scaptius,  agent  of  M.  Brutus  in  Cyprus,  his
cruelty  at  Salamis,  i.  818.

Scapula,  commands  the  republican  insur-
gents in  Spain,  ii.  805.

Scaurus,  iEmilins,  defeated  and  taken  pris-
oner by  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones,  i.  202.
A  candidate  for  the  consulship,  360.  Ap-
pointed pruiceps  of  the  senate,  iii,  853.

Scaurus,  M.,  taken  prisoner  at  Actium,  but
pardoned,  Iii.  258.

Scipio,  Q.  Ca^cilina  Motellus,  his  daughter
Cornelia  married  to  Cn.  Pompeius,  ii.  47.
Associated  with  Pompeius  in  the  consul-
ship, 47.  Restores  the  authority  of  the
censors,  50.  Commands  for  I'onipoius  in
Macedonia,  211.  Advances  with  his  loirions
from  Syria  into  Macedonia,  214.  Plunders
the  temple  of  Ephcsus  on  his  way,  215.
Compelled  by  the  Cttsarians  to  (■ntrcnch
himself,  210.  Shares  tho  honour  of  the
chief  command  with  Pompeius,  225.  As-
pires to  the  oftice  of  Pontifex  JIaxinius,
225.  Commands  the  centre  at  Pharsalia,
230.  Becomes  tho  leader  of  the  Pom-
peians  after  the  death  of  Pompeius,  251.
Bails  from  Patra;  for  Africa,  262.  Joins
Varus  and  Juba  there.  2S3.  His  dispute
with  Varus  at  Utica,  2S6.  Has  the  chief
command  of  the  republican  army,  287.
Worsted  by  C!a'sar  at  IJzita,  298.  Com-
pletely defeated  by  Cresar  at  Thapsus,  296.
His  death.  297,  810.

Scodra,  in  lllyricum,  made  tho  boundary  be-
tween the  dominions  of  Octavius  and  An-
tonius,  iii.  185.

Scribonia,  sister  of  Libo,  married  to  Octa-
vius, 111.  IS-').  Divorced,  218.  Accompa-
nies her  daughter  Julia  in  exile,  iv.  211.

Scribonianus,  Furius  Camillius.  conspires
with  others  asainst  the  life  of  Claudius,  v.
409. Banished  by  Claudius,  449.

Scythed  chariots  u'sed  bv  the  Belga?,  1.  226.
And  by  the  Britons,  876.

Sea-flghts  exhibited  by  Claudius  on  the  Lake
Fuclnus,  V.  895l

Sebaste,  tho  Cappadocian,  foiuded  by  king
ArchelauR,  iv.  112.

Sebaste,  in  Palestine,  visited  bv  Agrlppa,  iv.
168.

SedunI,  their  territory  occupied  bv  S.  Galba,
1.  286.

Segestes,  chief  of  the  Cheruscans,  enrols
himself  in  tho  Roman  servie»>,  and  warns
Varus  agjilnst  Arininius,  iv.  271,272.  Be-
sieged by  Arniiulus,  v.  82.

Seglmerus,  father  of  Armlnlus,  enrols  him-
self ill  tho  Roman  service,  i v.  271.

Segnl,  a  Belglc  i)eople,  1.  225.  Submit  to
Cawir,  4(H).

Sogontloci,  a  British  tribe,  submit  to  Ciesar,
1.88&

Seianns,  L.  jKllua,  his  origin  and  early  his-
tory, v.  04.  Appointed  prefect  of  tho
pru'torlan  guards,  94.  His  birth  and  tal-
ents lnH])lre  no  jealou.sy  in  'J'llierlus,  164.
His  ambition  and  liilrrgiii's,  172.  Kstah-
HkIics  the  ]>r»torlan  cam]),  J'H.  His  mach-
inations against  Diusns.  175.  Hediu-ca
LIvilla,  wife  of  DruKUS,  and  poisons  hini,
170. Ills  enmity  to  Agrlpplua  and  tlio

INDEX.

559

children  of  Gcrmanicus,  179. His  evil  in-
flufiice  on  Tiberius,  180. Demands  the
hiiud  of  Livillii  of  Tilxirius,  who  rejects
his  suit,  1N<>-1SS. His  renewed  intrigues,
18i>. I'lots  the  ruin  of  Asrippi"",  her  fam-
ily, and  friends,  ]^<J,  19(1,  U>-2.  '.'iil. Saves
the  lifu  of  Til)erius,  and  d.;  ' :
favour,  "iO^. llc)ina;ru  paid
classes  of  the  citizius,  jioO. Ji
210. Procures  the  bani.shni>-ni  <■!  Agrij)-
plna  and  her  son  Nero,  and  the  disj!TtM;e  of
brusus,  210. .\fflarici-d  to  I.ivilla.  and  ad-
vances to  the  r  i ■ '!"  ite

confers  on  lii:  "

consulate  for  i  f

his  influence,  ■-•-'i.  ■-■-'-. ii
fuses  to  see  Sejanus,  who  <■
ures  ajfainst  Tiberius's  lit'.
sifrns  discovered by ' "  . v  ir-

cum  Vented by Ti  ted by

Macro,  and  put  to  ili  .  Fall  of

his  family,  kinsmen,  unn  lu.  ;].i-  with  Mm,
2'27.  Proscription  of  his  children  and
friends,  22t».  Apicata,  his  divorced  wife,
discloses  to  Tiberius  the  circumBtituc«8  of
the  poisoning;  of  Drusus,  231.  MasMore
of  his  proscribed  friends,  238.

Beleucia,  the  Parthian  court  established  at,
i.  40S. Ueductxl  by  'lYajan,  vii.  SOU,  807.

Beleucus,  a  scion  of  the  Syrian  dynasty,
married  to  Uerenic<',  queen  of  Egvpt,  i.
851. Straufjled  by  his  wife.  361.

Bonato,  the  judicla  restored  to  the,  bv  Sulla,
1.  82.  Constitutional  functions  of  tlie  sea-
ate  under  the  republic,  iil.  892.  Under
Augustus,  8y3.  Method  of  transactlnjr
business  in  tb'  -■•■■'••  "'i  i  iutw,..ti..,,
of  the  Senator-
to  elect  the  .
the  Senate,  v.  i;. .j.

Eire  letl  by  tacit  understanding  iu  the
ands  of  Tllicrlus,  17.  Powers  of  the
senate  in  election,  legislation,  and  criminal
jurisillction,  9t>-108.  The  enipvror'i  con-
trol over  the  senate  thn.>u;.'h  the  powers
of  llie  censorship,  113.  Piii'i  .  >  ..»  ••  i>^ui-
per  senator  rejected  by  Tib.  "is

control  over  the  st-natc  by  ■  i-

Jestas,  113. His  show  ofd^; lie

senate.  16S.  His  will  annulled  by  the  sen-
ate, 2ni.  Its  obsequiousness  to"  the  em-
Seror  Caius,  MO.  Its  delibenitions  on  the
eath  of  Cains,  365.  Yields  to  the  claims
of  Claudius,  and  accepts  him  as  emi)cror,
866.  Claudius  maintains  tbi-  .li^'hiiv  of
the  onler,  382. Vacancies  -  ti

wealthv  provincial  familio-.
from  the Gaulish  nobles,  :  \u-

thority  of  the  senate  in  luativis  of  na-
tional' usage,  441.  Vows  and  sacriticcs
decreed  by  it  for  all  kinds  of  atrocities  in
the  reign  of  Nero,  vi.  124.  Its  base  adu-
lation, 151.  The  senate  the  idol  of  Lucan
in  his  Pharsalia,  237.  Nero's  proscrip-
tions, 252.  Its  numbers  rcduce<l  under
the  tyrannv  of  the  Claudiau  Ca'sars,  252.
Its  estimation  lowered  in  the  eyes  of  the
citizens,  25.3.  Decrees  Nero  a  public  en-
emy, and  sanctions  the  election  of  Oalba,
2t»r-293.  Accepts  the  adoption  of  Plso  by
Qalba  with  satisfaction,  301.  SuspccteJi
by  Otho's  soldiers  of  treachery,  827, Ac-

338. Revised
>mitiaii*8  pro-

■loWest  of  the

s«nat'.i->.  1 )'..
talniug the '
C.,iirt,-d  bv I!

'1

bv  UK  1!

the fr.

stowed

■■  \\iin i-i.ii.jiu MS auo piui.

re  of  M.  AureUuA  to  th<.

iiu.;i, M. Anna■n^ the rh  •  -
"Suasori*"  and  ~Conlro\'
His  ff.no.  vi.  !rt2.

Vl.  48.
by  hlni  :

ral  oniu.ii  ..j  v  i.i
.\gri]>i>ina,  *S.  His
70. ( I  rounds  for  ini'

.:ie  senate,  77.

!>  and  Burrbus
iam  Neroola,''
in^ Nero to

1 1  is  eondaet  on
iiu  i.i.n..-..-

uu  w«Blti^  4

Cbaif^tt  eon-

1  pat  to
-Nlaaoer

1  moral
'  >etween

I •£<!.
1

of  bi=dcalli,  100. 11

teaching,  230,  2:il.

his  writir'.'>  -.m  I  ''

Incon:^'

his Co

trasted  \ ,

Senecio,  hunted  tuUiath,  Vii

Senones,  the,  defeated  at  iL  o

V;ui.liinoiii.in  lalie,  1191. i .,-:. -aI

;i-  jJn Uefuse obedience to

1  .  wo  legions  left  bv  Ca;sar  in

t!.  ..-K.I6.

Scntiiium.  Ixtttle  ol^  L 191.
Sentiua,  Cnteua,  chosen  proconsul  of  Syria,

V.  70. Compels  Piso  to  quit  Syria  for

Kome,  "3.
Septiclus Chims, pnetorian prefect, dis-
graced by  Hadrian,  viL  350.
Septimius,"  murders  his  old  comrade  Pom-

peius,  iL  245,  246.

560

INDEX.

Seqnani,  a  Gallic  tribe,  their  territory,  i.
214.  Complain  to  Eome  of  the  tvr.mny
of  the  yEdui,  283.  Invite  the  Suevi  to
their  assistince,  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the
jEdui,  and  assume  the  leadership  of  the
Gallic  tribes,  233,  234.  Oppressed  by  the
Suevi,  23T.  Induced  to  allow  the  llelvetii
to  pass  through  their  territory,  245.  Their
condition  after  Caesar's  first  "campaigrn  in
Gaul,  266.  Establishment  of  Koman  in-
fluence over  them,  266.  Defeat  the  Lin-
gones  under  Julius  Sabinus,  vl.  402.
Berapis,  worship  of,  at  Alexandria,  vi.  8S1.
Serenus,  his  punishment  for  seditious  in-

trisrues,  v.  184.
Sertorius,  history  ot,  i.  88.  Insurrection  of
the  Spanish  provinces  under  him,  8S.  His
defeat  and  tiight,  39.  Succeeds  in  a  new
revolt  against  Kome,  89.  I'ejects  the
proffered  alliance  of  Mithridates,  40.  His
contest  with  Cn.  Pompeius,  40.  His  in-
fluence over  the  Iberians,  41.  His  milk-
white  hind,  41. His  death,  42.

Serva'us,  a  friend  of  Oermanicus,  takes  part
in  the  prosecution  of  Cu.  Piso,  v.  82.

Servian  walls  of  Kome,  i  IS.  Described,  iv.
879.

Servilia,  mother  of  M.  Junius  Brutus,  her
character,  i  811.  Her  bold  counsel  to  the
liberators,  iii.  70,  72.

Servilia,  daughter  of  Soranus,  charges
brought  asrainst  her,  vl.  171.  Sentenced
to  death,  172.

Bervilius  Isauricus,  his  nnsnccessftil  at-
tempts to  reduce  the  Cilician  jMratcs,  i.
48.  An  unsuccessful  candidate  for  the
ofllce  of  Pontifex  Maximus,  113.  Elected
consul  with  Ca'sar,  it.  184.  His  vigilance,
269.  l*roposed  for  Dolabclla's  successor
In  Syria,  iii.  111.  Moves  a  thanksgiving
for  tlie  victory  of  Mutina,  120.  IJecomes
consul  a  second  time,  178.  Kefuses  to  Join
Antoniui*,  173.

Servlus,  mound  of,  in  Rome,  1. 18.

Sestlus,  L.,  appointed  consul  by  Augustas,
111.  341.

Bestlus,  P.,  Cillcia  placed  under  his  con-
trol, II.  86.

Soverlanui",  t)refcct  ofCnppadocia,  slain  with
the  loss  of  a  legion,  vii.  4^.

Soverus,  A.  Ca'cinii. ,SV«  Cii'clnn. •

Bevcrus,  (asulus,  nffonds  Augustus  by  his
llcentioiiii  writlng.t,  v.  122.

8ovcr;i«,  C'uIIHub,  appointed  prefect  of  Syria,
vll.  8iU.  '

8overu«,  .Itilliis,  his  tactics  against  the  Jews
In  PaU'itllne,  vll.  318.

Bcxllllu,  inotlurof  VltcUlus,  her  noble  char-
acter, vl.  iH2.  Dies  »o<iii  alter  he  Is  de-
clareil  liiipenitor,  312.  Improbable  stories
BlM)ut  her  death,  il43.

Hvxtlllu*,  the  month.  Its  name  changed  to
Angu»tuis  III.  H711;  I  v.  lOO.

Hhaniinal,  hiit  prediction  reHjiectlng  Herod
the  <irea^  111.  3U2.

Sllivlla  Cuiniinn.  nllegod  onielo  of,  forbid-
ding an  nrined  Inlervrntloii  In  I'^gypt,  l,32s.

BIbylllne  Imm.Uii,  ollleerii  churged  wllh  the
ciiNlody  of  the,  111.371.  I'urgid  and  the
■purlonit  lM)okit  bnrnt  by  AnguxlUN.  373,

Bloorrl,  or  ilecret  nniMiiiKlns,  uf  the  Kenlotn,  In
JvniMtleiu,  vl.  42A,

Sicily,  importance  of,  to  Kome.  i.  82.  Gov-
ernment of,  entrusted  to  >I.  Porcius
Cato,  ii.  S6.  Who  surrenders  it  to  the
Cujsarians  without  a  blow,  121,  122.
Seized  be  Sextus  Pompeius,  iii.  160.  Pop-
ulation of,  at  the  commencement  of  the
Roman  empire,  iv.  340.  Visited  by  Ha-
drian, vii.  852.
Sigambri,  a  German  tribe,  utterly  extin-
guished,-vi.  88.
Silimus,  Appius.  his  noble  family  and  con-
nections, v.  408.  Incurs  the  hatred  of
Messalina  and  is  put  to  death,  408.
Silanus,  D.  Junius,  elected  consul,  1.  188.
Defeated  by  the  hordes  of  the  Cimbri  and
Teutones,  202.

Silanus,  Decimus,  paramour  of  the  younger
Julia,  T.  286  no^e  I.

Silanus,  Lucius,  son  of  Appius  Silanus,  be-
trothed to  Octavia,  daughter  of  the  empe-
ror Claudius,  v.  438.  Disgraced  by  a  con-
spiracy formed  by  Agrippina,  439.  Com-
mits suicide,  442.

Silanus,  M,  Junius,  proconsul  of  Asia,  keeps
A'onones,  king  of  Parthia,  in  custody,  v.
52.  Removed  from  his  proeonsulship  by
Tiberius,  59.  Found  guiltv  of  extortion
and  banished,  128.  His  daughter  married
to  Caius  Coisar,  286.  Put  to  death  by
Caius,  303.

Silanus,  M.  Junius,  nicknamed  "  the  golden
sheep  "  by  Caligula,  vi.  68.  Poisoned  by
Agrippina's  command.  68.

Silanus,  L.,  i)roscribed  by  Nero,  vi.  157.
Slain  .at  Barium,  158,

Silius,  C,  restrains  his  divisions  on  the
Rhine  from  open  mutiny,  v.  22.  Makes  a
demonstration  against  the  Chatti,  87.
Crushes  a  revolt  In  Gaul,  169.  Chiwged
with  ti-eason,  he  conmiits  suicide,  181.
His  image  disgraced  by  Tiberius,  433.

Silius,  C,  advocates  the  reinforcement  of
the  Lex  Cincia,  v.  420.  His  intrigue  and
marriage  with  Messalina,  425-427,  482.
His  fate  and  that  of  his  accomplices,  4.34.

Silius  Itallcus,  consul  at  the  u8ur|iation  of
Galba,  vi.  293.  His  chimicter  and  writ-
ings compared  with  those  of  Lucan,  viL
222. Cause  of  his  suicide,  257.

Silius,  P„  Ills  adventures,  11.  289.  In  the
service  of  Bocchus,  king  of  ]SIauretania,
289.  Advances  upon  Cirta,  the  capital  of
Numidia,  292.  Routs  and  slays  Sabura,
296.  Captures  AlVauius  luid  Faustus  Sul-
la, 802.

Silius,  P.,  succeeds  to  the  consulship,  ill.
868.  Defeats  the  Communl  Vennones,
Norleans,  and  Pannonlans,  1  v.  160.  Hiinds
over  his  command  to  Drusus,  160.

Silk,  cost  of,  in  Rome.  Ii.  313.

Sllnhlnm,  the  gum,  annual  tribute  of,  l^-om
tno  t!yrenalcji,  Iv.  93.

Slhires.  a  people  of  South  AVales,  attacked
by  Ostorlus  Scapula,  vl.  29,  8ft.  Over-
thrown, 86,  et  vuij.  Defeat  the  Ronums,
89.

Silver,  uses  of,  among  the  Greeks  and  Ro-
mans, Iv.  817.

SImllls,  praitorlon  prefect  un<ler  Hadrian,
vll.  IWI.

Simon,  son  of  Glora,  heads  a  revolt  In  Jeni-
Buleui,  vl.  427. Defeats  Cestlus  at  the

INDEX.

561

sates,  42T.  A  chief  of  the  zealots,  429.
His  position  In  the  defence  of  the  cit.v,  dur-
ing ihe  ^eat  siege,  449, 4'*).  Tukes  refuge
under^ound,  46f,  469. His  fate,  470.

Blnjar,  (froat  deeeit  of.  1.  i'i'i.

BlnojK",  in  the  time  of  AuKustus,  iv.  860.

Blriniuin,  Itoman  post  ut,  attacked  by  the
I'annouiuus,  Iv.  '247.

SIseniia,  son  of  tiabiuius,  hU  Incapacity  in
Syria,  i.  352.

Slavoa  and  slavery  in  Kome,  1. 889.  Cesar's
attempts  to  counteract  the  increase  of
slavery,  ii.  829.  Octavius's  treatment  of
slaves' taken  with  artus  in  their  hands,  ill.
207.  Tuxes  on  the  tale  and  eufrauchise-
nifnt  of  slaves,  lil.  424.  Uestrictions  of
Augustus  on  uianuuiission,  iv.  42.  Kxteu-
siou  of  the  franchise  by  uianuinis8iou,308.
Kttects  of  iiianuuiissiuu  on  the  civic  fran-
chise, 80s-ail.  Itesults  flowing  fVom  the
institution  of  slavery,  vil.  4h^J-4S2.

Snivrna,  the  honour  of  making  Tiberius  !■
tutelar  deity  granted  to,  v.  194.

Sohemus,  king  of  Iturea,  supports  Vebi..i
Blan,  vi.  850.

Boldurii,  or  itersonfd  servants  of  kings  of
Gaul,  i.  295.

Soli,  the  name  of,  changed  to  PompelopoUs,
i.  48.

Soothsayers  expelled  fixim  Italy  by  Tiberius,
v.  149.

>l>hi.sts  in  .\then8  in  the  time  of  Hadrian,
\  ii.  801.  Character  of  their  teaching,  802.
t'elebrated  sophists,  8C8,  et  ge<i.

Soranus,  Hareu,  charged  with  treason  to
Nero,  vi.  100,  169,  171.  His  daughter  Ber-
vilia  included  in  the  prosecution,  171.
Both  sentenced  to  death,  172.

Bosigenes,  assists  Ca-sar  lu  reforming  the
calendar,  ii.  38S.

Sosius,  C,  prefect  of  SjtIs,  an  officer  of  An-
tonlus,  his  military  exploits,  iii.  219.  Be-
comes coiisul,  and  pronounces  a  vihemtut
iiivcclivc  atralnsl  Kcluviu,-.  -■S^.  Al'iUi-
dons  i:<inic,  and  rciiairs  to  Aiif'.niii^.  -.Mo.
His  unsuccessful  attack  or.  '
leys,  249.  Taken  prisoni  r
pardoned,  258. Takes  J 1 1

■^otiutes,  a  tribe  of  Aquituui,  uncucu  u\
V.  Cnissus,  1.  295.

jiain,  the  first  province  acquired  by  the
Komans  beyond  their  own  seas,  L  33.  lu-
BuiTcction  of  the  Spauish  provinevs  under
Sertorius,  8S.  The  government  of  Fur-
ther Spain  assuiue<l  by  Ca-sar,  163.  Slate
of  the  lloman  provinces  In  S|>ain  at  this
period,  ]55i  Origin  of  the  name  Spain,
154  note  *.  And  of  Its  Iberian  Inhabitants,
212.  Metellos  Nej^s  chosen  for  the  gov-
ernment of  S]M»in,  828.  Spain  more  Ko-
manized  than  any  other  province,  IL  113.
The  Pompeian  lieutenants  in  Spain,  Var-
rt>.  Afranius,  and  Petreius,  180,  131.  Ex-
tortions of  the  t'a'sarlan  lieutenant  Q.
Oassius  Louginus,  267.  IJevival  of  the
republican  cause  in  Spain,  2U,'>.  Continua-
tion of  irregular  warfare  in  Spain,  iv.  60.
Mineral  wealth  of  the  t)rovince,  61.  The
Spanish  era,  02  note  i .  Endeavours  of  Sta-
tillus  Taurus  to  quell  the  hostilities  of  the
Iberians,  62.  Augustus  proceeds  to  take
the  Held  in  person,  62. Keduction  of  the

VOL Vii. — 36

mouiit^i
colon  i '

gllStll-

Sl.uii^..  1

iv.  10

SlMirtaeii

ft<». 1  •

S|., ■

una  lutein^'.

vii.  262.
Btasanor,  the  I'
Statllius Cor\

against  the  1
Statiliug  Taui>

fleet  in  the  nv

iii.  19\ A|  i

2tK (iain>

A

•.ay

\u-

.iks

>r.l.-s  by

'n  of  the

■  •f  Sjjatn

r»f

..f
.  to

Theprovinoe

-  for  Its  loyalty,

L

v-raptier,

■  trade  In,

-.  T.  411<IO<««

~  the  CcMriui

Pompeina,

f  AMm,

avslry  of

iited  pf»-

.-atus  o{

jvours  to

nines  oi  lue  lu«rruuu,  68L

.  prooonsol  of  Africa,  dtuged

with  the  pnctioe  oJT  mMlCL

^ulelde,4fi8.

y  Domitiaii.  tIL  18«L

d  and  eoiBpar«<l  with

•  t  in  Britain,  reAiaaa

'  -erial  purple.  Tit  488.

- Agrkwla,  4&1.

->  ArtaxatA,4M.

liens,  «laiy8  Do-

Stolcs,  fatal  ii.
upon  the  pi..
ii.  401. Acc.uui  .
Stoics,  vL  190. 1 1
tion  to  governm<  11

<ir  phUoaophy
th  and  morals,

.>i-
:he

leS
•1.

l.ir.  i  .iaiusl it

of  con;  ^nessnot

well  .:  iinoeenee

(■•■'•-  -  •'envel-

I'here  of
rsius, a
u..<.i,ii  I..  .-nM^^.-i...  ..... im  .--ioicsban-

isiied  from Uome,  vii.  82. <.  haracter  of
the  Stoics  In  the  time  of Trajan,  2M.
c,,i..i.i„  ....f  .,  principle  of  the  Stoics,  255.

St  :  mentioned  by  Boman  writ-

V  '.
Su\.,...,  ..,.,  ...vount  of  the  Gauls,  1.  211. Ac-
companies Petronins  to  Syene,  iv.  103.
Streets  of  Borne,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,

662

INDEX.

Iv.  405.  Trades  exercised  in  them,  406.
Crowds  of  loungers  and  gazers,  407.  In-
terruptions to  traffic,  407.  Paucity  oi'
streets  in  Rome,  407.

Street-games,  festival  of  the,  combined  with
the  worship  of  Augustus,  iv.  26.

Suburra,  the,  at  Kome,  character  of  its  pop-
ulation, iv.  888.

Suevi.  their  Tnenacing  attitnde  on  the  right
banlt  of  the  Rliine,  i.  232.  Invited  by
the  Sequani  to  pass  into  Gaul,  2:33.  Op-
press them  and  the  ^Kdui,  287,  254.  De-
feated by  Ca>sar  and  expelled  from  Gaul,
26(.^262.  Drive  the  Menapii  from  their
territories,  366.  Cross  the  I'hine  into
Gaul,  366.  Testimony  of  the  Usipotos  to
their  valour,  3(5S.  Their  encroachments
on  the  territory  of  the  TTbii,  86S.  Pur-
sued by  Caesar  to  the  Hercynian  forests,
399.

Suessiones,  a  Belgic  tribe,  head  a  confed-
eracy of  tribes  against  the  Roman  in-
vaders, 1.  267.  Reduced  by  Caesar,  270;
ii.  86.

Bnctonins  Lenis,  father  of  the  historian,
serves  under  Otho,  vi.  383  note  i.

Suetonius,  C,  Tranquillus,  his  "  Lives  of  the
CiPSars"  characterized,  vii.  242, 24S.  Sup-
ply the  place  of  history,  242.  Reasons
for  their  preservation,  242.  Disgraced
by  Hadrian  for  his  disrespect  to  the  em-
press, 350.

Suetonius  Paullinus,  the  first  Roman  who
crossed  the  Atlas,  v.  878.  Routs  the
Britons  in  Anglesey,  vi.  42.  Defeats  the
Iceni,  Is  recalled,  46-61.

Suetonius,  commands  part  of  Otiio's  army,
vi.  829. At  the  battle  of  Bedrlacum,  884.

Suicide,  prevalence  of,  at  Rome  in  tlio  time
of  Trajan,  viL  256.  Among  women,  268.
Not  the  result  of  speculative  opinions,
nor  practised  as  an  escape  ttova  tyranny,
256-200.

Builius,  a  delator,  employed  by  Mossalina  to
accuse  Valerius  Asiaticus,  v.  416.  His
success  as  an  informer,  419.  Defends  the
practice  of  foes  to  delators,  420.

Sulla.  Cornelius,  the  Hrst  to  decree  a  pro-
scription by  law,  1.  81  not«.  Oligarchical
r«!actlon  under  him,  81.  Effects  of  his  re-
tirement on  the  provincials,  87.  Ills  vic-
tories In  Macedonia  and  Asia  Minor,  44.
His  massacres  and  proscription,  54.  His
legislation  In  the  Interest  of  the  oligarchy,
59.  His  death,  01.  Fl.vcs  the  number  of
the  Bonatu  ut  six  hundred,  62.  Divines  the
obanicter  of  V,n.  Ponipcliis,  and  distrusts
him,  80.  Ueflulrcs  C.  Julius  Cinsar  to  di-
vorce his  wlro  (Nirnella,  93.  Warns  his
nartlsans  against  ('ji'sjir,  94.  His  resigna-
tion of  tbo  dictJitorslilp  in  075  and  death
leave  the  oligarchy  without  any  acknowl-
e<lged  leadur,  01.  His  system  of  govorn-
muut  a  iM>litical  anachronism,  Ir.  9.

Bulla,  Faustus,  son  of  the  dlotator,  bis
wnaltli,  I.  110.  Retreats  hoforc  Cii'sar,  II.
102.  At  I'otni!  with  till'  defeated  Pom-
TMtlnns,  28ii. His  death,  802.  HtUI.

Bulla,  KntiMtus  ('orm-llur.,  Iiunlmnd  of  Anto-
nia,  and  aon-ln-lnw  of  ClnudluH,  chosen
oonaul,  T.  221. I'ut  to  duath  by  Mcro,  vl.

«i,  lira.

Sulpicius  Rufus,  Sorvius,  the  jurist,  an  un-
successful candidate  for  the  consulship,  i.
183.  Prosecutes  iMurena  for  bribery,  138.
Elected  consul,  ii.  51.  Abets  the  presump-
tion of  Juba,  king  of  Numidia,  168.  Sent
as  a  commissioner  to  negotiate  with  An-
tonius,  iii.  104.  His  death  on  his  jour-
ney, 106.  His  vast  legal  knowledge  and
works,  iv.  44.

Sumptuary  laws,  enactment  of,  during  the
consulship  of  Pompoius  and  Crassus,  1.
846. CiBsar's  sumptuary  laws,  ii.  824.

Superstitions,  oriental,  introduced  into
Rome,  ii.  405.  Proscribed,  but  continue  to
reappear,  407.

Supper,  a  Roman,  described,  iv.  423.  Coarse-
ness of  the  luxury  of  the  Roman  table,
425.  The  ordering  of  a  Roman  supper,
425. Custom  of  recitation  at  supper,  428.

Sura,  Licinius,  conspires  against  Trajan,  vii.
213.

Sura,  Palfurius,  struck  off  the  roll  of  the
senate,  but  restored,  vii.  130.

Surenas,  the  Parthian  general,  the  word
probably  a  title,  not  a  personal  name,  de-
scription of,  i.  409  note  i ;  421  note  '.  His
position  in  the  state,  421.  Besieges  Car-
rhae ;  his  stratagem  to  eng.age  Crassus  in
conference,  427.  Seizes  the  proconsul  and
his  stiiff,  426.  Sends  the  head  and  hand
of  Crassus  to  Orodus,  428.  His  mock  tri-
umph, 428.

Surveys  of  the  empire,  iv.  825.

Syene,  garrison  of  Romans  at,  iii.  280.

Syllipus,  minister  of  the  Nabatha'an  king
Obodas,  conducts  the  expedition  of  yKIius
Gallus  into  Arabia,  iv.  97.  Charged  with
treachery,  97,  99.

Symeon,  bishop  of  Jerusalem,  martyrdom
of,  vii.  "lUnote-'.

Synnada,  condition  of,  in  the  time  of  Au-
gustus, iv.  860.

Sv^racusc,  Roman  colony  planted  by  Augns-
"tus  in,  Iv.  103.

Syria,  government  of,  coveted  by  the  con-
suls, 1.  35.  The  kingdom  reduced  to  a
Roman  province  by  Pompelus,  138;  iv.
112.  The  proconsulate  assigned  by  P.
Clodius  to  (Jabinius,  i.  305.  Who  Is  suc-
ceeded by  Crassus,  853.  Extent  of  the
i)rovlnee  of  Syria  at  this  period.  411.
'ower  of  C'lisslus  In  the  jirovlneo,  iii.  109.
Exactions  of  Antonius,  173.  Organization
of  the  i)r()vlnce  by  Augustus,  iv.  112.
Legions  stationed  in"  Syria  In  the  reign  of
Tiberius,  v.  142.  The'  Syrian  elemental
worship  atlnietlvo  to  the'  lower  orders  of
women  in  Rome,  vl.  199-202.  List  of  the
proconsuls  In  Syria,  201.  Character  of  its
governors  and  of  their  government,  202,
20.'!.  Anno.vatlon  of  .ludeato  the  province
of  Syria,  264.  Tlie  eoiimiiuul  In  Syria  as-
sumed by  the  eiiii>eror  Verus,  vii.  454.
Reverses  sustaliu'il  by  him,  followed  by
splendid  victories,  456.

TABITLAnitTM  of  Rome,  1. 180  note'K
Taefarlnas,  the  African  warrior,  sketch
of  his  career,  v.  56.  Defeated  liy  Furlus
Cunilllus,  57.  Renews  his  Incursions  Irilo
the  borders  of  the  AfH<'an  province,  166.
Defeated  and  commits  sulciue,  185.

INDEX.

563

Tacitus,  his  review  of  the  position  of  Octa-
vius  after  the  close  of  tne  civil  wars,  ill.
310. Ills  iilctures  of  Teutonic  freedom,  v.
46,  46. His  -Histories"  more  to  be  re-
lied on  than  his  "Annals,"  vi.  37'2. Mis-
appreciates  the  sources  of  Jewish  history,
489. Patronized by Doinitian,  vlL  136.
Compared  with  Livy  and  Lucan,  '238. His
reason  for  flxint?  the  limit-*  <.f  hi-i  l]i-t,,iv
considered,  '£<•'>. His |  '
fa vour  of  IVaJun,  '£il. < '  i
istics  of  his  unfairness  to
sars,  238. His  satirical  n:
of  his  own  times,  240. I '
graphical  rather  than  hlstj — .. -j  .
iiianiiness,  273. CoinjMirisou  butwecu  Uiui
and  Juvenal,  274. Increaso  of  bittemeM
with  his  vears,  275.

Taraiiis,  thi  Gallic  Jiiniter,  1.  223.  Identl-
tled  with  Jove  the  Thunderer,  iv.  fe4.

Tarcondiuiotus  I.,  a  Cllioiim  chief,  joins  the
Pompeians  in  the  civil  war,  11.  Ifxi.  SUln
at  Actluni,  iv.  109,  Holds  the  Clliclan  and
Syrian  gates,  109.

Tarcxjndimotus  II.,  placed  on  the  throne  (^
t'ilicia  by  Auerustus,  iv.  109.

Tarectum,  treaty  of;  between  OctavluB  and
Aulouius,  liL  197.

'i'arichea,  stormed  by  Vespasian,  vL  43T.
His  atrocity  there,  487.

Tarsus,  city  of,  subdued  by  Cassias,  111.  169.

Tarraco,  temple  of  Autjus'tus  at,  restored  by
Hadrian,  vil.  861.

Tarusates,  an  A(initanian  tribe,  defeated  by
1*.  Crassus,  1.  2i»().

Tasgetius,  massacred  by  the  Carnuteg,  L
391.

Taurini,  their  dwellinp-place,  Iv.  87.  Foun-
dation by  Augusta  of  the  Taurinl  (TurlnX

sa

Tauriscl,  war  of  Octavlns  with  the,  ill.  832.

Taxation,  i^•alllu^i\  df,  i.rtlio  Koiiiana,  v.  844.
Cuius  \  his  new

iiiui  i:  ■ ro's  pro-

posal :  ;ii  of  Indi-

rect taxatiuu,  vi.  b^.

Tectosages,  a  Belgic  tribe,  defeated  by  the
Komans,  1.  206.  Their  mcursiona  Into  the
south  of  tiaul,  227.

Telephus,  the  slave,  his  attempt  on  the  life
of  .\uftustus,  iv.  256.

Temples,  elt'ect  of  the  plunder  o^  upon  the
circulation  of  money,  ill  317.  The  tem-
ples the  banks  of  the  ancient  world,  31S.
Kestoration  of  the  temples  by  Augustus,
iv.  24,  27.  The  temple  architecture  of
Rome,  391.  The  Koman  principle  of  dec-
orating not  the  exterior  of  their  temples,
but  the  interior  of  theh:  dwellings,  viL
267.

Tenchtherl,  r  German  Irib*,  Invade  Bel-
gium, 1.  866.  Subdued  by  Drusus,  iv.
266.

Tentvra  and  Ombl,  the  bloodv  quarrel  of,
vli:  875.

Terentia,  wife  of  Cicero,  her  high  spirit,  L
819.

Terentia,  or  TerentlUa,  wife  of  Ma-cenas,
her  character,  iv.  154.  Her  power  over
her  husband,  154,  Her  amour  with  Au-
gustus, l.%4, 156.

Terminus,  the  god,  worship  of,  iv.  27. Sya-

tem  of  augural  limitation  and  the  conse-
cration of  boundaries,  2>.
Teutates,  Mercurius  wor>liipp<-d  by  the  Gal-
lic tribes  under  the  name  ol,  1.  228. Ad-
mitted to  the  citizenship  of  tba  Bonwn
Olympua,  iv.  iH.
Teutoberg,  fcrMt  U,  It.  tti.
Teutouea  th«,  oitela  tad  crMt  ml^ntloB  <<
i ut-«.iOI. TBax  dafiat  (b* BomaaB,
ul,  and an  aaailiUatod  at
i',  an-SM. Their  eamltjr  to
tib«a,ttT. I*eiiralaiu  af  MMce
Uib«a  Into  Oaul,  981. Supentl-
vcneratloa  naid  by  the  ancient  U«r-
-  to  women,  MOi DrireB  out  of  Gaul
by  CiMar,  Ml. laraaloB  of  BalKiam  by
Ctorman  tribei,  SM The  EbaiaMa  phui-
dered  br  a  body  of  OemaM,  40t. Wkn
attack  Uie  Koman  (tatioa  at '  '

but  are  defeat«d,  403,  40i  Oh—Hiad  >7
Marcua  YInlciua,  iv.  71.  Ctoa»  tka  lower
Rhine  and  defeat  LolUni,  IM.  Se*  alaa
Germany.

Tbamea,  the  rlTer,  forded  br  P*aar,  L  M8L

Thapaoa,  oeenpied  by  YlrKlllna,  IL  Wi.  Ib>
Tested  by  Omar,  i»4.  Seipto  daflMtad  by
Csaar  at  the  battle  o£  «&  Sam  euetad
by  C»aar  from  the  cittMaa,  MS.

Thaaoa,  the  remnant  of  tha  reBnUleana  at,
HI.  172.

Theatre '  v  It.  4M.

4».

■  ~,  opening  of  the,  L  844.

Its  extent,  iv.' 403,  409.

of  Maroelliia,  It.  410. Ita  extent,

408.

Theatrical  exhibitions  of  the  Romaaa,  It.

410. Pantomime,  410. Speetaelea,  411.

Tiberius's  control  over  the  playera,  T.  1401

K<Uct  of  Domltlan  against  Uie  mlaMa,

ViL  109.
Theodotua, the  rhetorician, nreeeptor to

Ptoiema-us XII.,  IL  844. Takea Pom-

peius's  hea<l  to  Cieaar,  S&t.
Tbeugenes the  auothaayer,  and  OetaThu^

iU.  60.
Tbermus,  the  tribune,  stofM  the  month  of

XciH><,  1  142. Abandons  his  post  at  Ign-

N  xi. KetreaU to  Apulia,  102.

~  Pompeina,  bat  taaUj  aban-

Tlu  rnue  in  Hoine. Se4  Baths.

Theudas,  a  fidse  Christ,  or  brigand.  In  Jndea,
vl.  420.

Tholomeus,  a  fidse  Christ,  in  Jndea,  vL  490.

Tboranius,  his  proscription  and  murder,
ill.  144.

Thrace,  progress  of  the  Eoman  arms  In,  in
the  time  of  Aneustus,  iv.  91.  lievolt  in,
extinguished  by  L.  Piso,  ISis.  Governed
by  native  kingis,  t.  149,  9WI.  Qnairel  in
tlie  royal  (kmily,  and  oeeapntlon  of  part
of  tho  country  by  a  Koman  offloer,  9(8.
t  the  aatMMmy  of  the  remain-
:.a8laB,Ta98u

'i:  us,  eharges  brought against

Lini,  vi.  10<>.  His  cljaracter.  166.  Frivo-
lous nature  of  the  charges,  167.  Consults
with  his  friends  tho  course  he  should
adopt.  169. Pnx-.  ■  -t  him  in

the  senate,  170. 1 1

Thrasyllus,  the  asUv ^  ,  vst  in  the

564

INDEX.

household  of  Tiberius  at  Ehodes,  iv.
234.

Thusnelda,  wife  of  Arminius.  Delivered
by  her  father  Segestes  as  a  hostage  to  the
Komans,  and  sent  to  Kavenna,  v.  32.  Led
in  triumph  by  Germanicus,  48.

Thysdrus,  siege  of,  by  the  Ca'sarians,  ii.  296.

Tiberias,  surrenders  to  Vespasian,  vi.  437.
Establishment  of  the  Jewish  schools  at,
vii.  292.  814.  Preservation  of  the  Jewish
nationality  by  the  teaching  of  the  Jewish
doctors  at,  814

Tiberius  Ntro,  his  birth  and  parentage,  iii.
21>?;  iv.  125.  Qua>stor,  iii.  338;  iv.  128.
Accuses  Murena  and  Ciepio  of  conspiracy,
iii.  867.  Annexes  Mwsia  to  Illyricum,  iv. .
89.  Compels  the  Parthians  to  restore  the
standards  of  Crassus,  116.  His  campaign
against  the  Vindelicians,  160.  Consul,  161.
Ills  marriage  with  Vipsania,  170.  Be-
trothed to  Julia,  but  despatched  before
marriage  to  Pannonia,  170.  His  character
in  early  life,  171-173.  His  marriage  with
Julia,  182.  Crosses  the  Ehine  and  ad-
vances into'Germany,  189,  190.  Keceives
the  tribunitian  power  for  five  years,  206.
Eetires  dissatisfied  to  Rhodes,  207,  208.
Effects  of  his  retirement,  213.  Interview
with  Caius  Ca'sar.  214.  liecallcd  to  Eome,
and  adopted  into  the  Julian  family,  221.
Exhibited  before  the  Eomans  as  the  part-
ner of  Augustus,  221.  His  gloomy  pros-
pects at  Pihodes,  233.  Addicts  himself  to
^astrology,  284,  On  his  return  from  Ehodos,
abstains  from  all  public  afl'airs,  285.  In-
troduces his  son  Drusus  to  the  citizens  in
the  forum,  236.  Composes  an  elegy  on
the  death  of  Lucius  Ca-sar,  286.  His
campaigns  in  Germany,  287.  His  cam-
paign against  Moroboduus,  245,  246.  Ex-
niblts  games  In  honour  of  Drusus,  250.
Completes  the  subjugation  of  the  Panno-
nians,  255.  The  honours  of  a  triumjih
granted  to  him,  265. Goes  to  the  Ehine,

276.  IHs  blooilless  campaign  in  Germany,

277.  Assured  of  succvssion  to  the  empire,
280.  Completes  the  lustrum  and  resumes
the  command  in  Jllyrieum,  286.  Sum-
moned to  the  death-bed  of  Augustus,  2vS7.
Eoa<line8S  of  tlie  Eomans  to  acquiesce  in
his  succession  to  the  empire,  v.  8.  His
stdf-dlstriist,  9, 26,  Announcement  of  the
death  of  Augustus,  10.  Possible  compet-
itors already  designatrd  by  Augustus,  10.
Eumoiirt'd  assuHsinatlon  of  Agrlppa  Pos-
tunius.  11.  Tiberius  succeeds  to  the  em-
pire, 12.  Pronounces  the  funeral  oration
over  the  bo<ly  of  Augustus,  15.  His  Hrst
address  to  the  senate,  16.  All  the  func-
tions of  empire  left  by  tacit  understanding
In  his  hands,  17.  Abolishes  the  last  poli-
tical privileges  of  the  people,  17.  Mutiny
of  the  legions  In  I'liiinonia  and  on  the
Ehlne,  IH.  20.  His  Jealousy  of  the  popu-
larity of  (iemuiiiliMis,  2ti,  3(1.  Determines
to  employ  tile  diseonlenled  soldiers,  26.
HIsaitlllee  In  dealing  with  them, 27.  His
jMdlry  In  the  senate,  21).  Death  of  his
wife  Julln,  29.  His  luuriiiurs  at  the
slender  reniiltn  of  the  rainpalgns  In  Ger-
niuny,  86,  'I'he  EuiniitiH  od'ended  at  his
Jealousy,  80. Eocalls bis  nephew  Ocr-

manicuB  to  Eome,  47.  And  sends  him  on
a  mission  to  the  East,  50.  His  conduct
on  the  death  of  Germanicus,  74-77.  Checks
the  flow  of  public  feeling,  76.  Opens  the
trial  of  Piso  with  a  speech,  81.  Mitigates
the  sentence  of  the  senate  on  Piso,  86.
Tiberius  free  from  all  suspicion  in  regard
to  the  death  of  Germanicus,  107.  In-
trigues of  Libo  Drusus,  88.  His  fear  of
the  senate  and  consequent  policy,  29,  91.
His  apprehensions  relieved  by  the  deaths
of  Germanicus  and  Piso,  91.  Secretly
Influenced  by  Livia  and  Sejanns,  87,  92,
108.  Logical  character  of  his  policy,  97.
Has  not  a  select  council,  but  originates
his  own  measures,  106  Eejects  the  pe-
tition of  a  pauper  senator,  118.  His  con-
duct with  regard  to  libels,  128.  Injustice
he  has  done  his  own  rei)utation,  129, 180.
Encourages  criminal  informers,  130,  186,
201.  Contemporary  opinion  favourable
to  him,  140, 185.  II  is  military,  civil,  and
provincial  government,  142-152.  Immo-
rality ascribed  to  him,  155.  His  simple
habits,  and  disregard  of  money,  156,  lo8.
His  show  of  deference  to  the  senate,  158.
His  defects  of  temper  and  demeanour,  159.
Comparison  between  Augustus  and  Tibe-
rius, 162.  His  jealousy  not  alarmed  by
the  inferior  origm  and  talents  of  Sejanus,
163.  Scions  of  the  imiKjrial  family,  164.
Associates  himself  with  his  son  Drusus  in
the  consulship,  164.  Eenewcd  disturb-
ances in  Africa  and  in  Gaul,  166.  The
tribunitian  power  conferred  upon  Drusus
in  conjunction  with  the  emperor,  171.
His  confldenoo  in  Sejanus,  175.  His  son
Drusus  poisoned  by  Sejanus,  176.  His
demeanour  on  the  death  of  Drusus,  177.
His  pretended  offer  to  restore  the  repub-
lic, 178.  Jealousy  of  the  family  of  Ger-
manicus, 179.  Deterioration  of  his  prin-
cipate  from  a.d.  23,  180.  His  motives  for
checking  the  delators,  184.  Eejects  the
suit  of  Sejanus  for  Livilla,  187.  Quarrels
with  Agripplna,  190.  Eleven  cities  of
Asia  contend  for  the  honour  of  making
Tiberius  their  tutular  deity.  193.  Medi-
tates retiring  from  the  city,  194.  His
motives  for  quitting  Eome,  19.'>.  Does
not  abandon  public  afl'airs  in  his  retire-
ment, 199.  Eetires  to  Caprea',  208.  Ills
life  there,  207.  Kurllier  ilelerioration  of
his  government.  20s,  Denlli  ofliis  mother,
210.  Complains  tot  lie  senate  of  Agrippina
and  her  son  Nero,  214.  Banishes  Agrip-
jiina  and  her  sons,  215.  Prosecutes  the
friends  of  Llvla,  216.  His  cruelly  to  Asi-
nlus  Gallus,  218.  His  proernsti nation  and
Irresolution,  219.  His  measures  for  the
destruction  of  Sejanus,  223,  227.  Eefuses
the  title  of  Pater  I'atrhe,  228.  His  intense
anxiety,  22H.  Takes  vengeance  for  the
murder  of  Drusus,  231,  238.  (Juits  Ca-
j)rea'  and  approaches  Eome,  231.  Hut
returns  to  Caprea'.  232.  Licentiousness
aserlhi'd  to  hhii,  233.  Cruelty  to  Agrip-
plna and  her  son  Drusus,  23r)-238.  His
despair  and  apparent  Insanity,  240.  Ee-
fleetlon  on  his  general  ])olley,"244.  Ques-
tion of  the  succession  to  the  empire,  246.
Appoints  Caius lUid  Tiberius  Gemellus

INDEX.

565

his  pHvatf'lielrs.  but  leaves  the  succession
iimlri,  iniiii.'d,  'A^O,  2M.  His  end  visibly
aiiproiciliiti^',  2.Vi.  I'owcr  of  the  crafty
Macro,  'i'lS.  Anecdote  told  of  Tiberius  by
JosepliuH,  2M.  His  last  days  and  death,
255-258.  Ills  character,  25f*.  Judgment
of  the  Komatis  on  bis  character,  250.
]taneful  influence  of  his  latter  years  on
society  and  litenilure :  a  rciirn  of  terror,
2(>1.  "(ieneral  state  of  r»ea<'e  and  security
of  the  provinces  under  hiui,  2<i8-2(>5.  Est-
pr.'ssioiis  of  iiidltrnHtiiiii  of  ilir  i.ioi.Ie  on
hisdeath,2H4.His  \^  sen-

ate, 2s,V  Hisoljsii]'  ,iU9,

2H7. Amount  of  ii  ■!  by

him  durinj;  bis  rci;,'ii,  JbN

Tiberius,  Alexander,  procurator  of  Judea,  a
renettado  tn»m  .ludaimii,  vi.  421.  Prefect
ofKifvpt,  and  Joins  the  party  of  Vespa-
sian. 488.

Tiberius  Uemellus,  pnind
Tiberius,  v. 24it. ^

f  the  emperor
lo-heir  of
<t. Put  to

the  emperor's  prh
death  by  the  emji  ■

Tlbullus,  Alblus, c..!,  [  his  patrl-

monv,  111.  177;  Iv.  I'-i ii  , .Ktrv,  461.

Tlcinum,  military  di>;iiiii;in( .  at,  vl.  34.S,
844.

Tlffcllinus,  jinetorian  prefect  and  minister
of  Nero,  shares  in  nis  eM-.>>is,  \  1.  118.
His  fatal  intluence  over  i'  ; 119.

His  victims,  Kubellius I  I'or-

nelius  Sullii,  120. Presiil-  iml-

nation  of  Octavia,  123.  lli-<  intainuus  de-
vices for  the  emiH»ror's  pleasures,  127.
His  -iiinilian  Gardens,  180.  Triuinuhal
statue  awarded  to  him,  151.  8acrince8
Petronius  to  his  jealousy,  108.  Head  de-
manded by  the  populace  after  Nero's
death.  eseai>es  through  the  intercession
of  Vinius,  802.

TifTuriui,  a  llelvethin  tribe,  defeated  by  C«e-
sur,  i.  247.

'Ilnnlus  KufUa,  baffled  by  the  Jews  in  Fal-
estine,  vli.  8181

Tiridates,  seizes  the  throne  of  Parthia,  ilL
281.

Tiridates.  son  of  Phraates,  chosen  klngr  of
Armenia,  but  subseuuently  dethroned  v.
2()8 ;  vl.  265.  Does  uomage  to  Nero,  vl.
2(W.

Tiro,  M.  Tullins,  his  life  of  Cicero,  ill.  148.
Cicero's  favourite  slave,  iv.  309.

Titianus,  brv)ther  of  Otho,  named  consul,  vl
Si'ti.  Placed  In  command  of  the  army  at
the  battle  of  Bedrlacum,  333.  l>ardoned
by  Vitelliu8,!>41.

Titius,  an  Antouine  officer,  puts  Sextus
PoraiH'ius  to  death,  iil.  205.  Inserts  firom
Antouius  to  (.k'tavlus  and  divulges  An-
tonius's  will,  241.  Gains  a  victory  over
Antoitius's  cavalry,  249.

Titus,  Flavins  Sabinus  Vespaslanus.  charged
by  his  father  with  the  conduct  of  affairs  In
Judea,  vi.  351.  Consul  with  his  father,
876.  Enamoured  of  Berenice,  sister  of
Af.Tippa,  486 ;  vli.  43.  Conducts  an  army
airainst  .lerusaleui,  454.  His  operations
ajrainst  the  outer  wall,  455.  Draws  a  line
of  circumvallation  round  the  city,  467.
Captures  the  fortress  Antonia.  40)0.  De-
struction of  the  temple,  46£l Cuuclusion

of  the  JewiBh  war.  471.  Titnt  retnnu  to
Kome  and  triumphs  with  Ua  btber,  471.
Erection  of  the  arch  of  'lltui^  tIL  tt.  And
of  his  hatha,  S>,M.  CoBtendt  la  a  iham
fl^ht  with  Caoc,  M  Aaramea  the  tm-
pire  OB  th«  i»tth  of  kla  fcthcr,  41  Hi*
MriX  Ufb  aad  chflmetor,  4»,  4a.  Fstoot
with  vbi«b  k*  «M  rMwded  bj  tka  Bo-
mana,4«.  UedwM UabrothM> DomltkB
the  partner  of  hi*  MBpir*,  47.  He  eom-
bines  the  suffhi^e*,  boti  «f  tk«  MibiM  and
of  the  people,  47.  DtantefS  ol  hia  reifn,
4».  Dedicate*  the  CoiMa«ani.  Aa  Hi*
illnra*  and  destk,  8*.  View  of  hU
character  takes  by  OiriatiaB*  and  Jew*,
61.

To^omnua,  son  of  CnnobeliBM,  wonted
bv  Aulus  Plautlo*,  rL  «!t. SlaUi,  IK.

Timne*,  king  of  Armeai*,  <tfcatad  hj
Pompeius,  L  UT.

Tifrranes,  phused  br  Corbolo  «•  Uw  ttwm
of  Armenia,  rl.  M&

Tolosa,  KomaB  eoioMV  at,  L  W,  908.  Th»
eltv  sa<ked  br  Opla,  9M  «<><«.

I  e  side*  of  the  road*  UMoa^

IV.  a<T.

i  luatioii*,  Tr^aa**  Jcalooqr  ot,

vii.  213.

Trajan,  ftub«r  of  the  emperar,  s  ipoalard  of
Italic*,  eomiiMiid*  tbe  10th  le^ioo  at  Jop-
pa,  prooonsiil  of  Asia,  vlL  ITS.

Tnjau,  M.  Ulpiua,  his  orista  and  early
career,  vli.  ITI.  1T2.  Ills  moderatioB  la
c«immand.  i:  jeaetaasthaBbiae

at  Mainz,  .  ace*  a  rampart

fWjm the I  :.o Daaabe,  tlT.

Adopted  by  Nerva,  ICs.  Hi*  demeaaoar
on  entering  Kome,  IT^  Maraanloiity  of
his  wUb  and  aister,  178.  Receive*  the
title  of  Optimas,  WX  HU  first  Daciaa
campaign.  1>1, IvV. Kecords  it  oa  the

Tn^au  column.  1"
pentoaal  hu'
ttoatoDiu
tbeDaaaU
Biake*  Dacla  a  pn.

His  triompb  aad
'lis  (ecoad  expedi-

isDc«elidna  and
iDce,  1M-19T. Tra-

Jaa'a  ianm  aad  eoluma,  ltT-908.  Hia
architectural  works  la  the  city,  aad  ia  tlie
pruviaeea,  9IM-9Ml  Hi*  ptovladai  ad-
mlnUtratioB,  90C  Hi*  oowaaateal  ana*
urea  and  chariuhle  inatUMiaai,  MS,  iO».
His  me*siu«*  fbr  tta  ipfij*!  beacAt  of
Italy  aad  tor  "'^'■'♦»*»*'^  the  ifgai^  of  the
senate,  911,  ?1«  Ptodc**  UMelT  aever
tota'.  ra*eaalar,n&  Hi*  jeal-

ous) \ iteleadoaraad  ecwi-

omy  in ms  sdmlaistiatiunj

214l ills  K-;n?i.i!  ?" TT!s  personal

qualities,  Iljrure  ai  e,  216-219.

His  correspondeii'  '  about  the

Christians,  tett-tifs.  irauiiioa  of  the
church  of  bis  eoadama*tk>n  of  Ignatins,
293.  His  preseae*  demaaded  in  the  East,
8ML  DedaMa  Anaeaia  the  vassal  of
a  Saaeba*  AaUoeb,  iSfi.  Hia
ape  dortoi;  tbe  great  earthquake  there,
299.  nis  expedition  into  Armenia,  8W
His  cruel  treatment  of  Parthamaslrla,
801-.S03.  Annexes  both  Armeni.-»s  to  th*
empire,  879.  Crosses  the  Tigris  and  cre-
ates the  new  province  of  Assvrla,  805i
The  title  of  Puthlcus  bestowed  on  him.

666

INDEX.

806.  Takes  CtesJphon,  launches  on  the
Persian  gulf,  and  subdues  the  Parthians,
806-308.  Eepulsedbcfore  Atra,  808.  His
sickness  and  death  at  Solinus,  811.  For-
tunate in  the  moment  of  his  death,  818.
His  apotheosis  at  Kome,  881.  His  eastern
conquests  abandoned  by  Hadrian,  382.
Pliny's  panegyric  on  him,  489.
Transtiberine  quarter  of  Home,  described,

iv.  384.
Trayelling,  rate  of,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,
iv.  821-823. Frequency  of  night  travel-
ling, 86&
Treason,  law  of,  or  "majestas,"  iii.  864.
Trebellius  Maximus,  his  prefecture  in  Bri-
tain, vii.  09.
Trebonius^.,  serves  under  Ca?sar  in  Gaul,
i.  264. His  law  conferring  provinces  on
Pompeius  and  Crassus,  841. His  law  for
the  prolongation  of  Caesar's  command  in
Gaul,  842,  843. His  violence,  421. Joins
Cicsar  under  the  walls  of  Eome,  ii.  128.
Appointed  to  the  command  of  the  land
forces for  besieging  Massilia, 180. His
immense  rampart  on  the  land  side  of  the
city,  156. Made  pra'tor of  Pome,  201.
And  propraitor  of  Further  Spain,  268.  Ex-
pelled from  his  government  by  the  repub-
lican insurgents,  806.  Joins  the  conspiracy
against Cicsar's life, 874. Obtains the
government  of  Asia,  iii.  81. Establishes
himself  there,  94. Seized  and  murdered
by  Dolabella,  110.
Troves,  colony  of,  founded  by  Claudius,  v.

879.  '

Tre\iri,  a  Belgic  tribe,  1.  225. Defeated  by
Labienus,  899. Two  of  Caesar's legions
stationed in  their  country,  405. Again
defeated  by  Labienus,  ii.  86. Defeated  by
Nonius  Gallus,  Iv.  70. In  revolt  agairst
Kome,  vi.  408. And  again  defeated,  405.
Operations  of  Ccrealis  in  their  country,
406,407.
Tribunes,  their  power  abridged  by  Sulla,  i.
81. The  potentuH  tHbuvHia, iii. 860.
Tho tribunitlan power  conferred upon
Augustus,  am. Who  BfTects  the  inviola-
bility of  the  emperor,  861. Appellate  ju-
riRdictlon  of  tlu^  tribunes,  862.
Tributuiii,  the,  as  a  Bource  of  public  reve-
nue, ill.  403.
TrlnobanteH,  a  British  tribe,  submit  to  Cn--
sar,  J.  85H. Tlifir  coinage,  vl 17. Their
power,  IS. Defented  by  Chmdlus.  25.
Trio, Fulclnlus, lodges an  imi)eachment
OKiilnst  IMho,  v.  70. His speech  for  tho
nroik'cutlon.  N2. Tho  emperor's  cjuition  to
nlm, 87. I'ronecutfS  Libo Drusus,  00.
ChoMii  consul,  '222.
"Trlstla"  of Ovid,  remarks on  tho,  Iv.

464.
Triumph,  mode  orronduotlng  a,  III.  ai6.
'J'riumvlnilr,  formiilloii  of  the  First,  I.  16S.
nctlretlonN upon  the character of this
KiiKue,  I6U. Formation  of  the  Second,  III,
l.'K  '

Trov,  giime  of,  exhibited  by  Atignslu^  Iv.

144. And  by  CInudluH,  v.  421.
TuImto,  entniHted  by  the  utiiuto  with the

rare  of  Africa.  II.  Wl.
Tullln.  dniighfcr  of  Cicero,  divorced  ft-om  P.
J>olabelln,  11.  862. Her  death,  802.

"  Turbot,  council  of  the,"  vii.  140.

Turones,  a  Gallic  tribe,  i.  215.  Compelled
to  submit  to  the  liomans,  282.  Eevolt,
but  are  reduced,  v.  167, 168.

Turpilianus,  Pctronis,  has  the  command  of
the  legion  in  Britain,  vi.  50.  Put  to  death
by  Galba,  295.

Tufulius,  in  arms  against  the  triumvirs,  iii.
178.

Tusculum,  Cicero's  villa  at,  described,  i
805.  Favourite  residence  of  Poman  no-
bles, 804.

Tutor,  Julius,  a  Trevirian,  joins  a  con-
spiracy to  liberate  Gaul,  vi.  400.  Defeat-
ed, 405.

Tyre,  complaint  of  the  citizens  of,  of  the
extortions  of  Gabinius'  publican!,  i.  354.
The  temple  of  Melcarth  at,  plundered  by
Cwsar,  ii.  276.

UBir,  a  German  tribe,  slaughter  the  fugi-
tive Sucvi,  i.  262.  Their  territory,  262
note'^.  Encroachments  of  the  Suevi  on
their  territory,  36S.  lYansplanted  from
the  right  bank  of  the  Ehine  to  Cologne  by
Agrippa,  iv.  81.

tripia  Trajana,  capit.al  of  the  Dacians,  vii.
1S6;  Roman  colony  at,  195.

TTlplum  Forum,  the,  vii.  202.

Umbrenus  urges  the  Allobroges  to  ioin  Cati-
lina,  1.  209.

Ummidius  A^rus.  jurisconsult  in  the  reign
of  Antoninus  Pius,  vii.  405.

Unelli,  campaign  of  Sabinus  against  the,  i.
289,  291. Defeated  by  Sabinus,  294.

TJr,  city  of,  of  Scripture,  i.  418.

Urban  cohorts  in  tho  time  of  Tiberius,  v.
148.

Usipetes,  a  German  race,  their  invasion  of
Belsrium,  i.  860.  Chastised  by  Drusus,  iv.
179,266.

Utica.  capital  of  tho  Koman  province  of
Africa,  11.  165,  Great  muster  of  the  re-
publican chiefs  at,  285.  Saved  from  de-
struction by  Cato,  287.  His  endeavours
to  deftaid  the  city  against  tho  Ciesarians,
298.  Sum  exacted  by  Ca-sar  from  the
citizens,  8ft3.

Uxellodunum,  tho  last  stronghold  of  tho
Gauls,  stormed  and  taken  by  Ciesar,  11. 37,

VACC.1-;r,  a  Spanish  tribe,  1.  l.W.
Vadlinonian  lake,  battle  of  the,  i.  191.

Valens,  Fnblus,  legate  of  n  legion  on  the
Plilne,  Incites  Vitellius  to  claim  the  cm-
l>ire,  vi.  818.  His  crimes,  319.  Advances
through  Gaul  to  Italy,  322.  His  rapacity
and  violence  on  his  route,  328.  Tampers
with  the  ])ra>torlaii8,  825.  Sends  troops
to  Forum  .lulil,  331.  Insubordination  In
his  camp.  383.  His  despatches  to  tho
senate,  339.  Allows  his  troops  to  plun-
<lor  the  cities  of  Italy,  339.  Meets  Vltel-
llus  nt  I.ug<lnnuni,  340.  He  iind  Caeinn
the  real  governors  of  the  einjilre,  !i.'i;t.
l{o-embo(iles  the  pra-torliin  and  urban
guards.  3M.  Ills  doubtful  coiuluct,  356,
Quits  Italy  for  the  Narbonensls,  taken
prisoner  In  the  Stieebades  Islands,  359,
Hlalu  at  Urblnum,  and  his  head  exhibited
to  (hu  Flavians,  362.

Valerius  Asluticus,  his  conduct  on  Uioas6as<

INDEX.

567

Bination  of  Calaa,  v.  865.  Aspires  to  the
einpiro,  36s  C'oubuI  a.v.  HK>,  416.  CLarjf-
eB  liroii^'ht  a^aiust  bitn  by  Mi'SBalinii,  416.
Suicide  of  Ills  wife,  417.  Acquitted,  but
destroys  hiuiself,  418.

Varinius,  the  prit-tor,  defeated  by  Spartacua,
1.50.

Varlus  liuftis,  L.,  his  fHendsbip  with  Mttce-
nas,  ill.  216.

Varro,  M.  TiTeiitiu<>,  lieutenant  of  Ponipeins
in  (<naiu,  C'a•^ar's  o])ini(iu  of  biui,  ii.  litS.
His  litemry  eharucter,  181.  Iliit  untitness
for  tnilitafv  oonimand,  131.  lias  two
legions  under  him  in  the  south  and  west
of  t^pain,  l;>i.  His  supineness,  183.  His
vacillating  conduct  und  subtiiit>i>ion  to  C'u--
sar,  164>-1Cl'.  Appointed  kniK-r  of  the
Jirst  jiublic  library  at  IJonie,  Kib.  Lett  by
Augustus  to  chastise  the  Alpine  moun-
taineers, iv.  68.

Varro,  Clngnnius,  consul-designate,  put  to
death,  vi.  ifi»ft.

Varus,  Arrius,  appolntM  prefect  of  the  pre-
toriaus,  vi.  878.

Varus,  Attius,  retreats  Ix'fore  Ca'sar,  11.  102.
C'omniands  the  I'oniiR-ian  forces  in  Africa,
165.  .loined  by  Jubii  and  t*cipio,  i^8.
His  dispute  with  Scipio  at  Utica,  "287.
Kscapts  from  Africa,  <S05.  Joins  the  dis-
altectcd  legions  iu  Spain,  81ft.  Uis  defeat
and  death,  817.

Varus,  Quintllius,  crushes  a  revolt  in  Judea.
V.  270.  .appointed  by  Augustus  to  the
couiuiand  or  the  legions  iu  tieruiany,  Iv.
269.  Irritation  causi'd  by  his  Indisi-reet
nuxle  of  governing  the  Gerui-ins,  270.
Intriguis  of  Arniinius,  271.  .\ilvaiice  of
Varus  into  tlie  fon  ft  of  TciitoLiirs.',  -72.
Attacked  on  his  rcti\at,  and  linally  ovii-
powered  with  tlie  loss  of  tlirte  Kiriuiis,
272,  273.  Tlie  scene  of  this  >lau^'litir  n -
visited  by  <ieriiianieus,  v.  fvS.  I'luur-.il
honoin  '" "'k- remains  of  the  sLiii^'li-

ter.-.l

Varus.  I.  M  (if  tlu'pr.'cedii^L',  pros-

ecuted ior  I!  i: .

Vatinius,  1'.,  <  :
ed  by  Clc. :

over  OetaMus  ai  m  a,  n.  -oo.  j>i<omu.-
consul.  280.  I'omuiauds  for  Antouius  at
Dyrrachium,  iii.  IftS.

Vectigaliii,  Isero's  pro{)08al  to  abolish  the,
vl.  87,  8>J.

Veiento,  Kabridus,  accnsed  of  libelling  the
senate,  vl.  116i  Banished  and  his  booka
burnt,  117.

Veil,  settlement  of  the  Koman  colony  o^
ii.  828.

Velabrum,  the,  at  Kome,  described,  ly.  88-?.

Veleda,  a  (ierman  prophetess,  priestess,  and
queen  of  the  Bructerl,  court  paid  to  her
bv  avilis,  vl.  402.

Veleia,  tablet  of,  vii.  208.

Velleius  Haterculus,  v.  280.  His  character
of  Sextus  PomiK-ius,  iii.  185.

Velocasscs,  a  Belgian  tribe,  join  the  confed-
erjiev  formed  agjiinst  the  Uomans.  i.  267.

Veneti,  a  Gallic  tribe,  i.  281.  (.'omiHlled  bv
P.  frassus  to  submit  to  him,  2*2.  28^.
Their  war  with  Ca-sar,  289-191.  Their
mode  of  warfare,  291.  Defeated  by  the
navy  under  Decimus Brutus,  29i  298.

Vennonefl,  an  Alpine  trib«,  deCwted  by  P.

Villus,  iv.  16a

Viiitidiiis  BaSfU.s,  Publius,  a|><ior7ptud  «i-

uCat  with

'  jde  con«ul

storj-,  154.

]'hi<  4rr  Ibv  cuUiIUiUld  ot  L.

Auto  ■>  MeecMW  over  th«  ftr*

thiuii-  BmIccm  ABtiochiu  in

Hamosata,  l<.i2. GriAtM  •  triiuuph,  11>2,
219.
Vcnutini,  Uag  ot  tke  Bri«uit««,  riL  86.
IMven  away  bv  bia  wife  UutteBMBdua,
Kecover*  hit  tkroBS,  tt.

YeraniuSj  proa*«ut4W  Cb.J*Uo,t.  8flL Ait-

"vi.  42.

IMiinied governor  of  Britau,  a.o.

Verc<-ll«e,  annihilation  c^  th«  CImbri  mv.

1.  206.
Verciugetorlz,  excites  the  Arveml  to  NTolt,

ii.  12. Persuades  the Cauls  to  rbtncti

their  mode  of  w;  '  "uaenta  to

Bjiare  Avaricum,

with  (.'a  Mir,  '."o

govia.

mee!

8urren<Ur>  iiiiiisc

~  a battle
1  «ar  at  Ger-

jr<at prvparatlou for

aied  camp  of  AkfliaL  W.

If  to  CiMar,  aa. l«d  la

(.'a■^>Hr's  triumph  and  stianjcled  at  KaoM^

84,309.

Vergobrvt,  or  chief  maeiatrate,  of  th«  GmiI^

L  2!«.
Veromandui,  a  Belgian  tribe.  Join  the  eon-
federacy  formed  aj;ain*t  tho  Komana,  L
267.
Verrea,  his  spoliation  of  the  province  ot
Sicily,  i  71. I'rosecuted,  71. Admits  bit
;;uilt,  and  retires  into  exile,  72. Put  to
.!.  t'h.  iii 140  note".
^  orSt.  Albuu,L88a.

N  uiu*  Commodna,  adopted  hj

-  hi*  aacoeaaar  in  tbe  empire,
Ml  ci>o.  llisebai*ct«r,88&  HIaeaadttct
in  the  Held,  88T.  BU  pranatare  deeth,
H»7.

'' \--'-' <>MAnreUiu.

y  Antuttinua,  tIL  88^
V  M.  AareUuawitiiUm-
Mii  i.M. AMwne*  the  eom-

mail  ,4. Uia  MTcnea.  4&&

And  Intilmea  to  OTcr-

thro^v  c  and  M&on,  M.  Anr»-

lius, .  hs  with  AureliuB,  45T.

Inro..  ':<riaD!>.  and  supinenece

ofVi  ' ' inthewaM

iaaBl,4M,

^'

Vespasian,  riaiiu>,  uiB  euuiiaigna  in  Bri-
tain, vl.  22,  27,  Commaade  the  torcf
destiiie4l  tor  the  rednetian  of  Jndeo,  896.
InJi.'  '■ ■  >,  429. Reduces Gali-

lee, ,)  IS,  and  Tarich*^  484-

436,  a,  487. Watches  the

mov.  i. ~  >ik.a  and  Otho,  488. De-

putes 1,1-  -.  ii  luus  to  open  the  siege
of  J>r>.i\!i.  ^."4.  His  triumph,  471.
Aimixr-  r..:  -■  :ie  to  the  empire,  478.
Uis  or  .  :i  :i  early  career.  846-34S
His  cai.-i^  I  -;  o  .-^ii  by  the  Syrian  legions
849.  I'ri.niaiiui.l  imjieror  at  .\leAaudria,
849.  Prepares  to  contest  the  empire.  860.
Marches  u^ton  Alexandria,  860. Date  of

568

INDEX.

his  prinoipato,  374.  Declines  aid  from
Partnia,  377.  Vexed  at  the  vices  of  his
Eon  Domitian,  878.  Assumes  something
Of  a  divine  character  in  the  eyes  of  the
Eomans,  880.  Works  miraculous  cures  at
Alexandria,  8S1.  Arrives  at  Kome,  382.
Kcvolts  in  the  provinces,  884,  et  seq.
Closes  the  temple  of  Janus,  vii.  10.  Ap-
plauded for  peace  by  the  Romans,  14.
His  lirmness,  vigilance,  and  moderation,
16.  His  personal  appearance  and  habits,
19,  20.  Eevision  ot  the  senate,  21.  De-
molishes Nero's  golden  house,  24.  Ke-
stores  the  Capitol,  24.  A  deficit  in  the
finances,  24,  25.  His  parsimony  unjustly
stigmatised,  25.  lieconstitutes  the  older
colonies,  26.  His  architectural  works,  27.
His  endowment  of  literature,  28.  His
measures  against  the  philosophers,  30.
His  erection  of  the  Colosseum,  36.  His
death  and  character,  40,  41.

Vestal  virgins,  Domitian's  zeal  for  the  pu-
rity of  the,  vii.  103.  His  inquisition  into
their  character,  104.  Punishment  of  the
culprits,  106.

Vesuvius,  its  appearance  in  the  time  of  Ti-
berius, V.  207.  Changes  in  its  phvsical  as-
pect, vii.  54. Great  eruption  of,  bS-61.

Yettius,  L.,  an  informer  in  the  pay  of  the
senate,  i.  143.  His  mysterious  disclosures
of  a  plot  for  assassinating  Pompeius  and
CiEsar,  174  His  imprisonment  and  death,
174.

Vetus,  Lucius,  put  to  death  with  his  mother-
in-law  and  daughter,  vi.  158.

Vlbultius,  Hufus,  sent  by  Pompeius  into
Spain,  ii.  128, 129.

Vienna,  in  CJaul,  capital  of  the  Allobroges,
early  Koraan  colony  at,  iv.  74.

Viminal  Hill,  the,  in  the  time  of  Augustus,
Iv.  375.

Vindelicia,  formidable  position  of,  iv.  159.
Incursions  of  the  Viudelicians  into  the
Cisalpine,  159.  Completely  subjugated  by
Til>erius,  160,  177.

Vinde.x,  Julius,  a  Gallo-Roman  of  Aquitania,
makes  overtures  to  (Jalba  for  a  revolt
apiingt  Nero,  vi.  280.  Conspires  with  Vlr-
dnius,  and  slays  himself  at  Vesontio,  280.
Nero  hears  of  his  revolt,  288.

Vine,  alleged  edict  of  Domitian  respecting
the  cultivation  of  the,  vii.  115.

Vinlclanus,  his  conspiracy  against  Claudius
and  condeiimation,  v.  409-411.

Vlnlclus,  .Mart-US.  chastises  the  Germans,  iv.
71,  287.  .Married  to  Julia,  daughter  of
Germanlcus,  v.  249.

Vlnlus,  T..  an  adherent  of  (Jalba,  accompa-
nies litin  to  Home,  vl.  294.  Becomes  con-
sul with  the  eini>er(>r  (Jalba,  298,  Saves
the  life  of  Tigt'lllnus.  802.  Murdered  In
the  Forum,  811.

Vlltnaulu,  daughter  of  Agrlppo,  I  v.  169  not«^.
.Married  to  I'lberlim,  170.  IHvoreed,  170,
1H2. Married  to  Anlnlus  Gallus,  v.  217.

Virgil,  ei)ntliic4itlon  and  roMtorution  of  his
imtrlmony.  111.  177;  Iv.  480.  Taken  Into
favour  by  OctavluK  and  MirccnaN,  ill.  177,
216.  The  celebrated  iirophrcv  In  his
fourth  Kelogue  |s8.  IIIh  thrlllfng  Nentl-
mentK  In  the  first  Georglu,  289.  Ills  (l<>-
scrlptlon  of  the  buttle  of  Aetluni,  2M.

His  story  of  AristKus,  iv.  53.  Urged
by  Augustus  to  send  him  a  specimen
of  his  forthcoming  epic,  60.  His
verses  on  the  death  of  Marcellus,  1*3.
His  enthusiasm,  439.  Remarks  on  his
"Eclogues"  and  "Georgics,"  440.  And
on  his  "yEneid,"  443.  llis  melancholy,
447.  His  death,  448.  His  personal  ap-
pearance, 449.  His  works  commanded  by
Caius  to  be  removed  from  the  public  libni-
ries,  V.  338.

Virgilius,  commands  for  Scipio  in  Thapsus,
ii.  294.

Yirginius,  Rufus,  commander  of  the  legions
in  Lower  Germany,  conspires  with  Vindex
against  Nero,  vi.  280.  Refuses  the  title  of
imperator,  281.  Alarm  of  Nero  at  the
news  of  Virginius's  revolt,  284.  Canied
otf  by  Galba  to  Rome,  297.  Consul-desig-
nate, 326.  Again  refuses  the  empire,  338.
His  narrow  escape  from  the  soldiers,  838,
843.

Vitellius,  Aulus,  his  early  history  and  ch.ar-
acter,  vi.  315,  816.  Proclaimed  emperor
by  the  Germanic  legions,  319.  Assumes
the  name  of  Germanicus  and  marches
upon  Italy,  821.  His  messages  to  Otho,
824.  Defeats  Otho,  who  commits  suicide,
833-386. Accepted  by  the  senate  as  em-

fieror,  889.  His  soldiers  plunder  the  Ita-
ian  cities,  839.  His  inarch  through  Gaul
to  Italy,  840.  His  indulgence  towards  his
enemies,  341.  His  gluttony,  842.  His
moderate  edicts,  842.  Waives  the  title  of
Augustiis,  842.  Disbands  the  praetorians
and  distributes  the  Othonians  omong  va-
rious other  legions,  34;3.  His  disorderly
progress  and  brutjil  behaviour  on  the  Held
of  Bedriacum,  344.  Withheld  from  enter-
ing Rome  in  the  garb  of  war,  345.  His
moderate  behaviour  in  the  senate,  ond
Indiscreet  comparison  of  himself  with
Thnisea,  352,  858.  Governed  by  Ciecina
and  Valens,  853.  Deserted  by  some  prov-
inces, feebly  supported  by  others,  855.
His  trooi^s  defeated  at  Bedriacum,  857.
His  bestialitv,  feiu-s,  cruelties,  and  disas-
ters, 8.58.  clauses  Junius  Bla'sus  to  bo
poisoned,  859.  His  slow  and  cautious
])olicy,  860.  Rouses  himself  from  sloth
and  goes  to  Mevania,  361.  Brought  back
to  Rome  by  an  insurrection  In  Campania,
801.  Offers  to  resign  tlic  empire,  but  pre-
vented by  his  soldiei-s,  362.  ;i6.'i.  Neglects
to  escape,  and  conceals  him.self  in  the
palace,  870.  Dragged  fh)m  his  hiding-
place  and  slain,  871.  Remarks  on  his
character,  872. Murder  of  his  son,  8S2.

Vitellius,  L.,  compelled  to  march  with  Otho
against  his  brother,  A.  Vitellius,  vl.  .380.
Commands  in  Kome,  861, 868.  Ex|)els  Hio
Flavians  from  Tarraeina,  868.  BuiTCuders
tti)il  is  put  to  death,  878.

Vitellius,  L.,  father  of  the  emi)eror,  prefect
of  Syria  under  Tiberius,  v.  71»;  vl.  262.
Prosecutes  Cn.  PIso,  v.  79,  S2.  Leads  tho
forces  of  Asia  and  Syria  against  the  I'ar-
thlans,  26s,  417.  Recalls  Pontius  Pilatus
fhim  Judea,  271.  His  grows  flattery  of
CaluH  and  (Maudlus,  of  Me^.-iallnu  an<I  tho
('laudlan  fVeedmen,  417.  One  of  the  pros-
ecutors of  Valerius  Asiuticus,  418.  Gained

INDEX.

509

over  by  Agripplna,  488.  Brin^  forward
a  bill  for  luurriaifi-  bc-twei'O  uucU-  and
iiiiT. .  4;l'.».  l)<x'»  not  t.iki'  ii:irt  x^ralnst
■'  I, 447. Con.-'  ■ .lius,

rharce  of  l'.<  ..•  ab-

I  •  I  liiudius  in  lirr ,  ,.  .x. Ccn-

fcur  mill  tlu'ice  consul,  HIIk

Vot-atfi,  an  .\i|uitauian  tribe,  reduced  by  P.
CrasHus,  i.  '^(i.

Vocoutil,  wars  of  Calvlnns  against  the,  L
iy(I.

Vocula,  Dillius,  sent  to  relieve  Castra  Ve-
tera, vL  »S>"i.  Succeeds  Uordeouiiu  Flac-
cus  in  the  war  against  C'ivUia,  8M.  He-
leases  Uunleonius,  and  tiiits  tlu-  rinirlMid-
era  to  death,  8»2-!«»& !'  '  ivlllii,

8i»6. Kelieves  Veteni.  dot

corre8i>ondin^ with i  WT,

Takes  shelter  in  (ieldnl  ^  .  \  ..slum,
897.  Kecu|)e8,  and  sa\i-  M  _■  ;: 'laomn,
89a Put  to  death  \>y  (  Iu-m<u-,  4i"I.

Volcie,  the  I,  i.-il'  -  •>(  the,  defeated  by
the  l'uniaii~.  !  ."'  I  lieir  Lncuniana  Into
the  south  ol  ii:iul.  ■.'■.'i>.

Volot^tsus,  chief  of  the  liesst,  le«da  an  nn-
Buceessful  rovolt  of  the  ThracUna,  Iv.
188.

P..1

40,

la,  hit  trMtmeatof
ua.rLM7.  OBtn
luksian  for  the  oon-

uucst  uf  JuiUa,  a? 7.

YoloKesus,  a  later  king  of  Parthia,  lay*
claim  to  Armenia,  vii.  4A9i.  Defeatoid,  45&
Rues  for  i>eaoe,  4fiT.

Volusenus,  sent  by  Cesar  to  explore  tte
coast  of  Britaiit,  L  8Ta  Commiaakmed  by
l^blenus  to  asaassinate  the  Atrebete  Cota-
niius,  ii.  88.  Follows  him  from  plwe  to
I.luce,  8s.

\ Oiioiu  >.  >on  of  Phraates,  aseends  the  throne
<>t  I'ail.i.i,  V.  51.  Dethroned  by  his  sub-
i>  ri>,  :iiiil  takes  refkige  in  Aruienla,  51.
Ki'|>t  iu  custody  by  Hilanoa,  proeonsul  of
Ryria,  M.  His  cause  undertaken  by  Cn.
Calpumius  Pisu,  64.

WAR,  the  laws  of,  as  onderatood  by  the
Konians,  t.  MH.

Wines  of  Greece  and  Asia  importe«l  into
Kome,  iv.  318.  Domitian's  e«lict  respect-
ing the  cultivation  of  the  vine,  vii.  115.

Women,  suiHTstitious  veneration  jiaid  bv
the  Uennans  to,  1.  titj*).  Political  nullity  of
the  Ifoiuuu  wouieu,  and  their  consequent  i
Security  in  times  of  revolution,  8l!\  Ko-
man  laws  and  customs  of  marriage,  iL  4Ui* ;
iv.  80.  Marriage  fallen  into  disfavour  and
desuetude, Si. Influence of  the lk«ed

women,  SO.  Servitude  of  married  wo-
men, 84.  And  htruj5.'U-i<  of  thf  wonica
against  it,  85.  Ijiw*  of  th.-  n-puMic  rn-
forcing  marriage  M.  IViultus  l..r  uu-
ch*6tit.v,  40.  The  ch_ra*t<r  of  the  Augus-
tan age  fatal  to  ft-male  \  in ur.  :^>4.  >tkaui<.--
lessness  of  both  »<-\i'S  iu  tli>-  r<-i.'u  of
Augustus,  v.  KM.  Puui»hui.ut  l..r  adul-
tery, and  mode  of  CM-aiiing  fr-iii  tno
eou»»-«JUene«-».  l.%4.  'lerril.U-  si^iilfi.ainv
of  the  faet  of  the  alNk-uer  of  jirdiioiiKiis
amuns  womeB,  IM  m'tt  •.  lutlumct'  uf
wooiM  over  the  eutpetar  Clewtliia.  414
The  flrtt  dcttdlj  rivilrjr  of  wom««  Im
Rone,  411.  Wonea  attrittod  to  s  eon.
■plnaf  iHpUMt  tke  Mto  of  Xer^  tL  14&.
AtlnellTeMM  of  tk*  SjrHw  worsUp  ot
the  devwU  to  Ike  lover  etdsr  tf  iMMUi
wonn,  MMML  PreralraM  aT  HkUo
amoi«tkeii.TtLtta
Woollea  good»  ti  Aila  Mbwr.  miitmt  ^aU
in,  iv.  SIC

OOMH

XANTBU8,  eultal  oT  Lyeta,
li.  Bmtoa,  UL  !« ; It.  lOtL
peantod  bf  AacMtua,  IOC
Xeaophoa,  Cteadhurs  jphyskten,  t.  481

JW*'

ZAMA,  euiltal  at  Vmldte,  Jnbo*s  pnpm-
tkiMe{,lBeMeeradiftot,U.Ml.  telo
of  J  abo*s  propertr  at,  Ml
ZarmmiMMfeanBa,  •■  Indlaa  Mge,  adalttod
to  the  KlenaliiiaB  myatetlea,  and  bonM
Umaetf  ob  •  Atoeiml  pyre  at  Athosa,  It.

lie

Seoioto,  the  party  ot  iBdepaadcBea  In  J«ra-
■aleas.TL«T,«nL  TlMfrSkai4i,araea«t
iisaaawi^  4ttL  Tha  OMat  jwalaeBt  «f
the  diMb  or  the  Zaalota,  40.  Ooosraaed
with  the  MoBta«Bards  vt  the  WeMh  nt-
olatioa,44T.  They  OMaaacre  tha  aaoderato
pai^,  and  aaaona  tha  gawwaat,  44tL
DirMed  into  three  •wtl0M,44lL  Orcrav*
the  ettlaenso/Jeraaatan.  451, 4881  Batea
tcnMftvaa  the  Koaaaaa,  aader  Tltaa,  48C
DefeBd  the  Upper  CltT,48C  IWatotb— eea
eansed  by  a  rraaaaBt  at  the  ZealeU  1b
Alexandria,  tU  K4.

Zela.  batUe  oC  U-  STC

Zeno,  son  of  Poleraa,kta9ef  Poatva,  orown-
ed  king  of  Armenia  by  Oarmaatfiia,  t.  <a.

Zenodorua,  the  tetiarok,  deprired  of  hia  ter-
ritories, ir.  114.

Zermizegettanaa  (Ulpia  Tr^JaM),  tha  capital
of  the  Daeiana,  tiL  1S&,  Bobmb  tuAoar
at,  195.

Zeugma,  haportanee  of  the  tova  o(  i.  419.
Craasaaat,41K Tnjan  at,  tIL  801  804.

An^  oftheu  Books  tent  free  hy  mail  to  any  adJreu  oh  rrctipt  of  Priee.

RECENT  PUBLICATIONS

D. APPLETON & CO.,

443 & 445 BBOADWAY, NEW YORK

The  Life  and  Correspondence  of

TIIEODOllE  PARKER,  Miuister  of  the  Twenty-eighth  Congre-
gational Society,  Boston.  By  John  Wei88.  With  two  Por-
traits on  Steel,  fac-aimile  of  Handwriting,  and  nineteen  Wood
Engravings. 2  void.,  8vo. 1,008  page

"These  volumes  contain  nn  nrenu' t  of  Mr.  Pnrkpr**  childhood  and  «e?f-
education  ;  of  the  ilowloinn  -.  . . .  ,

jihilosopliual  i>uisuUs;  an  ,
the  epofli  ill  Aiiii-rica  whu  i.

are  (leseribeil  in  letters  ami  fxiinc's  Iim  u  i  is  j  "jr
fraifuiem  1«  liitnxiuced  in  relation  to  Mr.  Parker's  .
of  friendship  oil literary,  gpecuhi'lvc,  :»•  d polifira

speraed. Thelllustratloni*  i  \  ,ir  ojf  p.ri  .oi! 'ji

Mr.  Parker'*  life,  the  hoi;  .  luta,  the  meetiug

buUAe,  his  library,  and  thii  ...  i."

Catechism  of  the  Steam  Engine,

In  its  various  Applications  to  Miubs,  Mills,  Steam  Navigation,

Railways,  and  Agriculture. With  Practical  Instructions  for

the  Manufacture  and  Management  of  Engines  of  ererr  Class.

By  John  Bocrse,  C.  E. New  and  Revised  Edition. 1  toL,

12aio. Illustrated.

'•  In  oft'ering  to  the  American  pnblio  a  reprint  of  a  work  »»n  the  Bteam
Engine  »o  dtservedly  successful,  and  so  Ions.' •■""-'■'•••■•■'•  «'«r..iH-.i ti.-  fni..
lishers  have  not  thought  it  necessary  that  it
Eiiijlisli  edition. There  were  some  details  in

improved  and  better  adapted  to  the  use  of  Aiu. ^ ...■

count  the  size  of  the  paifo  has  been  increased  to  a,  I'uU  l:iuio.  to  aiimit  of  ii»rj{i-r
illustrations,  which,  In  the  English  edition,  are  often  on  too  •mall  a  «cale,  and

■  1  I'V  others  equally  ap-

The  first  part  of

'  orta)>'e  and  fixed

li-t  rations  from

«es,  and  of

tion  of  some

.t  on  of  a  few

eonie  of  the  illu^-trations  themselves  hav>-  ti^
plioable,  more  recent,  and  to  in  more  i
Chapter  XI.,  devoted  in  the  English  i

atirioultural  engines,  in  this  edition  give.-,  ,

Amerioan  practice,  of  steam  enijines  as  appiii.-<l  to  u

appliaacea  and  machines  necessary  to  them. But  v

of  the  illustrntions  and  the  desonption  of  them,  ana

tyuo;;raphical  errors,  thia  edition  is  a  faithful  tranaoripi  oi  the  latest  English

edltioo.'*

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIOInS.

History  of  the  Romans  under  the

Empire.  By  Charles  Merivale,  B.  D.,  late  Fellow  of  St.  John's
College.  7  vols.,  small  8vo.  Handsomely  printed  on  tinted
paper

CONTENTS :

Vols.  I.  and  II. — Comprising  the  History  to  the  Fall  of  Julius  Caesar.

Vol.  III. — To  the  Establishment  of  the  Monarchy  by  Augustus.

Vols.  IV.  and  V. — From  Augustus  to  Claudius,  b.  c.  27  to  a.  d.  54.

Vol.  VI. — From  the  Reign  of  Nero,  a.  d.  54,  to  the  Fall  of  Jerusa-
lem, A.  D.  70.

Vol.  VII. — From  the  Destruction  of  Jerusalem,  a.  d.  70,  to  the
Death  of  M.  Aurelius.

This  waluable  work  terminates  at  the  point  where  the  narrative  of  Gibbon
comnmiices.

"  When  we  enter  3n  a  more  searching  criticism  of  the  two
writers,  it  must  be  admitted  tliiit  Merivale  has  as  Ann  a  grasp  of  Ins  subject  as
Gibbon,  and  that  hie  work  is  characterized  by  a  greater  freedom  from  preju-
dice, and  a  sounder  philosophy.

"  This  history  must  always  stand  as  a  splendid  monument
of  his  learning,  his  candor,  and  his  vigorous  grasp  of  intellect.  Though  he
is  in  some  respects  inferior  to  Macaulay  and  Grote,  ho  must  still  be  classed
with  them,  as  one  of  tlie  second  great  triumvirate  of  English  historians." —
North  American  Review,  April,  1863.

Practice  in  the  Executive  De-

partment  of  the  Government,  under  the  Pension,  Bounty,  and

Prize  Laws  of  the  United  States,  with  Forms  and  Instructions

for  Collecting  Arrears  of  Pay,  Bounty,  and  Prize  Money,  and

for  Obtaining  Pensions. By  Robert  Skwell,  Cou/iscllor  at

Law. 1  vol.,  8vo. Sheep.

"  I  offer  this  little  book  with  confidence  to  the  profession,  as  certain  to
■avo  lawyers,  in  one  case,  if  they  never  have  any  more,  more  time  and  trouble
»haii  its  Cost.  To  the  public  generally,  the  book  is  (iU'ered  as  containing  a
larg»(  ainDUnt  of  useful  information  on  a  subject  now,  unfortunately. brought
home  to  half  the  families  in  the  land.  To  the  olHcors  ami  soldiers  of  tne  Army
It  will  also  bo  found  a  useful  companion  ;  and  it  is  hoped  that  by  it  an  amount
of  Information  of  great  value  to  the  soldiers,  and  to  tlieir  families  at  heme,
will  Vie  disseminated,  and  the  prevailing  ignorance  n^specting  the  gubjoot
treated  of  In  a  great  degree  removed."— ito<rac</roOT  Preface.

Hints  to  Riflemen.

By  II.  W.  S.  Clkvei.anr, 1  vol.,  12mo. Illustratod,  with  nu-

nicroua  Designs  of  Rifles  and  Rifle  Practice.  Cloth.

''  I  offer  thene  hiniH  nil  llio  contribution  of  an  old  sportsman,  and  If  I  sno-
oeed  in  any  degree  in  exolting  an  Interest  in  the  subject,  my  end  will  be  ao
o»ni|illiilied,  even  if  tliii  fulure  iiivottlgulloiis  of  those  who  are  thus  attracted
should  priivu  any  of  my  opinlumi  to  bo  erroneous." — Evtraotfrom  I're/aot,

D.  APPLETON  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.

Laws  and  Principles  of  Whist,

Stated  and  Explained,  and  ita  Practice  liluatrated  on  an  Original

System,  by  means  of  haudii  played  completely  through. By

Cavendish. From  the  fifth  London  edition. 1  toL,  iquare

16mo. Gilt  edge.

"All  excellent  and  verv  <■!•  "'■iv  writi.ii  treatiM;  the  mlM  of  tk*  g*m«
thoroiiiflily  ezulained;  itr  I  by  memwtothmaiB  fijufmi •«€>%■

pleieh  throui^ti,  and  inuL'  -iid  Bbmm  of  Jkt  aunm  gfy  tlut

we  liave  never  t>een  in  any  ^. :  lUu  kind. Whtet  |4rT«r«  will  f

co^nizu  it  as  an  autlxirlty ;  and  that  it  is  •  toeeei  te  provetl  Djr  Ita  tttrlM
already  gttue  thruu^'b  tive  editiuna.  It  ia  got  oat  rtrj  BMtljr,  In  bliM  mad  gotd,
by  the  publUbera." — Corn,  Bulletin.

Roba  di  Roma.

By  W.  W.  Stobt. 2  vols.,  12mo.

"  Till  Rome  shall  fall,  the  City  of  the  Seven  niUa  will  be  iMzhMUUhto  M
•  Eubject  of  Interest.  '  Koba  di  Uuiua'  contains  th«  gatbeHnga  of  mi  boiteat
ol)«er°ver  and  a  real  artist.  .  .  .  It  has  peruunent  Talne  to  entitle  it  to  •
place  of  honor  on  the  sbolf  which  contains  every  lover  of  Italy's  Bome-booksL**
—Atherututn.

Heat  considered  as  a  Mode  of

Motion. Being  a  Course  of  Twelve  Lectures  delivered  at  the

RoviU  Institution  of  Great  Britain. By  John  Tymoall,  F.R.S.

Author  of  ''The  Glaciers  of  the  Alps." 1  toI.,  12ma With

101  illustrations.

"  No  one  can  load  Dr.  Tyndall's  book  without  being  Ifpre—ei!  with  the

ii>ti'ik-.ii\  ut'  111 HUthoiV  coiivietion  of  the  truth  of  the  tbeery  whieb  it  is  bie

h  the  boldness  with  whieh  be  eonftronts  the  difllmil*

I  ,  ••♦•••• Dr.  TyadalPe  is

t '  '  uihliihi'.'rv  or  luechanioal  theory  of  beet  has  t>een

pUa'i'd  )u  u  ^H-i  u.ai  at  no  one,  however  profound  hie

knowledge  upon  tl.  -,  will  rise  ttota  its  perusal  with-

out a  fi'eli'>»>  that  lu- -  ,  .  aud  liutmeted  in  a  hiyh  deigree

while  read'iig  its  pa^cs."  ~  LouUuu  K»ad*f.

Life  of  Edward  Livingston,

Vayor  of  the  City  of  New  York  ;  Member  of  Congress  ;  Senator
of  the  United  States;  Secretary  of  State :  Minister  to  Fraiice  ;
Author  of  a  Systora  of  Penal  Law  for  Louisiana ;  Member  of
the  Institute  of  France,  etc.  By  CaA2LEa  U.  Ucnt,  with  an
Introduction  by  GEOKaE  Baxckokt. 1  vol.,  8to.

"One  of  the  purest  of  statisiiu<n  aiul  tlie  most  geaial  of  men,  waa
Kdwanl  Livinsrston,  who>.  is  volume. ♦ • • •

"The  author  of  tbia\'  y  a  service. Hehasgivea

us  in  a  becoming  form  an  ii; . .  rne  whom  saece«dius  gea-

erations  will  be  proud  to  Uiiiiio  a4  aa  Amcricaa  Jurist  and  statefimaa-"—
Erantjeli^t.

D APPLETON  <fe  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS.

Hound  the  Block.

An  American  Xovel. With  Illustrations. 1  roL,  12mo.

"The  story  is  remarkably  clever.  It  proeents  the  most  vivid  and  varioui
pictures  of  men  and  manners  in  the  great  Metropolis.  Uiililco  most  novels
that  now  appear,  it  has  no  'mission,' the  aiitlior  being  neither  a  politician
.nor  a  reformer,  but  a  story  teller,  according  to  the  old  pattern,  and  a  capital
Btory  he  has  produced,  written  in  the  hapijiest  style,  and  full  of  wit  and  ac-
tion. He  evidently  knows  his  ground,  and  moves  over  it  with  the  foot  of  a
master.  It  is  a  work  that  will  bo  read  and  admired,  unless  all  love  for  good
novels  has  departed  from  us ;  and  we  know  that  such  is  not  the  case."— Boston
2^-aveler.

The  History  of  CiyUization  in

England. By  HenrY  Thomas  Buckle. 2  vols.,  8vo.

"Whoever  misses  reading  this  book,  will  miss  reading  what  is,  in  various
respects,  to  the  best  of  our  judgment  and  experience,  the  most  remarkable
book  of  the  day — one,  indeed,  that  no  thoughtful,  inquiring  mind  would  misB
reading  for  a  good  deal.  Let  the  reader  beas  averse  as  he  may  to  the  writer's
philosophy,  let  him  bo  as  devoted  to  the  obstructive  as  Mr.  l?nckle  is  to  the
progress  party,  let  him  be  as  orthodox  in  church  creed  as  the  other  is  hetero-
dox, as  dogmatic  as  his  author  is  sceptical — let  him,  in  short,  find  his  preju-
dices shocked  at  every  turn  of  the  argument,  and  all  his  prepossessions  w^liis-
tled  down  the  wind— still  there  is  so  much  in  this  extraordinary  volume  to
Btimulate  reflection,  and  excite  to  inquiry,  and  provoke  to  earnest  investiga-
tion, perhaps  (to  this  or  that  reader)  on  a  track  hitherto  untrodden,  and
across  t!ie  virgin  soil  of  untilled  lields,  fresh  woods,  and  pastures  new— that
we  may  fairly  defy  the  most  hostile  spirit,  the  most  mistrustful  and  least
sympathetic,  to  read  it  through  without  being  glad  of  having  done  so,  or  hay-
ing begun  it,  or  even  glanced  at  almost  any  one  of  its  pages,  to  pass  it  away
ariread." — New  Monthly  (.London)  Magazine.

Illustrations  of  Universal  Prog-

rcss. A  Scries  of  Essays.  By  Herijert  Spencer,  Author  of  "  The

Principles  of  Psychology;"  "Social  Statics;"  "Education."

1  vol.,  12mo.

"  The  readers  who  have  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mr.  Ilcrbert  Spencer
through  his  work  on  Education,  and  are  Interested  in  his  views  upon  n  larger
rnngu  of  Hubjects,  will  welcome  this  new  volume  of  *  Essays.'  rassliig  by
the  more  sclcntlttc  and  phllosophic-d  speculations,  we  may  call  attention  to  n

?;roup  of  articles  uuon  moral  and  political  snbjocts,  which  aru  very  pertinent
o  the  p'osent  contiltlon  of  affaire.'' — 7W6m»w.

Thirty  Poems.

Br  Wm.  Collin  Bryant.  1  vol.,  12mo.

**  Ko  EngllKh  poet  HurpftRscs  him  In  knowledge  of  nature,  and  but  few  nre
bis  eqiialM.  IIo  In  l>eltertlinn  Oowper  and  Thomson  In  their  siie'dal  walks  of
I<)ctrv.  and  Iho  equal  of  Wordewortli,  that  great  high  priest  of  nature."—
7TU  Worlil.

HISTORY  OF  THE  WORLD.

Br  PHIUP  SMITH,  B.  A.

PLAN  OF  THE  WORK.

Since  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  solaced  his  imprisonment  in  the  Tower  by
the  composition  of  his  "History  of  the  World,"  the  Literature  of
England  has  never  achieved  the  work  which  he  left  unfinished.  There
have  been  "  Universal  Histories,"  from  the  bulk  of  an  enojdopadiA
to  the  most  meagre  outline,  in  which  the  annals  of  eadi  nadoa  are
separately  recorded ;  but  without  an  attempt  to  trace  the  story  of
Divine  Providence  and  human  progress  in  one  connected  narrative.
It  is  proposed  to  supjjly  this  want  by  a  work,  condensed  enough  to
keep  it  withm  a  reasonable  size,  but  yet  so  full  as  to  be  free  from  the
dry  baldness  of  an  epitome.  The  Uterature  of  Germany  abounds
in  histories, — such  as  those  of  Miiller,  Schlosser,  Karl  von  Rotteck,
Duncker,  and  others, — which  at  once  prove  the  demand  for  such  a
book,  and  furnish  models,  in  some  degree,  for  its  execution.  But  even
those  great  works  are  somewhat  deficient  in  that  otyanic  wuiy  which
is  the  chief  aim  of  this  "  History  of  the  World."

The  story  of  our  whole  race,  Uke  that  of  each  separate  nation,  has
"  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end."  That  story  we  propose  to  fol-
low, from  its  beginning  in  the  sacred  records,  and  from  the  dawn  of
civilization  in  the  East, — through  the  successive  Oriental  Empires, —
the  rise  of  liberty  and  the  perfection  of  heathen  polity,  arts,  and
literature  in  Greece  and  Rome, — the  change  which  passed  over  the
face  of  the  world  when  the  light  of  Chrbtianity  sprung  up, — the
origin  and  first  appearance  of  those  barbarian  races  which  overthrew
both  divisions  of  the  Roman  Empire, — the  annals  of  the  States  which
rose  on  the  Empire's  ruins,  including  the  picturesque  details  of
medieval  history  and  the  steady  progress  of  modern  li!  ".  virili-

zation,— and  the  extension  of  these uifluences, by  c-on-

quest,  colonization,  and  Christian  missions,  to  the  reiui^i-^.,.  .^^^^as  of
the  earth.  In  a  word,  as  separate  histories  reflect  the  detacheid  scenes
of  human  action  and  sutlering,  our  aim  is  to  bring  into  one  view  the
several  parts  which  assuredly  form  one  great  whole,  moving  onwards,
under  tlie  guidance  of  Divine  Providence,  to  the  unknown  end  orduio*
ed  in  the  Divine  purposes.

Such  a  work,  to  be  really  useful,  must  be  condensed  into  a  modei^
ate  compass  ;  else  the  powers  of  the  writer  would  be  frittered  away,
and  the  attention  of  the  reader  wearied  out  by  an  overwhelming  bulk,
filled  up  with  microscopic  details.  The  more  striking  facts  of  history,
— the  rise  and  fall  of  empires, — the  achievements  of  warriors  and
heroes, — the  struggles  of  peoples  for  their  rights  and  fi-eedom, — the
conflict  between  priestcraft  and  religious  liberty, — must  needs  stand
out  on  the  canvas  of  such  a  picture  with  the  prominence  they  claim
in  the  world  itself.  But  they  will  not  divert  our  attention  from  the
more  qiuet  and  influential  working  of  science  and  art,  social  progress

HISTORY  OF  THE  WORLD.

and  individual  thought, — ^the  living  seed  sown,  and  the  fruit  borne,  in
the  field  broken  up  by  those  outward  changes.

While  special  care  will  be  bestowed  on  those  periods  and  nations,
the  history  of  which  is  scarcely  to  be  found  in  any  works  accessible
to  the  general  reader,  the  more  familiar  parts  of  history  will  be
treated  in  their  due  proportion  to  the  whole  work.  It  will  be  found,
we  trust,  by  no  means  the  least  valuable  part  of  the  scheme, — thai
the  portions  of  history  which  are  generally  looked  at  by  themselves,
-^those,  for  example,  of  Greece  and  Rome,  and  of  our  own  country,
— will  be  regarded  from  a  common  point  of  view  with  all  the  rest :  a
view  which  may,  in  some  cases,  modify  the  conclusions  drawn  by
classical  partiality  and  national  pride.

The  spirit  of  the  work, — at  least  if  the  execution  be  true  to  the
conception, — will  be  equally  removed  from  narrow  partisanship  and
affected  indifference.  The  historian,  as  well  as  the  poet,  must  be  in
earnest,

"  Dower'd  with  the  hate  of  hate,  the  scorn  of  scorn,
The  love  of  love ;"

but  he  must  also  be  able  to  look  beyond  the  errors,  and  even  the
virtues,  of  his  fellow-men,  to  the  great  ends  which  the  Supreme  Ruler
of  events  works  out  by  their  agency : —

"  Tet  I  doubt  not  through  the  ages  one  increasing  purpose  runs,
And  tlie  thoughts  of  men  are  widen'd  with  the  process  of  the  suns."

No  pains  will  be  spared  to  make  this  history  scholarlike  in  sub-
stance and  popular  in  style.  It  will  be  founded  on  the  best  authori-
ties, ancient  and  modem,  original  and  secondary.  The  vast  progress
recently  made  in  historical  and  critical  investigations,  the  results  ob-
tained from  the  modem  science  of  comparative  philology,  and  the
discoveries  which  have  laid  open  new  sources  of  information  concerning
the  East,  afford  such  facihties  as  to  make  the  present  a  fit  epoch  for
our  imdertaking.

The  work  will  be  divided  into  three  Periods,  each  complete  in
itself,  and  will  form  Eight  Volumes  in  Demy  Octavo.
I. — Ancient  History,  Sacred  and  Secular ;  from  the  Creation  to  the

Fall  of  the  Western  Empire,  in  A.  D.  476. Two  Volumes.
II. — Medikval  Histoky,  Civil  and  Ecclesiastical ;  from  the  Fall  of  the

Western  Empire  to  the  taking  of  Constantinople  by  the  Turks,

in  A.  D  1463. Two  Volumes.
m. — MoDKiiN History  ;  from  the  Fall  of  the  Byzantine  Empire  to

our  own  Times. Four  Volumes.
It  will  be  puhlishod  in  8  vols.,  8vo. Price  in  cloth  $3  50  per  vol.
Sheep  $4  50. Voluino  1  now  ready.

NEW  YORK:  D.  APPLETON  A  CO..  Publishers.

o

BINDING  CrCT.  JUM  ( 7  flW

University  of  Toronto
Library

DO  NOT

REMOVE

THE

CARD

FROM

THIS

POCKET

Acme  Library  Card  Pocket
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  UMTTEO

lUg^^^^^^^^^^^H

■'" ' '  ^!  ■!?■  ~  >'^:'■•^!

'f^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H

lill^^^^^l

Ij^^^^^^H

-\  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^H

^S^^^4

hhI^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^I

MHh^iiilrjn^

^^ii^^^^^^^^l

^''in'"i^53K<

hk'^  li^^^^^^^^^H

;t,';i^

iSK

'Ai\)\'i

■\'^:d

m

■  '■''■}''']■

m
m

■Is

m
