^•LIBRARY

£c i?

& «

y0Aavaan-

£ =

o-jo^ %ojnv>jo^

F0fcfc, ^OF-CALIFO%

I  f^ra

^ONV-SOl^

AV\E  UNIVERS/A .^lOSANCElfj>

^  m. >-i  *v> .^B^  *i>^

'ER% ,\lOSANGELfj>

*rs» /n ^ .^^  "^

THE

ROMANS UNDER THE EMPIRE.

VOL.  m.

LOSDOX

PBISTBD BT SPOTTISWOODK AXD CO.
SKTY-STREET SQCAEB

HISTOEY

ROMANS  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

CHARLES MEKIVALE, B.D.

RECTOR  OF  LAWFORD:
CHAPLAIX  TO  THE  SPEAKER  OP  THE  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS.

NEW

IN EIGHT VOLUMES.

VOL.  III.

LONDON:
LONGMAN,  GREEN,  LONGMAN,  ROBERTS,  &  GREEN.

1865.

CONTENTS

or

THE THIKD VOLUME.

N/,3

CHAPTER  XXH.

PAGB

Reflections  upon  Caesar's  assassination — His  person,  character,
and  abilities — Caesar  represents  the  virtues  and  defects  of
his  age — Influence  of  the  old  Etruscan  discipline  upon  the
Romans:  it  is  gradually  supplanted  by  the  civilization  of
the  Greeks — Character  of  Greek  civilization  in  its  decay
— Philosophy  and  free-thinking  introduced  into  Rome —
Decay  of  the  old  Italian  faith,  and  rise  of  Oriental  super-
stitious— Influence  of*  Greek  ideas  upon  the  principles  of
Roman  law — Liberal  tendencies  of  Cicero  and  the  contem-
porary jurisconsults — Influence  of  Greek  literature  upon
the  Romans — Conflict  between  the  Greek  and  Italian
spirit:  Ennius,  Nsevius,  Lucilius — Spirit  of  imitation  dif-
fused over  Roman  literature — Study  of  the  Greek  rhetori-
cians: its  effect  upon  Roman  eloquence — Decay  of  military
discipline — Familiarity  with  the  courts  and  standing  armies
of  the  East  demoralizes  the  proconsuls  and  the  legions —
Fatal  effects  of  the  observation  of  royalty  abroad — Con-
cluding remarks  --------  i

CHAPTER  XXIH.

Proceedings  upon  the  death  of  Caesar — The  exploit  of  the
liberators  meets  with  no  favour  from  the  people — Antonius
unites  with  Lepidus,  and  obtains  the  dictator's  treasures
and  papers — Pretended  compromise  and  decree  of  amnesty
— Caesar's  acts  are  ratified  and  his  will  disclosed — Public
obsequies  decreed  him — Antonius  delivers  the  funeral  har-
angue, which  inflames  the  people  against  the  liberators,
and  creates  a  tumult  in  which  they  are  compelled  to  con-
ceal themselves  (A.  u.  710,  B.C.  44)  -  ...  49

CHAPTER  XXIV.

Antonius  reassures  the  nobles  by  his  patriotic  policy — He
abolishes  the  dictatorship  for  ever,  and  represses  Caesarean

',',  .  .  •

VI  CONTENTS OF

PAGE

outbreaks — His  crafty  r.se  of  Cassar's  papers — He  assigns
lands  in  Campania—  Octavius  returns  to  Italy  and  claims
Caesar's  inheritance — His  favourable  reception  by  tha  nobles
and  citizens — He  discharges  the  dictator's  bequests  and
fulfils  his  obligations — Antonius  regards  his  proceedings
with  jealousy — The  liberators  abandon  Rome — Decimus
assumes  the  command  of  the  Cisalpine  —  Antonius  in-
duces the  senate  to  take  Syria  and  Macedonia  from  the
liberators,  and  bestow  them  upon  Dolabella  and  himself —
Brutus  attempts  to  recover  the  favour  of  the  people  by  the
Ludi  Apollinares— His  disappointment — Pretended  recon-
ciliation of  Antonius  and  Octavius,  whereby  Antonius  ob-
tains from  the  people  the  Cisalpine  province  with  the  army
of  Parthia  in  exchange  for  Macedonia — Cicero's  despon-
dency— He  leaves  Italy,  but  presently  returns  and  proceeds
to  Rome  (A.  u.  710,  B.  c.  44)  -  ....  -  90

CHAPTER  XXV.,

Cicero  re-appears  in  the  senate,  and  attacks  Antonins —
The  Philippics — Antonius  repairs  to  the  Cisalpine,  and
prepares  to  dispossess  Decimus — Octavius  arms  for  the  re-
public— Cicero  exhorts  the  senate  to  declare  Antonius  a
public  enemy — The  senate  negotiates  with  him,  and  he
rejoins  with  increased  insolence — Hirtius  and  Pansa  suc-
ceed to  the  consulship,  A.  u.  711 — Hirtius  leads  an  army
against  Antonius — Cassius  obtains  successes  in  Syria —
Trebonius  is  destroyed  by  Dolabella — Pansa  joins  his  col-
league— Two  battles  are  fought  before  Mutina — The  con-
suls are  victorious,  but  are  both  slain  (A.  u.  710,  711,  B.  c.
44,43.) 135

CHAPTER  XXVI.

Antonius  withdraws  from  the  Cisalpine  and  effects  a  junction
with  Lepidns  beyond  the  Alps — Octavius  excuses  himself
from  pursuing  him — The  senate  seeks  to  cast  off  Octavius
— Irritation  of  his  soldiers — He  claims  the  consulship  and
marches  upon  Rome — -The  senate  gives  way — Octavius
consul,  Sept.  711 — He  joins  Antonius  and  Lepidus — De-
cimus is  abandoned  by  his  soldiers  and  slain — The  second
triumvirate — Partition  of  the  provinces  and  legions — The
triumvirs  enter  Rome — The  proscriptions — Death  of  Cicero
— The  Republicans  collect  their  forces  in  the  East — Sex-
tus  seizes  Sicily — Antonius  and  Octavius  cross  over  to
Macedonia — The  armies  meet  at  Philippi  in  the  autumn  of

THE THIRD VOLUME.  VU

712 — Two  engagements  at  Philippi — Rout  of  the  Repub-
licans— Cassius  and  Brutus  kill  themselves  (A.  u.  711,  712,
B.C.  43, 42.)-  ---.-..-  177

CHAPTER  XXVII.

Antonias  assumes  the  government  of  the  Eastern  provinces,
and  Octavius  of  the  Western — Lepidus  commands  in  Africa
— Cleopatra  fascinates  Antonius  (712),  who  repairs  to  her
at  Alexandria — Insurrection  of  L.  Antonius,  and  war  of
Perusia  (713) — Reconciliation  of  the  triumvirs:  treaty  of
Brundisium :  peace  restored  to  Italy — Treaty  of  Misenum
and  admission  of  Sextus  Pompeius  to  a  share  of  power
(715) — Ventidius  triumphs  over  the  Parthians — Quarrel  of
the  triumvirs  with  Sextus — Octavius  arms  against  him  and
is  defeated  (716) — Treaty  of  Tarentum — The  triumvirate
is  renewed  for  five  years  (717) — Agrippa  commands  the
Octavian  fleet — Second  campaign  against  Sextus — En-
counters with  various  success — Agrippa's  great  victory
(718) — Lepidus  attacks  Octavius,  is  deserted  by  his  sol-
diers, captured  and  deposed  from  power — Sextus  flies  to
the  East  and  is  there  slain  (719) — Extinction  of  the  se-
natorial faction — Octavius  commands  in  Rome — Honours
heaped  upon  him — His  salutary  measures — His  ministers
Agrippa  and  Maecenas:  his  matrimonial  alliances  (A.  u.
712-719,  B.C.  42-35.) 233

CHAPTER  XX  VIII.

Antonius  renews  his  intimacy  with  Cleopatra — His  infatuated
devotion  to  her,  and  ill-treatment  of  Octavia — He  invades
Parthia,  is  discomfited  and  makes  a  disastrous  retreat  (7 18)
— He  attacks  Armenia,  and  celebrates  a  triumph  in  Alex-
andria (720) — He  enlarges  Cleopatra's  dominions  with
Roman  provinces — Orgies  of  their  court — Account  of  Alex-
andria— Octavius  increases  his  popularity  in  Rome — His
campaigns  in  the  Alps,  in  Dalmatia,  and  Pannonia  (719 —
721) — ^Edileship  and  public  works  of  Agrippa — Popular
indignation  against  Antonius — Rupture  between  the  trium-
virs— Antonius  divorces  Octavia — The  republic  declares
war  against  Egypt — Great  armaments  on  both  sides — The
battle  of  Actium,  and  rout  of  the  Antonians — Feeble
attempt  at  resistance  in  Egypt — Antonius  kills  himself —
Cleopatra  seeks  to  fascinate  Octavins — Being  reserved  to
grace  his  triumph  she  escapes  by  self-destruction — Octa-

VU1 CONTENTS  OF  THE  THIRD  VOLUME.

vius  puts  to  death  Cassation  and  others — Henceforth  he
affects  clemency — Apparent  change  in  his  disposition —
Character  of  Antonius  (A.  u.  718-724,  B.  c.  36-30.)  -  286

CHAPTER  XXIX.

Octavius  reduces  Egypt  to  the  form  of  a  province — He  con-
firms Herod  in  the  sovereignty  of  Jndea — Dispersion  of  the
Jews  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa — Causes  of  the  disper-
sion, the  narrowness  of  their  territory,  and  its  impoverish-
ment by  successive  conquerors  —  Antiochus  Epiphanes
attempts  to  Hellenize  the  Jews — Progress  of  Greek  ideas
and  language  in  Palestine — Jealousy  of  the  natives — The
Pharisees  and  Sadducees  represent  the  national  and  foreign
parties  respectively — The  Asmonean  princes  side  with  the
latter — Interference  of  Rome  with  Jewish  affairs — Antipater
the  Idumean  and  his  sons  govern  the  country — Antonius
grants  the  kingdom  to  Herod — He  obtains  the  favour  of
Octavius — His  persecution  of  the  Asmonean  princes —
Death  of  Mariamne — Herod's  devotion  to  Rome  -  -  350

CHAPTER  XXX.

Octavius  returns  to  Rome,  A.C.  725,  B.C.  29,  and  triumphs —
Festivals  and  rejoicings — Divine  honours  are  paid  to  him —
Peace  restored  throughout  the  empire,  and  the  temple  of
Janus  closed — Octavius  reflects  on  his  position:  pretended
debate  on  the  question  of  resigning  power — He  receives,
1.  the  prefix  of  imperator:  2.  the  potestas  censoria,  by
which  he  reforms  the  senate,  and  takes  the  census:  3.  the
principate — He  offers  to  resign  the  imperium,  but  accepts
it  again  for  four  years :  with,  4.  the  proconsular  power  in
the  provinces:  5.  the  title  of  Augustus:  6.  exemption  from
certain  laws — His  sickness— Question  of  the  succession —
He  gives  his  ring  to  Agrippa;  but  recovers  —  He  accepts,
7.  the  potestas  tribunitia — Commencement  of  the  mon-
archy ----------  388

CHAPTER  XXXI.

The  imperial  authority  a  combination  of  the  prerogatives  of
several  republican  offices  —  Their  character  and  functions
— 1.  the  imperium:  2.  the  principatus  :  3.  the  consulship
and  proconsular  command :  4.  the  potestas  tribunitia :
5.  the  potestas  consularis :  6.  the  supreme  pontificate :
7.  the  emperor's  legislative  and  judicial  functions — His
edicts,  rescripts  and  constitutions — His  exemptions  from
law — The  lex  rcgia — The  name  of  Caesar  ...  435

HISTOEY

ROMANS  UNDER  THE  EMPIEE,

CHAPTER  XXII.

Reflections  upon  Caesar's  assassination. — His  person,  character,  and
abilities. — Caesar  represents  the  virtues  and  defects  of  his  age  —
Influence  of  the  old  Etruscan  discipline  upon  the  Romans:  it
is  gradually  supplanted  by  the  civilization  of  the  Greeks.  —
Character  of  Greek  civilization  in  its  decay.  —  Philosophy  and
free-thinking  introduced  into  Rome. — Decay  of  the  old  Italian
faith,  and  rise  of  Oriental  superstitions. — Influence  of  Greek
ideas  upon  the  principles  of  Roman  law. — Liberal  tendencies  of
Cicero  and  the  contemporary  jurisconsults. — Influence  of  Greek
literature  upon  the  Romans. — Conflict  between  the  Greek  and
Italian  spirit:  Ennius,  Naevius,  Lucilius. -Spirit  of  imitation
diffused  over  Roman  literature. — Study  of  the  Greek  rhetoricians:
its  effect  upon  Roman  eloquence. — Decay  of  military  discipline.
— Familiarity  with  the  courts  and  standing  armies  of  the  East
demoralizes  the  proconsuls  and  the  legions. — Fatal  effects  of  the
observation  of  royalty  abroad. — Concluding  remarks.

CESAR  was  assassinated  in  his  fifty-sixth  year. He
fell  pierced  with  twenty-three  wounds,  only
one  of  which,  as the physician who  ex-  premature
amined his body affirmed,  was in itself
mortal.1 In  early  life  his  health  had  been  delicate,
and  at  a  later  period  he  was  subject  to  fits  of  epi-
lepsy, which  attacked  him  in  the  campaign  of  Africa,
and  again  before  the  battle  of Munda.2 Yet  the

1  Suet.  Jul.  86.

2  Suet.  Jul.  45.;  Plut.  Cffs.  17. ;  Dion,  xliii.  32.;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.
101. Ccmp.  Sir  Henry  Halford's  Essays,  p.  61. :  "  Many  attacks  of
epilepsy  arc  symptomatic  only  of  some  irritation  in  the  alimentary
canal,  or  of  some  eruptive  disease  about  to  declare  itself,  or  of  oilier
occasional  passing  ills. So  far  Julius  Ciesar  was  epileptic  ....  line

VOL.  III.  B

2  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

energy  and  habitual  rapidity  of  all  his  movements
seem  to  prove  the  robustness  of  his  constitution,  at
least  in  middle  life.  It  may  be  presumed  that  if  he
had  escaped  the  dagger  of  the  assassin,  he  might,  in
the  course  of  nature,  have  attained  old  age;  and
against  any  open  attack  his  position  was  impreg-
nable. He  might  have  lived  to  carry  out  himself
the  liberal  schemes  which  he  was  enabled  only  to
project.  But  it  was  ordained,  for  inscrutable
reasons,  that  their  first  originator  should  perish,
and  leave  them  to  be  eventually  effected  by  a  suc-
cessor, within  a  quarter  of  a  century.

The  judgment  of  the  ancients  upon  this  famous
judgment  of  deed  varied  according  to  their  interests
o^hisasTa^  and  predilections.  If,  indeed,  the  republic
had  been  permanently  re-established,  its
saviour  would  have  been  hailed,  perhaps,  with  un-
mingled  applause,  and  commanded  the  favour  of  the
Romans  to  a  late  posterity.  Cicero,  though  he
might  have  shrunk  from  participating  in  the  deed,
deemed  it  expedient  to  justify  it,  and  saluted  its
authors  in  exulting  accents,  as  tyrannicides  and
deliverers.1  But  the  courtiers  of  the  later  Caesars
denounced  it  as  a  murder,  or  passed  it  over  in
significant  silence.  Virgil,  who  ventures  to  pay  a
noble  compliment  to  Cato,  and  glories  in  the  eternal
punishment  of  Catilina,  bestows  not  a  word  on  the

these  attacks  were  of  no  consequence  in  deteriorating  his  masculine
mind."  Napoleon,  as  is  well  known,  had  more  than  one  attack  of
the  t-ame  kind.  Michelet's  description  is  picturesque  (Hist,  de  France,
i.  50.):  "J'aurais  vouluvoir  cette  blanche  etpale  figure,  fanee  avant
I'age  par  les  debauches  de  Rome,  cet  homme  delicat  epileptique,
marchant  sous  les  pluies  de  la  Gaule,  a  la  tete  des  legions,  traversant
nos  flenves  a  la  nage,  ou  bien  a  cheval,  entre  les  litieres  ou  ses
secretaires  etoient  portes."  Suetonius  adds  that  Cajsar  was  dis-
turbed in  his  latter  years  by  nocturnal  terrors.

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xiv.  4.  6.  14.;  Philipp.  i.  14.;  de  Off.  i.  31.,  ii.  7.,iii.
4.:  "Nnm  se  astrinxit  scelere  si  qui  tyrannum  occiditquamvis  fami-
liarem  ?  Populo  quidem  Romano  non  videtur,  qui  ex  omnibus
praclaris  factis  illud.  pulcherrimum  cxistimat."

CH.  xxn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  3

exploit  of  Brutus.1  Even  Lucan,  who  beholds  in  it
a  stately  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  admits  the  detestation
with  which  it  was  generally  regarded.2  Augustus,
indeed,  wisely  tolerant,  allowed  Messala  to  speak  in
praise  of  Cassius ;  but  Tiberius  would  not  suffer
Cremutius  to  call  him  with  impunity  the  last  of  the
Komaus.3  Velleius,  Seneca,  and,  above  all,  Valerius
Maximus,  express  their  abhorrence  of  the  murder  in
energetic  and  manly  tones.  It  was  the  mortification,
they  said,  of  the  conspirators  at  their  victim's  supe-
riority, their  disappointment  at  the  slowness  with
which  the  stream  of  honours  flowed  to  them,  their
envy,  their  vanity,  anything  rather  than  their
patriotism,  that  impelled  them  to  it.4  The  Greek
writers,  who  had  less  of  prejudice  to  urge  them  to
palliate  the  deed,  speak  of  it  without  reserve  as  a
monstrous  and  hateful  atrocity.5  Again,  while
Tacitus  casts  a  philosophic  glance  on  the  opinions
of  others,  and  abstains  from  passing  any  judgment
of  his  own,  Suetonius,  in  saying  that  CaBsar  perished
by  a  just  retribution,  imputes  to  him  no  legal  crime,
nor  extenuates  the  guilt  of  his  assassins.6  From

1  Virg.  JEn.  viii.  668.:

"  Et  te,  Catilina,  minaci

Pendentem  scopulo  Furiarumque  ora  trementem ;
Secretosque  pios  ;  his  dantem  jura  Catonem."

2  Lucan,  vii.  596. :

"  Vivat,  et  ut  Brati  procumbat  victima,regnet."
Comp.  vi.  791.,  and  viii.  609.
*  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  34.

4  Veil.  ii.  56. ;  Senec.  de  Ira,  iii.  30. ;  Val.  Max.  i.  7.  2.,  iii.  1.  8.,  &c.

5  Dion,  xliv.  1.  20,  21.,  &c.;  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  134.

6  Suet. ./«/. 76. : "  Jure  caesus  existimetur." As  this  writer's
judgment  has  been  cited  in  justification  of  the  assassination,  it  may
he  well  to  examine  it  more  closely. On  referring  to  the  context  of
this  passage,  it  will  be  seen  that  Suetonins  had  no  idea  of  vindicat-
ing the  obsolete  principle  of  a  barbarous  antiquity, that  regal  usurp-
ation authorized  murder  (see  Liv.  ii.  8.), — a  principle  which  the
opponents  of  senatorial  a-cendency  repudiated  and resented;  but
only  expressed  his own  personal  indignation  at the  extravagant
vanity  of  the  usurper. Suetonius  knew  and  cared  but  little  for  the

B  2

4  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXII.

Livy  and  Floras,  and  the  epitomizer  of  Trogus,  we
may  infer  that  the  sentiments  expressed  by  Plutarch
were  the  same  which  the  most  reasonable  of  the
Romans  generally  adopted ;  the  moralizing  sage
declared  that  the  disorders  of  the  body  politic  re-
quired the  establishment  of  monarchy,  and  that
Caesar  was  sent  by  Providence,  as  the  mildest  phy-
sician, for  its  conservation.1  On  the  whole,  when  we
consider  the  vices  of  the  times,  and  the  general
laxity  of  principle  justly  ascribed  to  the  later  ages
of  Greek  and  Koman  heathenism,  it  is  interesting  to
observe  how  little  sympathy  was  extended  by  an-
tiquity to  an  exploit  which  appealed  so  boldly  to  it.

The  accounts  we  have  received  of  Caesar's  person
casar-s  describe  him  as  pale  in  complexion,  of  a
person,  fa^  an(j  gpare  figure,  with  dark  piercing  eyes
and  an  aquiline  nose,  with  scanty  hair  and  without
a  beard.  His  appearance,  at  least  in  youth,  was

legal  traditions  of  the  commonwealth  ;  but  he  indulged  in  splenetic
mortification  at  greatness  and  its  outward  distinctions.  At  the  con-
clusion of  his  biography  he  repeats  the  common  remark  that  all  the
assassins  perished  by  violent  deaths,  evidently  with  the  complacency
of  one  who  thought  them  jure  ccesi,  quite  as  much  as  their  victim.
I  subjoin  the  whole  passage.

"Praegravant  tamen  caetera  facta  dictaque  ejus,  ut  et  abusit*
dominations  et  jure  csesus  existimetur.  Non  cnim  honores  modo
nimios  recepit,  ut  continuum  consulatum,  perpetuam  dictaturam,
prsefecturamque  morum,  insuper  prgenomen  imperatoris,  cognomen
Patris  Patrice,  statuam  inter  reges,  suggestum  in  orchestra;  sed  et
ampliora  etiam  humano  fustigio  decerni  sibi  passus  est :  sedemauream
in  curia,  et  pro  tribunal),  tensam  et  ferculum  Circensi  pompa,  templa,
aras,  simulacra  juxta  Deos,  pulvinar,  flaminem,  Lupercos,  appella-
tionem  mensis  a  suo  nomine."

It  was  not  the  dominalio  itself,  but  the  abusus  dominationis,  that
Suetonius  deemed  worthy  of  death;  his  truculent  virtue  was  inflamed,
not  by  the  successive  consulships,  the  perpetual  dictatorship.  &c.,
least  of  all  by  the  surname  of  Father  ot  his  Country,  which  a
Camillus  and  a  Cicero  had  borne,  but  by  the  divine  honours  affected
by  Cajsar.  The  words  jure  CCESUS  may  be  borrowed  from  a  legal
formula,  but  the  writer,  1  repeat,  uses  them  with  no  reference  to  a
legal,  but  to  a  moral  retributive  justice.

*  Senec.  Qu.  Nat.  v.  18  :  "A  Tito  Livio  positum  in  incerto  esse
utrum  eum  magis  nasci  reipublicae  profuerit  an  non  nasci."  Flor.  iv.
2.  92.;  Eutrop.  vi.  fin. ;  Plut.  GOES.  69.

en.  xxn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  0

remarkably  hand&ome,  and  of  a  delicate  and  almost
feminine  character.  He  continued,  even  in  later
years,  to  be  vain  of  his  person,  and  was  wont  to  hint
that  he  inherited  his  beauty  from  his  divine  ances-
tress. His  baldness,  which  he  strove  to  conceal  by
combing  his  locks  over  the  crown  of  his  head,  was
regarded  by  the  ancients  as  a  deformity,  and  a  slight
puffing  of  the  under  lip,  which  may  be  traced  in
some  of  his  best  busts,  must  undoubtedly  have  de-
tracted from  the  admirable  contour  of  his  counte-
nance. We  can  only  infer  indistinctly  his  appearance
in  early  life  from  the  busts  and  medals  which  remain
of  him ;  for  all  of  these  belong  to  the  period  of  his
greatness  and  more  advanced  age.  In  the  traits
which  these  monuments  have  preserved  to  us,  there
is  also  great  diversity.  Indeed,  it  may  be  said  that
there  is  a  marked  discrepancy  between  the  expres-
sion of  the  busts  and  that  of  the  medals.  The  former,
which  are  assuredly  the  most  life-like  of  the  two,
represent  a  long  thin  face,  with  a  forehead  rather
high  than  capacious,  furrowed  with  strong  lines,
giving  to  it  an  expression  of  patient  endurance  and
even  suffering,  such  as  might  be  expected  from  fre-
quent illness,  and  from  a  life  of  toil  not  unmingled
with  dissipation.  It  is  from  the  more  dubious  evi-
dence of  the  latter  that  we  derive  our  common
notions  of  the  vivid  animation  and  heroic  majesty  of
Caesar's  lineaments.

The  temptations  to  which  the  spirited  young  noble
was  exposed  from  the  graces  of  his  person HU  1009e
were  not  combated  by any strictness of morality-
moral  principle,  perhaps  not  even  by  a  sense  of  per-
sonal dignity. In  periods  of  great  social  depravity,
such  as  especially  degraded  the  class  to  which  Caesar
belonged,  it  is  by  the  women  even  more  than  by  the
men  that profligacy  is provoked  and encouraged.
The  early  age  at  which  he  became  notorious  as  the
gallant  of  the  matron Servilia  may  show  that  he

;

6  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

imbibed  the  rudiments  of  vice  in  the  school  of  a  pro-
ficient in  intrigue.  From  that  time  he  persisted
without  shame  or  scruple  in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure
in  whatever  shape  it  seemed  to  court  him.  His
amours  were  celebrated  in  verse  and  prose,  in  the
epigrams  of  Catullus  and  the  satires  of  Csecina  and
Pitholaus.  His  countrymen  enumerated  with  horror
the  connections  which  shocked  their  national  preju-
dices. When  they  repeated  from  mouth  to  mouth
that  Caesar  intrigued  with  the  consorts  of  a  Crassus,
a  Pompeius,  a  Grabinius,  or  a  Sulpicius,  they  mani-
fested neither  sympathy  for  the  injured  husband  nor
indignation  at  the  heartless  seducer,  still  less  disgust
at  the  sensual  indulgence.  But  the  corruption  of  a
Roman  matron,  of  a  wife  by  the  sacred  rite  of  the
broken  bread,  was  a  public  scandal,  hateful  both  to
gods  and  men ;  it  might  bring  a  judgment  upon  the
nation  itself;  the  culprit  was  denounced  as  a  national
offender.  If  such  austere  sentiments  were  not  uni-
versally felt,  it  was  at  least  easy  to  feign  them ;  the
domestic  rival  might  be  conveniently  branded  as  a
public  delinquent,  and  the  circulation  of  the  stories
against  Caesar's  moral  conduct,  however  ample  the
occasion  he  gave  for  them,  was  doubtless  part  of  a
system  of  organized  warfare  against  him.  The  same
remark  applies  also  to  the  current  tales  of  his  in-
trigues with  foreign  princesses.  These,  two,  were
stigmatized,  not  as  private  indulgences,  but  as  public
crimes.  The  more  constant  the  attachment  he  mani-
fested to  a  stranger,  the  votary  of  strange  divinities,
the  more  flagrant  the  guilt  imputed  to  him.  Eunoe,
queen  of  the  Mauretanian  Bogudes,  was  the  object
of  only  a  passing  desire ;  but  Cleopatra,  as  we  have
seen,  established  a  lasting  sway  over  him.  Though
he  despised  these  prejudices,  the  foundation  of  which
he  hardly  fathomed,  and  defied  the  clamour  they
excited,  he  had  reason  to  repent  of  his  indulgences
from  the  handle  they  gave  for  more  infamous  charges,

CH.  xxn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  7

the  only  attacks  which  seem  to  have  seriously  an-
noyed him  :  but  which,  easily  made  and  common  as
they  were,  require  some  proof,  of  which  they  possess
not  a  shadow,  before  I  can  be  expected  to  record
them  against  him.1

The  coarse  habits  of  the  age  were  peculiarly  ex-
emplified in  the  debauchery  of  the  table.  Excess  in
eating  as  well  as  in  drinking  was  common,  and  passed*
almost  unreproved.  Custom  had  sanctioned  HIS  tem-
the  abuse,  and  the  union  of  sage  philoso-  geSwwityl
phical  discussion  with  indulgence  of  the  vilest  glut-
tony must  provoke  a  smile  at  the  "follies  of  the  wise."
Caesar  took  the  manners  of  the  day  as  he  found  them ;
but  he  was  not  addicted  to  licentious  excess  in  these
respects,  and  among  the  class  of  riotous  young  men
who  made  themselves  conspicuous  in  undermining  the
institutions  of  the  country,  he  alone,  in  the  words  of
Cato,  came  sober  to  the  task  of  destruction.2  Nor
was  th  ere  any  petty  cupidity  in  the  eagerness  with
which  he  grasped  the  spoils  of  the  conquered  pro-
vinces. The  pearls  of  Britain,  the  statues  and  gems
of  Asia,  the  hoarded  gold  of  Gades  and  Antioch,  the
slaves  of  exquisite  figure  and  curious  accomplish-
ments, which  became  the  ransom  of  his  victories,
were,  in  his  hands,  the  instruments  of  a  lofty  am-
bition, not  objects  of  sordid  avarice.  He  was  more
liberal  in  giving  than  rapacious  in  seizing.  Ma-
murra,  Balbus  and  many  others,  could  attest  his
readiness  to  enrich  his  favourite  servants,  and  in
instituting  Octavius  his  principal  heir,  he  reduced

1  Dion,  xliii.  20. These  charges  seem,  after  all,  to  rest  solely  on
the  authority  of  C.  Memmius,  a  scurrilous  profligate  (Suet.  Jul.  49,
73),  from  whom  they  were  taken  by  Catullus,  Cicero,  and  others.
For  the  character  of  Memmius  comp.  Ovid, Trist.  ii.  433.;  Plin.
Epist.  v.  3.  ;  Cell.  xix.  9.

2  Suet.  ./«/.  53. :  "  Verbum  M.  Catonis  est,  tinnm  ex  omnibus
Caesarem  ad  evertendam  republican!  sobrium  accessisse." He  goes
on  to  tell  a  pleasing  story  in  illustration  of  his  moderation. Comp.
Veil.  ii.  41.:  "Magno  illi  Alexandro  sed sobrio  neque iracundo
simillirnus."

8  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxil.

the  inheritance  by  a  legacy  of  300  sesterces  to  every
Boman  citizen.1

The  gentleness  of  Caesar's  manners in  his  inter-
course with  his  associates  presents  an  ami-

Ilis  clemency. .  , -  • ,LI  i  r

able  feature  in  the  character  ol  a  man  so
much  their  superior.  Few  public  men  ever  made  or  re-
tained so  many  personal  friends,  and  in  this  respect
he  is  favourably  contrasted  with  the  most  eminent
of  his  rivals,  Crassus  and  Pompeius.  The  clemency
which  he  exhibited  towards  his  adversaries  cannot,  in
fairness,  be  ascribed  merely  to  policy.  The  Romans
themselves  never  so  disparaged  it,  and  when  they
remembered  how  effectively  his  successor  wielded  the
sword  of  proscription  for  the  maintenance  of  his
power,  they  might  reasonably  regret  and  applaud  the
mildness  of  their  elder  master.  We  may  venture,
indeed,  to  surmise  that  if  Caesar  had  attained  his
dangerous  eminence  in  early  youth,  he  would  have
been  less  scrupulous  as  to  the  means  of  protecting
himself;  but  there  seems  reason  for  believing  that,
by  the  time  he  had  climbed  the  summit  of  his  am-
bition, the  veteran  of  pleasure  and  adventure  had
begun  to  feel  the  hollowness  of  gratification,  and  to
shrink  from  doing  violence  to  his  better  nature.
Caesar,  indeed,  had  too  many  objects  of  interest
around  him  to  become  absorbed  in  any  one.  The
sphere  even  of  his  literary  engagements  embraced
almost  every  known  subject  of  intellectual  occupation.
HIS  excellence  His  skill  and  spirit  in  historical  narration
in  literature.  are  sufficiently  attested  by  the  works  which
have  descended  to  us  under  his  name ;  and  it  must

1  300  sesterces  =  about  3l.  The  number  of  the  urban  citizens  we
have  seen  on  a  recent  occasion  amounted  to  170,000,  and  was
probably  considerably  larger  at  Caesar's  death.  He  also  bequeathed
to  the  people  his  gardens  on  the  other  side  of  the  Tiber,  in  which
Cleopatra  had  been  lodged.  Suet.  Jul.  83.;  Plutarch,  Brut.  20.;
Appian,  ii.  143.;  Dion,  xliv.  35.  According  to  the  latter,  however,
Octavius  affirmed  that  the  legacy  to  the  citizens  was  much  smaller;
viz.  30  drachmas  to  each,  instead  of  75.

CH.  XXII.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.

be  remembered  that,  at  a  time  when  mere  dexterity
iu  composition  was  a  rare  and  difficult  accomplish-
ment, the  publication  of  only  a  few  books  in  terse
and  vigorous  language  implied  of  necessity  an  ex-
tended acquaintance  with  the  masters  of  literature.
Caesar's  historical  style  claims  to  be  favourably  con-
trasted with  the  roughness  of  Cato  and  Varro,  and
even  with  the  artificial  rhetoric  of  Cicero  and  Sallust,
if  it  may  not  be  compared  with  the  chastened  elegance
of  Livy,  or  the  sententious  gravity  of  Tacitus.  But
in  its  freedom,  ease,  and  openness  it  presents  an
unbroken  reflection  of  the  mind  from  which  it  ema-
nated, confident  in  its  simplicity  and  superior  to
artifice.  In  the  wordy  contests  of  the  bar  and  the
forum,  it  was  declared  by  his  countrymen  that  Caesar
might  have  rivalled  the  great  orator  himself,  if  he
had  not  preferred  to  throw  himself  into  action.  He
composed,  moreover,  a  treatise  on  grammar,  and  also
the  celebrated  satire  on  Cato,  an  essay  which  seems
to  have  made  a  great  impression  on  the  judgment
of  his  contemporaries.  Though  destitute,  perhaps,
himself  of  the  lively  humour  which  charms  society1,
he  was  a  shrewd  observer  and  a  profound  thinker,
and  he  made  a  collection  of  wise  and  witty  say-
ings, storing,  like  Lord  Bacon,  for  the  basis  of  a  new
structure  of  philosophy  the  condensed  experience  of
past  ages.  In  early  youth  he  had  written  tragedies
after  the  Greek  model :  during  his  rapid  march  from
Italy  into  Spain  before  his  last  campaign,  he  amused
himself  with  composing  verses,  perhaps  in  a  lighter
and  more  original  vein,  under  the  title  of  his  Journey.
As  chief  pontiff  he  compiled  an  official  work  on  the
subject  of  augury ;  and  that  he  took  some  actual
part  in  the  reformation  of  the  calendar  effected  by  his

'  In  this  sense  the  observation  attributed  to  Niebuhr  (Lectures  on
Roman  History,  ii.  45.),  that  not  one  witty  saying  of  Csesar  is  re-
corded, is  quite  true.  But  his  serious  retorts  were  often  smart  as
well  as  severe.

10  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxii.

learned  associates  may  be  surmised  from  the  special
work  he  devoted  to  the  science  of  astronomy.

But  while  other  illustrious  men  have  been  reputed
universality  great  for  their  excellence  in  some  one  de-
of  his  genim.  partment  of  human  genius,  it  was  declared
by  the  concurrent  voice  of  antiquity  that  Csesar  was
excellent  in  all.  He  had  genius,  understanding,
memory,  taste,  reflection,  industry  and  exactness.1
He  was  great,  repeats  a  modern  writer,  in  every
thing  he  undertook ;  as  a  captain,  a  statesman,  a
lawgiver,  a  jurist,  an  orator,  a  poet,  an  historian,
a  grammarian,  a  'mathematician,  and  an  architect.*
The  secret  of  this  manifold  excellence  was  discovered
by  Pliny  in  the  unparalleled  energy  of  his  intellectual
powers,  which  he  could  devote  without  distraction
to  several  subjects  at  once,  or  rush  at  any  moment
from  one  occupation  to  another  with  the  abruptness
and  rapidity  of  lightning.3  Caesar  could  be  writing
and  reading,  dictating  and  listening  all  at  the  same
time;  he  was  wont  to  occupy  four  amanuenses  at
once,  and  had  been  known  on  occasions  to  employ
as  many  as  seven  together.4  And  as  if  to  complete
the  picture  of  the  most  perfect  specimen  of  human
ability,  we  are  assured  that  in  all  the  exercises  of  the
camp  his  vigour  and  skill  were  not  less  conspicuous.
He  fought  at  the  most  perilous  moments  in  the  ranks
of  the  soldiers  ;  he  could  manage  his  charger  without
the  use  of  reins,5  and  he  saved  his  life  at  Alexandria
by  his  address  in  the  art  of  swimming.6

But  the  province  of  the  historian  must  be  kept
csssarrepre-  distinct  from  that  of  the  biographer.  For
MsquhanSsin  the  former  the  survey  of  Caesar's  character
and  defects.  derives  its  chief  interest  from  the  manner

1  Cic.  Philipp.  ii.  44.  2  Drumann,  iii.  746.

8  Comp.  Cicero's  remarkable  expression  (ad  Alt.  viii.  9.  4.):  "Sed
hoc  rfpas  horribili  vigilantia,  celeritate.  diligentia  est."

4  Plin.  H.  N.  vii.  25.  5  Plut.  Cces.  17.;  Suet.  Jul  57.

6  Suet.  /.  c.:  "  Si  flumina  morarentur  nando  trajiciens,  vel  iunixus
inflatis  utribus."

CH.  xxn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  11

iii  which  it  illustrates  the  times  wherein  he  occupied
so  prominent  a  place.  The  disposition  and  conduct
of  the  great  man  we  have  been  contemplating  corre-
spond faithfully  with  the  intellectual  and  moral  de-
velopment of  the  age  of  which  he  was  the  most
perfect  representative.  He  combined  literature  with
action,  humanity  with  sternness,  free-thinking  witli
superstition,  energy  with  voluptuousness,  a  noble  and
liberal  ambition  with  a  fearful  want  of  moral  prin-
ciple. In  these  striking  inconsistencies,  which  none
but  himself  could  blend  in  one  harmonious  tempera-
ment, he  represented  the  manifold  conflicting  tenden-
cies which  appeared  in  various  proportions  in  the
character  of  the  Roman  nobility,  at  a  period  when
they  had  thrown  off  the  formal  restraints  of  their
Etruscan  discipline,  and  the  specious  indulgence  of
Hellenic  cultivation  lured  them  into  vice,  selfishness,
and  impiety.

The  ruling  idea  of  the  Etruscan  institutions  was
their  immediate  derivation  from  a  divine  The  ruling
authority.  The  Lucumo  or  military  chief-  EteruKanhe
tain  was  at  the  same  time  the  priest  and  in8titutions-
augur  of  the  national  religion.  Under  the  marvel-
lous fiction  of  the  apparition  of  the  dwarf  Tages,  who
was  declared  to  have  sprung  from  the  soil  to  teach
the  worship  claimed  by  the  gods,  he  represented  the
archives  of  his  creed  as  inspired  and  infallible.  All
the  political  and  social  institutions  of  his  country  he
invested  with  the  same  divine  sanction ;  places,  not
of  worship  only,  but  of  ordinaiy  abode,  the  walls  of
cities  no  less  than  the  precincts  of  temples,  domestic
customs  and  public  ceremonies,  family  relations  and
official  personages,  births,  marriages  and  funerals,
games,  spectacles  and  sacrifices,  all  were  inaugurated
and  sanctified  by  holy  and  mysterious  formulas.  The
minute  details  into  which  a  ceremonial  law  so  com-
prehensive necessarily  ran  demanded  for  their  require-
ment the  devotion  of  a  particular  profession,  and

12  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

even  of  an  hereditary  caste.  The  Etruscans  divided
mankind  into  two  classes,  the  teachers  and  the  be-
lievers ;  and  the  former  of  these  was  easily  led  to
pretend  to  a  peculiar  sanctity,  and  perhaps  to  believe
in  it.  The  claims,  however,  which  they  advanced
upon  the  submission  of  the  human  intellect  required
the  production  of  some  apparent  proofs.  The  Etrus-
can augurs  asserted  that  they  possessed  the  art  of
foretelling  events  by  divination.  According  to  them
the  secrets  of  the  gods  were  not  imparted  directly
by  means  of  inspired  oracles,  but  were  to  be  learned
by  man  through  a  holy  discipline  of  observation  and
experience.  They  inquired,  under  the  direction  of
technical  rules,  into  the  hidden  properties  of  nature,
particularly  those  of  the  electric  phenomena1,  and
whatever  progress  they  made  in  real  knowledge  they
had  the  art  of  turning  their  discoveries  to  the  credit
of  their  institutions.

It  was  from  these  teachers  that  the  ancient  Romans
TheRomam  derived  the  ritual  part  of  their  religion.
Eml^ndia-  But,  though  they  embraced  with  supersti-
certa!nnuder  tious  awe  the  manifold  ceremonies  of  the
limitation..  Etruscan  cuit)  they  never  allowed  them-
selves to  be  so  completely  enchained  by  their  dogmatic
formalisms  as  the  people  from  whom  they  derived
them.  Their  race  from  the  first  was  too  mixed  in
its  character  to  be  exclusively  enthralled  by  the  ideas
of  any  one  of  its  component  elements.  The  Roman
priests  and  diviners  never  succeeded  in  separating
themselves  as  a  distinct  caste  from  the  rest  of  the
people.  Though  in  the  primitive  ages  the  patri-
cian claimed  exclusive  possession  of  all  the  religious

1  Cic.  de  Divin.  i.  41,  42.;  Diodor.  Sic.  v.  40.;  Scnec.  Nat.  Qu.  ii.
32. :  "  Hex;  autem  inter  nos  et  Tuscos,  quibus  sunima  persequendorum
fulminum  est  scientia,  interest.  Nos  putamus,  quod  nubes  collisae
sunt,  ideo  fulmina  emitti ;  ipsi  existimant,  nubes  collidi,  ut  fulmina
emittantur."  He  proceeds  to  expound  and  controvert  the  teaching
of  the  Etruscans  on  this  subject.  Compare  Micali,  L1  Italic,  fyc.  trad,
de  Raoul-Rochvtte,  ii.  246.  foil.

cir.  xxn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  13

secrets  of  the  nation,  the  progress  of  political  enfran-
chisement introduced  the  plebeians  to  a  share  in  this
as  in  all  other  privileges.  Though  the  science  of
augury  continued  for  centuries  to  be  assiduously  cul-
tivated, and  its  infallibility  strenuously  maintained,
bold  spirits  were  never  wanting  to  defy  its  conclusions
whenever  they  were  strongly  opposed  to  any  obvious
expediency.  Still  the  Eoman  people  continued  to
boast,  on  the  whole  with  justice,  of  the  soundness
and  devotedness  of  their  faith.  To  this  they  rejoiced
to  attribute  the  success  of  their  arms  and  policy.
The  unbelieving  Greeks  admired  it  with  a  sigh.1
The  superior  civilization  of  the  Etruscans  exercised
a  dominant  influence  over  Rome,  not  in  religious
matters  only,  but  in  manners,  arts  and  literature.  It
was  from  Etruria  that  she  imported  her  music,  and
her  stage-players,  who  were  properly  singers.2  The
genius  of  the  Etruscans,  though  it  appears  never  to
have  turned  towards  poetry,  excelled  in  works  of
scientific  information,  as  well  as  in  the  cultivation  of
the  arts.3  So  late  as  the  fifth  century  it  was  still  the
fashion  for  the  youth  of  Eome  to  be  regularly  trained
in  the  literature  of  Etruria,  as  at  a  later  period  in
that  of  Greece.4

The  effect  of  the  theocratic  discipline  to  which  the
Romans  so  far  subjected  their  imaginations,  im-
pressed a  marked  colour  upon  their  national  character
for  several  centuries.  The  history  of  no  nation  pre-
sents such  a  picture  of  blind  devotion  to  the  public
interest ;  such  entire  submission  of  the  citizen  to  the
claims  of  the  community,  such  heroic  abnegation  of

1  Polyb.  vi.  56.;  Dionys.  Ant.  Rom.  ii.  18,  19.
*  See'Xiebuhr,  H.  R.  i.  133.  E.  T.

3  Niebuhr  refers  to  Varro,  L.  L.  iv.  9.;  "  Volusius  qui  tragcedias
Tuscas  s-cripsit ;"  these  were  probably  translations  or  adaptations
from  the  Greek  drama  for  performance  in  the  Greek  theatres  at
Fasulae  and  elsewhere,  in  the  latest  period  of  Etruscan  cultivation.

4  Liv.  ix.  36.  :  "  Habeo  auctores  vnlgo  tarn  llomanos  pueros  sicut
nunc  Graecis,  ita  Etruscis  literis  erudiri  solitos."'

14  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxil.

all  selfish  views.  Brutus  and  Manlius  offered  up
their  sons  on  the  altar  of  the  commonwealth.  Curtius
and  Decius  made  the  more  generous  sacrifice  of  their
own  lives.  Regulus  kept  his  word  with  Carthage,
to  maintain  the  honour  of  his  country,  rather  than
his  own.  Fabricius  rejected  the  bribes  of  Pyrrhus.
Cincinnatus  relinquished,  at  the  call  of  patriotism,
the  simple  leisure  earned  by  a  life  of  public  service.
These  stories,  whatever  be  their  actual  truth,  serve
at  least  to  paint  the  heroic  ideal  of  the  nation.  The
legend  of  the  contest  with  Brennus,  and  the  final
triumph  of  patient  resolve  in  the  extremity  of  dis-
aster, was  enacted  in  real  life  throughout  the  mortal
agony  of  the  second  Punic  war.  The  manners  of  the
old  .Roman  heroes  corresponded  to  their  military
virtues.  Simple,  frugal,  and  honest  in  their  private
conduct,  they  were  just  and  generous,  according  to
their  own  principles,  in  their  dealings  with  enemies.
Such  at  least  was  the  boast  of  their  own  countrymen,
and  such  qualities  could  not  have  been  wholly  alien
to  the  practice  of  a  people  who  paid  so  much  homage
to  them  in  theory.  But  against  this  high  tone  of
moral  feeling  there  were  grave  counterbalancing  faults
to  be  set.  The  passion  of  the  Romans  for  conquest
hardened  their  hearts  against  the  natural  sentiment
of  compassion.  The  cruelty  they  learned  in  conflict
with  the  enemy  in  the  field,  they  exercised  with  no
less  harshness  at  home  on  their  slaves,  their  children,
their  wives,  and  their  parents.  The  ordinary  punish-
ments of  the  law  were  sanguinary  and  relentless.
The  patrician  creditor  confined  and  tortured  his
plebeian  debtor.1  The  superstitious  terrors  of  the
people  required  to  be  allayed  by  human  sacrifices.

1  The  fragment  of  the  XII.  Tables  on  this  subject,  "Secanto;  si
plusve  minnsve  secuerint  se  fraude  esto,"  may  possibly  be  interpreted
of  a  division  of  the  debtor's  estate  rather  than  of  his  body  :  the  se-
verities which  the  creditor  was  allowed  to  inflict  on  the  person  of
his  debtor  are  sufficiently  notorious  without  pressing  the  literal  sense
of  these  words.

CH.  XXII.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  15

The  principles  of  the  religion  learned  from  Etruria
fostered  intolerant  claims  to  the  exclusive  favour  of
the  deities.  To  reject  and  persecute  foreign  forms  of
worship  was  long  held  by  them  as  a  religious  prin-
ciple, and  the  gradual  relaxation  of  their  bigotry  only
marked  a  decline  in  the  vital  influence  of  their  creed.
It  was  on  this  principle  that  their  pride  of  nationality
was  founded,  and  in  this  it  found  its  strongest  sup-
port. The  Romans  regarded  all  foreigners  as  bar-
barians, long  before  they  had  any  pretensions,  like
the  Greeks,  to  superior  refinement  of  their  own.  In
their  early  language,  as  in  their  original  sentiments,
the  name  of  stranger  and  enemy  were  synonymous.
The  effect  of  their  religious  training,  had  it  con-
tinued to  exercise  its  primitive  sway  over  them,  would
have  been  to  isolate  their  ideas  and  narrow  the  sphere
of  their  sympathies,  till  they  sank  into  exhaustion,
evacuated  of  all  life  and  energy.  Austerity  in  its
decay  becomes  debasing  hypocrisy.  The  Romans
would  have  been  the  victims,  like  the  Egyptians  and
the  Mexicans,  of  a  formal  civilization,  and  a  rigid
ritual.  The  progress  of  their  social  development
would  have  been  mere  corruption.  No  expansion  of
the  heart  or  the  intellect  could  have  sprung  up
among  them,  without  the  infusion  of  more  genial
principles  of  national  life.

The domination of  a  priestly  caste  may  main-
tain the  outward  forms  of  a  ritual  and  of
a  dogmatic  creed  long  after  the  vitality  of  corruption  or

, , .  •=?. ,  ,  ° .  -re .-> -r-j.  the  ^Tuscans.

belief  has  become  extinct.  If  the  Etrus-
cans gave  no  direct  indication  of  having  secretly
fallen  away  from  the  faith  of  their  ancestors,  yet  as
it  was  impossible  for  the  class  to  which  the  interpre-
tation of  the  Divine  will  was  assigned,  to  continue
long  deceived  as  to  the  impostures  they  practised,  so
we  can  hardly  doubt  that  the  Etruscan  discipline  had
gradually  relaxed  its  hold  of  the  popular  mind  at  the
period  of  the  Roman  conquest.  Still  less  had  the

16  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xxn.

external  respect  which  the  Etruscans  maintained  for
their  form  of  worship  prevented  the  seeds  of  corrup-
tion of  manners  from  germinating  in  an  atmosphere
of  wealth,  luxury  and  security.  There  is  reason  to
believe  that  they  only  fell  before  the  Eomans  because
they  had  already  succumbed  to  the  blandishments  of
licentious  voluptuousness.  The  state  of  the  arts  in
the  later  period  of  their  glory  testifies  to  great  sen-
sual refinement1,  such  as  is  rarely  found  in  conjunc-
tion with  the  masculine  virtues  required  to  withstand
the  assault  of  so  vigorous  an  enemy  as  their  youthful
neighbours  then  were.  The  stories  of  their  depravity
which  the  Greeks  adopted  and  circulated,  may  be
gross  exaggerations2 :  nevertheless,  it  is  hardly  rea-
sonable to  doubt  their  reflecting  an  image  of  the
truth  ;  for  the  Greeks  had  no  particular  temptation
like  the  Romans,  either  themselves  to  defame  them,
or  to  take  a  pleasure  in  hearing  them  defamed.
Undoubtedly  the  Romans  in  their  turn  would  have
trodden  the  same  downward  path  of  unbelief  and
corruption  as  their  predecessors,  even  if  they  had
been  able  to  preserve  themselves  untainted  by  the
Hellenic  ideas,  which  gave  in  fact  the  most  vehement
impulse  to  their  moral  decline.  The  loosening  of
moral  and  religious  ties,  the  spread  of  luxury,  the
growth  of  impure  and  extravagant  tastes,  were  all
subjects  of  complaint  to  the  sages  of  the  republic,
before  the  conquest  of  Sicily  and  Magna  Grsecia,  and
still  more  of  Greece  beyond  the  sea,  opened  the  flood-
gates of  free-thinking  and  evil-living  by  which  Rome
was  so  rapidly  inundated.3

1  Micali,  iv.  276.

*  Theopompus  and  Timscus  in  Athenseus,  xii.  14.  referred  to  by
Niebuhr,  H.  R.  i.  139.,  who  discredits  them  on  the  ground  that  no
licentious  representations  are  to  be  found  on  any  Etruscan  works  of
art.  But  recent  investigators  affirm  the  contrary.  See  Quarterly
Itevieu;  vol.  Ixvi.  p.  392.

1  Sal  lust,  Fragm.  Hi.sl.  ap.  Anciustin.  Civ.  D.  ii.  18.:  "Ex  quo
tempore  niajorum  mores  non  paulatim  ut  antea,  sed  torrentis  modo

CH.  xxn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  17

What  had  the  descendants  of  the  great  masters  of
art,  literature,  and  philosophy,  to  offer  to  the
young  aspirants  for  the  honours  of  civiliza-
tion  ?  The  old  age  of  nations,  it  has  been  S^,SJ
observed,  is  rarely  venerable.1  In  the  man  oftheclti-
advancing  years,  while  they  subdue  the  mind  and
bow  the  bodily  frame,  often  elevate  the  character  by
chastening  the  passions.  But  in  nations  the  active
spirit  of  intellectual  progress  is  generally  succeeded
by  fretful  restlessness  in  the  pursuit  of  sensual  grati-
fication. The  masculine  appetites  of  instinct  are
replaced  by  conscious  pruriency  of  imagination.
Selfishness  succeeds  to  self-devotion,  pleasure  is
idolized  instead  of  virtue,  the  subtle  refinements  of
wit  supplant  the  discipline  of  the  understanding.  In
the  sixth  century  of  the  city,  the  literature  of  Greece
was  still  brilliant,  but  it  had  renounced  every  noble
tendency.  The  taste  for  the  aesthetic  arts  had  given
way  to  a  demand  for  merely  sensual  enjoyments.
Painting,  sculpture,  and  music,  had  become  lifeless
refinements  upon  the  spontaneous  creations  of  the
past  age  of  invention.  Poetry  had  dwindled  from
the  sublime  proportions  of  the  Epic  and  the  Drama
to  the  compact  neatness  of  the  Epigram,  and  it  had
lost  even  more  in  spirit  than  in  form.  Greek  litera-
ture, as  it  recommended  itself  to  the  admiration  of
the  Eoman  conquerors,  was  the  sickly  product  of  an
Oriental  court,  rather  than  the'  vigorous  offspring  of
Athenian  freemen.  Voluptuous  luxury  reigned  su-
preme in  all  the  arrangements  of  private  life ;  it  was
as  cooks,  parasites,  buffoons  and  panders,  that  the
Greeks  ministered  to  all  the  tastes  which  their  rude
masters  had  yet  developed  ;  they  appealed  to  a  frivo-
lous philosophy  to  dignify  pleasure  with  the  name  of

j-rrccipitati."  Comp.  Liv.  xxxix.  6.  ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxiv.  7.;  Veil,
ii.  1.

'  Compare  Duruy,  Hist,  des  Remains,  ii.  4.,  from  whom  this  image
has  been  borrowed.

VOL.  III.  C

18  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

virtue,  and  declared  to  an  admiring  auditory  that
the  gratifications  of  the  table  are  worthy  of  the  wise
man's  most  serious  attention.

While  this  feeble  corruption  pervaded  the  arts  and
Decay  and  literature,  the  manners,  and  morals  of  the
TCiigtonof  Greeks,  their  religion,  the  most  important
the  Greeks,  element  in  all  civilization,  suffered  more
than  all  the  rest  in  the  general  decay.  The  Greeks,
notwithstanding  the  brilliancy  of  their  mythology,
and  the  inexhaustible  fertility  of  their  invention  in
discovering  objects  for  every  human  character  and
disposition  to  worship,  had  never  been  a  believing
people.  Even  in  the  simple  age  of  the  Homeric
poems,  their  heroes  are  represented  as  defying  the
authority  of  omens  and  appealing  against  them  to
the  tribunal  of  conscience  and  reason.1  It  was  in
vain  that  the  characters  assigned  to  the  rulers  of  the
world  were  brought  more  into  harmony  with  the
demands  of  the  understanding ;  that  the  deification
of  War,  Lust  and  Deceit  gave  way  to  the  more  de-
corous worship  of  Compassion  and  Vigilance,  Chastity
and  Eenown,  Persuasion  and  Concord.2  The  early
appeal  to  Reason  was  never  suffered  to  succumb
before  the  pretensions  of  Tradition.  Shadowy  as
were  the  foundations  of  the  religious  usages  of  the
Greeks,  which  in  their  case  it  would  be  preposterous
to  dignify  with  the  name  of  beliefs,  they  could  make
no  show  of  resistance  to  the  assaults  of  the  intellect,
and  the  bold  speculations  of  trained  dialecticians.
Eeason  had  settled  into  atheism  at  a  time  when
science  was  content  to  believe  that  the  sun  was  about
the  size  of  the  Peloponnesus.  The  sceptics  of  the
age  of  Pericles  were  hardly  prompted  to  deny  a  first
cause  by  any  experimental  amplification  of  the  do-
main of  secondary  ones.  If  these  heartless  specula-

1  As  in  the  famous  line  (//.  fi.  243.):

els  olcavls  apiffros  a./j.vvea6ai  irtpi  irdrpris.

2  Constant,  Polylheisme  llomaine,  i.  18.,  from  Pausanias.

CH.  XXII.  F.NDER THE EMPIRE.  19

tions  provoked  a  transient  reaction  on  the  side  of
belief,  the  faint  reclamations  of  the  followers  of
Socrates  in  favour  of  Providence  and  God  were  soon
swtpt  away  in  the  torrent  of  vulgar  admiration  which
hailed  the  exaltation  of  Pleasure  in  the  philosophy  of
the  Garden.  The  general  estimation  which  Fatal  in-
this  system  acquired,  could  not  fail  to  prove  philosophy
fatal  to  all  the  higher  virtues  which  depend  principle  of
on  the  principle  of  faith.  Patriotism,  ™rafsn
honour,  even  common  probity,  had  no  longer  any
solid  ground  to  stand  upon ;  the  affections  which  obey
human  instinct  alone  retained  their  influence,  and
even  these  were  degraded  and  sensualized.  The
Epicureans  built  up  the  edifice  of  materialism  of
which  Aristotle  had  laid  the  foundations.  Infidelity
was  now  fortified  by  empirical  researches  into  the
causes  of  things,  and  even  the  founders  of  the  system
of  the  Stoics  could  hardly  sustain  themselves  above
the  universal  denial  of  a  state  of  future  retribution.
According  to  them  the  soul  of  the  perfect  sage  passed,
indeed,  after  death  into  the  sun  and  stars,  or  the
luminous  regions  between  our  atmosphere  and  the
heavens,  there  to  enjoy  divine  intuitions  till  the  day
of  the  general  conflagration  ;  but  on  the  prospects  of
the  common  herd  their  silence  was  gloomy  and  omi-
nous. Their  barren  ideal  of  virtue  had  no  attraction
for  the  multitude. v  It  remsrined  among  the  Greeks
the  curious  speculation  of  a  few  subtle  visionaries ;
nor  did  it  make  way  even  in  the  more  congenial  soil
of  the  Eornan  mind  till  it  descended  from  the  height
of  its  extravagant  conceptions  to  a  more  just  and
practical  view  of  human  nature.

It  was  in  the  middle  of  the  sixth  'century  of  the
city,  that  Ennius  began  to  familiarize  the  Enniu.in-
Uomans  with  the  models  of  Grecian  litera-  tatoBoma
ture. Himself  a  native  of  Magna  Grsecia,  of  o!53.
he  had  imbibed  on  subjects  of  popular  belief  the  lax
notions  prevalent  among  the  learned  wherever  the
c  2

20  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxil.

Greek  language  was  spoken.  His  imitations  were  not
confined  to  the  old  masters  of  epic  and  tragic  song.
While  he  felt  the  poetic  beauty  of  the  ancient  mytho-
logy which  he  set  himself  to  reproduce  in  Eoman
verse,  he  was  so  little  imbued  with  any  reverential
feeling  towards  it,  that  he  translated  at  the  same
time  the  Sacred  History  of  Euhemerus1,  an  author
who  had  been  denounced  in  his  own  age  and  country
for  impiety,  in  degrading  the  popular  conceptions  of
the  divinities  into  the  mere  deification  of  illustrious
mortals.  The  Romans,  unsuspicious  as  yet  of  the
consequences  of  tampering  with  received  dogmas,
showed  less  indignation  at  this  profanity,  than  their
corrupt  predecessors  in  the  same  school.2  Even  while
the  ideas  imported  from  beyond  the  sea  continued
silently  to  undermine  the  forms  of  popular  belief,  the
moral  principles  which  are  based  on  an  instinctive
'sense  of  responsibility  and  apprehension  of  future
retribution  were  too  deeply  rooted  in  the  serious
Italian  mind  to  be  easily  shaken.  It  happened,  how-
ever, that  at  the  close  of  the  same  century,  the  Athe-
nians sent  an  embassy  to  Eome  to  negotiate  the
remission  of  a  sum  which  the  republic  had  com-
manded them  to  pay  to  a  neighbouring  state.3  Un-
fortunately the  men  whom  they  commissioned  to
plead  the  cause  of  justice  before  the  tribunal  of  power
were  precisely  the  best  qualified,  by  the  parade  of
their  specious  sophistry,  to  confirm  the  principles  of
remorseless  tyranny.  The  envoys  were  the  most

1  Cicero,  de  Nat.  Dear.  i.  42.;  Plat,  delsid.  ei  Osir.  Opp.  vii.  420.,
Reiske  ;  Lactant.  de  fills.  Kelig.  i.  2.

2  Constant,  Polyth.  Rom.  ii.  17.

*  Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  37.;  Gell.  vii.  14.,  xvii.  21.  There  is  some
reason  to  question  the  authenticity  of  this  story,  but  it  may  serve  at
least  to  represent  the  undoubted  fact  of  the  jealousy  with  which '
Greek  literature  was  regarded  by  the  Romans  of  that  age,  and  the
hostile  measures  they  adopted  against  it.  In  the  book  entitled
Suetonius  de  claris  Rhetoribus  (in  princ.),  the  decree  of  the  senate  is
copied,  by  which,  it  is  said,  the  rhetoricians  and  philosophers  were
expelled  the  city  in  the  year  u.  c.  592.  Comp.  Gell.  xv.  1 1.

en.  xxii.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  21

eloquent  representatives  of  the  three  great  philoso-
phical schools,  Diogenes  of  the  Stoic,  Critolaus  of  the
Peripatetic,  and  Carneades  of  the  Academic.  While
the  senate  deliberated  or  haughtily  deferred  the  ques-
tion, these  clever  disputants  amused  themselves  with
haranguing  the  youth  of  Eome  on  the  most  recondite
subjects  of  human  inquiry,  and  found  among  them
an  eager  and  curious  audience.  The  novelty  of  their
topics  was  even  less  seductive  than  the  charm  of
their  conversation.1  The  subtleties  of  logic,  and  the
graces  of  rhetoric,  were  equally  new  to  their  admiring
pupils.  They  agreed  in  laying  down  the  broad
principles  of  materialism,  and  upon  this  foundation
the  Academic  raised  his  bewildering  labyrinth  of
doubt  and  indifference,  confusing  right  and  wrong,
truth  and  falsehood,  and  holding  up  Expediency  as
the  only  unchangeable  pole-star  of  human  wisdom.

Among  the  wise  men  of  the  elder  generation  one
alone  sounded  the  alarm  at  the  licentious-  Cato  warna
ness  of  this  fashionable  teaching.  Cato  the  ^aiStTreek
Censor,  then  approaching  his  eightieth  year,  literature-
exerted  all  the  authority  of  his  age  and  reputed  wis-
dom to  obtain  the  speedy  settlement  of  the  affair  in
suspense,  and  the  dismissal  of  the  dangerous  nego-
tiators.2 His  long  experience  of  men  and  things
had  confirmed  in  him  the  antique  prejudices  of  his
childhood.  The  Greeks,  he  was  wont  to  say,  are  the
parents  of  every  vice ;  whenever  they  shall  introduce
their  literature  among  us,  they  will  scatter  the  seeds
of  universal  corruption.3  His  solemn  warnings  made
a  strong  impression  upon  the  senators;  the  philo-
sophers were  dismissed  in  all  haste,  but  their  lessons
were  not  so  easily  forgotten.  The  fatal  taste  had

1  Julian.  V.  H.  in.  17.

2  Plut.  Cat.  Maj.  22.  ;  Quintil.  Inst.  xii.  1.

*Plin.  H.N.  xv.  4.,  xxix.  7. Plat.  Cat. Maj.  23. He  remarks
Upon this  : oAAci  ravrriv  u.tv  avroii  t>v(rq>i\nio.v  6  \p6vos airoSfiKvixri
Kfvijv,  4v  (jj  rols  Tf  Trpd.yfj.aa iv  rj  it6\is  f/p6ri  fj.fyltTTi],  Kal  irpbs  'E\\rjviK&
Ta  Kal  iraiSelav  airacrav  fff^fv  olxtius.

22  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

been  implanted,  and  new  successors  arrived  to  culti-
vate it.  Every  art  and  science  of  Greek  civilization
soon  had  its  foreign  professors  at  Rome,  and  they  all
conspired  together  to  overthrow  the  prejudices  on'
which  the  salutary  belief  of  the  nation  had  so  long
been  nourished.

The  relaxation  of  the  bonds  of  religious  belief,  had
overtaken  the  Greeks  in  the  impotence  of

Free-thinking ,  ,  , ,  •, . , .,  ,

introduced  at  old  age,  and  the  vices  to  which  it  gave  the
rein  were  those  of  national  decrepitude  and
degradation.  It  only  sank  them  more  deeply  into
the  meannesses  and  cowardly  trickeries  of  a  people
of  slaves.  They  exercised  their  newly-acquired  licence
in  devising  shifts  to  escape  chastisement  rather  than
in  steeling  themselves  against  remorse  for  deeds  of
rapine  and  cruelty.  But  when  the  same  pernicious
science  of  false  reasoning  was  introduced  into  Rome,
it  found  there  a  people  of  heroes  and  conquerors,
just  at  the  dawn  of  national  consciousness,  just  be-
ginning to  replace  mere  instinct  by  a  serious  sense
of  duty,  and  to  ask  themselves,  what  was  the  natural
bent  of  their  genius,  and  the  responsibility  it  entailed
upon  them?  The  spirit  of  irreligion  was  all  they
wanted  to  silence  every  rising  scruple,  and  encourage
them  to  devote  all  their  youthful  energy  and  enthu-
siasm to  the  career  of  conquest,  tyranny  and  plunder.
It  let  them  loose  upon  the  world  irresistible  and
relentless.  Their  strength  was  that  of  giants,  and
their  vices  were  those  of  giants  also.  Pride,  am-
bition, rapacity  and  violence  were  installed  in  the
vacant  thrones  of  the  mild  Saturn  and  the  boun-
teous Ops,  of  the  just  Jupiter  and  the  steadfast
Terminus.

The  tone  of  free-thinking  in  religious  matters  which
The  tone  of  became  fashionable  among  the  educated
hraremoni1ze'3ng  men  at  Rome  corresponded  in  its  bold  as-

with  the  spirit  .  ,  . *. „  .  , . ,

of  the  age.  surancc  with  the  spirit  01  enterprise  which
marked  at  this  epoch  their  political  career.  They

CH.  XXH.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  23

threw  themselves  into  the  new  paths  of  science,
not  indeed  as  curious  speculators  or  patient  seekers  of
the  truth,  but  with  all  the  thorough-going  intrepidity
which  signalized  their  public  character.  The  moral
feelings  of  the  Romans  were  as  coarse  and  blunt  as
their  nervous  sensibilities.1  They  did  not  feel  the
sacrifice,  so  painful  to  tender  and  scrupulous  con-
sciences, of  rejecting  the  supports  of  faith  and  tradi-
tion. They  beheld  without  misgiving  the  restraints
of  ancient  principles  give  way  before  the  advance  of
all-conquering  reason,  and  regarded  every  new  licence
they  acquired  as  a  province  wrested  from  the  dominion
of  the  enemy.  Crimes  of  violence  and  rapacity  re-
velled in  a  presumed  impunity,  as  regards  both  divine
and  human  laws,  on  a  scale  unparalleled  perhaps  in
all  human  history.  In  the  meanwhile  the  barriers  of
antique  severity  were  swept  rapidly  away.  The  im-
mense treasures  of  Greece  and  Asia  were  poured  in
overflowing  streams  into  Rome.  Luxury  came  before
refinement.  Art  was  adopted  as  fashionable  before
intelligence  .had  learned  to  appreciate  it.  The  fasti-
dious patrician  patronized  all  the  masters  of  ancient
literature;  but  the  models  from  Alexandria  or  Gyrene
which  he  selected  to  imitate  show  how  little  he  could
discriminate  between  their  merits.  Civilization  con-
tinued long  to  be  the  mere  exterior  polish  of  a  small
educated  class,  and  was  courted  and  caressed  as  an
ornament  rather  than  felt  as  the  humanizer  of  the
heart.

But  superstition  was  at  hand  to  avenge  religion,
as  it  always  will,  sooner  or  later. The  first  introduction
symptoms  of  the  decay  of  the  old  Italian  •upemuiom.
traditions,  comparatively  pure  and  austere

1  The  Romans,  says  Augustin  (C/».  D.  ii.  12.),  forbade  the  poets  to
bring  the  magistrates  into  contempt,  but  imposed  no  restraint  oil
their  ridiculing  the  gods.  He  refers  to  an  expression  of  Scipio  in
Cicero's  work  on  the  republic,  and  adds:  Poetas  Romanes  nulli
Deorum  pepercisse."

24  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

as  they  were,  were  followed  at  a  short  interval  by
the  introduction  of  hideous  and  brutal  mysteries  of
foreign  origin.  The  overthrow  of  the  faith  of  the
Greeks  in  a  divine  Providence  just,  wise  and  be-
neficent, had  been  succeeded  by  a  vulgar  addiction
to  magic,  the  belief,  that  is,  in  the  powers  of  evil,
the  science,  as  the  Hindoos  define  it,  of  the  fallen
angels.1  When  man  has  once  lost  his  hold  of  the
idea  of  retribution  and  compensating  good,  he  has
no  resource  but  to  prostrate  himself  before  the
powers  of  evil,  of  which  he  is  conscious  around  him
and  within  him.  This  spirit  of  fear  may  indeed
co-exist  along  with  the  spirit  of  love,  and  thus  even
in  the  laws  of  the  Twelve  Tables  we  find  that  the
practices  of  magic  were  authoritatively  interdicted.2
But  it  was  when  the  gods  of  Greece  had  fallen  into
utter  contempt,  that  devil-worship  first  reared  itself
ostentatiously  by  the  side  of  their  temples.  The
Babylonian  sorcerers  and  astrologers  had  followed
the  Macedonian  armies  into  the  west.  The  magician
Osthanes,  under  the  patronage  of  Alexander,  taught
the  occult  sciences  of  Persia  to  the  Greeks.3  Mystic
rites,  ostensibly  connected  with  the  respectable  names
of  familiar  deities,  were  promenaded  from  land  to
land,  and  the  curious  and  dissatisfied  were  seduced
into  initiation  in  them  by  the  promise  of  superior
illumination  or  extraordinary  powers.  It  was  at  the
time  when  the  attack  of  Ennius  upon  the  divinity  of
the  rulers  of  Olympus  had  attracted  general  notice,
that  an  obscure  native  of  Greece  brought  first  to
Etruria,  and  shortly  afterwards  to  the  more  congenial
soil  of  Eome,  the  mysterious  orgies  of  Bacchus,  which
had  already  obtained  an  infamous  celebrity  in  the
East.  The  horrible  wickednesses  which  were  perpe-
trated at  the  initiations,  at  which  the  passions  of
the  youth  of  either  sex  were  inflamed  by  wine  and

1  Constant,  dn  Pdlythdisme  Romain,  i.  105.

2  Plin.  H.  N.  xxviii.  4.,  xxx.  3.  '  Plin.  H.  N.  xxx.  2.

CH.  xxn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  25

U

music,  secresy  and  security,  had  been  practised  by
the  devotees  without  remorse  for  some  time,  before
they  were  discovered  by  the  revelations  of  a  slave  to
her  lover,  for  whose  purity  or  safety  she  was  con-
cerned. The  matter  was  laid  before  the  consuls,  and
the  results  of  a  thorough  investigation  exposed  to  the
shuddering  multitude.  The  Bacchic  orgies  were  de-
nounced as  a  monstrous  association  of  debauchery,
branching  out  into  adulteries,  murders,  and  possibly
seditious  combinations.  Through  them  the  crime  of
poisoning,  it  was  said,  had  become  familiar  to  the
Koman  matrons ;  and  after  the  first  root  of  the  evil
had  been  extirpated  in  the  city,  the  inquisition
which  was  made  throughout  the  rest  of  Italy  brought
no  less  than  two  thousand  such  miscreants  to  justice.1
It  was  one  thing,  however,  to  proscribe  an  inde-
cent cult,  and  visit  its  devotees  with  condign  They  „,, pro_
chastisement,  another  to  eradicate  the  moral  ^llf^",,'
want  and  to  stifle  the  spiritual  disquietude  '"i"*"-
which  impelled  men  to  slake  at  such  impure  sources
their  thirst  for  a  fixed  belief.  The  Bacchanalia,
though  constantly  interdicted,  continued  to  reappear
in  the  city.  The  Thracian  or  Orphic  mysteries,  in
which  Jupiter  was  said  to  be  worshipped  under  the
title  of  Sabazius,  caused  hardly  less  scandal  to  the
politic  defenders  of  the  pristine  institutions.2  ^Escu-
lapius  and  Cybele  were  admitted  to  the  honours  of
the  national  religion1,  and  other  foreign  divinities
were  placed,  by  a  curious  analogy,  on  the  footing  of
tributaries  to  the  state.2  The  monsters  of  Egypt,
however,  were  more  rigidly  proscribed  :  the  senate

1  Liv.  xxxix.  8.  19.  41.;  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  15.;  Val.  Max.  i.  3.  1.:
comp.  Augustin,  C.  D.  vii.  21.;  Tertull.  Apolog.  6.  A.  u.  557.

*  Val.  Max.  i.  3.  2. :  "  (J.  Cornelius  Hispullus  praetor  peregrinus
....  edictoChaldaeos  ....  abire  ....  jussit. Idem  qui  Sabazii  Jovis
cultu  simulato  mores  Rom.  inficere  conati  sunt  domes  suas  repetere
coegit." A.  u.  614.

*  Liv.  xxix.  14.;  Ovid,  Met.  xv.  625.

4  Tertull.  (rtrf  Nation,  i.  10.)  calls  them,  "vectigales  Dei." The
government  demanded  a  tribute  for  permission  to  worship  them.

26  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxil.

overthrew  their  altars ;  but  their  foreign  adherents,
supported  doubtless  by  the  secret  favour  of  the  popu-
lace, as  often  surreptitiously  restored  them.1  Rome
meanwhile  overflowed  with  the  impure  spawn  of
superstition.  Conjurors,  soothsayers,  astrologers  and
fortune-tellers  filled  every  street,  and  introduced
themselves  into  every  domestic  establishment.  The
dreams  of  Caesar  and  Pompeius  were  gravely  related.2
Cicero  collected  the  records  of  supernatural  pheno-
mena3 ;  Vatinius  invoked  the  shades  of  the  dead,  and
read,  it  was  said,  the  will  of  the  gods  in  the  entrails
of  a  murdered  child.4  Sextus  demanded  the  secrets
of  futurity  of  the  Thessalian  sorceress5;  Figulus,
the  Etruscan  augur,  obtained  the  reputation  of  a
prophet6 ;  Appius  Claudius  consulted  the  oracle  of
Delphi.7  The  belief  in  portents  and  omens  exercised
an  unconscious  sway  over  thousands  who  openly  de-
rided all  spiritual  existences,  and  professed  atheists
trembled  in  secret  at  the  mysterious  potency  of
magical  incantations.

Nevertheless,  though  some  of  the  wisest  states-
Ansterepnn-  men  combined  to  sap  the  foundations  of

eiples  of  the  ,  -  • •• «. ,1  T /^-

old  Roman the vulgar belief, though Cicero wrote

law  of  family: .  &  '  ?  .

i.  of  marriage,  m Qisproot oi the science ot divina-

1  Representations  of  Egyptian  rites  are  said  to  be  found  on  some
Etrnscan  vases.  Heyne,  Opusc.  vi.  194.;  comp.  Tertull.  /.  c.  •  "  Ce-
terum  Serapim  et  Isidem  et  Harpocratem  et  Anubim  prohibitos  Capi-
tolio  Varro  commeuiorat,  eorumque  statuas  a  senatu  disjectas,  non  nisi
per  vim  popularium  restructas.  Sed  tamen  et  Gabinius  Consul  Kal.
Jan.  cum  vix  hostias  probaret,  prse  popularium  coetu,  quia  nil  de  Se-
rape  et  Iside  constituisset,  potiorem  liabuit  senatus  censuram  quam
impetum  vulgi,  et  aras  institui  prohibuit."  Cicero  (de  Leg.  ii.  8.)  de-
nounces the  public  celebration  of  foreign  rites,  but  allows  them  to  be
cultivated  in  private.

-  If,  that  is,  we  may  suppose  Plutarch  and  others  to  have  drawn
from  contemporary  authorities.

*  Cic.  de  Divin.  i. 4  Cic.  in  Vatin.  6. 5  Lucan,  vi.  in  fin.

6  Suet.  (Oct.  94.)  asserts  as  a  current  tradition,  that  Figulus  pre-
dicted to  the  father  of  Augustus  that  his  son  should  become  lord  of
the  world. Comp.  Dion,  xlv.  1.

7  Lucan,  v.  70. See  above.

CH.  XXII.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  27

tion l,  and  even  Cato  the  Censor  had  wondered  how
one  augur  could  meet  another  without  a  smile2,
the  formal  usages  of  the  Roman  religion  continued
for  ages  to  survive  the  encroachments  of  free-thinking
upon  the  faith  they  originally  symbolised.  Nor  was
the  resistance  less  obstinate  which  the  fundamental
prescriptions  of  social  life  opposed  to  the  elements  of
innovation.  The  relations  of  family  and  property
among  the  Romans  were  determined  on  a  peculiarly
artificial  system.  The  first  principle  of  their  law
was  the  paramount  right  of  the  state  over  the  citizen.
Wh  ether  as  head  of  a  family  or  as  proprietor,  he  had
no  natural  rights  of  his  own ;  his  privileges  were
created  by  the  law  as  well  as  defined  by  it.  The
state,  in  the  plenitude  of  her  power,  delegated  a
portion  of  her  own  irresponsibility  to  the  citizen,
who  satisfied  the  conditions  she  required,  in  order  to
become  the  parent  of  her  children ;  but  at  the  same
time  she  demanded  of  him  the  sacrifice  of  his  free
agency  to  her  own  rude  ideas  of  political  expediency.
The  right  of  contracting  the  union  which  she  digni-
fied with  the  name  of  proper  matrimony,  was  re-
stricted to  persons  duly  qualified,  not  only  by  the
ordinary  and  reasonable  conditions  of  mature  age,
consent  of  parents,  distance  of  blood  and  actual  celi-
bacy, but  by  the  status  also  of  citizenship.3  The
modes  in  which  such  a  marriage  might  be  contracted

1  In  the  second  part  of  the  treatise  de  Divinatione,  Cicero  argues
in  his  own  person  against  the  possibility  of  any  discovery  of  future
events, and  particularly  against  the  whole  Etruscan  discipline  of
augury  (see  ii.  12.):  "Ut  ordiar  de  haruspicina  quam  ego  reipnblicae
causa  communisque  religionis  colendam  censeo:  sed  soli  sumus;  licet
verum  exquirere,"  &c.

2  Cic.  de  Divin.  ii.  24. This  remark  was  directed  against  the  en-
croachment* of  the  Etruscan  religious  ministry  of  which  Cato  enter-
tained an  old-fashioned  jealousy. It  does  not  appear  that  he  was
otherwise  than  a  believer  in  the  efficacy  of  rites  which  he  deemed
strictly  national. The  same  cannot  he  said  of  Cicero.

3  The  restriction  was  originally  still  more  closely  limited. It  was
in  the  year  u.  c.  310  that  the  tribune  Canuleius  effected  the  author-
ization of  marriage  between  patricians  and  plebeians. Liv.  iv.  2.

28  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

were  three :  confarreation,  a  simple  but  solemn  reli-
gions ceremony ;  coemption,  a  symbolical  represen-
tation of  the  primitive  usage  of  bargain  and  sale ;
and  use,  a  remnant  of  the  rude  state  of  society,  when
it  was  first  thought  expedient  to  hallow  by  an
honourable  title  the  faithful  cohabitation  of  a  defi-
nite period.  By  one  of  these  modes  the  woman
passed  from  her  parent's  family  into  that  of  her
husband,  and  became  a  participator  in  all  its  reli-
gious and  social  privileges.  She  thus  became  entitled
to  the  style  of  housewife  (materfamilias),  more  vene-
rable than  that  of  matron  (matrona),  which  belonged
in  strictness  to  the  female  connected  with  the  male
by  a  lower  tie.1  She  was  delivered,  in  legal  phrase,
into  her  husband's  hands ;  his  dominion  over  her  was
recognized  as  absolute ;  he  became  master  of  her
person  and  her  goods  almost  as  if  by  the  right  of
conquest ;  alone,  or  at  a  later  period,  with  the  con-
currence of  her  next  of  kin,  he  could  condemn  her  to
death.2  In  her  civil  relation  to  him  she  assumed  no
other  footing  than  that  of  her  own  children.  She
inherited  from  him  as  an  adopted  daughter,  and  after
his  death  received  a  legal  guardian  in  one  of  her
new  kinsmen,  or  whomsoever  her  husband  might
appoint  by  will.

The  same  austerity  presided  over  the  old  Roman
2.  of  parental  ideas  of  the  parental  authority.  Within  the
authority.  sanctuary  of  the  family  mansion  the  father
ruled  supreme.  He  exercised  the  power  of  life  and
death  over  his  children  as  over  his  wife.3  The  father
could  sell  his  child,  and,  if  the  child  recovered  his

1  Heinecc.  Antiq.  Rom.  i.  10.  1. Cicero  says,  Topic.  3.:  "Genus
enim  est  uxor,  ejus  duse  formse  ;  una  matrum  familias  earum  quae  in
rnanumconvenerant,alteraearum  quse  tantummodouxoreshabentur."

2  The  authorities  referred  to  are  Dionys.  Ant.  liom.\i.  25.;  Gcll.
ii.  23.;  Plin.  H.  N.  xiv.  13.;  Suet. Tib.  35.;  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  1.,  xiii.
32. ;  Val.  Max.  vi.  3.  8.

1  Besides  the  jurists  see  Dionys.  ii.  26,  27.;  Val.  Max.  v.  2.;  Senec.
de  Clem.  i.  15.;  ballast,  B.  C.  39.

CH.  xxil.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  29

freedom  by  emancipation,  could  sell  him  again  even
to  the  third  time,  before  he  finally  escaped  altogether
from  the  parental  dominion.1  The  Roman  jurists
remarked  with  truth  that  the  extent  to  which  the
authority  of  the  parent  over  the  child  was  sanctioned
by  their  law,  was  unknown  to  the  institutions  of  any
other  state.2  But  this  authority  was  never  supposed
to  be  founded  in  any  natural  principle;  it  was  merely
the  creation  of  state  policy  :  it  followed  as  a  corollary
upon  the  idea  of  civil  marriage,  and  had  no  place
where  the  union  of  the  parents,  as  in  the  contuber-
uium  or  concubinatus,  though  sanctioned  and  pro-
tected by  the  law,  was  not  consecrated  by  the  title  of
just  or  proper  matrimony.  It  was  intimately  connected
with  a  religious  idea,  according  to  which  the  head  of
each  family  was  bound  to  the  maintenance  of  the
sacrifices  peculiar  to  h.  Each  civil  household  formed
an  unit  in  the  aggregate  which  composed  what  may
be  denominated  the  political  family,  the  gens  of  the
Roman  community.  Whether  originally  connected
in  blood,  or  united  only  by  legal  fiction,  identity  of
patronymic  and  participation  in  the  same  duties,
obligations,  and  religious  services,  maintained  the
bond  of  clanship  between  the  several  members  of
these  independent  societies.

A  system  so  artificial  as  this  could  only  flourish  in
a  peculiar  and  exceptional  state  of  society.

A  •  CC i J f ilf Undermined

As  soon  as  an  opening  was  effected  for  the  bytheiaxer
influx  of  new  modes  of  thought,  it  was  as-  n"t",r'aie6C
suredly  doomed  to  perish,  however  circum-
stances, for  a  while,  might  retard  its  fall. The  free
operation  of  the  principles  of  natural  equity  could
not  fail  to  undermine  by  degrees  the  prejudices  upon
which  such  a  system  rested. But  the  extreme  tena-
city of  forms  which  characterized  the  ancient  Romans,

1  Dionys.  ii.  27.

2  Gaius,  i.  55.:  "Fere  enim  nulli  alii  sunt  homines  qtii  talem  in
filios  BUGS  habent  potestatem  qualem  DOS  habemus."

30  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

involved  the  early  progress  of  all  new  ideas  among
them  in  great  obscurity.  When  it  suited  Cicero's
views  to  adopt  the  tone  of  social  conservatism,  he
could  complain  of  the  great  luminaries  of  Eoman
jurisprudence,  even  of  the  generation  before  his  own,
for  the  tendency  they  had  shown  to  relax  the  primi-
tive strictness  of  the  law  of  family.  Undoubtedly,
the  burden  of  maintaining  the  family  sacrifices  had
become  more  and  more  grievous  as  the  interest  in
their  significance  and  the  number  of  the  clan  had
diminished.  The  illustrious  Scsevola  was  charged
with  lending  the  authority  of  his  name,  not,  indeed,
to  the  overthrow  of  the  old  principles,  but  to  a  liberal
construction  of  the  law  regarding  them.1  The  ex-
amples of  Clodius  and  Dolabella,  who  resorted  openly
to  a  legal  fiction  to  obtain  their  adoption  into  foreign
houses,  show  the  laxity  which  pervaded  the  ideas  of
their  time.2  Clodius  himself  had  allowed  the  sacri-
fices of  his  own  family  to  fall  into  desuetude3;  a
demagogue  would  not  have  laid  himself  open  to
animadversion  in  this  respect,  if  he  had  had  any
reason  to  fear  the  prejudices  of  the  people.  The
women  of  Eome  declaimed  against  the  tyranny  of
the  old  law,  which  placed  them  upon  so  unequal  a
footing  with  their  husbands  in  the  nuptial  relation.
The  men  themselves  united  with  their  consorts  in
demanding  greater  mutual  facilities  for  divorce.
Confarreation  allowed  the  husband,  indeed,  to  put
away  the  wife  in  some  strictly  limited  cases,  and  by
means  of  a  solemn  religious  process ;  but  it  gave  the
wife  no  licence  to  emancipate  herself.4  Such  restric-
tions were  incompatible  with  the  prevailing  laxity  of
morals,  and  it  is  probable  that  in  the  time  of  Caesar

1  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  19. Comp.  pro  Murena,  12. :  "Sacra  interire
illi  (majores)  noluerunt,  horum  (jctorum)  ingenio  senes  ad  coemp-
tiones  faciendas,  interimendorum  sacroruni  causa,  reperti  sunt."

2  Clc.proDom.  13.;  Suet.  Tib.  2.;  Dion,  xxxviii.  12.,  xlii.  29.

3  Cic.  pro  Dom.  1£.  4  Festus,  in  voc.  Diffarrcatio.

CH.  xxil.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  31

this  particular  form  of  marriage  had  already  become
almost  obsolete.1  But  coemption,  or  the  fictitious
purchase  of  the  wife  from  her  parents,  admitted  of
emancipation  or  the  restitution  of  the  symbolic  pur-
chase-money on  the  part  of  the  wife ;  and  this  was
the  form  of  which  the  Eoman  women  so  freely  availed
themselves,  under  the  influence  of  passion,  caprice,
or  pecuniary  interest.2  This  facility  of  separation
could  not  fail  to  introduce  new  regulations  in  the
wife's  favour  in  the  settlement  of  the  dowry,  and  in
other  not  less  important  respects.3  At  the  same  time
the  influence  of  public  opinion  imposed  limits  upon
the  actual  exercise  of  the  parental  power.  By  new
exceptional  provisions,  the  child  obtained  indepen-
dent property,  together  with  the  means  of  transfer-
ring and  bequeathing  it.  But  it  is  impossible  to
assign  the  exact  date  of  any  of  these  innovations  ;
and  all  we  can  assume  with  certainty  of  the  time
which  we  are  now  considering  is,  that  in  practice  the
principles  of  equity  and  natural  reason  were  begin-
ning to  temper  the  harsh  formalities  of  the  old  law
throughout  the  social  relations.

Still  more  rigid  and  exclusive  were  the  ideas  which
originally  regulated  the  tenure  of  property,  original  law
The cupidity  of the simple warriors  of  ''P™^-
ancient  Koine  was  limited  to  lands  and  houses,  slaves
and  animals.4 These  accordingly  were  the  only  ob-
jects which  the  primitive  Roman  law  recognised  as
property. For  these  the  citizen  fought  and con-
quered ;  these  the  state  secured  to  him  by  placing  all
the  modes  of  procedure  regarding  them  under  the

1  Compare  what  Tacitus  says  of  it  in  the  time  of  Tiberius  (Ann.
iv.  16.)-

-  See  on  this  subject  Callus's  letter  to  Cicero,  ad  Div.  viji.  7.

8  Cic.  pro  Murena,  12.: "  Mulieres  omnes  propter  infiiinitatem
consilii  majores  in  tutorum  potestate  esse  voluerunt: hi  (jcti)  in-
venerunt  genera  tutorum  quae  potestate  mulierum  continerentur.
Comp.  Gaius,  ii.  118.

4  Ulpian.  liegul.  tit.  19.  1.

32  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXII.

sanction  of  religious  forms.  These  she  denominated
things,  mancipi,  or  handhold  property,  and  threw
the  protection  of  the  law  over  them  for  the  benefit  of
her  citizens  only.  No  length  of  occupation  could
obtain  the  guarantee  of  the  law  to  any  such  property
in  the  hands  of  an  alien.1  In  the  course  of  time,
however,  other  wants  made  themselves  felt.  The
precious  metals,  ornamental  stuffs,  pictures,  statues
and  trinkets  of  all  kinds  acquired  a  value  in  the  eyes
of  the  plunderers  of  the  world's  treasures.  All  such
objects  accordingly  were  thrown  together  in  one  mul-
tifarious class,  distinguished  from  the  first  by  the
negative  particle  only.  They  were  things  necman-
cipi,  not  handhold.  While  the  sale  and  transfer  of
the  former  class  of  objects  were  placed  under  the
guarantee  of  the  state,  which  thought  to  protect  the
purchaser  from  fraud,  by  requiring  the  strict  exe-
cution of  the  letter  of  the  contract2,  the  latter  were
only  to  be  acquired  at  the  risk  of  the  buyer.  He
was  obliged  to  secure  himself  against  deception  by
his  own  ingenuity;  no  religious  and  sacramental
ceremonies  intervened  to  hallow  such  random  trans-
actions ;  the  mere  passing  from  hand  to  hand,  bare
tradition,  as  the  jurists  phrased  it,  was  a  sufficient
mode  of  procedure.  In  short  the  transfer  of  things
not-handhold  followed  the  law  of  nature,  while  that
of  the  others  was  retained  within  the  magic  circle  of
the  law  of  the  city.

But  it  was  found  impossible  to  leave  so  large  and
increasing  a  portion  of  the  objects  of  value

Affected  by .  _J ..

the  decision, m  so  unprotected  a  state. By  degrees  the

ofthepnuton. . . .  _  r J J

decisions  ot  the  praetors  founded on the
principles  of  equity  accumulated  into  a  new  body  of

1  XII.  Tab.  3.

2  According  to  the  formula,  "Uti  lingua  nuncupassit ita  jag
esto." XII. Tab.  6. Comp.  Cic.  de Oral.  i.57.,de  Off.  iii. 16.,
where  he  tells  a  curious  story,  from  which  it  appears  how  completely
the  law  failed  in  its  object. Compare  Troplong,  de  V Influence  du
Chnstianisme  sur  le  Droit  Civil  des  Remains,  p.  19.

CH.  xxil.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  33

law  regarding  them.  By  the  side  of  the  civil  law.
which  established  the  original  exclusive  definition  of
handhold  or  Quiritary  dominion,  there  grew  up  a
new  system  of  natural  property  under  the  sanction  of
the  praetorian  edicts.  This  secondary  law  was  ap-
plicable to  the  great  mass  of  provincial  territory.
While  the  ager  Komanus  might  be  held  in  full  or
Quiritary  possession,  under  the  guarantees  of  manci-
pation and  usucaption,  the  soil  of  the  provinces  was
supposed,  by  a  fiction  of  the  law,  to  pertain  exclu-
sively to  the  state,  and  its  actual  holders  were  re-
garded in  the  light  of  occupiers  and  tenants.  In  real
fact  this  tenant-right  was  equivalent  to  actual  posses-
sion; it  was  perpetual  and  irrevocable,  and  might
be  transferred  by  exchange,  sale,  gift,  or  succession.
But,  inasmuch  as  it  did  not  come  under  the  primi-
tive idea  of  property,  it  failed  to  realize  the  full
dominion  which  alone  was  qualified  as  Quiritary
tenure.  Accordingly,  such  property  could  only  be
transferred  under  the  forms  of  equity,  and  the  vast
extent  and  magnitude  of  the  transactions  of  this  kind
daily  occurring,  contributed  rapidly  to  enhance  the
importance  of  this  new  branch  of  law,  and  to  diffuse
a  general  knowledge  of  its  principles  and  respect  for
them.

The  attempt  to  infuse  the  more  liberal  spirit  of
natural  reason  into  the  strict  forms  of  the
original  law  could  not  fail  to  produce  much  neduudW

°r .  , .  .  ,  . . the  principles

confusion  and  inconsistency,  and  give  a  fair  of  natural

i  11  i  . , -I • i  i  reason.

handle  to  the  sarcasms  with  which  a  clever
advocate  might  find  it  convenient  to  assail  the  whole
system.  In  the  speech  for  Murena,  Cicero  auda-
ciously characterizes  the  civil  law  as  a  mass  of  fic-
tions and  incongruities,  and  declares,  with  all  the  pre-
sumption of  the  successful  pleader,  that  the  science
is  not  worth  the  three  days'  study  which  would  suf-
fice to  master  its  real  principles,1  But  his  testimony

1  Cic.  pro  Mur.  12.  13.
VOL.  III.  D

34  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

is  less  exceptionable  to  the  fact  that  the  most  illus-
trious jurisconsults  of  his  own  and  the  previous
generation  combined  to  exalt  the  estimation  of  equity
over  strict  law.  Such  were  the  views  of  Sulpicius
and  of  the  orator  Crassus.1  Scaevola,  we  have  already
seen,  impelled  the  tendency  of  public  opinion  in  the
same  direction.  And  Cicero  himself,  though  on  some
occasions  he  did  not  scruple  to  become  the  advocate
of  antiquity,  was  on  the  whole  a  partisan  of  liberal
innovation,  and  his  influence  contributed  in  no  slight
degree  to  the  progress  of  the  new  ideas  on  these
subjects.2  He  professed  to  base  his  administration
of  justice  in  his  province  on  the  principles  of  hu-
manity and  reason^.  As  a  philosopher  and  a  states-
man, he  declared  that  the  source  and  rule  of  right
were  not  to  be  sought  in  the  laws  of  the  Twelve
Tables,  but  in  the  depths  of  human  intelligence  ;  that
equity  is  the  true  idea  of  law,  the  supreme  reason
engraved  in  the  nature  of  man,  written  on  his  heart,
immutable  and  eternal,  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of
the  senate,  bearing  sway  over  all  mankind  ;  this  law
the  deity  alone  has  conceived,  established  and  pro-
mulgated.

These  noble  sentiments  constituted,  as  it  were,  the
Cicero's  pure  essence  which  the  wisest  of  the  Romans
morality.  j^  ^stilled.  fr0m  the  records  of  Greek

philosophy.  Above  all  others  it  bore  the  flavour  of
the  mind  of  Plato,  and  of  the  mild  and  liberal
masters  of  the  Academic  school.  This  was  the  great
boon  which  Greece  proffered  to  her  conquerors,  to
counteract  in  some  degree  the  malign  influence  of  so
many  of  her  lessons.  We  shall  have  occasion  here-
after to  trace  the  steps  by  which  the  Roman  law  was

1  Cic.  Philipp.  iv.  5.  of  Servius  Sulpicius  :  "  Jus  civile  semper
ad  sequitatem  et  facilitatem  referebat." Of  Crassus  (de  Orat.  i.):
"  Multa  turn  contra  scriptum  pro  aequo  et  bono  dixit."

2  Cic.  ad  Alt.  vi.  1.,  de  Leg.  ii.  5,  6.,  de  Fin.  iii.  20.,  de  Off.  i.  7.
de  Rep.  i.  17.,  iii. 17.:  "  Natura  enim  juris  explicanda  est  nobis,
neque  ad  hominibus  repetenda  natura."

CH.  XXII.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  35

humanized  by  the  Greek  Philosophy.  The  sect  of
the  Stoics,  just  now  beginning  to  excite  attention  and
compel  admiration  at  Rome,  became  by  the  logical
character  of  its  speculations,  and  the  lofty  sense  it
inculcated  of  justice  and  duty,  an  efficient  instrument
in  this  salutary  reform.  For  the  present  we  must  be
content  with  observing  the  progress  of  humanity  in
its  action  on  a  few  of  the  most  refined  and  intelli-
gent class.  The  pure  morality  of  Cicero's  treatise  on
Duties,  and  the  practical  exhibition  of  benevolence
and  natural  piety  which  characterizes  his  ethical  and
religious  writings !,  could  not  have  sprung  from  the
bosom  of  a  society  which  was  totally  unable  to  ap-
preciate them.

It  may  be  presumed  however  that  the  evil  which
the Romans imbibed from their Greek  The  1^^^^
teachers  penetrated  deeper  into  the  heart  GfSekof
of  society  than  the  good. Laxity  of  prin-  cor,a0^dhw  a
ciple  and  indifference  of  belief  had  their  8raaUclass-
attractions  for  the  vulgar,  while  the  nobler  lessons
of  philosophy,  its  ideas  of  equity  and  natural  right,
would  only  be  appreciated  by  the  refined  and  edu-
cated. The  priests,  who  belonged  to  this  latter  class,
might  shrink  from  the  atrocity  of  human  sacrifices2,

1  Such,  for  instance,  as  the  treatise  de  Senectute,  de  Amicitid,  de
3>i.'turu  Deorum.

2  The  Romans  affirmed  that  human  sacrifices  had  been  abolished
by  the  elder  Brutus  (Macrob.  i.  7.). But  on  three  occasions,  at  least,
such  victims  were  demanded  at  a  much  later  period;  namely,  in  the
yearu.  c.  527  (Oros.  iv.  13.),  and  again  c.  c.  536  (Liv.  xxii.  57.,  "mi-
nime  Romano  sacro")  ; and  once  more,  u.  c.  640  (Plut.  Qu.  Rom.
p.  284.). Soon  after  this  the  rite  was  denounced  by  a  decree  of  the
senate. Pliu.  H.  N.  xxx.  3.,  A.  u.  c.  657. But  compare  xxviii.  3.:
"  Boario  vero  in  foro  Graecum  Grsecamque  defossos,  aut  aliarum  gen-
tium cum  quibus  turn  res  esset,  etiam  nostra  aetas  vidit."  Dion  Cassias,
indeed,  asserts  that  a  sacrifice  of  this  kind  took  place  at  the  triumph
of  Julius  Caesar  (xliii.  24.),  and  adds  that  he  cannot  find  that  any
oracle  required  it. The  statements  of  the  Greeks  on  any  subject  of
this  kind  are  to  be  received  with  caution,  both  on  account  of  their  ig-
norance of  Roman  manners  and  their  prejudice  against  them. Thus
Eusebius  (Paneg.  13.)  affirms  that  human  sacrifices  were  continued
at  Rome  to  his  day,  alluding,  perhaps,  to  the  words  of  Lactantius

D  2

36  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

and  extenuate  the  literal  signification  of  the  most
scandalous  of  the  national  dogmas ;  the  nobles  might
soften  the  rigour  of  ancient  law  ;  but  to  the  common
people  these  silent  changes  were  offensive  and  unin-
telligible. The  literature  of  Borne,  adopted  as  it
was  from  Greece,  was  an  instrument  for  enlarging
men's  ideas,  and  refining  their  sentiments ;  but  it
remained  a  dead  letter  to  the  mass  of  the  citizens,  to
whom  the  glaring  spectacles  of  the  circus  and  amphi-
theatre proved  more  attractive  than  the  intellectual
culture  of  a  conquered  foe.

It  was  towards  the  end  of  the  second  Punic  war
influence  of  that  Upper  Italy  first  became  filled  with
Roman0"  Greek  settlers.  They  came  indeed,  in  the
literature.  grgj.  instance,  in  the  train  of  conquest,  and
in  the  condition  of  slaves.  But  their  well-trained
talents  soon  secured  them  ascendancy,  and  they  made
their  captors  captive.1  Throughout  the  sixth  century
of  the  city  the  foreign  professors  of  science  and  litera-
ture were  flocking  into  Eome.  Archagathus,  the  first
Greek  physician,  came  in  the  year  534,  and  the
schools  of  grammar  and  rhetoric  were  represented  at
the  end  of  the  century  by  Crates  of  Mall  us,  the  com-
mentator on  Homer.  The  Greek  language  was  first
rendered  fashionable  by  Scipio  Africanus  and  his
friend  La?lius.  Paulus  ^Emilianus2,  and  in  the  next
generation  Scipio  JEmilianus3,  were  celebrated  for

(defals.  Hel.  i.  21.):  "Etiam  nunc  sanguine colitur  humano  ( Jupiter
Latiaris);"  which  undoubtedly  refers  only  to  a  libation  of  the  blood  of
gladiators.  Dion's  statement  may  be  some  misconception  of  the  na-
ture of  a  military  punishment.  In  ancient  times  the  consul,  praetor,
or  dictator,  could  devote  to  Mars  a  victim  selected  from  the  legion.
Liv.  viii.  10.  The  story  of  the  human  sacrifices  of  Octavius  at  the
capture  ofPerusia  (Suet.  Octav.  15.)  is  dubious  and  obscure.

1  Hor.  Ep.  ii.  1.  156.:

"  Grsecia  capta  ferum  victorem  cepit."

2  Plut.  2Em.il.  28. ;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxv.  40.  30.

3  Scipio  ^Emilianus  was  adopted  by  the  son  of  the  elder  Africanus,
and  bore  his  cog»omen  also. Each  of  them  had  a  friend  named
Laelius,  and  both  Scipios  and  both  Laslii  were equally  distinguished
for  their  zeal  for  Greek  literature.

CH.  xxn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  37

their  interest  in  the  literature  of  Greek  antiquity.
It  was  with  a  verse  of  Homer  that  the  latter  pre-
dicted that  Rome  should  one  day  perish,  like  sacred
Ilium.1  Early  in  the  century  commenced  the  adap-
tation of  Greek  metres  to  the  Latin  tongue.2  Ennius
and  Livius,  under  the  patronage  of  the  liberal  nobles
of  the  day,  rendered  their  countrymen  familiar  with
the  models  of  the  Epos  and  the  Drama.3  But  these
innovations  were  not  unresented.  There  are  not
wanting  indications  of  a  struggle  between  the  old
school  and  the  new,  the  domestic  and  the  foreign,  in
literature  as  in  religion  and  law.  The  Romans  pos-
sessed, indeed,  even  at  that  early  time,  a  literature
of  their  own,  which  many  of  them  were  ill-disposed
to  see  superseded  by  an  exotic  growth.  No  nation,
perhaps,  was  ever  so  rich  in  ballad  poetry,  or  had
more  completely  woven  into  verse  the  whole  circle  of
its  ancient  traditions.  The  rhythm  indeed  was  rugged,
and  the  strain  homely4;  but  the  subject  was  rendered
dear  by  its  appeal  to  family  associations.  The  con-
tempt with  which  the  imitators  of  the  Greeks,  such
as  Ennius,  regarded  these  rude  but  interesting  essays
in  heroic  poetry,  excited,  we  may  believe,  a  dogged
spirit  of  opposition.  The  victory  of  the  Hexameter
over  the  Saturnian  verse  symbolized  a  sweeping

1  Iliad,  vi.  448.

ffffffrui  "Pi'tJ-ap  OTO.V  TTOT'  oKtaXy  "l\tos  Ipi],
See  Appian,  Pun.  132.

-  Porcius  Licinius,  apud  Gell.  xvii.  21.,  speaks  of  a  foreign  Muse:
"  Poenico  bello  secundo  Musa  pinnate  gradu
Intulit  se  bellicosam  in  Romuli  gentem  feram."

Comp.  Hor.  Ep.  ii.  1.  161.

"  Serus  enim  Gracis  admovit  acumina  chartis;
Et  post  Punica  bella  quietus  quajrere  ccepit
Quid  Sophocles  et  Thespis  et  ^Eschylus  utile  ferrent."

3  Suet,  de  ill.  Gramm.  1.:  "  Antiquissimi  doctorum,  qui  iidem  et
poette  et  semi-Gneci  erant,  Liviurn  et  Ennium  dico."
'Hor.  /.  c.:

"  Sic  horridus  ille
Defluxit  nurnerus  Saturnius."

38  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxil.

revolution  of  ideas,  and  obliterated  the  cherished  re-
Nsevius,  collections  of  many  centuries.  Obscure  as  is
ofathep'o°id  the  history  of  this  long-forgotten  contest,  it

Roman  i j  ,1 . xr •  •

literature,  would  appear  that  JNaevius  was  the  champion
of  the  old  Eoman  literature.  He  was  the  enemy
and  traducer  of  Scipio,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the
friend  of  the  elder  Cato l ;  the  satiric  poetry,  of  which
he  was  the  earliest  known  author,  continued  to  be
the  most  genuine  production  of  the  Roman  muse2 ;
his  dramatic  pieces  seem,  from  the  titles  of  many  of
them,  to  have  predicted  the  manners  of  the  urban
populace3 ;  he  contended  for  the  rude  purity  of  the
old  language  assailed  in  form  and  substance  by  inno-
vation on  all  sides;  and  he  felt  that  with  himself
that  purity  would  perish.  It  was  with  this  feeling,
assuredly,  that  he  composed  for  himself  an  epitaph,
filled  with  a  mournful  presentiment  of  this  impend-
ing change.  If  immortals,  he  said,  might  weep  for
mortal  men,  the  divine  Camoznce  would  weep  for
Ncevius  the  poet :  for  since  he  has  descended  to  the
receptacle  of  the  dead,  men  have  forgotten  at  Rome
the  use  of  Latin  speech.*

The  melancholy  strain  of  Nsevius  is  strikingly
contrasted  with  the  tone  of  exultation  in  which  his
His  rival  victorious  rival  speaks  also  from  his  tomb.
Ennius.  j^^  no  man>  exclaims  Ennius,  weep  for  m.e  !
Foi*  why  ?  I  live  in  the  mouths  of  my  countrymen.5

1  Cic.  de  Senect.  14.

?  Quintil.  i. :  "  Satira  tola  nostra  est."

3  As.  for  instance,  Agitatoria,  Ariolus,  Bubulcus,  Cerdo,  Figiilus,
Fullones,  Lignaria,  Tunicularia. Duruy,  H.  des  Remains,  ii.  26.

4  Nsevius  apud  Gell.  i.  24. :

"  Mortales  immortales  flcre  si  foret  fas,
Flerent  Divse  Camcenaj  Ncevium  poetam  :
Itaque  postquam  est  Orcino  traditus  thesauro,
Obliti  sunt  Romse  loquier  Latina  lingua."

*  Ennius  apud  Cic.  Tusc.  Disp.  i.  15.:

"  Nemo  me  lachrymis  dccoret,  nee  funera  flctu
Faxit :  cur  ?  volito  vivus  per  ora  virum."
Gell.  xvii.  21.

CH.  xxil.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  39

The  influence  of  the  Hellenizing  school  now  became
predominant  The  career  which  Ennius  had  marked
out  was  followed  by  a  long  succession  of  writers,
chiefly  dramatic,  who  devoted  themselves  to  the
adaptation  or  servile  imitation  of  Greek  models.
Caecilius,  Pacuvius,  Plautus  and  Terence  refined  suc-
cessively upon  the  language  and  taste  of  their  prede-
cessors. Accius  alone  ventured  to  compose  a  few
pieces  on  Eoman  subjects,  but  these  fell  speedily
into  oblivion.  But  meanwhile  the  mantle
of  Nsevius  had  fallen  upon  Lucilius,  whose
satiric  vein  was  inflamed  with  genuine  indignation
against  the  encroachment  of  foreign  ideas.  Respected
as  he  was  in  his  lifetime,  and  long  admired  after  his
death,  the  indiscriminate  severity  with  which  he  cen-
sured his  contemporaries  seems  to  bespeak  the  im-
pugner  of  certain  principles,  rather  than  of  personal
vices.  All  the  great  poets  of  his  day  fell  equally  under
his  lash ;  for  all  of  them  offended  equally  against  the
independence  of  the  Eoman  muse.  He  exercised
the  freedom  of  his  pen  even  upon  ^Emilianus  and
Laelius,  but  kept  his  raillery  within  such  bounds  as
to  escape  the  persecution  which  had  befallen  Xasvius.1
Bitter  were  his  sarcasms  on  the  old  Roman  or  Sabine
patricians,  who  deserved  rather  from  their  manners
to  be  deemed  Greeks2,  and  he  exposed,  we  may  be-
lieve, with  rude  scorn  the  sophistry  and  impiety  of
the  foreign  philosophers.3  Accordingly,  Lucilius
made  a  deep  impression  upon  his  age  in  rallying  the
austere  virtues  of  the  nation  around  the  principles  of
antiquity.  Many  a  grave  master  of  a  Roman  house-

1  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  1.,  and  the  Scholiast  in  loc.  He  also  attacked  M.
Scsevola.  Cic.  de  Orat.  \.

•  Lucil.  apud  Cic.  de  Fin.  i.  3.  :

"  Grfecum  te,  Albuti,  quam  Romanum  atque  Sabinum,
Maluisti  dici."

s  Lactant.  div.  Jnst.  v.  15.:  "Lucilius  apud  quern  disserens  Nep-
tunus  de  re  difficillima.  ostendit  non  posse  id  explicari,  nee  si  Car-
neadera  ipsum  Orcus  remittat."

40  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

hold,  disgusted  with  the  loose  morality  of  the  Greek
models  of  taste,  involved  in  one  sweeping  condemna-
tion all  who  cultivated  the  detested  language l,  and
long  resisted  the  current  of  fashion,  in  training  his
children  in  the  frugal  habits  and  modest  discipline
of  his  ancestors.2

But  the  seductions  of  the  most  harmonious,  flexible
imitative  and  copious  of  languages  proved  irresistible.
theaRSmanf  Even  Lucilius  himself  could  not  refrain
literature.  from  interweaving  Greek  words  with  the
homely  staple  of  his  Latin  style.  In  the  common
intercourse  of  life  Greek  became  a  fashionable  vehicle
of  expression.  The  example  of  Cicero  in  his  letters
confirms  the  allusions  of  Lucretius  to  the  practice  of
mingling  the  two  languages  freely  together  in  familiar
conversation.  The  Roman  nobles,  when  they  sate
down  gravely  to  the  composition  of  their  own  his-
torical memoirs,  adopted  sometimes  the  idiom  of  the
vanquished  foreigner  in  preference  to  their  own3 ;
or,  if  they  aspired  to  the  distinction  of  greater
originality,  still  devoted  themselves  to  the  imitation

1  Cic.  de  Orat.  ii.  66. :  "  M.  Cicero  senex nostros  homines

similes  esse  Syrorum  venaliurn,  ut  quisque  optime  Grace  sciret,  ita
e>se  nequissimum."

3  Horace  alludes  to  the  old-fashioned  practical  education  of  some
of  the  Roman  youth  even  in  his  day.  (ArsPoet.  325.)  Cicero  says
(de  Ley.  ii.  23.)  that  in  his  childhood  the  XII.  Tables  were  committed
to  memory:  "quasnunc  nemo  discit."  Varro,  apud  Non.  in  v.  Assa
voce:  "In  couviviis  pueri  modesti  ut  cantarent  carmine  antique  in
quibus  laudes  erant  majorum,"  i.  e.  the  old  family  ballads :  comp.
JJionys.  A.  P.  i.  79.  Cicero  would  revive  the  recital  of  these  family
records,  as  a  commendable  but  obsolete  practice  (de  Leg.  ii.  24. ).

3  Albinus,  Lucullus,  and  perhaps  Sulla,  wrote  their  memoirs  in
Greek.  The  dictator  adopted  the  name  of  Epaphroditus  when  he
addressed  himself  to  Greek  correspondents.  Polyb.  xl.  6.;  Plut.
Lucull.  1.  The  son  of  the  elder  Scipio  Africanus  wrote  an  histori-
cal work  in  Greek.  Cic.  Brut.  19.  Of  the  familiar  use  of  Greek  in
common  speech  we  have  two  remarkable  instances.  It  will  be  re-
membered that  Caesar,  on  seeing  Brutus  among  his  assassins,  is
said  to  have  exclaimed  in  Greek,  KOI  eru  riKvov,  and  Casca's  call  for
aid  was  in  the  same  language,  aSeA^e,  £oT)0ei.  Suet.  Jul.  82. ;  Plut.
Cas.  Brut.

CU.  XXII.  UNDER THE EMPIRE  41

of  his  most  illustrious  authors.  This  premature  in-
troduction to  the  best  of  models  proved  more  fatal
to  the  excellence  of  the  Romans  in  poetry,  than  in
any  other  walk  of  literature.  Imagination  is  seldom
found  to  survive  the  birth  of  self-consciousness  and
reflection.  The  noblest  poetical  compositions  of  the
age  of  CaBsar  were  mere  imitations  or  paraphrases.
Sublime  invention  and  vigorous  powers  of  versifi-
cation were  cramped  in  Lucretius  by  the  trammels
of  a  subject  unworthy  of  his  genius,  to  which  he  was
attracted  by  an  undue  admiration  of  foreign  models.
The  formal  adaptations  of  Catullus,  elegant  as  they
are,  fall  far  short  of  his  occasional  pieces  in  the
charms  of  genuine  simplicity.  Whenever,  indeed,
the  Romans  ventured  to  rely  on  themselves  alone,
their  productions  may  rank  among  the  noblest  efforts
of  the  true  poetical  temperament.

This  rage  for  imitation,  however,  conduced  un-
doubtedly to  the  diversion  of  the  mind  ^^n
from  politics  and  the  real  business  of  life,  oratory
and  thus  became  an  engine  of  no  mean  importance
in  preparing  the  Roman  people  for  a  monarchical
usurpation.  The  general  diffusion  of  literary  taste
among  the  nobility  enlarged  the  circle  of  their  inte-
rests, and,  immersed  in  the  study  of  writers  of  an  age
long  past  away,  they  could  forget  the  troubles  and
perils  of  their  own.  One  intellectual  occupation
alone  remained,  which  recalled  them  habitually  to
the  scenes  of  daily  life,  and  bound  them  fast  to  the
wheel  of  political  excitement.  The  Roman  noble
was  by  position  and  education  an  orator.  From  his
early  youth  he  was  instructed  in  eloquence  as  an  art ;
he  was  drilled  and  disciplined  for  the  business  of  the
forum,  at  least  as  carefully  as  for  the  camp.  To
the  Roman  people  he  must  address  himself  in  the
language  of  the  people  themselves;  he  might  clothe
his  harangue  in  more  fashionable  phraseology  for  the
perusal  of  his  associates :  but  he  must  speak  so  as  to

42  HISTORY OF THE BOMANS  CH.  xxil.

be  understood  by  a  homely  and  uneducated  popu-
lace. Whatever  allowance  we  may  make  for  the
revisal  which  Cicero  probably  bestowed  on  his  written
orations,  they  still  remain,  on  the  whole,  an  imperish-
able monument  of  the  spoken  language  of  the  nation.
Accordingly,  the  skill  of  the  political  orator  appeared
in  nothing  more  than  in  combining  a  technical  know-
ledge of  the  rules  of  rhetoric  with  a  pure  and  idiom-
atic Latin  style.  It  was  the  great  merit  of  the  mother
of  the  Gracchi  that  she  had  bred  up  her  children  in
the  simplicity  of  their  native  tongue,  of  which  they
availed  themselves  effectively  in  their  popular  ha-
rangues.1 Q.  Catulus  also  and  L.  Crassus  were  cele-
brated for  their  vernacular  diction  at  a  time  when
the  study  of  Greek  models  had  corrupted  most  of
their  contemporary  speakers.2  But  these  illustrious
men  had  themselves  drunk  deep  of  the  fountains  of
foreign  art :  the  persuasiveness  of  their  eloquence
was  derived  in  no  slight  degree  from  their  acquaint-
ance with  the  empirical  science  of  the  rhetoricians.
They  had  renounced  the  control  of  the  antique  pre-
judices which  were  still  striving  to  restrict  the  studies
of  the  Roman  youth,  and  stood  in  the  first  rank  as
patrons  of  the  modern  or  liberal  style  of  oratory.  For
in  this  department  of  intellectual  exertion,  also,  there
was  the  same  struggle  between  the  old  and  new,  the
domestic  and  foreign  element,  as  we  have  already
remarked  in  so  many  others.  In  the  flourishing
period  of  the  Roman  commonwealth,  the  art  of
speaking  was  in  fact  the  art  of  governing.  It
was  only  in  the  familiar  society  of  the  rulers  of
the  state  that  mysteries  so  important  were  to  be

1  Cic.  Brut.  58.:  "Legimusepistolas Cornelia? matris  Gracchorum-
apparet  filios  non  tarn  in  gremio  educates  quam  in  sermone  matris."

2  Cic.  Brut.  35.:  "Fait  in  Catulo  sermo  Latinus,  quse  laus  dicendi
non  mediocris  ab  oratorihus  plerisque  negkcta  est." Of  Crassas
(c.  58  ):  "Latinc  loquendi  et  sine  molestia  diligens  elcgantia."

CH.  xxn.  UXDER THE EMPIRE.  43

sought  and  communicated.1  From  the  first  the
nobles  regarded  with  jealous  apprehension  tanghtbythe
the  pretepsions  of  the  Greek  rhetoricians  rhetoricilu"-
who  opened  their  public  schools  for  instruction  in
eloquence.  The  foreign  intruders  were  repeatedly
ordered  to  quit  Eome ;  but  the  taste  they  had  in-
spired, the  interests  they  had  developed,  were  not  to
be  repressed :  the  young  aspirants  for  forensic  honours
repaired  to  schools  of  art  beyond  the  sea  and  returned
from  Athens  and  Apollonia,  Mytilene  and  Rhodes,
partisans  of  the  Attic  or  Asiatic  style  respectively,
but  equally  contemptuous  towards  the  old  homely
Italian.  Ultimately,  even  Roman  teachers  began  to
give  public  instruction  in  the  art  of  rhetoric l ;  but
either  they  were  not  qualified  to  compete  with  the
Greek  professors,  or  fashion  refused  to  countenance
them.  When  Cicero  as  a  young  man  wished  to  avail
himself  of  the  Latin  exercises  over  which  Plotius
presided,  his  advisers  recommended  him  rather  to
train  himself  for  public  life  by  declaiming  in  Greek.2
But  the  decay  of  the  ancient  ideas  was  still  more
apparent  in  another  quarter.  The  vitals  of  Decay  of
the  republic  were  corrupted  in  the  corrup-  Slic'ipUne.
tion  of  her  legions.  In  the  course  of  the  last  two
centuries  a  great  change  had  taken  place  in  the  com-
position of  the  Roman  armies,  a  still  greater  in  their
habits  and  sentiments.  In  ancient  times  only  the
wealthier  citizens  had  served  in  the  legions,  armed
and  equipped  according  to  the  class  assigned  to  them

1  Cic.  Brut.  72. :  "  Nee  id  solum  domesticse  consuetudinis,  nt
dudum  de  Lseliorum  et  Muciorum  familiis  audiebamus."

1  Suet,  (de  Cl.  Rhet.  1.)  cites  the  edict  of  the  censors,  A.  u.  662,
by  whom  the  Latin  rhetoricians  were  branded  as  pernicious  inno-
vators. It  does  not  appear  that  they  were  expelled,  or  their  schools
closed.  Plotius  and  his  principal  followers,  Gnipho,  Otacilius,  and
Clodius,  were  freemen.  The  Romans  did  not  consider  their  pro-
fusion creditable  to  a  man  of  ingenuous  birth.  See  Ellendt,  proleg.
in  Cic.  Brut.  p.  xv.

3  Cic.  Ep.  ad  Titinium.  apud  Saeton.  de  Cl.  Rhet.  2.

44  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxn.

by  the  censors.  They  were  wont  to  go  forth  a  few
days'  journey  from  their  homes,  and  return  at  the
close  of  a  few  weeks'  campaign  to  take  part  in  the
elections  or  ceremonies  of  the  city,  and  enjoy  the
sweets  of  domestic  life.  Originally  the  state  had
afforded  her  defenders  no  pay  for  a  service  demanded
alike  from  all  who  could  maintain  themselves  in
the  field  by  their  own  means.  Occasions,  indeed,  had
frequently  occurred  when  the  citizens  had  resisted
the  consul's  summons,  and  refused  to  serve  till  their
complaints  were  redressed  by  the  senate  ;  but  when
once  enlisted  and  bound  by  their  military  oath,  and
still  more  their  military  training,  their  conduct  had
been  as  exemplary  as  their  courage,  and  the  Roman
imperator  had  rarely  had  to  contend  against  the  mu-
tinous spirit  of  his  generous  soldiery.  But  this  ad-
mirable discipline  seems  to  have  been  first  broken
down  in  the  long  series  of  years  during  which  the
legions  were  occupied  in  the  conquest  of  Spain.
Eemoved  so  long  and  so  far  from  their  own  hearths
and  the  associations  connected  with  them,  demo-
ralized at  the  same  time  by  the  repeated  licence  to
plunder,  the  vigorous  exertions  of  Cato  and  Scipio
^Emilianus  could  restore  only  for  a  moment  a
healthy  tone  of  obedience  in  the  camps  of  the  con-
querors.1 Meanwhile,  the  rapid  decrease  of  the
middle  class  of  citizens  from  which  the  soldiers  of
the  republic  were  drafted,  rendered  the  recruitment
of  the  legions  constantly  more  difficult.  It  was  in
vain  that  C.  Gracchus,  among  the  various  measures
of  his  tribunate  for  conciliating  the  favour  of  the
commons,  sought  to  bribe  them  to  military  service
by  making  the  state  pay  for  their  clothing.  This
was  a  great  step,  at  least  in  principle,  towards  the
conversion  of  the  temporary  service  of  the  citizen
into  the  establishment  of  a  standing  army.  But  the
reform  of  Marius  struck  a  deeper  blow  at  the  insti-

1  Veil.  ii.  5.;  Floras,  ii.  18.

CH.  xxii.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  45

tutions  of  the  infant  republic.  He  opened  the  ranks
to  all  classes  of  citizens  without  pecuniary  qualifica-
tion.1 Important  as  this  change  was,  its  necessity
was  so  distinctly  felt  that  it  does  not  appear  to  have
roused  the  decided  opposition  of  the  nobles.  The
proletaries  of  over-crowded  Rome  won  the  great
victories  over  Jugurtha  and  th'e  Cimbri ;  but  the  new
recruit,  without  home  and  acres,  wife  and  family,
transferred  to  his  leader  the  devotion  he  owed  to  the
state.  The  camp  and  not  the  city  became  the  centre
of  his  dearest  interests.  The  names  of  the  senate  and
people  by  which  he  was  sworn  were  speedily  forgotten,
but  he  loved  his  centurion  and  he  worshipped  his
eagles.  Military  service  now  became  the  profession
of  a  life;  the  manners  and  sentiments  of  the  paid
swordsman  corresponded  with  his  occupation;  the
legionary  was  known  in  the  Suburra  by  his  gait  and
language,  as  surely  as  by  his  arms  and  accoutrements.
Whenever  an  expedition  was  announced  which  pro-
mised booty,  such  as  those  to  the  opulent  regions  of
the  east,  the  ranks  of  the  army  were  crowded  with
volunteers,  unprincipled  and  imperious  ;  the  veteran
despised  the  reward  of  a  few  acres  of  land,  and  quitted
his  plough  to  buckle  on  his  sword,  at  the  call  of  a
favourite  commander.2  He  claimed  as  his  own  the
spoils  of  the  conquered  enemy,  and  if  baulked  of  his
prey,  refused  to  follow  in  the  pursuit.  A  proconsul,
such  as  Lucullus,  who  strove  to  temper  the  severities
of  war  with  clemency  and  moderation,  was  baffled  by
the  mutinous  spirit  of  his  troops,  and  checked  in  the
mid  career  of  victory.  The  audacity  of  the  private
soldier  was  encouraged  by  the  example  of  centurions
and  tribunes :  the  imperator  found  it,  for  the  most
part,  easier  and  more  profitable  to  give  the  rein  to
licence  than  to  curb  it.  Meanwhile,  the  cohorts
transplanted  from  the  banks  of  the  Tiber  took  root

1  SalUist,  B.  J.  86. ;  Flor.  iii.  1.;  Val.  Max.  ii.  3.  1.

2  Compare  Liv.  xxxix.  22.

46  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH..XXII.

on  the  margin  of  the  Nile  and  the  Orontes.  The
garrisons  of  the  Syrian  frontier  were  transferred,
through  a  series  of  years,  to  the  command  of  each
successive  proconsul.  The  troops  which  Gabinius
carried  into  Egypt  fixed  their  abodes  there  after  his
return  to  Rome.1  The  soldiers  of  the  republic  com-
pared themselves  with  the  regular  battalions  which
guarded  the  thrones  of  Oriental  monarchs;  they
envied  the  splendour  of  their  equipments  and  the
lavish  profusion  of  their  pay ;  above  all,  the  honours
rendered'  to  them  by  nobles,  and  the  fear  they  in-
spired in  the  people.

In  the  healthier  days of  the  commonwealth  the
senate  had  been  described  as  an  assembly

Corruption  of „  , .  . ,. .  , ,  ,  . 1

the  Romau of  kingfs  i  in  dignity  and  substantial  power

generals.  ' J. ,  j i. J

every  member  01  that  august  order  had
deemed  himself  the  equal  or  the  superior  of  monarchs
on  their  thrones.  The  consul  who  went  forth  from
Rome  at  the  head  of  his  fellow-citizens  to  overthrow
the  dynasties  of  Greece  and  Asia,  had  returned  to
resume  his  place  in  the  city  with  the  proud  simpli-
city of  a  private  senator.  But  these  antique  virtues
were  rapidly  corrupted  by  contact  with  the  forms
and  shows  of  royalty.  The  series  of  years  to  which
the  proconsul's  command  became  frequently  extended,
weaned  him  from  his  attachment  to  home,  and  accus-
tomed him  to  pomp  and  power  inconsistent  with  re-
publican manners.'  Surrounded  by  officials  whose
fortunes  depended  on  his  favour,  supported  by  a
soldiery  which  acknowledged  no  law  but  his  word,
and  fawned  upon  by  courtiers  and  vassal  potentates,
he  forgot  the  sentiments  of  his  birth,  and  resigned
himself  to  the  charms  of  sovereignty.  Sulla  was
fascinated,  like  the  Spartan  Pausanias,  by  the  allure-
ments of  Asiatic  pomp  and  the  contagious  example

1  C03S.  B.  C.  ill  110. ;  Duruy,  Hist,  des  Itomains,  ii.  44.  The  van-
quished legionaries  of  Crassus  were  content  take  up  their  abode  in
Parthia.

CH.  xxil.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  47

of  despotism.  Pompeius  dreamed,  in  his  Alban  villa,
i  >f  the  guard  of  state  and  the  robe  of  honour,  and  the
silken  canopies  of  Syria  and  Armenia.  The  East
was  the  grave  of  many  a  great  Roman  virtue,  and  we
have  traced  a  change  even  in  the  character  of  Caesar
from  the  fatal  seductions  of  the  capital  of  Egypt.

Such  was  the  general  decay  of  principles  and  cor-
ruption of  manners  which  marked  the  era  concludes
of  the  foundation  of  the  imperial  govern-  remarks-
ment.  It  contained,  indeed,  elements  both  of  good
and  evil,  and  the  progress  of  this  history  will  derive
some  of  its  chief  interest  from  the  attempt  to  dis-
criminate between  them.  We  have  beheld  a  nation,
still  full  of  life,  still  instinct  with  energy,  just  arrived
at  the  culminating  .point  of  its  glories  in  the  career
most  appropriate  to  its  genius  ;  the  conquered  world
lies  prostrate  at  its  feet,  and  for  a  moment  it  seems
to  have  achieved  the  second  and  greater  triumph
over  its  own  passions.  The  task  now  lies  before  it
of  consolidating  its  acquisitions  and  imparting  civili-
zation to  its  subjects.  In  modern  times  all  moral
and  political  speculation  is  forward-looking,  and  is
full  of  anticipations  of  new  discoveries  in  happiness
and  knowledge.  But  the  Roman  statesman  and
philosophers,  with  their  strong  practical  instincts,
took  no  such  comprehensive  survey  of  the  destinies
of  their  race.  Cicero's  writings  may,  I  believe,  be
searched  in  vain  for  a  single  expression  of  reliance
on  the  progressive  improvement  of  mankind.  The
two  poles  of  his  philosophy,  between  which  he  wavers
with  perpetual  oscillation,  are  regret  for  the  past  and
resignation  to  the  present.  Caesar,  while  the  un-
seasoned fabric  of  his  own  institutions  was  tottering
around  him,  derived  no  consolation  from  belief  in  a
providential  government  of  the  world.  At  the  mo-
ment of  launching  his  country,  as  faith  might  have
fondly  persuaded  him,  on  a  career  of  tranquil  ex-
pansion and  comprehensive  culture,  the  founder  of

48  HISTORY OF  THE EOMANS  CH.  xxn.

the  empire  closed  bis  eyes  to  the  future  and  shrank
from  even  guessing  at  the  end.  The  old  beliefs  of
the  primitive  ages,  which  had  done  something  at
least  to  temper  prosperity  and  sweeten  the  ills  of
life,  had  perished  to  a  poisonous  core  in  a  shrivelled
husk.  The  science  of  ethics  was  apparently  ex-
hausted. It  had  finished  its  career  in  blank  disap-
pointment, and  there  was  no  faith  or  courage  to
commence  it  afresh.  Alexander  wept  on  the  margin
of  the  eastern  Ocean  that  there  were  no  more  lands
to  conquer;  Caesar,  from  the  furthest  bourn  of  philo-
sophic speculation,  may  have  confessed  with  a  sigh
that  within  the  visible  horizon  of  human  intuitions
there  were  no  more  provinces  for  reason  to  invade.
The  Great  Disposer  had  yet  another  leaf  to  turn  in
the  book  of  His  manifold  dispensations  ;  but  the  rise
and  progress  of  a  new  religion,  with  vigour  to  control
the  jarring  prejudices  of  nations  and  classes,  asserting
supernatural  facts,  and  claiming  divine  authority,
appealing  with  equal  boldness  on  the  one  hand  to
history,  on  the  other  to  conscience,  shaping  an  out-
ward creed,  and  revealing  inward  ideas,  the  law  of
the  simple  and  the  science  of  the  wise,  exalting
obedience  in  the  place  of  ambition,  and  expanding
patriotism  into  philanthropy,  was  the  last  offspring
of  the  womb  of  Time  that  Caesar  could  have  imagined,
or  Cicero  have  ventured  to  anticipate.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  U.NDER THE EMPIRE.  49

CHAPTER  XXIII.

Proceedings  upon  the  death  of  Caesar. — The  exploit  of  the  liberators
meets  with  no  favour  from  the  people. — Antonius  unites  with
Lepidus,  and  obtains  the  Dictator's  treasures  and  papers. — Pre-
tended compromise  and  decree  of  amnesty. — Caesar's  acts  are  ra-
tified and  his  will  disclosed. — Public  obsequies  decreed  him. —
Antcnius  delivers  the  funeral  harangue,  which  inflames  the  people
against  the  liberators,  and  creates  a  tumult,  in  which  they  are  com-
pelled to  conceal  themselves.  (A.U.  710.  B.C.  44.)

THE  struggle  was  over,  Csesar  had  ceased  to  breathe,
and  for  a  moment  the  eyes  of  his  assassins  consternation
encountered  each  other  across  his  body.  on^hVdeathof
When  they  looked  around  them,  the  hall  was  c<ESar-
already  vacant.  The  senators  had  fled  with  precipi-
tation ;  centurions,  lictors,  and  attendants,  who  had
accompanied  the  dictator  within  the  precincts  of  the
curia,  had  vanished  from  the  scene1,  and  the  harangue
which  Brutus  was  about  to  utter  commanded  no  lis-
teners. Antonius,  whose  detention  at  the  door  gave
him.  the  fairest  opportunity  of  escape,  had  slipped
through  the  crowd,  exchanged  clothes  with  a  slave  or
client,  and  made  his  way  unperceived  to  his  house  in
the  Carinae.  Fly,  shut  your  doors,  fly  !  was  the  cry  of
the  panic-stricken  senators2 ;  for  none  could  tell
where  the  next  blow  of  the  assassins  might  fall,  or
what  movement  their  deed  might  excite  among  the
murdered  man's  adherents.  Both  parties  had  arms
within  reach.  On  the  one  hand  Decimus  Brutus
had  provided  for  his  friends'  defence  by  stationing  a
body  of  gladiators  in  the  Pompeian  theatre  hard  by,

1  Cicero  (de  Divin.  ii.  9.)  speaks  of  Caesar  as  killed,  "tot  centurio-
nibus  suis  inspectantibus."  We  must  allow  for  some  rhetorical  am-
plification in  this  description.

•  Dion,  xliv.  20.:  Boo^-res,  <f>fvy(,  KAetf,  tpevyt,  K\ex.
VOL.  III.  E

50  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxni.

where  the  populace  was  already  assembling  to  wit-
ness the  shows  of  the  arena :  on  the  other  the  city
was  filled  with  the  dictator's  veterans,  who  had
mustered  there  in  unknown  numbers,  some  to  ac-
company him  in  his  projected  expedition,  some  to
pay  him  the  last  honours  on  the  eve  of  his  depar-
ture, more,  perhaps,  from  mere  restlessness  and
licentious  idleness.  The  feelings  of  the  populace
itself  were  unexplored :  during  Cesar's  short  tenure
of  power  it  had  wavered  with  more  than  usual
capriciousness :  none  could  guess  how  far  the  rami-
fications of  the  conspiracy  had  spread,  which  was
seen  to  comprise  members  of  factions  so  widely
different.  Lepidus,  the  master  of  the  horse,  now
just  about  to  assume  his  provincial  government  in
Gaul  and  Spain,  was  hovering  outside  the  walls
completing  his  military  preparations.  Forbidden
by  his  imperium  from  entering  the  gates,  he  had
not  been  prevented  from  attending  the  meeting  of
the  senate  beyond  them,  and  was  probably  a  witness
of  the  deed  which  had  thrown  Kome  into  consterna-
tion. At  this  crisis  he  was  not  wanting  in  energy.
He  had  one  legion  quartered  in  the  island  of  the
Tiber,  a  force  sufficient,  perhaps,  in  the  general
confusion,  to  seize  the  command  of  the  city.  To
this  force  he  immediately  repaired.  In  the  first
moment  of  suspense  he  crossed  over  into  the  Campus
Martius,  and  despatched  to  Antonius  an  assurance  of
support.1

The  affright  of  the  senators  soon  communicated
The  liberators  itself  to  the  populace,  and  spread  through
for™m,dan°dthe  evei7  Part  of  the  citv-  Confusion  and
mngueshthe  tumult  reigned  far  and  wide  ;  houses  were
people.  entered  and  violence  committed;  accord-

ing to some  accounts  even  blood  was  shed.2 The

1  Appian,  Bell.  Civ.  ii.  118.

2  Appian,  /.  c. If  blood  was  shed  it  was  probably  the  work  of
thieVes  and  plunderers. Decimus  had  his  gladiators  well  in  hand,

A.tr.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  51

swordsmen  of  Decimus  occupied  the  deserted  place?
of  the  fathers,  and  the  assassins  gladly  availed  them-
selves of  this  support,  while  they  marched  forth
from  the  senate-house  brandishing  in  their  right
hands  their  bloody  daggers,  and  wrapping  their
togas  about  their  left  arms,  for  defence  against  a
sudden  attack.  They  reached  the  forum  preceded
by  a  cap  of  liberty  hoisted  on  a  spear,  exclaiming
that  they  had  killed  a  king  and  a  tyrant.3  Having
gained  the  rostra,  Brutus  proceeded  to  deliver  a
studied  harangue,  destined,  as  he  conceived,  to
secure  the  applause  of  his  countrymen.  But  the
tumult  drowned  his  words  :  the  conspirators  exerted
themselves  to  express  by  gestures  the  assurance  that
justice  was  satisfied,  that  no  more  blood  should  be
shed;  and  their  leader  invoked  amid  the  din  the
name  of  Cicero,  as  the  strongest  pledge,  perhaps,
of  their  peaceful  intentions.  The  orator  flattered
himself  that  they  addressed  him  as  the  father  of  his
counti~y ;  but  Antonius  dared  afterwards  to  affirm
that  they  claimed  him  as  an  accomplice.2

The  consternation  with which the senators  had
dispersed  at  the  moment  of  the  murder,  Failing  to
might have revealed to the  conspirators  I^Ve^um,

.  ,i i  I-.,! c  j.1 • j j  i  j they  repair  to

with  how  little  favour  their  deed  would  thecapitoi.
be  entertained  by  them.  At  the  same  time  it
displayed  not  less  clearly  to  the  mass  of  the  citizens,
that  the  assassination  was  the  wild  stroke  of  revenge
or  rivalry,  and  not  ^the  judicial  act  of  legitimate
authority.  The  appeal  now  made  to  the  people  was
utterly  abortive.  The  populace  gazed  upon  the
blood-stained  crew  with  wonder  and  alarm,  but  in

and  would  have  allowed  them  no  such  excesses  as  this  writer  inti-
mates. Appian's  account  of  these  transactions  is  connected  and
graphic,  but  it  is  not  always  supported  by  the  other  authorities.

1  On  a  coin  of  Brutus  we  read  lib.  P.  R.  restitu.,  with  a  cap  of
liberty  (pileus)  between  two  daggers.  (Eckhel,  vi.  24.)  The  symbol
of  the  pileus  was  used  sometimes  by  the  later  emperors.

•  Cic.  Philipp.  ii.  12. ;  Dion,  /.  c. ;  Appian,  ii.  119.
E  2

52  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxm.

the  frenzy  of  its  excitement  could  neither  be  reasoned
with  nor  commanded.  Frustrated  in  their  first  vague
anticipations  the  assassins  had  no  ulterior  plan  or
policy.  But  every  minute  was  precious.  Under
pretence  of  offering  their  vows  in  the  temple  of
Jupiter,  they  ascended  the  Capitoline,  now  occupied
by  their  handful  of  armed  satellites,  and  thus  took
possession  of  the  heights,  imperfectly  fortified,  which
crowned  the  forum.  Undoubtedly  this  spirited  move-
ment is  to  be  ascribed  to  Decimus,  the  master  of
the  gladiators,  the  coolest  and  most  self-possessed
among  them.  This  retreat  saved  them  from  col-
lision with  the  armed  force  of  Lepidus,  which  occu-
pied the  forum  in  the  course  of  the  following  night.1
Meanwhile,  the  curia  was  abandoned  by  the  living,
The  body  of  an(l  the  marble  effigy  of  Pompeius  looked
riS'touT"  mutely  down  upon  the  prostrate  corpse  of
his  mighty  rival.  The  assassins  had  pro-
posed, at  first,  to  treat  the  body  with  the  formal
indignities  due  to  chastised  traitors,  and  drag  it
ignominiously  to  the  Tiber ;  but  they  soon  became
aware  that  their  own  position  was  too  precarious
to  indulge  in  an  act  which  might  provoke  popular
indignation,  and  all  their  care  was  directed  to  pro-
viding for  their  'own  safety.  During  the  first  hours
which  followed,  only  a  few  curious  eyes  intruded
upon  the  melancholy  scene:  at  last,  three  of  the
murdered  man's  attendants  summoned  courage  to
enter  the  hall,  and  removed  the  body,  stretched  upon
a  litter  imperfectly  supported  at  three  corners,  while
one  arm  hung  unheeded  over  its  side.2  Whether
this  was  done  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  or  whether
the  people  had  shrunk  at  mid-day  into  their  houses,

2  Besides  the  authorities  above  cited,  the  reader  may  consult  Livy,
Epit.  cxvi.,  Plutarch  in  the  contemporary  lives,  Floras,  Velleius,  &c.
There  is  some  confusion  among  them  as  to  the  order  of  the  events
which  follow,  but  Drumann  has  succeeded  in  unravelling  it.

2  Appian,  I.  c.  says,  with  graphic  conciseness,  avwufaws  ola  -rptis.

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  53

no  sensation,  it  appears,  was  created  by  the  passage
of  this  limping  pageant  to  the  pontifical  mansion
in  the  forum.  When  the  conspirators  withdrew  to
th£  Capitol  quiet  was  gradually  restored ;  it  was
affirmed  that  they  had  abjured,  from  the  first,  the
extension  of  their  vengeance  even  to  the  immediate
adherents  of  their  victim.  Some  of  them,  it  must
be  allowed,  had  urged,  as  a  necessary  precaution,
the  massacre  of  Antonius  also;  but  Brutus,  con-
sistent in  the  principles  which  he  brought  to  his
crime,  had  forbidden  an  act  which  might  seem  to
stain  with  a  trace  of  human  passion  the  purity  of
their  sublime  sacrifice.  The  philosopher  was,  pro-
bably, single-minded  in  this  self-restraint :  his  com-
panions were,  perhaps,  the  more  easily  persuaded
to  acquiesce  in  it,  from  the  current  suspicion  that
Antonius  was  no  sincere  friend  to  Caesar,  who  had
personally  offended  him,  and  by  whose  superiority
he  was  galled.1

Their  leader's  moderation  was,  indeed,  neither  felt
nor  understood  by  the  greater  part  of  the  The  con.pira.
selfish  crew  who  had  placed  their  enterprise  ^"hfca^i™"
under  his  direction.  But  from  the  first,  per-  g^JSio'Md
haps,  they  were  too  well  aware  of  their  real  olh« nobles-
weakness,  and  of  the  isolation  in  which  they  stood,
to  propose  following  up  the  projected  murder  of  the
chief  with  the  proscription  of  his  adherents.  If  they
examined  the  private  motives  by  which  they  were
personally  influenced,  they  cannot  but  have  been
convinced  that  the  murmurs  against  the  usurper

1  There  may  have  been  sufficient  grounds  for  this  suspicion  at  the
time;  nevertheless  it  should  be  observed  that  Anton ius's  subsequent
conduct  gave  no  colour  to  it.  There  is  at  least  no  known  authority
for  the  charge  of  ingratitude  brought  against  him  by  Seneca  (de
Benef.  v.  16.),  "  Ingratus  Antonius  in  dictatorem  suum,  quern  jure
ca?sum  pronuntiavit."  We  learn  from  the  recently  discovered  frag-
ment of  Nicolaus  of  Damascus  (ci.  36.),  that  some  of  Tatar's  friends
expressed  themselves  well  pleased  at  his  destruction:  a\ts  -vpdwov
tfepoTreiaj,  was  ;he  remark  ol'  one  of  them.

54  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXIII.

which  they  heard  or  uttered  were  the  offspring,  for
the  most  part,  of  malice,  jealousy,  and  pique  :  there
existed  no  general  indignation  against  him,  no  ran-
corous sense  of  injury  which  alone  might  avail  ^to
sanction  -measures  of  vengeance  against  his  followers.
For  the  sake  of  their  own  safety,  therefore,  they
paltered  with  the  treason,  and  temporized  with
the  men  whom  they  denounced  as  enemies  of  the
state.  The  policy  of  Brutus  was,  in  fact,  the  most
prudent,  as  well  as  the  most  merciful.  The  slaughter
of  Antonius  at  that  moment  would,  indeed,  have  cut
off  the  man  who  was  destined  eventually  to  crush
the  last  struggles  of  the  expiring  oligarchy ;  never-
theless, the  respect  now  paid  to  his  life  undoubtedly
averted  a  violent  and  sweeping  revolution  from  the
fury  of  the  exasperated  Ca?sareans.  It  gave  the
commonwealth  at  least  time  to  breathe,  to  collect  its
energies,  to  concert  its  measures,  and  defend  itself  in
fair  battle  on  an  open  field.  It  is  not  the  less  clear,
however,  that  the  conspirators,  in  adopting  their
leader's  counsel,  miscalculated  the  effect  of  their
bloody  stroke.  Cowering  behind  the  ramparts  of  the
Capitol,  they  awaited  with  anxious  forebodings  the
tardy  muster  of  their  political  friends.  But  the
chiefs  of  the  old  republic  had  retreated  from  the
impending  storm,  and  the  day  passed  without  an
outbreak  before  they  ventured  to  issue  from  their
concealment  and  brave  its  perils.  Of  those  who  now
presented  themselves  before  the  closed  gates  of  the
citadel  of  freedom,  one  of  the  first  was  Cicero  him-
self, who,  though  he  had  shrunk  from  answering  the
call  of  Brutus  in  the  forum,  had  speedily  recovered
his  courage,  and  now  evinced  a  generous  alacrity
in  enlisting  on  the  side  which  alone  assumed  an
attitude  of  authority.  One  by  one,  as  the  shades  of
evening  fell,  the  timid  nobles  mounted  the  Capito-
line,  and  introduced  themselves  to  the  confederates
assembled  in  feverish  debate.  Among  the  new  comers

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  55

were  Lentulus  Spinther,  son  of  the  late  consular,
Favonius,  the  shadow  of  the  sturdy  Cato,  M.  Aqui-
nus,  Octavius  Balbus,  a  Murcus,  a  Patiscus,  and
others.  It  is  mournful  to  recollect,  in  tracing  these
obscure  names,  how  many  victims  the  civil  war  had
made,  and  how  few  of  the  great  contemporaries  of
the  triumvirs  remained  to  sustain  the  republic,  now
tottering  to  its  last  fall.  The  deliberations  of  the
evening  were  suspended  by  the  hasty  greetings  which
intervened.  The  new  adherents  of  the  cause  were
anxious  to  claim,  by  the  loudness  of  their  approba-
tion, a  share  in  the  merit  of  the  deed  already  ac-
complished ;  and  Cicero  himself,  we  must  believe,
was  not  ashamed  to  lament  the  scruples  which  had
denied  him  initiation  in  the  plot.  But  the  libera-
tors, who  looked  to  the  events  of  the  moment  to
direct  their  course,  were  still  tardy  and  unprepared.
Cicero  might  fairly  claim,  from  his  reputed  wisdom
and  experience,  to  be  their  adviser.  He  urged
Brutus  and  Cassius  to  convene  the  senate  as  prae-
tors, in  the  absence  of  the  consuls,  and  assume
the  reins  of  government.  What  further  plan  or
policy  he  suggested  to  them  does  not  appear :  at
a  later  period,  indeed,  he  lamented  the  inactivity
which  prevailed  in  their  councils,  and  sighed  over
the  lost  opportunity,  when,  as  he  averred,  the  spirits
of  the  patriots  were  elated,  and  the  brigands,  as
he  called  the  Caasareans,  were  broken  and  dismayed.
If  the  remnant  of  the  senators  then  mustered  in  the
Capitol  had  decreed  themselves  a  legitimate  assembly
of  the  order,  and  fulminated  a  decree  to  annul  the
acts  of  the  dictator,  such  a  step  would,  at  least,  have
been  bold  and  decisive ;  and,  could  Cicero  have
claimed  the  merit  of  having  urged  it,  there  were
many  subsequent  occasions  on  which  he  would  not
have  failed  to  do  so.  But  he  intimates  neither  that
nor  any  other  advice  as  having  emanated  from  his
mouth  ;  and  we  are  compelled  to  conjecture  that

56  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxm.

his  counsel  extended  only  to  calling  the  senate
together,  and  leaving  the  future  conduct  of  affairs
to  the  course  which  chance  and  circumstances  might
dictate.

So  much,  however,  at  least  is  probable,  that  Cicero
Mistaken saw>  w^at  Brutus  and  his  associates  were

BruTJand for  the  mOSt Part blind  tO>  tne folly of HC-

hia  associates.  gotiating  with  Antonius  and  the  Csesareans,
The  most  reflecting  of  Roman  statesmen  was  well
assured  that  the  assasination  of  the  usurper  had
opened,  and  not  closed,  the  question  how  the  state
was  to  be  governed :  he  felt  that  the  party  of  the
tyrant,  if  not  absolutely  proscribed  and  massacred,
must,  at  least,  be  excluded  from  all  share  in  public
affairs.  But  he  was  fatally  mistaken  if  he  dreamed
that  the  senate's  authority  could  avail  to  re-establish
legitimate  order  ;  nor  did  he  fairly  estimate  the  pas-
sions of  the  multitude,  the  fury  of  the  veterans,  the
cupidity  of  the  legionaries,  and  the  general  love  and
admiration  which  invested  with  a  halo  of  glory  the
body  of  the  slaughtered  hero.  The  man  of  words
and  principles  could  not  comprehend  the  melancholy
truth  that  the  republic  could  only  be  saved  by  gold
and  iron,  by  buying  the  consent  of  the  populace,  and
the  support  of  the  soldiery.  Brutus,  indeed,  still
more  widely  erring,  clung  to  the  hope  that  Antonius
might  be  converted  to  the  generous  views  which  he,
perhaps,  alone  ascribed  to  his  own  associates.  He
trusted  that  Cassar's  followers  had  been  deceived  as
to  his  real  intentions  ;  that  they  had  attached  them-
selves to  him  as  the  proscribed  and  injured  candidate
for  legitimate  advancement,  not  as  the  deliberate  as-
sailant of  his  country's  laws  :  he  fancied  that  the  full
conviction  of  his  treason  against  the  state  would  pro-
duce tardy  repentance ;  at  least  he  conceived  that
the  ambition  of  Antonius  would  be  satisfied  by  lead-
ing, as  consul,  the  movement  of  law  and  freedom
which  the  liberators  had  commenced.  Accordingly.

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  57

Brutus  urged  Cicero  to  become  the  organ  of  commu-
nication with  the  fugitive ;  but  the  orator  declined
the  commission,  declaring  that  it  was  useless,  and
fearing,  perhaps,  that  it  would  be  personally  dan-
gerous. For  Antonius,  shut  up  in  his  private  dwell-
ing, had  doubtless  surrounded  himself  with  troops
of  Caesarean  veterans,  furious  men,  who  might  little
care  to  distinguish  between  an  actor  in  the  hateful
tragedy,  and  an  instrument  of  the  actors.

During  the  night  of  the  loth- 16th,  Antonius  had
not  been  idle. In  his  concealment,  he  had  Proceedings  of
obtained  information  both  of  the  movements  duriL  the
of  the  liberators,  and  of  the  attitude  as-  StVicth.'6
sumed  by  Lepidus. He  had  to  secure  himself  against
the  anticipated  violence  of  the  one  party,  and  at  the
same  time  to  watch  his  opportunity  for  cajoling  the
other. For  Lepidus,  at  the  head  of  the  only  regular
force  then  at  hand,  had  now  entered  the  forum,  aban-
doned  by  the  liberators; and  though  he  kept  up
communication  with  Antonius,  was  actually  in  a  posi-
tion to  overawe  the  powers  of  the  state,  and,  inde-
pendent both  of  consuls  and  senate,  assume  the  fallen
reins  of  government. The  bereaved Calpurnia  re-
ceived  her husband's  body  from  the  hands  of his
faithful  attendants,  and  while  she  was  yet  unassured
as  to  her  own  safety,  she  'determined  to  secure  the
most  valuable  of  his  effects  and  documents. From
her  mansion  overlooking  the  forum  she  be-  He  obtain, the
held  the  night  encampment  of  Lepidus;  P7££reofand
but  Antonius  had  already  obtained  her  con-  C(BSar'
fidence. In  the  course  of  the  night  she  contrived
to  remove  treasure  to  the  amount  of  four  thousand
talents  to  the  consul's  dwelling,  and  therewith  another
deposit,  which  became  of  still  greater  importance  to
him.  the  private  papers  of  the  deceased. Possessed
of  these  instruments,  among  which  was  the  testa-
ment and  other  memorials  of  the  dictator's  views.
Autonius  felt  at  once  the  vantage  ground  on  which

58  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  ca.  xxra.

he  stood,  and  conceived  a  deep  scheme  for  securing
efficient  support  to  his  own  pretensions.  As  soon  as
he  perceived  that  the  liberators  shrank  from  follow-
ing up  their  first  blow  with  reiterated  violence^  he
awaited  with  confidence  the  overtures  which  they  were
preparing  to  address  to  him.  At  the  same  time  he
proceeded  to  assail  the  only  rival  for  the  favour  of
the  Csesareans  who  had  yet  appeared  upon  the  scene,
with  offers  calculated  to  shake  the  bold  attitude  he
had  so  suddenly  assumed.  Antonius  was  well  aware
that  with  Lepidus  the  fever  of  ambition  was  but  a
momentary  excitement.  His  natural  indo-

and  effects  a ,  ,  ,  ,  .

combination  lencc  would  soon  prompt  him,  upon  re-
flection, to  embrace  the  offer  of  a  second
place,  rather  than  aspire  to  the  hazardous  pre-
eminence of  the  first.  The  consul  proposed  at
once  to  secure  for  him  the  succession  to  the  high
priesthood,  vacant  by  Caesar's  death ;  at  the  same  time
he  opened  negotiations  with  him  for  an  alliance  be-
tween the  son  of  the  one  and  the  daughter  of  the
other.  While  the  liberators  were  still  hesitating  as
to  their  course,  and  pondering  the  aimless  harangues
of  their  recent  associate,  Antonius  and  Lepidus  were
coming  rapidly  to  a  mutual  understanding,  and  the
only  power  in  Eome  was  on  the  point  of  placing  it-
self at  the  disposal  of  the  only  will  capable  of  direct-
ing it.

The  liberators  could  hardly  venture  to  .remain,
on  the  i6th  though  unassailed,  in  a  position  which  re-
it£>i*«t»  tained  only  the  tradition  of  defensibility,

appeal  again  - ...  , , . ,  „ '

to  the  people,  while  every  moment ol  their  absence  trom
the  centre  of  affairs  tended  to  consolidate  the  means
of  attack  upon  it.  The  citizens,  they  hoped,  after
one  night  of  reflection,  would  be  better  disposed  to
listen  to  them  :  the  moderation  of  their  views  had  been
tested,  they  conceived,  in  the  hour  of  victory,  by  their
voluntary  renunciation  of  ulterior  vengeance.  They
were  anxious  to  make  a  second  appeal  to  the  people

A.U.71C-B.C.44.  UNDER THE E5IPIRE.  59

in  the  forum ;  if  they  met  with  a  favourable  recep-
tion there,  they  might  require  the  doors  of  the  curia
to  be  thrown  open  to  them,  and  invite  the  consul,  to-
gether with  the  rest  of  the  senators,  to  join  with  those
members  of  their  order  who  had  already  sanctioned
the  tyrant's  overthrow.  Some  of  their  body  had  al-
ready despatched  emissaries  to  procure  a  few  venal
voices,  and  get  a  cry  raised  for  peace  and  mutual  re-
conciliation.1 It  was  politic  to  seem  to  accord  to
their  enemies  the  protection  which,  in  fact,  they
were  anxious  to  obtain  for  themselves.  This  cry  was
not  ill-received ;  but  the  attempt  to  extort  from  the
multitude  an  expression  of  approbation  towards  the
assassins  themselves  met  with  total  failure :  any  slur
cast  on  the  memory  of  the  murdered  man  was  fiercely
resented.  When  Cornelius  Cinna,  one  of  the  praetors,
a  kinsman  of  the  dictator,  came  forward  and  threw
aside  the  ensigns  of  his  office,  which  he  had  obtained
from  the  hands  of  one  whom  he  now  denounced  as
a  tyrant,  the  people  hooted  him  as  a  traitor  and
apostate.  At  this  juncture,  however,  Dolabella  came

to  the  aid  of  the  desponding-  faction  :  he  had  Doiabeiia
i  -Tii  •  .1  i sides  with

been  promised  the  succession  to  the  consul-  them.

ship  which  Csesar  was  about  to  resign.  Conscious  of  the
enmity  of  Antonius,  he  threw  himself  on  the  opposite
side,  and  sought  to  secure  the  prize  by  conferring  a
signal  service  on  the  murderers  of  his  patron  :  he  freely
declared  that  he  had  been  privy  to  their  design,  and
claimed,  with  voluble  pertinacity,  a  share  in  their
honours  and  dangers,  as  an  associate  who  had  only
been  prevented  by  accident  from  assisting  in  their
exploit.  He  had  the  audacity,  as  some  asserted,  to
propose  that  the  anniversary  of  the  murder  should  be
celebrated  as  the  birthday  of  the  commonwealth.
The  hired  clamourers  were  encouraged  by  this  demon-
stration to  raise  their  voices  again,  and  call  upon  the

1  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  121.

60  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXIII.

liberators  to  descend.  They,  on  their  part,  were  de-
lighted to  have  the  countenance  of  a  consul  (for
Dolabella  came  abroad  with  the  ensigns  of  the  office
which  he  claimed),  and  forgot  that  in  accepting  it
they  affixed  their  sanction  to  one  of  the  tyrant's
most  irregular  acts.  It  would  have  been  well  indeed
for  them,  if,  being  once  compromised  in  this  way,
they  had  accepted  the  pretender's  services  as  freely  as
they  were  proffered,  and  placed  him  openly  at  their
head,  to  exert  in  their  behalf  his  well-tried  abilities
as  a  mob-orator  and  unscrupulous  partisan.  But,
while  they  admitted  him  as  an  associate,  they  were
ashamed  to  follow  as  a  leader  one  of  the  most  noto-
rious creatures  of  the  usurper.

The  star  of  Brutus  was  still  in  the  ascendant.
The  confederates  still  childishly  confided  in  the  charm
of  his  ancestral  name,  and  imagined  that  the  dregs
of  the  Eoman  populace,  which  lived  upon  largesses,
could  be  animated  with  a  simple  love  of  constitu-
tional freedom.  Upon  this  point  the  moneyed  middle
class  also,  which  had  supported  and  profited  by  Cse-
sar's  financial  arrangements,  had  already  expressed
itself  supremely  indifferent.  The  city,  moreover,  was
crowded,  as  we  have  seen,  with  veterans  from  the
country,  great  numbers  of  whom,  weary  of  the  re-
tirement of  their  distant  farms,  had  quitted  their
allotments  and  nocked  into  Eome  to  enlist  in  some
new  enterprise  more  congenial  to  their  restless  spirits.
They  thronged  the  steps  of  the  temples,  the  forums
and  other  public  places,  ready  to  sell  themselves  to
any  adventurer,  and  quite  insensible  to  the  specious
abstractions  of  freedom,  patriotism,  and  justice.1
Brut,,8  From  such  an  audience  the  reasonings  of

popuifeeeinthe  the  liberators  were  little  likely  to  receive
the  forum.  intelligent  consideration.  Brutus  himself,
indeed,  was  listened  to  with  respect :  he  was  allowed

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iL  122.|

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  61

to  assume  a  tone  of  lofty  defiance  towards  the
slaughtered  usurper,  to  extol  the  courage  and
magnanimity  of  his  associates,  and  even  to  thank
Decimus  in  the  name  of  the  state  for  the  opportune
support  of  his  band  of  gladiators.  He  likened  the
deed  of  the  confederates  to  the  expulsion  of  the
Tarquins  by  his  own  ancestor  :  but  on  that  occasion,
he  remarked,  the  discarded  sovereign  was  at  least  a
legitimate  possessor  of  his  throne,  on  this  the  victim
of  a  righteous  indignation  was  not  only  a  tyrant,  but
an  usurper.  He  proceeded  to  claim  the  favour  of  the
citizens  in  behalf  of  Sextus  Pompeius,  in  the  unequal
struggle  he  was  yet  waging  for  "Roman  freedom
against  the  CaBsarean  lieutenants  ;  and  he  demanded,
at  the  same  time,  the  recall  of  Ca^setius  and  Ma-
rullus,  the  bold  defenders  of  the  republic,  who  had
been  banished  at  the  dictator's  instigation.

These  appeals  were  rash  and  ill-timed. They  met
with  no  favourable  response  from  the  popu-  He  is  coiaiy

i  mi  •  i  i r  11  received,  and

lace.  Ihe  conspirators  returned  crest-fallen  returns  with

i /~<  i  mi  it •  -i i c his  associates

to  the  Capitol.  The  mouldering  citadel  ot  to  the  capitoi.
the  infant  republic  was  not  tenable  against  a  regular
force,  and  the  nobles,  who  had  resorted  thither  in  the
first  moments  of  suspense,  now  abandoned  it  for  the
most  part,  and  repaired,  one  by  one,  either  to  their
own  homes,  or  to  the  quarters  of  Antonius  himself.1
It  was  now  ascertained,  beyond  a  doubt,  that  the
deed  of  deliverance  was  not  popular  among  the
citizens.  Even  their  full  assurance  of  Caesar's  resolve
to  keep  the  power  he  had  grasped,  and  throw  disguise
to  the  winds,  had  failed  to  shake  the  favour  with
which  his  countrymen  regarded  him.  Usurpation
had  ceased  to  be  regarded  with  horror,  and  the
empty  seat  of  the  usurper  only  invited  some  new
aspirant.  The  night  which  followed  was  passed  in
anxious  preparations  on  all  sides.  Antonius  never

1  Plutarch  (Brut.  18.)  pretends  that  Brutus  sent  them  away  that
their  safety  might  not  be  compromised.

62  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXIII.

faltered  for  a  moment.  As  consul  he  could  unlock
the  doors  of  the  public  treasury l ;  and  in  the  temple
of  Ops  he  found  hoards  accumulated  by  Caesar  to  the
amount  of  seven  hundred  millions  of  sesterces.2

With  these  unrivalled  resources  in  his
sefzeTthe  hands,  he  might  already  deem  himself
£L,'andC,aat  master  of  the  Roman  world.  He  caused
hi  "liberators,  the  city  to  be  illuminated  with  torches  and
mSrofthe  balefires,  and  required  the  magistrates  to

repair  to  their  posts,  and  to  transact  busi-
ness as  if  it  had  been  broad  day.3  The  liberators
now  sent  a  deputation  to  confer  with  him,  and
solicited  him,  in  a  humbled  self-excusing  tone,  to
summon  the  senate,  offering  to  submit  their  deed  to
its  deliberate  judgment.  At  the  same  time  those
among  Csesar's  adherents  who  were  most  nearly  in-
terested in  the  event,  the  veterans,  namely,  in  the
city,  who  had  received  from  him  lands  or  offices,  were
anxiously  bestirring  themselves.  Apprehensive  of  a
decision  which  should  reverse  their  patron's  acts,  they
sent  trusty  agents  from  house  to  house,  to  menace
the  senators  with  prompt  vengeance,  if  they  dared
to  tamper  with  their  rights.  The  senators,  however
much  a  large  portion  of  them  might  incline  to  favour
the  liberators,  were  alarmed  by  this  movement,  and
Antonius  soon  learnt  that  he  might  safely  convene
them,  and  trust  to  his  own  address  to  overreach  the
few  whom  the  prospect  of  military  violence  should
fail  to  terrify.  Thus,  everything  combined  to  render
the  consul  master  of  the  crisis.  Instead  of  directing
the  senate  to  assemble  in  the  curia  at  the  foot  of  the
Capitoline,  where  the  armed  band  of  Decimus  might

1  Besides  being  consul  himself,  Antonius  had  one  brother,  Caius,
praetor,  and  another,  Lucius,  tribune  of  the  people.

2  Cicero  (Philipp.  ii.  37.)  refers  to  the  official  documents  from  which
this  sum  was  known  to  have  been  deposited  there. The  orator  calls
itfunesta  pecunia,  insinuating  that  it  was  amassed  by  confiscation
and  rapine.

3  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  125.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  63

overawe  its  deliberations,  he  summoned  it  to  meet
him  in  the  temple  of  Tellus,  close  to  the  house  of
Pompeius  which  he  himself  occupied  in  the  Carinse.

Anxious  and  bewildered,  the  great  council  of  the
commonwealth  met  accordingly  before  day-

,  ,  ,,  .  ~&,r ,,-,, .? Meeting  of  the

break  on  the  morning  or  the  17th,  the  wnateonthe
festival  of  the  Liberalia.  Numerous  as  the
members  were  who  owed  their  seats  to  Caesar's  mere
appointment,  alien  as  they  were  in  blood,  and  at-
tached, as  might  be  presumed,  by  every  interest
to  the  cause  of  ( their  original  patron,  yet  their
natural  bias  had  so  far  yielded  to  the  spirit  of  class
and  the  influence  of  oligarchic  associations,  that  the
liberators  presumed  they  might  appeal  not  without
confidence  even  to  their  decision.  Emissaries  of  the
tyrannicides  also  had  been  at  work  through  the
night,  visiting  from  door  to  door,  and  claiming  the
suffrages  of  the  timid  and  reluctant  by  every  argu-
ment of  menace  or  persuasion.  At  an  early  hour
Cornelius  Cinna  repaired  to  the  curia  in  the  prast  or' s
robes,  which  he  had  so  lately  affected  to  discard.
Being  recognised  by  the  multitude,  he  was  mal-
treated, and  narrowly  escaped  being  torn  The  prffitor
in  pieces.  He  was  driven  into  a  neigh-  ^"edbyTfae
bouring  house,  and  the  mob  would  have  P0^'1"*-
wreaked  their  vengeance  upon  him  by  setting  it  on
fire,  had  he  not  been  saved  by  a  detachment  of
Lepidus's  soldiers.  This  violence  was  significant.
It  alarmed  the  senators,  and  gave  the  conspirators
the  first  practical  intimation  of  their  peril.  Had  it
been  directly  contrived,  as  was  perhaps  the  case,  by
their  disguised  enemy  himself,  it  could  not  have
answered  the  purpose  better.  For  hitherto  the  con-
sul had  abstained  from  intruding  an  armed  force
into  the  presence  of  the  assembly ;  he  now  suffered
Lepidus  to  bring  his  cohorts  to  the  spot,  and  sur-
round the  deliberating  senate  with  rows  of  drawn
swords.  The  aggression  of  Pompeius  at  Milo's  trial

64  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  ce.  xxm.

was  thus  turned  against  the  avengers  of  his  fall.
Moreover  the  badge  of  office  assumed  by  Cinna
indicated  that  Caesar's  creatures  were  not  disposed
to  surrender,  without  a  struggle,  the  advantages
they  enjoyed  by  his  appointment ;  and,  further,  that
they  had  now  recovered  the  hope  of  retaining  them,
of  which,  the  day  before,  they  seemed  to  despair.
Now,  too,  Dolabella  arrived  with  the  consular  fasces :
the  liberators,  as  we  have  seen,  had  committed  them-
selves to  the  support  of  his  claim,  and  Antonius,
who  saw  their  error  in  a  moment,  took  care  to  offer
no  opposition  to  it.  The  nobles  fell  headlong  into
the  trap.  They  regarded  the  conciliatory  demean-
our of  the  consul  towards  the  bitterest  of  his  enemies
as  the  strongest  proof  of  his  wish  for  a  peaceful
compromise ;  and,  in  discussing  the  terms  of  agree-
ment between  them,  they  relied  upon  Cicero's  elo-
quence or  adroitness,  which  had  so  often  proved
effectual  in  convincing  or  cajoling  the  statesmen  of
the  republic.

The  boldest  of  the  conspirators' friends  now  in-
The  discussion  sistcd that  they should be  invited, with

discloses  the  %.  ,  ,,  j

powerful  in- an  assurance  or  personal  safety,  to  attend

terests  opposed .  .  j  • i .1 •  c

to  any  con- the meeting,  and  mingle  their own sui-

demnstion  of  ' ,1  c .1 •  j

csaai-s  acts,  frages  with  those  of  their  order ;  thus
elevating  them  at  once  from  the  position  of  crimi-
nals or  at  least  defendants,  to  sit  in  judgment
upon  the  merits  of  their  own  deed.  Nor  did  An-
tonius think  fit  to  resist  this  claim:  he  was  well
assured  that  the  persons  in  whose  behalf  it  was
urged  would  not  venture  to  quit  their  asylum ;  nor
did  they.  Some,  however,  of  the  senators,  ascribing
his  concession  to  weakness,  took  courage  openly  to
applaud  the  exploit,  to  hail  the  liberators  by  the
popular  name  of  tyrannicides,  and  demand  a  public
reward  for  their  generous  self-devotion.  But  purer
patriots  again,  or  sterner  moralists,  here  interposed,
and  argued  that  to  reward  their  virtue  would  de-
tract from  its  sublime  simplicity :  the  meetest  re-

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  65

compense  of  such  a  deed,  they  urged,  would  be  the
consciousness  of  its  magnanimity.  Such  persons  in-
sisted that  the  public  approbation  should  be  signified
only  by  an  act  of  solemn  thanksgiving  to  the  gods.
Gradually,  as  more  voices  and  conflicting  passions
joined  in  the  discussion,  the  merits  of  the  actors
themselves  were  less  delicately  handled.  The  lan-
guage of  applause  grew  more  cold  and  measured;
the  views,  tempers,  and  characters  of  the  conspirators
were  canvassed  with  greater  severity.  The  assembly,
swayed  this  way  and  that  by  successive  speakers,
found  the  task  of  shaping  the  phrase  with  which
the  stroke  should  be  duly  qualified  more  and  more
arduous.  The  best  and  purest  among  them  shrank
from  the  deed  all  the  while  with  disgust,  and  only
voted  for  sparing  its  guilty  perpetrators  in  con-
sideration for  their  rank  and  birth :  the  idea  of
rewarding  them  as  public  benefactors  they  spurned
with  horror.1  Antonius  watched  the  eddying  cur-
rents of  opinion  with  secret  satisfaction.  As  the
progress  of  discussion  cleared  away  the  mists  of
passion  and  prejudice,  it  could  not  fail  to  become
apparent  how  directly  any  condemnation  of  Csesar
as  a  tyrant  must  lead  to  the  reversal  of  his  acts
and  cancelling  of  his  appointments.  Too  many  in
the  assembly  were  interested  in  his  disposition  of
honours  and  offices  to  pass  any  decree  which  should
invalidate  their  right  to  them.  Not  only  the  actual
magistracies  of  the  current  year  were  imperilled,
but  those  of  several  years  to  come.  Many  of  the
persons  to  whose  lot  they  had  fallen  were  in  fact  by
reason  of  their  youth,  or  from  other  disqualifica-
tions, legally  incompetent  to  enjoy  them.  Dola-
bella  himself  had  never  served  the  praetorship,  nor
had  he  attained  the  age  requisite  'for  the  con-
sulate. The  restoration  of  the  ancient  customs  of

1  Appian,  i'.  C.  ii.  126.
VOL.  III.  F

66  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXIII.

the  republic  would  prove  immediately  fatal  to
these  pretensions.  It  was  not  the  destruction  of
the  usurper,  but  the  condemnation  of  his  policy,
that  would  constitute  the  principle  of  the  counter-
revolution. To  avert  this  result,  a  thousand  in-
terests were  ready  to  start  up  in  arms.  At  the
first  moment  they  might  have  been  crushed,  silent
and  unresisting;  but  a  few  hours  of  reflection  and
debate  had  sufficed  to  give  them  expression,  and
to  nerve  them  with  resolution.  They  were  already
strong  enough  to  clog  the  hostile  votes  of  the
dictator's  foes,  to  invite  conciliation,  and  to  defy
violence.

While,  however,  the  debate  was  still  in  progress,
Antonius  and  while  many  who  were  personally  hostile
^pi^inttfe  to  Caesar  were  anxious  to  discover  a  middle
l°^Thl°over"  course,  by  which  his  usurpation  might  be
denounced,  while  at  the  same  time  his  dis-
tribution of  places  should  be  respected,  the  consul
took  measures  to  hasten  the  decision  by  a  cry  from
"without.  The  populace  in  the  forum  were  impatiently
awaiting  the  result  of  the  discussion.  A  message
arrived  requiring  the  immediate  presence  of  Antonius
to  soothe  them.  Accordingly  he  quitted  the  curia,
taking  Lepidus  with  him,  and  presented  himself  to
the  people.  A  voice  was  raised,  warning  him  to  be-
ware of  the  daggers  of  the  nobles.  He  threw  open
the  folds  of  his  toga,  and  revealed  a  glittering  breast-
plate beneath  it ;  thus  declaring  that  he  was  both
aware  of  his  danger,  and  prepared  to  repel  it.1  The
veterans  dispersed  among  the  multitude,  and  dis-
tinguished by  their  proud  gestures  and  licentious
cries,  thus  reminded  of  the  bloody  deed  by  which  their
chief  had  fallen,  shouted  aloud  for  vengeance :  but
these  exclamations  were  answered,  and  perhaps  over-
whelmed, by  still  more  general  cries  for  peace  and
conciliation.  Antonius  replied  that  peace  was  indeed

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  130.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  67

the  object  of  the  senate's  deliberations  :  hut  hmv,  he
added,  can  u-e  hope  to  secure  it,  since  the  most  solemn
oaths  have  failed  to  presewe  the  life  of  the  murdered
Ccesar.  To  those  who  called  for  vengeance,  he  ex-
pressed himself  still  more  boldly :  he  applauded  their
zeal  for  their  late  favourite,  and  declared  his  readi-
ness to  put  himself  at  their  head,  and  enforce  their
demand  :  but  as  consul,  he  urged,  it  was  his  duty  to
attend  upon  the  proceedings  of  the  senate,  to  act
as  the  instrument  of  its  decisions,  and  execute  its
decrees  for  the  common  weal.  And  this,  he  added
with  a  sigh,  ivas  ivhat  Ccesar  himself  was  wont  to
'!<_>:  he  postponed  his  own  personal  satisfaction  to
the  service  of  the  state:  and  Mmld  how  he  has  been
requited!  While  the  people  were  hanging  on  his
words  with  breathless  interest,  Antonius  abruptly  left
the  forum,  and  hastened  back  to  the  curia,  where  his
return  was  anxiously  awaited.  Meanwhile  Lepidus,
who  remained  behind,  as  was  doubtless  concerted  be-
tween them,  was  invited  to  ascend  the  rostra,  and
explain  to  the  multitude  in  a  set  speech  the  course
he  was  prepared  to  maintain.  His  counsels,  like
those  of  his  associate,  were  calm  but  resolute :  he
persisted  in  dissuading  violence,  while  he  acknow-
ledged the  ample  provocation  :  to  the  demand  for
peace  and  conciliation,  which  meant  the  confirmation
of  Csesar's  acts,  and  the  virtual  condemnation  of
the  murder,  he  bowed  with  affected  acquiescence,
though  taking  care  to  insinuate  that  peace  could
have  no  firm  guarantee  while  treason  stalked  abroad
with  unsheathed  dagger.  The  populace,  tutored
perhaps,  or  bribed  for  the  purpose,  offered  him
the  high  priesthood  by  acclamation.  The  will  of  the
people  was  thus  distinctly  signified.  They  demanded
peace ;  but  they  mourned  for  Caesar  ;  they  abhorred
his  assassins,  they  wished  to  honour  him  in  the  per-
sons of  his  friends  and  associates,  and  to  maintain,
out  of  respect  for  his  memory,  the  dispositions  he  had

F 2

68  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxm.

made.  Such  was  precisely  the  course  Antonius  de-
sired to  recommend,  and  he  could  now  vaunt  to
the  senate  that  his  influence  had  been  successful  in
quelling  the  fury  of  the  Csesareans,  and  diverting
them  from  a  bloody  revenge.

When  he  again  raised  his  voice  in  the  distracted
Antonms  assembly  the  consciousness  of  the  service  he
renate'o6  had  thus  performed  gave  additional  weight
let's  and'con-  to  his  persuasions.  Dolabella  had  pleaded
ap™ointsments.  earnestly  for  the  ratification  of  Caesar's  ap-
pointments, in  which  none  were  more  directly  inter-
ested than  himself.  It  was  not  the  appointment  of
magistrates  only,  added  Antonms,  that  was  imperilled
by  a  proposal  to  justify  the  murder  or  to  reward  its
perpetrators ;  the  whole  course  of  Caesar's  legislation
and  policy  was  exposed  to  reversal  by  a  decree  which
should  declare  his  supremacy  an  illegal  usurpation.
The  rights  which  he  had  extended  to  the  subjects  of
the  republic,  the  franchise  he  had  bestowed  upon
cities  and  nations,  the  colonies  he  had  founded,  the
lands  he  had  distributed,  the  adjustment  he  had  made
of  debts  and  liabilities,  the  whole  substance  of  the
legislation  of  the  last  five  years,  trembled  in  the
balance  ;  and  could  the  senate,  distracted  and  divided
as  it  was,  dare  to  provoke  the  consequences  of  such
a  wholesale  nullification  ?  This  would  be  indeed  to
commence  a  revolution,  and  where  was  the  power
which  could  control  its  progress  ?

All  this  was  ably  represented  by  Antonius. He

urged  the  senate  to pass over  the  fatal

T^ateHhe deed  in  total  silence,  and  leave  the  acts  of

the  dictator  as  it  found  them,  valid  and

unquestioned. By  this  time  the  great  majority  of

the  assembly  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  this

course  was  the  safest  and  wisest ;  and  they  left  the

exploit  of  the  liberators,  with  little  compunction,  to

the  judgment  of  posterity,  while  they  shrank  from

pronouncing  upon it  any sentence of  their  own.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  69

Cicero  followed  the  consul,  and  pleaded  in  behalf  of
the  same  specious  policy.  What  said  Cicero  ?  .  .  .
he  talked  Greek.1  He  adorned  his  eloquence  with
the  phrases  he  had  read  in  the  history  of  Athenian
revolutions,  of  amnesty  or  oblivion.  Let  the  past,  he
said,  be  forgotten,  and  let  every  man  go  free  and
unquestioned  for  his  share  in  it.2  The  deed  was
done,  and  it  was  useless  to  discuss  its  merits  ;  but  the
solemn  sanction  which  it  had  been  proposed  to  confer
upon  it  would  involve  the  innocent  with  the  guilty :
justice  and  policy  demanded  that  the  matter  should
now  be  hushed  up,  a  general  amnesty  proclaimed,  a
decree  not  of  pardon,  not  of  mercy,  not  even  of  tole-
ration, but  simply  of  oblivion.  Such  was  the  advice
of  Cicero  in  his  place  among  the  fathers  :  in  private
he  had  declared  himself  in  the  strongest  terms  in
approval  of  the  tyrannicide :  the  note  which  he  ad-
dressed to  Basilus  must  have  been  well  known,  and
its  sentiments  had  doubtless  been  reiterated  and
enforced  upon  others.  I  congratulate  you,  he  had
written,  /  rejoice  in  you,  I  love  you,  1  make  your
cause  my  own ;  give  me  your  love  and  confidence,
and  let  me  know  all  you  are  doing  and  proposing?
But  while  such  was  the  feeling  he  expressed  at  the
time,  and  continued  long  after  to  vaunt  on  all  public
occasions,  he  confessed  that  the  peace  of  the  city  and
the  last  faint  chance  of  senatorial  ascendancy  required
a  compromise  with  the  enemy  ;  nor  at  a  later  period,
when  he  found  how  grossly  he  had  deceived  himself
in  the  hope  of  its  success,  did  he  regret  the  con-
ciliatory policy  which  he  had  then  recommended.

1  Shakspeare,  Julius  Ceesar.

2  Cic.  Philipp.  i.  1.  (com p.  Plutarch,  Cic.  42.,  Dion,  xliv.  23 —
33. Veil. ii. 58.): "  Atheniensium  renovavi  vetus  exemplum  ;
Grsecum enim verbum usurpavi, quo  turn  in  sedandis  discordiis
usa erat civitas ilia ; atque omnem memoriara discordiarum
oblivione sempiterua delendam censui." The  d/uvrjo-ria  was  pro-
claimed at  Athens  upon  the  overthrow  of  the  thirty  tyrants. VaL
Max.  iv.  1.4.  3  Cic.  ad  Div.  vi.  15.

70  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXHI.

Undoubtedly  the  rash  act  of  the  liberators  had
This  was  the brought  matters  to  such  a  pass  that  any
bolder  counsel  was  full  of  manifold  peril.
° ° If  the  senate had resolved  to  extol  and

justify  the  murder,  it  must  have  been  prepared  to
proscribe  all  Caesar's  adherents,  and  defy  them  at
once  to  arms.  For  this  the  patriots  had  neither
the  strength  nor  the  courage.  The  gladiators  of
Decimus  in  the  Capitol  might  be  supported  indeed
in  a  few  days'  time  by  the  regular  troops  which,  as
proconsul  of  Gaul,  awaited  his  orders  in  the  Cisalpine
province.  The  wealthy  nobles  might  arm,  moreover,
their  retainers,  and,  as  in  the  days  of  Clodius  and
Milo,  fill  the  streets  with  their  paid  adherents.  But
the  legion  of  Lepidus  already  occupied  the  forum,
the  veterans  assembled  in  the  city  were  determined
to  maintain  their  personal  interests,  and  the  favour
of  the  urban  populace  was  backed  by  the  well-kuown
inclination  of  the  great  mass  of  the  provincial  popu-
lation. A  struggle  protracted  in  the  heart  of  the
empire  for  a  few  days  only  would  speedily  be  decided
by  the  armies  assembled  on  the  coast  of  Epirus,  com-
manded by  the  best  of  the  dictator's  officers,  and
already  glowing  with  admiration  for  the  presumed
heir  of  his  fortunes.  With  Antonius,  or  even  Lepidus
at  their  head,  they  would  array  themselves  on  the
side  of  formal  authority;  and  among  the  patriots
there  was  none,  perhaps,  at  that  moment  with  spirit
and  resolution  enough  directly  to  oppose  even  the
shadow  of  legitimate  power.  A  Scipio,  a  Domitius,  a
young  Pompeius,  might  have  ventured  to  rise  above
this  abject  subjection  to  mere  form  and  prescription  ;
but  the  greatest  men  of  the  party  had  all  perished.
Of  the  whole  number  of  the  conspirators,  if  Decimus
was  the  coolest  intriguer,  Cassius  alone,  perhaps,  had
the  talents  of  a  statesman  or  a  general.  Had  his
rank  been  higher,  and  his  superiority  over  his  asso-
ciates more  freely  admitted,  he  might  have  released

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  71

himself  at  this  moment  from  the  superstitious  de-
ference which  his  friends  continued  to  pay  to  the
empty  names  of  consul  and  imperator.  But  he  was
overawed,  partly  by  the  consciousness  of  the  com-
parative obscurity  of  his  name  and  lineage,  partly  no
doubt  by  the  ascendancy  which  Brutus  exercised  over
his  companions.

All  this  Cicero  may  have  considered,  and  probably
it  confirmed  him  in  the  policy  of  concili-  Nevertheless
ation  and  compromise  to  which  he  was  na-  p'0
turally  inclined,  and  from  which  he  had
swerved  once  only  in  the  course  of  his  career,  when
he  gave  the  fatal  order  for  the  destruction  of  Catilina's
associates.  The  persecution  with  which  that  bold
act  had  been  visited  had  impressed  him  with  deep
aversion  to  abrupt  and  violent  acts  of  state  craft.
He  would  have  been  the  last  to  counsel  the  desperate
stroke  of  the  tyrannicide :  once  accomplished  he  ac-
cepted and  strove  to  justify  it  for  the  sake  of  peace ;
but  he  shrank  from  carrying  it  out  to  its  consequences,
and  erecting  upon  it  the  edifice  of  a  counter-re-
volution. But  assuredly  he  was  not  deceived.  The
tyrant  was  dead,  but  the  tyranny,  he  well  knew,
survived.  The  tyrant  was  overthrown,  but  his  friend
and  chief  adviser,  the  man  second  only  to  himself  in
all  the  qualities  required  for  perpetuating  it,  remained
possessed  of  the  highest  office  in  the  state.  Antonius
had  entered  upon  the  political  inheritance  of  the
mighty  dead.  And  now  by  this  act  of  amnesty  he
seemed  to  be  confirmed  in  this  fearful  pre-eminence;
the  inheritance  was,  as  it  were,  formally  secured  to
him.  The  silence  of  the  fathers  on  the  murder  of
Caesar  was  deeply  significant.  It  served  to  brand  the
tyrannicide  as  an  useless  crime,  as  at  best  the  grati-
fication of  a  morbid  sentiment,  not  the  just  assertion
of  a  principle.  Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the
difficulties  in  which  the  senate  was  plunged  by  the
rash  violence  of  the  Ides  of  March,  it  is  clear  that

72  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH,  xxni.

the  specious compromise of  the Liberalia riveted
upon  it  the  chains  it  most  feared  and  execrated.
The senate decreed that no inquiry  should  be

made  into  Caesar's  assassination,  and  that
decre£jni^y  all  his  enactments  and  dispositions  should

remain  valid,  for  the  sake  of  peace.1  But
in  vain  did  the  patriots  shrink  from  their  principles
under  cover  of  this  plausible  phrase.  Few  even
within  the  walls  of  the  temple  really  anticipated
peace  as  the  result  of  this  decision.  The  fury  of  the
veterans  might  be  appeased  for  a  moment ;  but  the
disposition  of  the  distant  legions  had  not  yet  been
signified ;  the  attitude  of  the  young  Octavius  could
only  be  guessed ;  the  provinces  had  not  yet  learned
the  fate  of  their  only  benefactor.  Matius  could  pro-
phesy an  immediate  explosion  in  the  north,  and
menace  the  affrighted  Cicero  with  a  Gallic  tumult,  a
general  uprising  of  the  nations  beyond  the  Po.2  The
veterans,  at  the  same  time,  restless  and  dissatisfied
with  themselves  for  the  readiness  with  which  they
had  accepted  the  proffered  compromise,  threatened
to  break  out  into  violence  on  any  sudden  cause  of
excitement.  Such  an  occasion  was  close  at  hand.
Pi»o  demands  The  timidity  manifested  by  the  patriots
funeriuor  emboldened  Calpurnius  Piso,  the  dictator's

father-in-law,  to  request  the  senate  to
sanction  a  public  funeral  in  his  honour.  He  de-
manded also  that  the  provisions  of  his  testament
should  be  divulged.  The  fatal  consequences  which
might  ensue  from  a  public  spectacle  at  such  a
moment  and  for  such  an  object,  were  generally  fore-
seen and  feared.  Atticus,  a  shrewd  observer,  whis-
pered to  Cicero :  permit  the  funeral  and  all  is
lost.3  But  Antonius,  for  this  very  reason,  was

1  Cic.  Philipp.  ii.  39. :  "  pacis  causa." Ccmp.  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  135.

2  Cic.  ad  Att.  xiv.  1.:  "Matius  affirmat  .  .  .  minus  xx.  diebus  tu-
multum  Gallicum."  xiv.  4. :  "  Vereor  Gallica  etiam  bella."

3  Cic.  ad  Att.  xiv.  10.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  73

urgent  in  seconding  the  demand.  He  was  not  with-
out a  motive  indeed  for  wishing  the  will  to  be  kept
secret ;  for  he  wanted  to  spend  the  money,  and  give
no  account  of  it.  But  among  the  senators  were
doubtless  many  who  hoped  to  find  themselves  re-
membered in  the  testament  of  their  gracious  chief ;
and  while  they  advocated  its  publication  for  their  own
private  interests,  the  consul  was  content  to  surrender
one  advantage  for  the  prospect  which  he  clearly  fore-
saw of  another.  Accordingly  the  fatal  decree  was
issued,  that  the  body  should  be  honoured  with  mag-
nificent obsequies,  and  solemnly  reduced  to  ashes  in
the  Field  of  Mars.1

While  these  discussions  were  in  progress,  Brutus
and  Cassius  had  summoned  the  people  to  Brut™
the  Capitol,  to  plead  before  them  the  cause  p£p"e8 »"  u  ea

f  j.1-  T-T •  i_  • i j.1  L conciliatory

of  the  republic  in  accents  which  the  aspect  speech,
of  affairs  seemed  now  to  demand.  The  audience  was
less  interested  in  the  conspirators'  self-justification
than  in  their  renunciation  of  ulterior  views  to  the
prejudice  of  their  victim's  act  and  promises.  Brutus
guaranteed  to  the  veterans,  in  the  name  of  his  asso-
ciates, the  lands  already  assigned  them.  He  gave  an
additional  pledge  for  their  peaceful  possession,  by
undertaking  to  obtain  for  their  recent  occupants
compensation  from  the  public  treasury.  This  re-
ward, he  declared,  was  rightfully  theirs.  They  had
served  the  state  faithfully  in  Gaul  and  Britain :  their
later  and  less  loyal  acts  he  was  willing  to  ascribe  to
their  imperator  alone,  to  whom  they  bad  been  bound
by  the  military  oath.  It  had  been  customary,  in
bestowing  estates  upon  the  veterans,  to  impose  a
condition  that  they  should  not  be  sold  again  within
a  term  of  twenty  years  ;  they  were  meant  not  only
to  reward  the  soldier,  but  to  confine  him  to  the  spot,
and  keep  him  quiet.  From  this  restriction  Brutus

1  Suet.  Jul.  74.;  Appian,  B.  C.  ii.  136.

74  HISTORY  OF  THE KOMANS  CH.  xxra.

now  offered  to  release  them.  This  speech  it  was
proposed  to  publish,  as  the  deliberate  manifesto  of
the  republican  party.  Cicero  seems  to  have  been
consulted  about  revising  it.1  He  approved  of  its
style  and  substance ;  but  the  veteran  declaimer  la-
mented that  it  was  not  clothed  in  more  glowing  lan-
guage, to  inflame  the  passions  of  the  people,  rather
than  to  convince  their  judgment.2  The  character  of
Brutus's  oratory  was  dry,  logical  and  precise :  he  had
attempted,  perhaps,  to  define  the  amount  of  provo-
cation under  which  he  had  acted  against  Caesar,  after
so  long  serving  him,  and  to  explain  the  exact  con-
ditions under  which  an  oath  of  fidelity  might  cease
to  bind.  Such  refined  reasonings  were  little  suited
to  the  occasion.  Cicero  remembered  the  fiery  elo-
quence of  his  own  invectives  against  Catilina,  and
the  overwhelming  effect  of  his  broad  and  naked  as-
sertions of  the  enemy's  guilty  projects.  He  had
hoped  to  see  his  countrymen  touched  once  more
with  the  electric  spark  of  popular  enthusiasm,  such
as  he  had  then  flung  into  their  ranks ;  but  while  he
regretted  the  want  of  generous  ardour  in  the  leader
of  the  conspirators,  he  declined  the  ungracious  task
of  breathing  fire  into  their  frigid  proclamation.3

The  harangue  of  Brutus,  however,  in  the  con-
ihe  conspira-  sideration  it  evinced  for  the  classes  in-
£™c8°™eth°  terested  in  the  ratification  of  Ca3sar's  acts,
Sn,i",3a^d  had  touched  at  least  one  chord  of  grateful
ufnedTv  sympathy.  When  the  recent  decree  of  the
senate  came  to  be  submitted  to  the  people

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xv.  1.  B. :  "Brutus  noster  ad  me  misit  orationem  suam
habitant  in  concione  Capitolina,  petivitque  a  me,  ut  cam  nee  ambitiose
corrigerem  ante  quam  ederet."

-  Cic.  I.e. :  '•  Est  antem  oratio  scripta  elegantissime  sententiis,  verb:s
ut  nihil  possit  ultra.  Ego  tamen  si  illam  causam  habuissem  scripsis-
sem  ardentius."

3  Cicero  excuses  himself  to  Atticus  from  the  task  of  amending
Brutus's  speech  in  rather  hollow  language  :  "  Nemo  unquam
neque  poeta  neqne  orator  fuit,  qui  quemquam  meliorem  quam  se
arbitraretur."

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UNDEB THE EMPIRE.  75

in  the  forum,  there  was  a  general  disposition  to  ac-
cept the  solution  it  offered  of  the  crisis.  Cicero
mounted  the  rostra  with  more  alacrity  than  he  had
felt  for  some  years  before:  the  project  which  he
rose  to  advocate  was  plausible,  it  was  expected  with
favourable  ears,  and  it  was,  at  least  he  deemed  it,  his
own.  The  conspirators,  still  clinging  to  their  rock,
demanded  hostages  for  their  security :  Antonius  in-
spired them  with  confidence  by  his  promptness  in
sending  his  own  son  as  a  gage  of  his  fidelity.  He  had
with  some  difficulty  overruled  Lepidus,  who  had  ex-
pressed impatience  to  employ  force  against  the  as-
sassins.1 Force,  he  urged,  was  unnecessary  to  com-
plete a  victory  which  the  semblance  of  amity  had
already  secured.  He  persuaded  his  colleague  to
tender  his  son  as  an  additional  hostage,  and  thus  to
entice  them  from  their  stronghold  by  the  assurance
of  their  personal  safety.  The  liberators  descended
once  more  from  the  Capitol,  and  the  pretended  re-
conciliation of  the  rival  chieftains  was  ratified  by
private  hospitality.2  Lepidus  invited  Brutus,  his
wife's  brother,  while  Antonius  regaled  Cassius ;  the
rest  of  the  band  were  entertained  by  other  leaders
of  the  Caesareans.  An  anecdote  is  related  which  may
serve  to  illustrate  the  coarse  manners  of  the  times ;
it  preserves  at  least  the  characters  of  the  speakers.
Antonius,  it  is  said,  with  the  show  of  frank  and  care-
less gaiety  which  became  him  not  less  naturally  than
politics  and  war,  rallied  Cassius  on  the  deed  of  blood.
Have  you  still,  he  asked,  a  dagger  under  your  arm  f
To  which  Cassius  replied,  with  petty  irritability,  Yes
truly,  and  one  big  enough  to  slay  you  too,  if  you
presume  to  affect  the  tyranny.

The  evening  was  spent  in  these  hollow  festivities.
In  the  morning  all  parties  met  once  more  in  the
curia,  and  the  dictator's  assignment  of  the  provinces

1  Dion,  xliv.  34.  -  Plut.  Brut.  19.;  Dion,  /.  c.

76  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxm.

was  again  formally  confirmed. M.  Brutus  was  ap-
pointed to  the  government  of  Macedonia,

The  chief  ,,  , P

conspirators where the legions were assembled,  the

receive  the  j j  •  •,-  c i  • i

provinces  temper  and  disposition  oi  which  were  not
,y 'the  die-  yet  ascertained.  Cassius  obtained  Syria,
where  he  had  already  distinguished  himself,
and  acquired  personal  influence.  Trebonius  suc-
ceeded to  Asia,  Cimber  to  Bithynia,  and  Decimus  to
Cisalpine  Gaul.  This  ratification  of  Caesar's  acts
might  be  claimed  as  a  victory  by  either  party :  the
Caesareans  might  point  to  it  in  proof  of  the  esteem  in
which  their  lost  patron  was  still  held ;  while  the
nobles  triumphed,  not  less  speciously,  at  their  own
patrons  and  avengers  being  invested  with  such  im-
portant commands.  It  was  a  questionable  policy,
however,  on  their  part,  to  allow  all  their  chief  men
to  be  thus  removed  from  the  centre  of  affairs.  To
seek  the  armies  in  the  provinces  was  to  leave  the
focus  of  intrigue  unoccupied  at  home.  But  these
arrangements  were,  of  course,  only  prospective.
Brutus,  at  least,  and  Cassius  had  their  year  of
office  to  discharge,  and  their  prsetorial  functions
closely  bound  them  to  the  city.

Nevertheless  Antonius  grasped  in  his  own  hands

the  key  of  power. The  amnesty  he  had

confident9  to pretended  to  accept, but he resolved to

his  position. A  -  jij-j  j i..

counter-work,  and  he  did  not  doubt  to
overthrow  it:  his  position  was  a  firm  one,  and  he  had
set  his  foot  firmly  upon  it.  Himself  actual  and
legitimate  consul,  he  had  moreover  at  his  command
the  rank,  station,  and  military  power  of  Lepidus.
Dolabella,  his  colleague  in  the  consulship,  though
his  personal  enemy,  was  committed  to  the  same
policy  with  himself,  and  could  not  discard  his  sup-
port. His  brothers  Caius  and  Lucius  occupied  seats,
the  one  among  the  praetors,  the  other  among  the
tribunes.  The  rival  who  was  really  most  to  be
dreaded,  was  overlooked  by  all  parties,  and  was

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  77

still  absent  at  Apollonia  ;  and  Antonius  might  easily
flatter  himself,  that  he  who  had  outwitted  senates
and  statesmen,  could  wind  at  his  will  the  sickly  strip-
ling Octavius.  The  senate  had  voted  him  thanks
for  his  vigour  in  suppressing  the  accents  of  sedition
in  the  forum  ;  and  now,  when  a  public  funeral  was
demanded  for  Caasar,  it  relied  on  his  resolution  to
disarm  the  ceremony  of  danger.  Cassius,
it  is  said,  vehemently  opposed  this  conces-  i™i™gthT

cy i  j  •  • -iiri public  funeral

sion.  bimple  and  specious  in  itself,  he  «n<jreciuiof
foresaw  notwithstanding  that  it  would  pro-  is^ve"^
duce  fatal  confusion.  As  an  experienced  '
officer  he  knew  the  gusty  passions  of  the  veterans  ;
as  a  civil  magistrate  he  could  calculate  the  effect  of
rekindling  the  fury  of  the  populace.  But  Brutus,
still  confiding,  after  every  proof  to  the  contrary,  in
the  moral  effect  of  the  patriot  sacrifice,  gave  way
to  Piso's  instances,  and  exerted  his  fatal  ascendancy
over  his  associates  to  allay  their  misgivings.  So
also  when  it  was  proposed  that  Caesar's  will  should  be
recited,  Cassius  remonstrated,  under  the  conviction
that  it  would  be  found  so  framed  as  to  conciliate
popular  favour  towards  the  dictator's  heirs  and
adherents.  Brutus,  however,  on  the  other  hand,
with  the  same  lofty  disregard  of  consequences  as
before,  refused  to  countenance  this  opposition;  and
Antonius,  who  had  means,  in  either  case,  of  turning
the  decision  to  his  own  advantage,  allowed  the  prayer
of  Piso  to  be  crowned  with  success.

Caesar's heirs were the  three  grandsons of his
sisters. The elder  of  these  had  married  c^ar-*  win
successively  a  Pedius  and  a  Pinarius,  men  l^ivu,*,  the
of  ancient  and  honourable  families.1 Be-  p"ndp«' heir-
tween  her  two  descendants  in  the  second  generation

1  Suet.  Jul.  83.  The  former  of  these  names  docs  not  occur  earlier
in  Roman  history,  but  it  seems  to  be  selected  for  an  example  of
illustrious  descent  by  Persius.  Sat.  i.  85.  Suetonius  expressly
says  that  Q.  Pedius,  the  dictator's  heir,  was  his  grand-nephew,
and  not,  as  some  have  supposed,  his  nephew.  He  was,  however,

78  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxm.

their  great-uncle  divided  one-fourth  of  his  possessions ;
but  to  Octavius,  the  grandson  of  his  younger  sister,
he  had  bequeathed  the  remaining  three-fourths;
and  this  young  man  he  by  the  same  instrument
had  formally  adopted  as  his  son.  But  Csesar,  in  his
anxiety  to  found  a  dynasty,  and  bequeath  his  fortunes
and  his  policy  to  a  direct  successor,  had  still  hoped
for  issue  of  his  own.  In  the  event  of  such  hopes
being  realized,  during  his  own  absence  from  Eome,
he  had  named  certain  guardians  for  the  infant ;  and
these,  it  seems,  he  had  selected  from  among  the
very  men  who  were  at  the  moment  plotting  against
his  life.  So  little  did  he  anticipate  treachery  in
the  ranks  of  his  most  cherished  adherents.  He  had
even  placed  Decimus  on  the  list  of  persons  on  whom
he  destined  his  inheritance  to  devolve,  if  relinquished
by  his  appointed  heirs,  or  in  case  of  their  premature
decease.1  The  abuse  of  such  generous  confidence,
when  it  came  to  be  known,  made  a  painful  impression
upon  the  public  mind.

The  dictator,  it  has  been  said,  though  three  times

married,  had  never  had  male  children  in
m^ntof"1  lawful  wedlock.  His  only  daughter  Julia

had  died  prematurely,  and  been  quickly
followed  to  the  tomb  by  the  issue  of  her  ill-starred
union.  His  intention  of  instituting  Octavius  his
heir,  in  default  of  direct  descendants,  was  already
well  understood ;  but  Cleopatra  presumed  on  the
power  of  her  fascinations,  or  on  the  project  currently
ascribed  to  him  of  making  her  his  wife,  and  had
indulged  the  hope  of  extorting  from  him  the  recogni-
tion of  a  child  of  her  own,  of  which  she  pronounced
him  the  father.2  For  the  interests  of  this  child,

many  years  older  than  Oetavius,  having  served  as  a  legatus  in  Gaul
in  the  year  696.  The  antiquity  of  the  Pinarian  house  is  commemo-
rated by  Livy,  i.  7.

1  Suet.  I.  e.;  Plutarch,  CCES.  64.;  Appiati,  ii.  143.

2  Cicero  apparently  discredited  this  claim,  and  predicted  that  it
would  soon  be  forgotten.  Ad  Alt.  xiv.  1.  A.:  "  De  regina  rumor  ex-

A.L.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  79

whom  she  had  named  Csesarion,  she  had  come,  as  was
surmised,  to  Borne :  during  the  terrible  days  which
succeeded  her  lover's  assassination,  she  had  shrunk
from  the  public  eye;  and  when  the  recital  of  his
testament  frustrated  her  hopes,  she  departed  almost
unnoticed  from  the  city  in  which  she  had  so  lately
hoped  to  occupy  a  throne.1  Little  did  she  dream,
in  that  bitter  moment  of  disappointment,  how  soon
similar  hopes  would  again  be  permitted  to  revive,
and  how  near  she  should  arrive  once  more  at  the
same  dazzling  elevation.

The  splendid  inheritance  which  the  master  of
the  commonwealth  could  confer  upon  his  Ca«»rbe-
chosen  favourites,  was  burdened  with  mu-  i&miS'^ci'ie
nificent  legacies  to  the  people  to  whom  he  ^sy^ddthe
owed  his  pre-eminence.  The  same  spirit  Tiben
of  ostentatious  generosity  with  which  he  had  re-
quited their  applause  by  erecting  his  porticos  and
halls  for  public  business,  had  prompted  him  to
bequeath  to  the  citizens  for  their  recreation  the
palace  and  gardens  he  possessed  beyond  the  Tiber.2
The  lower  slopes  of  the  Janiculan  hill  were  at  this
time  abandoned  almost  entirely  to  the  mean  dwellings
of  the  poor.  It  was  in  this  district  that  the  Jews
before  the  time  of  Augustus  mostly  congregated.3
Some  tombs  of  famous  men,  particularly  one  of
Numa,4  were  shown  within  it,  but  it  contained  few
public  buildings  except  the  temple  of  Fors  Fortuna.
Although  inclosed  within  the  city  walls,  the  Trans-
tibertiue  region  retained  all  the  appearance  of  a
suburb,  and  a  large  part  of  it  was  included  in  the

tinguetur."  But  Oppius  was  employed  by  Octavius  at  a  later  period
to  publish  a  refutation  of  it  (Suet.  Jul.  52.),  and  the  master  of  Kome
did  not  think  himself  secure  while  such  a  rival  existed.

1  C  c.  ad  Att.  xiv.  8.

*  Suet.  Jul.  83.;  Dion,  xliv.  35.;  Appian,  B.  C.  iL  143.;  Plut.
Brut.  20.

3  Philo,  Leg.  ad  Cai.  23.

4  Dionys.  Hal.  Antiq.  ii.76. ;  Plut.  Num.  22.;  Liv.  xl.  29.

80  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxin.

gardens  of  which  we  are  speaking.  The  temple  just
mentioned  lay  at  the  first  milestone  from  the  Porta
Flumentana,  or  river  gate  *,  and  marked  the  extreme
point  of  Caesar's  property.  The  gardens  stretched
thither  along  the  bank  of  the  Tiber,  from  the  Pa-
latine bridge,  some  mutilated  arches  of  which  are
now  distinguished  by  the  name  of  Ponte  Rotto.
The  Sublician  bridge  abutted  upon  them  in  the
centre,  and  we  may  amuse  ourselves  with  imagining
that  the  palace  of  the  Pamphili,  standing  close  to
its  head,  occupies  the  exact  site  of  the  mansion  itself
which  furnished  a  temporary  residence  to  the  queen
of  ancient  beauty.  When  this  estate  was  surrendered
to  the  use  of  the  Roman  people,  the  halls  and  corri-
dors would  be  devoted  to  the  reception  of  works  of
art,  and  objects  of  indoor  enjoyment;  while  the  gar-
dens, planted  with  groves  and  intersected  with  alleys,
would  furnish  a  grateful  alternation  of  shade  and  sun-
shine, for  recreation  in  the  open  air.2  It  would  be
adorned  with  shrubs  of  evergreen,  cut  and  trimmed
in  various  fanciful  shapes.  Statues  of  admired  work-
manship, the  spoil  of  many  an  Oriental  capital,  would
spring  from  gravelled  walks  or  parterres  of  native
and  exotic  flowers ;  and  ivy  would  be  trained  to
creep  in  studied  negligence  around  them.  Long
ranges  of  tessellated  pavements  would  vie  in  varie-
gated brilliancy  of  colour  with  the  roses  and  violets,
the  hyacinths  and  poppies,  which  satisfied  the  simple
taste  of  the  ancient  florists.3  These  gardens,  occupying
the  right  bank  of  the  river,  immediately  faced  the

1  Sec  the  Calendarium  in  Orelli,  Inscript.  ii.  392.

2  Cicero  praises  a  sunny  garden  (ad  Div.  xvi.  18.)  ;  but  a  pas-
sage in  Propertius  gives  a  vivid  picture  of  the  umbrageous  planta-
tions which  surrounded  the  patrician  villas  on  the  banks  of  the  Tiber:

"  Tu  licet  abjectus  Tiberina  molliter  unda,"  etc.  i.  14.  1.
1  Columella  (de  R.  R.  x.)  gives  a  long  list  of  the  glories  of  a  Roman
garden :  several  of  its  flowers  were  of  foreign  origin,  but  the  greater
part  the  native  produce  of  Italian  fields  and  woods,  improved  no
doubt  by  cultivation.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  81

slope  of  the  Aventine  hill,  and  lay  almost  in  its
morning  shadow.  At  a  later  period  Augustus  added
to  their  attractions  by  excavating  at  their  side  a
reservoir  for  great  naval  spectacles l ;  and  they  re-
mained for  several  generations  the  cherished  pa-
trimony of  the  Eoman  people.2  In  a  later  age
they  were  eclipsed  in  fame  and  fashion  by  the
more  gorgeous  creations  of  Titus,  Caracalla,  and
Diocletian.

Besides  this  munificent  present  to  the  Eoman
people  collectively,  the  dictator  had  be-  A]>0  a  sum  of
queathed  to  each  citizen  the  sum  of  three  S^^"*1**
hundred  sesterces,  or  rather  less  than  three  eTery  citiz€n-
pounds  sterling.  The  money  itself,  indeed,  was  not
forthcoming;  for  Antonius  had  already  disposed  o£
the  whole  treasure  which  had  fallen  into  his  hands.
But  Octavius  had  not  yet  arrived  to  discharge  his
patron's  legacies ;  many  formalities  and  some  chances
lay  between  the  public  avowal  of  these  generous  in-
tentions and  the  claim  for  their  actual  fulfilment;
and  Antonius,  in  the  meantime,  might  turn  to  his
own  account  the  grateful  acknowledgments  of  the
people  for  a  largess  they  might  never  be  destined
to  enjoy.  The  bare  recital  of  Cassar's  testament
operated  on  their  feelings  most  favourably  to  his
interests.  Now  for  the  first  time  they  were  fully
roused  to  a  sense  of  their  benefactor's  wrongs.  Now
for  the  first  time  the  black  ingratitude  of  Decimus
and  the  others,  his  confidants  and  his  assassins,  stood
revealed  in  its  hideous  deformity.  The  sense  of  per-

1  Comp.  the  Monumentum  Ancyranum,  col.  4. :  "Navalis  praeliispec-
taculum populo dedi trans Tiberim;"  Tac.  Ann.xii.  56.  "Ut  quondam
Augustus  structo  cis  Tiberim  stagno."  This  lake  extended  apparently
from  the  convent  of  S.  Francisco  to  the  church  of  S.  Cecilia.  Comp.
Suet.  Tib.  7-2.

2  Statins,  Sytv.  iv.  4,  5.

"  Continuo  dextras  flavi  pete  Tybridis  oras,
Lydia  qua  penitus  stagnum  navale  coercet
Ripa,  suburbanisque  vadum  prsetexitur  hortis."
VOL.  III.  0

82  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  xxni.

sonal  loss  stifled  every  specious  argument  that  could
be  advanced  to  extenuate  the  crime.  The  vindication
of  the  laws,  the  assertion  of  liberty,  the  overthrow  of
a  tyrant  and  a  dynasty  of  tyrants,  all  sank  at  once
before  the  paramount  iniquity  of  destroying  the  only
substantial  benefactor  the  Koman  people  had  ever
had.  Many  a  magistrate  or  conqueror  indeed  had
lavished  shows  and  festivals  upon  them;  the  city
owed  its  noblest  ornaments  to  the  rivalry  of  suitors
for  popularity  ;  but  these  were  candidates  for  honours
and  distinctions,  and  had  all  a  personal  object  to
serve  ;  while  the  bequest  of  the  murdered  Julius  was
deemed  an  act  of  pure  generosity,  for  the  dead  can
have  no  selfish  interests.

The  heralds  proclaimed  throughout  the  city  the
appointed  place  and  hour  of  the  obsequies.

The  public  .rrp  ,  r  , .  n

funeral  of  the  A  tuneral  pyre  was  constructed  in  the
Field  of  Mars,  close  to  the  spot  where  lay
the  ashes  of  Julia ;  for  the  laws  forbade  cremation
within  the  walls,  and  the  laws,  enacted  for  pur-
poses of  health,  were  reinforced  by  feelings  of
superstition.  But  the  funeral  oration  was  to  be
pronounced  in  the  forum,  and  a  temporary  chapel,
open  on  every  side,  modelled,  it  is  said,  after  the
temple  of  Venus  the  Ancestress,  was  erected  before
the  rostra,  and  gorgeously  gilded,  for  the  reception  of
the  body.1  The  bier  was  a  couch  inlaid  with  ivory,
and  strewn  with  vestments  of  gold  and  purple.  At
its  head  was  suspended,  in  the  fashion  of  a  warrior's
trophy,  the  toga  in  which  the  dictator  had  been
slain,  pierced  through  and  through  by  the  assassins'
daggers.  Calpurnius  Piso  walked  at  the  head  of  the
procession,  as  chief  mourner;  the  body  was  borne
by  the  highest  magistrates  and  most  dignified  per-
sonages in  the  state ;  the  people  were  invited  to  make

1  Suet.  Jul.  84.:  "Pro  rostris  aurata  tedes  ad  simulachrum  templi
Veneris  Genetricis  collocata."  These  were  divine  honours,  and  im-
plied the  apotheosis  of  the  hero.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  1'XDER THE EMPIRE.  83

oblations  for  the  pyre,  of  garments,  arms,  trinkets,
and  spices.  So  great  was  the  concourse  of  the
offerers,  that  the  order  in  which  they  were  appointed
to  present  themselves  could  not  be  preserved,  but
every  one  was  allowed  to  approach  the  spot  by  what-
ever route  he  chose  from  every  corner  of  the  city.
When  the  mangled  remains  were  deposited  in  their
place,  they  were  concealed  from  the  gaze  of  the
multitude:  but  in  their  stead  a  waxen  effigy  was
raised  aloft,  and  turned  about  by  machinery  in  every
direction  :  and  the  people  could  distinctly  mark  the
three-and-twenty  wounds  represented  faithfully  upon
it.1  Dramatic  shows  formed,  as  usual,  a  part  of  the
ceremony.  Passages  from  the  Electra  of  Attilius,  and
the  Contest  for  the  arms  of  Achilles,  a  celebrated
piece  of  Pacuvius,  were  enacted  on  the  occasion.
The  murder  of  Agamemnon,  and  the  requital  of
Ajax,  who  complained  that  in  saving  the  Greeks  he
had  saved  his  own  assassins,  furnished  pungent  allu-
sions to  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  and  moved
the  sensibilities  of  an  inflammable  populace.2

While  the  feelings  of  the  citizens  were  thus  melt-
ing with  compassion  or  glowing  with  re-  The«msui

.  .  ° r  , Antoniu.

sentment,  Antomus came  iorward  as  the  pronounces
first  magistrate  of  the  republic,  to  deliver  eulogy,
the  funeral  eulogy  due  to  the  mighty  dead. Histo-
rians and  poets  have  felt  the  intense  interest  of  the
position  he  at  that  moment  occupied,  and  have  vied
with  each  other  in  delineating  with  the  nicest  touches
the  adroitness  he  displayed  in  guiding  the  passions  of

1  Appian,  B.C.  ii.  147. avta^f  rts  inrep  rb  Xe'xoy  a.vSpf'iKf\ov  avrov
Koutropos  fK  KTjpou  TTfiTon)fj.fvov  -rb  fixv  "yap  crania,  MS  vn-nov  firl  Ae^ous
ou^  itaparo'  rb  5«  av5pfiKf\ov  e/c  (Hjxavris  iwf<TTpt<f>fTO  TTO.VTJ],  Kal  cHpaycu
rptis  leal  tticoffi  £>ip(hi<ra.v. So  ancient  is  the  Italian  taste  for  puppet-
show.

2  These  plays  were  selected  for  the  purpose. "  Inter  ludos  cantata
sunt  quaedam  ad  miserationem  et  invidiam  csedis  ejus,  accommodata
ex  Pacuvii  Armorum  judicio  : Men'  servasse,  ut  essent  qai  me
perderent  ?  et  ex  Attilii  Electra  alia  ad  similem  sententiam."  Suet.
Jul.  /.  c.

o  2

84  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXIII.

his  audience.  Suetonius  indeed  asserts  that  he  added
few  words  of  his  own  to  the  bare  recital  of  the  de-
crees of  the  senate,  by  which  every  honour,  human
and  divine,  had  been  heaped  upon  Caesar,  and  of  the
oath  by  which  his  destined  assassins  had  bound  them-
selves to  his  defence.  But  Cicero  tells  a  different
story.  He  speaks  with  bitter  indignation  of  the
praises,  the  commiseration,  and  the  inflammatory
appeals,  which  he  interwove  with  his  address.1  With
such  contemporary  authority  before  us,  we  may
believe  that  the  speech  reported  by  Appian  is  no
rhetorical  fiction,  but  a  fair  representation  both  in
manner  and  substance  of  the  actual  harangue.  The
most  exquisite  scene  in  the  truest  of  all  Shakspeare's
historical  delineations  adds  little  except  the  charm  of
verse  and  the  vividness  of  dramatic  action  to  the
-graphic  painting  of  the  original  record.

This  famous  speech  was  in  fact  a  consummate  piece
-character  of  °f  dramatic  art.  The  eloquence  of  Anto-
tus  harangue.  njug  vf&&  }egg  movmg  than  the  gestures

which  enforced  it,  and  the  accessory  circumstances
which  he  enlisted  to  plead  on  his  behalf.  He  ad-
dressed himself  to  the  eyes,  no  less  than  to  the  ears
of  his  audience.  He  disclaimed  the  position  of  a
funeral  panegyrist :  his  friendship  with  the  deceased
might  render  his  testimony  suspected.  He  was,
indeed,  unworthy  to  praise  Cassar :  the  voice  of  the
people  alone  could  pronounce  his  befitting  eulogy.
He  produced  the  acts  of  the  senate,  and  of  the  fac-
tion by  whose  hands  Caesar  had  fallen,  as  the  ground
of  his  appeal,  and  the  vouchers  of  his  assertions.
These  he  recited  with  a  voice  tremulous  with  grief,
and  a  countenance  struggling  with  emotions.  He
read  the  decrees  which  had  within  a  twelvemonth
heaped  honours  upon  Caesar,  and  which  declared  his
person  inviolable,  his  authority  supreme,  and  himself

1  Suet,  /.  c. ;  Cicero,  Philipp.  ii.  36. :  "  Tua  ilia  pulchra  laudatio,  tua
miseratio,  tua  cohortatio."  Comp.  Plutarch,  Brut.  20.,  Anton.  14.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  85

the  chief  and  father  of  his  country.  Were  these
honours  excessive  or  dangerous  to  the  state,  the
senate  had  bestowed  them :  did  they  even  trench
upon  the  attributes  of  the  gods,  the  pontiffs  had
sanctioned  them.  And  when  he  came  to  the  words
consecrated,  inviolable,  father  of  his  country,  the
orator  pointed  with  artful  irony  to  the  bleeding  and
lifeless  corpse,  which  neither  laws  nor  oaths  had
shielded  from  outrage.  He  paused,  and  the  dramatic
chorus  sent  forth  some  ancient  wail,  such  as  ages
before  had  been  consecrated  to  the  sorrows  of  heroes,
who  like  Caesar  had  been  kings  of  men,  and  of
houses  which  like  the  Julian  had  sprung  from  gods
and  goddesses.  Then  from  these  examples  of  high
fortune  and  its  tragic  issues,  he  passed  on  to  recite
the  solemn  oath  by  which  the  senate,  the  nobles,  and
among  them  the  conspirators  themselves,  had  devoted
their  hearts  and  hands  to  their  hero's  defence ;  and
thereupon  turning  with  glowing  emotion  towards  the
temple  of  Jupiter,  conspicuous  on  the  Capitol,  he
exclaimed:  And  I,  for  my  part,  am  prepared  to
maintain  my  vow,  to  avenge  the  victim  I  could  not
save.  Such  words  from  the  chief  magistrate  of  the
state  were  deeply  impressive.  The  senators  scowled
and  murmured.  Antonius  pretended  to  check  his
impetuosity,  and  address  himself  to  soothing  their
alarm.  After  all,  he  said,  it  was  not  the  work  of
men,  it  was  the  judgment  of  the  gods.  Caesar  was
too  great,  too  noble,  too  far  above  the  race  of  men,
too  nigh  to  the  nature  of  the  immortals,  to  be  over-
thrown by  any  power  but  that  of  divinity  itself.
Let  us  bow,  he  exclaimed,  to  the  stroke  as  mortal
men.  Let  us  bury  the  past  in  oblivion.  Let  us
bear  away  these  venerable  remains  to  the  abodes
of  the  blessed,  ivith  dice  lamentations  and  deserved
eulogies  !

With  these  words  the  consummate  actor  girt  his
robes  closely  around  him,  and  striding  to  the  bier,

86  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxm.

with  his  head  inclined  before  it,  muttered  a  hymn
to  the  body,  as  to  the  imag-e  of  a  god. In

It  stimulates  .  -  **  11,1

the  people  to  rapid  verse  or  solemn  modulated  prose  he
chaunted  the  mighty  deeds  and  glories  of
the  deceased,  the  trophies  he  had  won,  the  triumphs
he  had  led,  the  riches  he  had  poured  into  the  trea-
sury. Thau,  Ccesar,  alone  wast  never  v:orsted  in
battle.  Thou  alone  hast  avenged  our  defeats  and
wiped  away  our  disgraces.  By  thee  the  insults  of
three  hundred  years  stand  requited.  Before  thee
has  fallen  the  hereditanj  foe  who  burnt  the  city
of  our  fathers.  So  did  the  Potitii  and  Pinarii  recite
their  hymns  to  Hercules :  so  did  the  frantic  hiero-
phant  sing  the  praises  of  Apollo.1  The  flarnen  of
Julius  seemed  instinct  with  the  inspiration  of  the
altar  and  the  tripod,  while  he  breathed  the  frantic
devotion  of  the  ancient  faith.  The  blood-smeared
image  was  turned  this  way  and  that  for  all  eyes  to
gaze  upon,  and  as  it  seemed  to  writhe  in  the  agonies
of  death,  the  groans  of  men  and  the  shrieks  of  women
drowned  the  plaintive  accents  of  the  speaker.  Sud-
denly Antonius  raised  the  mangled  garment  which
hung  over  the  body  itself,  and  waving  it  before  the
people  disclosed  the  rents  of  the  murderers'  daggers.
The  excitement  of  the  populace  now  became  uncon-
trollable. Religious  enthusiasm  fanned  the  flame  of
personal  sympathy.  They  forbade  the  body  to  be
carried  to  the  field  of  Mars  for  cremation.  Some
pointed  to  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  where  the  effigy
of  the  demi-sfod  had  been  enthroned  in  front  of

1  Compare  with  Appian's  words  (J5.  C.  ii.  146.)  the  invocation  to
Hercules  in  Virgil,  j£neid,  viii.  293,  and  the  hymn  to  Apollo  in
Statins,  Thebaid.  i.  in  fin.  The  abrupt  transition  to  the  second
person  both  in  Virgil  and  Appian  is  a  striking  coincidence,  and
persuades  me  that  the  poet  has  strictly  preserved  the  proper
font  of  hymnody,  and  the  historian  the  genuine  tradition  of  this
act  of  hero-worship.  The  chord  which  awakened  the  religious
sentiment  of  the  Komans,  Shakspeare  has  neglected  or  forborne
to  touch.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  87

the  deity  himself,  and  demanded  that  it  should  be
burnt  in  the  holy  shrine,  and  its  ashes  deposited
among  its  kindred  divinities.  The  priests  stepped
forward  to  avert  this  profanation,  and  it  was  then
proposed  to  consume  the  body  in  the  Pom-  ^^  cause
peian  Curia,  whence  the  mighty  spirit  ^n^din1*
had  winged  its  flight  to  the  celestial  man-  the  forum>
sions.  Meanwhile  chairs,  benches,  and  tables  had
been  snatched  from  the  adjacent  buildings,  a  heap
of  fuel  was  raised  before  the  door  of  the  pontifical
mansion  in  the  forum,  and  the  body  snatched  by
tumultuary  hands  was  cast  upon  it  in  a  frenzy  of
excitement.  Two  young  men,  girt  with  swords  and
javelin  in  hand,  were  seen  to  apply  the  torch.1  Such
a  vision  had  appeared  in  ancient  times  in  the  heat
of  battle.  Castor  and  Pollux,  it  was  believed,  had
descended  more  than  once  in  human  form  to  save  the
republic.  A  divine  sanction  was  thus  given  to  the
deed :  every  scruple  was  overruled ;  and  it  was  re-
solved to  consume  the  hero's  remains  in  the  heart  of  his
own  city.  The  people  continued  to  pile  up  branches
and  brushwood ;  the  musicians  and  players  added
their  costly  garments  to  the  heap,  the  veterans  their
arms,  the  matrons  their  ornaments ;  even  the  trinkets
which  adorned  the  children's  frocks  were  torn  off,
and  offered  in  the  blazing  conflagration.  Caesar  was
beloved  by  the  Romans:  he  was  not  less  dear  to
the  foreigners  who  owed  so  much  to  his  ascendancy,
and  had  anticipated  so  much  more.  Gauls,  Iberians,
Africans,  and  Orientals,  crowded  in  successive  groups
around  the  pyre,  and  gave  vent  to  the  sense  of  their
common  misfortune.  Among  them  the  Jews  were
eminently  conspicuous.  Caesar  was  the  only  Roman
who  had  respected  their  feelings,  and  assured  them

1  The  narratives  of  Suetonius  and  Appian  require  to  be  com-
pared together.  The  pretended  vision  was  doubtless  contrived
to  counteract  the  superstitious  repugnance  to  burning  within  the
walls.

88  HISTORY OF THE KOMAXS  CH.  xxni.

of  his  sympathy.  Many  of  this  people  continued  for
several  nights  to  assemble  with  sorrow  and  resentment
on  the  spot,  and  littered  another  funeral  dirge  over
the  blighted  hopes  of  their  nation.

So  violent  a  demonstration  of  grief  could  not  stop
here. Brands  snatched  from  the  flaming

an*  turn  their .,  j ,  ,  , .

fury  upon  the  pile  suggested  the  most  obvious  vengeance,

awassine.  , .§  8 , ,  ,  rm.

and  ottered  the  readiest  weapons.  Ihe
crowds  streamed  away  from  the  forum  through  the
streets  :  the  houses  of  Brutus  and  Cassius  were  the
first  objects  of  attack.  The  liberators  indeed  had
fled,  and  the  rioters  were  repulsed  ;  for  in  Eome  every
noble  mansion,  with  its  slaves,  clients  and  retainers,
formed  a  domestic  fortress,  and  was  proof  against  a
sudden  assault.  When  the  excitement  of  the  multi-
tude was  somewhat  exhausted  by  these  fruitless  sallies,
it  was  at  last  persuaded  to  refrain  from  further  vio-
lence. The  assurance  that  the  chiefs  of  the  assassins
had  fled  from  the  city  helped  perhaps  to  calm  its
vengeful  passions.  One  unfortunate  man  fell  a  vic-
tim to  its  fury.  Helvius  Cinna,  a  devoted  adherent
and  flatterer  of  the  dictator,  was  mistaken  for  Cinna
the  praetor,  against  whom  the  populace  had  before
expressed  its  indignation  :  and  in  spite  of  his  frantic
appeals,  he  was  torn  in  pieces  on  the  spot.1  But
this,  it  would  appear,  was  the  only  blood  shed.  Caius
Casca  affixed  to  his  house  door  a  paper  notifying  that
he  was  not  the  Publius  Casca  who  had  taken  a
prominent  part  in  the  conspiracy.2  The  house  of
Bellienus,  a  freedman,  notorious  for  his  staunch  ad-
herence to  the  Pompeian  faction,  was  burnt  to  the
ground  ;  but  there  seems  no  reason  to  suppose  that
any  further  violence  was  committed.3  After  all  it  must

1  Plat.  Brut.  20.  who  calls  him  iroiriTiKbs  avi\p. See  the  story  of
his  dream,  Plut.  GOES.  68. Comp.  Dion,  xliv.  50.;  Appian,  B.C.  ii.
147.;  Suet.  Jul.  85.;  VaL  Max.  ix,  9,  1.

2  Dion.  xliv.  52.

3  Compare  the  real  Cicero,  Philipp.  ii.  36.,  with  the  pseudo-Cicero
in  Dion's  history,  xlv.  23.

.4.0.7 10-B.C.44.  T.NDER THE EMPIRE.  89

be  allowed  that  a  popular  commotion  in  ancient  Rome
was  a  tame  affair  in  comparison  with  the  riots  which
our  own  generation  seems  doomed  periodically  to
witness.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  most  de-
graded and  dangerous  class  of  the  population  of  mo-
dern cities  was  almost  unknown  under  the  institu-
tions of  slavery ;  and  that  the  interests  even  of  a  mob
of  Roman  citizens  were  opposed  to  indiscriminate
rapine  and  destruction.  But  even  this  may  not  suf-
fice to  account  for  the  comparative  harmlessness  of
their  popular  ebullitions.  Trained  from  infancy  in
habits  of  obedience,  and  impressed  with  a  deep  sense
of  the  majesty  of  law,  they  had  not  yet  been  de-
bauched by  the  fatal  consciousness  of  their  own  power.
The  time  was  coming  when  the  reins  of  government,
now  thrown  upon  their  necks,  would  be  resumed  by
a  steadier  and  stronger  hand  than  ever  ;  and  Rome,
amidst  all  the  excesses  of  its  nobles  and  the  degra-
dation of  its  principles,  was  never  held  for  a  day  in
possession  by  a  horde  of  plunderers.

90  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAPTER  XXIV.

Antonius  reassures  the  nobles  by  his  patriotic  policy — He  abolishes
the  dictatorship  for  ever,  and  represses  Caesarean  outbreaks. — His
crafty  use  of  Caesar's  papers. — He  assigns  lands  in  Campania. —
Octavius  returns  to  Italy  and  claims  Caesar's  inheritance. — His
favourable  reception  by  the  nobles  and  citizens. — He  discharges
the  dictator's  bequests  and  fulfils  his  obligations. — Antonius  re-
gards his  proceedings  with  jealousy. — The  liberators  abandon
Home. — Decimus  assumes  the  command  of  the  Cisalpine. — An-
tonius induces  the  senate  to  take  Syria  and  Macedonia  from  the
liberators,  and  bestow  them  upon  Dolabella  and  himself. — Brutus
attempts  to  recover  the  favour  of  the  people  by  the  Ludi  Apol-
linares. — His  disappointment. —  Pretended  reconciliation  of  An-
tonius and  Octavius,  whereby  Antonius  obtains  from  the  people
the  Cisalpine  province  with  the  army  of  Parthia  in  exchange  for
Macedonia. — Cicero's  despondency. — He  leaves  Italy,  but  pre-
sently returns  and  proceeds  to  Rome.  (A.U.  710.  B.C.  4-t.)

SUCH  was  the  disastrous  effect  of  the  ill-timed  con-
Antonius  cession  by  which  the  populace  had  been
summoned  to  behold  a  sight,  and  listen  to
wor(js  wMch  could  not  fail  to  inflame  their
restless  blood  to  madness.  The  deed  of  deliverance
was  repudiated  and  denounced ;  its  perpetrators  were
compelled  to  fly  or  to  hide  themselves ;  the  names
of  law,  of  patriotism,  of  the  republic,  were  ren-
dered odious  to  the  mass  of  the  citizens,  and  tyranny
was  justified,  applauded  and  avenged.  The  demand
for  a  public  funeral  had  net  been  made  by  Antonius,
nor  to  all  appearance  in  concert  with  him.  The
opening  of  the  will,  a  measure  which  could  not
be  disconnected  with  it,  thwarted  some  of  his
schemes,  and  he  had  thus  far  done  no  more  than
accept  a  proposition  advanced  and  supported  by
others.  But,  when  once  determined  on,  he  had
taken  the  management  of  it  into  his  own  hands.
The  selection  of  scenes  from  the  dramas  which

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMTIRE.  91

were  represented,  the  religious  colour  studiously
cast  over  the  whole  ceremony,  the  contrived  inter-
ference of  the  pretended  Dioscuri,  and  even  the
means  provided  for  the  suppression  of  the  disturb-
ance must  all  be  attributed  to  the  consul's  astuteness.
The  sudden  outpouring  of  popular  fury  not  less
suddenly  abated.  The  movements  of  Antonius  may
be  compared  to  the  rise  and  fall  of  an  inunda-
tion.1 As  the  stream  swells  all  is  terror  and  con-
fusion, but  as  soon  as  it  subsides  within  its  banks
the  confidence  of  the  husbandman  returns.  Alarmed
as  the  nobles  had  been  by  the  furious  outburst
over  which  the  consul  had  manifestly  presided,  no
sooner  did  he  calm  the  excitement  and  succeed  in
restoring  order  than  their  hopes  once  more  re-
vived, and  they  were  willing  to  rely  on  the  first
assurance  he  gave  of  his  determination  to  preserve
the  peace.  Exulting  in  the  terror  which  had  driven
his  most  dangerous  adversaries  into  concealment,  he
assumed  a  generous  and  frank  demeanour  towards
their  adherents,  and  invited  the  chiefs  of  all  parties
to  deliberate  with  him  in  private  at  his  own  house.
The  result  of  these  deliberations  he  shaped  into
measures  to  be  submitted  to  the  assembled  senate.
Every  question  propounded  to  him  he  answered,
says  Cicero,  firmly  and  consistently ;  not  a  word
did  he  yet  say  of  the  contents  of  Caesar's  papers.2
The  dictator  had  recalled  from  banishment  many
victims  of  the  oligarchy;  but  he  had  sternly  resisted
every  solicitation  in  favour  of  the  justly  proscribed
agitators  who  were  suffering  for  their  share  in  the
Clodian  disturbances.  The  nobles  apprehended  that
the  recent  amnesty  would  be  stretched  to  cover  these
criminals ;  and  they  were  prepared  to  esteem  it  a
mark  of  great  forbearance  on  the  consul's  part
when  he  proposed  to  relieve  one  only  of  the  num-

1  Drumann,  L  105.  -  Cic.  Philipp.  i.  1.

92  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

ber  from  banishment.  This  was  Sextus  Clodius,  a
man  of  low  origin,  but  a  client'  and  an  agent  of
the  notorious  tribune.  Antonius,  having  married
the  tribune's  widow,  was  interested  in  one  who  had.
proved  himself  unscrupulous  and  active  in  such  a
patron's  cause.  A  curious  letter  exists  which  he  ad-
dressed on  this  man's  behalf  to  Cicero.  The  consul
professes  to  ask  as  an  act  of  grace 1  the  pardon  of
this  devoted  adherent  of  the  orator's  deadliest  foe.
Cicero,  whom  so  hollow  a  compliment  could  not
really  deceive,  did  not  fail  however  to  reply  in  a
corresponding  strain  of  pretended  regard.  Both
were  equally  false  and  each  equally  conscious  of  the
other's  falsehood.  But  they  wrote  doubtless  for  the
public,  to  whom  they  knew  that  their  letters  would
be  communicated,  and  each  was  anxious  to  appear
as  a  peacemaker  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen.
There  was  another  point  on  which  the  nobles  were
jealous.  They  grudged  the  immunities  from  tri-
bute which  Caesar  had  bestowed  upon  various  states
and  cities,  an  indulgence  which  thwarted  the  tradi-
tional policy  of  their  administration.  On  this  point
also  they  were  anxious  to  extort  a  pledge  from  the
consul  that  he  would  abstain  from  following  the  dic-
tator's example.  Great  was  their  satisfaction  when
he  assured  them  that  he  meditated  no  such  boons.1
Sulpicius,  one  of  the  haughtiest  of  the  republican
faction,  now  came  boldly  forward,  and  demanded
that  no  further  public  or  private  grace  of  the  dic-
tator should  be  registered  in  the  archives,  and  An-
tonius at  once  plied  before  the  storm,  and  undertook
of  his  own  accord  to  desire  the  senate  to  pass  a
decree  to  that  effect.  Many  other  acts  and  sayings
of  the  consul  corresponded  with  this  auspicious  be-
ginning. The  senate  was  gradually  warming  more

1  Cic.  ad  Alt  xiv.  13,  14.

2  Cicero,  Pkilipp.i.  1.  "Num  qui  exules  restituti  ?  unum  aiebaf,
preeterea  neminem. Num  immnnitates  data?  nullse,  respondebat,"

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  93

and  more  in  his  favour. He  accepted  Dolabella  as
his  colleague,  and  hollow  as  the  pretended  He  accepts

... f. ' ,  ,  ,  Dolabetlaaj

reconciliation  between  them  was,  the  no-  m.  colleague
bles  were  satisfied  with the  semblance  of  *uuhlp?n
harmony,  and  deemed  it  a  pledge  of  their  enemy's
good  faith. But  the  crowning  stroke  of  his  crafty
policy  was  his  proposal  that  the  name  and  an<i  aboiuhes
office  of  dictator  should  be  for  ever  abol-  officeevofthe
ished. The  assembled  senate  exulted  and  dictator-
approved. Antonius  had  brought  his  decree  to  the
place  of  meeting  already  prepared ;  not  a  word  was
wasted in discussing  it, and it was immediately
carried  by  acclamation.1 The  measures  of  Antonius
were  not  generally  designed for permanence,  but
this  monument  of  his  legislation  endured. Julius
Caesar  was  the  last  dictator  of  Eome.

Great  was  the  exultation  of  Cicero  and  the  patriots,
with  whom  political  phrases  had  still  an  extraordinary
influence.  With  the  abolition  of  the  name  of  dictator
they  declared  that  the  freedom  of  the  commonwealth
was  secured.  We  are  delivered,  they  exclaimed,  not
only  from  kingly  rule,  but  from  all  apprehension
of  kingly  rule.z  A  few  days  later  the  senate  might
congratulate  itself  on  being  preserved  from

,, ,  MI  •  r  -i  Impo«tureof

the  still  more  imminent  dangers  ot  anarchy,  the  pretended

,  ,  •; Marius.

Ihe  people  continued  to  assemble  in  agi-
tated groups  around  the  spot  where  the  holocaust  had
been  offered.  Here  they  repeated  night  after  night
the  solemnity  of  burning  an  effigy  of  the  deceased ;
and  every  time  this  ceremony  was  renewed  the  peace
of  the  city  and  the  lives  of  all  Caesar's  enemies  were
in  manifest  jeopardy.  In  an  era  of  revolution  there
are  always  by-plots  running  for  a  time  in  parallel

1  Cic.  /.  c.  and  i.  13. "  Haec  inusta  est  a  te,  inquam,  mortuo  Caesari
nota  ad  ignominiam  sempiterna." He  compares  it  to  the  decree  by
which  the  name  of  M.  Manlius  was  abolished.

2  Cicero  (Philipp.  i.  2.)  could  say,  long  after  the  futility  of  these
anticipations  was  apparent : "  Non  modo  regno  quod  pertuleramas,
sed  etiam  regni  timore  sublato."

94  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

lines  with  the  main  action  of  the  drama.  Even
before  Caesar's  death  the  popular  mind  was  in  an
unsettled  state,  and  a  keen-eyed  statesman  might
have  looked  forward  with  much  anxiety  to  any
event  which  should  excite  the  imagination  of  the
multitude,  and  arouse  its  slumbering  passions.  It
seems  that  a  man  named  Herophilus,  who  followed
the  humble  craft  of  a  horse-doctor,  having  first  dis-
guised his  Greek  extraction  by  assuming  the  Latin
name  of  Amatius,  was  emboldened  by  Caesar's  long
absence  in  his  last  Spanish  campaign,  and  the  sinis-
ter rumours  which  circulated  regarding  him,  to  sue
for  the  favour  of  the  people  by  declaring  himself  a
descendant  of  their  old  hero  Marius. ]  He  signed
himself  Caius  Marius,  son  of  Caius  and  grandson  of
Caius ;  and  as  such  he  claimed  affinity  with  Caesar
himself,  and  also  with  Cicero. 2  With  the  lower
orders  of  the  citizens,  with  many  of  the  veterans  in
the  colonies,  and  among  some  of  the  Italian  town-
ships, this  imposture  found  ready  acceptance.  During
Caesar's  absence  the  adventurer  had  addressed  him-
self to  Octavius,  and  demanded  of  him  a  public
acknowledgment  of  the  genuineness  of  his  claims,
which  the  terrified  youth  evaded  but  dared  not  refuse.
Octavius  even  allowed  himself  to  be  seen  among  the
crowds  which  thronged  about  this  man  in  the  public
places 3 ;  the  favour  of  the  populace  was  manifested
by  ardent  tokens  of  admiration ;  and  when  the  victor
of  Munda  returned  to  Rome,  and  gave  a  public  en-
tertainment in  his  gardens,  he  was  surprised  to  see
this  audacious  upstart  place  himself  on  the  opposite
side  of  the  same  pillar  with  himself,  and  divide  if

1  The  story  of  Herophilus  is  told  by  Appian,  B.  C.  iii. init.  ;
Val.  Max.  ix.  15,  1. Compare  the  allusions  to  it  in  Cicero's  cor-
respondence, ad  Att.  xii.  49.,  xiv.  5,  6,  7,  8.  ;  ad  Div. ix.  14.  ;
and  Philipp.  i.  2.

2  The  grandfather  of  Cicero  had  married  an  aunt  of  Marius. See
de  Leg.  iii.  16.  t

3  Nicolaus  Dam.  ci.  14.

.  A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  95

not  divert  the  applause  of  the  assembled  citizens.
Threatened  with  impeachment  for  this  daring  im-
posture, Amatius  impudently  appealed  to  Cicero  in
the  name  of  Marius,  their  common  kinsman,  to
defend  him  before  his  judges.  The  orator  with  grim
irony  referred  him  to  Caesar  himself,  as  not  less  his
relative,  and  possessed  of  much  more  power.  Caesar,
however,  used  his  power  without  hesitation  in  crush-
ing this  presumptuous  rival.  The  pretender  was
speedily  exiled  from  Rome ;  but  it  was  a  signal
proof  of  the  dictator's  clemency,  that  he  was  allowed
to  escape  with  his  life.  Cowed  by  the  energy  of  the
government,  the  false  Marius  abstained  from  ob
truding  himself  upon  public  notice  during  Caesar's
lifetime.  But  the  ferment  of  the  populace  which
followed  upon  the  fatal  obsequies  presented  a  tempt-
ing opportunity.  In  the  beginning  of  April  he  re-
appeared in  the  forum,  and  introduced  himself  among
the  groups  which  still  haunted  the  spot.  He  appealed
once  more  to  the  venerated  name  of  Marius,  and
fanned  the  unquenched  flame  of  their  excitement.
He  avowed  himself  ready  to  assume  the  championship
of  the  popular  cause,  which  Caesar's  natural  succes-
sors seemed  to  have  renounced.  The  assassins,  and
the  senate  in  general,  he  menaced  with  signal  ven-
geance. The  populace  had  already  erected  a  column
of  costly  marble  over  their  hero's  ashes,  inscribed,
to  the  Father  of  his  country :  their  new  leader  in-
sisted on  placing  an  altar  before  it,  and  on  sacrificing
thereon  to  Caesar  as  a  god.  The  people  pledged
themselves  with  vows  in  Caesar's  name,  and  decided
their  controversies  by  appealing  to  his  divinity. !
Cicero  had  retired  at  this  time  into  the  country.
These  irregularities  were  at  first  reported  to  him  as
the  work  of  Caesar's  freedmen :  their  origin  was  soon
more  accurately  disclosed,  and  he  awaited  in  anxious

1  Suet.  Jul.  85.;  Dion,  xliv.  56.;  Cic.  ad  Div.  xi.  2.

96  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

expectation  the  steps  the  consul  should  take  to  sup-
press them.  He  may  have  suspected  the  complicity
of  Antonius  in  a  movement  calculated  to  keep  alive
the  fears  of  the  senate,  and  throw  it,  in  the  absence
of  Brutus  and  Cassius,  more  completely  into  his  own
hands.  Whether  or  not  this  were  so,  Antonius  judged
it  expedient  to  extinguish  the  popular  demagogue.
He  dispersed  the  rioters  with  an  armed  force,  seized
the  adventurer,  and  threw  him  into  prison,  where  he
caused  him  to  be  put  to  a  traitor's  death,  without
form  of  law.1

This  vigorous  exercise  of  authority,  in  which  both
Antoniui  *ne  consuls  heartily  joined,  was  calculated
thf'au'hority  to  reassure  to  a  certain  extent  the  nobles,
plpeSYor  hi§  who  were  becoming  alarmed  at  the  un  ex-
own  ends,  pected  use  Antonius  was  beginning  to  make
of  the  fatal  decree  by  which  Csesar's  acts  were  ratified.
These  acts  embraced  in  their  proper  signification  the
laws  which  the  dictator  had  caused  to  be  passed,  the
appointments  he  had  made,  and  the  immunities  or
privileges  he  had  expressly  conferred  upon  countries,
cities,  or  individuals.  But  Antonius,  possessed  as  he
was  of  the  papers  and  private  notes  found  in  the
archives  of  the  deceased,  could  plead  for  every  mea-
sure he  desired  to  effect,  for  every  favour  he  was
anxious  to  bestow,  the  previous  wish  and  intention  of
the  illustrious  dead.  He  audaciously  claimed  for  the
mere  suggestions  and  memoranda  of  the  dictator  the
same  respect  which  had  been  accorded  to  his  actual
enactments.  This  glaring  misapplication  of  the  de-
cree, advanced  perhaps  at  first  with  caution  and  by
stealth,  once  admitted  in  trifling  matters,  was  pre-
sently stretched  further,  and  by  degrees  the  consul
was  emboldened  to  cover  every  project  he  cherished
with  the  convenient  mantle  of  Caesar's  will.  To
maintain  himself  upon  the  narrow  isthmus  on  which

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  3. :  xuplf  Shcr/i  /uoA-d  6pa<rews.

A.D.710-B.C.4-J.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  97

he  stood,  and  play  off  against  each  other  the  con-
tending parties  and  personages,  by  all  of  whom  he
was  feared  and  hated,  demanded  a  profuse  expendi-
ture of  places,  promises  and  money.  The  veterans
and  the  people,  the  Italians  and  the  provincials,  re-
quired to  be  amused  with  shows,  or  gorged  with
plunder.  Dolabella  could  only  be  kept  at  his  col-
league's side  by  having  his  debts  extinguished  with
the  spoils  of  the  temple  of  Ops.  Moreover,  the
consul's  private  pleasures  were  expensive.  He  had
to  attach  to  himself  a  party  upon  no  foundation  of
class'  interests,  but  from  mere  personal  habits  and
connexion.  No  resources  less  extensive  than  those
of  the  state  itself  could  cement  the  vast  edifice  of
boon-companionship  in  which  his  influence  resided.
To  forge  the  links  of  personal  devotion  Antonius
grasped  all  the  preferment  within  his  reach ;  and
the  presumed  will  of  the  dictator  was  abruptly  ap-
pealed to  whenever  an  excuse  was  required  for  ex-
pelling an  adversary  or  advancing  a  creature. l  The
senate  stood  aghast  at  the  audacity  with  which  these
slender  claims  were  urged.  But  Antonius  did  not
trust  to  his  own  unsupported  assertions.  When
Caesar's  notes  and  memoranda  failed,  he  found  in
one  of  his  scribes,  named  Faberius,  a  skilful  instru-
ment for  palming  upon  the  city  a  wholesale  Forgeries  of
forgery  of  supposititious  documents.  This  Fabcrius-
man  could  produce  in  rapid  succession,  at  his  patron's
bidding,  the  rough  draft  of  edicts  and  decrees,  which
he  affirmed  had  been  prepared  by  Caesar's  orders  to
receive  the  ready  sanction  of  the  senate  and  people.2
It  was  in  vain  that  many  of  the  dictator's  intimates
could  aver  that  these  dispositions  were  opposed  to
his  well-known  wishes,  while  much  which  he  really

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xiv.  20.:  "Ita  ne  vero,  ut  omnia  facta,  scripta,  dicta,
promissa,  cogitata  Csesaris  plus  valerent  quam  si  ipse  viveret.'1  Comp.
Phil.  i.  7,  8.;  ad  Att.  xiv.  14.

-  Cic.  ad  Att.  xiv.  18.;  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  5.;  Veil.  ii.  60.

VOL.  III.  H

98  HISTOKT OF THE EOMANS  CH.  xxiv.

desired  was  suppressed  :  their  explanations  were  si-
lenced by  clamour,  or  tacitly  disregarded  :  the  name
of  Csesar,  in  the  mouth  of  Antonius,  carried  every
thing  before  it.  Every  document  to  which  that
illustrious  subscription  was  attached  passed  without
serious  question,  and  was  transferred  to  imperishable
brass,  in  spite  of  the  murmurs  of  tribunes,  the  warn-
ings of  augurs,  and  the  indignant  reclamations  of
bewildered  senators.1  With  such  an  instrument  in
his  hands,  the  success  of  the  craftiest  of  intriguers,  in
corrupting  patriots  and  fixing  waverers,  can  excite
no  wonder.  In  a  short  time  he  extended  his  in-
fluence over  Italy,  the  provinces,  and  the  allies.  He
conferred  upon  Sicily  the  full  franchise  of  the  city.
He  sought  to  control  the  adverse  suffrages  of  the
senate  by  intruding  batches  of  new  members  into  its
ranks.  He  released  prisoners  from  confinement,  re-
called exiles  from  banishment,  and  reinstated  in  their
possessions  and  privileges  the  sufferers  of  various  par-
ties. For  all  such  as  owed  this  advancement  or  re-
habilitation to  the  presumed  favour  of  the  dead  man,
the  people  invented  a  familiar  name  of  derision,
which  has  been  transmitted  to  history.  They  were
called  Orcini  or  Charonitse  ;  liegemen  of  Death  and
fares  of  the  Stygian  ferryman.2

Nor  less  did  Antonius  turn  to  account  the  wrath  of
the  city  mob,  which  he  had  brought  upon

his .  .  ,•;., ,  .  .  „  °  .  *•,-..

l  safety  himseli  by  his  various  acts  ot  repression.  -He

ns  of  a  - •>  ,  f .

body-guard,  extorted  from  the  senate  permission  to  arm
for  his  personal  protection  a  body-guard  of  six  thou-
sand soldiers.  Doubtless,  the  treasures  amassed  by

1  The  Epistola  ad  Octavium  (Cic.  Ep.  ad  Brut.  ii.  8.),  though  un-
doubtedly spurious,  contains  some  pieces  of  spirited  declamation  not
unworthy  of  the  great  orator,  nor  unlike  his  style. Of  Antonius  it
says  :  "  Publicam  dilapidabat  pecuniam,  serarium  exhauriebat,  minue-
bat  vectigalia,  donabat  civitates,  ex  commentario  dictaturam  gerebat,
leges  imponebat,  prohibebat  dictatorem  creari  plebiscite,  ipse  regna-
Lat  in  consulatu."

2  Suet.  Oct.  35.;  Plut.  Ant.  15. Comp.  Cic.  Pkilipp.  5.  10.

secures  his

persona

by  mea

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  99

his  master  for  the  expenses  of  the  Parthian  armament
helped  to  buy  the  suffrages  by  which  this  new  tyranny
erected  over  the  body  of  the  murdered  tyrant.
These  troops  were  a  select  and  trusty  band.  They
consisted  for  the  most  part  of  centurions,  and  other
petty  officers  of  the  veterans.  They  surrounded  the
consul's  mansion  day  and  night,  and  soon  gave  it  the
appearance,  and  indeed  the  reality,  of  a  fortress  in
the  midst  of  the  city.1  In  vain  did  the  senate  stipu-
late that  their  numbers  should  be  gradually  reduced.
In  the  midst  of  the  partial  acclamations  and  disguised
jealousy  which  had  followed  upon  his  recent  conser-
vative exploits,  Antonius  left  the  city  in  the  month
of  April.  Anxious  to  fortify  his  position  on  the  eve
of  Octavius's  return  from  Apollonia,  he  had  caused
an  agrarian  law  to  be  proposed  by  his  brother  Lucius
the  tribune.  This  enactment  gave  the  consul  au-
thority to  make  fresh  assignments  of  lands  to  the
veterans;  it  had  been  carried  with  a  high  hand,
in  spite  of  a  thunderstorm,  which,  in  other  times,
would  have  stayed  the  proceedings ;  and  he  now
made  a  progress  into  Campania  to  super-  He  proceeds

. , , .f  ,.  ~ ,,r  r , into  Campania

intend  the  execution  of  the  measure,  and  to  Bupermtend
watch  over  his  personal  interests  in  an  mentofiand*.
affair  of  so  much  delicacy.  The  obscurity  which
hangs  over  these  agrarian  enactments  generally,
with  which  the  Eomans  themselves  seem  to  have
been  so  familiar  as  to  deem  all  explanation  super-
fluous, has  concealed  from  us  the  precise  nature  of
the  provisions  of  this  particular  law.  Cicero  speaks
of  them  in  terms  more  than  usually  extravagant.
He  affects  serious  alarm  for  his  own  lands  and
villas,  even  for  his  retreat  at  Tusculum.  Cceaar,
he  says,  proposed  to  drain  the  Pomptine  marshes ;
his  successor  has  given  the  whole  of  Italy  to  his
brother  to  divide.  It  would  appear  that  under  the

1  Appian,  H.  C.  iii.  5.
H  2

100  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

plea  of  disposing  of  the  fresh  drained  lands  in
that  sterile  district,  the  measure  extended  to  the
allocation  of  other  lots  in  more  distant  regions,
and  especially  in  Campania.  It  was  the  principle
of  the  Eoman  law  that  lands  allotted  to  colonists
from  the  public  domains  should  revert  to  the  state
when  from  the  death  or  desertion  of  their  legiti-
mate holders  they  ceased  to  be  occupied.  So  restless
were  the  new  proprietors  of  these  estates,  that  this
extinction  of  claims  was  perhaps  constantly  occurring.
This  gave  rise  repeatedly  to  fresh  divisions  of  land,
and  an  infusion  of  fresh  proprietors  into  existing
colonies.  It  is  possible  that  under  this  practice
Antonius  had  ousted  some  actual  occupiers,  that  he
had  founded  entirely  new  colonies  instead  of  replen-
ishing the  old.  A  few  such  cases  of  injustice  would
suffice  for  the  basis  of  Cicero's  sweeping  invective.  In
such  cases  compensation  at  least  was  ordinarily  offered;
but  whether  this  was  done  on  the  present  occasion  or
not,  the  old  colonists  undoubtedly  felt  themselves
aggrieved,  and  found  means  at  no  distant  period  to
express  their  resentment.1

The  orgies  by  which,  according  to  the  reiterated
Doiabeiiais  taunts  of  a  bitter  enemy,  the  progresses  of

applauded  by .  .  J-'IJ-J  1  i

the  nobles  for  Antomus  were  ordinarily  disgraced,  could
suppressing  not  disguise  from  him  the  clouds  of  danger

Cfcsarean  .°  , . .  , „

outbreaks.  gathering  around  his  path.  He  was  uneasy
at  the  conduct  of  Dolabella,  who  now  left  in  sole  en-
joyment of  power  in  the  city,  was  playing  into  the
hands  of  the  patriots,  and  crushing  with  redoubled
energy  every  popular  expression  of  regard  for  Caesar's
memory.  Antonius  had  carried  his  measures  of  re-
pression to  the  furthest  point  consistent  with  his

1  See  Cicero,  Philipp.  ii.  39,  40.;  Dion,  xlv.  9.

*  Cicero  had  comforted  himself  a  little  before  with  the  remark  that
Antonius  seemed  to  think  more  of  his  debaucheries  than  of  political
intrigue.  Ad  Att.  xiv.  3. :  4i  Quern  qnidem  ego  epularum  niagis  ar-
bitror  rationem  habere  quam  quidquam  mail  cogitare."  Never  was
a  statesman  more  grossly  deceived  by  his  own  wishes.

A.C.710-B.C.44. UNDER THE EMPIEE.  101

character  as  a  Csesarean :  but  his  colleague  was  re-
strained by  no  such  consideration.  Not  satisfied  with
the  punishment  inflicted  upon  the  pretended  Marius
and  his  riotous  adherents,  he  had  proceeded  to
overthrow  the  altar  they  had  erected  to  Caesar  in  the
forum,  and  even  the  marble  pillar  which  commemo-
rated his  obsequies.  Dolabella  encouraged  his  sol-
diers to  tear  from  their  pedestals  the  statues  of  the
dictator;  and  when  it  was  rumoured  that  those
monuments  of  popular  veneration  had  been  removed
to  a  foundry,  and  that  their  faces  were  being  trans-
formed to  the  likeness  of  other  originals,  the  people
broke  out  again  into  seditious  excesses,  and  were  only
quelled  by  the  unsparing  employment  of  military
force.1  Nor  was  he  content  with  merely  repressing
the  tumult  with  arms  :  he  terrified  the  discontented
by  the  severest  punishments,  and  caused  the  site  of
the  obnoxious  monuments  to  be  levelled  and  paved  for
public  traffic.2  The  nobles,  most  of  whom  had  crept
away  to  their  country  seats,  for  the  sake,  as  they
affirmed,  of  their  health,  lauded  their  new  deliverer
to  the  skies.  Cicero,  who  felt  his  own  person  insecure
in  the  unsettled  state  of  the  public  mind,  wrote  from
his  distant  retreat  at  Puteoli,  that  the  act  was  univer-
sally approved  even  by  the  lowest  classes,  that  the
republic  was  restored,  and  that  Brutus  might  now
carry  a  golden  crown  through  the  forum  without
molestation.  This  hasty  and  childish  exultation  at
the  first  symptom  of  supposed  re-action,  contemptible
in  a  statesman  of  so  much  experience  and  so  many
reverses,  is  too  consistent  with  the  temper  he  com-

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  3.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  as  Drumann  has
remarked,  that  this  writer  has  here  mistaken  the  one  consul  for  the
other.

-  Cicero,  ad  Aft.  xiv.  1 5.,  writing  from  Puteoli  on  1  May :  "  O
mirificum  Dolabellam  meum!  jam  enim  dico  meum  ;  antea,  crede
mihi,  subdubitabam.  Magnam  avadtupijtrtv  ista  res  habet:  de  saxo;
in  crucem  ;  colamnam  tollere  ;  locum  ilium  sternendum  locare."
Com  p.  Epp.  16,  18.

102  HISTORY OF THE R03IASS  CH.  xxiv.

monly  displayed  to  excite  any  surprise  ;  but  it  must
raise  a  more  painful  feeling  to  witness  such  self-
degradation  of  the  sage  and  patriot  before  the  worth-
less intriguer  who  had  divorced  his  lost  and  lamented
Tullia.  Nor  is  our  vexation  diminished  by  the  sus-
picion to  which  he  is  justly  liable  of  having  been
partly  influenced  in  this  flattery,  the  hollowness  of
which  he  himself  felt,  by  anxiety  for  the  restitution
of  his  daughter's  dower,  which  Dolabella  had  not  yet
had  the  grace  or  the  ability  to  make.1  The  character,
indeed,  and  the  figure  of  Dolabella  were  equally
despicable  :  Cicero  himself,  at  another  season,  could
scoff  at  the  puny  warrior,  and  ask,  who  tied  him  to
his  long  sword  ?  2  ^Tiile  in  the  city  the  consort  of
Tullia  was  a  notorious  spendthrift  and  debauchee,  he
exhibited  neither  courage  nor  conduct  in  the  field.
His  father-in-law  hails  him  at  this  crisis  as  another
Agamemnon  :  we  may  hear  the  same  voice  by  and  by
denounce  him  in  terms  only  applicable  to  a  Thersites.
A  greater  actor  now  appears  upon  the  stage.  Oc-
tavius,  the  grandnephew  of  Julius  Caesar,

°  *

crosses  orer - , ,  . , .  ,

to  itaiy  on  had  been  sent  by  him,  as  we  have  seen,  to
ca*ar-i  death,  combine  the  study  of  arts  and  arms  in  the
camp  at  Apollonia.  Here  he  was  appointed  to  re-
main under  the  tuition  of  the  rhetorician  Apollodorus,
and  in  the  daily  practice  of  his  military  exercises,  till
the  dictator  should  arrive  to  assume  the  command  of
the  army,  and  lead  it  to  the  Parthian  frontier.  Thus

1  Compare  Cic.  ad  Att.  xiv.  19,  1  and  5. It  seems  that  Atticus
occupied  himself  with  nothing  so  intently  in  this  awful  crisis  of  the
commonwealth,  as  with  pestering  his  friends  about  his  private  money
matters. Dolabella  was  in  debt  to  him  also,  which  caused  him  great
uneasiness. There  is  hardly  anything  more  melancholy  throughout
the  range  of  Cicero's  letters,  all  the  circumstances  considered,  than
the  following  sentence:  "  Sed  totum  se  ab  te  alienavit  Dolabella  ea
de  causa  qua  me  quoque  sibi  inimicissimum  reddidit. 0  hominem
pudentem!  Kal.  Jan.  debuit, adhuc  non  solvit;  praesertim  cum  se
maximo  sere  alieno  Faberii  manu  liberavit,  et  opem  ab  eo  petierit."
Comp.  ad  Div.  xvi,  24.;  Att.  xiv.  20,  21,  22.

2  Macrob.  Saturn,  ii.  3.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  103

employed  he  became  familiarly  known  to  the  officers
and  legionaries,  and,  with  a  shrewd  perception  of  his
interests,  he  studied  from  the  first  to  secure  their
affections.  He  had  hardly  been  four  months  on  the
coast  of  Epirus  when  tidings  arrived  of  the  Ides  of
March.  The  first  hasty  letters  of  Atia  to  her  son
could  only  announce  the  astounding  event ;  they  com-
municated no  advices  regarding  its  cause  and  the
circumstances  connected  with  it.  She  could  not  de-
clare whether  it  was  the  judicial  execution  of  a  reso-
lution of  the  senate,  or  the  rash  violence  of  some
private  enmity,  whether  the  citizens  had  hailed  it  with
exultation,  or  denounced  its  perpetrators  as  cowardly
assassins.  Still  less  could  she  assure  him  that  he  had
been  appointed  heir  to  the  dictator ;  she  could  only
allow  him  to  presume  on  his  proximity  in  blood,  and
the  favours  he  had  already  experienced.  Neverthe-
less, she  urged  him  to  repair  to  Rome  ;  to  bear  him-
self like  a  man ;  to  trust  boldly  to  fortune.  When  he
communicated  this  summons  to  his  friends,  many  of
them  warmly  dissuaded  him  from  such  a  course.  M.
Agrippa  and  Q.  Salvidienus  advised  him  to  throw  him-
self on  the  protection  of  the  legions  quartered  beyond
the  Adriatic  l ;  at  the  same  time  he  was  invited  by
some  of  their  officers  to  put  himself  at  their  head,
and  assured  of  the  alacrity  with  which  the  soldiers
would  follow  him  to  avenge  their  murdered  hero.
But  he  declined  with  grateful  acknowledgments  these
proffered  services,  and  straightway  crossed  the  sea
with  only  a  few  attendants.  His  movements  were
planned  with  the  utmost  caution,  so  as  to  avoid  notice
and  disarm  suspicion.  Instead  of  making  for  the
usual  landing-place  of  Brundisium,  he  reached  the
shore  at  Lupia,  an  obscure  town  in  the  neighbourhood,
lying  out  of  the  high  road.  Here  he  could  remain

1  Veil.  ii.  59. Compare  the  newly  discovered  fragment  of  Nicolaus
of  Damascus,  ci.  16.

104  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

for  a  short  time  unobserved,  collect  his  information,
and  mature  his  plans.

Arrived  on  the  coast  of  Apulia,  the  young  adven-
turer soon  learnt  more  accurately  the  real
toecwm\he  state  of  affairs.  Copies  of  the  will  and  of
the  decrees  of  the  senate  were  forwarded  to
him,  and  armed  with  these  documents  he  boldly  as-
sumed the  designation  of  Caius  Julius  Caesar  Octavi-
anus,  and  presented  himself  to  the  garrison  of  Brun-
disium  as  the  adopted  son  of  the  great  imperator.  In
thus  acting,  he  resolutely  waived  the  hesitation  of
his  mother  and  the  earnest  dissuasions  of  his  step-
father Philippus:  they  had  reminded  him  in  vain
that  his  uncle,  after  subduing  all  his  foes,  had  perished
by  the  hands  of  his  nearest  friends.  The  warning,
indeed,  sank  deeply  into  the  mind  of  the  young  as-
pirant, and  impressed  upon  him  the  solemn  conviction
that  the  sword  can  do  but  half  the  work  of  a  success-
ful revolution.  But  when  they  urged  him  to  rest
satisfied  with  the  obscurity  of  a  private  station,  and
renounce  his  splendid  inheritance  of  peril  and  pre-
eminence, he  pondered  their  counsels  and  deliberately
rejected  them.  And  it  is  difficult,  placing  ourselves
in  his  position,  to  pronounce  a  harsh  judgment  on
his  ambition.  The  security  that  was  promised  him
he  felt  to  be  illusory.  His  lot  was  cast  in  an  age  of
revolution,  in  which  Cesar's  nephew  must  be  the
mark  for  all  the  bolts  of  fortune.  The  fearful  alter-
native was  manifestly  forced  upon  him :  he  must  grasp
Caesar's  power  to  secure  himself  from  Caesar's  fate.

At  Brundisium  the  veteran  cohorts  received  the
He  i?  warmly  appeal  with  acclamation.  Octavius's  next

received  by  .  .  ,

the  veterans  step  was  to  transmit  to  the  senate,  to  the
itaiy.8  5  liberators,  and  to  Antonius,  his  solemn
claim  to  the  promised  inheritance.  In  the  prevalent
confusion  of  ideas  and  dereliction  of  principles,  a
legitimate  claim  met,  as  usual  in  such  cases,  with
general  indulgence.  Men  turned  away  from  the

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  105

mere  pretenders  to  power,  and  fixed  their  eyes  upon
one  who  stood  upon  a  natural  and  prescriptive  right :
they  did  not  steadily  contemplate,  nor  distinctly
conceive,  what  the  extent  of  his  claim  was,  which
could  not,  in  reality,  be  confined  to  the  private  in-
heritance. But  the  aspirant  disavowed  all  political
views ;  his  manners  were  ingratiating ;  his  language
was  specious ;  his  position  seemed  so  precarious  that
every  one  who  engaged  with  him  might  presume  that
he  was  conferring  an  obligation  :  the  gods  themselves
seemed  to  espouse  the  cause  of  the  orphan,  and  his
progress  was  accompanied  by  palpable  signs  and
portents.  The  party  of  Octavius  swelled  as  he  ad-
vanced. In  the  first  days  of  his  return  to  Italy
the  stripling  student  sprang  himself  from  boyhood
to  maturity.

With  a  prudence  and  moderation  beyond  his  years,
Octavius  repressed  the  zeal  of  the  veterans
who  flocked  to  him,  and  offered  to  avenge  inte^iewnwi»h
under  his  command  the  slaughter  of  their  w'hom  hen
old  general. He  declined  even  their  pro-  *>  Durable
ferred  escort,  and  contented  himself  as  he
slowly  advanced  westward,  with  the  attendance  of  a
few  adherents. In  the  meantime  he  was  feeling  the
pulse  of  the  cities  and colonies  on  his  route,  and
diligently comparing  the  result  with  the  accounts
which  daily  reached  him  of  the  posture  of  affairs  at
Rome. Thus  he  arrived  at  Naples  on  the  eighteenth
of  April,  and  in  the  neighbourhood  he  met  and  con-
versed with  Cicero,  who  was  filled  with  joy  at  the
prospect of  a new rival to Antonius.1 Octavius
flattered  him  with  the  fairest  professions  of  regard
and  veneration,  and  expressed  himself  with  modera-
tion, and  even  respect,  towards  the  liberators. His
immediate attendants, as Cicero  with  some  alarm
remarked,  gave  him  the  name  of  Caesar ;  but  not  so

1  Cicero,  ad  Att.  xiv.  10,  11.,  written  April  19,  20.,  from  his  villa
at  Puteoli.

a%"  ids  m

106  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

the  more  reserved  Philippus.1  The  veteran  patriot
shuddered  at  the  ominous  designation,  and  already
feared  that  the  fiercer  counsels  of  his  associates
would  spoil  the  young  man,  and  lead  him  into
mischief  in  spite  of  his  better  nature.

The  twenty-first  of  April  was  the  festival  of  the

Parilia,  an  epoch  of  great  interest  in  the
ids  meet- career  of  Julius  Cassar  ;  and  while  he  yet

lived,  certain  of  the  nobles  had  undertaken
to  do  him  honour  by  providing  for  the  cost  of  the
customary  shows.2  They  now  shrank  from  their
promise,  and  the  young  claimant  of  Cassar's  inherit-
ance, informed  of  the  circumstance  by  his  agents
while  yet  at  a  distance,  ordered  the  exhibitions  to
proceed,  and  pledged  himself  to  defray  the  expense.
He  continued  to  advance  slowly  and  with  rare  cir-
cumspection. At  Tarracina  he  halted  a  few  days.
The  Consul  Antonius  was  absent  from  Eome,  and
avoided  meeting  him  when  he  arrived  at  the  end
of  the  month.  By  this  time  all  the  city  was  eager  to
behold  the  youth,  of  whom  it  was  affirmed  that  he
was  about  to  declare  himself  Cesar's  heir.  The
hearts  of  the  populace  warmed  towards  him  ;  the
nobles,  in  their  hatred  of  Antonius,  and  their  hope
of  detaching  from  him  one  whose  path  he  had  so
directly  crossed,  were  not  less  eager  in  their  favour-
able prognostics.  The  young  man's  demeanour,  re-
solved and  imperturbable,  was  felt  as  an  augury  of
He  enters  the  success.  The  appearance  of  a  radiant  ef-
fl'voMabie  fulgence  about  the  sun  on  the  morning  of

his  entry  into  the  city  was  readily  embraced
as  a  fortunate  omen  :  it  interpreted  to  men  their  own
hopes  and  inclinations,  and  coloured  their  anticipa-
tions with  the  hues  of  the  rainbow.3

1  Cicero,  ad  Alt.  xiv.  12.  (April  22.):  "Caesar  .  .  quern  nego  posse
esse  bonum  civem."

2  Dion,  xlv.  6.

3  Liv. Epit. cxvii.  ; Suet.  Oct.  95.  ;  Veil.  ii.  59., and  all  the
authorities.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  107

The  omens  which  are  said  to  have  attended  upon
the  career  of  distinguished  personages  have  Real  effect

•i  ,2 , .  j  , of  the  omens

in most cases been  first  invented,  or  at  which  are  said
least  first  remembered,  after  their  distinc-  complnied"
tions  have  been  acquired. We  can  seldom  career'.113  s
feel assured  that  such  supposed  divine  intimations
have  really  been  observed  before  the  event  which
has  appeared  to  fulfil  them. The  fidelity  of  such
accounts  can  be  but  imperfectly  tested,  even  by  the
most  general  and  unanimous  consent  of  authorities.
There  is  perhaps,  however,  no  recorded  omen  more
strongly  authenticated  than  this. The  phenemonon
itself  may  be  easily  explained  by  natural  causes ;  the
coincidence  may  not  be  peculiarly  striking ;  but  if  it
did actually occur as mentioned,  and  was really
observed  at  the  time,  and  interpreted  as  we  are  told
it  was,  it  becomes  important  as  a  genuine  agent  in
the  development  of  events. For  undoubtedly,  in  the
superstitious  temper  of  the  times,  such  a  belief  must
have  been  a  potent  instrument  in  effecting  its  own
fulfilment. But  the  history  of  Octavius's  omens  is
the  history  of  his  life. From  infancy  to  youth,  and
from  manhood  to  the  hour  of  his  death,  his  career,  if
we  may  believe  the  narrative,  was  closely  attended
by  these  celestial  ministers. On  the  morning,  of  his
birth,  when  the  senate  was  occupied  with  the  investi-
gation of  Catilina's conspiracy,  his  father  Octavius,
detained by the domestic  event, had  arrived  late
at  the  curia :  it  was  solemnly  attested  that  on  that
occasion  Nigidius  the  astrologer,  having  inquired  the
cause of the delay, and ascertained the hour  of
the  birth,  declared  that  the  Lord  of  the  World  was
born. Some  months  later  the  father  consulted  the
oracle  of  Sabazius  in  Thrace  regarding  his child's
fortunes,  and  the  priests  returned  a  similar  response.
The  prodigy  which  revealed  the  wondrous  fact  was
the  same  which  had witnessed to the destiny of
Alexander  the  Great,  and  of  no  other  mortal  besides.

108  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXIV.

Throughout  the  infant's  tender  years  similar  portents
were  affirmed  to  have  been  observed ;  the  frogs  ceased
from  croaking  at  his  command,  an  eagle  returned  to
his  hand  the  bread  it  had  snatched  fr.om  his  grasp.
The  gravest  of  the  senators,  the  illustrious  Catulus,
dreamed  of  his  future  honours  two  nights  successively ;
Cicero  saw  the  King  of  Gods  and  Men  place  a  scourge
in  his  hand,  while  yet  he  was  unknown  either  to
Catulus  or  to  Cicero  by  sight.  Caesar  was  moved  to
adopt  him  as  his  son  by  a  portent  which  he  observed
on  the  field  of  Munda.  In  the  camp  at  Apollonia
he  consulted  with  his  friend  Agrippa  the  soothsayer
Theogenes.  Of  Agrippa,  who  was  the  first  to  inquire,
the  sage  predicted  a  great  and  wonderful  destiny;
Octavius,  vexed  and  apprehensive  of  a  less  favourable
response  to  himself,  at  first  hesitated  to  disclose  his
own  nativity ;  but  no  sooner  had  he  been  prevailed
on  to  name  the  auspicious  hour,  than  Theogenes
leaped  from  his  seat,  and  fell  on  his  knees  and  wor-
shipped him.  Such  were  among  the  recorded  indi-
cations of  his  future  greatness.1  Some  of  them  at
least  may  have  been  really  observed ;  the  youth  of
the  future  heir  of  Julius  Caesar  may  have  been  made
conspicuous  in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen,  as  the
centre ,  to  which  many  mysterious  intimations  con-
verged. Undoubtedly  such  intimations  were  care-
fully noted  and  remembered  in  those  times;  any  real
indications  of  genius  or  fortune  formed  a  nucleus  for
stories  of  the  kind  to  gather  round.  It  is  not  im-
probable that  superstition  was  already  on  the  watch
for  the  success  of  the  new  candidate  for  pre-eminence,
and  guided  towards  him  the  vague  anticipations  and
floating  presentiments  of  the  day.

Octavius  entered  Home.  His  friends  and  relatives
once  more  pressed  him  to  withdraw  his  claim  to  ad-
minister to  his  uncle's  testament;  but  their  instances

1  These  and  other  prodigies  are  mentioned  by  Suetonius,  Oct.  94,
95.,  and  Dion,  xlv.  2.

A.0.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  109

were  urged  in  vain. The  game  upon  which  he  had
resolved  to  stake  life  and  fortune  warmed  him  in  the

playing-. It  required  indeed  wary  walking  octavms  pays

J to ,  .  -i • i  court to the

to  steer  his  course  between  the  nval  pre-  senate,  and

tensions  and  intrigues  of  the  various  aspi-  discharge  Ma

j  A  •  T -J  uncle'sbe-

rants  lor  ascendancy.  Antonius,  Lepidus,  quests.
Sextus  Pompeius,  were  each  a  candidate  for  power,
while  the  party  of  the  oligarchs  watched  them  all,
and  tried  with  frivolous  and  futile  anxiety  to  play  off
one  against  another.  But  the  senate  was  the  politi-
cal power  to  which  Octavius  first  paid  his  court :  he
canvassed  its  members  one  by  one.  In  claiming  the
dictator's  inheritance,  he  studiously  concealed  any
ulterior  aims.  He  pleaded  filial  duty  towards  an
adoptive  father,  and  personal  gratitude  towards  se
great  a  benefactor.  His  first  act  was  to  present  him-
self before  C.  Antonius,  the  city  prator,  and  make  the
formal  declaration  required  of  one  who  undertook  the
rights  and  duties  of  an  inheritance.  But  it  was
necessary  to  obtain  the  sanction  of  the  people  to  his
adoption,  through  a  lex  curiata,  and  Octavius  pleaded
his  suit  in  a  public  harangue,  in  which  he  appealed
to  their  Caesarean  sympathies.  The  nobles  were
vexed  at  the  tone  of  this  address  :  Cicero  was  jealous
of  the  independence  already  assumed  by  the  youth,
whom  he  had  hoped  perhaps  to  attach,  at  the  expence
of  a  little  flattery,  to  the  interest  of  the  oligarchs.1
Cicero  wished  to  see  him  assail  Antonius ;  while  at
the  same  time  he  would  have  him  surrender  tamely
the  rights  which  formed  the  only  ground  of  contro-
versy between  them.  The  fervour  and  eloquence  of
the  panegyric  Octavius  uttered  on  the  dictator,  un-
stinted in  measure,  and  full  of  genuine  feeling,  went
straight  to  his  hearers'  hearts.  They  attributed  sin-
cerity to  his  blunt  and  broken  words,  far  more  than
to  the  elaborate  harangue  of  Antonius ;  who,  in  the

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xv.  2.

110  HISTOEY OF THE EOMANS  CH.  xxiv.

midst  of  his  pompous  enumeration  of  Caesar's  good
deeds,  had  omitted  to  promise  the  payment  of  his
bequests  to  the  people.  Upon  this  interesting  point
Octavius  had  freely  pledged  himself.1

Antonius  had  been  absent  in  the  south  of  Italy
interview  while  his  rival  was  slowly  advancing  to-
ocu"™  and  wards  the  city.  He  seems  to  have  avoided
Antonins.  meeting  him  on  his  progress ;  but  when  he
learnt  the  course  which  he  had  decided  to  take,  the
consul  hastened  back  to  Home,  which  he  reached
about  the  middle  of  May,  to  confront  and,  as  he
hoped,  to  overawe  the  intruder.  Antonius,  how-
ever, deemed  it  unbefitting  his  dignity  to  seek  out
so  youthful  and  tmdistinguished  an  adversary ;  he
awaited  his  visit  in  the  gardens  of  Pompeius.  Thither
accordingly  Octavius  repaired,  and  the  interview
which  ensued  revealed  to  each  the  full  extent  of  the
other's  ambition.  Octavius  began  with  claiming
bluntly,  as  heir,  the  sums  which  the  dictator  had
left  behind  him:  Antonius  replied  that  the  money
was  all  spent ;  that  it  was  not  the  testator's  private
hoard,  but  public  treasure ;  that  the  will  by  which
Octavius  claimed  would  have  been  set  aside  with  the
rest  of  Cassar's  acts,  but  for  the  interference  of
Antonius  himself.  It  was  unreasonable,  he  urged,
and  ungrateful  in  Octavius  to  press  such  a  demand
upon  his  benefactor ;  it  was  rash  in  him  to  assume
the  responsibilities  of  a  name  so  hateful  to  a  formi-
dable party  in  the  state.  But  the  other  was  not  to  be
put  off  thus.  Having  assured  himself  that  the  money
was  not  to  be  extorted  from  the  hands  into  which  it
had  fallen,  he  boldly  declared  that  be  had  pledged
himself  to  pay  the  legacies,  and  he  would  raise  the
sum  required  from  his  private  resources.  Nor  was
this  an  empty  vaunt.  He  caused  the  effects  of  the
deceased  to  be  sold,  obtained  from  his  relatives,  from

1  Dion,  xlv.  6.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  Ill

his  mother  Atia,  from  Philippus,  from  Pedius  and
Pinarius,  the  surrender  of  their  shares  in  the  inherit-
ance, borrowed  perhaps  from  his  personal  friends
and  well-wishers,  and  thus  altogether  amassed  a  sum
sufficient  to  cover  the  assumed  obligation.1  In  this
act  of  politic  munificence  he  was  laying  the  founda-
tion of  his  future  fortunes.  Meanwhile  the  people
resented  with  bitterness  the  pretences  on  which  the
consul  withheld  the  honest  executor  from  his  rights,
and  strove  to  defraud  them  of  their  undoubted  dues.
The  lex  curiata,  by  which  the  adoption  was  sanc-
tioned, they  would  have  ratified  with  obsequious
gratitude;  but  Antonius  had  gained  over  some  of
the  tribunes,  and  by  their  repeated  interference  the
business  was  impeded  and  put  off  from  day  to  day.2
Caesar  had  vowed  on  the  morning  of  Pharsalia  to
build  a  temple  to  Venus  the  Ancestress,  octaviusex-

,  •!_  j L J j.1- . J  i • hibiti  shows  to

whose  name he  adopted  that  day  as  his  which  the  dic-

•u j.j.1  *  £L J.-L  • j.  1. L J  j_ tat°r's  friends

battle-cry.  Alter  the  victory  he  had  not  were  pledged,
forgotten  his  vow :  the  temple  was  erected,  and  a
college  of  priests  instituted,  to  which  Octavius  him-
self belonged,  whose  duty  it  was  to  exhibit  annual
shows  in  honour  of  the  goddess.  But  after  their
patron's  death  the  members  of  this  body  either  shrank
from  the  expense,  or  were  deterred  by  fear  of  offend-
ing the  patriots ;  and  it  was  not  till  Octavius  came
forward  and  undertook  the  discharge  of  their  obliga-
tions, that  the  people  enjoyed  the  gratification  their
hero  had  provided  for  them.  Thus  once  more  did
the  young  heir  prove  himself  worthy  of  his  inherit-
ance. But  he  was  not  allowed  to  be  at  the  sole
charge  of  an  entertainment  which  was  meant  to
reflect  honour  upon  the  founder.  Caesar's  private
friends,  Matins,  Postuinius,  and  Saserna,  offered
munificent  contributions.  When  Cicero  remarked
with  bitterness  that  they  were  sowing  the  seeds  of

1  Appian,  B.C.  iii.  23.  ;  Dion,  xlv.  5.;  Pint.  Anton.  16.,  Brut.  22.
'-'  Floras,  iv.  4. ;  Dion,  /.  c.

112  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

another  civil  war,  Matius  at  least  could  answer  that
he  was  Caesar's  friend,  and  not  his  partisan.  When
the  duty  was  urged  upon  him  of  preferring  his
country  to  his  friend,  he  could  again  reply  that  to
such  a  pitch  of  patriotic  devotion  his  philosophy  had
never  soared.  He  had  always  dissuaded  Cassar  from
entering  upon  civil  war;  in  the  conduct  of  it  he
had  counselled  clemency  and  moderation:  he  had
never  received  any  political  favour  from  him,  and  no
political  intrigue  or  violence  should  prevent  him  from
paying  honour  to  him  as  his  friend.  The  dead
could  be  honoured  best  by  serving  his  living  repre-
sentative.1

Cicero  on  his  part  was  trying,  with  little  success,
popularity  of  to  construct  a  conservative  party  among  the
republicans,  which  should  hold  the  bal-
ance between  the  Caesareans  and  the  more  violent
of  the  patriots.  While  Antonius  succeeded  by  in-
trigue and  bribery  in  strengthening  the  faction  of
his  personal  adherents,  those  among  his  former  ad-
herents whom  his  insolence  or  rapacity  had  alienated
from  himself  did  not  on  that  account  draw  nearer  to
the  side  of  the  nobles.  Hirtius  declared  himself  dis-
gusted with  the  consul's  conduct,  and  especially  with
his  rifling  the  treasures  his  patron  had  amassed  for
the  public  service  :  nevertheless  he  allowed  that  both
he  and  the  liberators  had  equal  cause  for  strengthen-
ing their  position  by  arms.2  Equally  afraid  of  the
consequences  of  success  from  either  of  them,  he  pro-
bably hailed,  with  Pansa,  Matius  and  others,  the
revival  of  his  old  master's  policy  in  the  person  of  a
lineal  representative.  Octavius  was  urged  on  by  the
ardour  of  these  devoted  partisans.  He  now  ventured
to  claim  that  the  golden  throne  and  jewelled  crown
which  the  senate  had  decreed  to  his  father  should  be
exhibited  in  their  proper  place  at  the  celebration  of

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  xv.  27,  28.  "  Cic.  ad  Ait.  xv.  10.

A.r.710-B.c.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  113

the  festival.  The  tribunes,  instigated  by  Antonius,
refused  to  sanction  this  mark  of  honour,  and  the
knights,  if  we  may  believe  the  account  which  Atti-
cus  sent  to  Cicero,  supported  them  in  this  stretch  of
authority.  The  consul  even  threatened  Octavius  with
arrest  for  so  bold  an  appeal  to  the  passions  of  the
multitude ;  but  there  were  many  men  of  character
and  influence  upon  whom  his  firmness  made  a  deep
impression,  and  it  was  not  among  the  populace  only
that  his  character  and  pretensions  rose  to  the  highest
pitch  of  estimation.  When  he  contended  for  the
election  of  one  Flaminius  to  the  tribuneship  of  Hel-
vius  Cinna,  the  people  threatened  to  raise  him  to  the
bench  himself,  though  now  adopted  into  a  patrician
house,  and  not  yet  of  age  to  hold  the  office.  Anto-
nius interfered  to  stop  the  proceedings,  the  people
would  elect  no  one  else,  and  the  vacancy  remained
unfilled.1  Fortune  favoured  the  youth  who  deserved
so  well  of  her :  during  the  continuance  of  the  festival
of  Venus,  which  lasted  eleven  days,  there  appeared
a  comet  of  unusual  brilliancy,  which  remained  seven
days  visible.  Octavius  hailed  this  auspicious  pheno-
menon as  a  sign  that  the  great  Julius  had  been  ad-
vanced to  the  abode  of  the  gods,  and  the  Roman
people  readily  adopted  this  interpretation.  He  was
encouraged  to  erect  a  brazen  statue  to  the  new  divi-
nity in  the  temple  of  Venus  ;  its  head  was  surmounted
by  a  golden  star,  the  cynosure  of  court  poets  in  the
next  generation 2,  a  symbol  which  is  visible  on  many
coins  and  gems  still  preserved  to  us.  The  enthusiasm
thus  opportunely  excited  demanded  the  ad-  Th?  name
dition  of  new  honours  to  a  name  already  so  ^nged'to
renowned  :  it  was  decreed  that  the  desig-  f^i'"^^,*
nation  of  the  month  Quintilis,  the  fifth  of  Ca:sar-
Nmna's  calendar,  should  be  changed  to  Julius,  which

1  Suet.  Oct.  10.;  Dion,  xlv.  2,  6.

-  Virsr.  Eel.  ix.  47. :  "  Ecce  Dionai  processit  Claris  astrum."  Comp.
Ovid.  Metam.  XT.  847.;  Horat.  Od.  i.  12.  46.;  Propert.  iv.  6.  30.

VOL.  TIT.  1

114  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxrv.

it  has  borne  throughout  the  civilized  world  to  this  day,
and  a  special  ritual  was  appointed  for  the  worship  of
the  demi-god,  the  first  whom  the  senate  had  trans-
lated to  Olympus  since  the  apotheosis  of  Romulus.1

During  these  proceedings,  big  as  they  were  with
Brutus  and  *ne  ^ate  °f  the  republic,  the  names  of  the
?rompubHoink  principal  liberators  have  vanished  from  the
affairs.  page  of  history.  They  shrank  so  closely

from  the  current  of  public  affairs  that  it  was  gene-
rally believed  that  they  had  fled  from  Rome,  on  the
occasion  of  the  first  disturbances  which  attended
Cffisar's  obsequies,  and  the  murder  of  the  unfortunate
Cinna.  If  they  did  indeed  quit  the  city  for  the  mo-
ment, it  would  seem  that  they  soon  returned  to  it.
They  were  there  certainly  in  the  middle  of  April ;
but  Cicero,  who  alludes  to  their  presence  there,
laments  that  they  found  themselves  compelled  to
avoid  observation,  and  undoubtedly  they  refrained
from  the  public  exercise  of  their  functions.  It  was
probably  on  the  renewal  of  public  riot  under  the
auspices  of  the  pretended  Marius,  that  they  made
their  final  escape  from  the  city.  Their  first  retreat
was  Lanuvium,  in  its  immediate  vicinity.  Decimus,
who  was  at  least  a  bold  soldier,  still  kept  the  post  of
danger.  The  Cisalpine  province  had  been  assigned
him  by  Cassar  ;  the  senate  had  confirmed  his  appoint-
ment: but  the  consul  forbade  him  to  assume  it,
threatening  him  with  the  vengeance  of  the  Roman
people,  who,  he  declared,  were  so  infuriate  against
Cassar's  destroyers,  that  not  one  of  them  could  re-
main in  safety  at  Rome.2  Decimus  now  deemed  it
prudent  to  succumb  to  this  arbitrary  dictation.  He
conferred  indeed  with  Hirtius,  who  assured  him  that
the  rumours  of  popular  fury  were  exaggerated,  and

1  Stat.  Sylv.  1.  24:

"  Primus  iter  nostris  ostendit  in  sethera  Divis."

2  See  the  letter  of  Decimus  to  Brutus  and  Cassias  (Cic.  ad  Div.
xL  !.)>  written  in  April.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  115

that  the  consul  was  aware  that  he  could  not  main-
tain his  own  power  in  the  state  if  any  one  of  the
patriots  was  in  a  condition  to  wield  an  imposing  mili-
tary force.  Decimus  however  hesitated  to  defy  the
consul's  menaces  :  he  looked  around  him  for  support
against  the  new  tyranny,  but  he  distrusted  Sextus
and  Bassus,  the  Pompeian  leaders,  and  declared  that
he  would  only  in  the  last  resort  join  his  forces  with
theirs.  He  would  have  been  content,  so  despondent
was  he,  with  the  means  of  making  an  honourable
retreat :  with  this  view  he  solicited  the  mere  semblance
of  public  service  abroad  for  himself  and  his  associ-
ates. Antonius  promised  to  procure  him  the  legatio
libera;  but  even  this  trifling  favour  he  contume-
liously  delayed,  until  Decimus  resolved  at  last  to  con-
sult his  safety  by  open  flight.  He  declared  that  he
would  retire  from  public  life,  and  seek  a  retreat  in
Ehodes  or  some  other  quiet  asylum,  where  the  dignity
of  his  self-banishment  might  at  least  be  respected.
This  resolution  was  given  out  perhaps  as  a  blind  ;  at
least  he  was  not  constant  to  it.  Immediately  after
the  date  of  the  letter  in  which  he  announces  it,  we
find  him  in  his  Cisalpine  government,  where  he  had
placed  himself  at  the  head  of  the  forces  Decimm
of  the  republic,  and  hoped  to  derive  power-  theV^rn-

f , .  , F  F. .  j  i •  mentofthe

iul  aid  Irom  the  mumcipia  and  colonies,  cisaipme.
with  some  of  which  Cassius  had  intimate  relations.1
But  the  province  was  devoted  to  Caesar :  neither  the
troops  nor  the  provincials  were  disposed  to  attach
themselves  to  their  new  proconsul.  So  near  the  gates
of  Eome,  where  there  was  as  yet  only  one  legion
under  arms  for  the  consul's  protection,  Decimus  dared

Cic.  ad  Ait.  xiv.  13.  (April  19.):  "Quamvis  tu  magna  et  mihi  ju-
cunda  scripseris  de  D.  Bruti  adventu  ad  suas  legiones."  Comp.
Philipp.  iii.  15.,  v.  13,  x.  5.;  ad  Div.  xii.  5.  Cicero's  vehement
insertions  of  the  good  feeling  of  the  provincials  were  hazarded  to
encourage  the  senate.  They  do  not  seem  to  have  been  borne  out  by
the  result.

116  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

not  make  the  single  stride  which  should  confront  him
with  his  enemies.  He  amused  himself  in  this  agony
of  the  commonwealth  with  making  incursions  into
the  valleys  of  the  Alps,  and  chastising  marauders
on  his  frontiers.  To  his  associates  he  might  pretend
that  the  booty  he  thus  obtained,  the  spoils  of  rocks
and  snows,  was  necessary  to  content  his  soldiers,  ill-
paid  and  half-fed  from  the  resources  at  his  command.
But  his  real  object  was  the  puerile  ambition  of  aspir-
ing to  a  triumph.  He  wrote  to  the  senate  to  solicit
the  honour  of  a  supplication,  the  first  step  towards
the  attainment  of  his  desires,  and  he  called  upon
Cicero  to  exert  his  influence  on  his  behalf.1  But
these  dreams  were  dispelled  by  the  events  which
followed.

While  Trebonius  proceeded  to  his  government  in
Brat™  and  the  province  of  Asia,  and  Cimber  assumed
inlheneiigh"  command  in  Bithynia,  the  leaders  of  the

bourhood  of ..  .  • -i • ,  i  -IT

Rome.  late  conspiracy  remained  in  the  neighbour-

hood of  Rome.  It  was  ever  the  weakness  of  the
chiefs  of  the  oligarchy  to  believe  that  at  bottom
the  populace  of  Rome  was  loyal  to  the  old  constitu-
tion, and  only  required  time  and  rest  from  the  agita-
tion of  contending  factions  to  recover  a  healthy  tone
of  obedience  to  its  natural  heads.  At  the  same  time
they  still  clung  to  the  hope  that  Antonius  would
maintain  the  cause  of  good  government  against  the
anarchy  which  in  their  view  threatened  general  ruin.
They  brooded  with  sullen  satisfaction  over  their  late
desperate  deed,  which  they  trusted  would  at  least
deter  him  from  aspiring  to  similar  pre-eminence.
Upon  Dolabella  they  relied  more  confidently,  as  the
ancient  foe  and  recent  rival  of  his  actual  colleague.
In  Octavius  they  beheld  at  least  another  pledge  that
the  commonwealth  would  not  be  surrendered  tamely
into  Antonius's  hands ;  and  they  did  not  look  beyond

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  xi.  4.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  117

Antonius  for  any  possible  pretender  to  supreme
power.  Flattered  by  these  hopes  they  made  no
attempt  to  strengthen  their  own  hands  against  the
contingency  of  civil  war ;  and  though  some  towns  of
southern  Italy,  such  for  instance  as  Puteoli  and  Tea-
num,  chose  them  for  their  patrons,  they  carefully
abstained  from  any  hostile  movement  to  ensure  their
personal  safety,  or  secure  their  peaceable  succession
to  the  governments  to  which  they  had  been  appointed.
The  law  indeed  forbade  the  praetors  to  be  absent
from  the  city,  where  their  judicial  duties  were  unre-
mitting, for  more  than  ten  days.  Yet  Brutus  and
Cassius,  unable  to  obtain  security  for  their  persons
in  Borne,  were  compelled  to  linger  outside  the  walls.
Of  course  they  had  no  right  to  enter  the  provinces
assigned  them  before  the  expiration  of  their  year  of
office.  Antonius  proposed  to  take  advantage  of  this
dilemma.  He  summoned  the  senate  for  the  first  of
June.  The  self-exiled  praetors  consulted  with  their
friends  whether  they  should  present  themselves  before
the  assembly :  the  continued  influx  of  the  veterans
seemed  to  render  their  public  appearance  in  Eome
more  perilous  than  ever.  Their  advisers,  however,
were  divided  in  opinion.  Cicero  approved,  but  shrank
from  the  responsibility  of  counselling  the  bolder
course.  At  last  they  applied  to  the  consul  to  dis-
cover whether  they  could  be  secure  in  the  city,
and  though  his  answer  is  not  known,  we  may  con-
jecture that  it  was  not  such  as  to  encourage  them :
for  though  a  matter  affecting  their  personal  in-
terests was  debated  in  the  sitting  which  followed,
they  did  not  choose  to  exhibit  themselves.  The
senate  had  been  left  without  leaders,  and  struggled
helplessly  in  the  consul's  toils.  He  determined  to
push  his  advantage,  and  secure  the  government  of  an
important  province  with  the  command  of  a  powerful
army.  Syria  and  the  conduct  of  the  Parthian  war
were  the  greatest  prize  the  commonwealth  could  offer:

118  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

but  this  his  enemies  would  have  strained  every  nerve
to  withhold  from  him.  He  instigated  Dolabella  to
Antonius  ob-  claim  it.  The  senate  resisted  languidly
Doiabeiiaand  and  irresolutely,  and  the  tribes  granted

Macedonia  for  t_% •  T  J- j. 1

himself.  it  to  Antonius  s  instances,  immediately
afterwards  he  obtained  for  himself  Macedonia,  of
which  his  opponents  were  less  jealous,  as  the  great
army  there  assembled  was  destined  for  the  Eastern
frontier,  and  therefore  must  slip,  as  they  supposed,
from  his  hands.1  Antonius,  however,  as  we  shall
presently  see,  had  another  stroke  to  play.  Mean-
while these  provinces,  promised  to  Brutus  and  Cas-
sius,  were  lost  to  them  almost  without  an  effort.  It
was  in  vain  that  the  senate  had  confirmed  the  acts  of
the  dictatorship.  It  was  now  discovered  that  Anto-
nius meant  to  respect  them  only  so  far  as  they  served
his  own  purposes,  and  the  senate  could  only  bow  to
the  interpretation  he  chose  to  affix  to  its  decree.2
On  the  fifth  of  June,  these  new  appointments  were
followed  by  a  further  decree,  which  assigned  to
Brutus  and  Cassius,  in  compensation,  the  charge  of
providing  the  city  with  grain,  with  authority  for  that
purpose  in  certain  districts  on  the  coasts  of  the
Mediterranean.3  It  is  remarkable  that  the  manifest
violence  and  injustice  of  this  measure  should  have
elicited  no  indignant  condemnation  from  the  writers
who  record  it.  Cicero  indeed  alludes  to  it  as  a  mark
of  the  senate's  approbation,  and  while  he  admits  that

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  7,  8.

2  Antonius,  according  to  Appian,  ventured  to  declare  that  the
confirmation  of  Csesar's  acts  was  meant  only  to  satisfy  the  people  at
the  moment,  and  not  intended  to  be  fully  carried  out  in  all  respects.
Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  22.

3 1  speak  thus  vaguely  because  of  the  strange  discrepancy  in  the
provinces  named.  Cicero,  in  a  letter  of  the  period,  distinctly  men-
tions Asia  and  Sicily  (ad  Alt.  xv.  11.  20. ),  while  in  his  Philippics
(ii.  38,  xi.  12,)  he  assigns  Crete  to  Brutus.  Appian  asserts  that
Cassius  was  to  have  the  Cyrenaica,  which  was  in  fact  included  in  the
same  government  with  Crete.  The  arrangement,  whatever  it  was,
was  never  executed.

XU.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  119

so  inferior  a  charge  is  not  equal  to  their  high  deserts,
only  laments  that  they  should  seem  to  owe  it  in  some
degree  to  the  favour  of  Antonius.1

Cicero  draws  the  veil  from  the  fluctuating  counsels
and  impotent  complaints  of  the  liberators  Ci(!CT0.8  in_
themselves  at  this  crisis,  in  a  letter  to  At-  ^1^^!^
ticus.  The  day  after  this  important  decree  at  Antium-
had  been  made,  he  went  to  meet  them  at  Antium,
where  they  were  then  sojourning.  Brutus  was  well
pleased  to  see  him.  He  was  surrounded  by  a  group
of  friends  ;  among  them  were  his  mother  Servilia,  his
wife  Porcia,  and  Tertulla  his  sister,  the  wife  of  Cas-
sius, who  took  an  active  part  in  their  debates.2  Favo-
nius,  who  had  refused  to  participate  in  the  assassin-
ation, had  come  to  aid  the  assassins  with  his  advice.
Cicero  counselled  them  to  undertake  the  charge  as-
signed them,  of  which  they  had  just  received  intima-
tion. He  considered  that  it  would  at  least  ensure
their  personal  safety.  Cassius  hereupon  put  on  a
swaggering  martial  air  (such  is  the  description  of  the
narrator),  and  vowed  that  he  would  not  go  to  his  ap-
pointed province,  he  would  not  accept  as  a  boon  what
was  intended  as  an  insult.3  What  then  would  he  do  ?
asked  his  adviser.  He  would  betake  himself  to
Achaia,  a  province  full  of  devoted  Pompeians.  And
whither  would  Brutus  proceed  ?  To  Eome,  if  Cicero
advised  it.  No,  replied  the  other,  by  no  means ;  you

would  not  be  safe  there But  if  I  could  be  safe

there,  returned  Brutus,  ivould  you  then  be  satisfied  ?
....  Yes,  indeed,  said  Cicero ;  /  should  rejoice  that
you  should  neither  go  now  to  a  province,  nor  next

1  Cic.  Philipp.  ii.  13.;  ad  Att.  xv.  9.

2  Tertulla had  recently  recovered from a  premature  delivery
Cicero  lamented  her  being  delivered  of  a  still-born  child :  "  Tertullae
nollem  abortum;  tarn  enim  Cassii  sunt  jam  quam  Bruti  serendi,"
Ad  Att.  xiv.  20.,  written  on  the  llth  May. The  letter  in  which  this
scene  is  described  (ad  Att.  xv.  11.)  is  dated  June  9.

3  Cic.  1.  c. :  '•  Fortibus  sane  oculis Cassius,  Martem spirare  di-
ceres."

120  HISTORY OF THE ROilAXS  CH.  xxiv.

year,  after  the  expiration  of  the  prcetorship  :  but  I
decline  advising  you  to  trust  yourself  in  the  city.
And  he  went  on  to  explain  the  grounds  of  his  ap-
prehension for  the  liberator's  safety  in  Eome.  There-
upon they  began  one  and  all  to  cry  out,  lamenting
and  complaining,  Cassius  above  all  the  rest ;  harping
upon  the  opportunities  they  had  let  slip,  which  meant,
doubtless,  their  neglecting  to  put  Antonius  to  death
as  well  as  Csesar ;  and  accusing  Decimus  of  want  of
spirit  and  activity  in  his  province.  /,  for  my  part,
says  Cicero,  exhorted  them  to  refrain  from  comment
upon  the  past,  though  I  felt  as  they  did  about  it.
And  when  I  began  to  tell  them  what  I  thought  they
should  have  done, — so  soon  had  he  forgotten  his  own
sage  advice, — yet  there  was  nothing  new  in  it,  no-
thing but  what  every  one  has  said  over  and  over
again, —  nor  did  I  hint  that  any  one  else  ought  to
have  been  put  out  of  the  way, — but  only  that  the
senate  should  have  been  convened,  the  zeal  of  the
people  inflamed,  the  whole  power  of  government
seized  and  wielded, — when  I  began  to  say  this,
Servilia  exclaimed  she  had  never  heard  counsel  so
bold  and  spirited  from  any  one  I  Cicero  checked,
it  seems,  her  untimely  indignation.  Brutus  and
Cassius  appeared  thoroughly  ashamed  of  themselves,
and  were  now  disposed  to  acquiesce  in  the  appoint-
ments decreed  them.  They  only  hesitated  about  the
charge  of  provisioning  the  city,  which  they  deemed
beneath  their  dignity :  Servilia  undertook  to  exert
her  influence  with  Caesar's  friends  to  get  them  re-
lieved from  it.  And  so  the  writer  congratulates  him-
self on  having  discharged  a  painful  duty,  and  given
his  final  advice  to  friends  whose  utter  want  of  sense,
foresight,  and  method,  made  him  already  despair  of
their  success.  Nothing  more,  he  says,  remains  for
him  but  to  fly  far  away,  where  he  may  hear  no  more  of
the  acts  and  fame  of  the  Pelopidce,  a  name  which,  to
the  learned  Koman,  symbolized  a  dynasty  of  tyrants.

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  121

Such  is  the  lively  narrative  of  one  who  claims  to
have  been  the  principal  actor  in  this  in-

,  .  .  f.  i .  -I.  Their  vacilla-

terestmg  scene. Alter  making  every  allow-  tu>n  ana

r At  •<. rxt,  -.L  i_ j. •  imbecility.

ance  lor  the  vanity  ol  the  writer,  who  strives,
even  in  his  most  private  correspondence,  to  represent
himself  as  the  conductor  of  every  affair  in  which  he
participates,  and  for  his  restless  anxiety  to  excuse
himself  for  shrinking  from  espousing  openly  a  cause
he  deemed  hopeless,  still  it  is  impossible  not  to  read,
in  this  curious  document,  the  utter  condemnation  of
the  patriot  chiefs  as  men  of  conduct  or  energy.  They
had  assumed  the  part  of  statesmen  and  heroes  ;  but
their  policy  was  merely  to  snatch  at  any  proffered
advice ;  their  spirit  displayed  itself  only  in  puerile
sullenness  or  tardy  recrimination.  For  the  first  time
in  the  history  of  Kome  we  discover  a  group  of  female
politicians  in  counsel  with  the  statesmen  of  the  re-
public. Of  Porcia,  indeed,  we  have  already  heard,
that  in  courage  and  resolution  she  was  at  least  equal
to  her  husband.  But  in  the  voluptuous  intriguer
Servilia.,  the  matron  who  first  debauched  the  youth
of  Caesar,  we  were  not  prepared  to  discover  the  most
decided  and  vigorous  counsellor  of  the  whole  con-
clave. The  maternal  authority  which,  as  many  years
his  senior,  she  is  said  to  have  exercised  over  her  half-
brother  Cato,  bespeaks  doubtless  a  strong  mind,  to
which  we  may  attribute  the  influence  she  wielded
through  life  over  her  illustrious  lover.1  Even  in  his
later  years  he  had  continued  to  pay  court  to  her.
She  had  obtained  from  him  several  confiscated  estates,
and  among  them  still  kept  the  Neapolitan  villa  of
Pontius  Aquila 2 ;  and  her  engagement  to  get  the  terms
of  her  son's  appointment  altered  evinces  a  thorough

1  Asconius  in  Scanr.  p.  19. :  "Servilia  apud  Catonem  maternam
habebat  auctoritatem."  As 'mother  of  Brutus,  who  was  only  ten
years  younger  than  Cato,  she  must  have  been  considerably  older  than
the  latter.

Cic.  ad  Ait.  xiv.  21.:  "  Multa  inro<r6\oiKa.  Pontii  Xeapolitanum
a  matre  tyrannoctoni  possideri."

122  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

confidence  in  the  ascendancy  she  still  possessed  over
his  adherents  even  after  his  death.  Connected  as  she
was  by  the  nearest  ties  both  with  Brutus  her  son,  and
Cassius  her  daughter's  husband,  she  threw  herselt
unreservedly  into  their  interests  after  the  fatal  deed,
and  seems  to  have  striven  in  vain  to  nerve  their
courage  and  invigorate  their  policy.  Among  the
ribald  stories  of  the  day  was  one  that,  in  the  decay  of
her  own  charms,  she  had  surrendered  to  her  gallant
the  virtue  of  her  daughter  Tertulla  l  :  there  is  at  least
much  stronger  evidence  to  attest  her  devotion  to  her
son,  that  gallant's  assassin.

Brutus  and  Cassius  were  still  reluctant  to  quit
Italy.  The  scheme  for  removing  them  to  a  dis-
tance proved  abortive ;  they  pretended  to  make
preparations  for  undertaking  their  new  commission,
but  they  continued  to  linger  on  the  coast  of  Latium
and  Campania,  watching  events,  and  waiting  upon
fortune.  Their  ulterior  plans  were  wholly  unde-
cided. They  were  anxious  to  make  one  effort  more
to  win  the  favour  of  the  urban  populace,  and  this
they  hoped  to  do  through  the  spectacle  of  the  Ludi
Apollinares,  which  it  was  the  business  of  Brutus,
Brutns  as  city  pra?tor,  to  exhibit.  During  the

LmUAiS-  interval  they  flitted  from  place  to  place ;
iinare«.  from  Antlum  they  returned  to  Lanuvium,
thence  repaired  to  Anagnia,  and  finally  awaited  in
Nesis,  an  island  of  Baia3,  the  result  of  their  last
manoeuvre.  The  games  were  exhibited  at  the  charge
of  Brutus ;  but,  in  his  absence,  his  colleague  C.  An-

1  Suetonius  (Jvl.  50.)  quotes  a  jest  of  Cicero  as  his  authority,  and
is  copied  by  Macrobius,  Saturn,  ii.  2.  The  daughter's  name  was  pro-
perly Junia  Tertia.  Her  death  at  a  very  advanced  age  is  recorded
by  Tacitus,  Ann.  in.  76,  A.D.  22.  Servilia's  first  husband  M.  Brutus
-.va<  slain  B.C.  82.  She  afterwards  married  Junius  Silanus  (consul
B.C.  62),  and  her  daughter  by  him  may  thus  have  reached  her  hun-
dredth year  A.D.  22.  Servilia  herself  seems  to  have  been  the  Ninon
of  antiquity.  She  must  have  been  several  years  older  than  Caesar,
and  accordingly  between  60  and  70  years  of  age  when  her  admirer
was  still  lavishing  upon  her  the  spoils  of  the  Pompeians.

A.0.710-B.C.44.  TINDER THE EMPIRE.  123

tonius  presided  alone.  Brutus  had  spared  no  cost
in  engaging  players  for  the  theatre,  and  providing
wild  beasts  for  the  arena.  He  was  so  far  successful
in  his  object  as  to  elicit  the  applause  of  the  spec-
tators. But  this  empty  acknowledgment  of  his
efforts  to  please  had  lost  its  ancient  significance.1
The  Roman  people  had  been  too  grossly  pampered
with  playthings  and  amusements  to  feel  any  real
gratitude  to  their  interested  entertainers.  Mean-
while, to  the  horror  of  all  true  patriots,  the  seventh
day  of  the  month  Quintilis,  that  for  which  the  exhi-
bition was  announced,  was  now  first  publicly  desig-
nated as  the  Xones  of  Julius  2 ;  and  Brutus  might
resent  the  stratagem  of  his  colleague,  who  substituted
a  play  of  Accius  on  the  insipid  theme  of  Tereus  and
Philomel,  for  the  stirring  drama  on  the  banishment
of  the  Tarquins,  which  the  descendant  of  the  repub-
lican hero  had  been  careful  to  bespeak.3

Appearances  at  Rome  were  not  sufficiently  favour-
able to  encourage  the  hopes  of  Brutus,  or  xherepubu-
of  Cicero,  who  had  now  joined  him. The
neighbourhood  of  Rome,  perhaps  the  whole
extent  of  the  peninsula,  was  becoming  daily  Pomp«ius-
more  unsafe. Violence  was  apprehended  from  the
legions  of  Macedonia,  which  it  seems  were  expected
to  cross  the  water,  and  suddenly  throw  themselves
upon  Italy. The  liberators  had  assembled  a  number
of  vessels,  under  pretext  of  sending  them  abroad  for
grain. With  these  they  now  proposed  to  put  to
sea.4 Cicero, who had also resolved to retreat,

1  Cicero  (ad  Ail.  xvi.  2.)  complains,  "Pop.  Rom.  manus  suas  non
in  defendenda  rcpublica  sed  in  plaudcndo  consumere."

2  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xvi.  4.

3  Cicero  says  indeed  (ad  Alt.  xvi.  2.),  "  Delectari  mihi  Tereo  vide-
batur  (Brutus);''  and  we  may  suppose  that  there  would  be  many
passages  in  the  drama  of  a  republican  poet  on  such  a  subject  reflect-
ing on tyranny. A modern  audience  might  apply  the  story  of
Tereus  to  the  usual  career  of  successful  usurpation,  which  first  de-
bauches the  press  and  then  cuts  out  its  tongue.

4  Cic.  ad  Att.  xv.  12.

124  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

would  gladly  have  availed  himself  of  their  convoy,
for  the  waters  of  the  Mediterranean  were  again  in-
fested by  pirates1.  Wretched,  however,  as  was  the
prospect  of  affairs  at  home,  one  gleam  of  satisfac-
tion reached  them  from  the  success  which,  as  they
now  learnt,  was  attending  the  arms  of  Sextus  Pom-
peius.  Though  the  young  adventurer  was  contend-
ing avowedly  for  his  personal  interests,  and  had
merely  sworn  not  to  disband  his  forces  till  he  were
repossessed  of  the  patrimony  of  his  house, — though
his  brother  CnaBus  long  before  had  discarded  his
family  connexion  with  the  cause  of  the  oligarchy,
— yet  the  diversion  which  his  valour  was  making  in
the  West  might  aid  the  progress  of  the  good  cause
in  the  opposite  extremity  of  the  empire.  Sextus,
after  making  his  escape  from  the  field  of  Munda,
had  concealed  himself  in  the  country  of  the  Lace-
tani,  in  the  eastern  Pyrenees,  where  his  father's
memory  lived  in  the  hearts  of  the  people  no  less
than  in  the  trophy  he  had  erected  on  the  moun-
tains.2 From  these  defiles  he  had  descended  with
a  band  of  devoted  followers,  as  soon  as  the  victor
had  withdrawn  the  greater  part  of  his  legions  from
the  peninsula.  Asinius  Pollio  had  been  left  in
Baetica  with  a  force  inadequate  to  suppress  this
new  revolt.  Sextus  had  gained  over  the  cities  of
the  south,  one  by  one,  and  the  news  of  Cesar's
death  gave  an  impulse  to  the  success  of  his  enter-
prise, already  crowned  with  a  brilliant  victory  and
the  supposed  slaughter  of  the  rival  commander.
With  a  force  amounting  to  six  legions,  he  had  now
the  whole  Iberian  peninsula  in  his  power.  He
knew,  however,  that  the  consuls  would  not  let
this  noble  province  slip  thus  easily  from  their
hands.  Lepidus  was  assembling  a  large  army  to
wrest  his  conquests  from  him ;  he  was  probably
pressed  for  money,  and  was  therefore  disposed  to

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  xvi.  2.  2  Dion,  xlv.  10.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  125

try  the  effect  of  negotiations.  He  boldly  demanded
a  general  disarming  on  all  sides,  and  the  patriots,
denuded  as  they  now  were  of  the  military  resources
which  Csesar  had  promised  them,  might  look  with
equal  satisfaction  to  a  peace  concluded  on  these
terms,  which  would  place  them  once  more  on  a
level  with  their  enemy,  or  to  the  alternative  of
renewed  hostilities,  with  so  powerful  an  auxiliary  at
their  back.

Cicero,  indeed,  while  he  foresaw  that  civil  war  was
inevitable,  and  indulged  a  hope,  from  the  Cicero  8hrinks
imposing  attitude  of  Sextus,  that  its  result  SjJJJoStof
might  yet  be  favourable  to  the  cause  of  meuncho^8
the  republic,  had  fully  resolved  in  his  own  antit:iPations-
mind  to  decline  any  share  in  the  contest.  He  had
never  ceased  to  regret  his  participation  in  the  Pom-
peian  counsels  in  Epirus ;  the  mortifications  his  self-
love  had  there  experienced  had  deeply  impressed
him  ;  his  life  had  been  threatened  by  the  vehemence
of  Cnseus,  and  he  was  little  disposed  to  waste  his
sage  advice  upon  a  brother  not  less  violent  and  un-
reasonable. But  a  change,  he  felt,  had  come  over
the  character  of  civil  conflict.  He  would  no  longer
be  permitted  to  maintain  neutrality.  The  studies
to  which  he  had  recently  abandoned  himself  with
more  devotion  than  ever,  had  unnerved  him  for  the
duties  of  the  camp;  but  they  would  meet  with  no
indulgence  from  the  ferocious  gladiators  who  were
now  about  to  rush  into  combat.  From  Caesar  and
Pompeius,  the  urbane  and  the  lettered,  to  Antonius
and  Sextus,  the  selfish  and  the  savage,  was  a  great
and  melancholy  change.  Nor  did  Cicero  feel  that
his  independence  would  be  respected  even  by  some
of  the  chiefs  of  the  patriots,  such  for  instance  as
Cassius  and  Decimus.  He  had  little  confidence  in
the  loyal  professions  of  Hirtius  and  Pansa,  the  con-
suls elect,  whom  he  knew  to  be  still  sincerely  at-
tached to  the  memory  of  the  dictator,  and  almost

126  HISTORY OF  THE EOMANS  CH.  xxiv.

prepared  to  draw  the  sword  against  his  murderers.
The  mortifying  conviction  was  now  forced  upon  him,
that  the  murder  of  Csesar  was  a  fruitless  exploit.
That  the  tyrant  was  slain,  that  freedom  had  been
signally  avenged,  was  a  bitter  satisfaction,  and  one
who  could  so  entirely  renounce  all  gratitude  for  the
favours  he  had  sought  and  obtained  from  the  vic-
tim, might  still  continue  to  disguise  from  himself
the  baseness  and  treachery  of  the  deed  l ;  but  every
day  made  it  more  and  more  evident  that  the  per-
petrators of  the  crime  knew  not  how  to  profit  by  it.
Self-banished  from  Eorne,  where  his  voice  was  power-
less and  his  person  in  danger,  Cicero  wandered  from
place  to  place,  seeking  perhaps  to  divert  his  mind
by  change  of  scene.  In  the  course  of  two  months
we  hear  of  him  successively  at  Tusculum,  at  Lanu-
vium,  at  Fundi,  at  Formise,  at  Sinuessa,  Puteoli,
Pompeii  and  Neapolis.  But  neither  the  promenade
on  the  beach  at  his  marine  villas,  nor  the  sunny
hills  and  wide  prospect  of  his  inland  estates,  could
divert  his  thoughts  from  the  dangers  which  beset
him  on  every  side.  The  charming  coast  of  Baise
and  Neapolis  was  frequented  in  the  summer  months
by  the  Eoman  nobles,  and  Cicero  was  distressed
by  the  crowds  of  aristocratic  loungers,  who  invaded
his  solitude  and  marred  perhaps  his  visions  of  neu-
trality. Yet  in  the  lowest  depths  of  his  despon-
dency, he  could  find  one  sure  refuge  from  disquietude
in  the  composition  of  his  immortal  dissertations.
With  these  he  consumed  the  hours  of  inaction  which
hung  heavy  on  his  hands  ;  with  these  he  indemnified
himself  for  the  business  of  the  forum  and  the  senate-
house,  in  which  he  had  vainly  hoped  that  the
tyrant's  overthrow  would  have  opened  a  new  and
splendid  career  to  a  champion  of  the  gown.  His
treatises  on  Old  Age,  on  Friendship,  on  Glory,  and

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xv.  4.:  "  Gratiosi  eramus  apud  ilium,  quern  Di  mor-
tuum  perduint."

A.U.710-B.C.4-4. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  127

on  Fate,  took  their  high  spiritual  tone  from  the
mental  discipline  under  which  they  were  now  writ-
ten. Their  author  had  attained  a  frame  of  mind
more  nearly  approaching  to  religious  resignation
than  under  any  previous  afflictions.  From  his  let-
ters at  this  time  we  learn  that  his  judgment  of
others  was  more  charitable,  bis  confidence  in  him-
self less  overweening,  and  his  prospects  on  the
whole  calmer.  We  may  now  believe  him  when
he  avows  that  life  is  become  indifferent  to  him,
that  he  flies  from  the  centre  of  affairs,  not  from
apprehension  of  danger,  but  to  maintain  his  name
untarnished.  He  is  old  in  years,  and  ripe  in  re-
putation, and  all  he  wishes  is  to  retire  from  the
stage  with  dignity.  Athens,  the  home  of  the
afflicted,  the  city  of  the  soul,  is  the  place  to  which
he  could  now  most  cheerfully  betake  himself.  Be-
sides the  classic  attractions  of  the  land  of  Greece,
it  was  there  that  his  son  was  at  the  moment
studying.  The  first  wish  of  his  heart  was  now  to
cherish  the  sentiment  of  paternal  affection.  In  the
wreck  of  his  private  fortune,  which  partook  of  the
general  embarrassments,  he  is  still  solicitous  to  main-
tain his  child  suitably  to  his  rank  and  expectations.1
But  in  abandoning  Italy  he  took  leave  of  the  most
intimate  of  his  friends,  and  when  he  heard  that
Atticus  had  shed  tears  at  their  parting,  he  declared
that  had  he  but  witnessed  this  manifestation  of
tenderness,  he  might  perhaps  at  the  last  moment
have  relinquished  his  intended  journey.

While  the  foes  whose  opposition  would  have  been
most  formidable  to  him  were  thus  removed  from  the
centre  of  affairs,  and  seemed  only  to  await  for  an
opportunity  of  retiring  from  Italy  with  honour,  the
plans  of  Antonius  had  been  ripening.  He  was  not

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  xv.  15.:  "Id  etiara  ad  dignitatem  meam  pertinere,
eum  non  modo  Hberaliter  a  nobis  sed  etiam  ornate  cumulateque
tractari."

128  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXIV.

satisfied  with  the  province  of  Macedonia,  which  he
had  already  extorted.  He  wanted  the  government
Antonius  °^  the  Cisalpine,  from  which  he  might  keep
J>btrJnutehe°  one  hand  stretched  almost  to  the  gates  of
fhrc?s3p"nef  the  city.  At  the  same  time  he  coveted  the
thffclioM*  command  of  the  legions  destined  for  the
thlp^thian  Parthian  war,  six  legions  without  a  general,
for  the  service  of  whose  swords  several  com-
petitors were  already  suing.'  They  were  the  flower
of  the  forces  of  the  republic,  and  the  quarters  in
which  they  lay,  on  the  coast  of  the  Ionian  gulf,  were
within  sight  of  Italy.  Could  he  transport  these
soldiers  to  Ravenna,  the  commonwealth  would  lie
at  his  mercy ;  the  Rubicon  had  ceased  to  be  a  barrier
against  so  docile  a  pupil  in  the  art  of  military  usur-
pation. He  had  already  gratified  his  colleague  Dola-
bella  by  obtaining  for  him  the  province  of  Syria.  To
this  command  the  conduct  of  the  Parthian  expedition
would  necessarily  attach;  but  Antonius  was  deter-
mined to  wrest  from  his  rival's  hands  the  forces
destined  for  this  purpose.  Accordingly  he  caused
advices  to  be  forwarded  to  Rome,  importing  that  the
Getse,  to  the  north  of  Macedonia,  had  crossed  the
frontier,  and  were  committing  depredations  upon  the
colonists  and  provincials.  Upon  the  strength  of  this
alarm  the  consul  demanded  of  the  senate  a  military
force  to  chastise  the  marauders.  He  gave  out  that
the  dictator  himself  had  proposed  to  postpone  his
vengeance  upon  the  Parthians  to  the  pacification  of
this  frontier;  and  he  urged  further,  that  there  was
no  immediate  danger  in  the  East,  where  the  con-
querors of  Crassus  were  content  to  repose  upon  their
laurels.  Dolabella  was  persuaded  to  accept  of  a
single  legion,  and  allow  the  transfer  of  the  remaining
force  to  his  colleague  ;  the  senate  was  wheedled  into
consenting  to  it,  notwithstanding  that  the  emissaries
it  sent  to  inquire  into  the  state  of  the  province  de-

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xvi.  7.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  129

clared  that  they  met  with  no  traces  of  the  supposed
invaders.  They  reported,  however,  that  though  the
Geta3  had  not  really  penetrated  across  the  border,
they  might  be  expected  to  do  so,  as  soon  as  the
legions  were  withdrawn.1  It  was  decided  that  these
troops  should  not  be  despatched  to  Syria.  They  re-
mained in  their  old  quarters,  and  Antonius  could  now
send  his  brother  Caius  to  assume  the  command  of
them.  This  point  gained,  it  would  be  easy  to  sum-
mon them  to  Italy  when  the  time  for  employing
them  should  arrive.

The  assurance  that  the  consul  was  intriguing  for
an  exchange  of  his  province  alarmed  the  Baffled  by
senate.  Communications  were  held  with  ^tTa'hoj-
Decimus  ;  he  was  put  on  his  guard  against  1a0t*nrwCuhcUi"
the  machinations  in  progress  against  him,  Octavius-
and  exhorted  to  hold  his  own  against  the  enemy.
What  could  not  be  extorted  from  the  assembly  of  the
nobles,  Antonius  contemplated  obtaining  from  the
people.  If  the  senate  refused  to  submit  the  appoint-
ment to  the  comitia,  he  knew  that  it  dared  not  resist  an
appointment  which  the  comitia  should  itself  decree.
But  the  people,  whom  he  had  so  long  amused  or
coerced,  were  falling  under  the  influence  of  a  rival.
Octavius,  sheltered  behind  the  name  of  the  great
Julius,  had  aimed  many  covert  blows  at  the  consul's
popularity.  Antonius  had  irritated  many  of  his
supporters  by  the  measures  of  repression  which  had
won  him  the  acclamations  of  the  senate  ;  the  protec-
tion he  had  extended  to  the  assassins,  and  his  ex-
tenuation of  their  crime,  his  neglect  to  discharge  the
dictator's  legacies,  and  still  more  his  allowing  another
to  make  up  the  sum  from  his  private  funds,  had

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  25.:  "etr'  a\7)6fs  fW  inr'  'Avrwviov  S
This  writer  accounts  for  the  yielding  of  the  senate  by  supposing  that
Antonius  introduced  at  this  time  his  decree  for  the  abolition  of  the
dictatorship.  This  had  undoubtedly  taken  place  before.  We  may
presume  that  the  consul  bought  its  acquiescence  by  some  other  con-
cession.

YOL.  III.  K

130  HISTORY  OF THE EOMANS  CH.  xxiv.

placed  weapons  in  his  adversary's  hands,  which  he
wielded  with  a  vigour  and  adroitness  beyond  his
years.  Antonius  had  not  only  insulted  Cesar's  heir,
he  had  threatened  him.  Octavius  took  advantage  of
this  ebullition  of  temper  to  surround  his  own  person
with  armed  attendants,  and  he  paid  his  court  the  more
assiduously  to  the  veterans,  by  glowing  harangues
in  praise  of  their  lamented  chief,  and  in  defiance  of
the  consul  who  had  hesitated  to  avenge  him.  Even
the  officers  of  the  consul's  body-guard  responded  to
these  stirring  appeals.  Honoured  and  enriched  as
they  had  been  by  their  new  master,  they  could  not
renounce  the  memory  of  earlier  obligations.  They
surrounded  their  imperator  with  clamorous  impor-
tunity, urging  him,  for  their  sakes,  for  his  own  sake,
to  abstain  from  his  contumelious  disparagement  of
their  common  benefactor.  Antonius  felt  the  ground
shake  beneath  his  feet.  It  was  necessary  to  conciliate
his  own  supporters  ;  it  was  not  less  necessary  to  make
terms  with  Octavius.  The  young  upstart  had  be-
come an  important  political  character.  Accordingly
the  veteran  intriguer  made  the  requisite  overtures,
and  a  conference  between  them  resulted  in  a  pretended
reconciliation.1

His  position  thus  opportunely  strengthened,  the
with  M.  consul  no  longer  hesitated  to  apply  to  the
obta'nrfrom  people  for  an  exchange  of  provinces.  He
«ohpangeeofn  desired  that  Macedonia  should  be  trans-
proviaces.  ferred  ^  big  brotner  Caius,  the  Gaulish

provinces  to  himself.  The  paltry  forays  with  which
Decimus  had  indulged  his  legions  in  the  Alpine
valleys  might  have  screened  him  from  the  imputation
of  hostile  intentions  against  the  government  at  home ;
but  it  suited  Antonius  to  charge  him  with  preparing
to  attack  the  Caesareans,  and  assert  the  cause  of  the
tyrannicides  with  arms;  and  he  urged  the  recall  of

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  28—30.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  131

the  Macedonian  army  to  Italy,  for  the  defence  of  the
commonwealth  itself.  The  senate  was  agitated  and
perplexed.  For  a  moment  it  threatened  to  interpose
with  the  tribunitian  veto.  A  warier  and  more  states-
manlike method  of  defeating  the  intrigue  indirectly
was  suggested.  It  was  now  for  the  first  time  pro-
posed to  admit  the  whole  of  the  Cisalpine  Gaul
within  the  bounds  of  Italy;  and  thus  place  it  with
the  rest  of  the  peninsula,  under  the  direct  control  of
the  central  government.  Such  an  arrangement  would
obviate  the  danger  which  threatened  the  freedom  of
the  state  from  the  immediate  vicinity  of  a  military
commander.  There  would  no  longer  be  a  procon-
sular army  quartered  within  ten  days'  journey  of
Eome.  Such  a  measure,  however,  was  too  bold  and
vigorous  for  the  grasp  of  the  feeble  assembly  before
whom  the  idea  was  now  broached.  Upon  one  statesman
in  Home,  and  he  the  youngest  of  all,  it  made  the  im-
pression it  deserved.  Octavius  felt  at  once  the  full
importance  of  such  a  change  in  the  relation  of  the
province  to  the  metropolis,  and  when  the  time  and
opportunity  arrived  to  turn  it  to  his  own  advantage,
we  shall  see  that  he  did  not  neglect  it.  Now,  how-
ever, when  a  motion  was  made  in  the  comitia  for
transferring  Gaul  to  Antonius,  he  exerted  himself  in
its  favour,  and  prevailed  on  the  tribes  to  sanction  it.
The  policy  of  wresting  so  much  power  from  Decimus,
the  avowed  enemy  of  his  house,  might  naturally
dispose  him  to  this  course.  He  was  moreover  de-
sirous of  founding  upon  it  a  claim  to  the  consul's
services  on  no  distant  occasion.  The  tribunes,  cor-
rupted by  a  skilful  application  of  the  dictator's
treasures,  abstained  from  interposing ;  and  Antonius
seems  to  have  required  no  further  pretext  for  order-
ing the  embarkation  for  Italy  of  the  Macedonian
legions.1

It  is  difficult  to  disentangle  the  order  and  dates  of

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  30.
K  2

132  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxiv.

this  series  of  events  from  the  confused  narratives  in
which  they  are  recorded.  I  presume  that  the  ex-
change of  the  provinces  was  made  in  the  month  of
July.  The  legions  did  not  reach  Italy,  as  we  shall
see,  till  the  beginning  of  October  ;  but  to  put  in  mo-
tion a  large  force  long  quartered  in  distant  canton-
ments is  always  a  work  of  time,  and  requires  a  full
military  chest,  which,  doubtless,  was  wanting.  An-
tonius,  meanwhile,  assured  of  such  an  overwhelming-
force  behind  him,  could  view  the  intrigues  of  the  re-
publicans without  alarm.  The  praetors,  Brutus  and
Brutus  and  Cassius,  had  demanded  a  formal  release  from
ietveuofab-ain  their  obligation  to  residence  in  Eome.  While

seuce  from  ,  .  -  -

Rome.  they  proposed  to  undertake  the  discharge  of

their  commissions  abroad,  they  would  not  relinquish
the  advantage  of  their  position  as  prsetors  in  the  city.
They  now  required  the  consul  to  summons  the  senate
to  pass  this  decree  in  their  favour:  and  when  he
named  the  first  of  August  for  its  assembling,  they
addressed  urgent  solicitations  to  the  gravest  and  most
influential  of  the  order  to  attend.  Fear  of  personal'
violence,  a  sense  of  insulted  dignity,  disgust  per-
haps at  their  own  insignificance,  had  driven  many
consulars  and  men  of  authority  to  retire  to  their
country  seats.  They  returned,  however,  on  this
solemn  invitation,  and  assisted,  no  doubt,  in  carrying
the  object  for  which  the  praetors  had  desired  their
presence.  The  sitting  was  rendered  remarkable  by
a  furious  invective  pronounced  against  Antonius  by
Calpurnius  Piso,  the  dictator's  father-in-law.  Con-
nected with  both  the  principal  parties  in  the  state,  he
had  hitherto  trimmed  between  them.  His  sudden
attack  upon  the  consul's  policy  was  hailed  by  the
republicans  as  a  symptom  of  reaction.  But  when
Antonius  replied  with  equal  acrimony,  the  courage
of  the  senators  quailed,  and  Piso  found  no  supporter.
Neither  Brutus  nor  Cassius  had  ventured  to  appear.
They  rejoined  indeed,  some  days  afterwards,  with  a

A.U.;iO-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  133

fierce  but  impotent  manifesto.1  They  declared  that
if  they  judged  it  necessary  to  defend  the  common-
wealth with  arms,  the  consul's  menaces  should  not
deter  them.  They  bade  him  remember  not  how  long
Ca3sar  had  lived,  but  how  briefly  he  had  reigned.
But  Antonius  knew  that  they  durst  not  confront  him
in  the  senate,  and  treated  their  bravado  with  not  un-
merited contempt.

Cicero,  as  we  have  seen,  had  quitted  the  shores  of
Italy,  leaving  it  to  be  understood  that  he  Cicero  em-
should  return  by  the  first  of  January,  when  barkg*
the  new  consuls  would  commence  their  year  of  office.
As  long  as  Antonius  remained  at  the  head  of  the  go-
vernment, he  could  not  hope  to  effect  or  to  witness
any  good,  but  he  looked  for  the  commencement  of  a
new  and  happier  era  under  the  administration  of  up-
right and  honourable  men,  such  as  Hirtius  and  Pansa,
although  they  too  were  Caesareans.  But  it  was  not
permitted  to  the  patriot  statesman  to  forsake  the  com-
monwealth at  the  consummation  of  her  long  agony.
He  had  embarked  from  his  villa  at  Pompeii  about
the  middle  of  July,  in  company  with  three  other
vessels,  and  coasted  as  far  as  Rhegium,  landing  more
than  once,  on  his  route,  to  visit  friends.  From  thence
he  crossed  the  straits  to  Syracuse,  which  he  reached
on  the  first  of  August.  Anxious  to  avoid  whatever
might  excite  the  jealousy  of  his  enemies,  and  in  Syra-
cuse the  prosecutor  of  Yerres  believed  himself  too
popular  to  be  able  to  linger  there  without  arousing
suspicion,  he  remained  in  the  island  a  few  days  only,
and  was  proceeding  on  his  voyage  direct  for  the  coast
of  Greece,  when  adverse  winds  twice  drove  He  is  driven
him  back  on  the  promontory  ofLeucopetra,  back  to  Italy'
near  the  extremity  of  the  Bruttian  peninsula.  Here
he  was  greeted  with  the  rumour  that  Brutus  and
Cassius,  whom  he  had  left  at  Jsesis,  were  about  to

1  This  document  is  preserved  in  the  collection  of  Cicero's  corre-
spondence {ad  Div.  xi.  3.)- It  is  dated  August  4.

134  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  ru.  xxiv.

come  to  a  friendly  understanding  with  Antonius.  The
senate,  it  was  announced,  was  summoned  for  the  first
of  August,  and  the  republicans  were  expected  to  mus-
ter in  strength.  His  informants  went  on  to  assure  him
that  his  presence  was  much  desired  in  Rome,  where
his  flight  had  been  made  the  subject  of  some  harsh
animadversion.  Whatever  danger  there  might  be,  and
danger  there  undoubtedly  was,  in  returning,  Atticus
reminded  him  that  he  had  published  to  the  world
his  deliberate  sentiments,  that  to  die  for  one's  country
is  the  most  blessed  of  deaths.1  It  was  too  late  for
him  to  attend  the  expected  meeting,  nor  had  he  per-
haps much  hope  of  a  favourable  result:  but  Rome
had  still  its  imperishable  attractions  for  the  patriot

who  had  once  saved  it,  and,  with  many  a
return T0ves  °  solemn  foreboding,  he  turned  his  steps  once

more  in  the  direction  of  the  city.  On  his
way  be  fell  in  with  Brutus  and  Cassius  at  Velia.
From  them  he  learnt  the  issue  of  the  deliberations  of
the  first  of  August,  the  defeat  of  Piso,  the  prostration
of  the  republican  party :  they  spoke  with  resignation
of  their  own  misfortunes,  and  when  he  declared  hi.s
resolution  still  to  proceed,  they  cheered  him  on  his
road  to  martyrdom.  The  time,  he  felt,  had  come  to
obtain  a  crown  of  immortal  glory,  and  he  had  no
other  object  in  life  but  to  leave  it  with  honour.  On
the  thirty-first  of  August  he  re-entered  the  city,  de-
termined to  abide  whatever  fate  was  in  store  for  him,
and  never  again  abandon  the  post  to  which  duty,
honour  and  affection  conspired  to  bind  him.2

1  Cic.  ad  Alt.  xvi.  7.,  written  August  19.:  "Scripsisti  his  verbis,
veni  igitur,  tu  qui  fvBavaffiav,  veni. Reliiuiuis  patriam?" Attfcn.s
may  have  had  in  his  eye  the  passage  in  the  Tuscul.  Quceat.  i.  45. :  "  ISed
profecto  mors,"  &c. Billerbeck,  in  loc. Or  possibly  the  treatise  on
Glory,  which  is  lost,  may  have  supplied  the  allusion.

2  Cic.  /.  c. Compare  Philipp.  i.  3,  4.

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  135

CHAPTER  XXV.

Cicero  re-appears  in  the  Senate,  and  attacks  Antonius. — The  Philip-
pics. —  Antonius  repairs  to  the  Cisalpine,  and  prepares  to  dis-
possess Decimus. — Octavius  arms  for  the  republic. — Cicero  exhorts
the  Senate  to  declare  Antonius  a  public  enemy. — The  Senate  ne-
gotiates with  him,  and  he  rejoins  with  increased  insolence. —
Hirtius  and  Pansa  succeed  to  the  consulship,  A.U.  711. — Hirtius
leads  an  army  against  Antonius. — Cassius  obtains  successes  in
Syria. — Trebonius  is  destroyed  by  Dolabella. — Pansa  joins  his
colleague. — Two  battles  are  fought  before  Mutina. — The  Consuls
are  victorious,  but  are  both  slain.  ( A.  u.  710,  711.  B.C.  44,  43.)

THE  acclamations  of  the  nobles  and  the  populace
which  greeted  the  illustrious  consular,  on  his  ap-
pearance before  the  gates,  gratified  but  could  not
reassure  him.  Antonius  had  summoned  the  senate
for  the  morrow,  and  as  soon  as  he  heard  Antonius
of  Cicero's  arrival  he  invited  him  particu-  JjJ»«5*cieero
larly  to  attend.  But  he  was  preparing  all  inthes«ate
the  thunders  of  his  eloquence  to  launch  upon  the  head
of  the  public  enemy,  and  had  not  yet  forged  the
bolt.  At  the  last  moment  he  had  perhaps  not  quite
determined  upon  his  course,  and  still  called  Antonius
his  friend.  The  consul's  offences  were  not  yet  quite
inexpiable.  Accordingly  he  staid  away  from  the
sitting.  To  the  consuls  and  senate  he  feigned  sick-
ness, and  the  fatigue  of  his  late  journey;  to  his
friends  he  pleaded  his  disgust  at  the  divine  honours
which  he  expected  would  be  paid  to  Caesar.  There
was  some  formal  business  to  be  transacted  :  suppli-
cations were  to  be  decreed  to  the  gods  for  certain
public  successes,  and  Caesar's  name  would  be  invoked
among  the  Roman  divinities.1  He  wished  rather  to

1  Cic.  Philipp.  L  6.

136  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

be  attacked  than  attack.  Antonius  was  the  first  to
draw  the  sword.  In  his  address  to  the  senate  he  in-
veighed furiously  against  the  cowardly  absentee,  and
threatened  with  his  usual  rude  violence  to  send  work-
men and  demolish  the  house  on  the  Palatine,  which
the  citizens,  after  its  first  destruction  by  Clodius,  had
erected  to  their  unworthy  idol.  After  this  ebulli-
tion of  malice  and  defiance  the  consul  left  the  city
to  indulge  himself  in  revelry  at  his  Tiburtine  villa.

One  of  the  consuls  had  thus  quitted  his  post ;  but
cicero  den-  the  other  was  still  in  Eome.  Dolabella
Fh7iippic?n  convened  the  senate  again  in  the  temple  of
Concord  for  the  following  day,  to  deliberate
on  the  state  of  public  affairs.  This  was  the  spot
where  Cicero  had  delivered  the  most  effective  of  his
harangues,  on  the  day  which  witnessed  the  condem-
nation of  Catilina's  accomplices.  The  place  and  its
associations  nerved  him  now  with  the  courage  of  his
younger  and  more  hopeful  days.  The  insults  flung
upon  him  by  Antonius  had  stung  him  to  the  quick.
He  rose  before  the  assembled  senators,  and  proceeded
in  the  first  place  to  explain  and  vindicate  his  own  con-
duct, both  in  abandoning  the  city  and  in  returning
to  it.  Eefraining  from  any  allusion  to  the  tyrannicide
itself,  he  began  his  retrospect  of  affairs  with  the  meet-
ing in  the  temple  of  Tellus.  He  showed  that  all  parties
had  at  first  combined  for  the  common  good.  If  he
claimed  for  himself  the  merit  of  having  proposed  the
amnesty,  he  allowed  Antonius  the  praise  of  having
accepted  it,  and  given  his  own  son  as  an  earnest
of  his  good  faith.  The  liberators,  he  said,  were
satisfied,  the  decrees  of  Caesar  were  respected,  the
citizens  were  reassured,  the  noble  and  the  good  ap-
proved. Up  to  this  point  the  acts  and  demeanour  of
Antonius  had  been  mild  and  conciliatory  :  he  restored
no  exiles,  he  conferred  no  immunities,  he  abolished
the  dictatorship ;  no  whisper  did  he  yet  breathe  of
Cesar's  posthumous  demands.  The  senate  had  been

A.r.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  137

justly  charmed,  and  had  issued  a  decree  in  grate-
ful acknowledgment.  But  the  consuls  had  gone  still
further  in  the  same  honest  course.  They  broke
up  the  riotous  assemblages  in  the  forum,  they  pro-
scribed the  pretended  Marius.  It  was  not  till  the
first  of  June  that  Antonius  had  changed  his  conduct.
From  that  time  all  his  actions  were  in  strong  con-
trast with  the  policy  which  he  had  already  stamped
as  true  loyalty.  He  ceased  to  consult  the  senate,
and  carried  his  measures  through  the  comitia  of  the
tribes.  He  recalled  whom  he  would  from  banish-
ment, made  what  laws  he  pleased,  appointed  his  own
creatures  to  place  and  office,  and  pleaded  the  will  of
the  dead  tyrant  for  every  act  of  selfish  and  venal
policy.  The  liberators  were  frightened  from  the
city,  the  veterans  were  incited  to  sedition,  and  fed
with  hopes  of  a  new  revolution.  Then  at  last  had
the  orator  consented  to  retire  from  Eome  for  the  re-
mainder of  the  year,  intending  to  return  with  the
commencement  of  the  new  consulships ;  for  he  did
not  expect  that  the  usurper  would  deign  to  convene
the  senate  again  during  his  term  of  office.  Cicero
then  detailed  the  circumstances  of  his  leaving  the
shores  of  Italy,  and  of  his  speedy  return.  He  praised
the  gallantry  of  Piso,  once  his  bitterest  enemy,  on
the  first  of  August ;  and  now,  he  said,  he  had  come
forward  to  echo  Piso's  protest,  and  if  any  harm
should  befaf  him,  to  leave  this  crowning  monument
of  his  patriotism.  The  senate  listened  with  admi-
ration. The  applause  which  thundered  from  its
benches  warmed  his  blood,  and  redoubled  his  energy.
Dolabella  himself,  on  whom  he  had  heaped  many
fulsome  compliments,  was  not  displeased  at  being
favourably  contrasted  with  the  colleague  he  secretly
detested.  When  indeed  Piso  had  attacked  Antonius
to  his  face,  the  same  recreant  audience  had  cowered
under  the  consul's  fierce  reply :  and  now  too,  had  he
been  present  to  defend  himself,  it  would  doubtless

138  HISTORY OF THE EOMANS  CH.  xxv.

have  shrunk  from  supporting  Cicero's  invective.  But
this  second  attack  was  better  timed.  Antonius  had
not  deigned  to  listen  to  it ;  the  field  was  open  to  the
assailant;  he  declaimed  with  all  the  boldness  of  a
man  who  has  no  fear  of  contradiction,  and  his  de-
clamation sank  deep  into  the  minds  of  favourable
hearers.

The  series  of speeches against  Antonius which
Cicero  composed  in  the  course  of  the  fol-

Characteri3tica , .  •  , . ,  , ,  ,, .

ot  the  first lowing  months  is  known  by  the  name  ot  the

Philippic.  -TJU-T  •  J.-.L1 £  •  J.1-

Jrhihppics,  a  title  nrst  given  them  perhaps
by  the  orator  himself  in  allusion  to  the  harangues
of  Demosthenes  against  the  tyrant  of  Macedon.1
They  pretended,  like  their  immortal  prototypes,  to
be  the  last  indignant  assertion  of  a  country's  freedom
against  a  daring  aggressor.  In  this  first  speech,  how-
ever, Cicero  still  kept  some  terms  with  his  enemy.
He  seemed  to  feel  his  ground  before  committing
himself  irrevocably.2  The  declamation  is  directed
entirely  against  the  consul's  policy:  his  personal
habits  and  views,  a  moderation  very  unusual  with
Cicero,  are  left  untouched.  He  is  denounced  as
dangerous  to  the  state,  but  he  is  not  defamed  as  a
disgrace  to  humanity.  In  this  respect  the  first  of  the
Philippics  differs  widely  from  the  second,  and  gene-
Antonius  rally  from  those  which  follow.  After  the

lapse  of  some  days  Antonius  returned  to
Rome :  in  his  Tiburtine  retreat  he  had  learned  the

1  It  is  only  in  the  letters  to  Brutus  (ii.  4.),  which  are  universally
rejected  as  spurious,  that  this  title  is  put  into  Cicero's  own  mouth.
In  an  early  letter  to  Atticus,  however  (ii.  1.  A.U.  694),  he  alludes  to
the  Philippics  of  Demosthenes,  and  expresses  a  hope  that  his  own
Catilinarian  and other orations may  be  known  by  the  name  of
"  Consulares." It  is  not  unlikely  therefore  that  he  gave  the  designa-
tion of  Philippics  to  his  Antonian  invectives,  as  Plutarch  (Cic.  48.),
asserts,  and  that  the  fabricator  of  the  Epislolae  ad  Brutum  was  guided
here,  as  elsewhere,  by  a  genuine  tradition.

2  Cic.  Philipp.  v.  7.:  *'  Locutus  sum  de  republica  minus  equidem
libere  quam  mea  consuetudo,  liberius  tamen  quam  periculi  minse
postulabant."

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  139

unexpected  spirit  with  which  his  last  attack  was
rebutted.  After  due  deliberation  he  had  framed  a
rejoinder,  and  on  the  nineteenth  day  of  September
he  delivered  it  in  a  speech  to  the  senate.  It  was  a
virulent  invective  against  his  enemy's  whole  political
career,  and  accused  him  of  the  murder  of  the  Cati-
linarians,  the  assassination  of  Clodius,  the  rupture
between  Csesar  and  Pompeius.  It  strove  to  unite
against  him  the  hostility  of  every  faction  in  the  state,
and  above  all  it  denounced  him  to  the  veterans  as
the  real  contriver  of  their  hero's  destruction.  Cicero
again  was  absent :  his  friends  dissuaded  him  from
appearing  before  the  armed  bands  with  which  An-
tonius  overawed  debate.  The  two  gladiators  were
destined  never  to  meet  on  the  same  arena.  They
continued  to  wage  the  war  of  words,  but  they  never
saw  each  other  again  alive.

The  reconciliation  however  which  had  been  pub-
licly avowed  between.  Antonius  and  Octavius

, ••  . , . j  .  , Quarrel  be-

was  not  long  maintained  even  in  outward  tween  AIUO-
seeming. The  city  was  filled  with  rumours,  ocTav^s.

. i  ,,  .11 Rumours  that

propagated,  as  was  generally  surmised,  by  octaviushad

fu  I  J U  • i- • ] j.1,  •  conspired  to.

the  consul  and  his  mends,  that  Octavius  take  ins
had  suborned  assassins  to  take  his  rival's
life.1 It  was  in  vain  that  considerate  people  reflected
that  the  consul's  life  was  of  great  importance  to  the
younger  and  weaker  of  the  competitors  for  Caesars
succession,  inasmuch  as  it  was  only  by  authority  such
as  his  that  the  republicans  could  be  kept  in  check.

1  Suet.  Oct.  10.;  Plutarch,  Ant.  16.;  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  39.;  Dion,
xlv.  8.;  Seneca.,  de  Clem.  i.  9.  Cicero  alludes  to  the  rumour,  and  in-
sinuates its  truth  {ad  Div.  xii.  23.):  "  Prudentes  et  boni  viri  et  cre-
dunt  factum  et  probant:"  but  he  is  evidently  trying  to  encourage
his  correspondent  Cornificius,  by  representing  the  precariousness  of
the  consul's  power;  and  after  till  he  cannot  help  admitting  that  it
was  generally  disbelieved.  Appian  also  throws  suspicion  upon  it.
In  the  recently  discovered  fragment  of  Nicolaus  (vit.  C(es.  ci.  30.).
the  story  fs  told  more  at  length,  but  no  new  light  is  thrown  upon  it.
Nicolaus's  life  of  Octavius  is  an  unqualified  panegyric  of  his  hero,
aud  is  evidently  compiled  entirely  from  Cuesaix-au  authorities.

140  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

Octavius  vehemently  protested  his  innocence ;  but
men's  minds  remained  fretful  and  unsettled,  and  all
ears  were  open  to  receive  tales  of  scandal  against
those  in  power,  and  all  mouths  to  propagate  them.
Antonius  was  in  reality  far  more  disturbed  by  the
advices  which  reached  him  of  the  doubtful  disposition
of  the  legions  he  had  summoned  to  Italy.  Both  the
legionaries  and  the  disbanded  veterans  resented  his
remissness  in  the  pursuit  of  Caesar's  murderers.  He
Antoniu.  l6^  Ron*6  f°r  Brundisium  to  put  himself
Emndishimto  at  their  head.  Octavius  was  constrained  to
"mmandof  arm  in  n^s  turn.  He  visited  the  colonies  in
i£mm!n°cd  Campania,  which  had  pressed  their  services
do°.uaMace"  upon  him,  five  months  before.  He  col-
rauwu  forces  lected  among  them  a  force  of  ten  thousand
in  Campania.  men>  fay  ^}je  lavish  donative,  as  was  re-
ported, of  two  thousand  sesterces  a-piece.  But  they
were  neither  equipped  nor  officered  as  regular  troops ;
and  the  arrival  of  such  a  ferocious  rabble  alarmed
the  citizens  of  Rome,  who  knew  not  which  most  to
deprecate,  a  bloody  contest  between  the  rival  leaders
in  the  streets  of  the  city,  or  a  combination  between
them  to  oppress  and  plunder  it.  This  turbulent
soldiery,  however,  had  not  surrendered  their  inde-
pendence, or  lent  themselves  as  blind  instruments  to
the  caprice  of  their  leader.  As  Octavius  drew  near
to  the  city,  Canutius,  one  of  the  tribunes  engaged  in
his  interest,  harangued  the  people  against  Antonius,
and  denounced  him  as  aspiring  to  the  tyranny.  He
exhorted  them  to  accept  the  services  of  the  only
patron  who  was  at  the  head  of  an  armed  force  for
their  protection:  and  thereupon  he  went  forth  in
person  to  meet  the  new  comer,  and  brought  him  into
the  forum,  surrounded  by  a  body  of  veterans  with
concealed  weapons.  In  the  presence  of  these  sup-
porters the  tribunes  inveighed  a  second  time  against
the  consul's  ambition,  and  Octavius  proceeded  to
dwell  upon  the  merits  of  his  father  Caesar,  and  to

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  141

complain  that  his  cause  had  been  deserted  by  Anto-
nius.  He  ended  with  offering  himself  as  the  defender
of  the  commonwealth  and  the  avenger  of  the  mur-
dered hero.  But  he  had  gone  too  far.  The  veterans
had  not  left  their  farms  to  espouse  a  private  quarrel.
They  would  not  array  one  section  of  the  Cassareans
against  another.  Antonius  had  been  their  imperator;
he  was  now  the  consul  of  the  republic :  in  either
capacity  they  respected  him,  and  would  not  draw
their  swords  against  his  person.  They  insisted  upon
the  rivals  uniting  in  the  common  cause.  Octavius
gave  way,  at  least  in  appearance.  He  spoke  the
veterans  fair,  thanked  them  for  their  loyalty  to  his
father,  and  while  he  dismissed  with  courtesy  such  as
chose  to  leave  him,  he  loaded  with  caresses  and
promises  all  that  remained.  By  flattery,  persuasion,
and  dexterous  management,  the  whole  number  was
slowly  won  over.  Octavius  determined  at  once  to
employ  them.  He  marched  them  forth  from  the
city  to  the  frontier  of  the  Cisalpine.  He  visited
Ravenna  and  the  neighbouring  towns  in  person,  ex-
pended fresh  sums  in  tempting  recruits  to  his  service,
and  finally  appointed  Arretium  for  the  head-quarters
of  his  assembled  armaments.1

While  Octavius  was  thus  occupied,  Antonius  was
acting  with  equal  vigour. He  arrived  at  Antonina
Brundisium  early  in  October,  and  was  there  ^yamo™'
met  by  four  of  the  Macedonian  legions.2  hulesion8-
No acclamations greeted him in their quarters.
They  were  come  to  avenge  Caesar's  murder ;  he  had
dallied  with  the  murderers  ;  they  bade  him  mount
the  tribunal  and  defend  his  conduct  as  best  he  might.
But  he  failed  not  to  confront  the  malcontents  with

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  41,  42. These  events  took  place,  apparently,
in  October.

2  Cic.  ad  Div.  xii.  23.  (written  October  9.):  "  Bnmdisium  erat
profcctus  obviam  legionibus  Macedonicis  quatuor. " Comp.  ad  Alt.
xv.  13.,  written  October  24. ;  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  40 — 45.;  Dion,  xlv.
12,  13.

142  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXV.

the  firmness  of  his  great  commander.  It  was  not  the
part  of  the  Kornan  imperator  to  defend  his  own  con-
duct, but  to  enforce  obedience  to  his  commands.  He
scornfully  rebuked  their  ingratitude  for  the  exchange
he  had  given  them  from  the  sultry  plains  of  Parthia
to  the  voluptuous  cantonments  of  Italy.  He  com-
plained of  the  ready  ears  they  had  lent  to  the  emis-
saries of  a  petulant  stripling,  for  so  he  styled  Octa-
vius ;  he  threatened  to  discover  and  chastise  the  most
culpable  ;  but  he  mingled  promises  with  threats,  and
held  out  the  prospect  of  a  largess  of  four  hundred
sesterces  apiece,  and  quarters  in  the  Happy  Gaul,
the  fertile  Cisalpine  province.1  When  the  discontent
was  not  thus  appeased  he  demanded  the  roll-call  of
the  legions,  on  which  the  conduct  and  habits  of  every
private  were  carefully  noted,  and  of  those  whom  their
centurions  had  branded  with  censure,  he  picked  out
every  tenth  man  for  capital  punishment.  He  con-
tented himself,  however,  with  inflicting  death  upon
only  a  few  of  them.2  Nevertheless  this  act  of  rigour
did  not  check  the  progress  of  disaffection.  The  agents
of  Octavius  had  penetrated  into  the  camp,  and  con-
trasted the  liberality  of  their  patron  with  the  sordid
offers  of  his  rival.  The  Macedonian  legions  enter-
tained a  personal  regard  for  the  young  companion  of
their  exercises  at  Apollonia :  they  were  not,  like  the
disbanded  veterans,  devoted  to  the  memory  of  Csesar
alone,  and  indifferent  to  the  quarrel  between  his  suc-
cessors. Antonius  felt  his  insecurity.  He  was  obliged
and  despatchei  t°  precipitate  his  measures,  and  to  increase
fromie^of  ms  bribes.  Having  made  some  changes
the  cisalpine.  am0ng  the  superior  officers,  he  broke  up  the
whole  force  into  detachments,  and  directed  them  to

1  Appian,  J.  c.  -^u>po.v  fvSai/j.uva  'K.tXriK^v.

2  Such  is  the  temperate  statement  of  Appian. Cicero  paints  the
transaction  in  flaming  colours. "  He  slew  three  hundred  valiant
Romans — many  of  them  centurions — before  the  eyes  of  his  consort
Fulvia. Tarquin  shed  no  Roman  blood/' Cic.  Philipp.  iii.  4,  xii.  6.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  143

take  the  road  along  the  coast  of  the  Adriatic,  and
unite  again  at  Ariminum.  Movement  and  action,  he
thought,  were  the  surest  remedies  for  their  growing
insubordination.

The  consul  now  hastened  back  to  Eome,  the  re-
port of  the  attitude  assumed  by  Octavius  Herein™
adding  much  to  his  anxiety. The  squadron  ^J^1^
of  horse  which  accompanied  him  he  left  S0cTapvuJf9tof
outside  the  walls ; but  he  entered  them  the  8enate-
with  a  battalion  of  infantry,  accoutred  for  battle,  and
from  the  formidable  array  in  which  they  surrounded
his  dwelling,  with  their  sentries,  their  watch-words,
and  their  gestures  of  defiance,  it  seemed  as  if  they
had taken  military  possession  of  the  city.1 But
scarcely  had  he  entered  his  house  when  he  was  sum-
moned to  quit  it  in  haste  and  alarm. He  had  con-
vened the  senate  to  hear  his  complaint  against  Octa-
vius ;  but  as  he  approached  the  curia  he  encountered
the  fatal  news  that  one  of  his  legions,  named the
Martian,  had  transferred  its  eagles  to  his  rival.  Stop-
ping short,  and  pondering  for  a  moment  on  T^of^
this  alarming  intimation,  a  second  courier  a^go'^w
reached  him  with  the  further  intelligence  0ctaTiu«-
that  another  legion  had  also  abandoned  him.2 He
recollected  himself  enough  to  take  his  seat  in  the
curia  and  utter  a  brief  address,  to  save  appearances  ;
he  then  hastily  left  the  spot  and  took  horse  for  Alba,
whither  the  deserters  had  retired,  hoping  yet  to  recall
them  to  their  allegiance. But  the  gates  of  Alba  were
shut  against  him,  and  arrows  were  aimed  at  him  from
its  walls. His  last  resource  was  to  issue  a  promise  of
two  thousand  sesterces  to  every  soldier  who  still  re-

1  Cic.  Philipp.  v.  6. :  "  Unus  M.  Antonius  in  hac  urbe  post  urbem
conditam  palam  secum  habuit  armatos:  quod  neque  Reges  fecerunt,
neque  ii  qui  regibus  exactis  regnum  occupare  voluerunt. Cinnam
raemini:  vidi  Sullam:  modo  Caesarem  .  .  .  non  possum  affirmare
nullis  telis  eos  stipatos  fuisse;  hoc  dico,  nee  multis,  et  occultis."

2  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  45. ;  Cic.  Philipp.  iii.  8 — 10. The  senate  was
convened  for  November  28.

144  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  en.  xxv.

mained  firm  ;  and  when  he  had  thus  raised  his  bidding
to  an  equality  with  his  competitor,  he  fixed  the  loyalty
of  the  legions  which  had  not  yet  abandoned  him.

With  the command of the Cisalpine province,
Antoniu» Antonius  had  obtained  also  the  commission
to  drive  out  of  it  any  pretender  to  the

from  his  »  _J- 1 t  J

province.  vernment.  Accordingly  he  now  summoned
Decimus  to  withdraw,  and  prepared  to  expel  him  by
force  of  arms.  He  raised  his  standard  at  Tibur  ;  the
civil  war  was  openly  proclaimed,  and  great  numbers
of  senators  flocked  to  his  quarters.  The  common-
wealth lent  its  sanction  to  his  enterprise.  Besides
his  Macedonian  legions,  which  since  the  arrival  of
fresh  transports  amounted  to  three,  he  had  another
corps  of  veteran  troops  under  his  command,  and  con-
siderable reinforcements  of  new  recruits.  At  the  same
time  Lepidus  was  on  his  route  to  Spain  at  the  head  of
four  legions,  and  the  force  of  Pollio  in  those  parts  was
estimated  at  half  that  number.  Plancus  commanded
three  legions  in  the  Further  Gaul.  These  were  the
forces  on  which  Antonius,  it  was  deemed,  might  rely
Thearma-  in  his  contest  with  the  republicans.  On  the

mentsofAnto- ,  ,  ,.  .  , *  ..  p  r\ i.

niu»,  Lepidus, other  hand,  however,  the  position  01  Octa-

andOctavim  .  i  11 i  r  •  , i  i  in ,1

respectively,  vius  was  hardly  less  formidable.  Alba,  the
stronghold  nearest  to  the  city,  was  held  for  him,
as  we  have  seen,  by  two  veteran  legions  ;  he  com-
manded two  more  at  Arretium,  and  to  these  a  fifth
of  new  levies  was  about  to  be  added.  Though  pos-
sessed of  no  ostensible  command,  no  magistracy  or
office  of  public  trust,  still  citizens  of  all  classes
flocked  to  his  residence,  and  paid  their  court  to
him.  He  addressed  the  senate  with  a  •well-timed
manifesto,  and  suddenly  found  himself  applauded
and  caressed  by  the  same  men  who  had  just  before
given  their  countenance  to  Antonius.  Such  was  the
vacillation,  or  such  the  perplexity  of  the  Koman
nobles.  They  would  have  preferred  another  leader
to  Octavius  ;  but  even  him  they  were  prepared  blindly

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  145

and  eagerly  to  adopt  as  a  counterpoise  to  Antonius.
Hirtius  and  Pansa,  the  consuls  elect,  chiefs  trained
to  the  command  of  Caesar's  legions,  might  yet,  they
fondly hoped,  wrest from both the one and  the
ether  the affections of C«sar's  veterans.  Emm.  and
Brutus  and  Cassius  had  at  last  quitted  Italy  &3J™  JS*
for  the  East  There  was  little  disguise  about  ESTZhJ0
their  present  intentions. They  were  ex-  S^'ny
pected  to  betake  themselves  to  the  provinces  ™s™*lh™-
bequeathed  them  by  Caesar,  and  maintain  themselves
by  force  of  arms  against  the  proconsuls  appointed  by
the  actual  government. Dolabella,  in  haste

«••»•»!  i  j i •  • Dolabella  pro-

to  secure  Syria,  had  abandoned  his  post  in  ceed»  toward*
the  city,  and  quickly  followed  in  their  track.
Trebonius had already  established  himself  in  the
government  of  the  lesser  Asia,  and  it  was

. .  ,  ,  ,  , .  Trebonint  is

upon  his  position  there  that  the  republican  embused  in
chiefs,  who  had  neither  money,  nor  troops,
nor  regular  authority,  to  oppose  to  their  antagonist,
mainly  relied  for  the  success  of  their  future  Decimnspre-
operations. Decimus  sullenly  awaited  the  {£" "h£ main"
impending  attack,  but  of  his  various  assail-  i**""011-
ants  he  could  not yet  tell  who  first  would  strike
him.

Such  was  the  complication  of  affairs  during  the
months  of  October  and  November. Cicero,  Cicero'«
meanwhile, was working with feverish  J^*"-1 u"d
activity  among  the  senators  and  the  citi-  « "JJa"*"  *"*
zens,  striving to  build  up  a strong and  Phil'ppic-
consistent  party  against  the  pretensions  of  Antonius.
He  exhorted  and  encouraged  Decimus ;  he  flattered
and  caressed  Octavius ;  but  in  the  West  he  depended
chiefly  upon  the  loyalty  of  Hirtius  and  Pansa;  at
the  same  time  his  eyes  were  most  anxiously  directed
to  the  opposite  quarter,  and  fixed  upon  the  move-
ments of  Brutus  and  Cassius. But  it  was  against
Antonius  that  he  concentrated  all  his  energies. He
replied  to  the  consul's  late  rejoinder  with  his  second

VOL.  III.  L

146  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

Philippic,  an  overwhelming  torrent  of  invective,  to
which  the  history  of  popular  eloquence  perhaps  af-
fords no  parallel.  The  second  of  the  Philippics  de-
serves, on  the  whole,  to  be  pronounced  the  greatest
of  the  great  orator's  harangues ;  and  it  is  undoubtedly
that  on  which  his  renown  for  eloquence  rests  above
all  others.1  The  desponding  patriot  has  at  length
roused  himself  to  declare  deadly  war  against  his
country's  foe.  Long  had  he  hesitated,  long  had  he
schemed  for  his  personal  safety,  amidst  the  ruin
which  he  saw  too  clearly  closing  around  the  com-
monwealth. But  all  timid,  all  wavering,  all  selfish
counsels  he  now  discarded  for  ever.  The  attack
he  had  just  sustained  had  lashed  him  to  frenzy.
He  beheld  all  his  danger,  and  he  resolved  to  meet
it  without  shrinking.  Eome  should  be  saved,  or
he  would  perish  with  her.  He  had  saved  her  once
before,  and  no  man,  he  believed,  could  save  her  now
except  himself.  Or,  if  he  did  not  really  cherish  a
hope  of  saving  her,  he  would  at  least  destroy  her
tyrant  with  her,  and  build  his  own  fame  upon  the
overthrow  of  a  personal  enemy.  The  death-struggle
to  which  he  had  now  pledged  himself,  the  fanatic
rage  he  breathed  against  the  object  of  his  hate,  the
vast  interests  at  stake,  the  awful  scene  of  murder
which  had  just  closed,  and  the  train  of  proscription,
massacre,  and  civil  war,  the  anarchy  crowned  by
tyranny  which  loomed  in  the  distance,  all  combine
to  invest  with  solemn  interest  this  divine  effort  of
expiring  liberty.  By  what  fate,  it  began,  has  it  hap-
pened, that  throughout  the  last  twenty  years  no  man

1  Compare  the  celebrated  allusion  in  Juvenal,  x.  125.:

"  conspicuse  divina  Philippica  faniie
Volveris  a  prima  quae  proxima."

Fabricius  (Bibl  Lot.  i.  165.)  supposes  that  it  is  to  this  speech  that
Pliny  refers  (Ep.  i.  20.):  "  M.  Tullium,  cujus  oratio  optima  fertur  esse
quae  maxima."  The  second  Philippic  is,  I  believe,  the  longest  of  the
political  orations  extant  Nevertheless,  Pliny's  phrase  is  probably
an  allusion  to  what  Cicero  himself  said  of  Demosthenes.  Beinjr
asked,  which  of  the  Greek  orator's  speeches  he  deemed  the  best, "  Oh,"
he  replied,  "  the  longest."  Plutarch,  Cic.  24.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  147

has  proved  himself  notorious  as  an  enemy  to  the
commonwealth,  but  he  has  also  persecuted  me  ?
Clodius  and  Catilina  are  the  two  archtraitors  men-
tioned: but  where  is  the  name  of  Caesar  himself?
The  dictator  is  denounced  in  every  page  as  a  tyrant
and  usurper,  as  the  bitterest  foe  to  Eome,  as  justly
slain,  as  a  traitor  in  whose  murder  the  speaker  him-
self would  have  gladly  borne  a  part ;  yet  Caesar  had
always  befriended  Cicero,  he  had  treated  him  with  a
consideration  which  he  could  not  extort  from  his
friends  in  the  Pompeian  camp:  Cicero  dared  not
inscribe  Casar's  name  on  the  list  of  his  personal
enemies ;  but  its  absence  blunts  the  point  of  his
most  indignant  sarcasm.  The  speech  proceeds  to
brand  the  vices  and  crimes  of  Antonius,  in  the  strain
of  one  who  has  drawn  the  sword  against  his  adver-
sary and  thrown  away  the  scabbard.  It  may  be
doubted,  however,  whether  either  the  personal  or  the
political  crimes  it  imputes  to  the  ambitious  intriguer
were  such  as  would  degrade  their  perpetrator  in  the
eyes  of  the  Romans.  The  charges  of  cowardice  are
merely  puerile.  The  abilities  of  Antonius  had  been
judged  by  the  greatest  of  their  statesmen  to  be  of
the  rarer  kind.  Caesar  had  many  excellent  captains,
but  Antonius  was  the  best  of  his  civil  administrators.
No  senator  could  have  been  misled  by  the  contrast
the  orator  draws  between  Dolabella,  who  served  in  all
his  master's  campaigns  in  Egypt,  Africa,  and  Spain,
and  Antonius,  who  resided  with  sheathed  sword  in
the  city  or  made  his  progresses  through  Italy  with
mimes  and  mistresses  at  his  side.  Far  too  much
indeed  of  this  famous  invective  consists  of  startling
rhetorical  points,  which  could  have  had  no  effect
upon  an  audience  acquainted  with  the  facts,  deeply
interested  in  the  truth,  and  apt  to  resent  an  The  wcond
attempt  to  seduce  their  judgments.  The  ^p§ic.wa§
second  of  the  Philippics,  however,  was  liTere<L
never  actually  spoken.  Cicero  had  withdrawn  himself

L  2

148  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

from  Rome  at  the  moment  of  his  antagonist's
return  thither.  It  was  composed  in  the  orator's
private  chamber,  and  an  acute  critic  may  perhaps
discover  something  in  its  tone  to  distinguish  it  from
a  speech  delivered  before  the  face  of  the  assembly  it
was  intended  to  convince.  Had  it  been  checked  and
guided  by  the  eyes  and  voices  of  an  audience,  it
might  have  been  less  cogent,  less  elaborate,  less
cumulative,  less  complete ;  but  it  would  have  gained
in  practical  earnestness  and  even  in  immediate  effect.
In  none  of  his  spoken  orations  does  Cicero  indulge  in
such  open  declarations  of  hostility  to  Caesar :  neither
senate  nor  people  would  have  tolerated  the  direct
denunciation  of  a  man  of  whom  after  all  every  class
of  citizens  was  justly  proud.  But  in  his  closet  the
orator  forgot  what  the  shouts  of  an  assembly  of  his
countrymen  would  have  compelled  him  to  remember;
and  not  even  the  fear  of  offending  Octavius  sufficed
to  check  the  flow  of  his  genuine  sentiments,  when  he
had  once  taken  the  pen  in  his  hand.

Cicero  had  not  yet  ventured  to  confront  the  new
tyrant  in  an  assembly  which,  however  it  might  be
moved  by  the  orator's  eloquence  in  his  absence,  con-
tinued in  his  presence  to  be  the  mere  echo  of  his
sentiments  and  registry  of  his  decrees.  The  second
Philippic  was  the  work  of  a  month  of  enforced  leisure,
during  which  its  author  seems  to  have  been  chiefly
resident  in  Eome,  but  to  have  refrained  from  all
public  action.  It  was  towards  the  end  of  October
that  he  sent  the  completed  oration  to  Atticus,  asking
his  advice  whether  he  should  publish  it,  and  desiring
him  to  correct  it  himself,  and  submit  it  to  the  critical
perusal  of  some  common  friends.1  He  is  conscious
that  while  Antonius  still  retains  his  power  in  the
city,  it  would  be  madness  to  provoke  him  by  the

1  Cic.  ad  Att.  xv.  13.:  "  Orationem  tibi  misi:  ejus  custodiendse  et
proferendse  arbitrium  tuum.  Sed  quando  ilium  diem  quum  tu  eden-
dam  putes!"

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  149

publication  of  such  a  manifesto;  but  the  defection
which  had  taken  place  among  his  legions,  and  the
increasing  strength  of  Octavius's  position,  encourage
him  to  anticipate  a  time  when  it  may  be  safely  given
to  the  world,  and  help  to  fan  the  flame  of  liberty,  and
restore  the  gallant  liberators  to  their  homes  and
honours.  In  the  meantime  he  persisted,  notwith-
standing the  warnings  of  Atticus  and  others,  in  lend-
ing all  the  weight  of  his  influence  to  the  cause  of
Octavius.  Brutus  and  Cassius  were  alarmed  at  this
policy.  They  justly  surmised  that  Caesar's  heir  would
never  surrender  the  inheritance  of  dignity  and  power
to  which  Cicero  was  thus  helping  to  advance  him.
Lamentably  indeed  did  he  fail  in  penetrat-

,  ,.  -LI ? i  TT- Cicero's  mis-

ing  the  young  dissemblers  character. His  taken  estimate

., 1°  , ,  , ,,  • i j i of  Octavius.

easy  vanity  had  been  repeatedly  misled  by
the  attention  paid  him  by  the  young.  It  was  an
amiable  weakness  which  had  already  cost  him  dear,
especially  in  the  instance  of  the  younger  Curio ;  and
now  when  Octavius  affected  to  seek  his  advice,  and
addressed  him  as  his  father,  the  warm  heart  of  the
aged  statesman  yearned  at  once  towards  one  so  grace-
ful in  his  person,  so  winning  in  his  demeanour,  so
apparently  helpless  and  inexperienced.  Cicero  re-
membered, too,  that  Octavius  had  been  born  in  the
year  of  his  own  famous  consulship,  and  even  on  the
morning  of  his  deliverance  of  Home  from  Catilina,
and  his  enthusiasm  on  his  behalf  was  not  untinged
perhaps  with  a  shade  of  superstition.1  At  the  same
time  he  was  encouraged  by  the  rumoured  successes
of  Bassus,  who  still  headed  a  Pompeian  force  in
Syria ;  he  relied  upon  the  military  talents  of  Decimus

1  Plutarch,  Cic.  44.  The  Epistola  ad  Octavium  of  the  psuedo-
Cicero  seems  to  be  a  forgery  compiled  from  genuine  materials.  It
purports  to  be  an  invective  of  the  disappointed  orator  after  Octavius
bad  falsified  his  hopes.  "  Ego,  patres  conscripti,  ad  parricidium  in-
duxi;  ego  rempublicam  fefelli ;  ego  ipse  senatum  sibi  manus  inferre
coegi.  quum  te  Junouium  puerum,  et  matris  tuce  partum  aureuni  esse
dixi."

150  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

in  the  Cisalpine  ;  he  hoped  to  attach  to  their  common
cause  both  Plancus  in  the  Further  Gaul,  and  Corni-
ficius  in  Africa  ;  and  he  looked  to  the  succession  of
the  new  consuls  in  the  ensuing  January  for  the  re-
storation of  legitimate  government.

During  the  month  of  November  Cicero  wandered
from  one  of  his  villas  to  another,  occupied  in
du«d  by°the correspondence  with  the  republican  leaders,
n and  watchin the  movements  of  the  rival

[hewers, candidates  for  the  favour  of  the  veterans

dtize™ and  the  legions. Yet  even  then  he  devoted

every  moment  of  leisure  to  the  engrossing

interests  of  philosophy. In  this  feverish  interval  he

composed  for  the  instruction  of  his  son  his  graceful

treatise  on  Moral  Duties. But  as  soon  as  Antonius

withdrew  to  the  protection  of  his  soldiers  assembled

for  the  conquest  of  the  Cisalpine,  the  orator  returBfed

to  the  centre  of  affairs,  and  strained  every  nerve  to

stimulate both the senate  and people to  arm  in

defence  of  Decimus,  and  proclaim  the  invader  of  his

province  a  public  enemy. The  moment  had  arrived

for  the  publication  of  the second Philippic. The

satire  came  forth  from  the  orator's  desk  fortified  with

the  warm  approbation  of  Atticus,  and  polished  to  the

keenest  edge  by  repeated  touches  of  the  great  master

himself. Its  appearance  was happily  timed. The

hateful  object  of  the  attack  had  just  turned  his  back  ;

he  was  constrained  to  retire  from the  city  by  the

growing  insecurity  of  his  position,  and  the  treachery

rife  among  his  own  friends. At  the  moment  when

his  popularity  was  trembling in the  balance, the

patriot thundered  against it  and shook  it  to the

ground. The  effect  of  the  pamphlet  was  electrical.

It  scared  the  people  from  their  deferential  awe  of  the

claimant  of  Caesar's  succession. It  nerved  the  senate

to defy  him  with  a boldness  it  had  never  before

exerted. It  proved  to  the  veterans  under  Octavius's

banner  that  he  had  treated  their  young  favourite  with

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  151

intolerable  contumely.  They  grasped  their  swords
more  firmly,  and  demanded  to  be  led  against  him  in
the  name  of  the  senate.  The  consuls  elect,  just  about
to  seat  themselves  in  their  ivory  chairs,  were  fixed  at
once  in  the  interest  of  the  senate  by  the  general  accla-
mations which  hailed  this  proclamation  of  its  wrongs.
Cicero  himself,  not  unjustly  elated  with  the  applause
which  echoed  around  him,  easily  believed  that  he
was  now  the  mediator  between  parties,  and  the  real
though  unostensible  leader  of  the  republic.  For  a
moment  indeed  he  really  swayed  the  commonwealth,
not  by  the  splendour  of  office  or  the  terror  of  the
imperium,  but  by  the  influence  of  his  character  and
the  charm  of  his  genius.  It  was  the  noblest,  as  it
was  the  purest  triumph  that  any  Eoman  citizen  had
attained  since  the  days  of  an  Africanus  or  a  Camillus.
It  was  the  just  reward  of  so  many  years  of  self-devo-
tion, and  all  our  painful  sense  of  the  weaknesses  by
which  that  career  had  been  disfigured  gives  way,  at
least  for  a  moment,  to  the  heartfelt  pleasure  of  con-
templating it.  It  would  indeed  have  been  distressing
had  Cicero  been  permitted  to  close  his  day  of  toil  and
perplexity  without  such  a  gleam  of  brilliant  sunshine
to  gild  its  evening.  But  the  sun  was  rapidly  declin-
ing towards  the  horizon,  and  clouds  and  darkness
were  gathering  to  receive  it.  Octavius  watched  it
with  serene  anticipation,  assured  that  its  next  rising
would  illuminate  his  own  fortunes,  and  its  beams
settle  on  his  own  head.

The  third  and  fourth  Philippics  followed  upon  the
publication  of  the  second  in  rapid  succession.  The  third  and

»,.«.,  in  ,, fourth  Philip-

In  the  absence  of  both  the  consuls  trom  the  p."*. Enthu-

i •, |  siasmofthe

city  the  tribunes  had  convoked  the  senate  people.
for  the  twentieth  of  December.  Some  matters  of
form  were  to  be  expedited,  and  possibly  some  extra-
ordinary precautions  devised  for  the  secure  trans-
mission of  the  supreme  magistracy  to  the  consuls
elect  on  the  first  of  the  ensuing  month.  Cicero

152  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

burst  upon  the  assembly  with  a  freedom  and  bold-
ness of  speech  to  which  its  ears  had  been  long
strangers.  This,  he  said,  was  the  first  day  of
liberty  ;  on  this  day,  he  afterwards  boasted,  he
had  laid  the  foundation  of  his  country's  freedom.
Presumptuous  indeed  was  such  a  boast  at  such  a
moment.  But  all  that  he  required  for  its  accom-
plishment was  that  the  senate  should  decree  its
thanks  to  Octavius,  to  the  veterans,  to  the  legions
which  had  deserted  from  Antonius,  to  Decimus,
who  had  pledged  himself  to  maintain  the  Cisalpine
in  the  name  of  the  senate  and  people,  and  to  the
other  faithful  governors  of  provinces.  He  gloried
in  this  sturdy  assumption  of  authority  on  the  part
of  the  Roman  Fathers :  it  sounded  in  his  ears  like
an  echo  from  the  days  of  old.  He  persuaded  himself
that  it  would  breathe  new  life  into  the  common-
wealth ;  that  it  would  strengthen  the  hands  of  its
military  defenders,  and  strike  awe  into  every  as-
pirant to  illegitimate  power  in  whatever  quarter.
When  these  decrees  had  been  passed,  the  orator
descended  from  the  curia  into  the  forum,  and  re-
peated to  the  people  the  oration  he  had  just  de-
livered. The  citizens,  released  from  the  immediate
fear  of  the  consul's  myrmidons,  gave  way  to  their
bitter  recollection  of  his  severity  in  repressing  their
movements,  both  under  the  rule  of  the  dictator  and
since  his  death.  They  were  prepared  to  listen  to
the  praises  of  the  young  Ostavius,  and  cared  little
for  the  assumption  of  dignified  condescension  with
which  the  orator  and  the  senate  sought  to  cloak
their  need  of  him.  They  flattered  the  speaker  by
shouting  at  the  end  of  his  address  that  he  had  twice
saved  the  state.1  Cicero  indeed  had  brought  both
elements  of  the  government  into  harmony.  He
watched  over  them  and  bade  them  co-operate  for
the  war  which  now  seemed  inevitable.  Hirtius  was

»Cic.  Philipp.  vi.  1.

A.C.710-B.C.44.  UKDER THE EMPIRE.  153

confined  to  his  house  by  sickness,  and  Pansa  was
never  inclined  to  active  exertion  l ;  but  the  zeal  and
unwearied  energy  of  the  brave  old  consular  supplied
every  deficiency,  and  arms  and  troops  were  rapidly
collected  under  his  auspices  for  the  defence  of  the
government.  The  adversary  indeed  was  not  un-
worthy of  the  effort.  Antonius  had  learnt  the  art
of  war  under  its  ablest  teacher,  and  few  teachers
had  ever  had  a  more  able  pupil.  Dissolute  as  he
was  in  conduct  whenever  he  could  securely  indulge
his  sensual  appetites,  he  had  not  yet  surrendered
his  judgment  or  his  resolution  to  the  seductions  of
love  and  pleasure;  and  when  he  burst  away  from
Eome  and  threw  himself  into  the  camp  in  the
depth  of  winter,  he  called  his  soldiers 'at  once  to
arms,  and  challenged  Decimus  to  confront  him  in
the  open  field.  When  the  proconsul  shrank  Antoniu9
from  the  shock  of  battle,  and  shut  himself  J32S*™"n
up  in  Mutina,  the  strongest  fortress  in  his  Mutina-
province,  Antonius  instantly  drew  his  lines  round  it,
and  sate  himself  down  to  reduce  it  by  siege.2

Octavius  stepped  forward.  He  made  a  pretence
of  consulting  Cicero,  and  then  offered  to  octavms  offers
lead  his  forces  to  the  proconsul's  rescue.  Decfmus.

—M  ,  i • j j L i • Hesitation  of

Ihe  senate  was  alarmed  indeed  at  his  the  senate.
danger,  but  it  hesitated  to  accept  the  muMMed.
proffered  aid.  The  new  consuls  expressed  with
firmness  their  resolution  to  maintain  the  inviola-
bility of  the  republic;  but  they  still  seemed  to
entertain  hopes  from  mediation,  and  shrank  from
the  bold  and  irregular  step  which  Cicero  advocated.
The  new  Demosthenes  would  have  had  the  aggressor
denounced  as  a  public  enemy :  but  this  was  not  to
be  lightly  ventured.  The  province  had  actually
been  assigned  to  him ;  he  had  been  invited  to

1  Cic.  ad  Att,  xvi.  1.:  "In  Pansa  spes?  Xypos  iro\vi  in  vino  et  in
somrio  istorum." Comp.  ad  Div.  xvi.  £7.

2  Appian,  B.  C,  iii.  49.

154  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

expel  all  intruders ;  he  was  not  without  friends
in  the  senate  to  urge  this  consideration,  and  no-
thing but  sheer  violence  could  overrule  it.  Calenus
spoke  forcibly  for  his  old  comrade  in  arms,  and
even  Piso  recommended  moderation.  Negotiation
was  proposed,  and  many  who  had  least  hopes  from
negotiation,  still  regarded  the  interference  of  Octa-
vius  with  such  jealousy  that  they  were  willing  to
fly  to  any  alternative  in  preference.1

But  to  any  middle  course  Cicero  opposed  himself
Gcero  opposes  with  all  the  vehemence  of  his  excitable
!ng  inrwf  *  disposition,  easily  elated  with  success,  and

fifth  Philippic,  £J  i • T-  J. •  1

Dec.  20.  confident  in  his  power  to  represent  in  glow-
ing colours  the  justice  of  the  course  he  advocated.
Would  Antonius  have  peace?  for  so  his  friends
at  least  had  represented:  let  him  lay  dmvn  his
arms,  let  him  solicit  us,  let  him  deprecate  ivar :  he
shall  find  no  more  just  arbiter  of  his  claims
than  myself,  though  to  gain  the  favour  of  the  evil-
disposed  he  has  chosen  to  make  me  his  enemy
rather  than  his  friend.  Such  had  been  the  futile
reasoning  of  the  foes  of  Caesar.  He  too  had  been
exhorted  to  dismiss  his  forces,  and  trust  to  the  jus-
tice of  the  senate  for  the  redress  of  his  grievances.
But  what  reasonable  man  had  ever  expected  Cassar
to  give  ear  to  such  a  summons  ?  The  declamations
of  the  Marcelli  and  Clodii  had  only  served  to  drown
the  arguments  of  more  intelligent  councillors,  and
precipitate  a  crisis  which  was  perhaps  in  any  case
ultimately  inevitable.  But  to  lean  to  moderation
now  would  be  to  condemn  the  votes  of  the  last  meet-
ing. Cicero  could  remind  the  senate  how  it  had

O

thanked  the  gallant  men  who  had  undertaken  to
anticipate  its  commands  for  the  coercion  of  An-
tonius. And  his  character,  he  contended,  was  one
with  which  it  was  vain  to  treat :  his  known  ferocity,

1  Compare  the  speeches  of  Calenus  in  Dion,  xlvi.  I — 28.,  and  of
Piso  in  Appian,  iii.  54.  foil.

A.U.710-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  155

his  insatiable  cupidity,  his  avowed  determination
to  give  up  the  city  to  the  plunder  of  his  soldiers,
could  admit  of  no  parley :  negotiation  would  be  in-
terpreted by  all  Italy  as  a  sign  of  fear  and  inde-
cision; no  one  would  inquire  what  were  the  terms
proposed;  the  mere  avowal  that  terms  had  been
offered  would  spread  consternation  through  the  land.
Let  him  retire  forsooth  from,  Mutina!  let  him
desist  from  assailing  Detimus !  let  him  by  all
means  withdraw  from  the  province!  Surely  we
are  not  to  entreat  him  with  words  ;  we  must  com-
pel him  by  arms.  Having  exhausted  his  invention
in  representing  this  necessity  by  argument  and  illus-
tration, the  orator  finally  insisted  that  no  embassy
should  be  sent,  that  there  should  be  not  an  instant's
delay,  but  the  consuls  should  proclaim  a  state  of
tumult,  and  receive  extensive  and  summary  powers
for  the  defence  of  the  republic.  All  civil  affairs
should  be  suspended,  every  citizen  assume  the  mili-
tary garb,  levies  be  raised,  and  no  excuse  of  pre-
vious service  be  admitted,  throughout  Rome  and
Italy.

But  the  most  remarkable  passage  in  this  earnest
appeal  was  that  in  which  the orator  la-
mented that  the  elder  Ca3sar  had  not  pre-  "aneggy°rTcn<fn
ferred  at  the  commencement  of  his  career
the  approval  of  the  best  citizens  to  his  own  personal
aggrandisement. He  had  wasted  on  the  frivolous
and  unworthy  multitude  the  influence  wThich  might
have  ennobled  his  name  for  ever. But  it  was  not  so,
he  affirmed,  with  his  son  Octavius. The  experienced
statesman  pledged  his  own  knowledge  of  the  young
Caesar's  inmost  thoughts ; nothing  was  so dear  to
him  as  the  laws ;  nothing  so  venerable  as  the  dignity
of  the  senate ;  nothing  more  desired  than  the  ap-
plause of  the  optimates  ;  nothing  so  attractive  as  the
meed  of  genuine  glory.1

1  Cic.  Philipp.  v.  18.

156  HISTOEY OF THE K03IANS  CH.  xxv.

But  all  the  eloquence,  all  the  logical  acuteness,
Nevertheies.  the  authority  and  influence  of  their  veteran
deteSSu^to  adviser,  could  not  bend  the  more  cautious
or  more  interested  among  his  audience
to  adopt  these  decisive  measures.  The  honours  he
proposed  for  the  defenders  of  the  commonwealth
were  ratified  without  hesitation  :  he  solicited  per-
mission for  Octavius  to  sue  for  civil  magistracies
before  the  legal  age,  and  the  dispensation  was  freely
accorded.1  But  after  much  discussion  and  intrigue
the  proposal  of  Calenus  for  treating  with  Antonius
was  at  last  affirmed.2  Three  of  the  gravest  of  the
senators,  Piso,  Sulpicius,  and  Philippus,  were  charged
with  this  commission.  They  were  instructed  to  state
peremptorily  the  demand  of  the  senate  that  the
consular  should  desist  from  his  attack  on  Mutina ;
and  from  his  camp  they  were  enjoined  to  repair
direct  to  the  quarters  of  Decirnus,  and  thank  him  for
his  spirited  and  loyal  behaviour.  Cicero  thus  baffled
by  the  adherents  of  his  enemy  in  the  senate  strove  to
draw  closer  the  bauds  which  now  united  him  with
the  people,  and  hastening  to  the  forum  recounted  to
an  excited  throng  the  result  of  the  debate,  which  had
lasted  three  consecutive  days.  He  exhorted  them
to  remain  firm,  to  hope  the  best,  and  to  trust  to  his
vigilance  for  their  protection.  From  their  zeal  and
Cicero  the  vast  numbers  in  which  they  had  crowded

l£op"e^rhishe  to  hear  him,  he  augured  well  of  the  event.
piic.tri^Uip~ Many  and mighty crowds have I  ad-
dressed, he  said,  as  consul,  but  none  such
as  I  now  see  before  me. And  all  of  you  think

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  51.

2  Dion,  xlvi.  29.,  asserts  that  Cicero  lost  his  advantage  by  allowing
himself  to  stray  into  scurrilous  abuse of  Calenus: avrbs  /j.ev  yap
aKp&rtf  Kal  KaraKOpfi  TTJ  ira^Tjufa  ad  •jrpbs  iracras  U/JLO'LWS  f \pTj-ro  ....
Kal  r6rf  oliv  a<pfls  rb  ra  Sij/wina  StaffKoirew  fs  AotSopias  atrraj  KarfffTi).
Dion's  bitterness  against  Cicero  is  nowhere  more  strongly  marked
than  in  this  part  of  his  history;  nevertheless  such  testimony  against
him  must  not  be  overlooked.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  157

alike,  hope  alike,  and  will  act  alike.  Never  ivill
the  Romans  be  slaves,  whom  the  gods  have  destined
to  be  lords  of  all  mankind.  Other  nations  may
endure  servitude,  but  freedom  is  the  right  of  the
Roman  people.1  It  was  easier  to  rouse  an  excit-
able populace  than  to  control  the  conflicting  interests
and  sordid  calculations  of  an  assembly  of  statesmen.
Cicero  was  intoxicated  with  the  delight  of  swaying
to  and  fro  the  passions  of  the  vast  multitude  before
him.  He  used  the  people  to  act  upon  the  senate,
and  keep  it  firm  in  its  purpose.  He  now  whispered
to  his  correspondents,  with  a  smile  of  satisfaction,
that  he,  through  life  the  staunchest  bulwark  of  the
aristocracy,  had  become  in  his  latter  days  a  mob-
orator.  But  he  easily  suffered  himself  to  be  deceived
as  to  the  effect  of  his  own  restless  enthusiasm :  or
rather  perhaps  he  strove,  by  desperate  asseveration,  to
blind  himself  and  deceive  others,  when  he  declared  to
Plancus,  to  Decimus,  and  to  Cassius,  that  the  feeling
of  the  citizens  against  Antonius  was  unanimous,  and
the  whole  people  prepared  to  rush  to  arms  at  the
consul's  summons  :  so  great  is  the  longing  of  the
Eomans,  he  said,  for  freedom,  so  bitter  their  hatred
of  the  long  servitude  they  have  endured.2

The  new  consuls  entered  upon  their  office  at  the
commencement  of  the  year,  and Hirtius

f  11  i -LL  f J  J.TX The  new  con-

lollowed  the  envoys  in  a  lew  days  to  the  e«i  Hinius

rm  i  T_ i  j marches  to  the

frontier. Though  war  had  not  been  de-  cisatpme

,  ,  ,  . ,  (circa  Jan.  1,

clared  against  Antonius,  he  carried  some  TJD  andocta-

°  .  .  vius  places

troops  with him,  to give  more  weight  to  himself  under

111  ""  Command.

the  message  of  peace  on  which  they  were
bound.  Octavius  with  becoming  loyalty  surrendered
to  the  consul  of  the  republic  the  command  of  the
legions  which  he  had  attached  to  himself.  The
departure  of  Hirtius  inspired  Cicero  with  new  hopes ;
the  zeal  he  manifested  in  thus  arming,  while  still

1  Cic.  Philipp.  vi.  in  fin.

2  Cic.  ad  Div.  x.  3.,  xi.  8.,  xii.  1.

158  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXV.

languid  from  recent  sickness,  was  held  up  to  the'
admiration  of  the  more  indolent  colleague  he  had
left  behind.  But  the  life-blood  of  the  government
centred  in  Cicero's  own  breast.  It  was  he  that  en-
couraged the  senate,  he  that  inflamed  the  people,  he
that  awed  the  discontented,  he  that  communicated
with  the  officers  of  the  commonwealth  in  every
distant  province,  and  imparted  whatever  sympathy
of  views  and  sentiments  existed  among  them.  The
records  he  has  left  us  of  his  daily  life  are  the  history
of  the  times.  As  letter  succeeds  to  letter,  and  the
long  series  of  the  Philippics  unfolds  itself  before  us,
we  are  more  and  more  impressed  with  the  energy
and  versatility  of  the  powers  displayed  by  their
author.  We  feel  that  he  stands  alone  in  the  centre
of  public  action,  and  we  see  all  the  policy  of  the
state  revolving  around  him.  This  short  and  brilliant
interval  forms  the  most  glorious  epoch  of  the  vene-
rable statesman's  career.  His  studies  are  now  at  last
put  aside ;  but  in  his  private  correspondence  we  still
trace  the  playful  wit,  the  cheerful  hopefulness  which
never  abandoned  him,  in  whatever  straits  and  perils,
as  long  as  he  could  feel  satisfied  with  himself,  and
knew  that  he  was  providing  for  the  applause  of
posterity.  A  letter  to  Paetus,  written  in  the  month
of  February,  is  a  delightful  specimen  of  the  pleasant
raillery  in  which  Cicero  could  indulge  even  at  such
a  moment1;  but  it  concludes  with  a  solemn  adjura-
tion that  he  should  not  be  misinterpreted,  or  sup-
posed, because  he  thus  unbends  in  the  midst  of  his
solicitude  for  the  state,  to  have  surrendered  one
moment  which  could  have  been  seriously  employed,
or  one  thought  which  could  have  been  applied  with
advantage  to  grayer  matters.

But  events  meanwhile  were  hurrying  on  with  a
rapid  pace. Towards  the  close  of  January  the  envoys

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  ix.  24.

A.L-.711-B.C.-13.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  159

returned. They  had  lost  Sulpicius  by  illness  before
they  reached  Antonius's  camp. That  emi-  The  envoys
nent  statesman  and  jurist  was  the  steadiest  Janursi',<^ith

/. • i r» l-i  j.l_  TT 1  •  1 demands  from

friend  ot  liberty  among  them.  He  loved  Anu>mu».
the  laws,  the  wisdom  and  equity  of  which  he  had
been  bred  to  expound.  He  sank  perhaps  under
the  consciousness  that  his  task  was  hopeless,  and
that  neither  zeal,  honesty,  nor  genius,  could  avail
to  wrest  the  drawn  sword  from  the  rebel's  hand.
The  answer  brought  by  the  envoys  to  the  senate
fully  confirmed  Cicero's  worst  anticipations ;  but  the
pusillanimity  of  Piso  and  Philippus  in  submitting  to
become  the  bearers  of  so  insolent  a  message  filled
the  patriot's  breast  with  indignation  and  alarm.1  It
v:as  mere  treason.  They  icere  sent  to  convey  the
commands  of  the  senate ;  the  rebel  has  obeyed  in  no
single  point,  and  noiv  they  have  come  back  ivith  his
demands  in  return.  Antonius,  it  seems,  required
the  senate  to  ratify  his  grants  of  land  and  money  to
the  soldiers ;  to  waive  all  right  to  examine  into  his
expenditure  of  the  public  treasure ;  to  assign  to  him
for  five  years  the  government  of  the  Further  Gaul,
which  he  was  prepared  to  accept  in  exchange  for  the
Cisalpine  ;  finally,  to  confirm  whatever  he  might  pro-
duce from  CaBsar's  pretended  papers.  Antonius  was
playing  the  same  game  as  his  master  before  him,  but
with  less  specious  excuse :  he  was  advancing  claims
which  he  knew  could  not  be  granted  ;  but  it  was  not
like  CaBsar,  for  self-preservation,  but  merely  to  gain
a  few  days,  by  which  time  he  hoped  that  Mutina
would  fall  into  his  hands.  He  forbade  the  envoys  to
communicate  with  Decimus  ;  and  when  he  dismissed
them  from  his  own  quarters  he  prevailed  upon  them
to  carry  to  Home  his  quaestor  Cotyla,  and  introduce
him  to  the  senate  to  expound  and  justify  his  demands.2

1  Cic.  adDiv.  xii.  4.  toCassius:  "Nihil  feed ios  Philippe et  Pisone
legatis,  nihil  flagitiosius."
•  Cic.  Philipp.  viii.  8.

160  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

Cicero  was  shocked  at  this  miserable  compliance  :
he  groaned  over  the  death  of  Sulpicius  and  the  sick-
ciceroeT-  ness  of  Lucius  Caesar.  We  are  deserted,
indignation  in  he  exclaimed,  we  are  deserted,  0  Fathers,

by  the  chiefs  of  the  commonwealth;  the
consudars  have  abandoned  us  to  our  fate,  the  very
envoys  whose  return  should  have  revived  our  confi-
dence, have  only  thrown  us  into  deeper  perplexity
and  despair.  And  then  he  reminded  his  hearers  of
the  spirit  of  the  ancient  ambassador  Popilius,  who,
when  he  had  delivered  the  senate's  orders  to  king
Antiochus,  and  the  foreigner  made  excuses  for  delay,
drew  a  line  round  him  with  a  stick,  and  forbade
him  to  step  beyond  it  till  he  proffered  his  humble
submission.

Nevertheless  the  orator  would  not  confess  himself
The  senate  dismayed,  but  still  persisted  in  exhorting
steatearoefs  a  his  hearers  to  expect  decisive  success  from  a

bolder  policy.  He  insisted  more  urgently
than  ever  that  the  offender  should  be  declared  an
enemy  of  the  state.  Calenus  and  his  supporters  con-
tended warmly  against  this  demand,  and  even  Lucius
Cgesar  shrank  from  pressing  the  matter  to  such  an
extremity  against  his  own  nephew.  It  was  indeed
impossible,  after  the  rejoinder  of  Antonius,  to  avoid
an  armed  contest;  but  his  hostile  attitude  might  be
designated  more  mildly  as  a  tumult  than  a  war,  the
recusant  himself  might  be  styled  more  indulgently
the  adversary  of  Decimus  than  his  enemy.1  But
commence-  meanwhile  the  swords  of  the  combatants
hIStuuie.  had  already  met,  Hirtius  had  acted  with
HtoiuTand  promptness  and  vigour.  The  consul  Pansa
Antonius.  rea(^  ^  fae  senate  his  colleague's  despatch  :
he  had  stormed  a,  post,  he  had  seized  Claterna,  he

1  Appian.  B.  C.  in.  63.  Cicero  (Philipp.  viii.  2.)  maintained  on
the  contrary  that  the  term  tumultus  was  stronger  than  helium.  The
one  properly  implied  a  sudden  unforeseen  attack,  the  other  a  declared
state  of  war.

A.U.7U-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  161

had  driven  in  some  horsemen,  he  had  joined  battle,
and  blood  had  been  shed  on  both  sides.  The  advan-
tage seemed  to  be  on  the  side  of  the  government.  An-
tonius  occupied  Bononia  with  the  greater  part  of  his
force,  and  only  a  small  division  was  left  to  watch
Decimus  in  Mutina :  Octavius  was  posted  at  Forum
Cornelii,  the  modern  Imola :  except  Bononia,  Khe-
gium,  and  Parma,  the  whole  province  was  in  the
power  of  the  republican  forces,  and  assurances  were
received  that  the  Transpadanes,  of  whose  loyalty  some
doubt  had  been  entertained,  were  extremely  well
disposed  to  the  cause  of  the  senate.1  The  hopes  of
the  republicans  were  raised,  and  Cicero  seized  the
moment  to  propose  a  statue  to  Sulpicius,  the  patriot
who  had  died  in  the  service  of  his  country.  The
ninth  Philippic  is  a  graceful  panegyric  on  the  illus-
trious jurist,  and  the  monument  which  it  urged  the
Eoman  people  to  erect  to  him  remained  standing
before  the  rostra  through  many  generations.  At  the
end  of  three  centuries  of  the  peaceful  triumphs  of  law
the  name  and  honours  of  Servius  Sulpicius  were  still
associated  with  this  brazen  effigy,  and  possibly  it  was
not  forgotten  that  the  eloquence  of  Marcus  Tullius
had  helped  to  raise  it.2

While  the  government  at  Rome  was  thus  slowly
rousing  itself  to  the  struggle  for  freedom,  Ca88iua  ob.
the  faction  of  the  liberators  was  receiving  ad'?anT^
some  addition  of  strength  in  the  Eastern  iBSy"a-
provinces. Cassius  had  reached  Syria,  and  was  arm-
ing himself  with  the  diligence of  a good soldier
against  the  expected  attack  of  Dolabella :  he  had  at-
tracted to  his  standard  one  legion  which  had  main-

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  xii.  5.

2  Pomponius,  in  the  Digest,  i.  tit.  ii.  §  43. "  Servius  qnum  in
causis  orandis  primum  locum  aut  pro  certo  post  Marcum  Tullium
obtineret .  .  .  hicquumin  legatione  pcriisset  statuam  ei  pop.  Rom.  pro
rostris  posuit,  et  hodieque  exstat  pro  rostris  Augusti." Cic.  Philipp.
ix.  7.

VOL.  III.  M

162  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

tained  the  cause  of  the  republic  under  Caecilius  Bassus
throughout  the  period  of  Caesar's  ascendancy l :  L.
Murcus  and  Q.  Crispus,  who  held  commands  on  the
Eastern  frontier,  had  placed  themselves  under  his
orders,  and  four  legions,  which  Dolabella  had  sum-
moned from  Egypt,  had  been  constrained  to  surrender
to  him.  Deiotarus,  the  Gralatian  chief,  offered  him
the  swords  of  a  numerous  native  army  trained  in  the
Roman  manner.  Cassius  found  himself  early  in  the
year  at  the  head  of  an  imposing  force,  and  his  favour-
able statement  of  affairs  in  the  East  reached  Cicero
just  at  the  moment  when  he  could  employ  it  with
effect  to  reinforce  his  own  arguments  for  vigorous
and  decisive  action.  At  the  same  time  Brutus  had
been  acknowledged  by  Hortensius  in  Macedonia  as
his  legitimate  successor,  and  had  driven  C.  Antonius,
the  rival  claimant,  into  Apollonia,  where  he  kept  him
closely  shut  up.2  He  commanded  the  quaestors  to
pour  into  his  military  chest  the  tolls  and  tributes
they  were  collecting  for  the  expenses  of  the  province.3
With  Macedonia  both  Illyricum  and  Achaia  were  de-
termined to  the  side  of  the  republic.4  The  same  cause
might  count  also  with  some  confidence  on  the  support
of  Plancus  in  Gaul  and  Pollio  in  Spain :  for  both
these  officers,  though  recently  attached  to  Caesar,  had
no  personal  connexion  with  Antonius,  and  were  known
to  be  waiters  upon  the  winning  side.5  Pollio  openly
avowed  that  he  longed  for  rest  and  yearned  after  the
graceful  studies  to  which  he  was  addicted.  He  was
disposed  to  throw  the  weight  of  his  sword  into  the
scale  that  now  seemed  the  heaviest,  for  the  sake  of

1  Cassias  to  Cicero,  March  7  (ad  Div.  xii. 11.).  Joseph.  Antiq.
Jud.  xiv.  11. ;  Appian,  B.  C-  Hi  11.;  Dion,  xlvii.  27,  28.;  Cicero,
Philipp.  xi.  12.

2  Cic.  Philipp.  xi.  11.  »  Veil.  ii.  62.
4  Cic  Philipp.  x.  6.

s  Comp.  Asinius  Pollio  to  Cicero  (in  the  middle  of  March),  ad
Div.  x.  31.,  and  Plancus  to  the  consuls  (about  the  same  date),  ad
Div.  x.  8.

A.C.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  163

obtaining,  irrespective  of  men  or  principles,  peace  at
any  price  and  from  any  hands.

-  But  the  cause  of  freedom  sustained  a  grave  reverse
in  the  loss  of  a  good  officer  and  zealous  Treboniu8ig
partisan,  Trebonius.  Dolabella,  as  we  have  mifrdderaeddby
seen,  had  left  Rome  in  the  autumn,  antici-  DolabeUa-
pating  by  three  months  the  termination  of  his  con-
sulate, in  his  haste  to  possess  himself  of  his  province,
or  rather  to  amass  plunder  in  the  cities  on  his  route.
For  after  quitting  Italy,  he  made,  it  appears,  no
expedition  to  reach  his  destination,  although  the
attitude  Cassius  had  assumed  there  must  have  soon,
been  made  known  to  him.  It  was  not  till  the  com-
mencement of  the  following  year  that  he  crossed  over
into  Asia.  He  had  encountered  no  open  resistance  in
Macedonia,  nor  did  Trebonius,  who  commanded  in
Asia,  venture  to  defy  him  with  arms.  But  his  pro-
gress was  harassed  and  impeded,  supplies  were  refused
him,  and  the  cities  on  his  route  closed  their  gates
against  him.  Dolabella  resented  this  affront.  He
took  measures  to  throw  the  propraetor  off  his  guard,
scaled  the  walls  of  Smyrna  in  the  night,  and  caused
him  to  be  seized  in  his  bed.  When  Trebonius  begged
to  be  conducted  into  the  consul's  presence,  he  received
the  taunting  reply,  that  he  might  go  where  he  pleased,
but  he  must  leave  his  head  behind  him.  Dolabella
required  the  death  of  Caesar's  murderer.  Trebonius,
it  was  remarked,  was  the  first  of  the  parricides  who
suffered  the  penalty  of  his  crime,  and  that  within  less
than  a  year  from  the  date  of  its  perpetration.  With  the
dawn  of  day  the  gory  trophy  was  seen  suspended
from  the  consul's  tribunal ;  the  legionaries  and  camp-
tbllowers  vied  with  each  other  in  heaping  insults  on
the  mutilated  trunk,  and  the  head  itself  was  torn
down  and  kicked  like  a  ball  through  the  streets,  till
no  vestige  of  the  human  countenance  was  visible
upon  it.  This  bloody  tragedy  was  enacted  towards
the  end  of  February,  at  the  very  time  when  Cassius

M 2

164  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXV.

was  vaunting  the  prosperous  issue  of  his  affairs  in
Syria.  Cicero  in  his  eleventh  Philippic  amazed  and
shocked  the  senate  by  its  recital.  He  coloured  and
perhaps  aggravated  the  details,  to  excite  his  hearers'
indignation.  The  tortures  to  which,  according  to  his
passionate  account,  the  captive  was  subjected  through
two  entire  days  before  his  head  was  struck  from  his
body  are  inconsistent  with  the  statement  of  a  later
historian :  but  the  slaughter  of  a  Roman  citizen,  an
officer  of  the  highest  distinction,  by  a  magistrate  of
the  republic,  the  perpetration  of  the  worst  excesses  of
civil  war  in  the  midst  of  peace,  sufficed  to  alarm  and
enrage  the  father  without  any  fictitious  exaggera-
tion.1

Thus  did  Cicero's  long  suppressed  bitterness  against
Doiabeiiapro-  h*8  son-in-law  break  out.  The  imprecations
en^mydofnthe  ne  uttered  against  him  stunned  the  senate
and  bowed  it  to  his  will.  Dolabella  was  at
once  proclaimed  an  enemy  of  the  state,  and  all  the
servants  of  the  commonwealth  in  the  province  were
charged  to  chastise  and  destroy  him.2  But  he  had
been  formally  appointed  to  the  government  of  Syria,
while  the  attitude  there  assumed  by  Cassius  was
directly  opposed  to  the  mandate  of  the  republic.
Even  Cicero  was  constrained  to  admit  that  Cassius
was  serving  the  interests  of  the  Roman  people  in
defiance  of  their  own  decree.  When  Dolabella  was
solemnly  deposed  from  his  office,  the  question  arose
who  should  succeed  to  it  ?  Of  the  secret  opponents
of  Cassius  some  wished  to  send  out  P.  Servilius,
the  same  who  had  been  Cassar's  colleague  in  his
second  consulship ;  others,  among  whom  was  Calenus,
that  the  actual  consuls  should  assume  the  vacant
governments  of  Asia  and  Syria.  Cicero  perceived
that  Calenus  sought  to  divert  the  attention  of  the

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  26.;  Cic.  Phillpp.  xl  2.  foil.

2  Appian,  B.  C,  iii.  61.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  165

consuls  from  duties  nearer  and  more  urgent :  he
opposed  himself  to  both  propositions,  and  counter-
acted them  by  a  bold  step,  so  bold  that  even  Servilia
and  Cassius's  own  relations  would  have  dissuaded  him
from  it.1  The  senate  he  feared  might  prove  intrac-
table :  he  addressed  himself  to  the  people.  To  them
he  expatiated  on  the  services  of  Cassius,  who  by  his
promptness  had  wrested  Syria  from  the  grasp  of  the
hateful  Dolabella  ;  he  hinted  that  he  would  not  wait
for  the  confirmation  by  the  senate  of  the  charge  with
which  he  had,  so  fortunately  for  the  state,  already
invested  himself;  he  lauded  his  determination  to  act
for  the  public  good,  and  for  that  alone.  Thus  he  pre-
pared the  citizens  for  the  event  which  he  knew  was
impending.  Cassius  had  resolved  to  hold  his  own,
and  maintain  himself  in  the  government  he  had
so  boldly  seized.2  He  assumed  the  name  and  func-
tions of  proconsul,  and  neither  waited  for  the  decree
of  the  senate,  which  assigned  the  province  to  the
consul3,  nor  heeded  it  when  it  was  made  known  to
him.

Audacity  was  indeed  required  to  save  the  republic,
if  saved  it  yet  could  be,  in  spite  of  itself. While
the  senate  faltered  and  allowed  the  Antonians  to  hold
its bolts suspended, Cicero  was fearful of  losing
his  hold  upon  Lepidus. He  had  obtained  The  consul
honourable  distinctions for  the  proconsul  hiVcoifeague
of Spain, in the hope of securing his  cisalpine.
sendees  for  the  good  cause ;  but  Lepidus  had  not

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  xii.  7.,  to  Cassius,  at  the  end  of  March.  "Id  velim
mihi  ignoscas  quod  invita  socru  tua  fecerim.  Mulier  timida  verebatur
ne  Pansse  animus  ofifenderetur."

2  The  eleventh  Philippic  urged  these  arguments  on  the  senate,  but
they  were  defeated  in  that  assembly  by  Pansa. (Cic.  ad  Div.  xii.  7.)
He  proceeds  to  say:  "  Quod  autem  in  senatu  pluribus  verbis  disserui,
et  dixi  in  concione  ....  promisi  enim  et  prope  confirmavi  te  non
exspectasse  nee  exspectaturum  decreta  nostra,  sed  te  ipsum  tuo  more
reiupublicam  defensurum."

3  This  appears  from  a letter  of  Lentulus  (Cic.  ad  Div.  xii.  14.)
but  the  arrangement,  as  will  appear,  never  took  effect.

166  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXT.

deigned  to  express  gratitude  in  return ;  on  the  con-
trary he  continued  to  urge  the  senate  to  treat  with
Antonius,  and  plied  both  PJancus  and  Pollio  with
insidious  representations,  tending  to  cool  still  more
their  lukewarm  loyalty.  It  was  a  moment  of  deep
anxiety  to  the  patriot  orator  :  all  his  plans  and  hopes
seemed  on  the  point  of  being  frustrated ;  the  fate  of
Trebonius  excited  and  unnerved  him,  and  with  the
fear  of  death  and  torments  before  him  he  demanded
for  himself  and  for  his  country  the  extermination  of
the  armed  oppressors.  At  such  a  moment  the  consul
Pansa,  moved  by  the  friends,  the  wife,  and  the
mother  of  Antonius,  sought  to  avert  the  horrors  of
civil  war  by  a  second  attempt  at  negotiation.  An-
tonius, he  was  once  more  assured,  would  listen  to
reasonable  terms.  The  senate,  ever  ready  to  shift
responsibility  from  itself,  acceded  to  the  consul's
suggestion.  Four  consulars  were  named  to  compose
the  deputation.  Cicero  himself  was  included  in  the
list.  He  wavered  and  for  an  instant  acceded;  in
the  next,  he  saw  his  error,  and  launched  against  the
base  concession  the  thunders  of  his  twelfth  Philippic.
With  redoubled  energy  he  urged  the  indignity  of  dis-
cussing the  terms  of  obedience  with  an  avowed
traitor.  The  cruelty  of  Dolabella  had  been  learned
from  his  master  Antonius.  It  was  only  a  foretaste
of  the  tyranny  to  which  the  noble  and  the  good
would  be  subjected, when  Antonius,  with  every  scheme
successful  and  every  passion  inflamed,  should  enter
the  city  at  the  head  of  his  unresisted  legions.  He
shrank'with  disgust  from  the  service  the  senate  would
have  imposed  upan  him.  Once  in  the  power  of  his
enemy,  no  laws,  human  or  divine,  he  was  assured,
would  protect  him  from  his  bitterest  vengeance.
Cicero  himself,  in  the  single  campaign  he  had  served
in  early  life,  had  witnessed  the  interview  between
Pompeius  Strabo  the  consul,  and  Scato  the  general
of  the  Marsians.  He  remembered  the  courtesy  and

A.U.711-B.0.43  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  167

mutual  respect  with  which  in  those  days  avowed  an-
tagonists could  meet  in  parley.  Scato  being  asked
in  what  relation  he  deemed  himself  to  stand  to  the
Koman  general,  had  replied  with  dignified  urbanity,
1  am  his  friend  by  inclination,  his  foe  by  circum-
stances. But  those  were  honourable  men,  and  hon-
ourable times :  warfare  had  then  its  principles  and  its
laws :  in  those  days  noble  citizens  were  not  torn  from
their  beds,  insulted,  tortured,  and  slain  by  men
bearing  the  commission  of  the  republic.  Besides,  he
continued,  of  what  service  could  my  treating  with
the  monster  be?  I  have  only  one  ivord  to  utter,  one
reply  to  make,  one  condition  to  require — and  he
knows  it, — Obey  the  senate.  The  assembly  seems  to
have  been  at  last  convinced  that  further  parley  could
only  weaken  its  moral  force ;  and  the  consul's  feeble
proposition  fell  unsupported  to  the  ground.  Pansa's
levies  were  now  completed,  and  at  the  end  of  March
he  went  forth  with  four  legions  to  join  his  colleague
and  Octavius,  and  bring  the  affair  which  had  been
suffered  so  long  to  linger,  to  the  final  decision  of
the  sword.  But  both  the  consuls  had  quitted  Eome
without  celebrating  the  Latin  ferise,  and  it  was  re-
marked afterwards,  if  not  at  the  time,  that  this
omission  had  never  yet  occurred  without  fatal  con-
sequences.1

At  first  the  unfitness  of  the  season  for  field  opera-
tions may  have  retarded  the  crisis  which  The  consuls
was  impending  under  the  walls  of  Mutina.  SSJ^i.'^
Antonius, as the winter advanced, had  £Sugla
drawn out  the  greater  part  of  his  troops  Mutina-
from  Bononia,  leaving  there  only  a  small  garrison,
while  he  strengthened  with  additional  battalions  the
legions  which  occupied  his  lines  in  front  of  Decimus.
He  might  hope,  by  thus  pressing  the  blockade,  to
reduce  the  enemy  by  famine;  for  Mutina  was  too

1  Dion,  xlvi.  33. Comp.  Lir.  xxi.  63.

168  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

strong  to  be  taken  by  assault,  and  the  obstacles
he  had:  thrown  in  the  way  of  the  senate's  declaration
of  war  against  him  gave  him  time  and  opportunity.
Octavius  watched  his  operations,  but  hesitated  to
attack  him.  Antonius  asserted  loudly  that  he  was
assailing  Decimus  as  one  of  Caesar's  murderers,  and
this  plea  was  not  perhaps  without  its  influence  even
upon  his  rival's  soldiers.  Octavius  might  be  deterred
from  rushing  to  the  defence  of  one  whose  crime
rendered  him  so  deeply  obnoxious  to  the  Caesarean
veterans.  He  was  mortified,  moreover,  at  the  vacilla-
tion of  the  senate.  He  required  a  formal  authoriza-
tion to  assail  Antonius  as  a  public  enemy,  and  the
senate  sought  to  quiet  and  cajole  him,  by  sounding
titles  and  empty  distinctions.  While  a  reconciliation
between  the  senate  and  his  adversary  was  still  pos-
sible, his  merit  was  still  dubious  and  his  position
insecure.1  The  nobles,  he  perceived,  would  gladly
have  kept  both  himself  and  Antonius  in  check  by
playing  off  one  against  the  other,  and  he  already
contemplated,  no  doubt,  the  turn  in  the  wheel  of
fortune  which  should  throw  them  into  each  other's
arms  for  mutual  defence.  Nor  even  when  Hirtius
arrived  were  the  combined  armies  at  once  brought
into  the  field.  The  paralysis  at  the  heart  of  the
government  extended  to  the  hand  which  it  vainly
held  out  to  strike.  The  first  active  movement  on
the  part  of  the  republican  forces  was  made  at  the
instigation  of  Octavius.  He  persuaded  Hirtius  to
seize  Bononia,  in  which  enterprise  he  met  with  no
resistance.  The  combined  leaders  then  drew  near  to
Mutina,  and  apprised  Decimus  of  their  arrival  to
relieve  him.  At  first  they  sought  to  communicate
the  intelligence  by  means  of  torches  affixed  to  the
summits  of  trees;  but  as  these  signals  were  not
understood,  a  brief  message  scratched  on  a  leaden

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  64.;  Dion,  xlvi.  35.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  169

tablet  was  conveyed  across  the  river  by  a  diver.  This
mode  of  communication  was  thenceforth  adopted  by
both  parties  within  and  without  the  walls.1

Antonius  meanwhile,  emboldened  by  the  senate's
long  indulgence,  and  confident  in  the  in-  Antoninil
trigues  of  his  adherents  in  the  city,  had  re-  cJElro'X,,^
plied  to  Cicero's  invectives  with  an  angry  cu£roare?oin»
and  insolent  letter.  He  resented  the  decree  ihimenth
by  which  Dolabellahad  been  proclaimed  an  Philippic-
enemy,  for  pursuing  a  parricide  to  the  death.  He
justified  and  exulted  in  the  slaughter  of  Trebonius ;
he  vaunted  the  righteous  judgment  which  had  over-
taken the  assassin  within  a  year  from  the  day  of  his
crime,  and  appealed  to  it  as  a  manifest  proof  of  divine
providence.  He  upbraided  the  senate  with  conniving
at  the  usurpations  of  Brutus  and  Cassius ;  Decimus
he  branded  as  a  vulgar  cut-throat ;  Octavius  he  rudely
apostrophized  as  a  boy.  Alluding  to  the  disaster
upon  which  his  opponent  was  ever  most  sensitive,  he
taunted  the  senate  with  choosing  for  its  general  the
'vanquished  Cicero.  He  sneered  at  it  as  a  mere  Pom-
peian  club,  sworn  to  undo  all  that  the  great  Caesar
had  done,  to  degrade  his  name,  and  honour  his  assas-
sins. What,  he  asked  with  bitter  irony,  what  would
become  of  Caesar  if  he  could  come  to  life  again  ?  2  To
all  these  charges  and  insults  Cicero  replied  in  his
thirteenth  Philippic,  retorting  upon  them,  one  by
one,  with  a  flashing  torrent  of  indignant  sarcasm,  and
answering  scorn  with  scorn,  rebuke  with  rebuke,  and
defiance  with  defiance.  Though  the  formal  denun-
ciation was  still  withheld,  it  was  now  manifest  that
each  party  was  resolved  to  provoke  the  other  to  ex-
tremity, and  if  Antonius  was  not  even  yet  declared
an  enemy  of  the  state,  the  thirteenth  Philippic  pro-
claimed aloud  that  the  government  had  taken  up  its

1  Pliny  informs  us  (Hist.  Nat.  x.  53.),  that  Decimus  made  use  of
carrier  pigeons  to  convey  intelligence.

2  Cic.  Philipp.  xiii.  17. :  "  Quid  facial  si  reviviscat  ?  "

170  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxv.

position,  and  planted  itself  firmly  on  ground  from
which  it  would  never  recede.

During  the  absence  of  both  the  consuls  from  the
city,  Cicero  had  become  the  real  head  of
BUIS'  absence  the  republic.  He  caused  the  tribunes  to
The  lead  inm  convoke  the  people,  whose  enthusiasm
he  nursed  by  almost  daily  harangues ;  he
prevailed  upon  the  armourers  to  furnish  weapons
gratuitously,  he  raised  contributions  for  the  public
service,  and  laid  his  hands  heavily  upon  the  pro-
perty of  the  Antonians.1  His  diligence,  his  vigilance
and  feverish  activity  bore  down  all  resistance  and
extorted  submission  to  every  demand.  The  arrival
however  from  Mutina  of  a  false  report  of  the  consuls'
defeat  elated  the  depressed  faction  with  fresh  hopes,
and  they  conspired  to  seize  the  Capitol,  to  murder
Cicero,  and  make  a  general  massacre  of  the  patriot
senators.  It  was  intended,  apparently,  to  put  some
one  forward  to  propose  that  the  dictatorship  should
be  conferred  upon  the  great  orator.  The  Antonians
were  prepared  to  take  advantage  of  the  odium  such  a
proposition  must  excite  against  him,  to  raise  a  tumult,
and  direct  it  to  their  bloody  purpose.  The  intrigue
was  detected  and  frustrated.  Appuleius,  a  tribune  of
the  people,  came  forward  to  vindicate  the  veteran
statesman  from  the  charge  busily  circulated  against
him  of  affecting  supreme  power ;  and  within  three

1  Plutarch  (JEmi7.  Paul.  38.)  asserts  that  the  property-tax  re-
mitted to  the  citizens  of  Rome  after  the  conquest  of  Macedonia
(A.U.  587)  was  re-imposed  in  the  consulship  of  Hirtius  and  Pansa.
He  refers  doubtless  to  the  extraordinary  contributions  exacted  at
this  time  under  Cicero's  administration.  In  the  disturbed  years
which  followed  we  shall  find  similar  exactions  made  by  other  rulers.
(Comp.  Dion,  xlvii.  14,  16.,  xlviii.  34.;  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  5.  32.,
v.  67.)  But  there  is  no  reason  to  conclude  with  many  writers  on
Roman  antiquities  and  finance  that  the  tributum  of  the  ancient  con-
stitution was  permanently  re-established  at  this  period.  Later
writers  continued  to  speak  of  it  as  obsolete.  See  Val.  Max.  iv.  3.  8. ;
Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvii.  17.:  "  A  quo  tempore  pop.  Rom.  tributum  pen-
dere  desiit."  Comp.  Savigny,  Ron.  Steuerverfassung :  erst.  Nach-
trag:  ed.  1842.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  171

hours  from  the  conclusion  of  his  speech,  to  w.hich
the  citizens  had  given  a  most  favourable  hearing,
rumours  arrived,  exaggerated  indeed  and  premature,
of  a  complete  and  glorious  victory  over  the  common
enemy.1

On  the  approach  of  Hirtius  and  Octavius,  Antonius
had  broken  up  from  his  lines  before  Mutina,  Engagement
leaving  his  brother  Lucius  to  watch  the  Gaiio™£,
town,  while  with  his  cavalry,  in  which  arm  ?*™*  is
he  was  well  provided,  he  operated  upon  the  wo "n'el
front  and  flanks  of  the  advancing  forces.  Three
months  passed  without  a  blow  being  struck.  At
length  Antonius  was  informed  through  his  friends  in
Rome  that  Pansa  was  bringing  up  reinforcements ;
but  he  was  not  strong  enough  to  occupy  the  passes
of  the  Apennines,  and  the  consul  met  with  no  op-
position till  he  had  nearly  reached  Forum  Gallorum,
on  the  road  from  Bononia,  about  eight  miles  from
the  beleaguered  city.  Antonius  was  aware  that  his
new  opponent  led  four  newly  raised  legions,  and  he
knew  the  vast  superiority  of  his  own  veterans  over
such  raw  levies.  With  only  two  legions  therefore,
the  second  and  thirty-fifth,  he  had  pushed  forward  to
intercept  their  progress.  He  kept  his  legions  in
reserve,  behind  the  banks  and  water-courses  with
which  the  flat  and  marshy  country  was  intersected,
while  he  detached  some  picked  cohorts  and  a  few
veterans  fron  the  colonies  to  draw  the  inexperienced
foe  into  his  ambuscade.  But  the  night  preceding,
Hirtius,  divining  the  enemy's  intention,  had  des-
patched one  veteran  legion,  the  Martian,  together
with  two  cohorts  of  guards,  to  his  colleague's  assist-
ance. The  Martians  were  one  of  the  corps  which,
incensed  at  the  treatment  of  the  mutineers  at  Brun-
disium,  had  deserted  from  Antonius  at  Alba.  They

1  Cic.  Philipp.  xiv.  6.  This  is  Cicero's  own  account,  and  is  liable
certainly  to  the  suspicion  of  invention,  or  at  least  of  morbid  imagi-
nation.

172  HISTORY OF THE KOMAXS  CH.  xxv.

were  full  of  vengeful  feelings  against  their  late  com-
mander, and  moreover  they  had  no  hope  of  quarter
Accordingly,  no  sooner  did  thfey  perceive  the  An-
tonian  squadrons  before  them,  than  they  rushed  for-
ward, overcoming  the  control  of  their  officers,  and
hurrying  them  along  in  their  furious  career.1  Pansa,
though  taken  by  surprise,  ordered  two  of  his  legions
to  follow  in  support,  and  while  the  Martians  thronged
the  causeway  which  led  to  Mutina,  these  auxiliaries
strove  gallantly  to  keep  up  with  their  advance,
along  the  rough  fields  on  either  side,  Antonius
rapidly  brought  up  his  forces,  and  fearful  was  the
shock  of  the  collision.  The  causeway,  elevated  some
feet  above  the  plain,  concealed  the  combatants  on
either  side  from  those  on  the  other :  but  the  veterans
who  met  in  furious  conflict  upon  it  were  conspicuous
to  all,  and  great  was  the  admiration  of  the.  new
recruits  at  the  steadiness  with  which  they  kept  their
ranks  throughout  the  day,  and  the  grim  silence  in
which  they  laid  themselves  to  their  work.  Step  by
step  the  Antonians  overbore  the  stout  resistance  of
the  Martian  legionaries.  Pansa,  transfixed  with  the
thrust  of  a  spear,  was  carried  off  the  field  mortally
wounded.  But  the  rout  of  his  forces  was  averted  by
the  timely  diversion  of  Hirtius  on  the  rear  of  the
Antonians  ;  a  second  combat  of  hardly  less  obstinacy
than  the  first  succeeded ;  the  fresh  troops  maintained
their  advantage  over  the  weary  victors  of  a  struggle
which  had  already  lasted  many  hours,  and  Antonius
was  compelled  to  draw  off  his  legions  before  the  close
of  the  day.  According  to  one  account  he  passed  the

1  The  battle  of  Fornm  Gallorum  took  place  on  the  15th  of  April,
as  appears  from  the  letter  of  Galba  to  Cicero  (arf  Div.  x.  30.),  which
begins,  "A.  d.  xvii.  KaL  Mai.  quo  die  Pansa  in  castris  Hirtii  erat
futures."  Grid  errs  in  placing  it  a  day  earlier  {Fast.  iv.  625.  seqq.);
but  it  would  seem  from  his  notice  that  the  anniversary  of  the  two
battles  of  the  15th  and  the  27th  (see  below)  was  kept  on  the  same
day;  and  as  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  followed  the  existing  calendar,
we  are  driven  to  the  supposition  that  the  real  date,  as  in  other  in-
stances, was  not  strictly  regarded.

A.U.711-B.C.44.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  173

night  in  the  same  quarters  he  had  occupied  in  the
morning;  but  the  narrative  of  a  combatant  in  Pansa's
army,  which  states  that  he  retired  to  his  camp  before
Mutina,  seems  the  more  worthy  of  credit.1

While  the  news  of  a  great  victory  was  conveyed
in  a  despatch  crowned  with  laurel  to  the  Engagement

A, .. -p.  , .  before  Mutina,

senate,  while  Fansa was lying prostrate

with  the  fatal  wound  he  had  just  received,
another  action  took  place  before  the  walls  of  Mutina,
with  the  same  chequered  result  as  the  former.
Hirtius,  following  up  his  partial  advantage,  had
sought  to  draw  Antonius  forth  from  his  camp  to  a
second  engagement,  but  without  success.  At  last
on  the  27th  of  April,  by  the  feint  of  throwing
succours  into  the  town,  he  forced  the  besiegers  to
place  themselves  in  his  way.  Fearing  that  Mutina
would  thus  be  snatched  from  his  grasp,  Antonius
allowed  two  of  his  legions  to  take  up  a  position
between  it  and  the  Hirtians.  The  combat  once
begun  was  sustained  by"  fresh  detachments  from
the  Antonian  camp,  until  the  whole  of  the  be-
sieging army  was  engaged.  But  the  battalions
thus  brought  forward  in  detail  fought  with  less
confidence,  and  at  last  gave  way.  Hirtius  pursued
them  even  within  the  lines  of  their  camp,  and  fell
fighting  on  the  very  threshold  of  the  prsetorium.
Octavius  coming  up  to  his  support  carried  off  the

1  Galba  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  x.  30.)  ;  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  67  —  70.;
Dion,  xlvi.  37.  Our  first  authority  is  Scrv.  Sulpicius  Galba,  the  lieu-
tenant of  Caesar,  who  conducted  the  campaign  in  the  Alps,  CJES.  B.  G.
iii.  init.  (see  Chapter  VII.  of  this  history).  He  became  one  of  the
conspirators  against  the  dictator.  He  describes  in  a  letter  to  Cicero
the  battle  narrated  in  the  text,  in  which  he  held  a  command  in  Pansa's
army.  He  had  been  legatus  of  the  Martian  legion.  Appian's  account
is  more  favourable  to  Antonius;  but  this  historian  exhibits  much
prejudice  against  the  republicans  throughout  these  transactions,  and
many  of  his  statements  seem  totally  devoid  of  credit.  In  some  parti-
culars I  have  combined  the  two  accounts,  which  are  not  altogether
consistent  with  each  other.  Dion  enters  into  no  details,  but  gives  a
decided  victory  to  Hirtius:  iroAu  e'/c/mr

174  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxT.

consul's  body,  and  for  a  moment  held  possession
of  the  camp.  The  Antonians  however  finally  ral-
lied, and  recovered  their  position ;  but  the  honours
of  the  day  remained  with  the  assailants,  who  had
forced  their  enemy  to  leave  his  lines  to  meet  them,
and  had  driven  him  ignominiously  within  them
again.

Hirtius  thus  fell  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies,
The  new.  of  an(l  Pansa  died  of  his  wounds  almost  at
.  the  same  moment ;  but  the  news  of  the
h  first  battle,  unalloyed  by  any  knowledge
°f  this  double  disaster,  had  already  en-
APni22.  tered  the  walls  of  the  senate-house  at
Rome.  It  came  most  opportunely  for  Cicero,  at
the  moment  when  the  tribune's  interference  in  his
behalf  had  defeated  the  machinations  of  the  An-
tonians in  the  city,  and  restored  him  to  the  favour
of  the  people,  which  had  been  for  an  instant  shaken.
The  enthusiasm  of  the  citizens  towards  him  was  now
unbounded.  They  rushed  in  crowds  to  his  dwelling
on  the  Palatine,  insisted  upon  his  coming  forth  to
them,  and  then  carried  him  in  a  kind  of  triumph
to  the  Capitol,  as  if,  he  says,  he  had  been  himself
the  victorious  imperator,  and  thence  back  to  his  own
house.1  The  day  following,  the  22nd  of  April,  the
senate  was  convened  by  the  city  praetor,  M.  Cornutus,
who  in  the  absence  of  both  the  consuls  occupied  the
highest  executive  office  in  the  state.2  The  despatch
of  the  consul  Hirtius  was  read,  and  Servilius  moved
a  thanksgiving  to  the  gods  for  the  public  victory.
It  was  also  proposed  that  the  senate  should  now  lay
aside  the  military  garb  which  it  had  assumed  since
the  commencement  of  hostilities.  Then  arose  Cicero,

1  Cic.  Philipp.  xiv.  5.

*  The  date  is  fixed  by  an  expression  of  Cicero,  if  at  least  we
may  adopt  a  conjectural  but  very  satisfactory  reading  :  "  Pridie
Vinalia  (for  per  idus  Quintiles)  qui  dies  hodie  est."  The  Vinalia
was  the  23rd  of  April.  See  Kalend.  Maffei.  Praenestin.  in  Orell.
liiscr.  ii.  388.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  175

and  delivered  the  fourteenth  and  last  of  the  Philip-
pics :  it  was  fitting  that  so  unparalleled  a  series  of
bold  and  generous  declamations  should  be  crowned
at  last  with  one  song  of  triumph.  The  vigilance  of
the  statesman  was  not  laid  asleep  by  the  first  appear-
ance of  success.  He  deprecated  the  resumption  of
the  peaceful  toga,  as  at  least  premature.  The  mili-
tary garb  had  been  adopted  when  Decimus  was  to  be
relieved  from  his  besieger,  and  the  victory,  splendid
as  it  was  reported  to  be,  had  not  yet  effected  his
deliverance.  But  he  seized  with  eagerness  on  the
decree  proposed  by  Servilius,  as  implying  more
than  at  first  sight  appeared.  A  thanksgiving  had
never  before  been  voted  except  for  a  victory  over
a  foreign  foe.  Antonius  had  never  yet  been  for-
mally declared  an  enemy:  but  this  decree  implied
it.  Cinna  and  Sulla  had  gained  victories  in  the
civil  wars,  but  no  such  compliment  had  been  paid
to  them  :  Caesar  had  won  the  great  battle  of  Pharsa-
lia,  but  he  had  not  ventured  to  demand  such  a  token
of  public  satisfaction.  But  if  the  gods  were  to  be
thanked  for  this  signal  triumph  of  the  Roman  arms,
if  Antonius  was  to  be  pronounced,  what  he  had  long
really  been,  a  public  enemy,  why  should  not  the
victorious  generals  be  addressed  with  the  title  of
imperators  ?  This  again  was  a  title  due  to  the  con-
queror of  a  foreign  enemy  :  its  adoption  in  this  case
by  the  senate  in  a  formal  manifesto  would  doubly
stomp  the  rebel  and  traitor  as  the  enemy  of  Rome.
Cicero  further  proposed  that  the  leaders  of  the  com-
bined armies,  the  victors  of  the  triple  engagement,
Pansa,  Hirtius,  and  Octavius  *,  should  be  united  in

1  It  must  be  remembered  that  this  speech  was  delivered  on  the
report  of  the  first  battle,  that  at  Forum  Gallorum,  and  it  was  a
great  stretch  of  flattery  on  Cicero's  part  to  include  Octavius
among  the  generals  to  whom  the  victory  could  be  ascribed.  Dion
says  (xlvi.  38.):  TJTTTjfleVToy  Sf  O.VTOV  (^hvT<aviov)  avroKpdropfs  ov
fiovov  6  "iprjos  oAAa  icai  6  'Oviovios  Kaiwep  Ka/cais  diraAAa£as,  ft  rf  Katffap,
KO.ITOI  ftTjSe  f*a,x«ra.p.ti>os,  Kal  uiri)  trTparucTiav  teal  vvb  TTJJ

176  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS.  CH.  xxv.

the  honours  decreed  upon  this  occasion,  and  that
the  thanksgiving  should  be  extended  to  fifty  days.
He  urged  the  peculiar  merits  of  the  Martian  legion,
which  had  displayed  a  valour  worthy  of  its  patriotism.
He  lamented  the  dead  and  consoled  the  surviving
friends,  in  strains  borrowed  from  the  famous  speech
of  Pericles  to  the  Athenians,  and  concluded  with
expressing  the  terms  of  his  resolution,  not  in  the
dry  technicalities  of  customary  form,  but  in  the
noblest  accents  of  impassioned  declamation.  And
so  terminates  the  long  series  of  the  speeches  of
Cicero :  the  fourteenth  Philippic  is  the  last  that  has
come  down  to  us,  perhaps  the  last  he  uttered.  Like
the  rest  of  its  author's  harangues,  it  was  bold,  vigor-
ous, high-minded,  and  persuasive  ;  but  the  victory  it
celebrated  was  dubious,  the  disaster  was  grave,  and
the  contest  had  yet  to  be  decided  on  other  fields  and
with  other  combinations.

o>vo/j.d(r6^ffar.  Antonius  indeed  gave  out  that  his  young  rival  had
fled  ignominiously  in  the  first  battle  (Suet.  Oct.  12.),  but  there  is
every  probability  on  the  side  of  Dion's  assertion  that  he  took  no  part
in  it.  It  is  perhaps  to  another  slander  of  Antonius's  that  we  owe  the
statement  that  Octavius  caused  the  deaths  both  of'Hirtius  and  Pansa
by  bribing  the  surgeon  to  rub  poison  into  their  wounds.  But  the
etory  is  insidiously  countenanced  by  Tacitus,  Ann.  i.  10.  Dion  also
alludes  to  it,  xlvi.  39.

A.D.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  177

CHAPTER  XXVI.

Antonius  withdraws  from  the  Cisalpine  and  effects  a  junction  with
Lepidus  beyond  the  Alps. — Octavius  excuses  himself  from  pur-
suing him. — The  Senate  seeks  to  cast  off  Octavius. — Irritation  of
his  soldiers. — He  claims  the  consulship  and  marches  upon  Rome.
—The  Senate  gives  way. — Octavius  consul,  Sept.  711. — He  joins
Antonius  and  Lepidus. — Decimus  is  abandoned  by  his  soldiers
and  slain. — The  second  Triumvirate. — Partition  of  the  provinces
and  legions. — The  Triumvirs  enter  Rome. — The  proscriptions. —
Death  of  Cicero. — The  Republicans  collect  their  forces  in  the  East.
— Sextus  seizes  Sicily. — Antonius  and  Octavius  cross  over  to
Macedonia. — The  armies  meet  at  Philippi  in  the  autumn  of  712.
—  Two  engagements  at  Philippi. — Rout  of  the  Republicans. —
Cassius  and  Brutus  kill  themselves.  (A.U.  711,  712.  B.C.  43,  42.)

THE  historian  Appian  has  drawn  in  this  part  of  his
work  from  sources  which  were  evidently
unworthy of  implicit credit. The long:

j  *  Al. n  J  T-'I  .

ascendancy  01  the  Csesarean  dynasty  had
corrupted  the  springs  of  history,  and  both  the  reverses
of  Antonius  and  the  treacheries,  as  we  shall  hereafter
see,  of  Octavius,  had  been  extenuated  by  the  author-
ities to  which  he  was  content  to  refer.  We  are  per-
plexed by  the  next  occurrence  which  we  meet  with
in  this  writer's  pages.  Among  the  officers  in  whom
Antonius  most  confided,  both  for  his  zeal  and  ability,
was  Publius  Ventidius ;  and  at  the  moment  when  he
was  compelled  to  engage  the  superior  forces  which
surrounded  him,  he  was  expecting  succours  under
this  captain's  command,  drawn  from  the  Caesarean
colonies  in  the  south  of  Italy,  which  the  want  perhaps
of  money  or  arms  had  so  long  delayed.  Appian,
always  inclined  to  enhance  the  successes  of  the  An-

VOL.  III.  N

178  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

tonians,  assures  us  that  Ventidius  led  these  forces,
amounting  to  two  legions,  to  the  relief  of  his  patron's
adherents  in  the  city,  who  were  groaning  under  the
severe  exactions  imposed  upon  them  by  Cicero.  He
entered  the  walls  unopposed ;  the  senate,  and  among
them  Cicero  himself,  took  flight,  and  abandoned  to
their  enemy's  lieutenant  the  seat  of  government.1
But  if  we  are  to  believe  this  historian,  this  sudden
rout  of  the  republican  party  had  no  result,  and
Ventidius  quietly  marched  out  of  the  city  again  to
join  his  commander  beyond  the  Apennines.  Besides
the  manifest  improbability  of  such  an  occurrence,  it
must  also  be  remarked  that  neither  Cicero  nor  any
other  writer  gives  any  hint  of  it.2  Nor  is  it  possible
to  find  a  sufficient  interval  of  time  between  Pansa's
leaving  Eome  and  the  battles  before  Mutina,  for
the  train  of  circumstances  which  are  said  to  have
preceded  and  produced  this  momentary  revolution.
All  that  we  can  depend  upon  in  Appian's  account  is
the  statements  which  other  authorities  corroborate,
that  Ventidius  marched  to  the  succour  of  his  general
with  two  legions  of  newly-enlisted  veterans ;  and
presently,  that  finding  he  could  not  anticipate  the
junction  of  Hirtius  and  Pansa,  or  hearing  perhaps
the  disastrous  issue  of  the  battles,  he  turned  to  the
left  out  of  the  Flaminian  W.ay,  and  skirted  the
southern  slopes  of  the  Apennines  in  the  direction  in
which  he  hoped  to  meet  the  retreating  Antonians.

The  same  writer,  whose  partiality  to  Antonius  has
Antoniusre- been  thus  displayed,  would  fain  persuade

tires  from  be-  ,  i , i_  • i  .1  11

fore  Mutina,  us  that  his  hero  was  on  the  whole  suc-
hasty  retread  cessful  in  both  the  engagements  before  Mu-

across  the

AIP».  tina. So  far  was  this  from  the  fact,  that

he  lost  not  a  moment  after  the  event  of  the  action

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  66.

2  A  solitary  passage  in  a  letter  to  Atticus  (Cic.  ad  Att  xvi.  1.),
"  de  Ventidio  VOO>IK}>V  puto,"  is  too  obscure  to  be  cited  in  confirma-
tion of  Appian's  statement. There  is  no  allusion  to  it  in  Dion,  nor
in  the  epitome  of  Livy.

A.C.7i;-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  179

of  the  27th  in  breaking  up  from  his  camp,  and
striking  westward  under  cover  of  his  numerous
cavalry,  with  which  the  enemy  was  unable  to  cope.1
Though  beaten  off  from  his  immediate  object,
Antonius  was  far  from  despairing  of  ultimate  suc-
cess. Before  his  second  engagement  with  the
consular  forces,  he  had  received  partial  and  un-
derhand succours  from  Lepidus,  and  he  trusted  to
the  ascendancy  he  had  heretofore  exercised  over
that  vacillating  politician,  to  gain  him  over  com-
pletely, as  soon  as  he  should  come  in  personal
contact  with  him.  The  quarters  of  Lepidus  were
fixed  in  the  province.  From  thence  he  watched  the
inclinations  and  imposed  a  check  upon  the  move-
ments of  Plancus  in  the  Narbonensis,  who  still
hesitated  to  declare  for  the  senate.  Beyond  the  po-
sition of  Plancus,  and  watching  his  undecided  atti-
tude, lay  Asinius  Pollio  in  Spain :  a  chain  of  posts
thus  extended  from  the  Alps  across  the  Pyrenees,
and  a  shock  imparted  to  the  first  link  would  be
communicated  along  the  whole  line.  Antonius
hastened  to  cross  the  Alps.  His  infantry  had
suffered  severely  in  the  late  actions,  and  he  did  not
scruple  to  recruit  it  by  drafting  into  his  ranks  the
inmates  of  the  public  gaols  along  his  line  of  march.*
At  Vada,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  (renua,  he  fell  in
with  Ventidius  and  three  fresh  legions,  and  the
whole  force  continued  its  route  in  two  divisions.
But  his  march,  though  unpursued,  was  harassed  by
famine  and  fatigue.  Antonius  now  displayed  the
determination  of  his  character,  and  his  capacity  of
enduring  hardships.  Fresh  from  the  lap  of  luxury
and  dissipation,  he  amazed  his  hardiest  veterans  by
the  cheerfulness  with  which  he  drank  the  foulest
water,  and  contented  himself  with  the  most  loathsome
food  in  the  laborious  passage  of  the  mountains.3

1  Cic.  adDiv.  x.  15,  34.  *  Cic.  ad  Div.  xi.  10.

*  Plut.  Anton.  17

N  2

180  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH. xxvi.

Decimus  was  now  released  from  his  long  confine-
Deeimusis  ment  within  the  walls  of  Mutina.  The
™u"^etdbythl  forces  he  maintained  there  amounted  to
£vaandfofav<u~  three  legions,  perhaps  incomplete ;  but  he
was  exceedingly  weak  in  cavalry,  and  un-
provided with  beasts  of  burden,  which  doubtless
within  his  beleaguered  fortress  he  had  been  unable
to  maintain.  He  seems  also  to  have  been  in  straits
for  want  of  money.1  All  these  deficiencies  may
have  contributed  to  the  fatal  delay  of  two  days  which
he  allowed  to  intervene  before  he  set  forth  in  the
track  of  the  fugitives.  On  the  day  after  the  second
engagement,  Pansa,  who  was  still  living,  begged  to
confer  with  him  at  Bononia,  but  expired  before  he
could  reach  him.2  Decimus  distrusted  Octavius.
As  proconsul  of  the  province  he  assumed  authority
over  him,  and  directed  him  to  seize  the  passes  of  the
Apennines,  and  prevent  the  junction  of  "Ventidius
with  his  general.  At  the  same  time  he  assumed  for
himself  the  duty  of  occupying  the  roads  which  led
from  Mutina  to  the  Alps,  and  closing  the  northern
outlets  of  the  province  against  the  retreating  enemy.
We  have  seen  how  Antonius  had  already  escaped  out
of  the  net.  Neither  would  Octavius  obey

OcUvitude- ,,  ,  .  „ , , ,  , J

dines  to  join the  proconsul,  nor  if  he  had  proposed  to

in  the  pui.uit. ,  . '.  .  ,.  ,  r

do  so  would  his  soldiers  have  obeyed  him.3
They  protested  against  the  authority  of  one  of
Caesar's  assassins.  They  declared  that  they  had
chosen  the  dictator's  heir  as  their  leader ;  Decimus
they  could  only  regard  as  an  enemy.  The  want  of
money  still  crippled  the  proconsul's  movements;  the
vanquished  could  fly  much  faster  than  the  victors

1  Decimus  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  xi.  10.):  "  Alere  milites  jam  non
possum. Septem  legiones  nunc  alo:  qua  difficuhate  tu  arbitrare."
Pontius  Aquila  had  expended  large  sums  from  his  private  resources
in  supporting  Decimus's  troops. Dion,  xlvi.  40.

2  Decimns  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  xi.  13.).

*  Decimns  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  xi.  10.):  "Neque  Cassari  imperari
potest,  nee  Caesar  exercitui  suo,  quod  utrumque  pessimum  est."

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  181

could  advance;  Decimus  had  exhausted  his  own
and  his  friend's  credit,  and  all  the  wealth  of  Varro,
as  he  said,  could  hardly  suffice  to  extricate  him  from
his  embarrassments.1

Before  the  first  blow  of  civil  war  had  been  struck
at  Mutina,  Plancus  had  already  crossed  the

_,  .  ,  ,  .  , Antonius

Khone,  expecting  to  be  summoned  to  aid  effects  an
in  crushing:  the  common  enemy. He  now  LepMusin

u -J  XL T i  f j.1. the  Trans-

threw  a  bndge  across  the  Isere,  tor  the  aipine  pro-
transport  of  his  four  legions,  with  the  view
of  supporting  Lepidus,  whose  position,  menaced
with  a  sudden  attack  from  Antonius,  had  bec6me
extremely  precarious.  But  the  proconsul  of  the
Transalpine,  as  he  soon  discovered,  was  under  no
alarm.  The  old  allies  were  about  to  effect  a  new
combination.  Antonius  had  played  successfully  upon
the  compassion  of  the  veterans  under  the  proconsul's
banner,  and  Lepidus  himself,  though  pretending  to
be  coerced  by  his  own  soldiers,  was  well  disposed  to
take  part  with  the  crafty  dissembler,  who  addressed
him  by  the  name  of  father,  and  doubtless  offered  to
act  under  him,  and  acquiesce  in  the  second  place  in
their  contemplated  distribution  of  honours.2  They
met  with  all  their  forces  near  Forum  Julii.  Had
Plancus  crossed  the  frontier  he  would  have  been
crushed  by  their  superior  force:  his  lieutenant
Laterensis,  whom  be  had  employed  to  communicate
with  Lepidus,  killed  himself  in  despair  at  the  con-
summation of  the  treason.  Meanwhile  Planci]9and
Pollio  had  contrived  to  station  himself  at  fromatuXtag
the  furthest  corner  of  his  province,  in  the  them-
assurance,  as  he  declared  in  his  despatches  to  the
senate,  that  no  outbreak  of  civil  war  was  to  be  ap-
prehended. Before  the  month  of  April  no  vessels,  it

1  Decimus  to  Cicero,  /.  c.,  from  his  camp  at  Dertona,  the  fifth  of
May.

2  Plut.  Anton.  18. See  Lepidus's  letter  to  the  senate,  ad  Div.
X.  35.

182  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

seems,  crossed  the  Mediterranean;  and  the  letters
which  he  sent  overland  were  liable  to  be  intercepted
by  Lepidus.  Even  the  couriers  who  were  conveying
to  him  the  news  of  the  events  before  Mutina  were
detained,  as  he  says,  nine  days  by  the  proconsul  in
the  Trasalpine.  Such  was  the  excuse  he  now  made
for  his  avowed  want  of  preparation,  and  for  declining
to  move  towards  the  theatre  of  operations.  Under
such  circumstances  Plancus  hesitated  to  cross  the
Isere ;  he  broke  down  the  bridge  he  had  constructed,
and  called  loudly  on  Decimus,  Octavius,  and  even
Cornificius,  to  come  to  his  succour,  and  enable  him
to  assume  the  offensive.  But  Cornificius  was  too
distant  to  hear  his  cries ;  Octavius  refused  to  listen,
and  remained  unmoved  at  Mutina ;  while  Decimus
kept  marching  to  and  fro  within  the  limits  of  his
own  province,  which  he  seemed  to  shrink  from
leaving,  with  no  definite  purpose,  except  to  raise
money  and  make  new  levies  of  raw  conscripts.1  Of
all  the  captains  of  the  republic  at  this  perilous  crisis,
he  was  the  only  one  on  whose  fidelity  she  could
securely  lean :  as  one  of  the  tyrannicides,  it  was  with
him  a  question  of  victory  or  death,  and  his  steadiness
was  assured  by  the  necessities  of  his  position.  Never-
theless he  must  be  charged  with  committing  a  fatal
blunder  in  the  conduct  of  the  campaign ;  while  the
tone  of  despondency  betrayed  to  us  in  his  correspond-
ence, as  well  as  the  distrust  he  exhibited  towards
the  government  in  Eome,  indicate  a  mind  unfit  to
cope  with  the  difficulties  around  him.

At  last,  when  it  was  too  late  to  deter  Lepidus
Decimus  from  his  treachery,  Decimus  crossed  the
AJ£Tande  Alps  and  added  a  force,  amounting  now
joii..pian-  fo  j.en  iegionSj  Of  wnich  however  one  only

1  Decimus's  letters  to  Cicero  are  dated  successively  from  Dertona,
Statiellae,  Vercellse,  Eporedia,  and  Pollentia :  (ad  Div.  xi.  20.) :
"  Legiones  armo,  paro  :  Ego  nisi  valde  necesse  fuerit  ex  Italia  non
excedam."

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  183

had  seen  service,  to  the  army  of  Plancus.1  They  had
suffered  severely,  it  seems,  in  the  passage  of  the
mountains ;  at  all  events  they  were  dispirited  by  the
consciousness  of  their  inexperience,  and  of  the  fatal
consequences  of  their  leader's  delay.  The  hope  of
aid  from  Octavius  waxed  more  and  more  faint.
Plancus  openly  denounced  him  to  Cicero,  as  having
postponed  the  defence  of  the  republic  to  the  further-
ance of  his  personal  views  on  the  consulship.  He
accused  him  01  being  the  cause  of  Antonius's  escape,
of  Lepidus's  treason,  of  the  formidable  attitude  the
two  associates  had  assumed,  of  all  their  hopes
and  all  their  manosuvres.  If  Plancus  however  still
clung  to  the  hope  that  Octavius  might  yet  lend  his
hand  to  prop  the  state,  Cicero  himself  had  by  this
time  renounced  any  such  expectation.  From  the
moment  he  deserted  Decimus,  the  veteran  penetrated
his  views,  and  was  convinced  that  they  were  confined
to  his  own  aggrandisement  From  hence-
forth Cicero  declares  his  dependence  to  abandons
rest  upon  Decimus  and  Plancus  alone  in  from  oc-
the  West,  and  he  exerts  himself  with  gallant
constancy  in  exhorting  and  encouraging  them  to
the  utmost.  But  his  eyes  are  wandering  towards
Macedonia  and  Syria;  and  it  is  from  Brutus  and
Cassius,  after  all,  the  leaders  of  the  brave  band  of
patriots,  that  he  expects  the  deliverance  of  his
country.  From  Syria  the  rumour  reached  him  that
Dolabella  had  been  destroyed.  He  hardly  ventured
to  credit  it ;  but  it  was  speedily  confirmed.  After
the  murder  of  Trebonius  the  ruffian  had  cast  off  all
disguise.  He  had  declared  open  war  against  the
rival  who  preoccupied  the  province  he  claimed  to
govern.  He  had  seized  upon  the  city  of  Laodicea :
but  here  his  career  was  arrested  by  a  better  general

1  Plancns  to  Cicero  (a<f  Div.  x.  24.):  "In  castrio  Bruti  una  vete-
rana  legio,  altera  bima,  octo  tironum."

184  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS .  CH.  XXVI.

with  a  stronger  force  than  his  own.1  Cassius,  anti-
cipating the  decree  of  the  senate,  by  which  the  in-
truder was  formally  proscribed,  or  acting  in  the  spirit
of  Cicero's  counsel,2  Be  yourself  your  own  senate,
Doiabeiia  marched  against  him,  stormed  the  city  in
c^ciu8cob^-  which  he  had  posted  himself,  and  drove
mits  suicide.  ^^  £O  see^  death  from  the  hands  of  one
of  his  own  soldiers.

The report of this success might sustain the
drooping  spirits  of  the  republicans  in  Eome.

The  senate

treats  octavius  In  the  first  flush  of  victory  they  had  not
iy,  ancd  tries  to  cared  to  conceal  their  distrust  of  Octavius,

create  dissen- 1,1  i  j

sion  among whom they  now  deemed  unnecessary  to

his  soldiers.  *  ..  ..,

them.  He  had  declined  to  join  with
Decimus  in  pursuit  of  Antonius  ;  his  excuse  had  been
questionable,  his  attitude  uncompliant ;  Cicero  him-
self discovered  that  he  was  reserving  his  strength  for
personal  objects,  and  avowed  that  he  had  been  de-
ceived as  to  his  real  disposition.  Doubtless  Octavius
read  in  the  bitter  spirit  displayed  against  Antonius,
an  edict  of  proscription  against,  not  the  flagitious
consular,  but  the  friend  of  Caesar.  He  lay  himself
under  the  same  ban,  and  might  expect  to  be  made
the  next  victim.  The  bearing  of  the  senate  towards
him  had  entirely  changed.  The  honours  awarded
for  the  first  victory  had  been  divided  equally  between
him  and  the  consuls,  and  Cicero  had  pronounced  his
praise  amidst  the  applause  of  the  still  trembling
assembly ;  but  now  that  the  enemy  was  a  second  time
worsted,  and  the  victorious  consuls  had  both  fallen,
it  had  transferred  all  its  acknowledgments  to  Deci-
mus, it  had  decreed  thanksgivings  in  his  name
only,  as  if  he  had  been  the  conqueror  on  the  field  of
battle,  and  Octavius  the  beleaguered  skulker  behind
the  walls  of  Mutina.  Of  the  real  victor,  the  sole
survivor  at  least  of  the  three  combined  victors  of

1  Lentulus  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  xii.  14.),  from  Perga,  June  2.

2  Cicero  to  Plancus  (ad  Div.  x.  16.):  "  Ipse  tibi  sis  senatus."

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  185

those  days,  no  mention  was  made.1  It  was  not
against  Antonius,  whom  it  no  longer  feared,  but
against  the  possible  projects  of  Octavius  that  the
senate  provided  in  the  decree  by  which  it  now  called
Sextus  Pompeius  to  the  command  of  its  naval  forces,
and  directed  all  its  officers  from  the  Ionian  to  the
Euphrates,  to  place  themselves  at  the  disposal  of
Brutus  and  Cassius.2  When  Octavius  boldly  de-
manded a  triumph,  his  application  was  contemp-
tuously disregarded.  The  voice  of  Cicero  was  silent
on  his  behalf,  or  if  it  expressed  any  recognition  of
his  claims  to  distinction,  the  acknowledgment  was
accompanied  by  a  truculent  jest,  implying  that  the
young  man  must  be  got  rid  of  under  pretence  of
caressing  him.3  Meanwhile  every  effort  was  made
to  detach  the  veterans  from  their  youthful  favourite.
The  senate  treated  with  them  about  their  pay  and
promised  lands,  without  noticing  their  general ;  and
when  the  mass  continued  unmoved  by  these  solicita-
tions, attempts  were  made  to  sow  dissension  among
them  by  showering  rewards  upon  some  and  with-
holding them  from  others.

But  Octavius,  it  was  reported,  had  declared  that
he  would  take  care  not  to  be  got  rid  of.
The  veterans  were  discontented  with  the  nippTmiby
senate,  which  had  promised  them,  and  espe-  demands  the
cially  the  two  legions  which  had  abandoned
Antonius,  a  gratuity  which  it  had  not  at  once  the
means  of  paying. The  government  appointed  de-
cemvirs to  contrive  a  new  distribution  of  lands,  by

1  Cic.  ad  Div.  xi.  18. ;  Appian,  B.C.  iii.  74,  80.;  Dion.  xlvi.  40.

2  Dion.  /.  c.

1  Decimus  to  Cicero  (ad  Div.  xi.  20.),  May  24 :  "  Ipsnm  Csesarem
nihil  de  te  questum,  nisi  dictnm  quod  diceret  te  dixisse,  laudandutn
omandum  tollendum  :  se  non  commissurum  ut  tolli  posset."  The
equivoque  is  untranslateable :  it  would  run  in  English,  he  must  be
lifted  up  and  then  taken  off.  The  story  is  also  preserved  by  Sueto-
nius {Oct.  12.),  and  Velleius  (ii.  62.),  and  the  jest  is  much  in  Cicero's
style.

186  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

which  the  Antonians  should  be  mulcted  for  their
advantage.  But  it  displayed  its  spite  against  their
leader  by  omitting  to  name  him  on  this  commission,
and  this  neglect  the  veterans  resented  as  an  insult
to  themselves,  murmuring  loudly  against  Cicero  as
its  supposed  adviser.  Octavius  fostered  the  growing
spirit  of  discontent.1  He  was  now  in  secret  com-
munication with  Antonius  himself,  and  when  a
peremptory  order  from  the  government  reached
him,  to  lead  his  army  against  the  parricides  and
brigands,  as  they  were  styled,  now  combined  in  the
Transalpine  province,  he  replied  by  despatching  to
Rome  a  party  of  four  hundred  of  his  soldiers  to
demand  for  him  the  consulship.  He  had  been
already  released  from  the  lex  annalis ;  so  that  no
disqualification  could  be  pleaded  against  him  on  the
score  of  youth ;  but  the  senate,  which  had  now  the
power,  as  was  presumed,  of  securing  the  election  for
its  own  nominee,  sought  to  parry  his  claim  by  delay.
The  envoys  were  thereupon  instructed  to  demand
an  amnesty  for  the  Antonians ;  and  this  again  was
evaded  rather  than  refused.  The  soldier- ambas-
sadors now  lost  their  temper ;  they  had  entered  the
curia  unarmed,  but  one  of  the  party  rushed  out  to
seize  his  sword,  and  returning,  laid  his  hand  upon
it  before  the  astounded  senators,  with  an  oath,  that
if  they  refused  his  chief  the  consulship,  that  steel
should  extort  it  for  him.  Cicero  was  the  first  of  the
august  assembly  to  recover  his  speech.  If  this  be
the  way,  he  said  with  a  sneer,  that  you  sue  for  the
consulship,  doubtless  your  chief  will  acquire  it.3

1  Appian,  B.C.  iii.  86.

*  Plutarch  (Cfc.  45.)  asserts  that  Octavius  Winded  Cicero  by  pre-
tending to  unite  with  him  to  obtain  the  consulship  for  the  two  con-
jointly, and  thus  prevailed  upon  him  to  assist  his  canvass,  and  gain
over  the  senate  ;  of  which  Cicero,  he  says,  afterwards  bitterly  re-
pented. Such  a  tradition  must  not  be  entirely  passed  over;  never-
theless I  am  not  disposed  to  attach  credit  to  it.  Cicero  had  shown,
his  distrust  of  Octavius  before  this  time.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  187

The  words  were  reported  to  the  candidate,  who
deeply  resented  the  freedom  with  which  his  sinister
projects  were  laid  bare,  and  treasured  it  up,  as  was
said,  for  the  moment  of  revenge  which  was  not  long
in  coming.  He  now  advised  Lepidus  and  He  marches
Antonius  of  his  readiness  to  combine  with  p{£e,5u£e'
them,  and  invited  them  to  follow  him  to  ^  b^'hii
Eome,  whither,  still  pretending  that  he  f°ldiers-
was  constrained  by  his  own  soldiers,  he  directed
the  march  of  his  eight  legions.  The  track  of  this
licentious  soldiery  was  marked  by  rapine  and
violence;  the  bands  of  discipline  were  cast  away;
the  senate,  in  its  terror,  sought  to  arrest  the  in-
vasion by  bribes.  But  the  Octavians  continued  to
advance ;  no  time  was  to  be  lost ;  an  effort  was  made
to  check  the  rolling  storm  by  conceding  the  consul-
ship to  the  armed  aspirant.  But  the  senate  was
amazed  to  find  that  even  this  degrading  concession
now  came  too  late.  Thereupon,  summoning  the
ancient  courage  of  the  Eoman  patriciate,  the  fathers
solemnly  forbade  the  legions  to  approach  nearer
than  within  ninety  miles:  they  then  assumed  the
military  garb,  charged  the  praetors  with  the  defence
of  the  city,  and  threw  up  hasty  fortifications  on
the  Janiculan,  where  two  legions,  just  landed  from
Africa,  were  posted  most  opportunely  for  their  pro-
tection.

The  advance  of  the  Octavians  was  retarded by
the  lust  of  plunder  in  which  their  leader

• j i j LI  11  i  •  •  The  «enate

indulged  them,  so  that time was given  surrender  to

_  '  .  , Oetavius,  and

ior  these tumultuary preparations, and  aiiowshimw

i  IMI i' ,  ,1 assume  the

as  long  as  the  enemy  was  still  distant  the  cun.ui.Mp,

. , J  . ,  . . withPediu*

citizens  acted  with  promptitude  and  spint.  *»•  w»  <»i-
But  no  sooner  did  he  actually  appear  under
the  walls  than  all  this ardour  vanished. One  by
one senators and consulars slipped through the
gates, and betook themselves to the invader's
camp. Even  the  praetors  descended  from  the  Jani-

188  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

culan,  and  surrendered  their  legions  into  his  hands.
Cicero  indeed  was  among  the  last  to  parley.  He
was  received  with  a  bitter  sarcasm.  The  following
night,  on  a  wild  rumour  of  a  defection  among  the
troops,  he  resumed  his  courage  and  counselled  re-
sistance. Orders  were  hastily  given,  and  expresses
despatched  into  the  country  for  levying  troops.
Presently  the  rumour  was  contradicted,  and  the
senators  fled  in  confusion  from  the  city.  Cornutus,
a  sturdy  republican,  slew  himself.1  The  gates  were
now  thrown  open  amidst  the  acclamations  of  the
populace.  A  remnant  of  the  senate  consented  to
nominate  their  conqueror ;  the  tribes  assembled  in
the  comitium ;  there  were  no  consuls  to  hold  the
election  of  their  successors ;  some  excuse  was  made
to  evade  the  creation  of  an  interrex 2 ;  the  city
prsetor  was  deputed  to  appoint  two  persons  to  oc-
cupy the  place  of  the  consuls,  and  go  through  the
requisite  forms  with  a  mere  show  of  conventional
usage.  Octavius  apparently  had  himself  insisted  on
this  farce  being  played  out.  He  fulfilled  his  own
part  by  abstaining  from  entering  the  forum,  armed
as  he  was,  and  surrounded  with  military  ensigns.
The  polling  proceeded  without  interruption,  and
Q.  Pedius,  cousin  to  Octavius,  was  given  him  as  his
colleague,  or  rather  as  his  lieutenant,  in  the  office.3

. '  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.  92,  93.

2  The  creation  of  an  interrex  might  be  frustrated  by  the  veto  of  a
tribune,  and  the  fear  of  such  an  impediment  may  have  caused  this
form  to  be  disregarded.  Dion  says  that  there  was  no  time:  but  this
could  hardly  be  so  (see  note  below)  :  or  that  many  patricians  were
absent,  and  the  appointment  rested  with  the  patrician  houses.  He
is  evidently  at  a  loss,  and  suggests  reasons  without  much  considera-
tion of  their  value.

8  Dion,  xlvi.  45,  46.;  Veil.  ii.  65:  "Consulatum  iniit  Csesar  pridie
qnam  viginti  annos  impleret,  x.  Kal.  Octobris:  (  =  22  Sept.)."  But
Dion  makes  the  election  take  place  August  19.  :  for  he  says  that
Octavius  died  August  19.:  being  the  anniversary  of  his  first  election
to  the  consulship  (Ivi.  31.).  Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  i.  9.  We  may  suppose
that  the  earlier  day  was  that  of  the  senate's  decree,  the  later  that  of
the  actual  election.  Comp.  Suet.  Oct.  31.

A.U.711-B.C.43. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  189

This  was  the  twenty-second  of  September :  on  the
following  day  the  consul  completed  his  twentieth
year.

Quintus  Pedius  had  strong  claims  to  this  elevation.
He  was  closely  connected  with  the  late  Q.  Pediu.,
dictator,  as  the  grandson  of  his  sister  nephew  of
Julia.  He  had  served  with  distinction  c"*™-
under  his  kinsman's  banners  in  the  Gallic  war.
Throughout  the  civil  contentions  his  sword  had
been  at  Caesar's  disposal,  and  when  raised  to
the  prstorship  in  the  year  706  he  had  done
him  good  service  in  crushing  Milo's  insurrec-
tion. The  merit  he  displayed  in  the  final  cam-
paign against  Caesar  in  Spain  had  gained  him  the
honour  of  a  triumph,  and  a  proconsular  command.
The  dictator  had  named  him  among  his  heirs,  on
the  same  footing  as  his  grand-nephew  Pinarius,
reserving,  as  has  been  already  said,  the  bulk  of  the
inheritance  to  his  favourite  Octavius.  Pedius  had
recently  resigned  his  share  of  the  patrimony  to  his
cousin ;  and  while  his  own  ambition  was  satisfied
with  the  second  place,  he  zealously  aided  Octavius
to  secure  the  first.  The  senate  succumbed  to  this
last  revolution  without  a  murmur.  Its  only  care
now  was  to  heap  extraordinary  distinctions  upon  the
dictator's  heir.  It  decreed  prospectively,  that  when
he  should  have  completed  his  year  of  office,  he
should  retain,  at  the  head  of  his  legions,  precedence
over  the  consuls  his  successors.  It  surrendered  to
him  the  guardianship  of  the  city,  to  be  adminis-
tered during  his  absence  by  a  prefect  of  his  own
appointment,  and  even  issued  an  order  to  Decimus
to  transfer  the  troops  he  commanded  to  the  new
generalissimo  of  the  republic.  Cicero  and  the
sturdiest  of  the  patriots  had  disappeared ;  all  who
despaired  of  forgiveness  had  concealed  themselves ;
the  remnant  were  cowards  and  voluptuaries;  or
secret  partisans  of  Octavius  and  Antonius ;  and  all

HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

these  vied  with  one  another  in  abandoning  to  the
conqueror  the  liberties  of  the  citizens  and  the
honours  of  the  state.  Octavius  easily  obtained  the
legal  ratification  of  his  adoption.  He  then  caused
Pedius  to  propose  a  bill  for  the  condemnation  of
Caesar's  murderers.  His  friends  and  adherents
rushed  forward  as  their  accusers.  L.  Cornificius
prosecuted  Brutus,  and  Agrippa  Cassius.

The  liberators £„  ,  .,. '

are  accused When these illustrious personages were
demned  in cited  to  appear  as  criminals,  the  multitude,

it  is  said,  groaned  deeply,  and  the  nobles
hung  their  abashed  heads.  One  man  only  ventured
to  vote  for  their  acquittal,  and  judgment  passed
against  them  by  default.  The  conspirators  were
interdicted  from  fire  and  water,  in  the  barbarous
phrase  of  the  ancient  formulas,  with  the  consent  and
approbation  of  the  assembled  people.1  Sextus
Pompeius,  who  had  watched  the  course  of  affairs
from  Massilia,  and  had  recently  launched  with  a
well-appointed  fleet  into  the  Italian  seas,  was  in-
cluded in  this  hostile  decree,  while  that  against
Dolabella  was  rescinded,  though  too  late  to  save
him.

Octavius  could  securely  leave  the  city  in  the
charge  of  his  zealous  colleague,  and  summoning  his
octarii.!  legions  to  his  side,  he  was  once  more
anadveospS,Tnee-  on  his  way  to  the  north  of  Italy  by  the
Auton'usTad11  middle  of  September.  He  intended  to  effect

a  junction  with  Antonius  and  Lepidus,
who  were  preparing  to  cross  the  Alps  together,  and
no  one  perhaps  really  expected  that  he  would  execute
the  commission  with  which  he  was  ostensibly  charged,
of  defending  the  republic  against  them.  Brutus  and
Cassius  were  in  arms  against  the  government  with  a
force  of  twenty  legions.  Decimus,  the  associate  in
their  crime,  was  united  hand  and  heart  with  them.

1  Veil.  ii.  69.;  Liv.  Epit.  cxx.;  Plat.  Brut.  27.;  Appian,  B.  C.  iii.
95.;  Dion,  xlvi.  49.:  Hon.  Ancyran.,  col.  i.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  191

Plancus,  it  might  be  expected,  would  fall  under  his
control,  and  the  attitude  of  Pollio  was  at  least
dubious.  Sextus  swept  the  seas  and  menaced  the
islands.  It  was  only  by  the  swords  of  Antonius  and
Lepidus  that  the  existing  authorities  at  Eome  could
hope  to  maintain  their  usurpation,  and  the  conjunc-
tion of  Octavius  with  his  mortal  foe  was  a  political
necessity.  Accordingly,  no  sooner  had  he  quitted
the  city,  than  Pedius,  as  concerted  between  them,
proposed  that  Antonius  and  Lepidus  should  be
restored  to  favour.  The  senate,  wearied  and  con-
fused with  the  rapid  change  in  public  affairs,  un-
supported or  unawed  by  the  fervour  of  Cicero's  elo-
quence, deserted  by  the  most  illustrious  consulars,
and  willing  to  be  deceived  by  the  hollow  pretexts
of  forgiveness  and  oblivion,  consented  to  adopt  his
counsel.1  The  personal  animosity  between  Antonius
and  his  younger  rival  was  soothed  by  the  mediation
of  Lepidus.  The  report  of  this  sudden  turn  in  events
wrought  immediate  conviction  on  the  minds  of
Plancus  and  Pollio,  both  of  whom  renounced  their
adherence  to  the  party  which  had  vanished  from
the  curia  and  the  forum.  Their  fidelity  had  long-
wavered;  neither  Cicero  nor  any  of  the  statesmen
to  whom  he  had  disclosed  his  correspondence  with
them,  could  be  surprised  at  their  defection.  They
had  never  had  the  cause  of  the  republic  at  heart.
They  now  returned  to  the  Csesarean  banner,  under
which  they  had  so  long  served,  to  the  friends  and  to
the  interest  to  which  they  had  been  through  life
attached.

Decimus  prepared  to  wrestle  with  his  adverse  for-
tune with  the  sullen  resolution  which  be-  nedm™,
longed  to  his  character. He  had  mustered  M^MUM**
not  fewer  than  ten  legions ;  but  they  were  siain"  ""
mostly,  as  we  have  seen,  raw  troops,  and  he  could

1  Appian,  B.  C.  in.  96.

192  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

depend  neither  upon  their  steadiness  in  battle,  nor
on  their  constancy  to  the  leaders  whom  they  had
chosen.  Eecrossing  the  Alps,  he  sought  to  effect  a
junction  with  his  associates  in  Macedonia,  by  follow-
ing the  route  of  Aquileia  and  Illyricum.  The  ad-
vance of  Octavius  threatened  to  intercept  him :  he
dared  not  accept  the  challenge  of  the  veteran  legions,
but  turned  suddenly  to  the  left,  intending  to  scale
the  lofty  gorge  of  the  Septinier  pass,  and  descend
perhaps  by  the  valley  of  the  Inn  into  the  more
hospitable  regions  of  the  north.  The  difficulty  of
the  route,  and  the  vast  circuit  to  be  traversed  before
the  retreating  battalions  could  thus  gain  the  frontiers
of  Macedonia,  terrified  his  undisciplined  recruits.
Several  of  the  new-raised  legions  deserted  in  a  body,
and  offered  their  arms  to  the  consul.  The  veterans
quickly  followed  their  example,  and  joined  the
standards  of  Antonius.  Decimus  saw  them  depart
with  manly  resignation ;  to  some  of  the  auxiliaries
and  cavalry,  who  were  the  last  to  leave  him,  he
pretended  to  give  a  free  discharge,  and  even  sup-
plied them  with  money  from  the  military  chest,
which  he  could  no  longer  transport  with  him.  Three
hundred  horsemen  still  remained  faithful,  and  with
this  devoted  band  he  began  to  penetrate  the  gloomy
defile.  But  the  number  of  his  followers  gradually
dwindled  to  ten ;  with  so  scanty  an  attendance  the
luckless  fugitive  hoped  he  might  escape  undiscovered
by  the  level  route  he  had  been  constrained  to
abandon.  He  retraced  his  steps  into  the  plain  of
the  Cisalpine,  and  was  making  his  way  stealthily  to
Aquileia,  when  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  a  Gaulish
chieftain,  named  Camelus.1  The  barbarian  notified

1  Appian  (B,  C.  iii.  97,  98.)  gives  the  account  of  the  last  days  of
D.  Brutus.  I  have  done  some  violence  to  his  topographical  details,
to  make  the  narrative  consistent  and  intelligible.  Appian  speaks  of
four  veteran  legions  ;  but  we  know  on  surer  authority  that  Decimus
had  but  one.  (See  above,  p.  182.)  Comp.  Veil.  ii.  64.,  Dion,  xlvi.  53.

A.0.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  193

his  capture  to  Antonius,  who  immediately  demanded
the  prisoner's  head,  though,  it  is  said,  he  avoided  a
personal  interview  with  the  old  comrade  he  had
resolved  to  sacrifice.  Thus  fell  the  second  of  the
assassins  within  a  year  and  a  half  from  the  day  of
his  crime.  A  third,  Minucius  Basilus,  perished  by
a  violent  death  about  the  same  time,  being  murdered
by  his  own  slaves,  upon  whom  he  was  perpetrating
some  brutal  cruelties.1  The  name  of  this  last-
mentioned  conspirator  does  not  occur  in  the  civil
or.  military  annals  of  the  period  which  had  elapsed
since  Caesar's  death.  We  have  no  means  of  esti-
mating the  loss  the  republic  may  have  sustained
from  his  early  destruction :  but  we  can  hardly  over-
rate the  fatal  consequences  which  ensued  to  it  from
the  death  of  Decimus.  Of  all  the  captains  trained
in  Caesar's  school  this  was  undoubtedly  the  most
distinguished.  His  services  indeed  had  been  chiefly
performed  at  sea;  but  he  had  displayed  on  that
element  a  fertility  of  resource,  and  a  skill  in  the
training  of  men  and  officers,  such  as  would  have
proved  not  less  invaluable  on  land.  In  designating
him  for  the  consulship  his  master  showed  that  he
discovered  in  him  the  materials  of  a  good  civil
administrator ;  and  assuredly  among  the  soldiers  and
statesmen  of  the  republican  party  there  was  no  one
upon  whose  steadfast  resolution  more  entire  depend-
ence could  be  placed.

Antonius  and  Lepidus  moved  slowly  and  circum-
spectly on  their  progress  towards  the  city,  octavius,

mi  £ L 1 r\ i •  T5  •  J Lepidu.,and

They  confronted  Octavius  at  Bononia,  and  Antoniu.  hold

,  P  • i i • i  -I » conference

arranged  a  conference  on  an islet  in  the  together,  a»d
river  Rhenus,  which  took  place  at  the  end  tiie^mpi'e
of  October.2 The  spot  selected  for  their  them.

1  Appian,  /.  c. :  inrb  -run  &fpa.ir6vTci:v  avypfdij  euroi/X'C"*'  Ttraj
avruv  fir  I  Tijueupia.

*  Fischer,  Rom.  Zeit.  p.  327.  The  spot  assigned  by  modern
antiquarians  for  this  celebrated  meeting  is  called  Crocetta  del

VOL.  III.  0

194  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  XXTI.

meeting  was  approached  by  a  bridge  on  either  side.
Each  of  the  Caesarean  chiefs  was  followed  by  a  force
of  five  legions  to  a  camp  posted  at  a  convenient
distance.  From  thence  they  were  escorted  respec-
tively by  a  body  of  three  hundred  horse  to  the  foot
of  the  bridge;  and  while  Antonius  and  Octavius
halted  on  the  brink,  Lepidus,  according  to  agree-
ment, crossed  into  the  island.  He  there  waved  the
skirt  of  his  cloak,  and  the  others,  leaving  their
attendants  on  the  bank  on  either  side,  advanced
alone  and  unarmed  at  the  same  moment.  As  they
drew  near  they  watched  each  other's  mien  and
movements,  and  were  heard  to  demand  of  one
another  whether  they  bore  any  secret  weapon  con-
cealed in  their  bosoms.1  After  thus  satisfying  them-
selves of  their  personal  security,  they  opened  the
subject  of  their  conference,  which  was  no  less  than
the  terms  on  which  they  should  agree  to  share  the
sovereignty  of  the  state.  Octavius,  as  consul,  as-
sumed the  place  of  honour  between  the  others,  and
thus  seated  they  debated  for  three  days  successively,
and  in  that  interval,  passed  under  review  all  the
complex  relations  of  men  and  parties,  and  by  mutual
concessions  came  at  length  to  a  perfect  understand-
ing. The  name  of  the  dictatorship  was  generally
odious ;  Antonius  had  decreed  its  perpetual  suppres-
sion, and  besides,  the  office  never  had  been  nor  could,
consistently  with  the  theory  of  its  functions,  be
shared  by  three  occupants.  But  the  state  of  affairs,

Trebbo,  where  there  is  an  island  in  the  Reno,  half  a  mile  long,  about
two  miles  to  the  west  of  Bologna.  Appian  places  the  island  in  the
river  Lavinius,  a  confluent  of  the  Rhenus.  Cramer,  Ancient  Jtaly,
i.  88.  Comp.  Plut.  Anton.  19.  ;  Dion,  xlvi.  fin. ;  Appian,  B.  C.
iv.  2.

1  Dion,  xlvi.  55.  :  M$)  nal  £ut>i$i6v  rn  inrb  jua'ATjs  %xoi  -.  under  the
armpit.  The  Roman  threw  the  skirt  of  his  toga  over  his  left  shoulder,
and  often  carried  his  right  hand  in  the  folds  on  his  left  breast.  This
was  the  place  where  he  could  conceal  a  dagger  so  as  to  draw  it  forth
most  readily.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  195

it  might  be  urged,  demanded  the  creation  of  an
extraordinary  magistracy  for  the  settlement  of  public
affairs.  The  manner  in  which  the  senate  had  been
driven  to  violate  its  own  decrees  and  supersede  its
own  appointments,  might  furnish  a  specious  pretext
for  invoking  the  strong  arm  of  power  to  protect  its
deliberations  and  impart  consistency  to  its  action.
Accordingly  the  self-constituted  guardians  of  the  state
declared  themselves  a  commission  of  three,  They  ded^
a  triumvirate  for  the  settlement  of  the  {.m^fc'the
commonwealth.1  Their  office,  they  pro-  t6hfceome£o£-
claimed,  should  subsist  for  five  years,  and  wealth-
its  functions  should  be  equivalent  to  those  of  the
consulate.  But  they  assumed  a  licence  far  beyond
the  powers  of  any  legitimate,  or,  indeed,  of  any
extraordinary  magistracy  of  former  times.  They
appointed  officers  of  government  throughout  the
whole  term  prospectively,  and  they  partitioned
among  themselves  all  the  western  provinces  of  the
empire,  that  is,  all  the  regions  which  were  not  in  the
actual  possession  of  the  republican  leaders  beyond
the  Ionian.  Antonius,  it  was  arranged,  should  rule
the  Orauls  on  either  side  of  the  Alps,  with  the  excep-
tion of  the  Narbonensis,  which,  together  with  Iberia,
fell  to  the  share  of  Lepidus.  Octavius  received  the
islands  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia,  together  with  the
province  of  Africa,  the  granaries  from  which  Rome

1  At  the  head  of  this  chapter  I  have  allowed  myself  to  apply  to
this  compact  the  designation  of  the  "  second  "  triumvirate,  by  which
it  is  commonly  known.  But  in  fact  the  alliance  of  Csesar,  Crassus,
and  Pompeius,  or  the  so-called  "  first "  triumvirate,  was  no  more
than  a  private  understanding;  it  pretended  to  no  official  powers,  nor
was  it  recognised  by  the  state.  On  the  other  hand,  the  alliance  of
Antonius,  Lepidus,  and  Oetavius  was  avowedly  a  league  for  the
settlement  of  public  affairs  :  it  was  founded  upon  certain  constitu-
tional analogies  (see  in  the  treatises  on  Roman  antiquities  the  various
objects  for  which  triumvirates  or  commissions  of  three  were  appointed,
among  others  "  reipublicaj  constituendaV'  for  settling  the  common-
wealth) ;  and  it  received,  as  we  shall  see,  the  deliberate  sanction  of
the  senate  and  people.

O  2

HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  ca.  xxvi.

and  Italy  mainly  drew  their  subsistence.  But  the
sacred  soil  of  the  peninsula,  the  hearth  of  Koman
freedom,  was  exempted  from  this  proconsular  im-
perium.  Lepidus  was  designated  for  the  consulship
of  the  ensuing  year,  and  to  him,  as  the  first  magis-
trate of  the  commonwealth,  the  centre  of  the  empire
was  peculiarly  entrusted;  but  in  return

They  divide f L-i •  •  \ •  £ .1  i

»mong  them- tor  this  concession  to  him ot the place

selves  the  pro- , . ,  . ,  ,, , .  .  ,

rmcesand which neither ot his more active and

ihe  legions.  . .  ,,  ,,

aspiring  colleagues  could  consent  to  resign
to  the  other,  he  agreed  to  retain  only  three  of  his
ten  legions,  and  to  place  the  others  at  their  disposal
for  the  impending  war  against  Brutus  and  Cassius.
Of  these  seven  legions,  three  fell  to  the  lot  of
Octavius,  four  were  transferred  to  Antonius,  and
their  armies  were  thus  raised  to  the  strength  of
twenty  legions  each.

The  partition  of  the  empire,  as  if  it  were  a
patrimonial  inheritance,  was  perhaps  the  least  ar-
ihe  tnumvi™  duous  of  the  arrangements  which  had  to
£ni"iona0pf°~  be  effected.  The  successors  to  Caesar's
their  enemies.  power  k&&  neither  the  clemency  nor  the
magnanimity  which  rendered  his  usurpation  illus-
trious in  the  annals  of  revolution.  But  the  fate
with  which  his  generous  self-reliance  had  been  re-
quited might  steel  the  triumvirs  against  any  senti-
ments of  compassion.  Antonius  knew  the  danger
which  threatened  his  own  life.  Cicero  had  justified
the  murder  of  the  dictator;  he  had  lamented  the
weakness  which  had  spared  the  dictator's  friend.  The
liberators  had  confessed  their  error :  if  Brutus  alone
was  still  unconvinced,  the  time  was  past  for  romantic
scruples  like  his  :  the  return  of  the  patriots  to  power
would  renew  the  horrors  of  the  Sullan  proscription.
Antonius  had  a  thousand  personal  enemies,  and
assured  that  they  were  ready  to  strike  him,  he
hastened  to  be  the  first  to  strike.  Octavius,  unlike
Ms  colleague,  had  no  personal  quarrels ;  the  excite-

A.C.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  197

ment  of  action  and  of  danger  neither  inflamed  his
blood,  nor  blunted  his  feelings ;  but  he  had  plunged
abruptly  into  the  arena  of  civil  strife,  where  he  knew
himself  to  be  the  aim  of  the  swords  and  daggers  of
every  party ;  to  extricate  himself  from  the  peril,  and
to  raise  himself  to  the  elevation  which  he  claimed,
seas  of  blood  must  be  shed ;  and  he  calmly  contem-
plated the  necessity  without  remorse  and  without
passion.  Lepidus,  a  man  neither  of  feeling  nor
foresight,  was  easily  persuaded  to  crimes,  of  which  he
could  estimate  neither  the  advantage  nor  the  odium.
The  associates,  thus  prepared  for  the  work  of
slaughter,  sate  with  a  list  of  the  noblest  citizens
before  them,  and  each  in  turn  pricked  the  name  of
him  whom  he  destined  to  perish.  Each  claimed  to
be  ridded  of  his  personal  enemies,  and  to  save  his
own  friends.  But  when  they  found  their  wishes
clash,  they  resorted  without  compunction  to  mutual
concessions.  Octavius  could  easily  permit  Antonius
to  proscribe  the  detested  author  of  the  Philippics.
Antonius  surrendered  to  him  in  return  his  own
uncle  by  his  mother's  side,  Lucius  Csesar.  It  is  un-
certain whether  Lepidus  claimed  the  slaughter  of  his
brother  Paulus  ^Emilius,  or  whether  he  only  aban-
doned him  to  the  malice  of  his  colleagues.1  As  they
proceeded  their  views  expanded.  They  signed  death-
warrants  to  gratify  their  friends.  As  the  list  slowly
lengthened  new  motives  were  discovered  for  append-
ing to  it  additional  names.  The  mere  possession  of
riches  was  fatal  to  many ;  for  the  masters  of  so  many
legions  were  always  poor :  the  occupation  of  pleasant
houses  and  estates  sealed  the  fate  of  others ;  for  the
triumvirs  were  voluptuous  as  well  as  cruel.2  Lastly,

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  3.;  Dion,  xlvii.  6.,  from  whom  we  learn  that
both  these  illustrious  nobles  escaped  with  their  lives.  He  ascribes
indeed  the  escape  of  ./Emilius  to  the  contrivance  of  his  brother  Lepi-
dus, and  that  of  L.  Caesar  to  his  nephew  Antonius.

*  Pliny  reports  (/£  N.  xxxiv.  3.)  that  the  notorious  Vcrres  was
put  to  death  by  Antonius  merely  for  Taunting  the  superiority  of  his
Corinthian  bronzes.

198  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

the  mutual  jealousy  of  the  proscribers  augmented
the  number  of  their  victims,  each  seeking  the  de-
struction of  those  who  conspicuously  favoured  his
colleagues,  and  each  exacting  a  similar  compensation
in  return.1  The  whole  number  extended,  we  are
told,  to  three  hundred  senators  and  two  thousand
knights;  among  them  were  brothers,  uncles,  and
favourite  officers  of  the  triumvirs  themselves.  At
the  same  time  the  soldiers  put  forward  demands
which  required  consideration.  A  list  of  eighteen
Italian  cities  was  drawn  up  to  be  delivered  to  them
with  the  districts  adjoining,  by  the  dispossession  from
their  estates  of  the  existing  inhabitants.  Among
these  were  some  of  the  finest  cities  of  the  peninsula,
as  may  appear  from  the  names  of  Capua,  Ehegium,
Venusia,  Beneventum,  Nuceria,  and  Ariminum.2
Gavins  The  soldiery,  it  is  said,  in  return  interested
dS^hterf  themselves  in  effecting  a  marriage  between
the  young  Octavius  and  the  daughter  of
Antonius's  consort  Fulvia,  by  her  first  husband  the
tribune  Clodius.3

Cicero  had  betaken  himself  to  his  retreat  at  Tus-
Fint  proscnp-  culum,  and  was  there  making  arrangements
Seventeen  with  his  brother  Quintus  for  escaping  to
the  camp  of  Brutus  in  Macedonia.  It  is
probable  however  that  many  of  the  chiefs  of  the
republican  party,  who  had  fled  from  the  city  when
Octavius  entered  it,  had  returned,  in  the  vain  hope
that  his  elevation  to  the  consulship  would  be  a  pledge
of  restored  security.  They  beheld  a  protector  also
in  Pedius,  and  were  inspired  perhaps  by  the  honour-
able feeling  that  it  was  their  duty  to  seek  once  more
the  post  of  usefulness  and  danger.  At  this  post  they
were  found  when  the  news  arrived  of  the  combina-
tion which  had  taken  place  between  the  defender

1  Dion,  I.  c.,  who  asserts  that  the  number  of  the  victims  was  much
larger  than  in  the  Sullan  proscription.

2  Appian,  /.  c.  *  Dion,  xlvi.  56.;  Veil.  ii.  65.

A.U.7U-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  199

of  the  state  and  its  deadly  enemies.  This  announce-
ment was  presently  followed  by  the  manifesto  of  the
triumvirs,  in  which  they  proclaimed  the  league  they
had  formed  for  the  subjugation  of  the  republic,  but
concealed  as  yet  the  proscription  to  which  they  had
pledged  theinsleves.  Seventeen  however  of  their
principal  enemies,  and  among  them  Cicero,  they  had
already  doomed  to  massacre,  and  they  despatched
emissaries  to  execute  their  vengeance  upon  these
first  victims,  before  they  should  proceed  to  disclose
to  the  citizens  the  extent  of  their  hideous  designs.
Their  agents  attacked  the  houses  of  the  appointed
victims  in  the  middle  of  the  night :  some  they  seized
and  slew  unresisting;  others  struggled  to  the  last,
and  shed  blood  in  their  own  defence ;  others  escaping
from  their  hands  raised  the  alarm  throughout  the
city,  and  the  general  terror  of  all  classes,  not  knowing
what  to  expect,  or  who  might  feel  himself  safe,  caused
a  violent  commotion.  Pedius,  himself  entirely  ig-
norant of  the  views  of  tfae  triumvirs,  strove  to  calm
the  tumult.  He  ascertained  the  names  of  the  seven-
teen proscribed,  and  took  upon  himself  to  declare,  in
the  name  of  his  colleague,  that  the  exigencies  of  the
commonwealth  required  the  blood  of  so  many  traitors
and  conspirators,  but  that  with  their  destruction
justice  would  be  satisfied.  Of  the  denounced  most
had  already  fallen,  a  few  had  outstripped  their  pur-
suers; the  mass  of  the  republicans,  rejoicing  in  the
safety  assured  to  themselves,  desisted  from  attempting
to  save  the  lives  of  the  miserable  remnant.  The  city
breathed  once  more  from  its  panic  con-  Pediusdies
sternation;  but  Pedius,  overcome  with  8Udden'y-
fatigue  or  shame,  was  seized  with  mortal  sickness
and  died  the  following  night.1

Antonius,  Lepidus,  and  Octavius,  entered  the  city
on  three  successive days,  each  accompanied  by  a

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  6.

200  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

single  legion,  and  surrounded  by  a  praetorian  cohort.1
The  triumvirs  The  temples  and  towers  were  immedi-
th*triumri-y!  ately  occupied  by  troops,  the  banners  of
Slfmed.r0A  the  republic  waved  in  the  forum,  and  cast
twrdHrtof  their  ominous  shadow  over  the  heads  of
proscription,  foe  assembled  people.  Titius,  one  of  the
tribunes,  had  convoked  the  comitia  for  the  creation  of
the  new  magistrates,  and  the  armed  usurpers  were  now
formally  invested  with  the  title  of  triumvirs,  and  all
the  powers  they  claimed  conferred  upon  them.  Their
impatience  indeed  cut  short  the  delays  which  the  law
in  strictness  required :  the  triumvirate  was  pro-
claimed on  the  twenty- seventh  of  November,  and  the
next  night  the  new  reign  was  inaugurated  by  the
publication,  or  proscription,  of  the  names  of  one
hundred  and  thirty  senators  and  knights.  Soon
afterwards  an  hundred  and  fifty  more  were  added  to
the  list,  which  was  placarded  throughout  the  city,
with  offers  of  reward,  in  money  to  the  freemen,  in
freedom  to  the  slaves,  who  Should  bring  the  heads
of  the  denounced  to  the  triumvirs.  Every  dwelling
was  ordered  to  be  thrown  open  to  the  inquisitors  of
blood :  to  obstruct  the  vengeance  of  the  law,  or
conceal  a  fugitive,  was  forbidden  under  penalty  of
death.  The  formula  of  proscription  set  forth  that
the  destined  victims  were  implicated  in  the  murder
of  Caesar,  or  in  abetting  and  caressing  his  murderers ;
and  pleaded  that  the  triumvirs,  before  marching  to
crush  the  conspirators  in  the  provinces,  were  com-
pelled to  purge  the  capital  of  their  adherents,  by
whom  they  had  been  themselves  insulted,  outlawed,
and  proscribed.2

And  now  all  the  horrors  of  the  Sullan  and  Marian
Anecdotes  massacres  were  repeated  after  an  interval  of
proscription,  fifty  years.  The  executioners,  armed  with
the  prostituted  forms  of  authority,  rushed  un  resisted

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  7.

2  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  8— 11.;  Dion,  xlvii.  1—19.

A.C.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  201

and  unhindered  in  pursuit  of  their  victims.  They
found  many  to  aid  them  in  the  search,  and  to  stimu-
late their  activity.  The  contagious  thirst  of  blood
spread  from  the  hired  assassins  to  all  who  had  an
ancient  grudge  to  requite,  a  future  favour  to  obtain.
Many  fell  in  the  confusion  whose  names  were  not
included  in  the  list  of  the  proscribed.  Many  a  private
debt  was  wiped  out  in  the  blood  of  the  creditor.
Bobbers  and  cut-throats  mingled  with  the  bitter
partisan  and  the  private  enemy.  While  the  murderer
carried  the  head  of  his  victim  to  fix  it  on  a  spike
before  the  rostra,  and  claim  the  proffered  reward,  the
jackals  of  massacre  entered  the  tenantless  house,  and
glutted  themselves  with  plunder.  Among  the  first
to  fall  was  the  tribune  Salvius,  whose  office  ^^  of
invested  him  with  presumed  inviolability.  Salviu«-
This  man  had  been  a  staunch  adherent  of  Antonius.
He  had  interposed  his  veto  when  it  was  first  proposed
to  brand  him  as  a  public  enemy ;  but  the  eloquence
of  Cicero  had  convinced  him  of  his  error,  and  he  had
attached  himself  recently  with  ardour  to  the  policy
of  the  republicans.  When  he  heard  that  the  trium-
virs were  entering  Eome  he  knew  that  his  fate  was
sealed.  He  summoned  his  friends  to  a  banquet,  and
entertained  them  as  one  soon  to  be  taken  from  them.
Armed  men  burst  into  the  room,  and  when  the
guests  rose  in  dismay,  the  centurion  bade  them
resume  their  seats,  and  look  on  in  silence.  He  then
seized  Salvius  by  the  hair,  and  dragging  his  head
across  the  table,  severed  it  from  the  body  with  a
blow.  Paralysed  with  horror  the  guests  sate  mo-
tionless into  the  middle  of  the  night,  and  gazed  on
the  mangled  remains.

But  the  death  of  Annalis,  one  of  the  praetors,  was
peculiarly  touching. He  was  in  the  act  of  D^,,  of
suing  the  citizens  for  their  suffrages  on  be-  AnnaU'-
half  of  his  son,  who  was  a  candidate  for  the  quaestor-
ship,  and  was  passing  from  house  to  house,  escorted  by

202  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

his  lictors  and  attended  by  a  troop  of  friends  and
clients,  when  his  name  was  descried  on  the  fatal  list.
In  a  moment  he  found  himself  alone.  He  contrived
to  escape  to  the  dwelling  of  one  of  his  clients  in  an
obscure  spot  outside  the  walls.  There  he  might
perhaps  have  eluded  the  bloodhounds  of  the  trium-
virs; but  the  son  discovered  his  hiding-place  and
revealed  it  to  the  assassins,  seeking  and  obtaining
the  sedileship  as  his  reward.  But  the  same  night,  as
he  was  returning  intoxicated  from  a  feast  in  which
he  had  celebrated  his  guilty  success,  he  met  the  very
party  who  had  just  slain  his  father,  and  fell  himself
by  their  hands  in  a  drunken  quarrel.  Another  of  the
and  of  proscribed,  named  Thoranius,  having  a  son

Thoranius.  wjlo  g^oo(j  high  in  favour  with  Antonius,
besought  the  assassins  to  allow  him  an  hour  that  his
son  might  exert  his  influence  in  his  behalf.  They '
grinned,  and  replied  that  the  son  had  just  demanded
his  death.  The  old  man  begged  for  a  last  interview
with  his  unnatural  offspring,  and  when  brought  into
his  presence  warned  him  to  reject  the  patrimonial
inheritance,  lest  his  brother  should  in  like  manner
denounce  him  also.  This  monster  met  with  his
punishment  in  due  time,  though  less  sudden  and  less
striking  than  in  the  former  instance.  It  was  re-
marked that  he  quickly  spent  his  ill-gotten  wealth,  was
accused  of  theft  or  peculation-  and  driven  into  exile.2
Both  our  principal  authorities,  Appian  and  Dion,
Proscription  especially  the  former,  have  given  full  de-
m^oSSus  tails  and  abundant  anecdotes  of  this  fright-
acero.  ful  period.  They  balance  against  each  other
the  traits  of  devotion  and  perfidy,  of  meanness  and
generosity,  which  were  displayed  by  wives  and  hus-
bands, children  and  parents,  masters  and  slaves,2

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  18.

2  Velleius  is  particularly  smart  ou  this  subject  :  "  Id  tamen  no-
tandum  est,  fuisse  in  proscriptos  uxorum  fidem  summam,  libcrtorum
mediam,  servorum  aliquam,  filiorum  nullam." (ii.  67.)

A.L-.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  203

But  the  interest  which  attaches  to  one  name,  the
most  conspicuous,  and  probably  the  first  on  the
bloody  list,  the  name  of  Marcus  Cicero,  attracts  us
irresistibly  to  the  event  in  which  all  our  sympathy
centres.  The  last  days  of  the  most  amiable  of
Eoman  statesmen,  in  the  midst  of  his  utter  despair
for  the  republic,  and  too  abject  alarm  for  himself,
had  been  brightened  at  least  by  the  society  and
renewed  confidence  of  his  brother  Quintus.  He  had
deeply  lamented,  without  resenting  it,  the  apostasy  of
Caesar's  lieutenant  from  the  cause  of  liberty ;  an  act
which  had  been  darkened  still  more  by  the  ill-offices,
which  at  least  in  Cicero's  apprehension  he  had  not
scrupled  to  do  Mm  with  the  dictator.  But  since  the
event  of  the  tyrannicide  Quintus  had  repented  of  his
treachery,  and  had  devoted  himself,  though  in  no
conspicuous  post,  to  the  service  of  the  republic,
and  the  advancement  of  his  brother's  policy.  He  too
was  now  marked  out  for  death.  The  brothers  were
together  at  the  Tusculan  villa.  From  Theyfly
thence  they  fled  in  company  from  one  f^Tua-
retreat  to  another,  anxious  to  effect  their  culum-
escape  into  Macedonia,  an  asylum  which  they  pre-
ferred to  Syria  or  to  Sicily,  where  Sextus  Pompeius
had  now  raised  the  standard  of  liberty.  They  bent
their  steps  towards  Astura,  a  maritime  residence  of
Marcus  Cicero,  borne  in  litters,  from  which  they  had
the  mournful  satisfaction  of  conversing  together  as
they  proceeded.  On  the  way  they  recollected  that
they  had  not  with  them  money  sufficient  for  their
contemplated  expedition.1  Quintus  deter-
mined to  return  to  Kome  for  the  neces-  retiming
sary  supply,  while  the  elder  brother,  whose  siam  with5

, J  "  J>  , '  .  his  eon.

danger  was  perhaps  the  most  imminent.,

should  prosecute  his  flight  alone. A  mournful  separa-

1  Plut.  Cic.  47.  Astura  was  an  island  at  the  mouth  of  a  little
stream  of  the  same  name,  on  the  coast  a  few  miles  south  of  Antium.
Cicero  describes  it  (ad  Alt.  xii.  19. ).  "  Est  hie  quidem  locus  amoenus,
et  in  mari  ipso,  qui  et  Antio  et  Circeiis  aspici  possit."

204  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

tion  ensued.  Quintus  reached  the  city,  but  was
immediately  recognised  by  the  assassins,  and  slain
together  with  his  son,  after  an  affecting  scene  of
mutual  devotion.  Each  had  claimed  to  be  the  first
to  die :  the  soldiers  divided  themselves  into  two  par-
ties and  slew  both  at  the  same  moment.3

Meanwhile  the  surviving  fugitive  reached  Astura,
M.  cicero  an(^  there  embarked.  A  favourable  breeze
ww^from  wafted  the  vessel  off  the  promontory  of
fatai'vaco-'  Circeii,  and  from  thence  the  sailors  were
about  to  stand  out  to  sea,  when  Cicero
once  more  determined  to  land,  and  throw  himself,
as  was  supposed,  on  the  clemency  of  Octavius.  He
proceeded  some  miles  on  the  road  to  Rome;  .again
he  changed  his  mind,  and  retraced  his  steps  to
Circeii.  There  the  night  overtook  him,  and  the
hours  of  solitude  and  darkness  increased  his  sleepless
agitation.  Some  said  that  he  now  conceived  a  design
of  getting  secretly  into  Octavius's  dwelling,  and
slaying  himself  upon  his  hearthstone,  to  fasten  upon
him  an  avenging  dem&n.*  But  from  this  design  he
was  driven  by  the  fear  of  tortures,  and  the  recollec-
tion of  Trebonius's  cruel  fate.  With  the  dawn  of
day  a  gleam  of  hope  once  more  visited  the  miserable
sufferer.  He  besought  his  attendants  to  bear  him
once  again  to  the  sea-shore,  and  put  him  on  board  a
bark.  But  adverse  winds,  or  the  distress  of  sea-sick-
ness, or  his  own  wavering  resolution,  induced  him  to
return  to  land  a  second  time,  and  he  took  up  his
abode  for  the  night  in  his  villa  near  Formiae.3  In

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  20. ;  Dion,  xlvii.  10.

2  Plut.  L  c. Drumann  remarks  that  he  would  rather  have  sought
the  house  of  Antonius. But  the  tradition  seems  to  indicate  the  bitter
mortification  and  remorse  Cicero  felt  at  having  been  deceived  in  his
estimate  of  Octavius. See  the  Epistola  ad  Octavium,  before  referred
to.

*  Formiae,  now  Mola  di  Gaeta,  four  miles  from  Gaeta,  the  Caieta
of  the  Romans.  Cicero's  villa  was  one  mile  from  the  coast,  and
at  that  distance  considerable  remains  are  now  visible.  The  wood

A.P.711-B.C.43. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  205

vain  was  he  warned  of  the  danger  of  these  wretched
delays.  Utterly  prostrated  by  anguish  of  mind  and
weariness  of  body,  he  only  replied,  Let  me  die,  let
me  die  in  my  father-land,  which  I  have  so  often
saved.  But  his  slaves  now  shut  their  ears  to  their
master's  moans,  and  taking  him  in  their  arms,  re-
placed him  in  his  litter,  with  which  they  hurried
again  towards  the  coast,  through  the  thick  woods
which  lay  between.  The  bloodhounds  were  already
on  the  scent.  Scarcely  had  the  house  been
quitted,  when  a  band  of  soldiers,  led  by  •g*"81-
an  officer  named  Popilius,  a  client  whom
Cicero's  advocacy  had  saved  from  the  penalty  of
parricide,  approached  and  thundered  at  the  closed
doors.  No  one  appeared  to  give  them  admittance,
and  when  they  burst  them  open,  the  servants  of  the
house  denied  any  knowledge  of  the  fugitive's  move-
ments. But  a  traitor  was  near  at  hand.  A  young
man,  who  had  been  emancipated  by  Quintus,  and
educated  by  Marcus  Cicero,  by  name  Philogonus,  put
the  assassins  on  his  track.  Some  of  them  followed
in  pursuit,  while  Popilius  made  a  rapid  circuit  to
occupy  the  outlet  of  the  path  through  the  woods.
Cicero  had  not  yet  reached  the  open  shore,  when  he
perceived  the  pursuers  gaining  upon  him.  His  party
were  more  numerous  than  the  enemy :  they  would
have  drawn  their  swords  in  their  master's  defence,
but  he  forbade  them ;  or,  according  to  another  ac-
count, they  were  deceived  by  a  stratagem  into  the
belief  that  they  were  attacked  by  superior  numbers,
and  desisted  from  the  attempt.1  Cicero  now  bade  his
slaves  set  down  the  litter,  and  leaning  his  chin  on
his  left  hand,  his  usual  postuFe  in  meditation,  he
fixed  his  eyes  steadily  on  his  murderers,  and  offered

commemorated  in  this  narrative  has dwindled  into  "  vines,  olives
and  hedges." (Eustace,  Class. Tour.  ii.  31.3.) A  sort  of  obelisk
in  two  stories  close  by  is  believed  by  the  natives  to  be  Cicero's  tomb
1  (Jump.  Liv.  cxx.  fragm.  with  Appian,J9.  C.  iv.  20.

206  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

his  throat  to  the  sword.1  The  ruffians  were  shocked
at  the  squalid  unshorn  visage  of  the  great  man  whose
blood  they  thirsted  for.  Many  covered  their  faces
with  their  hands,  and  their  leader's  nerves  were  so
shaken,  that  he  drew  the  blade  three  times  across
the  victim's  throat  like  a  saw,  before  he  could  sever
cicero  is  Biain,  tne  bead  from  the  body.2  With  the  head
ami  handsad  the  murderer  carried  off  the  hands  also ;
Antouiulon  such  was  the  command  of  Antonius :  the
the  rostra.  thunder  of  the  Philippics  had  issued  from
the  one,  but  the  other  had  inscribed  them  upon
parchment  more  durable  than  stone  or  brass.  They
were  carried  to  Rome,  and  set  up  in  front  of  the
rostra,  to  the  amazement  and  horror  of  the  people,
who  for  so  many  years  had  been  swayed  through  the
whole  compass  of  human  passion  by  the  expression  of
that  countenance,  and  the  majestic  movement  of
those  hands.3  Antonius  openly  exulted  in  the  sight,
and  rewarded  the  assassins  with  profuse  liberality.
Fulvia,  with  all  the  littleness  of  female  resentment,
pierced  the  tongue  with  her  needle,  in  double  revenge
for  the  denunciations  it  had  uttered  against  both
her  husbands.4

Many  writers,  it  has  been  remarked,  have  related
the  death  of  Cicero,  but  Plutarch  alone

Reflections -  • j i • .  TJI  ,  •  i

deatheand  painted  it. In  the narrative here

character  of laid  before  him  the  reader  has  the  sub-
stance  of this picturesque account, to-
gether with  some  touches  introduced  from  collateral

1  Besides  the  authorities  for  the  circumstances  of  Cicero's  death
above  referred  to,  comp.  Val.  Max.  v.  3,  4.  ;  Seneca,  Suas.  i.  7.  ;
Veil.  ii.  66.  Livy,  Appian  and  Plutarch  are  not  quite  consistent  with
one  another.

-  Lucan,  viii.  673. :  "  Nondum  artis  erat  caput  ense  rotare."

3  Veil.  /.  c.  ;  Juvenal,  x.  120.

4  Hieron.  adv.  Rufin.  ii.,  following  the  earlier  authorities  ;  "  Fe-
cerunt  hcec  et  Fulvia  in  Ciceronem,  et  Herodias  in  Joannem,  quia
veritatem  non  poterant  audire,  et  linguam  vcriloquam  discriminali
acu  confoderunt." Drumann,  vi.  379.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIEE.  207

sources.  In  this,  as  in  many  other  passages  of  his
Lives,  the  Greek  biographer  has  evidently  aimed  at
creating  an  effect,  and  though  he  seems  to  have  been
mainly  guided  by  the  genuine  narrative  of  Tiro,
Cicero's  beloved  freedman,1  we  may  suspect  him  of
having  embellished  it  to  furnish  a  striking  termina-
tion to  one  of  his  favourite  sketches.  Nevertheless
the  narrative  is  mainly  confirmed  by  a  fragment  of
Livy's  history,  which  has  fortunately  been  preserved.
The  Koman  author  vies  with  the  Greek  in  throwing
dignity  and  interest  over  the  great  statesman's  end.
But  in  reviewing  the  uneven  tenor  of  his  career,
Livy  concludes  with  the  stern  comment,  He  bore
none  of  his  calamities  as  a  man  should,  except  his
death.  These  are  grave  words.  In  the  mouth  of
one  who  had  cast  his  scrutinizing  glance  over  the
characters  and  exploits  of  all  the  heroes  of  the  great
republic,  and  had  learnt  by  the  training  of  his  life-
long studies  to  discriminate  moral  qualities  and
estimate  desert,  they  constitute  the  most  important
judgment  on  the  conduct  of  Cicero  that  antiquity
has  bequeathed  to  us.2  Few  indeed  among  the
Romans  ever  betrayed  a  want  of  resolution  in  the
face  of  impending  death.  But  it  was  in  the  en-

1  Asconius  (ad  Cicer.  pro  Mil.  p.  49.)  refers  to  the  fourth  book  of
Tiro's  Life  of  Cicero. Comp.  Plut.  Cic.  41,  49.

2  Liv.  Fragm.  lib.  cxx.,  apud  Senec.  Suasor.  v.  :  "  Omnium  ad-
versomm  nihil  ut  viro  dignum  erat  tulit  prater  mortem." Comp.
Quintil.  Inst.  xii.  1. It  is  easy  to  say  that  Livy,  writing  under  the
domination  of  Octavius,  was  obliged  to  throw  a  slur  upon  the  victim
of  the  proscription. There  was  no  such  necessity. Velleius  has
shown  that  the  emperors  of  the  Julian  line  could  tolerate  a  warm
panegyric  on  Cicero,  and  were  satisfied  if  the  odium  of  his  destruc-
tion was  thrown  upon  Antonius. Cicero's  memory  found  severer
judges  in  the  defendants  of  the  Pompeian  faction  (Livy  himself  was
eminently  Pompeian)  than  the  Coesarean. Lucan  denounces  his
perverse  impolicy  (vii.  65.). It  can  hardly  be  accidental  that  Tacitus,
in  his  historical  works,  never  mentions  him. The  most  glowing
tribute  to  Cicero's  merits  is  the  well-known  passage  in  Juvenal,  viii.
237.,  and  this  is  written  in  the  spirit  of  a  Marian,  or  anti-oligarch.
Comp.  Veil.  ii.  66.

208  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvr.

durance  of  calamity  rather  than  the  defiance  of
danger  that  the  courage  of  Cicero  was  deficient.  The
orator,  whose  genius  lay  in  the  arts  of  peace  and
persuasion,  exhibited  on  more  than  one  occasion  a
martial  spirit  worthy  of  other  habits  and  a  ruder
training.  In  the  contest  with  Catilina  he  displayed
all  the  moral  confidence  of  a  veteran  general :  in  the
struggle  with  Antonius  he  threw  himself  without
reserve  into  a  position  where  there  was  no  alternative
but  to  conquer  or  to  perish.  In  the  earlier  conflict
he  had  still  his  fame  to  acquire,  his  proud  ascen-
dancy to  establish ;  and  the  love  of  praise  and  glory
inspired  him  with  the  audacity  which  makes  and
justifies  its  own  success.  But  in  the  later,  he  courted
danger  for  the  sake  of  retaining  the  fame  he  so  dearly
prized.  He  had  once  saved  his  country,  and  he  could
not  endure  that  it  should  be  said  he  had  ever  deserted
it.  He  loved  his  country ;  but  it  was  for  his  own
honour,  which  he  could  preserve,  rather  than  for  his
country's  freedom,  which  he  despaired  of,  that  he
returned  to  his  post  when  escape  was  still  possible.
He  might  have  remained  silent,  but  he  opened  the
floodgates  of  his  eloquence.  When  indeed  he  had
once  launched  himself  on  the  torrent  he  lost  all  self-
command  ;  he  could  neither  retrace  nor  moderate
his  career;  he  saw  the  rocks  before  him,  but  he
dashed  himself  headlong  against  them.  But  another
grave  authority  has  given  us  the  judgment  of  an-
tiquity, that  Cicero's  defect  was  the  want  of  stead-
fastness.1 His  courage  had  no  dignity  because  it
lacked  consistency.  All  men  and  all  parties  agreed
that  he  could  not  be  relied  upon  to  lead,  to  cooperate,
or  to  follow.  In  all  the  great  enterprises  of  his
party,  he  was  left  behind,  except  that  which  the
nobles  undertook  against  Catilina,  in  which  they
rather  thrust  him  before  them  than  engaged  with

1  M.  Seneca,  Suasor.  ii.  12:  "Nemo  sine  vitio  est ;  inCatone  mo-
deratio,  in  Cicerone  constantia  de&ideratur."

A.C.711-B.C.13.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  209

him  on  terms  of  mutual  support.  When  we  read
the  vehement  claims  which  Cicero  put  forth  to  the
honour  of  association,  however  tardy,  with  the  glories
and  dangers  of  Caesar's  assassins,  we  should  deem  the
conspirators  guilty  of  a  monstrous  oversight  in  having
neglected  to  enlist  him  in  their  design,  were  we  not
assured  that  he  was  not  to  be  trusted  as  a  confederate
either  for  good  or  for  evil.

Of  all  the  characters  of  antiquity  Cicero  is  un-
doubtedly that  with  which  we  are  most
intimately  acquainted;  for  he  alone has  t^uiifw*"
left 'to  us  the  record  of  his  thoughts  and  oewo-g
actions for more than half his public  inw^cor-

.  i  ~ - .,.  respondence.

career  in  a  voluminous  mass  ot  tamihar
as  well  as  political  correspondence.  No  public
character  probably  could  pass  unscathed  through  the
fiery  ordeal  to  which  he  has  thus  subjected  himself.
Cicero,  it  must  be  avowed,  is  convicted  from  his  own
mouth  of  vanity,  inconstancy,  sordidness,  jealousy,
malice,  selfishness,  and  timidity.  But  on  the  other
hand  no  character,  public  or  private,  could  thus  bare
its  workings  to  our  view  without  laying  a  stronger
claim  to  our  sympathy,  and  extorting  from  us  more
kindly  consideration  than  we  can  give  to  the  mere
shell  of  the  human  being  with  which  ordinary  history
brings  us  in  contact.  Cicero  gains  more  than  he
loses  by  the  confessions  he  pours  into  our  ear.  We
read  in  his  letters  what  we  should  vainly  search  for
in  the  meagre  pages  of  Sallust  and  Appian,  in  the
captious  criticism  of  Dion,  and  even  in  the  pleasant
anecdotes  of  his  friendly  biographer  Plutarch,  his
amiableness,  his  refined  urbanity,  his  admiration  for
excellence,  his  thirst  for  fame,  his  love  of  truth,
equity,  and  reason.  Much  indeed  of  the  patriotism,
the  honesty,  the  moral  courage  he  exhibited  was
really  no  other  than  the  refined  ambition  of  attain-
ing the  respect  of  his  contemporaries,  and  bequeathing
a  name  to  posterity.  He  might  not  act  from  a  sense

YOL.  Ill  P

210  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

of  duty,  like  Cato,  but  his  motives,  personal  and
selfish  as  they  in  some  sense  were,  coincided  with
what  a  more  enlightened  conscience  would  have  felt
to  be  duty.  Thus  his  proconsulate  is  perhaps  the
purest  and  most  honourable  passage  in  his  life.  His
strict  and  rare  probity  amidst  the  temptations  of
office  arrests  our  attention  and  extorts  our  praise ;
yet  assuredly  Cicero  had  no  nice  sense  of  honour,  and
was  controlled  by  no  delicacy  of  sentiment,  where
public  opinion  was  silent,  or  a  transaction  strictly
private.  His  courting  his  ward  Publilia  for  her
dower,  his  caressing  Dolabella  for  the  sake  of  getting
his  debt  paid,  his  soliciting  the  historian  Lucceius  to
colour  and  exaggerate  the  merits  of  his  consulship,
display  a  grievous  want  of  magnanimity  and  of  a
predominant  sense  of  right.1  Fortunately  his  in-
stinct taught  him  to  see  in  the  constitution  of  the
republic  the  fairest  field  for  the  display  of  his
peculiar  talents ;  the  orator  and  the  pleader  could
not  fail  to  love  the  arena  on  which  the  greatest
triumphs  of  his  genius  had  been  or  were  yet,  as  he
hoped,  to  be  acquired.  And  Cicero  indeed  was  not
less  ambitious  than  Caesar  or  Pompeius,  Antonius  or
Octavius.  To  the  pursuit  of  fame  he  sacrificed  many
interests  and  friendships.  He  was  not  less  jealous
of  a  rival  in  his  chosen  career  than  any  of  the  leaders
of  party  and  candidates  for  popular  favour.  He
could  not  endure  competition  for  the  throne  of
eloquence  and  the  sceptre  of  persuasion.  It  was  on
this  account  perhaps  that  he  sought  his  associates
among  the  young,  from  whose  rivalry  he  had  nothing
to  fear,  rather  than  from  his  own  contemporaries,
the  candidates  for  the  same  prize  of  public  admira-
tion which  he  aimed  at  securing  for  himself.  From

1  See  the  letter  to  Lncceius,  ad  Div.y.  12.:  "  Itaque  te  plane  etiam
atqne  etiam  rogo  ut  et  ornes  ea  vehementius  etiam  quam  fortassc
sends,  et  in  eo  leges  historian  negligas  ....  amorique  nostro
plusculum  etiam  quam  concedat  veritas  largiare."

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  211

his  pages  there  flows  an  incessant  stream  of  abuse
of  all  the  great  masters  of  political  power  in  his
time :  of  Caesar  and  Pompeius,  of  Crassus  and
Antonius,  not  to  mention  his  coarse  \ituperation  of
Piso  and  Gabinius,  and  his  uneasy  sneers  at  the
impracticable  Cato.  We  may  note  the  different  tone
which  his  disparagement  assumes  towards  these  men
respectively.  He  speaks  of  CaBsar  with  awe,  of
Pompeius  with  mortification,  with  dislike  of  Crassus,
with  bitter  malice  of  Antonius.  Caesar,  even  when
he  most  deeply  reprobates  him,  he  personally  loves ; l
the  cold  distrust  of  Pompeius  vexes  his  self-esteem ;
between  him  and  Crassus  there  subsists  a  natural
antipathy  of  temperament ;  but  Antonius,  the  hate
of  his  old  age,  becomes  to  him  the  incarnation  of  all
the  evil  his  long  and  bitter  experience  of  mankind
has  discovered  in  the  human  heart.2  While  we
suspect  Cicero  of  injustice  towards  the  great  men  of
his  day,  we  are  bound  also  to  specify  the  gross  dis-
honesty with  which  he  magnifies  his  own  merits
where  they  are  trivial,  and  embellishes  them  where
they  are  really  important.  The  perpetual  recurrence
to  the  topic  of  his  own  political  deserts  must  have
wearied  the  most  patient  of  friends,  and  more  than
balanced  the  display  of  sordidness  and  time-serving

1  Such  at  least  is  his  tone  up  to  the  time  of  Ctesar's  death. In
the  agony  of  the  crisis  that  followed  he  speaks  of  him  bitterly
enough.

2  I  have  noticed  several  traits,  and  passed  over  many  more  of  what
can  be  called  by  no  milder  name  than  ferocity  in  Cicero's  language
towards  his  enemies. They  can  be  palliated  only  by  reference  to  the
constant  exaggeration  in  which  the  orator  indulged. But  Cicero
was  a  moralist  as  well  as  an  orator,  and  he  certainly  left  upon  his
contemporaries  an  unfavourable  impression  of  the  qualities  of  his
heart. Livy  continues  the  sentence  quoted  above  with  the  words,
"  (mors)  quse  vere  existimanti  minus  indigna  videri  potuit,  quod  a
victore inimico  nil crudelins passurus  erat  quam  quod  ejusdem
fortunse  compos  ipse  fecisset." The  execution  of  the  Catilinarians
was  an  act  of  sanguinary  panic,  such  as  provokes  and  may  sometimes
compel  retaliation.

f  2

212  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

which  Atticus  doubtless  reflected  back  in  his  share
of  the  correspondence  between  them.

But  while  Cicero  stands  justly  charged  with  many
Cicero  judged  grave  infirmities  of  temper  and  defects  of
StandardThan  principle,  while  we  remark  with  a  sigh
menrofeat  the  vanity,  the  inconstancy,  and  the  in-
antiquity.  gratitude  he  so  often  manifested,  while  we
lament  his  ignoble  subserviences  and  his  ferocious
resentments,  the  high  standard  by  which  we  claim
to  judge  him  is  in  itself  the  fullest  acknowledgment
of  his  transcendent  merits.  For  undoubtedly  had
he  not  placed  himself  on  a  higher  moral  level  than
the  statesmen  and  sages  of  his  day,  we  should  pass
over  many  of  his  weaknesses  in  silence,  and  allow
his  pretensions  to  our  esteem  to  pass  almost  un-
challenged. But  we  demand  a  nearer  approach  to
the  perfection  of  human  wisdom  and  virtue  in  one
who  sought  to  approve  himself  the  greatest  of  their
teachers.  Nor  need  we  scruple  to  admit  that  the
judgment  of  the  ancients  on  Cicero  was  for  the  most
part  unfavourable.  The  moralists  of  antiquity
required  in  their  heroes  virtues  with  which  we  can
more  readily  dispense ;  and  they  too  had  less  sym-
pathy with  many  qualities  which  a  purer  religion
and  a  wider  experience  have  taught  us  to  love  and
admire.  Nor  were  they  capable,  from  their  position,
of  estimating  the  slow  and  silent  effects  upon  human
happiness  of  the  lessons  which  Cicero  enforced.  After
all  the  severe  judgments  we  are  compelled  to  pass
on  his  conduct,  we  must  acknowledge  that  there
remains  a  residue  of  what  is  amiable  in  his  character
and  noble  in  his  teaching  beyond  all  ancient  ex-
ample. Cicero  lived  and  died  in  faith.  He  has
made  converts  to  the  belief  in  virtue,  and  had
disciples  in  the  wisdom  of  love.  There  have  been
dark  periods  in  the  history  of  man,  when  the  feeble
ray  of  religious  instruction  paled  before  the  torch
of  his  generous  philanthropy.  The  praise  which  the

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  213

great  critic  pronounced  upon  his  excellence  in
oratory  may  be  justly  extended*  to  the  qualities  of
his  heart,  and  even  in  our  enlightened  days  it  may
be  held  no  mean  advance  in  virtue  to  venerate  the
master  of  Koman  philosophy.1

The  date  of  Cicero's  assassination  is  fixed  to  the
seventh  of  December,  when  he  wanted
twenty-seven  days  to  complete  his  sixty-  mmyofthe
fourth  year.2  As  his  name  stood  con-
spicuous in  the  original  list  of  seventeen  victims
publicly  denounced  before  the  triumvirs  reached
Eome,  it  is  probable  that  nearly  a  month  elapsed
between  the  notification  of  his  danger  and  his  actual
death.  Assuredly  there  could  be  no  difficulty  in
discovering  his  retreat  at  Tusculum,  and  these  dates
seem  to  prove  that  he  was  not  hotly  pursued,  and
might  without  difficulty  have  escaped.  To  the  last
he  could  hardly  persuade  himself  that  his  perse-
cutors were  inexorable.  Of  the  associates  of  his
proscription  a  large  proportion  probably  eluded
pursuit,  which  seems  to  have  relaxed  again  after
the  death  of  the  most  illustrious  victim.3  Many
crossed  the  sea  to  Macedonia,  others  to  Africa ;  a
still  larger  number  took  refuge  in  the  vessels  which
Sextus  sent  to  cruise  off  the  coast  of  Latium  and
Campania,  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  them  as-
sistance.4 Many  also  of  those  who  were  seized
found  the  enemy  not  implacable.  Lepidus  and
Antonius  were  accessible  to  bribes,  if  not  to  en-
treaties. Octavius  seems  to  have  felt  already  the

1  Quintilian,  Inst.  x.l.:  "Ille  se  profecisse  sciat  cui  Cicero  valde
placebit."

2  Tacit.  Dial,  de  Oral.  17. :  "  Ut  de  Cicerone  ipso  loquar,  Hirtio
nempe  et  Pansa  consulibus,  ut  Tiro  libertus  cjus  scripsit,  vii.  Idus
Decembris  occisus  est." Cicero  was  born  Jan.  3.  A.U.  648.  of  the  old
calendar. Fischer's  Him.  Zeit.  p.  332.

3  Veil.  ii.  64. :  "  Tribuni  (Canutii)  sanguine  commissa  proscriptio,
Ciceronis  vel  satiato  Antonio  paene  finita."

4  Dion,  xlvii. 12.  ; Appian, B.  C.  iv.  36. Among  those  who
escaped  was  M.  Terentius  Varro,  who  was  concealed  by  Calenus.

214  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

advantage  of  placing  his  own  lenity  in  favourable
contrast  with  his  rival's  ferocity.1  The  writers  of
the  empire  could  assert  of  him,  from  the  review  of
his  conduct  in  after  life,  that  he  was  not  by  nature
cruel,  but  partook  largely  of  the  generous  character
of  the  noble  Julius.2  Nor  had  he  many  private
injuries  to  avenge.  Antonius  alone  seems  to  have
really  enjoyed  the  taste  of  blood.  He  was  urged  on
by  a  fiend  in  woman's  shape,  the  notorious  Fulvia ;
and  while  the  female  relatives  of  the  other  trium-
virs sought  to  soothe  their  passions,  his  wife  alone
demanded  the  death  of  his  enemies  and  sported
with  their  sufferings.  The  proscription  of  the
triumvirs  differed  widely  from  those  of  Marius  and
of  Sulla.  The  one  was  devised  principally  as  a
means  of  extorting  money  by  confiscation,  while  the
others  were  directed  to  the  extermination  of  the
obnoxious  chiefs  of  the  opposite  parties.  The
soldiers  still  cried  aloud  for  their  promised  dona-
tives ;  the  equipment  of  the  vast  armaments  still  in
preparation  for  the  impending  war  demanded  ready
money:  but  the  treasury  stood  empty,  half  the
provinces  were  closed  against  the  fiscal  officers,
every  ordinary  means  of  raising  revenue  proved
abortive;  confiscation  of  private  fortunes  alone
offered  a  ready  resource  for  filling  the  coffers
of  the  state.  The  proscription,  in  short,  was  a
fiscal  expedient.  A  fourth  list  of  victims  was

1  Plutarch (Anton.  21.)  says  that  Antonius  incurred  the  most
blame  for  the  proscriptions,  as  being  older  than  Octavius,  and  of1
more  influence  than  Lepidus. Velleius  declares  that  Octavius  op-
posed the  measure,  but  was  outvoted  by  the  others. We  must  not
however  overlook  the  testimony  of  Suetonius,  who  says  of  Octavius :
"  Restitit  aliquamdiu  collegia  ne  qua  fieret  proscriptio,  sed  inceptam
utroque  acerbius  exercuit." He  goes  on  to  mention  special  instances
not  only  of  his  selfish  cruelty,  but  of  his  ferocity. (Suet.  Oct.  28.)
It  must  be  remembered  that  this  writer  paints  all  his  characters
in  the  strongest  colours. There  is  no  shade  in  his  portraits  of  the
Cassars.

2  Dion,  xlvii.  7.

A.U.711-B.C.43.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  215

shortly put forth; but these were not doomed
to  death,  but  only  to  the  loss  of  their  pro-  A  fourth  u«t

of  proscription,

perty. Among  them  many  were  women,  for  the  sake  of

,  I , ,  n  ,. J f  ,-i •  extorting

and  to  these  a  small  portion  ot  their  means  money,
was  ostensibly  reserved,  though  such  a  provision  in
their  behalf  was  not  perhaps  carefully  observed.1
But  this  persecution  of  the  female  sex  was  a  thing
so  unprecedented  in  the  annals  of  civil  strife  among
the  Romans,  that  one  historian  takes  occasion  to
dress  up  a  fictitious  narrative  of  a  female  insur-
rection in  consequence.2  So  scrupulously  did  the
revolutionary  leaders  abstain  from  assailing  the
innocent  sex  and  age,  that  when  the  triumvirs
demanded  in  one  instance  the  sacrifice  of  a  minor,
they  caused  him  to  be  first  invested  with  the  robe
of  manhood  before  they  inscribed  his  name  on  the
fatal  roll.3

But  the  triumvirs  had  employed  an  instrument
which  they  could  not  control.  The  horror  The  triumyire
of  the  proscription  was  more  than  doubled  ShereVtTand
by  the  impunity  it  threw  over  the  grati-  agentSt
fication  of  private  malice.  Every  one  who  resented
an  injury  or  coveted  a  neighbour's  estate,  found  the
means  under  this  bloody  enactment  of  satisfying  his
vengeance  or  his  cupidity.  The  proscribed  were
not  all  nor  perhaps  the  greater  number  of  those  who
perished.  Murders  were  daily  committed,  and  no
one  was  called  to  account  for  them.  Antonius
remarked  in  one  instance,  with  little  emotion,  that
he  knew  not  the  countenance  of  -the  mangled  head
presented  to  him.  The  estates  of  the  slaughtered
victims  were  sold  at  a  low  price  to  the  assassins,
while  the  soldiers  were  let  loose  throughout  the

1  Dion,  xlvii.  16,17-

2  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  32. But  Valerius  Maximus  mentions  that
Hortensia,  the  daughter  of  the  great  orator,  delivered  a  speech  before
the  triumvirs  in  deprecation  of  this  severity  (viii.  3.  3.),  and  Quin-
tilian  states  that  her  discourse  was  published  and  known  in  his  day.
Inst.  Oral.  i.  1.  6.  3  Dion,  xlvii.  6.

216  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXVI.

broad  fields  of  Italy,  ostensibly  to  hunt  out  the
victims,  but  really  in  order  to  throw  upon  the
country  the  burden  of  their  support.1  The  magis-
tracies in  the  towns  were  given  to  tribunes  and
centurions  as  the  reward  of  these  services,  while  the
highest  offices  in  the  city  were  distributed,  imme-
diately or  in  prospect,  among  the  nobler  adherents
of  the  triumphant  party.  Octavius  resigned  the
consulship  in  favour  of  Ventidius,  while  the  seat
octavius  vacated  by  the  death  of  Pedius  devolved
confuuuip  to  upon  C.  Carrinas.  Ventidius  Bassus  was
«emnarkabSieHi9  *•  Picenian  by  birth,  and  while  yet  a  child
had  been  carried  at  his  mother's  breast
before  the  car  of  Pompeius,  the  father  of  Magnus,
when  he  triumphed  over  the  Italians  in  the  Social
War.  The  strange  reverse  of  fortune  by  which
the  foreign  captive  became  exalted  to  the  highest
dignity  of  the  conquering  republic  formed  a  subject
of  admiring  comment  to  the  writers  of  antiquity.2
It  deserved  to  be  remarked  as  a  splendid  illustration
of  the  wisdom  by  which  the  franchise  and  honours  of
the  city  were  so  frequently  opened  to  her  subjects.
Ventidius,  low  perhaps  originally  in  birth  and  condi-
tion, had  been  for  a  time  a  jobber  of  beasts  of  burden
to  the  public  officers.  Caesar  had  discovered  in  him
the  promise  of  military  talents,  and  carried  him  into
Gaul.  There  he  had  rapidly  acquired  distinction,
and  his  second  patron  Antonius  was  induced  to
reward  his  fidelity  by  investing  him  with  the
prsetorship,  and  the  consulship  in  the  course  of  the
same  year.  The  trusty  veteran  had  not  yet  reached
the  summit  of  his  adventurous  career.

1  Dion,  xlvii.  14.

*  Val.  Max.  vi.  9.  9.  Juvenal  (vii.  199.)  compares  his  elevation,
•with  that  of  the  slave-king  Servius  Tullius.  Aulus  Gellius  (xv.  4.)
gives  his  history,  and  adds  the  pasquinade  which  was  made  upon,
him :

"  Concurrite  omnes  augures,  haruspices,
Portentum  inusitatum  conflatum  est  recens
Nam  mulos  qui  fricabat  consul  factus  est."

A.U.712-B.C.42. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  217

But  these  magistracies  could  be  enjoyed  for  a  few
days  only.  The  year  712  was  about  to  commence,
and  the  consuls  appointed  for  this  year  were
Lepidus  and  Plancus.  Both  of  them  i^a,,,
could  rest  their  claims  to  such  honours  "niu/'roTthe
upon  the  strength  of  the  military  rein-  year712-
forcements  they  had  brought  to  the  common  league.
It  may  be  surmised  that  Plancus  had  made  the
consulship  the  condition  of  his  timely  adhesion  to
the  Caesarean  conspiracy.  Both  he  and  Lepidus
had  further  demanded  the  distinction  of  a  triumph :
the  one  pretended  to  have  gathered  laurels  in  Gaul,
the  other  in  Spain ;  but  history  is  silent  as  to  their
services.  Plancus  had  sealed  his  devotion  to  the
cause  by  demanding  the  proscription  of  a  brother,
and  when  the  two  fratricides  traversed  the  streets
conspicuous  in  their  triumphal  chariots,  the  soldiers,
it  is  said,  with  the  usual  camp-licence,  hailed  them
with  the  bitter  verse,  The  consuls  triumph  not  over
the  Gauls,  but  over  the  Germans,  i.e.  their  brothers.1
The  citizens  cursed  them  as  they  rode  along ;  and
it  was  in  vain  that  Lepidus  issued  an  edict,  com-
manding them  to  rejoice  and  be  merry  under  pain
of  proscription.

We  now  turn  to  the  state  of  affairs  on  the  other
side  of  the  Adriatic.  Brutus  having  seized  the
government  of  Macedonia  had  been  en-

i .  j •  • .1  • , <•  • Therepub-

gaged  in  securing  the  points  of  commum-  iicam  beyond
cation  with  Italy.  The  interests  of  M.
Antonius  were  still  upheld  in  those  regions  by
Vatinius  at  Dyrrhachium,  and  C.  Antonius  at
Apollonia ;  and  the  efforts  of  the  republican  leader
had  been  directed  to  reducing  these  two  strong-
holds, the  gates  of  his  province  on  the  west.  Va-

1  Veil.  ii.  57. :  "  De  Germanis  non  de  Gallis  duo  triumphant  con-
sules."  But  the  Fasti  Capitolini  assign  the  respective  triumphs  of
the  consuls  to  two  separate  days,  Dec.  29  and  31.,  and  the  story  will
not  bear  to  be  accepted  literally.

218  HISTORY OF THE ROMA]S7S  CH.  xxvi.

tinius  had  maintained  himself  against  his  assailant,
and  had  audaciously  claimed  a  triumph  for  his
success  against  the  troops  of  a  compatriot ;  but  the
triumvir's  brother  had  been  -worsted,  and  fallen  into
his  adversary's  hands.  Brutus  however  had  mag-
nanimously spared  his  life.1  The  tyrannicide  was
still  anxious  that  Caesar's  blood  alone  should  atone
for  Caesar's  usurpation.  He  received  with  generous
pride  the  decree  of  the  senate  which  confirmed  to
him  the  command  in  Macedonia,  wrote  to  encourage
Octavius  to  arm  against  the  enemies  of  the  state,
and  declared  himself  ready  to  cross  over  into  Italy
whenever  the  expected  summons  should  arrive.
He  had  subdued  every  appearance  of  disaffection  in
his  province,  and  had  quelled  a  mutiny  among  his
own  troops,  hastily  collected  together,  and  consisting
partly  of  deserters  from  the  enemy's  ranks.  To
secure  their  good  will  he  had  been  constrained  to
adopt  the  common  practice  of  the  commanders  of
his  time.  He  had  made  unproroked  war  upon  the
Bessi  for  the  sake  of  plunder,  and  harassed  the
Brutus  collects  natives  of  his  own  province  with  excessive
w9dfo?ceer9cin8  exactions.2  There  must  have  been  great
Macedonia.  difficulty  in  officering  these  forces  with
trusty  partisans,  since  we  find  that  the  young
Horace,  then  studying  at  Athens,  without  birth  or
connexions  and  hardly  twenty  years  of  age,  was
intrusted  with  high  command  immediately  upon
his  enlistment.1  Brutus  continued  to  exercise  his

1  Dion,  xlvii.  21. ;  Plut.  Brut.  26. Brutus  spared  his  captive  a
second  time  when  he  discovered  him  intriguing -with  his  soldiers. It
is  a  question  however  whether  on  a  third  provocation  he  did  not  put
him  to  death  after  he  had  heard  of  the  massacre  of  Decimus. Plut.
Brut.  28. '

2  Dion,  xlvii.  25. ;  Plut.  Brut.  28 — 32.

3  Horat.  Sat.  i.  vi.  48. : "  Quod  mihi  pareret  legio  Romana
tribuno." There  were  properly  six  tribunes  in  each  legion,  who  com-
manded by  turns. But  it  is  not  likely  that  the  old  rules  of  the  ser-
vice were  strictly  adhered  to  at  this  time,  and  Horace's  expression
"  pareret  mihi  "  must  be  understood  with  considerable  latitude.

A.U.712-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  219

soldiers  by  various  incursions  upon  the  barbarians
beyond  the  frontier,  from  which  he  acquired  the
title  of  imperator,  which  carried  with  it  a  certain
assurance  of  valour  and  experience  among  the
Eoman  legionaries.  It  was  at  this  time  also  that
he  coined  money  with  his  own  effigy,  so  forgetful
was  even  Brutus  of  the  traditions  of  the  republic,
and  stamped  the  reverse  with  a  cap  of  liberty
between  two  naked  daggers.1

Nor  had  Cassius  been  less  active  and  successful  in
establishing  the authority  of  the senate

.,  ,  "  ,,  .  ,  ., ,,  Cassius  undis-

throusrhout  the  province,  and  on  the  Iron-  puted  master

-COI-TTI.J  j  of  8yrU-

tiers oi oyria. He bad avenged upon

Dolabella  the  cruel  murder  of  Trebonius ;  he  had
subdued  the  hostility  of  the  city  of  Tarsus,  enlisted
in  his  service  auxiliaries  from  Parthia,  and  repressed
by  the  terror  of  his  presence  the  Caesarean  sym-
pathies of  the  natives  of  Palestine.  Csecilius  Bassus,
who  had  affected  to  defend  the  republic  against  the
dictator's  lieutenants,  but  who  had  refused  to
deliver  up  his  forces  to  the  proconsul  appointed  by
the  senate,  had  been  deserted  by  his  own  soldiers,
and  Cassius,  in  consideration  of  his  hostility  to
Caesar,  had  dismissed  him  unpunished.  The  two
republican  chieftains,  emboldened  by  these  Bnitng
successes,  and  now  at  the  head,  Brutus  of  ™g™tu,gi<mi,
eight,  Cassius  of  eleven  legions,  met  once  c"Miu" eleven-
more  in  the  province  of  Asia.  They  were  informed

1  Eckhel,  Doctr.  Num.  vi.  24.  Dion  adds  that  there  was  an
inscription  declaring  that  he  and  Cassius  had  restored  liberty  to
Rome.  He  alludes  probably  to  the  significant  BID.  MAR.  which
may  be  read  on  these  remarkable  coins.  The  tyrannicide's  face
is  thin,  and  bears  out  the  famous  saying  of  Caesar  regarding  both
him  and  Cassius.  (See  Chap.  XXI.)  Such  is  not  the  character,
if  I  remember  rightly,  of  the  fine  unfinished  bust  preserved  in
the  Capitoline  Museum  at  Rome,  beneath  which  the  lines  have  been
inscribed :

"  Dum  ducit  sculptor  Bruti  de  marmore  vultnm
In  mentem  sceleris  venit  et  abstinuit."

220  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXVI.

by  this  time  of  the  course  of  events  in  Kome,  and
war  having  become  inevitable,  they  debated  whether
to  cross  the  sea  at  once  and  seek  the  foe  in  Italy,  or
to  await  his  attack  in  Macedonia.  They  agreed  to
remain  on  the  defensive,  and  while  they  relied  on
the  posture  of  Sextus  Pompeius  to  keep  the  at-
tention of  the  triumvirs  distracted,  contented  them-
selves with  stimulating  their  allies,  chastising  their
enemies,  and  amassing  arms  and  stores  within  their
own  frontiers  for  the  final  struggle  for  freedom.
With  Sextus  indeed  the  liberators  had  had  little
direct  communication.  Whether  they  dis-
pefu9Useiz°eT  trusted  the  associate  of  brigands  and

upon  Sicily.  .  -  l j .  i  • .

pirates,  who  never  scrupled  to  enlist  even
slaves  under  his  banners,  or  whether  they  shrank
from  the  heir  to  the  name  and  claims  of  Pompeius,
the  genuine  patriots  of  the  senatorial  party  were
disposed  to  fight  their  own  battle  alone.  Sextus,
after  maintaining  a  long  desultory  contest  with
Caesar's  captains  in  Spain,  having  been  driven  from
his  retreats  by  Pollio,  had  been  warmly  received  by
the  Massilians  after  the  dictator's  death  From
their  secure  haven  he  had  observed  the  revival  of
the  Caesarean  faction,  and  had  accepted  with  alacrity
the  maritime  command  with  which  the  senate,  in
its  deepest  despair,  had  invested  him.  While  the
triumvirs  were  concocting  their  schemes  of  murder
and  spoliation,  he  had  silently  collected  a  large  fleet,
and  launched  upon  the  waters  of  the  Mediterranean,
where  he  proceeded  to  wrest  from  their  grasp  the
flourishing  island  of  Sicily.  Here  he  set  up  his
standard,  and  soon  received  the  submission  of  Bithy-
nicus,  the  Caesarean  propraetor,1  while  his  vessels  ran
along  the  coast  and  signalled  the  fugitive  prescripts.
It  was  among  the  first  cares  of  the  triumvirs,  when
firmly  seated  in  power,  to  contest  the  sovereignty  of

1  Appian,  B.  C.  ir.  84.

A.U.712-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  221

the  sea  with  an  enemy  so  near  and  so  audacious.
While  Lepidus  retained  as  consul  the  government
of  the  city  and  the  general  supervision  of  the
general  interests  in  Italy,  while  Antonius

' ,  i  , ,  ,  Antonim  arms

undertook, as the most experienced in  a«ain.tthe
military  command,  to confront the  vast  o
armaments  collected  under  the  republican
banner  in  the  East,  Octavius  was  charged  with  the
task  of  assailing  Sextus  in  his  insular  stronghold.
For  this  service  a  fleet  of  war  galleys  was  equipped
in  the  ports  of  Ostia  and  Misenum,  and  Salvidienus
was  ordered  to  engage  the  flotilla  which  the  young
Pompeius  had  mustered  with  the  friendly  aid  of  the
roving  pirates of  the Mediterranean. But  their
light  vessels  were  better  found,  and  proved  more
manageable  in  the  shifting  currents  of  the  straits  of
Messana,  where  the  fleets  met,  than the heavier
barks  which  were  brought against them. Salvi-
dienus was  compelled  to  withdraw,  with  the  loss  of
an  equal  number  of  ships  with  the  enemy,  which
implies  a  much greater  loss of  men,  stores,  and
materials. Octavius  had  descended  to  the  extreme
point of  the Bruttian  peninsula  with  a  Octaviu»
large  force  to  support  his  naval  operations ;  «HhbseJi°tnc80^
but  finding  the  means  of  transport  cut  off,  "S^SSu.i0
or,  as  he  himself  announced,  being  sum-  intheEart-
moned  peremptorily  to  his  colleague's  assistance,  he
broke  up  from  Ehegium  where  his  quarters  lay,  and
directed  his  march  to  Brundisium.

Meanwhile  a  large  division  of  the  triumvirs'  forces
had  been  thrown  into  Macedonia  under  the  The  chiefe  of
command  of  Norbanus  and  Decidius  Saxa.  ^"the?/
The  passage  of  the  Ionian  Gulf,  it  seems,  corn7ron*nedach
had  not  been  disputed,  and  it  was  not  till  puiuppTin
after  several  legions  had  landed  that  Statius  Thrace-
Murcus,  who  commanded  the  republican  fleets,  took
up  an  attitude  of  observation  off  the  coast  of  Apulia.1

1  Dion,  xlvii.  33.

222  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

Brutus  and  Cassius  were  both  at  this  moment  in
Asia,  engaged  in  the  chastisement  or  plunder  of
Khodes  and  Xanthus,  and  the  Antonian  forces  were
allowed  to  penetrate  unchecked  through  Macedonia
into  Thrace,  and  to  close  the  denies  of  the  Ehodope
against  the  republican  leaders.  The  liberators  now
united  their  legions  with  tardy  resolution,  and
crossed  the  Bosphorus,  while  Antonius  on  the  other
hand  was  hastening  to  support  his  advanced  corps,
and  taking  advantage  of  ev  ry  favourable  breeze  to
waft  men  and  stores  across  the  Ionian.  Murcus  was
unable  to  cope  with  the  skill  or  good  fortune  of  the
Caesarean  navigators.  Antonius  crossed  in  safety
first,  and  was  shortly  followed  by  Octavius,  who  was
detained  however  by  sickness  at  Dyrrhachium,  while
his  colleague  hastened  to  join  his  lieutenants  at
Philippi,  and  by  his  sudden  and  opportune  arrival
saved  them  from  the  attack  of  an  overwhelming
enemy.  The  republicans  finding  the  passes  barred
against  them  had  turned  Norbanus's  flank  by  a
circuitous  route.  They  occupied  two  hills  facing  the
city  just  named,  to  the  south-east,  their  left  flank
resting  on  the  sea.  They  connected  their  double
camp  with  a  long  line  of  rampart,  and  blocked  up  the
hollow  between  the  hills,  through  which  lay  the
direct  communication  with  the  East.  Brutus  posted
himself  on  the  right,  Cassius  on  the  left  of  these
eminences.1  Their  legions  amounted  to  nineteen  in
number ;  they  were  not  all  raised  to  their  full  com-
plement, but  counted  not  less  than  eighty-thousand
effective  combatants  among  them.  Their  cavalry
was  estimated  at  twenty  thousand,  an  unusually
large  proportion,  and  the  rear  and  flanks  of  their  posi-
tion were  thronged,  if  not  encumbered,  by  masses  of
Oriental  auxiliaries.  The  news  of  a  partial  check

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  107.;  Dion,  xlvii.  35.  Col.  Leakehas  shown
that  our  historians'  accounts  tally  sufficiently  well  with  the  actual
localities.

A.U.7]2-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  223

sustained  by  Antonius  reached  Octavius  on  his  sick
bed.  He  feared  lest  his  colleague  should  either  lose
or  win  a  battle  in  his  own  absence ;  for  in  the  one
case  he  should  be  unable  to  withstand  alone  the
victorious  republicans,  in  the  other  he  anticipated
that  Antonius  would  speedily  turn  his  arms  against
himself.  Though  not  yet  recovered  from  his  sick-
ness, he  caused  himself  to  be  carried  along  with  his
soldiers  on  their  march,  and  effected  a  junction  with
the  other  legions,  which  were  now  encamped  between
Amphipolis  and  Philippi.  The  three  combined
armies  now  outnumbered  the  republican  forces ;  for
though  they  counted  but  nineteen  legions  among
them,  yet  each  of  these  corps  rather  exceeded  than
fell  below  its  proper  complement.  The  cavalry  of
the  triumvirs  amounted  only  to  thirteen  thousand,
and  their  position  in  a  plain  liable  to  inundation
from  the  river  Nestus,  was  disadvantageous ;  though
the  very  boldness  with  which  they  occupied  it  and
challenged  the  enemy  to  quit  his  strongholds  to
attack  it,  struck  terror  at  the  outset  into  the  hearts
of  their  adversaries.

The  battle  of  Philippi,  in  the  estimation  of  the
Eoman  writers,  was  the  most  memorable  Theirarmie«
conflict  in  their  military  annals.  The  num-  n"^rou?than
bers  engaged  on  either  side  far  exceed  ^^atch
all  former  experience.  Eighty  thousand  pharsalia-
legionaries  alone  were  counted  on  the  one  side,  and
perhaps  an  hundred  and  twenty  thousand  on  the
other,  at  least  three  times  as  many  as  fought  at
Pharsalia.  To  maintain  such  immense  numbers
constantly  in  a  state  for  active  service  required  all
the  resources  of  unscrupulous  ingenuity  in  their
commanders.  Brutus  and  Cassius  had  kept  detach-
ments in  constant  motion  from  place  to  place,  in-
venting pretexts,  as  they  exhausted  the  supplies  of
one  locality,  for  extorting  money  and  stores  from
another.  The  oppression  exercised  by  officers  and

224  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS.  CH.  xxvi.

men  upon  the  natives  wherever  they  were  quartered,
could  not  fail  to  breed  impatience  and  excite  tumul-
tuary resistance,  and  these  again  furnished  excuses
for  redoubled  exactions.  The  two  years  during
which  these  proconsuls  governed  the  East  cost  the
provincials  not  less  perhaps  of  blood  and  suffering
than  the  ravages  of  Mithridates,  and  swelled  the
cry  of  the  miserable  nations  for  peace  at  any  price,
and  security  under  any  form  of  government.  The
triumvirs  may  have  watched  with  satisfaction  the
sure  effect  of  this  systematic  tyranny  in  estranging
the  provinces  from  the  cause  of  the  republic :  but
neither  could  they  move  their  vast  multitudes  to  the
scene  of  action  without  great  efforts,  pressing  ex-
actions, and  the  loss  of  much  time.  Antonius  and
his  colleague  had  quitted  Rome,  the  one  for  Brun-
disium,  the  other  for  Rhegium  at  the  beginning  of
the  year ;  but  it  was  not  till  the  commencement  of
summer  that  the  former  crossed  the  sea.  He  had
sent  forward  his  first  division,  as  we  have  seen,  under
Norbanus  and  Saxa ;  but  he  could  not  follow  them
without  interposing  an  interval  of  some  weeks  or
months.  Money  was  wanting  to  feed,  clothe,  and
pay  the  legions ;  arms  and  magazines  must  be  pro-
vided; tribunes  and  centurions  strayed  from  their
ranks  in  the  relaxation  of  the  ancient  discipline,  and
could  with  difficulty  be  recalled  to  stated  times  and
places,  or  when  reassembled  be  kept  strictly  together.
When  at  last  the  march  began,  it  was  not  as  in
modern  times,  in  which  an  army  of  an  hundred
thousand  men  may  move  on  two  or  three  parallel
lines  to  the  point  of  its  destination.  Two  great
military  roads  led  from  Rome  to  Brundisium,  but
from  Dyrrhachium  a  single  route  passed  through  the
heart  of  Macedonia,  traversing  long  tracts  of  moun-
tain and  sterile  plain,  and  leaving  the  abodes  of
opulence  to  the  right  and  the  left,  in  its  impatience
to  reach  its  appointed  terminus  on  the  Hellespont ;

A.U.712-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  225

so  that  the  support  of  an  army  on  the  line  of  march
was  often  precarious,  and  its  advance  necessarily
slow.  The  rapidity  of  Caesar's  movements  was  justly
celebrated.  He  considered  speed  the  first  element
of  success,  and  in  order  to  attain  it  he  restrained  his
numbers  to  the  lowest  limit.  He  relied  upon  train-
ing and  discipline  to  supply  the  place  of  numbers.
He  preferred  one  veteran  to  a  handful  of  recruits,
and  the  twenty  thousand  combatants  with  whom  he
conquered  at  Pharsalia  could  move  with  many  times
the  speed  of  such  masses  as  now  advanced  towards
each  other,  while  they  could  engage,  perhaps,  on
equal  terms,  with  many  times  their  own  number  of
less  practised  swordsmen.  It  was  not  till  late  in  the
autumn  that  the  three  armies  of  the  triumvirs  had
assembled  in  their  camp  at  Amphipolis,  and  there,
being  destitute  of  magazines,  and  having  no  com-
munication with  the  sea,  they  had  no  choice  but  to
engage  at  once.1  The  republican  generals  were
surprised  and  alarmed  at  the  readiness  they  displayed
for  the  encounter  at  the  moment  of  their  arrival  ;
but  in  fact  delay  would  have  been  ruinous,  and  the
promptitude  with  which  they  sought  the  combat  was
a  sign  of  weakness  and  not  of  strength.  Had  their
opponents  known  how  to  profit  by  their  excellent
position  and  collateral  advantages,  the  fate  of  Koine
would  have  been  decided  elsewhere  than  on  the  field
of  Philippi.

But  the  great  battle  which  ensued  was  memorable
in  the  Roman  annals  on  another  account  The  republic

also. It  was on  that  field  that the  re-
public  perished. At  Pharsalia  the  contest  Philipl>i'
had  been  between  Ca?sar  and  Pompeius  :  it  was  the

1  Appian.B.  C.  iv.  122.:  fSffioiKfffav  rbv  xft^va  TrpocriovTct.  Comp.
Plut,  Brut.  47.  :  xe'^t'a  HoxSnpbv  irpoffSoKaxriv.  Suetonius,  in  fixing
the  birth  of  Tiberius  to  November  16  of  this  year,  says  that  it  was
after  the  battle  of  Philippi.  Comp.  Dion,  vii.  18.  This  is  the  nearest
approximation  we  can  get  to  the  exact  date.
VOL.  III.  Q

226  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvi.

crisis  of  the  personal  rivalry  of  two  competitors  for
supreme  power.  We  shall  remark  the  same  of  another
great  engagement  which  is  yet  to  follow,  the  third
great  battle  of  the  civil  wars,  the  decisive  contest  of
Actium.  The  republic  will  lie  slain  before  us,  and
the  struggle  will  be  between  Antonius  and  Octavius
over  its  dead  body.  But  at  Philippi  there  were  still
chiefs  who  fought  honestly  for  the  republic,  and  for
what  they  believed  to  be  the  common  weal.  Weak,
wavering,  and  hasty  as  they  had  proved  themselves
at  every  crisis  of  their  cause,  they  betrayed  at  least
no  selfish  views  of  personal  aggrandisement.  But
the  patriot  leaders  sufficiently  proved  by  their  own
example  since  Caesar's  death,  that  the  continuance  of
legitimate  government  was  impossible.  The  authority
they  held  in  the  provinces  they  had  seized  for  the
good  of  the  state  indeed,  but  in  direct  defiance  of  its
authority ;  their  only  plea  being  the  appointment  of
the  very  tyrant  whom  they  had  murdered,  and  whose
acts  they  had  denounced.  Cassius  rebuked  Brutus
for  controlling  the  profligate  corruption  of  one  of
their  adherents,  L.  Pella ;  and  Brutus  before  his  last
battle  promised  his  soldiers  the  plunder  of  Thessa-
lonica  and  Lacedsemon.1  The  philosopher  indeed
renounced  all  confidence  in  his  own  principles.  He
had  adopted  them  from  reading  or  imitation,  they
were  not  the  natural  growth  of  instinct  or  genuine
reflection,  and  as  may  easily  happen  in  such  a  case,
his  faith  in  them  failed  when  they  were  tested  by
adversity.  As  long  as  there  seemed  a  chance  that
the  godlike  stroke  would  be  justified  by  success,
Brutus  claimed  the  glory  of  maintaining  a  righteous
cause ;  but  when  all  hope  fled,  he  could  take  leave
of  philosophy  and  life  together,  and  exclaim,  /
once  dreamed  that  virtue  icas  a  thing,  I  find  her

1  The  Lacedaemonians  sent  aid  to  the  triumvirs. We  are  left  to
guess  the  provocation  they  had  received.

A.r.712-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  227

on/'/  a  name,  and  the  mere  slave  of  fortune.1  He
had  blamed  Cato  for  flying  from  misery  by  self-
murder;  but  he  learnt  to  justify  the  same  desperate
act  when  he  contemplated  committing  it  himself.2
The  legend  that  when  preparing  for  the  encounter
with  the  triumvirs  he  was  visited  by  the  ghost  of
Caesar,  which  summoned  him  to  meet  again  at
Philippi,  marks  the  conviction  of  the  ancients  that
in  the  crisis  of  his  fate  he  was  stung  by  guilty  re-
morse, and  haunted  by  the  presentiment  of  final
retribution.

The  republican  leaders  had  debated  between  them-
selves the  tactics  they  should  adopt  for  the

, ,  i r Ii  Account  of

campaign,  and  the counsel  ot the  more  the  battle  of

•  J  n •  u  '-UJi  j. ?hiliPPi-

experienced  Cassius,  who  wished  to  protract
the  contest  and  shift  it  to  the  eastern  side  of  the
Hellespont,  had  been  overruled  by  the  impatience  of
Brutus,  who  ascribed  his  colleague's  hesitation  to
fear,  while  he  was  unconscious  that  his  own  im-
petuosity arose  rather  from  disgust  and  weariness
than  from  any  settled  conviction  on  military  grounds.
At  the  last  moment,  when  the  Antonians  challenged
their  opponents  to  commence/  the  attack,  Cassius
would  have  removed  from  his  position  and  retreated
upon  Asia.  But  Brutus  had  set  his  life  and  fortunes
on  the  event  of  the  morrow,  and  insisted  upon  giving
battle.  Posted  on  the  right  wing  with  the  larger
half  of  the  combined  forces,  he  was  confronted  by
the  legions  under  the  command  of  Octavius.  The
eagerness  of  his  soldiers,  stimulated  by  a  lavish
gratuity,  anticipated  the  word  of  command,  and  they
rushed  with  overwhelming  force  on  their  adversaries,
who  speedily  gave  way,  bearing  along  with  them
their  leader,  still  feeble  from  sickness,  and  so  hotly

1  Dion  (xlvii.  49.)  quoting  the  lines  of  an  unknown  dramatist :
' T.  TATJUOC  opeTTj,  \6yos  op'  ijatf ,  tyw  5e  <re
'fis  (pyov  %VKOVV  GU  5'£p'  cSovAtvcs  rvxy-

-  Plut.  Brut.  40.

Q  2

228  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CQ.  sxvi.

pressed  that  the  litter  from  which  he  had  just  been
removed  was  pierced  through  and  through  by  the
First  engage-  exulting  pursuers.  Brutus  stormed  the
ttBMMiu  us  enemy's  camp  and  cut  three  legions  in

against  Octa-  J , , .r ,  .  .  ' .

Tius,  while  pieces  :  but  in  the  meantime  Antonms  on
theadvan-"9  the  right  had  gained  an  advantage  hardly

ta"e  over

cas.iu».  less  decisive  over  Cassius,  whose  operations
were  as  feeble  and  slow  as  his  associate's  had  been
hasty  and  impetuous.  Cassius  was  defective  in  eye-
sight :  he  mistook  the  scouts  sent  in  quest  of  him  by
Brutus  for  a  detachment  of  the  enemy's  horse ;  and
when  they  saluted  and  embraced  his  lieutenant
Titinius,  he  could  not  be  convinced  but  that  they
had  seized  and  massacred  him.  The  battle,  then,
was  lost,  the  cause  was  desperate,  and  now  his  friend
was  slaughtered,  as  he  deemed,  before  his  eyes.  He
upbraided  himself  for  having  lived  too  long,  and
skulking  into  a  tent  desired  his  freedman  Pindarus
to  give  him  the  fatal  blow.  He  had  schooled  him
for  this  last  service  in  the  most  imminent  peril  of
the  flight  from  Carrhae ;  and  he  now  exacted  it.
Such  was  the  story ;  but  who  was  there  to  attest  it  ?
cawius  com-  His  head  was  found  severed  from  his  body,
miu  suicide.  bu£  pin(jarus  was  never  seen  again,  and  the
rumour  was  widely  spread  that  he  had  slain  his
patron  by  secret  treachery.  Such  are  the  uncer-
tainties of  history !  Such  is  the  doubt  which  hangs
over  the  crowning  exploit  of  one  whom  a  partial
annalist  pronounced  the  last  of  the  Romans  ! l

Brutus,  even  if  he  discovered  the  extent  of  the

disaster  on  his  left  in  time  to  repair  it,  was

incomjxltentto  unable  to  bring  up  his  legions,  scattered  as

maintain  the ,  .  l .  ,  rr- 1

discipline  of  they  were  in  pursuit  or  plunder.  His  loss
<*-ho  iwccshim  had  been  much  less  than  that  of  the  Oc-

to  fight  again.  .  , ,  , . . .  - ~

tavians,  nor  had  the  division  of  Cassius,

1  Plutarch,  Brut.  43.  The  expression  in  the  text  is  attributed  to
Cremutius  Cordus  by  Tacitus,  Ann.  iy.  34.  Plutarch  and  Appian
ascribe  it  to  Brutus  himself.

A.r.712-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIBE.  229

which  had  fled  almost  without  a  blow,  suffered  any
serious  damage.  But  in  the  mean  and  cowardly
self-sacrifice  of  its  commander  the  cause  had  suffered
a  shock  from  which  it  could  not  recover.  The  moral
effect  of  his  fatal  deed  dismayed  the  army  and
subdued  the  energies  of  its  surviving  leader.  Cassius
had  controlled  the  turbulence  of  his  soldiers  by  his
rigorous  discipline  and  martial  bearing;  but  the
mild  student  who  now  remained  to  console  them  in
their  shame,  and  restore  them  to  confidence,  had
little  influence  over  their  reckless  passions.  In  vain
did  he  scatter  money  among  them,  and  hold  out
magnificent  hopes  of  future  spoil,  while  he  reluctantly
surrendered  to  their  vindictive  cruelty  the  lives  of
many  of  his  captives.  Day  by  day  the  legionaries  as
well  as  the  auxiliaries  deserted  his  standard.  Mean-
while the  enemy,  who  had  suffered  much  more
severely  in  the  late  engagement,  became  seriously
distressed  by  the  inconvenience  of  their  position,  and
were  menaced  both  with  famine  and  sickness.  Two
legions,  among  which  was  the  Martian,  were  cut  off
by  the  cruisers  of  Murcus,  in  crossing  the  Ionian
straits.  It  was  impossible  for  the  triumvirs  to
maintain  their  attitude  as  assailants,  and  Brutus
might  have  awaited  in  security  the  retirement,  if  not
the  dispersion,  of  their  unwieldy  multitudes.  But
the  murmurs  of  a  part  of  his  troops,  who  could
neither  win  a  battle  nor  be  satisfied  to  decline  one,
forced  him  against  his  will  to  lead  forth  his  army
and  meet  the  enemy,  who  was  more  anxious  than
ever  to  press  the  struggle  to  an  issue.

The  battle  of  Philippi  was  renewed  on  the  same
ground  after  an  interval  of  twenty  days.
It  was  well  contested:  there  was  no  sudden  element  at
and  overwhelming  onset  on  the  one  side,  DC***  or  a*

. ,  ...  .1.1  republican!.

no  panic  terror  and  contusion  on  the  other ;

but  both  armies  advanced  to  the  sword's  point  with

unbroken ranks, and throughout the  whole line

230  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xxvi.

man  challenged  man,  and  each  that  fell  was  re-
placed by  a  resolute  successor.  Slowly  and  gra-
dually, after  hours  of  mutual  slaughter,  the  Csesa-
reans  seemed  to  gather  strength  and  weight,  and  at
last  shattered  the  foremost  ranks  of  the  republicans.
When  the  first  line  wavered,  the  second  and  third
yielded  to  the  pressure ;  all  support  was  withdrawn,
and  the  incumbent  mass  of  the  conquerors  rushed
headlong  over  the  bodies  of  their  adversaries.
Among  the  slain  was  Marcus,  the  son  of  the  illus-
trious Cato,  who  died  a  soldier's  death,  such  as  his
father  should  have  envied,  refusing  to  fly  or  to
yield,  baring  his  head  that  he  might  be  recognised,
and  falling  upon  a  heap  of  slaughtered  enemies.
Octavius  beleaguered  the  camp  into  which  the
fugitives  had  poured  in  confusion,  while  Antonius
urged  the  pursuit  of  the  scattered  multitudes,
streaming  towards  the  mountains  or  the  sea.
Brutus  kept  together  a  force  of  four  legions,  with
which  he  gained  a  secure  position  among  the  hills
to  the  rear  of  his  camp;  but  the  slaughter  had
reached  even  to  the  verge  of  his  lines,  and  Antonius
watched  him  through  the  night  behind  a  rampart
of  corpses.  The  next  day  he  would  have  made  a
last  effort  to  break  through  the  ranks  of  his  assail-
ants, and  succour  the  remnant  which  still  occupied
the  camp.  But  the  soldiers  sullenly  refused  to
buckle  on  their  armoiir  again.  They  bluntly  bade
their  general  shift  for  himself;  they  had  tried  the
chance  of  war  often  enough,  and  would  do  no  more
to  cut  themselves  off  from  the  prospect  of  quarter.
Every  hope  was  fled  :  the  hope  of  victory,  the  hope
of  liberty,  even  the  last  hope  of  dying  gloriously  in
battle.  But  indignity  worse  than  death  might  still
remain.  Brutus  retired  with  a  few  attendants  to  a
woody  covert  by  the  banks  of  a  stream,  where  he
might  snatch  a  few  hours  of  rest  and  concealment.
Here  he  lamented  his  slaughtered  friends,  and

A.C.712-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  231

invoked,  as  with  his  dying  breath,  retribution  upon
the  head  of  his  enemies.  But,  as  if  yet  undeter-
mined, he  despatched  a  messenger,  to  penetrate
if  possible  within  the  camp,  and  report  the  condi-
tion of  its  defenders.  Then,  hardly  waiting  for  his
return,  he  drew  aside  his  companions  one  by  one,
and  besought  them  to  strike  him  to  the  heart,  or
hold  the  point  of  his  sword  for  himself  to  fall  upon.
One  after  another  they  all  shrank  from  the  horrid
service ;  but  as  the  night  drew  on,  and  it  became
necessary  to  remove  further,  he  sprang  to  his  feet
with  desperate  resolution,  exclaiming,  We  must
indeed  flee,  but  it  shall  be  with  our  hands.  Then
at  last  Brutus  accomplished  the  meditated  stroke ;
but  it  was  still  uncertain  whether  he  held  Brutus  killB
his  own  sword  and  threw  himself  upon  it,  Um8elf-
or  prevailed  on  an  attendant  to  steady  the  point
against  his  breast.  Several  of  his  officers  followed
his  example.  Labeo,  having  dug  himself  a  grave
in  his  tent,  enfranchised  a  slave,  and  thrusting  a
weapon  into  his  hand  bade  him  strike  home.  The
ferocity  of  the  victors  had  been  proved  by  the
proscriptions ;  those  who  despaired  of  resisting
dared  not  surrender  now,  as  they  had  so  promptly
done  at  Pharsalia  and  Munda.  Now  at  last  the
liberators  confessed  by  their  own  act  of  self-murder
how  much  for  the  worse  their  change  of  masters
had  been.1  It  is  affirmed,  however,  that  Antonius
caused  the  body  of  Brutus  to  be  wrapped  in  purple,
and  transmitted  to  his  mother  Servilia  for  inter-
ment. Porcia's  vehement  spirit  indeed,  if  we  may
credit  the  popular  account,  was  not  satisfied  with
the  performance  of  this  last  duty.  Having  threat-
ened self-destruction,  she  was  watched  by  her  at-
tendants, and  all  apparent  means  of  death  removed

1  Scutonius,  it  must  be  remarked,  affirms  (Oct.  13. )that  Octavius
behaved  with  great  cruelty  to  his  prisoners  after  this  victory.

HISTORY OF THE EOMAKS  CH.  xxvi.

from  her :  but  she  filled  her  mouth  with  coals  from
a  burning  brazier,  pressed  her  lips  firmly  together
and  perished  by  suffocation.1

1  Appian,  B.  C.  iv.  136.;  Plut.  Brut.  53.,  but  the  latter  writer
throws  some  doubt  upon  the  story,  or  at  least  upon  the  motive  as-
signed for  it.  It  has  been  suggested  that  she  may  have  inhaled
the  fumes  of  charcoal.  Comp.  the  death  of  Catulus  in  Florus,  iii.  21.,
"  ignis  haustu,"  with  the  expression  of  Velleius,  ii.  22.,  "  exitiali
hausto  spiritu."  Kegarding  the  battle  of  Philippi  a  curious  error
was  perpetuated  among  the  Roman  writers.  They  persisted  in
representing  it  as  fought  on  the  same  spot  as  the  battle  of  Phar-
s,alia.  The  name  of  Macedonia  was  given  by  the  Romans  to  the
whole  region  between  the  Adriatic  and  the  Hellespont,  and  such
names  as  Emathia,  Hsemonia,  were  applied  very  loosely  by  their
poets.  I  am  inclined  however  to  think  that  the  mistake  arose  from
an  ambiguity  in  Virgil's  lines,  which  became  a  locus  classicus  with
succeeding  writers:

"  Ergo  inter  sese  paribus  concurrcre  telis
Romanas  acies  iterum  viclere  Philippi  :
Ncc  fuit  indignum  superis  bis  sanguine  nostro
Emathiam  et  latos  Hterni  pinguescere  campos."

The  poet  here  refers  to  two  distinct  battles,  one  in  Thessaly  (Erna-
thia  is  not  a  correct  term),  the  other  in  Thrace,  but  the  words  might
very  easily  mislead.  The  site  of  the  battles  is  accordingly  con-
founded by  Manilius,  i.  908.,  Ovid.  Met.  xv.  824.,  Florus,  iv.  2.,
Lucan,  i.  680.,  vii.  854.,  ix.  271.,  Juvenal,  viii.  242.  The  mistake
may  have  been  favoured  by  the  fact  of  the  double  engagement  at
Philippi.  For  this  meaning  of  4 is  comp.  Georg.  iii.  33.  ''  Bisque
triumphatas  utroque  ab  litore  gentes,"  i.  e.  once  on  either  shore.

A.P.712-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  233

CHAPTER  XXVII.

Antonius  assumes  the  government  of  the  Eastern  provinces,  and
Octavius  of  the  Western. — Lepidus  commands  in  Africa.— Cleo-
patra fascinates  Antonius  (712),  who  repairs  to  her  at  Alexandria.
— Insurrection  of  L.  Antonius,  and  war  of  Perusia  (713). — Re-
conciliation of  the  Triumvirs  :  treaty  of  lirundisium  :  peace
restored  to  Italy. — Treaty  of  Misenum  and  admission  of  Sextus
Pompeius  to  a  share  of  power  (715X — Ventidius  triumphs
over  the  Parthians. —  Quarrel  of  the  Triumvirs  with  Sextus.
—'Octavius  arms  against  him  and  is  defeated  (716). — Treaty
of  Tarentum. —  The  Triumvirate  is  renewed  for  five  years
(717). — Agrippa  commands  the  Octavian  fleet. — Second  cam-
paign against  Sextus. — Encounters  with  various  success. — Agrip-
pa's  great  victory  (718). — Lepidus  attacks  Octavius,  is  deserted
by  his  soldiers,  captured  and  deposed  from  power. — Sextus  flies
to  the  East  and  is  there  slain  (719). — Extinction  of  the  senatorial
faction. — Octavius  commands  in  Rome. — Honours  heaped  upon
him. — His  salutary  measures. — His  ministers  Agrippa  and  Mae-
cenas: his  matrimonial  alliances.  (A.  u.  712 — 710.  B.C.  42 — 35.)

THE  self-destruction  of  the  chiefs  of  the  republican
cause  was  much  more  effectual  in  breaking
up  their  disheartened  and  deserted  party  republican e
than the  vicissitudes of fortune on the  termi™wTth  the

1 •  r -m_'l- • rm_ 1  r  conquerors.

plains  ot  Phmppi.  ihe  loss  ot  men  on
the  side  of  the  vanquished  had  not  been  con-
siderable ;  but  the  legionaries,  of  whom  a  large
number  had  formerly  served  in  Caesar's  ranks,  and
who  were  bound  to  their  actual  service  by  no  other
motive  than  the  hope  of  plunder,  were  no  longer
disposed  to  support  a  cause  which  its  own  lead-
ers had  surrendered  as  hopeless.  They  accordingly
passed  over  in  large  bodies  to  the  other  side.  Of
their  officers  many  hastened  to  attach  themselves
to  one  or  other  of  the  triumvirs.  -The  younger  men,
to  whom  war  had  not  become  a  trade,  and  who  might
hope  for  distinction  in  another  career,  were  glad  to

234  HISTORY  OF  THE  ROMANS CH.  xxvn.

renounce  for  ever  a  profession  which  they  had
embraced  perhaps  in  a  moment  of  blind  enthusiasm.
Such  a  man  was  Horace,  who  had  offered  his  services
to  Brutus  together  with  young  Cicero,  the  orator's
son,  and  doubtless  many  other  generous  students  of
the  Athenian  lecture-rooms.  Horace  lived  to  merit
the  favour  of  Octavius,  and  to  repay  it  with  immortal
verse.  In  his  days  of  ease  and  security  he  could
afford  to  raise  a  smile  against  himself  as  the  runaway
of  Philippi,  who  abandoned  his  shield  to  expedite  his
flight,  while  the  braggarts  of  the  morning  lay  sprawl-
ing in  the  dust.1  It  would  have  been  impolitic
perhaps  to  remind  even  the  kindest  of  patrons  of  the
previous  action  on  that  same  field,  in  which  the
Brutians  drove  the  Csesareans  before  them,  seized
their  camp,  and  pierced  their  general's  litter ;  but
history  may  restore  the  recreant  minstrel  to  the
honours  he  abjured,  and  claim  for  him  his  rightful
share  in  that  ineffectual  victory.

Some  however  of  the  most  illustrious  of  the
Antonius  surviving  nobility  carried  over  a  few  fol-
Sauonthoef  lowers  to  Thasos,  which  of  all  the  ^Egean
provinces?  islands  lay  nearest  to  the  scene  of  action.
mum?toavius  The  command  of  the  sea  gave  them  the
means  of  communicating  with  the  detach-
ments of  their  force  which  had  been  left  in  Asia,  and
also  with  their  fleet  in  the  Ionian  gulf.  Valerius
Messala,  who  had  stood  next  to  the  liberators  them-
selves, in  influence  and  authority  among  them  2,  and
who  headed  this  band  of  fugitives,  now  counselled

1  Hor.  Od.  ii.  7.

2  Veil.  ii.  71.:  "  Messala  fulgentissimus  juvenis  proximus  in  illis
castris  Bruti  et  Cassii  auctoritati." Horace  addressed  an  old  com-
rade with  the  words,

"  Te  rursus  in  bellum  resorbens

Unda  fretis  tulit  sestuosis."

Is  this  merely  a  metaphor,  or  had  the  poet  in  his  mind's  eye  a  vision
of  the  flotilla  which  he  had  seen  wafting  the  fugitives  across  the
high  seas?

A.C.712-B.C.42.  T'NPER THE EMPIRE.  235

submission ;  but  while  he  with  L.  Bibulus  and  others
gave  in  his  adhesion  to  Antonius,  the  rest  joined  the
armaments  of  Cassius  Parmensis,  Clodius,  Turulius,
and  the  young  Cicero,  and  betook  themselves  to  the
standards  of  Murcus  or  of  Sextus  Pompeius,  which
still  floated  triumphantly  in  the  West.  The  opposite
half  of  the  Eoman  possessions  fell  at  once  into  the
hands  of  the  victors.  While  Octavius,  whose  health
precluded  him  from  more  active  exertions,  prepared
to  return  to  Italy,  Antonius  undertook  the  govern-
ment of  the  Asiatic  provinces,  and  the  consolidation
o£  the  authority  of  the  triple  league  over  the  de-
pendent potentates  of  the  Eastern  frontier.  At  the
same  time  the  presence  of  a  large  and  still  augment-
ing hostile  force  in  Sicily,  Sardinia,  and  the  seas
surrounding  Italy,  compelled  them  to  grasp  the  con--
trol  of  the  provinces  nearest  the  capital  also;  and
under  pretence  that  Lepidus,  their  absent  colleague,
was  intriguing  with  Sextus,  they  assigned  to  them-
selves the  supreme  command  in  Spain,  the  Cisalpine,
and  the  two  provinces  of  Africa.  They  deigned  in-
deed to  intimate  to  Lepidus  that  the  districts  last
mentioned  should  be  restored  to  him,  if  he  should
succeed  in  clearing  himself  from  the  charge  advanced
against  him ;  but  if  he  presumed  to  resist  their
decree,  Octavius  was  prepared  to  coerce  him  with  an
overwhelming  force.  Lepidus  however  had

.,,  ,,  ,,  L ,  i  ...  j They  compel

neither  the  strength  nor  the  spirit  to  de-  tepid™  to

r -\ i •  ic TT  •! • J  J j. surrender  the

fend  himself. He  was  easily  induced  to  command  in
make  the  submission  required,  and  was  re-  comennum-

J J -J/L ii.  -ft. r ji  •  J- <*If  with  the

warded  with  the  giit  ot  the  provinces  ot  government  of
Africa. Meanwhile  the  veterans pressed
their  demands  for  lands  and  money. Octavius  un-
dertook to  make  new  assignments  of  territory,  and
formed  new  colonies  in  Italy,  while  Anto-
nius proceeded  to  repeat  the  same  course  of  Antonius8^
exaction  a.nd  plunder  throughout  the  East
which  had  already  ranked  the  name  of  Brutus  among

236  HISTORY OF THE ROMAN'S  CH.  xxvu.

the  spoilers  of  Asia.  He  had  the  merit  at  least  of
proclaiming  without  reserve  the  motive  of  his  de-
mands. You  deserve  death  for  rebellion,  he  declared
to  the  Pergamenes ;  this  penalty  1  will  remit ;  but  I
want  money,  for  I  have  twenty-eight  legions,  which
with  their  auxiliary  battalions  amount  to  1 70,000
men,  besides  cavalry  and  detachments  in  other  quar-
ters.1 I  leave  you.  to  conceive  what  a  mass  of
money  must  be  required  to  maintain  such  arma-
ments. My  colleague  has  gone  to  Italy  to  divide  its
soil  among  these  soldiers,  and  to  expel,  so  to  speak,
tJie  Italians  from  their  own  country.  Your  lands
we  do  not  demand ;  but  instead  thereof  we  will  have
money.  And  when  you  hear  how  easily,  after  all,
we  shall  be  contented,  you  will,  ive  conceive,  be
satisfied  to  pay  and  be  quit  of  us.  We  demand
only  the  same  sum  which  you.  have  contributed
during  the  last  two  years  to  our  adversaries ;  that
is  to  say,  the  tribute  of  ten  years ;  but  our  neces-
sities compel  us  to  insist  upon  receiving  this  sum
within  tiuelve  months*  The  case  of  the  Pergamenes
was  common  to  all  the  states  which  had  submitted  to
the  republican  proconsuls.  On  Xanthus,  Rhodes,  and
Athens,  and  other  cities  which  had  suffered  still  more
severely  in  consequence  of  their  resistance  to  Brutus,
the  conqueror  bestowed  favours  and  immunities :  but
his  hand  fell  heavy  upon  Phrygia,  Mysia,  Gallograecia,
Cappadocia,  Cilicia,  Ccele-Syria,  Palestine,  Itursea,
and  the  other  districts  of  Syria.  The  treasures  indeed
he  grasped  at  were  mostly  squandered  before  they

1  Appian  {B.C.  v.  5.)  says  that  the  number  of  legions  to  which
lands  and  gratuities  were  promised  on  the  establishment  of  the  tri-
umvirate  amounted  to  forty-three,  and  supposes  that  the  smaller
number  here  mentioned,  was  that  to  which  they  were  reduced  by  the
losses  of  the  campaign,  which  seems  a  very  unsatisfactory  explana-
tion. I  should  rather  suppose  the  fifteen  legions  to  be  the  8/j.i\os
tTfpov  crrparov,  which  I  have  rendered  loosely  in  the  text,  and  the
twenty -eight  those  which  were  engaged  in  the  actual  campaign.

2  Appian,  /.  c. The  demand  was  eventually  reduced  to  nine  years'
tribute  within  two  vears.

A.U.712-B.C.42.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  237

reached  his  hands  by  flatterers  and  parasites,  the
ministers  of  his  licentious  pleasures ;  and  to  the
despoiled  it  was  little  consolation  that  he  was  more
immoderate  in  rewarding  his  favourites  than  in
chastising  his  foes ;  or  that  his  rude  good  humour
could  endure  to  be  bantered  by  the  associates  of  his
revels.1

Among  other  political  affairs,  the  triumvir  decided
the  appeals  of  rival  claimants  to  dependent  cieopatra
kingdoms ;  and  in  these  cases  he  was  swayed  *e»*vitunter~
by  his  own  wanton  passions  not  less  than  by  Autoniu*-
the  demands  of  his  policy.  On  his  passage  through
Cilicia,  whither  he  arrived  in  the  summer  of  713,  he
was  met  by  Cleopatra,  who  sallied  forth  from  Alex-
andria to  deprecate  the  wrath  of  the  conqueror,  con-
scious of  her  crime  in  withholding  aid  from  the
avengers  of  her  lover's  murder.  She  might  indeed
reasonably  allege  the  imminent  peril  to  which  she
had  been  subjected  by  the  legions  of  Cassius  which
menaced  her  unprotected  realm :  nevertheless  she
could  plead  some  efforts  in  the  cause  of  the  trium-
virs ;  she  could  declare  that  the  armament  she  had
equipped  for  Bolabella  had  only  been  detained  in
port  by  stress  of  weather,  and  that  she  was  prepared
to  accompany  the  expedition  in  person,  had  she  not
been  prevented  by  sickness.  It  was  not  however  the
intrinsic  strength  of  her  arguments,  but  the  beauty
and  genius  by  which  they  were  enforced,  that  over-
came the  amorous  Roman.  She  had  quitted  her
capital  for  the  coast  of  Cilicia,  and  as-  Her»Piendid
cended  the  Cydnus,  in  a  bark  with  gilded  eiui''asc-
stern  and  purple  sails,  rowed  with  silver  oars  to  the
sound  of  pipes  and  lutes.  The  goddess  of  Love  was
seen  reclining  under  a  spangled  canopy,  attended  by
Cupids,  Graces,  and  Nereids,  and  the  air  around
seemed  perfumed  with  the  odours  of  Olympus.  As

1  Plut.  Anton.  25.

238  'HISTOKY  OF  THE  ROMANS CH.  xxvn.

she  approached  the  quay  of  Tarsus  the  people  rushed
to  behold  the  brilliant  spectacle,  and  left  the  pro-
consul alone  on  his  tribunal  in  the  forum.  When  he
summoned  her  to  his  presence,  she  replied  by  invit-
ing him  to  wait  upon  herself,  and  when  he  gallantly
complied  his  doom  was  sealed.1  Antonius,  who  had
first  seen  and  admired  the  queen  of  Egypt  in  the
suite  of  Gabinius,  but  prudently  abstained  from  ri-
valry with  his  master  Caesar,  now  submitted  to  be
the  slave  of  her  wildest  caprices,  and  the  instrument
of  her  most  barbarous  mandates.  At  her  instigation
he  caused  the  wretched  Arsinoe  to  be  murdered  at
the  altar  of  Artemis  in  Miletus,  and  compelled  the
citizens  of  Tyre  and  Aradus  to  surrender  to  her  ven-
geance some  illustrious  suppliants  who  had  invoked
their  protection.  Her  brother  and  consort  Ptolemaeus
she  had  already  removed,  as  was  surmised,

She  fascinates ,  .  -n i i • i  »  i  i • ,  i

the  triumvir, by  poison. Jb  ollowmg;  her  to  Alexandria  the

who  follows  J.r . ,  . , s  .

hertpAiexan-  triumvir  devoted  the  autumn  and  winter  to
autlSn  of  the  unrestrained  enjoyment  of  luxury  and
sloth.  He  relinquished  the  duties  of  an
imperator,  assumed  the  ordinary  dress  of  the  Greeks,
frequented  the  temples,  gymnasiums,  and  museums
of  the  professors,  as  a  private  sojourner  in  the  capital
of  Oriental  philosophy  ;  and  thus  offered  up  the  pride
of  the  Koman  proconsul  upon  the  shrine  of  the  god-
dess of  his  lawless  affections.2

Octavius  meanwhile  was  master  of  half  the  Roman
octavinsin  world,  and,  still  more,  he  continued  master
metres  for  of  himself.  On  his  way  towards  Eome  the
"idie^.8  "  sickness  under  which  he  had  recently  suf-
fered attacked  him  with  redoubled  violence,  and  his
life  was  in  imminent  danger.  But  Providence  spared

1  Plutarch,  Anton.  26. Athenaeus  (iv.  29.)  commemorates  in  con-
siderable detail  the  magnificence  of  Cleopatra's  fete,  and  Plutarch
notices  the  vain  attempts  the  rude  Roman  made  to  rival  the  taste  of
the  Egyptian. Comp.  Lucan,  x. 110.  foil.:  "  Nondum  translates
Eomana  in  saecula  luxus."

2  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  11.;  Plutarch,  Anton.  28.:  Athenseus,  /.  c.

A.U.713-B.C.4I.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  239

iiim  for  the  great  work  which  he  had  to  do,  and  of
which  his  rival  was  manifestly  incapable.  Italy
awaited  in  breathless  exhaustion  the  violence  which
she  must  expect  to  suffer.  While  Antonius  under-
took to  extort  the  treasures  requisite  for  the  payment
of  the  soldiery,  he  left  to  his  colleague  the  more
delicate  and  perilous  task  of  assigning  them  their
promised  estates,  and  settling  them  in  colonies
throughout  Italy.  Every  veteran  was  to  receive
from  fifty  to  three  hundred  jugers  of  land,  the
population  of  unfriendly  cities  was  to  be  expelled
to  make  room  for  them,  and  when  these  confisca-
tions proved  insufficient,  the  exchange,  purchase  or
surrender  of  still  ampler  territories  was  to  be  ne-
gotiated. But  no  remittances  came  from  Asia  to
Italy ;  the  exchequer  of  the  capital  was  exhausted ;
twenty-seven  legions  of  disbanded  veterans  clamoured
for  the  fulfilment  of  their  compact :  whole  cities  with
their  adjacent  districts  were  ceded  to  them;  confiscation  c,r
and  the  spoliation  spread  from  the  suburban  lands  'm  Italjr-
lands  to  remote  tracts,  from  municipal  to  private  pos-
sessions. Even  loyalty  to  the  Caesarean  party  proved
of  no  avail :  the  faithful  Mantua  shared  the  fate  of
its  neighbour  the  disaffected  Cremona ;  and  the  little
township  of  Andes  in  the  Mantuan  territory  was  in-
volved in  the  calamities  of  its  metropolis.  The  con-
fiscations indeed  in  the  Transpadane  province  had
commenced  upon  the  first  formation  of  the  triple
league,  when  Pollio  was  appointed  to  command  there
for  Antonius.  The  legatus,  himself  a  lover  of  litera-
ture, had  extended  his  sympathy  to  the  youthful  poet
Virgil,  who  was  one  of  the  sufferers  by  this  first  con-
fiscation. Virgil's  modest  patrimony  had  been  re-
stored to  him,  but  it  was  menaced  again  by  this
second  assignment ;  and  it  is  to  the  pilgrimage  he
now  made  to  Rome,  to  his  application  to  Maecenas,
the  councillor  of  Octavius,  and  to  Octavius  himself,
that  we  owe  the  piece  which  stands  first  in  the  series

240  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvil.

of  his  undoubted  works,  and  eventually  perhaps  the
composition  of  his  two  immortal  poems,  which  drew
their  inspiration  from  the  fountain  of  imperial  favour.
Virgil  was  treated  with  kindness,  and  his  petition
crowned  with  success;  but  his  good  fortune  was  a
rare  exception  to  the  calamity  which  overwhelmed
many  thousand  proprietors.  Three  of  his  most  ce-
lebrated rivals  in  literature,  Horace,  Tibullus,  and
Propertius,  were  involved  in  the  same  sweeping
confiscation.1  The  condition  of  the  Ofellus  of  Ho-
race's satire,  who  cultivates  as  a  labourer  the  fields
of  which  he  had  been  dispossessed  as  a  landlord,  and
consoles  himself  with  sage  reflections  on  the  per-
petual flux  of  property  from  hand  to  hand2,  was
realized  by  a  large  class  of  rural  proprietors,  among
whom  the  descendants  of  the  Sullan  colonists  were
perhaps  the  most  indignant  and  the  least  commise-
rated. But  this  was  not  a  time  in  which  such  in-
justice could  be  perpetrated  with  impunity.  The
elements  of  war  were  fermenting  throughout  the
peninsula ;  thousands  of  broken  fortunes  were  sud-
denly thrown  into  the  floating  mass  of  discontent,
which  wanted  only  this  ingredient  to  boil  over  in  a
new  revolution.

The  consuls  of  the  year  713  were  L.  Antonius,
the  triumvir's  brother,  and  for  the  second
L.  AntimiM  time  Servilius  Isauricus.  Lucius  watched
vuiuiiMo-  with  ambitious  aspirations  the  renewed  dis-
tractions of  Italy.  He  tampered  with  the
Ca3sarean  veterans,  affirming  that  the  upstart  Oc-
tavius,  an  unworthy  heir  to  the  great  warrior,  was
intriguing  to  undermine  his  nobler  colleague.  At
the  same  time  he  listened  to  the  murmurs  of  the
dispossessed  Italians,  who,  thronging  into  the  city
with  their  wives  and  children,  made  the  temples
and  forums  resound  with  their  groans  and  impreca-

1  Hor.  Ep.  ii.  2.  50.;  Tibull.  i.  1.  19.;  Propert  iv.  1.  129.

2  Hor.  Sat.  ii.  2.  112.

A.C.713-B.C.41.  UNDER THE KM  PI  RE.  241

tions.1  He  condoled  with  them  on  their  sufferings,
and  offered  himself  as  their  advocate  in  the  senate
or  their  leader  in  the  field.  Lucius  acted  in  consort
with  Fill  via,  a  woman  whose  roving  passions  had
at  last  fixed  on  a  husband  whom  she  could  not
retain.  In  order  to  recover  possession  of  the  man
she  lusted  after,  she  was  eager  to  fan  the  flames
of  civil  war  ;  for  she  knew  that  nothing  but  a  strong
political  exigency  could  rouse  him  from  his  volup-
tuous slumbers.2  In  this  crisis  both  Lepidus
and  Servilius  shrank  from  action.  The  hMdtaiWni
intrinsic  justice  of  the  cause  may  have
animated  some  nobler  spirits,  such  as  Tiberius  Nero,
but  the  majority  of  the  republican  chiefs  favoured
any  movement  which  might  afford  them  a  chance
of  regaining  their  ascendancy.  Lucius  indeed  pro-
claimed himself  the  defender  of  his  brother's  in-
terests, and  assumed  the  surname  of  Pietas,  to  sig-
nalize his  fraternal  zeal.3  Octavius,  whose  position
was  eminently  perplexing,  offered  ample  concessions.
But  the  consul's  aims  were  really  selfish  ;  the  in-
creasing difficulties  of  the  times,  enhanced  by  im-
pending famine  in  the  city,  and  the  unchecked  turbu-
lence of  the  urban  population,  inspired  him  with  the
most  flattering  hopes.  Before  the  completion  of  his
year  of  office  he  threw  off  the  mask,  joined  Fulvia  at
Pra3neste,  and  unfurled  his  banner  to  the  breezes  of
disaffection  from  whatever  quarter  they  might  blow.
Formidable  indeed  were  the  forces  which  the  new
allies  had  at  their  command.  While  the  ne  effects  a

_  ..  i • j  • i  formidable

veteran  leg-ions  insisted  on  their  discharge,  combination

®  against  Octu-

the  consul  had  obtained  authority  to  levy  vius ;

six  fresh  corps,  and  Calenus  promised  to  bring  him

1  Appian,  B.C.  v.  12.

2  Martial  has  preserved  an'epigram  ascribed  in  his  day  to  Octavius
himself,  in  which  the  writer  charges  Fulvia  in  language  of  "  true
Kotnan  plainness,"  that  is,  of  shameless  coarseness,  with  having  fruit-
lessly courted  him  in  revenge  for  one  of  her  husband's  infidelities.
Martial,  xi.  20.  3  Dion,  xlviii.  5.

YOL.  III.  R

242  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvtt.

eleven  more  which  were  stationed  on  either  side  of
the  Alps.  '  The  talents  of  Ventidius  were  also  placed
at  his  disposal ;  even  Pollio  countenanced  his  enter-
prise, and  money  flowed  to  him  from  the  provinces
in  the  east  or  the  west  which  were  administered  by
his  brother's  lieutenants.  He  excited  resistance  to
the  authority  of  Octavius  in  the  provinces  under  his
command,  and  beheld  with  satisfaction  the  increasing
power  of  Sextus  in  the  islands,  and  the  threatening
attitude  of  Domitius,  who  maintained  a  republican
armament  in  the  Ionian  gulf.  Octavius,  on  the
other  hand,  had  only  four  legions  under  arms  in
Italy,  together  with  the  praetorian  cohorts  attached
to  his  own  person.  He  promptly  recalled  Salvi-
dienus  from  Spain,  whither  he  was  conducting  a
force  of  six  legions.  His  want  of  money  he  supplied
by  drawing  largely  upon  some  hoards  yet,  it  appears,
untouched  in  the  Capitol,  and  borrowing  from  the
rich  temples  of  Antium,  Lanuvium,  Nemus,  and
Tibur.  But  the  military  genius  and  devoted  en-
thusiasm of  his  friend  Agrippa  were  of  more  service
to  him  than  either  men  or  money.  Though  com-
pelled for  a  moment  to  abandon  Eome  itself  to  a
superior  force,  he  profited  by  treachery  in  the  ene-
my's camp,  and  soon  reduced  Lucius  to  the  necessity

of  retiring  towards  the  Cisalpine. The  re-
- .  •  j  T» •  i
treating army occupied  Perusia, a  place

of  uncommon  strength,  where  it  might
hope  to  await  in  safety  the  arrival  of  succours  from
Pollio  and  Ventidius,  while  Fulvia  despatched  some
hasty  levies  under  Plancus  to  its  assistance.  But
the  first  cloud  of  disaster  discomfited  these  faithless
auxiliaries.  Pollio  stopped  short  at  Eavenna ;  Ven-
tidius came  no  nearer  than  Ariminum ;  Plancus  kept
close  within  the  defences  of  Spoletium.  Octavius
drew  his  lines  round  the  impregnable  works  of  Pe-
rusia, and  sat  himself  down  to  reduce  the  fugitives
by  famine.  Lucius  made  a  furious  sally,  Ventidius

A.U.713-B.C.41.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  243

essayed  a  diversion ;  but  neither  could  obtain  any
effectual  advantage.  The  Antonians  became  more
and  more  pressed  for  provisions  ;  but  their  leader
was  obstinate,  they  themselves  were  pitiless.  Then
was  consummated  one  of  the  most  frightful  acts
of  all  recorded  history:  unable  to  feed  the  useless
crowd  of  slaves  which  thronged  their  quarters,  and
apprehensive  lest,  if  allowed  to  leave  the  city,  their
flight  should  betray  to  the  enemy  the  extent  to
which  famine  was  pressing  upon  them,  they  refused
rations  to  the  miserable  multitude,  and  at  the  same
time  forbade  their  egress.  While  Lucius  and  his
soldiers  barely  supported  life  on  the  scantiest  daily
allowance,  the  slaves  perished  before  their  eyes,  and
were  hastily  shovelled  into  the  earth  as  they  fell,
that  the  smoke  of  the  funeral  pyres  might  not
advertise  the  ene-my  of  the  mortality  occurring
within  the  walls.  The  progress  of  the  The  Permian
Perusian  famine  was  slow,  but  it  failed  not  L-^ntonius
to  accomplish  the  views  of  the  besieger.  aSaS  Spared.
Lucius  was  compelled  at  last  to  capitulate,  and  the
conqueror  appears  to  have  allowed  him  to  treat  for
more  favourable  terms  than  his  circumstances  could
have  encouraged  him  to  claim.  While  every  in-
dulgence was  guaranteed  to  the  combatants,  the
city  itself  was  to  become  the  scapegoat  of  the  insur-
rection. It  was  only  saved  from  plunder  by  the
furious  act  of  one  of  its  own  citizens,  who  fired  it
and  consumed  it  to  ashes.1  The  victors,  baulked
of  their  prey,  turned  their  vengeance  upon  the  most
illustrious  of  their  captives,  and  either  massacred
them  promiscuously,  or  forced  their  reluctant  leader
to  surrender  them  to  judicial  punishment.  A  story
obtained  currency  among  a  certain  class  of.  political
pamphleteers,  that  Octavius  selected  three  hundred
of  the  number,  and  sacrificed  them  to  the  shade

1  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  49.
R  2

244  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvii.

of  the  murdered  demigod  Julius.1  Such  an  act,  it
must  be  remarked,  would  have  been  totally  alien
from  the  spirit  of  the  national  observances,  whatever
may  be  thought  of  its  harmony  with  the  character
of  a  partner  in  the  proscriptions.

Lucius  escaped  with  his  life,  and  his  conqueror
The  insurrec-  even  f°un(i  it  his  interest,  at  no  distant
UP"  MbrA^eto-  period,  to  appoint  him  to  a  provincial  com-
"gains"'ri6uea  mand.  His  adherents  Pollio,  Plancus,  Cras-
octavius.  sug^  an(j  Ateius,  let  their  arms  drop  from
their  hands.  The  first  allowed  himself  to  be  super-
seded in  the  Cisalpine  by  a  trustier  Octavian,  Alfenus
Varus ;  the  second  abandoned  his  soldiers  and  fled  to
Athens  in  company  with  Fulvia :  others  escaped  to
Antonius  in  Egypt,  while  even  Domitius  and  Sextus
profited  by  the  fragments  of  the  shattered  conspiracy.
Ventidius  still  kept  some  legions  together ;  but  he
made  no  hostile  movement,  and  Octavius  seems  to
have  abstained  from  molesting  him.  Calenus  alone
remained  at  the  head  of  a  large  force  ;  but  he  too  was
careful  not  to  exasperate  a  placable  antagonist,  and
his  death  occurred  opportunely  for  the  establishment
of  peace,  and  the  undisputed  supremacy  of  Octavius
in  the  West.  If  throughout  this  campaign  the  allies
of  Antonius  had  proved  themselves  lukewarm  or  un-

1  Suet.  Oct.  15. :  "  Scribunt  quidam."  Dion,  xlviii.  14. :  us  \6yos
ye  exc.  Vclleius  says,  "  Magis  ira  railitum  quatn  voluntate  sawitum
duds,"  and  Appian  takes  a  similar  view.  Such,  no  doubt,  was  the
account  given  by  Octavius  himself  in  his  memoirs,  and  followed  by
Nicolaus  of  Damascus.  Seneca  speaks  of  the  "  Perusinaj  arse,"  as  a
•well- known  story:  still  I  think  it  is  improbable;  for  if  the  massacre
had  been  made  under  colour  of  a  religious  sacrifice,  Octavius  would
not  have  disguised  it;  at  all  events  Dion  would  have  found  it  re-
corded in  the  national  archives,  from  which  he  drew  so  much  of  his
information.  Compare  the  distorted  account  of  the  sacrifice  of  Mucius
Scaevola,  where  Valerius  Maximus  has  substituted  jugularetur  (ix.
11.  2.)  for  the  vulneraretur  of  Cicero  (pro  Rose.  Amer,  12.).  Observe
also  the  suspicious  recurrence  of  the  number  300,  the  same  assigned
to  the  apocryphal  massacre  of  republicans  by  Caesar  after  Thapsus,
of  legionaries  by  Antonius  at  Brundisium,  of  senators  in  the  pro-
scription.

A.C.713-B.C.41.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  245

faithful  to  his  interests,  they  were  not  without  an
excuse  in  the  reserve  with  which  their  chief  had
dissruised  his  own  intentions.  He  had  detained  their

O

emissaries  at  Alexandria  through  the  winter,  while
their  operations  were  in  progress,  and  it  was  not  till
the  spring,  when  the  elements  of  the  rebellion  were
dispersed,  that  he  tore  himself  from  the  fascinations
of  Egypt,  like  a  man  roused  from  sleep  after  a
drunken  debauch ',  and  advanced  deliberately  by  the
route  of  Tyre,  Cyprus,  and  Ehodes.  But  he  had  not
been  unemployed.  He  had  been  intriguing  both  with
Sextus  and  Domitius  :  with  the  former  he  entered
into  an  agreement  for  mutual  support  against  the
master  of  Italy,  and  he  prevailed  upon  the  latter  to
renounce  the  hopeless  cause  for  which  his  father  had
perished  at  Pharsalia,  to  place  his  vessels  at  his  dis-
posal, and  accompany  him  across  the  Ionian  gulf.

Octavius  had  already  pacified  Italy,  and  was  oc-
cupied in  re-organizing  the  administration

f.t ri 11-  •  i  • i i j i  Apprehension!

ot  the  (iallic  provinces,  which  had  been  so  of  another
long  in  the  hands  of  his  enemies,  when  he
was  apprised  of  this  new  attack. Brtmdisium  was
menaced  by  Antonius,  while  Sextus  was  hovering  on
the  coast  of  Lucania  and  Apulia. Agrippa  advanced
to  confront  this  new  combination,  and  Octavius  fol-
lowed as  speedily  as  his  feeble  health  would  permit.
Antonius brought over troops from Macedonia,
Sextus  besieged  Thurii  and  Consentia ;  the  Csesarean
veterans  nocked  once  more  to  the  scene  of  blood  and
plunder  ;  another  civil  war  was  smouldering  in  the
embers  of  the  Perusian  conflagration. But  it  was
now  by  the  passions  of  the  soldiers  rather  than  of  the
commanders  that  this  renewal  of  horrors  was  threat-
ened. The  armed  bands  which  roamed  the  The«oidier»
fields  of  Italy  demanded  occupation, and  cweft'o6'^
compelled  their  leaders  to  find  them  work.  tiocn.mm
When  however  they  came  to  measure  their  strength

1  Pint.  Anton.  30.

246  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXVII.

together,  to  calculate  their  resources,  to  discuss
the  causes  and  prospects  of  another  struggle,  they
came  to  an  agreement  among  themselves,  and  in-
sisted upon  its  ratification  by  their  chiefs.  The
death  of  Fulvia,  in  the  spring  of  the  year
0  The  714,  smoothed  the  way  to  a  reconciliation.
Neglected  and  perhaps  rebuked  by  her  hus-

with  band  for  her  presumptuous  interference  in
public  affairs,  which  had  cost  him  the  loss
of  so  many  legions,  she  fell  sick  at  Sicyon,
whither  she  had  repaired  to  meet  him  on  his  route
from  Egypt,  and  there  died.  Maecenas,  Pollio,  and
Cocceius  negotiated  the  terms  of  a  new  arrangement
between  the  triumvirs  in  the  course  of  the  summer.
Octavius  had  divorced  Clodia  in  resentment  at  the
perfidy  of  her  family,  and  had  straightway  united
himself  with  the  illustrious  house  of  the  Scribonii.
But  on  the  death  of  Fulvia,  Antonius  in  his  turn
was  at  liberty  to  seek  an  alliance  with  the  family  of
his  colleague  by  marrying  his  sister  Octavia.  Scri-
bonia,  it  seems,  was  already  pregnant  by  Octavius,
and  the  new  consort  of  Antonius  was  about  to  give
birth  to  a  child  of  a  former  husband  Marcellus.  l
Pollio  also  had  two  sons  born  to  him  nearly  at  this
time,  though  the  dates  of  their  birth  are  not  accu-
rately known.  The  near  coincidence  of  all  these
distinguished  births  is  connected  with  one  of  the
most  intricate  questions  of  literary  history.  In  his
virgii-8  fourth  fourth  Eclogue,  addressed  to  Pollio,  Virgil
Eclogue.  celebrates  the  peace  of  Brundisium,  and
anticipates,  apparently,  the  birth  of  a  wondrous  boy,
who  shall  restore  the  Saturnian  age  of  gold,  and  rule

1  Dion,  xlviii.  31.  This  child,  if  it  was  ever  born,  could  not  have
been  M.  Marcellus,  the  "Tn  Marcellus  efis"  of  Virgil  (Mn.  vi.  884.);
for  the  latter,  if  any  credit  can  be  given  to  the  statement  of  Proper-
tins,  "  Occidit  et  misero  steterat  vicesimus  annus,"  must  have  been
bom  A.U.  711,  B.C.  43,  as  he  certainly  died  B.C.  23.  Being  sedile
at  the  time,  we  cannot  suppose  that  he  was  really  less  than  twenty
years  of  age.

A.U.714-B.C.40.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  247

the  world  with  all  his  father's  excellence.  The  glow-
ing language  in  which  this  reign  of  happiness  is  de-
picted breathes  some  portion  of  the  spirit,  while  it
appropriates  almost  every  image,  of  the  Messianic
predictions.  We  are  impelled  to  inquire  to  whom
among  the  most  illustrious  offspring  of  this  auspi-
cious epoch  it  may  be  fitly  referred.  The  noble
children  above  mentioned  have  been  severally  put
forward  as  candidates  for  the  honour ;  but  when
every  allowance  has  been  made  for  the  vague  lan-
guage of  poetry  and  prophecy,  no  one  of  them  can
be  held  to  satisfy  the  conditions  required ;  and  after
all  their  claims  have  been  weighed  and  dismissed,
we  are  still  at  a  loss  for  an  object  to  whom,  in  the
mind  of  the  writer,  the  sublime  vaticination  can
consistently  be  applied.  We  may  presume  however
that  the  hope  of  a  permanent  pacification,  and  the
yearning  for  an  era  of  social  tranquillity,  were  no  less
ardent  than  general  among  the  citizens  of  the  dis-
tracted commonwealth ;  and  we  may  perhaps  be
content  to  suppose  that,  in  adapting  the  strains  of
his  inspired  original,  Virgil  interpreted  the  common
feelings  of  his  countrymen,  and  darkly  shadowed
forth  the  character  of  the  coming  age  itself,  under
the  image  of  an  offspring  of  the  gods,  a  mighty
emanation  from  Jove. 1

1  Virg.  Eel  iv.  49.:

"  Cara  deum  soboles,  magnum  Jovis  incrementum."

I  am  constrained  to  adopt  Heyne's  solution  of  this  curious  enigma.
Gibbon  (Z>.  Sf  F.  ch.  xx.)  leaves  it  unattempted,  and  contents  himself
with  remarking  that  "  the  different  claims  of  an  elder  and  younger
son  of  Pollio,  of  Livia,  of  Drusus,  of  Marccllus,  are  found  to  be  in-
compatible with  chronology,  history,  and  the  good  sense  of  Virgil."
Octavius  himself,  strange  to  say,  has  been  also  put  forward  as  a  can-
didate. There  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing  Virgil  to  have  been
acquainted  with  the  prophetic  portions  of  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  if
not  directly,  at  least  through  the  medium  of  the  so-called  Sibylline
oracles.  Nor  can  we  doubt  that  the  Jewish  interpreters  them-
selves favoured  the  idea  that  Isaiah's  predictions  were  about  to  be
fulfilled.

248  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvir.

Even  in  a  heathen's  mouth  the  divine  oracles  might
seem  to  retain  some  portion  of  their  pro-

TrniKniillity  , .  . . m,  J. .  „ -

finally  re- phetic  spirit. Ihe  aspirations  ot  the  young

stored  in  Italy. -1 ., .*  in  r I/MI T  , mi

enthusiast  were  not  wholly  uniumlled.  The
peace  of  Brundisium  did  at  least  secure  the  repose  of
Italy.  For  a  period  of  three  hundred  and  fifty  years,
except  one  day's  fighting  in  the  streets  of  Rome,  from
Rhegium  to  the  Rubicon  no  swords  were  again
crossed  in  war.  So  long  a  period  of  tranquillity
among  so  large  a  portion  of  the  human  family  is  a  fact
unparalleled  in  the  history  of  the  world.  Many  of
the  recent  movements,  which  history  ascribes  to  the
ambition  of  chiefs,  were  doubtless  caused  in  reality
by  the  licentious  passions  of  the  soldiery  ;  it  was  the
men  that  forced  their  leaders  to  ravage  provinces  and
to  plunder  towns,  and  even  to  pass  from  one  side  to
another,  as  caprice  or  cupidity  prompted.  But  the
peace  of  Brundisium  finally  consigned  the  centre  of
the  empire  to  the  control  of  the  ablest  of  its  states-
men, and  the  consolidation  of  a  fixed  government  in
Italy  curbed  and  ultimately  crushed  the  spirit  of  in-
subordination. The  treaty  indeed  was  hardly  con-
cluded before  the  troops  of  Octavius  began  to  murmur
angrily  at  the  non-payment  of  the  gratuities  they
expected.  He  withstood  them  with  firmness,  and  now
for  the  first  time  they  learned  that  the  spirit  of  the
great  dictator  had  descended  upon  a  worthy  successor.
They  were  compelled  to  accept  such  terms  as  he  chose
to  offer  them,  and  marched,  abashed  and  humiliated,
in  the  ovation  with  which  the  triumvirs  entered
Rome.  The  nuptials  of  Antonius  and  Octavia  were
celebrated  amidst  general  acclamations,  a  fit  tribute
to  the  bride's  illustrious  virtues.  If  any  woman  could
frustrate  the  wiles  of  Cleopatra,  and  withdraw  her
infatuated  lover  from  the  sphere  of  her  fascinations,
such,  it  was  fondly  hoped,  was  the  fair,  the  modest,
and  the  discreet  Octavia.1  At  the  same  time  a

1  Plutarch  (Ant.  31.)  calls  her  XPW<*  davnaurrbv  yvvaiK6s. Octavia
was  own  sister  to  Octavius. This  writer  is  undoubtedly  mistaken

A.U.7M-B.C.40.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  249

re-distribution  was  made  of  the  provinces.  Scodra
in  Illyricum  now  marked  the  limits  of  the  dominion
assigned  to  Octavius  in  the  West,  and  Antonius  in
the  East.  Lepidus  was  allowed  to  retain  Africa.  Italy
was  declared  to  be  the  common  possession  of  the
triumvirs,  among  wl>om  the  insignificant  Lepidus
almost  ceased  to  be  counted.  Antonius  undertook  to
maintain  the  national  quarrel  with  the  Parthians,
while  his  colleague  charged  himself  with  the  care
of  treating  with  Sextus  Pompeius,  and  reducing  him
by  force  of  arms,  if  every  other  method  should  fail.

Indeed  the  hostile  attitude  still  preserved  by  this
adventurer  seemed,  at  least  to  superficial
observers,  the  only  obstacle  to  the  establish-  toteortatn
ment  of  a  durable  peace.  The  young  Pom-
peius may  be  deemed  perhaps  unfortunate  in  having
had  his  character  drawn  for  us  by  the  unfriendly  hand
of  a  courtier  of  the  Csesarean  family,  who  may  be
suspected  of  a  wish  not  only  to  palliate  his  patron's
crimes,  but  to  blacken  their  adversaries.  Velleius
declares  that  he  was  illiterate  and  rude  in  speech  !,
impetuous  and  headstrong  in  action,  hasty  in  judg-
ment, disloyal  to  his  country  2,  the  freedman  of  his
freedmen,  and  the  slave  of  his  slaves,  envious  of  all
that  was  most  noble,  and  the  creature  of  all  that
was  most  base.  But  in  fact  the  position  assumed  by
Sextus  could  command  neither  favour  nor  justice
from  his  countrymen,  of  whatever  political  predilec-
tions ;  for  he  associated  with  barbarians  and  outlaws,
he  contended  openly  for  his  own  private  objects,  and,

in  saying  she  was  the  daughter  of  C.  Octavius  by  his  first  wife
Ancharia.

1  Veil.  ii.  73.:  "  Scrmone  barbaro." Niebuhr  draws  onr  attention
to  this  circumstance. "  It  is  remarkable,"  he  observes,  "  to  see  how
at  that  time  men  who  did  not  receive  a  thorough  education  would
even  neglect  their  own  language  and  speak  a  barbarous  and  corrupt
jargon." — Led.  on  Pom.  Hist.  ii.  126.

2  Veil.  I.e. :  "Fide  patri  dissimillimus."  This  writer  always  speaks
with  respect  of  the  great  Pompeius;  in  this  place  he  contrasts  his
extirpation  of  the  pirates  with  his  son's  shameful  alliance  with  them.

250  HISTORY OF THE ROMAS6  CH.  xxvn.

while  he  received  the  remnant  of  the  republicans
under  his  banner,  scorned  the  pretence  of  asserting
any  public  cause.  The  parricidal  aim  of  reducing
Home  by  famine  had  been  ascribed  to  the  father ;  it
was  deliberately  adopted  by  the  son.  His  undisputed
command  of  the  sea  enabled  him  to  cut  off  the  corn
ships  from  Africa  and  Egypt,  while  he  held  in  his
own  hands  the  granaries  of  Sicily  and  Sardinia.  Even
in  the  midst  of  the  general  rejoicings  at  the  nuptials
of  Antonius  and  Octavia  the  markets  at  Rome  were
rising  to  famine  prices,  and  the  murmurs  of  the
populace  were  gradually  swelling  into  cries  of  sedition
and  insurrection.  Octavius,  it  was  known,  had  under-
The  people  taken  to  conciliate  or  subdue  the  last  enemy
b^°c^3  of  the  people;  let  him  be  conciliated,  ex-
cuiated.  claimed  the  multitude,  on  his  own  terms.
It  was  only  a  question,  they  declared,  of  the  govern-
ment of  one  or  two  provinces;  let  Sextus  then  be
satisfied,  or  woe  to  the  selfish  tyrants,  who  would  see
the  people  starve  rather  than  let  Sicily  or  Africa  drop
from  their  rapacious  grasp.  Octavius,  with  the  concur-
rence of  his  colleagues,  would  have  diverted  the  rising
storm  by  declaring  war  against  the  public  enemy ;
but  it  was  impossible  to  provide  funds.  An  attempt
to  impose  a  tax  on  slaves  and  legacies,  a  tax,  that  is,
upon  the  richest  class,  excited  hardly  less  general
discontent  than  if  it  had  fallen  upon  the  lowest.  The
Roman  patricians  still  possessed  vast  influence  among
their  clients,  the  rabble  of  the  streets,  and  employed
it  for  their  own  protection.  The  triumvirs  were  as-
sailed with  stones  in  the  Via  Sacra,  and  only  -rescued
from  serious  injury  by  the  swords  of  the  military.
They  were  now  constrained  to  come  to  terms  with
their  antagonist.  They  employed  the  mediation  of
Libo,  the  father-in-law  both  of  Sextus  and  Octavius  :
and  the  populace  surrounding  the  house  of  Mucia,
compelled  her  by  threats  to  plead  with  her  son  the
cause  of  reconciliation.  On  the  other  hand  Sextus  did

A.U.715-B.C.39.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  251

not  lack  advisers  who  urged  him  to  press  his  advan-
tage, and  make  no  peace  till  famine  should  force  his
opponents  to  submit  to  his  dictation.  But  the  giddy
and  frivolous  young  man,  easily  elated  by  the  de-
ference now  paid  him  on  all  sides,  yielded  to  the  first
overtures.  He  agreed  to  confer  with  the  triumvirs
in  person,  and  sailed  to  meet  them  at  Misenum.  The
conference  was  conducted  with  the  same  ceremony
and  precaution  as  that  in  the  island  of  the  Rhenus,
and  the  result  at  which  the  contracting  Treaty,*
powers  arrived  was  similar.  Sextus  was  Misenum-
virtually  admitted  into  partnership  with  the  triumvirs.
On  condition  of  his  withdrawing  his  ships  and  marines
from  the  places  he  occupied  on  the  coast  of  Italy,  he
was  invested  with  full  authority  over  the  three  great
islands  of  the  Tyrrhene  sea,  for  the  same  number  of
years  as  was  assigned  to  the  commands  of  his  collea-
gues. Achaia,  also,  according  to  some  accounts,  fell
to  his  share  in  this  distribution.1  At  the  same  time
an  amnesty  was  granted  to  all  his  adherents,  except-
ing only  the  murderers  of  Caesar ;  the  restitution  of
their  possessions  was  assured  to  them ;  liberty  was
offered  to  the  numerous  slaves  who  had  served  in  his
armaments,  and  to  such  of  his  soldiers  as  were  already
free,  the  usual  military  rewards  of  lands  and  money.
Sextus  promised  in  return  to  supply  the  city  with
corn  from  Sicily  and  Sardinia.  The  contract  was
formally  drawn  up  and  sealed,  and  then  transmitted
to  Rome,  and  consigned  to  the  custody  of  the  Vestal
Virgins.  The  puissant  allies  received  each  other,  in
turn,  at  sumptuous  entertainments,  in  vessels  moored
to  the  mole  of  the  harbour.  The  pretext  for  this
arrangement  was,  that  while  the  chiefs  feasted  to-
gether on  board,  their  numerous  followers  might  be

1  Veil.  ii.  77.;  Dion,  xlviii.  34.  He  was  gratified  moreover  with
compensation  for  his  father's  property  which  Caesar  had  confiscated,
amounting,  we  are  told,  to  fifteen  millions  and  a  half  of  drachmas.
Zonaras,  x.  22.

252  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvn.

accommodated  on  the  shore.  In  fact,  however,  Sextus
could  not  venture  on  land,  nor  the  triumvirs  out  at
sea.  It  was  reported  that  Menodorus,  the  Pompeian
admiral,  urged  his  leader  to  cut  the  moorings  of  his
vessel,  and  carry  off  his  rivals  in  it,  but  that  Sextus
rejected  the  tempting  proposal,  with  the  remark,
Would  that  Menodorus  could  do  this  without  my
order ;  such  treachei*y  might  befit  him  well,  but  not
a  Pompeius.  The  story  wears  a  suspicious  aspect,
and  we  may  reasonably  conceive  that  it  was  accom-
modated to  the  known  character  of  the  faithless
Greek,  who  betrayed,  as  will  hereafter  appear,  all
parties  in  turn.  The  festival  of  reconciliation  was
inaugurated  with  the  betrothal  of  M.  Marcellus,  the
infant  whom  Octavia  had  just  borne  to  her  late  hus-
band, and  the  daughter  of  Sextus.  The  succession  of
consuls  for  four  years  was  determined  :  the  first  pair
were  to  be  Antonius  and  Libo;  the  second  Octavius
and  Sextus;  these  were  to  be  succeeded  by  Cnseus
Domitius,  the  son  of  Lucius,  and  by  Sosius;  and  when
Antonius  and  Octavius  should  have  followed  these  last,
and  completed  their  term,  it  was  hoped  that  their
lust  of  power  would  be  satisfied,  their  own  security
established,  and  that  their  patriotism  would  then
impel  them,  according  to  promise,  to  restore  the
commonwealth  to  freedom.1

1  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  73.  The  treaty  of  Misenum  took  place  A.U.
715.  It  will  be  seen  by  reference  to  the  fasti  that  the  following  years
were  not  respectively  designated  by  the  names  of  these  consuls.  Oc-
tavius may  have  surrendered  his  turn  to  Agrippa  in  717:  certainly
he  was  not  consul  during  the  course  of  these  four  years.  Sextus
Pompeius  never  attained  the  consulship.  The  consul  of  that  name
in  the  year  719  was  another  person  (Dion,  xlix.  18.).  The  names
of  C.  Domitius  and  Sosius  occur  together  in  the  year  722.  An-
tonius became  consul  for  the  second  time  in  720,  and  resigned  on  the
first  day  of  the  year.  Octavius  was  appointed  the  second  time  in
721.  Appian  is  not  to  be  relied  on  in  these  matters.  Drumann
supposes  that  he  meant  to  say  that  the  years  from  720 — 723  were
disposed  of  as  mentioned  in  the  text,  those  from  716 — 719  remaining
under  a  former  arrangement.  For  the  utter  confusion  into  whicli
the  consular  appointments  fell  at  this  time,  see  Dion,  xlviii.  35.,  and
below.

A.B.715-B.c.3'J.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  253

Sextus  now  bent  his  sails  for  Sicily,  while  his  col-
leagues returned  together  to  Rome,  to  en-  Rejoicing,  in
joy  for  a  moment  the  blaze  of  popularity  in  Kome-
which  they  were  at  once  enveloped.  The  city  aban-
doned itself  to  a  delirium  of  joy :  the  civil  wars,  it
was  augured,  were  now  finally  at  an  end ;  the  youth
of  Italy  would  no  longer  be  torn  from  their  father's
hearths;  the  soldiers  no  longer  permitted  to  live
at  free  quarters ;  there  would  be  no  more  confisca-
tion of  lands,  agriculture  would  raise  her  drooping
head,  above  all,  plenty  would  be  restored,  and
abundance  extirpate  the  first  cause  of  war.  The
usurpers,  as  they  passed  along  the  roads,  were  sur-
prised to  hear  themselves  hailed  as  deliverers,  and  to
be  greeted  with  divine  honours.  None  breathed  the
name  of  freedom ;  none  sighed  for  the  republic  in
whose  name  the  great  dictator  had  been  stricken  to
the  ground.  The  new  despots  planted  themselves
firmly  in  his  footsteps.  They  supplied  the  exhausted
ranks  of  the  senate,  as  he  had  done  before  them,
with  foreigners,  soldiers,  freedmen,  and  even,  which
he  had  not  done,  with  slaves.  The  magistracies  were
filled  with  men  unworthy  in  character,  and  not  legally
qualified.  The  praetor's  bench  was  crowded  with  the
vociferous  aspirants  to  official  dignity :  the  consuls'
chairs  were  invaded  month  after  month  by  successive
occupants.  The  triumvirs  flung  honours  and  offices
among  the  gaping  crowd  of  expectants  with  a  liberal
hand,  and  the  subservient  senate  sanctioned  all  their
acts,  past,  present,  and  to  come.1

They  rose  from  this  political  debauch,  and  girded
themselves  again  for  work. Before  the  end  Octaviu.
of  the  year  (715) Octavius  had  betaken  ffl",'™^
himself  to  Gaul,  where  the  Narbonensis  was  ^etE«"sitn°the
troubled by some native  insurrectionary  autumnof-15-
movements,  and  Antonius  had  set  out  from  Rome,  to
lead,  as  he  declared,  the  legions of the republic

1  Dion,  xlviii.  34,  35. ;  Appian,  D.  C-  v.  75.

254  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvn.

against  the  Parthians.  He  distributed  thrones  in
Asia  at  his  own  pleasure  among  the  petitioners  who
came  to  beg  them.  He  gave  Pontus  to  a  son  of
Pharnaces,  Pisidia  to  Amyntas,  Cilicia  to  Polemo,
and  Palestine  to  Herod.  At  the  same  time  he  issued
orders  for  the  muster  and  march  of  troops  eastward.
But  this  was  the  extent  of  his  operations  for  the
Autobus  season.  At  Athens  he  rested  from  the

fatigues  of  military  service,  and  bestowed
'is-ne!  his  whole  time  upon  his  new  wife  Octavia,
as  devotedly,  and  to  all  appearances  as  much  to  his
own  contentment,  as  recently  to  his  paramour  Cleo-
patra. Throughout  the  winter  he  amused  himself
with  throwing  off  all  the  restraints  of  official  dignity ;
and  none  of  those  about  him  was  so  much  shocked
perhaps  as  the  grave  matron  at  his  side,  when  he
dressed  and  feasted  in  the  character  of  Bacchus,  or
relinquished  the  stern  duties  of  a  Eoman  imperator
for  the  trifling  occupations  of  the  Athenian  literati.
But  Antonius,  though  he  scorned  formal  and  conven-
tional restraints,  was  never  long  enslaved  by  his
licentious  caprices.  With  the  return  of  spring  he
returned  to  the  business  of  the  camp.  Once  more
his  door  was  thronged  with  officers,  heralds,  and
orderlies;  again  the  word  of  command  thundered
from  his  lips ;  foreign  embassies,  which  had  long
danced  attendance,  received  his  stern  and  sententious
award ;  decrees  issued  from  his  tribunals,  ships  were
launched,  stores  were  collected,  and  far  and  wide
resounded  the  busy  preparations  for  war.

These  preparations  were  intended  for  the  support

of  Ventidius,  who  in the  autumn  of the

Adventures  of  »•  « »  t i i  •*•

Q.  Labienus.  year  preceding  had  conducted  an  expedi-
tion against  the  Parthians  with  brilliant
success.  Those  daring  enemies  had  seldom  failed,
from  the  day  when  they  triumphed  over  Crassus,  to
seize  the  moments  when  the  legions  were  withdrawn
from  the  frontier,  to  ravage  the  plains  and  even  the

A.C.714-B.C.40.  TINDER THE EMPIRE.  255

cities  of  Syria,  and  menace  them  with  more  per-
manent occupation.  Cassius  however  had  succeeded
in  promoting  discord  in  the  royal  family  of  Parthia.
The  counsels  of  the  invaders  had  been  distracted  by
their  own  dissensions,  and  this  perhaps  alone  had
prevented  them  from  making  a  serious  impression
upon  the  Roman  province.  But  in  the  last  civil  war
the  line  of  the  Euphrates  had  been  denuded  of  its
garrisons,  and  at  the  same  moment  a  Roman  officer
had  tendered  his  services  to  the  foreign  enemy.
Quintus,  the  son  of  Titus  Labienus,  had  escaped
from  the  field  of  Munda,  and  after  Caesar's  death  bad
been  charged  by  the  liberators  with  the  negotiation
of  an  alliance  with  the  Parthian  court.  Orodes  had
kept  him  in  suspense  while  he  watched  the  turn  of
affairs  in  Rome,  and  when  the  day  of  the  proscrip-
tions arrived  the  son  of  the  Caesarean  renegade
despaired  of  safety  in  his  own  country.  He  con-
tinued to  reside  in  the  land  of  his  adoption,  entered
into  the  service  of  the  Parthian  monarch,  and,  when
the  affairs  of  the  triumvirs  seemed  utterly  em-
broiled, persuaded  him  to  make  a  vigorous  effort  to
possess  himself  of  Syria.  The  invaders  crossed  the
Euphrates  in  the  year  713.  Antonius,  summoned  in
haste  to  the  west  by  his  brother  Lucius,  hesitated  for
a  moment  whether  to  plunge  into  the  honourable
perils  of  a  Parthian  campaign,  or  to  confront  his
rival  Octavius,  now  exulting  in  the  capture  of  Peru-
sia,  in  Italy.  His  personal  interests,  or  the  demands
of  his  soldiers,  determined  him  to  the  latter  course.
The  invaders  divided  their  forces  :  Pacorus  occupied
Syria  as  far  south  as  the  borders  of  Palestine  ;  Labi-
enus entered  Asia  Minor,  defeated  and  slew  Decidius
Saxa,  and,  elated  with  his  rapid  successes,  assumed
the  title  of  imperator,  and  by  a  strange  solecism,  the
surname  of  Parthicus.1  But  these  successes  were

1  His  coins  still  exist,  with  the  legend  Q.  Labienus  Parthicns  Imp.,
and  on  the  reverse  a  horse  saddled  and  bridled,  emblematic,  we  may
suppose,  of  his  Parthian  cavalry.

256  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvn.

presently  checked  by  the  arrival  of  Ventidius  with
legions  devoted  to  the  interests  of  Antonius,  and  to
the  person  of  their  leader  his  lieutenant.  Labienus
fled  at  his  approach :  before  he  could  effect  a  junc-
tion with  Pacorus  he  was  overtaken  and  confined  to
the  mountains  of  the  Taurus,  while  the  defenders  of
the  empire  hastened  to  confront  the  Parthians,  whom
they  speedily  defeated  and  drove  across  the  frontier.
Labienus  was  soon  afterwards  taken  and  put  to
death.1

But  the  strength  of  the  Parthian  monarchy  was
ventidiui  not  broken  by  a  single  defeat.  Pacorus  re-
theuparthian"  turned  to  the  attack  in  the  ensuing  spring,
and  measured  his  sword  with  the  gallant
Picenian  in  a  second  and  a  third  battle.  The  last  of
these  encounters  took  place,  it  is  said,  on  the  anniver-
sary of  the  great  disaster  of  Carrha?,  the  disgrace  of
which  was  now  balanced  by  a  glorious  victory,  and
the  slaughter  of  the  invading  general.  Ventidius
abstained  from  pursuing  his  success  on  the  other  side
of  the  Euphrates.  His  courage  was  more  probably
damped  by  the  manifest  inadequacy  of  his  means,
than  by  the  apprehension  of  his  commander's
jealousy,  to  which  the  historians  have  ascribed  it.
There  was  moreover  an  enemy  on  the  flank  whom  it
was  necessary  to  chastise.  Ventidius  besieged  Autio-
chus,  king  of  Commagene,  in  his  city  Samosata,  and
Antonius  soon  arrived  there  from  Athens,  to  receive
his  submission  in  person.  The  mule-jobber  reached
the  summit  of  a  Roman's  ambition ;  he  returned  to
Rome  and  enjoyed  the  gratification  of  a  triumph
won  over  Taurus  and  the  Parthians.2  Antonius
forebore  to  prosecute  the  vengeance  of  Rome  against
the  humbled  invaders,  and  returned,  with  no  persona]

1  Liv.  Epit.  cxxvii.;  Dion, xlvii.  24 — 26.;  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  65
133. ;  Florus,  iv.  9.  ;  Veil.  ii.  78. ;  Plutarch,  Anton.  30,  33.

2  Past.  Capitol,  ann.  DCCXV  (716)  P.  Ventidius  P.  f.  pro  Cos.  ex
Tauro  et  Parthis.

A.U.716-B.C.3?.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  257

accession  of  renown,  to  the  delights  of  the  Grecian
capital.

Meanwhile  the  treaty  of  Misenum  had  completely
failed  in  restoring  peace  in  the  West.  It  is
remarkable  that  Virgil,  in  the  full  flow  of  the  sea  against
his  vaticination  of  a  golden  age,  had  paused
abruptly,  and  admitted  that  for  a  time  some  traces
should  yet  remain  of  the  ancient  wickedness,  that  the
sea  should  again  be  ploughed  by  ships,  another  Argo
sail  under  the  guidance  of  a  second  Tiphys,  another
war  ensue,  and  an  Achilles  arm  once  more  for  the
destruction  of  Troy.  This  sudden  transition,  if  it
does  not  betray  a  later  insertion  in  the  main  texture
of  the  poem,  may  indicate  that  the  parties  to  the
peace  of  Brundisium  already  anticipated  hostilities
with  the  only  remaining  power  which  they  had  not
associated  with  them  in  the  partition  of  the  empire.
In  the  treaty  so  lately  made,  the  prophet  may  have
trembled  for  the  fate  of  his  own  predictions.  But  he
was  speedily  reassured.  Sextus,  it  seems,  had  refused
to  fulfil  his  stipulations,  and  surrender  the  places  he
held  on  the  coast  of  Italy.  It  is  probable  that  he
pleaded  in  excuse  the  forcible  detention  of  Achaia  by
Antonius,  while  the  triumvir  on  his  part  insisted  on
keeping  that  province  in  pledge  for  the  payment  of
some  debts  he  claimed  from  it.1  ^  However  this  may
have  been,  Octavius  resented  the  treachery  and
requited  it.  Menodorus  had  carried  over  to  him  a
fleet  with  three  legions  on  board,  delivering  at  the
same  time  into  his  hands  the  strongholds  of  Sardinia
and  Corsica ;  and  when  Sextus  demanded  the  sur-
render of  the  traitor,  he  availed  himself  of  so  plaus-
ible a  pretext  for  refusing.  Sextus,  haughty  and  im-
petuous, flew  to  arms.  He  descended  in  the  spring
of  716  upon  the  defenceless  cities  of  Campania,
launched  his  corsairs  upon  the  waters  of  the  Tyrrhene
sea,  and  cut  off  from  Kome  her  expected  convoys  of

1  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  77.;  Dion,  xlviii.  45.
VOL.  III.  S

258  ^ HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvu.

grain.  But  Octavius,  with  his  new  accession  of
maritime  force,  could  hope  shortly  to  rival  Neptune's
lieutenant  on  his  own  element.1  He  ordered  ships  to
be  equipped  in  the  ports  of  Ostia  and  Eavenna,  and
transported  legions  from  Illyricum  into  Italy,  while
he  summoned  his  colleagues  from  Athens  and  Car-
thage to  his  assistance.  The  one  obeyed  the  call,  and
repaired  to  Brundisium,  where  the  conference  was
appointed  to  be  held,  but  not  finding  Oetavius  in
attendance,  returned  quickly  to  his  own  provinces,
and  followed  Ventidius,  as  we  have  seen,  within  the
Syrian  frontier ;  the  other,  in  pique,  or  from  indo-
lence, remained  at  home  a  passive  spectator  of  events.
On  the  eve  of  his  departure  from  Brundisium
Antonius  had  addressed  a  letter  to  Octavius,

Naval  engage- .  . . , ,  -  .. , .

ments:  defeat  m  which  he  exhorted  him  in  strong  and

ofOctaviufi.  ,  9 .

perhaps  peremptory  language  to  maintain
the  terms  of  the  recent  alliance,  and  even  threatened
to  demand  Menodorus  for  punishment,  claiming  over
him  the  rights  of  a  master,  as  the  slave  of  Pompeius
Magnus,  whose  property  he  had  acquired.2  But
this  bold  assumption  passed  without  regard.  Oc-
tavius felt  himself  strong  enough  to  act  without
the  aid  of  either  of  his  colleagues.  He  accepted  the
traitor's  services  and  appointed  him  to  a  command.
While  one  of  his  armaments  issued  from  the  ports
of  Etruria  under  Calvisius,  another  was  launched  at
Ravenna.  Octavius  himself  embarked  at  Tarttntum,
and  joined  the  latter  squadron  as  it  stood  across  from
the  Sallentine  promontory  to  the  Lacinian,  while  his
legions  advanced  by  land  to  Ehegium.  It  was  de-
termined to  make  a  combined  and  decisive  attack
upon  the  tyrant  of  the  seas  in  his  Sicilian  strong-
hold. Sextus  despatched  Menecrates  to  confront

1  Dnx  Neptunius. Hor.  Ep.  ix.  7.

2  Appian, B.  C.  v.  79. Dion  calls  him  Menas. The  fourth
of  Horace's  epodes,  inscribed  to  one  Menas,  whose  upstart  pride
is  made  the  object  of  satire,  has been supposed to  refer  to  this
personage.

A.U.716-B.C.38.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  25*J

Calvisius,  while  he  awaited  under  the  defences  of
Mrssanathe  assault  of  Octavius  in  person.  Mene-
crates  sought  the  foe  gallantly  in  his  own  waters.
The  fleets  met  in  the  bay  of  Cumse,  and  the  Pom-
peians,  superior  in  skill  if  not  in  numbers,  gained  a
considerable  advantage,  and  this  was  much  enhanced
by  a  storm  which  severely  damaged  the  Caesareans.
But  they  lost  their  admiral,  and  returned  discouraged
to  Sicily.  Octavius.  who  lay  off  Ehegium  and  awaited
the  arrival  of  Calvisius  to  make  a  combined  attack
with  overwhelming  forces,  was  disconcerted  by  the
news  of  this  disaster.  He  threaded  the  narrow
straits  in  quest  of  his  shattered  detachment :  but
Sextus  pounced  upon  his  hindmost  vessels,  and
compelled  the  whole  armament  to  take  up  a  posi-
tion along  the  coast,  to  receive  his  onset  with  their
beaks  off-shore.  The  Pompeians  charged  with  im-
petuous confidence,  stove  in  the  enemy's  bows  or
burst  their  moorings,  and  drove  them  on  the  rocks.
Octavius  saved  himself  by  leaping  on  a  reef,  and
called  off  his  men  from  their  vessels.  Some  of
his  captains  refused  to  obey  the  inglorious  signal,
and  forced  their  way  through  their  assailant's  line.
But  the  work  of  destruction  was  more  effectually
completed  by  the  occurrence  of  a  violent  tempest,
and  the  remnant  of  the  Caesarean  vessels  was  only
saved  by  the  supineness  of  the  conqueror.

Octavius  was  both  mortified  and  alarmed  by  this
discomfiture. He had put forth all his
naval  resources,  and  they  had  been  almost  rrofubyim
destroyed  before  his  eyes. The  pressure
of  scarcity  was  exasperating  the  urban  populace,  and
their  distress,  easily  convinced  them  that  the  quarrel
was  unjust. The  triumvir  had  to  bear  up  against
both  the  general  clamour  for  peace  and  the  want  of
money  to  prosecute  the  war. But his resolution
was  constant,  and  his  fortitude  never  deserted  him.
He  sent  the  ablest  of  his  counsellors,  Maecenas,  to
s  2

260  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvu.

renew  negotiations  with  Antonius.  He  disposed
his  numerous  land  forces  at  the  points  of  the  coast
most  open  to  attack.  He  ordered  the  construction
of  fresh  vessels,  and  patiently  collected  munitions
of  war,  while  he  trusted  that  Sextus,  incapable  of
using  his  victory,  would  exasperate  the  Romans  by
his  insolence  and  cruelty.  The  prince  of  the  cor-
sairs had  indeed  no  higher  conceptions  than  might
befit  the  chief  of  a  piratical  flotilla.  Instead  of
completing  the  destruction  of  the  Cassarean  fleet,
and  leading  his  forces  to  advance  boldly  upon  Rome,
he  contented  himself  with  making  desultory  descents
upon  the  coast,  and  marauding  off  the  shore.  His
victory  swelled  his  pride  and  made  him  ridiculous.
He  proclaimed  himself  the  offspring  of  Xeptune,
arrayed  himself  in  a  sea-green  mantle,  and  cast,  so
at  least  his  foes  reported,  not  horses  only,  but  living
men  into  the  waves  as  a  sacrifice  to  his  pretended
father.1  Mean  while  the  despatches  received  from
Mascenas  assured  Octavius  that  his  unsteady  col-
league had  promised  to  stand  by  him  ;  and  a  splen-
did victory  gained  by  Agrippa  over  the  revolted
Gauls  in  Aquitania  turned  once  more  the  tide  of
popular  opinion  in  his  favour.  Agrippa  was  re-
warded with  the  promise  of  the  consulship  for  the
next  year,  and  his  services  were  immediately  em-
ployed in  fitting  out  a  new  fleet,  and  in  training  the
forces  of  Octavius  for  the  element  which  was  destined
to  bring  him  imperishable  renown.

On  the  upper  sea  Italy  possessed  at  least  two
excellent  harbours,  those  of  Ravenna  and  Brundi-
sium.  But  the  whole  extent  of  its  western  coast
is  singularly  deficient  in  any  such  natural  advantages,

1  Dion,  xlviii.  48.  Such  stories  against  an  unpopular  and  van-
quished chieftain  must  of  course  be  received  with  suspicion.  If  they
were  generally  credited  at  the  time,  we  should  expect  to  hear  them
mentioned  by  Velleius  and  Horace.  Sextus  inscribed  the  figure  of
Neptune  on  his  coins,  as  prsefectus  classis  of  the  commonwealth  by
appointment  of  the  senate.

A.U.717-B.C.:;:.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  261

and  Agrippa  discerned  that  to  dispute  the  command
of  the  sea  with  Sextus,  his  leader  must  possess  a  secure
and  ample  station  for  his  naval  armaments

., ,i  r> o- -1  TT  i  i • Agrippa  con-

OppOSlte the  coast  ot bicily. He  cast  his  »trucu  the

eyes  on  the  small  land-locked  pools,  the
Avernus  and  the  Lucrinus,  which  lay  on  the  Cam-
panian  coast,  between  Misenum  and  Puteoli.  The
former,  which  was  the  innermost  of  these  basins,
was  separated  from  the  other  by  a  neck  of  land
about  one  mile  in  width ;  while  the  waters  of  the
outer  lake  were  only  sheltered  from  the  sea  by  a
narrow  ridge  or  belt  of  sand  or  shingle,  which,
according  to  one  of  the  marvellous  traditions  rife
in  this  locality,  had  been  formed  by  Hercules  to
spare  himself  the  long  circuit  of  the  bay.  But  the
sea  sometimes  made  breaches  in  this  bar,  and  Julius
Caesar,  if  we  may  trust  to  one  obscure  notice  of
antiquity,  had  repaired  it  artificially,  to  secure  the
fish  preserves  within  it  from  the  turbulence  of  the
waves.1  The  work  which  Agrippa  undertook  was
apparently  to  unite  the  two  lakes  by  a  canal,  to
face  the  exterior  mound  with  masonry,  and  to
pierce  it  also  with  a  channel  for  the  admission  of
vessels.  To  the  double  haven  thus  constructed,
and  defended  by  this  massive  breakwater,  in  honour
of  his  patron's  house  he  gave  the  name  of  the
Julian ;  misled  by  which  designation  later  writers
sometimes  ascribed  the  operation  to  Octavius,  some-
times to  the  dictator  himself.  Nor  indeed  was  the
work  itself  destined  to  endure.  At  a  later  period
Octavius  constructed  a  harbour  nearer  to  the  seat
of  government,  at  the  mouth  of  the  Tiber,  and  from
thenceforth  the  Julian  haven  seems  to  have  been
relinquished  as  a  naval  station,  its  entrance  rapidly

1  Sec  Servius  on  Virgil  s  lines  (Georg.  ii.  161.).

•'Lucrinoque  addita  claustra,
Julia  qua  ponto  longe  sonat  unda  refuse,
Tyrrhenusque  fretis  immittitur  aestus  Avernis."

262  HISTORY OF THE BOMAMS  en.  xxvu.

filled  up,  and  in  the  lapse  of  half  a  century  it  be-
came practicable  only  for  small  vessels.1

This  noble  construction,  with  many  other  kindred
Thetnnm- preparations,  was  the  work  of  the  year  717.

virate  renewed Vv •  .L-L •  J.T_I  f f\ A.

for  a  second During  their  progress  the  hopes  ot  Octa-

periodofflve  .  , ,  ,  ,

years.  vius  were  reassured,  and  he  even  deemed

he  could  dispense  with  the  aid  of  Antonius,  to  which
he  would  only  betake  himself  in  the  last  resort.  But
the  triumvir  of  the  East,  jealous,  perhaps,  of  the
vigour  of  his  colleague's  proceedings,  proposed  to
fulfil  his  engagement.  He  quitted  Athens,  whither
he  had  returned  from  the  Parthian  frontier,  and
where  he  had  devoted  the  winter  to  careless  festi-
vities, and  suddenly  appeared  off  Brundisium  with  a
fleet  of  three  hundred  sail.  Octavius  ventured  to
forbid  his  landing.  Antonius,  it  seems,  was  staggered
by  this  act  of  defiance  and  submitted  to  the  in-
sult, while  he  employed  the  services  of  his  wife
to  mediate  between  them.  The  negotiation  which
ensued,  resulted  in  an  amicable  arrangement,  de-
signated as  the  treaty  of  Tarentum.  Antonius  fur-
nished his  brother-in-law  with  a  hundred  and  thirty
ships  for  the  war  against  Sextus,  and  received  in
return  a  force  of  twenty  thousand  legionaries  for  the
Parthian  expedition  upon  which  he  was  about  to
embark.  This  treaty  they  confirmed  by  renewing
between  themselves  the  terms  of  the  triumvirate,
which  they  extended  to  a  second  period  of  five  years,
the  original  compact  having  in  fact  recently  expired.2

1  Frandsen  in  his  Life  of  Ayrippa  (p.  140.  foil.)  has  examined  this
subject  carefully,  and  succeeded  at  least  in  showing  the  difficulty  of
explaining  it. The  passages  relating  to  it  are  Dion,  xlviii.  49,  50. ;
Suet.  Oct.  16.;  Strabo,  v.  4.;  Plin.  H.N.  xxxvi.  15.; and  Virgil,
/.  c.  with  the  comments  of  Philargyrius  and  Scrvius. On  the  one
hand  the  lakes  are  said to  have  been  opened  to  the  sea,  on  the
other,  to  have  been  closed  against  it. The  account in  the  text
may possibly reconcile these  seemingly  contradictory  statements.
Vast  changes  have  been  made  in  the  features  of  the  locality  by
volcanic  action.

2  The  first  term  expired  December  31,  716. There  is some  dis-
crepancy between  Dion  and  Appian,  regarding  the  date  of  this  treaty

A.U.713-B.C.36.  UNDER THE EMPIKE.  263

Antonius  left  his  wife  behind  him  iu  her  brother's
care,  as  a  pledge  of  amity ;  but  this  separation
proved,  as  could  hardly  fail  to  be  foreseen,  the
cause  of  a  final  and  fatal  dissension.

Thus  seasonably  reinforced  in  the  arm  in  which  he
had  felt  his  weakness,  Octavius  still  con-  octavms  rein-

,  •  i ,  • ,  •  n  i  forced  by  An-

tmued  to  amass  munitions  of  war,  and  was  umius,  attacks
not  fully  prepared  to  assume  the  offensive  Hexuud££m-

, c ,1  ^  ,  i  ..  ,  ^ T- fit«<l  by  a

before  the  summer  of  the  year  / 18.  Lepi-  storm,
dus  was  once  more  summoned  from  Africa,  and  this
time  he  did  not  venture  to  withhold  his  assistance.
The  general  command  of  the  whole  naval  force  was
entrusted  to  Agrippa,  under  whose  direction  the  fleet
was  lustrated  with  religious  ceremonies,  and  the  first
of  the  Julian  month  was  selected  as  an  auspicious  day
for  putting  to  sea.1  Octavius  sailed  himself  from  the
Julian  haven,  Statilius  Taurus  from  Tarentum,  Le-
pidus  from  Carthage,  and  the  three  squadrons  were
directed  to  attack  simultaneously  the  three  coasts  of
the  triangular  island.  But  Octavius  was  still  pursued
by  the  evil  fortune  which  seemed  ever  to  attend
him  at  sea.  A  violent  storm  dispersed  his  squadron
and  drove  him  on  shore  at  Velia.  Taurus,  as  soon  as
the  news  of  this  disaster  reached  him,  returned  in-
gloriously  to  Tarentum  ;  Lepidus  alone,  not  aware,
we  may  suppose,  of  this  double  desertion,  reached
the  point  of  his  destination,  besieged  Lilybaeum,  and
reduced  several  towns  on  the  coast  of  inferior  note.
Octavius,  fearing  the  clamours  of  the  Koman  popu-
lace, hastily  repaired  his  shattered  vessels,  and
ventured  to  resume  operations  in  August.  Even  this

which  took  place  either  in  the  spring  of  717  (Appian),  or  early  in  the
ensuing  winter  (Dion).  In  either  case  some  interval  must  have
elapsed  between  the  expiration  of  the  first  term  and  its  renewal,
cither  three  months  or  twelve.  The  year  717  passed  without  active
operations  in  any  quarter.  Dion,  xlviii.  54.;  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  93-95.
Comp.  Fischer,  Rom.  Zeit.  352.;  Hoeck,  RiJm.  Gesch.  i.  1.  262.  ;
Drumann,  i.  448.

1  Appian,  B.  C.  \.  96.

264  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xxvn.

short  interval  might  have  been  turned  to  advantage
by  aa  adversary  more  active  or  more  politic  than
Sextus ;  but  once  more  this  unworthy  son  of  the
great  Pornpeius  suffered  the  opportunity  to  slip,  and
had  merely  provided  for  the  defence  of  some  of  his
landing-places,  when  the  enemy's  fleet  appeared
again  off  the  coast  of  Sicily.  But  the  corsairs  of  the
Mediterranean  were  doubtless  capricious  allies,  and
possibly  he  was  unable  to  trust  his  own  officers.
Menodorus,  who  had  deserted  him  at  a  critical  mo-
ment, returned  to  his  standard,  and  obtained  once
more  the  command  of  a  small  squadron.  He  was
despatched  with  seven  vessels  to  cruise  against  the
enemy ;  but  he  betrayed  his  trust  a  second  time,
and  threw  himself  again  into  the  arms  of  Octavius.

The  triumvir,  not  discouraged  by  his  repeated
Agripp*  g»in«  reverses  at  sea,  had  taken  the  command  of
I  Pomp^un'"  a  new  armament  for  the  invasion  of  Sicily,
«iu»dron.  an(j  brougnt  it  to  anchor  on  the  strand  of
Strongyle,  one  of  the  ^Eob'an  islands.  But  when
Sextus  collected  his  numerous  galleys  to  repel  the
attack,  Octavius  acknowledged  his  own  genius  or
fortune  to  be  unequal  to  the  contest,  and  while  he
repaired  himself  to  the  station  of  Taurus  at  Taren-
tum,  he  summoned  Agrippa  to  assume  his  place
in  front  of  the  enemy.  The  operations  of  the  new
admiral  were  crowned  with  partial  success.  He
defeated  a  division  of  the  Pompeians  off  Mylae,  and
captured  some  places  on  the  coast,  but  made  no
effective  impression  on  the  strength  of  his  adversary.
Octavius  meanwhile  had  transported  three  legions
from  Tarentum  to  Leucopetra,  and  thence,  supposing
Sextus  to  be  fully  occupied  by  his  lieutenant,  he  had
crossed  the  straits  and  encamped  before  Tauromenium.
Sextus  however,  apprised  of  this  movement,  steered
directly  for  the  place,  and  ordered  a  body  of  horse  to
accompany  his  progress  by  land,  while  the  bulk  of
his  military  forces  was  rapidly  concentrated  on  the

A.U.713-B.C.36.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  265

same  spot.  Thus  placed  between  two  dangers,  Octa-
vius  preferred  apparently  to  expose  himself  to  that
which  at  least  admitted  of  escape  in  case  of  disaster.
He  transferred  to  Cornificius  the  command  of  the
small  corps  he  had  landed  on  the  coast,  and  betook
himself  to  the  fleet.  The  squadrons  twice
engaged,  and  the  result  of  the  obstinate  agafn'Se-13

feated

combat  was  the  utter  destruction  of  the
Csesarean.  A  small  number  of  galleys  alone  escaped,
and  once  more  Octavius  was  among  the  fugitives.
Eeceived  on  the  shore  of  Italy  by  the  well-appointed
army  which  Messala  there  commanded  for  him,  he
speedily  resumed  the  tone  of  authority.  He  hastened
to  assure  Agrippa  of  his  personal  safety,  and  urged
him  to  strain  every  nerve  for  the  relief  of  Cornificius.
The  Roman  populace,  which  watched  every  turn  of
the  contest  with  anxiety  for  its  daily  sustenance,  cla-
moured more  and  more  loudly  against  the  ill-success
and  obstinacy  of  its  master.  Maecenas  was  charged
with  the  delicate  task  of  calming  its  apprehensions
and  amusing  it  into  good  humour.

Cornificius,  who  had  no  means  of  escape  but  by
traversing  the  island,  and  reaching  Agrip-

Gallant

pa  s  cantonments  on  the  northern  coast,  retreat  of
was  encumbered  by  the  wounded  and  help-
less fugitives  who  had  crept  from  the  disabled  galleys.
As  long,  however,  as  his  precipitate  march  was
harassed  only  by  the  light  battalions  which  hung  upon
his  flank  and  rear,  he  continued  to  make  progress,
though  with  excessive  difficulty  and  under  severe
privations ;  but  Sextus  shortly  closed  upon  him  with
troops  better  appointed,  and  he  was  only  saved  from
destruction  by  the  timely  arrival  of  three  legions  for-
warded by  Agrippa  to  his  rescue.  With  this  succour
he  made  good  his  retreat  to  Mylse,  which  was  in  the
hands  of  the  Csesareans.  The  spirit  he  had  manifes-
ted, and  his  resolution  in  carrying  along  with  him  the
wounded  fugitives,  gained  him  credit  both  with  his

266  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvn.

chief  and  his  countrymen.  In  the  following  year  his
services  were  rewarded  with  the  consulship ;  and  4ie
retained  through  life  the  singular  and  perhaps  incon-
venient privilege,  when  he  supped  abroad,  of  riding
home  by  torchlight  on  the  back  of  an  elephant.1
Meanwhile  Octavius  had  embarked  the  mass  of  his
forces  in  the  Bruttian  or  Lucanian  ports,  and  a  base
for  his  operations  being  secured  by  the  possession  of
Mylse  and  Tyndaris,  and  the  fertile  district  they  com-
manded, he  assembled  there  an  army  of  no  less  than
twenty-one  legions  and  twenty  thousand  cavalry.
Lepidus,  at  the  same  time,  was  bringing  up  his  con-
tingent, and  Taurus  was  menacing  with  his  fleet  the
southern  ports  and  landing-places  of  the  island.  Sex-
tus  found  himself  blockaded  within  the  north-eastern
peninsula  of  his  little  realm,  where  it  was  impossible
General  en-  long  to  maintain  his  numerous  forces.  The
fhffteeTs'off  contending  armies  confronted  each  other  on
siai^'com-  the  coast  hard  by  the  town  of  Naulochus,

Pletedeftt wh0e  the  fleetg  fought  in  &e  offing> Three

pompeians.  hunched  sail  were  arrayed  on  either  side,
to  decide  the  dominion  of  the  seas.  The  Octavian
galleys,  commanded  by  Agrippa,  were  larger  and
stronger  built  than  their  adversaries' 2 :  but  they
owed  their  superiority  still  more  to  the  grappling-
irons  with  which  their  admiral  had  provided  them,
and  which  brought  the  contest  to  a  speedy  termina-
tion. Dismayed  at  the  rapid  capture  or  destruction
of  his  vessels,  Sextus  gave  the  signal  for  retreat  into
the  difficult  channel  of  the  Messanian  straits ;  but  his
movement  was  intercepted  by  the  skill  of  the  enemy,

1  Dion.  xlix.  7. Florus  (ii.  2.  10.)  commemorates  the  distinctions
accorded  to  Duilius  after  his  victory  over  the  Carthaginians  in  the
first  Punic  war:  "Pervitam  omnem  ubi  a  ccena  rediret  prselucere
funalia,  praecinere  sibi  tibius  jussit,  quasi  qnotidie  triumpharet."  The
honour  of  riding  the  elephant  becuine  restricted  to  the  emperors
Juvenal  (xii.  106.)  calls  these  animals

"  Csesaris  armentum  nulli  servire  paratum
Private."

2  Dion,  xlix.  3.;  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  106.

A.U.718-B.C.36.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  267

and  the  greater  part  of  his  armament  cut  off,  driven
on  shore  and  burnt.  He  reached  his  haven  with  no
more  than  seventeen  galleys.  Agrippa's  victory  by
x  a  was  complete,  and  it  was  followed  by  a  success  no
less  triumphant  on  land ;  for  the  Pompeian  legions,
left  in  the  heat  and  panic  of  the  contest  without
orders,  surrendered  without  a  blow.  Sextus  Sextu8  escapes
threw  aside  his  imperatorial  garb,  collected  into  the  i=ast-
his  treasures  and  costliest  effects,  and  abandoned  the
island  for  the  East,  where  he  still  hoped  to  secure
an  asylum  from  the  favour  or  policy  of  Antonius.1

Even  yet  the  cause  of  the  Pompeians  in  Sicily  was
not  really  desperate,  and  an  extraordinary  Lepidm  com-

„  J  , f  J bines  wif.  the

turn  of  fortune  seemed  for  a  moment to  remnant  or  tue

i  T\I  •  Pompeian  s,

restore  them  to  the  ascendant.  Plenums,  and  makes
the  officer  to  whom  Sextus  had  confided  the  octavlG".
defence  of  Lilybasum,  and  whom  he  had  recalled  in
haste  from  the  western  extremity  of  the  island  for
the  defence  of  Messana,  entered  the  Pompeian  strong-
hold after  bis  chief  had  so  precipitately  abandoned  it.
He  had  eight  legions,  and  with  this  force  he  under-
took to  defend  a  place  well-fortified  and  strongly
situated.  Agrippa  and  Lepidus  combined  their  forces
to  reduce  him;  but  Plennius  intrigued  with  the
triumvir,  and  agreed  to  surrender  the  city,  on  con-
dition that  the  plunder  should  be  divided  between
his  legions  and  the  army  of  Africa.  Agrippa  pro-
tested against  this  nefarious  compact;  nevertheless
it  was  carried  through,  and  the  luckless  Messanians
were  subjected  to  the  savage  excesses  of  the  two
armies- throughout  the  night.  The  Pompeian  soldiers
saluted  Lepidus  as  their  imperator;  and  he,  puffed
up  with  this  sudden  fortune,  seeing  himself  at  the
head  of  twenty  legions,  determined  to  claim  the  undi-
vided empire.  Orders  were  despatched  to  the  fortresses
of  the  island  to  keep  their  gates  closed  against  the
Csesareans.  Octavius  hastened  to  meet  the  danger.

1  Dion,xlix.  11.;  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  122.

268  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvn.

He  led  his  troops  to  the  walls  of  Messana.  Lepidus
had  already  withdrawn  to  an  entrenched  camp  close
at  hand.  Another  act  of  the  long  drama  of  the  civil
wars  seemed  on  the  point  of  commencing ;  but  Lepi-
dus, without  a  party  cry  of  any  kind  to  inscribe  on
his  banners,  and  himself  little  known  or  respected
among  the  soldiery,  proved  unable  to  secure  the
fidelity  of  his  own  legions.  The  sack  of  Messana  had
revolted  the  feelings  even  of  the  brigands  to  whom  it
had  been  surrendered.  Remorse  for  their  own  crime
easily  blended  with  disgust  at  the  chieftain  who  had
debauched  them.  They  were  in  the  mood  to  accept
with  enthusiasm  an  appeal  to  their  generosity.  Oc-
tavius  with  ready  boldness  threw  himself,  almost  un-
attended, into  the  midst  of  them,  and  besought  them
in  their  own  camp  to  renounce  the  horrid  design  of
civil  war  to  which  their  leader  was  exciting  them.1
Lepidus  called  to  arms.  Octavius  withdrew  unharmed
in  person,  though  his  cloak  was  pierced  by  a  javelin.

He  seized,  it  is  said,  an  eagle  with  his  own
b/hi8.  soldier.,  hand,  and  was  speedily  followed  by  whole

cohorts  and  legions,  which  deserted  from
his  adversary.  Lepidus  quickly  found  his  position  nd
longer  tenable.  To  descend  from  the  vauntings  of
defiance  to  the  whine  of  supplication  was  easy  and
natural  to  his  paltry  spirit.  He  doffed  his  purple
mantle,  and  threw  himself  at  his  colleague's  feet,
hardly  observed,  among  the  crowd  of  courtiers,  who
now  thronged  around  the  victor.  He  suffered  no
H-w  life  spared  other  punishment  but  deprivation  of  his  share
.a  contempt.  jn  ^g  triumvirate,  and  the  government  of
the  empire  ;  nor  was  he  grudged  the  empty  honour  of
the  chief  priesthood,  a  dignity  inalienable  with  life.2

1  Appian.  B.  C.v.  124, 125. ;  Veil.  ii.  80. :  "Inermiset  laccrnatus
praeter  nomen  nihil  trahens  ....  non  ab  Scipionibus  aliisqueveteri-
bus  Rom.  ducum  quicquam  ausum  patratumque  fortius."

2  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  131.  ;  Liv.  Epit.  cxxix. Lepidus  was  con-
fined to Circeii, according  to  Suetonius  (Oct. 16.),  and  strictly
watched. At  a  later  period  he  was  summoned  to  Eome,  not  cut

A.U.718-3.C.36.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  269

Undoubtedly  Lepidus  had  owed  his  great  public  dis-
tinctions more  to  his  high  rank  and  family  influence
than  to  any  abilities  he  had  displayed  even  in  his  earlier
and  more  active  years.  Yet  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
judge  of  him  entirely  from  the  effect  which  ease  and
flattery  produced  upon  a  temper  naturally  indolent.
Csesar,  who  had  placed  him  only  one  step  below  him-
self, might  have  respected  or  feared  him ;  and  it  is
possible  that  Octavius  spared  his  life  from  policy
rather  than  contempt.

The  subsequent  fortunes  of  the  prince  of  the  pirates
have  little  interest  or  importance,  and  may
be  briefly  told  in  this  place. In  his  flight  care«qofent

Sextus

he  landed  for  a  moment  on  the  coast  of
Bruttium,  and  rifled  the  temple  of  Juno  on  the  Laci-
nian  promontory.  From  thence  he  steered  for  Lesbos,
the  asylum  where  he  had  been  placed  with  Cornelia
during  the  fatal  campaign  of  Pharsalia,  and  where
his  illustrious  name  was  still  held  in  affection.1  An-
tonius  was  at  this  time  engaged  in  his  distant  ex-
pedition against  the  Parthians,  and  Sextus  proposed
to  surrender  to  him  on  his  return.  But  in  the  mean-
time a  rumour  spread  that  the  triumvir  had  suffered
disaster,  and  new  schemes  of  ambition  began  to  fer-
ment in  the  restless  wanderer's  head.  Antonius  how-
ever returned  iu  safety  to  Alexandria.  His  power  was
not  broken ;  his  supremacy  throughout  the  Eoman
provinces  in  the  East  was  undiminished.  Never-
theless Sextus  would  not  abandon  his  new  hopes :  he
began  to  intrigue  with  various  parties  simultaneously,

of  favour,  says  Dion  (liv.  5.),  but  to  make  his  humiliation  mqre
conspicuous.

1  Cornelia  had  endeared  herself  to  the  Lesbians  during  her  retreat
among  them. Lucan,  viii.  155.:

"  Tanto  devinxit  amore

Hos  pudor,  hos  probitas,  castique  modestia  vultus;
Quod  submissa  nimis,  nulli  gravi?  hospita  ttirbse,
Stantis  adhuc  fati  vixit  quasi  conjuge  victo."

I  would  willingly  believe  that  these  pretty  verses  commemorate  a
genuine  tradition.

270  HISTORY OF THE KOMAKS  CH.  xxvn.

with  the  Eoman  commander,  with  the  Parthians,  and
with  the  turbulent  chieftains  of  Pontus  and  Armenia.
Antonius  listened  to  his  representations  of  the  dan-
gerous ascendancy  his  rival  had  acquired  in  the  West ;
but  the  discovery  of  the  suppliant's  treachery  con-
vinced him  that  from  such  an  ally  no  faithful  services
could  be  expected.  Sextus  meanwhile  advanced  into
Asia,  amused  the  triumvir's  lieutenants  with  great
dexterity,  and  obtained  possession  of  some  places
of  strength  by  stratagem.  His  followers  gradually
swelled  to  the  respectable  dimensions  of  an  army
of  three  legions.  Some  chiefs  of  the  old  aristocratic
party  still  clung  to  him ;  among  them  were  Cassius
Parmensis,  one  of  the  tyrannicides,  Thermus,  Antis-
tius,  Fannius,  and  his  father-in-law  Libo.  But  when,
wearied  and  despondent  with  so  many  years  of  re-
verses, they  divined  their  leader's  headstrong  deter-
mination to  defy  the  triumvir's  power  in  the  field,
they  finally  abandoned  his  desperate  cause.  Sextus,
now  hemmed  in  by  the  lieutenants  of  Antonius,  still
refused  to  capitulate,  and  tried  every  device  to  elude
He  is  taken  by  his  pursuers.  Deserted  at  last  by  every  fol-
niiedputtotSiaM  lower,  he  fell  into  the  hands  of  an  officer
named  Titius,  who  caused  him  in  a  short
time  to  be  put  to  death.  It  is  uncertain  whether  the
order  for  his  destruction  was  really  given  by  Anto-
nius, who  was  capable  of  an  act  of  generosity,  and  in
whom  it  might  have  been  politic  to  reserve  so  im-
portant a  personage  to  play  off  against  Octavius.
Some  attributed  it  to  Plancus,  who  now  commanded
under  Antonius  in  Syria,  and  who  feared,  it  is  said,
the  influence  the  captive  might  exercise  in  exasperat-
ing the  dissensions  between  the  triumvirs.1  Sextus
perished  in  his  fortieth  year.  He  was  the  last  de-

1  These  last  exploits  of  Sextus  are  told  at  length  by  Appian,  B.  C.
v.  133 — 144.,  and  conclude  the  existing  portion  of  his  work  on  the
civil  wars  of  Rome.  Sextus  was  killed  in  the  year  719.  Comp.
Dion.  xlix.  18.;  Liv.  Epit.  cxxxi.

A.U.719-B.C.15.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  271

scendant  in  the  male  line  of  the  great  Pompeius.1
His  eventful  story  gives  ample  evidence  of  the  dis-
tracted state  of  the  doomed  republic,  in  which  so  long
a  struggle  could  be  maintained  by  a  roving  buccaneer
against  the  great  public  interest  of  the  Roman  world.
The  last  of  the  Pompeii  died  unhonoured  and  un-
lamented.  He  had  cut  himself  adrift  from  Traditions
the  parties  of  the  senate  and  the  forum,  and  JhefliufThe11
the  remnant  of  the  father's  faction  disdained  r°mpeii-
to  flatter  the  memory  of  a  degenerate  son.  Never-
theless the  recollection  of  the  fearful  tragedy  of  his
race,  which  closed  with  his  final  overthrow,  made  a
deep  impression  upon  his  countrymen's  imagination.
The  spirits  of  the  dead,  they  believed,  were  reani-
mated to  warn  these  heroes  of  the  republic  of  the
incredible  reverse  impending  over  them.  A  wild  story
is  told  of  a  certain  Gabienus,  an  officer  in  the  Octa-
vian  fleet,  who  was  taken  in  the  sea-fight  off  Tauro-
menium  and  his  throat  cut  by  command  of  Sextus.
He  lay  with  his  head  almost  severed  from  his  body
throughout  the  day.  As  the  shades  of  evening  fell,
the  dead  man  was  heard  to  moan.  A  crowd  collected
around  him.  He  spoke,  and  declared  that  he  had
returned  from  the  abodes  of  the  departed  to  announce
to  the  young  Pompeius  that  his  pious  enterprise  was
there  known  and  approved.2  Here  is  the  apparent
foundation  of  the  curious  episode  in  Lucan's  poem,
in  which  Sextus  is  made  to  consult  a  Thessalian  sor-
ceress regarding  the  event  of  the  civil  wars.  Erictho
raises  a  dead  man  to  life,  who  proclaims  the  anxiety
prevailing  among  the  ghosts  of  the  Roman  heroes  at
the  expected  issue  of  the  contest.  The  traitors  and
conspirators,  a  Marius  and  a  Catiline,  had  burst  their
chains  with  frantic  exultation  :  the  champions  of  the

1  A  Cnjeus  Pompeius,  whom  Caligula  forbade  to  assume  the  ap-
pellation of  Magnus,  may  have  been  a  descendant  of  the  triumvir
through  Pompeia,  the  daughter  of  Sextus. Suet.  Calig.  35.,  Claud.
27.  29. ;  Dion,  Ix.  21,  29.

2  Piin.  //.  N.  vu.  53.

272  HisTor.r  OF  THE  ROMANS  cu.  xxvn.

republic,  a  Camillas  and  a  Sulla,  were  downcast  and
dismayed.  Of  all  the  pious  shades,  Brutus  alone  re-
joiced, in  the  prospect  of  his  offspring's  exploit.  Such
is  the  extent  of  the  dead  man's  revelation.  After  all
it  is  no  more  than  a  contest  for  a  grave ;  one  rival
shall  He  by  the  waters  of  the  Nile,  the  other  by  those
of  the  Tiber.  Let  not  Sextus  inquire  about  his  oivn
fate ;  his  sire  Pompeius  shall  announce  it  to  him
on  the  Sicilian  shore.  The  poet  is  here  supposed  to
intimate  his  intention  of  introducing  at  the  close  of
his  epic  a  vaticination  on  the  fortunes  of  Rome  by  the
mouth  of  her  favourite  hero.  He  had  heard,  we  may
presume,  the  story  which  has  been  just  related,  and
sought  to  give  it  poetical  dignity  by  transferring  the
subject  from  the  obscure  Gabienus  to  the  great  Pom-
peius himself.  It  should  be  remarked  that  the  con-
sultation with  the  sorceress  is  represented  as  some-
thing impious  and  cowardly,  and  there  is  peculiar
fitness  in  assigning  it  to  a  personage  on  whom  all
Roman  history  conspired  to  cast  a  slur.1

We  have  seen  the  great  Csesarean,  or  if  we  may
still  so  denominate  it,  the  Marian  party  di-  octavimatth*
vided  in  its  affections  between  three  rival  c"ar°ean  or
chieftains,  each  of  whom  might  claim  to  be  inure.".
the  true  representative  of  the  common  cause.  If
Octavius  could  vaunt  himself  as  the  dictator's  legiti-
mate heir,  Antonius  had  been  his  friend,  his  minister,
and  had  first  proclaimed  himself  his  avenger.  Lepi-
dus  might  assert  claims  of  still  earlier  date  ;  for  it
was  by  his  father  that  the  first  abortive  attempt  had
been  made  to  overthrow  the  Sullan  ascendancy.  But
one  of  the  aspirants  had  now  retired  from  the  stage,
another  self-expatriated,  and  falling  rapidly  into  the
tastes  and  habits  of  the  despised  Orientals,  had

1  Lucan,  Ti.  589.:

"  Pompeii  ignava  propago."

There  is  also  a  imirked  similarity  between  the  vaticination  in  Lucan,
vi.  785.  seq.,  and  Libo's  invective  apainst  Pompeius  quoted  by  Vale-
rius Maximus,  vi.  2.  8.,  pointing,  I  think,  to  a  common  tradition.

A.U.71S-B.C.36.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  273

already  forfeited  to  a  great  extent  the  respect  of  his
countrymen,  and  whatever  interest  still  attached  to
him  regarded  his  personal  fortunes  rather  than  those
of  his  party.  The  hopes  of  the  old  senatorial  fac-
tion were  finally  extinguished  ;  death,  disap-
pointment, and  confiscation  had  broken  up  the  «na'wnr£i

,  j faction.

its  resources  ;  the  scattered  remnant  made
their  way  one  by  one  to  Rome,  and  there  subsided
almost  unnoticed  into  the  conservative  element  of  the
state,  prepared  to  support  whatever  government  ex-
isted. The  lists  of  proscription  were  allowed  to  fall
into  oblivion,  and  many  of  those  who  had  escaped  the
first  inquisition  re-appeared  by  degrees  in  the  forum
and  senate-house,  and  foufld  no  obstacle  opposed  even
to  their  obtaining  public  distinctions.  The  Roman
people  seemed  tacitly  to  acknowledge  that  it  had
now  but  one  cause  to  maintain,  the  cause  of  order
and  law,  and  of  this  cause  Octavius  was  universally
recognised  as  th'e  visible  impersonation,  ocuvius
This  idea  he  now  set  himself  earnestly  to  £* wi"

c.  j.1.  i-l  •  • J  *.!•..• A clemency  and

confirm  in  the  public  mind  ;  to  this  point  hiswrerity.
hi.s  mildness  and  his  severity  equally  tended.  He
spared  Lepidus,  out  of  respect,  perhaps,  for  the  noble
images  which  crowded  his  ancestral  halls ;  he  enlisted
in  hi.s  own  legions  all  the  citizens  whom  he  had  taken
in  arms  against  himself:  on  the  other  hand  his  re-
storing to  their  masters  for  legitimate  punishment
the  slaves  who  had  dared  to  combat  side  by  side  with
free  men,  was  an  act  of  not  less  popular  severity ;  and
even  his  condemning  to  the  cross  the  miserable
wretches  whose  masters  could  not  be  found,  was
doubtless  applauded  as  a  just  tribute  to  the  spirit  of
law  and  discipline.1  The  proud  position  which  he

1  Dion,  xlix.  12.  Comp.  Monum.  Ancyr.  v.  2.,  and  Oros.  vi.  18.
Sextus  had  freely  availed  himself  of  the  services  of  fugitive  slaves.
Vel.  ii.  73. ;  Horat.  Epod.  9.9.:

"  Servis  amicus  perfidis."
Lucan,  i.  43.:

"Servilia  bclla  «ub  ^Ktr.:!."
VOL.  III.  T

274  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xxvii.

thus  acquired  was  maintained  by  the  enormous  array
of  forty-five  legions,  twenty-five  thousand  cavalry,
and  thirty-seven  thousand  light-armed  auxiliaries.
The  commander  of  such  a  force  had  only  one  enemy
to  fear,  disaffection  within  the  camp.  Though  in
battle  Octavius  had  repeatedly  sustained  reverses,  he
showed  himself  to  possess  the  art  of  managing  a
mutinous  soldiery.  The  appeal  which  Caesar  had
made  with  such  confidence  to  the  military  spirit  of
his  legionaries  might  have  failed  with  the  horde  of
butchers  and  brigands  who  now  marched  under  the
Eoman  eagles.  But  Octavius  subdued  them  by  di-
viding their  interests.  Some,  who  claimed  release
from  service,  he  disbanded  with  gratuities,  others  he
contented  or  stimulated  with  promises,  while  he
gorged  with  the  tribute  imposed  upon  Sicily  those
whose  arms  were  the  most  indispensable,  or  appetite
most  insatiable.  Having  thus  succeeded  in  quelling
the  disaffection  which  was  rife  among  his  motley
ranks,  he  dismissed  the  vessels,  as  many  as  remained,
which  he  had  borrowed  of  Antonius,  established  his
authority  over  the  island,  and  committed  the  African
provinces  to  Statilius  Taurus.  He  then  hastened
Distinctions  back,  with  a  portion  of  his  troops,  to  the

heaped  upon  . .*•  - _  *

him  at  Rome,  expectant  citizens  ot  Konie.  Ihe  senate
was  on  the  alert  to  receive  the  conqueror  with  every
honour  which  fear  or  flattery  or  genuine  admiration
could  suggest.  Octavius,  now  in  his  twenty-eighth
year,  found  himself  regarded  as  the  sole  defender,  or
master,  it  may  be,  of  the  commonwealth.  Besides
an  ovation  for  his  Sicilian  victory,  it  was  decreed  that
the  anniversaries  of  his  successes  should  be  solemnly

The  cruelty  of  this  wholesale  massacre  is  the  more  horrible  ^rom
the  fact  of  their  freedom  having  been  assured  to  the  enlisted  slaves
on  the  first  hollow  reconciliation  between  the  contending  parties.  For
the  details  of  the  artifice  by  which  they  were  seized  and  disarmed,
see  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  131.  It  is  remarkable  that  Octavius  had  enlisted
in  his  own  fleet  not  less  than  20,000  slaves.  Suet.  Oct.  16.;  Dion,
xlviii.  49.  But  these,  it  seems,  had  been  manumitted  by  legitimate
authority.

A.U.71S-B.C.3G.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  275

observed,  and  that  a  rostral  column  erected  in  the
forum  should  bear  on  its  summit  his  effigy  in  gold,
and  commemorate  by  an  inscription  the  restoration
of  peace  by  land  and  sea.  His  approach  to  Rome
was  greeted  by  a  festive  procession  of  the  senate  and
citizens  to  meet  him.  In  strict  observance  of  the
law,  which  had  seemed  to  be  torn  to  atoms  by  re-
peated violations,  he  convened  the  people  outside
the  pomcerium,  and  addressed  them  in  a  studied
oration.  He  detailed  the  whole  conduct  of  his
triumvirate,  excused  the  bloodshed  of  the  proscrip-
tions by  the  plea  of  necessity,  promised  peace  and
tranquillity  for  the  future,  and  pledged  himself  that
the  civil  wars  had  reached  their  final  termination.
The  favour  which  this  magnificent  announcement
challenged,  was  assured  by  a  remission  of  public  dues
and  taxes.  On  the  thirteenth  of  November,  718,  these
gracious  words  and  actions  were  crowned  by  the  popu-
lar ceremony  of  the  ovation.1  The  sea  was  open,  and
stores  of  grain  floated  securely  into  the  granaries  of  the
city.  The  gratitude  of  the  half-famished  multitude
was  not  yet  satisfied.  They  voted  their  deliverer  a
public  residence  on  the  Palatine  hill,  and  would  hav  >
snatched  the  pontificate  from  Lepidus,  and  conferred
it  upon  him.  But  this  harsh  and  illegitimate  pro-
ceeding he  declined  to  sanction,  and  Rome  beheld  with
astonishment  an  act  of  moderation  so  much  in  con-
trast with  the  grasping  ambition  of  the  great  dictator.
The  whole  course  of  the  youthful  conqueror's  pro-
ceedings indicated  a  disposition  to  leave  the  0otavills
Romans  as  much  liberty  as  they  could  now  j^gSS^Si
exercise  with  advantage  to  themselves  to-  ^gulL'0
gether  with  the  appearance  at  least  of  some-  triumTiratc-
thing  more.  A  veil  was  thrown  over  the  glaring

1  Suet.  Oct.  22.;  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  130. The  Fasti  Capitolini  re-
cord this  as  his  second  ovation:  "  Imp.  Caesar  Divi  f.  C.  n.  ii.  iii.  vir
R.  P.  C.  ii.  ovans  ex  Sicilia  an.  DCCXVII.  (718)  Idibus  Novemb."  His
former  ovation  had  been  for  the  victory  of  Philippi.
T  2

276  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvil.

irregularities  in  the  appointment  of  the  higher  ma-
gistracies, which  had  gone  on  increasing  since  Caesar's
first  arbitrary  infringements  of  the  established  rules.
It  has  been  noticed  that  in  the  year  710  there  were
sixteen  praetors  appointed,  being  double  the  legiti-
mate number:  but  in  716  not  less  than  sixty-seven
were  enumerated,  a  great  proportion  of  whom  held
the  office  only  for  a  few  days. l  The  recent  custom
of  intruding  several  persons  successively  into  the
consulship  of  the  same  year  had  been  retained  and
aggravated.  The  public  ceased  to  inquire  even  the
names  of  their  transient  rulers,  and  contented  them-
selves with  branding  with  the  contemptuous  title  of
lesser  consuls  all  but  the  two  from  whom  the  fasti  of
the  year  were  designated.  The  motive  for  seeking
the  evanescent  honour  of  a  few  days  or  even  hours
was  not  the  emolument  or  perhaps  the  dignity  of  the
office  itself,  but  arose  from  its  being  a  necessary  step
to  attaining  the  highest  employment  in  the  provinces.
On  the  other  hand  some  poorer  or  meaner  candidates,
disgusted  at  the  charges  of  their  office,  dishonourably
abandoned  their  posts.  In  one  instance  a  boy  was
made  quaestor,  and  assumed  the  gown  of  manhood
the  day  after.  One  man  appointed  to  a  place  in  the
senate,  desired  to  descend  into  the  arena  as  a  gladi-
ator, a  degradation  which  it  was  deemed  necessary  to
prohibit  by  special  enactment.  But  a  new  era  of  re-
gular and  legitimate  succession  was  now  announced ;
the  reign  of  anarchy  was  to  be  consigned  to  oblivion ;
all  the  letters  and  documents  implicating  his  adver-
saries which  had  come  into  the  conqueror's  hands  he
professed  to  commit  to  the  flames,  as  a  pledge  that
he  would  abstain  from  vengeance.  While  he  still
retained  for  the  present  the  title  of  triumvir,  he
withdrew  some  restrictions  which  the  charge  imposed
upon  the  free  exercise  of  the  higher  magistracies;

1  Dion,  xlviii.  43,  53. Comp.  34,  3:5.'

A.U.718-B.C.36.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  277

and  he  declared  his  intention  of  resigning  the  title
itself  as  soon  as  Antonius,  on  his  return  from  Parthia,
should  consent  to  join  in  the  voluntary  surrender.1
In  gratitude  for  these  concessions  the  people  invested
their  champion  with  the  inviolability  which  belonged
to  the  tribunitian  office,  and  with  a  seat  upon  the
tribune's  bench  in  the  public  assemblies.2  Amidst
these  mutual  forms  and  compliments  the  triumvir  of
the  East  was  little  heeded.  If  a  name  which  had
but  lately  exercised  such  powerful  influence  upon
the  Roman  people  was  at  all  remembered,  it  was  with
an  anxious  foreboding  of  the  disastrous  effects  of  any
fresh  collision  between  him  and  his  rival,  which
should  throw  the  republic  under  the  feet  of  an
Oriental  conqueror.  The  rumours  which  reached
the  city  of  his  having  submitted  once  more  to  the
charms  of  the  Egyptian  enchantress,  and  the  spec-
tacle of  the  injured  dignity  of  Octavia,  their  favourite
sister,  straitened  the  bonds  of  love  and  confidence
between  the  people  and  their  accepted  chief.  Vigo-
rous measures  were  adopted  to  repress  the  brigand-
age which  prevailed  throughout  Italy  and  Sicily.
Rome  itself  was  now  patrolled  for  the  first  time  by
a  nocturnal  police,  an  institution  which  was  found
too  salutary  to  be  abandoned.  Even  the  worship  of
the  saviour  of  the  commonwealth  began  to  insinuate
itself  into  many  Italian  or  provincial  towns,  where  he
found  a  place  among  the  local  tutelary  divinities.3

We  have  signalized  the  brilliant  success  of  the  new
master  of  the  Roman  people  both  in  war  M.  yipwnim
and  peace. It  remains  to  present  to  our  Agnppa-
eyes  the  portraits  of  the  two  distinguished  statesmen,
to  whose  practical  ability  his  genius  was  mainly  in-

1  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  1 32.

•  Dion,  xlix.  15.;  Appian,  I.e.  This  writer  anticipates  here  the
investment  of  Octavius  with  the  tribunitia  potestns,  which  we  shall
see  belongs  to  a  later  period.

3  Appian,  /.  c.

278  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvn.

debted  for  its  triumphs  both  in  the  one  and  the
other.  The  naVne  of  Agrippa  has  already  been  in-
scribed on  these  pages,  and  his  services  to  his  patron's
cause  commemorated  in  their  proper  place.  He  was
born  in  the  same  year  as  Octavius,  memorable  for
Cicero's  consulship,  and  though  of  mean  extraction,
in  so  much  that  he  seems  to  have  dropped  altogether
the  namen  of  the  obscure  Vipsanian  gens,  to  which
he  belonged,  and  to  have  wished  to  descend  to  pos-
terity as  Marcus  Agrippa  only1,  he  was  admitted  in
early  youth  to  the  intimacy  of  his  more  illustrious
contemporary,  and  educated  together  with  him,  in
arts  and  arms,  at  Apollonia.  The  fortunes  of  the
young  men,  thus  closely  connected  at  the  outset,
were  destined  never  to  be  far  sundered.  At  the
moment  when  the  relatives  of  Octavius  advised  him
to  decline  the  perilous  honours  thrust  upon  him  by
Caesar's  \vill,  it  was  from  his  friend  that  he  received
the  spirited  counsel  to  claim  and  hazard  all.  His-
tory has  presented  to  us  many  examples  of  youthful
daring,  such  as  that  of  Octavius  himself;  few  perhaps
of  two  friends  and  companions  of  the  same  tender
age  striking  together  into  the  path  of  glory  and
danger.2  The  character  of  Agrippa  was  eminently
bold  and  decided.  With  him,  says  Velleius,  words
and  deeds  were  never  separated.  If  he  had  less  of
the  far  and  wide-seeing  sagacity  which  distinguished
the  friend  and  patron,  he  had  perhaps  more  of  his
practical  intuition  which  seizes  upon  the  right  ex-
pedient at  the  right  moment.  His  courage  and  skill
in  war  were  eminently  conspicuous.  It  might  have

1  M.  Seneca,  Controc.  ii.  12.  Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  i.  3.;  Veil.  ii.
96,  127.,  and  see  the  story  told  by  Suetonius,  Tib.  23.  Fnmdsen,  in
biaLife  of  Agrippa,  decides  that  Vipsanius  is  the  right  orthography,
though  the  name  of  such  a  gens  does  not  occur  elsewhere,  and  not
Vipsanus,  as  some  modern  editors  of  Tacitus  prefer  to  read  it,  on
the  authority  of  a  variation  in  the  MSS.

-  The  early  career  of  Henry  of  Navarre  and  his  future  minister
Sully  lias  been  noticed  as  a  parallel  instance.

A.tr.:i8-B.C.36.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  279

caused  many  a  pang  to  a  more  generous  temper  than
that  of  Octavius  to  contrast  his  friend's  unvarying
success  and  well-merited  fame  as  a  soldier,  with  his
own  singular  series  of  mishaps,  and  the  discredit
which  could  not  fail  to  attach  even  to  his  personal
prowess.  At  Philippi,  and  on  two  occasions  off  the
Sicilian  coast,  Octavius  became  exposed  to  the  sneers
of  his  detractors.  He  could  not  face  his  enemy's
array  with  a  composed  countenance,  blurted  forth
Antonius ;  he  prostrated  himself  on  the  deck,  and
stupidly  stared  on  the  heavens,  nor  did  he  rise
find  show  himself  to  his  mvn  soldiers  till  Marcus
Agrippa  had  scattered  his  foes  before  him.1  Tlr-
weakness  of  his  health  gave  perhaps  the  first  ground
for  such  rude  sarcasms  ;  that  he  was  awakened  from
a  deep  sleep  for  his  great  combat  with  Sextus  is  in
fact  an  incident  which  has  been  deemed  illustrious  in
the  career  of  a  consummate  general  of  modern  times2;
nor  does  there  seem  any  just  reason  for  imputing  any
paltry  timidity  to  Octavius,  who  at  a  later  period
could  show  the  scars  of  more  than  one  honourable
wound.3  But  whatever  uneasiness  he  may  have  felt
at  Agrippa's  superior  renown  in  arms,  he  controlled
any  feeling  of  jealousy.  He  freely  required,  and  re-
ceived not  less  freely,  his  friend's  services,  either  at
his  own  side  or  at  a  distance.  To  Agrippa  he  en-
trusted the  conduct  of  the  indictment  against  Cassius
the  tyrannicide ;  in  the  first  heat  of  the  proscriptions,
he  pardoned  Murcus  in  deference  to  his  instances.
He  availed  himself  of  his  military  skill  in  the  siege
of  Perusia,  and  after  the  pacification  effected  at  Brun-
disium,  despatched  him  to  govern  the  further  province
of  Graul,  where  he  crossed  the  Rhine,  the  second  of
the  Romans,  chastised  the  Germans,  and  quelled  the

1  Suet.  Oct.  16.

2  "  Like  Conde  sleeping  ere  his  first  of  fields."
*  Suet.  Oct.  20.

280  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvn.

rising  insubordination  of  the  lately  conquered  pro-
vincials. l.  The  offer  of  a  triumph  he  declined;  nor
does  it  appear  from  what  motive :  the  suggestion
is  obvious,  but  hardly  satisfactory,  that  he  sought  to
avoid  the  risk  of  giving  umbrage  to  his  patron.  When
Octavius  returned  to  Eome  after  the  reduction  of
Sicily,  Agrippa  enjoyed  a  large  share  in  the  distinc-
tions which  awaited  him.  He  was  presented  with  a
naval  crown  in  honour  of  his  great  victory. 2  This
decoration  was  a  band  of  gold,  ornamented  with
spikes  in  the  form  of  the  rostra  or  beaks  of  the
Eoman  galleys.  Illustrious  as  Agrippa  was  in  peace
and  in  war,  on  land  and  at  sea,  the  rostral  crown
represented  on  busts  and  medals,  and  immortalized
by  the  muse  of  Virgil3,  has  rendered  him  most
famous  in  history  as  a  naval  commander.

Agrippa  continued  to  assist  his  patron  at  the
council-board,  and  to  his  sagacity  undoubtedly  much
of  the  spirit  is  to  be  ascribed  which  animated  the
c.cunius  long  administration  upon  which  Octavius
Maecenas.  now  entered.  But  there  was  yet  another
partner  to  whom  the  triumvir  was  wont  to  entrust  a
large  share  in  the  cares  of  government,  and  who
has  generally  been  considered  not  less  the  first  of  his
ministers  than  Agrippa  was  the  foremost  of  his
officers.  Caius  Cilnius  Maecenas,  unlike  his  gallant
coadjutor,  was  sprung  from  ancient  and  illustrious
parentage  on  either  side.4  The  names  both  of  Cilnius

1  Dion,  xlviii.  49.;  Appian,  B.  C.  v.  92. Comp. Strabo,  iv.  3.;
Tac.  Ann.  xii.  27.

2  Plin.  H.  N.  xvi.  4. :  "  Rostratse  ...  in  duobus  maxime  ad  hoc  aevi
celebres;  M.  Varro  c  piraticis  bellis  dante  Magno  Pompeio;  item-
que  M.  Agrippa  tribuenteCaesare  e  Siculis,  quze  etipsapiratica  fuerc."

8  Virg.  JEn.  viii.  684.:

"  Tempora  navali  fulgent  rostrata  corona,"
4  Horat.  Sat.  i.  vi.  init. :

"  Non  quia,  Maecenas,  Lydorum  quicquid  Etruscos
Incoluit  fines,  nemo  generosior  cst  tc;
Nee  quod  avus  tibi  maternus  fuit  atque  paternus,
Olim  qui  ruagnis  Icgionibus  imperitarint."

A.r.719~B.c.3.->.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  281

and  Maecenas  appear  on  many  Etruscan  cinerary  urns,
but  never,  it  is  said,  in  connection  with  each  other;
from  which  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  two  families
were  not  united  until  a  late  period.  Of  the  Maece-
nates  indeed  we  have  no  certain  trace  in  history l ;
but  the  Cilnii  are  commemorated  as  the  royal  house
of  Arretium.  Their  pride  and  power  were  fostered
by  the  command  of  the  Etruscan  armies,  and  their
tyranny  at  last  provoked  their  subjects  to  overthrow
them.2  Whether  in  consequence  of  this  civic  revolu-
tion, or  the  more  sweeping  disasters  of  the  Roman
conquest,  the  Cilnii  sank  from  this  time  into  com-
parative insignificance.  Octavius  selected  his  friend
and  minister  from  the  equestrian  order,  nor  in  the
height  of  his  favour  and  power  did  the  wary  states-
man covet  any  more  brilliant  advancement.  It
seems  to  have  been  fortunate  for  Octavius  that  he
was  compelled  at  the  very  outset  of  his  public  career
to  select  his  own  advisers.  No  man,  perhaps,  so
highly  connected  and  so  inexperienced,  was  ever
thrown  so  entirely  upon  his  own  resources  from  the
moment  that  he  determined  to  choose  the  perilous
path  of  political  distinction.  His  own  relations  were
vexed  at  his  rejecting  their  first  timid  counsels :  their
names  no  longer  appear  among  the  partners  of  his
deliberations.  The  origin  of  his  connection  with
Maecenas  is  not  known.  That  statesman  was  pro-
bably his  senior,  at  least  by  some  years,  and  it  is  not
likely  that  he  was  associated  with  him,  as  with  Ag-
rippa,  in  the  schools  of  Apollonia.  Nor  can  it  be  as-
serted that  Msecenas  actually  drew  the  sword  in  his

These  "  legions"  must  have  been  foreign,  i.e.  Etrnscan  armies,  for
we  hear  of  no  Cilnius  or  Maecenas  among  the  consuls  or  higher  ma-
gistrates of  Rome.

1  Cicero  (pro  Cluenf.  56.)  mentions  a  C.  Maecenas,  a  knight,
who  with  other  "robora  populi  Romani  "  put  down  M.  Drusns
the  tribune,  A.U.  663.  This  may  have  been  the  grandfather  of  the
statesman.

•  Liv.  x.  3.  r>.

282  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  sxvn.

patron's  cause,  at  Mutina,  at  Philippi,  at  Perusia,  or
in  any  of  his  later  engagements.  But  the  minister's
advice  was  so  essential  to  the  warrior's  exploits,  the
sagacious  care  of  Maecenas  seemed  so  closely  inter-
woven with  the  fortunes  of  Octavius,  that  his  pane-
gyrists professed  themselves  unable  to  separate  the
one  from  the  other  in  celebrating  even  the  military
achievements  of  the  triumvir.1  The  occasions  how-
ever on  which  Maecenas  is  first  mentioned  are  those
in  which  the  skill  of  a  negotiator  or  an  able  adminis-
trator were  most  urgently  required.  The  treaty  of
Brundisium,  in  which  the  jealousies  of  Octavius  and
'Antonius  were  to  be  assuaged,  the  division  of  the
Eoman  world  to  be  arranged,  and  its  terms  to  be  con-
solidated by  the  specious  expedient  of  family  inter-
marriages, was  the  work  of  Maecenas,  with  the  assistance
at  least  of  Pollio  and  Cocceius.  During  the  doubtful
progress  of  the  Sicilian  war  the  centre  of  Octavius's
power  was  repeatedly  shaken  by  disturbances  at  Rome.
Twice  was  Maecenas  deputed  to  appease  the  disaffec-
tion and  to  supply  the  pressing  wants  of  the  people.
For  this  delicate  task  his  temper  and  talents  were  so
admirably  adapted,  that  at  a  later  period  his  master
retained  him  permanently  at  the  head  of  the  civil
administration  of  Eome  and  Italy,  and  left  him,  dur-
ing his  own  frequent  absences  from  the  centre  of
affairs,  the  virtual  sovereign  of  the  empire.  Maecenas
seems  to  have  possessed  a  genuine  taste  for  the  polite
arts,  and  to  have  enjoyed  the  society  of  men  of  letters,

1  The  lines  of  Propertius  (n.  i.  27,  sqq.)  show  this  very  strikingly.
On  reading  them  we  could  hardly  persuade  ourselves  that  Maecenas
was  not  personally  engaged  in  all  the  great  events  of  Octavius's  mili-
tary career,  did  we  not  know  for  certain  that  he  was  not  present  at
the  battle  of  Actium.  It  has  been  recently  contended,  however,
with  great  appearance  of  probability,  that  the  first  Epode  of
Horace  (Ibis  Liburnis,  &c.)  is  addressed  to  Maecenas  on  his  join  •
ing  his  patron's  expedition  to  Sicily.  Appian  (v.  99.)  speaks  of
the  Liburnian  galleys  which  were  lost  in  that  disastrous  engage-
ment. This  epode,  as  is  well  known,  has  been  generally  rc'errcd
to  the  battle  of  Actium.

A.r.T19-B.c.35.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  283

even  before  he  could  perceive  how  important  an  in-
strument literature  might  be  made  for  reconciling
the  public  mind  to  the  loss  of  liberty.  His  connec-
tion with  Virgil  dates  from  the  year  714,  and  was
prior  to  that  with  Horace,  to  whom  indeed  the  elder
poet  is  supposed  to  have  introduced  him.  He  was
instrumental  in  restoring  to  both  their  forfeited  es-
tates, and  recommending  them  to  the  favour  of  Oc-
tavius.  Varius,  who  was  senior  to  either  of  the  great
masters  of  Roman  song,  may  have  already  enjoyed
his  intimacy  at  a  still  earlier  period.

The  government  of  the  western  triumvir  was  sup-
ported by  many  other  personages  of  high  M  ValeriU3
character  and  ability ;  and  already  the  as-  Messala-
cendancy  of  his  genius  was  marked  by  the  transition
to  his  service  from  that  of  his  rival  of  the  men  of
greatest  political  discernment.  Messala  had  thrown
himself,  after  the  battle  of  Philippi,  upon  the  gene-
rosity of  Antonius,  from  whom  he  had  experienced
honourable  treatment ;  but  lie  foresaw  that  the  reck-
less career  of  Cleopatra's  lover  must  end  in  disaster,
and  when  the  triumvirs  quarrelled  he  speedily  trans-
ferred himself  to  that  which  he  already  augured
would  be  the  winning  side.  He  was  entrusted  in  re-
turn with  a  high  command  in  the  war  against  Sextus,
and  no  sooner  was  that  contest  brought  to  a  termina-
tion, than  he  was  despatched  to  chastise  the  Salassians,
;i  turbulent  tribe  which  infested  the  passes  of  the
(iraian  and  Pennine  Alps.  He  had  been  proscribed
by  the  man  who  now  heaped  these  distinctions  upon
him,  and  the  favour  with  whicli  he  was  treated
might  re-assure  less  distinguished  objects  of  the
triumvir's  former  animosity.  Pollio  had  also  aban-
doned the  service  of  Antonius,  and  sought  permission
to  reside  in  Italy  under  his  rival's  protection.  He
there  devoted  himself  to  studious  indolence,  and
showed  by  his  example  how  literature  might  continue
to  flourish  under  monarchical  patronage.

284  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvii.

Nor,  while  he  availed  himself  of  the  arms  and

counsels  of  the  best  men  of  the  day,  had  the

matrimonial crafty  aspirant  neglected  to  strengthen  his

alliances.  ..? r, ,,  , .  , ,

position  at  the  most  important  epochs  by
matrimonial  alliances.  In  his  early  youth  Caesar  had
betrothed  him  to  the  daughter  of  his  friend  Servilius ;
but  this  arrangement  was  broken  off  when,  upon  the
dictator's  death,  the  young  heir  found  himself  too
much  embarrassed  and  pre-occupied  to  decide  upon
so  important  a  step.  His  first  union  was  contracted,
in  obedience  to  the  demands  of  the  soldiery,  with
Clodia,  the  daughter  of  Fulvia  by  her  first  husband
the  infamous  tribune.  It  was  thus  that  the  first
treaty  between  Octavius  and  Antonius,  in  the  year
711,  seemed  to  be  most  auspiciously  ratified.  But
the  bride  was  still  a  child,  and  the  marriage  had  not
been  consummated,  when  the  Perusian  war  broke  out,
and  the  angry  husband  revenged  himself  on  his
mother-in-law  by  divorcing  her  daughter.  Octavius
was  now  free  to  further  his  interests  by  another  politic
engagement.  He  was  anxious  to  baffle  his  colleague's
intrigues  with  Sextus,  and  with  this  view  he  sought,
as  we  have  seen,  the  hand  of  Scribonia,  the  sister  of
Libo,  whose  daughter  had  already  become  the  consort
of  the  young  Pompeius.  This  marriage  took  place  in
714,  and  its  fruit  was  one  daughter,  who  was  early
betrothed  to  Octavia's  son  Marcellus,  and  eventually
given  to  Agrippa.  But  in  the  very  year  of  this  in-
fant's birth  the  state  of  affairs  had  changed.  Octa-
vius was  now  once  more  on  good  terms  with  Antonius,
and  at  open  variance  with  Sextus;  and  the  unfor-
tunate Scribonia,  who  had  been  already  made  the
spouse,  or  rather  perhaps  the  victim  of  two  former
husbands,  was  now  sacrificed  to  a  political  pique  if
not  to  an  illicit  passion.  For  on  the  disruption  of
this  fragile  tie  the  triumvir  straightway  carried  off
Livia  Drusilla  from  her  consort  Tiberius  Claudius,  to
whom  she  had  borne  one  son  and  was  about  to  pre-

A.r.719-B.c.:>5.  UNDER THE EMTIRE.  285

gent  another.1  Of  all  his  wives  this  is  the  only  one
whom  Octavius  can  be  supposed  to  have  espoused
from  inclination.  The  admiration  with  which  he
regarded  her,  while  she  was  yet  united  to  another,
she  had  the  skill  or  the  good  fortune  to  retain  to  the
last  through  nearly  fifty  years  of  an  unfruitful  mar-
riage; and  throughout  the  family  history,  and  in
much  even  of  the  public  policy  of  the  second  of  the
Ca3sars,  we  shall  discover  henceforward  the  arts  and
counsels  of  this  consummate  intriguer.

1  Livia  Drusilla  was  the  daughter  of  a  Claudius  Pulcher,  who  was
adopted  into  the  Livian  gens,  and  became  Livius  Drusus  Claudianus.
He  was  proscribed  by  the  triumvirs,  and  slew  himself  in  his  tent  at
Philippi.  By  her  first  husband  Tiberius  Claudius  Nero  she  had  two
sons,  Tiberius  Claudius  Nero  (who  became  afterwards  emperor),  born
A.U.  712,  and  Nero  Claudius  Drusus,  born  soon  after  her  marriage
with  Octavius,  A.U.  716.

286  HISTOEY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvnr.

CHAPTER  XXVIII.

Antonius  renews  his  intimacy  with  Cleopatra. — His  infatuated  de-
votion to  her,  and  ill-treatment  of  Octavia. — He  invades  Parthia,
is  discomfited,  and  makes  a  disastrous  retreat  (718). — He  attacks
Armenia,  and  celebrates  a  triumph  in  Alexandria  (720). — He  en-
larges Cleopatra's  dominions  with  Roman  provinces. — Orgies  of
their  court. — Account  of  Alexandria. — Octavius  increases  his
popularity  in  Rome. — His  campaigns  in  the  Alps,  in  Dalmatia.
and  Pannonia  (719 — 721). — .^Edileship  and  public  works  of
Agrippa. — Popular  indignation  against  Antonius. — Rupture  be-
tween the  triumvirs. — Antonius  divorces  Octavia. — The  Republic
declares  war  against  Egypt. — Great  armaments  on  both  sides. —
The  battle  of  Actium,  and  rout  of  the  Antonians. — Feeble  attempt
at  resistance  in  Egypt. — Antonius  kills  himself. — Cleopatra  seeks
to  fascinate  Octavius. — Being  reserved  to  grace  his  triumph  she
escapes  by  self-destruction. — Octavius  puts  to  death  Cassarion  and
others. — Henceforth  he  affects  clemency. — Apparent  change  in
his  disposition. —  Character  of  Antonius.  (A.F.  718 — 724.  B.C.
36—30.)

THE  triumph  of  Ventidius,  the  only  Roman,  as  Plu-
tarch reminds  us,  who  up  to  his  time  had
meetTcTeo- gained  such  a  distinction  for  a  Parthian

patra  in  Asia, °.  • i ,  i

and  endows  victory,  might  cause  some  jealousy  in
Roman  the  mind  of  Antonius,  who  was  less  con-
tent perhaps  to  owe  his  advancement  and
renown  to  his  lieutenant's  successes,  than  his  more
politic  colleague  Octavius.  Another  of  his  officers,
C.  Sosius,  had  performed  as  governor  of  Syria  some
martial  or  predatory  exploits  on  the  frontiers  of  that
province,  and  Canidius  Crassus  had  defeated  the
Armenians,  with  their  Albanian  and  Iberian  allies,
and  once  more  planted  the  Roman  standards  at  the
foot  of  the  Caucasus.  The  triumvir  might  fear  lest
his  own  military  reputation  should  suffer  eclipse  from
the  prowess  of  his  lieutenants :  already  the  saying  had
become  popular  that  both  Octavius  and  his  colleague
won  more  battles  by  the  hands  of  their  subordinates

A.U.718-B.C.36.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  287

than  in  their  own  persons.1  But  the  charms  of  idle-
ness and  dissipation  continued,  after  each  succeeding
interval  of  vigour,  to  regain  their  ascendancy  over
him.  After  his  return  from  Tarentum  to  his  own
sphere  of  empire,  and  the  dismissal  of  Octavia,  An-
tonius  warmed  again  into  life  that  great  evil  ivh  Ick
had  long  slept,  his  passion  for  Cleopatra,  which  men
had  fondly  hoped  was  extinguished  by  a  more  legiti-
mate attraction.  On  his  route  to  Syria  he  despatched
Fonteius  to  invite  her  to  leave  her  palace  and  meet
him.  The  Egyptian  queen  rejoiced  in  this  tribute
to  her  reviving  influence,  and  revolved  in  her  ardent
imagination  new  schemes  of  conquest  and  dominion.
She  aspired  to  make  her  dynasty  independent  of  the
galling  influence  of  the  republic,  to  consolidate  a
great  Asiatic  monarchy,  which  should  rival  Rome  on
the  one  side  and  Parthia  on  the  other.  She  met  An-
toniu's  in  Lycaonia,  and  there  held  him  fast  in  silken
fetters,  while  she  extorted  from  his  complaisance  pre-
sents the  most  glittering  and  the  most  dangerous.
But  even  the  donation  of  cities  and  territories  hardly
excited  so  much  indignation  among  the  Romans,  as
his  public  acknowledgment  of  the  twins  she  had  borne
to  him,  to  whom  he  gave  the  titles  of  the  Sun  and
Moon,  adopting  without  shame  the  inflated  style  of
an  Oriental  potentate.2  Antonius,  however,  He  makM
even  amidst  the  orgies  of  his  barbarian  ££?n.rta{hes
court,  was  intently  watching  the  revolu-  Parthians-
tions  of  Parthia.  The^sovereign  Orodes  had  recently
resigned  his  throne  to  his  son  Phraates,  and  his
successor  had  secured  his  seat  by  the  murder  of  the
abdicated  monarch  and  the  destruction  of  his  nu-
merous kinsmen,  while  many  of  the  Parthian  no-
bility had  fled  from  the  impending  massacre,  and
taken  refuge  in  the  camps  and  cities  of  the  Roman
Empire.3  Among  these  fugitives  was  Monaeses,  a

1  Pint.  Anton.  34.

2  Dion,  xlix.  32  ;  Plutarch,  Anton.  36.

3  Dion,  xlix.  23  ;  Plutarch,  Anton.  37.

288  HISTORY OF THE EOMASS  en.  xxvnr.

man  of  rank  and  influence,  whom  Anton ius  received
with  ostentatious  generosity,  and  gave  him  in  fee
some  towns  in  Asia  Minor,  as  the  Persian  king  had
once  endowed  the  illustrious  exile  Themistocles.  The
Parthian  monarch  sought  to  withdraw  his  satrap  from
the  enemy's  blandishment  by  the  offer  of  pardon  and
renewed  favour ;  and  Antonius  permitted  communi-
cations between  them,  and  listened  to  overtures  of
reconciliation  with  the  republic  by  which  they  were
accompanied,  in  order,  it  is  affirmed,  to  blind  Phra-
ates  to  his  own  preparations  for  war.  All  the  Roman
imperator  claimed  of  the  Parthians  was  the  restor-
ation of  the  captured  standards  of  Crassus,  and  the
liberation  of  such  of  the  prisoners  as  still  survived.

Both  parties  were  intent  upon  deceiving  each
compaignof  other,  and  neither  perhaps  was  deceived,
aga'nst'the  Antonius  allowed  these  futile  negotiations
Partwans.  ^Q  j^  protracted,  well  pleased  to  prolong
his  enjoyment  of  Cleopatra's  society,  and  it  was  not
till  midsummer  that  he  roused  himself  from  volup-
tuous dalliance,  and  led  an  army  of  a  hundred  thou-
sand men  to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates.  Here,  as
if  about  to  plunge  into  the  toils  and  perils  of  the
Parthian  deserts,  he  at  last  bade  his  mistress  quit
his  side  and  repair  to  her  own  territories.  But  the
attitude  of  defence  assumed  by  the  enemy  on  his
own  frontier  was  more  imposing,  perhaps,  than  he
anticipated.  The  Roman  general  resolved  to  aban-
don his  design  of  penetrating  into  the  fastnesses  of
the  barbarian  empire,  and  contented  himself  with
turning  his  arms  against  Artavasdes,  king  of  Media
Atropatene,  an  ally  or  dependent  of  the  Parthian
crown.  Antonius  placed  himself  under  the  guidance
of  the  king  of  Armenia,  who  led  his  army  through
the  southern  districts  of  his  country,  an  abundant
and  well- watered  country,  the  same  through  which
Crassus  had  rashly  refused  to  direct  his  march.  But
while  he  sat  himself  down  before  the  Median  capital

A.r.718-n.c.36.  UNDER THE EMPIUE.  289

Praaspa,  the  corps  which  oovered  his  rear  and  pro-
tected his  magazines  and  siege  batteries  was  attacked
by  the  dexterous  adversary  and  cut  in  pieces.1  The
Armenians  made  an  excuse  for  deserting  their  patron,
and  the  Komans,  destitute  of  stores  and  equipments,
were  exposed  to  the  united  assault  of  the  Medes  and
Parthians.  Antonius  made  desperate  efforts  to  ob-
tain possession  of  the  city,  within  which  he  might
have  repaired  his  losses,  and  recruited  himself  for
another  campaign.  But  the  want  of  machines  could
not  be  compensated  by  the  bare  valour  of  the  assail-
ants, and  Phraates,  who  had  now  come  up,  enjoyed
from  a  distance  the  sight  of  his  adversary  wasting  his
strength,  and  the  time  which  was  becoming  precious,
in  these  unavailing  endeavours.  The  Eoman  pro-
posed terms  of  accommodation ;  the  Parthian  laughed
him  to  scorn.  Antonius  broke  up  from  his  camp
soon  after  the  autumnal  equinox,  when  the  winter
was  about  to  set  in  throughout  the  cold  and  lofty
regions  which  surrounded  him.  The  only  ni, djsa.troui
course  open  for  his  retreat  lay  to  the  retreat'
north-west,  into  the  heart  of  a  country  still  rougher
and  more  inclement  than  that  which  he  was  about
to  quit ;  and  the  Armenians,  to  whose  hospitality  he
must  entrust  himself,  had  already  betrayed  and
abandoned  him.  The  retreat  lasted  seven-and-
twenty  days 2,  during  which  the  sufferings  of  the
Koman  army  were  unparalleled  in  their  military
annals.  The  intense  cold,  the  blinding  snow  and
driving  sleet,  the  want  sometimes  of  provisions,
sometimes  of  water,  the  use  of  poisonous  herbs,  and
the  harassing  attacks  of  the  enemy's  cavalry  and
bowmen,  which  could  only  be  repelled  by  maintain-

1  Dion  calls  the  city  Praaspa,  Plutarch  Phraata,  the  locality  is  un-
certain, and  Livy  (Epit.  cxxx.)  estimates  the  retreat  to  the  frontier
of  Armenia  at  three  hundred  miles. Media  Atropatene  lay  between
the  mount  Zagrus  and  the  Caspian,  in  the  latitude  of  Osrhoene  and
the  heads  of  the  Tigris.

2  Plutarch,  Anton.  50. Livy  says  twenty-one  days  only.
VOL.  III.  U

290  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

ing  the  dense  array  of  the  phalanx  or  the  tortoise,
reduced  the  retreating  army  by  one-third  of  its
numbers.  At  length,  at  the  distance  of  three  hun-
dred miles,  it  reached  a  river,  which  the  historians
designate  as  the  Araxes,  the  boundary  of  Armenia,
and  when  it  had  crossed  to  the  further  side,  the
enemy  desisted  from  the  pursuit.  The  brave  and
disciplined  fugitives,  however  reduced  in  numbers
and  abashed  in  confidence,  were  still  formidable
to  the  people  within  whose  frontiers  they  had  arrived.
The  Armenians  dared  not  repel  them :  but  their
leader  was  too  impatient  to  renew  his  accustomed
winter  orgies  to  allow  any  long  halt ;  and  the  rapid
marches  which  he  required  of  the  wearied  and
dispirited  legions  cost  them  eight  thousand  gallant
soldiers  before  they  reached  their  resting-places
within  the  Boman  province.  In  Syria  Antonius
was  met  by  Cleopatra ;  festivities  recommenced  with
unabated  splendour :  the  soldiers  were  gratified  with
presents  of  vestments  and  money,  and  the  triumvir
returned  with  his  mistress  to  spend  the  winter  in
the  palace  of  the  Ptolemies.1

Antonius,  to  whom  warfare  and  dissipation  fur-
nished alternate  excitement  of  equal  potency,  now
planned  his  revenge  upon  the  Armenians  and  their
crafty  sovereign,  Artavasdes.  The  Median  chief-
tain, of  the  same  name,  now  invited,  instead  of
repelling  him;  for  the  Median  and  Parthian  had
quarrelled  about  the  division  of  the  spoil,  and  the
former  had  been  at  ancient  feud  with  his  name-
sake on  the  Araxes.  The  Eoman  had  failed  in  an
attempt  to  seize  the  person  of  his  Armenian  enemy,
by  a  treacherous  summons  to  partake  of  the  fes-
tivities of  the  Egyptian  court.  Artavasdes  had
prudently  avoided  the  snare,  and  awaited  the  attack,
which  he  now  clearly  foresaw,  within  his  own  fron-
tiers. Antonius  quitted  the  banks  of  the  Nile  in

1  Plutarch,  Anton.  51.;  Dion,xlix.  33.

A.r.719-B.C.35.  KNDER THE EMPIRE.  291

the  spring  of  719,  and  hoped,  while  pretending  to
lead  another  expedition  against  the  Parthians,  to
surprise  and  master  the  crafty  Armenian.  Arta-
vasdes  was  again  saved  by  an  accident..  While
Antonius  was  equipping  himself  in  Syria  for  the
campaign,  his  consort  Octavia  came  from  Italy  to
Athens.  That  noble  matron  felt  the  responsibility
and  the  dignity  of  her  position  as  the  sister  of  one
and  wife  of  the  other  master  of  the  Koman  world.
Two  such  rivals  could  hardly  continue  in  harmony
with  one  another ;  but  she  felt  it  to  be  her  mission
to  maintain  peace  between  them5  to  allay  their
jealousies,  and  interpret  to  them  their  misunder-
standings. The  connection  between  her  husband
and  Cleopatra  must  be  as  fatal,  she  was  assured,  to
his  fame  and  fortunes  as  to  her  own  domestic
happiness.  The  Komans  were  growing  more  and
more  dissatisfied  with  it,  while  Octavius  watched
their  rising  irritation,  and  prepared,  under  the
specious  pretence  of  vindicating  his  sister's  claims,
to  direct  it  for  his  rival's  humiliation.  The  octavia  bringi
anxious  wife  now  brought  with  her  pre-  mone^to
sents  for  her  lord,  and  his  principal  <nt\  a*

,,  ,,  .,,  i-l  \ refu»e«to«ee

adherents,  together  with  money  and  equip-  her.
ments  for  his  soldiers.  She  was  attended  also  by  a
corps  of  two  thousand  men,  whom  she  had  armed
with  unusual  splendour  to  serve  as  a  body-guard  to
Antonius.  But  the  heartless  profligate  refused  to
come  into  her  presence.  He  coldly  commanded  her
by  a  letter  to  remain  at  Athens,  while  he  went  forth
on  his  Parthian  expedition;  but  at  the  same  time
he  did  not  scruple  to  accept  the  presents  which  her
generosity  had  proffered.  Cleopatra  on  her  part
feared  to  part  with  her  admirer,  while  a  rival  she
could  not  fail  to  respect  still  solicited  an  interview.
She  directed  all  the  force  of  her  charms  and  artifices
to  retain  him  at  her  side,  and  persuaded  him  to

1  Plutarch,  Anton.  53.
D  2

292  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

forego  his  threatened  chastisement  of  the  Armenian,
and  so  postpone  to  another  season  the  long  impend-
ing demand  for  the  standards  of  Crass  us.  These
intrigues  assured  for  the  moment  the  safety  of  Arta-
vasdes :  but  Cleopatra  had  nothing  to  fear  from  the
proud  consort  of  her  unworthy  lover ;  for  Octavia
scorned  to  play  the  rival  to  a  foreign  mistress,  and
returned  with  calm  dignity  to  Home,  abandoning
her  reckless  husband  to  the  fate  he  merited.  At
home  she  was  received  with  every  demonstration  of
tenderness  and  respect  by  the  citizens ;  the  care  she
took  of  her  children  by  Antonius,  and  even  of  those
whom  Fulvia  had  borne  to  him,  all  of  whom  were
equally  abandoned  by  their  profligate  father,  moved
their  warmest  admiration :  but  they  reserved  their
pity,  says  Plutarch,  for  the  wretched  husband  him-
self; especially  such  as  had  seen  the  woman  to  whose
arts  he  had  surrendered,  and  judged  her  to  have  no
advantage  over  Octavia  either  in  youth  or  beauty.1

In  the  year  720  Antonius  claimed  his  assigned
Antonius  succession  to  the  consulship,  which  was
menla'cio).  duly  conceded  to  him  ;  but  he  cared  not  to
antriumphTnes  enter  upon  its  duties,  and  on  the  same  day
Alexandria,  relinquished  it  to  L.  Sempronius  Atratinus.
With  the  spring  he  again  quitted  the  Egyptian  court,
and  repaired  to  his  camps  on  the  Parthian  frontier.
His  advance  was  sudden,  and  Artavasdes  was  sur-
prised by  his  appearance  at  the  head  of  a  powerful
army  before  Nicopolis,  in  Lesser  Armenia,  from
whence  he  despatched  a  peremptory  summons  to
the  barbarian  chieftain  to  confer  with  him  in  person.
The  Armenian  hesitated.  Antonius  dashed  boldly
into  the  centre  of  his  dominions,  and  led  his  army  to
the  walls  of  Artaxata  on  the  Araxes.  Artavasdes
now  ventured  into  his  ally's  presence.  He  was  not
allowed  to  recover  his  freedom,  and  with  the  sove-
reign in  his  power,  Antonius  found  no  resistance

1  Plutarch,  Anton.  57.

A.U.-20-B.C.34.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  293

opposed  to  him  by  the  people.  The  whole  of  Ar-
menia fell  for  the  moment  into  his  hands :  one  or
two  Koman  garrisons  were  left  to  demand  a  tribute
and  to  hold  some  important  positions,  which  sufficed
to  give  to  the  occupation  of  the  country  the  empty
title  of  a  conquest.  The  triumvir'  now  abandoned
once  more  his  plans  against  the  Parthians,  and  re-
turned with  a  large  booty  and  a  train  of  royal  and
noble  captives  to  Egypt,  where  he  crowned  the  dis-
gust of  the  Eomans  by  parading  the  glories  of  a
triumph,  in  which  Artavasdes  was  led  in  chains
before  the  admiring  eyes  of  the  Alexandrians.1
The  dazzling  splendour  of  this  military  spectacle,
combining  the  elegance  of  Greek  and  the  gorgeous-
ness  of  Asiatic  invention,  far  surpassed,  we  may
suppose,  the  most  sumptuous  pageants  of  Roman
creation.  But  the  pride  of  Oriental  sovereignty  was
not  satisfied  without  the  personal  homage  of  its
captives,  a  humiliation  which  the  good  sense  of  the
Koman  conquerors  had  never  permitted  them  to  ex-
act. The  triumphal  procession  passed  in  slow  pomp
through  the  rows  of  wondering  Copts  and  Macedo-
nians, and  reached  at  last  the  golden  throne  on  a
silver  dais,  upon  which  Cleopatra  was  seated.  Here
the  Armenians  were  ordered  to  prostrate  themselves
before  her  feet ;  but  this  the  sturdy  mountaineers
refused  to  do,  and  persisted  in  their  refusal  till
Antonius  was  constrained,  from  mere  shame,  to
waive  the  ceremony.  This  spectacle  was  succeeded
after  the  Roman  fashion  by  a  grand  entertainment
given  by  the  imperator  to  the  Alexandrian  people.
Soon  afterwards  he  convened  an  assembly  of  the
citizens  in  the  halls  and  gardens  of  the  gymnasium,
the  chief  place  of  public,  resort.  They  were  He  assigns
received  by  Antonius  and  Cleopatra,  seated  **t*
side  by  side  on  thrones  of  equal  height  and  her  children.
splendour ;  on  lower  chairs  they  beheld  the  children

1  Dion,  xlix.  39,  40.;  Plutarch,  Anton.  50.; Strabo.  xi.  14.

294  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvin.

of  their  sovereign,  both  Caesarion,  the  reputed  offspring
of  the  great  Julius,  and  those  she  had  borne  to  her
later  admirer.  The  triumvir  delivered  an  oration  in
which  he  declared  Cleopatra  queen,  not  of  Egypt
only,  but  of  Cyprus,  Lybia  and  CaBle-Syria,  and
Caesarion  the  partner  of  her  sovereignty.  This  ac-
knowledgment of  the  legitimacy  of  Caesar's  child  was
meant  to  invalidate  the  claim  of  Octavius  to  the
dictator's  inheritance,  and  was  deeply  and  fatally
resented  by  the  injured  heir.  At  the  same  time  the
triumvir  did  not  scruple  to  designate  his  own  spu-
rious brood,  the  children  of  an  alien  paramour,  as
kings,  the  offspring  of  kings.1  To  Alexander,  whom
he  arrayed  in  the  flowing  robe  and  peaked  tiara,  the
Persian  badge  of  royalty,  he  assigned  with  a  mag-
nificent wave  of  his  hand  the  barbaric  realms  of  the
Armenian,  the  Parthian,  and  the  Mede.  To  Ptole-
maeus,  who  wore  the  Macedonian  cloak  and  bonnet,
bound  with  the  simple  fillet,  he  pretended  to  deliver
the  throne  of  the  Seleucidae,  with  the  Koman  pro-
vinces of  Cilicia,  Syria  and  Phoenice.  His  daughter,
who  bore  the  name  of  Cleopatra,  he  endowed  with
the  sovereignty  of  Gyrene  ;  and  he  audaciously  trans-
mitted a  mandate  to  Eome,  requiring  that  these
titles  should  be  acknowledged  and  registered  there.2
The  Alexandrian  court  now  plunged  again  into  the
most  extravagant  debauchery ;  the  queen

Ambitions  .,, , ,.  j  ,• •>  •

view,  of still  leading  the  way,  and  exerting  her  in-
exhaustible  powers of  invention  in  con-
triving new pleasures and amusements for the
Koman  voluptuary. She  had  secured,  as  she  fondly

1  Plutarch,  Anton.  54.:  /3o<nAe?s  jSatriAeajf  avayopfva'a.s.  See  also
Dion.  The  Greek  idiom  is  equivocal,  and  Plutarch  may  have  really
meant  to  say,  that  these  personages  were  dignified  with  the  pompous
designation  of ''kings  of  kings"  (Hoeck,  R.  G.  i.  283,):  but  medals
of  the  time  exist  with  the  legend  in  Latin,  "  Cleopatne  reginse,  regum
filiorum  regum," — "  kings  the  sons  of  kings."  Vaillant,  Hist.  Ptolem.
Sharpe,  Eyi/pt  under  the  Ptolemies,  p.  204.

*  Plutarch,  /.  c. ;  Dion,  xlix.  41.

A.U.720-B.C.34.  UNDER THE E3IPIRE.  .  295

deemed,  the  stability  of  her  ancestral  throne,  and
extended  its  outworks  far  beyond  the  boundaries
with  which  her  fathers  had  been  contented.  Vaster
views  of  dominion  were  opening  upon  her ;  she
might  look  forward,  as  no  idle  dream,  to  behold  her
pavilion  planted  on  the  Tarpeian  hill,  and  erect  the
throne  of  Alexander  among  the  trophies  of  Marius.1
When  she  pledged  her  royal  word  with  more*  than
usual  solemnity,  she  swore  by  the  decrees  she  would
dictate  from  the  Capitol.2  Nor  was  she  really  in-
different to  the  person  of  the  illustrious  lover  whom
she  held  captive.  Though  her  own  security  had  been
her  first  object,  and  her  ambition  perhaps  the  second,
we  can  hardly  doubt  that  she  was  at  last  enslaved
herself  by  a  licentious  passion,  and  that  the  various
connections  to  which  she  had  formerly  submitted
from  interest  or  casual  liking  were  now  succeeded
by  a  real  and  engrossing  attachment.  She  might
disdain  the  fear  of  a  rival  potentate,  and  defy  the
indignation  of  Octavius :  but  her  anxiety  about  his
sister  was  the  instinct  of  the  woman  rather  than  of
the  queen.  She  could  not  forget  that  a  wife's  legiti-
mate influence  had  once  detained  her  lover  from  her
side  for  more  than  a  whole  year ;  she  might  still  ap-
prehend the  awakening  of  his  reason,  and  his  renun-
ciation of  an  alliance  which,  she  well  knew,  he  felt
at  times  to  be  bitterlv  degrading.3  To  re-

.,  r  i  j •  11 i  Dissipation  of

tarn  her  grasp  ot  her  admirer,  as  well  as  her  the  Aie«n-

11  fi-r.1 •  i drUa  court.

seat  upon  the  throne  of  the  Ptolemies,  she

must  drown  his  scruples  in  voluptuous  oblivion,  and

discover  new  charms  to  revive  and  amuse  his  jaded

1  Propert.  ii.  11,  45.:

"Fcedaque  Tarpeio  conopia  tendere  saxo;
Jura  dare  et  stutuas  inter  et  aima  Mari."

•  Dion,  1.  5.

*  Roman  history  has  few  love  romances,  and  lam  willing  to  accept
the  view  of  Cleopatra's  character  which  has  been  familiarized  to  us
by  so  keen  an  interpreter  of  nature  as  Shakspeare. The  ancients,  it
must  be  allowed,  from  the  Roman  point  of  view,  saw  nothing  in  her
conduct  but  vanity  and  selfishness.

296  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvni.

passion.  Her  personal  talents  were  indeed  of  the
most  varied  kind ;  she  was  an  admirable  singer  and
musician ;  she  was  skilled  in  many  languages,  and
possessed  intellectual  accomplishments  rarely  found
among  the  staidest  of  her  sex,  combined  with  the
archness  and  humour  of  the  lightest.  She  pampered
her  lover's  grosser  appetites  by  rank  and  furious  in-
dulgences, she  stimulated  his  flagging  zest  in  them
by  ingenious  surprises ;  nor  less  did  she  gratify  every
reviving  taste  for  nobler  enjoyments  with  paintings
and  sculptures,  and  works  of  literature.  She  en-
couraged him  to  take  his  seat  as  gymnasiarch,  or
director  of  the  public  amusements,  and  even  to  vary
his  debauches  with  philosophy  and  criticism.1  She
amused  him  with  sending  divers  to  fasten  salt-fish
to  the  bait  of  his  angling-rod2 ;  and  when  she  had
pledged  herself  to  consume  the  value  of  ten  million
sesterces  at  a  meal,  amazed  him  by  dissolving  in  the
humble  cup  of  vinegar  before  her  a  pearl  of  inesti-
mable price.3  Her  lover  attended  her  in  the  forum,
at  the  theatre,  and  the  tribunals ;  he  rode  with  her,
or  followed  her  chariot  on  foot  escorted  by  a  train  of
eunuchs :  at  night  he  strolled  with  her  through  the
city,  in  the  garb  of  a  slave,  and  encountered  abuse
and  blows  from  the  rabble  of  the  streets  ;  by  day  he
wore  the  loose  Persian  robe,  with  the  Median  dagger
at  his  girdle,  and  designated  as  his  palace  the  prseto-
rium  or  general's  apartment.  Painters  and  sculptors
were  charged  to  group  the  illustrious  pair  together,
and  the  coins  of  the  kingdom  bore  the  heads  and
names  of  both  conjointly.  The  Roman  legionary,
with  the  name  of  Cleopatra  inscribed  upon  his  shield,
found  himself  transformed  into  a  Macedonian  body-
guard. Masques  were  presented  at  the  court,  in
which  the  versatile  Plancus  sank  into  the  character

1  Dion,  /.  c.  *  Plutarch,  Anton.  29.

*  Plin.  H.  N.  ix.  58.;  Macrob.  Saturn,  ii.  13. This  sum  may  equal
80.00U/.

A.r.720-B.C.R4.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  297

of  a  stage-buffoon,  and  enacted  the  part  of  the  sea-
god  Glaucus  in  curt  cerulean  vestments,  crowned  with
the  feathery  heads  of  the  papyrus,  and  deformed  with
the  tail  of  a  fish.1  But  when  Cleopatra  arrayed  her-
self in  the  garb  and  usurped  the  attributes  of  Isis,
and  invited  her  paramour  to  ape  the  deity  Osiris,  the
portentous  travesty  assumed  a  deeper  significance.
It  had  been  the  policy  of  the  Macedonian  sovereigns
to  form  an  alliance  between  the  popular  superstitions
of  their  Greek  and  Egyptian  subjects.  Ptolemaeus
Soter  had  prevailed  on  the  native  priesthood  to  sanc-
tion the  consecration  of  a  new  divinity  Serapis,  who
if  not  really  of  Grecian  origin,  was  confidently  iden-
tified by  the  Greeks  with  their  own  Pluto,  or  perhaps
with  Zeus.  The  Macedonians  had  admitted  with
little  scruple  their  great  hero's  claims  to  be  the  off-
spring of  Ammon,  the  king  of  gods,  who  was  wor-
shipped in  the  Oasis  of  the  desert.  The  notion  that
a  mere  man  might  become  exalted  into  union  with
deity,  favoured  by  the  rationalizing  explanations  of
their  popular  mythology  already  current  among  the
learned,  had  gradually  settled  into  an  indulgent  ad-
mission of  the  royal  right  of  apotheosis.2  It  has  been
already  mentioned  that  Antonius  assumed  the  charac-
ter of  Bacchus  at  Athens.  In  the  metropolis  of  Grecian
scepticism  this  could  only  be  regarded  as  a  drunken
whim :  but  when  he  came  forward  in  Alexandria  as
the  Nile-God  Osiris,  the  Bacchus  or  fructifying  power
of  the  Coptic  mythology,  he  claimed  as  a  present  deity
the  veneration  of  the  credulous  Egyptians.3

1  Veil.  ii.  83. This writer exhibits peculiar bitterness  against
Plancus. He  had  said  of  him  (c.  63.),  "  dubia  id  est  sua  fide." In
Pliny  Plancus  figures  as  the  umpire  of  Cleopatra's  wager  above  men-
tioned. When  she  was  about  to  dissolve  a  second  pearl,  the  fellow  of
the  first,  he  snatched  it  from  her,  and  it  was  afterwards  cut  in  two,  and
so  furnished  pendants  for  the  ears  of  a  statue  of  Venus  at  Rome.

2  On  some  of  the  coins  of  Cleopatra  is  the  legend  K\e6ira.Tpa  fact
vftertpa. See  Eckhel,  iv.  23.

8  Osiris  was  also  tv  legendary  king  of  Egypt,  and  the  assumption
of  the  character  by  Antonius  may  have  had  a  political  object.

298  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvnr.

The  social  circumstances  of  Alexandria  rendered
this  assumption  of  divinity  not  only  sig-

Alexnndria  . ,,  f,  T_ ir r -LL  •

and  the  niticant  to  the  eastern  halt  ot  the  empire,
but  peculiarly  distasteful  to  the  Romans
themselves.  It  was  in  fact  to  set  up  a  rival  to  the
Capitoline  Jupiter ;  and  to  suggest  to  the  unsteady
provincials  that  the  Nile  or  the  Orontes  had  equal
claims  to  their  reverence  with  the  Tiber.  The  suc-
cessors of  Alexander  had  been  no  common  antagonists
even  in  the  age  of  the  Scipios;  and  the  Eoman  senate
had  more  than  once  hesitated  before  committing  itself
to  a  war  with  the  opulent  and  populous  East.  One
indeed  of  these  dynasties  had  given  place  to  the  pro-
consuls of  the  republic ;  but  an  able  and  daring  sove-
reign occupied  the  throne  of  the  Ptolemies  at  the
head  of  a  wide  confederation,  and  had  added  to  her
Macedonian  phalanx  and  her  Egyptian  navy  the
discipline  and  terror  of  the  Roman  legions.  The
Alexandrian  population  was  one  of  the  most  fierce,
inconstant,  and  turbulent  in  the  world.  It  combined
the  pride  of  the  Greeks,  the  stubbornness  of  the  Jews,
and  the  sullen  and  acrid  passions  of  the  Coptic  race.
Into  the  original  Macedonian  colony,  and  into  a  city
which  its  founder  designed  for  the  fortress  and  em-
porium of  his  domains,  had  been  poured  a  busy  and
fermenting  mass  of  human  beings  from  the  neigh-
bouring Delta,  from  the  adjacent  Syria,  from  the
islands  and  maritime  towns  of  Hellas,  and  from
nearly  every  quarter  of  the  globe  in  which  crime,
poverty,  or  political  change  supplied  a  stream  of
exiles  and  adventurers.  These  elements  were  united
rather  by  the  city  walls  than  by  the  affinities  of  law,
lineage,  or  creed.  Yet  in  one  respect  they  were
nearly  all  agreed,  in  aversion  to  the  central  control  of
Eoman  arms  and  edicts,  and  in  a  propensity  to  re-
gard the  ancestral  and  composite  religions  of  the
East  with  more  favour  than  the  barren  simplicity  of
the  Etruscan  cult.  But  the  tyranny  of  their  rulers

A.D.720-B.C.34. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  299

had  more  than  counterbalanced  the  advantages  of
their  position  and  the  liberality  of  their  institutions.
While  the  population  of  Egypt,  if  we  may  trust  our
authorities,  had  fallen  off  one  half  in  the  course  of
two  centuries,  the  trade  of  Alexandria  with  the  East
was  still  limited  and  languid ;  she  had  not  yet  dis-
covered the  sources  of  her  future  opulence  and
renown.1  Amidst  this  motley  assemblage  of  con-
querors and  conquered,  of  natives  and  of  strangers,
one  third,  it  is  said,  of  the  free  population  consisted
of  Jews,  a  people  who  had  already  begun  to  develop
not  only  throughout  Asia,  but  even  in  Home,  their
strong  national  propensity  for  foreign  sojourn  and
monetary  dealings.2  The  Jews  in  Alexandria  had
connected  themselves  with  the  upper  class  rather
than  the  lower:  they  had  cultivated  the  Greek  lan-
guage, and  imbibed  perhaps  some  taste  for  Greek
ideas;  and  when  they  became  ashamed  of  retaining
the  oracles  of  their  sacred  books  under  the  seal  of  the
old  Hebrew  idiom,  which  had  been  long  unintelligible
to  the  vulgar  even  among  themselves,  they  translated
them  into  the  Greek,  as  it  was  then  spoken  at  Alex-
andria, rather  than  into  the  vernacular  dialect  of  their
compatriots  in  Palestine.  They  proved  themselves
diligent  in  traffic  and  docile  as  strangers  in  a  foreign
land,  and  thus  obtained  the  reward  of  citizenship  by
a  special  decree.  The  free  population  of  Alexandria
is  said  to  have  amounted  about  this  time  to  three

1  Diodorus  estimates  the  population  of  Egypt  under  the  last  of  the
Ptolemies  at  3,000,000,  which,  even  with  the  addition  of  the  Alex-
nndrian  census,  is  scarcely  half  what  he  declares  it  to  have  been  two
hundred  years  earlier.  This  in  all  probability  is  to  be  confined  to
the  free  population.  The  reading,  however,  according  to  Wesseling,
is  uncertain.  Diodor.  i.  31.,  xvii.  52.

•  Philo,  speaking  of  the  Jewish  denizens  of  Alexandria,  seventy
years  later,  says  that  of  the  five  quarters  of  the  city  two  were  called
the  Jewish,  from  the  great  proportion  of  inhabitants  of  that  nation,
and  that  there  were  many  Jews  in  the  other  quarters  also  (in  Place.
8.).  This  influx  of  Jews  began  with  the  conquest  of  their  country
by  Ptolemteus  Soter,  and  was  increased  when  Philometor  offered
them  an  asylum  from  the  oppression  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes.

300  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvin.

hundred  thousand  souls l :  the  slaves  have  been
loosely  estimated  at  an  equal  number.2  But  if  we
reflect  that  the  Egyptians  had  little  opportunity  of
making  captives  in  war,  and  that  the  means  of  pur-
chase must  have  been  confined  to  a  small  class ;  when
we  consider  also  the  analogy  of  modern  oriental  cities,
in  which  the  possession  of  slaves  is  exceedingly  limited,
we  shall  be  disposed  to  reduce  this  estimate  by  half  or
even  two-thirds.  It  is  probable  that  a  large  portion
of  the  menial  drudgery  of  the  capital  was  still  per-
formed by  the  Coptic  population ;  but  the  slave-
dealers  of  Alexandria  ministered  to  the  demands  of
luxury  and  ostentation;  and  while  their  vessels  im-
ported the  most  accomplished  artists  that  could  be
purchased  in  the  harbours  of  Greece  and  Asia,  cara-
vans from  the  Bahr  Abiad  and  the  Niger  conveyed  to
their  markets  the  negroes  of  central  Africa,  and  with
them  barbarians  not  less  fair  in  complexion  than  the
pale-faced  denizens  of  the  German  forests.3

The  first  month  of  the  year  721  passed  away  in
the  capital of  the  East  amidst  licentious

Popularity  of  •  ,1  r i  • i.  11

octaviusin  orgies,  the  rumour  ot  which  caused  deep
resentment  at  Rome,  while  the  popularity  of
Octavius,  not  without  reason,  was  rising  daily  higher.
The  heir  of  the  dictator  was  gradually  beginning  to
fill  the  space  left  vacant  in  the  public  eye  by  his

1  Diodorus,  xvii.  52.

2  Gibbon,  JDecl.  and  Fall.  c.  xii.;  Mannert.  Geog.  Gr.  und  Rom.  x.
i.  629. The  length  of  the  city  was  three  miles  and  a  half,  and  the
breadth  about  one  mile. Its  shape  was  tolerably  regular,  so  that
Pliny's  estimate  of  fifteen  miles  for  the  circuit  must  be  erroneous,
unless  it  is  meant  to  include  the  suburbs.

*  Lucan,  x.  127.:

"  Turn  famulae  nnmerns  turbae,  popnlusque  minister;
Discolor  hos  sanguis,  alios  distinxerat  setas;
Haje  Libycos,  pars  tarn  flavos  gerit  altera  crines,
Ut  nullis  Cffisar  Rheni  se  dicat  in  arvis
Tam  rutilas  vidisse  comas."

It  is  possible  that  these  fair- haired  slaves  may  have  come  from  the
north,  perhaps  from  the  interior  of  Russia;  but  there  are  some  tribes
of  extremely  light  complexion  in  Africa  almost  under  the  equator.

A.U.7:il-B.c.33.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  301

uncle's  death.  His  manners  were  affable,  his  concern
for  the  public  weal  was  passionate  and  unwearied,
and  even  the  pretence  he  still  maintained  of  amity
towards  an  unworthy  colleague  and  an  injurious
relative  seemed  amiable  and  graceful.  After  the
reduction  of  Sicily  he  had  devoted  some  time  to  the
establishment  of  a  mild  but  firm  government  in
Home  :  in  the  following  year,  however,  he  had  thrown
himself  without  reserve  into  fatigues  and  dangers  to

o  o

maintain  the  honour  of  his  country  against  hostile
barbarians.  He  engaged  the  Salassi  and  His  campaigns
Taurisci  in  person  amidst  the  most  difficult  S^H.rn*.
passes  of  the  Alps,  defeated  the  Liburni  and  D^mL'tialTf.

A  V  719  "20

Japydes  in  Dalmatia,  and  carried  his  arms  ra'i.'
against  the  Pannonians  on  the  waters  of  the  Save.
The  first  of  these  wars  he  left  Messala  to  bring  to  a
conclusion ;  in  the  other  he  was  occupied  in  person
during  three  successive  summers,  and  the  scale  on
which  his  operations  were  conducted  required  the
joint  exertions  of  all  his  best  commanders.  At  the
end  of  three  campaigns  the  general  rising  of  the
Illyrian  tribes  was  effectually  quelled,  and  the  vast
region  from  the  Save  to  the  borders  of  Epirus  was
reduced  to  the  form  of  a  province.1  Octavius  obtained
the  distinction  of  a  wound  in  actual  combat,  besides
incurring  other  dangers  and  injuries.  The  senate
decreed  him  a  triumph,  but  the  moment  was  not  pro-
pitious to  the  indulgence  of  vanity,  and  he  discreetly
deferred  its  celebration  to  a  later  period.

The military reputation of Octavius was  thus
fully  restored  at  the  moment  when  the  dis-
closure of  his  rival's  disasters in Parthia  m«inuiiu
hung  like  a  heavy  cloud  over  the  brilliancy  unions  with
of  his  former  fame. The  despatches  which
Antonius  had  sent  to  Eome  had  disguised  his  losses
and  disgrace ;  and  the  senate  had  been  induced  by

1  Lir.  Epit.  cxxxi.,  cxxxii. ; Suet. Oct.  20,  21. ; Appian,  Illyr,
16—28.;  Dion,  xlix.  33— 38.;  Florus,  iv.  12.

302  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvin.

his  specious  representations,  seconded  by  the  influence
of  his  colleague,  who  at  that  moment  was  still  dubious
of  the  event  of  the  Sicilian  contest,  to  decree  sacri-
fices and  thanksgivings  in  honour  of  his  pretended
victory.  Even  in  the  following  year,  after  the  defeat
and  death  of  Sextus,  Octavius  continued  to  lavish
upon  the  absent  triumvir  professions  of  unabated
good-will,  and  at  his  instance  certain  public  honours
were  assigned  him,  his  chariot  was  placed  in  front  of
the  rostra,  a  statue  was  raised  to  him  in  the  temple
of  Concord,  and  he  was  invited  to  assist  with  his  family
at  the  festive  banquets  of  the  goddess.'  The  young
conqueror  carried  his  professions  so  far  as  to  address
a  letter  of  condolence  to  his  rival,  when  the  discom-
fiture of  his  expedition  was  no  longer  a  secret.  He
affected  to  lament  the  envy  to  which  his  own  recent
successes  would  necessarily  expose  him.  In  the  mean
time  he  congratulated  himself,  in  the  society  of  his
intimate  associates,  on  the  increasing  ability  and
firmness  of  his  legions,  thus  constantly  exercised  in
distant  and  dangerous  warfare ;  he  fed  the  hopes  of
his  followers  with  visions  of  future  plunder,  planned
new  expeditions  which  he  had  no  expectations  of
effecting,  and  revived  the  recollection  of  his  uncle's
most  romantic  exploit,  by  threatening  an  attack  upon
the  Britons.2  Antonius  gave  no  heed  to  the  far-
resounding  din  of  his  rival's  armaments,  but  few  of
his  countrymen  were  blinded  probably  as  to  their  real
destination.

Agrippa  continued  to  follow  diligently  the  footsteps

of  his  illustrious  patron,  filling  up  the  out-

dero™pte«  the line  of  his  policy,  and  fixing  upon  him  the

city  as  ffidile.  , . .. L ~ ./  ...  °  -!. . .

admiration  ot  the  citizens.  Ihe  triumvir
was  anxious  that  the  people  should  be  amused  by
shows  and  buildings  of  more  than  usual  splendour,
and  in  the  year  720  this  faithful  minister  descended

1  Dion,  xlix.  18.  2  Dion,  xlix.  38.

A.C.721-B.C.33.  T.NDER THE EMPIRE.  303

from  the  rank  he  had  attained  as  a  consular  to  serve
the  inferior  office  of  aedile.  He  discharged  the  duties
of  this  popular  magistracy  with  unexampled  magni-
ficence. He  renewed  and  beautified  the  most  impor-
tant public  buildings,  repaired  the  highways,  cleansed
the  sewers  lf  restored  the  aqueducts,  and  multiplied
the  fountains.2  The  decoration  of  the  barrier  of  the
circus  with  the  figures  of  dolphins  was  attributed  to  his
taste 3 ;  nor  did  he  omit  to  dispense  to  the  people  an
unlimited  supply  of  the  necessary  articles  of  oil  and
salt,  and  throughout  the  year  he  furnished  the  whole
population  with  the  gratuitous  services  of  the  barbers.
He  opened,  it  is  said,  an  hundred  and  seventy  baths
for  public  recreation,  and  his  shows  lasted  through
fifty-nine  days  without  intermission.  The  presents
he  made  of  money  and  precious  objects  were  more
than  usually  lavish  and  systematic.  The  plunder  of
the  Illyrian  campaigns,  from  which  Pollio  is  supposed
to  have  founded  his  noble  library  for  the  use  of  the
citizens,  furnished  doubtless  the  resources  for  this
profuse  expenditure.  If  the  coffers  of  the  generous
gedile  were  drained  by  it,  we  may  surmise  that  the
triumvir  freely  opened  his  own  hoards  to  supply  the
deficiency.  For,  grateful  as  the  Romans  might  be
to  the  agent  through  whom  these  bounties  were  dis-
pensed to  them,  it  was  to  Octavius  himself  that  they
attributed  the  principal  merit  of  the  design ;  and  it
may  be  presumed,  when  a  rough  soldier  like  Agrippa
proposed  that  the  innumerable  works  of  art  concealed
in  the  villas  of  the  wealthy  should  be  amassed  in
museums  for  the  gratification  of  the  public,  that  he

1  Agrippa  caused  himself  to  be  conveyed  in  a  boat  up  the  Cloaca
Maxima. Dion,  xlix.  43.;  Plin.  H.  N.  xxxvi.  24., "  Urbs  subter
navigata."

2  Frontinus,  de  Aqueduct,  c.  9.

3  Dion,  /.  c. The  spina  or  barrier  of  the  circus  was  the  low  wall
which  ran  along  the  centre  of  the  area  parallel  to  its  length. Along
the  top  of  this  wall  Agrippa  placed  figures  of  dolphins  and  egg-shaped
halls:  Touy  rt  $f\<piva,*  TO  Tt  uoftS-rj  5rjfuoi/p7T)MaTa  KaTfffrijffaro,  3iro>y
Si'  aiiriav  al  -rrepioSoi  riav  irfpiSpopuv  avaSfiKvixavTat.

304  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

was  obeying  the  master  impulse  of  another  hand  only
slightly  veiled  from  general  observation.1  The  morals
and  even  the  tranquillity  of  the  city  were  promoted  by
a  salutary  edict  of  Agrippa's  sedileship  for  the  banish-
ment of  astrologers  and  soothsayers.  At  this  period
also  Octavius  commenced  the  series  of  public  works
which  became  some  of  the  most  durable  monuments
of  his  fame.  With  the  fruitful  spoils  of  the  Dalma-
tian war  he  constructed  the  library  and  portico  to
which  he  gave  the  name  of  his  sister  Octavia,  of  which
some  mutilated  features  still  exist,  and  attract  the
student  of  antiquity  to  the  most  squalid  quarter  of
the  modern  city.  On  the  death  of  Bocchus  king  of
Mauretania,  the  ruler  of  the  imperial  republic  con-
stituted a  Eoman  province  of  his  ample  domains.  ^
The  god  Terminus  planted  his  foot  firmly  on  the
western  slopes  of  the  Atlas ;  but  he  disdained  even  to
visit  the  vaunted  conquests  of  Antonius,  who  pre-
tended to  annex  Armenia  and  Media  to  the  empire,
while  he  affected  with  the  same  breath  to  bestow
them  upon  his  mistress  or  his  favourites.

When Octavius felt  assured  that  his  popularity

had  taken  root,  he  became  less  solicitous
hc"weuernthe  to  maintain  the  appearance  of  good- will

towards  the  object  of  general  odium.  Al-
ready at  the  beginning  of  the  year  721  the  rivals  had
entered  upon  a  series  of  angry  recriminations.  An-
tonius objected  that  his  colleague  had  expelled  Sextus
from  the  seat  of  his  power,  and  deprived  Lepidus
of  the  share  of  the  administration  which  had  been
guaranteed  to  him,  without  dividing  with  himself
the  troops  and  provinces  wrested  from  them.  He
further  complained  that  Octavius  had  assigned  the

1  Compare  Pliny,  Hist.  Nat.  xxxv.  9. :  "  M.  Agrippa  vir  rusticitati
propior  quam  deliciis. Exstat  certe  ejus  oratio  nmgnifica  et  maxirno
civium  digna  de  tabulis  omnibus  signisquo  publicandis;  quod  fieri
satius  fuisset  quam  in  villarum  exilia  pelli. Verum  eadcm  ilia  tor-
vitas  tabulas  duas  Ajacis  et  Veneris  mercata  est  a  Cvzicenis."

2  Dion,  /.  c.

A.U.721-B.03.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  305

lands  of  Italy  to  the  Caesarean  veterans  without  mak-
ing1 or  leaving  room  for  any  provision  for  the  absent
Antonians.  Octavius  retorted  by  charging  his  rival
with  the  murder  of  Sextus  and  the  cruel  captivity  of
the  king  of  Armenia,  a  friend  and  ally  of  the  re-
public, whose  honour  suffered  by  such  harsh  injustice.
Nor  did  he  fail  to  brand  with  due  censure  the  honours
which  he  had  conferred  upon  the  foreign  queen  and
her  upstart  children,  and  to  complain  of  the  claim
he  advanced  on  behalf  of  Csesarion.  As  for  the  in-
sinuations against  his  disposal  of  the  troops  and
territories  he  had  acquired  by  his  own  prowess,  he
replied  that  Antonius  had  made  no  offer  to  share
with  a  colleague  his  Armenian  conquests,  and  he
contrasted,  with  bitter  irony,  the  petty  assignments
of  land  which  he  could  make  to  his  own  followers  in
Italy  with  the  broad  domains  which  the  self-styled
conqueror  of  the  Parthians  pretended  to  have  ac-
quired beyond  the  Euphrates  and  the  Tigris.1
Stung  by  these  sarcasms  Antonius  tore  him-  taw* a*  mi-
self  from  the  fascinations  of  the  Egyptian  kVn'gof0
capital,  and  rejoined  his  legions  on  the
Syrian  frontier,  at  the  head  of  which  he  penetrated
once  more  to  the  Araxes,  declaring  that  he  was  about
to  bring  the  contest  of  Rome  with  Parthia  to  a  final
decision.  But  he  already  perceived  that  the  ruler  of
the  West  was  only  watching  the  opportunity  to  attack
him,  and  instead  of  wasting  his  own  forces  in  a  dif-
ficult and  uncertain  conflict,  his  real  object  was  to
negotiate  with  the  king  of  Media  the  terms  of  an
alliance  against  the  powers  of  the  western  world.
The  barbaric  sovereign  obtained  a  share  of  the  king-
dom of  Armenia,  and  a  detachment  of  Roman  legion-
aries to  strengthen  him  against  the  Parthians ;  in
return  for  these  favours  he  furnished  the  triumvir
with  some  squadrons  of  Median  cavalry,  and  restored
some  standards  which  he  had  captured  from  his

1  Plutarch,  Anton.  55,  56.;  Dion,  1.  1,2.
VOL.  III.  X

306  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

legate  Statianus.  At  the  same  time  he  betrothed  his
daughter  lotape  to  Alexander,  the  infant  son  of  An-
tonius  and  Cleopatra,  and  allowed  her  to  be  carried
into  Egypt  as  a  hostage  for  his  fidelity.1

As  soon  as  these  negotiations  were  concluded,
Antoniuacoi-  the  triumvir  turned  his  face  once  more
m?es,  an"  westward.  He  had  already  appointed  Cleo-

winters  (722)

*t  Samoa. "  patra  to  meet  him  at  Ephesus ;  thither  he
directed  Canidius  to  lead  sixteen  legions  of  Koman

O

veterans,  thoroughly  trained  in  many  arduous  cam-
paigns, and  devoted  to  the  person  of  the  imperator
who  had  shared  their  direst  reverses.  There  also  he
summoned  his  auxiliaries  and  allies.  His  officers
levied  fresh  battalions  among  the  subjects  of  the
republic  in  Greece  and  Thrace,  Asia  Minor  and  Syria,
the  wide  provinces  through  which  his  command  ex-
tended, and  the  aid  of  the  barbarians  from  the  Cas-
pian to  the  Syrtis  was  invoked  to  swell  the  multitude
of  all  colours,  arms,  and  languages  assembled  under
his  banners,  a  numerous  fleet  was  collected  from  the
ports  and  islands  of  the  eastern  Mediterranean ;  the
most  daring  seamen  and  the  most  skilful  navigators
of  the  world  belonged  to  the  portion  of  the  Roman
dominions  which  acknowledged  the  authority  of  An-
tonius.  The  queen  of  Egypt  exerted  herself  to  as-
sume such  a  martial  attitude  as  should  comport  with
her  claims  to  universal  sovereignty.  Her  armies  were
numerous  and  well-appointed  :  their  native  pride  had
never  been  damped  by  defeat:  her  navies  were  ju>tly
celebrated  for  the  size  of  their  galleys  and  the  weight
of  their  artillery ;  and  she  could  pour  into  the  lap  of
her  patron  and  admirer  treasures  hoarded  through
centuries  of  commercial  splendour.  Yet  the  real
object  of  these  vast  preparations  was  still  unavowed.
The  triumvir  might  seek  still  to  amuse  the  eyes  which
watched  him,  by  throwing  himself  once  more,  while
they  were  in  progress,  into  the  frivolous  dissipation

1  Dion,  xlix.  44.

A.U.722-B.C.32.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  307

by  which  he  had  so  repeatedly  disgraced  himself.
He  passed  the  winter  at  Samos  with  Cleopatra  ID  the
same  sensual  pleasures  which  had  been  witnessed  by
Athens  and  Alexandria.  The  delicious  little  island
was  crowded  with  musicians,  dancers  and  stage-

*  O

players  ;  its  shores  resounded  with  the  wanton  strains
of  the  flute  and  tabret.  The  resources  which  should
have  been  husbanded  for  the  approaching  conflict
were  lavished  upon  a  splendid  Dionysiac  festival,  and
the  new  Bacchus  appeared  again  at  Athens  and  re-
peated the  same  puerile  extravagances  as  in  former
years,  while  every  day  was  hurrying  matters  to  a
crisis,  and  provoking  the  long  suspended  signal  of
war.  The  messengers  that  passed  between  the  rivals
served  only  to  enact  the  part  of  spies.  Hollow  ex-
planations were  mutually  given  of  the  formidable
preparations  making  on  both  sides ;  but  neither
party  was  deceived,  and  the  farce  of  dissimulation
was  now  almost  played  out.1  While  their  prepara-
tions were  in  progress  the  consulate  for  the  year  722
was  filled  by  two  adherents  of  Antonius,  Domitius
and  Sosius,  in  accordance  with  the  previous  agreement
between  the  triumvirs  which  Octavius  had  not  deemed
it  politic  to  cancel.  The  consuls  opened  their  career
with  a  vehement  harangue  in  favour  of  their  chief,
and  a  severe  invective  against  Octavius.  The  latter
was  absent  at  the  time  from  the  city :  he  speedily
returned,  convened  the  senate,  and  pronounced  a  no
less  bitter  reply.  Through  the  first  half  of  the  year
Rome  still  hung  in  awful  suspense,  awaiting  the  call
to  arms,  and  only  hoping  that  the  bolts  of  war  might
glide  off  from  the  absent  triumvir  and  strike  his
Egyptian  paramour,  the  legitimate  object  of  national
detestation.  But  while  the  summons  was  still
withheld  the  citizens  pressed  their  lips  and  General  ex-
stifled  their  anticipations.  The  prevailing  ££.*
sentiment  of  gloomy  yet  vague  foreboding  found

1  Plutarch,  Anton.  57.  foil.;  Dion,  1.  6.  foil,
x  2

308  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

expression  in  the  voice  of  a  youthful  enthusiast.
Cherished  by  Maecenas,  and  honoured  with  the  smiles
of  Octavius  himself,  Virgil  beheld  in  the  sway  of  the
chief  of  the  Komans  the  fairest  augury  of  legitimate
and  peaceful  government.  With  strains  of  thrilling
eloquence,  not  less  musical  than  those  with  which
Lucretius  had  soared  into  the  airy  realms  of  imagin-
ation, he  descended  to  the  subject  of  the  hour  and
gave  words  to  the  thoughts  with  which  every  bosom
was  heaving.  He  invoked  the  native  gods  of  Italy
with  Romulus  and  Vesta,  guardians  of  Tuscan  Tiber
and  Roman  Palatine,  to  permit  the  youthful  hero  to
save  a  sinking  world.  He  reminded  his  countrymen
of  the  guilt  of  their  fathers'  fathers,  which  had  effaced
the  landmarks  of  right,  and  filled  the  world  with  wars
and  a  thousand  forms  of  crime.  He  mourned  the
decay  of  husbandry,  the  dishonour  of  the  plough,  the
desolation  of  the  fields ;  he  sighed  over  the  clank  of
the  armourer's  forge,  and  the  training  of  the  rustic
conscript.  It  was  not  the  border  skirmishes  with  the
Germans  or  the  Parthians  that  could  excite  such  a
frenzy  of  alarm ;  it  was  the  hate  of  neighbour  against
neighbour,  the  impending  conflict  of  a  world  in  arms.
The  foes  of  Rome  were  indeed  raging  against  her,
but  her  deadliest  enemy  was  of  her  own  household.
Virgil  pointed  to  the  Rhine  and  the  Euphrates,  but
his  eye  was  fixed  upon  the  Nile.1

1  See  the  concluding  lines  of  Virgil's  first  Georgic:

"  Hinc  movet  Euphrates,  illinc  Germania  bellum:
Vicinse  ruptis  inter  se  legibus  urbes
Arma  t'erunt;  sasvit  toto  Mars  impius  orbe."

The  critics  are  divided  as  to  the  period  to  which  they  refer.  In  the
year  717  there  was  actual  warfare  on  the  Rhine  and  the  Euphrates,
but  at  that  time  there  was  apparent  harmony  between  the  triumvirs,
and  the  prospect  at  least  of  universal  pacification.  On  the  other  hand,
in  the  year  722  there  was  no  apprehension  of  hostilities  on  the  eastern
or  the  northern  frontier,  but  there  was  a  general  foreboding  of  civil
war.  Among  the  prodigies  of  the  year  722  Dion  mentions  an  erup-
tion of  Etna:  compare,

"  Quoties  Cyclopum  effervere  in  agros
Vidimus  undantem  ruptis  fornacibus  ^Etnam."

A.U.722-B.C.32.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  309

While  the  Antonian  consuls  occupied  the  chief
seats  of  the  magistracy,  it  suited  the  policy  Theconmu
of  Octavius  to  pretend  that  they  grasped  Koame,°2nd
the  substantial  power  also.  Accordingly,  in  Auwni^.
absenting  himself  from  the  curia  at  the  moment  of
their  accession  to  office,  he  affected  to  apprehend
violence  beyond  the  means  of  a  private  citizen  to
resist  ;  and  when  he  returned  to  confront  his  enemies
and  repel  aggression,  he  placed  soldiers  at  the  door,
and  surrounded  himself  with  an  escort  of  sturdy  ad-
herents, each  of  whom  only  half  concealed  a  dagger
folded  in  his  robe.  Thus  doubly  protected  he  took
his  accustomed  place  between  the  consuls,  and  from
that  august  eminence  defended  himself  in  terms  of
studied  modesty,  while  he  turned  against  Antonius
and  his  creatures  the  language  of  opprobrious  accu-
sation. The  adherents  of  the  absent  triumvir  were
struck  dumb  ;  no  voice  was  raised  in  his  defence ;
and  when  Octavius  summoned  the  senate  to  meet
again  on  a  certain  day  to  hear  a  more  formal  disclo-
sure of  his  charges  against  his  colleague,  the  consuls
evaded  the  blow  which  they  felt  to  be  impending  by
escaping  secretly  from  the  city.  This  precipitate
retreat,  under  the  avowed  pressure  of  personal  dan-
ger, might  recall  a  painful  reminiscence  of  the  flight
of  the  tribunes  to  Cesar's  camp  at  Eavenna.  The
consuls  hastened  to  rejoin  their  patron  in  the  East,
and  were  attended  or  followed  by  many  of  the  sena-
tors. Antonius  rejoiced  at  having  a  public  rather
than  a  personal  grievance  to  inscribe  upon  his  ban-
ners ;  such  a  grievance,  indeed,  as  had  decided  many
generous  minds  at  the  opening  of  the  late  war.  Octa-
vius, on  the  other  hand,  sought  to  break  the  force  of
this  specious  pretence  by  declaring  that  he  had  al-
lowed the  fugitives  to  depart  on  their  own  petition,
and,  to  confirm  the  truth  of  this  assertion,  he  gave
free  leave  to  all  who  wished  it  to  betake  themselves
to  the  camp  of  his  enemies.1

1  Suetonius,  Octav.  17.;  Dion,  1.  2.

310  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

This  act  of  homage  to  the  prescriptions  of  law  and
Antomus  order  was  attended  with  the  happiest  effects.
wmreifTheir  ^  conciliated  the  prejudices  of  the  citi-
protector.  Zens,  vexed  at  the  first  symptom  of  reviving
violence,  and  anxious  for  any  colourable  justification
of  the  cause  to  which  they  were  already  devoted.  It
threw  upon  a  feared  and  detested  renegade,  the  tyrant
of  a  foreign  court,  the  slave  of  a  foreign  mistress,  the
odium,  and  as  was  devoutly  believed,  the  curse  due
to  an  invader  of  his  country.  But  Antonius  still  en-
acted a  Eoman  part.  When  he  assumed  the  vindi-
cation of  the  injured  magistrates  of  the  city,  he  con-
vened the  members  of  the  senate  in  his  train,  and
gave  to  his  hostile  declarations  the  colour  of  a  legiti-
mate decree.  He  crowned  the  insults  which  he  heaped
upon  Octavius  with  a  formal  missive  of  divorce  to
his  injured  consort ;  but  neither  his  public  nor  bis
private  grounds  of  offence  sufficed  to  satisfy  the  con-
sciences of  those  around  him,  many  of  whom  now
shrank  from  his  side  and  threw  themselves  into  the
arms  of  his  enemy.  The  defection  of  Titius,  an  officer
in  whom  he  had  placed  great  confidence,  but  whose
zeal  in  the  execution  of  Sextus  he  strenuously  dis-
avowed, was  a  great  blow  to  his  fortunes.  And  when
he  was  deserted  by  Plancus,  who  had  abandoned  every
cause  and  every  patron  in  turn,  it  was  apparent  that
the  shrewdest  of  observers  had  discovered  the  weak-
ness of  his  resources  and  the  peril  of  his  position,
piancus  and  These  two  personages  had  been  intimate  as-

Titius  divulge  .  „ , , j. •  •  i i_ j  i

the  contents  of  sociates  ot  the  triumvir,  and  had  not  only
exMpmttf  shared  in  all  his  political  counsels,  but  also
!£l£rtphim.  attested  his  will.  This  document,  as  was
not  unusual  with  such  important  instruments,  had
been  entrusted  to  the  custody  of  the  Vestal  virgins  at
Home.  The  traitors  could  not  only  disclose  the  con-
tents, but  reveal  to  the  government  the  place  where
the  paper  was  deposited.  The  populace  was  more
scrupulous  than  its  rulers,  and  murmured  at  the

A.C.722-B.C.32.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  311

meanness  or  impiety  of  Octavius  in  profiting  by  this
treachery,  and  breaking  the  seals  which  divine  and
human  laws  pronounced  eminently  sacred.  But,  when
the  fatal  contents  were  divulged,  indignation  over-
ruled every  other  feeling.  No  terms,  it  was  insisted,
should  be  kept  with  the  basest  of  traitors,  who  could
own  a  child  of  Cleopatra  as  the  legitimate  offspring  of
Caesar,  confer  upon  a  foreign  potentate  and  her  bastard
brood  the,  treasures  and  territories  of  the  republic,
and  direct  his  own  body  to  be  entombed  with  hers
in  a  foreign  sepulchre.  When  these  amazing  facts
were  known,  the  citizens  were  prepared  to  believe
implicitly  any  story  or  surmise  that  could  be  bruited
against  the  culprit.  Who  could  doubt  that  Antonius
had  pledged  Cleopatra  in  his  cups  to  sacrifice  the
West  to  her  ambition,  and  remove  to  Alexandria
the  government  of  the  world ;  to  spurn  the  Gods  of
the  Forum  and  the  Capitol,  and  prostrate  Mars  and
Quirinus  before  the  monsters  of  the  Nile  ?  The  torrent
of  popular  indignation  swept  the  waverers  and  the
neutral  along  with  it.  No  one  ventured  to  doubt,  to
hesitate,  or  to  palliate ;  Octavius  cast  his  eyes  on  the
ground,  and  listened  with  suppressed  exultation  to
the  wild  acclaim  which  greeted  him  as  the  champion
of  the  nation,  the  assertor  of  its  principles,  and  the
defender  of  its  faith.  But  he  could  still  calculate
calmly  the  chances  of  success,  and  abstain  from  wan-
ton affronts.  To  declare  Antonius  a  public  enemy,
which  the  people  loudly  demanded,  would  have  been
to  pronounce  sentence  against  every  Roman  who  had
arrayed  himself  on  his  side.  To  these,  his  misguided
adherents,  he  would  still  leave  open  the  door  to  re-
pentance, and  he  contented  himself,  and  persuaded
the  citizens  to  be  content,  with  proclaiming  octavuw

_  ._, .  ,  a declares  wmr

war  against  Egypt. This  ceremony  he  per-  again.t  the
formed  in  person,  in  the  garb  of  a  Fetial  Egypt,
herald,  according  to  the  solemn  rites  of  antiquity,  at
the  portals  of  the  Temple  of  Bellona,  the citizens

312  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxviu.

thronging  densely  around  him  arrayed  in  their  sol-
diers' cloaks.1  He  thus  threw  upon  his  rival  the
odium  of  the  blackest  treason,  in  drawing  his  sword  on
behalf  of  a  foreign  enemy  against  his  own  country
and  kindred.

It  was  from  Athens  that  Antonius  issued  his  de-
-Antoniuf  claration  of  war  and  his  bill  of  divorce.
di?orcsinbgy  This  last  act  was  the  crowning  effect  of

Ociavia.

Cleopatra's  influence,  and  the  consumma-
tion of  her  triumph.  She  had  evinced  the  utmost
jealousy  of  every  attempt  of  her  victim  to  renounce
her  fascinations,  and  retrieve  his  good  name  in  fields
of  honourable  warfare;  and  when  he  at  last  roused
himself  to  action  for  the  defence  of  his  political
ascendancy,  and  advanced  towards  the  West  to  mea-
sure himself  with  his  imperious  rival,  she  clung
more  closely  than  ever  to  his  side  in  spite  of  the
earnest  entreaties  of  Domitius  and  others,  that  he
should  drive  from  his  presence  the  bird  of  evil  omen,
as  unfit  even  from  her  sex  to  undergo  the  toils  or
share  in  the  direction  of  the  war.  They  would  have
sacrificed  the  two  hundred  ships  and  twenty  thousand
talents  which  she  contributed  to  the  cause,  rather
than  retain  the  disadvantage  of  her  disgraceful  alli-
ance. The  resolution  of  Antonius  was  for  a  moment
shaken,  but  the  sorceress  speedily  resumed  her  sway.
He  replied,  and  probably  she  dictated  the  answer,
that  in  none  of  his  allies  did  he  discover  a  superior
in  understanding  to  her,  who,  while  she  ably  go-
verned her  own  kingdom,  partook  with  himself  the
arduous  cares  of  his  eastern  administration.  This
avowal  was  sealed  by  the  divorce  of  Octavia.  Her
base  and  profligate  husband  sent  persons  to  Rome
to  conduct  her  repudiation  with  all  the  harshness
of  the  law.  They  ejected  Octavia  from  the  house
which  was  no  longer  hers,  and  drove  her  to  take
refuge  with  her  brother,  carrying  with  her  all  the

1  Dion,  1.  4.

A.r.:22-B.C.32.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  313

children  Antonius  had  left  in  Italy,  among  whom
were  not  only  her  own,  but  those  of  Fulvia  also.  The
Romans  greeted  her  with  admiration  and  pity ;  but
her  sorrows  were  not  for  herself  but  for  the  passions
for  which  she  was  the  victim,  and  for  the  rupture
of  which  she  might  deem  herself  the  unoffending
cause.  The  simplicity  of  her  demeanour  had  won
her  popularity  wherever  she  had  sojourned,  and  the
dignified  reserve  with  which  she  veiled  a  certain
coldness  of  temperament,  common  to  her  perhaps
with  the  astute  Octavius,  commanded  the  veneration
of  the  most  dissolute  communities.  At  Athens  she
had  not  only  been  hailed  with  honours  when  pre-
sent, but  the  remembrance  of  her  virtues  continued
to  be  cherished  after  her  departure.  Cleopatra  was
jealous  even  of  her  rival's  shadow,  and  could  not
bear  to  be  haunted  by  it  in  the  dwelling  she  had
quitted.  She  strove  to  outshine  in  liberality  the
name  which  she  could  not  imitate  in  virtue,  and
the  fickle  Athenians  were  induced  to  compliment
her  in  a  public  harangue.1

The  military  preparations  which  Antonius  had
made,  although  they  did  not  take  his  ad-  preparation,
versary  by  surprise,  caused  him  deep  onbothside*-
anxiety  from  their  promptness  as  well  as  their
magnitude.  In  the  midst  of  much  real  and  some
affected  dissipation,  the  eastern  triumvir  had  dis-
played his  great  abilities  in  the  collection  and
disposition  of  his  vast  forces.  Nor  was  he  satisfied
with  this  naval  and  military  superiority,  but  exerted
himself  to  undermine  his  enemy's  power  with  gold,
which  he  lavished  among  the  Csesareans  in  Italy.
Conscious  of  the  intrigues  at  work  against  him,
Octavius  dared  not  quit  the  centre  of  affairs  ;  and  the
report  of  prodigies,  as  well  as  the  disturbances
caused  by  the  contributions  he  was  forced  to  levy,
demanded  his  constant  presence  in  the  city.  After

1  Plutarch,  Anton.  57.

314  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

all  it  was  only  by  an  accident  that  he  escaped  being
attacked  in  the  peninsula;  for  Antonius  had  ad-
vanced as  far  as  Corcyra,  and  his  troops  were
gradually  concentrating  on  the  points  from  which
they  could  most  readily  be  transported  across  the
Ionian  gulf,  when  a  premature  announcement  that
Octavius  had  himself  crossed  over  from  Italy  and
was  lying  with  his  whole  fleet  off  the  Ceraunian
headland,  persuaded  the  assailant  that  his  attack
was  anticipated,  and  induced  him  to  await  the  en-
counter on  his  own  shores.  Owing  to  this  mis-
apprehension the  rest  of  the  year  722  passed  away
without  a  blow  being  struck:  Octavius  employed
himself  vigorously  in  pushing  forward  his  prepara-
tions and  counterworking  his  rival's  emissaries;
and  when  on  the  first  of  January  723  he  assumed
the  consulship  with  his  friend  Messala,  to  the  rejec-
tion of  Antonius,  to  whom  it  had  been  previously
guaranteed,  he  was  hailed  as  the  legitimate  defender
of  the  state  and  leader  of  its  armies.  The

Octavius  .  1 , 1 •  •  •  11

resigns  the term  assigned  to  his  triumvirate  had  now

triumvirate.  ,  , '  .  j i •  1-1

elapsed :  he  increased  his  popularity  by
declining  to  renew  it.  At  the  same  time  he  ad-
dressed a  letter  to  Antonius,  in  which  he  demanded
that  he  should  withdraw  all  his  forces  to  a  certain
distance  inland,  in  order  that  they  might  confer
together  securely  at  some  point  on  the  eastern  coast
of  the  Ionian  sea,  or  meet  on  similar  conditions  in
Italy.  This  last  feint  was  intended  to  inspire  his
soldiers  with  confidence,  but  .Antonius,  as  he  ex-
pected, put  it  aside,  remarking  scornfully,  Who  then
shall  stand  umpire  between  us  if  either  infringes
the  covenant  ? l  There  was  now  no  third  power,
like  that  of  Lepidus,  to  pretend  to  hold  the  scale
between  them.

Every  moment  of  delay  increased  the  difficulties
of  a  leader  who  lavished  his  resources  with  frivolous

1  Dion,  1.  9.

A.U.723-B.C.31. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  3J5

prodigality.  Antonius  had  adopted  Patrae  for  his
winter  quarters,  but  for  the  better  support  companion  or
of  his  vast  armies  he  had  dispersed  them  in  a^Si'ty
small  divisions  along  the  coast  of  the  Ionian,  "*a  *nd  land-
though  a  large  portion  of  their  subsistence  was  sup-
plied by  sea  from  Egypt  at  the  charge  of  Cleopatra.
If  the  whole  of  these  battalions  could  have  been
assembled  together,  they  would  have  presented  a
magnificent  force  of  an  hundred  thousand  legionaries
and  twelve  thousand  horse,  besides  the  countless
squadrons  of  Oriental  auxiliaries,  led  for  the  most
part  in  person  by  their  native  chieftains.  These  for-
midable armaments  were  placed  under  the  command
of  Canidius  Crassus.  Antonius  had  determined,  at
Cleopatra's  instigation,  to  decide  the  war  at  sea,  on
which  element  she  knew  that  her  own  subjects
were  strongest;  and  accordingly  he  chose  his  own
post  at  the  head  of  his  numerous  war-vessels.  The
galleys  which  he  had  collected  in  the  gulf  of  Am-
bracia,  near  the  promontory  of  Actium,  amounted,
it  is  said,  to  five  hundred  in  number,  many  of
them  rising  to  ten  banks  of  oars,  and  labouring
through  the  sea  with  unwieldy  bulk  and  propor-
tions. But  these  magnificent  machines  were  for  the
most  part  ill-manned  and  inexpertly  handled ;  their
captains  had  been  obliged  to  press  landsmen  for  the
service,  and  travellers,  muleteers,  and  field  labourers
had  been  seized  and  hurried  on  board  to  learn  the
duties  of  war  and  navigation  together,  almost  in  the
face  of  the  enemy.  For  the  coast  of  Calabria  from
Tarentum  to  Brundisium  was  bristling  meanwhile
with  the  masts  of  the  Caesarean  flotilla ;  hardly
reaching  indeed  in  number  to  one  half  of  the
Antonian,  and  not  less  inferior  perhaps  in  the
size  of  its  vessels.  But  the  Liburnian  galleys  were
fully  equipped,  skilfully  manoeuvred,  and  adapted
for  light  and  rapid  movements,  which  in  ancient
warfare  was  generally  of  the  first  importance.  It

316  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxviu.

might  be  remembered  however  that  this  class  of
vessels  had  been  sorely  worsted  by  the  mariners
of  Sextus,  and  that  the  great  victory  of  Agrippa
off  Naulochus  had  been  decided  by  the  superior
weight  of  his  armament ;  and  doubtless  Octavius  re-
lied upon  the  genius  of  his  admiral  more  than  on
his  ships,  his  seamen,  or  his  fortune.  His  army
consisted  of  eighty  thousand  Eoman  legionaries,
well-trained  and  appointed,  with  cavalry  not  inferior
in  number  to  his  antagonist's.  He  was  much  less
encumbered  with  subsidiary  forces ;  yet  he  might
despair  of  transporting  so  vast  a  multitude  across
the  sea  in  the  face  of  the  Antonian  cruisers ;  and
he  must  have  rejoiced  to  find  that  the  enemy,
whom  he  could  hardly  have  reached  to  strike  on
land,  was  prepared  to  meet  him  at  sea.

Throughout  the  winter  both  parties  watched  each

other,  and  engaged  only  in  petty  skirmishes.
crossli  the  Agrippa  assumed  the  offensive,  while  An-

tonius  rather  avoided  than  parried  his  at-
tacks. The  Caesarean  commander  cruised  over  the
whole  of  the  Ionian  sea,  cut  off  numerous  transport
and  merchant  vessels  of  the  enemy,  and  established
himself  securely  at  Methone  in  the  Peloponnesus,
from  whence  he  annoyed  him  by  repeatedly  attack-
ing his  stations  on  the  coast.1  Meanwhile  the  An-
tonian navy  suffered  in  various  ways,  partly  from
the  want  of  exercise  for  the  men,  partly  from  sick-
ness, partly  also  from  desertion.  Shut  up  in  their
ports,  the  motley  crowds  which  imperfectly  manned
it  gained  little  in  experience,  while  they  dwindled
away  in  numbers.2  The  straits  were  left  unguarded,
the  sea  was  abandoned.  Octavius  seized  the  op-
portunity, assembled  his  troops  with  admirable

1  Dion,  1.  11.;  Ofos.  vi.  19.

2  Orosius  says  that  one-third  of  their  number  perished  from  hunger,
and  pretends  to  quote  a  saying  of  Antonius  on  the  occasion,  that  while
the  oars  remained  sound,  there  would  be  no  want  of  oarsmen,  as  long
as  there  was  a  population  in  Greece. Oros.  /.  c.

A.U.723-B.C.31.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  317

precision,  and  transported  them  across  the  Ionian
gulf  to  Toryne  on  the  coast  of  Epirus.  He  sum-
moned the  principal  citizens  from  Koine  to  attend
upon  the  progress  of  his  arms  l :  on  the  one  hand
they  were  pledges  of  the  good  will  of  the  state
towards  him,  on  the  other  they  were  hostages  for
its  good  faith.  Encircled  by  this  brilliant  retinue
he  steered  for  Corcyra,  which  was  abandoned  to
him  without  a  blow;  he  gained  the  continent  at  a
spot  called  Glykys  Limen,  the  fresh-water  harbour,
where  the  river  Acheron  discharges  itself  into  the
sea  ;  and  from  thence  he  boldly  directed  his  course
towards  the  gulf  of  Ambracia,  at  the  mouth  of
which  the  vast  armaments  of  Antonius  were  arrayed
line  within  line.  He  was  aware  of  the  hardships
under  which  the  Antonians  were  suffering,  and  of
the  discontent  which  the  presence  and  haughty  bear-
ing of  Cleopatra  excited  amongst  their  officers.  The
information  he  had  received  led  him  to  anticipate
an  important  defection  from  their  ranks  as  soon  as
he  should  appear  in  force  before  them.  In  this
however  he  was  for  the  time  deceived,  and  when  the
enemy  promptly  assumed  an  attitude  of  defence  he
retired  from  the  position  he  had  taken  at  the  en-
trance of  the  gulf,  and  brought  his  galleys  to  anchor
in  port  Comarus.

The  army  which  had  disembarked  at  the  foot  of
the  Acroceraunia  directed  its  march  south-  He  encamp,  8t
ward  along the coast till  it  reached  its  oMhe'l'mbU'-
commander  at the spot where the  fleet  "?tM?,Uwhich
had  come  to  land. The  camp  was  formed  S^l."^"1
on  a  slight  eminence  in  the  neighbourhood,  tioned-
the  site  upon  which  Octavius  afterwards  founded  his
City  of  Victory,  Nicopolis. From  this  elevation,  as
he  fronted  the  position  of  the  enemy,  he  might  be-
hold on  his  right  the  expanse  of  the  Ionian  sea,  on
his  left  the  deep  bay  of  Ambracia,  which  penetrates
1  Dion,  1.  11.

318  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH. xxvin.

thirty  miles  into  the  mainland,  and  has  a  mean
breadth  of  not  less  than  ten.  This  sheet  of  water
is  bordered  by  a  wide  alluvial  plain,  and  surrounded
by  an  amphitheatre  of  hills,  crowned  in  the  extreme
distance  by  the  snowy  ridge  which  divides  Epirus
from  Thessaly  and  JEtolia.  Before  him,  the  ground
sloped  gently  to  the  narrow  inlet  of  the  gulf,  and  faced
a  tongue  of  low  land,  projecting  from  the  shores
of  Acarnania  on  the  south,  and  bending  the  chan-
nel of  the  straits  like  the  limbs  of  a  siphon.
At  the  tip,  or  acte,  of  this  peninsula  stood
a  temple  sacred  to  Apollo,  denominated  the  Actium,
or  chapel  of  the  Point ;  and  here  the  neighbouring
tribes  had  been  wont  to  celebrate  an  annual  festival
in  honour  of  their  tutelary  deity.  At  this  period
the  whole  of  this  strip  of  land  was  covered  with  the
armaments  of  Antonius ;  his  camp  lay  on  the  sea  coast,
in  a  low  marshy  spot,  where  the  health  of  the  troops
had  suffered  extremely  from  damp  in  the  winter,
and  the  heats  scarcely  yet  passed  of  the  summer.
On  either  side  of  the  strait  he  had  erected  re-
doubts, and  the  vast  multitude  of  his  vessels  effec-
tually barred  the  inlet,  which  was  scarcely  half  a
mile  in  width.

Octavius  might  despair  of  making  any  impression

upon  so  strong  a  position  except  through

prepTro'to the  treachery  of  the defenders. Having

engage*

fortified  his  camp  he  connected  it  by  a  line
of  entrenchment  with  the  station  of  his  fleet  at  Co-
marus,  and  according  to  an  uncertain  tradition,  made
an  abortive  attempt  to  transport  his  vessels  on  greased
skins  across  the  peninsula  which  he  occupied,  and  so
turn  the  flank  of  his  adversary's  fleet.  The  attempt,
if  it  was  really  made,  and  there  certainly  seems  no
sufficient  motive  for  making  it,  was  not  persisted  in.
The  invader  sate  himself  quietly  down,  and  bided  the
errors  or  misfortunes  of  his  adversary.  Antonius
himself  was  at  Patrse,  when  he  heard  of  the  enemy's

A.C.723-B.C.31.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  319

arrival  on  the  coast.  He  proceeded  with  his  usual
gallantry  to  confront  the  danger,  in  the  face  of  which
his  martial  spirit  seemed  always  to  revive.  From  his
camp  at  Actium  he  crossed  the  straits,  and  entrenched
himself  with  the  main  body  of  his  infantry  in  front
of  the  Caesarean  lines,  sending  at  the  same  his  cavalry
round  the  head  of  the  gulf  to  attack  the  enemy  in
flank  and  rear.  But  he  had  left  Agrippa  behind' him.
No  sooner  had  he  quitted  Patrse  than  the  pursuer
occupied  it,  and  hastening  in  his  track,  reached  the
island  of  Leucas,  near  the  entrance  of  the  gulf,  and
cut  off  a  naval  squadron  of  the  Antonians  under  the
command  of  Nasidicus.  At  the  same  time  Statilius
Taurus  and  the  traitor  Titius,  who  did  not  scruple  to
join  in,  the  enterprise  against  the  patron  he  had  de-
serted, though  Pollio  had  been  excused  from  arming
on  the  ground  of  his  private  friendship  with  Antonius1,
gained  a  victory  over  the  cavalry,  which  was  making
the  circuit  of  the  gulf,  and  carried  off  Philadelphus
king  of  Paphlagonia,  as  the  first  fruits  of  the  exten-
sive defection  which  was  about  to  take  place.  The
example  of  the  barbarian  potentate  was  immediately
followed  by  Domitius,  the  son,  as  we  have  seen,  of
the  most  inveterate  of  Caesar's  enemies.  Nothing  was
simpler  than  to  plead  disgust  at  the  influence  of  the
Egyptian  harlot ;  and  this  was  the  pretext  ruction
offered  by  the  renegade  and  accepted  with  "J^"*  ^
suppressed  scorn  by  Octavius.  Antonius  allie"'
was  alarmed  and  distressed  at  this  instance  of  perfidy;
but  he  magnanimously  sent  the  traitor's  slaves  and
baggage  after  him,  resisting  Cleopatra's  more  vindic-
tive counsels.  Domitius  was  suffering  at  the  time
from  fever,  and  his  death,  which  took  place  only  a
few  days  afterwards,  was  regarded  by  many  as  a
sign  of  tardy  remorse.  But  the  example  was  fatal.
Amyntas,  who  had  received  Pisidia  from  the  triumvir,
and  Deiotarus  king  of  Galatia,  went  over  without
1  Veil.  ii.  S3.

320  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvur.

delay,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  discouragement  and
distraction  which  these  losses  occasioned,  the  party
most  hostile  to  Cleopatra  exerted  themselves  to  urge
more  vehemently  than  ever  her  immediate  dismissal.
Canidius  advised  his  leader  to  quit  the  fleet,  in  which
arm  he  deemed  success  most  uncertain,  and  break
away  with  the  land  forces  into  Thrace  or  Macedonia,
and  there  await  on  chosen  ground  the  attack  of  an
inferior  enemy,

The  defection  of  individuals  was  followed  by  the
ni«  forces  are  defeat  of  detachments.  Sosius  made  an
panhu'U-  unsuccessful  attack  upon  Agrippa's  galleys1,
gagemenu.  an(j  Antonius  himself  was  worsted  in  a
skirmish  with  the  outposts  of  the  land  forces.  These
repeated  checks  reduced  him  to  the  necessity  of  aban-
doning his  plan  of  combining  a  front  and  flank  move-
ment on  the  enemy's  main  body,  and  when  his  troops
and  officers  were  once  more  collected  in  the  camp  at
Actium,  he  had  already  renounced  the  idea  of  en-
countering the  enemy  either  by  land  or  sea.  It  was
He  deter-  the  advice  of  the  dastard  Cleopatra,  such  at
cie"p'itra'i  least  was  the  rumour,  for  the  Eomans  could
wltMrawto  n°t  bear  to  brand  even  the  renegade  An-
Egypt-  tonius  as  a  coward,  to  abandon  the  defence

of  Greece  to  a  few  garrisons,  and  withdraw  the  main
body  of  sea  and  land  forces  to  Egypt.  But  in  order
to  maintain  the  appearance  of  a  hostile  attitude  and
encourage  the  allies,  it  was  determined  that  the  fleet
should  put  to  sea  in  battle  array,  and  give  to  its  pro-
jected retreat  the  appearance  of  a  challenge.  The
fleet  of  Antonius  had  never  been  fully  manned  ;  its
complements  were  now  still  more  reduced  by  sick-
ness and  desertion,  and  it  became  necessary  to  destroy
a  large  number  of  the  vessels.  The  best  and  largest
were  retained,  laden  with  treasure,  and  filled  with
twenty  thousand  chosen  legionaries  and  two  thousand

1  Dion  has  made  a  slip  of  the  pen  in  stating  that  Sosius  was  killed
in  this  skirmish.  He  mentions  him  again  several  times.

A.U.723-B.C.31.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  321

bowmen.  The  soldiers  were  dismayed  at  the  pre-
parations for  flight  which  could  not  be  concealed  from
them.  One  of  the  centurions,  who  had  fought  through
several  campaigns  for  the  leader  who  was  about  to
desert  him,  and  was  covered  with  scars,  wept  as  An-
tonius  passed  along  the  ranks.  Imperator,  he  ex-
claimed, why  do  you  distrust  these  wounds,  or  this
sivord,  and  rest  your  hopes  on  miserable  logs  of
wood?  Let  Egyptians  and  Phoenicians  fight  on
sea,  but  give  us  land,  on  which  we  are  wont  to
conquer  or  die.  The  imperator  had  no  words  to
reply  with ;  but  merely  waved  his  hand  in  cold  en-
couragement, and  passed  quickly  on.  Another  of  his
officers,  Q.  Dellius,  had  just  gone  over  to  the  enemy.
He  was  now  suspicious  of  everybody  and  had  lost  all
confidence  in  himself.  He  abandoned  himself  to  the
guidance  of  Cleopatra,  whom  he  feared  perhaps  and
distrusted  hardly  less  than  the  rest.  It  is  said  that
at  this  time  he  insisted  upon  her  tasting  all  the  viands
which  were  offered  to  him.  Cleopatra  derided  the
futility  of  such  a  precaution.  She  placed  a  chaplet
on  his  head,  and  in  the  course  of  the  banquet  invited
him  to  cast  the  flowers  into  his  goblet,  and  quaff
thorn  in  the  wine.  When  he  was  about  to  pledge  her
she  abruptly  stopped  him,  and  commanded  a  con-
demned criminal  to  swallow  the  draught.  The  wretch
fell  instantly  dead  at  her  feet.  The  flowers  had  been
steeped  in  poison.1  Every  preparation  was  now  made
for  the  speediest  flight,  and  when  Antonius  pretended
that  the  sails  he  ordered  to  be  put  on  board  were  pro-
vided for  the  pursuit  of  the  vanquished  enemy,  the
boast  of  his  lips  was  belied  by  his  downcast  eye  and
distracted  countenance.  Indeed  the  victory  of  the
Ca3sareans,  as  was  generally  remarked,  was  already
assured  before  the  conflict  commenced.  So  great
was  the  moral  advantage  they  derived  from  the  con-
stant defections  from  the  enemy,  from  the  confidence

1  Plin.  //.  -V.  xxi.  9.
VOL.  III.  Y

322  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxviu.

which  generally  accompanies  offensive  operations,
and  from  the  various  successes  they  had  already
gained,  which  they  showed  an  eager  disposition  to
push  to  the  utmost.  Nevertheless  the  material  re-
sources of  Antonius  were  exceedingly  formidable.
When  the  mighty  masses  of  his  bargelike  vessels
thronged  in  dense  array  the  mouth  of  the  inlet,  they
seemed  capable  of  crushing  with  overwhelming  weight
the  light  galleys  which  presumed  to  oppose  them.
The  gales  which  blew  four  days  in  succession  pre-
vented the  fleets  meeting,  but  on  the  fifth  a  calm
The  fleeu  ensued.  At  noon  a  light  breeze  arose  from

teforuenthe  the  sea,  and  the  Csesareans  advanced  gal-
mouth  of  the  1  ,1  .  !  !  ,.  1  1

bay.  lantlym  two  squadrons,  led  respectively  by

Agrippa  and  Octavius  himself.1  When  they  found
that  the  enemy  would  not  come  forward  to  meet  them,
they  spread  their  wings  as  if  to  envelope  them  on
either  side.  Then  at  last  Antonius  gave  the  signal  to
Battle  of  jorn  combat.  The  water  along  the  coast  near
the  outlet  of  the  gulf  appears,  at  least  at  the
present  day,  too  shallow  for  the  movements  of  the  large
vessels  which  were  now  engaged,  and  it  is  probable  that
Antonius  stood  out  into  the  open  sea  to  give  himself
more  room  for  manoeuvring,  and,  if  necessary,  for
escape.  But  his  huge  hulks  were  ill-adapted  for
advance  or  retreat.  They  were  protected,  and  at  the
same  time  encumbered,  by  bulky  frames  of  timber
attached  to  their  sides,  and  the  fragile  triremes  dared
not  impinge  against  them  either  in  front  or  flank.
They  carried  arsenals  in  their  holds  and  citadels  on
their  decks.  They  hurled  massive  stones  from  wooden
towers,  and  thrust  forth  ponderous  irons  to  grapple
the  unwary  assailant.  But  the  Caesarean  galleys  came
to  the  attack  with  agile  and  dexterous  manoeuvres.
Their  well-trained  rowers  bore  up  and  backed  alter-
nately, or  swept  away  the  banks  of  the  enemy's  oars

1  Pint.  (Anton.  65.),  confirmed  apparently  by  Virgil. Velleius,
wnose  sketch  is  rapid  and  inaccurate,  gives  a  different  arrangement.

A.U.723-B.C.31.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  323

under  cover  of  a  shower  of  arrows.  They  scudded
round  and  round  the  unwieldy  masses  in  parties  of
three  or  four  to  each,  distracting  the  attention  of  the
defenders,  and  protecting  each  other  in  turn  from
grappling  and  boarding.  The  combat  was  animated
but  indecisive;  the  Liburnians,  the  light  cavalry  of
the  seas,  crippled  but  could  not  destroy  the  steadfast
phalanxes  of  Antonius.  But  while  his  unmanageable
barges  rolled  lazily  on  the  water,  incapable  of  attack-
ing, and  scarcely  repelling  the  desultory  attacks  of
their  pigmy  assailants,  suddenly  the  wind  shifted.
The  breeze  was  favourable  for  flight.  Cleopatra,
whose  galley  was  anchored  in  the  rear,

, . . « 3 •* i  .,  .,  i j , t i Cleopatra  flies,

hoisted  the  purple  sails  on  hfir  gilded  deck1,  and  is  followed

J J  -Jl il_  f  by  Antonio*.

and  threaded  rapidly  the  maze  ot  com-
batants, followed  by  the  Egyptian  squadron  of  sixty
barks.  This  movement,  unexpected  to  the  last  by
either  party,  was  ascribed  to  a  woman's  cowardice;
but  from  what  had  already  passed  in  the  council,
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  was  previously  con-
certed. When  Antonius  himself,  observing  the  ap-
pointed signal,  leaped  into  a  five-oared  galley,  and
followed  swiftly  in  her  wake,  the  rage  and  shame  of
his  adherents  filled  them  with  desperation.  Many
tore  down  the  turrets  from  their  decks  and  threw
them  into  the  sea,  to  lighten  their  vessels  for  flight.
Others  only  nerved  themselves  for  a  more  furious
struggle;  while  the  CaBsareans  exulting  in  the  pro-
spect of  a  speedy  triumph,  rashly  attempted  to  board
and  met  many  severe  repulses.  The  struggle  was
still  arduous,  and  victory  not  yet  assured.  Shattered
and  disabled  as  these  floating  masses  were,  it  was
impossible  to  sink  or  disarm  them,  until

_ l  , . Destruction  of

nre  was  resorted  to. Octavms  sent  to  his  theAntonum
camp  for  the  requisite  materials;  torches
and  burning  javelins  were  hurled  into  them  from  a
distance,  piles  of  combustibles  were  drifted  against

'Flor.  iv.  11.
y  2

324  HISTORY OF THE EOMANS  en.  xxvm.

them :  one  by  one  they  took  fire,  and  from  the  want
of  implements  at  hand  it  was  impossible  to  extinguish
the  rising  conflagration.  One  by  one  they  burnt
down  to  the  water's  edge  and  sank  slowly  into  the
abyss ;  the  Csesareans  attempted  in  vain  to  save  them,
not  so  much  from  humanity,  as  for  the  hope  of  booty ;
but  men  and  treasures  went  together  to  the  bottom,
and  all  the  fleets  of  Asia  were  buried  in  the  wilder-
ness of  waters.1

As  a  spectacle,  a  sea-fight  in  modern  times  is  said

The  Augustan  to  be  obscure  and  uninteresting. The  ma-
poets  describe  . , . „ „  1-1
the  batne  in noeuvrcs  it  admits  ot  are  tew  and  simple,

^ith'the  and  the  skill  and  courage  of  the  combatants
sentiment.  could  hardly  be  appreciated  at  a  distance,
even  if  the  thick  pall  of  smoke  which  envelopes  them
with  little  intermission  did  not  conceal  them  from  the
spectator  and  from  each  other.  But  a  naval  battle
of  antiquity  must  have  presented  a  far  more  exciting
spectacle.  The  field  of  view  was  not  too  extensive,
the  atmosphere  was  unclouded  by  smoke,  and  the
movements  of  attack  and  defence,  at  so  many  different
points,  were  even  more  diversified  than  the  charge
and  recoil  of  battalions  on  land.  The  contrast  between
the  size  and  tactics  of  the  vessels  engaged  at  Actiurn
must  have  added  variety  and  interest  to  the  scene,  as
beheld  from  either  shore  of  the  Ambracian  gulf;  and
it  was  beheld  by  two  armies  comprising  perhaps  twice
an  hundred  thousand  spectators,  whose  emotions  of
hope  and  fear,  of  delight  and  consternation,  were  ex-
pressed in  many  a  roar  of  exultation,  or  long-drawn
murmur  of  anxiety.  But  the  moral  setting  of  the

1  For  the  events  of  the  campaign  and  battle  of  Actinm  see  Plat.
Anton.  58—66.;  Dion,  1. 3—35.;  Flor.  iv.  1 1. ;  Oros.  /.  c.  From  Dion's
account  of  the  battle  it  would  seem  that  far  the  greater  part  of  the
Antonian  ships  perished.  Plutarch,  on  the  other  hand,  says  loosely
that  three  hundred  were  captured.  After  the  number  which  Antonius
himself  destroyed,  and  the  desertion  of  the  Egyptians,  which  this
writer  mentions,  hardly  so  many  as  three  hundred  could  have  been
engaged.  The  slain  were  estimated  by  Plutarch  at  five  thousand,  by
Orosius  at  twelve  thousand.

A.U.723-B.C.31. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  325

picture  endues  it  with  a  still  higher  charm.  The
masters  of  Eoman  song  have  vied  with  one  another
in  adorning  with  the  hues  of  the  imagination  the
decision  of  the  v:orl$s  debate.  Horace  brands  the
inebriate  frenzy  of  the  Egyptian,  who  had  dared  to
threaten  with  ruin  the  Capitol  and  the  empire.  Pro-
pertius  ascribes  the  triumph  to  Apollo,  who  cast  aside
his  lyre  and  grasped  his  bow,  and  exhausted  his
quiver  in  defence  of  Eome.  Virgil  assumes  all  his
strength  and  majesty  to  delineate  the  crowning  victory
of  his  imperial  hero.  The  East  and  West  have  met
in  decisive  conflict,  and  the  rout  of  Actium  has  pro-
strated the  world  before  the  fathers,  the  people,  and
the  gods  of  his  country.1  '  The  issue  of  the  long
struggle  of  the  nations  against  the  all-conquering  re-
public is  indeed  a  momentous  event  in  human  annals.
The  laws  and  language,  the  manners  and  institutions
of  Europe  still  bear  witness  to  the  catastrophe  of
Actium.  The  results  it  produced  can  never  recur  to
our  minds  without  impelling  us  to  reflect  upon  the
results  we  may  suppose  it  to  have  averted.  It  would
be  monstrous  indeed  to  admit  that  the  triumph  of
Antonius  could  have  permanently  subjected  Kome  to
Egypt,  the  West  to  the  East.  The  vitality  of  Euro-
pean intellect  would  have  thrown  off  the  yoke  of  an
inorganic  and  alien  despotism;  the  spirit  which  de-
fended Hellas  from  the  Persian,  and  Christendom
from  the  Moor,  would  have  avenged  Kome  upon  the
Copt  and  the  Arabian.  But  the  genius  of  an  Octa-
vius  could  hardly  have  been  replaced ;  none  but  him-
self among  his  own  generation  could  have  founded  a
dynasty  on  the  ruins  of  the  republic,  and  in  the  next
generation  the  opportunity  would  have  passed  away.
The  empire  of  Antonius  would  have  been  dismem-
bered like  that  of  Alexander,  and  in  the  first  century,
instead  of  the  fifth,  the  Western  world  would  have

1  Hor.  Od.  i.  37.;  Fropert.  iv.  6.  55.;  Virg.  sEn.  viii.  679.

326  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

been  split  into  petty  and  degenerate  principalities.
The  Goths,  let  loose  prematurely  upon  their  victims,
would  have  exterminated  ideas  which  neither  awed
nor  attracted  them.  The  arts  and  manners  of  Borne
would  have  left  no  deeper  traces  in  the  mind  of  Eu-
rope, than  Hellas  has  impressed  upon  Western  Asia.
The  language  of  her  Curia  and  her  Forum  would
have  been  forgotten,  and  the  writings  of  Cicero  would
have  crumbled  in  her  dust.  We  might  guess  her
grandeur  from  her  imperishable  Cloaca,  and  measure
her  power  by  the  foundations  of  her  walls ;  but  her
roads  and  camps  would  be  a  marvel  and  a  mystery,
and  Csesar  a  name  like  Ninus  or  Sesostris.

Antonius  urging  to  the  utmost  the  speed  of  his
Antoniusand  lignt  bark,  gained  rapidly  upon  Cleopatra's
S|etphaeratofly  flying  squadron.  When  the  queen  of  Egypt
Alexandria,  recognised  her  pursuer,  she  raised  a  signal
to  encourage  him  to  come  alongside  of  her  vessel,
and  caused  him  to  be  lifted  upon  deck.  But  what-
ever the  motives  of  his  flight,  the  imperator  felt  his
dishonour  and  was  overwhelmed  with  shame.  He
could  not  endure  even  to  come  into  her  presence,  but
sate  apart  at  the  prow  of  the  ship,  and  buried  his
face  in  his  hands.  The  swift  Liburnian  galleys  fol-
lowed in  pursuit,  and  were  not  repulsed  till  two  of
the  vessels  which  accompanied  his  flight  were  taken.
When  this  danger  was  past,  in  which  the  wretched
fugitive  had  roused  himself  for  a  moment  and  dis-
played his  usual  promptitude  and  courage,  he  re-
lapsed once  more  into  gloomy  silence,  and  for  three
days  repelled  every  attention.  At  last  Cleopatra's
women  persuaded  him  to  speak  with  their  mistress,
and  her  caresses  regained  their  power.  She  assured
herself  that  with  so  renowned  a  captain  for  her  forces
she  could  still  maintain  the  sovereignty  of  her  king-
dom, and  that  she  was  not  yet  reduced  to  make
terms  with  the  ruler  of  Rome.  The  fugitives  put  to
shore  at  Tsenarus,  and  from  thence  the  imperator

A.U.723-B.C.31.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  327

despatched  orders  to  Canidius  to  lead  his  land  forces
through  Macedonia  into  Asia.  It  was  an  empty  com-
mand ;  Antonius  himself  must  have  felt  that  he  was
already  a  general  without  an  army ;  for  he  began  to
prepare  for  the  worst,  dividing  among  his  attendants
such  valuables  as  he  had  with  him,  and  exhorting
them  to  quit  his  own  precarious  service,  and  capi-
tulate with  the  conqueror.  He  then  set  sail  with
Cleopatra  for  Alexandria.

The  battle,  according  to  some  accounts,  ended  at
four  o'clock.  It  seems  more  probable  how-  Canidius
ever  that  it  continued  late  into  the  evening,  ocf£ius°*nA
In  the  afternoon  the  wind  veered  to  the  rend^T
west,  as  usually  occurs  there  at  that  period  of  the  day,
and  the  freshening  breeze  fanned  the  fury  of  the
flames.  As  the  shades  of  evening  began  to  close,  the
Antonian  soldiers,  who  had  watched  with  bitter  anxiety
the  distress  and  peril  of  their  leader's  fleet,  now  read
in  the  wide-spread  conflagration  the  utter  destruc-
tion of  his  hopes.  But  they  had  failed  to  notice  his
shameful  desertion,  and  to  the  last  they  expected  to
see  him  land  and  throw  himself  into  their  ranks,
which  they  bitterly  lamented  that  he  should  ever
have  quitted.  The  men  loved  and  venerated  their
imperator,  and  the  contempt  they  had  been  taught
to  entertain  for  Octavius  gave  them  the  fullest  as-
surance of  victory  on  land.  For  seven  days  they
continued  to  cherish  this  delusive  expectation.  Cani-
dius at  last  marshalled  the  retreat,  and  led  them
forth  on  the  road  to  Macedonia.  But  the  troops  of
Octavius  were  already  in  motion  to  arrest  their
progress.  Canidius  himself  was  faithless  or  despond-
ing. He  eluded  the  vigilance  of  his  own  centu-
rions, and  escaped  secretly  to  the  conqueror.  When
this  last  defection  became  known  the  Antonians
indignantly  threw  down  their  arms,  or  consented
to  employ  them  in  the  service  of  Octavius.  The
whole  military  force  of  the  republic,  which  counted

328  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvni.

from  thirty  to  forty  legions,  was  thus  combined  under
the  auspices  of  a  single  imperator.1

The great  battle  of Actium  was  fought  on  the

second  of  September  A.  u.  723  ; and  this

baatue°of  AC- date  has  been  formally  recorded  by  histo-

tium,  Sept.  2. .  .  -, . .  , , ,  ,  .  ,. ,-,

rians  as  signalizing  the  termination  of  the
republic  and  the  commencement  of  the  Roman  mon-
archy.2 Octavius  himself  regarded  it  as  the  inaugu-
octavius  ration  of  a  new  era.  As  a  perpetual  me-
pdli  in  com-  morial  of  this  complete  and  final  triumph,

raemoration  of , „  , ,  .  ,  -j. r i •

his  victory,  he  founded  a  city  upon  the  site  ot  his  camp,
and  gave  to  it  the  name  of  Nicopolis,  the  City  of
Victory.  The  spot  on  which  his  own  tent  had  been
pitched  he  caused  to  be  paved  with  masonry  as  holy
ground,  and  suspended  around  it  the  beaks  of  the
captured  vessels.  Here  he  erected  a  shrine  to  his
patron  Apollo,  and  commemorated  with  punctilious
superstition  the  fancied  omens  of  his  success.3  The
remains  of  a  long  and  lofty  wall,  of  a  spacious
theatre  and  stadium,  of  a  broken  aqueduct,  and  of
many  irregular  groups  of  houses,  baths  and  sepul-
chres, attest  the  magnificence  of  the  scale  on  which
Nicopolis  was  planned.  The  mass  of  ruins  is  mostly
of  Roman  brickwork,  and  betrays  by  its  material
and  construction  that  it  was  planted  on  Grecian  soil
by  the  hands  of  foreigners  and  masters.  The

Treatment  of J  ,.  r>,i  '-IT  i  i

the  van-  mountaineers  ot  the  neighbourhood  were
compelled  to  migrate  from  their  wild  fast-
nesses, and  families  of  husbandmen  or  brigands  were
converted  by  the  caprice  of  the  founder  into  burghers
of  a  maritime  city.  They  were  placed  under  the
iron  formulas  of  Roman  civilization,  and  learned  the
rudiments  of  municipal  science  under  the  tuition  of

1  Plut.  Anton.  76.  foil.;  Dion,  li.  5.  -  Dion,  li.  1.

3  In  this  shrine  Octavius  placed  t\vo  brazen  statues  representing
the  peasant  Eutychus,  or  Good-luck,  and  his  ass  Nicon,  the  Victorious.
He  had  met  them  the  day  before  the  battle,  and  derived  encourage-
ment from  their  names,  which  he  had  carefully  inquired.

A.V.723-B.C.31.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  329

Eoman  veterans.1  The  site  of  the  new  city  lay  at
some  distance  from  both  the  sea  and  the  gulf,  and  a
separate  haven  was  constructed  on  the  shores  of  the
inland  basin,  for  the  supply  of  its  wants  and  exchange
of  its  commodities.  The  little  chapel  of  the  point
was  replaced  by  a  more  splendid  structure  in  honour
of  the  god  who  had  given  victory  to  the  Romans.
Octavius  instituted  a  gymnic  and  musical  festival,
with  the  designation  of  the  Actian  games,  to  recur  at
this  spot  every  fifth  year,  and  this  solemnity  continued
to  be  respectfully  observed  for  many  generations.2

These  peaceful  monuments  of  victory  were  reserved
however  for  the  work  of  a  period  of  greater  Treatment  of
leisure.  The  first  business  which  occupied  thecaPtives-
the  conqueror  was  to  decide  the  fate  of  the  vanquished.
From  his  treatment  of  the  captives  of  Actium  the
panegyrists  of  the  future  emperor  might  take  occa-
sion to  celebrate  his  clemency,  his  detractors  to  stig-
matize his  rigour.3  Some  of  the  most  illustrious  of
his  opponents  he  put  to  death  with  circumstances  of
great  cruelty,  and  among  them  was  a  son  of  the  tri-
bune Curio,  whose  devotion  to  Csesar  and  services  in
his  cause  should  have  secured  a  milder  fate  for  his
offspring.  On  the  other  hand  a  Scaurus  was  pardoned
for  the  sake  of  his  mother  Mucia,  though  a  half-
brother  of  Sextus  Pompeius,  and  the  life  of  Sosius,
an  inveterate  foe,  was  granted  to  the  entreaties  of
a  common  friend.  Meanwhile  the  army  exulting
in  their  success,  from  which  they  hoped  for  the
realization  of  all  their  golden  dreams,  proclaimed
their  leader  for  the  sixth  time  imperator.  They

1  Strabo,  vii.  7. Comp.  Wordsworth's  Greece,  p.  232.

-  Dion,  li.  1.

3  Ovid.  Trist.  ii.  44. :

"Tu  vcniam  parti  supcratae  saspe  dedisti,

Non  conccssurus  quam  tibi  victor  erat.
Divitiis  etiam  multos  ct  honoribus  auctos

Vidi,  qui  tulerant  in  caput  arma  tuum."

On  the  other  hand  may  be  cited  the  story  in  Dion,  li.  2.,  compared
with  Suetonius,  Oct.  13.

330  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxviu.

were  doomed,  however,  to  disappointment.  The
treasures  of  Egypt  had  been  carried  off  in  the
barks  of  Cleopatra ;  the  spoils  of  war  had  perished
in  the  conflagration  of  the  enemy's  fleet ;  the  An-
tonian  army  had  capitulated  on  honourable  terms:
there  was  no  camp  filled  with  plate,  jewels,  and
splendid  accoutrements,  to  be  devoted  to  plunder,
and  the  great  victory  of  Actium  proved  rich  in
laurels  but  barren  in  spoil.  The  soldiers  showed
a  disposition  to  resent  this  disappointment;  but
Octavius,  who  had  faced  and  quelled  their  muti-
nous cries  before,  broke  their  rebellious  spirit  by
dispersing  them  in  various  quarters  and  dividing
their  interests.  He  selected  certain  legions  for
his  immediate  service  in  carrying  the  war  into
Egypt;  and  these  he  satisfied  with  the  prospect  of
a  more  fruitful  victory.  The  veterans  whom  he
had  enticed  from  their  lands  in  Italy  he  dismissed
to  the  enjoyment  of  their  estates,  while  the  fresh
recruits  whom  he  had  enlisted  in  the  provinces
were  constrained  to  return  to  their  homes  unre-
warded. But  he  justly  feared  the  consequence  of
this  general  discharge  of  his  turbulent  and  discon-
tented legionaries.  Maecenas,  who  had  been  left
at  the  head  of  affairs  at  Home,  was  of  inferior
rank  and  a  civilian  by  profession ;  but  Agrippa
commanded  the  fear  no  less  than  the  love  of  the
citizens,  and  when  he  was  entrusted  with  full
powers  for  the  administration  of  the  government
during  the  absence  of  his  chief,  the  tranquillity  of
the  republic  and  the  authority  of  its  ruler  were
amply  secured.  Octavius  now  directed  his  course
through  Greece  and  along  the  coast  of  Asia  Minor.
He  exacted  contributions  from  disaffected  cities,
deprived  free  populations  of  their  privileges,  dis-
placed dependent  chieftains,  and  established  new
dynasties  on  their  thrones.1  At  the  close  of  the
1  Dion.  li.  2.

A.U.73-B.C.31.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  331

year  he  crossed  the  sea  once  more,  and  met  at
Bnmdisium  a  large  multitude  of  citizens  of  all
ranks,  who  came  thither  to  pay  him  honour,  as
consul  for  the  fourth  time.  He  now  seized  for
distribution  among  his  soldiers  the  lands  of  some
Italian  cities  which  had  favoured  his  rival,  assigning
to  them  in  exchange  the  confiscated  territories  of
Greek  and  Asiatic  communities.  He  divided  also
among  the  most  pressing  claimants  the  treasures
he  had  amassed  in  his  progress  during  the  autumn,
and  even  proposed  to  offer  for  sale  his  own  private
estates  and  those  of  his  most  devoted  adherents.
When  it  was  found  that  no  one  ventured  to  com-
pete for  them  in  the  market,  his  creditors  could
not  refuse  to  wait  a  little  longer  for  the  satisfaction
of  their  claims.1

Meanwhile  the  fugitives  from  the  blood-stained
waves  of  Actium  had  reached  Alexandria  in  ci^p^m
safety.  At  the  first  sight  of  the  Egyptian  ""'it'^"
fleet  returning  the  idle  and  turbulent  popu-  JS^y  the
lace  had  flocked  to  the  beach  and  the  quays,  Bed8ea-
and,  as  it  approached,  welcomed  with  exultation  the
prows  crowned  with  laurel,  the  streamers  flaunting  in
the  breeze,  and  the  chaunt  of  victory  wafted  from  the
decks.  The  queen  had  taken  measures  to  anticipate
the  effect  which  the  announcement  of  her  disaster
might  produce.  She  summoned  the  chief  people  of
the  city  into  her  presence,  and  caused  the  arrest  and
immediate  execution  of  those  whose  disaffection  she
feared.  She  caused  Artavasdes  the  Armenian  to  be
put  to  death,  and  sent  his  head  to  the  king  of  Media,
as  a  pledge  of  amity  and  an  incentive  to  further
exertions  in  her  favour.  The  populace,  moody  and
discontented  when  the  ill  news  spread,  remained
quiescent  for  want  of  leaders,  and  the  rifled  coffers
of  the  murdered  nobles  furnished  treasures  to  se-
cure the  fidelity  of  the  soldiers.  Antonius  had

1  Dion,  li.  4.

332  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXVIH.

stopped  at  Paraetonium,  where  some  Eoman  troops
were  stationed  under  Pinarius  for  the  defence  of
Egypt,  intending  to  bring  them  with  him  to  Alex-
andria. But  when  that  officer  shut  the  gates
against  him  and  killed  the  bearers  of  his  missive,
the  desperate  state  of  his  affairs  flashed  fully  upon
him,  and  he  was  with  difficulty  prevented  from
laying  violent  hands  on  himself.  His  attendants
dragged  him  to  Alexandria,  where  he  found  the
queen,  whose  courage  and  energy  rose  with  her
danger,  preparing  with  a  mighty  effort  to  abandon
the  kingdom  which  she  knew  it  was  impossible  to
defend.  She  had  undertaken  to  transport  her
ships  across  the  desert  to  the  head  of  the  Arabian
gulf,  to  load  them  with  the  choicest  troops  and
treasures  she  yet  retained,  and  to  sail  far  away  to
some  secure  regions  beyond  the  reach  of  the
conqueror  whose  pursuit  she  dreaded.1  It  seems
uncertain  whether  she  had  intended  to  invite  her
Her  plan  is  infatuated  lover  to  accompany  her  flight,
disconcerted.  The  firgt  detachment  of  ships  which  reached
the  shores  of  the  Eed  Sea  was  burnt  by  the  Arabs
of  Petra,  and  Antonius,  who  had  now  rejoined  her,
believing  that  the  legions  under  Canidius  were
still  his  own,  persuaded  her  to  abandon  the  design.
Some  trifling  measures  were  now  taken  for  guarding
the  approaches  of  Egypt,  until  the  army  should
arrive,  and  the  respite  afforded  by  the  pursuer's
unavoidable  delay  might  have  been  turned  to  ac-
count for  putting  the  kingdom  in  a  state  of  de-
fence. But  Antonius  had  lost  all  energy.  He
built  himself  a  solitary  retreat  in  the  sea,  which

1  Plutarch  (Anton.  69.)  asserts  that  Cleopatra  proposed  to  convey
her  ships  across  the  isthmus  "  which  separates  the  lied  Sea  from  the
sea  of  Egypt,"  which  he  estimates  at  less  than  half  its  real  width.  It
is  more  probable  that  she  contemplated  opening  the  canal  of  the
Ptolemies  from  the  Nile  to  the  Red  Sea,  which,  if  it  ever  was  com-
pleted, on  which  Pliny  (H.  N.  vi.  35.)  throws  some  doubt,  may  have
been  abandoned  and  partially  closed  at  an  early  period.

A.U.723-E.C.31.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  333

he  connected  with  the  island  of  Pharus  by  a  mole;
and  there  he  withdrew  himself  from  all  society,  and
brooded  gloomily  over  the  wreck  of  his  fortunes.

Cleopatra  was  not  daunted  even  by  this  deser-
tion. She  had  abandoned  at  her  lover's  cieopatmnow
instance  her  scheme  of  flight  and  dream  "u^of™

of  Arabian sovereignty. She now  urged  the..'™ time

,  x- r 3  e  -it n<>g°ti»t««

on her preparations tor defence with  with  octaviu«.

prudence  as  well  as  vigour.  In  order  to  conciliate
the  favour  of  her  subjects  she  invested  her  youth-
ful sons  with  the  garb  of  manhood,  and  presented
them  to  the  people  as  their  leaders,  that  they
might  feel  themselves  governed  by  men  and  not
by  a  woman.  At  the  same  time  she  sought  to
treat  with  Octavius  in  her  own  name  and  that  of
Antonius,  but  to  these  solicitations  he  persisted  in
returning  no  answer.  Abandoned  by  the  cowardice
of  her  ally,  she  now  sought  her  own  safety  by  betray-
ing him.  The  conqueror,  she  augured,  might  be
bribed  to  save  her  by  the  splendid  ransom  she  could
pay  for  her  kingdom.  She  sought  and  obtained,  it
was  said,  secret  assurances  of  his  favour,  accompanied
with  a  promise  that  her  sovereignty  should  be  re-
spected, on  condition  of  her  putting  Aiitonius  to
death.  But  Egypt  was  a  prize  which  the  ruler  of
the  Roman  world  was  not  likely  to  forego,  and  no
such  terms,  he  might  be  convinced,  were  necessary
to  effect  the  destruction  of  his  enemy.  There  was  no
hope  of  foreign  succour.  The  chieftains  to  whom
Cleopatra  had  applied  for  aid  were  easily  induced  by
his  agents  to  refuse  it ;  and  finally,  a  band  of  gladi-
ators who  had  striven  bravely  to  force  their  way  from
Cyzicus,  where  they  were  kept  in  training  to  cele-
brate the  anticipated  victory  over  Octavius,  were
compelled  to  surrender  to  his  lieutenant  Didius.1

1  Dion  Cassius  wonders,  not  without  reason,  at  the  devotion  dis-
played by  these  hired  swordsmen.  They  were  at  last  only  induced
to  surrender  upon  a  promise  that  they  should  be  dismissed  from

334  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvin.

And  now  the  wretched  pair  became  more  and  more
urgent  in  their  solicitations  to  the  ruler  of
ASonTusand  their  destinies.  Antonius  abased  himself
so  low  as  to  remind  his  ancient  colleague  of
the  mutual  regard  which,  he  averred,  they  had  enter-
tained for  each  other  in  their  earlier  years ;  but  Octa-
vius,  so  far  from  yielding  to  these  claims,  put  one  of
his  envoys  to  death,  and  dismissed  another,  the  tri-
umvir's son  Antyllus,  without  deigning  to  accord  him
an  answer.  The  chief  of  the  Eomans  felt  neither
delicacy  nor  compunction  in  dealing  with  his  outlawed
adversary.  He  retained  the  money  which  had  been
sent  to  bribe  him,  at  the  same  time  that  he  refused
even  to  listen  to  the  messengers  who  brought  it.  His
only  fear  was  lest  the  suppliants  with  whom  he  thus
cruelly  sported  should  be  driven  to  desperation,  and
destroy,  as  they  threatened,  the  treasures  they  had
amassed  in  their  capital.  In  order  to  avert  such  a
catastrophe  he  charged  his  freedman  Thyrsus  to  amuse
Cleopatra  with  a  hint  that  he  was  enamoured  of  her  ;
hoping  to  decide  her  resolution  by  an  appeal  to  her
vanity,  and  induce  her  to  sacrifice  Antonius  to  a  new
conquest,  if  not  to  her  personal  security.  Antonius,
on  his  part,  was  not  unaware,  perhaps,  of  these  in-
trigues, nor  confident  of  the  queen's  good  faith.  He
quitted  his  retreat,  and  sought  her  society  again  in
the  palace  ;  there  he  kept  watch  over  her  movements,
while  each  perhaps  attempted  to  deceive  the  other,
and  stifle  the  consciousness  of  despair  by  plunging  into
revelry  and  excess.  Strange  stories  were  told  of  the
way  in  which  they  amused  themselves.  They  formed,
it  was  said,  with  their  boon  companions  a  society  to
which  they  gave  the  name  of  the  Inimitable  Livers,
the  members  of  which  were  pledged  to  discover  the

their  employment  as  gladiators,  and  allowed  to  take  up  their
abode  at  Daphne  near  Antioch.  Messala  broke  the  pledge  which
Didius  had  given  them,  dispersed  them  in  small  parties  as  if  for
enlistment  in  various  legions,  and  caused  them  to  be  slain  in  detail.
Dion,  li.  7.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  335

means  of  enjoyment  for  every  hour  of  the  day.  But
a  change  had  come  over  the  character  of  their  orgies :
they  no  longer  roamed  abroad  disguised  and  inebri-
ated, and  filled  the  streets  with  nocturnal  tumult  and
reckless  gaiety :  they  bound  one  another  mutually
to  die  together,  and  Cleopatra  made  experiment  of
various  poisons,  trying  their  effect  on  slaves  or  crimi-
nals, to  ascertain  if  there  be  any  mode  of  death  which
is  a  pleasure  and  not  a  pain.  The  means  which  were
speediest  in  their  operation  proved  at  the  same  time
the  most  excruciating.  The  true  euthanasia  she  dis-
covered, it  is  said,  in  the  bite  of  the  asp,  which  suf-
fused the  brain  with  languor  and  forgetful  ness,  and
extinguished  the  faculties  gradually  without  any
sense  of  suffering.

Just  at  this  period,  while  the  arrival  of  the  con-
queror off  the  coast  of  Egypt  was  daily  expected,
Antonio's  obtained  in  formation  that  Cornelius  Gallus,
one  whom,  though  an  officer  in  his  rival's  armies,  he
esteemed  a  personal  friend,  had  reached  Para3tonium
and  received  from  Pinarius  the  troops  which,  as  before
mentioned,  had'  rejected  his  own  solicitations.  He
hoped,  through  his  interest  with  their  new  com-
mander, to  be  more  successful  in  a  second  appeal,
and  repaired  with  confidence  to  the  spot.  But  Gallus,
exulting  in  the  trust  reposed  in  him  by  Octavius,  from
whose  favour  he  might  hope  for  the  highest  promo-
tion, disregarded  every  solicitation:  he  ordered  his
trumpeters  to  drown  with  the  clang  of  their  instru-
ments the  address  which  his  suitor  advanced  to  de-
liver under  the  walls,  and  succeeded  by  a  feint  in
enticing  his  vessels  into  the  harbour,  and  there  cap-
turing or  destroying  them.  While  Antonius  pcuriusiandi
was  thus  fruitlessly  engaged  his  adversary  cieo^Ei'"
had  reached  Pelusium,  which  Cleopatra  had  SC^SS1
charged  the  garrison  to  surrender  after  a  onhi»he»rt-
slight  show  of  resistance.  The  representations  art-
fully made  to  her  by  Thyrsus  had  worked  upon  her

336  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvm.

imagination,  and  while  she  was  fully  sec  sib le  that
the  invader's  arms  were  irresistible,  she  still,  in
her  thirty-ninth  year,  flattered  herself  that  her  own
charms  would  prove  not  less  omnipotent.  Visions  of  a
Roman  throne  still  flitted  before  her :  her  hopes  had
twice  been  frustrated,  but  she  still  relied  on  the  arts
which  had  so  well  served  her  ;  she  played  boldly  with
the  loaded  dice,  and  threw  her  last  cast  with  a  hand
that  had  never  faltered.

Antonius  recovered  some  portion  of  his  energy  as
Antonius  is  the  danger  became  more  pressing.  Perhaps
6k??muh!anaa  the  assurance  of  Cleopatra's  treachery,  the
oMriwto  fear  and  suspicion  of  which  had  long  un-
whfch  fo2e-bat'  manned  him,  restored  him  to  his  former
fused.  spirit.  Rushing  back  from  Parastonium  he

encountered  the  invader's  cavalry  before  the  walls  of
Alexandria,  and  routed  it  in  a  brilliant  skirmish.
Thereupon  he  ordered  javelins  to  be  cast  ^nto  his
antagonist's  camp,  with  billets  attached  to  them,  in
which  he  promised  six  thousand  sesterces  to  every
soldier  who  should  desert  to  him.  But  Octavius
quietly  picked  up  these  missives,  and  himself  recited
their  contents  to  his  soldiers  :  so  great  was  his  influ-
ence, that  he  could  engage  them  to  resent  with  in-
dignation the  attempt  upon  their  fidelity.  A  second
affair  resulted  in  the  defeat  of  Antonius.  In  this  ex-
tremity it  was  reported  that  he  sent  his  conquering
foe  a  challenge  to  single  combat,  which  was  of  course
contemptuously  refused.  He  now  made  ready  to
take  to  sea,  and  was  preparing,  it  was  said,  either  to
attack  the  enemy  or  to  steer  for  the  coast  of  Spain,
when  the  machinations  of  the  faithless  queen  pre-
vailed on  the  sailors  to  desert.  Antonius
byhisfleetand  was  himself  still  on  land  when  he  beheld
his  vessels  salute  those  of  his  adversary,
and  join  their  ranks.  At  the  same  moment  the  last
battalion  of  his  soldiers  abandoned  him.  Cleopatra,
who  was  herself  taken  by  surprise  at  the  sudden-

A.r.724-B.c.30. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  337

ness  of  this  defection,  found  herself  for  an  instant
in  the  power  of  her  outraged  and  indignant  as-
sociate. Fearing  the  fury  of  his  despair,  she  en-
closed herself  with  a  few  female  attendants  in  a
splendid  mausoleum  she  had  caused  to  be  constructed
for  her  own  sepulchre,  and  spread  the  report  that  she
had  put  herself  to  death.  Antonius  was  satisfied.
His  wrongs  were  avenged,  and  his  indignation  was
appeased.  He  had  no  further  hope  of  life,  and  no-
thing more  to  live  for.  At  the  last  moment  he  could
indulge  the  soothing  persuasion  that  the  traitress  had
repented  of  her  treason,  and  had  died  for  the  lover
she  had  betrayed.  In  this  sweet  dream,  not  onthem-
less  delusive  than  all  the  hollow  enioy-  &«££«'•

_, .  ,. ,. . .  A i • death.Anto-

ments  of  his  career  ot  dissipation,  Antonius  niu.  give.
,  . , ,. iT->-,i .1 -j f  him§«if amor-

determined  to  die. v>  ith  the  aid  ot  an  at-  t»i  wound.

tendant  he  inflicted  upon  himself  a  mortal  wound,
and  fainted  with  loss  of  blood,  though  he  did  not  im-
mediately expire.  Cleopatra  was  apprised^  TheioTen-
of  the  fatal  deed,  and  shuddered  with  a  lMt  interyiew-
pang  of  remorse.  As  soon  as  the  wounded  man  came
to  himself  a  messenger  was  introduced  to  him  from
her,  with  the  assurance  that  she  yet  survived.  This
last  avowal  of  tenderness  roused  the  dying  embers  of
his  passion.  He  entreated  his  attendants  to  convey
him  to  her  place  of  refuge ;  and  from  a  window  above
the  queen  and  her  women  let  down  a  rope,  to  which
he  caused  his  litter  to  be  attached,  and  lifted  into  the
upper  chamber.  His  strength  just  sufficed  for  this
last  inverview,  and  he  expired  in  a  few  moments  in
the  arms  of  the  mistr ASS  for  whom  he  had  sacrificed
his  fame,  his  fortunes,  and  his  life.

A  slave  had  brought  the  fatal  dagger  to  Octavius,
and  exhibited  the  blood  of  his  enemy  still  oetanu.  at-
reeking  upon  it.  The  conqueror  affected  to  {Jf^SlfonS?
weep  for  a  man  so  closely  allied  to  him,  and  Cle°p»tra-
one  who  had  held  so  eminent  a  place  in  the  common-
wealth. He  pretended  to  be  anxious  to  justify  him-

VOL.  Ill,  Z

338  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvni.

self  to  those  about  him,  and  showed  them  the  letters
which  had  passed  between  them,  in  which  his  own
moderation  and  the  arrogance  of  his  rival  were  con-
spicuously displayed. In  the  meantime  he  sent  a
trusty  officer,  Proculeius,  to  the  place  whither  Anto-
nius  had  been  carried  in  the  agonies  of  death. The
wounded man had already  breathed  his  last ;  the
doors  of  the  massive  sepulchre  were  closed,  and  the
women  refused  to  admit  their  strange  visitor.  A  threat
of  violence  might  drive  the  imprisoned  queen  to  de-
stroy herself,  and  the  messenger  was  strictly  charged
to  preserve  her  alive,  partly  for  the  sake  of  the  hid-
den treasures  which  she  alone,  it  was  supposed,  could
reveal,  and  partly  that  she  might  form  the  most  at-
tractive spectacle  in  the  destined  triumph  of  Octavius.
Proculeius  contrived  to detain  her  in  conversation
with  a  confederate  at  the  door,  while  with  one  or  two
soldiers  he  climbed  by  a  ladder  to  the  upper  story.
As  he  entered,  Cleopatra  wildly  grasped  the  dagger
she  wore  at  her  girdle ;  but  he  arrested  the  move-
ment, and  forcibly  restrained  her  arm,  while  he  ex-
horted her  to  recover  her  self-possession,  and  put
entire  confidence  in  his  kind  and  honourable  master.
All  attempts  at  defence  had  been  already  aban-
He  ent«n doned,  and  on  the  first  day  of  the  month
Alexandria, gexti]is, at the moment  perhaps when
these  events  were  happening,  the  emporium  of  the
three  continents opened  its  haven to  the Roman
galleys. The  palace  of  the  Ptolemies  was  vacant,
and  the city  of  Alexander  knelt  in  supplication.1
From  the  auspicious  advent  of  the  conqueror  who
was  about  to  incorporate  them  amongst  the  subjects
of  his empire,  the  Egyptians  dated  a  new  era  in
their  chronology. He  neither  returned  nor  heeded
the  compliments  they  lavished  upon  him. He  en-

1  Hor.  Od.  iv.  14.:

"  Portus  Alexandrea  supplex
Et  vacuam  patefecit  aulam."

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  339

tered  the  city  leaning  upon  the  arm  of  the  philo-
sopher Areius,  and  when  he  took  his  seat  in  the
gymnasium,  and  summoned  the  citizens  into  his
presence,  he  declared  that  their  resistance  was  par-
doned, first,  out  of  respect  for  their  illustrious  foun-
der ;  secondly,  for  the  beauty  of  their  streets  and
edifices ;  and  thirdly,  for  the  merits  of  his  friend,
their  fellow-townsman.  Many  of  his  officers  asked
permission  to  give  decent  interment  to  the  corpse  of
Antonius,  but  he  allowed  Cleopatra  to  dispose  of  it
after  her  own  fashion  ;  and  he  was  well-pleased  per-
haps to  learn  that  the  body  of  one  whose  arrogant
and  alien  manners  had  caused  such  disgust  to  his
fellow-citizens,  was  embalmed  and  robed,  and  buried
with  royal  obsequies  among  the  remains  of  kings.

When  these  ceremonies  were  finished  Cleopatra
allowed  herself  to  be  led  to  the  palace
of  her  ancestors.  Exhausted  with  fever  by  f"ter^w%A"h
the  vehemence  of  her  passionate  mourning,
she  refused  the  care  of  her  physician,  and  declared
that  she  would  perish  by  hunger.  Octavius  was
alarmed  at  the  avowal  of  this  desperate  resolution.
He  could  only  prevail  upon  her  to  protract  her
existence  by  the  barbarous  threat  of  murdering  her
children.  He  held  out  also  the  hope  of  a  personal
interview,  and  again  her  vanity  whispered  to  her
not  yet  to  despair.  The  artless  charms  of  youth,
which,  as  she  at  least  deemed,  had  enchained  the
great  Julius  at  a  single  interview,  had  long  since
faded  away;  the  more  mature  attractions  which  ex-
perience had  taught  her  to  cultivate  for  the  conquest
of  her  second  lover,  might  fail  under  the  disastrous
ravages  of  so  many  years  of  indulgence  and  dissipa-
tion :  but  time  had  not  blighted  her  genius ;  her
distresses  claimed  compassion ;  and  from  pity,  she
well  knew,  there  is  but  one  step  to  love.  In  the
retirement  of  the  women's  apartments  she  decked
her  chamber  with  sumptuous  magnificence,  and
z  2

340  HISTORY OF THE ROMAKS  CH.  xxvm.

threw  herself  on  a  silken  couch  in  the  negligent
attire  of  sickness  and  woe.  She  clasped  to  her
bosom  the  letters  of  her  earliest  admirer,  and  sur-
rounded herself  with  his  busts  and  portraits,  to
make  an  impression  on  the  filial  piety  of  one  who
claimed  to  inherit  his  conquests  and  sympathise  with
his  dearest  interests.  When  the  expected  visitor
entered  she  sprang  passionately  to  meet  him  and
threw  herself  at  his  feet  ;  her  eyes  were  red  with
weeping,  her  whole  countenance  was  disordered,  her
bosom  heaved,  and  her  voice  trembled  with  emotion.
The  marks  of  blows  inflicted  on  her  breast  were
visible  in  the  disorder  of  her  clothing.  She  addressed
him  as  her  lord,  and  sighed  as  she  transferred  to  a
stranger  the  sovereign  title  she  had  so  long  borne
herself,  and  which  she  had  first  received  from  her
conqueror's  father.  The  young  Eoman  acknow-
she  attempts  ledged  the  charms  of  female  beauty,  and
wm  wiofout  had  often  surrendered  to  them:  but  he  knew
also  his  own  power  of  resisting  them,  which
he  had  already  sternly  practised,  and  he  now  guarded
himself  against  her  seductions  by  fixing  his  eyes  ob-
durately on  the  ground.1  He  coldly  demanded  the
justification  of  her  political  conduct ;  upbraided  her
for  making  war  upon  the  republic ;  refused  to  admit
the  plea  that  she  was  constrained  by  her  associate,
and  drove  her  from  point  to  point  with  ruthless  per-
tinacity. Despairing  of  conquest  she  threw  herself
upon  his  mercy,  handed  to  him  the  list  of  her  trea-
sures, and  pleaded  piteously  for  bare  life.  A  slave,
interrogated  and  threatened  perhaps  with  torture,
declaring  that  some  of  her  effects  were  still  withheld,
she  flew  at  him,  and  tore  his  face  with  her  nails,  ex-
claiming that  she  had  indeed  reserved  a  few  trifles,  not
for  her  own  use  or  ornament,  but  as  presents  to  gain

1  For  tiie  continence  of  Octavius  see  Nicolaus  of  Damascus, Vit.
Auy.  5.  15.

A.U.724-B.C.30. UNDER THE EMPIKE.  341

the  favour  of  Livia  and  Octavia.  Her  visitor  checked
her  with  a  smile ;  he  was  satisfied  with  the  convic-
tion that  she  was  anxious  still  to  live,  and  he  now
sought  to  encourage  her  with  the  assurance  that  he
would  treat  her  better  than  she  expected.  He  went
away,  says  Plutarch,  thinking  that  he  had  deceived
her,  but  he  was  more  deceived  himself.

Cleopatra  had  tasked  her  powers  of  fascination  to
the  utmost,  and  she  knew  that  they  had  cieop»tr»u
failed.  She  penetrated  the  design  of  carry-  th?"on- c
ing  her  to  Rome  through  the  cold  though  triumph,
courteous  demeanour  by  which  it  was  veiled,  and  she
sternly  resolved  to  frustrate  it.  From  a  son  of  Dola-
bella,  who  had  conceived  a  romantic  passion  for  her,
she  heard  without  surprise  that  even  within  three
days  she  was  to  be  conveyed  away  with  her  children,
to  adorn  the  conqueror's  triumph.  She  formed  her
plan  with  secresy  and  decision.  She  directed  her
attendants  to  make  ready  for  the  voyage,  while  she
only  desired  permission  to  pour  libations  on  the
tomb  of  Antonius.  Octavius,  now  secure  of  his
victim,  readily  consented.  The  queen  re-  Siie  commit*
paired  with  her  female  companions  to  the  suidde-
mausoleum.  She  gave  orders  for  a  banquet  to  be
served,  and  in  the  meanwhile  embraced  the  dead
man's  bier,  and  mingled  her  tears  with  the  wine  she
poured  upon  it.  She  addressed  her  lord  in  terms  of
unabated  affection,  appealed  to  his  conviction  of  her
faith  and  love,  and  besought  him,  as  one  having
power  with  the  gods  of  his  country,  for  her  own
gods,  she  said,  had  deserted  her,  not  to  suffer  himself
to  be  triumphed  over  in  the  person  of  a  wife  de-
voted to  him,  but  to  let  her  die  upon  his  coffin  and
find  her  sepulchre  in  his  tomb.  Sentinels  mean-
while kept  guard  outside  ;  a  man  in  peasant's  clothes
approached  with  a  basket  on  his  arm,  which  when
they  uncovered  and  found  in  it  figs  of  unusual
beauty,  he  pressed  them  to  partake  of  them,  and

342  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvnr.

they  allowed  him  to  carry  them  in.  Soon  after
the  queen  commanded  all  her  attendants  to  leave
her,  except  her  two  favourite  women,  Iras  and
Charmion,  and  at  the  same  time  she  sent  a  sealed
packet  to  be  delivered  to  Octavius.  It  contained
only  a  brief  and  passionate  request  to  be  buried
with  her  lover.  His  first  impulse  was  to  rush  to
the  spot  and  prevent  the  catastrophe  it  portended :
but  in  the  next  moment  the  suspicion  of  a  trick  to
excite  his  sensibility  flashed  across  him,  and  he  con-
tented himself  with  sending  persons  to  inquire.  The
messengers  made  all  haste;  but  they  arrived  too
late ;  the  tragedy  had  been  acted  out,  and  the  cur-
tain was  falling.  Bursting  into  the  tomb  they  be-
held Cleopatra  lying  dead  on  a  golden  couch  in  royal
attire.  •  Of  her  two  women,  Iras  was  dying  at  her
feet,  and  Charmion  with  failing  strength  was  re-
placing the  diadem  on  her  mistress's  brow.  Is  this
well,  Charmion  ?  exclaimed  abruptly  one  of  the  in-
truders. It  is  well,  she  replied,  and  worthy  of  the
daughter  of  kings.  And  with  these  words  she  too
fell  on  her  face  and  died.

The  manner  of  Cleopatra's  death  was  never  cer-
tainly known.  It  seems  that  there  were  no  marks
of  violence  on  her  person,  nor  did  any  spots  break
out  upon  it,  such  as  usually  betray  the  action  of
poison.  But  the  experiments  she  was  reported  to
have  made  on  the  bite  of  venomous  reptiles  were
remembered :  these  were  coupled  with  the  story  of
the  basket  of  figs,  in  which  such  means  of  destruc-
tion might  easily  be  concealed.  It  was  rumoured
that  Octavius  employed  the  services  of  the  Psylli,
the  poison-suckers  of  the  desert,  to  restore  his  victim
to  life ;  and  at  last  it  came  to  be  positively  affirmed
that  her  arms  were  found  slightly  punctured,  as
with  the  fangs  of  an  asp.  This  at  least  was  the
account  of  the  affair  which  Octavius  himself  allowed
to  be  circulated.  When  the  figure  of  Cleopatra  was

A.C.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  343

afterwards  carried  in  his  triumph,  she  was  repre-
sented reclining  on  a  couch  with  the  asp  clinging
to  either  arm,  and  mortal  sleep  stealing  slowly
through  every  limb.1

The  last  sovereign  of  the  line  of  the  Ptolemies  died
on  the  thirtieth  of  August,  724,  in  the
fortieth  year  of  her  age,  and  the  twenty-  Jf0
second  of  her  eventful  reign.  Her  last  todeath-
wish  was  not  denied  her.  She  was  buried  as  a  queen
by  the  side  of  her  favourite ;  and  when  his  statues
were  overthrown  by  the  order  of  the  ruthless  con-
queror, the  effigies  of  the  most  renowned  beauty  of
antiquity  were  redeemed  from  destruction,  by  no
respect,  it  is  said,  for  her  charms,  her  genius,  or  her
rank,  but  by  a  bribe  of  a  thousand  talents  adroitly
administered  by  one  of  her  servants.  Still  less  could
the  claims  of  admiration  or  pity  prevail  to  save  the
wretched  child,  whose  origin  she  had  proudly  ascribed
to  the  great  dictator.  He  had  been  publicly  pro-
claimed the  lineal  descendant  of  Julius  Caesar,  the

1  Propert.  iii.  11.  53. :

"  Brachia  spectavi  sacris  admorsa  colubris,
EC  trahere  occultum  membra  soporis  iter."

The  actual  mode  of  Cleopatra's  death  was  a  mystery  to  the
ancients  themselves.  Undoubtedly  Octavius  was  anxious  to  pre-
serve her  life,  and  she  must  have  fallen  by  her  own  act.  The  test  of
discoloration  is  very  uncertain,  and  it  is  not  improbable  that  among
her  experiments  she  had  ascertained  a  method  of  destroying  life  by
poison  without  disfigurement.  The  notion  that  the  asp  was  the  in-
strument of  death  may  be  derived  from  the  mysterious  agency  at-
tributed by  the  Orientals  to  the  serpent  tribe.  The  Roman  poet
himself  use  the  phrase  sacri  colubri ;  but  I  would  not  be  supposed  to
adopt  the  lively  rhapsody  in  which  M.  Michelet  indulges  on  this
subject  (Hist,  de  la  Rep.  "Bom.,  at  the  end):  "  Le  mythe  Oriental  du
serpent  que  nous  trouvons  deja  dans  les  plus  vieilles  traditions  de
1'Asie,  reparait  ainsi  a  son  dernier  age,  et  la  veille  du  jour  ou  elle  va

se  transformer  par  le  Christianisme L'aspic  qui  tne  et  delivre

Cleopatre  ferme  la  longue  domination  du  vieux  dragon  Oriental.

C'etait  une  belle  et  mysterieuse  figure  que  1'imperceptible

serpent  de  Cleopatre,  suivant  le  triomphe  d'Octave,  le  triomphe  de
1  Occident  sur  1'Orient."

For  the  account  of  the  last  days  of  Antonius  and  Cleopatra,  see
Plutarch,  Anton.  69.  to  the  end;  Dion,  li.  6—15.;  Veil.  ii.  87.

344  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvin.

direct  heir  of  the  imperial  patrimony,  to  which
Octavius  could  advance  only  the  claim  of  adoption.
While  the  struggle  for  supreme  power  was  still
pending,  Oppius  had  been  employed  to  write  in
disproof  of  these  arrogant  and  hateful  pretensions.
What  his  arguments  were  we  have  no  means  of
knowing ;  certain  it  is  that  Octavius  felt  it  necessary
to  reinforce  them  by  the  sword.  Antyllus,  the  son
of  Antonius  by  Fulvia,  had  been  betrayed  by  his
attendant  Theodorus,  and  put  to  death.1  The  tri-
umvir's children  by  Cleopatra  were  still  suffered  to
live,  though  deprived  of  course  of  their  pretended
sovereignties ;  this  show  of  clemency  may  have  been
held  out  as  a  lure  to  Caesarion,  whom  his  mother  had
removed  from  the  scene  of  danger  and  sent  privily
into  Ethiopia.  In  an  evil  hour  the  poor  youth  was
induced  to  return  on  a  hint  conveyed  to  him  that  he
was  to  be  placed  on  the  throne  of  Egypt.  Still,  it  is
said,  Octavius  hesitated  how  to  dispose  of  him,  when
Areius  determined  him  to  command  his  execution,  by
an  adroit  adaptation  of  the  Homeric  adage,  'Tis  no
good  thing  a  multitude  of  Coesars.2  The  conqueror
proceeded  to  vindicate  his  filial  piety  by  avenging  the
blood  of  the  dictator  on  Cassius  Parmensis,  the  last
survivor  of  his  murderers.  He  caused  a  certain
Ovinius  to  be  put  to  death,  because  he  had  degraded
the  dignity  of  a  Koman  senator  in  becoming  the
superintendent  of  the  queen's  tapestries.3  It  is  said

1  The  triumvir  had  two  sons  by  Fulvia;  the  eldest,  M.  Antonius,
was  known  perhaps  at  Alexandria  by  the  Greek  form  of  the  name,
Antyllus,  by  which  the  Greek  writers  always  designate  him;  the
second,  Julus  Antonius,  had  been  kept  at  Rome  and  educated  by
Octavia,  who  obtained  his  life  from  her  brother,  and  afterwards  his
marriage  with  her  daughter  by  her  first  husbaad,  Marcella. He  be-
came prsetor  A.u.  741,  and  was  eventually  put  to  death,  or  induced
to  kill  himself,  in  consequence  of  an  intrigue  with  the  daughter  of
Octavius. Tac.  Ann.  iv.  44.;  Dion,  Iv.  10.

2  Plut.  Anton.  81.:  OVK  ayadbv  iro\vKai(rapirj,  for  Tro\vKotpavir].

3  Orosius, vi. 19.: "Quod obscoenissime lanificio textrinoque
reginac  senator  pop.  Rom.  prseesse  non  erubuerat."

1.1J.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  345

that  he  now  also  commanded  the  execution  of  Ca-
nidius  ;  and  from  the  statement  of  Velleius,  that  the
sufferer  met  the  blow  with  less  fortitude  than  might
have  been  expected  from  his  professions,  it  may  be
conjectured  that  he  had  given  personal  offence  to
Octavius  by  a  tone  of  arrogant  defiance.1

Triumphant  in  victory  and  secure  in  power  Oc-
tavius now  wiped  his  blood-stained  sword,  From  thu
and  thrust  it  into  the  scabbard.  The  b^me/re-"*
dominion  of  the  world  demanded  no  other  "uciemency.
victims.  Far  wider  was  the  vengeance  which  might
have  been  apprehended  from  a  partner  in  the  pro-
scriptions, who  had  displayed  as  yet  no  sense  of  the
policy  of  mercy.  But  the  conqueror  suddenly  re-
frained his  hand,  and  filled  the  world  with  wonder  at
a  moderation  which  it  could  not  comprehend.  The
official  seal  which  he  used  bore  the  impress  of  the
sphinx,  and  such  an  emblem  the  Romans  might  deem
appropriate  to  a  man  whose  character  they  regarded
as  one  of  the  greatest  enigmas  of  history.  Four  hun-
dred years  later,  indeed,  an  imperial  satirist  ventured
to  compare  the  founder  of  the  empire  to  the  came-
leon,  which  perplexes  the  spectator  by  the  ever-
shifting  variety  of  its  hues.2  The  simile  has  been
much  admired,  and  does  perhaps  truly  represent  the
notion  of  Octavius  current  among  his  countrymen ;
but  in  fact  it  would  be  difficult  perhaps  to  find  one
less  appropriate.  In  the  conspicuous  clemency  of
Csesar  the  Romans  had  seen  only  the  natural  kind-

1  Oros.  /.  c.;  Veil.  ii.  87.:  "  Titnidius  decessit  quam  professioni  qua
semper  usus  erat  congruebat." This  last  writer  declares  that  Octa-
vius put  none  of  his  adversaries  to  death,  and  boasts  that  Decimus,
Sextus,  Brutus,  and  Cassius  were  slain  either  by  his  rival  or  by  their
own  hands. He  seems  to  insinuate  that  this  was  the  case  with  Cani-
dius  also  and  Cassius  Parmensis.

2  Julian.  Imp. Ctssares  : 'fls  8e  xal  rb  riav  Ka«ro/>a>v  avvfKpoTtlro

ffufivofftov 'OKTaStaybs ^trtKTfpxfrai, iroAAo aufiSwv  S>atrep

ol  -)(a.fj.ai.\iovrt^  xpai/juira.,  Kal  vvv  fJ.(f  u\piiiiv,  alBts

tira  ,u«Aar  Kal £o<pti>87]s  Kal ffvi'v«pr]S, avitro  Sf

Kdl  XolTOS.

346  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxvin.

liness  of  his  disposition  ;  and  so  in  the  cruelty  of  the
young  Octavius  they  read  nothing  but  an  inherent
ferocity  of  temper.  They  could  not  understand  the
austere  and  passionless  ambition  of  one  who  could  be
cruel  for  the  preservation  of  his  life  and  advance-
ment of  his  fortunes,  and  no  less  merciful  for  the
maintenance  of  his  fame.  But  neither  in  his  temper
nor  his  acts  did  Octavius  shift  capriciously  to  and
fro  :  during  the  early  part  of  his  career  his  sternness
never  relaxed  into  pity,  nor,  during  the  long  period
which  followed,  did  he  swerve,  except  once  or  twice
in  a  moment  of  passion,  from  the  systematic  mild-
ness he  prescribed  to  his  policy.  Koine,  indeed,
would  have  been  content  to  purchase  the  long  peace
which  was  now  promised  her  at  a  greater  expenditure
of  life.  She  was  deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of
the  danger  she  had  escaped.  The  crafty  policy
which  had  painted  the  war  of  Actium  as  an  attack
on  her  national  existence  had  been  completely  suc-
cessful. The  tone  of  the  public  manifestos  was
eagerly  adopted  by  the  citizens  of  every  class.  The
literature  of  the  day  reflected  in  all  its  branches  the
general  sentiment  of  horror  at  the  peril  which  threat-
ened for  a  moment  their  laws  and  their  religion.
Cleopatra  it  denounced  as  a  lascivious  queen,  an  in-
solent woman,  a  vile  foreigner :  she  was  the  favourite
of  the  demons  of  the  Nile,  of  the  bull  Apis,  and  the
hound  Anubis.1  Shame  and  disgust  filled  every
breast,  and  the  Eomans  could  represent
their  fear  of  national  humiliation  as  a  pious  senumTn" a
concern  for  the  dignity  of  Mars  and  Qui-  agaTJt  cieo-

•vr _i_l- 1  1.1  J.-U  patra,  spares

rmus. Nevertheless,  so  ably  was  the  cur-  the  character
rent  of  popular  indignation  directed,  that  a
peculiar  delicacy  was  still  observed  in  branding  the

1  Compare  Virgil:  "Nefas  JEgyptia  conjux;"  Horace:  "Fatale
monstrum  ;"  Propertius:  "Det  fcemina  pcenas;  Quantus  mulier
foret  una  triumphus;  Ausa  Jovi  nostro  latrantem  opponere  Anubim,"
&c.;  Lucan:  "An  munclum  ne  nostra  quidem  matrona  teneret  ;
Dedecus  JEgypti,  Latio  feralis  Erinnys,  Romano  non  casta  malo."

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  347

treachery  of  the  renegade  Antonius.  The  influence
of  Octavia,  who  loved  his  child  Julus,  and  destined
him  in  marriage  for  her  own  daughter,  may  have
coloured  the  policy  of  the  government  and  through
it  the  sentiments  of  the  people.  It  was  decreed,
indeed,  that  in  another  generation  the  blood  of  the
Antonian  house  should  mingle  with  the  Julian,  and
the  claims  of  the  rivals  of  the  civil  wars  be  united
in  the  person  of  an  imperial  scion.  But  this  dispen-
sation was  still  in  the  womb  of  time ;  Virgil,  Horace
and  Propertius  could  neither  have  foreseen  nor
guessed  it;  and  the  decent  respect  they  and  other
writers  of  the  day  maintain  for  the  character  of  An-
tonius seems  to  indicate  the  desire  of  Octavius  him-
self, who  did  not  choose  that  his  own  glory  should  be
diminished  by  any  disparagement  of  the  fame  of  his
worsted  adversary.  Such  a  sacrifice  may  seem  ob-
vious and  easy;  but  few  conquerors  have  had  the
magnanimity  to  make  it.

The  character  of  Antonius  himself  is  one  of  the
most  mixed  in  history.  While  a  Pompeius  Antonius
and  a  Caesar  have  been  made  the  subjects  %£!!£?$£?
of  eulogy  and  of  disparagement  equally  racter-
indiscriminate,  according  to  the  political  or  personal
leanings  of  their  critics,  the  discrepancy  in  the  judg-
ments passed  upon  Antonius  is  chiefly  due  to  the
capriciousness  which  marked  his  conduct,  and  the
opposite  virtues  and  vices  which  were  blended  to-
gether in  one  of  the  least  artificial  characters  of
antiquity.  Antonius  despised  hypocritical  pretences.
With  many  generous  and  lofty  qualities,  he  had  been
brought  up  in  a  school  of  more  than  military  frank-
ness, among  the  free-thinkers  of  Caesar's  court  and
camp,  the  men  who  with  the  same  absence  of  prin-
ciple as  their  master,  wanted  that  natural  justness
and  harmony  of  character  which  in  him  could  educe
dignity  and  consistency  out  of  the  chaos  of  passion.
While  the  rival  who  dogged  his  career  and  at  last

348  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxviir.

supplanted  him  was  darkly  feeling  his  way  among  the
mazes  of  intrigue  and  dissimulation,  Antonius  dis-
played himself  openly  to  the  world  :  he  trusted  in
his  acknowledged  merits,  his  services  to  his  patron,
his  military  renown,  his  numerous  personal  friend-
ships l ;  and  he  disdained  to  sacrifice  to  fame  or
safety  the  enjoyments,  coarse  and  selfish  as  they
were,  which  fortune  and  his  own  genius  had  placed
within  his  reach.  He  had  little  of  the  literary  polish
so  widely  diffused  among  his  equals  in  station,  having
been  summoned  to  active  life  at  an  early  age,  and
never  released  from  its  absorbing  interests  till  the
blandishments  of  pleasure  had  established  their  empire
over  him.  His  taste  for  gaudy  show  and  personal
ostentation  was  that  of  a  rude  soldier,  rather  than
the  chief  of  a  highly  civilized  community.  The  vices
with  which  he  has  been  charged,  and  for  which  his
name  has  become  a  byword,  are  the  most  susceptible
of  dark  and  extravagant  colouring,  and  at  the  same
time  most  patent  to  common  observation.  It  was
his  misfortune  to  have  for  his  bitterest  enemy  one
whose  estimate  of  men  was  most  superficial,  and  the
licence  of  whose  tongue  most  unscrupulous.  Cicero
exerted  all  the  force  of  his  genius  to  make  Antonius
despicable ;  but  the  glaring  colours  with  which  he
charged  his  Philippics  are  more  startling  to  the  eye
of  a  remote  posterity  than  they  were  to  the  clearer
vision  of  his  own  contemporaries.  The  lightnings  of
Cicero's  rhetoric  glanced  harmless  from  the  laurels
on  the  brow  of  Antonius,  which  were  nipped  by  the
chilling  depreciation  of  the  more  astute  Octavius.
The  loves  of  The  loves  of  Antony  and  Cleopatra

"  Antony  and .,  „ ...  • .1  c

cieopatra." form a  familiar  page  in the  romance  ot
history. But  a  sober  analysis  of  such  famous  ro-

1  Drumann  has  given  a  list  of  the  associates  whose  intimacy  with
Antonius  is  recorded  in  the  Philippics  of  Cicero ;  the  number  of  the
group  seems  to  vouch  at  least  for  the  personal  popularity  of  the
central  figure.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  349

mancesj  has  generally  revealed  a  dark  shade  of  un-
ruly passiou  on  one  side,  and  of  vanity  and  self-
interest  on  the  other.  Antonius  was  the  dupe  of
his  own  wanton  will.  The  object  of  his  devotion
was  incapable  of  exciting  any  genuine  sentiment  of
tenderness  :  she  -was  the  public  slave  of  any  man's
passion  whose  political  interest  she  required.1  If
ever  her  lover  flattered  himself  that  he  had  found  the
way  to  her  heart,  he  knew  that  her  heart  was  not
worth  the  possession.  But  the  man  who  could  so
far  corrupt  his  own  inclinations  as  to  turn  from  the
embraces  of  an  Octavia,  beautiful,  virtuous,  and  his
own,  to  dally  with  the  false  enticements  of  a  blood-
stained adulteress,  could  have  no  just  appreciation  of
the  woman's  charms  which  Cleopatra  had  renounced
for  ever.  The  queen  of  Egypt  had  indeed  a  hard
game  to  play  ;  it  was  a  game  for  a  man,  and  not  for
a  woman.  We  may  forgive  her  the  loss  of  her  inno-
cence, but  we  cannot  disregard  the  surrender  of  all
sentiment  and  delicacy  ;  and  if  she  claims  the  indul-
gence extended  sometimes  to  licentiousness  in  the
other  sex,  she  must  forfeit  at  least  the  privilege  of
her  own,  and  her  interest  in  our  sympathies  as  men.
As  a  woman  she  deserves  neither  love  nor  admiration ;
but  as  a  queen  her  ambition  was  bold  and  her  bearing
magnanimous  :  she  contended  gallantly  for  the  throne
of  her  ancestors  with  the  weapons  which  nature  had
given  her.  Her  noblest  epitaph  is  written,  not  in  the
language  of  amatory  rhapsodies  or  sickly  compassion,
but  in  the  ferocious  sarcasms  of  her  exulting  con-
querors.2

1  Lncan,  x.  359. : "  Interqne  maritos  Discurrens,  JEgypton  habet
Romamque  meretur."

•  Comp.  Horace,  Od.  i.  7.  on  her  overthrow:

"  Nunc  est  bibendum,  nunc  pede  libero

Pulsanclo.  tcllus,"  &c.

But  the  same  writer  who  sneers  at  the  effeminacy  of  her  habits  and
the  frivolonsness  of  her  vanity,  does  justice  to  her  manly  courage,  her
philosophic  fortitude,  and  her  kingly  pride.

350  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAPTER  XXIX.

Octavius  reduces  Egypt  to  the  form  of  a  province. — He  confirms
Herod  in  the  sovereignty  of  Judea.— Dispersion  of  the  Jews  in
Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa. — Causes  of  the  dispersion,  the  narrow-
ness of  their  territory,  and  its  impoverishment  by  successive  con-
querors.— Antiochus  Epiphanes  attempts  to  Hellenize  the  Jews. —
Progress  of  Greek  ideas  and  language  in  Palestine. — Jealousy  of
the  natives. — The  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  represent  the  national
and  foreign  parties  respectively.  — The  Asmonean  princes  side
with  the  latter. — Interference  of  Rome  with  Jewish  affairs. — Anti-
pater  the  Idumean  and  his  sons  govern  the  country. — Antonius
grants  the  kingdom  to  Herod. — He  obtains  the  favour  of  Octavius.
— His  persecution  of  the  Asmonean  princes. — Death  of  Mariamne.
— Herod's  devotion  to  Borne.

THE  policy  of  Rome  in  the  East  had  followed  hitherto
policy  of  the  the  lines  marked  out  for  it  by  Cnaeus  Pom-
SJknring  the  peius.  The  conqueror  of  Mithridates  had
prttyesove°  abstained  from  incorporating  with  the  em-

reignties  in  .  ,  j T  •  r> j i ,  •,

the  heart  of  pire  the  vast  and  diversified  territories  re-
dwninYons.  duced  to  submission  by  his  sword.  He  had
been  content  with  breaking  them  up  into  petty  de-
pendencies, assigning  to  them  rulers  of  his  own  choice,
schooled  in  obedience  to  his  will ;  and  by  trans-
ferring them  from  one  to  another,  he  had  inured
both  kings  and  people  to  look  to  the  Roman  people
as  the  king  of  kings.  Cilicia  indeed  and  Syria
were  reduced  to  the  form  of  provinces ;  but  even
within  their  nominal  frontiers  several  petty  sovereign-
ties were  allowed  to  exist,  and  the  laws  and  institu-
tions of  Rome  were  only  partially  applied  to  her
Oriental  acquisitions.  The  forms  of  society  in  the
East  were  for  the  most  part  so  complete  and  mature,
and  differed  so  entirely  from  the  Roman,  that  to
supersede  them  violently  would  have  been  a  hazard-
ous experiment.  The  Orientals  were  moreover  pecu-

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  351

liarly  tenacious  of  their  own  habits,  and  showed  no
inclination,  like  the  half-civilized  tribes  of  western
Europe,  to  exchange  them  for  those  of  their  con-
querors. Nor  did  the  existing  state  of  society  in  the
East  cherish  the  sentiment  <  of  freedom  of  which  the
Roman  oppressor  was  so  jealous  in  Graul  or  Spain :
the  courts  of  the  Herods  and  the  Ptolemies  were
schools  for  the  practice  of  obedience,  and  for  im-
bibing lessons  of  self-abasement.  Nor  again  on  the
Nile  or  the  Euphrates  was  there  any  Roman  element
in  the  population  through  which  the  tone  of  Roman
sentiment  and  opinion  might  gradually  be  insinuated.
Perhaps  also  the  treasures  and  resources  of  the
nations  of  Asia  might  be  deemed  too  attractive  to
be  placed  within  reach  of  grasping  officials ;  the
republic  shrank  from  the  danger  of  leaving  such
rich  harvests  to  be  gathered  year  by  year  by  comman-
ders too  daring  to  overawe  and  too  distant  to  control.
The  wealth  of  the  East  was  allowed  to  accumulate
in  the  coffers  of  dependent  princes,  till  the  moment
came  when  Rome  should  summon  them  to  disgorge  it.
Such  were  the  principles  upon  which  the  republic
had  long  acted  in  regard  to  the  feeble  the  Ptolemies
dynasty  which  she  allowed  to  retain  its  seat  t^ig".*^
on  the  throne  of  the  Ptolemies.  Pompeius,  EgypL
Gabinius,  and  Caesar  had  successively  given  kings  to
Egypt,  when  either  of  them  might  have  incorporated
it  with  the  domain  of  the  Roman  people.  But  the
statesmen  of  the  Macedonian  court  had  long  antici-
pated the  day  when  even  the  shadow  of  independence
would  be  denied  them.  Many  and  desperate  had
been  the  efforts  they  had  made  to  frustrate  the  policy
which  was  slowly  and  secretly  weaving  its  meshes  to
entangle  them.  This  conviction  that  Rome  was
only  seeking  an  excuse  for  closer  interference  with
their  affairs  had  urged  them  to  advise  the  destruction
of  Pompeius,  in  whose  landing  on  their  shores  after
Pharsalia  they  beheld  a  clear  omen  of  their  approach-

352  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  OH.  xxix.

ing  fate.  We  have  seen  that  the  bloody  precaution
was  vain.  The  dissensions  of  the  royal  house  of-
fered an  occasion  for  interference,  and  the  con-
queror, pressed  by  the  clamours  of  a  needy  soldiery,
plunged  into  a  career  of  violence  and  spoliation,
which  bred  a  fruitless  resistance  on  the  part  of  the
Egyptians,  and  would  have  ended  in  their  immediate
subjugation,  but  for  the  peculiar  influence  which
Cleopatra  acquired  over  him.  The  queen  was  aware
how  precarious  was  the  power  which  she  owed  to
the  sword  of  a  foreign  intruder.  Her  treasures,  her
armies,  and  her  person  were  devoted  to  the  task  of
fortifying  her  position.  Her  genius  and  charms  con-
spired to  bind  to  her  service  the  Koman  potentate
who  seemed  most  capable  of  protecting  her;  and
intoxicated  with  the  unexpected  fortune  she  had  at-
tained, she  allowed  herself  to  indulge  in  a  dream  of
aggression  and  vengeance  against  the  power  which
had  so  long  overshadowed  her  dominions.  But  the
dove  or  the  hare,  the  helpless  quarry  of  the  falcon
or  the  hunter,  were  fit  emblems  of  a  queen  of
Egypt  relentlessly  pursued  by  the  Eoman  imperators.1
When  he  set  his  foot  on  the  shore  of  Africa,  Octa-
vius  had  resolved  to  extinguish  the  dynasty  of  the
Ptolemies.  But  he  had  no  intention  of  giving  to  the
senate  the  rich  domain  which  he  tore  from  its  native
rulers.  He  would  not  sow  in  a  foreign  soil  the  seeds
of  independence,  which  he  was  intent  upon  crushing
nearer  home.  Egypt  with  the  sea  in  its  front,  and  a
desert  on  either  hand,  was  difficult  of  access  to  the
octavius  re-  Roman  armies ;  its  overflowing  stores  of  grain
fo"m"of  a°Pro-  might  give  it  the  command  of  the  Italian
hisoewnndlrect  markets,  and  its  accumulated  treasures
control.  might  buy  the  swords  of  mercenary  legions.
Octavius  made  it  his  own.  He  appointed  a  favourite

1  Horace,  Od.  i.  37.:

"Accipiter  velut

Molles  columbas  aut  leporem  citus
Venator,"  &c.

A.u.7:24-B.C.30.  l.NDER TUB EMPIRE.  353

officer,  Cornelius  Gallus,  whose  humble  rank  as  a
knight,  as  well  as  his  tried  services,  seemed  to  insure
his  fidelity,  to  govern  it.  In  due  time  he  persuaded
the  senate  and  people  to  establish  it  as  a  principle,
that  Egypt  should  never  be  placed  under  the  admin-
istration of  any  man  of  superior  rank  to  the  eques-
trian, and  that  no  senator  should  be  allowed  even  to
visit  it,  without  express  permission  from  the  supreme
authority.  For  the  defence  of  this  cherished  pro-
vince Octavius  allotted  three  legions,  besides  some
squadrons  of  cavalry,  and  a  body  of  nine  cohorts  of
pure  Eoman  extraction.  One  legion  was  quartered
in  Alexandria,  the  inhabitants  of  which,  though  tur-
bulent, were  incapable  of  steady  resistance ;  a  divi-
sion of  three  cohorts  garrisoned  Syene  on  the  Nu-
bian frontier,  and  others  were  stationed  in  various
localities.  Under  the  military  commander  was  a  re-
venue officer,  whose  accounts  were  delivered  to  Octa-
vius himself,  by  whom  he  was  directly  appointed.
Auletes,  the  father  of  Cleopatra,  had  received  a  re-
venue of  twelve  thousand  five  hundred  talents  ' ;  but
his  government  was  ill-administered,  he  was  cheated
and  plundered  by  his  own  servants ;  a  more  vigilant
and  careful  system  discovered  resources  hitherto  un-
explored, and  the  returns  of  the  Eoman  officials  rose
steadily  with  the  growth  of  commerce,  which  increased
equally  perhaps  with  both  the  East  and  the  West.
This  development  of  the  resources  of  Egypt  was  fa-
voured by  the  peculiar  good  fortune  it  enjoyed,  in
being  jealously  guarded  from  the  extortions  of  a
staff  of  Koman  officials.  The  administration  of  law,
police,  and  other  internal  affairs  was  confided  to  the
natives  themselves,  and  their  old  habits  and  prejudices
were  studiously  consulted  in  maintaining  the  details
of  the  system  which  existed  under  the  Macedonian
kings.  At  the  same  time  the  Alexandrians  were
denied  the  universal  privilege  of  the  provincial  cities,

1  Strabo,  xvii.  1.
VOL.  III.  A  A

354  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

that  of  having  a  senate  of  their  own,  nor  for  two  cen-
turies was  any  Egyptian  admitted  into  the  senatorial
order  at  Borne.1

The  new  ruler  did  not  refrain  however  from  ex-
pressing his  contempt  for  the  character  of  his  prede-
cessors. He  visited  the  tomb  of  Alexander  with  the
interest  which  a  man  equally  great,  and  revolving
schemes  of  empire  not  less  magnificent,  could  not  fail
to  entertain  2 :  but  when  he  was  invited  to  inspect  the
remains  of  the  Ptolemies,  he  replied  disdainfully,  /
He  semes  the  came  to  see  a  king,  not  dead  man?  Before
ranhia'and  leaving  Egypt  he  laid  the  foundations  of  a
judea.  cfty  on  the  Sp0£  where  he  haci  worsted

his  enemy's  forces  on  the  sea-coast,  about  three  miles
from  the  eastern  gate  of  Alexandria.  The  Egyptian
Kicopolis  became  a  useful  port,  and  place  of  embark-
ation from  the  capital.  From  thence  he  proceeded
before  the  close  of  the  year  to  make  a  triumphal
progress  through  Palestine,  Syria,  and  Asia  Minor.
He  passed  rapidly  in  review  the  states  and  provinces
which  lay  in  the  line  of  his  route.  He  listened  with
proud  reserve  to  the  solicitations  of  the  rival  claimants
for  the  Parthian  throne.  The  victors  of  Carrhas  were
induced  to  seek  the  settlement  of  their  intestine  feuds
at  the  hands  of  the  Eoman  imperator.  A  chieftain
of  the  royal  race  named  Tiridates  had  availed  himself
of  the  hatred  in  which  Phraates  was  held  by  his  sub-
jects to  overthrow  his  power;  but  he  had  been  him-
self overthrown  in  turn,  and  now  sought  the  support  of
the  national  foe.  Phraates  strove  to  supplant  him  in
the  favour  of  Octavius,  and  the  Eoman,  after  gravely

1  Dion,  li.  17.

2  A  saying  attributed  by  Plutarch to Octavius (Peg.  et  Imp.
Apophth.)  indicates that the  Romans  had already  instituted  this
comparison: 'AKovcras  Se  ore  'AA.e'£cw5pos  5i/o  «al -rpidxovra.  yeyovws
ITTJ  Kareffrpafj.^ei'os  TO  TrAeuTTa  SiTjirJpei,  ri  iroffjffei  Tbv  \onrbv  -%p6vov,
€8a-u(ia£(v  el  ^  /ueifof  '  A\f£av5pos  tpyov  rryfiro  TOV  /cnjcraerOcu  fj.eyoXi}v
rr/enaviav  rb  Siaraf ai  r-rjv  virdpxovffav.

3  Dion,  li.  1 6. The  historian  adds  that  the  conqueror  refused  to
visit  the  bull  Apis,  saying,  dfovs,  oAA.'  oi>xi  jBoui  vpoffKvvew  eidiffOai.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  355

weighing  the  representations  of  both  parties,  declined
to  interfere,  contenting  himself  with  granting  to  the
fugitive  an  asylum  in  the  territories  of  the  republic,
and  carrying  to  Eome  his  rival's  son  as  an  hostage.1
Among  the  potentates  who  were  most  anxious  to  win
the  conqueror's  regards  during  this  rapid  journey  was
the  chief  whom  Antonius  had  established  on  the
throne  of  Judea.  The  national  historian  of  the  Jews
does  not  scruple  to  affirm  that,  after  the  battle  of
Actium,  their  sovereign,  the  great  Herodes,  the  friend
and  ally  of  the  beaten  triumvir,  inspired  the  victor
with  more  apprehension  than  his  flying  rival  himself.2
But  Herod  the  Idumean,  who  owed  his  sudden  eleva-
tion to  the  throne  of  the  Asmonean  princes  to  the
favour  of  the  Koman  government,  was  well  aware
that  a  breath  from  the  same  mighty  power  would
suffice  to  overthrow  him.  He  justly  feared  the  con-
sequences of  his  intimate  connexion  with  the  defeated
party  :  but  he  was  attached  to  Antonius  by  no  other
ties  than  those  of  interest,  and  at  the  first  news  of  his
disaster  in  the  Ionian  gulf,  hastened  to  abandon  his
cause,  while  it  might  yet  be  counted  meritorious  to
do  so,  and  ventured  to  throw  himself  without  reserve
on  the  clemency  of  the  victor,  whom  he  sought  at
Ehodes  on  his  way  to  Egypt.  He  recommended  him-
self to  Octavius  by  the  zeal  of  his  recent  devotion  to
Antonius,  while  he  pledged  himself  to  prove  not  less
faithful  to  the  new  patron  to  whom  he  offered  to  trans-
fer his  services.  The  conqueror  was  satisfied  with
these  professions.  He  knew  the  abilities  of  the  king
of  Judea,  and  he  was  assured  that  he  could  depend
upon  him  as  long  at  least  as  his  fortunes  were  in
the  ascendant.  He  confirmed  him  in  the  possession

1  Dion,  li.  18. Justin,  xlii.  5.,  says  that  the  youth  was  restored;
he  is  speaking  perhaps  of  a  later  transaction  between  Augustus  and
the  Parthian  monarch. Comp.  Dion,  liii.  33.

2  Josephus,  Bell.  Jud.  i.  20. :  riape?xe  (i*v  roi  Se'ous  ir\tov  ^  titaff-)(fi>
ofaru  yelp  fcA.ec/ceVai  Kaiaap  'Ayn&vtov  tKpivtv,  'HpwSov  irv^if^fvovros.

A  A  2

356  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

of  the  territories  guaranteed  him  by  his  rival ;  and  he
marked  his  regard,  upon  the  occasion  of  his  journey
through  Palestine,  by  adding  to  them  Gadara  and
Samaria  on  the  north  and  the  districts  of  Gaza  and
Joppa  on  the  sea-coast.1  But  the  relations  of  Judea
towards  the  all-conquering  republic  require  to  be
more  fully  explained.  In  Judea  arose  that  extra-
ordinary development  of  political  enthusiasm  which
at  a  later  period  shook  the  empire  to  its  centre  at  the
moment  of  its  greatest  magnificence  and  power  :  and
in  the  streets  of  Jerusalem  and  among  the  villages  of
Galilee  were  sowed  the  seeds  of  a  moral  revolution,
which  undermined  in  their  appointed  time  the  found-
ations of  ancient  society,  and  established  Christianity
upon  the  ruins  of  the  common  heathenism.  Eome
threw  off  the  assailant  from  without,  with  a  violent
effort  the  most  signal  in  her  military  annals,  since
she  first  struggled  for  existence  against  the  Gauls  and
Carthaginians  :  but  the  enemy  within,  the  religious
principle  which  invaded  her  laws,  institutions  and
ideas,  she  could  neither  overcome,  nor  foil,  nor  fly
from,  and  three  centuries  of  feverish  resistance  termi-
nated in  the  dissolution  of  her  own  moral  being.

Where  the  Eomau  conquers  there  he  inhabits,  was
character  of  the  proud  boast  of  the  people  whose  mis-
resl/enTlIn  si°n  it  was  to  reduce  the  world  to  political
foreign  lands.  unity  where  the  Greek  inhabits  there  he
civilizes,  might  be  said  of  the  great  masters  of  human
intelligence,  whose  commerce  penetrated  every  sea,
and  whose  colonists  carried  to  the  East  and  the  West
the  standards  of  poetry,  philosophy  and  science.  But
the  Jew,  with'  a  spirit  no  less  restless,  with  pro-
pensities no  less  migratory,  neither  conquered,  nor
colonized,  nor  civilized.  He  intruded  himself  silently
and  pertinaciously  into  every  known  corner  of  the
globe ;  and  no  one  could  say  wherefore  he  came,  or

1  Joseph.  /.  c. :  OvSev  8e  OVTWS  fvijytv  avrbv  es  ras  S&pias  us  rb  (j.?ya.-
TOV  Xai.f$a.vovTOS.

A.U.724-B.C.30. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  357

what  was  the  object  of  his  sojourn.  His  presence  in
foreign  lands  was  marked  by  no  peculiar  aim  or  mis-
sion. He  cultivated  neither  literature,  nor  art,  nor
even  commerce  on  a  great  scale,  or  as  a  national
pursuit.  He  subsisted  for  the  most  part  by  the  ex-
ercise of  active  industry  in  petty  dealings,  evaded  as
much  as  h«  could  the  public  burdens  of  the  natives
among  whom  he  dwelt,  while  their  privileges  he
neither  sought  nor  coveted,  and  distinguished  himself
alike  in  every  quarter,  under  every  form  of  govern-
ment, and  in  the  midst  of  every  social  system,  by
rigid  adherence  to  the  forms  of  an  obscure  and  ex-
clusive creed.

The  Jews  had  entered  the  great  city  of  the  West
along  with  the  Phrygians,  Syrians  and  Disper8ion  of
Egyptians,  and  other  wanderers  from  the  ThefrTe'ttie-
opposite  hemisphere;  but  they  were  hardly  mentinBome-
observed  perhaps,  or  recognised  as  a  distinct  people
by  the  multitude,  until  their  chiefs,  Aristobulus  II.
and  his  children,  were  dragged  among  a  troop  of
their  captive  subjects  in  the  third  triumph  of  Pom-
peius.  The  vanity  of  the  great  conqueror,  who
affected  to  tread  in  the  steps  of  the  Macedonian
Alexander,  had  led  him  to  violate  the  ancient  policy
of  the  republic,  which  had  studiously  cultivated  the
alliance  of  the  Jewish  commonwealth  as  a  counter-
poise to  the  power  of  the  Seleucids  and  Ptolemies.
When  the  throne  of  the  Syrian  was  stricken  to  the
ground,  and  that  of  the  Egyptian  only  sustained  by
the  hand  of  a  Eoman  imperator,  the  maxims  of  the
state  might  be  allowed  to  yield  to  personal  ambition,
and  Pompeius  trampled  with  lofty  contempt  on  the
dearest  prejudices  ofvhis  countrymen's  allies.  Cassar
undertook  to  soothe  the  wounded  pride  of  a  sensitive
people.  He  had  himself 'received  important  succour
from  them  at  the  crisis  of  his  fortunes  in  Alexandria.
Gratitude  and  policy  combined  to  make  him  their
friend.  He  requited  their  services  with  ample  as-

358  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

surances  of  his  favour;  and  on  his  return  to  Eome
he  allowed  their  compatriots  to  celebrate  their
national  rites  in  a  synagogue  of  their  own,  on  the
banks  of  the  Tiber.1  We  have  seen  that  the  little
society  which  this  people  formed  at  Eome  com-
bined to  make  a  public  manifestation  of  regard  for
their  benefactor  on  the  occasion  of  his  funeral.  In
the  capital  of  the  republic  we  may  imagine  that
their  numbers  were  at  this  time  insignificant.  But
as  they  cast  their  eyes  eastward  the  Eoman  states-
men might  behold  with  curiosity  and  interest  the
increasing  throng  of  strangers  of  this  same  nation,
who  maintained  their  own  peculiar  usages  and  wor-
ship and  moral  physiognomy  throughout  the  conti-
nent and  islands  of  Greece.  As  they  ex-
tended their  view  beyond  the  boundaries  of
Europe,  this  infusion  of  the  Jewish  element  among
the  native  populations  became  still  more  strongly
marked.  Lydia  and  Phrygia  had  received  a  draft
of  two  thousand  families,  transplanted  thither  from
Judea  by  Antiochus  the  Great.  The  Jews  spread  in
successive  migrations  over  all  the  countries  of  Lesser
Asia,  and  Ephesus,  Pergamus,  Tralles  and
Sardis  became  celebrated  for  the  resort  of
wanderers  from  Palestine.2  Before  the  date  of  Cicero's
consulship  their  numbers  had  become  so  great  in  the
Eoman  province  of  Asia,  that  it  was  esteemed  a  good
service  to  the  state  on  the  part  of  the  praetor
Flaccus,  when  he  forbade  them  to  drain  the  coun-
try of  gold  by  sending  their  annual  contribution,
amouoting  only  to  a  double  drachma  each,  to  the
temple  at  Jerusalem.3  At  the  same  time  we  hear
of  a  multitude  of  Jews  being  settled  in  the  east-
ern islands  of  the  Mediterranean,  and  their  well-
known  industry  was  employed  at  a  later  period

1  Joseph.  Ant.  xviii.  3. 5.;  Philo,  Legat. ad Cai.  ii.  568.  ed.
Man  gey.

2  Joseph.  Ant.  xiv.  10.  3  Cic.  oro  Flacco,  28.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  359

by  Octavius,  in  working  the  mines  of  copper  in
Cyprus.  They  soon  formed  an  important  part  of
the  population  of  its  chief  city  Salamis,  and  still
later  we  shall  find  them  take  possession  of  the
whole  island,  and  convert  it  into  a  magazine  and
armoury  for  the  organization  of  a  great  national
revolt.  Great  multitudes  of  Jews  were  settled  in
Syria  and  Phoanicia  by  Seleucus  Nicator,  and  An-
tioch  became  famous  for  their  resort.1  To  the  east
of  Syria  and  Palestine  the  dispersion  of  the  Jews
was  still  greater  than  to  the  west.  The  ten  tribes
which  had  been  transported  beyond  the  Euphrates
had  never  returned  to  the  abodes  of  their  ancestors.
The  permission  which  Cyrus  gave  to  the  remnant
of  the  Babylonish  captivity  to  repair  to  Judea  and
restore  their  national  polity  was  accepted  by  only
a  small  proportion  of  the  whole  people.

rni  'j_  r J.T- •  -LIT  In  Babylonia

Ihe  city  ot  then*  conquerors  had  become  an  Mariner
endeared  to  them  by  the  recollections  of  e'
two  generations ;  and,  after  the  fall  of  Babylon,  and
the  dissolution  of  the  fleeting  population  which  the
Assyrian  kings  had  collected within  its  walls,  the
Jews, if  we may  believe their own writers,  took
the  place  of  the  native  races  throughout the sur-
rounding districts.2 As  we  proceed  further  the  re-
cords  of  the Jewish dispersion become doubtless
less  distinct ;  but  the  ceaseless  pulse  of  emigration
beat,  we  are  assured,  more  and  more  faintly,  through
Adiabene and Armenia,  to  the Caucasus and  the
Caspian  shore,  and  was  not  yet  exhausted  even  on
the  borders  of  China. The  Jews,  we  have
already  seen,  were  reputed  to  form  a  third  cyrenef^d
part  of  the  population  of  Alexandria,  and
this  proportion  they  maintained  throughout  the  whole

1  Joseph.  Ant.  xi.  5.  1.,  Bell.  Jud.  vii.  3.  3.

-  Philo  (de  Legat.  ad  Caium,  ii.  587.  ed.  Mangey)  specifies  the  vast
extent  of  the  Jewish  colonies  throughout  the  three  continents.  Comp.
Joseph.  Ant.  XT.  13.  1.

360  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

of  Egypt.  Their  first  settlement  in  this  region
had  followed  upon  their  revolt  against  the  Chal-
dean domination,  and  the  murder  of  their  governor
Gredaliah.1  The  number  of  the  fugitives  of  that
epoch  was  increased  by  a  second  plantation  under
Artaxerxes  Ochus ;  and  Alexander,  on  founding  his
new  city,  invited  to  its  walls  a  race  which  was
esteemed  generally  peaceable  as  well  as  industrious.
The  Thebaid  was  enriched  with  a  colony  of  eight
thousand  Samaritans  after  the  destruction  of  Tyre.
The  conquest  of  Palestine  by  the  kings  of  Syria
and  Egypt  renewed  periodically  these  importations
of  Jewish  blood.2  The  immigrants  gradually  spread
themselves  to  the  westward,  to  Gyrene  and  the  Pen-
They  make  tapolis,  as  well  as  southward  into  Ethiopia.3
amon|various  The  knowledge  of  the  name  and  usages  of
the  Jews  was  still  further  extended  by  re-
ligious proselytism.  We  have  little  means  indeed
of  tracing  the  progress  which  they  made  in  this  way
among  the  Roman  and  Greek  populations;  though
it  seems  probable  that  the  mystery  which  surrounded
their  august  ceremonial  excited  curiosity,  ripening
into  interest,  and  resulting  at  least  in  a  partial  re-
ception of  their  usages  and  creed  in  many  societies
in  the  West.  But  in  Damascus  we  are  assured,  as
regarded  at  least  a  later  period,  that  the  religion  of
Moses  made  a  vast  number  of  proselytes,  and  that
almost  all  the  women  attached  themselves  to  it.4
Meanwhile  on  the  petty  tribes  on  their  own  borders
the  Jews  imposed  the  yoke  of  their  ceremonial  law
by  force.  Hyrcanus  subdued  the  Idumeans,  and
gave  them  the  choice  of  exile  or  circumcision.  The
same  alternative  was  offered  to  the  Itureans,  and
perhaps  to  the  Moabites  also.  In  each  case  the

1  2  Kings,  xxv.  23.  2  Joseph.  Ant.  xii.  1.

3  Act.  Apost.  ii.  10.,  viii.  26.

4  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  ii.  20.  2. Comp.  Acts,  xiii.  50.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  361

love  of  country  prevailed.  The  Homerite  Arabians
were  subjected  to  the  rule  of  a  Jewish  sovereign,
who  compelled  his  people  to  accept  the  faith  and
usages  of  his  own  nation.

We  have  thus  glanced  at  the  ramifications  of  this
populous  nation  through  a  large  portion  Theyforma
of  the  three  continents  of  the  ancient  ?edteracay  con~
world.  The  Jews  made  themselves  homes  u£°threeut
in  every  country  from  the  Tiber  to  the  continent8-
Euphrates,  from  the  pines  of  the  Caucasus  to  the
spice-groves  of  Happy  Arabia,  and  the  political  con-
federacy by  which  they  continued  to  be  closely
linked  together  supported  the  throne  of  Parthia  on
the  one  hand,  and  of  Egypt  on  the  other.  Whatever
motive  had  induced  each  successive  swarm  to  aban-
don the  parent  hive,  whether  it  had  been  impelled
by  a  spirit  of  enterprise,  or  by  the  pressure  of  want,
whether  it  had  been  sold  in  captivity,  or  transplanted
at  the  caprice  of  a  conqueror,  it  still  clung  perti-
naciously to  the  outward  symbols  of  its  nationality.
The  annual  tribute  to  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  was
a  faint  expression  of  this  characteristic  feeling.  The
exclusive  claims  the  Jews  advanced  to  the  possession
of  divine  truth,  and  the  strictness  of  their  terms  of
communion,  had  already  become  the  object  of  won-
dering remark.  Yet  at  the  period  we  are  now
reviewing  they  had  drawn  upon  themselves  far
less  dislike  and  suspicion,  on  account  of  the  morose
reserve  of  their  character,  than  after  they  had  been
exasperated  by  political  persecutions,  and  inflamed
by  religious  fanaticism.  They  solicited  the  atten-
tion of  the  foreigners  among  whom  they  dwelt  to  the
literature  enshrined  in  their  sacred  books,  nor  did
they  disdain  to  admit  a  tincture  of  exotic  cultiva-
tion, and  allowed  in  many  quarters  even  their  own
language  to  fall  into  disuse  among  them.  While
they  attracted  to  their  own  mysterious  rites  the
votaries  of  every  heathen  superstition,  they  imbibed

362  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

perhaps  themselves  some  of  the  same  spirit  of  ec-
lecticism in  religion,  to  which  they  had  invited  the
worshippers  of  Belus,  Isis,  and  Jupiter.

Among  the  .manifold  causes  which  contributed  to
The  narrow-  stimulate  foreign  emigration  among  the
itaiuftheeir  Jewish  people,  there  was  none  so  potent  per-
theirdfJ£?r-of  haps  as  there  was  none  so  uniform,  as  the
narrowness  of  their  proper  limits,  and  the  na-
tural sterility  of  a  large  portion  of  their  soil.  The  dis-
Paraiiei  be-  persion  of  the  Greeks  presents  on  the  whole
andjrewuh  k  *ne  most  striking  parallel  to  that  of  the  Jews ;
emigration.  an(j  Up0n  ^e  former  people  also,  whatever
allowance  be  made  for  their  ambition,  their  love  of
adventure  and  their  natural  propensity  to  commerce,
this  motive  operated  with  constant  pressure  during
the  ages  which  succeeded  the  loss  of  their  political  in-
dependence. Greece  in  the  most  flourishing  period
of  her  freedom  had  expanded  the  wings  of  her  com-
merce on  every  side,  and  the  Avealth  which  she  at-
tracted to  her  shores  raised  lofty  cities  and  maintained
populous  communities,  in  spots  which  nature  had
abandoned  to  the  mountain  or  the  swamp.  But:  with
the  fall  of  her  independence  her  spirit  of  enterprise
had  been  exhausted;  commerce  decayed,  the  arts
languished,  the  means  of  subsistence  ceased  to  flow  in
from  abroad :  her  monuments,  indeed,  and  her  fame,
still  attracted  strangers  to  her  shores,  and  the  liberal
expenditure  of  foreigners  became  perhaps  the  prin-
cipal support  of  the  crumbling  populations  of  Athens
and  Corinth.  The  surplus  of  her  offspring,  beyond
what  her  own  narrow  plains  and  valleys  could  nourish,
was  driven  by  stern  necessity  abroad.  For  a  time
the  pressure  was  disguised  under  the  appearance  of  a
voluntary  emigration  to  reap  the  fruits  of  Macedonian
conquest:  but  the  truth  became  at  last  apparent,  that
Greece,  except  under  some  extraordinary  stimulus,  is
capable  of  subsisting  only  a  very  limited  number  of
inhabitants,  and  the  excess  must  emigrate  or  starve.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  363

There  is  sufficient  evidence  to  the  fact  that  Pales-
tine also,  a  country  abounding  in  mountains  impoverwh-

i ,  i •  ii-i-  ment  of  Palea-

and  barren  plains,  was  enabled  in  a  remote  tine  by  it.

i  .  i  i  niceessire

age,  under  a  wise  and  prosperous  ad  minis-  conqueror.,
tration,  to  crown  its  rocks  with  mould,  and  cover  its
sands  with  verdure,  till  every  corner  of  the  narrow  land
was  devoted  to  the  raising  of  food  for  man,  and  a
wide-spread  commerce  on  either  sea  supplied  the
requirements  of  an  immense  population.  She  had
been  reduced  from  this  palmy  state  by  intestine  divi-
sions and  domestic  oppression.  She  next  became  the
prey  of  foreign  conquerors,  and  her  children,  already
impoverished  and  diminished  in  number,  were  car-
ried off  into  distant  captivity.  Their  ultimate  re-
storation to  their  own  country  had  not  sufficed  to
repair  the  decay  of  this  state  of  transient  fertility.
Successive  attacks  from  Syria  and  Egypt  kept  Pales-
tine in  a  constant  state  of  weakness  and  poverty ;  the
population  outgrew  the  scanty  means  of  subsistence
offered  by  an  ungrateful  soil,  and  the  resource  of
emigration  was  accepted  by  one  perhaps  from  choice
but  by  ten  times  that  number  from  necessity.

But  though  Palestine  had  long  ceased  to  derive
any  great political importance from  the

J ,°  ,  r  .,..  Peculiarity  of

numbers, the enterprise, or  the  military  i* geographi-

. . r .  . , .  .  .  i cal  position.

spirit  of  its  actual  inhabitants,  it  continued
to  demand  attention  from  the  statesman,  partly  as  the
national  centre  of  a  population  so  widely  spread,  and
not  less  from  the  peculiar  position  which  it  occupied
geographically.  Palestine  appears  on  the  map  of
Asia  as  a  prolongation  of  the  region  designated  as
Syria  and  Phoenicia.  The  whole  of  this  long  but
narrow  slip  of  territory  skirts  the  waves  of  the  Medi-
terranean on  the  one  side,  and  the  ocean-like  expanse
of  the  Arabian  desert  on  the  other.  It  extends  four
hundred  miles  in  length,  while  its  breadth,  which  is
nearly  uniform,  is  hardly  more  than  sixty.  This
narrow  tract  of  land,  between  seas  and  sands,  is  the

364  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

isthmus  which  connects  Egypt  and  Arabia  on  the
south  with  the  Lesser  Asia,  Armenia  and  Parthia  on
the  north.  It  has  formed  in  all  ages  the  great  line  of
communication,  whether  for  purposes  of  commerce  or
of  conquest,  between  the  two  continents  of  Asia  and
Africa.  By  this  road  Alexander  descended  from  the
fields  of  his  Oriental  victories  to  found  the  noblest
monument  of  his  triumphs  at  the  mouth  of  the  Nile  ;
and  Palestine  was  the  lock  on  the  gate  of  Egypt
which  Pompeius  opened  to  the  Komans  with  his
Accessible  sword.  Important  as  this  region  is  from
from^udc™n-  tts  position,  it  so  happens  that  its  configu-
figuration.  ration  renders  it  peculiarly  accessible  to
military  enterprise.  Narrow  as  it  is,  a  system  of
Easy  lines  of  valleys,  through  which  are  poured  the  waters

comiriMtica-  /•,•• A  j.i T  i  ii T j

tion  through  ot  the  Orontes,  the  Leontes,  and  the  J  ordan,
length.  divides  it  in  the  middle  with  a  straight  line

through  its  whole  length.  The  high  road  which
traversed  this  easy  and  fertile  level  conducted  from
Antioch  to  Heliopolis,  Caesarea  Philippi,  Tiberias,  and
Jericho :  from  this  point  it  struck  more  to  the  west,
to  avoid  the  wilderness  of  Judah  and  the  arid  shores
of  the  Dead  Sea,  and  crossed  the  plateau  of  Jerusalem
and  Hebron,  till  it  reached  Graza  on  the  coast  of  the
Mediterranean,  or  turned  again  more  eastward  and
passed  through  Idumea  into  Arabia.  Another  parallel
line  of  communication  skirted  the  sea-coast  and  met
with  no  local  obstruction,  at  least  from  the  promontory
of  Carmel  to  mount  Casius  on  the  frontier  of  Egypt.
Between  these  two  lines  the  country  rises  to  a  con-
siderable elevation,  on  the  western  side  in  three  or
four  level  terraces,  abounding  in  the  productions  of
as  many  different  climates ;  on  the  eastern  more  ab-
ruptly and  irregularly,  and  with  a  large  proportion  of
Antiochus  barren  rock  and  sand.  Thus  critically  situ-
attempt'.'t'o  sited  between  the  frontiers  of  the  great  com-
the  Jews.  petitors  for  Oriental  dominion,  the  Jews  had
been  exposed  from  the  earliest  times  to  the  hardships

A.C.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  365

of  foreign  invasion.  The  Assyrians,  the  Egyptians
and  the  Greeks  had  successively  attacked  them.  They
had  followed  the  fate  of  Syria  in  the  partition  of
Alexander's  empire,  and  had  become  reconciled  to
their  subjection  to  the  sceptre  of  the  Seleucidae,  till
the  fourth  Antiochus,  surnamed  Epiphanes,  made  a
violent  attempt  to  impose  upon  them  the  religion  of
Greece.  Inspired  with  fierce  enthusiasm  at  the  blow
which  struck  down  the  impious  Heliodorus  in  his
attempt  to  rifle  their  temple,  they  flew  to  arms  to
repel  the  aggression  upon  their  faith.1  The  king  of
Syria  had  plunged  into  a  desperate  struggle  with
Eome,  and  he  sought  to  strengthen  himself  by  ani-
mating with  a  religious  principle  the  coalition  of  the
Asiatic  Greeks  over  which  he  presided.  He  aimed  at
making  himself  the  centre  of  this  fanatical  resistance,
and  while  he  impressed  on  one  side  of  his  coins  the
firure  of  the  Olympian  Jupiter,  he  appended  to  his
own  name  the  stamp  of  divinity  on  the  other.  The
Greeks,  whose  religious  faith  was  utterly  worn  out,
were  little  offended  perhaps  at  this  daring  assumption,
with  which  some  previous  examples  had  rendered
them  familiar;  they  were  contented  at  least  with
levelling  a  languid  sneer  against  it,  and  converted
the  surname  of  Epiphanes,  the  illustrious,  into  Epi-
manes,  the  infatuated.  But  the  tyrant  miscalculated
the  extent  to  which  the  influence  of  Greece  had  as
yet  infected  the  Jewish  mind.  Even  in  Jerusalem
there  existed  indeed  a  Hellenizing  party  among  the
Jews,  which  aimed  at  throwing  down  the  wall  of  par-
tition between  Jew  and  Gentile.  The  Grecian  go-
vernment had  favoured  this  party,  and  promoted  its
adherents.  Jesus,  the  brother  of  the  high  priest
Onias,  was  the  leader  of  the  ivicked  men,  as  the
national  chronicle  designated  them,  who  persuaded
many,  saying,  Let  us  go  and  make  a  covenant  with

1  2  Maccab.  iii.  7.  foil.

366  HISTOBT OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXIX.

the  heathen  that  are  round  about  us.1 He  assumed
the  Greek  name  Jason,  which  corresponded  nearly,
both  in  sound  and  signification, with his  Hebrew
appellation,  while  Onias  affected  the  designation  of
Menelaus. They  erected  in  the  capital  of  Judea  a
gymnasium,  for  the  propagation  of  Hellenistic  taste,
while  the  Samaritans  even  offered,  it  is  said,  to  con-
vert their  temple  on  Mount  Gerizim  to  the  service
of  the  Grecian  Jupiter.2 Encouraged  by  the  favour
with  which  these  innovations  appeared  to  be  received,
Antiochus  gave  orders  that  the  statue  of  Zeus  Olym-
pius  should  be  erected  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.
He  appointed  that  monthly  festivals  should  be  cele-
brated in  honour  of  Bacchus,  at  which  all  the  families
of  Judea  were commanded to  present  themselves
crowned  with  ivy. The  national  rites  and  ceremonies
were  abruptly  suppressed,  sacrifices  were  demanded
to  the  pagan  demons  whose  altars  were  planted  at  the
corners  of  the  streets,  and  the  people  were  required
to  eat  the  meats  forbidden  by  Moses.  To  this  it  must
be  added  that  the  persecutor  rifled  the  treasures  of
the  temple ;  and  as  these  treasures  comprehended  not
only  the  offerings  of  the  devout,  but  the  hoarded
savings  of  the  industrious,  he  concentrated  against
himself  the  two  ruling  passions  which  have  ever  held
divided  empire  in  the  breast  of  the  Jew. Stung  to
frenzy  by  these  tyrannical  measures  and  the  barbarity
with  which  they  were  enforced,  the  mass  of  the  nation
flew  to  arms. Under  a  family  of  heroes,  the  Macca-
bees, or  Asmonean  princes,  they  defied  the  oppressor
and  recovered  their  independence. Both  Greeks  and
Jews  combined  in  declaring  that  his  miserable  death
The  jews was  a  signal  manifestation  of  divine  retri-
»ui»eRome? r  bution. The  success  of  the  national  party
"™m. ' '  among  the  Jews  was  assured  by  the  treaty  of
alliance  they  now  made  with  Rome  : a  treaty  which

1  1  Maccab.  i.  11.  J  Joseph.  Ant.  xii.  5.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIEE.  367

they  regarded  as  the  safeguard  of  their  independence,
and  preserved  on  tablets  of  brass  in  the  temple  of
Jerusalem.1

The  defenders  of  Jewish  nationality  had  been  driven
during  their  long  struggle  from  the  frontiers  Progress  of  the

, . <=  , .  ,. . . , Hellenic  ele-

and  sea-coast  into  the  mountainous  districts  m<mt  among

,  ~ ,  , .,  , the  population

in  the  centre  or  the  country,  while  the  of  Palestine.
Syrian  invaders  girdled  their  territory  with  a  line  of
cities,  which  they  garrisoned  with  Greek  colonists.
Some  of  these  hostile  fastnesses  were  destroyed  by  the
Jews  on  the  recovery  of  their  independence ;  but  they
mere  generally  permitted  them  to  exist,  while  they
constrained  their  inhabitants  to  adopt  the  religion  and
usages  of  the  natives.2  From  this  original  stock  the
blood,  the  language,  and  the  customs  of  Hellas  .were
gradually  transfused  into  the  population  of  Palestine,
which  had  vainly  prided  itself  on  the  purity  of  its
race,  the  reserve  of  its  manners,  and  the  exclusiveness
of  its  creed.  It  will  be  well  to  pause  for  a  moment
to  trace  the  silent  progress  of  this  phenomenon,  which
in  fact  may  serve  to  illustrate,  from  a  single  point,
the  process  which  had  been  going  on  throughout
Western  Asia  from  the  date  of  the  Macedonian  con-
quest, and  which  is  important  from  the  insight  it  gives
us  into  the  march  of  Hellenic  ideas  over  extensive
regions  which  were  soon  to  become  a  part  of  the
Eoman  empire.

While  the  Eoman  almost  universally  adopted  the
walls  and  dwellings  of  the  vanquished  enemy  E:rtent  of
and  expelled  the  natives  to  make  room  for  %$£££*
settlers  of  his  own  race,  the  Greek  mode  of  Palcstine-
colonization  demanded  generally  the  erection  of  new
cities  for  Hellenic  occupation  in  the  conquered  terri-
tory. In  this  the  immigrants  from  Eastern  Europe
followed  the  policy  or  habits  of  Oriental  conquerors,
though  their  mode  of  building  must  have  been  much

1  1  Maccab.  viii.;  Joseph.  Ant.  xii.  10.  6.

2  Joseph.  Ant.  xiv,  4.

368  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

more  substantial  than  that  which  contents  a  Tartar
or  Hindoo  potentate,  when  he  raises  his  capital  of
mud  or  wood  to  receive  the  transplanted  population
of  the  surrounding  plains.  Appian  may  furnish  us
with  an  idea  of  the  scale  on  which  this  Hellenic
system  of  colonization  was  adopted.  He  tells  us  that
the  founder  of  the  dynasty  of  the  Seleucidae  in  Syria
built  a  vast  number  of  cities  throughout  his  do-
minions * :  of  these  he  named  sixteen  Antiochia  after
his  father,  six  Laodicea  from  his  mother,  nine  from
his  own  name  Seleucia,  four  from  those  of  his  wives
Apamea  or  Stratonicea.  Besides  these  the  historian
gives  a  list  of  twenty-three  other  cities  founded  by
the  same  hand,  bearing  the  names  of  Greek  or  Mace-
donian towns,  or  referring  to  the  exploits  of  the
founder,  or,  lastly,  commemorating  his  great  master
Alexander.  When  we  consider  how  small  was  the
handful  of  Macedonian  soldiers  by  which  Persia  was
conquered,  it  is  evident  that  it  was  not  for  the  settle-
ment of  these  veterans  only  that  so  many  cities  were
founded,  but  to  supply  the  demands  of  a  mighty  im-
migration. The  opening  of  the  Eastern  world  to
European  enterprise  attracted  vast  numbers  of  Greeks
from  their  native  country,  and  though  these  cities
were  perhaps  partially  filled  from  the  surrounding
regions,  we  may  conclude  that  the  original  nucleus  of
the  population  throughout  them  was  Greek.  It  was
during  the  first  two  centuries  from  the  conquest  that
the  principal  influx  of  Greeks  into  Asia  must  have
taken  place.  Syria  we  may  suppose  was  saturated
with  the  Hellenic  infusion  by  the  time  when  the  Jews
rejected  its  yoke.  Greece  itself  ceased  to  throw  off
its  swarms  when  its  own  population  had  dwindled  to
the  numbers  adapted  to  its  natural  resources.  Ac-
cordingly, at  the  time  of  which  we  are  now  speaking,
the  proportion  of  the  native  and  the  intruding  races
throughout  the  region  of  Syria  was  definitely  fixed.

1  Appian,  Syriac,  c.  57.

A.U.724-B.C.30. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  369

The  influence  exercised  by  the  Greeks,  as  an  element
in  the  population,  was  already  at  its  height  :  if  the
notices  we  can  collect  regarding  it  belong  strictly  to  a
later  period,  we  shall  not  err  much  in  assuming  them
to  illustrate  the  circumstances  of  the  earlier  epoch.
The  influence  of  the  Greek  language  seems  to  have

far  outstripped the  encroachment of  the  Genera

/->  1  1 j_  •  j_l_  •  Ti 1  §ion  Of  the

Greek  population  in  these  regions.  It  al-  Greek  ian-
most  superseded  the  native  dialects  even  in  wett«nAsio.
cities  which  were  not  originally  founded  for  Hellenic
colonists.  Thus  we  find  that  at  Tyre,  at  Sidoii,  and
at  Ascalon,  the  Komans  published  their  decrees  in
the  Latin  and  the  Greek  idioms;  in  the  Latin,  in
token  of  their  own  supremacy  ;  in  the  Greek,  as  the
language  most  generally  understood  by  the  conquered
people.1  Ascalon  became  famous  for  its  Greek  writers
in  philosophy,  history,  and  grammar.2  Gadara,  a
city  of  Greek  foundation,  is  celebrated  by  Strabo  for
its  contributions  to  Hellenic  science.3  A  large  pro-
portion of  the  inscriptions  discovered  at  Palmyra  are
said  to  be  Greek,  though  the  orthography  of  some  is
Syrian  or  Phoenician.4  But  the  prevalence  of  the
Greek  language  even  at  Jerusalem  itself  is  marked  by
an  interesting  circumstance  recorded  in  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles.  On  the  occasion  of  a  riot  which  was
excited  in  that  city  through  the  jealousy  which  existed
between  the  Oriental  and  the  Greek  Jews,  St.  Paul
addressed  the  multitude;  when  they  heard  that  he
spake  in  the  Hebrew  tongue  they  the  more  kept
silence  :  from  which  it  appears  that  they  would  have
listened  to  him  and  understood  him  even  if  he  had
spoken  in  Greek,5  After  this  instance,  we  shall  not

1  Joseph.  Ant.  xii.  12.  5.,  xiv.  10.  2.:  &ov\ofiat 8e Kal '
xa.1  'Pcaficuffrl  iv  5e\Ty  ^aA/cr;  TOVTU  ayarfO^vai  ....  6trcas  inrb

2  Stephanns,  de  Urbibus,  v.  'AcrK<i\ti>v.

3  Strabo,  xvi.  2.

4  Compare  Hug,  Jnlrod.  to  the  A".  Test.  ii.  36.  Engl.  Transl,

5  Acts,  xxii.  2.

VOL.  III..  B  B

370  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

be  surprised  to  learn  that  even  the  religious  authorities
of  Palestine  offered  no  resistance  to  the  diffusion  of
the  Greek  language,  and  that  some  of  their  books
and  legal  documents  were  written  indifferently  in  the
Greek  or  the  vernacular  idiom.1  It  is  probable  that
the  fusion  of  the  two  races  had  proceeded  to  a  con-
siderable extent  even  while  they  affected  to  draw  the
strongest  lines  of  demarkation  between  one  another.
The  Greeks  and  Jews  enjoyed  an  equality  of  civic
privileges  throughout  most  of  the  cities  of  Palestine.
Disputes  regarding  the  extent  of  these  rights  fre-
quently arose  between  them,  and  appeals  were  made
to  the  decision  of  the  emperor  at  Eome.  The  judg-
ment, founded  on  antiquity  and  original  colonization,
was  sometimes  given  in  favour  of  the  foreigners.
Emboldened  by  such  awards,  the  Greek  colonists  in
some  localities  ventured  to  affirm  that  they  were  the
first  inhabitants  of  the  country.  Scythopolis  ascribed
its  foundation  to  Bacchus  himself2,  and  Joppa  com-
memorated as  a  local  tradition  the  adventure  of
Perseus  and  Andromeda.3

The  progress  of  a  foreign  language  and  its  cor-
influenceof  responding  ideas  among  a  people  so  jea-
Suonupon"  l°us  and  retentive  of  their  own  usages  as
Jewish  ideas.  j.Qe  jews>  C0uld  not  fail  to  excite  alarm
and  indignation.  It  was  associated  in  their  minds
with  the  remembrance  of  the  Syrian  oppressor  who
had  imposed  upon  them  the  abominations  of  pagan
idolatry.  But  among  the  educated  classes,  in  the
higher  ranks  of  the  aristocracy  and  in  the  court  of
their  rulers  themselves,  the  fascinations  of  Greek
civilization  exerted  extensive  influence.  The  revo-
lution by  which  John  Hyrcanus  changed  the  popular
championship  of  his  family  into  a  royal  domination
brought  out  in  strong  relief  the  colours  of  their  social

1  Hug,  ii.  46.;  with  reference  to  the  Mischna.

2  Plin.  H.  N.  v.  16.  3  Strabo,  xvi.  2.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  371

divisions.  On  the  one  hand  the  Pharisees,  the  se-
paratists or  the  exclusives,  as  their  name  Antagoni8mof
may  import,  clung  with  sullen  tenacity  to  a^,™*^?
the  ancient  prescriptions  of  the  national  ducees'
polity.  Bred  in  a  devout  belief  in  the  theocracy  or
divine  government  of  their  country,  they  beheld  with
affright  the  contrast  between  the  corruptions  and
perils  of  society  around  them  and  the  ideal  of  purity
and  security  which  existed  in  their  own  heated  ima-
ginations. They  saw  that  the  faith  of  the  higher
classes  was  crumbling  away,  sapped  by  the  perpetual
assaults  of  heathen  superstition,  damped  by  dis-
couragement from  an  apostate  government,  sicken-
ing with  the  long  delayed  hope  of  a  triumphant
fulfilment.  Without  logical  or  moral  convictions  of
their  own,  they  determined  in  the  strength  of  an
indomitable  will  to  maintain  the  creed  of  their  an-
cestors, and  sought  only  to  entrench  it  behind  a
complicated  system  of  forms  and  ceremonial  obser-
vances, to  which  they  vainly  looked  as  so  many
bulwarks  to  break  the  force  of  the  assailant's  attack.
They  encumbered  the  simplicity  of  the  Mosaic  law
with  a  mass  of  sophistical  interpretations,  derived  in
fact  from  sources  not  less  alien  and  corrupt  than  the
Greek  theosophies  which  they  combated.  But  thus
equipped,  they  could  await  in  proud  defiance  the
time  when  the  development  of  a  new  knowledge  or
a  higher  philosophy  should  vindicate,  as  they  loudly
proclaimed,  the  divine  principle  of  revelation  en-
shrined in  the  casket  of  human  traditions.  These
are  tactics  which  constantly  reappear  in  the  history
of  religious  antagonisms.  The  peculiar  secret,  how-
ever, of  the  strength  and  popularity  of  the  Pharisees
lay  probably  in  the  boldness  with  which  they  affirmed
the  doctrine  of  a  future  life.  They  taught  indeed
the  transmigration  of  souls  through  successive  bodies ;
a  crude  and  ready  way  of  evading  the  difficulties
which  beset  the  more  scientific  attempts  to  form  a

B  B 2

372  HISTORY OP THE KOMANS  CH.  XXIX.

theory  of  future  retribution  :  but  their  views  of  fu-
turity, such  as  they  were,  embraced  every  class  alike,
and  they  appealed  to  the  fears  and  hopes  of  mankind
in  general,  and  repudiated  the  aristocracy  of  souls
which  satisfied  the  Greek  philosophers.  On  the  other
hand,  the  reaction  which  resulted  from  this  system
gave  rise  to  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees.  These  reli-
gionists asserted  that  the  pure  spirit  of  their  national
creed  required  no  such  shadowy  defence  as  their
opponents  had  raised  around  it.  They  appealed  to
the  five  Books  of  Moses  as  the  pure  fountain  of  their
ancient  faith.  We  need  not  conclude  from  this  that
they  rejected  the  inspiration  of  other  books  of  the
Hebrew  canon.  The  Pentateuch  was  the  volume  of
the  law;  and  the  Sadducees  upheld  the  text  of  the
law  as  distinguished  not  from  the  historical  and
prophetical  books  which  followed  it,  but  from  the
traditionary  glosses  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  foreign
ideas  they  considered  them  to  have  naturalised.1
But  they  explained  away  everything  in  the  received
Scriptures  which  might  appear  to  modify  in  any
degree  the  doctrines  of  Moses ;  they  repudiated  the
notion  of  a  future  state,  because  they  could  not  read
it  from  Genesis  to  Deuteronomy  ;  and  they  resolved
the  theory  of  angelic  existences  into  peculiar  mani-
festations of  the  Divine  Being  himself.  It  has  been
asserted  by  their  apologists  that  their  rejection  of
supersensuous  theories  went  only  to  the  denial  of  a
resurrection  of  the  body,  such  as  was  undoubtedly  the
belief  of  the  Pharisee:  but  all  existing  testimony
affirms  that  they  rejected  also  the  immortality  of
spirit.2  In  other  points  also  their  creed  touched

1  The  common  opinion,  that  the  Sadducees  rejected  the  prophetical
books  of  the  Old  Testament,  is  founded  upon  the  assertion  of  Ter-
tullian,  de  Prcescr.  Haeret.  45.,  and  St.  Jerome,  ad  Matth.  22.,  but  it
seems  tome  to  have  been  sufficiently  refuted.  See  Winer,  Real-
Worterbuch,  art.  Saddukeser.

-  Sahador,  Domination  Romaine  en  Judee,  i.  95.  Compare  Joseph.
Antlq.  xviii.  1.  4.,  'SaSSovxaiois  TOT  tyvx&s  &  \6yos  ffvva<j>avi£fi  TOIS

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  373

upon  the  system  of  the  Epicureans.  They  asserted
the  absolute  freedom  of  the  human  will,  derided  the
notion  of  fate,  and  regarded  the  Deity  as  standing
apart  from  the  concerns  of  the  world  in  a  state  of
selfish  indifference.  The  Sadducees,  like  the  Epicu-
reans of  the  Hellenic  world,  belonged  principally  to
the  higher  classes.  They  occupied  important  posts
in  the  religious  no  less  than  in  the  social  institutions
of  their  country.  But,  notwithstanding  the  profession
they  made  of  a  pure  Jewish  belief,  a  creed  so  nega-
tive on  the  most  vital  points  could  not  fail  to  render
them  practically  indifferent  to  the  great  religious
questions  of  their  day.  The  Pharisees,  or,  The
as  we  may  call  them,  the  national  party,
who  preponderated  in  the  great  council  of  iu  Palestine-
the  Sanhedrim,  and  relied  upon  the  support  of  the
bulk  of  the  people,  denounced  the  sacrilegious  at-
tempt of  John  Hyrcanus  to  unite  the  sacerdotal  with
the  regal  office.1  The  crown  of  the  priesthood  they
declared  was  the  right  of  the  sons  of  Aaron,  the  crown
of  royalty  appertained  to  David  and  his  successors,  but
the  crown  of  the  law,  the  supreme  authority  of  the
state,  belonged  to  the  whole  people  of  Israel,  repre-
sented in  the  national  assembly  of  the  Sanhedrim.2
This  bold  interpretation  of  the  ancient  constitution
of  the  Jews  could  find  no  favour  with  the
Sadducees ;  and  when  the  baffled  usurper  can£>  connects

1 •  IP  .1 •  LI  himself  with

threw  himself  upon  their  support,  he  was  thesaddi.™.'

, , ,,  x ...  m, or  the  anti-

received by  them  with open  arms. Ine  national

decision  in  his  favour  of  this  powerful  sec-
tion of  the  nation  determined  the  result  of  the  con-

ffdi^aai. ;  and  B.  Jud.  ii.  8.  18.  The  other  passages  from  Josephus
are  Antiq.  xiii.  5,  9.,  xiii.  10.  6.  It  is  unnecessary  to  refer  to  the
well-known  passages  in  the  New  Testament.

1  The constitutional  limits  of  the  championship  assigned  to  the
Asmonean  dynasty  (1 Maccab.  xiv.  47.)  included  a  certain  pre-
cedence or  leadership  in  civil  affairs  combined  with  the  high  priest-
hood.

2  Salvador  (i.  91.)  quotes  from  the  Mischna,  de  Synedriis,  i.  5.

374  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxix.

test.  The  Asmonean  princes  mounted  the  throne  of
Israel,  disgraced  the  chiefs  of  the  Pharisees,  abolished
their  religious  ordinances  and  proscribed  their  teach-
ing, while  they  sought  to  secure  themselves  against
the  popular  indignation  thus  excited,  by  surrounding
their  palace  with  foreign,  mercenaries.1  The  party
triumph  of  the  Sadducees  bound  them  in  political
servitude.  They  became  the  avowed  supporters  of
the  government :  they  undertook  the  defence  of  an
anti-national,  an  Hellenistic,  an  idolatrous  policy ;
while  their  opponents,  released  from  the  trammels  of
power,  prided  themselves  on  the  sacrifice  they  had
made  to  principle,  clung  yet  more  closely  to  their
peculiar  views,  and  engaged  the  admiration  of  the
multitude  by  the  austerity  of  their  religious  pro-
fessions.

But  an  enemy  more  fatal  than  the  Greek  or  the
First  inter-  Syrian  was  at  hand.  The  rivalries  which
Boman8(1nhe  sprang  up  within  the  family  of  the  Asmo-
jewish  affairs.  nean  princes  led  to  an  invitation  to  the
Romans  to  take  part  in  the  national  divisions.  We
have  seen  how  Pompeius  decided  between  the  claims
Pompeius  de-  of  Hyrcanus  and  Aristobulus.  In  contempt

cides  between /•  . -i  • i  j  -T  p ,t  t

the  claims  of oi  the  wishes  and  prejudices  01  the  people,

Hyreanus  and ,  , ,  ., rr  J, „

Aristobulus.  he  took  the  side  oi  the  former,  by  whose
personal  feebleness  of  character  he  could  most  readily
profit;  and  while  he  assigned  to  him  the  nominal
sovereignty  together  with  the  high  priesthood,  placed
over  him  as  minister  the  Idumean  Antipater,  an
active  and  intriguing  partisan  of  the  Roman  interests.
Pompeius  carried  away  Aristobulus  and  his  sons,
Alexander  and  Antigonus,  to  Rome,  as  hostages  for
the  fidelity  of  this  new  government,  which  continued
to  be  jealously  watched  by  the  proconsuls  of  Syria,
and  encouraged  to  crush  the  national  spirit  of  its
subjects  and  familiarize  them  gradually  with  the

1  Aristobulus  I.,  eldest  son  of  John  Hyrcanns,  was  the  first  to
assume  the  title  of  king.  Joseph.  Ant.  xiii.  11.  1.,  B.  J.\.  3.  1.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  375

idea  of  complete  subjugation.  The  Jews  indeed  bore
the  yoke  of  dependence  with  increasing  impatience.
Pompeius  had  outraged  their  religious  prejudices  by
the  desecration  of  their  Temple  ;  he  had  exasperated
them  by  a  series  of  sanguinary  executions,  and  humi-
liated them  by  the  demolition  of  the  walls  of  Jerusa-
lem. One  after  another  Aristobulus  and  his  sons  made
their  escape  from  detention.  We  may  be  tempted
to  suspect  connivance  on  the  part  of  the  Koman
government,  which  could  afford  to  buy  an  excuse  for
armed  interference  at  the  price  of  a  revolt  in  Pales-
tine. The  intruders  however  were  hardly  prepared
for  the  desperate  resistance  now  organized  against
them  by  the  exiled  princes,  who  unfurled  once  more
on  their  native  soil  the  glorious  banner
of  the  Maccabees.  Antipater  armed  himself  th"jew°Tot°he
to  defend  the  throne  of  Hyrcanus  and  the  mnnmvix?
influence  he  wielded  in  his  name.  He  ap-  u
pealed  to  the  proconsuls  of  Syria  to  support
the  interest  of  the  republic  in  Palestine,  while  the
insurgents  addressed  themselves  to  the  ambition  or
jealousy  of  the  Parthians,  and  strove,  with  the  aid
of  their  brethren  dispersed  throughout  the  East,  to
consolidate  a  vast  Oriental  confederacy  against  the
European  power  which  had  already  advanced  its
standards  to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates.  The
struggle  which  now  commenced  was  destined  to
continue  with  little  intermission  for  nearly  two
hundred  years.  So  long  did  it  take  to  subdue  Judea.
The  contest  was  animated,  on  the  part  of  the  Jews,
by  a  deep  religious  spirit,  and  maintained  with  an
unity  of  purpose  and  combined  action  unexampled  in
the  history  of  foreign  resistance  to  the  all-conquering
policy  of  Rome.  It  was  nourished  by  feelings  of  the
deadliest  animosity  on  both  sides  :  it  was  signalized
by  the  most  frightful  examples  of  barbarity,  in  which
each  of  the  contending  parties  strove  to  outdo  the
other ;  but  it  was  directed  by  a  controlling  Provi-

376  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

dence  to  a  beneficial  consummation,  in  the  destruc-
tion of  the  Jewish  nationality,  and  the  dispersion
throughout  the  world  of  the  Christian  communities.

The  first  period  of  this  eventful  struggle  extended
scaurus, over  twenty-nine  years,  during  which  Aris-

Gabinius,  ,11  J V  ? J  11 il

oassus,  and  toDulus  and  his  sons  contended  gallantly
paTeYunT.  for  their  rights  against  the  intruders.  An-
tipater  was  supported  in  his  vicarious  sovereignty
by  Scaurus,  the  lieutenant  whom  Pompeius  had  left
behind  him  in  Judea,  and  afterwards  by  M.  Philippus
and  Lentulus  Marcellinus,  who  succeeded  one  another
in  the  government  of  Syria.  The  menacing  attitude
assumed  by  the  Parthians  on  the  frontier  demanded
the  concentration  of  larger  forces  under  a  leader  of
the  highest  consideration.  Gabinius  was  entrusted
with  the  command  of  the  armies  of  the  republic  in
the  East.  He  engaged  the  services  of  M.  Antonius,
whose  military  talents  he  was  the  first  to  unfold,  and
owed  his  most  brilliant  victories  to  the  skill  and  con-
duct of  the  future  triumvir.  Crassus,  who  succeeded
Grabinius,  while  meditating  a  career  of  unexampled
conquest  beyond  the  Euphrates,  was  tempted,  as  we
have  seen,  to  reach  forth  his  hand  and  rifle  the  trea-
sures of  the  Temple  :  such  was  the  price  at  which
the  usurping  government  of  Judea  was  constrained
to  buy  the  support  of  a  Koman  proconsul.  The  dis-
aster of  Carrhse  shook  the  throne  of  Hyrcanus ;  but
the  Parthians  acted  with  indecision,  Cassius  was
prompt  and  vigorous,  and  averted  or  repelled  their
invasions :  Antipater  was  still  enabled  to  uphold  his
ascendancy  through  many  vicissitudes  of  victory  and
defeat.  He  sent  a  detachment  of  Iturasan  bowmen
to  the  camp  of  his  patron  Pompeius,  who  in  return
commanded  the  execution  of  Alexander  ;  while  Aris-
tobulus  himself  was  poisoned  shortly  afterwards,  ac-
cording to  the  report,  by  the  partisans  of  the  senato-
rial faction.  But  after  Pharsalia  Antipater  speedily
changed  his  side,  and  the  zeal  he  displayed  in  sending

A.C.7:>4-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPI1JE.  377

aid  to  Ctesar  in  Egypt,  backed  by  the  good  offices  of
Antonius,  secured  him  the  favour  and  support  of  the
new  ruler  of  the  republic.  In  vain  did  Antigonus,
the  surviving  son  of  Aristobulus,  implore  the  con-
queror of  Pompeius  to  reverse  his  rival's  policy  in
Judea.  Caesar  confirmed  Hyrcanus  in  his  high  priest-
hood and  titular  sovereignty ;  but  he  placed  the  real
power  more  firmly  than  ever  in  the  hands  of  the
Idumean,  and  honoured  him  with  the  distinction  of
Koman  citizenship.

The  ascendancy  of  the  Idumean's  family  was  hence-
forth fully  assured.  Antipater  now  acted  Ascendancy  of
with  hardlv  a  pretence  of  regard  towards  the  family  W

,.  • i  •  TTT-JJ^I Antipater,  the

his  nominal  sovereign.  He  divided  the  wumean.
territories  subjected  to  his  sway  between  his  four
sons,  of  whom  the  second,  named  Herodes,  was
destined  to  reunite  the  whole  of  Palestine  under  his
sceptre  at  no  distant  period.  The  district  which  was
assigned  to  him  on  this  occasion  was  Galilee,  and  at
the  time  of  his  investment  with  the  government  he
was  about  twenty-five  years  of  age.  The  historian  of
the  Jews  forgets  his  own  chronology  when  he  affirms
that  the  age  of  Herod  at  this  time  was  only  fifteen,
and  admires  the  vigour  with  which  he  acted  in  such
tender  years  in  chastising  the  brigands  on  his  borders.
It  is  probable  indeed  that  the  persons  whom-  he
branded  with  this  title  were  insurgent  patriots  rather
than  roving  marauders.  The  wives  and  families  of
the  victims  boldly  complained  to  Hyrcanus  of  the
slaughter  of  their  relatives;  and  while  the  exploit  re-
commended the  young  chieftain  to  the  Eoman  com-
mander, Sextus  Ca3sar,  it  was  execrated  by  the  na-
tional party  at  Jerusalem,  as  an  act  of  subservient
tyranny.  The  advisers  who  now  swayed  the  counsels
of  the  feeble  Hyrcanus  urged  him  to  make  a  despe-
rate effort  to  shake  off  the  yoke  of  the  Idumean
cabal,  degrading  alike  to  himself  and  to  his  people.
Herod  was  summoned  by  his  titular  sovereign  to

378  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

appear  at  Jerusalem,  and  explain  before  the  Sanhedrim
the  circumstances  of  his  recent  act  of  violence.  But
he  declined  to  place  himself  in  so  perilous  a  position
until  he  had  sought  and  obtained  the  safeguard  of
Roman  protection,  and  when  he  presented  himself
before  the  council  he  held  in  his  hand  the  proconsul's
command  that  he  should  be  acquitted.  The

The  national  .  ,  r- J.-L T • i  _LII

spirit  is  roused  passions,  however,  ot  the  Jewish  notables

against  them. *  ij  j c J.-L' • t ,L j  • ,

were  worked  up  to  defy  this  insolent  dicta-
tion. Sameas  or  Shammai,  a  just  man.,  in  Jewish
phraseology,  that  is,  a  strict  observer  of  the  law  and
upholder  of  its  religious  and  political  traditions,
whose  devotion  to  the  cause  of  his  country  and  his
Grod  placed  him  beyond  the  reach  of  Roman  intimi-
dation,1 addressed  them  with  the  indignant  eloquence
so  often  directed  by  the  national  orators,  and  never
without  effect,  against  foreign  aggression.  All  the
criminals,  he  said,  who  have  hitherto  been  brought
before  us,  have  come  clothed  in  mourning,  in  the
attitude  of  supplication,  in  the  guise  of  humility ;
but  this  man  alone  dares  to  stand  in  our  presence
arrayed  in  purple,  his  hair  gallantly  trimmed,
and  suTi^ounded  by  armed  soldiers,  as  though  pre-
pared to  massacre  us  if  we  dare  pronounce  sentence
against  him.  And  he  ended  with  a  solemn  predic-
tion that  the  culprit,  if  he  now  escaped  condemna-
tion, would  live  to  shed  the  blood  of  all  his  judges
and  of  Hyrcanus  himself.  All  which,  says  the  historian,
took  place  as  was  predicted,  Sameas  himself  alone
escaping  the  vengeance  which  successively  overtook
them.  The  council  would  have  acted  resolutely  on
the  orator's  advice,  but  the  timid  monarch  secretly
warned  the  criminal  of  his  danger.  Herod  burst
away  from  the  toils  in  which  he  was  entangled,  and
threw  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  Roman  commander.
He  was  favourably  received  by  Sextus  Caesar,  and

1  Josephus,  Ant.  xiv.  9.  4.,  SJKCUOJ  avrip  xal  8j«  TOVTO  TOV  StSieVat

A.F.724-B.C.30.  rNDER THE EMPIEE.  379

soon  enabled  to  make  a  military  demonstration
against  the  seat  of  government.  His  father  and
family,  fearful  of  the  consequences  of  his  meditated
violence,  with  difficulty  restrained  him  from  an  at-
tack which  would  have  raised  the  whole  Jewish  people
in  arms,  and  shaken  to  pieces  the  edifice  of  craft  nd
sophistry  in  which  their  power  resided.

The  disturbances  which  ensued  in  Syria,  and  shortly
afterwards  throughout  the  Koman  dominion
in  the  East,  allowed  the  Sanhedrim  a  short  A^'oSh^in
respite  to  congratulate  themselves  upon
their  successful  patriotism,  and  to  foster  their  means
of  future  resistance.  The  Caesareans  and  Pompeians
once  more  drew  their  swords  against  each  other
within  sight  of  the  Parthian  squadrons.  Sextus
Caesar  was  murdered;  Csecilius  Bassus  commanded
in  the  name  of  the  senate,  and  held  out  with  foreign
assistance  against  the  dictator's  lieutenants.  The
dictator  was  assassinated  :  Cassius  repaired  to  the
province  in  which  his  military  talents  were  most
known  and  respected.  Herod  yielded  complacently
to  this  revolution  in  the  government  of  Syria.
When  the  new  proconsul  imposed  a  heavy  tribute
upon  the  Jews  in  common  with  the  other  nations
under  his  rule,  for  the  support  of  the  vast  armies
which  were  to  defend  the  cause  of  the  republic,  he
exerted  himself  zealously  to  obtain  its  payment.
Accordingly  he  was  confirmed  in  the  government
of  Coele-Syria,  which  Sextus  Caesar  had  already
assigned  to  him;  and  Cassius  promised  him  the
kingdom  of  Judea  as  soon  as  the  arms  of  the  re-
public should  be  crowned  with  victory.  Soon
after  this  Antipater  perished  by  poison,  and  new
intrigues  were  employed  by  the  national  party  for
expelling  his  family  from  Jerusalem.  Antigonus
ventured  to  invade  the  country,  and  advanced  with
an  armed  force  his  claims  to  the  throne  of  his
ancestors.  The  battle  of  Philippi  threw  Syria  once

380  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

more  into  the  power  of  the  Caesareans.  Antonius
entered  Antioch,  and  took  up  the  tangled  and  broken

thread  of  his  predecessor's  policy.  Herod
court  topay  hastened  to  make  his  submission,  and  soon

entered  into  relations  of  personal  intimacy
with  the  frank  and  dissipated  Koman,  to  whom  his
abilities,  his  manners,  and  his  temper  too  easily  re-
commended him.1  Christendom,  in  its  pictures  and
its  proverbs,  has  represented  the  tyrant  Herod  as
the  impersonation  of  mingled  craft  and  violence,  an
aged  debauchee,  hideous  in  feature  and  loathsome
in  his  passions.  But  monstrous  as  were  his  crimes
and  odious  as  were  his  vices,  in  which  Asiatic  selfish-
ness was  rendered  more  repulsive  by  the  varnish  of
European  cultivation,  we  must  not  forget  that  he  is
described  to  us,  at  least  in  early  life,  as  a  man  of
gallant  bearing,  handsome  mien,  and  affable  man-
ners, gifted  with  talents  to  found  a  throne,  and
with  graces  not  unworthy  of  the  fairest  princess
HIS  marriage  of  his  times,  the  Asmonean  Mariamne.
moueanepriu-  This  ill-fated  woman  united,  as  the  grand-
ad, daughter  of  Aristobulus  on  the  one  side
and  Hyrcanus  on  the  other,  the  claims  of  the  rival
branches  of  the  Maccabean  house.  By  obtaining
her  hand  the  son  of  the  Idumean  might  hope  to
conciliate  the  obedience  of  the  people,  who  still
clung  with  unabated  devotion  to  the  scions  of  that
glorious  race.  He  might  trust  to  the  chances  of
an  age  of  revolutions  and  his  own  unscrupulous
address,  to  remove  from  his  path  the  princes  who
still  stood  between  his  consort  and  the  crown  of
her  fathers.  Through  his  influence  with  Hyrcanus
the  betrothal  was  effected  while  the  intended  bride
was  yet  a  child.  But  before  the  time  arrived  for
the  completion  of  the  promised  contract  Antigonus
with  the  aid  of  the  Parthians  had  made  himself
master  of  Jerusalem,  and  overthrown  the  power  of

1  Joseph.  Ant.  xir.  12.  2.

A.U.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  381

the  Idumean  princes.  Antonius  however  had  as-
sured Herod  of  his  favour,  and  the  baffled  intriguer
now  repaired  to  Kome,  to  represent  the  impolicy
of  leaving  Judea  in  the  bands  of  its  most  formi-
dable rival,  while  he  solicited  for  himself  with  lavish
bribes  the  crown  which  he  should  be  encouraged
to  tear  from  the  nominee  of  the  Parthians.  The
tide  of  fortune  in  the  East  was  now  turned  by  the
great  victory  of  Ventidius.  Antonius  was  prepar-
ing to  repeat  the  blow.  The  squadrons  of  Pacorus
had  disappeared  from  the  western  banks  of  the
Euphrates,  when  Sosius  appeared  before  the  gates  of
Jerusalem  leading  Herod  by  the  hand,  and  de-
manded the  surrender  of  the  city  and  t,he  descent
of  Antigonus  from  his  throne.  The  Jews  defended
their  prince  and  their  independence  with  all  the
constancy  of  their  race.  The  Komans  might  now
learn  for  the  first  time  how  desperate  an  enemy
they  had  to  deal  with  on  the  furthest  frontier  of
their  empire.  Vast  numbers  were  slain  on  Herod  the
both  sides ;  but  the  Romans  at  last  en-  th?kinrgedomM
tered  the  city  carrying  sword  and  fire  into  intoni'ii. ror
its  streets,  and  the  throne  of  Herod  was  erected  in  a
deep  slough  of  blood  and  ashes,  while  he  received  his
crown  from  the  hands  of  the  victorious  imperator.1

The  brave  Antigonus,  fallen  from  his  brief  dream
of  power,  was  conveyed  to  Antioch  to  await  Hcrod  Cut9  off
the  pleasure  of  Antonius  himself.  What-  gSS£S£
ever  were  the  sentiments  with  which  the  famili-
triumvir  might  be  disposed  to  regard  his  captive,
the  instances  of  his  favourite,  who  was  clamorous
for  his  death,  prevailed  upon  him  to  sanction  this
cruel  injustice.  His  execution  was  accompanied  with
circumstances  of  unusual  atrocity,  for  which  his-
tory has  failed  to  supply  us  with  the  motive.  An-
tonius was  the  first  of  the  Romans  who  consented

1  Joseph.  Ant.  xiv.  16.

382  HISTORY OF THE EOMANS  CH.  XXIX.

to  smite  a  king  with  the  axe.1  Perhaps  this  igno-
minious punishment  was  intended  to  brand  the  suf-
ferer as  a  rebel  and  an  usurper.  Perhaps  it  was
adopted  in  ostentatious  disregard  of  the  prescriptions
of  Roman  policy,  in  token  that  the  triumvir  claimed
to  rule  in  Asia  as  an  Oriental  despot  rather  than  the
agent  of  an  European  republic.  The  wretched  vic-
tim had  been  previously  subjected  to  the  cruel  chas-
tisement of  the  lictor's  rods.  The  adherents  of  the  '
vanquished  Asmonean  were  visited  with  no  more
merciful  fate  at  the  hands  of  Herod  himself.  The
Idumean  had  learnt  in  the  school  of  the  Roman
proscriptions  the  two  concurrent  objects  for  which
the  tyrant  selects  his  victims,  the  satisfaction  of  his
vengeance  and  the  replenishment  of  his  coffers.
The  requisitions  of  Antonius  pressed  hard  upon
the  creature  of  his  favour,  and  the  debt  could
only  be  discharged  by  a  system  of  rapine  and  con-
fiscation. The  Jews,  crushed  to  the  ground  under
this  reign  of  terror,  gave  vent  to  their  indignation
by  the  acclamations  they  unguardedly  lavished  upon
the  young  Aristobulus,  the  brother  of  their  queen
Mariamne.  The  jealousy  of  Herod,  already  watch-
ing its  moment  to  strike,  was  inflamed  to  a  sudden
resolution,  and  the  youth  was  drowned,  as  was
believed,  in  bathing  by  the  ministers  of  the  royal
policy.  Neither  his  sister  nor  the  people  were
deceived  by  the  vain  pretence  of  sorrow,  and  the
magnificence  of  the  funeral  which  his  murderer
exhibited  in  public.  But  Herod  was  conscious  that
in  clearing  away  the  rival  claims  from  the  founda-
tion of  his  throne,  he  was  forfeiting  irretrievably
the  popular  regard,  which  the  brilliancy  of  his  court,
the  munificence  of  his  public  works,  his  bravery
and  his  good  fortune  might  gradually  have  con-
ciliated. He  became  daily  more  and  more  de-
pendent upon  the  protection  of  his  Eoman  patron,

1  Dion,  xlix.  22.;  Joseph.  Ant.  xv.  1.

A.0.724-B.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  383

to  whose  profuse  expenditure  he  was  compelled  to
minister  by  fresh  exactions  upon  his  indignant
subjects.  He  was  tortured  also  with  apprehension
from  the  unbounded  influence  of  Cleopatra.  The
sovereigns  of  Judea  and  Egypt  were  rivals  for  the
favour  of  the  disposer  of  Oriental  crowns,  and  their
attention  was  divided  between  paying  court  to  the
triumvir  and  outwitting  one  another.  On  the  one
hand,  the  mistress  was  daily  receiving  new  tokens
of  her  lover's  devotion ;  crowns  and  sceptres  were
showered  in  her  lap,  and  the  throne  of  Judea
itself  might  be  bartered  to  her  in  a  moment  of
passionate  fondness.  On  the  other,  the  friend  and
ally  of  the  triumvir  held  a  position  of  real  political
importance  on  the  frontier  of  Parthia  and  Arabia,
while  years,  already  arrived  at  their  meridian,
must  strip  his  rival  of  her  charms,  or  satiety  pall
upon  them.  The  queen  of  Egypt  accompanied  the
Roman  imperator  to  the  banks  of  the  Euphrates,
and  received  from  him,  at  parting  on  the  eve  of
hs  perilous  enterprise,  certain  territories  bordering
upon  the  kingdom  of  Judea.  On  her  return  home-
wards she  directed  her  route  through  Herod's  do-
minions, and  contrived  to  make  a  sojourn  of  some
duration  in  his  capital.  Her  pretext  was  the  ar-
rangement of  the  terms  on  which  she  should  sur-
render to  him  the  financial  administration  of  these
new  acquisitions ;  but  she  took  advantage,  it  is  said,
of  the  opportunity  to  make  advances  to  him  of  a  dif-
ferent kind,  hoping,  in  case  of  the  defeat  of  cieopatra
i  j  L  j  f  •  j  make8  ad-

her  Roman  lover,  to  secure  a  devoted  mend  vances  to

in another  powerful potentate.1 Herod  he  rejects.
however  was  too  astute  a  politician  to  fall  into  the
snare. He knew  how readily she  would  sacrifice
him if Antonius should return victorious  to her
arms. At  the  same  time  he  was  not  without  ap-

1  Joseph.  Ant.  xv.  5.  2.

384  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

prehension  of  the  consequence  of  rejecting  her
favours :  and  if  we  may  believe  the  historians,  he
allowed  it  to  be  solemnly  debated  among  his  coun-
sellors whether  she  should  not  be  detained  and  put
to  death.  This  suggestion  was  overruled  and  Cleo-
patra reached  Alexandria  in  safety,  soon  to  be  rejoined
by  her  Roman  protector.  Herod  undertook  at  her
desire  to  farm  the  revenues  of  her  new  possessions,
an  engagement  which  he  diligently  discharged.

During  the  years  of  feverish  intoxication  which
Herod  is  con-  followed,  Cleopatra  found  no  means  of  ma-
•oTCre>tyis  turing  the  ambitious  projects  she  had  doubt-
by  octavms.  jegg  conceived  with  regard  to  her  neighbour's
dominions.  The  rival  potentates  watched  and  fenced
with  one  another,  uncertain  whether  to  blend  in  al-
liance or  to  challenge  to  the  combat,  when  the  battle  of
Actium  rudely  snapped  the  threads  of  their  intrigues,
and  reduced  both  to  the  attitude  of  suppliants  for
existence.  We  have  seen  with  what  different  success
the  rulers  of  Egypt  and  Judea  humbled  themselves
before  Octavius.  Herod  was  replaced  with  pomp  and
ceremony  on  the  throne  from  which  he  had  hastily
descended  to  throw  himself  at  the  feet,  of  the  uni-
versal ruler.  But  he  returned  to  a  divided  family,
an  estranged  wife,  and  an  indignant  people.  So  ap-
prehensive had  he  been  of  the  consequences  of  his
deserved  unpopularity  that  he  had  not  dared  to  quit
Judea  till  he  had  secured  himself  by  the  murder  of
Hyrcanus  against  the  pretensions  of  the  Asmonean
family.  History  hardly  presents  a  more  tragic  situa-
tion than  that  of  the  devoted  Mariamne,  the  miserable
object  of  a  furious  attachment  on  the  part  of  the
monster  who  had  slain  before  her  eyes  her  uncle,  her
brother  and  her  grandfather.  Herod  doted
andjeasiouly  upon  her  beauty,  in  which  she  bore  away

of  Mariamne. <£  i r  •  r i  ,•

the  palm  irom  every  princess  01  her  time  ;
the  blood  which  flowed  in  her  veins  secured  to  him
the  throne  which  he  had  raised  upon  the  ruins  of  her

A.U.724-B.C.30.  TINDER THE EMPIRE.  385

father's  house ;  but  her  personal  and  political  claims
upon  the  royal  regard  made  her  doubly  obnoxious  to
the  sister  of  the  usurper,  who  felt  alike  humiliated  by
either.  Mariamne  was  imperious  in  temper;  she
despised  the  meaner  parentage  both  of  Herod  and
Salome,  and  was  disgusted  with  the  endearments  of
her  husband,  stained  with  the  blood  of  her  murdered
kinsmen.  She  rebuked  him  impetuously  for  his  bar-
barities, repelled  his  caresses  and  denied  him  his
rights  over  her  person,  while  she  maintained  inviolate
against  all  others  the  dignity  of  her  conjugal  virtue.1
Herod  was  apprehensive  of  her  influence  with  the
people,  to  the  detriment  of  his  own  upstart  family,
and  her  resentment  was  inflamed  by  discovering
that  he  had  given  orders  on  leaving  Judea  that  she
should  be  put  to  death  in  the  event  of  his  being  sacri-
ficed by  Octavius.  There  was  little  need  of  artifice
to  effect  the  destruction  of  one  who  laid  herself  open
so  fearlessly  to  the  wrath  of  a  tyrant,  however  he
might  be  besotted  by  his  love.  The  foes  of  Mariamne
pretended  that  she  had  plotted  to  poison
her  husband.  She  was  seized,  examined,  to^aputsto
and  sentence  of  death  formally  passed  upon
her.  The  sentence  may  have  been  intended  only  to
intimidate  her;  but  its  execution  was  urged  by  the
jealous  passions  of  Salome,  and  Herod's  fears  were
worked  upon  till  he  consented  to  let  the  blow  fall.
Her  misery  was  crowned  by  the  craven  reproaches  of
her  mother  Alexandra,  who  sought  to  escape  partaking
in  her  fate  by  basely  cringing  to  the  murderer.  But
she,  the  last  daughter  of  a  noble  race,  endured  witli
constancy  to  the  end,  and  the  favour  of  her  admiring
countrymen  has  not  failed  to  accord  to  her  a  dis-
tinguished place  in  the  long  line  of  Jewish

i  •  rr>i  j j -ii  • j i  • i  i_ n"  remorse.

heroines. I  hey  recorded  with  grim  delight

the  tyrant's  unavailing  remorse,  his  fruitless  yearnings

1  Joseph.  Ant.  xv.  7.  4.
VOL.  III.  C  C

386  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxix.

for  the  victim  he  had  -sacrificed,  the  plaintive  exclama-
tions he  made  to  echo  through  his  palace,  and  the  pas-
sionate upbraidings  with  which  he  assailed  her  judges.
He  strove,  it  was  said,  by  magical  incantations  to  recal
her  spirit  from  the  shades,  and  as  if  to  drive  from  his
mind  the  intolerable  recollection  of  her  loss,  com-
manded his  attendants  always  to  speak  of  her  as  one
alive.1  Whether  or  not  the  pestilence  which  ensued
might  justly  be  regarded  as  a  divine  judgment,  the
harp  diseases  and  deep  settled  melancholy  which  af-
flicted the  murderer  formed  a  signal  and  merited  re-
tribution for  his  crime.

From  the  time  that  Octavius  replaced  the  diadem
nisobwqui-  on  Herod's  brow,  and  assured  him  of  his
luiT'ofRome*!  protection,  the  Idumean  sought  to  deserve
^verament  his  favour  by  solicitous  and  abject  compli-
m  Judea.  ances.  We  shall  have  occasion  to  revert
hereafter  to  the  affairs  of  Judea  during  the  long
period  through  which  he  continued  to  administer
them.  At  present,  in  closing  this  chapter,  it  will  be
sufficient  to  say  that  Herod  became  from  hencefor-
ward the  foremost  vassal  of  the  Roman  state,  his
forces  the  most  numerous,  his  court  the  most  brilliant,
his  obedience  the  most  exemplary.  The  tribute  he
paid  to  Rome  was  an  annual  acknowledgment  of  the
tenure  by  which  be  held  his  power;  but  it  was
neither  meant  to  impoverish  his  own  treasury  nor  to
enrich  that  of  his  sovereigns.  He  continued  to  fill
Judea  with  edifices  in  the  Greek  taste ;  he  adorned
Jerusalem  with  a  spacious  amphitheatre,  instituted
games  and  spectacles  after  the  European  fashion,  and
at  a  later  period  stood  foremost  in  proclaiming  the
divinity  of  his  great  patron,  and  cherishing  the  rites
of  the  Csesarean  cult,  But  at  the  same  time  he
soothed  the  injured  feelings  of  the  native  population
by  the  magnificence  with  which  he  rebuilt  their

1  Joseph.  Ant.  xv.  7.  7.,  Bell.  Jud.  i.  22.  5.

A.U.724-B.r.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  387

temple ;  though  he  continued  to  pursue  his  political
ends  with  the  same  sanguinary  barbarity  as  ever,  he
was  not  regardless  of  the  general  well-being  of  the
people ;  and  notwithstanding  the  manifold  expendi-
ture in  which  he  indulged,  he  graciously  remitted  to
his  subjects  one-third  of  their  contributions.1

1  Joseph.  Ant.  XT.  10.,  Bell.  Jud.  i.  21.

CC  2

388  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CH. XXX.

CHAPTER  XXX.

Octavius  returns  to  Rome,  A.U.  725,  B.C.  29,  and  triumphs. — Festi-
vals and  rejoicings. — Divine  honours  are  paid  to  him. — Peace  re-
stored throughout  the  empire,  and  the  temple  of  Janus  closed. —
Octavius  reflects  on  his  position:  pretended  debate  on  the  question
of  resigning  power. — He  receives,  1.  the  prefix  of  imperator:  2.
the  potestas  censoria,  by  which  he  reforms  the  senate,  and  takes
the  census:  3.  the  principate.  He  offers  to  resign  the  imperium,
but  accepts  it  again  for  four  years :  with,  4.  the  proconsular  power
in  the  provinces:  5.  the  title  of  Augustus:  6.  exemption  from
certain  laws. — His  sickness. — Question  of  the  succession.  He
gives  his  ring  to  Agrippa;  but  recovers.  —  He  accepts,  7.  the
potestas  tribunitia. — Commencement  of  the  monarchy.

WITH  the  slaughter  of  Brutus  and  Cassius,  says  the
Tacitus'sre-  gravest  of  Roman  historians,  in  commen-
pMrtionrf6  cmg  his  review  of  the  imperial  polity,  all
Octavius.  public  grounds  of  civil  contention  ceased ;
with  the  overthrow  of  Sextus  the  Pompeian  faction
was  extinguished ;  and  finally,  on  the  deprivation
of  Lepidus  and  the  death  of  Antonius,  even  the
victorious  party  acknowledged  no  divided  interests,
and  Octavius  maintained  his  place  without  a  rival  at
its  head.  The  survivor  of  so  many  revolutions,  the
last  heir  of  so  many  political  testaments,  dropped  the
irregular  and  odious  title  of  triumvir.  He  vaunted
himself  consul  of  the  republic,  and  pretended  to  wield
the  powers  of  the  tribunate  only  to  protect  the  com-
mons against  a  revival  of  aristocratic  ascendancy.
Thenceforth  he  proceeded  to  attach  to  his  own  person
the  soldiers  by  largesses,  the  people  by  cheapness  of
provisions,  and  the  nation  generally  by  the  charms
of  public  tranquillity  :  step  by  step  he  developed  his
ambitious  views,  he  drew  into  his  own  hands  the
functions  of  the  senate,  the  magistrates,  and  the  laws :
nor  did  he  meet  with  any  opposition  in  this  career,  for

A.L-.724-U.C.30.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  389

the  most  independent  of  the  nobles  had  perished  in  the
wars,  and  the  rest,  advanced  in  wealth  and  honours
according  to  the  promptness  of  their  submission,
learned  to  prefer  the  security  of  the  new  regime  to
the  dangers  of  a  counter-revolution.  Nor  was  the
change  resented  by  the  provinces ;  for  to  them  the  old
rule  of  the  senate  and  people  had  become  odious  from
the  contests  of  the  nobles  and  the  cupidity  of  their
governors,  against  which  the  laws  afforded  them  no
protection,  controlled  as  they  were  by  force,  by  favour,
and  by  corruption.1

Such  is  the  simple  statement  which  I  have  now  to
illustrate  and  confirm.  The  chapters  of  this  work
next  ensuing  will  be  devoted  to  the  task  :  1.  of  tra-
cing the  steps  by  which  the  conqueror  gathered  into
his  hands  the  various  offices  and  functions  of  the
state :  2.  of  divining  the  nature  and  limits  of  the
powers,  from  the  combination  of  which  resulted  the
imperial  despotism  of  the  Caesars:  3.  of  describing
the  administrative  system  imposed  upon  Borne,  Italy,
and  the  provinces.

During  the  absence  from  Eome  of  the  victor  of  Ac-
tium,  which  extended  over  almost  two  com-
plete years  from  the  date  of  that  battle,
the  government  of  Italy  and  the  city  remained  in  the
hands  of  the  faithful  and  politic  Maecenas.  We  have
seen  that  the  authority  of  the  civilian  was  strength-
ened by  the  presence  of  Agrippa,  whose  name  was
equally  popular  with  both  the  army  and  the  people :
but  it  was  from  the  former  probably  that  the  acts  of
the  administration  emanated,  and  according  to  the
testimony  of  history  the  labouring  vessel  of  the  state
was  guided  into  port  by  his  policy.  After  the  first
subsidence  of  the  storm  of  civil  warfare  Italy  was  still
agitated  by  the  ground-swell  of  popular  dissatisfaction.
The  soldiers  still  murmured  at  the  disappointment  of
their  demands,  the  citizens  groaned  under  the  pres-

1  Tacitus,  Ann.  i.  2.

390  HISTORY OF THE EOMANS  CH.  xxx.

sure  of  the  unexampled  exactions  to  which  they  had
been  subjected,  the  ordinary  course  of  monetary  trans-
actions had  been  thrown  into  confusion  by  the  rapid
vicissitudes  of  victory  and  defeat,  and  the  value  of  all
commodities  unsettled  by  pouring  into  the  market  the
hoarded  treasures  of  a  hundred  temples.  Peace  was
the  magic  word  which  alone  the  minister  could  em-
ploy to  soothe  the  waves  of  popular  discontent ;  no
political  measures  would  avail  to  retrieve  at  once  the
manifold  disasters  of  so  many  years  of  civil  conten-
tion ;  but  in  the  prospect  of  future  tranquillity  balm
might  yet  be  found  for  the  sorrows  of  the  past  and
the  anxieties  of  the  present ;  and  the  policy  of  the
statesman  was  directed  to  establishing  the  foundations
of  a  permanent  peace  on  the  fears,  the  hopes,  and  all
the  dearest  interests  of  society.  If  the  state  of  the
public  mind  was  rife  with  elements  of  disorder  for
the  use  of  the  adventurer  and  the  demagogue,  not  less
did  it  supply  the  conservative  statesman  with  the
strongest  weapons  of  defence.  A  son  of  the  dispos-

sessed  triumvir  Lepidus  was  tempted  to  con-
er0f  spire  against  the  government  of  Octavius.

JQS  attempt  was  not  more  prosperous  than
that  of  his  grandfather,  who  aspired  to  overthrow  the
constitution  of  Sulla,  while  it  Avas  yet  warm  from  the
anvil  of  the  dictator's  forge.  Maecenas,  whose  silent
and  unobtrusive  vigilance  none  of  the  intrigues  around
him  could  escape,  detected  the  plot  and  watched  it
unobserved,  till  the  moment  arrived  for  extinguish-
ing it  at  a  single  blow.  The  hapless  conspirator  was
seized  and  sent  in  chains  to  Octavius  in  the  East,
before  it  could  be  known  what  watchword  he  was
about  to  inscribe  upon  his  banner.  The  flatterers  of
the  rising  dynasty  prognosticated  an  awful  conflagra-
tion from  the  civil  conflict  upon  which  he  was  about
to  rush,  and  congratulated  the  commonwealth  on  its
being  so  maturely  subdued.1  But  at  that  moment

1  Veil.  ii.  88.;  Dion,  liv.  15.;  Liv.  Epit.  cxxxiii.

A.C.7-24-B.C.30.  UNI^K THE UMPIRE.  391

there  did  not  exist  resources  for  a  serious  rebellion
against  Octavius.  The  master  of  the  legions  and  the
treasury  could  still  allow  the  father  to  retain  his  life
and  official  dignity,  while  he  inflicted  condign  punish-
ment upon  the  son.

Octavius  passed  the  second  winter  after  the  battle
of  Actium  in  Asia  Minor,  and  it  was  there  octavim
that  he  entered  upon  his  fifth  consulship  at  Rb0*nel.  from
the  opening  of  the  year  725,  in  which  he  ££.<[,£*'
associated  with  himself  a  noble  of  no  other  ."ow^cdupon
historical  distinction  named  Appuleius.1  He  him"
continued  to  linger  on  the  further  side  of  the  ^Egean
through  the  first  half  of  the  year,  in  order  perhaps
that  the  honours  which  the  senate  was  disposed  to
lavish  upon  him  might  seem  to  fall  spontaneously
from  its  hands,  while  he  was  absent  from  the  city  for
the  defence  or  advancement  of  its  highest  interests.
He  received  courier  after  courier  bearing  the  succes-
sive decrees  passed  with  acclamation  in  his  honour.
The  senate  graciously  permitted  the  conqueror  to
wear  on  all  public  occasions  the  triumphal  insignia,
namely,  a  scarlet  mantle  and  a  laurel  crown.  A
quinquennial  festival  was  instituted  in  his  name 2 ;  his
birthday  was  commemorated  with  religious  rites,  and
the  day  on  which  the  news  of  his  victory  reached  the
city  was  marked  as  an  auspicious  epoch  in  the  calen-
dar. The  Vestals,  the  senate  and  the  people  of  Rome
were  enjoined  to  go  forth  in  solemn  procession  to
conduct  him  into  the  city  when  he  should  arrive
before  its  gates.  The  priests  were  ordered  to  add  the
name  of  Octavius  to  the  sacred  formula,  in  their
prayers  for  the  safety  of  the  senate  and  people.  A
decree,  it  is  said,  of  much  more  substantial  importance

1  Dion,  li.  18.  Correct  Suet.  Oct.  26.,  "quintamininsulaSamo:"
he  should  have  said  "  quartam."

-  Dion,  li.  19.;  Suet.  Oct.  59.  These  festivals  were  celebrated  in
the  provinces,  as  well  as  in  the  city.  Herod  instituted  them  at  Jeru-
salem and  Caesarca.  Joseph.  Ant.  xv.  8.,  xvi.  5.

392  HISTORY OF THE HOMASS  CH.  xxx.

was  proposed,  by  which  Octavius  should  be  invested
for  life  with  the  potestas  tribunitia,  the  functions
and  privileges  of  the  tribunate,  with  some  additional
and  extraordinary  powers :  but  this  he  seems  at  this
time  to  have  refused,  being  yet  unprepared  to  take
so  bold  a  step  towards  supreme  dominion.

It  was  resolved  to  raise  the  youthful  hero  at  once
HIS  wpie  to  a  level  with  the  great  warriors  Pompeius
triumph.  an(j  QggSar?  by  assigning  him  the  honours
of  a  triple  triumph.1  The  successes  which  he  had
obtained  over  the  Dalmatians,  in  person  or  by  his
lieutenants,  furnished  the  subject  of  the  first :  the
second  was  accorded  to  the  great  battle  of  Actium,
which  had  broken  the  strength  of  the  Egyptian  ag-
gressor, while  the  last  commemorated  the  final  ex-
tinction of  the  rivalry  of  the  East  and  West  before
the  walls  of  Alexandria.  The  name  of  Antonius  was
not  associated  with  these  discomfitures ;  the  trophies
exhibited  were  carefully  confined  to  the  spoils  of  the
foreigner.  Octavius  triumphed  on  the  seventh  and
following  days  of  the  month  Sextilis,  in  the  year  725.
The  spectacle  of  the  last  day  was  the  richest  and  most
attractive.  The  procession  was  headed  by  the  captive
children  of  the  queen  and  her  Koman  lover ;  and  the
figure  of  Cleopatra  herself  was  introduced  reclining
lifeless  upon  a  couch ;  but  the  magistrates  who  were
wont  to  precede  or  accompany  the  triumphal  car  were
on  this  occasion  directed  to  follow  it,  and  mingled
ignominious]  y  with  the  officers  of  the  victorious  army;

1  The  imperator  triumphed  for  his  personal  successes  over  the
Dalmatians,  Pannonians,  and  Lipydre;  hut  he  claimed  also  to  share
the  merit  of  the  victories  of  his  legate  C.  Carrinas  over  the  Suevi  and
Morini.  Virgil  in  his  picturesque  allusion  to  these  triumphs  associates
with  these  northern  tribes  "the  indomitable  Dallas  and  Araxes  that
spurns  a  bridge."  It  was  only  by  a  poetical  licence  that  the  compli-
ments of  the  rude  chieftains  of  the  Caspian  or  the  Caucasus  could  be
interpreted  into  tokens  of  submission.  Carrinas  was  associated  in
this  triumph  with  his  imperator.  It  was  remarked  that  his  father  had
been  slain  by  Sulla,  and  his  family  proscribed  and  disqualified  from
public  service.  Dion,  li.  21.

A.u.72i-n.c.29.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  393

an  innovation  which  might  be  remarked  as  significant

o  O

of  the  impending  predominance  of  military  power  in
the  state.

As  soon  as  the  imperator  had  sacrificed  to  Jupiter
in  the  Capitol, he  proceeded  to  dedicate  Dedicate
a  temple  to  Minerva, and  to  inaugurate  glmSflSi
in  the  name  of  the  great  Julius  the  basi-  B1>€Ctacle8-
lica  recently  completed,  which his  uncle  had  com-
menced in  the  forum. In  this  building,  which  be-
came the  usual  place  of  meeting  for the  senate,  he
placed a  statue of the  goddess  Victory,  which  is
mentioned  as  still  standing  there  two  centuries  later,
and  was  in  all  probability  the  same  which  was  finally
removed  from  those  august  precincts  by  the  Christian
emperor  Gratianus,  amidst  the  indignant  murmurs  of
the  pagans  of  Kome.1 Octavius  now  dedicated  also
the  shrine  of  the  hero  Julius,  which  had  been  erected
on  the  spot  of  his  cremation.2 This  and  other  tem-

1  This  famous  statue  had  been  brought  at  an  earlier  period  from
Tarcntum  to  Rome. (Dion,  li.  22.)  On  the  death  of  Octavius  it  was
removed  from  its  pedestal  and  carried  before  his  funeral  bier.  (Suet.
Oct.  101.) The  altar  which  stood  in  front  of  it  is  mentioned  by  Hero-
dian,  writing  of  the  reign  of  the  emperor  Gordianus,  Herodian,  vii.  28.
The  struggle  of  the  pagans  to  preserve  it,  as  the  palladium  of  their
ancient  faith,  is  illustrated  in  the  address  of  Symmachus  to  the  em-
peror A.D.  384,  and  the  replies  of  the  bishop  Ambrosias  and  the  poet
Prudentius.

2  Caesar's  body  was  consumed  in  front  of  the  pontifical  mansion,
that  is,  at  the  south-eastern  extremity  of  the  lloinan  forum,  where
it  begins  to  descend  from  the  Velia  and  the  arch  of  Titus. The
temple  faced  the  Capitoline,  and  its  position  must  be  nearly  that  of
the  existing  church  of  S.  Francesca  liomana,  which  is  said  to  occupy
the  site  of  an  older  edifice  dedicated  to  S.  Maria. Both  these  later
structures  may  possibly  have  risen  on  the  foundation  of  the  temple
of  Julius. For  the  position  of  this  temple  compare  Ovid,  Metam.
xv.  841.:—

"  Ut  semper  Capitolia  nostra  forumque
Divus  ab  excelsa  prospecfet  Julius  aede."
And  again,  Ex  Pont.  ii.  2.  85.,

''  Fratribus  assimilis  quos  proxima  templa  tenentes

Divus  ab  excelsa  Julius  aide  videt."

The  "  loftiness  "  of  this  temple  refers  both  to  its  commanding  posi-
tion, and  also  to  the  substruction  (/ffwprJy,  Dion,  li.  19.)  on  which  the
columns  were  raised.

394  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

pies  he  decorated  with  the  spoils  of  Egypt.  He
entered  from  this  period  on  the  restoration  of  the
decayed  or  ruined  fanes  of  the  national  divinities  in
the  city ;  he  encouraged  his  courtiers  to  imitate  his
example  in  the  same  politic  course J ;  and  it  was  only
a  few  years  later  that  the  favourite  poet  of  the  court
could  speak  of  three  hundred  shrines  consecrated  by
his  patron  to  the  gods  of  Italy.2  A  succession  of
splendid  spectacles  followed.  A  troop  of  patrician
children  rehearsed  the  Game  of  .Troy,  an  equestrian
exercise  remembered  in  the  eighth  century  of  the
city  by  antiquarians  only.  A  senator  named  Vinte-
lius  fought  publicly  as  a  gladiator.  The  rhinoceros
and  hippopotamus,  then  first  seen  at  Eome,  were
slaughtered  in  the  amphitheatre.  Bands  of  Dacians
and  Sueves,  captured  on  the  Gaulish  or  Thracian
frontier,  the  former  at  least  a  name  yet  hardly  known
to  the  conquerors  of  the  civilized  world,  were  com-
pelled to  combat  and  destroy  each  other  in  the  arena.
On  one  day  in  the  course  of  these  festivities,  the
senators,  it  is  recorded,  supped  each  apart  in  the
vestibule  of  his  own  mansion :  but  the  motive  of
this  stately  observance  was  forgotten  in  the  time  of
Dion.

Octavius  now  addressed  to  his  soldiers  an  harangue,
Effect  ofthe  in  which  he  lavished  encomiums  on  his  most
templet  in  the  illustrious  officers,  and  proceeded  to  gratify
upon  Tile8  them  with  suitable  rewards.  Upon  Agrippa,

circulation  of ,  . , ,. .  • i j i  11 i •

money.  whom  he  justly  distinguished  above  ail  his
comrades,  he  conferred  the  decoration  of  a  cerulean

1  Suet.  Oct.  29. :  "  Sed  et  cseteros  principes  viros  ssepe  hortatus  est,
ut  pro  facultate  quisque  monumentis  vel  novis  vcl  rcfoctis  et  excultis
urbem  adornaret;  multaque  a  multis  exstrncta  sunt."  He  continues,
"  A  M.  Agrippa  vero  compliira  et  egregia." Comp.  Veil.  ii.  89.;
Scree,  de  Benef.  iii.  32.

2  Virgil,  ^En.  viii.  in  fin.,  "Dis  Italis." Octavius  himself  re-
cords the  building  or  restoration  of  ninety-five  temples  in  all  (Man.
Ancyr.  iv. ;  Comp. Dion,  liii.  2.);  but  the  three  hundred  shrines
referred  to  are  probably  the  jcdiculaj,  or  chapels,  of  the  Lares  in
each  vicus.

A.U.T25-B.C.29.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  395

banner,  in  token  of  his  naval  victory.  One  thousand
sesterces  were  assigned  to  each  of  the  veterans  of
his  numerous  legions 1 ;  four  hundred  were  allotted
to  every  private  citizen,  and  in  this  general  largess
children  were  for  the  first  time  included.  Profuse
in  his  liberality  to  his  dependants,  he  was  moderate
in  his  demands  upon  his  subjects.  He  declined  the
coronary  gold  proffered  to  him  by  the  Italian  states,
and  while  he  scrupulously  discharged  the  debts  and
pledges  he  had  incurred,  he  refrained  from  demand-
ing the  dues  to  which  he  was  himself  entitled.  The
conqueror  of  Egypt  could  afford  to  be  generous.
The  lavish  expenditure  of  Cleopatra  had  not  sufficed
to  exhaust  the  hoarded  treasures  of  her  ancestors  :  but
the  masses  of  gold  and  silver  bullion  which  the  victor
had  torn  from  the  palaces  and  temples  of  Alexandria
must  have  far  exceeded  the  coined  money  in  value.
When  he  poured  into  the  Eoman  market  this  un-
counted wealth,  estates  and  commodities  were  doubled
in  nominal  value,  and  the  interest  of  money  at  the
same  time  sank  two  thirds.2  A  similar  disturbance
in  the  money  market  had  been  observed  during  the
dictatorship  of  Julius  Coesar.  The  Eoman  economists,
led  away  by  the  splendour  of  the  great  captain's
military  successes,  had  attributed  this  effect  to  the
treasure  which  he  was  supposed  to  have  introduced
into  the  city  from  G-aul.  There  is  no  reason,  how-
ever, to  suppose  that  the  wealth  of  the  barbarians  had
sufficed  for  much  more  than  paying  the  expenses  of
their  conqueror's  campaigns.  He  enriched  his  fol-

1  They  amounted  to  120,000. Vide  Monum.  Ancyr.  iii.  17.

8  Suet.  Octav.  41 .:  "  Inveeta  urbi  regia  gaza  tantam  rd  nmnmariie
copiam  fecit  ut  foenore  diminuto  plurimum  agrorum  pretiis  acces-
scrit."  Dion,  li.  21.:  <*XTT«  ra  [iff  Kr-f}/j.tvra  (Tnri/j.riOrji'at,  ret  Sf  Suvei-
(r/uaro,  cfyaTTTjTiij  65rl  Spa^M??  Trp6rtpoi>  ovra,  Tore  tiri  TO?  rpirqiAopicp
OUT?)*  ytvfffOcu.  Oros.  vi.  19.:  "Roma  in  tantum  opibus  nucta
est,  ut  proptcr  abundnntiam  pecuniarum,  duplicia  quam  usque
ad  id  fuerant  possessionum  aliurumque  rcrum  venalium  pretia
statuerentur."

396  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

lowers  with  the  spoils  of  war,  but  he  did  not  return
himself  full-handed  to  Italy.  As  soon  as  he  became
master  of  Eome  he  found  himself  compelled  to  rifle
the  treasury  of  the  temple  of  Saturn  to  obtain  the
necessary  resources  for  maintaining  his  legions.  We
are  informed,  incredible  as  it  may  appear,  that  at  the
commencement  of  the  Social  wars  the  public  treasury
contained  hoards  to  the  amount  of  seventy  millions
of  our  money1,  and  if  we  could  suppose  that  the
masses  of  the  precious  metals  which  Metellus,  Lucul-
lus,  and  Pompeius  paraded  in  their  triumphs  were
faithfully  deposited  and  as  faithfully  preserved  there,
we  might  presume  that  this  sum  had  been  more  than
doubled  when  Caesar  laid  his  impious  hands  upon  it.2
There  is  no  collateral  evidence,  however,  that  the
conqueror  of  Eome  became  thus  suddenly  possessed
of  enormous  wealth.  The  armies  which  he  main-
tained were  comparatively  small  in  number ;  the  cost
of  his  public  works  had  already  been  for  the  most
part  defrayed  :  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  it  probable
that  the  government  he  overthrew  had  abstained  from
dipping  into  the  public  coffers,  to  defray  the  vast
civil  and  military  expenses  which  it  had  incurred
since  the  time  of  Sulla.  In  fact,  the  temple  of  Sa-
turn was  only  one  of  many  sacred  treasuries  which
were  plundered  'in  the  campaigns  of  the  period.
Crassus  and  Pompeius  had  rifled  the  hoards  of  Jeru-
salem, Csesar  himself  had  plundered  Gades,  Scipio

1  Pliny,  H .  N.  xxxiii.  17. He  mentions  the  gold  only,  which
amounted  to  1,620,829  Ibs. The  Roman  pound  of  gold  =  40  aurei,
or  about  42  of  our  sovereigns.

2  Lucan,  iii.  155. Orosius  (vi.  15.)  states  the  amount  of  gold
seized  by  Csesar  at  4,135,000 Ibs.^about  170,000,000/. Pliny  gives
the  amount  in  ingots:  "  C.  Csesar  primo  introitu  urbis  in  civili  bello
suo  ex  aerario  protulit  laterum  aureorum  xxv.n.  argenteorum  xxxv.,
et  in  numerate  quadringenties  centena  milliu  sestertium. Nee  fuit
aliis  temporibus  respublica locupletior  "  (Plin.  I.e.).  I  have  intimated
however  in  the  text  that  I  do  not  believe  anything  like  this  amount
of  treasure  was  found  in  the  temple  of  Saturn. Comp.  Dureau  de
la  Malle,  Econ.  Polit.  des  Romains,  i.  91.

A.U.725-B.C.29.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  397

had  lived  for  two  years  at  free  quarters  in  Asia  Minor.
After  the  death  of  the  dictator,  Brutus  and  Cassius
had  spoiled  all  the  Eastern  provinces  in  succession ;
Octavius,  and  more  particularly  Antonius,  had  gleaned
the  remains  of  this  harvest,  which  had  fed  the  twenty
legions  of  their  rivals.  The  plunder  of  Alexandria
was  only  the  crowning  spoliation  of  a  series  of  rob-
beries extending  through  many  years,  and  perpetrated
in  turn  by  the  hands  of  every  Roman  imperator.
The  temples  of  the  ancient  world  were  the  banks  in
which  private  possessors  deposited  their  most  precious
effects.  Vast  quantities  of  plate  and  jewellery  were
probably  amassed  in  them ;  and  the  necessities  of
war  must  frequently  have  required  these  to  be  melted
down  and  coined  into  money  according  to  their  intrin-
sic value  for  the  daily  pay  of  clamorous  legionaries.
It  was  not  the  spoils  of  Graul  then,  nor  the  plunder
of  the  national  treasury,  that  enhanced  so  enormously
the  circulation  of  gold  and  silver  at  this  period,  but
the  systematic  distribution  of  the  hoarded  wealth  of
the  East  and  West.  The  effect  thus  produced  upon
prices,  we  may  easily  conceive,  fell  short  in  no  degree
of  that  which  is  recorded  of  it.  It  would  doubtless
have  been  much  greater,  but  for  the  practice,  which
in  such  disturbed  times  must  have  been  extremely
common,  of  concealing  money  and  valuables.  The
existence  of  such  a  practice  undoubtedly  requires  no
proof,  but  it  is  illustrated  by  an  interesting  discovery
of  buried  coins  near  Fiesole,  the  Roman  Fa?sulae,  the
dates  of  which  extend  to  the  consulship  of  Cicero,
and  no  later.  At  the  close  of  that  year,  it  will  be
remembered,  Catilina  was  scouring  the  hills  of  Etruria,
and  many  a  Roman  colonist  or  Etruscan  freebooter
may  have  thrust  his  pot  of  money  underground,
there  to  await  the  event  of  the  impending  revo-
lution.

During  the  imperator's  fourth  consulate, in  the
year  preceding  his  return  from  the  East,  Statilius

398  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

Taurus  had  erected,  after  the  example  of  Pompeius,

a theatre of  stone  in  the  Field  of  Mars.

honours  paid The  people  of  Rome  might  now  deem  their

to  Octayius.  °_ ,

amusements  a  part  ot  the  permanent
charge  of  the  government.  They  expressed  their
gratitude  by  allowing  their  benefactor  to  nominate
one  of  the  praetors  annually,  a  privilege,  indeed,
which  it  was  no  longer  theirs  to  confer,  nor  his  to
exercise.  But  the  Eoman  citizens  observed  with-
out alarm  the  shadows  of  tyranny  beginning  to
close  around  them.  The  enhancement  of  prices,
which  they  might  have  felt  more  sensibly,  hardly
touched  a  populace  whose  subsistence  and  diver-
sions were  provided  by  the  state.  A  vast  proportion
of  the  higher  classes  had  been  enlisted  in  the  legions,
and  these  were  for  the  most  part  seduced  into  ac-
quiescence by  the  wages  of  their  military  service.
Those  who  remained  to  suffer  by  the  economical
results  of  the  revolution,  became  the  more  depen-
dent upon  the  favour  of  their  ruler,  and  scrambled
the  more  eagerly  for  the  emoluments  of  civil  em-
ployment, which  he  distributed  with  politic  liber-
ality. All  eyes  were  turned  in  admiring  expectation
upon  the  fountain  from  whence  these  golden  rivers
flowed.  Octavius  became  the  idol  of  the  glowing
imaginations  which  anticipated  a  reign  of  universal
riches  attendant  upon  universal  peace.  The  Romans
heard  without  dismay  that  their  patron  and  pre-
server had  permitted  the  people  of  Ephesus  and
Nicaea  to  erect  temples  in  honour  of  the  associated
deities  of  Rome  and  Julius,  and  even  that  he  had
enjoined  Roman  citizens  abroad  to  pay  them  divine
honours.1  They  noticed  with  complacency  that  he
had  restricted  the  worship  of  himself  alone  to  Greeks
and  Asiatics  :  but  the  extravagance  of  flattery  soon
subdued  all  remaining  scruples.  Philosophy  and

1  It  was  not  unusual  to  erect  temples  even  to  the  proconsuls  in  the
provinces. Suet.  Oct.  52.

A.C.725-B.C.29.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  399

morality  were  impotent  to  resist ;  and  the  pride
of  equality,  the  last  barrier  of  reason,  gave  way
before  the  acknowledged  supremacy  of  a  living
mortal.  Among  the  Komans  themselves  the  ado-
ration of  the  Caesar  was  veiled  perhaps  at  first  in
the  recesses  of  private  dwellings ;  but  the  remark
of  Dion,  that  no  personage  of  consideration  ever
worshipped  a  living  emperor  in  Eome  or  Italy,
can  hardly  be  maintained  in  the  face  of  the  com-
pliments which  were  paid  to  their  patron  by  Virgil
and  Horace,  not  to  mention  the  grosser  adulation
of  later  times.1

The  second  of  the  civil  wars  which  was  consum-
mated by  the  triumph  of  Octavius,  had  lasted  through
a  period  of  twenty  years,  dating  from  the  passage  of
the  Kubicon  in  the  year  of  the  city  705.  With
the  reconciliation  of  internal  dissensions  all  foreign
quarrels  were  buried  in  oblivion,  universal  peace  was
restored,  the  fury  of  arms  was  lulled  to  sleep  in  every
quarter,  the  laws  recovered  their  force,  the  tribunals
their  authority,  the  Senate  its  majesty,  the  powers  of
the  magistrates  returned  to  their  ancient  limits.2
Such  was  the  glowing  language  of  the  panegyrists  of
the  Caesarean  house;  but  they  echoed  faithfully  the
solemn  accents  of  the  national  decrees.  The  cry  of
the  whole  nation  was  for  peace,  and  the  government
took  advantage  of  the  general  enthusiasm  to  inaugurate
the  cessation  of  hostilities  by  an  impressive  religious
ceremony.  The  temple  of  Janus,  on  the  border  of
the  Koman  Forum,  stood  constantly  with

j  rrn  • •  £ 4/U '  Closing  uf  the

open  doors. Ihe  origin  ot  this  usage  was  Tempieof

lost  in  remote  antiquity ;  but  at  the  close  of

the  first  Punic  war  there  existed  a  tradition,  that

1  Dion.  li.  20. ;  Virg.  Georg.  iii.  16.;  Hor.  Ep.  ii.  1.  15.  Comp.
Ovid,  ex  Pont.  iv.  9.  105.

-  Veil.  ii.  89. :  "  Finita  vicesimo  anno  bella  civilia,  sepulta  cxterna,
revocata  pax,  sopitus  ubique  armorum  furor,  restituta  vis  legibus,
judiciis  auctoritas,  senatui  majcstas,  imperium  magistratuiun  ad  pris-
tinum  redactum  modum."

400  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXX.

Jamis  had  never  been  shut  except  in  time  of  peace ;
and  it  was  confidently  affirmed  that  no  such  blissful  era
had  dawned  upon  the  martial  city  since  the  tranquil
reign  of  its  lawgiver  Numa.  In  the  year  725  of  the
city  the  senate  decreed  that  this  temple  should  be
closed  for  the  third  time  by  Octavius.1  In  its  zeal  to
assign  a  distinction,  which  was  now  regarded  as  a
merit,  to  the  victorious  imperator,  it  refused  to  re-
cognise the  existence  of  the  petty  disturbances  of
Spain  or  on  the  Gallic  frontier,  where  his  lieutenant?
were  still  engaged  in  obscure  and  desultory  warfare.
Octavius  enumerated  the  closing  of  the  gates  of
Janus  among  his  most  honourable,  as  it  was  un-
doubtedly one  of  his  most  popular  achievements  ;  and
so  much  was  he  pleased  with  the  favour  it  obtained
from  the  citizens,  that  he  performed  the  same  cere-
mony again  on  two  subsequent  occasions.2

When  the  excitement  attendant  upon  these  spec-
TheKomans  tacles  and  ceremonies  had  subsided,  both
m"i[sterere-  the  Eoman  people  and  the  new  master  they
theiruppo°skion  had  admitted  within  their  walls  had  leisure
other.'  to  meditate  upon  the  future.  Octavius  felt

that  the  pretexts  upon  which  he  had  taken  the  com-
mand of  the  legions  were  fully  satisfied.  He  had
avenged  the  murder  of  the  Marian  champion  ;  all  the
conspirators  against  Caesar  had  perished  by  the  sword.
He  had  defended  the  state  from  foreign  invasion,  and
trodden  on  the  prostrate  neck  of  the  enemy.  Some
humble  advances  on  the  part  of  the  Parthians  might
be  accepted  as  an  instalment,  at  least,  of  the  repara-
tion due  for  the  disaster  of  Carrhaa.  The  closing  of
the  temple  of  Janus  indicated  that  the  state  reposed

1  Liv.  i.  19.;  Veil.  ii.  38.  89,  90.;  Flor.  iv.  12.;  Suet.  Oct.  22.

2  Monuin.  Ancyr.  ii.  42.:  "  Qimmque  a  condita  urbe  Janum  Qui-
rinum  bis  oinuino  clausum  fuissc  prodatur,  eum scnatus  per  me
Prindpem tcr  claudendum  cssc  decrevit." It  has  been  doubted
whether  the  word  ter  be  not  a  mistake  or  an  abbreviation  for  tertio.
But  J)ion  alludes  to  the  two  subsequent  occasions,  A.U.  729  and  744.
Dion,  liii.  26.,  liv.  36. Comp.  Oros.  vi.  22.

A.U.7125-B.C.29.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  401

peacefully  under  the  laurels  its  champion  had  gained
for  it,  and  required  no  longer  the  protection  of  his
sword.  Hitherto  he  had  acted  with  the  studied  mo-
deration of  a  republican  patriot.  Though  conse-
crated by  the  example  of  his  illustrious  uncle  ready
to  his  hand,  he  had  abstained  from  demanding  the
title  of  dictator  ;  he  had  laid  down  the  extraordinary
office  of  triumvir  at  the  moment  when  its  appointed
object  seemed  to  be  attained.  Thenceforth  he  had
remained  content  with  the  consulship,  the  cornerstone
of  freedom  and  law.  Armed  with  the  powers  of  this
popular  office,  which,  while  jealously  limited  within
the  city,  conferred  in  the  provinces  and  on  the
frontiers  almost  boundless  authority,  Octavius  had
disposed  the  affairs  of  the  empire  beyond  the  seas  at
his  own  discretion,  and  surrounded  himself  with  an
enormous  military  force.  The  senate,  in  the  exercise
of  its  legitimate  functions,  confirmed  all  the  acts  of
his  foreign  and  domestic  policy :  every  step  he  had
taken  had  been  carefully  adapted  to  acknowledged
precedent,  and  admitted  an  apology  from  constitu-
tional usage.  Meanwhile,  the  adulation  of  his  grate-
ful countrymen  .threatened  to  transgress  in  every
direction  the  strict  form  to  which  he  so  studiously
confined  himself.  He  feared  to  be  hurried  over  the
boundaries  of  law  by  the  pressure  of  popular  accla-
mation. The  concentration  in  his  hand  of  all  the
powers  of  the  sword,  which,  by  their  dispersion  among
several  rivals,  had  hitherto  preserved  the  balance  of
the  state,  seemed  to  point  to  the  dictatorship  as  the
natural  summit  of  his  ambition.  But  he  was  deeply
impressed  by  the  fate  of  his  great  predecessor,  to
whom  he  confessed  his  own  inferiority  in  fame,  in
favour,  and  perhaps  in  genius.  In  the  height  of  his
power  and  popularity  Julius  had  perished,  because
the  personal  envy  of  his  associates  could  be  cloaked
under  the  guise  of  resistance  to  tyranny.  The  con-
spiracy against  him  had  been  headed  by  his  dearest

VOL.  III.  D  D

402  HISTORY OF THE BOMANS  CH.  xxx.

and  most  trusted  friend ;  and  Octavius,  secure  in  the
devotion  of  the  national  will,  might  tremble  at  the
specious  pretences  of  the  private  assassin.  He  had
resolved  deliberately  from  the  first  to  win  supremacy
and  to  keep  it;  he  would  not  now  thwart  the  settled
purpose  of  his  life  by  surrendering  the  preeminence
he  had  attained,  and  throwing  the  prize  into  the
forum  for  his  rivals  to  scramble  for.  The  people  of
Rome  were  at  the  moment  determined  to  have  a
chief  ruler,  whom  they  regarded  as  a  pledge  of  pub-
lic tranquillity ;  and  the  succession  of  Julius  would
undoubtedly  have  devolved  by  popular  acclamation
upon  a  Lepidus,  or  an  Agrippa,  if  its  hereditary  claim-
ant renounced  his  pretensions.  Indeed,  in  the  second
recast  of  the  imperial  drama,  Agrippa  might  seem  to
play  the  part  of  Brutus  to  the  Caesar  of  Octavius.
The  trusty  friend  and  officer  of  the  imperator  might
still  wear  a  poniard  under  his  robe,  to  be  drawn  in
any  moment  of  dissatisfaction  or  jealousy.  Caesar,  it
was  surmised,  had  judged  Brutus  worthy  to  inherit
from  himself;  and  the  reputation  of  Agrippa  as  a
soldier  and  a  statesman,  together  with  the  regard  in
which  he  was  held  by  the  citizens  and  the  legionaries,
might  point  him  out  to  the  people  as  fittest  to  succeed
or  supplant  Octavius.  Indeed,  it  was  only  in  birth
and  family  connexions  that  his  chief  was  superior  to
him.  These  accidental  merits  might  be  thrown  into
the  shade  by  a  strong  personal  claim  to  popular  ad-
miration ;  by  pretending  to  a  more  genuine  republi-
can spirit  and  disparaging  the  dubious  merit  of  de-
scent from  the  dictator,  the  lieutenant  might  take,  in
general  regard,  the  place  of  the  imperator  himself.

Accordingly,  among  the  various  motives  which
might  combine  to  induce  Octavius  to  veil  his  su-
premacy under  the  forms  of  the  republic,  not  the
least  cogent,  we  may  imagine,  was  the  position
of  his  friend.  The  common  tradition  of  antiquity,
that  Agrippa  was  at  heart  a  republican,  is  founded

A.U.725-B.C.29.  UNDER THi: EMPIRE.  403

probably  on  a  consciousness  of  the  demands  of  his
political  situation.  It  was  currently  re-  Pretended
ported  that  Octavius  after  his  return  to  « e«n  o^-
Kome  deliberated  seriously  whether  or  not  hu^rf!*™,
he  should  resign  his  preeminence ;  and  shouiderrc8iegn
tradition,  faithful  to  its  conception  of  the  pow«.pm
character  of  the  soldier-statesman,  represented  him  as
earnestly  exhorting  his  chief  to  sacrifice  his  personal
ambition  at  the  shrine  of  the  general  weal.  The
rhetorical  taste  of  the  historian  Dion  eagerly  seized
the  opportunity  for  an  ingenious  array  of  arguments
suitable  to  the  occasion.  He  introduces  a  supposed
debate  in  the  private  recesses  of  the  palace,  in
which  Agrippa  and  Maecenas  respectively  counsel
their  master,  the  one  to  relinquish  the  monarchy,  the
other  to  retain  it.1  Modern  criticism  has  justly  con-
cluded that  these  elaborate  harangues  are  pure  inven-
tions of  the  writer.  That  attributed  to  Agrippa  is  in
substance  ill-conceived,  for  it  confines  the  supposed
patriot's  argument  mainly  to  the  question  of  personal
ease  and  security,  and  recommends  resignation  simply
as  a  measure  of  precaution.  But  the  speech  ascribed
to  Maecenas  is  a  composition  of  a  higher  order ;  and
though  it  is  written  on  the  misconception  that  the
rule  of  Octavius  was  a  definite  monarchical  system,
approaching  to  that  of  Commodus,  it  is  not  the  less
valuable  as  an  authentic  development  of  the  imperial
constitution  in  the  second  or  third  century.  Indeed
the  writer  is  himself  partly  conscious  that  the  organi-
zation of  the  commonwealth,  suggested,  as  he  pre-
tends, by  Maecenas,  was  not  fully  carried  out  under
the  principate  of  his  patron.  After  giving  in  minute
details  the  various  regulations  under  which  the  pri-
vate council  of  the  emperor,  the  senate,  the  knights,
the  magistrates,  the  army  and  the  provinces,  were
ultimately  constituted,  he  adds,  that  Octavius,  while
he  fully  approved  his  friend's  advice,  deferred  from

1  Dion,  lii.  1 — 40.
D  D 2

404  HISTOEY OF THE KOMANS  CH.XXX.

motives  of  policy  its  complete  execution,  and  left
indeed  many  of  his  recommendations  to  be  effected
by  his  successors  in  the  supreme  power.

We  shall  hardly  believe  that  the  undisputed  master
octaviusre-  °f  the  republic  at  the  age  of  thirty-three
pr^x  of im-  seriously  debated  within  himself  whether
he  should  descend  from  the  elevation  to
which  he  had  dared  to  aspire  at  nineteen.  That  he
may  have  allowed  such  a  notion  to  get  abroad  may
not  be  improbable ;  but  his  private  counsels  with
Agrippa  and  Maecenas,  who -knew  him  too  well  to  be
deceived  by  any  specious  pretensions  to  republican
virtue,  were  undoubtedly  devoted  to  rearing  the
edifice  of  legitimate  power  on  the  basis  of  military
force.  The  army  which  followed  the  triumphal  car
through  the  streets  of  Home  was  not  disbanded  when
the  procession  had  reached  its  goal.  The  imperator
still  kept  his  place  at  the  head  of  the  legions,  and
retained  the  imperiuin  or  military  authority  which  it
was  usual  to  surrender  into  the  hands  of  the  senate.
But  CaBsar  had  been  permitted  to  wield  the  imperium
permanently,  in  token  of  which  the  title  of  imperator
was  prefixed  to  his  name.  The  precedent  once  estab-
lished, it  was  easy  to  resort  to  it  again,  and  the  senate
readily  sanctioned  the  adoption  of  this  peculiar  dis-
tinction by  Cassar's  successor,  who  had  in  strictness
an  hereditary  claim  to  it.1  Thus  the  permanent
command-in-chief  of  all  the  military  forces  of  the
state  was  conferred  upon  Octavius  before  the  close  of
the  3'ear  725.  Almost  at  the  same  time  he  was  in-
vested with  functions  of  another  nature,  namely,  the
powers,  without  the  title,  of  the  censorship.2  The
new  master  of  the  Koman  people  was  anxious  to

1  According  to  the  tenor  of  the  decree,  by  which,  if  we  may  be-
lieve Dion,  the  "  pranomen  Imperatoris "  was  conferred  not  only
upon  Ctcsar,  but  upon  his  children  and  his  posterity. Dion,  xliii.
44.,  lii.  41.

2  Suet.  Oct.  27. Dion  speaks  of  him  as  actually  censor  (lii.  42.),
but  this  is  not  to  be  pressed  strictly.

A.U.725-B.C.29.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  405

restore  the  mutilated  and  degraded  senate  of  Julius
and  Antonius  to  a  portion  at  least  of  its  ancient
estimation.  The  numbers  of  this  once  august  body
of  nobles,  limited  in  the  later  ages  of  the  republic  to
six  hundred,  had  been  increased  by  the  dictator  to
nine  hundred,  and  still  further  indefinitely  aug-
mented by  Antonius.  Decimated  by  the  sword  of
the  proscriptions,  its  vacancies  had  probably  been
again  supplied  by  many  unauthorized  intruders ;
for  it  is  stated  that  its  numbers  at  the  restoration
of  peace  were  found  to  exceed  a  thousand.1  In
dignity,  in  fortune,  perhaps  in  age,  the  qualifica-
tions of  a  large  proportion  fell  below  the  standard
required  by  law.  Foreigners,  common  soldiers,  and
freedmen,  had  been  enrolled  in  it  almost  indiscri-
minately, even  slaves,  freed  for  the  occasion,  had
been  advanced  to  it,  and  the  proscription  had  spared
precisely  those  members  who  conferred  upon  it  least
respectability.  The  policy  of  the  new  ruler  demanded
that  the  acts  of  his  government  should  be  adminis-
tered through  the  hands  of  this  body  :  the  senate
under  the  Caesarean  regime  was  to  impersonate  the
state ;  and  the  great  mass  of  the  Roman  people,  re-
strained from  the  actual  functions  and  honours  of
government,  was  to  see  itself  reflected  in  this  ancient
and  venerable  order.  It  was  necessary  therefore  to
impart  to  it  dignity  corresponding  to  this  exalted
destination.  To  accomplish  this  end  it  was  requisite
that  the  body  should  be  thoroughly  renovated.  It
had  been  the  function  of  the  censors,  under  the  re-
public, to  choose  new  members  periodically  to  re-
place vacancies  in  the  senate,  and  examine  the
circumstances  and  character  of  the  existing  members,
with  a  view  to  the  expulsion  of  the  unworthy.  A
notable  instance  of  its  exercise  occurred  in  the  year
704,  in  the  censorship  of  Appius  Claudius.  But  the

1  Dion,  /.  f.

406  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

grave  responsibility  of  an  office,  worthy  of  the  purest
days  of  the  republic,  had  been  prostituted  in  the
corruption  of  the  age  to  mere  personal  or  party
views.  The  Komans  were  little  disposed  to  entrust
an  office  so  delicate  and  invidious  to  the  minister  of
a  political  faction.  They  offered  it  to  Octavius,  as
the  man  who  alone  could  execute  it  without  fear  or
He  accepts  the  partiality.  He  accepted  it  in  substance,
ce°iTsoreh0ip, '  while,  on  considerations  apparently  of  tech-
the  ^nate  of  nical  form,  he  declined  the  title  appertain-
members.  ing  to  it.1  He  associated  Agrippa  in  the
office  with  himself;  and  herein  we  may  suspect  a
sinister  motive  ;  for  its  vigorous  exercise  was  sure  to
create  disgust  and  disaffection  among  many  person-
ages not  destitute  of  weight  and  influence,  and  it  was
a  crafty  stroke  of  policy  to  commit  a  possible  rival  to
hostility  with  them.  Octavius  made  Agrippa  his  in-
strument for  eliminating  the  most  staunch  repub-
licans from  the  assembly,  through  which  he  proposed
to  rule  with  absolute  sovereignty.  But  he  proceeded
cautiously,  and  with  great  show  of  moderation.  In
the  first  instance  he  allowed  such  among  the  senators
as  were  conscious  of  their  want  of  desert,  or  of  their
compromised  position,  to  withdraw  spontaneously
from  the  assembly.  When,  in  his  place  in  the  curia,
he  called  upon  the  members  to  consider  their  own
lives  and  birth,  and  judge  for  themselves  whether
they  were  fit  for  the  illustrious  college,  fifty  of  the
number  at  once  understood  the  hint,  and  quitted  the
place  of  assembly  to  return  no  more.  But  the  wielder
of  the  censorship  was  not  yet  satisfied.  Upon  further
examination  he  struck  off  as  many  as  one  hundred
and  forty  more  names  from  the  list,  and  those  only
who  had  withdrawn  of  their  own  accord  did  he  permit
to  retain  through  life  the  insignia  of  the  order.  The
ejected  members  indeed  resented  with  loud  murmurs

1  Suet.  Oct.  27. The  censorship  was  held  to  be  incompatible  with
the  consulship.

A.U.725-B.C.29.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  407

the  severe  measure  which  was  dealt  to  them.  Oc-
tavius  pretended  to  require  the  defence  of  an  escort
of  his  most  faithful  followers,  and  even  wore  a  corselet
under  his  toga  in  the  assembly.1  Upon  the  termi-
nation of  the  inquiry  he  issued  an  edict  forbidding
all  persons  of  senatorial  rank  to  quit  Italy  without
his  express  permission ;  he  feared  the  disaffection
which  might  be  excited  by  his  discontented  nobles  in
the  provinces.2  Over  all  whose  ill-will  he  had  cause
to  apprehend  he  kept  constant  watch,  and  while  he
publicly  asserted  that  he  had  committed  the  corre-
spondence of  Antonius  to  the  flames,  it  was  well
known  that  he  preserved  for  the  most  part  and  dili-
gently studied  it.

The  censorial  power  thus  added  to  the  other  func-
tions of  the  imperator  and  consul  might
cause  Octavius  to  be  regarded  as  the  foun-  MO»ftM>
tain  of  honours  and  advancement.  The
new  and  perhaps  even  the  older  senators  could
not  fail  to  regard  him  as  the  author  of  their
dignity:  at  the  same  time  he  undertook  to  supply
the  vacancies  which  twenty  years  of  slaughter
had  made  in  the  ranks  of  the  patricians.  The
civil  wars  had  drained  the  life-blood  of  the  oldest
and  noblest  families  of  Eome.  The  various  reli-
gious rites  which  were  attached  to  these  venerable
houses  became  extinguished  with  them.  It  was  ne-
cessary to  repair  the  loss  and  redeem  the  scandal.
Octavius  obtained  a  law,  passed  in  the  regular  form,
to  enable  him  to  call  up  many  plebeian  families  into
the  patrician  gentes.3  While  he  thus  affected  to
restore  the  hereditary  distinctions  of  the  state  to
their  ancient  splendour,  he  was  in  fact  making

1  Suet.  Oct.  35. :  "  Cordns  Cremutius  scribct  ne  admissum  quidem
tune  qucmquam  scnatorum  nisi  solum  el  praetentato  sinu."

2  Dion,  /.  c. This  regulation  continued  long  in  force. Sicily  and
the  Xarboncnsis  were  alone  excepted  from  it ;  the  latter  at  a  later
period. Tac.  Ann.  xii.  23.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  25.

408  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

such  honours  more  cheap  and  promiscuous,  and
thereby,  as  he  clearly  saw,  widening  the  gulf  which
already  lay  between  the  master  of  the  Komans  and
his  dependent  nobility.  The  eyes  of  the  citizens
were  averted  from  an  order  which  had  lost  the
charm  of  ancestral  dignity,  and  fixed  with  more
admiring  gaze  on  the  hand  which  could  depress
the  lofty  or  exalt  the  lowly  at  its  will.

In  the  year  726  Octavius  claimed  a  sixth  con-
octavma takes  sulship,  in  which  he  associated  himself  with
theeRomaa  Agrippa.  His  conduct  was  truly  civil  as
people.  fae  Eomans  expressed  it ;  such,  that  is,  as

befitted  a  good  and  loyal  citizen.  He  shared  the  en-
signs of  office  with  his  colleague,  after  the  simple
fashion  of  the  genuine  republic,  assuming  the  fasces
himself  only  each  alternate  month.1  At  the  expira-
tion of  his  term  he  modestly  gave  account  of  the  dis-
charge of  his  duties,  and  declared  upon  oath  that  he
had  not  transgressed  the  just  limits  of  his  functions.
,  He  continued  to  exercise  the  power  of  the  censorship ;
and  this  year  he  numbered  the  Koman  people,  an  act
of  authority  which  the  government  had  omitted  to
perform  for  a  period  of  forty-two  years.2  The  result
of  this  inquiry  gave  the  number  of  four  million  and
sixty-three  thousand  citizens  of  the  military  age,  that
is,  from  seventeen  to  sixty  years,  which  represents  a
total  of  more  than  seventeen  millions  of  both  sexes.3

1  Dion  (liii.  1.)  says  that  the  consuls  shared  the  fasces  equally
throughout  the  year. Hoeck  corrects  this  statement  on  the  authority
of  ancient  usage.

2  Monum.  Ancyr.  ii.  1.

3  See  Clinton's  calculations,  Fast.  Hell.  iii.  461. This  enumeration
comprehends  the  citizens  dispersed  throughout  the  provinces. The
census  in  the  year  684  had  given  four  hundred  and  fifty  thousand
citizens  of  military  age. The  franchise  at  this  period  had  been
already  extended  to  the  Italians,  and  this  number  is  manifestly  in-
adequate to  represent  the  whole  free  population  of  the  peninsula.
But  the  admission  of  the  Italians  made  but  a  trifling  addition  to  the
numbers  of  the  census. The  enumeration  of  the  lustrum  was  con-
fined perhaps  under  the  republic  to  the  citizens  who  could  present
themselves  before  the  censors  in  the  city. Under  the  empire  it  was

A.U.726-B.C.2S.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  409

This  was  an  enormous  advance  upon  the  numbers
which  had  been  published  on  the  last  similar  occasion.
The  citizens,  it  may  be  presumed,  did  not  estimate
with  precision  the  different  bases  on  which  preceding
calculations  had  been  made,  and  they  were  doubtless
filled  with  admiration  when  they  heard  it  announced
officially  that  the  Roman  people  had  increased  eight-
fold through  forty-two  years  of  dissension  and  blood-
shed. Some  part  of  the  glory  of  this  result  might
seem  to  redound  upon  the  fortunate  hero  of  the
nation  who  had  taken  the  census.  The  Romans
were  now  eager  to  confer  new  honours  upon  their
favourite.  It  was  the  function  of  the  censors,  on  the
completion  of  their  solemn  duty,  to  select  from  the
number  of  those  who  had  previously  served  the  same
office,  one  whose  acknowledged  merits  and  distinc-
tions might  point  him  out  as  fittest  to  lead  the
assembled  fathers  by  his  vote  and  counsel.  Since
the  death  of  the  illustrious  Catulus  there  had  been
no  first  man,  or  prince,  as  he  was  termed,  of  the
senate.  Agrippa  now  exercised  his  censorial  Andi8ap.
power  in  naming  his  colleague  to  that  dis-  JS!»«rC?»f
tinguished  place,  which,  while  it  conferred  the8eiiate-
no  direct  authority  upon  him,  could  not  fail  by  its  in-
direct influence  to  smooth  his  path  to  the  princedom
of  the  people.1

Meanwhile  the  usurper  exerted  himself  to  keep
pace  in  acts  of  popular  munificence  with

f,  ,  i • 1  J  Liberality  and

the  honours  which  were  showered  upon  magnanimity
him.  In  his  sixth  consulship  he  cele-
brated at  Rome  the  Actian  festival  in  commemora-
tion of  his  great  victory,  and  exhibited  games  and
shows  to  the  people,  intoxicated  with  the  repeated
draught  of  insidious  flattery.  The  public  treasury,

executed  throughout  Italy  and  the  provinces  by  the  help of  local
machinery.

1  J)ion,  liii.  1. The  full  significance  and  influence  of  this  title  will
be  explained  in  the  next  chapter.

410  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

so  lately  filled  to  overflowing  with  the  spoils  of  the
East,  was  already  exhausted ;  but  Octavius  defrayed
the  cost  at  his  own  private  expense.  With  similar
liberality  he  this  year  increased  fourfold  the  cus-
tomary largess  of  corn.1  While  he  thus  courted  the
favour  of  the  mass  of  the  citizens  his  generosity  was
not  less  diligently  displayed  in  giving  aid  to  poor
members  of  the  senate,  and  to  men  of  families  whose
circumstances  would  not  allow  them  to  undertake
the  costly  magistracies  of  the  state.  He  remitted
at  the  same  time  with  certain  exceptions  all  arrears
of  public  dues,  and  burnt  the  documents  relating  to
them.2  To  the  state  he  made  compensation  for  this
sacrifice  from  his  own  funds.  There  was  no  less
generosity,  of  another  kind,  in  rescinding  many  en-
actments of  the  triumvirate,  which  bore  with  harsh-
ness and  injustice  upon  particular  citizens.  A  single
magnanimous  edict  swept  away  all  that  remained
of  the  iniquitous  legislation  of  that  reign  of  terror.
At  the  same  time,  the  example  and  earnest  exhorta-
tions of  the  imperator  induced  many  of  the  prin-
cipal nobles  to  undertake  the  execution  of  splendid
works  for  the  decoration  of  the  city.  Agrippa  and
Pollio,  Statilius  and  Philippus,  Plancus  and  Balbus,
vied  with  each  other  in  paying  court  to  their  patron
by  this  well-timed  munificence,  which  the  public
Heconse-  could  no  longer  claim  from  them.  Octa-
vius consecrated  the  famous  temple  of
the  Palatine.  Apollo  on  the  Palatine  hill 3 ;  which,  be-
sides its  dazzling  columns  of  Parian  marble4,  was
renowned  for  the  library  which  he  there  collected

1  Dion,  liii.  2.  -  Dion,  I.e.;  Suet.  Oct.  32.

3  This  temple  was  built  on  a  part  of  the  site  of  the  founder's  private
mansion:  a  portion  of  this  dwelling  had  been  consumed  by  lightning,
and  the  augurs  declared  that  the  god  demanded  the  spot  for  his  own.
Suet.  Oct.  29.

4  Virg.  JEn.  viii.  in  fin.,  with  studied  reiteration ;

"  Ipse  sedens  niveo  candentis  limine  Phrebi."

A.U.727-B.C.27.  TXDER THE EMPIRE.  411

for  the  use  of  the  citizens.  Nothing  could  exceed
the  outward  signs  of  prosperity  which  attended  the
foundation  of  the  new  constitution  of  Rome.  Amidst
the  acclamations  of  the  people,  the  gratitude  of  the
nobles,  and  the  zealous  services  of  his  associates
and  ministers,  Octavius  might  tread  the  ground
firmly  and  feel  his  footing  sure.  He  effected  a
closer  union  between  himself  and  his  colleague  by
giving  him  his  sister's  daughter  Marcella  in  mar-
riage.1 It  was  a  measure  of  precaution,  perhaps,
not  less  than  a  mark  of  favour.

As  Octavius  felt  himself  more  secure  of  his  coun-
trymen's regard, he ventured to affect

M. r  .-n L  • 1.  1 • J mi. Octayius  offers

magnanimity  of  a  still  higher  kind. The  to  resign  the

•  iT.J 1.  ?  J  I.- imperium.

impenum  had  been  conferred  upon  mm
without  any  limitation  in  point  of  time:  the  citi-
zens in  their  enthusiasm  had  invested  their  cham-
pion with  powers  only  second  to  those  of  a  dictator,
without  even  the  ordinary  guarantees  for  their
speedy  cessation.  The  politic  usurper  was  appre-
hensive of  the  jealousy  which  would  succeed  to
this  boundless  confidence  when  the  first  ardour  of
their  affection  should  cool.  He  had  caused  him-
self to  be  appointed  consul  for  the  seventh  time
for  the  year  727 :  but  on  the  first  of  January  he
offered  in  a  solemn  address  to  the  senate  to  resign
the  imperatorial  functions  into  the  hands  of  his  in-
dulgent patrons.  Such  then  was  the  result  of  the
private  deliberations  of  which  the  city  had  already
been  apprised.  Octa,vius  was  prepared,  forsooth,
to  restore  the  independence  of  the  commonwealth.
The  imperial  rule  was  an  ensign  of  war:  but  the
imperator  had  shut  the  temple  of  Janus.  Every
public  enemy  had  fallen  before  him;  every  citizen
had  been  preserved ;  every  province  secured ;  every
ally  satisfied.  The  champion  of  the  state  had

1  Marcella,  daughter  of  Octavia  by  her  first  husband  C.  Marcellus,
consul  A.U.  704. Plut.  Anton.  87. ;  Dion,  liii.  1.;  Suet.  Oct.  63.

412  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  xxx.

fought  for  the  interests  of  Eome,  nor  had  he  ever
proposed  to  advance  his  own  dignity  beyond  the
legitimate  bounds  of  constitutional  precedent.  If
the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  times  had  sur-
rounded his  person  with  extraordinary  distinctions,
if  all  the  legions  of  Caesar  and  Pompeius,  of  Brutus
and  Antonius,  had  arrayed  themselves  under  the
banner  of  the  last  survivor  of  the  civil  wars,  he  at
least  could  not  forget  the  duties  of  a  citizen,  nor
would  he  shrink  from  the  sacrifice  which  patriotism
demanded.  Duty,  he  continued,  commanded  him
to  resign  his  military  supremacy ;  his  personal  safety
counselled  the  same  course;  the  toils  and  troubles
he  had  undergone  had  exhausted  the  vigour  of  his
youth,  and  his  failing  health  reminded  him  that
a  power  which  might  be  wielded  for  a  moment  in
the  excitement  of  a  political  crisis,  was  a  burden  ex-
ceeding, under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  strength
of  man.  In  replacing  his  trust  in  the  hands  of
the  commonwealth,  he  depended  upon  her  wisdom
and  firmness,  under  the  sanctions  of  the  law,  for
the  preservation  of  public  order  at  home  and  do-
minion abroad,  which  by  divine  favour  his  victorious
arms  had  obtained  for  her.  Such  was  probably  the
tone  of  the  wily  politician's  address.  The  garb  in
which  the  historian  Dion  has  invested  it,  is  evi-
dently borrowed  from  the  ideas  of  a  much  later
age,  and  we  are  not  to  imagine  that  Octavius  pro-
posed in  direct  terms  to  surrender  a  throne  and  a
sceptre,  and  exchange  an  acknowledged  despotism
for  popular  independence  and  legal  equality.1

The  historian  just  referred  to  has  analysed  with
much  ingenuity  the  feelings  with  which  the  Eomans

1  Dion.liii.  3 — 12.  Comp.  Suet.  Oct.  28. :  "De  reddenda  reptiblica
bis  cogitavit:  primopost  oppressurn  statim  Antonium  . .  .  .  ac  rursus
taedio  valetudinis."  Seneca,  de  Brev.  Vitce,  c.  5. :  "  IX  Augustus  cui  dii
plura  quam  ulli  praestiterunt,  non  tlesiit  quictem  sibi  precari,  vaca-
tionem  a  republ.  pctere.  Omnis  ejus  sermo  ad  hoc  semper  revolutus
est,  ut  sibi  pararet  otiutn."

/.r.727-n.c.27.  UNDKIl THE EMPIRE.  413

beheld  this  unexpected  manoeuvre.  Doubtless  many
of  them,  and  those  in  truth  the  wisest  and  Theiioman«
most  far-sighted,  shuddered  at  the  prospect  wSUhSXg
which  it  pretended  to  open.  They  foresaw  it-
that  the  descent  of  their  champion  from  his  actual
preeminence  would  only  reopen  the  question  of  a
century  of  civil  war,  what  man  or  what  party  should
bear  rule  in  Rome.  Whether  the  heir  of  the  dictator
had  really  usurped  the  powers  which  he  wielded,  whe-
ther he  had  seized  them  by  force  or  extorted  them  by
flattery,  or  whether  in  fact  they  had  been  thrust  upon
him,  restitution  was  no  longer  possible.  It  was  not
in  the  power  of  the  imperator  himself  to  restore
the  commonwealth  to  the  position  she  occupied  only
fifteen  years  before,  when  the  trumpets  were  sounding
under  the  Avails  of  Mutina,  still  less  to  roll  time  and
circumstance  seven  years  further  back,  when  Caesar's
Gallic  coursers  stemmed  the  waters  of  the  Rubicon.
The  double  process  of  exhaustion  and  infusion  had
drained  the  senate  of  its  best  blood,  and  replenished
it  with  weaker  and  impurer  life.  It  had  forfeited  all
claim  to  guide  the  counsels  of  the  people  ;  and  the
people  itself  had  undergone  a  similar  transmutation,
and,  while  it  had  learned  to  disdain  the  prescriptive
authority  of  its  patrician  chieftains,  had  acquired  no
independent  principles  of  political  action.  The  Roman
nation  at  the  close  of  the  Julian  revolution,  without
organic  life  or  spontaneous  motion,  lay  supine  and
plastic  in  the  hands  of  the  most  powerful.  The  work
of  destruction  was  fully  accomplished  ;  exhausted  of
the  ideas  and  spirit  of  the  past,  the  antiquated  forms
of  the  republic  were  incapable  of  any  reconstructive
effort.  Some  at  least  of  Octavius's  hearers  may  have
been  conscious  of  all  this  :  others  again,  less  far-sighted
as  politicians,  may  have  looked  not  less  deeply  into
the  recesses  of  the  human  heart,  and  refused  to  believe
in  his  sincerity.  Nor  were  there  wanting,  perhaps,
others  who  checked  the  acclamations  which  rose  to

414  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

their  lips,  through  fear  of  deterring  him  from  his
purpose  by  the  readiness  of  their  acceptance.  Mean-
while the  agents  who  were  acquainted,  or  believed
themselves  acquainted,  with  his  real  wishes,  played
upon  the  hopes,  the  fears,  and  the  admiration  _  of  the
multitude,  and  failed  not  to  guide  the  popular  senti-
ment into  the  channel  to  which  he  tacitly  pointed.
The  senators  with  one  voice  entreated  their  magnani-
mous patron  to  retain  the  powers  they  had  entrusted
to  him  for  their  benefit.  Either  part  was  discreetly
played  ;  the  illusion  on  each  side  duly  felt  or  feigned ;
and  when  the  chief  actor  came  forward  to  acknow-
ledge the  plaudits  of  his  audience  and  submit  himself
to  the  expressed  wishes  of  the  people,  the  curtain  had
already  fallen  upon  the  last  scene  of  the  revolutionary
drama.

The  imperium  or  chief  military  command  was  thus
iic  is  prevailed  thrust  back  upon  Octavius ;  but  he  could

on  to  resume  , ,  M j  , •. r

it  for  a  term  only  be  prevailed  on  to  accept  it  for  a  spe-
wituVoconro-  cified  period  of  ten  years.  Neither  in  ex-
daivide?thean  tent  nor  duration  did  this  command  imply
of  the  pro-  a  monarchical  autocracy ;  nor  was  it  so
the  senate.  understood  either  by  the  nation  or  its
chosen  chief.  What  Octavius  acquired  by  this  pre-
tended resignation  was  in  fact  simply  a  legal  con-
firmation of  his  military  authority  in  Eome  and  the
provinces.  But  while  he  limited  it  in  duration  to
a  prescribed  period,  he  also  restricted  it  in  extent
to  a  certain  portion  of  the  national  dominions.  He
selected  from  the  list  of  the  entire  provinces  such
as  from  their  position  or  character  seemed  most  to
require  the  vigour  of  military  control.  These  he
reserved  for  his  own  government ;  the  rest  he
handed  over  to  the  senators,  to  be  ruled  by  officers
in  their  sole  appointment.  This  division  seemed  to
surrender  to  the  senate  the  riches  of  the  wealthiest
portions  of  the  empire,  as  well  as  those  most  easily
governed ;  while  the  imperator  assigned  to  himself

A.U.727-B.C.27.  I'NItKK THE EMPIRE.  415

the  harder  and  less  grateful  task  of  defending  the
least  secure  and  bridling  the  most  unruly.  In
resuming  the  government  of  these  provinces  for
ten  years  he  caused  it  to  be  understood  that  he
hoped  in  that  interval  more  effectually  to  protect
or  more  thoroughly  to  subjugate  them,  and  that  he
would  be  ready  on  its  expiration  to  resign  them
once  more  and  for  ever.  We  shall  see  that  the
time  for  such  resignation  never  actually  arrived ;
the  term  of  military  command  was  periodically  re-
newed throughout  the  life  of  its  first  holder ;  and
even  his  successors,  long  after  the  perpetuity  of
their  supreme  authority  was  virtually  guaranteed
to  them,  still  continued  to  preserve  a  memorial  of
its  first  establishment  in  the  quinquennial  or  de-
cennial festivals  with  which  they  repeatedly  inau-
gurated it.1  But  the  nascent  jemperor,  if  Octavius
may  now  be  so  designated,  obtained  at  least  one
conspicuous  ensign  of  royalty  in  the  formal  institu-
tion of  a  guard  of  ten  cohorts  for  his  personal  ser-
vice, which  was  still  more  closely  attached  to  him
by  double  the  legionaries'  pay.2

The  master  and his  subjects  continued  to  rival
each other in demonstrations  of  mutual  octariusM-
confidence  and  self-sacrifice. But  the  fa-  JiHeo/ll-
vours  of  the  one  were  specious  and  illu-  pu*U8>
sory, while those of  the other, even when they
seemed  to  refer  only  to  names  and  titles,  were,  in
fact,  substantial  realities. Octavius  had  warily  de-
clined any  of  the  recognised designations  of  sove-
reign rule. Antonius  had  abolished  the  dictatorship ;
his  successor  respected  the  acclamations  with  which
the people had greeted  this  decree. The  voices
which  had  saluted  Caesar  with  the  title  of  king  were
peremptorily  commanded  to  be  dumb. Yet  Octa-
vius  was  fully  aware  of  the  influence  which  attached

1  Dion,  liii.  16.  *  Dion,  liii.  12.

416  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXX.

to  distinctive  titles  of  honour.  While  he  scrupu-
lously renounced  the  names  upon  which  the  breath
of  human  jealousy  had  blown,  he  conceived  the
subtler  policy  of  creating  another  for  himself,
which,  borrowing  its  original  splendour  from  his
own  character  should  reflect  upon  him  an  untar-
nished lustre.  Some  of  the  counsellors  to  whom
his  secret  wishes  were  communicated  suggested  to
him  the  name  of  Quirinus  or  of  Eomulus.  To
assume  the  title  of  the  divine  author  of  the  Eoman
race  was  too  bold  a  step  for  the  wariest  of  states-
men :  but  it  is  said  that  Octavius  would  gladly  have
accepted  the  designation  of  the  founder  of  the  city.
But  he  remembered  that  the  son  of  Ehea  had  been
the  first  of  a  line  of  kings ;  and  such  an  association
of  ideas  might  prove  fatal  to  his  policy.  To  the
epithet  Augustus,  which  was  next  proposed,  no
such  objection  could  attach.  The  name  was  in-
tact ;  it  had  never  been  borne  by  any  man  before,
and  Octavius  required  the  influence  of  no  other
man's  name  to  recommend  his  own.  But  the
adjunct,  though  never  given  to  a  man,  had  been
applied  to  things  most  noble,  most  venerable,  and
most  divine.  The  rites  of  the  gods  were  called
august,  the  temples  were  august;  the  word  itself
was  derived  from  the  holy  auguries  by  which  the
divine  will  was  revealed;  it  was  connected  with
the  favour  and  authw*ity  of  Jove  himself.  And
courtly  poets  could  play  still  further  upon  it,  in
strains  which  our  language  cannot  faithfully  re-
echo, and  pray  for  the  Eoman  commander,  that  he
might  increase  in  years  and  increase  in  power.1
This  illustrious  title  was  bestowed  upon  the  heir

'  Dion,  liii.  16. ;  Suet.  Oct.  7.;  Floras,  iv.  12.;  Ovid,  Fast.  i.  609.:

"  Sancta  vocitnt  Augusta  Patrcs:  augusta  vocantur

Templa  sacerdotum  rite  dicata  manu:
IIujus  et  augurium  dependet  origine  verbi,

Et  quodcunque  sua  Jupiter  auget  ope.
Augcat  imperium  nostri  duels,  augeat  annos."

A.C.727-B.C.27.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  417

of  the  Caesarean  empire  in  the  middle  of  the  month
of  January,  727,  and  thenceforth  it  is  by  the  name
of  Augustus  that  he  is  recognised  in  Roman  his-
tory. The  exact  day  is  given  with  some  vari-
ation by  the  ancient  authorities.  The  scientific
chronologer  Censorinus  fixes  it  to  the  seventeenth,
while  Ovid,  the  poetical  ritualist,  assigns  it  to  the
thirteenth.  Strange  to  say,  an  existing  calendar
discovers  to  us  the  sixteenth  as  the  actual  date ;
while  Orosius,  the  Christian  historian,  anxious  no
doubt  to  find  or  make  a  synchrony  between  an
epoch  so  important  in  the  world's  history  and  one
of  the  most  signal  events  recorded  in  his  own  creed,
claims  it  for  the  sixth,  on  which  the  church  cele-
brated the  festival  of  the  Epiphany.1  It  seems  that
the  Augustan  years,  by  which  the  later  Romans
sometimes  calculated,  were  made  for  convenience
sake  to  commence  with  the  first  day  of  the  month ;
and  thus  the  more  correct  epoch  from  which  many
historians  dated  the  origin  of  the  empire,  being  of
no  practical  importance,  was  left  to  conjecture  or
fancy.

Not  yet,  however,  did  the  princeps-imperator
grasp  the  whole  sphere  of  the  functions  of  Augu,tu.
the  destined  monarchy  of  Rome.  More  2ndUTtauimthe
than  one  stride  remained  to  be  taken  be-  province«-
fore  he  could  reach  the  summit  of  his  ambitious
designs,  and  place  himself  at  the  head  of  every
order  and  interest  in  the  state.  In  the  mean  time
he  gave  way  to  no  indiscreet  haste.  He  allowed
his  new  powers  time  to  consolidate  themselves,  and
become  familiar  to  the  people,  before  he  sought
still  further  to  extend  them.  There  was  a  vast
system  of  administration  to  be  organized ;  from
the  city  itself  to  the  furthest  provinces  there  was

1  Censorin.  de  Die  Natal.  21.  ;  Ovid,  Fait.  i.  587.  ;  Kalendar.
Pracnestin.  in  Fast.  Verrian. (Orelli,  Inscr.  ii.  382.) Oros.  vi.  20.:
"  Octavo  Idas  Januarias  quo  nos  Epiphania  observarnus."
VOL.  III.  E E

418  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

no  department  of  the  government  which  did  not
require  reform  and  reconstruction.  Augustus  com-
mitted the  capital  once  more  to  the  superintending
vigilance  of  Agrippa  and  Maecenas,  while  he  under-
took to  visit  in  person  the  frontiers  of  the  empire,
and  chastise  the  last  disturbers  of  his  universal
peace.  The  exploits  of  his  proconsular  command
in  the  provinces  shall  be  recorded  in  another  place ;
we  are  now  hastening  to  complete  the  annals  of
his  ascent  to  supremacy  at  home.  It  is  enough  at
the  present  moment  to  say,  that  in  the  year  727
he  threatened  in  the  first  instance  a  descent  upon
Britain,  but  the  affairs  of  Graul,  and  afterwards  of
Spain,  detained  him  from  so  distant  and  barren  an
enterprise.1  At  the  same  time  his  legatus,  Teren-
tius  Varro,  was  engaged  in  warfare  with  the  moun-
taineers of  the  Graian  Alps,  and  while  Vinicius
and  Crassus  avenged  the  majesty  of  the  republic
on  the  Grermans  and  Dacians,  Augustus  remained
in  Spain,  confined  for  the  most  part  at  Tarraco
with  sickness,  through  the  two  following  years,  in
which,  however,  though  absent  from  the  city,  he
assumed  an  eighth  and  ninth  consulship.  Early  in
730  he  returned,  crowned  with  laurels,  his  own  or
his  officers 2,  to  Rome,  and  signalized  the  restora-
tion of  the  peace  of  the  empire  by  closing  a  second
time  the  temple  of  Janus.2

Even  before  he  entered  the  walls  his  subservient
Augustus  on  senate  had  hastened  to  confirm  with  a  so-
uome'refeira  lemn  sanction  the  acts  of  his  proconsulate.
f^ou'rs  from  Augustus  straightway  reciprocated  the
thepeopie.  compliment  by  refusing  to  discharge  a  pro-
mised largess  to  the  people  until  he  had  obtained
the  consent  of  that  illustrious  order.  Once  more  the

1  This  is  the proposed  invasion  to  which  Horace  refers,  Od.  i.
35.  29. :

"  Serves  iturum  Csesarem  in  ultimos
Orbis  Britannos."

2  Dion,  liii.  26.;  Oros.  vi.  21.

A.U.730-B.C.24.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  419

senate  responded  by  releasing  its  gracious  master
from  the  provisions  of  the  Cincian  law1,  an  HeU  rele(ued
immunity  which,  as  will  be  shown  here-  ch!d!ih<ie" '**"
after,  has  been  extravagantly  supposed  to  muneribn»-"
extend  to  the  whole  circle  of  the  laws.  A  similar
exemption  from  a  particular  enactment  Hig  relatiTeg
was  granted  at  the  same  time  to  Marcellus  "onTthT^iex
the  son  of  Octavia,  and  Tiberius  the  off-  <")nillu-"
spring  of  Livia  by  her  first  husband  Tiberius  Claudius
Nero.  The  former  of  these  youths,  so  nearly  con-
nected with  Augustus,  had  attained  his  nineteenth
year.  He  was  released  from  the  restrictions  of  the
lex  annalis,  and  allowed  to  sue  for  the  consulship
ten  years  before  the  legal  period,  while  by  a  similar
dispensation  Tiberius,  at  this  time  eighteen  years  of
age,  was  permitted  to  hold  the  great  offices  of  the
state  five  years  earlier  than  the  law  allowed.  At
the  same  time  the  career  of  honours  was  opened
to  each ;  the  one  was  designated  for  the  sedileship,  the
other  for  the  quaestorship.2  The  splendour  of  the
imperium  and  the  principate,  thus  reflected  upon
the  nearest  connexions  of  the  chief  of  the  common-
wealth, served  to  lead  men's  minds  gradually  to
the  notion  of  hereditary  succession ;  and  another
advance  was  made  on  the  path  which  rose  insensibly
towards  monarchy.

This  question  of  the  succession  must  at  this  time
have  forced  itself  upon  men's  minds  with  peculiar
urgency.  The  long  and  dangerous  sickness  under

1  Dion.  liii.  23. Comp.  Noodt,  Diss.  de  Jure  summi  Imperii,  ifc.
in  Opp.  i.  629.,  ed.  Barbeyrac,  1735. The  difficulty  respecting  the
lex  Cincia (A.  u.  550)  which is supposed  to  have  restricted  the
amount  of  gifts  of  property,  arises  from  the  enormous  sums  men-
tioned as  gifts,  especially  by  Pliny  the  younger,  without  any  hint  of
such  restriction. Savigny  in  his  essay  on  the  subject  in  the  Zeit-
schriftfiir  Gesch.Rechtswissenschaft,\v.  1.,  has  discovered  a  plausible
solution  :  but  his  additional  remarks,  Vermischte  Schriften,  i.  384.,
have  thrown  the  whole  question  open  again.  The  original  limitation
of  the  law  may  have  become  disregarded.

2  Dion,  /.  c.

E  E  2

420  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

which  Augustus  had  recently  suffered  in  Spain,  fol-
His  dangerous  lowing  several  other  attacks  of  hardly  less
Qirotfoa  of  violence  in  earlier  years,  could  not  fail  to
thesucce98ion.  on  ^  ftomans  with  the  anticipation  that
his  life  would  not  be  long  protracted.  The  pros-
pect of  a  vacancy  in  the  place  he  occupied  among
them  inspired  them,  with  unfeigned  alarm.  It  was
impossible  not  to  forecast  the  troubles  and  perils
into  which  the  vessel  of  the  state  must  drive
when  the  pilot  of  the  revolutionary  storm  should
be  lost  to  her.  The  appointment  of  a  legitimate
successor  to  the  supreme  power  which  he  so  ably
wielded  might  seem  the  safest  precaution  for  the
expected  crisis.  But  Augustus  himself  had  en-
couraged no  such  arrangement.  Caesar  had  per-
mitted the  senate  to  decree  that  his  imperatorial
title  should  descend  to  the  adopted  heir  of  his
fortunes;  but  Augustus  had  carefully  abstained
from  claiming  his  uncle's  title  in  virtue  of  his
descent.  While  he  asserted  his  right  to  the  private
property  of  the  testator,  and  took  upon  himself  the
domestic  obligations  it  involved,  he  had  founded
all  his  claims  to  preeminence  on  his  services  to
the  state  and  the  favour  of  the  people.  During
his  absence  in  Spain  Agrippa  had  wielded

Conspicuous  , ,  ,  . i .  . t  -,i -, •

position  of  a  delegated  authority  at  home  with  his  ac-
customed zeal  and  discretion.  Much  firm-
ness and  delicacy  was  no  doubt  required  to  control
the  fears  and  hopes  which  must  have  been  excited
in  various  quarters  by  the  report  of  the  imperator's
sickness.  Nor  could  Agrippa  himself  have  con-
templated the  contingency  of  his  death  unmoved
by  conflicting  passions.  He  must  have  felt  that
the  price  of  succession  lay  near  enough  to  tempt
him  to  sue  for  it.  The  exalted  position  in  which
he  was  placed  at  Eome,  must  have  offered  oppor-
tunities no  less  than  temptations.  The  enthusi-
asm of  the  Romans  was  easily  kindled  by  the  splen-

A.U.730-B.C.24.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  421

dour  of  public  works  and  the  munificence  of  their
authors. It  was  during  the  breathless  sus-

,. .,  ?  , m  ThePantheon.

pense  of  the  protracted  sojourn  at  larraco
that  the  walls  of  the  glorious  Pantheon  were  rising  in
the  Field  of  Mars.  While  the  consulars  and  nobles
vied  with  each  other  in  repairing  or  erecting  the
shrines  of  particular  divinities,  Agrippa  undertook
to  raise  a  single  magnificent  temple  to  the  tutelary
deities  of  the  Julian  house.  This  building  still
stands  almost  unchanged  from  its  original  form
and  arrangement.  The  most  conspicuous  place  in
the  interior,  fronting  the  entrance,  is  supposed  to
have  been  occupied  by  the  image  of  Jupiter  the
Avenger,  who  had  chastised  the  murderers  of  Caesar ;
the  principal  niches  on  either  side  may  have  been
filled  with  statues  of  Mars,  Venus,  and  Eomulus,
of  JEneas,  Julus  and  Julius  himself.  It  is  possible
that  other  gods  and  heroes  may  have  stood  in
the  spaces  between  them ;  but  the  name  of  Pan-
theon, or  divine  consistory,  by  which  the  building
was  known  to  posterity,  is  undoubtedly  a  misno-
mer, derived  probably  from  its  circular  walls,  its
unusual  height,  and  the  ample  dome  which  sur-
mounted it.  Such  a  form  of  construction  was  little
in  unison  with  the  spirit  of  temple  architecture ;
but  it  might  remind  the  admiring  worshipper,
when  his  eye,  whichever  way  it  turned,  encountered
the  image  of  a  new  divinity,  of  the  palace  of  the
Olympian  deities  suspended  in  the  sky.1  It  is  said
that  the  courtly  founder  had  reserved  one  niche

1  Sec  Fransden's  Agrippa,  p.  165.  foil.  The  passages  of  the  ancient
writers  respecting  the  destination  of  the  Pantheon  are  Pliny,  H.  N.
xxxvi.  15.;  Dion.  liii.  27.;  Macrob.  Sat.  ii.  13.;  Capitol.  Anton.  8.;
Serv.  ad  JEn.  ix.  408.  The  inscription  on  the  portico  declares  that
it  was  erected  in  Agrippa's  third  consulship,  A.  u.  727;  bnt  Dion
expressly  says  that  it  was  finished  in  729.  The  great  feature  of  the
Pantheon  is  the  dome.  It  exceeds  in  span  any  of  its  modern  rivals.
The  diameter  of  that  of  St.  Paul's  is  stated  to  be  112  feet,  of
S.  Sophia  115,  of  S.  Peter's  and  the  Duomo  of  Florence  139,  and  of
the  Pantheon  142.

422  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxx.

for  the  figure  of  Augustus  himself;  but  when  this
extravagant  compliment  was  declined,  he  placed  it
on  one  side  of  the  door  of  entrance,  and  erected
his  own  statue  as  its  companion  on  the  other.
This  apparent  assumption  of  equality  may  have
had  some  significance  in  the  mind  of  the  favoured
minister.  Augustus  himself  was  not  unconscious,
and  even  affected  to  approve  of  it.  It  can  hardly
have  failed  to  suggest  to  the  citizens  the  idea,  that
if  the  master  were  lost,  the  minister  was  at  hand
to  supply  his  place.  Agrippa  possessed  many  quali-
fications for  wielding  the  ensigns  of  command;  he
was  conscious  that  he  possessed  them,  and  he  let
the  people  understand  that  he  was  so.

If  the  imperator's  return  in  safety  to  Eome  dissi-
Augustus  in  pated  any  schemes  of  ambition  thus  gather-
gtofhilTring  ing  in  the  bosom  of  his  friend,  the  recur-
to  Agrippa.  rence  of  sickness  still  more  virulent  and
more  alarming  than  before,  may  have  speedily  revived
them.  In  the  year  731,  when  Augustus  had  entered
upon  his  eleventh  consulship  in  conjunction  with
Calpurnius  Piso,  he  was  stretched  upon  a  couch  from
which  all  hope  seemed  to  have  fled.1  He  had  sum-
moned to  his  chamber  all  the  great  notables  of  the
commonwealth.  It  was  supposed  that  they  were
called  to  receive  his  last  instructions,  and  the  recom-
mendation of  Marcellus  as  successor  to  his  public
functions.  But  they  were  mistaken.  He  pretended
to  resign  his  trust  at  the  last  moment  into  the  hands
from  which  he  had  received  it,  and  die  in  the  austere
discharge  of  an  act  of  duty.  After  conferring  with
them  for  a  space  upon  state  affairs,  he  handed  to  his
colleague  Piso  a  schedule  of  the  forces  and  resources
of  the  republic 2,  and  at  the  same  time  delivered  his
seal-ring  to  Agrippa.  Not  a  word  did  he  utter.  The
bystanders  interpreted  the  action  to  signify  that  he

1  Dion,  liii.  30.

2  This  is  called  by  Suetonius  (Octav.  28.)  "Rationariuinlmperii."

A.U.731-B.C.23.  U]SDER THE EMPIRE.  423

restored  all  the  powers  of  the  state  to  the  civil  autho-
rities ;  but  at  the  same  time  commended  his  minister
to  their  choice,  should  they  determine  to  confide  them
again  to  any  single  hand.

But  the  crisis  was  fortunately  averted. Augustus
recovered. His  first  care  was  to  afford  his

,  .  ...  ,, , , Augustus  re-

subiects  a  more  positive  assurance  that  he  covers.  He

• ft,  . , ,  •  c  •  declines  the

had  had  no  intention  ot  naming  a  successor.  con.uuhip,

TT  , ,  , .  , and  accepts

He proposed to  open his  testament  and  the  -potestas

r  tribnnitia,"

show  that  he  made  no  such  appointment.  A.U.  731,
But  the  fathers  were  shocked  at  his  sup-
posing they  could  require  any  fuller  assurance  of  his
magnanimous  patriotism.  They  would  not  allow  him
to  communicate  to  them  the  contents  of  the  will.
He  responded  to  their  confidence  with  further  acts  of
generosity.  He  now  resigned  the  consulship  which
he  had  borne  for  so  many  years  consecutively,  and
even  appointed  in  his  place  a  conspicuous  opponent  of
his  policy,  by  name  L.*Sestius,  who  cherished  the
principles  of  his  friend  M.  Brutus,  to  whose  effigy  he
assigned  a  conspicuous  place  in  his  mansion.  Augus-
tus affected  to  admire  such  faithful  attachment  even
in  an  enemy,  and  sought  to  convince  the  world  that
his  government  was  administered  by  the  noblest  and
best  of  whatever  shade  of  political  opinion.  In  re-
turn for  this  specious  liberality  his  countrymen  pro-
ceeded finally  to  invest  him  with  the  last  element  of
power  the  state  had  yet  to  give.  They  conferred
on  him  for  life  the  potestas  tribunitia,  or  privileges
and  functions  of  the  tribunate  ! ;  not  the  tribunate
itself,  for  that  could  not  be  legitimately  held  by  a
patrician.2  The  character  of  this  extraordinary  dig-
nity will  be  explained  in  another  place ;  it  will  suffice
at  present  to  say  that  it  placed  its  possessor  at  once

1  Dion,  liii.  32. This  writer  had  already  stated  that  the  trihuni-
tian  power  was  conferred  upon  Augustus  for  life  in  the  year  724.
(Comp.  li.  19.) This  we  may  presume  was  an  error,  as  neither  he  nor
any  other  writer  affirms  that  Augustus  resigned  and  reaccepted  it.

2  Dion,  liii.  32. ;  Suet.  Oct.  27.

424  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS.  ca.  xxx.

at  the  head  of  the  popular  element  in  the  constitu-
tion. It  might  serve  in  other  hands  as  a  counterpoise,
in  those  of  Augustus  as  a  complement,  to  the  powers
he  already  wielded.  It  made  him  chief  of  the  peo-
ple as  he  had  before  become  chief  of  the  senate.  If
he  was  already  commander  of  the  legions,  he  was
now  supreme  over  the  materials  from  which  the
legions  were  raised.  At  the  same  time  some  exten-
sion was  given  to  the  functions  which  he- exercised  as
prince  in  the  senate,  or  in  his  proconsular  capacity  in
the  provinces.  He  was  permitted  to  exercise  a  cer-
tain paramount  authority  even  over  the  prefects
appointed  by  the  senate  in  the  half  of  the  empire
confided  to  its  care.  But  the  tribunitian  power  was
still  justly  considered  the  keystone  of  the  whole  im-
From  hence-  perial  edifice.  From  this  period  Augus-
terde^|nTte"d  tus  maJ  deserve  the  title  of  emperor,  and
as  emperor.  }jere  accordingly  may  close  our  review  of
the  steps  by  which  he  attained  the  summit  of  his
power.

A.u.?31-B.c.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  425

CHAPTER XXXI.

The  imperial  authority  a  combination  of  the  prerogatives  of  several
republican  offices. — Their  character  and  functions. — 1.  the  im-
perium:  2.  the  principatus:  3.  the  consulship  and  proconsular
command:  4.  the  potestas  tribunitia:  5.  the  potestas  consu-
laris:  6.  the  supreme  pontificate:  7.  the  emperor's  legislative
and  judicial  functions. — His  edicts,  rescripts  and  constitutions.
—  His  exemptions  from  law. — jThe  lex  regia. —  The  name  of
Caesar.

WE  have  followed  through  thirty  chapters  the
eventful  annals  of  the  revolution  which  transferred
the  commonwealth  of  Rome  from  the  rule  of  an
oligarchy  to  that  of  a  single  potentate.  We  now
enter  upon  the  history  of  the  imperial

. f  -.  , i  T i Thegorern-

gfovernment  from  its  permanent  establish-  mem  formed

,  .  rT  ,  by  the  comhi-

ment  by  Augustus. In  order to  under-  nation  of
,  , y  ,.  i  •  v  i_ x  »«veraldis-

stand  the  transactions  which  we  are  about  tinct  preroga-

to  review,  it  is  necessary  to  obtain  a  clear
conception  of  the  nature  of  the  constitution  as  it
came  from  the  plastic  hands  of  the  second  of  the
Caesars.  The  successive  steps  by  which  he  acquired
his  various  powers  and  prerogatives,  distinct  from
and  complementary  to  each  other,  have  been  already
marked.  It  remains  tp  examine  each  of  these  pre-
rogatives in  order,  and  ascertain  as  far  as  possible
their  precise  nature  and  limits.  When  we  have
achieved  this  task  we  shall  be  in  a  position  to  com-
prehend the  extent  of  the  authority  assumed  by
Augustus,  and  to  trace  by  comparing  one  era  with
another,  the  progress  of  despotism  through  the  ages
that  lie  before  us.  We  shall  have  weighed  the  real
meaning  of  the  old  republican  phrases  and  titles

426  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXXI.

which  will  still  continue  to  meet  us  on  every  side;
at  the  same  time  we  shall  have  guarded  ourselves
from  confounding  names  with  things ;  we  shall  have
distinguished  legal  sanctions  from  mere  popular
impressions,  and  drawn  the  veil  from  the  self-
delusions  of  the  people  and  the  impositions  of  the
sovereign.  But  the  examination  will  have  been
instructive,  inasmuch  as  it  will  show  that  the  sys-
tem of  the  Eoman  empire  with  which  the  greatest
monarchies  of  modern  Europe  have  claimed  affinity,
recognises  in  its  most  solemn  formulas  the  popular
will  as  the  foundation  of  political  power,  and  repu-
diates alike  the  fantastic  principles  of  patriarchal
autocracy  and  of  feudal  sovereignty.

I.  When  the  Eoman  fathers  elected  their  king
i.  The  impe-  m  the  first  ages  of  the  national  history,
they  made  a  decree  in  the  assembly  of
their  curies  by  which  they  surrendered  to  him
certain  rights  over  their  own  persons  and  wills.
These  were  the  prerogatives  of  proposing  laws,  of
deciding  suits,  of  commanding  the  armies,  and
of  taking  the  auspices,  that  is,  of  performing  the
most  solemn  act  of  religious  ceremonial.  The  main
element  of  political  freedom  they  still  retained,  in
the  right  of  discussing  and  rejecting  the  measures
he  proposed  for  their  acceptance.  The  change  from
monarchical  to  republican  government  imposed  no
essential  restrictions  upon  these  royal  prerogatives :
the  great  safeguard  of  popular  independence  which
was  then  invented  was  the  division  of  the  supreme
authority  between  two  colleagues  and  its  limita-
tion to  a  single  year.  The  later  institution  of  the
tribunitian  magistracy,  as  the  guardian  of  the  pri-
vileges of  the  plebs,  was  no  restriction  upon  the
consuls  in  their  capacity  as  chiefs  of  the  patricians,
but  only  a  guarantee  for  the  liberties  of  the  second
order,  which  was  rising  in  political  importance,
and  had  become  impatient  of  the  oppression  of  its
rival.

.A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  427

The  consul  received  the  imperium on the  day
when  he  entered  upon  his  office:  in  the
first  ages  of  the  republic  his distinctive  imper»"oroni7

.7*  , . , . in  the  field.

appellation  was  praetor,  a  term  which  sig-
nified the  leader  of  an  army ;  and  his  first  duty  in
almost  every  instance  was  to  place  himself  at  the
head  of  the  citizens,  and  take  the  field  for  the
defence  of  their  estates  or  the  extension  of  their
boundaries.  But  it  was  only  in  the  field,  and  as
soon  as  he  had  quitted  the  precincts  of  the  city,
that  he  acquired  the  title  of  imperator.  His  armed
compatriots,  on  the  first  success  obtained  under  his
auspices,  saluted  him  with  the  designation  of  military
command,  nor  perhaps  could  he  in  strictness  claim
it  until  this  formal  salutation  had  taken  place.
But,  at  least  in  later  times,  he  was  known  as
imperator  as  soon  as  he  put  himself  at  the  head  of
the  troops,  and  the  subsequent  salutation  on  the
field  of  victory  was  held  to  be  a  popular  ratification
by  the  soldiers  of  the  choice  which  had  been  made
in  the  comitia.  The  citizens  had  invested  him  with
the  imperium,  and  he  had  now  proved  himself
worthy  of  their  favour.

As  soon  as  the  consul  entered  upon  his  military
career he assumed certain symbols of
command. The  cloak  of  scarlet  or  purple  the  en'si™  of
which  the  imperator  threw  over  his  corselet  entering  the
was  named  the  paludamentum,  and  this,
which  became  in  later  times  the  imperial  robe,  he
never  wore  except  on  actual  service. When  towards
the  close  of  the  year  he  returned  from  the  frontier
to  restore  the  armed  citizens  to  their  homes  during
the  winter,  and  to  surrender  to  a  successor  already
designated  in  the summer  the civil  and  military
functions  of  the  consulship,  he  laid  aside  the  impe-
ratorial  garb,  before  entering  the  walls. The  im-
perium which  he  bore  within  the  city  was  more  re-
stricted than  that  which  he  was  permitted  to  wield  in

428  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

the  camp.  The  citizens  when  they  met  for  deliber-
ation in  their  assemblies  rejected  with  indignation
the  stern  discipline,  and  the  power  of  the  axe  and
the  rod  to  which  they  cheerfully  submitted  in  the
face  of  the  enemy.  They  were  released  from  their
sacrament  or  oath  of  obedience,  and  resumed  along
with  their  late  commander  the  symbol  of  civil  func-
tions, the  peaceful  toga.  This  custom,
inxtheca°s°  of  strictly  and  iealously  guarded  throughout

a  triumph.  .  J  r ±i  VI  •  J -i?  J £

the  best  ages  ot  the  republic,  admitted  ot
one  splendid  exception.  If  the  imperator  had
gained  a  victory  which  the  senate  deemed  worthy  of
the  honour  of  a  triumph,  the  constitutional  rule  was
relaxed  for  the  occasion.  After  returning  from  the
scene  of  his  campaign,  accompanied  by  his  veterans,
the  successful  general  remained  outside  the  walls
till  the  preparations  for  the  ceremony  were  complete.
He  then  entered  it  by  the  triumphal  gate,  at  the
head  of  his  troops,  arrayed  in  the  ensigns  of  military
command,  and  pursued  his  way  through  the  principal
streets  to  the  Capitol,  where  he  offered  the  national
sacrifice  to  Jupiter.  As  soon  as  the  ceremony  was
completed,  he  disbanded  the  legions,  and  took  his
seat  once  more  in  the  curule  chair  in  the  senate-
house.

In  the  course  of  years,  however,  when  the  fron-
•rhe  procoura-  tiers  of  the  empire  became  enlarged,  and

larimperium. afc the game time the ciyil Duties  of the

first  magistrates  increased  in  weight  and  urgency,
prgetors,  consulars,  and  others  were  deputed  by  the
senate  to  lead  the  armies  of  the  commonwealth  at  a
distance  from  the  city.  The  imperium,  as  far  as
regarded  its  exercise  in  the  camp,  was  conferred
upon  them ;  they  were  invested  with  the  prerogative
of  military  command  and  discipline,  with  the  right
of  arbitrating  between  the  soldiers  in  camp,  and  of
taking  the  auspices,  without  which  no  military
operation  could  be  duly  conducted.  The  citizens

A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  429

who  were  now  enlisted  under  the  banner  of  this
special  officer  were  required  to  take  the  oath  of
obedience  to  him  as  well  as  that  of  fidelity  to  the
senate  and  people.  It  was  apparently  at  the  period
of  the  second  Punic  war  that  the  mutual  engage-
ment which  at  first  the  soldiers  voluntarily  made
among  themselves  was  changed  into  an  oath  exacted
by  the  tribune  in  each  cohort,  and  referred  to  the
imperator  and  the  state.

A  further  change  took  place  in  the  character  of
the  imperium  when  the  wide-spread  in-

L f J.-L  T_1-  J j.1- J.-L Extended  over

terests  of  the  republic  required  that  the  several  Pro-

., . .  *  i . i-ii  rincee  at  once,

supreme  military  command  should  be  con-  "  in  the  ca»e

,,  ,r  , ,  T •  j/u !-• £ r  of  Sulla,

nded  to  a  generalissimo,  the  chief  ot  many  Manus,  and

, .  . J Pompeius.

legions,  quartered  in  several  provinces
and  distributed  along  an  extensive  frontier  line.
The  imperator  directed  the  operations  of  these
numerous  armed  bodies  through  his  subordinate
officers,  each  separate  force  of  one  or  more  legions
being  entrusted  to  a  legatus  or  lieutenant-general.
Such  had  been  the  far-reaching  command  of  Sulla
and  Marius,  and  of  others  before  them ;  and  such
was  preeminently  the  command  of  Pompeius  when
the  provisions  of  the  Manilian  and  Gabinian  laws
gave  him  the  supreme  control  of  the  public  resources
throughout  the  eastern  half  of  the  empire.  Under
these  circumstances  the  soldiers  of  every  legion  still
swore  obedience  to  the  commander-in-chief,  though
they  might  never  have  come  personally  under  his
orders.  The  legates  were  merely  his  representatives,
to  whom  he  delegated  the  functions  necessary  for
conducting  the  operations  he  directed,  and  even
the  victories  they  gained  were  attributed  solely
to  the  valour  of  his  arm,  and  the  virtue  of  his
auspices.  Except  in  cases  of  special  favour,  the
honours  of  the  triumph  were  reserved  for  the
commander-in-chief  alone,  and  even  the  title  of
iroperator  was  imparted  to  none  but  him.

430  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxr

Another  step  in  the  progress  of  military  authority
pompemsas was  the  licence  first  assumed  by  Pompeius
^°umne8suthe °f  remaining himself  in  the immediate
re^a^ing  in vicinity  of  the  capital,  while  he  despatched
hood'ofB^mV,  his  lieutenants  to  command the legions
h?8dcoramaend entrusted  to  him  in  distant  povinces. He
to  lieutenants.  affected,  indeed,  to  be  occupied  with  the
enlistment  of  recruits,  and  the  collection  of  muni-
tions of  war :  but  the  pretence  was  in  truth  merely
nominal;  it  was  well  understood  that  his  real  object
was  to  keep  close  to  the  centre  of  political  action,
and  control  by  his  immediate  presence  the  course  of
affairs  at  home. Still  he  so  far  respected  the  pre-
scriptions of  the  law  as  to  abstain  from  entering  the
city,  at  least  in  public,  during  the  exercise of  his
Spanish  proconsular  command. He  might,  indeed,
come  actually  within  the  walls  and  confer  privately
with  his  friends, without  exciting animadversion ;
but  he  could  perform  no  public  act,  nor  be  seen  to
take  part  in  the  proceedings  of  the  people  in  the
forum, nor  of  the  fathers in  the senate,  at  least
when  they  assembled  in  any  hall  or  temple  within
the  city. But  in  the  time  of  Pompeius  Eome  had
in  more  than  one  quarter  outgrown  the  lines  traced
by  Servius. Many  public  and  private  buildings  lay
without  the  hallowed  precincts  of  the  pomosrium,
and  the  movement  of  the  population  was  almost  as
busy  in  the  Field  of  Mars  as  in  the  Velabrum  or
Suburra. Already  skilled  in  evading  the  spirit  of
the  constitution,  the  senate  was  wont  to  seek  the
advice  and  animating  presence  of  its  champion  by
meeting  in  the  temple  of  Bellona,  whither  the  im-
perator  might  repair  without  violating  its  letter. It
was  by  availing  himself  of  this  technical  subterfuge
that  Pompeius  contrived  to  maintain  himself  at  the
head  of  the  domestic  administration  of  the  state,
during  the  period  of  Caesar's  absence  in  Gaul,  with-
out relaxing  his  hold  upon  her  military  resources.

A.U.731-B.C.23.  TENDER THE EMPIRE.  431

and  thus  he  had  doubly  fortified  himself  against  the
anticipated  attack  of  his  antagonist.

Caesar,  on  the  other  hand,  disdained  to  temporize,
or  manage  by  vain  pretences  the  people
who  had  submitted  to  his  sway. His  rival  the « £Z£™
had.  in  effect,  reigned  almost  as  despotically  ™rii,;'"ilmi*"

'.'..=»  J, makes  himtelf

as  a  king,  while  he  preserved  an  outward  perpetual
show  of  obedience  to  recognised  forms ;  he
would  reign  openly  and  fearlessly,  and  inaugurate
a  new  government  of  facts  and  not  phrases.  He
assumed  the  title  of  imperator  with  a  new  force  and
meaning  attached  to  it.  He  adopted  it  as  a  constant
prefix  to  all  his  other  appellations,  bearing  it  equally
within  and  without  the  city.  While  in  fact  he  re-
leased his  veterans  from  personal  attendance  upon
him,  and  declined  even  the  escort  of  a  guard  of
honour,  he  openly  avowed  himself  the  perpetual
commander  of  the  national  armies,  and  vaunted  his
military  supremacy  as  the  noblest  addition  to  his
name.  The  functions  of  dictator  he  assumed  to
enable  him  to  reform  abuses,  and  remodel  the  laws ;
but  those  of  imperator  he  grasped  as  the  source  of
all  real  power  and  the  appropriate  reward  of  his
unparalleled  desert  in  warfare.  It  may  be  conjec-
tured that  it  was  during  his  usurpation  that  the  tri-
bunes struck  the  names  of  the  senate  and  people
from  the  formula  of  the  legionaries'  oath,  and  caused
them  to  vow  fidelity  to  their  imperator  alone.
Certain  it  is  that  before  the  end  of  a  century  the
oath  had  been  thus  mutilated,  and  it  is  difficult  to
imagine  that  such  an  innovation  would  have  been
attempted  by  the  more  politic  of  his  successors,  or
permanently  respected  by  the  senate,  if  introduced
by  tyrants  whom  it  detested  and  whose  acts  it  abro-
gated after  their  deaths.1

1  Tac.  Hist.  i.  55.  (A.U.  823,  A.D.  70):  "Senatns  pop.  que  Rom.
obliterata  jam  nomina  sacramcuto  advocabant."

432  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxr.

The  imperium  had  been  conferred  upon  Octavius
The  proconsu-  by  a  decree  of  the  senate,  when  he  took  up
Intesefon'd  arms  in  conjunction  with  the  consuls  to
triumvirate.  protect  Decimus  Brutus  against  his  assail-
ant. He  had  been  saluted  imperator  by  his  victo-
rious legions  under  the  walls  of  Mutina.  Throughout
the  various  campaigns  which  he  conducted  in
Macedonia  and  Pannonia,  in  Dalmatia  and  Egypt,
he  had  exercised  no  other  than  the  proconsular
functions.  In  virtue  of  the  triumviral  commission
which  gave  him  the  government  of  one  third  part  of
the  empire,  he  had  acted  as  the  command  er-in-chief
of  various  armies  under  numerous  lieutenants.  This
same  commission  had  invested  him  moreover  with
extraordinary  powers  for  the  reformation  of  the
government  at  home ;  aod  he  marched  as  he  listed
up  and  down  the  city,  and  brandished  his  sword
without  scruple  in  the  precincts  of  law  and  justice.
It  was  an  age  of  revolutions,  and  none  ventured  to
ask  whether  the  commission  were  legal,  or  whether
it  were  legally  discharged.  The  senate  greeted  the
victor  of  Actium  with  the  complete  ratification  of  all
his  acts;  and  from  thenceforth  both  master  and
subjects  vied  with  each  other  in  striving  to  bury  the
past  in  oblivion.  From  that  happy  era  of  reconcili-
ation and  amnesty  the  conqueror  studied  to  represent
himself  as  in  all  things  the  servant  and  instrument
of  the  state.  While  he  accepted  the  title  of  im-
perator as  a  perpetual  prefix  to  his  names  and  titles,
after  his  uncle's  example,  and  thus  asserted,  in  the
spirit  of  the  old  traditions,  the  military  basis  of  the
national  polity,  he  nevertheless  abstained  from  as-
suming the  ensigns  of  command  within  the  city.
Augustus  never  appeared  in  the  senate  or  before  the
people  in  the  garb  of  an  imperator.  He  never  main-
tained a  legionary  garrison  within  the  city.  He  left
it  to  his  successor  to  establish  a  camp  of  praBtorian
cohorts  within  the  walls,  and  contented  himself

A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  433

•with  the  personal  service  of  a  mere  handful  of  body-
guards. Nevertheless,  as  generalissimo  of  the  Roman
armies  he  controlled  the  operations  of  the  legions
throughout  the  provinces;  he  appointed  all  their
officers,  and  made  them  strictly  subordinate  to  him-
self. For  a  moment  indeed  the  policy  of  Augustus
wavered  in  this  particular.  He  allowed  Carrinas  to
triumph  in  conjunction  with  himself,  and  two  years
afterwards  Crassus  and  Messala  exhibited  in  the
Capitol  the  spoils  of  Thrace  and  Aquitania.  But
from  the  year  727  the  highest  honours  of  the  pro-
fession of  arms  were  closed  against  the  lieutenants
of  the  commander-in-chief,  and  by  a  bold  fiction  the
reward  of  their  victories  was  conferred  upon  the
emperor  himself,  under  whose  auspices  they  were
reputed  to  have  gained  them.  By  an  act  of  grace
on  his  part,  he  divided  the  command  of  the  provinces
between  himself  and  the  people  represented  by  the
senate.  He  reserved,  as  we  have  seen,  for  his  own
direct  control  the  regions  which  from  their  position
on  the  frontiers,  or  from  the  temper  of  their  popu-
lation, seemed  most  liable  to  disturbance  from  within
or  from  without.  The  imperial  provinces  were  the
Tarraconensis  and  Lusitania  in  Spain,  the  whole  of
Gaul  beyond  the  Alps,  the  two  Grermanies,  or  districts
bordering  on  the  Rhine,  in  the  West ;  and  in  the  East
Syria,  Phoenicia,  Cilicia  with  Cyprus,  and  Egypt.
To  the  senate  he  resigned  the  more  peaceful  regions
of  Africa,  Numidia,  Cyrenaica,  Asia,  Bithynia,  Pon-
tus,  Achaia,  Dalmatia,  Macedonia,  Sicily  and  Crete,
Sardinia,  and  Erotica.  The  scanty  military  forces
required  to  keep  these  in  subjection  were  headed
by  officers  appointed  by  the  senate.  But  the  posi-
tion of  these  officers  and  their  troops  was  an  object  of
jealousy  to  the  emperors.  It  was  rarely  that  they
were  afforded  an  opportunity  of  obtaining  a  triumph ;
but  the  last  instance,  it  may  be  remarked,  of  saluting
with  the  title  of  imperator  occurred  in  the  case  of  a

VOL.  III.  F  F

434  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

senatorial  proconsul  in  Africa.1  Meanwhile  the  em-
peror became  more  and  more  distinctly  recognised
as  the  generalissimo  of  the  whole  military  force  of
the  state.  It  was  to  him  accordingly,  and  not  to  his
lieutenants,  that  the  military  oath  was  taken.  If
Caesar  had  permitted  the  names  of  the  senate  and
people  to  drop  from  the  prescribed  formulas,  it  may
be  supposed  that  Augustus  would  not  insist  upon
their  being  reinserted,  and  accordingly  they  fell  into
complete  desuetude.  Sufficient  respect  was  deemed
to  be  paid  to  these  empty  names  by  the  initials  S.  P.
Q.  E.,  which  still  continued  to  represent  them  on
the  imperial  banners.2

The  military  oath  was  originally  imposed  upon
those  only  who  were  actually  engaged  in

The  military  .  J,  j • • j. j •  j-i.1

oath  of  service,  and  was  administered  immediately
takeietoethe  before  their  taking  the  field.  But  when
the  provinces  came  to  be  permanently

armies

occupied  with  standing  armies,  it  became
usual  to  repeat  the  ceremony  every  year  on  the
calends  of  January:  under  the  emperors  it  was
further  exacted  on  the  anniversaries  of  their  birth
and  accession.  But  as  every  Eoman  citizen  of
competent  age  was  deemed  liable  to  military  service,
and  as,  at  least  in  the  provinces,  the  greater  part  of
the  Eoman  residents  were  actually  invested  with
military  rank  and  charged  with  some  corresponding
functions,  the  custom  gradually  extended  from  the
soldiers  duly  enlisted  to  the  mass  of  the  citizens,

1  Tacitus,  Ann.  in.  74. :  "  Tiberius  ....  id  quoque  Blaaso  tribuit
ut  imperator  a  legionibus  salutaretur.  .  .  . coricessit  et  quibusdam
Augustus  id  vocabulum,  at  tune  Tiberius  Blseso  postremum."

2  The  names  of  the  senate  and  people  wt're  never,  as  far  as  we
know, restored. In  the  Christian  period  the  formula  became:  "Per
Deum  et  per  Christum  et  per  Spiritum  Sanctum  et  per  majestatem
Imperatoris." Veget.  ii.  1. I  may  observe  that  I  was  first  led  to
study  the  character  of  the  imperial  government  from  perusing  De  la
Bleterie's  ingenious  essays  on  the  subject  in  the  Memoires  de  FAca-
d&mie  <? Inscriptions,  torn.  xxi.  xxiv.  xxv.  xxvii.,  and  to  him  I  owe  a
great  portion  of  these  remarks.

A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  435

and  from  the  citizens  to  the  provincials.  Thus  we
find  that  even  under  the  earlier  successors  of  Augus-
tus, the  custom  prevailed  of  binding  the  whole  mass
of  the  subjects  to  the  allegiance  of  the  emperor  by
the  sanction  of  an  oath  repeated  at  least  once  every
year.1  Still  a  peculiar  feeling  seems  to  have  lingered
in  the  minds  of  the  best  instructed  Komans,  which
forbade  them  to  address  or  allude  to  their  ruler  by
his  military  title,  except  strictly  in  reference  to  his
military  capacity.  It  is  observed  that  the  elder
Pliny  never  speaks  of  emperors  before  his  own  time
as  imperators.  It  was  as  Caesars  or  Princes,  as
members  of  a  particular  family,  or  as  invested  with
a  civil  title,  that  they  were  more  properly  known  to
him  and  to  the  citizens  in  general.  But  when  he
refers  to  Vespasian,  or  his  son  Titus,  he  uses  the
term  imperator ;  because  as  admiral  of  their  fleet  at
Misenum,  he  recognised  in  them  his  military  supe-
riors.2 In  the  same  manner,  one  generation  later,
the  younger  Pliny,  who  was  proconsul  of  Bithynia,
with  military  command,  addresses  Trajan  as  impe-
rator also.3

II.  As the title of  'imperator conferred the
highest  military  rank  upon  Augustus  and

J  •  J J.T-  f  •  u- The  ti116

his successors, so did that  ot pnnceps  ofprinccps

.  i .,  . -i senatus."

senatus,  or  pnnceps (as  it  came  to be
expressed by  an easy but material abridgment),
convey  the  idea  of  the  highest  civil  preeminence

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  7. :  "  S.  Pompeius  et  S.  Appuleius  Coss.  primi  in
verba  Tibcrii  juravere;  mox  senatus  milesque  et  populus,  xvi.  2:2.
Principio  anni  vitare  Thrasea  solenne  jusjurandum." Comp.  Plin.
Ep  x.  50.

2  Pliny  the  elder  addresses  Vespasian  in  the  preface  to  his  great
work  as  "  Jucundissime  imperator."

3  Plin.  Ep.  x.  1.  3.:  "Imperator  sanctissime  imperator  optime."
But  he  more  commonly  used  the  term  dominus,  which  evinces  a  great
degeneracy  of  feeling. Ovid contrasts  Romulus  with  Augustas
(Fast.  ii.  142.):

"  Vis  tibi  grata  fuit;  florent  sub  Caesare  leges:
Tu  doniini  nomen,  principis  ille  tenet."

FF  2

436  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  xxxi.

consistent  with  the  forms  of  the  old  constitution.
In  ancient  times  this  title  had  been  appropriated  to
the  first  in  succession  of  living  censorii,  men  who
had  served  the  office  of  censor;  and  such  were
necessarily  patricians  and  senators.1  The  sole
privilege  it  conferred  was  that  of  speaking  first  in
the  debates  of  the  senate ;  a  privilege  however  to
which  considerable  importance  might  attach  from
the  exceeding  deference  habitually  paid  to  authority
and  example  by  the  Roman  assemblies.  The  age  of
the  princeps,  and  the  weight  of  his  personal  cha-
racter, for  none  but  men  venerable  for  their  probity
could  be  appointed  censors  at  all,  invested  his
position  with  peculiar  dignity.  When  the  qualifi-
cation of  age  or  priority  was  relaxed  it  was  only  in
favour  of  a  more  illustrious  reputation.  In  the
year  544  (B.C.  210)  the  consul,  in  making  the  ap-
pointment which  was  vested  in  his  orifice,  claimed
the  privilege  of  selection  from  among  the  censorii.
He  chose  Fabius  Maximus :  Fabius,  he  said,  is  the
first  of  the  Romans,  as  Hannibal  himself  would
allow.'2  This  deviation  from  the  established  custom
became  a  precedent  for  later  times.  The  names  of
some  of  the  distinguished  personages  who  attained
this  honourable  post  have  been  preserved  to  us.
Among  the  most  illustrious  is  that  of  M.  JEmilius
Lepidus,  the  great-great-grandfather  of  Lepidus
the  triumvir,  who  was  reappointed  six  times  at
successive  lustrums.  In  the  decline  of  the  com-
monwealth a  graceful  tribute  was  still  paid  to  public
virtue  in  the  appointment  of  ^Emilius  Scaurus ;  but
the  most  celebrated  and  not  the  least  respected  of
the  list  was  Lutatius  Catulus,  whose  position  at  the
head  of  the  senatorial  oligarchy  has  been  signalized
at  the  outset  of  this  history.

1  Liv.  xxvii.  11.:  "Ut  qui  primus  censor  ex  iis  qui  viverent  fuisset,
eum  principem  legerent."

2  Liv.  /.  c.

A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  437

The  title  of  prince  of  the  senate  fell  into  abeyance
after  the  death  of  Catulus  in  the  year  694.
The  functions  of  the  censorship  had  been  twfutieto  °

• ,  L j  J -ii  ' j.'  Augustus.

interrupted  and  with  one  exception  sus-
pended during  the  lives  of  a  whole  generation.
But  the  authority  of  the  dictator  or  triumvir
reigned  paramount  in  a  subservient  senate,  and
required  no  aid  from  the  indirect  influence  of
private  estimation.  It  was  the  policy  however  of
Augustus  to  lead  the  senate,  the  chosen  instrument
of  his  will,  by  indirect  agency,  and  the  functions  of
the  censorship  which  he  had  exercised,  though
under  another  title,  might  furnish  a  pretext  for
allowing  this  principate  or  leadership  to  be  con-
ferred upon  himself.  The  title  of  princeps  was
modest  and  constitutional;  it  was  associated  with
the  recollection  of  the  best  ages  of  the  free  state
and  the  purest  models  of  public  virtue ;  it  could  not
be  considered  beyond  the  deserts  of  one  who  was
undoubtedly  the  foremost  man  of  the  nation.  Nor
was  it  altogether  without  some  solid  advantages.
Although  it  implied  the  holding  of  no  magistracy  or
direct  power  of  any  kind,  it  is  easy  to  conceive  the
influence  which  a  person  in  the  place  of  Augustus
might  indirectly  exercise  through  it.  On  the  one
hand  it  connected  its  bearer  with  the  aristocratical
party,  the  despised  and  broken  remnant  of  which
might  again  raise  its  head  under  the  patronage  of
the  same  chief  who  had  effected  its  overthrow.  On
the  other  hand  it  might  serve  no  less  as  a  guarantee
to  the  still  jealous  democracy,  that  their  faithful
champion  would  guide  their  adversaries  into  the
paths  of  equity  and  public  virtue.  It  was  more
particularly  valuable  to  the  founder  of  the  empire,
who  wished  to  preserve  the  semblance  of  free  dis-
cussion in  the  first  assembly  of  the  commonwealth,
from  the  legitimate  means  it  gave  him  of  expressing'
his  own  sentiments  upon  every  question  before  the

438  HISTORY OF  THE EOMANS  CH.  xxxi.

members  should  be  committed  by  discussion  to  any
other.  It  saved  both  parties  from  the  risk  of  col-
lision for  it  afforded  to  the  creatures  of  the  empire
the  fairest  excuse  for  following  in  the  wake  of  so
high  an  authority,  while  it  precluded  its  foes  from
declaring  their  opinions,  before  the  ruler's  real
views  could  be  known  or  the  support  on  which  he
could  rely  be  correctly  estimated.  The  popularity
which  the  assumption  of  this  republican  title  con-
ferred upon  the  early  emperors  may  be  inferred
from  the  care  with  which  it  is  noted,  and  its  con-
stitutional functions  referred  to  by  the  writers  of
the  Augustan  age  and  that  which  succeeded  it.1
But  it  was  an  easy  and  natural  step  in  the  pro-
gress of  political  ideas  to  drop  the  appli-

Its  signifies- &  .  ,  5r

tionis  cation  of  the  title,  and  contract  it  trom

extended  •  •••••.  •  i

under  the  prince  ot  the  senate,  to  prince  merely.
The  original  character  of  the  appellation
was  soon  forgotten,  and  the  proper  limits  of  its
privileges  confounded  in  the  more  vague  and
general  prerogative  which  the  bare  designation  of

1  Compare  Tacitus,  Annal.  i.  1.:  "Nbn  Cinnse  non  Sulke  longa
dominatio;  et  Pompeii  Crassique  potentia  cito  in  Caesarem,  Lepidi  et
Antonii  arma  in  Augustum  cessere ;  qui  cuncta  discordiis  civilibns
fessa  nomine  Principis  sub  imperium  accepit."  Again,  '•  jSTon  regno
neque  dictatura  sed  principis  nomine  coustitutam  rempublicam,"and
Hist.  i.  4. :  "  Vulgato  imperii  arcano  posse  Principem  alibi  qnam
Romse  fieri."  Sueton.  Calig.  22. :  "  Nee  multum  abfuit  qnin  statim
diadema  sumeret,  speciemque  principatus  in  regni  fonnam  conver-
teret"  See  also  c.  31.;  Plin.  Paneg.  9.:  "  Ut  non  obsequereris  prin-
cipi  civis,  legatus  imperatori,  filius  patri;"  and  again,  c.  55.:  "Hie
regnum  ....  arcet  atque  submovet,  sedemque  principis  obtinet,  ne
sit  domino  locus."  See  also  Ovid,  /.  c.  Later  writers  confound  the
terms  princeps  and  imperator  without  scruple.  Vopiscus,  Tacit.  7.:
"Vos  sanctissimi  milites  et  sacratissimi  vos  quiritcs  babetis  prin-
cipem:"  and  again,  "Vos  sanctissimi  commilitones  qui  scitis  principem
approbare  ....  Exercitus  sine  principe  .  .  .  ."  Even  the  jurist
Gaius,  in  the  age  of  the  Antonines,  gives  the  emperor  his  military
title  while  speaking  of  him  strictly  in  his  civil  capacity,  in  which  he
issued  his  constitutions  or  decrees:  " Constitutio  principis  est  quod
Jmperator  decreto  vel  edicto  vel  epistola  constituit."  But  these  con-
stitutions continued  to  be  correctly  designated  as  Principales.  There
were  no  constitutiones  Jmperatorite.

A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  439

first  or  premier  seemed  to  imply.  While  the  com-
monwealth was  still  free,  Cicero  might  with  inno-
cence and  propriety  style  Pompeius  the  prince  or
foremost  man  of  all  ages  and  nations  l ;  but  when
applied  to  Augustus  and  his  successors,  such  a
phrase  could  not  fail  to  acquire  a  grave  technical
significance.2  Accordingly  we  shall  find  that
Tiberius,  the  second  prince  of  the  imperial  regime,
careful  and  accurate  as  he  was  in  his  use  of  political
terms,  assumed  without  remark  that  this  distinction
implied  a  supreme  authority,  having  no  definite  or
peculiar  object,  but  extending  to  a  general  super-
intendence over  every  magistracy  in  the  state.  My
station,  he  said  in  a  letter  to  the  senate,  is  not  that
of  an  cedile,  a  prcetor  or  a  consul ;  let  those  magis-
trates confine  themselves  to  the  exercise  of  their
special  functions,  and  labour  for  the  common  weal
each  in  their  own  province  ;  wider  and  loftier  are
the  duties  which  devolve  upon  the  prince  ;  he  must
lead  the  way  in  proposing  measures  for  the  general
good  of  the  state,  for  the  correction  of  manners,
and  the  cure  of  political  diseases.3  If  such  was  the
monarchical  view  of  the  principate  taken  by  Tiberius,
we  may  suppose  that  the  original  limitation  of  its
functions  was  speedily  obliterated,  and  that  even
the  most  moderate  and  constitutional  of  succeeding
emperors,  such  as  Trajan  and  the  Antonines,  would
not  seek  to  restore  it  in  the  spirit  of  the  past.  It  is
recorded,  however,  of  Pertinax,  who  ascended  the
throne  as  the  nominee  and  champion  of  the  senate

1  Cic.  pro  Dom.  25.,  ad.  Div.  i.  9.  4. Velleius  applies  a  similar
phrase  both  to  Pompeius  and  Crassus.

2  The  grandsons  of  Augustus,  Caius,  and  Lucius  obtained  the  title
of  Principes  Juventutis;  a  designation  originally  given  to  the  first  or
most  distinguished  of  the  knights,  the  three  hundred  youths  whom
Romulus  selected  for  his  body-guard. In  the  Consoldtio  ad  Liviam
(r.  356.),  attributed  to  Pedo  Albinovanus,  the  wife  of  Augustus  is
complimented  with  the  title  of  Princeps  Kumana.

8  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  53.

440  HISTORY  OF THE EOMANS  CH.  xxxi.

itself,  that  hs  revived  the  ancient  and  popular  title
of  prince  of  that  assembly ;  from  which  we  may  infer
that,  in  his  time,  it  had  long  fallen  into  desuetude,
and  was  only  restored  as  a  measure  of  policy  to  fortify
a  precarious  claim  to  power.1

III.  Emperor,  king,  and  prince,  are  the  titles  by
in.  The  which  the  nations  of  modern  Europe  have
undeurl8thep  generally  agreed  to  designate  the  posses-
repubiic.  sorg  Q£  SOVereign  authority :  but  while  the
early  Eomans  rejected  with  horror  the  ideas  of  auto-
cratic domination  which  they  attached  to  the  appel-
lation of  king,  they  carefully  disjoined  from  the  em-
pire or  the  principate  any  notion  of  civil  supremacy.
The  Eoman  imperator  was  strictly,  as  we  have  seen,
the  commander  of  the  armies ;  the  princeps  was  the
most  illustrious  and  most  honoured  of  the  senators.
But  the  supreme  magistracy  within  the  city  was  that
of  the  consulship.  As  long  as  the  consuls,  says
Polybius,  are  resident  within  the  city  they  enjoy
supreme  power  in  all  public  affairs.  All  the  other
magistrates,  excepting  only  the  tribunes,  are  sub-
ordinate to  their  authority.  They  admit  foreign
ambassadors  to  audience ;  they  propose  matters  for
deliberation  to  the  senate.  The  decrees  of  that  body
are  executed  by  their  hands.  Further,  it  is  the
consuls  that  convoke  the  assemblies  of  the  people,
submit  measures  to  their  decision,  and  provide  for
the  fulfilment  of  their  pleasure.'2  He  proceeds  to
declare  that  they  are  also  supreme  in  military  affairs ;
but  in  the  later  ages  of  the  republic  the  consuls
seldom  quitted  the  city  for  the  camp,  and  the  armies
were  led  by  the  proconsuls  in  the  provinces.  But
although  they  surrendered  to  their  deputies  the
command  of  the  troops,  they  lost  no  portion  of  their

1  Xiphilin  (epit.  Dion.  Ixiii.  5.):  ^al  t\aSe  rds  -re  &\\as  fWiK\r)afis
Kal  Trpoff-riKovaas,  Kal  trepav  tin  T<£  SrjfJLOTiKbs  tlvai  &oij\ecr6af  Trfairos
yap  TTJS  yepovcrias  Kara  fb  apxatov  firuj'

2  Polyb.  vi.  12.

A.r.73l-E.c.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  441

dignity  and  preeminence  at  home.  The  administra-
tion of  the  public  revenues,  though  collected  by  the
quaestors,  resided  in  the  consuls  themselves.  They
inherited  from  the  kings  the  prerogative  of  admin-
istering the  laws :  but  these  functions  were  shared
in  some  degree  with  the  tribunes,  and  gradually
transferred  to  the  praetors,  till  in  process  of  time  the
consuls  abandoned  the  bench  of  justice  altogether,
and  confined  their  cares  to  the  other  important  offices
they  had  to  discharge.

So  wide  a  jurisdiction  and  so  enviable  a  dignity
might  have  been  easily  perverted  to  the  re-establish-
ment of  tyranny.  The  Komans  guarded  against  this
danger  by  dividing  the  power  and  limiting  its  dura-
tion; but  the  spirit  and  resolution  of  the  people
were  the  firmest  bulwark  of  their  liberties.  In  course
of  time  it  was  thought  necessary  to  provide  further
that  no  consul  should  be  re-elected  except  after  an
interval  of  ten  years  l ;  but  this  jealous  regulation
was  infringed  within  half  a  century.2  Nevertheless
it  was  well  kept  on  the  whole,  till  first  the  splendid
successes  of  Marius  against  Jugurtha,  and  afterwards
the  peril  of  the  state  during  the  eruption  of  the
Cimbri,  induced  the  Eomans  to  disregard  it;  and
the  champion  of  the  commons  enjoyed  six  consul-
ships in  the  course  of  eight  years.3  The  precedent
was  readily  adopted  by  the  revolutionary  chieftains
of  the  disastrous  times  that  followed.  A  Cinna,  a
Carbo,  and  a  Sulla  extorted  the  office,  the  two  former
more  than  once,  within  the  period  prescribed  by

•

1  Liv.  vii.  42.  A.C.  413.  This  restriction  was  extended  to  all  other
magistracies.

*  Q.  Fabius  Maximus  and  P.  Decius  Mus  were  re-elected  more
than  once  at  shorter  intervals  than  ten  years.  Livy  records  the  cir-
cumstances as  regards  the  former  in  the  year  453;  but  this  was  not
a  solitary  instance.

s  Marius  was  consul  I.  A.U.  647,  and  five  times  consecutively  in  the
years  650 — 654.  His  seventh  consulship  took  place  after  an  interval
of  thirteen  years,  A.C.  668.

442  HISTOKY OF  THE KOMANS  CH.  xxxi.

law.  From  the  death  of  Sulla  there  is  no  instance
of  its  violation,  till  the  extraordinary  crisis  occurred
which  induced  the  people  to  appoint  Pompeius  sole
consul  to  coerce  the  contending  factions  of  the  city.
The  usurpation  of  Julius  Caesar  introduced  a  new
era  in  this  as  in  other  respects.  He  exercised  four
of  his  five  consulships  in  the  course  of  the  last  five
years  of  his  career.  Neither  the  prefixed  title  of
imperator  nor  even  the  perpetual  dictatorship  super-
seded in  his  estimation  the  political  importance  of
usurped  by  this  republican  dignity.  He  clung  to  it
juiius  csesar.  even  while  he  seemed  most  regardless  of
its  degradation  by  the  numbers  whom  he  thrust  into
it  for  a  few  months  or  days  only.  Even  while  the
senate  and  people  lavished  upon  him  the  most
brilliant  ensigns  of  personal  preeminence,  he  seems
to  have  grasped  with  insatiate  avidity  all  the  pomp
and  circumstance  which  belonged  officially  to  the
consulship.  The  Romans,  childishly  fond  of  shows
and  decorations  for  their  own  sake,  were  peculiarly
attached  to  those  associated  with  the  national  tradi-
tions ;  and  it  was  hard  to  persuade  them,  when  they
gazed  upon  the  robed  and  laurelled  figure  of  the
consul  seated  on  the  ivory-mounted  chair,  that  they
were  not  still  living  under  the  free  institutions
of  which  he  was  in  their  eyes  the  symbol  and  the
pledge.

Octavius,  from  the  camp  before  Mutina,  had  de-
Numerons  and  manded  the  vacant  consulship  on  the  death
^muTsMps  of  °f  Hirtius  and  Pansa ;  which  the  senate,
upon  whom  the  right  of  nomination  in  such
an  emergency  devolved,  had  ventured  to  refuse  him.
He  approached  the  city  at  the  head  of  his  soldiers,
and  the  desertion  of  the  legions  in  which  the  assem-
bly confided  rendered  all  further  resistance  fruitless.
In  the  year  711  Octavius  became  consul  for  the  first
time.  It  would  appear  that  he  scrupled  to  associate
the  highest  ordinary  magistracy  of  the  state  with  the

A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  443

extraordinary  functions  of  the  triumvirate,  and  after
entering  on  a  second  consulship,  on  the  calends  of
January  721,  he  resigned  it  again  the  same  day.
Two  years  afterwards,  when  the  term  of  the  trium-
virate had  expired,  he  exercised  a  third  consulship,
and  from  that  time  forward  he  caused  himself  to
be  annually  re-elected  for  eight  years  successively.
While  the  show  of  popular  suffrage  was  still  preserved,
effectual  means  were  doubtless  taken  to  deter  any
candidate  from  proposing  himself  without  the  sanc-
tion of  the  virtual  ruler  of  the  state,  and  Augustus
continued  to  nominate  himself  and  whomsoever  else
he  chose  as  his  colleague,  assigning  him  generally
only  a  portion  of  the  year,  and  filling  his  place  with
more  than  one  supplementary  appointment.

But  the  dignity  of  the  perpetual  consul,  who
wielded  a  substantial  power  and  carried  on  After  731  he
a  deliberate  policy,  must  have  derived  ad-  ^pTtVe0
ditional  lustre  from  this  contrast  with  his  consul8hiP-
fleeting  and  shadowy  colleagues.  Augustus,  though
constantly  desired  to  renew  his  term  of  office,  and
yielding  professedly  to  the  gentle  urgency  of  his  ad-
miring compatriots,  seems  to  have  had  some  misgiv-
ing that  his  position  was  too  nearly  allied  to  royalty.
After  the  year  731  he  declined  to  resume  the  consul-
ship. He  proposed  to  visit  the  provinces  and  make  a
lengthened  progress  through  the  distant  parts  of  the
empire.  The  principles  of  his  administration,  which
promised  to  combine  the  security  of  the  subject
with  efficiency  in  the  executive,  required  to  be
fixed  throughout  the  dependencies  of  the  state  by
the  same  temperate  hand,  and  under  the  same  ex-
perienced eye,  which  had  established  them  firmly  at
the  centre  of  government.  But  so  illustrious  a
personage  could  not  quit  the  city  except  in  the
character  of  a  great  public  officer.  He  could  not
leave  behind  him  the  privileges  and  powers  which
befitted  the  saviour,  the  reformer,  and  the  defender

444  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

of  the  commonwealth.  The  consul  of  past  years
might  have  assumed  the  government  of  a  procon-
sular province  on  resigning  his  functions  in  the
city.  But  it  was  not  to  any  single  province  that  the
care  of  Augustus  was  to  be  confined.  A  proconsular
imperium  of  far  wider  extent  had  been  entrusted
Augustus  under  the  republic  to  the  most  dis-
^ovn,uiar  tinguished  champions  of  the  state.  The
throughout  instance  of  Pompeius  has  been  frequently
the  empire.  referred  to.  The  command  entrusted  by
the  senate  to  Cassius  at  a  later  period  had  been  of
similar  character.  He  had  been  constituted  supreme
over  the  governors  of  all  the  eastern  provinces.
These  commands  were  assigned  for  a  special  purpose,
and  extensive  as  they  were,  they  were  nevertheless
strictly  defined.  Not  so  however  the  proconsular
imperium,  which  was  now  granted  to  Augustus.  It
was  limited  to  no  special  purpose ;  it  was  extended
over  all  the  provinces  both  imperial  and  senatorial ;
and  it  was  declared  at  once  perpetual.  It  gave  him
throughout  the  domains  of  the  republic  the  control
of  the  revenues,  the  disposal  of  the  armies,  the
execution  of  the  laws,  the  administration  of  internal
reforms,  and  the  adjustment  of  foreign  relations.
The  senate  indeed  still  retained  the  appointment  of
officers  in  its  own  division  of  the  empire ;  but  these
officers  found  themselves  accountable  in  every  pub-
lic act  to  the  imperator  himself,  and  doubtless  he
maintained  and  brandished  over  their  heads  the
power  of  directing,  punishing,  and  displacing  them.
IV.  While  Augustus  was  meditating  the  surrender
of  the  consular  supremacy  he  had  so  long

IV The

"potestcs enioyed,  his  countrymen  proposed  to  con-

tribuuitia." - J J  , .  „ i-r ,1  ,-  £

fer  upon  him  tor  life  the  prerogatives  ot
the  tribunate.  The  coincidence  of  these  circum-
stances may  have  been  more  than  accidental.  From
the  moment  he  ceased  to  be  consul  Augustus  would
lose  the  important  privilege  of  initiating  legal

A.H.731-B.C.23.  TINDER THE EMPIRE.  445

measures  in  the  senate.  The  commons  would
doubtless  have  delighted  to  appoint  him  tribune,
and  in  that  capacity  he  might  have  proposed
measures  to  the  comitia  of  the  tribes,  and  have
superseded  in  effect  the  action  of  the  more  aristo-
cratical  assembly.  But  there  were  grave  objections
to  such  a  course.  Augustus,  since  he  had  become  a
patrician,  could  not  with  propriety  occupy  a  place
on  the  tribunitian  bench,  which  was  reserved  ex-
clusively for  the  plebeian  order.  Neither  did  it
comport  with  his  policy  to  raise  the  commons  into
an  effective  instrument  of  government.  He  had
discouraged  and  almost  suppressed  the  meetings  of
their  capricious  and  turbulent  assembly,  and  now
sought  to  rule  through  the  senate  alone,  which  he
could  more  easily  direct  or  coerce.  Hitherto  he
had  guided  his  subservient  legislators  from  the
consul's  chair :  henceforth  it  became  requisite  that
he  should  have  the  means  of  controlling  them  from
the  level  of  their  own  benches.  The  tribunitian
power,  which  was  now  conferred  upon  him  without
the  office,  placed  in  his  hands  precisely  the  instru-
ment he  required.  By  the  interposition  of  his  veto
he  could  compel  the  rejection  of  any  measure  he
disliked ;  and  if  he  divested  himself  of  the  prero-
gative of  proposing  legislative  enactments,  he
assumed  in  compensation  the  right  to  prohibit
them.

Such  was  the  most substantial element  of  the
tribunitian  power ;  but  its  importance  to  it  confei,
Augustus was not confined  to a single  ™vjh!eability
privilege. While  the  relation  of  the  Plebs  cmp«or-
to  the  Patres  had  been  radically  changed  since  the
first  institution  of  the  tribunate,  the  old associa-
tions attaching  to  that  office  still  conspired  to  endear
it  to  the  mass  of  the  nation. Even  in  the  latter
troubles  of  the  republic,  when  the tribunes  were
often  the  hired  agents  of  the  oligarchy,  the  popular

446  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXXI.

sentiment  had  seldom  failed  to  applaud  the  exercise
of  their  veto  when  they  stepped  forward  to  obstruct
the  proceedings  of  the  senate.  The  people  had
greeted  Clodius  and  Metellus  with  acclamations
not  less  hearty  than  those  which  saluted  the  ears
of  Antonius  and  Curio.  They  still  venerated  the
tribunes  as  the  guardians  of  their  rights,  and  the
pledges  of  their  social  privileges,  and  they  mustered
in  all  their  strength  to  protect  their  persons  and
assert  their  inviolability.  Accordingly,  in  assuming
the  tribunitian  power,  Augustus,  the  commander  of
the  legions  and  the  organ  of  the  senate,  laid  claim
to  the  favour  and  admiration  of  the  commons.
Even  while  he  silenced  the  voice  of  their  dema-
gogues, and  coldly  conceded  to  them  a  mere  shadow
of  popular  suffrage,  he  still  vaunted  himself  their
legitimate  protector,  and  pretended  to  throw  himself
between  them  and  the  traditional  oppressors  of  their
class,  the  patrician  oligarchy.1

It  was  the  policy  of  the  founder  of  the  empire  to
They  date  the  res^  his  authority  on  the  presumed  will  of
reign  by  'thf  tne  nation.  In  the  view  of  the  Eomans  a
ho?dL°gftw8ir  king  ruled  by  virtue  of  his  own  sole  will
power.  an(j  pieasure9  a  dictator  by  the  authority

of  a  privileged  order ;  but  the  tribunitian  power  was
the  organ  of  the  people  itself,  which  it  placed  in  the
hands  of  its  chosen  champion.  In  either  case  the
authority  itself,  at  least  while  it  lasted,  was  supreme,
absolute  and  irresponsible ;  it  was  legitimate  or
odious,  popular  or  tyrannical,  according  to  the
source  from  whence  it  sprang.  In  the  second
century  of  the  empire,  Tacitus  represents  the  tribu-
nitian power  as  a  designation  of  sovereignty,  equi-
valent to  the  rejected  titles  of  king  or  dictator,  by
which  the  emperor  crowned  all  his  other  offices  and

1  Tac.  Ann.  i.  2.:  "  Ad  tuendam  plebem  tribunitio  jure  contentum
(se  ferens),"  a  passage  already  referred  to  at  the  beginning  of  the  last
chapter.

A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  447

prerogatives.1  Impressed  with  this  idea  Augustus
and  his  successors  always  carefully  inscribed  the
tribunitian  title  on  their  coins  and  monuments.
They  insisted  that  it  should  be  formally  renewed  to
them  every  year,  and  counted  the  duration  of  their
tenure  of  power  not  by  the  period  they  had  held  the
imperium  or  the  principate,  but  by  the  number  of
times  the  power  of  the  tribunate  had  been  conferred
upon  them.2

The  protection  which  the  tribunate  afforded  to
the  commons  was  not  confined  to  the  ob-
struction of  proceedings  in  the  senate  pre-  ia£ua£*

.,..,,  . .  mi x -vT  of  the  tribune.

judicial  to  their  interests.  Ihe  tribune
was  always  on  the  watch  to  relieve  a  plebeian  from
an  oppressive  exercise  of  the  powers  of  any  other  ma-
gistracy.3 He  could  control  the  inquisition  of  the
censors  into  the  lives  and  manners  of  the  citizens,
quash  judicial  proceedings,  forbid  the  praetor's  exe-
cution of  a  j  udicial  sentence ;  nor  was  he  compelled
to  assign  any  reason  for  his  peremptory  interposi-
tion.4 There  were  two  kinds  of  appeal  by  which  the
Koman  citizen  might  stay  the  hostile  proceedings  of
a  civil  magistrate ;  the  one  was  to  the  people,  the
other  to  the  tribune  himself.  The  powers  of  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  56.:  "Id  summi  fastigii  vocabulum  Augustus
reperit,  ne  regis  aut  dictatoris  nomen  assumeret,  ac  tamen  appcllatione
aliqua  caetera  imperia  praemineret."

2  The  emperors  dated  their  tribun.  potestas  from  the  day  it  was
first  conferred;  e.g.  in  the  case  of  Augustus,  June  27,  731. The
title  is  preserved  on  the  medals  of  all  the  earlier  emperors,  and  the
year  of  the  trib.  pot.  is  usually  added,  which  is  equivalent  to  the  year
of  the  reign,  except  when  the  emperor  was  associated  in  the  trib.
pot.  during  the  lifetime  of  his  predecessor. Thus  the  date  of  a
coin of  Tiberius, Tib. Caes. Aug. P. P. trib.  pot. xxxv  =  the
twentieth  year  of  his  reign. From  the  year  1021  of  the  city,  268
of  our  era,  the  title  first  ceases  to  occur  regularly  on  the  imperial
medals.

*  The  tribunate  was  not,  in  strictness,  a  magistracy,  and  did  not
possess  the  imperium,  Pint.  Qu.  Rom.  84.;  but  in  the  later  ages  of
the  republic:  the  term  was  very  generally  applied  to  it.  Comp.  Cic.
cont.  Rnll.  ii.  5.,  and  Veil.  ii.  2.

4  Walter,  Gesch.  des  Romischen  Rechts,  p.  1 72.

448  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

guardian  of  the  plebs  extended  indeed  only  one  mile
beyond  the  walls  ;  but  within  those  limits  they  were
sure  to  be  respected  ;  he  was  not  permitted  to  be
absent  a  single  day  from  the  city,  and  his  doors  must
stand  open  at  all  hours  to  those  who  wanted  to
implore  his  succour.  He  claimed  the  power  of  in-
flicting imprisonment  and  even  death  on  any  one,
even  the  highest  magistrate,  who  should  resist  him
in  the  discharge  of  his  functions;  his  attendant
ministers  had  been  known  to  arrest  even  a  consul
or  a  censor,  and  on  one  occasion  he  had  hurried  the
first  magistrate  of  the  state  to  the  Tarpeian  rock,
and  would  have  cast  him  headlong  forthwith,  had  he
not  been  prevented  by  the  interposition  of  a  col-
league. In  fact  it  was  only  by  the  mutual  jealousies
and  conflicting  interests  of  the  ten  members  of  the
tribunitian  college,  whom  the  senate  was  always
careful  to  play  off  against  each  other,  that  any  limits
were  set  to  the  jealous  despotism  of  the  office.  To
crown  the  prerogatives  of  the  tribunate,  the  person
of  its  possessors  was  declared  sacred,  and  its  sanctity
was  held  to  be  violated  not  by  deeds  only  but  even
by  opprobrious  language.  The  sovereign  people
threw  around  its  champions  the  garb  of  its  o\vn
majesty,  and  when  the  tribunes  took  refuge  from
the  consular  menaces  in  the  camp  of  Caesar  they
carried  with  them  the  indignant  sympathy  of  the
insulted  nation.

Such  were the mighty  functions and  preroga-
tives which  the  Romans  confided  to  Au-
protection gustus,  or  rather  transferred  to  him  when
°

they  bestowed  upon  him  the  tribunitian
power.  They  were  transferred  to  him  from
the  legitimate  tribunes;  for  though  the  ordinary
office  of  tribune  still  continued  to  exist,  its  political
importance  was  surrendered  to  the  possessor  of  the
extraordinary  title.  Nor  were  these  prerogatives
checked,  as  heretofore,  by  any  of  the  safeguards

CH.  xxxi.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  449

which  the  people  had  raised  against  their  flagrant
abuse.  They  were  no  longer  limited  to  a  single  year,
nor  counterpoised  by  the  rivalry  of  a  bench  of  col-
leagues ;  the  restriction  by  which  they  were  locally
confined  was  soon  relaxed,  and  rendered  indefinite ;
the  appeal  to  the  people  became  merged  in  that  to
the  emperor  alone ;  the  right  of  protection  was  ex-
changed for  the  prerogative  of  pardon ;  and  finally
the  sanctity  of  the  tribune  himself  was  extended  by
an  indulgent  interpretation  to  the  mere  effigy  of  the
emperor  in  his  statues  or  on  his  coins.  The
law  of  treason,  by  which  the  ancient  legis-  *****  n
lators  of  the  republic  had  sought  to  protect
popular  liberty  from  the  encroachments  of  tyranny,
and  which  had  been  applied  at  a  later  period  to
enhance  the  dignity  of  the  officers  who  reflected  the
majesty  of  the  nation,  was  gradually  concentrated
upon  the  emperor  alone,  the  sole  impersonation  of
the  sovereign  people.1  The  definition  of  the  crime
itself  was  loose  and  elastic,  such  as  equally  became
the  jealousy  of  a  licentious  republic,  or  of  a  despotic
usurper.  The  emperors  surrounded  themselves  with
a  host  of  parasites  who  stimulated  and  directed
the  sentiment  of  veneration  attaching  to  their  ex-
alted position,  and  gradually  diverted  it  from  their
office  and  fixed  it  on  their  persons.  From  the  sanc-
tity of  the  tribunes  to  the  divinity  of  the  Caesars
was  a  long  stride  in  public  opinion;  but  the  first
century  of  adulation  made  it  easy  and  practicable.

V.  Some  at  least  of  the  powers  of  the  v  Eve)ltl
tribunate had been accorded to Julius ^'rr'ngon
Caesar  and  afterwards  to  Augustus  himself  ^JjSSl1**
as  early  as  the  period  of  his  victory  over  C0n8ulari9-"
Sextus. On his return  from  Asia  in  725  he  was

1  Cicero,  de  Invent.  Rhetor,  ii.  18 :  "  Mnjcstatem  minuerc  est  digni-

tatc  nut  amplitudine  aut  potestate  populi,  aut  eorum  quibus  populus

potcstatem  dcdit,  aliquid  derogare." The  jurists  continued  to  give  a

similar  definition  under  the  empire:  "  Majestns  est  crimeu  illud  quod

VOL. Ill  Q  G

450  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

again  -  invested,  according  to  Dion,  with  the  tribu-
nitian  prerogatives.  It  seems  probable  that  the
historian  was  misled  by  finding  mention  made  in
his  authorities  of  some  particular  instance  in  which
the  imperator  had  been  allowed  to  obstruct  a  de-
cree of  the  senate,  or  extend  his  protection  to  an
appellant.  The  power  which  was  bestowed  upon
him  in  731  is  generally  referred  to  as  the  keystone
of  the  imperial  arch,  and  from  this  era  the  estab-
lishment of  the  monarchy  is  most  properly  dated.
This  power,  divested-  as  it  practically  was  of  the
direct  limitations  under  which  it  had  been  wielded
by  the  tribunes  of  the  republic,  could  not  fail  to
clothe  its  possessor  with  prerogatives  utterly  in-
consistent with  civil  liberty,  besides  casting  upon
him  an  impression  of  personal  sanctity,  which  must
tend  to  elevate  him  more  and  more  above  the  ranks
of  the  citizens.  Nevertheless,  the  existence  of  inde-
pendent magistrates  of  the  highest  class,  such  as  the
consuls,  could  not  fail  to  impose  restraint  upon  his
action  and  detract  from  the  splendour  of  his  pre-
eminence. In  circumstances  of  the  last  emergency,
when  the  senate  fulminated  its  ultimate  decree,  re-
quiring the  consuls  to  see  that  the  state  suffered  no
harm,  those  magistrates  received  unlimited  authority
over  the  citizens  of  all  sorts  and  conditions  within
Eome  or  beyond  it,  under  pretext  of  which  they  had
been  known  to  inflict  condign  chastisement  even
upon  the  tribunes  themselves.  As  long  therefore  as
this  awful  weapon  remained  sheathed  in  the  armoury
of  the  senate,  even  the  emperor  could  not  feel  himself
really  supreme.  But  Augustus,  as  we  have  seen,
shrank  from  the  annual  assumption  of  the  consulship
to  which  the  people  continued  to  invite  him.  He
renounced  the  trabea  and  the  fasces  at  the  close  of
the  year  731,  and  declared  that  he  would  retire  from

adVersus  pop.  Rom.  et  securitatem  ejus  committitur."  Ulpian,  in
Digest,  xlviii.  tit.  4.  1.  There  will  be  occasion  to  examine  this  sub-
ject more  closely  hereafter.

A.C.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  451

the  supreme  administration  of  the  state  which  their
possession  implied.  No  sooner,  however,  had  he
descended  from  the  curule  chair  than  the  city  was
visited  with  a  series  of  calamities.  Famine  was
succeeded  by  pestilence,  and  an  inundation  of  the
Tiber  swept  away  some  of  the  holiest  monuments  of
the  national  religion.1  Prodigies  were  announced
which  filled  the  multitude  with  the  apprehension  of
still  greater  evils.  The  people  murmured  against
their  hero,  whose  retirement  from  the  helm  of  state
was  manifestly  displeasing  to  the  gods,  and  they
denounced  their  own  supineness  in  allowing  him  to
abdicate  the  consulship.  They  assembled  in  angry
crowds  and  urged  the  senate  to  create  him  dictator.
The  senate  deliberated,  and  the  multitude,  in  their
impatience,  threatened  to  reduce  the  curia  to  ashes.
The  senate  acquiesced,  and  the  people  seized  the
fasces  of  the  two  consuls2,  and  rushing  with  them  to
Augustus,  entreated  or  insisted  that  he  should  accept
absolute  power  for  the  restoration  of  the  public
safety,  together  with  the  care  of  supplying  the  city,
such  as  had  been  forced  in  a  similar  emergency  upon
Pompeius.  But  the  fixed  resolve  of  the  imperator
was  not  even  then  to  be  overcome.  He  tore  his  robe
and  bared  his  breast  to  the  multitude,  while  he
stoutly  refused  to  accept  an  arbitrary  and  hateful
office  .which  even  his  rival,  the  arrogant  Antonius,
had  proposed  to  abolish.3  He  could  only  be  induced

1  Dion.  liv.  1.  The  critics  have  generally  referred  the  ode  of
Horace,  Od.  i.  2.,  to  this  event;  but  I  am  disposed  to  agree  with
Orelli  that  it  relates  to  an  earlier  period,  perhaps  A.U.  725.  The  ap-
plication of  the  word  princeps  to  Augustus  at  this  early  date  is  no
objection,  for  it  is  not  used  in  the  sense  of  princeps  senatus,  but
generally,  as  by  Propertius,  iv.  6.  46.:

"  Principe  te  fluctus  regia  vela  pati."

•  The  consuls  had  each  twelve  fasces,  the  dictator  twenty-four,  in-
asmuch as  during  his  six  months  of  office,  he  superseded  the  consular
magistracy.

s  Dion,  /.  c.;  Veil.  ii.  89.;  Suet.  Oct.  52. :  "  Genu  nixus,  dejecta  ab
humei  is  toga  nudo  pectore  deprecatus  est."
G  G  2

452  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

to  accept  the  charge  of  relieving  the  scarcity ;  nor
would  he  allow  himself  to  be  invested  with  the
functions  of  the  censorship,  which  were  again  prof-
fered to  him.  But  he  caused  two  functionaries  to  be
appointed  to  institute  the  census  of  the  people,  and
these  were  the  last  private  citzens  who  ever  discharged
that  office  which  in  later  times  was  almost  always
performed  by  the  emperors  themselves.  The  enu-
meration of  the  people  was  a  solemn  and  religious
ceremony,  which  befitted  the  personage  of  highest
consideration  in  the  state.

The  transport  of  popular  despair  was  thus  calmed ;

but  the  person  of  the  beneficent  hero  who

against ' could  alone  avert  impending  calamity  from

AugustM.  O.  J

the  nation  was  not  secure  against  the  malice
of  political  foes.  While  the  great  mass  of  the  citi-
zens undoubtedly  revered  Augustus  as  their  champion
and  patron,  the  assertors  of  liberty  were  not  utterly
extinguished,  and  if  armed  resistance  to  his  usurp-
ation was  acknowledged  to  be  hopeless,  there  was
still  room  and  opportunity  for  private  conspiracy.
Licinius  Murena  and  Fannius  Caepio,  men  of  dis-
tinction in  the  commonwealth,  were  implicated  in
the  charge  of  treason  against  the  majesty  of  the  state
in  the  person  of  its  cherished  imperator.1  The  cul-
prits were  allowed  perhaps  to  evade  the  vigilance
of  the  officers  of  justice.  They  were  condemned  in
their  absence,  the  stepson  of  the  emperor,  Tiberius,
putting  himself  forward  as  their  accuser ;  and  it  is
said  that  in  the  course  of  a  short  time  they  were
privily  made  away  with.  The  moderation  which
Augustus  had  affected  seems  to  have  revived  the
spirits  of  the  republicans.  When  he  condescended
to  appear  in  certain  trials  and  give  evidence  at  the
praetor's  tribunal,  in  the  guise  of  a  private  citizen,
subjecting  himself  witli  plausible  humility  to  the

1  Dion,  liv.  3.

A.U.733-B.C.21.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  453

licentious  abuse  of  some  of  the  parties  engaged,
though  flatterers  were  found  to  extol  this  specious
patriotism,  his  enemies  took  occasion  by  it  to  bring
him  into  contempt.  Augustus  may  have  found
already  that  it  was  no  easy  task  to  reign  as  the  first
citizen  of  a  republic.  He  panted  for  more  unlimited
sovereignty,  and  yet  shrank  from  the  suspicion  of
claiming  it.  He  was  not  yet  assured  that  his
countrymen  felt  their  need  of  him,  and  he  aimed  at
bringing  the  necessity  of  monarchy  to  a  decisive
test.  It  was  undoubtedly  with  this  view
that  he  now  withdrew  himself  fom  the  froiTR^me,
centre  of  affairs,  and  left  the  city,  nomi-
nally, at  least,  to  the  control  of  its  legitimate  magis-
trates, while  he  occupied  himself  with  a  tour  of
inspection  in  the  eastern  provinces.  At  the  consular
comitia  for  the  year  733  the  tribes,  now  first,  for
many  years,  left  free  to  the  exercise  of  their  own
discretion,  elected  Lollius  to  one  seat,  and  offered
the  other  of  their  own  accord  to  Augustus.  But
when  the  wish  of  the  citizens  was  signified  to  him,
he  declined  to  accede  to  it:  a  fresh  election  was
announced,  and  the  new  candidates  threw  the  city
into  confusion  by  their  intrigues  and  violence.
Some  personages  of  the  highest  consideration  now
waited  upon  the  emperor  abroad,  and  besought  him
earnestly  to  return,  and  quell  the  dis-
turbance with  his  nod.  Again  Augustus  trea£d"o
refused  to  interfere  ;  he  contented  himself
with  rebuking  the  rival  candidates  and  Ite^wy

refuses

enjoining  them  to  absent  themselves  from
the  city  at  the  time  of  election.  The  commotions  of
the  populace  were  not  even  thus  allayed,  and  it  was
by  violence  rather  than  legitimate  suffrage  that  an
election  was  at  last  effected.  Augustus  watched  his
opportunity,  and  when  he  appointed  Agrippa  to
govern  the  turbulent  city  in  his  absence,  even  the
consuls,  upon  whose  office  the  prefect  must  have

454  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

glaringly  encroached,  were  well  pleased  to  lean  upon
the  proffered  aid.  The  elections  for  the  next  year
now  passed  off  without  disturbance,  Appuleius  and
Silius  succeeding  in  due  course  to  the  vacant  chairs.
But  at  the  next  election  the  people  insisted  once
more  on  creating  only  one  consul,  Sentius  Satur-
ninus,  and  keeping  the  other  place  open  for  Augus-
tus himself.  Again  did  their  favourite  baulk  their
desire,  and  the  attempt  to  supply  his  place  was
attended  with  a  repetition  of  popular  commotions
not  without  bloodshed.  At  this  crisis  Agrippa  it
seems  was  absent  from  the  city ;  the  reins  of  govern-
ment had  fallen  to  the  ground:  the  senate  was
reduced  to  despair,  and  rushed  in  its  consternation
to  the  extremity  of  decreeing  that  the  state  was  in
danger,  and  arming  the  sole  consul  with  arbitrary
powers  for  its  protection.  Sentius  was  appalled  at
the  perilous  supremacy  thrust  upon  him.  The  im-
perator,  he  apprehended,  would  never  forgive  the
momentary  encroachment  on  his  own  paramount
authority.  He  induced  the  senate  to  retract  the
rash  decree  and  send  envoys  to  the  real  master  of
the  state,  and  beseech  him  to  step  forward  and  save
it.  Augustus  now  felt  that  his  time  was  come.  He
consented  to  interfere  so  far  as  to  name  a  second
consul,  and  quiet  was  once  more  restored.  Blood
tin  wood  is  nad  been  shed,  and  this  perhaps  was  the
p^puia^go-  proof  he  required  to  convince  all  classes
pn>TCdetobe  °f  the  state  that  popular  government  was
impracticable.  no  }onger  compatible  with  the  exercise  of
genuine  freedom.  He  was  now  ready  to  return  to
the  city,  and  the  citizens  were  no  less  prepared
to  place  themselves  unreservedly  in  his  power.1
When  he  entered  Eome  in  735  new  honours  and
privileges  were  tendered  for  his  acceptance.  These
for  the  most  part  he  declined.  He  allowed  a

1  Dicn.  lir.  10.

A.U.735-B.C.19.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  455

temple  to  be  consecrated  to  the  Fortune  of  his
return,  and  the  auspicious  day  to  be  commemorated
with  a  festival  named  the  Augustalia.  He  accepted
the  powers  of  the  censorship  ostensibly  for  a  term  of
five  years ;  but  he  allowed  them  from  thenceforward
to  be  periodically  renewed  to  him.  But  ne  accept,  the
the  great  prize  for  which  he  had  been  so  ^JUSS-
long  intriguing  was  the  consular  power,  forhfe-
which  he  now  finally  accepted  for  life.  He  thus
cut  the  knot  which  entangled  his  position ;  for  he
dared  not  assume  the  perpetual  consulship;  he
dared  not  associate  a  colleague  in  his  own  perma-
nence ;  still  less  did  he  dare  to  abdicate  the  highest
magistracy  in  the  state,  and  exalt  a  citizen  over  his
own  head.

As  the  tribunitian  power  assumed  by  the  emperor
transcended  the  legitimate  tribunate,  so  did  importance  of
the  consular  power  which  was  henceforth  thisi)ower-
attached  to  his  prerogative  surpass  the  ordinary
consulate  both  in  authority  and  dignity.  Its  supe-
rior eminence  was  displayed  even  in  its  outward
trappings.  The  senate  decreed  that  Augustus  should
occupy  a  seat  between  the  actual  consuls  in  its
assemblies,  and  assigned  him  the  constant  attend-
ance of  the  twelve  consular  lictors,  the  same  number
which  was  wont  to  attend  only  alternate  months
upon  the  supreme  magistrates  of  the  republic.
Whatever  prerogatives  the  consuls  possessed  by
virtue  of  their  office  were  undoubtedly  conferred
upon  him  in  this  new  capacity,  and  the  imperator
of  the  armies  and  proconsul  of  the  provinces  became
supreme  over  the  citizens  in  Rome  itself.  It  was
no  longer  possible  for  the  senate,  by  declaring  the
state  in  danger,  to  arm  a  domestic  magistrate  with
rival  powers  to  the  commander  of  the  legions  abroad.
If  the  necessity  should  arise  for  introducing  an
armed  force  within  the  walls,  Augustus  might  lay
aside  the  toga  and  array  himself  in  the  military

456  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXXI.

garb.  Possibly  the  emperors  in  the  first  instance
condescended  to  obtain  on  such  occasions  the  author-
ity of  a  senatorial  decree;  but  they  soon  dropped
all  delicacy  on  the  subject,  and  when,  towards  the
end  of  his  life,  Augustus  himself  declared  the  state
in  danger,  no  mention  is  made  of  any  action  of  the
senate  regarding  it.1

VI.  The  foregoing  enumeration,  however,  of  the

political  functions  which  the  emperor  com-
supreme  bined  in  his  own  person,  and  by  which  he

effectually  controlled  the  commonwealth
throughout  its  civil  and  military  organization,  does
not  yet  embrace  the  whole  sphere  of  his  action.  It
will  be  desirable  therefore  in  this  place  to  anticipate
the  few  years  which  intervened  between  his  attain-
ing the  perpetual  power  of  the  consulate  and  the
death  of  Lepidus  in  742,  when  he  was  invested,  for
life  also,  with  the  illustrious  dignity  of  the  supreme
pontificate.  In  the  hands  indeed  of  such  a  mere
political  puppet  as  its  last  possessor,  this  dignity
might  seem  to  be  merely  an  honorary  distinction,
and  to  confer  no  other  privileges  than  those  of  rank
and  precedence.  But  it  had  been  far  otherwise  in
earlier  times,  when  the  noblest  organs  of  the
oligarchy  or  the  staunchest  champions  of  the  com-
mons wielded  therewith  the  great  political  instrument
of  the  state  religion ;  it  was  far  otherwise  when  the
emperors  grasped  it  as  one  of  their  most  cherished
prerogatives,  and  evinced  their  sense  of  its  im-
portance by  the  pertinacity  with  which  they  retained
it.  We  have  seen  the  use  which  Caesar  made  of  it,
in  sweeping  away  the  cobwebs  of  antiquated  pre-
scription by  which  the  nobles  had  kept  in  their  own
hands  the  regulation  of  the  national  calendar.  It
must  never  be  forgotten  that  that  salutary  reform,
the  most  lasting  monument  of  the  dictator's  power,

1  This  was  upon  the  disastrous  defeat  of  Varus  in  Germany;  Dion,
Ivi.  23. See  Hoeck,  R.  G.  i.  1.  393.

A.U.742-B.C.12.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  457

had  a  political  no  less  than  a  social  aspect.  Nor
was  his  successor  less  sagacious,  as  we  shall  soon  per-
ceive, in  deriving  political  advantage  from  this  dig-
nity, and  making  it  his  instrument  for  imposing  upon
his  countrymen  the  spiritual  yoke  of  a  new  element  in
their  religion.  The  Pontifex  Maximus  or  supreme
pontiff  was  the  chief  of  the  pontifical  college,  con-
sisting of  fifteen  members,  and  itself  the  chief  of  the
four  principal  boards  or  associations  of  the  minis-
ters of  the  .Roman  religion.  The  epulones  formed  a
college  for  the  administration  of  the  sacred
festivals,  to  which  much  of  the  pomp  and  epuione*.  c
pageantry  of  the  national  worship  attached :  *£?,  ™™
the  quindecemvirs  had  the  custody  of  the
Sibylline  books,  mysterious  volumes  inscribed  in
occult  language  with  the  future  fortunes  of  the  state :
the  augurs  exercised  the  science  of  divination  ac-
cording to  prescribed  formulas,  the  meaning  and
power  of  which  they  alone  understood :  but  superior
to  all  these  in  dignity  and  importance  was  the  col-
lege of  the  priests  or  pontiffs,  whose  business  it  was
to  ordain  ceremonies,  to  appoint  sacrifices,  to  main-
tain the  temples,  to  declare  the  usages  of  every
ancient,  and  determine  those  of  every  new  cult,  to
control  in  short  the  whole  ritual  of  the  state
religion ;  all  which  they  did  under  the  sanction  of  a
code  of  pontifical  law,  explained,  expanded,  and
enforced  by  their  own  decisions.

The  interests  of  the  people  might  seem  to  demand
that  they  should  have  a  potential  voice  The  people
in  the  appointment  of officers to  whom  supreme*10
functions so extensive and so delicate  Tugustu's  on
were  to be committed. The  power of  A-L-742-
election  became,  as  might  be  expected,  a  subject  of
jealousy to the different orders of the citizens.
From  the  curies  it  was  transferred  to  the  centuries
or  the  tribes. At  another  time  it  was  resigned  to
the members  of  the  college itself; again it  was

458  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

restored  to  the  assembly  of  the  people,  and  this
arrangement  was  finally  ratified  by  the  legislation
of  Julius  Caesar.  The  appointment  to  the  presi-
dency of  the  college  had  followed  nearly  the  same
career.  Antonius  had  recommended  Lepidus  to  the
people,  and  they  had  acceded  to  his  suggestion  with
alacrity.  A  few  years  afterwards  they  had  offered  it
to  Octavius,  and  this  offer  seems  indeed  to  have
been  more  than  once  repeated,  sometimes  by
popular  acclamation.,  sometimes  by  the  zeal  of
individuals  who  might  pledge  themselves  to  obtain
for  it  the  ratification  of  the  comitia.1  But  the  dig-
nity of  chief  pontiff  was  perpetual,  and  Augustus
constantly  forbore  to  wrest  it  from  the  feeble  old  man
to  whom  it  had  fallen.  He  shrank,  as  we  have  seen,
from  accepting  any  distinct  state-office  for  life ;  and
still  more  from  seizing  any  such  in  defiance  of  legal
prescription,  however  little  he  might  apprehend
the  sympathy  of  the  people  for  a  rival  whom  they
had  allowed  to  drop  into  oblivion.  Accordingly  he
waited  with  no  signs  of  impatience  for  the  death  of
the  existing  occupants ;  but  when  that  event  took
place,  and  the  growing  consolidation  of  his  power
encouraged  him  to  extend  its  foundation  still  wider,
he  no  longer  hesitated  to  accept  the  vacant  dignity,
and  take  the  religion  of  the  state  under  his  immediate
superintendence.  This  religious  supremacy  was  in-
deed too  important  a  prerogative  to  be  confided  by
the  emperor  to  any  private  citizen.  The  election
of  magistrates,  the  march  of  armies,  the  transac-
tion of  all  public  business,  might  lie  at  the  mercy
of  one,  who  from  that  exalted  place  could  control
the  divination  of  the  augurs,  and  the  responses  of
the  quindecemvirs.  But  the  union  of  the  emperor

1  Dion,  xlix.  15.  (A.U.  718);  and  again,  liv.  15.,  where  he  says,
WO\\O.KIS  yap  Kal  iSia.  KOI  KOivrj  rrjs  IfpwffWTjs  rcvurris  a£iov/j.fvos  OVK  eSi-
£i£fTos  TOV  AfirKov  faStiy  avrfiv.

A.U.742-B.C.12.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  459

and  the  pontiff  reduced  these  discordant  elements
to  harmony.  Every  act  of  policy  received  the  seal
of  religious  ceremonial.  Meanwhile  the  people  re-
linquished their  suffrages  to  the  emperor  without
an  effort  to  retain  them.  The  elections  to  the
pontifical  college  ceased  to  be  anything  but  a  mere
form.  The  emperor's  appointment  was  direct  and
conclusive,  while  the  number  of  the  members  was
extended  indefinitely  to  augment  the  circle  of  his
favours.  The  choice  of  the  Vestal  virgins  was  also
thrown  into  his  patronage.  Augustus  could  deter-
mine  the  authority  of  the  manifold  vati-
thT  cinations,  passed  from  mouth  to  mouth,
™apu?hSoHsnef  which  perplexed  and  terrified  the  people.
vaticination.  He  pretended  to  institute  a  strict  enquiry
into  their  validity,  and  amassed,  it  is  said,  not
fewer  than  two  thousand  volumes,  Greek  as  well  as
Latin,  which  he  adjudged  to  be  burnt  as  spurious
and  pernicious.  The  Sibylline  books,  which  he
retained  and  sanctioned,  received  fresh  credit  from
the  results  of  this  investigation :  but  they  too  were
purged,  it  was  said,  from  some  apocryphal  interpo-
lations, and  a  select  canon  of  unimpeached  integrity
was  deposited  in  two  golden  caskets  within  the
pedestal  of  the  statue  of  the  Palatine  Apollo.1

The  care  and  vigilance  of  Augustus  in  his  sacer-
dotal capacity  were  exerted  in  various  matters.  He
hastened  to  correct  an  error  which  had  already

1  Suet.  Oct.  31.:  "  Quicquid  fatidicorum  librorum  Grseci  Latinique
generis  nullis  vel  parum  idoneis  auctoribus  vulgo  ferebatur,  supra  duo
millia  contracta  undique  cremavit;  ac  solos  retinnit  Sibyllinos;  hos
quoque  dilectu  habito;  condiditque  duobus  forulis  anratis  sub  Pala-
tini  Apollinis  basi.'  Tacitus  refers  to  the  same  circumstance,  Ann.
vi.  12.  Similar  examinations  had  been  made  on  various  occasions
under  the  republic,  and  again  by  Tiberius,  A.U.  772.  Dion,  Ivii.  18.
Treasures  were  deposited  for  greater  security  within  the  base  or
pedestal  of  the  divine  images.  Comp.  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxiii.  5  "in
Capitolini  Jovis  solio."

460  HISTORY  OF  THE KOMANS  cii.  xxxi.

vitiated  the  computation  of  the  year,  the  pontiffs
under  the  guidance  of  their  inefficient  chief

The  name  of .  . °  1,1-  ,1-1

the  month  having  intercalated  in  every  third  year,
changed  to  since  the  reformation  of  the  calendar,  in-
stead of  every  fourth.  At  the  period  when
Augustus  proposed  to  rectify  this  blunder,  in  the
year  746,  there  had  been  twelve  days  intercalated,
whereas  there  should  have  been  nine  only.  The
remedy  was  to  allow  fifteen  years  to  pass  without
intercalation;  but  from  the  year  761  tbe  process
continued  to  be  correctly  observed,  till,  as  has  been
shown  in  a  former  chapter,  it  was  found  necessary
many  centuries  afterwards  to  repair  the  accumula-
tions of  the  trifling  error  which  still  existed.1  The
name  of  the  month  Quintilis  had  been  changed  to
Julius  in  honour  of  the  chief  pontiff,  who  had  ac-
complished the  reformation  of  the  calendar  in  the
year  708,  and  the  month  itself  had  been  chosen  as
that  of  the  reformer's  birth.  The  precedent  was
seized  to  invent  a  fresh  distinction  for  the  new  re-
former, and  Sextilis  was  duly  changed  to  Augustus.
The  emperor  indeed  had  been  born  in  September ;
but  the  glories  of  the  month  which  precedes  it  in  the
calendar  had  eclipsed  the  estimation  even  of  that
auspicious  epoch.  Tbe  decree  of  the  senate  by  which
the  transfer  was  sanctioned  declared  that  the  month
henceforth  to  be  styled  Augustus  was  the  most  for-
tunate to  the  empire  of  all  the  twelve;  for  in  that,
Octavius  had  commenced  his  first  consulship ;  in  that,

1  Suet.  Oct.  31.;  Plin.  H.  N.  xviii.  57.;  Hacrob.  Saturn,  i.  14.
The  peculiar  mode  of  computing  time  used  by  the  Romans  led  to  this
confusion.  Observe  the  last-mentioned  writer's  expressions:  "Nam
quum  oporteret  diem  qui  ex  quadrantibus  confit  quarto  quoque  anno
confecto  antequam  quintus  inciperet,  intercalare,  illi  quarto  nonperacto
sed  incipiente  intercalabant  ....  post  hoc  unnm  diem  quinto  quo-
que incipiente  anno  intercalari  jussit."  The  bissextile  years  had
been  712,  715,  718,  721,  724,  727,  720,  733,  736,739/742,745.
The  correction  took  place  doubtless  in  the  following  year.  From
745  there  was  no  further  intercalation  till  761.  Ideler,  Chronol.  ii.
132.

A.r.737-B.C.17. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  461

the  legions  on  the  Janiculum  had  devoted  themselves
to  his  service ;  in  that,  his  three  triumphs  had  been
celebrated ;  in  that,  finally,  Egypt  had  submitted  to
the  dominion  of  Rome,  and  civil  discord  had  reached
its  term.  The  citizens,  it  is  recorded,  ratified  the
decree  with  a  plebiscitum,  on  the  motion  of  a  tribune
of  the  people.1

The  biographer  of  Augustus  has  enumerated  the
principal  acts  of  religion  which  the  second
Ca?sar  reformed;  but  some  of  them  at  Augiwtu.-*
least  were  the  pious  deeds  of  a  period
anterior  to  his  pontificate.  The  erection  or  repair
of  temples  was  a  work  of  munificence  from  which
no  private  citizen  was  excluded,  and  this  the  first
of  the  citizens  had  effected  himself  on  an  exten-
sive scale,  besides  instigating  others  to  emulate  him
in  the  same  career.  There  may  have  been .  some
irregularity  however  in  the  ritual  restorations  which
he  enacted,  unless  we  are  to  suppose  that  the  pontiff
Lepidus  was  made  the  organ  of  his  patron's  po-
licy. The  customary  supplication  for  the  safety  of
the  state  was  renewed  after  long  disuse  in  the  year
725 ;  the  flamen  of  Jupiter  was  reappointed,  and
the  Lupercalia  and  other  festivals  revived  probably
about  the  same  time ;  and  lastly  the  year  737  was
rendered  famous  by  the  celebration  of  the  secular
games,  a  grand  service  of  prayer  and  praise  to  the
gods  for  the  general  weal.  On  this  occasion  it  is
recorded  that  the  quindecemvirs  announced,  upon
inspection  of  the  Sibylline  books,  that  the  secular
festival  ought  to  be  held.  The  nature  and  purport
of  this  traditional  solemnity  were  but  faintly  indi-
cated ;  Augustus  appointed  the  most  experienced
jurist  and  antiquary  of  the  time,  Ateius  Capito,  to
examine  and  report  upon  them ;  and  at  his  sugges-

1  Suet.  1.  c. ;  Dion,  Iv.  6. ;  Macrob.  Saturn,  i.  12.

462  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

tion  the  various  ceremonies  were  ordained  and  duly1
executed,  the  most  interesting  of  which,  at  least  in
our  eyes,  must  have  been  the  choral  performance  of
the  hymn  which  Horace  the  court  poet  composed  at
his  patron's  desire.1  After  these  and  other  honours
paid  to  the  national  gods,  Augustus  proceeded  to
exhibit  next  to  them  his  veneration  for  the  national
heroes.  He  repaired  the  edifices  which  had  been
constructed  in  past  times  by  the  great  statesmen  and
warriors  of  the  republic,  and  allowed  the  names  of
the  founders  to  continue  to  adorn  them,  instead  of
replacing  them,  as  custom  would  have  permitted,  by
that  of  the  restorer.  It  was  no  point  of  his  ambition
to  display  himself  as  the  author  of  a  new  order  of
things,  and  throw  the  past  into  the  shade ;  on  the
contrary,  both  his  temper  and  his  policy  led  him  to
juster  views,  and  induced  him  to  cherish  every  link
of  the  chain  which  connected  him  with  the  consuls
and  imperators  of  the  ancient  commonwealth.  He
thronged  the  corridors  of  the  Augustan  forum,  which
he  erected  by  the  side  of  the  Julian,  with  the  statues
of  the  most  famous  captains  of  Roman  story,  arrayed
in  the  triumphal  ornaments  which  they  had  won  and
worn  successively.  An  imperial  edict  declared  that
he  placed  them  thus  conspicuously  in  the  eyes  of  the
citizens,  in  order  that  his  countrymen  might  estimate
by  their  model  both  his  own  actions  and  those  of
future  princes.2

VII.  The  position  of  the  emperor,  as  regarded
vn  Lc-isia  ^e  legislative  and  judicial  functions  per-
tive'an/judi-  taining  to  his  several  capacities,  requires

cial  functions. , ,  ,

to  be  examined  separately.

The  making  of  the  laws  was  the  great  prerogative
of  the  Roman  people,  which  they  had  never  surren-

1  The  ludi  seculares  were  performed  A.u.  737. It  was  doubtless
in  his  pontifical  character  that  Augustus  forbade  the  Romans  to  use
the  Druidical  worship. Suet.  Claud.  25.

2  Suet.  Oct.  31.

CH.  xxxi.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  463

dered  to  any  magistrate.  When  the  assemblies  of
the  curies  fell  into  disuse,  or  were  maintained  only
for  the  sake  of  certain  technical  formalities,  it  was
in  the  comitia  of  the  centuries  alone  that  laws  properly
so  called  (leges}  could  be  passed,  on  the  motion  of  a
senatorial  magistrate  for  the  ratification  of  the  project
of  law  already  approved  by  the  senate.  But  the
plebiscita,  which  from  an  early  period  of  the  republic
had  the  force  of  law,  and  were  binding  upon  all
classes  of  citizens,  were  proposed  by  the  tribunes
and  enacted  by  the  comitia  of  the  tribes.  This  power
of  making  laws  is  necessarily  the  attribute  of  sove-
reignty: wherever  it  is  really  admitted  to  reside,
there  the  power  of  the  state  must  actually  centre.
Augustus  professed  to  wield  a  delegated  authority.
He  made  no  attempt  therefore  to  suspend  the  legis-
lative functions  either  of  the  senate  or  the  people:  he
merely  studied  to  guide  and  control  them ;  but  in  so
doing  he  showed  the  way  to  his  successors  gradually
to  supersede  them.  Accordingly  both  the  senate
and  the  people  continued  to  meet  for  the  purpose  of
legislation.  Every  ordinance  which  the  emperor
wished  to  receive  the  force  of  law  was  made  to  pass  at
his  instance  through  the  regular  stages,  according  to
the  forms  of  the  old  constitution.  His  care

,  ,.  .He  assumes

now  was  to  prevent  others  trom  proposing  the  prerogative

1  • J  J  r T_-  IJ  of  initiation.

laws,  independent  of  his  counsel  and  sug-
gestion :  he  wished  the  initiative  to  be  actually  or
virtually  confined  to  his  own  hands.  Under  the  com-
monwealth both  the  consuls,  as  we  have  seen,  and
the  tribunes  had  possessed  this  prerogative  of  initi-
ation. Augustus  had  certain  reasons  for  declining
to  be  either  consul  or  tribune ;  but  he  retained  the
substance  of  either  office  by  the  anomalous  potestas
which  he  had  caused  to  be  conferred  upon  him.  In
this  consular  capacity  he  accepted  a  specific  permis-
sion to  propose  a  single  measure  at  any  sitting  of  the
senate.  It  does  not  appear  why  he  thus  restricted

464  HISTORY OF THE ROMAN'S  CH.  xxxi.

himself;  nor  again  why  his  successors  relaxed  this
limitation  and  allowed  themselves  at  last  to  propose
as  many  as  five  enactments  on  the  same  day.  It
would  seem  that  the  licence  assumed  by  Augustus
was  extensive  enough  for  any  practical  purpose  ;  and
it  may  be  doubted  whether  he  used  his  tribunitian
power  for  introducing  plebiscita  at  all.  At  the
same  time  the  actual  consuls  and  tribunes,  whom  he
over-shadowed  from  his  superior  eminence,  were
doubtless  too  well  drilled  in  compliance  to  exercise
their  initiatory  functions  except  at  his  special  in-
stance. Thus,  without  abrogating  the  functions  either
of  the  senate  or  the  people,  which  continued  to  exist
and  were  occasionally  referred  to  for  at  least  two
centuries,  the  emperor  became  in  fact  the  sole  foun-
tain of  the  national  legislation,  and  it  was  rarely,
if  ever,  that  any  obstruction  was  thrown  in  the  way
of  his  enactments  by  the  independent  exercise  of
their  suffrages.

But  occasions  might  still  arise  when  Augustus
The  emperor's  might  not  choose  to  propose  a  law  directly,
and  yet  might  wish  a  certain  colour  or  in-
terpretation to  be  given  to  existing  statutes.  Here
also  the  strict  forms  of  the  constitution  substan-
tially befriended  him.  The  magistrates  who  pos-
sessed judicial  functions,  or  in  the  Roman  phrase,
jurisdiction, — such  as  the  consuls  originally,  the
praetors,  and  in  certain  cases  the  tribunes  also,  in  the
city,  the  proconsuls  and  propraetors  in  the  provinces,
— were  enjoined  to  publish  their  edict  or  procla-
mation, in  which  they  declared  beforehand  the  prin-
ciples on  which  their  decisions  would  be  guided  in
cases  for  which  the  strict  letter  of  the  law  offered  no
solution.  In  his  consular  or  tribunitian  capacity
Augustus  might  claim  to  sit  upon  the  bench  of
justice.  He  too  might  take  occasion  to  announce
his  \iews  of  law  by  edict ;  with  this  advantage,  that
whereas  the  jurisdiction  of  other  magistrates  was

A.U.731-B.C.23.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  465

local,  his  was  unlimited;  while  theirs  was  specific,
his  was  general ;  while  theirs  was  temporary,  his  was
lifelong.  The  force  of  their  edicts  was  circumscribed,
while  his  were  unlimited  in  duration,  and  even
survived  his  own  decease  if  the  senate  consented
to  confirm  the  acts  of  the  departed  emperor.  The
decisions  of  the  emperor  therefore  could  not  fail  to
accumulate  more  and  more  authority.  The  exact
bounds  of  their  validity  would  not  be  too  closely
scanned.  He  would  be  emboldened  in  course  of
time  to  declare  not  only  what  was  the  law,  but  what
should  be  the  law,  and  still  the  people,  if  they  dis-
covered the  encroachment,  would  in  fear  and  adula-
tion only  the  more  applaud  it.  But  Augustus,  and
even  his  successors,  were  for  the  most  part  extremely
temperate  in  pressing  this  grave  prerogative.  They
continued  to  seek  the  sanction  of  the  senate,  after
they  had  ceased  to  refer  to  the  people  for  every
important  decision  to  which  they  wished  permanent
authority  to  attach.  Meanwhile,  the  magistrates,
the  provincial  governors,  states  and  corporations,
and  lastly  private  citizens,  besieged  the  doors  of  the
palace  with  questions  for  the  emperor's  solution.
Every  day  new  cases  arose  in  the  administrative
system  of  the  empire,  which  called  for  his  authori-
tative decision.  The  rescript  or  reply  ReKrip,8,nd
which  issued  from  his  council  chamber  cuu»«i'ution«-
Avas  gladly  accepted  by  a  perplexed  executive,  and
registered  for  future  reference  in  the  public  archives.
In  process  of  time  the  edicts,  the  rescripts,  and  the
official  letters  of  the  emperor  were  collected,  com-
pared, and  methodized,  and  a  vast  mass  of  imperial
legislation  received  the  sanction  of  customary  use
inder  the  name  of  the  prince's  constitutions.1

1  Gaius,  i.  5.:  "Constitutio  Principisest  quod  Imperator  decreto  vel

cdicto  vel  epistola  constituit;  necunquam  dubitatum  est  quin  idlcgis

vicem  obtincat,  cum  ipse  imperator  per  legem  imperium  accipiat."

The  reason  here  assigned  is  of  course  illegitimate ;  but  in  the  time  of

VOL.  III.  II  H

466  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

But  Augustus  at  least  did  not  live  to  witness  these
Misconception  distant  results.  If  he  was  not,  in  any  strict
"Ve^bu^*86  sense,  the  maker  of  the  laws,  still  less  was
soiutus."  ^6  exempted  from  the  obligation  to  obey
them.  The  misconception  which  long  existed  on
this  point  among  the  learned  has  been  cleared  away
by  a  subtler  criticism,  sharpened  in  the  struggle  for
constitutional  freedom,  and  is  chiefly  interesting  now
as  an  obsolete  memorial  of  those  pretended  rights  of
despotism  against  which  the  philosophical  jurists  of
modern  Europe  have  successfully  contended.  But
it  is  not  long  since  the  autocracy  of  the  Austrian
Csesars  was  defended  by  an  appeal  to  the  lex  regia
of  the  Eoman  empire,  and  it  was  contended  that
even  from  the  time,  of  Augustus  the  people  had
formally  released  their  sovereign  from  every  law  and
ordinance  of  the  state.  It  is  true  that  the  Roman
jurists,  at  least  from  the  third  century  of  the  empire,
were  prone  to  magnify  the  imperial  prerogatives,
and  sought  to  place  them  upon  the  basis  of  such  a
popular  donation.  Justinian  himself  asserts  boldly
that  whatever  the  prince  wills  has  the  force  of  law,
because  the  people  has  surrendered  to  him  all  its
own  sovereignty  and  power,1  and  that  by  the  special
enactment  denominated  the  Eoyal  Law,  through
which  he  received  the  imperium.  The  emperor
Alexander  Severus  had  preceded  the  great  legislator
in  declaring  that  the  law  of  the  imperium  has
released  the  sovereign  from  the  forms  of  law.2
Ulpian  had  said,  still  more  concisely,  The  prince  is
released  from  the  laivs 3 ;  and  this  same  phrase  is

Gains  (circa  A.  D.  1 50),  the  theory  of  the  constitution  was  forgotten
or  overlooked  even  by  the  jurists  themselves.

1  Justinian,  Inst.  i.  tit.  3.  6. :  "  Quod  principi  placuit  legis  habet
vigorem,  cum  lege  regia  qua  de  ejus  imperio  lata  est,  populus  ei  et
in  eum  omne  suum  imperium  et  potestatem  concessit."

1  In  pr.  D.  de  Const.  Princ. :  "  Licet  enim  lex  imperil  solennibus
Juris  imperatorem  solvent,  nihil  tamen  tarn  proprium  Imperil  est,
quam  legibus  vivere."

3  D.  }.  tit.  3.  31.:  "Princeps  legibus  soiutus  est."

CH.  xxxi.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  467

used  by  the  historian  Dion1,  a  courtier  and  a  min-
ister, to  express  the  entire  independence  of  all  legal
restrictions  which  the  emperor  enjoyed.  Doubt-
less these  authorities  reflect  the  actual  sentiments  of
their  own  days ;  it  is  not  less  certain  however  that
the  language  they  used,  the  old  technical  language
of  Eoman  law,  bore  in  fact  no  such  meaning  as  the
phrase  seems  in  strictness  to  convey.  It  is  seldom
perhaps  that  a  mere  verbal  ambiguity  or  incorrect-
ness has  led  to  so  grave,  a  misapprehension  as  in  the
instance  before  us.  There  is  no  doubt  that  in  the
best  ages  of  the  commonwealth  the  legal  term,  to
be  released  from  the  laivs,  meant  simply  a  specific
exemption  from  some  particular  law  or  constitutional
principle.  If  a  candidate  for  public  honours  was
permitted  by  special  enactment  to  sue  for  a  magis-
tracy before  the  legal  age,  he  was  said  to  be  released
from  the  laws 2 ;  if  an  imperator  obtained  leave  to
enter  the  city  before  the  day  appointed  for  his
triumph,  the  same  phrase  was  applied  to  him 3 :  so
when  a  citizen  was  allowed  to  be  buried  within  the
walls,  or  a  praBtor  to  absent  himself  more  than  ten
days  from  the  city.4  The  same  phrase  was  applied
to  Julius  Csesar,  the  same  to  Augustus,  when  they
demanded  exemption  from  special  restrictions ;  and
the  fact  that  it  was  applied  to  the  latter  on  more
than  one  occasion  in  the  course  of  his  principate
shows  that,  at  least  in  his  time,  the  Komans  were

1  Dion,  liii.  18.:  \f\wrai  '/ap  STJ  rtev  v6/u.ov  &s  avra  TO  JiartviKa
/$T)/uaT«  \fj€f  TOUT"  ta-TLv,  (\fvdepot  arrb  irdffrjs  ava-yKaias  vo^ia-fus  flirt,
and  comp.  c.  28.

-  As  in  the  case  of  Pompeius. Cic.  pro  Leg.  Manil.  21.

*  Suet.  Jul.  18.

4  Cicero,  de  Legg.  ii.  23.,  Pfiilipp.  ii.  13.  In  all  these  cases  the
phrase  is  clearly  adopted  from  much  earlier  usage.  The  word  "leges"
by  itself  has  often  the  general  scope  of  our  phrase  "  the  constitution."
So,  for  instance,  in  the  phrase  "  inter  arma  silent  leges. "  With  us
the  suspension  of  a  single  principle  of  law  may  sometimes  be  called
the  suspension  of  the  constitution.

H  H 2

468  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xxxi.

fully  sensible  of  its  technical  limitation.  But  these
occasional  exemptions  were  easily  converted  into
precedents.  When  the  senate  confirmed  the  acts  of
a  deceased  emperor  his  successors  might  claim  to
step  at  once  into  all  his  immunities.  The  imperium
was  still  formally  conferred  by  a  senatorial  decree,
representing  the  law  of  the  curies,  an  example
of  which  has  been  preserved  to  us  in  the  case  of
Vespasian.1  This  document,  a  portion  of  which  still
exists,  declares  that  the  new  emperor  shall  enjoy
every  exemption  as  well  as  every  function  bestowed
upon  his  predecessors,  and  such  doubtless  was  the
prescribed  formula  employed  at  each  accession.  We
shall  find  however  that  this  sweeping  donation  did
not  supersede  the  action  of  the  senate,  which  con-
tinued to  a  late  period  to  dispense  the  various  pre-
rogatives of  sovereignty,  one  by  one,  with  affected
hesitation.  It  was  not  till  the  accession  of  Alexander
Severus,  and  that  only  for  special  reasons,  that  it
conferred  all  together,  immediately  after  the  im-
perium, the  name  of  Augustus ,  and  father  of  his
country,  the  proconsular  and  tribunitian  powers,
and  the  right  of  initiative  in  the  senate?

1  Gruter,  p.  242.;  Gibbon,  Decl.  and  Fall,  ch.  Ixx. ;  Niebuhr,  Hist.
Rom.  i.  337.,  is  confident  of  its  genuineness. It  has  been  repeatedly
published  by  writers  on  Eoman  law,  and  editors  of  Tacitus  and
Suetonius. The  passage  which  bears  upon  the  question  before  us
runs: — "Utique  quibus  legibus  plebeive  scitis  scriptum  fuit  ne  Divus
Aug.  Tiberiusve  Julius  Caesar  Aug.  Tiberiusque  Claudius  Cassar
Aug.  Germanicus  tenerentur,  iis  legibus  plebisque  scitis  Imp.  Czcsar
Vespasianus  solutus  sit :  quaeque  ex  quaque  lege  rogatione  Divum
Aug.  Tiberiumve Jul.  Csesarem,  Tiberiumque  Claudium Caesarem
Aug.  Germanicum  facere  oportuit,  ea  omnia  Imp.  Cassari  Vespasiano
Aug.  facere  liceat." The  emperors  omitted  are  evidently  those
whose  acts  the  senate  had  refused  to  ratify.

2  Lampridius,  Alex.  Sev.  1,  8. The  emperor  himself  remarks  upon
it  as  a  novelty:  "  Qua;  omnia  novo  exemplouno  die  in  me  contulistis."
After  this  time  it  became  common  to  confer  all  these  functions
together,  but  still  not  till  the  imperium  had  been  first  bestowed.
Comp.  Capitol.  Max.  et  Bulb.  8.;  Vopisc.  Prob.  11,  12.

CH.  XXXI.  L'NBEK THE EMPIRE.  469

It  may  be  difficult  to  reconcile  this  usage  with
the  literal  sense  of  the  document  just  re-  The«lex
ferred  to :  nevertheless,  in  questions  of  this  regia-"
sort  the  clear  records  of  history  must  prevail  over
the  bare  letter  of  the  law,  which,  as  we  have  just
seen,  may  sometimes  deflect  widely  in  practice
from  its  grammatical  purport.  The  decree  however
which  has  been  cited  was,  we  may  suppose,  an  ex-
ample of  the  lex  regia  to  which  the  imperial  jurists
refer  as  the  foundation  of  the  sovereign  power.  This
law  derived  its  name  from  the  period  of  kingly  rule,
when  the  chief  of  the  Koman  state  received  his
investiture  from  the  assembly  of  his  nobles.  In
spite  of  the  jealousy  with  which  the  regal  title  was
regarded,  the  name  continued  perhaps  to  be  attached
to  every  lex  curiata  de  imperio  throughout  the
period  of  the  commonwealth,  and  thus  survived  to
witness  the  revival  of  the  monarchy,  and  to  serve
as  an  instrument  for  its  consolidation.  Yet  even
under  the  grinding  tyranny  of  the  most  despotic  of
the  emperors,  the  Romans  might  still  console  them-
selves with  reflecting  that  no  king  reigned  in  Rome.
The  imperial  medals  struck  in  the  metropolitan  mint
abstained  from  this  hateful  title.1  It  was  only  in
the  provinces,  and  under  the  decent  veil  of  a  foreign
language,  that  the  idea  could  be  suggested  to  the
public  mind  by  the  term  basileus  inscribed  on  the
coins  which  passed  from  hand  to  hand.  The  Greek
writers  indeed  in  the  second  and  third  centuries
ascribe  the  royal  title  to  the  emperor  without  reserve ;
but  in  Latin  it  is  only  to  be  found,  I  believe,  thus
applied  among  the  solecisms  of  the  African  Tertullian
and  in  the  metaphors  of  a  poetaster  such  as  Claudian.2

1  Spanheim.  de  Usu  Numism,  p.  686. ;  Eckhel,  Doctr.  Numm.  viii.
366.

2  Tertull.  de  Virgin.  VeL  17.:  "  Ut  ait  Rom  an  a  quaedam  regina."
Claudian,  Epith.  Hon.  253. :

"  Magnorura  soboles  regum  parituraquc  rcgcs."

470  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XXXI.

It  is  the  more  remarkable  that  the  emperors  should
have  refrained  so  carefully  from  appropriating  it,
since  the  very  mansion  which  the  chief  pontiff
inhabited  was  technically  denominated  the  regia.1
But  the  wreath  of  the  emperor,  the  symbol  of  the
widest  and  noblest  sovereignty  the  world  has  ever
known,  the  ensign  of  a  Julius,  an  Augustus,  and  a
Trajan,  finally  gathered  round  it  a  glory  of  its  own,
and  eclipsed  with  its  halo  of  brilliant  associations  the
pallid  lustre  of  Oriental  diadems.2

But  this  consummation  falls  only  just  within  the
The  name  of  limit s  of  the  long  period  before  us.  It
was  impossible  indeed  that  the  sovereign
who  wielded  the  powers  of  so  many  distinct  offices
should  not  soon  acquire,  at  least  in  popular  language,
some  peculiar  designation  expressive  of  this  aggregate
supremacy.  It  mattered  not  that  the  designation
bore  no  such  literal  meaoing ;  or  rather  it  suited  the
imperial  policy,  and  accorded  not  less  with  popular
prejudice,  that  its  actual  signification  should  be  wide
of  the  idea  it  was  really  intended  to  convey.  Octa-
vius  was  the  adopted  heir  of  Julius  Caesar :  from  the
moment  of  his  adoption  the  surname  of  Caesar  became
appropriated  to  him,  and  it  was  by  this  name  ac-
cordingly that  he  was  most  familiarly  known  to  his
own  contemporaries.  Modern  writers  for  the  sake
of  distinction  have  agreed  for  the  most  part  to
confine  this  illustrious  title  to  the  first  of  the

1  The  same  name  was  applied  to  a  state  pavilion  in  the  theatres,
and  to  any  public  hall  or  curia  of  peculiar  magnificence ;  as  by  Statius,
Sylv.  L  i.  30.:  "Belligeri  sublimis  regia  Pauli."  Hence,  I  conceive,
rather  than  from  any  supposed  convertibility  of  the  terms  imperator
and  ficuri\evs,  the  imperial  halls  of  justice  were  denominated  £a<rt At/ecu.
Another  derivation  of  the  Basilica  is  from  the  ar6a.  /3a<nAt/c^  at
Athens  in  which  the  Archon  Basileus  presided.  But  this  seems
extremely  far-fetched  both  in  geography  and  chronology.

-  It  may  be  worth  while  to  observe  that  the  linen  fillet  is  a  sacri-
ficial, the  wreath  of  laurel,  or  rather  bay,  a  military  ensign ;  the  golden
band  surmounted  with  spikes  or  rays,  the  parent  of  our  modern
crowns  and  coronets,  is  a  token  of  divinity.

CH.  XXXI.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  471

Caesarean  dynasty ;  but  we  should  doubtless  gain  a
clearer  conception  of  the  gradual  process  by  which
the  idea  of  a  dynastic  succession  fixed  itself  in  the
minds  of  the  Romans,  if  we  followed  their  own
practice  in  this  particular,  and  applied  the  name  of
Caesar  not  to  Augustus  only,  but  also  to  his  adopted
son  Tiberius,  to  the  scions  of  the  same  lineage  who
succeeded  him,  and  even  to  those  of  later  and  inde-
pendent dynasties.1  As  late  indeed  as  the  reign  of
Diocletian,  the  Roman  monarch  was  still  eminently
the  Caesar.  It  was  not  till  the  close  of  the  third
century  of  our  era  that  that  illustrious  title  was
deposed  from  its  preeminence,  and  restricted  to  a
secondary  and  deputed  authority.  Its  older  use
was  however  revived  and  perpetuated,  though  less
exclusively,  through  the  declining  ages  of  the  empire,
and  has  survived  with  perhaps  unbroken  continuity
even  to  our  own  days.  The  Austrian  Kaiser  still
retains  the  name,  though  he  has  renounced  the  suc-
cession of  the  Caesars  of  Rome,  while  the  Czar  of
Muscovy  pretends  to  derive  his  national  designation
by  direct  inheritance  from  the  Caesars  of  Byzantium.

1  Dion  (Hi.  40.)  gives  it  as  the  advice  of  Maecenas,  us  tfye  rb  fitv
irpayfjut  rb  rijs  fj.ovapx^as  a'lPV>  r^  &  OPO/UO  rrjs  £a<riAei'as  is  Kai  firdparov
<po€ri6fs,  rovro  pfv  /XT;  irpocr\a.Sris,  TT?  Se  5?;  TOV  Kaiaapos  irpoa'riyopkf
Xpwufvos  avrdpxft.  The  popular  notion  that  Czar  and  Caesar  are  in
fact  the  same  word  is  now  denied  by  the  learned;  but  it  is  still,  I
believe,  encouraged  by  the  Russian  government  and  commonly  ac-
cepted by  the  nation.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

LOSDOH

PEIXTBD BY 8POTTI8WOODE ASD CO.
SEW-STREET SQUARE

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY

Los  Angeles

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below.

41584

•  _•.; tt_»

# £

WSOl^

O u_

|j c?
NV-SOl^

IRARYQr

.^E-UNIVERS1//)
