UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA
AT LOS  ANGELES

THE

ROMANS [JNDER THE EMPIRE

VOL.  VI.

WORKS BY  CHARLES MERIVALE, D.D.

SOMETIME  DEAN OK  KLY.

HISTORY of the EOMANS under the EMPIRE.

With  Maps. 8  vols. Crown  8vo.  3s.  6of.  each.

The  FALL  of the ROMAN REPUBLIC;  a  History

of  the  Last  Century  of  the  Commonwealth. With  Maps.
Fcp.  8vo.  Is.  6d.

The  ROMAN  TRIUMVIRATES.  With  Map.  Fcp.  8vo.
2*.  6d.  (Epochs  of  Ancient  History.)

GENERAL  HISTORY  OF  ROME  from  the  Founda-
tion of  the  City  to  the  Fall  of  Augustulus,  B.C.  753— A.D.  476.
With  5  Maps.  Crown  8vo.  Is.  6d.

SCHOOL  HISTORY  of  ROME. Abridged  from  Dean

MEBIV  ALE'S  General  History  of  Rome,  with  the  sanction  of  the
Author,  by  C.  PULLEH,  M.A. With  13  Maps. Fcp.  8vo.  9s.  6d.

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.  39  Paternoster  Row,
London,  New  York,  and  Bombay.

HISTORY

ROMANS  TINDER  THE  EMPIRE

BY  THE VERY  REV.

CHARLES MERIVALE, D.C.L.

LATE DEAN OF ELY

IN EIGHT VOLUMES

VOL.  VI.

NEW IMPRESSION

LONGMANS, LIKE  EN, AND CO.

•39 PATERNOSTER KOW, LONDON
NEW YORK AND BOMBAY

.'  '  '. ^  .  * 1904

Y.6

CONTENTS

THE SIXTH VOLUME.

CHAPTER  XLVII.

PAOS

The  family  of  Herod  the  Great  at  Rome — Berenice,  and  her
children  Herodias  and  Agrippa — Herodias  repudiates  her
husband  Philippus,  marries  Herod  Antipas,  and  receives  a
principality  in  Palestine — Agrippa  courts  the  young  Caius,
and  imbues  him  with  the  ideas  of  Oriental  sovereignty —
Falls  under  the  displeasure  of  Tiberius  and  is  arrested— On
the  death  of  Tiberius  he  is  released,  and  taken  into  favour
by  Caius — First  commencement  of  the  new  principate —
Liberality  of  Caius — His  subservience  to  the  senate — At-
tempts to  restore  the  Comitia — Becomes  consul,  July,  790
— His  industry  in  administration — Magnificence  of  his
shows — He  falls  into  excessive  dissipation— His  dangerous
illness — Despair  of  the  citizens  and  provincials — On  his
recovery  his  head  turned  by  flattery — Puts  to  death  the
young  Tiberius,  Macro  and  Ennia,  and  Silanus — His  ex-
travagances, necessities,  and  cruelty — Believes  himself  a
jjod,  and  requires  his  subjects  to  worship  him — Indifference
of  the  Romans  and  Greeks — Resistance  of  the  Jews — Dis-
turbances at  Alexandria — Agrippa  goes  to  Palestine:  in-
trigues against  Antipas  and  Herodias  :  obtains  their
oanishment,  and  succeeds  to  their  dominions — Caius  orders
his  statue  to  be  set  up  in  the  Jewish  synagogues,  and  i»
the  temple  at  Jerusalem—  Mission  of  Philo  the  Jew,  and
interview  with  the  emperor  (A.D.  37 — 40,  A.u.  790 — 793)  1

a4£fc

Vi  CONTENTS OF

CHAPTER  XLVIII.

PAOS

Heflections  on  the  deficiency  of  our  materials  for  the  history  of
Caius — Defects  of  his  education  and  training — His  contempt
for  political  disguises — The  priesthood  of  the  Arician  Diana
— Colossal  character  of  his  conceptions :  his  architectural
extravagances  —  The  viaduct  over  the  Velabrum  —  The
bridge  of  boats  at  Baiae  -  His  extravagant  luxury — He  pre-
tends to  eloquence—  His  spite  against  great  reputations,
and  belief  in  his  own  divinity — Systematic  persecution  of
the  wealthy  nobles — Massacre  of  exiles — The  people  alien-
ated by  taxation — His  expedition  into  Gaul — Overthrow
of  Lentulus  Gaetulicus  and  Lepidus — Pretended  invasion
of  Britain — Returning  to  Rome,  he  plays  the  tyrant  with-
out disguise — Conspiracies  against  him — He  is  slain  by
Cassius  Chaerea  (A.D.  39 — 41,  A.U.  792 — 794)  -  51

CHAPTER  XLIX.

The  senate  deliberates  on  the  state  of  affairs — The  praetorians
carry  off  Claudius  to  their  camp  and  swear  allegiance  to
him — The  senate  yields  and  accepts  him  as  emperor — He
proclaims  an  amnesty,  excepting  only  Chaerea  and  a  few
others — Contempt  and  neglect  with  which  he  had  been
treated  in  his  early  years — His  devotion  to  literature — He
takes  the  policy  of  Augustus  as  his  model:  1.  His  military
exploits  and  conduct  of  foreign  affairs.  2.  His  revision  of
the  senate  and  knights,  and  census  A.U.  800.  3.  His  ad-
ministration of  religious  affairs:  secular  games,  A.C.  800.
4.  His  laborious  administration  of  justice.  5.  His  build-
ings and  constructions:  the  Aqua  Claudia:  the  Portus
August!:  draining  of  the  lake  JFucinus.  6.  His  public
shows  in  the  amphitheatre,  and  mock  sea-fight  in  the  lake
Fucinus — Gluttony  and  intemperance  ascribed  to  him  -  98

CHAPTER  L.

Claudius  subject  to  the  influence,  1.  Of  women:  his  wives:
Messalina.  2."  Of  freedmen:  Polybius,  Narcissus,  &c. —
Treatment  of  the  sisters  of  Caius  — Banishment  of  Seneca —
Death  of  App.  Silanus — Conspiracy  of  Scribonianus — In-
vasion of  Britain  and  triumph  of  Claudius — Death  of
Valerius  Asiaticus — Internal  administration  of  Claudius —
Rivalry  of  Messalina  and  Agrippina — Messalina's  amour
with  Silius,  and  daring  marriage  with  him — Alarm  and
anger  of  Claudius — Her  disgrace  and  death — Intrigues

THE SIXTH VOLUME.  Vll

PAOK

tor  a  successor — Claudius  marries  Agrippina — Her  son
Dumitius  betrothed  to  his  daughter  Octavia:  adopted
under  the  name  of  Nero  —  Influence  of  Agrippina:  she
founds  the  Colonia  Agrippinensis — Advancing  popularity
of  Nero — Agrippina  effects  the  destruction  of  Lepida — She
poisons  Claudius — Nero  succeeds  to  power — Remarks  on
the  character  of  Claudius — The  adoration  paid  him  during
his  life  by  Seneca,  and  abuse  of  him  after  his  death — The
Apocolocyntosis — Flattery  of  Nero  (A.U.  794—807,  A.D.
41—54) 134

CHAPTER  LI.

The  wise  and  liberal  policy  of  Claudius  towards  Gaul — His
measures  for  the  suppression  of  Druidism — He  gives  a  king
to  the  Cherusciins  and  withdraws  the  Roman  armies  from
Germany — Political  state  of  Britain — Invaded  by  Aulus
Plautius  (A.  o.  796,  A.  D.  43)— Arrival  of  Claudius — Defeat
of  the  Trinobantes — Further  successes  of  Plautius  and  Ves-
pasian— Subjugation  of  Southern  Britain — Campaigns  of
Ostorius  Scapula  against  Caractacus  and  the  Silures —
Foundation  of  the  Colonia  Camulodunum  (A.  u.  804,  A.  D.
51) — Final  defeat  and  capture  of  Caractacus — Magnan-
imity of  Claudius — Account  of  the  Roman  province  of
Britain,  and  the  stations  of  the  legions — Suetonius  Paul-
linus  routs  the  Britons  in  Anglesey — Insurrection  of  the
Iceni  under  their  Queen  Boadicea — Camulodunum  stormed
and  destroyed — Slaughter  of  the  Romans  and  overthrow  of
their  establishments — Return  of  Suetonius  from  Anglesey,
and  defeat  of  the  Iceni  (A.U.  814,  A.  D.  61) — Final  paci-
fication of  Southern  Britain  --..-.  212

CHAPTER LII.

The  family  of  the  Domitii — Early  years  of  Nero. — His  edu-
cation under  Seneca — Struggle  for  influence  over  him  be-
tween the  senate,  his  tutor,  and  his  mother — He  makes  a
favourable  impression  at  the  commencement  of  his  reign
— His  intrigue  with  Acte  and  gradual  progress  in  vice —
Behaviour  of  Agrippina  and  Seneca — Praise  of  his  cle-
mency—  Disgrace  of  Pallas — Murder  of  Britannicus  —
Division  between  Nero  and  Agrippina — Intrigues  against
her — Consecration  of  a  temple  to  Claudius — Favourable
characteristics  of  Nero's  early  government — His  financial
and  legislative  measures — The  "  Quinquennium  Neronis  "
(A.  D.  54— 59,  A.  p.  807— 812) 2«l

vill  CONTENTS OF THE SIXTH VOLUME.

CHAPTER  LIH.

RAM

Nero's  passion  for  Poppsea  Sabina — Intrigues  against  Agrip-
pina — Nero's  machinations  against  her  unsuccessful — She
is  finally  despatched  by  his  orders — Seneca  and  Burrhus
implicated  in  the  murder — Institution  of  the  Neronian
games — The  Ludi  Maximi — Nero's  insensibility  to  national
feeling — Moderation  in  regard  to  charges  of  libel  and  ma-
jesty— Death  of  Burrhus — Seneca  seeks  to  withdraw  from
public  life — Rise  arid  influence  of  Tigellinus — Death  of
Plautus  and  Sulla — Nero's  extravagance  and  cruelty —
Repudiation,  banishment  and  death  of  Octavia — Prose-
cution of  wealthy  freedmen,  Doryphorus  and  Pallas —
Nero's  progress  in  licentiousness — He  exhibits  himself  in
the  circus — His  infamous  debauchery — Burning  of  Rome
—Persecution  of  the  Christians — Restoration  of  the  city
— Nero's  "Golden  House" — Further  exactions  and  con-
fiscations— Conspiracy  of  Piso — Its  detection  and  punish-
ment— Death  of  Lucan  and  Seneca — Pretended  discovery
of  the  treasures  of  Dido — Death  of  Poppsea — Further  pro-
scriptions— Storms  and  pestilence — Reflections  of  Tacitus
— Death  of  Annaeus  Mela  —  Prosecution  and  death  of
Soranus  and  Thrasea  (A.  D.  58 — 6&,  A.  u.  81 1—819)  308

CHAPTER  LIV.

Consideration  of  the  causes  which  induced  the  Romans  to
endure  the  tyranny  of  the  emperors — Freedom  of  thought
and  education  allowed  by  it  accepted  a?  a  compensation
for  restraints  on  political  action — Toleration  of  philosophy
— Opposition  of  the  Stoics  to  the  government;  their  cha-
racter and  position  in  the  commonwealth — State  of  religion
at  Rome:  suppression  of  the  Gaulish  superstitions:  en-
croachment of  Oriental  cults — Proscription  of  the  Syrian
and  Egyptian  priesthoods — Judaism  becomes  fashionable  at
Rome:  introduced  among  the  freedmen  of  the  palace —
Turbulence  and  proscription  of  the  Jews  at  Rome — First
reception  of  Christian  ideas  among  them- St.  Paul's
Epistle  to  the  Romans — His  arrival  and  preaching  at  Rome
—  Persecution  of  the  Christians — Question  of  the  applica-
tion of  this  name  by  Tacitus — The  tyranny  of  the  emperors
supported  by  the  corruption  of  the  age — Reflections  on
Roman  vice — Counteracting  principles  of  virtue — Christian-
ity accords  with  the  moral  tendencies  of  the  age — Seneca
and  St.  Paul — The  teaching  of  Seneca  moral,  not  political
-Persius  and  Lucan  .......  395

HISTORY

ROMANS  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.

CHAPTER  XLVII.

The  family  of  Herod  the  Great  at  Rome. — Berenice,  and  her  chil-
dren Herodias  and  Agrippa. — Herodias  repudiates  her  husband
Philippus,  marries  Herod  Antipas,  and  receives  a  principality  in
Palestine.  —  Agrippa  courts  the  young  Caius,  and  imbues  him
with  the  ideas  of  Oriental  sovereignty. — Falls  under  displeasure
of  Tiberius,  and  is  arrested. — On  the  death  of  Tiberius  he  is  re-
leased, and  taken  into  favour  by  Caius. — First  commencement  of
the  new  principate. — Liberality  of  Caius. — His  subservience  to
the  senate. — Attempts  to  restore  the  comitia. — Becomes  consul,
July,  790. — His  industry  in  administration.  —  Magnificence  of
his  shows. — He  falls  into  excessive  dissipation. — His  dangerous
illness. — Despair  of  the  citizens  and  provincials. — On  his  recovery
his  head  turned  by  flattery. — Puts  to  death  the  young  Tiberius,
Macro  and  Ennia,  and  Silanus. — His  extravagances,  necessities,
and  cruelty. — Believes  himself  a  god,  and  requires  his  subjects  to
worship  him. — Indifference  of  the  Romans  and  Greeks. — Resist-
ance of  the  Jews. — Disturbances  at  Alexandria. — Agrippa  goes  to
Palestine:  intrigues  against  Antipas  and  Herodias:  obtains  their
banishment,  and  succeeds  to  their  dominions.— Caius  orders  his
statue  to  be  set  up  in  the  Jewish  synagogues,  and  in  the  temple
at  Jerusalem. — Mission  of  Philo  the  Jew,  and  interview  with  the
emperor.  (A.  D.  37 — 40,  A.  u.  790 — 793.)

THE son  of  Philip,  king  of  Macedon, could find
among-  the  free  citizens  of  the  Grecian  re-

,,.°  LI, f  1  1  Royal  chil-

publics  no  youth  ot  equal  rank  to com-  <iren  educated

.,, ,. . .,  f ,-.-,  . at  Home.

pete  with  him  in  the  games  of  Olympia,  A.  D.  sj.
and  the heir  of  an Augustus or Tibe-
rius  might  already  disdain the companionship of
the  children  of  Eoman  knights  and  senators. But
the  capital  of  the  world  was  now  frequented  by  the
scions  of  many  royal  families. The  children  of  de-
VOL.  VI.  R

6

2  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVII.

pendent  sovereigns,  invited  to  receive  a  Eoman
education,  were  retained  there  as  pledges  for  their
parents'  fidelity  ;  the  pretenders  to  disputed  thrones
were  encouraged  to  lay  their  claims  before  the
emperor  in  person,  and  allowed  to  wait  year  after
year  for  his  final  determination.  A  distinguished
society  of  royal  birth  was  thus  collected  together  in
the  centre  of  republican  equality,  objects  of  remark
and  interest  to  those  around  them,  to  whom  they
communicated  the  ideas  in  which  they  had  themselves
been  bred  quite  as  fast  as  they  imbibed  the  notions
of  their  conquerors.

The  awe  with  which  these  illustrious  strangers
might  at  first  regard  the  institutions  of  their  mighty
mistress  would  naturally  abate  upon  closer  acquaint-
ance with  them.  They  found  the  Romans  profoundly
dissatisfied  with  the  noble  polity  of  their  ancestors,
discarding  one  by  one  the  guarantees  of  their  ancient
freedom,  and  abandoning  themselves  to  an  ignorant
admiration  of  the  hollow  splendour  of  Oriental  des-
potism. What  remained  of  the  equal  laws  to  which
the  vital  forces  of  the  conquering  republic  had
been  ascribed,  appeared  to  their  closer  examination
a  mere  shadow  and  pretence.  Unable  to  appreciate
the  real  energy  which  still  moved  under  these  anti-
quated forms,  and  the  influence  his  old  traditions
still  practically  exerted  on  the  Roman  citizen,  they
learnt  to  look  with  complacent  disdain  upon  the
names  of  the  senate  and  people.  The  Roman
nobles,  on  the  other  hand,  notwithstanding  the  public
and  official  contumely  with  which  they  treated  the
most  illustrious  of  their  subjects,  did  not  fail  to  ad-
mire in  their  hearts,  with  a  blind  reverence,  the  social
prescriptions  of  eastern  civilization,  and  were  not  slow
to  acquire,  under  the  tuition  of  these  gallant  kings
and  princes,  a  glowing  interest  in  the  forms  of
Oriental  monarchy.1

1  Hor. Sat. i.  3.  1?.:  «*  Modo re§res atque  tetrarchas,
jnagna  loquens.''

A.D.37-A  U.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  3

In  this  circle  of  distinguished  foreigners  the  dy-
nasties of  Thrace  and  Cappadocia,  of  Egypt.  Herod
Syria  and  Armenia,  were  all  represented.  Seated  at
But  none  among  them  were  at  this  time  so  Bome'
conspicuous  as  the  members  of  the  family  of  Herod
the  Judean,  some  of  whom  were  domiciled  for  many
years  at  Eome,  and  admitted  to  the  most  intimate
acquaintance  with  the  princes  of  the  Csesarean  house.
The  imperial  city  was  in  fact  at  this  period  the
common  asylum  of  many  unfortunate  princes  who
would  in  their  own  country  have  been  exposed  to
certain  destruction  from  the  horrid  precautions  of
dynastic  jealousy.  I  have  not  paused  to  enumerate
precisely  the  members  of  his  own  family  whom  the
tyrant  of  Judea  had  successively  put  to  death.  For
many  years  his  own  children  had  been  screened  from
his  fury  by  the  shadow  of  the  imperial  palace  ;  when
at  last  they  had  been  restored,  at  his  instance,  to  their
native  soil,  they  had  been  led  speedily  to  the  scaffold
before  the  eyes  of  their  indignant  countrymen.  But
Augustus  had  again  interfered  to  save  the  monster's
grandchildren.  Herodes,  the  son  of  Aristobulus,  to
whom  the  name  of  Agrippa  had  been  given  in  com-
pliment to  the  emperor's  friend  and  minister,  had
been  removed  to  Eome  soon  after  his  father's  death,
and  with  him  his  mother  Berenice,  and  his  Hi8  mother
elder  sister  Herodias.1  These  children  Sdri'SU
united  the  blood  of  the  rivals  Salome  and  Herodias-
Mariamne :  their  nearest  kinsmen  had  perished  by
the  hands  of  the  executioner,  and  the  dominions
which  should  have  descended  to  their  father  Aristo-
bulus and  his  brother  Alexander  had  been  divided
among  their  uncles,  the  offspring  of  their  grand-
father's later  marriages.  At  Eome,  however,  they

1  Joseph,  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  6.  3. :  -rbv  'Ayptirirav  ....  Oavftaros
a^iiurarov  yfyfi/7]fj,fvoi>,  Ss  e'/c  irdvv ISitarov,  Kal irapb.  iraffav  Sofav  TCUV
ti86rciit'  asrbv,  eirl  roffdvSe  /jy£^0/j  Swa^fus. xviii.  7.  1.  :  'HptbSov rov
3a,ffi\fti<s  o\iyov  irpb  rrjs  rf\fvrrjs  'Aypiinras  fv  rrj  'PoijUf?  Stantafifvos,
B  2

4  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XM'TI.

had  been  received  with  kindness.  Antonia,  the
daughter  of  the  triumvir,  might  remember  the  inti-
macy which  had  subsisted  between  her  father  and
Herod,  and  she  introduced  the  grandchildren  of  the
king  of  Judea  to  the  society  of  her  own  offspring  by
Drusus.1  Herod  Agrippa,  born  in  the  year  743,
was  but  one  year  older  than  Claudius,  the  youngest
of  her  children,  with  whom  he  was  bred  up  in  the
closest  intimacy.  Both  Herod  and  his  sister  inherited
the  ambitious  spirit  of  their  house.  Upon  the  dis-
grace of  Archelaus,  and  the  vacancy  of  the  throne  of
Judea,  they  might  hope,  through  their  interest  with
the  rulers  of  the  empire,  to  recover  that  portion  of
their  ancestral  inheritance.  Notwithstanding,  how-
ever, their  intrigues  and  aspirations,  the  imperial
government  still  retained  its  new  acquisition,  and
showed  no  disposition  to  relinquish  it.  All  their
views  were  now  covertly  directed  to  saving  some
inferior  province  or  principality  from  the  wreck  of
their  grandsire's  sovereignty.  But  the  schemes  of
the  sister  were  thwarted  by  the  indolence  of  her
husband  Philippus,  while  the  golden  hopes  still
cherished  by  the  brother  could  only  be  revealed  in
the  royal  magnificence  he  displayed  in  a  private  sta-
tion. The  liberality  with  which  he  courted  the  chiefs
of  Rome,  and  led  the  career  of  prodigality  among
them,  soon  exhausted  his  resources  and  plunged  him
into  desperate  embarrassments.  Nor  could  he  retrieve
his  affairs  by  flattery  of  the  emperor,  for  Tiberius,
after  the  death  of  Drusus,  refused  to  see  any  of  the
young  prince's  companions,  whose  presence  would
have  renewed  his  sorrow.

Philippus,  the  despised  husband  of  Herodias,  was  a
Agrippa  son  of  Herod  the  Great  by  a  second  Mari-
Mm*hifsto  amne,  who  had  easily  resigned  himself  to
cains  crcsar.  ^he  obscure  privacy  which,  on  account,
perhaps,  of  his  acknowledged  imbecility  of  character,

1 Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  7 1

A.D.37-A.U.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRK.  5

nad  been  assigned  him  on  the  division  of  his  father's
fortunes.  The  union  of  an  uncle  and  a  niece  was
abhorrent  to  Eoman  notions,  and  these,  we  may  sup-
pose, were  still  more  offended  when  Herodias,  im-
patient at  the  restraint  imposed  upon  her  by  a  con-
sort she  disdained,  and  solicited  at  the  same  time
in  marriage  by  another  uncle,  Antipas,  presumed  to
repudiate  Philippus  by  her  own  act,  and  connect  her-
self with  his  half-brother.1  Nevertheless,  the  favour
of  the  imperial  family  now  smoothed  the  way  before
her.  She  returned  with  her  new  husband  to  Sa-
maria, the  province  which  had  been  erected  into  a
sovereignty  in  his  favour,  and  obtained  a  subordinate
appointment  for  her  brother  as  governor  of  the  city
of  Tiberias.  But  Agrippa  did  not  long  remain  satis-
fied with  this  inferior  position.  The  compassion  of
friends  and  kinsmen  furnished  him  with  funds  for
recommencing  his  career  of  politic  extravagance  at
Rome,  to  which  spot,  in  the  decline  of  the  reigning
emperor,  he  once  more  betook  himself.2  He  threw
himself  with  renewed  fervour  into  the  pleasures  and
dissipations  of  his  imperial  patrons,  drew  off  gradu-
ally from  his  early  associate,  the  stupid  and  neg-
lected Claudius,  in  whose  prospects  there  was  little
to  encourage  him,  and  having  to  choose  for  an
ally  between  the  grandson  and  the  grand-nephew  of
Tiberius,  shrewdly  attached  himself  to  the  latter.3
Agrippa  was  twice  the  age  of  the  stripling  Caius :  in-
telligent and  active^  and  well  versed  in  men  and
affairs,  he  soon  acquired  unbounded  ascendancy  over
the  young  prince,  now  trembling  in  the  uncertainty

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  6.  4.  :  eVi  vvyxvaft  ippovfiaaffa.  T<£V
iroTpicof.

2  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  3. : &x€ro  €7r'  'A.\f^av5peias irXfw
ei>6a  'A\€£dv8pov Sflrai TOV  'AXa/Sapx0" /uupiaSas efaofl'i Sdvfta aim?
Sowai. In  this  and  other  enterprises  Agrippa  was  assisted  by  the
good  services  of  his  wife  Cyprus,  the  daughter  of  Phasael,  a  brothel
of  Herod  the  Great.

3  Joseph.  Antiy.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  4.

6  HISTORY OF THIS ROMANS  CH.  XLVJI.

of  his  own  fortunes,  and  oscillating  between  the
brightest  hopes  of  power  and  the  direst  apprehensions.
To  Caius  such  a  friend  and  mentor  as  the  Jewish
chief  was  invaluable.  With  Agrippa  he  passed  the
hours  he  could  steal  from  the  exacting  jealousy  of
his  uncle ;  from  him  he  learnt  the  customs  of  the
East  and  the  simple  machinery  of  Asiatic  despotism,
and  imbibed  a  contemptuous  disgust  at  the  empty
forms  of  the  Republic,  which  served  only,  as  he
might  in  his  blind  inexperience  imagine,  to  impede
the  march  of  government,  while  they  contributed
nothing  to  its  security.  He  saw  the  loathed  and  abject
Tiberius  cowering  in  terror  before  a  senate  more  ab-
ject in  its  terrors  than  himself,  hiding  his  person
from  the  sight  of  his  subjects,  feeling  his  way  before
every  step,  and  effecting  every  end  by  intrigue  and
circumvention  ;  while  the  petty  lord  of  a  Syrian
plain  or  watercourse  was  every  inch  a  king ;  while
in  the  little  town  of  Samaria,  as  he  heard,  every
word  of  the  tetrarch  was  obeyed  without  remon-
strance or  hesitation.

But  it  was  not  in  the  simplicity  of  their  despotic
He  inflames authority  only  that  the  sovereigns  of  the

hisimagina- _,  j> ,  j j i  J

tion  with  the East  so  far  transcended,  he  was assured,

description  ,  .  , .  _ ,  . ,

of  the  spien-  the  princes  and  imperators  of  the  rival
Jerusalem,  hemisphere.  Their  wealth  was  more  abun-
dant, for  all  the  possessions  of  their  subjects  were
held  only  in  dependence  upon  them ;  their  splendour
was  more  dazzling,  for  thirty  generations  of  autocrats
had  striven  to  excel  one  another  in  the  arts  of  mag-
nificence and  display.  The  capitals  of  the  Oriental
monarchs  far  exceeded  in  beauty  and  convenience  the
mass  of  dark  and  smoky  cabins,  in  which  the  con-
querors of  the  world  were  still  doomed  to  burrow.
But  of  all  the  cities  of  the  East  none  equalled
Jerusalem  in  splendour.1  The  great  Herod  had

1  Pliny  (Hist.  Nat.  v. 14.) calls  Jerusalem,  "longc clarissima
arbium  Orientis,  non  Judyws  modo ;"  referring,  it  may  be  supposed,

A  i>.37-A,D.7!#0.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  7

adorned  it  with  buildings,  the  magnificence  of  which
outshone  anything  that  could  yet  be  seen  at  Home.
His  theatres  and  gymnasiums,  his  forums  and  colon-
nades, were  of  the  costliest  materials  and  the  noblest
proportions.  The  precincts  of  the  temple,  which  he
rebuilt  upon  the  holiest  of  Jewish  sites,  and  enlarged
with  an  outer  court  of  much  greater  dimensions,
might  have  contained  all  the  fanes  of  Kome  together.
For  fifty  years  marble  had  been  piled  upon  marble
in  constructing  it.1  It  occupied  the  whole  summit  of
the  hill  of  Moriah,  next  to  Zion  the  most  prominent
quarter  of  the  city,  and  rising  upon  enormous  sub-
structions from  the  deep  valleys  beneath,  seemed  like
one  immense  citadel,  the  capital  of  the  Jewish  nation.2
On  the  rival  summit  of  Mount  Zion,  the  highest
elevation  in  Jerusalem,  was  planted  the  royal  resi-
dence; no  modest  mansion  for  the  most  eminent  of
Eoman  senators,  but  a  palace  worthy  of  the  name,  an
abode  befitting  an  Oriental  potentate,  erected  not  by
the  contributions  of  the  populace,  but  by  confiscation
of  the  estates  of  the  great  and  powerful  of  the  land.
Surrounded  with  lofty  walls  and  towers,  springing,
like  the  temple,  from  the  depths  of  the  gorges  be-
neath, containing  vast  halls  and  ample  corridors,  its
courts  filled  with  trees  and  grass-plots,  with  reser-
voirs, fountains,  and  running  streams,  it  was  a  palace,
a  villa,  and  a  fortress  all  in  one.3  Zion  and  Moriah
faced  each  other  across  the  deep  and  narrow  trench
of  the  Tyropoeon,  and  the  temple  and  palace  were
connected  by  a  bridge  or  causeway,  across  which  the

to  its  external  splendour  rather  than  to  its  historic  fame.  Although
this  writer  may  be  suspected  of  a  wish  to  flatter  his  patrons  Vespa-
sian and  Titus,  its  conquerors,  his  glowing  language  is  sufficiently
borne  out  by  Joscphus,  Strabo,  and  Tacitus.

1  Josephus  dates  the  commencement  of  the  third  temple  from  the
eighteenth  year  of  Herod's  reign,  A.  u.  734,  B.  c.  20,  and  it  was  not
yet  finally  completed.  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jvd.  xv.  11.  1.,  xx.  9.  7.

8  Strabo,  xvi.  2.  p.  763.;  Tac.  Hist.  v.  12.:  "Templum  in  modum
arcis."  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  v.  5.,  vi.  6

*  Joseph.  Bell.  Jud.  v.  4.  4.

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  cu.  XLVU

sovereign  marched  above  the  heads  of  his  subjects,
as  the  sun  passes  in  the  heavens  from  cloud  to  cloud.
If  the  kings  of  Judea  had  abstained  as  yet  from
claiming  the  title  of  divinity,  from  regard  to  the  fan-
tastic scruples  of  their  people,  such  at  least  was  the
honour  to  which  the  Eastern  potentates  might  gene-
rally pretend,  and  such,  should  he  ever  be  restored  to
authority  in  his  native  land,  Agrippa  himself  already
and  the  meditated  to  assume.  The  slaves  of  Asia
munificence  acknowledged  their  sovereigns  as  the  sole
sovereigns.  fountains  of  life  and  property ;  they  re-
garded them  as  above  the  law  or  beside  the  law ;  no
privileged  ranks  and  classes  of  men,  no  traditions
and  prescriptions  of  accustomed  usage,  stood  between
them  and  their  arbitrary  caprices ;  uncles  and  nieces,
brothers  and  sisters,  sons  and  mothers  might  marry
at  their  will1  :  to  the  multitude  they  held  in  fact  the
place  of  gods  upon  earth ;  to  deny  them  the  title
might  seem  mere  senseless  prudery.

Such  was  the  sovereignty  of  which  Agrippa  talked,
and  such,  when the  associates  conversed

Influence  of  1

WCM  Orieutal  together  on  the  future  succession  to  the
principate  of  Tiberius,  was  the  sovereignty
to  which  the  young  aspirant  was  encouraged  to  look.
We  shall  trace  throughout  the  brief  career  of  Caius,
the  first  despot  or  sovereign  prince  of  Eome,  the
influence  of  the  ideas  which  his  friend  thus  opened
to  him.  We  are  arrived  at  a  period  when  the  per-
sonal character  of  their  ruler  has  come  to  exercise
a  decisive  influence  on  the  sentiments  no  less  than
on  the  welfare  of  the  Eoman  people,  and  through
them  of  the  world  at  large.  It  becomes  the  more

The  steadfast  abhorrence  of  the  Romans  for  these  irregularities
is  one  of  the  finest  traits  in  their  character.  Comp.  Lucan,  Phars.
viii.  397.:

"  Num  barbara  nobis

Est  ignota  Venus  ?  .  .  .  Epulis  veeana  meroque
Hegia  non  ullos  exceptos  legibus  horret
Concubitus  . .  ."

A.D.37--A.U.790. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  9

important  therefore  to  note  the  conditions  under
which  that  character  was  formed.  Since  the  over-
throw of  the  renegade  Antonius,  Eome  had  enjoyed
a  respite  from  the  invasion  of  Asiatic  principles  and
notions.  Augustus  had  set  up  bulwarks  against  them
which  Tiberius  had  not  failed  to  respect ;  it  remained
for  the  puerile  selfishness  of  Caius,  under  tuition
of  the  wily  foreigner,  to  introduce  into  the  city  an
element  of  disunion  more  fatal  to  her  polity  and
manners  than  the  arms  of  a  triumvir  or  the  edicts  of
an  imperator.  The  prostitution  of  personal  dignity
by  self-display  in  the  theatre  and  circus  ;  the  assump-
tion of  the  divine  character,  to  the  utter  destruction
of  all  remaining  sense  of  religion  ;  excessive  extrava-
gance in  shows  and  buildings ;  indulgence  of  self  and
indulgence  of  the  populace,  together  with  savage  op-
pression of  the  nobler  classes  ;  unstinted  gratification
of  brutal  ferocity; — all  these  are  attributes  of  Oriental
sovereignty,  which  Caius  was  first  of  the  Koman  em-
perors to  exercise,  but  in  which  some  of  his  successors
rioted,  impossible,  even  more  furiously  than  himself.
Caius,  now  in  the  middle  of  his  twenty-fifth  year,
was  by  nature  more  impressible  than  was

i ..,,., j  *.  .  Caius  unsound

usual  with  his  hard  and  prosaic  country-  both  in  mmd

i mi.  i- i J i- j • 1  •  and  body.

men.1  The  poetical  and  rhetorical  exercises
to  which  he  had  been  directed,  without  the  compen-
sating influence  of  severer  training,  which  had  been
unkindly  withheld  from  him,  had  imparted  perhaps  a
certain  flaccidity  to  his  character,  confirmed  })y  the
enervating  voluptuousness  in  which  he  had  been
steeped  from  his  cradle.  His  constitution  was  weakly.
In  childhood  he  had  been  subject  to  fits,  and  though
he  outgrew  this  tendency,  and  learnt  to  bear  fatigue
of  body,  he  was  not  unfrequently  seized  with  sudden
faintings.  Early  indulgence  in  every  caprice,  and
premature  dissipation,  had  strained  his  nerves  and

1  Dion  notes  that  Caius  at  the  moment  of  Tiberius' s  death  wanted
five  months  and  four  days  to  complete  his  twenty-fifth  year/ lix.  6.

10  HISTORST OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVII.

brain,  till  at  last  a  temperament  naturally  excitable,
and  harassed  by  constant  fever,  seemed  always  to
tremble  on  the  verge  of  delirium.  It  was  said  of  him,
at  least  in  his  later  years,  that  he  never  slept  for  more
than  three  hours  together.  Through  the  weary  dark-
ness of  the  night  he  would  toss  in  lestless  agitation  OD
his  bed,  or  pace  with  hurried  and  unequal  strides  the
long  resounding  corridors,  shouting  impatiently  for
the  dawn.  His  dreams  were  wild  and  terrible,  and
in  his  waking  visions  his  mind  seemed  ever  on  the
stretch  with  the  vastness  of  its  shadowy  images,  in
which,  he  fancied  he  beheld  the  great  Spirit  of  the
Ocean,  and  engaged  in  converse  with  him.  The  might
and  majesty  of  the  Csesarean  empire,  as  of  a  Titan
that  defied  the  Gods,  inflamed  his  perturbed  imagina-
tion, his  conceptions  expanded  like  the  welling  visions
of  a  dream,  and  his  grasp  of  power  was  a  fitful  struggle
to  realize  a  sick  man's  nightmare.1

While  the  germs  of  this  unhappy  temperament,
-  so  pitiable  in  a  private  man,  so  fearful  in  a
nd  ruler,  were  still  undeveloped  in  his  youth-
SSSta?*1*  fill  frame,  deep  must  have  been  the  charm
to  Caius  of  his  conversations  with  Agrippa,
which  revealed  to  him  glimpses  of  a  yet  unknown
world  of  splendour  and  enjoyment.  But  they  were
dangerous,  as  indeed  every  step,  word,  and  look  in  his
position  was  fraught  with  danger.  It  happened  that
the  friends  were  one  day  taking  the  air  together  in  a
carriage,  when  the  Judean  took  occasion  to  express
his  hope  that  no  long  time  would  elapse  before  the
realization  of  their  cherished  wishes  ;  that  the  sceptre
would  soon  drop  from  the  grasp  of  the  aged  emperor,
and  be  placed  in  the  hands  of  his  nephew.  But  the
charioteer  listened  as  he  drove,  and  reported  the  con-

1  Suet.  Calig.  50. :  "  Valetudo  ei  neque  corporis  neque  animi
constitit.  Puer  comitiali  morbo  vexatus,  &c.:  mentis  valetudinem
et  ipse  senserat  .  .  .  incitabatur  insomnia  maxime;  neque  enitn
plus  quam  tribus  nocturnis  horis  quicsccbat,"  &c.

A.D.37-A.U.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  11

vrersation  to  Tiberius.  Agrippa  was  suddenly  arrested
and  placed  in  confinement,  where  he  remained,  un-
heard and  untried,  for  the  six  months  which  inter-
vened before  the  emperor's  final  illness.  Caius  trem-
bled at  this  disgrace,  the  prelude,  as  he  might  antici-
pate, to  his  own,  and  redoubled  the  servile  compli-
ances with  which  he  paid  court  to  the  tyrant.  Antonia,
whose  influence  was  still  in  the  ascendant,  averted  the
danger  from  her  grandson,  and  succeeded  in  softening
in  some  degree  the  rigour  of  Agrippa's  captivity.1
Tiberius  was  getting  visibly  weaker.  The  ministers
of  the  imperial  tyranny  were  on  the  watch,  and  at
every  symptom  of  his  end  approaching  made  some
relaxation  in  their  treatment  of  the  prisoners,  who  at
his  death  might  suddenly  be  restored  to  liberty  and
power.  The  friends  of  Agrippa  were  not,  it  seems,
prevented  from  visiting  him,  and  some  there  were
who  were  not  afraid  of  doing  so.  One  day  a  freedman
entered  his  chamber  with  an  air  of  mystery,  and
whispered  in  his  ear  in  the  Jewish  language,  the  Lion
is  dead.*  It  seems  that  the  premature  report  of  the
emperor's  death  had  reached  him.  The  captive  under-
stood his  meaning,  and  cried  aloud  with  joy.  When
the  centurion  who  guarded  him  was  admitted  to  a
knowledge  of  the  secret,  he  urged  his  prisoner  to
take  a  seat  at  his  own  table,  and  celebrate  with
festivity  the  event  from  which  they  both  anticipated
his  speedy  deliverance.  But  suddenly  the  news  arrived
of  the  emperor's  unlooked-for  recovery.  He  had
quitted  his  residence,  it  was  added;  he  had  sum-
moned his  attendants ;  he  was  already  on  his  way  to
Rome.  Dire  was  the  consternation  in  the  prison,  as
at  the  same  moment  in  the  palace.  The  pleasant
party  was  rudely  broken  up.  Trembling  for  the  con-
sequences of  his  imprudence,  the  centurion  sought  to

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  8

2  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  10. :  owcevcras  irpbs  avrbv  y\<lxr0Tj  Trj

iW,  rfdvrjKtv  &  AeW.  (pyffiv.

12  HISTORY  of  THE  ROMANS CH.  XLVII,

compensate  by  redoubled  violence  for  the  indulgence
he  had  shown  his  prisoner.  He  loaded  Agrippa  with
chains,  and  threatened  him  loudly  with  death.  The
confirmation  of  the  first  report  came  opportunely  to
restore  his  equanimity,  and  to  allow  Agrippa  to  profit
by  the  order  which  soon  arrived  from  Caius  for  his
release.

But  the  alarm  which  had  been  excited  by  the  pre-
on  the  death  mature  announcement  of  the  tyrant's  de-
the^eop'teex-  cease  was  not  universally  allayed  by  this
donation*  in"  confirmation  of  the  event.  Too  many  still
against  him.  feare(j  fagfr  ft  was  Qn\j  &  device  to  discover

the  real  sentiments  of  the  people,  and  subject  to  a
bloody  punishment  all  who  should  venture  to  give
utterance  to  the  general  satisfaction.  Some  con-
demned victims  were  awaiting  in  prison  the  expira-
tion of  the  ten  days'  respite  which  the  law  allowed
them  ;  and  it  was  believed,  we  are  assured,  (such  was
the  horror  of  the  times,)  that  when  the  death  of
Tiberius  was  announced,  the  gaolers,  either  refusing
to  credit  it,  or  in  default  of  authority  for  refraining,
consigned  those  whose  term  had  arrived,  in  spite  of
their  cries  and  obtestations,  to  the  hands  of  the  exe-
cutioner.1 There  is  reason,  indeed,  to  believe  that
this  atrocity,  a  parallel  to  which  has  actually  occurred
in  modern  times,  was  merely  a  popular  invention  .
but  the  report  served  to  exasperate  still  more  the  fury
of  the  multitude,  which,  on  the  assurance  that  the
lio'n  was  really  dead,  burst  out  into  wild  exclamations
of  disgust  and  hatred.  Tiberius  to  the  Tiber,  they
cried,  and  called,  it  is  said,  for  the  hook  and  ropes
to  drag  the  body  to  the  Gemoniae  and  to  the  river,
that  the  goddess  Earth  and  the  spirits  of  the  buried

1  Suet.  Tib.  75.  This  story,  which  is  given  as  a  popular  rumour,
is  opposed  to  the  express  declaration  of  Dion  (Iviii.  27.),  that,  on  the
first  occurrence  of  Tiberius's  illness,  the  condemned  were  respited  to
await  the  event,  ana  is  not  entitled  to  much  credit  The  parallel
case  alluded  to  is  that  of  the  last  victims  of  Kobespierre.

1.D.37-A.TT.790. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  13

might  not  receive  it  into  their  holy  keeping.1  But
this  ebullition  of  feeling,  if  it  has  been  truly  repre-
sented to  us,  was  not  lasting :  a  calmer  expression  of
popular  disapprobation,  which  demanded  that  the
remains  should  be  hastily  consumed  at  a  distance,
and  not  brought  to  Rome  at  all,  was  also  speedily
overruled ;  and  it  was  left  to  the  senate  to  decide,
with  the  consent  of  the  new  chief  of  the  state,  how
the  body  of  the  late  emperor  should  be  disposed  of.
and  how  his  memory  should  be  treated.2

If  the  populace  of  the  city  really  entertained  any
vehement  dislike  of  their  late  ruler,  it  was  Thcwmof
not  for  his  cruelty,  by  which  they  had  been  JnSuued'by
little  affected,  but  for  the  ungenial  austerity  the  >enate"
of  his  government,  at  which  they  had  long  repined,
and  which  they  might  expect  to  give  away,  under  the
sway  of  a  gay  and  gallant  youth,  to  an  era  of  festi-
vities and  amusements.  The  senate,  which  had  far
more  reason  to  hate  the  patron  of  Sejanus  and  the
delators,  comported  itself  at  least  with  decent  gravity.
The  announcement  of  the  emperor's  actual  decease
was  brought  to  the  fathers  by  Macro,  in  a  letter  from
Gains.  He  was  commissioned  to  present  to  them  at
the  same  time  the  testament  of  Tiberius ;  but  while
he  desired  in  his  new  master's  name  that  all  the  post-
humous honours  formerly  assigned  to  Augustus,  the
public  funeral,  the  confirmation  of  his  acts,  and  the
deification,  should  now  be  decreed  to  his  successor,  he
declared  that  the  dying  man's  disposition  of  his  patri-
mony was  the  act  of  an  incapable  dotard,  and  required
that  it  should  be  solemnly  annulled.  The  legal  validity

1  Suet.  /.  c. :  "  Ut  pars,  Tiberium  in  Tiberim,  clamitarent :  pars
Terrain  matrem,  Deosque  Manes  orarent,  ne  mortuo  sedem  ulhim.
nisi  inter  impios,  darent."

-  The  people  demanded  that  the  body  should  be  consumed  in  the
amphitheatre  at  Atella,  the  public  place  nighest  at  hand,  instead  of
being  brought  to  Rome;  also  that  it  should  be  semiustulatum,  scorched
and  not  burnt  decently  to  ashes,  as  was  usual  with  the  cheap  and
hurried  obsequies  of  slaves  and  criminals.

14  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  XLVII.

of  this  instrument,  as  we  have  seen,  could  extend
only  to  the  private  property  of  the  testator ;  but  all
felt  how  strong  a  claim  it  would  constitute  to  a  divi-
sion of  political  sovereignty,  and  Macro  might,  per-
haps, actually  represent  to  the  senators  how  incongru-
ous it  was  to  give  a  presumptive  right  to  the  empire
to  a  stripling  like  the  young  Tiberius,  who  had  not
yet  reached  the  age  which  entitled  him  even  to  a  seat
in  their  assembly.1  The  late  emperor's  wish  to  make
his  grandson  and  grand-nephew  joint-heirs  of  all  the
property  or  power  he  might  be  able  to  bequeath  was
too  generally  known,  perhaps,  to  admit  of  tho  sup-
pression of  his  testament ;  but  Macro  was  assured  of
the  favour  in  which  the  child  of  Grermanicus  was  held
by  the  people,  and  he  counted  on  certain  means  of
overcoming  whatever  reluctance  the  fathers  might
have  to  cancel  it.2  The  rush,  indeed,  of  the  popu-
lace into  the  Curia  decided  and  hastened  their  reso-
lution. The  will  was  set  aside  ;  a  public  funeral  was
appointed ;  but  the  consideration  of  further  honours
for  the  deceased  was  postponed  to  a  decree  by  which
all  the  functions  and  dignities  of  empire  were  at  once
conferred  upon  Caius.3

1  The  idea  that  the  two  princes  were  left  co-heirs  of  the  empire
was  strongly  impressed  upon  the  minds  of  all  our  Greek  authorities.
See  Dion,  lix.  1. ;  Philo,  Leg.  ad  Cai.  4.  Josephus  says  that  Tiberius
recommended  his  grandson  to  Caius  as  his  associate  in  power.

*  Dion  lix.  1.

*  Suet. Calig.  14. This  biography  is  headed  in  the  editions  of
Suetonius  with  the  name  of  Caligula,  and  I  refer  to  it  under  that
title:  but  it  should  be  remarked  that  Suetonius  in  his  text  always
calls  this  prince  Caius  or  Caius  Caesar,  and  such  is  the  appellation
given  him  uniformly  by  Tacitus,  Seneca,  and  Pliny,  as  well  as  the
Greek  writers  generally. I  need  not  say  that  such  is  also  his  desig-
nation on  medals. Aurelius  Victor,  in  his  trifling  abridgment  of
history;  is  perhaps  the  first  writer  who  gives  him  the  name  of  Ca-
ligula. This,  as  has  been  mentioned,  was  a  mere  nickname  of  the
camp,  and  though  it  continued  current  there,  the  emperor  himself
always  resented  it:  "Nee  iinpune  cessit  primipilario  quod  Caligulam
dixerat." Senec.  de  Const.  Sap.  18. The  later  acceptance  of  the
name  is  due  perhaps  to  the  careless  epitomists,  who  wished  to  save
themselves  trouble  in  distinguishing  between the,  various  Caesars
who  bore  the  praenomen  of  Caius,

A.D.37-A.U.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  15

Full  of  anxiety  at  the  fortunes  which  were  about  to
open  upon  him,  the  young  emperor  placed  CaiU8  con.
himself  at  the  head  of  the  mourning  pro-  ob^qulS  of
cession  which  conducted  the  remains  of  Tiberius-
Tiberius  from  Misenuna  to  Rome.  The  people
streamed  forth  from  the  towns  on  the  way  and  from
the  city  itself  to  meet  him,  as  the  leader  of  a  tri-
umphal rather  than  of  a  funeral  pageant.  Along  the
roadside  altars  were  decked  for  sacrifice,  and  steamed
with  incense  ;  torches  blazed  and  flowers  were  strown
in  profusion  before  him.  Every  joy  and  blessing
were  invoked  upon  his  head,  and  voices  were  heard
throughout  the  crowd  addressing  him  with  the  most
endearing  appellations.1  In  the  universal  delight  and
anticipation  of  good  days  to  come,  the  crimes  and
injuries  of  the  dead  tyrant  were  forgotten,  and  to  the
execution  of  the  decree  in  his  honour  no  resistance
was  offered.  Though  basking  in  the  sunshine  of
popular  favour,  the  behaviour  of  the  young  aspirant,
for  he  could  hardly  yet  feel  secure  of  his  position,
was  measured  and  discreet.  As  chief  mourner  at  the
imperial  obsequies,  he  pronounced  a  funeral  oration,
the  tone  of  which  was  sober  and  moderate,  respectful
alike  to  the  deceased  and  to  his  people,  nor  unac-
companied with  a  decent  tribute  of  tears.  From  the
merits  of  Tiberius  he  turned  with  warmer  enthusiasm
to  the  exploits  of  Augustus  and  Grermanicus,  and
traced  to  those  sainted  heroes  of  his  line  his  own
personal  claims  to  the  regard  of  the  Roman  people.
From  the  forum  the  body  was  carried  with  the  pro-
per ceremonies  to  the  Campus  Martius  for  cremation,
and  the  ashes  finally  enshrined  in  the  Caesarean
mausoleum.2  At  the  close  of  the  solemnities,  Caius
presented  himself  in  the  senate-house,  and  addressed
the  fathers  and  others  there  assembled  in  a  speech

1  Suet.  Calig.  13.:  "Super  faueta  omina  sidus,  et  pullum,  et  pu-
pum  et  alumnum  appellantes.'*
*  Suet.  Caliy.  15.;  Dion,  Iviii.  28  ,  lix.  3.

16  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  C

full  of  flattery  and  submissiveness.  He  declared
himself  the  child  or  ward  of  the  senators,  prepared
to  share  with  them  the  toils  and  pleasures  of  office,
and  to  guide  all  his  actions  according  to  their  wise
direction.1  Nor  did  he  fail  to  assume  a  tone  of  re-
gret at  being  unable  to  accomplish  the  late  emperor's
wishes  with  regard  to  his  infant  grandson.  At  his
tender  years,  he  said,  he  stands  yet  i/n  need  of  tutors,
teachers,  and  guardians ;  but  I  will  be  more  than
tutor,  teacher,  or  guardian  to  him ;  I  will  be  his
father,  and  he  shall  be  to  me  as  a  son.*  At  the
same  time  he  scrupulously  executed  the  will  of
Tiberius  in  every  other  particular.  It  comprised
liberal  donations  to  the  praetorians  and  to  the  citizens
generally :  the  former  he  doubled,  the  latter  he  in-
creased by  the  sum  which  had  been  promised  but
never  paid  them,  on  his  own  assumption  of  the  toga,
together  with  the  interest  accruing.  Nor  were  the
police  of  the  city,  or  the  legions  beyond  the  bounds
of  Italy,  forgotten  in  this  prudent  liberality,  which
was  still  further  enhanced  by  the  payment  of  the
bequests  of  Livia,  which  her  parsimonious  son  had
neglected  to  carry  into  effect.3  For  this  and  still
greater  profusion  ample  provision  was  found  in  the
treasures  accumulated  by  Tiberius,  the  sum  of  which
was  differently  stated  by  the  authorities  of  the  day,
but  which,  on  the  estimate  of  Suetonius,  which  is  not
the  highest,  may  have  amounted  to  twenty-one  mil-
lions of  our  money.4

Libemi  con-  Nor  were  the  liberal  acts  of  the  new  em-
duct  of  the  new  .

emperor.  peror  contmed  to  this  promiscuous  muni-
ficence in  gifts  and  largesses.  He  issued  a  general

1  Dion,  lix.  6.

*  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cat.  4.:  ty&>  5i,  ftpy,  iraiSayuyob*  xal  8i$affKA\ovt
ical  firiTp&rotw  inrepf}a\ii>v,t/iavTbv  1j5ri  ypdipu  irarfpa,  vlov  8«  iKtivov.

3  Suet.  Tib.  51.;  Calig.  16.;  Dion,  lix.  2.

4  Suet.  Calig.  37.:  "Totum  illud  Tiberii  Csesaris  vicies  ac  septies
millies  sestertium." Sestertia  27  x  1 10,000=2,700,000  =  at  8{.  the
sestertium.  21,600,000/.

A.D.37-A.C.790.  UNDER THE EMFIBE.  17

pardon  to  the  occupants  of  the  imperial  prisons,
and  recalled  the  banished  from  their  exile.  The
informations  and  pretended  evidence  relating  to
the  treasonable  practices  which  had  been  imputed  to
his  mother  and  brothers,  he  burnt  publicly  in  the
forum,  declaring  at  the  same  time  that  he  had  ab-
stained from  perusing  them,  and  had  not  acquainted
himself  even  with  the  names  of  the  delators.1  When
a  paper  was  presented  to  him  which  purported  to
divulge  an  intrigue  against  him,  he  rejected  it  with
the  exclamation  that  he  had  given  cause  of  offence
to  no  man.2  He  proscribed  the  most  infamous  minis-
ters of  vice,  the  creatures  of  the  worst  of  the  nobles,
and  as  it  was  reported  of  Tiberius  himself,  expelling
them  indignantly  from  the  city,  and  was  with  diffi-
culty dissuaded  from  throwing  them  into  the  sea.
The  writings  of  Labienus,  Cremutius,  and  Cassius
Severus,  which  the  senate  had  suppressed,  were  at
his  instance  restored  to  circulation :  it  was  for  the
interest,  he  declared,  of  every  good  prince  that  history
should  be  written  and  read.  He  published  the  ac-
counts of  the  state,  after  the  example  of  Augustus,
an  example  which  Tiberius  from  indolence  or  reserve
had  neglected  to  follow.  As  regarded  the  judicial
functions  of  the  emperor,  the  behaviour  of  Caius  was
eminently  popular,  in  abolishing  the  appeal  to  him-
self from  the  tribunal  of  the  superior  magistrates.
Into  the  means  and  character  of  the  senators  he  made
no  invidious  inquisition;  they  had  suffered  enough
under  the  Tiberian  persecutions:  but  he  revised
strictly,  though  with  no  undue  severity,  the  roll  of
the  equestrian  order,  enriching  it  with  the  addition
of  many  new  members  from  the  wealthiest  classes  of
Italy  and  the  provinces ;  and  he  added  a  fifth  decuria
to  the  bench  of  judices,  which  was  overburdened  with

1  Dion,  lix.  6.

2  Suet.  Calig.  15..  "Contendens,  nihil  sibi  admissum  cur  cuiquam
invisus  esset."

VOL.  VI.

18  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVII.

its  duties.  Under  his  auspices  many  provincial  com-
munities received  the  gift  of  Eoman  citizenship.1  The
heir  of  the  Drusi  attempted,  as  Suetonius  expresses
it,  to  revive  the  Comitia  for  the  election  of  magis-
trates ;  but  his  magnanimous  policy  was  defeated  by
the  indifference  of  the  nobles  to  public  office,  for  the
candidates,  it  seems,  were  seldom  more  numerous
than  the  places,  or  if  a  greater  number  at  any  time
offered,  they  contrived  to  come  to  a  private  arrange-
ment among  themselves.2  The  centuries  convened
for  the  election  found  they  had  nothing  to  do,  but  go
through  the  empty  forms  and  disperse.  After  two
years'  trial,  Caius  resumed  the  plan  of  direct  nomi-
nation recommended  to  him  by  his  predecessors,  and
as  far  as  the  real  substance  went,  the  usage  of  popular
election  was  finally  suppressed.  Such,  together  with
the  remission  of  the  percentage  on  sales  in  Italy,  an
impost  which,  though  trifling  in  its  amount,  seemed
to  trench  on  the  cherished  immunity  of  the  conquer-
ing race,  and  many  acts  of  liberality  to  individuals,
were  the  beneficent  measures  which  ushered  in  the
reign  of  the  new  emperor.3  His  piety  towards  his
own  relations  was  not  less  conspicuous,  nor  did  it
serve  less  to  recommend  him  to  the  regard  of  the
citizens.  Immediately  after  his  first  appearance  in
the  senate,  he  hastened,  amidst  the  prayers  and  vows
of  the  people — for  the  weather  was  tempestuous — rto

1  See  Agrippa's  speech  in  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cai.  c.  36.:  <pl\a>v  Ma>»
irarpiSas  SArjs  rrjs  'PcaficuKijs  i]£icaffas  iroAireias.

2  Suet.  Calig.  16. :  "  Tentavit  et  comitiorum  more  revocato  suffra-
gia  populo  reddere." Dion  expresses  EO  doubt  a  common  and  pro-
bably a  just  feeling  of  the  injndiciousness  of  this  attempted  conces-
sion of  political  rights  to  a  people  who  seemed  incapable  of  using
them  discreetly:  TOI)S  5'  %[>.<ppova.s  ^Au7rtj<raTo,  fKoytaantvovs  Sri  /c&v  «ri
rots  iroAAow  a!  apxal  alQis  yevievrai  ....  TroAAck  Kal  Seivti  trvfj.&4i<rfrai.
lix.  9. Comp.  Veil.  ii.  124.,  cited  above.

1  These  acts,  which  all  belong  to  an  early  period  in  this  reign,
have  been  here  brought  together  in  one  view,  though  some  of  them
may  date,  perhaps,  in  its  second  year.  The  revival  of  the  Comitia
was  made  in  791:  the  first  consulship  of  Caius  was  assumed  without
ftny  pretence  of  election.

A.D.37-A.0.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  19

seek  in  person  the  ashes  of  his  mother  and  brother  in
their  desolate  islands.  Having  collected  these  august
remains,  and  carefully  inurned  them,  he  conveyed
them  in  his  own  arms  to  Eonie,  ascending  the  river
from  Ostia  with  funereal  pomp,  and  laid  them  in  the
imperial  mausoleum,  appointing  at  the  same  time  an
annual  service  in  memory  of  the  deceased.  The  name
of  the  month  September  he  changed  to  Grermanicus,
an  alteration  which  was  not  destined  to  survive  him,
and  conferred  upon  Antonia,  through  a  decree  of  the
senate,  all  the  distinctions  which  the  piety  of  Tiberius
had  before  assigned  to  Livia.1  Claudius,  who  had
hitherto  been  left  in  the  obscurity  of  the  equestrian
rank,  he  invited  to  assume  the  consulship  in  conjunc-
tion with  Himself,  and  saluted  the  young  Tiberius,  on
the  day  of  his  claiming  the  toga,  with  the  title  of
Prince  of  the  Koman  Youth.  His  natural  sensibility
prompted  him,  further,  to  demand  honours  for  his
three  sisters,  a  thing  unheard  of  under  the  Koman
commonwealth.  It  was  ordained  that  the  sacramental
oath  of  the  citizens  to  the  emperor  should  contain  the
words,  /  will  not  hold  myself  nor  my  own  children
dearer  than  Gains  Ccesar  and  his  sisters,  and  that
every  motion  of  the  consuls  in  the  senate  should  con-
clude with  the  invocation  of  a  blessing  upon  him  and
them  together.2  All  these  measures  were  accepted
with  unbounded  delight  by  the  jubilant  populace.
When  Caius  assumed,  at  the  instance  of  the  senate,
the  collective  honours  of  the  empire,  he  had  insisted
on  making  a  single  exception,  declining  with  the
modesty  of  tender  youth  the  appellation  of  Father  of
his  Country.3  This  conduct  the  people  regarded
perhaps  with  satisfaction,  as  a  tribute  to  the  Nemesis
which  scans  with  evil  eye  the  heights  of  human  pros-
perity ;  nor  were  they  less  pleased,  we  may  believe,
at  his  refraining  from  pressing  on  the  senate  the  con-

1  Dion,  lix.  3.  2  Suet.  Calig.  15.  3  Dion,  lix.  3.

c  2

20  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVU.

firmatioii  of  Tiberius's  acts.  The  name  of  the  tyrant
disappeared  from  henceforth  from  the  public  instru-
ments, in  which  the  titles  and  functions  of  succeeding
emperors  were  recited.1  The  vulgar  notion  of  Deity
was  that  of  a  Being  who  presides  with  dignified  inter-
est over  the  sports  and  amusements  of  his  creatures,
and  to  such  a  character  the  gloomy  recluse  of  Caprese
had,  in  the  estimation  of  the  Romans,  no  claim  what-
ever. If  the  senate,  with  its  usual  servility,  would
have  acquiesced  in  the  apotheosis  of  a  tyrant  who  had
degraded  and  decimated  it,  the  citizens  interposed  to
forbid  the  honour,  and  Caius  made  no  effort  to  en-
force it.  The  enthusiasm  with  which  the  early  pro-
mise of  the  new  principate  was  received,  might  be
estimated  from  the  multitude  of  a  hundred  and  sixty
thousand  victims  which,  it  was  computed,  were  offered
in  gratitude  to  the  Gods  in  the  course  of  the  first
three  months.  Its  birthday,  it  was  decreed,  should
be  sanctified  with  the  name  and  rites  of  the  Parilia,
as  the  era  of  the  new  foundation  of  the  state.2

The  young  man's  personal  defects  and  vices,  of
rhe  first  consul-  which  some  mention  has  already  been  made,
ship  of  caius.  were  unknownj  it  must  be  observed,  at  this
time  to  the  mass  of  the  citizens.  The  cunning  and
selfishness  which  we  have  already  noticed  in  him,  the
ferocity  which  found  pleasure,  it  is  said,  in  the  sight
of  torments  and  executions,  his  unworthy  taste  for  the
company  of  dancers  and  gladiators  and  for  vulgar
shows,  the  defects  in  his  education,  and  his  moral
inaptitude  for  all  elevating  subjects  of  thought,  had
been  concealed  from  the  eyes  of  the  Romans  in  the
recesses  of  the  palace.  For  five  years  his  residence
had  been  mostly  confined  to  Caprese.  At  a  later
period  it  was  reported  that,  in  spite  of  all  his  dis-
simulation, he  had  not  been  able  to  conceal  the  vile-
ness  of  his  nature  from  Tiberius  himself,  and  the
monster  was  supposed  more  than  once  to  have  re-

1  Dion,  lix.  9.  2  Suet.  Calig.  14.  16

A.D.37-A.U.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  21

marked,  not  without  a  grim  satisfaction,  that  Caius
lived  for  his  own  and  all  men's  perdition,  and  that  he
was  rearing  a  serpent  for  the  Romans,  and  a  Phaethon
for  the  universe.1  But  if  any  vague  rumours  of  this
prince's  faults  reached  the  ears  of  the  multitude,  they
were  easily  excused  in  a  son  of  Grermanicus,  on  the
plea  of  inexperience  and  bad  example.  The  Romans
had  yet  to  learn  the  horror  of  being  subject  to  a
master  who  had  never  been  trained  to  mastery  over
himself.  His  accession  to  the  principate  was  signal-
ized, as  we  have  seen,  by  unexpected  moderation,  by
profuse  liberality,  and  by  some  traits  of  generous
feeling;  but  when  on  the  calends  of  July,  three
months  later,  he  assumed  the  consulship,  he  confirmed
their  warmest  anticipations  by  an  address  to  the  senate,
in  which  he  exposed  without  reserve  all  the  vices  of
his  predecessor,  and  denounced  them  to  general  ex-
ecration. At  the  same  time  he  promised  to  conduct
his  own  career  on  very  different  principles,  and  de-
clared himself  the  devoted  minister  of  the  august
assembly  before  him.  The  fathers,  apprehensive  that
such  auspicious  sentiments  might  one  day  change,
thought  it  possible  to  fix  them  by  decreeing  that  the
harangue  which  contained  them  should  be  annually
recited  in  their  presence.  During  the  two  Hig  devotlon
months  which  followed  Caius  seems  to  have  tobU9ine"-
striven  assiduously  to  redeem  his  pledge  of  good
government.  Untrained  as  he  was,  and  immoderate
alike  in  every  caprice,  he  threw  himself  perhaps  into
this  work  with  feverish  impetuosity.  The  liberal
and  equitable  measures  connected  with  his  name  may
be  for  the  most  part  referred  to  this  brief  period,
during  which  he  placed  himself  in  fact  as  well  as  in
name  at  the  head  of  affairs.  Two  summer  months
were  honourably  spent  in  a  labour  which  was  pro-
bably beyond  his  strength.  On  the  arrival  of  the  last

1  Suet.  Cdlig.  11.:  "Exitio  suo  omniumque  Caium  virere,  et  se
natricem  pop.  Romano,  Phaethontcm  orbi  terrarum  cducare."

22  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XI.VIL

day  of  August,  the  anniversary  of  his  birth,  he  pro-
posed to  exchange  the  duties  of  industry  for  those  of
festive  hospitality.  His  popularity,  which  had  gone
on  increasing  from  day  to  day,  was  crowned  by  the
ardour  with  which,  descending  from  the  awful  chair
of  state,  he  plunged  into  the  full  tide  of  the  national
amusements,  by  the  splendour  of  the  shows  he  exhi-
bited, and  the  novelty  as  well  as  variety  of  the  dis-
sipations he  provided.  .  He  professed  to  restore  the
golden  age  of  Augustus,-  the  age,  as  he  imagined,  of
universal  recreation,  which  had  suffered  a  gloomy
eclipse  under  the  leaden  sceptre  of  Tiberius.  The
consecration  of  a  temple  to  the  divine  founder  of  the
empire,  which  had  been  slowly  completed  by  his  suc-
cessor, furnished  a  fitting  memorial  for  the  birthday
HIS  pubuc  en-  of  the  reigning  sovereign.  The  magnifi-
tertamments.  cence  wnich  was  now  displayed  was  such  as
had  not  been  witnessed  at  least  by  two  generations.
The  ceremony  was  conducted  by  Caius  himself,  in
a  triumphal  robe,  borne  in  a  chariot  drawn  by  six
horses :  after  the  completion  of  the  sacrifices,  a  hymn
was  sung  by  a  select  chorus  of  noble  children,  whose
fathers  and  mothers  were  both  alive  ;  a  banquet  was
given,  not  to  the  senators  only,  but  also  to  their  wives
and  families,  as  well  as  to  the  mass  of  the  citizens ;  the
festival  was  followed  by  an  entertainment  of  divers
kinds  of  music,  and  by  horse  and  chariot  races,  recurring
in  rapid  succession  through  two  days.  Four  hundred
bears,  and  as  many  lions  and  panthers,  were  slaugh-
tered in  the  amphitheatre  ;  patrician  youths  enacted
the  game  of  Troy;  while  the  emperor  himself  pre-
sided over  these  manifold  sports,  and  sate  benignly
through  them  with  his  sisters  by  his  side,  and  sur-
rounded by  the  ministers  of  the  Augustan  hero-
worship.  That  no  citizen  might  be  required  to  absent
himself  from  a  scene  in  which  his  prince  condescended
to  take  delight,  the  public  offices  were  closed  and
business  suspended,  and  even  the  term  of  private

A.D.37-A.H.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  23

mourning  was  abridged.  Widows,  provided  at  least
they  were  not  pregnant,  might  straightway  marry
without  scandal.  To  set  the  spectators  quite  at  ease,
they  were  not  required  to  make  their  obeisance  to  the
emperor ;  they  were  even  permitted  to  disencumber
themselves  of  their  sandals,  as  at  a  private  entertain-
ment, and  to  cover  their  heads  for  protection  against
the  sun,  as  in  the  forum  and  the  streets.  This,  it  is
said,  was  the  first  occasion  of  the  use  of  cushioned
benches  at  the  games ;  but  as  yet  this  indulgence  was
confined  to  the  senators  only.1

Such  a  festive  inauguration  of  amusements  long
disused  might  be  excused  on  the  first  cele-  ne  rughes  into
bration  of  an  imperial  birthday,  at  the  out-  di8SiPation-
set  of  a  young  prince's  reign,  and  at  the  close  of  a
weary  session  of  public  business.  But  with  Caius  it
was  the  opening  <)f  a  new  era  of  enjoyment  from
which  he  never  afterwards  desisted.  Eesigning  in
the  third  month  the  chair  of  magistracy  he  rushed
for  recreation  into  the  wildest  dissipations.  While
the  consul  suffectus  supplied  his  place  at  the  head  of
affairs,  the  emperor  abandoned  himself  to  a  long
holiday  of  uninterrupted  amusement,  His  entiiu-
eiasm  for  the  public  spectacles  was  the  frenzy  of  one
just  escaped  from  the  dreary  confinement  of  a  her-
mitage. Soon  sated  with  every  fresh  object,  he
sought  renewed  excitement  in  variety  and  strange-
ness. He  introduced  the  novelty  of  nocturnal  spec-
tacles, at  which  the  whole  city  was  illuminated  with
lamps  and  torches.  Money  and  viands,  at  his  com-
mand, were  thrown  liberally  to  the  populace.  He
indulged  too  in  a  giddy  humour  which  was  not
always  dignified.  On  one  occasion,  when  he  feasted
the  citizens  at  a  gorgeous  banquet,  he  was  so  pleased
with  the  justice  a  certain  knight  did  to  the  luxuries
before  him,  that  he  ordered  his  own  plate  to  be
offered  to  him.  A  senator,  who  similarly  gratified

*  Dion,  Hx.  7. ;  Suet.  Caliq.  17.

24  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  OH.  XLVII.

him,  was  inscribed  at  once  on  the  list  of  praetors.
The  games  of  the  circus  were  continued,  with  occa-
sional interludes,  through  the  whole  twelve  hours  of
the  day ;  and  on  some  special  festivals  the  arena  was
strown  with  cinnabar  and  borax,  and  the  chariots
driven  by  none  under  the  rank  of  a  senator.1  But
even  these  follies  were  less  criminal  than  the  vices
and  sensualities  to  which  they  led  the  way.  If  Caius
desired  that  his  people  should  riot  without  stint  in
the  pleasures  which  had  so  long  been  grudged  them,
not  less  was  he  resolved  to  indulge  himself  to  the
utmost  in  the  gratification  of  every  sense.  He  let
fall  the  mask,  hitherto  but  loosely  worn,  of  discre-
tion and  modesty,  and  revelled  with  furious  appetite
in  the  grossest  voluptuousness  of  every  kind.  The
consequence  of  these  excesses  was  not  slow  to  follow
The  young  man's  weakly  constitution  was  unable  to
bear  the  strain  to  which  he  subjected  it,  and  in  the
eighth  month  of  his  delirious  dream  he  was  pros-
trated by  a  severe  and  dangerous  illness.

Caius  falls  sick. m  *  .

Despair  of  the  Ihe  warm  sympathy  which  was  now  dis-
played for  him,  not  in  Eome  only  but
throughout  the  provinces,  shows  how  large  a  space
the  chief  of  the  Boman  state  already  filled  in  the  in-
terests of  the  vast  population  over  which  he  seemed
so  conspicuously  to  tower.  Multitudes  crowded
round  the  palace  in  which  he  lay,  both  by  day  and
night,  making  anxious  inquiries  after  his  health.  A
citizen,  Afranius  Potitus,  solemnly  devoted  his  own
life  for  the  prince's  preservation,  and  a  knight  named
Atanius  Secundus  vowed  to  descend  into  the  arena,
and  fight  among  the  gladiators,  in  the  event  of  his
happy  restoration.  Such  were  the  extravagances
which  found  favour  in  that  day  of  unreal  and  fan-

1  Suet.  Calig.  18.  Pliny  mentions  this  use  of  cinnabar  (minium)
and  borax  ( chrysocolla).  Hist.  Nat.  xxxiii.  27.:  "Visumque  jam
est  Neronis  principis  spectaculis  arenam  Circi  chrysocolla  sterni,
quum  ipse  concolori  panno  aurigaturus  esset."  He  describes  these
substances  in  xxxiii.  26.  37.  foil.

A.D.37-A.U.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  25

tastic  sentiment.  The  Eomans  themselves  were  not
perhaps  unconscious  of  the  folly  which  they  en-
couraged and  applauded,  and  the  story  that  Caius  on
his  recovery  compelled  his  devotees,  the  one  to  kill
himself,  the  other  to  risk  the  chances  of  mortal  com-
bat, was  possibly  invented  as  an  expression  of  the
prevailing  cynicism  of  the  times.1

The  account  which  has  been  preserved  to  us  of
the  grief  and  dismay  of  the  provinces  at

,,  , ,. , ,  , *• i |  Excitement

the  prospect  of  the  emperor  s  early  loss  is  and  dun-ess  in

i -LI  i  j. j.-  j. ii the  provinces.

remarkable,  not  only  as  a  testimony  to  the
wide-spread  interest  in  his  person,  but  for  the  pic-
ture it  presents  of  the  general  prosperity  at  this
epoch.  We  must  remember  that  the  shadow  of  the
Tiberian  tyranny  extended  little  beyond  the  imme-
diate precincts  of  Eome  and  Capreae,  and  though  the
description  which  follows  is  fantastically  drawn,  it
seems  to  betoken  an  actual  state  of  substantial
and  permanent  well-being,  not  confined  to  a  single
locality,  nor  dependent  on  the  life  of  an  individual,
but  flowing  from  a  well-organized  and  universal
system  of  administration.  Who,  asks  Philo,  the
Jewish  philosopher  of  Alexandria,  was  not  amazed
and  delighted  at  beholding  Gains  assume  the  go-
vernment of  the  empire,  tranquil  and  well  ordered  as
it  was,  fitted  and  compact  in  all  its  members,  North
and  South,  East  and  West,  Greek  and  Barbarian,
Soldier  and  Civilian,  all  combined  together  in  the
enjoyment  of  a  common  peace  and  prosperity"?  It
abounded  everywhere  in  accumulated  treasures  of
gold  and  silver,  coin  and  plate ;  it  boasted  a  vast
force  both  of  horse  and  foot,  by  land  and  by  sea,
and  its  resources  flowed  in  a  perennial  stream.
Nothing  was  to  be  seen  throughout  our  cities  but
altars  and  sacrifices,  priests  clad  in  white  and
garlanded,  the  joyous  ministers  of  the  general
mirth;  festivals  and  assemblies,  musical  contests

1  Dion,  lix.  8,  9.;  Suet.  Caliy.  14, 18.

26  HISTOET  OP  THE ROMANS  en.  XLVIX.

and'  horse  races,  wakes  by  day  and  by  night,  amuse-
ments, recreations,  pleasures  of  every  kind  and
addressed  to  every  sense.  The  rich,  he  continues,
no  longer  trampled  upon  the  poor,  the  strong  upon
the  weak,  masters  upon  servants,  or  creditors  on
their  debtors ;  but  the  independence  of  every  class
met  with  due  respect ;  so  that  the  Saturnian  age
of  the  poets  might  no  longer  be  regarded  as  a  fiction,
so  nearly  was  it  revived  in  the  life  of  that  blessed
era.  Such  was  the  state  of  things  at  the  accession
of  Caius ;  such,  he  adds,  it  remained  for  a  space  of
seven  happy  months,  at  the  end  of  which  the  ne\Vs
arrived  of  the  alarming  illness  of  the  emperor.1
Alas !  he  had  discarded  the  simplicity  of  his  earlier
mode  of  living ;  he  had  abandoned  himself  to  wine
and  lust  and  manifold  excesses,  and  in  that  short
space  he  had  reached  the  brink  of  a  premature  grave.
When  these  sad  news,  says  Philo,  were  spread
among  the  nations, — for  the  season  for  sailing  was
about  to  close  with  the  decline  of  autumn,  and  all
who  did  not  wish  to  winter  abroad  were  hastening
home  from  every  quarter, — every  enjoyment  was  at
once  cast  aside,  every  city  and  house  was  clouded
with  sorrow  and  dejection,  in  proportion  to  its  re-
cent hilarity.  All  parts  of  the  world  sickened  with
Caius,  and  were  worse  sick  than  he,  for  his  was  the
sickness  of  the  body  only,  theirs  of  the  soul.  All  men
reflected  on  the  evils  of  anarchy,  its  wars,  plagues,
and  devastations,  from  which  they  foresaw  no  protec-
tion but  in  the  emperor's  recovery.  But  as  soon  as  the
disease  began  to  abate,  the  rumour  swiftly  reached
every  corner  of  the  empire,  and  universal  were  the

1  The  security  and  outward  prosperity  of  the  empire  under  this
principate  may  be  further  inferred  from  the  curious  comment  of
Orosius:  "Servi  rebelles  et  ftigitivi  gladiatores  perterruere  Romam,
evertere  Italiam,  Siciliam  delevere,  jam  paene  universe  humano
generi  toto  orbe  metuendi.  In  diebus  autem  Salutis  hoc  est,  tempo-
ribus  Christianis,  convellere  quietem  non  potcst  vel  Cjesar  infestus."
Oros.  vji,  5.

ft.».3-.-A.tT.:90.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  27

excitement  and  anxiety  to  hear  it  from  day  to  day
confirmed.  The  safety  of  the  prince  was  regarded
by  every  land  and  island  as  identical  with  its  own.
Nor  was  a  single  country  ever  so  interested  before
in  the  health  of  any  one  man,  as  the  whole  world
then  was  in  the  preservation  of  the  adorable  Caius.
So  blind*  concludes  the  sage,  is  the  mind  of  man
to  the  matters  that  most  nearly  concern  it,  guessing
and  imagining  this  and  that,  but  in  fact  knowing
nothing.1

This extravagant flattery,  such as  that  against
which  the  mature  good  sense  of  Pompeius
had  not  been  proof,  easily  turned  the  weak  nomine*  by
and  giddy  brain  of  Caius  Caesar. He  began
in  his  wild  hallucinations  to  regard  the  life  which
had  been  saved  by  so  many  prayers  as  something
sacred  and divine,  and  to  justify  to himself  any
means  that  might  seem  conducive  to  its  protection.
He  felt  aggrieved  by  the  nearness  of  the  youthful
cousin  whom  he  had  deprived  of  his  inheritance,
and  quickly  persuaded  himself  that  his  existence  was
a  source  of  danger  to  the  occupant  of  the  throne.
It  was  enough  to  affirm  that  the  wretched
object  of  his  iealousy  had  plotted  against  young  Tiberius

, .J ,,  ...J  -5  , r  . °  , todeath.

him :  the  citizens  had  no  love  nor  interest
but  for  the  child  of  Grermanicus,  the  giver  of  all  good
gifts  to  them ;  and  when  Caius  caused  him  to  be
privately  despatched,  not  venturing  still,  from  a  sense
of  shame  perhaps  rather  than  of  distrust,  to  bring
him  to  trial,  they  acquiesced  in  the  murder  as  an
act  of  wholesome  expediency.2  A  centurion  pre-
sented the  poor  lad  with  a  sword,  with  the  order  to
thrust  it  into  his  own  bosom  ;  but  so  untrained  was
he  in  the  use  of  weapons,  that  he  was  obliged,  it  was
said,  to  ask  instruction  how  to  use  it  effectually.3

1  Philo.  leg.  ad.  Cat.  4.

*  Philo,  leg.  ad.  Cai.  10.  t  O.KOIVIJJVTJTOV  o-p-^v  Offf/jhs  (pvafcas  aiaVrjTos
.  .  .  ovros  a  iraOeiv  tft.4x\i]ffev  &v  .  .  .  .  Ia"xyp6repos  &v  yu-vvaro  .  ,  .
3  Suet.  Cqlig.  23.;  Dion.  'ix.  9.;  Philo,  /.  c.

28  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVII.

The  charm  which  blinded  the  Komans  to  the
Degraded  man-  crimes  and  vices  of  their  new  ruler  was
uersofcaius.  gjmpiy  the  contrast  he  presented  in  his
manners  to  the  sullen  recluse  who  had  robbed  them
of  their  pleasures.  Caius  was  endowed  with  no
personal  recommendations  of  figure  or  countenance.
His  features,  if  not  altogether  devoid  of  beauty  were
deformed  by  a  harsh  and  scowling  expression,  and
seem  even  in  the  rigid  marble  to  writhe  with  mus-
cular contortion.  His  head  was  bald  ;  his  complexion
sallow  and  livid :  his  body  was  long,  and  his  neck
and  legs  slender :  his  gait  was  shambling,  and  his
voice  hoarse  and  dissonant.1  But  he  was  popular
with  the  rabble,  and  the  knights  and  senators,  who
had  lately  trembled  before  the  sovereign,  now  cow-
ered before  the  rabble ;  for  he  lived  in  the  eyes  of
the  people ;  all  his  actions  were  public ;  he  sate
through  the  day  the  observed  of  all  observers  in  the
circus ;  even  his  vices  and  sensual  indulgences,  gross
and  startling  as  they  were,  he  made  matters  of
parade  and  ostentation.  The  habits  of  Greece  and
Asia  had  suffered  the  rulers  of  the  state  to  take
part  in  the  public  contests  of  skill  and  agility,  from
which  the  pride  of  the  Eoman  noble  revolted :  kings
of  Hellenic  blood  had  not  disdained  to  contend  for
prizes  in  the  lists  at  Antioch  or  Seleucia ;  even  the
renegade  Antonius  had  striven  for  mastery  in  the
schools  of  Alexandria.  With  such  examples  before
him,  Caius,  the  first  of  the  Eoman  emperors,  did  not
forbear  from  singing  and  dancing  in  public,  under

1  Suetonius  (Calig.  50.)  and  Seneca  (de  const.  Sap,  18.)  vie  with
one  another  in  investing  this  prince  with  the  most  odious  traits  of
deformity:  "  Statura  fuit  eminenti,  colore  expallido,  corpore  enormi,
gracilitate  maxima  cervicis*  et  crurum,  oculis  et  temporibus  concavis,
fronte  lata  et  torva,  capillo  raro  ac  circa  verticem  nullo,  hirsutus
csetera."  "  Tanta  illi  palloris  insaniam  testantis  fceditas  erat,  tanta
oculorum  sub  fronte  anili  latentium  torvitas,  tanta  capitis  destituti
et  emendicatis  capillis  aspersi,  deformitas,"  &c.  This  is  mere  sign-
painting.  Medals  and  busts  concur  in  giving  us  such  a  countenance
as  I  have  described  in  the  text.

A.D.3r-A,U.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  29

the  tuition  of  a  noted  tragedian.1  His  passion  for
the  sports  of  the  circus  led  him  to  descend  in  person
into  the  arena  as  a  charioteer,  and  even  it  is  said  as
a  gladiator.2  If  the  base  multitude  were  delighted
at  seeing  knights  and  senators  driven  to  exhibit
themselves  for  their  amusement,  much  more  were
they  charmed  at  the  condescension  of  the  emperor
himself,  in  bearing  a  part,  like  the  deities  of  old,  in
the  sports  and  contests  of  his  creatures.  From  this
time,  under  imperial  encouragement,  charioteering
began  to  take  the  place  of  a  state  institution.  The
rival  parties  or  factions  were  known  by  their  colours,
— the  Grreen,  the  Blue,  the  Ked,  and  the  White, —
and  the  people  enlisted  themselves  on  the  sides  of
their  favourites  with  an  ardour  that  menaced  some-
times the  peace  of  the  city.  The  Green  was  the  fac-
tion to  which  Caius  attached  himself :  he  frequented
its  stables,  lived  familiarly  with  its  grooms  and  dri-
vers, and  gave  all  his  confidence  to  some  of  its  most
noted  performers.  He  endowed  it  with  a  separate
place  of  exercise,  a  circus  or  stadium,  in  the  four-
teenth region  of  the  city,  to  which  the  name  of  Caian
continued  long  afterwards  to  be  attached.3

The  nobles  might  sigh  over  this  odious  degrada-
tion of  the  majesty  of  the  Caesars;  yet  it  was  better,
they  might  think,  that  Caius  should  prostitute  it

1  Dion.  lix.  5.  29.;  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cai.  30.

*  Dion.  lix.  5.  :  irpot6vros  8e  8})  rov  xp^vov  Ka^  ^s  $h(0[i.a  Kal  ts
IrY&VHjpa  iro\\iav  irpo^XQfV appdra  re  yap  #\a<re  Kal  4/j.ovo/j.dxn<rtv.
opxflfffi  re  ^xP7f(TaTO»  Ka^  rpaytaStav  wrexpivaro'  Kal  ravra  fj.4v  irov  ael
tirotef  SJTO|  Se  irore  TOI)S  irptirovs  rijs  yipovvias  airovSrj  vvtcrbs,  &s  Kal
fir  avayKot6v  n  &ov\£v/j.a  ^raire^d^evos,  wpxricraro.

*  Dion,  lix.  4.;  Suet.  Calig.  55.: "Prasinaa  factioni  addictus  et
deditus." On  one  occasion  he  presented  a  charioteer  of  the  Green,
named Eutychus,  with  a  sum  of  2,000,000  sesterces,  or  16,000/.
Suet.  /.  c. ; Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  3. It  was,  I  suppose,  in  his
enthusiasm  for  the  art  that  he  threatened,  according  to  Suetonius
(c.  55.),  to  make  his  horse  Incitatus,  or  Galloper,  a  consul. Dion
believes  that  he  actually  did  make  him  a  priest  of  his  own  divinity
(lix.  28.).

30  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  XLTII.

in  these  trifling  amusements,  than  guard  it  with  the
cruel jealousy of  Tiberius. As lone: as

Bloodiness  of ,  J  * ,  -,

thegiadia- the  emperor  and  people  were  amused  to-

torial  shows.  ,  *,,  ,  f  . * .  .  -ITJ.

gether,  they  hoped  to  enjoy  in  tranquillity
their  own  voluptuous  indolence ;  but  they  must  have
beheld  with  dismay  the  prodigality  which  in  a  few
months  had  squandered  all  the  savings  of  the  late
reign,  and  began  to  call  for  fresh  contributions ;  nor
could  they  have  been  unconcerned  at  the  increasing
bloodshed  and  ferocity  which  now  distinguished  the
gladiatorial  shows.  The  amphitheatre  of  Taurus  was
not  spacious  enough  for  the  combatants  who  were
launched  into  the  arena.  The  Septa  in  the  Campus
Martius,  and  other  capacious  buildings,  were  seized
for  these  cruel  ceremonies.  Not  only  did  the  em-
peror himself  exhibit  these  spectacles ;  he  required
the  praetors  and  aediles,  who  since  the  disuse  of
popular  election  had  been  relieved  from  this  service,
to  conform  once  more  to  the  custom  of  the  common-
wealth. The  restrictions  imposed  by  Augustus  on
the  number  of  the  gladiators  were  utterly  swept
away.  It  was  the  delight  of  Caius  to  witness,  not
the  dexterous  fence  of  single  pairs  of  swordsmen,  but
the  promiscuous  struggling  of  armed  bands  together.
He  was  not  content  with  the  combats  of  slaves  or
criminals,  or  even  of  occasional  volunteers  from  the
ranks  of  Roman  citizenship.  He  compelled  the  free
and  noble  to  expose  themselves  in  these  horrid  contests
on  various  pretences,  and  on  one  occasion  presented
as  many  as  six-and-twenty  knights  together1.  The
combats  with  wild  beasts  were  carried  on  with  the
same  prodigality  of  human  blood.  Once,  when  the
number  of  criminals  condemned  to  this  service  was
not  found  sufficient,  he  suddenly  commanded  some
of  the  spectators  within  the  rails  to  be  dragged  into
the  arena,  and  opposed  defenceless  to  the  lions.1

1  Dion,  lix.  10.;  Suet.  Calig.  27. The  story  is  not  unlike  some
of  the  traits  of  cynical  irony  of  which  we  read  in  Caius,  and  may

i.C.S7-A.U.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  31

Caius  was  not  slow,  as  might  be  expected,  to  profit
by  the  lessons  he  was  thus  taking  in  the
art  of  shedding  blood. There  was  still  an-  Ennu  we

. ,  • -r.  .  , put  to  death.

other  personage  m  Kome  on  whom  he
looked  with  no  less  jealousy  than  on  the  innocent
Tiberius,  the  man  to  whom  he  owed  his  empire  and
possibly  even  his  life.  The  disposition  of  the  late
emperor  towards  his  nephew  had  been  always  doubt-
ful. It  was  supposed  by  many  that  he  detested  his
evil  nature,  and  meditated  his  removal  for  the  safety
of  one  nearer  to  him.  Macro,  the  tyrant's  sole  con-
fidant, had  boasted  to  Caius  that  he  had  saved  him
from  destruction  not  less  than  three  times.  Whether
this  were  true  or  not  it  was  at  least  indiscreet  to
refer  to  it,  and  in  hastening  the  end  of  Tiberius,  and
engaging  the  senate  to  accept  his  successor,  Macro
had  laid  obligations  on  Caius  too  great  to  be  repaid.
By  this  time  the  connexion  between  the  prince  and
Ennia  had  become  irksome  to  the  licentious  lover,
as  yet  too  shy  to  break  his  chains  without  blushing.
He  had  promised  to  make  her  his  empress,  but  he
now  hesitated  to  satisfy  her  claim.  On  the  one
hand,  the  husband  ventured  to  give  unpalatable
counsels.  He  urged,  it  is  said,  high  and  generous
views  of  the  duties  of  empire,  and  rebuked,  per-
haps, the  wanton  levity  which  disgraced  the  purple
of  the  Caesars.  On  the  other,  the  wife  pressed  the
fulfilment  of  the  engagement  made  to  her,  and
lavished  on  her  sated  admirer  caresses  which  now
only  disgusted  him.  Caius  had  released  his  friend
Agrippa  from  confinement,  and  had  conferred  on
him  the  sovereignty  of  a  district  in  Palestine.  But
he  did  not  immediately  dismiss  him  to  the  enjoy-
ment of  it ;  his  society  was  too  agreeable,  his  coun-

not  be  beyond  the  bounds  of  credibility:  the  addition  that  be  caused
the  tongues  of  these  victims  to  be  cut  out,  to  prevent  their  outcries,
Beems  a  mere  extravagant  fiction.  He  was  generally  careful  to  keep
on  good  terms  with  the  populace.

A2  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVII.

sels  too  convenient,  to  be  at  once  dispensed  with.1
The  prince  continued  to  imbibe  lessons  in  kingcraft
from  the  Eastern  politician,  and  to  emulate,  under
his  experienced  guidance,  the  behaviour  of  Asiatic
autocrats ;  and  we  shall  not  perhaps  err  in  ascribing
to  this  influence  the  resolution  he  adopted  of  ridding
himself  first  of  his  cousin,  and  soon  afterwards  of  his
unamiable  mentor.  The  storm  which  was  impending
over  Macro  was  soon  made  visible  to  the  courtiers.
Caius  was  observed  to  frown  at  his  approach,  and
heard  to  mutter,  /  am  no  longer  a  boy,  but  see,  here
is  my  tutor ;  here  is  the  subject  who  fancies  himself
a  ruler :  I  who  was  born  a  prince,  nursed  by  em-
perors, cradled  in  the  cabinet  of  state,  must  bow  for-
sooth to  an  audacious  upstart,  a  novice  affecting
the  airs  of  a  hierophant.*  The  minister,  as  may  be
supposed,  did  not  long  survive  the  utterance  of  such
sentiments  by  such  a  master.  Macro  received,  as  the
last  favour,  permission  to  be  his  own  executioner,
and  Ennia,  the  partner  of  his  intrigues,  and  equally
disappointed  in  their  success,  fell  at  the  same  time
with  him.3

The  destruction  of  the  emperor's  greatest  bene-
factor was  soon  followed  by  the  murder  M.suanus
of  a  man  of  much  higher  distinction,  and  ^TS^If  £
one  whom  from  his  station,  experience,  lieath<
and  intimate  connexion  with  himself,  he  might
have  regarded  as  the  most  able  and  faithful  of  his
friends.  Caius  had  been  united,  as  has  been  men-
tioned, in  early  youth  to  Claudia,  the  daughter  of  M.
Junius  Silanus,  a  personage  whose  ancient  nobility
might  entitle  him  above  almost  any  other  citizen  to
the  honour  of  an  imperial  alliance.  The  prince's
father-in-law  had  been  treated  with  the  highest  dis-
tinction both  by  Tiberius,  with  whom  he  had  ingrati-
ated himself  by  discreet  but  not  servile  flattery,  and

Joseph.  Antitj.  Jud.  xviii.  7.  11.  2  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cai.  8.

•  Suet.  Calig.  26. Dion,  lix.  10.

A.P,3?-A.tJ.790.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  33

afterwards  by  his  successor.  He  had  been  appoin-
ted to  the  government  of  Africa;  but  latterly  the
jealousy  of  Caius  had  been  excited  against  him,  the
death  of  his  daughter  had  relaxed  the  bonds  of
affinity  between  them,  and  the  advice  he  presumed
to  offer  was  ill-received  and,  perhaps,  unskilfully
tendered.  The  command  of  the  legion  and  one-half
the  patronage  of  the  province  had  been  withdrawn
from  him,  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  another  officer,
who  was  sent  to  watch  him,  and  his  innocently  pro-
viding himself  with  an  antidote  to  sea-sickness  was
represented,  we  are  told,  as  a  precaution  against
poison.  Preparations  were  made,  at  the  emperor's
instance,  for  bringing  him  to  trial  for  treasonable
designs ;  but  on  the  refusal  of  a  noble  orator  to  con-
duct the  accusation,  he  was  got  rid  of  more  summarily
by  an  order  to  kill  himself.1

The  emperor's  pecuniary  necessities,  in  which  his
extravagance  had  already  involved  him,  Rapid8ucce8-
were  perhaps  the  primary  motive  of  this  rio™°lndecu
and  other  atrocities  which  quickly  followed.  confi8Cations-
The  treasury  was  exhausted,  and  unpopular  taxes
had  been  remitted;  but  his  passion  for  show  and
expenditure  increased  with  indulgence,  and  the  ap-
petite of  the  people  required  to  be  pampered  with
novelty  and  variety.  The  fatal  facility  of  murder,
without  even  the  intervention  of  any  judicial  pro-
cess, offered  a  dire  temptation  to  power  unchecked
by  principle  or  pity.  Delation,  ever  ready  at  his
back,  was  too  dear  an  instrument  for  the  prodigal  to
use.  Informers  and  orators  required  a  portion  of  the
victim's  fortune,  and  their  most  zealous  efforts  might

1  Suet.  Calig.  23.;  Dion,  lix.  8.;  and  more  particularly  Philo,
legat.  ad  Cai,  9.  I  cannot  but  regard  this  story  as  suspicious.  It
was  a  strong  act  of  policy,  and,  in  the  disturbed  state  of  the  African
frontier,  not  an  unreasonable  one,  to  weaken  the  arm  of  the  sena-
torial proconsul  by  placing  an  imperial  legatus  by  his  side.  Such
an  encroachment,  howerer,  on  the  independence  of  the  senate  might
naturally  be  resented,  and  an  invidious  fiction  be  grafted  on  it,
VOL.  VI.  B

°f  hue

34  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xtvil.

sometimes  fail  of  success  ;  but  a  simple  order  to  the
accused  to  despatch  himself  was  attended  with  no
expense,  and  it  was,  moreover,  sure  to  be  effectual.
This  was  the  process  by  which  the  emperor's  blows
were  made  generally  to  fall  on  men  whose  sole  crime
was  their  riches  ;  but  if  any  pretext  was  wanted,  the
papers,  real  or  pretended,  of  Tiberius,  the  same
which  he  had  recently  professed  to  destroy  unopened,
sufficed  to  furnish  matter  of  accusation.  The  two
crimes  most  commonly  alleged,  as  most  odious  to
the  nobility  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  the  populace  on
the  other,  were  complicity  in  the  bloody  artifices  of
Sejanus,  and  hostility  to  the  house  of  Germanicus.1
While  the  feelings  of  the  profligate  were  thus  be-
of  coining  hardened  in  cruelty,  they  were  sud-
denly  embittered  by  a  domestic  loss,  which,
Sp0ilt  and  pampered  as  he  was,  seems  to
A.u.791.  have  shattered  his  reason.  The  three
sisters  of  Caius  have  already  been  mentioned.  The
scandalous  rumours  of  the  day  insinuated  that  he
had  indulged  an  incestuous  passion  for  all  of  them
in  turn,  a  horror  almost  unknown  among  all  the
horrors  of  Eoman  vice,  and  which  only  once  before
had  been  ascribed  by  party  malice  to  a  profligate  of
an  earlier  age.  The  public  honours  he  had  obtained
for  them,  and  certain  marks  of  favour  he  was  said  to
bestow  on  them  in  private,  hardly  suffice  to  esta-
blish the  credit  of  this  charge  as  regards  at  least  two
of  the  sisters  ;  but  the  commerce  of  Caius  with  Dru-
silla  is  too  circumstantially  attested  to  be  reasonably
rejected.  He  had  been  rebuked,  it  is  said,  for  this
intrigue  by  Antonia  while  yet  a  stripling.  Tiberius
united  Brasilia  to  Cassius  Longinus;  but  Caius,
when  he  attained  to  power,  separated  her  from  her
husband,  and  after  living  for  some  time  openly
with  her,  gave  her  to  an  unworthy  favourite,  M.
Lepidus,  who  seems  to  have  resigned  her  to  him

1  Dion,  lix.  4,  6,  10.,  Ix,  4,

A.D.38-A.U.791. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  35

again  without  scruple.  His  passion  for  this  poor
creature  knew  no  limits.  In  his  illness,  if  we  may  be-
lieve our  accounts,  he  had  actually  named  her  heiress
of  the  empire  and  of  his  official  dignities.1  But  he
recovered,  while  she  shortly  afterwards  fell  sick  and
died.  Caius  was  plunged  in  a  frenzy  of  despair.  He
commanded  that  she  should  be  honoured  with  a
public  funeral  of  extraordinary  magnificence,  that
all  business  should  cease,  and  even  the  commonest
affairs  of  domestic  life  be  suspended  on  pain  of
death.2  For  himself,  he  rushed  from  the  city  to  the
solitude  of  his  Alban  villa,  declared  that  he  was  in-
capable of  appearing  in  the  distressing  pageant,
and  abandoned  himself  instead  to  the  most  trifling
amusements.3  Once  again  he  burst  from  his  retreat,
and  with  his  beard  and  hair  untrimmed,  hastened
down  the  Italian  coast  till  he  reached  Sicily,  where  he
diverted  himself  with  the  ordering  of  some  public
games  at  Syracuse.  When  this  humour  was  satisfied,
he  returned  not  less  abruptly  to  Kome,  to  close  the
season  of  mourning  and  appoint  divine  honours  for
the  deceased.  The  senate  acquiesced  without  hesi-
tation. Not  only  did  it  decree  her  the  honours  of
the  blessed  Livia,  but  added  that  her  gilded  statue
should  be  placed  in  the  curia,  and  another  in  the
temple  of  Venus,  to  which  the  same  adoration  should
be  paid  as  to  the  daughter  of  Jupiter,  She  was  to
bear  in  heaven  the  title  of  Panthea,  the  Universal
Divinity ;  a  temple  was  to  be  erected  to  her ;  meu
and  women  were  enjoined  to  provide  themselves
with  her  consecrated  images  for  their  private  devo-

1  Suet. Calig.  24. : "  Heredem quoque  honorum atque  imperil
aeger  instituit."

2  Suet.  /.  c. :  "  Justitium  indixit ;  in  quo  risisse,  lavisse,  ccenasse,
cum  parentibus  aut  conjuge  liberisve,  capital  fuit." Comp.  Dion,
lix.  11.

*  Seneca,  Cons,  ad  Polyb.  36.:  "  Conspectum  civium  suoruin  pro-
fugit  .  .  .  justa  non  praestitit,  sed  in  Albano  suo  tesseris  ac  foro,
provocatis  hujusmodi  aliis  occupationibus,  acerbissimi  furoris  levabat
mala. "

P  2

36  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  XJLVII.

tions ;  women  were  to  swear  henceforth  by  no  other
name.  The  worship  of  Brasilia  or  Panthea  was  im-
posed as  a  duty  upon  all  the  cities  of  Italy  and  the
provinces.  A  senator,  Livius  Greminus,  swore  that
he  had  with  his  own  eyes  beheld  her  ascend  into
heaven,  and  he  confirmed  the  assertion  by  steadfastly
imprecating  curses  on  himself  and  his,  if  he  spake
not  the  truth.  The  perjury  was  rewarded  on  earth
by  the  gift  of  a  million  of  sesterces.  Having
strained  his  morbid  feelings  to  this  pitch  of  fana-
ticism, the  crazy  monster  relieved  them  by  an  out-
burst of  cynical  humour.  He  declared  that  if  any
man  dared  to  mourn  for  his  sister's  death  he  should
be  punished,  for  she  had  become  a  goddess ;  if  any
one  ventured  to  rejoice  at  her  deification,  he  should
be  punished  also,  for  she  was  dead.1

So  far  was  Caius  constant  to  this  fantastic  passion
cai™  mar-  that  he  never  afterwards  swore,  it  is  said,
Ihortijre-  by  any  other  name  than  Brasilia's.  His
Loiii*1"'  unbridled  fancy  had  before  impelled  him
Paulina.  fo  snat,ch  himself  &  wife  from  the  arms  of
her  husband,  after  the  manner,  as  he  himself  pomp-
ously proclaimed,  of  Eomulus  and  Augustus ;  and
this  victim  being  repudiated  a  few  days  only  after
the  deification  of  Brasilia,  he  repeated  the  same
feat  with  another.2  The  first  of  these  wives  was
Orestilla,  the  consort  of  Cn.  Piso,  the  son  of  the
enemy  of  Grermanicus ;  the  other  was  Lollia  Paulina,
the  most  celebrated  beauty  of  her  days,  who  was
united  to  a  distinguished  noble,  Memmius  Eegulus,
the  consul  who  had  arrested  Sejanus.3  But  Caius

1  Suetonius,  Dion,  II.  cc.  Seneca,  however,  by  whom  the  story
was  probably  suggested,  gives  it  no  such  extravagant  turn :  "  Eodem
tempore  quo  templa  illi  constituebat  ac  pulvinaria,  eos  qui  parum
moesti  fuerant  crudeli  afficiebat  animadversione."

*  Suet.  Calig.  25.  On  the  occasion  of  his  marriage  with  Orestilla,
the  wife  of  C.  Piso:  "Matrimonium  sibi  repertum  exemplo  Romuli
et  Augusti."  The  first  had  thus  carried  off  Hersilia  (Plut.  Rom.  14.),
the  last  Livia  s  Dion,  lix.  12.

A.U.38-A.U.791.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  3?

was  not  smitten,  perhaps,  so  much  by  the  charms  of
her  person  as  of  her  estate,  for  she  was  the  richest
woman  in  Eome,  the  heiress  of  the  extortioner  of
Gaul ;  and  the  emperor,  like  a  mere  private  spend-
thrift, was  driven  to  restore  his  shattered  fortunes  by
a  judicious  alliance.  Lollia  displayed  her  magnifi-
cence with  a  pomp  truly  imperial.  /  have  seen  her,
says  Pliny,  on  no  occasion  of  special  solemnity,  but
at  a  plain  citizen's  bridal  supper,  all  covered  with
pearls  and  emeralds — her  hair  and  headdress,  ears,
neck,  and  fingers — worth  as  much  as  forty  millions
of  sesterces.  Such  was  the  style  in  which  she  came
to  witness  the  act  of  marriage.  Nor  were  these  the
love-tokens  of  a  princely  prodigal ;  they  were  the
treasures  of  her  grandsire,  amassed  from  the  spoils
of  provinces.  Such  was  the  end  of  all  this  rapine.
Lollius  suffered  disgrace  and  perished  by  his  own
hand,  that  his  grand-daughter  forsooth  might  blaze
by  lamp-light  in  the  splendour  of  forty  millions.1
But  once  united  to  the  rapacious  emperor,  she  was
not  suffered  long  to  parade  this  brilliancy.  She  too
was  repudiated  in  her  turn  by  the  inconstant  prince,
and  we  can  hardly  suppose  that  she  was  suffered  a
second  time  to  carry  off  her  jewels  with  her.2  Never-
theless, we  shall  find  her  recommended  again  for  her
riches  as  the  bride  of  another  emperor ;  nor  does
Pliny,  in  noting  the  splendour  of  her  fortune,  remark
how  suddenly  she  was  deprived  of  it.

In  the  second  year  of  his  principate  Caius  per-
formed an  imposing  ceremony,  the  distri-  Her?d
bution  of  crowns  and  sceptres to  various  ^'Some
foreign  applicants. The  solemnity  was  not  verre1|gn8ty
the  less  interesting  from  the  respect  he  paid  iutheEast-
to  the  forms  of  the  republic. A  silken  curtain,  then

1  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  ix.  58.

2  Suet.  Calig.  25.:  "Brevique  missam  fecit  interdicto  cujusquam
in  perpetuum  coitu." This  prohibition  means,  perhaps,  that  she  was
forbidden  to  contract  another  marriage,  in  order  that  the  emperor
might  not  be  required  to  restore  her  portion.

88  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  r

most  rare  and  precious,  was  drawn  across  a  lofty
stage  in  the  forum ;  and  the  emperor  was  discovered
seated  between  the  consuls.  He  recited  the  decree
of  the  senate,  which  conferred  the  throne  of  Itursea
upon  Soemus,  of  the  Lesser  Armenia  upon  Cotys,
of  Thrace  upon  Khsemetalces,  and  of  Pontus  upon
Polemo.1  At  the  same  time  Agrippa,  who  recently,
on  the  death  of  Philip,  had  been  gratified  with  his
tetrarchy,  to  which  the  districts  of  Abilene  and  Ccele-
Syria  had  been  added,  was  allowed,  after  long  delay,
to  repair  to  his  new  dominions.2  As  the  first  pledge
of  his  amity,  the  emperor  had  already  presented  him,
on  his  release  from  custody,  with  a  chain  of  gold  of
equal  weight  with  the  iron  fetters  which  had  bound
him  to  his  warder.  This  present  was  no  more  than
a  token  perhaps  of  the  riches  which  were  at  the  same
time  heaped  upon  him,  which  enabled  him  to  exhibit
his  accustomed  magnificence  in  Eome  during  the  pe-
riod that  Caius  still  chose  to  retain  him  about  his  own
person.  But  these  shining  marks  of  favour,  and  the
consciousness  of  his  personal  influence,  did  not  fail
to  inspire  him  with  more  ambitious  views.  He  aimed
at  recombining  under  his  sceptre  the  broken  frag-
ments of  the  great  sovereignty  of  Herod,  one  portion
of  which  was  now  under  the  immediate  government
of  Koman  officials,  another  still  occupied  by  his  kins-
man Antipas  and  his  sister  Herodias.  He  employed
perhaps  the  period  of  his  prolonged  sojourn  in  Kome
in  imbuing  his  patron's  mind  with  distrust  of  the
rulers  of  Samaria ;  and  the  mutual  recriminations  of
the  Jewish  princes,  which  the  government  forbade  to
i  sue  in  an  appeal  to  arms,  could  only  be  controlled
eventually  by  the  direct  decision  of  the  emperor.
It  was  in  the  fall  apparently  of  the  year  791  that

1  Dion.  lix.  12.

*  Joseph.  Anthj.  Jnd.  xviii.  7.  11.  Agrippa  was  relieved  from  his
attendance  on  his  patron  in  the  second  yrar  of  the  Caian  principle,
on  promising  to  return  whenever  his  presence  was  required.

A.0.38-A.U.791. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  39

Agrippa  sailed  for  the  East. The  speediest  and  surest
voyage  from  Home  to  Palestine  lay  not  by  AggripPa
way  of  Brundisium  and the  Hadrian  and  17eiandria
Carpathian  seas,  but  by  the longer  route  topa'eT*7
of Puteoli and Alexandria, on account  tine-
of  its  favourable  winds,  and  the  superiority  of  the
vessels  which  ran  between  those  important  havens.
It  was  to  Alexandria,  therefore,  on  the  recommend-
ation of  the  emperor  himself,  that  Agrippa  in  the
first  instance  repaired. His  presence  there  gave  rise
to  scenes  of  disorder,  which  were  not  without  their  in-
fluence on  the  future  fortunes  of  the  Jewish  people,
and  must  not  be  passed  over  in  silence.

No  one  yet  perhaps  could  augur  that  the  Jewish
people,  the  citizens  of  a  narrow  and  obscure  Thejew«at
corner  of  the  empire,  would  one  day  divide  £iSteddby
the  interest  of  mankind  with  Borne  itself,  in  the  nati™'
a  great  and  mortal  struggle.  Yet  no  other  city  but
Jerusalem  might  seem  at  this  period  to  rival  the
capital  of  the  Caesars,  as  the  centre  of  a  compact
and  at  the  same  time  a  wide-spread  nationality,
and  the  beloved  metropolis  of  innumerable  colonies
planted  in  every  land.  No  other  city  was  so  bound
to  the  hearts  of  its  children  throughout  the  world  by
its  customs  and  traditions,  its  faith  and  its  aspira-
tions. No  other  possessed  within  its  bosom  the
germs  of  universal  conquest :  it  yet  remained  to  be
seen  whether  circumstances  would  suffer  the  material
extension  of  its  power  over  alien  nations,  or  whether
its  authority  should  eventually  be  confined  to  a  moral
and  spiritual  pre-eminence.  But  as  the  presence  of
the  Roman  was  felt  on  every  foreign  shore  as  that
of  a  material  organizer  and  controller,  so  the  Jews
appear  in  some  mysterious  way  to  have  rebuked,  by
the  force  of  their  character,  wherever  they  established
themselves,  the  feeble  decrepitude  of  the  races
around  them.  The  disintegration  of  ancient  nation-
alities was  nowhere  more  manifest  than  in  the  teem-

40  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  Cn.  XLVII.

ing  city  of  Alexandria,  where  the  Greek  and  Copt
mingled  in  ill-cemented  union,  and  were  bound  most
strictly  together  by  their  common  hatred  of  the
Jews  residing  among  them.  The  number  of  this
foreign  race  in  Egypt  has  already  been  stated  at  a
million  ;  of  the  five  sections  of  the  great  emporium
of  the  East  two  were  principally  inhabited  by  Jews,
and  they  were  found  scattered  in  considerable  force
throughout  the  others.  But  if  the  proportion  of  this
element  to  the  indigenous  population  was  so  large,
its  habits  were  less  gregarious,  its  temper  less  excit-
able :  it  was  devoted  to  the  quiet  pursuit  of  com-
merce or  letters ;  it  had  no  wish  for  the  exercise  of
arms,  nor  was  it  entrusted  with  them.  The  native
Alexandrians,  however,  regarded  these  Jewish  denizens
as  aliens  to  be  hated  and  despised :  lively  and  tur-
bulent themselves,  they  were  ever  ready  to  break  out
in  violence  against  their  graver  neighbours,  and  it
required  all  the  vigilance  and  impartial  austerity  of
the  Eoman  rule  to  protect  the  one  from  the  bitter
animosity  of  the  other.  The  arrival  of  Agrippa
seems  to  have  been  the  signal  for  an  outburst  of  this
national  jealousy.  It  was  the  humour  of  the  Alex-
andrians to  mock  and  injure  the  Jews  on  all  occasions  :
they  now  chose  to  make  the  new  king  of  the  Jews  a
special  object  of  derision,  and  for  this  purpose  taking
an  idiot  of  the  name  of  Carabas,  well  known  in  their
streets,  they  crowned  him  with  a  diadem  of  papyrus
leaves,  put  a  reed  in  his  hand,  and  bore  him  in  mock
triumph  through  the  city,  attended  by  a  body-guard
of  children  armed  with  sticks.1  On  reaching  the
quarters  of  their  foes  they  redoubled  their  shouts  and
acclamations,  saluting  him  with  the  titles  of  Lord
and  King.  Instead  of  checking  this  outrage,  by
which  the  Jews  were  naturally  exasperated,  the
Eoman  governor,  Avilius  Flaccus,  seems  to  have  en-
couraged and  applauded  it.  This  man,  after  serving

1  Philo,  in  Flaccum,  6.

A.D.38-A.IT.791.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  41

Tiberius  discreetly  in  the  command  of  Egypt  for  the
space  of  five  years,  had  fallen  out  of  favour  with  the
new  emperor,  and  was  seeking,  as  the  Jewish  party
imagined,  to  recover  it.  The  cherished  enmity  of
the  Jewish  political  leaders  to  Eome,  and  the  uneasy
jealousy  of  the  state  towards  them,  was  well  known
to  the  men  who  bore  rule  in  these  parts ;  the  Eoman
officials  had  themselves  too  often  provoked  them  pur-
posely by  injustice,  in  order  to  make  their  exaspera-
tion a  pretext  for  harsher  measures  of  repression.
Such  perhaps  was  the  object  which  Flaccus  now  had
in  view  ;  such  at  least  it  appeared  to  the  sufferers
themselves,  one  of  whom,  the  most  distinguished  name
in  their  secular  literature,  has  denounced  it  with  no
little  eloquence  and  feeling.  Tiberius  had  forbidden
the  worship  of  his  pretended  divinity  in  Eome :  even
in  the  provinces  he  had  restrained  and  discouraged  it.
He  knew  that  it  was  absurd ;  and  nothing  absurd  in
politics,  he  shrewdly  determined,  could  continue  to
be  always  safe.  But  the  crude  inexperience  of  his
youthful  successor  was  troubled  by  no  such  scruples.
The  governors  of  the  provinces  were  induced  to  be-
lieve that  they  could  in  no  way  pay  court  to  him
more  palatably,  than  bv  impelling  their  subjects  to
the  adoration  of  the  Caesar.  The  excessive  repug-
nance of  the  Jews  to  admit  any  representations  of
the  human  form  into  their  places  of  reli-  Statne9of
gious  meeting  incited  Flaccus  to  adopt  this  iSST0*
means  of  humiliating  them,  and  he  insti-  Jewish8
gated  their  fellow-citizens  in  Alexandria  ^gog^s.
to  demand  that  statues  of  the  emperor  should  be
erected  in  their  synagogues.  Tumults  and  bloodshed
quickly  followed.  The  Alexandrians,  as  the
strongest  party,  drove  the  Jews  into  a  single  ancesat

? /,, J'.,  i j •  ji  •  Alexandria.

quarter  of  the  city,  plundering  and  burning
their  residences  throughout  the  rest,  and  subjecting
many  of  them  to  death  and  tortures. But  the  pre-
fect, who  had  acted  thus  shamefully,  found  that  in

42  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVII.

his  zeal  he  had  fatally  overreached  himself.  The
Fiacc™,  the  government  at  Borne,  always  sensitive
*o°v™rnor,  about  the  condition  of  Egypt,  was  seriously
.u.graced.  alarmed  and  offended.  He  was  summoned
home  to  answer  for  the  peril  into  which  he  had
brought  the  storehouse  of  Italy,  and  sent  thither  in
chains  by  his  successor  Bassus.1

Agrippa  hastily  quitted  the  scene  into  which  his
Banishment  presence  had  introduced  so  terrible  a  dis-
An"pa°dand  turbance,  and  prosecuted  his  voyage  to
A.e™d39.9'  Palestine.  His  arrival  in  his  new  prin-
ce. 792.  cipality  excited  the  alarm  and  jealousy  of
the  rulers  of  Samaria,  on  whose  compassion  he  had
so  lately  lived.  Antipas  was  wary  and  circumspect,
slow,  perhaps,  to  feel,  and  still  slower  to  move ;  He-
rodias,  more  quick  and  prompt,  if  not  really  more
ambitious,  than  her  husband,  urged  him  with  all  hei
influence  to  repair  to  Eome,  and  sue  for  the  province
of  Judea,  or  at  least  for  such  a  confirmation  of  his
actual  sovereignty  as  might  secure  it  against  the  in-
trigues of  their  artful  neighbour.2  It  was  long  before
she  could  prevail  on  him  to  risk  the  voyage  to  Italy,
whence  so  many  occupants  of  Eastern  thrones  had
never  returned.  At  last  they  sailed  together  for  Baiae,
where  Caius  was  then  sojourning,  closely  followed
by  Agrippa,  with  charges  against  them  of  complicity
with  a  new  revolution  in  Parthia,  and  of  preparing
to  hold  Samaria  against  the  Romans  with  seventy
thousand  stand  of  arms  they  had  there  collected.  The
result  of  the  interviews  which  the  rivals  had  succes-
sively with  the  emperor  was  that  Antipas  was  de-
prived of  his  sovereignty,  and  relegated,  first  to
Lugdunum,  and  afterwards  to  the  distant  province
of  Spain.3  Herodias,  as  the  daughter  of  Antonia's

1  Philo,  in  Flacc.  6 — 13.:  rovro  KO.IV&TO.TOV  virefjifive  $\di<Kos  4v  x^Pf
fis  aQtiyttTo,  iro\fuiov  -rptmov  (erypriBeis. Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  9.  1.

2  Salvador  (i.  454.)  reminds  us  how  Antipas  is  characterized  as  a
fox  in  the  Gospels. St  Luke  xiii.  32.

*  Joseph.  Antiq.  xviii.  8.  2,

\.D.39-A.r.792. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  43

friend  Berenice,  was  indulged  with  an  offer  of  pardon,
together  with  some  portion  of  her  estates ;  but  this,
with  the  high  spirit  of  a  Jewish  matron,  she  firmly
rejected,  and  insisted  on  sharing  her  hus-  AgriPPa
band's  disgrace.  The  fortunate  Agrippa  was  sSm^in
now  gratified  with  the  addition  of  Samaria  jSJiJXV
to  his  dominions.  The  province  of  Judea  Galilee-
alone  remained  to  reunite  the  sovereignty  of  Herod.
Caius  had  now  played  the  autocrat  without  re-
straint or  remonstrance  for  more  than  two
years,  and  his  pride  had  been  inflated  to  the  diy'ine  wor-
highest  pitch.  The  foreign  princes,  whom
he  had  assembled  about  his  throne  and  admitted  to
his  table,  had  pampered  him  with  fulsome  adulation.
They  had  vied  with  one  another  in  doing  homage  to
him  as  the  dispenser  of  crowns ;  they  had  suffered
him  to  regard  and  treat  them  as  his  vassals,  and  ac-
knowledged themselves  as  merely  ministers  of  his
paramount  authority.  When  they  contended  among
themselves  for  precedence,  he  cut  short  the  dispute
with  the  maxim  of  Homer,  One  chief,  one  king.  It
is  mentioned,  as  the  height  of  his  daring  insolence,
that  he  all  but  assumed  the  diadem,  and  converted
the  shadow  of  the  principate  into  the  reality  of  a
royal  rule.1  But  the  Eastern  King  was  always  near
allied  to  Divinity.  This  was  a  political  dogma  which
tlie  Macedonians  had  found  established  in  Asia,  and
they  had  willingly  availed  themselves  of  it.  Eegard-
ing  the  Godhead  as  a  Spirit  of  Joy  and  Bounty  only,
without  the  sterner  attributes  and  moral  excellences
attached  to  him  by  the  Western  and  Northern  world,
the  Oriental,  and  the  Greek  especially,  was  prone  to
discover  an  emanation  of  Divinity  in  every  human
dispenser  of  worldly  blessings.  Giver  of  good  things,
Giver  of  prosperity,  was  the  title  with  which  he  was

1  Suet.  Calig.  22.:  "  Exclamavit,  «Fs  icoipavos  tarw  tfj  faun\fvs:  Nee
mnltum  abfuit  quin  statim  diadema  sumeret,  spcciemque  principatus
iu  rcgui  furuuun  converteret."

44  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  cu.  XLVii.

content  to  address  the  Judge  and  Supreme  Euler  of
the  Universe1:  it  was  easy  to  divert  his  adoration
from  the  supreme  to  the  lesser  givers,  his  own  chiefs
and  kings,  who  were  nearer  to  him,  and  whose  bounty
he  could  more  sensibly  appreciate.  If  they  were  not
almighty,  even  the  (rods  above  were  subject  one  to
another,  and  all  to  Fate2:  if  they  were  vicious  and
impure,  the  Gods  too  had  their  pleasant  vices :  their
follies  and  even  their  crimes  were  little  regarded  as
long  as  these  imperfections  did  not  touch  the  mass  of
their  worshippers.  It  was  long  before  the  higher
moral  sense  of  the  Eomans  could  yield  assent  to  this
degrading  view  of  the  Deity ;  but  when  the  populace
grew  thoroughly  corrupt,  and  imbued  in  a  great  de-
gree with  Oriental  phantasies,  the  upper  class,  with
no  belief  of  its  own,  was  willing  that  they  should
amuse  and  deceive  themselves  by  any  belief  however
preposterous.  The  divine  honours  paid  to  so  many
of  his  race,  and  the  regular  form  which  the  Caesar-
worship  was  assuming  amidst  the  ruins  of  ancient
rituals,  made  a  lively  impression  on  the  imagination
of  the  excitable  Caius.  When  eleven  cities  of  Asia
contended  before  the  senate  for  the  honour  of  devot-
ing themselves  to  the  worship  of  Tiberius,  the  claims
of  Miletus  and  Ephesus  had  been  rejected  because
they  were  too  deeply  engaged  in  the  service  of  Apollo
and  Diana.3  The  cult  of  the  emperor,  they  were
given  to  understand,  ought,  wherever  it  was  esta-
blished, to  precede  every  local  religion ;  or  rather  his
worshippers  ought  to  divide  their  vows  and  sacrifices
with  no  other  patron.  The  principle  thus  gravely
asserted  Caius  carried  out  without  compunction.  He
aspired  not  only  to  be  recognised  as  a  God,  but
claimed  the  same  pre-eminence  among  the  Gods  as

1  Callimachus.  in  Jov.  91.:  Swrop  tdwv,  Surop  airrifjLOff^vijs.  .

*  St&t.Sylv.  iii.  3.  52.:

"  Mox  crescit  in  illos
Imperium  Snperis :  sed  habent  et  Numina  legem."

*  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  55.

A.D.39-A.TT.792. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  45

he  enjoyed  without  a  rival  among  human  potentates.
His  assumption  of  the  name  and  attributes  some-
times of  Hercules,  sometimes  of  Bacchus,  sometimes
of  Apollo,  was  the  whim  of  his  monstrous  imagina-
tion ;  but  when  he  announced  that  he  was  the  Latian
Jupiter  himself,  still  more  when  he  pretended  to
converse  as  an  equal  or  superior  with  Jupiter,  and
challenged  him  with  an  Homeric  verse  to  combat,  he
asserted  that  the  worship  of  the  Caesar  was  paramount
throughout  the  world  to  every  other  formula  of  reli-
gious devotion.1

This  assumption  of  divinity,  in  which  even  the
Eomans  acquiesced,  met,  we  may  suppose,  Thisciaim
with  no  resistance,  and  was  admitted  almost  ^Jauywith
without  remark  in  the  provinces  generally.  indifference-
The  Athenians  might  sigh  to  see  the  heads  of  some  of
their  noblest  images  struck  off,  and  the  trunks  carried
to  Koine  to  be  united  to  the  features  of  a  barbarian
emperor ;  but  it  was  the  insult  to  art,  taste,  and
feeling,  not  to  their  languid  religious  principles,
which  they  chiefly  resented.2  But  with  the  Jews,
both  at  home  and  abroad,  it  was  far  otherwise.
Where,  indeed,  their  numbers  were  few,  and  their
sense  of  nationality  weakened  by  distance  or  disper-
sion, the  order  to  set  up  the  emperor's  statue  in  their
synagogues  might  excite  no  direct  resist-  but  resented
ance ;  but  wherever  numbers  and  union,  as  uonlby  thgena~
well  as  obstinate  prejudices,  gave  them  Jew'-
strength,  they  sternly  refused  to  admit  the  accursed
thing  within  their  walls,  and  defied  the  powers  of
earth  to  intrude  it  on  them.  At  Alexandria  the  con-
test had  issued  in  riot  and  bloodshed.  The  Jews

1  Suet. Calig.  22.: "Cum  Capitolino  Jove  secreto  fabulabatur,
modo  insusurrans,  ac  prsebens invicem  aurem,  modo  clarius nee
sine  jurgiis. Nam  comminantis  audita  est:  tf  fSavdeip',  $)  tyk  at."  //
xxiii.  724.  Comp.  Dion,  lix.  28.,  and  a  story  in  Seneca,  tie  Ira,  i.  nit.

2  Suet.  /.  c. We  must  remember  the  infatuated  worship  they  had
themselves  paid  to  Antonius  in  the  guise  of  Bacchus  more  than
seventy  years  before.

46  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  C

were  overpowered  for  the  time. We  have  seen  in-
deed that  the  indiscretion  with  which  the  prefect  had
encouraged  their  assailants  had  been  followed  by  bib
disgrace ;  but  this  had  been  merely  a  popular  perse-
cution, and  the  resistance  of  the  Jews  to  it  might  be
excused,  and  its  abettor  punished. When,  however,
the  decree  of  the  senate  should  be  launched,  with  the
sanctions  of  law  and  power,  for  the  establishment  of
the  emperor's  worship  in  the  synagogue,  opposition  to
it  would  be  regarded  with  far  other  eyes,  the  fury  of
the  multitude  would  be  backed  by  all  the  force  of
Kome,  and  the  hands  of  the  prefect  strengthened  for
a  complete  and  final  victory. When  Bassus  arrived
to  take  the  place  of  Flaccus,  he  bore,  perhaps,  in  his
hands  the  instrument  of  this  spiritual  tyranny. The
triumph of  the  Jewish  party  was  but  short-lived.
Not  only  in  Alexandria  but,  as  they  were  informed,
in  Judea  and  throughout  the  world,  the  decree  for
the  worship  of  the  idol  of  stone  would  be  speedily
enforced  without  remorse. Possibly  there  was  still  a
moment  of  suspense  before  the  bolt  fell. The  Alex-
andrian Jews  sought  to  avert  it  by  a  direct  appeal  to
the  sense  or  mercy  of  the  emperor. Among  many
learned  and  eloquent  men  who  adorned  their  per-
suasion, was  at  that  time  one  of  peculiar  eminence,
whose  profound  erudition  and  skill  in  moulding  the
belief  of  his  country  to  the  philosophy  of  the  Greeks
have  given  him  a  high  place  in  the  ranks  of  classical
literature. Philo  the  Jew,  as  he  was  spe-
i?hiu>0the cially  designated  to  distinguish  him  from
the  many  scholars  who  once  bore  the  same
name  but  have  long  passed  into  oblivion,  was  now
sent  with  four  others  as  a  deputation  from  his  coun-
trymen in  Egypt,  to  lay  before  Caius  the  grievances
under  which  they  suffered,  to  explain  the  nature  of
their  religious  scruples,  and  to  avert  if  possible  the
wrath  of  the  self-styled  Divinity  by  protestations  of
loyalty  and  true  devotion.

>.P.40.-A.r.793.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  47

The  account  of  this  embassy,  which  the  illustrious
envoy  has  himself  left  us,  is  one  of  the  most  interview  of
curious  monuments  of  antiquity.  No  other  envoyfwuu
fragment  of  ancient  history,  excepting  per-  Caius-
haps  the  fourth  of  Juvenal's  Satires,  gives  us  so  near
an  insight  into  the  actual  domestic  life  of  the  rulers
of  the  world  ;  and  though  the  style  of  Philo  is  labo-
rious and  turgid,  and  the  character  of  his  mind,  ever
exercised  in  weaving  plausible  unrealities,  such  as  to
engage  little  confidence  in  his  judgment  or  even  in
his  statements  of  fact,  nevertheless  we  cannot  rise
from  its  perusal  without  feeling  that  we  have  made  a
personal  acquaintance,  to  use  the  words  of  another
sophist,  with  the  kind  of  beast  called  a  tyrant.1  As
Antipas  and  Agrippa  had  contended  which  should
outstrip  the  other  in  first  reaching  the  prince's  ante-
chamber, so  the  Alexandrians  sent  now  their  deputa-
tion as  well  as  the  Jews,  and  both  the  one  and  the
other  landed  almost  at  the  same  moment  on  the  coast
of  Campania.  The  Jews  were  much  dismayed  at
hearing  on  their  arrival  that  Petronius,  the  governor
of  Judea,  had  been  commanded  to  erect  a  colossal
figure  of  the  Caesar  in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  even
in  the  Holy  of  Holies  2  ;  and  that  the  consummation
of  this  crowning  impiety,  retarded  for  a  moment  by
that  officer's  hesitation  at  the  prayers,  the  murmurs,
and  the  menaces  of  the  true  believers,  was  urged
more  imperatively  than  before  by  a  fresh  injunction
from  Rome,  and  now  only  awaited  the  completion  of
the  abominable  image  by  the  hands  of  Phoenician
artificers.  At  this  moment  the  tyrant  was  flitting
from  one  of  his  villas  to  another,  followed  by  trains

1  The  saying  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  twenty  years  later,  as  re-
corded by  Philostratus,  iv.  37.  :  rb  5«  Qfyiov  rovro  6  «aXoC<rwoiiro\Aoi
•fvpavvov,  oCre  Air6aat  a!  Ke<pa\al  avrf  olSa,  ofaf  d  ya/ji^vvxAv  re  tea)

*  Philo,  legat.  ad  Cainm,  26.:  O^TOU  rttnuv  -rb  iepiv
Ko\offcriaiov,  eltrwraTu  T&V  a&\mav  HvartOrivat  A  Pai'oj  Ttpoa
lflK\i\aiv  auroC.

48  HISTORY  OP THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVH.

of  courtiers  and  petitioners,  and  among  them  the
rival  envoys  of  Egypt,  long  unable  to  obtain  an
audience.  At  last  he  summoned  these  last  to  an
interview  together  in  the  gardens  of  Maecenas,  which
he  had  connected  with  the  ample  pleasure  grounds  of
the  Lamias,  and  where  he  was  engaged  in  planning
extensions  and  alterations,  to  adapt  the  proudest
seats  of  the  nobility  to  the  proportions  of  a  royal
residence.  This  was  the  spot,  says  Philo,  chosen
ivhereon  to  enact  the  catastrophe  of  the  great  drama
of  Jewish  nationality.1  Here,  he  continues,  we
found  the  tyrant,  surrounded  by  stewards,  archi-
tects, and  workmen, — every  hall  and  chamber  thrown
open  for  his  inspection, — ranging  from  room  to
room.  Called  into  his  presence,  we  advanced  reve-
rently and  discreetly,  saluting  him  by  the  title  of
Augustus  and  Imperator.  Halting  for  a  moment
in  his  eccentric  course,  he  suddenly  addressed  them.
What,  said  he,  are  you  the  God-haters,  the  men  who
deny  my  divinity,  confessed  by  all  the  world  besides?2
and  he  raised  his  hand  towards  heaven  with  a  frightful
execration.  The  Alexandrians  pressed  forward  in
their  turn  with  odious  adulation.  Lord  and  master,
said  their  spokesman  Isidorus,  still  more,  and  more
justly,  will  you  hate  them,  when  you  learn  that  of
all  mankind  these  Jews  alone  have  refused  to  sa-
crifice for  your  safety.  .  .  .  Lord  Gains,  Lord
Gains,  exclaimed  the  Jews,  we  are  slandered.*  We
have  sacrificed  for  you,  we  have  offered  hecatombs,
we  have  not  feasted  on  the  flesh  of  our  victims,  but
have  made  holocausts  of  them,  not  once  but  thrice
already;  first  when  yon  assumed  the  empire,  again
when  you  were  restored  from  your  dire  disease,
once  more  for  the  success  of  your  expedition  against
the  Germans.  .  .  Be  it  so,  replied  he,  ye  sacri-

1  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cat.  44.:  KtiOi  yap  eVl  irapovtriv  T)(ut>  ft  Karck  irdvros
rov  Zdvovs  1/xeAAe  ffKijvofiaTf'iffQai  Spa.fj.aTOTroi.ta.

1  Philo,  /.  c. :  vfj.fis  &rre  of  Beo/j.iire'ts,  of  6tbv  /tJ)  i>aftl£ovTts  flva,(  /ut,
rbv  fjSrj  irapa  iraffiv  TOIS  &\AOJS  &vci>fj.o\oyT]iJ.evoi>.

'  Philo.  C.  45.: itboir  rdt'e.  (rvKo

A.D.40-A.U.793.  UNDER THE EMPIKE.  49

ficed  for  me,  but  not  to  me.  The  unfortunate  Jews
were  struck  dumb  with  abysmal  terror.1  For  a
moment  they  were  relieved  by  the  emperor  suddenly
rushing  off  to  some  distant  apartments,  some  up-
stairs, some  below,  examining  their  proportions  and
decorations,  approving  here,  ordering  changes  and
reconstructions  elsewhere.  The  envoys  were  hurried
in  his  train,  backwards  and  forwards,  the  Alexan-
drians pressing  on  with  them,  and  ever  jeering  and
mocking  them,  as  in  a  play.  But  at  the  next  pause
in  his  career,  Caius  turned  round  abruptly  with  the
question,  Pray,  gentlemen,  why  do  not  you  eat
pork?  Whereat  the  Alexandrians  in  their  glee  so
far  forgot  themselves  as  to  burst  into  loud  uncourtly
merriment,  which  brought  on  them  frowns  and  shrugs
from  some  of  the  emperor's  attendants.  The  moment
was  favourable  to  the  Jewish  envoys,  and  they  an-
swered discreetly,  Every  people  has  its  special  cus-
toms;  our  opponents  are  not  without  their  own
peculiarities.  .  .  .  Some  nations,  one  of  them
meekly  suggested,  refrain  from  eating  the  Jlesh  of
young  lambs.  .  .  .  Quite  right  too,  screamed
the  emperor,  their  meat  is  bad.  Pleased  with  his
joke,  which  took  the  Jews  by  surprise,  he  went  on
more  mildly  to  inquire  into  the  national  usages  of
their  countrymen :  but  when  they  began  to  address
him  in  a  set  speech,  explaining  and  justifying  the  prin-
ciples of  their  polity,  he  soon  cut  them  short,  afraid,
as  Philo  surmised,  to  listen  to  a  justification  which
he  should  be  unable  to  refute,  and  rushed  back  to  his
architectural  fancies.  Among  the  wonders  before
them,  the  envoys,  terrified  as  they  were,  could  not
help  remarking  the  windows  of  one  chamber  filled
with  a  transparent  stone,  admitting  the  light  but
warding  off  the  wind,  and  tempering  the  burning
rays  of  the  sun.  Once  more  the  emperor  came  up  to
them,  and  desired  them,  with  less  asperity  than  at

1  Philo,  c.  45. :  tpplit
701*  VI  E

50  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVII.

first,  to  resume  their  explanations  ;  but  again  he  in-
terrupted them  after  a  few  words  by  running  off  to
superintend  the  arrangement  of  some  pictures.  The
Jews  continued  still  to  follow  him,  more  dead  than
alive  from  fear,  putting  in  from  time  to  time  a  few
words  of  solicitation  or  apology,  but  addressing  them-
selves all  the  while  in  silent  prayer  to  the  great  God
of  their  fathers.  He  had  mercy,  says  Philo,  upon
us,  and  turned  at  last  the  emperor's  heart  to  pity.
.  .  .  Men  who  think  me  no  god,  exclaimed  Caius,
are  more  unfortunate,  after  all,  than  criminal;  and
with  this  remark  he  left  the  place  and  dismissed
them.  Though  his  last  words  were  not  ungracious,
the  Jews  perceived  that  they  had  failed  in  the  object
of  their  mission,  and  returned  home  with  heavy
hearts,  with  no  hope  in  the  compassion  or  justice  of
man.  They  betook  themselves  to  their  Grod,  and
they  found  deliverance.  The  resolution  indeed  of
the  tyrant  was  in  no  wise  shaken  :  the  instances  even
of  Agrippa,  whom  the  Jews  engaged  to  plead  their
cause,  and  to  enforce  moral  with  political  arguments,
were  totally  unavailing.1  The  orders  to  Petronius
were  repeated  with  increasing  stringency,  and  every
plea  and  pretext  for  delay  disregarded.  The  Jews,
stung  to  madness,  were  preparing  to  defend  their
holy  place  at  the  price  of  their  national  existence,
when  in  a  moment  a  blow,  that  might  seem  heaven-
directed,  struck  down  the  monster,  and  paralysed
the  sacrilege.  But  the  crimes  of  this  semi-Oriental
divinity  have  yet  to  be  described  more  particularly,
before  we  can  rejoice,  as  it  deserves,  in  the  just  retri-
bution of  his  downfall.

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xviii.  9.  8.  According  to  this  writer  Caius
at  one  moment  yielded  to  Agrippa,  and  rescinded  his  orders  to
Petronius  ;  but  on  hearing  of  the  resistance  the  Jews  were  prepared
to  make,  repeated  them  more  vehemently  than  ever.  The  last
missive,  however,  did  not  reach  Petronius  till  after  the  news  had
arrived  of  the  tyrant's  death.  Comp.  Tac.  Hist.  v.  9. :  "  Jussi  a
Caio  Csesare  effigiem  ejus  in  templo  locare,  arma  potius  sumpserunt:
quern  motum  Cffisaris  mors  djrerait,"

4.D.37-A.H.790.  UNDER THE EMPIRK.  ft]

CHAPTER XLVIII.

Reflections  on  the  deficiency  of  our  materials  for  the  history  of
Cains. — Defects  of  his  education  and  training. — His  contempt  for
political  disguises. — The  priesthood  of  the  Arician  Diana. — Colos-
sal character  of  his  conceptions :  his  architectural  extravagances.
— The  viaduct  over  the  Vclabrum. — The  bridge  of  boats  at  Baiae.
— His  extravagant  luxury.  —  He  pretends  to  eloquence.  —  His
spite  against  great  reputations,  and  belief  in  his  own  divinity. —
Systematic  persecution  of  the  wealthy  nobles. — Massacre  of  exiles.
— The  people  alienated  by  taxation. — His  expedition  into  Gaul.
— Overthrow  of  Lentulus  Gaetulicus  and  Lepidus — Pretended
invasion  of  Britain. — Returning  to  Rome,  he  plays  the  tyrant
without  disguise. — Conspiracies  against  him — He  is  slain  by
Cassius  Chffirea,  (A.  D.  39—41,  A.  u.  792 — 794.)

THE  loss  of  several  books  of  the  Annaln  of  Tacitus
leaves  us  dependent  for  our  knowledge  of  Theprinci-
fche  domestic  events  of  the  third  principate  caiu9°lgap
on  the  meagre  pages  of  Dion  and  Sueto-  Annaisor
nius.  Of  that  immortal  work,  every  gap  Tacitu'-
in  which  may  be  equally  deplored  as  a  loss  to  history
and  to  philosophy,  four  books,  from  the  seventh  to
the  tenth,  contained  the  affairs  of  less  than  ten  years ;
a  larger  space  proportionally  than  the  writer  had
allowed  to  the  details  of  the  Tiberian  administration ;
from  whence  we  may  conclude  that  the  later  period
was  even  more  prolific  than  the  earlier  in  important
and  interesting  events.  If  two  or  even  three  of  these
books  were  appropriated,  as  we  may  suppose,  to  the
reign  of  Caius,  many  circumstances  must  undoubtedly
have  been  deemed  worthy  of  more  particular  consi-
deration than  we  find  in  the  dry  statements  of  Dion,
and  the  desultory  anecdotes  of  the  Roman  biogra-
pher, and  must  have  occupied,  in  the  thoughtful  view
of  a  wiser  writer,  no  unimportant  place  in  the  general
history  of  his  countrymen.  We  may  presume  that  in

62  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLTIH.

them  the  affairs  of  the  Eoman  administration  in  the
East  (of  which  we  now  derive  our  information  from
Jewish  sources  only)  were  treated  with  the  fulness  of
detail  and  wealth  of  language  which  became  the  pen
of  the  most  eloquent  of  historians,  and  with  all  that
deep  interest  in  the  subject  which  must  have  been
felt  by  one  who  had  lived  to  witness  the  struggle  and
awful  catastrophe  in  which  they  had  resulted.  From
them  we  should  have  learnt,  perhaps,  the  real  nature
of  the  complaints  of  the  Alexandrians  against  the
Jews,  and  have  been  admitted,  at  least,  to  a  familiar
acquaintance  with  the  condition  of  the  Egyptian
capital,  with  its  mixed  population  of  surly  Copts,
subtle  and  garrulous  Greeks,  reserved  and  busy
Hebrews.  We  should  have  traced,  in  a  few  burning
touches  never  to  be  obliterated,  the  fierce  unyielding
character  of  that  marvellous  people,  to  whom,  as  the
surest  of  human  depositaries,  were  committed  the
oracles  of  (rod.  We  should  have  received  more  par-
ticular details  of  the  false  and  offensive  statements
regarding  the  origin  of  the  intruders  from  Palestine,
which  circulated  among  their  enemies,  and  which,  as
we  discover  from  the  allusion  of  Tacitus  himself  at  a
later  period,  were  accepted  by  the  Eomans  with  the
prone  credulity  of  national  exasperation.1

But  more  especially  we  might  expect  to  bave  found
HOW  Taci-  m  these  lost  books  a  j  udicious  and  temperate
tui»wouid  survey  of  the  state  of  public  feeling  at  Rome,
and  a  comparative  view  of  the  genius  of  the
nation  as  it  appeared  under  the  first  and
under  the  third  princeps ;  with  an  estimate  of  the
manifest  decline  of  national  sentiments,  and  decay  of
ancient  ideas,  which  could  render  possible  the  exist-
ence of  a  tyranny  Oriental  in  its  features,  a  reign  of
abject  terror  and  self-abasement  in  the  centre  of  the
Western  capital,  in  the  midst  of  every  outward  appli-
ance of  luxury  and  festive  enjoyment.  We  should

1  Tacitus,  Hist.  v.  2 — 5.

A.D.3*-A.tr.?90.  tNDEk THE EMPIftE.  53

have  seen  perhaps  portrayed  in  glowing  characters
the  circumstance  which  marked  the  great  distinction
between  the  despotism  of  a  Tiberius  and  a  Caius:
that  the  one  blighted  with  its  chill  shadow  the  germs
of  national  enjoyment ;  while  the  other,  though  far
more  wanton  and  ferocious,  surrounded  itself  with
all  the  most  alluring  forms  of  gaiety  and  voluptuous-
ness. Above  all,  we  should  have  admired  the  dark
picture  of  the  terrible  emperor  himself,  drawn  as
Tacitus  only  could  have  drawn  him,  as  a  deified  Tar-
quin  or  a  crowned  and  sceptred  Catilina.  In  a  few
striking  lines  he  has  already  described  him  to  us,
such  as  he  was  in  early  youth,  a  degraded  and  servile
dissembler,  drowning  all  sense  of  honour  and  affec-
tion in  obscene  sensuality,  making  himself  unworthy
of  life  for  mere  life's  sake  : l  in  another  place  a  single
expression  escaping  from  his  pen,  implies  his  belief
in  the  monster's  insanity;2  and  this  no  doubt  is  the
view  of  his  character  which  the  complete  account  of
his  career,  had  it  descended  to  us,  would  have  brought
out  in  full  and  startling  relief.

The  most  cursory  examination,  indeed,  of  our  ex-
isting authorities  will  show  that,  while  they

. .  ...  ,.  ...  J Possibly

seem  to  vie  in  reciting  the  worst  atrocities  some  inju.-
of  the  Caian  principate,  there  is  much  in  teen  done

.....  r  ...  to  thecha-

which  their  accounts  contradict  each  other,  rocter  of
and  much  about  which  a  thoughtful  reader
is  constrained  to  suspend  his  credence. Critics,  ac-
cordingly, have  not  been  wanting  who,  rejecting  as
confused  and  incredible  the  bulk  of  this  hostile  testi-

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  20.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  3.:  "Caii  turbata  mens."  Again,  but  not  quite
in  the  same  sense  (Hist.  iv.  48.),  "  Turbidus  animi."  Seneca,  in  a
passage  quoted  above,  speaks  of  his  insania  as  sufficiently  manifest.
So  again  (Cons,  ad  Polyb.  36.),  "Furiosa  inconstantia."  Statius,
Sylv.  iii.  3.  70.  "  furiis  agitattis."  Suetonius  assures  us  that  he  was
himself  sensible  of  his  infirmity,  and  proposed  to  take  a  course  of
hellebore  in  retirement.  Calig.  50.  His  distraction  of  mind,  his
habitual  fever  and  sleeplessness,  as  described  by  this  writer,  ara
strongly  indicative  of  intermittent  insanity

54  HISTORY OF THE HOMANS  CH.  xtvin.

mony,  have  suggested  that  Caius  was  in  truth  the
victim  of  the  capital  and  the  nobility,  a  protector  of
the  provinces  and  the  populace,  whose  character  was
blackened  with  desperate  malice  by  the  animosity  of
partisans.  Even  the  adverse  testimony  of  Tacitus,
they  would  urge,  might  have  served,  as  in  the  case
of  Tiberius,  to  discredit  some  statements  of  his  col-
leagues, and  thus  to  mitigate  our  idea  of  the  crimes
of  the  object  of  their  common  hostility.  It  is  pos-
sible we  might  read  in  the  character  of  Caius,  thus
sifted  by  cross-examination  of  the  adverse  witnesses,
an  anxiety  to  avoid  the  errors  of  his  predecessor ;  and
that  as  Tiberius  secluded  himself  from  his  people,  and
fell  into  the  hands  of  an  unworthy  favourite,  his  suc-
cessor may  have  resolved  to  know  everything  and  do
everything  himself,  to  rely  on  no  minister  or  adviser,
but  rushing  unceasingly  from  Kome  to  Italy,  from
Italy  to  the  provinces,  to  inform  himself  of  every  de-
tail of  his  world-wide  administration  :  a  task  to  which
no  man  was  equal,  least  of  all  a  sickly  youth  of  im-
perfect education  and  unbalanced  intellect, — a  task
which  had  overstrained  the  energy  of  a  Julius,  the
sagacity  of  an  Augustus,  and  the  prudent  industry  of
a  Tiberius.  That  there  was  a  period  at  the  com-
mencement of  his  brief  principate  during  which  there
was  at  least  a  struggle  between  beneficent  wishes  and
selfish  inclinations,  when  his  liberal  and  patriotic
declarations  were  not  consciously  insincere,  nor  "his
deference  to  the  people  and  senate  assumed  at  the
mere  dictate  of  fear,  cannot  fairly  be  disputed.  His
activity  was  certainly  remarkable ;  many  of  his  plans
of  public  improvement  were  as  wise  as  they  were
bold  ;  the  vigilance  of  his  government  never  relaxed ;
though  well  aware  of  the  perils  of  his  position,  he  was
harassed  by  no  craven  timidity ;  we  hear  of  no  com-
plaints under  him  of  affairs  neglected  and  foes  encou-
raged :  yet  he  yielded  himself  to  no  minister  or
favourite;  he  did  his  own  work  with  a  vehement

».I».37-A.u.790.  UNDER THE EMPIHE.  ,55

impetuosity,  no  less  conspicuous  in  the  toils  of  admi-
nistration than  in  the  excesses  of  debauchery.  Never-
theless, the  verdict  of  antiquity  has  gone  against  him.
The  question  with  our  imperfect  lights  will  not  bear
to  be  reopened ;  and  we  have  no  other  course  but  to
join  in  the  general  condemnation  pronounced  upon
the  miserable  stripling,  of  whom  the  best  that  can  be
said  is  that  the  wildness  of  a  brain,  stricken  in  the
cradle  with  hereditary  insanity,  was  aggravated  by
the  horrors  of  his  unnatural  position.  Accepting  the
common  impression  of  his  character  as  on  the  whole
sufficiently  established,  I  shall  be  satisfied  with  point-
ing out,  in  one  or  two  remarkable  instances,  the  ap-
parent misrepresentation  of  conduct  really  wise  and
laudable.

The  men,  it  must  be  observed,  who  had  preceded
Caius  in  empire  had  all  been  trained  to  rule
by  long  exercise,  and  had  tested  their  powers  tages  under
in  the  best  of  schools,  in  manly  obedience  to  succeeded
the  circumstances  which  controlled  them.
Caius  alone  had  inherited  his  autocracy  without  un-
dergoing this  discipline,  for  the  mere  abject  servility
of  his  submission  to  his  uncle  does  not  deserve  the
name  of  a  moral  and  reasonable  training.  It  was
only  for  a  short  time  that  he  had  enjoyed  any  expec-
tation of  eventually  succeeding,  and  the  sole  course
which  then  offered  for  reaching  the  glittering  prize
was  to  crouch  unremarked  in  the  shadow  of  the  em-
peror's footstool.  He  was  jealously  precluded  from
the  efforts  which  might  have  helped  to  fit  him  for  the
arduous  post  before  him.  Such  instruction  as  he  re-
ceived was  confined  to  merely  literary  exercises  :  the
habit  of  declamation,  though  ostensibly  the  training
of  a  Cicero  or  a  Demosthenes,  had  in  fact  no  more
bearing  on  real  affairs  than  the  lessons  of  a  modern
schoolboy.  When  we  read  that  Caius  pronounced  a
funeral  harangue  over  the  bier  of  Livia  at  the  age  of
fifteen  ;  that  Augustus  and  Julius  Ciesar,  and  others,

56  HISTOItY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.

performed  similar  feats  in  still  tenderer  years,  we
must  consider  these  exercitations  as  mere  conventional
themes,  composed  by  rule  and  measure,  and  under  a
tutor's  eye.  As  a  scholar  Caius  showed  some  vivacity,
and  achieved,  perhaps,  some  success ;  the  remarks
recorded  of  him  in  later  years  show  natural  wit  and
cleverness : l  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
his  mind  expanded  by  exercise  and  observation,  or
that  he  ever  learnt  much  more  than  what  his  peda-
gogues instilled  into  him.2  Such  talents  and  such
accomplishments  had  none  of  the  bone  and  muscle  of
true  intellectual  strength,  and  could  impart  no  just
self-reliance  to  the  pupil,  who  entered  almost  at  the
same  moment  on  manhood  and  on  empire.  There  is,
however,  another  respect  in  which  the  practical  train-
ing of  the  earlier  emperors,  denied  to  Caius,  aided  in
the  development  of  their  native  genius  for  govern-
ment. At  this  crisis  in  the  life  of  the  Eoman  people,
when  society,  shaken  to  its  basis,  trembled  on  the
verge  of  hopeless  anarchy,  the  broad  enunciation  of  a
principle  or  theory  of  government  might  have  over-
turned it  in  a  moment.  It  was  not  for  the  safety  of
their  rulers  only  that  it  was  requisite  to  rest  in  prac-
tical expedients ;  it  was  much  more  essential  to  the
welfare  of  the  people  that  they  should  be  kept  in
ignorance  of  the  real  views  of  their  rulers,  and  allowed
to  indulge  in  the  dream  of  independence,  from  which
they  derived  their  self-respect,  and  walked  with  firmer
step  and  erecter  carriage.  If  the  substance  of  freedom
was  irretrievably  lost,  it  would  have  been  mere  cyni-

1  As,  for  instance,  his  calling  Livia  an Ulysses in  petticoat*
("  Ulyxem  stolatum"),  and  describing  the  style  of  Seneca,  the  phi-
losopher, as  untempered  mortar  ("  arenam  sine  calce  "). Suet.  Culiy.
23.  53.

2  It  must  be  allowed,  however,  that  Josephus  (Antiq,  Jud.  xix.  2.
S.)  speaks  highly  of  this  prince's  education,  though  he  admits  that  it
was  nullified  by  the  curse  of  his  position:  eirpiarevue  re  rwv  /COT*  aurb*
VO\ITWV,  ov  fj.^]v  avTiffxeif  oTa  re  fyeve-ro  avrf  ra  e/c  TTJS  iraiSeias  trwAAe-
ycv-a  ayaOa  irfjlis  TOV  t^Tt\Q6v^a.  o\sf)pov  avry  >nrb  rfjs  ffoVfftas.

*.t».37-A.u.790.  tNDER THE EMHfcE.  57

cism  to  strip  them  of  the  shadow  which  they  still  mis  •
took  for  it,  and  deprive  them  of  the  last  consolations
of  their  brilliant  servitude.  This  was  the  lesson  which
Augustus  and  Tiberius  learnt  in  the  school  of  expe-
rience, before  their  time  arrived  for  applying  it:  but
such  a  lesson  was  never  impressed  on  the  rude  mind
of  their  successor.  Caius,  when  he  found  himself  the
master  of  a  legion  of  slaves,  felt  neither  shame  nor
scruple  in  proclaiming  his  own  power,  and  exacting
their  devotion.  He  despised  as  ignoble  the  caution
of  his  predecessors  in  disclaiming  the  full  acknowledg-
ment of  their  undoubted  prerogatives.  He  regarded
himself,  not  as  a  Princeps  or  Imperator,  but  as  a
King  ;  and  if  he  did  not  extort  from  his  subjects  the
odious  title,  he  allowed  the  idea  to  become  impressed
on  them  by  jurists  and  moralists ;  so  that  we  may
now  begin  to  trace  the  dawning  in  the  Kornan  mind
of  the  theory  of  royal  prerogative.  The  complete  and
irresponsible  power  he  claimed  over  the  persons  and
property  of  his  people,  and  even  the  soil  on  which
they  stood,  was  derived  neither  from  hereditary  nor
elective  right :  it  was  the  prey  of  the  strongest,  which
Fate  had  placed  in  his  hands,  and  which  Force  only
could  secure  to  him.1  His  wild  untutored  intellect
could  grasp,  perhaps,  no  higher  or  subtler  principle
of  authority  than  this:  it  was  ever  present  to  his
mind  and  harassed  it  with  perpetual  anxiety  :  he  lived
in  constant  oscillation  between  the  exultation  of

1  Thus,  we  read  in  Seneca,  de  Benef.  vii.  4. :  "  Jure  civili  omnia
Regis  sunt,  et  tamen  ilia  quorum  ad  regem  pertinet  universa  pos-
sessio,  in  singulos  dominos  descripta  sunt,  et  unaquaeque  res  habet

possessorem  suum Ad  reges  potestas  omnium  pertinet,  ad

singulos  proprietas."  True,  he  is  here  laying  down  a  general  prin-
ciple ;  but  its  applicability  to  the  Roman  polity  of  his  day  is  hardly
disguised.  So  again  (vii.  fi.):  "Caesar  omnia  habet,  fiscus  ejus
privata  tantum  ac  sua ;  et  universa  in  imperio  ejus  sunt,  in  patri-
monio  propria."  Pliny  (Paneg.  50.),  praising  the  moderation  of
Trajan:  "Est  quod  Caesar  non  suum  videt."  Compare  at  a  later
period,  Gaius,  ii.  7. :  "  In  provincial!  solo  dominium  popoli  Romani
est  vel  Csesaris.  Memento,"  said  Caius  of  himself  (Suet.  Calig.  29.),
"oiiiuia  mini  et  in  onmcs  licerc."

68  HISTORY Of  THE ROMANS  cfl.  1LV111,

unrestrained  enjoyment  and  the  depressing  conscious-
ness of  danger :  he  strained  his  imagination  to  realize
by  the  most  wanton  excesses  the  substance  of  unli-
mited power,  at  one  moment  as  an  excitement,  at
another  as  a  relief  and  consolation.

Many  instances  are  given  of  these  excesses,  to  some
strange  °f  which  the  course  of  our  narrative  will
pHesthwd6  compel  us  to  refer.  I  mention  one  only
Aricfau  in  this  place,  which  seems  to  illustrate,  in  a
form  which  may  be  regarded,  perhaps,  as
mythical  rather  than  strictly  true,  the  turn  which  the
position  of  Caius  gave  to  his  reflections.  In  the  dark
recesses  of  the  woods  which  overshadowed  the  lake  of
Nemus,  stood  a  chapel  of  the  Tauric  Diana,  whose
sanguinary  rites  on  the  shores  of  the  Cimmerian  Bos-
phorus  were  remembered,  though  uo  longer  practised,
in  the  milder  clime  of  Latium.  Nevertheless,  the
belief  still  commonly  prevailed  that  the  priest,  or
Icing  as  he  was  denominated,  who  ministered  at  her
altar  was  qualified  for  his  office  by  the  slaughter  of
his  predecessor,  and  held  it  only  by  the  tenure  of
strength  in  combat  or  swiftness  in  flight  against  the
next  aspirant.  Such  was  the  legend  of  the  shrine,
which  had  become  embodied  in  the  poetical  ritual  of
Ovid,  and  was  noted  even  in  the  graver  treatise  of
the  geographer  Strabo.1  If  so  wild  an  usage  had
ever  actually  existed,  and  received  the  sanction  of
authority,  we  may  believe  that  it  had  long  fallen  into
desuetude.  But  the  story  rendered  current  by  the
credulity  of  popular  antiquarians  excited  the  curiosity
and  horror  of  the  vulgar ;  and  Gains,  ever  logical  in
his  deductions,  and  a  shrewd  proscribe!1  of  all  hollow
pretensions,  affected  indignation  that  the  actual  in-

1  Ovid,  Fast.  iii.  271.:

"Kcgna  tenent  fortesque  manu  pedibusque  fugaccs,

Et  perit  exemplo  postmodo  quisque  suo."

Comp.  Strabo,  v.  3.  p.  239. :  rb  6'  'Apre/xicrioj/  S  na\ovfft  N«'ju°*  .
Kol  -ydp  n  Ba,p&a.putbv  Kparet  Kal  'SicvBiKbv  irepl  rb  tfpbv  fflor
t(iv  iffrlv  cwi,  irfpiffKoiruv  ras  em6f(Tfis,  troi/nos  afjivvtadai

4.D.38-A.U.791.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  59

cuinbent  of  the  office,  the  champion  of  the  grove,
should  enjoy  his  dignified  indolence  unchallenged.
He  instigated,  we  are  assured,  a  stronger  man  to  seek
him  in  his  retreat,  and  required  him  to  defend  his
preferment  with  his  life.1  We  may  imagine  the  grim
satisfaction  with  which  the  imperial  philosopher  might
reduce  this  theory  of  succession  to  practice.  Such,
at  all  events,  was  the  view  he  took  of  his  own  posi-
tion. He  regarded  himself,  sometimes  perhaps  with  a
bitter  smile,  as  no  other  than  the  minister  of  a  bloody
destiny,  once  raised  to  power  by  a  deed  of  blood,  and
liable  to  be  cast  down  not  less  suddenly  by  another.
The  contemplation  of  his  extraordinary  position
as  the  deified  autocrat  of  the  world,  lying  Catus  imbibe,
as  it  did  almost  beyond  the  verge  to  which  own  "u^o^'
a  Roman's  imagination  could  at  this  period  nature-
extend,  seems  to  have  filled  this  vain  creature's
mind  with  an  inward  assurance,  which  he  mistook
perhaps  for  the  inspiration  of  divinity,  that  he  was
altogether  a  being  of  different  texture  from  the  com-
mon clay  of  mortality.  As  shepherds  or  herdsmen
differ  in  species  from  the  animals  they  dispose  of,  so,
he  boldly  argued,  must  the  ruler  of  the  Roman  world
belong  to  a  higher  and  grander  existence  than  the
troop  of  slaves  he  governs.2  When  this  conception
had  taken  possession  of  him,  it  became  his  passion  td
realize  it  in  every  outward  act ;  to  prove  to  himself,
to  manifest  to  the  world  that  he  was  subject  to  none
of  the  laws  by  which  mere  men  are  controlled ;  that
his  transcendental  being  was  elevated  above  the  re-
straints of  all  inferior  existences ;  that  he  stood  in
incommunicable  dignity  far  aloof  from  the  ordinary
sympathies  of  humanity ;  while  no  conception  was  so
daring,  no  combination  so  preposterous,  as  to  be  be-
yond his  power  to  execute.  Thus,  on  the  one  hand,
we  find  him  taking  a  pride  in  showing  himself  inac-

1  Suet.  Cal.  35. :  "  Nemorensi  regi,  quod  multos  jam  annos  po«
tiretur  saccrdotio,  validiorem  adversarium  subornavit."

2  Philo,  leg  in  Cai.  11.

60  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  C

cessible  to  the  ordinary  sentiment  of  pity,  steeling
himself  to  the  sight  of  pain,  and  at  last  feeling,  or
affecting  perhaps  to  feel,  an  actual  pleasure  in  it1;
exulting  again  in  the  defiance  of  the  rules  of  com-
mon decency,  and  indulging  in  open  shamelessness  of
behaviour,  for  the  mere  wanton  sport  of  offending
and  horrifying  his  associates.  It  was  in  this  spirit
that  he  complained  that  his  reign  was  signalized  by
no  great  public  calamity,  such  as  the  Varian  massacre,
or  the  fall  of  the  theatre  at  Fidenae.8  On  the  other
hand,  he  delighted  in  the  execution  of  the  most  fan-
tastic projects,  to  prove,  as  it  would  seem,  that  he
was  lord  both  of  sea  and  land,  and  of  all  the  powers
of  nature,  and  that  nothing  was  too  extravagant,  no-
thing too  amazing,  for  the  deified  Caesar  to  effect.
To  stand  on  the  summit  of  a  lofty  basilica  and
scatter  money  to  the  populace,  seemed  to,  him  an
act  of  divine  munificence ;  to  sail  along  the  Cam-
panian  coast  in  enormous  galleys,  equipped  with
porticoes,  baths,  and  banquet  halls,  interspersed  with
gardens  and  orchards,  delighted  him  as  a  defiance  of
the  elements.3

We  find  the  colossal  character  of  this  wonder-
coiossaicon-  worker's  conceptions  running,  as  generally
cafusThis  with  the  Eoman  potentates,  in  the  direction
ertrava.tural  of  material  constructions.  To  pull  doivn
gance*.  in  or^er  to  re-erect,  to  change  the  square
into  the  round;  —  such,  in  a  word,  was  the  idea
which  governed  the  passion  of  the  time  for  building,
which  was  constantly  projecting  the  bay  of  the
tribune  from  the  flat  wall  of  the  basilica,  replacing

1  It  pleased  him  to  say  that  he  practised  the  aStarp&jila,  or  stead-
fastness of  the  Stoics,  in  accustoming  himself  to  gaze  upon  human
suffering  without  blenching. Pliny  remarks,  as  a  peculiarity  of  this
emperor's  eyes,  that  they  seldom  or  never  winked  :  he  calls  them
"oculi  rigentes"  (/f.  N.  xi.  54.);  but  whether  this  was  natural,  or
had  been  attained  by  muscular  effort,  he  does  not  say.

2  Suet.  Calig.  31.

•  Suet.  Calig.  37. :  "  Nihil  tarn  cfficere  concupiscebat  quam  quod
posSn  effici  negaretur."

4.D.38-A.U.701.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  61

the  oblong  temple  of  Greece  with  the  circular  dome-
vaulted  Pantheon,  and  turning  the  arch,  the  genuine
invention  of  native  art,  to  support  story  above  story,
and  rear  Antiochs  and  Alexandrias  upon  the  area
of  Eome.  To  build  was  to  create,  and  to  create
was  divine.  Fired  with  the  persuasion  of  his  august
divinity,  Caius  rioted  in  the  number  and  magni-
ficence of  his  architectural  undertakings.  He  com-
pleted the  temple  of  Augustus,  which  Tiberius  had
left  unfinished,  and  effected  the  repair  or  restoration
of  the  theatre  of  Pompeius,  which  had  suffered  by
an  accidental  conflagration,  while  he  commenced  an
amphitheatre  of  his  own  on  the  site  of  the  Septa  in
the  Campus.1  The  great  aqueduct  which  conveyed
the  waters  of  the  Aqua  Claudia  to  Eome,  together
with  those  of  the  Anio  Novus,  which  were  conducted
in  a  separate  channel  above  them,  was  also  designed
by  Caius,  though  the  work  was  far  too  gigantic  to  be
accomplished  during  his  short  tenure  of  power.  The
furthest  point  from  which  these  streams  were  carried
was  more  than  fifty-six  miles  from  the  city ;  but  for
a  distance  of  nearly  ten  miles  the  channel  was  sus-
pended on  an  unbroken  series  of  arches,  which  in
some  places  exceeded  a  hundred  feet  in  height.2  This
was  reputed  in  every  respect  the  greatest  of  all  the  fine
works  of  this  kind  executed  at  Eome ;  and  however
needless  and  extravagant  may  have  been  the  ostenta-
tion displayed  in  its  method  of  construction,  we  must
not  fail  to  admire  the  utility  of  its  design.  Several
works  are  enumerated  which  Caius  projected  for  the
decoration  of  the  provinces,  but  of  these  none  per-
haps were  completed,  nor  indeed  did  they  deserve  to
be  so8 ;  unless  we  except  one  of  a  different  kind,  the
cutting  of  the  Isthmus  of  Corinth,  the  expediency  of

1  Suet.  Calig.  21.:  "Opera  sub Tiberio semiperfecta  .  .  .  absolvit."
8  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxvi.  24.  10.;  Frontinus,  de  Aquaduct.  13, 14.;

Becker,  Rom.  Alterth.  i.  704.

*  Suet.  1.  c. :  "  Destinaverat  et  Sami  Polycratis  regiam  restituere,

Mileti  Didymeum  peragere." Corap.  Dion,  lix.  28.

62  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  cH.  XLVIH.

which  is  so  manifest,  that  it  is  much  to  be  wondered
that,  among  the  many  projectors  who  designed,  none
ever  succeeded  in  effecting  it.  It  is  hardly  possible
to  give  serious  credit  to  one  of  the  plans  ascribed
to  him,  that  of  building  a  city  in  the  passes  of  the
Alps.  It  seems  more  reasonable  to  suspect  that  the
people  chose  thus  to  caricature  some  scheme  of
beneficence,  such,  for  instance,  as  the  establishment
of  a  hospice  in  the  wilderness  of  snows.1  The
creation  of  harbours  of  refuge  at  Khegium  and  on
the  opposite  coast  of  Sicily  for  the  corn  ships  which
encountered  the  perils  of  the  Messanian  straits  was
worthy  of  a  prudent  government;  but  though  de-
signed and  begun,  the  undertaking  languished  for
lack  of  funds,  and  was  never  completed.8  The  en-
largement of  the  palace  of  the  Caesars  was

The  imperial  ? i c f\ • £ i  -n

palace  of  a  ireak  ot  Oriental  extravagance,  rrom
the  northern  angle  of  the  Palatine  hill,
where  the  modest  residence  of  Augustus  had  over-
looked the  forum,  Caius  extended  a  series  of  chambers
and  arcades  to  the  valley  beneath,  and  made  the
temple  of  Castor  and  Pollux  serve  as  a  vestibule  to
the  imperial  abode.  The  emperor,  it  is  said,  would
frequently  take  his  stand  between  the  statues  of  the
twin  deities,  the  guardians  of  the  city,  and  thus  ex-
hibit himself  for  the  adoration  of  the  passers  by.
But  he  affected  to  converse  with  Jupiter  himself,  en-
shrined in  the  temple  of  the  Capitol,  and  for  this
purpose  he  required  a  readier  means  of  access  to  the
sacred  mount.  Accordingly  he  carried  a
viaduct  from  the  Palatine  to  the  Capito-
line,  a  bold  construction,  suspended  above
the  buildings  of  the  Velabrum,  and  designed,  we  may
suppose,  to  rival  the  bridge  over  the  Tyropceum  at
Jerusalem,  one  of  the  chief  wonders  of  the  Eastern
netropolis,  of  which  he  had  often  loved  to  hear.3

1  Suet.  /.  c.:  "In  Alpium  jugo  urbem  condere.'

*  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  2.  5.

1  Suet.  Caliy.  22. : "  Super  templum  August! ponte  iransimsso

A.D.39-A.U.792  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  63

That  so  vast  a  structure  should  have  been  flung
boldly  across  so  wide  and  deep  a  gorge,  and  completed
within  the  space  of  two  or  three  years,  may  excite
our  wonder,  and  almost  stagger  our  belief,  yet  it  may
seem  still  more  astonishing  that  every  remnant  and
vestige  of  it  should  have  been  swept  entirely  away..
It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  this  demolition  was  con-
summated within  a  few  years  after  the  first  completion
of  the  edifice.  But  this  is  only  one  out  of  many
instances  of  the  promptness  with  which  the  great
Koman  builders  overthrew  whatever  stood  in  the
way  of  newer  and  generally  still  grander  designs,  and
transferred  the  enormous  piles  of  hewn  materials
to  fresh  and  often  very  different  destinations.  The
most  remarkable  and  renowned,  however,  of  this  em-
peror's creations  was  constructed  of  far  less  solid
materials,  and  never  intended  perhaps  to  serve  any
other  than  a  temporary  purpose.  If  we  may  believe
the  accounts  we  have  received  from  various  authors,
the  great  bridge  of  boats  which  Caius  threw  H|8  bri(]ge
across  the  Baian  Gulf  from  Bauli  to  Puteoli  SST^1"
was  a  freak  of  insane  vanity,  the  most  ex-  Baiffi>
travagant  toy,  perhaps,  that  human  folly  ever  inven-
ted to  sport  with  one  day  and  cast  away  the  next.
Between  Baiae  and  Bauli,  on  the  western  side  of  this
celebrated  bay,  a  spit  of  laud  projects  a  few  hundred
yards  into  the  sea  towards  the  opposite  point  of
Puteoli,  about  two  miles  distant ;  and  this  is  also
nearly  the  depth  of  the  arc  defined  by  these  two
prominent  headlands.  From  Puteoli,  on  the  other
hand,  a  mole  advanced  into  the  water,  built  upon
arches,  the  remains  of  which  extend  twelve  hun-

Palatium  Capitoliumque  conjunxit."  The  site  of  this  temple  is  not
known,  but  it  may  very  well  have  been  at  the  foot  of  the  Palatine
and  of  the  house  of  Augustus.  The  width  of  the  valley  from  crest
to  crest  is  above  two  hundred  yards.  Pliny  takes  occasion  from  this
junction  of  one  quarter  of  the  city  with  another  to  say,  with  a  bold
perversion  of  language,  that  Caius  surrounded  Rome  with  his  palace-
"  Bis  vidimus  urbem  totam  cingi  domibus  principum  Caii  et  Ne«
ronis."  Hist.  Nat.  xxxvi.  24.  5.

64  HISTORY  OP  THE ROMANS  CH.  xivrn.

dred  feet ;  and  thus  there  existed  on  either  side  of
the  bay  the  rudiments,  the  one  natural  the  other
artificial,  of  a  complete  mole  or  breakwater.  It  was
by  a  parallel  mound  or  bank  at  the  bottom  of  this
bay  that  the  sea  was  excluded  from  the  Lucrine  Lake
and  the  Avernus  beyond  it.  The  great  work  of
Agrippa,  who  converted  this  lake  into  a  haven  by
perforating  the  mound  with  a  ship-canal,  has  been
noticed  in  an  earlier  chapter.  It  was  not  beyond
the  means,  nor  above  the  bold  conception,  of  a  wise
and  paternal  ruler  to  improve  on  this  political  master-
piece, by  the  construction  of  a  mole,  vast,  indeed,  as
its  dimensions  must  have  been  both  in  length  and
depth,  at  the  entrance  of  the  outer  gulf.  Such  was
the  principle  of  the  works  effected  by  the  steadfast
energy  of  a  later  emperor,  which  still  exist  at  Civita
Vecchia  or  Centum  cellse ;  and  the  great  amount  of
shipping  which  must  have  been  often  assembled  at
Puteoli,  as  well  as  the  importance  of  its  cargoes,
might  have  justified  the  expense  and  grandeur  of
such  an  undertaking.  But  no  such  purpose  can  be
ascribed  to  Caius  ;  his  object  was  as  selfish  as  the
means  he  employed  were  showy  and  unsubstantial.
The  ancient  legends  of  the  bay  ascribed  the  dyke  of
the  Lucrine,  a  broad  shingle-bank  thrown  up  in  the
course  of  ages  by  the  sea,  to  the  creative  power  of
Hercules ;  and  the  ambition  to  vie  with  the  man-
god  was  more  powerful  with  the  self-styled  divinity,
who  affected  to  rival  him,  than  any  magnificent  con-
ceptions of  imperial  policy.  He  ransacked,  we  are
told,  the  havens  far  and  near  to  collect  every  vessel
he  could  lay  hands  on,  till  commerce  was  straitened
in  every  quarter,  and  Italy  itself  threatened  with
famine.  These  vessels  he  yoked  together  side  by
side,  in  a  double  line,  extending  from  one  shore  to
the  other.1  On  this  broad  and  well-compacted  base

1  Dion,  lix.  17.:  &<]>'  ovirtp  KO.\  \ifds  tv  rt  rij  'lra\la  Hal  Iv  'PcS/w;  pd-
tytvtro. We  may  be  allowed  tc  ?uspect  that  this  state-

4.U.39-A.U.792.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  65

he  placed  an  enormous  platform  of  timber ;  this  again
he  covered  with  earth,  and  paved,  after  the  manner
of  a  military  highroad,  with  stones  hewn  and  laid  in
cement.  The  way  thus  built  was  furnished  with  nu-
merous stations  or  post-houses,  for  the  use  of  which
fresh  water  was  conveyed  by  an  aqueduct  from  the
continent.1  Such,  it  seems,  was  this  extraordinary
bridge  :  it  could  never  have  been  intended  to  retain
it  permanently;  it  was  doubtless  necessary  to  restore
the  vessels  which  had  been  pressed  into  the  service
of  the  prince's  vanity ;  but  he  determined  before  aban-
doning his  work  to  enact  on  it  a  peculiar  pageant,
the  novelty  and  brilliancy  of  which  should  transcend
every  recorded  phantasy  of  kings  or  emperors.2  The
venerable  seer  Thrasyllus  had  prophesied,  it  seems,
at  an  earlier  period  that  the  young  Caius  would  no
more  become  emperor  than  he  would  ever  drive  his
chariot  across  the  gulf  of  Baise.3  Caius  had  indeed
attained  to  power,  yet  the  words  might  still  ring
ominously  in  his  ears ;  pride  and  superstition  com-
bined, perhaps,  to  urge  him  on,  and  he  declared  that
he  would  drive  across  the  bay,  not  alone  in  his  chariot,
but  attended  by  an  army,  and  arrayed  as  an  emperor
indeed.  The  great  world  of  Eome  mustered  on  the

ment  is  founded  upon  a  remark  of  Seneca  which  will  hardly  bear  it
out.  De  Brev.  Vit.  18.:  "  Dum  ille  pontes  navibus  jungit,  et  viribus
imperil  ludit,  aderat  ....  alimentorum  egestas.  Exitio  paene  et
fame  constitit  ....  superbi  regis  imitatio."  But  the  scarcity  he
speaks  of  occurred  at  the  moment  of  Caius's  death,  which  was  two
years  later,  when  there  was  found,  it  was  said,  to  be  no  more  than
seven  or  eight  days'  consumption  of  corn  in  the  granaries.

1  Suet.  Calig.  19.;  Dion,  lix.  17.;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.xix.  1. The
first  makes  the  length  3600  paces,  the  second  26  stades,  the  last  30
Blades ;  but  the  real  distance  is  about  two  miles.

2  Suet.  1.  c. :  "  Novum  atque  inauditum  genus  spectac.uli  excogi-
tavit." Eumenius  (Paneg.  in  Constant.  13.)  alludes  to  this  pageant,
which  he  calls,  in  his  courtly  language,  "  Delicata  vcctatio  principis
otiosi." Clinton,  Fast.  Earn.  App.  p.  5.

*  Suet.  /.  c.:  "  Non  magis  Caium  imperaturum  quam  per  Baianum
sinum  equis  discursurum."  The  author  tells  us  that  he  had  as  a  boy
heard  his  grandfather  mention  this,  as  supposed  in  the  palace  to  have
been  the  real  motive  for  this  whimsical  undertaking.

VI.  F

66  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Xl/em.

shores  around  to  witness  the  imperial  miracle.  From
Puteoli  to  Misenum  the  semicircle  of  the  bay  was
crowded  with  admiring  multitudes ;  the  loungers  of
the  baths  and  porticoes  sallied  forth  from  their  cool
retreats  ;  the  promenaders  of  the  Lucrine  beach
checked  their  palanquins  and  chariots,  and  hushed
the  strains  of  their  delicious  symphonies  ;  the  terraces
of  the  gorgeous  villas  which  lined  the  coast,  and
breasted  the  fresh  and  sparkling  ripple,  glittered
with  streamers  of  a  thousand  colours,  and  with  the
bright  array  of  senators  and  matrons,  drowning  the
terrors  which  day  and  night  beset  them  in  shrieks
of  childish  acclamation.  The  clang  of  martial  music
echoed  from  shore  to  shore.  From  Bauli  the  emperor
descended  upon  the  bridge — having  first  sacrificed  tc
the  gods,  and  chiefly  to  Neptune  and  Envy — arrayed
in  a  coat  of  mail  adorned  with  precious  gems,  which
had  been  worn  by  Alexander  the  Great,  with  his
sword  by  his  side,  his  shield  on  his  arm,  and  crowned
with  a  chaplet  of  oak-leaves.1  On  horseback,  followed
by  a  dense  column  of  soldiers,  he  traversed  the  solid
footway,  and  charged  into  Puteoli  as  a  conquering
foe.  There  he  indulged  his  victorious  army  with
a  day  of  rest  and  expectation.  On  the  morrow
he  placed  himself  in  a  triumphal  car,  and  drove
back,  exulting,  in  the  garb  of  a  charioteer  of  the
Green  at  the  games  of  the  Circus.  The  mock
triumph  was  adorned  by  pretended  captives,  repre-
sented by  some  royal  hostages  from  Parthia,  at  the
time  in  custody  of  the  Koman  government.  The
army  followed  in  long  procession.  In  the  centre  of
the  bridge  the  emperor  halted,  and  addressed  an
harangue  to  his  soldiers  on  the  greatness  of  their

1  Suet.  Dion,  //.  cc.  These  sacrifices  seem  hardly  in  accordance
with  Caius's  character,  but  that  to  Livor  or  Envy  is  perhaps  signi-
ficant in  connexion  with  Hercules :

"Diram  qui  contudit  Hydram  .  .  .
Comperit  invidiaw  supremo  fine  domari."

Hor.  Ejrist,  ji.  2,  JQ,

A.T>.10-A.fTr.792.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  67

victory,  from  a  tribunal  erected  for  the  purpose.  He
contrasted  tbe  narrow  stream  of  the  Bosphorus  and
the  Hellespont,  at  most  seven  stades  in  width,  with
the  broad  ocean  which  he  had  yoked  in  chains,  and
declared  that  the  exploits  of  Xerxes  and  Darius  were
trifles  compared  with  his  mightier  enterprise.1  After
wearying  both  himself  and  his  hearers  with  this  pro-
digious folly,  he  distributed  money  among  them,  and
invited  them  to  a  banquet.  At  this  entertainment
the  emperor  retained  his  place  on  the  bridge,  but  the
soldiers  were  collected  around  him  for  the  most  part
in  vessels.  It  extended  far  into  the  night,  and  at
nightfall  the  bridge  and  the  ships  were  illuminated
with  torches,  and  at  the  signal  the  whole  curving
line  of  coast  shone  forth,  as  in  a  theatre,  with  innu-
merable lights.2  Charmed  with  the  stillness  of  the
water,  and  the  brilliancy  reflected  upon  it,  the  popu-
lace crowded  round  in  boats,  and  partook  of  the  mirth
and  festivity.  But  their  holiday  did  not  end  without
a  frightful  disaster,  many  of  the  spectators  in  the
boats  or  on  the  bridge  being  jostled  accidentally  into
the  waves.  Those  who  fell,  and  those  who  might
have  saved  them,  were,  it  seems,  equally  intoxicated  :
the  light  was  uncertain;  no  one  gave,  or  none  re-
ceived, orders ;  and  the  emperor  himself,  we  are  told,
was  overcome  with  wine :  whether  drunk  or  sober,  it  is

1  It  is  remarkable  that  there  should  be  no  allusions  to  this  exploit
in  Pliny  or  the  poets,  to  whom  it  might  often  have  furnished  an  apt
illustration  ;  as,  for  instance,  when  Juvenal  says :

"  Quidquid  Gratia  mendax
Audet  in  historia,  cum  stratum  classibus  isdem
Snppositumque  rotissolidum  mare." x.  174.
or  Lucan :

"  Tales  fama  canit  tumidum  super  sequora  Xerxem
Construxisse  vias,  multwn  cum  pontibus  ausus
Europamque  Asise,  Sestonque  admovit  Abydo."

Pfiars.  ii.  672.

The  description  of  Dion  is  more  than  usually  vivid:  rov  yap
\<ap(ov  fjLiivottSovs  OVTOS,  irvp  iravra.x68ff,  KaOfarep  tv  Qed-rpy  rivt,  eSflxOr),
5><rre  fj.rj5ep.ta>'  aXaBriffiv  rov  <7/cdrov  ytVfffBar  ical  yap  r^v  vvitra  rinepav
Sxnrtorov  rV  6d\affffav  yrfv,  irotfjffai  yd (.\viatv. lix.  17.
7  2

68  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.

not  impossible  that  he  enjoyed  the  horror  of  the
scene,  and  even  forbade  assistance  to  be  rendered  to
the  sufferers.1

Among  the  tasteless  extravagances  of  the  day  there

was  none  to  which  the  vulgar  rich  more
iux™y  ogfan  commonly  devoted  themselves  than  that  of

the  table.  It  was  not  so  much  their  am-
bition to  surround  themselves  with  the  most  graceful
or  gorgeous  appliances  of  luxury,  with  richly  fur-
nished chambers,  with  exquisite  music,  with  couches
and  tables  of  costly  materials  and  elaborate  workman-
ship, though  all  these  too  had  their  votaries,  as  to
amaze  their  guests  with  the  extraordinay  money  value
of  the  articles  they  managed  to  consume.  It  was  for
their  rarity  only  that  nightingales  and  peacocks,  and
the  tongue  and  brain  of  phoanicopters,  whatever  these
creatures  may  be,  could  be  regarded  as  delicacies  ;
still  less  could  it  give  any  pleasure  to  the  palate  to
swallow  pearls  dissolved  in  powerful  acids.  But  such
was  the  rampant  luxury  of  Caius,  in  which  he  strove
to  imitate  or  rather  to  outdo  the  Oriental  Cleopatra.
In  this  and  other  particulars  of  the  same  kind  he
succeeded  probably  in  surpassing  all  previous  ex-
amples :  he  contrived,  we  are  assured,  to  expend  the
amount  of  eighty  thousand  pounds  sterling  on  a
single  repast  ;  and  having  effected  this,  he  could  say
complacently,  a  man  should  be  frugal,  except  he
be  a  Caesar.*  This  vehement  ambition  to  be  the

1  Suetonius  says  plainly  (CaJig.  32.):  "  Quum  multos  e  litore  invi-
tasset  ad  se,  repente  omnes  prnscipitavit.  Quosdam  gubernacula
apprehendentes,  contis  remisque  detrusit  in  mare."  But  according  to
Dion  the  intoxication  was  general  :  £/xirA?jcr<Ms  5i  no!  inrepKopiis  Kal
fflrov  Kal  jueflTjj,  ytv6fjifvos,  <rwxyovs  (it?  TU>V  iralpotv  «s  fty  6d\aff(rav
lurb  TTJS  y«pvpa,s,  tf5£«|/e,  ffvxvofc  8i  Kal  rwv  &\\<av  es  ir\oiois  ffj.06\ovs
i  vapcae\.(i>cras  KaTeSvfrev,  &<rrt  Kal  a.Tro\(<r6ai  rivets'  ol  "yap  ir\fious

2  Suet.Ca%.  37.:  "  Aut  frugi  esse  hominem  oportere  aut  Caasarem."
Comp.  Senec.  Cons,  ad  Helv.  d.  11.  The  famous  epicure  Apicius,  in
the  reign  of  Tiberius,  was  said  to  have  devoured  in  his  career  of
good  living  a  hundred  millions  of  sesterces,  or  800.000/.,  and  to

A.D.59-A.C.792.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  6&

first  in  everything  he  deigned  to  undertake,  extended
to many unworthy objects besides gluttony  and
charioteering. It  was  a  little  better  direc-
ted when  the  Caesar  presented  himself  before  feet"  lobe
the  senate  or  the  tribunals  as  an  orator,  and
made  perhaps  some  effort  of  mind  and  understand-
ing to  deserve  the  acclamations  which  were  only  too
sure  to  follow. On  one  occasion,  at  least,  a  man  who
had  unfortunately  incurred  his  displeasure  was  saved
by  sacrificing  his  own  reputation  as  a  speaker  to  the
vanity  of  his  imperial  antagonist.1 But  even  the
victims  of  tyranny  might  not  always  show  such  for-
bearance towards  it,  and  Caius,  in  the  midst  of  the
applause  with  which  his  genius  was  greeted,  must
have  frequently  felt  mortification  at  the  real  hollow-
ness  of  his  pretensions. His  passion  for  fame  dege-
nerated, as  might  be  expected  in  so  base  and  selfish  a
nature,  into  a  brutal  envy  of  the  fame  of  others,  and
a  passion  for  destroying  every  well-earned  reputa-
tion. He  caused,  we  are  told,  the  statues  of  the
heroes  of  the  republic,  which  Augustus  had  set  up  in
the  Campus,  to  be  overthrown  and  broken,  so  that
the  names  could  not  be  restored  to  the  figures  they
belonged  to2 ;  after  which  he  issued  a  decree,  which
itself  was  not  perhaps  unreasonable,  though  opposed
to  the  most  cherished  customs  of  antiquity,  that  no
statue  of  a  living  man  should  be  erected,  at  least
without  a  special  authorization  from  the  chief  of  the
state. He  proceeded,  however,  with  still  msspne
baser  spite  to  deprive  the  images  of  illus-  g?el?repu-
trious  houses  of  the  insignia  by  which  they  ^^ of
were  distinguished; as,  for  instance,  the  klnd>-
Cincinnati  of  their  ringlets,  and the Torquati  of

have  put  an  end  to  his  life  when  he  found  that  he  had  only  ten
millions,  or  80,000/.,  left.

1  See  the  story  of  Domitius  Afer  in  Dion,  lix.  19.:  lorei-ire  utv
ovSev  otrSe  dire\oyf]ffa.To,  dav/udfeip  3t  5J;  /col  Karairtir^ilxSai.  TT)V  Seiv6rrfra
roD  Tatnv  TrpooTronjffdfj.evos  ....  eTrljcet

1  Suet.  Cully,  34.:  "Ut  restitui  salvis  titulis  non  potuerint."

70  HlStO&f  OF  TflE BOMANS  cfi.  xtvul.

their  golden  collars.  He  forbade  the  last  collateral
descendant  of  the  great  ]f  oinpeius  to  bear  the  sur-
name of  Magnus;  nor  would  he  allow  the  modest
worth  of  Agrippa  to  be  honoured  by  placing  his  effi-
gies, as  in  the  Pantheon  and  elsewhere,  by  the  side
of  those  of  Augustus.1  Descended  himself  from
this  plebeian  statesman,  he  resented  his  origin  as
degrading  to  a  Caesar,  and  let  it  be  understood  that
he  was  actually  the  grandson  of  Augustus,  through  an
incestuous  commerce  with  the  unhappy  Julia.2  He
heaped  his  insensate  injuries  not  less  basely  on
another  description  of  greatness,  in  commanding  the
works  of  Virgil,  and  Livy  to  be  removed  from  the
libraries ;  for  the  one,  he  said,  had  neither  genius  nor
'learning,  the  other  was  a  negligent  blunderer.3  He
even  threatened  to  abolish  the  immortal  songs  of
Homer.  Plato  expelled  the  father  of  fiction  from
his  state ;  why,  he  asked,  should  not  I  from  mine  ?
With  such  principles  of  conduct,  or  rather  with  such
impulses,  it  might  be  expected  that  the  tyrant  would
deride  with  a  sneer  the  curious  labours  of  the  jurists,
and  accordingly,  we  are  told,  that  he  proposed  not
only  to  abolish  the  institution  of  the  jurisconsults,
but  even  threatened  to  annul  every  existing  canon  in
Rome  and  throughout  the  empire,  and  make  his  own
word  and  will  the  sole  measure  of  law  to  mankind.4
Such  were  the  passionate  freaks  by  which  this
caius  reaiiy  infatuated  being  strove  to  realize  to  him-
wu1h'Tnotion  self  the  omnipotence  which  he  claimed.
<iivi"ityTu  In  the  strange  perverted  state  of  religious
conceptions  at  the  period,  I  see  no  reason  to  doubt

1  Suet.  Calig.  23.:  Dion,  Ix.  5.  2  Suet.  Calig.  I.  c.

*  In  this,  as  in  other  cases,  it  seems  not  impossible  that  the  extra-
vagance imputed  to  Caius  is  a  blind  or  wilful  perversion  of  his
enemies.  A  deficiency  of  invention  in  Virgil  and  of  accuracy  in
Livy  may  surely  be  admitted  by  emperor  or  author  without  the
imputation  of  unworthy  jealousy.

4  Suet.  Calig.  34.;  Philo,  leg.  ad  Cat.  17.:  vSpav  y&p  riyofyitiroi
Rurbi',  TOVS  Tuf  tKa.ffra.xov  vop.oOtTwv  &is  icevas  frfjfffis  eAiKV,

4.B.39-A.U.792.  UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  71

that  Caius  was  really  possessed  with  a  vague  notion
of  his  own  divinity.1  The  gods  of  those  days,  if
they  did  not  actually  touch  the  earth,  flitted,  at
least,  very  near  to  its  surface.  To  partake  in  some
sense  or  other  of  the  godhead  was  the  dream  of
philosophers  as  well  as  the  boast  of  tyrants.  Nor
was  Caius  capable  of  that  lofty  irony  with  which  Au-
gustus or  Tiberius  could  look  with  complacent  scorn  on
the  flatteries  of  vulgar  courtiers.  It  was  not  difficult
to  persuade  him  of  the  truth  of  that  which  all  around
him  asserted ;  nor  had  he  sufficient  power  of  reason-
ing, when  any  misgiving  of  the  fact  obtruded  itself,
to  analyse  the  idea  of  divinity,  and  compare  his  hu-
manity with  it.  This  is  far  from  the  same  thing  as
a  conviction  of  the  fact  itself.  Caius,  we  may  sup-
pose, was,  from  the  feeble  constitution  of  his  mind,
incapable  of  a  steadfast  conviction,  or  of  grasping
truth  at  all.  His  intellect  was  passively  recipient
in  such  matters  :  he  imbibed  the  notions  suggested
to  him,  and  if  occasionally  he  sported  with  them  in
the  exuberance  of  his  levity,  we  are  not  to  suppose
that  he  scornfully  disbelieved  the  character  with  which
the  world  had  invested  him.  The  divinity,  indeed,
which  he  affected  was  something  very  different  from
the  moral  inspiration  claimed  by  his  predecessors.
It  was  all  outward  and  sensuous.  In  his  passion  for
scenic  representation,  he  delighted  to  array  himself
in  the  garb  of  Hercules  or  Bacchus,  or  even  of  Juno
and  Venus,  to  brandish  the  club  or  the  thyrsus,  or
disguise  himself  in  a  female  headdress,  and  enact  the
part  of  the  deity  in  the  temples  or  in  his  private

1  Hoeck,  who  only  wants  the  faculty  of  imagination  to  be  an  his-
torian of  a  high  class,  cannot  comprehend  the  fact  of  this  belief.  I
am  sensible  how  imperfect  is  my  account  of  the  phenomenon,  but  I
feel  no  difficulty  in  crediting  it :

"  Nihil  est  quod  credere  de  BC
Non  possit  cum  laudatur  Dis  scqna  potestas."

Juvenal,  iv.  70,

72  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  C

apartments.1  Whatever  god  he  affected  to  be,  the
senate  and  people  shouted  vehemently  around  him,
with  the  admiration  of  spectators  in  a  theatre  rather
than  the  reverence  of  worshippers.

Our  accounts  of  the  principate  of  Caius  have  not
generally  preserved  the regular  order of

Sy.tematio 6  J—f , .,,.  „  , , => .,

persecution events. The  Duildinsf  ot  the  bridge  is  placed

of  the  nobles. , _.  ,  > -. .  »  i ., .

by  Dion,  our  only  annalist,  in  792,  and  it  is
probable  that  the  triumphal  show  was  exhibited  in  the
spring  of  that  year.  This  era  is  important,  as  marking
apparently  the  final  exhaustion  of  the  ordinary  reve-
nues of  the  state,  which  sank  under  this  wild  paroxysm
of  extravagance,  and  required  a  new  development  of
tyranny  to  recruit  them.  From  this  period  we  may
date  the  confirmed  and  systematic  persecution  of  the
rich  nobility,  which  gave  this  reign,  notwithstanding
all  the  fair  promise  of  its  commencement,  a  bad  pre-
eminence in  crime  in  the  eyes  of  the  senate.  Hitherto,
amidst  all  his  follies  or  atrocities,  Caius  had  continued
still  to  wear  the  mask  with  which  he  had  begun  his
career,  and  professed  to  abominate  the  conduct  of  his
predecessor  and  to  abjure  his  policy.  The  creatures
of  the  Tiberian  government,  those  especially  who  had
made  themselves  detested  by  delation,  were  still  in
disgrace ;  and  the  vituperation  of  the  late  emperor,
in  which  many  tongues  were  now  heard  to  indulge,
had  been  regarded  as  a  passport  to  favour  with  his
successor.  The  senate  continued  to  indulge  in  this
delusion  to  the  last;  until  Caius,  resolved  to  repair
his  fortunes  by  a  course  of  prosecution  and  confisca-
tion, and  to  revive  in  all  its  horrors  the  application
of  the  law  of  majesty,  ventured  to  introduce  his  new
policy  by  an  open  panegyric  on  the  ruler  he  had  so
lately  denounced.  If  we  are  to  believe  the  historian,
he  did  not  pretend  to  the  grace  of  consistency.  lam
emperor,  he  exclaimed,  to  the  amazement  of  his
auditors,  and  I  may  say  one  tiling  to-day  and  the

1  Dion,  lix.  26.

4.D.39-A.D.792.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  73

contrary  to-morrow :  but  it  is  not  for  you,  citizens
and  subjects,  to  assail  the  memory  of  him  who  was
once  your  chief.  He  then  proceeded  to  caiuseuio-
enumerate  the  persons  who  had  perished  %£H™l*Si
under  Tiberius,  and  showed,  or  pretended  Tiberius-
to  show,  that  in  almost  every  case  they  had  been  the
victims  of  the  senate  rather  than  of  the  emperor ;
some  had  accused  them,  others  had  borne  false  wit-
ness against  them,  all  had  combined  in  voting  for
their  destruction.  Moreover,  he  continued  with  piti-
less logic,  if  Tiberius  was  in  fault,  you  should  not
have  decreed  him  honours  in  his  lifetime,  or  having
done  so,  you  should  not  after  his  death  have  an-
nulled them.  You  it  was,  senators,  he  exclaimed,
who  swelled  the  pride  of  Sejanus  by  your  flatteries,
and  then  destroyed  the  monster  you  had  yourselves
created.  You  wronged  your  prince ;  you  murdered
his  minister:  I  can  look  for  no  good  at  your  hands.
And  then  he  went  on  to  introduce  the  prosopopoeia
of  Tiberius  himself  addressing  him,  approving  of  all
he  had  said,  and  recommending  him  to  love  none  of
them,  nor  to  spare  any :  for  they  all  hate  you,  they
all  wish  for  your  death,  and  they  will  kill  you
if  they  can.  Then  look  not  to  pleasing  them,,  nor
care  for  what  they  say  of  you ;  but  care  only  for
your  own  will  and  pleasure,  and  provide,  as  is  meet
and  right,  for  your  own  august  safety.  At  the  end
of  this  wild  harangue  Caius  ordained  that  the  laws  of
majesty  should  be  again  enforced,  and  that  they  should
be  graven  afresh  on  brazen  tablets.  The  senate  and
people  trembled,  we  are  told,  alike  at  the  visions  of
terror  which  were  opened  to  them.  The  fathers  were
at  first  struck  dumb  and  could  make  no  reply ;  the
next  day  they  met  together  again  to  pay  servile  court
to  the  tyrant.  They  lauded  his  speech  as  a  monu-
ment of  truth  and  regard  to  his  uncle's  memory,
thanked  him  for  his  mercy  in  pardoning  them  and
suffering  them  still  to  live,  and  decreed  that  his

74  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  C

august  words  should  be  recited  annually  in  their
hearing,  and  sacrifices  performed  to  the  imperial
clemency.  To  these  compliments  were  added  the
more  ordinary  honours  of  a  golden  statue,  a  choral
festival,  and  an  ovation.1

Itis  hardly  possibleto  resist  the  impression  that  these

proceedings  have  been  represented  to  us  in  a

humo"rnpecu-  grotesque  caricature ;  nor  is  that  impression

liar  to  Caius. j. . • i j i  .

diminished  when  we  come  to  examine  the
details  of  the  persecution  which  followed.  Yet  there
is  a  certain  consistency  in  the  ghastly  banter  which
equally  in  the  pages  of  Dion  and  Suetonius,  of  Jose-
phus  and  Philo,  forms  the  peculiar  feature  in  the
character  of  this  tyrant  among  his  kindred.  The
Eomans  were  astounded  at  the  deposition  of  their
consuls  from  office  for  neglecting,  so  little  even  yet
had  the  etiquette  of  royalty  been  established  among
them,  to  ordain  a  festival  on  the  anniversary  of  the
emperor's  birthday.  They  were  still  more  scandalized
at  three  days  being  suffered  to  pass  without  the
appointment  of  their  successors,  and  the  republic
being  left  for  that  interval  without  its  highest  magis-
trates.2 It  seems,  however,  that  Caius  assigned  an-
other motive  for  the  disgrace  of  these  consuls.  They
had  kept  holiday  for  the  victory  of  Augustus  over
Antonius.  Now  Augustus  was  the  grandfather  of  the
emperor's  mother  Agrippina ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,
Antonius  bore  the  same  relation  to  his  father  Grer-
manicus;  and  we  are  told  that  he  had  whimsically
declared  beforehand,  that,  whether  they  mourned  or
feasted  on  the  occasion,  he  would  convict  them  equally
of  treason.3  Even  when  the  cupidity  of  the  ever-needy

1  Dion,  lix.  16.

2  Suet.  Calig.  26. :  "  Consulibus  oblitis  de  natali  suo  edicere,  abro-
gavit  magistratum*  fuitque  triduo  sine  summa  potestate  respnblica."

*  Dion  (lix.  20)  places  this  event  under  the  year  792.  Caius
commenced  it  as  consul  with  L.  Apronius.  He  laid  down  the
office  himself  after  thirty  days,  and  was  succeeded  by  Sanquinius.
Apronius  held  the  office  six  months.  It  does  not  appear  who  were

A.D.39-A.C.792. tNDER  ffiE EMttRE.  76

despot  demanded  the  blood  of  the  wealthiest  senators,
he  could  still  make  sport  of  his  own  tyranny.  Thus
we  read  that  when,  on  the  condemnation  and  death
of  Junius  Priscus,  his  wealth  was  found  to  fall  much
below  the  amount  anticipated,  the  emperor  affected
to  regret  that  his  victim  had  deceived  him,  and  thrown
away  his  own  life  through  want  of  candour.  The  con-
demnation at  this  time  of  L.  Annseus  Seneca,  dis-
tinguished at  a  later  period  as  one  of  the  chief  of
Roman  philosophers,  seems  to  show  that  he  had  be-
come already  noted  for  the  riches  which  have  thrown
some  slur  on  his  reputation  as  a  teacher  of  wisdom.
He  was  saved  by  the  assurance  conveyed  by  a  friend
that  he  was  already  far  advanced  in  a  decline,  and
that  his  possessions  might  soon  be  grasped  without
even  the  trouble  of  a  prosecution.  Caius  had  devised
various  means  for  drawing  into  his  coffers  the  estates
of  the  rich  nobles  on  their  deaths.  In  this  case  the
accused  was  allowed,  perhaps,  to  compound  for  life  by
bequeathing  his  property  to  the  emperor,  and  sacrifi-
cing on  the  altar  of  his  Clemency.  It  is  to  Massacre  of
this  insatiable  cupidity  that  we  may,  perhaps,  the  e:tUei
ascribe  an  act  of  cruelty,  which,  as  it  is  represented  to
us,  seems  such  a  mere  ferocious  caprice  that  we  should
hesitate  to  believe  it  of  any  but  a  confirmed  madman.
I  can  only  give  the  story  in  the  words  of  Philo,  and
leave  it  to  the  reader  to  form  his  own  conclusions  upon
it.  Caius,  they  say,  lying  one  night  sleepless,  began
to  think  of  the  noble  exiles  in  the  islands,  and  how,
though  nominally  suffering  pains  and  penalties,

the  unfortunate  consuls  who  suffered  from  this  frolic.  One  of  them
put  himself  to  death  from  mortification;  but,  as  Caius's  birthday  was
August  31.,  and  the  battle  of  Actium  Sept.  2.,  we  must  conclude  that
the  deposition  took  place  in  September.  Dion  goes  on  to  say  that
Caius  hereupon  resumed  the  consulship,  abolished  the  comitia,  and
appointed  Domitius  Afer  his  colleague.  But  as  he  went  into  Gaul,
as  we  shall  see,  this  same  year  with  the  avowed  object  of  engaging
in  A  campaign,  for  which  the  season  must  have  been  very  far  advanced
in  October,  the  story  is  liable  to  some  suspicion.

76  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVHI

they  were  actually  enjoying  a  life  of  ease,  quiet,  and
luxury.  "  What  sort  of  exile"  he  said  to  himself,
"  is  this  foreign  sojourn  of  theirs,  revelling  as  they
do  in  abundance  of  all  good  things,  and  living  in
a  pleasant  retirement  the  lives  of  true  philosophers?"
And  thereupon  he  issued  orders  to  put  the  most
illustrious  of  them  to  death,  Flaccus,  the  late  prefect
of  Alexandria,  bevng  first  on  the  list.  It  would  seem
at  least  from  this  anecdote,  as  has  been  elsewhere
intimated,  that  the  ordinary  condition  of  the  exiles
was  one  of  considerable  indulgence,  and  that  they
were  allowed  the  enjoyment  of  their  fortunes.  That
the  emperor  should  have  caused  some  of  the  wealthiest
to  be  executed  upon  very  trifling  pretexts  in  order  to
seize  on  their  possessions  seems  only  too  probable.1

But  the  spendthrift  put  no  curb  on  his  lavish  pro-
Thepopu-  digality,  and  his  necessities  became  more
Lted  byen"  and  more  urgent  continually.  Had  he  limi-
tation. £e(j  j-^g  (jemail(jg  for  plunder  to  the  class  of
the  wealthy  aristocracy,  he  might  have  still  retained
the  favour  of  the  populace,  on  whose  amusements  so
much  of  his  ill-gotten  riches  was  expended ;  but
when,  in  order  to  provide  a  more  certain  and  constant
flow  of  gold  into  his  coffers,  he  ventured  to  smite  the
mass  of  the  citizens  with  new  or  increased  taxation,
he  converted  the  whole  Eoman  people  into  an  enemy,
and  stood  thenceforth  naked  in  the  eyes  of  history,
without  friend  or  apologist.  The  conquering  nation,
whatever  else  it  had  lost,  still  retained  an  excessive
jealousy  of  taxation,  which  it  blindly  confounded
with  tribute.  It  was  still  the  privilege  of  the  Eoman,
whatever  other  distinctions  he  had  surrendered,  to  be
exempt  from  the  most  direct  imposts.  It  was  still

1  Philo,  in  Flaec.  sub  fin,  Comp.  Dion,  lix.  1 8.  and  Suet.  Galig.
28.,  who  gives  a  still  finer  point  to  the  story.  "  Eevocatum  quendam
a  vetere  exilio  sciscitatus,  quidnam  ibi  facere  consuesset,  respondente
eo  per  adulationem,  Deos  semper  oravi  ut,  quod  evenit,  periret
Tiberius  et  tu  imperares ;  opinans  sibi  quoque  exules  suos  mortem
imprecaj.'i,  misit  circum  insulas  qui  universes  contrucidarent."

A.P.31-A.U.792.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  77

the  fiction  of  the  commonwealth  that  the  Koman  paid
in  personal  service  the  contribution  for  the  support  of
his  empire,  which  was  commuted  to  the  subject  for
money.  But  in  fact,  at  this  time,  the  citizen  was
using  every  endeavour  to  escape  both  from  one  bur-
den and  the  other,  and  the  light  taxation  which
Augustus  had  already  imposed  upon  him  barely  com-
pensated for  the  general  relaxation  of  his  civil  and
military  obligations.  It  might  have  been  the  wish  of
a  wise  and  benevolent  ruler  to  equalize  the  burdens
of  the  empire  by  bringing  Italy  under  the  same  fiscal
yoke  as  the  provinces.  But  neither  Augustus  nor
Tiberius  had  ventured  to  levy  custom  on  the  com-
merce or  productions  of  that  favoured  spot ;  and  the
decree  by  which  Caius  now  imposed  a  rate  on  imports
at  the  harbours  on  the  coast,  and  at  the  gates  of  the
cities  in  the  interior,  and  even  of  Eome  itself,  must
be  taken  as  a  token  of  caprice  or  tyranny  rather  than
of  an  equitable  intelligence.  Yet  it  might  not  be
unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  fees  he  exacted  from
suitors  before  the  tribunals  were  intended  to  improve
the  position  of  the  judges,  and  render  the  course  of
justice  more  pure ;  and  even  the  tax  he  is  said  to  have
levied  upon  prostitution  may  have  been  meant  as  a
measure  of  policy  and  outward  decorum.  It  is  easy
to  understand  the  outcry  it  would  raise,  and  the  gross
charges  it  might  suggest  against  the  emperor  himself. [
It  was  believed  that,  among  less  innocent  contrivances
for  raising  his  revenues,  he  had  actually  succeeded  in
making  gold,  of  excellent  quality,  but  so  little  in
quantity  as  not  to  defray  the  expense  of  the  manu-
facture.2 It  is  not  improbable  that  he  attained  the
same  end  by  debasing  the  currency.3  The  delight

1  Suet.  Calig.  40.  2  PHn.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxiii.  22.

*  Thus  we  find  that,  "  Emptum  plus  minus  asse  Caiano,"  was  an
expression  for  anything  particularly  worthless.  Stat.  Sylv.  iv.  9.  22.
The  copper  coinage  of  Caius  was  called  in  by  his  successor.  Dion,
Ix.  22.

78  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  en.  XLVITT.

with  which  he  contemplated  the  gold  he  thus  amassed
was  represented  as  something  monstrous  and  insane:
at  times  it  was  affirmed  he  would  cause  it  to  be  spread
in  heaps  upon  the  floor,  and  wade  in  it  with  bare  feet,
or  fling  himself  down  and  roll  frantically  upon  it.1
Whatever  favour  he  may  have  once  enjoyed  with  the
populace  from  the  splendour  of  the  shows  with  which
he  indulged  them, — a  favour  which  was  already,  per-
haps, beginning  to  wane  from  satiety,  and  even  from
disgust, — it  was  speedily  swallowed  up  in  feelings  of
indignation  and  resentment.  The  universal  selfish-
ness which  he  had  so  long  pampered  turned  in  a  mass
against  him.  The  citizens  refused  to  obey  in  the
theatre  his  signal  to  applaud  or  to  condemn :  they
beheld  with  indifference  the  feats  of  the  imperial
athlete  himself;  the  shows  and  games,  which  they
had  regarded  almost  as  their  daily  food,  ceased  at  last
to  attract  them2 ;  and  it  was  probably  in  vexation  at
this  sullen  yet  passive  disobedience,  which  baffled
both  his  menaces  and  caresses,  that  he  uttered  his
well-known  exclamation,  accompanied  no  doubt  with
the  significant  gesture  by  which  he  intimated  his
cruel  will  to  his  headsmen,  Would  that  the  people  of
Rome  had  but  one  neck  ! 3

We  may  place  the  mummery  of  the  Baian  triumph
in  the  spring  or  early  summer  of  792,  the

Caiusun-  & , ~ *

dertakea  an season  when  the  Campaman  coast  was  most

expedition  -  - . - i  •  j  '  -i.»

agam.t  the thronged  with  lounging  and  gazing  multi-

Oermans.  &  .  J,  .  ,

tudes,  and  which  on  that  account  would
most  probably  be  chosen  for  the  emperor's  grand  act

1  Suet.  Calig.  42.

2  We  shall  the  less  wonder  at  the  self-restraint  on  their  part  if  we
accept  literally  the  story  of  Suetonius,  that  he  amused  himself  some-
times by  causing  the  awning  in  the  circus  to  be  withdrawn,  and
forbidding  the  scorched  spectators  from  retiring. It  must  be  re-
membered, however,  that  as  the  circus  was  never  more  than  partially
veiled,  ft  large  portion  of  the  multitude  must  have  always  been  exposed
to  the  heat  of  the  sun. Suet.  Calig.  26.

Suet.  Caliy.  30.  32. Comp.  Senec.  Apocolocynt.  6. "  Gestn  illo
manus  ....  quo  decollare  homines  solebaV

A.U.39-A.P.792.  TTNDEfc THE EMPTim.  79

of  self-glorification.  This,  we  are  told,  was  promptly
followed  by  the  fiercest  access  of  his  tyranny  and  the
increasing  exactions  which  his  empty  treasury  re-
quired. But  nearly  at  the  same  moment  Cains,  —  I
follow  now  implicitly  the  accounts  we  have  received,
—  pretended  to  have  a  nobler  object  in  view.  On
making  a  progress  to  the  Clitumnus,  two  or  three
days'  journey  from  Rome,  in  the  autumn  of  the  same
year,  he  remarked  how  slender  was  the  number  of  his
escort  of  Batavian  horsemen,  and  the  thought  came
suddenly  into  his  head  that  the  battalion  might  be
recruited  by  a  successful  incursion  into  the  German
territories.  He  announced  that  the  barbarians  were
encroaching  on  the  Roman  frontiers,  and  required  his
powerful  arm  to  check  them  ;  but  his  mind  was  filled
at  once  with  visions  of  the  sums  he  might  extort  from
the  provincials  both  of  Gau-l  and  Spain,  to  replenish
his  coffers,  and  slake  his  craving  thirst  for  gold.
From  the  Clitumnus,  accordingly,  he  set  out,  ap-
parently without  even  returning  to  Rome  ;  the  legions
and  auxiliaries  he  required  for  his  expedition  were
directed  with  all  speed  to  follow.  For  his  own  part
his  march  was  irregular  and  intermittent  ;  sometimes
so  rapid  that  his  guards  could  hardly  keep  up  with
him,  even  though  they  laid  their  colours  on  the  backs  of
their  animals  ;  sometimes,  again,  so  tardy  and  delibe-
rate that  he  was  borne  himself  on  men's  shoulders,  and
the  cities  through  which  he  was  to  pass  were  required
to  sweep  the  roads  and  lay  the  dust  before  him.1  He
was  attended  throughout  by  a  train  of  players  and  gla-
diators, dancers  and  women,  the  vile  retinue  of  a  Par-
thian sovereign.  On  reaching  the  camp  on  the  Rhine,
he  displayed  his  sense  of  discipline  by  animadverting
severely  on  the  officers  whose  contingents  were  slow

1  Suetonius  (Calig.  43.)  speaks  of  this  expedition  as  a  sudden
thought,  which  is  quite  consistent  with  the  character  before  us.  Dion
(lix.  xxi.)  differs  upon  this  and  other  minor  points  ;  hut  in  general
the  two  accounts  agree  remarkably.

80  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  GIT.  XLvrn.

in  arriving  at  head-quarters:  some  whose  term  of
service  was  on  the  point  of  expiring,  he  degraded,  on
the  pretext  of  their  age  and  infirmities,  and  reduced
the  pay  or  pensions  of  the  veterans  to  one-half  of  the
sum  guaranteed  them.1  But  after  all  there  was  no
enemy  to  chastise ;  and  the  young  warrior  devised
the  expedient  of  sending  a  few  captives  across  the
river,  and  placing  them  in  concealment,  while  the
alarm  was  sounded  in  the  praetorium  that  the  foe  was
at  hand.  Thereupon,  rising  hastily  from  table  with
his  guests,  he  galloped,  attended  by  a  few  body-
guards only,  into  the  wood,  dispersed  the  pretended
adversaries,  plucked  some  branches  from  the  trees,
and  suspended  on  them  the  trophies  of  his  victory :
then  returning,  he  upbraided  the  legions  which  had
lagged  behind,  and  rewarded  his  companions  with  a
new  kind  of  military  chaplet,  in  which  the  sun,  moon,
and  stars  were  represented,  and  to  which  he  gave  the
name  of  the  crown  exploratory '.  But  enough  of  this
mummery.  The  pretended  victory,  we  are  told,  was
duly  notified  in  a  laurelled  letter  to  the  senate ;  and
the  fathers  were  petulantly  upbraided  for  indulging
in  their  banquets,  their  baths  and  theatres,  while  their
emperor  was  exposing  his  august  person  to  the  darts
of  the  barbarians.  At  the  same  time  the  submission
of  a  fugitive  prince  from  Britain  was  accepted  and
blazoned  forth  as  the  capitulation  of  the  whole  island.
To  me  indeed  it  seems  impossible  to  mistake  the
Explanation  spirit  of  caricature  in  which  these  accounts
go'nlnarr'a-  are  written ;  and  even  had  we  no  clue  to  a
tive-  better  understanding  of  the  circumstances,

I  should  be  little  disposed  to  confide  in  them.  But
it  will  be  remembered  how,  towards  the  close  of  the
reign  of  Tiberius,  the  command  of  the  legions  on  the
Ehine  was  left  by  him  reluctantly  in  the  hands  of  a
chief  whom  he  had  not  the  courage  to  dispossess.
Lentulus  Gtetulicus  had  defied  the  emperor,  and  the

1  Suet.  Calig.  44.

A.D.39.-A.U.792.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  81

emperor  had  succumbed  to  his  menaces.  Tiberius
was  old  and  timid,  and  satisfied  perhaps  that  the
obedience  of  the  legions  would  at  least  last  his  own
time :  but  Caius  partook  neither  of  his  fears  nor  his
confidence.  The  relaxation  of  discipline  by  this  legate
had  given  occasion  to  attacks  on  the  part  of  the  Ger-
mans. But  it  was  much  more  dangerous  to  the  im-
perator,  as  a  token  of  independence  on  the  part  of  his
own  officer ;  and  it  was  with  the  bold  determination,
as  I  conceive,  to  put  down  this  rising  spirit,  that  Caius,
under  pretence  of  defending  the  frontiers,  left  Eome
for  Gaul,  to  defend  himself  and  his  imperial  authority.
In  daring  Caius  was  not  deficient ;  perhaps  he  had
not  sense  enough  fairly  to  estimate  the  dangers  which
beset  him.  But  at  such  a  crisis  daring  was  the  best
wisdom,  and  the  apparition  of  the  redoubted  emperor
in  the  midst  of  a  disaffected  camp,  together  with  some
examples  of  sternness,  which  showed  that  he  was  not
to  be  trifled  with,  may  have  actually  saved  the  state
from  a  bloody  and  bootless  revolution.

The  senators,  in  the  tyrant's  absence,  to  return  to
the  narrative  before  us,  were  indulging  in  Caiu,  at
a  happy  respite  from  their  troubles,  and  Lu8dnnnm-
had  willingly  offered  vows  in  the  temples  for  every
success  he  could  desire,  and  recommended  the  pro-
vinces to  follow  their  example.1  As  the  season  drew
to  a  close  Caius  repaired  to  Lugdunum,  the  spot
from  which  Augustus  and  Grermanicus  had  directed
the  administration  of  the  country,  and  conducted  its
census.  From  hence  he  issued  requisitions  to  the
cities  for  extraordinary  contributions,  and  devised
methods  of  extorting  money  from  the  nobles.  Offences
against  the  state  were  investigated  and  multiplied,,

Suet.  Calig.  45.  Philo,  alluding  to  these  religious  ceremonies,
describes  them  not  as  thanksgivings  for  victories  gained,  but  as  vows
for  future  successes.  Comp.  leg.  ad  Car.  in  a  passage  already  referred
to  (c.  45.):  Kol  yitp  I66cra.it.tv  .  .  .  say  the  Jewish  envoys  .  . .  trpurot
ufv  .  .  .  rplrov  SJ,  KarA  T^V  i \irt$ a  rfjj  TtpnaviKrjs  "hnjs.

VOL.  VI.  <J

82  HISTORY  OP  THE ROMANS  CH.  TLVIII.

and  punishment  only  redeemed  by  the  payment  of
heavy  fines.  So  well  was  he  satisfied,  it  would  seem,
by  these  experiments,  of  the  actual  riches  of  his
Gaulish  subjects,  that  he  conceived  an  extraordinary
plan  for  diverting  a  large  portion  of  them,  with  little
risk  or  trouble,  into  his  own  coffers.  Orders  were
despatched  to  Rome  to  transmit  to  Lugdunum  the
costly  furniture  and  decorations  of  some  of  the  im-
perial residences.  These  it  was  determined  to  sell
by  auction,  and  it  was  expected  that  the  vanity  of  the
admiring  natives  would  induce  them  to  pay  profusely
for  objects  of  such  peculiar  interest.  The  precious
goods  arrived,  transported  by  innumerable  carriages
and  beasts  of  burden,  the  requisition  for  which  sufficed
for  a  time  to  cripple  the  industry  of  Italy ;  and  Caius
himself,  as  auctioneer,  explained  and  eulogized  the
several  articles,  and  urged  his  courtiers  to  bid  warmly
against  each  other.  This,  he  said,  is  a  vase
or  statue  which  Antonius  sent  from  Egypt;
that  is  a  gem  or  picture  which  Augustus
brought  with  him  from  the  East;  this  was  a  trophy
of  my  father's ;  this  was  a  trinket  of  my  mother's.1
Such  a  recommendation  was  of  course  felt  as  a  com-
mand, and  the  sale  proceeded  gloriously.  The  sums,
however,  thus  scraped  together  were  flung  the  next
moment  away.  A  large  portion  was  spent  in  a  dona-
tive to  the  Gallic  legions ;  not  less  perhaps  was  squan-
dered on  the  games  which  were  now  solemnized  in  the
Gallic  capital.  The  provincial  nobles  had  already
instituted  games  in  honour  of  Augustus,  which  were
enacted  before  his  altar :  the  lively  genius  of  the  nation
had  begun  to  emulate  the  literary  efforts  of  Greece
and  Rome,  and  contests  in  eloquence  and  versifica-
tion held  a  prominent  place  in  these  exhibitions.
Whatever  might  be  the  merit  of  these  trials  of  wit
and  fancy,  Caius,  with  the  low  humour  natural  to
him,  proceeded  to  degrade  them  by  the  unseemly

'  Dion,  lix.  21.}  Svet,  Ca%.  39.

A.D.3'J-A.U.792.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  83

penalties  he  inflicted  on  the  unsuccessful  competitors,
some  of  whom  were  required  to  obliterate  their  com-
positions with  their  tongues,  or  be  cast  headlong  into
the  furious  waters  of  the  Khone.1

Whatever  were  the  freaks  of  cruelty  or  folly  with
which  the  tyrant  actually  disgraced  his  conspiracy
sojourn  among  the  Gauls,  yet  if  we  view  ftgai"8t  CaiU8>
the  enterprise  in  the  light  in  which  I  have  ventured
to  place  it,  as  a  bold  stroke  of  defensive  policy,  we
shall  be  disposed  to  look  with  some  indulgence  on
the  bloody  executions  with  which  it  is  said  to  have
been  attended.  Whether  it  be  the  case  that  Execution  of
Gaetulicus  resented  his  chiefs  intrusion  by
conspiring  against  his  life  and  power,  or
whether  the  sentence  of  death  which  now  A«riPPina-
descended  on  him  was  only  a  tyrant's  measure  of
precaution,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  position
he  occupied  was  incompatible  with  the  dignity  or
safety  of  the  imperial  throne.  There  seems,  however,
reason  to  surmise  that  he  laid  himself  open  to  the
blow  by  an  act  of  direct  provocation.  Caius  was
accompanied  into  Gaul  by  his  surviving  sisters,  and
by  some  of  the  habitual  companions  of  his  pleasures
among  the  nobility  of  Rome.  Of  these  none  was  so
conspicuous  as  M.  ^Emilius  Lepidus,  the  youthful
minion  before  mentioned,  whom  hfc  had  united  to
Drusilla,  and  whom,  as  was  generally  believed,  he  had
intended  to  associate  with  her  in  the  succession.  The
weakness  of  the  emperor's  health,  and  his  late  severe
illness,  might  have  seemed  for  a  moment  to  bring
this  splendid  inheritance  almost  within  reach  of  the
fortunate  aspirant.  The  sceptre  of  the  world,  for
which  the  ^Emilii  had  so  often  contended,  seemed
about  to  descend  into  his  grasp.  But  the  death  of
his  patron's  favourite  sister  suddenly  obscured  the
prospect.  Still  doomed  to  a  private  station,  he  con-

1  Suet.  Calig.  20. Comp.  the  allusion  of  Juvenal :  "  Lugdnnensem
rhetor  dicturus  ad  aram  "  (i.  44.).
o  2

84  IIISTOBY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  HA  III

tinued  perhaps  to  brood  over  his  disappointment ;  and
it  is  not  improbable  that  the  charge  now  advanced
against  Lepidus,  of  intriguing  with  Julia  or  Agrip-
pina,  or  even  with  both  at  once,  and  of  combining
with  them  to  overthrow  the  ruler  of  the  state,  was  in
fact  substantially  true.  The  authority  and  abilities
of  Gsetulicus,  if  gained  to  their  side,  would  lend
strength  to  the  blow ;  and  discontented  as  he  pro-
bably was,  and  perhaps  alarmed  for  his  own  safety,
nothing  is  more  likely  than  that  Graetulicus  was  drawn,
as  some  accounts  represented,  into  their  conspiracy.
Such  at  least  was  the  statement  which  Caius  caused
to  be  circulated.  The  secret  of  the  plot  was  betrayed,
and  its  leaders  seized  and  cut  off  in  Gaul,  at  the  end
of  the  year  792.  The  guilty  sisters  were  condemned
to  banishment,  and  Agrippina  was  compelled  to  carry
the  urn  containing  her  paramour's  ashes  on  foot  to
Rome.  In  the  account  of  this  affair  which  Caius
transmitted  to  the  senate  for  publication,  he  disclosed
without  reserve  every  particular  of  their  wanton  and
shameless  lives ;  though  the  Eomans  were  fully  per-
suaded that,  however  vicious  they  had  proved  them-
selves, the  brother  had  been  their  seducer,  and  the
partner  of  their  worst  iniquities.  At  the  same  time
he  sent  three  swords,  which  he  declared  had  been  in-
tended for  his  assassination,  with  directions  that  they
should  be  suspended  as  votive  offerings  in  the  temple
of  Mars  the  Avenger.  As  his  sisters,  at  his  desire,
had  received  many  distinctions  from  the  senate ;  he
enjoined  that  in  the  future  no  such  extraordinary
marks  of  favour  should  be  conferred  on  any  of  his
own  relations.1

On  receiving  their  master's  account  of  the  con-
An  ovation  spiracy  he  had  detected,  and  the  danger
theriuPP°4i-  from  which  he  had  relieved  the  state  by  its
conspiracy1.8  discovery,  the  senators  had  hastily  sent  a
deputation  to  convey  their  humble  congratulations,

;  Suet.  Calig.  24.,  Gaud,  9.;  Dion,  JIx.  22,

A.D.39 A.u.792.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  86

and  offer  him  the  honours  of  an  ovation:  but  he
complained  of  the  number  of  the  envoys  as  beneath
the  importance  of  the  occasion,  and  of  the  ovation
as  unworthy  of  so  great  an  achievement ;  he  treated
his  visitors  as  spies,  and  particularly  resented  the  mis-
sion of  Claudius,  who  accompanied  them,  as  sent  to
direct  and  admonish  him  with  the  authority  of  an
uncle.  He  was  on  the  Ehine  at  the  time  of  their
arrival ;  and  it  was  said  that,  in  his  ill-humour,  he
even  suffered  Claudius  to  be  thrown  into  the  stream.
Great  was  the  terror  which  this  reception  created  at
Rome,  where  dire  apprehensions  already  reigned  of
the  proscriptions  which  might  be  expected  to  follow
on  the  recent  disclosures.  The  furious  caprices  of
the  emperor  were  manifested  again  in  his  sudden
repudiation  of  Lollia,  whom  he  accused  of  sterility,
and  the  advancement  of  Milonia  Cspsonia,
with  whom  he  was  known  to  have  been  for  riTMpnu
some  time  connected,  to  the  perilous  honour
of  his  hand.  This  woman,  whose  name  was  long  held
in  detestation,  is  represented  to  us  as  neither  young
nor  handsome ;  but  it  was  believed  that  she  had  at-
tracted and  retained  her  lover's  interest  by  the  use  of
philtres,  which  contributed  to  unsettle  his  mind,  and
render  him  more  intractable  than  ever.  Caesonia  had
borne  three  children  to  a  former  husband,  and  was
far  advanced  in  pregnancy  at  the  time  of  this  mar-
riage. When,  however,  a  daughter  was  born  to  him
within  a  month  of  the  nuptial  solemnity,  Caius  did
not  scruple  to  acknowledge  the  child  as  actually  his
own,  to-  carry  it  to  the  temples  of  the  gods,  to  lay  it
in  the  lap  of  Minerva,  and  to  give  it  the  Csesarean
appellation  of  Julia  Drusilla.1

1  Dion,  lix.  28.  28.;  Jav.  vi.  16.;  Suet.  Calig.  25.;  Joseph.  Antiq.
xix.  1.  Suetonius  assures  us  that  the  emperor  was  the  more  con-
vinced that  the  child  was  his  own,  by  the  ferocity  it  showed  from  its
birth,  attacking  with  its  nails  the  eyes  and  countenances  of  its  piay-
fellows.  It  should  be  observed  that  Dion  speaks  of  its  being  carried

86  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  clt.  XLVUI.

From  Graul  Caius  had  announced  to  the  senate  that
caiu«a»-  he  was  about  to  assume  the  consulship  for
thiTd'con-  the  third  time  at  the  commencement  of
!"»"«,  793  at  Lugdunum,  and  had  at  the  same  time
A.  ».  793,  indicated  whom  he  required  to  accept  it  as
his  colleague.  But  this  nominee  happening  to  die  a
few  days  before  the  first  day  of  January,  the  fathers
were  thrown  into  perplexity,  the  tribunes  and  praetors
not  venturing  to  convene  the  senate  on  their  own  re-
sponsibility while  there  was  still  a  consul  absent  from
the  city.  They  rushed  tumultuously  to  the  Capitol
and  performed  the  customary  sacrifices,  not  omitting
to  prostrate  themselves  before  the  emperor's  vacant
chair,  and  lay  upon  it  the  new  year's  presents,  which,
from  the  time  of  Augustus,  the  Caesars  had  been
wont  to  accept  on  these  solemn  occasions.  This
done,  they  repaired  of  their  own  accord  to  the  senate-
house,  and  neglecting  all  state  affairs,  consumed
the  day  in  complimentary  harangues  and  fulsome
adulation  of  the  tyrant.  On  the  third  day  they  re-
covered somewhat  of  their  presence  of  mind.  The
praetors  constituted  themselves  a  commission  fqr  con-
ducting the  business  of  the  senate,  and  convened  it
in  the  usual  form.  Nevertheless  such  was  the  abject
terror  in  which  it  lay,  that  it  dared  not  proceed  to
any  matters  of  administration  till  it  was  announced
and  m  ^a^  ^ius  na(^  abdicated  his  functions  on
oUthf'8  the  twelfth  day,  and  that  the  consuls  desig-

twclfth  day.  ,  J  >  ,  .  .  &

nate  were  at  liberty  to  ascend  their  chairs.
The  first  act  of  the  senate  under  their  presidency
was  to  decree  that  the  birthdays  of  Caius  and  Dru-
silla  should  be  solemnized  with  the  same  honours  as
that  of  Augustus ;  but  their  countrymen  excused  this
new  baseness,  by  asserting  that  the  decree  was  made
in  compliance  with  an  expressed  command.1  The

to  the  Capitol  ;  but  it  is  clear  that  the  marriage  and  birth  took  place
in  Gaul.  The  confusion  in  Dion's  chronology  of  this  reign  is  very
great.  '  Dion,  lix.  24.

A.0.40-A.U.-93.  UNDER THE EJIHRE.  87

fears  of  tb.e  bewildered  nobles  were  more  particularly
excited  at  this  moment  by  tbe  report  that  their  per-
secutor was  attended  in  Graul  by  a  routine  of  foreign
princes,  such  as  Agrippa  and  Antiochus  of  Comma-
gene,  who,  as  they  apprehended,  were  instructing
him  in  the  arts  of  Eastern  sovereignty  ;  and  the  fact
of  his  having  summoned  Ptolemaeus,  son  of  Juba,
king  of  Mauretania,  to  his  presence,  and  put  him  to
death  for  the  sake  of  his  riches,  caused  gloomy  fore-
bodings among  such  of  the  patricians  at  home  as  still
retained  their  much  coveted  possessions.1

The  conspiracy  had  been  detected,  the  disloyal  pun-
ished ;  the  legions,  warned  by  the  fate  of  their  con-
tumacious chief,  were  transferred  to  Servius  Gralba,
by  whom  discipline  was  enforced  with  pristine  severity.
Furloughs  were  withheld,  the  labours  of  the  camp
were  redoubled,  the  soldiers  were  taught  both  to  work
and  to  fight,  and  to  feel  the  difference  between  a
dissolute  intriguer  in  the  prsetorium  and  a  stern  war-
rior of  the  ancient  stamp.  When  they  ventured,  in
the  relaxation  of  a  camp-spectacle,  to  applaud  him,
he  drily  rebuked  their  unwarrantable  freedom  with
the  order  to  keep  their  hands  under  their  cloaks.2
The  winter  of  793  was  occupied  in  prepa-  The
rations  for  a  descent  upon  Britain,  and  the  e
military  season  was  opened  by  the  emperor's  of  Caiu9>
advance  from  Lugdunum,  or  from  the  Ehine,  to  the
shores  of  the  Channel.  The  troops  which  he  had  as-
sembled in  Gaul  are  said  to  have  been  exceedingly  nu-
merous ;  the  enterprise  he  had  in  view  was  nothing
less  than  the  complete  reduction  of  the  island,  the
submission  of  which  had  been  promised  him  by  a  re-
cent fugitive.  At  Gessoriacum  the  legions  were  mus-

1  Dion,  /.  c. ;  Suet.  Calig.  26.  Ptolemseus  was  son  of  Juba  by
Cleopatra  Selene,  daughter  of  M.  Antonius.  He  was,  therefore,  the
grandson,  Caius  the  great  grandson,  of  the  triumvir.

*  Suet,  in  Galb.  6. :  "  A  Caio  Csesare  Gsetulico  substitutus,  postridie
quam  ad  legiones  venit,  solemn  forte  spectnculo  plaudentes  inhibuit,
data  tessera  ut  manus  poenulis  continerent."

88  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVHI.

tered  in  great  force.  While  awaiting  the  moment  of
embarkation,  they  were  directed  one  day  to  take  up
a  military  position  on  the  beach ;  horse  and  foot  were
drawn  up  in  order  of  battle  fronting  the  waves  of
the  ocean,  and  the  whole  armament  of  catapults  and
other  engines  of  war -was  arrayed  on  their  flanks,  or
in  the  rear,  as  if  for  immediate  engagement.  Caius
himself  reviewed  his  army  from  a  trireme  at  sea;
then  landed  and  placed  himself  on  a  lofty  tribunal,
as  about  to  give  the  signal  for  battle.  Suddenly,
amidst  the  clang  of  trumpets  and  measured  voices
of  the  centurions,  the  order  issued  to  pile  arms  and
pick  up  shells,  with  which  every  man  hastened  to  fill
his  helmet  and  laid  them  at  the  emperor's  feet.  Col-
lected into  a  vast  heap  together,  these  spoils  of  the
ocean,  as  Caius  described  them,  were  sent  to  Eome,
and  the  senate  was  directed  to  deposit  them  with  due
solemnity  among  the  treasures  of  the  palace  and
Capitol.  In  token  of  this  pretended  victory,  the
emperor,  we  are  told,  caused  a  lighthouse  to  be  erected
to  guide  vessels  by  night  into  the  harbour ;  and  the
campaign  being  thus  auspiciously  terminated,  he  pre-
sented the  men  with  a  largess  of  a  hundred  sesterces
apiece,  and,  as  if  this  liberality  had  exceeded  all
previous  examples,  bade  them  retire,  glad  and  rich,
from  his  presence.1  The  good  fortune  which  has
given  us  a  clue  to  the  real  proceedings  of  Caius  on  the
Rhine,  through  the  mists  of  malicious  misrepresent-
ations, seems  here  wholly  to  desert  us.  Yet  I  hesi-
tate to  believe  that  the  British  expedition*  as  it  was
sarcastically  denominated,  was  such  a  monstrous  farce
as  it  has  been  described.  The  erection  of  a  light-
house indicates  at  least  an  intelligent  purpose,  and
cannot  have  been  a  mere  whimsical  fancy.  Possibly
Caius  was  diverted  from  a  real  intention  of  attack-

1  Suet.  Calig.  46. ;  Dion,  lix.  25.  Compare  the  references  to  this
affair  in  Tacitus  (Agric.  13.,  German.  37.):  "Mox  ingentes  Caii
Csesaris  mines  in  ludibrium  versae  "

A.D.  40-A.tr.  793. tNDER THE EMPIRE.  89

ing  Britain  by  some  act  of  submission,  from  which
he  anticipated  the  opening  of  freer  and  more  regular
communications  with  the  natives.  Even  the  picking
of  shells  may  be  a  grotesque  misrepresentation  of  re-
ceiving a  tribute  of  Rutupian  pearls.

Nevertheless,  whatever  distrust  we  may  feel  of  the
burlesque  account  of  this  exploit  transmit-  Calusclaimi!
ted  to  us,  the  claim  Caius  now  advanced  to  tttriun»ph-
a  triumph,  as  for  a  glorious  success,  was  no  doubt
utterly  extravagant ;  nor  i&  it  incredible  that  the
tricks  with  which  he  is  said  to  have  given  colour  to
it,  were  hardly  less  absurd  than  they  are  described.
Seven  times,  he  declared,  the  army  had  acknowledged
his  victories  by  saluting  him  as  Imperator. The
British  chief  Adminius,  who  had  solicited  through
his  aid  restoration  to  power,  was  retained,  he  said,
as  a  pledge  of  the  barbarians'  submission. He  had
placed  his  foot  upon  the  ocean,  and  reduced  it  to
dependence  for  ever. Accordingly  he  issued  orders
to  the  imperial  procurators  to  prepare  a  triumph  on
the  most  magnificent  scale  that  had  ever  yet  been
attempted ;  but  directed  them  at  the  same  time  not
to  lavish  on  it  the  treasures  of  the  fiscus,  but  to  extort
the  requisite  sums  from  the  citizens  and  provincials,
for  which  purpose  he  gave  them  full  authority  over
the  property  of  all  his  subjects. Meanwhile  he  col-
lected, for  lack  of  veritable  captives,  a  few  Grerman
slaves  or  fugitives,  or  hired  the  tallest  and  bulkiest
of  the  Grauls  themselves,  causing  them  to  dye  their
hair  red  and  let  it  grow,  to  acquaint  themselves  with
the  language  of  the  tribes  beyond  the  Khine,  and  as-
sume German  appellations.1 To  make  the  intended

1  Suet.  Calig.  47.:  "Coegitque  non  tantura  rutilare  et  submittere
comarn,  sed  et  sermonemGermanicumaddiscere  et  nomina  barbarica
ferre."  Compare  the  evident  allusion  to  this  trick,  real  or  imputed,  in
Persius,  vi.  45.:  "  Jam  lutea  gausapa  captis,  Essedaque.  ingentesque
local  Csesonia  Ehenos."  But  after  all  the  captives  of  Caius  were
never,  perhaps,  exhibited  in  Rome  at  all ;  and  we  have  in  Tacitus
11  similar  account  of  an  imposture  practised,  as  he  assures  us.  at  o

DO  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVIII.

ceremony  still  more  imposing,  he  directed  the  galleys
in  which  he  had  put  to  sea  to  be  impelled  against
the  stream  of  the  Ehine  and  thence  drawn  overland
to  the  rivers  of  Gaul,  and  thus  conveyed  to  Rome.
The  legions  were  wafted  by  this  circuitous  course
more  expeditiously,  perhaps,  than  they  could  have
inarched  by  land;  and  Caius  led  them  throughout
in  person,  and  visited  on  his  way  the  stations  on  the
Lower  Ehine,  in  which  his  father  had  planted  his  tent,
and  with  which  his  own  childhood  had  been  familiar.
Possibly  he  conferred  here  with  Galba  on  the  last
measures  he  might  require  to  punish  the  designs  of
Gsetulicus,  and  his  harsh  and  violent  temper  may
have  prompted  him  to  a  more  bloody  inquisition
than  he  found  it,  on  reflection,  prudent  to  enforce.
But  the  report  that  he  now  remembered  the  mutiny
of  certain  legions  against  Germanicus,  and  the  ex-
pulsion of  Agrippina  from  the  camp,  with  himself  an
infant  in  her  arms,  and  proposed  in  his  fury  to  mas-
sacre, after  twenty-five  years'  interval,  the  whole  of
the  battalions  which  bore  their  name,  and  when  dis-
suaded from  this  bloody  purpose  was  only  deterred
by  his  fears  from  decimating  them,  is  surely  too  ex-
travagant for  belief.1

It  has  been  recorded  how,  when  Augustus  was
journeying  simply  habited  among  the  Alps,  a  Gaul
caius  return.  wfl°  had  designed  to  attack  him  was  re-
toRome.  strained  by  the  imposing  majesty  of  his
countenance.2  Far  different  was  the  impression  which

later  period  by  Domitian  (Agric.  39.).  Possibly  the  habit  of  wearing
false  flaxen  hair  had  made  the  citizens  suspicious  of  the  genuine.

1  Suet.  Calig.  48. :  "  Consilium  iniit  nefandse  atrocitatis  legiones .  .  .
contrucidandi  ....  vixque  a  tarn  pnecipiti  cogitatione  revocatus  in-
hiberi  nullo  modo  potuit  quin  decimare  velle  perseveraret.  Vocatos
itaqueadconcioneminermes  ....  equitatu  armato  circumdedit.  Sed
quum  videret  suspecta  re  plerosque  dilabi  ad  resumenda  ....  arma
profugit  concionem,"  &c.  Notwithstanding  the  particularity  of  this
account,  I  must  reject  the  whole  as  incredible.

8  Suet.  Oct.  79.

A.D.40-A.U.793.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  91

the  stage-divinity  of  Cams  made  on  the  rude  minds
of  the  provincials.  One  of  them,  beholding  him
on  his  tribunal  glittering  with  the  insignia  of  Jove,
was  seen  to  smile :  the  emperor  demanded  what
he  thought  of  him ;  I  think  you  a  great  absurdity,
was  the  blunt  reply.  Possibly  the  imperial  mummer
at  the  moment  had  been  thinking  the  same ;  at  all
events,  his  sense  of  humour  was  touched,  and  the
man,  being  no  better  than  a  low  artificer,  was  allowed
to  escape  unpunished.1  He  reserved  all  his  anger
for  the  nobles  and  senators,  who,  it  seems,  not  ven-
turing to  decree  him  honours  after  their  late  un-
gracious reception,  and  apprehensive  lest  his  claim
to  congratulation  on  his  maritime  successes  might
prove  no  more  than  a  grim  jest,  had  neglected  to  in-
vite him  to  enter  the  city  in  triumph.  /  am  coming,
he  exclaimed,  7am  coming — but  not  for  the  senate —
for  the  knights  and  people  who  alone  deserve  my
presence  among  them.  For  the  senate  I  will  neither
be  a  prince  nor  a  citizen,  but,  clapping  his  hand  on
his  sword,  an  imperator  and  a  conqueror.  He  then
forbade  any  of  the  order  to  come  forth  to  meet  him,
and  waiving  the  offer  of  a  triumph,  which  they  had
too  long  withheld,  made  his  entry  with  the  solemnity
of  an  ovation  only,  and  scattered  money  to  the  popu-
lace. His  return  took  place  on  his  birthday,  the  last
day  of  August,  in  the  year  793.2

The  last,  and  in  the  eyes  of  the  Romans  themselves
the  most  abominable,  phase  of  the  Caian  ty-  Caiu.finaiiy
raimy  remained  still  to  be  exhibited. They  a^Tintwd"
had  witnessed  his  assumption  of  divinity  with  autocrat-
a  smile;  and  even  the  rivalry  he  had  affected  with  the
Jupiter  of  the  Capitol,  whose  thunders  he  pretended  to
imitate,  and  with  the  tale  of  whose  parricide  and
incest  he  had  met  the  imputation  of  similar  crimes

1  Dion,  lix.  26.:  KO.\  '6s  a.irtKpivaro,  tpw  ykp  avr
vnpaX'fipTifi.a.'  Kal  oJSiv  fj.tvrot  Sfivbv  «jra0«,
*  Suet.  Caliy.  49.

92  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVlll.

against  himself,  had  excited  no  other  feeling,  perhaps,
but  one  of  placid  amusement.1  The  selfish  cowardice
with  which  the  nobles  had  beheld  the  cruelties  in-
flicted on  so  many  of  their  own  class,  without  raising
a  hand,  or  even  a  murmur,  on  their  behalf,  amazing
as  it  seems  to  us  at  first  sight,  may  be  accounted  for  by
the  distrust  of  one  another,  with  which  the  system
of  delation  had  generally  imbued  them.  The  people
growled  with  indignation  at  the  unwonted  exactions
imposed  on  them  ;  nevertheless,  they  could  not  long
resist  the  seductions  of  new  shows  and  largesses.
The  style  and  character  of  the  principate  had  been
coloured  indeed  more  and  more  by  the  arbitrary
usages  of  Eastern  monarchy;  no  rule  or  privilege
could  continue  to  hold  its  ground  against  the  will
of  the  prince,  whose  caprices  could  be  enforced  with
the  naked  sword  by  a  devoted  bodyguard.  But  it
was  not  till  he  entered  Eome  in  the  garb  of  an  impe-
rator,  and  made  the  forum  his  camp  and  the  palace
his  prsetorium,  —  it  was  not  till  he  brandished  the
fasces  in  the  eyes  of  the  citizens,  and  subjected
them  to  military  law,  —  that  Caius  really  appeared
to  Eoman  imaginations  as  a  Pisistratus  or  a  Tarquin.
From  this  time  the  die  was  cast,  and  he  finally  aban-
doned all  the  decorous  fictions  of  the  republic.
He  avowed  himself  a  tyrant,  and  continued  thence-
forth to  wear  the  outward  ensigns  of  autocracy  with-
out scruple.2  '  He  can  hardly  have  been  uncon-
scious that  this  overt  act  of  usurpation  would  raise
him  up  more  dangerous  enemies  than  all  his  previous

1  Aurel.  Viet,  de  Caesar.  4.  :  "  Cum  Jovem  se  ob  incestum  ....  as
sereret."  Comp.  Dion,  lix.  26.  :  Zetfs  TO  elvat  tir\a.TTfTo,  Kai  Sia  ToCro
Kal  yvvcugiv  a>  Acus  re  iro\\cus  Kal  rats  a$e\<pcus  fj.d\iffra  ffvvelvai  irpoe

Aurel.  Victor,  de  Caesar.  4.  :  "  His  elatus  dominum  dici,  atque  in-
signe  regni  capiti  nectere  tentaverat."  In  the  epitome  the  same  author
asserts  that  Caius  actually  wore  the  diadem.  Suetonius,  in  a  passage
before  referred  to,  says  that  he  was  very  near  assuming  it,  and  only
desisted  on  the  assurance  that  he  had  risen  above  the  highest  eminence
of  kings  and  sovereigns.  Caliy.  22.

A.D.40  A.U.793.  UNDER THE EMPIRE  .  93

atrocities.  Another  Caius  had  perished  by  the  dag-
ger, and  such  was  the  fate  which  he  must  have  appre-
hended for  himself.  But  the  disdain  he  felt  for  the
wretched  people  he  had  trampled  upon,  seems  to  have
fortified  his  courage.  When  a  plot  against  his  life  was
discovered  by  the  treachery  of  one  of  the  con-

.,  j.i  • i  • j. j • •  i Conspiracy

spirators,  and  the  persons  implicated  in  it  against  him
tried  to  save  themselves  by  denouncing  some
of  his  most  familiar  associates,  such  as  the  captain  of
his  gunrds,  and  his  favourite  freedman  Callistus,  he
went  up  boldly  to  the  accused,  bared  his  breast,  and
offered  them  a  sword  to  take  his  life  if  they  really
desired  it.2  •  This,  at  least,  was  not  the  act  of  a  coward,
such  as  Caius  is  generally  represented;  nor,  it  may  be
added,  in  spite  of  many  furious  declamations  against
him,  can  we  charge  him  with  bloody  severity  in  re-
venging this  attempt  upon  his  person.  Cerialis,  the
leader  of  the  conspiracy,  though  put  to  the  question
to  reveal  its  extent,  was  suffered  to  escape  with  his
life,  to  perish  many  years  after  in  a  similar  enterprise ,
against  another  master.3

The  senate,  however,  seized  the  occasion  to  recovei
their  master's  favour  by  decreeing  solemn  crowning
games  for  his  preservation,  and  by  offer-  "  ofJcaUn8
ing  him  a  seat  in  the  curia  so  far  elevated  princiPttte-
above  the  floor  that  his  person  should  be  inacces-
sible to  an  assailant.4 This  anxiety  to  place  him  a?

1  Josephus  mentions,  among  the  atrocities  of  Caius  which  gave  the
greatest  offence,  his  allowing  slaves  to  lay  informations  against  their
masters. Antiq.  xix.  i.  2. Another  provocation  was  the  report  that
he  meditated  transferring  the  seat  of  empire  to  Alexandria  or  Antium,
his  birthplace. Suet.  Calig.  49.

2  Zonaras,  xi.  6.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  17.  The  language  of  Seneca  in  his  treatise  on
Anger  (de  Ira,  19.)  strongly  exemplifies  the  baneful  passion  against
which  he  preaches.  It  is  impossible  to  attach  much  importance  to
denunciations,  the  climax  of  which  is  that  Caius  allowed  some  of  his
victims  to  be  executed  at  night.  "  Quid  tarn  inauditum  quum  noctur-
num  supplicium  ?  .  .  .  quantulum  fuit  lucem  exspectare  J "

1  Dion,  lix.  26.

94  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  XLVin.

it  were  beyond  their  own  reach  may  indicate  that
the  intended  attack  upon  him,  like  that  upon  Julius
Caesar,  was  to  have  been  made  in  the  senate-house,
and  that  the  consent  of  the  whole  body  of  senators
was  fully  expected.  In  the  face  of  such  evidence
of  the  general  detestation  in  which  he  was  held,
Caius  still  relied  on  disarming  his  foes  by  inspiring
them  with  mutual  jealousy  and  distrust.  Shrinking
from  combination  and  almost  from  conversation  with
one  another,  they  vied  in  paying  abject  court  to  the
tyrant,  or  to  the  vilest  of  his  creatures.  Among  the
foremost  of  these  was  a  freedman  named  Protogenes,
who  was  said  to  carry  about  with  him  two  tablets,
inscribed  the  Sword  and  the  Dagger,  which  contained
the  names  of  the  persons  destined,  the  one  to  execu-
tion, perhaps,  the  other  to  assassination.1  Whenever
this  noted  delator  entered  the  senate-house,  the
fathers  crowded  round  to  take  him  obsequiously  by
the  hand.  On  seeing  a  certain  Scribonius  Proculus
thus  coming  forward  to  greet  him,  What!  he  exclaimed,
durst  thou  salute  me,  enemy  as  thou  art  to  Caesar  ?
and  at  the  words  the  senators  fell  upon  the  wretched
man,  and  stabbed  him  to  death  with  their  styles.8
Such  an  instance  of  slavish  pusillanimity  might  re-
assure the  emperor  amidst  the  dangers  by  which  he
was  actually  environed.  He  indulged  more  freely,
perhaps,  than  ever  in  the  notion  of  his  own  omnipo-
tence, and  rioted  in  the  fantastic  caprices  to  which
such  a  notion  seemed  always  to  prompt  him.  One
day,  at  a  public  banquet,  when  the  consuls  were  re-
clining by  his  side,  he  burst  suddenly  into  a  fit  of
laughter  ;  and  when  they  courteously  inquired  the

1  Dion,  I.  c.  Suetonius  (Calig.  c.  49.)  says  that  these
\vyp&  wese  discovered  among  the  emperor's  papers  after  his  death.
At  the  same  time  a  chest  was  also  found,  filled  with  a  great  variety  of
poisons,  the  power  and  qualities  of  which  were  carefully  marked,  as
ascertained  by  experiment  When  they  were  thrown  into  the  sea,
the  fishes  perished  far  and  near.

*  Dion,  /,  c,

A.D.41  -A.D  791.  DNDER THE EMPIRE.  95

cause  of  his  mirth,  astounded  them  by  coolly  replying
that  he  was  thinking  how  by  one  word  he  could  cause
both  their  heads  to  roll  on  the  floor.1  He  amused
himself  with  similar  banter  even  with  his  wife  Caesonia,
for  whom  he  seems  to  have  had  a  stronger  feeling  than
for  any  of  his  former  consorts.  While  fondling  her
neck  he  is  reported  to  have  said,  Fair  as  it  is,  how
easily  I  could  sever  it.*

But  the  end  of  this  monstrous  principate,  not  yet
four  years  old,  was  already  drawing  nigh ;

j •<-  r. v  , xi Conspiracy

and,  if  we  may  believe  our  accounts,  the  °fh£™£us
tyrant's  overthrow  was  due  not  to  abhorrence
of  his  crimes  or  indignation  at  his  assaults  on  the
Roman  liberties,  so  much  as  to  resentment  at  a  private
affront.  Among  the  indiscretions  which  seem  to
indicate  the  partial  madness  of  the  wretched  Caius,
was  the  caprice  with  which  he  turned  from  his  known
foes  against  his  personal  friends  and  familiars.  Thus
he  sacrificed  to  a  freak  of  ill-humour  the  tragedian
Apelles,  the  companion  of  his  pleasures,  and  instigator
of  many  of  his  excesses.  No  one  felt  himself  secure,
neither  the  freedmen  who  attended  on  his  person,
nor  the  guards  who  watched  over  his  safety.  Among
these  last  was  Cassius  Chserea,  tribune  of  a  praetorian
cohort,  whose  shrill  woman's  voice  provoked  the
merriment  of  his  master,  and  subjected  him  to  in-
jurious insinuations.3  Even  when  he  demanded  the
watchword  for  the  night  the  emperor  would  insult
him  with  words  and  gestures.  Chaerea  resolved  to
wipe  out  the  affront  in  blood.  He  sought  Callistus
and  others,  the  same  apparently  who  had  before  been
accused  of  conspiring  against  Caius,  and  who  had  lived

1  Suet.  Calig.  32.:  "Quid  nisi  uno  meo  nutu  jugular!  utruinque
vestrum  statim  posse  ?  "

*  Suet.  Calig.  33. :  "  Tarn  bona  cervix  simul  ac  jussero  demetetur."

•  Suet.  Calig.  56.;  Senec.  de  const.  Sap.  18.:  "Chaerese  tribune
militum  sermo  non  pro  manu  erat,  langnidus  sono  et  infracta  vocc
suspectior. Huic  Caius  signum  petenti  modo  Veneris,  modo  Priapj
lUbut." Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  1.  3.;  Dion,  lix.  29.

96  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xtvm.

m  apprehension  ever  since.  He  soothed  the  jealousies
which  Caius  had  sown  between  them,  persuaded  them
to  trust  one  another  in  their  common  peril,  and
organised  with  them  and  some  of  the  most  daring  of
the  nobles  a  plot  against  the  emperor's  life.  Yet  this
was  not  a  conspiracy  of  the  senate :  it  had  no  consular
or  praetor  at  its  head,  nor  had  it  any  ulterior  project
in  view.  There  was  no  design  of  sacrificing  the  tyrant
in  the  curia,  and  proclaiming  tyranny  at  an  end.
From  want  of  resolution  the  deed  was  postponed
from  day  to  day,  and  not  portents  only,  but  some
treacherous  whispers  may  have  warned  the  emperoi
to  beware  of  Cassius !  A  woman  named  Quintilia,
the  mistress  of  one  of  the  conspirators,  refused  under
torture  to  discover  the  design.1  Caius  contented
himself  with  despatching  an  order  for  the  execution
of  a  Cassius  Longinus,  proconsul  of  Asia,  who  was
accordingly  summoned  to  Home,  but  arrived  there
just  too  late  to  suffer  by  the  tyrant's  mandate.2  At
last,  after  many  delays,  the  festival  of  the  Palatine
games  was  fixed  on  for  carrying  the  project  into
effect.  Four  days  did  Caius  preside  in  the  theatre,
surrounded  by  the  friends  and  guards  who  were  sworn
to  slay  him,  but  still  lacked  the  courage.  On  the
fifth  and  last,  the  24th  of  January  794,  feeling  indis-
posed from  the  evening's  debauch,  he  hesitated  at
first  to  rise.  His  attendants,  however,  prevailed  on
him  to  return  once  more  to  the  shows ;  and  as  he
was  passing  through  the  vaulted  passage  which  led
from  the  palace  to  the  circus,  he  inspected  a  choir  of
noble  youths  from  Asia,  who  were  engaged  to  perform
upon  the  stage.  He  was  about  to  call  them  back
into  the  palace  to  rehearse  their  parts  before  him,

1  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  1.  c.

2  Suet.  Calig.  57. ;  Dion,  lix.  29. This,  however,  would  suppose
an  interval  of  nearly  two  months,  which  seems  hardly  admissible.
Cassius  had  been  the  husband  of  Drusilla,  whom  he  was  forced  to
relinquish  to  Caius,  to  be  united  to  M.  Lepidus.

A.0.41-A.U.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  97

but  the  leader  of  the  band  excused  himself  on  ac-
count of  hoarseness.  Caius  was  still  engaged  in
conversation  with  them  when  Chserea  and  another
tribune,  Sabinus,  made  their  way  to  him :  the  one
struck  him  on  the  throat  from  behind  with  his  sword,
while  the  other  was  in  the  act  of  demanding  D^,,  of
the  watchword.  A  second  blow  cleft  the  Caius-
tyrant's  jaw.  He  fell,  and  drawing  his  limbs  together
to  save  his  body,  still  screamed,  I  live  I  I  live !  while
the  conspirators  thronging  over  him,  and  crying,
again!  again!  hacked  him  with  thirty  wounds.
The  bearers  of  his  litter  rushed  to  his  assistance  with
their  poles,  while  his  bodyguard  of  Germans  struck
wildly  at  the  assassins,  and  amongst  the  crowd  which
surrounded  them  killed,  it  was  said,  more  than  one
senator  who  had  taken  no  part  in  the  affair.  The
conspirators  extricated  themselves  from  the  narrow
passages,  and  left  the  body  where  it  fell.  It  was
borne  in  secret  by  friendly  hands  to  the  pleasure
grounds  of  the  Lamian  palace,  and  there  hastily  and
imperfectly  consumed,  and  thrust  into  a  shallow  tomb.
At  a  later  period,  the  sisters  Livia  and  Agrippina,
restored  from  banishment,  exhumed  it,  reduced  it
solemnly  to  ashes,  and  consigned  it  again  to  a  more
decent  sepulchre.  Till  this  was  done  the  shade,  we
are  assured,  could  have  no  rest  itself,  nor  would  it
suffer  the  keepers  of  the  garden  to  slumber  undis-
turbed at  night.1

1  Suet.  Calig.  59.  Caius  was  slain  in  his  thirtieth  year.  His  reign
lasted  three  years,  ten  months,  and  eight  days,  from  the  16th  of
March,  790,  to  24th  of  Jan.  794.

VOL.  VI.

96  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

OHAPTEE  XLIX.

The  senate  deliberates  on  the  state  of  affairs. — The  praetorians  carry
off  Claudius  to  their  camp  and  swear  allegiance  to  him. — The
senate  yields  and  accepts  him  as  emperor. — He  proclaims  an  am-
nesty, excepting  only  Chserea  and  a  few  others. — Contempt  and
neglect  with  which  he  had  been  treated  in  his  early  years. — His
devotion  to  literature. — He  takes  the  policy  of  Augustus  as  his
model:  1.  His  military  exploits  and  conduct  of  foreign  affairs.

2.  His  revision  of  the  senate  and  knights,  and  census  A.  u.  800.

3.  His administration of  religious  affairs — secular games  A.  u.
800. 4.  His  laborious  administration  of  justice. 5.  His  buildings
and  constructions  :  the  Aqua  Claudia;  the  Portus  August!;  drain-
ing of  the  lake  Fucinus. 6.  His  public  shows  in  the  amphitheatre,
and  mock  sea-fight  in  the  lake  Fucinus. — Gluttony  and  intem-
perance ascribed  to  him.

THUS,  after  an  interval  of  eighty-four  years,  another
coupon  of  Caius  Caesar  fell  by  the  hand  of  the  assassin,
the  assassins,  j^  one  ^Q  wou[(j  never  have  been  men-
tioned in  conjunction  with  the  first,  except  for  the
likeness  of  his  name  and  of  the  manner  of  his  death.1
The  parallel,  however,  was  not  confined  to  the  first
act  of  the  tragedy :  its  subsequent  scenes  presented  a
repetition  of  nearly  similar  circumstances  ; — the  same
confusion  among  the  assassins  themselves,  the  same
hasty  and  ill-concerted  attempts  at  establishing  the
freedom  they  had  recovered,  and,  lastly,  a  like  defeat
and  overthrow  by  the  strong  and  well-directed  will  of
a  military  power.  It  would  seem  that  the  Eomans,
strong  as  they  were  in  individual  enterprise,  and
though  trained  by  all  their  habits  to  deliberation  in
common,  were  little  capable  of  combining  to  any  pur-
pose ;  possibly  the  very  force  of  their  personal  char-
acters, and  the  vehemence  of  their  wills,  rendered

1  Tac.  Hiat.  iii.  68.:  "Kepentina  vis  dictatorem  Caesarem  oppres-
icrat:  occulta?  Gaium  insidi'e.''

A.D.41-A.U.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  99

them,  in  the  gravest  crises  of  their  history,  thus  unfit
for  united  action.

When  each  of  the  conspirators  had  thrust  his
weapon  into  the  mangled  body,  and  the  Thecon8uis
last  shrieks  of  its  agony  had  been  silenced,  SSSIteto.
they  escaped  with  all  speed  from  the  cor-  llberation-
ridor  in  which  it  lay ;  but  they  had  made  no  disposi-
tions for  what  was  to  follow,  and  were  content  to
leave  it  to  the  consuls  and  senate,  amazed  and  unpre-
pared, to  decide  on  the  future  destiny  of  the  republic.
Among  the  first  of  the  emperor's  friends  who  pene-
trated to  the  spot  where  he  fell,  was  the  trusty
Agrippa,  who  threw  a  mantle  over  the  body,  and  tried
for  a  moment  to  conceal  the  fact  of  his  death.  But
the  violence  of  the  German  guards,  and  the  sturdy
bearing  of  a  consular,  Valerius  Asiaticus,  who  pro-
claimed aloud  that  the  tyrant  had  ceased  to  breathe,
and  how  much  he  regretted  having  borne  no  part  in
the  transaction  himself,  made  it  fully  known,  and
at  the  same  time  daunted  the  courage  of  those  who
might  have  avenged  it.  There  remained  no  other
duty  for  Agrippa  to  perform  but  to  carry  off  the  re-
mains, and  while  awaiting  the  course  of  events,  con-
sign them  hastily  to  the  grave.  While  the  Germans
were  awed  by  the  imposing  attitude  of  Valerius,  some
cohorts  of  the  city  guards  accepted  the  orders  of  the
consuls,  and  occupied  the  public  places  under  their
direction.  At  the  same  time  the  consuls,  Sentius
Saturninus  and  Pomponius  Secundus,  the  latter  of
whom  had  been  substituted  for  Caius  himself  only  a
few  days  before,  convened  the  senate,  not  in  the  ac-
customed curia,  because  it  bore  the  name  of  Julian,
but  in  the  temple  of  the  Capitoline  Jupiter.  The
first  act  of  the  sitting  was  to  issue  an  edict,  in  which
the  tyranny  of  Caius  was  denounced,  and  a  remission
of  the  most  obnoxious  of  his  taxes  proclaimed,  to-
gether with  the  promise  of  a  donative  to  the  soldiers.
The  fathers  next  proceeded  to  deliberate  on  the  form

H 2

100  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLIX.

under  which  the  government  should  be  henceforth
administered.  On  this  point  no  settled  principles
prevailed.  Some  were  ready  to  vote  that  the  memory
of  the  Caesars  should  be  abolished,  their  temples  over-
thrown, and  the  free  state  of  the  Scipios  and  Catos
restored ;  others  contended  for  the  continuance  of
monarchy  in  another  family,  and  among  the  chiefs
of  the  nobility  more  than  one  candidate  sprang  up
presently  to  claim  it.  The  debate  lasted  late  into  the
night ;  and  in  default  of  any  other  specific  arrange-
ment, the  consuls  continued  to  act  as  the  leaders  of
the  commonwealth.  Saturninus  obtained  a  decree
in  honour  of  the  restorers  of  public  freedom,  and
especially  of  Cassius  Chserea,  the  head  and  hand  of
the  conspiracy.  When  the  hero  approached  the
curule  chairs  and  demanded  the  watchword  of  the
consuls,  he  was  entrusted,  amidst  vociferous  accla-
mations, with  the  sacred  name  of  Liberty.  The  sena-
tors separated.  Chaerea  delivered  the  word  to  the
four  Urban  cohorts,  and  despatched  a  tribune  named
Lupus  to  execute  the  vengeance  of  the  state  on  the
wretched  Caesonia,  whose  reputed  influence  over  'her
husband  marked  her  as  an  object  of  particular  detest-
ation, and  on  her  child,  the  monster's  only  offspring.1
But  while  the  senate  deliberated,  the  praetorian
The  pr.Bto-  guards  had  resolved?  Accident  presented
cuudiJ£woff  them  with  an  object  to  rally  round,  and  a
'wewtue-and  keen  sense  of  interest  combined  with  the
glance  to  wm.  consciousness  of  power  to  determine  them
to  exert  the  strength  which  their  union  and  discipline
gave  them.  In  the  confusion  which  ensued  on  the
first  news  of  the  event,  several  of  their  body  had  flung
themselves  furiously  into  the  palace,  and  began  to
plunder  its  glittering  chambers.  None  dared  to  offer
them  any  opposition;  the  slaves  and  freedmen  fled
or  concealed  themselves.  One  of  the  inmates,  half-

1  Suet.  Calig.  60.;  Dion,  Ix.  1.;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xix,  2.
*  Gibbon,  Decl.  and  Fall,  ch.  iii.

A.D.4J-A.U.794. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  101

hidden  behind  a  curtain  in  an  obscure  corner,  was
dragged  forth  with  brutal  violence ;  and  great  was
the  intruders'  surprise  when  they  recognised  him  as
Claudius,  the  long  despised  and  neglected  uncle  of
the  murdered  emperor.1  He  sank  at  their  feet  al-
most senseless  with  terror :  but  the  soldiers  in  their
wildest  mood  still  respected  the  blood  of  the  Caesars,
and  instead  of  slaying  or  maltreating  the  suppliant,
the  brother  of  Grermanicus,  they  hailed  him,  more
in  jest  perhaps  than  earnest,  with  the  title  of  Im-
perator,  and  carried  him  off  to  their  camp.  During
the  night,  while  the  senate  was  still  debating,  and
the  soldiers,  now  collected  in  greater  numbers,  were
pressing  the  empire  which  he  dared  not  yet  accept,
with  more  determination  upon  him,  the  consuls,  in-
formed of  his  place  of  retreat,  sent  some  of  the  tri-
bunes to  invite  him  to  their  meeting,  to  deliver  his
opinion  upon  the  state  of  affairs.  To  this  summons
he  timidly  replied  that  he  was  detained  in  the  camp
by  force,  and  the  clash  of  arms  and  menacing  attitude
of  the  soldiers  seemed  sufficiently  to  confirm  the  ex-
cuse. In  the  morning,  when  it  was  found  that  the
senate  had  come  to  no  conclusion,  and  that  the  peo-
ple crowding  about  its  place  of  meeting  were  urging
it  with  loud  cries  to  appoint  a  single  chief,  and  were
actually  naming  him  as  the  object  of  their  choice,
Claudius  found  courage  to  suffer  the  praetorians  to
swear  allegiance  to  him,  and  at  the  same  time  pro-
mised them  a  donative  of  fifteen  thousand  sesterces
apiece.2  At  the  same  time  Agrippa,  who  had  quitted

1  Suet.  Claud,  10.:  "  Prorepsit  ad  solarium  proximum,  interque
praetenta  foribus  vela  se  abdidit." The  solarium  was  the  terrace  or
portico  outside  the  house;  the  windows  which  opened  upon  it  were
furnished  with  curtains. Some  historians  have  adopted  Bnrmann's
unnecessary  conjecture  "  scalarium,"  as  if  Claudius  had  hidden  him-
self under  the  stairs. Dion  says,  ev  ytavia  irov  trKoreivp ;  Josephus,
Kara  rt  TrpofffSarbv  6\lyats  0a0nlffi  x<up'l°v- Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  3.

2  Suet.  Claud.  10.:  "Primus  Caesarum  fidem  militis  etiam  prsemio
pigneratus." This  fatal  example  we  shall  find  regularly  followed  for
the  future.

102  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  JH.  XLIX.

the  half-burnt  bones  of  Caius  to  repair  to  the  long-
deserted  associate  in  whose  fortune  he  now  confided,
went  in  his  interest  to  the  senate,  and  exhorted  it  to
yield  with  a  good  grace  to  the  force  which  was  about
to  be  arrayed  against  it.  While  protesting  that  all
his  own  wishes  were  on  its  side,  he  declared  that
there  was  no  hope  of  its  success  in  the  impending
struggle.  The  prcetorians,  he  said,  besides  their
greater  numbers,  are  trained  and  veteran  soldiers  ;
our  forces  are  a  mere  handful  of  slaves  and  f reed-
men.1  He  earnestly  counselled  it  to  temporize  and
negociate.  On  the-  other  hand,  he  secretly  urged
Claudius  to  persist  in  his  claims  to  unconditional  sub-
mission, though  he  recommended  him  to  speak  of  the
august  assembly  in  terms  of  respect  and  consideration,
to  flatter  its  vanity  by  affecting  to  consult  it,  and  by
promising  to  approve  himself  in  all  things  a  ruler  of
a  different  stamp  from  the  tyrant  who  had  goaded  it
to  its  futile  assertion  of  liberty.2

The  senators  assembled  once  again  in  the  temple
The  senate  of  Jupiter  3 1  but  now  their  numbers  were

submits,  and  jj.  .1  ijj  j

accepts  ciau-  reduced  to  not  more  than  a  hundred,  and
peror.  even  these  met  rather  to  support  the  pre-

tensions of  certain  of  their  members  who  aspired  to
the  empire,  among  whom  were  Valerius  Asiaticus
and  Minucianus,  the  husband  of  Julia,  than  to  main-
tain the  cause  of  the  ancient  republic.  But  the  for-
midable array  of  the  praetorians,  who  had  issued  from
their  camp  into  the  city,  and  the  demonstrations  of
the  popular  will,  daunted  all  parties  in  the  assem-

1  The  Vigiles,  or  Urban  cohorts,  were  a  corps  of  freedmen,  ac-
cording to  the  institution  of  Augustus. Besides  them,  the  senators
might  have  armed  their  slaves.

2  Suet.  Dion,  //.  cc. ;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  4.

1  Josephus  says  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Ni/n^opos  or  Victor.  He
may  mean  Jupiter  Stator,  whose  temple  below  the  Capitoline  was
not  unfrequently  used  for  its  meetings  by  the  senate,  or,  more  pro-
bably, this  is  his  way  of  expressing  the  temple  of  Jupiter  in  the
Capitol,  to  whom  the  spoils  of  victory  (ytKtjT^pia)  were  dedicated.

A.1>.41 A.U.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  103

bly:  even  the  guards  in  which  it  confided,  vacillated,
and  Chserea  in  vain  protested,  almost  alone,  against
the  substitution,  as  he  said,  of  an  idiot  for  a  madman;
while  Sabinus  sullenly  declared  that  he  would  not
survive  the  advent  of  another  Csesar  to  power.  Pre-
sently the  Urban  cohorts  passed  over,  with  their  offi-
cers and  colours,  to  the  opposite  side.  All  was  lost :
the  praetorians,  thus  reinforced,  led  their  hero  to  the
palace,  and  there  he  commanded  the  senate  to  attend
upon  him.  Nothing  remained  but  to  obey  and  pass
the  decree,  which  had  now  become  a  formal  act  of
investiture,  by  which  the  name  and  honours  of  Im-
perator  were  bestowed  upon  the  new  chief  of  the
commonwealth.  Such  was  the  first  creation  of  an
emperor  by  the  military  power  of  the  praetorians:
we  shall  witness  at  no  distant  period  the  interference
of  a  still  stronger  power,  that  of  the  legions  them-
selves, in  the  work.1

Surrounded  by  drawn  swords  Claudius  had  found
courage  to  face  his  nephew's  murderers,  CUudin(1  pro.
and  to  vindicate  his  authority  to  the  citi-  *££'£<££
zens,  by  a  strong  measure  of  retribution,  [°f  andaCfew"
in  sending  Chserea  and  Lupus,  with  a  few  othera-
others  of  the  blood-embrued,  to  immediate  execution ;
while  Sabinus,  omitted  from  the  proscription,  kept
bis  word  to  his  associates  by  throwing  himself  on  his
own  sword.  Claudius  was  satisfied  with  this  act  of
vigour,  and  proceeded,  with  a  moderation  but  little
expected,  to  publish  an  amnesty  for  all  the  words
and  acts  of  the  late  interregnum.2  Nevertheless  for

1  Aurel.  Viet,  de  Caesar.  4. :  "  Ita  Romae  regia  potestas  firmata."
A.  coin  of  Claudius  bears  on  one  side  the  legend  IMPER.  RECEI-T.
'Jmperatore  recepto);  on  the  other,  PROCTOR  RECEPT.  (prsetorianis
receptis). Eckhel,  Doclr.  Numm.  vi.  235.

2  Suet.  Claud.  11.:  "Imperio  stabilito  nihil  antiquius  duxit  quam
id  biduum  . .  .  memorise  eximere." Dion,  Ix.  3. Orosius  speaks  in
magniloquent  language  of  this  act  of  clemency,  vii.  6. This  Christian
writer  takes  a  peculiar  view  of  the  reign  of  Claudius. At  its  com-

104  HISTORY OP  THE ROMANS  C

thirty  days  he  did  not  venture  to  come  himself
into  the  curia,  so  terrible  was  the  impression  thf
deed  of  blood  had  made  upon  him,  and  so  conscious
was  he  of  his  personal  inferiority  to  the  nobles  who
had  aspired  to  the  place  he  occupied  in  virtue  of  his
name  alone.  When  at  last  he  recovered  courage  to
take  his  seat  between  the  consuls,  he  caused  the  pre-
fect and  tribunes  of  his  guard  to  attend  constantly
about  his  person,  a  precaution  to  which  Tiberius  had

i  occasionally  consented,  but  which  Caius  had  boldly
disregarded.1  The  same  apprehensions  followed  him
from  the  curia  to  the  council-room,  to  the  hall  of
audience,  and  even  to  the  private  apartments  of  the
palace.  Before  the  curtains  which  veiled  the  en-
trance to  his  antechamber  guards  were  posted  to  ex-
amine all  who  entered.  Down  to  a  late  period  of  his
principate  even  women  and  children  were  not  ex-

V  empted  from  the  search,  lest  they  should  bear  about
them  concealed  weapons.  Satellites,  lance  in  hand,
were  stationed  at  the  head  and  foot  of  his  couch  at
the  banquet,  and  he  was  even  served  at  table  by  sol-
diers. This  jealous  custom  he  retained  to  the  end  of
his  reign,  and  it  became  an  established  etiquette  of
the  court  under  his  successors.  Even  when  he  visited
a  sick  friend,  for  Claudius  affected  as  far  as  possible
the  obliging  manners  of  a  patrician  citizen,  he  caused
the  chamber  of  the  invalid,  and  even  his  bedclothes,
to  be  carefully  examined.8

mencement,  he  says,  the  apostles  Peter  and  Paul  came  to  Rome,  the
faith  was  preached,  and  Rome  was  blessed  in  consequence  with  many
signal  advantages — a  merciful  emperor,  a  wise  administration,  pros-
perity at  home  and  abroad.  But  after  Claudius  expelled  the  Jews
or  Christians  from  the  city,  all  this  was  changed.  Rome  was  harassed
by  famine,  the  emperor  abandoned  himself  to  sanguinary  tyranny,
and  perished  in  the  end  miserably  by  poison.

1  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  15.

*  Suet.  CVa«d.35.:  "  Quanquam  jactator  civilitatis."  Dion  (Ix.  3)  :
of  the  guards  in  the  banquet  hall :  Kal  TOVTO  /t«i>  e{  ticflvov  /caraSejx-
6ty  K<d  StSpo  ael  ylyverat.  Of  the  personal  search  :  y  8e  tptvva  77  5id
ndvrwv  Sta  'Ovtiriracridvov  eVatWro.

A.D.41-A.U.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  105

The  personal  fears,  indeed,  of  the  new  emperor
contributed  with  a  kindly  and  placable  dis-

...  i •>•  •  .  T_- Fears  and  mo-

position  to  make  him  anxious  to  gain  his  gratum  of
subjects'  good- will  by  the  gentleness  and  ur-
banity of  his  deportment.1  Far  from  assuming  the  cold
reserve  of  Tiberius,  or  the  ferocious  pride  of  his
nearest  predecessor,  Claudius  showed  himself  full  of
consideration  for  all  who  had  any  claims  on  the  prince
and  father  of  the  people.  His  proclamation  of  am-
nesty was  followed  by  the  pardon  of  numerous  exiles
and  criminals,  especially  such  as  were  suffering  under
sentence  for  the  crime  of  majestas.  The  wretched
sisters  of  Caius  were  recalled,  and  allowed  to  return
to  their  domestic  duties  or  dissipations.2  Many  harsh
enactments  of  the  late  ruler  were  annulled,  and  com-
pensation made  wherever  it  was  possible.  Confiscated
estates  were  relinquished.  Moderation  and  generosity
characterized  the  fiscal  measures  of  the  opening  reign;
the  new-year's  presents,  which  Caius  had  not  only
accepted  but  solicited, — to  enable  him,  as  he  said,
to  bear  the  expense  of  rearing  a  daughter, — were
waived,  and  even  interdicted.  The  emperor  refused
the  inheritance  of  any  man  who  had  relatives  of  his
own ;  he  persisted,  moreover,  to  the  last  in  declining
the  prsenomen  of  Imperator.3  The  statues  of  which
Caius  had  plundered  Greece  and  Asia  were  generally
sent  back,  and  the  temples  he  had  ceased  for  his  own
cult, — as  for  instance,  that  of  Apollo  at  Miletus,
one  of  the  finest  edifices  of  the  age, — were  restored
to  their  proper  divinities.  The  honours  which  Clau-
dius paid  to  the  memory  of  his  brother  Grermanicus

1  Aurel.  Victor,  de  Caesar.  4. :  "  Pleraque  per  formidinem  tamen
egrcgie  consultabat."

2  Dion,  Ix.  4. Suet.  (Claud.  12.)  says  that  he  obtained  the  express
sanction  of  the  senate  for  every  such  act  of  grace.

3  Suet.  Claud.  12. This  peculiarity  is  confirmed  by  the  coins  and
inscriptions. See  Eckhel,  Doctr.  Numm.  vi.  247. The  moderation
of  Claudius  is  specified  also  by  Dion,  Ix.  5.

106  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  ctt.  XLlx.

and  his  parents,  as  well  as  to  Livia  and  to  Augustus,
were  accepted  as  a  pledge  that  he  would  take  these
illustrious  examples  for  his  model,  and  for  their  sake
he  was  excused  for  not  withholding  respect  even  from
Caius  and  Tiberius.1  The  discovery  Claudius  made,
or  pretended,  of  lists  of  intended  victims,  and  of  the
fatal  poison-chest,  added  to  the  horror  of  the  citi-
zens at  the  monster  from  whom  they  had  escaped,
and  made  them  doubly  grateful  for  the  goodness  of
his  successor.  The  popularity  of  the  new  prince,
though  manifested,  thanks  to  his  own  discretion,  by
no  such  grotesque  and  impious  flatteries  as  attended
on  the  opening  promise  of  Caius,  was  certainly  not
less  deeply  felt.  When,  a  few  months  after  his  ac-
cession, during  a  temporary  absence,  a  report  was
spread  of  his  assassination,  the  people  were  violently
excited ;  they  assailed  the  soldiers  and  the  senate
with  cries  of  treason  and  parricide,  and  were  not
appeased  till  the  chief  magistrates  came  forward,  and
solemnly  protested  that  their  favourite  was  safe,  and
returning  rapidly  to  the  city.2

The  confidence  indeed  of  the  upper  classes,  after
The  early  life  the  bitter  disappointment  they  had  so  lately
of  Claudius,  suffer^  was  not  to  be  so  lightly  won.  The

senate  and  knights  might  view  their  new  ruler  with
indulgence,  and  hope  for  the  best ;  but  they  had  been
too  long  accustomed  to  regard  him  as  proscribed  from
power  by  constitutional  unfitness,  as  imbecile  in  mind,
and,  which  was  perhaps  in  their  estimation  even  a
worse  defect,  as  misshapen  and  half-developed  in  phy-
sical force,  to  anticipate  from  him  a  wise  or  vigorous

1  Suet.  Claud.  11.:  "  Jusjurandum  neque  sanctius  sibi,  neque  cre-
brius  . .  .  quara  per  Augustum.  Avise  Livia;  divinos  honores ....
parentibus  infevias  publicas  .  .  .  .  Ne  Marcum  quidem  Antonium
inhonoratum  transmisit.  Tiberio  marmoreum  arcum  peregit."
Though  he  abolished  the  Acts  of  Caius— those  of  Tiberius  had  been
abolished  before — he  refused  to  make  a  festival  of  the  day  of  his
asac.ssination.

'  Suet.  Claud.  12.

A.T).]-A.u.7»4.  DiNDBR THE EMPIRE.  107

administration.1  The  neglect  with  which  his  edu
cation  was  treated  in  his  early  years  when  Hehadbeen
he  was  abandoned  to  the  care  of  nurses,  and  ••tfcei  »nd

.,  ..  _  ,  ,  contempt  for

the  instructions  of  a  coarse  and  senseless  h™  infirmities
pedagogue,  who  exasperated  his  infirmities  body,
by  ill-usage,  was  owing  probably  to  the  crime  which
a  Eoman  parent  seldom  forgave,  the  weakness  of  his
constitution  and  the  distortion  of  his  frame.8  In  an-
other rank  he  would  have  been  exposed  perhaps  in
infancy ;  as  the  son  of  Drusus  and  Antonia  he  was
permitted  to  live :  but  he  became  from  the  first  an
object  of  disgust  to  his  parents,  who  put  him  gene-
rally out  of  their  sight,  and  left  him  to  grow  up  in
the  hands  of  hirelings  without  judgment  or  feeling.
The  child  was  born  at  Lugdunum,  in  744,  on  the
first  of  August,  the  auspicious  day  of  the  dedication
of  the  altar  of  Augustus,  and  received  the  name  of
Tiberius  Claudius  Drusus,  to  which  was  afterwards
added  that  of  Grermanicus,  on  the  premature  decease
of  his  father.  His  childhood  and  youth  were  one
long  sickness,  uncheered  by  parental  affection ;  and
he  seems  to  have  been  deemed  from  the  first  unfit
for  any  bodily  exercises.  His  mother  was  not  ashamed
to  call  him  a  monster  of  a  man,  an  abortion  of  nature :
the  greatest  expression  of  contempt  she  could  apply
to  any  one  was  to  call  him  more  a  fool  than  her  soil/
Claudius.  His  grandmother  Li  via  held  him  in  dis-
dain, and  seldom  even  spoke  to  him :  her  admoni-
tions were  given  in  short  and  sharp  letters,  or  con-
veyed to  him  by  the  mouth  of  others.  His  sister
Livilla,  on  once  hearing  that  he  might  possibly  be

1  Aurel.  Viet,  de  Caesar.  4. :  "  Et  sane  quia  vecors  erat  mitissimus
videbatur  imprudentibus."

2  Suet.  Claud.  2.:  "  Etinm  post  tutelam  receptam  alieni  arbitrii  et
sub  paedajjogo  fuit;  quern  barbarum  ct  olim  superjumentarium,  ex
industria  sibi  appositum,  ut  se  quibnscunque  de  causis  quam  saavis-
sime  coerceret." Publius,  the  eldest  son  of  the  first  Scipio  Afri-
canus,  is  perhaps  the  only  known  instance  of  a  Roman  of  his  birth
and  station  withheld,  under  the  commonwealth,  from  public  affair*
by  the  delicacy  of  his  constitution. Cic.  Brut.  19.;  Off".  33.

108  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xtrx.

called  hereafter  to  power,  exclaimed  loudly  at  the
unworthy  fate  of  the  Eoman  people  to  fall  under
such  a  governor.  Augustas  himself,  who  should  have
known  human  nature  better,  and  who  might  have
felt  sympathy  with  bodily  infirmity,  could  not  endure
that  any  of  his  race  should  lack  the  personal  qualities
which  befitted  the  highest  station,  and  slighted  the
poor  youth  both  in  public  and  in  his  own  family.
Some  fragments  of  the  emperor's  correspondence  are
citedx  to  show  the  little  esteem  in  which  he  held
him.1  Thus  he  consults  with  Livia  how  the  youth  is
to  be  treated,  and  how  far  it  will  be  proper  to  pro-
duce him  m  public.  He  may  be  suffered  to  attend
at  a  pontifical  banquet,  if  he  will  submit  to  conform
to  the  example  and  guidance  of  a  cousin;  but  he
cannot  be  permitted  to  witness  the  games  of  the  cir-
cus from  the  conspicuous  elevation  of  the  imperial
lodge.  He  must  not  be  seen  at  the  festival  of  the
Latin  Ferise,  either  at  Alba  or  in  Eome.  If  he  can
follow  the  sacred  procession  up  the  mountain  with
his  brother  Grermanicus,  people  will  ask  why  he  is
not  entrusted  with  municipal  office,  which  of  course
is  out  of  the  question.  I  wish,  says  Augustus,  that
the  poor  creature  would  take  pains  to  imitate  some
respectable  personage  in  bearing,  gait,  and  gesture.
.  .  .  .  You  may  imagine,  he  adds,  hoiv  sur-
prised I  was  to  find  something  to  like  in  his  de-
claiming, for  you  know  that  he  cannot  ordinarily
even  speak  so  as  to  be  understood.  With  this  strong
prejudice  against  his  grandchild,  we  cannot  wonder
that  the  emperor  allowed  him  to  enjoy  no  higher
distinction  than  the  formal  dignity  of  the  Augurate,
and  that  in  the  distribution  of  his  legacies,  in  which
he  carefully  marked  the  degrees  of  his  esteem,  he
left  him  no  more  than  the  trifling  bequest  of  eight
hundred  sesterces.2

1  Suet.  Claud.  4.

*  Suet.  Claud.  4.  Champagny  observes  (Cesars,  i.  331.):  "  Auguste

».!>.<  l-A.u.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  109

The  obscurity  in  which  the  young  man  was  retained
by  Augustus,  continued  still  to  envelope  withheld

i  .  i ,•«  , • • i  TT  i« from  active

him  under  the  next  prmcipate.  He  peti-  we,  he
tioned  Tiberius  to  be  suffered  to  partake  of  hfmseffsto
the  honours  and  burdens  of  the  state,  but  ubS
the  empty  distinction  of  the  consular  ornaments  was
the  utmost  that  was  conceded  to  him.  After  this
mortification  he  relinquished  all  hope  of  public  ser-
vice, and  retired  to  his  country  seats,  where  he  asso-
ciated, as  was  reported,  with  none  but  the  meanest
companions.  The  men  of  his  own  class,  indeed,
were  too  busy  in  paying  court  to  the  emperor  or  his
favourites  to  attend  to  a  despised  outcast :  his  early
friend  Agrippa,  as  we  have  seen,  deliberately  cast  him
off  as  an  unprofitable  acquaintance.  Yet  there  is  no
evidence  of  his  having  replaced  these  selfish  com-
panions by  less  worthy  associates.  The  charges  of
drunkenness,  gambling,  and  addiction  to  women,
all  which  were  now  heaped  upon  him,  are  probably
exaggerated.1  The  extent  of  his  literary  labours,  in
which  he  rivalled  the  most  industrious  students  of
antiquity,  seems  alone  to  preclude  the  possibility  of
excessive  habitual  irregularity.  Claudius,  we  are  told,
composed  a  history  of  Eoman  affairs  from  the  battle
of  Actium  in  no  less  than  forty-one  books :  to  this
he  added  a  biography  of  himself,  or  memoir  of  his
own  times,  in  eight,  a  history  of  the  Etruscans  in
twenty,  and  of  the  Carthaginians  in  eight  also.8  Be-
sides these  ponderous  historical  works,  he  composed  a

ne  1'aimait  pas;  il  n'en  fit  jamais  qu'un  Augure:  il  le  trouvait  trop
imbecile  pour  faire  autre  chose  que  deviner  1'avenir."

1  Suet.  Claud.  5.: "Super  veterem  segnitise notam,  ebrietatis
quoque  et  alese  infamiam  subiit." Comp.  c.  33. T&c.Ann.  xii.  49.:
"  Quum  privatus  olim  conversatione  scurrarum  iners  otium  oblec-
taret."

2  The  first  of  these  works  he  began  originally  from  the  death  of
Caesar,  but  was  admonished  by  his  mother  and  L  via,  that  the  theme
was  ill  suited  to  his  position. Of  his  own  life  he  wrote  "magis
inepte  quam  ineleganter."  which  seems  to  mean  that  the  style  was
better  than  the  subject.

110  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  XUX.

defence  of  Cicero  against  the  criticisms  of  Asinms
Grallus,  a  comedy  in  the  Greek  language,  and  a  trea-
tise on  the  art  of  dice-playing.1  It  may  be  suspected,
indeed,  that  a  great  part  of  the  labour  of  these  va-
rious compositions  was  shared  by  the  grammarians
and  learned  freedmen  with  whom  the  literary  Eoman
generally  surrounded  himself2;  but  whatever  allow-
ance we  make  for  their  assistance,  it  will  still  appear
that  he  possessed  a  power  of  application  quite  in-
consistent with  the  weakness  of  intellect  which  his
maligners  so  freely  imputed  to  him.  Nevertheless
these  respectable  occupations  gained  him  no  consi-
deration. Tiberius  treated  him  to  the  last  with  a
contumely  and  injustice  which  seems  to  have  revolted
the  citizens.  Caius,  out  of  deference  to  the  general
sentiment,  elevated  him  to  the  consulship,  and  allowed
him  to  appear  at  the  spectacles  in  the  place  which
befitted  him,  where  he  sometimes  represented  the
absent  emperor  himself;  but  in  private  he  was  still
subjected  to  the  grossest  indignities,  and  the  empe-
ror's boon  companions  were  encouraged  to  make  sport
of  his  reputed  imbecility.  Thus,  for  instance,  if  he
came  at  any  time  late  to  the  imperial  supper  table,
the  guests  would  spread  themselves  on  the  couches
and  keep  him  standing;  if  he  fell  asleep  after  eating,
they  would  put  rough  gloves  on  his  hands,  to  enjoy

1  Suet.  Claud.  41,  42. The  Etruscan  and  Carthaginian  histories
were  written  in  Greek:  I  suspect  from  this  that  Claudius's  historical
works  were  mostly  compilations,  or  even  transcripts. The  Latin
language  probably  afforded  him  no  originals  on  these  foreign  sub-
jects. Claudius  had  also  some  grammatical  fancies. He  wished  to
introduce  three  new  letters  into  the  Roman  alphabet,  the  digamma,
the  psi,  and  another  which  is  not  known. See  Lipsius's  note  on
Tac.  Ann.  xi.  14. The^  and  V/  may  still  be  traced  on  some  monu-
ments of  this  reign,  but  they  did  not  survive  it.

2  Suetonius  (/.  c.)  mentions  a  Sulpicius  Flavus  as  assisting,  and
the  great  historian  Livy  as  encouraging,  him  in  his  historical  labours,
In  the  same  way  we  read  of  Ateius  Philologus  making  historical  col-
lections for  the  use  of  Sallust  and  Asinius  Pollio. Suet,  de  illuxtr.
Gramm.  10.

A.D.41-A.U.794.  (JNDER THE EMPIRE.  Ill

his  confusion  when  he  rubbed  his  eyes  on  waking.1
Such  were  the  consequences  at  Home  and  in  the
palace  of  being  born  of  a  weakly  constitution,  and  of
having  suffered  from  paralysis,  of  halting  on  one  leg,
of  trembling  in  hand  and  head,  and  of  having  per-
haps the  speech  affected  with  thick  and  imperfect
utterance.2  Even  the  good  nature  which  the  poor
man  exhibited  under  these  trials  of  his  temper  was
turned  into  ridicule,  and  denounced  as  a  sign  of  the
weakness  of  his  understanding.  That  the  judgment
of  one  from  whom  the  practical  knowledge  of  men
and  things  had  been  withheld  was  not  equal  to  his
learning,  and  that  the  infirmities  of  his  body  affected
his  powers  of  decision,  his  presence  of  mind,  and
steadfastness  of  purpose,  may  easily  be  imagined :
nevertheless,  it  may  be  allowed  that  in  a  private
station,  and  anywhere  but  at  Eome,  Claudius  would
have  passed  muster  as  a  respectable,  and  not  perhaps
an  useless,  member  of  society.

The  opinion  which  is  here  given  of  this  prince's
character  may  possibly  be  influenced  in  Claudiu9  af_
some  degree  by  the  study  of  his  counte-  ut^the^Hcy
nance  in  the  numerous  busts  still  existing,  of  A"sU8tus-
which  represent  it  as  one  of  the  most  interesting  of
the  whole  imperial  series.  If  his  figure,  as  we  are
told,  was  tall,  and  when  sitting  appeared  not  ungrace-
ful, his  face,  at  least  in  repose,  was  eminently  hand-
some. But  it  is  impossible  not  to  remark  in  it  an
expression  of  pain  and  anxiety  which  forcibly  arrests
our  sympathy.  It  is  the  face  of  an  honest  and  well-
meaning  man,  who  feels  himself  unequal  to  the

1  Suet.  Claud.  8. Comp.  the  satirical  lutlux  de  morte  Claudii,  or
Apocolocyiitosis  of  Seneca  (in  fin.):  Apparuit  suliito  C.  Ctesar,  et
petere  ilium  in  servitutem  coepit:  producit  testes  qui  ilium  viderant
ab  illo  flagris,  ferulis,  colaphis  vapulantem."

2  Suet.  Claud.  30.;  Dion,  Ix.  2.;  Juvenal,  vi.  620.:  "  Tremulum
capui  ....  manantia  labrn." Senec.  Apocol.:  "  Bonre  statura,  bene
canum  ....  assidue  caput  movere,  dextrum  pedem  trahere  .  .  .  .  re-
epondisse  nescio  quid  perturbato  sono  et  voce  confusa."

112  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  ca,  xux.

task  imposed  upon  him.  There  is  the  look  of  per-
plexity in  which  he  may  have  pored  over  the  mys-
teries of  Etruscan  lore,  carried  to  the  throne  of  the
world,  and  engaged  in  the  deepest  problems  of
finance  and  citizenship.  There  is  the  expression  of
fatigue  both  of  mind  and  body,  which  speaks  of
midnight  watches  over  books,  varied  with  midnight
carouses  at  the  imperial  table,  and  the  fierce  caresses
of  rival  mistresses.  There  is  the  glance  of  fear,  not
of  open  enemies,  but  of  pretended  friends;  the  re-
miniscence of  wanton  blows,  and  the  anticipation  of
the  deadly  potion.  Above  all,  there  is  the  anxious
glance  of  dependence,  which  seems  to  cast  about  for
a  model  to  imitate,  for  ministers  to  shape  a  policy,
and  for  satellites  to  execute  it.  The  model  Claudius
found  was  the  policy  of  the  venerated  Augustus ;
but  his  ministers  were  the  most  profligate  of  women,
and  the  most  selfish  of  emancipated  slaves.  This
imitation  of  the  measures  of  the  great  founder  of
the  empire  is  indeed  the  key  to  the  public  policy  of
the  Claudian  principate.  Both  at  home  and  abroad
we  shall  find  the  new  ruler  following  the  lines  already
traced  by  his  illustrious  ancestor ;  and  our  examina-
tion of  his  career  of  sovereignty  will  place  in  the
strongest  light  the  points  of  difference  between  the
middle  of  the  eighth  century  of  Eome  and  its  ter-
mination.

I.  The  commencement  of  the  new  reign  was
i.  Military  marked  by  the  renewed  activity  of  the
o?  thepre?gn  armies  on  the  frontiers.  Servius  Gralba,
r  ciaudim.  confirmed  m  his  command  on  the  Khine,
led  his  forces  across  that  river  into  the  territory  of
the  Chatti,  whom  he  had  found  some  pretext  for
visiting  with  the  terror  of  the  Koman  arms.  Corbulo
gained  some  successes  over  the  Chauci,  constructed
roads  and  canals  for  the  further  prosecution  of  his
enterprises,  and  was  preparing  to  accomplish  the  long-
intermitted  task  of  German  subjugation,  when  com-

A.T>.4l-A.n.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  113

manded  to  desist  from  so  large  and  perilous  an  under-
taking.1 At  the  same  time,  at  the  southern  extremity
of  the  empire,  the  majesty  of  Eome  was  vindicated
against  the  Maurusians,  a  people  of  the  still  unsettled
province  of  Mauretania.2  Suetonius  Paullinus  was
the  first  of  the  Eomans  that  crossed  the  range  of  the
Atlas.  Penetrating  a  ten  days'  march  southward,  he
reached  a  river  which  was  called  the  Grir,  one  of  the
streams  perhaps  which  fall  from  the  southern  slopes
of  those  mountains,  and  are  lost  in  the  sands  of  the
Sahara.8  But  Claudius  determined  to  carry  into
effect  the  plan  which  Augustus  had  prematurely  an-
nounced, of  an  invasion  and  thorough  reduction  of
the  great  island  of  Britain.  As  his  ancestor  had  pro-
posed to  follow  in  person  the  steps  of  Julius  Csesar,
so  Claudius  was  not  content  to  leave  this  important
achievement  in  the  hands  of  his  lieutenants,  but,
untrained  as  he  was  to  arms,  he  quitted  the  cares  of
administration  in  the  capital,  and  joined  his  legions
on  the  further  side  of  the  Channel.4  The  particulars
of  this  deliberate  aggression  will  deserve  to  be  fully
related  in  another  place :  it  is  enough  here  to  say
that  it  was  completely  successful ;  and  though  little
resistance  was  offered,  and  Claudius  himself  found  no
enemy  to  confront  him  in  the  field,  it  was  of  suffi-
cient importance  to  merit  the  distinction  of  a  triumph,
which  the  emperor  claimed,  and  led  with  great  pomp
and  ceremony  in  the  year  797.  Claudius  proved

J  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  18,  20.  Our  authorities  do  not  distinguish  be-
tween this  and  the  Corbulo  who  has  been  mentioned  under  the  reign
of  Tiberius.  1  have  there  shown  that  they  were  certainly  different
persons.  Of  this  Corbulo  more  will  be  said  on  a  later  occasion.

2  Dion,  Ix.  9.

a  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  v.  1.  This  river  seems  to  have  been  confounded
with  the  Niger,  of  which  the  ancients  had  some  vague  reports.  The
size,  direction,  and  periodical  swelling  of  the  Niger  suggested  the
idea  of  its  connexion  with  the  Nile,  which  was  not  quite  extinct  in
recent  times.  "  Et  Gir  notissimus  amnis  ^Kthiopum,  siraili  mentitus
gurgite  Nilum."  Claudian,  de  laud.  Stil.  i.  252.

4  Suet.  Claud.  17.;  Dion,  Ix.  19.  foil.

VOL.  yj.  I

114  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XLix.

himself  not  unworthy  of  the  honour,  which  of  all
Roman  conquerors  Sulla  and  Augustus  had  alone
usurped  before  him,  of  extending  the  limits  of  the
pomo3rium,  in  token  that  the  frontiers  of  the  empire
had  been  advanced  under  his  auspices.1

The  foundation  of  colonies  had  been  one  of  the
Foundation  great  public  merits  of  Augustus.  It  had
ofcoionie..  gratified  the  soldiers;  it  had  given  indepen-
dence to  many  needy  citizens ;  it  had  proved  his  per-
sonal disinterestedness,  in  the  relinquishment  of  tracts
of  tributary  domain,  and  the  abandonment  of  some
sources  of  the  imperial  revenue.  On  the  other  hand,
the  parsimony  of  Tiberius  had  been  manifested  in  his
abstaining  from  these  popular  benefactions.  No  colony
of  Tiberius  is  mentioned;  none  of  his  careless  and
grasping  successor  Caius.  But  Claudius  was  distin-
guished among  the  Eoman  imperators  by  his  politic
munificence  in  this  particular.  It  was  his  ambition
to  lengthen  the  cords  and  strengthen  the  stakes  of
the  empire ; — he  restored  some  impoverished  found-
ations in  Italy,  and  established  new  colonies  in  the
frontier  provinces.  The  famous  cities  of  Treves,
Cologne  and  Colchester  owe  their  origin,  among
others,  to  his  hand,  and  their  celebrity  partly  per-
haps to  the  wisdom  with  which  he  chose  their  sites,
and  the  bounty  with  which  he  endowed  them.2

From  his  place  between  the  consuls  in  the  senate-
Huconductm  house,  Claudius,  as  the  chief  of  the  Eoman

regard  to  IT  i  i .

foreign  affairs,  people,  dispensed  crowns  to  subject  poten-
tates with  imperial  munificence.  The  suppliants  who

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  23. :  "  Pomcerium  uuxit  Caesar,  more  prisco,  quo
iis  qui  protulere  imperium,  etiam  terminos  urbis  propagare  datur.
Nee  tamen  duces  Romani,  quanquam  magnis  nationibus  subactis,
usurpaverent  nisi  L. Sulla  et  D.  Augustus." Aurel. Victor,  de
Casar.4.:  "Ketenti  fines  seu  dati  imperio  Romano." Spanheim
traces  on  the  medals  of  Claudius  that  he  received  the  title  of  Im-
perator  no  less  than  twenty-seven  times. Spanh.  de  usu  Num.  ii.
404. Augustus  had  received  it  only  twenty-one  times. Tac.  Ann.
i.  9.

2  See  A.  Zumpt,  "de  colomis  Uomanormn  militaribus." Comm
Epiyr.  i.  385.

en.  XT.TX.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  11.5

had  thronged  the  court  of  Tiberius  and  Caius  were
relieved  from  their  painful  attendance,  and  sent  to
play  the  tyrant  in  their  turn  at  home.  Antiochus,
long  a  petitioner  in  the  antechamber  of  the  senate,
was  now  restored  to  the  throne  of  Commagene  ;  and
Mithridates,  who  claimed  descent  from  the  great
Eastern  hero,  received  a  grant  of  the  kingdom  of  the
Bosphorus,  for  which  Polemo,  its  recent  occupant,  was
indemnified  with  a  district  of  Cilicia.1  The  services
of  Herod  Agrippa,  who  had  managed  so  adroitly  to
aid  in  securing  the  empire  for  Claudius,  received  a
brilliant  and  complete  reward,  not  only  in  the  con-
firmation of  his  authority  in  Galilee,  but  in  the  ad-
dition to  his  dominions  of  Samaria  and  Judea.  By
the  cession  of  this  wealthy  province  the  kingdom  of
the  Great  Herod  was  once  more  reunited,  and  con-
stituted far  the  most  important  of  all  the  vassal  so-
vereignties of  the  empire.  At  the  same  time  the  little
district  of  Chalcis  in  Syria  was  erected  into  a  princi-
pality for  a  younger  brother  of  Agrippa.  The  Jews,
though  they  had  welcomed  the  transfer  of  their  coun-
trv  from  Antipas  and  Herodias  to  the  less  capricious
jurisdiction  of  a  Eoman  proconsul,  accepted  this  new
arrangement  with  marked  satisfaction.  Agrippa  was
personally  popular  with  them,  and  the  memory  of  the
first  Herod,  tyrant  as  he  was,  was  still  held  in  admi-
ration by  the  great  body  of  the  people.  But  besides
this,  the  emperor  had  accompanied  his  new  disposi-
tions with  decrees,  in  which  the  impious  encroach-
ments of  Caius  on  their  national  privileges  were
formally  disavowed,  the  malice  of  their  oppugners  in
the  great  Eastern  cities  restrained,  and  the  free  en-
joyment of  their  religious  usages  specifically  con-
firmed. The  return  of  Agrippa  to  Palestine  and  his
entry  into  Jerusalem  was  a  national  triumph.  He
studied  to  retain  the  approbation  of  his  subjects  by

1  Dion,  lx.  8.
I  2

116  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.

acts  of  munificence,  and  flattered  their  pride  by  his
show  of  independence.  But  when  he  ventured  on
the  royal  act  of  extending  and  strengthening  the
fortifications  of  his  capital,  he  was  sternly  reminded
of  the  realities  of  his  position  by  the  interdict  of
the  proconsul  of  Syria,  and  compelled  to  desist.  Nor
could  the  circumstances  of  his  own  kingdom  suffer
him  to  forget  that  his  subjects  were  divided  into  two
rival  parties,  whose  claims  he  was  required  constantly
to  compromise,  and  whom  he  could  hardly  hope,  with
all  his  craft,  to  combine  into  a  nation  of  common  and
united  sentiments.  While  the  Jewish  element,  bent
fanatically  on  the  maintenance  of  its  ancient  customs,
and  jealous  of  every  transgression  of  its  cherished
principles,  expected  him  to  conform  strictly  to  its
religious  rites,  to  court  its  priesthood,  and  offer  sacri-
fice in  its  temples,  the  Pagans  and  Hellenizers,  hardly
less  numerous  or  powerful,  elevated  him  above  all
laws  and  usages,  and  pressed  on  him  with  impetuous
zeal  the  attributes  of  divinity.  At  Jerusalem  Agrippa
enacted  the  Jew  with  solemn  gait  and  tragic  counten-
ance, amidst  general  acclamation ;  but  at  Caesarea  he
allowed  the  more  genial  part  of  the  Greek  to  be  im-
posed on  him.  It  was  at  a  festival  in  this  Hellenic
capital,  after  an  harangue  he  had  addressed  to  the  po-
pulace, that  they  shouted,  It  is  the  voice  of

Death  of  7  '  , J  _ '  '

Herod  a,  god  not  of  a  man. His  mirth  was  turned

Agrippa.  »  J

into  sadness.  He  was  smitten  at  the  same
instant  with  a  sore  disease,  and  died  after  a  few  days'
illness,  at  the  premature  age  of  fifty-four.1  This  un-
expected catastrophe  seems  to  have  unhinged  the  plans
of  the  Roman  government.  So  important  a  charge
as  the  sovereignty  of  Palestine  could  be  intrusted  only
to  a  tried  servant  of  the  emperor ;  and  even  Agrippa
had  given  cause  of  jealousy  by  the  relations  he  had
cultivated  with  the  princes  on  his  frontier.  None  of

1  Josephns,  Antiq.  Jud.  xix.  8.:  Act.  Apost.  xii.,  A.T  797,  A,D.  44.

CH.  Xtlx.  tNDEH THE EMPIRE.  117

his  family  merited  to  succeed  him.  His  brother  Herod
was  allowed  to  continue  in  the  obscure  dignity  of  his
petty  chiefdom,  and  his  son  Agrippa,  already  resident
as  a  hostage  in  Eome,  was  retained  there  in  honour-
able custody;  while  the  dominions  of  the  great
Idumean  reverted  once  more  to  the  control  of  the
proconsul  of  Syria,  and  acquiesced,  with  a  few  un-
easy murmurs,  in  its  full  incorporation  with  the
empire.

II.  From  the  day  that  the  first  Caesar  fell  beneath
the  daggers  of  a  senatorial  faction,  it  had  n.  Ci»u<uu.
become  a  tradition  of  the  state  to  regard  SglTityofthe
the  senate  as  the  natural  counterpoise  to  the  senate>
emperor,  and  as  a  rival  whom  it  was  necessary  foi
him  to  amuse  with  flatteries,  or  control  by  force.  The
mutual  jealousy  of  these  two  co-ordinate  authorities,
long  kept  in  check  by  the  discretion  of  Augustus,  had
been  exasperated  by  a  sense  of  mutual  wrong  under
Tiberius,  and  had  broken  out  in  furious  violence
under  his  overbearing  successor.  But  Claudius,  on
his  accession,  freely  acknowledged  that  the  overthrow
of  Caius  by  a  just  retribution  had  convinced  him
of  the  folly  of  all  hostile  demonstrations,  and  he
solemnly  proclaimed  his  intention  of  constituting  the
senate  the  friend  and  confidant  of  his  own  adminis-
tration.1

It  was a fundamental principle of  the  Kornaii
municipal  polity  that the citizen  should  After  the  ex-

, .-,*•  . , .  ,,  , .  . , . ample  of  Au-

contribute  in  his  person,  the  subject  in  his  guntu.,  he
means,  to  the  service  of  the  state. The  «rfti»«mB.
great  problem  of  statesmen  was  to  make  these  two
obligations  balance  one  another ;  to  compensate  the
commonwealth  for  the  immunity  from  taxation  of  a
portion  of  its  children  by  laying  on  them  the  most
onerous  and  important  employments. The  members
of  the  senate  were  made  responsible  for  the  discharge

1  Joseph.  Hell.  Jud.  ii.  11.  2.

tig  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  C

of  the  highest  magistracies ;  but  in  order  that  these
offices  should  be  adequately  filled  by  men  of  fortune
equal  to  their  expense,  and  of  consideration  suitable
to  their  dignity,  it  was  necessary  to  maintain  this
functionary  reservoir  constantly  at  the  same  exalted
level,  to  prevent  it  sinking  from  the  poverty  or  mean-
ness of  its  individual  members  too  low  to  furnish  the
required  supply.  Hence  the  expediency  of  the  fre-
quent revisions  of  the  list  of  the  senate,  such  as,  under
the  republic,  had  been  executed  by  the  censors  at
rapidly  recurring  intervals,  and  had  been  repeated
more  than  once  by  Augustus.  But  the  last  of  these
solemn  inquisitions,  on  which  the  eyes  of  the  citizens
had  always  turned  with  intense  and  even  superstitious
interest,  had  taken  place  as  far  back  as  the  year  757. 1
Tiberius  had  shrunk  from  the  labour  or  the  odium
of  renewing  them.  Caius  had  wantonly  neglected  to
do  so.  It  was  left  for  Claudius,  whose  mind  teemed
with  antique  prepossessions,  and  who  was  appalled
by  no  drudgery,  to  follow  the  example  of  the  founder
of  the  empire,  and  consolidate  afresh  the  basis  of  the
civil  administration.  The  fierce  independence  of  the
fathers  had  been  tamed  by  indolence  or  fear,  and  we
hear  no  more  on  this  occasion  of  the  resentment  of
the  expelled  members,  or  the  murmurs  of  the  body  in
general.  Claudius  demanded  of  them  a  true  state-
ment of  their  means,  and  insisted  on  their  possessing
the  requisite  qualification ;  nor  can  we  suppose  that
he  neglected  the  show  at  least  of  inquiring  into  their
manner  of  life,  and  visiting  with  condemnation  such
as  appeared  unworthy  to  stand  at  the  head  of  Eoman
society.  But  he  was  mild  and  temperate  in  the  ex-
ercise of  his  authority.  Having  no  political  factions
to  court  or  intimidate,  he  had  no  need  to  expose

1  Dion,  IT.  13.  This  seems  to  have  been  the  last  extraordinary
Lectio  Senatus;  but  probably  the  censure  of  the  year  767,  just
before  Augustus's  death,  did  not  pass  without  some  special  cases  of
removal.

CH.  XLIX.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  119

himself  to  the  charge  of  political  partiality ;  and  he
showed  himself  liberal  in  supplying  the  needs  of  noble
but  impoverished  families.  Nevertheless,  this  revision
thinned  the  benches  of  the  curia,  and  showed  the  citi-
zens but  too  plainly  that  the  progress  of  affairs,  even
since  the  time  of  Caesar  and  Augustus,  had  concen-
trated wealth  in  few  hands,  and  swept  many
illustrious  houses  into  obscurity.  To  remedy  v^ancicsfrom
this  evil,  to  obliterate  the  traces  of  this  social  families  m  the
revolution,  Claudius  proposed  to  call  up  to
the  senate  the  wealthiest  of  the  knights  and  even  of
lower  ranks.1  Nor  did  he  confine  his  views  within  the
limits  of  Italy.  The  senate  had  already  received  ac-
cessions from  Spain,  Africa,  the  Narbonensis,  and
other  provinces.  The  Jus  Honorum,  or  claim  of  ad-
mission to  the  senate  and  the  magistracies,  which  were
filled  from  the  senate  or  served  themselves  to  re-
plenish it,  had  been  formerly  conceded  to  the  citizens
of  many  foreign  communities,  by  Caesar,  Pompeius,
and  Augustus.  The  principle  thus  acknowledged
awaited  further  extension,  on  fitting  occa-  He  open,
sions,  from  every  new  ruler;  and  Claudius  honouJftothe
had  both  precedent  and  expediency  in  his  Gau1'*
favour  when  he  decreed  its  application  to  the  whole
of  Gallia  Comata,  or  at  least,  as  the  first  step  in  the
process,  to  the  JEdui,  the  first  Gallic  ally  of  Kome,
the  friends  and  brothers,  as  they  had  been  styled,  of
the  Eoman  people.  This  preference  of  the  Gauls
over  other  subjects  was  justified  by  their  tried  fidelity
during  the  period  which  had  elapsed  since  their  con-
quest. It  was  tendered  as  a  boon  at  the  close  of  their
first  century  of  submission.  But  it  was  really  owing
to  the  favour  with  which  the  emperor  regarded  their
country  as  his  own  birthplace,  and  still  more,  per-
haps, to  the  intimate  relations  his  father  and  brother
had  held  with  it  during  their  long  administration

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  25.;  Dion,  Ix.  29.

120  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  XL1X

there.  The  measure  was  received  indeed  with  some
murmurs  of  discontent :  undoubtedly  it  deserved  to
be  explained  more  luculently,  both  as  to  its  motives
and  anticipated  results,  than  in  the  rambling  and  in-
conclusive arguments  actually  used  by  its  propounder,
as  we  may  judge  from  the  fragment  of  the  speech  in
which  he  recommended  it,  preserved  on  a  brazen
tablet  which  was  discovered  three  centuries  ago  at
Lyons.1  But  its  advantages  required  in  fact  no
imperial  expositor.  On  the  one  hand,  the  attraction
of  provincial  notabilities  to  Rome  might  be  regarded
as  a  security  for  the  faithful  service  of  the  connexions
they  left  behind ;  on  the  other,  the  wants  and  interests
of  the  province  might  thus  be  brought  directly  to  the
knowledge  of  the  imperial  city  itself:  in  short,  it  was
a  step  towards  the  fusion  of  the  two  great  elements
of  society  at  the  time,  an  advance  in  the  development
of  political  unity,  and  as  such  it  assisted  in  the  genial
task  of  riveting  the  sympathies  of  the  world  together.
At  a  later  period  another  happy  consequence  ap-
peared, in  the  effect  produced  on  the  higher  classes
at  Rome  by  the  simpler  tastes  of  these  representatives
of  provincial  manners.  The  senseless  extravagance  of
the  children  of  the  conquerors,  and  their  vile  imita-
tion of  the  Greeks  and  Orientals,  were  shamed  by
the  decent  self-respect  of  the  yet  uncorrupted  bar-
barians.2

1  See  the  contents  of  the  "  Tabulae  Kress  duae  Lugduni  erutte  ad
latus  S.  Sebastiani,  A.  1 529,  quae  Claudii  Imp.  orationem  continent
super  civitate  Gallis  danda,"  in  an  excursion  of  Lipsius  to  Tac.  Ann.
xi.  23.  They  hare  been  published  with  a  commentary  by  Zell  in
Germany,  according  to  Hoeck's  references:  but  I  have  not  seen  the
tract  myself.  It  is  curious  to  compare  this  genuine  transcript  of  the
emperor's  words  with  the  paraphrase,  if  such  it  may  be  called,  of
Tacitus  (Ann.  xi.  24.);  which  is  important,  as  showing  what  degree
of  authenticity  may  be  claimed  for  the  speeches  and  conversations  he
attributes  to  his  characters.

4  Tac.  Ann.  iii.  55. :  "  Novi  homines  e  municipiis  et  coloniis  atque
ctium  provinciis  in  Senatum  crebro  assumpti  domesticam  parcimo-
niam  intulerunt "

CH.  XLIX.  UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  121

The  order  thus  revised  and  rendered  worthy  of  it*
imperial  functions  was  required  to  apply  with

.-,.:  •  • i ,.  T /• , r J i . Claudius  re-

assidmty  to  its  duties,  and  iresh  penalties  vises  the  ustoi

J  .  . ' ,  ,  ^  ,  the  knights.

were  assigned  to  indolence  and  absence.
The  senate  evinced  its  renewed  activity  under  this  reign
by  the  promulgation  of  a  great  variety  of  laws.  The
second  or  equestrian  order  was  subjected  to  a  similar
inquisition,  and  refreshed  once  more  with  the  infusion
of  baser  blood.1  Notwithstanding  the  creation  of  new
patrician  houses  by  Augustus,  this  caste,  to  which
some  of  the  most  solemn  religious  functions  apper-
tained, continued  to  dwindle  away,  and  required  ad-
ditional grafts.2  The  effects  of  luxury,  of  vice  and
celibacy,  had  proved  more  fatal  than  the  sword  of
the  executioner.  But  all  these  causes  combined  to
decimate  the  ancient  families ;  and  we  observe,  more
and  more,  the  rise  of  new  names  into  distinction,  and
lose  sight  in  the  same  proportion  of  old  and  cherished
appellatives.3  In  order  to  carry  out  these
reforms,  Claudius  assumed  the  censorship  in  cirud"s.p
800,  and  held  a  lustrum.4  Augustus,  as  we
have  seen,  when  he  performed  this  solemnity,  had  ab-
stained from  adopting  the  title  of  Censor.  Whatever
his  motive  for  this  innovation  may  have  been,  his

1  Suet.  Claud.  16.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  25. :  "  Paucis  jam  reliquis  familiar um  quas  Romulus
majorum  et  L.  Brutus  minorum  gentium  appellaverant;  exhaustis
etiam  quas  dictator  Cassar  lege  Cassia  et  princeps  Augustus  lege
Saenia  sublegere."

3  The  barbarism  of  the  double  gentile  name  seems  to  appear  first
about  this  period,  as  in  the  grammarian  Remmius  Fannius  Palsemon,
originally  a  slave. We  meet  with  the  same  in  Nzevius  Sertorius,  and
also  in  Milonia  Ccsonia. This  usage  may  owe  its  origin  to  adoption,
the  name  of  both  the  original  and  the  adoptive  gens  being  now  often
retained  in  conjunction. From  this  time  the  double  appellative  oc-
curs very  frequently. At  first  the  names  so  conjoined  were  gene-
rally obscure  ones;  at  a  later  period  we  shall  be  startled  by  a  Julius
Calpurnius, an JElius  Aurelius, a  Claudius Rutilius,  a  FJavius
Valerius  Aurelius,  &c.

4  Tac.  Ann.  xi. 13,  25.;  Suet. Claud.  16.; Dion,  Ix.  29.;  Flip.
Hist.  Nat.  x.  2.

L22  HISTORY OF  THE  ROMANS  CH.  XLifc

successor  was  more  punctilious  in  preserving  the
name,  together  with  the  functions  of  the  office.  The
enumeration  of  the  citizens  on  this  occasion  gave  a
result  of  5,984,072  males  of  military  age,  which  may
imply  a  total  Eoman  population  of  not  less  than
25,419,066.1  Thirty-four  years  before  the  return
amounted  to  only  4,897,000,  or  a  total  of  about
17,400,000;  and  this  considerable  difference  is  not
to  be  accounted  for  by  the  mere  increase  of  popu-
lation in  the  course  of  a  single  generation.  While,
however,  it  may  be  taken  as  evidence,  in  some  de-
gree, of  the  general  prosperity  which  is  for  the  most
part  indicated  by  a  rapid  increase  of  births  over
deaths,  we  must  consider  it  also  as  a  result  of
the  fresh  introductions  into  the  class  of  citizens
which  were  in  progress  under  Tiberius  and  Caius.
This  increase  was  still  more  developed  under  the  next
principate.  It  is  probable  that  Claudius  conferred
the  boon  on  many  communities  as  well  as  individuals ;
and  it  is  not  impossible  that  both  he  and  Caius  made
a  traffic  of  it  for  their  private  advantage.  Such,  at
all  events,  was  undoubtedly  the  case  with  his  minis-
ters and  favourites,  many  of  whom  amassed  enormous
fortunes  by  procuring  the  franchise  from  their  master
for  wealthy  applicants.  The  Eoman  citizen  was  still
exempt  from  the  most  onerous  requisitions  of  the
state,  the  poll  and  land  tax;  and  the  twentieth  on
successions  was  lightened  to  him  when  the  property
descended  in  a  direct  line.2  The  sale  of  the  franchise
by  the  emperor  was  in  fact  no  other  than  the  spend-
thrift's economy;  it  was  living  upon  the  capital  of
the  state.  The  fatal  extravagance  of  the  system  was
first  perceived  at  a  somewhat  later  period,  and  we

1  See  Tacitus  (I,  c.)  compared  with  the  somewhat  different  state-
ment of  Eusebiue, For  the  proportion  of  males  between  17  and  60
to  the  sum  of  a  population,  see  Clinton,  Fast.  Hell.  iii.  457,  461.
Hoeck,  Ram.  Gesch.  i.  2.  286.

2  See  Dion,  Iv.  25.,  and  Gierlg's  explanation  of  Plin.  Paneg.  .19.

CH XLIX.  tKDEll  TflB EMflftfc.  123

shall  see  some  checks  put  on  the  claim  to  immunity
by  succeeding  emperors.

III.  Nor  did  the  example  of  Augustus  fail  to  re-
mind his  curious  imitator  that  the  care  of  the

,.  •. ,. . .  ,, ,,  , . III.  Measures

national  religion  is  among  the  first  duties  for  the  con**

- ,,  ,.  -°  *„ ,. ration  of  the

or  the  conservative  reformer.  Claudius  national  re-
promptly  acquiesced  in  the  general  disgust
with  which  the  impieties  of  Caius  had  been  regarded.
The  assumption  of  the  special  attributes  of  divinity,
the  club  of  Hercules,  and  the  thyrsus  of  Bacchus,  and
the  caricature  of  the  national  deities,  which  had  dis-
graced the  last  reign,  found  no  favour  or  indulgence
from  him.  The  Orientalism  which  had  pervaded  the
court  and  sanctuary  under  the  disciple  of  Agrippa,
was  swept  sternly  away  by  the  historian  of  Etruria.
In  other  matters  the  measures  of  Claudius,  as  chief
of  the  state  religion,  seem  to  have  been  generally
practical  and  useful.  He  limited  the  number  of  holi-
days, which  were  become  a  serious  impediment  to
business;  but  as  regarded  the  foreign  cults  which
had  so  often  intruded  into  the  city,  and  been  so  often
banished  from  it,  he  contented  himself  with  proscrib-
ing such  only  as  seemed  politically  dangerous.  The
Jews,  who  had  been  expelled  by  Tiberius,  but  who
seem  to  have  lately  recovered  their  position  there
through  the  influence  of  Agrippa,  were  treated  with
indulgence,  till  the  disturbances  they  excited  by  sedi-
tions or  domestic  dissensions  caused  them  to  be  chased
once  more  from  the  city.1  The  spirit  of  the  anti-
quarian was  again  visible  in  the  treaty  Claudius  con-
tracted with  Agrippa  by  the  sacrifice  of  a  swine  in
the  forum  ;  in  his  restoration  of  the  expiatory  offer-
ings of  Servius  in  the  grove  of  Diana;  and  in  his
proposing  to  appoint  a  senatorial  commission  to  ex-
amine the  conduct  and  efficiency  of  the  Haruspicinal

1  Suet  Claud.  25.:  "  Judseos  impulsore  Clircsto  assidue  tumul-
tuantes  Roma  cxpulit."  On  this  celebrated  passage  more  will  be
ssaid  hereafter.

124  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  rn.  xux.

discipline.1  The  chief  pontiff  celebrated  the  com-
pletion of  the  eighth  century  with  the  ceremony  of
secular  games.  But  in  this  his  vanity  seems  to  have
prevailed  over  his  literary  prepossessions,  for  he  could
not  but  have  been  aware  that  the  Etruscan  Sseculum
bore  no  reference  to  a  period  of  a  hundred  years ;
nor,  in  fact,  had  more  than  sixty-three  years  elapsed
since  Augustus  had  summoned  the  Komans  to  behol£
a  solemnity  which  none  then  living  had  before  seen,
and  none  should  ever  see  again."*

IV.  Among  other  merits  which  history  has  ascribed
iv.  Patience  t°  Augustus  was  the  sedulous  industry  with
o"  cuuSn  which,  after  the  manner  of  the  old  patri-
tratiaonm$8ii»-  cians,  he  had  occupied  himself  with  dis-
pensing justice  to  the  citizens.  The  patient
application  of  his  laborious  follower  was  eminently
conspicuous  in  this  practice  also.  Sometimes  in  the
open  forum,  sometimes  in  the  neighbouring  basilicas,
Claudius,  old  and  infirm  as  he  was,  would  endure
from  hour  to  hour,  every  day  of  business,  the  drudg-
ery of  judicial  investigations,  and  give  at  least  decent
attention  to  the  clamorous  appeals  of  the  advocates,
who,  emboldened  by  his  unexampled  patience  and
good  nature,  would  venture  not  unfrequently  to
worry  and  even  insult  him.  So  little  did  he  spare
himself  in  this  irksome  duty,  that  his  measure  for
curtailing  the  numerous  non-days  of  the  calendar  was
ascribed  to  a  wish  to  gain  more  time  for  the  labours
of  the  tribunals.3  When,  after  a  long  morning  sit-
ting, he  arose  at  last  for  refreshment, — even  if,  as  on

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  15.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  11.;  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  vii.  48.  The  secular  games
of  Augustus  were  A.  u.  737  ;  those  of  Claudius  A.  u.  800.  "  Quare
vox  prseconis  irrisa  est,  invitantis  more  solemni  ad  ludos,  quos  nee
spectasset  quisquam,  necspectaturusesset:  quum  superessent  adhuc
qui  spectaverant,  et  histrionum,  producti  olira,  tune  quoque  produce-
rentur."  Suet.  Claud.  21.;  Plin.  lc.

1  Suet.  Claud.  14, 15.j  Dion,  Ix.  4.  17.  Comp.  the  satirical  Apo~
colocyntosis  :  "  Si  memoria  repetis,  ego  eram  qui  tibi  ante  templum.
tuum  jus  dicebam  totis  diebus  mense  Julio  et  Augusto."

CH.  XLIX.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  125

one  occasion,  the  odour  of  a  pontifical  banquet,  pre-
pared in  the  adjoining  temple,  served  to  hasten  his
movements,  —  the  petitioners  for  a  hearing  would
sometimes  obstruct  his  passage  and  cling  about  his
person,  till  he  meekly  resumed  his  seat,  and  devoted
the  afternoon  also  to  their  affairs.1  However  this
passion  for  judicial  functions  might  be  open  to  cari-
cature, and  however  his  intellectual  infirmities  might
betray  themselves  in  occasional  haste,  frivolity,  or
indecision,  the  conduct  of  Claudius  seems  to  have
been  actuated  by  a  sincerely  beneficent  intention,
and  shows  beyond  dispute  the  principles  of  modera-
tion and  equity  which  distinguished  him.  A  man
can  hardly  be  naturally  a  tyrant  who  takes  pleasure
in  meting  out  justice,  and  deciding  questions  of  right.
It  was  with  real  satisfaction  therefore,  we  may  be-
lieve, that  Claudius  suppressed  the  laws  of  majesty,
and  forbade  the  practice  of  delation ;  that  he  relin-
quished the  most  grievous  exactions  of  his  predeces-
sor ;  that  he  promised  never  to  subject  a  Eoman  citi-
zen to  torture ;  that  he  declined  to  raise  the  festivals
of  his  house  to  the  dignity  of  national  solemnities.
When  he  repressed  the  encroachments  of  the  freed-
men,  and  caused  false  pretenders  to  the  franchise  to
be  capitally  punished,  and  again  when  he  withdrew
the  liberty  which  Caius  had  allowed  to  slaves  of  giv-
ing evidence  against  their  masters,  he  consulted  prin-
ciples of  Eoman  law  to  which  the  citizens  attached
considerable  importance.  It  was  not  in  the  interests
of  humanity,  but  of  a  jealous  and  inquisitorial  policy,
that  such  indulgences  had  been  granted,  and  it  gave
occasion  to  intolerable  licence.  The  justice  indeed
of  Claudius  was  little  tempered  with  mercy.  Under
his  reign  more  parricides,  it  was  said,  were  adjudged
to  the  ancient  punishment  of  the  sack  than  in  all  the
ages  that  had  elapsed  before  it.2  Nevertheless,  one

1  Suet.  Claud.  15,  33.

»  Suet.  Claud.  34. ;  Senec.  de  Clem.  i.  23.

126  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  cu.  XLTX.

of  his  enactments  at  least  remains  to  show  that  his
views  with  respect  to  the  servile  population  were
milder  and  more  enlightened  than  those  of  previous
legislators.  He  ordained  that  the  sick  slaves  exposed
in  the  temple  of  ^Esculapius  should,  if  they  recovered,
obtain  their  freedom ;  but  the  masters  who  ridded
themselves  of  their  obligations  to  the  old  and  infirm
by  actually  putting  them  to  death,  as  may  have  been
sometimes  done,  he  declared  guilty  of  murder.  We
may  hope  that  this  the  only  recorded  instance  of  his
consideration  for  that  degraded  caste  was  in  fact  but
a  single  specimen  of  a  more  extensive  legislation.1
V.  In  the  construction  of  enormous  works  of  mag-
nificence or  utility  the  Romans  beheld  the
constructions  most  flattering  reflection  of  their  own  great-

of  Claudius.  _.,  j . i •  r- /-.i j  •

ness.  The  undertakings  01  Claudius  were
not  unworthy  of  this  colossal  age  of  material  creations;
yet  they  were  not  the  mere  fantastic  conceptions  of  tur-
gid pride  and  unlimited  power.  The  aqueduct  begun,
as  we  have  seen,  by  Caius,  was  completed  after  se-
veral years'  labour,  by  his  successor,  from  whom  it
derived  the  name  of  Claudian,  by  which  it  was
thenceforth  distinguished.  This  channel- secured  for
the  city  the  purest  and  most  abundant  of  all  its  sup-
plies of  water,  and  enriched  the  populace  with  the
cheapest  and  most  useful  of  its  luxuries.  The  charges
which  have  been  made  against  Caius,  of  withdrawing
first  the  vessels,  and  afterwards  the  carts  and  waggons
of  Italy  from  their  ordinary  employment  in  conveying
food  to  the  population,  and  of  leaving  Rome  at  his
death  with  no  more  than  •  a  week's  consumption  of
grain  in  store,  though  involving  probably  considerable
misrepresentation,  seem,  nevertheless,  to  have  been
grounded  on  the  scarcity  which  actually  broke  out  more
than  once,  and  lasted  for  several  years,  during  the
government  of  his  successor.  It  must  be  considered

1  Suet.  Claud.  25. :  "Quod  si  quis  necare  mallet  quern  quam  ex-
ponere,  caedis  crimine  teneri." Comp.  Dion,  Ix.  13.  29.

CH.  XLIX.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  127

among  the  difficulties  with  which  the  feeble  old  man
had  to  contend,  and  it  may  serve  to  enhance  our
idea  of  the  merits  of  his  laborious  administration,  that
he  received  from  the  selfish  tyrant  before  him  the
legacy  of  empty  granaries,  as  well  as  an  exhausted
treasury.1  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  senate's  ready
acquiescence  in  the  choice  of  the  praetorians  was  de-
termined by  the  prospect  of  a  famine  in  the  city,
a  popular  riot,  and  a  servile  insurrection;  and  the
republicans  of  the  day  may  well  have  consented  to
waive  their  speculative  principles  in  favour  of  an
emperor,  at  a  moment  when  the  tribes  and  centuries
of  antiquity  would  have  demanded  the  creation  of  a
dictator.  It  has  been  seen  that  the  Alexandrian  corn
ships  came  to  anchor  at  Puteoli,  more  than  a  hun-
dred miles  from  the  place  of  their  cargo's  destination.
Such  was  the  want  of  harbours  or  secure  roadsteads
along  the  strand  of  Latium,  that  it  was  only  the
smaller  coasting  vessels  of  Gaul  or  Spain  that  could
venture  to  run  to  land  at  any  nearer  point.  The
mouth  of  the  Tiber  had  become  nearly  choked  up  by
the  accumulation  of  sand,  and  the  few  vessels  that
now  sought  the  quays  of  Ostia  were  generally  obliged
to  ride  at  anchor  in  the  offing.  The  engineers  de-
spaired of  clearing  and  keeping  open  a  passage  in  the
main  stream  of  the  river ;  but  they  now,  under  the
direction  of  Claudius,  resorted  to  the  plan  of  cutting
a  new  channel  from  the  right  bank,  a  little  above  the
deserted  harbour,  and  constructing  an  artificial  haven,
with  the  aid  of  two  moles  advanced  into  the  sea.  The
entrance  was  illuminated  by  a  light-house;  and  from
henceforth,  as  long  as  science  and  industry  survived
in  the  capital  of  the  world,  the  vessels  which  sup-
plied it  with  its  first  necessary  could  come  by  day  or
by  night  to  a  safe  and  convenient  anchorage,  and
transfer  their  freight  to  the  barges,  to  be  propelled

1  Aurel.  Victor,  de  Caesar.  4.;  Senec.  de  Brev.  Vit.  18.;  C.  Caesar
"  deccdebat  ....  septein  aut  octo  dierum  cibaria  superessp."

128  HISTORY OF THE BOMANS  CH.  XLJX.

against  the  descending  current  by  the  labour  of  men
or  horses.1  To  this  haven  was  given  the  name  of
The  Port™  Portus  Eomanus  or  Portus  Augusti,  to  dis-
SsThSJ&S  tinguish  it  from  the  now  neglected  establish-
at  Oitu.  ment  of  Ostia.  Claudius  himself  deserves
the  entire  credit  of  this  bold  and  salutary  undertak  -
ing;  for  he  persisted  in  it  notwithstanding  the  re-
monstrances of  his  timid  engineers,  and  the  great
outlay  it  required.  Its  importance  was  speedily  shown ;
for  in  the  eleventh  year  of  his  reign  the  empire  was
visited  by  a  scarcity,  which  seems  to  have  followed
on  the  failure  of  the  crops  throughout  the  provinces,
and  redoubled  exertions  were  required  to  save  the
capital  from  famine.  Rome  was  in  an  uproar ;  the
multitude  surrounded  the  emperor  in  the  forum,  and
assailed  him  with  the  most  violent  gestures.2  The
precautions  of  Augustus  on  similar  occasions,  with
the  expulsion  of  foreigners  from  the  city,  were  again
resorted  to.  The  importation  of  grain  into  Rome  re-
quired more  method  and  attention  than  had  hitherto
been  given  to  it ;  and  the  completion  of  a  harbour
to  which  corn  could  be  brought  at  all  seasons,  was
wisely  followed  by  a  measure  to  encourage  the  con-
struction of  ships  of  greater  size  than  had  usually
been  employed  in  the  trade.

Another  undertaking,  though  its  object  was  merely
The  eminai  °^  ^oca^  u*^i*7>  deserves  to  be  recorded  for  its
FudnulF*17  magnitude.  The  Marsians  had  represented
to  Augustus  the  disasters  to  which  their
country  was  liable  from  the  swelling  of  the  waters  of
the  Fucinus,  a  basin  among  their  mountains  in  the
heart  of  Italy,  nearly  thirty  miles  in  circumference,

1  Suet.  Claud.  20.;  Dion,  Ix.  11.;  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  ix.  5.,  xvi.  76.
§  2.  An  immense  vessel,  which  Caius  had  constructed  to  convey  an
obelisk  from  Alexandria  to  Rome,  was  sunk  to  form  the  foundation
of  the  mole.

a  Four  famines  are  specially  mentioned  as  occurring  in  this  reign :
— 1.  at  Borne  in  the  first  and  second  year;  2.  in  Judea  in  the  fourthi
3.  in  Greece  in  the  ninth  ;  4.  at  Home  in  the  eleventh.  Brotier  on
Tac.  Ann.  xii.  43.  Comp.  Suet.  Claud.  18.;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Ju(J.  xx.
2.5.;  Act.  ApasL  xi.  28.

en.  xi.1  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  129

which  receives  the  drainage  of  several  valleys,  but  has
no  apparent  natural  outlet.  Among  the  limestone  hills
which  encircle  it  there  are  probably  subterranean
clefts  through  which,  as  in  other  regions  of  similar
formation,  a  portion  of  its  waters  drains  away ;  but
they  are  not  capable  of  expansion  with  the  increase
of  volume  within,  and  in  seasons  unusually  wet  the
lake  overflowed  the  lips  of  its  crater,  submerging  a
great  extent  of  valuable  land.  The  tunnel  by  which
the  superfluous  waters  of  the  Alban  lake,  a  much
smaller  reservoir,  are  still  carried  off  was  a  work  of
the  early  republic.  But  this  emissary  is  little  more
than  a  mile  in  length,  while  the  perforation  required
for  the  Fucinus,  which  Augustus  shrank  from  under-
taking, was  not  less  than  three.  Claudius  however  was
not  deterred  by  difficulties  which  labour  and  money
could  surmount.  He  did  not,  perhaps,  stop  to  calcu-
late with  accuracy  the  real  utility  of  the  work.  He
commanded  it  to  be  done,  and  his  command  was
executed;  but  it  occupied  thirty  thousand  men  for
eleven  years,  an  amount  of  labour  which  no  doubt
might  have  been  more  profitably  employed  in  many
other  ways.  Unlike  the  Alban  tunnel,  which  has
continued  to  discharge  its  waters  without  intermis-
sion for  two  and  twenty  centuries,  the  emissary  of  the
Fucinus  fell  speedily  into  decay,  and  required  to  be
repaired  and  restored  to  efficiency  by  a  later  emperor.
It  has  now  been  completely  choked  up  for  many  hun-
dreds of  years,  and  the  meadows  on  the  shelving  bank
of  the  lake  are  still  subject,  as  in  ancient  times,  to
the  caprices  of  the  seasons.1

VI.  Measures  for  the  amusement  of  the  populace
may  properly  be  mentioned  next  after  such  Vi.  Measure,
as  were  intended  for  its  well  being;  for  in  menteo?1thueie'
the  view  of  the  Koman  administrator  the  citizens-
two  were  of  co-ordinate  and  almost  equal  necessity.

1  Suet.  Claud.  20. ;  Dion,  Ix.  1 1.
VOL.  VI.  K

130  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  xux.

If,  on  the  one  hand,  he  provided  the  people  with  ch£ap
corn,  on  the  other,  that  they  might  have  no  reasonable
pretext  for  discontent,  he  was  careful  to  famish  them
with  the  unfailing  excitement  of  magnificent  public
exhibitions.  Accordingly,  if  Claudius  executed  im-
mense works  of  engineering,  for  supplying  the  me-
tropolis with  water,  for  securing  the  access  of  her
richly-freighted  flotillas,  or  for  averting  a  periodical
inundation,  not  less  was  he  required  to  watch  with
simulated  interest  the  long-protracted  combats  of  men
and  beasts,  in  which  the  multitude  expected  their
ruler  to  share  their  own  barbarous  satisfaction.  We
have  already  admired  the  patience  with  which  Au-
gustus submitted  to  this  tax  on  his  time  and  temper.
Tiberius,  we  have  seen,  could  not  school  his  stub-
born mind  to  a  similar  sacrifice.  Caius  shared  the
vulgar  taste  for  brutal  excitement,  and  in  this  in-
stance, at  least,  could  court  popularity  while  he  gra-
tified his  own  appetite.  Claudius,  patient  and  plod-
ding by  nature,  regarded  this  condescension  as  a
legitimate  portion  of  the  routine  to  which  he  had
devoted  himself;  and  he  sate  through  the  weary
hours  of  popular  amusement  without  interest,  it  may
be  believed,  but,  at  the  same  time,  without  disgust.
His  constitutional  insensibility  did  not  even  require
the  rest  and  diversion  of  mind  which  were  commonly
demanded  even  by  the  mass  of  the  populace.  In  the
The  giadia-  shows  of  the  amphitheatre,  after  the  morn-
toriai  ihowa.  jng  exhibitions,  there  was  an  interval  al-
lowed for  rest  or  refreshment,  during  which  the
spectators  retired  for  the  most  part  from  the  spot,  to
resume  their  places  at  a  later  hour.  Claudius,  it
was  observed,  rarely  availed  himself  of  this  respite.
His  bodily  infirmities  perhaps  made  him  averse  from
change  and  motion,  and  he  was  content  to  retain  his
seat  in  the  imperial  tribune,  and  witness  the  inter-
ludes of  rope-dancing  and  jugglers'  feats,  which  formed
a  languid  entertainment  in  the  intervals  of  bloodshed.

en.  XLIX.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  131

It  is  said,  indeed,  that  lie  was  not  satisfied  with  these
innocent  recreations,  and  sometimes  called  for  a  fresh
supply  of  gladiators  to  fill  the  hours  of  suspense.1  If,
at  least,  the  spectators  made  the  demand,  he  would
comply  with  it  with  his  usual  apathy.  The  general
taste  for  these  spectacles  was  increasing,  and  under
Claudius  it  certainly  received  no  check.  He  suffered
himself  indeed  to  be  made  the  tool  of  the  popular
humour  here  as  elsewhere,  condescending  to  bandy
coarse  jokes  with  the  multitude,  and  degrading  the
majesty  of  empire  to  the  level  of  vulgar  buffoonery  ;
nor  can  we  resist  the  testimony  of  our  authorities  to
his  brutal  indifference  to  human  suffering,  and  his
morbid  curiosity  in  scrutinizing,  and  as  it  were  ana-
lysing it  in  his  victims.2

Augustus  had  exhibited  a  mock  sea-fight  in  the
basin  he  constructed  on  the  bank  of  the  Tiber,  and
Claudius  directed  a  show  of  siege  operations,  and  the
storming  of  a  city,  in  the  meadows  of  the  Campus
Martius  ;  but  we  do  not  read  that  on  either  of  these
occasions  the  illusion  was  carried  to  the  extent  of
actual  bloodshed.  It  was  very  different,  Grand6pec.
however,  with  the  extraordinary  spectacle  ^l^th?*'
which  Claudius,  towards  the  close  of  his  lake  Fucinus-
reign,  paraded  on  the  Fucine  lake,  to  celebrate  the
completion  of  his  work  there,  and  the  first  admission
of  its  water  into  the  tunnel  he  had  constructed.  He
summoned  the  population  of  Eome  and  Italy  to
witness  from  the  surrounding  hills  the  manoeuvres  of
two  fleets  of  triremes  and  quadriremes,  manned  by
armies  of  gladiators,  while  vessels  filled  with  soldiers
were  posted  on  the  shores  to  prevent  desertion,  and
cut  off  retreat.  One  authority  estimates  the  opposing
armaments  at  twelve  vessels  each,  another  at  fifty ;

1  Suet,.  Claud.  34. ;  Dion,  Ix.  13.

*  Suet.  /.  c.:  "  Ssevum  et  sanguinarium  natura  fuisse,  magnis  mini-
misque  apparuit  rebus. Tormenta  qusestionum  ....  exigebat  corani
. . .  jugular!  jubebat  ut  exspirantium  facies  videret."

132  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  C

while  Tacitus,  whose  numbers  are  not  generally  ex-
cessive, declares  that  the  combatants  engaged  were
as  many  as  nineteen  thousand,  and  that  the  whole
circuit  of  the  lake  was  lined  with  the  flotilla  which
guarded  them ;  an  exaggeration  manifestly  of  the
most  flagrant  kind.  Eefinements  of  luxury  formed
a  horrid  combination  with  the  atrocity  of  the  spectacle.
Claudius,  armed  and  cloaked  as  an  imperator,  with
his  consort  in  a  military  mantle  by  his  side,  seated
himself  on  a  throne  overlooking  the  waters,  attended
by  senators,  knights,  and  soldiers.  The  combatants,
who  were  styled  Sicilians  and  Rhodians,  denied  before
him,  and  saluted  him;  and  when  he  graciously  re-
turned their  greeting,  it  was  understood  as  an  inti-
mation that  the  contest  was  not  intended  to  be
mortal.1  When  the  vessels  were  drawn  up  in  array,
the  figure  of  a  Triton  in  silver  was  made  to  emerge
suddenly  from  the  lake,  and  sound  the  signal  for
engagement.  They  went  through  the  manoeuvres  of
a  sham  fight,  advancing  and  retreating,  striking  and
rebounding  from  each  other ;  but  the  emperor,  we
are  told,  was  not  satisfied  with  this  peaceful  display,
and  ordered  the  attack  to  commence  in  earnest.  Dion
assures  us  that,  when  the  men  hesitated  to  destroy
one  another,  he  caused  his  own  flotilla  to  charge,  and
cut  them  in  pieces.  Suetonius,  more  soberly,  only
suggests  that  he  thought  of  doing  so ;  but  Tacitus
here  at  least  is  more  moderate  than  either  of  his
compeers,  and  announces  that,  after  many  wounds,
the  combatants  were  separated  and  dismissed.  Such
remarkable  discrepancies  in  the  relation  of  a  matter
of  such  patent  notoriety  may  put  us  on  our  guard
against  many  astounding  anecdotes  of  their  times
with  which  these  authors  perplex  and  provoke  us.2

1  Suet.  Claud.  21.:  "  Ave  imperator,  morituri  te  salutant."
8  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  56.;  Suet.  Claud.  21.;  Dion,  Ix.  33. It  seems  to
have  been  in  connexion  with  this  exhibition  that  Claudius  gave  a
Imnquet  at  the  head  of  the  emissary,  at  which  the  sudden  rush  of  the

rtfi.  VLtX.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  133

In  reading  of  the  shattered  health  and  frame  of  the
prince  who  was  raised  unwillingly  to  the  per9onaiin-
throne  from  his  desk,  at  a  period  far  beyond  atu'butTd  to
the  middle  of  life,  untrained  for  govern-  Claudiu9-
ment,  and  with  no  natural  bent  towards  affairs,  we
cannot  but  admire  the  force  of  the  Roman  character,
which  appears  to  have  borne  this  feeble  creature
through  labours  which  might  task  the  highest  powers
and  the  happiest  disposition.  Yet  this  incessant  strain
of  mind  and  body  seems  to  have  been  favourable  to
his  health,  which  recovered  its  tone  under  the  labours
of  the  principate.  The  wear  and  tear  of  a  life  so
trying  required  no  doubt  the  support  of  stimulants  ;
the  excess  in  eating  and  drinking  to  which  Claudius
is  said  to  have  been  addicted,  and  which  has  made  his
name  notorious  for  gluttony,  was  at  first  perhaps  no
more  than  indulgence  of  the  craving  which  his  ex-
hausted powers  naturally  excited.  Encouraged  by  the
artifice  of  the  wives  and  parasites  who  ruled  him,  he
lapsed  more  and  more  into  gross  intemperance,  and  the
pains  of  indigestion,  from  which  he  suffered  so  acutely
as  to  meditate,  it  was  said,  escaping  from  them  by
suicide,  were  caused,  we  may  believe,  by  this  habitual
abuse.1  His  jaded  appetite  was  excited  by  the  splen-
dour of  his  banquets  and  the  numbers  of  the  com-
pany :  his  viands  were  often  spread  in  ample  halls  or
pleasure-grounds,  and  his  couches  crowded  by  many
hundreds  of  guests.  On  such  occasions  he  gratified
his  senses  to  the  utmost,  and  seldom  rose  from  table
till  he  had  gorged  to  repletion,  and  required  to  relieve
his  stomach  by  vomiting.  In  judging  of  the  character
of  the  poor  old  man,  whose  private  failings  have  been
elevated  into  notoriety,  some  allowance  must  be  made
for  the  coarseness  of  the  times,  and  the  ordinary  licence
of  his  associates.  Nor  must  we  forget  how  readily

water  into  the  tunnel  before  the  proper  moment  was  very  near  causing
ft  frightful  catastrophe. Tacitus,  c.  57.;  Suet.  c.  32.
'  Suet.  Claud.  31.

134  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  cu.  XLU.

the  scandalous  anecdotes  of  the  day  were  accepted  by
annalists  and  biographers  as  veritable  history.  With
regard  to  women,  the  intemperance  of  which  he  is
accused  may  be  almost  confined  to  the  ease  with
which  he  passed  from  the  caresses  of  one  lawful  wife
to  those  of  a  successor :  of  all  the  Csesars  Claudius
stands,  on  the  whole,  the  most  nearly  free  from  the
charge  of  illicit  and  disgraceful  indulgences.1  But
now  for  the  first  time  at  Koine  the  story  of  the  prince's
wives  becomes  the  history  of  the  principate :  the  city
of  Scipio  and  Augustus  recedes  for  a  moment  from
our  view,  and  we  seem  to  stray,  as  in  a  wayward
dream,  through  the  saloons  of  Versailles  or  Aranjuez.

1  Suet.  Claud.  33.  Two  of  his  female  favourites  are  named  by
Tacitus  (Ann.  xi.  30.),  and  Dion  has  a  passing  remark  on  his  in-
temperance with  regard  both  to  wine  and  women.  But  the  parti-
culars of  his  alleged  excesses,  from  which  his  gluttony  has  become  so
generally  infamous,  are  confined  to  the  scandalous  chronicle  of  bin
biographer.

4.D.41-A.C.794.  CJXDER THE EMPIRE.  135

CHAPTER  L.

Claudius  subject  to  the  influence,  1.  Of  women:  his  wives:  Messalina.
2.  Of  freedmen:  Polybius,  Narcissus,  &c. — Treatment  of  the
sisters  of  Caius.  —  Banishment  of  Seneca.  —  Death  of  Appius
Silanus. — Conspiracy  of  Scribonianus. — Invasion  of  Britain  and
triumph  of  Claudius.  —  Death  of  Valerius  Asiaticus.  —  Internal
administration  of  Claudius. — Rivalry  of  Messalina  and  Agrippina.
— Messalina's  amour  with  Silius,  and  daring  marriage  with  him.
— Alarm  and  anger  of  Claudius. — Her  disgrace  and  death. — In-
trigues for  a  successor.— Claudius  marries  Agrippina. — Her  son
Domitius  betrothed  to  his  daughter  Octavia:  adopted  under  the
name  of  Nero. — Influence  of  Agrippina:  she  founds  the  Colonia
Agrippinensis. — Advancing  popularity  of  Nero. — Agrippina  ef-
fects the  destruction  of  Lepida. — She  poisons  Claudius. — Nero
succeeds  to  power. — Remarks  on  the  character  of  Claudius. —
The  adoration  paid  him  during  his  life  by  Seneca,  and  abuse  of
him  after  his  death. — The  Apocolocyntosis. — Flattery  of  Nero.
(A.U.  794—807,  A.D.  41—54.)

THE  ruler  to  whom  the  conduct  of  affairs  was  now  en-
trusted had  been  bred,  beyond  the  usual
term  of  infancy,  by  the  women  of  the  im-
perial  household ;  for  the  weakness  of  his
sickly  frame  still  required  the  care  of  female  nursing
at  an  age  when  the  young  Roman  was  ordinarily
transferred  to  his  tutors  and  the  masters  of  his  ath-
letic exercises.  To  the  last  he  continued  to  feel  the
need  of  the  petty  attentions  and  ministrations  of  the
gentler  sex.  In  early  adolescence  bis  guardians  pro-
posed to  provide  for  his  domestic  comfort  by  espousing
him  to  consorts  of  their  own  selecti6n ;  but  of  those
who  were  successively  chosen  for  the  honour  two  were
lost  to  him  before  marriage ;  the  one  being  rejected
on  account  of  the  offence  her  parents  had  given  to
Augustus,  the  other  dying  untowardly  on  the  day

136  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  L.

appointed  for  the  nuptials.1  Claudius  was  at  last
united  to  Plautia  Urgulanilla,  who,  to  judge  from  the
names  she  thus  combined,  was  the  daughter  perhaps
of  Plautius  Silvanus,  a  distinguished  commander  in
Pannonia,  whose  tragic  story  has  been  related  under
the  principate  of  Tiberius,  and  was  descended  from
Urgulania,  the  proudest  of  the  friends  of  Livia.2  By
this  noble  bride  Claudius  became  the  father  of  two
children :  the  first  of  them  was  the  Drusus,  to  whom
the  daughter  of  Sejanus  was  affianced  almost  at  his
birth,  and  who  died  in  infancy ;  the  second  was  a
girl,  and  received  the  name  of  Claudia.  But  when
her  mother  was  detected  intriguing  with  a  freedman
of  the  household,  and  repudiated  by  her  husband,
Claudius  disowned  the  infant,  and  shocked  the  Ko-
mans  by  causing  it,  at  the  age  of  five  months,  to  be
ruthlessly  abandoned.3  By  ^Elia  Petina,  the  daughter
perhaps  of  ^Elius  Tubero,  to  whom  he  next  united
himself,  he  had  one  child  only,  whom  he  called  after
his  mother  Anton  ia,  and  who  became  affianced  to
Cnseus  Pompeius  Magnus,  the  son  of  a  Crassus,  who
thus,  by  a  strange  favour  of  fortune,  combined  a
descent  from  two  triumvirs,  with  an  alliance  with  the
families  of  three  others.4  The  union  with  Petina
lasted  probably  some  years ;  and  it  was  in  the  reign  of
Caius,  as  we  may  suppose,  that  Claudius  divorced  him-
self from  her  on  some  trifling  disagreement.  A  third

1  Suet.  Claud.  26.  The  first  was  JEmilia  Lepida,  the  great  grand-
daughter of  Augustus,  being  the  child  of  his  granddaughter  Julia  by
L.  Paullus,  and  sister  of  M.  JEmilius  Lepidus,  the  friend  and  victim
of  Caius  Caligula;  the  second,  Livia  Medullina,  of  the  family  of  the
Camilli.

*  For  Plautius  Silvanus,  see  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  22.;  Veil.  ii.  112.;
Dion,  Iv.  34.  He  was  the  grandson  of  Urgulania,  the  friend  of
Livia.

1  Suet.  Claud.  27.  It  seems  not  unlikely  that  this  horrid  act  was
perpetrated  in  imitation  of  Augustus,  who  forbade  the  infant  of  the
younger  Julia  to  be  nourished.  But  to  cast  away  a  child  which  had
once  been  token  up,  was  an  abuse  of  the  paternal  authority  from
which  the  feelings  of  the  Romans  revolted.

4  For  MYms  Tubero,  see  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  1.

A.D.41-A.U.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  137

marriage  with  Valeria  Messalina  speedily  followed  •
the  two  children  she  bore  him  came  into  the  world
towards  the  commencement  of  his  principate.1  The
shamelessness  of  the  women  of  the  higher  ranks  has
been  noticed  on  former  occasions :  the  precariousness
of  the  position  they  held  in  marriage  seems  to  have
made  them  despair  of  acquiring,  or  at  least  of  long
retaining,  domestic  influence;  and  they  too  often
abandoned  themselves  to  indulgences,  from  which
they  had  no  motives  either  of  affection  or  prudence
to  withhold  them.  Of  all  the  Eoman  matrons,  how-
ever, Messalina  has  acquired  the  most  infamous  ce-
lebrity; her  name  has  been  used  even  to  our  own
times  as  the  greatest  byword  of  reproach  to  her  sex ;
the  satirist  has  striven  in  vain  to  inflame  the  glowing
colours  which  the  historian  has  flashed  upon  her
crimes.  As  the  wife  of  a  man  whom  she  probably
despised,  it  would  seem  absurd  to  suppose  that  she
put  any  unusual  check  on  the  wanton  passions  of  her
class ;  yet  we  may  see  reason  hereafter  to  question,
at  least  to  their  full  extent,  the  enormities  for  which
she  has  been  so  signally  notorious.

Messalina  was  the  daughter  of  Valerius  Messala
Barbatus,  sometimes  called  also  Messalinus,

,  i • ,t  -i ,  •  f  , m  Character  and

who  stood  in  the  relation  of  cousin  to  Clau-  ™*gu>™<£lof
dius  by  marriage;  for  his  wife,  Domitia
Lepida,  was  a  granddaughter,  while  Claudius  was
himself  the  grandson,  of  the  triumvir  Antonius. This
Lepida  seems  to  have  been  herself  dissolute  as  well

1  The  son,  who  received  a  few  years  after  his  birth  the  surname
of  Britannicus,  had  completed,  according  to  Tacitus,  his  fourteenth
year  in  808  (/Inn.  xiii.  15),  and  was  therefore  born  A.U.  794:  if,
however,  he  was  only  two  years  younger  than  Nero  (see  Ann.  xii.
25.),  ho  must  have  been  born  as  early  as  792  or  793.  Suetonius  also
contradicts  himself  in  saying  that  the  child  was  born  on  the  20th
day  after  his  father's  accession  (i.e.  in  Feb.  794),  and  in  his  seconr
consulship;  for  this  did  not  commence  till  795.  I  take  the  middk
of  these  dates,  viz.  Feb.  794.  It  does  not  appear -whether  the
daughter,  called  Qutavia,  was  older  or  younger  than  her  brother.

138  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  <:n.  L.

as  ambitious,  and  such  were  the  qualities  which  de-
scended from  her  to  her  child.1  Nevertheless  Messa-
lina,  at  the  time  when  she  consented  to  attach  herself
to  the  fortunes  of  Claudius,  could  have  had  no  pros-
pect of  a  throne.  However  little  she  may  have  re-
garded her  husband,  she  clung  no  doubt  to  the
position  she  had  acquired  with  him,  all  the  more
vehemently  as  it  was  strange  and  unexpected,  and
her  most  earnest  efforts,  her  vices  and  her  crimes,
would  be  directed,  we  may  suppose,  to  securing  it.
Whatever  may  have  been  the  irregularity  of  her  con-
duct, it  was  doubtless  her  wish  to  disguise  it  from
him,  and  she  succeeded  in  keeping  him  convinced,
at  least  to  the  last  moment,  of  her  entire  devotedness.
But  his  character  was  too  weak  to  allow  her  to  put
entire  trust  in  his  convictions ;  he  was,  in  fact,  con-
stantly swayed  by  the  influence  of  one  or  another  of
those  about  him ;  the  whisper  of  a  friend  or  courtier
might  blast  her  dearest  schemes,  and  her  intrigues
were  directed  to  securing  in  her  interest  the  persons
by  whom  he  was  most  closely  surrounded.  For  this
purpose,  we  are  assured,  she  amassed  money  and  she
lavished  favours.  She  joined  with  the  ministers  of
the  court  in  selling  appointments  to  the  wealthiest
applicants,  in  extorting  bribes  by  threats  and  prose-
cutions, in  procuring  the  confiscation  of  the  estates
of  nobles,  and  persuading  the  emperor  to  bestow  them
on  herself:  thus  enriched,  she  sought  to  bind  her
accomplices  to  her  side  by  dividing  her  plunder  with
them,  and  entangling  them  in  her  fascinating  caresses.
Perilous  as  such  a  guilty  commerce  was,  she  carried
it  on  with  boldness  and  success,  and  continued  during

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  64.  Domitia  Lepida  was  sister  to  Cn.  Doraitius,
the  husband,  as  will  be  afterwards  recorded,  of  Agrippina  minor,  and
father  of  the  Emperor  Nero.  She  was  daughter  to  L.  Domitius  by
Antonia  major,  according  to  Suetonius, — minor,  according  to  Tacitus,
less  correctly, — and,  therefore,  granddaughter  of  the  triumvir  Anto-
nius  and  Octavia.  Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  iv.44.;  Suet.  Ner.  5.

4.&.41-A.U.794.  UNDER TflE EMPIRE.  139

several  years  to  enjoy  the  full  confidence  of  her  hus-
band, while  she  closed  the  lips  both  of  her  paramoura
and  victims.  But  the  connexion  in  which  she  may
thus  have  placed  herself  with  the  freedmen  of  the  pal-
ace, the  real  ministers  of  the  court  and  instruments  of
the  imperial  pleasure,  has  proved  fatal  at  least  to  her
reputation  with  posterity.  Whatever  were  her  vices
and  domestic  treasons,  they  might  have  been  over-
looked perhaps  by  historians,  who  were  generally
content  to  rebuke  the  petulance  and  ambition  of
women  with  a  contemptuous  sneer ; 1  but  no  infamy
could  be  too  atrocious  to  charge  upon  the  matron
who  was  guilty  of  a  criminal  association  with  a  Poly-
bius  or  Narcissus,  the  vile  Grecian  ministers  of  a
Roman  imperator,  the  men  who  sounded  a  lower
depth  even  in  the  depths  of  delation,  by  sacrificing
the  best  blood  of  Quirinus  to  the  cupidity  of  branded
and  base-born  foreigners.

The  regimen  of  women  who  trafficked  in  offices  of
state,  an  enormity  hitherto  unknown  in  Tiieregimenof
Rome,  might  have  been  regarded  as  the  thefreedmen-
last  degradation  of  the  commonwealth,  had  it  not
been  followed  by  the  still  more  degrading  regimen
of  freedmen.  Next  to  his  women  it  was  by  his  freed-
men that  Claudius,  we  are  told,  was  governed.  The
facility  of  enfranchisement  has  been  already  men-
tioned. We  have  seen  how  the  slaves  of  a  noble
household  were  of  two  very  different  classes ;  of  which
the  lower  consisted  of  mere  menial  drudges,  the  rude
boors  of  Thrace,  Africa,  or '  Cappadocia ;  while  the
upper,  principally  from  Greece  and  Syria,  comprised
the  polished  instruments  of  fastidious  luxury,  exqui-

1  It  was  Valerius  Mcssala,  or  Messalinus,  the  father  of  the  empress,
who  had  resisted,  in  the  time  of  Tiberius,  the  proposition  that  the
wives  of  provincial  governors  should  be  forbidden  to  accompany  their
husbands  abroad.  He  had  used  the  proud  old  Roman  argument:
"Viri  in  eo  culpam  si  foemina  modum  excedat."  This  man  and
Aurelius  Cotta  Messalinus  seem  to  have  both  been  sons  of  Mcssala
(Jorvinus.  See  Ruperti  on  Tacitus,  Ann.  ii.  32.

140  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  L.

sitely  trained  and  educated,  and  accustomed,  by
every  compliance,  however  abject,  to  ingratiate  them-
selves with  their  sensual  and  pampered  masters.
While  the  former  class  had  little  hope  perhaps  of
improving  their  condition,  or  escaping,  if  not  pre-
maturely worn  out  by  toil,  a  neglected  and  even  an
abandoned  old  age,  the  latter  might  calculate  on
securing  their  freedom  early,  after  which  they  enjoyed
a  thousand  opportunities  of  rendering  themselves  as
necessary  to  their  patron  as  they  had  previously  been
to  their  master.  The  intercourse  of  the  Roman
noble  with  his  fellow-citizens  had  been  always  stiff
and  ceremonious :  the  many  privileges  they  had  in
common  gave  even  the  plebeian  a  claim  to  formal
respect  from  his  patrician  neighbour;  and  it  was
rarely  that  the  ties  of  confidence  and  easy  friendship
subsisted  between  men  so  nearly  equal  in  considera-
tion, so  often  rivals,  and  always  liable  to  become  so.
But  the  Roman  magnate  wearied  of  the  unceasing
round  of  conventionalities  in  which  he  moved,  and
longed  for  associates  with  whom  he  might  unbend
in  real  familiarity,  without  demeaning  himself  to
the  company  of  mere  slaves.  The  fashion  of  em-
ploying freedmen  for  the  service  of  the  patrician
household,  and  the  management  of  domestic  affairs,
was  first  imported  into  Rome  by  the  conquerors  of
the  East,  by  Sulla,  Lucullus,  and  Pompeius; — who
were  too  proud,  after  enjoying  the  submission  of
kings  and  potentates,  to  recognise  the  equality  of
their  fellow-citizens.  Caesar,  indeed,  with  his  usual
magnanimity,  had  disdained  to  avail  himself  of  this
unworthy  indulgence.  The  ascendancy  he  naturally
exercised  over  all  that  came  in  contact  with  him,
enabled  him  to  secure  the  spontaneous  services  of
men  of  birth  and  consideration  hardly  inferior  to  his
own,  such  as  Matius,  Oppius,  and  Hirtius.  Such
were  the  stewards  of  his  revenues,  the  managers  of
his  public  and  private  benevolences,  Romans  in  birth

t.D.14-A.TT.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  141

and  blood,  men  attached  to  him  by  real  friendship,
but  who  felt  that  they  could  ply  without  disgrace
before  his  acknowledged  superiority.  But  even  the
inheritor  of  a  throne  had  no  such  personal  influence
as  nature's  emperor,  the  first  of  the  Csesars.  Augustus,
great  as  he  was  in  genius  as  well  as  in  station,
scarcely  found  such  willing  subservience  among  the
citizens  of  his  native  country.  Agrippa  became  too
powerful  to  continue  really  his  friend;  the  self-
respect  even  of  Maecenas  grew  at  last  irksome  to
him.  He  had  recourse  to  the  venal  attachment  of
his  freedmen,  whose  fidelity  exacted  no  requital,  and
hardly  expected  an  acknowledgment ;  and  of  these
he  held  many  in  intimacy,  and  cultivated  their  esteem.
The  names  of  Polybius  and  Hilarion,  of  Licinus,
Eunus,  and  Celadus,  occur  in  history  or  inscriptions
among  the  trusty  freedmen  of  the  first  princeps.1
He  neither  required  of  them  degrading  services,  nor
again  did  he  suffer  them  to  gorge  themselves  with
the  spoils  of  his  suitors.  He  enjoyed  the  solace  of
their  intimacy,  and  when  most  anxious  for  privacy,
and  the  ever-coveted  respite  from  the  formalities  of
patrician  life,  it  was  in  the  suburban  villa  of  one  of
these  humble  ministers  that  he  would  disburden
himself  of  the  cares  of  his  station.2  Tiberius,  whose
strict  self-discipline,  at  least  till  the  later  years  of
his  retirement,  was  even  more  severe  and  unremitting,
allowed  himself  no  such  relaxation;  his  freedmen
were  few  in  number,  and  seem  to  have  enjoyed  no
portion  of  his  confidence.  The  perturbed  spirit  of
Caius  was  agitated  by  restless  furies  which  never
suffered  him  to  seek  repose,  or  court  the  charms  of
simplicity  for  a  moment.  During  the  fitful  fever  of
his  brief  grasp  of  power,  he  never  threw  off  the  public
man  and  the  sovereign ;  he  never  sought  the  shade,
or  cast  upon  another  the  cares  and  toils  of  his  awful

1  Suet.  Oct.  67,  101.,  with  notes  of  Baumgarten-Crusius

2  Suet.  Oct.  72.

142  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  u

preeminence.  None  ever  possessed  more  than  a  mo-
mentary influence  over  him.  But  the  fashion  of  keep-
ing freedmen  always  in  attendance  on  the  Eoman
noble  had  become,  from  the  prevailing  indolence  of
the  age,  by  this  time  general,  and  Caius  had  many
such  about  his  court,  though  he  deigned  to  make
little  use  of  them.  When,  therefore,  a  prince  suc-
ceeded to  whom  ministers  and  confidants  were  a
necessity,  the  institution  was  ready  to  his  hands.
The  various  services,  partly  official,  partly  menial,
which  monarchs  in  modern  times  have  been  allowed
by  the  spirit  of  feudalism  to  exact  from  their  noble
vassals,  were  discharged  for  Claudius  by  these  Grecian
adventurers.  Polybius  was  the  director  of  his  studies,
who  unrolled  for  him  perhaps  the  dusty  volumes  of
Etruscan  lore,  in  which  he  pretended  to  instruct  his
countrymen.  Narcissus  was  his  secretary;  Pallas
was  his  steward.  To  Felix,  the  brother  of  Pallas,
he  gave  the  command  of  a  province  and  an  army.
The  eunuch  Posides,  whatever  his  special  functions
may  have  been,  was  among  that  class  of  his  intimate
attendants  which  the  Roman  borrowed  from  the  do-
mestic establishments  of  the  East.  Narcissus  was
the  most  confidential  of  his  advisers;  Harpocras,
Myron,  Arnphaeus,  Pheronactes,  and  Drusillanus,  are
mentioned,  though  with  no  specified  offices,  among
the  friends  and  favourites,  who  shared  in  the  cares,
or  amused  the  leisure  of  a  patron  who  lacked  the
faculty  of  originating  for  himself  either  his  employ-
ments or  his  diversions.1  These  were  the  men  who
secured  the  intimacy  of  the  chief  of  the  Eoman  no-
bility ;  they  occupied  his  attention  to  the  exclusion
of  senators  and  consulars ;  they  suggested  the  mea-
sures of  his  administration,  engaged  favourable  au-
diences for  foreign  potentates,  directed  the  appoint-
ment of  proconsuls  and  legates,  controlled  the

'  Suet.  Claud.  28.:  Scnec.  ApocoJ.  14.;  Tertull.  d?.  Pali  5

A.0.41-.A.IT.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  143

march  of  armies  and  the  campaigns  of  imperators ;
these  were  the  men  who  determined  with  Messalina
who  should  be  the  victims  of  delation,  who  were  the
fattest  for  sacrifice,  who  the  most  pliant  for  cor-
ruption ;  to  these  every  noble  Roman,  every  wealthy
foreigner,  paid  court  by  presents  and  flatteries ;  upon
these  Messalina  bestowed  her  own  favours,  and  pro-
cured for  them  within  the  walls  of  the  palace  itself
the  noblest  women  of  Rome.1  Most  of  these  men
amassed  colossal  fortunes ;  the  wealth  of  Pallas  and
Narcissus  became  proverbial;  and  when  Claudius
was  once  heard  to  complain  of  the  slenderness  of  his
own  imperial  revenues,  it  was  replied  that  he  would
be  rich  enough  if  his  two  wealthy  freedmen  would
deign  to  take  him  into  partnership.2  Both  the  one
and  the  other  of  these  favourites  were  honoured  by
the  senate  with  the  insignia  of  high  magistracies,
though  it  was  impossible  to  admit  them  to  such
offices  themselves,  and  they  were  loaded,  moreover,
with  enormous  grants  of  public  money.3  As  long  as
the  good  understanding  between  the  empress  and  the
freedmen  was  maintained  by  mutual  compliances,
the  emperor  remained  the  infatuated  victim  of  their
heinous  conspiracy.  He  continued  to  be  deluded  for
years  with  the  notion  that  he  was  governing  Rome
with  the  energy  of  an  ancient  consul  or  dictator,  but
his  operations,  contrived  and  guided  by  their  hands,
were  little  more  than  the  mere  shadows  of  sovereignty :
if  he  made  the  laws,  the  administration  of  them,  in
which  alone  the  real  government  consisted,  was  still

1  Suet.  Claud.  24.;  Dion,  Ix.  2,  17,  18.

2  Suet.  Claud.  28. :  "  Abundaturum  si  a  duobus  libertis  in  consor-
tium reciperetur." Of  Narcissus  Dion  says  (Ix  34.),  fnvpidSas  ir\e(ovs
(JLvptew  elxf,  KO.I  irpocrf'txov  ««T«5  ir6\(is  Kal  jSacriAeiy. Of  Pallas  Tacitus
(/4nn.  xii.  53.): "  Pallanti centies quadragies sestertium censuit
consul  designatus." Juvenal,  i.  108.:  "Ego  possideo  plus  Pallante
et  Licinis."

*  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  38.,  xii.  53.  Pliny  (Epp.  vii.  29.,  viii.  6.)  mentions
the  senatusconsultum,  and  the  monument  erected  to  Pallas  with  au
inscription.

144  HISTORY OF THE HOMANS  CH.  I,

subjected  to  their  control,  and  was  exercised  from
East  to  West  by  their  creatures.  Claudius,  under  the
influence  of  his  wives  and  children,  enacted  not  their
prince  but  their  minister.1

Such  at  least  is  the  conclusion  to  which  the  testi-
mony of  all  our  authorities  would  lead  us.  Never-
theless, if  the  evil  influences  of  the  Claudian  court
were  so  paramount  as  they  are  described,  it  must  be
deemed  strange  that  its  public  policy  was  so  well
directed,  and  on  the  whole  so  nobly  executed,  as  we
have  seen  it  to  have  been,  and  that  the  scandals  of
the  reign  of  Messalina  and  the  freedmen  are  confined
for  the  most  part  to  the  interior  of  the  palace.  It
will  be  seen,  as  we  proceed,  that  the  worst  enormities
of  the  government  of  Claudius  refer  to  affairs  on  which
we  are  quite  unable  to  speak  with  certainty ;  while
the  merits  of  his  principate,  whatever  estimate  we
may  form  of  them,  relate  precisely  to  the  matters
which  are  most  patent  to  the  judgment  of  history.
To  return,  however,  to  the  narrative  before  us.  Even
in  the  first  year  of  the  new  reign,  while  the  public
conduct  of  the  emperor,  both  at  home  and  abroad,
was  earning  merited  applause,  the  imperial  family
was  torn  with  jealousies,  and  harassed  by  intrigues.
Among  the  first  acts  of  Claudius  was  the
•istersofcaius,  recall  from  banishment  of  the  sisters  of

and  second  /~« .  i,-mjr  i  •  « . •  •  i  i

banishment  of  (Jams :  but  Messalina,  it  is  said,  was  jealous

of  Julia's  fascinations,  and,  irritated  at  the

secret  interviews  she  was  reported  to  enjoy  with  her

uncle,  succeeded  in  driving  her  once  more  into  exile

for  her  reputed  irregularities. Her  punishment  was

shared  by  the  philosopher  Seneca,  who  was  alleged

Banishment to  have  criminally  intrigued  with  her. He

seneca. wag  connne(35  ^y  a  decree  of  the  senate,  to

the  rude  and  unhealthy  island  of  Corsica.2 Here

1  Suet.  Claud.  29. :  "  His  uxoribusque  deditus,  non  principem  sed
ministrum  egit."

2  Dion.  Ix.  8. ;  Senec. Consol.  ad  Polyb.  30,  32. Claudius,  says
Seneca,  "  me  deiecit  quidem,  sed  impulsum  a  fortuna  et  cadeutem

4.D.41-A.U.794.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  145

he  was  detained  for  some  years,  apparently  till  the
fall  of  Messalina  herself;  yet  it  is  at  least  remark-
able, that  his  voice,  which  has  uttered  some  of  the
fiercest  denunciations  of  the  crimes  and  vices  of
the  emperor,  should  be  totally  silent  on  the  enor-
mities of  the  empress.  It  has  already  been  noticed
that  Caius  had  intended  to  put  the  great  Stoic  mo-
ralist to  death  for  no  other  reason  than  the  reputation
of  his  wealth,  and  at  a  later  period  we  again  read  of
him  as  one  of  the  richest  men  of  his  time.  It  would
seem,  therefore,  that  on  this  occasion  he  was  not  de-
prived of  his  estates  ;  and  if  Messalina  was  really  the
promoter  of  his  exile,  the  prosecution  cannot  be  im-
puted to  the  cupidity  so  generally  ascribed  to  her.
Of  the  wretched  Julia  we  hear  no  more  but  that  the
malice  of  her  persecutors  was  not  yet  satisfied,  and
that  she  was  not  suffered  long  to  survive  her  second
disgrace.1

The  year  795  was  marked,  according  to  the  same
authorities,  by  a  crime  of  still  deeper  atro-  ;peath  of  Ap.
city,  ascribed  to  the  same  baneful  influence.  PiU9Silanus-
The  shamelessness  of  the  empress  and  the  weakness
of  the  man  she  governed,  were  frightfully  exemplified
in  the  death  of  Appius  Silanus.2  This  nobleman,
the  head  at  this  period  of  the  great  Junian  house,
was  connected  with  the  ^Emilii,  the  Cassii,  and  with
the  Caesars  themselves :  Claudius  proposed  to  draw
still  closer  the  bonds  of  alliance  between  their  families,
and  strengthen  thereby  the  bulwarks  of  his  own  im-
perial throne.3  With  this  view  be  recalled  him  from

sustinuit,  et  in  prseceps  euntem  leniter  divinse  manus  usus  moderatione
deposuit."  An  enemy  of  Seneca  denounces  him  at  a  later  period  as
"  domus  Germanici  adulterum."  Tac.  Ann  xiii.  42.

1  Suet.  Claud.  29. ;  Dion,  Ix.  8,  18.

2  Dion  (Ix.  14.)  calls  him  erroneously  Caius  Appius  Silanus  :  his
praenomen  was  Appius,  and  his  nomen  Junius.

*  Appius  Silanus  was  married  first  to  ^Emilia  Lepida,  the  great
granddaughter  of  Augustus,  through  the  two  Julias. By  her  he  had
two  sons,  Marcus  and  Lucius,  and  a  daughter  Junta  Calvina. Le-
YOL,  VI.  L

146  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  u

the  command  of  a  province  in  Spain,  united  him  in
marriage  with  the  mother  of  the  empress,  and  affi-
anced his  son  to  his  own  daughter  Octavia,  then  a
tender  infant.  But,  from  whatever  cause,  Messalina,
it  seems,  conceived  an  implacable  enmity  against
him :  it  was  surmised  that  she  had  cast  on  him  amor-
ous glances  which  he  had  not  deigned  to  return ;  at
all  events,  she  resolved  on  his  destruction,  and  con-
certed with  Narcissus  an  extraordinary  plan  for  its
accomplishment.  Early  one  morning  the  favourite,
for  Narcissus  at  this  moment  stood  foremost  in  his
patron's  graces,  burst  suddenly  into  his  apartment,
with  affected  alarm,  and  related  that  he  had  dreamt
that  night  that  the  emperor  had  been  murdered  by
Silanus.  Messalina,  the  partner  of  the  imperial
chamber,  thereupon  declared  that,  strange  to  relate,
the  very  same  vision  had  occurred  also  to  herself.
Claudius  was  horrified  and  bewildered.  At  the  next
moment  Silanus  presented  himself,  according  to  a
previous  appointment ;  but  in  his  consternation  the
appointment  had  slipped  altogether  from  the  empe-
ror's memory,  and  he  beheld  in  his  unseasonable  in-
trusion, a  proof  of  his  meditated  crime.  The  con-
federates seized  their  advantage :  they  hastily  extorted
from  their  dupe  an  order  for  their  victim's  arrest  and
immediate  execution ;  and  the  next  day  Claudius  re-
counted the  occurrence  to  the  senate,  and  publicly
thanked  the  faithful  servant  who,  even  in  his  sleep,
had  watched  over  his  patron's  safety.1  In  this  or
similar  ways,  we  are  assured,  died  many  others  also,
who  seemed  to  stand  in  the  way  of  Messalina  and
her  accomplice.  Whenever  they  wanted  to  rid

pidus  the  triumvir  and  Cassms  the  tribune  were  among  the  con-
nexions of  this  family.  Caius  Caligula  had  married  Claudia  or
Claudilla,  daughter  of  a  M.  Silanus,  consul  in  772.  See  the  Genea-
logical Tables  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.

1 Suet  Claud.  37.;  Dion,  /.  c. Tacitus  alludes  to  this  murder,
Ann.  xi.  29.

A.7X42-A.U.795.  TTNDETC THE EMPIRE.  147

themselves  of  an  enemy,  nothing  was  easier  than  to
excite  the  dotard's  apprehensions  and  procure  a  sen-
tence of  death,  disgrace,  or  banishment.  In  his  mo-
ments of  terror  he  was  ready  to  subscribe  his  name
to  any  order  of  cruelty  or  injustice  :  as  soon  as  the
paroxysm  had  subsided,  he  would  forget  all  that  had
passed,  and  was  known  to  inquire  sometimes  the  next
day  for  the  persons  he  had  so  recently  consigned  to
the  executioner,  and  to  wonder  at  their  absence  from
his  table.  When  reminded  of  the  cause  of  their  non-
appearance,  he  was  visibly  surprised  and  mortified.1
It  seems  probable  that  this  imputation  of  extraor-
dinary weakness  and  obliviousness  is  merely  a  per-
version of  some  actual  instances  of  absence  of  mind,
not  unpardonable,  perhaps,  in  one  so  painfully  oc-
cupied with  cares  and  manifold  occupations  ;  but  we
have  seen  enough  of  the  earnestness  and  general
good  sense  of  Claudius  to  question  the  truth  of
charges  which  would  ascribe  to  him,  while  yet  in  the
full  activity  of  his  faculties,  whatever  they  may  have
been,  the  infatuation  of  second  childishness.

Meanwhile  the  spirit  of  resistance  to  the  imperial
tyranny  which  had  so  long  slumbered  in  conspiracy  of
the  breasts  of  a  trampled  aristocracy,  but  ynds£"buosm-
had  at  last  awakened  under  the  insane  des-  anu8'
potism  of  Caius,  continued  to  pervade  the  ranks  of
the  senate  and  knights.  The  blow  struck  by  Chaerea
had  been,  as  we  have  seen,  almost  accidental  ;  it  was
unconnected,  at  least,  with  any  general  conspiracy;
and  the  sudden  resolve  of  the  praetorians  found  the
chiefs  of  the  state  unprepared  and  vacillating.  But
since  the  opportunity  for  acting  had  passed  away,
many  plans  of  action  had  been  discussed  and  con-
certed. The  ease  with  which  the  tyrant  had  been
overthrown  astonished  the  men  who  had  so  long
shrunk  from  the  attempt.  The  obtrusion  of  a  weak,

Cleud.  39.  ;  Dion,  I.  c,
I-  3

148  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CIT.  L.

but  not  the  less  dangerous  despot  upon  them,  though
at  first  sullenly  acquiesced  in,  was  all  the  more  deeply
resented.  A  common  sympathy  drew  together  many
of  the  nobles  to  overthrow  the  existing  government
and  replace  it  by  a  better  system,  or  at  least  by  a
better  man.  Their  eyes  were  cast  upon  Annius  Vini-
cianus,  as  apparently  the  fittest  of  their  class  to  re-
construct the  authority  of  the  senate.  But  the  fruit-
less act  of  the  gallant  tribune  had  warned  them  that
it  was  not  enough  merely  to  strike  down  the  occupant
of  the  throne ;  it  was  necessary  to  secure  the  support
of  a  legionary  force,  strong  enough  to  control  the
praetorians,  and  protect  the  cradle  of  new-born  liberty.
Of  the  special  claims  of  Vinicianus  to  the  post  assigned
nim  we  have  no  account ;  from  his  name  we  may  con-
jecture that  he  was  a  Vinicius,  allied  to  the  reigning
family,  and  adopted  into  the  ancient  house  of  the
Annii.  Among  the  conspirators  was  Furius  Camillus
Scribonianus,  proconsul  of  Dalmatia ;  and  this  man,
endeared  perhaps  to  the  troops  he  commanded  by
the  late  successes  of  a  Camillus  in  Africa,  if  not  by
the  recollection  of  his  ancestor's  exploits  against  the
Grauls,  offered  to  bring  a  military  force  to  support
the  contemplated  movement.  Intoxicated  with  the
confidence  of  success,  he  hurled  defiance  at  the  em-
peror from  his  camp  beyond  the  Adriatic,  and  sum-
moned him  scornfully  to  descend  from  his  throne
and  hide  his  head  in  obscurity.  Claudius,  we  are
assured,  was  smitten  with  consternation.  He  took
the  warning  of  the  rebel  legate  into  serious  consid-
eration, and  actually  debated  with  his  courtiers  on
the  necessity  of  submission.1  But  the  vaunts  of  Ca-
millus, as  it  soon  appeared,  were  empty  and  ineffec-
tual. When  he  disclosed  his  intentions  to  the  soldiers,
and  invited  them  to  follow  him  into  Italy,  in  the  name
of  the  ancient  republic,  he  found  them  altogether

Suet.  Claud.  13.  35. ;  Dion,  lx.  15. Tacitus  alludes  to  the  event
which  he  had  narrated  in  one  of  his  lost  books,  in  Ann.  xii.  58.

4.D.42-A.D.795.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  149

indifferent,  or  rather  hostile  to  a  cry  they  scarcely
comprehended.  When  they  turned  their  swords
against  him  he  had  no  resource  but  in  speedy  flight
to  an  island  off  the  coast ;  and  even  there  he  seems  to
have  been  speedily  surprised  and  killed  by  one  of  his
angry  officers.1  The  legions  which  had  behaved  with
such  unexpected  fidelity  were  loaded  with  caresses  by
the  emperor.  The  Seventh  and  Eleventh  received
from  the  Senate  the  appellations  of  Claudian,  Pious,
and  Faithful.  The  discovery  of  the  plot  was  followed
by  a  bloody  proscription.  The  guiltiest  or  the  most
conspicuous,  and  among  them  Vinicianus  himself,
were  subjected  to  judicial  sentence ;  others  escaped
condemnation  by  suicide.  Claudius  in  his  terror
forgot  his  regulations  regarding  the  testimony  of
slaves,  and  invited  denunciations  without  scruple
from  every  quarter :  yet  it  is  recorded  that  he  gene-
rally spared  the  families  of  the  culprits,  and  remitted
in  their  favour  the  confiscation  of  the  forfeited  estates.
Among  the  sufferers  was  one  only  of  the  rank  of
prsetor ;  and  he  was  required  to  abdicate  his  office,
before  the  emperor  would  subject  him  to  the  pun-
ishment of  the  sword.  Narcissus  and  Polybius,  sup-
ported by  Messalina,  bore  the  principal  odium  of  this
inquisition ;  those  who  suffered,  and  those  who  es-
caped, were  supposed  to  owe  their  fortune  respectively
to  the  demands  advanced  by  court-favourites  for  their
condemnation  or  acquittal,  and  these,  in  either  case,
sought  only  their  personal  emolument.  The  famous
and  affecting  story  of  Arria  and  Pa3tus  is  connected
with  this  proscription,  and  may  serve  to  impress  it
on  our  recollection.2

1  Tacitus (Hist.  11.  75.) mentions this  deed,  the  name  of  the
soldier,  and  the  fact  of  his  receiving  high  promotion  in  consequence.
It  is  curious  that  a  circumstance,  apparently  so  notorious,  should
have  been  unknown  to  Dion,  who  says  that  Camillus  threw  hiinself
on  his  own  sword.

2  Suet.,  Dion,  //.  cc. The  story  of  Arria  and  Psetus  is  told  af
length  by  the  younger  Pliny,  Epint.  in.  16. Comp.  Martial,  i 14.

150  HISTORY OF THE fcOMANS  C«.  1

The discovery of this formidable combination
against  his life  and  power  might easily

Strange  inoon-  1,1  t  j  • •

•istency  in  the  render  the  shy  and  suspicious  emperor  a
cond'ict'of  e  mere  puppet  henceforth  in  the  hands  of
his  advisers.1  Then  commenced,  we  might
suppose,  in  earnest  the  reign  of  Messalina  and  the
freedmen :  thenceforth  the  pretended  ruler  of  the
state  might  be  expected  to  withdraw  more  and  more
from  public  observation,  and  every  affair  of  govern-
ment to  be  transacted  by  the  agency  of  his  confiden-
tial instruments.  The  man  who  had  deliberated  on
retiring  from  power  at  the  first  challenge  of  an  auda-
cious rival,  who  again  after  the  suppression  of  the
revolt,  essayed,  as  we  are  assured,  to  abdicate,  but
was  prevented  by  influence  behind  the  throne,  could
scarcely  recover  courage  to  wield  the  sceptre  of  the
world  from  the  height  of  the  Palatium.2  Accord-
ingly, we  may  picture  to  ourselves  the  corruption
which  would  now  pervade  every  department  of  public
affairs,  subject  as  they  were  to  the  control  of  a  de-
graded and  venal  crew,  and  veiled  by  their  contrivance
from  the  scrutiny  of  the  nominal  ruler.  We  may
imagine  the  wiles  of  the  depraved  and  wanton  Mes-
salina ;  how  she  steeped  the  senses  of  her  consort  in
brutal  indulgences  ;  how  she  pandered  to  his  grossest
appetites,  while  she  gratified  her  own  amorous  ca-
prices or  satiated  her  cupidity  unobserved.  All  this,
indeed,  and  more  stands  recorded  on  the  page  of  what
is  designated  as  the  history  of  Home  ;  and  it  is  only
here  and  there  that  a  corner  of  the  veil  is  raised,  and

1  There  is  an  obscure  reference  to  a  second  attempt  against
Claudius  by  Asinius  Gallus,  son  of  the  Gallus  whom  Tiberius  had
put  to  death,  and  Statilius  Corvinus,  the  one  the  grandson  of  Pollio,
the  other  of  Messala,  in  Suetonius,  Claud.  13.  and  Dion,  Ix.  27.  The
conspiracy  was  abortive,  and  its  authors  seem  to  have  been  treated
with  contemptuous  lenity.  Of  Gallus  Dion  says,  aftiKpATarus  Kal
StxreiSfOTOTos  &v,  KO.K  TOVTOV  Kma.<ppovr)6f\s ,  ytXiara.  juaAAo*'  $  KivSvvoi

%<f>\fV.

•  Suet.  Claud  36

4.0.43-A.U.79G.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  151

we  are  permitted  to  see  the  unfortunate  Claudius  still
acting  as  emperor  of  the  Eomans,  still  presiding  on
the  tribunals,  still  listening  with  patience,  if  not  with
favour,  to  the  pertinacious  attacks  on  his  own  power-
ful freedmen,  which  the  most  eloquent  pleader  of  the
day  did  not  hesitate  to  launch  against  them1,  still
assisting  at  the  deliberations  of  the  senate,  still  con-
trolling the  affairs  of  provinces  and  nations,  devis-
ing schemes  and  settling  the  details  of  colonization,
thirsting  for  military  toils  in  addition  to  his  intense
application  to  business  at  home,  and,  coward  as  we
are  assured  he  was,  actually  quitting  Rome,  the  focus
of  hostile  intrigue,  and  throwing  himself,  like  another
Augustus,  into  the  wildest  fastnesses  of  barbarian
enemies.  Such  are  the  strange  inconsistencies  of  the
history  before  us,  which  it  only  remains  for  us  to  set
over  against  one  another,  but  which  we  cannot  pre-
tend to  reconcile  or  explain.

Accordingly,  the  year  796,  the  next  which  followed
on  the  abortive  attempt  of  the  malcontents,

.  , ,  r m T  '±t Campaign  and

witnessed  the  progress  ot Claudius  with  triumph  of

.,.,  p • °  r, ,. . , ,•• T.  ,.  Claudius.

military  pomp  from  Ostia  into  the  heart  ot
Britain,  an  expedition  the  particulars  of  which  may
be  reserved  for  another  chapter.  Claudius  was  absent
from  the  city  six  months.  On  his  return  he  was
greeted  by  the  senate  with  a  decree  for  a  triumph,  an
honour  not  unmerited  by  his  success.8  He  assumed

1  Quintil.  Inst.  Oral.  vi.  3, 81.:  "  Afer  cum  ageret  contra  libertum
Claudii  Csesaris,  et  ex  diverse  quidam  conditionis  ejusdem,  cujus  erat
litigator,  exclamasset,  Prseterea  tu  semper  in  libertos  Caesaris  dicis:
Nee mehercule,  inquit,  quidquam proficio." This  was  the  same
Domitius  Afer  who  had  aided  Sejanus  in  persecuting  the  family  of
Gerrnanicus,  and  who  had  pretended  to  be  overcome  by  the  eloquence
of  Caius. Pliny  and  Quintilian  speak  of  him  as  the  greatest  orator
of  his  time,  and  we  have  seen  that  he  was  one  of  the  supplest  of
courtiers. Yet  he  stood  up  against  the  freedmen  of  Claudius,  and
survived  most  of  them,  dying  at  last  in  prosperity  and  honour  in  the
sixth  year  of  Nero. Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  19.

2  Suet.  Claud.  17.; Tac.  Agric.  13.; Dion,  Ix.  19.  foil.; Plin.
Hist.  Nat.  xxxiii.  16. On  his  return  Claudius  seems  to  have  atan-

]52  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  L

in  token  of  his  exploits  the  title  of  Britamricus,  an
appellation  which  was  communicated,  moreover,  to  his
infant  son,  and  which  has  superseded  in  history  the
name  of  Tiberius  Claudius  Grermanicus,  by  which  the
child  had  been  originally  designated.  The  triumph
of  Claudius  was  rendered  remarkable  by  his  voluntary
self-abasement  in  climbing  the  steps  of  the  Capitoline
temple  on  his  knees,  an  act  performed,  perhaps,  IL
imitation  of  Julius  Caesar.1  It  was  followed  by  solemr
games,  and  was  made  the  occasion  of  bestowing  many
gracious  distinctions,  both  civil  and  military,  on  the
most  deserving  officers  of  the  state.  If  Claudius  was
proud  of  appearing  to  rival  Augustus,  not  less  did  he
pique  himself  on  comparing  his  beloved  Messalina  to
the  chaste  and  noble  Livia.  To  her  accordingly,  as
to  the  consort  of  the  first  princeps  before  her,  were
decreed  at  his  instance  a  seat  of  honour  by  her  hus-
band's side  on  all  public  occasions,  and  the  permission
to  ride  in  the  carpentum,  which  had  formerly  been
forbidden  to  the  sex  by  the  law  of  Oppius,  and  was
still  generally  confined  to  sacerdotal  personages  at
the  greatest  solemnities.2  So  unworthy,  however,  was
the  chief  of  the  Eoman  matrons  of  these  honourable
distinctions,  that  when  the  brass  coinage  of  Caius  was
called  in  by  the  decree  of  the  senate,  she  obtained
the  metal  to  cast  of  it  statues  of  a  dancer  named
Mnester,  with  whom  she  was  furiously  smitten.3  Like
so  many  others  of  the  men  on  whom  she  fixed  her

doned  the  ^Emilian  Way,  and  embarked  on  the  canal  by  which
Augustus  connected  the  Po  with  the  Adriatic  at  Kavenna.  Plin.
H.  N.  in.  20.

1  Dion,  Ix.  20. See  vol.  ii.,  chapter  xix.

*  Dion,  I.e.;  Suet.  Claud.  17.  Comp.  Calig.  15.  He  had  pre-
viously made  an  exception  in  favour  of  his  mother  Antonia.  Of  the
use  of  the  carpentum  Tacitus  says  (^4nn.xii.  42.),  "Qui  mos  sacerdo-
tihus  et  sacris  antiquitus  concessna."

1  The  senate,  according  to  Dion,  caused  the  brass  coinage  which
bore  the  head  of  Caius  to  be  melted  down  from  disgust  at  the
tyrant's  memory.  Dion,  /.  c.:  nal  tvp&x^fi  M«"  TOVTO,  ov  fj.fvroi  Kal  si
rb  Bi\nov  6xa\icos  4x<S>pi\afv,  a.\\'  avSpiavras,  K.  r.  A.  I  have  already
shown  that  there  is  reason  to  surmise  that  this  coinage  was  debased,
and  am  disposed  to  doubt  the  whole  of  Dion's  story  concerning  it.

A.D.43-A.U.796.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  153

admiration,  Mnester,  if  we  may  believe  the  historians,
was  moved  neither  by  caresses  nor  menaces  to  gratify
her,  and  was  at  last  only  driven  into  her  embraces  by
the  express  command  of  the  emperor  himself,  to  whom
she  had  ventured  shamelessly  to  apply  for  it.  In  thia
and  many  other  cases,  we  are  told,  Messalina  solicited
a  like  indulgence  from  her  fond  and  facile  spouse,
and  he  without  hesitation  complied.1  At  other  times
when  she  wandered  from  the  imperial  couch  in  quest
of  the  coarsest  gratifications,  she  would  cause  one  of
her  handmaids  to  take  her  place  by  the  side  of  the
besotted  slumberer.2  It  seems  necessary  to  say  thus
much  upon  the  subject,  disgusting  as  our  authorities
have  represented  it,  in  order  to  show  how  grossly
improbable  are  the  details  of  Messalina's  licentious-
ness, and  to  guard  the  reader  against  too  easy  a  belief
in  some  astounding  incidents  which  have  yet  to  be
related.

We  seem,  indeed,  in  perusing  the  narrative  before
us,  to  be  weltering  in  a  dream  of  horrors,
which,  nevertheless,  exert  over  us  a  kind  of  program  ?n
fascination,  and  however  we  may  pause  at
intervals  to  question  the  phantasms  they  present  to
us,  forbid  us  to  shake  off  our  constrained  assent  to
their  reality. The  destruction  of  Julia,  which  had
followed  shortly  after  her  second  banishment,  was
succeeded  at  no  long  interval  by  the  death  of  her
husband  Vinicius. Messalina,  says the  historian,
was  apprehensive  of  his  vengeance :  Messalina,  adds
the  historian  in  the  same  sentence,  was  incensed  at
his  repudiation  of  her  licentious  advances. If  such
different  statements  are  not  in  themselves  absolutely

1  Dion,  I.e.:  rb  5"  aurb  TOVTO  Kal  irpbs  &\\ovs  crvxvobs  firparrfv.

2  Dion,  Ix.  18.,  compared  with  the  well-known  passage  in  the  sixth
satire  of  Juvenal. Aurelius  Victor  and  the  elder  Pliny  repeat  also
some  scandalous  stories  which  bear  on  their  faces  strong  marks  of  &
prurient  invention. It  will  appear  from  her  mother's  age,  which  will
be  noticed  by  and  by,  that  Messalina  must  have  been  married  from
the  nursery. She  can  hardly  have  been  more  than  eighteen  at  this
lime.

154  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  1*

incompatible,  it  will  be  admitted  at  least  that  they  are
open  to  suspicion ;  and  when  we  find  that  the  over-
throw of  Vinicius  was  effected  by  no  overt  act,  no
public  charge  and  judicial  sentence,  but  was  popularly
ascribed  to  the  occult  agency  of  poison  administered
by  the  contrivance  of  the  empress,  a  cloud  of  distrust
must  be  allowed  to  rest  on  the  whole  story.1  Hitherto
we  have  been  left  to  the  inferior  authority  of  Dion
or  Suetonius ;  but  now,  at  last,  we  seem  to  recover
the  guidance  of  a  firmer  hand,  and  the  next  act  of
Messalina's  wickedness  is  described  in  the  pages  of
Tacitus.  The  great  chasm  in  this  writer's  annals
extends  from  the  death  of  Tiberius,  at  the  end  of  his
sixth,  to  the  seventh  year  of  Claudius,  in  the  middle
of  his  eleventh  book.2  In  this  year,  the  800th  of  the
city,  Valerius  Asiaticus,  whose  high  position

Destruction  of J '  ,  ,  ..  j?  r>  i_  1 I J 1.

Valerius  Asia-  among  the  nobles  of  Koine  has  already  been
mentioned,  was  one  of  the  consuls.  The
connexion  imputed  to  him  with  a  woman  named
Poppsea  is  said  to  have  given  offence  to  Messalina,
who  coveted,  moreover,  the  gardens  of  Lucullus  on
the  Pincian  hill,  which  he  had  inherited,  and  which
he  was  adorning  with  more  magnificence  than  ever.
She  induced  a  delator  named  Suilius  to  assail  the  pair
with  a  charge  of  adultery,  and  caused  Sosibius,  the
tutor  of  her  child  Britannicus,  to  suggest  to  the  em-
peror at  the  same  time  how  dangerous  were  the
wealth  and  influence  of  such  a  man,  one  who  was
supposed  to  have  been  a  chief  instigator  of  the
murder  of  Caius,  who  had  extolled  the  act  and
claimed  glory  for  it  in  public,  whose  high  considera-
tion extended  from  the  city  to  the  provinces,  and
who,  it  was  reported,  was  about  to  betake  himself  to
Gaul,  of  which  he  was  a  native,  and  where  he  had
great  connexions,  and  place  himself  at  the  head  of
the  Germanic  legions.  The  army  was  already  be-

1  Dion.  lx.  27.  »  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  1.

A.D.47-A.U.800. UNDER  THE  EMPIBE.  155

Doming  an  object  of  jealousy  to  the  emperor.  Clau-
dius was  in  a  moment  alarmed  at  the  prospect  of
rebellion  and  civil  war.  He  immediately  summoned
his  guards,  and  sent  Crispinus,  the  prefect  of  the
praetorians,  with  a  detachment  to  Baise,  where  Asi-
aticus  was  seized  in  his  villa,  thrown  into  chains,  and
hurried  to  the  city.  The  consul  was  not  allowed  to
defend  himself  before  the  senate :  the  trial,  if  such
it  may  be  called,  was  conducted  in  the  private  apart-
ments of  the  emperor,  in  the  presence  of  his  creatures
and  freedmen.  Charges  of  licentiousness  and  of
treasonable  practices  were  strangely  mixed  up  to-
gether, and  advanced  against  him  by  Suilius  and
Messalina  herself,  bat  these  he  treated  with  lofty
disregard,  till  the  imputation  of  disgraceful  effemi-
nacy roused  the  spirit  of  the  Roman  noble  within
him.  His  energetic  and  passionate  defence  had
great  effect  upon  Claudius,  and  even  drew  tears  of
sensibility  from  the  empress,  who  slipped  out  of  the
room  to  conceal  her  emotion,  whispering  only  to  a
confederate,  as  she  passed,  that  the  criminal,  never-
theless, must  not  be  suffered  to  escape.1  Asiaticus
was  remanded,  but  Poppsea,  in  the  meanwhile,  under
the  terror  of  impending  condemnation,  was  induced
to  put  an  end  to  her  own  life.  The  catastrophe  was
concealed  from  Claudius,  who  invited  her  husband
some  days  afterwards  to  his  table,  and  wondered  why
he  had  come  without  his  wife.  /  have  just  lost  her,
he  quietly  replied,  and  sat  down  to  supper.2

Among  the  prosecutors  of  the  unfortunate  Asiaticus
was  L.  Vitellius,  one  of  the  most  notorious
of  the  class  of  court  flatterers,  in  which  he  flatteries  of

,,  . „  „  i  • i • i i  • ,1 I/.  Vitellius.

was  the  more  infamous  from  his  high  birth

and  station. Under  Tiberius  he  had  governed  Syria,

and  had  done  good  service  to  the  state  and  its  ruler

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  2.

*  Tac.  L  c.:  "  Ad  quod  functam  fato  respondent." The  husband
of  Poppaea  was  a  Scipio.

156  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  L.

in  requiring  the  king  of  Parthia  to  pay  homage  to
the  emperor's  portrait  on  the  legionary  standards.1
He  was  the  first  of  the  citizens  who  actually  adored
Caius  as  a  god.  On  his  return  from  his  province  he
entered  the  august  presence  with  his  head  covered,
with  measured  steps  and  downcast  eyes,  as  a  wor-
shipper, and  finally  prostrated  himself  at  the  feet  of
the  divinity.  When  Caius,  in  his  maddest  mood,
asked  him  if  he  had  never  seen  him  in  the  em  brace  of
Luna,  he  adroitly  replied  that  the  (rods  alone  had  the
privilege  of  beholding  one  another.2  From  this  time
Vitellius  reigned  at  Home  as  the  prince  of  flatterers.
After  the  death  of  his  first  patron  he  attached  himself
not  less  sedulously  to  Claudius  and  his  favourites.
He  sought  and  obtained  the  honour  of  taking  off
Messalina's  sandals,  one  of  which  he  would  carry
in  his  bosom  and  frequently  take  out  and  kiss  with
fervour.  He  placed  golden  statues  of  Narcissus  and
Pallas  among  the  images  of  his  own  family.  Envied
for  his  success  in  this  career  of  ignominy,  he  became
the  object  of  many  scandalous  imputations,  and  the
high-minded  Asiaticus  complained  that  he  should  owe
his  ruin  to  the  arts  of  so  shameless  a  libertine.  Vitel-
lius himself  pretended  to  lament  the  fall  of  his  ancient
friend ;  he  enumerated  the  services  of  Asiaticus  and
his  family,  and  when  Claudius  actually  deliberated  on
acquitting  him,  made  a  merit  of  demanding  for  him
the  favour  of  being  allowed  to  choose  his  mode  of
death.  Claudius,  ever  swayed  by  the  last  speaker,
graciously  consented,  and  with  this  proviso  the  sen-
tence was  recorded  against  him.  Asiaticus  de-
clined the  counsel  of  his  friends  to  starve  himself,

1  Suet.  Vitell.  1,  2.;  Calig.  14.;  Dion,  lix.  27.

Dion, ./.  c. :  Btr^AAios  (tlv  ovv,  ^KtiOev  ap£dfjievos,  irdvras  /col  jueTO
TOUTO  rota  &\\ovs  Ko\a.K(ia  uirepe/JcfAeTO.  When  Claudius  was  per-
forming the  ceremonies  of  the  hundredth  year,  Vitellius  addressed
him  with  the  words  "  Saape  facias,"  a  customary  greeting  on  occasions
of  ordinary  sacrifice,  but  involving  a  magnificent  hyperbole  in  the
case  of  a  Secular  rite.

A.D.47-A.U.800.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  157

a  course  which  might  leave  an  interval  for  the  chance
of  pardon  ;  and  after  the  lofty  fashion  of  the  ancient
Romans,  bathed,  perfumed,  and  supped  magnificently,
and  then  opened  his  veins  and  let  himself  bleed  to
death.  Before  dying  he  inspected  the  pyre  prepared
for  him  in  his  own  gardens,  and  ordered  it  to  be
removed  to  another  spot,  that  an  umbrageous  plan-
tation which  overhung  it  might  not  be  injured  by
the  flames.1

The  success  of  this  accusation  seems  to  have  incited
Suilius  to  further  delations,  and  the  success  Diiigenee  of
of  Suilius  stimulated  the  cupidity  of  many  SSSSSt^tog
other  delators.  The  fondness  of  Claudius  the  law8-
himself  for  judicial  procedure,  made  this  in  fact  a
delicate  mode  of  flattery.  He  was  proud  to  find  his
own  vigilance  in  maintaining  justice  responded  to
by  zeal  and  activity  in  the  accusers,  and  he  plumed
himself  on  not  disappointing  them  in  the  promptness
of  his  convictions,  and  the  severity  of  his  sentences.
However  well-meaning  Claudius  may  have  been,
however  much  he  may  have  confided  in  his  own  con-
scientiousness, it  is  but  too  apparent  that,  amidst  the
glitter  of  false  rhetoric,  and  the  noisy  display  of  false
sentiment  around  him,  he  had  not  the  strength  of
will  or  understanding  to  struggle  for  the  truth,  or
aim  steadily  at  the  right.  If  the  imperial  judge  was
laborious,  it  may  be  believed  that  he  was  not  unfre-
quently  capricious  and  fitful.  The  cause  which  had
dragged  painfully  through  a  long  morning  sitting
may  have  been  interrupted  occasionally  by  an  intem-
perate carousal,  and  only  resumed  with  feelings  of
weariness  and  disgust.  After  all  the  plodding  in-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  3.:  "Tantum  illi  securitatis  novissimse  fuit."  Such
is  the  generous  patrician's  sense  of  the  glories  of  his  family  estate
which  "  Manciple  nulli  datnr,  omnibus  usu."  The  suburban  planta-
tions of  the  Boman  nobility  might  be  now  of  three  hundred  years
growth.  Propertius  may  describe  to  us  how

"  Nemns  omne  satas  intendat  vertice  sylvas,
Urgetur  quantis  Caucasus  arboribus."  i.  1 4.  5.

158  HISTORY  OF THE EOMANS  CTT.  L.

dustry  he  manifested,  he  was  accused,  not  perhaps
without  foundation,  of  giving  sentence  often  with
only  one  side  heard,  sometimes  with  neither.1  With
a  master  so  vain  and  so  unstable,  surrounded  by  a
crew  of  greedy  parasites  all  playing  on  his  weak-
nesses, the  last  hope  of  the  class  over  whom  these
accusations  were  always  impending  was  to  mitigate,
if  possible,  the  zeal  of  the  accusers  by  diminishing
their  temptations.  An  ancient  law  of  the  republic
had  forbidden  the  noble  advocate  to  accept  fee  or
reward  for  the  exercise  of  his  eloquence  at  the  bar
of  justice;  yet  for  many  generations  this  dignified
piece  of  legislation  had  been  treated  as  a  dead
letter.  Hortensiiis  and  Cicero,  and  many  able
pleaders,  before  and  since,  had  erected  fortunes  on
the  grateful  acknowledgments  of  their  clients  ;  and
the  penalty  which  Augustus  had  sanctioned  for  a
violation  of  this  law  had  probably  been  rarely  en-
forced.2 The  assignment  by  Tiberius  to  the  delators
of  a  share  in  the  spoils  of  their  victims  was  an  in-
fringement of  the  spirit  of  this  regulation :  but  the
defence  of  the  imperial  majesty  was  supposed  to  over-
ride every  other  consideration.  Now  at  last,  after  a
long  interval,  the  nobles  who  had  failed  to  overthrow
the  new  tyranny  by  arms,  sought  to  repress  it  by  an

1  Senec.  Apocol.  11.:  "Quo  non  alius

Potuit  citius  discere  causas;

Una  tantum  parte  audita

Ssepe  et  neutra."

The  satirist  is  confirmed,  or  copied,  by  Suetonius  in  saying  that
Claudius  put  to  death  in  the  course  of  his  reign  thirty  senators  and
above  three  hundred  knights.  The  numbers  may  readily  be  sus-
pected. We  may  remember  the  three  hundred  whom,  according  to
one  account,  Csesar  slew  after  Thapsus,  the  three  hundred  killed  by
Antonius  at  Brundisium,  the  three  hundred  sacrificed  by  Octavius  at
Ferusia.  The  slaughters  ascribed  to  Claudius  were  not  massacres,
but  judicial  executions,  and  these  rarely,  perhaps,  for  crimes  against
himself.  His  stolid  nature  knew  no  mercy,  and  he  consigned  to  death
without  remorse  every  victim  of  a  sanguinary  code  and  of  a  harsfc
and  barbarous  procedure,
1  Dion,  liv.  }&

A.P.47--A.TT.800.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  159

appeal  to  the  law  of  Cincius,  and  demanded  in  fact
of  Claudius  the  abolition  of  what  his  predecessors
had  deemed  their  surest  safeguard.  Claudius,  with
that  strict  submission  to  the  letter  of  the  law  which
seems  to  have  been  more  strongly  marked  in  him
than  the  sense  of  equity  or  of  right  reason,  allowed
the  matter  to  be  brought  into  public  discussion.  C.
Silius,  a  consul  designate,  ventured  to  advocate  the
return  to  the  ancient  principles,  while  the  ordinary
practice  had  an  unpopular  defender  in  the  delator
Suilius.  Nevertheless,  the  senate  could  not  shut  its
eyes  to  the  injustice  and  impolicy  of  forbidding  all
remuneration  to  oratorical  talent,  and  contented  it-
self with  restricting  it  to  the  sum  of  10,000  sesterces,
about  eighty  pounds  sterling,  for  the  advocacy  of  any
single  cause ;  a  limitation  which,  had  it  been  actually
enforced,  as  we  cannot  suppose  was  the  case,  must
have  greatly  discouraged  the  profession,  the  high
consideration  of  which  has  generally  been  found  the
strongest  bulwark  against  the  authority  of  unscru-
pulous governments.  It  was  not  by  such  methods
that  the  vice  of  delation  was  to  be  checked ;  nor  do
we  find  that  this  abortive  recurrence  to  the  principles
of  a  simpler  state  of  society  had  the  slightest  effect
in  controlling  it.  As  far,  however,  as  we  can  under-
stand the  circumstances,  the  conduct  of  Claudius
seems  to  do  him  much  credit.1

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  5 — 7.  On  the  "  lex  Cincia,"  see  Cic.  de  Orat.
ii.  71.,  and  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  42.,  xv.  20.;  Plin.  Ep.  v.  21.  The  "lex
Cincia  "  seems  to  have  embraced  two  particulars:  1.  the  prohibition
of  fees  for  advocacy;  and,  2.  certain  restrictions  upon  gifts  in  ge-
neral. With  the  second, of  these  we  are  not  here  concerned:  as
regards  the  first,  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  there  was  not  some  dis-
tinction made  between  fees  paid  by  a  client  for  his  defence,  and  re-
wards assigned  by  the  state  for  the  prosecution  of  a  criminal:  the
latter  may  naturally  have  become  a  matter  of  jealousy  to  the  class
who  found  themselves  so  often  placed  as  criminals  at  the  bar;  but
to  the  other  no  reasonable  objection  could  be  advanced.  I  do  not
find,  however,  any  such  distinction  referred  to  in  the  few  passages
relate  to  this  law.

160  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS '  en.  L

The  subjugation  of  southern  Britain  was  celebrated

The  secular m ^6 Year  ^00 ^J ^6 OVatioU of AuluS

games.  Plautius,  the  same  able  and  successful  offi-

cer who  had  prepared  the  way  for  the  triumph  of  the
emperor  three  years  before.  The  honour  of  the
greater  triumph  could  not  be  conferred  on  a  lieu-
tenant; but  Claudius  showed  no  unworthy  jealousy
of  his  exploits,  the  most  glorious,  perhnps,  of  any
since  the  time  of  Caesar ;  and  after  investing  him  with
the  triumphal  ornaments,  the  laurelled  crown  and
robe,  actually  walked  on  his  left  hand,  while  Plautius
rode  himself  on  horseback  through  the  streets  to
the  Capitol.1  This  was  unquestionably  the  greatest
honour  imperial  Eome  ever  bestowed  on  a  subject ;
but  the  modesty  of  Plautius  was  equal  to  his  merit,
and  he  continued  to  enjoy  the  favour  of  his  masters
by  giving  their  jealousy  no  umbrage.  The  city  had
now  completed  eight  centuries  of  fame  and  fortune,
according  to  popular  computation,  and  though  only
sixty-three  years  had  elapsed  since  Augustus,  follow-
ing the  pontifical  traditions,  had  been  called  on  to
celebrate  secular  games,  Claudius,  in  his  turn,  was
easily  persuaded  that  the  auspicious  era  deserved  to
be  commemorated  by  a  similar  solemnity.  Among
other  festivities,  the  Game  of  Troy  was  rehearsed  by
noble  youths,  and  Britannicus,  then  in  his  seventh
year,  was  introduced  to  the  people,  as  a  participator
in  the  ceremony,  or  at  least  a  witness  of  it.  But
another  child,  the  son  of  the  emperor's  niece  Agrip-
pina,  by  her  deceased  husband  Domitius,  made  a
more  conspicuous  figure.  The  age  of  Lucius  Do-
mitius exceeded  his  cousin's  by  three  years  :  he  was
beautiful  in  person,  and  he  was  the  grandson  of  the
still-lamented  Grermanicus,  and  on  all  these  accounts,
it  was  to  him  that  the  Eomans  looked  with  present
favour,  and  ot  him  that  they  formed  the  fairest

1  Suet.  Claud.  24.;  Dion,  Ix.  30.

A.D.47-A.tr.800.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  16 J

auguries.1  The  appearance  of  the  two  children  on
that  day,  and  the  different  reception  they  encountered,
might  be  taken  by  a  thoughtful  spectator  as  a  presage
of  the  fate  that  was  reserved  for  them,  of  the  pre-
mature death  of  the  one  and  the  guilty  glories  of
the  other.

Our  history,  at  least  in  its  earliest  stages,  has  pre-
sented a  succession  of  antagonisms  between  The  ftist
the  lords  of  human  kind,  the  mortal  duels  of  ^  wdomeuVatlrT
a  Sulla  and  Marius,  a  Caesar  and  Pompeius,  Rome-
an  Octavius  and  Antonius :  but  these  deadly  feuds
have  been  confined  to  the  harder  and  coarser  sex  ;
the  rivalry  of  Octavia  and  Cleopatra  was  a  contest  of
beauty  and  fascination,  expressed  only  by  lofty  scorn
on  the  one  side,  and  by  sly  depreciation  on  the  other.
But  we  have  now  before  us  a  contest  of  another
stamp.  The  shows  of  the  arena  at  this  period  were
sometimes  disgraced  by  the  combats  of  armed  Ama-
zons ;  but  the  court  of  Claudius  was  the  first  to
present  the  hideous  spectacle  of  two  women  of  the
highest  birth  and  rank,  and  closely  connected  by  ties
of  blood  and  marriage,  engaged  in  a  desperate  en-
counter of  intrigue  and  perfidy,  ending  in  the  violent
overthrow  of  the  one  and  the  rise  of  the  other,  but
equally  in  the  eternal  infamy  of  both.  Considering
how  little  regard  was  generally  paid  to  women  in
private,  and  still  less  in  public  life  at  Rome,  nothing
seems  to  me  to  mark  so  much  the  feebleness  of  Clau-
dius, as  the  licence  thus  assumed  by  two  rival  prin-
cesses to  convulse  the  world  with  a  quarrel  of  the
boudoir,  and  the  power  they  had  to  stamp  a  character
on  the  history  of  their  times.

Messalina  had  in  vain  procured  the  banishment  of
Julia,  while  her  sister  Agrippina,  certainly  Mutual  hatred
not  inferior  in  beauty,  energy,  and  unprin-  £ndAgrip°a
cipled  ambition,  was  suffered  to  remain  in  |)ma'

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  11. It  seems  most  probable,  amidst  the  conflict-
ing accounts,  that  Britannicus  was  born  early  in  794,  and  Nero  in
790,  December  15. Suet.  Ner.  6. Comp.  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  25,
VOL.  VT.  M

162  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  I.,

Rome.  The  emperor's  niece  continued  to  occupy  a
place  next  to  the  empress  herself  in  the  imperial
household,  to  divide  with  her  the  attentions  of  the
courtiers,  and  even  to  exert  her  blandishments,  not
without  effect,  on  the  unwary  good  nature  of  her
uncle.  We  may  imagine  the  jealousy  of  the  reigning
favourite ;  the  anxiety  with  which  she  would  watch
every  movement  of  an  aspirant  whom  she  had  injured
and  menaced,  and  from  whom  she  had  no  mercy  to
expect,  of  a  woman  leagued  with  her  enemies  and
intriguing  with  her  friends ;  her  fears  for  the  affec-
tions of  her  husband,  for  the  fidelity  of  his  freedmen,
for  the  precarious  prospects  of  her  son.  Watched  in
turn  by  an  able  and  unsparing  foe,  with  full  access  to
the  ear  of  Claudius,  and  ever  ready  to  abuse  it,  the
stay  of  the  wretched  she  had  oppressed,  the  hope  of
the  ambitious  she  had  repelled,  Messalina  must  have
been  indeed  the  weakest  of  her  sex,  if  she  really  pa-
raded the  utter  disregard  of  decorum  as  well  as  duty,
which  has  been  ascribed  to  her.  It  seems  incredible
that  the  husband  should  be  suffered  to  remain  ig-
norant of  wrongs  which  could  so  easily  be  divulged
to  him,  were  they  so  gross  and  notorious  as  after  her
death  they  were  declared  to  have  always  been.  While
Messalina  lived  and  reigned,  it  might  be  more  dan-
gerous to  slander  her;  but  we  must  observe  that
Agrippina  became  both  the  victor  and  the  survivor
in  the  strife  between  them.  Who  can  doubt  that  it
was  then  her  aim  to  disgust  the  mind  of  Claudius
with  the  woman  he  had  once  admired,  to  disgust  both
him  and  the  citizens  with  the  child  she  pretended  to
have  borne  him,  and  thus  prepare  the  way  by  un-
scrupulous detraction  for  the  elevation  of  her  own
son  above  Britannicus  ?  By  constituting  herself  the
narrator  of  the  contest  she  made  history  tell  the  tale
as  she  wished  it  to  be  told.  She  has  succeeded  in
representing  Messalina  to  posterity  in  the  same
hideous  colours  in  which  she  had  before  represented

XD.47-A.tT.SOO.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  163

her  to  her  contemporaries.  Historians,  wearied  with
the  vain  task  of  seeking  for  truth  in  documents  of
state  and  imperial  manifestos,  turned  eagerly  to  re-
velations of  the  palace  vouchsafed  by  an  inmate  of
its  recesses,  an  actress  in  its  most  private  scenes :  and
the  memoirs  of  Agrippina  were  no  doubt  accepted  as
an  authority  on  transactions  which  she  was  most
concerned  in  tricking  with  the  falsest  colours.  An
anecdotist  such  as  Suetonius,  or  a  professed  satirist
like  Juvenal,  would  readily  embrace  the  piquant  ca-
lumnies of  a  triumphant  intriguer :  that  even  Ta-
citus yielded  to  the  same  attractions,  may  be  fairly
assumed  from  his  referring  to  these  very  memoirs  as
authentic  documents  on  another,  nor  a  less  delicate
subject.1  We  have  no  choice,  however,  but  to  read
the  story  in  the  light  in  which  these  brilliant  de-
claimers  have  placed  it,  only  bearing  in  mind  the
foul  source  from  which  it  has,  in  all  probability,  de-
scended to  us,  and  remarking  such  tokens  of  its
distortion  from  the  truth  as  an  attentive  perusal
cannot  fail  to  suggest  to  us.

Nor  must  we  overlook  the  circumstance  that  others
besides  Agrippina  were  interested  in  over-

ru  •  XT, -u- L c j.1 • r  1  Thefreedmen

throwing  the  object  of  their  fear,  no  less  conspire  with
than  of  her  detestation.  The  confederacy
which  had  so  long  subsisted  between  the  empress  and
the  freedmen  might  be  dissolved  by  mutual  jealousies
and  intrigues.  Polybius,  who  had  reigned  supreme
in  the  imperial  household,  was  the  friend  of  Seneca,
and  as  such  it  seems  probable  that  he  became  attached
to  the  party  of  Agrippina.  Messalina  procured  at
last  his  disgrace ;  and  this  was  doubtless  the  last  tri-
umph she  obtained  over  the  rising  influence  of  her

1  Pliny,  whose  appetite  for  information  was  on  most  subjects  in-
discriminate, consulted  the  memoirs  of  Agrippina  as  veritable  history.
See  his  preface  and  Hist.  Nat.  vii.  6.  &.;  and  comp.  Tac.  Ann.  iv.  54.
Nor  is  there  any  difficulty  in  believing  that  a  story  once  accredited
became  repeated  -vith  even  additional  colouring  by  succeeding
writers.

164  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  .L.

rival.  The  triumph  cost  her  dear.  It  alarmed  arid
alienated  from  her  the  other  minions  of  the  palace.
When  they  found  that  the  guilty  commerce  they  had
so  long  maintained  with  her  had  ceased  to  secure
their  own  lives  and  fortunes,  they  might  easily  be
persuaded  to  transfer  their  power  to  the  opposite
side.  They  aided,  as  we  shall  see,  in  the  overthrow
of  Messalina :  it  may  readily  be  believed  that  they
effected  their  success  by  fraud,  and  defended  it  by
unscrupulous  falsehood.

Messalina's  enmity  towards  Agrippina  and  Do-

mitius  was  redoubled,  we  are  told,  at  per-

M?s°airi£a ceiving  the  manifest  disposition  of  the  citi-

with  Siliw.  • JT_ • />  ITT

zens  in  their  favour ;  and  she  would  have
sought  means  of  destroying  her  rival  by  suborned
accusers,  had  she  not  been  preoccupied  at  the  moment
by  a  new  and  strange  passion,  which  seemed  akin  to
fascination.  She  had  fallen  in  love  with  Caius  Silius
before  mentioned,  who  was  reputed  not  only  the
handsomest,  but  one  of  the  most  virtuous  of  the
nobles.1  She  had  insisted  on  his  divorcing  his  wife,
in  order  to  obtain  entire  possession  of  him.  Silius
was  either  unconscious  at  first  how  deadly  her  caresses
were,  or  possibly  he  conceived  that  to  reject  her  ad-
vances would  be  certain  destruction,  while  in  admit-
ting them  there  might  be  chances,  at  least,  of  escape.
To  her  caresses  she  added  bribes,  and  held  out  the
hope  of  a  more  splendid  destiny,  till  he  yielded  to  her
demands,  and  was  amazed  to  find  himself  courted
without  reserve,  his  house  besieged  by  her  repeated
visits,  all  his  movements  watched  and  followed.

1  Juvenal,  x.  331.:

"  Optimus  hie  et  formosissimus  idem
Gentis  patricias  rapitur  miser,  extinguendus
Messalinse  oculis."

This  C.  Silius  is  supposed  to  have  been  the  son  of  Silius  the  com-
mander of  the  Roman  forces  in  Gaul  under  Tiberius,  who  was  consul
A.U.  766,  and  put  an  end  to  his  own  life,  being  charged  with  majestas
in  777 :  see  above.

A.V.48-A.U.801.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  165

Brilliant  presents  were  thrust  upon  him,  the  highest
public  office  laid  at  his  feet,  and  finally  the  slaves,
the  freedmen,  and  all  the  glittering  retinue  which
attended  the  emperor  himself,  were  arrayed  before
his  door,  as  if  the  fortunes  of  the  principate  had  been
actually  transferred  to  him.1

But  Messalina  was  inconstant;  her  amour  with
Silius,  however  flagrant  its  guilt,  lost  some-  Precipitation
what  of  its  charm  from  its  very  openness  %  |"^|-
and  facility,  and  the  object  of  her  capri-  A-u-801-
cious  passion  perceived  that  she  too  often  strayed
from  him  to  new  and  unknown  rivals.  He  was
mortified  and  alarmed,  and  ventured  to  demand  the
immediate  fulfilment  of  her  most  glowing  promises.
Let  us  wait  no  longer,  he  said,  on  the  old  man's  slow
decay :  the  innocent  might  be  content  to  bide  their
time,  and  amuse  themselves  with  the  pleasures  of
anticipation ;  but  guilty  as  they  were,  they  must  act
at  once  with  promptitude  and  boldness.  He  urged
that  he  was  now  single  and  childless,  and  prepared
to  adopt  Britannicus :  were  Claudius  once  removed
Messalina,  he  vowed,  should  retain  in  his  arms  all
the  power  and  splendour  she  had  enjoyed  by  the  side
of  the  emperor.  He  would  seize  the  supreme  autho-
rity, but  he  would  reign  in  the  name  of  Messalina's
son,  the  last  scion  of  the  Csesarean  family.  To  these
instances,  however,  his  paramour  was  now  less  eager
to  listen;  not  from  any  lingering  regard  for  her
miserable  husband,  but  through  fear  of  raising  her
lover  to  a  position  in  which,  in  his  turn,  he  might
prove  unfaithful  to  herself.  Nevertheless  the  pros-
pect of  a  pretended  marriage  still  inflamed  and  stimu-
lated her,  from  the  very  grandeur  of  its  infamy,
which  gives  the  last  flavour  to  crime  in  the  ima-
gination of  the  most  wanton  of  criminals.2  I  am

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  12.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  26.:  "  Norn  en  tamen  matrimonii  concupivit,  ob
rnagnitudinem  infamiar,  cujus  apud  prodigos  novissima  voluptas  est."

166  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  L,

well  aware,  says  Tacitus,  whose  steps  we  have  been

closely  following,  what  a,  fiction  and  fable

thTt'Messaii'na  it  will  be  deemed,  that  in  a  town  which

were  regularly  knows  everything,  and  keeps  no  secrets,  any

married.  , y.  V*  7*  ,  Vt 1

human  being  ever  reached  such  a  pitch
of  audacity,  least  of  all  one  a  consul  designate,  the
other  the  consort  of  the  sovereign,  as  to  meet  on  a
day  appointed,  with  witnesses  to  sign  and  seal,  as
for  a  regular  and  legitimate  marriage;  that  she
should  listen  to  the  words  of  the  diviners,  approach
the  temples,  sacrifice  to  the  Gods,  and  recline  herself
at  the  nuptial  board ;  finally,  that  she  should  sur-
render herself  as  to  the  embraces  of  a  husband,  and
the  rites  of  the  nuptial  chamber.  But  far  be  it  from
trie  to  invent  or  to  colour  for  the  marveVs  sake :  1
only  relate  precisely  that  which  those  who  have  gone
before  me  have  themselves  heard  and  committed  to
writing.1

The  historian  requires  us  to  believe, —  and  his  ac-
incredibiuty  count  corresponds  with  those  of  every  other
of  this  account,  existing  authority,— that  Messalina  was  ac-
tually married  to  Silius  with  the  most  formal  cere-
monies, during  the  lifetime  of  her  legitimate  husband,
and  without  any  act  of  divorce  having  passed  between
them ;  for  the  deed,  though  enacted  publicly  before
all  the  rest  of  the  world,  was  done  without  the  hus-
band's knowledge,  who  was  the  last  to  learn  the
disgrace  which  had  fallen  on  his  house.2  Such  an
incident  has  assuredly  no  parallel  in  civilized  life :
to  admit  it  as  a  fact,  we  must  suppose  at  least  that
the  most  sacred  forms  and  feelings  of  society  were
at  the  time  confounded  or  abjured,  that  the  Romans
of  the  age  of  Claudius  were  living  alike  without  laws
and  national  principles.  But  for  such  a  supposition

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  27.:  "  Haud  sum  ignarus  fabulosum  visum  iri .  .  .  .
sed  nihil  compositum  miraculi  causa,  verum  audita  scriptaque  seni-
oribus  tradam."

2  Juvenal,  I.e.:  "Dedecus  ille  domus  sciet  ultimus." This  is  not
a  nacre  phrase  of  rhetoric,  but  is  fully  confirmed  by  the  historians.

A.Dl48-A.u^01.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  167

there  is  no  ground  whatever.  There  was  at  this  period
no  such  relaxation  of  conventional  restrictions;  on  the
contrary,  the  reign  of  Claudius,  himself  a  formalist  and
a  purist,  was  probably  marked  by  a  strong  reaction  of
strictness  arid  austerity  on  the  most  delicate  points  of
usage. !  ,I£  the  law  allowed  a  woman  formally  to  re-
pudiate her  husband,  yet  such  an  act  could  only  be
done  by  direct  communication  with,  him ;  whereas
Tacitus  declares  that  Messalina  demanded  the  rites
of  marriage  with  Silius  unknown  to  Claudius,  and
therefore  while  still  the  legal  wife  of  a  living  hus-
band.1 Can  we  suppose  that  the  culprits,  however
reckless  themselves,  would  have  found  creatures  so
subservient  to  their  wild  behests  as  to  rush  on  the
certain  punishment  which  must  have  awaited  their
abetting  them  ?  In  accepting  the  common  story  of
this  marriage  we  are  driven  at  least  to  the  notion
that  Claudius  was  reputed  at  the  time  no  better  than
an  idiot,  with  whom  any  extravagance  might  be  ven-
tured :  yet  we  have  seen  ample  grounds  to  think
far  more  favourably  both  of  his  understanding  and
courage.  It  happens,  however,  that  a  word  dropped
almost,  as  it  would  seem,  accidentally  by  Suetonius
supplies  a  clue  to  the  real  character  of  this  extra-
ordinary event,  and  may  remove  from  the  story  at
least  its  grossest  improbability.  It  is  not  clear,
indeed,  whether  the  writer  himself  believes  the  ver-
sion of  the  occurrence  at  which  he  hints.  This  cir-
cumstance, however,  is  of  little  importance  to  its
correctness ;  for  Suetonius,  as  we  have  seen,  was  too
fond  of  a  ribald  scandal  to  brook  the  overthrow  of
the  popular  tale  of  wonder.  Claudius,  it  is
suggested,  had  been  assured  by  the  diviners  Possijiy"™tf-
that  evil  was  about  to  befall  the  husband  <|»"dil"  h!m-
of  Messalina.  From  such  superstitions  few
indeed  at  that  time  were  exempt,  and  his  yielding  to

1  For  the  women's  licence  of  divorcing  their  husbands  under  the
later  republic  and  the  empire,  see  Cic.  ad  Div.  viii.  7.;  Senec.  de
Uenef.  iii.  16.;  Martial,  vi.  7.;  Juvenal,  vi.  224.

ifiS  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  ell.  L.

them  is  no  argument  of  peculiar  weakness.  He
conceived  the  idea  of  evading  his  impending  fate  by
marrying  his  wife  to  another  man.  It  was  rumoured,
accordingly,  that  the  nuptials  of  Silius  were  actually
of  the  emperor's  own  contrivance ;  that  he  in  fact
not  only  recommended  and  urged  them,  but,  to  pre-
vent evasion,  sealed  himself  the  documents  necessary
to  their  validity.1  It  is  not  mentioned,  indeed,  but
of  this  there  can  be  no  reasonable  doubt,  that  he  had
previously  divorced  his  wife  in  due  form,  in  order  to
make  her  new  marriage  legitimate.  Simple  and
unceremonious  as  the  act  of  divorcement  might  be,
it  was  nevertheless  of  immense  significance.  The
scandalmongers  of  the  day,  the  parasites  of  Claudius,
the  foes  of  Messalina,  above  all,  Agrippina  herself
in  her  memoirs,  may  have  combined,  each  for  reasons
of  their  own,  to  heighten  the  colouring  of  the  story
by  dropping  this  essential  feature  in  it;  but  it
seems  far  more  likely  that  this  conspiracy  against
the  truth  of  history  should  have  succeeded,  than  that
the  marriage  itself  with  its  bright  array  of  Auspices
and  Flamens,  of  attendants  and  witnesses,  should  have
been  celebrated  in  defiance  of  law,  religion,  and  the
common  feeling  of  the  people,  without  the  sanction
of  the  emperor  and  husband.

The  sequel  of  the  narrative,  as  told  by  Tacitus
combination  himself,  will  tendto  confirm  this  view.  The
men'agS  emperor's  household  were  struck  with  con-
Messaiina.  sternation,  and  the  freedmen,  who  wielded
his  power,  trembled,  we  are  assured,  at  a  revolution
of  the  palace  so  strange  and  ominous.  From  the
passion  which  Messalina  had  conceived  for  Silius,
they  had  already  anticipated  danger,  even  before  it

1  Suet.  Claud.  29.:  "Nam  illud  omnem  fidem  excesserit,  quod
nuptiis  quas  Messalina  cum  adultero  Silio  fecerat,  tabellas  dotis  et
ipse  consignaverit,  inductus  quasi  de  industria  simularentur,  ad  aver-
tendum  transferendumque  periculum,  quod  imminere  ipsi  per  qusedam
ostenta  portenderetur."  The  construction  of  the  sentence  is  diffi-
cult, but  its  meaning  can  hardly  be  doubted.

A.D.48-A.C.801.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  169

reached  the  height  of  an  audacious  defiance.  Cal-
iistus,  Pallas,  and  Narcissus  had  all  shared  in  the
alarm,  and  had  combined  to  deter  her  from  the  in-
dulgence of  an  intrigue,  more  perilous  to  herself  and
to  them  than  any  of  the  licentious  loves  to  which  she
had  before  abandoned  herself.  That  she  should  stray
to  the  embraces  of  a  freedman,  that  an  obscure
player,  such  as  her  favourite  Mnester,  should  dance
himself  into  the  chamber  of  the  empress,  might  be
a  disgrace  to  the  emperor ;  but  the  intrusion  there
of  a  patrician  and  a  senator,  a  man  of  ability  as  well
as  consideration,  was  in  fact  a  defiance  to  themselves.1
When,  however,  it  appeared  that  their  opposition
would  have  no  other  effect  than  to  expose  them  to
her  resentment,  they  desisted  from  their  futile  ad-
monitions, and  the  two  first  of  the  associates  seemed
to  have  resigned  themselves  to  let  things  take  their
course.  Narcissus,  however,  whether  from  personal
apprehensions,  or  urged  by  Agrippina,  determined
that  the  empress  should  fall.  The  marriage  with
Silius,  once  effected, — and  it  mattered  little  how  it
had  actually  been  brought  about, — might  be  repre-
sented as  an  insult  to  the  husband,  treason  against
the  prince,  impiety  towards  the  (rods.  Nevertheless,
though  plainly  required  to  defend  himself,  the  state,
and  the  people  with  a  high  hand,  the  firmness  of
Claudius  could  not  be  depended  upon ;  such  was  the
sluggishness  of  his  feelings,  such  his  devotion  to  his
consort,  so  many  the  deeds  of  blood  he  had  already
perpetrated  at  her  demand.  Caution  and  artifice
were  required  in  dealing  with  one  so  weak,  so  easily
impressible  by  the  first  speaker,  but  not  less  easily
moved  by  his  next  successor.  As  soon  as  Messalina's
daring  project  was  executed,  and  while,  as  we  are
assured,  it  was  yet  unknown  to  Claudius,  who  was  at

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  28. :  "  Dam  histrio  cubiculum  principis  insultaverit,
dcdccus  quidem  inlatum;  sed  discidium  procul  abfuisse:  nunc  ju-
venem  nobilcm  ....  majorem  ad  spetn  accinjri."

170  HISTORY t/F THE ROMANS  CH.  i»

the  time  performing  sacrifices  at  Ostia,  Narcissus
persuaded  two  women,  with  whom  his  master  was
familiar,  to  break  to  him  the  terrible  news.  One  of
these,  named  Calpurnia,  demanded  an  interview,  and
throwing  herself  at  his  feet  announced  with  loud  la-
mentations the  circumstances  of  his  dishonour.  The
other,  a  Greek  freedwoman,  named  Cleopatra,  who
was  standing  by,  thereupon  inquired  her  authority,
and  she  desired,  as  had  been  pre-arranged,  that  Nar-
cissus should  be  interrogated.1  Thus  brought  upon
the  scene,  the  favourite  humbly  confessed  his  fault  in
having  too  long  concealed  the  crimes  of  his  mistress,
and  her  amours  with  many  a  noble  citizen,  with  a
Titius,  a  Vettius,  and  a  Plautius ;  but  the  present  case,
he  asserted,  was  more  atrocious  than  any  of  these,
and  he  could  no  longer  keep  silence.  Did  Claudius
know  that  he  had  been  divorced  by  his  own  wife  ?
that  the  people,  the  senate,  the  soldiers,  had  all  wit-
nessed the  marriage  of  Silius  ?  was  he  yet  uncon-
scious that,  unless  he  acted  with  vigour,  the  city  was
&  en  now  in  the  power  of  the  husband  of  Messalina  P
Claudius,  we  are  assured,  was  surprised  and  as-
tounded at  this  revelation  of  guilt  in  one

Claudius  in-  -  r>  i i  • i i i  -I-I-IT

censed  and  whose  fidelity  he  had  never  doubted.  It
was  difficult  to  persuade  him  of  the  fact ;
but  it  was  confirmed  again  and  again  by  the  officers
of  his  household.  The  plans  of  Narcissus  had  been
well  laid :  all  conspired  to  assure  the  emperor  that
he  was  the  victim  of  an  abominable  crime ;  that  his
honour,  and  still  more  his  power  and  safety,  were
fatally  compromised.  Even  on  the  supposition  that

1  Of  these  women  Tacitus  says  with  a  circumlocution  which  is
meant  for delicacy,  "  Quarum  is  corporibus  maxime  insueverat."
Yet  it  is  impossible  not  to  suspect  that  this  Calpurnia  is  the  same
whom  Agrippina  afterwards  subverted,  "  Quia  formam  ejus  lauda-
verat  princeps,  nulla  libidine,  sed  fortuito  sermone." See  Ann.  xii.  22.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  29,  30.:  "An  discidium  tuum  nosti? nam  matri-
monium  Silii  vidit  populus  et  senatus  et  miles;  ac  ni  propere  agis,
tenet  urbem  maritus.''

A.D.48-A.U.801.  UNDER -THE EMPIRE.  171

he  had  himself  set  this  marriage  on  foot  with  the  object
which  has  been  suggested,  we  may  still  understand
how  the  representations  of  interested  advisers  might
persuade  him  to  regard  it  very  differently  after  its
accomplishment,  and  make  him  feel  that  his  device
for  evading  a  distant  danger  had  actually  entangled
him  in  another  more  imminent.  But,  however  this
may  be,  lie  readily  acceded,  we  are  told,  to  the  in-
stances of  those  about  him,  urging  him  to  throw  him-
self at  once  into  the  camp  of  the  praetorians,  and
postpone  revenge  or  justice  till  he  had  secured  his
safety.  Their  object  was  to  prevent  an  interview
between  him  and  his  wife.  On  his  way  to  Eome  he
was  almost  overpowered  by  his  alarms.  Am  I  yet
emperor?  .  .  .Is  Silius  no  longer  a  subject?
were  the  questions  .he  was  continually  asking :  and  so
great  was  his  terror,  such  the  apparent  prostration
of  his  power  of  will  and  purpose,  that  Vitellius  and
Largus,  who  accompanied  him  in  his  carriage,  feared
to  animate  a  courage  which  they  apprehended  would
again  fail  him  at  the  last  moment.1

The  scene  now  changes  to  the  suburban  palace
of  the  bridegroom,  where  Messalina  was  NBptial  orgie,
abandoning  herself  to  voluptuous  tran-  ofMes8ali«a-
sports.  The  season  was  mid-autumn,  the  vintage
was  in  full  progress;  the  wine-press  was  groaning,
the  ruddy  juice  was  streaming;  women  girt  with
scanty  fawnskins  danced  as  drunken  Bacchanals
around  her :  while  she  herself,  with  her  hair  loose  and
disordered,  brandished  the  thyrsus  in  the  midst,  and
Silius  by  her  side,  buskined  and  crowned  with  ivy,
tossed  his  head  to  the  flaunting  strains  of  Silenus  and
the  Satyrs.  Vettius,  one,  it  seems,  of  the  wanton's
less  fortunate  paramours,  attended  the  ceremony,  and
climbed  in  merriment  a  lofty  tree  in  the  garden.
When  asked  what  he  saw,  he  replied,  An  awful  storm

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  81. :  "  An  ipse  imperil  potens?  an  Silins  privatyg

esset?"

172  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  I,

from,  Ostia ;  and  whether  there  was  actually  such  an
appearance,  or  whether  the  words  were  spoken  at
random,  they  were  accepted  afterwards  as  an  omen  of
the  catastrophe  which  quickly  followed.1

For  now  in  the  midst  of  these  wanton  orgies  the
Gemmation  rumour  swiftly  spread,  and  swiftly  mes-
ofthheeemp-ort  sengers  arrived  to  confirm  it,  that  Claudius
peror-.  wrath.  jcnew  fa  a£^  ^a^  Claudius  was  on  his  way

to  Rome,  and  was  coming  in  anger  and  for  vengeance.
The  lovers  part :  Silius  for  the  forum  and  the  tribu-
nals ;  Messalina  for  the  shade  of  her  gardens  on  the
Pincian,  the  price  of  blood  of  the  murdered  Asiaticus.
The  jovial  crew  was  scattered  on  every  side:  but
meanwhile  armed  soldiers  had  surrounded  the  spot,
and  all  that  could  be  seized  were  thrown  suddenly
into  chains.  Messalina,  sobered  in  a  moment  by  the
lightning  flash  which  revealed  her  danger,  had  no.t
lost  her  presence  of  mind.  She  resolved  to  confront
the  emperor.  She  summoned  her  son  and  daughter
to  accompany  her  into  their  father's  presence ;  at  the
same  time  entreated  the  chief  of  the  Vestals  to  attend
her,  and  intercede  for  her  with  the  supreme  pontiff.
Three  only  of  her  women  ventured  to  remain  by  her
side ;  with  these  she  traversed  the  length  of  the  city
on  foot ;  but  her  appearance  in  distress  and  mourning,
on  which  she  had  counted  for  commiseration,  attracted
no  voice  or  gesture  of  compassion,  and  mounting  a
common  cart  at  the  gates  she  proceeded  sadly  on  the
road  to  Ostia.2

Claudius  was  at  the  same  time  advancing,  but
Meetin  of  sl°wly  and  timidly ;  for,  amongst  his  other
ciaudius  and  causes  of  alarm,  he  distrusted  the  loyalty  of

Messalina.  T  J J

Lusms  Greta,  the  prefect  of  his  guards,  and
knew  not  whether  he  was  about  to  enter  Rome  as  an
emperor  or  a  captive.  Narcissus,  however,  was  at
hand  and  boldly  urged  that,  at  such  a  crisis,  the

1  Tac.  I.e.:  "  Sive  ceperat  ea  species,  seu  forte  lapsa  vox  in  pra>
sagium  vertit."
J  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  31.

\.I>.48-A.H.801.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  173

command  of  the  soldiers  should  be  transferred  for  a
single  day  to  one  of  his  trusty  freedmen,  at  the  same
time  offering  himself  to  take  it. Claudius  consented :
Narcissus  assumed  the  command ;  and  while  the  train
moved  slowly  along,  insisted  on  taking  his  seat  an  the
emperor's  carriage,  lest  Vitellius  and  Largus,  less
resolute  than  himself,  should  allow  his  courage  to
evaporate. Even  to  the  last  indeed  Claudius  still
vacillated. At  one  moment  he  exclaimed  with  fitful
vehemence against  the abominable  crimes  of  his
consort,  but  again  he  melted  into  tears  at  the  recol-
lection of  her  children ;  while  Vitellius,  not  knowing
how  the  matter  might  end,  discreetly  confined  him-
self to  such  exclamations  as  How  shocking  I  and,  Is
it  possible  ? Narcissus  could  prevail  neither  on  him
nor  on  Largus  to  reason  calmly  with  their  master,
and  confirm  him  in  the  apprehension  of  his  intole-
rable wrong. Such  were  the  circumstances  under
which  Messalina  came  in  sight,  and  requested  leave
to  present  to  him  Britannicus  and  Octavia. Narcissus
could  only  whisper  in  his  ear  the  odious  name  of
Silius,  and  remind  him  of  the  divorce,  the  marriage,
and  the  treason,  while  he  thrust  letters  at  the  same
moment  into  his  hand  containing  proof  of  her  nu-
merous infidelities. He  contrived  indeed  to  prevent
the  children  being  shown  to  him;  but  the  vestal
Vibidia  forced  her  way  into  the  emperor's  presence,
and  claimed  perhaps  the  privilege  of  her  order  to
save  a  passing  criminal  from  death.  Narcissus  was  ob-
liged to  assure  her  that  his  master  would  himself  hear
the  culprit,  and  give  her  an  opportunity  of  defence.1
Claudius  meanwhile  uttered  not  a  word. Vitellius
affected  ignorance  of  the  circumstances  al-
leged, and  shrank  from  the  responsibility  snSaSd0*'

f • •  1  -VT •  J.I.LI judgment  of

of  giving  any  orders. Narcissus  took  the  hisaccom-
lead,  and  every  one  yielded  to  him  the  pl
position  he  had  thus  boldly  assumed. He  required

>  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  33, 34.

174  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CM.  U

jthe  house  of  Silius  to  be  thrown  open,  and  caused
.the  emperor  to  be  conducted  thither.  In  the  hall
stood  the  image  of  Silius  the  father,  disgraced  by
Tiberius,  which  the  senate  had  ordered  to  be  over-
thrown ;  while  the  effigies  of  the  Neros  and  Drusi,
the  kinsmen  of  the  emperor  himself,  were  placed
ignominiously  behind  it.  When  his  indignation  had
been  sufficiently  inflamed  by  this  spectacle,  which
seemed  of  itself  to  proclaim  the  criminality  of  the
culprit's  projects,  Claudius  was  hurried  to  the  camp.
The  praetorians  stood  to  arms  to  receive  him :  he  was
thrust  on  the  tribunal,  and,  prompted  by  Narcissus,
made  to  utter  a  few  confused  words,  whereupon  they
called  aloud  for  the  condign  punishment  of  the
guilty.  Silius,  arrested  and  brought  in  fetters  to
the  spot,  declined  to  defend  himself;  nor  would  he
stoop  to  any  entreaties  except  only  for  speedy  death.
He  was  executed  forthwith,  together  with  Titius,
Vettius,  and  altogether  seven  knights  of  distinguished
family,  accused  of  abetting  him  in  his  crime.1
Mnester  the  dancer  was  added  to  the  number,  that,
among  so  many  honourable  victims,  no  pity  might
seem  to  be  extended  to  a  mere  ignoble  player,  though
he  vehemently  protested  that  no  man  had  so  stoutly
resisted  the  seductions  of  Messalina,  and  that  he  was
among  the  first  on  whom,  had  she  succeeded,  her
resentment  was  destined  to  fall.  Another  youth
of  family,  named  Montanus,  was  included  in  the
proscription,  for  no  other  crime  than  that  of  having
for  a  single  day  found  favour  in  the  eyes  of  the
adulteress.

•  The  "  lex  Julia  de  adulteriis "  required  that  there  should  be
seven  Roman  citizens  witnesses  to  a  divorce;  and  if  it  be  true  that
Claudius  had  actually  divorced  his  wife  in  order  to  marry  her  to
Silius,  it  f-eenis  not  unlikely  that  these  were  the  parties,  whom  it  was
thought  advisable  t,o  remove.  The  act  of  divorce  Was  read  by  a
freedman,  and  this  part  may  have  been  enacted  by  Mnester.  Fanlus
in  Digest,  xxiv.  2.  §  9.  Comp.  Juvenal  vi.  46.:  "  Collige  sarcinula*
dicet  libertus,  et  exi."

A.0.48-A.U.801.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  175

Nevertheless  Messalina  still  hoped.  She  had  with-
drawn again  to  the  gardens  of  Lucullus,  vacillation  of
and  was  there  engaged  in  composing  ad-  deSSfoT and
dresses  of  supplication  to  her  husband,  in  Messalina-
which  her  pride  and  long  accustomed  insolence  still
faintly  struggled  with  her  fears.  Narcissus  was  not
insensible  to  his  danger,  and  was  anxious  to  strike
his  last  blow  without  delay.  But  the  emperor  still
paltered  with  the  treason.  He  had  retired  to  his
palace ;  he  had  bathed,  anointed,  and  lain  down  to
supper ;  and  warmed  with  wine  and  generous  cheer,
he  had  actually  despatched  a  message  to  the  poor
creature,  as  he  called  her,  bidding  her  come  the  next
day  and  plead  her  cause  before  him.  Narcissus
knew  how  easy  might  be  the  passage  from  compas  -
sion  to  love ;  even  the  solitary  night  and  the  vacant
couch  would  kindle,  he  feared,  a  sentiment  of  yearn-
ing and  compunction  in  the  fond  dotard's  mind.
Gliding  from  the  chamber,  he  boldly  ordered  a  tribune
and  some  centurions  to  go  and  slay  his  victim.  Such,
he  said,  was  the  emperor's  command ;  and  his  word
was  obeyed  without  hesitation.  Under  the  direction
of  the  freedman  Euodus,  the  armed  men  sought  the
outcast  in  her  gardens,  where  she  lay  prostrate  on  the
ground,  by  the  side  of  her  mother  Lepida.  While  their
fortunes  nourished  dissensions  had  existed  between  the
two ;  but  now,  in  her  last  distress,  the  mother  had  re-
fused to  desert  her  child,  and  only  strove  to  nerve  her
resolution  to  a  voluntary  death.  Life,  she  urged,  is
over ;  nought  remains  to  look  for  but  a  decent  exit
from  it.  But  the  soul  of  the  reprobate  was  corrupted
by  her  vices ;  she  retained  no  sense  of  honour ;  she
continued  to  weep  and  groan  as  if  hope  tetill  existed ;
when  suddenly  the  doors  were  burst  open,  the  tribune
and  his  swordsmen  appeared  before  her,  'and  Euodus
assailed  her,  dumb-stricken  as  she  lay,,  with  contu-
melious and  brutal  reproaches.  Housed  at  last  to
the  consciousness  of  her  desperate  condition  she  took

176  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CT».  I.

a  weapon  from  one  of  the  men's  hands  and  pressed  it
trembling  against  her  throat  and  bosom.  Still  she
wanted  resolution  to  give  the  thrust,  and  it  was  by
a  blow  of  the  tribune's  falchion  that  the  horrid  deed
was  finally  accomplished.  The  death  of  Asiaticus
was  avenged  on  the  very  spot ;  the  hot  blood  of  the
wanton  smoked  on  the  pavement  of  his  gardens,  and
stained  with  a  deeper  hue  the  variegated  marbles  of
Lucullus.  The  body  was  given  up  to  her  mother.
Claudius  had  not  yet  risen  from  table  when  it  was
announced  to  him  that  Messalina  was  no  more.
Whether  she  had  fallen  by  her  own  hand  or  by  an-
other's was  not  distinctly  declared ;  nor  did  he  in-
quire. Again  he  called  for  wine,  pledged  his  guests,
heard  songs  and  music,  and  exhausted  all  the  formal-
ities of  the  banquet.  Nor  on  the  following  day  did
he  allude  to  the  circumstance,  or  manifest  any  emo-
tion of  joy  or  hatred,  of  anger  or  sorrow,  neither  on
seeing  the  triumphant  foes  of  Messalina,  nor  her
sorrowing  children.  The  senate  favoured  the  oblivion
he  seemed  to  court  for  the  event,  by  decreeing  that
her  name  should  be  effaced  from  all  public  and
private  monuments.  Narcissus  was  rewarded  with
the  ornaments  of  the  qusestorship.1

Such  were  the  circumstances  of  the  fall  of  Mes-
intriguesfor  salina,  as  they  were  commonly  related  and
Bu«^8sorgto  "believed.  Stamped  with  the  authority  of
Messalina.  Tacitus  and  Juvenal,  they  have  since  been
received  and  repeated  by  all  historians  of  the  empire.
Whatever  the  crimes  of  the  miserable  woman  may
have  been, —  and  the  stain  of  wantonness  as  well  as  of
cruelty  so  often  in  her  station  allied  to  it,  is  indelibly
attached  to  her  name, — there  seems  reason  to  sur-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  37,  38. ;  Dion.  Ix.  31.;  Suet.  Claud.  39.  This
writer  mentions,  as  an  instance  of  the  forgetfulness  or  absence  of
mind  of  Claudius,  that  after  the  death  of  Messalina,  he  was  heard
to  ask  at  supper,  Why  my  lady  did  not  come  ?  "  cur  domina  non
veniret."  Messalina  can  hardly  have  been  more  than  twenty-three
or  twenty-four  at  her  death.

A..0.49- -A.U,899,  UNDER TFE EMPIRE.  !77

mise  that  her  enormities  have  been  exaggerated  by
sinister  influence,  and  that  the  last  fatal  act,  in  par-
ticular, for  which  she  suffered  was  misrepresented  by
a  monstrous  artifice.  It  may  still  remain  doubtful
whether  she  was  the  victim  of  Agrippina's  ambition,
or  of  the  fears  of  the  freedmen ;  whether  these  two
powers  combined  together  for  her  overthrow,  or
whether  each  followed  its  own  objects  with  mutual
jealousy  and  distrust.  The  factions  which  still  fes-
tered in  the  bosom  of  the  palace  soon  made  them-
selves odiously  apparent.  During  the  first  fever  of
his  apprehensions,  and  while  still,  perhaps,  under  the
wing  of  his  faithful  prsetorians,  Claudius,  it  is  said,
in  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  had  made  confidants  of
his  soldiers,  and  had  declared  to  them,  that  since
matrimony  had  succeeded  so  ill  with  him,  never
again  would  he  subject  himself  to  the  caprices  of
another  consort ;  if  he  forgot  this  vow  they  might
hack  him  in  pieces  with  their  swords.1  But  this
resolution  was  of  very  short  duration.  His  freedmeu
had  determined  otherwise ;  the  most  powerful  among
them  sought  each  to  secure  his  power  by  raising  a
client  of  his  own  to  the  first  place  in  his  affections,
and  he  was  too  easily  led  by  the  artifices  of  those
about  him  to  make  any  resistance  to  wishes  which
were  seconded  by  his  own  amorous  temperament.
But  he  was  perplexed  by  the  difficulty  of  choosing
between  the  candidates  offered  for  his  selection,  all
of  whom  were  equally  ready  to  yield  to  him.  Nar'
cissus  intrigued  for  ^Elia  Petina,  the  same  whom
Claudius  had  formerly  repudiated ;  Callistus  for  Lollia
Paulina,  the  rejected  of  the  emperor  Caius,  while
Pallas  became  the  champion  of  Agrippina  herself.
The  first  was  recommended  on  the  ground  of  her
former  intimacy,  as  well  as  her  connexion  with  the

1  Suet.  Claud.  26.:  "Quatenus  sibi  matrimonia  male  cederent
permansurum  se  in  caolibatu;  tic  nisi  permansisset  non  recusaturun?
confodi  manibns  ipsorum,"

VOL.  VI.  N

178  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  OH.  U

imperial  house  through  the  family  of  the  Antonil ;
the  second  had  the  merit,  in  addition  to  her  immense
riches,  of  being  childless,  and  therefore  the  less  likely
to  regard  Britannicus  with  jealousy ;  the  last,  besides
her  descent  from  Grermanicus,  and  the  popular  favour
which  accompanied  her,  had  the  advantage  of  being
able  to  plead  her  own  cause  covertly,  by  the  oppor-
tunities consanguinity  gave  her  of  hanging  fondly
upon  her  uncle,  and  enticing  him  with  her  unsus-
pected caresses.1  If  the  charms  of  A£rip-

Ambition  and .  , ,  1  ,  •,  j . ,  . .

artifices  of Dina,  then  perhaps  three  and  thirty  years

Aarippina.  PTJI  j  j .LI •  •  i

of  age,  had  already  passed  their  prime,  her
powers  of  artifice  and  intrigue  had  reached  their  full
maturity ;  and  sne  soon  effected  the  impression  at
which  she  aimed.2  Ere  yet  the  emperor  had  avowed
his  intention  of  espousing  her,  she  was  conscious  that
the  prize  was  within  her  reach,  and  began  to  exercise
over  him  the  influence  of  a  wife.  She  began  already
to  extend  her  views  to  the  elevation  of  her  son  Do-
mitius  by  uniting  him  to  the  orphan  Octavia ;  and
as  the  girl  was  affianced  to  Lucius  Silanus,  the  son
of  the  murdered  Appius,  she  did  not  hesitate  to  plan
the  frustration  of  that  arrangement  by  aiming  a
scandalous  charge  against  the  betrothed  husband.
She  gained  over  Vitellius ;  this  supple  courtier  pre-
tended, that  as  censor  two  years  before,  he  had  noted
the  young  man's  immoralities,  and  now  insinuated  a
charge  of  incest  against  him.3  Claudius,  as  guardian

1  Suet.  Claud.  26.  : "  Per  jus  osculi  et  blanditiarum  occasiones
pellectus  in  amorem." Of  the  three  rivals  Tacitus  says,  "  Suam
quaeque  nobilitatem,  formam,  opes  contendere." The  first  qualifi-
cation seems  to  apply  especially  to  Petina,  the  second  to  Agrippina,
and  the  last  to  Lollia;  and  it  seems  clear  from  what  follows  (Ann.
xii.  22.)  that  the  divorced  wife  of  Caius  had  not  been  deprived  of  the
magnificent  dowry  she  had  brought  him.

2  Agrippina  seems  to  have  been  born  in  769. Suetonius  tells  us
(Calig.  7.)  that  the  three  sisters  were  born  in  consecutive years,
and  the  birth  of  Julia  (Livilla  in  Suetonius)  is  placed  by  Tacitus  in
771. Agrippina  seems  to  have  been  the  eldest  of  the  three.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  4.:  "  Nomine  Ccnsoris  serviles  fallacias  obtegens."

A.D.49-A.IT.802.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  179

of  the  public  virtue,  was  shocked,  as  the  confederates
expected,  at  this  odious  imputation,  and  allowed
Vitellius,  although  the  censorship  was  passed  and
the  lustrum  closed,  to  promulgate  his  edict  for  re-
moving him  from  the  senate.1  The  blow  was  the
more  severe  inasmuch  as  he  had  been  advanced  that
year  to  the  prsetorship;  and  he  was  now  degraded
without  being  heard  in  his  own  defence,  perhaps  even
before  he  was  aware  of  the  conspiracy  against  him.
This  was  the  first  step  towards  rescinding  the  act  of
his  betrothal,  which  speedily  followed.  The  office
to  which  he  had  been  preferred  in  consideration  of
his  affinity  to  the  imperial  house,  he  was  required
to  resign  on  the  last  day  of  the  year ;  and  thus  dis-
graced, he  was  suffered,  for  a  time  at  least,  to  hide
himself  in  obscurity,  while  the  way  was  smoothed  for
the  destined  nuptials  of  Domitius  and  Octavia.

Yet  an  obstacle  still  intervened  between  Agrippina
and  the  elevation  to  which  she aspired.
Ancient usage and the national senti-  sanction*  fh.
ment  long  engrafted  upon  it,  though  with  unciewithn*
no  express  legislative  declaration,  forbade
among  the  Eomans  the  marriage  of  an  uncle  and
niece. Claudius  had  just  declared  his  horror  at  in-
cest, and  here  was  an  union  proposed  to  him  to
which  that  term  in  its  full  force  at  least  popularly
applied. It  had  been  rumoured,  indeed,  whether
truly  or  not,  that  the  first  Caesar  was  prepared  to
defy  the  national  sense  of  delicacy;  but  Claudius
had  less  courage,  and  if  it  was  easy  to  overcome
his  moral  scruples,  it  was  more  difficult  to  confirm
his resolution. Again  Vitellius came forward  to
Agrippina's  assistance. He  took  occasion  to  demand

Vitellius  had  been  joined  with  Claudius  in  the  office. Of  Silanus
Seneca  says  (Apocol.  8.):  "Sororem suam festivissimam  omnium
puellarum,  quam  omnes  Venerem  vocarent,  maluit  Junonem  vocare."
1  Tac.  /.  c. :  "  Lecto  pridem  Senatu." The  order  had  been  duly
revised,  and  in  strictness  the  removal  of  the  culprit  from  its  ranks
ihould  have  awaited  another  lectio.
N  2

180  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  fc

publicly  of  the  emperor  whether  he  would  submit  to
ihe  blind  prejudices  of  the  populace,  or  be  swayed
by  the  counsel  and  authority  of  the  senate  ?  Claudius
decorously  replied  that  he  was  himself  only  one  of
the  citizens,  and  could  not  venture  to  controvert  the
judgment  of  the  fathers  of  the  republic.  Then  re-
pair., I  conjure  you,  to  the  palace,  and  there  await
my  coming,  said  Vitellius  earnestly ;  and  then  enter-
ing the  curia,  he  besought  an  immediate  hearing  on
a  subject,  most  important,  as  he  declared,  to  the
commonwealth.  After  expatiating  with  feeling  on
the  splendid  solitude  of  the  Caesar  in  the  recesses  of
his  palace,  and  his  need  of  a  faithful  partner  to  share
his  pleasures  and  anxieties,  he  protested,  that  if  Clau-
dius now  yearned  for  a  consort,  he  had  amply  proved
by  his  long  devotion  to  the  laws  that  he  was  yielding
to  no  unworthy  impulse.  The  orator  proceeded  to
enlarge  on  the  happy  fortune  of  the  times,  in  having
a  prince  who  sought  only  a  legal  marriage,  instead
of  invading,  as  others  had  been  known  to  do,  the
marriage  rights  of  the  citizens ;  and  then  recommend-
ing the  claims  and  merits  of  Agrippina,  he  argued
with  all  the  art  of  a  practised  rhetorician  against  the
prejudices  which  seemed  to  forbid  so  eligible  an
union.  Other  nations,  he  said,  permitted  such  alli-
ances ;  nor  was  it  beneath  the  dignity  of  Eome  to
consult  the  customs  even  of  foreigners.  Formerly
the  marriage  of  cousins  had  been  prohibited,  yet  its
recent  permission  had  produced  no  evil.1  Similar
results,  he  argued,  would  follow  a  wise  relaxation  in
the  present  instance  also;  and  prejudices,  after  all,

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  6.:  "  Sobrinarum  diu  ignorata."  On  the  marriage
of  cousins  german,  the  commentators  refer  to  Plutarch,  Qu&kt.  Bom.
6.,  who  shows  the  occasion,  but  not  the  date  of  the  restriction  being
removed.  The  union  of  Marcellus  and  Julia  was  an  illustrious
instance  in  later  times.  But  marriage  of  uncles  with  nieces  was
forbidden.  The  law  of  Claudius  licensed  marriage  with  a  brother's
daughter,  but  not  with  a  sister's,  and  this  distinction  was  in  force  ir.
the  time  of  Gains.  See  Inst.  i.  62

A..D.49-A.U.802.  UNDER THE  EMPIRE.  181

were  the  growth  of  habit  and  usage,  and  would  follow
the  current  of  legislation.  The  compliance  of  a
part,  at  least,  of  his  audience  outran  even  the  elo-
quence of  the  speaker.  The  harangue  was  hardly
concluded  before  a  tumult  of  assentation  arose  which
admitted  of  no  further  discussion,  but  threatened,  if
he  yet  hesitated,  to  overbear  the  prince's  scruples  by
force.  A  multitude  had  already  collected,  crying
aloud  that  the  Koman  people  was  of  one  mind  with
the  senators.  Vitellius  swiftly  bore  the  news  to  his
anxious  master,  and  Claudius,  passing  rapidly  through
the  crowd  of  the  forum,  amidst  a  burst  of  acclama-
tions, entered  the  curia,  and  moved  for  a  decree  to
legalize  the  marriages  in  question.  Claudius  and
Agrippma  were  united  in  the  year  802.  It

• lA  J v  J  e a L  A. Marriage  of

might  seem  a  delicate  mode  01  flattery  to  ciaudms  and
contract  these  preposterous  alliances ;  but
a  knight,  named  Alledius,  was  the  only  citizen  who
could  be  induced,  by  the  hope  of  the  prince's  or  even
of  Agrippina's  favour,  to  do  such  violence  to  natural
feeling.1  This,  however,  was  of  little  importance;
the  conscience  of  the  feeble  Claudius  was  easily  put
to  sleep,  and  it  became  the  business  of  his  mistress,
now  enthroned  by  his  side,  to  lull  it  constantly  by
gentle  opiates,  through  the  course  of  wickedness  on
which  she  was  about  to  enter.3

It  is  not  unimportant  to  notice  these  lingering
scruples,  this  solemn  discussion,  and  this  The  authority
sudden  downfall  of  the  barriers  of  religious  J^m"^"?
principle,  at  a  moment  when  the  whole  bent  Sltio™"6"0*
of  legislation  had  been  studiously  directed  usage-
to  preserve  or  restore  the  sanctions  of  ancient  usage.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  T.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  4 — 7. Suetonius  tells  us  that  Claudius  repealed  a
provision  of  the  Julian  law  introduced  by  Tiberius,  which  forbade
men  of  sixty  years  from  contracting  marriage. It  has  been  supposed
that  this  was  done  to  legalize  his  own  union  with  Agrippina,  as
though  at  this  time  he  was  himself  almost  on  the  verge  of  sixty. See
Claud.  23.  and  the  note  of  Baunigarten  Crusius. But  he  was  actually
fifty-eight  only.

182  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  c*L  t

They  mark,  on  the  one  hand,  the  general  observance
thus  far  of  ancient  forms ;  while,  on  the  other,  they
allow  us  to  perceive  how  hollow  that  observance  was,
and  how  easily  it  could  be  overruled  by  modern
licentiousness.  They  may  lead  us  indeed  to  reject
as  incredible  the  common  story  of  Messalina's  im-
pudent no-marriage ;  nevertheless,  they  may  prepare
us  for  violations  not  less  audacious,  of  the  laws  of
nature  and  of  man,  which  we  shall  meet  with  here-
after. The  authority  of  the  senate  and  the  licence
of  the  Caesar  to  create  law  and  right  of  their  own
sovereign  will,  were  thus  established  with  the  concur-
rence of  the  people,  and  to  their  entire  satisfaction  ;
yet  the  authority  and  licence  were  shared  by  these
two  still  co-ordinate  powers ;  it  remained  yet  to  be
seen  whether  either  could  destroy  the  other,  or  if
destroyed  continue  to  exist  without  it.

A  century  earlier  the  wretch  who  was  driven  to
suicide  of  despair  by  persecution  stalked  with  gloomy
L.  suanus.  resolution  to  the  hearthstone  of  his  enemy,
and  slew  himself  upon  it,  to  establish  an  avenging
demon  in  his  house  for  ever.1  But  this  superstition
had  now  died  away,  or  the  chambers  of  the  Csesar
were  no  longer  accessible,  and  the  suicide  could  seek
his  last  consolation  only  in  the  hope  of  fixing  on  the
tyrant  the  indignation  of  his  fellow-countrymen.
Sil  anus  chose  the  moment  of  Agrippina's  triumph  to
put  an  end  to  his  own  life,  assured  perhaps  that  he
could  not  long  escape  her  enmity,  and  exulting  in
the  power  of  casting  at  least  a  gloom  over  the  city
on  the  day  of  her  ill-omened  nuptials.  Nevertheless
her  cruelty  was  restrained  neither  by  shame  nor  fear :
his  sister  Calvina,  the  presumed  partner  of  his  guilt,
was  sentenced  to  exile  by  the  voice  of  the  subservient
senators;  and  to  the  decree  which  inflicted  this
punishment,  Claudius  caused  a  clause  to  be  added

1  See  the  story  of  Cicero  in  Plutarch,  Cic.  47.,  vol.  iii.,  ch.  xxvi.

A.D.49-A.U.802  UNDER THE EMPIRE  183

enjoining  the  lustration  of  the  city  by  solemn  sacri-
fices.1 The  citizens,  who  had  before  scowled  or
murmured,  laughed  now  at  the  notion  that  at  such  a
moment,  when  one  illustrious  incest  was  openly  pa-
raded, the  secret  guilt  of  another  should  require  a
special  expiation.  It  is  said,  however,  that  Agrippina
was  moved,  even  in  the  first  flush  of  her  success,  by
the  disgust  at  her  conduct,  and  sought  to  extenuate
her  disfavour  by  recalling  Seneca  from  exile,  and
promoting  him  to  the  prsetorship.  The

,°  , , f , . ,  „ Recall  of

philosopher  was  already  in  high  repute  for  seneca  from
his  character  and  acquirements,  and his
appointment  to  the  care  of  her  child's  education  was
perhaps  the  best,  as  well  as  the  most  popular,  that
could  be  made. It  is  probable,  however,  from  his
sharing  the  disgrace  of  Julia,  that  he  was  previously
connected  with  Agrippina  herself,  and  held  a  con-
spicuous place  in  the  clique  or  faction  which  had
roused  Messalina's  apprehensions.2

The  marriage  of  the  mother  was  quickly  followed
by  the  betrothal  of  the  son,  then  in  his
twelfth  year,  to  Octavia,  an  alliance  for  betrotul'd'to
which  Claudius  had  been  gradually  pre-
pared by  the  counsels  of  the  friends  he  most  relied
on.  Domitius  took  his  place  at  once  by  the  side  of
Britannicus  in  every  favour  the  doting  emperor  could
bestow:  nevertheless,  the  complete  ascendancy  she
had  acquired  over  her  facile  husband  failed  to  allay
the  jealousies  of  the  new-made  empress.  Of  JEMa,
Peiina  indeed,  who  seems  to  have  been  defended  by
the  insignificance  of  her  character,  we  hear  no  more ;
but  the  rivalry  of  the  rich  and  noble  Lollia  was  not
to  be  forgiven.  Eepulsed  by  one  emperor  and  dis-
appointed of  another,  she  was  accused  of  consulting
the  Chaldseans  about  the  imperial  nuptials.3  Clau-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  8.

*  Tac.  I.  c. For  the  date  (A.U.  802)  see  Clinton,  Fast.  Horn.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  22.

1&4  HISTOEY  OP  THE KOMANS  CH.  V.

dius  himself  condescended  to  harangue  against  her  in
the  senate ;  but  in  denouncing  her  guilt,  he  wandered,
as  usual,  into  historic  details  on  the  greatness  and
antiquity  of  her  family,  and  commiserating  her  fall,
contented  himself  with  demanding  her  banishment
from  Italy,  with  the  loss  of  her  famous  fortune,  a
sum  of  five  million  sesterces  being  alone  reserved  to
her.  But  Agrippina,  it  seems,  was  dissatisfied  with
the  lenity  of  this  sentence,  and  according  to  common
belief,  sent  a  tribune  to  invite  or  compel  her  to  kill
herself.1  About  the  same  time  another  matron
named  Calpurnia, — whether  she  was  the  same  who
has  before  been  mentioned  as  a  favourite  of  the
emperor  does  not  clearly  appear,  — was  also  disgraced
by  the  artifices  of  the  empress,  for  no  other  cause
than  because  Claudius  had  been  heard  to  speak  in
praise  of  her  beauty :  it  was  admitted,  indeed,  that  the
remark  had  been  made  in  perfect  innocence,  and  the
Fury  of  the  palace  did  not  push  her  anger  to  ex-
tremities.

Agrippina  still  marched  on  triumphantly. Clau-
dius, beset  by  freedmen,  and  especially  by

Domitius,  T» n  .1  j

adopted  by  Dallas,  the  creature  and,  as  was  supposed,
sume»  the  the  paramour  of  his  consort,  yielded  to  the

name  of  Nero.  * .  i • i  11- 11

persuasions  which  were  blindly  urged  upon
him.  He  was  reminded  of  the  example  of  Augustus,
and  again  of  Tiberius,  in  fortifying  the  position  of
their  own  children  by  calling  older  kinsmen  to  its
support.  Both  precedents  were  of  evil  augury.  But
the  imperial  pedant  was  proud  to  walk  in  the  steps
of  his  renowned  predecessors ;  and  in  the  year  803,
the  next  after  his  marriage,  he  consented  to  adopt
Domitius  into  the  Claudian  house,  to  place  him  for-
mally on  the  same  line  of  succession  with  his  own

1  Dion  tells  a  horrid  story,  that  when  the  head  of  Lollia  was  brought
for  her  inspection,  Agrippina  forced  open  the  mouth  with  her  own
band,  to  look  for  certain  marks  in  the  teeth,  by  which  to  assure  her-
self of  its  identity.  lx.  32.

A.D.50-A.U.803.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  18i

son,  and,  inasmuch  as  be  was  three  years  the  senior,
to  give  him  actual  precedence  in  the  career  of
honours.  This,  it  was  remarked  by  the  genealogists,
was  the  first  instance  of  the  adoption  of  a  son  by  any
Claudius  of  the  patrician  branch  of  that  illustrious
house,  which  had  maintained  its  name  and  honours
in  direct  male  descent  from  the  era  of  Attus  Clausus
the  Sabine,  if  not  of  Clausus  the  ally  of  JEneas.  It
proved  fatal  to  the  race.  L.  Domitius  thus  intro-
duced into  his  stepfather's  family  received  the  name
of  Nero,  a  name  long  renowned  for  the  obligations  it
had  laid  on  Kome,  but  destined  henceforth  to  become
infamous  for  ever  throughout  the  world.1  The  mar-
riage to  which  he  was  pledged  with  his  cousin  Octavia,
now  become  his  sister,  was  incestuous  and  abomi-
nable in  the  eyes  of  his  countrymen.  But  worse  than
this  was  the  position  of  jealous  rivalry  in  which  he
was  placed  with  regard  to  the  injured  Britannicus.
This  poor  child  was  supposed,  even  at  his  tender
years,  to  have  some  quickness  of  parts,  and  he  did
not  fail  to  perceive  the  guile  which  lurked  beneath  the
pretended  affection  of  Agrippina.  One  by  one  the
slaves  and  attendants  of  his  childhood,  between  whom
and  himself  there  existed  a  mutual  attachment,  were
removed,  as  he  well  knew,  by  her  artifices,  and  replaced
by  creatures  of  her  own ;  and  by  these  he  was  edu-
cated as  the  son  of  a  plebeian  client,  rather  than  as  a
noble  by  birth,  still  less  as  heir  to  the  purple.2  The
elevation,  as  it  may  now  be  called,  of  this  cruel  step-
mother to  the  title  of  Augusta  by  a  decree  of  the
senate  seemed  to  crown  her  personal  ambition.3
Henceforth  she  laboured  for  her  son's  advancement
only.  There  were  few  that  did  not  anticipate  the

1  Hor.  Od.  iv.  4.  37.:  "Quid  debeas,  O  Roma,  Neronibus,"  &c.

2  Dion,  Ix.  32. :  <as  ical  -riav  rvxovrotv  nvb.  rpeQeffBai  eiroift.

*  Livia  was  styled  Augusta  after  her  husband's  decease;  Messalina
bore  the  title  on  her  coins,  though  these  perhaps  are  provincial ;  but
Agrippina  was  the  first  wife  of  a  reigning  emperor  who  enjoyed  it  by
a  decree  of  the  senate.  See  Eckhcl,  Docfr.  Numm.  vi.  252.  foil.

186  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH I*

transfer  of  the  empire  to  her  child  from  those  of
Messalina,  and  the  commiseration  of  the  citizens
for  the  hapless  Britannicus  was  already  strongly
excited.

But  the  contentions  of  rival  princes  and  the  con-
flicts of  civil  war  were  ever  flitting  before
rolr'£pthe the  minds  of  the  occupants  of  power  at
Rome. The  praetorians  had  decided  the
fate  of  empire  at  the  last  vacancy ;  the  legions  might
be  expected  to  interfere  at  the  next,  and  throw  their
weight  into  the  scale  between  Nero  and  Britannicus.
It  was  doubtless  with  a  view  to  conciliate  the  soldiers
that  Agrippina's  masculine  spirit  aspired  to  positions
which  had  hitherto  been  never  occupied  by  women ;
that  she  displayed  herself  to  the  citizens  and  the  army
in  the  character  of  a  chief  of  the  legions. To  plant
a  colony  was  the  proper  function  of  an  im-

Her  founda-  J f

tionofthe perator, of  one  to whom, among  other

ColoniaAgrip- r  ' ,  „ .. .  .&

pinen8i9,or powers,  that  of  taking  the  auspices and

Cologne.  >  .  6  f  .

performing  the  proper  rites,  was  duly  in-
trusted by  the  vote  of  the  Curies.  It  was  the  boast
of  Agrippina  that  she  was  the  first,  possibly  she  was
the  last  also,  of  Roman  women  who  founded  a  colony
of  Roman  veterans.1  The  illustrious  city  of  Cologne
owes  its  origin  to  the  caprice  of  this  empress,  who
transformed  a  village  of  the  Ubii  on  the  Rhine  into
a  stronghold  of  Roman  dominion.2  Here,  or  in  the
camp  adjacent,  Agrippina  had  herself  been  born  ;  here
had  stood  the  prsetorium  of  her  father  Grermanicus,

1  The  foundation  of  a  city  by  Dido  in  the  -ZEneid,  and  her  sitting
before  the  temple  septa  armis,  indicated  to  the  Roman  reader  that  she
was  a  queen,  not  less  plainly  than  the  royal  title  applied  in  so  marked
a  manner  to  her.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  27. If  originally  founded  by  Agrippa  himself,  as
another  passage  of  Tacitus  (Germ.  28.)  seems  to  irnply.it  must
have  been  reconstituted  by  Agrippina,  and  received  from  her  the
name  which  is  found  in  inscriptions,  of  Colonia  Claudia  Augusta
Agrippinensium. It  is  curious  that  this  abnormal  colony  has  alone
of  all  its  kindred  foundations  retained  to  the  present  day  the  name
of  Colonia.

A.U.50-A.W.803.  UNDER  THE EMPIRE.  187

and  here  perhaps  her  grandsire  Agrippa  had  effected
the  passage  of  the  frontier  stream.  Agrippina  was
fond  also  of  assuming  a  conspicuous  place  in  military
spectacles.  When  Caractacus,  the  conquered  British
chief,  was  brought  in  chains  before  the  emperor's
tribunal  at  Some,  where  he  was  surrounded  by  his
guards  and  the  officers,  she  seated  herself  on  another
tribunal  by  his  side,  and  received  together  with  him
the  homage  of  the  captive  and  his  family.1  That  a
woman  should  thus  take  her  station  in  front  of  the
standards  was  considered  bold  and  unfeminine :  the
veteran  Pliny  deemed  it  worthy  of  grave  remark,  as
a  token  of  the  times  in  which  he  had  lived,  that  he
had  himself  in  his  youth  beheld  the  consort  of  Clau-
dius witnessing  the  sea  fight  of  the  Fucine  lake
arrayed  in  a  soldier's  cloak,  by  the  side  of  the  impe-
rator.2  Nor  less  surprised  perhaps  were  the  foreign
envoys  to  see  her  seated  together  with  the  emperor
when  admitted  to  a  solemn  audience.  But  Agrip-
pina, says  Tacitus,  affected  to  be  a  partner  in  the
empire  which  her  sire  had  defended  and  her  grand-
sire  won :  she  boasted  herself  the  daughter  of  one
imperator,  the  sister  of  another,  the  consort  of  a
third ;  moreover,  she  expected,  and  indeed  was  des-
tined, to  become  the  mother  of  a  fourth ;  a  combi-
nation of  which  there  was  no  previous  and  probably
no  later  example.3  Her  face  was  associated  with  the
emperor's  on  the  coinage.4  It  was  remarked  also

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  36,  37.

3  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxiii.  3.:  "Nos  vidimus  Agrippinam  Claudii
principis,  edente  eo  navalis  proelii  spectaculum,  assidentem  ei  indu-
tam  paludamento."

3  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  42.  Germanicus,  as  the  quasi-associate  of  Tiberius,
Claudius,  Caius,  and  Nero.  So  it  was  said  of  Elizabeth,  daughter  of
our  Edward  IV.  and  queen  of  Henry  VII.,  that  she  was  "daughter
to  a  king,  sister  to  a  king,  wife  to  a  king,  and  mother  to  a  king,  and
to  two  queens  also."  Strype's  Memorials,  i.  c.  35.

*  Eckhel,  Doct.  Numm.  vi.  257.:  "  Fuit  Agrippina  ex  Augustorum
uxoribus  prima,  cujus  imaginem  perinde  atque  suam  in  nummis  sig-
nari  indulsit  maritus."

188  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  t.

that  her  ascending  the  Capitol  in  the  carpentum,
or  litter  reserved  for  the  priests  and  the  divine  images,
was  an  assumption  of  honours  beyond  her  sex ;  but
this  distinction  had  been  conceded  by  Augustus  to
Livia,  and  by  Claudius  himself  to  Messalina,  But
in  pride  and  outward  show,  no  less  than  in  dissolute-
ness of  manners  and  relentless  bloodshed,  Agrippina
had  now  learnt  to  rival  the  predecessor  she  had
overthrown.1

The  advancement  of  the  youthful  Nero  to  im-
perial power  was  in  progress  even  at  this

Nero  Is  Intro- J ,  . , T ,,  of./l ,

ducedtopnb- early  period. In  the  year  804  he  was  m-

licdistinctions.  .j-.-i.ii  r  1. J  J

A.  D.  si.  vested  with  the  gown  of  manhood,  and
designated  for  consul,  at  the  instance  of  the
devoted  senate,  as  soon  as  he  should  reach  his  twen-
tieth year.  But  in  the  mean  time  he  was  deputed
to  hold  proconsular,  or  vice-imperial,  power  beyond
the  city ;  which,  as  he  was  still  retained  beneath  the
roof  of  the  palace,  was  for  the  present  a  mere  hono-
rary title,  and  only  a  presage  of  the  substance  that
was  to  follow.  He  received,  moreover,  the  flattering
style  of  Prince  of  the  Koman  Youth.  Agrippina
took  occasion  from  these  special  distinctions,  to  mark
in  every  way  the  difference  between  her  son  and  the
still  infant  Britannicus  :  the  one  was  to  be  regarded
as  a  man,  the  other  to  be  treated  always  as  a  child;
the  one  was  exhibited  to  the  people  in  official  robes,
while  the  other  appeared  only,  if  he  appeared  at  all,
in  the  praetefxta  of  the  pupil  and  the  minor.  Mean-
while centurions  and  tribunes,  freedmen  and  tutors,
as  many  as  seemed  to  favour  the  offspring  of  Messa-
lina, or  even  to  commiserate  his  fortune,  were  re-
moved from  about  him  on  various  pretences ;  and
his  once  casually  calling  his  brother  by  his  original
name  of  Domitius  was  construed  into  an  insult,  to
which  he  must  have  been  instigated  by  the  evil  dis-
posed among  his  friends  and  attendants.8

1  Dion,  be.  33.  *  Tac.  Ann.  sii.  41.

i.D.51-A.U.804.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  189

Whatever,  indeed,  were  the  crimes  and  excesses  of
the  wretched  Messalina,  there  can  be  no

, -1.11,1  .  -f-  -r>  Increasing  in-

doubt  that  her  artifices  or,  it  we  may  so  fluence  of
believe,  her  genial  fascinations  had  sur-
rounded her  with  many  friends,  and  that  the  enter-
prise of  Narcissus  against  her  had  not  been  unat-
tended with  danger  to  himself  and  to  the  emperor.
We  have  seen  that  Vitellius  and  Largus  had  refrained
from  stimulating  Claudius  against  her,  and  that
Lusius  Greta,  the  prefect,  was  deemed  so  attached  to
her  interests  as  to  be  an  object  of  distrust  and  appre-
hension to  his  agonized  master.  Another  officer  of
the  guard,  named  Crispinus,  was  still  regarded  as
her  partisan ;  and  both  these  men,  important  from
the  position  they  held,  were  supposed  to  be  still
devoted  to  the  interests  of  her  desolate  children.
Agrippina  watched  with  sleepless  vigilance  for  the
moment  to  supplant  them,  and  at  last  she  prevailed
on  the  emperor  to  risk  a  revolution  of  the  palace  by
dismissing  them  from  their  posts,  and  replacing  them
with  a  favourite  and  staunch  adherent  of  her  own.
The  new  prefect,  Afranius  Burrhus,  was  brave  and
able,  and  once  armed  with  authority  from  the  em-
peror, made  himself  master  of  the  camp  without  a
struggle.1  We  shall  see  hereafter  that  he  was,  more-
over, independent  and  honest,  as  far  perhaps  as  his
position  could  allow ;  but  he  understood  that  it  was
by  Agrippina  that  he  had  been  advanced,  and  by  her
be  might  at  any  time  be  displaced,  and  he  attached
himself  to  her  interests  and  the  faction  of  her  son,
as  far  as  it  was  now  opposed  to  that  of  Britannicus.
The  destruction  which  fell  on  many  of  the  freedmen
may  probably  be  ascribed  to  their  adherence  to  the
party  of  Messalina;  Callistus,  the  patron  of  Lollia.
seems  to  have  sunk  into  obscurity ;  while  Narcissus,
who  had  recommended  Petina,  could  with  difficulty
retain,  notwithstanding  his  signal  services,  any  por-

'  Tac.  Ann.  xil.  43.

190  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  L.

tion  of  his  former  influence.  The  paramount  sway
which  Agrippina  now  exercised  over  her  spouse,  and
over  all  who  sought  to  retain  his  favour,  was  re-
markably manifested  in  her  saving  Vitellius  from  a
charge  of  majesty  brought  against  him  by  a  senator ;
who  not  only  failed  in  his  prosecution,  but  was  him-
self sentenced  to  banishment,  and  interdicted  fire  and
water.  Nevertheless,  though  Agrippina  triumphed,
the  people  were  uneasy  at  the  prospect  of  civil  war,
or  unnatural  murder  which  seemed  opening  before
them.  The  year  804  was  celebrated  for  the  prodigies
which  attended  it :  among  the  most  calamitous  of
these  was  an  earthquake,  by  which  many  houses  in
Rome  were  overturned,  and  many  people  killed  in
the  panic  which  ensued.  The  harvest  failed  gene-
rally throughout  the  provinces,  and  the  supply  of
corn  to  the  capital  ran  low.  Only  fifteen  days'  con-
sumption remained  in  the  granaries.  The  populace
rioted  for  bread,  and  actually  attacked  the  emperor
when  transacting  business  in  the  forum.  They  drove
him  tumultuously  from  his  tribunal,  and  would  have
injured  and  perhaps  torn  him  in  pieces,  but  for  the
prompt  succour  of  a  military  force.1

Augustus  had  required  that  every  revelation  ot
the  future  should  be  stamped  with  the
licence  of  government,  and  Tiberius  had
expelled  from  Italy  the  pretenders  to  astro-
logical  science.  Claudius,  in  the  spirit  of
imitation,  perhaps,  rather  than  of  intelligent  policy,
sought  to  enforce  this  edict,  which  the  citizens  had
treated  with  scornful  disregard.  The  measure,  in-
deed, as  Tacitus  declares,  was  fruitless ;  yet  it  hardly
deserves  to  be  called  harsh.  Perhaps  its  immediate

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  43.  Suetonius  {Claud.  18.)  says  that  he  was  pelted
with  crusts  of  bread.  This  licentious  conduct  of  the  populace  does
not  imply  any  special  contempt  for  Claudius.  One  of  the  most
deeply  respected  of  all  the  emperors  was  treated  in  the  same  manner
at  a  later  period.  See  Aurel.  Victor,  Epit.  30.  in  Anton.  Pio.

•.D.5-2-A.TJ.805.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  191

motive  was  the  reputed  crime  of  a  young  Scriboni-
anus,  the  son  of  the  officer  who  had  revolted  in
Dalmatia.  He  was  accused  of  intriguing  against  the
emperor's  life  by  consulting  these  dangerous  im-
postors. Claudius  was  alarmed,  but  he  was  also
mortified  at  the  ingratitude,  as  he  .esteemed  it,  of
one  whose  life  and  dignity  he  had  spared  in  the  wreck
of  his  father's  fortunes.  Scribonianus  was  banished ;
nor  did  he  long  survive.  Some  pretended  that  he
fell  a  victim  to  poison,  while  others  affirmed  that  his
death  was  merely  natural ;  so  impossible  was  it  to  ar-
rive at  the  truth  in  such  matters,  so  indifferent,  it  may
be  added,  were  the  Eomans  generally  to  the  truth.1
At  the  same  time  the  emperor  continued  to  exert
unremitting  vigilance  in  maintaining  the  dignity  of
the  senatorial  order :  he  took  measures  for  removing
from  its  ranks  the  members  who  had  descended  into
poverty,  and  such  as  on  this  account  voluntarily
resigned  received  his  marked  approbation.  The
thunders  of  the  law,  conceived  in  a  spirit  of  ancient
fanaticism,  were  levelled  against  matrons  who  de-
graded their  class  by  forming  connexions  with  slaves ;
such  abandoned  wretches  were  to  be  reduced  to  the
state  of  servitude  themselves.  It  had  been  often  re-
marked that  the  freedmen  were  generally  the  harsh-
est in  their  treatment  of  the  less  fortunate  brethren
from  whose  ranks  they  had  themselves  recently
emerged ;  and  it  was  Pallas,  the  pampered  paramour
of  two  empresses,  who  advised  this  measure,  severe
against  the  unfortunate  women,  but  doubtless  still
more  severe  against  their  more  miserable  partners  in
guilt.2  He  received  his  master's  thanks,  however,
for  the  wholesome  austerity  of  his  counsel,  and  was
recompensed  with  the  praetorian  ornaments,  and  a

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  52.:  '•  Ut  quisque  credidit  vulgayere."

2  Thus the younger Pliny,  telling  the story of  one  Largius
Macedo,  who  was  attacked  by  his  slaves,  says  that  he  was  "  Superbus
alioqui  dominus  et  ssevus,  et  qui  servisse  patrem  suum  parum,  immo
nimium,  meminisset." Epist.  iii.  14.

192  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  CH.  L-

colossal  grant  of  public  money  by  the  subservient
senators.  A  Cornelius  Scipio  went  so  far  in  adula-
tion as  to  affirm  tha4^  lie  was  sprung  from  Pallas,  the
legendary  king  of  Arcadia,  and  moved  that  he  should
be  specially  thanked  for  deigning  to  assist  their  de-
liberations, and  take  his  place  among  the  servants
of  the  emperor.  Claudius  undertook  however  to
declare  that  his  freedman  was  satisfied  with  honorary
distinctions,  and  would  beg  respectfully  to  decline
the  present,  and  continue  in  his  state  of  actual
poverty ;  a  poverty,  it  was  remarked,  of  some  three
hundred  millions  of  sesterces.1

The  favour  and  authority  of  this  fortunate  upstart
ciaudiu8  ex-  continued  still  to  increase.  He  was  able
Ytfegwofthl"  to  protect  his  brother  Felix,  who  had  been
knights.  advanced  already  through  his  interest  to
the  procuratorship  of  Judea,  where  his  exactions  had
driven  the  people  into  riot  and  revolt.  It  was  at  his
instance  also,  perhaps,  that  Claudius  now  empowered
the  knights  who  managed  the  fisc  in  the  provinces,
and  even  in  Eome,  to  exercise  jurisdiction  or  judicial
authority,  such  as  was  entrusted  to  the  magistrates,
the  consuls  and  praetors  at  home,  and  their  deputies
abroad.  This  principle  of  arrangement  had  already
been  sanctioned  by  Augustus  with  respect  to  the  ex-
ceptional government  of  Egypt ;  it  had  been  extended
sometimes  to  certain  other  localities;  but  it  was
reserved  for  Claudius  to  establish  it  generally  as  an
instrument  of  monarchical  rule,  by  which  authority
derived  directly  from  the  chief  of  the  state  was  placed
throughout  the  empire  on  the  same  level  as  that  of
the  officers  of  the  people.9

1  Tac.  xii.  53. :  "Sestertii  ter  millies:"  300  million  sesterces,  equal
about  2,400,000/.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  60.:  "Claudius  omne  jus  tradidit  de  quo  totiens
seditione  aut  armis  certatum."  See  Lipsius,  Excurs.  ii.  on  Tac.
Ann.  xii.  The  procurators  of  the  emperor  were  knights,  and
Tacitus  seems  to  regard  this  as  a  settlement  of  the  ancient  contest
between  the  senate  and  the  equestrian  order  for  the  Judicia.

A.D.53-A.CJ.806.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  193

The  influence  of  Agrippina  continued  still  in  the
ascendant,  nor  to  the  end  of  her  husband's

TJ» j-j ••  •  j i'  /• Continued

lite did it  experience any  decline ; for  influence  of

ru j-  i n  • •  i Agrippina.

Claudius  was  not  naturally  capricious ;  he
was  as  patient  in  suffering  as  in  acting,  and  never
seems  to  have  revolted,  even  mentally,  against  the
domestic  tyranny  to  which  he  had  now  once  more
subjected  himself.  Almost  the  last  public  act  of  his
principate  was  receiving,  at  her  instigation,  the
scandalous  charges  now  brought  against  Statilius
Taurus,  a  man  of  wealth  and  ancestral  dignity,  who
had  recently  returned  to  Eome  laden,  as  it  was
affirmed,  with  the  spoils  of  the  province  of  Africa.
The  crime  objected  to  him  was  not,  however,  extor-
tion in  his  government  only,  but  the  more  odious
practice  of  magic.  Claudius  allowed  his  case  to  be
brought  under  the  cognisance  of  the  senate ;  it  was
believed,  however,  that  both  charges  were  equally
false,  and  prompted  solely  by  the  malice  of  Agrippina,
who  coveted  his  house  and  gardens.  But  neither  the
sympathy  of  his  peers,  nor  the  common  persuasion  of
his  innocence,  availed  to  save  the  object  of  a  powerful
enmity.  The  accused,  proud  and  indignant,  preferred
a  voluntary  death  to  the  humiliation  of  replying  to
his  accusers  before  a  tribunal  of  freedmen  and  cour-
tiers ;  and  the  senators,  who  were  now  seldom  con-
sulted in  proceedings  which  related  to  the  emperor's
safety  and  dignity,  could  only  express  their  sentiments
by  expelling  the  prosecutor  from  their  assembly,  with
a  burst  of  petulant  disgust  which  resisted  even  Agrip-
pina's  efforts  to  protect  him.1

But  this  covert  persecution  of  one  hapless  family,
and  these  attacks  on  the  most  eminent  of
the  nobles,  were  exceptions  to  the  general  <orwaTafth<-
posture  of  affairs,  which  were  still  for  the  po?S«  n°e»-
most  part  conducted  with  temper  and  mo-
deration. It  was  the  policy  of  Claudius,  or  his  adp-

1  Tac  Ann.  xii.  59. A.U.  806.
VOL.  VI.  O

194  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  I*

visers,  to  maintain  the  populace  in  good  humour  at
whatever  cost,  and  this  might  still  be  effected,  at
the  expense  of  the  tax-payers  of  the  provinces,  by
multiplied  shows  and  reiterated  largesses.  While
the  aged  emperor's  sun  was  thus  setting  with  a  milder
and  serener  ray  than  might  have  been  expected
from  the  elements  of  storm  and  confusion  with  which
he  seemed  to  be  surrounded,  another  light  was  rising
in  the  opposite  quarter,  portending,  as  was  fondly
anticipated,  a  season  of  beneficent  rule  and  widely
extended  happiness.  In  the  course  of  806,  while
still  only  in  his  sixteenth  year,  Nero  was  permitted
to  celebrate  his  marriage  with  Octavia.  In  order  to
acquire  some  popularity  for  an  union  of  so  question-
able a  character,  the  young  prince  was  instructed  to
come  forward  in  public,  and  graciously  plead,  in
speeches  made  for  him  by  his  tutor,  the  cause  of
liberality  for  more  than  one  distinguished  client.  He
harangued  first  in  behalf  of  the  venerable  community
of  Ilium,  the  ancestor  of  Rome,  the  parent  of  the
Julian  race ;  the  glories  of  which,  real  or  fabled,  he
set  forth  with  eloquence  and  ingenuity,  and  demanded
that  it  should  for  their  sake  be  relieved  from  all
public  burdens  for  ever.1  Again  he  pleaded  for  the
colony  of  Bononia,  for  which,  when  distressed  by  a
ruinous  conflagration,  he  solicited  a  grant  of  money.
About  the  same  time  the  Rhodians  were  allowed  to
recover  their  autonomy,  which  seems  to  have  been
withdrawn  from  them  on  account  of  some  domestic
sedition ;  and  tribute  was  remitted  to  Apamea  for

1  It  seems  not  improbable  that  Lucan  makes  his  apparently  pur-
poseless digression  to  describe  the  site  of  Troy  (Phars.  ix.  964.  foil.),
in  compliment  to  the  interest  his  patron  Nero  thus  showed  in  the
sacred  city.  The  young  emperor  may  have  taken  to  himself  the
lines  applied  to  Julius:

"  Gentis  lulese  vestris  clarissimus  aris
Dat  pia  thuru  nepos  ....
Restituam  populos;  grata  vice  moenia  reddent
Ausonidse  Phrygibus,  Rornanaque  Pergama  surgent."

A.D.54-A.U.807.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  196

five  years  in  consideration  of  the  damage  it  had  sus-
tained from  an  earthquake.1  Claudius  himself  made
an  harangue,  which  seems  to  have  been  highly  cha-
racteristic of  his  pedantic  style,  in  favour  of  granting
the  boon  of  immunity  to  Cos.  He  spoke  largely  on
the  antiquity  of  the  Coans.  The  Argives,  he  said,
or  rather  Cceus,  the  father  of  Latona,  was  the  first
inhabitant  of  the  island ;  by  and  by  ^Esculapius
brought  thither  the  divine  art  of  healing,  which  was
practised  there  with  eminent  success  by  his  descen-
dants from  generation  to  generation.  Having  enu-
merated many  of  these  skilful  practitioners,  and
distinguished  the  periods  in  which  they  flourished,
the  emperor  came  at  last  to  the  special  praise  of  his
own  physician  Xenophon,  and  declared  that  he
yielded  to  his  entreaties  in  relieving  his  countrymen
from  all  imperial  contributions,  and  devoting  their
island  from  henceforth  to  the  service  of  the  god  of
healing  only.2

The  last  year  of  the  emperor's  life  and  reign,  the
807th  of  the  city,  opened  once  more  with

,. .  _ •  ! •  ,  . T  Further  tri-

prodigies  of  evil  import,  which  were  sup-  mophnpf
posed  to  betoken  the  decay  of  public  prin-
ciple and  deterioration  of  national  sentiment.3 It
was  natural,  perhaps,  to  augur  that  the  advent  of  a
young  and  gallant  prince  to  power  would  commence
a  new  era  both  in  government  and  in  society ;  that
the  pensive  retrospect  of  Augustus  and  his  later  imi-
tator would  be  exchanged  for  a  burst  of  buoyant
anticipations,  and  that  Nero  would  pay  his  court  to
the future,  as Claudius had venerated the past.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  58.;  Suet.  Claud.  25;  Ner.  7.  The  young  prince's
orations  were  in  Greek.  It  does  not  appear  clearly,  though  it  may,
I  think,  be  inferred  from  Tacitus,  that  these  last  indulgences  were
obtained  by  Nero,  and  I  have  left  the  statement  equivocal  as  I
found  it.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  61. The  Byzantians  petitioned  also  for  relief
and  were  exempted  from  payment- for  five  years.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  64.:  "  Mutationem  morum  in  deterius  portendi. '

O 9

196  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  T,.

Among  these  portents,  that  which  alone  can  interest
us  was  the  fact  that  all  the  chief  magistracies  lost,  in
the  course  of  a  few  months,  one  of  their  occupants
by  death ;  a  quaestor,  an  aedile,  a  tribune,  a  praetor,
and  a  consul.1  This  fatality  made  a  considerable
impression  upon  the  populace;  but  none  of  them
was  so  much  alarmed  at  these  omens  as  Agrippina
herself  at  the  boding  words  which  were  heard  to  fall
from  Claudius  in  a  moment  of  inebriation,  that  it
was  his  fate  to  suffer  the  crimes  of  all  his  consorts,
but  at  last  to  punish  them.*  The  palace,  it  seems,
was  still  distracted  by  female  jealousies.  It  is  re-
markable, after  the  account  we  have  perused  of  the
unpardonable  crime  and  condign  punishment  of
Messalina,  together  with  her  guilty  associates,  that
her  mother  was  suffered  still  to  haunt  the  precincts
of  power,  and  to  intrigue  against  the  woman  who
had  succeeded  in  supplanting  her  daughter.  Do-
mitia  Lepida,  the  sister  of  Cn.  Domitius,  and  cousin
as  well  as  sister-in-law  to  Agrippina,  was  not  many
years  her  senior,  and  was  still  reputed  little  inferior
to  her  in  the  autumn  of  their  personal  charms.3  But
the  contest  between  them  was  not  now  for  the  heart
of  a  paramour.  The  arts  of  Lepida  were  directed
to  diverting  the  childish  reverence  of  Nero  from  his
mother  to  his  aunt,  and  the  caresses  she  lavished
upon  him  seemed  to  have  had  some  effect  on  his
warm  and  impressible  temper.  Agrippina  trembled
for  her  influence,  not  over  the  actual,  but  over  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  64.;  Dion,  Ix.  35. According  to  Suetonius  the
old  man  entertained  a  presentiment  of  his  approaching  end,  and  be-
trayed it  more  than  once. Claud.  46.

2  Tac.  l.c.:  "Fatale  sibi  ut  conjugum  flagitia  ferret  dein  puniret."
Comp.  Dion,  Ix.  34. ;  Suet.  Claud.  43.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  64. :  "  Nee  forma  setas  opes  multum  distabant "
If  Agrippina  was  now  thirty-eight,  the  mother  of  Messalina  cau
hardly  have  been  more  than  forty-five.  This  Domitia  Lepida  may
be  called  the  younger,  to  distinguish  her  from  an  elder  sister  of  the
same  name,  who  will  appear  on  the  scene  later.  See  Suet.  Ner.  34.;
Dion,  Ixi.  17

A.D.54-A.IT.807.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  197

future  emperor.  Both  these  women,  it  is  said,  were
equally  dissolute  in  manners,  equally  violent  in  tem-
per ;  each  fought  for  possession  of  the  young  prince
with  the  desperate  determination  to  use  her  power
with  him  to  destroy  the  other.  But  the  genius  or
the  fortune  of  Agrippina  prevailed.  She  suborned
delators  to  charge  her  rival  with  the  crime  of  seeking
to  marry  Claudius  after  destroying  his  actual  wife
by  incantations ;  to  this  was  added  the  more  palpable
treason  of  raising  a  servile  insurrection  in  Calabria.
These  charges  were  deemed  to  be  sufficiently  proved,
and  Claudius  gave  full  scope  to  the  vengeful  cruelty
of  the  conqueror.  Lepida  was  condemned  and  exe-
cuted, in  spite  of  the  remonstrances  of  Narcissus,
rendered  desperate  himself  by  the  overthrow  of  the
only  influence  which  had  hitherto  placed  any  check
on  the  triumphant  despotism  of  Agrippina.  Nar-
cissus had  received  the  quaestorial  ornaments  as  the
reward  of  his  services;  but  he  had  found  himself
outstripped  in  the  race  of  favour  by  Pallas,  the  con-
fidant of  the  new  empress,  and  full  of  discontent  and
apprehension  for  himself,  he  was  anxious  to  save  the
mother  of  his  own  victim,  to  counterpoise  the  power
which  had  risen  upon  her  fall.1  He  now  muttered
moodily  to  his  friends  that  whether  Britannicus  or
Nero  succeeded  to  power,  his  own  destruction  was
equally  assured :  nevertheless,  his  life,  he  insinuated,
was  ever  at  the  service  of  his  master ;  as  he  had
tracked  the  adultery  of  Messalina  and  Silius,  he  had
ample  proofs  to  convict  Pallas  and  Agrippina  also ;
and  he  threatened  to  bring  up  the  offspring  of  the
late  empress  to  avenge  himself  on  the  betrayers  of
his  father  and  the  real  assassins  of  his  mother.2

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  38.:  "Decreta  Narcisso  qusestoria  insignia;  levis-
siinum  fastidii  ejus,  cum  supra  Pallantem  et  Callistum  ageret."

2  Tac.  Ann.  xii,  65.:  "  Matris  etiam  interfectores  ulcisceretur." It
appears  that  Narcissus  knew  that,  though  himself  the  most  promi-
nent actor  in  the  recent  tragedy,  there  existed  actual  proof  against
Agrippina  of  an  important  share  in  the  conspiracy.

198  HISTORY OF THE ROMAKS  CH.  L.

Such  were  the  conflicting  schemes  and  interests  by
Decline  of  which,  in  addition  to  the  ever  recurring
Claudius.  cares  of  empire,  the  declining  years  of  the-
most  patient  of  masters  were  disturbed.  But  Claudius,
now  in  his  sixty-fourth  year,  and  exhausted  with  toil
at  least  as  much  as  by  the  intemperance  in  which  he
may  have  indulged,  fell  sick  at  Rome,  and  was  in-
duced to  quit  his  constant  station  in  the  city, — for
he  had  pertinaciously  denied  himself  the  customary
relaxation  of  occasional  retreats  to  baths  and  villas,
— for  the  medicinal  air  and  water  of  Sinuessa.1
Agfippina,  we  are  assured,  had  long  determined  to
hasten  his  still  lingering  end,  and  precipitate  by  a
crime  the  advent  of  her  son  to  power.  But  she  con-
tinued anxiously  to  debate  with  herself  what  kind  of
poison  to  employ ;  fearing  lest,  if  the  agent  were  too
active,  the  secret  might  betray  itself,  and  again,  if  it
were  too  slow  and  gradual,  the  victim  might  come
to  suspect  the  cause  of  his  sensible  decline,  and  take
measures  even  in  his  last  hours  to  defeat  her  aspira-
tions. The  crime  of  poisoning  was  rife  in  Rome.
Caius  had  made  elaborate  experiments  in
the  science,  and  many  must  have  been  his
agents  and  familiars,  who  lived  by  pander-
ing to  the  murderous  passions  of  the  day.  One  at
least  of  these  horrid  professors,  the  infamous  Locusta,
has  obtained  a  name  in  the  annals  of  crime,  and  has
been  dignified  by  the  grave  irony  of  Tacitus  with  the
title  of  an  instrument  of  monarchy.2  The  men  ac-
cused her  of  being  the  accomplice  of  many  wicked
wives  who  wished  to  rid  themselves  of  their  hus-
bands ;  possibly  she  was  equally  accessible  to  either

1  Strabo,  v.  p.  351.;  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxi.  4.;  Martial,  xi.  8. See
Hoeck,  R8m.  Gesch.  i.  3,  330.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  66. :  "  Diu  inter  instruments  regni  habita."  Comp.
Juvenal,  i.  71.:

"*  Instituitque  rudes  melior  Locusta  propinquas
Per  tamam  et  populum  nigros  efferre  maritos."

A.D.54-A.U.807.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  199

sex ;  but  the  only  case  recorded  against  her  is  that
of  Agrippina  and  Claudius,  in  which  she  was  em-
ployed to  prepare  a  potion  for  the  unfortunate  em-
peror. The  substance  which  she  offered  to  compound
was  calculated  to  unsettle  the  mind  without  pro-
ducing immediate  death.1  Halotus,  one  of  the  slaves
of  the  palace,  and  the  taster  of  the  imperial  viands,
was  engaged  to  administer  the  dose,  which  was  con-
cealed in  a  dish  of  mushrooms,  the  favourite  delicacy
of  the  emperor's  supper  table.2  The  treacherous  mor-
sel was  swallowed ;  but  from  the  quantity  of  wine,  as
was  supposed,  that  he  had  drunk,  or  from  the  natural
relief  of  his  overloaded  stomach,  the  poison  failed  of
effect.3  The  murderess  was  alarmed.  She  feared
discovery  from  the  suspicions  of  Claudius,  or  from
the  treachery  of  her  detestable  allies.  Throwing
away  further  precautions,  she  called  on  the  physician
Xenophon,  whom  she  had  already  secured  in  case  of
need.  This  man  thrust  a  poisoned  feather  down  the
sufferer's  throat  under  pretence  of  aiding  him  to
vomit,  and  this  time  at  least  the  venom  was  deadly
and  the  effect  sufficiently  rapid.4

1  Tac.  I  c. :  "  Exquisitum  aliquid  placebat  quod  turbaret  mentem
et  mortem  differret."

2  It  appears  from  inscriptions  that  the  office  of  taster  was  already
known  in  the  court  of  Augustus. Gruter,  p.  602.; Hoeck,  Mom.
Gesch.  i.  3.  329.

•  The  words  of  Tacitus  (xii.  67.),  "  Socordiane  Claudii  an  vino-
lentia,"  with  some  varieties  of  reading,  have  caused  much  perplexity.
If  they  are  correct,  I  should  imagine  socordia  to  mean  the  languid
action  of  the  internal  organs,  which  might  be  supposed,  with  what
reason  I  know  not,  to  retard  the  operation  of  the  poison.  Ruperti
quotes  from  Livy,  xxvi.  14.:  "Impletas  cibis  vinoque  venae  minus
efficacem  in  maturanda  morte  vim  veneni  f'aciunt."  By  the  words,
"  nee  vim  medicarninis  statim  intellectam,"  Walther  supposes  that
the  guests  did  not  at  once  perceive  that  poison  had  been  given  :  but
intelligere  is  the  proper  word  for  feeling  the  effect  of  a  medicine  or
a  wound.  Comp.  Statius,  Theb.  xi.  546.:  "  Mox  intellecto  magis
ac  magis  seger.anhelat  vulnere."

'  4  Tac.  /.  c.  There  is  surely  some  confusion  in  the  account  of
Tacitus,  whatever  may  be  the  corruption  of  his  text.  The  firs-t
poison,  as  he  says  himself,  was  not  intended  to  tnke  speedy  effect;  the

200  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH L

Claudius  fell  senseless  on  his  couch,  and  was
Denhofciau-  removed,  as  if  fainting,  to  his  chamber.
ces'ioTof8"0"  Agrippina  called  for  flannels  and  restora-
tives, and  pretended  to  apply  them  to  the
body,  while  it  lay  in  the  agonies  of  death,  and  even
after  the  spirit  had  departed.  The  sickness  of  the
emperor  was  now  publicly  announced,  and  the  senate
summoned  to  hear  the  vows  of  the  consuls  and  priests
for  his  recovery.  While  these  ceremonies  were  in
progress,  however,  measures  were  preparing  in  the
palace  for  the  succession  of  Nero :  the  doors  were
kept  strictly  closed,  and  placed  under  guard  of  the
trustiest  officers.  Agrippina,  affecting  an  excess  of
grief,  held  Britannicus  clasped  to  her  bosom,  calling
him  her  pet  and  darling,  and  the  image  of  his  dear
father,  and  keeping  him  by  every  artifice  from  quit-
ting the  chamber.  His  sisters,  Antonia  and  Octavia,
were  in  like  manner  detained  within  the  palace;
while  rumours  were  spread  that  the  sufferer  was  re-
viving, and  despatches  sent  to  the  guards  and  legions,
declaring  that  all  went  well,  and  that  the  astrologers
predicted  his  happy  recovery.  Thus  twelve  or  more
hours  passed.  On  the  morrow  at  mid-day,  the  thir-
teenth of  October,  the  doors  of  the  palace  were  sud-
denly thrown  open,  and  Nero,  with  Burrhus  at  his
side,  walked  straight  to  the  guardhouse,  at  the  outer
gate.1  At  the  prefect's  word  of  command,  he  was
received  with  acclamations,  and  lifted  in  a  litter  on
the  men's  shoulders.  Some  indeed  still  hung  back
and  murmured,  W, here  is  Britannicus  ?  but  there  was
none  to  bid  them  act  for  him,  and  they  speedily

second  must  have  been  rapid  indeed  not  to  be  rejected  with  the
vomiting  which  immediately  ensued.  Suetonius  gives  other  versions,
all  somewhat  different,  of  the  circumstances.  Claud.  44.  Comp.
Dion,  Ix.  34.

1  We  may  conclude  from  Tacitus  that  Claudius  died  soon  after
being  carried  from  the  supper  table,  about  midnight  of  the  12th—
13th;  but  his  death  was  announced  as  taking  place  some  hours  later,
and  the  13th  was  the  day  stated  in  the  Fasti.  Comp.  Dion,  Ix.  34.;

A.D.54-A.U.807.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  201

followed  the  first  impulse  which  had  been  given  them.
Nero  was  carried  to  the  camp ;  he  made  a  suitable
address,  promised  the  expected  donative,  after  his
father's  example,  and  was  saluted  imperator.1  The
senate  accepted  without  hesitation  the  declared  will
of  the  praetorians ;  nor  was  there  afterwards  any  dis-
sent on  the  part  of  the  legions  in  the  provinces.  The
first  act  of  the  fathers  was  to  decree  the  deification
of  Claudius,  who  was  thus  honourably  dismissed,
with  the  least  possible  delay,  from  the  remembrance
of  the  citizens  to  the  pious  services  of  his  appointed
Flamens.  His  funeral  was  ordered  with  great  splen-
dour, according  to  the  precedent  of  Augustus,  and
the  magnificence  of  Agrippina  on  the  occasion  was
not  inferior  to  that  displayed  formerly  by  Li  via.  But
his  will  was  never  publicly  recited ;  it  was  feared
that  the  preference  it  gave  to  the  adopted  son  over
the  actual  would  cause  remark  and  dissatisfaction.2

We  meet  with  more  than  one  instance  in  the  im-
perial history  of  the  parents  suffering  for  E8timateof
the  sins  of  their  children.  We  have  already  the  character
seen  how  much  reason  there  is  to  believe  that
the  hatred  of  the  Romans  to  Tiberius  disposed  them
readily  to  accept  any  calumny  against  Li  via.  Tibe-
rius himself  was  hated  the  more  for  the  crimes  of  his
successor  Caius ;  and  there  is  ground  to  surmise  that
much  of  the  odium  which  has  attached  to  Claudius
is  reflected  from  the  horror  with  which  Nero  came
afterwards  to  be  regarded.  Thus  did  the  Romans

Suet.  Claud.  45. Seneca  (Apocol.  2.)  pretends  that  he  did  not  ex-
pire till  after  mid-day:  "  Inter  sextam  et  septimam  erat: "
"Jam  medium  curru  Phoebus  diviserat  orbem,

Et  propior  nocti  fessas  quatiebat  habenas."

Bora  Aug.  1.  A.U.  744,  Claudius  died  Oct.  13.  A.  c.  807,  aged
eixty-three  years,  two  months,  and  twelve  days.  See  Clinton,  Fast.
Rom.  i.  36.

1  Suet.  Ner. 8.;  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  69.;  Joseph.  Antiq.  Jud.  xx.  8.?
Dion  (Xiphilin),  Ixi.  3.

2  Suet.  Claud.  45.  ;  Tac.  /.  c.;  Dion,  Ix.  35.

202  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  L

avenge  themselves  on  the  authors  of  the  principle
of  hereditary  succession  so  long  unknown  to  their
polity,  and  known  at  last  so  disadvantageous^.  Of
Claudius,  at  least,  a  feeling  of  compassion,  if  not  of
justice,  may  incline  us  to  pronounce  with  more  in-
dulgence than  has  usually  been  accorded  to  him.1
He  was  an  imitator,  as  we  have  seen,  of  Augustus,
but  only  as  the  silver  age  might  parody  the  golden ;
for  the  manners  he  sought  to  revive,  and  the  senti-
ments he  pretended  to  regenerate,  had  not  been
blighted  by  the  passing  tempest  of  civil  war,  but
were  naturally  decaying  from  the  over-ripeness  of
age.  Nevertheless,  it  was  honourable  to  admire  a
noble  model ;  there  was  some  generosity  even  in  the
attempt  to  rival  the  third  founder  of  the  state.  Nor,
in  fact,  does  any  period  of  Eoman  history  exhibit
more  outward  signs  of  vigorous  and  successful  ad-
ministration;  none  was  more  fertile  in  victories  or
produced  more  gallant  commanders  or  excellent  sol-
diers ;  domestic  affairs  were  prosperously  conducted ;
the  laborious  industry  of  the  emperor  himself  tired
out  all  his  ministers  and  assistants.  The  senate
recovered  some  portion  of  its  authority,  and,  with
authority,  of  courage  and  energy.  Claudius  secured
respect  for  letters,  in  an  age  of  show  and  sensuality,
by  his  personal  devotion  to  them.  From  some  of
the  worst  vices  of  his  age  and  class  he  was  remark-
ably exempt.  His  gluttony,  if  we  must  believe  the
stories  told  of  it,  was  countenanced  at  least  by  many
high  examples ;  his  cruelty,  or  rather  his  callous
insensibility,  was  the  result  of  the  perverted  training
which  made  human  suffering  a  sport  to  the  master
of  a  single  slave,  as  well  as  to  the  emperor  on  the
throne;  and  it  was  never  aggravated  at  least  by

1  Philostratus  (in  Vit.  Apoll.  v.  27.)  judges  more  mildly  of  him.
juerck  yhp  -rbi/  irpiarov  avroKp&ropa,  vtp  ov  TO  'Paifialcav  SifKOff/jrfOri,
Tvpavviftts  ovrta  ^aAsTrol  foxvaav  tirl  •Kfvr^KOV'ra.  eTTj  a>s  jU7)8e  K/\aiS6ior
rd  /utVo  rovrtav  rpiffKaiSfKa  &p£avTa  xp-qffrbv  56£cu.

A.D.S4-A.C.807.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  203

wanton  caprice  or  ungovernable  passion.  The  con-
tempt which  has  been  thrown  on  his  character  and
understanding  has  been  generated,  in  a  great  degree,
by  the  systematic  fabrications  of  which  he  has  been
made  the  victim.  Though  nattered  with  a  lip-wor-
ship which  seems  to  our  notions  incredible,  Claudius
appears  to  have  risen  personally  above  its  intoxicat-
ing vapours ;  we  know  that,  in  one  instance  at  least,
the  fulsome  adulation  of  a  man,  the  most  remark-
able of  his  age  for  eloquence  and  reputed  wisdom,
failed  to  turn  the  course  whether  of  his  justice  or
his  anger.

The  circumstances  of  this  adulation,  and  of  its  dis-
appointment, it  is  due  to  the  memory  of
Claudius  to  detail. We  have  no  distinct  ac-  honoured  as
count  of  the  cause  of  Seneca's  banishment,  seneca  durin?
which  is ascribed,  by  little  better  than  a
guess,  to  the  machinations  of  Messalina  against  the
friends  and  adherents  of  Julia. However  this  may  be,
we  have  seen  with  what  impatience  the  philosopher
bore  it. On  the  occasion  of  the  death  of  a  brother  of
Polybius,  he  addressed  a  treatise  from  his  place  of
exile  to  the  still  powerful  freedman, such as was
styled  a  Consolation,  in  which  he  set  forth  all  the  ar-
guments which  wit  and  friendship  could  suggest  to  al-
leviate his  affliction  and  fortify  his  wisdom.

.  /,,  . , .  ,,  . ,.  . •  . , . , , The  Con»ol»-

After  assuring  him  of  the  solemn  truth  that  «on  to  Poiy-

11  11  • T  1 •  blUB.

all  men  are  mortal,  and  reminding  him
that  this  world  itself,  and  all  that  it  contains,  is  sub-
ject to  the  common  law  of  dissolution ;  that  man  is
born  to  sorrow ;  that  the  dead  can  have  no  pleasure
in  his  grief ;  that  his  grief  at  the  best  is  futile  and  un-
profitable ;  he  diverts  him  with  another  topic  which
is  meant  to  be  still  more  effectual.  The  emperor,  he
says,  is  divine,  and  those  who  are  blessed  by  employ-
ment in  his  service,  and  have  him  ever  before  their
eyes,  can  retain  no  idle  interest  in  human  things;
their  happy  souls  neither  fear  nor  sorrow  can  enter ;

204  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  L

the  divinity  is  with  them  and  around  them.1  Me,
he  declares,  this  God  has  not  overthrown;  rather  he
has  supported  when  others  supplanted  me ;  he  still
suffers  me  to  remain  for  a  monument  of  his  provi-
dence and  compassion.  Whether  my  cause  be  really
good  or  bad,  his  justice  will  at  last  pronounce  it
good,  or  his  clemency  will  so  regard  it.  Mean-
while, it  is  my  comfort  to  behold  his  pardons  tra-
velling through  the  world:  even  from  the  corner
where  I  am  cast  away  his  mercy  has  called  forth
many  an  exile  before  me.  One  day  the  eyes  of  his

compassion  will  alight  on  me  also Truly

those  thunderbolts  are  just  which  the  thunderstricken
have  themselves  learnt  to  adore.  May  the  immortals
long  indulge  him,  to  the  world!  may  he  rival  the
deeds  of  Augustus  and  exceed  his  years  !  While  still
resident  among  us,  may  death  never  cross  his  thres-
hold !  Distant  be  the  day,  and  reserved  for  the  tears
of  our  grand-children,  when  his  divine  progeni-
tors demand  him  for  the  heavens  which  are  his
own!3

Such  were  the  phrases,  sonorous  and  unctuously
HU  adoration  polished,  which  Polybius  was  doubtless  ex-
Of  Claudius  pected  to  recite  in  the  ears  of  the  imperial

proves  un-

pedant:  standing  high  as  he  still  did  in
the  favour  of  Claudius  and  Messalina,  he  had  the
means,  and  was  perhaps  not  without  the  will,  to
recommend  them  with  all  his  interest,  and  intercede
in  the  flatterer's  behalf.  Yet  Claudius,  it  would
seem,  remained  wholly  unmoved  by  a  worship  more
vehement  than  Ovid's,  and  enhanced  still  more  by
the  unquestioned  reputation  of  its  author.  What-
ever had  been  the  motives  of  his  sentence  against
Seneca,  it  was  not  by  flattery  that  he  could  be  swayed
to  reverse  it.  Surely,  as  far  as  we  are  competent  to

1  Senec. Cons,  ad  Polyb.31.:  "Non  desinam  toties  tibi  offerre
Csesarem."

2  Senec.  Cons,  ad  Polyb.  26,  31,  32.

A.D.54-A.U.807. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  205

judge,  we  must  think  the  better  both  of  his  firm-
ness and  his  sense.1  Shortly  afterwards  Polybius  was
himself  subverted  by  the  caprice  of  Messalina ;  Mes-
salina  in  her  turn  was  overthrown  by  Agrippina ;  and
it  was  not  till  the  sister  of  Julia  had  gained  the
ascendant,  that  Seneca  obtained  at  her  instance  the
grace  he  had  vainly  solicited  through  the  good  offices
of  the  freedman.

But  however  little  Claudius  may  have  relied  on
the  sincerity  of  this  brilliant  phrasemonger,  Seneca.8  8atire
he  could  scarce  have  anticipated  the  revul-  «onhoef  ceilflu-a"
sion  of  sentiment  to  which  so  ardent  a  dius*
worshipper  would  not  blush  to  give  utterance  on  his
decease.  It  was  natural  of  course  that  the  returned
exile  should  attach  himself  to  his  benefactress :  from
her  hands  he  had  received  his  honours;  by  her  he
was  treated  with  a  confidence  which  flattered  him.
No  doubt  he  was  among  the  foremost  of  the  courtiers
who  deserted  the  setting  to  adore  the  rising  luminary.
Yet  few,  perhaps,  could  believe  that  no  sooner  should
Claudius  be  dead,  ere  yet  the  accents  of  official  flat-
tery had  died  away  which  proclaimed  him  entered
upon  the  divine  career  of  his  ancestors,  than  the
worshipper  of  the  living  emperor  should  turn  his
deification  into  ridicule,  and  blast  his  name  with  a
slander  of  unparalleled  ferocity.  There  is  no  more
curious  fragment  of  antiquity  than  the  Vision  of
Judgment  which.  Seneca  has  left  us  on  the  death  and
deification  of  Claudius.  The  traveller  who  has  visited
modern  Eome  in  the  autumn  season  has  remarked
the  numbers  of  unwieldy  and  bloated  gourds  which
sun  their  speckled  bellies  before  the  doors,  to  form
a  favourite  condiment  to  the  food  of  the  poorer

1  It  should  be  remarked  that  we  cannot  speak  with  certainty  of
this  presumed  intercession  of  Polybius.  It  is  possible  that  the  Con-
solation did  not  reach  him  till  he  was  no  longer  in  a  position  to  serve
its  author;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  this
to  have  been  the  case.

206  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  L.

classes.  When  Claudius  expired  in  the  month  of
October,  his  soul,  according  to  the  satirist,  long
lodged  in  the  inflated  emptiness  of  his  own  swollen
carcass,  migrated  by  an  easy  transition  into  a  kin-
dred pumpkin.  The  senate  declared  that  he  had
become  a  god ;  but  Seneca  knew  that  he  was  only
transformed  into  a  gourd.  The  senate  decreed  his
divinity,  Seneca  translated  it  into  pumpkinity;  and
proceeded  to  give  a  burlesque  account  of  what  may
be  supposed  to  have  happened  in  heaven  on  the
appearance  of  the  new  aspirant  to  celestial  honours.1
— A  tall  gray-haired  figure  has  arrived  halting  at  the
gates  of  Olympus :  he  mops  and  mows,  and  shakes
his  palsied  head,  and  when  asked  whence  he  comes
and  what  is  his  business,  mutters  an  uncouth  jargon
in  reply  which  none  can  understand.  Jupiter  sends
Hercules  to  interrogate  the  creature,  for  Hercules  is
a  travelled  god,  and  knows  many  languages;  but
Hercules  himself,  bold  and  valiant  as  he  is,  shudders
at  the  sight  of  a  strange  unearthly  monster,  with
the  hoarse  inarticulate  moanings  of  a  seal  or  sea-calf.
He  fancied  that  he  saw  his  thirteenth  labour  before
him.  Presently,  on  a  nearer  view,  he  discovers  that
it  is  a  sort  of  man.  Accordingly  he  takes  courage  to
address  him  with  a  verse  from  Homer,  the  common
interpreter  of  gods  and  men ;  and  Claudius,  rejoicing
at  the  sound  of  Greek,  and  auguring  that  his  own
histories  will  be  understood  in  heaven,  replies  with

1  The  piece  here  alluded  to  is  entitled  in  the  MSS.  and  editions
Ludits  de  morte  Claudii  Caesaris.  Its  style  is  very  similar  to  that  of
Seneca,  with  whose  works  it  has  been  found,  and  in  brilliancy  and
point  it  is  by  no  means  unworthy  of  the  great  master  of  rhetoric.
It  contains,  indeed,  no  allusion  to  the  gourd  or  pumpkin;  but  Dion
tells  us  (Ix.  35.)  that  Seneca  wrote  a  satire  on  the  deification  of
Claudius,  to  which  he  gave  the  name  of  Apocolocyntosis  (or  puinp-
kinification),  and  there  seems  no  ground  to  doubt  the  identity  of  the
two  pieces.  It  is  not  uncommon  in  ancient  literature  for  the  same
work  to  be  cited  under  two  names.  Thus  the  poem  of  Lucan  is  sotne-
fiines  culled  Phar.mlia,  sometimes  de  Betto  Cirili.

A.D.54-A.U.807.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  207

an  apt  quotation.1  To  pass  over  various  incidents
which  are  next  related,  and  the  gibes  of  the  satirist
on  the  Gaulish  origin  of  Claudius,  and  his  zeal  in
lavishing  the  franchise  on  Grauls  and  other  barba-
rians, we  find  the  gods  assembled  in  conclave  to
deliberate  on  the  pretensions  of  their  unexpected
visitor.  Certain  of  the  deities  rise  in  their  places,
and  express  themselves  with  divers  exquisite  reasons
in  his  favour;  and  his  admission  is  about  to  be
carried  with  acclamation,  when  Augustus  starts  to  his
feet  (for  the  first  time,  as  he  calls  them  all  to  wit-
ness, since  he  became  a  god  himself,  for  Augustus
in  heaven  is  reserved  and  silent,  and  keeps  strictly
to  his  own  affairs),  and  recounts  the  crimes  and  hor-
rors of  his  grandchild's  career  He  mentions  the
murder  of  his  father-in-law  Silanus,  and  of  his  two
sons-in-law  Silanus  and  Pompeius,  and  the  father-
in-law  of  his  daughter,  and  the  mother-in-law  of
the  same,  of  his  wife  Messalina,  and  of  others
more  than  can  be  named.  The  gods  are  struck  with
amazement  and  indignation.  Claudius  is  repelled
from  the  threshold  of  Olympus,  and  led  by  Mercury
to  the  shades  below.  As  he  passes  along  the  Via
Sacra  he  witnesses  the  pageant  of  his  own  obsequies,
and  then  first  apprehends  the  fact  of  his  decease.
He  hears  the  funeral  dirge  in  which  his  actions  are
celebrated  in  most  grandiloquent  sing-song,  descend-
ing at  last  to  the  abruptest  bathos.2  But  the  satirist
can  strike  a  higher  note  :  the  advent  of  the  ghost
to  the  infernal  regions  is  described  with  a  sublime
irony.  Claudius  is  come,  shout  the  spirits  of  the
dead,  and  at  once  a  vast  multitude  assemble  around
him,  exclaiming,  with  the  chant  of  the  priests  of
Apis,  We  have  found  him,  we  have  found  him  ;

1  Senec.  Apocol.  5.:  T'LS  ir&Qfv  fls  avSpiav,  ir66i  rol  irrA\ts; . .  .
fj.e  <pep(ai  &Vf/j.os  KiK6vffffft  ire\a<Tfffv,

2  Senec.  Apocol.  12.  :  "Ingenti  fjuyaKriyopiq  iisenia,  cantubatur  ana-
presti.s;  fuiidite  fletus,  edite  planctus,  fingite  luctus,"  &c.

208  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  r

rejoice  and  be  glad  ! l  Among  them  was  Silius  the
consul  and  Junius  the  prsetor,  and  Trallus  and  Tro-
gus,  and  Gotta,  Vettius,  and  Fabius,  Eoman  knights,
whom  Narcissus  had  done  to  death.  Then  came  the
freedmen  Polybius  and  Myron,  Harpocras,  Amphaeus,
and  Pheronactes,  whom  Claudius  had  despatched  to
hell  before  him,  that  he  might  have  his  ministers
below.  Next  advanced  Catonius  and  Eufus,  the  pre-
fects, and  his  friends  Lusius  and  Pedo,  and  Lupus
and  Celer,  consulars,  and  finally  a  number  of  his
own  kindred,  his  wife  and  cousins,  and  son-in-law.
Friends  everywhere  f  simpered  the  fool ;  pray  how
came  you  all  here  ? — How  came  we  here  ?  thundered
Pompeius  Pedo :  who  sent  us  here  but  thou,  0  mur-
derer of  all  thy  friends  f 2 — And  thereupon  the  new
comer  is  hurried  away  before  the  judgment-seat  of
-<Eacus.  An  old  boon  companion  offers  to  plead  for
him  ;  .<Eacus,  most  just  of  men,  forbids,  and  condemns
the  criminal,  one  side  only  heard.  As  he  hath  done,  he

1  Senec.  Apocol.  13. :  "  Claudius  Caesar  venit .  .  .  fvpfyKapfv,  avyxai-
pu/j.ev."  Great  has  been  the  success  of  this  remarkable  passage,  which
may  possibly  have  suggested  the  noble  lines  of  Shakspeare,  Rich.  III.
Act  i.  sc.  4. :

Clarence  is  come,  false,  fleeting,  perjured  Clarence,
That  stabbed  me  in  the  field  by  Tewkesbury.

It  is  more  probable  that  Voltaire  had  it  in  his  mind  when  he  pro-
nounced on  the  fate  of  Constantine  and  Clovis;  and  more  than  one
stanza  of  Byron's  Vision  of  Judgment  is  evidently  suggested  by  it.
Lucan  also,  in  almost  every  page  of  whose  poem  I  trace  the  study  of
his  uncle  Seneca,  seems  to  have  had  it  before  him  in  those  inspired
lines,  Phars.  vi.  in  fin.:

"  Tristis  felicibus  umbris
Vultus  erat:  vidi  Decios,  natumque  patremque,
Lustrales  bellis  animas,  flentemque  Camillum
Et  Curios;  Syllam  de  te,  Fortuna,  querentem  ....
Abruptis  Catilina  hiinax  fractisque  catenis
Exsultant  Mariique  truces  nudique  Cethegi .  . .  ."
Comp.  also  Juvenal,  ii.  153.:

"  Curius  quid  sentit  et  ambo

Scipiadffl  ....  quoties  hinc  talis  ad  illos  Umbra  venit."
*  For  Catonius,  see  Dion,  Ix.  18. ;  for  Junius,  Rufus,  and  Vettius,
Tac.  Ann.  xi.  35. Pompeius  Pedo  seems  to  be  the  same  who  is
called  Urbicus.

A.D.54-A.U.807. UNDER THE EMPIBE,  209

exclaims,  so  shall  he  be  done  by.1  The  shades  are
astounded  at  the  novelty  of  the  judgment :  to  Clau-
dius it  seems  rather  unjust  than  novel.  Then  the
nature  of  his  punishment  is  considered.  Some  would
relieve  Tantalus  or  Ixion  from  their  torments  and
make  the  imperial  culprit  take  their  place ;  but  no,
that  would  still  leave  him  the  hope  of  being  him-
self in  the  course  of  ages  relieved.  His  pains  must
be  never  ending,  still  beginning :  eternal  trifler  and
bungler  that  he  was,  he  shall  play  for  ever  and  ever
with  a  bottomless  dicebox.2

Such  was  the  scorn  which  might  be  flung  upon  the
head  of  a  national  divinity,  even  though  he
were  the  adoptive  father  of  the  ruler  of  the  tnmfg^nt  flat-
state  ;  nor  perhaps  was  the  new  and  upstart
deity  much  more  cavalierly  treated  than  might  some-
times bethelot  of  the  established  denizens  of  Olympus.
It  is  true  that  Nero  at  a  later  period  thought  fit  to
degrade  his  parent  from  these  excessive  honours,  and
even  demolished  the  unfinished  works  of  his  temple
on  the  Cselian  hill? :  but  there  is  no  reason  to  sup-
pose that  Seneca  reserved  his  spite  until  this  catas-
trophe, or  that  the  prince  evinced  any  marks  of  dis-
pleasure at  the  unrestrained  laughter  with  which
doubtless  his  satire  was  greeted.4  While  the  memory

1  Senec.  /.  c. :

Elf  KC  vd8ot  rd  T*  eptfe  8i(o;  «'  lOtta.  ytvotro  ....
"  Claudio  iniqunm  magis  videbatnr  quam  novum."

*  Senec.  /.  c.  in  fin. :

"  Eefugit  digitosque  per  ipsos
Fallax  assiduo  dilabitur  alea  forto."

*  Suet.  Claud.  45.;  Vespas.  9.

4  Nero  is  said  to  have  called  mushrooms  Hie  food  of  Gods,  &t<av
jSpayto.  Suet.  Ner.  3.  The  jest  of  Gallio,  Seneca's  brother,  that
Claudius  was  dragged  to  heaven  by  a  hangman's  hook,  is  conceived
in  a  similar  spirit  of  inhuman  banter.  Dion,  Ix.  35.  Juvenal's
phrase,  "Tremulumque  caput  descendere  jussitln  coelum"  (vi.  623.),
is  equally  happy,  and  for  once  less  coarse  than  either.  Comp.
Statius.  Sylv.  iii.  3.  77.  "Nondum  stelligerum  senior  demissus  in
axem  Claudius."

VOI«  VI  P

210  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  i.

of  the  deceased  emperor  was  thus  ruthlessly  torn  in
pieces,  the  writer  had  been  careful  to  exalt  in  terms
the  most  extravagant  the  anticipated  glories  of  his
successor;  and  the  vain  thoughtless  heir  perceived
not  that  the  mockery  of  his  sire  was  the  deepest  of
insults  to  himself.  Of  the  figure,  accomplishments,
and  character  of  Nero  I  shall  speak  more  particularly
hereafter :  enough  that  he  was  young,  that  he  was
not  ungraceful  in  appearance,  that  he  had  some  ta-
lents, and,  above  all,  the  talent  of  exhibiting  them.
With  such  qualifications  the  new  occupant  of  a  throne
could  never  want  for  flatterers.  To  sing  them,  the
sage  of  the  rugged  countenance  mounts  gaily  on  the
wings  of  poetry,  and  sports  in  strains  of  mellifluous
mellowness,  such  as  might  grace  the  erotic  lyre  of
the  most  callow  votary  of  the  Muses.  At  last,  he
says,  in  mercy  to  his  wretchedness,  the  life-thread  of
the  stolid  Claudius  had  been  severed  by  the  fatal
shears.  But  Lachesis,  at  that  moment,  had  taken  in
her  hands  another  skein  of  dazzling  whiteness,  and
as  it  glided  nimbly  through  her  fingers,  the  common
wool  of  life  was  changed  into  a  precious  tissue  1 : — a
golden  age  untwined  from  the  spindle.  The  Sisters
ply  their  work  in  gladness,  and  glory  in  their  blessed
task ;  and  far,  far  away  stretches  the  glittering  thread,
beyond  the  years  of  Nestor  and  Tithonus.  Phoebus
stands  by  their  side,  and  sings  to  them  as  they  spin,
— Phoebus  the  god  of  song  and  the  god  of  prophecy.
Stay  not,  0  stay  not,  gentle  sisters ;  he  shall  trans-
cend the  limits  of  human  life :  he  shall  be  like  me
in  face,  like  me  in  beauty ;  neither  in  song  nor  in
eloquence  behind  me.  He  shall  restore  a  blissful  age
to  wearied  men,  and  break  again  the  long  silence  of
the  laws.  Yes,  —  as  when  Lucifer  drives  the  stars
before  him,  atod  morning  dissipates  the  clouds,  the
bright  sun  gazes  on  the  world,  and  starts  his
chariot  on  its  daily  race,— so  Ccesar  breaks  upon  the

1  Senec.  Apocol.  4.:  "  Mutatur  vilis  prctioso  lana  metallo."

A..D.54-A.0.807.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  211

earth ;  such  is  the  Nero  whom  Rome  now  beholds :
—  beams  his  bright  countenance  with  tempered
rays,  and  glistens  his  fair  neck  beneath  its  floating
curls.]

'  Senec.  /.  c. :

"  Ille  raihi  similis  vultu,  similisque  decore,
Nee  cantu  iiec  voce  minor;  felicia  lassis
Ssecula  prrestabit,  legumque  silentia  rumpet ....
Talis  Cujsar  adest;  talem  jam  Roma  Neronem
Aspiciat:  flagrat  nitidus  fulgore  remisso
VuJtus,  et  effuso  cervix  formosa  capilla.**

212  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS

CHAPTER  LI.

'lT»e  wise  and  liberal  policy  of  Claudius  towards  Gaul. — His  measures
for  the  suppression  of  Druidism. — He  gives  a  king  to  the  Chorus-
cans  and  withdraws  the  Roman  armies  from  Germany. — Political
state  of  Britain. — Invaded  by  Aulus  Plautius  (A.  u.  796,  A.  D.  43).
— Arrival  of  Claudius. — Defeat  of  the  Trinobantes. — Further  sue
cesses  of  Plautius  andVespasian. — Subjugation  of  southern  Britain
— Campaigns  of  Ostorius  Scapula  against  Caractacus  and  the
Silures. — Foundation  of  the  Colonia  Camulodunum  (A.  u.  804,
A.  D.  51). — Final  defeat  and  capture  of  Caractacus. — Magnanimity
of  Claudius. — Account  of  the  Roman  province  of  Britain,  and  the
stations  of  the  legions.  —  Suetonius  Paullinus  routs  the  Britons  in
Anglesey. — Insurrection  of  the  Iceni  under  their  queen  Boadicea.
— Camulodunum  stormed  and  destroyed. — Slaughter  of  the  Romans
and  overthrow  of  their  establishments. — Return  of  Suetonius  from
Anglesey,  and  defeat  of  the  Iceni  (A.  u.  814,  A.  D.  61).— Final
pacification  of  southern  Britain.

BEFORE  comparing  with  the  event  the  presage  of  our
sanguine  philosopher,  we  will  briefly  dwell  on  that
episode  in  the  history  of  Claudius,  which  is  to  English
readers  the  most  interesting  in  his  reign,  the  inva-
sion and  conquest  of  southern  Britain.  If  this  em-
peror's disposition  was  cautious  rather  than  enterpris-
ing, his  military  policy  was  crowned  everywhere  with
solid  success ;  while  in  this  island  his  own  exploits,
no  less  than  those  of  his  lieutenants,  were  bold  and
brilliant,  and  reflect  lustre  on  his  administration  from
the  remotest  corner  of  the  Roman  world.

Claudius,  indeed,  whenever  he  directly  copied  the
Claudius  by  example  of  Ancrustus,  approached  nearest
^u  to  the  character  of  a  discreet  and  able
sovereign.  When  he  placed  himself,  as  it  were,  in
the  capital  of  Gaul,  and  traced  from  that  centre  the
lines  of  his  policy  on  the  frontiers,  he  best  fulfilled

rn.  Ll.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  213

the  prescriptive  functions  which  evwy  Roman  at-
tached to  the  idea  of  the  Imperator.  Born  at  Lug-
dunum,  on  the  day  when  the  divinity  of  Augustus
was  proclaimed  officially  in  the  province,  the  child  of
the  conqueror  of  the  Germans  and  the  chief  and
patron  of  the  Gauls,  Claudius  might  himself  deserve
the  appellation  of  Gaul  almost  as  much  as  of  Eoman.1
It  was  on  this,  his  native  soil,  that  he  ever  felt  him-
self strongest.  Gaul  was  the  standing-point  whence
he  loved  to  survey  the  empire ;  whence  he  derived
his  happiest  inspirations;  whence  he  directed  his
most  successful  measures,  pacific  or  military.  It  was
from  the  colony  of  Lugdunum  that  he  extended  his
views  to  the  incorporation  of  the  Gaulish  with  the
Roman  people ;  from  Lugdunum  that  he  cast  his
mental  vision  across  the  Rhine  on  the  one  hand  and
the  British  Channel  on  the  other,  and  resolved  to
secure  both  these  frontiers  of  the  empire  by  vigorous
aggressions  upon  the  regions  beyond  them.  The
Cock,  or  Gaul,  says  Seneca,  using  a  play  on  words
which  eighteen  centuries  have  rendered  venerable,
was  bravest  on  his  own  dunghill.2  But  this  jest,  in-
tended as  a  bitter  sarcasm,  expressed  a  sober  truth.
Whatever  were  his  personal  failings,  the  character  of
Claudius  as  a  Roman  emperor,  representing  the  prin-
ciple of  civilization  by  conquest,  is  redeemed  by  the
bold  and  intelligent  spirit  of  his  Gaulish  policy.

We  have  already  remarked  the  liberal  measures
which  Claudius  adopted  for  gradually  amal-  Hi8  liberal
gamating  the  nations  beyond  the  Alps  with  Ta'r'dlthe
their  southern  conquerors. On  a  people  so  Gau1"'
impulsive  as  the  Gauls,  these  measures  exercised,  no

1  Suet.  Claud.  2.:  "  Lugduni,  eo  ipso  die  quo  primum  ara  ibi  Au-
gusto  dedicata  est."

2  Senec.  Apocol  7. :  "  Gallum  in  suo  sterquilinio  plurimum  posse."
The  proverb  seems  to  have  been  ancient  even  in  the  time  of  Seneca.
But  the  satirist  identifies  him  still further  with  the  land  of  his
nativity:  "As  might  be  expected  of  a  Gaul,"  he  says,  "Claudius
(spoiled  Rome."

214  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  M.

doubt,  a  soothing  influence,  while  they  moulded  their
habits  in  the  prescribed  direction.  The  men  who
were  proud  to  fight  under  one  Caesar,  were  assuredly
not  less  pleased  with  admission  to  the  senate  by  an-
other. It  would  be  gratifying,  indeed,  could  we  feel
warranted  in  accepting  as  a  sober  truth  the  sneer  of
Seneca,  that  Claudius  really  meant  to  extend  his  boon
of  citizenship  to  other  nations  besides  the  Gauls;
that  he  proposed  to  be  the  patron  of  the  Germans,
the  Britons,  the  Iberians,  and  the  Africans :  we  should
rejoice  to  have  solid  ground  for  ascribing  to  him  a
broad  and  general  view  for  the  reformation  of  the
Eoman  polity,  the  extinction  of  the  Italian  munici-
pium  in  the  empire  of  the  world,  rather  than  a  mere
act  of  bounty  towards  a  single  favoured  people.  But
of  this  we  have  no  distinct  evidence.  All  we  can  say
with  certainty  is  that  he  threw  open  the  gates  of  Eome
to  the  inhabitants  of  Gaul,  and  applied  the  principles
of  the  first  Caesar  with  the  frankness  not  unworthy
of  that  bold  emancipator.  If  it  were  not  the  first
step  taken  by  the  emperors  in  that  happy  direction,
neither,  it  was  evident,  could  it  be  the- last.

Claudius,  however,  it  may  be  affirmed  with  cer-
uisgust  and tainty,  had  a  special  motive  besides  personal

suspicion  with  . •,.. - Vi • j.  , 1-1 /-t i -vr

which  the  BO- partiality,  for  this  favour  to  the  Gauls.  JNo

mans  regarded f  . •'..- . .  ,  .  .. _ _  ,

Druidism.  people  within  the  circuit  of  Koman  domi-
nion more  required  at  this  moment  to  be  concili-
ated ;  none  held  within  its  bosom  such  dangerous
elements  of  disaffection.  Under  Tiberius  a  serious
revolt  had  been  quelled  by  a  statesman's  firm  resolu-
tion. Under  Caius  the  germ  of  a  civil  war  had  been
extinguished,  as  it  appears,  by  the  happy  boldness
of  a  madman.  But  whenever  disturbances  should
again  rise,  whether  from  discontent  among  the  natives,
or  from  the  irregular  ambition  of  a  Eoman  official,
there  existed  in  the  deep-rooted  influence  of  the
Druids,  and  the  wide  ramifications  of  their  system,
still  alive  though  proscribed  and  persecuted,  the

CH.  M.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  215

seeds  of  a  violent  outbreak  of  Celtic  nationality.
With  the  scanty  knowledge  we  possess  of  the  real
character  and  history  of  Druidism,  we  have  no  means
of  testing  the  vague  notions  entertained  by  the  Ro-
mans themselves  of  the  extent  to  which  its  authority
prevailed.  If  indeed  we  may  believe  their  represen
tations,  that  singular  form  of  priestcraft  was  recog-
nised at  this  period  throughout  wider  regions  than
perhaps  any  other  creed  of  Paganism.  Its  centre
was  in  the  north  of  Gaul,  at  Dreux,  or  Chartres,  or
Autun;  but  its  most  illustrious  fanes  were  to  be
sought  on  the  coasts  of  Britanny,  in  the  sacred  islands
off  the  mouth  of  the  Loire;  in  the  temples  of
Stonehenge  or  Abury  in  our  own  country  ;  in  the
Isle  of  Anglesey  and  possibly  also  of  Man.1  From
the  shores  of  the  Gulf  of  Lyons  to  the  Firth  of  Clyde
a  common  system  of  usage  and  ceremonial  attested
the  identity  of  the  Druidism  of  the  Gauls  and  Britons.
It  was  among  the  Britons,  indeed,  as  we  are  told,  that
the  system  was  taught  in  its  greatest  purity ;  and
such  was  the  facility  of  communication  between  the
two  great  members  of  the  Celtic  family,  that  the
youth  of  Gaul  constantly  crossed  the  Channel  to  seek
the  highest  instruction  in  its  tenets.  In  Gaul  the
Roman  ruler  sought  to  modify  and  control  this  dan-
gerous antagonist  by  assuring  the  natives  that  their
religion  was  merely  another  form  of  the  Greek  and
Italian  polytheism :  to  them  Druidism  was  officially
declared  to  be  a  special  modification  of  truths  com-
mon to  the  wisest  and  most  advanced  nations  of  an-
tiquity. But  the  fear  with  which  he  really  regarded
it,  as  an  implacable  enemy,  an  inspired  rival,  was

1  The  silence  of  the  Roman  authorities  on  Stonehenge  and  the
other  presumed  Druidical  monuments  of  Britain  is  no  doubt  remark-
able  ;  yet  it  seems  extravagant  to  suppose,  with  some  modern
theorists,  that  they  are  posterior  to  the  Roman  period.  They  are
first  referred  to  by  Henry  of  Huntingdon,  early  in  the  twelfth  century,
as  then  of  unfathomed  antiquity,  and  they  form,  unquestionably,  part
of  a  common  system  of  monumental  structures,  scattered  from  Carnar
in  Britanny  through  a  great  part  of  northern  and  central  Europe.

216  HISTORY OF  tfiE KOMANS  cfc.  tt

betrayed  by  the  dark  colours  he  allowed  to  be  thrown
over  it  at  home.  The  bondage  in  which  it  kept  the
minds  of  its  subjects,  the  atrocity  of  its  human  sa-
crifices, the  daring  falsehood  of  its  promise  of  immor-
tality, were  exposed  to  the  disgust  and  contempt  of
the  votaries  of  Olympus.  Its  rites  were  barbarous ;
its  ceremonies  were  sinister  and  gloomy.  The  priests
alone,  it  was  averred,  pretended  in  their  pride  to  the
occult  science  which  apprehends,  or  rather  misappre-
hends, the  Grods.1  The  horrors  of  the  sacred  groves,
on  which  no  birds  alighted,  in  which  no  breezes
rustled,  their  scarred  and  leafless  trunks,  their  bloody
altar  stumps,  the  dripping  of  their  black  fountains,
the  mutterings  of  their  riven  caves,  the  ghastly  vis-
ages of  their  shapeless  idols,  were  enhanced  with  all
the  art  of  poetic  colouring,  and  contrasted  with  the
graceful  forms  of  Nymphs  and  Dryads  in  their  fair
retreats,  with  the  frank  and  cheerful  character  of  the
southern  religions,  the  faith  of  innocence,  mirth,  and
trust.2  Amidst  the  importunate  doubts  and  fears  re-
garding the  future,  or  rather  in  the  despair  of  another
iife  which  Paganism  now  generally  acknowledged,
the  Koman  was  exasperated  at  the  Druid's  assertion
of  the  transmigration  of  souls.  Yet  happy,  he  ex-
claimed in  the  bitterness  of  his  spirit,  were  the  Gauls

1  Lucan,  i.  450.: —

"  El  vos  barbaricos  ritus  moremque  sinistrum
Sacrorum,  Druid  w,  positis  repetistis  ab  armis:
Soils  nosse  Deos  et  cueli  numina  vobis,
Aut  solis  nescire  datum  est."

2  Lucan,  iii.  399.: —

"  Lucus  erat  longo  nunquam  violatus  ab  aevo  ....
Hunc  non  ruricolse  Panes,  nemornmque  potentes
Sylvani  Nymphseque  tenent:  sed  barbara  ritu
Sacra  deum,  structae  sacris  feralibus  arae,
Omnis  et  humanis  lustrata  cruoribus  arbos  ....
Illis  et  volucres  metuunt  insistere  ramis
Et  lustris  recubare  ferae;  nee  ventus  in  illas

Incubuit  sylvas Turn  plurima  nigris

Fontibus  unda  cadit Jam  fama  ferebat

Saepe  cavas  motu  terras  mugire  cavernas  ....

CH.  1JL.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  217

arid  Britons  in  their  error,  insensible  as  it  made
them  to  the  greatest  of  all  fears,  the  fear  of  death :
in  this  faith  they  rushed  gaily  and  recklessly  on  the
sword;  their  generous  souls  disdaining  to  spare  the
life  so  soon  to  be  recovered. l

Augustus,  at  the same  time  that  he  offered  his
own  divinity  as  an  object  of  worship  to  the

n 1  L T J  u J /• -L  •  J  J  j.i Proscription  of

Gauls  at  Lugdunum, had forbidden the  Druidumby

r  -pv .  , . i . , . T,  TT  Augustus,  Ti-

exercise  ot  Druidical  rites  in  Rome.  Hence-  berius,and
forth  the  fierce  and  gloomy  superstition  of
the  North  was  branded  as  impious  and  immoral,
hurtful  to  the  manners  of  the  citizens  who  might
be  tempted  to  mingle  in  it,  and  even  to  the  public
safety.  But  Augustus  had  not  ventured  to  prohibit
the  natives  of  the  transalpine  provinces  from  using
their  ancient  rights  on  their  own  soil.  Tiberius
seems  to  have  pressed  on  the  hostile  system  with  a
still  stronger  hand:  the  revolt  of  the  ^Eduans  and
of  Sacrovir,  who,  as  we  have  seen,  was  probably  him-
self a  Druid,  may  have  exasperated  his  enmity.2  It
was  reserved,  however,  for  Claudius  to  decree  its  en-
tire abolition,  and  to  enforce  with  severity  the  edict
of  proscription.  Of  the  measures,  indeed,  which  he
took,  and  the  details  of  his  persecution,  we  have  no
information:  a  single  anecdote  preserved  by  Pliny
seems  to  show  that,  in  Rome,  at  least  it  was  search-
ing and  sanguinary.  A  Graulish  chief,  he  tells  us,  a

1  Lucan,  i.  460.: —

"  Felices  errore  suo  quos  ille  timorum
Maximus  baud  urget  leti  metus:  inde  ruendi
In  ferrum  mens  prona  viris,  animsequc  capaces
Mortis,  et  ignavum  rediturae  parcere  vitas."

2  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxx.  4.:  "Tiberii  Caesaris  principatus  sustulit
Druidas,  et  hoc  genus  vatum  medicorumque." Some  have  supposed
that  Pliny  has  made  a  mistake,  or  that  he  means  Tiberius  Claudius:
it  seems  more  likely  that  he  refers  to  a  partial  proscription  of  Druidism
by  the  successor  of  Augustus. Strabo  (iv.  4.  p.  198.)  had  spoken
under the  second  principate  of  the diligence  of  the  Romans in
abolishing  the  worst  atrocities  of  the  Celtic  cults-

218  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LI.

Vocontian  of  the  Narbonensis,  who  had  obtained
Roman  knighthood,  was  delivered  to  the  executioner
because  on  his  coming  to  Rome  on  private  business,
the  Druid's  talisman  palled  the  serpent's  egg  was
discovered  upon  his  person.1  The  jealousy  of  the
government  and  the  curious  interest  of  the  people
were  most  excited,  perhaps,  by  the  magical  powers
claimed  by  the  priests  of  Gaul,  and  the  prophetic
pretensions  of  its  bards.

While  these  harsh  measures  for  crushing  the  na-
tional  spirit  of  the  Gauls,  and  extirpating

Claudius  gives ., . , *  .  ~  ,.

a  king  to  the  their  leaders,  were  in  course  of  execution,
the  Roman  government  was  not  less  anxious
to  advance  the  eagles  beyond  their  frontiers,  and  re-
move from  their  borders  the  dangerous  spectacle  of
freedom.  On  the  side  of  Germany,  indeed,  the  do-
minion of  the  conquerors  had  long  been  prepared  by
artifice  more  sure  than  arms.  After  the  execution  of
Gsetulicus,  the  legions,  which  he  had  debauched,  had
been  exercised  by  his  successor,  Galba,  in  some  de-
sultory operations  against  the  Chatti ;  but  generally
the  peace  of  the  frontiers  had  been  preserved,  while
the  Germans  were  rapidly  assimilating  themselves  to
the  manners  of  their  more  powerful  and  civilised
neighbours.  Since  the  death  of  Arminius,  the
Cheruscans,  once  so  formidable,  had  been  greatly
enfeebled  by  internal  anarchy.  At  length,  unable  to
govern  themselves,  they  solicited  a  chief  from  the
emperor.  The  son  of  Flavius,  the  brother  of  Armi-
nius, had  been  educated  at  Rome,  in  the  civilization
of  the  South,  with  a  view,  no  doubt,  to  future  service.
The  Cheruscans  were  willing  to  accept  a  kinsman  of
their  late  hero :  Claudius  seized  the  opportunity  for
advancing  his  own  views ;  and  the  youth  went  forth

1  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxix.  3.  The  serpent's  egg  (ovum  angumum)
seems  to  have  been  an  echinite  or  other  fossil  substance,  to  which  the
Druids  ascribed  a  mysterious  origin,  and  not  less  mysterious  virtues.
It  was  worn  round  the  neck  as  an  amulet.

CH.  M.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  219

from  the  school  of  monarchy,  the  first  foreigner,  as
the  emperor  reminded  him,  who,  born  at  Eome,  a
citizen  and  not  a  captive  or  a  hostage,  had  been  raised
by  Eoman  hands  to  an  independent  sovereignty.
Italicus,  such  was  the  name  the  German  adopted,  had
been  trained  to  the  skilful  use  both  of  the  Eoman
and  the  German  weapons ;  beneath  the  varnish  of
Italian  cultivation  he  retained  some  also  of  the  coarse
tastes  of  his  ancient  countrymen ;  and  he  seems  to  have
possessed  popular  manners,  which  for  a  time  ingra-
tiated him  with  the  jealous  barbarians.  But  presently
offence  was  given ;  suspicions  and  enmities  arose ;
the  charge  of  Roman  manners  was  promptly  made
against  him,  and  connected  with  the  imputation  of
foreign  inclinations,  and  a  disposition  to  sacrifice  to
the  stranger  the  weal  of  the  fatherland.  It  was  in
vain,  urged  his  enemies,  that  he  boasted  himself  the
nephew  of  Arminius  the  patriot :  was  he  not  the  son
of  Flavins  the  renegade  ?  Italicus,  on  the  other  hand,
reminded  the  disaffected  that  he  had  come  among
them  at  their  own  invitation,  and  challenged  his
enemies  to  decide  by  arms  whether  he  deserved  by  his
prowess  to  claim  kinship  with  their  bravest  champion.
He  succeeded,  after  some  vicissitudes,  in  putting
down  the  open  attempts  to  unseat  him ;  but  the
Cheruscans  continued,  under  his  rule,  to  be  disturbed
by  dissensions,  to  the  advantage  of  the  Eomans,  who
looked  on  complacently,  and  abstained  from  inter-
fering.1

Meanwhile  the  Chauci,  who  had  formed  a  closer
connexion  with  Eome,  and  had  profited  for
many  years  by  their  state  of  peaceful  de-  corbuioin
pendence,  which  gave  an  opening  to  their
commerce  with  Gaul  and  Britain,  had  ventured,  at
the  instigation  of  a  piratical  chief  named  Gennascus,
to  seek  plunder  by  incursions  into  the  lower  German

1  Tac.  Ann.  \\.  16.  17.

220  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  U.

province. Sanquinius,  the  commander  in  this  quar
ter,  had  recently  died,  and  the  defence  of  the  district
was  for  a  time  neglected. This  man  was  succeeded,
however,  by  Domitius  Corbulo,  an  active  and  enter-
prising soldier,  who  promptly  restored  discipline  in
the  camps,  repaired  the  flotilla  of  the  Ehine  and
ocean,  and  pursued  the  depredators  into  all  their
harbours. He  chastised  the  Frisii,  who  had  dared  to
withhold  their  stipulated  tribute ;  and,  without  actu-
ally annexing  their  country  to  the  Eoman  dominions,
planted  among  them  a  government  of  the  friends  and
clients  of  the  empire,  supported  by  the  presence  of
a  military  force. At  the  same  time  he  sought  to  sub-
due the  Chauci  by  corrupting  some  of  their  chiefs,
and  by  the  murder  of  Grennascus,  towards  whom,  as
a  mere  pirate,  no  terms  of  honour  need  be  kept.
This  attempt  on  the  outlaw's  life  was  indeed  suc-
cessful; nevertheless,  the  result  was  not  so  propitious
as  Corbulo  had  anticipated.  The  Chauci,  long  wavering
A.n.47. iQ  their  dependence,  were  decided  against
A.  0.  soo. Rome  by  irritation  at  this  treacherous  deal-
ing, and  flew  to  arms  with  frantic  ardour. Possibly  this
was  what  Corbulo  desired ;  he  had  scattered  with  his
own  hand  the  seed  of  rebellion,  the  crop  had  ripened,
and  he  was  about  to  reap  the  harvest. But  he  had
worse  enemies  at  the  court  of  Claudius  than  the  Chauci
on  the  Ehine. He  was  there  represented  as  seeking
Avar  for  his  own  aggrandisement. If  he  failed,  the
empire  would  suffer ;  if  he  triumphed,  the  emperor
himself  might  find  him  dangerous. Such  were  the
insinuations, it  was alleged,  by  which the timid
prince  was  induced  to  stop  the  progress  of  conquest
in  Germany,  and recall his  standards  behind  the
Ehine. But  Claudius  doubtless  knew  that  peace  was
now  a  more  effective  auxiliary  than  war  ;  and  he  pre-
ferred holding  out  the  hand  of  treacherous  friendship
to  engaging  in  superfluous  hostilities. The  order  to
retire  reached  Corbulo  when  he  was  actually  planting

CH.  LI.  ONDER THE EMPIRE.  221

a  camp  in  the  territory  of  the  Chauci  for  the  site  of
a  fortress,  or  a  colony.  He  read  in  it  the  danger
to  which  he  was  exposed  from  the  emperor's  jealousy;
the  contempt  in  which  he  should  be  held  by  the
arrogant  barbarians,  the  mockery  to  which  he  should
be  subjected  even  from  his  own  allies.  Nevertheless,
with  the  old  Eoman  endurance,  he  stifled  every  sign
of  anger  or  murmur  of  remonstrance ;  and  mutter-
ing only,  how  fortunate  were  once  the  Roman  cap-
tains, gave  the  signal  for  retreat.  With  the  with-
drawal of  the  legions,  the  Chauci  relapsed  into  their
fatal  torpor.  It  was  necessary,  however,  to  furnish
the  soldiers  with  employment;  and,  forbidden  to
exercise  them  in  war,  Corbulo  now  engaged  them  in
a  great  work  of  engineering,  which  has  long  outlasted
the  conquests  of  Eome  beyond  the  Ehine.  He  cut
a  canal  from  the  Maas,  near  its  mouth,  to  the
northern  branch  of  the  Ehine  parallel  to  the  line  of
coast,  to  effect  an  easy  communication  between  his
stations,  in  a  region  where  the  yielding  soil  could
scarce  bear  the  weight  of  a  military  causeway,  to
drain  at  the  same  time  the  lowlands,  and  oppose
dykes  to  the  encroachment  of  the  ocean.1  Before
the  adoption  of  the  modern  railroad,  the  canal  of
Corbulo  was  the  common  highway  of  traffic  between
Eotterdam  and  Leyden ;  and  its  plodding  trekschuyt
may  still  faithfully  represent  the  old  Eoman  tow-boat
of  the  Pomptine  marshes.2

1  Tac.  Ann.  xi.  18 — 20.  "  This  great  work  still  forms  a  principal
drain  of  the  province  of  Holland,  between  the  city  of  Leyden  and  the
village  of  Sluys  on  the  Maas." — Greenwood,  Hist,  of  the  Germans,  i.  1 4 1

*  Comp.  Horace's  Journey  to  Brundisium.  A  more  important  work
of  this  kind  was  projected  about  the  year  812  by  L.  Vetus,  a  Roman
commander  in  northern  Gaul.  He  proposed  to  unite  the  Saone  and
Moselle  by  a  canal,  to  expedite  the  transmission  of  troops  from  the
South  ;  but  was  dissuaded  from  the  enterprise  by  JElius  Gracilis,  the
legatus  of  the  Belgic  province,  as  likely  to  bring  him  into  suspicion
with  the  emperor.  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  53.  Steininger  (Gesch.der  Tre-
virer,  p.  86.)  laments,  that  up  to  this  day  so  useful  a  work  should  havo
been  neglected,  though  it  presents  no  great  difficulties.

222  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LI.

The  religion  of  the  Germans  was  distinct  from  that
rhe  Romans  °f  t^e  Grauls ;  and  from  this  reason,  perhaps,
r/freedSlT8  as  well  as  from  the  long  animosity  between
tha^lnGer-  tne  two  nations,  the  Eomans  were  less  ap-
many.  prehensive  of  the  effect  which  might  be
produced  on  the  one  bank  by  the  view  of  surviving
independence  on  the  other.  But  with  the  island
of  Britain,  more  distant  yet  not  remote,  the  case
was  different.  Though  the  Channel  was  a  broader
barrier  than  the  Rhine,  the  communication  of  ideas,
of  hopes,  fears,  and  enmities,  was  more  close  and
constant  between  the  Grauls  and  Britons  than  between
the  Gauls  and  Germans.  There  was  nearer  affinity
in  blood,  language,  and  manners ;  there  were  no  re-
collections of  mutual  hostility ;  no  memorials  on  either
side  of  conquest  or  encroachment ;  above  all,  Druidism
was  paramount  among  both,  and  the  ministers  of
the  Gallic  rites  looked  to  the  sacred  recesses  of  the
northern  island  as  the  real  hearth  and  home  of  their
own  religious  polity.  The  persecution  of  the  Druids
on  the  continent  drove  them  back  to  the  spot  where
they  had  imbibed  their  own  mystic  lore;  and  the
recital  of  their  wrongs  inflamed  the  indignation  of
the  children  of  that  heroic  race  which  could  boast
that  it  had  repulsed  the  mighty  Caesar  with  disaster
from  its  shores.1

The  tribute  which  Julius  Ca3sar  had  pretended  to
impose  on  some  chiefs  of  southern  Britain

Relation  of TIT  -,  rv  i  -,

u'eTOntrnent  rarely  offered,  and  never  exacted.

Augustus,  we  have  seen, had  once  threatened

to  recover  it  in  person  by  force  of  arms :  it  is  possible

that  some  slight  concessions  then  made  to  his  demands

1  Names,  indeed,  of  Gaulish  tribes  and  those  possibly  of  German
origin,  may  be  noticed  in  the  south-eastern  parts  of  Britain,  but  there
is  no  record  of  a  hostile  invasion,  no  allusion  to  hostile  reminiscences;
and  the  existence  of  Drnidical  remains  on  the  very  spots  where  these
tribes  were  seated  speaks  in  favour  of  their  actual  affinity  to  the
original  stock.

CH.  U  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  223

suffice  to  divert  him  from  an  enterprise  he  had  no
real  desire  to  undertake.1  Under  Tiberius  the  affairs
of  Britain  excited  no  political  interest  at  Rome.  But
the  rapid  progress  of  Roman  civilization  in  northern
Graul,  the  growth  of  the  cities  on  the  banks  of  the
teeming  Rhine-stream,  the  spread  of  commercial
relations  along  the  shores  of  Belgium,  Holland,  and
Friesland,  had  elicited  a  spirit  of  friendly  intercourse
from  the  British  side  of  the  oceau.  Londinium,  a
city  which  escaped  the  notice  of  Caesar,  had  become
in  the  time  of  Claudius  a  great  emporium  of  trade.
Camulodunum  was  the  residence  of  the  chief  poten-
tate of  southern  Britain;  the  fertile  plains  of  our
eastern  provinces  were  studded  with  numerous  towns
and  villages :  the  vessels  of  the  Thames,  the  Colne,
and  the  Wensum  reciprocated  traffic  with  those  of  the
Rhine,  the  Maas,  and  the  Scheldt :  the  coinage  of
Cunobelinus,  king  of  the  Trinobantes,  of  which  spe-
cimens still  exist,  attests,  by  its  skilful  workmanship
and  its  Latin  legends,  an  intimate  and  friendly  con-
nexion between  Britain  and  Graul,  or  possibly  Italy.2
We  may  conjecture,  that  the  Romans  themselves,  in
the  interval  since  the  invasion  of  Caesar,  had  settled
as  traders  in  our  island.

1  My  attention  has  been  directed  to  a  fragment  of  Livy  recently
produced  by  Schneidewin,  from  which  it  would  appear  that  Augustus
actually  set  foot  in  Britain:  "Caesar  Augustus  populo  Romano
nuntiat,  regressus  a  Britannia  insula,  totum  orbem  terrarum  tarn
bello  quam  amicitia  Romano  imperio  subditum."  The  passage
seems  to  be  a  fragment  of  an  epitome,  and  is  probably  not  strictly
faithful  to  the  sense  of  the  author.  See  The  Christian  Reformer  for
Jan.  1857,  p.  7.  Suetonius  (Claud.  16.)  and  Eutropius  (vii.  13.)  say
expressly  that  no  Roman  set  foot  in  Britain  from  Julius  Caesar  to
Claudius.

*  In  the  time  of  Caesar,  according  to  his  own  account,  the  Britons
had  no  coinage,  and  used  only  rude  pieces  of  iron  by  weight.  Eckhel
expresses  some  doubt  of  the  genuineness  of  the  few  British  coins
which  were  known  in  his  day.  Their  number,  however,  has  now
been  greatly  increased,  and  modern  numismatists  have  assiduously
collected  and  catalogued  them.  I  am  informed  that  they  are  gene-
rally rather  coarse  imitations  of  Macedonian  types,  derived,  no  doubt,
from  Gaul  and  Massilia.

224  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  U.

The  south-eastern  parts  of  Britain  seem  to  have
chief  .tates  been  occupied  at  this  period  by  three  prin-
Britai*ethe  cipal  nations,  the  Kegni  in  Sussex,  the
iheRebganTand  Trinobantcs  in  Hertford  and  Essex,  the
theiceni.1  Iceni  in  Norfolk  and  Suffolk,  The  Trino-
bantes  were  already  known  as  the  most  powerful
of  the  British  tribes  in  the  time  of  Caesar.  Their
leader,  Cassivellaunus,  had  assumed  the  direction  of
a  league  against  the  invader.  His  authority  had  been
still  further  extended  by  his  successors.  If  we  may
believe  that  the  great  system  of  roads,  to  which  we
give  the  name  of  British,  was  actually  the  work  of
our  Celtic  ancestors,  extending  as  they  do  across  the
length  and  breadth  of  the  island  from  Eichborough
to  the  Menai  Straits,  from  the  mouth  of  the  Axe  to
the  Wash  and  Humber,  it  would  seem  to  indicate
that  there  was  once  a  time  when  the  whole  of  south
Britain  at  least  was  subject  to  some  common  author-
ity. Of  such  a  political  combination,  however,  there
is  certainly  no  trace  in  history :  possibly  the  union
extended  only  to  matters  of  religion.1  Cunobelinua
indeed,  the  greatest  of  the  descendants  of  Cassivel-
launus, seems  to  have  united  a  large  part  of  the

1  Caesar  describes  the  Britons  as  in  a  state  of  barbarism,  which
completely  disappears  in  the  accounts  of  Tacitus  and  Dion.  We
hear  no  more  now  of  their  painted  bodies,  their  scythed  chariots,
their  hideous  sacrifices,  their  revolting  concubinage.  Can  we  sup-
pose that  Cesar  was  willing  to  represent  the  country,  which  he  found
it  inconvenient  to  subdue,  as  more  miserable  than  it  really  was  }
Or  could  the  hundred  years  of  intercourse,  which  had  since  inter-
vened, with  the  pacified  tribes  of  Gaul  and  Germany,  have  effected
BO  remarkable  a  change?  The  existence  of  a  common  system  of
roads  throughout  the  country,  which  is  admitted  by  some  of  the  best
modern  antiquarians,  seems  a  strong  proof  of  a  common  civilization.
These  lines  of  road  do  not  correspond  with  the  Roman  Itineraries;
and  some  of  them,  as  those  which  lead  from  Seaton  to  Yarmouth,
and  from  Southampton  to  Richborough,  do  not  seem  to  belong  to  a
Roman  system.  They  point  to  a  native  traffic,  carried  on  by  land
and  water,  between  Armorica  and  the  Frisian  or  Danish  coasts.
But  if  not  Roman,  there  is  no  later  period  of  an  united  Britain  to
which  they  can  well  be  ascribed,

CH.  LI.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  225

island  under  his  control  or  influence.  From  his  capi-
tal at  Camulodunum,  near  the  mouth  of  the  Colne
in  Essex,  to  which  he  had  transferred  the  royal
residence  from  Verulamium,  for  the  advantage  per-
haps of  intercourse  with  Gaul  and  Grermany,  he
extended  his  sway  over  the  south  and  centre  of
Britain,  and  may  possibly  have  been  recognised  as
paramount  in  arms  by  the  pure  Celtic  races  on  the
Severn,  and  even  beyond  it.  The  people  of  Kent
and  Sussex  may  also,  in  some  sense,  have  acknow-
ledged his  sovereignty.  But  the  Iceni  were  inde-
pendent, jealous,  and  perhaps  hostile  to  him.  To
this  nation  also  a  number  of  petty  tribes  were  sub-
servient, extending  across  the  centre  of  the  island
from  the  Wash  to  the  Avon  and  Severn.  Between
the  Eomans  and  these  proud  and  self-confident
islanders,  causes  of  quarrel  were  never  wanting ;  k
only  remained  for  the  southern  conquerors  hovering
on  their  coasts,  and  mingling  in  all  their  dealings,  to
choose  their  own  moment  for  aggression.  The  petty
chiefs  who  chanced  to  be  expelled  from  their  own
country  by  domestic  dissensions,  generally  sought  a
refuge,  which  was  never  denied  them,  within  the
Koman  dominions,  and  the  kings  of  the  Trinobantes
or  Iceni  sometimes  ventured  to  demand  that  they
should  be  surrendered.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fugi-
tives were  constantly  urging  the  Eoman  government
to  restore  them  by  arms  or  influence  to  their  forfeited
rights  at  home,  and  holding  out  splendid  promises  of
4tribute  and  submission  in  return.  Between  these  two
classes  of  applicants  the  Eomans  would  not  long
hesitate.  When  Adminius,  one  of  the  sons  of  Cuno-
belin,  solicited  Caius  to  recover  for  him  his  share  in
the  paternal  inheritance,  the  emperor  prepared,  as
we  have  seen,  to  enforce  his  claims  with  a  military
demonstration.  The  threatened  invasion  was,  how-
ever, postponed,  whether  its  ostensible  object  were
gained  or  not.  Of  Adminius  and  his  pretensions  we

VOL.  VI.  Q

226  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CE.  Li.

hear  no  more ;  but  other  fugitives  and  other  claim
ants  soon  appeared  upon  the  scene.

The  solicitations  of  Bericus  to  Claudius  were  the
Claudius  Pre-  counterpart  to  those  of  Adminius  to  his  pre-
f"alionrof  *  decessor,  though  of  this  suppliant  we  know
Britain.  even  less  than  of  the  former.  But  he  too
was  a  chief  expatriated  by  domestic  enemies,  he  too
was  demanded  in  extradition  by  his  countrymen,  but
retained  by  the  policy  rather  than  the  compassion  of
the  Romans ;  he  too  succeeded  in  getting  a  Roman
army  equipped  for  his  restoration.1  Claudius  could
assert,  like  Augustus  before  him,  that  the  tribute  of
Britain  had  been  long  withheld.  Like  Augustus,  he
was  determined  to  chastise  the  defaulters,  and  take
firmer  sureties  than  before  for  future  submission.
Like  Augustus,  he  proposed  to  lead  the  eagles  in
person,  to  earn  a  title  and  a  triumph,  as  his  ancestors
had  done,  on  the  field  of  battle.  But  he  could  not
spare  the  time,  he  would  not  perhaps  encounter  the
toil,  required  for  the  conquest  of  the  powerful
islanders.  Aulus  Plautius,  who  held  a  high  com-
mand in  Graul,  was  chosen  to  conduct  the  invasion,
and  prepare  the  way  for  the  emperor  by  a  prelimi-
&.D.43.  nary  campaign  in  the  year  of  the  city
796.  It  was  now  about  a  hundred  years
since  the  epoch  of  Caesar's  first  descent  on  Britain.
The  futile  and  almost  ignominious  result  of  that
attempt  was  still  remembered  among  the  legions
of  the  northern  provinces.  The  storms  and  shoals
of  the  ocean  had  since  then  caused  more  than  one
disaster  to  their  arms.  The  inhospitable  character
of  the  natives  of  either  coast  had  more  than  once
been  proved,2  and  when  Plautius  announced  to  his

1  Dion,  Ix.  19.  This  Bcricus  may  probably  have  been  the  Veric  of
some  British  coins.

2  Hor.  Od.  iii.  3.:  "  Visam  Britannos  hospitibus  feros." Yet  the
British  chiefs  had  sent  back  the  shipwrecked  sailors  of  Germanicus
(Tuc.  Ann.  ii.  24.). These  men.  however,  brought  home  a  terrifii;

A.D.43-A.C.796.  UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  227

soldiers  the  service  they  were  destined  for,  they  re-
fused to  follow  his  standards,  and  broke  out  into
murmurs  and  even  mutiny.  Plautius  reported  the
condition  of  his  camp  to  Eome.  The  Emperor,  bent
on  his  purpose,  determined  to  enforce  discipline.  He
sent  Narcissus  to  the  camp,  to  bring  the  turbulent
legionaries  to  obedience.  They  received  him  with
cries  of  lo  Saturnalia!  mocking  the  arrogant  freed-,
man  as  a  slave  who  ventured  to  assume  the  character
of  his  master.  But,  satisfied  with  their  jest,  they  seem
to  have  returned  at  last  of  their  own  accord  to  their
duty,  and  submitted  to  their  chief's  commands.

Four  legions,  the  Second,  the  Ninth>  the  Four-
teenth and  the  Twentieth,  all  noted  after-
wards in  British  history,  were  selected  for  tiue "invades
this  distant  adventure.  Plautius,  we  are
told,  arrayed  his  forces  in  three  divisions,  to  which
he  assigned  different  places  of  landing,  in  order  to
baffle  the  defence,  and  secure  a  footing  in  one  quar-
ter, if  repulsed  in  another.  I  shall  have  occasion  to
show  how  little  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  details
of  this  expedition,  meagre  as  they  are,  recorded  by
Dion  only ;  we  have,  however,  no  choice  but  to  relate
them  as  they  have  been  reported,  and  point  out  their
inconsistency  as  we  proceed.  The  ships  encountered
adverse  weather,  and  were  more  than  once  driven
back ;  but  the  appearance  of  a  meteor,  which  shot
from  east  to  west,  restored  the  courage  of  the  sol-
diers, by  following  the  direction  in  which  they  were
bound.  It  would  seem  then  that  their  course  lay
from  the  Belgian  roadsteads  on  either  side  the  Itiau
promontory,  to  the  British  above  and  below  the
South  Foreland ;  from  the  ship-builders'  creeks  at
the  efflux  of  the  Aa  and  the  Liane  to  the  havens  or
low  accessible  beaches  of  Kichborough,  Dover  and

account  of  the  sea  and  land  monsters  they  had  encountered.  More-
over, the  poverty  of  the  unclad  islanders  was  still  remembered  in  the
traditions  of  the  camps.

Q  2

228  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  U.

Lymne.  Whatever  were  the  points  at  which  they
came  to  land,  they  seemed  to  have  encountered  no
resistance.  Soon  afterwards  we  shall  find  the  Regni
in  friendly  relations  with  the  Romans,  and  it  is  pos-
sible that  the  invaders  had  already  tampered  with
their  fidelity  to  the  common  cause,  and  engaged
their  influence  over  the  coast  of  Kent  and  Sussex.
It  was  reported,  however,  that  the  natives  had  been
lulled  into  false  security  by  the  rumours  sedulously
wafted  from  Graul  of  the  disaffection  of  the  legions,
and  neglected  in  consequence  the  measures  necessary
for  opposing  their  disembarkation.1

The  sons  of  the  great  Cunobelin,  Caractacus  and
successes  of  Togodumnus,  wielded  the  forces  of  the  Tri-
hi?HeutBeS.nt  nobantes  and  held  a  primacy  of  rank  and
vespasianm.  p0wer  among  the  chiefs  of  South  Britain.
Like  their  ancestor  Cassivellaun,  and  following  the
usual  tactics  of  their  German  neighbours,  they  ab-
stained from  meeting  the  invader  in  the  field,  and
ensconced  themselves  in  the  forests,  or  behind  the
rivers,  where  he  could  only  attack  them  at  a  disad-
vantage. Plautius,  however,  pushed  boldly  forward,
worsted  both  princes  in  succession,  and  received  the
submission  of  some  clans  of  the  Boduni,  as  they  are
called  by  Dion,  the  same,  it  is  generally  supposed,  as
the  Dobuni  of  Ptolemy,  the  inhabitants  of  modern
Gloucestershire.2  Placing  a  garrison  in  this  district,
he  advanced  to  the  banks  of  a  broad  river,  which  the
Britons  deemed  impassable ;  but  a  squadron  of  Bata-
vian  cavalry,  trained  to  swim  the  Rhine  and  Wahal,
dashed  boldly  across  it,  and  dislodged  them  from
their  position  by  striking  at  the  horses  which  drew
their  chariots.  A  force  under  Flavins  Vespasianus
penetrated  into  the  unknown  regions  beyond,  and
obtained,  not  without  great  hazards,  some  further
successes.  Such  was  the  command  in  which  this

1  Dion,  Ix.  19.
*  Ptol.  Gcogr.  11.  3.  25,  28. Smith's  Diet,  of  Class  Geography.

A..U.43  -A.ir.796. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  229

brave  and  strenuous  captain  was  first  shown  to  the
Fates,  which  from  henceforth  destined  him  for  em.
pire.1  His  empire  and  his  dynasty  soon  passed  away,
but  Providence  designed  him  for  its  instrument  in
a  work  of  wider  and  more  lasting  interest.  On  the
plains  of  Britain  Vespasian  learnt  the  art  of  war,  which
he  was  to  practise  among  the  defiles  of  Palestine,  and
against  the  despair  and  fury  of  the  Jews.

From  the  mention  of  the  Boduni  or  Dobuni  it  is
natural  to  suppose  that  the  broad  stream  Not  probable
above  mentioned  was  the  Severn  near  its  cro*sfd*heui
mouth.  Yet  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  SeTem-
Plautius  can  have  advanced  so  far  into  the  country
in  the  few  weeks  since  his  landing,  and  the  language
of  Dion  seems  presently  to  contradict  it.  The  de-
feated Britons,  says  this  writer,  retired  to  the  Thames,
and  placed  that  river  between  themselves  and  the
Eomans  in  the  lowest  portion  of  its  course,  where  it
swells  to  a  great  breadth  with  the  tidal  waters  of  the
ocean.  The  invaders,  he  continues,  attempting  to
follow  them,  fell,  in  their  ignorance  of  the  ground,
into  great  danger :  but  again  the  Batavians  swam
their  horses  across  the  river,  and  the  barbarians
were  routed  once  more  with  much  slaughter.  In
this  hattle  Togodumnus  was  slain:  Caractacus  had
perhaps  retired  to  the  West,  where  we  shall  meet
with  him  again.  A  few  only  of  the  Eomans  were  lost
in  the  pursuit  among  the  marshes.2

Plautius,  it  would  seem,  now  for  the  first  time
firmly  planted  himself  on  the  north  bank  He  await9  the
of  the  Thames. It  is  impossible  to  suppose  Sa'Jdiu0/ on
that  if  he  had  once  reached  the  Severn,  he  ban^oftue
would  have  again  fallen  back  behind  a  bar-  Tliames-
rier  which  he  must  have  already  crossed  or  doubled.
Nor,  as  I  have  said,  is  there  time  allowed  for  such
distant  operations. For  he  now  sent  to  summoc

'  Tac.  Ayric.  13.:  "  Monstratus  fatis  Vespasianus."
2  Dion,  Ix.  20.

430  HISTORY Of  THE ROMANS  CH.  u.

Claudius  to  pass  over  into  Britain,  and  assist  per-
sonally in  the  final  reduction  of  the  twice  broken
Trinobantes.  He  awaited  behind  his  entrenchments
his  chief's  arrival.  Claudius  made  his  appearance
before  the  end  of  the  military  season.  1  can  dis-
cover no  river  that  will  answer  the  description  of  the
historian,  except  the  Medway ;  and  if  any  reliance  is
to  be  placed  on  the  terms  in  which  Dion  expresses
himself,  we  must  believe  that  instead  of  traversing
half  the  island  unopposed,  Plautius  first  met  the
Britons  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Maidstone  or  Eo-
chester.  The  three  divisions  of  his  army  may  have
converged  from  the  three  most  frequented  of  the
Kentish  ports,  at  Canterbury.  But  it  is  better  to
confess  the  impossibility  of  tracing  his  movements.
Dion  is  throughout  very  indistinct  in  his  conception
of  British  history  and  geography,  and  when  Tacitus
himself  comes  to  our  aid,  we  shall  find  his  knowledge
also  slender  and  superficial.

Plautius  had  been  instructed  to  call  the  emperor

to  his  assistance,  if  difficulties  should  occur

ente™  Britain  that  deserved  his  august  interference. The

In  person  and ,  .  .  IT

subdues  the legatus  was  perhaps  courtier  enough  to  di-

Trinobantes. .& , .  , " . ,  , . °

vine  his  master  s  wishes,  and  to  represent
the  state  of  affairs  according  to  his  desire.  Claudius
held  himself  ready  for  the  expected  summons,  and
there  can  have  been  no  delay  in  his  reply  to  it.  Per-
haps he  had  already  gone  forth  to  meet  it.  Leaving
the  conduct  of  affairs  at  home  to  Vitellius,  his  col-
league in  the  consulship,  he  proceeded  by  the  route
of  Ostia  and  Massilia,  attended  by  a  retinue  of  offi-
cers and  soldiers,  and  a  train  of  elephants  already
bespoken  for  the  service.  His  resolution  was  tried
by  adverse  winds,  which  twice  drove  him  back,  not
without  peril,  from  the  coast  of  Graul.1  When  at  last
he  landed,  his  course  was  directed  partly  along  the

4  Suet.  Claud.  I?.

n.u.43»i.u.796.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  231

military  roads,  partly  by  the  convenient  channels  of
the  navigable  rivers,  till  he  reached  the  coasts  of  the
British  sea.  At  Ofessoriacum  he  embarked  for  the
opposite  shores  of  Cahtium,  and  speedily  reached  the
legions  in  their  encampment  beyond  the  Thames.
The  soldiers,  long  held  in  the  leash  in  expectation  of
his  arrival,  were  eager  to  spring  upon  the  foe.  With
the  emperor  himself  at  their  head,  a  spectacle  not
beheld  since  the  days  of  the  valiant  Julius,  they  tra-
versed the  level  plains  of  the  Trinobantes,  which
afforded  no  defensible  position,  till  the  natives  were
compelled  to  stand  at  bay  before  the  stockades  which
encircled  their  capital  Camulodunum.  It  is  not  per-
haps too  bold  a  conjecture  that  the  lines  which  can
still  be  traced  from  the  Colne  to  a  little  wooded
stream  called  the  Eoman  river,  drawn  across  the
approach  to  a  tract  of  twenty  or  thirty  square  miles
surrounded  on  every  other  side  by  water,  indicate
the  ramparts  of  this  British  oppidum.1  Within  this
inclosed  space  there  was  ample  room  not  only  for
the  palace  of  the  chief  and  the  cabins  of  his  people,
but  for  the  grazing  land  of  their  flocks  and  herds  in
seasons  of  foreign  attack ;  while,  resting  on  the  sea
in  its  rear,  it  commanded  the  means  of  reinforcement
and,  if  necessary,  of  flight.  But  the  fate  of  the  capi-
tal was  decided  by  the  issue  of  the  encounter  which
took  place  before  it.  The  Trinobantes  were  routed.
They  surrendered  their  city,  and,  with  it,  their  na-
tional freedom  and  independence.  The  victory  was
complete  the  subjection  of  the  enemy  assured:  with-
in sixteen  days  from  his  landing  in  Britain,  Claudius

1  These  lines  have  a  fosse  traceable  on  their  western  side;  they
were  therefore  defences  against  attack  from  the  land,  not  from  the
sea.  At  one  or  two  points  they  are  strengthened  by  small  rect-
angular castella,  which  may  be  later  Roman  additions;  and  it  is
difficult  to  point  out  any  other  period  of  our  history  when  the  defence
of  the  little  peninsula  on  which  Colchester  stands  could  have  given
occasion  to  works  of  this  nature.  It  is  assened,  moreover,  thai
British  coins  have  been  found  in  these  works.

232  HISTOKY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  Ll.

had  broken  a  powerful  kingdom,  and  accomplished
a  substantial  conquest.  He  left  it  to  Plautius  to
secure  by  the  usual  methods  the  fruits  of  this  signal
success,  and  returned  himself  immediately  to  Rome,
from  which  he  had  not  been  absent  more  than  six
months  altogether.1

Claudius  had  gained  a  victory :  some  indeed  were

found  to  assert  in  after  times  that  the  foa
triumphs  at  had  never  met  him  in  the  field,  and  had

yielded  city  and  country  without  a  blow :
but  his  soldiers  undoubtedly  had  hailed  him  re-
peatedly, in  the  short  space  of  sixteen  days,  with  the
title  of  Imperator,  and  he  was  qualified  by  the  pur-
port of  his  laurelled  despatches  to  claim  the  crown-
ing honour  of  a  triumph  as  the  meed  of  conduct  and
valour.  We  have  seen  already  how  the  senate  has-
tened to  decree  him  this  distinction;  how  he  received
the  appellation  of  Britannicus ;  how  arches  crowned
with  trophies  were  erected  to  him  in  Rome  and  at
Gessoriacum ;  how,  finally,  he  deprecated  the  evil
eye  of  Nemesis  by  an  act  of  ungainly  humiliation.
Cheap  and  frivolous  as  these  honours  now  were,  the
conquests  of  Claudius  were  really  solid  and  extensive,
and,  with  due  precaution  on  the  part  of  his  lieute-
nants, might  have  been  firmly  established  from  that
moment.  They  were  soon  destined,  indeed,  to  suffer
a  grave  disaster :  but  this,  which  broke  for  a  moment
the  steady  current  of  victory,  served  only  to  apprise
the  conquerors  of  the  real  condition  of  their  position,
and  compel  them  to  complete  the  unfinished  work  of

1  Dion,  Ix.  21.  Suetonius  {Claud.  17.)  declares  that  the  conquest
was  bloodless:  "  Sineullo  praelio  aut  sanguine  intva  paucissimos  dies
pane  insulae  in  deditionem  recepta  sexto  quam  prof'ectus  erat  mense
Remain  rediit,  triumphavitque.'  He  evidently  wishes  to  disparage
the  emperor's  exploit  as  unworthy  of  a  triumph.  At  a  later  period
it  was  not  less  extravagantly  magnified.  Orosius  says  of  Claudius:
"  Orcadas  etiarn  insulas  ultra  Britanniam  in  Oceauo  positas  Romano
adjecit  imperio"  (vii.  5.).

A.U.43-A.U.796.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  U^iJ

subjugation,  and  settle  at  once  the  fate  of  Britain  for
four  hundred  years.1

It  seems  not  impossible  that  the  prompt  submis-
sion of  the  Trinobantes  in  the  East  was
caused  by  the  retreat  of  the  main  forces  of  acfvanSsTnto
the  nation  westward ;  for  it  is  in  the  west-
ern parts  of  the  island  that  we  next  hear  of  the  ope-
rations of  the  invaders,  and  the  chief  who  most  ob-
stinately resists  them  is  still  the  Trinobantine  Carac-
tacus.  Vespasianus,  whose  deserts  have  already  been
mentioned,  attracted  the  notice  of  the  emperor  during
his  brief  visit  to  the  camp.  He  was  now  sent  in  com-
mand of  the  second  legion  to  reduce  the  Belgae  and
Damnonii,  who  occupied  the  south-western  regions
from  the  Solent  to  the  Axe,  and  from  the  Axe  to  the
Tamar  or  the  Land's  End.  From  the  Isle  of  Wight,
the  Vectis  of  the  Eomans,  to  the  rugged  barrier  of
Dartmoor  Forest,  he  engaged  them  in  thirty  battles.

1  The  high  estimation  in  which  the  exploits  cf  Claudius  were  held
appears  from  fhe  inscription  (imperfect  and  conjecturally  supplied)
upon  his  arch  of  triumph —

TI.  CLAUdio  Drusi  f.  Czesari

AUGUsto  Germanico  Pio

PONT1FICI  Max.  Trib.  pot.  ix.

COS.  V.  IMperatori  xvi.  pat.  patriae

SENATUS  POPUlusque  Rom.  quod

REGES  BRITanniB  perduelles  sine

ULLA  JACTUra  ccleriter  ceperit  (?)

GENTESQ.  extreinarum  Orcadum  (?)

PRIMUS  INDICIO  facto  R.  imperio  adjecerit  (?)

SeeBunsen's  Roin.  iii.  3.  p.  91.;  Orell.  Inscr.  715.;  and  compare  the
lines  in  Seneca's  Medea,  which  the  moderns  have  regarded  as  a  pro-
phecy, but  may  really  have  been  meant  to  indicate  a  recent  event  in
history:

"  Venient  annis  sacula  seris

Quibus  Oceanus  vincula  rerum

Laxet,  et  ingens  pateat  tellus,

Tiphysque  novos  detegat  orbes,

Nee  sit  terris  ultima  Thule."
Compare  again :

"  Parcite,  0  Divi,  veniam  precamur,

Vivat  ut  tutus  mare  qui  hubegit."

See  the  preface  of  Lipsius  to  his  edition  of  Seneca's  works.  To*ge
passages  would  be  more  interesting  could  we  feel  mere  confidence  m
their  presumed  authorship.

234  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH. Ll

Many  a  fosse  and  mound,  many  a  tumulus  of  heroes
bones,  on  the  hills  of  Wilts  and  Dorset,  still  bears
silent  testimony  to  these  obscure  and  nameless  com-
bats; and  the  narrow  gorge  of  the  Teign,  deeply
scarred  with  alternately  round  and  square  entrench-
ments, was  the  scene,  perhaps,  of  the  last  desperate
struggles  for  the  garden  of  Britain.1

It  may  be  conjectured  that  the  conquest  of  this
part  of  the  island  was  facilitated  by  the

Subjugation  i«  if J/L  i r j.1.

of  the  Regni cowardice  or  treachery  ot  the  people  01  tne

East.  Cogidubnus,  king  of  the  Regni,  ac-
knowledged himself  a  vassal  of  the  Romans,
and  consented  to  be  their  instrument  for  the  enslave-
ment of  his  countrymen.  He  attached  himself  as  a
client  to  the  emperor,  aod  assumed  the  name  of  Ti-*
berius  Claudius.8  The  Iceni,  also,  instead  of  uniting
with  the  Trinobantes  in  the  defence  of  their  common
freedom,  appear  to  have  yielded  without  a  blow  to
the  influence  of  the  invaders.  From  their  position
on  the  eastern  coast,  and  their  habits  of  intercourse
with  the  Roman  traders  of  the  Rhine  and  Scheldt,
they  may  have  learnt  already  to  tremble  at  the  power
of  the  conquerors,  or  to  covet  their  luxuries.  As  far,
therefore,  as  their  authority  extended  to  the  wild
forests  of  the  interior,  and  possibly  even  to  the  coast

1  Tac.  Hist.  iii.  ^\.\Agric.  13,  14. Eutropius  gives  the  number  of
thirty-two  battles. Suet.  (Vespas.  4.):  "Duas  validissimas  gentes,
superque  viginti  oppidn,  et  insulam  Vectem,  Britanniae  proximam,  in
ditionem  redegit." In  extending  the  operations  westward  of  the  Isle
of  Wight  I  indulge  only  in  conjecture;  but  the  numerous  coins  of
Claudius  which  have  been  found  at  Isca  Damnoniorum,  or  Exeter
(see  Shortt's  Isca  Antiqua),  indicate  a  very  early  occupation  of  this
distant  position. Isca  may  still  have  retained  the  importance  it
evidently  once  possessed  as  the  emporium  of  the  Mediterranean  tin
trade. Coins  of  the  Greek  dynasties  of  Syria  and  Egypt  have  been
found  there  in  great  abundance.

2  Tac.  Agric.  14.:  "  Quaedam  civitates  Cogidubno  Regi  donatae
(is  ad  nostram  usque  memoriam  fidissimus  mansit)  vetere  ac  jam
pridem  recepta  populi  Romani  consuetudine,  ut  haberet  instrumenta
sorvitutis  et  Reges." The  name  of  Tiberius  Claudius  Cogidubnns  ia
preserved  in  the  curious  inscription  at  Chichester

A.»o44-A  0.797.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  235

of  the  Irish  Sea,  they  seem  to  have  retained  the
native  tribes  in  stolid  inactivity,  while  their  neigh-
bours were  successively  robbed  of  independence.
Their  king  Prasutagus,  blindly  rejoicing  in  the  down-
fal  of  the  chiefs  of  Camulodunum,  opened  his  own
strongholds  to  the  visits  of  Roman  officials,  and  al-
lowed himself  insensibly  to  fall  under  the  tutelage
of  tribunes  and  quaestors.  His  offer  of  a  small  tri-
bute, in  acknowledgment  of  deference  or  subjection
to  Borne,  was  soon  made  a  pretext  for  vexatious  im-
positions ;  and  the  encroachments  thus  hazarded  on
the  liberties  of  his  people  goaded  them  at  last  to  re-
sistance and  insurrection.1

Plautius  was  recalled  to  Rome,  to  enjoy  the  reward
of  his  services,  in  the  year  800.  His  succes-
sor Ostorius  Scapula  found  himself  on  his  ar-  oporto*
rival  beset  by  the  refractory  Britons  in  vari-  A.c^47.'
ous  quarters,  and  putting  his  forces  at  once  in
marching  order,  aimed  a  severe  blow  in  the  direction
from  which  the  annoyance  seemed  chiefly  to  proceed.
In  order  to  confine  the  still  unconquered  tribes  with-
in the  boundary  of  the  Severn,  he  drew  a  double  line
of  posts  along  the  course  of  that  river  and  the  Avon,
into  the  heart  of  the  island.8 This  last  measure,  per-
haps, roused  the  jealousy  of  the  Iceni,  or  inflamed

1  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Frisians,  Saxons,  and  Danes  had
settled  on  the  eastern  coasts  of  Britain  before  the  Eoman  invasion.
It  seems  probable  that  the  Anglican  character  of  the  population  of
Norfolk  and  Suffolk  dates  from  the  pre-Roman  period. Hence  we
might  account  for  the  want  of  union  between  the  Iceni  and  the
Trin  obantes. The  name  Iceni  is  still  evidently  retained  in  many
localities  of  their  district,  as  in  Icknield,  Ickworth,  Exning,  &c.,  and
has  certainly  a  Teutonic  sound. It  has  been  suggested  that,  though
written  by  the  Greeks  'iKtjvol,  the  second  syllable,  which  disappears
in  all  these  words,  was  probably  short.

2  The  ground  on  which  we  tread  here,  following  the  general  con-
sent of  our  critics from  Camden  downwards,  is most  uncertain.
Neither  the  names  nor  the  construction  can  be  made  out  clearly  from
the  MSS.  of  Tacitus. Bitter  reads :  "  Cunctaque  castris  Avonam

Sabriuam  fluvlos  cohibere  parat." Tac.  Ann.  xli..  31.

236  HISTORY  o*'  THE  ROMANS  CH.  LI.

their  discontent.  It  seems  to  have  trenched  on  some
rights  of  sovereignty  exercised  by  them  in  those  parts,
and  threatened  to  overawe  them,  faithful  as  they  had
proved  themselves,  no  less  than  the  turbulent  barba-
rians of  the  West.  They  flew  suddenly  to  arms,
suffered  a  severe  defeat,  and  again  relapsed  into  a
state  of  sullen  submission.  Peace  being  thus  restored
in  his  rear,  Ostorius  had  leisure  to  penetrate  into  the
country  of  the  Cangi,  a  tribe  which  our  antiquaries
have  commonly  placed  in  the  furthest  corner  of  Car-
narvonshire, the  promontory  or  peninsula  of  the
Cangani.1  There  is  not  much,  indeed,  to  support
this  bold  conjecture:  nevertheless,  wherever  the  true
locality  is  to  be  sought,  the  relations  of  the  Koman
commander  now  extended  far  over  Britain ;  for  he
was  •  recalled  from  his  attack  upon  the  Cangi  by  a
hostile  movement  of  the  Brigantes,  a  people  who  un-
doubtedly held  the  regions  north  of  the  Mersey,  and
whose  power  extended  from  sea  to  sea.2  No  sooner
were  these  ill-combined  efforts  repressed,  and  sub-
mission secured  by  a  judicious  mixture  of  energy  and
moderation,  than  the  attention  of  Ostorius  was  called
to  the  coercion  of  the  Silures,  the  people  of  South
Wales,  who  continued,  under  the  guidance  of  Carac-
tacus,  to  threaten  the  outposts  of  the  Roman  power,
and  obstruct  their  communications.  From  the  name
of  their  chief,  who  seems,  as  before  observed,  to  have
been  the  son  of  Cunobelin,  it  would  appear  that  the
Silures,  far  westward  as  their  district  lay,  bore  some
relation  of  dependence  or  descent  to  the  leading
nation  of  the  East.  This  relation  is  again  indicated  by

1  PtoL  Geogr.  ii.  3.  Tacitus,  however,  declares  that  Ostorius  nearly
reached  the  Irish  sea:  "Ductus  in  Cangos  exercitus  ....  vastati
agri  ....  jam  ventum  baud  procul  mari  quod  Hiberniam  in-
mlam  aspectat."  Ann.  xii.  32.  Kitter  rends  "  Decantos,"  a  name
found  also  in  Ptolemy,  for  "  Cangos."  Neither  tribe  is  mentioned
elsewhere.

1  Seneca  culls  them  "cwruleos  scuta  Brigantas  "  (Apocol.  12.).

i.D.f,0-A.tT.803.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  237

the  establishment,  of  which  we  are  uow  apprised,  of
a  colony  at  Camulodunum,  on  purpose  to  Foundation  of
check  and  overawe  them.1  Ostoriuswascom-  chamcu!oto-of
missioned  by  the  emperor  to  plant  amilitary  """'50.
colony  in  Britain,  to  become  the  stronghold  A-  "• 803>
of  the  Eoman  power  in  the  island.  For  this  pur-
pose the  site  of  the  Trinobantine  capital,  far  as  it
was  removed  from  the  seat  of  hostilities  at  the  time,
was  chosen.  If  far  from  the  Severn  and  the  mountains
of  Siluria,  it  lay  so  much  the  nearer  to  GTaul,  and  the
centre  of  the  Eoman  resources.  It  was  the  proper
base  of  the  Koman  operations  for  the  entire  subju-
gation of  the  island.  If  not  in  the  direct  route  from
Gessoriacum  and  Lugdunum  to  Britain,  it  was  not
far  distant  from  it ;  it  lay  to  the  north  of  the  broad
Thames ;  it  overshadowed  the  dubious  territories  of
the  Iceni  ;  while  the  prompt  submission  of  the  Eegni
on  the  shores  of  the  Channel,  might  avail  to  exempt
them  from  the  burden  of  so  unwelcome  a  guest  in
their  peaceful  country.  Farther,  the  establishment
of  a  colony  in  the  country  of  the  Trinobantes,  in-
volving as  it  did  the  confiscation  of  a  portion  of  their
soil,  the  utter  subjection  of  their  people,  the  over-
throw of  their  civil  polity,  might  be  inflicted  on  them
to  punish  the  protracted  resistance  of  their  chief
among  the  distant  tribes  to  whom  he  had  betaken
himself.  On  all  these  accounts  the  foundation  of  the
colony  of  Camulodunum  may  not  seem  so  irrelevant
as  some  have  considered  it,  to  the  contest  now  pend-
ing between  the  Eomans  and  the  Silures.2

Under  the  republic  the  colony  was  a  direct  offshoot
from  the  parent  city :  a  number  of  citizens  were  told

1  Such  is  the  express  declaration  of  Tacitus:  "Id  quo  prompting
veniret  (i.  e.  the  reduction  of  the  Silures),  Colonia  Camulodunum

. . .  deducitur "

8  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  32.  It  is  on  account  of  this  presumed  incongruity
that  some  antiquarians  have  actually  supposed  that  Camulodunum
was  somewhere  in  North  Wales-

238  HISTORY OF TEE ROMANS  <"H.  U.

off  by  lot  to  occupy,  like  a  swarm  of  bees,  to  which  they
character  were  commonly  compared,  their  appointed
mVncoFonV  station ;  and  the  soil  of  the  conquered
in  Britain.  ]an(j  wag  appropriated  to  them  as  their
ager  or  national  territory.  As  an  offset  from  a  nation
of  soldiers  the  colonists  were  themselves  all  soldiers.,
and  their  new  city,  founded  on  the  principles  of  the
old,  was  in  fact  a  stationary  camp,  furnished  with  the
same  civil  and  military  appliances  as  the  metropolis
itself;  not  only  with  the  streets  and  houses,  the  walls
and  ditch,  but  with  the  temples  and  tribunals,  above
all  with  the  sacred  Augural,  or  spot  on  which  the  au-
spices might  be  duly  observed.  But  the  citizen  had
now  lost  most  of  his  military  traditions.  When  he
migrated  to  a  foreign  settlement,  it  was  generally  as
a  private  trader  or  adventurer.  The  civilian  could
no  longer  be  induced  to  relinquish  his  peaceful  indul-
gences and  go  forth  armed  and  booted,  in  the  prospect
of  a  slender  patrimony  to  be  cultivated  with  toil  and
defended  with  his  blood.  On  the  other  hand  the  paid
defenders  of  the  state, — the  military  profession,  as  it
had  now  become, — were  no  longer  fit  to  return,  after
many  years  of  service,  to  the  staid  habits  of  the  mu-
nicipium  from  which  they  had  been  levied:  they
retained  no  taste  for  the  amenities  of  civil  life,  and
might  even  be  dangerous  in  the  crowded  streets  and
among  the  mutinous  rabble  of  a  vicious  city.  The
colony  was  now  merely  a  convenient  receptacle  for
the  discharged  veterans  of  the  camp.  Transferred
from  active  duty  in  the  field  or  the  parade,  to  which
they  were  no  longer  equal,  they  were  expected  to
maintain,  as  armed  pensioners  of  the  state,  the  terror
of  the  Koman  name  on  the  frontiers  by  their  proud
demeanour  and  habits  of  discipline,  rather  than  by
the  strength  of  hands  now  drooping  at  their  sides.
The  lands  of  the  Trinobantes  were  wrested  from  their
ancient  possessors  and  conveyed  to  the  new  intruders  s
the  veterans  established  themselves  in  the  dwellings

4.D.50-A. u.803.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  239

of  the  hapless  natives,  desecrated  their  holy  places,
applied  to  their  own  use  their  goods  and  chattels,
perhaps  even  their  wives  and  daughters  ;  and  if  they
left  them  any  rights  at  all,  set  up  tribunals  of  their
own  to  decide  every  matter  in  dispute  with  them.
The  colonists  in  an  assembly  of  their  own,  like  the
comitia  of  the  Roman  people,  chose  their  own  officers,
and  governed  themselves  by  their  own  regulations
and  by-laws  ;  holding  themselves  ever  ready  to  fly  to
arms  in  defence  of  their  common  usurpation.  In  the
colony  of  Camulodunum  the  Britons  beheld  an  image,
rude  indeed  and  distorted,  of  the  camp  on  the  Rhine
or  Danube,  combined  with  the  city  on  the  Tiber.
They  enjoyed,  as  far  as  they  could  learn  to  appreci-
ate it,  a  faint  reflex  of  the  civilization  of  the  South,
and  were  taught  to  ascribe  the  fortune  of  their  con-
querors to  the  favour  of  strange  divinities,  to  whom
altars  were  erected  and  victims  slain.  But  to  none
of  these  did  they  see  such  honour  paid  as  to  Claudius
himself,  in  the  name  of  none  were  so  many  Inaugura.
vows  conceived,  as  of  the  emperor  whose  "wsh^of
person  they  had  once  beheld  visibly  among  Simuiodu-
them  ;  of  whom  they  still  heard  by  report,  num<
as  the  presiding  genius  of  the  empire,  the  centre  of
the  world's  adoration.  A  temple  of  unusual  size
and  splendour  was  erected  to  this  divinity  in  the
colony  of  Camulodunum,  or  the  Conquering  Claudian,
as  it  was  officially  styled,  special  estates  were  granted
for  its  service,  and  the  most  distinguished  among  the
Britons  were  invited  to  enrol  themselves  in  the  col-
lege of  the  Claudian  Flamens.1

In  one  respect,  however,  the  new  colony  fell  short
both  of  the  city  and  the  camp,  on  the  plan  Security  of
of  which  it  was  designed. The  capital  of  theRomans-
the  Trinobantes  has  already  been  described  as  a  vast
enclosure  for  retreat  from  invasion,  occupied  by  clus-

!Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  31. ;  Orell.  Inscript.  208.:  "  Colonia  Viotrwensis
rpife  est  in  Britannia  Camuloduni."

240  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LI.

ters  of  straggling  huts  and  cabins,  with  no  continuous
streets,  still  less  with  any  regular  fortifications.  Such
a  mode  of  agglomeration,  common  to  the  Britons
with  the  GTermans,  and  at  least  the  northern  Gauls,
was  altogether  foreign  to  the  habits  of  the  Eomans,
who  dwelt  always  in  compact  masses  of  habitations,
laid  out  on  plans  comparatively  regular,  and  defended
by  works  of  military  art.  The  oppidum  was  the  Bri-
tish, the  urbs  was  the  Roman  city.  But  the  veterans
who  now  occupied  the  stronghold  of  Cunobelin  were
too  indolent,  it  seems,  to  trace  the  lines  of  a  fortress
for  their  own  protection  :  they  found  the  site  of  their
new  dwellings  agreeable,  the  houses  even  of  the  Bri-
tons were  to  the  rude  inmates  of  the  tent  not  incon-
venient :  they  furnished  themselves  with  a  temple,  a
senate-house,  and  even  a  theatre  for  the  amusement
of  their  idleness ;  they  erected  a  statue  of  Victory  to
commemorate  their  triumph ;  but  they  delayed  to
construct  the  necessary  defences,  and  in  contemptu-
ous disregard  for  the  conquered  enemy,  continued  to
enjoy  their  new-acquired  ease  with  no  apprehensions
for  their  future  security.1  However  slight  might  be
the  influence  of  this  type  of  southern  culture  upon
the  distant  Silures,  the  Iceni,  whose  frontier  bordered
closely  upon  it,  were  powerfully  affected.  They  be-
held with  admiration  the  advance  of  luxury  and  splen-
dour, and  acquiesced  once  more,  with  increasing  fer-
vour, in  the  terms  of  unequal  alliance  proffered  by
the  Romans.

Thus  doubly  secured  by  the  influence  of  arms  and
Resistance  of  ^8  in  his  rear,  Ostorius  was  enabled  to
andathecus  bring  the  whole  weight  of  his  forces  to  bear
on  the  still  unconquered  Silures.  For  nine
years  Caractacus,  at  the  head  of  the  independent
Britons,  had  maintained  the  conquest  with  the  in-
vader. The  genius  of  this  patriot  chief,  the  first  of

1  TH.C.  Ann.  xiv.  31:  "Dnm  amoenitati  prius  quam  usui  consulitur,'"

A.W.50-A.U.803.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  241

our  national  heroes,  may  be  estimated,  not  from  vic-
tories, of  which  the  envious  foe  has  left  us  no  account,
but  from  the  length  of  his  gallant  resistance,  and  the
magnitude  of  the  operations  which  it  was  necessary
to  direct  against  him.  How  often  he  may  have  burst
from  the  mountains  of  Wales,  and  swept  with  his
avenging  squadrons  the  fields  of  the  Eoman  settlers
on  the  Severn  and  the  Avon, — how  often  he  may
have  plunged  again  into  his  fastnesses,  and  led  the
pursuers  into  snares  prepared  for  them  beyond  the
Wye  and  the  Usk, — remains  for  ever  buried  in  the
oblivion  which  has  descended  on  the  heroic  deeds  of
the  enemies  of  Eome.  Worn  out,  or  starved  out,
or  circumvented  perchance  by  the  toils  ever  closing
around  him,  he  made  a  last  effort  to  remove  the  seat
of  war  from  the  country  of  the  Silures  to  that  of  the
Ordovices  or  North  Wales,  the  common  boundary  of
the  two  lying  probably  between  the  Wye  and  the
Teme.1  Ostorius  having  returned  from  his  foray
among  the  Cangi,  having  chastised  and  pacified  the
Brigantes,  and  established  at  the  same  time  his  co-
lony at  Camulodunum,  collected  all  his  strength  to
crush  this  last  effort  of  resistance.  To  attack  the  Si-
lures  he  would  descend  probably  from  his  northern
stations  along  the  course  of  the  Severn  ;  the  Britons,
hovering  on  the  eastern  flanks  of  the  Welsh  moun-
tains, would  draw  him  up.  one  of  their  lateral  valleys
to  the  westward ;  but  whether  he  forced  his  passage  by
the  gorges  of  the  Verniew,  or  the  upper  Severn,  by
the  Clun,  the  Teme,  or  the  Wye,  seems  impossible  to
determine.  Each  of  these  routes  has  had  its  advo-
cates, and  to  this  day  the  surviving  descendants  of
the  Britons  contend  with  generous  emulation  for  the

1  From  the  distances  marked  in  the  xn.  and  xnr.  Itine.ra  of  Anto-
ninus it  has  been  supposed  thatBranogenium  (of  the  Ordovices")  is  it
Leintwardine  on  the  Teme,  and  Magna  (of  the  Silures)  at  Kent-
chester,  a  little  north  of  the  Wye.  The  boundary,  therefore,  -/trr'.Ud
lie  between  these  trro  rivers.

VOL.  VI.  B

242  HISTORY  OF T£E ROMANS  en.  u.

honour  of  the  discovery.  All  along  the  frontier  of
the  principality,  every  hill  crowned  with  an  old
entrenchment,  and  fronted  by  a  stream,  has  been
claimed  as  the  scene  of  the  last  struggle  of  British
independence ;  there  are  at  least  six  Eichmonds  in
the  field,  and  the  discreet  historian  must  decline  to
decide  between  them.1

Caractacus  took  up  a  position  of  his  own  choosing,

where  the  means  both  of  approach  and  of
and  overthrow  retreat  were  most  convenient  for  himself

and  unfavourable  to  the  enemy.  It  was
defended  in  part  by  a  steep  and  lofty  acclivity;  in
part  by  stones  rudely  thrown  together ;  a  stream  with
no  frequented  ford  flowed  before  it,  and  chosen  bands
of  his  best  armed  and  bravest  warriors  were  stationed
in  front  of  its  defences.2  To  the  spirit  and  eloquence

1  The  spots  which  have  been  most  confidently  assigned  for  the  last
battle  of  Caractacus  are  Coxall  Knoll,  on  the  Teme,  near  Leint-
wardine  (Roy);  Cefn  Carnedd,  west  of  the  Severn,  near  Llanidloes
(Hartshorne,  Salop.  Antiq.  p.  63.);  Caer  Caradoc,  on  the  C3un,  in
Shropshire  (Gough's  Camden,  iii.  p.  3,  13.);  and  the  Breiddhen  hills,
near  Welshpool,  on  the  Severn  (Archceol.  Cambr.  April,  1851).  A
Roman  camp,  now  called  Castel  Collen,  may  be  traced  as  far  west
as  the  Ython,  near  Rhayader,  and  here,  too,  a  suitable  locality
might  be  found.  But  all  is  misty  conjecture.  It  would  seem  that
Ostorius,  intending  to  strike  at  the  centre  of  Siluria,  was  drawn  north-
westward  by  the  movements  of  Caractacus  into  the  country  of  the
Ordovices,  along  one  of  the  lateral  valleys  that  issue  from  the  Welsh
mountains.  Tacitus  says  only:  '^Transfert  bcllum  in  Ordovices."
Ann.  xii.  33.

*  Tac.  I.e.:  "  Praefluebat  amnis  vado  incerto."  This  seems  to  imply,
not  that  the  stream  was  actually  deep  or  rapid,  but  that  crossing  no
road  at  the  spot,  it  had  no  accustomed  ford.  Even  the  season  of
the  year  is  not  mentioned,  so  that  we  cannot  tell  whether  the  water
was  above  or  below  its  ordinary  height.  It  seems,  however,  to  have
been  crossed  without  difficulty.  The  character  of  Coxall  Knoll,
which  many  years  ago  I  examined  with  more  faith  than  I  can  now
indulge  in,  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  narrative.  The  river  is  now
a  narrow  and  shallow  stream,  at  least  in  the  middle  of  summer,  and
deeply  tinged  by  the  peat-mosses  through  which  it  flows:  "  Visus
adhuc  amnis  veteri  de  clade  rubere."  The  hill,  steep  in  front,  but
easily  accessible  from  the  rear,  is  crowned  with  considerable  earth-
WOKS.  On  descending  from  the  spot  which  I  believed  to  be  tiw

A.P.50--A.U.803.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  243

of  the  chief  the  Britons  responded  with  shouts  of
enthusiasm,  and  each  tribe  bound  itself  by  the  oaths
it  held  most  sacred,  to  stand  its  ground  or  fall,  if  it
must  fall,  fighting.  Ostorius,  on  his  part,  was  amazed
at  the  ardour  of  men  whom  he  supposed  to  be  beaten,
cowed,  and  driven  hopelessly  to  bay.  He  was  even
disconcerted  at  the  strength  of  the  British  position,
and  the  swarms  which  defended  it.  It  was  the  eager-
ness of  the  soldiers  rather  than  his  own  courage  or
judgment  that  determined  him  to  give  the  signal  for
attack.  The  stream  was  crossed  without  difficulty,
for  every  legionary  was  a  swimmer,  and  the  Britons
had  no  engines  for  hurling  missiles  from  a  distance,
nor  were  they  noted  even  for  the  rude  artillery  of
bows  and  slings.  But  they  defended  their  rampart
obstinately  with  poles  and  javelins,  and  from  behind
it  dealt  wounds  and  death  upon  the  assailants  till  the
Eomans  could  form  the  tortoise,  approach  to  the  foot
of  the  wall,  tear  down  its  uncemented  materials,  and
bursting  in,  challenge  them  to  combat  hand  to  hand.
Unequal  to  the  shock  of  the  Eoman  array,  the  Britons
retreated  up  the  hill;  the  Eomans,  both  the  light  and
the  heavy-armed,  pressed  gallantly  upon  them,  and
imperfectly  as  they  were  equipped,  they  could  with-
stand neither  the  sword  and  pilum  of  the  legionary,
nor  the  lance  and  spear  of  the  allies.  The  victory,
quickly  decided,  was  brilliant  and  complete.  The
wife  and  daughter  of  Caractacus  were  taken;  his
brothers  threw  down  their  arms  and  surrendered.1

scene  of  the  eclipse  of  British  freedom,  I  found  an  Italian  organ-boy
making  sport  at  an  alehouse  door  to  a  group  of  Welsh  peasants.  I
could  not  fail  to  moralize  with  Tacitus;  "Kebus  humanis  inest
quiclam  orbis."

1  Caracthcus,  Togodumnus,  and  Adrninius  have  been  mentioned
from  Dion  as  the  sons  of  Cnnobelin.  We  have  disposed  of  the  two
last;  but  Tacitus  seems  here  to  refer  to  other  surviving  brothers  of
the  family.  From  this  presumed  discrepancy,  coupled  with  the  re-
moteness of  the  campaigns  of  Caractacus  from  the  country  of  Cu-
nobelin,  it  has  been  imagined  that  Dion  was  in  error  and  that  the
R  2

244  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  on.  LI

The  brave  chief  himself  escaped  from  the  slaughter,
caractacus evaded  the  pursuit,  and  found  an  asylum
f°r  a  time  in  tn6  territory  of  the  Brigan-

hibuedEaV  *es?  leaving  all  the  south  open  to  the  inva-
?a°rdonTddby  ders.  He  might  hope  to  remove  the  con-
ciaudius.  £es£  £0  j-j-jg  northern  parts  of  the  island,  a
land  of  streams  and  mountains  like  his  own  long-
defended  Siluria:  but  Cartismandua,  the  female  chief
of  this  nation  (for  though  married  she  seems  herself,
rather  than  her  husband  Venutius,  to  have  been  ac-
tual ruler  of  the  Brigantes),  was  determined  by  her
own  fears  and  interests  to  betray  him  to  the  Romans.
The  fame  of  his  nine  years'  struggle  had  penetrated
beyond  the  British  isles  and  the  Gaulish  provinces  ;
and  when  he  was  led  captive  through  the  streets  of
Rome,  great  was  the  curiosity  of  the  citizens  to  be-
hold the  hero  who  had  rivalled  the  renown  of  Armi-
nius  and  Tacfarinas.  The  triumph  of  Claudius  had
been  solemnized  before  ;  but  the  emperor  gratified
his  vanity  by  exhibiting  the  British  prince  before  the
imperial  tribunal.  A  grand  military  spectacle  was
devised,  in  which  Claudius  appeared  seated  before
the  gates  of  the  praBtorian  camp,  attended  by  his
guards,  and  surrounded  by  the  multitude  of  citizens.
Agrippina,  clothed  like  himself  in  a  military  garb,
took  her  seat  on  the  tribunal  by  his  side,  the  ensigns
of  a  Roman  army  floating  over  her  head.  The  slaves
and  clients  of  the  vanquished  prince  were  first  led
before  them,  with  the  glittering  trophies  of  his  arms
and  accoutrements.  Behind  these  marched  the  bro-
thers, the  wife,  and  the  tender  daughter  of  the  hero,
and  their  pusillanimous  wailings  moved  no  pity  in
the  spectators.  But  the  bearing  of  Caractacus  him-

British  hero  was  a  native  chief  of  the  remote  Silures,  and  not  a  Trino-
bantine.  So  also  the  Welsh  traditions  represent  Caractacus  as  a
Silurian  ;  but  are  not  these  the  traditions  of  a  people  hemmed  in
between  the  Severn  and  the  Irish  Channel,  who  had  lor/?  forgottcr
that  they  had  once  extended  to  the  German  Ocean?

A.u.808. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  245

self,  who  closed  the  train  of  captives,  was  noble  and
worthy  of  his  noble  cause :  nor  did  it  fail  to  excite
the  admiration  it  deserved.  He  was  permitted  to
address  the  emperor.  He  reminded  Claudius  that
the  obstinacy  of  his  resistance  enhanced  the  glory  of
his  defeat ;  were  he  now  ignominiously  put  to  death,
the  fate  of  so  many  worsted  enemies  of  Rome,  his
name  and  exploits  would  be  soon  forgotten ;  but  if
bid  to  live,  they  would  be  eternally  remembered,  as
a  memorial  of  the  emperor's  clemency.  The  imperial
historian  was  easily  moved  by  an  appeal  to  his  yearn-
ing for  historic  celebrity.1  He  granted  the  lives  of
his  illustrious  captives,  and  bade  them  give  thanks,
not  to  himself  only  but  to  his  consort,  who  shared
with  him  the  toils  and  distinctions  of  empire.  It
was  politic  as  well  as  merciful  to  spare  the  legitimate
claimant  of  a  British  throne  ;  to  keep  him  at  Rome
to  be  employed  as  occasion  might  suggest :  and  thus
Caractacus,  we  may  believe,  was  retained,  together
with  his  family,  in  honourable  custody,  till  he  grew
old  in  the  long-deferred  hope  of  restoration.  They
were  enrolled  perhaps  among  the  clients  of  the  Clau-
dian  house ;  and  indulgence  may  be  challenged  for
the  pleasing  conjecture,  that  Claudia  the  foreigner,
Claudia  the  offspring  of  the  painted  Britons,  whose
charms  and  genius  are  celebrated  by  Martial,  was
actually  the  child  of  the  hero  Caractacus.2

The  victory  had  been  the  most  complete,  and  in
its  results the  most  important,  that  had
vet  occurred  in  Britain ;  and  there  was  no  rediunoe  of

...  ,  ,,.  ., the  Britons.

mean  servility  in  the  senators  extolling  the
emperor's  fame  and  fortune  to  the  skies,  and  com-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  36—38.  Such  an  act  of  clemency  in  a  Komaiv
imperator  must  not  be  passed  by  without  especial  notice.  Claudius
stands  in  honourable  contrast  to  the  murderers  of  Pontius,  of  Perses,
o»  Jugurtha,  and  Vercingetorix.

*  Martial,  ii.  54.,  iv.  13.  This  was  the  faith  of  Fuller,  Stillingfleet,
and  our  old  ecclesiastical  historians,  who  identified  this  princess  at

246  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LL

paring  him  to  a  Scipio  and  a  Paulus,  who  had  ex-
hibited a  Syphax  and  a  Perses  to  the  applauding
citizens.  To  Ostorius  were  accorded  the  triumphal
ornaments  ;  but  he  had  not  yet  leisure  to  repose  on
his  laurels,  for  the  Britons  flew  again  to  arms  on  the
capture  of  their  champion,  and  maintained  on  the
skirts  of  their  mountain  fastnesses  a  warfare  of  forays
and  surprises,  which  kept  the  Romans  ever  on  the
alert.  Again  and  again  defeated,  they  still  found
means  to  revenge  their  losses.  Harassed  and  deci-
mated, they  retaliated  by  bloody  massacres.  They
were  roused  to  despair,  however  fruitless,  by  the
ferocious  threats  of  the  prefect,  who  vowed  to  destroy
and  extinguish  their  very  name,  as  that  of  the  Sigam-
bri,  once  so  formidable,  had  been  utterly  obliterated
in  Germany.1

On  the  death  of  Ostorius  which  shortly  ensued
from  chagrin,  it  is  said,  as  much  as  from  fatigue,  the
province  was  entrusted  to  Didius,  sent  in  haste  from
Rome  to  take  the  command.  During  the  interval,
while  the  legions  perhaps  were  careless  or  reluctant
in  their  obedience  to  an  inferior  officer,  the  Roman
arms  suffered  an  ignominious  check  from  the  Silures,
and  the  province  itself  seemed  for  a  moment  to  lie
at  their  mercy.  The  arrival  of  Didius,  old  and  in-
active as  he  was,  served  to  brace  again  the  discipline
of  his  armies,  and  they  recovered  their  superiority.
But  the  transient  shock  their  reputation  had  suffered
cartismandua  broke  the  charm  of  success.  Cartismandua,
EwnTb^  who  had  delivered  Caractacus  to  the  Ro-
mans, and  in  return  had  been  upheld  by
their  influence  against  the  indignation  of  her  country-

the  same  time  with  Claudia,  the  convert  of  St.  Paul.  More  favour
has  been  recently  shown  to  the  ingenious  hypothesis  of  Mr.  Williams,
who  infers,  from  the  remarkable  inscription  at  Chichester,  that  the
Claudia  of  Martial  and  St.  Paul  was  daughter  of  king  Cogidubnus.
On  this  subject  I  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  again.
1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  38,  39.

A.D.50-A.U.803.  UNDER THE EMPIBE.  247

men,  was  now  expelled  from  her  realm  by  a  popular
insurrection.  Relying  on  her  foreign  defenders,  she
had  driven  away  her  mock-husband  Venutius,  slain
some  of  his  kinsmen,  and  degraded  herself  to  the
embrace  of  a  menial.  The  Brigantes  took  the  side
of  the  injured  husband,  placed  him,  as  a  noted  war-
rior, at  their  head,  attacked  the  queen  in  her  strong-
hold, and  had  nearly  succeeded  in  overpowering  her,
when  Didius  interfered,  and  released  her  from  her
peril.  But  the  new  prefect  did  not  attempt  to  re-
cover the  footing  of  the  Eomans  in  the  north.  He
allowed  Venutius  to  seat  himself  once  more  on  the
throne  of  the  Brigantes,  and  was  content  with  keep-
ing watch  over  his  power,  and  occasionally  advan-
cing an  outpost  beyond  his  borders.  Such  was  the
state  of  affairs  which  continued  to  subsist  in  this
quarter  twenty  years  later.1

Thus  unsettled  were  the  limits  of  the  Roman
occupation  at  the  close  of  the  reign  of  Clau-
dius. The  southern  part  of  the  island  from  proving
the  Stour  to  the  Exe  and  Severn  formed  a
compact  and  organised  province,  from  which  only  the
realm  of  Cogidubnus,  retaining  still  the  character  of
a  dependent  sovereignty,  is  to  be  subtracted.2  Beyond
the  Stour,  again,  the  territory  of  the  Iceni  constituted
another  extraneous  dependency.  The  government  of
the  province  was  administered  from  Camulodunum,
as  its  capital ;  and  the  whole  country  was  overawed
by  the  martial  attitude  of  the  Conquering  Colony
there  established.  Already,  perhaps,  Londinium,
though  distinguished  by  no  such  honourable  title,
excelled  it  as  a  place  of  commercial  resort.  The
broad  estuary  of  the  Thames,  confronting  the  waters
of  the  Scheldt  and  Maas,  was  well  placed  for  the  ex-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  40.;  Hist.  in.  45.;  Agric.  14.:  "Parts  a  prioribus
continuit  paucis  admodura  castellis  in  nlteriora  promotis."

2  Tacitus,  who  entered  public  life  thirty  years  later,  says  of  him
(Ayric.  14.):  "Is  ad  nostram  usque  memoriam  fidissimus  mansit."

248  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  W

change  of  British  against  Gaulish  and  German  pro-
ducts ;  and  the  hill  on  which  the  city  stood,  facing
the  southern  sun,  and  adapted  for  defence,  occupies
precisely  the  spot  where  first  the  river  can  be  crossed
conveniently.  Swept  east  and  west  by  the  tidal
stream,  and  traversed  north  and  south  by  the  con-
tinuous British  roads,  Londinium  supplied  the  whole
island  with  the  luxuries  of  another  zone,  just  as
Massilia  had  supplied  Gaul.1  Hither  led  the  ways
which  penetrated  Britain  from  the  ports  in  the  Chan-
nel, from  Lynine,  Kichborough,  and  Dover.  From
hence  they  diverged  again  to  Camulodunum  north-
east, and  to  Verulamium  north-west,  where  the  chief
lines  of  communication  intersected  one  another.
While  the  prefect,  as  governor-in-chief  of  the  pro-
vince, was  occupied  on  the  frontier  in  military  opera-
tions, the  finances  were  administered  by  a  procurator ;
and  whatever  extortions  he  might  countenance,  so
slight  was  the  apprehension  of  any  formidable  resist-
ance, that  not  only  the  towns,  now  frequented  by
thousands  of  Eornan  traders,  were  left  unfortified,
but  the  province  itself  was  suffered  to  remain  almost
denuded  of  soldiers.  The  legions  now  permanently
quartered  in  Britain  were  still  the  four  which  have
before  been  mentioned.  Of  the-^d  the  Second,
presidiary  the  same  which  under  the  command  of  Ves-
pasian had  recently  conquered  the  south-
west, was  now  perhaps  stationed  in  the  forts  on  the
Severn  and  Avon,  or  advanced  to  the  encampment  on
the  Usk,  whence  sprang  the  famous  city  of  Caerleon,
the  camp  of  the  Legion.2  The  Ninth  was  placed  in

1  Milton:  "  Me  tenet  urbs  reflua  quam  Thamesis  alluit  unda; "  not
Reading  or  Windsor,4W& London,  the  only  city  on  the  tidal  waters
of  the  Thames.

2  The  Roman  towns  and  villas,  which  have  been  discovered  in
such  numbers  along  the  course  of  the  Severn  and  Avon,  grew  pro-
bably out  of  their  system  of  defences  against the  long  untamed
brigandage  of  the  western  mountaineers The  Caesars  had  their
Welsh  marches  as  well  as  the  Plantagenets. Isca  Silurum  must  have

CH.  O  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  249

guard  over  the  Iceni,  whose  fidelity  was  not  beyond
suspicion.  We  may  conjecture  that  its  headquarters
were  planted  as  far  north  as  the  Wash,  where  it
might  dislocate  any  combinations  these  people  should
attempt  to  form  with  their  unsteady  neighbours  the
Brigantes.  The  Twentieth  would  be  required  to  con-
front the  Brigantes  also  on  their  western  frontier,  and
to  them  we  may  assign  the  position  on  the  Deva  or
Dee,  from  which  the  ancient  city  of  Chester  has  de-
rived its  name,  its  site,  and  the  foundations,  at  least,
of  its  venerable  fortifications.1  There  still  remained
another  legion,  the  Fourteenth ;  but  neither  was  this
held  in  reserve  in  the  interior  of  the  province.  The
necessities  of  border  warfare  required  its  active
operations  among  the  Welsh  mountains,  which  it
penetrated  step  by  step,  and  gradually  worked  its  way
towards  the  last  asylum  of  the  Druids  in  Mona,  or
Anglesey.  The  Gaulish  priesthood,  pro-

° , J. , .  ,  , '  Retreat  of  the

scribed  in  their  own  country,  would  natu-  Druids  into
rally  fly  for  refuge  to  Britain  :  proscribed
in  Britain,  wherever  the  power  of  Eome  extended,
they  retreated,  inch  by  inch,  and  withdrew  from  the
massive  shrines  which  still  attest  their  influence  on
our  southern  plains,  to  the  sacred  recesses  of  the
little  island,  surrounded  by  boiling  tides,  and  clothed
with  impenetrable  thickets.  In  this  gloomy  lair,
secure  apparently,  though  shorn  of  might  and  dignity,
they  still  persisted  in  the  practice  of  their  unholy
superstition.  They  strove,  perhaps,  like  the  trembling
priests  of  Mexico,  to  appease  the  gods,  who  seemed
to  avert  their  faces,  with  more  horrid  sacrifices  than

been  an  important  post  for  the  protection  of  the  Roman  ironworks
•'in  the  Forest  of  Dean.

1  The  position  of  the  headquarters  of  the  Second  legion  at  Isca
Silurum  (Caerleon),  and  of  the  Twentieth  at  Deva  (Chester),  is
established  from  lapidary  remains.  These  may  be  no  doubt  of  a  later
period,  but,  as  a  general  rule,  these  positions,  after  the  first  consoli-
dation of  the  Roman  power,  were  permanent.

250  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  U

ever.  Here  they  retained  their  assemblies,  their
schools,  and  their  oracles ;  here  was  the  asylum  of
the  fugitives;  here  was  the  sacred  grove,  the  abode
of  the  awful  Deity,  which  in  the  stillest  noon  of  night
or  day  the  priest  himself  scarce  ventured  to  enter,  lest
he  should  rush  unwitting  into  the  presence  of  its
Lord.1

Didius  had  been  satisfied  with  retaining  the  Koman
Suetonius  acquisitions,  and  had  made  no  attempt  to
rouVthe"  extend  them  ;  and  his  successor,  Veranius,
Augury.  had  contented  himself  with  some  trifling
A'U.'SH.  incursions  into  the  country  of  the  Silures.
The  death  of  Veranius  prevented,  perhaps,  more  im-
portant operations.  But  he  had  exercised  rigorous
discipline  in  the  camp,  and  Suetonius  Paullinus,  who
next  took  the  command,  found  the  legions  well
equipped  and  well  disposed,  and  their  stations  con-
nected by  military  roads  across  the  whole  breadth  of
the  island.  The  rumours  of  the  city  marked  out  this
man  as  a  rival  to  the  gallant  Corbulo,  and  great  suc-
cesses were  expected  from  the  measures  which  he
would  be  prompt  in  adopting.  Leaving  the  Second
legion  on  the  Usk  to  keep  the  Silures  in  check,  and
the  Twentieth  on  the  Dee  to  watch  the  Brigantes,  he
joined  the  quarters  of  the  Fourteenth,  now  pushed
as  far  as  Segontium  on  the  Menai  Straits.2  He  pre-
pared a  number  of  rafts  or  boats  for  the  passage  of
the  infantry ;  the  stream  at  low  water  was,  perhaps,
nearly  fordable  for  cavalry,  and  the  trusty  Batavians
on  his  wings  were  accustomed  to  swim  by  their
horses'  sides  clinging  by  the  mane  or  bridle,  across

1  Lucan,  iii.  423., —

"  Medio  cum  Phoebus  in  axe  est,
Aut  coelnm  nox  atra  tenet,  pavet  ipse  sacerdos
Accessus,  dominumque  timet  deprendere  luci."

2  Segontium  is  the  modern  Caernarvon. There  is  every  appearance
of  great  changes  having  taken  place  in  the  line  of  coast  in  this  neigh-
bourhood.

A.D.61-A.0.814.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  251

the  waters,  not  less  wide  and  rapid,  of  their  native
Khine.  Still  the  traject  must  have  been  perilous
enough,  even  if  unopposed.  But  now  the  further
bank  was  thronged  with  the  Britons  in  dense  array,
while  between  their  ranks,  the  women,  clad  in  black
and  with  hair  dishevelled,  rushed  like  furies  with
flaming  torches,  and  behind  them  were  seen  the  Druids
raising  their  hands  to  heaven,  invoking  curses  on  the
daring  invaders.  The  Komans  were  so  dismayed  at
the  sight  that,  as  they  came  to  land,  they  at  first
stood  motionless,  to  be  struck  down  by  every  as-
sailant. But  this  panic  lasted  but  for  a  moment.
Eecalled  by  the  cries  of  their  chiefs  to  a  sense  of
discipline,  of  duty,  of  danger,  they  closed  their  ranks,
advanced  their  standards,  struck,  broke  and  trampled
on  the  foe  before  them,  and  applied  his  own  torches
to  his  machines  and  waggons.  The  rout  was  com-
plete ;  the  fugitives,  flung  back  by  the  sea,  had  no
further  place  of  retreat.  The  island  was  seamed  with
Eoman  entrenchments,  the  groves  cut  down  or  burnt,
and  every  trace  speedily  abolished  of  the  foul  rites  -
by  which  Hesus  had  been  propitiated,  or  the  will  of
Taranis  consulted.1

From  this  moment  the  Druids  disappear  from  the
page  of  history ;  they  were  exterminated,  Disconteut  of
we  may  believe,  upon  their  own  altars ;  for  the  Iceni'
Suetonius  took  no  half  measures.  But  whatever  were
his  further  designs  for  the  final  pacification  of  the
province,  they  were  interrupted  by  the  sudden  out-
break of  a  revolt  in  his  rear.  The  Iceni,  as  has  been
said,  had  submitted,  after  their  great  overthrow,  to
the  yoke  of  the  invaders :  their  king  Prasutagus  had
been  allowed  indeed  to  retain  his  nominal  sovereignty:
but  he  was  placed  under  the  control  of  Roman  offi-
cials ;  his  people  were  required  to  contribute  to  the
Roman  treasury:  their  communities  were  incited  to

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  30.

252  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  M.

a  profuse  expenditure  which  exceeded  their  resources :
while  the  exactions  imposed  on  them  were  so  heavy
that  they  were  compelled  to  borrow  largely,  and
entangle  themselves  in  the  meshes  of  the  Koman
money-lenders.  The  great  capitalists  of  the  city,
wealthy  courtiers,  and  prosperous  freedmen,  advanced
the  sums  they  called  for  at  exorbitant  interest ;  from
year  to  year  they  found  themselves  less  able  to  meet
their  obligations,  and  mortgaged  property  and  person
to  their  unrelenting  creditors.  Among  the  immediate
caases  of  the  insurrection  which  followed,  is  men-
tioned the  sudden  calling  in  by  Seneca,  the  richest  of
philosophers,  of  the  large  investments  he  had  made,
which  he  seemed  in  danger  of  losing  altogether.1

But  the  oppression  of  the  Eomans  was  not  confined
insurrection  to  these  transactions.  Prasutagus,  in  the
oftheiceni.  hOpe  of  propitiating  the  provincial  govern-
ment to  his  family,  had  bequeathed  his  dominions  to
the  republic.  He  expected  perhaps  that  his  wife  and
his  children,  who  were  also  females,  if  not  allowed
to  exercise  even  a  nominal  sovereignty  after  him,
would  at  least  be  treated  in  consequence  with  the
respect  due  to  their  rank,  and  secured  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  ample  means  and  consideration.  This  was
the  fairest  lot  that  remained  to  the  families  of  the
dependent  chieftains,  and  the  Komans  bad  not  often
grudged  it  them.  But  an  insolent  official,  placed  in
charge  of  these  new  acquisitions  after  the  death  of
Prasutagus,  forgot  what  was  due  to  the  birth  and
even  the  sex  of  the  wretched  princesses.  He  sus-
pected them,  perhaps,  of  secreting  a  portion  of  their
patrimony,  and  did  not  scruple  to  employ  stripes  to
recover  it  from  the  mother,  while  he  surrendered  her
tender  children  to  even  worse  indignities.  Boadicea,
the  widowed  queen  of  the  Iceni,  was  a  woman  of
masculine  spirit.  Far  from  succumbing  under  the

1  Dion,  Ixii.  2. Dion  is  ill-natured  j  yet  I  do  not  think  he  can  have
Invented  this  story;  and  Brutus  had  done  the  like.

A.T>.6i-A.n.814  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  253

cruelty  of  her  tyrants  and  hiding  the  shame  of  her
family,  she  went  forth  into  the  public  places,  showed
the  scars  of  her  wounds,  and  the  fainting  forms  of  her
abused  daughters,  and  adjured  her  people  to  a  des-
perate revenge.  The  Iceni  were  stung  to  frenzy  at
their  sovereign's  wrongs,  at  their  own  humiliation.
The  danger,  the  madness,  of  the  attempt  was  con-
sidered by  none  for  a  moment.  They  rose  as  one
man  :  there  was  no  power  at  hand  to  control  them  :  the
Eoman  officials  fled,  or,  if  arrested,  were  slaughtered ;
and  a  vast  multitude,  armed  and  unarmed,  rolled
southward  to  overwhelm  and  extirpate  the  intruders.
To  the  Colne,  to  the  Thames,  to  the  sea,  the  country
lay  entirely  open.  The  legions  were  all  removed  to
a  distance,  the  towns  were  uninclosed,  the  Eoman
traders  settled  in  them  were  untrained  to  arms.
Even  the  Claudian  colony  was  undefended.  The  pro-
curator, Catus  Decianus,  was  at  the  moment  absent,
and  being  pressed  for  succour,  could  send  no  more
than  two  hundred  soldiers  for  its  protection.  Little
reliance  could  be  placed  on  the  strength  of  a  few
worn-out  veterans :  the  natives,  however  specious
their  assurances,  were  not  unjustly  distrusted,  for
they  too,  like  the  Iceni,  had  suffered  insolence  and
ill-treatment.  The  great  temple  of  Claudius  was  a
standing  monument  of  their  humiliation :  for  its
foundation  their  estates  had  been  confiscated,  for  its
support  their  tribute  was  required,  and  they  regarded
as  victims  or  traitors,  the  native  chiefs  who  had  been
enrolled  in  its  service.  Whatever  alarm  they  might
feel  at  the  indiscriminate  fury  of  the  hordes  descend-
ing upon  them,  they  smiled  grimly  at  the  panic
which  more  justly  seized  the  Eomans.  The  guilty
objects  of  national  vengeance  discovered  the  direst
prodigies  in  every  event  around  them.  The  wailings
of  their  women,  the  neighing  of  their  horses,  were
interpreted  as  evil  omens.  Their  theatre  was  said  to
have  resounded  with  uncouth  noises;  the  buildings  of

254  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  M.

the  colony  had  been  seen  inversely  reflected  in  the
waters  of  their  estuary ;  and  at  ebb-tide  ghastly  re-
mains of  human  bodies  had  been  discovered  in  the
ooze.1  Above  all,  the  statue  of  Victory,  planted  to
face  the  enemies  of  the  republic,  had  turned  its  back
to  the  advancing  barbarians  and  fallen  prostrate  De-
fore  them.  When  the  colonists  proposed  to  throw
up  hasty  entrenchments  they  were  dissuaded  from
the  work,  or  impeded  in  it  by  the  natives,  who  per-
sisted in  declaring  that  there  was  no  cause  for  fear  :
surprise  and  ifc  was  not  tiH  ^e  Iceni  were  actually  in
caprnurio-°f  sight,  and  the  treachery  of  the  Trinobantes
dunum.  no  ionger  doubtful,  that  they  retreated
tumultuously  within  the  precincts  of  the  temple,  and
strengthened  its  slender  defences  to  support  a  sudden
attack  till  succour  could  arrive.  But  the  impetuosity
of  the  assault  overcame  all  resistance.  The  strong-
hold was  stormed  on  the  second  day,  and  all  who  had
sought  refuge  in  it,  armed  and  unarmed,  given  up  to
slaughter.2

Meanwhile  the  report  of  this  fearful  movement  had
Suetonius  travelled  far  and  wide  through  the  country.
re6iievesthe  I*  reached  Pctilius  Cerialis,  the  commander
of  the  Ninth  legion,  which  I  suppose  to
have  been  stationed  near  the  Wash,  and  he  broke  up
promptly  from  his  camp  to  hang  on  the  rear  of  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  32. :  "  Visam  speciem  in  asstuario  Tamesas  subversae
colonise."  The  "  estuary  of  the  Thames  "  may  comprise,  the  whole
extent  of  the  deep  indentation  of  the  coast  between  Landguard  Point
and  the  North  Foreland.

8  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  31,  32.;  Agric.  16.:  "Nee  ullum  in  barbaris
saevitiaa  genus  omisit  iraet  victoria."  The  atrocities  inflicted  on  the
captives  are  described  in  horrid  detail  by  Dion,  Ixii.  1 — 7.;  ras  yap
yvva"tKas  ras  fvyfve<rrdras  Kal  evTrpeirfcrrdras  •yu/xvis  e/cpe/xcciraj',  Kal  TOVS
re  [natTTovs  avruv  irfpisrefiov,  Kal  rots  ffrA/^utn  fftpuv  irpoffffflairrov,  oirtas
ws  Kal  foOiovcrai  avrobs  6p$vro'  Kal  pera  rovro  iracrcroAois  o£«rt  8icJ
Tavrbs  TOV  ar&/j.aros  Kara  /j,f)Kos  avfireipav.  In  the  immediate  neigh-
bourhood of  Colchester  a  skeleton  is  said  to  have  been  found  which,
from  the  implements  lying  by  it,  seems  to  have  been  that  of  a  Roman
priest,  buried  head  downwards :  Kal  ravra  irdina^  says  Dion,  v§pl£ovref.

4..D.61-A.U.814.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  255

insurgents.  It  reached  the  Twentieth  legion  at  Deva,
which  awaited  the  orders  of  Suetonius  himself,  as
soon  as  he  should  learn  on  the  banks  of  the  Menai
the  perils  in  which  the  province  was  involved.  The
prefect  withdrew  the  Fourteenth  legion  from  the
smoking  groves  of  Mona,  and  urged  it  with  redoubled
speed  along  the  highway  of  Watling  Street,  picking
out  the  best  troops  from  the  Twentieth  as  he  rushed
by,  and  summoning  the  Second  from  Isca  to  join  him
in  the  South.  But  Paenius  Postumus,  who  commanded
this  latter  division,  neglected  to  obey  his  orders,  and
crouched  in  terror  behind  his  fortifications.  The  Icenj
turned  boldly  on  Cerialis,  who  was  hanging  close  upon
their  heels,  and  routed  his  wearied  battalions  with
great  slaughter.  The  infantry  of  the  Ninth  legion
was  cut  in  pieces,  and  the  cavalry  alone  escaped  to
their  entrenchments.1  But  the  barbarians  had  not
skill  nor  patience  to  conduct  the  siege  of  a  Eoman
camp.  They  left  the  squadron  of  Cerialis  unmolested,
nor  did  they  attempt  to  force  the  scattered  posts
around  them.  After  giving  Camulodunum  to  the
flames,  they  dispersed  throughout  the  country,  plun-
dering and  destroying.  Suetonius,  unappalled  by  the
frightful  accounts  which  thronged  upon  him,  held  on
his  course  steadfastly  with  his  single  legion,  broke
through  the  scattered  bands  of  the  enemy,  and  reached
Londinium  without  a  check.2  This  place  was  crowded
with  Koman  residents,  crowded  still  more  at  this  mo-
ment with  fugitives  from  the  country  towns  and  villas :
but  it  was  undefended  by  walls,  its  population  of
traders  was  of  little  account  in  military  eyes,  and  Sue-
tonius sternly  determined  to  leave  it,  with  all  the  wealth
it  harboured,  to  the  barbarians,  rather  than  sacrifice

1  The  site  of  this  battle  has  been  assigned,  with  some  probability,
from  the  great  tumulus  at  that  spot,  to  Wormingford,  six  miles  north
of  Colchester.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  33.:  "  A".  Suetonius  raira  constantia  mediosintei
hostes  Londinium  perrexit."

256  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LI.

his  soldiers  in  th«  attempt  to  save  it.1  The  policy  of
the  Koman  commander  was  to  secure  his  communica-
tions with  Gaul :  but  he  was  resolved  not  to  abandon  the
country,  nor  surrender  the  detachments  hemmed  in
at  various  points  by  the  general  rising  of  the  Britons.
The  precise  direction  of  bis  movements  we  can  only
conjecture  Had  he  retired  to  the  southern  bank  of
the  Thames,  he  would  probably  have  defended  the
passage  of  that  river ;  or  had  the  Britons  crossed  it
unresisted,  the  historians  would  not  have  failed  to
specify  so  important  a  success.  But  the  situation  of
Camulodunum,  inclosed  in  its  old  British  lines,  and
backed  by  the  sea,  would  offer  him  a  secure  retreat
where  he  might  defy  attack,  and  await  reinforcements;
and  the  insurgents,  after  their  recent  triumphs,  had
abandoned  their  first  conquests  to  wreak  their  fury  on
other  seats  of  Koman  civilization.  While,  therefore,
the  Iceni  sacked  and  burnt  first  Verulamium,  and  next
Londinium,  Suetonius  made,  as  I  conceive,  a  flank
march  toward  Camulodunum,  and  kept  ahead  of  their
pursuit,  till  he  could  choose  his  own  position  to  await
their  attack.  In  a  valley  between  undulating  hills,
with  woods  in  the  rear,  and  the  ramparts  of  the
British  oppidum  not  far  perhaps  on  his  right,  he  had
every  advantage  for  marshalling  his  slender  forces  •
and  these  were  increased  in  number  more  than  in
strength  by  the  fugitives  capable  of  bearing  arms,
whom  he  allowed  to  cling  to  his  fortunes.2  Ten  thou-

1  "  Unius  oppidi  damno  servare  universa  statuit." Our  early  anti-
quarians could  trace  the  remains  of  a  Koman  encampment  at  Islington,
which  they  supposed  to  have  been  the  quarters  of  Suetonius  at  this
moment.

2  Tac.  I.e.:  " Comitantes in  partem  agminis  acceperat." I  am  in-
debted to  the  Rev.  Mr.  Jenkins,  of  Stanway.  near  Colchester,  for  this
conjecture  with  regard  to  the  direction  of  the  march,  and  the  site  of
the  battle. His  views  are  explained  in  a  tract  in  the  Arcfueologia,
1S42;  and  I  may  refer  the  reader  to  some  further  remarks  upon  them
in  the  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  xcvii. His  speculations,  I  may  add,
have  been  of  the  highest  value  to  me,  though  I  must  be  content  some-
times to  follow  them  "  non  passibus  aequis."

*.D.Gl-A.u.814.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  257

sand  resolute  men  drew  their  swords  for  the  Roman
empire  in  Britain.  The  natives,  many  times  their
number,  spread  far  and  wide  over  the  plain ;  but  they
could  assail  the  narrow  front  of  the  Romans  with  only
few  battalions  at  once,  and  their  waggons,  which  con-
veyed their  accumulated  booty  and  bore  their  wives
and  children,  thronged  the  rear,  and  cut  off  almost
the  possibility  of  the  retreat.

But  flushed  with  victory,  impatient  for  the  slaughter,
animated  with  desperate  resolution  to  die  or  Defeat  of
conquer,  the  Britons  cast  no  look  or  thought  the  Ioeni>
behind  them.  Boadicea  drove  her  car  from  rank  to
rank,  from  nation  to  nation,  with  her  daughters  be-
side her,  attesting  the  outrage  she  had  endured,  the
vengeance  she  had  already  taken,  proclaiming  the
gallant  deeds  of  the  queens  before  her,  under  whom
British  warriors  had  so  often  triumphed,  denouncing
the  intolerable  yoke  of  Roman  insolence,  and  declar-
ing that  whatever  the  men  might  determine,  the
women  would  now  be  free  or  perish.  The  harangue
of  Suetonius,  on  the  other  hand,  was  blunt  and  sar-
castic. He  told  his  men  not  to  mind  the  multitudes
before  them,  nor  the  noise  they  made :  there  were
more  women  among  them  than  men :  as  for  their  own
numbers,  let  them  remember  that  in  all  battles  a  few
good  swordsmen  really  did  the  work ;  the  half-armed
and  dastard  crowds  would  break  and  fly  when  they
felt  again  the  prowess  of  the  Roman  veterans.  Thus
encouraged,  the  legionaries  could  with  difficulty  be
restrained  to  await  the  onset ;  and  as  soon  as  the  as-
sailants had  exhausted  their  missiles,  bore  down  upon
them  in  the  wedge-shaped  column,  which  had  so
often  broken  Greeks,  Gauls,  and  Carthaginians.  The
auxiliaries  followed  with  no  less  impetuosity.  The
horsemen,  lance  in  hand,  pierced  the  ranks  which
still  kept  their  ground.  But  a  single  charge  was
enough.  The  Britons  were  in  a  moment  shattered
and  routed.  In  another  moment,  the  Romans  had

VOL.  VI.  S

258  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  M.

reached  the  wide  circumvallation  of  waggons,  among
which  the  fugitives  were  scrambling  in  dismay,
slew  the  cattle  and  the  women  without  remorse,
and  traced  with  a  line  of  corpses  and  carcases  the
limits  of  the  British  position.  We  may  believe
that  the  massacre  was  enormous.  The  Eomans  de-
clared that  80,000  of  their  enemies  perished,  while
of  their  own  force  they  lost  only  400  slain  and  about
as  many  wounded.  Boadicea  put  an  end  to  her  life
by  poison :  we  could  have  wished  to  hear  that  the
brave  barbarian  had  fallen  on  a  Eoman  pike.  Sue-
tonius had  won  the  greatest  victory  of  the  imperial
history ;  to  complete  his  triumph,  the  coward,  Postu-
mus,  who  had  shrunk  from  aiding  him,  threw  himself,
in  shame  and  mortification,  on  his  own  sword.1

By  this  utter  defeat  the  British  insurrection  was
Final  sup-  paralysed.  Throughout  the  remainder  of
£he9i!i°ur°f  the  season  the  Eomans  kept  the  field ;  they
received  reinforcements  from  the  German
camps,  and  their  scattered  cohorts  were  gradually
brought  together  in  a  force  which  overawed  all  re-
sistance. The  revolted  districts  were  chastised  with
fire  and  sword,  and  the  systematic  devastation  in-
flicted upon  them,  suffering  as  they  already  were  from
the  neglect  of  tillage  during  the  brief  intoxication  of
their  success,  produced  a  famine  which  swept  off  the
seeds  of  future  insurrections.  On  both  sides  a  fearful
amount  of  destruction  had  been  committed.  Amidst
the  overthrow  of  the  great  cities  of  southern  Britain,
not  less  than  seventy  thousand  Eoman  colonists  had
perished.  The  work  of  twenty  years  was  in  a  moment
undone.  Far  and  wide  every  vestige  of  Eoman  civiliza-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  34 — 37.;  Agric.  16.  Dion,  Ixii.  12.  From  the
slender  accounts  we  have  received  of  this  outbreak  it  would  seem  to
have  been  confined  to  the  Iceni,  which  makes  it  the  more  probable
that  these  people  were  a  different  race  from  the  Celtic  Britons.  Their
numbers  as  indicated  by  Dion,  and  even  by  Tacitus,  deserve  little
reliance.

A.D.61-A.0.814.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  259

tion  was  trodden  into  the  soil.  At  this  day  the  work-
men who  dig  through  the  foundations  of  the  Norman
and  the  Saxon  London,  strike  beneath  them  on  the
traces  of  two  distinct  Koman  cities,  between  which
lies  a  mass  of  charred  and  broken  rubbish,  attesting
the  conflagration  of  the  terrible  Boadicea.

The  temper  of  Suetonius,  as  may  be  supposed  from
what  has  been  already  said  of  him,  was  stern  succeeded

j  ij-  i  JJ/L  J-  by  a  milder

and  unbending,  even  beyond  the  ordinary  policy.
type  of  his  nation.  No  other  officer,  perhaps,  in  the
Koman  armies  could  have  so  turned  disaster  into  vic-
tory, and  recovered  a  province  at  a  blow ;  but  it  was
not  in  his  character  to  soothe  the  conquered,  to  con-
ciliate angry  passions,  to  restore  the  charm  of  moral
superiority.  Classicianus,  who  was  his  next  procura-
tor, complained  of  him  to  the  emperor,  as  wishing  to
protract  hostilities  when  every  end  might  be  obtained
by  conciliation.  A  freedman  of  the  court,  named
Polycletus,  was  se#t  on  the  delicate  mission,  to  judge
between  the  civil  and  the  military  chief,  and  to  take
the  measures  most  fitting  for  securing  peace  and  obe-
dience. Polycletus  brought  with  him  a  large  force
from  Italy  and  Ofaul,  and  was  no  less  surprised  per-
haps than  the  legions  he  commanded,  to  see  himself
at  the  head  of  a  Eoman  army.  Even  the  barbarians,
we  are  told,  derided  the  victorious  warriors  who  bowed
in  submission  to  the  orders  of  a  bondman.  But  Poly-
cletus could  make  himself  obeyed  at  least,  if  not
respected.  The  loss  of  a  few  vessels  on  the  coast
furnished  him  with  a  pretext  for  removing  Suetonius
from  his  command,  and  transferring  it  to  a  consular,
Petronius  Turpilianus,  whose  temper  and  policy  in-
clined equally  to  peace.1

From  the  lenity  of  this  propraetor  the  happiest  con-

1  Tacitus,  as  an  admirer  of  Trajan,  can  never  forego  a  gibe  at
captains  who  preferred  the  conquests  of  peace  to  those  of  warfare.
Of  this  Turpilianns  he  says:  "Is  non  irritato  hoste,  Deque  Inocssitns,
honestnm  pacis  nomen  segni  otio  imposnit." Ann.  xiv.  39.
8  *

260  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  11.

sequences  evidently  ensued.  The  southern  Britons
Happy  ef-  acquiesced  in  the  dominion  of  Borne,  while
Pocucy0andIS  the  northern  were  awed  into  deference  to  her
grL  op/civa-  superior  influence.  Her  manners,  her  arts,
Briton.1"  her  commerce,  penetrated  far  into  regions
yet  unconquered  by  the  sword.  Her  establishments
at  Londinium,  Verulamium,  and  Camulodunum  rose
again  from  their  ashes.  Never  was  the  peaceful
enterprise  of  her  citizens  more  vigorous  and  elastic
than  at  this  period.  The  luxuries  of  Italy  and  the
provinces,  rapidly  increasing,  required  the  extension
to  the  utmost  of  all  her  resources.  Manufactures
and  commerce  were  pushed  forward  with  unexampled
activity.  The  products  of  Britain,  rude  as  they  were,
consisting  of  raw  materials  chiefly,  were  demanded
with  an  insatiable  appetite  by  the  cities  of  Graul  and
Germany,  and  exchanged  for  arts  and  letters,  which
at  least  decked  her  servitude  with  silken  fetters.  The
best  of  the  Roman  command ers,-^- and  there  were
some,  we  may  believe,  among  them  both  thoughtful
and  humane, — while  they  acknowledged  they  had  no
right  to  conquer,  yet  believed  that  their  conquests
were  a  blessing.  The  best  of  the  native  chiefs, — and
some  too  of  them  may  have  wished  for  the  real  hap-
piness of  their  countrymen,-  —acknowledged,  perhaps,
that  while  freedom  is  the  noblest  instrument  of  vir-
tue, it  only  degrades  the  vicious  to  the  lowest  depths
of  barbarism.

TODER THE EMPIRE  261

CHAPTEE LIT.

The  family  of  the  Domitii. — Early  years  of  Nero. — His  education
under  Seneca. — Struggle  for  influence  over  him  between  the  senate,
his  tutor,  and  his  mother. — He  makes  a  favourable  impression  at
the  commencement  of  his  reign. — His  intrigue  with  Acte  and
gradual  progress  in  vice. — Behaviour  of  Agrippina  and  Seneca. —
Praise  of  his  clemency. — Disgrace  of  Pallas. — Murder  of  Britan-
nicus. — Division  between  Nero  and  Agrippina. — Intrigues  against
her. — Consecration  of  a  temple  to  Claudius. — Favourable  charac-
teristics of  Nero's  early  government. — His  financial  and  legislative
measures. — The  "Quinquennium  Neronis."  (A.D.  54 — 59.  A.  u.
807-812.)

A  PECULIAR  interest  attaches  to  the  history  of  the
Komans  through  the  greater part  of  its

r  • •  Lit -U- -U  Family  cha-

course,  irom  the  precision  with  which  we  racterofthe

,  ,  , Domitii,  the

can  trace  the  character  ot  families,  descend-  ancestors  Of
ing  often  with  the  same  unmistakeable
lineaments  from  father  to  son,  for  many  generations.
We  mark  the  pride  of  the  Claudii ;  the  turbulence  of
the  Lepidi ;  the  cool  selfishness  of  the  Pompeii.
Tbere  is  no  more  striking  analogy  between  Roman
and  English  history  than  this :  it  is  only  an  aris-
tocracy that  can  present  us  with  a  family  history  of
pubbic  interest.  The  great  men  of  democratic  Athens
stand  out  alone :  no  one  cares  to  ask  who  were  their
fathers,  or  whether  they  left  any  sons.  Had  they
sprung  every  one  from  the  earth,  as  they  fancifully
boasted  of  their  nation,  their  career  and  character
could  not  have  been,  to  all  appearance,  more  inde-
pendent of  family  antecedents.  So  strongly,  how-
ever, were  the  features  of  the  Koman  family  traced
by  the  hereditary  training  of  its  members,  that  though
the  descent  of  blood  was  often  interrupted  by  the
practice  of  adoption,  the  moral  aspects  of  its  character

262  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  in.

were  still  broadly  but  clearly  preserved;  and  it  be-
comes of  little  importance  to  ascertain,  in  each  par-
ticular instance,  whether  the  race  was  actually  con-
tinued by  natural  succession,  or  interpolated  by  a
legal  fiction.  The  hereditary  traditions  of  the  Scipios
were  reflected  faithfully  in  the  legal  representatives
of  their  house,  though  some  of  the  greatest  of  the
name  were  not  really  connected  by  ties  of  affinity
with  one  another.  It  was  enough  that  the  sentiment
of  connexion  was  preserved  by  the  link  of  the  do-
mestic cult,  and  the  common  inheritance  of  the
family  honours.  It  had  been  remarked,  however,  of
the  patrician  Claudii  that  numerous  as  their  branches
were,  none  of  them  down  to  the  time  of  Tiberius
Claudius  the  emperor,  had  ever  been  reduced  to  the
necessity  of  perpetuating  itself  by  adoption ;  and
many  others,  no  doubt,  of  the  chief  Roman  houses
had  preserved  their  blood-descent  equally  unbroken.1
Such  unquestionably  had  been  for  many  generations
the  boast  of  some,  at  least,  of  the  Domitii.  The
stock  from  which  the  emperor  Nero  sprang  may  be
traced  back  from  son  to  father  for  about  two  hundred
years.  The  Domitian  gens  was  widely  spread  and
illustrious  in  every  branch.  An  Afer,  a  Marsus,  a
Celer,  a  Calvinus,  had  all  obtained  distinction  in  one
or  other  of  the  various  careers  which  courted  the
buoyant  energy  of  the  Roman  aristocracy.  But  of
these  houses  none  was  so  full  of  honours  as  that  of
the  Ahenobarbi,  the  progenitors  of  the  emperor  Nero.
It  was  illustrious  for  the  high  public  part  it  played
through  several  generations ;  illustrious  for  its  wealth
and  consideration,  for  its  native  vigour  and  ability,
but  execrable  at  the  same  time  above  every  other  for
the  combination  of  ferocity  and  faithlessness  by  which

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  25. : "  Adnotabant  peritinullamantehacadoptionem
inter  patricios  Claudios  reperiri,  eosque  ab  Atto  Clauso  continues
duravisse."  Comp.  Suet.  Claud.  39.

OH.  ill.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  263

its  representatives  were  successively  distinguished.
The  founder  of  the  race,  according  to  Suetonius,  was
a  Lucius  Domitius,  to  whom  the  Dioscuri  announced
the  victory  of  Eegillus,  changing  his  beard  from  black
to  red  in  token  of  the  divine  manifestation.  Thence-
forth the  name  of  Ahenobarbi,  the  Red  or  Brazen
beards,  was  common  to  the  family,  and  they  in-
herited, it  was  piously  believed,  the  complexion  as
regularly  as  the  name.  Time  went  on,  and  the  Red-
beards  enjoyed  seven  consulships  :  one  of  them  filled
the  office  of  censor :  the  house  was  raised  from  the
Plebs  to  the  Patriciate.  From  Cnseus  Domitius
Ahenobarbus,  consul  in  632,  the  conqueror  of  the
Allobroges,  we  have  the  descent  complete  The  son
of  this  victorious  imperator  was  chief  pontiff  and
censor  in  662  ;  his  temper  was  violent  and  his  public
conduct  austere.  No  wonder,  said  of  him  the  refined
and  graceful  Crassus,  that  his  beard  is  of  brass,  for
his  mouth  is  of  iron  and  his  heart  of  lead.  The
grandson  was  consul  in  667,  and  being  joined  in
marriage  to  a  daughter  of  Cinna,  took  the  side  of
the  Marians  in  the  first  civil  wars.  The  great  grand-
son, Lucius,  has  been  signalized  in  these  pages  as  an
upholder  of  the  Optimates  against  Caesar,  the  son-in-
law  and  representative  of  Cinna,  and  therefore  against
his  own  father's  friends.  He  perished  after  a  career
of  furious  partisanship,  disgraced  with  cruelty  and
treachery,  on  the  field  of  Pharsalia.  The  fifth  in
descent,  a  Cnseus,  for  the  prsenomen  generally  alter-
nated, was  the  follower  of  Brutus  and  Cassius,  sided
afterwards  with  their  foe  Antonius,  and  finally  de-
serted his  falling  fortunes  for  the  luckier  star  of
Octavius.1  The  sixth  was  Lucius  Domitius,  who
crossed  the  Elbe  with  a  Roman  army,  a  man  to  be
noted  in  the  military  annals  of  his  country,  but  whose

1  Yet  this  Domitius,  according  to  Suetonius,  was  "  by  far the
best "  of  his  race. Suet.  Ner.  2.

HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  en.  Ul.

temper  was  as  savage  as  his  grandfather's,  and  his
tastes  so  sanguinary  that  Augustus  was  compelled  to
check  the  bloodshed  of  his  gladiatorial  shows.  The
son  of  Lucius,  the  seventh  in  direct  succession,  was
infamous  for  crimes  of  every  kind ;  for  murder  and
treason,  for  adultery  and  incest.  He  was  mean  as
well  as  cruel,  and  even  stooped  to  enrich  himself  by
petty  pilfering.  Towards  the  end  of  Tiberius's  reign
he  was  subjected  to  a  charge  of  Majesty,  and  would
probably  have  perished,  but  for  the  opportune  decease
of  the  emperor.  Married  to  Agrippina,  the  sister  of
Oaius  Caligula,  he  became  the  father  of  Lucius
Domitius,  afterwards  Nero  He  made  a  jest  of  his
own  enormities ;  and  it  was  reported  at  least,  that
on  the  child's  birth  he  replied  to  the  felicitations  of
his  friends  by  grimly  remarking,  that  nothing  could
spring  from  such  a  father  and  such  a  mother  but
what  should  be  abominable  and  fatal  to  the  state.1
The  commencement  of  the  future  emperor's  career
was  clouded  with  perils  and  disasters.  At

Misfortunes  of..  - ,  , -  -i • p ,  -i i

Nero's  early  the  age  ot  three  years  he  lost  his  father  s
protection,  and  Caius,  to  whom,  by  way  of
precaution,  two  thirds  of  his  patrimony  had  been  be-
queathed, shamelessly  grasped  the  remainder  also.
The  child  thus  despoiled,  and  rendered  doubly  an
orphan  by  the  exile  of  his  mother,  was  left  to  the
care  of  his  father's  sister,  Domitia  Lepida.  By  this
selfish  intriguer,  the  mother  of  Messalina,  he  seems
to  have  been  little  cared  for ;  his  first  tutors  were
a  dancer  and  a  barber;  nevertheless  his  aunt  ap-
pears to  have  considered,  at  least  at  a  later  period,
that  she  had  something  of  a  mother's  claims  upon

1  Suet,  JVer.  5,  6.;  Dion,  Ixi.  2.  This  writer's  history,  in  the
shape  in  which  we  possess  it,  from  book  Iv.  to  Ix.  is  probably  only
an  abridgment,  the  author  of  which  is  unknown.  From  book  Ixi.
we  have  only  the  epitome  of  Xiphilinus,  which  is  still  more  meagre
than  the  preceding,  nor  does  it  seem  to  be  always  faithful.  It  is
often  quoted  under  the  name  of  the  abbreviator.  I  have  thought  it,
however,  more  convenient  to  pre*erve  that  of  the  original  author.

ill,  ill.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  265

him.  Claudius,  however,  kindly  restored  him  his
inheritance,  together  with  the  fortune  of  Crispus
Passienus,  who  had  been  Agrippina's  tirst  husband,
and  was  afterwards  apparently  united  to  another  of
his  aunts,  named  also  Domitia.1  The  favour  of  this
emperor,  if  we  may  believe  the  rumours  of  the  day,
gained  the  child  at  an  early  period  the  jealousy  of
Messalina ;  and  he  narrowly  escaped  being  smothered
by  her  emissaries  in  the  security  of  his  midday
slumber.

From  this  epoch  his  fortunes  have  already  been
traced  to  the  moment  of  his  accession.

„,,  ...  /. .-,  T\  His  education.

The  position  of  the  young  Domitms,  as
the  son  of  a  noble  of  the  highest  class,  closely  allied
with  the  reigning  family,  yet  not  directly  in  the  line
of  succession,  was  peculiarly  favourable  to  his  educa-
tion. The  loss  of  his  fierce  and  brutal  father,  when
he  was  but  three  years  old,  was  certainly  no  matter
of  regret.  The  superintendence  of  his  early  training
would  thus  fall  exclusively  to  his  mother  interrupted
only  by  the  two  years  of  her  exile ;  and  Agrippina
seems,  with  all  her  faults,  to  have  had  at  least  a
princely  sense  of  the  duty  which  thus  devolved  upon
her.  The  child  was  docile  and  affectionate,  apt  to  learn
and  eager  for  praise.  His  mother  sought  to  imbue
his  mind  with  the  best  learning  of  the  times,  and  at
the  same  time  to  impart  brilliancy  and  fascination
to  his  manners.  It  was  the  fashion  to  complain  of
the  decline  of  education  at  this  period  in  the  Koman
world.  Surrounded  by  vice  and  grossness  of  all
kinds,  and  conscious  of  their  degeneracy  in  virtue  as

1  Care  must  be  taken  not  to  confound  the  two  aunts  of  Nero,
Domitia  Lepida,  usually  known  by  her  second  name  only,  and
Domitia.  The  first  was  wife  to  Valerius  Messala,  mother  of  Messalina,
a  rival  of  Agrippina,  who  got  her  put  to  death  by  Claudius:  Tac.
Ann.  xii.  65.  The  other  was  second  wife  to  Passienus,  ard  though
also  an  object  of  jealousy  to  Agrippina,  survived  her,  and  was  sup-
posed to  have  been  eventually  poisoned  by  Nero.  Suet.  Ner.  34. ;
Dion,  Ixi.  1 7

266  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LII.

well  as  their  neglect  of  decorum,  it  was  in  the  corrupt
training  of  childhood  that  moralists  seemed  to  dis-
cover the  germ  of  the  evils  they  deplored.  But,  as
usual  with  reactionists  in  social  life,  who  from  im-
perfect experience  and  sympathy  see  the  defects
only  of  the  present,  and  the  good  only  of  the  past,
they  mistook  the  cause  of  the  disease,  and  wasted
their  energies  in  declamations  against  an  imaginary
complaints  of  ev^'  ^  was  the  complaint  of  the  day  that
patriot™0*1  children  were  no  longer  educated  by  their
education.  own  mothers,  but  consigned  in  their  ten-
derest  years  to  the  mercenary  supervision,  first  of
handmaids,  and  soon  afterwards  of  pedagogues.
Such,  it  was  said,  had  not  been  the  practice  of
Aurelia,  the  mother  of  Julius  Caesar ;  of  Atia,  the
parent  of  Octavius ;  of  Cornelia,  from  whom  her  sons,
the  Gracchi,  distinguished  for  their  eloquence,  had
imbibed  the  rudiments  of  the  Eoman  tongue.1  Yet,
according  to  the  ancient  usage,  the  child  had  always
been  removed  from  the  women's  chamber  at  seven
years ;  and  it  cannot  be  pretended  that  the  training  of
the  first  seven  years  of  life  could  have  laid  deep  the
foundations  either  of  the  moral  or  the  intellectual  cha-
racter. Indeed  even  the  women,  thus  specially  men-
tioned, were  exceptions  to  the  mass  of  the  untutored
matrons  of  Home.  Many  mothers  never  taught  their
children  anything  up  to  the  age  of  seven,  and  it  was
not  unusual,  nor  undefended  by  some  on  principle,  to
leave  them  to  learn  even  the  rudiments  of  reading  from
the  pedagogue  after  that  epoch  was  passed.2  This
complaint,  then,  which  is  particularly  advanced  in  the
juvenile  work  of  Tacitus  (for,  as  his,  I  think,  the
Treatise  on  Orators  should  be  recognised),  was,  in  fact,
unfounded.  The  real  quarrel,  however,  of  the  conser-
vatives to  whom  he  belonged,  was  with  the  practice,

1  Tac.  de  Orator.  28,  29.

*  See  Quintilian,  Inst.  Orat.  i.  1.,  who,  however,  objects  to  the
practice.

CH.  iai.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  267

introduced  in  the  last  age  of  the  republic,  of  sending
children  to  public  schools  instead  of  keeping  them
under  tutors  at  home.  Domestic  tuition,  the  necessity
of  an  early  stage  of  society,  seemed  more  dignified  and
aristocratic ;  it  savoured  of  the  idea  that  letters  were
a  craft  and  mystery ;  that  the  learning  of  the  noble
was  a  privilege,  not  to  be  freely  communicated  to
all  classes ;  and  on  this  account,  unconsciously  per-
haps, it  found  patrons  among  the  patriots  of  the
imperial  era,  the  upholders  of  every  republican  pre-
judice. It  was  easy  then,  as  now,  to  point  out  the
superficial  evils  of  public  education,  the  conceit  and
ostentation  it  may  foster ;  but  the  patrician  clung
with  peculiar  tenacity  to  his  cherished  isolation  and
reserve,  the  qualities  which,  in  his  view,  most
proudly  distinguished  the  high-born  Eoman  from  the
Greeks,  the  Orientals,  and  the  vulgar  all  over  the
world.  Whatever  tended  to  place  the  young  noble
on  an  equality  with  other  men,  to  imbue  him  with
liberal  feelings,  to  break  down  the  pride  of  caste
and  the  traditions  of  antique  usage,  among  which  he
had  been  born,  was  regarded  by  the  purists  of  the
empire  with  suspicion  and  dislike.  A  society  which
had  no  other  safeguard  but  blind  habit,  might  natu-
rally be  alarmed  at  anything  which  tended  to  innova-
tion ;  but  a  few  only  of  the  most  thoughtful  of  the
nation  perceived  the  downward  progress  of  society
around  them ;  and  even  they  too  often  mistook  or
misrepresented  its  causes.

Augustus,  it  is  curious  to  remark,  discovered  means,
in  his  usual  spirit  of  compromise,  of  recon-

•T i_ J/L .LI  a- L-  c J Augustus  com-

cilmg  both  the  conflicting  systems  of  edu-  promises  be.

,. ° i-ii r  j-i-  T T.- tw<*n  public

cation  which  he  found  in  action. In  his  j^p™1*18
day,  a  certain  Verrius  Flaccus  was  a  noted
preceptor,  and  kept  a  school  much  resorted  to  by
the  young  nobility. The  emperor  invited  this  teacher
to  undertake  the  education  of  his  grandsons ;  but  for
this  purpose  he  required  him  to  remove  his  benches

268  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  US.

into  the  palace  itself  and  limit  the  number  of  hii
pupils.1  This,  indeed,  was  probably  a  solitary  at-
tempt to  give  to  the  children  of  the  ruling  family
the  stimulus  of  competition  in  a  class.  For  them,
with  this  exception,  the  old  haughty  fashion  of
solitary  teaching  was,  as  far  as  we  can  learn,  still
maintained.  The  children  of  Drusus  and  Grermanicus
seem  to  have  been  instructed  in  the  pomp  of  antique
exclusiveness,  under  the  eye  of  pedagogues  at  home ;
and  such  was  apparently  the  case  with  the  young
Domitius  also.

Tiberius  had  betrayed  a  base  jealousy  of  his  grand-
child Caius ;  but  Claudius,  still  following

Principles  of ,  ,' „ , . .,, . ' .

education the example of  his  illustrious ancestor,

adopted  by -i-ii  T  ...  .  i-i_j_i

seneca  for  his had  shown  no  disposition  to  restrict  the

pupil  Nero.  A

education  of  the  son  ot  Agrippina.  It  was
the  complaint  of  the  day,  that  at  a  more  advanced
stage,  everything  was  sacrificed  to  the  study  of  rhe-
toric; and  that  the  science  of  moral  philosophy,
which,  in  better  times,  had  been  conjoined  with  more
practical  training,  was  now  entirely  abandoned,  as
producing  no  immediate  and  tangible  results.  The
most  eloquent  teachers  deserted  the  less  fashionable
branch  of  instruction,  and  the  care  of  morals  fell
into  the  hands  of  a  lower  class  of  teachers.2  Yet  it
may  be  doubted  whether  this  complaint  was  gene-
rally well  founded ;  it  is  allowed,  at  least,  that  a
reaction  speedily  followed,  and  professors  of  philoso-
phy were  soon  found  to  teach  the  old  course  of  ethical
speculation,  who  rejected  as  frivolous  the  charms  of
oratory  formerly  used  to  embellish  it.3  But  neither

1  Suet,  de  Illustr.  Gramm.  17.

*  See  Quintil.  /.  c.:  "  Nam  ut  lingua  primura  coepit  esse  in  qusestu,
institutumque  eloquentise  donis  male  uti,  curam  morum  qui  diserti
habebantur  reliquerunt.  Ea  vero  destituta  infirmioribus  ingeniis
velut  prasdse  fuit."

8  Ibid.:  "  Contempto  dicendi  labore  partem  tamen  potiorem,  si
dividi  posset,  retinuerurit."

rn.  I,rr.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  269

the  one  fault  nor  the  other  could  be  imputed  to  the
master  who  was  chosen,  as  we  have  seen,  to  form  the
mind  and  unfold  the  abilities  of  the  young  Domitius.
L.  Annseus  Seneca,  the  son  of  the  rhetorician  Marcus,
presents  us  with  our  completest  specimen  of  the
professed  philosopher  of  antiquity.  He  was  neither
a  statesman  who  indulged  in  moral  speculation,  like
Cicero,  nor  a  private  citizen  who  detached  himself,
like  Epicurus  or  Zeno,  from  the  ordinary  duties  of
life,  to  devote  himself  to  the  pursuit  of  abstract
truth.  To  teach  and  preach  philosophy  in  writing,  in
talking,  in  his  daily  life  and  conversation,  was,  indeed,
the  main  object  he  professed;  but  he  regarded  all
public  careers  as  practical  developments  of  moral
science,  and  plumed  himself  on  showing  that  thought
may,  in  every  case,  be  combined  with  action.  His
father,  Marcus,  in  the  course  of  a  long  life  of  suc-
cessful teaching,  may  possibly  have  amassed  a  fortune;
and  his  brother  was  adopted  by  a  brilliant,  and
perhaps  a  wealthy  declaimer.  It  is  not  unlikely,
therefore,  that  Seneca  inherited  a  good  patrimony :
nevertheless  he  must  have  found  means  of  improv-
ing it  very  early,  if  the  story  be  true,  that  the  em-
peror Caius  had  marked  him  for  death  on  account
of  his  possessions.  He  continued,  no  doubt,  to  make
the  most  of  the  favour  of  the  great  and  powerful.  If,
in  his  precepts,  he  inculcates,  with  the  Stoics,  indif-
ference to  worldly  advantages,  the  spirit  he  illustrated
in  his  life  was  that  of  an  earnest  man  of  business.
If  he  shrank  from  the  profession  of  arms,  and  if  even
his  eloquence  was  confined  to  speculative  discussions,
he  played  the  true  Roman  in  the  art  of  making
money  beget  money.  At  a  time  when  the  philoso-
phers fell  too  generally  into  the  error  of  dissuading
men  from  the  toils  and  perils  of  a  public  career,  it
was  well  that  Seneca's  precepts  were  not  too  strictly
enforced  by  his  own  practice.  His  instructions  were,

270  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LIT.

on  the  whole,  the  best  perhaps  that  could  at  that
time  have  been  imparted  to  a  royal  pupil.  Both  in
sentiment  and  action,  Seneca,  with  all  his  faults,  rose
no  doubt  far  above  the  ordinary  pedagogues  of  the
day,  the  cringing  slave,  or  the  flattering  freedman,
to  whom  the  young  patricians  were,  for  the  most
part,  consigned.  Doubtless,  it  was  Seneca's  principle
of  education  to  allure,  possibly  to  coax,  rather  than
drive,  his  pupil  into  virtue.  He  yielded  on  many
points  in  order  to  borrow  influence  on  others.  He
deigned  to  purchase  the  youth's  attention  to  severer
studies,  by  indulging  his  inclination  to  some  less
worthy  amusements.  To  teach  Nero  eloquence  and
philosophy,  it  might  be  necessary  to  connive  at  his
relaxations  in  singing,  piping,  and  dancing.  These
were  the  recreations  to  which  he  most  earnestly  de-
voted himself,  in  which  he  believed  himself  to  excel,
and  in  which  he  acquired  a  tolerable  proficiency :  to
make  sonorous  verses  was  not  beyond  his  ability ;  but
when  he  harangued,  his  tutor,  we  have  seen,  was
obliged  to  compose  his  orations  for  him.  Yet  we
might  possibly  find,  were  the  truth  known,  that  his
able  predecessors  had  not  trusted,  in  their  first  ju-
venile efforts,  entirely  to  their  own  abilities.  The
attainments  just  mentioned  would,  no  doubt,  be  fri-
volous in  any  man  in  princely  station ;  and,  it  must  be
added,  that  in  a  Roman  noble  they  were  worse  than
frivolous,  branded  as  they  were  by  public  opinion,
the  opinion  at  least  of  the  best  men,  as  culpable.
Nevertheless,  it  was  something  to  occupy  the  mind
of  a  ruler  of  millions  with  any  taste  that  was  harmless
and  bloodless.  Even  the  morose  old  Eomans  did  not
deny  that  music  and  singing  were  humanizing  arts ;
they  rather  protested  against  humanity  being  made
an  object  of  instruction  at  all  to  the  lords  and  con-
querors of  mankind.

In  the  midst  however  of  creatures  and  sycophants,

CH.  Lir.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  271

and  the  vilest  instruments  of  his  elders'  pleasures,
the  young  noble  could  not  fail  to  be  affected  by  the
most  fatal  influences.  From  childhood  he  vicio™  moral
was  steeped  in  enervating  indulgences  :  the  Syolfng'
softness  with  which  he  was  habitually  nobles>
treated,  the  delicacies  with  which  he  was  pampered,
relaxed  the  nerves  both  of  his  mind  and  body.1
Clothed  in  purple  and  the  gaudiest  trappings,  he
was  imbued  with  the  vice  of  personal  ostentation,
and  led  step  by  step  to  the  most  inordinate  desires.
The  growing  youth  reclined  indolently  on  beds  of
down.  His  palate,  in  the  phrase  of  Quintilian,  was
educated  before  his  lips  and  tongue :  the  sensual
tastes  were  cultivated  before  the  moral.  The  kitchen
was  more  frequented  than  the  lecture  room.2  Im-
pertinence and  immodesty  were  encouraged,  the  one
by  applause,  the  other  by  example.3  The  child  soon
followed  his  father  to  the  theatres  and  the  circus,  the
schools  of  all  that  was  exciting  to  the  worst  passions ;
and,  under  the  stimulus  thus  prematurely  given,
learnt  to  be  a  man  before  he  had  experienced  the
preparatory  training  of  boyhood.4

The  feelings  with  which  the  youthful  heir  to  the
purple  may  generally  be  supposed  to  have  entered  on
his  succession,  are  picturesquely  described  by  the  poet

1  Quintil.  i.  2.:  "Nostros  amicos,  nostros  concubines  violent;  omne
convivium  obscoenis  cantilenis strepit ; pudenda  dictu  spectantur.

Fit  ex  his  consuetude,  deinde  natura." "  Infantiam  statim

deliciis  solvimus. Mollis  ilia  educatio,  quam  indulgentiam  vocamns,

nervos  omnes  et  mentis  et  corporis  frangit." "  Quid  non

adultus  concupiscet  qui in  purpuris  repit?" "In  lecticis

crescunt." "  Ante  palatum  eorum  quam  os  instituimus."

2  Senec.  Ep.  95.:  "In  rhetorum  et  philosophorum  scholis  solitudo
est ; et  quam  celebres  culinse  sunt ; quanta circa  nepotum  focos
juventus  strepit !"

*  Senec.  Const.  Sap.  41.12.;  Tac.  de  Oral.  29. :  "Per  quae  paulatim
impudentia  irrepsit  et  sui  alienique  contemptus."

4  Tac.  I.e.. :  "Histrionalis  furor  et  gladiatorum  eqnorumque  studia,
quibus  occupatus  et  obsessus  animus  quantulum  loci  bonis  artibus
relinquit?  "

272  HISTORY OF THB ROMANS  CH.  LI1.

Statius.  The  child  of  the  Persian  Achcemenes  bal-
perib  which  ance89  in  joy  and  fear,  the  pleasures  and  the
'heryoungeem-  risks  of  sovereignty :  Will  his  nobles  continue
A?D°.rk  faithful  ?  will  his  people  obey  the  rein  ?  to
A.  c.  807.  whom  shall  he  entrust  the  marches  of  the
Euphrates?  who  shall  keep  for  him  the  Caspian
gates?  He  shrinks  from  the  mighty  bow  of  his
father,  and  scarce  dares  to  press  his  charger :  the
sceptre  seems  too  heavy  for  his  grasp ;  his  brows  have
not  yet  grown  to  the  compass  of  the  tiara.1  Such
was  the  constant  condition  of  Oriental  sovereignty ;
nor  need  the  description  be  materially  modified  to
suit  the  inheritance  of  the  Caesars.  While  con-
spiracies were  rife  against  the  reigning  emperor,  the
presumptive  heir  was  generally  regarded  with  hope
and  affection.  But  his  accession  might  at  once  di-
rect every  evil  passion  against  himself;  the  senators
might  forget  their  oaths,  the  commons  murmur  at
authority;  and  the  chiefs  of  the  legions  on  every
frontier  might  corrupt  the  temper  of  the  soldiers.  If
the  genius  of  Nero's  next  predecessor  was  not  fitted
to  dismay  him  by  the  grandeur  of  its  proportions,  he
would  still  remember  that  he  was  the  heir  of  Augus-
tus and  Julius,  that  he  had  succeeded  to  all  their
power,  with  none  of  their  experience,  and  but  little
of  their  abilities.  But  it  was  within  the  palace,  and
amongst  the  members  of  his  own  family,  that  his
perils  chiefly  lay.  Those  who  were  nearest  to  him
might  be  the  nearest  objects  of  bis  distrust  and
apprehension.  Agrippina  and  Britannicus  were  more

'  Stat,  Theb.  viii.  286.:

"  Sicut  Aclucmenius  solinm  gentesque  paternas
Excepit  si  forte  puer,  cui  vivere  patrem
Tatins,  incerta  formidine  gaudia  librat,
An  fidi  procures,  ne  pugnet  vulgus  habenis;
Cui  latus  Euphrates,  cui  Caspia  limina  mantlet:
Sumere  tune  arcus  ipsumque  onerare  veretur
Patrio  cquum  ;  visusque  sibi  nee  sceptra  capaci
Bustentare  manu,  nee  adhuc  implere  tiaram."

>  p.54-A.T'.S07.  UNDER THE EJiPIUK.  273

formidable  to  him  than  Suetonius  or  Corbulo.  His
best  counsellors  early  warned  him  against  the  dan-
gerous encroachments  of  the  first  ;  of  the  second  he
learned  to  be  jealous  at  least  from  the  day  of  his
accession.  When  Nero  walked  across  the  court  of
the  palace  leaning  on  the  arm  of  Burrhus,  to  show
himself  to  the  praetorians,  and  solicit  their  support,
his  chief  anxiety  was  to  anticipate  the  claims  of  his
half-brother.  Though  admitted  himself  by  adoption
into  the  reigning  family,  the  sacred  stock  of  the
Claudii  and  the  Julii,  and  thus  become  in  a  legal
sense  the  eldest  scion  and  legitimate  heir  of  the
Csesarean  house,  he  felt  that  a  legal  fiction  could  not
extinguish  the  natural  sense  of  right,  and  that  still
to  the  mass  of  the  citizens  Britannicus  must  appear
the  true  representative  of  the  father  from  whose
loins  he  sprang.  The  stern  self-repression  of  the
Roman  character,  which  had  schooled  itself  to  accept
mere  legal  adoption  as  equivalent  to  blood-descent,
had  at  length  given  way.  Nature  had  reasserted  her
sway,  and  resented  in  thousands  of  bosoms  the  recog-
nition of  the  child  of  Domitius  as  the  eldest  born  of
Claudius.1

Now  however,  more  than  ever,  would  the  ribald
stories  against  the  wretched  Messalina  come  struggle  for
into  play. This  was  the  moment  when  the  N1££"S!BOT*r
sneers,  retailed  by  a  later  generation,  against  JXrfthe8
the  noble,  the  highborn  Britannicus,  would  mother>
have their deepest  significance.8 These  were  the
insinuations  which  now  supported  the  tottering  prin-
ciple of  the  law,  and  seemed  to  justify  the  resolve  of

1  In  the  time  of  Dion  the  superiority  of  natural  over  legal  descent
seems  to  have  been  generally  acknowledged.  That  writer  begins  his
account  of  Nero's  reign  by  declaring  that  Britannicus,  as  the  legi-
timate, ought  to  have  succeeded  in  place  of  Nero,  the  adopted  son
(Ixi.  1.):  ««  8e  8^  TOV  vbftov,  be  adds,  KO!  tif  Uepuvt  5<ek  r^v  Trolytriv

2  Juvenal,  vi. 124.  : "  Ostenditqne  mum, generose Britannice,
ventrem."

VOL.  TI.  T

274  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  til.

the  soldiers.  When  the  praetorians,  prepared  per-
haps by  Burrhus,  had  taken  the  part  of  the  pre-
tender, every  popular  scruple  was  speedily  repressed.
Law  and  the  sword  had  both  declared  on  his  side ;
natural  affection  or  respect,  alone  arrayed  against
them,  shrank  from  the  unequal  contest,  or  yielded
to  the  representations  speciously  palmed  upon  it.
It  was  not  worth  while  to  contend  for  the  heritage  of
a  youth  whose  real  parentage  was  obscured  by  such
suspicions.  To  the  ruling  class,  at  all  events,  the
dogmas  of  the  law  presented  a  sufficient  plea  for
acquiescence :  the  nobles  of  Eome  were  little  dis-
posed to  risk  their  heads  for  a  sentiment  of  justice
or  compassion.  As  long  as  he  governed  with  decent
respect  to  the  pretensions  of  his  nobility,  Nero  might
regard  himself  as  secure  against  the  open  rivalry  of
Britannicus :  should  he  ever  raise  the  alarm  of  the
senate,  then  indeed  the  scion  of  the^genuine  Claudian
stock  might  furnish  a  name  to  inscribe  on  the  banner
of  a  new  revolution.  The  senate,  with  the  instinct
of  selfish  cowardice,  fancied  itself  strong  in  the  weak-
ness of  its  ruler's  title.  The  prince's  advisers  anxious
for  their  charge,  anxious  for  themselves,  anxious  also,
we  may  believe,  for  the  good  of  the  commonwealth,
took  advantage  of  this  state  of  affairs  to  promote
good  government,  to  make  it  the  interest  of  all  classes
to  maintain  him.  But  it  was  easier  to  conciliate  the
senate  and  the  people  than  to  secure  the  confidence
of  the  prince  himself;  to  maintain  their  ascendancy
over  him  against  every  rival ;  to  guide  his  ardent  and
susceptible  feelings  into  safe  channels ;  above  all,  to
supplant  the  influence  of  his  mother,  and  prevent
her  from  extending  to  his  maturer  years  the  authority
she  had  exerted  over  his  infancy.  The  woman  who
had  subverted  Messalina,  who  had  murdered  Claudius,
\vho  had  removed  from  her  path  every  rival  without
compunction,  was  resolved  no  doubt  to  hold  fast  the
power  to  which  she  had  waded  through  so  much

».D.54-A.b.8U7. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  275

blood.  It  was  not  for  Nero  that  she  had  plunged
into  this  sea  of  crimes ;  however  she  might  disguise
it  to  her  own  conscience,  her  ambition  was  for  herself
more  than  for  her  son.  She  had  already  played  the
imperator  before  the  legions  in  the  camp  :  she  would
not  now  resign  the  part  to  the  stripling  who  occupied
the  palace.  With  this  view  Agrippina  now  leagued
herself  with  the  freedmen  of  the  court,  especially
with  Pallas,  whose  immense  wealth,  whose  craft  and
long  acquaintance  with  the  springs  of  government,
seemed  to  make  him  a  more  useful  ally  than  the
pedantic  philosopher,  or  the  rude  captain.  Though
all-powerful  with  Claudius,  Pallas  seems  from  an  early
period  to  have  become  distasteful  to  Nero,  who  had
at  least  the  merit  of  rising  above  the  flatteries  of
slaves  and  freedmen.  Docile  as  he  was  to  JBurrhus
and  Seneca,  and  easily  cowed  by  the  arrogance  of
his  mother,  against  Pallas  alone  he  evinced  spirit  and
independence.  To  Agrippina,  indeed,  he  was  still
fondly  devoted.  The  first  act  of  his  reign  was  to
demand  fresh  honours  and  compliments  for  her,  and
his  first  watchword,  The  best  of  mothers,  was  inspired
probably  by  genuine  affection.1  From  the  camp  the
prastorians  bore  him  into  the  senate  house,  demand-
ing by  signs  if  not  by  words  that  he  should  be  ac-
cepted as  chief  of  the  state ;  and  before  evening  all
the  honours  of  empire  were  heaped  upon  him,  of
which  he  declined  alone  the  title  of  Father  of  his
Country.  Of  the  testament  of  Claudius  no  notice
was  taken;  nor  are  we  informed  what  its  provisions
really  were.  Had  it  declared  Nero  the  heir,  it  would
of  course  have  been  duly  recited.  The  Neropro.
funeral  oration  of  the  deceased  was  spoken,  (taSSfoStum
as  might  be  expected,  by  his  successor  in  over  Claudius-
person ;  an  oration  which  Seneca  was  believed  to  have
composed  for  him,  and  which  displayed  more  graces

1  Tac Ann.  xiii.  2. ;  Snet.  Ner.  9.

276  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  I.IT.

of  style  than  could  be  anticipated  from  the  stripling
himself.  The  mention  it  made  of  the  late  emperor's
birth,  and  the  triumphs  of  his  ancestors,  was  received
with  marked  attention ;  for  in  these  family  records
the  Komans  took  a  national  pride.  They  listened
with  respect  to  the  boast  of  his  learning,  and  to  the
assertion,  true  and  honourable  as  it  was,  that  his
reign  had  been  sullied  by  no  external  calamity.  But
when  the  speaker  passed,  by  a  natural  transition,  to
the  praise  of  his  wisdom  and  discretion,  the  multi-
tude burst  into  laughter.  They  had  been  wont,  in
the  exuberant  licence  of  the  forum,  to  make  Claudius
their  butt,  and  this  scornful  humour  they  had  so  long
been  permitted  to  indulge,  that  they  could  not  now
lay  it  aside  when  a  last  act  of  tardy  justice  was  de-
manded of  them.  At  the  same  time  more  thoughtful
men  remarked  that  Nero  was  the  first  of  their  princes
who  had  needed  help  in  making  a  speech.  It  was  a
painful  token  of  the  degradation  into  which  they  had
fallen.  If  Nero  was  but  seventeen  years  of  age,
Caesar  declaimed  in  the  forum  at  twelve,  Augustus  at
nineteen.  Tiberius  was  a  practised  orator.  Caius,
the  madman,  could  harangue  the  senate  with  grace
and  vigour ;  even  Claudius  could  speak  with  elegance
after  due  preparation.  But  Nero,  they  remarked,
with  a  sigh  or  a  sneer,  had  been  directed  to  other
studies.  Sculpture  and  painting,  singing  and  driving,
such  were  the  arts  on  which  his  sensibility  had  been
occupied ;  yet  in  the  occasional  composition  of  verses
it  was  allowed  that  he  had  shown  himself  not  deficient
in  the  elements  of  polite  learning.1

From  the  Campus  the  orator  returned  to  the  sen-
Favourabie  ate  house,  and  expounded  to  his  nobles

impression  . . ,  ,,  , , , , ,

made  by  hi, the  principles  of  government  he  had  been

first  «peech  to  •"•  °

the  .enate. taught  to  prescribe  to  himself. They  were
not  offended by  his  placing  the  authority  of  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  3. :  "  Caelare,  pingere,  catitus  aut  regimen  eqttorum
exercere;  et  aliquando,  carminibus  pangendis,  inesse  sibi  element*
doctrinse  ostendebat."

A.D.54-A.U.807. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  277

senate  on  the  same  footing  with  the  consent  of  the
soldiers ;  and  he  made  a  favourable  impression  by
reminding  them  that  his  youth  had  been  impli-
cated in  no  civil  or  domestic  discords ;  he  had  no
injuries  to  avenge,  no  enmities  to  prosecute.  He
promised  to  reject  the  most  odious  instruments  of
preceding  administrations ;  he  would  not  affect,  like
Claudius,  to  be  the  judge  of  all  affairs  in  person,  a
pretence  which  could  only  result  in  throwing  power
into  the  hands  of  irresponsible  assessors.  In  his
household  no  office  should  be  put  up  to  sale ;  between
his  family  and  his  people  he  would  always  scrupu-
lously distinguish.  The  senate  should  retain  all  its
prescriptive  functions.  Italy  and  the  domains  of  the
Roman  people  should  look  to  the  tribunals  for  justice.
For  himself  he  would  confine  his  care  to  the  provinces
over  which  he  was  set  to  wield  the  sword  of  military
command.  This  speech  filled  the  senators  with
hopes  of  a  mild  administration :  they  decreed,  in  their
joy,  that  the  harangue  should  be  engraved  on  silver,
and  recited  annually  on  the  accession  of  the  consuls.1
At  the  same  time  their  new  ruler  allowed  them  to
act  with  some  show  of  independence.  They  hastened
to  profit  by  this  brief  respite  to  flout  the  system  of
delation  from  which  they  had  so  much  suffered.
With  this  view,  apparently,  they  repealed  the  per-
mission Claudius  had  given  to  accept  fees  and  rewards
for  pleading  causes.2  And  further,  they  relieved
the  quaestors  designate  from  the  burden  of  exhibiting
gladiatorial  shows,  which  the  late  emperor,  in  his
zeal  for  the  diversions  of  the  populace,  had  laid  upon
them.  But  Agrippina  pretended  to  complain,  as
though  it  were  meant  to  abolish  the  acts  of  her  hus-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii,  4.;  Suet.  Ner.  10.;  Dion,  Ixi.  3.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  5.:  "Ne  quis  ad  causam  orandam  mercede  aut
donis  emeretur."  At  a  later  period  Nero  seems  to  have  restored  the
wiser  provisions  of  Claudius.  See  Suet.  Ner.  17.:  "Ut  litigatore?
pro  patrociniis  certam  justamque  mercedem  darent"

278  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lit.

band ;  and  she  had  influence  enough  with  her  son  to
make  him  convene  the  senators  within  the  walls  of
the  palace,  where,  though  unable  to  control  their
proceedings,  she  could  at  least  hear  their  deliberations
from  behind  a  curtain.  Nor  did  she  deign  always  to
practise  even  this  slight  reserve.  On  one  occasion,
when  an  embassy  from  Armenia  was  awaiting  audience,
she  prepared  to  seat  herself  beside  the  emperor ;  nor,
dismayed  though  they  were  at  this  unprecedented
arrogance,  did  the  courtiers  venture  to  interfere  till
Seneca  whispered  to  the  prince  to  descend  himself
and,  under  pretence  of  filial  duty,  meet  her  at  the
foot  of  the  throne.

Not  the  demeanour  only,  but  the  acts  of  Agrippina,
might  now  iustly  cause  alarm. From  the

Arrogant  be- i  /• i  J , -,  ,-  -,

haviourof  day  ot  her  sons  elevation  she  seemed  re-
solved to  play  the  empress.  She  was  borue
in  the  same  litter  with  him,  or  he  walked  by  her  side
while  she  proudly  rode  aloft.1  To  mark  the  unity
of  place  and  purpose  between  herself  and  him,  she
caused  coins  to  be  stamped,  on  which  the  heads  of
both  were  conjoined.2  She  gave  answers  to  ambas-
sadors, and  sent  despatches  to  foreign  courts.3  She
directed,  without  the  emperor's  privity,  the  murder
of  M.  Silanus,  proconsul  of  Asia.  This  man  was
accounted  stupid  and  harmless;  he  had  caused  no
apprehension  to  the  most  jealous  rulers,  and  Caius
Caligula  had  been  used  to  call  him  in  contempt  the
golden  sheep.  But  Agrippina  feared  that  even  his
sluggish  temper  might  be  roused  to  avenge  the
murder  of  his  brother  Lucius,  whom  she  had  put
out  of  the  way  before,  as  a  possible  rival  to  her  son.
Marcus  Silanus  was  now  removed  by  poison,  admin-
istered by  her  agents,  with  hardly  an  attempt  at  dis-
guise.4 But  the  news  of  this  crime  could  not  reach

1  Dion,  Ixi.  3. ;  Suet.  Ner.  9.

2  See  Eckhel,  Doctr.  Numm.  vi.  257.  s  Dion,  /.  c.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  1. The  mother  of  the  two  Silani  was  a  daughter
of  Julia  and  Lucius  Paulus  (Suet.  Oct.  64.),  possibly  ^Emilia  Lepida

-A.u.M)7.  UiNuKK THE KMPIKK.  279

Rome  for  some  months,  and  the  destruction  of  Nar-
cissus, whom  meanwhile  she  drove  to  death  by  cruel
treatment  in  prison,  was  not  regarded  generally  with
disfavour.  The  senate  and  people  were  not  yet
alarmed.  Burrhus  alone  and  Seneca  were  startled  at
this  virtual  assumption  of  the  power  of  life  and  death,
conceded  only  to  the  emperors  as  a  state  necessity,
and  now,  it  was  hoped,  for  ever  abandoned  even  by
them.  They  opposed  themselves  to  her  Close  aliiance
plans  of  personal  cruelty  and  vengeance,  Bfulrh^aand
and  exerted  themselves  in  strict  alliance,  to  asainsther-
undermine,  the  influence  she  still  possessed  over  her
son.  There  was  little  indeed  in  common  in  the
character  of  the  two  associates.  Burrhus  was  noted
for  his  military  bluntness,  his  sense  of  discipline  and
decorum,  while  Seneca  was  a  courtier  in  manners,
and  affected  to  combine  the  man  of  the  world  with
the  philosopher.  But  the  necessities  of  their  position
bound  them  closely  together,  and  we  may  allow  that
both  were  equally  disposed  to  form  their  pupil's  mind,
as  far  as  possible,  to  virtue.  They  agreed,  however,
that  a  youth  of  his  temper  and  in  his  position  could
be  but  imperfectly  trained  ;  and  they  agreed  in  the
slippery  policy  of  winking  at  some  forms  of  vice,  or
even  enticing  him  to  them,  in  order  to  divert  him
from  more  pernicious  foibles,  or  crimes  of  deeper  dye.1
The  readiest  means  of  weaning  the  young  man  from
his  childish  dependence  on  his  mother  was
to  occupy  him  with  an  amorous  intrigue.  wUhthTfreld-

XT  1  i i i LI i j. i • t if • i  woman,  Acte.

JN  ero  was  already  betrothed  to  his  half-sister

Octavia  ;  but  this  victim  of  family  policy  was  unable

by  name  (Suet.  Claud.  26.);  their  father  was  App.  Junius  Silanus,
killed  by  Claudius  (Suet.  Claud.  29.);  and  L.  Silanus,  one  of  the
brothers,  had  been  betrothed  to  Octavia,  the  sister  of  Britannicus.
This  near  connexion  with  the  imperial  family,  and  the  popular
mutterings  that  he  would  make  a  better  successor  to  Claudius  than
the  stripling  Nero,  moved  the  jealousy  of  Agrippina  against  him.
See  Tac.  /.  c.  and  Kilter's  note.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  2.:  "Juvantes  invicein,  quo  facilius  lubricam
principis  ffitatem,  si  virtutem  aspernaretur,  voluptatibus  conccssis  re-
tinerent."

280  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  T.ll.

to  attract  his  affections,  which  were  still  free  for
another  engagement.  The  care  of  his  tutors  was
directed  only  to  guard  him  from  the  fascinations  of
noble  matrons,  and  avert  the  scandal  of  illegitimate
connexions;  and  apparently  without  attempting  to
recall  him  to  a  sense  of  duty  to  his  spouse,  they  were
well  pleased  to  see  him  devote  himself,  with  the
ardour  of  a  first  illusion,  to  the  charms  of  a  Greek
freedwoman  named  Acte.  The  confidants  of  this
amour  were  two  companions  a  little  above  his  own
age,  Salvius  Otho  and  Claudius  Senecio,  of  whom
the  first  was  of  distinguished  family,  the  second
the  son  of  a  freedman  of  the  court ;  but  both  were
notorious  profligates,  whose  influence  with  him  his
mother  had  already  noticed,  and  tried  in  vain  to
avert.  Their  power  seemed  confirmed  by  their  par-
ticipation in  this  secret  (for  the  bashful  youth  still
hoped  it  was  a  secret)  and  Agrippina  was  alarmed
Behaviour  of  and  incensed.  Instead  of  biding  the  effects
Agrippina.  o£  possession  on  a  first  childish  passion,  she
proclaimed  to  all  around  her  indignation  and  fear,
execrating  in  the  coarsest  terms  the  freedwoman  who
dared  to  be  her  rival,  the  handmaid  who  aspired  to
be  her  daughter-in-law.  This  violence  overshot  its
mark,  and  threw  the  frightened  and  irritated  youth
into  the  arms  of  Seneca,  who  contrived  to  cast  a  veil
over  the  intrigue,  by  finding  a  pretended  lover  for
the  object  of  his  devotion.  The  mother  now  saw
her  mistake.  Changing  her  tactics,  she  began  to
bid  against  the  tutor  by  still  greater  indulgences,
offering  her  own  bosom  for  the  secret  confidences  of
his  passion,  her  own  apartment  for  the  gratification
of  his  impatient,  but  still  timid,  desires.  She  deigned
to  apologize  for  her  undue  severity,  and  opened  freely
to  his  generous  profusion  the  stores  of  her  private
coffers,  which  were  hardly  inferior  to  his  own.  But
Nero  was  not  so  deceived :  his  advisers  would  not
suffer  him  to  be  deceived.  Indeed,  such  was  the
temper  of  Agrippina,  that  she  could  not  long  persist

A.D.54-A.U.807. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  281

in  the  pretence  of  submission  and  indulgence,  and
Nero  was  mortified  at  her  openly  spurning  the  pre-
sents he  made  her,  saying  that  he  had  nothing  to
give  which  she  had  not  herself  given  to  him.1

Accordingly  the  influence  of  Seneca  and  Burrhus
continued  to  rise.  The  confederates  were  Nero.s  gra(iutti
far  more  wary  in  their  proceedings.  Their  nfs^ledby
plan,  as  has  been  said,  was  to  govern  Nero  hi>m*nl8ter8-
by  yielding  to  him,  and  they  justified  to  themselves
their  tolerance  of  his  failings  by  the  assurance  that
they  should  thus  save  him  from  vices  more  odious
and  more  fatal.  The  errors  of  Nero  assumed  gradu-
ally a  deeper  dye ;  his  passions  blossomed  in  vice,  and
bore  fruit  in  crime ;  yet  the  downward  progress  was
not  precipitate ;  it  was  susceptible  of  palliation  and
disguise;  it  lurked  long  among  the  secrets  of  the
palace,  or  was  whispered  only  within  the  precincts
of  the  court.  High  as  the  great  Stoic  philosopher
strained  the  principles  of  virtue  in  his  sublimest
exhortations,  he  often  acknowledged,  in  descending
to  a  lower  level,  that  for  his  own  part  he  aspired
only  to  be  not  the  worst  among  bad  men.  To
the  student,  he  says,  who  professes  his  wish  and
hope  to  rise  to  a  loftier  grade  of  virtue,  I  would
answer  that  this  is  my  wish  also,  but  I  dare  not
hope  it.  I  am  pre-occupied  with  vices.  All  I
require  of  myself  is,  not  to  be  equal  to  the  best,  but
only  to  be  better  than  the  bad.2  He  preached,  he
owns,  more  rigidly  than  he  practised.  But  such
confessions  must  not  be  regarded  as  the  simple  out-
pouring of  conscious  infirmity.  We  cannot  doubt,
from  the  general  context  of  the  speaker's  declama-
tions, that  they  are  meant  to  disguise  a  considerable
amount  of  self-satisfaction  ;  that  Seneca,  like  many
preachers  of  virtue  and  holiness,  while  he  professed
to  sigh  over  his  own  weakness  on  some  points,  was

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  13.:  "  Dividere  filium  qute  cunctaex  ipsahaberet.
*  Senec.  Epist.  75.;de  Vit.  Beat.  17.

282  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS '  CH.  LII.

convinced  that  in  repudiating  vices  which  -were  in
truth  less  congenial  to  him,  he  was  soaring  far  above
the  level  of  ordinary  humanity.  The  morality  he  im-
pressed upon  Nero  was  such  as  this :  Be  courteous
and  moderate;  shun  cruelty  and  rapine;  abstain
from,  blood : — there  was  no  difficulty  in  this  to  a
young  and  popular  prince,  nattered  on  all  sides,  and
abounding  in  every  means  of  enjoyment: — Compen-
sate yourself  with  the  pleasures  of  youth  without
compunction;  amuse  yourself,  but  hurt  no  man.
It  required  no  philosopher  to  give  these  lessons ;  and
it  may  be  questioned  whether  the  comparative  in-
nocence of  the  young  man's  early  indulgences  would
have  been  exchanged  for  grosser  enormities  under
more  vulgar  tuition.

So,  too,  the  praise  of  clemency  which  Seneca  re-
sounds in  Nero's  ears  in  the  first  year  of  his

Seneca's  praise  . , ,  -,  . -, ... -i.,,?  ,.

of  Nero's  power,  might  be  received  with  little  emotion
by  one  who  had  not  yet  felt  the  tyrant's  in-
ducements to  cruelty.  He  regarded  himself  with
complacency  in  the  glass  which,  as  Seneca  expresses
it,  was  there  set  up  to  reflect  him.  Let  him  turn
his  eyes,  says  the  philosopher,  on  the  great  mass  of
mankind,  wicked,  turbulent,  ready  at  any  moment  to
reduce  the  world  to  anarchy,  could  it  only  succeed  in
breaking  the  imperial  yoke  imposed  on  its  evil  pas-
sions. Let  him  reflect  that  he  has  been  chosen  from
the  whole  race  of  man  to  enact  the  part  of  Grod  upon
earth ;  he  is  the  arbiter  of  life  and  death,  of  every
fortune  and  position.  These  thousands  of  swords,
let  him  say,  which  my  Peace  retains  in  their  scab-
bards, are  ready  to  leap  forth  at  my  nod :  what
nations  shall  be  destroyed,  or  what  removed;  who
shall  be  freed  and  who  enslaved ;  what  Icings  shall
be  enthroned  or  dethroned;  what  cities  built  or
razed;  all  belongs  to  my  absolute  decision.  Pos-
sessed of  all  this  power,  no  anger  has  impelled  me
to  the  infliction  of  unjust  punishments ;  no  youthful

A.D.54-A.0.807. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  283

heat  of  mine,  no  rashness  or  contumacy  of  my  people,
no,  nor  yet  the  too  common  pride  of  proving  the
extent  of  my  power,  has  tempted  me  to  wanton
violence.  This  day,  if  the  gods  require  it,  I  am
prepared  to  read  before  them  the  roll  of  all  the  sub-
jects  they  have  given  me  charge  of.  .  .  .  This,  0
CcBsar,  he  continues,  you  may  boldly  affirm,  that
none  of  the  things  which  have  fallen  into  your
hands,  have  you  by  force  or  by  fraud  usurped.  In-
nocence, the  rarest  merit  of  princes,  innocence  is
yours.  You  have  your  reward.  No  man  was  ever
no  dear  to  his  friend,  as  you  are  to  the  Roman
people.  Henceforth  none  will  quote  the  conduct  of
the  divine  Augustus,  or  the  first  years  of  Tiberius :
none  will  look  beyond  yourself  for  an  example  of
virtue :  we  shall  gauge  the  remainder  of  your  prin-
cipate  by  the  flavour  of  your  first  twelvemonth.1
From  this  last  expression  it  appears  that  the  tract
was  composed  towards  the  end  of  Nero's  first  year  of
government,  and  up  to  that  period  at  least,  according
to  the  -writer's  testimony,  his  administration  had  been
unsullied  by  cruelty  or  any  glaring  crime.  Yet  the
evidence  of  history  cannot  be  set  aside  which  declares
that  it  had  already  been  disgraced  by  a  deed  of  the
most  heinous  dye ;  and  whatever  might  be  its  general
colour  thus  far,  this  deed  alone  was  enough  to  suffuse
it  with  an  indelible  stain.

It  would  seem  that  Agrippina's  intrigues  to  recover
her  influence  in  the  palace  had  met  with  Di3gra(.e  nf
little  success.  While  still  sparing  his  mother  f ""meiilSrt
from  the  feelings  of  fear  or  respect  which  f.s£pM.na'
had  not  yet  lost  all  their  force,  he  intima-  A-  "• 808-
ted  his  dissatisfaction  by  removing  the  favourites  on
whose  counsels  she  leaned,  or  by  whose  hands  she

1  Senec.  de  dementia,  i.  1.:  "  Principatus  tuus  ad  anni  gmtum
exigitur."  Such  is  the  admirable  reading  elicited  by  Lipsius  from
che  MS.  ad  augustum,  which,  though  coEJectural,  seems  sufficiently
certain.

284  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LII.

acted.  He  disgraced  Pallas,  who  had  acted  as  the
chief  minister  of  Claudius,  and  now  demanded  of  the
new  emperor  a  pledge  that  no  inquiry  should  be  made
in^o  his  transactions  in  that  capacity;  that  all  ac-
counts, as  he  phrased  it,  between  himself  and  the
state  should  be  considered  as  settled.  Deprived  of
his  offices,  and  dismissed  from  court,  he  was  exposed
shortly  afterwards  to  a  charge  of  conspiring  against
the  emperor,  from  which  Seneca  himself  defended
him.  But  meanwhile  his  disgrace  alone  sufficed  to
arouse  the  terrors  of  Agrippina.  Forgetting  her
recent  dissimulation,  she  gave  vent  to  furious  menaces
and  reproaches.  Mortified  at  the  growing  influence
of  her  son's  tutors,  she  had  intimated  to  him  that  it
was  to  her  he  owed  the  empire :  she  now  went  further,
and  let  him  understand  not  less  plainly  that  she  had
the  means  of  withdrawing  it  again.1  The  patroness
of  Pallas  declared  aloud  that  Britannicus,  now  ap-
proaching his  fourteenth  birthday,  was  arrived  at
manhood 2 :  she  proclaimed  him  the  genuine  offspring
and  natural  heir  of  Claudius,  and  threatened  to  divulge
openly  the  secret  horrors  of  the  palace,  to  avow  the
iniquity  of  her  marriage,  and  even  confess  the  mur-
der of  her  husband.  But  whatever,  she  said,  were
her  crimes,  one  thing  more  she  had  done :  she  had
preserved  the  life  of  her  stepson.  Now  she  would
rush  with  him  to  the  camp.  The  soldiers  should
decide  between  the  daughter  of  Grermanicus  and  the
wretched  Burrhus  and  Seneca,  who  presumed,  for-
sooth, to  sway  the  empire  of  the  world,  the  one  with
his  maimed  hand,  the  other  with  his  glib  professor's
tongue.  Thus  saying,  she  clenched  her  hand  in  an

1  Dion,  Ixi.  7.

*  I  suppose  him  to  have  been  born  in  the  first  year  of  Claudius,
the  twentieth  day  of  his  reign,  t.  e.  February  12.  794.  Suet.  Claud.
27.  But  this  writer  is  wrong  in  placing  this  date  in  the  second  con-
sulship of  Claudius.  Tacitus,  again,  is  in  error  in  saying  that  Nero
was  only  two  years  his  senior.  He  must  have  been  the  elder  by
more  than  three  venrs.  See  Ann,  xii.  25.

i.D.55-A.u.808. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  285

attitude  of  menace,  and  stormed  with  bitter  curses,
adjuring  the  spirit  of  the  deified  Claudius,  and  the
shades  of  the  murdered  Silani,  and  the  victims  of  al]
the  crimes  she  had  herself,  now  it  seemed  in  vain,
committed.1

That  Nero  should  be  alarmed  at  this  defiance  was
only  natural :  we  cannot  doubt  that  it  now

£• I •  J u-  -j.1.  r .LI Nero's  plea  for

first  impressed  mm  with  a  sense  ot  the  the  murder  of
danger  to  be  apprehended  from  his  mother's
temper,  and  made  him  feel  tha.t  while  Britannicus
lived  his  own  life  and  throne  were  in  her  power.2  He
had  assumed  the  purple,  as  we  have  seen,  in  October.
Already,  before  the  end  of  the  year,  in  the  third  month
of  his  reign,  whether  from  rising  jealousy  towards
him,  or  from  mere  capricious  ill-humour,  he  had  in-
sulted the  poor  child  in  the  presence  of  his  boon
companions.  At  a  supper  he  gave  during  the  Satur-
nalian  festival  in  December,  he  had  taken  occasion,
as  king  of  the  feast,  to  mortify  his  bashful  timidity
by  requiring  him  to  stand  up  and  sing  before  the
company.  Even  the  half-tipsy  revellers  had  been
shocked  at  this  indignity,  for  as  such  it  was  regarded,
and  expressed  still  more  pointedly  their  compassion
when  Britannicus  chanted  a  lyric  stave  on  the  sor-
rows of  the  discrowned  and  disinherited.3  The  em-
peror was  disconcerted ;  he  began  to  brood  from  this
time  over  the  specious  claims  of  the  pretender,  and
Agrippina's  threats  satisfied  him  that  they  were  really
formidable.  Yet  he  could  make  as  yet  no  public

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  14.:  "  Audiretur  hinc  Germanici  filia,  inde  vilis
rnrsus  Burrhus  et  exul  Seneca  trunca  scilicet  manu  et  professoria
lingua  generis  human!  regimen  expostulates."  We  do  not  know
whether  the  "  trunca  manus ''  refers  to  an  actual  mutilation,  or  is
merely  figurative.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  18.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  15.:  "Exorsus  est  carmen,  ^uo  evolutum  eum
sede  patria  rebnsque summis significabatur." Suetonius repeats
what  may  be  called  an  idle  insinuation,  that  Nero  put  Britannicua
to  death  from  jealousy  of  his  skill  in  singing. Ner.  33.

986  HISTORY  OF  THE EOMANS  CH.  ur.

charge  against  him,  and  he  did  not  venture  to  com-
mand his  execution,  unarraigned  and  unconvicted.
He  resolved,  we  are  assured,  to  take  him  off  privily ;
and  engaged  a  tribune  of  the  guards,  named  Pollio,
to  devise  safe  and  secret  means.  The  infamous  Lo-
custa,  who  was  at  the  moment  in  custody  on  a  charge
of  poisoning,  was  taken  into  counsel.  All  the  at-
tendants who  loved  the  poor  youth  had  long  since
been  removed  from  about  him.  There  was  no  hand
to  intercept  the  noxious  potions  which  were  admin-
istered to  him  by  his  own  tutors.  But  the  poison
seemed  to  fail  of  its  effect,  and  Nero  grew  impatient.1
He  stormed  at  the  tribune,  he  menaced  the  poisoner,
as  traitors  to  his  cause,  and  interested  only  in  averting
suspicion  from  themselves.  They  promised  to  serve
him  faithfully  the  next  time ;  the  poison  was  now
prepared  in  the  palace  itself  under  the  emperor's  own
eyes,  and  he  was  assured  that  it  would  cause  death  as
swiftly  as  steel  itself.2  Confident  of  the  result,  he
contrived  his  crime  with  an  audacity  perhaps  un-
Brjtannicusis  paralleled.  Britannicus  was  seated,  as  still
poisoned.  a  minor?  at  tne  table  where  the  younger
scions  of  the  imperial  family  partook  of  their  simpler
meal  together,  while  their  elders  banqueted  in  full
state  beside  them.  There  the  warm  wine-cup  was

1  Sir  G.  Cornewall  Lewis  remarks  on  the  failure  of  the  first  at-
tempt to  poison  Claudius,  as  a  proof  that  the  art  was  not  so  well  un-
derstood at  this  time  at  Rome  as  in  certain  periods  of  modern  history.
Early  Roman  History,  ii.  485.  note. Here  is  a  second  instance  of
such  inexperience.  Wamust  be  the  more  cautious,  therefore,  how  we
trust  to  the  many  rumours  of  poisoning  accredited  by  the  Roman
writers.

2  Suetonius  adds  various  particulars  to  the  account  of  Tacitus.
Nero,  he  says,  called  Locusta  to  him,  abused  and  struck  her,  de-
claring that  she  had  given  an  antidote  instead  of  poison. When  she
excused  herself,  affirming  that  she  had  made the  dose  weak  the
better  to  disguise the  crime: As  if,  he exclaimed,  /  feared  the
Julian  law  (against  murderers  and  poisoners)! He  then  caused  her
to  prepare  the  potion  in  his  own  apartments,  and  tried  it  on  various
animals,  till  he  found  it  strong  enough  to  kill  a  young  pig  instan-
taneously.

A.D.55-A.U.808.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  287

tasted  in  due  course,  and  presented  to  him.  He
found  it  too  hot,  and  in  the  drop  of  cold  water  which
was  infused  into  it  so  deadly  a  poison  was  conveyed,
that  the  child,  on  swallowing  it,  fell  back  lifeless
without  a  word  or  a  groan.  All  the  guests  beheld  it.
Some  rushed  in  terror  from  the  apartment ;  others,
warier  and  more  collected,  still  kept  their  seats,  and
bent  their  eyes  on  Nero.  He,  without  rising  from
his  couch,  assured  them  placidly  that  such  were  the
fits  to  which  his  brother  was  subject,  and  that  his
senses  would  soon  reburn.  The  body  was  removed :
the  guests  addressed  themselves,  as  they  were  bidden,
again  to  the  banquet ;  but  the  alarm  and  horror  of
Agrippina,  remembering  perhaps  the  scene  which  had
occurred  four  months  earlier  in  that  festive  hall,  were
so  marked,  that  it  was  clear  to  all  that  she  at  least
was  guiltless  of  this  crime;  while  the  wretched
Octavia,  with  the  self-control  which  long  necessity
had  taught  her,  suppressed  all  signs  of  emotion,  and
betrayed  neither  grief  nor  affection  nor  fear.  That
same  night  the  corpse  of  Britannicus  was  consumed ;
his  simple  pyre  had  been  prepared,  it  seems,  before-
hand. The  obsequies  took  place  in  the  Campus
Martius,  in  the  midst  of  a  sudden  tempest,  betoken-
ing to  the  citizens  the  divine  indignation  at  a  deed
of  blood  which  men  had  generally  agreed  to  excuse
as  a  state  necessity.1  The  accounts  which  Dion  fol-
lowed added  a  further  horror  to  the  scene,  declaring
that  the  rain  washed  off  the  paint  with  which  the
body  had  been  coloured,  and  disclosed  the  livid  stains
of  poison.  In  a  winter's  night,  amidst  the  smoke  of
half-extinguished  torches,  such  an  incident  could
hardly  have  been  observable.2

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  18.;  Suet.  Ner.  33.  Suetonius,  however,  says
that  the  funeral  followed  the  next  day.

*  Dion,  Ixi.  7.  This  assassination  probably  took  place  immediately
after  the  birthday  of  Britannicus,  the  12th,  as  before  observed,  of
February.

288  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  Ca.  ui.

From  first  to  last  every  circumstance  connected
with  this  hideous  fratricide  was  carried  out  with  the
same  coolness  and  calculating  prevision.  No  long-
experienced  adept  in  crimes  of  state  could  have  acted
with  more  consummate  art  than  the  timid  stripling
before  us,  who  blushed  at  being  discovered  in  the
embrace  of  a  freedwoman.  No  sooner  were  the  hasty
obsequies  completed,  than  an  edict  followed  in  which
their  haste  was  excused  and  defended  by  argument
and  example.  Nero  adroitly  seized  this  occasion  to
recommend  himself  to  the  citizens  whose  sensibility
he  had  outraged.  Having  lost,  he  said,  the  support
of  a  dear  brother,  he  must  now  look  for  aid  and
sympathy  to  the  republic  itself.  He  claimed  a  deeper
interest  in  the  affections  of  his  people,  since  he  had
become  the  last  of  the  imperial  stock,  the  sole  re-
maining hope  of  a  nation  to  whom  the  blood  of  Caesar
was  dear.  The  emperor  completed  his  crime  by
showering  presents,  houses,  and  estates  on  the  favour-
ites of  the  palace  :  among  them  were  some,  at  least,
whose  professions  of  superior  gravity  made  their
participation  in  these  spoils,  for  as  such  they  were
regarded,  peculiarly  invidious.1  The  hand

Grounds  for  _°  7 r  • VT.  r,  i 11 i

imputing  this of  a  master  of  state-craft  can  hardly  be

crime  to  the  . ,  , .  ,  .  .  r

advice  of mistaken  throughout these  proceedings;

Seneca.  .  *

and  there  is  one  only,  as  far  as  we  can
judge,  to  whom  it  can  be  reasonably  ascribed.  Pos-
terity, while  it  shrinks  from  condemning,  must  not
venture  to  acquit  him.2  At  all  events,  we  have  seen
that,  much  later  than  this,  the  clemency  of  Nero's

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  18.  In  this  remark  the  interpreters  have  gene-
rally supposed  that  he  points  at  Seneca.  Suetonius  (/.  c.)  says  that
Locusta  was  rewarded  with  large  estates,  and  it  has  been  supposed,
but  his  expression  has  perhaps  been  misinterpreted,  that  she  was
provided  with  pupils  to  be  instructed  in  the  state  mystery  of  poison-
ing. "  Locustaspro  navata  opera  impunitatem  prsediaque  ampla  sed
et  discipulos  dedit."

*  We  need  pay  no  attention,  I  think,  to  the  charges  of  Dion
against  Seneca  (Ixi.  10.),  which  seem  animated  with  more  than  his
usual  malignity  against  men  of  reputation  for  virtue,  and  miss,  be-
sides, the  peculiar  weaknesses  which  are  justly  imputable  to  him.

a.».55-A. n.808.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  289

first  year  was  celebrated  by  Seneca  as  the  special
glory  of  his  own  instructions.  It  is  clear  that,  at
least,  after  the  deed  was  done,  he  consented  to  absolve
the  perpetrator,  and  to  persuade  the  world,  as  far  as
his  silence  could  avail  to  persuade  it,  either  that  no
murder  had  been  committed,  or  that  no  defence  was
required  for  it.

The  temptations  under  which  the  philosopher  lay
to  this  duplicity  are  sufficiently  obvious.
His  influence  could  only  be  maintained  by  m»kLgK&r£i

power  secure

parrying  the  counter  projects  of  Asrrippina,  senecaaimsdt

J i • • H  1.LJ.T-  i  j -L. making  him

and  his  influence  once  lost,  there  could  be  popular  with
no  more  hope  for  Nero  or  for  Rome,  for
himself  no  retreat  but  in  absolute  insignificance,
could  even  that  avail  to  save  him.  Undoubtedly  his
position  was  a  trying  one.  He  believed  that  his
power  at  court  enabled  him  to  direct  the  empire  for
the  general  welfare.  The  common  weal  was,  after
all,  the  grand  object  of  the  heroes  of  Roman  story.
Few  of  the  renowned  of  old  had  attained  their  emi-
nence as  public  benefactors,  without  steeling  their
hearts  against  the  purest  instincts  of  nature.  The
deeds  of  a  Brutus  or  a  Manlius,  of  a  Sulla  or  a  Caesar,
would  have  been  branded  as  crimes  in  private  citi-
zens ;  it  was  the  public  character  of  the  actors  that
stamped  them  with  immortal  glory  in  the  eyes  of
their  countrymen.  Even  Seneca,  sage  as  he  was,  was
not  superior  to  the  sophistry  which  might  have  justi-
fied the  murder  of  Britannicus  by  the  precedent  of
Romulus  and  Remus.  Meanwhile  he  was  studious
in  directing  the  public  administration  of  his  pupil  to
the  general  advantage  of  the  empire,  to  the  credit
and  advantage  more  particularly  of  the  senatorial
order,  which  was  perhaps  the  best  direction  the
government  could  at  that  moment  take.1  While  it

1  We  may  ascribe,  perhaps,  to  the  liberal  views  of  the  minister  the
geographical  inquiries  instituted  by  Nero  in  the  direction  of  the
Caspian  Sea  and  the  country  of  the  Ethiopians  (Plin.  H.  N.  vi,

TOL.  VI.  U

290  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  UI

was  the  best  for  the  people,  it  was,  at  the  same  time,
the  most  prudent  for  the  prince.  A  contented  senate
made  a  secure  emperor.  Claudius  well  understood
this,  and  the  favour  he  showed  to  this  proud  and
privileged  body  was  the  secret  of  his  immunity  from
senatorial  conspiracies,  and  enabled  him  to  quit  the
city  for  the  provinces  without  apprehension,  which
Tiberius  had  never  ventured  to  do.  This  policy  was
the  most  conducive  also  to  the  prince's  reputation.
The  fame  of  Nero's  five  years  rests  mainly  on  the
favour  it  obtained  from  a  courted  and  therefore  an
indulgent  senate.  The  fathers  balanced  against  the
crime  of  fratricide  the  fact  that  their  chief  had  re-
jected statues  of  gold  and  silver ;  that  he  had  refused
to  allow  the  year  to  commence  with  his  own  natal
month  of  December,  and  retained  the  ancient  solem-
nity of  the  Kalends  of  January ;  that  he  had  checked
with  a  gentle  remonstrance  the  impetuous  zeal  which
offered  to  swear  to  all  his  acts  beforehand ;  that  he
had  dismissed  with  contempt  the  charges  of  a  delator
against  a  knight  and  a  senator.1

The  schism  between  the  mother  and  the  son  seemed
now  complete.  Agrippina  embraced  the
wretched  orphan  Octavia,  and  declared  her-
geif  the  protectress  of  her  inj  ured  innocence.
She  called  her  friends  into  consultation  in  private :
she  collected  money  from  all  quarters  with  an  avidity
which  indicated  some  political  project.  She  culti-
vated the  regard  of  military  officers,  and  caressed  the
remnant  of  the  ancient  nobility,  as  if  seeking  to  make

15.  35.),  which  were  vulgarly  supposed  to  be  preparatory  to  some
military  enterprises.  Comp.  Senec.  Nat.  Quasi,  vi.  8.  The  long
digression  of  Lncan  (Phars.  x.)  on  the  subject  of  the  river  Nile
seems  to  indicate  the  interest  of  the  best  informed  men  of  the  empire,
and  particularly,  perhaps,  of  his  uncle  Seneca,  in  these  expeditions
of  discovery.  The  yearning  for  extended  physical  knowledge  is
one  of  the  most  curious  features  of  Lucan's  poem.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  10. Comp.  Suet.  Ner.  10. "Agenti  Senatui
gratias  respondit:  quum  meruero."

A.D.55-A.IT.808. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  291

a  party  and  secure  a  chief  for  it. All  this  was  dis-
closed to  Nero,  who  retaliated  first  by  with-

,  .  ,  , ,  ,  . , ,,  Her  enemies

drawing  the  guard  by  which  the  empress  intrigue

J J  J  j.u  • i. 5  against  her.

was  attended,  and  then  removing  her  from
her  apartments  in  the  palace  to  the  mansion  formerly
inhabited  by  Antonia,  that  the  attendants  at  his  own
receptions  might  have  no  pretext  for  presenting
themselves  to  her  likewise.  When  he  paid  her  a
formal  visit  here,  he  was  always  escorted  by  a  mili-
tary guard,  and  restricted  the  interview  to  a  brief
salutation.  This  marked  disfavour  had  a  strong  effect
on  the  courtiers.  The  door  of  Agrippina  became
rapidly  deserted.  Of  her  ancient  friends  none  but
a  few  women  continued  to  visit  her.  Among  these
was  Junia  Silana,  the  spouse  of  C.  Silius,  whom
Messalina  had  required  him  to  divorce,  and  who
now,  in  constant  hatred  of  the  dead  empress,  still
clung  to  the  side  of  her  rival  and  successor.  Yet
she  had  a  feud  with  Agrippina  also ;  for  when  she
had  proposed  to  solace  herself  with  another  marriage,
it  was  Agrippina  who  had  set  the  object  of  her  choice
against  her ;  and  her  present  attachment  was  only
simulated  with  a  view  to  vengeance.  As  soon  as  she
was  assured  that  the  mother  had  lost  all  influence
with  her  son,  she  seized  the  moment  to  strike.  She
suborned  two  confederates  to  denounce  Agrippina
as  conspiring  against  the  throne,  and  averred  that  it
was  her  scheme  to  raise  Eubellius  Plautus,  the  son
of  Blandus,  who  stood  in  the  same  relationship  to
Augustus  as  Nero  himself,  first  to  empire  and  then
to  her  own  bed.1  There  was  another  woman  in  the
plot.  The  pretended  conspiracy  was  divulged  to  a
freedman  of  Domitia,  whose  hostility  to  Agrippina

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  19.  Rubellius  Plautus  was  son  of  Rnbellius
Blandns  (already  mentioned  in  chap,  xlvi.)  and  of  Julia,  daughter  of
Drusus,  granddaughter  of  Tiberius.  He  was,  therefore,  through  his
grandmother,  great-great-grandson  of  Augustus.  Nero  was  great-
great-grandson  of  Augustus  through  his  grandfather  Germanicus.
v  2

292  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  Ml.

was  well  known :  Domitia  passed  on  the  witnesses  to
Paris,  a  favourite  of  Nero ;  and  late  one  night,  in  the
sacred  privacy  of  his  carousal,  the  emperor  was
startled  by  the  appearance  of  this  confidential  ser-
vant, with  an  assumed  look  of  deep  anxiety,  and
received  intimation  of  the  unnatural  crime  which
was  said  to  be  meditated  against  him.  The  weak-
spirited  youth,  whose  nerves  were  already  shaken
with  premature  dissipation,  believed  without  further
inquiry,  and  would  have  yielded  at  once  to  the
suggestions  of  his  sudden  alarm.  He  would  have
commanded  not  only  the  immediate  execution  of
Plautus,  but  the  removal  of  Burrhus  from  his  mili-
tary post,  on  the  mere  suspicion  that,  having  been
originally  raised  by  Agrippina,  he  would  be  disposed
now  to  support  her.  But  these  intrigues  of  the
palace  were,  it  is  confessed,  obscure  even  to  the  citi-
zens at  the  time.  Some  writers  affirmed  that  Burrhus
was  only  kept  in  his  place  by  the  interposition  of
Seneca;  while  others,  less  notorious  for  their  par-
tiality to  that  statesman,  made  no  mention  of  any
doubt  on  Nero's  part  of  the  fidelity  of  Burrhus,1
Yet  all  combined/j  without  hesitation,  in  asserting
that  Nero  was  already  willing  and  even  anxious  to
rid  himself  of  his  mother,  and  was  only  deterred
from  at  once  commanding  her  death  by  the  assurance
of  Burrhus  that  she  should  be  sentenced  judicially  if
the  crime  were  proved  against  her.  Every  culprit,
it  was  honestly  insisted,  might  claim  a  hearing,  and
above  all  a  parent.  As  yet  there  were  no  accusers,
but  merely  a  single  informer  against  her ;  and  he
the  emissary  of  a  hostile  house.  Nero  acquiesced,
heavy  perhaps  with  wine,  and  unaccustomed  to  argu-
ment.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  20. :  "  Fabius  Rnsticns  auctor  est  .  .  .  .  ope
Seneca  dignationem  Burrho  retentam.  Plinius  et  Cluvius,  nihil
dubitatum  de  fide  prsefecti  referunt.  Sane  Fabius  inclinat  ad  lavdes
Seneca."  The  student  of  Tacitus  will  remark  the  numerous  in-

&.D.55-A.U.808. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  293

This  rapid  consultation  took  place  that  night :  the
next  morning  Agrippina  was  required  to
hear  the  charge  against  her  and  refute  it.  feSaTEerMi*
Burrhus  conducted  the  examination,  and
Seneca  attended.  Burrhus,  anxious  perhaps  foi
himself,  was  violent  and  overbearing.  All  the  spirit
of  the  virago  flashed  out  at  once.  She,  too,  spared
neither  sarcasms  nor  nu-uaces.  It  was  well,  she  said,
for  Silana,  the  childless,  to  suggest  that  she,  a  mother,
had  designs  against  the  life  of  a  son ;  as  if  mothers
could  put  away  their  children  as  easily  as  strumpets
their  gallants.  It  was  well  for  Domitia  to  vaunt  her
interest  in  Nero ;  she  who  was  adorning  her  fishponds
at  Baias,  while  Agrippina  was  raising  him  to  the
family  of  the  Caesars,  to  the  proconsular  Potestas,  to
the  hope  and  promise  of  the  Consulship.  And  then
she  demanded  an  interview  with  the  emperor  in
person,  relying  on  the  power  of  a  mother's  indignation
or  despair;  and  without  deigning  to  assert  her  in-
nocence, as  if  distrusting,  nor  to  urge  her  claims,  as
if  reproaching  him,  she  bluntly  required  the  punish-
ment of  her  accusers,  and  the  reward  of  her  faithful
adherents.

The  hardihood  of  Agrippina  was  crowned  with
more  success  than  it  merited.  The  charges  The  Charge9
against  her  were  declared  to  be  unfounded,  Sfcure'd^?1"
and  of  those  whom  she  denounced  as  the  founded'
inventors  of  the  calumny,  Calvisius  and  Iturius  were
placed  in  distant  confinement,  the  freedman  Atimetus
was  put  to  death,  while  Silana  herself  was  banished.
Paris  alone  escaped  free,  by  the  special  grace  of  the
emperor,  who  admired  his  talents  as  an  actor,  and
had  received  him  into  private  intimacy.  Eubellius
himself,  it  seems,  was  not  noticed  at  all.  The  favour

trances  in  which  that  author  intimates  his  dislike  to  Seneca.  He
could  not  forgive  him  for  his  connexion  with  the  monster  Nero,  who
lived  to  be  detested  more  than  all  their  tyrants  by  the  senate  and
aristocracy.

294  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  m.

which  Burrhus,  the  blunt  uncourtly  soldier,  still  re-
tained, is  even  more  remarkable.  Not  only  were
the  insinuations  levelled  on  this  occasion  against  him
disregarded,  but  when  soon  afterwards  he  was  ac-
cused, together  with  Pallas,  of  intriguing  for  a
Cornelius  Sulla,  he  was  allowed  to  take  his  place
among  the  judges,  and  turn  the  charge  against  him-
self into  a  process  against  his  accuser.  Burrhus  again,
and  Pallas  under  his  wing,  were  triumphantly  ac-
quitted, while  their  assailant  Paetus  was  himself  con-
demned to  banishment.1

Such  were  the  firmness  and  moderation  of  Nero's
administration  throughout  the  first  model

Nero's  disso-  .,  - .  . .  °  , „

lute  amuse-  year  oi  his  prmcipate ;  and  tor  some  years
afterwards  it  continued  to  be  conducted,
for  the  most  part,  on  similar  principles.  It  was  un-
doubtedly the  administration,  not  of  the  young  prince
himself,  but  of  the  shrewd  and  thoughtful  men  to
whom  he  had  given  his  confidence ;  and  Seneca  de-
serves the  praise  of  abstinence  from  bloodshed  and
violence,  and  a  laudable  care  to  retain  his  patron  in
the  paths  .of  ancient  usage.  The  licence  he  mean-
while extended  to  his  private  amusements  may
readily  be  pardoned.  If  it  was  impossible  to  engage
the  light-minded  youth  in  the  details  of  business,
there  may  have  been  no  better  course  than  to  absorb
him  in  frivolous  pleasures,  which  should  leave  him
neither  leisure  nor  inclination  to  interfere  with  the
government  at  all.  Such  seems  to  have  been  the
view  Seneca  took  of  the  alternative  before  him.  But
in  after  years  the  frivolity  of  Nero,  and  the  vile
character  of  his  pastimes,  seemed  to  have  incensed
the  Romans  against  him  no  less  than  the  tyranny
which  accompanied  them :  the  dislike  with  which
Seneca  is  regarded  by  Tacitus  was  caused  perhaps

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  23.  Faustus  Cornelius  Sulla  was  husband  of
Antonia,  and  son-in-law  of  Claudius  cons  A.U.  805  A.TI.  52  Ann,
*ii  *<»

A.D.56-A.U.809. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  295

mainly  by  the  belief  that  it  was  he  who  corrupted
the  principles  of  his  tender  charge,  and  undermined
in  him  the  stern  simplicity  of  the  Koman  character.
The  carelessness  with  which  Nero  began  soon  to  ex-
hibit himself  in  the  circus  and  the  theatre  will  appear
hereafter ;  but  already  in  the  second  year  of  his  reign
he  condescended  to  roam  the  streets  disguised  as  a
a  slave,  accompanied  by  his  boon  companions,  snatch-
ing the  wares  exposed  for  sale,  cuffing  the  angry
owners  and  sometimes  receiving  blows  in  return.1
These  freaks  soon  became  notorious,  and  many  dis-
solute youths  were  encouraged  by  the  example  to
perpetrate  like  excesses.  But  when  Montanus,  a
senator,  struck  the  emperor  unawares  in  one  A.  „.  ^
of  these  nocturnal  encounters,  and,  on  dis-  A-u-809-
covering  him,  too  openly  begged  his  pardon,  he  re-
ceived an  order  to  kill  himself.  Thenceforth  Nero  took
care  to  have  soldiers  always  at  hand  to  protect  him.
This  taste  for  vulgar  brawls  induced  him  to  foster  the
passions  of  the  stage,  until  the  licentiousness  of  the
spectators  became  intolerable ;  and  it  was  found  ne-
cessary to  expel  the  histrions,  or  pantomimic  dancers,
and  to  restore  the  guard,  which,  from  the  time  of
Augustus  till  recently,  had  kept  the  police  of  the
theatres.2

While  such,  however,  were  the  early  indications  of
a  corrupt  and  feeble  character  which  the  „

r .  , ., .. n  r- Consecration

younff  prince  exhibited,  to  the  sorrow  01  ofatempieto

J  j. •*.-  J 1  £ J.U  •  Claudius.

decent citizens,  and alarm  01 the  wiser

and  more  thoughtful,  various  incidents  in  his  ad-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  25. We  know  not  what  exaggeration  there  may
be  in  these  stories. When  after  an  evening's  debauch  Nero  appeared
next  morning  without  any  marks  of  injury  on  his  visage,  it  was
whispered  that  lie  had  applied  a  lotion  of  sovereign  efficacy  to  his
skin,  the  ingredients  of  which  were  indicated  with  precision. Plin.
H.  N.  xiii.  43.

2  Tacitus  says :  "  Non  aliud  remedium  repertum  est  quam  ut  his-
triones  Italia  pellerentur,  milesque  theatre  rursum  insideret." The
soldiers  had  been  just  before  withdrawn. The  histrions  or  mimes  are
to  be  distinguished  from  other  performers. It  was  only  the  former

296  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lll.

ministration  recommended  it  strongly  to  different
classes  of  his  people.  The  populace,  ever  favourably
impressed  by  marks  of  family  affection,  were  pleased
at  the  respect  he  seemed  to  show  to  the  memory  of
his  predecessor.  Though  they  despised  Claudius
when  alive,  they  acquiesced  in  the  ascription  of
divine  honours  to  him  after  death,  and  thought  it
highly  becoming  in  his  successor  to  build  him  a
temple  after  the  manner  of  his  ancestors,  and  appoint
a  college  of  Claudian  Flamens  from  among  the
highest  families  of  the  city.1  Nor  did  Nero  disdain
to  recognise  the  claims  of  his  natural  father,  while
paying  these  honours  to  the  adoptive.  He  obtained
a  statue  for  Domitius  from  the  senate.  For  Asconius
Labeo,  who  had  been  his  guardian  after  his  father's
death  and  still  survived,  he  demanded  the  consular
ornaments.  This  attention  to  the  claims  of  others
was  accompanied  by  modesty  in  regard  to  himself.
His  liberality  was  eminently  conspicuous.  To  pre-
serve their  rank  to  some  impoverished  senators,  he
endowed  them  with  the  census  which  the  law  re-
quired. At  the  same  time  he  followed  the  example
of  Augustus  and  Claudius  in  respecting  the  prescrip-
tions of  the  state  religion.  When  the  temples  of
Jupiter  and  Minerva — two  of  the  cells  perhaps  of
the  triple  temple  in  the  Capitol — were  struck  with
lightning,  he  caused  the  city  to  be  illustrated,  by  the
advice  of  the  Haruspices.  Of  this  solemn  cere-
monial the  most  picturesque  feature  was  a  procession
of  the  priests  of  the  various  services ;  the  Salii  bear-
ing the  golden  shields  on  their  heads ;  the  Vestals

that  were  expelled;  the  latter  were  retained,  under  the  superin-
tendence of  a  military  guard,  which  Augustus  had  originally  assigned
for  that  purpose.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xii.  ult.  The  temple  of  Claudius  on  the  Caelian  hill
is  supposed  to  have  stood  on  the  oblong  platform,  scarped  on  three
sides,  now  occupied  by  the  garden  of  the  Passionists,  and  marked
from  a  distance  by  a  few  slender  cypresses.  Ampere,  Hist.  Rom.  a
flo/ne,  §  3.

A.D.56-A.U.80S. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  297

guarding  the  sacred  Palladium ;  the  Galli,  who  lave
in  Almo  the  Mother  of  the  Gods;  with  the  noble
Augurs  and  thrice-noble  Flamens,  the  Septemvirs
and  Epulones,  and  every  lesser  priesthood  girt  with
the  simple  cincture  of  the  rustic  Gabii.1

We  do  not  hear,  indeed,  that  Nero  took  any  per-
sonal part  in  the  government ;  and  whatever  Favourable
merit  ihere  was  in  his  administration  must  $ Nero^Miy
in  fairness  be  ascribed  to  the  ministers  sovemment.
rather  than  to  their  master.  Nor  can  we  give  him
the  lesser  praise  of  deliberately  choosing  his  instru-
ments well,  and  submitting  his  own  inexperience  to
their  riper  judgment.  Seneca  and  Burrhus  had  been
given  him  by  Agrippina.  The  rare  occasions  on
which  the  prince  appears  on  the  public  scene  during
this  period  were  prepared  for  him  by  these  advisers,
and  the  kindly  acts  or  sayings  imputed  to  him  were
doubtless  suggested  by  them.  Thus  much  it  seems
just  to  detract  from  the  fame  of  Nero's  Quinquen-
nium :  nevertheless,  setting  aside  all  question  of  the
real  authorship  of  the  acts  belonging  to  it,  the  ge-
neral course  of  government  deserves  apparently  the
praise  it  has  received.  The  kindness  of  kings  upon
their  coronation  day  has  passed  into  a  proverb.
Little  stress  need  be  laid  on  the  gracious  promises
of  Nero  at  his  accession,  when  words  could  cost  him
nothing,  and  might  gain  him  much.  His  declarations
in  favour  of  justice  and  generosity  were  carried  out
consistently  as  long  as  there  was  no  temptation  to
tyranny.  The  senate  and  magistrates  were  suffered
to  exercise  their  functions  without  control.  If  he
ever  interfered  within  their  jurisdiction,  it  was  in

1  Lucan  gives  a  spirited  description  of  the  procession,  which  no
doubt  he  witnessed  himself  (PAars.  i.  592.):

"  Turn  jubet  et  totara  pavidis  a  civibus  urbem
Ambiri,  et  festo  purgantes  mcenia  lustro
Longa  per  extremes  pomceria  cingcre  fined
Pontifices,  sacri  quibus  cst  permissa  potestas,"  &c.

298  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  in.

the  direction  of  mercy,  to  overrule  harsh  sentences,
or  to  mitigate  them.1  Never,  however,  was  there  a
period  more  noted  for  the  punishment  of  great  cri-
minals, especially  of  officers  convicted  of  extortion  in
the  provinces.2  But  all  these  cases  were  prosecuted
in  due  course  of  law;  no  irregular  procedure  was
allowed  even  to  further  the  ends  of  justice,  and,
above  all,  the  practice  of  delation  was  rigidly  re-
pressed. This,  no  doubt,  was  the  circumstance  which
invested  the  early  years  of  Nero  with  their  brightest
colours.  There  were  no  trials  on  charges  of  Majestas ;
and  Nero  showed  himself,  even  to  a  late  period,
superior  to  petty  mortifications  from  raillery  and
libel.3  The  empire  had  grown  consciously  stronger
since  the  time  of  Tiberius,  and  could  afford  to  disre-
gard ridicule.  Stories  were  current  of  the  unwonted
humanity  evinced  by  this  lord  of  the  world,  such  as
was  seldom  shown  by  the  master  of  a  score  of  bond-
men. When  required  to  set  his  name  to  a  sentence
of  death,  Would  to  God,  he  exclaimed,  that  I  had
never  learnt  to  write  /4

The  financial  measures  of  this  epoch  display,  as  far
as  we  can  trace  them,  not  only  a  liberality

Liberality  of  , .  .  '  £  J

Nero's  finan- which miffht OB coniounded  with mere

cial  measures. ,  <  .  .

thoughtless  profusion,  but  some  indications
of  a  wise  and  intelligent  policy.  Nero  inherited  from
Claudius  the  best  of  all  legacies  to  a  despot,  a  full
treasury  and  a  flourishing  revenue.  He  could  give
without  borrowing ;  he  could  endow  without  extorting.

1  See  the  cases  mentioned  by  Tacitus,  Ann.  xiii.  43,  52.;  and  again
xiii.  27.,  xiv.  18.  22.  45.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  30.  33.  42.,  xiv.  18,  26,  46.

*  Suet.  Ner.  39. :  "  Mirum  ....  nihil  eum  patientius  quam
maledicta  et  convicia  homimim  tulisse."

4  Suet.  Ner.  10.:  "Quam  vellem  nescire  literas."  The  story  is
from  Seneca,  who  takes  occasion  to  remind  his  blushing  pupil  of  it
(de  Clem.  ii.  1.):  "U't  de  dementia  scriberem,  Nero  Caesar,  una
me  vox  tua  maxime  compulit:  quam  ego  non  sine  admiratione  et
cum  dk-eretur  audisse  memini,  et  deinde  aliis  narrasse,"  &c.

CH.  in.  UNDER TBQS EMPIRE.  299

A  donative  to  the  soldiers,  the  necessary  condition
of  their  support,  was  followed  by  a  largess  to  the
people,  prudent,  no  doubt,  but  not  equally  indispen-
sable. Fresh  draughts  of  veterans  were  established,
with  the  surrender  of  public  domains,  in  the  colonies
of  Capua  and  Nuceria.  Another  measure,  of  which
we  should  much  wish  to  know  the  particulars,  was
the  advance,  apparently,  of  certain  sums  to  the  trea-
sury, to  maintain,  as  the  historian  oracularly  phrases
it,  the  solvency  of  the  Eoman  people.  We  may
conjecture  that  this  liberality  was  meant  to  relieve
the  farmers  of  the  tolls  and  tributes,  or  other  re-
sponsible agents  of  finance.  It  amounted,  we  are
told,  only  to  forty  millions  of  sesterces ;  and  it  is
hard  to  conceive  any  great  public  relief  being  effected
by  a  loan  or  even  a  gift  of  320,000  pounds  sterling.1
In  their  excessive  jealousy  of  taxation  the  citizens
had  complained  that  a  rate  of  one  twenty-fifth  or
four  per  cent,  was  exacted  by  the  state  on  the  pur-
chase-money of  slaves.  The  buyer  of  these  articles
of  luxury  was  in  most  cases  the  Eoman,  the  vendor
was  the  subject  or  foreigner;  and  when  the  imperial
government  transferred  the  tax  from  the  buyer  to
the  vendor,  the  multitude  were  led  to  suppose  that
they  had  actually  escaped  it,  not  perceiving  that  the
amount  of  the  rate  was  still  as  before  levied  upon
them  in  the  advanced  price  of  the  commodity.2  Nor
was  it  the  ruling  caste  only  towards  which  this  con-
sideration was  extended.  When  the  proconsuls  and
other  magistrates  abroad  were  forbidden  to  exhibit
gladiators  and  wild  beasts  in  their  provinces,  the  re-
striction must  have  been  meant  to  relieve  the  subjects
of  the  state  from  the  burden  of  providing  them.3

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  31. :  "  Sestertium  quadringenties  aerario  illatum
est  ad  retinendam  popnli  fidem."

1  Tacitus  (ie.)  remarks  this  consequence:  "Specie  magis  quam  vi,
quia  cum  venditor  pendere  juberetur,  in  partem  pretii  emptoribus
accrescebat."

*  Tac.  /.  c.  "  Ne  quis  magistratus  aut  procurator  qui  provinciam

300  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  LH.

This  gleam  of  consideration  for  the  interests  of  a
class  to  whom  it  was  so  rarely  extended  by

His  proposal  to ,-, •*->  j_ >  j. • j-

abolish  the  the  Koman  statesmen,  seems  to  indicate  a
I?D.1B8.ia'  change  of  feeling  in  the  conquerors  towards
the  conquered,  which  we  are  prompt  to  re-
mark, expecting  important  consequences  to  follow.
But  we  are  still  doomed  to  be  disappointed.  Meagre
and  inconclusive  are  the  notices  we  find  regarding
the  views  of  the  imperial  administration.  It  is
impossible  to  construct  from  them  anything  which
may  be  called  a  policy.  We  note  the  glimmer  of  a
great  social  principle  beneath  the  folds  of  political
history ;  but  in  a  moment  the  field  of  vision  is  over-
clouded, and  we  dare  not  indulge  the  speculations
which  have  risen  in  our  minds  lest  it  should  appear
that  they  are  founded  on  a  misapprehension  of  our
own,  or  on  a  misstatement  of  our  informant.  After
the  financial  measures  just  mentioned,  Tacitus  pro-
ceeds to  speak  of  another,  apparently  of  much  greater
importance.  The  circumstance  refers  to  the  fourth
year  of  Nero's  reign,  and  is  thus  stated  by  the  his-
torian, the  obscurity  or  confusion  of  whose  account
it  may  be  well  to  exhibit,  to  show  by  a  single  instance
how  little  precision  is  to  be  looked  for  in  the  prince
of  pictorial  narrators.  So  numerous,  he  says,  were
the  complaints  of  the  people  against  the  extortions
of  the  publicans,  that  Nero  actually  meditated  sur-
rendering all  duties  and  conferring  the  noblest  of
all  presents  on  the  human  race.  But  the  sena-
tors, with  much  praise  of  his  liberality,  restrained
his  ardour,  by  proving  that  the  empire  would  be
dissolved  if  the  imposts  by  which  it  was  supported
should  be  diminished :  for  it  was  clear  that  if  the
duties  were  abolished,  a  remission  of  taxes  would  be
speedily  demanded.  They  showed  that  many  asso-
ciations for  farming  the  revenues  had  been  established

obtineret,  spectaculum  gladiatorum  aut ferarum,  aut  quod  aliud
ludicrum  edoret."

A.I>.5S-A,n.811.  UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  301

by  consuls  and  tribunes  of  the  plebs  at  a  period  when
the  Roman  people  were  most  jealous  of  their  liber-
ties :  .  .  .  they  allowed,  however,  that  it  was  expe-
dient to  put  some  restrictions  on  the  cupidity  of
the  publicans.1  The  question  here  arises  whether
the  duties,  of  which  Nero  would  have  made  a  present
to  the  human  race,  were  those  which  prevailed  gene-
rally throughout  the  empire,  or  whether  they  refer
only  to  such  as  were  peculiar  to  the  ruling  caste  of
citizens.  Undoubtedly  the  offer,  at  first  sight,  seems
to  be  universal ;  and  so  it  has  been  generally  regarded
by  the  critics,  historians,  and  writers  on  Koman
finance.  Yet  there  are  words  in  the  passage  which
seem  to  me  very  clearly  to  limit  its  application  to  the
Roman  citizens  only,  the  class  for  whom,  according
to  ideas  which  had  not  yet  lost  their  force,  the  subject
races  of  the  empire  toiled,  unpitied  and  unregarded.
The  question  must  be  discussed  at  greater  length.
The  abolition  of  the  whole  system  of  in-
direct taxation  throughout  the  empire  would  *»  «r  wh»i  it

. TIT  t_  ii  t*  f  i really  imports.

indeed  have  been  the  conception  ot  a  mad-
man. It  could  only  have  been  effected  in  company
with  an  immense  increase  of  direct  payments,  such
as  the  land-tax,  poll-tax,  and  property-tax,  at  a  time
when  the  state  had  relinquished  all  claim  to  the  ab-
solute use  and  possession  of  its  conquered  territories.
But  no  such  increase,  it  would  seem,  was  contem-
plated. Nor,  again,  is  the  establishment  of  such  a
system  of  free-trade,  by  the  removal  of  all  imposts  on
commercial  transactions  between  land  and  land,  con-
sistent with  the  spirit  of  the  time,  and  the  cherished
ideas  of  antiquity,  which  were  far  as  yet  from  realizing
an  equality  of  rights  among  mankind.  Doubtless

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  50. :  "  Crebris  populi  flagitationibus  immodestiam
pnblicanorum  arguentis,  dubitavit  Nero  an  cuncta  vectigalia  omitti
jnheret,  idque  pulcherrimum  donum  generi  mortalmm  daret  ....
Plerasque  vectigalium  societatcs  a  Consulibus  et  Tribunis  plebis  con-
Btitatas,  acri  etiara  populi  Jiomani  turn  libertate."

302  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  T.n.

Seneca  was  in  advance  of  his  age ;  doubtless  he  would
speak  even  more  freely  as  a  philosopher  than  he
would  act  as  a  statesman ;  yet  the  rare  expressions  of
political  liberality  which  have  been  gleaned  from  his
writings  would  be  a  very  insufficient  ground  for  as-
cribing to  him  any  profound  views  on  this  subject.
Virtue,  he  says  in  one  place,  embraces  all  men  to-
gether^ freedmen,  slaves,  and  kings.  .  .  .  We  are
born  to  a  common  inheritance.  .  .  .  Wisdom  invites
the  human  race  to  live  together  in  amity.1  Such
commonplaces  as  these  constitute  at  best  but  a
slender  claim  to  the  praise  of  practical  liberalism.
It  seems  therefore  impossible  to  suppose  that  Nero
really  meant  to  remit  the  whole  custom  duties  of  the
empire.  I  would  limit  the  extent  of  his  scheme  to
a  surrender  of  duties  payable  on  commodities  and
transactions  in  Italy,  and  the  colonies  of  Eoman
citizens.  Such  a  remission  would  have  had  a  clear
analogy  to  defend  it.  From  the  time  of  the  conquest
of  Macedonia  the  land-tax  had  been  remitted  to  the
citizens,  though  the  census  or  property-tax  on  move-
ables,  which  also  bore  the  invidious  name  of  tribute,
continued  to  press  upon  them.  But  the  popular
tribune  Metellus  Nepos  had  abolished  the  indirect
taxation  of  tolls  and  dues  in  Italy,  and  it  was  with
great  soreness  that  the  citizen  had  seen  this  burden
reimposed  by  Julius  Caesar,  and  maintained,  as  a  state
necessity,  by  the  triumvirs  and  the  emperors.  We
may  easily  believe  that  the  young  impulsive  Nero

1  Senec.  de  Benef.  iii.  18.:  "Virtus  omne8  admittit,  libertinos,
servos,  reges."  Epist.  95.:  "  Membra  sumus  magni  corporis  ....
natura  nos  cognates  edidit.''  Epist.  90. :  "  Sapientia  genus  huma-
num  ad  concordiam  vocat."  These  and  a  few  more  passages,  in
which  God  is  called  our  common  parent,  slaves  and  freemen  are  said
to  be  naturally  equal,  &c.,  constitute,  I  think,  the  writer's  whole
claim  to  the  character  of  a  cosmopolite.  They  are  once  only  faintly
echoed  by  Lucan,  Phars.  i.  60.:

"Turn  genus  humanum  positis  sibi  consulat  armis,
Inque  vicem  gens  omnis  amet."

\D.58-A.tT.811.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  303

conceived  it  worthy  of  the  successor  of  the  tribunes,
to  abolish  once  more  this  detested  impost  upon  the
favoured  caste ;  and  this  was  probably  as  far  as  his
liberality  extended.  The  flourish  about  a  boon  to
the  human  race  was  an  indiscreet  bravado  either  of
the  ignorant  prince,  or  of  the  unreflecting  historian
Nero's  advisers,  indeed,  naturally  pointed  out  that
the  burdens  of  which  the  citizens  complained  had
been  originally  imposed,  not  by  triumvirs  and  em-
perors, but  by  the  consuls  and  tribunes  of  the  free
state.  Eome  in  the  height  of  her  pride  and  inde-
pendence had  felt  no  humiliation  in  submitting  to
them.  But  were  her  claim  to  exemption  from  these
dues  conceded,  she  would  have  a  pretence  for  de-
manding abolition  of  the  tribute  or  census  also,  and
for  obtaining  that  complete  immunity  which  was
the  dearest  wish  of  her  indolent  selfishness.1  Nero,
whose  generosity  was  a  mere  impulse,  founded  on  no
principle  of  policy  or  humanity,  was  no  doubt  easily
persuaded  to  desist  from  his  scheme ;  and  perhaps
we  may  trace  in  the  genuine  liberality  of  his  advisers,
who  discouraged  such  an  indulgence  to  a  special  class,
the  wider  and  wiser  views  of  the  sage  who  presided
over  them.  The  project  resulted  in  a  few  sensible
regulations  of  detail ;  for  making  the  revenue  laws
better  known  that  they  might  be  better  obeyed ;  for
limiting  the  claims  for  arrears ;  for  putting  the  pub-
licani  under  stricter  supervision;  for  abolishing  a
few  trivial  but  vexatious  imposts ;  for  relieving  the
importer  of  grain  from  the  pressure  of  certain  bur-

1  It  will  be  seen  that  I  regard  the  phrase  of  Tacitus,  "  donum
generi  humane,"  as  an  incorrect  expression.  We  are  not  yet  in  a
position  to  consider  whether  the  times  in  which  the  historian  himself
wrote  offered  any  excuse  for  this  mistake.  At  a  later  period  the
exemption  of  Italy  from  the  land-tax  was  annulled,  and  the  whole
empire  placed  on  an  equal  footing  in  respect  of  fiscal  burdens.
Savigny  thinks  that  this  took  place  in  the  time  of  Diocletian  (see
Vermischte  Schrift.  i.  43.),  from  an  obscure  passage  in  Aurelius
Victor  (Ccesar.  30.),  on  the  occasion  of  the  permanent  establishment
of  an  imperial  court  and  army  in  Italy.

304  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  OH.  IJT.

dens ;  and  with  this  view  exempting  the  ships  of  the
corn  merchants  from  the  common  tax  on  property.1
The  salutary  regulations  here  recorded  belong  to
The  policy  of  *ne  nrs^  three  or  four  years  of  this  prin-
Svfctionto  cipate;  but  the  general  improvement  of
the  wnate.  fae  administration  depended  on  principles
which  continued  to  operate  through  the  first  half,  at
least,  and  in  many  cases  to  the  end  of  a  reign  of
more  than  thirteen  years.  So  long  did  Nero  persist,
under  the  guidance  of  trusty  counsellors,  in  main-
taining the  dignity  of  the  senatorial  order,  as  the
highest  judicial  and  legislative  tribunal.  The  position
of  Seneca  and  Burrhus  in  antagonism  to  Agrippina
could  only  be  maintained  by  upholding  the  authority
of  the  senate ;  the  activity  of  which  is  attested  by  the
number  of  laws  and  decrees  which  at  this  period
emanated  from  it.  The  youth  and  inexperience  of
Nero,  overwhelmed  as  he  was  by  the  weight  of  affairs
which  the  recent  example  of  his  laborious  predecessor
forbade  him  to  reject,  compelled  him  to  rely  on  these
practised  advisers ;  and  the  more  so  as  the  odium
which  attached  to  the  whole  class  of  the  imperial
freedmen  required  him  to  waive  their  succour.  The
dispersion  of  the  secret  conclave  gave  immediate
relief  to  the  senate,  which  breathed  more  freely,  and
acted  more  boldly,  when  it  felt  that  no  private  in-
fluence stood  between  it  and  the  throne.  It  expressed
the  sense  of  its  recovered  liberty,  partly  by  the  loudest
eulogies  of  the  new  reign,  partly  by  renewed  activity
within  the  now  extended  sphere  of  its  operations.2

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  51

*  Hoeck  has  collected  from  the  Digest  the  names  of  certain  Sena-
tusconsulta ;  viz.  Silanianum,  Calvisianum,  Memmianum,  Trebel-
lianum,  and  Neronianum,  which  may  be  referred  to  this  period.  They
apply  to  the  treatment  of  slaves,  to  adoption,  to  testamentary  trusts,
&c.  See  Exm.  Gesch.  i.  3.  p.  356.  fol.  Ne'ro  transferred  to  the
senate  a  share  of  the  appeals  in  civil  cases,  which  recent  princes  (and
perhaps  Claudius  more  particularly,  in  his  insatiable  appetite  for
business)  had  grasped  for  themselves.  At  a  later  period  he  re-

A.D.58-A.U.811.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  305

On  the  occasion  of  a  military  success  in  Armenia,  it
not  only  saluted  Nero  as  imperator,  and  decreed  the
customary  supplications,  arches,  and  statues ;  but
established  an  annual  commemoration  of  the  days
on  which  the  victory  was  gained,  the  news  brought
home,  and  the  decree  made  concerning  it.  Were  we
to  thank  the  Gods,  said  C.  Cassius,  according  to  their
kindness,  the  whole  year  would  not  suffice  us.  Let
it  be  at  once  divided  into  two  portions,  one  for  public
affairs,  the  other  for  giving  thanks  for  Nero.  Even
the  irony  of  a  senator  who  bore  the  name  of  a  tyran-
nicide, if  irony  it  were,  proved  the  freedom  of  speech
now  permitted  to  his  order.1

The  ancient  usage  of  the  republic  still  required
the  prince  to  take  his  seat  on  the  tribunal ;  NO  inquiry
and  there,  assisted  by  his  council,  Nero,  ^regularities

i'i ™ i-  i f  VI  T L  J i  of  his  private

like  (Jlaudms  before  mm,  ustened  to  ap-  we.
peals  from  the  ordinary  courts  of  justice,  and  gave
final  sentence  from  his  own  breast.  Warned,  how-
ever, by  his  predecessor's  example,  he  limited  the
addresses  of  the  rival  pleaders,  and  checked  vague
declamation  by  requiring  each  point  to  be  separately
discussed  before  opening  on  another.2  His  j  udgments
were  issued  always  in  writing,  and  after  mature  de-
liberation; and  in  the  interval  he  expected  his
assessors  to  give  him  their  opinions  separately,  from
which  he  made  up  his  own  in  private,  and  delivered

linquished  the  labour  and  responsibility  altogether.  Such,  at  least,
seems  the  best  way  of  reconciling  the  discrepancy  between  Tac.  Ann.
xiv.  28.  and  Suet.  Ner.  17.  See  note  of  Baumgarten  Crusius  in  loc.
Suet.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  41.

*  Suet.  Ner.  1 5.  Baumgarten  Crusius  explains  him  thus :  "  Er  liess
die  Sache  Punkt  fiir  Punkt  untersuchen : "  "  productis  testibus,  literis,
aliisque  judicii  instrumentis,  idque  per  vices,  utraque  parte  alternatim
audita.  Hie  igitur  transitus  fuit  ad  nostrorum  judiciorum  (the
German)  morem  ab  antiquo,  qui  observatur  in  Britannia  adhuc
terrisque  Gallise  subjectis."  This,  no  doubt,  is  the  improvement  to
which  Seneca  points  in  his  sneer  at  the  impatience  of  Claudius:  "Una
tantum  parte  audita,  ssepe  et  neutra."
VOL.  VI.  X

306  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  til.

it  as  the  common  decision  of  the  cabinet.  It  would
seem,  from  this  account  of  his  public  conduct,  that
he  was  strongly  impressed  with  the  conviction  that
he  held  power  on  sufferance  only;  and  was  not
blinded  by  adulation  to  the  precariousness  of  his
position  as  the  first  citizen  of  an  aristocratic  republic.
But  as  long  as  he  executed  his  delegated  functions
for  the  common  weal  of  his  order,  they,  on  their  part,
made  no  inquisition  into  the  privacy  of  his  do-
mestic life.  The  curtains  which  the  Eoman  drew
across  the  vestibule  of  his  mansion  were  a  sacred
screen,  behind  which  none  could  enter  unbidden.
Within  that  vail  the  courteous  statesman  or  the
bland  philosopher  might  play  the  tyrant  to  his  slaves,
to  his  children,  and  to  his  women.  There  self-in-
dulgence and  debauchery  in  their  grossest  shapes
sheltered  themselves  alike  from  the  decrees  of  the
censors,  and  the  murmurs  of  public  opinion.  It  was
not  till  a  later  period,  when  the  fall  of  Nero  dissi-
pated all  lingering  reserve,  that  the  inner  life  of  the
palace  was  disclosed  to  the  eyes  of  the  citizens,  and
the  process  laid  bare,  step  by  step,  by  which  he  was
corrupted  into  a  monster  of  depravity.  Already,
beneath  the  show  of  care  for  the  interests  of  the
state,  he  was  learning  to  regard  his  own  safety,  his
own  convenience,  as  paramount  to  every  obligation,
and  trying  what  amount  of  horrors  the  world  would
bear  for  the  sake  of  his  gracious  administration.
But  Kome  was  tranquil ;  the  citizens  were  content ;
the  senate,  affecting  to  speak  the  voice  of

The"QuIn- ,  . '  , £T  , ,  .

quennium the  nation,  pronounced  Nero  the  best  of

Neronis."  .  .  „ .  .

its  princes  since  Augustus.  Affairs  might
seem  to  run  more  smoothly  even  from  the  absence  of
great  principles  to  guide  them.  Nero  differed  from
all  his  predecessors  in  the  extent  to  which  he  suffered
affairs  to  take  their  natural  course.  Julius  Ca3sar
had  deliberately  overthrown  old  forms  and  prescrip-
tions which  he  felt  to  be  obsolete,  confident  of  the

CH.  tn.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  307

creative  force  of  his  own  master-genius.  Augustus
strove  to  revive  the  past.  Tiberius  was  content  with
shaping  the  present.  Caius,  awakened  in  his  youth-
ful inexperience  to  the  real  character  of  the  station
which  his  predecessors  had  disguised  from  themselves
and  the  world,  chose  rashly  to  claim  for  it  all  the
prerogatives  which  logically  belonged  to  it.  Claudius
affected,  in  the  narrow  spirit  of  a  pedant  on  the
throne,  to  govern  mankind  by  personal  vigilance,  as
a  master  governs  his  household.  Nero,  at  last,  or
his  advisers  for  him,  seems  to  have  renounced  all
general  views,  to  have  abstained  from  interfering
with  the  machinery  of  empire,  and  contented  himself
with  protecting  it  from  disturbance.  The  tradition
of  the  felicity  of  these  five  auspicious  years,  to  which
the  best  of  this  prince's  successors  gave  long  after-
wards the  palm  of  virtuous  administration,  attests  the
consciousness  of  the  Komans  that  they  were  ruled
with  a  masterly  inactivity.1  Great  honour  is  un-
doubtedly due  to  the  men  who  actually  governed  for
Nero,  that  they  did  so  little  to  abuse  their  temporary
ascendancy.  There  seems,  however,  less  reason  to
extend  our  admiration  to  Nero  himself,  or  to  regard
this  happy  result  as  the  triumph  of  philosophy  over
youthful  passions,  and  the  fatal  sense  of  irresponsi-
bility. We  must  [rather  admit  that  his  reserve  was
caused  by  incapacity  or  indifference,  by  an  engrossing
taste  for  frivolities  which  belonged  to  his  tender
years,  or  by  the  dissipation  to  which  his  position  too
naturally  enticed  him.

1  It  was  the  well-known  saying  of  the  Emperor  Trajan,  fifty  yeare
later:  "  Procul  differre  cunctos  principes  Neronis  quinquennio."
Aurel.  Victor,  Caetar.  5.,  Epit.  5.

X  2

808  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Mil,

CHAPTER LIU.

Nero's  passion  for  Poppaea  Sabina. — Intrigues  against  Agrippina. —
Nero's  machinations  against  her  unsuccessful. — She  is  finally
despatched  by  his  orders. — Seneca  and  Burrhus  implicated  in
the  murder. — Institution  of  the  Neronian  games.  —  The  Ludi
Maximi. — Nero's  insensibility  to  national  feeling. — Moderation
in  regard  to  charges  of  libel  and  majesty. — Death  of  Burrhus.
— Seneca  seeks  to  withdraw  from  public  life. — Rise  and  influence
of  Tigellinus. — Death  of  Plautus  and  Sulla.  —  Nero's  extrava-
gance and  cruelty.  —  Eepudiation,  banishment,  and  death  of
Octavia.  —  Prosecution  of  wealthy  freedmen,  Doryphorus  and
Pallas. — Nero's  progress  in  licentiousness. — He  exhibits  himself
in  the  Circus.  —  His  infamous  debauchery. — Burning  of  Rome.
—  Persecution  of  the  Christians.  —  Eestoration  of  the  city.  —
Nero's  golden  house.  —  Further  exactions  and  confiscations.  —
Conspiracy  of  Piso. — Its  detection  and  punishment. — Death  of
Lucan  and  Seneca.  —  Pretended  discovery  of  the  treasures  of
Dido. — Death  of  Poppsea. — Further  proscriptions. — Storms  and
pestilence. — Reflections  of  Tacitus. — Death  of  Annaeus  Mela. —
Prosecution  and  death  of  Soranus  and  Thrasea.  (A.D.  53-66,
A.U.  811-819.)

THE  legislation  of  Nero's  principate  has  been  exa-
uncertainty  mined,  and  the  character  of  his  civil  ad-
toryhofthia  ministration  depicted,  from  the  notices  of
period.  historians  and  jurists.  The  materials  are
slender,  and  the  delineation  is  necessarily  unsteady
and  superficial.  Such  is  the  public  history  of  the
times.  But  we  now  turn  to  an  intrigue  of  the  palace,
a  story  of  domestic  hate  and  private  crime,  and  we
find  its  whole  course,  and  every  detail,  described  to
us  with  the  clearest  and  strongest  lines ;  while  to  the
careful  inquirer  more  darkness  really  hovers  over  this
picture  than  the  other.  A  thoughtful  reader  can
hardly  peruse  a  sentence  of  the  Annals  of  Tacitus,
his  chief  guide  at  this  period,  without  feeling  that

A.D.58-A.U.8H.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  30J»

he  is  in  unsafe  hands.  The  matters  of  which  his
author  now  treats  had  for  the  most  part  no  public
bearing ;  transacted  in  secret,  they  could  only  have
been  revealed  by  treacherous,  or  at  least  by  interested
narrators ;  and  it  is  with  vexation,  not  unmixed  with
wonder,  that  we  remark  the  complacency  with  which
he  recounts  events  of  which  he  could  have  had  no
certain  knowledge,  of  which  false  and  coloured  state-
ments must  necessarily  have  been  rife,  and  can  hardly
have  failed  to  imbue  the  representations  of  the  writers
from  whom  he  almost  indiscriminately  drew.  Many
persons,  says  the  Jewish  historian  Josephus,  have
undertaken  to  write  the  history  of  Nero ;  of  whom
some  have  disregarded  the  truth  on  account  of  favours
received  from  him,  others  from  personal  hostility
have  indulged  in  abominable  falsehoods.  As  a
foreigner,  Josephus  was  exempt  from  many  of  the
prejudices  of  the  Komans ;  he  regarded  these  matters
from  a  more  distant  and  a  clearer  point  of  view.
Undoubtedly,  the  particular  details  of  intrigue  and
crime,  on  which  we  are  about  to  enter,  must  be  re-
ceived with  caution  and  distrust ;  nevertheless,  Jo-
sephus himself  believes  in  the  poisoning  of  Britan-
nicus,  and  the  murders,  now  to  be  related,  of  Agrip-
pina  and  Octavia ;  the  name  of  Nero  is  branded  with
atrocities  which  can  neither  be  denied  nor  extenu-
ated.1 The  story  must  be  told  as  it  is  delivered  to
us,  and  no  man  will  care  to  mar  its  horrible  interest
by  scrutinizing  step  by  step  the  ground  on  which  he
is  treading.

Since  her  defeat  by  Seneca  and  Burrhus,  at  the
outset of the new reign, the empress-  Ri8eof  POP-
ID  other  seems  to  have  refrained  from  pro-  pffiaSabina-
voking  a  further  trial  of  strength ;  and,  possibly,  she
regained  by  this  prudent  reserve  a  portion  of  the

1  Josoph,  Antty.  Jud.  xx.  7.  3.

310  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LOT.

influence  she  had  forfeited.  When,  after  an  interval
of  almost  five  years,  the  curtain  again  draws  up  on
a  scene  of  the  interior  of  the  palace,  we  find  Nero
still  married,  but  not  united,  to  Octavia,  Agrippina
watching  their  connexion  with  a  jealousy  which
frustrates  every  attempt  to  draw  him  into  another
marriage,  while  Acte  still  retains  her  place  as  the
reigning  favourite.  We  find  the  young  and  gallant
Otho  still  first  of  the  prince's  friends  and  associates,
fascinating  his  master  by  his  graces,  and  rising  in
public  honours.  Nero  is  now  two  and  twenty  instead
of  seventeen  :  in  other  respects  we  note  little  change
in  the  personages  or  situations  of  the  drama.  But
a  new  character  now  steps  upon  the  stage,  destined
to  work  out  a  startling  catastrophe.  Poppaea  Sabina,
the  wife  of  Otho,  was  the  fairest  woman  of  her  time,
and  with  the  charms  of  beauty  she  combined  the
address  of  an  accomplished  intriguer.1  Among  the
dissolute  women  of  imperial  Eome,  she  stands  pre-
eminent. Originally  united  to  Rufius  Crispinus,  she
had  allowed  herself  to  be  seduced  by  Otho,  and  ob-
tained a  divorce  in  order  to  marry  him.  Introduced
by  this  new  connexion  to  the  intimacy  of  Nero,  she
soon  aimed  at  a  higher  elevation.  But  her  husband
was  jealous  and  vigilant,  and  she  herself  knew  how
to  allure  the  young  emperor  by  alternate  advances
and  retreats,  till,  in  the  violence  of  his  passion,  he
put  his  friend  out  of  the  way,  by  dismissing  him  to
the  government  of  Lusitania.2  Poppsea  suffered

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  45.  (under  the  year  811):  "Huic  mulieri  cuncta
alia  fuere  prseter  honestum  animum."  There  are  several  busts  in
existence  supposed  to  represent  Poppsea;  but  their  authenticity  is
very  questionable.  The  features  are  of  infantine  grace  and  delicacy,
not  unsuited  to  the  soft  voluptuousness  of  the  habits  imputed  to  her.
See  Ampere,  Hist,  de  Home  a  Borne,  §  3.  But  her  images,  we  are
told,  were  generally  destroyed  at  the  death  of  Nero.

1  The  story  is  somewhat  differently  told  by  our  authorities,  and
even  by  Tacitus  himself  in  his  Histories  and  his  Annals.  In  the

A..D.59-A.U.812. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  311

Otho  to  depart  without  a  sigh.  She  profited  by  his
absence  to  make  herself  more  than  ever  indispensable
to  her  paramour,  and  aimed,  with  little  disguise,  at
releasing  herself  from  her  union,  and  supplanting
Octavia  by  divorce  or  even  by  death.1

It  seems,  however,  that  this  bold  design  could
only  be  effected  by  the  overthrow  of  Agrip-  Dete8tation  ln
pina.  If  this  woman  had  recovered  a  $iaw£>gpop-~
portion  of  her  power  over  her  son,  she  at  pularly  held>
least  retained  little  of  his  affections.  To  control  him
by  fear  was  no  longer  possible ;  an  influence  once
broken  could  never  be  restored  on  the  footing  of
ancient  habit.  There  was  hardly  a  crime  of  which
she  was  not  reputed  guilty ;  there  was  no  excess  of
which  Rome  believed  her  incapable.  Murder  and
adultery  were  the  common  instruments  of  her  am-
bition :  in  marrying  Claudius  she  had  engaged  in  an
act  which  popular  feeling  regarded  as  incest.  In-
dignant and  disgusted  at  her  crimes,  her  debauch-
eries, and  the  crimes  and  debaucheries  of  her  fa-
vourites and  creatures,  hating  her  as  the  sister  of
Caius,  hating  her  as  the  wife  of  Claudius,  loathing
her  as  the  harlot  of  Narcissus  and  Pallas,  execrating
her  at  last,  in  the  bitterness  of  their  disappointment,
as  the  vile  daughter  of  their  noble  Germanicus,  her
countrymen  were  prepared  to  believe  the  rumour
that  she  had  tried,  as  a  last  device,  to  entangle  her
own  son  in  a  criminal  intrigue  with  herself.2  Some,
indeed,  whispered  that  Nero  had  been  the  first  to
solicit  his  mother ;  but  the  other  story  gained  more

latter  work  he  speaks,  no  doubt,  from  his  latest  and  best  information,
which  agrees  with  the  distich  in  Suetonius  (Otho,  3.):

"  Cur  Otho  mentito  sit,  quaeritis,  exul  honore?
Uxoris  mo3chus  cceperat  esse  suss."

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  46.,  A.D.  58,  A.U.  811.

2  Tac,  Ann.  xiv.  2.  (A..U.  812):  "Tradit  Cluvius  Agrippinam,"  &c.
On  the  other  hand:  "  Fabius  Eusticus  non  Agrippinas  sed  Neroni
cupitum  id  memorat.  .  .  .  Sed  qua?  CJuvius  eadem  caeteri  quoque
auctores  prodidere,  et  fama  hue  inclinat."

312  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  Lin.

general  credence ;  no  one  asked  whether  a  woman  of
fifty  could  dream  of  such  a  conquest  over  the  fairest
charmers  of  the  court,  or  betray  her  odious  secret  to
those  who  watched  around  her.  But  so  nearly  was
she  successful,  they  went  on  to  aver,  that  it  was  with
difficulty  her  arts  were  frustrated  by  Seneca;  who
deterred  Nero  from  the  crime,  by  representing,  from
the  lips  of  Acte,  the  shock  it  would  cause  to  public
feeling,  and  the  dangers  which  might  ensue.1

However  this  may  be,  and  whether  or  not  Agrip-

pina,  the  writer  of  a  scandalous  chronicle

intrigues herself,  has  suffered  from  the  lying  tongues

against  her.  -  •  n  T>

of  enemies  of  her  own,  Poppaea  was  now  en-
gaged with  her  in  open  strife,  and  one  or  the  other
must  perish  in  the  contest.  Poppsea  had  so  far  suc-
ceeded as  to  get  her  lover  to  contemplate  marriage
with  her,  while  he  still  shrank  from  the  preliminary
steps.  Of  Octavia,  indeed,  neither  one  nor  the  other
took  account.  It  was  Agrippina's  anger,  Agrippina's
power,  that  Poppsea  sought  to  overcome.  She  treated
Nero  as  a  child  controlled  by  an  unreasonable  parent;
she  excited  him  to  rebel  against  undue  authority ;
made  him  ashamed  of  his  subservience,  and  alarmed
at  the  state  of  dependence  in  which  she  represented
him  as  lying.  He  was  no  emperor,  she  said ;  he  was
not  even  a  free  man.  Finally,  she  persuaded  him

1  The  strange  story  told  by  Dion  (Ixi.  11.)  seems  equivalent  to  a
confession  that  this  scandal  was  not  generally  reputed  worthy  of
belief:  &AA'  fKtivo  nev,  fir'  aArjfles  iyevfro,  tire  irpbs  rbv  rpStrov  avrwv
fir\dff(h],  OVK  oT5o •  &  8£  8$)  irpbs  irdvrtev  J/ucAay^Tat  \4yta,  on  fratpav
•nvcb  TJ;  'Aypnnrivri  6/j.oiav  6  Nfpcav  Si  avrb  ruvro  es  ret  judAiffTa  riydirrjiTf,
leal  auTJj  re  ^Kftvri  irpoffiraifav,  Kal  rots  &\\oi?  eVSei/cfu/xtJ'or,  f\*ye  on
/ecu  rjj  n-qrpl  6m\oiri.  Lncan,  towards  the  end  of  his  poem,  speaks
with  true  Roman  indignation  of  the  incest  permitted  to  the  Parthians,
in  which  he  may  possibly  have  had  regard  to  stories  nearer  home
(viii.  406.):

"  Damnat  apud  gentes  sceleris  non  sponte  peracti
(Edipodionias  infelix  fabula  Thebas:
Parthorum  dominus  quoties  sic  sanguine  mixto
Nascitur  Arsacides!  cui  fas  implere  parentem
Quid  rear  esse  nefas ! "

the
of  his

A.U.59-A.D.812.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  313

that  his  mother  was  conspiring  against  him :  the
charges  triumphantly  rebutted  four  years  before,
were  repeated  with  more  success :  for  Nero  began
now  to  feel  an  interest  in  believing  them,  and  he  had
learnt,  in  the  exercise  of  his  power,  that  it  was  pos-
sible to  condemn  the  suspected  without  bringing
them  face  to  face  with  their  accusers.1

No  intrigue  of  the  palace  could  be  supposed  com-
plete at  this  period  unless  Seneca  was  its  Nero  contem.
instigator  or  accomplice ;  and  accordingly  j^J
the  sage  is  himself  accused  of  counselling  mother-
the  dreadful  crime  which  has  now  to  be  related.
The  first  attempt  on  Agrippina's  life,  as  recounted
by  Tacitus,  is  one  of  the  darkest  scenes  of  his  long
tragedy.  That  it  is  true  in  the  main,  we  have  at
least  no  reason  to  question ;  but  Suetonius  and  Dion
have  each  added  details,  not  wholly  consistent  with
one  another,  which  may  serve  to  remind  us  that  the
particulars  of  such  deeds  could  seldom  be  accurately
known,  and  how  much  scope  there  was  for  invention
and  embellishment  in  the  obscurity  of  contemporary
histoiy.  Nero,  it  seems,  full  of  fear  or  disgust,  long
avoided  all  private  intercourse  with  his  mother,  and
recommended  her  to  withdraw  to  a  suburban  resi-
dence. But  this  was  not  enough  to  reassure  him.
There  was  no  intention  of  bringing  her  to  trial :  open
violence  against  her  could  not  be  ventured :  against
poison  she  was  guarded  by  her  own  caution,  and  the
fidelity  of  her  attendants :  the  statement  that  she
had  fortified  herself  by  antidotes,  is  one  of  the  vulgar
fictions  of  antiquity,  which  modern  science  scarce
deigns  to  refute,  yet  it  is  not  impossible  that  she
allowed  such  a  rumour  to  be  spread  as  a  measure  of
precaution.  Again,  after  the  mysterious  death  of

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  1.  Such  was  the  dread  in  which  Nero  at  this
time  held  his  mother,  that  he  entertained  thoughts  (so  Rt  least  we  are
assured)  of  quitting  Rome,  divesting  himself  of  power,  and  returning
to  a  private  station  at  Rhodes.  Suet.  Ner.  34.

314  HISTORY  OJ THE ROMANS  CH.  Lin.

Britannicus,  a  second  catastrophe  of  the  kind  in  the
imperial  family  would  have  excited  terrible  suspi-
cions. Among  the  prince's  intimates  was  one  Ani-
cetus,  a  freedman  of  the  court,  but  advanced  to  the
command  of  the  fleet  atMisenum,  who  had  formerly
been  his  preceptor,  and  had  personal  grounds  of
hostility  to  Agrippina.  This  man  explained  to  his
eager  patron  the  mechanism  by  which  a  vessel  might
be  constructed  to  fall  in  pieces  at  a  given  signal  in
the  water.  In  this  Agrippina  should  be  invited  to
embark;  the  disruption  of  the  treacherous  planks
might  be  imputed  to  the  winds  and  waves,  and  then
her  pious  son  might  erect  a  temple  to  his  victim,  and
satisfy  the  unconscious  world  of  his  dutiful  affection.'
Such  a  vessel  was  accordingly  prepared,  fitted  up
Failure  of  an  sumptuously,  and  assigned  for  the  convey-
de^trofher  at  ance  °f  Agrippina  from  Bauli,  where  she
"ea>  would  land  from  Antium,  to  Baise,  whither

she  was  invited  by  Nero,  at  the  celebration  of  the
five  days'  festival  of  Minerva  in  the  month  of  March.
At  this  period,  the  beginning  of  spring,  the  fashion-
able season  of  the  baths  began ;  and  Nero  pretended
to  open  it  with  an  act  of  reconciliation  with  the  parent
from  whom  he  had  been  too  long  estranged.  The
empress  left  her  own  vessel  at  Bauli,  as  anticipated,
and  was  received  on  the  beach  by  Nero ;  but  apprised,
as  was  believed,  of  some  intended  treachery,  she  de-
clined to  mount  the  fatal  bark,  and  insisted  on  com-
pleting the  transit  to  Baias  in  a  litter.  But  there

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  3.  Suetonius  says  that  the  first  design  was  to
crush  Agrippina  under  the  falling  roof  of  a  chamber  prepared  on
shore  for  the  purpose;  but  that  of  this  Agrippina  was  forewarned.
Ner.  34.  Dion  assures  us  that  Poppaea  and  Seneca,  not  Nero,  first
took  the  idea  of  the  treacherous  ship  from  some  machinery  of  the
kind  in  the  theatre,  and  applied  it  to  the  projected  destruction  of
Agrippina.  But  this  strange  mechanism  occurs  again  in  Dion's
history  (Ixxvi.  1.),  under  the  reign  of  Severus.  Kcimar  refers  to  a
coin  of  that  emperor  on  which  it  is  represented.  See  Vaillant,
Num.  Imp.  y-  230.

A.D.59 l.tr.81-'.  UNDER THTB EMPIRE.  315

every  apprehension  was  removed  by  the  caresses
lavished  upon  her.  The  banquet  was  protracted  to
a  late  hour,  and  when  at  last  Nero  took  leave  of  her
with  the  blandest  demonstrations  of  affection,  she  no
longer  hesitated  to  enter  the  vessel  which  had  been
sent  to  Baiae  to  receive  her.  The  weather  was  fair,
the  sky  brilliant  with  stars,  the  gay  company  of  the
baths,  turning  night  into  day,  lingered  on  the  beach
as  she  embarked.  There  was  nothing  strange  or
unusual  in  such  a  nocturnal  excursion.  But  no
sooner  had  the  rowers  put  off  from  shore  than  the
canopy  beneath  which  Agrippina  reclined  with  her
ladies  gave  way  under  the  weight  of  lead  with  which
it  had  been  loaded,  and  crushed  one  of  her  attend-
ants. At  the  same  instant  the  bolts  were  suddenly
withdrawn.  In  the  confusion,  however,  the  mechan-
ism failed  to  act;  the  sailors  tried,  by  rushing  to
one  side  of  the  vessel,  to  overturn  or  sink  it,  having
means  at  hand  to  make  their  own  escape.  This  too
was  unsuccessful,  but  Agrippina  and  her  companions
were  immersed  in  the  water,  and  one  of  the  women,
named  Acerronia,  hoping  to  save  herself  by  exclaim-
ing that  she  was  the  empress,  was  beaten  with  oars
and  drowned.  Agrippina,  with  more  presence  of
mind,  kept  silence,  and  swam,  or  floated  on  frag-
ments of  the  wreck,  till  picked  up  by  boats  from
the  shore;  but  she  too  was  struck  once  on  the
shoulder.  Carried  to  a  villa  of  her  own  on  the  banks
of  the  Lucrine  lake,  and  now  fully  conscious  of  the
treachery  from  which  she  had  so  narrowly  escaped,
she  felt  in  her  retreat  that  the  only  chance  of  safety
was  to  pretend  entire  ignorance  of  it.  Without  delay
she  despatched  her  freedman  Agerinus  to  Nero,  to
announce  her  happy  escape  from  a  lamentable  acci-
dent, to  entreat  him  to  calm  his  own  impatience,  and
defer  visiting  her  till  she  had  tended  her  wounds,
and  rested  from  her  fatigues.

Of  the  failure,  Nero  was  already  made  aware. He

316  HISTORY OF THE EOMANfe  CH.  T.m.

had  watched  the  vessel  quit  the  shore  of  Baise ;
Further  perhaps  in  the  moonlight  he  had  witnessed
^afnsrtion8  the  catastrophe ;  at  all  events,  long  before
Agrippina.  fae  arriyai  of  Agerinus  he  was  apprised
that  Agrippina  had  escaped,  wounded,  but  with  life ;
and  he  knew  too  well  that  she  was  no  longer  deceived
by  his  caresses.  He  believed,  in  his  terror,  that  she
was  prepared  to  arm  her  slaves,  to  call  upon  the
soldiers,  to  appeal  to  the  senate  and  people  against
him.  Burrhus  and  Seneca  were  at  hand.  Tacitus
leaves  it  uncertain  whether,  as  some  believed,  they
were  actually  concerned  in  the  plot.  His  silence
may  be  taken,  perhaps,  as  so  far  favourable  to  them.
When,  however,  they  came  into  the  prince's

Complicity  of  , ' ,•> .  *. ...

seneca  and  presence,  and  heard  his  confession  of  guilt
and  earnest  demand  for  advice,  there  was
first  a  long  silence;  they  may  have  despaired  of
dissuading;  possibly  they  thought  that  there  now
was  no  alternative;  either  the  son  or  the  mother
must  perish.  At  last  Seneca  turned  to  Burrhus  and
asked  whether  the  soldiers  should  be  directed  to  kill
her.  Burrhus  replied  that  the  soldiers  could  not  be
trusted  against  a  daughter  of  Grermanicus :  Let  the
admiral,  he  said,  be  required  to  fulfil  his  promise.
.  ...  Be  mine  the  deed,  replied  Anicetus ;  where-
upon Nero  exclaimed  with  transport  that  this  was
the  first  day  of  his  imperium;  that  he  owed  the
boon  to  a  freed  man.  When  Agerinus  presently  ap-
peared, Anicetus  let  a  dagger  be  dropped  at  his  feet,
then  seized  him  as  an  assassin,  and  loaded  him  with
chains;  intending,  after  the  murder  of  Agrippina,
to  declare  that  she  had  attempted  to  assassinate  the
emperor,  and  failing  in  her  design,  had  put  an  end
to  her  own  existence.

The Baian palace and the Lucrine villa lay
Murder  of perhaps not many furlongs apart, and

Agrippma  f  • •  j ,  J j 5l_i  ~

effected. t  hose incidents,  crowded  within  a  narrow
space,  had all occurred in the course of  a few

A.D.59-A.U.812. UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  317

hours.  As  soon  as  Agrippina's  disaster  was  known
to  the  residents  of  the  coast,  they  rushed  to  the
beach,  thronged  the  moles  and  terraces  and  leapt
into  the  boats  beneath  them,  to  ascertain  what  had
befallen  her.  The  shore  gleamed  with  innumerable
torches,  and  resounded  with  cries,  and  vows,  and
agitated  murmurs.  When  it  was  known  that  she
had  escaped,  the  multitude  hurried  to  her  place  of
refuge  in  a  tumult  of  joy.  Arrived  at  the  doors,
they  found  them  beset  by  the  armed  band  of  Anicetus.
Placing  a  guard  at  every  entrance,  the  freedman  had
made  his  way  into  the  villa,  and  required  the  slaves
to  lead  him  into  their  mistress's  presence.  There
lay  the  matron  on  a  couch,  with  a  single  attendant,
by  the  light  of  a  single  lamp,  waiting  anxiously  for
her  messenger's  return.  Reassured  for  a  moment
by  the  enthusiasm  of  the  populace,  she  sickened  over
the  long  delay ;  and  when  the  cries  of  the  multitude
sank  into  silence,  too  surely  presaged  the  end  which
was  to  follow.  The  slave  herself  slipped  at  last  out
of  the  room,  and  as  she  exclaimed,  Do  you  too  desert
me  ?  she  beheld  Anicetus  and  his  soldiers  enter.  She
had  scarce  time  to  bid  them  return  with  a  favourable
account  of  her  health  to  their  master,  when  one  of
them  struck  her  on  the  head  with  a  stick,  and  the
rest  rushed  upon  her,  and  despatched  her  with  many
wounds,  she  exclaiming  only,  as  she  lay  prostrate
before  them,  Strike  the  womb  which  bore  a  monster! l
In  this  account,  says  Tacitus,  all  writers  in  the
main  agree.  As  to  what  is  reported  to
have  followed  there  was  no  such  general  beha^iom  oi

•L T  -j. •£  -n Nero-

Agreement :  we  may  believe  it  it  we  will.
Perhaps  he  would  wish  us  to  believe,  what  he  dares
not  himself  assert,  that  Nero came  in  person  to
examine  the  corpse  of  the  mangled  old  woman,  and
coolly  praised  its  beauty  to his attendants.8 The

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  3—8.
1  So  also  Dion,  Ixi.  14.;  OVK  rj$eii>  '6rt  ovrta  Ka\^n  ^repa  elxov.

318  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lin.

remains  were  burnt  the  same  night  without  ceremony ;
nor  were  they  even  entombed  till  some  of  Agrippina's
domestics  placed  the  ashes  in  a  decent  sepulchre
beside  the  road  to  Misenum.  One  of  her  freedmen,
Mnester,  slew  himself  upon  it ;  a  token  of  fidelity
which  deserves  at  least  to  be  recorded  to  her  credit.
Through  a  long  career  of  ambition  and  wickedness
she  had  never  blinded  herself  to  the  fate  which  too
surely  awaited  such  a  position  and  such  schemes  as
hers.  When  she  consulted  the  Chaldeans  about
her  son's  fortunes,  they  had  warned  her  that  he
was  destined  to  reign  himself  and  then  to  slay  her.
Let  him  kill  me,  she  had  answered,  let  him  but
reign.1

Then  began,  if  we  may  believe  some  writers,  the
Nero  attempts  torments  of  mind  which  from  thenceforth
HmTeif  to  never  ceased  to  gnaw  the  heart-strings  of  the
the  senate.  matricide :  the  Furies  shook  their  torches
in  his  face ;  Agrippina's  spectre  flitted  before  him ;
the  trumpet,  heard  at  her  midnight  obsequies,  still
blared  with  ghostly  music  from  the  hill  of  Misenum.2
However  they  might  falter  in  their  hopes  or  fears
about  the  future,  the  a"hcient  moralists  clung  fondly
to  the  conviction  that  successful  crime  meets  a  sure
punishment  in  this  world.3  We  shall  read  how,
many  years  later,  Nero  shunned  the  sight  of  Athens,
as  the  city  of  the  vengeful  Eumemdes,  and  shrank,
in  conscious  guilt,  from  initiation  in  the  Mysteries ;
yet,  I  fear,  too  much  reliance  must  not  be  placed  on
these  popular  imaginations,  for  we  are  informed  that

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  9.:  "Occidat  dum  imperet."
'  Suet.  Ner.  34. :  "  Ssepe  confessus  exagitari  se  mat.erria  specie,
verberibusque  Furiarum  ac  taedis  ardentibus." Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  10.;
Dion,  /. c.;  Stat.  Sylv.  ii.  7.  118.:

"  Pallidumque  visa
Matris  lampade  respicis  Neronem."
*  Juvenal,  xiii.  2.

"  Prima  est  hsec  ultio,  quod  se
Judice  nemo  nocens  absolvitur."

A.D.59-A.D.81'-'. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  319

he  ventured  himself  to  enact  the  part  of  Orestes ;
nor  would  Lucan  have  alluded  to  the  fate  of  Cly-
tEemnestra,  had  the  murder  of  Agrippina  been  known
to  have  left  a  sting  in  his  patron's  breast.1  We  are
assured,  however,  and  so  far  no  doubt  truly,  that  the
first  impulse  of  the  self-accuser  was  to  fly  from  the
scenes  which  could  not  change  their  faces  like  the
courtiers  to  flatter  him,  and  retire  to  Naples,  from
whence  he  despatched  a  letter  to  the  senate,  com-
posed, as  usual,  by  Seneca,  explaining  the  deed  he
had  perpetrated.  This  missive  asserted  that  his
mother  had  conspired  against  his  life ;  that  her  crea-
ture had  been  found  with  a  weapon  in  the  audience
chamber;  that,  in  confusion  at  the  discovery,  she
had  perished  by  her  own  hand.  /  am  scarcely  yet
assured  of  my  safety,  exclaimed  the  monster :  It  is
no  satisfaction  to  me,  he  added,  to  have  escaped*
The  disaster  in  the  bay  he  represented  as  an  acci-
dental shipwreck.  He  declared,  however,  that  the
death  of  this  imperious  woman  might  be  accepted,
at  all  events,  as  a  public  benefit ;  and  he  enumerated
her  acts  of  arrogance  and  ambition,  ascribing  to  her
fatal  influence  many  of  the  worst  excesses  of  Claudius.
The  explanation  bordered  too  closely  on  a  justifica-
tion :  it  was  taken  as  a  murderer's  confession  of  guilt,
veiled  by  the  ingenuity  of  a  hired  advocate.  But  to
put  the  best  face  on  their  master's  enormities  was
recognised  as  the  duty  both  of  the  minister  and  the
courtiers.  While  the  senators  heaped  flatteries  and

1  Lucan,  vii.  777.:

"  Haud  alias,  nondum  Scythica  purgatus  in  ara,

Eumenidum  vidit  vultus  Pelopeus  Orestes."

Comp.  Suet.  Ner.  2).;  Dion,  Ixiii.  22.  According  to  Fenerbach,
(der  Vatican.  Apollo),  the  Apollo  Belvedere,  which  may  have  stood
in  Nero's  villa  at  Antium,  is  not  the  Dragon-slayer,  but  the  Averter
of  the  Furies.  Undoubtedly  the  posture  is  not  that  of  an  archer.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  1\.  Quintilian  quotes  from  the  letter  these
words:  "  Salvum  me  csse  adhuc  nee  credo  nee  gaudeo.1'  Inst.  Orat
viii.  5.  18.

320  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  Mil.

felicitations  upon  him,  they  contrived  to  sell  theii
suffrages  for  some  acts  of  favour.  Some  exiles  were
recalled,  particularly  noble  women,  who  were  said  to
have  suffered  through  the  influence  of  Agrippina ;
the  ashes  of  Lollia  Paulina  were  restored  to  her
native  country,  and  a  tomb  permitted  to  be  raised
over  them.

Nevertheless,  the  crime  of  which  the  wretched
youth  was  conscious,  seemed  so  far  to  transcend  the
worst  deeds  of  the  Eoman  princes,  that  Nero  still
apprehended,  when  reflection  returned,  a  burst  of
indignation  and  even  violence.  The  demeanour  of
his  facile  nobles  reassured  him  beyond  all  expectation.
Still  he  hesitated  to  show  himself.  His  ad-

His  triumphal .  - , .  , . ,

entry  into  visers  urged  him,  as  his  best  security,  to
affect  the  confidence  of  innocence.  Still
trembling,  still  blushing,  he  entered  Eome  in  the
face  of  day.  Seneca,  Burrhus,  even  the  hardy  Ani-
cetus,  might  be  amazed  at  his  glowing  reception.
The  senators  came  forth  in  their  festal  robes  to  meet
him  :  their  wives  and  children  were  arranged  in  long
rows  on  either  side  of  the  way;  the  streets  were
thronged  with  seats  raised  against  the  houses,  to  ac-
commodate the  multitude  of  spectators  as  at  a  tri-
umphal procession.  And  a  triumph  indeed  it  was  :
Nero  had  conquered  Eome,  and  now  led  its  people  at
his  ehariot- wheels  to  the  Capitol.  There  he  offered
thanksgivings  to  the  (rods,  and  descended  again  only
to  fling  himself,  in  insolent  security,  into  every  form
of  monstrous  dissipation,  from  which  the  last  remains
of  reverence  for  a  mother  had  hitherto  served  to
withhold  him.1

So  secure,  indeed,  was  the  monster  of  his  subjects'
servile  devotion,  that  he  could  now  venture  to  despise
the  grim  raillery  with  which  the  populace  assailed
him ;  for  it  was  more  in  jest  than  indignation  that

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  13.

A.D.59-A.y.812. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  321

they  hung  the  sack,  the  instrument  of  death  for
parricide,  about  his  statues,  placarded  the  walls  with
the  triad  of  matricides,  Nero,  Orestes,  Alcmceon,  the
three  men  that  slew  their  mothers,  and  teased  him
by  pretending  to  denounce  the  perpetrators  of  these
offensive  ribaldries.1  A  discreet  neglect  soon  caused
this  petty  annoyance  to  cease.  The  current  of  men's
excited  imaginations  was  speedily  diverted

, ,,  ,.  ~  -c. L  Nero  gratifies

by  the  celebration  ot  magnificent  games,  the  populace
and  the  reflections  of  the  jeering  populace
were  turned  from  their  ruler's  cruelty  to  the  in-
decency with  which  he  descended  himself  upon  the
stage,  and  contended  in  feats  of  skill  with  the  singers
and  musicians.  Already  at  an  earlier  period,  in  his
passion  for  charioteering,  he  had  erected  a  circus  in
his  own  gardens  on  the  Vatican,  and  there  he  had
held  the  whip  and  reins,  in  the  presence  of  applauding
spectators  admitted  by  invitation  to  his  private  enter-
tainments. His  tutors,  it  was  said,  had  conceded
him  this  indulgence  to  keep  him  from  the  more
heinous  impropriety  of  singing  and  playing ;  for  he
threatened  to  come  forth  like  Apollo,  a  Eoman,  as
he  remarked,  no  less  than  a  Grecian  divinity,  and
claim  as  an  honour  for  himself  the  admiration  which
was  allowed  to  be  honourable  to  the  Deity.  But  he
would  be  now  no  longer  thus  restricted.  He  resolved
to  exhibit  himself  as  an  actor ;  and  still  shrinking
from  the  reputed  enormity  of  appearing  before  pro-
miscuous multitudes  on  the  public  stage,  he  devised
a  new  festival,  which  he  called  the  Juvenalia,  to  be
held  within  the  precincts  of  the  palace,  institution  of
The  prince  himself  was  the  hero  of  this  so-  the  Juvennlla-
lemnity.  Arrived  at  the  age  of  manhood,  his  beard
was  clipped,  and  the  first  tender  down  of  his  cheek

1  Dion,  Ixi.  1 6. :  Nepoic,  'OpeoTTjy,  'A\/f;uaiW,  (i.i}rpoKT6voi.
Com  p.  Suet.  Ner.  3.:

"  Qais  negat  .^Eneae  magna  de  stirpe  Neronem?

Sustulit  hie  marrem,  sustulit  ille  patrem,"
VOL.  VT.  Y

322  HisTORr  OF  THE  ROMANS  CH.  un

and  chin  enclosed  in  a  golden  casket,  and  dedicated
to  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol.1  This  ceremony  was  fol-
lowed by  music  and  acting ;  men  of  all  ranks  and  in
great  numbers  were  admitted  as  spectators ;  illustrious
Komans  were  bribed  to  exhibit  themselves  as  dancers
and  singers;  grave  senators  and  stately  matrons
capered  in  the  wanton  measures  of  mercenary  buf-
foons and  posture-makers.  The  degradation  to  which
Nero  thus  constrained  his  noblest  subjects  seems,  in
the  view  of  the  philosophic  Tacitus,  to  deepen  the
shades  which  hung  over  the  fame  of  the  matricide.
The  historian  proceeds  to  describe,  as  an  enhance-
ment of  his  excesses,  the  establishment  of  what  we
should  call  a  public  garden  round  the  basin  of  Au
^ustus  beyond  the  Tiber,  where  drinks  and  viands
were  distributed  to  the  populace,  and  all  comers,
gentle  and  simple,  received  a  ticket  for  refreshments,
which  good  men  exchanged  for  these  vile  commo-
dities because  they  were  compelled,  the  profligate
from  depraved  inclination.  Henceforth  vice,  he  says,
walked  abroad  more  heinous  and  more  shameless
than  ever.  These  promiscuous  assemblages  of  men
and  women  of  all  ranks  together,  corrupted  the
manners  of  the  age  more  than  any  cause  that  could
be  named.2

1  Dion,  Ixi.  19.  There  may  be  some  question  about  the  exact
period  of  the  institution  of  the  Juvenalia.  Tacitus  mentions  it  under
the  year  812,  but  he  does  not  expressly  state  that  it  was  then  in-
stituted, for  which,  however,  we  have  Dion's  authority.  The  cere-
mony of  first  cropping  the  beard  was  more  properly  performed  in
the  twentieth  year  (Suet.  Culiq.  10.);  and  if  Nero  was  born,  as  I
suppose,  in  October,  790,  this  would  bring  the  date  to  810  or  811.
Suetonius  and  Dion  tell  a  story,  which  I  reject  without  hesitation  as
worthless,  that  Nero  caused  his  aunt  Domitia  to  be  poisoned  with  a
pretended  medicine,  from  mere  caprice,  because,  being  sick,  she  had
said  she  could  now  die  without  regret,  having  lived  to  see  her
darling's  beard  clipped.  Hitherto  at  least  Nero's  enormities  were
not  without  a  motive.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  15.:  "Nee  ulla  moribus  corrupt  is  olim  plus  li-
fcidinuin  circuindcdit  quam  ilia  colluvies  "

A.P.60-A.U.813. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  323

Last  of  all,  to  crown  the  universal  degeneracy,
when  his  people  had  been  sufficiently  cor-

Nero  descend*  LJ-VT  J  ITT-  IP  .  i

upon  the  rupted,  JNero  descended  himself  upon  the
stage,  with  the  lyre  in  his  hand,  which  he
was  seen  to  tune  with  nervous  solicitude  before  com-
mencing his  performance.  His  voice  was  husky,  his
breath  was  short,  and  all  the  appliances  of  his  art
were  unavailing  to  correct  their  defects.1  But  of  this
he  was  much  too  vain  to  be  conscious.  Nevertheless,
to  silence  envious  detractors,  a  troop  of  soldiers  was
kept  always  in  attendance,  and  at  their  head  stood
Burrhus  himself,  disguising  the  sob  of  shame  with
ejaculations  of  applause.  A  band  of  young  nobles,
entitled  Augustani,  was  enrolled  to  applaud  the  per-
formance, to  praise  the  divine  beauty  of  the  prince,
and  the  divine  excellence  of  his  singing.2  Doubtless
the  verses  already  quoted  from  Seneca  were  fre-
quently in  their  mouths.  Nero  himself  was  a  verse-
maker  also.  His  claims  to  poetical  merit  were,  as
might  be  expected,  meagre,  and  he  so  far  distrusted
himself  in  this  art,  that  he  entertained  many  rhymers
about  him,  whose  business  it  was  to  catch  each  pretty
turn  of  phrase  or  thought  that  fell  from  him,  and
weave  it  into  verse  as  best  they  might.  You  may
trace,  says  Tacitus  gravely,  in  the  poems  of  Nero  the
manner  of  their  origin :  for  they  flow  not,  as  it
were,  with  a  current  and  inspiration  of  their  own  :
they  have  no  unity  of  style  or  meaning.3  In  private
Nero,  as  a  philosopher's  pupil,  affected  some  interest
in  philosophical  discussions,  the  common  pastime  of
educated  men  in  his  time ;  and  he  suffered  himself

1  Dion,  Ixi.  20.: Quin^a, Ppaxi>  KO.\  nf\av. Lucian,  Neron.  7.:
Ti  5^  irvevfia.  b\iyov  Kal  OVK  d.iroxp&i'  irov  5$.

2  Nero,  it  seems,  had  been  charmed  at  Naples  by  the  performance
of  professional  claqueurs  from  Alexandria,  and  made  them  his  model.
Suet.  Ner.  20.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  16.: "  Non  impetu  et instinctu,  nee uno  oro
fluens." Suetonius  {Ner.  52.)  holds  that  he  did  compose  his  verses
himself,  and  appeals  to  the  manuscripts  he  had  seen  of  tboxn.
v  2

324  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH, Mil.

to  be  attended,  after  the  fashion  of  the  day,  by  the
professed  sages  of  Greece  and  Eome.  It  is  said
however  that  he  had  no  real  sympathy  with  their
pursuits;  he  enjoyed  a  boyish  gratification  in  setting
them  to  wrangle  together.  Agrippina,  indeed,  is
accused  of  having  dissuaded  him  from  the  study,  as
unfit  for  a  king  of  men.1  For  painting  and  sculpture,
as  Grecian  arts,  he  may  have  acquired  the  taste  of
a  virtuoso,  and  the  charms  of  Grecian  architecture
incited  him  to  magnificence  in  building.2  But  his
true  delight  was  in  the  shows  of  the  theatre  and  the
institution  of  circus.  In  813  he  instituted  games  called
the  Neronia.  after  himself  Neronia,  to  be  conducted  in
the  Greek  fashion,  and  to  recur  periodically  like  the
Olympian.3  They  embraced  musical  and  gymnastic
contests,  as  well  as  chariot-racing.  For  games  of
athletic  skill  he  erected  a  gymnasium,  this  desig-
nation, as  well  as  the  contests  themselves,  being
altogether  new  to  the  Romans.  It  is  curious  to  read
in  Tacitus  how  the  old-fashioned  citizens,  still  a
numerous  and  respectable  body,  murmured  at  the
introduction  of  these  foreign  customs,  which  they
connected  with  the  reputed  profligacy  of  Grecian
morals,  and  how  the  rising  generation  defended  them.4
No  page  of  our  author  reads  more  like  a  declamation
of  our  own  day.  Nero  caused  himself  to  be  inscribed

1  Suet.  Ner.  52.

*  The  statues  of  the  Apollo  Belvedere,  whether  it  be  an  original
work  of  Grecian  art,  or  a  Roman  copy  (it  seems  not  yet  to  be  de-
cided whether  the  material  be  the  marble  of  Paros  or  of  Carrara),
and  the  Fighting  Gladiator,  were  found in the  ruins  of  Nero's
palace  at  Antium. Of  Nero's  taste  for  building  I  shall  speak  here-
after. On  the  subject  of  the  former  work,  see  above,  p.  319,  note.

*  Dion,  Ixi.  21.;  Suet.  Ner.: " Instituit  quinquennale  certamen
primus  omnium  Romse." According  to  Eckhel  (Doctr.  Numm.  vi.
264.)  these  games  continued  to  be  repeated  as  late  as  the  time  of
Constantine.

4  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  21,  22. The  contempt  of  the  Romans  for  the
gymriic  entertainments  of  Greece  is  marked  by  Lucan,  vii.  270.-.

"  Graiis  dclecta  juventus
{•jymnasiis  nderit,  studioque  ignava

A.D.GO-A.U.813.  UNDER THE EMPIKE.  325

on  the  list  of  Citharcedi,  and  obtained  the  prize  as
the  best  of  lyrists  without  an  antagonist ;  for  all  the
rest  were  declared  by  the  judges  unworthy  even  to
compete  with  him.  No  reward  was  given  for  elo
quence ;  but  Nero  again  was  pronounced  to  be  the
conqueror.  The  first  public  display  of  Lucan's
poetical  genius  was  made  on  this  occasion;  when  he
came  forward  to  sing  the  praises  of  the  prince  who
had  made  him  his  companion  and  assistant.1  On
the  whole  the  first  celebration  of  the  Neronia  was
dignified  and  imposing ;  for  the  low  buffoonery  of  the
histrions,  the  favourites  of  the  baser  sort,  was  excluded
from  this  Hellenic  festival.  It  was  remarked  that
from  this  time  the  Greek  fashions,  long  denizened  in
Naples  and  the  cities  of  Campania,  obtained  more
and  more  favour  with  the  Koman  voluptuaries ;  the
loose  Greek  robes  in  which  the  spectators  were  en-
joined to  array  themselves,  to  favour  the  illusion  of
the  spectacle,  were  retained  in  common  use,  and  dis-
placed, in  spite  of  the  sneer  of  Augustus,  the  toga  of
the  world's  masters.2

Our  authorities,  especially  Suetonius  and  Dion,
abound  in  details  of  the  grandeur  and  ex-
travagance of  the  shows  with  which  Nero  t^vaganfeof

? , , , .  ,  ,-11  the  shows.

astonished  his  people,  more  particularly  on  The  LU.U

-i i  •  i T T  -»  IT • • Maximi.

the  occasion  ot  celebrating  theLudi  Maximi,
as  he  styled  them,  for  the  eternity  of  the  Roman
Empire.  The  most  remarkable  of  these  exhibitions
was  perhaps  that  of  an  elephant  which  descended
from  the  cornice  of  the  amphitheatre  to  the  arena
upon  the  tight  rope — it  does  not  appear  how  it  first
reached  that  elevation — with  a  Roman  knight  on  its
back.  The  distribution  of  precious  objects — gold,

1  Suetonius,  vit.  Lucati.

9  Tac.  /.  c.  The  chlamys,  a  loose  and  short  cloak,  and  crepis,  a
kinil  of  sandal,  were  distinctive  articles  of  Grecian  costume,  alreadv
much  in  use  among  the  Koman  sojourners  at  the  Greek  cities  of
Italy.  See  note  of  Lipsius  on  Tac.  Ann,  xiv.  21.

326  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  en.  Ltn.

jewels,  tissues,  pictures,  animals,  and  finally  ships,
houses,  and  estates — exceeded  the  wanton  liberality
of  Caius.  Nero  followed  the  Eoman  tradition  in
constructing  an  amphitheatre  for  the  display  of  his
own  elegant  spectacles l ;  but  he  amazed  and  morti-
fied citizens  by  excluding,  in  the  spirit  of  Greek
humanity,  the  combats  of  gladiators,  and  by  with-
holding the  blood  even  of  condemned  criminals.
Yet  his  scruples  were  those  of  the  man  of  art,  rather
than  the  man  of  feeling.  His  Roman  entertainments
were  served  after  the  bloodier  fashion  of  his  own
countrymen.  In  the  course  of  his  reign  he  is  said  to
have  produced  not  less  than  five  hundred  senators
and  six  hundred  knights  arrayed  for  combat,  though
evidently  their  contests  were  not  meant  to  be  mortal.
While  the  populace  exulted  in  the  descent  of  their
magnates  into  the  arena,  Nero  himself  was  better
pleased  when  he  prevailed  on  them  to  compete  on
the  stage  in  music,  and  reduced  what  at  other  times
had  been  an  occasional  sally  of  vanity  to  a  regular
practice.  Foreign  spectators  were  more  affected  than
either  the  prince  or  his  people,  at  beholding  beneath
their  feet  a  Paulus,  a  Mummius,  a  Scipio,  and  a
Marcellus,  whose  fathers'  trophies  were  still  con-
spicuous in  the  streets,  whose  fathers'  halls  and
temples  were  the  proudest  monuments  of  the  city.2
Nero  was  the  first  of  the  emperors  who  seems,  with
some  emotions  of  sensibility,  to  have  been  wholly
devoid  of  national  prejudices.  Coarse  and  unamiable
as  the  national  feeling  of  the  Eomans  was,  the  world

1  The  theatres  adapted  to  scenic  representations,  in  which  the
Greeks  were  content  to  exhibit  such  spectacles,  were  incapable,  of
course,  of  receiving  the  crowds  of  the  great  metropolis;  but  Nero,
like  many  great  builders  before  him,  was  content  with  a  temporary
edifice  of  wood.

*  Suet.  Ner.  12.;  Dion,  Ixi.  17.:  Kol  eSaKTi/AoSef/cTow  76  avrovs
iAATJAojs,  Kal  eire\eyov,  VlaKfS6ves  ftev,  our6s  taTiv  6  rov  IlavAou  e/cyowor
'EAArji'ey  5e,  ovros  rov  Mofj.fj.iov  2uceXjaiTa«,  fSere  -rbv  K\avSiov
'HirfipSiTcu,  "(SfTf  rbv  "Ainriov  'AffiacoJ,  rbv  AO'UKIOV  "IfiripfS,  rbt
floinr\iov  Kapxr)5oV«oi,  'A<)iKav6v  •  'Paifnaioi  5e  iravras.

1.0.60-A.D.813.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  327

had  no  better  security  against  wanton  and  unmitigated
tyranny.

We  have  now  reached  a  period  when  the  chief  of
the  Koman  state,  the  representative  of  its  Nero.s  insen.
most  illustrious  families,  is  found  alto-  ^Si0
gether  insensible  to  the  principles  which  fe«lins-
had  carried  her  in  triumph  through  every  combi-
nation of  foreign  and  domestic  peril.  The  announce-
ment of  such  a  fact  may  induce  us  to  pause  in  our
narrative,  and  estimate,  as  we  best  may,  the  circum-
stances of  the  times  which  made  such  a  phenomenon
possible.  Was  the  gay  and  thoughtless,  but  instructed
and  accomplished,  prince  before  us  the  impersonation
of  the  general  feeling,  or  an  exception  to  it  ?  He
was  partly  both.  His  want  of  sympathy  with  antiquity
is  to  be  ascribed  partly  to  his  education,  which  was
exceptional,  partly  also  to  his  position,  in  which  he
represented  the  lowest  class  of  citizens,  and  reflected
their  temper  and  instincts.  The  teaching  The  regu]t  of
of  Seneca,  which  drew  all  its  interest  from  K"^"
the  Greek  philosophy,  was  alien  from  the  sloic8P°hi£-e
old  Eoman  sentiments.  His  doctrines  80pUy'
were  essentially  cosmopolite.  He  sought  to  refer
questions  of  honour  and  justice  to  general  and  eter-
nal principles,  rather  than  solve  them  by  the  test  of
precedents  and  political  traditions.  The  educated
men  of  the  later  Eepublic,  as  well  as  of  the  early
Empire,  had  opened  their  arms  wide  to  embrace  these
foreign  speculations ;  and  whether  they  had  resigned
themselves  to  Epicurism,  as  was  the  fashion  under
Julius  and  Augustus,  or  had  cultivated  Stoicism,
which  was  now  more  generally  in  vogue,  they  equally
abandoned  the  ground  of  their  unpolished  fathers,
which  asserted  the  preeminence  of  patriotism  above
all  the  virtues,  the  subordination  of  every  claim  of
right  and  duty  to  national  interest  and  honour.  But
men  cannot  rule  the  world  in  the  same  spirit  in  which
they  conquer  it.  Humanity  in  its  widest  sense,  as

328  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  €H.  Lilt.

sympathy  with  man,  follows,  by  the  condition  of  GUI
nature,  on  the  sense  of  ease  and  security.  We  shall
presently  see,  indeed,  the  Eoman  Stoics  suddenly
awaking  from  this  dream  of  philanthropy,  and  fling-
ing themselves  againjwith  passionate  disappointment,
upon  the  narrower  interests  which  constituted  the
strength  of  their  fathers ;  trying  indeed,  but  feebly
and  with  no  consistency,  to  connect  the  duties  of  the
Koman  with  the  universal  spirit  of  rectitude  and
holiness.  But  as  yet,  Stoicism,  in  the  ranks  of
Eoman  society,  was  merely  a  speculative  creed ;  and
the  habit  now  prevalent  there,  of  speculating  on  the
unity  of  mankind,  the  equality  of  races,  the  univer-
sality of  justice,  the  subjection  of  prince  and  people,
of  masters  and  slaves,  of  conqueror  and  conquered,
to  one  rule  of  Eight,  tended  undoubtedly  to  sap  the
exclusive  and  selfish  spirit  of  Eoman  antiquity.
It  was  by  his  position,  however,  at  the  head  of  the
dissolute  democracy  of  Eome,  that  Nero

2nd.  Of  his  , .  • n j j- .  i •  ir

position  at was  taught  more  especially  to  divest  himselt

the  head  of  _ _ ?,  ,  , J .  . ,

the  Roman  of  the  ideas  and  motives  which  seemed  to
become  the  offspring  of  the  Domitii  and
the  Julii.  The  eminence,  indeed,  to  which  he  was
born  might  itself  preclude  him  from  ever  imbibing
them.  The  men  by  whom  his  infancy  had  been  sur-
rounded were  slaves  and  freedmen,  chiefly  of  Greek
extraction,  men  whose  lessons  of  life  and  manners
were  pointed  doubtless  with  many  a  gibe  at  the
decrepitude  of  Latium  and  Sabellia,  with  proud
laudation  of  the  genius  of  Hellenic  culture,  which
had  survived  so  many  conquests  and  captivities,  and
laid  its  invisible  yoke  on  the  necks  of  the  world's
masters.  The  society  of  the  palace  displayed,  in
striking  colours,  the  intellectual  superiority  of  the
Greeks ;  and  Nero  was  led,  by  all  his  early  tuition,
to  regard  intellectual  polish  as  the  true  end  of  civili-
zation. But  the  emperor,  moreover,  was  the  repre-
sentative of  the  Eoman  populace ;  of  that  hybrid

A-D.60-A.ir.813. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  329

multitude  of  the  circus  and  the  baths,  which  owed  no
fealty  to  the  traditions  of  the  forum  and  the  camp.
These  were  the  natural  supporters  of  his  tribunitian
power,  while  the  nobles,  the  true  blood  of  Kome,
might  be  regarded  as  his  hereditary  enemies.  Even
the  names  of  his  predecessors,  Tiberius  and  Caius,
might  remind  him  of  the  tribunes  of  two  centuries
before,  the  champions  of  the  plebs  against  the  opti-
mates.  We  may  almost  imagine,  that  in  this  pre-
valence of  personal  over  family  appellations,  there
lingered  yet  a  reminiscence  of  the  popularity  of  the
Gracchi  '

It  would  appear,  indeed,  that  while  the  nobles  had
no  cause  of  quarrel  against  their  prince,  but  Nero.9  tem.
for  the  offence  he  may  have  given  to  antique  SiSgp/iL
prejudices,  they  allowed  themselves  to  re-  M^yand
fleet  on  his  character  and  administration  in  llbel<
terms  that  could  not  fail  to  make  a  breach  between
them.  Scandalous  as  the  vices  and  the  amusements
of  Nero  had  now  become,  monstrous  as  were  the
crimes  he  had  perpetrated  within  the  sphere  of  his
own  family,  his  government  was  still  conducted  on
wholesome  principles,  the  co-ordinate  powers  of  the
state  flourished  under  his  tolerant  protection,  the
magistrates  were  held  in  honour,  the  senate  bore
something  more  than  the  mere  semblance  of  author-
ity. The  state  was  prosperous,  the  laws  were  re-
spected, public  criminals  were  punished,  virtue  and
moderation  were  recognised  as  claims  to  reward.
Under  such  circumstances,  the  canker  of  internal
corruption,  the  absence  of  high  principles,  might  be
concealed  from  the  eyes  of  ordinary  observers ;  and
it  may  be  doubted  whether  all  the  philosophy  of

1  The  indignant  allusion  of  Lucan  to  the  Drusi  and  Gracchi,  and
to  the  supposed  exultation  of  their shades  at  the  success  of  the
Ca;sareau  usurpation,  is  not  uninstructive  (Phars.  vi.  in  fin.)-
"  Vidi  ego  laetantes,  popularia  nomina,  Drusos;
Lc^ibus  imrnodicos,  ausosque  ingcntia  Gracohos."

330  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Llii.

Rome  could  furnish  one  man  wise  enough  to  look
beneath  the  surface,  and  detect  the  symptoms  of
national  decay  which  really  lurked  there.  The  in-
stincts of  Christianity  alone  could  indicate  the  dis-
ease, at  the  same  time  that  they  afforded  the  remedy.
We  must  allow,  then,  that  justice  as  well  as  prudence
should  have  repressed  the  selfish  jealousy  of  the
nobles;  and  taught  them  at  least  to  tolerate  the
ruler  who  deserved  well  of  the  republic.  But  it
would  seem  that  they  had  no  such  self-control.  In
the  year  815,  the  turning-point,  as  it  is  commonly
regarded,  of  Nero's  public  administration,  a  prsetor
named  Antistius,  who  already,  as  tribune  of  the
plebs,  had  shown  little  disposition  to  confine  himself
within  the  limits  of  his  functions,  thought  fit  to
compose  verses  against  the  emperor,  and  to  recite
them  in  a  company  of  knights  and  senators.  The
law  of  Majesty,  under  which  such  indecent  raillery
would  have  met  with  speedy  punishment,  had  been
set  aside :  Nero  piqued  himself  on  his  generous  dis-
couragement of  the  informers.  But  the  flatterers  of
power  were  ever  prompt  to  seize  an  opportunity  for
courting  it.  It  was  easy  to  represent  that  the  safety
of  the  prince  required  protection  to  his  dignity.  A
few  years  only  of  exemption  from  the  shame  and
peril  of  delation  had  sufficed  to  blunt  the  sense  of
its  enormities,  and  the  demand  now  made  by  the
courtly  Capito  for  reviving  of  charges  of  Majesty,
seems  to  have  been  hailed  by  all  with  blind  precipi-
tation. The  senate  assented  without  serious  opposi-
tion from  any  of  its  members.  But  Capito  required,
further,  that  the  action  of  the  law  should  be  retro-
spective. The  ribaldry  of  Antistius,  he  protested,
was  not  only  shocking,  but  dangerous.  The  safety
of  the  state,  not  of  the  emperor  only,  required  an
example  to  be  made.  The  stretch  of  legal  principle
for  his  punishment  was  well  deserved;  and  it  was
for  once  only.  Many  acquiesced  in  these  violent

A.D.62-A.U.815. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  331

proceedings,  so  at  least  they  pretended,  to  give  the
prince  an  opportunity  of  gracefully  absolving  his
maligner  by  the  exercise  of  the  tribunitian  veto.  A
consul  designate,  inspired  by  this  refined  notion  of
flattery,  proposed  that  the  culprit  should  be  stripped
of  his  prsetorship  and  scourged  to  death,  after  the
ancient  manner.  The  senators  ratified  the  outrageous
sentence  with  headlong  ardour ;  but  Paetus  Thrasea
alone,  one  of  the  few  honest  men  among  them,  re-
fused to  concur  in  it,  and  while  he  tempered  his
vote  with  much  praise  of  the  emperor,  and  invectives
against  his  defamer,  invoked  the  milder  punishment
of  exile  with  confiscation.  This  temperate  counsel
had  a  great  effect  on  the  impulsive  assembly,  ever
prone,  as  we  have  seen,  to  the  most  sudden  conver-
sions, and  devoid,  it  would  seem,  of  those  convic-
tions and  principles,  the  possession  of  which  is  among
the  most  essential  qualities  of  a  deliberative  body.
It  was  determined  to  proceed  no  further  without
first  ascertaining  the  emperor's  real  wishes ;  and  this
precipitate  flattery  ended  in  placing  him  in  the  dis-
agreeable position  of  deciding  as  a  judge  on  a  ques-
tion of  his  own  personal  dignity.  Nero  hastened  to
refer  the  affair  again  to  the  senate,  not  omitting,
however,  to  claim  some  credit  for  allowing  it  to  ab-
solve the  criminal.  After  some  farther  discussion,
Thrasea's  firmness  prevailed ;  and  the  senators  gene-
rally acquiesced  in  his  vote  for  the  minor  punish-
ment.1 Patient  as  the  emperor  had  shown  himself
in  the  case  of  a  libel  against  his  own  person,  he  bore,
as  might  be  expected,  with  equal  composure,  the
publication  of  scandalous  writings  against  the  senate.
When  a  certain  Fabricius  Veiento  was  accused  of
putting  forth  offensive  libels  against  the  fathers  and
the  pontiffs,  Nero,  to  whom  the  cognisance  of  the
charge  was  referred  by  appeal,  again  declined  to  in-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  48. For  the  turbulent  character  of  this  man,
called  elsewhere  (Ann.  xiii.  53.;  xvi.  10.)  L.  Vetus,  see  xiii.  28.

332  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  <  H.  (.in.

berfere.  It  was  not  till  a  fresh  indictment  was  pre-
sented against  the  culprit,  and  he  was  declared  to
have  trenched  on  the  imperial  prerogatives,  and  even
to  have  sold  magistracies  and  other  appointments
that  the  chief  of  the  state  could  be  induced  to  sum-
mon him  before  his  tribunal.  Veiento  was  banished
from  Italy;  his  books,  the  original  subject  of  com-
plaint, were  ordered  to  be  burnt,  and  it  was  declared
criminal  to  read  or  possess  them.  As  long  as  this
interdict  lay  upon  them,  they  were  sought  for  with
ardour ;  but  when  it  was  shortly  afterwards  removed,
they  soon  ceased  to  attract  curiosity.1

To  those  who,  with  the  bitter  experience  of  past
Death  of  years,  foresaw  that  the  first  step,  however
fs"ribeud  to  hesitating,  in  the  direction  of  tyranny,
poison.  must  rapidly  lead  to  a  revival  of  its  pristine
terrors,  even  these  indications  of  imperial  jealousy
might  serve  as  a  warning.  But  the  young  Caesar's
progress  in  dissipation  and  expense  gave  nearer
cause  for  apprehension.  The  wasteful  extravagance
of  his  tirst  eight  years  could  not  have  been  main-
tained with  pure  hands,  had  he  not  found  in  the
coffers  of  his  predecessor  the  accumulated  treasures
of  a  reign  of  carefulness  and  moderation.  Though
no  friendly  voice  has  deigned  to  signalize  the  economy
of  Claudius,  this  fact  seems  alone  sufficient  to  estab-
lish it,  and  to  add  another  to  the  various  circum-
stances which  impugn  the  common  notion  of  his
imbecility,  and  the  unchecked  rapacity  of  his  minis-
ters. But  the  descent  from  dissipation  to  extrava-
gance, from  extravagance  to  want,  from  want  to  vio-
lence and  tyranny,  was  inevitable.  It  could  only  be
a  question  of  time.  The  profusion  of  the  prince
would  surely  grow  with  indulgence;  his  treasury
must  stand  always  empty,  and  unlimited  power  would
not  long  be  baulked  of  the  means  of  replenishing  it.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  50.:  "Conquisitos  lectitatosque,  donee  ouin  peri-
culo  parabantur,  inox  licentia  habendi  oblivionem  attulit.

A  D.62-A.C.815.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  333

Such  was  the  gloomy  prospect  before  the  nobles,
when,  the  first  to  apprehend  as  the  first  to  feel  the
tyranny  of  their  autocrat,  they  saw  with  dismay  the
death  of  Burrhus  and  the  removal  therewith  of  the
strongest  bulwark  against  the  encroachments  of  un-
thrifty despotism.  Eumours  of  poison  were  whis-
pered among  them,  and  symptoms  were  reported
which  gave  colour  to  the  suspicion.  Nero,  it  was
related,  had  repeatedly  come  to  the  sick  man's  bed-
side, to  inquire  after  his  health  ;  but  he  could  extort
from  him  no  thanks  for  this  solicitude,  no  frank
avowal  of  his  sufferings,  but  only  the  dry  answer,
I  am  doing  well.1  But,  however  this  may  be,  neither
symptoms  nor  rumours  had  so  much  effect  on  the
general  belief  .as  the  apprehensions  excited  by  the
character  of  the  personages  between  whom  Nero
divided  the  military  command  which  had  reposed  in
the  hands  of  Burrhus.  Fenius  Eufus  was  timid  and
indolent,  ready  to  please  either  prince  or  people  by
any  base  acquiescence  :  but  the  wickedness  Eievation  of
of  Tigellinus  was  more  active  ;  already  in-  Tisellinu8-
famous  as  the  partner  of  his  master's  debaucheries,
he  became  the  worst  adviser  of  his  tyranny,  and  the
willing  instrument  of  his  cruelties.2  Such  were  the
ministers  to  whom  Nero  instinctively  resorted,  a  bad
man  and  a  weak  man  ;  the  one  to  contrive  crimes,
the  other  to  sanction  them.  And  at  this  moment  he
might  have  a  special  motive  for  ridding  himself  of  a
brave  and  honest  adviser  ;  for  he  was  meditating  a
divorce  from  Octavia,  which  Burrhus  sturdily  op-
posed as  unjust  and  impolitic.  When  urged  by  the
emperor  to  accede  to  it,  he  had  bluntly  replied,
at  least  was  the  reply  the  Romans  delighted  to

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  51.

2  Tac.  /.  c.  ;  Dion,  IxiL  13. This  seems  to  have  been  the  first  occa-
sion of  dividing  the  prefecture  between  two,  the  plan  recommended  by
Maecenas according  to  Dion (lii.  24.): ru>v  5t  5fc  l-mriuv  $6a  rovt
ipitTTOvs  TT/S  Trepi  <re  fypovpas  &p%ttv.

334  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lrti.

ascribe  to  him):  If  you  dismiss  the  daughter  of
Claudius,  restore  at  least  the  empire  which  was  her
dowry.1

The  death  of  Burrhus  helped  to  break  down  the
influence  of  Seneca  also.  This  result,  how-
ktwmpta  to  ever,  flowed  in  a  great  measure  from  the
from  public  blind  jealousy  of  the  nobles  themselves.  It
was  natural  that  they  should  regard  as  an
upstart  the  provincial,  the  sophist,  the  son  of  the
grammarian:  they  might  cavil  at  the  liberality  of
his  views,  and  impugn  his  influence  as  pernicious.
From  them,  probably,  came  the  accusations  which
were  now  heaped  on  the  surviving  guardian  of  Nero's
innocence,  and  which  Nero  showed  himself  little
anxious  to  baffle.  The  riches  Seneca  had  acquired
were  imputed  to  him  as  a  crime ;  it  was  insinuated
that  the  frugal  sage  had  amassed  them  to  hatch
treason  and  corrupt  the  populace.  It  was  pretended
moreover  that  he  vaunted  himself  the  prince's  master
in  eloquence  and  poetry,  disparaging  at  the  same
time  the  excellence  he  could  not  hope  to  rival  in
music  and  charioteering.  Nero's  petty  and  vindic-
tive spirit  was  an  instrument  easily  played  upon.
Seneca  was  not  blind  to  the  shy  consciousness  which
shunned  his  presence.  Fear  and  habit  alone  con-
tinued to  preserve  his  life.  Now  was  the  time  to
take  the  course  which  he  had  long  meditated,  as  the
means  of  escaping  from  danger.  He  pleaded  age
and  ill  health,  and  demanded  leave  to  withdraw  from
court ;  at  the  same  time  he  offered  to  relinquish  the
wealth  which  rendered  him,  as  he  knew,  most  ob-
noxious. Such  tokens  of  distrust  alarmed  Nero.  He
set  himself  to  caress  and  cajole;  his  blandishments
were  fascinating,  but  his  entreaties  were  in  fact  com-
mands ;  and  Seneca  found  his  escape  cut  off,  without

1  .Both  Dion  and  Suetonius  ascribe  the  death  of  Burrhus  more  con-
fidently to  poison.  The  former  writer  remarks  the  rude  freedom  of
speech  in  which  the  prefect  indulged  (Ixii.  13.).

A.D.62-A.D.815.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  335

being  for  a  moment  deceived  as  to  the  imminence  of
his  peril.  -Muttering  to  himself  or  his  friends  the
wisest  maxims  of  his  school,  he  renounced  all  out-
ward show,  either  of  wealth  or  influence,  and  pre-
tended to  devote  himself  more  earnestly  than  ever  to
philosophic  abstraction.1

Although  the  ostensible  authority  over  the  praeto-
rians might  be  divided  between  Rufus  and
Tigellinus,  it  was  not  long  before  the  entire  fl«^o>

C  J  £ AU  •  J  t.elUnus.

confidence  of  the  emperor  was  given  to  a
single  favourite.  Rufus,  indeed,  owed  his  elevation
primarily  to  the  good- will  of  the  populace,  to  whom
he  was  endeared  by  the  liberality  in  dispensing  their
dole  of  grain  without  making  a  profit  himself;  he
had  also  been  admitted  to  the  friendship  of  Agrippina ;
and  on  both  these  accounts  he  became  an  object  of
suspicion  to  Nero.  But  his  colleague,  a  man  of  ob-
scure birth  and  of  no  pretensions  to  distinction  or
popularity,  was  better  fitted  to  obtain  a  tyrant's  con-
fidence. This  confidence  once  acquired  he  sought
successfully  to  keep  by  humouring  the  prince's  pas-
sions, and  plunging  him  into  crimes  on  the  plea  of
safety  and  necessity.

The  first  victims to  this man's intrigues  were
Plautus  and  Sulla,  personages  of  high  rank

.  ,  . '  r  „ , ' , ,  °  , Execution  of

and  consideration,  or  whom  JNero,  as  the  Ruteiiius
favourite  knew,  was  painfully  jealous. Ru-  Cornell8™
bellius  Plautus,  whose  relation  to  the  im-
perial family  has 'been  before  noticed,  was  generally
respected  for  his  character ;  his  name  was  connected
accordingly  with  the  plot  which  Silana  had  ventured
to  impute  to  Agrippina ;  and  recently  on  the  appear-
ance of  a  comet  which  was  supposed  to  portend  the

Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  53 — 56.  The  fears  of  Seneca  and  the  artifices
of  Nero  are  set  forth  in  a  dialogue  between  them.  Oar  dramatic
fabulist  neAXir  wears  the  historian's  veil  more  loosely  than  in  this
scene,  which  assuredly  was  never  acted,  and  still  less  conld  have  teen
reported.

336  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lin

fall  of  the  reigning  prince,  it  was  to  him  that  they
had  turned  their  eyes  as  the  fittest  and  most  natural
successor.1  Nero  had  recommended  his  kinsman  to
remove  from  Borne  to  his  estates  in  Asia ;  and  here
Plautus  had  resided  since  813  with  his  wife  and  a
modest  retinue  of  slaves,  abstaining  from  all  parti-
cipation in  affairs.  Still  Nero  watched  him  with
anxiety,  while  Tigellinus  continued  to  insist  upon  the
birth,  the  wealth,  and  the  reputation  of  the  exile,  and
the  proximity  of  his  retreat  to  the  armies  of  Syria.
It  was  determined  in  secret  conclave  that  his  life
should  be  taken,  and  for  this  purpose  a  centurion
with  sixty  soldiers,  under  the  orders  of  an  eunuch  of
the  palace,  was  despatched  from  Eome.  Sulla,
meanwhile,  had  been  removed  to  Massilia:  he  was
poor  while  Plautus  was  rich ;  he  was  despicable  in
character,  while  Plautus  was  highly  esteemed ;  but
the  nobility  of  his  descent  and  the  name  of  the  great
dictator  could  be  objected  against  him,  and  the  Grer-
manic  legions,  it  was  thought,  might  possibly  attach
themselves  to  him.  Such  were  the  alarms  of  the
un warlike  stripling,  who  kept  a  handful  of  guards  in
his  service  only  by^  largesses  and  caresses.2  Sulla's
fate  was  soon  decided.  It  required  but  six  days  for
Nero's  myrmidons  to  reach  the  coast  of  Graul,  and
the  exile  was  already  slain  and  his  head  brought  to
the  emperor,  while  the  murderers  of  Plautus  were  still
on  their  journey.  As  soon  as  it  was  known  in  the

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  1 9.,  xiv.  22. :"  Quasi  jam  depulso  Nerone,  qnisnam
deligeretur  anquirebant;  et  omnium  ore  Rubellius  Plautus  cele-
brabatur. "

z  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  57.:  "Propinquos  huic  Orientis, illi  Germanise  ex-
ercitus  ....  erectas  Gallias  ad  nomen  dictatorium."  The  Nar-
bonensis,  as  has  been  remarked  more  than  once  in  the  course  of  this
history,  was  closely  connected  with  the  old  senatorial  party  under
Pompcius,  Domitius,  and  Fonteius.  It  is  curious  to  find  this  con-
nexion again  referred  to.  after  all  the  pains  the  Caesars  had  taken  to
undo  it.  It  is  not  impossible  that  the  democratic  emperor  may  have
been  reminded  of  it  by  the  recent  attempt  of  Gastulicus  to  assert
his  independence  in  that  quarter

A.P.62-A.U.815.  UNDER THE EMP1KE.  337

city  that  this  precious  life  was  also  in  danger,  some
of  his  kinsmen  hastened  to  advertise  him,  and  their
warnings,  with  exhortations  to  resist  and  dare  the
worst,  reached  him  before  the  messengers  of  death
arrived.  It  seems  strange,  indeed,  that  the  victim
should  have  made  no  effort  to  escape  or  to  resist.1
All  Asia  lay  before  him  for  flight :  the  legions  of  the
East  were  commanded  by  Corbulo,  whose  fame  made
him  odious  to  the  emperor.  But  Plautus  was  un-
moved :  whether  he  despaired  of  escaping  or  defending
himself,  or  was  actually  weary  of  the  suspense  of  his
position,  or  whether  he  hoped  by  submission  to  avert
the  confiscation  of  his  patrimony,  he  calmly  pursued
his  exercises  and  studies,  and  was  found  at  last  by
his  assassins  unrobed  for  the  games  of  the  palaestra.
The  eunuch  looked  on  while  the  centurion  struck  the
victim's  -head  off.  When  the  trophy  was  brought  to
Bomer,  Nero  is  said  to  have  exclaimed,  that  he  was
now  free  to  effect  his  marriage  with  Poppsea,  without
fear  of  a  rival  to  profit  by  the  public  commiseration
for  Octavia.  But  he  pretended  to  be  delivered  from
two  dangerous  adversaries,  and  required  the  senate  to
congratulate  him,  and  decree  a  thanksgiving  for  the
state  preserved  and  a  revolution  averted.2

Thus  at  the  close  of  the  eighth  year  of  his  princi-
pate  did  Nero  exhibit  himself,  almost  with-  Further  de.
out  disguise,  as  a  vulgar  tyrant,  timid  and  ™£%™mtar
sanguinary,  cutting  off  one  by  one  the  most  cruelty>
eminent  around  him  in  station  or  virtue. From  this

1  Many  of  my  readers  will  remember  Gibbon's  remark,  and  tho
striking  note  appended  to  it:  "To  resist  was  fatal;  and  it  was  im-
possible to  fly.  .  .  .  Under  Tiberius  a  Roman  knight  attempted
u>  fly  to  the  Parthians.  He  was  stopped  in  the  straits  of  Sicily ;  but
so  little  danger  did  there  appear  in  the  example  that  the  most  jealous
of  tyrants  disdained  to  punish  it."  See  Tac.  Ann.  vi.  14.  Neverthe-
less the  explanation  must  be  felt  to  be  unsatisfactory.  I  can  only
refer,  in  addition,  1.  to  the  gross  apathy  with  regard  to  death  in  which
the  Romans  were  now  generally  sunk;  and  2,  to  their  singular  ab-
horrence of  exile  among  strangers.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  57 — 59.

VOL.  VI.  7,

338  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lin.

time  no  senator  could  fail  to  see  that  his  own  life
hung  only  on  the  caprice  of  a  master,  and  of  the
creatures  who  surrounded  him.  It  was  impossible
for  him  to  impose  on  himself,  any  more  than  on  the
prince,  by  the  abject  servility  of  his  adulation.  Yet
having  once  devoted  himself  to  soothing  the  monster
by  caresses,  all  his  moral  courage  deserted  him ;  con-
demned by  his  own  conscience,  he  had  no  prop  to
lean  on ;  there  seemed  no  other  course  for  him  but
to  repeat  and  daily  increase  the  dose  of  flattery,  to
crouch  more  obsequiously  under  every  act  of  cruelty
and  oppression ;  only  to  hope  that  his  own  turn  of
suffering  might  come  the  last.  Seneca's  influence
was  gone.  It  is  some  satisfaction  to  believe  that  the
crimes  which  followed  were  neither  suggested  nor
excused  by  this  preacher  of  expediency ;  and  we  may
hope  that,  at  last,  when  his  doctrines  were  reproved
by  the  result,  he  learned  to  detest  the  subterfuges
under  which  he  had  sheltered  his  own  dereliction
from  honesty  and  virtue.  The  tyrant's  passions  now
ranged  unrestrained.  The  crime  he  had  long  pre-
pared was  about  to  be  consummated.  To  the  child-
wife  to  whom  he  was  united,  he  never  felt  nor  pre-
tended attachment.  Their  cohabitation  had  been
Fan  of  brief  and  barren.  Octavia  was  too  artless
octavia.  f-0  raise  anv  obstacle  to  his  licentious
amours.  Yet,  as  the  daughter  of  Messalina,  even
her  existence  would  remind  him  of  the  crimes  which
had  raised  him  to  power  :  as  the  child  of  Claudius,
the  people,  with  their  usual  caprice,  might  lavish
upon  her  the  favour  they  had  withheld  from  her
father.  To  these  obvious  motives  for  jealousy  was
added  the  fierce  ambition  of  Poppsea,  who  demanded
of  her  lover  the  last  proof  of  his  devotion.  Still  some
pretext  was  necessary,  and  the  barrenness  of  the  de-
serted wife  was  alleged  as  a  reason  for  repudiating
her.  She  was  required  to  remove  from  the  palace ;
but  at  the  same  time  the  house  of  Rurrhus  and  the

A.».62-A.tT.81i.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  339

estates  of  Plautus  were,  with  a  show  of  liberality,
assigned  to  her.  The  marriage  with  Poppaea  followed
only  twelve  days  later.  The  intruder  was  now  in  a
position  to  destroy  the  victim  she  had  injured.  She
contrived  an  accusation  against  her  of  adultery  with
a  slave ;  her  maids  were  tortured  to  extort  evidence
of  her  guilt ;  and  Tigellinus  paid  court  to  the  reign-
ing favourite  by  presiding  at  the  foul  examination.
Well  did  he  earn  the  scathing  sarcasm  which  clings
like  the  shirt  of  Nessus  to  his  name.1  Yet  the  pre-
tended revelations  thus  odiously  obtained  hardly  gave
a  colour  to  the  harsh  measure  of  sending  her  to  a
place  of  custody  in  Campania ;  and  when  the  populace,
excited  by  such  great  and  unmerited  misfortunes,
murmured  against  the  decree,  Nero  found  it  neces-
sary to  recal  her.  Thereupon  the  citizens  rushed
tumultuously  to  the  Capitol  to  sacrifice  to  the  national
divinities ;  they  overthrew  all  the  statues  of  Poppsea
within  their  reach,  while  they  crowned  Octavia's  with
flowers.  They  crowded  about  the  palace,  and  filled
its  courts :  the  emperor  dispersed  them  with  a  mili-
tary force,  and  replaced  the  images  of  his  paramour.
Yet  he  dared  not  persist  in  this  defiance :  trembling
and  irresolute,  he  neither  dared  to  retain  Poppsea  in
the  palace,  nor  could  he  determine  to  restore  Octavia
to  her  place  and  rights.  If,  while  still  absent  in
Campania,  her  name  alone  sufficed  to  raise  a  tumult,
what,  he  asked,  might  be  the  effect  of  her  actual
return  to  the  city  ?  But  the  charges  hitherto  made
against  her  had  failed  of  reasonable  proof:  even  if
proved,  an  intrigue  with  a  slave  deserved,  in  Roman
eyes,  neither  the  name  nor  punishment  of  treason.
Another  charge  must  be  invented,  another  connexion,
more  capable  of  such  an  imputation,  must  be  fabri-
cated. Nero  had  long  loathed  the  sight  of  Anicetus,
the  contriver  of  his  mother's  murder.  Strange  to

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  60. ;  Dion,  Hi.  13

z  2

340  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  LIII.

relate,  he  induced  him,  by  extraordinary  promises,
to  avow  an  amour  with  the  wretched  princess.  For
the  present  he  must  be  banished,  for  appearance
sake,  to  an  island ;  but  he  should  reap  ample  rewards
at  a  later  period.  This  confession  was  enough.  A
charge  not  of  adultery,  but  of  Majesty,  was  founded
upon  it ;  for  the  captain  of  the  fleet  was  capable  of
guilty  aspirations ;  and,  with  additional  insults  to  her
Her  banish-  outraged  innocence,  Octavia  was  imprisoned
ment.  |n  pan(jateria.  Familiar  as  the  JRomans

had  now  become  with  the  banishment  of  grave  and
noble  matrons,  they  were  not  insensible  to  the  cruel
aggravations  of  her  lot.  The  Csesarean  princesses
who  had  thus  suffered  before  her,  the  Julias  and
Agrippinas,  had  at  least  attained  the  strength  and
fortitude  of  mature  years ;  they  had  seen  some  happy
days ;  they  had  the  consolation,  for  such  it  was  re-
garded in  the  creed  of  Paganism,  of  reflecting  in
their  sorrow  that  they  had  had  a  portion,  at  least,  of
the  common  enjoyments  of  life.  But  to  Octavia  her
marriage  had  been  no  other  than  a  funeral :  led  as
she  was  to  a  house  where  everything  was  funereal
and  fatal ;  where  her  father,  and  soon  afterwards  her
brother,  had  been  poisoned ;  where  a  maid  had  be-
come more  powerful  than  her  mistress ;  where  a
paramour  had  supplanted  the  lawful  spouse ;  lastly,
where  she  had  been  branded  with  a  crime  more  hate-
ful to  her  than  the  worst  of  deaths.1

The  poor  child  had  not  yet  attained  her  twentieth
birthday,  when,  encompassed by  soldiers

Her  death.  J ' .  '  J ,

and  centurions,  she  augured  too  surely  that
the  days  of  her  existence  were  numbered.  Still
clinging  with  agony  to  life,  she  proclaimed  in  vain

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  63. :  "  Nnptiarum  dies  loco  funeris  fait,  deducts;
in  doTnnvn  in  qua  nihil  nisi  luctuosum  haberet,  erepto  per  venennm
patre  et  statim  fratre:  turn  ancilln,  domina  validior;  et  Poppaea  non
nisi  in  perniciem  uxoris  niipta :  postremo  crimen  omni  exitio
gravins."

A.b.62-A.tr.8i5. DNDER  THE  EMfifcE.  341

that  she  was  now  no  more  than  Caesar's  widow,  no
more  than  his  sister,  and  invoked  the  names  of  their
common  kindred,  the  offspring  of  Germanicus,  the
name  of  Agrippina  herself,  during  whose  power  her
union,  if  unhappy,  had  at  least  been  protected.  After
a  few  days  she  was  seized  and  bound,  and  her  veins
opened  with  the  knife ;  she  fainted,  and  the  blood
refused  to  flow ;  she  was  finally  stifled  by  the  fumes
of  a  warm  bath.  Her  head  was  severed  from  her
body,  and  carried  to  the  cruel  Poppsea.  Vows  and
sacrifices  were  offered  to  the1  Gods  by  a  decree  of  the
senate :  and  so,  says  the  historian,  we  are  henceforth
to  understand,  without  special  mention,  that  when-
ever any  atrocious  barbarity  was  perpetrated  by  the
emperor,  the  triumph  of  his  personal  selfishness  was
celebrated  with  the  same  ceremonies  as  had  once
signalized  the  victories  of  the  Eoman  people.

Nero  had  now  cleared  away  all  partners  or  rivals
of  his  power  in  his  own  family.  He  remained  alone,
the  last  of  a  race  which  he  was  not  destined  to  per-
petuate. Nevertheless,  his  causes  of  apprehension
were  not  removed  by  these  hideous  massacres.  He
had  exchanged  the  jealousy  of  a  kinsman  for  the
enmity  of  the  whole  world.  He  turned  from  nobler
victims  to  the  vain  and  wealthy  freedmen

,,,.  .  111TN1  XT Prosecution  of

or  his  own  household. Dorypnorus,  the  wealthy  freed-

f  n i  j -L-L  men-  Dory-

secretary  ot  the  palace,  was  put  to  death  phonu  and

for  the  opposition  he  had  presumed  to  offer
to  the  nuptials  of  Poppsea ;  unless,  indeed,  the  riches
he  had  amassed  in  the  imperial  service  were  the  real
cause  of  his  destruction,  as  of  that  of  Pallas,  for
whose  natural  death,  aged  as  he  now  was,  the  prince
was  tired  of  waiting.1  The  wealth  of  Seneca,  also,
for  he  still  had  the  reputation  of  wealth,  tempted
Nero's  cupidity;  and  he  listened  eagerly  to  accu-
sations of  conspiracy  which  the  flatterers  of  power

1  Tac.  Ann>  xiv.  65.

342  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  till.

contrived  to  forge  against  the  fallen  minister. But
the  charge  against  him  in  connexion  with

Charge  against - ... °.  -r».  , i  ,

Seneca  re-  the  illustrious  rise  was  at  least  premature ;
it  was  triumphantly  rebutted,  and  the  prince
acquiesced  reluctantly  in  his  escape  for  a  season.  The
man  of  peace  was  provoked  at  last  to  self-defence.
Piso,  awakened  to  his  danger,  embarked  soon  after-
wards in  a  real  conspiracy,  and  we  shall  have  reason
to  suspect  that  Seneca  himself  was  not  unconnected
with  that  formidable  enterprise.1

The  prodigality  of  the  emperor's  pastimes  was  thus
driving  him  to  the  sanguinary  measures  by  which
tyrants  fill  their  coffers ;  and  the  discovery  how  easy
was  the  process,  how  submissive  were  the  victims,
prompted  him  to  indulge  his  passions  without  re-
straint. His  licentiousness  became  now  as  reckless
as  his  cruelty.  He  had  sunk  already  to  the  degra-
dation of  singing  and  playing  in  public ;  but  there
was  still  a  lower  depth  which  his  abandoned  tastes
and  thirst  for  vulgar  admiration  tempted  him  to
fathom.  As  a  child  his  talk  had  been  of  the  Greens
and  Blues ;  his  counters  had  been  cars  of  ivory.  The
passion,  checked  by  his  preceptors,  had  been  cherished
up  to  manhood,  and  since  he  had  become  his  own
master  he  had  thrown  off  gradually  all  restraint  in
Nero  drives  indulging  it.  From  his  private  circus  in
thecS^10  the  gardens  of  the  Vatican,  from  the  arena
Maximus.  Qf  (jrecjan  colonies  in  Campania,  he  de-
scended at  last  to  the  Circus  Maximus  at  Kome,  and,
placing  a  freedman  in  the  imperial  tribune  to  fling
the  kerchief  for  a  signal,  drove  his  chariot  victoriously
round  the  goal,  before  the  eyes  of  200,000  citizens.
The  rabble  greeted  him  with  delight;  so  soon  had
they  forgotten  their  sympathy  with  Octavia ;  so  heed-
less were  they  of  the  shame  of  their  country.  The
senators  clapped  their  hands  reluctantly,  shuddering

1  Tas.  Ann.  adv.  &&•

A.D.63-A.U.816.  UNDEH THE EMPIRE.  343

the  while  at  the  downfall  of  ancient  principles,  and
trembling  at  every  shout  for  their  own  lives  and
fortunes.1

Nero  had  proposed  at  this  period  to  visit  Greece
and  Egypt,  but,  when  he  renounced  this  in-  Nero.8  pre.
tention,  he  assigned  as  a  reason  his  people's  |fe°£ed  b*t°hme
wish  to  retain  him  among  them  as  the  leader  l^andthe"
of  all  their  amusements.  Possibly  they  ap-  "%?&.
prehended — so  completely  did  they  now  A-D-816-
regard  the  emperor's  presence  as  the  pledge  of  their
subsistence — that  in  his  absence  the  regular  supplies
of  the  city  would  be  impeded  or  withheld.2  It  was  this
general  conviction  of  the  necessity  of  the  Prince  to
the  Subject,  that  assured  him  of  their  protection,  and
made  him  so  formidable  to  the  helpless  senate.  To
attempt  the  life  of  Caesar,  tyrant  and  monster  though
he  might  be,  was  an  outrage  on  the  lives  and  fortunes
of  the  people  whose  existence  was  bound  up  with  his.
Distracted  by  apprehensions  on  either  side,  the
senators  knew  not  whether  to  wish  for  their  master's
absence  or  his  presence  among  them ;  but  in  Eome
he  was  at  least  the  guardian  of  public  tranquillity,
and  this  tranquillity,  by  his  name,  his  guards,  or  his
largesses,  he  contrived  successfully  to  maintain.

Never,  on  the  other  hand,  were  the  citizens  so
good-humoured,  as  when  they  saw  their

•  i •  ir  i-L  mL Infamous

prince  enioving  nimsell  among  them. I  he  debauchery
,  J  J ^  .  .  , f  .,  ,  publicly  en-

prince,  too,  on  his  part,  wished  it  to  appear  couraged  by

that  he  was  never  so  happy  as  when  ex-
hibiting his private  pleasures  to the  eyes  of  his
people. The  banquets  he  gave  were  no  longer  to  be

1  Suet.  Ner.  22. The  date  of  this  odious  exhibition  cannot  be
fixed  precisely. It  must  have  been  later  than  the  institution  of  the
Neronia in 813,  and before 817, from an anecdote  in  Tacitus
(Ann.  xv.  44.).

2  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  36. : "  Talia plebi  volentia  fuere,  voluptatum
cupidine,  et  quse  praecipua  cura  cst,  rei  frumentariae angustias.  si
abesset,  metuenti."

344  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  tJ«

hidden  in  the  recesses  of  the  palace.  In  the  Campus
Martins,  in  the  Circus  Maximus,  in  the  theatres  and
other  open  places,  a  series  of  entertainments  rapidly
followed :  and  not  here  only,  but  in  every  public  spot
in  the  city,  the  emperor's  table  was  spread  from  day
to  day,  and  all  the  world  was  welcome  to  see  him
dine,  if  not  to  partake  of  his  dinner.  Nor  were
gluttony  and  drinking  the  only  intemperance  he  thus
shamelessly  practised  and  more  shamelessly  displayed.
To  such  degradation  had  he  reduced  the  citizens,
that  they  were  not  offended  by  the  most  naked  ex-
hibitions of  wantonness.  Whatever  allowance  we
may  make  for  the  indignant  exaggerations  of  later
moralists,  or  for  the  prurient  imaginations  of  the
narrators,  it  seems  impossible  to  question  the  fact  of
the  prostitution  he  encouraged,  ordered,  and  even
compelled.  To  Tigellinus  was  ascribed  the  most
monstrous  of  all  his  inventions.  On  one  occasion,
a  table  was  spread  for  the  emperor  and  his  guests  on
a  raft  in  the  Basin  of  Agrippa,  and  numerous  vessels,
decked  with  gold,  silver,  and  ivory,  attended  with
the  materials  and  ministers  of  the  repast.  The  colon-
nades which  encircled  the  water  were  filled  partly
with  invited  spectators ;  but  certain  places  were  re-
served for  women  of  all  ranks,  even  for  matrons  and
virgins,  who  were  surrendered  to  them  without  re-
serve. Finally,  one  day  Nero,  who  had  already
thrown  off  all  restraints  of  decency  and  self-respect
in  his  own  person,  went  through  the  marriage  cere-
mony, arrayed  in  veil,  necklace,  and  girdle,  before
the  priests  and  soothsayers,  with  the  vilest  of  his
male  associates.1

1  The  reader  may  compare  for  himself  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  37.;  Suet.
Net:  27 — 29.;  Dion,  Ixii.  15.  It  is  not  worth  while  to  point  out
some  apparent  discrepancies,  or  suggest  possible  exaggerations,  espe-
cially in  Dion's  account:  /col  fy  Qovrria.  iravrl  Ty  Pov\ofj.evif>  o-^flv  ^t
tjOf\ev  •  oil  yap  ifff  avrois  ovS'  eva.  a.Trapi'riaa.aOcu :  which  is  followed
by  a  trait  of  nature  which  redeems  it  from  utter  incredibility :  wBicrnoi
re  Kal  ir\riya,l  xa.1  &Apv§oi  ....  teal  &v5pes  re  IK  TOVTUV  <rv\vo\

A.i>.64- A.U.8I".  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  345

Let  this  suffice : — such  things  have  occurred  per-
haps, in  other  times  and  other  places ;  perhaps  they
have  been  recorded  by  historians  as  well  as  satirists :
but  the  foul  annals  of  the  period  before  us  have  at-
tained an  unfortunate  distinction  from  the  genius
which  has  been  engaged  in  illustrating  them.  While
the  world  endures,  the  iniquities  of  Nero  will  retain
their  preeminence  in  infamy,  and  it  will  be  equally
impossible  to  recount  them  at  length,  or  to  pass  them
over  in  silence.

But  in  the  midst  of  these  horrors,  which  steeped
in  the  same  fearful  guilt  the  people  and  the

,,  -r,  ° .  ,  .  Great  con-

prinCe  together,  .Providence  was  preparing  flagrauon  in

an  awful  chastisement;  and  was  about  to
overwhelm  Home,  like  the  cities  of  the  Plain,  in  a
sheet  of  retributive  fire.  Crowded,  as  the  mass  ol
the  citizens  were,  in  their  close  wooden  dwelling-
chambers,  accidents  were  constantly  occurring  which
involved  whole  streets  and  quarters  of  the  city  in
wide-spreading  conflagrations,  and  the  efforts  of  the
night-watch  to  stem  these  outbursts  of  fire,  with  fe\v
of  the  appliances,  and  little  perhaps  even  of  the  dis-
cipline, of  our  modern  police,  were  but  imperfectly
effectual.  But  the  greatest  of  all  the  fires  which
desolated  Rome  was  that  which  broke  out  on  the
19th  of  July,  in  the  year  817,  the  tenth  of  Nero,
which  began  at  the  eastern  end  of  the  Circus,  abutting
on  the  valley  between  the  Palatine  and  the  Cselian
hills.1  Against  the  outer  walls  of  this  edifice  leaned
a  mass  of  wooden  booths  and  stores  filled  chiefly  with

4<p8d.p-n<Ta.v.  Modern  writers,  as  usual,  have  taken  the  most  unfavour-
able view,  and  have  supposed  the  entertainment  in  Agrippa's  Basin
to  have  been  open  to  all  the  world.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  38.:  "Initium  in  ea  parte  Circi  ortum  quae
Palatino  Caelioque  uiontibus  contigua  est  ....  simul  coeptus
ignis  ....  longitudinem  Circi  corripuit."  In  the  second
clause  the  word  Circus  evidently  means  the  edifice  so  called,  and,
accordingly,  1  give  the  same  interpretation  to  it  in  the  first.  But
no  part  of  tr-.e  Circus  can  properly  be  said  to  adjoin  the  Palatine

346  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  laii.

combustible  articles.  The  wind  from  the  east  drove
the  flames  towards  the  corner  of  the  Palatine,  whence
they  forked  in  two  directions,  following  the  draught
of  the  valleys.  At  neither  point  were  they  en-
countered by  the  massive  masonry  of  halls  or  temples,
till  they  had  gained  such  head,  that  the  mere  inten-
sity of  the  heat  crumbled  brick  and  stone  like  paper.
The  Circus  itself  was  filled  from  end  to  end  with
wooden  galleries,  along  which  the  fire  coursed  with  a
speed  which  defied  all  check  and  pursuit.  The  flames
shot  up  to  the  heights  adjacent,  and  swept  the  base-
ments of  many  noble  structures  on  the  Palatine  and
Aventine.  Again  they  plunged  into  the  lowest  levels
of  the  city,  the  dense  habitations  and  narrow  winding
streets  of  the  Velabrum  and  Forum  Boarium,  till
stopped  by  the  river  and  the  walls.  At  the  same
time  another  torrent  rushed  towards  the  Velia  and
the  Esquiline,  and  sucked  up  all  the  dwellings  with-
in its  reach,  till  it  was  finally  arrested  by  the  cliffs
beneath  the  gardens  of  Maecenas.  Amidst  the  horror
and  confusion  of  the  scene,  the  smoke,  the  blaze,  the
din  and  the  scorching  heat,  with  half  the  population,
bond  and  free,  cast  loose  and  houseless  into  the
streets,  ruffians  were  seen  to  thrust  blazing  brands
into  the  buildings,  who  affirmed,  when  seized  by  the
indignant  sufferers,  that  they  were  acting  with  orders  ;
and  the  crime,  which  was  probably  the  desperate
resource  of  slaves  and  robbers,  was  imputed  by  fierce
suspicions  to  the  government  itself.1

and  the  Caslian;  and  I  think  it  possible  that  in  the  first  passage
Tacitus  means,  not  the  building,  but  the  quarter  of  the  city  which
went  by  the  name  of  Circus  Maximus.  Dion  Hal.  (iii.  68.)  describes
the  Circus  and  its  exterior  galleries  :  Q<a6ev  trtpl  -rbv  linr6Spo/j.oi>
aT6a  fnov6<ntyo5  fpycurTfipia  fyovtra  ev  avry  KO.\  otKiiaeis  vntp

1  Tac.  /.  c.  :  "  Nee  quisquam  defendcre  audebat,  crebris  multorum
minis  restinguere  prohibentium,  et  quia  alii  palam  faces  jaciebant
atquc  sibi  auctorem  esse  vociferabantur,  sive  ut  raptus  lieentius
exercerent  sen  jussu."  Pliny  (Hist.  Nat.  xvii.  1),  Dion  (Ixii  17,  I*.).

*.b.6*-A.u.8i7. UNDER  THE  ISMMKE.  347

At  such  a  moment  of  sorrow  and  consternation,
every  trifle  is  seized  to  confirm  the  suspicion

I- r> i i  mi a  "L  11 The  *re  bursts

ot  io ul  play.  Ihe  names,  it  seems,  had  out  a  second
subsided  after  raging  for  six  days,  and  the
wretched  outcasts  were  beginning  to  take  breath  and
visit  the  ruins  of  their  habitations,  when  a  second
conflagration  burst  out  in  a  different  quarter.  This
fire  commenced  at  the  point  where  the  ^Emilian
gardens  of  Tigellinus  abutted  on  the  outskirts  of  the
city  beneath  the  Pincian  hill ;  and  it  was  on  Tigel-
linus himself,  the  object  already  of  popular  scorn  if
not  of  anger,  that  the  suspicion  now  fell.  The  wind,
it  seems,  had  now  changed,  for  the  fire  spread  from
the  north-west  towards  the  Quirinal  and  the  Viminal,
destroying  the  buildings,  more  sparsely  planted,  of
the  quarter  denominated  the  Via  Lata.  Three  days
exhausted  the  fury  of  this  second  visitation,  in  which
the  loss  of  life  and  property  was  less,  but  the  edifices
it  overthrew  were  generally  of  greater  interest,  shrines
and  temples  of  the  gods,  and  halls  and  porticos  de-
voted to  the  amusement  or  convenience  of  the  people.
Altogether  the  disaster,  whether  it  sprang  from  acci-
dent or  design,  involved  nearly  the  whole  of  Borne.
Of  the  fourteen  regions  of  the  city,  three,  we  are
assured,  were  entirely  destroyed ;  while  seven  others
were  injured  more  or  less  severely :  four  only  of  the
whole  number  escaped  unhurt.1  The  fire  made  a

and  Suetonius  (.ZVer.  38.)  attribute  the  fire  to  Nero's  orders  without
hesitation,  a  view  which  generally  recommended  itself  to  the
ancients.

1  The  three  quarters  which  are  said  to  have  been  destroyed  must
have  been  the  Circus  Max.  (XL),  the  Palatiuin  (x.),  and  Isis  and
Sernpis  (in.)-  I  must  question,  however,  the  entire  destruction  of
the  great  edifices  on  the  Palatine  :  the  temple  of  Apollo  is  men-
tioned only  two  years  later  by  Suetonius  (Ner.  25.),  and  the  Sibylline
oracles  kept  in  it  (comp.  Amm.  Marcell.  xxiii.  3.)  were  consulted
immediately  afterwards.  The  destruction  of  the  Palatine  library  in
the  fire  of  Commodus,  a  hundred  and  fifty  years  later,  is  mentioned
by  Gak-nus  (de  Compos.  Medicam.  i.  1.).  Pliny  speaks,  however,
of  the  temple  of  the  Palatiuin,  dedicated  to  Augustus  by  Livia,  as

548  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  O

complete  clearance  of  the  central  quarters,  leaving,
perhaps,  but  few  public  buildings  erect  6ven  on  the
Palatine  and  Aventine ;  but  it  was,  for  the  most  part,
hemmed  in  by  the  crests  of  the  surrounding  eminences.
and  confined  to  the  seething  crater  which  had  been
the  cradle  of  the  Eoman  people.  The  day  of  its
outburst,  it  was  remarked,  was  that  of  the  first
burning  of  Eome  by  the  Gauls,  and  some  curious
calculators  computed  that  the  addition  of  an  equal
number  of  years,  months,  and  days  together,  would
give  the  complete  period  which  had  elapsed  in  the
long  interval  of  her  greatness.1  Of  the  number  of
houses  and  insulse  destroyed,  Tacitus  does  not  venture
to  hazard  a  statement ;  he  only  tantalizes  us  by  his

consumed,  H.  .ZV.  xii.  42.  The  seven  quarters  partially  injured  ap-
pear to  have  been,  first  the  Aventinus  (xm.),  Piscina  Publica  (xii.),
Via  Sacra  (iv.),  Caelimontana  (n.)»  and  Forum  Romanum  (viu.);
yet  the  Capitoline  was  certainly  untouched,  and  there  is  no  reason
to  believe  that  the  temples  and  basilicas  which  encompassed  the
forum  suffered.  In  the  second  fire  the  Via  Lata  (vn.)  and  a  great
part  of  the  Circus  Flaminius  (ix.)  were  devastated.  The  four
which  wholly  escaped  were  the  Transiiberina  (xiv.),  the  Esquilina
(v.),  the  Alta  Semita  (vi. ),  and  the  Porta  Capena  (i.).  See  Bunsen's
Rom.  i.  191.  The  nine  days'  duration  is  proved,  not  from  the
historians  (Tacitus  notes  only  the  six  days  of  the  first  fire),  but  by
an  inscription,  Gruter,  61.  3.  (Hoeck,  p.  374.  note).  The  great  fire
of  London  lasted  only  four  days,  and  swept  an  area  of  436  acres;
while  the  space  through  which  this  conflagration  raged,  though  with
less  complete  destruction,  must  have  comprised  at  least  one-third  of
Rome,  or  not  less  than  three  times  that  extent.  Comp.  Lambert's
Hist,  of  London,  ii.  91.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  41.:  "  Fuere  qui  adnotarent  xiv.  Kal.  Sext.  prin-
cipium  incendii  hujus  ortum  quo  et  Senones  captam  Urbem  inflam-
maverant:  alii  eo  usque  curae  progressi  sunt  ut  totidem  annos  mensesque
et  dies  inter  utraque  incendia  numerent."  The  interpreters  have  given
up  generally  the  a' tempt  to  explain  this  obscure  passage;  but  the
principle  of  Grotefend's  suggestion,  which  I  take  from  Hitter's  note,
seems  peculiarly  happy.  Between  19  July,  364,  the  received  date  of
the  Gaulish  fire,  and  19  July,  817,  are  exactly  453  years;  and  the
addition  of  417  years,  417  months,  and  417  days,  completes  this  period
wanting  about  40  days.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  these
calculators  to  have  taken  363  for  the  date  of  the  Gaulish  fire,  the
interval  will  be  454  years,  and  418  years  4-  418  months  -t  418  days
=*454  years— 8  days  only.

A.D.fi4-A.u.817. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  349

slender  notice  of  the  famous  fanes  and  monuments
which  sank  in  the  common  ruin.  Among  them  were
the  temple  of  Diana,  which  Servius  Tullius  had
erected ;  the  shrine  and  altar  of  Hercules,  consecrated
by  Evander,  as  affirmed  in  the  tradition  impressed
upon  us  by  Virgil ! ;  the  Eomulean  temple  of  Jupiter
Stator,  the  remembrance  of  which  thrilled  the  soul  of
the  banished  Ovid2;  the  little  Regia  of  Numa,  which
armed  so  many  a  sarcasm  against  the  pride  of  con-
suls and  imperators ;  the  sanctuary  of  Vesta  herself,
with  the  Palladium,  the  Penates,  and  the  ever-glow-
ing hearth  of  the  Roman  people.  But  the  loss  of
these  decayed,  though  venerable,  objects  was  not  the
worst  disaster.  Many  an  unblemished  masterpiece
of  the  Grecian  pencil,  or  chisel,  or  graver, — the
prize  of  victory, — was  devoured  by  the  flames ;  and
amidst  all  the  splendour  with  which  Rome  rose  after-
wards from  her  ashes,  old  men  could  lament  to  the
historian  the  irreparable  sacrifice  of  these  ancient
glories.3  Writings  and  documents  of  no  common
interest  may  have  perished  at  the  same  time  irre-
coverably ;  and  with  them,  trophies,  images,  and
family  devices.  At  a  moment  when  the  heads  of
patrician  houses  were  falling  rapidly  by  the  sword,
the  loss  of  such  memorials  was  the  more  deplorable ;
and  from  this  epoch  we  may  date  the  decay,  which
we  shall  soon  discover,  in  the  domestic  traditions  of
the  nobles.

1  Virg.  Mn.  viii.  270.:

"  Hanc  aram  luco  statuit,  qu«e  maxima  semper
Dicetur  nobis,  et  erit  quse  maxima  semper."

2  Ovid.  Trial,  iii.  1—49.:

"  Adjice  servatis  unum,  pater  optime,  civem ....
Me  miserum!  vereorque  locurn,  venerorque  potentem."
*  Suet.  Ner.  38.: "Domus priscornm dncum  hostilibus adhuc
spoliis  adornatse,  Deorumque  aedes, . . . . et  quicquid  visendum
et  memorabile  ex  antiquitate  duraverat." Tac.  I.e.:  " Monuments
ingeniorum  antiqua  et  incorrupta:"  which  Lipsius  characteristically
interprets  of  the  autograph  writings  of  the  ancients,  so  vainly  re-
gretted by  reviving  letter*.

350  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Mil.

Nero  was  at  Antium,  nor  did  he  quit  that  favourite
The  are  im-  residence  till  apprised  that  the  flames  had
popu14etoe  reached  the  long  colonnades  with  which  he
fcero  himself.  jja(j  connected  the  mansion  on  the  Palatine
with  the  villa  of  Maecenas.  It  would  seem  that  with
due  energy  the  progress  of  the  fire  along  these  gal-
leries might  have  been  cut  off;  but  the  attempt  was
either  not  made,  or  made  too  late,  and  the  flames,  it
is  said,  extended  to  the  palace,  and  involved  it,  or
at  least  some  portion  of  it,  in  the  general  ruin.1  The
injury  indeed  to  Nero's  own  dwelling  was  greatly
exaggerated,  possibly  to  make  him  appear  to  have
suffered  equally  with  his  people.  Altogether,  how-
ever, the  disaster  was  the  greatest  that  had  befallen
the  city,  since  the  era  of  the  Gaulish  invasion.  The
mansions  of  the  nobles  were  scathed,  but  the  cabins
of  the  populace  were  annihilated.  The  prince  was
popularly  held  responsible  for  every  public  calamity ;
and  when  the  rumour,  not  improbable  in  itself,  was
circulated,  that  Nero  had  watched  the  conflagration
from  the  towers  of  his  villa,  and  chaunted  the  Sack
of  Troy  to  his  own  lyre,  the  sufferers  were  prone  to
believe  that  he  had  commanded  the  city  to  be  fired,
and  forbidden  the  flames  to  be  extinguished.2  Once,

1  The  words  of  Tacitus  are  these  (c.  39.) :  "  Eo  in  tempore  Nero,
Antii  agens,  non  ante  in  urbem  regressus  est  quam  domui  ejus,  qua
palatium  *et  Msecenatis  hortos  continuaverat,  ignis  propinquaret.
Neque  tamen  sisti  potuit  quin  et  palatium  et  domus  et  cuncta  circum
haurirentur."  I  have  expressed  in  the  text  the  qualification  I  must
put  on  these  words.  There  must  have  been  a  colonnade  or  gallery
across  the  Velia  to  connect  the  buildings  on  the  Palatine  and  the
Esqniline,  probably  a  viaduct,  like  the  bridge  of  Caius  across  the
Velabrum,  with  carriage-way  underneath.  This  construction  was
possibly  of  wood.  The  palace  on  the  Palatine  may  have  been  injured,
but  it  could  not  have  been  destroyed  without  the  destruction  of  every
other  edifice  on  that  hill.  That  the  other  portion  of  the  palace,  the
villa  of  Maecenas  on  the  Esquiline,  wholly  escaped  seems  certain  from
the  anecdote  which  follows.

*  Suet.  Ner.  38.:  "Hoc  incendium  ex  turre  Msecenatiana  prospec-
tans,  laetusque  flammae  ut  aiebat  pulchritudine,  S,\o>criv  Ilii  in  illo
suo  scenico  habitu  decantavit."  Comp.  Dion,  Ixii.  29.;  Juvenal,
viii.  219.

*.n.64-A.u.8l7. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  351

it  was  said,  when  the  line  before  quoted  by  Tiberius,
After  my  death  perish  the  world  in  fire,  was  recited
to  him ;  Nay,  in  my  lifetime,  had  been  his  fiendish
reply.  Another  suspicion,  hardly  less  horrible,  pre-
vailed, that  he  had  caused  the  destruction  of  the
ancient  city,  not  out  of  pure  wantonness,  but  in  order
to  rebuild  it  more  magnificently,  and  dignify  the  new
Eome  with  his  own  name.1  Accordingly,  whatever
favour  the  populace  had  hitherto  entertained  towards
the  chief  who  flattered  and  amused  them,  they  were
now  fiercely  exasperated.  It  was  to  little  purpose
that  he  provided  accommodation  for  the  shelter  of
the  houseless  multitudes,  and  supplied  with  anxious
care  their  most  pressing  necessities.2  It  was  in  vain
that  the  gods  were  soothed  with  holocausts,  and  the
Sibyls'  books  consulted  for  expiations;  that  vows  were
offered  to  Vulcan,  Ceres  and  Proserpine,  and  Juno
propitiated  by  processions  of  Roman  matrons.  The
people  continued  to  mutter  their  dissatisfaction  with
increasing  significance;  it  was  necessary  to  divert
their  suspicions  by  offering  them  another  victim ;  and
Nero  seems  to  have  saved  himself  at  last,  by  sacri-
ficing the  little  band  of  alien  sectaries,  already  the
objects  of  their  hatred  and  reviling,  to  whom  the
vulgar  gave  the  name  of  Christians?

1  Suetonius,  a  faithful  expounder  of  popular  traditions,  more  than
insinuates  this  charge:  "  Quasi  offensus  deformitate  veterum  sedifi-
ciorum,  et  ar/gustiis  flexurisque  vicorum,  incendit  urbem."  Ner.  38.

*  Tac.  /. c. :  "  Solatium  populo  exturbato  et  profugo  campum  Martis
et  monumenta  Agrippae;  hortos  quin  etiam  suos  patefecit;  et  subitaria
aertificia  exstruxit  quas  multitudinem  inopemacciperent:  subvectaqne
utensilia  ab  Ostia  et  propinquis  municipiis;  pretiumque  frumenti
minutum  usque  ad ternos  nummos. Quse,  quanquam  popularia,
in  irritum  cadebant,  quia  pervaserat  rumor,  ipso  tempore  flagrantis
urbis  inisseeum  domesticam  scenam,  etcecinisse  Trojanum  excidium,
praesentia  mala  vetnstis  cladibus  assimulantem."

*  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  44.:  "Ergo  abolendo  rumori  Nero  subdidit  reos
. . . .  quos  per  flagitia  invisos  vulgus  Christianos  appellabat.
Auctor  nominis  ejus  Christus,"  &c. I  shall  enter  in  another  place  into
the  question,  who  were  the  persons  to  whom  the  vulgar  applied  this
name? In  the  text  I  confine  myself  as  closely  as  possible  to  the
words  of  Tacitus.

352  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lin.

This  name,  says  Tacitus  in  a  famous  passage  in
his  Annals,  was  derived  from  one  Christus,  who  was
executed  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius  by  the  procurator
ofJudea,  Pontius  Pilate.  This  accursed  superstition,
for  a  moment  repressed,  spread  again,  not  over
Judea  only,  the  source  of  this  evil,  but  the  City  also,
whither  all  things  vile  and  shameful  find  room  and
reception.  Accordingly,  he  adds,  those  only  were
first  arrested  who  avowed  themselves  of  that  sect,
afterwards  a  vast  number  discovered  by  them,  who
were  convicted,  not  so  much  on  the  charge  of  burning,
as  for  their  general  hatred  to  mankind.  Their  exe-
cution was  accompanied  with  mockery.  They  were
wrapped  in  skins  to  be  torn  in  pieces  by  dogs,  or
crucified,  and  thus  set  on  fire  to  serve  as  torches  by
night.  Nero  lent  his  own  gardens  for  the  spectade,
and  gave  a  chariot  race  on  the  occasion,  at  which  he
'mingled  freely  with  the  multitude  in  the  garb  of  a
driver,  or  actually  holding  the  reins.  The  populace,
however,  turned  with  their  usual  levity  to  compas-
sion for  the  sufferers,  justly  odious  though  they  were
held  to  be ;  for  they  felt  that  it  was  not  for  their
actual  guilt  nor  the  common  weal  that  they  were
punished,  but  to  glut  the  ferocity  of  a  single  tyrant.*

This  horrid  sacrifice,  so  deeply  impressive  to  the
The  rebuilding  minds  of  sixty  generations  of  Christians,
of  Rome.  ruffled  then  for  a  moment  the  feelings  of
Koman  society,  and  excited  perhaps  in  the  heart  of
the  historian,  impassive  as  he  constrains  himself  to

1  This  remarkable  and  often  cited  passage  has  several  difficulties.
I  understand  the  "  odium  generis  humani"  to  mean,  not  the  hatred  in
which  these  sectaries  were  held,  but  rather  their  reputed  enmity
towards  all  others.  It  is  a  question  whether  the  confession  mentioned
was  of  the  burning  or  only  of  the  Christian  belief:  I  suppose  the
latter:  "  aut  flammandi"  is  obscure  in  construction,  but  the  sense
cannot  be  doubtful:  "sontes"  may  apply  to  the  specific  charge,
meaning  that  the  people  really  believed  them  guilty  of  it,  or  it  may
relate  to  the  crime  of  their  creed  generally.  The  gardens  referred
to  were  on  the  slope  of  the  Vatican,  and  embraced,  it  is  supposed,  the
site  of  the  Place  and  possibly  of  the  Church  of  St.  Peter's.  The  obelisk

A.D.64-A.T.817.  DNDER THE EMPIRE.  353

appear,  more  pity,  more  wonder,  more  reflection  at
least,  than  he  has  deigned  to  intimate.  But  a  few
days  passed,  and  when  the  people  looked  again
around  them,  they  beheld  the  reconstruction  of  their
smoking  city  commencing  with  extraordinary  vigour.
The  decision  with  which  the  plans  of  the  govern-
ment were  taken,  must  appear  to  us  perfectly  amaz-
ing. The  rebuilding  of  so  large  a  portion  of  the
largest  of  ancient  cities  on  a  general  design,  including
the  construction  of  a  palace,  to  cover,  or  at  least
embrace  with  all  its  adjuncts,  some  hundreds  of  acres,
was  carried  into  execution  without  a  moment's  delay,
and  seems  to  have  been  effected  in  the  course  of  the
four  years  which  intervened  to  the  death  of  Nero.1
The  city  of  the  plebs,  a  collection  of  narrow  winding
lanes  which  crept  along  the  hollows  at  the  foot  of  the
seven  hills,  thronged  with  high  unsightly  masses  of
brick  or  woodwork,  among  which  its  shifting  crowds
could  with  difficulty  wind  their  way,  had  long  been
an  eyesore  to  the  denizens  of  the  patrician  mansions
above,  constructed  in  the  graceful  style  of  Greece,
their  level  lines  of  marble  masonry  flanked  with  airy
colonnades,  and  interspersed  with  broad  courts  and
gardens.  This  combination,  indeed,  or  contrast  of
the  ancient  and  the  modern,  the  grotesque  and  the
elegant,  this  upper  growth  of  aristocratic  luxury
culminating  above  the  smoky  hives  of  vulgar  in-
dustry, must  have  given  a  character  to  the  whole
eminently  striking  and  picturesque.  Kome  was  in-

which  now  fronts  that  church  stood  on  the  spina  of  Nero's  Circus,
certainly  not  far  from  its  present  position.  Mosheim  (de  Reb.  Chr
ante  Constant,  saec.  1.  §  34.)  fixes  the  beginning  of  this  persecution
to  the  middle  of  the  November  of  this  year.

1  The  conflagration  took  place  in  July,  817.  Nero's  death  followed
in  June,  821;  but  it  would  appear  that  the  rebuilding  had  been  com-
pleted before  that  time;  certainly  the  palace  had  been  completed
much  earlier.  It  is  impossible  not  to  suspect,  from  this  and  other
circumstances,  that  the  destruction  was  less  extensive  than  has  been
represented.  The  temple  of  Apollo — apparently  that  on  the  Palatine
*-• is  mentioned  in  the  year  822  (Tac.  Hist,  iii  65.).
VOL.  VI,  A  A

354  HISTORY 0* THE ROMANS  en.  Lin.

deed  a  double  city,  naif  Greek  and  half  Italian.  The
elements  of  change  long  operating  in  its  manners
were  equally  active  in  its  external  development.
Grecian  forms  were  steadily  encroaching  on  the  in-
digenous features  of  its  architecture.  To  reform,  to
improve,  had  been  in  fact  to  copy  foreign,  and  to
displace  native,  models.  The  marble  Rome  of  Au-
gustus, restorer  as  he  professed  himself,  was  a  Grecian
mask  applied  to  a  Roman  countenance.  Every  new
temple  or  theatre,  bath  or  fountain,  added  another
Hellenic  object  to  the  scene,  and  aided  in  this  gradual
disintegration.  Nero  in  all  his  tastes  was  Grecian  or
Oriental ;  yet  when  this  grand  opportunity  offered  for
recasting  the  lower  city  on  the  model  he  admired,
the  promptness  with  which  he  seized  it  shows  that  he
followed  an  instinct  of  the  times,  and  not  a  mere
caprice  of  his  own.  The  architects  were  ready  at
once  with  their  plans  for  a  total  reconstruction  after
the  fashion  of  Athens  or  Antioch,  a  style  more
familiar  to  their  schools  than  the  obsolete  Italian.
After  the  fire  of  the  Gauls  Rome  had  been  rebuilt
by  the  citizens  themselves,  each  man  for  himself
from  his  own  notions  and  resources ;  the  whole  re-
sulting in  manifold  combinations  of  a  few  simple
elements,  the  wooden  shed,  the  broad  brick  wall,
the  narrow  windows,  the  projecting  eaves,  the  pointed
gable.1  But  after  Nero's  fire  restoration  was  the
work  of  the  government;  the  citizens,  the  mass  at
least  of  the  lower  classes  who  still  dwelt  in  the
valleys,  were  not  rich  enough  to  build  for  themselves,
even  had  they  been  suffered  to  do  so ;  the  treasury
supplied  them  with  money,  but  at  the  same  time

1  The  fastigiata  and  pcctinata  tccta  seem  to  imply  something  more
than  the  Greek  pediment,  and  to  have  been  in  common  use  for
dwelling  houses,  not  only  for  public  buildings.  There  is  perhaps  no
distinct  notice  of  gable  ends  to  the  ordinary  Roman  roofs;  but  the
fact  that  the  earliest  temples  at  Rome  were  thatched,  and  therefore
of  course  dwellings  also,  shows  that  the  roofe  must  have  been  high-
pitched.

\.P.fi4  A.tr.81?. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  355

provided  them  with  designs:  the  time  had  come
when  the  rulers  of  the  state  must  execute  all  great
public  works  for  the  people,  and  employ  the  services
of  a  profession  to  which  architecture  of  a  foreign
type  was  alone  familiar.  The  character  indeed  of
the  site,  and  the  necessity  of  lodging  vast  numbers
upon  small  areas,  must  have  tended  to  modify  the
more  lax  and  spacious  features  of  Hellenic  architec-
ture; the  crowded  dwellings  of  the  Suburra  and
Velabrum  could  not  have  been  less  than  fifty,  sixty,
or  even  seventy  feet  in  height :  but  the  substitution,
to  a  great  extent,  of  stone  for  brick  or  wood  in  the
basement  at  least  of  these  edifices,  the  straightening
and  widening  of  the  streets,  and  the  erection  of  open
colonnades  round  every  block  of  houses,  was  the
application  of  a  foreign  style,  which  completely
changed  the  external  appearance  of  Kome.  On  the
whole  the  system  of  Nero  and  his  architects  was  both
salubrious  and  convenient,  though  many  citizens,
admirers  of  all  things  old,  continued  to  lament  the
disappearance  of  their  dark  and  tortuous  alleys,  and
to  allege,  with  some  justice  perhaps,  that  the  narrow-
ness of  the  avenues  and  the  height  of  the  overhanging
edifices  had  afforded  a  grateful  shade  in  summer,
and  protection  from  the  winds  in  winter.1

But  Nero,  we  are  told,  took  advantage  of  the  void
which  had  been  created  for  another  and  E3ttension  Of
more  selfish  purpose. He  determined  to  £eGo?dpe*lace
extend  in  various  directions  the  limits  of  HoU8e-
his  own  residence,  and  to  cover  a  large  portion  of  the
area  of  Rome  with  the  buildings  of  the  imperial
palace. On  this  point,  however,  I  am  constrained  to
be  sceptical. We  have  already  seen  that  he  had  before

1  Tac.  Ann,  xv.  43.:  "Erant  tamen  qni  crederent  veterem  illam
formam  salubritati  magis  conduxisse."  Whatever  we  may  think  of
the  justice  of  this  complaint,  it  may  be  worth  remarking,  as  a  sign  of
the  difference  in  our  own  ideas  and  the  Roman,  that  there  is  no  ex-
pression of  regret  for  the  picturesque  features  of  the  ancient  city  so
ruthlessly  sacrificed  to  the  taste  or  judgment  of  the  dny.

A  A.  2

356  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lin,

connected  the  older  residence  of  the  Caesars,  enlarged
as  it  had  been  by  successive  occupants,  on  the  Pala-
tine, with  the  villa  of  Maecenas  on  the  Esquiline,  by
a  series  of  galleries  which  spanned,  perhaps,  the
hollow  between  those  hills  on  arches,  so  as  to  allow
of  the  circulation  of  the  populace  in  the  most  crowded
parts  of  the  city  below  it.  Such  seems  to  have  been
the  character  of  the  Domus  Transitoria  or  House  of
Passage,  which  fell,  as  we  have 'seen,  a  prey  to  the
flames.  I  much  question,  however,  whether  either
of  the  edifices  which  it  connected  had  suffered  very
severely,  and  the  Grolden  House,  as  the.  restored
palace  was  denominated,  was  still  the  old  mansion
of  Augustus  and  the  villa  of  Maecenas  connected  a
second  time  by  a  long  series  of  columns  and  arches.
It  is  probable,  indeed,  that  the  House  of  Passage
was  now  considerably  enlarged,  and  made  to  embrace
a  vast  extent  of  gardens,  with  their  baths,  their  fish-
ponds, and  their  storied  terraces.1  Nevertheless,  the
public  must  always  have  had  means  of  communica-
tion beneath  these  galleries,  or  through  them,  from
the  forum  to  the  Caelian  hill,  and  to  the  Esquiline  or
Capene  gates.  We  cannot  suppose  that  the  emperor's
stone  walls  intercepted  the  Sacred  and  the  Appian
ways.  These  colonnades,  such  as  I  have  imagined

1  This  house,  says  Tacitus,  was  not  so  remarkable  for  its  gold
and  precious  stones,  as  for  the  gardens  it  embraced :  "  arva  et
stagna,  et  in  modum  solitudinum  nine  sylvse,  inde  aperta  spatia  et
prospectus,"  c.  42.  The  taste  of  the  Romans  in  gardening  required
geometrical  lines  of  gravel,  pavement,  box  borders,  and  shrubberies.
See  the  younger  Pliny's  description  of  his  Tuscan  villa  (Ep.  v.  6.),
and  some  of  the  frescoes  still  visible  on  the  walls  of  houses  in  Pompeii.
Mntius,  the  friend  of  Caesar,  invented  the  art  of  cutting  yews,  box,
and  cypress  into  figures  of  men  and  animals  (Plin.  H.  N.  xii.  6.).
and  this  grotesque  practice  survived  to  the  time  of  Pliny  and  Martial
(Mart.  iii.  58.,  xii.  50.).  Nero,  I  presume,  ventured  to  discard  this
formality,  and  his  attempt,  to  restore  some  natural  features  to  a
garden  landscape  offended  the  admirers  of  antiquity.  This  was  the
"  rure  vero  barbaroque  Isetari "  of  Martial.  I  refer  to  Prof.  Panbeny 's
Lectures  on  Roman  Husbanrlri/,  vii  .  for  these  and  further  details  of
the  subject  of  Roman  gardening.

&.D.14-A.U.817. UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  357

them,  were  three  in  number ;  each  of  them,  it  is  said,
a  mile  in  length.  They  reached,  it  may  be  presumed,
from  the  bridge  of  Caius  over  the  Velabrum,  which
was  perhaps  destroyed  by  the  fire,  and  never,  as  far
as  we  know,  rebuilt,  almost  to  the  site  of  S.  Maria
Maggiore  on  the  Esquiline,  and  of  S.  Gregorio  on
the  Caelian,  and  these  were  again  connected  perhaps
by  a  third.1  The  area  now  filled  with  the  Colosseum
was  embraced  within  their  ample  circuit,  and  this
spot  was  occupied  by  a  basin  of  water.2  It  is  a  par-
donable extravagance  in  Pliny  to  declare  that  the
city  was  encompassed  by  the  palace  of  Nero ;  but
this  expression,  which  he  has  applied  also  to  the  far
less  extensive  encroachments  of  Caius,  seems  to  show
that  even  within  the  circuit  of  its  ample  arcades
many  houses,  streets,  and  places  were  surrendered  to
the  occupation  of  the  citizens.  We  should  still  less
expect  strict  accuracy  in  the  statements  of  a  pasqui-
nade, which  has  been  preserved  to  us  by  Suetonius.
Insinuating  a  direct  comparison  between  the  con-
flagration of  the  Gauls  and  of  Nero,  Home,  it  said,
will  be  reduced  to  a  single  house:  migrate,  0  Romans,
to  Veiiy  like  your  ancestors  before  you ;  if  Veii  in-
deed itself  be  not  embraced  also  by  that  single  house.3

1  Martial  (de  Sped.  2.)  defines  the  limits  of  this  palace  in  two
directions  by  the  baths  of  Titus  on  the  Esquiline,  and  the  portico  of
Claudius,  connected,  it  may  be  presumed,  with  his  unfinished  temple
on  the  Caelian:

"  Claudia  diffusas  ubi  porticus  explicat  umbras,

Ultima  pars  mike  deficientis  erat."

It  has  been  mentioned  that  Nero  is  said  to  have  destroyed  the  works
of  the  Claudian  temple:  this,  if  not  a  misrepresentation,  was  probably
to  make  room  for  his  own  constructions.

-  Martial,  I.  c.:

"  Hie  ubi  conspicui  venerabilis  amphitheatri
Erigitur  species,  stagna  Neronis  erant."

Comp.  Suet.  Ner.  31.:  ''Stagnum  maris  in^tar,  circumseptum  ssdi-
ficiis  ad  urbium  speciem:  rura  insuper,  arvis  atque  vinetis,  et  pascuis
eilvisque  varia."

*  Suet.  Ner.  39.:

"  Roma  domus  net:  Veios  migrate  Quirites;
Si  non  et  Veios  occupet  una  domus."

358  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  C

But  the  epithet  of  Grolden,  which  this  palace  obtained,
was  derived  from  the  splendour  of  its  decorations.
Externally  it  was  adorned  with  all  the  luxury  of  art
and  taste  at  their  highest  eminence,  with  gilded  roofs
and  sculptured  friezes,  and  panels  of  many-coloured
marble.  Within,  it  was  a  rich  museum  of  painting,
precious  stones,  and  statuary :  amidst  the  rubbish  of
its  long-ruined  chambers  some  of  the  choicest  works
of  ancient  art  have  been  discovered,  and  the  modern
frescoes  which  we  most  admire  seem  to  have  been
copied  by  stolen  glimpses  from  walls  unveiled  for  a
moment  and  again  shrouded  in  darkness.1  The  grand
entrance  from  the  Forum  and  the  Sacred  way  was
adorned  with  a  marble  statue  of  the  emperor  120
feet  in  height,  the  colossus  which  afterwards  gave  its
name  to  the  amphitheatre  of  Vespasian.  When  Nero
at  last  took  possession  of  this  gorgeous  habitation,
he  remarked  complacently  that  now  he  was  lodged
as  a  ma/n  should  be.*

These  vast  constructions  were  planned  and  exe-
cuted by  the  architects  Severus  and  Celer,

Exactions  and •• ,  •. «• ,  ••  ..  i  IT  f

conflations both  of  them,  it  may  be  remarked,  not  of

required  to  ~ , -  r> T»  • •  mi

defray  the  Greek  but  ot  Roman  origin.  These  men
t£|e"oen8truc-  seem  to  have  been  bold  designers  as  well
as  able  builders ;  their  profession  combined
engineering  with  architecture.  They  had  great  in-
fluence with  their  master,  and  seem  to  have  inspired
him  with  many  grand  conceptions,  the  exact  purport

1  Saet.  Ner.  31.:  "In  caeteris  partibus  cuncta  auro  lita,  di.-tincta
gemmis  unionumque  conchis  crant. Cceiuitiones  laqueatte  tabulis
eburneis  versatilibus,"  &c. The  baths  of  Titus  were  afterwards
erected  on  a  part  of  this  palace  on  the  Esquiline,  and  stand  on  its
lower  chambers,  within  which  the  great  vase  of  the  Vatican  and  othei
monuments  of  art  have  been  discovered. The  Laocoon  was  found
similarly  imbedded  at  no  great  distance. How  such  works  came  to
be  there  left  amidst  the  rubbish  seems  inexplicable. It  is  believed
that  Raphael  took  the  designs  of  some  of  his  arabesques  from  paintings
revealed  in  these  chambers,  which  he  purposely  caused  to  be  filled  up
again,  to  conceal  the  plagiarism.

2  Martial,  i.  2. ;  Suet.  I.e. : "  Se  quasi  hoinincui  jam  habitare  ccepisse."

A,D.64-A.U.8l7. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  359

of  which  may  have  been  inadequately  represented  to
us.  The  navigable  canal  which  they  projected,  from
the  lake  of  Avernus  and  the  Julian  haven  to  Kome,
Avas  evidently  not  a  mere  freak  of  power,  but  a  work
of  utility  for  the  transport  of  grain  to  the  city.1  The
attempt,  made  in  earnest,  was  probably  abandoned
from  caprice.  The  rebuilding  of  Eome  in  the  course
of  four  years  tasked  all  the  energies  of  the  artisans  of
Italy.  But  the  expense  of  these  extraordinary  efforts
caused  on  the  whole  more  dangerous  discontent  than
the  worst  caprices  of  tyranny;  and  unless  we  suppose
Nero  devoid  of  the  most  ordinary  foresight,  we  must
allow  that  he  would  hardly  have  caused  a  conflagra-
tion, which  could  not  fail  to  entangle  him  in  fatal
embarrassments.  He  was  compelled  to  strain  the
patience  of  his  subjects  by  increased  exactions.  An
organized  system  of  plunder  was  now  extended
throughout  the  empire,  which  ruined  the  citizens,
the  allies,  and  the  free  communities.  Nero  began
by  requiring  contributions,  under  the  name  of  free
gifts;  and  neglect  in  responding  to  this  invitation
was  visited  by  heavier  imposts.  Treasures,  human
and  divine,  were  swept  into  the  gulf.  The  temples
of  Home  itself  were  denuded  of  the  offerings  of  ages,
the  spoil  of  conquered  enemies  long  hoarded  in  the
shrines  of  the  gods,  "the  trophies  of  victories  and
triumphs  held  sacred  through  all  emergencies,  which
even  Caesar,  who  sacked  the  treasury,  had  reluctantly
respected.2  From  Greece  and  Asia  not  the  offerings

1  Nero  is  said  also  to  have  designed  extending  Kome  to  Ostia.
Suetonius  says  of  his  buildings,  '•  Non  in  alia  re  damnosior  quam  in
cedificando."  The  magnificence  of  his  baths  continued  to  be  celebrated
long  after  him.  Martial  says  of  them,  "Quid  Nerone  pejus?  Quid
thermis  melius  Neronianis?"  The  Church  of  S.  Louis,  on  the
Pincian,  is  supposed  to  stand  upon  them.  Ampere,  Hist.  Romaine
a  Home,  §  3.  In  the  year  817  Nero  erected  himself  also  a  triumphal
arch  on  the  Capitoline,  to  celebrate  his  pretended  successes  against
the  Parthians.  To  occupy  that  sacred  site  with  a  monument  of
personal  vanity  was  an  act  of  unprecedented  ostentation.  Tac.
Ann.  xv.  18.  *  Tacitus,  xv.  4\

360  HISTOKY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LIU.

only,  but  the  images  of  the  gods  themselves,  were
carried  off  by  authorized  commissioners.1  Of  these
Acratus  was  a  freedman  of  the  palace,  who  retained
as  a  courtier  the  spirit  of  a  slave2 ;  Carrinas  Secun-
dus,  a  freeborn  Roman,  once  a  teacher  of  rhetoric,
who  had  starved  at  Athens  in  the  practice  of  his  pro-
fession, acquired  notoriety  at  Home,  and  suffered
banishment  as  a  declaimer  on  tyrannicide,  now
finished  his  career  as  an  unscrupulous  agent  of  ty-
ranny.3 Seneca,  as  a  man  of  sense  and  honour,  was
shocked  at  these  outrages  on  the  national  feeling  of
the  Greeks,  and  distressed  lest  they  should  be  ascribed
to  his  counsels.  Once  more  he  begged  leave  to  retire
into  privacy.  Again  disappointed,  he  affected  sick-
ness, and  confined  himself  strictly  to  his  chamber.
Some  averred  that  his  life  was  now  attempted  by
poison  at  Nero's  instigation;  that  he  escaped  either
by  the  confession  of  the  person  employed,  or  by  his
own  care  in  abstaining  from  all  suspicious  viands,
and  tasting  nothing  but  plain  fruits  and  vegetables,
bread  and  water.  Insults  such  as  these  to  the  faith
and  feelings  of  the  people  were  accompanied,  no
doubt,  by  cruel  extortions  and  the  confiscation  of
private  possessions ;  and  Nero,  emboldened  by  the
incredible  submission  of  the  world  to  his  feeble
sceptre,  treated  gods  and  men  alike  as  mere  slaves  of
his  will,  ordained  equally,  whether  in  earth  or  heaven,
for  his  personal  service  and  gratification.  Neverthe-
less the  calamities  with  which  this  year  closed  must

1  Pausanias  refers  to  the  spoliation  of  the  Grecian  temples  by  Nero:
v.  25,  26.,  ix.  27.,  x.  7. From  Delphi  he  carried  off  no  less  than  five
hundred  brazen  statues. Caius  had  robbed  the  Thespians  of  e
Cupid  by  Praxiteles,  which  Claudius  restored  them. Nero  seized  it
a  second  time. Comp.  Dion  Chrys.  Or.  Rhod.  p.  355. Plin.  Hist,
Nat.  xxxiv.  19.

2  Tac.  1.  c. ',  Dion  Chrys.  /.  c. :  fare  yap  "A/cparos  eKewos  ryv  olicov  •
ft.ivr)v  axfSbv  airatrav  Trepif\Q!i>v  roirrov  'X.a.piv.

*  For  Carrinas  see  Dion,  lix.  20.,  and  compare  Juvenal,  vii.  20-1
alluding,  as  is  generally  supposed,  to  the  same  person.

A.D.64-A.U.817. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  361

have  struck him  with  alarm  in  the  midst  of  his
frantic  caprices. An  outbreak  of  gladiators

,.,  , ,  Followed  by

at  Fraeneste  was  speedily  suppressed ;  but  portents  and
it  reminded  men  of  the  attempt  of  Spar-
racus,  and  the  ancient  troubles  of  the  republic,  and
betrayed  the  fact  that  the  prospect  of  revolution  was
contemplated  with  hope  no  less  than  with  apprehen-
sion. The  loss  of  some  galleys  on  the  Campanian
coast,  through  a  thoughtless  command  of  the  em-
peror's which  their  captains  dared  not  disobey,  might
impress  the  singer  of  the  Sack  of  Ilium  with  Minerva's
vengeance  on  an  older  sacrilege1 ;  while  the  occur-
rence of  fearful  prodigies,  of  monstrous  births,  of
storms  and  meteors,  above  all,  the  blazing  of  a  comet,
extorted  from  the  soothsayers  the  prophecy  of  a  new
rebellion,  though  they  ventured  to  promise  that  it
should  be  instantly  quelled.8

This  apprehension  of  impending  change  was,  in-
deed, no  groundless  presentiment.  Nero's  crimes
and  follies  had  been  long  threatened  with  retribution;

1  Virg.  JEn.  xi.  260.:  "  Scit  triste  Minervse

Sidus,  et  Euboicffi  cautes,  ultorque  Caphareus."
Tac.  Ann.  xv.  46.;  "  Glades  rei  navalis,  non  bello,  quippe  baud  alias
tarn  immota  pax." Oomp.  the  fragment  of  Turnus,  Wernsdorf,  Poet.
Lat.  Min.  iii.:  "  Et  molle  imperil  senium  sub  nomine  pacis."

2  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  47.:  "Sidus  cometes,  semper  illustri  sanguine
Neroni  expiatum." Seneca's  allusion  to  this  comet  is  curious,  if  he
was  conscious  of  the  conspiracy  at  that  moment  in  agitation. Nat.
Qucest.  vii.  17.:  "Qui  sub  Nerone  apparuit  et  cometis  detraxit  inf'a-
miam." Virgil  speaks  generally  of  the  evil  influence  of  comets:
"Cometae  Sanguinei  lugubre  rubent." 2En.  x.  272. The  instinct
of  a  later generation  made  them  always  presage  evil  to  tyrants.
Lucan,  i.  528.:  "Terris  mutantem  regna  cometen." Stat.  Theb.  i.
fin.:  "Mutentquaesceptracometae." Sil.  i.  460.:  "Terret  fera  regna
cometes." And  so  our  republican  Milton: "Which  with  fear  of
change  Perplexes  monarchs." To  the  portent  of  the  comet,  Tacitus
adds:  "Bicipites  hominum  partus  .  .  .  natus  vitulus  cui  caput  in
crure  esset." The  double  head  presaged  unnatural  rivalry. Comp.
Lucan,  i.  626.:

"  Quodque,  nefas,  nullis  impune  apparuit  extis,
Ecce!  videt  capiti  fibrarum  iucrescere  molem
Alterius  capitis."

362  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  en.  till.

and  the  murmurs  of  the  injured  had  deepened  into  a

fixed  discontent,  which  official  seers  might  represent

as  the  token  of  an  occult  conspiracy. Among  the

nobles  there  were  many  who  complained  of

Growing  dis-  1-1.  i •,•

content  of  the  personal insults,  many whose ambition.

nobility.  1,1  • •  i_  j_ i j

whether  criminal  or  honest,  had  met  with
unexpected  rebuffs,  many,  no  doubt,  who  had  suffered
wanton  oppression ;  others  who  resented  the  degra-
dation of  the  republic ;  lastly,  there  were  some  who
watched  their  discontent  from  a  distance,  awaiting
the  moment  when  they  might  turn  it  to  their  own
aggrandisement.  It  was  necessary  to  fix  on  some
personage  around  whom  the  discontented  could  rally,
and  whom  they  could  agree  to  substitute  for  Nero.
There  was  no  idea,  in  any  quarter,  of  returning  to
the  ancient  free  state.  The  pride  of  independence
and  mutual  equality,  once  so  strong  in  the  Koman
aristocracy,  had  collapsed  for  ever ;  to  the  mass  of
the  people  it  had  never  been  known.  The  necessity
of  monarchy  was  indeed  enforced  by  practical  con-
siderations. No  conspiracy  could  hope  for  success
without  the  support  of  the  soldiers ;  the  soldiers
would  not  draw  their  swords  for  a  political  ab-
straction ;  and  any  leader  to  whom  they  gave  their
allegiance,  must  have  Eome  and  the  empire  at  his
feet.  If,  however,  they  could  not  escape  from  sub-
jection to  a  single  ruler,  the  nobles  were  anxious  to
have  an  easy  and  quiet  man,  who  would  interfere
little  with  them,  and  even  pretend  to  put  himself
under  their  protection.  Among  the  great  families
already  scathed  by  proscriptions,  there  was  at  this
time  but  one  peculiarly  eminent  which  was  not  con-
nected with  the  hated  house  of  the  Claudii  and  the
Julii.  The  Pisos  had  long  borne  themselves  as  rivals
of  the  emperors  :  a  Cnaeus  Piso,  as  we  have  seen,  had
fancied  himself  the  equal  of  Tiberius ;  and  the  pride
with  which  another  had  threatened  to  withdraw  from
public  life,  showed  that  he  could  not  brook  to  act  aa

A  D.64  A.r.817. TTNDER THE EMPIRE.

a  subordinate.  Even  after  the  death  of  Cnaeus,  and
the  disgrace  of  his  house,  his  sons  and  grandsons  had
continued  to  hold  their  rank  among  the  Eoman
nobility.  One  of  the  first  caprices  of  Caligula  was
his  attempt  to  degrade  the  head  of  the  Calpurnii,  by
taking  from  him  his  wife,  and  afterwards  by  banish-
ing him.1  But  this  man,  C.  Calpurnius  Theyforma
Piso,  was  restored  to  favour  by  Claudius,  in  %£$£??&,
compliment  to  the  senate ;  he  was  moreover  at  its  head-
elevated  to  the  consulship.  The  eloquence  of  the
speech  with  which  he  repaid  this  indulgence  has  been
especially  commemorated  in  the  verses  of  a  client  or
parasite.2  His  abilities,  his  riches,  his  liberality
are  all  equally  extolled  by  the  same  panegyrist ;  but
they  are  sufficiently  confirmed  by  the  sincerer  testi-
mony of  an  historian  and  a  satirist.3  Piso,  however,
was  not  a  man  of  action,  and  in  the  absence  of  higher
aims  in  life  he  became  celebrated  for  his  skill  in  the
mock  campaigns  of  chess  or  draughts.  His  mild
temper  was  not  agitated,  perhaps,  by  the  illusions  of
political  ambition;  but  he  disdained  to  yield  pre-
cedence to  any  other,  and  held  aloof,  as  far  as  pos-
sible, from  public  life  till  tempted  in  an  unwary
moment  with  the  offer  of  preeminence.

Around  this  central  figure,  itself  of  no  great  mark
or  hopefulness,  were  soon  grouped  a  num-  T1?e  con.
ber  of  lesser  men,  senators,  knights,  and  E'piaiis"™
military  officers,  intent  upon  transferring  ^u™"*™'
the  empire  to  him  from  the  last  descendant  emperor-
of  the  Julii. Women  were  also  admitted  to  the  con

1  C.  Calpurnius  Piso  was  banished  for  taking  back  his  wife,  after
the  emperor  had  dismissed  her.  Caligula  had  probably  a  political
motive  in  this  outrageous  tyranny.  He  wanted  to  bring  the  rival
family  to  an  end.

1  See  the  Carmen  ad  Pison.  68.  This  poem  is  ascribed  by
Wernsdorf  to  Saleius  Bassus,  the  "tenuis  Saleius"  of  Juvenal:  it  is
certainly  not  Lucan's.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  48.  Juvenal,  v.  108.:  "  Quae  Piso  bonus,  ejuue
Cutta  sclebut  Largiri."  The  Bcholiasi  on  this  passage  confirms,  with

364  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Mil.

spiracy.  Fenius  Rufus,  the  colleague  of  Tigellinus
in  command  of  the  praetorians,  was  impelled  to  join
it  by  hatred  towards  the  rival  who  had  eclipsed  him
in  his  chiefs  regards.  His  position,  if  not  his  per-
sonal qualities,  gave  him  the  foremost  place  in  the
whole  band.  Another  of  the  conspirators,  a  man  of
more  vehemence  than  vigour,  was  the  youthful  poet
M.  Annaeus  Lucanus,  who,  in  the  better  years  of
Nero's  career,  had  been  his  associate  and  a  rival  in
versification,  and  is  supposed  to  have  suffered  slights
from  the  imperial  jealousy.1  Dion  has  specified
Seneca,  Lucan's  uncle,  as  also  an  accomplice.2  The
tribune  of  a  praetorian  cohort,  named  Subrius  Flavus,
claimed  the  honour  of  assassinating  the  emperor  with
his  own  hand.  He  proposed  to  attack  him  openly
while  singing  on  the  stage,  and  again,  in  the  con-
fusion of  the  conflagration  of  Eome,  to  waylay  him
among  the  passages  of  his  burning  palace.3  He
seems,  however,  to  have  been  a  man  of  no  real  de-
termination, and  to  have  shrunk  in  either  case  from

some  additions,  the  account  of  Suetonius,  Calig.  25.  He  mentions
also  Piso's  fame,  "  in  ludo  latrunculorum,"  by  which  he  is  identified
with  the  subject  of  the  panegyric.

1  The  statement  in  the  anonymous  life  of  Lucan  (ex  comment,
f.ntiqnissimo),  that  he  gained  the  prize  from  the  emperor  at  the  Quin-
quennia, is  contrary  to  the  text  of  the  genuine  biography  of  Nero.
See  Suet.  Ner.  12,  21.  The  short  fragment  upon  Lucan  ascribed  to
Suetonius  affirms,  with  more  probability,  that  he  provoked  his  patron
by  some  indiscretions,  and,  having  lost  his  favour,  proceeded  first  to
libel  and  afterwards  to  conspire  against  him.  But  that  Nero  was
jealous  of  his  talent  and  forbade  him  to  exhibit  it  in  public,  is  dis-
tinctly asserted  by  Tacitus,  Ann.  xv.  49.:  "Lucanum  propriae  causie
accendebant  quod  famam  carminum  ejus  premebat  Nero,  prohi-
bueratque  ostentare  vanus  ussimilatione."

8  Dion,  Ixii.  24.  If  not  actually  engaged  in  the  plot  we  may  infer,
I  think,  from  Tacitus  that  he  was  aware  of  it.  The  sentiment
ascribed  to  him  by  Dion,  that  the  assassination  was  necessary  to  free
Rome  from  Nero  and  to  free  Nero  from  himself,  savours  of  Seneca's
rhetoric.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  50.  This  statement,  dropped  negligently  by  the
historian,  shows,  if  true,  that  the  conspiracy  had  been  lour  in
agitation.

A.D.65-A.u.81S. UNDEK THE EMPIRE.  365

the  personal  hazard.  It  was  next  proposed  to  strike
the  blow  when  the  emperor  was  at  a  private  villa  of
Piso's:  again  Piso  refused  to  violate  the  laws  of
hospitality,  a  piece  of  sentiment  which  in  such  a
matter  can  hardly  command  our  respect.  Some
indeed  surmised  that  in  fact  he  feared  to  leave  the
capital  open  to  a  possible  rival,  or  even  to  the  senate
and  the  partisans,  if  such  there  were,  of  a  republic.1
But  indecision  reigned  on  all  sides  among  the  con-
spirators. Their  behaviour  was  as  frivolous  as  the
motives  generally  attributed  to  them  were  personal
and  selfish.  One  indeed  among  them,  a  freedwoman
named  Epicharis  (but  why  a  woman  among  them  at
all?  why  a  Grecian  freedwoman?),  seems  to  have
acted  with  more  sense  and  spirit  than  any  of  the
men.  Not  only  did  she  embrace  their  plans  with
ardour,  and  nerve  their  courage  to  the  utmost,  but
while  they  were  concerting  imprudent  schemes,  and
again  lightly  relinquishing  them,  she  alone  undertook
to  gain  the  fleet  at  Misenum,  which  protected  the
corn  fleets  of  Alexandria,  and  held  the  existence  of
Kome  in  its  hands.  Possibly  she,  too,  was  more
energetic  than  discreet.  Her  secret  was  betrayed  by
an  officer  named  Volusius,  whom  she  had  engaged
in  the  scheme;  but  she  alone  was  arrested.  The
names  of  her  confederates  she  had  concealed  from
her  betrayer,  and  while  she  was  still  retained  in
custody  and  fruitlessly  interrogated,  the  conspirators,
trusting  to  her  fortitude  and  fidelity,  continued  to
meet  and  deliberate.  At  last  they  fixed  the  nine-
teenth of  April,  the  day  of  the  Circensian  games,  for
executing  tneii  enterprise.  A  senator  named  Scae-
vinus  demanded  the  honour  of  striking  the  blow,
and  for  this  purpose  abstracted  a  votive  dagger  from

1  The  apprehended  rival  was  L.  Junius  Torquatus  Silanus,  the  son
of  M.  Silanus  (pecus  aurea)  cons.  A.D.  46,  poisoned  by  Agrippina.
See  above,  c.  lii.  Lucius  was  atucpos,  or  great-great-great-grand  son,
of  Augustus.

366  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  Mil,

a  temple  of  Salus  or  of  Fortune.1  It  was  arranged
that  he  should  make  the  attack  with  the  support  of
a  chosen  party  in  the  senate,  while  Planting  Later-
anus  was  prostrating  himself  before  the  emperor,
and  clinging  to  his  limbs  or  throwing  him  down.
Piso  himself  was  to  await  the  result  in  the  adjacent
temple  of  Ceres,  whence  Fenius  was  to  fetch  him  to
the  camp,  and  present  him,  together  with  Antonia,
the  daughter  of  Claudius,  to  the  soldiers.  It  was
still  deemed  expedient  to  conciliate  the  soldiery  by  the
presence  of  a  representative  of  Germanicus.  Such,
at  least,  was  the  account  given  by  Pliny,  though
Tacitus  hesitates  to  believe  it,  from  the  known
attachment  of  Piso  to  his  wife,  and  the  improbability
of  Antonia  embracing  a  scheme  from  which,  except
by  marriage  with  Piso,  she  could  reap  no  personal
advantage.2  There  seems,  however,  little  force  in
the  objection,  while  in  the  abiding  sense  it  implies
of  military  devotion  there  is  something  both  natural
and  touching.

And  here  the  historian  remarks  on  the  fidelity  wifh
conviction  which  the  secret  was  kept  among  con-
Sfthlcon"-"0"  federates  of  different  rank,  age,  and  sex.
skaters.  '  rj^g  pi0{.  seemg  to  have  been  in  agitation  for

nearly  a  year,  and  even  the  indiscretion  of  Epicharis,

1  I  irould  willingly  conjecture  that  there  was  some  connexion
between  this  Scaevinus  and  the  Scasva  whom  Lucan  so  delights  to
honour.  Comp.  Phars.  vi.  256.:

"  Exornantque  Decs  ac  nudnm  pectore  Martem

Armis  Scaeva  tuis:  felix  hoc  nomine  fames,"  &c.
The  last  lines  the  poet  penned  contain  a  thrilling  reminiscence  of  this
true  Roman  hero,  Cffisaruan  though  he  was:

"  Scsevam  perpetuas  meritum  jam  nomina  famse
Ad  campos,  Epidamne,  tnos,  ubi  solns  apertis
Obsedit  muris  calcantem  mcenia  Magnum." x.  extr.
We  might  imagine  him  only  holding  his  hand,  till  Scaevinus  should
strike  down  the  last  of  the  Julii,  to  complete  the  passage  with  a  sen-
timent like  that  of  the  verse  I  have  before  quoted:

"  Vivat,  et  ut  Bruti  procumbat  victima,  regnet"
*  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  53,

i.D.65-A.C.818. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  367

if  we  may  believe  our  accounts,  seems  not  to  have
materially  endangered  it.  But  the  bold  and  eager
Scaevinus  at  last  unwittingly  betrayed  it.  The  day
before  the  attempt  was  to  be  made,  after  holding  a
long  conversation  with  one  of  the  party,  he  was  ob-
served to  seal  his  will,  then  taking  his  dagger  from
its  sheath,  and  trying  its  edge,  he  gave  it  to  a  freed-
man,  named  Milichus,  to  sharpen.  He  then  lay
down  to  a  supper  of  more  than  usual  profusion,  and
gave  freedom  to  the  most  esteemed  of  his  slaves.  At
the  same  time  his  manner  was  that  of  a  man  labour-
ing under  anxiety,  which  he  tried  in  vain  to  disguise
by  the  assumption  of  excessive  hilarity.  Finally  he
charged  Milichus  to  prepare  bandages  and  fomenta-
tions for  the  cure  of  wounds.  These  circumstances
awakened  suspicion,  if  indeed  Milichus  was  not
actually  admitted  to  the  secret.  At  all  events  the
wretch,  whose  servile  nature  had  not  been  eradicated
by  freedom,  was  tempted  to  reveal  his  suspicions  by
hopes  of  a  splendid  reward.1  The  first  of  the  con-
spirators who  were  arrested  at  his  indication,  and
threatened  with  the  question,  made  ample  disclo-
sures. Hopes  of  pardon  induced  them  to  denounce
one  another,  together  with  some  perhaps  who  were
innocent ;  and  Lucan,  in  particular,  is  charged  with
thus  revealing  the  name  of  his  own  mother.  Such
charges,  it  must  be  remembered,  are  commonly  made
by  unscrupulous  governments  to  disgrace  a  commi-
serated victim.  But  the  sufferings  of  a  freedwoman
would  excite  little  sympathy,  and  Epicharis  alone,
it  was  admitted,  from  the  weakness  of  constancy  of
whose  sex  greater  infirmity  might  be  ex-  Ep'chari8-
pected,  refused  to  betray  the  men  who  had  trusted
her.  When,  after  being  lacerated  on  the  rack,  she
was  brought  a  second  time  before  her  judges,  bound
to  the  chair,  in  which  she  could  not  sit  unsupported,

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  56.  57.

368  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  rn.  r.ni.

she  contrived  to  strangle  herself  with  the  thongs,
and  died  without  a  confession.  Of  all  the  conspirators,
Treachery  of  Feiiius  Kufus  was  the  one  whose  fate  de-
FemusRufu*.  serve(j  the  least  pity.  As  prefect  of  the
guards,  he  contrived  adroitly  to  place  himself  on  the
tribunal  by  the  side  of  Tigellinus,  and  sought  to
screen  himself  from  inquiry  by  the  violence  with
which  he  judged  his  own  associates.  Denounced  at
last  by  one  of  the  victims,  he  turned  pale,  stammered,
and  was  unable  to  defend  himself.1  The  accused
were  speedily  convicted.  Doomed  without  mercy
by  this  domestic  inquisition,  they  were  allowed  only
to  choose  their  mode  of  death,  an  indulgence  which
spared  the  government  the  odium  of  a  public  sen-
tence. When  escape  was  impossible,  the  culprits
suffered  with  the  callous  fortitude  which  had  become
habitual  with  their  class  under  the  terrors  of  the
imperial  tyranny.  If  they  deigned  to  natter  the
prince  with  their  last  breath,  it  was  for  the  sake  of
their  children.  Lucan  died  with  a  firmness  which,
Death  of  while  he  still  hoped  for  pardon,  is  said  to
Lucan.  have  failed  him ;  and,  when  his  veins  were
opened  in  the  bath,  found  consolation  in  reciting
some  of  his  own  verses,  descriptive  of  a  monstrous
death  by  bleeding  at  every  pore.2  Perhaps  his  con-
science would  not  suffer  him  to  utter  at  such  a
moment  those  denunciations  of  a  tyranny  he  had  so
often  flattered,  or  that  praise  of  constancy  he  had
failed  to  exhibit,  with  which  so  much  of  his  poetry
glows.  Swords,  he  had  once  exclaimed,  were  given
men  that  they  might  never  be  slaves.  Again,  He  is
happiest  who  is  content  to  die,  next  happiest  he  who

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  66.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  70. The  lines  were  probably  those  of  Phars.  ix.
811.  foil.:

"Sanguis  erant  lachrymse;  qusecunque  foramina  novit
Humor,  ab  his  largus  manat  cruor;  ora  redundant,
Et  patulse  nares;  sudor  rubet;  omnia  plenis
Membra  fluunt  venis:  totum  est  pro  vnlnere  corpiis."

4.D.65-A.C.818. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  369

is  compelled.1  Among  the  first  on  whom  sentence
was  pronounced  was  the  unfortunate  Seoeca,  who
had  in  vain  withdrawn  himself  from  public  affairs,
in  vain  relinquished  to  the  emperor  the  riches  he
supposed  him  to  covet.  He  had  long  lived  in  ex-
pectation of  this  catastrophe,  and  Nero  had  striven
to  reassure  him  by  a  show  of  confidence  and  regard.
Nero  might  indeed  be  indifferent  to  his  ancient
friend ;  but  he  had  no  reason  to  bear  him  malice.  It
was  to  Poppsea  more  probably  that  he  owed  his  doom,
for  she  was  not  likely  to  forgive  the  zeal  with  which
he  had  dissuaded  her  lover  from  repudiating  Octavia,
and  she  felt  her  own  influence  to  depend  on  removing
from  Nero's  sight  even  the  shadow  of  honour  and
virtue.  It  is  some  consolation  to  be  assured  that
his  end  was  composed  and  dignified.2  He  Demi,.*
caused  his  veins  to  be  opened  in  the  pre-  Seneoa-
sence  of  his  friends  and  kindred,  and  continued
calmly  to  converse  with  them  through  the  protracted
agony  of  a  death,  which  his  age  and  the  sluggishness
of  his  blood  rendered  peculiarly  painful.3

The  threats  of  some,  and  even  the  calmness  of
his  other  victims  redoubled  Nero's  alarm.  Further  prose.
They  seemed  equally  to  rely  on  speedy  ^adufa"^,,
vengeance,  to  point  to  unseen  avengers.  ofthesenate-
Roused  to  wild  fury  by  the  necessities  of  self-defence,

1  Comp.  iv.  575.:  "  Ignoratque  datos  ne  quisquam  serviat  enses."
x.  211.:  "  Scire  mori  sors  priraa  viris,  sed  proxima  cogi."

*  We  may  hope  that  there  is  no  truth  in  the  story  introduced  by
Dion,  that  Seneca  urged  his  wife  Paulina  to  die  with  him,  to  show
how  successful  his  lessons  had  been  in  teaching  her  to  despise  death.
She  let  him  open  her  reins,  we  are  told,  but  on  his  dying  first,
caused  them  to  be  bound  up  again.  Dion,  Ixii.  25.:  comp.  Tac.
Ann.  xv.  64.

3  This  mode  of  bleeding  to  death  seems  to  have  been  so  coiiimonly
adopted  from  an  idea  that  it  was  comparatively  painless.  I  have
heard  that  a  high  medical  authority  has  pronounced  it  to  be  much
the  reverse,  at  least  when  the  circulation  is  languid.  In  such  cases
the  Romans  were  wont  to  accelerate  the  flow  of  blood  with  the  warm
bath:  Seneca,  in  his  impatience,  allowed  himself  to  be  stifled  with
the  steam.

VOL.  VI.  B  B

370  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LIU

he  extended  his  blows  from  the  actual  conspirators
to  many  more  whom  he  feared  and  suspected,  and
his  thirst  for  their  blood  was  stimulated  by  the  glit-
tering prospect  of  rich  estates.  The  property  of  men
who  had  been  suffered  to  die  by  their  own  hand  could
not  legally  be  confiscated,  and  to  seize  it,  sentence  of
banishment  must  issue  against  their  heirs,  or  they
must  be  removed  by  assassination.  Nero  invoked  the
skill  of  the  poisoners.  The  courage  of  the  miserable
nobles  quailed  completely  before  the  arrow  which
flies  in  darkness.  For  every  execution,  for  every
murder,  vows  and  sacrifices  were  offered  in  the
Capitol.  Parents  thanked  the  gods  for  the  loss  of
their  children,  sens  for  the  loss  of  their  fathers :  the
palace  doors  were  hung  with  garlands  by  the  rela-
tions of  those  over  whom  the  prince  was  declared  to
have  justly  triumphed.  Nero  himself  was  not  un-
mindful of  the  informers  whose  treachery  had  saved
him.  Milichus,  besides  rewards  in  money,  received
the  title  of  Preserver.  The  soldiers  were  enriched
with  a  donative;  the  populace  were  gratified  with
two  thousand  sesterces  each,  and  an  ample  largess  of
corn.  Tigellinus  and  Nerva,  who  had  conducted  the
inquiry,  were  honoured  with  triumphal  statues.1
Nevertheless  Nero  seems  to  have  faintly  excused  his
severity  and  declared  in  an  harangue  to  the  senate,
that  he  was  urged  by  no  private  feelings,  but  only
by  the  necessity  of  his  position  and  the  demands  of
the  public  safety.  This  sufficed  to  open  the  flood-
gates of  patrician  flattery.  The  most  shameless
decrees  followed  in  his  honour :  thanks  and  offerings
to  the  gods  were,  as  usual,  precipitately  voted,  and
the  day  of  his  escape  was  recommended  to  perpetual
commemoration.  The  proposal  of  Anicius  Cerialis

1  This  Nerva  is  supposed  to  have  been  son  to  the  jurist  who  has
been  mentioned  as  intimate  with  Tiberius.  He  is  not  to  be  con-
founded with  the  future  emperor  of  the  same  name,  01  whom  he  may
have  been  the  father.

*.I>.f)5-A.C.818. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  371

to  erect  him  a  temple  forthwith,  was  only  put  timidly
aside  on  the  pretence  that  it  might  seem  to  anticipate
his  death ;  for  it  was  only  after  death,  according  to
established  usage,  that  the  emperor  could  be  pro-
nounced immortal.1

But  already, not long  before  the  era  at  which
we  are  now  arrived,  the  living  Nero  had  enjoyed  a
poetical  apotheosis. Lucan  had  expressed,
in  the  fervour  of  his  youthful  intimacy  with  coumpnmenrtsy

,,  T T j /• •  ii  ,  • to  Nero.

the  most  accomplished  ot  princes,  the  senti-
ment common  to  many  dreamers  of  the  day,  that  the
age  of  conflicts  and  disasters  through  which  the  state
had  passed  was  requited  by  the  advent  of  a  Nero  to
power.  This  was  a  compensation  for  Pharsalia  and
Munda,  for  Perusia  and  Philippi.  The  ruin  of  cities,
the  desolation  of  fields,  the  destruction  of  teeming
populations,  all  were  repaid  by  the  prosperity  which
this  child  of  fortune  was  to  inaugurate.  Even  the
gods  of  Olympus,  it  was  declared,  could  not  enjoy
their  ever-blessed  sovereignty  till  they  had  conquered
peace  by  the  overthrow  of  the  giants.2  There  is  more.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  74.  Modern  historians  have  followed  one  anothei
in  asserting  that  divine  honours  were  paid  by  Rome  to  the  living
Nero.  This  passage,  to  which  they  alone  blindly  refer,  proves  pre-
cisely the  reverse.  "Reperio  in  couamentariis  senatus  Cerialem
Anicium,  consulem  designatum,  pro  sententia  dixisse,  ut  templum
D.  Neroni  quam  maturrime  publica  pecunia  poneretur.  Quod
quidem  ille  decernebut  (proposed),  tanquam  mortale  fastigium

egresso " The  remainder  of  the  sentence  is  corrupt,  but

the  context  implies  that  the  proposal  was  rejected.  Setting  aside
the  momentary  freaks  of  Caligula,  no  Roman  emperor,  at  least  for
the  first  two  centuries,  allowed  himself  to  be  wprshipped  by  the  citi-
zens; "  Jurabit  Roma  per  umbras,"  was  the  worst  in  this  respect  that
republican  indignation  could  say  of  them.

*  Lucan,  Phars.  i.  37.:

"Jam  nihil,  O  superi,  querimur;  scelera  ipsa  nufatque
Hac  mercede  placent,"  &c.

It  was  not  till  a  later  period  that  Nero  affected  to  close  the  temple
of  Janus,  "tanquam  nullo  residue  bello;"  the  true  reading  appa-
rently of  Saet.  Ner.  13.:  but  anticipations  of  a  golden  age  of  peace

B  it  a

372  HISTOKl OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LIU.

/  believe,  in  this  encomium  than  merely  extravagant
Popular  an-  flattery.  Setting  aside  the  vaunted  merita
aglpoafex"r°aoar-  of  the  prince  himself,  in  which  none  but
dmary  felicity.  juvenjie  triflers  should  have  seen  much  to
admire,  the  age  seems  to  have  been  impressed  with
signs  which  to  more  thoughtful  men  betokened  ex-
traordinary felicity.  A  blaze  of  luxury  dazzled  all
eyes.  The  profusion  of  the  higher  classes  was  taken
for  a  proof  of  their  wealth  ;  but  wealthy  they  un-
doubtedly were  beyond  all  former  experience.  The
rapidity  with  which  fortunes  were  made,  as  it  were
underground,  by  the  ministers  of  the  imperial  govern-
ment, even  by  freedmen  and  slaves,  urged  men  to
projects  and  speculations,  to  secret  investments,  and
distant  enterprises.  It  would  appear  that  the  great
and  ancient  families,  which  had  escaped  the  proscrip-
tions of  recent  tyrants,  had  removed  the  sources  of
their  abundance  from  the  observation  of  the  central
government;  and  the  riches  they  displayed  in  the
capital  might  seem  to  have  dropped  from  the  clouds,
or  sprung  from  the  bosom  of  the  soil.  Presently  the
public  was  amazed  to  learn  that  one-half  of  the
province  of  Africa  was  held  in  fee  by  six  noble  fa-
milies of  Eome.  Such  is  the  statement  of  a  contem-
porary, and  no  doubt  that  statement  was  believed.1
The  existence  of  these  vast  appropriations,  indeed,
was  only  made  known  by  their  confiscation.  But
when  the  emperor's  eyes  were  once  directed  to  that
land  of  fabled  riches,  the  seat  of  the  famous  garden
of  the  Hesperides,  it  was  easy  to  palm  fictions  upon

to  follow  when  he  should  be  translated  to  divine  power  in  the  skies
were  already  popular:

"  Turn  genus  humanum  positis  sibi  consulat  armis,
Inque  vicem  gens  omnis  amet:  pax  missa  per  orbem
Ferrea  belligeri  compescat  limina  Jani."

1  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xviii.  7.  3.  Speaking  of  the  pernicious  extent
of  private  domains  in  Italy  and  the  provinces:  "Sex  domini  semis*
seni  Africae  possidebant,  quum  interfecit  eos  Nero  princeps."

A  D.65-A.U.818. TINDER TITE EMPIRE.  373

him,  which  should  exceed  the  glowing  realities  of
the  fortune  he  enjoyed.  A  strange  story  is  ponded
told  of  a  brainless  projector,  a  man  of  Punic  f^"^^
origin,  named  Cesellius  Bassus,  who  was  ofDido-
persuaded,  apparently  by  a  dream,  that  a  hoard  of
gold,  in  bars  and  ingots,  was  to  be  found  in  a  cave
on  his  own  land,  which  he  presumed  to  be  the  de-
posit of  Dido,  queen  of  Carthage.1  He  crossed  the
sea,  and  hastened  to  acquaint  the  prince  of  the  trea-
sure-trove, which  by  law  accrued  to  the  fiscus.  Ac-
cess to  Nero,  even  on  such  an  errand,  could  only  be
obtained  by  money,  and  Bassus  purchased  at  a
handsome  price  admittance  for  his  glittering  tale.
For  its  truth  indeed  he  had  no  evidence  to  offer,
nor,  it  seems,  was  any  demanded.  The  spendthrift's
hopes  were  unclouded  by  misgivings.  He  allowed
the  story  to  be  circulated  through  Rome,  and  re-
galed his  ears,  while  his  preparations  were  in  pro-
gress, with  the  flattery  of  his  courtiers,  who  con-
tinued to  inflame  his  expectations.  At  the  same
moment  the  Quinquennial  games  were  in  course  of
celebration,  and  the  circumstance  was  seized  by  the
poets  and  declaimers  to  dilate  on  the  prince's  for-
tune, for  whom  the  soil  bore  not  her  accustomed
fruits  only,  nor  her  precious  metals  alloyed  with
dross  and  earth,  but  the  pure  ore  itself,  already  refined
for  use.  Fired  with  these  glowing  benedictions,  he
plunged  into  deeper  prodigality  than  ever.  He  be-
came reckless  in  the  profusion  of  treasures  which  he
believed  to  be  unlimited ;  the  treasury  was  speedily
exhausted  in  the  anticipation  of  unbounded  replen-
ishment. But  the  officers  sent  under  the  guidance
of  Bassus  to  recover  the  hoards  he  had  indicated,
spent  their  time  in  exploring  and  digging  to  no  pur-
pose. The  people  and  the  soldiers  of  the  province
turned  out  in  crowds  to  witness  the  search  and  to

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  1.:  "  Lateres  (ingots)  prsegraves  jacere,  adstan-
tibns  parte  alia  column  is  "  (bars).

374  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  Mil.

protect  it.  After  examining,  spade  in  hand,  every
corner  of  the  wretched  man's  estate,  with  more
patience  than  his  crazy  tale  deserved,  they  were
obliged  at  last  to  report  the  total  disappointment  of
their  hopes ;  and  he  either  put  himself  to  death  in
despair,  or,  according  to  another  account,  was  sent
in  chains  to  Eome  to  answer  for  his  folly  or  his
crime.1

What  remains  of  the  year  818,  the  most  fertile

perhaps  in  all  our  annals  in  marked  con-
formMic/ta  trasts  of  the  horrid  and  ludicrous,  of  public

and  private  sufferings,  of  barbarous  cruelty
and  frantic  resistance,  shall  be  told  nearly  in  the
words  of  Tacitus  himself.  The  senate,,  the  historian
says,  on  the  return  of  the  Neronian (Quinquennial)
games,  anxious  to  avert  a  public  scandal,  offered
the  emperor  the  prize  for  song  and  crown  of  elo-
quence, without  the  show  of  a  contest  But  Nero,
protesting  that  he  required  no  favour,  insisted  on
being  pitted  against  his  rivals,  and  earning  his
honours  by  the  sworn  award  of  the  judges.  First,
he  simply  recites  a  poem  on  the  stage ;  then,  implored
by  the  populace  to  exhibit  all  his  accomplishments,
he  plays  and  dances  before  them,  observing  in  every
particular  the  rules  prescribed  to  the  performers,
who  must  not  sit  down  to  rest  themselves,  nor  wipe
their  brows  with  a  handkerchief.  Finally,  bowing
the  knee,  and  making  a  professional  salute,  he
awaited  the  judges'  decision  with  a  show  of  bashful
apprehension.3  And  the  popu  lace  too,  wont  to  follow

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  1 — 3. A.u.  818,  A.D.  65. It  was  even  affirmed
by  some  that  the  culprit  was  contemptuously  released.

2  Nero's  vocal  and musical powers  are  thus  described  in  the
dialogue  which  bears  his  name  included  in  the  works  of  Lucian.
"  His  voice  is  unnaturally  deep  and  hollow  (comp.  Lucan's  jest,
"  Sab  terris  tonuisse  putes  "),  and  seems  to  buzz  in  his  throat  with  a
disagreeable  sound,  which,  however,  he  mitigates  by  modulating  it
carefully  to  music. His  skill  as  a  singer  is  not  contemptible,  except
inasmuch  as  it  is  contemptible  in  an  emperor  to  attend  to  such  things

A..D.65-A.tJ.818.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  375

every  movement  of  the  actor  with  voice  and  gesture,
cheered  throughout  in  concert.  They  seemed  to  be
really  delighted ;  and  so  perhaps  they  were,  so  reck-
less were  they  of  the  national  dishonour.  But  the
spectators  from  remoter  burghs  of  Italy,  still  re-
taining some  antique  notions,  those  too  from  the
provinces  who  were  strangers  to  the  abandoned
habits  of  the  city,  were  ashamed  and  affronted;
and  these,  when  they  refused  to  clap  their  hands,
and  even  hinde-red  the  hired  applauders,  were  beaten
by  the  soldiers  posted  among  the  seats.  Many
knights  were  trodden  down  in  trying  to  make  their
way  out :  others  were  seriously  injured  by  keeping
their  places  a  day  and  a  night  without  intermission,
fearing  to  be  denounced  if  they  absented  themselves
for  a  moment,  by  spies  set  to  watch  every  movement
even  of  their  countenances.  Of  the  poorer  sort,
indeed,  many  were  punished  on  this  account  on  the
spot :  against  the  nobler  the  ill-will  of  the  emperor
was  treasured  for  future  manifestation.1

After  the  conclusion  of  the  games  died  Poppcea,
from  the  chance  violence  of  her  husband,  neMlotpop.
who  kicked  her  when  in  a  state  of  preg-  RoniuSpi."!
nancy :  for  I  cannot  believe  in  the  story  to  her-
of  poison,  though  asserted  by  some  writers,  from
mere  hatred,  as  I  believe,  to  Nero;  for  he  was
anxious  for  children,  and  greatly  enamoured  of
his  wife.  Her  body  was  not  consumed  by  fire,
as  is  the  Roman  custom ;  but  embalmed  after  the

at  all.  But  when  he  enacts  the  part  of  the  Gods,  how  ludicrous  he
is!  yawn  the  hearers  must,  in  spite  of  a  thousand  perils.  For  he
nods,  drawing  a  long  breath,  squares  his  toes,  raises  himself  to  the
utmost,  and  bends  back  like  a  man  bound  to  the  wheel.  Naturally
of  a  sanguine  complexion,  his  visage  now  glows  with  a  deeper  red."
Then  follows  the  story  of  a  tragedian,  who  persisted  in  contending
for  the  prize  against  him,  with  great  applause  from  the  audience,
but  much  to  Nero's  mortification,  who  set  on  some  of  the  players  to
attack  hiii  and  beat  him  to  death.
'  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  4,  5.

376  HISTORY OF TftB ROMANS  ck.  !.m

manner  of  foreign  kings,  and  thus  introduced  into
the  sepulchre  of  the  Julii.  The  obsequies,  however,
were  publicly  solemnized,  and  Nero  himself  pro-
nounced her  eulogy  from  the  rostrum,  praising  her
beauty,  declaring  that  she  was  the  mother  of  a  divine
infant,  (a  daughter  she  had  lately  borne  him,  already
dead,)  and  representing  her  other  gifts  of  fortune  in
the  light  of  personal  merits.1

The  death  of  Poppcea,  much  mourned  in  public,
not  less  blest  in  secret  from  the  sense  of

Proscription  of 77*  7  .,  ,7

c.  cassius  and  her  shamelessness  and  cruelty,  was  the
more  bitterly  considered  from  Nero's  for-
bidding C.  Oassius  to  appear  at  her  funeral.  This
was  the  first  sign  of  the  coming  evil,  which  was
not  long  delayed.  Silanus  was  included  in  the
same  proscription ;  with  no  charge  against  either,
except  that  Cassius  was  eminent  for  ancestral
wealth  and  high  consideration,  Silanus  for  illus-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  6.;  Suet.  Ner.  35.;  Dion,  Ixii.  27.  Our  author
does  not  mention,  though  he  afterwards  alludes  to  the  fact  as  if
mentioned,  that  the  senate  decreed  divine  honours  to  Poppasa.  Em-
balming, after  the  fashion  of  the  Egyptians  and  the  Greek  sovereigns
in  the  East,  from  a  symbol  of  immortality  easily  slid  into  a  symbol
of  divinity.  Pliny  has  a  remarkable  statement,  that  the  amount  of
spices  consumed  at  Poppsea's  funeral  exceeded  a  whole  year's  pro-
duce of  Arabia  (xii.  41.).  This  would  naturally  be  understood  to
refer  to  the  burning  of  her  body,  and  the  critics  are  perplexed  at  the
apparent  discrepancy  between  the  two  authors,  nor  do  I  think  they
are  successful  in  reconciling  them.  I  fear  it  must  be  considered
one  of  the  blunders  which  Pliny,  in  his  haste  and  indiscriminate
appetite  for  miscellaneous  information,  has  too  often  committed.
With  this  memento  before  us  we  may  allow  some  distrust  of  another
statement  also,  that  Poppsea  was  always  followed  by  a  troop  of  five
hundred  she-asses  to  provide  her  a  bath  of  milk,  as  a  cosmetic,  daily.
That  her  mules  were  shod  with  gold  we  may,  if  we  please,  admit.
It  should  be  observed  that  Dion's  repetition  of  these  stories  is  no
confirmation  of  them.  It  is  remarkable  that  Josephus  (Antiq.  Jud.
xx.  7.  11.)  calls  this  wretched  creature  "a  devout  woman,"  Qfoaffai
yap  fy.  Perhaps  she  patronized  the  Jewish  freedmen  connected  with
the  palace;  possibly  she  discountenanced  the  Christian  converts.
Josephus  was,  however,  under  some  personal  obligations  to  her.
See  Joseph.  Vit.  3.  On  this  point  more  will  be  said  in  another
place.

*.1>.65-A.D.818. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  377

trious  birth  and  youthful  modesty.  Such  were  the
crimes  for  which  Nero  sent  a  message  to  the  senate,
in  which  he  insisted  that  they  should  both  be  removed
from  the  commonwealth,  objecting  to  Cassius  that
among  the  images  of  his  ancestors  he  venerated  the
bust  of  the  tyrannicide  inscribed  the  Party-Leader.
This,  he  said,  was  to  sow  the  seeds  of  a  civil  war,  to
urge  a  revolt  against  the  family  of  the  Ccesars.
Moreover  he  had  attached  to  himself  Silanus,  a
restless  and  turbulent  stripling,  to  lure  the  disaf-
fected to  rebellion.  Silanus,  he  declared,  had  pre-
sumed already  to  promise  posts  and  places:  a
charge  as  frivolous  as  false ;  for  Silanus,  thoroughly
cowed  by  the  death  of  his  uncle  Torquatus,  was  only
anxious  to  secure  his  own  safety.  But  further,  the
prince  suborned  delators  to  accuse  Lepida,  the  wife
of  Cassius  and  aunt  to  Silanus,  of  incestuous  in-
tercourse with  her  nephew,  and  the  practice  of
magical  rites.  Certain  senators,  Vulcatius  and
Marcellus,  and  a  knight,  Calpurnius  Fabatus,  were
arrested  as  his  accomplices ;  these  men,  however,  got
a  respite  by  appealing  to  the  prince,  and  eventually
escaped,  from  their  insignificance,  among  the  greater
criminals  by  whom  Nero's  attention  was  engaged.
On  Cassius  and  Silanus  exile  was  pronounced  by
decree  of  the  senate.  Lepida  was  left  to  the  empe-
ror's judgment.  Cassius  was  transported  to  Sar-
dinia to  die  there  of  old  age :  Silanus  was  removed
to  Ostia  to  be  sent  to  Naxus ;  but  he  was  presently
confined  in  Barium,  a  town  of  Apulia.  While
enduring  there  his  undeserved  misfortune  with  the
fortitude  of  a  philosopher,  he  was  laid  hands  on  by
a  centurion  under  orders  to  kill  him.  He  declared
himself  well  prepared  to  die,  but  he  would  not  suffer
a  cut-throat  to  claim  the  honour  of  slaying  him.
Such,  though  unarmed,  were  his  vigour  and  resolu-
tion that  the  centurion  was  obliged  to  call  his  men
to  hold,  him;  yet  he  struggled  against  him  \uith  his

378  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  crt.  Ixtl

bare  hands  till  despatched  at  last  with  cut  and  thrust,
as  if  in  regular  combat.1

Nor  less  sudden  was  the  destruction  of  Lucius
Death  of  LU  Vetus,  his  mother-in-law  Sextia,  and  his
mothe^and"9  daughter  Pollutia,  objects  of  hatred  to  the
daughter.  prince  because  their  mere  existence  seemed
to  reproach  him  with  the  slaughter  of  Rubellius
Plautus,  the  son-in-law  of  Vetus.*  Nero  first
discovered  his  feelings  on  hearing  the  delation  of
Fortunatus,  a  freedman  of  Vetus,  and  of  Claudius
Demianus,  a  man  whom  Vetus,  when  proconsul  of
Asia,  had  cast  into  prison  for  his  crimes.  WJien
the  accused  was  informed  of  the  leind  of  witnesses
who  were  pitted  against  him,  he  quits  Rome  for  his
Formian  villa.  Soldiers  are  sent  to  surround  and
watch  him  at  a  distance.  His  daughter  was  with
him,  still  brooding  over  the  recollection  of  her  hus-
band's death,  of  the  murder  she  had  herself  witnessed,
of  the  severed  head  she  had  embraced.  She  preserved
hi-s  blood-stained  garments  as  a  widow  and  a
mourner,  taking  only  meat  and  drink  sufficient  to
sustain  her  alive.  At  her  father's  desire  she  now
repairs  to  the  emperor  at  Naples,  and  access  being
denied  her,  haunts  his  door  to  extort  an  audience,
calling  on  him  to  hear  the  innocent,  not  to  surrender
to  a  freedman  his  own  colleague  in  the  consulship,
sometimes  with  womanish  lamentations,  and  again,
casting  off  her  sex,  with  threats  and  frantic  violence,
till  tlie  prince's  obduracy  moved  the  disgust  of  all
beholders.  Then  at  last  she  bids  her  father  abandon
hope,  and  bear  what  is  beyond  help.  Tlie  trial,  he
hears,  is  impending,  and  a  severe  sentence  pi^epared.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  7 — 9.  This  was  the  L.  Junius  Torquatus  Siln-
ntis  referred  to  in  a  preceding  note.

*  This  L  Vetus  is  mentioned  in  Ann.  xiv.  58.  by  the  name  of  L.
Antistins.  He  was  consul  with  Nero  in  tlie  first  year  of  his  reign,
A.D.  55.  He  commanded  afterwards  in  the  Upper  Germany,  and
proposed  to  connect  the  Rhine  and  Saone  with  a  canal.  Ann.  xiii.
53.  See  above,  ch.  li.

A.D.fi5-A.U.Sl8. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  379

Friends  advised  him  to  make  Ccesar  heir  to  the  bulk
of  his  property ',  and  secure,  perchance,  the  remainder
for  his  grandchildren.  But  this  counsel  he  rejected,
and  lest  by  a  last  act  of  base  submission,  he  should
disgrace  a  life  which  had  bordered  on  independence,
first  divided  his  money  and  furniture  among  his
slaves, — all  but  three  couches  retained  for  a  triple
bier ; — then  himself,  his  daughter,  and  his  mother,
together  in  one  chamber,  with  the  same  steel  severed
one  another's  veins ; — wrapped  each,  for  decency,  in
a  single  blanket,  they  are  laid  hastily  in  the  vapour-
bath,  each  gazing  on  the  others  and  praying  to  be
the  first  to  die,  and  leave  the  others  dying  yet  still
alive.  And  fortune  maintained  the  proper  order  :
the  elders  died  first  and  last  the  latest  born,.  They
were  tried  after  their  burial :  it  was  decreed  that
they  should  suffer  after  the  manner  of  the  ancients.
Nero  pretended  to  forbid  this  severity,  allowing
them  forsooth  to  die  in  private :  such  was  the  mockery
superadded  after  they  were  dead  and  gone.

Publius  Gallus,  a  Roman  knight,  was  interdicted
fire  and  water,  because  he  had  been  inti-  Nameofti,e
mate  with  Fenius  Rufus,  and  on  no  dis-  S^ed'to1"
tant  terms  with  Vetus.  The  freedman  and  jS™1  and
accuser  were  rewarded  for  their  pains  Germanlou«-
with  seats  in  the  theatre  among  the  tribune's  attend-
ants. And  the  month  which  followed  April  (called
now  Neronian)  was  changed  from  Maius  to  Clau-
dius, while  June  assumed  the  name  of  Germanicus,
because,  as  Cornelius  Orfitus  in  proposing  the
change  declared,  the  name  of  Junius  had  been  ren-
dered ominous  by  the  deaths  of  two  guilty  Torquati.

This  year,  disgraced  by  so  many  deeds  of  horror,
was  further  distinguished  by  the  Gods  with  campanuand
storms  and  sicknesses. Campania  was  £*ufii!££
devastated  by  a  hurricane  which  overthrew  %££?£&
buildings,  trees,  and  the  fruits  of  the  soil  i*'1"81"*-
in  every  direction,  even to  the  gates  of  the  city,

S80  HISTOBY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  no.

within  which  a  pestilence  thinned  all  ranks  of  tJie
population,  with  no  atmospheric  disturbance  that
the  eye  could  trace.  The  houses  were  choked  with
dead,  the  roads  with  funerals :  neither  sex  nor  age
escaped.  Slaves  and  free  men  perished  equally
amidst  the  w ailing s  of  their  wives  and  children,
who  were  often  hurried  to  the  pyrs  by  which  they
had  sate  in  tears,  and  consumed  together  with  them.
The  deaths  of  knights  and  senators,  promiscuous  as
they  were,  deserved  the  less  to  be  lamented,  inasmuch
as  falling  by  the  common  lot  of  mortality  they  seemed
to  anticipate  the  prince's  cruelty.1

We  have  seen  in  these  extracts  a  graphic  repre-
Meianchoiy sentation  of  the  mingled  farce  and  tragedy

reflections  of  , .  ,  -i

Tacitus  on  his  which  one  man  s  wantonness,  and  the  su-
Mstorian.  pineness  of  the  million,  allowed  to  be  in-
flicted on  the  great  Eoman  people ;  and  the  disaster
with  which  it  concludes,  the  visitation  of  a  superior
Providence,  though  in  the  actual  amount  of  suffering
far  more  terrible,  is  felt  as  a  relief  because  at  least
it  brought  with  it  no  stigma  upon  humanity.  The
thirty  thousand  victims  who  were  registered  in  this
single  autumn  in  the  temple  of  Libitina,  may  be
compared  with  twice  that  number  entered  in  the
bills  of  mortality  in  the  course  of  eighteen  months
in  the  great  plague  of  London.2  But  Nero,  who  it
seems  had  fled  from  the  contagion  to  his  Campanian
watering-places,  still  continued  to  exercise  the  same

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  10 — 13. The  account  of  this  year  concludes  with
a  notice  of  the  prince's  liberality  to  the  city  of  Lugdunum,  to  which
he  repaid  a  large  sum  it  had  formerly  presented  to  Rome,  on  the
occasion  perhaps  of  the  fire. Read  with  Rittcr  ?trbis  for  turbidis
(casibus),  and  comp.  xv.  45.  "  coiif'erendis  pecuniis  pervastata  Italia,
provincise  eversse,"  &c.

2  Comp.  Suet.  Ner.  39.:  "Pestilentia  unius  auctumni  quo  triginta
millia  ad  rationem  Libitiriae  venerunt. " It  is  needless  to  say  that
this  statement  affords  no  adequate  ground for calculating,  with
Brotier  and  others,  the  population  of  Rome;  but  it  is  important  as
showing  the  care  and  method  with  which  the  register  of  deaths  \vag
kept.

*.D.fi6-A.tr.819. TINDER THE EMPIRE.  381

cruelty  as  before,  and  the  year  819  commenced  with
another  iniquitous  process,  which  destroyed  two
nobles,  one  of  them  a  son  of  Ostorius  Scapula,  him-
self a  soldier  of  reputation.1  He  was  already  afraid
of  his  own  officers,  of  the  men  of  action,  not  of  words,
the  men  who  swayed  the  affection  of  the  legions  to
which  his  own  person  was  unknown.  Here  Tacitus
pauses  for  a  moment  as  if  overcome  by  the  horror  of
his  subject,  and  embodies  in  despairing  language  his
distress  at  the  prostration  of  his  countrymen's  ener-
gies, while  he  justifies  the  sad  interest  with  which  he
still  lingers  over  it.  Even,  he  says,  were  I  relating
foreign  wars,  and  deaths  endured  for  the  republic.  1
should  both  fatigue  myself  and  expect  to  fatigue  my
readers  with  the  same  unvaried  tale  of  sad  though
not  dishonourable  ends.  But  now  the  servile  patience
of  the  sufferers,  and-  the  loss  of  so  much  blood  at  home,
oppress  the  soul  and  overwhelm  it  with  melancholy.
Nor  ivould  I  ask  of  those  to  whom  these  horrors  shall
become  known  any  other  indulgence  for  the  wretches
who  perished  so  pusillanimously,  but  to  refrain
from  detesting  them.  It  was  the  ivrath  of  the  Gods
against  the  Roman  state ;  not  such  as,  in  the  case
of  armies  worsted  or  cities  taken,  may  once  be
noted,  and  then  passed  over  in  silence.  We  owe  it
to  the  posterity  of  illustrious  nobles  to  recount  all
their  deaths  separately,  just  as  the  obsequies  of  each
are  distinguished  from  the  common  herd  of  funerals?
And  so,  with  these  bitter  words,  he  returns  again  to
his  task,  and  proceeds  with  dogged  endurance  to
record  the  names  and  fortunes  of  the  sufferers  of  the
years  which  followed.  A  chance  which  he  did  not
anticipate,  but  which  he  would  hardly  have  regretted,
has  abridged  the  story  of  these  gloomy  times,  and

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  14,  15.

*  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  16.;  " Detur hoc  illustrium  virornm  posteritati,  ut
quomodo  cxsequiis  a  promiscua  sepultura  separantur,  ita  in  traditions
suprcmorum  aecipiant  habeantqne  propriam  memoriam."

382  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  en.  Lin

confined  the  remaining  pages  of  our  author's  annals
to  little  more  than  a  single  subject,  to  which  we,  too,
must  follow  him  with  respect  and  sympathy.

Before,  however,  we  proceed  to  the  crowning  enor-
oeathof  An-  E^ty  of  the  death  of  Thrasea,  another  pro-
fa*herirfla'  scription  must  be  noticed,  partly  as  involv-
mcan.  }ng  one  name  at  least  of  historical  notoriety,
partly  as  illustrating  the  horrors  under  which  the  Ko-
man  nobles  at  this  time  lived  and  perished.  Annseus
Mela,  Rufius  Crispinus,  Anicius  Cerialis,  and  C.
Petronius  were  involved  in  the  same  fate  almost  at
the  same  moment.  Crispinus,  it  seems,  was  a  public
character ;  he  had  been  prefect  of  the  praetorians  and
worn  the  consular  ornaments ;  such  being  the  case
he  became  an  object  of  jealousy  to  aspiring  courtiers,
and  liable  to  false  accusation.  Charged  accordingly
with  participation  in  some  recent  conspiracy,  prob-
ably that  of  Piso,  he  had  been  banished  to  Sardinia,
where  he  soon  put  an  end  to  his  own  life.  But  Mela
had  preferred  a  private  station  to  the  perils  of  a  more
conspicuous  career.1  This  man  was  the  brother  oi
Gallic  and  Seneca,  and  seems  to  have  partaken  of  the
Epicurean  indifference  of  the  one,  together  with  the

1  I  have  mentioned  the  three  sons  of  M.  Annseus  Seneca  the
rhetorician  in  chapter  xli.:  "docti  Senecae  ter  numeranda  domus."
Mart.  iv.  40.  Of  these  Novatus  took  the  name  of  Gallic  after  adop-
tion by  M.  Junius  Gallio.  He  is  generally  supposed  to  be  the  Gallio
mentioned  in  Acts  xviii.  12.  as  proconsul  of  Achaia  under  Claudius.
His  mildness  of  character  ("caring  for  none  of  these  things")  is  re-
ferred toby  Statins  ( Sylv.ii.  7.  32.):  "dnlcem  generasse  Gallionem;"
and  by  Seneca  {Nat.  Qu.  prssf.  iv.):  "quern  nemo  non  parum  amat.
etiam  qni  amare  plus  non  potest;"  the  false  brilliancy  of  his  style  by
Tacitus  (de  Orat.  26.);  "tinnitus  Gallionis."  The  brothers  seem
to  have  been  all  addicted  to  letters.  I  know  not  why  M.  Nisard,  in
his  Etudes  sitrles  Foetes  Latins  (i.  89.),  in  advancing  his  theory  that
the  Tragedies  which  go  under  the  name  of  Seneca  were  written  by
different  members  of  the  family  (Senecanum  opus,  he  calls  them),  ex-
cludes Gallio  from  the  partnership.  M.  Nisard  cannot  inform  u?
how  the  authorship  of  the  several  plays  is  to  be  distributed,  except
that  he  gives  the  Octavia,  as  the  worst,  decidedly  to  Lucan.  I  think
myself  that  there  is  strong  evidence  of  L.  Seneca  being  author  of
some  at  least  of  them.

A..D.66-A.U.S19. -CflUER THE EMPIRE.  383

love  of  money  which  casts  a  stigma  on  the  oilier.
Not  seeking  to  rise  above  the  rank  of  knighthood,  he
had  amassed  wealth  for  himself  while  replenishing
the  imperial  fiseus  in  the  provinces.  He  was  father,
however,  to  Lucau,  a  relation  which,  however  honour-
able, exposed  him  to  danger  and  led  ultimately  to
his  ruin.  After  his  son's  death  he  had  shown,  it  is
said,  peculiar  keenness  in  collecting  the  debts  due  to
him,  and  in  so  doing  had  offended  a  certain  Fabius
Rusticus,  who  charged  him  in  revenge  with  com-
plicity in  the  crime.  His  wealth  insured  his  con-
demnation. Forged  letters  were  produced,  a  case  of
Majestas  was  vamped  up,  and  Mela,  after  bequeathing
a  large  part  of  his  estates  to  Tigellinus,  in  hope  of
preserving  the  remnant  for  his  heirs,  shrank  from
the  anxiety  of  a  trial  by  opening  his  own  veins.  But
to  his  last  will  he  had  appended  a  word  of  complaint
at  being  thus  compelled  to  die  in  his  innocence,
while  Crispinus  and  Cerialis,  the  prince's  real  ene-
mies, were  allowed  to  survive  him.  The  first  indeed,
as  we  have  seen,  had  already  destroyed  himself;  the
other,  on  finding  his  own  life  menaced,  speedily  took
the  same  course.  Petronius,  who  was  sacrificed  to
the  jealousy  of  Tigellinus,  seems  to  have  been  a  man
of  more  remarkable  character  than  any  of  these.
His  sentiments  and  habits  were  those  of  a

Character  and

Maecenas  transferred  to a  corrupter  age,  death  of

i  TT -L J Petrouiue.

and  confined  to  a  lower  sphere.  He  had
governed  Bithynia,  and  become  subsequently  consul ;
and  in  these  high  offices  he  had  shown,  like  his  trusty
prototype,  activity  and  vigilance.  But  when  released
from  public  trammels,  choice  and  policy  combined  to
dispose  him  to  the  enjoyment  of  ease  and  luxury  in
a  private  station :  his  days  were  passed  in  slumber,
his  nights  devoted  to  genial  dissipation.  If  he  still
occupied  a  large  space  in  the  eyes  of  the  citizens,  it
was  owing  to  his  refined  taste,  to  the  exquisiteness  of
his  luxury,  and  the  elegance  of  his  debauches ;  and

384  HISTORY OF THE ROMAKS  CH.  Mil.

all  he  said  and  did  was  repeated  with  admiration  of
its  studied  ease,  or,  to  borrow  a  phrase  of  his  own,
its  curious  felicity,  Petronius  was  admitted,  with
the  choicest  profligates  of  the  day,  to  the  prince's
intimacy,  and  stood  so  high  in  his  confidence  as  to
be  entitled  the  Arbiter  of  the  Imperial  Pleasures.
Nothing  was  grateful,  nothing  was  admired  in  luxurj^
but  what  had  the  stamp  of  his  approbation.  But
here  he  invaded  the  province  coveted  by  Tigellinus.
Two  favourites  could  riot  sit  so  near  the  throne  to-
gether. Tigellinus  proved  the  craftier ;  he  accused
his  rival  of  a  guilty  intimacy  with  the  traitor  Scae-
vinus,  and  having  suborned  a  slave  to  depose  against
him,  deprived  him  by  an  adroit  manoeuvre  of  the
means  of  defence.  Nero  was  a,t  the  time  in  Cam-
pania, and  Petronius  was  seized  on  his  way  to  visit
him,  and  detained  far  from  all  assistance  at  Cumse.
We  hear  no  more  in  this  age  of  the  judicial  contests
of  the  delators  under  Tiberius.  Accusers  had  not
now  the  opportunity  of  making  themselves  famous
for  their  oratory.  Their  hateful  trade  was  no  longer
gilded  even  by  the  false  glory  of  eloquence.  Petro-
nius, like  so  many  others,  resolved  at  once  to  antici-
pate trial  and  sentence  by  suicide.  The  manner
indeed  in  which  he  proceeded  to  yield  his  life  was
singular.  Summoning  his  friends  to  his  presence,
he  opened  his  veins  in  the  course  of  their  conversa-
tion, bound  them,  and  opened  them  again,  as  its
interest  warmed  or  languished.  But  their  talk  was
not  of  matters  of  philosophy  or  the  question  of  the
soul's  immortality;  they  only  recited  trifling  com-
positions, and  improvised  verses.  To  some  of  his
slaves  he  made  presents,  others  he  caused  to  be
punished.  He  lay  down  to  supper,  composed  him-
self to  sleep,  and  sought  to  give  his  death  the  ap-
pearance, and  if  possible  the  sensations,  of  a  natural
end.  In  his  will  he  refused  to  follow  the  mode  of
flattering  the  emperor  or  his  creatures,  and  filled  a

A.0.66-A.U.819.  DNDEK THE EMPIRE.  385

codicil  with  the  indignant  recital  of  their  enormities.-
He  signed  and  sealed,  and  transmitted  the  document
to  the  tyrant.  Finally,  he  broke  his  signet,  that  it
might  never  again  be  used  to  bring  the  guiltless  into
peril ;  and  dashed  in  pieces  a  costly  murrhine  vase,
to  deprive  Nero  of  the  relic  which  he  knew  him  most
ardently  to  covet.1

Our  sole  relief  in  tracing  the  bloody  records  of  the
Neronian  tryanny  is  the  reflection  that  its  victims,
ill-used  as  they  were,  were  seldom  worthy  of  a  happier
fate ;  in  most  at  least  of  the  cases  we  have  noticed,
they  were  among  the  basest,  the  most  abandoned,
and,  when  occasion  offered,  the  most  barbarous  of
their  countrymen.  We  may  presume  that  the  in-
difference with  which  citizens,  provincials,  and  slaves
witnessed  the  massacre  of  their  chiefs,  their  patrons,
their  masters,  was  derived  from  a  strong  sense  of  th<i
iniquity  of  their  career,  their  crimes  and  vices.  We
pay  the  tribute  of  a  sigh  to  the  fate  of  Britannicus

1  Plin.  Hist.  Nat.  xxxvii.  7.  As  regards  the  authorship  of  the
Satiricon,  which  goes  under  the  name  of  Petronius  Arbiter,  the  readei
may  refer  to  the  elaborate  arguments  of  Studer  in  the  £heinische>>
Mitseum,  1843.  This  writer  maintains  the  old  view.  He  collects
allusions  to  the  age  of  Nero,  and  the  early  emperors:  as  1.  in  the
reflections  on  the  decline  of  eloquence,  c.  1.  (comp.  the  Dial,  de  Oral.
c.  35.;  2.  on  the  wealth  and  manners  of  freedmen  (comp.  Plin.  Hist.
Nat.  xxxiii.  11.,  Senec.  Epist.  27.);  3.  on  Orbitas  (comp.  Senec.  aa
Marc.  19.  and  alib.,  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  52.);  4.  in  the  names  Maecena-
tianus,  Apelles,  Menecrates  (comp.  Suet.  Caliy.  32.,  Ner.  30.);  5.  in
the  estimate  of  Lucan  as  a  poet;  6.  in  the  verses  on  the  civil  wars;
7.  in  the  reference  to  an  invention  for  working  glass  with  the  hammer
(comp.  Plin.  xxxvi.  26.,  Dion,  Ivii.  21.);  8.  in  the  mention  of  the
Vinum  Opimianum  and  the  Horti  Pompeiani;  9.  in  the  reference  to
the  substitution  of  mosaic  work  for  painting,  c.  83.  (comp.  Plin.  xxxv.
1.);  10.  to  the  new  fashion  of  anointing  the  feet,  c.  70.,  introduced,
according  to  Pliny,  xiii.  3.,  under  Nero.  He  further  shows  that  the
arguments  of  Niebuhr  and  others  for  placing  the  work  later,  i.e.  in
the  time  of  the  Antonines,  the  Sever i,  or  even  Constantine,  are  of  no
value,  and,  on  the  whole,  leaves  me  tolerably  confident  that  it  belongs
to  the  age  of  Nero,  and  was  composed  by  Petronius,  the  "Arbiter
elegantiarum  "  of  that  emperor.

VOL.  VT.  C  C

386  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  i.m.

and  Octavia,  innocent  as  they  yet  were  in  the  first
bloom  of  youth ;  but  we  confess  that  they  too,  had
they  been  suffered  to  live  a  few  years  longer,  would
probably  have  lived  to  deserve  all  their  sorrows.
But  the  crowning  crime  of  Nero  was  of  a  diiferent
stamp ;  for  its  victims  were  men  of  acknowledged
honour  and  probity.  Nero  at  last,  says  Tacitus,
yearned  to  destroy  Virtue  itself,  in  the  persons  of
Pcetus  Thrasea  and  Barea  Soranus.

These  two  illustrious  names  have  been  thus  joined

together  by  Tacitus,  and  the  connexion  shall
Bea  and  Bwea  not  be  severed,  though  it  does  not  appear

that  there  was  any  alliance  in  blood  or
friendship  between  them,  nor  were  they  in  fact  in-
volved in  a  common  proscription.  They  were  united
in  the  protest  of  their  noble  lives  against  the  iniquity
of  the  times.  Soranus  had  been  proconsul  in  Asia,
and  had  shown  unusual  consideration  for  the  claims
of  the  subject  provincials.  But  besides  being  re-
buked by  his  superior  goodness,  Nero  had  special
grounds  of  mortification  against  him.  He  had  re-
fused to  punish  a  city  which  had  defended  the  statues
of  its  gods  against  the  commissioner  sent  by  Nero  to
plunder  it.  He  was  marked  for  accusation  by  a
needy  delator.  He  was  charged  with  intimacy  with
the  culprit  Bubellius  Plautus,  and  with  treasonable
intrigues  in  his  province.  Against  Thrasea  the
charges  were  still  more  vague  than  these.  This
man  was  eminent  among  the  Stoics,  the  sect  then
most  in  vogue  among  the  Koman  nobility;  and
even  the  stern  thoughtful  air  and  sober  garb  which
became  his  profession,  were  felt  as  a  reproach  to  the
frivolous  dissipation  of  the  prince  and  his  flatterers.1
His  household  was  regulated  with  antique  simplicity :
his  wife,  the  child  of  the  heroic  Arria,  was  wise  and
patient ;  his  son-in-law,  Helvidius  Priscus,  was  brave

1  Suet.  Ner. 37. :  "  Thrasese  objectum  est  tristior  et  paadagogi
vultus."

A.D.66 A.IT.819.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  387

and  generous ;  he  was  admired  by  the  gentle  Persius,
a  philosopher  without  conceit,  and  a  satirist  without
gall.1  All  his  public  acts,  for  he  was  a  senator  and
had  held  high  office,  were  remarked  by  the  bad  with
mortification,  by  the  good  with  undisguised  triumph.
When  the  cruel  motion  was  made  in  the  senate
against  the  memory  of  Agrippina,  Thrasea  had  re-
tired without  giving  his  vote:  in  the  Neronian
games,  when  so  many  nobles  had  disgraced  them-
selves by  unworthy  compliances,  Thrasea  had  stiffly
declined;  an  offence  the  more  pointed  because  in
the  Antenorian  games  at  his  own  city  Patavium,  he
had  relaxed,  as  a  Greek  among  Greeks,  and  taken
part  in  the  acting  and  singing.2  He  had  interfered
to  moderate  the  fierce  flattery  of  the  senate,  when  it
would  have  put  Antistius  to  death  for  raillery  against
the  emperor.  Again,  when  divine  honours  were
decreed  to  Poppsea,  he  had  abstained  from  attending
her  obsequies.3  Capito  Cossutianus,  the  son-in-law  of
Tigellinus,  kept  a  note  of  all  these  delinquencies,
partly  from,  his  own  vicious  hatred  of  virtue,  but
still  more,  perhaps,  for  the  effectual  aid  Thrasea  had
lent  to  certain  envoys  from  Cilicia,  who  had  been
sent  to  Eome  to  charge  him  with  oppression  in  their
province.

Nor  was  this  all:  the  conduct  of  the  stern  re-
publican had  been  marked  by  still  increas-  Frivolous
ing  symptoms  of  political  disgust,  which  ^8et8
could  not  fail  to  be  noticed. His  admirers  Thrasea-
in  the  next  generation  related  with  a  glow  of  satis-

1  The  scholiast  on  Persius  informs  us  that  the  poet  was  kinsman  to
Arria. Rupert,  in  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  34. It  is  conjectured  that  Thrasea
belonged  to  the  Gens  Fannia.

2  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  21.:  "Parum  expectabilera  operam  prabuerat:"
"he  had  not  done  what  was  required  of  him." It  has  been  explained
elsewhere  how  the  proud  Roman  of  the  city  deigned  to  make  himself
a  mere  Greek  in  the  holidays  in  the  country.

3  Tlisit  divine  honours  were  decreed  to  Poppaea,  though  not  before
stated  by  Tacitus,  appears  also  from  Dion,  Ixiii.  26. Her  temple  was
dedicated  by  Nero,  inscribed  with  the  epigraph,  "Sabmse  Deas  Veneri

C  C  2

388  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  on.  LHI.

faction  how  Thrasea  and  Helvidius  were  wont  to
pledge  each  other,  crowned  with  festal  chaplets,  on
the  birthdays  of  Brutus  and  Cassius  * ;  but  whether
this  were  so  or  not,  the  detractors  of  his  own  day
remarked,  with  a  shrug,  that  he  had  shunned  making
oath  to  the  emperor  at  the  commencement  of  the
year ;  that  though  a  quin  decemvir,  he  had  failed  to
offer  vows  for  his  safety ;  that  he  had  never  sacri-
ficed for  his  health,  or  for  the  preservation  of  his
heavenly  voice;  once  a  constant  attendant  in  the
senate  house,  he  had  for  three  years  refrained  from
entering  it ;  lately  when  the  fathers  had  rushed  to
condemn  Vetus  and  Silanus,  he  had  pleaded  clients'
business  to  keep  away.  This,  it  was  said,  was  seces-
sion from  public  life ;  this  was  faction ;  if  many  chose
to  do  the  same,  it  would  be  dissension,  it  would  be
civil  war.  In  their  proneness  to  party  contentions,
people,  it  was  muttered,  were  beginning  to  talk  for-
sooth of  Nero  and  Thrasea,  as  formerly  of  Caesar  and
Cato.  Followers  he  has,  it  was  added,  who  affect  his
dress  and  manners,  if  not  yet  the  perverseness  of  his
opinions;  and  reflect  on  the  genial  laxity  of  the
prince  by  their  sourness  and  solemnity.  By  him
alone  the  life  of  Ccesar,  his  accomplishments,  his
genius,  are  held  in  no  honour.  To  believe  Poppcca
no  goddess  evinced  the  same  evil  spirit  as  to  with-
hold approval  from  the  acts  of  the  divine  Julius
and  the  divine  Augustus.  The  journals  of  the
Senate  were  read  in  the  provinces  and  the  camps
only  to  discover  the  motions  which  Thrasea  refused
to  sanction.  The  sect  to  which  he  belonged  had  been

matrons  fecerunt." Eckhel,  Doctr.  Numm.  vi.  287.,  gives  two  coins
inscribed  on  one  side  to  "  Diva  Claudia,"  the  infant  daughter,  on  the
other  to  "  Diva  Poppsea  Augusta."
1  Juvenal,  v.  36.:

"  Quale  coronati  Thrasea  Helvidiusque  bibebant

Brutorum  et  Cassi  natalibus."

The  respect  in  which  Thrasea  was  held  by  later  generations  is  stronglj
marked  in  the  epistles  of  the  younger  Pliny.  See  vii.  19.,  viii.  22-

A.».66-A.U.81». UNDER THE EMPIRE.  389

ever  the  patron  of  a  faction ;  it  had  numbered  a
Tubero  and  a  Favonius,  names  distasteful  even  to
the  republic.  Such  are  the  men  who  now  set  up  the
name  of  Liberty  as  a  plea  for  overthrowing  the  em-
pire :  should  they  succeed  in  overthrowing  it,  they

will  soon  attack  liberty  itself. These

insinuations  easily  inflamed  the  fury  of  Nero,  and  he
encouraged  Capito  to  proceed  with  his  impeachment
with  the  aid  of  another  vehement  delator,  Eprius
Marcellus.1

The  reader  will  have  remarked  that  hitherto  the
victims  of  Nero  had  almost  all  perished  in  private.
Either  he  had  made  use  of  secret  assassination,  or
threats  alone  had  sufficed  to  drive  his  enemies  to
suicide  in  the  recesses  of  their  own  houses.  Slowly,
and  from  confused  and  doubtful  whisperings,  had  the
people  learnt  for  the  most  part  the  fate  of  Agrip-
pina  and  Britannicus,  of  Octavia,  Cassius,  and  Sila-
nus.  Such  deeds  were  not  exhibited  in  public,  such
records  were  not  written  in  contemporary  history.
The  sensibility  of  that  excitable  populace  was  little
affected  by  mutterings  of  horrors  removed  actually
from  their  sight,  or  softened  to  their  imaginations
by  the  lapse  of  time.  This  was  no  doubt  the  secret
of  Nero's  policy,  which  enabled  him  to  break  all  his
pledges  to  justice  and  humanity,  and  gave  impunity
to  crimes  which  posterity  has  so  deservedly  execrated.
But  in  the  cases  now  before  us,  the  threats  of  the
accusers  seemed  to  be  of  no  avail,  and  the  emperor
was  prevailed  on  to  consent,  not  without  apprehension,
to  the  course  of  a  public  prosecution.  A  moment
was  adroitly  seized  to  carry  through  the  process  when
attention  was  absorbed  in  a  matter  of  casual  interest.
Tiridates,  a  claimant  to  the  throne  of  Armenia,  came
to  Rome  to  receive  the  diadem  from  the  hand  of  the
emperor.  To  dispose  of  foreign  crowns  was  the  pride

1  j'uc.  Ami.  xvi.  22.

390  HISTORY 01 THE ROMANS  CH LUI.

of  the  senate  and  its  chiefs,  and  here  a  rival  potentate
was  stooping  to  receive  the  gift.  Nero,  with  no
conquests  of  his  own  to  boast  of,  was  eager  to  make
a  grand  display  of  his  dignity  and  power.1  The
citizens,  with  their  increasing  frivolity  and  love  for
shows  and  ceremonies,  were  gloating  over  the  meeting
of  the  prince  and  the  king,  when  Thrasea  and  So-
ranus  were  both  suddenly  denounced.  Thrasea  de-
sired an  interview  with  the  emperor;  this  being
refused,  he  addressed  him  by  letter,  pledging  him-
self to  refute  every  accusation,  and  requiring  only
to  be  confronted  with  his  accuser.  Nero  had  eagerly
seized  the  paper  in  which  he  hoped  to  read  an  avowal
of  guilt,  accompanied  with  an  abject  submission.
Disappointed  in  this  anticipation,  he  resolved  with
mortified  vanity  to  let  the  impeachment  proceed,
and  summoned  the  senate  to  hear  and  pronounce
upon  it.

On  the  circumstances  of  this  illustrious  sacrifice
Thrasea  dis-  Tacitus  dwells  with  peculiar  solemnity.
hiTfriend?  He  sets  before  us,  as  in  a  discussion  of  the
heesh0ou"de  friends  of  Thrasea,  the  arguments  which
adopL  were  doubtless  often  in  the  mouths  of  the

sufferers  of  those  days  and  their  anxious  associates,
for  defying  the  delator  with  a  bold  though  hopeless
defence,  or  for  submitting  in  silence  to  the  inevitable
sentence.  On  the  one  hand,  those  who  urged  the
accused  to  present  himself  in  the  senate-house  de-
clared their  conviction  that  his  constancy  would  not
fail  him ;  he  would  say  nothing  but  what  would  en

1  Suetonius,  Ner.  13.,  describes  the  ceremony.  Nero  wore  triumphal
robes,  surrounded  by  troops,  and  the  whole  solemnity  bore  a  military
character.  At  the  close  the  soldiers  saluted  him  with  the  title  of
Imperator,  and  his  laurels  were  offered  to  Jupiter  in  the  Capitol.  This
presumed  victory  was  followed  by  the  closing  of  the  temple  of  Janus.
Comp.  the  medals  on  which  the  closing  of  Janus  is  recorded,  as  given
by  Eckhel,  vi.  273.,  which  must  overrule  the  conflicting  statement  ot
Orosius,  though  professing  to  be  taken  from  Tacitus,  that  Janus  was
never  closed  between  Augustus  and  Vespasian.  Oros.  vii.  3.

A.D.66 A.o.819.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  39 1

hance  his  reputation.  ....  Let  the  citizens,
behold  him  confronting  the  terrors  of  death :  let  the
fathers  hear  his  ^vordst  the  words  of  a  god  rather
than  of  a  man :  possibly  even  Nero  himself  might
be  moved  by  the  eloquence  of  inspiration :  at  least,
should  he  persist  in  his  cruelty,  posterity  would
distinguish  this  example  of  a  worthy  death  from
the  cowardice  of  those  who  let  themselves  perish  in
silence.  .  .  .  On  the  other  hand,  some  ad--
vised  him  to  await  the  event  in  his  own  chamber.
To  his  virtue  and  constancy  they  paid  the  same
tribute  as  the  first  speakers ;  but  they  warned  him
of  the  insults  he  might  have  to  undergo ;  the  railing
of  his  accusers  might  be  followed  by  the  revilings,
and  even  the  blows,  of  the  servile  crowd  around  them.
.  .  .  .  Let  hi/m  relieve  the  senate  from  the  in-
famy of  such  a  crime;  let  him  leave  it  undeter-
mined what  the  fathers  would  venture  to  decree
against  Thrasea  at  their  bar.  That  Nero  would  be
made  to  blush  there  was  no  hope  whatever:  but  de-
fiance might  goad  him  to  further  cruelties  against
his  victim's  children.  But  the  counsels  of  the  anxious
band  were  not  solely  confined  to  considerations  of
dignity  or  expediency.  One  at  least  among  them,
the  young  Arulenus  Kusticus,  offered  at  all  risks  to
intercede,  as  tribune  of  the  people,  and  exercise  the
ancient  right  of  his  office  to  quash  the  decree  of  the
senate.  He  was  only  restrained  by  the  mild  pru-
dence of  Thrasea  himself,  who  pronounced  that  now,
on  the  threshold  of  a  public  career,  it  was  his  duty
not  to  throw  away  his  life  to  no  purpose,  but  reserve
it  for  the  chance  of  future  usefulness.1

Every  suggestion  invited  and  affably  considered,
the  sage  withdrew  to  make  his  final  deter-  Proceedings

-\r  1-1 J.-L  against  him  in

mination  in  private. Meanwhile,  the  pro-  thoenate.
ceedings of  his  enemies  were carried  on  impetu-

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  25,  26.

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Lttl,

ously.  The  next  morning  two  praetorian  cohorts
occupied  the  temple  of  Venus  Grenitrix,  whither
the  senate  was  summoned.  The  approaches  were
thronged  by  bands  of  gowned  citizens,  sword  in  hand,
while  soldiers  were  posted  in  the  forums  and  halls
around ;  it  was  amidst  the  scowls  and  threats  of  these
terrible  bystanders  that  the  fathers  entered  the  Curia.
A  message  from  the  emperor  was  delivered.  It  con-
tained a  general  complaint  against  the  senators  for
deserting  their  posts,  and  preferring  the  ease  of  theii
suburban  pleasances  to  the  fatigues  of  public  duty
This  was  the  theme  on  which  the  accusers  spoke
Thrasea  and  Helvidius  in  the  first  instance,  next  to
them  Paconius  Agrippinus  and  Curtius  Montanus,  as
known  objects  of  the  prince's  jealousy,  were  charged
with  this  dereliction  of  their  senatorial  duties,  ascribed
to  a  contumacious  and  treasonable  disgust  towards
the  government.  To  Thrasea,  it  was  asserted,  the
peace  of  the  world,  and  the  victories  of  the  empire,
were  equally  distasteful.  The  forums,  the  temples,
the  theatres,  wherever,  in  short,  the  Roman  people
congregated  most  for  duties  or  amusements,  he
shunned  alike,  as  though  they  were  solitudes  unin-
habitable to  man.  He  had  snapped  the  social  bonds
of  rank  and  profession;  he  had  abandoned  the
Roman  commonwealth ;  let  him  die  tne  death,  and
make  the  unholy  divorce  final  and  complete.

The  declamation  of  Marcellus  was  loud  and  pas-
sionate ;  and  the  senate,  terrified  beyond  its
again*?  wont  by  the  threatening  sights  around  it,
succumbed  impotently  to  its  fury.  Neverthe-
less, so  deep  was  the  compassion  for  the  blameless  vir-
tue of  Thrasea,  the  gallant  bravery  of  Helvidius,  the
guileless  innocence  of  Agrippinus  and  Montanus,  that
when  the  harangue  of  the  accuser  ended,  it  still  sate
motionless  and  silent.  Then  uprose  Sabinus  to  ad-
vance his  charges  against  Soranus,  and  with  the
treasons  he  imputed  to  the  father  he  combined  a

A.u.66-A.tT.8l9.  UNDER THE EMP1BE.  393

charge  of  unholy  divination  against  his  young  and
widowed  daughter.  Servilia,  such  was  the  matron's
name,  admitted  that  she  had  consulted  the  sorcerers
as  to  the  fate  impending  on  her  sire ;  but  she  had
conceived  no  imprecations  on  the  prince;  for  his
safety  she  had  always  prayed ;  in  the  ardour  of  her
feminine  devotion  she  had  ever  mentioned  his  name
among  the  gods  whom  she  invoked.  Soranus  avouched
her  innocence  with  passionate  exclamations :  with
his  acts,  whatever  their  colour  might  be,  he  showed
that  she  was  in  no  way  connected.  But  the  charges
against  both  were  pressed  with  redoubled  vehemence.
Among  the  most  conspicuous  of  the  witnesses
against  Soranus  was  Egnatius,  his  client  and  the
professed  imitator  of  his  conduct  and  opinions.
The  senate  was  moved  with  more  tha*n  common  dis-
gust at  the  sight  of  a  man  who  professed  himself
among  the  straitest  of  the  Stoics,  denouncing  the
noblest  model  of  his  own  sect.1

The  accusers,  however,  were  completely  successful.
After  a  short  pause,  which  gave  room  for  Deathof
one  example  of  generous  devotion  in  the  ThrM«''
person  of  Cassius  Asclepiodotus,  a  foreigner,  once
the  client  and  now  the  defender  of  Soranus,  the
senate  decreed  death,  allowing  only  the  choice  of
death  to  themselves,  against  Thrasea,  Soranus,  and
Servilia.  Helvidius  and  Paconius  were  to  be  banished
from  Italy.  Montanus  was  only  declared  incapable
of  all  public  functions  as  a  citizen.  Marcellus  and
Cossutianus,  on  the  other  hand,  were  rewarded  with
largesses  and  honours.  The  whole  day  had  been
consumed  in  this  double  process.  It  was  already
evening  when  the  quaestor  of  the  consul  arrived  with
the  fatal  intelligence  before  the  door  of  Thrasea,  who,
it  seems,  had  remained  quietly  at  home,  and  was

1  The  crime  of  Egnatins  furnished  a  standing  example  of  unnatural
perfidy  to  the  satirists.  "  Stoicus  occidit  Baream,  delator  amicum  "
Juv.  Sat.  iii.  116.

304  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LIU.

entertaining  a  number  of  distinguished  friends,  both
male  and  female.  He  was  engaged  more  particu-
larly in  a  discourse  with  the  Cynic  Demetrius,  and
from  the  solemnity  of  his  gestures  as  well  as  from
words  which  were  overheard  from  him,  it  was  sup-
posed that  the  topic  of  their  discussion  was  the  nature
of  the  soul  and  the  independence  of  mind  and  body.
Amidst  the  tears  and  groans  of  the  company,  to  whom
the  message  was  quickly  communicated,  Thrasea
contented  himself  with  urging  them  not  to  incur
danger  on  his  behalf,  and  forbade  his  wife  to  follow
the  example  of  the  elder  Arria,  bidding  her  live  for
the  last  solace  and  protection  of  their  only  daughter.
Then  going  forth,  he  met  the  messenger  of  death,
and  received  from  his  hands  the  decree  of  the  senate.
He  rej oiced  to  find  that  Helvidius  was  spared.  Taking
the  young  man,  together  with  Demetrius,  into  his
chamber,  he  held  out  his  arms  to  the  operator,  and
dashing  on  the  ground  the  first  blood  that  started,
A  libation,  he  exclaimed,  to  Jove  the  Deliverer/  Look,
young  mem,  he  added,  and  heaven  avert  the  omen  I
but  in  the  age  to  which  you  are  born,  it  behoves  men
to  confirm  their  own  courage  by  beholding  fortitude
in  others.1  And  here, — with  only  the  addition  that
his  pains  were  long,  and  that  he  turned  towards
Demetrius, — the  last  sentence  of  the  historian  is
suddenly  interrupted :  our  manuscripts  of  this  part
of  Tacitus  have  come  to  us  from  a  single  copy,  and
the  chance  which  has  torn  off  some  few  leaves,  per-
haps, from  the  end  of  a  volume,  has  broken  the  thread
of  a  narrative,  so  painfully  interesting,  so  solemnly
instructive.  The  interest  is  common  to  all  mankind
who  can  sympathize  in  the  sorrows  and  virtues  of  the
noblest  of  their  species ;  the  instruction  is  for  those
who  can  gather  from  these  agonizing  details  the
warnings  or  consolations  they  are  fitted  to  impart.

1  Tac.  Ann.  xvi.  ult.

I.D.66-A.U.819. UNDER THE EMPIRE.  395

In  the  following  chapter  we  shall  enter  upon  an  ex-
amination of  the  state  of  thought  and  sentiment  at
Kome  at  this  period,  which  may  help  us,  perhaps,  to
unriddle  some  of  the  perplexing  questions  which  have
been  opened  but  not  solved  tor  us  in  the  narrative
of  the  historians.

396  HISTORI OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Liv

CHAPTER  LIV.

Consideration  of  the  causes  which  induced  the  Romans  to  endure  the
tyranny  of  the  emperors. — Freedom  of  thought  and  education
allowed  by  it  accepted  as  a  compensation  for  restraints  on  political
action. — Toleration  of  philosophy. — Opposition  of  the  Stoics  to
the  government  :  their  character  and  position  in  the  common-
wealth.— State  of  religion  at  Rome:  suppression  of  the  Gaul  sh
superstitions:  encroachment  of  Oriental  cults. — Proscription  of
the  Syrian  and  Egyptian  priesthoods. — Judaism  becomes  fashion-
able at  Rome:  introduced  among  the  freedmen  of  the  palace. —
Turbulence  and  proscription  of  the  Jews  at  Rome. — First  recep-
tion of  Christian  ideas  among  them. — St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the
Romans. — His  arrival  and  preaching  at  Rome. — Persecution  of  the
"  Christians." — Question  of  the  application  of  this  name  by  Tacitus.
— The  tyranny  of  the  emperors  supported  by  the  corruption  of  the
age. — Reflections  on  Roman  vice. — Counteracting  principles  of
virtue. — Christianity  accords  with  the  moral  tendencies  of  the  age.
— Seneca  and  Saint  Paul. — The  teaching  of  Seneca  moral,  not
political. — Persius  and  Lucan.

THE  tyranny  of  Nero,  and  with  it  the  tyranny  of  the
Roman  emperors, — that  tyranny  which  has

Characteristics ,  111  •  i  p

of  theimperiai  been  held  up  as  a  warning  beacon  to  free
men  for  so  many  hundred  years, — has  now
reached  its  climax :  with  Thrasea  not  a  virtuous  man,
but  Virtue  itself,  in  the  affected  phrase  of  Tacitus,
may  seem  to  have  been  proscribed.  Surveyed  from  a
great  distance  in  time  and  place,  and  from  our  point
of  view,  unfamiliar  as  we  happily  are  with  the  cir-
cumstances attending  them,  such  atrocities  as  those
recorded  in  our  latter  chapters  seem  to  border  on  the
incredible.  It  is  not  so  much  the  barbarity  of  the  des-
pot, --  released  from  all  fear  of  God  and  overwhelmed
at  the  same  time  with  the  fear  of  man, —  as  the  patience
of  the  subjects,  that  moves  our  wonder,  and  appears
at  first  sight  among  the  most  inscrutable  problems  of

CH.  LIV.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  39?

history.  Every  Koman  was  armed,  and  the  military
force  at  the  prince's  hand  was  of  the  most  trifling  de-
scription ;  every  Roman  vaunted  himself  of  the  same
ruling  race  as  the  prince ;  his  equal  in  intelligence,
in  theory  at  least  his  equal  before  the  law.  The  em-
peror of  the  Romans  stood  absolutely  alone  at  the  head
of  his  people.  He  had  no  society  of  tyrants  of  his  own
class,  like  the  slave-owner,  to  support  him :  he  had  no
foreign  allies,  like  an  autocrat  in  modern  Europe,  to
maintain  his  authority  as  a  bulwark  to  their  own.  Yet
the  attempts  against  the  life  or  power  of  the  Caesars
have  been,  as  far  as  we  have  seen,  comparatively  few.
They  have  generally  been  the  work  of  private  enemies
or  domestic  traitors :  those  which  have  been  contrived
by  public  men,  and  for  public  ends,  whether  successful
or  not,  have  conciliated  no  sympathy  from  the  multi-
tude. To  throw  any  light  on  this  phenomenon,  for
such  it  may  deserve  to  be  called,  we  must  look  more
deeply  into  the  circumstances  of  the  times,  and  the
moral  condition  of  the  Roman  world.

Of  the  enormities  of  Nero  more  particularly  it  has
been  already  observed,  but  it  may  be  well  to

If  11  •  j.1 J.  J.L.  It8  aCt8  W6re

repeat  and  enforce  the  observation,  that  they  e?ner*llj,

Jf shrouded  in

were  comparatively  unknown  to  the  mass  ol  comparative

n  f •  i  privacy.

the  citizens.  Some  years  of  sincere  benevo-
lence and  virtue,  some  more  of  discreet  and  thoughtful
vigilance,  had  disposed  the  subjects  of  Nero  to  cherish
a  kindly  feeling  towards  their  ruler,  and  to  reject  as
querulous  declamation  the  vague  and  unproved  charges
of  tyranny  which  they  might  sometimes  hear  made
against  him.  To  some  crimes,  real  and  manifest,
they  suffered  themselves  to  be  blinded.  The  Quin
quennium  of  Nero  could  not  be  effaced  at  once  from
their  memories.  The  remembrance  of  it  has  beeb
among  the  most  lasting  monuments  of  the  proneness
of  the  Romans, — shall  we  not  say  of  mankind  in  gen*
oral  9 — to  canonize  the  virtues  of  the  great  rather  than
to  execrate  their  vices.  We  have  seen,  moreover,  that,

398  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  IAV

the  victims  of  Nero,  unlike  those  of  Caius  or  Tiberius,
perished  generally  with  closed  doors.  Though  their
crimes,  their  sentences,  and  the  manner  of  their  deaths
were  discussed  in  the  senate  and  recorded  in  the  pub-
lic archives,  they  were  withdrawn  at  least  from  the
public  eye,  and  the  story  of  their  sufferings,  when  it
reached  at  last  the  ears  of  the  citizens,  was  less  mov-
ing than  if  they  had  been  witnessed  in  the  open  day.
We  must  not  judge  too  harshly  of  the  shrinking  from
public  exposure,  or  the  hope  of  securing  indulgence  for
a  surviving  family,  which  induced  so  many  of  the  ac-
cused to  anticipate  the  centurion's  sword  by  suicide :
yet  the  practice  was  not  less  really  a  crime  against
society ;  it  riveted  more  strongly  the  tyranny  of  the
despot,  who  might  smile  at  being  thus  relieved  from
a  portion  of  the  odium  due  to  him.  Both  Thrasea  and
Cato  fell  short  of  the  dignity  of  suffering,  the  last  and
noblest  lesson  it  was  given  them  to  teach.  We  must
not  wonder  that  the  people  showed  little  sympathy
with  the  men  who  waived  a  dying  appeal  to  their  feel-
ings, to  their  self-respect,  to  their  love.  They  chose
to  die  the  death  of  slaves,  when  they  might  have  ap-
proved themselves  as  martyrs  and  it  was  as  slaves
rather  than  martyrs  that  they  came  to  be  regarded.1
But  the  Romans,  it  may  be  added,  had  they  been
The  idea  of  more  conscious  of  the  cruelties  thus  perpe-
Ifttrra?olheftmi"  trated  in  the  midst  of  them, — had  they  felt
Romans.  more  keenly  the  pain  and  shame  of  the
victims  of  the  tyranny  which  overshadowed  them, —

1  Several  passages  of  contemporary  writers  express  some  bitter-
ness at  the  desperation  with  which  the  best  men  threw  away  their
lives.  Thus  Tacitus  praises  Agricola  (Agric.  c.  42.):  "Quianon
contumacia  neque  inani  jactatione  libertatis  famam  fatumque  pro-
vocabat  .  .  .  sciant  obsequium  ac  modestiam,  si  industria  ac  vigor
adsint,  eo  laudis  excedere  quod  plerique  per  abrupta,  sed  in  nulluip
reipublicse  usum,  ambitiosa morte  inclaruerunt."  Comp.  Ann.  iv  50.;
and  Martial,  i.  9. :

"  Nolo  virum  facili  redimit  qui  sanguine  famam ;
Hunc  volo  laudari  -]ui  sine  morte  potest."

CB.  I,iv.  CNDEU THE EMPIRE.  39ft

I

would  still  have  borne  it  with  an  apathy  which  it
requires  some  effort  to  understand.  For  they  were
hardened  against  the  sense  of  wrong  and  suffering  by
the  viciousness  of  their  own  institutions,  by  their  own
personal  habits  and  usages,  by  the  daily  practice  of
every  household  among  them.  •  Whenever  the  Roman
entered  his  own  dwelling,  the  slave  chained  in  the
doorway,  the  thongs  hanging  from  the  stairs,  the
marks  of  the  iron  and  the  cord  on  the  faces  of  his
domestics,  all  impressed  him  with  the  feeling  that  he
was  a  despot  himself;  for  despot  and  master  were
only  other  words  for  the  same  fearful  thing,  the
irresponsible  owner  of  a  horde  of  human  chattels.1
When  he  seated  himself  in  the  circus,  and  beheld  the
combats  of  men  with  beasts,  or  of  men  with  their
fellow -men, — when  he  smelt  the  reeking  fumes  of
blood  which  saffron  odours  could  not  allay,  heard  the
groans  of  the  wounded,  and,  appealed  to  with  the  last
look  of  despair,  gave  ruthlessly  the  sign  for  slaughter,
— he  could  not  but  be  conscious  of  the  same  glow  of
pleasurable  excitement  at  the  sight  of  death  and
torture  which  is  ascribed  to  the  most  ferocious  ol
t}7rants.  Again,  when  he  invaded  a  province  as
quaestor  or  proconsul,  and  set  himself  to  amass  a
fortune  without  regard  to  duty  or  humanity,  he  felt,
not  without  pride,  that  if  among  citizens  he  was  a
citizen,  he  was  himself  a  king  or  an  emperor  among
the  subjects  of  the  state.  His  own  conscience  would
not  suffer  him  to  be  indignant  at  any  tyranny  he
•witnessed.  He  had  done  as  much  or  more  himself.
Tyranny  was  his  own  birthright :  how  could  he  resent
its  exercise  in  another  ?  unless  it  immediately  touched
himself,  what  interest  had  he  in  resenting  it?  And

1  The  frightful  stories  of  VediosPollio  (Dion,  liv.  23.),  and  Peda-
nius  (Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  42.), — with  which  compare  that  of  Largius
M.icedo  (Flin.  Epist.  iii.  14.),  may  suffice  to  show  that  the  Roman
masters  were  supported  by  the  law  in  greater  cruelties  than  any  the
emperors  practised  in  defiance  of  it.

400  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  Liv.

ior  all  the  iniquities  he  himself  practised,  he  had  no
doubt  a  salvo  in  his  own  breast.  Slavery  he  firmly
believed  to  be  an  eternal  law  of  Nature.  The  free
races  were,  he  was  assured,  as  gods  to  the  servile
races.  He  confessed  the  more  readily,  perhaps,  that
Caesar  was  in  some  sense  divine,  inasmuch  as  hp
claimed  to  be  himself  of  superior  nature  to  the
prostrate  herds  at  his  feet.  But  if  Caesar  was  divine,
must  he  not  acquiesce  in  Caesar's  sovereign  authority?1
An  old  state  tradition  pronounced  that  the  massacres
of  the  circus  were  politically  expedient.  That  men
should  be  hardened  against  fear  by  the  frequent
spectacle  of  death  was  a  fixed  principle  in  the  moral
creed  of  the  Eoman.  Lastly,  that  Kome  should  rule  the
world  seemed  to  him  the  final  cause  of  creation.2  He
was  not  generally  troubled  by  any  slur  thus  cast  upon
Providence  as  harsh  and  partial.  He  never  thought
of  the  moral  government  of  the  world  as  a  system  of
mysterious  wisdom  and  mercy,  and  it  was  no  part  of
his  philosophy  to  reconcile  the  jarring  facts  around
him  with  the  disposition  of  the  Almighty  Power  to
whom  he  gave  the  name  of  Best  as  well  as  of  Greatest.
The  ordinary  notion  of  absolute  government,  de-
ihe  Roman  rived  from  the  form  it  assumes  in  Europe
prelav™  not  at  the  present  day,  is  that  of  a  strict  system
prevent™..  of  prevention,  which,  by  means  of  a  power-
ful army,  an  ubiquitous  police,  and  a  censorship  of

1  If  some  were  still  inconsistent  enough  to  complain  of  the  loss  of
liberty,  Seneca  could  thus  justly  rebuke  them:  "Respondisse  tibi  ser-
vum  indignaris,  libertumque  et  uxorem  et  clientem;  deinde  de  re-
publica  libertatem  sublatam  quereris,  quam  domi  sustulisti." Senec.
de  Ira,  iii.  35.

2  In  such  a  case  the  evidence  of  a  popular  poet  is  worth  more  than
that  of  a  philosopher. Statius  expounds  the  universal  law  of  tyranny
boldly  and  plainly,  Sylv.  iii.  3.  49. :

"  Vice  cuncta  reguntur

Alternisquc  regunt:  propriis  sub  regibus  oninis
Terra;  premit  felix  regum  diademata  Roma.
Hanc  ducibus  frsenare  datum ;  mox  crescit  in  illos
Imperium  Superis ;  sed  habent  et  Numina  legem."

CH.  Lt\  UNDER THE EMPTTU'V  401

letters,  anticipates  every  manifestation  of  freedom
in  thought  or  action,  from  whence  inconvenience
may  arise  to  it.  But  this  was  not  the  system  of  the
Csesarean  Empire.  Faithful  to  the  traditions  of  the
Free  State,  Augustus  had  quartered  all  his  armies  on
the  frontiers,  and  his  successors  were  content  with
concentrating,  cohort  by  cohort,  a  small  though  trusty
force  for  their  own  protection  in  the  capital.  The
legions  were  useful  to  the  emperor,  not  as  instruments
for  the  repression  of  discontent  at  home,  but  as  faith-
ful auxiliaries  among  whom  the  most  dangerous  of
his  nobles  might  be  relegated,  in  posts  which  were
really  no  more  than  honourable  exiles.  Nor  was  the
regular  police  of  the  city  an  engine  of  tyranny.
Volunteers  might  be  found  in  every  rank  to  perform
the  duty  of  spies ;  but  it  was  apparently  no  part  of
the  functions  of  the  guardians  of  the  streets  to  watch
the  countenances  of  the  citizens,  or  beset  their  pri-
vacy. We  hear  of  no  intrusion  into  private  assem-
blies, no  dispersion  of  crowds  in  the  streets.  It  was
generally  deemed  sufficient  to  divert  the  interest  of
the  people  from  public  affairs  by  supplying  them  with
a  constant  variety  of  employment  or  dissipation,  to
amuse  them,  in  their  casual  bursts  of  anger,  by  the
sacrifice  of  some  object  of  their  aversion,  to  soothe
their  discontent  by  redoubled  largesses,  to  allay  their
alarms  of  plague  or  famine  by  more  extravagant
shows  and  massacres  in  the  circus.  Or  if  at  any  time
their  murmurs  took  shape  in  action,  or  secret  con-
spiracies against  the  government  were  detected,  the
arm  of  the  emperor  descended  upon  them  swiftly
and  ruthlessly,  and  the  severity  of  the  punishment
stunned  and  laid  them  in  the  dust.

Conscious  of  their  power  to  repress  disaffection,
it  was  not  therefore  the  policy  of  the  em-  Freedom  of
perors ostentatiously  to prevent it. For  Imongthe
this  reason  we  find  that  they  made  no  effort  R
to impose  restraints upon thought. Freedom of

VOL.  VI.  D  D

402  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  en.  IT*.

thought  may  be  checked  in  two  ways,  and  modern
despotism  resorts  in  its  restless  jealousy  to  both.
The  one  is,  to  guide  ideas  by  seizing  on  the  channels
of  education ;  the  other,  to  subject  their  utterance  to
the  control  of  a  censorship.  In  neither  one  way  nor
the  other  did  Augustus  or  Nero  interfere  at  all.  From
the  days  of  the  republic  the  system  of  education  had
been  perfectly  untrammelled.  It  was  simply  a  matter
of  arrangement  between  the  parties  directly  inte-
rested, the  teacher  and  the  learner.  Neither
Jucation  state  nor  church  pretended  to  take  any
ent  of  priests  concern  in  it :  neither  priest  nor  magistrate

or  magistrates.  , .  .- , L -.  ,°.

regarded  it  with  the  slightest  jealousy.
Public  opinion  ranged,  under  ordinary  circumstances,
in  perfect  freedom,  and  under  its  unchecked  influ-
ence both  the  aims  and  methods  of  education  con-
tinued long  to  be  admirably  adapted  to  make  intel-
ligent men  and  useful  citizens.  The  end  of  the
highest  education  among  the  Romans  was  to  fit  a
man  for  the  discharge  of  his  public  duties.  But,  in
theory  at  least,  they  took  a  very  liberal  view  of  public
duty,  and  conceived  that  every  thing  which  refined
and  enlarged  his  intellectual  powers  made  him  a  wiser
legislator  and  an  ajrier  m&gistrate.  At  the  age  of
seven,  or  sometimes  a  few  years  later,  the  child  began
his  course  of  public  instruction  on  the  benches  of  the
Grammarian.  From  him  he  learned  to  read  and
speak  his  own  language  step  by  step  with  the  Greek,
and  imbued  his  memory  with  the  thoughts  and  lan-
guage of  the  classics  of  either  tongue,  from  Homer
to  Ennius  or  Virgil.  At  fourteen,  or  as  soon  as  the
powers  of  thought  began  to  unfold  themselves,  he
was  transferred  to  the  school  of  the  Rhetorician,
where  he  first  began  to  concentrate  his  studies  upon
the  future  business  of  his  life.  He  was  to  be  made
a  public  man,  and  therefore  above  all  things  a  public
speaker.  He  was  to  be  trained  for  a  perfect  orator,
by  declamation,  by  writing,  by  careful  study  of  the

CH.  trr.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  403

best  models,  by  constant  exercise  in  rivalry  with  his
schoolfellows.  But  it  was  not  the  mere  trick  of  action,
or  knack  of  speaking,  that  he  was  to  acquire :  he  was
to  be  thoroughly  informed  with  the  matter  requisite
for  his  calling.  Every  branch  of  knowledge  might
sometimes  have  its  application :  every  art  and  science
might  serve  on  occasion  to  illustrate  the  topics  pre-
sented to  him  for  discussion :  and,  if  any  were  too
remote  from  the  sphere  of  forensic  eloquence,  they
would  serve  at  least  to  expand  the  mind  of  the  pupil,
to  give  breadth  and  depth  and  height  to  his  under-
standing. Among  these  sciences,  however,  itsextentand
there  was  one  which  held  the  highest  place,  liberality-
one  which  for  its  preeminence  among  them  deserved
to  be  removed  from  the  circle  of  the  rhetorician's
instructions,  and  entrusted  to  the  care  of  a  special
teacher.  At  seventeen,  or  when  the  fated  struggle
begins  between  the  moral  principles  and  the  instincts
of  appetite, — at  the  commencement,  such  as  morality
and  religion  have  represented  it,  of  the  great  battle
of  life  between  vice  and  virtue, — the  youth  was
transferred  to  the  academy  of  the  Philosopher  or
Sophist,  to  learn  the  mysteries  of  the  (rood,  the  Fair,
and  the  Honourable.1  While  he  still  continued  to
exercise  himself  daily  in  rhetorical  studies  and  prac-
tice, he  explored  the  dark  by-ways  of  morals  and
metaphysics  under  accomplished  teachers,  and  tra-
versed perhaps  the  whole  circuit  of  Grecian  specula-
tion before  he  determined  in  which  sect  definitively
to  enrol  himself.

Such  a  course  of  education,  it  must  be  allowed,
was  nobly  conceived ;  and  at  the  hands  of  the  Eo-
mans  it  received  fair  play  ;  for  it  was  warped  by  no
sectarian  prejudices,  nor  confined  by  narrow  notions
of  state  policy.  At  first,  indeed,  the  government

1  Thus  Persius,  at  twelve  years,  entered  the  school  of  the  gram-
marian Palaemon;  thence  he  went  to  the  rhetor  Virginius;  and
finally,  at  sixteen,  to  the  philosopher  Cornutus.  Suet.  vit.  Pers.

V  T> '-'

404  HTSTOKY OF  THE ROMANS  en.  LIT.

looked  with  distrust  on  the  new  science  of  the  rhe-
toricians, and  the  strange  doctrines  of  the  sophists
from  beyond  the  sea :  the  stern  republic  of  Cato  sus-
pected the  tendencies  of  a  learning  imported  by  the
High  training  effeminate  parasites  of  conquered  Greece.
£t Blunder  But  even  these  camp  prejudices  were  tran-

the  Free  State. gientj  ^ Jn the 1.^ j^g Qf ^ Free

State  the  intellect  of  the  Roman  youth  was  allowed
to  be  developed  without  restraint,  and  undoubtedly
with  no  common  success.  The  Roman  men  of  affairs
were  generally  men  of  well-trained  understandings.
Their  soldiers  could  speak  and  write  as  well  as  com-
mand. Their  knowledge  of  ideas  and  letters  was
wide  in  its  range,  though  perhaps  their  views  had
little  depth,  and  still  less  originality.  But  there  is
something  very  remarkable  in  the  ease  with  which
they  could  turn  from  the  active  to  the  literary  life,
from  study  to  composition,  from  speaking  to  specu-
lation. With  the  fall  of  freedom  the  sphere  of
eloquence  became  lamentably  restricted,  and  oratory
degenerated  into  mere  declamation:  the  subjects  to
which  the  learner  was  directed  were  frivolous,  and
the  nature  of  his  preparation  in  art  was  no  doubt
less  discursive  and  complete.1  Nevertheless,

Not  materially  ,  ,

lowered  under  even  under  the  empire,  the  education  ot
youth  bore  honourable  fruit.  It  created  men
of  letters,  if  not  practical  statesmen ;  it  sharpened
the  intellect,  formed  habits  of  industry,  enlivened
thought,  and  fostered  a  variety  of  interests,  and  an

1  For  the  subjects  of  declamation  compare  what  has  been  said  in
chap,  xli.;  and  see  Tacitus,  Dial.de  Orat.  35.:  "Sequiturut  materise
abhorrenti  a  veritate  declamatio  quoque  adhibeatur.  Sic  fit  ut  tyran-
nicidarum  prcemia,  aut  vitiatarnm  electiones,  aut  pestilentiae  remedia,
aut  incesta  matrum,  aut  quicquid  in  schola  quotidie  agitur,  in  foro
vel  raro  vel  nunquam,  ingentibus  verbis  perscquuntur;"  and  Petron.
Satyr.  1.:  "Et  ideo  adulescentulos  existimo  in  scholis  stultissimos
fieri,  quia  nihil  ex  iis  qu«e  in  usu  habemus  aut  audiunt  aut  vident,  sed
piratas  cum  catenis  in  litore  stantes,  sed  tyrannos  edicta  scribentes,"

«»•  wrr.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  405

aptitude  for  manifold  pursuits. It  continued  as  be-
fore to  be  exercised  with  perfect  freedom. The  most
jealous  of  the  Caesars  made  no  attempt  to  control  it,
to  dictate  its  subjects,  and  prescribe  its  methods.  Its
text-books  were  still,  as  ever,  the  most  fa-  Deciamation
mous  compositions  of  republican  Greece;  JlUVTylna
the favourite topics of  its declamations  tyrannicide
were  the  glories  and  virtues  of  the  freemen  of  anti-
quity, and  the  praise  of  tyrannicide  resounded  from
all  its  benches.1 Even  the  milder  method  of  guiding
education,  by  enlisting  salaried  professors  in  the  in-
terest of  the  government,  was  not  discovered  till  a
later  period ;  even  then  we  shall  find  reason  to  ques-
tion whether  it  was  adopted  as  a  precaution  of  state
policy,  or  rather  as  a  cheap  subornation  of  flattery.

The  same  indulgence  which  was  extended  to  educa-
tion smiled  upon  the  literature  which  flowed

if.  .. mi  . . No  restrictions

so  copiously  trom  it.  Ihere  was  no  restric-  on  freedom  of
tion  on  writing  or  publication  at  Korne  an-
alogous to  our  censorships  and  licensing-  acts.  The
fact  that  books  were  copied  by  the  hand,  and  not
printed  for  general  circulation,  seems  to  present  no
real  difficulty  to  the  enforcement  of  such  restrictions,
had  it  been  the  wish  of  the  government  to  enforce
them.  The  noble  Koman,  indeed,  surrounded  by
freedmen  and  clients  of  various  ability,  by  rhetori-
cians and  sophists,  poets  and  declaimers,  had  within
his  own  doors  private  aid  for  executing  his  literary
projects ;  and  when  his  work  was  compiled,  he  had

1  The  well-known  line  of  Juvenal,

"  Cum  perimit  saavos  classis  numerosa  tyrannos,"
is  confirmed  by  Tacitus  above  cited,  and  by  the  subjects  of  some  of
the  declamations  ascribed  to  Quintilian,  which  have  come  down  to
us.  The  only  exceptions  to  this  licence  of  teaching  mentioned  i«
history,  are  the  case  of  Carrinas  Secundus,  banished  by  Caius  for  de-
claiming in  favour  of  tyrannicide  (Dion,  lix.  20.),  and  of  the  rhetor
Virginias  and  the  philosopher  Musonius  Rufus,  proscribed  by  Nero,
as  Tacitus  says,  on  account  of  their  influence  over  youth,  but  osten-
sibly implicated  in  the  conspiracy  of  Pi.so.  Ann  xv.  71.

406  HISTORY OP TFB .ROMANS  CH.  UV.

in  the  slaves  of  his  household  the  hands  for  multiply-
ing copies,  for  dressing  and  binding  them,  and  send-
ing forth  an  edition,  as  we  should  say,  of  his  work
to  the  select  public  of  his  own  class  or  society.1  The
circulation  of  compositions  thus  manipulated  might
be  to  some  extent  surreptitious  and  secret.  But  such
a  mode  of  proceeding  was  necessarily  confined  to
few.  The  ordinary  writer  must  have  had  recourse
to  a  professional  publisher,  who  undertook,  as  a
tradesman,  to  present  his  work  for  profit  to  the
world.  Upon  these  agents  the  government  might
have  had  all  the  hold  it  required :  yet  it  never  de-
manded the  sight  beforehand  of  any  speech,  essay,
or  satire  which  was  advertised  as  about  to  appear.
It  was  still  content  to  punish  after  publication  what
it  deemed  to  be  censurable  excesses.  Severe  and
arbitrary  as  some  of  its  proceedings  were  in  this
respect,  of  which  instances  have  been  already  re-
corded, it  must  be  allowed  that  these  prosecutions
of  written  works  were  rare  and  exceptional,  and  that
the  traces  we  discover  of  the  freedom  of  letters,  even
under  the  worst  emperors,  leave  on  the  whole  a
strong  impression  of  the  general  leniency  of  their
policy  in  this  particular.2

The  fear,  indeed,  of  such  retrospective  censorship
Thisindui-  nad  damped  the  ardour  of  men  of  letters
fnncomapen8a!d  through  the  dark  days  of  Tiberius,  and  no
«on  upon  pub"  man  coveted  eminence  as  a  writer  under
HO  action.  j.]^  ^yranny  of  njs  successor,  who  proscribed

Homer  and  Virgil,  and  scowled  with  envious  morose-
ness  upon  every  kind  of  excellence.  But  Claudius

1  See  Corn.  Nep.  tn  Alt.  13.;  Cic.  ad  Att.  iv.  4.  5.  8.,  xiii.  12.  44.

2  The  patience  of  Nero  under  the  bitterest  pasquinades  is  remarked
but  not  explained  by  Suetonius,  Ner.  39. :  "  Mirum  et  vel  prsecipue
notabile  inter  base  fuit,  nib.il  eum  patientius  quam  maledicta  et  con-
vicia  hominum  tulisse,  neque  in  ullos  leniorem,  quam  qui  se  dictii
aut  carminibus  lacessissent, exstitisse." He  proceeds  to  cite  ex
amples,  some  of  which  have  been  quoted  in  the  preceding  chapter.

UNDER THE EMPIKE.  407

was  a  patron  of  letters,  perhaps  not  an  unenlightened
patron.  Historical  composition  flourished  again  un-
der the  auspices  of  the  imperial  historian.  The  ac-
cession of  Nero,  youthful  and  benign  to  every  talent,
was  the  signal  for  renewed  activity  in  all  depart-
ments of  literature,  particularly  in  the  lighter,  such  as
might  expect  especial  countenance  from  the  favourite
of  Apollo.  Undoubtedly  the  licence  which  was  ex-
tended to  writings  at  this  period  was  accepted  by  the
mass  of  the  rising  generation  of  educated  men,  as
compensation  for  the  restraints  imposed  on  them  in
active  life.  While  the  interchange  of  thought  was
free,  or  appeared  so,  they  might  fondly  persuade
themselves  that  they  were  freemen  themselves.  Here,
at  least,  the  traditions  of  the  republic  were  unbroken.
Nor  are  we  to  suppose  that  the  circle  of  readers
was  so  small  that  the  government  could  consideration
safely  despise  the  influence  of  an  unpalat-  oftheciiLTof
able  composition.  Whatever  was  its  extent  readera-
it  was  coincident,  at  least,  with  the  class  of  which
the  government  was  naturally  most  jealous.  The
publications  of  Kome  were  perused  no  doubt  by  the
senators,  the  knights  and  the  freedmen  of  the  city :
there  is  evidence  to  show  that  in  many  cases  they
penetrated  far  into  the  provinces,  and  for  some  kinds
of  writing,  at  least,  there  was  a  regular  sale  at  Lug-
dunum,  or  any  other  provincial  capital.1  Some  cu-
rious calculations  have  been  made,  to  show  that  the
rapidity  with  which  copies  could  be  multiplied  by
hand  from  dictation  was  little  less  than  that  of  print-
ing. It  is  not  impossible  that  a  limited  number  of

1  The  authorities  on  this  subject  are  collected,  but  with  little  critical
discrimination,  by  Adolf  Schmidt.  Denk  und  Glaubensfreiheit,  pp.
116.  125.  The  younger  Pliny,  as  a  metropolitan  man  of  letters,
imagined  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  a  bookseller  at  Lugdunum;
he  was  the  more  pleased  to  learn  that  his  own  compositions  were  on
Bale  there,  among  the  latest  publications  of  the  trade  at  Kome.  See
Ep-'st.  ix.  11.

408  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  IJV.

copies,  a  hundred  for  instance,  could  be  written  off
quicker  in  this  way  in  the  librarian's  workshop,  than
a  single  one  could  be  set  up  in  type  by  the  printer.
This,  of  course,  supposes  the  employment  of  a  multi-
tude of  scribes ;  but  these  were  slaves  cheaply  pur-
chased, and  maintained  at  little  cost.1  The  exceed-
ingly low  price  of  books  at  Eome,  if  we  may  take
the  poems  of  a  popular  author  as  an  example,  show
that  the  labour  must  have  been  much  less  or  much
cheaper  than  we  usually  imagine.2  The  world  of
Roman  society,  the  circles  of  rank  and  fashion,  in
the  city  and  its  neighbourhood,  were  permeated  by
the  published  thoughts  of  their  favourite  writers  with
electric  speed  and  electric  diffusiveness.3  It  would
be  too  much  to  dignify  with  the  name  of  devotion  to
literature  the  aptitude  of  the  educated  Roman  for
the  use  of  his  style  and  tablets.  No  doubt  the  vice
of  the  system  of  instruction  imparted  to  him  was  its
tendency  to  degenerate  into  the  conning  of  facts,
maxims,  and  the  commonplaces  of  the  schools,  rather
than  the  cultivation  of  thought.  Trained  from  child-

1  Schmidt's  remarks  on  this  subject  are  well  worth  considering.
He  says  boldly,  "  was  in  der  Gegenwart  fur  die  Literatur  die  Presse
ist.  das  war  im  Alterthum  die  Sklaverei,"  p.  119. Certainly  the
means  possessed  by  the  ancients  for  multiplying  copies  were  far
beyond  those  of  the  middle  ages.

2  For  the  exceeding  cheapness  of  the  most  popular  books  see
Martial,  i.  118.:  "  Denariis  tibi  quinque  Martialem." It  would  seem
that  a  copy  of  one  book  at  least  of  Martial  (about  700  lines)  smoothed
with  pumice,  and  elegantly  bound,  was  sold  for  3s.  4r/.;  a  plainer
copy  (comp.  i.  67.)  for  about  Is.  6d.,  or  (xiii.  8.)  even  for  4d.,  and
still  leave  a  profit  to  the  bookseller:

"  Omnis  in  hoc  gracili  Xeniorum  turba  libello

Constabit  nummis  quatuor  empta  tibi.
Quatnor  est  nimium :  poterit  constare  duobus  ;

Et  faciet  lucrum  bibliopola  Tryphon."

*  One  book  of  Martial  (540  verses)  could  be  transcribed  in  an  hour
(ii.  1.  5.):  "hsec  una  peragit  librarius  hora."  On  the  rapidity  of
writing  Schmidt  quotes  Galen,  de  Cogn.  Morb.  c.  9.,  which  shows
that  shorthand  was  in  common  use  for  published  books.  Schmidt,
pp.  132.  136.

Ctt.  LIV.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  409

hood  to  observe  and  imitate,  he  was  versed  in  all  the
forms  of  literature,  while  he  lacked  perhaps  the  ideas
to  fill  them.  Hence  the  facility  with  which  mere
children,  as  in  the  cases  more  than  once  referred  to,
produced  set  orations  on  hackneyed  subjects.  With
their  notebooks  crammed  with  the  accumulated  jot-
tings from  a  long  course  of  dictations,  they  were  pre-
pared to  produce,  at  short  notice,  passable  exercita-
tions  on  any  ordinary  topic.  Ovid,  speaking  of  the
precocity  of  his  poetical  talent,  tells  us  that  in  child-
hood his  thoughts  ran  spontaneously  in  verse;  and
the  phrases  with  which  the  tablets  or  the  memory  of
the  Eoinans  were  stored  might  seem  of  their  own
accord  to  take  the  form  of  continuous  composition.
Almost  every  distinguished  man  among  Faciluie8  at-
them  seems  to  have  kept  his  journal  or  com^'ion
Ephemerides;  to  have  made  collections  of  catio™oftipli"
wise  and  witty  sayings;  to  have  turned  book8>
some  of  his  observations  on  men  and  things  into
verse ;  to  have  strung  together  a  volume  of  miscel-
laneous extracts  from  his  reading ;  and  the  transcrip-
tion of  a  few  copies  of  these  stray  leaves  constituted
the  publication  of  a  book.  With  the  char-

-  Charactens-

acter  of  the  common  literature  ot  the  day  tics  of  the  po-

i /-i  , i j  i/l T. Pularlitera-

tne  Csesarean  government  had  every  selnsn  tureofthe
reason  to  be  satisfied.  It  was  engrossing ;
it  occupied  many  restless  minds  to  the  exclusion  of
all  dangerous  subjects,  either  of  action  or  reflection.
It  seems  to  have  been  lively ;  it  was,  at  least,  fasci-
nating. It  was  generally  voluptuous,  to  enervate  the
strong  and  daring ;  it  was  satisfied  with  a  low  range
of  topics,  leaving  loftier  themes  to  reserved  and  soli-
tary genius.  Such  was  the  kind  of  literature  in  which
Nero  himself  was  ambitious  of  shining;  such  were
the  writings  he  could  best  appreciate.  The  few  re-
maining verses  which  are  ascribed  to  him,  or  sup-
posed to  be  parodies  upon  him,  seem  to  show  that  he
was  a  proficient  in  the  lilting  metre  and  empty  pret-

410  HISTORY OF THE EOMANS .  CH.  LIT.

tiness  of  expression  which  marked  the  poetical  style
of  his  tutor.1  He  is  said,  indeed,  to  have  aspired  to
the  fame  of  an  historian,  and  to  have  taken  for  his
subject  the  Affairs  of  Koine.  His  performance,  how-
ever, never  went  beyond  a  consideration  of  the  num-
ber of  books  to  which  the  work  should  extend.  The
emperor,  urged  a  flatterer,  should  not  deign  to  com-
pose less  than  four  hundred  volumes  on  the  imperial
theme.  The  Stoic  Cornutus  bluntly  suggested  that
the  public  would  not  read  a  work  so  prolix.  Yet,
replied  Nero,  your  master  Chrysippus  wrote  as

many  books But  they  at  least,  returned

the  sage,  were  of  some  use  to  mankind?

But whatever  the  truth  of  this  story may be,
the  Eomans of  this  age  were  not  solely

Fashion  of  _  .  .  »  /

historical triliers  in  the  drama,  in  epigram  and  fugi-

composition.  ,  -, &,

tive  poetry;  men  were  found  not  only  to
write  but  to  read  vast  compilations  of  history,  now
known  to  us  only  by  the  number  of  volumes  they
are  said  to  have  filled.  The  works  of  the  emperor
Claudius,  of  Servilius  Nonianus,  and  Aufidius  Bassus,
attest  the  patient  labour  of  these  men  of  letters;
men  who  must  have  looked  for  reputation  rather
from  the  recitation  of  their  compositions,  book  by
book,  to  select  audiences,  than  to  their  wide  dissemi-
nation by  the  labour  of  copyists.  An  account  of  the
Extraordi-  life  and  studies  of  the  elder  Pliny,  the  type
aci5^ityeofruie  °f  Roman  industry  at  the  same  time  both
ewer  pimy.  ^  affairs  an(j  letters,  will  find  its  proper
place  at  a  later  period ;  but  we  may  here  remark
that  during  the  reign  of  Nero  this  distinguished  man,
after  holding  for  many  years  a  military  command  in
Grermany,  was  devoting  himself  to  study  in  retire-
ment, meditating  a  history  of  the  German  wars  which

1  Seneca  (Nat.  Qu.  i.  5.)  quotes  a  verse  of  Nero's: —

"  Colla  Cytheriacaa  splendent  agitata  columbse."
The  well-known  lines  in  Persius,  Sat.  i.,  are  not  improbably  r-trodies.
*  Dion,  Ixii.  29.

CH.  i.rv.  DNDEft THE EMPIRE.  411

he  deemed  it  inexpedient  to  put  on  paper  in  times  of
tyranny,  composing  a  work  on  grammar  and  a  trea-
tise on  the  literary  life,  accumulating  extracts  from
his  reading  or  notes  of  his  thoughts  and  conversation
which  extended  at  his  death  to  a  hundred  and  sixty
volumes,  and  preparing  slowly  and  methodically,
from  the  perusal  of  many  hundreds  of  works,  the
wonderful  encyclopaedia  of  Eoman  arts  and  learning
which  he  published  eventually  under  the  name  of
the  Natural  History.

The  noble  Roman  chafed  indeed  at  the  restraints
which  prudence  prescribed  him  in  the  rela-  Di8(.ourage-
tion  of  contemporary  events,  in  which  truth  J^p'o^T'
could  seldom  be  told  without  impugning  history-
the  conduct  of  men  in  power,  court  favourites  or
court  parasites,  if  it  did  not  hit  the  blots  in  the  cha-
racter of  Caesar  himself.  It  was  still  more  galling,
perhaps,  to  leave  the  field  open  to  the  flatterers  and
intriguers  who  debased  history  into  mere  panegyric,
and  filled  the  ear  of  Eome  with  unblushing  false-
hood. The  harsh  repression  exercised  towards  the
utterers  of  the  truth  in  this  particular,  had  deterred
the  most  honourable  men  from  her  ill-requited  ser-
vice, and  checked  the  licence  of  remark  on  the  per-
sonages around  him  which  the  Roman  magnate  cher-
ished as  his  birthright.  To  many  this  restraint  on
personal  criticism  was  the  sorest  point  in  their  ser-
vitude. But  with  this  exception  the  mind  of  the
educated  classes  still  flowed  freely  enough  in  the
well-worn  channels  of  literature,  and  the  stability  of
the  government  was  no  doubt,  in  a  great  degree,
founded  on  the  ease  and  freedom  with  which  the
men  of  letters  moved  in  their  chains,  and  their  gene-
ral acquiescence  in  the  position  assigned  them.1

1  It  is  fair  to  remark,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  strictures  of  con-
temporary history  were  not  checked  at  Rome,  as  among  ourselves
within  recent  times,  by  the  code  of  honour,  nor  practically  at  least,  a»
it  would  apper.r,  by  ».  law  of  libel.

41*2  HISTORY OF  THE ROMANS  CH.  uv.

The  class,  never  numerous  at  Eome,  which  inter-
ested itself  in  moral  speculations,  had  en-
phi!5f<£hy  at  joyed  remarkable  freedom  from  interfer-
reh^on'and  ence  at  the  hands  of  constituted  authority.
The  proud  aristocracy  of  the  senate  was
little  troubled  by  the  nervous  alarms  at  heterodoxy,
so  common  to  half-instructed  democracies,  full  of
prejudices,  and  conscious  of  their  want  of  skill  and
learning  to  defend  them.  Hence,  except  once  or
twice,  at  moments  of  great  intellectual  disturbance,
the  government  of  the  Free  State  had  suffered  the
philosophers  to  teach  as  they  pleased,  and  put  no  re-
straints on  the  spirit  of  inquiry  which  was  sapping
the  positive  beliefs  of  the  day.  If  it  ever  evinced
any  jealousy  of  the  new  teaching,  it  was  against  the
Greek  foreigner,  not  against  the  heretic,  against  the
enemy  of  Eome,  not  the  enemy  of  the  gods,  that  it
was  directed.  The  full  establishment  of  the  Eoman
power  in  the  East  was  followed  by  complete  acqui-
escence in  the  teaching,  however  liberal  and  daring,
which  flowed  from  that  source  to  the  West.  From
the  last  century  of  the  republic  all  attempt  at  inter-
ference ceased.  The  young  Eoman  noble  was  ini-
tiated, as  a  matter  of  course,  in  the  contentions  of
the  Academy  and  the  Lyceum  ;  he  traversed  the  in-
evitable career  from  doubt  to  rationalism,  and  from
rationalism  to  doubt  again  ;  while  neither  priests  nor
magistrates  complained  of  the  new  sphere  of  ideas
into  which  he  was  launched,  sure,  as  they  were,  to
extinguish  in  his  mind  the  old  belief  of  his  country-
men. All  the  Grecian  schools  agreed  at  least  in  one
thing,  namely,  to  inculcate  outward  respect  for  estab-
lished forms  of  religion  as  an  instrument  of  govern-
ment. It  might  be  curious  to  trace  the  origin  of
this  peculiar  feature  in  their  teaching ;  whether  it
was  a  prudent  concession  to  the  demands  of  the
authorities,  under  which  they  taught;  whether  they
were  unconsciously  swayed  by  the  apprehension  that

CH.  rnr.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  413

in  the  uncertainty  which  confessedly  hung  over  their
own  undetermined  principles,  the  Voice  of  the  People
might  be  after  all  a  faint  echo  of  the  Voice  of  God  .
but  so  it  was  that  Stoic,  Epicurean,  Peripatetic  and
Eclectic,  all  consented  to  practise  on  public  occa-
sions the  rites  which  they  not  less  openly  derided  in
their  speaking  and  writing.  The  compromise  was
certainly  effectual,  at  least  to  a  late  period.

Modern  despotisms  are  charged  with  allowing  the
freest  licence  of  religious  discussion,  not  in
the  interest  of  truth,  but  as  a  necessary  opposition  to

..  r l^  -I  i -i  .  government

compensation  lor  the  silence  they  impose  «m  assumed

11 j.  .  IM* i TJ MI i by  the  Stoics

upon  all  discussion  on  politics.1  It  will  be  under  the
seen  that  if  Roman  imperialism  is  liable  to
the  same  charge,  it  was  at  least  no  new  invention  of
tyranny.  The  Sceptic  and  the  Atheist  had  been  al-
lowed full  scope  under  the  government  of  the  senate,
and  the  Csesars,  in  leaving  religion  still  open  to  their
attacks,  only  followed  the  state  tradition  bequeathed
them  from  the  republic.  The  philosophers,  however,
while  they  accepted  freedom  as  their  right,  were  not
bound  thereby  to  keep  terms  with  the  government
which  condescended  to  grant  it.  They  had  a  higher
mission,  and  a  corresponding  sense  of  duty.  With
the  gross  and  immoral  practices,  indeed,  allowed,  en-
couraged, sometimes  even  prescribed,  by  the  Pagan
superstitions,  philosophy  did  not  concern  herself.  She
did  not  stoop  to  inform  or  amend  the  ignorant  rabble
of  the  temple-worshippers:  but  the  opposition  between
her  and  the  government,  when  the  government  became
flagrantly  wicked  and  tyrannical,  was  more  and  more
openly  avowed.  The  wisdom  of  the  Porch  was  not
the  antagonist  of  vulgar  vices ;  but  her  precepts,  ad-

1  This  charge,  so  commonly  made  against  certain  Continental  go-
vernments at  the  present  day,  and  with  peculiar  force  against  the  old
monarchy  of  France  (see  De  Tocqueville's  instructive  book,  I'Ancien
Regime  et  la  Revolution,  liv.  ii.  ch.  11..  liv.  iii.  ch.  2.),  may  he  ex-
tended, I  conceive,  with  equal  truth  to  oligarchies  generally.

414  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  itv.

dressed  to  the  ruling  classes  of  the  empire,  stood  forth
in  bold  and  startling  hostility  to  the  principles  of
existing  authority.  The  city  of  the  Stoics  was  the
city  of  God,  not  the  city  of  Caesar.  The  empire  for
which  they  sighed  on  earth  was  the  empire  of  the
best  and  wisest,  of  the  oligarchs  of  reason,  not  the
empire  of  the  blind  ignoble  multitude  impersonated
in  the  tribune  of  its  choice.  Christian  moralists  have
taunted  Stoicism  with  the  hopeless  distance  at  which
it  stood  from  the  sympathies  of  mankind  in  general.
Such,  they  say,  is  the  nature  of  man,  that  it  requires
the  prospect  of  reward,  here  or  hereafter,  as  an  effi-
cient stimulus  to  virtue.  This  argument  is  probably
true,  and  as  a  general  proposition  no  doubt  the  Stoics
would  have  also  admitted  it.  But,  having  themselves
no  assurance  of  any  such  retributive  Providence,  they
aimed  at  raising  the  choicest  spirits  from  the  com-
mon level  to  a  higher  standard  of  excellence,  and  in-
culcated duty  without  reward  as  the  end  of  existence,
not  as  a  religion  for  the  many,  but  as  a  philosophy
for  the  few.  Shocked  as  their  nobler  instincts  were
at  the  vile  degradation  of  the  multitude,  they  con-
ceived the  Truth  as  something  unappreciable  by  it.
Could  the  Truth  have  been  made  intelligible  to  man-
kind in  general,  it  would,  in  their  view,  have  ceased
to  be  truth  at  all.  And  this,  after  all,  was  very  simi-
lar to  the  view  of  Christianity  itself  entertained  by
some  of  our  primitive  teachers.  Tertullian  in  a  strik-
ing passage  asserted  broadly  that  the  Caesars  would
long  since  have  been  converted  to  Christianity,  if
Christians  could  be'  themselves  Caesars,  that  is,  if  go-
vernment could  be  Christian.1  Christianity,  he  con-
ceived, must  always  stand  apart  from  the  ordinary
march  of  affairs  ;  the  true  faith  could  only  be  the  faith
of  a  chosen  congregation ;  mankind  in  general  were

1  Tertull.  Apolog.  21.:  "Sed  et  Csesares  credidissent  super  Christo,
si  aut  CiEsarcs  non  essent  saeculo  necessarii,  aut  si  Chrhtinni  pvfnist-
tent  esse  Ccesares"

m,  r.iv.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  415

equally  incapable  of  moral  renovation  and  of  spiritual
conversion.

Let  the  Stoics,  then,  be  judged  solely  by  what
they  attempted.  Their  aims  were  high,  but  PrinciPie.on
not  wide-reaching.  They  sought  to  make  Sm^t'obe
some  men  more  than  human,  but  there  Judged>
was  no  question  with  them  of  the  few  or  the  many
They  boasted  that  their  preternatural  standard  of  holi-
ness was  not  absolutely  unattainable,  and  if  they
could  point  to  a  single  Cato  or  a  single  Thrasea,  as
having  attained  to  it,  their  problem  was  solved,  their
principle  was  established.  Virtue  had  become  im-
personate. Man  had  become  God.  The  end  of  crea-
tion was  accomplished.  Even  from  the  attempt  to
accomplish  this  end,  however  imperfectly,  other  bless-
ings might  flow,  indirectly  and  collaterally  :  though,
indeed,  by  the  true  mystic  of  the  Porch  these  were
little  heeded.  The  aspirations,  however,  of  the  Stoics
in  general  were  really  less  visionary  and  unpractical.
They  descended  from  the  clouds  to  earth  to  impreg-
nate with  noble  and  fruitful  principles  such  forms  of
government  as  were  actually  accessible  to  them.  Cap-
tivated as  they  often  were  by  the  aspect  of  the  law,
as  the  exponent  of  the  Divine  Will,  the  representa-
tive of  Divine  Justice  upon  earth,  they  devoted  them-
selves to  moulding  it  to  their  notions,  and  informed
it  with  wise  and  lofty  maxims.  Stoicism  enlarged
the  minds  of  its  worthy  votaries  by  purer  concep-
tions of  Deity,  and  more  liberal  views  of  humanity,
teaching  the  unity  of  God  with  man,  and  of  men
with  one  another,  asserting  the  supremacy  of  the
Will  over  the  Passions,  of  Mind  over  Matter,  of  eter-
nal Duty  over  temporal  Expediency.  It  sublimed
every  aspiration  after  the  Good,  the  Just,  the  Hon-
ourable, by  pronouncing  it  the  instinct  of  divinity
within  us.  The  immortality  of  the  soul,  the  triumph
of  the  Kighteous,  a  fleeting  Present  and  an  illimit-
able Future,  these  indeed  were  doctrines  which  some

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  MV.

Stoics  held,  some  perhaps  ventured  to  teach  dogma-
tically: but  they  were  not  the  true  vital  principles
of  the  sect ;  they  savoured  too  much  of  offering
bribes  to  virtue  ;  they  were,  in  short,  too  popular,  to
seduce  the  sterner  preachers  of  a  morality  which
must  have  no  regard  either  to  punishment  on  the
one  hand,  or  reward  on  the  other.1

Galling  indeed  to  the  selfish  voluptuaries  of  the
stoicism  palace  must  have  been  the  bold  and  even
thi8aperioedato  ostentatious  preaching  of  these  soul-stir-
culrecte^at  ring  doctrines,  which  seemed  to  proclaim  a
Rome.  higher  freedom  than  that  of  the  body,  a  no-

bler existence  than  that  of  the  world  and  the  flesh.2
Whatever  there  was  of  ardour,  of  generosity  and
self-devotion,  among  the  Koman  youth  at  this  era
of  national  torpor,  was  absorbed  in  the  strong  cur-
rent of  Stoicism.  The  Epicurism  of  the  earlier  em-
pire had  been  the  plea  of  men  who  were  ashamed
of  the  renunciation  they  had  made  of  their  indepen-
dence. But  since  independence  had  become  a  mere
phantom  of  the  past,  the  philosophy  which  excused
men  for  deserting  it  was  no  longer  specially  attrac-
tive ;  while  Stoicism,  which  could  substitute  a  higher
object  in  its  place,  assumed  in  its  turn  the  ascen-
dant. Under  the  Free  State  it  had  generally  been
admitted  that  the  maxims  of  the  Porch,  stiff  and

1  Epictetus  and  Marcus  Aurelius,  says  M.  Denis  (Idees  Morales
dans  I'Antiquite,  ii.  253.),  faithful  to  the  old  traditions  of  the  Porch,
speak  but  faintly  and obscurely  on  the  immortality  of  the  soul.
The  only  philosophers  who  formally  admit  it  are  Seneca,  Plutarch,
and  Maximus  Tyrius;  the  former  as  a  matter  of  hope,  the  others  as
an  incontestable  dogma.

2  The  expression  "  the  flesh"  for  human  passions,  which  has  been
almost  appropriated  to  Christian  teaching,  is  found  at  this  time  in
Seneca. In  the  Consolatio  ad  Marciam,  c.  24.,  he  says,  as  St.  Paul
might have  said:  "Animo  cum  came  grave  certamen." Comp.
Persius,  Sat.  ii.  in  fin.:

"  Et  bona  Dis  ex  hac  scelerata  ducere  pulpa."
It  had  been  already  used  commonly  by  Philo,  who  took  it  perhaps
from  the  Septuagint. Sirac.  xxiii.  23,

CS I.TT.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  417

harsh  as  they  were,  ill  accorded  with  the  conduct  of
public  affairs,  and  the  government  of  mankind  in
general.  The  experience,  perhaps  the  instinct,  of  the
free-born  Koman  assured  him  that  a  man  could  not
be  an  active  and  useful  citizen,  and  at  the  same  time
the  disciple  of  a  speculative  Puritanism.  The  pre-
tensions of  the  jurist  Sulpicius  to  unite  the  two  cha-
racters had  moved  the  derision  of  Cicero :  the  attempt
of  Cato  had  issued  in  more  serious  consequences  ;  it
had  hastened  the  fall  of  the  republic.  But  these  men
had  few  admirers  or  followers  in  their  own  day.  It
was  under  the  empire,  when  man's  free  will  had  no
longer  scope  for  action,  that  the  philosophy  which
exalted  Fate  above  all  human  affairs  found  accept-
ance with  thoughtful  and  melancholy  idlers.  Stoicism
became  a  consolation  for  inactivity,  not  a  stimulus  to
action.  Views  of  the  highest  wisdom  which  led  men's
speculations  away  from  the  deceitful  shows  of  life,  and
fixed  them  upon  ideal  excellences,  might  be  an  object
of  suspicion  to  the  government ;  they  might  be  inter-
preted by  timid  and  jealous  rulers  as  discontent  with
existing  circumstances,  disaffection  towards  the  empire,
a  disposition  to  change  and  innovation.  Nevertheless,
the  charge  against  them,  which  Tacitus  sup-  -n^  cha,ge
poses  to  have  been  urged  by  Tigellinus,  that  contnm^ioL
they  made  men  restless  and  ambitious  med-  1*'^,  not"
dlers  with  affairs,  is  strongly  belied  by  all  wel1'
we  read  about  the  most  genuine  and  consistent  pro-
fessors of  Stoicism  at  this  period  at  Home.1  Possibly
it  is  not  intended  to  express  the  opinion  of  the  author
himself:  possibly  it  is  directed  against  the  false  pre-
tenders to  the  title,  or  the  ardent  patriots  who  failed
to  recognise  the  purely  spiritual  character  of  its  pre-
cepts. Seneca  seems,  at  all  events,  to  speak  more
accurately,  when  he  says  that  they  are  in  error  who
imagine  that  the  true  philosopher  is  contumacious,

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiv.  57.:  "  Assumpta  Stoicorum  arrogantia,  sectaquc,
qnae  turbidos  et  negotiorum  appetentes  facial."
VOL.  VI.  E  E

4:18  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LIT,

refractory,  a  despiser  of  magistrates  and  govern-
ments.1 Even  the  notion,  so  commonly  adopted,  that
the  Stoics  particularly  devoted  themselves  to  the
science  of  law,  and  played  a  great  part  in  construc-
ting the  fabric  of  Roman  jurisprudence,  is  much  mis-
taken or  exaggerated.2  The  legal  principles  which
can  be  traced  to  their  moral  maxims  are  but  few ;  and,
indeed,  the  reasoners  who  were  bound  to  maintain
the  equality  of  all  sins  could  hardly  have  interested
themselves  in  the  just  apportionment  of  punishments
to  crimes.  All  enthusiasm,  no  doubt,  is  hateful  to
tyranny.  The  enthusiasm  of  the  Stoics  was  to  be
feared,  to  be  watched,  to  be  controlled.  Yet  this
sentiment,  checked  as  it  was  by  the  force  of  circum-
stances, and  the  deadly  apathy  of  society  around  it,
passed  in  many  noble  spirits  of  the  sect  into  a  kind
of  quietism.  They  had  no  concern  with  the  republic  :
they  lived  under  the  (rods,  not  under  Caesar.3  It  be-
came their  aim  and  pride  rather  to  bear  all  things
than  to  dare  anything.  They  tried  to  persuade  the
emperor  that  he  was  a  slave,  but  they  made  no  at-
tempt to  deprive  him  of  his  sovereignty.

Political  in- XT  1J  '1  1.

uocence  of  its  j\ero  would  smile,  perhaps,  at  the  decla-
mations he  heard  on  the  splendid  text  of
the  poet :  Great  Father  of  the  Gods,  punisft,  Thou
tyrants  no  other  wise  than  thus :  let  them  behold  the
Virtue  they  have  abandoned,  and  pine  away  at  the

1  Senec.  Ep.  73. :  "  Errare  mihi  videntur  qui  existimant  philoso-
phise fideliter  deditos  contumaces  esse  ac  refractarios,  et  contemptores
magistratuum."

2  This  remark  is  opposed  to  the  common  opinion  of  the  com-
mentators on  Roman  law,  which  the  few  and  trifling  coincidences
which  Heineccius  discovers  between  the  Stoic  and  the  legal  principles
are  surely  not  sufficient  to  justify. See  Antiqu.  Rom.  i.  i.  3. That
under  the  early  empire  many  jurisconsults  were  Stoics  would  natur-
ally follow  from  the  prevalence  of  the  Stoic  philosophy  among  the
highest  order  of  minds  at  that  period.

*  So  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  himself  an  Eclectic,  could  say  in  the
true  spirit  of  the  Stoics:  f'/xol  -noKirfias  t£v  ovSf/j.ias  fj.(\fi  •  £5  y&p  inrh
rait  dtou.  Philostr.  Vit.  Apoll.  v.  35.

CH.  LIT.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  419

loss  of  her.1  On  the  whole,  then,  the  philosophers
were  little  offensive  to  the  government.  They  enjoyed
accordingly  an  impunity  which  they  might  mistake
for  deference.  It  was  known,  perhaps,  that  they  were
discredited  among  the  masses  of  the  people  by  the
worthless  character  of  the  many  hypocrites  who  as-
sumed their  name;  and  the  emperors  observed  with
complacency  the  popular  suspicion  under  which  the
best  men  laboured,  confounded  as  they  too  often  were
with  notorious  pretenders.2  To  a  late  period  in  Nero's
reign  they  remained,  as  we  have  seen,  entirely  unmo-
lested :  it  was  not  till  they  were  urged  by  patriotism
or  humanity  to  engage  in  the  intrigues  of  political
conspirators,  that  they  became  objects  themselves  of
imperial  hosiility.  Even  then,  the  proscription  fell
on  individuals  only ;  it  was  never  extended  to  the
class:  the  schools  were  never  closed,  the  teachers
were  never  silenced,  the  principles  were  never  con-
demned.3 All  this  we  shall  witness  at  a  later  period;

1  Persius,  Sat.  iii.  35. :

"  Magne  Pater  Divum,  saevos  punire  tyrannos  ....
Haud  alia  ratione  velis  ....
Virtutem  videant  intabescantque  relicta."

2  Quintil.  Procem.  Inst.  i.  "Veterum  quidem  sapientiaa  professorum
multos  et  honesta  prsecepisse,  et  ut  prseceperunt  etiam  vixisse,  facile
concesserira :  nostris  vero  temporibus  sub  hoc  nomine  maxima  in
plerisque  vitia  latuerunt:  non  enim  virtute  et  studiis  ut  haberentur
philosophi  laborabant,  sed  vultnm  et  tristitiam,  et  dissentientem  a
caeteris  habitum  pessimis  moribus  prsetendebant." Comp.  Juvenal,
ii.  3.:

"  Qui  Curios  simulant  et  Bacchanalia  vivunt  ....
Eronti  nulla  fides,"  &c.

8  Canus  Julius,  the  Stoic,  is  reputed  the  first  of  the  philosophers
who  suffered  from  the  jealousy  of  the  empire.  The  circumstances  of
his  death,  under  Caius,  are  set  forth  with  great  pomp  by  Seneca
(Tranquill.  Anim.  14.);  but  the  charges  against  him  are  not  men-
tioned. Paetus  suffered  under  Claudius,  and  many  philosophers
were  sacrificed  by  Nero,  but  always  for  political  offences.  The  no-
tion that  Nero  banished  the  philosophers  from  Rome  and  Italy,
though  commonly  asserted  (see  Imhof,  Domitianut,  p.  104.),  is  un-
questionably erroneous.  It  rests  merely  on  the  assertion  of  the  rhe-
torician Philostratus  (Vit.  Apoll.  iv.  35.),  but  this  Brucker  (ffwt
B  E  2

420  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LIT.

though  Stoicism,  we  shall  still  remark,  was  not  offi-
cially smitten,  till  it  perversely  attacked  an  indulgent
prince  and  a  liberal  monarchy.  The  pupil  of  Seneca,
at  least,  is  guiltless  of  the  persecution  of  his  master's
philosophy.  I  repeat  that  we  must  appreciate  to  its
full  extent  the  freedom  of  thought  conceded  by  the
empire,  to  understand  the  patience  of  the  Eomans
under  the  restraint  it  placed  upon  action.

But  these  considerations  apply  only  to  the  higher
classes  of  the  state,  to  which  the  exercise

The  revival  .  .

of  religion  ot  the  intellect  was  a  privilege  dearly
gu8teu.tou»  prized,  earned  by  toil,  guarded  with  iea-

great  extent F  ji.iL-UJr.Ll--  •

a  genuine lousy,  esteemed  the  badge  of  their  preemi-

movement.  , ' ,  .

nence.  Let  us  turn  now  to  the  subjects
which  interested  the  vulgar  herd  of  the  city  and  the
provinces,  and  examine  how  far  the  liberty  allowed
in  these  respects  might  console  them  for  the  losses
they  sustained,  when  they  placed  themselves  under
a  master's  control.  Little  as  even  the  multitude
believed  in  the  dogmas  of  the  national  religion,  they
were  still  devotedly  attached  to  their  ancient  rites
and  usages ;  they  required  their  rulers  to  pay  out-
ward deference  to  the  gods,  as  symbols,  at  least,
of  truth,  if  not  truth  itself,  actual  and  positive.
The  revival  of  religion  by  Augustus  was  not  mere
statecraft :  it  was  the  expression  of  a  real  want  of
the  age,  and  it  had  great  and  lasting  results.  If  it
gave  no  genuine  impulse  to  belief  in  the  mind  of
the  Komans,  it  nevertheless  undoubtedly  confirmed
them  for  ages  in  practices  which  had  all  the  signs,
and  some  perhaps  of  the  effects,  of  actual  belief.  It
reanimated  the  spirit  of  worship  and  respect  for
superior  existences.  The  current  of  men's  spiritual
affections  continued  to  set  steadily  in  the  direction  of
ritual  observance.  The  restoration,  adorning,  and

Phil.  ii.  118.)  very  reasonably  interprets  of  a  prohibition  of  magic,
to  which  Apollonius,  according  to  his  biographer,  pretended.  See
Newroan  on  Apollon.  Tyanseus,  in  the  Encycl.  Metropolitans

<3fi  L1V.  UNDER THE EMPIKK.  121

multiplication  of  temples  went  on  from  Caesar  to
Caesar.  The  established  sacrifices  were  offered,  the
appointed  auspices  observed,  year  by  year  continu-
ally. There  is  no  apparent  indication  of  a  decrease
in  the  number  of  temple-worshippers;  though  the
stream  of  devotion  might  fluctuate  towards  rival  fanes,
it  rolled  on  with  undiminished  force  and  volume.1
The  priesthood  remained  as  grave  and  honourable  a
function  as  ever  ;  the  temples  continued  to  receive
lavish  gifts  and  endowments.  Though  the  most
illustrious  of  the  oracles  fell  into  disuse,  and  the  silence
of  Apollo  at  Delphi  was  ascribed  to  the  growing  sin-
fulness  of  the  times  by  the  pious  apprehensions  of
the  multitude,  to  the  jealous  policy  of  kings  by  the
juster  observation  of  political  reasoners,  the  science
of  divination  flourished  with  unabated  luxuriance,
and  new  prophets  sprang  into  repute  to  attract  the
inquirers  who  were  repelled  from  the  voiceless  tripods
of  the  old.2  The  priests  contrived  to  retain  the

1  This  assertion  is  opposed  to  the  general  opinion,  and  writers  on
the  subject  have  repeated  one  another,  or  appealed  in  succession  to  a
common  stock  of  texts  in  confirmation  of  a  different  view.  I  believe
the  texts  in  question  are  the  following  only:  Propert.  ii.  6.  35.:

. . . . "  Velavit  aranea  fanum
Et  mala  desertos  occupat  her  ha

andiii.  13.  47.:

"  At  nunc  desertis  cessant  sacraria  lucis,

Aurum  omnea  victa  jam  pietate  colunt  ;"

both  of  which,  besides  their  rhetorical  character,  refer  to  a  period
antecedent  to  the  revival  we  are  considering.  Philostratus,  in  Vit.
Apoll.  i.  2.,  says  that  some  temples  were  refilled  by  his  philosopher
after  having  suffered  desertion;  but  this  does  not  refer  to  Koine  or
Italy.  The  passage  in  Pliny,  Ep.  v.  97.,andLucian,  Tinwn,*.,  refer,
such  as  they  are,  to  another  period.  Such  are  the  slender  autho-
rities, however,  which  seem  to  satisfy  Neauder,  Kircltenyeschiclitf.,
i.  80.;  Tzschirner,  Fall  des  Heidentkums,  \  13.;  and  Schmidt,  a  sedu-
lous collector  of  texts,  Denk  und  Glaubensfreiheit,  1  68.
*  On  the  silence  of  the  Delphic  oracle,  Juvenal,  vi.  555.  :
.  .  .  .  "  Llelphis  oracula  cessant."

422  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  L1V

submission  of  the  vulgar,  ever  willingly  persuaded,  to
their  pretended  communications  with  heaven,  by  the
fame  of  wonders  worked  by  images  or  in  temples,  and
still  more  by  the  supposed  fulfilment  of  their  au-
guries. It  was  the  interest  of  the  government  to
humour  this  submission  under  discreet  regulations,
and  of  its  more  enlightened  subjects  to  humour  the
government  itself  by  affecting  to  join  in  it,  so  that
the  populace  became  the  victim  of  a  double  conspi-
racy. The  policy  of  the  state  is  freely  disclosed  to
us  in  the  counsels  ascribed  by  Dion  to  Maecenas,
which  no  doubt  represent  in  substance  the  views  of
the  emperors  and  their  advisers  even  at  this  period.
'Be  careful,  he  said,  yourself  to  worship  the  gods  al-
ways and  everywhere,  according  to  the  customs  of
Rome,  and  compel  others  to  do  likewise ;  but  detest
and  punish  the  promoters  of  strange  religions,  not
for  the  sake  of  the  gods  only,  but  because  such  inno-
vators beguile  men  into  foreign  sentiments  and  cus-
toms, and  hence  arise  plots,  combinations,  and
clubs,  which  are  especially  dangerous  to  monarchy.1
To  maintain  the  exclusive  practice  of  the  genuine
Eoman  religion,  if  indeed  it  could  be  accurately  de-
fined, had  been  long  deemed  impossible  under  the
republic.  A  compromise  had  been  effected  by  grant-
ing toleration,  sometimes  by  special  decree,  as  in  the

Lucan  gives  one  reason  which  might  be  assigned  for  it:  v.  113. :

"  Postquam  reges  timuere  futura
Et  Superos  vetuere  loqui."

And  again,  140. :

"  Seu  Paean,  solitus  templis  arcere  nocentes,
Ora  quibus  solvat  nostro  non  invenit  aevo."

Comp.  Plutarch,  de  Defectu  Oraculorum,  5.  foil.  Lucian,  indeed,  at
a  somewhat  later  period,  seems  to  refer  to  Delphi  as  still  prophetic'
f)  iJ/euSets  elalv  ol  vvv  eKiriirTovrfS  tKei  xprja-fjiot. — Alexander,  43.  But
possibly  the  work  is  not  genuine.

1  Dion,  lii.  36.  Comp.  Cic.  de  Leg.  ii.  8.:  "  Separatim  nemo  ha-
hessit  deos,  neve  novos,  sivc  advenas,  iiisi  publicc  udscitos,  privatim
coluuto."

CH.  Utv.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  423

sase  of  the  Jews,  to  certain  foreign  cults  established
in  their  own  countries,  which  it  seemed  expedient  to
tolerate,  or  which  had  taken  too  deep  root  in  Eome
to  be  really  extirpated.  Any  other  practices  or  be-
lief, however,  that  made  their  way  into  the  city  from
abroad,  must  do  so  at  their  peril.  They  were  liable
at  any  moment  to  legal  animadversion,  and  it  re-
quired the  enactment  of  no  new,  the  rescinding  of
no  old  law,  to  expose  them  to  proscription,  whenever
the  jealousy  of  the  monarchy,  more  sensitive  than
the  Free  State,  was  awakened  against  them.1

The  policy  of  Augustus,  accordingly,  in  the  mat-
ter of  religion,  was  a  more  systematic  en-
forcement of  the  principles  of  the  repub-  tuTiiomL
lie,  namely,  to  endow  the  state  religion  with  reiS  to
emoluments  and  honours,  to  tolerate  cer-  ituionfof
tain  accredited  foreign  cults,  but  to  forbid  syriar"-

i  n j.  j  i  spectively.

and  repress  all  strange  and  novel  usages.
It  was  the  attempt,  in  short,  to  cast  the  religious
sentiments  of  the  age  in  a  mould,  once  for  all,  from
which  there  should  be  no  escape  in  the  future.2  The
moment  might  appear  well  chosen  for  such  an  at-
tempt, when  in  the  prevailing  fusion  of  nations  and
opinions,  and  the  wide-spread  disappointment  of
moral  and  religious  speculations,  men  seemed  con-
tent to  rest  from  all  further  experiment  in  a  decently

1  Such  was  the  distinction  between  the  religiones  licitae  and  illi-
citffi. Tertullian,  Apol.  4.  21.;  Minucius  Felix,  Octav.  8. Judaism
was  licensed,  though  occasionally  the  licence  was  withdrawn,  and  its
professors  expelled  from  Rome  by  a  special  decree. Christianity,  as
we  shall  see,  was  unlicensed. Ic  had  no  legal  standing  in  Rome,
and,  not  being  a  national  religion,  I  presume  it  had  no  legal  stand-
ing anywhere. I  merely  allude  to  this  subject  here  to  mark  the  dis-
tinction.

2  It  may  be  worth  while  to  remind  the  reader  of  the  three  const!
tuent  elements  of  the  Roman  religion:  1.  the  service  of  the  old  Sa-
bine  or  Italian  divinities;  2.  the  aruspicinal  discipline,  &c.,  derived
principally  from  Etruria;  3.  the  cult  of  certain  foreign  deities  intro-
duced generally  by  the  advice  of  special  oracles  (publice  ascitos),
such  as  those  of  Ceres,  JEsculapius,  and  Cybele.

424  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  L1V

veiled  atheism  or  pantheism.  Such  an  attempt  seems
to  have  succeeded  for  once  in  the  history  of  China ;
but  it  was  singularly  ill-timed,  as  became  speedily
apparent,  in  the  age  and  clime  which  witnessed  the
origin  of  Christianity.  And,  indeed,  not  yet  to  ad-
vert to  the  phenomenon  of  the  Christian  revelation,
the  spiritual  activity  of  the  human  mind  throughout
the  East,  at  this  moment,  was  such  as  to  defy  the
control  of  the  emperor's  or  the  praetor's  edicts.  The
ideas  of  Druidism,  the  religion  of  the  West,  were  al-
most powerless.  In  Eome  they  collapsed  instan-
taneously ;  in  the  cities  of  Graul  they  yielded  without
a  struggle  to  Eoman  forms  and  nomenclature  ;  it  was
only  in  the  deep  woods  and  silent  plains  that  they
retained  a  spark  of  vitality.  Not  so  the  Syrian
elemental-worship ;  not  so  the  moral  convictions  of
Judaism  and  Tsabaism.  The  crowds  which  nocked
to  Eome  from  the  eastern  shores  of  the  Mediter-
ranean brought  with  them  practices  and  prejudices
hardly  worthy,  perhaps,  to  be  called  beliefs,  which
disdained  amalgamation  with  Italian  paganism,  and
however  distorted  they  might  be  from  their  original
types,  acknowledged  no  constraining  influence  from
the  opinions  and  usages  around  them.  The  stronger
sentiment,  as  usual,  attracted  and  controlled  the
weaker.  Jupiter  had  conquered  Hesus  and  Taranis,
but  he  was  a  child  in  the  hands  of  Mithras  and  Mel-
earth.  The  broader  forms  of  the  Syrian  religion,  as
established  in  its  native  countries,  were  tolerated  in
Eome;  and  from  toleration  they  advanced  without
pause  or  hesitation  on  a  career  of  active  proselytism.
The  symbolic  rites  of  Cybele  and  Astarte  invaded  the
streets  and  the  forum,  and  carried  off  crowds  of  wor-
shippers from  the  shrines  of  Juno  and  Diana.  But
they  too  were  tolerant  in  their  turn,  and  demanded
no  exclusive  devotion  from  their  converts  :  the  idle-
ness and  wealth  of  Eome  could  afford  time  and  means
for  the  celebration  of  many  new  ceremonies  in  addi-

CH.  uv.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  425

tioii  to  tiie  simple  performance  of  divine  service
which  its  own  religion  prescribed.1  They  offered,
and  herein  was  the  secret  of  their  success,  a  mental
excitement  without  the  fatigue  and  agitation  of  argu-
ment. In  philosophy  no  step  could  be  taken  without
some  use  of  the  reasoning  powers ;  every  man  held
his  opinions  in  defiance  of  all  opponents ;  even  the
schools  of  oratory  as  well  as  of  philosophy  had  their
sects,  their  masters,  their  maxims,  and  their  disputa-
tions. The  noble  Koman,  indeed,  for  the  most  part
entertained  a  professional  sophist  to  think  and  argue
for  him :  nevertheless  it  was  not  till  he  abandoned
his  philosophy  for  his  religion  that  he  was  completely
relieved  from  intellectual  toil  and  discipline;  and
doubtless  the  outward  observance  of  ritual  forms  was
in  a  great  degree  the  refuge  to  which  he  fled  from
the  painful  questions  of  morals  and  metaphysics.
The  curious  and  sometimes  awful  rites  of  initiation,
the  tricks  of  the  magicians,  the  pretended  virtues  of
charms  and  amulets,  the  riddles  of  emblematical
idolatry,  enshrined  in  the  form  of  brutes  or  monsters
half-brute  half-human,  with  which  the  superstitions
of  the  East  abounded,  amused  the  languid  interests
of  the  voluptuary  who,  as  has  been  well  remarked,
had  neither  the  energy  for  a  moral  belief,  nor  the
boldness  requisite  for  a  logical  scepticism.2

While  the  men's  minds  were  still  too  hardy  to  sub-
mit to  these  voluptuous  excitements,  the  The  Roman
women  had  thrown  themselves  into  them  SSTtedbTtte
with  all  the  passionate  self-abandonment  of  S^molHe.  of
their weaker natures. Uninstructed,  ill-  c^*""

1  "  Rem  divinam  facere,"  to  perform  holy  rites,  consisted  in  the
occasional  sacrifice,  the  daily  burning  of  incense  and  casting  of  salt
and  flour  into  the  flame,  the  one  in  the  temples,  the  other  on  the
domestic  hearth  or  altar.  The  more  public  solemnities,  such  as
processions,  hymns,  and  musical  services,  together  with  the  fasts  and
vigils  appropriated  to  foreign  divinities,  were  generally  less  familiar
to  the  Roman  ritual.

-  Such  is  nearly  the  expression  of  De  Broglie  in  speaking  on  this
subject,  in  his  I'EgUae  et  {'Empire,  i.  4'J

426  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  en.  uv.

treated,  half-employed,  yet  vain  of  the  outward  show
of  deference  the  laws  and  habits  of  the  age  continued
to  accord  them,  the  Koman  matrons  followed  these
frivolous  novelties  with  a  fervour  which  scandalized
their  supercilious  lords.  They  rushed  from  the  sordid
constraint  of  their  lives  at  home  to  the  licentious  free-
dom of  the  veiled  orgy  and  masquerading  procession.
In  them  they  sought  too  for  spiritual  consolation,  and
they  found,  at  least,  an  occupation  and  an  interest.1
And  beyond  this  their  imaginations  were  kindled  with
ideas  of  communion  with  the  Deity,  and  exaltation
above  earthly  things,  which  made  them  the  dupes  of
charlatans,  the  prey  of  ribald  intriguers.  The  story
of  the  unscrupulous  gallant  who  gained  possession  of
his  mistress  by  personating  the  god  Anubis  with  the
connivance  and  aid  of  the  priests,  is  one  instance
recorded,  out  of  many,  no  doubt,  which  have  passed
into  oblivion,  of  the  crimes  and  injuries  which  vexed
the  souls  of  the  Roman  husbands.2  Augustus  had
already  banished  the  Egyptian  rites  from  Rome;  but
they  triumphed  over  his  decrees.  Tiberius  repeated
the  same  experiment  on  the  submission  of  their  de-
votees ;  he  caused  the  temples  of  Isis  to  be  razed,  and
even,  it  is  said,  executed  her  priests.3  But  the  men

1  Strabo  may  have  pointed  his  general  remark  on  the  superior  de-
votion of  the  female  sex  from  personal  observation :  Siirames  y&p  TTJS
5eLfft5a.i/j.ovlas  apxriyobs  olomai  T&J  yvvcuicas' avrai  5^  Kal  rods  &vfipas
•npoKaKovvTCii  irpbs  -rcks eirl  ir\(ov  Btpairftas  ruv  6tuv,  teal loprcis,  Kal
•jroTviaffiwiis' a-n&viov  5'  fl  ris  avrjp  icaff  avrbv  £<ai>  e6picrKtrai  roioZ-ros.
— vii.  3.  p.  297. See  Lipsius  on  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  32.

2  Joseph.  Anliq.  xviii.  3. A  Eoman  knight,  Decius  Mundus,  had
tried  in  vain  to  seduce  Paulina  by  presents  and  flatteries. One  of
his  female  slaves  promised  to  gain  him  the  object  of  his  passion,  and
bribed  the  priests  of  Isis,  whom  Paulina  worshipped. The  priests
assure  the  devotee  that  Anubis  had  promised  to  appear  to  her. She
hastens  delighted  to  the  temple;  the  doors  are  closed,  the  lights  ex-
tinguished, the  god  reveals  himself  and  demands  favours  which  she
dares  not  deny. Mundus  boasts  that  he  has  enjoyed  her  under  the
semblance  of  the  god. She  discloses  the  injury  to  her  husband,
who  complains  to  the  emperor  Tiberius. Mundus  is  banished,  the
priests  crucified,  the  temple  overthrown.

3  The  cults  of  Egypt,  with  their  allegorical  monsters  and  hideous

CH.  LIV.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  427

were now  following  in  the train of  the women.

The  effeminacy  of  the  times  involved  both

sexes  in  the  same  vortex  of  superstition ;  £ngcthpre-

the  Nile-Grods  continued  to  fascinate  their  the  men

ail  over
he  m

also.

votaries  with  charms  which  could  not
be  dissolved;  the  idol  of  the  blear-eyed  Egyptian
still  brandished  the  terrors  of  her  cymbal,  and  threat-
ened with  blindness  the  perjurer  of  the  forum.1  The
rites  of  the  Syrian  Goddess,  if  less  dangerous  than
the  Isiac  to  morals  and  less  insulting  to  the  majesty
of  the  Eoman  household,  were  perhaps  even  more
degrading.  They  were  more  attractive,  it  would
seem,  to  the  lower  classes  than  to  the  patrician  rulers
of  the  state,  and  thereby  escaped  the  same  animad-
version. The  priests  of  Astarte  roamed  from  village
to  village,  carrying  their  sacred  image  on  an  ass's
back,  and  at  every  halt  attracted  the  gaping  rustics
with  the  strains  of  their  flutes,  danced  in  a  circle
round  the  goddess  with  their  hair  dripping  with  un-
guents, cut  themselves  with  knives  and  swords,  and
dashed  their  own  blood  around  them,  handing  finally
a  cap  from  rank  to  rank  for  the  pence,  figs,  or  crusts
of  the  admiring  spectators.2  The  obscene  mutilation
of  the  priests  of  Cybele  excited  still  more  astonish-
ment, mingled,  no  doubt,  with  superstitious  terror ;
but  though,  as  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,  she  was
honoured  by  the  Roman  matrons  with  the  solemn
feast  of  the  Megalesia,  the  frantic  asceticism  of  her

symbols,  were  peculiarly  hateful  to  the  Komans,  who  regarded  such
superstitions  as  abnormal.  But  political  jealousy  contributed  to  this
exceptional  treatment,  for  they  do  not  seem  to  have  been  always  ex-
cluded from  the  religiones  licitce,  or  licensed  observances.

1  Juvenal,  xiii.  93.:

"Decernat  quodcunque  volet  de  corpore  nostro
Isis,  et  irato  feriat  mea  lamina  sistro."

2  Lacian,  Lucius,  32.  Apuleius,  Metamorph.  viii.  in  fin.,  describes
these  proceedings  with  his  usual  animation. His  scene  is  laid  be-
yond the  Adriatic,  yet  there  seems  no  reason  to  doubt  that  these
ribaldries  were  imported  into  Italy.

428  HISTORY OF THE KOMANS  CH.  LIV

Eastern  devotees  found  probably  no  imitators  among
the  manlier  sons  of  Italy.

The  apologists  for  polytheism  had  not  yet  pro-
claimed their  theory  that  all  the  various

The  time  , /.  ,.  IT

arrived  for gods  or  various  nations  were  only  diverse

appreeiat-  .  p  .  i  -r-i  ,  • i  TT •

ing  the  idea representations  01  the  same  Essential  Unity.

oftheDi-  m* , ,  „ ,  ,  J

vine  unity, They  had  gone  no  further  than  to  counte-

theessen-  ,  T,. • ,  ,•  ? r\

tiai  dogma nance  the  politic  interpretations  of  Caesar

of  Judaism.

and  Augustus,  who  announced  to  their
Graulish  subjects  that  Belenus  and  Teutates  were
merely  other  names  for  Apollo  and  Mercury.  Never-
theless, amidst  the  distraction  of  the  religious  senti-
ment between  its  thousands  of  devotional  objects,  the
time  had  come  for  some  faint  and  timid  appreciation
of  the  idea  of  the  Divine  Unity  presented  by  the
nobler  theology  of  the  Jews.  The  Jewish  religion
had  come  first  under  the  close  observation  of  the
Romans  after  the  conquest  of  Palestine  by  Pompeius.
Some  thousands  of  the  inhabitants  had  been  carried
off  into  slavery,  and  of  these  a  large  proportion,  re-
served perhaps  to  grace  the  conqueror's  triumph,  had
been  sold  in  the  Roman  markets.  Several  princes  ot
the  nation  had  been  retained  as  hostages ;  and  these
personages,  who  were  treated  with  great  show  of
courtesy,  were  allowed,  no  doubt,  the  attendance  of
clients  of  their  own  race.  The  way  to  the  capital
of  the  world  was  opened,  and  the  Jews  continued  to
flock  thither  of  their  own  accord :  they  were  impelled
by  their  thirst  of  lucre  and  their  restless  industry :
yet  they  possessed,  as  far  as  we  know,  no  special  arts
or  aptitude,  like  the  Greeks  or  Egyptians,  for  making
themselves  necessary  or  acceptable  visitors  at  the
doors  of  the  native  Italians.  Much  did  the  Romans
marvel  at  the  swarms  of  these  uncouth  adventurers,
with  their  deeply  marked  physiognomy,  their  strong
national  feelings,  their  far-reaching  reminiscences  of
past  glory,  their  proud  anticipation  of  a  more  splen-
did future,  their  exclusive  usages,  their  vacant  fanes,

CH.  uv.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  429

their  incommunicable  Deity.  They  thronged  together
in  particular  quarters  of  the  city,  which  they  almost
made  their  own } :  their  numbers  soon  amounted  to
many. thousands,  and  the  turbulence  which  was  early
remarked  as  characteristic  of  them,  caused  the  senate
to  regard  them  with  jealousy,  its  orators  to  denounce
them  as  dangerous  subjects.  But  they  were  fortunate
in  finding  patrons,  first  in  Caesar  and  after-
wards in  Augustus,  who  secured  them  the  inBomT
free  exercise  of  religion,  countenanced  their  by  the'fUt
assemblies,  made  gifts  to  their  temple,  and
even  admitted  them  along  with  the  citizens  of  the
republic  to  a  share  in  the  largesses  of  corn.2  If  the
distribution  took  place  on  their  Sabbath,  the  Jews
were  allowed  to  apply  for  their  share  on  the  day  fol-
lowing. The  mysteriousness  of  their  belief,  or  rather,
perhaps,  the  earnestness  of  its  devotees,  exercised  an
extraordinary  influence  on  the  Roman  mind.  Amidst
many  public  expressions  of  hatred  and  disgust,  knights
and  senators  still  turned  towards  it  with  curiosity,  in-
terest, and  awe.  In  Palestine  rude  centurions  lowered
their  ensigns  before  its  symbols,  or  built  synagogues
for  its  worshippers.  In  Rome  the  name  of  its  first  ex-
pounder was  held  in  honour ;  its  sacred  books  were
not  unknown,  the  glowing  imagery  of  their  poetry  was
studied  and  reproduced.  Men  and  women,  the  latter
doubtless  the  most  numerously,  crowded  its  place
of  meeting,  observed  its  holy  days,  and  respected
its  antique  traditions.  Many,  it  would  seem,  were

1  Philo,  -Leg.  ad  Cai. p.  1014.:  TV  irtpav  rov  Ttfifptcas  iroraiJLOv
tieyd\i)i>  TTJS  'PcfyxTjs airoroytiV .  .  . KarexofiffTlf  Kdl  o'iKOVfjLfvriv  irpbs
'lovSaltev. Most  of  them,  it  is  added,  were  captives  who  had  been
enfranchised,  and  had  become  Roman  citi/ens.

2  Philo,  Leg.  ad  Cai.  p.  1015. This  is  an  important  fact  for  the
consideration  of  those  who  estimate  the  number  of  the  citizens  from
the  number  of  these  recipients  of  corn. According  to  Josepnus, —
but  allowance  must  be  made  for  his  spirit  of  exaggeration, — no  less
than  8000  Jews  resident  in  Rome  joined  on  one  occasion  in  a  peti-
tion to  Augustus. Joseph.  Anlig.  xvii.  11.  1.

130  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LTV

admitted  to  some  partial  communion  with  the  Jewish

worshippers :  though  we  do  not  hear  of  their

beco"m™ submitting  to  the  initiatory  rites,  or  to  the

fashionable  ,.  -, ,•  t  U  1 IT J •

among  the  peculiar  abstinences  01  national  Judaism.
The  foreigner  was  still  reserved  in  impart-
ing to  these  converts  the  secrets  of  his  faith ;  and
the  best  informed  of  the  Eomans  continued,  to  a  late
period,  possessed  with  the  notion  that  he  either  had
no  Grod  at  all,  or  adored  him  under  a  vile  and  bestia]
symbol,  or  possibly  did  not  really  know  what  he  be-
lieved or  wherefore.1

This dallying  with Judaism was a fashionable
weakness:  it  furnished  interest  or  excite-
ment  to  the  dissipated  idlers  to  whom  Ovid
en  of addressed  his meretricious poetry.2 To

the  palace.  ,  .  i i  i j2 j.

such  persons  it  was  probably  first  recom-
mended through  the  medium  of  the  slaves  from
Palestine  who  swarmed  in  patrician  households.  The
emperor's  palace  itself  seems  to  have  been  a  nursery
of  Jewish  usages  and  opinions.  The  Columbaria  of
Claudius,  recently  discovered,  reveal  a  number  of
Hebrew  names  among  the  imperial  freedmen ;  and,
what  is  still  more  remarkable,  many  are  the  same
names,  albeit  Greek  and  not  Hebrew,  which  occur
in  the  salutations  of  St.  Paul  to  his  fellow-country-
men  in  the  capital.3  Assuredly  there  were  in  Ccesar's

1  Comp.  Juvenal,  xiv.  97.: "Nil  praeter  nubes  et  coeli  numen
adorant." Lucan,  Phars.  ii.  592. :  "  Et  dedita  sacris  Incerti  Judsea
Dei." Seneca,  quoted  by  S.  Augustin,  de  Civ.  Dei,  vi.  11.:  "  Major
pars  populi  facit  quod  cur  facial  ignorat." For  the  symbol,  the  ass's
head,  see  Tac.  Hist.  v.  4.

2  Ovid,  Art.  Amand.  i.  416.;  Rem.  Amor.  220.;  Tibull.  i.  3.  18.

8 1  refer  to  Mr.  Lightfoot's  account  of  the  inscriptions  in  certain
Columbaria  recently  discovered  at  Rome,  Journal  of  Class.  Philol.
No.  X.  p.  57-,  from  Henzen's  supplement  to  Orelli's  Collection.
These  were  receptacles  for  the  ashes  of  slaves  and  freedmen  of
the  imperial  family.  Some  of  the  names,  as  Hermas  and  Nereis,  are
connected  with  the  Claudian  gens;  others,  as  Tryphaena  and  Try-
phera,  with  the  Valerian,  that  of  Messalina ;  others,  as  Crescens,
Philetus,  Hymena3us,  are  mentioned  as  Caesar's  freedmen;  others
again,  viz.  Philolo'gus  and  Ampliatus  (Amplias),  occur  indepen-

CH.  LT*  DNDER THE EMPIRE.  431

twusehold  both  slaves  and  freedmen  of  every  race  and
nation  subject  to  Kome:  but  that  the  connexion  be-
tween it  and  Judea  should  be  more  than  usually  close,
might  be  expected  from  the  favour  in  which  the  Jews
were  held  by  the  first  emperors,  and  from  the  inti-
macy of  the  imperial  family  with  so  many  Jewish
princes  detained  within  the  precincts  of  the  palace.
Judea,  under  the  sway  of  the  procurators,  was  governed
directly  from  the  emperor's  own  chamber  ;  in  one  in-
stance a  freedman  of  the  emperor  administered  its
affairs,  as  his  master's  private  property.1  When  we
read  in  the  Jewish  historian  that  Poppsea,  the  mur-
deress and  adulteress,  was  a  devout  woman,  we  must
suppose  that  she  was  regarded  as  a  patroness  by  the
Jewish  clients  of  Nero's  household ;  in  moments  of
threatened  persecution  she  may  have  befriended  them,
nor  is  it  improbable  that  she  admired  their  usages,
humoured  their  prejudices,  and  partook  of  the  fashion-
able inclination  to  join  in  their  ceremonies.2

The  favour  in  which  the  Jews  were  held  by  the
emperor  was  indeed  precarious. Beyond  Turbuienct
the  walls  of  the  palace,,  and  of  other  noble  atBomeew6
mansions, they were, as we have said,  vernment
generally  disliked ;  the  apprehension  which  ffi^y  of
their  unquiet  attitude  at  home  continued  thera-
more  and  more  to  inspire,  penetrated  to  the  centre
of  the  Eoman  power,  and  even  at  Rome  every  out-
break of  sullen  fierceness  among  them  was  regarded
as  a  symptom  of  national  disaffection. They  were
accused  not  of  turbulence  only,  but  of  corrupting  the

dently.  Among  them  are  some  names  apparently  Jewish,  as
Baricha,  Zabda,  Achiba,  Giddo,  Sabbatis,  all  Valerii.  One  at  least,
Sentia  Renata,  seems  to  bespeak  a  Christian  baptism.  Comp.
Romans,  c.  xvi.

1  Felix,  the  favourite  of  Claudius  and  Nero,  was  procurator  of
Judea,  and  married  to  Drusilla,  the  daughter  of  Agrippa. Tac.
Hist.  v.  9.

2  Joseph.  Antiq.  xviii. 7.  11. The  dancer  Apaturius,  Popprsa's
favourite,  was  a  Jew.

432  HISTORY  OF  THE ROMANS  rn.  wrr.

minds  of  women  ;  and  when,  under  Tiberius,  an
effort,  as  we  have  seen,  was  made  by  the  government
to  check  the  growing  relaxation  of  female  manners,
the  Jews  were  marked  out  for  proscription  together
with  the  Egyptians.  The  priests  of  Isis  had  been
convicted  of  flagrant  immorality,  and  there  was  a
presumed  connexion,  of  origin  if  not  of  character,
between  her  rites  and  those  of  the  Jewish  divinity.1
Besides  the  disaffection  and  the  licentiousness  imputed
to  them,  they  disturbed  the  peace  of  the  city ;  for
the  Jews  and  Egyptians  renewed  in  Eome  the  per-
petual quarrel  of  their  nations  in  Alexandria,  till  they
provoked  the  police  of  the  streets  to  crush  them  both
together.  The  rites  of  both  people  were  interdicted,
and  four  thousand  of  the  free  descendants  of  Jewish
slaves  and  captives  were  transported  at  once  to  Sar-
dinia, while  all  the  Jews  at  Eome  of  free  origin  were
required  to  quit  the  shores  of  Italy,  or  abjure  their
profane  superstition?  It  would  seem,  however,  that
the  latter  part,  at  least,  of  this  severe  edict  was  not
strictly  executed.  The  Jews  bowed  to  the  storm,  con-
formed perhaps  for  a  time,  but  soon  returned  to  their
old  quarters  and  renewed  their  old  practices.  Those
who  were  attached  to  the  magnates  of  the  city  found,
no  doubt,  powerful  protectors.  They  celebrated  the
birthday  of  their  deceased  king,  and  adored  him  as  a
god  with  pomp  and  fervour,  to  avert  perhaps  the

1  The  ancient  emigration  of  the  Jews  from  Egypt  was  known,
though  under  strange  disfigurements,  to  the  Romans  (Tac.  Hist.
v.  3.);  the  influence  of  the  Jewish  race  in  Alexandria  was  also  no-
torious: and  the  Jews  in  Koine  spoke  probably  the  same  dialect  of
Greek as  their  brethren  in  Egypt. We  may  presume,  moreover,
that  they  had  imbibed  from  the  Alexandrians,  or  imparted  to  them,
many  religious  as  well  as  social  usages. The  linen  robes  and  fillets
common  to  the  priesthoods  both  of  Jerusalem  and  Alexandria  seemed
to  connect  them  with  one  another,  and  were  a  conspicuous  point  of
difference  between  them  and  the  priesthoods  of  Greece  and  Kome.
Thus  Lucan,  with  a  distinctive  epithet,  "  Linigerum  placidis  com-
pellat Achorea  dictis,"  x.  175.

2  Tac.  Ann.  ii.  85.;  Suet.  776.  36.;  Joseph.  Antiq.  xviii.  3.  5.  Sc<$
Tot.  v.,  chapter  xliv.

CH.  UT.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  433

jealousy  of  the  government,  to  which  the  worship  of
Jehovah  seemed  a  bond  of  more  dangerous  sym-
pathy.1

Thus  at  Borne,  as  well  as  in  their  own  country,  the
Jewish  people  were  divided  into  two  classes
or  factions,  of  which  the  one  retained  the  at  Komi,8
zeal  and  cherished  the  aspirations  of  its  ommm
national  heroes,  the  other,  more  courtly  inu>  two ei
and  discreet,  yielded  to  the  moral  influence
of  the  conquerors,  and  was  content  to  exchange  the
subjection  of  its  native  land  for  its  own  personal  ad-
vantage. While  the  slaves  of  the  Palatine  acquiesced
with  a  complacent  smile  in  their  gilded  servitude,  the
artificers  and  chapmen  of  the  Transtiberine,  and  the
pedlars  of  the  Egerian  valley,  were  agitated  year  by
year  with  rumours  of  new  Messiahs  appearing  in  the
streets  of  Jerusalem  or  on  the  slopes  of  the  wilder-
ness, and  drawing  after  them  excited  multitudes,  till
their  career  was  rudely  intercepted  by  the  Roman
sword.  The  direct  establishment  of  the  Roman  power
in  Palestine  by  Claudius,  following  so  soon  upon  the
brutal  attack  on  the  Jewish  faith  by  Caius,  seems  to
have  driven  this  frantic  populace  of  Judea  to  a  suc-
cession of  desperate  outbreaks.  Among  the  Jewish
sojourners  in  foreign  cities,  connected  as  they  were
by  constant  intercourse  with  their  native  land,  the
same  restless  feeling  was  speedily  manifested.  It  is
thus  that  we  can  best  explain  the  hasty  notice  of
Suetonius,  when  he  states  that  Claudius  once  more
expelled  the  Jews  from  Rome,  on  account  of  their
repeated  riots  at  the  instigation  of  a  certain  Chres-

1  This  is  the  interpretation  which Salvador,  I  think  justly,  puts
upon  the  lines  of  Pcrsius,  Sat.  v.  180.:

"At  cum

Herodis  venere  dies,  unctaque  fenestra
Dispositae  ptnguem  nebulam  vomuere  lucernes  .  .  .
Labra  moves  tacitus,  recutitaque  Sabbata  palles."

Herod  Agrippa  was  dead  some  years  before  these  lines  were  written:
the  homage  or  worship  was  paid  to  his  memory.
VOL.  VI.  F F

434  HISTORY OF TTTE flOMANS  en.  irv.

tus.1  This  name,  as  is  well  known,  was  a  form  of  the
title  Christus,  the  anointed  Messiah,  familiar  to  the
Romans  and  derived  from  the  Hellenistic  Jews  them-
selves, and  was  the  watchword,  no  doubt,  of  the  dis-
turbers of  peace  in  the  city,  who  looked,  at  every
fresh  arrival  of  exciting  news  from  home,  for  a  divine
manifestation  in  favour  of  the  kingdom  of  Jehovah.2
The  scarcity  which  befell  the  city  as  well  as  the  pro-
vinces at  this  period  might  furnish  a  further  motive
for  an  act  of  prudential  severity.  It  was  manifestly
expedient  to  remove  from  the  midst  of  the  needy
populace  of  the  forum  the  most  fierce  and  turbulent
of  their  fellow-subjects.  With  the  return  of  better
times  the  Jews  returned  also;  but  meanwhile  the
proscription  would  again  have  been  partial  only  ;  the
Herodians,  under  the  shelter  of  noble  houses,  would
shrink  from  the  general  persecution,  and  repudiate,
no  doubt,  with  earnest  protestations,  the  crimes  and
follies  of  the  zealots.

Not  that  the  luxurious  dependants  of  the  Roman
nobles  were  themselves  unmoved  amidst  the
pride  o?  the  universal  ferment  of  Jewish  opinion. They
ifreedmen were  vain  of  their  own  position,  and  of  the
influence  they  had  attained  over  their  mas-
ters ;  they  were  proud  of  the  number  of  fellow-slaves
or  freedmen,  for  the  most  part  refined  and  intelligent
Greeks,  who  sate  at  their  feet  to  hear  their  ancient

1  Suet.  Claud.  25.:  "  Judaeos  impulsore  Chresto  assidue  tumnltn-
antes  Roma  expulit." Tertullian  (Apol.  3.)  and  Lactantius  (Intt.
i.  4.  7.,  iv.  7.  5.)  explain  this  word  as  a  metonym  for  Christ,  signify-
ing just  or  good.

2  We  know  the  time  and  place  where  the  believers  in  Jesus  were
first  called  Christians  (Acts,  xi.  26.  XPW""^0",  "received  the  title,
already  popularly  known,  of  Christians");  but  this  does  not  show
that  the  followers  of  false  Christs  had  not  received  the  name  before,
or  that  the  name  was  not  commonly  given  to  both  by  the  heathens
without  discrimination. For  the  false  Christs,  see  the  commentators
on  S.  Matth.  xxiv.  24.  il/evSoxpi'fToi,  and  Joseph.  Antiq.  xviii.  1.  1.
on  Judas  the  Ganlonite,  and  xx.  5.  1.  on  Theudas. Comp  for  the
Jewish  view  of  the  subject,  Salvador,  Domin.  Horn,  en  Judfa,  i.  435.

CT1.  1ST.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  435

lore,  and  drank  in  with  warmed  imaginations  the
wonders  of  the  Law,  and  the  splendid  promises  of
the  Prophets.  God,  they  believed,  still  spake  by  their
mouths  ;  exiles  and  outcasts  as  they  were,  they  were
still  the  depositaries  of  His  oracles  ;  in  the  power  of
their  own  eloquence  they  felt  the  yet  unexhausted
power  of  a  living  faith  in  Jehovah.  They  were  con-
vinced that  there  was  still  a  future  before  them,  a
future  of  glory  and  spiritual  empire ;  though  they
sought  in  vain  to  penetrate  the  designs  of  Provi-
dence, and  scan  the  process  through  which  it  was  to
be  developed.  They  too  had  heard  of  a  Christ  here
and  a  Christ  there ;  but  they  had  no  hope  of  a  tem-
poral deliverance,  and  the  destruction  of  each  pre-
tended Messiah  was  a  relief  to  them  rather  than  a
disappointment.  It  was  to  minds  thus  prepared  that
the  message  of  Jesus,  the  true  Christ,  the  spiritual
king  of  the  Jews,  was  announced.  Among  the  many
deliverers  who  had  risen  and  fallen,  one  alone,  it  was
declared,  had  risen  again :  crucified,  dead  and  buried,
He  had  been  raised  from  the  grave  by  the  hand  of
the  Almighty.

On  the  first  succeeding  Pentecost  after  this  awful
fact  was reported to have  occurred,  the  Reception  of
doctrines  and  pretensions  of  the  disciples  ammguST
of  this  risen  Jesus  had  been  propounded  to  £"8th"ewg
a  concourse of  Jews and proselytes,  as-  p™861?169-
sembled  at  Jerusalem  from  all  quarters  of  the  world.
Sojourners  at  Rome  had  returned  there  full  of  the
solemn  tidings,  and from that  time the  peculiar
character  of  the  new  revelation,  as  the  announcement
of  a  spiritual,  not  a  temporal  deliverance,  had  been
circulated  from  mouth  to  mouth  among  the  Jews  of
the  capital. By  some  among  them  such  a  view,  as
we  have  seen,  might  be entertained with favour-
though  by  others  it  would  be  abhorred  as  treason  to
the  natiorial  cause. At  first,  however,  there  would
be  no  question  in  any  quarter,  of  the  abandonment

436  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Liv,

of  ancient  rites  and  usages.  If  a  few  more  ardent
or  more  tender  spirits  were  at  once  captivated  by  the
first  shadowing  forth  of  true  Christian  liberty,  they
would  not  dream  as  yet  of  seceding  from  the  rest  on
matters  of  religious  discipline.  They  would  join  with
their  brethren  in  urging  upon  their  foreign  proselytes
that  entire  submission  to  the  Hebrew  law  which  was
demanded,  not  often  successfully,  by  the  strictest
adherents  of  the  old  belief.  Again,  year  by  year,
visitors  from  this  Jewish  society  would  arrive  at
Jerusalem,  and  from  them  the  Christian  Church,  now
beginning  to  take  a  specific  form  in  the  place  of  its
origin,  would  learn  that  a  small  knot  of  inquirers  in
the  distant  capital  had  accepted  their  announcement
of  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus,  and  were  ripe  for  further
instruction  in  the  mysteries  of  his  faith.  At  last,  in
the  fulness  of  time,  the  greatest  of  their  teachers,  Paul,
the  eloquent  and  the  learned,  addressed  this  little
flock  in  a  letter  of  spiritual  admonition,  which  laid,
in  fact,  the  real  foundation  of  Christianity  in  Eome.
special  aP-  Now,  supposing  the  people  to  whom  this  mis-
to!them  of  s^ve  was  directed  to  be,  as  I  have  here  repre-
teac]Mng''in  sented  them,  Jews  and  Greeks,  retainers  of
tottepi8tle  aristocratic  households,  clients,  for  instance,
Romans.  Qf  foe  great  Narcissus  and  even  of  the  em-
peror himself,  to  none  could  the  warning  with  which
it  commences,  of  the  fearful  depths  of  vice  to  which
heathenism  had  fallen,  have  been  more  peculiarly
appropriate.  On  none  could  the  general  scope  of  its
argument,  that  the  Grospel  was  given  to  the  Jews
first,  the  teachers,  and  next  to  the  Greeks,  the  prose-
lytes, of  the  Roman  synagogue,  tell  with  greater
effect.  That  circumcision  was  not  essential,  that
the  works  of  the  law  were  ineffectual,  that  faith  and
grace  are  the  foundations  of  a  true  Christian  calling,
— such  would  be  the  topics  uppermost  in  the  mind
of  a  preacher  to  thoughtful  and  perplexed  believers,
anxious  to  conform  to  the  old  ways  in  all  things,  but

CH Liv.  U2JDER THE EMPIRE.  437

unable  to  enforce  conformity  upon  their  foreign
adherents.  And  lastly,  the  exhortation  to  remain
subject  to  the  higher  powers  would  speak  with  em-
phasis to  that  class  among  the  Jews  who  had  hitherto
kept  aloof  from  the  intrigues  of  their  impatient
countrymen,  and  proclaimed  themselves  obedient  in
everything,  first  to  their  own  patrons  and  masters,
and  next  to  the  political  authorities  under  which
they  lived.1  The  Epistle  to  the  Eomans  is,  I  con-
ceive, especially  addressed  to  the  godly  few  of  that
patrician  following,  half  Jew,  half  Grecian,  who  were
feeling  their  way  still  timidly  and  doubtfully  to
belief  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  son  of  (rod,  the  true
Messiah,  the  founder  of  the  spiritual  kingdom  of
Israel.2

This  epistle,  written  in  the  East  in  the  year  811
(A.D.  58),  was  followed,  after  an  interval,  perhaps,  of
three  years,  by  the  arrival  of  the  apostle

1 •  -if j. -rt  TT  i J  TT Arrival  of

himselt  at  Koine. He  came  in  bonds. He  st.  Paul  m
had  been  seized  and  nearly  killed  by  his  A.n.ei.
countrymen at Jerusalem, for preaching
the  true  Messiah. He  had  been  accused  by  them  to
the  Eomans  as  a  mover  of  sedition. But  he  had
proclaimed  himself  a  Eoman  citizen,  had  appealed  to
Caesar,  and,  though brought  as a  prisoner  to  the
imperial  tribunal,  he  came  under  the  protection  of
the  government.3 At  Eome,  he  avowed,  no  doubt,

1  Romans,  i.  8.  foil.,  i.  16.,  iii.  25.  foil.,  xiii. 1.  foil. "They  that
are  of  the  household  of  Narcissus"  (xvi.  11.)  are  mentioned  along
with  the  others  of  whom  so  many  appear  to  have  been  "  of  Caesar's
household." It  is  reasonable  to  infer  that  this  Narcissus  is  the
favourite  of  Claudius. His  freedmen  and  dependents  might  popu-
larly retain  the  title  of  his  "  household  "  even  after  his  own  death.

2  On  this  supposition  the  remarkable  compliment,  if  I  may  so  call
it,  to  this  congregation,  that  their  faith  was  spoken  of  throughout  the
world  (Rom.  i.  8.),  receives  an  apt  explanation. The  disposition  of
these  conspicuous  freedmen  towards  Christianity  would  be  reported
to  the  family  of  the  procurator  in  Judea,  and  thence  would  doubtless
be  published  abroad  as  an important  fact  among  the  Jews  and
Christians  everywhere.

*  The  exact  dates  of  these  events  are  not  important  to  this  his-

438  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  Liv.

his  real  character  as  a  teacher  of  a  harmless  doctrine,
already  known,  and  not  unfavourably,  in  the  highest
quarters ;  and  though  long  detained  untried,  through
the  indolence,  probably,  of  the  emperor,  he  suffered
no  other  inconvenience.  He  was  guarded  by  the
praetorians  within  the  precincts  of  the  palace,  lodged
in  a  hired  cabin  attached,  it  may  be  supposed,  to  its
outer  courts,  such  as  those  commonly  occupied  by  the
retainers  of  a  noble  patron ;  free  access  to  him  was
allowed  to  his  compatriots  and  co-religionists,  and  for
two  years  he  was  employed  in  preaching  and  extend-
ing the  faith  even  among  the  members  of  Caesar's
household.1  Of  the  perfect  security  with  which  the
Gospel  of  the  true  Christ  was  professed  at  this  time
at  Kome  there  can  be  no  question.  To  account  for  it
some  have  supposed  an  intimacy  between  Paul  and  the
prefect  Burrhus,  or  the  minister  Seneca,  and  the  writ-

tory.  I  have  followed  the  opinions  which  seemed  to  me  on  the
whole  the  best  supported.

1  The  phrase  in  Phil.  i.  13.,  ev  '6\tp  ry  TrpaiTcapiy,  as  is  well  known,
has  been  diversely  interpreted,  of  the  emperor's  palace,  and  of  the
camp  of  the  praetorians.  I  incline  to  the  former  interpretation.  St.
Paul,  we  must  remember,  speaks  as  a  foreigner.  In  the  provinces
the  emperor  was  known,  not  as  Princeps,  but  as  Imperator.  In
Judea,  governed  more  immediately  by  him  through  the  imperial
procurators,  he  would  be  more  exclusively  regarded  as  a  military
chief.  The  soldier,  to  whom  the  apostle  was  attached  with  a  chain,
would  speak  of  him  as  his  general.  When  Paul  asked  the  centurion
in  charge  of  him,  "  Where  shall  I  be  confined  in  Rome  ?  "  the  an-
swer would  be,  "  In  the  prsetorium,"  or  the  quarters  of  the  general.
When  led,  as  perhaps  he  was,  before  the  emperor's  tribunal,  if  he
asked  the  attending  guards,  "Where  am  I?"  again  they  would  re-
ply, "In  the  prastorium."  The  emperor  was  protected  in  his  palace
by  a  body-guard,  lodged  in  its  courts  and  standing  sentry  at  its
gates:  and  accordingly  they  received  the  name  of  " prsetorians."
After  the  establishment  of  a  camp  for  this  body-guard  outside  the
city,  a  cohort  was  still  kept  always  in  attendance  on  the  emperor's
person,  and  in  his  principal  residence,  and  this  accordingly  in  mili-
tary language  continued,  I  conceive,  to  bear  the  title  familiar  to  the
soldiers.  The  palace,  like  other  patrician  mansions,  was  surrounded
by  numerous  cabins,  tenanted  by  the  retainers  of  the  great  man  him-
self, and  ir  one  of  these,  as  "  a  hired  house,"  the  apostle  was  per-
mitted to  dwell,  from  the  favour  perhaps  in  which  his  nation  was
held,  instead  of  being  cast  into  the  vaults  beneath  the  palace  floors.

TH.  LIT.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  439

ings  of  the  apostle  and  the  philosopher  present  cer-
tainly some  striking  points  of  apparent  sympathy.
At  a  later  period  it  was  gravely  asserted  among  the
new  sect,  that  Tiberius,  on  the  official  statements
of  Pontius  Pilate,  had  acknowledged  the  divinity  of
the  culprit  whom  the  procurator  had  crucified,  and
had  demanded  divine  honours  from  the  senate  for
the  Founder  of  Christianity.  These  the  senate,  it
was  said,  declined  to  sanction :  the  emperor,  how-
ever, insisted  that  the  Christians  should  be  all  owed  at
least  a  full  toleration.1  The  story  itself,  as  told  by
Tertullian,  is  probably  groundless  throughout ;  but  it
shows  at  least,  and  such  is  the  purpose  for  which
Tertullian  cites  it,  that  the  early  indulgence  of  the
government  to  Christianity  was  an  admitted  fact
which  challenged  explanation.  Whatever  may  be
the  value  of  these  traditions,  the  opposition  in  which
the  true  believers  stood  to  the  assertors  of  false  and
temporal  Messiahs  would  be  alone  a  sufficient  motive
for  the  favour  they  manifestly  received.

Nevertheless,  there  is no ground  for  supposing
that,  under  the  shelter  of  this  indulgence,  gtoryof
the  young  disciples  shunned  the  genuine  Gradna'L
practice  of  their  profession,  or  walked  un-  j," "hecon-
worthily  of  their  spiritual  hopes. The  faint  Ru0™°£the
traces  left us by  history may  suggest  a  converts-
pleasing  pwture  to  the  imagination  of  the  life  and

1  Tertull.  Apol.  5.:  "Tiberius  ....  annunciatum  sibi  ex  Syria
Palaestina  quod  illic  veritatem  illius  divinitatis  revelaverat,  detulit
ad  Senatum  cum  praerogativa  suffragii  sui.  Senatus,  quia  non  ipse
probaverat,  respnit.  Cffisar  in  sententia  mansit,  comminatus  peri-
culum  accusatoribus  Christianorum."  This  strange  story  has  been
generally  rejected  as  incredible  by  the  best  critics  and  historians.
It  may  be  remarked,  however,  that  the  official  minute  of  our  Lord's
trial  and  sentence  was  no  doubt  transmitted  by  the  procurator  to
the  emperor,  and  was  deposited  in  the  archives  at  Rome.  It  wns
hence  perhaps  that  Tacitus  was  able  to  speak  so  pointedly  of  the
execution  of  Christ  by  Pontius  Pilate:  "  Auctor  nominis  ejus  Chris-
tus,  Tiberio  imperitante,  per  procuratorem  Pentium  Pilatum  suppli-
cio  affeotus  crat."  Ann.  xv.  44.

440  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  la*.

conversation  of  the  first  Christians  at  Rome,  that
little  band  of  earnest  and  spiritual  converts,  first
exploring  by  the  light  of  conscience  the  rudiments  of
the  new  doctrine,  then  receiving  clearer  instruction
from  the  letters,  and  lastly  from  the  mouth,  of  the
inspired  apostle,  strengthened  by  his  presence,  in-
flamed by  his  zeal,  reasoning  ardently  with  the  more
timid  of  their  brethren,  gradually  overcoming  the
scruples  of  some,  bearing  with  the  prejudices  of
others,  suffering  patiently  the  scorn  of  the  proud  and
worldly  with  whom  they  mingled,  and  presenting  to
their  curious  visitors  from  surrounding  Paganism  the
first  and  purest  example  of  zeal  beautified  by  charity.
Some  minds  there  were  at  Borne  which  shrank  with
a  rebound  from  the  grosser  forms  of  corruption  thrust
everywhere  upon  them ;  some  which  were  softened  to
feelings  of  humanity  by  the  general  ease  and  tran-
quillity of  the  times ;  some,  again,  which  warmed
with  spiritual  emotions  under  the  fervent  teaching
of  virtuous  philosophers  :  even  in  that  sink  of  vice,
under  the  flaunting  banners  of  lust  and  cruelty,  there
was  a  preparation  at  work  for  the  reception  of  Grospel
truth,  and  the  plain  preaching  of  St.  Paul  was  more
attractive  perhaps  to  many  than  the  strange  rites  and
mysteries  of  the  Jewish  synagogue.  But  the  apostle
preached  to  his  disciples  in  bonds,  and  of  the  multi-
tudes who  came  to  hear  him,  no  man  forbidding
him,  the  true  children  of  Rome  were  themselves  still
under  constraint  of  pride  and  prejudice,  and  depen-
dent on  the  idols  of  society  around  them,  from
which  few,  perhaps,  could  wholly  escape.  Jews  and
Greeks  might  submit  to  the  yoke  of  a  crucified  Re-
deemer,  but  conversion  among  the  native  Italians  was
as  yet  rare  and  imperfect.1  To  renounce  a  world

1  A  great  proportion  of  the  converts  greeted  by  St.  Paul  in  the
last  chapter  to  the  Romans  bear  Greek  names.  They  muy  have
been  Jews  or  other  foreigners,  but  assuredly  not  Romans  by  birth.
The  same  was  probably  the  case  of  those  with  Latin  names  also.

CH Ltv.  DNDER THE EMPIRE.  441

which  it  might  seem  impossible  to  mingle  with-
out defilement,  rather  than  seek  by  active  labours  to
purify  it,  would  be  the  refuge  of  the  grave  and  gloomy
spirits  which  really  broke  through  the  restraints  of
law  and  custom  to  join  themselves  to  a  divine  Saviour.
The  story  of  Pomponia  Grraecina,  supposed  by  many
to  have  been  one  of  these  Roman  believers,  may  be
taken  at  least  in  illustration  of  the  form  which  be-
lief might  be  expected  to  assume  among  a  reserved
and  sensitive  people,  disdaining  the  spirit  of  prosely-
tism,  and  ashamed  to  the  last  of  rejecting  their
domestic  and  national  ideas.  This  noble  matron,
the  wife  of  Aulus  Plautius,  the  conqueror  of  Britain,
was,  it  seems,  denounced  to  the  emperor  as  guilty  of
a  foreign  superstition  ;  a  charge  implying  not  merely
participation  in  the  rites  of  a  licensed  religion,  but
abandonment  of  the  national  worship,  such  as  Chris-
tianity perhaps  alone  then  demanded  of  its  votaries.1
Nero,  from  respect  for  a  brave  and  loyal  officer,
or  possibly  from  a  feeling  of  indulgence,  as  above

Mr.  Williams's  attempt  to  identify  the  Pudens  and  Claudia  of  Mar-
tial (iv.  13.,  xi.  56.)  with  the  converts  mentioned  oy  St.  Paul  (2  Tim.
iv.  21.)  is  interesting;  but  we  must  not  forget — 1.  that  both  these
names  are  very  common  at  the  period:  2.  that  the  name  of  Pudens
in  the  Chichester  inscription  is  only  conjectural:  3.  that  the  charac-
ter Martial  gives  of  Pudens  is  painfully  inconsistent  with  the  Chris-
tian profession.  The  Claudia  of  Martial  was,  he  says,  of  British
extraction.  In  our  island,  as  in  Gaul,  many  chiefs  were  enrolled  no
doubt  in  the  imperial  gens,  and  it  is  idle  to  assign  this  lady  to  auy
one  British  family  in  particular.  At  all  events,  the  notion  of  Cam-
den  and  Fuller,  that  she  was  a  daughter  of  Caractacus  domiciled  in
Koine,  seems  as  plausible  as  that  which  derives  her  from  Tib.  Clau-
dius Cogidubnus,  the  king  of  the  Kegni  in  Sussex.  See,  however,
Williams's  Essay  on  Pudens,  &c.,  or  an  abstract  of  his  arguments  in
Alford's  Greek  Test.  iii.  104.

1  Such,  no  doubt,  should  in  strictness  have  been  the  demand  of
Judaism  also:  but  there  is  ample  evidence  of  the  compromise  which
the  Jews  generally  allowed  to  their  half-attached  followers  and  ad-
mirers. Herod,  for  instance,  made  no  doubt  conditions  with  them,
like  Naarnan  the  Syrian,  who  stipulated  that  he  should  be  allowed
to  bow,  when  he  stoqd  with  his  master  iu  the  temple  of  Kimmon.
2  Kittys  v.  18.

442  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  uv.

exolained,  towards  the  new  sect,  refused  to  entertain
the  accusation  himself,  and  referred  it  to  the  domestic
tribunal  of  the  husband  and  his  kinsmen.  Pom-
ponia  was  examined  by  lenient  judges,  and  by  their
tenderness,  their  ignorance,  or  their  indifference,  was
suffered  to  escape  unpunished.  But  it  was  remarked
with  awe  by  the  frivolous  society  around  her,  that  she
withdrew  from  all  conversation  with  them,  shrank
into  the  secret  companionship  of  her  own  pensive
meditations,  and  passed  the  rest  of  her  life,  which
was  prolonged  many  years,  in  reserve  and  retirement.
Such,  it  would  seem,  were  the  effects,  most  foreign
to  the  spirit  of  the  age,  which  might  be  expected
from  conversion  to  Christianity  in  a  noble  matron  of
Rome.1

St.  Paul  was  kept  under  restraint  for  at  least  two

years,  but  soon  after  that  period  was  set  at  liberty;  a

further  testimony,  it  would  appear,  to  the

Outburst  of  i j J • rr •  f i_-  j.  •>

the  persecu-  acknowledged  motiensiveness  of  his  sect.
Yet  in  little  more  than  another  year  we
read  with  surprise  of  the  sudden  persecution  directed
against  it  by  Nero,  and  we  hear  that  he  was  induced
to  denounce  the  Christians  as  the  authors  of  the  con-
flagration, to  propitiate  the  popular  feeling ;  for  none
others  were  so  detested  for  their  strange  and  mis-
chievous superstition,  or  so  generally  held  guilty  of
the  most  abominable  crimes,  of  the  crime,  indeed,  of

1  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  32.  (A.  u.  810): "  Supers titionis  externae  rea:"
an  expression  which  has  been  very  generally  interpreted  of  conver-
sion to  Christianity.  See  Lardner,  Testimonies,  i.  344.  The  Komans,
indeed,  ascribed  Pomponia's  long  melancholy  to  grief  for  the  murder
of  Julia  by  Messalina,  fourteen  years  earlier. Tac.  I.  c.;  Dion  Ix.
18. It  seems  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  sorrow  turned  her
mind  to  spiritual  consolations.

2  That  the  Apostle  was  detained  at  Borne  for  two  years  appears
from  the  conclusion  of  the  Acts. Ills  release  is  presumed  on  the
authority  of  tradition embodied  in  the  early  church  histories,  and
supported inferentially  by  the  Epistles. Supposing  him  to  have
reached  Rome  early  in  814  (A.  D.  61),  he  may  have  quitted  it  again
in  816,  the  year  before  the  persecution.

CH.  Liv.  UN1>KR THE EMPIRE.  443

hatred  towards  the  whole  human  race.1  The  horror
of  the  sacrifice  will  be  enhanced  if  we  consider  the
position  and  character  of  its  victims,  such  as  I  have
represented  them.  They  were  not  a  base  and  turbu-
lent rabble,  like  the  mass  of  the  Jewish  residents,
who  had  been  more  than  once  swept  away  by  general
edicts  of  exile  or  deportation ;  but  a  mixed  company
of  Greeks  and  Eomans,  as  well  as  Jews,  some  well-
born, all  perhaps  instructed  and  accomplished,  ca-
pable of  appreciating  the  refined  intelligence  of  the
Apostle,  all  trained  by  habit,  as  well  as  by  principle,
to  obey  the  laws,  and  respect  the  usages  of  those
around  them.  Not  only  were  men  and  women  of
gentle  nature  put  to  the  most  cruel  of  deaths, — not
only  was  mockery  added  to  their  pangs, — but  the
process  against  them  seems  to  have  been  more  sum-
mary and  informal  than  we  read  of  in  the  persecu-
tions of  later  times.2

Critical  readers  have,  I  believe,  often  felt  a  diffi-
culty in  accepting;  the  plain  assertions  of

_Ty  i r<  •  i-  I.  •  mi.  Difficulty  of

Tacitus  and  ouetomus  on  this  subject. Iney  accounting  for

•%  . ,  this  supposed

have  remarked  that  there  is  nothing  m  the  persecution  of

i rn • a.- the  Christians.  .

known  habits  and  teaching  of  early  Christi-
anity to  account  for  such  infatuated  hatred. If  here
and  there  a  patrician  convert  vexed  his  kinsmen  by
withholding  the  domestic  offering,  such  cases  were  at

1  Tac.  Ann.  xv.  44. :  "  Per  flagitia  invisos  ....  odio  generis  hu-
mani  .  .  .  .  sonteset  novissima  supplicia  meritos." Suet.  Ner.  16. :
"  Genus  hominum  superstitionis  novse  et  maleficae."

2  This  may  be  inferred,  I  think,  from  the  words  of  Tacitus,  com-
pared with  later  accounts  of  the  punctilious  observance  of  form  in
the  proceedings  against  the  Christians. It  was  only  towards  the
end  of  the  last  and  worst  of  the  persecutions,  that  of  Diocletian,  ac-
cording to  their  own  confession,  that  punishment  was  summarily  in-
flicted. See  Buinart,  praef.  in  Act.  Martyr,  p.  xxix.,  from  Eusebius.
Up  to  that  time  every  judicial  sentence  had  been  formally  regis-
tered, and  Christian  inquirers,  when  they  found  these fewer  than
they  had  expected,  declared  that  the  registers  had  been  tampered
with. Comp.  Prudentius,  Peristeph.  i.  75.:  "  Chartulas  blasphemus
olim  nam  satelles  abstulit."

444  HISTORY 0¥ THE ROMANS  CH.  Liv

least  extremely  rare,  nor  would  they  be  noticed  by
the  vulgar,  whose  clamours  alone  are  recorded.  The
usages  of  the  disciples  were  indeterminate  in  their
outward  form ;  their  tenets  were  mostly  subjective ;
there  was  little  in  either  that  could  openly  clash  with
popular  prejudices.  The  first  Christians  at  Rome
did  not  separate  themselves  from  the  heathens,  nor
renounce  their  ordinary  callings;  they  intermarried
with  unbelievers,  nor  even  in  their  unions  with  one
another  did  they  reject  the  ordinary  forms  of  law.1
It  would  seem  that  they  burnt  their  dead  after  the
Eoman  fashion,  gathered  their  ashes  into  the  sepul-
chres of  their  patrons,  and  inscribed  over  them  the
customary  dedication  to  the  Divine  Spirits.2  They
wore  no  distinctive  garb  like  the  professors  of  phi-
losophy; they  continued  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of
their  unconverted  countrymen,  frequented  their  syn-
agogues and  respected  their  sabbaths,  at  the  same
time  that  they  paid  special  honour  to  the  day  which
followed  the  sabbath,  as  the  day  of  their  Lord's  resur-
rection. Before  St.  Paul  came  among  them  they  can
hardly  have  had  a  ministry,  nor  can  we  speak  with
certainty  of  any  definite  provision  being  made  even
by  him  at  Eome  for  this  distinctive  badge  of  an  in-
dependent religion.  Christianity  with  them  was  emi-
nently a  doctrine  rather  than  a  ceremonial.  They  in-
vested, indeed,  with  mysterious  significance  their  rites
of  Initiation  and  Communion ;  and  in  the  typical  lan-
guage in  which  the  meaning  of  these  sacraments  was

1  Mixed  marriages  were  denounced  by  Tertullian  and  Cyprian;
but  not,  as  far  as  we  know,  earlier. The  ceremonial  of  Christian
marriage,  the  espousals,  the  ring,  and  other  particulars,  are  derived
from  heathen  usage,  nor  is  there  any  trace  of  a  special  church  ser-
vice in  primitive  times. The  passage  from  Tertullian,  ad  Uxor.  ii.
8,  9.,  proves  nothing  to  the  contrary. Christians  made  it  a  matter
cf  conscience  to  obtain  the  consent  and  blessing  of  the  bishop.

2  Such  is  the  interpretation  which,  it  seems,  must  be  given  to  the
letters  D.  M.  (dis  manibus),  which  occur  so  frequently  on  the  tombs
of  the  early  Christians  at  Rome. See  Muratori  in  the  Roman  Acad.
Archeol.  xiii.  39.  foil.  (Lightfoot,  I.  cO

CTT.  TTV.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  445

shrouded  the  heathens  might  find  a  motive  for
jealousy.1  Nevertheless,  such  mysteries  were  com-
mon to  the  pagan  cults  also,  and  the  misconstruction
eventually  put  on  them  in  the  case  of  the  Christians
was  the  consequence,  perhaps,  rather  than  the  cause,
of  the  odium  in  which  the  sect  came  itself  to  be  held.2
The  precipitate  harshness,  indeed,  with  which  men
and  women  of  the  world  have  judged  the  Christianity
spirit  of  devotion  in  mudern  times,  the  sour-  !„  Keom0ebl-
ness.  the  self-righteousness,  the  hypocrisy  S£'eTimlor
they  have  ascribed  to  it,  may  indicate  to  us  after'Nero-
the  feeling  with  which  such  of  the  Eomans  as
came  personally  in  contact  with  this  saintly  com-
munity might  regard  its  character  and  habits.  They
would  express,  no  doubt  more  openly  than  our  milder
manners  allow,  their  wonder,  their  vexation,  and  their
scorn.  But  the  atrocious  language  of  Tacitus  and
Suetonius  far  transcends  this  limit,  and  we  are  lost
in  wonder  at  the  charge  of  firing  the  city,  with  the
general  imputation  of  hating  all  mankind,  against  a
sect  so  unobtrusive  as  well  as  so  innocent.  Nor  can
we  fail  to  remark  how  short  a  time  is  allowed  by  our
accounts  for  the  growth  of  this  hostile  feeling.  Up
to  the  arrival  of  St.  Paul  the  Christians  form  evi-
dently an  obscure  and  unorganized  society  ;  within
three  years  from  that  date  the  whole  city  is  filled
with  inveterate  detestation  of  them.  This  is  the
more  strange  when  we  observe  how  little  attention,
except  in  this  instance,  Christianity  attracted  at  this
period  in  Eoine.  It  has  not  been  mentioned  by

1  As  regards  the  Eucharist  at  least,  the  language  of  the  Christian
liturgies,  which  the  further  we  inquire  seem  to  remount  higher  in
primitive  antiquity,  is  more  decided  and  uniform  than  that  of  the
fathers.

2  We  do  not  know  when the  notorious  calumnies  against  the
Christian  love-feasts  were  first  propounded ;  but  they  are  first  re-
ferred to by  the apologists in the  second  or  perhaps  the third
century. See  Minucius  Felix,  Octav.  9.;  Tertull.  Apol.  3.;  Athena-
goras,  4.

446  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  OH.  MV.

Lucan,  or  the  elder  Pliny,  though  both  these  writers
have  noticed  the  manners  of  the  Jews ;  nor  by  Seneca,
though  Seneca  is  full  of  the  tenets  of  the  philoso-
phers ;  nor  by  Persius,  though  Persius  is  a  shrewd
observer  of  the  salient  features  of  society  generally.
Such  is  the  silence  of  the  contemporaries  of  St.  Paul
and  Nero.  Had  the  Christians  occupied,  even  in  the
next  generation,  a  large  space  in  Roman  eyes,  could
the  painters  of  manners,  such  as  Juvenal  and  Mar-
tial, who  have  dashed  in,  with  such  glaring  colours,
Jews,  Greeks,  and  Egyptians,  have  failed  to  fill  their
canvas  with  portraits  and  caricatures  of  them  ?l
Half  a  century  had  passed  from  the  Neronian  perse-
cution before  we  meet  with  the  first  charges  now
extant  against  them.

Such  being  the  grounds  for  questioning  the  accu-
racy of  our  accounts  of  this  matter,  it  has
to'the'per-8  been  suggested  that  it  was  against  the  Jews,
™ntedea°lg~  _  not  the  Christians,  the  devotees  of  false
Christs,  not  the  worshippers  of  Jesus,  the
wolves  of  the  Transtiberine,  not  the  lambs  of  the
Palatine,  that  Nero's  edict  was  really  directed.  We
have  seen  how  'obnoxious  the  Jews  generally  were  to
the  bigotry  of  the  Roman  populace :  they  were  re-
proached with  their  ferocity,  isolation,  and  spiritual
pride  ;  the  turbulence  of  their  fanatical  Christ-seekers
had  already  provoked  both  prince  and  people.  The
menacing  attitude  they  held  in  their  own  country  was
a  cause  at  this  moment  of  increased  exasperation.  It
was  easy  to  imagine  that  the  compatriots  of  the  men
who  were  levying  war  against  Rome  in  Palestine  had
kindled  a  conflagration  in  the  capital  itself.  Tiberius

1  Juvenal  alludes  (vii.  257.)  to  the  cause  of  Nero's  persecution,
and  to  the  mode  of  punishment.  Comp.  also  i.  155.  Martial  no-
tices the  fortitude  of  those  who  refused  to  sacrifice  with  the  stake
and  pitched  shirt  before  them  (x.  25.).  This  may  refer  to  the  later
persecution  of  Trajan.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  barbar-
ous torture  was  invented  before  Nero  (see  Senec.  Epist.  14.),  and
continued  to  be  practised  after  him.

CJf.  LIT.  TTNI>ER THE EMPITtE.  447

had  gratified  the  popular  clamour  by  deporting  thou-
sands of  these  wretches  to  Sardinia.  Claudius  had
expelled  them  in  a  body  from  Rome.  The  people
now  stimulated  Nero  to  make  shorter  and  bloodier
work  with  them ;  and  the  fanatics  of  the  city  were
subjected  to  the  same  barbarous  vengeance  which  had
alighted  repeatedly  on  their  brethren  in  the  moun-
tains of  Galilee  and  the  wilderness  of  Judea.  It  is
conjectured  that  our  authorities,  writing  fifty  years
later,  confused  the  Jews  with  the  Christians.  That
Suetonius,  in  a  previous  statement,  had  fallen  into
such  an  error,  is  generally  admitted.  He  may  have
done  the  same  in  this  place.  Tacitus,  though  a
graver  authority,  is  liable  to  the  charge  of  colouring
the  events  he  describes  with  the  hues  of  his  own
period.  When  he  wrote  the  false  Christs  were  ex-
tinguished and  forgotten,  but  the  true  Christ  had  be-
come notorious  throughout  the  empire.  The  true
believers,  meek  and  inoffensive  as  they  were,  had
succeeded,  by  an  unjust  fate,  to  all  the  odium  which
had  popularly  attached  to  the  fanatics.  On  the
Christians,  regarded  as  a  remnant  or  revival  of  Juda-
ism, Tacitus,  it  may  be  supposed,  bestowed  all  the
bitterness  which  a  terrible  war  had  engendered  in
Roman  breasts  against  everything  Jewish.1  They
were  lying  at  the  moment  under  sentence  of  proscrip-
tion by  his  master,  Trajan :  they  were  deserting  the
temples,  withholding  sacrifice  from  the  imperial  altars,
meeting  in  secret  and  illicit  conclave  in  the  pro-
vinces, and  Pliny,  the  friend  of  Tacitus,  was  inquir-
ing how  he  should  proceed  towards  them.2  Whatever

1  It  should  be  noticed,  to  show  how  readily  Tacitus  might  con
found  the  Jews  and  the  Christians,  that  he  characterizes  both  in
precisely  the  same  remarkable  terms.  Comp.  of  the  Christians,  Ann.
xv.  44. :  "  Odio  generis  humani ; "  and  of  the  Jews,  Hist.  v.  5. :
"  Adversus  omnes  alios  hostile  odium."

2  Plin.  Epist.  x.  96.  (97.):  a  letter  supposed  to  have  been  written
in  the  year  104,  probably  a  few  years  earlier  than  the  later  books  of
tbe  Annah.

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  re.  LIV.

the  historian  may  think  of  the  charges  of  immorality
calumniously  preferred  against  them,  their  anticipa-
tions of  a  world-wide  triumph,  of  the  fall  of  the  em-
pire, and  the  dissolution  of  the  age  in  fire,  might  be
held  as  damning  evidence  against  them,  and  entitle
them  in  his  view  to  a  return  of  that  scorn  and  hatred
which  they  were  deemed  themselves  to  cherish  against
the  whole  frame  of  society.1

Such  is  the  view  recommended  to  us  by  the  great
conjecture  name  of  Gibbon,  which  it  is  due  perhaps
of  Gibbon.  ^0  j^g  character  as  an  historian  to  lay  be-
fore the  reader.  Though  liable  to  the  suspicion  of
interested  motives,  he  is  too  shrewd  to  advance  even
an  interested  argument  without  reasonable  grounds.
But  the  existence  of  Christians  in  the  time  of  Nero
is  no  longer  held  to  depend  in  any  degree  on  the
testimony  of  Tacitus,  nor  does  the  conjecture  merit
in  itself  the  disdain,  real  or  affected,  with  which  out
polemics  have  generally  treated  it.2

For  myself,  perplexed  by  the  received  account,  yet
scrupling  to  admit  such  entire  misappre-
^ewrag-  hension  on  the  part  of  our  authorities,  I
crave  a  fair  consideration  for  another  sug-
gestion:— that  the  suspicions  of  the  Eoman  mob
were  directed  against  the  turbulent  Jews,  notorious
for  their  appeals  to  the  name  of  Christ,  as  an  ex-
pected prince  or  leader : — that  these  fanatics,  arrested
and  questioned,  not  so  much  of  the  burning  as  of
their  political  creed,  sought  to  implicate  the  true
disciples,  known  to  them  and  hated  by  them,  how-

1  These  topics  had  not  been  untouched  by  St.  Paul;  but  it  will  be
readily  conceived  that  it  was  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  and  the  pub-
lication of  the  Apocalypse  that  they  became  most  prominent,  and
began  to  attract  the  notice  of  the  heathens. Dr.  Milman,  feeling  the
difficulty  which  attaches  to  our  accounts  of  the  Neronian  persecu-
tion, has  suggested  that  the  popular  hatred  towards  the  Christians,
and  belief  in  their  guilt,  were  caused  by  their  vaunts  of  an  impend-
ing conflagration  of  the  world. Hist,  of  Christianity,  ii.  37.

2  Gibbon,  Decl.  and  Fall,  eh.  xvi.

CH.  LIT.  UNDER THE KMPIRB.  449

ever  obscure  and  inoffensive  in  Eoman  eyes,  in  the
same  charge1 : — that  the  true  Christians,  thus  asso-
ciated in  the  charge  of  Christ-worship,  avowed  the
fact  in  their  own  sense,  a  sense  which  their  judges
did  not  care  to  discriminate : — that  the  believers  be-
came thus  more  or  less  sufferers,  though  doubly
innocent  both  of  the  fire  and  of  political  disaffection  :
— finally,  that  our  historians,  misled  by  this  false
information,  finding  even  in  the  public  records  that
the  name  of  Christ  was  the  common  shibboleth  of
the  victims,  too  readily  imagined  that  the  persecution
was  directed  against  the  Christians  only.  Fright-
ful as  this  attack  on  the  brethren  was,  it  thus  fell
only  obliquely  upon  them ;  it  may  be  hoped  that  it
was  as  transient  as  it  was  sudden.  If  we  may  draw
any  conclusions  from  the  monuments  lately  discovered
of  the  Claudian  freedmen,  it  would  seem  that  many
of  the  disciples,  whom  St.  Paul  had  greeted  by  name,
died  quietly  in  their  beds.  Though  Christian  writers
have  concurred  in  citing  the  Neronian  as  the  first  ot
their  persecutions,  it  is  remarkable  that  the  Church
,  has  specified  none  of  its  victims  among  her  noble
army  of  Martyrs.2  St.  Paul  himself  is  not  supposed
to  have  fallen  on  this  occasion.  Absent  at  the  time
from  Rome,  he  returned  there  soon  after ;  but  in  the
epistle  he  wrote  from  thence  within  two  or  three
years  of  this  date,  no  allusion  occurs  to  the  recent
sufferings  of  his  disciples.  The  story  that  he  was
beheaded  at  Eome  in  the  last  year  of  Nero  has  been
current  from  early  times ;  but  this  tradition,  however
probable  in  itself,  is  attended  with  circumstances

1  The  animosity  of  the  Jews  of  the  old  faith  to  the  Christian  re-
formers is  strongly  marked  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  recurs
again  in  almost  the  earliest  documents  of  the  first  apostolic  age.  See
particularly  Martyr.  Polycarp.  c.  13.; Justin  Martyr,  Dialog,  and
Apol.i  Tertullian,  adv.  Judeeos. Tacitus  himself  points  to  the  be-
trayal of  one  set  of  victims  by  another:  "  primo  correpti  qui  fateban'
tur,  deinde  indicia  eorum  multitudo  ingens."

2  Mosheim,  De  Rebus  Christ,  ante  Constant.  SKC.  i.  §  34.

VOL.  VI.  0  G

450  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  MV.

which  show  how  little  it  was  connected,  in  the  minds
of  the  first  Christians,  with  the  theory  of  a  general
proscription  of  their  faith. 1

The  notion  that  Nero's  measures  extended  to  the
General  re-  provinces,  or  issued  in  a  standing  decree
ttSTnto™"  against  Christianity,  though  attested  by
some  of  the  ancients  and  much  cherished
by  many  moderns,  rests  on  slender  and  equivocal
testimony.9  It  was  one  thing  to  indulge  the  mo-
mentary rage  of  the  populace,  another  to  establish
the  principle  of  religious  persecution.  There  seems
no  reason  to  doubt  that  Nero  respected  the  maxims
of  his  country  in  tolerating  generally  all  religions
against  which  no  public  scandal  could  be  alleged.
The  citizens  were  not  restrained  by  law  from
practising  foreign  rites,  provided  they  did  not  overtly
reject  those  of  the  nation,  and  their  conduct,  even
in  this  particular,  was  not  jealously  watched.  The
proselytes  to  Judaism,  and  even  to  Christianity,

1  For  the  presumed  date  of  St.  Paul's  martyrdom  I  refer  to  the
statement  of  Jerome:  "xiv.  Neronis  anno," CataL  c.  5. Cyril  of
Jerusalem  reported  that  his  death  was  caused  by  a  quarrel  with
Simon  Magus,  Chrysostom  that  he  was  punished  for  having  con-
verted Nero's  mistress  (Cave's  Life  of  St.  Paul). That  St.  Paul
suffered  at  Rome  has  been  a  constant  tradition  from  early  times
(Euseb.  Hist.  Eccl.  ii.  25.;  Origen,  in  Gen.  iii.);  but  the  argument
from  Clemens  Romanus  (i.  5.,  possibly  the  original  authority  for  it)
seems  to  me  mere  trifling. A  Regius  professor  of  divinity  ought  not
to  sanction  the  translation  of  ^aprvpiiaas  iiri  TUV  fiyov/j.fvcai>,  mar-
tyrium  subiens  sub  prcpfectis  Urbis;  and  a  learned  chronologer'a
illustration* of  the  phrase  by  the  Svo  avroKpdropos  (Helius  and  Nero)
of  Dion,  is  an  ingenious  extravagance. Perhaps  a  cautious  inquirer
will  be  satisfied  with  the  language  of  the  apostle  himself  (2  Tim.  iv.
6 — 16.),  which  indicates  the  expectation  of  speedy  martyrdom,  and
may  itself  have  suggested  the  ecclesiastical  tradition.

2  That  the  persecution  extended  to  the  provinces  is  first  asserted
by  Orosius  (vii.  71.). This  notion  is  considered  to  be  amply  re-
futed by  Dodwell  (Diss.  Cypr.  xi.). See  Gieseler,  Eccl.  Hist.  i.  1.
28. The  Lnsitanian  inscription  is  given  up. That  Nero  issued  a
standing  decree  against  Christianity,  which  continued  to  be  the  law
of  the  empire,  is  roundly  asserted  by  Tertullian  (ad  Nation,  i.  7.),  a
writer  prone  to  misinterpret  facts  to  the  advantage  of  his  own  argu-
ment

CH.  UV.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  451

might  possibly  evade  the  required  solemnities;  the
magistrates  were  lax,  the  bystanders  were  indifferent.
As  yet  we  meet  with  no  indication  of  that  uneasy
apprehension  of  spiritual  emotions,  expressed  by  the
specific  inhibition  of  new  and  strange  religions  by
which  the  minds  of  men  may  be  moved,  which
marked  a  later  period  of  Eoman  jurisprudence.1
Toleration,  indeed,  on  such  a  basis,  constitutes  no
claim  to  a  prudent  liberality  on  the  part  of  the
Roman  government.  It  was  rather  an  unreflect-
ing  persistence  in  habits  of  thought  derived  from  an-
other state  of  society.  The  toleration  of  the  empire
was  a  relic  of  the  proud  exclusiveness  of  primitive
ages,  which  never  contemplated  the  possibility  of  the
sons  of  Mars  and  Ehea  deigning  to  bow  before  the
gods  of  enemies  and  strangers  ;  which  had  no  fear  of
innovation,  nor  appreciated  the  risks  of  conversion.
The  government  indulged  in  indolent  security  while
the  foundations  of  the  old  ideas  were  crumbling
away.  The  active  growth  of  Christianity  first  opened
the  eyes  of  rulers  and  people.  The  sword  had  been
long  suspended  over  the  Christians ;  sometimes  it
had  descended,  and  the  disciples,  always  insecure,  had
been  made  to  suffer ;  but  whenever  the  jealousy  of
the  state  was  awakened,  no  special  edict  was  required
to  drag  them  before  the  altar  of  Jupiter,  and  invite
them  to  sprinkle  it  with  incense,  and  conceive  a  vow
to  the  genius  of  the  emperor.2

1  Paul.  Sentent.  v.  21.  2. "  Novae  et  usu  incognitas,  quibus  mentes
hominum  moveantur."

2  The  fact  that  Nero's  was  the  first  persecution,  the  barbarities
attending  it,  possibly  also  the  notoriety  given  to  it  by  the  narrative
of  Tacitus,  impressed  later  generations  of  Christians  with  a  peculiar
horror  of  this  tyrant. But  the  notion  that  he  was  the  Antichrist  of
the  Apocalypse,  and  that  he  should  return  in  power  from  the  Eu-
phrates (xiii.  3.,  xvi.  12.,  xvii.  8.  16;  comp.  Neander,  Pflanzung  und
Leitung,  p.  480.),  cannot  be  traced  to  primitive  times. The  date  of
the  pseudo-Sibylline  oracle,  elr'  avaKdfj.il/ei  iaa&av  Oeea  aurdv  is  very
uncertain. St.  Augustine  (Civ.  Dei.  xx.  19.)  speaks  of  the  belief  as
common,  but  not  universal,  in  his  day: "  Nonnulli  ipsuru  resurrec-

C  G 2

452  HISTORY  OF THE ROMANS  on.  Lrv.

The  Roman  Empire,  at  this  epoch,  was  like  one  of
Th»  govern- tne  statues  so  common  at  the  time,  in  which

°

Bup-

a  new  head  had  been  fitted  to  the  original
trunk;  and  as  the  sculptor,  passing  his
finger-nail  along  the  marble,  assured  hirn-

of  the  age. gejf fo^  foe junc|:ure  was nofc Sensible to

the  touch,  so  the  citizens  might  believe,  under  the
wide-spread  liberty  of  thought  they  actually  enjoyed,
that  the  fatal  severance  between  freedom  and  des-
potism was  not  to  be  detected  by  the  nicest  organs.1
But  beneath  the  more  refined  and  sensitive  classes  of
the  capital,  those  which  claimed  the  privilege  of
thought  and  knew  how  to  use  it,  lay  next  the  multi-
tude of  triflers  and  idlers,  the  rich  voluptuaries,  the
pampered  officials,  the  upstart  freedmen  of  the  em-
peror and  his  courtiers,  who,  environed  as  they  were
with  perils,  endured  the  tyranny  of  the  Caesars  for
the  sake  of  their  own  ease  and  luxury,  and  were  con-
tent to  enjoy  the  present  hour  without  regard  to  the
past  or  the  future.  Minds  enervated  by  indulgence,
shattered  by  vice,  estranged  from  all  high  and  pure
aspirations  by  the  pleasures  of  sense,  were  unable  to
cope  with  despotism  :  these  men  could  only  crouch
like  dogs  under  the  uplifted  arm  of  their  master;
they  had  not  energy  even  to  fly  from  it.  Whatever
indignation  they  might  feel  towards  the  tyrant,  they
could  only  vent  it  in  spiteful  demonstrations  against
his  creatures  ;  and  he  could  at  any  time  avert  their
murmurs  from  himself  by  throwing  to  them  a  victim
from  his  own  court  or  household.  Then  was  revealed
on  the  public  stage  of  history  the  secret  to  which  the
interior  of  every  private  house  could  testify,  of  the
fearful  union  which  may  subsist  between  soft  volup-
tuous manners  and  callous  ferocity  of  disposition.

turnm,  et  futurum  Anti-Christum  suspicantur."  Comp.  Lactantius,
de.  Mort.  Fersecut.  c.  2.,  and  some  verses  of  Commodianus,  possibly
of  the  third  century.

1  Pers. Sat. i.  64.: "Ut per Iseve severos  Effundat  junctura
ungues."

CH.  UY.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  453

Then  the  men  whose  own  muscles  were  flaccid  with
the  abuse  of  the  bath,  the  table,  and  the  couch,  were
seen  to  gloat  with  horrid  fascination  over  the  pangs
of  physical  suffering  they  wantonly  inflicted.  The
cruelty  of  the  women  vied  with  that  of  the  men.  To
these  cynical  sensualists,  with  a  depravity  of  feeling
unfortunately  not  uncommon,  the  spectacle  of  virtue
tormented  would  be  a  positive  enjoyment ;  and  there
is  too  much  reason  to  apprehend  that  by  them  the
despotism  of  a  Nero  was  supported  for  the  gratifica-
tion it  ministered  to  their  fiendish  maliciousness.

The  corrupt  morality  of  the  age,  pervading  all
ranks  and  classes,  was,  above  all,  the  cause  Reflections  on
of  the  patient  endurance  of  tyranny  which  moraiuyaofd
so  lamentably  distinguished  it.  With  the  the  age>
loss  of  self-respect  engendered  by  merely  selfish
indulgences  men  lose  that  keen  sense  of  wrong,
even  when  inflicted  on  themselves,  which  nerves,
the  hand  of  resistance  more  vigorously  than  fear  or
pain.  The  distrust  which  the  victim  of  Tiberius  and
Nero  conceived  for  all  around  him,  from  the  conscious-
ness of  his  own  turpitude,  paralysed  every  attempt  at
combination.  The  vices  common  to  all  great  c  ties
flourished  with  rank  luxuriance  in  the  capital  of  a
society  thus  depraved  and  soulless.  Sensuality  in  its
most  degrading  forms  pervaded  all  classes,  and  was
fostered  by  the  publicity  of  ordinary  life,  by  the  al-
lurements of  art,  sometimes  by  the  direct  injunctions
of  a  gross  superstition,  to  a  degree  of  shamelessness
which  has  made  it  the  opprobrium  of  history.  Doubt-
less the  iniquities  of  Eome  have  been  more  nakedly
exposed  than  those  of  modern  cities  by  the  unblush-
ing frankness  of  its  moralists  and  satirists ;  but  their
frankness  or  effrontery  was  itself  a  product  of  the
licentiousness  of  the  age :  Juvenal  would  have  cast  a
veil  over  the  wantonness  he  chastised,  if  public  de-
corum had  seemed  in  the  least  to  require  it.  The
distinguishing  vices  of  the  great  were  meanness  and
servility,  the  pursuit  of  money  by  every  artifice  and

454  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  Cfl.  iiv.

compliance :  they  had  little  of  the  sense  of  honour
which  forms  an  exterior  bulwark  even  to  feeble  moral
principles  among  ourselves.  The  poor,  on  the  other
hand,  with  their  dearest  wants  and  pleasures  provided
for  them,  were  not  stimulated  to  dishonesty  by  the
dire  struggle  for  life,  or  even  by  the  thirst  of  advance-
ment, which  are  at  once  the  bane  and  the  preserving
salt  of  modern  society.  But  they  were  brutal,  blood-
thirsty, callous  to  the  infliction  of  pain,  familiar  in
daily  life  with  cruelties  such  as  we  shudder  to  hear  of
in  modern  times  under  the  influence  of  violent  pas-
sions, in  the  momentary  excesses  of  popular  outbreaks.
Much  candour  and  discrimination  are  required  in
comparing  the  sins  of  one  age  with  those  of  another,
still  more  in  pronouncing  between  them,  especially
where  the  hideousness  of  the  subject  must  deter  us
from  dragging  them  fully  into  light :  but  we  must
not  be  led  to  lay  upon  Pagan  Idolatry  too  large  a
share  of  the  reproach  from  which  even  true  religion
has  not  been  exempted ;  for  Christianity,  divine  as  it
is  in  its  precepts  and  its  sanctions,  has  proved  but
weak  in  contending  against  the  passions  of  our  cor-
rupt nature :  the  cruelty  of  our  Inquisitions  and
sectarian  persecutions,  of  our  laws  against  sorcery,  our
serfdom  and  our  slavery;  the  petty  fraudulence  we
tolerate  in  almost  every  class  and  calling  of  the  com-
munity ;  the  bold  front  worn  by  our  open  sensuality ;
the  deeper  degradation  of  that  which  is  concealed;
all  these  leave  us  little  room  for  boasting  of  our
modern  discipline,  and  must  deter  the  thoughtful
inquirer  from  too  confidently  contrasting  the  morals
of  the  old  world  and  the  new.

The  fairest,  perhaps,  and  certainly  the  most  pleasing
counter-  comparison  we  can  make  between  modern
pn-ncfpies  and  ancient  civilization,  between  the  effect
of  virtue.  Q£  a  Divine  an(j  a  human  teaching,  lies  in
the  virtues  they  may  seem  respectively  to  have  fos-
tered: for  we  must  not  forget  that  even  under  heathen-

Cfi.  LIV.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  455

ism  there  was  always  a  moral  teaching  at  work,  and
amidst  all  the  incentives  to  vice,  instruction  was  never
wanting  in  virtue.  However  feebly  the  voice  of  re-
ligion or  philosophy  may  have  fallen  on  the  ears  of
the  multitude,  the  circumstances  of  daily  life  read
constant  lessons  in  love  and  honesty.  Human  nature
indeed,  like  running  water,  has  a  tendency  to  purify
itself  by  action ;  the  daily  wants  of  life  call  forth  cor-
responding duties,  and  duties  daily  performed  settle
into  principles,  and  ripen  into  graces.  Even  at  Eome
in  the  worst  of  times,  men  of  affairs,  particularly
those  in  middle  stations,  most  removed  from  the
temptations  of  luxury  and  poverty,  were  in  the  habitual
practice  of  integrity  and  self-denial;  mankind  had
faith  in  the  general  honesty  of  their  equals,  in  the
justice  of  their  patrons,  in  the  fidelity  of  their  de-
pendents :  husbands  and  wives,  parents  and  children,
exercised  the  natural  affections,  and  relied  on  their
being  reciprocated :  all  the  relations  of  life  were
adorned  in  turn  with  bright  instances  of  devotion,
and  mankind  transacted  their  business  with  an  or-
dinary confidence  in  the  force  of  conscience  and  right
reason.  The  steady  development  of  enlightened  legal
principles  conclusively  proves  the  general  dependence
upon  law  as  a  guide  and  corrector  of  manners.  In
the  camp  however,  more  especially,  as  the  chief  sphere
of  this  purifying  activity,  the  great  qualities  of  the
Eoman  character  continued  to  be  plainly  manifested.
The  history  of  the  Caesars  presents  to  us  a  constant
succession  of  brave,  patient,  resolute,  and  faithful
soldiers,  men  deeply  impressed  with  a  sense  of  duty,
superior  to  vanity,  despisers  of  boasting,  content  to
toil  in  obscurity  and  shed  their  blood  at  the  fron-
tiers of  the  empire,  unrepining  at  the  cold  mistrust  of
their  masters,  not  clamorous  for  the  honours  so  spar-
ingly awarded  them,  but  satisfied  in  the  daily  work  of
their  hands,  and  full  of  faith  in  the  national  destiny
which  they  were  daily  accomplishing.  If  such  humble

456  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  LIV.

instruments  of  society  around  them  are  not  to  be  com-
pared for  the  importance  of  their  mission  with  the
votaries  of  speculative  wisdom,  who  protested  in  their
lives  and  in  their  deaths  against  the  crimes  of  their
generation,  there  is  still  something  touching  in  the
simple  heroism  of  these  chiefs  of  the  legions,  of  which
we  have  met  already  with  some  bright  examples,  and
shall  encounter  many  more, — the  heroism  of  a  Plau-
tius,  a  Suetonius,  a  Vespasian,  a  Corbulo,  and  an
Agricola, — which  preserves  to  us  in  unbroken  succes-
sion the  features  of  the  Scipios,  the  Catos,  the  ^Emilii,
and  the  Marcelli.  Here  are  virtues,  not  to  be  named
indeed  with  the  zeal  of  missionaries  and  the  devotion
ef  martyrs,  but  worthy  nevertheless  of  a  high  place
in  the  esteem  of  all  who  reverence  human  nature,
which  may  prove,  in  the  teeth  of  some  thoughtless
fanatics,  that  the  age  was  not  utterly  degraded  which
furnished  the  first  votaries  to  the  Gospel.1

The  acceptance  of  Christianity  we  should  consider
not  so  much  a  strong  reaction  from  the  pre-

Christianity  ...  • i -i  «• ,  i

congenial  to vailing  wickedness  ot  the  age,  as  a  symp-

certain  moral  ° .,  ...  ?•  i  7i

tendeneiea  of torn  ot  the  aspirations  struggling  beneath

the  age.  .  „  j r ',  •  j r-

its  surface,  and  ot  its  anxious  demand  for
moral  convictions.  I  have  shown  in  another  place
that  the  Grospel  was  not  embraced,  on  its  first  pro-
mulgation in  Judea,  by  the  despair  of  the  most
wretched  outcasts  of  humanity,  but  rather  by  the
hopeful  enthusiasm  which  urges  those  who  enjoy  a
portion  of  the  goods  of  life  to  improve  and  fortify

1  These  remarks,  I  know,  are  liable  to  misconstruction,  but  it
seems  a  duty  to  protest  against  the  common  tendency  of  Christian
moralists  to  dwell  only  on  the  dark  side  of  Pagan  society,  in  order
to  heighten  by  contrast  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel.  The  argument
becomes  dangerous  when  the  treatment  of  it  is  unfair.  The  preten-
sions advanced  by  such  an  advocate  as  Count  Champagny  for  the
Roman  Church,  which  alone  he  identifies  with  Christianity,  to  be
the  sole  depository  of  all  moral  principles  and  practice,  are  distress-
ing to  those  who  reflect  how  fearfully  they  have  been  belied  by  the
result.

C.S.  LtV.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  457

their  possession. And  so  again  at  Eome  we  have  no
reason to suppose  that Christianity  was only  the
refuge  of  the  afflicted  and  miserable ;  rather,  if  we
may  lay  any  stress  upon  the  monuments  above  re-
ferred to,  it  was  first  embraced  by  persons  in  a  certain
grade  of  comfort  and  respectability ;  by  persons  ap-
proaching to  what  we  should  call  the  middle  classes
in  their  condition,  their  education,  and  their  moral
views. Of  this  class  Seneca  himself  was  the  idol,  the
oracle:  he  was,  so  to  say,  the  favourite  preacher  of
the  more  intelligent  and  humane  disciples  of  nature
and  virtue. Now  the  writings  of  Seneca  show,  in
their  way,  a  real  anxiety  among  this  class  to  raise  the
moral  tone  of  mankind  around  them :  a  spirit  of  re-
form, a  zeal  for  the  conversion  of  souls,  which,  though
it  never  rose  indeed,  under  the  teaching  of  the  philo-
sophers, to  boiling  heat,  still  simmered  with  genial
warmth  on  the  surface  of  society. Far  different  as
was  their  social  standing  point,  far  different  as  were
the  foundations  and  the  presumed  sanctions  of  theii
teaching  respectively,  Seneca  and  St.  Paul  were  both
moral  reformers ; both,  be  it  said  with  reverence,
were  fellow-workers  in  the  cause  of  humanity,  though
the  Christian  could  look  beyond  the  proximate  aims
of  morality,  and  prepare  men  for  a  final  development
on  which  the  Stoic  could  not  venture  to  gaze. Hence
there  is  so  much  in  their  principles,  so  much  even  in
their  language,  which  agrees  together,  so  that  the  one
has  been  thought,  though  it  must  be  allowed  without
adequate  reason,  to  have  borrowed  directly  from  the
other.1 But  the  philosopher,  be  it  remembered,  dis-
coursed to  a  large  and  not  inattentive  audience,  and
surely  the  soil  was  not  all  unfruitful  on  which  his

1  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  refer  to  the  pretended  letters  between
St.  Paul  and  Seneca.  Besides  the  evidence  from  style,  some  of  the
dates  they  contain  are  quite  sufficient  to  condemn  them  as  clumsy
forgeries.  They  are  mentioned,  but  with  no  expression  of  belief  in
their  genuineness,  by  Jerome  arid  Augustine.  See  Jones,  On  the
Canon,  ii.  80.

HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  L1V

seed  was  scattered,  when  he  proclaimed  that  God
dwells  not  in  temples  of  wood  or  stone,  nor  wants
the  ministrations  of  human  hands l :  that  He  has
no  delight  in  the  blood  of  victims  2 :  that  He  is  near
to  all  His  creatures 3 :  that  His  spirit  resides  in
men's  hearts* :  that  all  men  are  truly  His  offspring5:
that  we  are  members  of  one  body,  which  is  God  or
Nature6:  that  men  must  believe  in  God  before  they
can  approach  Him1 :  that  the  true  service  of  God  is
to  be  like  unto  Him*:  that  all  men  have  sinned,  and
none  performed  all  the  works  of  the  law  9 :  that  God
is  no  respecter  of  nations,  ranks,  or  conditions,  but
all,  barbarian  and  Roman,  bond  and  free,  are  alike
under  His  all-seeing  Providence.™

St.  Paul  enjoined  submission  and  obedience  even
Seneca-.  to  the  tyranny  of  Nero,  and  Seneca  fosters
imd'mOTai  no  ideas  subversive  of  political  subjection,
teaching.  Endurance  is  the  paramount  virtue  of  the
Stoic.  To  forms  of  government  the  wise  man  was
wholly  indifferent ;  they  were  among  the  external  cir-
cumstances above  which  his  spirit  soared  in  serene
self-contemplation.  "We  trace  in  Seneca  no  yearning
for  a  restoration  of  political  freedom,  nor  does  he  even

1  Senec.  Ep.  95.,  and  in  Lactantius,  Inst.  vi.

z  Ep.  116.: "Colitur  Deus  non  tauris  sed  pia  et  recta  voluntate."

*  Ep.  41.  73.

4  Ep.  46.:  "  Sacer  intra  nos  spiritus  sedet."
'•*  De  Provid.  i.

*  Ep.  93.  95.:  "  Membra  sumus  magni  corporis."

1  Ep.  95.:  "Primus  Deorum  cultus  est  Deos  credere."

*  Ep.  95.:  "Satis  coluit  quisquis  imitatus  est."

*  Senec.  de  Ira,  i.  14.;  ii.  27.:  "  Quis  est  iste  qui  se  profitetuf
omnibus  legibus  innocentem?"

l*DeBenef.  iii.  18.:  "Virtus  omnes  admittit  libertines,  servos,
reges."  These  and  many  other  passages  are  collected  by  Oham-
pagny,  ii.  546.,  after  Fabricius  and  others,  and  compared  with  well-
known  texts  in  Scripture.  The  version  of  the  Vulgate  shows  a
great  deal  of  verbal  correspondence.  M.  Troplong  remarks,  after
De  Maistre,  that  Seneca  has  written  a  fine  book  on  Providence,  for
which  there  was  not  even  a  name  at  Rome  in  the  time  of  Cicero.
J'lnfiuence  du  Christianisme,  Ijfc-,  i.  ch.  4.

A.D./0-A.U.823. UNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  459

point  to  the  senate,  after  the  manner  of  the  patriots
of  the  day,  as  a  legitimate  check  to  the  autocracy  of
the  despot.  The  only  mode,  in  his  view,  of  tempering
tyranny  is  to  educate  the  tyrant  himself  in  virtue.
His  was  the  self-denial  of  the  Christians,  but  without
their  anticipated  compensation.  It  seems  impossible
to  doubt  that  in  his  highest  flights  of  rhetoric, — and
no  man  ever  recommended  the  unattainable  with  a
finer  grace, — Seneca  must  have  felt  that  he  was
labouring  to  build  up  a  house  without  foundations ;
that  his  system,  as  Caius  said  of  his  style,  was  sand
without  lime.  He  was  surely  not  unconscious  of  the
inconsistency  of  his  own  position,  as  a  public  Inc0nsistency
man  and  a  minister,  with  the  theories  to  SuTg^nd
which  he  had  wedded  himself;  and  of  the  Ws  conduct-
impossibility  of  preserving  in  it  the  purity  of  his
character  as  a  philosopher  or  a  man.  He  was  aware
that  in  the  existing  state  of  society  at  Korne,  wealth
was  necessary  to  men  high  in  station  :  wealth  alone
could  retain  influence,  and  a  poor  minister  became  at
once  contemptible.  The  distributor  of  the  imperial
favours  must  have  his  banquets,  his  receptions,  his
slaves  and  freedmen ;  he  must  possess  the  means  of
attracting  if  not  of  bribing;  he  must  not  seem  too
virtuous,  too  austere,  among  an  evil  generation ;  in
order  to  do  good  at  all  he  must  swim  with  the  stream,
however  polluted  it  might  be.  All  this  inconsistency
Seneca  must  have  contemplated  without  blenching ;
and  there  is  something  touching  in  the  serenity  he
preserved  amidst  the  conflict  that  must  have  per-
petually raged  between  his  natural  sense  and  his
acquired  principles.  Both  Cicero  and  Seneca  were
men  of  many  weaknesses,  and  we  remark  them  the
more  because  both  were  pretenders  to  unusual  strength
of  character :  but  while  Cicero  lapsed  into  political
errors,  Seneca  cannot  be  absolved  of  actual  crime.
Nevertheless,  if  we  may  compare  the  greatest  mas-
ters of  Roman  wisdom  together,  the  Stoic  will  appear^

460  HISTORY OF THK KOMANS  CH.  LlV.

I  think,  the  more  earnest  of  the  two,  the  more  anxious
to  do  his  duty  for  its  own  sake,  the  more  sensible  of
the  claims  of  mankind  upon  him  for  such  precepts  of
virtuous  living  as  he  had  to  give.  In  an  age  of  un-
belief and  compromise,  he  taught  that  Truth  was
positive  and  Virtue  objective.  He  conceived,  what
never  entered  Cicero's  mind,  the  idea  of  improving  his
fellow-creatures:  he  had,  what  Cicero  had  not,  a  heart
for  conversion  to  Christianity.

The  advance  of  moral  principles  between  the  age
Auius  Persius of  Cicero  and  Seneca  is  strongly  marked  by

a  teacher  ol  ,  _  . ,  , . , -, °  J  .  , J

stoicism.  the  tavour  with  which  the  expression  has
been  received  that  the  Stoic  was  enveloped,  as  it
were,  in  the  atmosphere  of  Christianity.1  We  possess
one  other  small  volume  of  the  moral  teaching  of  the
time,  comprising  the  six  satires  of  the  poet  Persius,
himself  also  a  Stoic,  and  a  pupil  of  the  Stoic  Cornu-
tus,  the  friend  and  probably  the  freedman  of  the
family  of  Seneca.  Aulus  Persius  was  born  in  the
year  787,  and  died  in  the  middle  of  Nero's  reign,  at
the  early  age  of  twenty-eight.  Possessed  of  ample
means,  and  with  weakly  health,  he  engaged  in  no
public  affairs,  but  devoted  himself  entirely  to  philo-
sophical speculation,  to  which  he  did  honour  by  the
purity  and  simplicity  of  his  private  life.  The  fasti-
diousness, perhaps,  rather  than  the  ardour  of  his
virtue  urged  him  to  step  forth  as  a  moral  reformer :

1  Troplong,  1.  c.,  who  cannot  altogether  give  up  the  significancy  of
the  phrase,  "  Seneca  noster,"  so  common  with  the  fathers  of  the
church.  See  St.  Jerome,  de  Script.  EccL  c.  12.;  Tertull.  de  Anim.
1. ;  August,  de  Civ.  Dei,  vi.  10.  He  adds:  "Sa  correspondance
avec  S.  Paul,  quoique  apocryphe,  ne  vaut-elle  pas  d'ailleurs  comme
mythe  ?  "  I  have  already  mentioned  the  coincidence  of  the  use  of
"  caro  "  in  Seneca  and  St.  Paul.  Troplong  says  that  "  angelus  "
occurs  also  in  its  biblical  sense  in  the  writings  of  the  philosopher.
But  the  great  subject  of  the  presumed  influence  of  Christianity  on
the  moral  teaching  of  this  and  later  periods  may  be  conveniently  re-
served for  another  occasion.  M.  Denis,  in  his  recent  work,  IdGet
Morales  dans  I'Antiquitf,  has  traced  some  Christian  maxims  far  back
into  the  region  of  heathen  philosophy

CH.  tiv.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  461

the  passion  of  his  contemporaries  for  verse  composi-
tion suggested  to  him  the  vehicle  of  poetical  satire
rather  than  of  prose  dissertation ;  and  his  lucubra-
tions, curious  and  not  uninstructive  as  they  are,  have
doubtless  been  preserved  to  us  only  by  the  accident
of  the  form  in  which  they  have  been  conveyed.  Of
the  poetical  merit  of  these  singular  compositions  I
have  no  occasion  here  to  speak :  they  have  been  very
variously  judged;  but  those  who  have  criticised  most
severely  their  jejuneness  in  thought  and  general
crabbedness  of  expression,  have  done  scant  justice  to
the  smartness  of  observation  and  felicity  of  language
with  which  they  occasionally  glitter.1  In  a  moral
point  of  view,  however,  they  are  not  without  their
significance.  A  comparison  of  the  satires  of  Persius
with  those  of  Horace  may  serve  to  mark  the  progress
of  the  age  in  ethical  principles.  Horace  shoots  folly
as  it  flies :  his  bolts  are  either  flung  at  random  for
his  own  amusement,  or,  as  I  have  elsewhere  sug-
gested, have  a  covert  political  object:  there  is  neither
love  of  truth,  nor  indignation  at  vice,  nor  scorn  of
baseness,  nor  a  generous  wish  to  amend  error.  But
Persius  is  not  a  man  of  the  world  amusing  himself
with  his  fellow-creatures;  he  is  a  philosopher  seeking
to  understand  them,  and  still  further,  he  is  a  philo-
sopher of  the  age  and  school  of  Seneca,  really  anxious
to  instruct  them.  He  recals  men  to  true  wisdom  by
showing  not  the  sin  or  folly,  or  the  evil  consequences
of  their  passions,  but  their  inconsistency.  Men  and
women,  he  lets  us  know,  are  not  true  philosophers :
they  say  one  thing  and  do  another,  in  youth  and
age,  in  public  and  private  life,  in  the  street  and  in
the  chamber,  with  no  intention  to  deceive,  but  from

1  M.  Nisard's  judgment  on  Persius  is  harsh  and  unfair  (Etudes
gur  les  Poetes  Lat.  de  la  Decadence,  i.  201.).  The  passages  from
Boileau  which  he  cites  in  comparison  are  sufficient  to  demonstrate
the  superiority  of  the  third  in  rank  of  the  Roman  satirists  over  the
first  of  the  moderns.

462  HISTORY OF TFE ROMANS  CH.  LIV.

defective  education.'  Genuine  philosophy  alone  can
teach  them  to  choose  the  right  path  and  to  keep  it :
this  is  the  training  which  makes  men  true  to  them-
selves and  to  society.  This  is  a  wisdom  which  it  is
in  the  power  of  every  man  to  attain :  and  this  wis-
dom he  shows  us  by  his  own  example  is  Not  harsh
and  crabbed  as  dull  fools  suppose,  But  musical  as
is  Apollo's  lute.  The  philosophy  of  the  Porch  was
never  so  persuasively  recommended  as  by  the  charm-
ing verses  in  which  Persius  sings  of  the  influence
Cornutus  exercised  on  his  youthful  affections,  and  the
perfect  harmony  which  subsisted  in  heart  and  soul
between  the  master  and  the  pupil,  into  whose  purged
ear  he  had  instilled  the  fruitful  seed  of  Cleanthes.*

It  has  been  supposed  that,  in  his  strictures  on  the
NO  political  bad  taste  of  contemporary  versifiers,  Persius
tphf  writhfgl"  nas  covertly  reflected  on  the  effeminacy  of
of  Persius.  Nero's  own  compositions.1  Be  this  as  it
may,  it  should  be  remembered  that  the  poet  was
dead  before  the  prince  had  made  himself  generally
infamous  for  worse  faults  than  those  of  style  and  sen-
timent. Nevertheless,  it  is  deserving  of  remark  that
the  sage,  the  moralist,  the  reformer,  has  not  uttered
a  single  word  on  the  political  aspect  of  the  times ;
no  breath  of  indignation  at  the  servile  submission  of
his  countrymen,  of  consolation  for  broken-hearted

1  Thus,  the  temple-worshipper  is  inconsistent  when  he  thinks  he
can  seduce  the  pure  and  holy  gods  (ii.  4.):  the  tyrant,  who  thinks
himself  powerful  but  is  really  the  slave  of  his  terrors  (iii.  42.):  the
sick  man  who  resents  his  physician's  advice  (iii.  88.). Every  man
pretends  to  he  different  from  what  he  really  is  (iv.  23.). Men  ac-
knowledge the  necessity  of  wisdom,  but  put  off  seeking  it  (v.  66.)
They  seek  for  liberty  and  fancy  they  have  gained  it,  when  they  are
really  slaves  to  vice  and  passion  (v.  125.).

2  Persins,  Sat.  v.  45.:

"  Non  equidem  hoc  dnbites  amborum  foedere  certo

Consentire  dies,  et  ab  uno  sidere  nasci

Cultor  enim  juvenum  purgatas  inseris  aures
Frnge  Cleanthea. Petite  hinc,  juvenesque  senesqne,
Finem  animo  certum,  miserisque  viatica  canis."
8  Pers.  Sat.  i.  99.  foil.

CH.  Liv.  UNDER THE EMPIRE  463

patriots,  of  encouragement  for  the  few  gallant  spirits
who  still  might  hope  for  better  days  to  come.  Persius
betrays  no  consciousness  of  the  degradation  of  his
countrymen,  nor  yearning  for  the  recovery  of  their
ancient  liberties.  A  single  allusion  to  the  freedom  of
the  Athenians  of  old  suggests  only  the  recollection
of  the  deceptions  practised  upon  them  by  their  dema-
gogues l :  to  the  Senate,  once  the  real  bulwark  of  Ro-
man independence,  still  something  more  than  the
mere  shadow  of  a  great  name,  be  makes  no  allusion
whatever.  The  philosopher,  like  the  Christian,  is
content  that  men  should  work  out  the  appointed
end  of  their  being  under  the  circumstances  in  which
Providence  has  placed  them.

A  more  important  contribution  to  the  history  of
mind  and  opinion  at  this  period,  is  supplied

i ,1 T»7  T f -r  -ii-ii The"Phar-

by  the  Priarsaiia  ot  Lucan,  a  work  doubly  »aiia"  of
interesting, both from its own peculiar
merits as  a  poem,  and  from  the  fate  of  its  distin-
guished author. Lucan,  as  we  have  seen,  was  the
chosen  companion  of  Nero's  early  days,  being  of  about
the  same  age,  and  showing  much  of  the  ready  and
brilliant  talent  which  might  charm  a  youth  of  Nero's
temper  and  accomplishments. The  stories  Tradition  of
that  are told  of  their  rivalry  in  poetical  between"0"8
exercitations  ;  of  the  success  of  the  subject  *£]canand

TO  account-
ed for.

and  the  jealousy  of  the  prince ;  of  the
taunts  with  which  the  one  resented  this  jealousy,
and  the  other's  revenge  by  forbidding  him  to  recite
in  public ;  finally,  of  the  stifled  wrath  which  led  the
offended  bard  to  conspire  against  the  tyrant's  life ; —
all  these  may  in  the  main  be  true,  though  possibly
coloured  and  exaggerated.  For  my  own  part,  I  am
disposed  to  believe  that  they  grew  out  of  an  attempt
to  account  for  the  change  of  sentiment, — as  it

1  Persins,  Sort.  iv.  20. :

"  Dinomaches  ego  sum,  suffla;  sum  candidus:  esfv
Dum  ne  deteriug  sapiat  pannucea  Baucis."

464  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  U7.

appears  at  least  to  an  ordinary  observer, — between
the  commencement  and  the  continuation  of  Lucan's
poem.  We  have  remarked  already  the  vehement
strain  of  panegyric  upon  Nero  which  ushers  in  the
great  Epic  of  the  Civil  Wars :  and  when  we  consider
that  the  author  perished  at  the  age  of  twenty-six,  in
the  eleventh  year  of  Nero's  reign,  we  can  hardly
throw  back  the  period  of  this  dedication  to  the
golden  era  of  the  Quinquennium.  It  must  be  al-
lowed that  the  tyrant  had  already  revealed  much  of
the  evil  of  his  character  when  the  courtier  dared  to
canonize  his  virtues ;  if  the  stern  republicanism  of
the  poem  as  it  advances  was  an  after-thought,  it  can-
not be  excused  on  the  common  plea,  that  the  vices
of  tyranny  were  undiscovered  at  its  commencement.
But,  after  allj  this  presumed  change  is  a  gratuitous
Lucan  not  in-  imputation.  To  Nero  himself,  after  the
n°"8natterynof  opening  invocation,  there  is  no  farther  al-
Nero.  lusion ;  and  if,  as  the  current  of  his  verse

rolls  on,  his  appeals  to  the  spirit  of  liberty  and  de-
nunciations of  tyranny  become  more  vehement  and
frequent,  we  must  not  suppose  that  Lucan  regarded
the  principate  as  a  tyranny,  or,  till  the  last  moment  of
personal  pique  or  indignation,  the  prince  himself  as  a
tyrant.1  It  would  be  a  still  greater  mistake  to  repre-
sent the  panegyric  on  Nero  as  covert  irony.  Lucan
was  perfectly  in  earnest.  The  poem,  as  we  know,
was  left  unfinished  at  his  death,  and  though  the  books
may  have  been  successively  recited  to  friends,  it  was
not,  as  far  as  we  can  judge,  definitely  published  in
the  author's  lifetime.2  Whatever  his  cause  of  quarrel

1  Throughout  the  Pharsalia  there  is  no  stronger  expression  of  re-
publican indignation  than  in  lines  which  occur  towards  the  end  of
the  first  book:

"  Snperos  quid  prodest  poscere  finem?
Cum  domino  pax  ista  venit:  due,  Eoma,  malorum
Continuam  seriem,  clademque  in  tempera  multa
Extrahe,  civili  tantum  jam  libera  hello."

1  Collections  of  small  poems  such  as  odes,  epigrams,  and  satires,

CH.  LIV.  UNDER THE UMPIRE.  465

might  be,  I  suppose  that  Lucan,  had  he  deliberately
changed  his  opinion  on  the  necessity  of  a  chief  ruler,
might  have  taken  measures  for  expunging  the  pas-
Rage  in  which  it  is  so  emphatically  asserted.

But  we  must  not  deceive  ourselves.  Lucan  was  a
vehement  patriot.  He  was  an  ardent  ad-  Lucanapar.
mirer  of  the  historic  liberties  of  his  country.  ienTtefnot'of
He  sighed  from  wounded  pride  and  offended  the  ^ople-
virtue,  at  the  remembrance  of  the  latter  days  of  the
republic,  and  believed  that  Eome  had  forfeited  her
appointed  privilege  of  universal  conquest  since  she
surrendered  the  pledges  of  her  freedom.1  But  what
was  the  freedom  he  so  fiercely  regretted  ?  -It  was  the
rule  of  his  own  class,  the  licence  to  enjoy  the  fruits
of  conquest  claimed,  seized,  and  jealously  guarded
by  the  nobles  and  senate  in  defiance  of  the  rights  of
every  other  class  of  citizens,  of  the  subject  provincials,
and  of  the  world  at  large.  Critics  have  asked,  who  is
the  hero  of  the  Pharsalia  ?  Is  it  Caesar,  or  Pompeius,
or  Cato  ?  It  is  none  of  the  three,  it  may  be  answered  ;
it  is  the  Senate.  Liberty  and  the  Senate  are  for  ever
in  the  poet's  mouth,  as  correlative  terms ;  but  he  has
no  yearnings  for  the  people ;  of  the  knights  as  an
order  in  the  state  he  never  once  speaks.2  The  Senate

were  published  in  separate  books;  but  we  know  of  the  ^Eneid,  and
we  may  infer  the  same  of  other  works  of  similar  pretensions,  that
portions  were  first  recited  to  select  audiences,  but  the  poem  reserved
for  publication  as  a  whole.  The  same  appears  to  have  been  the
case  with  the  Metamorphoses.  The  story  that  the  first  three  books
of  the  Pharsalia  were  corrected  and  published  by  the  writer  comes
from  an  old  commentary  of  no  authority.  They  are  in  no  respect
more  correct  than  the  later  books.
1  Lucan,  Phars.  vii.  426.: —

"  Sed  retro  tua  fata  tulit,  par  omnibus  annis,
Emathias  funesta  dies:  hac  luce  cruenta
Effectum,  ut  Latios  non  horreat  India  fasces;"  &c.
*  The  complacency  with  which  the  Senate  is  assumed  to  be  the
governing  order  of  the  state  is  very  instructive. See  particularly
the  opening  of  the  fifth  book  of  the  Pharsalia  : —
"  Docuit  populos  venerabilis  Ordo

Non  Magni  partes  sed  Magnum  in  partibus  esse

VOX.  VI.  H  H

466  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  CH.  UV.

is  his  idol,  its  temple  is  the  Curia,  and  its  priests  are
the  consuls ;  but  he  has  no  incense  for  tribunes  and
chiefs  of  the  Comitia  and  the  Forum.  The  idea  he
had  conceived  of  the  polity  of  the  Republic  was  a
dignified  oligarchy  of  patrician  nobles,  born  to  sway
the  voters  of  the  Campus  from  the  steps  of  the  temple
of  Bellona,  to  stride  without  partners  or  rivals  over
every  province  of  the  empire  they  had  acquired  by
the  blood  of  their  plebeian  clients.  The  descendants
of  the  fallen  oligarchy,  in  the  ardour  of  their  pre-
tended patriotism,  had  completely  forgotten  the  tribes
as  an  element  of  their  ancient  constitution,  and  in
their  aspirations  for  the  revival  of  liberty  never
dreained  of  restoring  to  them  any  portion  of  their
power.  In  the  emperor's  principate  or  first  place  in
the  senate  they  fully  acquiesced ;  they  did  not  grudge
him  his  seat  of  honour  between  the  consuls  ;  it  was
of  his  tribunate,  his  championship  of  the  people,  that
they  were  alone  really  jealous.  The  idea

He  had  no  , J  . , f J J  , .

wish  to  abolish  they  entertained  or  a  glorious  revolution
on'iyufsubor-  was  not  the  abolition  of  the  empire ;  they
emperor  to  desired  only  to  eliminate  from  it  the  popular

the  senate.  .  . .  . ,

element,  and  restrict  it  solely  to  a  govern-
ment through  the  senate.  They  would  have  suffered
their  chief  to  command  their  armies,  as  long  as  he
held  his  command  by  decree  of  the  senate,  not  by  a
law  of  the  people.  They  would  have  felt  it  as  no
encroachment  on  their  special  rights  that  he  should
sway  half  the  provinces  as  imperator  or  proconsul.
Such  of  the  emperors  as  had  sought  to  gain  the
favour  of  the  aristocracy  had  seduloubly  humoured
these  selfish  views.  Nero,  following  the  precepts  of
Augustus  and  the  example  of  Claudius,  had  sunk  the

CunctaquejussMri  primum  hoc  decernite  Patres

Consulite  in  medium,  Patres,  Magnumquejwfote
Esse  ducem "

With  equal  complacency  the  people  are  left  to  Csesar,  v.  882.
392.,  &c.

CH.  MV.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  467

tribune  in  the  princeps,  and  accordingly  Nero  was
long  popular  with  the  senators.  It  was  not  till  he
began  in  his  caprice  to  make  war  upon  them  person-
ally that  he  became  personally  hateful  to  them  ;  but
even  then  his  government,  still  administered  to  a
great  extent  by  their  order,  retained  its  hold  on  their
consideration,  and  the  fiercest  patriots  among  them
never  contemplated  its  overthrow.  They  might  hope
to  remove  Nero  from  its  head,  and  to  replace  him  by
a  puppet  of  their  own ;  but  even  Lucan  himself,  the
disciple  of  Cato,  when  he  girded  himself  like  Brutus
with  a  dagger  to  take  the  Caesar's  life,  had  no  thought
of  restoring  the  republic  of  free  elections  and  popular
magistracies.  We  shall  find,  as  we  proceed  in  this
history,  that  Tacitus  himself,  a  patriot  of  calmer
judgment,  was  abundantly  satisfied  when  he  found  the
senate  placed  ostensibly  at  the  head  of  affairs,  and
the  emperors  affecting  to  be  no  more  than  its  hand
and  its  mouth-piece.  Under  Nerva  and  Trajan  the
Koman  liberals  believed  that  they  had  recovered  the
days  of  Catulus  and  Pompeius.

But  to  Lucan,  after  all,  whatever  it  might  be  to
men  of  more  reflection  and  experience,  the

„  .  „ ,  i_ .  Character-

idea  of  the  senate  was  a  mere  phantom,  an  istic.of

abstraction  of  the  imagination.  Our  poet  utoantem*
was  a  youth,  bred  a  declaimer  of  the  schools,
the  child  and  pupil  of  declaimers  and  rhetoricians,
and  his  mind  had  never  been  opened  either  by  train-
ing or  observation  to  views  of  actual  life.  It  had
become  irksome  to  men  of  age  and  experience  to
mingle  in  public  affairs  which  they  were  not  suffered
to  conduct,  and  the  young  competitors  for  civil  dis-
tinction were  left  without  control  to  indulge  the
ardour  of  speculative  opinion.  There  was  no  moral
check  on  their  thoughts,  none  on  their  speech :  the
new  impulse  given  to  popular  composition  by  the
advent  of  Nero  to  power  raised  a  race  of  schoolboys
to  illegitimate  authority  in  the  world  of  letters.

H  H  2

468  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS  CH.  UV

Young  Rome  of  the  time  of  Nero  was  eminently
conceited,  and  I  fear  eminently  shallow.  Placing
Seneca  at  their  head,  as  is  the  wont  of  the  rising
generation  to  shelter  under  a  great  name  its  own
conscious  self-distrust,  the  favourites  of  the  prince,
accepted  at  the  same  time  as  the  favourites  of  the  nml-
titude,  overbore  the  finest  taste  and  judgment  of  the
veterans  of  literature.  The  faults  and  vices  of  youth
were  admired,  humoured,  and  stimulated.  Eeserve
and  modesty,  persevering  toil,  patient  self-examina-
tion, were  regarded  as  irksome  in  themselves,  and  as
a  reflection  on  the  character  of  the  prince.  Talent
flourished  in  such  an  atmosphere,  as  in  a  forcing-
house,  but  it  was  no  climate  for  the  natural  ripening
of  genius.  The  wit  and  cleverness  of  Lucan,  con-
sidering his  years,  are  preternatural:  the  trumpet-
tones  of  his  scorn  or  admiration,  after  more  than
thirty  years'  familiarity,  still  thunder  in  my  ears  with
startling  intensity :  but  he  has  no  divination  of  men
and  things ;  his  imagination  never  clothes  itself  in
the  costume  of  the  past ;  he  is  never  transported  out
of  himself ;  he  never  saw  the  conqueror  of  the  Gauls ;
he  never  trod  the  plains  of  Emathia.  If  he  is  to  be
compared  at  all  with  the  inspired  singer  of  the  ^Eneid,
pensive,  passionate,  and  abstracted,  I  know  not  what
more  to  his  advantage  can  be  said,  than  the  remark
of  Statius,  that  the  Epic  of  Lucan  was  an  earlier
effort  than  the  first  prolusions  of  Virgil.1

Next  to  Liberty  Lucan  chanted  the  praises  of  Phi-
losophy, and  his  views  of  the  one  had  as
viewTor little  of  truth  and  sense  as  of  the  other.  He
proclaimed  himself  a  follower  of  the  Stoics,
and  no  mr  a  has  set  forth  their  views,  such  as  he  con-

1  Statius,  Sylv.  ii.  7.  73. :  "  Hsec  primo  juvenis  canes  sub  sevo
Ante  annos  Culicis  Maroniani."

According  to  the  life  of  Lucan  ascribed  to  Suetonius,  this  was  the
poet's  own  boastful  comparison :  "  Et  quantum  mihi  restat  ad
Culicem!"

CH.  LIV.  ILNDER  THE  EMPIRE.  469

ceived  them,  with  more  spirited  and  sounding  phrases.
If,  however,  we  examine  them,  we  discover  in  them
all  the  vagueness  and  uncertainty  of  the  teaching  of
the  day;  it  is  impossible  to  gather  from  the  verses  of
Lucan  whether  the  poet  or  his  masters  believed  in
the  existence  of  the  Grods,  or  moral  government  of  the
world.  These  doctrines  are  repeatedly  asserted,  and
again  not  less  repeatedly  denied.1  Fate,  the  idol  of
the  Stoics,  plays  a  great  part  on  the  Pharsalian  stage  ;
yet  once,  at  least,  the  poet  does  not  scruple  to  declare
his  uncertainty  whether  Apollo  prophesies  that  which
is  fated,  or  fate  is  that  which  Apollo  prophesies.*
There  is,  however,  in  his  view  at  least  one  manifest
destiny,  the  law  of  nature  which  justifies  Eome's
dominion  over  the  world.  While  he  throws  aside  the
old  contracted  notions  of  the  individuality  of  nations,
and  affirms,  with  the  emphasis  of  Seneca,  the  com-
mon origin  and  rights  of  all  mankind,  he  never
shrinks  from  the  glaring  inconsistency  of  his  creed  as
a  Eoman  with  his  creed  as  a  philosopher.

Nevertheless  this  philosophy,  crude  as  it  is,  has
availed  to  soften  his  feelings  at  least  in  one  Hi8  genera;
particular. No  Eoman  poet  dwells  with  id?efm^2a.
such  warmth  as  Lucan  on  the  sentiment  of  t10"'
conjugal  affection.3 There  is  a  sweetness  in  more
than  one  passage  of  the  Pliarsalia,  where  it  pauses  on

1  The  Pharsalia  is  full  of  auguries,  visions,  and  other  testimonies
to  supernatural  power:  the  author  repeatedly  invokes  the  gods;  but
he  makes  no  use  of  mythological  machinery,  and  more  than  ouce
expressly  denies  the  existence  of  a  superintending  Providence:  vii.
447.  454. :

"  Mentimur  regnare  Jovem  ....  mortalia  nulli
Snnt  curata  Deo."

*  ,'fiarx.  v.  92.:

"  Sive  canit  fatum,  seu,  quod  jubet  ipsc,  canendo
Fit  fatum."

•  Comp.  the  passion  of  Pompeius  and  Cornelia,  v.  725-816.,  viii.
<0-158.,  ix.  51-116. Even  the  sterner  esteem  of  Cato  andMarcia
has  a  touch  of  sentiment  and  enthusiasm.

470  HISTORY OP THE ROMANS  cu.  UT.

its  stately  inarch  to  indulge  in  a  moment's  tenderness,
which  little  harmonizes  with  its  author's  general
harshness,  and  may  be  taken  as  a  tribute  perhaps  to
the  merits  of  a  consort  worthy  of  his  genius,  whose  de-
votion to  his  memory  was  recorded  in  fitting  strains  by
the  next  generation.1  But  this  appreciation  of  the
gentle  influence  which  soothes  most  effectively  the
ills  of  life,  is  beyond  the  experience  of  youth,  and
shows  a  power  of  imagination  in  Lucan  which  we
miss  with  regret  in  many  passages  of  his  Epic  more
brilliant  in  conception,  and  more  sonorous  in  language.
His  general  deficiency  indeed  in  this  faculty  is  most
strikingly  exhibited  in  the  descriptions  of  physical
suffering  in  which  he  seems  to  revel.  His  ever-recur-
ring pictures  of  death  and  wounds,  of  diseases  and
famines,  are  coarse  material  painting,  in  which  he  only
aims  at  representing  vividly  the  scenes  he  has  himself
witnessed  in  the  amphitheatres,  or  possibly  in  the
streets  of  his  own  city.  He  has  treasured  up  in  his
mind  all  the  horrors  which  have  been  presented  to
his  senses,  nor  has  he  the  art  or  delicacy  to  create
the  effect  required  by  generalities  and  abstractions.
This  is  the  common  fault  of  young  writers ;  it  is  to
be  feared,  however,  that  it  was  eminently  the  fault  of
the  age  also;  it  sprang  from  the  hard  materialism
engendered  by  sensual  indulgence,  from  a  terrible
familiarity  with  objects  the  most  painful  and  disgust-
ing, and  a  cynical  freedom  of  life  and  conversation.

Another  feature  of  Lucan's  Pharsalia  is  its  affecta-
tion of  encyclopedic  knowledge,  not  perhaps  character-

1  Statins,  Lc.  120..

"  Adsis  lucidus,  et  vocante  Polla,
Unum,  quaeso,  diein  Deos  silentum
Exores;  solet  hoc  patere  limen
Ad  nuptas  redeuntibus  maritis.
Hsec  te  non  thiasis  procax  dolosis
Falsi  numinis  induit  figuras;
Ipsum  sed  colit  et  frequentat  ipsum,
Imis  altius  insitum  medullis."

Corap.  Martial,  vii.  21.

CH.  uv.  UNDER THE EMPIRE.  47]

istic  of  the  man  himself  so  much  as  of  the  period  which
boasted  the  vast  compilations  of  Strabo's  Afl^ti,,,,
Geography  and  Pliny's  Natural  History.  lta£™yclo~
Astronomy  and  astrology,  geography  mathe-  knowledse-
matical  and  terrestrial,  antiquities  and  philosophy,  my-
thology and  navigation, — all  these  branches  of  science
have  their  attractions  for  the  young  academician :
wild  and  confused  as  his  views  of  them  often  are,
caught  up  from  the  teaching  of  many  masters,  and
never  as  it  seems  digested  in  the  mind  of  the  pupil,
they  exhibit  the  appetite  of  the  age  for  indiscriminate
knowledge,  an  age  of  facts  rather  than  of  principles.1
They  afford  a  glimpse  of  the  diversified  subjects  of  in-
tellectual occupation  and  moral  interest  which  a  world-
wide empire  afforded,  when  all  the  races  of  mankind,
their  climes  and  their  characters,  seemed  brought
into  one  focus.  Amidst  the  material  luxury  and  the
rampant  vices  of  the  times,  they  show  that  there  was
still  room  for  mental  cultivation,  which  must  have  kept
many  hearts  pure  and  single,  and  arrested  the  de-
generacy of  society.  By  literature,  and  possibly  by
domestic  interests,  Lucan  seems  himself  to  have  been
saved  from  the  contagion  around  him.  His  poem,
considering  the  atmosphere  of  voluptuousness  in  which
he  moved,  is  singularly  free  from  all  indelicacy  of
thought  and  language.2  Modesty,  indeed,  was  a
tradition  of  the  Koman  Epic ;  vices  which  passed  cur-
rent in  every  circle  of  contemporary  society  are  never

1  Among  other  passages  the  reader  noay  be  referred  for  Lucan's
ideas  of  astronomy  to  ix.  531.;  of  astrology  to  i.  660.;  of  geography
to  i.  396.,  ii.  399.,  iii.  171.,  iv.  51.,  vi.  333.,  ix.  411.,  x.  268.;  of  his-
tory to  ii.  69.,  x.  20.;  of  antiquities  to  ix.  950.;  of  philosophy  to  ii.
286.,  ix.  564.;  of  mythology  to  iv.  593.,  ix.  619.;  of  navigation  to
viii.  168.

2  Lucan  is  described  to  us  as  a  wealthy  idler:  Juvenal,  vii.  79.  :

"  Contentus  fama  jaceat  Lncanus  in  hortis  Marmoreis."

He  was  born  at  Corduba  in  Spain,  but  of  Roman  parents,  and  neither
his  father  Mella,  nor  his  uncles  Seneca  and  Gallio,  betrayed  the  sim-
plicity of  a  provincial  extraction.  The  notion  of  Quintilian  that  his
rhetorical  style  savoured  of  Spanish  turgidity,  and  the  compliments

472  HISTORY OF THE ROMANS.  CH.  Liv,

BO  much  as  named  by  the  singers  of  the  life  heroic :
but  that  Lucan  should  exhibit  the  same  instinct  as
Virgil,  that  Caesar  and  Pompeius  should  be  robed  for
us  in  the  decent  drapery  of  ^iEneas  and  Turnus,  is
much  to  the  credit  of  the  poet,  and  possibly  of  his
age  also.  It  would  seem  that  amidst  the  general  dis-
solution of  principles  some  ideas  retained  their  in-
fluence and  enforced  a  religious  self-restraint ;  wild
as  was  the  licence  of  the  age,  it  had  its  recognised
limits ;  a  certain  sense  of  decorum,  however  illogical
we  may  deem  it,  still  preserved  its  sway  over  the
chartered  libertines  of  Rome.1  It  may  be  added  that
while  professed  philosophers  spoke  with  doubt  and:
anxiety,  and  at  best  with  faint  hope,  of  the  prospect ,
of  a  future  state,  Lucan,  faithful  to  the  common
sentiment  of  poetry,  and  the  universal  aspirations  of
unsophisticated  nature,  expresses  at  one  time  the
popular  belief  in  its  existence,  and  philosophic  con-
ceptions of  its  character  at  another.2

of  Statius  to  his  native  Baetis,  are  more  fanciful  than  sound. Sef  •
however  Sylv.  ii.  7.  33.:

"  Attollat  refluos  in  astra  fontes
Graio  nobilior  Melete  Baetis.
Bffidn,  Mantua,  provocare  noli."

1  The  purity  of  the  Pharsalia  is  equal  to  that  of  the  JSneid,  and  '
the  same  may  be  said  of  the  later  epics  of  Silius,  Statius,  and  Vale-
rius Fiaccus. Lucan's  moral  perceptions  are  more  just  than  Vir-
gil's; bating  some exaggerated  expressions  of  vindictiveness,  they
are  a  very  fair  reflection  of  the  teaching  of  his  masters  the  Stoics.
I  must  censure,  however,  his  tenderness  for  the  scoundrel  Domitius.
who  dying  forsooth,  "  Venia  gaudet  caruisse  secunda." Phars.  vii.
604.

2  The  scorn  Lucan  throws  on  the  Druidical  doctrine  of  transmi-
gration, i.  455.,  implies  no  denial  of  a  spiritual  immortality. On  the
other  hand,  the  reality  of  the  future  life,  as  a state of  reward, is
strongly  set  forth  in  many  passages:  see  particularly  vi.  782.,  vii.
816.,  and  the  sublime  canonization  of  Pompeius,  ix.  L :

"  At  non  in  Pharia  manes  jacuere  fa  villa,
Nee  cinis  exiguus  tantam  compescuit  Umbram:
Prosiluit  busto,  semiustaque  membra  relinquens,
Degeneremque  rogum,  sequitur  convexa  Tonantis.  .  .  .
Semidei  Manes  habitant,  quos  ignea  virtus,
Innocuos  vita?,  patientes  aetheris  imi
Fecit,  et  ceternos  animum  colleqit  in  orb?*,"

APPENDIX TO VOL.  VX

GENEALOGICAL  TABLES.

TABLE  I.

C.  Julius  Cassar,
praetor,  =  AurelU

d.  670.

0.  JtiLttrs  Caesar,

dictator,  =1.  Cornelia, =2.  Pompeia, =3.  Calpurr.ia,

b.  664,  k.  710. I dr.  of  Cinna. dr.  of  Pom- dr.  of  L.  Piao.
peius  Bnfns

Julia-- H.  Atinf
I Balbn*.

Alia
Tab.  II

On.  Pompeins= Julia
Magnut

by  adoption,

0.  Octavius

aft.  C.  Julius  Cassar

Octavianus  Augustus.

Tab.  II.  IV.

TABLE  II.

C.  Octavins=1.  Ancharia.

Octavia  (major)

2.  Ada,  dr.
Balbus,  and  Julia,
sister  of  Julius  Caesar.
Tab.  I.

Octavia  (minor)  =  l.  C.Marce!l!is,=2.  M.  Antonlus,

d.  743.

cons.  704.

triumvir.
Tab.  m.

C.  Octavius,  b.  691.

adopted  by  Julius  Cesar.

AUGUSTUS,  727.

T«b.  IV.

M.  Marcellns= Julia,  dr.  Marcella=

b.  711.  of  Augustus, (major)

d.  731.

=  1.  M.  Aprippa,  Maroella.

2.  Julus  Antonius, (minor),
son  of  the  triumvir.
Tab.  HI

474

APPENDIX

I

s  °

"11 ~%*

"**£• o

-H
fl

•  d a

fi .

11 1

1  i

£*•*  £•* 2* /"^

5 S

• •

1

p.
. g"

ii  ii  —  Jji—
¥ 1J

-llllg

1  1^
lill

3 0

1 §

Q

'§ "S

S 6

1

1

s" S

a"  .,

efl §

Hi-

'p, ^

s a

a

-IS

O jR

•5-S

O

s

B

01

ii

u

•js

—- 1!
• pi

APPENDIX.

475

w

I

a.

476

APPENDIX.

4

w «

—III

SHU

W £>

•«tj j

§  C  »

IIS

-  §="^
•CH

«^«

-m

Ilif

ill

-

-

I 111

n ii  n

-1  wi

^  II  ^1
B|«f«w

APPENDIX.  477

TABLE  VI.

b.  744.  emp.  794.

d.807.  ,

Drusus,  Claudia,

d.  infant.  d.  infant.

=  4.  -Elia  Petina =  5.  Valeria  Messalina =  6.  Agrippina.

(minor).
___  !  I  __  Tab.  in.  T.

Antonla.  Octavia  Britannicus,

=  1  .  On.  Pomp.  Magnus.  =  Nero  b.  794.  k,  809

=  '2.  Faustus  Sulla.

TABLE  VH.
fFrom  Smith's  Classical  Biography.)

M.  IEmilius  Lepidns  =  Appuleia.
cons.  676.

L.  JEmilius  Paulas,  M.  /Emilius  Lepidns,  Cornelius  Scipio

cons.  704.  triumvir  =  Junia.  2Emilianus,

k.  by  Pompeius,  677.

Paulus  Emilias  Lepidus, M.  JEmilius  Lepidus,
cons.  720  =  Cornelia.  conspired  against  Augustus,

k.  724.

L.  JEmilius  Paulus.  M.  JEmilius  Lepidoe.  ^Emilia  Lepidu

ooiis.  754  =  Julia  gr.  dr.  cons.  76P,

of  AugnBtns.

iliaLepl

^Bmllius Emilia  Emilia  Lepida,

iu  =  Drnsilla Jjepida  =  1.  CLAUDIUS.  m.  Drusus,  son

k.  792. T»b.  IV 2.  App.  Silanus.  of  Otermanicus,

Tab.  Vm.  d.  789.

OP UNCERTAIN OBIOIN.

Q.  2Bmilius  Lepidus,
cons.  733.

Q.  /T.miliiiB  Lepidtu,
cons.  764.

478  APPENDIX

TABLE  VIH.
rFrom  Smith's  Classical  Biography.)

D.  Junins  Sllanns,  cons.  692  =  Servilla,

mother  of  Bruttw.

M.  Silanus,  Jnnia  =  Lepidus, Jnnla  =  C.  Cassius  Longinna

cons.  729.  triumvir.

M.  Silanus,  cons.  772.  D.  Silanus.

Junia = OAIUS  CALIOULA.  Junla  Sllana  =  C.  SUlus.

Claudilla.

0.  Silanus,  cons.  763.

App.  Silanus,  cons.  781  =  Emilia  Lepida. Tab.  IV.
k.  801.  I gt.  gd.  dr.  of  Augustus.

Junla  Calvina, JunU  Lep

M.  Silanna. L.  Silanns, D.  Torquatus  Silanus, Junla  Calvina, Junto  Lepida.
k.  *08.  affianced  to  cons.  806.  m.  "VrrEi.uns,

Octavia,  dr.  o?
CLAUDIUS.
£.302.

END OF THE SIXTH VOLUME.

PRINTED BY

SrOTTISWOODE  AND  CO.  LTD..  NEW-STREET  SQUARE
LONDON

University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.

A 000361  913 7
