The Voyage of Bran, Son of Febal, to the Land of the Living, Vol. II
Kuno Meyer & Alfred Nutt, 1895
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The Voyage of Bran, Vol. II (1895) — the Celtic doctrine of rebirth and the comparative notes completing Meyer and Nutt's immram edition. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/voyageofbranson02scuoft). This 1895 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================



I


dBrtmrn  JLtftrarp

No.  6

THE    VOYAGE    OF    BRAN

VOL.   II


LIBRARY

sS — ^4?


"1,


The

Voyage  of  Bran  Son  of  Febal

to  the  Land  of  the  Living

AN  OLD  IRISH  SAGA

EDITED    AND   TRANSLATED    BY

Kuno  Meyer

With  Essays  upon  the  Irish  Vision  of  the

Happy  Othervvorld  :  and  the  Celtic

doctrine  of  Re-birth  :  by

Alfred    Nutt

VOL.  II


The  Celtic  Doctrine
of  Re-birth

BY

Alfred    Nutt

With  Appendices  :  the  Transformations  of  Tuan

Mac  Cairill,  the  Dinnshenchas  of  Mag  Slecht

Edited  and  Translated  by

Kuno    Meyer


London :

Published  by  David  Nutt  in  the  Strand
1897


GRIMM  LIBRARY.     No.   i.

GEORGIAN  FOLK-TALES.     Translated  by

Marjory  Wardrop.

Cr.  Svo,  pp.  xii+175-     Ss-  «#•


GRIMM  LIBRARY.     No.  2.

THE  LEGEND  OF  PERSEUS.    By  Edwin

Sidney  Hartland,  F.S.A.

Vol.  I.  THE  SUPERNATURAL  BIRTH.

Cr.  Svo,  pp.  xxxiv  +  228.     7s.  6d.  net.


GRIMM  LIBRARY.     No.  3.

THE  LEGEND  OF  PERSEUS.    By  Edwin

Sidney  Hartland,  F.S.A.

Vol.    II.     THE    LIFE-TOKEN.

Cr.  Svo,  pp.  viii  +  445.     125.  6d.  net.

GRIMM  LIBRARY.     No.  4.
THE    VOYAGE    OF  BRAN,    SON    OF
FEBAL.    Edited  by  Kuno  Meyer.    With
an  Essay  upon  the  Happy  Otherworld  in
Irish  Myth,  by  Alfred  Nutt.     Vol.  1.
Cr.  Svo,  pp.  xvii  +  331.     10s.  bd.  net.

GRIMM  LIBRARY.     No.  5.

THE  LEGEND  OF  PERSEUS.    By  Edwin

Sidney  Hartland,  F.S.A.

Vol.  III.   ANDROMEDA.      MEDUSA.

Cr.  Svo,  pp.  xxxvii  +  225.     75.  6d.  net.


All  rights  reserved


PREFAC  E

This  second  instalment  of  my  studies  in  connection  with
the  Voyage  of  Bran  appears  later  and  is  less  extensive  in
scope  than  was  anticipated  by  me.  I  had  hoped  to  bring
out  vol.  ii.  within  a  year  after  vol.  i. ;  I  had  intended  to
trace  the  re-birth  conception  throughout  the  Aryan-speaking
world  in  the  same  way  as  I  have  traced  that  of  Elysium,
and  then  to  discuss  the  relation  of  both  to  similar  concep-
tions in  the  earlier  civilisations  of  the  East  as  well  as  in
barbaric  and  savage  communities  of  the  present  day.  The
failure  of  my  hopes  accounts  in  some  measure  for  the  cur-
tailing of  my  plan ;  to  carry  this  out  in  its  original  form
would  have  involved,  in  view  of  the  scanty  working-time  at
my  disposal,  another  year's  delay.  It  seemed  advisable,
therefore,  to  restrict  myself  to  the  essential  part  of  my
scheme — the  exposition  and  discussion  of  the  Irish  evidence
— and  to  reserve  the  important  but  secondary  question  of
origin  for  future  investigation.1

I  would  again  emphasise  my  wish  to  have  my  work
judged  in  the  first  place  as  a  contribution  to  the  history  of
mythic  literature  among  the  Irish.  In  this  respect  I
venture  to  think  it  has  some  claim  to  the  attentive  con-

1  A  further  reason  for  modifying  the  original  plan  will  be  found  in
the  last  chapter.

a  2


vi  PREFACE

sideration  of  scholars,  and  should  prove  of  assistance  to
fellow-students.

I  wish  to  renew  my  expression  of  indebtedness  to  the
scholars  already  mentioned  in  the  preface  to  vol.  i.,  in
particular  to  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  Professor  Erwin
Rohde,  and  Dr.  Whitley  Stokes.  A  somewhat  lengthy
examination  and  criticism  of  M.  d'Arbois'  views  on  the
Tuatha  de  Danann  mythology  entered  into  my  original
plan.  Here  again  it  seemed  best  to  content  myself  with
setting  forth  my  own  theory.

Professor  Kuno  Meyer  has  laid  me  under  deep  obligation
by  careful  persual  of  the  proof-sheets,  by  many  important
suggestions,  and  by  the  appendices  of  unedited  Irish  texts,
which  will  give  this  volume  a  value  in  the  eyes  of  philo-
logists to  which  it  could  not  otherwise  lay  claim.  I  have
also  to  thank  Dr.  Jevons  for  kindly  reading  over  the  chapter
in  which  I  discuss  the  classical  testimonia  and  enabling  me
to  correct  and  amplify  the  argument  based  upon  them.  I
must  state,  however,  that  this  chapter  contains  much  to
which  he  would  not  yield  unqualified  assent.  I  mention
this  lest  I  should  seem  to  lay  upon  him  the  responsibility
for  possible  errors  of  my  own.

My  critics  have  treated  me  with  a  leniency  and  apprecia-
tion that  demand  my  grateful  recognition.  Many  helpful
suggestions  were  made,  notably  by  Mons.  L.  Marillier,
Professor  York  Powell,  Mons.  Henri  Gaidoz,  and  Dr.  F.  B.
Jevons.  Some  of  these  I  have  been  able  to  utilise  in  the
present  volume ;  the  larger  number  had  reference  to  that


PREFACE  vii

part  of  my  scheme  which,  for  the  present,  I  have  dropped.
One  point,  however,  which  could  not  be  dealt  with  in  the
body  of  the  work,  but  which  involves  important  questions  of
method,  may  be  briefly  glanced  at  here.  My  friend,  Profes-
sor W.  W.  Newell,  protested  at  the  close  of  his  notice  in  the
Journal  of  American  Folklore  against  the  use  of  the  terms
Celtic  or  Aryan  as  applied  to  anything  else  save  languages.
'  It  is  not  at  all  certain  that  there  exist  either  Celtic  or
Aryan  legends,'  he  says.  If  the  adjective  be  held  to  imply
a  monopoly  of  the  legends  in  question,  I  agree.  But  I  have
never  used  the  terms  criticised  in  this  restrictive  sense,  and
I  do  not  think  there  is  any  danger  of  such  a  misleading
interpretation  becoming  current.  I  do  hold,  on  the  con-
trary, that  there  is  a  sense  in  which  we  may  legitimately
speak  of  Aryan  myths  or  Aryan  institutions  as  opposed  to
Semitic  myths  and  Semitic  institutions,  or  to  the  myths  and
institutions  of  any  other  well-defined  groups  of  men.  It  is
not  implied  that  such  myths  or  institutions  are  the  exclu-
sive or  even  the  special  possession  of  either  Aryans  or
Semites  ;  it  is  enough  that  a  majority  of  Aryans  or  Semites
should  possess  them  and  should  impress  upon  them  differ-
entiating features.  In  the  same  way,  within  the  Aryan
group  I  hold  it  perfectly  legitimate  to  speak  of  Celtic
myths  and  institutions.  Here  again  I  imply  no  exclusive
possession,  but  I  do  most  emphatically  imply  differentiating
features,  and  differentiating  features  common,  in  a  greater
or  less  measure,  to  the  various  Celtic-speaking  peoples.  The
existence  of  these  differentiating  features  in  Celtic  romance,


viii  PREFACE

custom,  and  belief,  on  the  one  hand,  the  presence  of  a
common  Celtic  tone,  temper,  and  colouring  on  the  other
hand,  can,  so  at  least  it  seems  to  me,  only  be  denied  by  those
who  are  ignorant  of  the  facts,  or  who  are  incapable  of  right-
fully apprehending  their  significance.  And  I  furthermore
emphatically  urge  that  within  the  Aryan  group  the  test  of
speech  is  not  the  sole,  perhaps  not  even  the  most  important
test  of  kinship.  Philologically,  Celtic  is  most  closely  allied
to  Italic ;  in  other  respects  the  Celt  seems  to  me  to  have
closer  and  more  varied  affinities  with  the  Greek.

As  regards  the  general  question  of  the  relations  of  Aryan
to  the  older  Oriental  culture  I  have  expressed  myself  fully
and  plainly  in  the  final  chapter.

In  conclusion,  I  would  urge  increased  study  of  the  Celtic
past  by  the  English-speaking  communities.  They  are
pledged  to  it  alike  by  filial  piety  and  by  political  expedi-
ency, for  the  Celtic  element  in  their  civilisation  is  consider-
able, and,  though  it  may  somewhat  change  its  form,  it  is  not
likely  to  decrease.  As  far  as  the  purely  scientific  aspects
of  the  study  are  concerned  the  facts  speak  for  themselves ;
as  far  as  its  beauty  and  interest  are  concerned  there  again
the  facts  speak  for  themselves.  But  I  rest  my  advocacy  of
the  fostering  of  Celtic  studies  upon  other  than  scientific  or
aesthetic  grounds ;  I  believe  it  to  be  a  task,  patriotic  in  the
highest  sense  of  the  word,  as  tending  to  sympathetic  appre-
ciation of  a  common  past,  to  sympathetic  union  in  the
present  and  future  of  all  the  varied  elements  of  a  common
nationality.  ALFRED  NUTT.

July  1897.


CONTENTS


THE  CELTIC  DOCTRINE  OF  RE-BIRTH
CHAPTER    XIII

THE   MONGAN    LEGEND

The  object  and  methods  of  the  investigation — The  date  and
peculiarities  of  the  Mongan  story ;  the  statements  of  Bran's
Voyage  and  of  the  glossator ;  the  testimony  of  the  eleventh
century  prose  texts  ;  the  poem  ascribed  to  Muru  of  Donegal ;
the  annalistic  references  ;  the  nature  and  value  of  the  Book  of
Fermoy  text — Comparison  of  the  reconstituted  Mongan  legend
with  the  Mabinogion  of  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyfed,  and  Mana-
wyddan,  son  of  Llyr — Date  and  nature  of  the  Mabinogion
discussed— Mongan  and  Finn — The  legends  of  Mongan,  Arthur,
and  Finn,  discussion  of  their  relation  to  each  other,  and  of
the  relations  between  Goidelic  and  Brythonic  heroic  myth —
Reconstitution  of  the  myth  underlying  the  three  cycles  of  heroic
romance — Sketch  of  the  Mongan  saga  in  Irish  literature  ;
elements  which  it  yields  for  the  re-birth  conception,

CHAPTER    XIV

IRISH    RE-BIRTH   LEGENDS

The  birth-story  of  Cuchulinn — The  birth-story  of  Etain — The
Begetting  of  the  Two  Swineherds ;  summary  of  story,  and
discussion  of  its  date  and  nature — Conclusions  drawn  from
these  stories — The  birth-story  of  Conall  Cernach — The  trans-


PAGE


CONTENTS

PAGE

formations  of  Tuan  mac  Cairill — The  birth-story  of  Aed  Slane
— Comparison  of  the  Irish  stories  with  the  Welsh  Hanes
Taliessin ;  vindication  of  the  archaic  nature  of  the  Taliessin
story — Amergin  and  Taliessin  :  early  Celtic  pantheism — Nature
of  the  re-birth  conception  as  found  in  Celtic  romance,    .  .        38


CHAPTER    XV

THE   RELATION   OF   IRELAND   TO   CHRISTIAN    AND
CLASSIC   ANTIQUITY

The  possible  influence  of  Christianity  upon  the  Irish  re-birth  legends  ;
must  be  discarded  ;  the  Conall  Cernach  and  Aed  Slane  birth-
stories — The  alleged  Irish  origin  of  Erigena's  pantheism  ;  must
be  rejected — The  classical  statements  respecting  the  Pytha-
goreanism  of  the  Celts ;  their  import,  value,  the  historic  con-
ditions under  which  they  took  shape,  the  legitimate  deductions
to  be  drawn  from  them — Necessity  for  studying  the  Greek
conceptions  out  of  which  Pythagoras  formed  his  doctrine,  .        98


CHAPTER    XVI

AGRICULTURAL    RITUAL    IN   GREECE   AND    IRELAND

Pythagoras  and  Orpheus — Orphicism  in  the  Hellenic  world — Philo-
sophic Orphicism  insufficient  to  account  for  Celtic  belief —
Ritual  Orphicism ;  the  myth  of  Zagreus ;  points  of  contact
between  ritual  Orphicism  and  Celtic  belief — Orphic  pantheism
and  Celtic  panwizardism — The  origins  of  Orphicism — Rohde's
exposition  of  the  Dionysus  cult — Orgiastic  mania  the  common
root  of  Orphic  and  Celtic  transformation  and  reincarnation
beliefs — The  agricultural  origin  of  the  Dionysus  ritual — The
existence  of  agricultural  and  ritual  sacrifice  among  the  Celts :
(a)  on  the  Continent ;  the  priestesses  of  the  Namnites  ;  (b)  in
Ireland ;  the  worship  at  Mag  Slecht — The  Greek  origin  of  the
Dionysus  cult — Both  Greeks  and  Celts  have  passed  through  a
stage  of  agricultural  ritual  sacrifice,  in  which  the  Greek
Dionysus  and  the  Irish  Tuatha  de  Danann  mythologies  have
their  root,  ........       124


CONTENTS  xi

CHAPTER   XVII

THE   TUATHA    DE   DANANN

PAGE

The  ditmskenchas  of  Mag  Slecht  and  the  mythic  reign  of  Tighern-
mas ;  the  Annalistic  account ;  apparent  discrepancy  with  the
Dinnshenchas — The  true  nature  of  the  Tighernmas  tradition  ;
consequences  for  Irish  mythology  —  Classification  of  Irish
mythical  literature  concerning  the  Tuatha  de  Danann — The
Annalistic  account ;  the  romantic  account  of  Battle  of  Moytura ;
the  Rabelaisian  element  in  Irish  mythology  ;  comparison  of
Annalistic  and  romantic  accounts ;  necessary  deduction  as  to
agricultural  origin  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  ;  Dinnshenchas
mentions  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  and  discussion  of  the  tra-
ditions concerning  the  fairs  of  Carman  and  Tailltin — The  heroic
saga  mentions  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann ;  validity  of  this
evidence ;  comparison  between  the  mythic  literature  of  Greece
and  Ireland ;  true  import  of  heroic  saga  evidence — Develop-
ment of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  mythology,         .  .  .       160


CHAPTER    XVIII

THE  CONTEMPORARY    FAIRY    BELIEF   OF   THE   GAELIC-
SPEAKING   PEASANT

Irish  mythic  literature  in  its  relation  to  peasant  lore — Parallel  of
Greek  and  Irish  mythic  literature  in  their  relation  to  national
life — The  essential  elements  of  Irish  peasant  lore — The  con-
servatism of  Irish  social  organisation — The  influence  of  Chris-
tianity— Formal  classification  of  Irish  peasant  lore — Its  true
nature — The  fairies ;  fallen  angels  explanation ;  peculiar  signifi-
cation of  the  Gaelic  versions — Special  features  of  fairy  lore ;  the
agricultural  festivals  and  their  connection  with  the  fairy  world  ;
local  character  of  the  Irish  fairies  ;  fairy  love  of  neatness  ;  fairy
revels  by  night ;  witchcraft  and  fairydom  ;  the  changeling
belief— Irish  in  relation  to  general  European  fairy  lore — The
Tuatha  de  Danann  and  death,      .....       199


xii  CONTENTS

CHAPTER    XIX

SUMMARY   AND   CONCLUSION

PAGE

Summary  of  preceding  investigation — Statement  of  results  (a)  as
regards  the  Aryan  world  generally  ;  {d)  as  regards  Greece ;  (c)
as  regards  Ireland — Objective  and  subjective  elements  in  the
primitive  agricultural  cults,  their  diverse  fortunes  in  the  develop-
ment of  mythology — Possible  non-Aryan  origin  of  the  cult,  Mr.
Gomme's  views  discussed  and  criticised — Dr.  Jevons'  views  con-
cerning the  development  of  the  Elysium  and  Re-birth  themes
in  the  Greek  world  discussed  and  criticised — Conclusion,  .       239


APPENDICES    OF    IRISH    TEXTS

Edited  for  the  first  time  and  translated  by

Prof.  Kuno  Meyer

A.  Tuan  Mac  Cairill's  story  to  Finnen  of  Moville,     .  .  .      285

B.  The  versified  dinnshenchas  of  Mag  Slecht,  .  .  .       301

INDEX  to  both  of  Mk.  Nutt's  Essays,  .  .  •      3°7


THE   VOYAGE  OF  BRAN

THE  CELTIC  DOCTRINE  OF  RE-BIRTH

CHAPTER    XIII

THE    MONGAN    LEGEND

The  object  and  methods  of  the  investigation — The  date  and  peculiarities
of  the  Mongan  story ;  the  statements  of  Bran's  Voyage  and  of  the
glossator ;  the  testimony  of  the  eleventh  century  prose  texts  ;  the  poem
ascribed  to  Mum  of  Donegal ;  the  annalistic  references  ;  the  nature  and
value  of  the  Book  of  Fermoy  text — Comparison  of  the  reconstituted
Mongan  legend  with  the  Mabinogion  of  Pvvyll,  Prince  of  Dyfed,  and
Manawyddan,  son  of  Llyr — Date  and  nature  of  the  Mabinogion
discussed — Mongan  and  Finn — The  legends  of  Mongan,  Arthur,  and
Finn,  discussion  of  their  relation  to  each  other,  and  of  the  relations
between  Goidelic  and  Brythonic  heroic  myth — Reconstitution  of  the
myth  underlying  the  three  cycles  of  heroic  romance — Sketch  of  the
Mongan  saga  in  Irish  literature  ;  elements  which  it  yields  for  the  re-birth
conception.

In  the  preceding  chapters,  in  which  are  studied  the  origin
and  nature  of  the  two  leading  and  mutually  complementary
conceptions  found  in  the  old  Irish  romantic  legend,  The
Voyage  of  Bran,  I  dealt  with  the  Irish  vision  of  the
Happy  Otherworld,  and  reached  the  following  provisional
conclusion :  Substantially  pre-Christian,  this  vision  finds
its  closest  analogues  in  the  earliest  known  stage  of  Hellenic
belief,  and  forms  with  them  the  most  archaic  Aryan  pre-
sentment we  possess  of  the  divine  and  happy  land.
VOL.  II.  A


2  SCOPE   OF    INVESTIGATION

I  now  propose  to  consider  the  conception  of  reincarna-
tion or  rebirth.  In  the  case  of  the  Elysium  vision  there
was  an  a  priori  possibility  that  the  Irish  accounts  were  simply
distorted  reminiscences  of  Christian  Heaven  and  Paradise ;
here  too  the  surmise  of  Christian  influence  is  at  least
possible.  The  chief  Christian  dogma  may  well  have
borne  unexpected  fruit.  Stranger  results  have  followed
from  the  contact  of  higher  and  lower  cultures.  The  lines
of  my  investigation  will  thus  be  much  the  same  as  in  the
Elysium  section.  After  a  careful  examination  of  the
Mongan  stories  with  a  view  to  determining  how  far  they
are  early  in  date  and  archaic  in  character,  I  shall  adduce
and  study  Irish  parallels.  The  question  of  Christian
influence,  notably  of  the  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation,  will
then  be  briefly  glanced  at ;  the  conceptions  involved  in
the  obscure  Pythagorean  and  Orphic  systems  of  Hellenic
antiquity  must  be  noticed,  and  their  possible  bearing  upon
Celtic  belief  discussed.  Ritual,  custom,  and  folklore  must
then  be  cross-examined  to  check  results  derived  from  written
texts.  If,  as  I  trust,  the  history  of  the  Irish  rebirth  concep-
tion can  be  set  forth  with  some  certainty,  and  its  nature
elucidated,  the  conclusions  already  reached  in  the  Elysium
section  cannot  fail  to  be  either  confirmed  or  invalidated.

In  this,  as  in  the  Elysium  section  of  my  study,  my  object
is  to  place  and  account  for,  historically,  certain  Irish  legends.
I  start  from  these,  and  the  illustrative  material  I  bring
together  will  be  found,  I  trust,  pertinent  in  reality,  though
it  often  seem  remote  from  and  disconnected  with  the  starting
point.  On  the  other  hand,  I  deliberately  discarded  in  the
first  volume  much  that  would  necessarily  find  a  place  in
a  general  history  of  the  Elysium  conception,  but  which  did
not,  in  my  opinion,  fit  in  with  the  proper  mode  of  investi-


MONGAN    IN    BRAN'S   VOYAGE  3

gating  the  particular  manifestation  of  it  I  had  in  view.
I  shall  follow  the  same  course  in  the  following  pages,  at
the  risk  of  at  times  appearing  to  neglect  facts  and  consi-
derations germane  to  my  subject.

The  stories  of  which  Mongan  is  the  hero,  as  also  the
historical  notices  concerning  him,  printed  in  vol.  i.,  have
already  yielded  the  conclusion  that  there  existed,  as  early
at  least  as  the  tenth  century,  tales  about  a  Mongan  son  of
Fiachna,  a  noted  wizard,  a  son  of  Manannan,  and,  by  some
accounts,  a  rebirth  of  Finn,  son  of  Cumall.  This  sufficed
for  my  purpose  at  the  time,  but  a  minuter  scrutiny  of  these
stories  is  now  necessary.

The  Mongan  References  in  Bran's  Voyage.

The  poems  contained  in  Bran's  Voyage  are  the  oldest
portion  of  the  text,  dating  back  as  they  do  to  the  eighth  or
possibly  to  the  seventh  century.  What  have  they  to  say  of
Mongan  ?  His  real  father  is  Manannan,  son  of  Ler,  who  will
come  to  parts  dwelt  in  by  Bran,  will  journey  to  the  house  of
the  woman  of  Linemag,  and  will  lie  with  Caintigern  ;  of  his
progeny  shall  be  a  very  short  while  a  fair  man  in  a  body
of  white  clay,  whom  Fiachna  shall  acknowledge  as  his  son,
who  shall  be  the  delight  of  fairy  knolls,  have  the  power  of
shape-shifting,  be  throughout  long  ages  an  hundred  years
in  fair  kingship,  be  slain  by  a  son  of  error,  be  fifty  years
in  the  world,  be  killed  by  a  dragon  stone  from  the  sea  in
the  fight  at  Senlabor,  be  taken  by  the  white  host  under  a
wheel  of  clouds  to  the  gathering  where  there  is  no  sorrow
(Quatrains  49-59,  vol.  i.  pp.  24-28).

The  prose  text  of  Bran's  Voyage  states  that  Manannan
appeared  to  Bran,  telling  him  '  it  was  upon  him  to  go  to
Ireland  after  long  ages,  and  that  a  son  would  be  born  to


4  THE    GLOSSES

him,  even  Mongan,  son  of  Fiachna '  (p.  16),  a  passage
which  introduces  the  idea,  absent  from  the  verse,  of  a  con-
siderable lapse  of  time  between  Bran's  journey  to  the
Otherworld  and  Mongan's  birth.

The  statements  of  the  verse  are  evidently  not  homo-
geneous, and  the  passage  concerning  Mongan's  death  has
apparently  been  coloured  in  a  Christian  sense.

It  will  be  recollected  that  Prof.  Meyer  traces  all  existing
mss.  of  Bran's  Voyage  to  a  transcript,  probably  made  in
the  tenth  century,  from  an  older  text.  The  glosses  which
accompany  the  present  text  are  probably  of  the  same  date,
i.e.  the  tenth  century,  as  this  lost  archetype  MS.,  and  it  is
interesting  to  see  how  the  tenth  century  scribe  understood
the  dark  allusions  of  the  poem  he  was  copying.  Thus
(Quat.  49)  when  Manannan  announces  that  he  will  go  to
the  woman  of  Linemag,  the  scribe  adds  the  gloss :  '  Con-
ception of  Mongan.'  The  statement  that  Manannan's
progeny  will  be  'a  fair  man  in  a  body  of  white  clay'  elicits
the  gloss:  'Mongan,  son  of  Fiachna.'  Quatrain  55  seems
to  have  puzzled  the  scribe.  '  He  will  be  throughout  long
ages  an  hundred  years  in  fair  kingship,'  says  the  verse;  i.e.
1  post  mortem  '  comments  the  glossator,  adding,  moreover,
'  he  will  be  famous  without  end  in  futuro  corpore,'  glosses
caused,  possibly,  by  the  wish  to  reconcile  the  statements  of
this  quatrain  with  the  very  definite  life-span  of  fifty  years
assigned  to  Mongan  in  Quat.  58.  On  this  quatrain  again
is  a  gloss,  '  in  corpore,'  showing  how  distinct  in  the  glossa-
tor's mind  was  Mongan's  other-  from  his  mortal  life.  The
line  in  the  same  quatrain,  '  a  dragon  stone  from  the  sea
will  kill  him,'  is  glossed  :  '  this  is  the  Death  of  Mongan,1  a

1  This  is  a  reference  to  a  story  thus  entitled,  a  story  which  has  not
come  down  to  us.


MONGAN  IN  THE  PROSE  TALES   5

stone  from  a  sling  was  thrown  at  him.'  So  far  Bran's
Voyage.  It  affords  clear  evidence,  I  think,  to  the  idea  of
an  earthly  chief  being  the  son  of  a  superhuman  father,
and  endowed,  in  consequence,  with  superhuman  qualities
and  attributes.  We  may  further  conclude,  that  already  in
the  tenth  century  certain  passages  were  interpreted  as
testifying  to  the  continued  existence  after  death  of  the  god-
begotten  hero,  and  that  the  lack  of  homogeneity  in  the
account  of  Mongan,  which  strikes  the  careful  reader  of
the  ancient  poem,  also  struck  its  earliest  known  com-
mentator, inducing  him  to  supply  glosses  of  a  reconciling
and  harmonistic  nature.  Again  we  may  fairly  assume  that
the  poem  made  little  chronological  distinction  between
Mongan  and  Bran,  whilst  the  later  prose  fixes  a  gulf
between  them,  a  fact  doubtless  due  to  the  assignation  of
Mongan  to  a  well-defined  historical  period  in  the  interval
that  elapsed  between  the  composition  of  the  verse  and
prose  portions.

The  Prose  Tales  concerning  Mongan.

With  the  obscure  and  scanty  hints  yielded  by  our  text
must  be  compared  the  statements  in  the  prose  texts  which
Professor  Kuno  Meyer  has  printed  and  translated  from  the
Book  of  the  Dun  Cow.1  These  tales  must  be  as  old  as  the
early  eleventh  century,  and  were  probably  redacted  at  the
same  time  (late  tenth  century)  as  the  hypothetical  archetype
of  all  existing  versions  of  Bran's  Voyage,  i.e.  they  belong  to
that  period  of  comparative  calm  following  the  troubles  of
the  Viking  invasion  age,  when  the  remains  of  older  Irish
story-telling  were  being  gathered  up,  transcribed,  in  part

1  Vol.  i.  pp.  44  et  seq.


6   MONGAN  IN  THE  PROSE  TALES

remodelled.       The    tales,    briefly    recapitulated,    are    as
follows  : —

The  tale  entitled  Compert  Mongdin  (Mongan's  Concep-
tion) gives  him  as  father  Fiachna  Lurga,  sole  king  of
Ulster,  an  ally  of  Aedan  (king  of  the  Scotch  Dalriada,
who  reigned  from  574  to  606).  The  hero's  birth  is  due
to  the  favours  accorded  Manannan  by  Fiachna's  wife  in
return  for  his  promise  to  save  her  husband's  life.  The
queen's  name  is  not  given,  nor  is  aught  stated  of  the  son
to  be  born  except  that  he  should  be  famous.

In  the  Story  of  Mongan  l  the  king  appears  on  friendly
terms  with  the  dwellers  of  various  fairy  knolls,  to  whom  he
sends  a  messenger,  laying  upon  him  strict  injunction  to
take  naught  from  his  hosts  beyond  what  he  had  been
sent  for.

The  Cause  of  Mongan's  Frenzy  -  relates,  in  obscure  and
confused  fashion,  a  visit  of  Mongan  and  his  court  to  Faery,
a  visit  of  much  the  same  kind  as  those  of  Conn  and
Cormac  described  in  the  first  volume.  It  is  probably  the
introductory  prose  opening  to  the  rhapsody  which  Mongan
brought  back  with  him  from  Faery,  and  which  was  given
in  the  now  lost  tale  of  Mongan's  Frenzy.

The  Story  from  which  it  is  inferred  that  Mongan  was  the
son  of  Find  mac  Cumaillandthe  Cause  of  the  Death  of  Fothad
Airgdech  3  relates  how  Mongan,  to  save  his  and  his  wife's
honour  from  a  bard  to  whom  he  had  given  the  lie  and  who
had  threatened  to  bespell  his  land  in  consequence,  is  helped
by  Cailte  who  comes  (from  the  dead),  addresses  Mongan
as  Find,  and  substantiates  the  truth  of  his  story.  The  tale
ends  thus  :  '  Mongan,  however,  was  Find  though  he  would
not  let  it  be  told.'

1  Pp.  57  et  seq.  2  Pp.  56  et  seq.  3  Pp.  45  et  seq.


MONGAN    IN   THE    PROSE   TALES       7

In  these  stories  Mongan  is  always  associated  with
Rathmore  of  Moylinny ;  in  two  of  them  his  relations  with
his  wife  are  emphasised ;  in  two  of  them  he  is  on  intimate
terms  with  the  sid  or  fairy  folk ;  in  two  of  them  he  is
brought  into  contact  with  a  poet,  Forgoll.

It  is,  I  think,  evident  that  these  stories  cannot  have
their  sole  origin  in  the  verse  portions  of  Bran's  Voyage.
Whilst  there  is  general  agreement  as  to  the  birth,  character,
and  attributes  of  Mongan,  the  details  are  so  dissimilar,  the
independence  of  either  account  is  so  obvious,  that  the
hypothesis  of  common  derivation  from  an  earlier  and  more
complete  Mongan  legend  at  once  suggests  itself.  If  we
turn  to  early  notices  of  a  professedly  historical  nature  the
surmise  that  such  a  legend  existed  is  strengthened.  The
verse  preserved  by  the  eleventh  century  Tigernach,  and
ascribed  to  the  late  seventh  century  Ulster  kinglet,  Benn
Boirche,  an  ascription  which  is  possibly  correct,  connects
Mongan 's  death  with  Islay  as  does  Quat.  56  of  Bran's
Voyage.  To  a  similar  statement  of  the  tenth  century
historian,  Cinaed  ua  Hartacain,  less  weight  might  be
attached,  as  it  possibly  rests  wholly  upon  the  authority  of
Benn  Boirche ;  but,  as  we  shall  see  later,  it  is  important  in
another  connection.  The  eleventh  century  annalists  are
the  first  to  cite  the  name  of  Mongan's  slayer,  Arthur,  son
of  Bicor  of  Britain,  but  the  tradition  may  certainly  be
relied  upon  as  genuine.  As  Professor  Zimmer  has  pointed
out,  the  name  Arthur  occurs  several  times,  both  among  the
Northern  and  Southern  Kymry  at  the  close  of  the  sixth
and  beginning  of  the  seventh  centuries.1

1  Nennius  Vindicatus,  p.  284.


8  MONGAN    AND   COLUMBA

So  far  we  have  dealt  with  testimonia  which  can  be  dated
with  some  precision,  and  which  are  all  anterior  to  the
middle  of  the  eleventh  century.  Among  the  testimonia  of
uncertain  date  is  one  which,  could  we  accept  the  traditional
ascription,  would  be  of  first-rate  importance.  The  four-
teenth century  ms.,  Laud,  615,  has  preserved  some  verses
ascribed  to  Muru  of  Fothain,1  who  died  a.d.  650,  in  which
is  told  how  Mongan  came  '  to  converse  with  Colum  Cille
from  the  flock-abounding  Land  of  Promise.'  Another
poem  in  the  same  ms.2  professes  to  give  the  hero's  greeting
to  the  Saint,  part  of  which,  as  already  noted  by  Professor
Meyer,  is  substantially  the  same  as  Quatrain  25  of  Bran's
Voyage.  In  view  of  the  well-known  practice  of  Irish  writers
to  father  their  own  productions  upon  earlier  celebrities,  it
is  safer  to  suspend  judgment  on  the  date  and  authorship
of  these  verses.  It  is  noteworthy,  however,  that  they  con-
tain an  idea  foreign,  save  indirectly,  to  Bran's  Voyage  as
well  as  to  the  prose  tales  preserved  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun
Cow.  Mongan  is  represented  as  being  himself  an  inhabitant
of  the  Land  of  Promise.  This,  it  may  be  urged,  is  a
natural  development  of  the  supernatural  parentage  assigned
to  him  in  the  legend.  True — provided  it  be  added  :  at  an
early  stage  in  the  history  of  the  legend.  Thus,  in  Greek
myth,  Menelaus  is  transported  to  the  Isle  of  Rhadamanthus
solely  because  of  his  kinship  through  Helen  to  the  gods.
Some  such  idea  may  well  underlie  the  representation  of
Mongan  as  Lord  in  Faery,  but  if  so  it  is  decisive  testimony
to  the  archaic  character  of  the  Mongan  legend.  For  in  the
later  stage  of  legend,  when  the  historical-heroic  have
superseded  the  purely  mythic  elements,  divine  parentage
by  no  means  necessarily  ensures  access  to  the  divine  land.
1  Vol.  i.  p.  87.  2  Vol.  i.  p.  88.


MONGAN    AND    COLUMBA  9

Another  point  worth  noting  in  connection  with  these
verses  is  the  clear  distinction  they  make  between  the
Christian  heaven  and  the  Land  of  Promise.  Mongan
comes  from  the  latter  and  goes  to  Heaven  under  Colum
Cille's  protection  :

'  Mongan  found  not  any  help
When  he  went  to  see  Heaven,
But  his  head — great  the  profit !
Under  Colum  Cille's  cowl ' :

strong  witness,  these  words,  both  to  the  might  of  the  pagan
hero  to  whom  Heaven  could  be  opened,  and  to  the  essential
paganism  which  necessitated  his  being  smuggled  in  under
the  cowl  of  the  greatest  of  all  Irish  saints  save  Patrick.

In  any  case,  this  view  of  Mongan  as  a  dweller  in  the
Land  of  Promise  is  also  found  in  those  undated  verses,
quoted  by  Professor  Meyer,1

'  O  Mongan,  O  Manannan,
Your  wandering  is  not  frequent
In  the  land  with  living  heart,'  etc.

which  contain,  perhaps,  the  most  exquisite  of  the  many
exquisite  names  the  Irish  poets  gave  to  the  western  wonder-
isle  of  their  longing  fancy.

Mongan  in  the  Annals.

In  view  of  the  foregoing  facts,  the  passage  quoted  in
vol.  i.  (p.  139)  from  the  Irish  annals  found  in  Eg.  1782,
and  translated  by  Mr.  Standish  Hayes  O'Grady,  annals
dating  back  certainly  to  the  twelfth  and  probably  to  the
eleventh  century,  acquires  a  fresh  significance.  'Albeit,'
says  the  annalist,  '  certain  dealers  in  antiquarian  fable  do

1  Vol.  i.  p.  85.


io  MONGAN   AND   COLUMBA

propound  Mongan  to  have  been  son  of  Manannan  and  wont
to  enter  at  his  pleasure  into  divers  shapes,  yet  this  we  may
not  credit,  rather  choosing  to  take  him  for  one  that  was  but
a  man  of  surpassing  knowledge,  and  gifted  with  an  intelli-
gence clear,  and  subtle,  and  keen.'  Here  we  may  see  the
outcome,  so  far  as  the  official  science  of  the  day  was  con-
cerned, of  the  long  evolution  of  the  Mongan  legend  with
its  two  different  modes  of  representing  the  hero,  one  purely
romantic  (resting,  as  I  shall  hope  to  show,  upon  an  older
mythic  basis),  one  historic.  The  annalist  has  no  doubts ;
the  romantic  tales  are  but  'antiquarian  fables,'  the  real
Mongan  is  the  sixth  to  seventh  century  Ulster  kinglet.  But
another,  and  for  us  far  more  important  conclusion,  must  be
drawn  from  his  statement,  for  which  the  extant  bulk  of
Mongan  romance  affords  so  little  justification.  He  must
have  been  familiar  with  many  tales  besides  those  we  have
glanced  at,  tales  too  in  which  the  attribute  of  shape-shifting,
so  strongly  insisted  upon  in  Bran's  Voyage,  but  absent  from
the  stories  preserved  by  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  must  have
been  prominent.  Have  any  remains  of  this  legend  cycle,
known  to  the  twelfth  century  historian,  but  unrepresented,
directly,  in  pre-twelfth  century  mss.,  come  down  to  us?  If
so,  in  how  far  do  they  faithfully  represent  the  older  saga  ?
These  are  questions  which  must  be  answered  before  a
sketch  of  the  Mongan  legend  and  of  its  evolution  in  Irish
romantic  literature  can  be  essayed.

Mongan  and  Dub-Lacha.
In  the  first  volume  of  this  work  Professor  Kuno  Meyer
has  printed  and  translated1  from  a  fifteenth  century  ms.,
the  Book  of  Fermoy,  a  story  entitled  '  The  Conception  of

1  Pp.  58  et  seq.


MONGAN    AND    DUB-LACHA  n

Mongan  and  Dub-Lacha's  love  for  Mongan.'  In  its  present
form,  the  story  is  probably  little,  if  any,  older  than  the  ms.
which  has  preserved  it.  Not  only  the  actual  form  of  the
speech,  but  style,  expression,  literary  convention,  betray  a
far  later  date  than  that  of  the  tales  found  in  the  Book  of
the  Dun  Cow.  But,  as  I  have  so  frequently  pointed  out,  the
fact  that  an  Irish  story  was  rewritten  in  the  thirteenth  or
fourteenth  century  by  no  means  implies  that  it  may  not  pre-
serve the  structure  and  incidents  of  a  pre-eleventh  century
tale  with  almost  absolute  fidelity.  In  so  far  as  a  pre-
sumption exists,  it  favours  the  retention  of  the  older  tale  in
essentials  if  not  in  accidents.  We  may  therefore  apply
ourselves  to  the  consideration  of  the  Book  of  Fermoy  story
without  any  prejudice  based  upon  its  comparatively  late
date.

I  do  not  propose  to  summarise  here  a  story  already
printed  in  full,  and  which  must  be  read  through  to  enable
appreciation  of  the  following  discussion.  The  first  portion
of  the  tale  covers  practically  the  same  ground  as  the
eleventh  century  Conception  of  Mongan.  Comparison
between  the  two  is  interesting.  In  the  eleventh  century
tale  the  amorous  god  appeals  to  the  wife,  in  the  fourteenth
century  tale  to  the  husband.  The  wife  only  yields  under
menace  of  danger  to  her  husband ;  the  husband  is  easier
going,  '  I  would  not  let  one  single  Irishman  fall  on  account
of  that  condition,'  says  he.  In  the  one  tale,  then,  the
husband,  in  the  other  the  wife,  ignores  the  supernatural
parentage  of  the  wonder-child.  In  the  younger  tale  the
device  is  precisely  the  same  as  in  the  Arthur  or  Hercules
birth  stories — the  wife  receives  the  god  in  the  guise  of  her
husband.  The  earlier  tale  plunges  at  once  in  medias  res ;
the  later  one  has  an  elaborate  introduction,  intended,   it


i2  MONGAN   AND    DUB-LACHA

would  seem,  for  it  is  obscure,  to  provide  an  opportunity  for
Fiachna's  danger  and  the  intervention  of  the  amorous  god.
The  personages  of  this  introduction  are  well-known  figures
in  Irish  bardic  romance;  the  Black  Hag  who  makes  a
demand  she  knows  cannot  be  satisfied,  in  order  to  have  the
chance  of  sending  the  hero  upon  an  expedition  full  of  danger ;
the  King  of  Lochlann  who  can  only  be  cured  of  illness  by
the  flesh  of  one  particular  cow ;  the  venomous  sheep  which
ravage  the  hero's  army,  the  equally  venomous  hound  which
overcomes  them.  In  the  earlier  tale  we  have  only  a  general
prophecy  concerning  the  fate  of  the  supernaturally  begotten
child ;  the  later  tale  tells  us  that  he  was  carried  off  to  the
Land  of  Promise  by  his  father  when  three  nights  old.  The
earlier  tale  only  knows  a  Mongan,  the  later  one  a  servant-
companion  and  a  lady-love  begotten  the  same  night  as
himself,  and  possibly  of  supernatural  parentage  likewise.

In  all  these  respects  the  later  tale,  as  will  at  once  be
apparent  to  students  of  storyology,  has  a  more  tndrchenhaft
character.  Reference  need  only  be  made  in  this  place  to
the  first  volume  of  Mr.  Hartland's  Legend  of  Perseus,  in
which  will  be  found  a  vast  array  of  examples  of  the  theme
— the  magic  birth  of  one,  two,  or  three  heroes  destined  to
be  companions  in  after  adventures — from  all  ages  and
countries,  whilst  the  carrying  off  of  the  wonder-child  is  a
commonplace  of  the  European  folk-tale,  specially  prominent
and  traceable  far  back  in  Celtic  romance.  Before
discussing  the  significance  of  this  fact,  the  remainder  of  the
tale  must  be  examined.

Mongan  having  lost  his  wife  to  the  King  of  Leinster
through  one  of  those  rash  promises  which  are  so  frequent
in  early  Irish  fiction,  is  enabled  to  visit,  and  finally  to
recover  her,  thanks  to  his  skill  in  magic.     Aided  by  his


MONGAN   AND    DUB-LACHA  13

foster-brother,  who  plays  the  part  of  a  Sancho-like  chorus,
he  gains  access  to  his  wife  in  the  guise  of  a  monk,  confess-
ing her  in  a  manner  familiar  to  students  of  mediaeval
KpyTTTaSca,  and  finally  carries  her  off  in  the  likeness  of  a
Connaught  prince,  having  left  in  her  place  with  the  King  of
Leinster  a  hideous  hag  whom  his  magic  had  turned  for  a
night  into  the  semblance  of  Erin's  fairest  damsel.

The  lateness  of  certain  traits,  e.g.  the  transformation  of
Mongan  into  a  monk,  must  not  lead  us  astray.  The
prominent  fact  in  the  story  is  insistence  upon  that  shape-
shifting  power  of  Mongan,  celebrated  by  the  eighth  century
poet  of  Bran's  Voyage,  noted  by  the  twelfth  century  annalist
but  unrepresented,  directly,  in  those  Mongan  stories  known
to  be  as  old  as  the  eleventh  century.  Here  is  strong
ground  for  presumption  that  our  tale  does  reproduce  in
essentials,  modernise  certain  details  as  it  may,  a  genuine
episode  of  the  original  Mongan  legend.  We  can  strengthen
the  presumption  by  comparing  the  Book  of  Fermoy  Mongan
story  as  a  whole  with  two  Welsh  tales  belonging,  undoubted-
ly, to  the  earliest  stratum  of  Welsh  romance.  If  the  com-
parison yields  proof  that  on  either  side  of  the  Irish  Channel
have  been  preserved  mythico-romantic  fragments,  relating
partly  to  the  same  group  of  superhuman  beings,  and  present-
ing largely  the  same  incidents  in  their  career,  it  will  I  think
be  granted  that  the  Irish  fragments,  if  written  down  later
than  the  Welsh  ones,  must  be  nevertheless  at  least  as  old  as
they.  The  Welsh  stories  in  question  are  the  Mabinogion
of  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Dyfed,  and  Manawyddan,  son  of  Llyr.

Mongan  and  the  Mabinogion.

The  former  tells  how  Pwyll  met,  whilst  hunting,  Arawn,
a  prince  of  Annwvyn  (or  'Faery'),  how  the  two,  at  Arawn's


14  THE    MABINOGI    OF   PWYLL

request,  to  atone  for  an  unintentional  insult  on  PwylPs  part,
changed  shapes ;  how  Pvvyll  reigned  a  year  in  Arawn's  stead
undetected  even  by  Arawn's  wife;  how  he  slew  Arawn's
foe,  and,  on  returning  to  his  own  country,  was  known  ever
afterwards  as  Pwyll,  Prince  of  Annwvyn.     At  the  time,  he
was  unwed,  but  later  he  was  wooed  by  a  supernaturally  wise
and   beautiful   maiden  from   Faery   (even  as  Connla  and
Oisin  were  wooed),  by  name  Rhiannon.     At  the  marriage
feast  he  grants  incautiously  a  boon  to  a  stranger  who  turns
out  to  be  Gwawl,  an  old  lover  of  Rhiannon's,  and  who
promptly  claims  her  at  Pwyll's  hands.      Rhiannon  urges
compliance   to  save  her  husband's  honour,  but  obtains  a
year's  respite  from  Gwawl.     At  the  end  of  the  year  Pwyll,
instructed  by  Rhiannon,  appears  disguised  as  a  beggar,  and
by  means  of  a  trick  wins  Rhiannon  back  from  Gwawl,  and
takes  her  to  his  own  land.    The  son  she  bears  is  carried  off
on  the  night  of  his  birth,  and  Rhiannon,  accused  by  her
women  of  having  slain  and  eaten  him,  is  doomed  to  degrad-
ing penance.    But  the  boy  is  left  with  Teirnyon,  a  retainer  of
Pwyll's,  a  mare  of  whose  had  foaled  that  night,  and  as  he
watched,  a  gigantic  claw  came  through  the  roof  to  carry  off
the  foal.     Teirnyon  hewed  off  the  claw,  the  monster  fled,
leaving  the  boy  behind.    He  is  brought  up  as  Teirnyon's  son
until  he  has  reached  youth ;  then  his  foster-father,  seeing
his  likeness  to  Pwyll,  and  bethinking  him  of  the  story,  takes
him  to  Pwyll's  court,  proclaims  Rhiannon's  innocence,  and
his  foster-son,  acknowledged  as  Pwyll's  heir,  in  due  course
succeeds  the  latter,  his  name  being  Pryderi.

The  Mabinogi  of  Manawyddan  takes  up  the  chain  of
events  at  a  later  stage.  Pwyll  is  dead.  Pryderi,  his  suc-
cessor, and  Manawyddan  are  two  of  the  seven  heroes  who
escape  from  Ireland  with  Bran's  head  after  the  disastrous


THE   MABINOGI    OF   MANAWYDDAN      15

failure  of  Bran's  expedition  to  avenge  the  wrongs  of  his
sister  Branwen.  For  seven  years  after  their  return  they
had  stayed  at  Harlech  listening  to  the  song  of  the  three  birds
of  Rhiannon,  and  fourscore  years  they  had  passed  at
Gwales  in  Penvro — 'they  regaled  themselves  and  were
joyful  .  .  .  and  of  all  they  had  heard  of  they  remembered
nothing  .  .  .  nor  of  any  sorrow  whatsoever  .  .  .  nor  were
they  more  weary  when  first  they  came,  neither  did  they,
any  of  them,  know  the  time  they  had  been  there.'  But  at
last  they  opened  the  fated  door  and  must  needs  return  to
earth.  These  things  are  told  of  in  the  Mabinogi  of  Bran-
wen,  daughter  of  Llyr,  which  links  together  the  Mabinogion
of  Pwyll  and  Manawyddan.

When  the  latter  opens,  Manawyddan  has  lost  his  inheri-
tance during  the  expedition  to  Ireland  and  the  after-years
spent  in  Faery.  Pryderi  then  bestows  upon  him  his  mother,
Rhiannon,  and  the  four,  Manawyddan  and  Rhiannon,
Pryderi  and  his  wife,  Kicva,  live  happily  together.  But  a
friend  of  Gwawl's,  Llwyd,  son  of  Kilcoed,  has  not  forgotten
the  old  wrong  done  unto  Gwawl  by  Rhiannon  and  Pwyll,
and,  in  revenge,  by  art-magic  he  wastes  their  land  and
drives  them  forth.  For  many  years  they  wander  through
Britain  supported  solely  by  the  skill  of  Manawyddan,  who
is  a  master  of  every  craft.  At  length  Pryderi  and  Rhiannon
are  lured  into  a  magic  castle  of  Llwyd's  and  there  kept
captive.  For  a  year  longer  Manawyddan  supports  Kicva
by  his  craft  of  shoemaking,  then  returning  to  their  own
land  they  plough  and  sow  and  await  the  harvest.  But
Llwyd's  enmity  has  not  slumbered.  His  wife  and  the
women  of  his  court,  changed  into  mice,  devour  the  grain
as  it  ripens  ready  for  the  sickle.  Manawyddan  determines
to  watch,  and  succeeds  in  catching  Llwyd's  wife,  as  she,


16    MONGAN    AND    THE    MABINOGION

being  pregnant,  cannot  escape  quickly  as  her  companions.
By  threatening  to  slay  her  Manawyddan  obtains  the  release
of  Rhiannon  and  Pryderi,  the  unspelling  of  the  land,  and
a  promise  from  Llwyd  to  seek  no  revenge.

It  needs  no  pointing  out  that  the  action  of  these  stories
passes  in  the  same  realm  of  romantic  fancy  as  the  Irish
tales  concerning  Mongan,  and  those  which  narrate  Irish
visits  to  the  Happy  Otherworld.  We  are  in  a  kindred
wonder-world  of  magic  singing  birds,  of  feasts  in  which  years
pass  as  an  hour,  of  damsels  immortally  fair  and  gracious,
of  magicians  who  assume  all  shapes  at  will.  But  more ;
the  incidents  and  episodes  of  the  fifteenth  century  Irish
Mongan  are  found  in  the  Welsh  tales,  different  as  sequence
and  connection  may  be.  Pwyll  is  lured  into  Faery,  as  is
Mongan's  father,  Fiachna.  Mortal  and  immortal  change
shape,  though  in  the  one  case  the  immortal,  in  the  other
the  mortal  wife  is  deceived.  Pwyll's  son  is  carried  off  on
his  birth-night,  as  is  Mongan  when  three  nights  old.  A
foal  is  born  the  same  night  as  Pryderi  under  circumstances
that  link  together  the  fate  of  man  and  beast,  as  a  comrade
servant  is  born  the  same  night  as  Mongan.  Pwyll  loses  his
wife  for  a  year  as  Mongan  does  his,  and  wins  her  back  by
a  trick,  involving  disguise,  as  also  does  Mongan.1

These  parallels,  all  between  the  stories  of  Mongan  and
Pwyll,  justify  the  surmise  of  some  kind  of  connection
between  the  stories.  The  case  is  immensely  strengthened
by  consideration  of  the  Mabinogi  of  Manawyddan.  For
Manawyddan,  son  of  Llyr,  is  undoubtedly  the  counterpart
in  Welsh  literature  of  Manannan,  son  of  Ler,  in  Irish  litera-

1  In  the  Academy  of  Aug.  15,  1S96,  Prof.  Rhys  equates  Rhiannon  and
Etain,  in  which  latter  name  he  surmises  a  Rigetain.  In  view  of  the
facts  noted  above,  the  suggestion  acquires  some  force.


MONGAN   AND   THE   MABINOGION    17

ture.  His  union  with  Rhiannon,  the  fairy  mother  of
Pryderi,  the  damsel  from  the  Welsh  equivalent  of  the  Irish
Land  of  Promise,  the  owner  (like  Cleena,  in  Teigue,  son
of  Cian)  of  the  magically  sweet  singing  birds,  thus  assumes
a  new  and  most  significant  aspect.  The  two  are  really  of
the  same  kin,  and  from  the  same  divine  land.  Behind
the  Welsh  tale,  as  we  now  possess  it,  we  may  dimly  con-
jecture a  form  in  which  Manawyddan  and  Rhiannon,  lord
and  lady  of  the  god  land  of  the  living  heart,  were  the  real
father  and  mother  of  the  wonder-child  Pryderi,  the  latter
being  the  real  hero,  as  is  his  Irish  counterpart  Mongan,  of
the  adventures  related  of  his  father  Pwyll.  How  significant
in  this  aspect  the  action  of  Manawyddan  in  his  struggle
against  Llwyd  !  It  is  not  merely  the  mortal  wife  of  his  old
age,  but  his  immortal  companion  and  his  own  son  whom  he
has  to  deliver  out  of  the  hands  of  his  magician  foe.

The  same  transference  of  incident  and  attribute  from
father  to  son  which  I  conjecture  to  have  taken  place  in
the  Welsh  tales,  has  also,  most  probably,  taken  place  in
the  Irish  Mongan  legend,  Mongan  being  morally,  as  he
may  once  have  been  physically,  a  reincarnation  of  Man-
annan.

It  will,  I  think,  be  conceded  that  the  Welsh  and  Irish
stories  owe  their  likeness  to  origin  in  a  common  body  of
mythic  romance,  the  chief  actors  in  which  were  the  sea-god
Manannan,  and  a  supernaturally  begotten  semi-mortal  son
of  his.  It  will  further,  I  think,  be  conceded  that  the  Irish
story  preserved  by  the  fifteenth  century  ms.,  the  Book  of
Fermoy,  whilst  younger  in  tone  and  colouring,  less  close  in
details  to  the  hypothetical  parent  myth,  yet  reproduces  its
general  outline  and  march  of  incident  more  faithfully  than
do  the  Welsh  tales.     In  other  words,  the  Irish  story  is  sub-

VOL.  II.  '  B


18  DATE    OF    MABINOGION

stantially   as   old   as,    not   to  say  older  than,  the   Welsh
Mabinogion.

But  what  the  age  of  these  ?  A  question  we  must
answer,  or  we  are  simply  explaining  the  unknown  by  the
more  unknown.  I  have  said  above  that  they  undoubtedly
belong  to  the  earlier  stratum  of  Welsh  romance.  This
'undoubtedly'  derives,  however,  no  justification  from  the
ms.  tradition.  The  oldest  MS.  of  the  Mabinogion  cannot
be  carried  farther  back  than  the  end  of  the  thirteenth
century.  In  claiming  an  earlier  date  we  rely  upon  the
critical  canon  that  no  literature,  even  that  of  the  most  self-
conscious  and  deliberately  archaising  age,  our  own  for
instance,  entirely  escapes  the  influence  of  the  time.  If  the
Mabinogion  proper  (i.e.  the  four  stories  of  Pvvyll,  Branwen,
Manawyddan,  and  Math)  had  been  composed,  or  even
entirely  remodelled,  in  the  late  twelfth  or  thirteenth  century,
they  could  not  have  failed  to  be  influenced  by  the  French
romantic  form  of  the  Arthur  legend,  which  became  known
in  South  Wales  in  the  second  half  of  the  twelfth  century,
mingled  with  and  modified  the  genuine  native  form  of  the
legend,  and,  in  especial,  gave  it  that  note  of  universality
which  enabled  it  to  interpenetrate  and  assimilate  other
legendary  cycles,  which  had  hitherto  preserved  a  distinct
individuality  in  the  national  consciousness.  That  the  four
Mabinogion  ante-date  the  year  i  ioo,  so  far  as  their  contents
are  concerned,  is  the  opinion  of  most  experts.

Granted  they  belong  to  the  eleventh  century  or  early
twelfth  century  ;  granted  their  subject-matter  is  kin  to  that
of  Irish  mythic  romance,  there  are  divers  ways  of  accounting
for  this  kinship,  and  upon  the  explanation  favoured  will
largely  depend  our  estimate  of  the  real  antiquity  and  origin
of  the  Mabinogion.     The  subject-matter  of  these  tales  is,


ORIGIN   OF   MABINOGION  19

as  Professor  Rhys  has  said,  the  fortunes  of  three  clans  of
supernatural  beings :  the  children  of  Llyr,  the  children  of
Don,  the  family  of  PwylL  We  cannot  fail  to  recognise  the
Irish  Tuatha  de  Danann,  or  Folk  of  the  Goddess  Danu,  a
leading  chief  among  whom  is  Ler,  father  of  Manannan.

Now  Brythons  (represented  by  modern  Welshmen)  and
Goidels  (represented  by  the  modern  Gaels  of  Ireland  and
Scotland)  may  have  had  a  common  fund  of  mythic  fancies,
developed  by  each  section  of  the  Celtic  race  in  its  own
way.  On  a  priori  grounds  there  is  no  objection  to  be  urged
against  the  hypothesis,  which  amply  accounts  for  the  likeness
in  essentials  and  marked  variation  in  details  of  the  legends
we  have  considered.  Nor  does  it  necessarily  exact  throwing
them  back  to  prehistoric  (i.e.  in  this  connection  to  pre-
Roman)  times.  As  is  well  known,  a  considerable  Brythonic
immigration  took  place,  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  centuries,  into
Wales  from  the  Northern  Brythonic  district  (which  was
roughly  equivalent  to  Scotland  south  of  Clyde  and  Forth
and  England  north  of  Humber).  These  Brython  invaders
may  well  have  brought  their  traditions  with  them,  and  that
these  should  resemble  those  of  the  Goidelic  inhabitants  of
the  opposite  coast  of  Ireland  need  cause  no  wonder.

But  the  very-fact  of  this  fourth  to  fifth  century  invasion
of  Wales  by  Brythons,  who  supplanted  an  existing  Goidelic
population,  suggests  another  explanation.  The  Bishop  of
St.  Davids,  in  his  Vestiges  of  the  Gael  in  Gwynedd,  treats
this  Goidelic  population  as  the  first  wave  of  Celtic  im-
migration into  Britain,  whilst  for  Mr.  Skene  it  merely  repre-
sents temporary  and  foreign  invasion  from  Ireland  affecting
the  coasts  rather  than  the  interior.1  But  both  scholars
agree  in  referring  the  Mabinogion,  not  to  Wales  as  the
1  Cf.  the  Introduction  to  the  Four  Ancient  Books  of  Wales.


2o     RHYS'S   THEORY   OF   MABINOGION

country  of  the  Kymry  (Brythons),  but  to  the  period  when
Mona  and  Arvon  were  possessed  by  a  Goidelic  population,
the  legendary  kings  of  which  are  the  main  actors  in  these
tales.  Professor  Rhys  has  recently  developed  the  views  of
the  Bishop  of  St.  Davids.  It  was  not,  according  to  him,
until  the  fifth  to  sixth  centuries,  that  the  Brythons
obtained  definite  supremacy  over  the  earlier  Goidelic  popu-
lation, which  may  well  have  preserved  its  speech  for  some
time  longer.  The  Mabinogion  are  the  mythico-heroic
traditions  of  this  Goidelic  people  inhabiting  Wales  down
to  the  sixth  century,  translated  into  the  Brythonic  speech
of  their  conquerors,  and  filtered  through  a  medium  of
Brythonic  culture  and  historic  conditions.

There  is  much  that  is  fascinating  in  this  hypothesis.  It
accounts  for  the  apparent  archaic  pre-Christian  character  of
the  Mabinogion  more  satisfactorily  than  does  the  preceding
view,  according  to  which  they  were  imported  into  Wales  in
the  fifth  century  by  the  Brythonic  invaders  from  North
Britain.  For  these  invaders  of  Wales  belonged  probably  to
a  long  Romanised  and  Christianised  population,  and  had
doubtless  sloughed  off  their  pagan  beliefs  (though  this  is  by
no  means  so  certain  as  some  writers  assume).  Many
peculiar  features  of  the  Mabinogion  are  undoubtedly  most
easily  explained,  if  they  are  regarded  as  the  mythic  tradi-
tions of  one  race  arbitrarily  fitted  into  the  historic  traditions
of  another.  On  the  other  hand,  the  scanty,  obscure,  and
controverted  historical  facts  upon  which  the  hypothesis
rests  can  hardly  be  said  to  afford  it  sufficient  support,  while
the  philological  facts  relied  upon  by  Professor  Rhys  await
expert  criticism.1

1  In   a   paper  read   before   the   Hon.    Society  of  Cymmrodorion,
Professor  Meyer  has  argued  against  the  theory  on  the  ground  of  its


LATE   IRISH    ORIGIN  OF  MABINOGION     21

A  third  hypothesis  remains.  The  Irish,  as  was  shown  suf-
ficiently in  the  first  volume,had  developed,  by  the  earlyseventh
century,  a  great  school  of  story-telling,  which  flourished
vigorously  down  to  the  Viking  period  (beginning  of  ninth
century),  reviving  a  century  later,  after  the  storm  and  stress
of  the  Scandinavian  invasion  had  passed,  when  it  gathered  up
and  retold  the  ancient  tales  and  stories  which  we  find  in  the
great  vellums  of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  century  and  later
mss.  From  the  beginning  of  this  period,  not  to  speak  of  a
far  earlier  date,  the  relations  between  Wales  and  Ireland
were  close  and  continuous.  We  know  by  the  existence  of
actual  translations  from  the  Irish,  that  Welsh  literature  was
affected  by  that  of  Ireland.  We  may  conjecture  that  at
any  date  up  to  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century  Irish  story-
tellers may  have  delighted  Welsh  hearers  with  their  romantic
fictions,  and  have  formed  Welsh  disciples  who  retold  the
foreign  legends,  fitting  them  into  the  framework  of  their
own  land  and  its  history.  This  hypothesis  would  account
for  what  seem  grave  alterations  in  the  very  essence  of  the
mythic  legends  preserved  in  the  Mabinogion,  and  for  the
fact,  which  I  was  the  first  to  point  out  in  my  study  on  the
Mabinogi  of  Branwen,1  that  the  Mabinogion  apparently
betray  familiarity  with  the  great  North  sea  sagas  of  Siegfrid
and  Gudrun-Hilde,  which  may  well  have  become  known
on  either  side  the  Irish  Channel  in  the  tenth-eleventh
centuries.

I  need  not  stop  to  discuss  which  of  these  hypotheses  has
the  most  in  its  favour.  For  even  if  the  last  be  accepted,  it
still  throws   back  the   Mabinogion  to  the  early  eleventh

variance  with  the  known  history  of  the  period.     For  the  purposes  of
my  thesis  it  matters  little  which  view  be  accepted.
1  Folklore  Record,  vol.  v.


22        MONGAN,    FINN,    AND   ARTHUR

century,  and  the  Book  of  Fermoy  Mongan  (which  preserves
in  part  the  same  traditions  in  a  form  partly  more  genuine)
to  a  yet  earlier  age.  In  other  words,  the  tale  for  which  we
have  only  a  fifteenth  century  ms.  voucher,  may  be  con-
sidered equal  in  age  (so  far  as  the  contents  are  concerned)
with  those  preserved  by  the  oldest  Irish  vellum,  the  Book
of  the  Dun  Cow,  copied  at  the  end  of  the  eleventh  century
from  far  earlier  mss.,  and  its  subject-matter  may  be  used
with  equal  confidence  for  working  back  to  the  earlier  forms
of  the  legend.

Mongan,  Finn,  and  Arthur.

I  trust  that  the  result  of  this  comparison  between  Gaelic
and  Welsh  mythic  romance  may  be  deemed  interesting
and  important  enough  to  justify  another  comparison  of
the  same  kind  before  essaying  to  sketch  the  growth  of  the
Mongan  legend.  The  parenthesis  I  am  about  to  open  may
seem  unduly  lengthy,  but  its  contents  are,  I  think,  germane
to  the  point  at  issue.

Mongan  then  is  a  son  of  Manannan — the  supernatural
being  endowing  his  mortal  offspring  with  superhuman
attributes  and  capacities.  But  Mongan  is  also  a  re-birth  of
Finn,  son  of  Cumall,  or  rather,  to  put  it  as  the  Irish  story-
teller does,  Mongan  was  Finn,  though  the  latter  had  been
supposed  to  be  long  dead.  Now,  as  I  have  repeatedly
pointed  out,1  the  chief  parallelism  between  Irish  and  Welsh
heroic  saga  is  furnished  by  the  stories  of  Finn  among  the  Irish
and  of  Arthur  among  the  Britons.  In  the  circumstances  of
their  birth  and  upbringing,  in  the  unfaithfulness  of  their  wife

1  Cf.  more  specially  Transactions  of  the  Second  Int.  Folklore  Con-
gress ('Problems  of  Heroic  Legend'),  and  Rev.  Celt.  vol.  xii.  ('Les
derniers  travaux  allemands  sur  la  legende  du  Saint-Graal ').


MONGAN,    FINN,    AND   ARTHUR       23

with  their  favourite  nephew  and  knight,  there  is  marked
similarity.  But  if  we  enlarge  the  area  of  comparison  by
adducing  the  Mongan  story,  as,  considering  the  identity  of
Mongan  and  Finn,  we  are  entitled  to  do,  the  similarity  is
still  more  marked.  For  the  birth  stories  of  Mongan  and
Arthur  are  substantially  the  same,  allowing  for  the  fact  that
in  the  Arthur  legend  traits  and  incidents  are  translated  out
of  mythic  into  human  conditions,  whilst  the  final  passing
of  Arthur  to  Avalon  assumes  an  entirely  fresh  meaning  if  we
regard  the  mythic  Arthur  as  the  Brythonic  counterpart  of
the  Goidelic  Mongan,  owing  his  mortal  origin  to  the  lord
of  the  magic  wonderland  whither  he  passes  after  his  span
of  mortal  life  is  ended.  That  such  may  have  been
Mongan's  original  fate  we  may  surmise  from  the  verses
which  associate  him  with  his  divine  father  as  dwellers  in  the
land  of  the  living  heart.  But  just  as  the  Brythonic  myth,
fitted  into  the  framework  of  the  historic  Arthur  saga,  lost
the  pristine  significance  of  the  birth  incident,  so  the  his-
toricising  of  the  Gaelic  myth,  by  fusion  of  the  mythical  and
historical  Mongans,  may  well  have  obscured  the  original
form  of  the  death  incident.

If  it  be  admitted,  as  it  can  I  think  scarcely  be  denied,
that  the  groups  of  mythic-heroic  legend  associated  respec-
tively with  the  names  of  Finn-Mongan  in  Ireland  and
Arthur  in  England,  are  largely  made  up  of  identical  tradi-
tional material,  and  may,  in  fact,  be  regarded  as  variant
forms  of  a  common  heroic  myth,  this  substantial  identity
may  be  explained  by  either  of  the  three  hypotheses  we  have
just  considered  in  the  case  of  the  Mongan-Pryderi  parallel.
Arthur  may  be  the  Brythonic  counterpart  of  the  Goidelic
Finn-Mongan,  or  he  may  be  the  British-Goidelic  form  of
the  hero  of  whom  Finn-Mongan  is  the  Irish-Goidelic  form,


24  FINN   SAGA

or  the  heroic  romance  connected  with  his  name  may  be  a
Welsh  imitation  dating  from  the  ninth  to  the  eleventh  cen-
turies of  similar  Irish  stories.  The  third  hypothesis  is  at  once
open  to  the  grave  objection  that  the  Arthur  saga,  in  both
its  historic  and  its  romantic  form,  is  clearly  indicated  in  the
Historia  Brittonum  of  the  South  Welsh  Nennius  writing
at  the  close  of  the  eighth  or  in  the  early  part  of  the  ninth
century,  whilst  it  is  extremely  likely  that  in  this  portion  of
his  compilation  he  is  embodying  documents  which  may  be
a  hundred  years  older.  If  this  argument  were  not  con-
sidered sufficient  it  could,  I  think,  be  amply  proved  that
the  peculiarities  of  the  Arthur  romance,  as  we  know  it  from
the  twelfth  century  Geoffrey,  and  the  somewhat  later
romance  writers,  are  quite  inconsistent  with  the  theory  of
comparatively  recent  importation  of  the  romantic  elements
which  it  contains.

Let  us  look  at  the  matter  a  little  more  closely.  Here
are  three  groups  of  legend,  partly  historic  but  mainly
romantic,  similar  or  identical  in  important  respects,  associ-
ated each  with  definite  historic  tribes  and  territories.  If
we  adopt  the  traditional  chronology  associated  with  the
heroes  of  these  legends  and  arrange  the  groups  accordingly,
we  have :

(a.)  The  Finn  group,  associated  chro?iologically  with  an
Irish  chieftain  of  the  third  century  of  our  era,  topographically
rather  with  Southern  and  South-Western  Ireland,  although
some  of  the  earlier  notices  seem  to  refer  him  to  that  West
Scottish  district  with  which,  at  a  later  stage,  he  is  so  pro-
minently connected ;  these  notices,  however,  seem  to  involve
the  parallelism  of  Finn  and  Mongan.

Finn  is  a  posthumous  child,  reared  in  the  woods,
the   destined   avenger  of  his    father,    possessor  of


ARTHUR    SAGA  25

magic  gifts  and   powers,  deserted  by  his  wife  for
his  favourite  nephew  and  warrior.

.*.  The  oldest  witness  extant  to  the  Finn  legend  may
date  back  to  the  eighth  century.1  A  considerable  number
of  testimonia  belong  to  the  tenth  and  early  eleventh
centuries.  But  the  legend  as  a  whole  only  becomes  really
popular  in  all  Ireland  from  the  eleventh  century  onwards,
from  which  date  it  competes  with  and  finally  supplants  the
Ulster  cycle  of  Conchobor  and  Cuchulinn.

(d.)  The  Arthur  group  associated  chronologically  with  a
Romano-British  chieftain,  who  fought  with  considerable
success  against  the  invading  Germanic  tribes  at  the  close
of  the  fifth  and  in  the  early  part  of  the  sixth  century ;
topographically  (1),  with  the  North-Western  Brythonic
district,  covering  the  western  half  of  Southern  Scotland
and  Northern  England;  (2),  with  South-West  Britain  (the
romantic  element  of  the  legend  being  located  in  South
Wales  as  early  as  the  eighth  century).2

Arthur  owes  his  birth  to  shape-shifting  on  his
father's  part — i.e.  it  is  practically  the  same  as  Mon-
gan's,  whilst  his  life-story  largely  resembles  Finn's,
in  so  far  as  his  wife's  unfaithfulness  and  its  attendant
circumstances  are  concerned.  Arthur  has  super-
natural kindred  and  passes  into  Faery  at  his  death.

1  Waifs  and  Strays,  vol.  ii.  p.  403,  where  I  cite  a  verse  from  the  gloss
on  the  Amra  Choluim  Cille,  referring  to  Grainne's  love  for  Diarmaid,
quoted  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  the  meaning  of  two  words  which
had  become  obsolete  in  the  eleventh  century.

2  In  the  mention  of  the  Twrch  Trwyth  story  found  in  the  Mirabilia
embodied  by  Nennius  in  his  Historia  Brittonum,  and  in  Nennius's
allusion  to  a  lost  saga  of  Arthur's  son  Amhir,  whose  grave  is  located
in  modern  Herefordshire.


26  MONGAN   SAGA

.•.  The  earliest  extant  witness  to  the  Arthur  legend  is,  as
we  have  seen,  possibly  of  the  seventh,  certainly  of  the
eighth,  century.  The  legend  must  have  been  known  and
popular  in  the  Northern  and  Southern  insular  Brythonic
(or,  as  they  came  to  be  called,  Kymric)  districts  in  the
ninth,  tenth,  and  eleventh  centuries  ;  it  must  have  been
popular  in  the  continental  Brythonic  district  (Brittany)  at
least  as  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century,  as  it
was  carried  by  the  Normans  to  Italy  in  the  second  half  of
that  century,  and  they  could  only  have  learnt  it  from  their
Breton  neighbours.  But,  as  a  whole,  the  legend  only
secures  wide  acceptance  and  popularity  from  the  early  part
of  the  twelfth  century  onwards.

(c.)  The  Mongan  group,  associated  chronologically  with
an  Ulster  chieftain  slain  in  615,  topographically  with  the
extreme  North- West  of  Ireland.

Mongan  is  a  son  of  the  sea-god  Manannan,  or  a
re-birth  of  Finn  son  of  Cumal.  The  supernatural
character  of  his  birth  is  ignored  by  one  of  his  mortal
parents ;  his  boyhood  is  spent  with  his  divine  father
in  Faery ;  he  is  a  notable  wizard  and  shape-shifter ;
he  loses  and  recovers  his  wife  (born  the  same  night
as  he,  perhaps  of  the  same  divine  begetting,  in  which
case  she  =  Arthur's  sister  with  whom  he  has,  un-
knowing, incestuous  intercourse)  by  art  magic ;  he
has  dealings  with  the  fairy  folk.

.•.  The  Mongan  legend,  as  we  have  seen,  is  testified  to
as  early  as  the  eighth  century  (the  verse  portion  of  Bran's
Voyage).  It  must  have  been  very  popular  in  Northern
Ireland  in  the  ninth  to  eleventh  centuries,  but  after  the


RELATIONSHIP   OF   THE    SAGAS     27

twelfth  century  it  disappears  almost  entirely  from  Irish
story-telling.

It  is  significant  that  the  latest  of  the  three  groups,  in  so
far  as  the  traditional  historic  date  of  the  hero  is  concerned,
the  one  also  connected,  historically,  with  the  least  important
tribe,  by  far,  also,  the  least  important  of  the  three  in  its  in-
fluence upon  romantic  literature  at  large,  is  that  which  con-
tains the  largest  proportion  of  mythical  elements  and  which
works  those  elements  into  the  most  connected  sequence.
Does  not  this  fact  justify  afresh  the  view  that  in  proportion
as  mythic  saga  is  interpenetrated  by  or  assimilates  a  larger
mass  of  historic  fact,  whether  it  be  the  life-history  of  an
individual  or  of  a  race,  or  the  changes  in  topographical  dis-
tribution of  several  races,  in  so  far  it  sheds  or  transforms
its  mythico-romantic  elements,  which,  instead  of  being  the
latest,  are  really  the  earliest  among  its  constituent  parts  ?

The  facts  which  have  briefly  been  submitted  to  the  reader
will  doubtless  be  held  to  disprove  the  theory  that  any  one
of  these  three  legendary  cycles  is  the  original,  and  that  the
similarity  between  the  other  two  is  due  to  simple  copying.
Such  a  theory  must  necessarily  start  with  the  Mongan  cycle,
which  is  at  once  the  most  archaic  and  the  earliest  recorded.
It  would,  I  think,  pass  the  wit  of  man  to  frame  an  intelli-
gible account  of  the  process  by  which  fictions,  devised  to
honour  an  obscure  Ulster  chieftain,  spread  into  Britain  on
the  one  hand,  throughout  Southern  Ireland  on  the  other,
and  associated  themselves  with  heroes  of  far  greater  impor-
tance and  of  an  earlier  age.  In  setting  forth  a  different
theory  I  will  endeavour  to  gather  up  the  scattered  threads
of  investigation  into  the  history  of  the  Mongan  legend,  and
to  present  the  main  outline  of  that  history  in  connected
form.


28    DEVELOPMENT  OF  MONGAN  LEGEND

Earlier  than  and  underlying  the  heroic  legends  of  Finn,
Arthur,  and  Mongan,  I  assume  that  among  the  Celtic-
speaking  inhabitants  of  these  islands,  Goidels  and  Brythons
both,  there  was  current  the  tale  of  a  wonder-child,  begotten
upon  a  mortal  mother  by  a  supernatural  father — reincarnated
in  him,  or  transmitting  to  him  supernatural  gifts  and  powers
— associated  with  his  father  in  the  rule  of  that  Land  of  Faery
to  which  he  passes  after  his  death.  Such  a  tale  would  be
a  natural  framework  into  which  to  fit  the  life-story  of  any
famous  tribal  hero.  Identification  might  arise  from,  or  at
least  be  facilitated  by,  identity  or  likeness  of  name,  possibly
again  by  likeness  of  circumstance.  Once  the  identification
was  established,  the  legend  would  be  subject  to  two  sets  of
influence,  one  purely  romantic,  derived  from  and  further
developing  the  mythic  basis ;  the  other  historic,  or  quasi-
historic,  anxious  to  accommodate  the  traditional  incidents  to
the  known  facts  of  the  hero's  life.  The  popular  story-teller
would  discard  the  historic  framework,  save  a  few  vague
names  of  persons,  places,  or  battles  ;  the  professed  antiquary
would  gloss  and  rationalise  the  mythic  incidents,  torturing
them  into  conformity  with  the  facts  known  to  him.  Between
these  extreme  modes,  every  variety  of  treatment  might  be
looked  for.

This  hypothetical  a  priori  reconstruction  can  be  amply
verified  by  an  impartial  examination  of  the  literature  which
has  preserved  to  us  the  legends  of  Finn  and  Arthur.  In
both  cases  we  note  a  constant  struggle  between  romantic
tradition  and  pseudo-historic  record.  There  exists,  too,  a
curious  analogy  between  the  legend  itself  and  its  life  in
history  and  literature :  the  god  animates  the  mortal,  endowing
him  with  strange  and  mystic  powers,  with  the  gift  of  shape-
shifting,  bestowing  upon  him  the  boon  of  deathless  life  in


THE   MONGAN   LEGEND  29

the  Land  of  Youth  and  Promise :  so,  too,  the  ancient  myth
quickens  the  record  of  some  mortal  hero's  story,  lifts  it
above  the  limits  of  time  and  space,  endows  it  with  the
power  of  transformation  to  suit  altered  conditions  of  tribal
history,  bestows  upon  it  the  immortality,  more  surely  the
attribute  of  the  great  heroic  romances  than,  perhaps,  of  any
other  creation  of  man's  fancy.  How  strikingly  is  this  the
case  with  Finn  and  Arthur,  of  whom  one  became  the  repre-
sentative of  pan-Gaeldom,  the  other  the  type  and  standard-
bearer  of  mediaeval  Christendom,  whilst  the  tale  of  their
deeds,  centuries  and  centuries  after  their  death,  had  power
to  influence  alien  generations,  to  originate  new  growths  of
artistic  emotion  and  expression.  Such,  too,  might  have
been  the  fate  of  Mongan  but  for  historic  circumstances
which  can,  I  think,  be  definitely  indicated.

The  hero  of  this  mythic  romance  was  known  to  the
Celtic  tribes  inhabiting  North-West  Ulster  as  Mongan.1
This  I  assume  because  the  fact  that  the  historic  Ulster
chieftain,  slain  in  615,  bore  this  name,  seems  to  have  been
one  of  the  reasons  why  he  stepped  into  the  shoes  of  his
mythic  namesake.  There  may,  of  course,  have  been  other
reasons,  some  similarity,  for  instance,  between  the  life-
history  of  the  real  Mongan  and  the  familiar  legend.
Mongan  may  have  been  a  posthumous  child,  or  a  bastard,
skulking  for  his  life  in    youth,  winning  his   chieftainship

1  Mongan  is  not  a  real  full-name.  Like  Willie  for  William,  it  is  a
shortened  hypocoristic  form  (of  endearment)  of  a  longer  compound
name,  the  first  element  of  which  was  Mong.  The  second  may  have
been  anything,  but  the  only  male  name  beginning  with  Mong  known  to
me  is  Mong-find,  lit.  'white  mane,'  K.M.  A  most  suitable  name  for
the  sea-god's  son,  and  if  Mong-find  was  the  original  name  it  is  possible
that  while  one  element  persisted  in  North  Ireland  the  other  (Find)
survived  in  South  Ireland.


30         MYTHIC   HISTORIC   MONGAN

under  circumstances  that  struck  the  popular  fancy  and
recalled  the  older  story.  We  can  but  conjecture.  We
can,  however,  indicate  another  reason  for  bringing  down
the  earlier  hero  from  his  mythic  wonderland  and  locating
him  in  North-East  Ulster  at  the  close  of  the  sixth  century.
One  of  the  very  strongest  witnesses  to  the  genuine  character
of  Irish  mythic  romance  and  to  the  passionate  hold  it  had
on  the  imagination  of  the  Irish  race  is  afforded  by  the
repeated  efforts  to  bring  the  older  heroes  within  the  pale
of  the  new  faith.  Mongan  did  not  escape  a  tendency,
manifested  in  the  case  of  Conchobor  and  Cuchulinn,  of
Cormac  and  Finn.  And  with  him  the  legend  assumes  a
peculiarly  pregnant  and  ingenious  form.  The  lord  of  the
old  pagan  wonderland  of  delights  is  sent  to  the  Christian
heaven,  doubtless  to  proclaim  its  vast  superiority,  whilst
testifying  to  that  precognition  of  the  faith  among  the  pagan
Irish,  which  similar  legends  endeavour  to  establish.  A  hero,
specially  beloved  and  renowned  among  the  Northern  Irish,
his  guide  and  safeguard,  must  be  none  other  than  the
greatest  of  North-Irish  saints,  the  best-beloved,  too,  of  the
bardic  class,  Columba  of  Hy.  But  Columba's  period,
the  middle  of  the  sixth  century,  was  well  known,  and  a
later  age,  receiving,  with  naive  credulity,  the  legend  of
Mongan's  visit  to  Heaven  under  Columba's  guidance,  and
seeking  to  realise  it,  would  naturally  cast  about  among  the
saints'  contemporaries  for  the  hero  of  the  story.  A  famous
Ulster  chief,  of  the  same  name,  whose  lifetime  partly  over-
lapped Columba's,  who  may  well  have  come  in  contact  with
the  saint  in  his  own  youth,  whose  life-history,  as  I  have
hinted,  may  have  vaguely  recalled  incidents  in  the  accounts
of  the  mythic  Mongan,  naturally  offered  himself.  The
identification  once  firmly  established,  the  actual  life-story


MYTHIC   HISTORIC    MONGAN         31

of  the  historic  Mongan  became  a  potent  factor  in  remodel-
ling the  legend ;  the  birth-story  was  definitely  associated
with  his  parents,  Fiachna  and  Caintigern  (although  it  lost
little,  if  any,  of  its  mythic  character),  the  form  in  which  it
has  come  down  to  us  being  undoubtedly  determined  by  real
events  in  Fiachna's  life ;  the  passing  of  Mongan  into  Faery,
on  the  other  hand — which,  we  can  hardly  doubt,  was  an
essential  feature  in  the  purely  mythic  legend — was  supplanted
by  the  actual  death-story  of  the  historic  Mongan.  For  some
reason,  which  will  probably  always  remain  unknown  to  us,
the  incursion  of  a  British  chieftain  resulting  in  Mongan's
defeat  and  death  at  Senlabor  in  the  year  615,  strongly
affected  the  imagination  of  the  Ulster  story-tellers.  But
save  in  the  historic  setting  given  to  the  birth-story,  save  in
the  substitution  of  historic  for  mythic  circumstance  in  the
death-story,  there  is  but  little  trace  of  historic  fact  in  the
Mongan  legend  as  it  has  come  down  to  us.  The  bulk  of
it  is  formed  by  romantic  commonplaces,  based  upon,
developing  and  remodelling  incidents  in  the  original
mythic  legend.

How  does  this  view  agree  with  the  known  facts  of  the
literary  history  of  the  legend  ?  Columba  dies  in  a.d.  592.
Within  fifty  years  of  his  death  the  legend  of  his  having
extended  his  protection  to  a  mythic  hero  of  his  own  tribe,
to  Mongan,  lord  of  the  Pagan  Elysium,  enabling  him  thereby
to  visit  the  Christian  Heaven,  obtains  currency,  and  is
noted  in  the  verses  of  Muru  who  died  in  650.  At  this  time
the  identification  with  the  historic  Mongan,  slain  in  615,
had  not  been  thought  of.  Muru  may  well  have  known
the  latter,  and  may,  even  in  his  early  youth,  have  known
Columba  himself;  in  any  case  he  almost  certainly  knew
that  the  saint  predeceased  the  chief,  and  could  not  there-


32     ORIGINAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  MONGAN

fore  have  summoned  the  latter  from  the  Land  of  Promise.
But  within  the  next  fifty  years  the  legend  of  the  meeting
of  saint  and  semi-divine  hero  led  to  the  identification  of  the
latter  with  the  historic  Mongan,  and  the  story,  as  we  have
it,  was  called  into  being.  Now  we  understand  why  in  Bran's
Voyage  the  Mongan  episode  is  introduced  at  all,  and  at  such
disproportionate  length.  The  old  importance  of  Mongan
as  lord  with  his  divine  father  in  Faery  was  still  vaguely
present  to  the  story-teller's  mind ;  the  most  famous  incident,
for  the  story-teller,  in  Manannan's  career  was  probably  his
begetting  the  wonder-child  Mongan ;  a  tale  wholly  con-
cerned with  the  over-sea  Elysium  and  unconnected  with
the  great  heroic  cycles  could  hardly  fail  to  mention  both
Manannan  and  his  son.  But  the  legend,  as  Bran's  Voyage
relates  it,  has  definitely  assimilated  the  historic  elements
derived  from  the  life-story  of  the  historic  Mongan.  The
process  involved  may  well  have  taken  eighty  to  a  hundred
years,  so  that  taking  640  (conjectural  date  of  Muru's  verses,
which  testify  to  the  unhistoricised  Mongan  legend)  as  a
starting-point,  we  can  hardly  place  the  composition  of  the
verse  portion  of  Bran's  Voyage  much  before  740,  a  date
already  assigned,  on  other  grounds,  in  the  first  section  of
this  essay.

The  foregoing  hypothesis  likewise  accounts,  I  would
maintain,  for  that  connection  between  Mongan  and  Finn,
apparent  even  in  the  scanty  remains  of  the  legend  that  have
come  down  to  us,  and  otherwise  inexplicable.  This  con-
nection is  vouched  for  not  only  by  the  purely  romantic  text
which  makes  Mongan  a  re-birth  of  Finn,  but  by  the  pseudo-
historic  notice  due  to  Cinaed  ua  Hartacain,  the  leading
Irish  historian  antiquary  of  the  tenth  century,  which  brings
into  close  juxtaposition  the  deaths  of  both  heroes.    War-


HOME   OF    MONGAN    LEGEND         33

ranted  by  no  other  circumstances,  historical,  geographical,
or  literary,  that  we  can  detect  or  surmise,  this  connection,
vague  and  casual  as  it  is,  is  explicable  if  we  admit  an
original  mythic  connection  between  the  two  cycles,  consist-
ing in  the  fact  that  both  heroes  are  largely  hypostases  of
the  same  semi-divine  personage.

In  the  after-history  of  the  legend  we  trace  that  conflict
between  historic  record  and  romantic  convention  I  have
already  spoken  of.  In  the  stories  preserved  by  the
Book  of  the  Dun  Cow  the  romantic  side  predomi-
nates ;  in  the  passage  of  the  eleventh  to  twelfth  century
annalist  the  would-be  historical  point  of  view  is  sharply
asserted.

As  it  comes  before  us,  the  Mongan  legend  is  essentially
North  Irish.  The  mythic  hero  was  in  all  probability  an
object  of  especial  veneration  to  the  northern  tribes ;  it  is
the  great  saint  of  the  northern  race  to  whom  the  legend
ascribes  his  reconciliation  with  the  new  faith ;  it  is  a
northern  cleric  (Muru  of  Donegal),  to  whom  we  owe  our
knowledge  of  the  legend  ;  it  is  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun
Cow,  that  vellum  copied  in  a  northern  monastery  from  an
earlier  compilation  of  Flann  of  Monasterboice,  the  greatest
scholar  of  North  Ireland  in  the  early  eleventh  century,  that
are  preserved  the  romantic  tales  concerning  the  hero.  Now
for  several  hundred  years  the  headship  of  the  Irish  race  was
to  be  found  in  the  north ;  the  head  kingship  was  almost
hereditary  among  the  descendants  of  Niall  of  the  Nine
Hostages  {floruit  a.d.  322-404) ;  in  so  far  as  any  one  Irish
heroic  legend  could  claim  to  be  the  common  possession  and
the  great  treasure  of  the  whole  race,  it  was  the  Ulster  saga  of
Conchobor  and  Cuchulinn.  Such  was  the  state  of  affairs
from  the  end  of  the  fourth  to  the  middle  of  the  tenth  cen-
VOL.  II.  C


34     HISTORY    OF   MONGAN    LEGEND

tury — predominance  of  the  North  in  the  political  as  in  the
literary  sphere.  Then  comes  a  great  change.  Brian  of  the
Munster  Dal-Cais  clan  wrests  the  head  kingship  of  Ireland
from  the  O'Neils.  The  centre  of  political  gravity  is  shifted
from  the  North  to  the  South.  To  this  political  there  cor-
responds, I  believe,  a  literary  revolution.  The  Finn  story,
which  I  take  to  be  essentially  South  Irish,  acquired,  in
addition  to  the  considerable  popularity  it  already  enjoyed,
official  recognition  from  the  bardic  class,  intent  upon  pleas-
ing the  new  holders  of  power  and  purse,  and  gradually
superseded  the  older  Ulster  cycle  as  the  national  Irish
heroic  saga.  Thus  whilst  the  Mongan  story,  a  Northern
legend,  enjoyed  literary  favour  consequent  upon  the  pre-
dominance of  North  Irish  chieftains,  it  was  overshadowed
by  the  superior  claims  of  the  great  cycle,  of  which  Cuchu-
linn,  fortissimus  heros  Scotorum,  was  the  protagonist ;  when
that  predominance  ceased  it  was  killed  by  the  competition
of  the  Finn  saga,  the  tribal  legend  of  the  new  masters
of  Irish  polity,  of  the  new  dispensers  of  literary  favour.
Such  are  the  historic  causes  which  prevented  its  attain-
ing the  same  rank  as  the  kindred  legends  of  Arthur  or
Finn.

I  said  killed,  and  the  word  is  hardly  excessive,  for  the
Mongan  legend  ceased  to  be  a  formative  factor  in  Irish
romance  after  the  twelfth  century.  Yet,  by  a  lucky  accident,
an  extensive  fragment  took  the  fancy  of  a  fourteenth  to
fifteenth  century  Irish  story-teller,  and,  rewritten  in  the
taste  of  the  day,  has  been  preserved  to  us  by  the  scribe  of
the  Book  of  Fermoy.

The  foregoing  discussion,  unduly  long  though  it  may
seem,  was  indispensable.  We  purpose  investigating  the
nature  and  origin  of  certain  Irish  beliefs  and  fancies,  our


MONGAN    IN    TRADITION  35

evidence  for  which  is  largely  contained  in  the  scanty  extant
remains  of  the  Mongan  cycle.  A  clear  idea  must  first  be
gained  of  the  general  position  of  the  cycle  in  the  evolution
of  Irish  mythic  romance.  It  would  be  presumptuous  to
speak  of  proof  in  regions  of  research  where  the  facts  are
alike  scanty,  obscure,  and  insufficiently  studied  as  yet,  but
I  have,  I  trust,  succeeded  in  establishing  a  strong  presump-
tion in  favour  of  the  archaic  and  original  character  of  the
Mongan  texts.  This  presumption  I  base  not  so  much  upon
the  texts  themselves,  though  I  firmly  believe  that  to  an  im-
partial student  the  internal  evidences  of  age  and  authenticity
will  appear  neither  few  nor  light,  as  upon  their  relation  to
other  mythico-romantic  texts,  and  upon  the  way  in  which
they  have  come  down  to  us.  That  we  have  in  the  Mongan
story  a  local,  historicised  variant  of  an  older  mythic  legend,
dating  back  in  its  present  form  to  the  first  half  of  the  eighth
century,  akin  to,  but  neither  derived  from  nor  itself  the
origin  of  the  romantic  cycles  connected  with  Finn  in  Ire-
land, with  Pryderi  in  Goidelic  Britain,  with  Arthur  in
Britain,  a  variant  deprived,  by  well-known  historic  causes,
of  expansive  and  transformative  power,  and  ultimately
overshadowed  out  of  existence  by  the  kindred  Finn  saga
— by  this  theory  alone  can  I  explain  the  appearance,  the
growth  and  the  decay  of  the  legend  in  Irish  romantic
literature.1

1  As  use  has  been  made  of  the  verse  ascribed  to  Mum  of  Donegal,  a
seventh-century  Irish  cleric,  I  must  again  point  out  that  the  language,
metrical  peculiarities,  and  style  of  this  little  poem,  as  well  as  of  the
numerous  poems  ascribed  to  or  associated  with  Columba,  among  which
it  is  found,  do  not  warrant  an  earlier  date  than  the  thirteenth  century.
But  I  must  also  point  out  that,  although  the  Muru  poem  fits  admirably
into  my  hypothetical  reconstruction  of  the  evolution  of  the  Mongan
legend,  yet  the  hypothesis  nowise  depends  upon  its  being  a  product,


36  THE    MURU   VERSES

A  firm  basis  being  thus  secured  for  further  investigation,
we  must  now  proceed  to  study  parallel  Irish  stories  which
have  come  down  to  us  from  the  pre-eleventh  century  period.
It  may  be  well,  however,  to  briefly  review  the  evidence  of
the  Mongan  cycle  as  to  the  nature  of  the  re-birth  con-
ception.

Supernatural  beings  (e.g.  Manannan),  themselves  death-
less, have  the  power  of  begetting  children  with  mortal
women,  of  endowing  their  offspring  with  supernatural  attri-
butes and  powers,  in  especial  with  that  of  shape-shifting.
Heroes  (e.g.  Finn  Mac  Cumaill)  may,  after  a  lapse  of  several
centuries,  be  born  again  into  the  world,  retaining  the
memory  of  their  past  existence.

Both  of  these  motifs — divine  cum  mortal  parentage,  re-
even  as  far  as  the  tradition  which  it  embodies  is  concerned,  of  the  seventh
century.  It  can  be  put  on  one  side  altogether  without  affecting  the
general  validity  of  my  argument.  A  fortiori  it  is  quite  indifferent  to  me
whether  it  is,  formally,  a  seventh-century  poem  or  a  thirteenth-century
pastiche.  But  I  am  exceedingly  loth  to  believe  that  it  and  the  poems
among  which  it  is  found  can  be  inventions  of  the  thirteenth  century
without  any  basis  of  older  text  or  of  oral  tradition.  Why  should  a
thirteenth-century  cleric  poet  have  taken  the  trouble,  or  where  should
he  have  got  the  idea,  of  making  up  a  legend  about  Columba  and  Mon-
gan, and  even  if  this  possibility  be  admitted,  could  he  have  invented  the
contents  of  the  legend  ?  There  is  nothing,  as  we  have  seen,  in  the  ex-
tant Mongan  saga  to  suggest  such  an  idea  or  to  yield  the  materials  for
its  embodiment.  Such  a  question  must  be  determined  by  the  balance
of  probability,  and  all  the  probabilities  to  my  mind  favour  the  view  that
the  cleric  poet  who  wrote  down  in  the  thirteenth  century  poems  ascribed
to  Muru  and  Columba,  had  before  him  far  older  poems  the  substance  of
which  he  reproduced,  or  was  acquainted  with  a  definite  oral  tradition
concerning  the  relations  between  Columba  and  Mongan.  I  also  believe
that  in  ascribing  the  poem  to  Muru,  the  author,  whoever  he  was,
followed  tradition,  and  if  a  tradition  existed  it  seems  to  me  it  must  be
of  early  date.


MONGAN   AND   RE-BIRTH  37

birth  with  memory  of  past  existence — are  introduced  so
casually  into  the  tales  that  they  were  evidently  either  quite
familiar  to  author  and  hearers,  or  were  retained  from  a  far
older  mythico-romantic  system  on  account  of  the  traditional
sanctity  attaching  to  them.


CHAPTER    XIV

IRISH  RE-BIRTH  LEGENDS

The  birth-story  of  Cuchulinn— The  birth-story  of  Etain— The  Begetting
of  the  Two  Swineherds  ;  summary  of  story,  and  discussion  of  its  date
and  nature — Conclusions  drawn  from  these  stories — The  birth-story
of  Conall  Cernach — The  transformations  of  Tuan  mac  Cairill — The
birth-story  of  Aed  Slane — Comparison  of  the  Irish  stories  with  the
Welsh  Hanes  Taliessiti ;  vindication  of  the  archaic  nature  of  the
Taliessin  story — Amergin  and  Taliessin  :  early  Celtic  pantheism —
Nature  of  the  re-birth  conception  as  found  in  Celtic  romance.

The  stories  now  to  be  examined  are  far  from  possessing  the
intrinsic  merit  of  the  Voyages  to  the  Otherworld  discussed
in  the  first  volume.  They  have  engaged  the  attention  of  no
such  original  and  charming  artists  as  the  unknown  story-
tellers to  whom  we  owe  Cuchulinn's  Sick-Bed  or  the
Adventures  of  Teigue  Mac  Cein.  As  a  rule  fragmentary
and  obscure,  the  central  incident  is  not  infrequently  glossed
over  and  rationalised  away  so  that  it  is  difficult  at  first  sight
to  distinguish  its  true  character.  This  is  notably  the  case
with  the  Birth-Story  of  Cuchulinn,  the  first  among  these
tales  to  demand  notice,  from  the  importance  of  its  hero  as
from  the  antiquity  of  its  record.  For  among  the  many  mss.
that  have  transmitted  it  to  us  one  is  the  Book  of  the  Dun
Cow,  that  oldest  Irish  vellum,  copied  at  the  close  of  the
eleventh  century  from  compilations  of  the  earlier  half  of  the
same  century.

38


THE   CUCHULINN    BIRTH-STORY     39

The  Birth-Story  of  Cuchulinn  is  extant  in  two  versions,
neither  of  which  is  in  its  original  form,  and  one  of  which
has  come  down  to  us  mingled  with  and  distorted  by  the
other.  I  give  each  version  in  outline ;  where  desirable,  in
full  detail.1

Version  A. — Dechtire,  sister  of  Conchobor,  fled  one  day
and,  with  her,  fifty  damsels.  Neither  from  the  men  of  Ulster
nor  from  Conchobor  did  they  ask  leave.  Track  nor  trace
of  them  was  not  found  for  three  years,  nor  was  aught  heard
of  them.  Then  they  came  in  bird  guise  to  the  Plain  of
Emania,  and  they  devoured  everything  and  left  no  blade  of
grass  standing.  Great  was  the  grief  of  the  men  of  Ulster
at  this  sight.  Nine  chariots  were  harnessed  to  pursue  the
birds,  for  'twas  a  custom  of  theirs,  bird-hunting.  Concho-
bor was  there,  and  Fergus,  Amorgin,  and  Blai  Briugaid,
Sencha  and  Bricriu.  The  birds  flew  before  them  to  the
south,  past  Sliab  Fuait,  etc.  Night  fell  upon  the  warriors
of  Ulster ;  the  bird  flock  vanished ;  the  men  of  Ulster  un-
harnessed. Fergus  set  forth  in  search  of  shelter  and  came
to  a  little  house.  Therein  he  found  a  man  and  a  woman
who  greeted  him.  Fergus  asked  for  food,  but  was  not  given
any  because  his  comrades  were  outside.  '  Come  to  this
house  with  thy  comrades,  and  they  shall  be  welcome.'
Fergus  rejoined  his  companions  and  brought  them  with
him,  men  and  chariots,  and  they  went  into  the  house.
Then  Bricriu  went  out  and  heard  somewhat,  a  low  plaint.
Guided  by  the  noise,  he  went  towards  the  house  he  saw
before  him,  a  house  great,  fair,  and  magnificent.  Entering
by  a  door  and  gazing  in,  he  beheld  the  master  of  the  house,

1  The  story  has  been  edited  by  Prof.  Windisch  in  the  first  volume
of  Irische  Texte,  and  translated  by  M.  Louis  Duvau,  Rev.  Celt.  vol.  ix.
Cf.  also  Zimmer,  L.  U.  pp.  420-425.


4o     THE   CUCHULINN    BIRTH-STORY

a  young  warrior,  handsome,  of  noble  mien,  who  spake  to
him  thus :  '  Come  in,  Bricriu.'  '  For  my  part/  said  the
woman,  'thou  art  welcome.'  'Why  does  thy  wife  greet
me  ? '  said  Bricriu.  '  It  is  for  her  sake  that  I,  too,  greet
thee,'  [said  the  woman].  '  Are  you  missing  any  one  at
Emania?'  said  the  man.  'In  truth,  yes;  fifty  damsels
these  three  years.'  'Would  you  know  them  if  you  saw
them  ? '  '  If  I  did  not,  it  is  only  because  one  may  forget
or  be  doubtful  after  three  years.'  '  Try  and  recognise  them,'
said  the  man,  '  the  fifty  damsels  are  here ;  this  woman  in
my  power  is  their  mistress,  and  she  is  Dechtire.  They  it
is  in  bird  shape  who  came  to  Emania  to  lure  the  men  of
Ulster  hither.'  The  woman  then  gave  Bricriu  a  crimson
mantle  with  fringes,  and  he  went  forth  to  rejoin  his  com-
rades. On  his  way  he  bethought  him  :  '  As  to  these  fifty
damsels  whom  Conchobor  is  seeking,  I  shall  deceive  him
about  having  found  them  here.1  I  shall  hide  that  I  have
found  them,  and  only  speak  of  the  house  full  of  fair  women.'
Conchobor  asked  Bricriu  what  of  his  search  ?  'I  came  to
a  fair  and  brilliant  house,  and  therein  I  saw  a  queen,  noble,
gracious,  of  right  royal  mien,  with  fair,  curling  hair  •  a
group  of  women,  lovely  and  well  clad ;  the  master  of  the
house  brilliant  and  generous.'  '  He  is  my  vassal,'  said
Conchobor,  '  he  lives  on  my  land ;  bid  his  wife  come  and
sleep  with  me  this  night.'  But  no  one  save  Fergus  would
go  on  this  mission.  He  was  welcomed,  and  the  woman
went  with  him,  but  she  complained  to  Fergus  she  was  in
travail.      Fergus   told  Conchobor  this,  and  a  delay  was

1  Read  (Windisch,  Ir.  Texte,  p.  144,  1.  30) :  '  In  coeca  ingen  si  tra,'
al  se,  '  testo  ar  Conchobar,  dober  muin  n-immi  a  izgbdil  sunn.'  As  to
the  meaning  of  the  phrase  dob6r  muin  n-immi,  see  Stokes,  Rev.  Cell.
xiii.  p.  473,  s.  v.  muin. — K.  M.


THE   CUCHULINN    BIRTH-STORY    41

granted  her  on  that  account.  Then  each  of  the  men
of  Ulster  went  to  bed  with  his  wife,  and  all  slept.  When
they  awoke,  they  saw  somewhat,  a  little  child  in  Con-
chobor's  lap.

[The  remainder  of  this  version  describes  how  the  Ulster
warriors  put  forward  their  claims  to  act  as  foster-father  to
this  child.]

Version  B. — The  mysterious  birds  come  to  ravage  the
plain  of  Emania.  Nine  cars  are  harnessed  for  the  pursuit,
in  one  of  which  Conchobor  takes  place  with  his  maiden
sister,  Dechtire,  who  serves  as  his  charioteer.  Among  the
other  warriors  are  Conall  Cernach,  Fergus,  Loegaire  the
Victorious,  Celtchar,  and  Bricriu.1  Full  of  beauty  was  the
bird  flock  and  their  song.  They  sang  as  they  were  flying.
Nine  times  twenty  were  they,  linked  two  and  two  by  silver
chains  ;  at  the  head  of  each  group  of  twenty  flew  two  birds
of  noble  plumage,  linked  by  a  chain  of  red  gold.  These
birds  flew  apart  till  nightfall,  preceding  the  hunters  to  the
end  of  the  land.  Night  fell  upon  the  men  of  Ulster,  and
thick  snow  fell.  Conchobor  bade  his  men  seek  shelter.
Conall  Cernach  and  Bricriu  find  a  new  house.  Entering
they  see  a  man  and  woman,  who  greet  them.  Returning  to
their  comrades,  Bricriu  declared  it  was  beneath  them  to  go
into  the  house,  where  they  would  find  neither  clothing  nor
food.  Yet  they  went  in,  and  took  their  chariots  with  them.
And  hardly  were  they  in  the  house  with  their  chariots,  a?id
their  horses,  and  their  ar??is,  but  there  came  to  them  all  manner
of  good  things,  meats  known  and  unknown,  so  that  they  never

1  The  redaction  of  this  version  is  probably  later  than  that  of  Version
A  in  so  far  as  the  list  of  Conchobor's  companions  is  concerned.  Conall,
Loegaire,  and  Celtchar  are  'common  form'  in  the  more  highly-developed
texts  of  the  cycle.


42    THE   CUCHULINN    BIRTH-STORY

had  a  better  night}  The  master  of  the  house  then  told  the
men  of  Ulster  that  his  wife  was  in  travail.  Dechtire  went
to  her,  and  she  gave  birth  to  a  son.  At  the  door  of  the
house  was  a  mare  which  gave  birth  to  two  foals.  The  men
of  Ulster  took  the  child.  The  father  gave  him  the  two
foals.  Dechtire  brought  him  up.  In  the  morning,  house
and  birds  had  vanished,  and  the  warriors  found  themselves
in  the  east  of  the  land.  They  returned  to  Emania,  taking
with  them  the  child,  the  mare,  and  the  two  foals.  The
child  grew  up  and,  falling  ill,  died.  Great  was  Dechtire's
grief.  On  her  return  from  burying  him  she  asked  for  drink
in  a  vessel  of  brass.  Drink  was  brought  her.  As  she
raised  the  vessel  to  her  lips  she  felt  a  little  beast  come
with  it,  and  she  drank  it  in.  She  slept  afterwards,  and
at  night  she  saw  somewhat,  a  man  neared  her  and  spake
unto  her,  telling  her  she  was  with  child  by  him.  He
it  was  who  had  carried  her  off  with  her  companions,
he  had  led  them  in  the  shape  of  birds.  He  was  the
child  she  had  reared ;  now  he  was  about  to  enter  her
womb,  and  would  take  the  name  of  Setanta.  He  was
Lug,  son  of  Ethne.

[The  version  then  tells  how  the  men  of  Ulster  were
shocked  at  Dechtire's  pregnancy,  thinking  the  father  must
be  Conchobor,  who  had  done  violence  to  his  sister  when
drunk.  She  is  married  to  Sualtam.  The  child  she  bears
is  named  Setanta.  The  oldest  ms.  which  has  preserved
this  version,  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  then  relates  the
strife  of  the  Ulster  warriors  to  foster  Setanta,  which  is  also
found  in  Version  A.]

It  is  evident  that  we  have  here  three  separate  accounts

1  This  passage  is  only  found  in  full  in  the  later  MS.,  though  it  is  pre-
supposed by  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow  text.


DIFFERENT   VERSIONS   OF   STORY     43

of  the  parentage  of  Cuchulinn,  the  greatest  of  Irish  braves.
(1.)  He  is  a  re-birth  of  the  god  Lug,  who  lures  his  mother
Dechtire  to  Faery,  commits  himself  as  a  child  to  her  care,
and,  when  he  dies  in  this  shape,  passes  into  her  under  the
form  of  a  little  beast  which  she  drinks  (Version  B).
(2.)  He  is  the  son  of  Dechtire  and  an  unnamed  lord  of
Faery,  who  transforms  her  into  a  bird,  carries  her  off  to  his
home,  and,  after  three  years,  when  she  is  on  the  point  of
giving  birth,  sends  her  in  bird-shape  to  lure  her  brother
and  his  chief  warriors,  to  whom  the  child,  when  born,
is  committed  (Version  A).  (3.)  He  is  the  son  of  Dechtire
and  Conchobor.  This  account  is  implied  in  the  definite
statement  of  Version  B,  that  the  men  of  Ulster  suspected
Conchobor.

It  is  furthermore  evident  that  neither  version  has  come
down  to  us  in  an  original  form.  Notably  Version  B,  as
we  have  it,  presupposes  Version  A  in  Lug's  statement  to
Dechtire  that  he  had  carried  her  off  with  her  companions  in
the  shape  of  birds,  whereas,  according  to  existing  texts,  he
had  done  nothing  of  the  kind.  I  have  given  Version  A.
in  sufficient  fulness  to  be  spared  the  need  of  pointing  the
traces,  obvious  to  the  careful  reader,  of  abridgment  and
contamination.

If  now  we  turn  to  the  MS.  tradition  of  the  story  we  gain
valuable  hints  as  to  the  age  and  nature  of  the  incidents  it
relates,  and  concerning  the  way  in  which  Irish  mythic
romance  has  been  transmitted  to  us.  Version  A  is  found
in  a  fifteenth  century  Ms.,  Eg.  1782.  Version  B  is  likewise
found  in  this  ms.  and  also  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,
which  further,  as  already  pointed  out,  contains  the  strife
of  the  Ulster  warriors  over  Cuchulinn's  fostering,  found  in
Version  A.     In  the  Eg.  form  of  Version  B  it  is  missing.


44  EVOLUTION    OF   STORY

If  we  compare  that  portion  of  Version  B  common  to  the
fifteenth  century  ms.,  Eg.  1782,  and  to  the  eleventh  century
ms.,  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  we  find  that  the  fifteenth
century  text  is  much  superior.  Not  only  does  it  contain
details,  barely  indicated  or  slurred  over  by  the  eleventh
century  text,  but  in  many  passages  it  has  preserved  what
is  obviously  the  true  reading  where  the  Book  of  the  Dun
Cow  text  has  been  corrupted  by  transpositions  or  other
scribal  errors.  Finally,  as  we  have  seen,  Version  A  (only
known  to  us  from  a  fifteenth  century  ms.)  is  presupposed
by  Version  B,  found,  in  a  corrupt  form,  in  an  eleventh
century  MS.

I  have  dwelt  upon  these  facts  at  some  length,  as  they
afford  an  admirable  instance  of  truths  always  to  be  borne
in  mind  when  studying  mediaeval  Irish  literature.  The
date  of  the  ms.  affords  no  certain  clue  (save  as  a  terminus
ad  quern)  to  the  age  of  the  text  which  it  may  contain.  The
oldest  ms.  may  yield  a  text  substantially  younger  than  that
of  mss.  centuries  later  in  date.  The  absence  of  a  text
from  the  older  mss.  affords  no  decided,  or  even  strong,
presumption  against  its  possible  antiquity.

Having  thus  cleared  the  ground  for  a  consideration  of
the  versions  upon  their  merits  instead  of  upon  their  nominal
date,  we  may  form  some  idea  of  the  evolution  of  the  legend
as  it  offers  itself  to  us  in  extant  Irish  literature.  Of  the
three  forms  of  the  birth-story  presupposed  by  our  texts  it
is  by  no  means  certain  that  the  one  which  ascribes  Cuchu-
linn's  birth  to  incest  between  Conchobor  and  Dechtire  is
necessarily  the  youngest.  The  existence  of  a  parallel
incident  in  the  allied  heroic  legends  of  Arthur  and  of
Siegfried  testifies  clearly  to  a  mythic  original  for  a  trait
now  existing  only  in  heroic  guise.     The  mythic  prototypes


EVOLUTION   OF   STORY  45

of  Conchobor  and  Dechtire  doubtless  belonged  to  a  stage
of  thought  in  which  the  horror,  felt  at  a  later  date,  for
incest  was  wholly  missing.

The  Irish  heroic  sagas  assumed  their  present  shape  under
certain  definite  historical  and  social  conditions.  Prominent
among  these  is  the  personality  of  the  men  who  composed
or  transmitted  them.  Roughly  speaking,  these  sagas  may  be
described  as  a  compromise  between  the  views  of  three  classes,
(1)  the  official  bard  or  story-teller,  with  his  natural  love  for  the
romantic,  his  natural  tendency  to  retain  and  magnify  that
which  gave  colour  and  animation  to  his  story — (2)  the  official
historian  or  antiquary,  intent  upon  preserving  or  inventing
the  title-deeds  of  his  clan  in  tradition,  desirous  of  rationalis-
ing the  mythic  and  romantic  elements,  of  assigning  a  fixed
date,  a  definite  historical  action  to  the  vague  and  shadowy
figures  of  old-time  kings  and  heroes — and,  finally,  the  com-
piler, generally  a  monk,  who  copied  the  tales,  and  may  well
have  exercised  no  inconsiderable  amount  of  editorial  supervi-
sion. The  incest  form,  as  it  may  be  called,  of  Cuchulinn's
birth-story  would  appeal  far  less  to  the  first  class  than  either
of  the  rival  versions,  involving,  as  these  did,  the  welcome
machinery  of  the  lords  of  Faery,  and  would  be  profoundly
repugnant  to  the  third  class,  the  Christian  compilers  and
scribes.  To  the  second  class  alone  would  it  be  welcome
as  wearing,  apparently,  a  more  historic  aspect  than  either
of  the  other  forms.  But  at  an  early  stage  in  the  growth  of
the  Cuchulinn  saga  a  euhemeristic  version,  which  made
him  a  son  of  the  Ulster  chief,  Sualtam,  became  current,
and  effectually  rivalled  any  popularity  the  incest  form  might
have  enjoyed  among  the  learned  class.  Thus  discarded
by  the  antiquaries,  indifferent  to  the  bards,  repugnant  to
the  monks,  the  incest  form  had  little  chance  of  surviving,


46  PERSONAGES    OF    STORY

and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  has  barely  more  than  survived.
The  other  two,  the  abduction  and  re-incarnation  forms,  as
they  may  be  called,  have  been  more  fortunate,  though  here,
as  elsewhere  in  the  Cuchulinn  saga,  the  pronounced  historic
character  impressed  upon  the  saga  as  a  whole  has  tended
to  obscure  or  minimise  the  mythic  constituents.  Both
versions  probably  enjoyed  equal  favour,  they  influenced
each  other  mutually,  and  at  some  date  we  cannot  now  fix,
but  which  cannot  be  later  than  the  late  tenth  century,  the
fostering  strife  was  added  to  Version  A,  which  assumed  the
form  represented  by  the  fifteenth  century  ms.,  Eg.  1782.
Early  in  the  eleventh  century  a  maladroit  fusion  was  made
between  this  Version  A  and  Version  B,  and  the  result  was
copied  into  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow  at  the  close  of  the
eleventh  century.  A  purer  text  of  Version  B  continued  to
be  copied  and  is  now  found  in  Eg.  1782.

These  simple  facts  in  the  literary  history  of  Cuchulinn's
birth-story  warrant,  I  submit,  the  conclusion  that  it  is  no
mediaeval  resetting  of  a  romantic  motif,  but  yields  the  frag-
mentary, distorted,  and  obscure  remains  of  a  pre-mediaeval
legend,  of  at  least  equal  antiquity  with  the  oldest  form  of  the
Mongan  story.  It  is  significant  to  note  that  the  personages
are  already  familiar  to  us  from  the  Happy  Otherworld
stories.  Lug,  as  Lord  of  Faery,  perhaps  the  earliest  ruler  of
of  that  domain  supplanted  later  by  Manannan,  we  have
already  met ;  whilst  Cuchulinn,  as  we  know,  went  to
Faery  at  the  request  of  Fann,  Manannan's  Queen.  The
attributes  of  Lug's  palace  in  Version  A  (for  though  un-
named there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  his  identity)  are  the
same  as  in  other  stories :  the  inexhaustible  store  of  riches
and  dainties,  the  property  of  sudden  appearance  and
equally  sudden  disappearance,  whilst  the  shape  into  which


THE   ETAIN    BIRTH-STORY  47

Lug  transforms  Dechtire  and  her  companions  recalls  that
assumed  by  Fann  and  Liban  in  Cuchulinn's  Sick -Bed.
But  Version  A  only  records  the  love  of  a  supernatural
being  for  a  mortal  maiden.  Version  B,  the  really  interest-
ing one  as  far  as  the  present  investigation  is  concerned,
exhibits  clearly  the  re-incarnation  process  as  conceived  by
the  early  Irish  story-teller.  It  is  purely  mechanical ;  the
god  lives  again  as  the  mortal  after  duly  submitting  himself
to  the  conditions  incident  to  mortal  birth.  Whether  the
story-teller  thought  of  him  as  losing  his  divine  identity  is
impossible  to  decide,  the  fact  that  Lug  figures  at  a  later
stage  of  the  Cuchulinn  saga,  and  remains  a  prominent
personage  throughout  Irish  mythic  romance,  having  of
course  no  bearing  upon  this  particular  point.  Nor  is  the
significance  of  the  curious  incident  of  the  god's  appearance
as  the  foster-child  of  his  destined  mother-wife  apparent  at
first  sight.  So  fragmentary  is  the  record  that  it  seems
unsafe  to  ask  from  it  more  than  the  bare  fact  of  the  ancient
Irish  belief  in  the  possibility  of  a  god  being  swallowed  as
an  animal  by  a  mortal  maiden  and  born  in  the  ordinary
course  of  nature  as  a  mortal  hero.

The  Etain  Birth-Story.

The  personages  of  the  story  I  now  propose  citing  are  also
familiar  to  us  from  the  first  volume.  I  there  quoted  (p.  176)
from  the  Tochmarc  Etaine  (Wooing  of  Etain)  Mider's
ardent  appeal  to  Etain,  describing  in  such  vivid  colours
the  delights  of  the  Happy  Otherworld.  At  the  time  it
was  only  necessary  to  point  out  that  the  Tochmarc  Etaine
involved  the  conception  of  re-birth,  but  to  rightly  appreciate
the  light  it  throws  upon  the  subject  a  full  summary  of  at


48  THE    ETAIN    BIRTH-STORY

least  a  portion  of  its  contents  must  be  given.1  The  drama
of  Etain's  fortunes  comprises  three  acts,  clearly  defined  not
only  by  the  structure  of  the  legend,  but  also  by  the  way  in
which  it  has  come  down  to  us  in  the  mss.

(A).  Etain  Echraide,  daughter  of  Ailill,  was  wife  of  Mider,
lord  of  the  sid  (fairy  mound)  of  Bri  Leith.  He  had  another
wife,  Fuamnach,  and  she,  being  jealous  of  Etain,  drove  her
rival  forth  by  aid  of  the  magic  spells  of  the  druid  Bresal
Etarlaim.  A  foster-son  of  Mider,  Mac  Oc  \j.e.  Angus,  son
of  the  Dagda  whom  we  know  already  as  lord  of  the  Happy
Otherworld  in  its  hollow  hill  form],2  received  the  queen  and
tended  her  with  loving  care.  He  placed  her  in  a  grianan
[the  usual  signification  of  this  word  in  Irish  romance  is :
ladies'  bower]  with  glass  sides  or  windows,  and  he  was
wont  to  carry  her  about  wherever  he  went.  Tidings  of
this  reached  Fuamnach  and  further  inflamed  her  jealous
hatred.  Bethinking  her  how  she  might  destroy  her  rival,
she  persuaded  Mider  and  Mac  Oc,  who  were  at  enmity  on
Etain's  account,  to  agree  to  a  meeting  for  the  purpose  of
making  peace.  Whilst  Mac  Oc  was  thus  absent  from  his
palace,  Fuamnach  gained  access  to  it  and  blew  'in  the
same  way '  on  (or  under)  Etain,  casting  her  forth  from  her
grianan  and  whirling  her  hither  and  thither  throughout
Ireland.  At  last  sucked  down  by  the  force  of  the  wind
through  the  chimney  of  the  Ulster  chief,  Etar  of  Inber
Cichmaine,  Etain  fell  into  the  cup  of  the  chief's  wife,  was
swallowed  by  her,  and  in  due  course  was  born  as  a  girl.
'  It  was  one  thousand  and  twelve  years  from  the  first
begetting  of  Etain  by  Ailill  to  the  last  begetting  by  Etar.'

1  Professor  Rhys's  summary  (Arthurian  Legend,  25-28)  is  intended
to  illustrate  different  points  in  the  story,  and  does  not  follow  the
chronological  order.  -  Vol.  i.  p.  211.


THE    ETAIN    BIRTH-STORY  49

She  retained  her  name  of  Etain  and  was  brought  up  in
great  state,  surrounded  by  fifty  maidens  of  her  own  age,
daughters  of  princes,  as  her  companions.  One  day,  as  she
and  her  companions  were  bathing  together,  they  beheld
riding  towards  them  a  man  of  the  stateliest  aspect.  When
he  reached  them  he  sat  down  on  the  bank  and  sang  the
following  lay,  alluding  to  the  scenes  through  which  Etain
had  already  passed,  and  the  wars  which  would  be  fought
on  her  account :  * —

1.  So  is  Etain  here  to-day

At  the  Fair  Wives'  Mound  behind  Alba.
Among  little  children  is  her  lot
On  the  banks  of  Cichmaine's  Inver.

2.  It  is  she  that  healed  the  monarch's  eye
From  the  well  of  Loch  da  Lig  ;

It  is  she  was  gulped  in  the  drink
By  Etar's  wife  in  a  heavy  draught.

3.  For  her  sake  the  king  will  chase
The  birds  away  from  Tethba,
And  will  drown  his  chargers  twain
In  Loch  da  Airbrech's  waters.

4.  Many  great  battles  will  chance
For  thy  sake  to  Echaid  of  Meath  ;
Ruin  will  fall  upon  Faery

And  war  on  myriads  of  men.2

He  ended  and  vanished,  no  one  knew  whither.

But  of  Mider  and  Mac  Oc  it  is  told  how  they  met  and
waited  a  while  for  Fuamnach.  As  she  did  not  come,  both
suspected  treachery.     Mac  Oc  hastened  home,  and,  finding

1  Most  of  the  allusions  in  this  poem  can  be  understood  no  longer,
the  stories  to  which  they  refer  having  perished.

2  Professor  Rhys's  translation,  Arthurian  Legend,  p.  30.
VOL.  II.  D


50  THE    ETAIN    BIRTH-STORY

his  griandn  empty,  went  in  search  of  Fuamnach,  surprised
her  with  the  druid  Bresal  Etarlaim,  and  struck  off  her
head,  which  he  carried  home.1

The  second  and  third  acts  of  the  drama  may  be  noted
more  briefly.

B.  Eochaid  Airem  was  high  king  of  Ireland  what  time
Conchobor  ruled  in  Ulster,  Curoi  in  Munster,  and  Ailill  in

1  Professor  Zimmer  conjectures  that  the  effect  of  the  spells  which
Bresal  Etarlaim  laid  upon  Etain  at  Fuamnach's  request  was  to  trans-
form her  into  some  kind  of  insect.  Such  a  transformation  undoubtedly
does  take  place  at  some  time  in  the  story,  and  it  seems  more  natural
to  treat  it  as  the  result  of  the  druid's  spells  rather  than  as  due  to
Fuamnach's  attack  upon  her  in  Mac  Oc's  palace.  Note,  too,  the
statement  that  Fuamnach  blew  upon  her  rival  in  the  griandn,  '  in  the
same  way,'  presumably  as  she  had  done  before,  which  seems  to
indicate  that  Etain,  when  driven  forth  from  Mider's  palace,  was
in  a  shape  capable  of  being  blown  away.  Mac  Oc's  griandn
would  thus  be  a  kind  of  cage,  and  the  statement  that  he  carried  her
about  with  him  in  all  his  journey  becomes  more  intelligible.  If  it  be
objected  that  his  loving  care  of  Etain  cannot  be  accounted  for  on  this
hypothesis,  it  may  be  answered  that  the  Mac  Oc,  the  wisest  and  most
cunning  of  the  Tuatha  De,  knew  some  means  of  counteracting  the  spell
and  restoring  Etain  to  her  true  shape.  It  frequently  happens  in  folk-
tales of  the  bespelling  type,  which  are  more  than  commonly  frequent
in  Celtic  folk-lore,  that  spells  are  only  valid  for  a  given  period  of  years,
or  so  long  as  certain  circumstances  last.  Some  such  idea  may  underlie
the  extremely  confused  and  fragmentary  story  of  Etain's  misfortunes.
Professor  Rhys  treats  the  whole  from  a  mythological  point  of  view ;  he
regards  Mac  Oc  as  a  Celtic  Zeus,  Etain  as  a  dawn  goddess,  and  her
dwelling  in  the  glass  griandn,  which  the  god  carries  about  him,  '  seems
to  be  a  sort  of  picture  of  the  expanse  of  the  heavens  lit  up  by  the  light
of  the  sun.'  A  last  faint  reflection  of  mythical  conceptions  such  as
these  may  quite  possibly  be  contained  in  our  story.  But  it  may  also,
without  necessary  exclusion  of  the  mythological  element,  be  regarded
as  embodying  scenes  and  incidents  still  found  in  oral  folk-tale  tradition,
and  persisting  therein  to  this  day  in  a  form  possibly  more  archaic  than


THE    ETAIN    BIRTH-STORY  51

Connaught.1  He  bade  the  men  of  Ireland  come  feast  with
him,  but  they  refused,  as  he  had  no  wife.2  So  he  sent
messengers  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  Ireland  to
find  a  wife  worthy  of  him,  and  the  choice  fell  upon  Etain,
daughter  of  Etar.  Now  Ailill  Aenguba,  Eochaid's  brother,
fell  in  love  with  Etain,  and  for  desire  of  her  he  wasted
away,  and  no  one  could  heal  him.  Eochaid,  having  to
make  a  kingly  circuit  throughout  Ireland,  left  his  brother
in  Etain's  charge.  Ailill  was  thereupon  emboldened  to
confess  his  love,  and  Etain  said  it  was  pity  he  had  been
silent  so  long,  as  she  would  gladly  have  satisfied  his  desire.

that  of  either  myth  or  heroic  legend,  though  these  were  recorded
centuries  earlier.  For  Fuamnach  and  Etain  suggest  inevitable  com
parison  with  the  rival  beauties,  heroines  of  the  Schneewitchen  folk-tale,
and  Etain,  secluded  within  the  glass  bower,  tended  by  the  wizard  lord
of  the  wonderland  in  the  hollow  hill,  recalls  Schneewitchen  in  her  glass
coffin  watched  over  by  the  dwarves.  In  Folk- Lore,  vol.  iii.,  I  have
pointed  out  that  the  most  archaic  extant  variant  of  the  Schneewitchen
story  is  the  Gaelic  tale  'Gold  Queen  and  Silver  Queen,'  and  that  an
allied  version  underlies  and  is  presupposed  by  the  lai  of  Eliduc,  composed
by  Marie  de  France  in  the  twelfth  century.  At  the  time  I  overlooked
the  Etain  parallel,  which  confirms  so  decisively  the  views  I  expressed.
The  folk-tale  of  the  two  queens,  one  of  whom  is  persecuted  by  her
jealous  rival,  may  safely  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  very  oldest
portion  of  Celtic  romance.

1  This  chronological  indication  affords  a  good  example  of  the  un-
certainty of  the  traditional  chronology.  The  death  of  Eochaid  Airem  is
assigned  by  the  Four  Masters  to  the  year  I IO  before  the  birth  of  Christ,
yet  a  legend,  probably  full  as  early  as  any  part  of  the  annalistic  scheme,
ascribed  the  death  of  Conchobor,  Eochaid's  contemporary,  to  his
indignation  on  hearing  of  the  Crucifixion.  The  sixteenth  century
historian,  Keating,  gets  out  of  the  difficulty  by  imagining  a  prophetic
druid.

2  The  refusal  may  be  conjectured  as  due  to  their  fearing  excessive
use  of  the  l  droit  du  seigneur''  which  belonged  to  the  Irish  kings.


52  THEETAIN    BIRTH-STORY

As  soon  as  he  was  well  she  would  fix  a  meeting-place.
But  when  the  time  came  Ailill  slept,  no  matter  how  hard
he  tried  to  keep  awake.  This  happened  twice,  and  mean-
while Etain  met  each  time  a  man  in  Ailill's  shape  who  did
nothing  but  bemoan  his  weakness.  The  third  time  she
asked  his  name,  and  he  told  her  he  was  Mider,  her  husband,
when  she  was  Etain  Echraide,  parted  from  her  by  the
magic  arts  of  Fuamnach  and  Bresal  Etarlaim.  He  pressed
her  to  come  with  him,  but  she  refused  to  leave  the  high
king  of  Ireland  for  a  man  whose  family  and  race  were
unknown  to  her.  Would  she  come,  if  Eochaid  allowed  it  ?
Yes,  she  answered.  When  she  returned  home  Ailill  was
healed  of  his  love-sickness,  which  had  been  caused  by
Mider.

C.  Mider  then  waylaid  Eochaid  and  induced  him  to  game
with  him.  Twice  Eochaid  won,  taking  great  treasure  from
Mider  the  first  time,  imposing  upon  him  and  his  folk  great
tasks  the  second  time.  But  the  third  time  Mider  won,  and
the  stake  he  claimed  was  his  arms  about  Etain  and  the
right  of  a  kiss.  A  month's  delay  was  asked  by  the  king,
and  used  in  assembling  his  best  warriors.  On  the  last  day
of  the  month  the  palace  doors  were  closed  and  the  warriors,
arms  in  hand,  surrounded  the  queen.  Of  a  sudden  they
were  ware  of  Mider  standing  in  their  midst.  He  claimed
his  stake,  reminding  Eochaid  how  he  had  paid  when  he
lost  and  Etain  of  her  promise  to  come  with  him  should  the
king  permit.  Then  taking  his  weapons  in  his  left  hand,  he
grasped  Etain  in  his  right  arm  and  kissed  her.  Hasty  was
the  rush  of  the  warriors  to  avenge  the  insult  done  the  king,
but  Mider  and  Etain  rose  through  the  roof,  and  all  the  men
of  Ireland  saw  were  two  swans  winging  their  way  to  Sid-
ar-Femain.      Eochaid  and   his   host   hastened  in  pursuit,


DATE   OF  STORY  53

and  long  after  the  king  was  able  to  storm  Mider's  fairy
palace  and  win  back  his  wife.  But  the  enmity  of  the  fairy
clan  clung  to  his  race,  and  Eochaid's  grandson,  Conaire,
fell  a  victim  to  it.

So  far  the  story.  Study  of  the  ms.  tradition  again  yields
precious  clues  as  to  its  age  and  nature.  All  three  sections
are  found  in  a  fragmentary  form  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun
Cow,  i.e.  the  story  as  a  whole  must  be  as  old  as  the  early
part  of  the  eleventh  century.  The  first  part  is  only  found
in  this,  the  oldest  profane  Irish  ms.  ;  parts  2  and  3  are
found  in  later  mss.  in  two  forms,  one  evidently  akin  to  that
found  in  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow  but  presenting  a  better
text,  and  a  variant  form  intended  to  serve  as  introduction
to  the  famous  heroic  tale  Togail  Bruidne  Da  Derga,  the
Destruction  of  Da  Derga's  fort,  which  relates  the  death  at
the  hand  of  over-sea  pirates  of  Conaire,  the  grandson,  as  we
have  just  seen,  of  Eochaid  Airem.  This  variant  form  was
the  one  preserved  by  the  Book  of  Druim  Snechta,  a  famous
ms.,  now  lost,  from  which  many  texts  in  the  Book  of  the
Dun  Cow  and  the  Book  of  Leinster  are  taken,  and  which
cannot  have  been  compiled  later  than  the  year  1050.
Intended  solely  to  explain  the  enmity  of  the  fairy  clan
towards  Conaire,  this  version  would  naturally  omit  the  first
portion  of  the  story,  and  restrict  its  narrative  to  those
sections  in  which  Conaire's  grandfather,  Eochaid,  played
a  part;  it  is  probable  that  the  celebrity  of  the  Book  of
Druim  Snechta,  the  most  famous  and  important  of  all  the
eleventh  century  collections  of  national  hero  tales,  caused
the  omission  of  the  first  section  in  all  mss.  of  the  tale,
except,  by  a  lucky  chance,  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow.  But
it  is  evident  that,  although  the  first  section  is  preserved  by


54  DATE   OF   STORY

this  one  MS.  alone,  it  is  an  essential  part  of  the  story,  and
is  presupposed  by  both  of  the  other  sections.1  The  com-
piler of  the  ms.,  copied  into  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  was
in  all  probability,  as  has  already  been  stated,  Flann  Manis-
trech,  the  most  learned  Irish  antiquary  and  historian  of  his
day.  He  knew  and  preserved  for  us  the  first  section,  he
knew  both  versions  of  the  other  sections,  and,  according  to
his  wont,  essayed  to  harmonise  them,  luckily  with  less
skill  than  he  doubtless  prided  himself  upon  possessing,  so
that  it  has  been  easy  for  Professor  Zimmer  to  disentangle
the  twisted  threads,  and  lay  bare  his  method  of  compilation.2
The  chronological  remark  respecting  the  difference  in  time
between  the  two  births  of  Etain  is  probably  due  to  him.
He  was,  like  most  Irish  scholars  of  the  time,  passionately
interested  in  chronological  computations — indeed,  his  chief
work  is  an  elaborate  series  of  synchronisms  between  Irish
and  classic  history.  As  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville  has
pointed  out,  the  story  itself  dates  from  a  period  long
anterior  to  the  artificial  system  by  which  the  mythology  and
heroic  romance  of  early  Ireland  were  recast  in  a  pseudo-
historic  form  modelled  upon  biblical  and  classic  writers.
Etain  rejects  Mider  because  she  does  not  know  his  kin  and

1  It  is  a  mere  accident  that  the  one  ms.  which  does  preserve  this  sec-
tion should  be  the  oldest  Irish  profane  MS.,  or  that  it  should  be  found  in
one  of  the  150  fragmentary  folios,  which  are  all  that  remain  to  us  of  the
Book  of  the  Dun  Cow.  Had  this  portion  been  copied  in  the  fourteenth
or  fifteenth  century,  when  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow  was  far  more
perfect  than  now,  and  had  the  folio  of  the  original  been  lost,  as  folios
have  been  lost  within  the  last  five  centuries,  we  should  only  have  a
fifteenth  century  instead  of  an  eleventh  century  warrant  for  this  portion
of  the  tale.  Yet  the  internal  evidence  in  favour  of  its  early  character
would  be  precisely  the  same  as  now.

,J  See  Zimmer,  L.  U.,  pp.  585-594.


ETAIN    AND    CUCHULINN  55

race.  But  by  Flann  Manistrech's  day,  nay  long  before,
the  chiefs  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  had  their  genealogies
properly  drawn  out  and  their  exact  date  assigned  to  them
in  the  pre-Christian  annals.  Etain's  remark  testifies  to  a
period  when  the  folk  of  the  goddess  Danu  still  retained
their  mythical  supernatural  nature  free  from  the  fetters  of
date  and  human  circumstance.

The  archaic  nature,  the  early  record  of  our  story,  are  thus,
as  in  the  case  of  Cuchulinn's  Birth-Story,  testified  to  by  the
way  in  which  the  mss.  have  transmitted  it  to  us.  We  may
use  the  extant  version,  dating  back  as  this  does  to  the  early
eleventh  century,  with  full  confidence  that  it  represents,
substantially,  an  original  centuries  older.

The  agreement  with  the  Cuchulinn  Birth-Story  is  marked.
The  goddess,  equally  with  the  god,  has  the  power  of  being
re-born  in  mortal  shape,  and  the  same  expedient  for  pro-
ducing conception  is  adopted  in  both  cases.  There  seems
to  be  no  power  of  sex-change,  for  Lug  is  re-born  as  a
boy,  Etain  as  a  girl.  The  differences  are  more  interesting
than  the  resemblances.  Etain  is  apparently  limited  to  one
manifestation  of  her  personality ;  at  least  while  she  figures
on  earth  as  Etar's  daughter  we  hear  nothing  of  her  in
Faery  as  Mider's  wife  or  Mac  Oc's  beloved.  She  seems  to
preserve  her  identity;  it  is  not  a  different  but  the  same
Etain  that  Mider  loves,  whether  as  a  Tuatha  de  Danann
or  an  Ulster  princess.  It  is  not  quite  easy  to  be  sure  if
she  loses  the  sense  of  her  identity,  if  as  a  mortal  she  retains
no  recollection  of  her  previous  divine  existence,  but  I
think  this  is  most  probably  the  case.  Lug,  on  the  other
hand,  though  re-born  in  the  same  manner  as  Etain,  mani-
fests himself  in  mortal  state  whilst  retaining  his  own  god
personality ;  he  is,  if  we  take  the  facts  of  the  story,  at  once


56  ETAIN    AND    CUCHULINN

father  and  son.  In  his  capacity  of  son  and  mortal  he  puts
off  his  supernatural  attributes — the  strength,  skill  and
valour  of  Cuchulinn,  although  extra-human,  are  not  super-
human. These  differences  may  be  due  to  the  strong  historic
character  stamped  upon  the  extant  Cuchulinn  saga,  and  to
the  consequent  obliteration  or  transformation  of  features,
originally  mythic  ;  but  it  may  testify  to  belief  in  the  god's
capacity  to  express  himself  in  a  human  avatar  without  in-
terruption or  limitation  of  his  divine  personality.  In  the
points  just  noted  both  stories  differ  from  the  Mongan-
Finn  legend,  where  the  Finn  personality  disappears,  lies
dormant  for  centuries,  and  then  reappears  as  Mongan
without  losing  consciousness  of  identity.

For  the  rest,  Etain  and  Mider  belong,  as  do  Lug  and
Manannan,  to  that  class  of  the  Tuatha  De  which  is  especially
associated  with  the  Happy  Otherworld,  and  which  owns,  as
its  chief  attribute,  the  power  of  assuming  all  forms  at  will.1

1  On  p.  51  I  pointed  out  that  the  first  section  of  the  Tochmarc
Etaine  yields  the  earliest  recorded  post-classic  European  form  of  the
folk-tale  theme :  the  jealous  wife  and  persecuted  rival,  which  theme
makes  its  first  appearance  in  general  European  literature  in  Marie  de
France's  lai  of  Eliduc.  The  variant  version  of  sections  2  and  3  (i.e.
the  version  which  was  known  to  but  not  followed  by  the  compiler  to
whom  we  owe  the  MS.  copied  into  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow)  figures,
as  already  stated,  as  an  introduction  to  the  Destruction  of  Da  Derga's
fort,  and  is,  in  part,  recapitulated  in  the  opening  paragraphs  of  that
famous  hero  tale,  which,  in  the  estimation  of  the  ancient  Irish,  ranked
only  second  to  the  Tain  bo  Cuailgne.  Now  this  tale,  as  I  have  noted
(Folklore,  ii.  87),  contains  the  earliest  recorded  post-classic  European
examples  of  the  following  folk-tale  themes :  The  Jealous  Stepmother
and  Exposed  Child  (Etain  is  the  stepmother)  and  the  Supernatural
Lover  in  Bird  Shape.  This  latter  theme  makes  its  earliest  appearance
in  general  European  literature  in  Marie  de  France's  lai  of  Yonec.  I
venture  to  think  the   significance  of  these   facts   indisputable ;    they


THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS  57

The  foregoing  stories  are  concerned  with  the  fortunes  of
kings  and  heroes  :  they  form  part  of  the  web  of  myth,
heroic  adventure,  fantastic  romance,  and  historic  reminis-
cence that  go  to  the  making  of  heroic  saga.  Our  next  tale
is  purely  romantic  and  unconnected,  save  loosely  and  arti-
ficially, with  the  great  cycles  of  heroic  legend.  It  is  the
story  entitled,  '  The  Begetting  of  the  Two  Swineherds,'
and  it  has  been  edited  and  translated  (into  German)  by
Professor  E.  Windisch  {Irische  Texte,  iii.  1)  from  the
fifteenth  century  ms.  Eg.  1782.  A  shorter  form  of  the
story  is  preserved  by  the  twelfth  century  ms.  the  Book  of
Leinster.  Up  to  a  certain  point  the  two  versions  agree
closely,  and  give  the  incidents  with  great  fulness,  but  after
a  time  the  Book  of  Leinster  scribe  (or  the  scribe  of  the
older  mss.  copied  into  the  Book  of  Leinster)  seems  to  have
tired  of  his  task,  and  to  have  merely  jotted  down  the  heads
of  the  story.  As  no  English  version  is  accessible,  and  as
the  tale  is  of  the  greatest  interest  to  students  of  romance
and  folk-lore,  I  propose  to  give  the  narrative  part  almost
entire,  availing  myself  of  a  translation  of  the  Book  of
Leinster  version  (kindly  made  for  me  by  Professor  Kuno
Meyer)  up  to  the  point  where  it  ceases  to  give  the  story  in
full  detail,  and  rendering  the  latter  portion  from  Professor
Windisch's  German  translation  of  the  Eg.  version.

testify  to  the  Celtic  character  of  Marie's  work,  which  indeed  can  only
be  denied  by  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  subject ;  they  also  testify  to
a  community  of  romantic  incident  between  the  Celts  of  Ireland  and  the
Celts  of  Britain  and  Brittany,  from  both  of  which  Celtic  districts  Marie
drew  her  stories ;  finally,  they  demonstrate  the  great  antiquity  on  Celtic
soil  of  types  of  romantic  fiction  to  which  some  scholars  wish  to  assign
a  modern  origin.


58  THE   TWO    SWINEHERDS

The  Begetting  of  the  Two  Swineherds.
Book  of  Leinster  Text

Whence  is  the  Begetting  of  the  Swineherds  ?  Not  hard,
viz.  the  swineherd  of  Ochall  Oichni  and  the  swineherd  of
Bodb,  the  latter  king  of  the  sfd  of  Munster,  the  former  of
the  sid  of  Connaught.  The  sid  of  Bodb,  that  is  Sid  ar
Femun.1  The  sid  of  Ochall  is  sid  Conachar.2  There  was
friendship  between  the  two.  They  had  two  swineherds,
called  Friuch  and  Rucht :  Friuch  was  Bodb's  swineherd,
and  Rucht  Ochall's ;  and  there  was  also  friendship  between
them,  viz.  both  possessed  the  lore  of  paganism,  and  used
to  shape  themselves  into  any  shape,  as  did  Mongan,  the
son  of  Fiachna.

The  friendship  of  the  two  swineherds  was  of  this  sort,
viz.  when  there  was  mast  in  Munster,  the  swineherd  from
the  north  would  come  with  his  lean  swine  to  the  south  ;
and  vice  versa.  People  tried  to  make  mischief  between
them.  The  men  of  Connaught  said  the  power  of  their
swineherd  was  greater.  The  men  of  Munster  said  theirs
was  greater.  One  year  there  was  great  mast  in  Munster ;
the  swineherd  from  the  north  came  southward  with  his
swine.  His  comrade  bade  him  welcome.  '  They  are
hounding  us  one  against  the  other.  These  people  say  thy
power  is  greater  than  mine.'  '  It  is  certainly  not  less,'
said  Ochall's  swineherd.  '  We  can  test  that,'  said  Bodb's
swineherd.  '  I  shall  hinder  thy  swine,3  though  they  feed  on
the  mast,  they  shall  not  be  fat,  whilst  mine  shall.'  And
thus  it  fell  out.     Then  Ochall's  swineherd  went  home  with

1  In  the  Tochmarc  Etaine  this  sid  belongs  to  Mider.

2  Cruachan,  according  to  Eg.

s  '  I  shall  bespell  thy  swine.' — Eg.


THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS  59

his  lean  swine ;  they  hardly  reached  there  what  with  their
wretched  state.  People  laughed  at  him  when  he  reached
home.  '  Thou  wentest  in  an  evil  hour,'  said  they  to  him  ;
1  thy  comrade's  power  is  greater  than  thine.'  '  That  is  not
good,'  said  he.  'We  shall  have  mast  in  our  turn,  and  I
shall  play  the  same  trick  on  him.'  And  so  it  happened.
Bodb's  swine  dwindled  away,  so  that  every  one  said  their
power  was  equal  on  both  sides.  Bodb's  swineherd  returned
from  the  north  with  his  lean  swine.

Then  Bodb  took  his  swineherd's  office  from  him.  The
man  in  the  north  also  had  his  taken  from  him.  Then
they  were  two  full  years  in  the  shapes  of  ravens,  one  year  in
the  north,  in  Connaught,  on  Dun  Crilachan,  another  year
on  Sid  ar  Femun.  There  the  men  of  Munster  came
together  on  a  certain  day.  '  What  a  noise  the  birds  are
making  ! '  said  they ;  'for  a  whole  year  have  they  been
slanging  each  other  and  never  ceasing.'  While  they  were
saying  this,  Fuidell  mac  Fiadmire,  the  steward  of  Ochall,
came  towards  them  on  the  hill.  They  bid  him  welcome.
'  What  a  noise  the  birds  are  making  before  your  eyes  !  One
would  think  they  were  the  same  two  birds  which  we  had  in
the  north  last  year.'  Then  they  saw  the  two  ravens  change
into  human  shape,  and  recognised  them  for  the  two  swine-
herds. They  bade  them  welcome.  '  It  is  not  right  to
welcome  us,' said  Bodb's  swineherd;  'there  will  be  many
corpses  of  friends,  and  great  wailing  through  us  two.'
'  What  has  happened  to  you  ? '  said  Bodb.  '  Nothing
good,'  said  he.  '  Since  we  went  from  you,  we  have  been
two  years  in  the  shape  of  birds.  You  have  seen  what  we
have  done  before  your  eyes.  In  that  wise  we  were  a  whole
year  in  Cruachan,  another  year  on  Sid  ar  Femun,  and  the
men  from  the  north  and  the  south  have  seen  the  power  of


60  THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS

both  of  us.  We  shall  now  go  into  the  shape  of  water
beasts,  and  be  under  seas  to  the  end  of  two  other  years.'
Thereupon  one  of  them  went  into  the  Shannon,  the  other
into  the  Suir,  and  they  were  two  years  under  water.  A
whole  year  they  were  seen  in  the  Suir  devouring  each
other,  another  year  they  were  seen  in  the  Shannon.

[Up  to  this  point  the  Book  of  Leinster  version,  save  for
greater  concision  of  style,  corresponds  closely  with  that  in
Eg.  1782.  But  from  this  onwards  only  the  bare  facts  of  the
transformations  are  given.  I  therefore  quote  the  remainder
from  Professor  Windisch's  translation  of  the  Eg.  version.]

One  day  the  men  of  Connaught  had  a  great  gathering  at
Ednecha,  on  the  Shannon,  and  there  they  saw  the  two
beasts,  each  as  big  as  a  mound  or  the  peak  of  a  hill,  and
they  assailed  each  other  so  furiously  that  fiery  swords
darted  out  of  their  jaws  and  reached  to  the  sky.  The  folk
came  about  them  from  every  side.  They  came  out  of  the
Shannon,  and  as  they  touched  the  shore,  lo !  before  the
eyes  of  all,  two  men-shapes,  and  they  were  known  for  the
two  swineherds.  Ochall  bade  them  welcome.  'What
were  your  wanderings?' said  he.  '  Truly  wearisome  wan-
derings our  wanderings !  You  have  seen  what  we  did  in
your  sight.  Two  whole  years  have  we  been  in  this  wise  in
seas  and  waters.  Now  we  must  take  fresh  shapes,  that
each  may  further  test  his  comrade's  might.'  And  they
went  each  his  own  way.  Now  for  another  space  of  time
they  were  two  champions.  One  took  service  with  Bodb,
king  of  the  sid  of  Munster,  the  other  with  the  king  of
sid  Nento-fo-hiusce  (that  is,  Fergna).  Every  feat  of
Bodb's  men  was  by  the  hand  of  the  champion ;  'twas  the
same  with  his  comrade  of  Sid  Nento.  The  fame  of  each
soon   spread   throughout    Ireland.      None    knew   whence


THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS  61

either  came.  Bodb  went  into  Connaught,  for  the  men  of
Connaught  had  a  great  gathering  at  Loch  Riach  (I  omit  a
long  description  of  the  troop  he  took  with  him).  Never
had  come  a  better  warrior  host,  nor  shall  there  come  its
like  to  the  end  of  the  world.  Seven-score  women  and  the
same  number  of  children  died  beholding  them.  (Bodb  and
his  followers  sit  upon  the  men  of  Connaught,  literally,  and
crush  the  life  out  of  the  most  of  them ;  a  parley  between
the  two  kings  winds  up  with  a  challenge  from  Bodb's
champion,  Rinn.)  Then  the  three  Connaughts  spake
together,  and  there  was  found  no  man  among  them  to  go
forth  against  Rinn.  '  'Tis  a  shame,'  said  Ochall ;  '  our
honour  is  lost.'  Then  saw  they  somewhat,  a  host  from
the  north  (I  omit  a  long  description  of  the  brilliant  appear-
ance of  the  strangers).  When  they  came  the  men  of
Connaught  stood  up  and  made  place  for  them,  whence  the
saying,  '  until  the  day  of  doom  Connaught  men  under  the
yoke.  The  tending  of  the  sons  of  kings  and  queens,  the
tending  of  hounds,  such  is  their  lot  for  ever.' 1

1  The  indignant  scribe  has  here  interpolated  the  following  remark  :
'  This  is  entirely  untrue,  for  at  that  time  there  were  no  Connaughtmen
in  the  world.  For  they  are  of  the  seed  of  Fergus  MacRoig,  and  at
that  time  he  was  not  born.  'Tis  the  men  who  aforetimes  were  in  the
land  that  is  now  Connaught  that  stood  up.'  This  historical  gloss  dates
back  in  all  probability  to  the  common  original  of  both  the  Book  of
Leinster  and  Eg.  1782.  It  is  just  the  remark  that  an  eleventh
century  scribe,  familiar  with  the  systematisation  of  Irish  legend  that
had  taken  place  in  the  previous  hundred  years,  might  be  expected  to
make.  The  value  of  an  interpolation  like  this  is  twofold.  It  proves
how  carefully  the  scribe  followed  his  model,  even  when  it  outraged  his
scholarly  convictions,  and  it  proves  the  lateness  of  the  historical
scheme  in  which  he  believed  so  firmly.  For,  as  we  shall  see,  our  story
in  its  present  form  can  hardly  be  carried  further  back  than  the  ninth  or
eighth  century.


62  THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS

(a)  The  host  sits  down  and  welcome  is  proffered.
'Welcome  to  you,'  said  Ochall.  'We  have  trust,'  said
Fergna.  "Tis  pitiful,'  said  Mainchenn,  a  druid  from
Britain  ;  '  from  now  on  and  for  ever,  Fergna,  when  thou
seest  a  king,  thou  and  thy  seed  shall  lag  in  his  tracks.
Till  now  thou  wast  Fergna  the  Straight,  from  henceforth
thou  shalt  be  Fergna  the  Crooked,  and  yield  tribute  for  thy
kingship  for  ever.  Where  hast  thou  left  thy  horses ? '  'On
the  plain.'  'There  lay  before  thee  land  and  dominion,  but
another  came  before  thee  and  has  chosen  them.'  '  Who  is
that?'  said  Fergna.  '  Bodb,  king  of  the  sid  of  Munster,'
said  he.  As  they  saw  him  in  the  gathering,  a  score  of  men
fell  dead  before  him  for  horror  and  deadly  terror.  In  all
the  three  Connaughts  there  was  found  no  man  to  fight
against  Rinn.  Then  said  Faebar,  '  I  will  go  against  him.'
'  Unwelcome  tidings,'  said  Rinn.  Therewith  they  shocked
against  each  other,  and  fought  for  three  days  and  three
nights.  They  smote  each  other  in  such  wise  that  their
lungs  were  visible.  Then  they  were  separated.  Thereafter
they  went  astray  and  became  two  demons,  and  a  third  of
the  folk  died  for  fright  at  them.  The  next  morning  they
lay  ill,  but  Bodb  took  the  field  afterwards  and  carried  off
a  full  victory.

(6)  Then  came  two  other  hosts  to  the  gathering,  one
from  Leinster,  the  other  from  Meath,  three  times  fifty  was
the  count  of  each  of  them,  namely,  Breg  mac  Mide  and
Lore  mac  Maisten.  Leinster's  king  went  to  the  king  of  Con-
naught,  Meath's  king  went  to  Bodb.  Two  heroes  each
had  fought  with  one  another  on  the  field,  and  smote  each
other  so  that  their  lungs  became  visible.  The  hosts  rose
up  thereafter  one  against  the  other,  and  a  battle  was  fought
between  them,  and  the  four  kings  fell,  namely,  Lore  and


THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS  63

Breg,  and  Ochall  and  Corpre  Cromm,  king  of  Dalriada.
It  was  in  Sid  Nento-fo-hi-uscib.  Bodb  cleanses  the  battle-
field thereafter,  and  went  to  his  own  land,  and  takes  the
two  champions  with  him,  namely,  Rinn  and  Faebar.1

Thereafter  they  go  into  the  shape  of  water  beasts,  that  is,
the  shape  of  two  worms.  One  went  into  the  spring  of
Uaran  Garad  in  Connaught,  the  other  in  the  river  Cruind
in  Ulster.

Once  upon  a  time  Medb  went  from  Cruachan  to  the
spring  after  she  had  washed  her  face,  a  small  bronze  vessel
in  her  hand  that  she  might  wash  her  hands.  She  dipped
the  vessel  in  the  water,  and  the  beast  went  swiftly  into  the
vessel,  and  every  colour  was  to  be  seen  upon  him.  Long
she  stood  beholding  it,  and  the  colour  of  the  beast  seemed
beautiful   to   her.      The   water   vanished,   and   the   beast

1  I  have  quoted  these  two  paragraphs  in  full,  as  exemplifying  the
confused  and  obscure  way  in  which  the  story  is  told,  as  well  as  the
characteristic  inclusion  of  varying  accounts  of  the  same  episode.  For,
as  will  have  been  noticed  at  once  by  the  careful  reader,  paragraph  b  is  a
different  version  of  the  events  recorded  in  paragraph  a.  In  the  one
Munster  and  Connaught  are  alone  in  presence,  in  the  other,  Leinster
and  Meath  likewise  join  in  the  fray.  In  both  cases  Munster  remains
victorious.  Maistiu  is  a  well-known  fairy  mound,  five  miles  east  of
Athy  in  Kildare.  Breg  mac  Mide  recalls  Mider  of  Breg  Leith  (Etain's
husband)  whose  fairy  palace  was  at  Mag  Breg.  The  scribe  seems  to
have  muddled  his  information.  Corpre  the  Crooked,  King  of  Dalriada,
(i.e.  North  East  Ulster)  in  the  paragraph  b  version  seems  to  correspond
to  Fergna  the  Crooked,  from  the  North,  in  the  paragraph  a  version.
It  should  be  noted  that  in  the  paragraph  a  version  Fergna  is  accom-
panied by  a  druid  from  Britain  who,  as  is  common  in  Irish  heroic
legend,  stirs  up  his  masters  to  action  by  taunts  and  foresayings.
The  historical  background  of  both  versions  is  the  same,  Munster,
aided  by  Meath,  is  ranged  against  the  rest  of  Ireland  and  comes  off
victorious.


64  THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS

remained  alone  in  the  vessel.  '  Pity  it  is,  thou  creature,'
said  the  queen,  '  that  thou  dost  not  speak*  and  tell  me
somewhat  of  my  fortunes  after  I  have  won  the  sovereignty
of  Connaught.'  '  What  wouldst  thou  soonest  ask  ? '  said  the
beast.  '  I  would  fain  know  how  it  is  with  you  in  your
beast  shape  ?  '  said  she.  '  Truly  a  plagued  beast  am  I,  and  in
every  shape  have  I  been.'  Then  he  gave  her  good  counsel.
'  Fair  as  thou  art,  thou  shouldst  take  to  thee  a  good  man  to
be  with  thee  in  thy  sway.'  '  I  have  no  wish,'  said  she,  'to
take  a  man  of  Connaught,  to  have  the  upper  hand  of  me.'
'  We  know  a  man  for  thee,  Ailill '  (here  a  lengthy  eulogium,
which  I  omit).  The  beast  added,  '  Food  shall  come  to  me
from  thee  every  day,  to  this  spring.  Crunniuc  is  my  name.'
Medb  went  home,  and  the  beast  went  back  into  the  spring.

That  very  day  Fiachna  mac  Dare  went  to  the  river  Cruinn
in  Cualgne.  As  he  was  washing  his  hands  he  saw  somewhat,
a  beast  on  a  stone  before  him,  and  no  colour  but  was  on  it.
'  'Tis  well  so,  Fiachna,'  said  the  beast.  Fiachna  was
frightened,  and  stepped  back  a  little.  '  Don't  run  away
or  be  frightened;  it  will  be  better  for  thee  to  speak  with  me.'
'  What  have  we  to  say  to  each  other  ? '  said  the  king.  '  That
thou  art  a  lucky  man  and  shalt  find  a  ship  full  of  treasures
in  thy  land.'  'After  that,'  said  Fiachna.  '  House  me  and
treat  me  well,'  said  the  beast.  '  How  can  I  treat  you  well?  '
'Give  me  food.'  'Why  should  I,  you  are  only  a  beast?'
said  Fiachna.  '  In  reality  I  am  a  man,  Bodb's  swineherd.'
'  Thy  name  ? '  '  Tummuc'  '  We  have  heard  of  thee,'  said
Fiachna.  (The  story  then  tells  how  Fiachna  found  his
treasure,  and  how  he  fed  Tummuc  with  his  own  hand  for  a
year,  Medb  doing  the  same  by  Crunniuc.)

One  day  Fiachna  went  to  the  river.  '  Come  and  talk
with  me,'  said  he  to  the  beast.     '  Well  it  is  for  thee,'  said


THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS  65

the  beast,  'blessing  of  corn  and  milk,  of  sea  and  land  upon
thee,  for  thou  hast  been  very  friendly  towards  me.  Now
I  am  looking  forward  to  a  great  combat  with  the  beast  I
told  thee  of  last  year,  that  is  in  Connaught  at  this  time.'
'  How  may  that  be?  '  asked  the  king.  '  Not  hard  to  say;
to-morrow  one  of  thy  cows  shall  drink  me,  whilst  one  of
Medb's  shall  drink  my  comrade.  Therefrom  shall  two  bulls
be  born,  and  there  shall  be  great  war  in  Ireland  on  our
account.     Fare  thee  well.'     All  came  true,  as  he  said.

The  names  of  these  beasts  in  their  divers  shapes  were
these :  Rucht  and  Ruccne 1  as  swineherds ;  Ingen  and  Ette
as  ravens ;  Bled  and  Blod,  two  sea-beasts ;  Rinn  and
Faebar  as  champions  ;  Crunniuc  and  Tummuc,  two  worms  ;
Finn  and  Dub,  two  bulls,  Whitehorn  and  Black  of  Coolney,
the  finest  bulls  ever  seen  in  Ireland,  their  horns  were  decked
with  silver  and  gold  by  the  provinces  of  Ireland.  In  Con-
naught  no  bull  dared  bellow  before  the  bull  of  the  West,
nor  in  Ulster  did  any  dare  bellow  before  the  bull  of  the
East.     Joint's.

It  may  be  well  to  give  what  corresponds  in  the  Book  of
Leinster  to  the  foregoing  pages  translated  from  Eg.  1782.
The  language  is  obscure,  and  Professor  Meyer  has  had  to
leave  several  words  unrendered.

Again  they  were  two  stags,  and  either  of  them  would  gather
the  ...  of  the  other  so  that  he  made  a  ...  of  the  abode  of
the  other.

They  were  two  champions  wounding  each  other.

They  were  two  spectres,  either  of  them  terrifying  the  other.

They  were  two  dragons,  either  of  them  beating  (?)  snow  on

1  It  will  be  noticed  that  these  names  differ  from  those  assigned  to
the  swineherds  in  the  opening  of  the  story,  another  instance  of  the
fusion  of  variant  versions.

VOL.  II.  E


66  THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS

the  land  of  the  other.  They  dropped  down  from  the  air  and
were  two  worms.  One  of  them  went  into  the  well  of  Glass
Cruind  in  Cualgne,  where  a  cow  of  Ddre  mac  Fiachnai  drunk
it  up  ;  and  the  other  went  into  the  well  of  Garad  in  Connaught,
where  a  cow  of  Medb  and  Ailill's  drank  it,  so  that  from  them
sprang  the  two  bulls,  The  Whitehorn  Ai  and  the  Dun  of
Cualgne.
(Their  names  were)  Rucht  (Snout)  and  Rucne,  when  they
were  swineherds.

Ingen  (Talon)  and  Eitte  (Wing),  when  they  were  birds.

Bled  (Whale)  and  Blod,  when  they  were  sea-beasts.

Rind  (Point)  and  Faebar  (Edge),  when  they  were  champions.

Sc£th  (Shadow)  and  Sciath,  when  they  were  spectres.

Crunniuc  and  Tunniuc,  when  they  were  worms.

The  Whitehorn  of  Ai  and  the  Dun  of  Cualgne,  when  they
were  cattle.

The  unprejudiced  reader  will  certainly  agree  with  Pro-
fessor Windisch  that  the  Book  of  Leinster  scribe,  or  his
model,  had  before  him  a  complete  version,  the  same,  sub-
stantially, as  that  now  found  in  the  fifteenth  century  MS.
Eg.  1782.  There  are,  however,  slight  differences.  Thus
the  Book  of  Leinster  mentions  two  transformations,  into
stags  and  into  dragons,  unknown  to  Eg.  1782,  but  unknown
also  to  the  final  recapitulation  of  the  legend  which  it  gives
itself.  A  further  proof  this,  if  more  were  needed,  that  the
story,  as  it  stands,  embodies  accounts  drawn  from  different
sources.  The  loss  of  the  dragon  transformation  is  particu-
larly regrettable.  One  remembers  the  fighting  dragons  of
the  Brythonic  Merlin  story.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  that
the  Dinnshenchas  has  preserved  the  Two  Swineherds  legend
in  forms  differing  from  both  the  Book  of  Leinster  and  the
Egerton  versions.  In  the  dinnshenchas  of  Ath  Luain
(Rev.    Celt.,  xv.   464)  we  learn  that  'the  two  swineherds


THE   TWO   SWINEHERDS  67

were  incarnate  in  seven  shapes,  a  full  year  in  each  of  them.
And  those  were  Cronn  of  Agnoman's  two  sons,  named
Rucht  and  Rucne.  Ette  and  Engan  (Wing  and  Talon)
were  their  two  names  when  they  were  birds.  Cu  and
Cethen  were  they  when  wolves.  Bled  and  Blod  were  they
when  trout  of  the  Boyne.  Crunniuc  and  Dubmuc  when
they  were  worms.'  Another  dinnshetuhas,  that  of  Luimnech
(Rev.  Celt.,  xv.  452)  represents,  again,  an  entirely  different
form  of  the  story,  and  is  worth  quoting  in  full.  '  There  was
a  set  meeting  between  Munster  and  Connaught,  and  the
two  kings  brought  with  them  their  champions,  the  two  sons
of  Smuchaill.  son  of  Bacdub.  Rind  and  Faebur  were  their
names.  One  of  the  twain  placed  himself  under  the  safe-
guard of  Bodb  of  Sid  Femin,  the  other  under  that  of
Ochall  of  Sid  Cruachan.  The  champions  displayed  their
swineherd's  art.  To  judge  between  them  every  one
pressed  into  the  stream.  Thereupon  came  the  flood-tide,
which  they  had  not  perceived,  and  carried  off  their  cloaks.'
These  variant  forms,  all  witnessed  to  by  pre-eleventh-century
texts,  show  the  popularity  and  wide  spread  of  the  story.

The  Begetting  of  the  Two  Swineherds,  for  the  most  part
a  folk-tale  pure  and  simple — perhaps  the  earliest  noted
folk-tale  of  post-classic  European  literature — interests  us
not  alone  for  the  striking  way  in  which  it  presents  the
re-birth  conception,  but  also  for  its  allusion  to  the  Mongan
story.  The  shape-shifting  power  possessed  by  Mongan,  son
of  Fiachna,  is  especially  signalled  out  as  the  chief  attribute
of  the  swineherds.  Alike  then  for  the  history  of  the  re-birth
conception  in  Irish  literature  and  for  the  history  of  the
Mongan  legend,  it  is  necessary  to  date  our  story  as  pre-
cisely as  may  be.  The  date  of  the  Book  of  Leinster  (about
1 140)  supplies  a  terminus  ad  quern,  and,  the  version  of  this


68  DATE   OF   STORY

ms.  presupposing,  as  we  have  seen,  an  earlier  one,  it  is  safe
to  date  it  back  to  the  early  twelfth  century  at  the  very
latest.  A  terminus  a  quo,  for  the  present  form  of  the  story,
is  supplied  by  the  fact  that  it  is  formally  numbered  among
the  remsccla,  or  introductions,  to  the  Tain  bo  Cuailgne,  the
Raid  for  the  Kine  of  Coolney,  the  greatest  of  Irish  hero
tales.  For  the  last  transformation  of  the  two  swineherds  is
into  the  bulls,  the  cause  of  the  raid  and  of  the  wars  that
ensued.  The  story  runs  thus  :  Medb,  the  famous  Con-
naught  queen,  vaunting  her  possessions  as  greater  than
those  of  her  husband,  Ailill,  is  angered  by  his  remark  that
her  cow,  Finnbennach,  is  inferior  to  the  Black  of  Coolney.
She  forms  the  plan  of  raiding  Ulster  and  carrying  off  Finn-
bennach's  rival.  Assembling  the  men  of  Ireland,  and  taking
advantage  of  the  moment  when  the  Ulster  warriors  are  en
couvade,  she  invades  the  land.  But  Cuchulinn,  exempt
from  the  consequences  of  the  curse  that  weakens  his  com-
rades, single-handed  holds  at  bay  the  forces  of  Ireland,  and
gives  Conchobor  and  his  warriors  the  time  to  recover.
Later,  Medb  succeeds  for  a  while  in  carrying  off  the
champion  bull,  but,  when  brought  into  Connaught,  he
attacks  and  destroys  his  rival,  and  returns  home.

Now  the  present  text  of  this  heroic  romance  goes  back,
substantially  (for  it  was  interpolated  and  worked  over  in
succeeding  ages),  to  the  early  seventh  century.  The  story
goes  that  it  had  faded  from  the  memory  of  the  bards  of
Ireland,  and  that  Fergus,  Conchobor's  uncle,  rose  from  the
dead,  at  the  intercession  of  the  saints  of  Ireland,  to  tell  it
to  Senchan  Torpeist,  the  chief  bard  of  the  day.  A  version
of  this  story,  without  any  mention  of  the  saints  of  Ireland,
must  be  as  old  as  the  ninth  century,  as  part  of  it  is  imbedded
in  the  oldest  portion  of  Cormac's  Glossary.     The  legend


DATE   OF   STORY  69

allows  of  but  one  interpretation.  Senchan  Torpeist,  a
perfectly  historical  personage,  was  the  author  of  a  redaction
of  the  Tain,  which  supplanted  all  earlier  versions,  and  the
merits  of  which  were  so  transcendent  as  to  confer  upon  it
the  pre-eminence  it  has  enjoyed  throughout  the  entire  range
of  native  Irish  literature.  It  became  the  fashion  to  attach
other  stories,  originally  independent,  to  the  Tain  by  way
of  introduction  or  continuation.

As  early  as  the  first  quarter  of  the  eleventh  century  there
was  an  official  list  of  twelve  recognised  remscela,  or  intro-
ductions, to  the  Tain,  and  among  these  is  our  story.  The
idea  was  an  ingenious  one,  far  more  so  than  is  the  case
with  many  of  the  other  remscela,  some  of  which  have  very
little  connection,  apparent  to  the  modern  reader,  with  the
Tain.  To  explain  the  rivalry  of  the  two  bulls,  they  were
made  avatars  of  the  wizard  swineherds,  the  first  occasion  of
whose  dissension  thus  became  the  ultimate  cause  of  the
great  war  in  which  perished  so  many  heroes.  But  the
artificial  character  of  the  proceeding  is  obvious.  The  Tain
bb  Cuailgne,  a  glorification  of  Ulster,  is  the  supreme
apotheosis  of  the  chief  Ulster  brave,  Cuchulinn,  whilst  the
Begetting  of  the  Two  Swineherds,  in  so  far  as  it  involves
historical  and  racial  data,  sets  forth  the  rivalry  of  Munster
and  Connaught  and  is,  in  effect,  a  long  factum  on  Munster's
behalf.  Never  could  such  a  story  have  been  from  the
outset  an  integral  portion  of  the  Tain  cycle.  Yet  it
easily  lent  itself  to  incorporation  in  a  saga,  of  which  the
dominant  idea  was  the  failure  of  Connaught  and  the  triumph
of  Connaught's  foe.  Skill  and  consistency  are  shown  by  the
adapter ;  it  is  the  Munster  swineherd  who  finally  animates
the  redoubtable  Black  of  Coolney.

The  foregoing  conclusions  are  strengthened  by  examina-


70  DATE   OF   STORY

tion  of  the  text.  There  is  a  marked  difference  between
what  may  be  called  the  original  story  and  the  Ulster  con-
tinuation intended  to  fit  it  into  the  Tain  cycle.  The  former
is  meagre,  confused,  often  incoherent ;  one  feels  that  the
narrator  cared  for  little  more  than  the  actual  sequence  of
incidents,  and  that  he  was  at  little  pains  to  give  life  and
animation  to  the  narrative — he  was  only  repeating  the  story
of  an  alien,  an  indifferent,  if  not  a  hostile  tribe.  The
moment  the  familiar  personages  of  the  Tain  cycle  come
upon  the  scene,  the  tone  changes,  precise,  animated  and
appropriate  detail  replaces  the  confused  hurry  of  the  older
part.  The  few  words  placed  in  Medb's  mouth  reveal  at
once  the  proud  ambitious  woman,  who  will  have  no  mistress
save  herself,  whose  character  is  so  strongly  and  consistently
marked  throughout  the  Tain  cycle — whilst  Fiachna,  the
cautious,  timid,  avaricious  kinglet,  is  presented  with  equal
dramatic  skill.

Thus  the  Begetting  of  the  Two  Swineherds,  in  its  present
form,  is  the  working  up  of  an  older  tale,  originally  South
Irish,  to  fit  it  into  the  great  Northern  cycle  of  Conchobor
and  Cuchulinn.  Extant,  certainly,  in  the  early  part  of  the
eleventh,  it  cannot  well  be  older  than  the  middle  or  end
of  the  eighth  century.  I  should  be  disposed  to  attribute  it
to  the  eighth  century,  to  that  period  of  comparative  calm
before  the  outbreak  of  the  Viking  storm  which  we  may  con-
jecture to  have  been  the  golden  age  of  Irish  story-telling,
rather  than  to  the  Irish  renaissance  period  (950-1050)  when
the  land  was  recovering  from  the  Viking  invasions  and
reconstituting  its  ancient  mythic  and  heroic  literature.

If  these  conclusions  are  valid,  there  is  little  weight  to  be
attached  to  the  Mongan  reference.  It  may  have  been
added  any  time  between  the  composition  of  the  story  as  we


IMPORT   OF   STORY  71

have  it  and  the  period,  early  eleventh  century,  to  which  we
can  trace  back  the  existing  ms.  text.  Even  if  it  is  due,  as  is
quite  possible,  to  the  eighth  century  Northern  story-teller
who  drafted  the  Munster  tale  into  the  Northern  cycle,  it
simply  proves  that  there  were  extant  in  his  day  stories  con-
cerning Mongan  the  shape-shifter,  a  conclusion  we  had
already  reached  upon  other  grounds.

Of  far  more  importance  are  the  results  for  the  general
history  of  Irish  romantic  literature.  The  Munster  tale  of
the  Two  Swineherds  must  have  enjoyed  a  favour  extending
far  beyond  the  limits  of  its  native  province,  or  it  would  never
have  been  deemed  worthy  of  annexation  and  incorporation
in  their  great  heroic  cycle  by  the  Northern  story-tellers.
We  thus  get  a  glimpse,  one  of  the  few  vouchsafed  to  us,  of
the  considerable  mass  of  romantic  narrative  that  must  have
existed  in  the  South  before  the  rise  of  the  Munster  Brian
family  to  supreme  power,  but  which  has  perished  owing  to
the  fact  that  the  chief  collections  of  heroic  and  mythic
romance  were  put  together  at  a  time  when  the  Northern
kings  of  the  race  of  Niall  were  dominant,  and  attention  was
chiefly  paid  to  the  Northern  cycles.

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  utilise  the  varying  elements
of  the  tale  for  the  history  of  the  re-birth  conception.  As
regards  the  actual  incarnation  incident  (the  latest  portion
of  the  extant  text),  it  is  of  precisely  the  same  nature  as  in
the  Cuchulinn  and  Etain  stories — the  persona  incarnanda  has
to  actually  enter  the  body  of  the  mother  and  is  subject  to
her  form  and  to  his  own  sex.  Personality  may  be  assumed
to  continue — at  least  we  may  say  that  the  story-teller  regarded
the  enmity  of  the  two  bulls  as  due  to  more  than  ordinary
bovine  rivalry.  The  earlier  part  of  the  tale  is  more  interest-
ing from  the  possibilities  it  suggests,  and  the  circle  of  per-


72  CONCHOBOR'S    BIRTH

sonages  it  involves.  Owing  to  the  concision  and  incoherence
of  the  extant  text  it  is  impossible  to  have  a  clear  idea  of  the
transformation  process.  All  we  can  be  sure  of  is  that  the
personality  subsists  in  its  entirety  whatever  be  the  form
under  which  it  manifests  itself.  But  the  main  point  is  that
the  masters  of  the  swineherds  belong  to  the  Tuatha  de
Danann,  the  same  clan  of  divine  beings  of  which  Manannan,
Mider,  and  Lug  are  members.  It  is  apparently  owing  to
their  connection  with  this  mysterious  wizard  folk  that  the
swineherds  possess  their  superhuman  attributes.

The  Conchobor  Birth-Story.

The  tales  we  have  just  considered,  and  which  belong
respectively  to  what  may  be  called  the  Northern  mythic,  the
Northern  heroic,  and  the  Southern  romantic  story  groups,
have  this  in  common,  that  the  incarnation-transformation
incident  is  the  pivot  upon  which  the  whole  turns.  But  there
are  a  number  of  stories  into  which  it  enters  episodically.
Thus,  one  of  the  varying  accounts  of  King  Conchobor's  birth
introduces  it.  For  to  Conchobor,  as  to  Cuchulinn,  different
fathers  are  ascribed  in  heroic  romance.  One  version  makes
him  a  son  of  Cathbad  the  druid.  It  would  seem  at  one
time  to  have  been  considered  derogatory  either  for  a  king
to  be  the  son  of  any  one  else  but  a  king,  or  for  such  a
famous  king  to  be  the  son  of  a  druid  whom  the  Christian
scribes  would  naturally  regard  as  a  representative  par
excellence  of  paganism.  At  all  events  another  version
attributes  to  Ness,  Cathbad's  wife  and  Conchobor's  mother,
an  intrigue  with  the  Ulster  king,  Fachtna  Fathach,  who  was
thus  the  hero-king's  father.  But  this  very  version  contains
the  following  incident.  After  telling  how  Cathbad  had  won
Ness  to  wife — he  found  her  bathing  and  went  between  her


CONCHOBOR'S    BIRTH  73

and  her  dress,  and  bared  his  sword  over  her  head  and  forced
her  to  do  his  will x — the  story  proceeds: '  At  a  certain  hour  of
the  night  thirst  fell  upon  Cathbad.  Ness  went  through
the  whole  fort  to  seek  a  drink,  but  found  none.  She  went
to  the  river  Conchobur  and  strained  the  water  in  the  cup
through  her  veil,  and  then  brought  it  to  Cathbad.  "  Let
a  light  be  kindled,"  said  he,  "that  we  may  see  the  water."
There  were  two  worms  in  the  water.  Cathbad  bared  his
sword  over  the  head  of  the  woman  with  intent  to  kill  her.
"  Drink  thyself,"  said  he,  "  what  thou  wouldst  have  me
drink,  or  thou  wilt  be  killed."  Then  she  drank  twice,  a
worm  at  either  draught.  Thereupon  she  grew  pregnant,  and
some  say  it  was  by  the  worms  that  she  was  pregnant.  But
Fachtna  Fathach  was  the  leman  of  the  maiden,  and  he
caused  this  pregnancy  in  violation  of  (the  conjugal  rights
of)  Cathbad,  the  noble  druid.'2

We  may  fairly  assume  that  three  different  accounts  of
Conchobor's  birth  were  current  in  the  texts  that  underlie
those  that  have  come  down  to  us.  (a)  He  was  the  son  of
a  druid  who  mastered  a  damsel  from  Faery  ;  this  is  sub-
stantially the  version  that  has  survived,  probably  because
it  took  the  fancy  of  the  story-telling  class,  {b)  He  was  the
son  of  a  king  and  the  druid's  wife ;  this  is  probably  a  bit  of
'  historian '  rationalism,  and  has  exercised  little  influence
upon  the  saga,  (c)  He  was  the  son  of  a  god  who  incar-
nated himself  in  the  same  way  as  did  Lug  and  Etain ;  this
is  probably  the  oldest  form,  and  it  may  be  owing  to  the  fact

1  This  looks  very  like  an  attenuated  form  of  the  theft  of  the  swan-
maid's  or  mermaid's  garments,  a  widely  spread  incident  in  mediaeval
romance  and  in  current  folk  literature.

2  Professor  Meyer's  translation,  R.C.  vi.  p.  178,  from  a  MS.  in  the
Stowe  Collection  (a.d.  1300).


74         CONALL   CERNACH'S   BIRTH

that  the  father's  name  was  unknown  that  Conchobor  is
usually  described  by  the  matronymic  alone,  Conchobor
mac  Nessa.  As  the  chief  hero  of  the  cycle,  Cuchulinn,  had
a  similar  birth-story  told  of  him,  this  probably  led,  in
Conchobor's  case,  to  its  being  passed  over  in  favour  of  the
rival  version.

The  Conall  Cernach  Birth-Story.

Conchobor  and  Cuchulinn  are  not  the  only  Ulster  heroes
of  whom  the  story  is  told.  Conall  Cernach,  after  Cuchu-
linn the  leading  Ulster  brave,  Cuchulinn's  comrade  and
avenger,  owed  his  birth  to  the  same  cause,  as  we  learn  from
the  Coir  Anmann  (Fitness  of  Names),  an  eleventh  to  twelfth
century  Irish  compilation  which  does  for  the  nicknames  of
about  three  hundred  noteworthy  Irish  persons  mentioned  in
legend  what  the  Dinnshenchas  does  for  the  names  of  note-
worthy places.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  mediaeval  Irish  Lempriere.  To
account  for  the  name  Conall  it  relates  as  follows  :  '  Find-
choem,  Cathbad's  daughter,  Amirgen's  wife,  suffered  from
hesitation  of  offspring  so  that  she  bore  no  children.  But  a
certain  druid  met  her  and  said,  "  If  my  fee  were  good,  you
should  bear  a  noble  son  to  Amirgen."  "  Good  shall  be  thy
fee  from  me."  "Come  to  the  well  to-morrow,"  said  the
druid,  "and  I  will  go  with  thee."  So  on  the  morrow  the
twain  fare  forth  to  the  well,  and  the  druid  sang  spells  and
prophecies  over  the  spring.  And  he  said,  "Wash  thyself
therewith  and  thou  wilt  bring  forth  a  son,  and  no  child  will
be  less  pious  than  he  to  his  mother's  kin — to  wit,  the  Con-
naughtmen."  Then  the  damsel  drank  a  draught  out  of  the
well,  and  with  the  draught  she  swallowed  a  worm,  and  the
worm  was  in  the  hand  of  the  boy  as  he  lay  in  his  mother's
womb,  and  it  pierced  the  hand  and  consumed  it.     When


CONALL   CERNACH'S    BIRTH  75

his  mother's  brother,  Cet  mac  Magach,  heard  that  his  sister
would  bear  a  child  that  should  slay  more  than  half  the  men
of  Connaught,  he  continued  protecting  his  sister  until  she
should  bring  forth  her  boy.  The  damsel's  time  came,  and
she  bore  a  son.  Druids  came  to  baptize  the  child  into
heathenism,  and  they  sang  the  heathen  baptism  over  the
little  child,  and  they  said,  "  Never  shall  be  born  a  boy  more
impious  than  this  one  towards  the  men  of  Connaught ;  not
a  night  shall  he  be  without  a  Connaughtman's  head  on  his
belt."  Then  Cet  drew  the  little  child  towards  him,  and  put
it  under  his  heel  and  bruised  its  neck,  but  did  not  break
its  spinal  marrow.  Whereupon  its  mother  exclaims  to  Cet :
"Wolfish  {conda)  is  the  treachery  {fell)  thou  workest,  O
brother  ! "  "  True,"  says  Cet,  "  let  Conall  ( Con-feall)  be  his
name  henceforward."  And  he  gave  her  son  back  to  her.
Whence  he  is  called  wry-necked  Conall.' 1

No  need  to  emphasise  the  traces  of  antiquity  in  this  in-
tensely savage  story,  notably  the  protection  afforded  the
pregnant  wife  by  her  brother.  It  seems  implied  that  the
child  belongs  to  the  mother's  kin,  and  that  such  an  abnor-
mal case  as  Conall's  enmity  to  his  maternal  kinsmen  is
worthy  special  note.  But  it  is  not  quite  easy  to  decide
whether  the  birth  incident  belongs  to  a  very  early  stage  in
the  evolution  of  the  conception,  before  any  clear  distinc-
tion was  drawn  between  human  and  praeterhuman,  and  no
necessity  was  felt  for  assigning  a  semi-divine  origin  to  the
event,  or  whether  it  be  not  simply  the  last  worn-down  form
of  a  commonplace  out  of  which  all  true  significance  has
faded.  I  incline  to  the  latter  explanation,  but  I  would  not
bring  forward  any  definite  reason  for  so  doing.

1  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes'  translation,  Irische  Texte  (forthcoming
volume,  quoted  from  advance  sheets  kindly  lent  me  by  the  translator).


76  TUAN    MAC   CAIRILL

The  Transformations  of  Tuan  mac  Cairill.

All  the  tales  we  have  hitherto  examined  have  this  in
common,  that,  if  not  anterior  (that  is  a  question  I  will
not  prejudge  at  this  stage  of  the  inquiry)  to  the  Christian
classic  learning  which  has  so  profoundly  modified  much
in  Irish  tradition,  they  are,  at  all  events,  substantially  un-
affected by  it.  On  the  contrary,  we  have  seen  that  the
Christian  learned  gloss  or  modification  is  either  in  direct
contradiction  to  the  text  into  which  it  has  been  foisted,  or
strongly  opposed  to  it  in  tendency.  We  now  pass  to  in-
stances where  the  antique  conception  was  pressed  into  the
service  of  the  alien  learning.  The  chief  creation  of  the
latter  was  the  elaborate  system  of  pre-Christian  chronology
modelled  upon  and  synchronised  with  that  of  Biblical  and
classical  antiquity.  The  mythology,  the  heroic  legends,  the
genuine  historical  traditions  of  the  race,  were  thrown  into
one  melting-pot  and  transformed  into  a  series  of  annals
reaching  back  to  the  Deluge.  The  main  feature  of  the
annalistic  scheme  is  furnished  by  the  so-called  invasions  of,
or  immigrations  into,  Ireland.  Much  ingenuity  has  been
spent  in  finding  an  historic  basis  for  the  traditions  presented
in  this  form,  and  this  much  may  be  conceded,  that  memories
of  the  various  races  that  have  undoubtedly  inhabited  Ire-
land in  historic  times,  and  of  the  various  immigrations  that
have  without  doubt  taken  place,  may  be  dimly  reflected
therein,  but  when  it  is  remembered  that  one  of  these  pre-
Christian  races  is  that  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  the  repre-
sentatives of  an  early  Gaelic  Olympus,  it  would  seem  a
thankless  task  to  extract  definite  historic  record  from  what
is  told  of  them.  Now  a  peculiarity  of  this  highly  artificial
annalistic  scheme  is,  that  each  successive  race  is  supposed


TUAN    MAC   CAIRILL  77

to  have  died  out  or  vanished  from  mortal  ken.  The  ques-
tion naturally  arose,  by  what  means  was  the  knowledge  of
past  races  handed  down  ?  The  answer  is  supplied  by  the
legend  of  Tuan  mac  Cairill,  the  oldest  text  of  which  is  pre-
served by  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow  (going  back  therefore
to  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  century  at  the  latest)  as  a
species  of  preface  to  the  Lebor  Gabdla,  or  Book  of  Invasions.
I  summarise  the  story  from  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville's
French  version  {Cycle  Mythologique,  47  et  seq.).1

St.  Finnen  is  one  of  the  chief  saints  of  sixth-century  Ire-
land. He  it  was  who  had  the  celebrated  dispute  about  a
copy  of  the  gospels  with  Columba,  the  consequences  of
which  were  the  battle  of  Cooldrumma,  Columba's  exile  to
Iona  and  evangelisation  of  Scottish  Pictland,  and  the  ensu-
ing Gaelic  settlement  in  Western  Scotland.  One  day  Finnen
came  to  the  fort  of  a  pagan  warrior,  who  at  first  refused  him
entrance.  Finnen  had  recourse  to  a  practice  widely  spread
in  ancient  Ireland,  and  still  living  in  modern  Brahminic
India;  he  fasted  upon  the  denier  of  hospitality.  The
latter  yielded,  and  Finnen  and  he  became  great  friends.2
His  name  was  Tuan,  son  of  Cairell,  a  man  of  Ulster.  Once
he  was  known  as  Tuan,  son  of  Starn,  the  brother  of  Par-
tholon,  the  first  man  who  came  to  Ireland.  Finnen  is  as
fond  of  a  tale  as  Patrick  in  the  Ossianic  cycle  of  legends,
and  demands  immediately  the  story  of  all  that  has  passed
in  Ireland  since  those  days.    Tuan  pleads  for  a  delay,  to  be

1  An  edition  and  translation  by  Professor  Kuno  Meyer,  of  the  oldest
version  of  this  story,  will  be  found  in  Appendix  A.  It  will  be  noticed
that  it  differs  in  several  respects  from  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville's
translation.

2  As  will  be  seen  from  Professor  Meyer's  translation,  Tuan  is  not
the  same  as  the  warrior  who  denied  the  saint  hospitality.


78  TUAN    MAC   CAIRILL

employed  in  studying  the  new  faith  of  which  Finnen  has
told  him,  but  the  saint  grants  him  permission  to  relate  the
history  of  the  past,  an  example  which  may  be  commended
to  modern  missionaries.     So  Tuan  relates  as  follows  : —

There  had  been  five  immigrations  into  Ireland  up  to  the
present  time.  Before  the  Deluge  no  one  came  thither,  nor
after  the  Deluge  until  three  hundred  and  twelve  years  had
passed.  Then  came  Partholon  and  twenty-four  com-
panions ;  they  multiplied  until  they  were  five  thousand,  and
then  all  perished  of  the  plague  save  Tuan  alone.  For
twenty-two  years  he  was  the  sole  inhabitant  of  Ireland.
Then  came  Nemed,  and  by  that  time  Tuan  was  grey,  de-
crepit, naked,  long-haired  and  clawed.  One  evening  he
slept,  and  awoke  on  the  morrow  as  a  stag,  full  of  youth  and
vigour.  He  sang  Nemed's  coming  and  his  transformation.
Now  Nemed  had  come  with  but  eight  companions ;  they
multiplied  until  they  were  four  hundred  and  thirty  thousand
of  either  sex,  and  then  all  perished.  By  this  time  Tuan
had  again  reached  the  extreme  limit  of  age;  again  he
changed  his  form  for  that  of  a  boar,  and  he  sang  as  follows  :
'  To-day  I  am  a  boar,  a  king,  a  mighty  one,  looking  forward
to  triumph.  Once  I  was  in  the  assembly  which  gave  the
judgment  of  Partholon  ;  it  was  sung,  and  all  praised  the
melody.  Full  of  pleasantness  was  the  chant  of  my  judg-
ment— pleasant  to  the  young  women,  the  very  fair  ones.
My  voice  was  grave  and  sweet,  my  step  in  the  battle  was
swift  and  firm,  my  face  was  full  of  charm.  .  .  .  To-day  I  am
a  black  boar.'  Years  passed,  and  age  again  overtook  Tuan.
He  returned  to  his  Ulster  home,  where  the  change  always
took  place.  Meanwhile  Semion,  son  of  Stariat,  from  whom
descended  the  Firbolg  and  the  Galium,  had  occupied  Ire-
land.    So  Tuan  minded  him  of  the  forms  he  had  formerly


TUAN    MAC   CAIRILL  79

had.  He  fasted  three  days,  as  was  his  wont  before  each
change,  and  he  became  a  great  eagle  of  the  sea.  He  sang
a  song,  and  proclaimed  his  trust  in  the  true  God.  Then
came  Beothach,  son  of  Iarbonel,  and  from  him  are  sprung
the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  gods  and  false  gods;  they  came
probably  from  the  sky,  hence  their  skill  and  knowledge.
Whilst  Tuan  was  in  the  shape  of  an  eagle  came  the  last  of
the  invasions  into  Ireland,  that  of  Mil  and  his  sons.  Then
after  a  nine  days'  fast  Tuan  changed  into  a  salmon,  and,
thanks  to  the  protection  of  God,  he  escaped  all  dangers —
the  net  of  the  fisherman,  the  talon  of  the  bird  of  prey,  the
spear  of  the  huntsman.  One  day,  however,  he  was  caught
in  a  net  and  brought  to  the  wife  of  Cairell.  He  recollected
well  how  he  was  roasted  on  the  gridiron,  and  how  Cairell's
wife  ate  him,  so  that  he  passed  into  her  womb,  and  whilst
there  he  heard  and  recollected  the  talk  of  the  household
concerning  the  deeds  that  were  done  in  Ireland  at  the  time.
He  grew  up  and  became  a  prophet,  and,  after  a  while,  when
Patrick  came  to  Ireland,  he  was  baptized  and  believed  in
God,  Creator  of  all  things.

One  of  the  mss.  which  have  preserved  this  legend  tells  us
that  Tuan  was  a  hundred  years  in  man's  shape,  eighty  years
as  a  stag,  twenty  as  a  boar,  a  hundred  as  an  eagle,  twenty
as  a  salmon,  so  that  until  his  second  birth  as  a  man  there
elapsed  a  period  of  three  hundred  and  twenty  years.1

1  Dr.  Jevons  calls  my  attention  to  the  coincidence  between  the  facts
of  this  tale  and  Egyptian  transmigration  belief  as  recorded  by
Herodotus.  I  quote  B.R.'s  racy  version:  'The  same  people  were
they  that  first  helde  the  opinion  that  the  soule  of  man  was  immortall,
passing  from  one  body  into  another  by  a  continuall  course,  as  every
one  tooke  hys  beginning  and  generation  of  another,  and  when  it  had
passed  through  all  bodyes  that  have  their  beeyng  eyther  in  the  lande,


8o  DATE   OF   STORY

To  apprehend  the  full  significance  of  this  remarkable
tale,  and  to  appreciate  at  its  proper  value  the  evidence  it
supplies  toward  reconstituting  the  history  of  the  re-incarna-
tion conception  in  Ireland,  we  must  have  a  definite  idea  of
its  nature.  I  look  upon  it  as  a  Christian  learned  utilisation
of  the  incident  we  have  found  in  a  pagan  heroic  form  in  the
Cuchulinn  and  Etain  cycles,  in  a  pagan  romantic  form  in
the  story  of  the  Two  Swineherds.  In  other  words,  it  pre-
supposes themes  and  incidents  such  as  meet  us  in  these
tales.  If  we  can  date  it  with  any  accuracy,  we  obtain  a  fresh
terminus  ad  quern  for  dating  the  earlier  stories  upon  which  it
is  modelled.  Now  certain  Irish  antiquaries,  not  content
with  tracing  the  story  of  their  country  up  to  within  three
hundred  and  twenty  years  of  the  Deluge,  must  needs  bring
a  daughter  of  Noah,  the  Lady  Cessair,  to  Ireland  before
the  Deluge.  She  had  the  ingenious  idea  that,  as  the  world
was  to  be  drowned  for  its  sins,  could  she  reach  a  land,  sinless
because  uninhabited,  she  might  escape.  But  in  this  she  was
mistaken,  save  as  regards  one  of  her  companions,  Fintan,
who  was  miraculously  preserved  until  the  coming  of  Pat-
rick. This  is  evidently  an  extension  of  the  idea  contained
in  the  Tuan  mac  Cairill  story,  with  further  insistence  upon
the  biblical  and  further  elimination  of  the  pagan  (the
transformation)  element.  As  Cessair  is  mentioned  by
Eochaid  hua  Flainn,  who  died  in  984,  the  legend  of  which
she  is  the  heroine  cannot  be  much  younger  than  the  middle
of  the  tenth  century,  and  the  Tuan  story  must  be  older.    In

sea,  or  aire,  then  consequentlie  to  returne  into  the  body  of  man  agayne,
which  course  it  finished  within  the  course  of  3000  yeares.'  Dr.  Jevons
suggests  a  possibility  of  influence  upon  the  Irish  story.  I  do  not  think
this  likely,  quite  apart  from  any  question  of  the  knowledge  of  Hero-
dotus, or  a  Latin  account  based  upon  Herodotus,  in  Ireland.


DATE   OF  STORY  81

its  designation  of  Partholon  as  the  first  invader  of  Ireland
it  agrees  with  Nennius,  who  noted  a  brief  account  of  the
early  history  of  Ireland,  certainly  derived  from  Irish  sources,
in  his  Historia  Brittonum,  compiled  in  the  early  part  of  the
ninth  century.  It  would  be  unsafe,  however,  to  carry  the
Tuan  legend  so  far  back,  especially  as  the  name  of  his
father,  Starn,  is  decidedly  Norse,  which  would  seem  to  in-
dicate that  the  legend  only  took  shape  after  the  Viking
invasions.  It  is  probably  a  production  of  the  late  ninth
or  early  tenth  century,  and  may  be  regarded  as  the  first
attempt  to  give  a  rational  answer  to  questions  raised  by  the
annalistic  scheme;  the  incident,  familiar  from  heroic  legend
and  the  current  romantic  fiction  of  the  day,  of  an  individual
passing  through  several  phases  of  existence,  offered  a  con-
venient machinery  which  was  utilised  with  no  little  skill.
It  is  possible,  indeed,  that  a  pagan  story  has  been  taken
over  bodily,  and  that  only  the  annalistic  framework  and
Christian  details  are  due  to  the  ninth-tenth  century  adapter.
But  I  incline  rather  to  look  upon  it  as  a  new  composition
upon  old  lines  than  as  the  amplification  of  an  old  composi-
tion.

In  either  case,  witness  is  borne  to  the  popularity  of  the
theme  in  Ireland.  Nor  do  we  fail  to  notice  that,  however
pious  be  the  intent  of  the  narrator,  however  grave  the  show
of  historical  learning,  the  actual  machinery  of  the  re-birth  is
as  crude  and  archaic  as  in  purely  pagan  stories.  It  seems,
moreover,  to  be  implied  that,  having  once  quitted  human
for  animal  shape,  birth  according  to  the  ordinary  course  of
nature  was  necessary  before  Tuan  could  re-assume  humanity.
The  phenomenon  of  motherhood  cannot  be  overlooked;
that  of  fatherhood  may  easily  escape  notice  at  a  certain
stage  of  development.     Hence,   as  may  be  seen  by  the

VOL.  II.  F


82  AED   SLANE'S   BIRTH

countless  examples  brought  together  by  Mr.  Hartland  in
the  first  volume  of  his  Legend  of  Perseus,  the  widespread
occurrence  of  belief  in  conception  without  male  interven-
tion. In  this  respect  other  Irish  stories  show  the  character-
istic marks  of  a  very  early  stage  of  thought.

In  view  of  the  prominence  of  the  re-birth  incident  in  the
Ulster  cycles  of  Conchobor  and  Cuchulinn,  and  of  Mongan,
the  Ulster  origin  of  Tuan  and  the  presence  of  the  story  in
the  great  Ulster  ms.,  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  are  note-
worthy. Noteworthy,  too,  the  association  of  antique  legend
with  Finnen,  Columba's  teacher,  recalling  as  it  does  a  like
association  of  Columba  and  Mongan.  We  are  brought
back  in  this,  as  in  other  cases,  to  the  sixth  century  as  the
formative  and  transformative  period  when,  quickened  by
contact  with  the  higher  culture  of  Christianity,  Irish  heroic
and  mythic  romance  manifested  itself  in  definite  literary
form  ;  we  are  also  brought  back  to  a  small  group  of  northern
saints  as  intermediaries  and  conciliators  between  the  pagan
lore  they  loved  and  the  Christian  faith  they  adored.1

The  Birth-Story  of  Aed  Slane.

The  next  story  also  has  Finnen  as  one  of  its  chief  actors.
It  is  the  well-known  birth-story  of  Aed  Slane,  high  king
of  Ireland  from  594  to  600.  It  runs  as  follows  :  Once  upon
a  time  there  was  a  great  gathering  of  the  Gael  in  Tailtin.
Diarmaid  the  king,  son  of  Fergus  Cerrbel,  was  there  with
his  two  wives,  Mairend  the  Bald  and  Mugain  of  Munster.
Mugain  was  jealous  of  Mairend,  and  egged  on  a  satirist  to

1  In  this  connection  the  likeness  of  name  between  Forgoll  the  poet,
who  figures  in  the  Mongan  stories,  and  Dalian  Forgaill,  Columba's
disciple  and  panegyrist,  may  be  noted.


AED   SLANE'S   BIRTH  83

make  her  rival  remove  the  golden  crown  wherewith  the
bald  one  hid  her  shame.  So  the  satirist  craved  a  boon  of
the  queen,  and,  being  gainsaid,  tore  the  crown  from  her
head.  '  God  and  Ciaran  be  my  aid,'  cried  the  queen,  and
lo  !  before  a  glance  could  be  cast  at  her,  the  long,  fine  wavy
golden  locks  were  over  the  ford  of  her  shoulders,  such  was
the  marvellous  might  of  Ciaran.  Then,  turning  to  her  rival,
Mairend  said,  '  Mayest  thou  suffer  shame  for  this  in  the
presence  of  the  men  of  Ireland.'  Thereafter  Mugain  be-
came barren,  and  she  was  sad  because  the  king  was  minded
to  put  her  away,  and  because  all  the  other  wives  of  Diarmaid
were  fruitful.  So  she  sought  help  of  Finnen,  and  the  cleric
blessed  water  and  gave  her  to  drink ;  and  she  conceived.
But  first  a  lamb  made  its  appearance,  then  a  silver  trout,
and  only  at  the  third  trial  was  Aed  Slane  born.

This  story,  preserved  by  the  Book  of  the  Dun  Cow,  has
come  down  to  us  in  two  forms  :  (a)  a  prose  text,  abridged
above ;  (b)  a  poem  of  Flann  Manistrech,  which  omits  the
rivalry  between  the  queen  and  merely  gives  the  birth-story.
Neither  text  can  be  carried  back  linguistically  beyond  the
early  eleventh  century ;  but  the  date  of  the  form,  it  must
again  be  stated,  does  not  decide  the  date  of  the  substance.

If  we  compare  the  account  of  Aed  Slane's  birth  with  that
of  Conail  Cernach  {supra,  pp.  74,  75)  we  find  them  exactly
similar.  In  either  case  a  barren  queen  applies  to  a  wizard
for  offspring.  True,  in  the  one  case  it  is  a  pagan  druid,  in
the  other  a  Christian  saint ;  but  both  act  in  the  same  way.
The  one  sings  spells  over  the  water,  the  other  blesses  it ;
the  queen  drinks  and  conceives.  The  chief  difference
would  seem  to  lie  in  the  superior  skill  of  the  pagan  over  the
Christian  wizard.  I  think  my  readers  will  agree  that  the
one  tale  is  simply  a  Christianised  version  of  the  other,  the


84  TALIESSIN

details  of  which  have  somewhat  suffered  in  the  transforming
process,  or  by  the  contamination  of  two  originally  inde-
pendent stories — that  of  the  jealous  queen  and  that  of  the
miraculous  birth.  It  is  possible  that  in  the  former  the  curse
of  the  beshamed  queen  actually  caused  her  rival  to  bring
forth  animals  instead  of  human  children,  and  that  this  has
influenced  the  other  incident.  Possible,  again,  that  of  Aed
Slane,  as  of  his  contemporary,  Mongan,  stories  were  afloat
concerning  previous  existences  of  his  which,  as  with  Tuan
mac  Cairill,  were  passed  in  animal  shape.  The  story  as
it  stands,  wrested  to  the  purposes  of  Christian  symbolism,
has  departed  too  widely  from  its  basis  to  allow  of  perfectly
sure  reconstruction.

The  Taliessin  Legend.

I  have  recited  nearly  every  important  instance  of  the
re-birth  incident  in  Irish  legend,  but  before  discussing
the  import  of  the  evidence  we  have  collected  it  may  be
well  to  turn  once  more  to  Welsh  romance,  which  has  already
supplied  us  with  such  valuable  material  for  comparison.
The  story  of  Taliessin  is  one  of  the  best-known  Welsh
tales.  Its  existing  form  cannot  be  traced  farther  back  than
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  or  beginning  of  the  seventeenth
century ;  but  its  component  elements  are  of  immeasurably
greater  antiquity,  as  I  hope  to  show  beyond  possibility  of
doubt.

There  was  a  man  named  Tegid  Voel,  whose  dwelling
was  in  the  midst  of  the  lake  Tegid,  and  his  wife  was  called
Caridwen.  Their  daughter  was  the  fairest  of  the  world's
maidens,  but  one  of  their  sons,  Avagddu,  the  most  ill-
favoured  man  of  the  world.  His  mother  was  grieved  at
this  and  resolved,  according  to  the  books  of  Vergil,  to  boil


TALIESSIN  85

a  caldron  of  inspiration  and  science  for  him  that  his  recep-
tion might  be  honourable  because  of  his  knowledge  of  the
mysteries  of  the  future  state  of  the  world.  A  whole  year
and  a  day  the  caldron  was  to  boil,  and  Gwion  Bach  was
set  to  stir  the  caldron,  and  a  blind  man,  Mordu,  to  kindle
the  fire  beneath  it.  It  chanced  that  one  day  towards  the
end  of  the  year  three  drops  of  the  charmed  liquor  flew  out
of  the  caldron  and  fell  on  Gwion  Bach's  finger,  which  he
put  to  his  mouth  and  straightway  foresaw  everything  that
was  to  come,  and  perceived  that  his  chief  care  must  be  to
guard  against  the  wiles  of  Caridwen.  So  he  fled  in  great
fear.  But  the  caldron  burst  in  two,  and  when  Caridwen,
hastening  towards  it,  saw  all  her  labour  lost,  she  pursued
Gwion.  He  saw  her,  changed  into  a  hare,  and  fled.  But
she  changed  herself  into  a  greyhound.  Then  he  ran  to  the
river  and  became  a  fish ;  she,  as  an  otter,  chased  him  until
he  was  fain  to  turn  himself  into  a  beast  of  the  air.  She,  as
a  hawk,  followed  him  until,  in  fear  of  death,  he  espied  a
heap  of  winnowed  wheat  upon  the  floor  and,  dropping
among  it,  turned  himself  into  one  of  the  grains.  She  trans-
formed herself  into  a  high-crested  black  hen  and  went  to
the  wheat  and  scratched  it  with  her  feet  and  found  him  out
and  swallowed  him.  And,  as  the  story  says,  she  bore  him
nine  months,  and  when  she  was  delivered  of  him  she  could
not  find  it  in  her  heart  to  kill  him  by  reason  of  his  beauty.
So  she  exposed  him  on  the  sea ;  he  was  rescued  by  Elphin,
and  became  Taliessin,  prince  of  the  bards.  His  after-
adventures  do  not  interest  us  at  present.1

The  story,  as  I  have  said,  cannot  be  traced  back  beyond
the  end  of  the  sixteenth  century.     But  the  transformation-
fight  incidents  are   presupposed  by  several   poems  in  the
1  Summarised  from  Lady  Charlotte  Guest's  translation.


86  TALIESSIN

so-called  Book  of  Taliessin,  a  ms.  of  the  thirteenth  century,
containing  a  number  of  poems,  for  the  most  part  ascribed
to  the  sixth-century  Welsh  bard  Taliessin,  but  concerning
the  real  date  and  nature  of  which  we  know  very  little.  It
is  a  collection  of  pieces  of  the  most  diverse  character,  of
which  some  may  go  back  to  the  ninth  or  eighth  centuries,
whilst  others  are  probably  little  older  than  the  date  at  which
they  were  incorporated  in  the  ms.  The  poems  which  refer
to  incidents  of  the  prose  tale  are  those  brought  together  by
Mr.  Skene  in  his  translation  [Four  Ancient  Books  of  Wales,
i.  523  et  seq.).     The  chief  passage  is  as  follows  : —

'  A  second  time  was  I  formed,
I  have  been  a  blue  salmon  ;
I  have  been  a  dog  ;  I  have  been  a  stag  ;
I  have  been  a  roebuck  on  the  mountain.

I  have  been  a  grain  discovered
Which  grew  upon  a  hill.

A  hen  received  me

With  muddy  claws  and  parting  comb,

I  rested  nine  nights.

In  her  womb  a  child. '

This  fact  alone  should  have  been  sufficient  to  deter  the
rash  persons  who  have  described  the  prose  story  of  Taliessin
as  an  eighteenth-century  imitation  of  the  Second  Calendar
in  the  Arabian  Nights.  It  is  obvious  that  prose  and  verse
relate  to  the  same  tradition,  obvious  also  that  the  verse
presupposes  a  story,  the  incidents  of  which  were  familiar  to
the  poet's  hearers.  It  is  to  my  mind  equally  evident  that  the
story  presupposed  by  the  verse  differed  in  details  from  the
prose  one  preserved  in  a  solitary  late  ms.    The  unprejudiced


DATE   OF   HANES   TALIESSIN         87

reader  fresh  from  the  consideration  of  tales  such  as  those
of  Tuan  mac  Cairill,  and  the  Two  Swineherds  cannot  fail
to  recognise  in  the  Hanes  Taliessin  a  kindred  story  involving
the  same  elements,  though  undoubtedly  far  younger  in
actual  redaction.  This  may  have  taken  place  at  the  end  of
the  sixteenth  century,  the  traditional  date  of  Hopkin  ap
Philip,  to  whom  it  is  ascribed.  But  if  so,  one  can  only  say
that  Hopkin  was  a  skilful  archaiciser.  I  should  be  far
more  inclined  to  place  its  composition  in  the  late  fourteenth
century ;  it  would  then  correspond  in  Welsh  literature  to
tales  like  the  Adventures  of  Teigue  mac  Cein  in  Irish
literature.

As  for  the  substance  of  the  tale,  we  may  either  look  upon
it  as  a  Welsh  adaptation,  fitted  into  the  national  history,  of
an  Irish  romance,  in  which  case  it  is  not  likely  to  be  younger
than  the  twelfth  century,  after  which  date  Irish  literature
does  not  seem  to  have  affected  Wales,  or  treat  it  as  going
back  to  the  hypothetical  Goidels  of  Britain ;  or,  again,  as
belonging  to  a  fund  of  mythic  romance  common  to  both
Goidels  and  Brythons.  There  is  much  that  speaks  in
favour  of  the  second  hypothesis — indeed  of  all  the  products
of  Welsh  romance  the  Hanes  Taliessin  is  the  one  that
testifies  most  strongly  to  community  of  mythic  tradition
between  the  race  to  which  it  is  due  and  the  Goidels  of
Ireland.  In  the  first  place,  Professor  Rhys  has  equated
Telyessin  (a  probably  more  archaic  form  of  the  name)  son
of  Gwion  with  Ossin  son  of  Finn.  To  fully  appreciate  the
force  of  the  parallel  we  must  note  that,  whilst  there  is  no
story  which  makes  Ossin  a  re-birth  of  Finn,  yet  we  have  a
story  to  the  effect  that  he  was  born  whilst  his  mother  was
in  animal  shape,  and  we  recall  that  Finn  was  re-born  as
Mongan.     Thus  the  philological  equation  is  sustained  by


88  TALIESSIN    AND   FINN

some  likeness  of  circumstance  between  the  Irish  and  Welsh
father  and  son.  This  likeness  is,  however,  limited  to  the
central  conception ;  the  details  are  so  different  that  it  is
entirely  out  of  the  question  to  regard  the  Taliessin  birth-
story  as  a  possible  loan  from  the  Finn  cycle,  which,  as  it
has  come  down  to  us,  contains  nothing  that  could  suggest
the  incidents  of  the  Welsh  tale.  The  equation  must  there-
fore date  back  to  a  time  when  elements,  which  have
disappeared  from  the  Finn  saga,  or  have  survived  casually
like  Finn's  re-birth  as  Mongan,  or  Ossin's  animal  parentage,
were  far  more  prominent.  As  I  pointed  out  fifteen  years
ago,1  Finn  is  the  chief  Gaelic  representative  of  the  Aryan
hero  whose  fortunes  have  been  summed  up  by  J.  G.  von
Hahn  as  the  Aryan  Expulsion  and  Return  formula.  In
this  cycle,  of  which  we  find  examples  among  every  Aryan-
speaking  race  (even  among  the  Romans,  who  are  so  un-
accountably deficient  in  other  types  of  mythical  narrative),
the  hero's  birth  may  be  mythical  as  in  the  case  of  Perseus,
Cuchulinn,  or  Romulus  and  Remus,  or  historical  as  in  the
case  of  Cyrus,  Siegfried,  Finn,  and,  in  the  extant  form  of
the  legend,  Arthur,  though  here  the  mythical  incident  has
survived  in  an  attenuated  form.  Now  Taliessin's  birth-story
is  as  marked  an  example  of  the  mythical  form  of  the
incident  as  can  be  found  within  the  entire  range  of  the
cycle.  His  after-adventures  do  not  correspond  at  all  to
the  formula  type,  whereas  those  of  Finn  present  it  in  a
singularly  complete  form.  Taliessin,  the  miraculously  con-
ceived re-birth  of  a  Welsh  equivalent  of  Finn  and  of  a
goddess  dwelling  beneath  the  waves  (Caridwen's  husband
lived  in  the  midst  of  Lake  Tegid),  that  is,  of  one  form  of

1  In  my  study  upon  the  Aryan  Expulsion  and  Return  formula  among
the  Celts,  Folklore  Record,  vol.  iv.


TALIESSIN   AND    ELYSIUM  89

the  Celtic  Otherworld,  thus  takes  us  back  to  a  stage  of  the
Finn  legend  which  must  have  been  extremely  rich  in
mythical  incident.  Let  us  pursue  the  parallel  further.  In
Irish  legend  Finn's  re-birth  Mongan,  is  son  of  Manannan,
lord  of  the  Happy  Otherworld  lying  beyond  the  western
waves,  and  is  himself  closely  connected  with  that  land.
In  Welsh  legend  Finn's  (Gwion's)  re-birth  Taliessin,  son  of
the  Otherworld  goddess,  Caridwen,  is  likewise  connected
with  that  mysterious  realm.  Thus  a  remarkable  poem,
No.  xiv.  of  the  Book  of  Taliessin,1  makes  the  bard  utter
the  following  description  of  a  land  we  can  at  once  identify
with  the  domain  of  Manannan,  Lug,  or  Mider  : —

1  Perfect  is  my  chair  in  Caer  Sidi ;
Plague  and  age  hurt  him  not  who  's  in  it,
They  know  Manawyddan  and  Pryderi ;  -
Three  organs  round  a  fire  sing  before  it,
And  about  its  points  are  ocean's  streams
And  the  abundant  well  above  it —
Sweeter  than  white  wine  the  drink  in  it. '

Another  very  interesting  poem  in  the  same  collection
describes  an  expedition  to  Annwfn  or  Hades,  made  by
Arthur,  in  which  the  poet  took  part.  Mention  is  made  of
a  wonderful  caldron,  the  chief  treasure  of  the  land  :

'  The  head  of  Hades'  caldron — what  is  it  like  ?
A  rim  it  has,  with  pearls  round  its  border  ;
It  boils  not  a  coward's  food  ;  it  would  not  be  perjured  ; '3

1  Skene,  ii.  p.  274.  I  use  Professor  Rhys's  translation,  Arthurian
Legend,  301.

2  i.e.  Manannan  and  his  son,  if  lam  right  in  my  surmise,  supra,  p.  17.

3  Professor  Rhys's  translation  in  the  preface  to  Messrs.  Dent's  edition
of  the  Morte  d'Arthur.     Cf.  Skene,  ii.  264.


9o  TALIESSIN    POEMS

which  recalls  the  magic  goblets  of  Angus  and  of  Manannan.
The  facts  I  have  cited  amply  warrant  the  conclusion  that
the  legends  connected  with  the  name  of  Taliessin,  late  as
may  be  the  date  of  their  transcription,  are  substantially
as  old  as  anything  extant  in  Welsh  literature,  and  may  be
used  with  the  same  confidence  with  which  we  use  the
parallel  Irish  legends.1

In  addition  to  these  poems  in  the  Book  of  Taliessin,  in
which  the  bard  recalls  a  series  of  metamorphoses  through
which  he  has  passed  evidently  akin  to  that  by  means  of
which  the  flying  Gwion  seeks  to  elude  the  pursuit  of  the
wrathful  goddess  of  the  caldron,  there  exist  others  which
claim  for  him  a  capacity  of  metamorphosis  more  general  in
its  character.  Thus,  in  the  remarkable  poem  called  Kat
Godeu,  the  Battle  of  Godeu,  Skene,  i.  276,  the  poet  sings :

'  I  have  been  in  a  multitude  of  shapes,
Before  I  assumed  a  consistent  form.'

1  In  weighing  the  evidence  furnished  by  Welsh  poetry,  ascribed  to
Taliessin  and  other  early  bards,  which  treats  of  the  same  group  of
traditions  as  the  Mabinogion,  we  must  bear  in  mind  the  essentially
different  nature  and  purpose  of  the  two  classes  of  literature.  The
prose  texts  are  intended  to  condense  the  tradition,  so  that  it  can  be
conveniently  memorised  by  the  bard  ;  the  poems  are  examples  of  the
use  to  which  he  puts  this  learning.  The  more  obscure,  the  more  far-
fetched, the  more  artificially  allusive  his  handling  of  the  traditions,  the
greater  would  seem  to  have  been  its  merit  in  the  eyes  of  his  contem-
poraries. An  interesting  parallel  is  furnished  by  the  Skaldic  poems,
resting  upon  and  continually  presupposing  a  basis  of  mythico-heroic  tra-
dition, and  Snorre's  Edda,  intended  as  a  handbook  to  that  tradition  for
the  use  of  apprentice  Skalds.  In  the  one  case  as  in  the  other  the  prose  is
a  masterpiece  of  direct  story-telling,  the  verse  a  masterpiece  of  perverted
ingenuity.  In  either  case  the  simple  prose  presupposes  the  artificial
verse,  which  again  presupposes  a  current  oral  tradition  which  cannot
have  differed  substantially  from  the  far  later  prose  version.


TALIESSIN'S   TRANSFORMATIONS     91

He  then  enumerates  them :  a  sword,  a  tear  in  the  air,  the
dullest  of  stars,  a  word  among  letters,  a  book,  the  light  of
lanterns,  an  eagle,  a  coracle  in  the  sea,  a  drop  in  a  shower,
a  sword  in  the  grasp  of  the  hand,  a  shield  in  battle,  a  string
in  a  harp,  sponge  in  the  fire,  wood  in  the  covert.  Con-
tinuing, the  poet  alludes  in  an  incomprehensibly  obscure
style  to  a  number  of  adventures  through  which  he  has
passed,  and  which  seem  to  indicate  some  such  story  as  that
of  Tuan  mac  Cairill,  a  life  prolonged  indefinitely,  mani-
festing itself  in  various  shapes  and  witnessing  the  passing
of  various  races.  Towards  the  end  is  a  more  intelligible
passage : —

'  I  have  been  a  speckled  snake  on  the  hill,
I  have  been  a  viper  in  the  Llyn.
I  have  been  a  bill-hook  crooked  that  cuts,
I  have  been  a  ferocious  spear.'

In  face  of  such  a  self-identification,  not  only  with  forms  of
life,  but  with  forces  and  properties  of  nature,  with  products
of  art  and  craft,  the  word  pantheism  naturally  suggests
itself.     Let  us  glance  at  an  Irish  parallel.

When  the  sons  of  Mil  invaded  Ireland,  they  were  led  by
Mil's  son,  the  poet  Amairgen.  Setting  foot  upon  the  land
he  was  about  to  conquer,  Amairgen  burst  into  song  : —

'  I  am  the  wind  which  blows  o'er  the  sea  ;
I  am  the  wave  of  the  deep  ;
I  am  the  bull  of  seven  battles  ;
I  am  the  eagle  on  the  rock ;
I  am  a  tear  of  the  sun  ;
I  am  the  fairest  of  plants  ;
I  am  a  boar  for  courage  ;
I  am  a  salmon  in  the  water ;
I  am  a  lake  in  the  plain ;
I  am  the  word  of  knowledge  ;


92         TALIESSIN    AND   AMAIRGEN

I  am  the  head  of  the  battle-dealing  spear  ;

I  am  the  god  who  fashions  fire  in  the  head  j1

Who  spreads  light  in  the  gathering  on  the  mountain  ? 2

Who  foretells  the  ages  of  the  moon  ?  3

Who  teaches  the  spot  where  the  sun  rests  ? ' 4

Amairgen,  chief  poet  of  the  race  which  is  to  conquer  the
Tuatha  de  Danann,  the  lords  of  Faery,  and  Taliessin,  chief
of  the  Welsh  poets,  son  of  the  enemy  of  the  goddess  of  the
cauldron,  the  Welsh  counterpart  of  the  Irish  Tuatha  De,
may  be  regarded  as  varying  forms  of  one  mythic  original.
Their  pretensions  are  the  same,  and  have  the  same  basis.
Foes  of  the  wizard  gods  who  shift  their  shape,  who  are  in-
visible at  will,  who  manifest  themselves  under  different
forms,  they,  too,  by  might  of  the  magic  all-compelling
chanted  spell,  have  acquired  like  powers.  It  has  been
pointed  out  by  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  and  Professor
Rhys  agrees  with  him,5  that  the  Irish  version  has  retained
a  more  archaic  form  of  the  conception  underlying  both
poems.  Amairgen  says  'I  am,'  Taliessin  'I  have  been.'
But  what  is  claimed  for  the  poet  is  not  so  much  the  memory
of  past  existences  as  the  capacity  to  assume  all  shapes  at
will ;  this  it  is  which  puts  him  on  a  level  with  and  enables
him  to  overcome  his  superhuman  adversaries.6

1  Fire  =  thought.     Of  man  is  understood.

2  Gloss  :  Who  clears  up  each  question  but  I  ?

3  Gloss  :  Who  tells  you  the  ages  of  the  moon  but  I  ?

4  Gloss  :  Unless  it  be  the  poet  ?

5  Cycle  Myth.  246.     Hibbert  Lectures,  549.

6  In  regard  to  the  date  of  the  poems  ascribed  to  Amairgen  it  must
be  noted  that  they  occur  in  those  MSS.  of  the  Lebor  Gabala,  or
Book  of  Invasions,  which  give  what  may  be  called  the  second  edition
of  that  work,  that  which  makes  Cessair  the  first  immigrant  into  Ireland.
The  poems  are,  however,  heavily  glossed,  and  it  is  almost  certain  that


TUATHA   DE   DANANN    AND   RE-BIRTH    93

We  have  examined  all  the  chief  examples  of  the  re-birth
theme  in  Celtic  literature  which  can  be  decidedly,  or  quasi-
decidedly,  assigned  to  a  period  earlier  than  the  eleventh
century.  The  most  marked  characteristic  of  the  theme
is  its  almost  invariable  association  with  the  Tuatha  de
Danann,  that  is,  with  the  gods  of  ancient  Ireland.  Lug
re-born  as  Cuchulinn,  Etain  re-born  as  Etain,  are  members
of  the  god  clan.  Mongan,  re-birth  of  Finn,  by  one  account,
is  son  of  Manannan,  another  member  of  the  god  clan,
according  to  another  account.  Taliessin,  re-birth  of  a
Welsh  counterpart  of  Finn,  is  son  of  a  Welsh  goddess  akin
to  the  Tuatha  De.  The  Two  Swineherds  are  trusted  servants
of  two  kings  of  the  same  clan.  A  feature  common  to  so
many  forms  must  be  regarded  as  an  essential  element  of
the  conception.  If  this  be  admitted,  we  must  probably
treat  certain  stories  as  secondary  because  they  do  not
contain  this  feature.  Such  are  the  birth-stories  of  Conall
Cernach,1  of  Conchobor,2  of  Aed  Slane,  the  story  of  Tuan
mac  Cairill.  As  regards  this  latter,  the  secondary  nature
of  the  extant  version  is  obvious — it  is  a  case  of  a  current
popular  conception  being  used  for  a  special  didactic  purpose.
As  regards  the  other  stories,  it  is  harder  to  decide ;  once
the  Ulster  saga  cycle  had  been  thoroughly  systematised,
one  might  reasonably  presume  that  the  special  circumstances

they  formed  part  of  the  original  edition  of  the  Lebor  Gabala,  which,
known  as  it  was  to  the  early  ninth  century  Nennius,  must  be  a  product
of  the  eighth  century  at  the  latest.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  poems
are  as  old  substantially  as  the  first  coming  of  the  Goidelic  Celts  to
Ireland.     For  other  questions  raised  by  these  poems  see  infra.

1  Though,  as  already  hinted,  this  may  in  reality  testify  to  an  even
earlier  stage  of  the  conception.

2  Though  here  as  surmised  supra,  there  may  even  have  been  a  form
of  the  incident  involving  god  re-birth.


94     TUATHA    DE   DANANN    AND   RE-BIRTH

attending  the  birth  of  the  chief  personage  of  the  cycle,
Cuchulinn,  would  be  imitated,  so  that  we  may  have  here  an
instance  of  a  feature  common  to  all  mythico-heroic  cycles,
transference  of  characteristics  from  the  chief  to  secondary
personages ;  on  the  other  hand,  the  greater  simplicity  of
the  incident  might  warrant  the  surmise  of  greater  age.  I
believe  the  former  to  be  the  correct  explanation.  The  Aed
Slane  legend  also  betrays  its  secondary  nature;  it  is  the
annexation,  to  the  profit  of  a  Christian  saint,  of  an  originally
pagan  idea.

Now,  the  distinguishing  trait  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann
throughout  Irish  romance,  from  the  most  archaic  sagas
down  to  tales  still  current  among  the  peasantry,  is  their
supremacy  in  magic.  It  is  this  which  enables  them  to
overcome  in  their  strife  with  the  earlier  races  that  disputed
with  them  the  possession  of  Ireland ;  if  they  yield  to  the
sons  of  Mil  it  is  because  these  in  the  person  of  their  poet
leader  have  mastered  the  all-compelling  spell  and  fight  on
an  equality  with  their  wizard  adversaries.  Hence  the
capacity  for  transformation,  for  self-manifestation  in  divers
forms,  the  supreme  test  of  the  wizard's  art,  is  assigned  to
Amairgen  ;  hence  Taliessin,  in  whose  complex  legend  some
of  the  individuality  of  this  ancient  arch  poet-wizard  seems
to  be  represented,  has  at  once  like  pretensions  and  is  a
re-birth.  These  stories  are  secondary  in  this  sense,  that
their  heroes  would  not  be  characterised  as  they  are  had
there  not  previously  existed  in  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  an
ideal  type  of  achievement  to  which  they  must  conform ;
they  are  primary  in  so  far  as  the  retreat  of  the  divine  clan,
which  can  only  be  effected  by  their  being  beaten  at  their
own  game,  is  an  integral  portion  of  the  mythology.

If  association,  whether  directly  or  by  way  of  transference


RE-BIRTH    IN    IRISH   LITERATURE     95

or  by  contrast,  with  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  be  the  salient
mark  of  the  re-birth  conception  in  Irish  mythic  legend,
that  which  characterises  the  forms  under  which  it  has  been
preserved  to  us  is  incoherence,  lack  of  precise  intelligible
presentment.  We  have  to  wrest  the  incident  from  the
sagas  of  Cuchulinn  and  Etain  and  Conchobor ;  not  only
too  are  its  outlines  blurred,  its  lines  confused,  but  we  note
in  the  literary  tradition  a  tendency  to  put  it  on  one  side,
to  replace  it  by  other  legendary  motifs ;  we  discern  dimly
a  certain  embarrassment  in  dealing  with  the  theme.  By
far  the  clearest  and  most  straightforward  handling  is  that
in  the  Two  Swineherds,  to  be  accounted  for,  if  I  am  right
in  my  surmise,  by  the  fact  that  it  was  from  the  outset  a
simpler,  more  popular  version  of  the  theme,  and  that  the
adaptation  necessary  to  fit  it  into  the  Ulster  heroic  cycle  only
involved  animal  and  not  human  re-birth.

A  conception,  thus,  very  old  in  itself,  having  its  roots
deep  down  in  an  early  mythology,  a  conception  which,  as
it  comes  before  us  in  Irish  romance,  is  in  the  act  of  fading,
of  replacing  significant  by  insignificant  traits,  of  yielding
the  field  to  other  conceptions — such,  to  judge  it  from  the
evidence  set  forth  in  the  preceding  pages,  is  the  old  Irish
conception  of  re-birth.

If,  apart  from  the  dominant  element  of  the  conception
and  the  history  of  the  forms  in  which  it  is  embodied,  we
consider  the  machinery  by  means  of  which  it  is  expressed,
we  note  the  crude  materialism  of  the  legends.  In  comment-
ing upon  the  story  of  the  Two  Swineherds,  Professor
Windisch  says  :  '  Wenn  in  der  Mongansage  Cailte  von
Mongan  sagt  dass  dieser  der  wiedergekommene  Finn  sei,  so
konnte  dies  an  die  buddhistischen  Jatakas  erinnern,  allein
die   indische   Seelenwanderungslehre   ist   doch  wesentlich


96  NATURE   OF    DOCTRINE

anders,  denn  sie  ist  der  systematisierte  Causalnexus  und
umfasst  alle  Wesen,  wahrend  in  der  irischen  Sage  nur
einzelnen  Personen,  die  mythischen  Ursprungs  sind  oder
derer  sich  der  Mythus  bemachtigt  hat,  verschiedene
Existenzen  zugeschrieben  werden,  und  zwar  ohne  dass
dabei  die  Idee  der  Vergeltung  scharf  hervortrete.'  This
statement,  the  correctness  of  which,  as  far  as  it  goes,  I
have  endeavoured  to  prove  in  the  foregoing  pages,  is
however  not  sufficiently  precise  or  restrictive.  It  is  not
enough  to  say  that  the  idea  of  retribution  is  not  insisted
upon  in  the  Irish  stories ;  it  is  in  fact  entirely  absent  from
them.  It  is  not  enough  to  point  out  that  the  Indian
doctrine  of  soul-transmigration  applies  to  all  beings  instead
of  to  a  favoured  few  in  Ireland ;  it  should  be  noted  that
the  Irish  doctrine,  if  doctrine  it  may  be  called,  has  no
apparent  connection  with  any  belief  in  a  soul  as  distinct
from  the  body,  or  in  a  life  led  by  the  soul  after  the  death
of  the  body.  With  the  exception  of  the  poems  connected
with  Amairgen  and  Taliessin,  all  the  forms  of  the  re-birth
conception  are  innocent  of  metaphysical  colouring.  In
respect  of  this,  as  in  respect  to  the  Irish  Vision  of  a  Happy
Otherworld,  the  impression  left  on  our  minds  by  a  pre-
liminary survey  of  the  entire  mass  of  mythic  romance  is
that  it  is  the  outcome  of  no  religious  or  philosophical
impulse.

Before  passing  on  to  inquire  if  we  must  regard  this
belief  as  belonging  to  the  pagan  stratum  of  Irish  thought,
or  if  it  must  be  explained  as  a  loan  from  Christian  classic
culture,  I  must  note  one  chance  and  casual  reference  which
would  seem  to  indicate  how  widely  it  was  spread  and  what
profound  influence  it  exercised  :

Cuchulinn    had   reached    manhood   and   was   still    un-


CUCHULINN'S   RE-BIRTH  97

married.  The  warriors  of  Ulster  were  doubly  uneasy  about
this.  In  the  first  place,  they  feared  for  their  wives  so  long
as  the  irresistible  young  hero  was  free,  and  in  the  second,
they  desired  that  his  supreme  martial  virtues  should  be
perpetuated — they  urged  the  hero  to  wed  because  they
knew  '  that  his  re-birth  would  be  of  himself.' x

1  '  The  Wooing  of  Emer,'  Prof.  Meyer's  translation,  Arch.  Review,
i.  70.


VOL.  II.


CHAPTER    XV

THE  RELATION  OF  IRELAND  TO  CHRISTIAN  AND
CLASSIC  ANTIQUITY

The  possible  influence  of  Christianity  upon  the  Irish  re-birth  legends ;  must
be  discarded  ;  the  Conall  Cernach  and  Aed  Slane  birth-stories — The
alleged  Irish  origin  of  Erigena's  pantheism  ;  must  be  rejected — The
classical  statements  respecting  the  Pythagoreanism  of  the  Celts  ;  their
import,  value,  the  historic  conditions  under  which  they  took  shape,
the  legitimate  deductions  to  be  drawn  from  them — Necessity  for
studying  the  Greek  conceptions  out  of  which  Pythagoras  formed  his
doctrine.

The  leading  examples  of  the  re-birth  theme  in  early  Irish
mythico-romantic  literature  have  now  been  laid  before  the
reader,  and  the  conclusions  which  may  fairly  be  drawn
from  them  have  been  set  forth.  Searching  for  analogies
for  a  possible  origin,  we  naturally  turn  in  the  first  place  to
Christianity  and  its  doctrines.  The  central  incident  of
the  Christian  scheme,  the  Incarnation,  weighty  with  con-
sequences of  such  incalculable  import,  in  itself  striking,
picturesque,  and  presented,  even  in  the  canonical  gospels,
with  sufficient  realism  to  enable  its  apprehension  by  the
minds  of  a  race  in  the  culture  stage  of  the  early  Irish,
might  well  be  expected  to  have  exercised  a  profound  and
far-reaching  influence  upon  their  imaginations.  There  are
good  reasons,  as  will  presently  be  seen,  not  only  for  dis-
pensing with,  but  for  decisively  discarding  Christian  agency
in  the  formation  of  these  Irish  legends.  Before  adducing
them,  the  problem  may  profitably  be  discussed  on  general

98


CHRISTIAN    INFLUENCE  99

grounds.  Is  it  then,  or  is  it  not,  likely  that  Christian
literature  should  be  the  source  of  the  stories  set  forth  in
the  preceding  chapters?  I  italicise  the  word  likely,  as
likelihood  is  all  we  can  attain  in  such  an  investigation,
and  whether  or  not  we  are  held  to  have  attained  it  depends
less  upon  technical  knowledge  of  Irish  or  Christian  litera-
ture than  upon  considerations  of  a  general  common-sense
character.

Lest  I  be  taxed  with  understating  the  case  for  Christian
influence,  I  would  point  out  that  the  canonical  writings
are  of  far  less  importance  in  this  connection  than  the
apocryphal  and  hagiological  literature  produced  in  such
profusion  during  the  first  six  centuries  of  Christianity.
Take  the  very  incident  of  the  Incarnation ;  the  restraint,
the  dignity,  the  grace  of  the  Gospel  narrative  are  far  from
being  followed  in  writings  representing  the  more  popular
side  of  Christian  teaching.  From  these,  indeed,  instances
might  be  cited  representing  a  level  of  feeling  and  fancy
scarce  higher  than  that  of  the  Irish  sagas.  The  question
raised  above  would  probably  be  met  by  most  investigators
with  an  uncompromising  negative  if  comparison  were
restricted  to  the  New  Testament.  The  first  chapter  of
St.  Matthew  is  hardly  likely  to  have  originated  the  birth-
story  of  Cuchulinn.  But  hesitation  is  legitimate  in  the
face  of  so  many  popular  Christian  texts,  all  vouched  for  at
a  far  earlier  date  than  the  Irish  legends,  and  for  the  most
part,  probably,  if  not  certainly,  known  in  Christian  Ireland.
Nevertheless,  a  candid  and  dispassionate  survey  of  the
extant  Irish  texts,  together  with  due  consideration  of  the
way  in  which  they  have  come  down  to  us,  must,  I  believe,
apart  from  other  evidence,  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the
influence  of  Christianity,  if  exercised  at  all,   was  of  the


ioo  CHRISTIAN    INFLUENCE

slightest  character.  In  considering  the  Christian  texts  we
must  bear  in  mind  the  conclusions  forced  upon  us  by  study
of  the  Happy  Otherworld  conception.  There,  too,  we
noted  scant  kinship  between  the  Irish  and  the  canonical
Christian  account,  whereas  the  points  of  contact  between
Ireland  and  popular  Christian  literature  were  many  and
marked.  But  this  arose,  as  we  saw,  from  the  assimilation
by  Christianity  of  older  material.  The  same  possibility  in
the  case  of  the  re-birth  conception  must  at  least  be  admitted.
It  is,  however,  upon  the  occurrence  of  the  theme  as  a
whole  in  Irish  legend  that  I  lay  stress  in  arguing  against
Christian  influence.  In  no  case  is  it  found  associated  with
a  personage  of  the  national  mythology  who  might  be  set  up
as  a  possible  rival  to  Christ ;  there  is  no  hint  here,  as  in
certain  portions  of  the  Scandinavian  mythology — e.g.  the
Balder  myth — of  a  possible  loan  from  the  armoury  of  the
alien  faith,  made  with  the  intent  of  more  effectually  com-
bating it.  Nor,  indeed,  does  the  history  of  Ireland  record
any  such  persistent  and  conscious  struggle  between  the  old
and  new,  the  native  and  foreign  faiths,  as  is  known  to  have
been  waged  in  the  North.  And  yet,  seeing  that  associa-
tion with  the  members  of  the  pagan  Irish  pantheon,  the
Tuatha  de  Danann,  is  characteristic  of  the  re-birth  theme,
opportunity  was  afforded,  had  such  been  desired,  for
trumping  the  Christian  ace  by  the  elaboration  of  an  Irish
divine  virgin-born  being,  who  could  be  successfully  opposed
to  the  foreign  deity.  The  entire  absence  of  even  the
faintest  attempt  in  this  direction  is  to  my  mind  proof  con-
clusive that  pagan  Ireland  did  not  borrow  directly  and
deliberately  from  the  incoming  creed.  Again,  the  con-
fused, fragmentary  nature  of  the  traditions  themselves,  the
evident  effort  revealed  by  the  texts  to  rationalise  or  discard


CHRISTIAN    INFLUENCE  101

the  features  of  the  re-birth  theme,  point  in  the  same  direc-
tion. It  is  only  what  might  fairly  be  expected  from  our
knowledge  of  the  introduction  of  Christianity  into  Ireland,
a  task  achieved  with  far  greater  tenderness  than  elsewhere
for  the  existing  native  beliefs,  with  far  greater  accommoda-
tion to  the  social  organisation  of  the  race  to  be  converted.
Whether  the  shamrock  incident  actually  occurred  or  not,
the  story  certainly  yields  a  glimpse  of  the  methods  by
which  Christian  dogma  was  recommended  to  the  native
theologian.  Is  it  too  much  to  assert  that  the  first  Christian
missionaries  would  probably  appeal  to  the  existence  of
birth-stories,  such  as  those  told  of  Cuchulinn  or  Conall,  as
evidence  for  the  miraculous  birth  of  Christ  ?  Later,  when
the  faith  was  firmly  established,  a  different  feeling  would
undoubtedly  form  itself;  stories  in  any  way  parallel  with
the  great  mystery  of  Christianity  would  come  to  wear  an
uncanny  aspect ;  unconsciously  they  would  tend  to  be
minimised,  to  be  replaced  by  other  versions.  The  orthodox
Irish  monk-antiquary  of  the  tenth-eleventh  centuries  would
doubtless  regard  such  stories  much  in  the  same  way  as  does
the  orthodox  believer  of  to-day  stories  of  virgin-birth  in
the  sacred  records  of  other  than  the  Christian  religion ;  his
attitude  would  be  the  same — the  least  said  the  soonest
mended.  To  this  unconscious  glossing,  rationalising,
eliminating  attitude  on  the  part  of  the  class  to  which,
materially,  we  owe  the  preservation  of  Irish  mythic  romance,
I  attribute  the  features  characterising  the  texts  in  which
the  re-birth  theme  is  embodied.

In  one  instance  we  can  test  directly  the  strength  of  these
general  considerations.  The  birth-stories  of  Aed  Slane
and  of  Conall  Cernach  are  beyond  doubt  variants  of  one
incident,  differentiated  solely  by  the  fact  that  the  miracle  is


io2  ERIGENA'S   PANTHEISM

ascribed  in  the  one  case  to  Christian,  in  the  other  to  pagan
agency.  The  Christian  story  is  probably  the  older  of  the
two  in  so  far  as  its  present  form  is  concerned ;  it  was  cer-
tainly written  down,  as  we  have  it,  not  later  than  the  early
eleventh  century,  whereas  the  other  story  is  part  of  a  com-
pilation probably  fifty,  possibly  a  hundred  years  later.  The
age  of  this  particular  bit  of  the  compilation  can  only  be
guessed  at,  nor  is  it  even  known  if  it  was  derived  from
written  or  oral  sources.  Thus  all  the  outward  conditions
are  favourable  to  the  thesis  of  Christian  priority.  But  see
to  what  conclusions  this  leads.  We  must  imagine  a
mediaeval  story-teller,  at  a  period  when  Ireland  had  been
Christian  for  centuries,  gifted  with  sufficient  critical  and
historical  imagination  to  adapt  a  Christian  story  to  a  pagan
hero  by  careful  elimination  of  every  Christian  feature,
whilst,  as  may  be  seen  by  a  reference  to  the  tale  itself,
printed  supra,  p.  75,  'to  give  verisimilitude  to  a  bald  and
unconvincing  narrative,'  he  artfully  inserted  casual  remarks
about  pagan  baptism.  The  veriest  tiro  in  mediaeval  litera-
ture knows  that  this  could  never  have  happened,  and  no
candid  student  who  reads  the  two  stories  together  but  will
admit  the  one  to  be  simply  a  Christian  adaptation  (the
Christian  veneer  being  thin  in  the  extreme)  of  an  incident
preserved  by  the  other  in  a  pre-Christian  form.

The  Pantheism  of  Erigena.

Before  quitting  the  ground  of  a  priori  argument,  and
citing  the  facts  which  effectually  prove  the  contention  I
have  been  urging,  I  would  glance  for  a  moment  at  an
alleged  point  of  contact  between  Irish  pre-Christian  and
Christian  doctrine.  At  first  blush  the  point  may  seem
remote  from  the  purpose  of  this  work  ;    it  will  be  found,


ERIGENA'S   PANTHEISM  103

however,  to  stand  in  unexpected  but  intimate  connection
with  it.

The  ninth  century  is  a   decisive   turning-point   in   the
history  of  Western  religious  thought ;  it  witnessed  marked
elaboration  of  dogma,  and,  in  especial,  the  birth  of  that
philosophy  of  the  schools  which  was  to  furnish  the  in-
tellectual sustenance  of  Christendom  for  ages.     The  chief
mover  in  these  great  changes,  the  intellectual  giant  who
dominates  the  century,  was  John  the  Irishman,  known  as
Erigena.     In  his  own  age  he  was  vehemently  accused  of
heresy ;  at  a  later  period  he  fell  under  the  condemnation
of  the  Church,  and  works  of  his  were  doomed  to  the  public
fire.      And  still   the  controversy  rages  whether   this  con-
demnation was  justified  or  not,  whether  Erigena  is  to  be
reckoned   among    the   great    doctors   or   the    great   false
teachers.      Both    sides   fortify   themselves   with    citations
from  his  works,  nor  is  it  difficult  by  judicious  selection  to
triumphantly   demonstrate    either    his    orthodoxy   or    his
heterodoxy.      The  reason    is  apparent  when   his  work  is
carefully  considered.     A  logician,  as  acute  and  subtle  as
any  of  the  schoolmen,  he  accepted  for  his  scheme  of  the
universe,  a  metaphysical  basis  irreconcilable  in  reality  with
the   fundamental   postulates   of  Christianity.      He   strove
perpetually  to  bring  the  superstructure  reared  upon  this
basis  into  accord  with  those  elements  of  the  faith  which,
logically,  he  should  have  excluded,  but  to  which  emotion-
ally and  morally  he  was  attached.     Hence,  at  the  decisive
point  of  the  argument,  a  frequent  stopping  short,  or  the
interposition  of  a  supersubtle  gloss,  by  which  its  essential
unorthodoxy  may  be  concealed.     In  using  the  latter  word
I  impute  no  wilful  double-dealing.       Erigena  was  clever
enough,  had  he  wished  it,  to  convey  an  impression  really


104  ERIGENA'S    PANTHEISM

clear  though  apparently  obscure.  His  position,  however,
though  apparently  clear,  is  in  reality  ambiguous,  by  reason
of  his  equal  allegiance  to  two  mutually  exclusive  doctrinal
schemes.  A  layman  like  myself,  without  dogmatic  pre-
possessions, can  have  little  doubt  that  Erigena's  opponents
were  in  the  right,  and  that  the  logical  consequences  of  his
philosophy  are  fatal  to  the  orthodox  Christian  scheme.
His  great  achievement  was  to  make  current  in  the  West
the  mystic  philosophy  of  the  pseudo-Dionysius  the  Areo-
pagite,  and  his  leading  Greek  commentator,  Maximus  the
Confessor,  developing  and  elaborating  the  whole  into  a
comprehensive  scheme  of  the  universe.  But  the  pseudo-
Dionysian  writings  are  in  the  main  Neo-Platonic  specula-
tions arbitrarily  and  fancifully  interpreted  in  a  Christian
sense.  The  basis  of  these  speculations  is  pantheistic  ;  the
resulting  philosophy  of  Erigena  is  likewise  pantheistic,
strive  as  he  did  to  evade  the  consequences  of  his  own
reasoning,  strive  as  his  apologists  may  to  deny  it  by  insist-
ing upon  his  evasions.  Now,  as  we  saw  in  the  last  chapter,
there  exists,  both  in  Irish  and  Welsh,  a  body  of  utterances,
ascribed  in  either  case  to  a  magician  bard,  which  certainly
wear  a  pantheistic  aspect.  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville
quotes  in  his  Cycle  Mythologique  Irlandais  certain  passages
from  Erigena,  and  continues : — '  Telle  est,  au  neuvieme
siecle,  la  doctrine  enseignee  en  France  par  l'lrlandais
Jean  Scot.  C'est  la  doctrine  que  l'epopee  mythologique
irlandaise  met  dans  la  bouche  d'Amairgen,  quand  elle  lui
fait  dire,  "  Je  suis  le  dieu  qui  met  dans  la  tete  (de  l'homme)
le  feu  (de  la  pensee),  je  suis  la  vague  de  l'ocean,  je  suis
le  murmure  des  fiots,  etc."  Le  file,  le  savant  chez  lequel  la
science,  c'est  a  dire  l'idee  divine,  s'est  manifestee,  et  qui
devient  ainsi   la  personification  de  cette  idee,  peut,  sans


ERIGENA'S   PANTHEISM  105

orgueil,  se  proclamer  identique  a  l'etre  unique  et  universel
dont  tous  les  etres  secondaires  ne  sont  que  les  apparences
ou  les  manifestations.  Sa  propre  existence  se  confond
avec  celle  de  ces  etres  secondaires.' x

Such  a  conclusion  seems  to  me  unwarranted.  There  is
no  necessity  for  seeking  the  origin  of  Erigena's  pantheism
elsewhere  than  in  his  Greek  sources.  As  a  simple  matter
of  fact,  the  very  passages  upon  which  M.  dArbois  relies
are  definitely  connected  with  the  teaching  of  the  Areo-
pagite  by  his  Irish  expounder.  Where  a  cause  suffices  it  is
not  advisable  to  cast  about  for  another.  Moreover,  I  feel
by  no  means  sure  that  M.  dArbois  does  not  read  into  the
sayings  attributed  to  the  spell-mighty  soothsayer  of  the
Tuatha  De  more  than  they  mean.  The  question  whether
they  do  really  embody  even  the  crudest  form  of  a  doctrine
properly  to  be  styled  pantheism  is  fraught  with  difficulties.
For  the  present  I  do  not  propose  to  attempt  an  answer.
Again,  it  is  evident  that  M.  dArbois  begs  the  question  of
the  age  and  origin  of  the  Irish-Welsh  texts.  So  far  from
being  a  possible  source  of  Erigena's  teaching,  they  might
be  claimed  as  offshoots.  It  is  possible  that  M.  d'Arbois
did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  state,  much  less  to  refute,
a  theory  which  is,  indeed,  inadmissible,  and  which  I  only
mention  to  reject.  Not  for  one  moment  can  it  be  admitted
that  speculations  such  as  Erigena's,  cast  in  an  abstract  but
definitely  Christian  mould,  could  originate  the  sayings
ascribed  to  Amairgen,  found  in  the  Lebor  Gabdla,  compiled
in  the  eighth,  and  revised  in  the  late  tenth  century,  or  to
Taliessin  in  the  Book  of  Taliessin,  many  portions  of  which,
so  far  as  their  redaction  is  concerned,  must  go  back  to  the
eleventh  century.  It  is  inconceivable,  even  if  the  dates
1  Cycle  Mythologique,  p.  249.


106  ERIGENA'S    PANTHEISM

were  more  favourable,  that  the  one  species  of  literature
could  have  given  rise  to  the  other.1

If,  then,  both  hypotheses  are  to  be  rejected,  that  which
derives  Erigena's  pantheism  from  pre-Christian  Irish  doc-
trine, and  that  which  detects  in  his  writings  the  source  of
the  quasi-pantheistic  utterances  found  in  certain  Irish  and
Welsh  texts  of  the  early  Middle  Ages,  what  remains?
Little  more,  I  think,  than  this :  Erigena  may  possibly
have  inherited  a  tendency  towards  pantheism,  or  derived
it  from  early  hearing  of  old  tales  and  poems  fancifully  inter-
preted by  his  logical  and  mystical  intellect,  and  this  may
have  facilitated  his  reception  and  advocacy  of  the  pseudo-
Dionysian  writings.  To  speak  of  an  identity  of  doctrine  is
to  go  far  beyond  what  the  evidence  allows.

But  if  direct  connection  be  set  aside,  an  indirect  connec-
tion of  an  extremely  suggestive  kind  may  be  hinted  at.
Erigena  founded  himself  upon  a  Christian  interpretation
of  the  Neo-Platonists,  who  in  their  turn  worked  into  their
reconstruction  of  the  Platonic  scheme  many  additional
elements  from  those  Orphic-Pythagorean  doctrines  of  which
Plato  himself  had  made  such  far-reaching  use.  In  especial
the  pantheism  associated  vaguely  and  crudely  with  these
doctrines  seems  to  have  attracted  the  Neo-Platonists.

Thus  at  an  early  stage  of  our  investigation  into  the
re-birth  theme  we  are  brought  face  to  face  with  that  body
of  Greek  belief,  half-magical,  half-philosophical,  at  once
mystic  and  realistic,  the  importance  of  which  came  out  so
prominently  in  the  first  section  of  this  essay.     For,  as  will

1  A  popular  account  of  Erigena  by  Mr.  W.  Larminie  may  be  found
in  the  Contemporary  Review,  March  1897.  Mr.  Larminie  accepts  too
readily,  in  my  opinion,  M.  d'Arbois'  reference  of  Erigena's  pantheism
to  Celtic  sources.


CLASSICAL   EVIDENCE  107

be  recollected,  it  was  through  the  medium  of  these  doctrines
and  of  the  mysteries  in  which  they  were  embodied  that
Greek  eschatology  assumed  a  shape  which  Christianity  took
over  with  little  alteration.


The  Classical  Evidence  respecting  Celtic  Doctrine.

I  now  proceed  to  cite  the  facts  which  render  the  hypo-
thesis of  Christian  origin  to  account  for  the  re-birth  theme
in  archaic  Irish  literature  unnecessary,  nay,  which  compel
us  to  put  it  aside  as  certainly  false.

We  learn  as  a  rule  very  little  concerning  the  beliefs  of  the
Celtic  races  from  the  Greeks  and  Latins  with  whom  they
came  so  often  and  so  much  in  contact.  But  in  regard  to
this  very  point  we  have  a  comparatively  extensive  body  of
testimony  to  the  existence  of  a  belief  which  reminded  the
ancients  of  the  Pythagorean  doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  or
transmigration  of  souls.

The  texts  follow  in  chronological  order  as  far  as  can  be
ascertained.1

(1)  Between  82  and  60  B.C.  Alexander  Polyhistor  wrote  a
work  entitled  Pythagoric  Symbols.  A  passage  of
this  lost  treatise  quoted  by  Clement  of  Alexandria 2
is  to  the  effect  that  Pythagoras  was  a  disciple  of  the
Galatians  (the  Celts  settled  in  Asia  Minor)  and  the
Brahmins.

1  These  texts  have  been  previously  discussed  by,  inter  alios,  Jules
Leflocq,  Etudes  de  Mythologie  Celtique,  M.  Henri  Gaidoz,  Mytlwlogie
Gauloise,  and  M.  d'Arbois  de  Jubainville,  alike  in  his  Introduction  a
titude  de  la  Literature  Celtique,  and  in  his  Cycle  Mytkologique.

2  Printed,  Mullach,  Frag.  Hist.  Graec,  iii.  239.


108    C^SAR- DIODORUS  —  TIMAGENES

(2)  About  50  B.C.  Julius  Caesar  wrote  as  follows  about  the

druids,  a  name  first  used  by  him  of  the  sacerdotal
class  among  the  Celtic  races  inhabiting  the  present
France.  After  stating  that  the  druids  were  exempt
from  military  service,  that  their  doctrines  were  sup-
posed to  be  derived  from  Britain,  that  their  instruc-
tion was  purely  oral  and  lasted  in  some  cases  for
upwards  of  twenty  years,  he  continues :  '  In  primis
hoc  volunt  persuadere,  non  interire  animas,  sed  ab
aliis  post  mortem  transire  ad  alios,  atque  hoc  maxime
ad  virtutem  excitari  putant,  metu  mortis  neglecto.
Multa  praeterea  de  sideribus  atque  de  eorum  motu,
de  mundi  et  terrarum  magnitudine,  de  rerum  natura,
de  deorum  immortalium  vi  ac  potestate  disputant
et  juventuti  tradunt.' 1

(3)  About  40  B.C.  Diodorus  of  Sicily  wrote  as  follows  of

the  druids :  '  Among  them  the  doctrine  of  Pytha-
goras had  force,  namely,  that  the  souls  of  men  are
undying,  and  that  after  achieving  their  term  of
existence  they  pass  into  another  body.  Accordingly,
at  the  burial  of  the  dead,  some  cast  letters,  addressed
to  their  departed  relatives,  upon  the  funeral  pile,
under  the  belief  that  the  dead  will  read  them  in  the
next  world.' 2

(4)  The  Greek  historian  Timagenes  wrote  his  History  of

Gaul  during  the  reign  of  Augustus,  probably  about
20  B.C.  The  original  has  perished,  but  Ammianus
Marcellinus  quotes  him  to  the  following  effect  in  a
passage  describing  the  origin  of  Gauls,  and  the
organisation  of  their  learned  men  in  three  classes,
bards,  euhages,  and  druids :  '  Inter  eos  druides
1  De  Bello  Gallico,  lib.  vi.  c.  xiv.  a  Book  v.  ch.  28.


STRABO  —  VAL.    MAX.  — MELA        109

ingeniis  celsiores,  ut  auctoritas  Pythagorae  decrevit,
sodaliciis  adstricti  consortiis,  quaestionibus  occult-
arum  rerum  altarumque  erecti  sunt,  et  despectantes
humana,  pronuntiarunt  animas  immortales.' l

(5)  Strabo,  writing  about  the  year  19  a.d.,  mentions  the

studies  of  the  druids  both  in  natural  science  and
in  moral  philosophy.  Popular  belief,  he  says,  urged
liberality  towards  them  as  ensuring  abundant  har-
vests. He  adds,  that  they,  like  other  people,  taught
the  immortality  of  souls  and  of  the  world,  but  held
that  fire  and  water  would  one  day  prevail  over  all
things.2

(6)  Valerius  Maximus,  writing  about  the  year  20  a.d.,  thus

alludes  to  the  druids:  '  Persuasum  habuerunt  animas
hominum  immortales  esse.  Dicerem  stultos  nisi  idem
bracati  sensissent  quod  palliatus  Pythagoras  credidit '
(vi.  vi.  10).  'They  would  fain  have  us  believe  that
the  souls  of  men  are  immortal,  f- 1  should  be  tempted  —
to  call  these  breeches-wearing  gentry  fools,  were  not
their  doctrine  the  same  as  that  of  the  mantle-clad
Pythagoras.'  In  the  preceding  sentence  Valerius
alludes  to  a  belief  likewise  noted  by  Mela  :  '  Money
loans  are  given  to  be  repaid  in  the  next  world,
because  they  hold  men's  souls  to  be  immortal.'

(7)  Pomponius  Mela  wrote  a  treatise  on  geography,  which

he  finished  about  the  year  44  A.d.  He  speaks  as
follows  of  the  Gauls  and  their  druids :  '  Gentes
superbae  superstitiosae,  aliquando  etiam  immanes
adeo    ut    hominem    optimam   et    gratissimam    diis

1  Amra.  Marc.  xv.  9  (Gardthausen:s  edition,  i.  p.  69.  Gardthausen
reads  drasidae  instead  of  druides) ;  and  cf.  Mullach,  Frag.  Hist.  Grace,
iii.  323.  2  Strabo,  book  iv.  ch.  4.  p.  197.


no  POMPONIUS    MELA

victimam  crederent  .  .  .  Habent  tamen  magistros
sapientiae  druidas.  Hi  terrae  mundique  magni-
tudinem  et  formam,  motus  coeli  ac  siderum,  et,
quid  dii  velint,  scire  profitentur.  Docent  multa
nobilissimos  gentis  clam  et  diu,  vicenis  annis,  aut
in  specu  aut  in  abditis  saltibus.  Unum  ex  his
quae  praecipiunt  in  vulgus  effluxit,  videlicet  ut
forent  ad  bella  meliores,  aeternas  esse  animas,
vitamque  alteram  ad  Manes.' 1

Mela  likewise  alludes  to  the  Gaulish  custom  of
burning  the  dead,  and  confirms  Valerius  Maximus
in  regard  to  the  funereal  beliefs  and  practices  of  the
Celts  of  his  day : — '  Business  accounts  and  pay-
ments of  debts  were  passed  on  to  the  next  world,
and  there  were  some  who  of  their  own  free-will  cast
themselves  upon  the  funeral  piles  of  their  relatives,
expecting  to  live  along  with  them.' 2  Both  Valerius
and  Mela  are  describing  the  practice  and  feeling  of
a  people  far  more  civilised  than  when,  one  hundred
to  one  hundred  and  fifty  years  previously,  it  had
attracted  the  notice  of  classical  observers.
(8)  Lucan  in  the  Pharsalia,  written  about  60-70  a.d.,  has  a

1  Book  iii.  ch.  ii.  At  first  sight  Mela  seems  to  be  simply  repeating
the  statements  of  Csesar  ;  he  adds,  however,  to  the  latter's  account  the
fact  that  in  his  day  the  druids  had  to  carry  on  their  teaching  secretly.
This  is  in  accordance  with  historic  fact,  as  we  know  that  from  the
time  of  Tiberius  onwards  severe  laws  were  passed  by  the  Roman  em-
perors against  the  exercise  by  the  druids  of  their  religion.  If  Mela
were  simply  transcribing  Csesar,  we  should  hardly  find  this  insistence
upon  the  secret  and  retired  character  of  druidic  teaching.

-  Itaque  cum  mortuis  cremant  ac  defodiunt  apta  viventibus.  Olim
negotiorum  ratio  etiam  et  exactio  crediti  deferebatur  ad  inferos,
erantque  qui  in  rogos  suorum  velut  una  victuri  libenter  inmitterent.


LUCAN'S   TESTIMONY  in

famous  and  often  quoted  passage  about  the  druids,
which  Mr.  Matthew  Arnold  has  thus  rendered :  '  To
you  only  is  given  knowledge  or  ignorance,  which-
ever it  be,  of  the  gods  and  the  powers  of  heaven.
From  you  we  learn  that  the  bourne  of  man's  ghost
is  not  the  senseless  grave,  not  the  pale  realm  of  the
monarch  below ;  in  another  world  his  spirit  survives
still ;  death,  if  your  lore  be  true,  is  but  the  passage
to  enduring  life.'     {Celtic  Literature,  p.  42.)

This  version  by  no  means  gives  the  full  force  of
the  Latin.     Lucan  says  :

.     .     .     regit  idem  spiritus  artus,
Orbe  alio.     .     .     .  (Pharsalia,  i.  455"56)

i.e.  the  same  spirit  animates  a  body  in  another
world.  It  is  thus  not  merely  a  question  of  the
spirit's  surviving,  but  of  the  renewed  linking  of  its
fate  with  a  body.     Thus,  as  the  passage  continues  :

longae,  canitis  si  cognita,  vitae
Mors  media  est,     .     .     .

death  is  the  centre,  not  the  finish,  of  the  round  of
life.  The  continuation  of  the  passage  accounts  for
the  doctrine  in  the  same  way  as  Caesar  and
Pomponius  Mela  :

Certe  populi  quos  despicit  Arctos
Felices  errore  suo,  quos  ille  timorum
Maximus  haud  urget  leti  metus.     Inde  ruendi
In  ferrum  mens  prona  viris,  animaeque  capaces
Mortis,  et  ignavum  rediturae  parcere  vitae.

'  Happy  the  folk  upon  whom  the  Bear  looks  down,
happy  in  this  error,  whom  of  fears  the  greatest  moves


ii2  IMPORT   OF   EVIDENCE

not,  the  dread  of  death.  Hence  their  warrior's
heart  hurls  them  against  the  steel,  hence  their  ready
welcome  of  death,  for  who  were  coward  enough  to
grudge  a  life  sure  of  its  return.'

The  precise  weight  to  be  attached  to  this  evidence  re-
quires most  careful  determination.  In  the  first  place,  it
should  be  noted  that  two  distinct  conceptions  of  what
happens  to  man,  or  rather  to  a  special  element  of  the
complex  entity  man,  after  death  are  indicated.  Certain
passages  merely  note  that  the  belief,  familiar  to  the  classic
observers  in  their  own  religions,  as  well  as  from  observation
of  barbarous  nations  other  than  the  Celts,  in  the  existence
of  another  world  in  which  men  lived  a  life  not  too  dis-
similar from  the  earthly  one,  was  held  by  the  Celts  with
peculiar  vividness.  Other  passages  again,  in  especial  that
of  Caesar,  definitely  formulate  a  belief  in  metempsychosis ;
the  soul  of  man,  instead  of  taking  up  its  abode  in  another
world,  remains  in  this  world,  but  inhabits  another  body.
These  passages,  explicit  as  they  seem,  can  undoubtedly  be
explained  away;  although  they  reach  us  from  various
sources,  they  are  in  reality,  it  may  be  urged,  echoes  of  one
original,  due,  probably,  to  the  Greek  Posidonius,  who
travelled  in  southern  Gaul  at  the  beginning  of  the  first
century  B.C. ;  the  guild  organisation  of  the  druids  (a  touch
preserved  by  Timagenes,  who  almost  certainly  used
Posidonius),  recalled  to  him  the  Pythagorean  confrater-
nities, and  association  of  ideas  led  him  to  impart  a  Pytha-
gorean colouring  to  the  druidic  beliefs  concerning  the
other  life.  Or  again,  it  may  be  said  that  Caesar's  assertion
concerning  the  druids,  '  hoc  volunt  persuadere,'  '  they  try  to
convince  men  of  this,'  proves  that  the  doctrine  he  ascribes


IMPORT   OF    EVIDENCE  113

to  them  does  not  belong  to  the  Celts  at  large,  but  solely  to
the  Druid  class.     Give  their  due  weight  to  these  considera-
tions,   yet    I    hold    that    enough    remains    to    show   that
some  form  of  a  belief  in  metempsychosis  and  re-birth  was
current  among  Celtic  races  of  the  Continent  in  pre-Christian
times.   Where  belief  existed,  myth  may  safely  be  postulated.
That  the  insular  Celts  shared,  to  some  extent  at  all  events,
the  beliefs  and  practices  of  their  continental  kinsmen  is
likely,  a  priori,  and  is  positively  asserted  by  Caesar.1     And
if  we  bear  in  mind  the  inherent  difficulties  which  beset  any
attempt  to  explain  the  Irish  mythic  legends  by  reference  to
Christian  literature,  we  are  forced  to  the  conclusion  that
they  have  their  roots  in  a  mental  state  akin  to  that  of  the
continental  Celts  as  described  by  classical  writers  of  the
century  before  Christ.     If  the  classical  evidence   proves
nothing  else,  it  surely  proves  the  possibility  of  Celtic  pre-
Christian  re-birth  legends.     Whether  it  does  or  does  not
prove  more  must  now  be  examined.

The  more  important  of  the  classical  texts  just  cited  belong
to  the  hundred  years  preceding  the  birth  of  Christ.  Their
evidence  may  be  considered  from  two  points  of  view  :  that
of  the  Celtic  tribes,  probably  inhabitants  of  southern  Gaul
and  northern  Italy,  which  formed  the  subject  of  Graeco-
Roman  observation,  and  that  of  the  Graeco-Roman  beliefs,
which  were  used  as  a  standard  by  which  to  roughly  charac-
terise the  barbarian  creed.  As  regards  the  first  point  there
is  no  prima  facie  justification  for  carrying  back  the  features
of  Celtic  belief  disclosed  by  the  texts  much  beyond  the

1  Caesar's  statement  that  the  druidic  doctrine  was  believed  to  have
been  discovered 'in  Britain,  and  thence  brought  into  Gaul  (vi.  c.  xiii.) —
Disciplina  in  Britannia  reperta  atque  in  Galliam  translata  esse
existimatur — will  be  discussed  later.

VOL.  II.  H


ii4  IMPORT   OF   EVIDENCE

first  century  B.C. ;  the  classical  observers  would  probably
have  been  incapable  of  judging,  had  they  even  cared  to
inquire,  whether  the  beliefs  they  noted  were  old  or
recent.  As  regards  the  second  point,  the  classical  state-
ments must  be  taken  as  representing  average  well-edu-
cated Grseco-Roman  opinion  of  from  150  to  50  B.C.  Now
the  three  most  important  testimonies,  those  of  Alexander
Polyhistor,  Diodorus,  and  Caesar,  indicate,  the  two  first
explicitly,  the  third  implicitly,  a  comparison  with  the  doc-
trine of  Pythagoras.  The  testimony  of  Valerius  Maximus
is  partly  to  the  same  effect,  whilst  the  reference  to  Pytha-
goras by  Timagenes  may  possibly  convey  the  same
implication.  It  thus  becomes  necessary,  in  order  to
appreciate  the  full  force  of  the  classical  evidence,  not
indeed  to  discuss  at  this  stage  the  origin  and  real  nature
of  the  Pythagorean  system,  but  to  set  forth  the  current
opinion  concerning  it  prevalent  in  well-informed  circles
of  Grseco-Roman  society  during  the  first  and  second
centuries  before  Christ.1

The  Pythagorean  doctrine  may  be  briefly  described  as
follows :  The  soul  exists  prior  to  and  independent  of  the
body  with  which  it  is  associated  in  life.  Such  association
has  a  penal  character ;  the  body  is  a  prison  in  which  the
Deity  has  confined  the  soul  and  from  which  it  may  not  free
itself  voluntarily.  Virtue  in  this  life,  and  by  virtue  must
be  understood  the  exact  following  of  the  rules  of  conduct
laid  down  by  the  philosopher,  enables  the  soul,  when  freed
from  the  body  by  death,  to  lead  an  incorporeal  existence
in  the  upper  air;  vice,  on  the  contrary,  leads  to  further
imprisonment  in  the  flesh  by  re-birth  in  human  or  even  in

1  In  what  follows  I  rely  mainly  upon  Zeller's  exposition  :  Griechische
Philosophic,  i.


PYTHAGOREAN    DOCTRINE        115

animal  form,  or  to  the  pains  of  Tartarus.  Life  as  a  whole
thus  wears  a  probationary  aspect,  the  outcome  of  which —
release  from  the  chains  of  the  flesh,  renewed  bondage,  or
damnation  to  hell — is  dependent  upon  acceptance  of  a
philosophical  doctrine  and  conformity  to  an  ethico-ritualistic
rule.

Apart  from  the  more  strictly  philosophico-religious  side
of  the  doctrine,  stories  were  afloat  as  early  as  the  fourth
century  b.c.  if  we  accept  Diogenes  Laertius'  ascription
of  them  to  Heraclides  of  Pontus,  that  Pythagoras  pro-
claimed himself  a  son  of  Hermes  in  a  previous  existence,
and  professed  to  have  derived  from  his  divine  father  the
memory  of  the  various  forms  through  which  he  had  passed.
The  fable  that  Pythagoras  had  been  present  at  the  siege  of
Troy  in  the  shape  of  Euphorbos  seems  to  be  older  than
the  time  of  Heraclides  of  Pontus,  by  whom  it  was  amplified
into  a  long  series  of  re-births.  Stories  such  as  these  were
universally  popular,  and  would  perhaps  occur  more  readily
to  the  mind  of  the  average  man  of  the  world,  in
thinking  of  Pythagoras,  than  the  ethical  basis  of  the  re-
birth doctrine.

Connected  with  the  Pythagorean  theory  of  souls  was  the
doctrine  of  Sou^oves,  beings  living  partly  under  the  earth,
partly  occupying  the  spaces  of  the  air,  appearing  at  times
to  mankind,  conceived  of  generally  as  bodiless  souls,  but
also  as  elemental  spirits,  and  from  whom  was  derived  the
knowledge  of  soothsaying  and  of  lustral  rites.  Heroes
would  seem  to  have  been  counted  among  the  8at/xoves.

Must  we  accept  the  classical  statements  au  pied  de  la
lettre,  and  postulate  upon  their  basis  a  close  and  far-
reaching  kinship  between  the  two  systems  of  doctrine — the
Pythagorean  and  that  of  the  southern  Gauls  ?    Before  doing


n6  DISCUSSION   OF

so  we  must  try  and  put  ourselves  back  into  the  mental
altitude  of  the  first  century  Grreco-Roman  observers,  a
far  from  easy  task.  The  Roman  mind,  quickened  by
Greek  culture,  had  come  into  contact  with  races  in  a  much
lower  stage  of  civilisation,  occupying  widely  spread  regions.
Two  modern  analogies  present  themselves,  but  both  are
deceptive.  In  the  sixteenth  century  the  peoples  of  western
Europe  were  brought  into  new  and  extensive  contact  with
races  far  lower  in  the  culture  scale ;  during  the  last  hundred
years  the  careful  study  of  lower  by  higher  races  has  been
pursued  with  unremitting  zeal.  But  the  sixteenth  century
European,  as  a  rule  far  less  removed,  intellectually  and
artistically,  from  the  native  of  America  or  Asia,  than
was  the  Greek  or  Roman  from  the  Celt  or  German,  was
hampered  with  a  religion  which  forbade  his  taking  interest
in  one  side  of  barbarian  life,  or  wellnigh  forced  him  to
take  a  false  view  of  it.  Whilst  in  our  own  days  a  new
faculty,  practically  unknown  in  classical  times,  that  of
critical  comparative  analysis,  has  been  developed.1  Thus
neither  in  the  full,  but  prejudiced  and  uncritical,  accounts
of  sixteenth-century  travellers,  nor  in  the  critical  studies  of
modern  investigators,  seeking  as  they  do  to  indicate  differ-
ences as  well  as  resemblances,  to  describe  native  life  from
the  native  instead  of  from  our  point  of  view,  can  we  hope
to  find  parallels  to  the  mode  of  observing  natural  to  a
Posidonius  or  a  Caesar.  They  observed  grosso  viodo  and
superficially ;  they  were  interested  in  themselves  far  more
than  in  the  barbarians  whose  peculiarities  they  might  note,

1  This  statement,  perhaps  too  rigid,  must  be  taken  as  applying
more  especially  to  the  Grxco-J?oman  world.  Had  Cxsar  been
accompanied  by  an  Aristotle,  our  knowledge  of  our  Celtic  and  Teu-
tonic forefathers  would  certainly  be  more  precise  and  detailed.


1


CLASSICAL   EVIDENCE  117

but  they  were  not  likely  to  be  prejudiced  by  religious  or
scientific  prepossessions.  In  so  far  as  they  cared  to  see  at
all  they  probably  saw  accurately  and  set  down  concisely.

The  classical  references  to  the  Pythagoreanism  of  the
Celtic  races  may  thus  be  looked  upon  as  the  traveller's
rough  indication  to  his  stay-at-home  countrymen  of  a
religious  phenomenon,  the  exact  particulars  of  which  the
one  would  not  have  cared  to  know  if  the  other  had  cared
to  note,  rather  than  as  the  outcome  of  close  and  searching
study,  and  they  must  be  interpreted  as  much  in  the  light
of  the  current  anecdotes  respecting  the  Samian  sage  as  by
the  formal  doctrine  of  the  schools.  We  must  remember,
too,  that  if  the  attitude  of  civilised  man  towards  barbarian
belief  differed  in  antiquity  from  that  of  our  times,  so  equally
did  the  attitude  of  the  barbarian  towards  the  civilised  creed.
He  had  neither  persecution  nor  patronage  to  dread,  nor
were  his  crude  fancies  scrutinised  and  tested.  It  was  far
easier  on  both  sides  to  imagine  a  kinship  of  belief,  and  by
so  imagining  to  effect  a  fusion,  than  it  is  nowadays.

These  considerations  may  help  us  in  determining  the
value  to  be  attached  to  the  classical  testimonies.  Two
extreme  cases  may  be  put;  the  southern  Celts  simply
possessed  mythico-romantic  legends  of  much  the  same
character  as  those  found  at  a  later  date  among  the  Irish,
and  classical  travellers  read  into  them  the  features  of  the
philosophical  system  to  which  they  presented  some  affinity ;
or,  again,  they  possessed  not  alone  a  mythology,  but  also
an  ethico-philosophic  system  of  doctrine  really  comparable
with  the  Pythagorean.  The  truth  probably  lies  between
these  two  extremes,  but  inclining  rather  towards  the  latter.
Caesar's  testimony  demonstrates  to  my  mind  the  existence
of  a  doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  applicable  to  men  gener-


u8  DISCUSSION   OF

ally,  the  subject  of  quasi-religious  teaching  and  possessing
an  ethical  basis.  These  traits  would  probably  appear  to
the  classical  observer  a  sufficient  warrant  for  the  identifying
the  druidic  and  Pythagorean  systems.1

Having  admitted  some  basis  of  fact  in  justification  of
the  classical  view,  we  must  ask  if  it  is  to  be  accounted  for
by  historical  influence  of  the  one  system  upon  the  other.
This  is  Maass'  view  (Orpheus  16059).  Commenting  upon
Caesar's  statement  he  says,  'The  astronomical  studies  (of
the  druids),  as  well  as  their  doctrine  of  metempsychosis,  are
probably  to  be  laid  to  the  account  of  the  Greek  population
of  Massilia  and  the  neighbouring  coast  land.'  This  is  an
easy  way  of  settling  the  question.  Let  us  note,  however,
that  if  the  southern  Celts  did  borrow  metempsychosis  from
Greek  believers  in  Pythagoreanism,  they  forthwith  and
utterly  transformed  the  ethical  spirit  of  the  doctrine.  The
Greek  philosopher  and  his  disciples  said — Be  virtuous  that
you  may  not  be  born  again ;  the  Gaulish  druid  said — Be
brave  (and  bravery  was  probably  the  chief  element  in  his

1  It  matters  little  in  this  connection  whether  Cresar's  remark  is  the
result  of  personal  observation  or  whether  he  is  simply  repeating  state-
ments of  Posidonius,  as  has  recently  been  conjectured  by  an  ingenious
German  afflicted  with  the  current  mania  for  asserting  that  everything
is  merely  copied  from  something  else.  Posidonius,  a  Greek,  a
naturalist  and  a  schoolman,  was  more  likely  to  observe  accurately  a
point  of  this  kind  than  Cresar.  I  have  already  alluded  (supra,  p.  112)
to  the  possibility,  to  which  my  friend  Professor  Jevons  has  called  my
attention,  that  Posidonius  was  led  into  exaggerating  the  Pythagoreanism
of  the  druidic  doctrine  because  he  was  struck  by  certain  similarities
between  Pythagorean  and  druidic  organisation.  Had  he  lived  when
the  quasi-monastic  communities  of  the  Pythagorean  congregations  was  a
novel  and  a  striking  phenomenon  in  the  Hellenic  world,  I  should  give
more  weight  to  the  possibility.  In  the  first  century  B.C.  it  strikes  me
as  unlikely  in  the  extreme.


CLASSICAL   EVIDENCE  119

ideal  of  virtue),  because  you  will  be  born  again.  If  the
point  of  view  was  so  entirely  different,  the  reason  for
borrowing  is  not  apparent.

None  the  less  is  it  probable  that  the  druids,  the  learned
priestly  class,  of  the  southern  Celts  were  considerably
influenced  by  contact  with  Greek  culture,  and  that  the
development  of  features  in  their  own  teaching  bearing  any
affinity  with  that  of  their  Greek  neighbours  would  be  con-
ditioned by  this  influence.  But  there  must  have  been
germs  susceptible  of  development.  Had  the  southern
Celts,  when  they  became  acquainted  with  Greek  learning,
lacked  a  mythology,  lacked  a  theory  of  the  relation  of  this
to  the  other  life,  they  would  hardly,  I  believe,  have  bor-
rowed precisely  the  Pythagorean  doctrine  of  metempsychosis,
or,  having  borrowed,  have  transformed  it  in  the  sense
indicated  by  Csesar.  Something  there  must  have  been,
common  to  both  races,  which  the  druids  could  proudly
point  to  in  token  of  a  kinship  with  the  wiser,  more  learned,
more  powerful  Greek,  something  which  the  Greek  could
note  with  a  half-amused  superficial  interest  as  akin  to
his  own  speculations.  The  points  of  likeness  would  be
exaggerated,  the  differences  minimised,  on  the  one  side
from  vainglory,  on  the  other  from  good-humoured  indiffer-
ence, on  both  from  want  of  the  true  critical  spirit.

I  have  dwelt  upon  this  aspect  of  the  question  at  some
length,  because  if  it  be  once  admitted  that  the  classical
testimonies  simply  describe  the  result  of  a  century's  contact
between  southern  Celt  and  Massilian  Greek,  it  would  be
easy  to  claim  the  Irish  legends  as  a  further  outcome  of  this
influence  of  the  higher  Greek  upon  the  lower  Celtic  culture.
They,  indeed,  would  represent  its  effects,  not  at  first-hand,
as  in  the  case  of  the  southern  Celts  described  by  Caesar


i2o      COMPARISON    OF  IRISH   AND

and  by  others,  but  at  third,  tenth,  or  possibly  twentieth
hand.  Would  not,  it  may  be  asked,  the  higher  and  more
spiritual  elements  of  the  original  doctrine  be  gradually  but
inevitably  sloughed  off,  and  the  naturalistic  elements  be
rudely  and  grossly  transformed  ?  Here  we  have,  it  may  be
said,  a  parallel  case  of  development  to  that  which  we  can
observe  in  the  series  of  pre-Roman  British  coins,  the  design
of  which,  originally  borrowed  from  the  Macedonian  Stater,
was  gradually  rudened  and  simplified  out  of  recognition.

In  deciding  how  far  this  analogy  is  true  and  valid,
we  must  note  the  points  of  difference  between  the  Irish
mythico-romantic  legends  and  the  doctrines  described  by
Caesar  and  others  as  current  throughout  southern  Gaul  in
the  first  century  B.C.  The  former  say  nothing  of  a  theory
of  souls,  nor  do  they  so  much  as  hint  at  an  ethical  system
deriving  its  sanction  from  this  theory.  They  vouch  for  a
belief  in  the  capacity  of  certain  supernatural  beings  (pro-
bably regarded  as  gods  in  the  ages  prior  to  that  in  which
the  stories  were  written  down),  to  enter  into  human  shape,
and  either  assume  a  new  individuality  or  reshape  their  own.
Beings  partly  or  wholly  human  (though  the  second  feature
cannot  be  definitely  asserted),  can  also  assume  different
shapes,  or  pass  through  different  stages  of  existence.  If  the
Irish  belief,  recoverable  solely  from  the  legends,  lacks  the
positive  doctrinal  and  ethical  features  we  may  fairly  ascribe
to  southern  Celtic  belief,  it  is,  on  the  other  hand,  partly
associated  with  a  crude  pantheism  (in  the  Amairgen  and
Taliessin  poems),  of  which  the  classical  observers  of
southern  Celtic  belief  say  no  word,  and  which  is  con-
spicuously absent  (however  prominent  it  may  have  been
in  the  Orphicism  out  of  which  Pythagoras  developed  his
system),  from  Pythagoreanism  itself.     If,  then,  we  assume


SOUTHERN   CELTIC   CONSIDERED   121

that  the  insular  Celts  were  influenced  by  the  latter  at
second-hand  through  their  continental  kinsfolk,  we  must
further  assume  that  they  threw  back  the  conception  into  a
mythological  stage  by  eliminating  the  metaphysical,  social,
and  ethical  elements,  which  gave  it  character  and  vitality,
and,  possibly,  that  they  substituted  a  fresh  metaphysical
element,  which  should  be  styled  panwizardism  rather  than
pantheism — a  belief,  not  in  the  immanence  of  deity,  so
that  all  shapes  are  but  manifestations  of  one  essence,  but
in  the  all-might  of  the  soothsayer  and  spell wright,  who  is
superior  to,  can  control  and  overrule  the  forms  in  which
life,  animate  or  inanimate,  manifests  itself.

Such  a  series  of  assumptions,  not  very  probable  in  them-
selves, takes  no  account  of  the  fact  that  pre-Christian  Irish
belief,  in  all  matters  concerning  the  relation  of  this  to  the
other  life,  cannot  be  fairly  judged  solely  on  the  evidence  of
the  mythico-romantic  legends.  Early  Irish  religion  must
have  possessed  some  ritual,  and  what,  in  default  of  an
apter  term,  must  be  styled  philosophical  as  well  as  mytho-
logical elements.  Practically,  the  latter  alone  have  come
down  to  us,  and  that  in  a  romantic  rather  than  in  a  strictly
mythical  form.  Could  we  judge  Greek  religion  aright  if
fragments  of  Apollodorus  or  the  Metamorphoses  were  all
that  survived  of  the  literature  it  inspired  ?

Considerations  such  as  these  suggest  several  possibilities
in  connection  with  the  Irish  re-birth  legends.  They  may
be  the  mythic  expression  of  a  creed  which  on  its  ritual  and
metaphysical  side  was  akin  to  that  of  Caesar's  Gauls,  or
they  may  be  the  romantic  outcome  of  contact  with  an  alien
higher  culture,  or,  again,  they  may  represent  a  stage  of
mythic  fancy  and  thought  out  of  which  the  southern  Celts
had  partly  passed  owing  to  Greek  influence,  but  in  which


122  RECAPITULATION    OF

they,  and  perhaps  the  Greeks  also,  must  at  one  time  have
sojourned.  The  validity  of  these  various  explanations  may
be  tested  in  two  ways.  Archaic  Irish  culture  must  be
examined  for  indications  of  belief  other  than  those  yielded
by  the  romantic  legends.  Archaic  Greek  culture  must  be
examined  for  possible  phases  of  belief  and  fancy  more
closely  comparable  with  those  of  the  Irish  sagas  than  the
points  of  contact  noted  in  classic  times  between  Pytha-
goreanism  and  the  druidism  of  the  southern  Celts.  Should
these  be  found  to  exist,  it  will  be  difficult  to  resist  the  con-
viction that  the  last  of  the  three  explanations  suggested
above  is  the  correct  one.

I  propose  taking  the  second  way  first.  Pythagoreanism
is  no  isolated  and  underived  element  of  Greek  religious
growth.  It  has  its  roots  in  the  past  of  the  Hellenic  race  ;
it  is  a  synthesis  of  far  older  manifestations  of  religious
fancy.  These  must  now  be  investigated.  Should  they
reveal,  as  I  hope  to  show,  striking  points  of  kinship  with
the  Irish  sagas,  points  in  which  both  differ  from  the  formal
Pythagorean  doctrine,  the  task  before  us  will  be  singularly
facilitated.  For  if  we  can  reasonably  assign  the  Irish
myths  to  a  stage  of  religious  thought  and  expression  known
to  have  existed  in  archaic  Greece,  we  are  entitled  to
interpret  the  scanty  and  obscure  hints  respecting  the  non-
romantic  sides  of  Irish  mythology  and  religion  in  the  light
of  the  far  more  abundant  evidence  preserved  by  the  literary
and  material  monuments  of  Hellas.

It  may  be  well  to  briefly  recapitulate  the  steps  of  the
investigation.  The  Irish  re-birth  legends  are  probably  the
common  property  of  the  Goidels  of  both  Britain  and
Ireland;  they  are  certainly  pre-Christian  in  contents  and
spirit ;   they  are   probably  akin   to   mythical   tales   which


ARGUMENT  123

must  have  existed  among  the  southern  Celts,  representing,
however,  an  earlier  stage  of  mythic  fancy,  unaffected  by
contact  with  late  Greek  culture ;  they  show  traces  of  a
crude  pantheism  lacking  in  southern  Celtic  belief  as
described  by  classical  writers,  and  in  the  Pythagorean
system  with  which  that  belief  was  compared.


CHAPTER    XVI

AGRICULTURAL  RITUAL  IN  GREECE  AND  IRELAND

Pythagoras  and  Orpheus— Orphicism  in  the  Hellenic  world— Philosophic
Orphicism  insufficient  to  account  for  Celtic  belief — Ritual  Orphicism  ;
the  myth  of  Zagreus  ;  points  of  contact  between  ritual  Orphicism  and
Celtic  belief — Orphic  pantheism  and  Celtic  panwizardism — The
origins  of  Orphicism — Rohde's  exposition  of  the  Dionysus  cult —
Orgiastic  mania  the  common  root  of  Orphic  and  Celtic  transformation
and  reincarnation  beliefs — The  agricultural  origin  of  the  Dionysus
ritual — The  existence  of  agricultural  and  ritual  sacrifice  among  the
Celts  :  (a)  on  the  Continent ;  the  priestesses  of  the  Namnites  ;  (6)  in
Ireland ;  the  worship  at  Mag  Slecht — The  Greek  origin  of  the
Dionysus  cult — Both  Greeks  and  Celts  have  passed  through  a  stage  of
agricultural  ritual  sacrifice,  in  which  the  Greek  Dionysus  and  the  Irish
Tuatha  de  Danann  mythologies  have  their  root.

It  would  be  foreign  to  my  object  to  enter  into  an  elaborate
discussion  of  the  relation  between  the  doctrines  of  Pytha-
goras and  those  of  his  forerunners  and  contemporaries.  I
content  myself  with  citing  what  Professor  Erwin  Rohde  says
in  this  connection  :  '  The  teaching  of  Pythagoras,  whilst  it
enabled  him  to  weld  his  followers  into  a  congregation  at
once  wider  and  stricter  in  its  organisation  than  any  Orphic
sect,  must  have  coincided  in  all  essential  points  with
the  practical  religious  side  of  Orphic  theology'  (Psyc/ie,
452),  supported  in  the  main  as  is  this  statement  by  the
authority  of  Zeller,  and  exceeded  as  it  is  by  the  contentions
of  E.  Maass,  who,  in  his  Orpheus :  Untersuchungen  zur
griechischen    rbmischen   altchristlichen  Jenseitsdichtung  und

124


ORPHIC    DOCTRINE  125

Religion  (1895),  represents  the  high-water  mark  of  scholarly
critical  appreciation  of  the  Orphic  doctrines.     Indeed  the
brief  summary  of  the   Pythagorean    system   given   above
might  be  applied  with  scarce  a  change  to  the  Orphic  beliefs
recognised  by  the  most  competent  scholars  as  existing  in
the  middle  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.  at  the  latest.    Orphicism
represented  the  soul  as  in  bondage  to  the  body,  a  prisoner
in  its  dungeon  from  which  it  may  not  free  itself,  and  from
which  death  itself  affords  no  certain  release ;  for  when  the
soul  has  quitted  the  body,  wandering  free  in  the  upper  air,
it  is  breathed  again  into  a  new  body,  and  thus,  subjected
to  the  '  round  of  necessity,'  to  the  '  wheel  of  birth,'  it  divides
its  existence  between  unfettered  bodilessness  and  bondage
in  human  and  animal  form.     From  this  fate  there  is  but
one   means  of   deliverance ;   participation    in   the   Orphic
Dionysiac  mysteries  enables  the  initiate  '  to  step  out  of  the
round,'  '  to  have  a  respite  from  woe.'    Not  his  own  strength,
but  the  grace  of  the  '  releasing  gods '  has  man  to  thank  for
his  deliverance.    But  this  grace  insists  upon  the  observation
of  rules,  principally  ascetic  ones.     Animal  flesh  as  food  is
to  be  shunned ;  the  soul  imprisoned  in  the  body  in  '  expia-
tion '  of  its  '  imperfection,'  or  rather  in  '  satisfaction  of  its
debt,' l  may  be  kept  pure  from  the  contaminating  influence
of  its  prison-house  by  adherence  to  elaborate  rules  for  the
preservation  of  ritual  purity.    The  Orphic  initiates  are  alone
'  the  pure  ones ' ;  when  they  die  they  have  little  to  fear
from   the  dread  judgment  of  Hades;   not  for  them  the
terrors  of  Tartarus  or  the  foul  horrors  of  the  filth-swamp  in

1  The  fault  or  debt  on  account  of  which  the  soul  suffers  imprisonment
is  nowhere  pointed  out.  As  Rohde  remarks  (Psyche),  the  effect  of  this
doctrine  is  to  treat  life  in  the  flesh  as  contrary  to  the  true  and  natural
destination  of  the  soul.


126  ORPHIC   DOCTRINE

which  wallow  the  impure,  the  uninitiated,  but  sojourn  in  the
'  fair  meadows  that  lie  along  deep-flowing  Acheron.'  Nay,
so  great  is  the  power  of  initiation  that,  thanks  to  it,  children
may  intercede  successfully  for  the  '  miserable  souls '  of  their
parents  or  ancestors,  and  procure  for  them  cleansing  and
remission.

Such  are  certain  features  of  the  doctrine  widely  spread
throughout  the  Grecian  world  in  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  which
appealed  to  the  strong  ethical  instinct  of  Pythagoras,  and
were  definitely  systematised  by  him.  The  pivot  upon  which
the  doctrine  turns  is,  as  the  reader  will  doubtless  have  noticed,
twofold  :  dread  of  the  punishments  of  Hades  duplicates  the
desire  to  be  released  from  the  chains  of  carnal  existence,
and  is  in  reality  inconsistent  with  it.  Older  Orphicism
would  seem  (for  definite  evidence  is  lacking)  to  have
resolved  the  inconsistency,  by  regarding  the  stay  in  Hades
as  purgatorial  only,  and,  possibly,  by  a  quasi-pantheistic
doctrine  concerning  the  ultimate  fate  of  the  regenerated
soul,  which,  released  from  its  '  body-grave '  (a-Qixa-a-yjfxa),
was  to  be  reabsorbed  into  the  all-embracing  Godhead.
Pythagoras,  on  the  other  hand,  seems  to  have  laid  greater
stress  upon  the  metempsychosis  side  of  the  doctrine;  certain
it  is  that  late  antiquity  associated  his  name  with  it.

Concerning  the  after-fate  of  this  body  of  doctrine,  which
we  must  call  the  Orphic  Pythagorean,  denoting  thereby  at
once  the  priority  of  the  Orphic  and  the  indissoluble  fusion
of  both  elements,  it  is  sufficient  to  quote  the  words  of
Maass,  '  Platonic  philosophy  bestowed  upon  Orphic  teach-
ing concerning  immortality,  new  life,  fresh  spirit,  and
complete  expression'  {Orpheus,  171).  Plato  synthesised,
developed,  and  transformed  the  beliefs  and  fancies  of  his
predecessors ;  since  his  time  they  have  become  an  integral


ORPHIC   DOCTRINE  127

and  imperishable  portion  of  man's  intellectual  and  moral
patrimony.

Vital,  however,  as  may  be  the  interest  and  import  of
Orphicism  for  the  religious  and  philosophical  evolution  of
humanity,  there  is  little  in  the  foregoing  considerations  to
enlighten  us  concerning  the  special  points  we  are  investi-
gating. For  the  side  of  Orphic  doctrine  upon  which  I  have
dwelt  differs  so  little  from  the  fully-developed  Pythagorean
system  as  to  yield  no  clue  concerning  the  possible  influence
of  Greek  upon  Celtic  culture  in  the  three  centuries  preceding
the  birth  of  Christ,  or  concerning  a  possible  prehistoric  com-
munity of  Greek  and  Celtic  belief.  Let  us  take  the  first
point  and  ask  a  question  which  has  not  presented  itself,  so
far  as  I  have  been  able  to  ascertain,  to  any  of  the  scholars
who  have  asserted,  more  or  less  definitely,  the  dependence
of  Celtic  upon  Greek  culture.  Why  should  the  Celts,  who
came  into  contact  with  the  Grseco-Roman  world  of  the
western  Mediterranean  towards  the  close  of  the  third
century  B.C.,  have  borrowed  precisely  the  doctrine  of
metempsychosis?  They  borrowed  much  else,  it  may  be
answered,  if  we  interpret  Caesar's  words  in  accordance  with
the  probabilities  of  the  case.  But  even  if  we  admit  that  all
the  subjects  of  druidic  study  enumerated  by  Caesar  are
loans  from  Greek  culture,  still  the  fact  remains  that  metem-
psychosis was  especially  signalled  out  by  classical  observers
as  a  characteristic  Celtic  doctrine.  If  the  Celts  borrowed
it,  they  did  so  on  such  a  large  scale  that  the  nature  of  the
borrowed  conception  remained  practically  unchanged.  Why,
I  again  repeat,  should  they  have  borrowed  this  particular
doctrine  instead  of  the  many  others  concerning  the  nature
and  destiny  of  the  soul  elaborated  by  Greek  philosophy?
We  must  recollect  that  important  as  have  been  the  conse-


128  ORPHIC    DOCTRINE

quences  of  the  Orphic-Pythagorean  systems,  their  direct
effect  upon  Hellenic  life  was  slight,  their  direct  effect  upon
Hellenic  thought  before  150-100  B.C.  but  little  slighter.  Of
the  great  lyric  poets,  Pindar  alone  is  markedly  affected  by
Orphic  doctrine ;  of  the  great  dramatists,  vEschylus  and
Sophocles  are  almost  entirely  uninfluenced ;  and  although
Euripides  shows  decided  leaning  to  Orphicism  in  many
passages,  the  import  of  this  fact  is  greatly  lessened  when
the  insatiable  intellectual  and  moral  curiosity  which  led  him
to  welcome  every  form  of  emotional  thought  is  borne  in
mind.  Even  contemporaries  of  Plato,  like  the  orators,
betray  in  their  references  to  a  future  life  and  the  destiny  of
the  soul  how  little  the  average  Greek  citizen  was  affected
by  the  mystic  theosophy  of  the  Orphic-Pythagorean  sects.
After  Plato,  it  is  true,  the  personality  and  immortality  of
the  soul  are  integral  elements  of  philosophic  speculation,
but  the  schools  by  no  means  retained  the  spiritualist  con-
clusions of  Plato.

In  regard  to  all  questions  connected  with  the  nature
and  destiny  of  the  soul,  post-Platonic  speculation  is,
comparatively,  agnostic.  It  is  certainly  not  impossible
for  the  Celts  to  have  picked  up  Orphic-Pythagorean
doctrines  from  the  Greeks  of  southern  Gaul  in  the  second
and  first  centuries  B.C.  But  it  is  equally  certain  that  these
doctrines  had  fallen  into  disrepute  at  this  time  among
the  philosophers,  whilst  the  average  man,  in  so  far  as  his
creed  was  not  a  mere  echoed  smattering  of  the  fashionable
philosophy  of  the  day,  contented  himself,  in  all  probability,
with  obeying  the  ritual  dictates  of  the  traditional  religion
which  the  Orphic-Pythagorean  movement  was  designed  to
supplement  and  supplant,  even  if  it  be  not  regarded  as  a
definite  protest  against  it.


RITUAL   MYTHOLOGICAL   ORPHICISM   129

If  the  features  of  Orphicism  noted  in  the  foregoing  pages
neither  reveal  any  prima  facie  reason  why  the  Celts  should
have  borrowed  metempsychosis  from  the  Greeks,  nor  why,
if  the  fact  of  borrowing  be  admitted,  they  should  have
transformed  the  ethical  basis  of  the  conception,  still  less  do
they  throw  any  light  upon  the  Irish  re-birth  legends.  There
is  as  great  a  gulf  fixed  between  these  and  the  half-religious,
half-philosophical  doctrine  of  the  Orphic  sects,  as  there  is
between  the  elaborate  eschatology  of  Orphicism  and  the
simple  sensuous  pictures  of  the  Irish  land  of  women  and
everlasting  youth.  There  is,  however,  in  Orphicism  another
element,  ignored  by  Pythagoras.  As  this  comes  before  us
in  its  earliest  manifestations,  it  may  be  described  as  a
naturalistic  pantheism  set  forth  by  myths  and  ritual  symbols
of  a  rude  character.  This  Orphic  pantheism  may  possibly
have  contributed  towards  and  influenced  those  Stoic  doc-
trines of  pantheism  which  were  such  a  marked  feature  of  the
Stoic  system  throughout  the  centuries  immediately  preced-
ing the  rise  of  Christianity,  though,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the
completed  outcome  of  Stoic  speculation  differed  toto  ccelo
from  Orphic  imaginings.  It  certainly  entered  very  largely
into  the  tangled  web  of  Neo-Pythagorean  and  Neo-Platonist
mysticism  ;  here  the  old  naturalistic  doctrine,  interpreted  in
the  most  diverse  ways,  and  in  a  spirit  equally  arbitrary  and
fanciful,  was  sublimated  into  a  confused  mass  of  occult
mystical  theosophies.  The  larger  portion  of  the  professed
Orphic  texts,  as  well  as  of  the  comments  upon  the  doctrine,
belong  to  the  later  stage  in  the  evolution  of  Orphicism
which  lasted  far  down  into  the  Christian  period.  The
investigator  into  the  creed  and  history  of  the  Orphic  sects
is  therefore  much  in  the  position  of  a  student  of  Christianity
who  had  to  rely  mainly  upon  the  writings  of  Swedenborg,

VOL.  II.  I


130  ORPHIC    RITUALISM

Blake,  and  Madame  Blavatsky.  Yet  enough  has  survived
of  early,  i.e.  pre-Platonic,  Orphicism  to  enable  a  fairly  clear
idea  of  its  nature.

The  elements  in  the  Orphic  system  now  to  be  examined
were  expressed  in  purely  mythological  terms  instead  of
forming  the  material  of  a  philosophic  ethical  doctrine.
Fruitful  comparison  with  the  Celtic  legends  is  thus  possible.
For  evidently  if  Celtdom  was  influenced  by  Greece  in  his-
toric times,  such  influence  is  likely  to  have  been  exercised
by  a  ritualistic  mythology  rather  than  by  an  abstract  ethical
philosophy.  Again  the  Irish  re-birth  legends  are,  as  we
have  seen,  strongly  mythological  by  virtue  of  their  associa-
tion with  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  the  representatives  of  a
pre-Christian  Irish  Olympus  ;  and  if  prehistoric  contact  can
be  established  between  these  legends  and  early  Greek  belief,
it  must  be  on  mythological  ground.

Participation  in  the  Dionysiac  mysteries  was  the  chief
ritual  act  of  the  Orphic  sectary.  The  mystery  therein  set
forth  is  the  story  of  Dionysus  Zagreus.  The  general  re-
marks made  above  concerning  the  nature  of  Orphic  tradition
are  strongly  exemplified  in  this  special  instance.  Our  most
detailed  authority  is  the  Greek  poet  Nonnus x  who  wrote  in
the  fifth  century  of  the  Christian  era ;  yet  there  is  sub-
stantially no  doubt  but  that  he  and  other  authorities,  almost
as  late,  reproduce  faithfully  the  outlines  of  a  myth  known
to  Onomacritos  in  the  sixth  century  before  Christ.2  The
story  runs  thus :

The  Zagreus  Myth.
Zeus  had  committed  the  care  of  this  world  to  Zagreus,

1  In  his  Dionysiaca  ;  cf.  Book  vi.  v.  170  et  seq.

2  Rohde,  Psyche,  411  b.


THE    ZAGREUS    MYTH  131

his  and  Persephone's  son.     But  the  wicked  Titans,  urged
on  by  the  jealous  Hera,  won  the  child's  confidence  by
many  gifts,  especially  by  that  of  a  mirror,  and  were  thus
able  to  fall  upon,  and,  as  they  thought,  to  slay  him.     But
though  his  limbs,  pierced  by  the  Titans'  swords,  ceased  to
beat  with  life,  the  end  of  one  existence  was  for  him  but  the
beginning  of  another;    he  reappeared  in  a  new  form  in
diverse  shapes.      Now  he  was  a  young  man,  the  son   of
Kronos,  the  bolt-wielder ;  now  old  Kronos  himself,  heavy
kneed,  bestower  of  rain.     A  thousand  were  his  transforma-
tions, from  childhood  to  manhood,  from  a  roaring  lion  to
a  neighing  long-maned  steed,  from  a  horned  dragon  to  a
spotted  tiger.     Lastly  he  assumed  bull  shape  and  warred
against  the  Titans  with  his  sharp  horns,  fighting  for  his  life.
Then  Hera,  the  cruel  stepmother,  took  part  in  the  fray ;  to
his  bellowings  answered  the  bellowings  of  the  air,  and  all
the  steeps  of  Olympus  shook  to  the  roaring  tempest.     The
bull  succumbed,  and  Zagreus  in  his  bull  form  was  rent  into
pieces  by  the  knives  of  his  foes.     Nay,  they  went  further,
and  the  torn,   quivering  fragments   of  the   god-bull  were
devoured  by  his  foes.      The  heart  alone  was  rescued  by
Athene  and  by  her  given   to  Zeus.      According   to   one
account  he  himself  ate,  according  to  another  he  gave  it
mixed   with   drink   to   Semele.      Whichever   account   was
followed,  the  son  of  Zeus  and  Semele,  Dionysus,  was  looked
upon  as  Zagreus  re-born.1

To  fully  appreciate  the  import  of  this  myth,  it  should  be
noted  that  Zeus  was  also  represented  as  begetting  Zagreus
upon  his  own  daughter  Persephone  in  serpent  form,  she
having  assumed  that  shape  to  evade  his  amorous  pursuit,2

1  Roscher,  Lexikon,  1056.

2  Ibid.,  1058  ;  cf.  the  worm  form  common  in  the  Irish  re-birth  legends.


132  ORPHIC    RITUALISM    AND

and  that  in  his  intercourse  with  Semele  he  displays  the
same  capacity  for  shape-shifting  as  is  attributed  to  Zagreus-
Dionysus  :  ■  now  fitting  a  bull's  head  to  human  limbs  Zeus
imitated  the  bellowings  of  Dionysus  the  bull ;  now  a  heavy-
maned  lion,  anon  a  leopard,  or  again  a  coiled  and  creeping
dragon.' 1  Finally,  metamorphosis  is  more  often  met  with  in
the  fully  developed  Dionysus  legend  than  in  that  of  any
other  god,  saving,  of  course,  Zeus,  to  whom  the  supreme
attribute  of  godhead,  shape-shifting,  is  always  pre-eminently
assigned.


Ritual  Orphicism  and  Celtic  Belief.

That  this  group  of  mythical  conceptions  affords  a  far
more  fruitful  ground  of  comparison  with  Irish  legend  than
the  fully-developed  Orphic  metempsychosis  doctrine  is  self-
evident.  Comparison  can  be  instituted  moreover  without
in  any  way  prejudging  the  question  whether  the  obvious
parallelism  of  the  two  mythologies  is  due  to  prehistoric
community  or  to  historic  contact.  Either  cause  is  possible.
Orphic  mysteries  were  spread  throughout  the  Greek-speak-
ing world,  and  retained  their  popularity  until  a  far  later
date  than  that  of  the  historic  contact  of  Celt  and  Greek  in
the  third  and  second  centuries  before  Christ.  The  objection
to  the  possibility  of  Greek  influence,  valid,  so  long  as  the
sole  mode  under  which  the  latter  could  be  manifested
seemed  to  be  that  of  a  highly-advanced  ethico-philosophic
doctrine,  now  loses  its  force.  For  although  the  third  or
second  century  Greek  might  interpret  his  Orphic  mysteries
in  the  light  of  philosophic  speculation,   whether  due   to

1  Nonnus,  Dio?iysiaca,  vii.  319.


CELTIC   MYTHOLOGY  133

Pythagoras,  Plato,  or  the  later  Stoics,  yet  the  actual  ritual
and  the  explanatory  myths  retained  their  primitive  form,
and  would  be  passed  on  to  the  ruder  Celt  unsophisticated
by  religious  or  philosophic  gloss.  I  freely  admit  therefore
that  the  ritual  and  mythological  sides  of  Orphicism  afford
a  possible  origin  for  the  Irish  mythic  sagas  set  forth  in  the
preceding  chapters.  Zeus,  the  shape-shifting  father  of  the
shape-shifting  wonder-child  Dionysus,  may  have  supplied
the  model  upon  which  the  sagas  of  Manannan  and  Mongan,
of  Lug  and  Cuchulinn,  of  Ceridwen  and  Taliessin  were
framed.  The  re-birth  of  Dionysus,  due  to  material  incor-
poration with  father  and  mother,  in  the  latter  case  through
the  medium  of  a  draught,  is  on  the  same  level  of  savage
archaic  fancy  as  the  birth-stories  of  Cuchulinn,  of  Conall
Cernach,  of  Etain ;  the  essence  of  the  myth  may  well  have
passed  unchanged  from  the  one  race  to  the  other.

But  possibility  must  always  be  carefully  distinguished
from  probability.  The  course  of  investigation  has  brought
us  to  the  same  stage  in  regard  to  the  re-birth  conception  as
it  did  in  regard  to  the  presentment  of  the  Happy  Other-
world.  Irish  mythic  legend  shows  in  both  cases  the  closest
affinity  with  what  is  apparently  the  most  archaic,  most
primitive  stratum  of  Greek  myth.  Although  the  two  con-
ceptions have  been  studied  separately,  nevertheless  the
result  of  either  study  is,  mutatis  mutandis,  valid  for  the
other.  Let  us  note  then  that  whilst,  owing  to  the  present-
ment in  ritual  form  thanks  to  which  its  archaic  features
were  retained,  the  Greek  re-birth  myths  were  preserved
down  to  the  period  of  ascertained  historic  contact  between
the  Hellenic  and  Celtic  worlds,  in  such  a  form  as  to  make
their  influence  upon  Celtic  belief  and  fancy  possible,  this
was  not  the  case  with  the  Elysium  myths.    The  older  Greek


i34  ORPHIC    RITUALISM   AND

Elysium,  which  presents  such  marked  analogy  with  the  Irish
Happy  Otherworld,  had  been  replaced,  save  as  a  literary
survival,  by  the  Orphic-Pythagorean  heaven,  a  conception
which,  as  we  saw  every  reason  to  believe,  could  no  more
have  originated  the  Irish  mythic  legends  than  could  the
still  later  form  it  assumed  after  assimilation  and  modification
by  Christianity.  The  strong  likelihood  that  the  affinity  be-
tween the  Greek  and  Celtic  Elysium  myths  is  due  to  prehistoric
community  rather  than  to  historic  contact  justifies  a  similar
presumption  in  the  case  of  the  re-birth  myths.  If  the  latter
stood  entirely  by  themselves,  it  would,  I  think,  be  safer,
having  found  a  possible  origin  for  the  Irish  legends  in  the
Orphic  ritual-myths  not  to  seek  any  further.  But  the  close
connection  of  Elysium  and  re-birth  conceptions,  and  the
more  than  probable  prehistoric  nature  of  the  former  in
Ireland,  make  it  necessary  to  pursue  investigation  in  the
case  of  the  latter.


Orphic  Pantheism.

To  clear  away  at  once  the  more  advanced  phases  of  Orphic-
ism,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  crude  pantheism  involved
in  the  ritual  myths  hadr  even  at  the  earliest  period  at  which
we  meet  the  doctrine,  been  strongly  developed  in  a  dogmatic
and  philosophic  sense.  The  Orphic  dictum  vouched  for  by
Plato,  Zeus  K€(fiaXrj}  Zeus  /iecnra,  Aios  S'  c'k  Travra  reruKTai,  is
sufficient  to  prove  this,  although,  as  Zeller  has  pointed  out,
the  greater  part  of  Orphic  pantheistic  texts  belong  to  a  far  later
stage  of  Orphic  literature,  a  stage  in  which  the  original  ritual
myth  had  been  duplicated  in  that  of  Phanes,  the  mysterious
being  in  whom  were  combined  at  once  the  primal  creative
power  and  created  substance,  who  was  swallowed  by  Zeus


CELTIC    MYTHOLOGY  135

and  re-born  as  the  existing  creation,  which  is  thus  a  mani-
festation in  its  totality  of  Zeus'  active  essence.  It  is  the
first  philosophical  stage  of  Orphic  pantheism  which  affected
the  later  schools,  in  especial  Stoicism,  and  which  in  all  pro-
bability furnished  the  philosophic  interpretation  put  upon
the  Orphic  myths  by  the  Greeks  of  the  third  and  second
centuries  B.C.  This  interpretation,  although  differing,  we
must  believe,  from  still  later  explanations  such  as  we  find  in
Plutarch,1  must  have  differed  even  more  from  that  special
form  of  pantheism,  or  rather,  as  I  have  called  it,  panwizard-
ism,  recoverable  from  the  Amairgen  and  Taliessin  poems.
The  fact  that  Celtic  mythic  belief  presents  the  more  archaic
form  of  the  pantheistic  doctrine,  just  as  it  presents  the  more
archaic  picture  of  Elysium,  gives  a  hint,  slight  but  significant,
that  the  affinity  of  Celtic  mythology  with  Orphicism  must
be  older  than  the  contact  of  Greek  and  Celt  in  the  third
and  second  centuries  B.C.

Thus,  just  as  reference  to  the  Pythagoreanism  of  the
period  immediately  preceding  the  Christian  era  was  found
insufficient  to  account  for  the  Irish  re-birth,  so  reference  to
the  older  Orphicism  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  out  of  which
the  Pythagorean  system  was  largely  developed,  leaves  us

1  '  What  the  poets  have  fabled  concerning  the  dismembering  of
Dionysus,  and  the  Titans'  assault  upon  him,  together  with  their  punish-
ment, and  how  they  were  destroyed  by  lightning,  sets  forth  in  hidden
meaning  the  doctrine  of  resurrection  ;  that  element  of  our  nature  which
is  brutish,  devoid  of  reason,  devilish,  and  not  divine,  was  styled  by  our
forefathers,  the  Titans  ;  that  element  in  us,  it  is,  which  suffers  punish-
ment, and  on  which  justice  is  wrought.' — Plutarch  'On  the  eating  of
human  flesh.'

The  Zagreus  myth  was  brought  into  connection  with  the  deluge ;
Zeus  to  revenge  the  slaying  of  Zagreus  would  burn  the  world  by  with-
holding rain — he  relents,  and  the  excessive  downpour  causes  the  deluge.


136  SOURCES    OF   ORPHICISM

also  at  fault.     But  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  further  back  we
get  the  more  numerous  and  more  important  are  the  points
of  contact.     The  similarity  between  Pythagoreanism  and
the  South  Celtic  belief  which  so  impressed  the  classical
observers  is  found  to  be  due  to  the  wholesale  borrowing  by
Pythagoras  of  older  Orphic  doctrines.     As  elaborated  by
Pythagoras    they   were    incapable   of    exercising    any   real
influence  upon  Celtdom ;   even  in  their  earlier  form,  pre-
sented in  terms  of  an  archaic  ritualism,  they  are  found  asso-
ciated with   a  pantheism,  which,    crude   though   it  be  in
comparison  with  Stoic  speculation,  is  yet  far  more  highly
developed  than  that  preserved  in  the  Irish  texts.     It  is  of
course  possible,  as  I  have  already  said,  for  Celtdom  to  have
absorbed  the  archaic  whilst  remaining  unaffected  by  the
more  advanced  features  of  the  system.     But  it  is  equally
possible   for   the   kinship  of   Hellenic   and  Celtic  mythic
fancy  to  antedate  that  first  development  of  Orphicism  in  a
philosophical   direction,    which,    through   the    medium    of
Pythagoras,  of  Plato,  of  the  Platonising  Christian  Fathers,
was  ultimately  to  furnish  such  a  large  element  in  the  philo-
sophic scheme  of  the  ninth  century  Christian  Pantheist,
John  Erigena,  the  Irishman.      To  test  this  possibility  we
cannot  afford  to  stop  at  the  oldest  literary  manifestations  of
Orphicism    in    the  sixth    century  B.C.     We  must  track    it
further  back  and  examine  its  place  in  the  entirety  of  Greek
religion,  belief,  and  fancy.     Before  doing  so,  I  would  again
emphasise  the  fact  that  we  are  not  absolutely  compelled  to
do  so,  if  we  are  concerned  solely  with  the  origin  of  the  Irish
mythic  stories  set  forth  in  the  preceding  pages ;  rigorously
speaking,  the  Orphic-mythic  system,  as  we  know  it  from  the
sixth  century  onwards,  may  be  accepted  as  their  sole  source.
But  we  shall  see,  when  we  come  to  discuss  these  stories  in


DIONYSUS    WORSHIP  137

connection  with  such  other  features  of  Irish  mythology  as
have  survived,  that  an  explanation  valid  for  them  alone
will  not  account  for  the  wider  group  of  facts.  I  am,  how-
ever, somewhat  anticipating  the  course  of  the  argument  in
insisting  upon  the  need  of  pushing  the  investigation  further.

The  Dionysus  Cult.

Orphicism  centres,  as  we  have  seen,  round  the  Dionysiac
mysteries.  As  a  body  of  doctrine,  as  a  ritual  organisation,  we
cannot,  positively,  carry  it  beyond  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  or,
probably,  a  century  or  two  further  back.  It  is  otherwise,
however,  with  the  worship  of  Dionysus,  alluded  to  as  this  is
in  a  well-known  Homeric  passage,  familiar  as  it  is  to  Hesiod,
and  attested  as  it  is  by  a  mass  of  varied  archaeological  evi-
dence which  compels  us  to  assume  its  existence  in  Greece  in
the  ninth  or  eighth  century  B.C.  at  the  latest.  Let  us  then
consider  the  Dionysiac  cult  apart  from  any  special  connec-
tion with  fully  developed  Orphicism.  I  cannot  do  better
than  summarise  Professor  Rohde's  brilliant  sketch  in  Psyche
(pp.  319  el  seq.).  Although,  as  will  be  shown  later,  I  draw
somewhat  different  conclusions  from  part  of  the  material  he
has  adduced,  although  we  may  see  reason  to  supplement  or
rectify  his  argument,  still  the  bird's-eye  view  he  affords  will
be  found  singularly  vivid  and  illuminating.  Moreover,  by
setting  forth  certain  facts  and  suggestions  in  the  words  of  a
scholar  whose  exposition  is  based  upon  other  principles  and
has  other  objects  in  view  than  those  of  the  present  investi-
gation, I  avoid  the  reproach  I  might  otherwise  incur  of
selecting  such  facts  and  conclusions  as  suit  my  thesis.  The
reader  may  be  startled  by  seeing  how  aptly  Greek  myth  and
ritual  illustrate  Irish  romance,  and  will  certainly  view  the


138         ROHDE'S    EXPOSITION    OF

process  with  less  suspicion  if  he  realise  its  independence  of
the  facts  I  have  adduced  and  the  inferences  I  have  drawn
from  them.  The  following  paragraphs  thus  render  in  brief
Professor  Rohde's  exposition.  My  comment  thereon  is
reserved  for  a  later  stage  of  the  inquiry.

Belief  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul  involves  acceptance
of  its  affinity  to  the  divine  nature,  for  immortality  is  the
especial  attribute  of  godhood.  The  Homeric  presentment
of  Hades,  and  of  the  bloodless,  phantom-like  existence  of
its  dwellers,  was  incapable  of  originating  and  nourishing
such  a  belief;  the  roots  of  this  we  must  seek  in  the  Diony-
sian  cult.

In  mankind  at  large  in  an  early  stage  of  development  the
state  of  ecstasy,  mania,  has  always  had  special  weight  and
import.  In  it  the  patient,  freed  from  the  chains  of  sense,
passes  into  a  world  wherein  the  capacities  of  will  and  desire
seem  commensurate,  wherein  the  bonds  of  individuality  are
loosened,  wherein  the  fixed  and  settled  outlines  of  nature
by  which  man  is  controlled  and  confined  shift  and  transform
themselves  and  accommodate  themselves  to  his  directed
energy.  Life  viewed  from  this  ecstatic  standpoint  is  not  a
series  of  individual  manifestations  rigidly  confined  within
irremovable  limits,  but  is  a  plastic  essence  the  infinite
potentialities  of  which  are  accessible  to  whoso  knows  the
means  of  attaining  and  mastering  them.  The  state  of
ecstasy  may  be  reached  in  many  ways,  chief  among  them  the
rapid  motion  prolonged  to  exhaustion,  the  music  madden-
ing to  the  senses,  the  sudden  change  from  the  blackness  of
night  to  the  fierce  flare  of  torch  and  bonfire,  in  short  all  the
accompaniments  of  the  frenzied  midnight  worship  we  know
to  have  characterised  the  cult  of  Dionysus  amid  the  moun-


DIONYSUS   WORSHIP  139

tains  of  Thrace.  Doubtless  more  artificial  means  were  not
lacking ;  hemp  and  other  narcotics  may  have  aided  in  pro-
voking the  god-possessed  frenzy  in  which  Maenad  and
Bassarid,  with  senses  exacerbated  to  insensibility,  rent
asunder  the  living  victim  and  devoured  his  quivering  flesh.
The  god,  the  very  god  enters  into  them,  the  bull-horned
devotee  is  at  once  symbol  and  manifestation  of  the  bull-god
he  worships.  As  such  he  shares  the  divine  energies,  the
divine  privileges.  '  'Tis  when  they  are  full  of  the  god  that  the
Bacchse  draw  milk  and  honey  from  the  stream,  not  when
they  have  come  to  themselves,'  says  Plato ;  'wine  and  honey
gush  forth  from  the  earth,  they  are  amidst  the  sweet  smells
of  Syria,'  says  Euripides,  in  the  play  from  which  more  than
from  any  other  source  we  may  gain  some  idea  of  the  divine
frenzy  of  the  Dionysus  worshipper.  The  contrast  between
the  fierce  energies,  the  fierce  joys  of  ecstasy  and  the  condi-
tion of  ordinary  life  easily  led  to  a  dualistic  conception  of
life.  The  very  word  eWTao-is  involves  the  idea  that  soul,
or  spirit,  call  it  what  one  may,  is  capable  of  leaving  the
body,  of  being  elsewhere.  To  free  the  spirit,  to  enable  it
to  transcend  bodily  conditions,  to  bring  it  into  communion
with  the  god,  such  are  the  objects  aimed  at  by  the  devotee.
Such  men  and  women  as  displayed  a  greater  capacity  for
entering  the  '  possessed '  state,  and  in  whom  the  god  mani-
fested himself  with  the  strongest  energy,  would  naturally
excel  their  fellows ;  somewhat  of  their  power  would  abide
with  them  in  their  ordinary  life ;  a  caste  of  soothsayers,  of
wizards  would  constitute  itself.  And  in  very  deed  the
soothsaying  power  of  the  Thracians  was  far-famed.

This  yearning  for  the  powers  and  joys  of  the  ecstatic
state,  the  feeling  of  communion  with  mightier,  freer  beings,
which  it,  and  it  alone,  afforded,  are,  as  already  said,  almost


Mo  ROHDE'S    EXPOSITION    OF

world-wide.  And  they  are  always  accompanied  by  intense
belief  in  the  life  and  power  of  the  spirit  apart  from  the
body.  So  too  with  the  Thracian  worshippers  of  Dionysus.
Herodotus  tells  of  the  Thracian  Getae,  whose  belief  '  made
men  immortal.'1  After  this  life  they  passed  away  to  an
endless  one  with  Zalmoxis  their  god,  who  ever  sits  in  the
hollowed  hill.  Again  we  learn  from  Pomponius  Mela,
'  that  they  deemed  the  souls  of  the  departed  would  return.' 2
Such  a  conception  is  implied  too  in  the  assumption,  widely
prevalent  in  antiquity,  of  a  kinship  between  the  Thracian
and  Pythagorean  doctrine  concerning  the  soul,  and  justifying
the  ascription  to  the  Thracians  of  a  belief  that  the  soul
entered  into  a  new  body  in  which  it  continued  its  earthly
existence,  and  in  so  far  was  'immortal.'  It  is  significant
that  in  the  Hecuba  of  Euripides  it  is  the  Thracian  Polymestor
who  tells  the  queen,  in  answer  to  her  question  concerning
her  fate  after  death,  that  she  shall  become  a  dog.

If  the  spirit  can  attain  to  and  recruit  itself  with  the  divine
essence  in  the  state  of  ecstasy,  must  not  its  own  essence  be
divine,  and  if  divine,  immortal,  and  may  not  death  as  a
permanent  separation  of  body  and  spirit  be  the  portal  of
immortality  for  the  latter?  And,  if  so,  who  would  not
yearn  for  death  as  admitting  the  spirit  to  a  realm  it  can
only  attain  here  in  rare  moments  of  '  possession '  by  com-
munion with  the  god  ?  Thus,  as  Herodotus  reports,  the
Thracian  greeted  the  new-born  child  with  cry  and  lament,
whilst  the  dead  were  buried  with  joyful  clamour,  for  that
they  henceforth  lived  in  perfect  bliss.3  Hence  the  Thracian
readiness  for  death,  which  astounded  the  ancients ;  to  these
barbarians  it  seemed,  as  Galen  notes,  'a  fair  thing  to  die.'

1  Herodotus,  iv.  94.

2  Pomponius  Mela,  ii.  18.  3  Herodotus,  v.  4.


DIONYSUS    WORSHIP  141

The  cult  of  Dionysus  had  penetrated  the  Hellenic  world
before  the  period  in  which  the  Homeric  poems  took  shape,
but  in  Homer's  days  it  was  as  yet  a  minor  and  local  worship  ;
Dionysus  has  no  place  among  Homer's  Olympians.  At  a
later  period,  perchance  during  the  storm  and  stress  of  the
Dorian  invasion,  the  Thracian  god  made  rapid  conquests
throughout  the  Grecian  world  in  spite  of  the  fundamental
opposition  between  the  spirit  of  his  cult  and  the  genius  of
the  Hellenic  race.  Greek  religion  was  profoundly  modified
in  consequence,  but  so  also  was  the  Thracian  cult ;  it  be-
came humanised,  Hellenised.  Yet  it  ever  retained  its  primal
animating  principle,  and  even  in  such  a  comparatively  late
manifestation  of  Dionysus'  power  as  the  origination  of
comedy  we  can  detect  the  link  which  unites  the  comedian's
art,  the  art  of  transformation,  of  manifestation  in  diverse
personalities,  with  the  midnight  orgy  in  which  the  frenzied
devotee  sought  from  the  god  the  power  of  loosening  himself
from  the  chains  of  sense,  of  entering  into  the  ecstatic
state.

Among  the  Olympians  it  is  with  the  most  typical  of
Hellenic  deities,  with  Apollo,  that  Dionysus  became  most
closely  associated ;  and  the  mutual  action  and  reaction
upon  each  other  of  these  worships,  so  diverse  in  their
original  spirit,  form  an  important  chapter  in  the  history  of
Greek  religion.1  The  Dionysus  worship  was  not  only
softened,  it  was  regularised ;  the  frame  of  mind  in  which
ecstasy  was  yearned  and  striven  for  yielded  the  elements  of
an  elaborate  system  of  purificatory  and  ascetic  rites.  For
as  the  object  aimed  at  is  the  release  of  the  spirit  from  the
bonds  of  the  flesh,  the  more  permanent  mode  of  accom-

1  Rohde  does  not  explain  this  association,  a  natural  and  inevitable
one,  in  my  opinion.     See  infra,  passim.


142  ROHDE    ON    DIONYSUS

plishing  this  by  means  of  ascetic  mortification  came  to
rival,  and  with  minds  of  a  higher  cast,  to  supplant  the
temporary  excitement  of  the  orgiastic  frenzy.  Again,  the
influence  of  a  sacerdotal  hierarchy,  such  as  that  associated
with  the  cult  of  Apollo,  would  make  for  the  substitution  of
a  symbolic  ritual,  performed,  and  only  to  be  performed  by
itself,  rather  than  for  the  perpetuation  of  an  actual  ritual
shared  in  by  all  the  worshippers.

But  the  evolution  of  the  religious  idea  did  not  stop  here.
If  ecstasy,  release  for  a  time,  shorter  or  longer  as  orgiastic
frenzy  or  ascetic  mortification  is  the  mode  adopted,  from
the  bonds  of  carnal  sense,  be  the  consummation  to  be
achieved,  then  subjection  to  these  bonds  must  be  regarded  as
the  highest  evil,  and  it  must  be  the  devotee's  aim  to  escape
therefrom,  not  only  in  this  life,  but  in  possible  manifestations
of  the  spirit,  after  this  life ;  the  necessary  existence  of
such  manifestations  being  an  inevitable  deduction  from  the
phenomena  of  ecstasy.  Thus  are  reached  the  half-religious,
half-metaphysical  conceptions  of  the  soul  prisoner  of  the
body,  and  the  purely  religious  corollary  therefrom,  that  the
task  of  the  devotee  is  to  minimise  the  effects  of  this  bondage
in  this  life,  and  to  escape  from  it  altogether  after  death.

So  far  Professor  Rohde,  whose  entire  exposition,  with  its
buttressing  apparatus  of  citation  from  Greek  literature,
should  be  read.  But  the  summary  I  have  just  given  is
sufficient  to  focus  upon  the  phenomena  of  Irish  mythic
romance  a  light  under  which  they  assumed  ordered  and
reasoned  significance.  For  we  see  that  a  body  of  myth  in
which  shape-shifting,  the  capacity  for  self-manifestation
under  diverse  forms,  are  prominent  features  is  most  naturally
explained  by  the  existence  of  a  body  of  religious  belief  in


DIONYSUS    AND    ELYSIUM  143

the  attainment  of  ecstasy  through  the  medium  of  orgiastic
frenzy.  And  by  carrying  the  analysis  of  the  Dionysus  cult
beyond  the  stage  reached  by  Professor  Rohde  we  shall  find
the  wherewithal  to  account  for  the  other  features  of  Celtic
belief,  besides  its  pseudo  -  Pythagoreanism  noted  by  the
ancients,  and  to  make  it  more  than  probable  that  similar
beliefs  existed  among  the  insular  Celts.

Dionysus  and  Elysium.

Before  entering  upon  this  task  the  two  pregnant  citations
from  Plato  and  Euripides  demand  more  than  passing
notice.  They  supply  a  psychological  reason  for  that  associa-
tion of  Elysium  and  metamorphosis  which  persists  so  strongly
in  the  Irish  mythic  romances,  and  which  might  otherwise
seem  inexplicable.  The  one  belief  as  the  other  is  seen  to
be  rooted  in  the  phenomena  of  ecstasy.  The  devotee  who
seeks  to  escape  from  the  fetters  imposed  upon  him  by
bodily  conditions  also  seeks  to  escape  to  a  realm  in  which
his  ideal  of  felicity,  dependent,  however,  at  first  wholly
upon  bodily  conditions,  may  be  realised.  Fancy  links
together  the  two  conceptions,  and  even  though  in  the
course  of  evolution  they  develop  independently,  still  the
connection  remains  apparent,  inexplicable  as  its  cause  may
seem.  The  hint  afforded  by  Plato  and  Euripides  must  be
borne  in  mind  when  the  history  of  the  twin  conceptions
among  the  Aryan-speaking  races  is  investigated,  and  it  is
sought  to  determine  whether  or  no  they  are  derived,
mediately  or  immediately,  from  the  older  cultures  of  the
East.

To  return  to  the  Dionysus  cult,  Professor  Rohde's
analysis,  brilliant  and  suggestive  as  it  is,  brings  into  promin-
ence elements  which  are  mainly  secondary,  at  least  in  the


144  ORIGIN    AND    NATURE   OF

stage  in  which  he  considers  them,  and  omits  to  duly
emphasise  others  which  are  primary.  This  is  easily  ex-
plicable when  his  object — the  discussion  of  Hellenic  spirit-
belief — is  remembered.  But  the  conceptions  which  he
passes  by  are  of  first-rate  importance  for  us.

The  True  Nature  of  the  Dionysus  Cult.1

There  can  be  little,  indeed  we  say  no  doubt,  that  we
must  regard  the  ritual  involved  in  the  oldest  forms  of
Dionysus  worship  as  akin  to  a  great  mass  of  symbolic  rites
prevalent  throughout  large  areas  of  both  the  Old  and  New
World,  the  purport  of  which  is  to  strengthen  the  life  of  the
vegetation  upon  which  that  of  man  depends,  by  infusing
into  it  the  vital  energy  of  a  specially  selected  victim.  The
greater  the  potentialities  of  life  and  vigour  possessed  by  the
victim,  the  greater  the  benefit  ensuing  from  his  sacrifice.
Hence,  at  an  early  stage  of  thought,  the  conclusion  that  if
the  mysterious  being  or  power,  the  god,  of  whom  growth
and  life,  both  animal  and  vegetable,  may  be  regarded  as  an
attribute  or  manifestation,  can  be  sacrificed,  the  greatest
amount  of  advantage  can  be  counted  upon.  In  practice
this  resolves  itself  into  treating  the  victim  as  a  manifestation
or  a  symbol  of  the  god,  with  the  natural  consequence  of
intensifying  the  conception  of  his  metamorphic  nature.  He
is  ever  being  sacrificed  but  to  remanifest  himself  in  new

1  In  this  paragraph  I  am  practically  summarising  and  restating  the
views  of  Mannhardt  and  Mr.  Frazer.  I  refer  to  the  latter's  Golden
Bough,  and  to  Mr.  Hartland's  Legend  of  Perseus,  for  a  full  exposition
and  justification  of  the  theory.  Cf.  also  Robertson  Smith's  article,
'Sacrifice,'  in  the  ninth  edition  of  the  Encyclopedia  Britannica,  and
his  Religion  of  the  Semites,  and  Voigt's  article,  '  Dionysus,'  in  Roscher's
Lexikon.


THE   DIONYSUS    WORSHIP  145

forms,  and  with  added  potencies.  Nor  must  another  ad-
vantage be  overlooked.  If  the  life  and  energy  of  the
sacrificed  god  can  be  made  to  pass  indirectly  into  man
through  the  vegetation  upon  which  he  subsists,  so  it  can  pass
directly  Thus  a  twofold  aspect  of  the  sacrifice.  The  vital
essence  of  the  victim,  existing  in  the  blood,  in  the  heaving,
quivering,  quick  flesh,  is  distributed,  partly  to  mother-earth
that  she  may  nourish  and  in  due  season  bring  forth  the  fruit
of  her  womb,  the  god-son  by  whom  she  is  impregnated,  and
whom  she  bears ;  partly,  to  the  devotee.  And  the  latter
is  straightway  justified,  for  does  he  not  acquire  by  participa-
tion in  the  rite  access  to  that  state  of  ecstasy  in  which  for
the  time  being  he  seems  to  pass  out  of  the  mortal  into  the
immortal,  out  of  the  confined  into  the  unconfined,  to  leave
behind  him  human  limitations,  and  ascend  into  the  sphere
of  the  superhuman,  the  divine  ?

Take  such  a  series  of  assumptions  and  conceptions  as  the
basis  of  a  creed  expressing  itself  in  ritual  form,  and  it  may
put  on  the  most  diverse  aspects  according  to  the  genius  and
social  organisation  of  the  race.  Among  an  essentially  war-
like people,  exercising  sway  over  subject  populations,  de-
pendent for  its  power  and  influence  and  wealth  upon  its
martial  valour  and  consequent  prestige,  what  may  be  called
the  agricultural  side  of  the  creed  would  tend  to  be  mini-
mised ;  the  powers,  the  energies  which  the  ruling  warrior
caste,  and  its  priestly  representatives,  would  seek  to  attain,
would  be  less  the  quickening  of  bud  and  fruit,  than  the
heightening  and  intensifying  of  human  individuality  as
directed  to  combat  and  domination.  Sacrifice  would  tend
to  lose  its  fixed  calendarial  character  determined  by  the
unchanging  round  of  natural  processes,  and  to  form  a  fund,
so  to  say,   of  reserve  energy,  upon  which  the  race  could

VOL.  II.  K


I


i46  NATURE    OF   SACRIFICE

draw  when  and  as  needed.  In  such  a  way  those  usages
of  human  sacrifice  attested  to  by  classical  observers  of  the
second  and  first  centuries  B.C.,  as  existing  among  their
Celtic  neighbours,  might  establish  themselves.  They  should
be  regarded  as  renewing  the  vital  energies  of  the  race,  as
seizing  upon  and  utilising  for  the  conqueror  the  stock  of  life
existing  among  the  conquered.1

The  strong  stress  laid  by  classical  observers  upon  the
psychological  basis  of  the  Celtic  doctrine,  which  they  com-
pared with  the  Pythagorean  metempsychosis,  is  in  consonance
with  this  interpretation.  Death  had  no  terror  for  the  Celt,
for  had  not  his  priest  power  to  furnish  him  with  a  fresh
stock  of  life,  and  whence  could  this  power  be  derived  save
through  the  medium  of  sacrifice  ?  It  was  after  all  a  logical
deduction  from  the  original  conception.  If  sacrifice,  ritually
performed  (and  in  course  of  time  ritual  creates  inevitably
a  priestly  class),  could  renew  and  recreate  the  sources  of
life  manifested  in  nature,  why  not  in  man  ?

The  theory  thus  adumbrated  accounts  reasonably  for  two
features  of  Celtic  religion  which  more  than  any  other  im-
pressed classical  observers :  human  sacrifice,  on  a  scale
and  with  circumstances  of  horror  which  startled  even  the
cruel  and  callous  Roman,  and  a  doctrine  of  life  in  which
they  detected  an  analogy  to  the  Pythagorean  system.
But  a  hypothesis  cannot  be  regarded  as  satisfactory  simply
because  it  satisfactorily  accounts  for  facts,  it  must  also  in
some  measure  rest  upon  independent  evidence.  Tacitly,  I
have  postulated  among  the  Celts  such  a  ritual  of  sacrifice,

1  C  .  Caesar's  explanation  of  Celtic  sacrifice  :  '  They  think  that  unless
a  man's  life  is  rendered  up  for  a  man's  life,  the  will  of  the  immortal
God  cannot  be  satisfied,  and  they  have  sacrifices  of  this  kind  as  a
national  institution.'


CELTIC   SACRIFICE  147

originally  agricultural,  as  we  find  among  the  Thracians  and
as  developed  with  the  Greeks  into  the  Dionysus  worship  of
historic  times.  This  ritual  I  assume  to  have  departed  from
its  agricultural  type,  and  to  have  developed  so  as  to  suit  the
needs  of  a  community  essentially  warlike  in  spirit  and
organisation.  But  traces  of  the  original  form  and  significance
of  the  ritual  must  have  persisted.     Do  such  exist  ?

Ritual  Sacrifice  in  the  Celtic  World.

One  of  the  few  facts  concerning  Celtic  ritual  in  the  period
before  Christ  which  has  come  down  to  us  is  due  to  the
Greek  traveller  Posidonius.  Strabo  and  Dionysius  Perie-
getes  have  preserved  his  account  of  the  priestesses  of  the
Namnites,  who  celebrated  their  rites  in  an  island  at  the
mouth  of  the  Loire.  No  man  durst  set  foot  on  this  island,
which  was  solely  devoted  to  the  use  of  these  priestesses,  but
at  times  they  visited  men  on  the  mainland.  These  women
'  possessed  of  Dionysus,'  in  a  state  of  frenzy,  accomplished
once  a  year  the  following  rite :  the  temple  of  the  god  they
worshipped  was  roofed,  but  annually  the  priestesses  unroofed
it ;  it  had,  however,  to  be  roofed  again  before  sunset.  So
each  of  the  women  came  to  the  work  bringing  upon  her
shoulders  a  burden  of  the  requisite  materials,  and  in  case
any  one  allowed  her  burden  to  fall  to  the  ground  she  was
instantly  torn  to  pieces  by  her  companions,  who  carried  her
mangled  remains  round  the  temple  until  the  flame  of  their
fury  burned  itself  out.  Each  succeeding  year  saw  the  horrid
scenes  repeated  (Rhys,  Hibb.  Led.  197,  quoting  Strabo,
iv.  4).

With  chis  account  of  the  Namnites  priestesses  must  be
compared  that  given  some  hundred  and  fifty  years  later
by  Pomponius  Mela  of  the  priestesses  of  the  island  Sena,


i48  CELTIC    SACRIFICE

probably  the  modern  Seine,  and,  if  so,  not  far  distant  from
the  unnamed  isle  of  Posidonius.  I  quote  Professor  Rhys'
version  {Hibb.  Led.  196):  'Sena,  in  the  Britannic  Sea,
opposite  the  coast  of  the  Osismi,  is  famous  for  the  oracle
of  a  Gaulish  god,  whose  priestesses,  living  in  the  holiness  of
perpetual  virginity,  are  said  to  be  nine  in  number.  They  call
them  Gallizenae,  and  they  believe  them  to  be  endowed  with
extraordinary  gifts :  to  rouse  the  sea  and  wind  by  their  in-
cantations, to  turn  themselves  into  whatsoever  animal  form
they  may  chose,  to  cure  diseases  which  among  others  are
incurable,  to  know  what  is  to  come,  and  to  foretell  it.
They  are,  however,  devoted  to  the  service  of  voyagers  only
who  have  set  out  on  no  other  errand  than  to  consult
them '  (Mela,  iii.  6).

Before  discussing  these  accounts  I  may  be  allowed  to
note  the  essential  kinship  between  the  historic  island  of
women  devoted  to  the  worship  of  a  god,  in  which  men
durst  not  set  foot,  but  whose  dwellers  sallied  forth  to  seek
temporary  mates  on  the  mainland,  and  the  isle  of  women  in
Irish  legend,  whose  goddess  dwellers  come  to  Ireland  to
seek  out  heroes  whose  love  they  may  win.

To  return  to  the  classical  accounts.  That  they  apply,  if
not  to  the  very  same,  at  least  to  closely  allied  institutions,
is  evident,  also  that  they  at  once  mutually  complement  each
other  and  reveal  a  development  which  we  know  from  other
sources  to  have  taken  place.  The  bloody  and  ferocious
rite  mentioned  by  the  earlier  traveller  has  disappeared  by
the  time  of  Mela,  in  consequence,  it  cannot  be  doubted,
of  the  stringent  enactments  made  by  the  Roman  power
against  the  Druidic  practice  of  human  sacrifice.  The  object
of  the  cult  has  suffered  some  change  in  consequence,  a
different  aim  has  been  assigned  to  the  might  of  the  priestess,


IRISH   RITUAL   SACRIFICE         149

and  she  is  on  the  way  of  tranformation  into  the  mediseval
witch  with  her  power  over  wind  and  tide.  Yet  Mela  has  pre-
served a  trait  unnoted  by  the  older  traveller ;  the  priestesses
of  the  old  god,  giver  of  life,  manifester  of  life,  lord  of  form
and  shape,  whose  flesh  and  blood  supply  the  plastic  essence
out  of  which  Nature  is  ever  fashioning,  and  into  which
she  is  ever  refashioning  herself,  possess  and  retain  the
might  and  attribute  of  their  master;  like  the  swineherd
servants  of  the  Tuatha  De  kings  in  Irish  legend,  they
can  '  turn  themselves  into  whatsoever  animal  form  they  may
choose.'

That  the  nature  of  the  ritual  described  by  Posidonius  is
originally  agricultural  may  be  proved,  I  think,  by  its
periodicity.  The  god  of  vegetable  growth,  unlike  him  of
war  or  of  the  windy  sea,  must  be  strengthened  and  placated
at  fixed  seasons.  The  sacrifice  of  the  priestess  of  Sena
may  be  looked  upon  as  akin  to  the  Meriah  sacrifice  among
the  Khonds  of  Bengal.

Ritual  Sacrifice  in  Ireland.

As  we  shall  see  later,  survivals  of  the  practice  have  per-
sisted in  Britain  which,  when  compared  with  more  perfectly
preserved  examples  elsewhere,  put  its  real  nature  beyond
doubt.  But  at  this  stage  I  do  not  wish  to  appeal  to  in-
ferential and  analogical,  but  solely  to  direct,  evidence.
Fortunately  among  the  very  few  statements  respecting  the
ritual  side  of  old  Irish  religion  we  possess,  one  there  is,  con-
clusive on  the  point  under  investigation.  The  dinnshenchas
of  Mag  Slecht  runs  as  follows :  '  'Tis  there  was  the  King
idol  of  Erin,  namely  the  Crom  Croich,  and  around  him
twelve  idols  made  of  stones ;  but  he  was  of  gold.  Until
Patrick's  advent  he  was  the  god  of  every  folk  that  colonised


150  IRISH   SACRIFICE

Ireland.  To  him  they  used  to  offer  the  firstlings  of  every
issue  and  the  chief  scions  of  every  clan.  Tis  to  him  that
Erin's  king,  Tigernmas,  son  of  Follach,  repaired  on  Hallow-
tide,  together  with  the  men  and  women  of  Ireland,  in  order
to  adore  him.  And  they  all  prostrated  themselves  before
him,  so  that  the  tops  of  their  foreheads  and  the  gristle  of
their  noses,  and  the  caps  of  their  knees  and  the  ends  of
their  elbows  broke,  and  three-fourths  of  the  men  of  Erin
perished  at  these  prostrations  ;  whence  Mag  Slecht,  "  Plain
of  Prostration"'  (Stokes,  Rennes  Ditidsenchas,  R.C.  xvi.
35-36).1

As  previously  stated  {supra,  i.  196),  many  of  the  prose  dtnn-
shenchas  are  also  found  in  a  verse  form  in  the  Book  of  Leinster
version ;  this  is  the  case  with  the  Mag  Slecht  dinnsenchas,
and  the  verse  adds  the  information  that  the  object  of  the
men  of  Ireland  in  offering  one-third  of  their  progeny  was  to
obtain  corn  and  milk ;  whence,  as  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes  com-
ments, '  we  may  infer  that  the  Irish  Celts,  like  other  races,
held  that  the  Earth-gods  could  be  propitiated  by  human
sacrifices '  (I.e.  36).  Although  the  Dinnshtnchas  is,  as  pre-
viously stated,  a  comparatively  late  compilation  (it  was  put
together  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  centuries  out  of  material,
some  of  which,  e.g.  the  verse  found  in  the  Book  of  Leinster
may  have  been  redacted  a  couple  of  centuries  before)  this
particular  tradition,  like  the  majority  of  those  contained  in  it,
must  be  of  pre-Christian  origin.  It  would  have  been  quite
impossible  for  a  Christian  monk  to  have  invented  such  a
story,  and  we  may  accept  it  as  a  perfectly  genuine  bit  of

1  In  Appendix  B.  Professor  Kuno  Meyer  has  edited  and  translated
the  metrical  version  of  this  dinnshenckas  found  in  the  Book  of  Leinster.
This  is  probably  the  oldest  form,  from  which  the  prose  versions  are
abridged.


GREEK   AND  CELTIC   SACRIFICE    151

information   respecting   the   ritual   side    of   insular   Celtic
religion.

The  insular  Celts,  then,  as  also  the  Continental,  practised
what  may  be  called  agricultural  sacrifice ;  in  the  case  of  the
Continental  Celts  the  circumstances  of  the  ritual,  the  sex  of
the  officiating  priests,  the  fierce  frenzy  which  accompanied
it,  were  such  as  to  suggest  to  the  Greek  observer  the
Dionysus  cult  of  his  own  land.  The  parallel  he  thus
implied  was  truer  than  he  knew ;  Dionysus  too,  son  of  Zeus
and  Semele,  comrade  of  Apollo,  lord  of  the  ecstasy  of  wine,
of  the  drama's  glamour,  had  indeed  been  aforetime  such  a
one  as  the  priestesses  of  Seine  worshipped  when  they  rent
and  devoured  their  stumbling  comrade.

Comparison  of  Greek  and  Celtic  Agricultural
Sacrificial  Cults.

Thus  we  find  among  the  Celts  traces  of  a  form  of  reli-
gion closely  akin  to  that  out  of  which  the  historical  Greek
Dionysus  cult  was  evolved ;  the  social  and  historic  con-
ditions of  either  race,  Celt  and  Greek,  differing  greatly  as
they  did,  the  development  of  this  religion  differed  likewise.
Bloody  and  ferocious  as  it  was  at  the  outset,  its  savage
characteristics  were  intensified  among  the  Celts  by  divorce
from  the  agricultural,  by  association  with  the  warlike
interests  of  the  race,  nor  had  it  to  suffer  rebuke  and  com-
petition from  the  cult  of  milder  gods.  In  Greece,  on  the
other  hand,  the  agricultural  side  of  Dionysus  persisted,  but
humanised  and  refined ;  whilst  association  with  deities  of  a
more  civilised  character  (I  give  the  word  its  etymological
value)  conferred  upon  the  god  an  infinitely  wider  and  more
varied  range  of  attributes  and  interests.  But  differ,  as  came
to  do  the  two  cults,  they  retained  an  essential  kinship  due


152  COMPARISON   OF   GREEK

to  common  origin ;  the  root  conception  of  both  is  the
capacity  of  renewing,  transmitting,  transforming  the  life
inherent  in  the  god,  his  ministers,  or  his  devotees:  the
sanction  of  this  conception  is  in  both  cases  the  same ;  the
participant  in  the  rites  attains  a  state  in  which  this  capacity
manifests  itself  beyond  all  doubt,  in  which,  too,  the  highest
ideal  of  felicity  may  be  grasped  by  him.  The  romantic
fiction  which  was  the  outcome  of  this  religion  is  necessarily
dominated  and  animated  by  the  mutually  related  concep-
tion of  escape  from  the  bonds  which  confine  man  to  one
manifestation  of  his  being,  of  escape  from  an  earth  which,
at  its  happiest,  makes  but  a  sorry  show  by  side  of  the  Elysium
he  pictures  in  his  frenzy.

The  close  parallel  between  the  fifth  century  Greek  account
of  the  Thracians  and  the  first  century  Graeco-Roman  account
of  the  Celts  may  be  noted  en  passant.  The  same  things
strike  Herodotus  about  the  one  set  of  barbarians  as  strike
Posidonius  about  the  other,  the  tenacity  of  belief  in  another
life,  the  contempt  of  death,  the  existence  of  conceptions
which  reminded  both  observers  of  Pythagoreanism.  I  note
the  parallel  but  disclaim  any  idea  of  suggesting  racial  affinity
between  Thracians  and  Celts.  To  argue  this  would  be,  I
believe,  to  misunderstand  the  history  of  the  Aryan-speaking
races  in  Europe.  Both  Thracians  and  Celts  are  Aryan-
speaking  peoples,  and  in  the  dark  backward  of  time  to
which  we  are  carried  by  the  necessity  of  dating  the  Thracian
Dionysus  worship  before  the  Greek  phase  of  it,  revealed  by
the  Homeric  mention,  say  from  1500  to  1000  B.C.,  I  hold
that  there  would  be  singularly  little  difference  in  religious
conceptions  and  social  organisation  between  the  various
less-advanced  members  of  the  Aryan  group  who  occupied
Central  and  Northern  Europe.     The  historic  causes  which


AND   CELTIC   SACRIFICE  153

were  to  differentiate  Celt  and  Teuton  and  Slav  had  not  yet
begun  to  operate,  and  it  is  quite  indifferent  to  our  thesis  to
which  branch  of  the  Aryan  family  the  Thracian  Aryans  are
to  be  affiliated.  All  that  need  be  noted  is  that  Greece,
coming  in  contact  at  four  centuries  of  distance  with  Aryan
barbarians  of  substantially  the  same  social  and  religious
culture,  was  struck  by  the  same  phenomena.

Greek  Origin  and  Nature  of  the  Dionysus  Cult.

Of  more  importance  than  the  exact  racial  affinities  of  the
prehistoric  Thracians  is  the  question  whether  the  Dionysus
cult  is  Greek  in  origin  and  development,  or  an  alien  in-
trusive element  in  Greek  religion.  The  Greeks  of  the  fifth
and  following  centuries  were  of  the  latter  opinion  for  the
most  part,  and  it  has  been  widely  held  by  modern  scholars.
A  series  of  myths,  similar  in  outline  and  import,  were,  until
recently,  interpreted  as  traces  of  the  opposition  which  the
alien  cult  encountered  in  the  Hellenic  world.  Stories  went
how  this  or  that  king,  fearing  the  frenzied  worship  paid  to
the  new  god,  strove  against  him,  and  how  Dionysus  sent
madness  upon  his  very  family  so  that  they  knew  him  not,
and  when  he  would  have  spied  upon  or  interfered  with  their
midnight  rites  tore  him  to  pieces — a  striking  symbol  of
the  fierce  conflict  which  this  un-Hellenic  cult  had  to  pass
through  before  it  could  effect  a  lodgment  in  the  Hellenic
world  !  But  of  late  these  myths  have  been  interpreted  in
an  entirely  different  sense :  they  are  regarded  as  attempts  to
explain  a  ritual,  the  true  significance  of  which  had  been
lost.  The  ritual  comprised,  as  we  have  seen,  the  sacrifice
of  the  god  to  the  god — of  his  representative,  that  is,  in  animal
or  human  form.  Now  the  human  representative  might  be
invested  with  special  powers  and  attributes  and  sanctities,


154  GREEK   ORIGIN   OF

such  as  made  him  for  the  time  the  chief  man  of  his  tribe  or
family,  attributes  and  sanctities  which  assimilated  him  to  the
god  and  ensured  corresponding  advantage  from  his  sacrifice.
Thus,  the  story  of  the  king  or  chief  torn  in  pieces  by  the
women  of  his  own  household  and  kin  might  well  be  no
fiction,  but  an  echo  of  what  had  actually  taken  place  at  one
time.  But  as  the  race  outgrew  the  stage  of  agricultural
sacrifice,  the  ferocious  slaughter  of  the  king-victim  would
assume  an  aspect  utterly  inexplicable.  His  death,  instead
of  being  the  chief  act  in  the  worship  of  the  god,  came  to  be
regarded  as  punishment  for  opposition  to  him,  and  in  this
way  such  stories  as  those  of  Pentheus  and  Lycurgus  would
arise.

Now  if  this  interpretation  be  correct,  not  only  does  it
afford  no  warrant  for  the  alien  origin  of  the  Dionysus  cult,
it  conclusively  disproves  the  theory  of  recent  alien  origin.
Had  the  cult  been  introduced  into  Greece  in  historic  times
with  the  full-blown  ritual  of  sacrifice  in  its  original  form,  a
phenomenon  so  strange,  so  repugnant  to  Greek  feeling  must
needs  have  justified  its  existence  in  such  a  way  that  mis-
apprehension of  its  significance  would  be  impossible.  If  we
admit  what  may  be  called  the  anthropological  interpretation,
we  must  needs  hold  that  the  Greeks  were  dealing  with  a
survival,  with  a  rite  that  maintained  itself,  as  rites  will,  long
after  the  animating  conception  had  fallen  away  from  the
popular  mind.  But  this  is  a  process  involving  a  lengthened
period  of  time.  Moreover,  as  Professor  Jevons  has  acutely
observed  (Folklore  ii.),  the  most  famous  of  these  legends,
that  in  which  King  Lycurgus  is  the  victim,  is  no  witness  to
the  Thracian  origin  of  the  cult,  as  Lycurgus  is  represented
as  a  Thracian  king.  It  is  singular  that  Professor  Rohde,
whilst   admitting   the   anthropological   explanation   of    the


DIONYSUS  WORSHIP  155

Lycurgus  and  alien  myths,  yet  argues  for  the  comparatively
late  introduction  of  the  cult  into  Greece,  which  that  explana-
tion disproves.  Another  German  scholar,  Professor  Maass,
has  in  his  Orpheus  felt  the  difficulty  and  essayed  to  clear  it
up.  His  work  is,  as  already  noted,  an  argument  in  favour
of  the  early  and  genuinely  Hellenic  character  of  the  Orphic
doctrine.  He  is  thus  led  to  distinguish  two  distinct  myths
of  the  sacrificed  and  eaten  god ;  one,  purely  Hellenic,  in
which  Orpheus  is  the  victim-deity  whose  essence  by  the  act
of  sacrifice  is  diffused  throughout  the  creation ;  one,  of
Thracian  origin,  in  which  Dionysus-Zagreus  plays  a  similar
part.  Fusion  of  the  two  cults  took  place  in  Thrace  in  the
sixth  century,  and  the  Thracian  god  supplanted  the  original
Greek  protagonist  of  the  myth.  Orphicism  received  in
consequence  an  accession  of  primitive,  barbaric  energy
which  enabled  it,  under  the  shadow  thrown  upon  the  Greek
world  by  the  advancing  menace  of  Persian  invasion,  to
successfully  appeal  to  large  sections  of  the  Hellenic  race
(Orpheus,  pp.  169  et  seq).

Maass  himself  admits  the  paradoxical  character  of  certain
among  his  conclusions,  notably  the  replacing  of  Orpheus
by  a  Thracian  supplanter  as  late  as  the  sixth-century.  It
seems  hardly  necessary  to  argue  against  a  theory  which
runs  counter  to  all  we  know  of  sixth-century  Orphicism ;  it
is  sufficient  to  point  out  that  the  complicated  hypothesis  is
unnecessary.  It  is  far  simpler  to  treat  the  ensemble  of
Dionysiac-Orphic  conception  as  being  Greek  from  the  be-
ginning, as  falling  into  disuse  and  disrepute,  thanks  to  a
combination  of  historic  conditions  which  turned  the  Greek
mind  in  other  directions,  and  impressed  upon  it,  as  a  whole,
a  stamp  alien  to  these  conceptions.  Yet,  they  nevertheless
persisted,  as  elements  connected  with  religion  will  persist ;


156  GREEK   ORIGIN    OF

they  still  formed  a  portion  of  the  emotional  and  intellectual
store  of  the  Greek  mind,  and  were  subject  to  the  phases  of
the  development  through  which  that  mind  passed.  That
development  not  only  led  the  Greeks  away  from  the  fierce
and  unbridled  frenzy  in  which  the  Dionysian  creed  found
its  most  characteristic  manifestations,  it  was  equally  hostile
to  the  ascetic  doctrine  into  which  that  frenzy  ultimately
transformed  itself.  The  Greek  soon  outgrew  the  primitive
stage  of  the  cult,  and  by  the  time  it  reached  the  ascetic
stage,  he  had  grown  away  from  that  likewise.  Thus  the
Pythagoreanism  which  was  the  last  outcome  of  the  Diony-
sian cult  (and  truly  Pythagoras  himself  never  imagined  a
stranger  metamorphosis)  exercised  so  little  influence  upon
Hellas,  whilst  the  corresponding  ascetic  doctrine  of  Buddha
revolutionised  India.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Greek  turned
Dionysus  to  an  account  equally  consonant  with  the  nature
of  the  god  and  the  genius  of  the  race,  making  him  the
patron  of  the  most  varied  and  living  of  all  forms  of  literary
art,  of  the  drama.

To  claim  the  Dionysus  cult  as  belonging  to  Greece  from
the  earliest  time  to  which  we  can  hark  back  is  by  no  means
to  deny  its  Thracian  character  likewise.  It  is  simply  to
assume  that  the  Greeks  and  their  northern  neighbours  had
once  possessed  similar  rites,  that  the  former  outgrew  and
transformed,  whilst  the  latter  retained  them  in  their  primi-
tive aspect.  It  is  quite  possible  that  such  traces  of  primi-
tive barbarism  as  lingered  in  Greek  usages  should  be
reinforced  during  times  of  closer  contact  between  the  more
and  less  advanced  peoples.  Such  a  time  of  contact  may
well  have  been,  as  Rohde  conjectures,  the  period  of  the
Dorian  invasion,  and  thus  may  be  explained  the  wilder,
savager  nature  of  the  Dionysus  ritual  in  Sparta.     Nor  is  it


DIONYSUS   WORSHIP  157

wonderful  that  under  these  circumstances  the  later  Greeks
should  be  tempted  to  assign  a  worship,  features  of  which
had  become  strange  if  not  actually  repugnant  to  them,
wholly  to  alien  influence.

A  remark  of  Professor  Maass  might  be  further  adduced  in
support  of  the  original  Greek  character  of  the  Dionysus
worship :  he  would  explain  the  Orphic-Pythagorean  metem-
psychosis doctrine  by  the  instinctive  fondness  of  the  Greek
race  for  a  mythology  based  upon  the  conception  of  metamor-
phosis, combining  with  it  the  various  theories  which  it  had
gradually  elaborated  concerning  the  nature  and  fate  of  the
soul.  This  may  be  admitted  if  we  recollect  that  a  mytho-
logy such  as  the  German  scholar  alludes  to  is  in  itself  an
outcome  of  and  a  witness  to  religious  conceptions  and  ritual
practices,  of  which  the  original  Dionysus  cult  is  the  most
characteristic  and  famous  example.

We  may  take  it  then  that  the  Aryan-Greek  like  the  Aryan-
Celt  passed  at  one  stage  of  his  development  through  a  phase
of  religion  which  may  be  styled  the  agricultural-sacrificial,
and  that  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other  the  resultant  mytho-
logy outlived  the  official  recognition  and  practice  of  the  ritual.
Unofficially  we  shall  see  reason  for  believing  that  the  latter
also  did  persist.  In  both  cases,  too,  this  phase  of  religion  gave
rise  to  a  philosophy,  as  far  subtler  and  more  complex  in  the
one  case  than  the  other  as  the  Greek  outstripped  the  Celt  in
every  form  of  culture.  But  with  the  Greek  an  ethical  system
as  well  as  a  philosophy  came  into  being.  And  here  the
reader  will  doubtless  have  detected  an  apparent  fault  in  the
argument.  The  Orphic  sectary  of  the  sixth  century,  whose
highest  lure  is  that  he  can  release  man  from  the  cycle  of
birth,  from  possibility  of  entering  into  another  form  after
death's  release  from  the  present  one,  is  the  lineal  heir  of  the


158  GREEK  ORIGIN   OF

votary  who  sought  in  frenzy  the  means  of  attaining  the
power  of  transformation.  How  has  the  change  come  about  ?
Professor  Rohde,  it  will  be  recollected,  has  essayed  to
answer  this  question  (supra,  p.  142).  The  steps  according  to
him  are :  desire  to  throw  off  the  bonds  of  sense ;  disgust
with  the  body  which  in  this  life  frustrates  the  effort ;  dread
of  similar  bondage  after  the  present  life  is  closed  by  death ;
consequent  desire  to  escape  re-birth  which  can  only  be
conceived  of  as  an  association  of  spirit  and  body.  It  may
seem  unlikely  that  such  a  subtle  chain  of  reasoning  should
result  in  convictions  which  deeply  moved  no  inconsiderable
section  of  the  Hellenic  race  as  did  the  Orphic  doctrines.
If  the  sanction  of  Orphicism  was  really  escape  from  re-birth,
one  would  naturally  seek  for  a  less  far-fetched  cause.  But
the  question  need  not  be  examined  here.  A  similar
phenomenon  confronts  us  in  India ;  there  too,  and  in  the
sixth  century  likewise,  the  moral  revolution  of  Buddhism
rests  upon  the  passionate  longing  to  have  done  with  life,
to  be  released  from  the  horror  of  possible  re-birth.  The
nature  and  cause  of  these  strangely  similar  phenomena
should  be  inquired  into  at  the  same  time.

The  discussion  of  these  points,  secondary  though  they
be,  is  not  useless  for  our  argument.  It  is  of  moment  to
show  that  Greek  and  Celt  share  certain  fundamental  concep-
tions :  it  is  well  to  remember  that  Asia  as  well  as  Europe
has  its  share  in  the  Aryan  problem,  for,  so  rapidly  has  the
pendulum  swung,  one  is  in  danger  of  forgetting  nowadays
that  the  men  who  sang  the  hymns  of  the  Rig  Veda  or  told
the  stories  of  the  Jatakas  spoke  an  Aryan  tongue  equally
with  the  men  who  listened  to  the  lays  of  Homer  or  pictured
Cuchulinn  holding  the  warriors  of  Ireland  single-handed
at  bay.


DIONYSUS   WORSHIP  159

We  must  now  return  to  Ireland.  Comparison  with
Greek  myth  and  ritual  has  revealed  the  sources  of  that
body  of  mythic  romance  of  which  the  Voyage  of  Bran  is
but  one,  and  not  the  most  striking  example.  We  can  assert
with  some  confidence  that  this  body  of  romance  drew  life
and  inspiration  from  such  a  conception  of  nature,  animate
and  inanimate,  as  in  Greece  produced  alike  the  cult  of
Dionysus  and  the  rich  store  of  metamorphosis  myth  asso-
ciated with  his  name.  To  verify  this  hypothesis  we  must
essay  to  determine  with  greater  precision  than  has  hitherto
been  attained  the  real  nature  of  the  mysterious  beings  who
play  so  large  a  part  in  the  Voyage  of  Bran  and  allied
legends.  If  the  surmise  to  which  we  have  been  led  be
correct,  some  traces  of  the  nature  we  assign  hypothetically
to  the  Tuatha  De  Danann  must  be  recoverable  from  the
stories  told  of  them.  And  in  investigating  the  character
and  attributes  of  this  mysterious  race,  let  us  remember  that
we  are  also  attacking  the  problem  of  the  origin  and  nature  of
Irish  fairy-belief ;  for  what  the  Irish  peasant  of  to-day  fables
and  believes  of  the  good  people,  his  ancestors  of  a  thousand
years  ago  fabled  and  believed  of  the  Folk  of  the  Goddess.

Lest  I  be  misunderstood,  I  would  say  that  whilst  I  claim
already  to  have  found  an  immediate  source  for  certain
features  of  Celtic  and  Greek  mythic  romance  and  worship
in  cults  akin  to  that  of  Dionysus,  I  prejudge  nothing  as  to
the  ultimate  origin  of  these  cults  themselves.  These  may
be  due  to  the  influence  of  the  East  upon  Aryan  Europe,
or  they  may  be  the  result  of  a  contact  wholly  European
between  Aryan  and  non-Aryan.  Before  essaying  to  solve
this  final  problem  we  have  still  to  supply  many  details  in  our
sketch  of  the  purely  Aryan,  and  in  especial  of  the  purely
Irish,  development  of  this  phase  of  religion.


CHAPTER  XVII

THE   TUATHA   DE  DANNAN

The  dinnslunchas  of  Mag  Slecht  and  the  mythic  reign  of  Tighernmas  ;  the
Annalistic  account ;  apparent  discrepancy  with  the  Dinnshenchas —
The  true  nature  of  the  Tighernmas  tradition  ;  consequences  for  Irish
mythology — Classification  of  Irish  mythical  literature  concerning  the
Tuatha  de  Danann — The  Annalistic  account  ;  the  romantic  account
of  Battle  of  Moytura ;  the  Rabelaisian  element  in  Irish  mythology ;
comparison  of  Annalistic  and  romantic  accounts  ;  necessary  deduction
as  to  agricultural  origin  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  ;  Dinnshenchas
mentions  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  and  discussion  of  the  traditions
concerning  the  fairs  of  Carman  and  Tailtinn — The  heroic  saga
mentions  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  ;  validity  of  this  evidence ;  com-
parison between  the  mythic  literature  of  Greece  and  Ireland ;  true
import  of  heroic  saga  evidence  —  Development  of  the  Tuatha  de
Danann  mythology.

The  Annalistic  Account  of  Tighernmas.

A  convenient  starting-point  for  our  investigation  into  the
origin  and  nature  of  the  mysterious  folk  of  the  goddess
Danu  is  afforded  by  the  dinnshetichas  of  Mag  Slecht,  quoted
in  the  last  chapter.  From  it  we  learn  that  at  Hallowtide — at
the  close,  that  is,  of  the  autumn  and  beginning  of  the
winter  season — the  ancient  Irish  worshipped  the  image  or
symbol  of  a  god  with  human  sacrifice.  Now  the  Irish
annals  have  somewhat  to  say  about  the  cult  practised  at
Mag  Slecht.  In  the  Annals  of  the  Four  Masters  we  read,
a.m.   3656  (/.*.  according  to  the  chronology  of  the  Four

160


ANNALISTIC   ACCOUNT  161

Masters,  1538  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ),  as  follows
concerning  Tighernmas,  king  of  Ireland  at  the  time :  '  It
was  by  Tighearnmas  also  that  gold  was  first  smelted  in
Ireland.  ...  It  was  by  him  that  goblets  and  brooches  were
first  covered  with  gold  and  silver  in  Ireland.  It  was  by
him  that  cloths  were  dyed  purple  and  blue  and  green.  It
was  in  his  reign  that  the  three  black  rivers  of  Ireland  burst
forth.  ...  At  the  end  of  the  year  he  died  with  three-
fourths  of  the  men  of  Ireland  about  him,  at  the  meeting  of
Mag  Slecht,  in  Breifne,  at  the  worshipping  of  Crom  Cruach,
which  was  the  chief  idol  of  adoration  in  Ireland.  This
happened  in  the  night  of  Samhain  (All  Hallows)  precisely.
It  was  from  the  genuflections  that  the  men  of  Ireland  made
about  Tighearnmas  here  that  the  plain  was  named.'

Keating,  a  contemporary  of  the  Four  Masters,  adds  many
details  in  his  summary  of  the  older  annals.  He  dates
Tighernmas,  a.m.  2186  (1219  years  before  Christ  in  his
system  of  chronology).  Nine  lakes  burst  over  the  land  in
his  time ;  ornaments,  fringes,  and  brooches  were  first  used
by  the  Irish  upon  their  dress ;  he  first  established  it  as  a
custom  in  Ireland  that  there  should  be  one  colour  in  the
dress  of  a  slave,  two  in  that  of  a  peasant,  and  so  on  to  the
nine  colours  in  the  dress  of  a  king  or  queen ;  he  first  began
to  offer  idolatrous  worship  to  Crom  Cruaich  in  Ireland,  about
a  hundred  years  after  the  arrival  of  the  Gaels  (p.  223).

Nature  and  Import  of  Annalistic  Account.

In  dealing  with  the  statements  of  these  seventeenth
century  compilers  we  must  remember  that  they  confined
themselves  to  extracting  from  the  older  historical  writers
what  they  deemed  most  worthy  of  preservation,  to  comparing
the  varying  accounts  of  the  same  personage  or  event,  noting

VOL.  II.  L


i62  ANNALISTIC   ACCOUNT

that  which  they  considered  the  best,  and  to  arranging
chronologically  the  facts  they  recorded.  Keating  was,
luckily  for  us,  a  man  of  liberal  faith,  and  admitted  many
stories  which  the  Four  Masters  evidently  rejected  as  fabul-
ous. He  was  also  far  less  precise  in  his  chronology.  But
in  the  main,  the  principle  and  the  practice  of  both  com-
pilers are  the  same ;  the  traditional  history  is  accepted  as
genuine,  even  though  it  be  necessary  here  and  there  to
correct  its  statements.  Now,  this  traditional  history  was
put  together,  in  the  form  under  which  it  is  reproduced  by
the  seventeenth  century  writers,  from  the  eighth  to  the
eleventh  century.  We  can  detect  two  drafts — the  first
belonging  to  the  eighth  century,  the  second  to  the  renais-
sance period  (950-1150)  of  Ireland's  recovery  from  the
Viking  invasions.  Of  the  first  draft  only  one  considerable
fragment  has  survived  imbedded  in  the  Historia  Brittonum
of  the  eighth-ninth  century  Welsh  chronicler,  Nennius.  But
it  is  probable  that  many  of  the  traditions  preserved  in  the
Dinnshenchas  go  back  to  this  draft  even  where  they  do
not  represent  the  scattered,  independent  local  traditions
upon  which  it  was  based.  The  second  draft  is  represented
by  a  number  of  poems,  assigned  to  antiquary  historians  of
the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries,1  in  which  the  history  of
the  country  was  memorised  for  teaching  purposes,  and  by
annalistic  works  compiled  by  the  same  class  of  men  or
founded  upon  their  writings.  The  most  learned  and  critical
of  the  eleventh  century  Irish  chroniclers,  Tighernach,  judged
the  traditional  history,  prior  to  the  third  century  B.C.,  to  be

1  Thus  the  statement  that  Tighernmas  first  smelted  gold  in  Ireland
is  found  in  a  poem  by  Gilla  Coemain  (who  died  1072),  preserved  in
The  Book  of  Leinster,  p.  16.  The  passage  is  quoted  by  M.  d'Arbois,
Cycle  Myth. ,  p.  200.


ANNALISTIC   ACCOUNT  163

1  incerta? x  The  statements  concerning  Tighernmas  which
have  just  been  quoted  from  compilations  of  the  seventeenth
century,  but  which  go  back  to  the  eleventh  century  at  the
latest,  would  thus  have  come  under  Tighernach's  condemna-
tion. But  traditions  may  have  interest  and  value  even  if
they  are  not  history  in  the  sense  of  being  an  actual  record
of  fact,  and  it  would  be  unwise  to  disregard  these  traditions
because  an  eleventh  century  Irish  chronicler  had  sufficient
critical  insight  to  discern  their  unhistorical  character.

Discrepancy  between  Annals  and  Dinnshenchas.

If  we  examine  the  statement  concerning  the  cult  of  Crom
Cruaich  found,  on  the  one  side,  in  the  Dinnshenchas,  on  the
other,  in  the  Annals,  we  notice  an  apparent  discrepancy.
The  Dinnshenchas  says  that  the  idol  was  the  god  of  every
folk  that  colonised  Ireland.  The  Annalists,  on  the  con-
trary, first  mention  the  cult  in  connection  with  Tighern-
mas, a  king  of  the  last  race — the  Milesian — that  invaded
Ireland ;  and  one  of  them,  Keating,  definitely  ascribes  its
establishment  to  him.  It  seems  natural  at  first  blush  to
treat  this  discrepancy  as  due  to  difference  in  age  between
the  two  sources  of  tradition ;  the  Dinnshenchas,  the  older
of  the  two,  has,  it  may  be  thought,  retained  a  trait,  the  pre-
Milesian  {i.e.  pre-Goidelic,  pre-Aryan)  origin  of  the  worship,
which  the  Annals,  representing  the  tradition  of  Milesian,
i.e.  Goidelic  bards,  have  forgotten  or  slurred  over.  Or,
again,  it  may  be  held  to  testify  to  a  change  in  the  nature  of
the  cult  consequent  upon  the  settlement  of  the  Goidels  in
Ireland.     Such  a  change  has  been  assumed  by  me  to  have

1  Tighernach's  Annals  are  being  edited  and  translated  by  Dr.
Whitley  Stokes,  in  vol.  xvii.  of  the  Revue  Celtiquc.


164        TIGHERNMAS   TRADITIONS

taken  place  among  the  continental  Celts,  sacrifices  which
were  at  the  outset  purely  agricultural  in  character  suffering
considerable  modification  at  the  hands  of  a  warlike  aristo-
cracy •  here,  it  may  be  said,  in  evidence  of  a  similar  evolu-
tion among  the  insular  Celts.  But  a  tacit  implication
underlies  both  of  these  explanations — namely,  that  the
legends  recorded  in  the  Annals  have  a  genuine  historic  basis ;
that  the  succession  of  the  various  races,  said  to  have  colon-
ised Ireland,  represents  a  genuine  succession  of  races,  or,  at
all  events,  of  stages  of  culture.  Such  an  implication  is,
in  my  opinion,  baseless,  and  a  careful  examination  of  the
tradition  proves  that  the  real  solution  of  the  problem  must
be  sought  for  in  another  direction,  and  has  consequences  of
a  far  wider  import.

The  Real  Nature  of  the  Tighernmas  Traditions.

What  have  the  Annals  to  say  about  Tighernmas  ?  His
reign  wears  an  aspect  obviously  fabulous.  Not  only  is  it
marked  by  great  natural  convulsions,  but  within  its  limits
the  arts  and  crafts,  the  rules  and  appliances,  of  social  life  are
stated  to  have  originated.  We  cannot  fail  to  recognise  a
variant  of  a  myth  found  at  the  beginning  of  history  in  the
case  of  nearly  all  early  races  which  have  attained  to  the
conception  of  history  at  all ;  the  civilisation  which  early  man
sees  around  him — material,  social,  religious — must  have  had
a  cause,  a  beginning.  This  cause,  this  beginning,  are  sought
in  the  activity,  in  the  rule,  of  some  greatly  gifted  king.  The
idea  of  slow  evolution  is  either  incomprehensible  to  man  at
a  certain  stage  of  mental  development,  or  else  is  expressed
wholly  in  mythic  terms ;  his  tendency  is  to  synthesise  long
periods  of  growth,  and  to  express  this  synthesis  under  the
concrete  symbol  of  a  wonder-working  reign.     Although  this


TIGHERNMAS   TRADITIONS       165

interpretation  of  the  traditions  about  Tighernmas  is  put
forward  for  the  first  time,1  I  do  not  think  it  will  fail  to
command  the  assent  of  all  who  have  studied  early  tradi-
tional history,  and  I  venture  to  regard  it  as  established.

It  is  but  natural  that  religious  worship  should  be  among
the  institutions  the  origin  of  which  is  assigned  to  Tighern-
mas's  reign.  The  practices  in  question  were  intimately
connected  with  the  whole  fabric  of  civilisation  known  to  the
framers  of  these  traditions,  and  it  would  have  gravely  dis-
credited my  interpretation  if  reference  to  them  had  been
lacking.

We  can  now  appreciate  the  significance  of  the  fact  that
Tighernmas's  reign,  the  starting-point  of  Goidelic  civilisa-
tion as  the  Goidel  bards  and  wizards  imagined  it,  is  not
assigned  to  the  first  arrival  of  the  sons  of  Mil  in  Ireland,
but  to  a  period  dated  by  different  Annalists  a  hundred  to
one  hundred  and  fifty  years  later.  Milesian  history  prior  to
Tighernmas,  including  the  account  of  the  Milesian  invasion  ,
and  struggle  against  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  is  as  purely
mythological  as  is  the  history  of  the  Tuatha  De  themselves.
I  do  not  imply  by  this  that  the  traditions  concerning  Tigh-
ernmas are  historic,  in  the  sense  of  being  a  record  of  fact,  in
contradistinction  to  earlier  mythical  traditions ;  in  a  sense
they,  too,  are  mythical,  but  they  are  myths  of  a  different
character  from  those  euhemerised  in  the  annalistic  account
of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann.  In  the  one  case  we  have  a
mass  of  fiction  based  upon  the  personification  of  natural  '
phenomena,  or  arising  out  of  a  ritual  worship  of  natural

1  M.  d'Arbois,  it  is  true,  equates  the  reign  of  Tighernmas  with  the
'  golden  age,'  when  Kronos  was  Master  of  the  Universe,  in  Greek
mythology  {Cycle  Mythologique>  p.  200),  but  his  opinion  of  the  texts
differs  considerably  from  mine.


166  DISCUSSION   OF

energies  and  manifestations ;  in  the  other  we  have  a  synthesis
of  genuine  historic  processes  expressed  in  a  concrete  symbol.
The  traditions  about  Tighernmas  thus  furnish  us  with  a  fixed
point  in  the  confused  welter  of  prehistoric  Irish  mythic
romance.  The  Goidels  believed  at  one  time  that  with  this
king  started  their  civilisation,  a  vital  element  of  which  was
their  religion.  Before  him  then  their  history  is,  in  reality,
Occupied  with  beings,  the  object  of  religion — gods,  that  is ;
in  other  words,  it  is  a  mythology  in  the  usual  acceptation
of  the  term.

This  is  a  consequence  of  considerable  moment  for  the
criticism  of  the  Irish  pre-Christian  records,  reached  solely  by
an  unforced  exegesis  of  the  texts.  A  still  more  momentous
consequence  follows,  for  the  reconstruction  of  Irish  pre-
Christian  belief;  the  origin  of  this  belief  was  by  the  Irish
Celts  themselves  associated  with  the  practice  of  ritual  sacri-
fice, thus  confirming  amply  both  the  statements  of  classical
observers  respecting  the  importance  of  this  element  in  the
religion  of  other  branches  of  the  Celtic  race,  and  the  infer-
ences concerning  it  deduced  from  the  classical  account  of
Celtic  metempsychosis  in  the  foregoing  chapter.  The  results,
drawn  from  two  wholly  disconnected  series  of  facts  and
observations,  confirm  each  other,  without,  I  trust,  either
result  being  due  to  a  strained  interpretation  of  the  evidence.
In  this  connection  we  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  by  the  annal-
istic  statements  that  Tighernmas  perished  whilst  adoring
Crom  Cruaich,  recalling  as  it  does  the  fact  that  the  ritual
sacrifice  of  the  king-priest,  the  representative  and  incarna-
tion of  the  god,  is  the  supreme  act  of  worship  in  similar
cults  among  other  races.

If,  in  the  light  of  this  theory,  we  turn  back  to  the  double
stream  of  tradition  from  whose  apparent  discrepancy  con-


IRISH   EVIDENCE  167

cerning  the  Crom  Cruaich  cult  we  started,  we  plainly  discern
that  it  is  apparent  only.  The  Dinnshenchas  statement  may
be  regarded  as  testifying  to  a  stage  of  tradition  in  which  the
mythic  and  heroic  history  of  the  race  have  already  begun  to
be  symbolised  as  successive  colonisations  of  the  island,
without  attaining  the  degree  of  precision  and  detailed  full-
ness found  in  the  Annals ;  it  simply  notes  the  immemorial
antiquity  of  the  worship  in  Ireland.  The  Annals  belong  to
a  more  advanced  stage ;  the  mythology  has  been  thoroughly
euhemerised,  with  the  consequence  that  the  mythical  reign,
the  fount  and  origin  of  civilisation,  instead  of  being  placed
in  the  very  beginning  of  the  Annalistic  record,  is  inserted  in
a  long  series  of  shadowy  reigns,  and  its  true  character  is
thus  disguised.

The  theory  I  have  just  expounded  by  no  means  excludes
the  possibility  that  the  Annalistic  records  may  likewise
reveal  changes  and  developments  in  the  ritual,  following
the  arrival  of  the  Goidels  in  Ireland.  It  is  not  necessary  to
assume  at  this  stage  that  the  cult  we  postulate  belonged  to
this  or  that  race  exclusively.  Our  interpretation  of  the
records  is  consistent  either  with  the  hypothesis  of  its  purely
Goidelic  character,  or  with  the  supposition  that  it  was  taken
over  by  the  Goidels  from  a  conquered  pre-Aryan  popula-
tion. A  myth  concerning  the  origin  of  the  cult  would
naturally  attract  to  itself,  influence,  and  be  influenced  by,
any  traditions  concerning  later  modifications  of  the  cult.

The  mythical  nature  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  has
indeed  been  taken  for  granted  throughout  the  course  of
this  investigation.  I  could  not  do  otherwise  than  agree
with  all  previous  writers  on  the  subject  whose  knowledge
and  critical  capacity  qualified  them  to  form  a  judgment.
It  was  well,  however,  to  clearly  establish  the  fact,  not  on  the


168  CLASSIFICATION   OF

strength  of  the  romantic  fiction  devoted  to  this  mysterious
race  of  beings,  but  on  the  far  more  cogent,  because  unde-
signed, evidence  afforded  by  the  form  under  which  the
traditions  have  come  down  to  us,  and  the  method  adopted
for  turning  them  into  pseudo-history.  All  doubt  on  the
subject  being,  as  I  venture  to  think,  finally  removed,  we
may  now  proceed  to  consider  the  general  mass  of  legendary
fiction  connected  with  the  Tuatha  de  Danann.

Classification  of  Irish  Mythical  Literature.

Extant  evidence  may  be  divided  into  several  classes,
(i)  We  have  in  the  Dinnshenchas  a  considerable  mass  of
undated  fragmentary  tradition.  It  is  a  priori  likely  that  the
eleventh  to  twelfth  century  compilers  of  this  collection  took
their  matter  indiscriminately  from  all  kinds  of  sources,  and
the  hastiest  perusal  confirms  this  surmise.  Much  of  the
matter  contained  in  it  may  go  back  to  the  earliest  stage  of  Irish
story-telling,  but  each  special  item  has  to  be  tested  upon
its  own  merits.  (2)  In  the  Annals  we  find  the  fortunes  of  the
Tuatha  De  euhemerised — i.e.  these  beings,  originally  gods,
figure  as  mortal  kings  and  heroes  with  well-assigned  dates.
This  process  of  euhemerisation  must  have  begun  not  very
long  after  the  Irish  became  acquainted  with  Christianity  and
Christian-classic  culture;  it  offered  the  simplest  means  of
saving  the  legends  to  which  literary  class  and  people  alike
were  attached.  As  the  tradition  has  come  down  to  us  it
belongs,  in  the  main,  not  to  the  pre- Viking  period  of  formation
(to  the  sixth-eighth  centuries,  that  is),  but  to  the  great  anti-
quaries of  the  tenth-eleventh  centuries  who  reconstructed
Irish  history  and  Irish  legend  after  the  stress  of  the  Viking
invasions  had  died  away.  The  possibility  of  new  elements
having  been  introduced  during  the  Viking  period  (roughly


IRISH   MYTHICAL   LITERATURE    169

speaking,  800-950)  must  always  be  kept  in  view.  In  both
these  classes  of  tradition  we  find  matters  concerning  the
Tuatha  De  grouped  together  and  forming  more  or  less
compact  wholes.  (3)  But  our  next  class  of  evidence  is
furnished  by  the  incidental  references  to  the  Tuatha  De
scattered  throughout  the  heroic  legends,  and  of  which  so
many  examples  have  been  quoted  throughout  this  essay.
I  have  cited  sufficient  to  bear  out  the  assertion  that  the
tellers  of  these  heroic  legends  did  not  regard  the  Tuatha  De
in  the  same  light  as  the  Annalists.  Far  from  treating  them
as  men  who  had  once  lived  and  were  now  dead,  the
Tuatha  De  figure  in  the  legends  as  supernatural  beings —
immortal,  or  at  all  events  unassigned  to  any  definite  period.

(4)  A  further  class  of  evidence  is  constituted  by  tales  present-
ing substantially  the  same  sequence  and  mass  of  incidents  as
the  Tuatha  de  Danann  sections  in  the  Annals,  but  conceived
and  related  in  a  romantic  spirit.  The  question  has  not
yet  been  even  raised,  let  alone  settled,  whether  these  tales
represent  the  material  upon  which  the  Annalist  worked,  or
are  romantic  amplifications  of  the  Annalistic   statement.1

(5)  There  is,  finally,  another  class  of  evidence  :  the  belief  of
the  Irish  peasantry  of  this  and  the  previous  century  in  the
fairies  who  have  succeeded  to  the  attributes  of  the  Tuatha
de  Danann ;  our  estimate  of  the  value  of  this  evidence
must,  of  course,  largely  depend  upon  the  results  disclosed
by  our  examination  of  the  earlier  classes.

The  Annalistic  Account  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann.

It  will  be  convenient  to  note  precisely  what  the  Annals
have  to  record.     The  Four  Masters  and  Keating  give,  be-

1  M.  d'Arbois,  in  his  Cycle  Mythologique,  assumes  their  priority  to
the  Annalistic  account,  but  does  not  discuss  the  question  in  any  detail.


170   TUATHA   DE   DANANN    IN   ANNALS

tween  them,  the  gist  of  what  may  be  called  the  pseudo-
historic  or  euhemeristic  version — a  version  the  outlines  of
which  had  begun  to  assume  shape  in  all  probability  as
early  as  the  seventh  century,  but  to  which,  even  as  late  as
the  eleventh  century,  a  distinguished  Irish  chronicler,
Tighernach,  refused  historic  credibility.

According  to  the  Four  Masters  the  Firbolgs  took  posses-
sion of  Ireland,  anno  mundi  3266  {i.e.  1928  years  before
Christ),  and  ruled  until  they  were  vanquished  by  the
Tuatha  de  Danann  in  the  year  3303  at  the  battle  of
Moytura.  In  this  battle  Nuada,  king  of  the  Tuatha  de
Danann,  lost  his  hand,  and  (it  being  a  rule  among  the
ancient  Irish  that  no  one  with  a  personal  defect  or  blemish
could  rule)  Bress,  son  of  Elatham,  reigned  in  his  stead.
After  seven  years,  Bress  resigned  the  kingship  to  Nuada,
who  had  had  a  hand  of  silver  made  for  him  by  Dian-Cecht
and  Creidne  the  artificers.  After  a  twenty  years'  reign
Nuada  was  attacked  by  the  Fomorians,  led  by  Balor  of
the  mighty  blows.  In  the  ensuing,  the  second  battle  of
Moytura,  Nuada  was  slain  by  Balor.  He  was  succeeded
by  Lugh,  the  long-handed,  who  reigned  for  forty  years,  and
was  in  his  turn  succeeded  by  Eochaidh  Ollathair,  named
the  Daghda.  Suffice  to  say,  that  the  rule  of  the  Tuatha  de
Danann  lasted  until  the  year  3.^00,  when  the  sons  of  Mil
invaded  Ireland,  and  in  the  battle  of  Tailtinn  totally
defeated  the  Tuatha  De,  after  which  two  of  the  Milesian
chieftains  divided  Ireland  between  them.

Such  is  the  bald  narrative  of  the  Four  Masters,  which
represents  the  supreme  effort  of  the  antiquary-historian
class  to  rationalise  Irish  mythology,  and  to  present  it  as  a
sober  record  of  fact.  If  we  turn  to  Keating,  we  note  a
far   more   liberal    acceptance    of    the    mythical,    romantic


TUATHA   DE   DANANN    IN   ANNALS    171

element  found  in  the  older  writers  from  which  he  and  the
Four  Masters  drew.  Thus,  we  learn  from  him  that  the
Tuatha  De  Danann  were  expert  in  magic  art.  An
example  of  this  is  quoted  from  their  history  before  they
came  to  Ireland.  They  inhabited  the  present  Greece,  and,
when  the  Athenians  were  assailed  by  the  Syrians,  aided
them  most  effectually,  '  for  they  used  to  send  demons  into
the  bodies  of  the  slain  Athenians,  quickening  them  by
means  of  their  heathen  lore'  (p.  136).  Thus  the  first
glimpse  we  obtain  of  them  is  in  that  capacity  of  masters
over  the  essence  and  manifestation  of  life  which  they
retain  throughout  Irish  legend.  Afterwards  they  went  to
the  north  of  Europe,  where  they  dwelt  a  while  in  the  four
cities  of  Falias,  Gorias,  Finias,  and  Murias,  whence  they
sailed  for  North  Britain  and  Ireland,  bringing  with  them
four  talismans :  the  Lia  Fail,  which  possessed  the  property
of  roaring  under  every  king  of  Ireland  on  his  election 1 ;  the
sword  of  Lugh  the  long-handed ;  the  spear  that  the  same
Lugh  used ;  and  the  caldron  of  the  Daghda.  When  they
reach  Ireland,  they  surround  themselves  with  a  magical
mist,  under  cover  of  which  they  land  unperceived.  The
account  of  the  two  battles  of  Moytura  is  substantially
the  same  as  in  the  Four  Masters,  but  the  supernatural
character  of  the  race  is,  more  or  less,  definitely  asserted  in
many  of  the  passages  quoted  from  older  writers.  It  is,
however,  in  his  account  of  the  Milesian  invasion  that
Keating  reproduces  the  largest  amount  of  fable ;  much  of
this  is  of  no  interest,  being  simple  monkish  fabrication  with
a  view  to  connecting  the  Goidels  with  the  peoples  of
antiquity,  and  in  especial   with   the   Hebrews,   but   some

1  Cf.  vol.  i.  p.  187.    The  earliest  preserved  mention  of  the  talisman  is
in  a  poem  of  Eochaid  ua  Flainn's,  preserved  in  the  Book  of  Leinster.


172  BATTLE   OF   MOYTURA

interesting  facts  may  be  noted.  Thus,  Mil  himself  is  made
a  contemporary  of  Pharaoh  Nectanebus,  a  perfectly  accept-
able date  if  we  regard  the  Milesian  invasion  as  a  romantic
account  of  the  Goidelic  settlement  in  Ireland ;  it  is  true
that  this  settlement  conflicts  utterly  with  Keating's  later
chronology,  which  places  the  arrival  of  the  sons  of  Mil  in
Ireland  about  1300  B.C.,  but  this  is  only  one  proof  among
many  of  the  way  in  which  independent  and  mutually
inconsistent  traditions  were  forced  into  one  Procrustean
bed  by  the  Irish  antiquaries.  When  the  sons  of  Mil
approached  the  coast,  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  defended
themselves  by  their  old  expedient  of  a  magical  mist,  and  by
raising  a  magical  storm,  but  in  the  end  they  were  defeated.
Such  is  the  pseudo-historical  account.  Even  in  Keating,
with  his  love  for  a  romantic  tale,  the  rationalising  process
has  been  thoroughly  carried  out,  and,  save  for  a  few  chance
references,  little  remains  to  attest  the  mythical  character  of
the  Folk  of  the  goddess  Danu.  It  is  significant  that  one
of  them  should  commemorate  this  capacity  to  restore  the
dead  to  life,  whilst  another  ascribes  to  them  the  power
attributed  by  classical  writers  to  the  priestesses  of  Sein,
namely,  of  raising  and  quelling  storms  by  art  magic.

The  Battle  of  Movtura.

We  may  now  compare  a  text  belonging  to  the  fourth
class  of  evidence  discriminated  above — that  of  romantic
tales  which  relate  substantially  the  same  events  as  those
found  in  the  Annals.  The  text  in  question  is  known  as  the
Battle  of  Moytura,  and  has  been  edited  and  translated  by
Mr.  Whitley  Stokes  in  the  twelfth  volume  of  the  Revue
Celtique.  It  has  only  survived  in  a  recent  ms.  (of  the
fifteenth  century),  and  its  linguistic  features  do  not  allow  its


BATTLE  OF   MOYTURA  173

ascription,  in  its  present  form,  to  an  earlier  period  than  the
eleventh  century.  But  I  must  again  repeat,  the  date  of  the
redaction,  which  has  fortuitously  come  down  to  us,  yields
no  certain  clue  to  the  date  of  the  story  itself.  As  the
Revue  Celtique  is  not  accessible  to  the  general  reader,  a
somewhat  full  summary  of  the  tale  may  be  of  interest.

The  opening  finds  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  'in  the
northern  isles  of  the  world,  learning  lore  and  magic,  and
druidism  and  wizardry  and  cunning.'  The  tradition  is
substantially  the  same  as  in  Keating,  but  the  latter  can
hardly  have  known  our  story,  or  he  would  not  have  missed
its  picturesque  details.  Thus,  of  the  talismans  it  is  told :
1  the  spear  of  Lugh,  no  battle  was  ever  won  against  it  or  him
who  held  it  in  his  hand ;  the  sword  of  Nuada,  when  it  was
drawn  from  its  deadly  sheath,  no  one  ever  escaped  from  it;  the
Dagdae's  caldron,  no  company  ever  went  from  it  unthank-
ful.' We  then  learn  that  the  Tuatha  De  made  an  alliance
with  the  Fomorians :  Balor,  grandson  of  Net,  giving  his
daughter  Ethne  to  Cian,  son  of  Dian-Cecht,  'and  she
brought  forward  the  gifted  child,  Lug.'  The  Tuatha  De
then  invaded  Ireland,  and  here  comes  in  a  naive  bit  of
rationalism,  which  betrays  the  composite  nature  of  our
text,  and  the  lateness  of  its  final  redaction :  '  they  burnt
their  barques  at  once  on  reaching  Connemara,  so  that  they
should  not  think  of  retreating  to  them,  and  the  smoke  and
mist  that  came  from  the  vessels  filled  the  neighbouring
land  and  air;  therefore  it  was  conceived  that  they  had
arrived  in  a  mist.'  The  first  battle  of  Moytura  follows,
between  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  and  the  Firbolgs ;  the
latter  are  defeated,  and  seek  refuge  with  the  Fomorians.
Nuada,  being  wounded,  is  ineligible  for  kingship,  and  the
choice  falls  upon  Bres,  whose  father,  Elatha,  is  king  of  the


i74  BATTLE  OF   MOYTURA

Fomorians.  '  Now  the  conception  of  Bres  came  to  pass
in  this  wise.  Eri,  Delbaeth's  daughter,  a  woman  of  the
Tuatha  De,  was  one  day  looking  at  the  sea  and  the  land,
and  she  beheld  the  sea  in  perfect  calm  as  it  were  a  level
board.  And  as  she  was  there  she  saw  somewhat.  A  vessel
of  silver  was  revealed  to  her  on  the  sea.  .  .  .  Then  she  saw
that  in  it  was  a  man  of  fairest  form.  Golden  yellow  hair
was  on  him  as  far  as  his  two  shoulders.  A  mantle  with
bands  of  golden  thread  was  around  him.  His  shirt  had
trimmings  of  golden  thread.  On  his  breast  was  a  brooch
of  gold,  with  the  sheen  of  a  precious  stone  therein.'  He
woos  expeditiously,  and  the  maiden  is  not  coy.  When  he
would  leave  her  she  wept.  '  Severing  from  thee  I  lament ;
the  fair  youth  of  the  Tuatha  Dea  Danonn  have  been
intreating  me  in  vain,  and  my  desire  is  for  thee  as  thou
hast  possessed  me.'  He  leaves  her  a  gold  ring,  charging
her  not  to  part  with  it  save  to  one  whose  finger  it  should
fit.  He  also  tells  his  name.  'Elotha,  son  of  Delbaeth,1
King  of  the  Fomorians,  hath  come  to  thee.  Thou  shalt
bear  a  boy,  Eochaid  Bres,  that  is,  Eochaid  the  beautiful.'
When  the  boy  was  born  he  had  a  fortnight's  growth  after  a
week,  and  at  seven  had  reached  a  growth  of  fourteen
years.  Now  when  he  was  made  king,  the  Fomorians
1  bound  their  tribute  upon  Ireland,  so  that  there  was  not  a
smoke  from  a  roof  in  Ireland  that  was  not  under  tribute  to
them.'  The  Tuatha  de  Danann  champions  were  also  reduced
to  menial  service ;  Ogma  had  to  carry  a  bundle  of  firewood,
the  Dagdae  to  build  raths.  The  story  is  then  told  of
Dian-Cecht's  making  a  hand  of  silver  for  Nuada,  and  of  his
slaying  his  son  who  approved  himself  a  better  leech  than

1  Bres  is  thus  apparently  a  son  of  brother  and  sister,  as  is  Siegfried
in  German  legend.


BATTLE   OF   MOYTURA  175

his  father.  Meanwhile,  the  chiefs  of  the  Tuatha  De
murmured  greatly  against  Bres :  '  their  knives  were  not
greased  by  him,  and  however  often  they  visited  him  their
breaths  did  not  smell  of  ale.'  For  this  niggardliness  he  was
made  the  subject  of  the  first  satire  known  in  Ireland,  and  he
was  only  allowed  to  remain  king  on  promise  of  remitting  the
rent  and  tribute.  But  in  his  heart  he  purposed  gathering
together  the  champions  of  the  Fairy-Mound,  even  the
Fomorians,  to  overmaster  the  tribes.  He  got  the
recognition  ring  from  his  mother,  and  together  they  went  to
the  land  of  the  Fomorians.  Recognised  by  his  father,  the
latter  refused  to  help  him  because  his  cause  was  not  just,
but  sent  him  to  Balor,  King  of  the  Isles,  and  to  Indech,  son
of  Dea  Domnand,  King  of  the  Fomorians,  'and  these
assembled  all  their  forces  westwards  unto  Ireland,  so  that
they  made  one  bridge  of  vessels  from  the  Foreigner's  Isles
to  Erin.' 1

Nuada  was  in  sovranty  over  the  Tuatha  De.  Once  a
great  feast  was  being  held  at  Tara,  and  the  doorkeeper
beheld  a  strange  company  coming  towards  him.  '  A  young
warrior,  fair  and  shapely,  with  a  king's  trappings,  was  in  the
forefront  of  the  band.'  On  being  asked  his  name,  he
answered  that  he  was  'Lug,  son  of  Cian,  son  of  Dian-
Cecht  and  of  Ethne,  daughter  of  Balor.'  He  was  then
asked  his  craft,  'for  no  one  without  an  art  entered  Tara.'
' A  wright,'  said  he.  They  needed  no  wright.  'A  smith.'
They  needed  no  smith.  '  A  champion.'  No  !  'A  harper.'
No!  'A  hero.'  No!  'A  poet  and  historian.'  No!  'A
sorcerer.'  No!  'A  leech.'  No!  'A  cupbearer.'  No!
'  A  brazier.'     No  !     Then  he  said,  '  Ask  the  king  if  he  has

1  All  this  part  of  the  story  is  undoubtedly  coloured  by  events  of  the
Viking  period.


176  BATTLE   OF    MOYTURA

a  single  man  who  possesses  all  these  arts,  and  if  he  has,  I
will  not  enter  Tara.'  The  king  then  ordered  the  chess-
boards 1  in  Tara  to  be  sent  out  to  him,  and  he  won  all  the
stakes;  and  when  that  was  told  to  Nuada,  'Let  him  into  the
garth,'  said  the  king,  'for  never  before  has  a  man  like  him
entered  this  fortress.'  Lug  approved  himself  equally  skilful
as  warrior  and  as  harpist ;  and  when  Nuada  beheld  his  many
powers,  he  considered  if  here  were  not  a  champion  able  to
put  away  the  bondage  under  which  they  suffered  from  the
Fomorians ;  and  he  changed  seats  with  Lug  until  thirteen
days  were  ended.2  Thereafter  Lug  met  with  the  Dagdae,
Ogma,  Goibniu,  and  Dian-Cecht,  and  they  held  secret  con-
verse for  a  year,  and  they  summoned  to  them  the  wizards  of
Ireland,  and  their  leeches  and  charioteers  and  smiths  and
farmers  and  brehons.    But  the  king  first  sought  to  learn  what

1  Here  occurs  in  the  original  one  of  the  interesting  examples  of
scribal  interpolation  which  are  not  uncommon  in  Irish  texts.  '  But  if
chess  was  invented  at  the  time  of  the  Trojan  war,  it  had  not  reached
Ireland  then,  for  the  battle  of  Moytura  and  the  destruction  of  Troy
occurred  at  the  same  time.'  The  interest  of  such  an  interpolation  is
manifold  ;  it  shows  the  class  of  men  to  whom  is  due  the  final  redaction
of  these  stories,  thoroughly  well  educated — nay,  learned  for  their  time,
and  gifted  with  critical  power  as  well  as  with  learning.  Familiar  with
the  Annalistic  chronology  as  it  had  been  developed  by  a  succession  of
learned  antiquaries,  the  scribe  could  not  but  note  what  seemed  to  him  a
gross  historical  blunder.  Nevertheless,  he  made  no  change  in  the  text
he  was  reproducing,  but  contented  himself  with  providing  an  antidote
in  the  shape  of  a  marginal  note,  which  some  later  copyist  transferred  to
the  text.  Obviously  a  man  like  this — a  worthy  and  faithful  but  pedantic
scribe — would  do  nothing  in  the  way  of  romanticising  his  text.  Rather
may  we  conclude  that  if  he  felt  justified  in  making  any  change,  and  this
instance  would  seem  to  show  that  he  didn't,  he  would  have  toned  down
and  rationalised  it.

2  Thus  giving  him  the  kingship  for  a  time.


BATTLE    OF    MOYTURA  177

aid  he  could  gain  from  his  followers.  His  sorcerer,  Math-
gen,  would  cast  the  mountains  of  Ireland  on  the  Fomorians,
and  roll  their  summits  against  the  ground — the  twelve  chief
mountains  of  Ireland  would  support  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,
in  battling  for  them ;  his  cupbearer  would  bring  the  twelve
chief  lakes  of  Ireland  before  the  Fomorians,  so  that  they
should  not  find  water  therein  whatever  thirst  might  seize
them — but  drink  should  be  provided  for  the  men  of  Ireland,
'  though  they  bid  in  battle  to  the  end  of  seven  years ' ;  his
druid  would  pour  three  showers  of  fire  on  the  foes  of  the
Fomorians,  and  would  take  out  of  them  two-thirds  of  their
valour  and  their  bravery  and  their  strength,  and  would  bind
their  urine  in  their  own  body  and  in  the  body  of  their  horses
— but  every  breath  the  men  of  Ireland  exhaled  should  be
an  increase  of  valour  and  bravery  and  strength  to  them.
Then  said  the  Dagdae :  '  The  power  which  ye  boast,  I  shall
wield  it  all  myself.'  'Thou  art  the  good  hand'  (Dagdae),
was  the  cry ;  and  the  name  stuck  to  him  afterwards.  Lug
and  Dagdae  and  Ogma  obtained  counsel  and  aid  from  the
three  gods  of  Danu,  and  during  seven  years  they  prepared
for  battle.

At  length  the  two  hosts  found  themselves  in  presence.
The  men  of  Ireland  made  a  resolution  not  to  allow  Lug  to
go  into  the  battle,  as  they  feared  an  early  death  for  him,
owing  to  the  multitude  of  his  arts.  The  chiefs  of  the
Tuatha  De  gathered  around  him,  and  he  asked  each  one
what  power  he  wielded.  In  turn,  Goibniu  the  smith,  Dian-
Cecht  the  leech,  Credne  the  brazier,  Luchta  the  wright,
Ogma  the  champion,  the  Morrigan,  sorcerers,  cupbearers,
druids,  poets,  and  witches,  vaunt  their  prowess.  Lastly,  the
Dagdae  declares  that  under  his  club  the  bones  of  the
enemies  shall  be  as  hailstones  under  the  feet  of  herds  of

VOL.  II.  M


178  BATTLE    OF    MOYTURA

horses.  And  so,  when  the  battle  raged,  the  weapons  of  the
Tuatha  de  Danann,  however  much  they  suffered,  were  re-
paired at  once  by  Goibniu  and  his  comrades ;  the  slain  and
maimed  were  restored  to  life  or  healed  by  Dian-Cecht  and
his  kin.  In  vain  did  some  of  the  Fomorian  warriors  sacri-
fice themselves  to  frustrate  the  magic  wiles  of  their  foe.
But  the  Fomorians  were  mighty  warriors,  and  the  battle
was  desperate ;  '  harsh  was  the  thunder  throughout  the
battle,  the  shouting  of  warriors,  the  clashing  of  shields,  the
flashing  and  whistling  of  glaives,  the  rattling  and  jingling  of
quivers,  the  winging  of  darts  and  javelins,  the  crashing  of
weapons.'  Nuada  fell  by  Balor.  'An  evil  eye  had  Balor;
never  was  it  opened  save  only  on  the  battlefield.  ...  If
an  army  looked  at  that  eye,  though  they  were  many  thou-
sands in  number,  they  would  not  resist  a  few  warriors.'
He  had  acquired  this  power  thus  :  '  His  father's  wizards
were  cooking  wizardry ;  he  came  and  looked  over  the
window,  and  the  reek  of  the  brew  came  on  his  eye.'  He
and  Lug  met,  and  Lug  slew  him  with  the  cast  of  a  sling,
which  carried  the  eye  through  the  head,  and  thrice  nine
of  his  host  died  beholding  it.  The  Fomorians  were
routed ;  and,  as  to  the  slain,  '  they  are  in  no  wise  to  be
numbered  till  we  number  stars  of  heaven,  sand  of  the  sea,
flakes  of  snow,  dew  on  a  lawn  .  .  .  and  the  Son  of  Ler's
horses  in  a  sea  storm.'  Lug  and  his  comrades  captured
Bres ;  to  save  his  life  he  undertook  that  the  kine  of  Erin
should  always  be  in  milk,  but  this  would  not  avail  him ;
then,  that  the  men  of  Ireland  should  reap  a  harvest  in
every  quarter  of  the  year,  but  this  would  not  avail  him ;
finally,  he  named  the  lucky  days  for  ploughing  and  sowing
and  reaping,  and  for  this  he  was  spared.


BATTLE    OF    MOYTURA  179

The  Rabelaisian  Element  in  Irish  Mythology.

In  the  above  summary  I  have  simply  given  the  sequence
of  the  events  common  to  this  romantic  tale  and  to  the  Annals,
or  which,  at  least,  may  reasonably  be  supposed  to  underlie
the  Annalistic  account.  The  tale  is  told  in  a  very  confused
way,  offers  incidents  which  are  obviously  out  of  place,  or
interpolated  from  other  tales,  and  has  a  kind  of  underplot
formed  by  adventures  of  the  Dagdae.  These  are  conceived
in  a  Rabelaisian — and  at  times  an  ultra-Rabelaisian — vein,  of
which  the  Dagdae's  visit  to  the  Fomorian  camp  may  serve
as  a  specimen.  Having  asked  for  a  truce,  which  is  granted,
he  is  offered  his  fill  of  porridge  by  the  Fomorians ;  the
king's  caldron  is  filled  for  him,  five  fists  deep,  into  which
went  fourscore  gallons  of  new  milk  and  the  like  quantity  of
meal  and  fat.  Goats  and  sheep  and  swine  were  put  into  it,
and  all  were  boiled  together  with  the  porridge.  The  entire
mess  was  spilt  into  a  hole  in  the  ground,  and  the  Fomorian
chief  threatened  death  to  the  Dagdae  unless  he  consumed
it  all.  The  Dagdae  was  equal  to  the  task ;  and  little  wonder
that  at  the  end  his  belly  was  bigger  than  a  house  caldron.
The  complications  which  ensue  are  discreetly  omitted  by
Mr.  Whitley  Stokes  in  his  translation,  alike  on  grounds  of
decorum  and  from  the  great  obscurity  of  the  passage.
Indeed,  it  is  noteworthy  that,  although  on  the  whole  the
language  of  the  tale  is  comparatively  recent — not  older,  that
is,  than  the  eleventh  century — and  although  certain  portions
give  the  impression  of  having  been  redacted  perhaps  a
century  or  two  later,  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  many
passages  are  so  archaic  as  to  baffle  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes,
the  greatest  living  authority  on  old  Irish.  If  it  be  further
added   that   the  oldest   portion   of    Cormac's    Glossary — ■


180  BATTLE   OF    MOYTURA

a  text  that  is  of  the  tenth  century — contains,  s.v.  Nescoit,
an  episode  of  our  tale  almost  verbally  the  same,  the  reader,
with  Annals  and  romantic  tale  before  him,  will  not  be
inclined  to  dispute  the  conclusion  that  the  latter  cannot  be
regarded  as  an  amplification  of  the  former,  but  must,  on  the
contrary,  be  held  to  represent  the  mass  of  fiction  out  of
which  the  Annalists  extracted  their  dry  and  bald  pseudo-
history.'  It  is  true  that  our  tale,  the  only  considerable
surviving  fragment  of  this  romantic  literature,  is  late  in
redaction,  and  has  probably  been  considerably  worked  over
in  details,  but  it  reproduces  with  substantial  accuracy,  I
believe,  the  matter  as  well  as  the  tone  and  manner  of
an  earlier  version.  In  especial  I  regard  the  Rabelaisian,
Aristophanesque  element  not  as  accidental  and  secondary,
but  as  primary  and  essential,  and  as  belonging  therefore  to
the  earliest  literature  in  which  the  Tuatha  de  Danann
mythology  was  embodied.  It  is  no  chance  coincidence,
but  is  due  to  the  essential  kinship  of  the  two  bodies  of
mythic  fiction,  that  this  very  element  is  prominent  also  in
the  mythology  which  has  Dionysus  for  its  centre.1

1  The  Rabelaisian  passages  which  introduce  the  Dagdae  are  closely
allied  in  style  and  tone  to  the  great  middle-Irish  Rabelaisian  burlesque,
The  Vision  of  Mac  Conglinne.  As  Professor  Wollner  has  acutely
pointed  out  in  his  Introduction  to  Professor  Kuno  Meyer's  edition  and
translation,  the  Vision  has  come  down  to  us  in  two  forms  :  a  shorter
one  which  may  go  back  to  the  eleventh  or  early  twelfth  century  ;  a  longer
one  which  is  probably  as  late  in  redaction  as  the  thirteenth  century.
The  author  of  this  second  version  followed  the  lines  of  the  old  story  fairly
closely,  but  clothed  it  in  a  form  as  picturesque,  humorous,  and  masterly
of  its  kind  as  anything  in  literature  before  Rabelais  himself.  Professor
Wollner  has  made  it  evident  that  neither  version  is  a  mere  Irish  imitation
of  the  continental  stories  about  the  Pays  de  Cocagne,  but  represents  a
native  development,  on  the  burlesque  side,  of  the  fancies  presented
romantically  in  the  Elysium  voyages.     It  may,  in  fact,  be  regarded  as


BATTLE    OF    MOYTURA  181

Comparison  of  Annalistic  and  Romantic  Accounts.

Now,  if  the  Annalistic  account  be  compared  with  the
romantic  one,  it  is  seen  that  whereas  the  former,  as  befits
the  dignity  of  history,  is  wholly  concerned  with  the  strife
in  war  and  policy  of  rival  races,  the  latter  has  for  under-
lying theme  the  agricultural  welfare  of  the  land.  The  rule
of  Bres  is  marked  by  want  and  famine ;  his  defeat  is
signalised  by  the  return  of  material  prosperity,  which  he  is
forced  to  guarantee,  and  by  the  institution  of  agriculture
properly  so  called.  It  hardly  needs  pointing  out  that  this
element  is  not  likely  to  have  been  introduced  by  story-
tellers of  the  twelfth,  thirteenth,  and  fourteenth  centuries.
We  possess  a  number  of  stories  which  may  with  certainty  be
assigned  to  these  centuries,  and  which  do  develop  the
Tuatha  de  Danann  mythology  in  a  romantic  vein,  and
probably  without  much  regard  for  the  authenticity  of  the
traditions ;  but  their  development  is  on  quite  different  lines.
It  is  the  princely,  courtly,  amorous,  and  wizard  side  of  the
Tuatha  de  Danann  upon  which  they  lay  stress,  and  which
they  exaggerate  in  a  manner  that  wearies  when  it  does
not  offend.  The  rude  and  simple  buffoonery  of  the  comic
interludes  in  the  older  mythic  tales  is,  as  a  rule,  foreign  to
the  later  mediaeval  fiction,  which,  mutatis  mutandis,  occupies
in  Irish  legendary  literature  somewhat  the  same  place  that
the  Amadis  cycle  does  in  the  literature  of  chivalric  romance.1

a  parody  on  the  genre  of  mythic-romantic  narrative  studied  in  the  first
section  of  this  essay.  Professor  Wollner  states  that  all  the  elements  of
Mac  Conglinne's  vision  of  the  land  of  unlimited  eating  belong  to  an
early  stage  of  agricultural  development.

1  There  are  exceptions — e.g.  the  story  known  as  the  Pursuit  of  the
Gilla  Dacker  (Silva  Gadelica,  pp.  292-311;  Joyce,  Old  Celtic
Romances,  pp.  221-273).  But  the  comic  element  is  supplied  by  the
Fenian  heroes  rather  than  by  the  T.  de  D.  wizards.


i82         ANNALS    AND    MYTHOLOGY

We  must  pause  here  for  a  moment  and  sum  up  the
results  of  our  investigation.  The  mythical  nature  of  the
Tuatha  de  Danann  is  proved  by  the  fact  of  their  preceding,
in  the  legendary  history  of  the  race,  the  fabulous  king  to
whose  reign  is  ascribed  the  origin  of  civilisation ;  the  story
of  their  arrival  in  Ireland,  of  their  conflict  with  the  Firbolgs
and  Fomorians,  of  their  dispossession  by  the  sons  of  Mil,
is  thus,  in  the  main,1  mythology.  At  a  comparatively  early
date,  say  in  the  seventh  century  a.d.,  the  process  of  turning
this  mythology  into  pseudo-history  began — a  process  similar
in  its  essential  spirit  to  that  by  which  Euhemeros  and  other
classic  writers  endeavoured  to  rationalise  Greek  mythology.
The  Annalistic  account  has  preserved,  however,  some  of  the
mythical  features  of  the  god  clan — e.g.  their  magical  power
generally,  and  their  dominion  over  the  weather  specially.
The  romantic  fiction  in  which  the  mythology  had  been
embodied,  and  from  which  the  Annalists  extracted  their
narrative,  has  disappeared  in  its  earliest  forms,  but  is
represented  with  substantial  accuracy  by  the  only  con-
siderable remaining  fragment  of  the  second  stage  of  this
fiction^the  Battle  of  Moytura.  Here  we  find  the  magical
powers  of  the  Tuatha  De  strongly  insisted  upon,  and  like-
wise a  connection  of  these  beings  with  the  agricultural
welfare  of  Ireland,  wholly  lacking  in  the  Annalistic  account.

The  surmise  that  the  Tuatha  De  are,  in  part,  at  least,  gods
of  growth  and  fertility,  manifestations  of  the  spirit  of  life
animating  in  ever  fresh  transformations  the  whole  of  nature,
is  strengthened  by  the  fact  that  in  the  legendary  description

1  I  say,  in  the  main,  as  it  is  not  impossible  that  historical  conflicts
between  the  invading  Goidels  and  the  races  they  found  in  possession  of
Ireland  may  have  supplied  some  details  to  the  final  redaction  of  the
mythology.


MYTHICAL    ACCOUNT  183

of  the  beginning  of  civilisation  (Tighernmas'  fabulous  reign),
religious  worship  is  identified  with  the  cult  of  Crom  Cruaich,
a  cult  of  ritual  sacrificial  nature,  probably  akin  to  that  of
which  Dionysus  was  the  object  among  the  Greeks.

DlNNSHENCHAS    MENTIONS    OF   THE   TUATHA    DE    DANANN.

The  Dinnshenchas  mentions  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann
now  claim  our  attention.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  noteworthy
that  out  of  the  161  legends  from  this  collection  printed  and
translated  by  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes  from  the  eleventh  to  twelfth
century  compilation,  no  less  than  forty-eight,  or  nearly  one-
third,  are  wholly  or  mainly  concerned  with  the  fortunes
of  this  mysterious  race.  How  large  the  proportion  is  must
strike  the  student  who  remembers  that  in  the  literature
which  we  can  with  certainty  assign  to  the  centuries  preced-
ing the  eleventh,  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  cycle,  as  such,  fills
a  very  small  place.  One  could  not  wish  for  a  more  effective
reminder  how  much  of  Irish  mythic  romance  has  perished
beyond  recovery,  how  unsafe  must  be  any  argument  founded
solely  upon  the  occurrence  in  extant  literature  of  this  or  that
legendary  theme.1

As  a  sample  of  the  legendary  matters  contained  in  the
Dinnshenchas,  let  us  take  the  account  of  the  origin  of  the
famous  fair  held  every  third  year  at  Carman  on  the  first  of
August.  '  There  were  three  men  who  came  from  Athens
and  one  woman  with  them,  sons  of  Extinction  son  of  Dark-
ness son  of  Ailment,  and  their  names  were  Violent,  Black,

1  The  Dinnshenchas  references  are  to  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes'  edition  and
translation  of  the  Rennes  MS.  {Revzte  Celtique,  vols.  xv.  and  xvi.),  of
the  Oxford  MS.,  issued  separately  under  the  title  Bodley  Dinnshenchas
(D.  Nutt) ;  and  of  the  Kilbride  ms.,  issued  separately  under  the  title
Edinburgh  Dinnshenchas  (D.  Nutt).


1 84      DINNSHENCHAS    OF    CARMAN

and  Evil,  and  her  name  was  Carman.  By  spells  and  charms
and  incantations  the  mother  ruined  every  place.  ...  So  they
came  to  Ireland  to  bring  evil  upon  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,
by  blighting  the  corn  of  this  island  upon  them.  To  the
Tuatha  de  Danann  that  seemed  ill.  So  Ai,  son  of  Ollam
of  their  poets,  and  Cridenbel  of  their  lampooners,  and  Lugh
Laebach  of  their  wizards,  and  Be'cuille  of  their  witches,  went
to  sing  charms  upon  them,  and  parted  not  from  them  till
they  had  driven  the  three  men  over  sea.'  Carman,  left  as
a  hostage,  dies  of  grief,  'and  she  asked  the  Tuatha  de
Danann  to  hold  her  fair  at  her  burial-place,  and  that  fair
and  place  should  always  bear  her  name.  And  the  Tuatha
de  Danann  performed  this  so  long  as  they  were  in  Ire-
land.' .  .  .  '  For  holding  the  fair,  the  Leinstermen  were
promised  corn  and  milk,  and  freedom  from  control  of  any
other  province  in  Ireland ;  that  they  should  have  men  royal
heroes  ;  tender  women  ;  good  cheer  in  every  several  house ;
every  fruit  like  a  show ;  and  nets  full  of  fish  from  waters.
But  if  it  was  not  held,  they  should  have  decay,  and  early
greyness,  and  young  kings.' 1

Explanation  of  the  Carman  Legend.

The  full  significance  of  this  legend  is  not  apparent  until
we  recall  that  the  first  of  August  was  a  day  sacred  to  Lug,
the  slayer  of  Balor,  the  master  of  all  arts,  the  father  of
Cuchulinn,  and,  possibly,  as  we  saw  in  the  first  volume,  the
oldest  lord  of  the  Happy  Otherworld.  In  addition  to  the
triennial  festival  at  Carman,  an  annual  festival  was  held  at
Tailltin  in  Meath,  the  institution  of  which  was  definitely
ascribed  to  Lug.    The  story  is  thus  told  in  the  dinnshenchas

1  R.  D.  No.  18.


DINNSHENCHAS    OF    TAILTIN      185

of  Tailtin :  '  Tailtin,  daughter  of  Magmor,  was  the  wife  of
Eochu  the  Rough,  son  of  Dua  the  Dark.  Tis  by  him  the
fortress  of  the  Hostages  was  built  in  Tara,  and  she  was  the
foster-mother  of  Lug,  the  son  of  the  Dumb  Champion.  'Tis
she  that  asked  her  husband  to  clear  away  for  her  the  wood
of  Cuan,  so  that  there  might  be  an  assembly  around  her
grave.  And  after  that  she  died  on  the  calends  of  August,
and  her  lamentation  and  funeral  games  were  held  by  Lugaid.
Hence  we  say  Lugnasad.'1  Keating,  in  his  account  of  the
festival,  remarks  that  the  c  games  resembled  those  called
Olympic  in  Greece,'  a  remark  far  truer  than  he  knew.  For
just  as  the  Olympic  games  were  at  the  outset  the  festival  of
one  special  Greek  tribe,  to  which  circumstances  gave  a  pan-
Hellenic  character,  so  we  may  judge  that  each  Goidelic  tribe
celebrated  its  own  Lugnasad,  and  that  the  same  historic
circumstances  which  made  Tara  a  political,  made  the  neigh-
bouring Tailltin  a  religious  centre,  and  gave  to  its  Lugnasad
a  character  of  pre-eminence  which  it  retained  for  over  a
thousand  years  at  least.  The  natural  tendency  would  be  to
associate  the  god's  name  solely  with  his  chief  festival,  and  to
drop  it  in  the  mention  of  other  festivals.  But  we  are  justified
in  taking  all  the  celebrations  into  consideration  if  we  wish  to
form  a  clear  idea  of  the  nature  of  the  festival.  It  happens,
too,  and  not  infrequently,  that  the  secondary  and  more
neglected  examples  of  a  rite  preserve  its  primitive  traits
better  than  the  leading  ones,  to  which  a  larger  mass  of
extraneous  matter  becomes,  in  the  course  of  time,  attached.
If,  then,  we  take  both  legends  as  referring  to  the  same  festival
— the  one  (Carman)  special  to  the  Leinster  tribes,  the  other
(Tailltin)  common  to  the  whole  Irish  race,  we  cannot  fail  to
note  the  predominantly  agricultural  character  of  the  rite ;  it
1  R.  D.  No.  99 ;  also  Ed.  D.


1 86  BRES    IN    DINNSHENCHAS

is  connected  with  the  discomfiture  of  evil  powers  hostile  to
vegetation,  upon  its  due  performance  depends  the  welfare
and  increase  of  the  soil.  That  both  accounts  should  start
the  festival  from  the  death  of  a  woman  is  suggestive  in
connection  with  Professor  Rhys's  explanation  of  the  term
Lugnasad  as  Lug's  marriage — i.e.  in  his  interpretation,  the
wedding  of  sun-god  and  earth,  from  which  the  life-giving
produce  of  the  soil  was  to  spring.  This  sacred  marriage  is,
as  we  know,  a  widespread  feature  of  the  agricultural  ritual
studied  by  Mannhardt  and  Mr.  Frazer,  as  underlying  the
polytheistic  mythology  of  Greeks  and  Germans.  But  just
as  the  ritual  often  culminated  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  king-
priest,  the  symbol  or  incarnation  of  the  animating  spirit  of
vegetation,  so,  too,  his  consort  suffered  not  infrequently  a
like  fate.  Such  an  interpretation  of  the  legend  as  is  here
suggested  cannot  be  regarded  as  assured,  but  it  is  at  least
plausible.

We  have  met  with  Bres,  the  Fomorian  king  over  the
Tuatha  de  Danann,  both  in  the  Annals  and  in  the  romantic
tale.  The  dinnshenchas  of  Cam  Hui  Net  runs  as  follows  :
'  Bres,  son  of  Elathan,  died  there ;  'tis  he  that  in  the  reign
of  Nechtan  Fairhand,  King  of  Munster,  demanded  from
every  rooftree  in  Ireland  a  hundred  men's  drink  of  the  milk
of  a  hornless  dun  cow,  or  of  the  milk  of  a  cow  of  some
other  single  colour.  So  Munster's  kine  were  singed  by  him
(Nechtan)  in  a  fire  of  fern,  and  then  they  were  smeared  with
a  porridge  of  the  ashes  of  flaxseed,  so  that  they  became  dark
brown.  That  was  done  by  the  advice  of  Lugh  Mac  Ethlenn
and  of  the  wizard  Findgoll,  son  of  Findamnas;  and  they
also  formed  three  hundred  cows  of  wood,  with  dark  brown
pails  in  their  forks  in  lieu  of  the  udders.  These  pails  were
dipped  in  black  bog  stuff.     Then  Bres  came  to  inspect  the


BRES    IN  DINNSHENCHAS  187

manner  of  these  cattle,  and  so  that  they  might  be  milked  in
his  presence.  ...  All  the  bog  stuff  they  had  was  squeezed
out  as  if  it  was  milk.  .  .  .  The  Irish  were  under  a  gets  to
come  thither  at  the  same  time,  and  Bres  was  under  a  gets
to  drink  what  should  be  milked  there.  So  three  hundred
bucketsful  of  red  bog  stuff  are  milked  for  him,  and  he  drinks
it  all ' ! x     Little  wonder  that  he  died  in  consequence.

This  curious  legend  has  all  the  appearance  of  being  one
of  those  explanations  of  ritual  which  are  the  source  of  so
many  myths.  The  statement  that  the  men  of  Ireland  were
under  a  get's  or  taboo  to  assemble  at  a  particular  place  and
time  seems  to  indicate  a  festival  of  a  similar  character  to  the
Lugnasad,  and  the  remainder  of  the  story  is  a  description  of
the  rites  practised  (passing  the  cattle  through  the  fire  as  a
substitute  for  actual  sacrifice?)  and  an  attempt  to  account
for  them.

At  times  we  catch  in  the  Dinnshenchas  legends  far-off
echoes  of  a  giant  world,  so  mighty  and  so  remote  as  to  leave
upon  the  mind  the  same  thrill  of  uncanny  wonder  as  is
provoked  by  the  mythical  lists  in  Kilhwch  and  Olwen.
'  Tuirbe's  strand,  whence  was  it  named  ?  .  .  .  Tuirbe  Frag-
mar,  father  of  the  Gobban  Saer,  'tis  he  that  owned  it.  From
that  heritage  he  used  to  hurl  a  cast  of  his  axe  from  the  Hill
of  the  Axe  in  the  face  of  the  flood  tides,  so  that  he  forbade
the  sea,  and  it  would  not  come  over  the  axe.  And  no  one
knows  his  genealogy,  unless  he  be  one  of  the  defectives  who
fled  from  Tara  before  the  Master  of  Many  Arts '  (i.e.  Lug).2

In  this  legend,  which  tells  the  power  of  Goibniu's  father,

we  have  not  only  a  supreme  manifestation  of  Tuatha  de

Danann  dominance  over  the  forces  of  nature,  we  have  also,

as  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes  has  pointed  out,  a  close  parallel — the

1  R.  D.  No.  46.  a  R   D.  No.  125 ;  also  Ed.  D.


1 88  ANGUS   OF   THE   BRUGH

only  one  In  the  Aryan  story-treasure — to  a  feat  of  Vishnu's
told  of  in  Aryan-speaking  India  at  much  the  same  time
probably  that  the  Goidels  first  landed  in  Ireland.

To  return  to  the  purely  agricultural  side  of  Tuatha  de
Danann  power.  This  is  how  the  Plain  of  Life  got  its  name.
4  Life,  daughter  of  Cannan  the  Pict,  wedded  Deltbanna,  son
of  Drucht.  .  .  .  Out  of  the  elfmound  of  Bodb  on  Femen
was  he.  South  of  Tara  they  set  up,  and  because  the  plain
over  which  she  came  seemed  beautiful  to  her,  she  asked
that  her  name  might  be  in  it ;  and  Deltbanna  dealt  out  no
more  liquor  for  the  men  of  Erin  until  yon  plain  was  called
by  his  wife's  name.' x

Nor  is  the  semi-humorous  element  noticeable  in  the  oldest
romantic  tales  concerning  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  absent
from  the  Dinnshenchas.  We  are  told  that  '  Gaible,  son  of
Ethadon,  son  of  Nuada  of  the  Silver  Hand,  stole  a  bundle
of  twigs  which  Ainge,  the  Dagda's  daughter,  had  gathered
to  make  a  tub  thereof.  For  the  tub  which  the  Dagda  had
made  for  her  would  not  cease  from  dripping  while  the  sea
was  in  flood,  but  not  a  drop  was  let  out  during  the  ebb.  He
hurled  a  cast  of  that  bundle,  and  a  fair  wood  grew  thereout.' 2

Mention  has  already  been  made  in  vol.  i.  (p.  211),  of  the
legend  known  as  the  Conquest  of  the  Sid,  which  tells  how
Angus,  son  of  the  Dagda,  won  his  fairy  palace  of  the  Brugh
and  of  its  marvels.  'Great  was  the  power  of  the  Dagda
over  the  sons  of  Mil,  even  after  their  conquest  of  Ireland,'  says
this  tale.  '  For  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  his  subjects,  destroyed
the  corn  and  milk  of  the  sons  of  Mil,  so  that  the  latter  were
forced  to  make  a  treaty  of  peace  with  the  Dagda.  Not
until  then,  and  thanks  to  his  goodwill,  were  they  able  to
harvest  corn  and  drink  the  milk  of  their  cows.' 3
1  R.  D.  No.  12.         2  R.  D.  No.  11.         3  Quoted,  Cycle  Myth.  p.  69.


HEROIC   ACCOUNT  189

This  is  perhaps  the  most  definite  statement  that  can  be
recovered  from  Irish  mythic  literature  concerning  the  agri-
cultural essence  and  potency  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  ;  for
this  reason  I  have  reserved  it  until  now.  The  evidence
previously  adduced  would  suffice,  I  maintain,  even  in  the
absence  of  this  statement,  to  assign  to  the  Folk  of  the  goddess
Danu  the  role  of  protectors,  fosterers,  inspirers  of  vegetable
and  animal  life  ;  and  when  this  role  is  found  connected  with
the  practice  of  ritual  sacrifice,  the  conclusion  as  to  the  true
nature  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  seems  inevitable.

Heroic  Saga  mentions  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann.

But,  it  may  be  said,  only  one  or  two  phases  of  the  com-
plex personality  of  the  Tuatha  De  have  been  considered.
Other  evidence  concerning  these  beings  has  been  neglected.
In  this  chapter  I  have  adduced  texts  which,  on  the  whole,
deal  with  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  mainly,  if  not  solely,  and
as  a  distinct  group  of  individuals.  But  the  many  stories
quoted  in  earlier  chapters,  alike  from  the  Dinnshenchas  and
the  Heroic  Sagas,  clearly  show  that  this  is  not  the  only
mode  of  their  appearance  in  Irish  mythic  romance.
Throughout  the  entire  range  of  that  romance,  whether  it
tell  of  the  Milesian  kings  who  founded  Emania,  of  the
Ulster  king,  Conchobor  Mac  Nessa,  and  his  knights,  of
Cormac,  or  of  Finn  and  his  band  of  warriors,  the  Tuatha
de  Danann  appear  as  the  friends,  the  protectors,  the  rivals,
the  opponents,  of  the  mortal  heroes.  The  story-tellers
seem  ignorant  of  any  limitation  of  time  imposed  upon  these
wizard  champions — they  remain  eternally  wise  and  courteous
and  amorous  throughout  the  thousands  of  years  strung
together  by  the  chroniclers.  Limitations  of  place,  on  the
contrary,  may  be  noted,  especially  in  the  later  romances — the


i9o  GREEK    AND    IRISH

invisible  kingdom  of  Erin  being  parcelled  out  among  the
folk  of  the  sid  as  definitely  as  its  outward  form  was  shared
among  the  races  of  Niall  or  Owen,  of  Connall  or  of  Brian.

How  does  the  consideration  of  this  aspect  of  the  Tuatha
de  Danann  affect  the  estimate  of  their  nature  we  have  based
upon  the  more  purely  mythological  texts  ?  To  rightly
answer  this  question  we  must  keep  steadily  in  view  what
each  class  of  mythico-romantic  literature  really  is,  and  what
is  the  true  import  of  its  evidence.  Comparison  between
Ireland  and  Greece  has  already  proved  fruitful  and  illumina-
ting. Resort  may  again  be  had  to  this  expedient,  and  it
may  prove  of  value  not  only  as  illustrating  the  unfamiliar
Irish  by  the  familiar  Greek  literature,  but  as  throwing  new
light  upon  the  latter.

Comparison  of  Greek  and  Irish  Mythic  Literature.

We  know  Greek  mythology  on  the  literary  side  from
several  sources.  We  have  the  witness  of  the  heroic  poems,
the  most  famous  of  which,  the  Homeric,  have  come  down
to  us  entire,  whilst  we  have  a  considerable  amount  of  infor-
mation concerning  the  secondary  and  more  imitative  works.
This,  the  epic  tradition,  may  be  dated  from  the  tenth  to
seventh  centuries  B.C.  The  interest  is  primarily  heroic,
only  secondarily  mythological.  From  the  eighth  and  seventh
centuries  we  have  the  systematised,  crudely  philosophical
account  of  the  mythology  which  has  come  down  to  us  under
the  name  of  Hesiod.  To  a  somewhat  later  period  belong  the
more  romantic  versions  of  mythological  episodes  known  as
the  Homeric  Hymns.  From  the  seventh  to  fifth  centuries
we  have  a  number  of  scattered  references  in  the  lyric  poets,
especially  in  Pindar,  at  the  close  of  this  period ;  in  the
main  the  lyrists  follow  the  epic  tradition,  but  seem  also  to


MYTHIC    LITERATURE  191

have  preserved  traces  of  a  number  of  local  sagas  which  had
not  attained  the  honour  of  incorporation  in  the  epic  cycles.
In  the  fifth  century  the  dramatists  furnish  us  with  a  great
mass  of  new  material  only  in  part  derived  from  the  epic
tradition,  whilst  the  historian  and  philosopher  make  the  first
essays  of  critical  rationalism  applied  to  the  mythology.  But
not  until  the  great  creative  impulse  of  Greek  literary  art  is
long  spent,  not  until  the  critical,  antiquarian,  Alexandrine
period,  do  we  get  systematised  surveys  of  the  whole  or
definite  portions  of  the  mythology.  The  second  century
Apollodorus  and  Antoninus  Liberalis ;  the  first  century
Parthenius  (imitated  by  Ovid),  have  preserved  much  precious
material.  Meanwhile,  the  critical  philosophical  spirit  had
been  busily  at  work,  and  the  mythology  had  either  been
rationalised  into  pseudo-history,  as  by  Euhemeros,  or  refined
away  in  a  maze  of  metaphysical  subtleties.  But  all  this  time,
and  for  centuries  longer,  the  practice  of  worship  was  kept
up,  the  rites  were  duly  performed,  the  personages  of  the
ecclesiastical  hierarchy  recorded  ;  and,  from  the  mass  of
inscriptions  and  other  historical  texts  relating  to  what  may
be  called  religious  archaeology,  we  derive  valuable  hints
concerning  the  formal  side  of  the  mythology.  So  conser-
vative were  the  ministers  of  public  worship,  that  in  the
second  century  after  Christ,  Pausanias,  travelling  through
the  Greek  world,  describing  the  shrines  de  visu,  and  tran-
scribing, where  not  deterred  by  religious  scruples,  the  temple
legends,  transmitted  to  the  modern  world  what  is  in  some
respects  the  most  precious  and  authentic  source  of  informa-
tion concerning  the  myths  of  Hellas.  At  the  present  day
the  investigator  of  Greek  religion  starts,  in  the  first  place,
with  what  may  be  the  very  latest  recorded  testimony — in-
scriptions, etc.,  dating  possibly  from  the  Christian  period,


iQ2  GREEK    AND    IRISH

or  the  evidence  of  Pausanias  concerning  the  actual  facts  of
worship ;  the  Alexandrine  compilers  are  often  found  to  have
an  evidential  value  superior  not  only  to  the  dramatic  and
lyric  development  of  the  epic  tradition,  but  even  to  the  very
fount  of  that  tradition — to  Homer  himself.  The  euhemeris-
tic  and  philosophical  interpretations  are  of  value  solely  as
witnesses  to  the  existence  of  that  which  they  endeavour  to
explain.

If  we  compare  Greece  and  Ireland  we  see  at  once  that
the  inscriptional,  historic  evidence  by  which,  in  the  former,
we  can  control  and  supplement  the  information  derived
from  literature,  is,  in  the  latter,  wholly  lacking.  Moreover,
whilst  the  almost  entirety  of  Greek  mythic  literature  is
earlier  than,  and  absolutely  unaffected  by,  Christianity,  the
entirety  of  Irish  mythic  literature,  in  its  present  form,  is
later  than  Christianity,  and  has  been  affected  by  Christian
classic  culture  to  some  extent.  In  spite  of  these  profound
differences,  comparison  between  the  two  literatures  is  not
only  possible  but  fruitful.  The  earliest  Irish  heroic  cycles
correspond  to  the  Greek  epic  tradition,  but  it  is  doubtful  if
any  Irish  epic  tale  occupies  in  Irish  literature  the  same
position  the  Iliad  does  in  Greek;  rather  must  the  Irish
tales  be  regarded  as  answering  partly  to  the  latest  cyclic
poets,  partly  to  the  archaicising,  imitative  school  represented
in  Greece  by  the  third-century  Apollonius  Rhodius.  The
Irish  Hesiod  is  the  Book  of  Invasions,  but  unfortunately
this  is,  of  all  portions  of  the  Irish  mythic  record,  the  one
which  has  been  most  deformed  by  the  alien  culture  of
Christianity.  Luckily,  a  small  amount  of  the  mythology,
treated  euhemeristically  in  the  Book  of  Invasions,  has  come
down  to  us  in  romantic  form  ;  this  may  be  compared  with
those  myths  preserved  by  the  Homeric  Hymns.     Finally,  to


MYTHIC    LITERATURE  193

the  compilatory,  descriptive  section  of  Greek  mythological
literature — Apollodorus,  Antoninus  Liberalis,  Pausanias —
correspond,  though  very  imperfectly,  the  Irish  compilations,
known  as  the  Coir  Anman,  or  mythico-heroic  biography,
and  the  Dinnshenchas,  or  mythico-heroic  topography.

Just,  then,  as  the  student  of  Greek  myth  turns  to  the
actual  details  of  the  cult  and  to  the  literature  which  is  most
closely  connected  therewith,  if  he  wishes  to  form  a  clear
idea  of  the  nature  and  origin  of  a  divinity,  using  the  poetic
representation  by  the  epic  or  dramatic  singer  as  a  secondary
and  controlling  source  of  information,  so  the  student  of
Irish  myths  must  seek  for  precise  evidence  as  to  the  nature
of  the  Irish  gods  from  the  compilations  rather  than  from  the
heroic  sagas.  The  reason  is  evident.  All  forms  of  litera-
ture— the  rudest  as  well  as  the  most  sophisticated — are  sub-
ject to  the  same  necessity,  that  of  interesting  the  hearer  or
reader  in  the  fortunes  of  the  personages  presented  to  him.
In  heroic  sagas  the  gods  can  but  appear  as  foils  to  or
conveniences  for  the  hero ;  they  are  not  the  leading  char-
acters, and  it  is  essential  that  their  powers  or  fortunes
should  not  compete  with  those  of  the  real  heroes.  More-
over, from  the  numberless  incidents  of  the  god's  career
known  to  the  heroic  singer,  it  is  almost  inevitable  that
certain  ones  alone  should  be  chosen  for  the  complex
web  of  his  narrative.  Fighting  and  love-making  are  the
staple  of  heroic  saga  as  of  all  romance;  it  is  the  warlike
and  amatory  side  of  the  Pantheon  which  will  be  represented
in  it  far  more  frequently  and  certainly  than  that  which
would  find  expression  in  the  ritual  legends.

'Tis  then,  I  would  urge,  vain  to  seek  in  mentions  of  the
Tuatha  De,  scattered  through  the  Cuchulinn  and  other
heroic  sagas,  aught  else  than,  in  the  nature  of  things,  we

VOL.  II.  N


i94    DEVELOPMENT    OF   THE   TUATHA

can  find  there — reference  to  the  warlike  and  amorous  ex-
ploits of  these  beings,  presented  so  as  to  be  an  effective
foil  to  the  fortunes  of  the  mortal  or  semi-mortal  hero.  It  is
much  that  we  were  able  to  recover  from  the  heroic  sagas
the  picture  of  beings  pre-eminent  in  art  magic,  capable  of
assuming  all  shapes  at  will,  lords  of  a  land  of  ideal  plenty
in  which  every  form  of  vivid,  sensual,  material  enjoyment
is  present ;  masters  of  the  mystery  of  life,  by  whom  the
perpetual  flow  and  transformation  of  the  animating  essence
(which  in  this  world  can  only  be  maintained  by  bloody  sacrifice
and  inevitable  death)  is  so  ordered  and  governed  that  neither
death  nor  decay  assail  them.  It  would  be  too  much  to
look  for  those  myths,  dependent  upon  and  symbolising
the  ritual,  which  form  the  root  of  all  the  complex  manifes-
tations of  the  divine  personality.  As  it  is,  now  that  analysis
has  led  us  to  this  point,  the  connection  of  the  two  con-
ceptions we  are  investigating  must  seem  natural  and  legiti-
mate ;  the  god  from  whose  favour  are  sought  fertility  and
increase,  who  is  himself  the  incorporate  symbol  of  life  and
growth  manifest  in  perpetually  recurring,  ever  varying,  yet
eternally  similar  forms,  is  also  lord  of  the  land  in  which
fertility  and  increase  find  their  highest  expression.

Development  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  Mythology.

The  development  of  the  mythical  literature  connected
with  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  may  now  be  briefly  sketched.
Originally,  if  we  may  judge  from  analogy,  it  doubtless  consisted
wholly  of  chants  forming  part  of  the  ritual,  and  of  legends
accounting  for  and  interpreting  ritual  acts.  Out  of  such
materials  there  would  gradually  arise  a  mythology — an
attempt,  that  is  to  say,  to  represent  the  phenomena  of
the  natural  and  social  world  under  the  guise  of  a  divine


DE    DANANN    MYTHOLOGY  195

history.  Removed  one  degree  from  its  primitive  function
of  being  a  simple  assistant  and  exponent  of  the  ritual  acts
upon  which  depends  the  material  welfare  of  the  race,  the
mass  of  mythic  legend  becomes  complex  and  plastic;  its
divine  dramatis  persoticz  acquire  a  wider  range  of  attributes,
supplementary,  as  a  rule,  to  the  primitive  conception,  but
often  transcending  and  supplanting  it.  A  body  of  narrative
comes  into  being,  plot  and  incidents  and  personages  of
which  are  readily  adaptable  to  that  idealised  representation
of  racial  history  known  as  heroic  saga.  But  when  the  gods
enter  the  world  of  mortal  heroes,  they  must  bow  to  the
conventions  of  heroic  legend ;  they  insensibly  put  off  more
and  more  of  their  primitive  character,  and  tend  to  approxi-
mate to  the  ideal  standard  of  their  mortal  antagonists  and
interlocutors.  In  the  case  of  the  Tuatha  De,  two  of  their
essential  characteristics  not  only  persist  after  their  inclusion
in  the  heroic  sagas,  but  are  developed  and  influence  the
development  of  the  heroic  epos.  As  holders  and  givers  of
life,  the  Tuatha  De  are  alike  deathless  and  capable  of  mani-
festation under  the  most  diverse  forms — hence  their  wizard
might,  hence,  too,  the  attribute  of  deathlessness  so  marked
a  feature  of  themselves  and  their  land;  as  bestowers  of
fertility  and  increase,  they  are,  by  their  nature,  liberal
and  amorous.  Thus  is  formed  that  picture  of  these
beings  found  in  the  oldest  heroic  sagas,  long  antedating,  in
all  likelihood,  the  rise  of  Christianity,  almost  unaffected  by
the  advent  of  the  new  faith,  and  persisting  in  literature
down  to  this  very  century.  The  fairy  loves  of  Etain  or  of
Cuchulinn,  the  hosts  of  Connla  or  Cormac,  had  sufficiently
sloughed  off  their  godhead  to  retain  their  place  undisturbed
in  the  heroic  romance  which  was  loved  with  equal  fervour
by  the  half-pagan  bard  and  the  Christian  saint.     It  went


196    DEVELOPMENT    OF    THE    TUATHA

otherwise  with  the  mythology  properly  so  called.  This
could  not  but  conflict  with  Christianity,  and  was  only
preserved  under  a  form — the  pseudo-historic — which  masked
its  real  nature,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Battle  of  Moytura,
was  associated  with  and  subordinated  to  the  pseudo-history.
To  some  extent  the  process  of  turning  the  mythology  into
history  may  have  reacted  upon  the  heroic  sagas,  though
most  of  them  had  assumed  a  settled  shape  long  before.
Some  modification  seems  to  have  taken  place  with  a  view
of  bringing  them  into  line  with  the  Annalistic  schemes
devised  by  the  antiquary  class.  The  fact,  too,  that  beings,
originally  deathless,  were  assigned  to  definite  dates,  tended,
in  some  cases,  to  emphasise  that  '  mortalising '  (if  I  may
coin  the  word),  of  the  Tuatha  De,  which  itself  was  a  neces-
sary consequence  of  their  inclusion  in  these  heroic  cycles.

Pre-eleventh  century  Irish  literature  has  thus  preserved
the  outlines  of  the  mythic  narratives  which  grew  out  of  the
old  chants  and  ritual  legends,  but  only  more  or  less
disguised  as  pseudo-history ;  in  the  case  of  certain  texts —
e.g.  the  Battle  of  Moytura — the  disguise  is  slight  and  un-
essential, the  body  of  the  story  is  genuine  mythology.  It
has  also  preserved,  in  the  narrative  of  the  dealings  between
the  Tuatha  De  and  the  heroes,  glimpses  of  these  beings  which
are  but  little  younger  in  age  than  the  purely  mythological
conceptions.  Both  forms — mythic  and  heroic — had  passed
into  literature  long  before  the  Viking  invasion ;  their  sub-
stance persists  in  the  post- Viking  redactions,  although  the
latter  have  certainly  been  affected  in  small  details  by  the
events  of  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries.  But  as  a  whole,
myth  and  heroic  epos  alike  belong  to  the  oldest  and  most
genuine  manifestations  of  Gaelic  belief  and  romantic  fancy.

In  post-eleventh  century  literature,  as  is  but  natural,  the


DE    DANANN    MYTHOLOGY  197

Tuatha  De  tend  to  break  away  more  and  more  from  their
primitive  mythological  basis,  and  to  develop  upon  lines
laid  down  in  the  heroic  sagas.  It  is  possible,  also,  that  the
lateness  of  the  date  at  which  the  great  southern  heroic  saga,
that  of  Finn  and  his  warrior  band,  came  into  the  hands  of
the  professional  bardic  class,  is  responsible  for  the  oblitera-
tion of  certain  mythic  features  of  the  Tuatha  De  in  this
cycle.  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that
the  wizard  god-clan  plays  a  far  more  important  part  in  the
Fenian  than  in  the  older  cycles.1  Be  this  as  it  may,  the
tendency  in  the  mythic  romance  of  the  thirteenth  to  the
eighteenth  centuries  is  to  accentuate  the  courtly,  amorous,
and  magic  side  of  these  beings ;  to  leave  in  the  shade  their
original  agricultural  character,  and  to  eliminate  the  Rabe-
laisian element.

It  should  be  added  that  the  true  nature  of  the  Tuatha
De  was  never  entirely  lost  sight  of  in  Ireland.  I  have
already  quoted  several  passages  clearly  showing  that  Irish
scribes  and  antiquaries  recognised  these  beings  as  the  gods
of  their  ancestors,  and  were  led  astray  neither  by  the
romantic  nor  by  the  pseudo-historic  presentment  of  their
forms  in  the  literature  of  the  time.  More  remarkable  still
is  the  fact,  as  vouchsafed  for  by  an  entry  in  the  Book  of
Armagh  (i.e.  dating  at  the  latest  from  the  tenth  century),
that  the  mythical  belongings  of  these  beings  were  correctly
described ;  the  unknown  writer  styles  them  dei  terreni —
gods  of  the  earth.

1  The  reason  for  this  is,  I  think,  obvious.  The  Northern  cycle  was
fashioned  by  the  bards  at  a  time  when  the  heroic  tradition  was  still
looked  upon  as  history ;  it  was  sung  before  men  who  claimed  descent
from  the  heroes.  Hence  the  subordination  of  the  immortal,  the
prominence  of  the  mortal  element.


198  TUATHA    DE    DANANN

I  have  hitherto  refrained  from  making  any  use  of  the
fairy  belief  of  modern  Ireland.  It  was  necessary,  in  the
first  place,  to  form  a  clear  idea  concerning  the  nature  and
development  of  the  ancient  belief  with  which  it  is  con-
nected. Historical  and  mythological  evidence  has  been
adduced  in  support  of  the  contention  that  the  Tuatha  De
are,  in  the  main,  deities  of  agriculture,  and  that  their
worship  consisted,  in  the  main,  of  ritual  sacrifices.  We
are  now  in  a  position  to  examine  the  evidence  of  modern
folklore,  and  see  if  it  also  supports  this  contention.


CHAPTER    XVIII

THE   CONTEMPORARY    FAIRY    BELIEF   OF   THE   GAELIC-
SPEAKING    PEASANT

Irish  mythic  literature  in  its  relation  to  peasant  lore — Parallel  of  Greek  and
Irish  mythic  literature  in  their  relation  to  national  life — The  essential
elements  of  Irish  peasant  lore — The  conservatism  of  Irish  social
organisation— The  influence  of  Christianity — Formal  classification  of
Irish  peasant  lore — Its  true  nature — The  fairies ;  fallen  angels  ex-
planation ;  peculiar  signification  of  the  Gaelic  versions  —  Special
features  of  fairy  lore  ;  the  agricultural  festivals  and  their  connection
with  the  fairy  world  ;  local  character  of  the  Irish  fairies  ;  fairy  love  of
neatness  ;  fairy  revels  by  night ;  witchcraft  and  fairydom ;  the
changeling  belief ;  Irish  in  relation  to  general  European  fairy  lore —
The  Tuatha  de  Danann  and  death.

The  foregoing  discussion  shows  us  that  we  must  be  pre-
pared to  expect  elements  of  varying  origin  and  date  in
modern  fairy  lore,  and  gives  us  useful  hints  for  distinguish-
ing them.  We  have  seen  that  the  original  basis  of  the
Tuatha  de  Danann  mythology  is  an  agricultural  creed
expressing  itself  in  a  ritual  determined  by  the  sequence  of
the  seasons  and  their  relation  to  agricultural  operations,  and
having  for  its  animating  principle  a  conception  of  life  as
something  fluid  and  indestructible,  derivable  from  powers
which  need  to  be  sustained  and  placated  by  sacrifice  if
they  are  to  perform  efficiently  the  services  which  their
human  worshippers  seek  at  their  hands.     Overlaying  this

199


2oo  DEVELOPMENT    OF    IRISH

primitive  basis,  dependent  upon  it  in  its  main  outlines,  but
differing  largely  from  it  in  detail  and  in  colouring,  we  find
a  mythology  which  appeals  to  other  than  purely  agricul-
tural needs  and  interests,  which  is  intended  more  especially
for  the  warrior  and  governing  class,  which  has  taken  account
of  the  enlargement  of  religious  conceptions  due  to  the
widened  material  and  intellectual  horizon  of  the  race,  and
which  has  become  plastic  by  having  passed  out  of  the
hands  of  a  sacerdotal  class,  intent  solely  upon  preserving
the  formulas  of  ritual  and  their  orthodox  explanation,  into
those  of  a  literary  class  intent  mainly  upon  pleasing  an
audience  of  chiefs,  champions  and  (to  an  extent  which
varied  considerably  at  different  periods)  great  ladies.  This
second  stage  of  the  mythology,  in  all  its  varying  forms,  and
developed  in  directions  which  led  it  far  away  from  its
original  starting-point,  has  formed  the  staple  of  purely
Irish  literature  from  the  earliest  period  to  which  we  can
trace  it  back  down  to  its  practical  extinction  in  the  last
century.  By  far  the  largest  portion  of  that  literature  is
heroic  saga,  stories  about  famous  kings,  warriors,  and
heroines  of  olden  times ;  when  these  stories  are  examined
with  any  care  they  are  found  to  be  versions,  more  or
less  altered  by  an  admixture  of  historic  fact  or  deliberate
poetic  fancy,  of  mythological  tales.  In  view  of  this  fact
much  of  the  elaborate  discussion  bestowed  upon  the
historic  credibility  of  these  sagas  is  beside  the  mark.  It
is  possible  that  men  named  Cuchulinn  or  Finn  or  Cormac
did  actually  live  at  about  the  dates  traditionally  assigned
to  them,  and  were  famous  chiefs  or  warriors ;  it  is  certain
that  99-iooths  of  what  is  ascribed  to  them  bears  no
relation  whatever  to  historic  fact,  but  is  simply  older  myth
slightly  humanised,  or  new  invention  on  the  lines  of  older


MYTHIC    LITERATURE  201

myth.  This  literature,  although  appealing  mainly  to  the
fighting,  ruling  class,  was  yet  common  to  the  whole  people ;
the  tradition  was  living  and  national,  it  was  the  task  of
the  official  poet  or  story-teller  to  give  it  voice  and  form,
but  his  subject-matter  was,  in  the  main,  imposed  upon  him,
and  he  could  not,  even  had  he  wished,  depart  widely  from
the  traditional  outlines.  Hence  there  was,  so  far  as  we  know,
no  such  break  between  the  highest  literature  of  the  time
and  the  mass  of  the  people  as  there  is,  for  instance,  in
modern  times,  where  first-class  literature,  save  in  the  case
of  a  few  religious  classics,  is  neither  appreciated  by  nor
exercises  any  influence  upon  the  majority  of  the  nation.

Thus  the  Irish  peasant  necessarily  became  familiar
with  the  bardic,  romantic  version  of  the  mythology ;  it  is
doubtful  if  there  was  ever  any  real  consciousness  on  his
part  of  the  changes  in  spirit  and  incident  which  gradually
modified  the  old  stories.  The  new  world  takes  its  place  by
the  side  of  the  old.  On  the  other  hand,  although  historic
records  represent  the  mass  of  the  population  as  engaged
as  much,  apparently,  in  fighting  as  in  those  occupations
of  sowing,  reaping,  hunting,  fishing,  cattle-breeding,  in
which  the  mythological  conception  had  a  serious  and
practical  and  not  merely  an  aesthetic  or  historical  value,
yet  we  know  that  this  must  arise  from  the  imperfection  of
the  record.  Raids  and  cattle-spoilings  and  expeditions  to
win  fresh  territory  or  to  carry  off  desirable  damsels,  are
more  interesting  alike  to  teller  and  hearer  than  the  bare
chronicle  of  harvests,  but,  after  all,  the  folk  at  large  must
always  have  been  engaged  mainly  in  bread-winning,  an
arduous  task  dependent  as  we  have  seen  upon  the  good-
will of  mysterious  powers,  to  assure  which  definite  means
were  requisite.     So  we  may  take  it  that  these  means  were


202  MYTHIC    LITERATURE

never  neglected,  whatever  else  might  be,  and  that  the
antique  powers,  however  much  they  may  have  changed  in
appearance  and  attribute,  received  their  prescribed  meed
of  rite  and  sacrifice.  Thus,  a  portion  at  least  of  the
older  myth  store  would  be  preserved,  and  in  course  of
time  the  same  power  would  come  to  wear  a  double  aspect,
rustic  or  courtly,  according  as  the  stories  concerning  him
belonged  to  the  earlier  or  the  later  stage  of  the  mythology.

Mythic  Literature  in  Greece  and  Ireland.

We  may  again  find  in  Greece  at  once  a  parallel  and  a
contrast  to  the  development  of  mythic  literature  in  Ireland.
Down  to  a  certain  period,  alike  the  substance  and  the
animating  spirit  of  Greek  literature  are  almost  wholly  drawn
from  the  mythology,  and  down  to  that  period  the  literature
is  national,  accessible  to,  shared  in,  and  understanded  of
all.  The  aesthetic  and  intellectual  impulse  of  the  race
manifested  itself  at  the  set  and  hallowed  seasons  when  a
common  purpose  of  worship,  rejoicing,  emulation,  effort,
intensified  the  energy  and  the  sense  of  brotherhood  of  the
Hellenic  tribes.  Then  came  a  change ;  the  highest  minds
of  the  race  turned  away  from  the  mythology;  Homer,
Hesiod,  Pindar,  the  tragedians,  the  heroic  historian  Hero-
dotus, are  replaced  by  Thucydides,  Plato,  the  orators,  the
writers  of  realistic  comedy.  The  mythology  loses  its  import
for  the  thinker,  the  man  of  letters,  and,  coincident  with
this  loss,  literature  puts  off  its  national  character  and
becomes  the  interest  and  occupation  of  a  class.  But  all
the  while  the  practical  side  of  the  mythology  maintained
itself  in  full  vigour;  the  antique  rites  were  performed
in  the  prescribed  manner,  the  business  of  religion  was
carried  on  as  before.     In  Ireland  there  is  nothing  corre-


IN  GREECE  AND  IRELAND    203

sponding  to  the  great  break  at  the  close  of  the  fifth  century
B.C.  between  the  Greek  thinker  and  artist  and  the  tradi-
tional mythology ;  the  Irish  man  of  letters  never  outgrew
his  archaic  ideal.  But  the  practical,  the  business  side  of
the  mythology,  was  revolutionised  by  the  introduction  of
Christianity.  In  Greece  the  poet  and  philosopher  came
to  disdain  or  ridicule  the  myth,  whilst  the  priest  still  per-
formed the  rite  with  slavish  accuracy.  In  Ireland  the
myth,  with  a  modicum  of  change,  lived  on  in  the  poet's
heart  and  brain,  the  rite  had  to  yield,  to  disappear,  to
hide,  or  to  disguise  itself  before  the  alien  faith.  Down  to
the  introduction  of  Christianity  the  Irishman  was  in  the
position  of  the  Greek  to  whom  participation  in  the  Thar-
gelia,  or  the  rites  of  the  Eleusinian  mother,  and  the  public
reading  of  the  Homeric  poems,  the  recitation  of  the  epi-
nician  odes,  the  performance  of  the  crowned  tragedy,  were
all  acts  of  kindred  nature  having  the  like  intent  and
sanction.  After  the  introduction  of  Christianity  his  rude
substitutes  for  Homer,  the  ode,  or  the  drama,  still  retained
their  sway  over  him,,  but  his  Dionysus,  his  Demeter,  had
to  creep  back  to  the  peasant's  hut,  their  earliest  home,  to
forfeit  the  pomp  and  circumstance  of  kingly  and  sacer-
dotal display.

The  Essential  Elements  of  Irish  Peasant  Lore.

A  priori,  then,  we  might  postulate  certain  things  about  the
belief  of  the  Irish  peasant.  After  all,  strive  as  may  kings
and  priests,  change  as  may  modes  of  government  and  faith,
man,  equally  with  all  animated  nature,  must  eat  and  breed,
and  grow  and  decay  and  die.  It  is  only  amongst  a  com-
paratively small  section  of  humanity  that  the  true  nature  of
such  influence  as  man  can  exercise  over  the  great  recurrent


204  IRISH    PEASANT    LORE

manifestations  of  natural  life  is  recognised  and  acted  upon.
For  the  vast  majority  of  the  peasant  class  the  proper  mode
of  compelling  the  essence  of  life  to  manifest  itself  as  we
wish  is  what   the  cultured  style   a  supernatural   one,  by
means  of  rite  and  spell  or   charm.     The  peasant  is  alike
credulous   and   sceptical,    tenacious   of   old    custom   and
largely  tolerant  to  anything  that  appeals  to  his  sense  of
logic.      He  will  grant  the  efficacy  of  the  Christian  rite,
especially  when  it  is  presented  to  him  under  the  quasi-
mythological   guise  of  saintly  influence,  but   he  will  not
renounce  the  older  practice ;   in  dealing  with  powers  so
capricious  as  those  of  Nature,  the  wise  man  accepts  all  the
help  he  can  get ;  the  saint  may  fail  here,  the  fairy  there,
the  witch   in  a  third  case,   and  where  the  one  fails  the
other  may  succeed.     And  the  older  powers  he  cherishes,
in  spite  of  priests  and  saints,  are  not  the  gods  whom  the
imagination   of  poets   and   the    ambition  of  priests   had
glorified,  rather  their  ruder  prototypes  to  whom  all  along  his
worship  had  been  paid.     When,  bereft  of  their  trappings,
shorn    of  their   splendour,   Dionysus  and  Demeter  creep
back  to  the  peasant's  hut,  he  is  conscious  of  little  sense  of
degradation,  they  are  not  suddenly  unfamiliar  to  him  as
they  are  to  priest  and  bard  who  had  embodied  in  them
the  highest  ideal  of  the  race.     So  the  ancient  rite,  little
changed  it  may  be  from   its  earliest  inception,  lives  on
fairly  harmoniously  (save  in  cases  to  which  we  shall  allude
presently)  by  the  side  of  the  newer  ones.      Bread  must
be  won,  and   man   must  have  his  proper  machinery  for
influencing  and  controlling  the  life  that  quickens  and  dies
in  the  bread.     But  man  does  not  live  by  bread  alone.     He
has  a  fancy  to  be  charmed,  an  intellect  to  be  satisfied.
The  new  faith  has  much  for  both  needs,  but  here  again


IRISH    PEASANT    LORE  205

the  old  faith  retains  its  power.  And  whereas  in  every
other  European  land  the  ministers  of  the  new  faith  were  as
bitterly  opposed  to  the  fanciful  as  to  the  business  aspect  of
the  older  creed,  in  Ireland  it  is  the  saint  who  protects  the
bard,  the  monk  who  transcribes  the  myth,  whilst  the  bird
flock  of  Faery,  alike  with  the  children  of  Adam,  yearn  for
and  acclaim  the  advent  of  the  apostle.

The  Conservatism  of  Irish  Myth.

Thus  the  imaginative  part  of  the  mythology  lived  on
little  influenced  by  the  new  order  of  things,  subject  only
to  the  natural  development  which  accentuated  the  courtly
and  amorous  side  of  its  personages.  True,  a  new
imaginative  literature  in  the  shape  of  saintly  legend  and
apocrypha  claimed  the  ear  of  the  folk,  but  it  differed  too
much  from  the  older  tales  to  influence  or  be  influenced
by  them  to  any  appreciable  extent.  What  is  noteworthy
is,  that  after  the  introduction  of  the  new  faith,  literature,
whether  Christian  or  non-Christian,  remained  in  the  main
national.  The  organisation  of  court  bards  and  story-tellers
was  maintained,  the  great  social  gatherings,  such  as  the
fairs  of  Carman  and  Tailltin,  the  Irish  equivalents  of  the
Greek  Olympic  festival,  were  kept  up,  the  mass  of  the
people  continued  to  share  in  the  intellectual  and  artistic
life,  such  as  it  was,  of  the  higher  classes.  Until  native
Irish  society  was  finally  broken  up,  until  in  the  course  of
the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries  the  higher  classes
attained  a  higher  level  of  culture,  foreign  in  essence  and
form,  which  effectually  separated  them  from  the  remainder
of  their  countrymen,  this  state  of  things  continued — Gaelic
Ireland,  even  down  to  the  time  of  Michael  Comyn  and  the


2o6  CHRISTIAN    INFLUENCE

last  bards  of  the  eighteenth  century,  possessed  a  homo-
geneous culture,  a  common  literary  convention.

The  Influence  of  Christianity.

We  may  discern  in  the  lore  of  the  Irish  -  speaking
peasant  two  elements,  the  one  practical — for  use  ;  the  other
imaginative — for  pleasure.  Either  element  is  partly  derived
from  Christianity,  partly  and  to  a  much  greater  extent  from
pre-Christian  conceptions.  In  both  cases  the  non-Chris-
tian portion  has  been  somewhat  influenced  by  Christianity,
but  in  greatly  varying  measure.  The  imaginative  element
has  only  suffered  outward  unessential  changes  in  the  rare
and  secondary  instances  in  which  it  has  been  changed  at
all.  Not  so  the  practical,  work-a-day  element  Here  there
was  direct  possibility  of  conflict  with  the  Church's  claim
to  control  and  guide  the  operations  of  nature  to  the  ad-
vantage of  her  faithful  sons.  Even  if  the  priest  did  not
himself  care  to  listen  to  stories  of  Finn  and  the  Tuatha  de
Danann,  he  could  indulge  his  flock  in  their  chief  intel-
lectual pastime  provided  mass  was  duly  attended  and
the  homily  duly  listened  to.  It  was  otherwise  when  belief
in  powers  that  interfered  at  every  moment  in  the  peasant's
life  was  concerned ;  it  was  the  Church's  prerogative  to
bless  harvest  and  herd,  to  make  intercession  for  shower  or
sunshine,  to  be  the  recognised  intermediary  for  praise  and
thanksgiving.  It  is  curious  to  see  how  the  inevitable
rivalry  affected  the  older  faith.  The  Church  did  not  as
a  rule  contest  the  reality  of  the  adverse  powers,  but  it
stamped  them  with  an  unholy  brand— they  were  demons,
or  the  neutral  angels,  whatever  might  was  theirs  in  the
present  they  were  bereft  of  all  hope  of  future  bliss.     Here


CHRISTIAN    INFLUENCE  207

too  there  was  discrimination ;  the  more  potent  the  efficacy
of  the  pre-Christian  rite,  the  more   it  would  arouse   the
opposition  of  the  Christian  priest  as  tending  to  draw  away
the  peasant  from  the  true  path.      Much  was  indifferent,
harmless  even,  it  could  not  be  approved,  there  must  attach
to  it  a  vague  sense  of  the  uncanny,  the  unallowed,  but
still  it  might  be  tolerated,  passed  over  with  indulgence.
Much,  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  older  faith  was  in  itself
fierce,  monstrous,  obscene,  though  in  using  these  words
we  must  recollect  that  they  convey  to  us  a  sense  of  repro-
bation which  was  totally  lacking  at  the  time.     The  bloody
sacrifice,  the  frenzied  and  orgiastic  spring  and  harvest  festival,
were  expressions  of  religious  fervour  as  were,  to  cite  similar
instances,  the  sacrifice  to  Moloch  and  the  midnight  worship
of  Dionysus.     It  is  these  intense  and  awful  rites  that  are
really  potent,  it  is  to  them,  when  the  milder  agencies  of
Church  or  fairy  prove  of  no  avail,  that  the  peasant  has
recourse.      The   Church   cannot   tolerate  or   even   ignore
them,  it  must  oppose  and  thunder  against   them.      And
so  in  the  peasant's   mind   the   natural   horror  of  certain
conceptions  and  certain   rites   is   intensified   by  the  fact
that  they  essentially  are  the    forbidden  thing.     Whether
this  does  not  in  a  measure  tend  to  heighten  his  appre-
ciation of  the  potency  attaching  to  them  is  another  matter ;
it  may  fairly  be  argued  that  by  branding  as  unholy  and
malign  certain  features  of  the  older  faith,  the  Church  has
in  reality  kept  them  alive,  it  may  be  asked  whether  witch-
craft be  not  largely  a  product  of  the  attitude  taken  up  by
adherents  of  the   higher   towards   the   most   archaic   and
savage  features  of  the  lower  faith.     In  any  case,  the  vary-
ing attitude  of  the  Church — tolerant,   mildly  censorious,
fiercely    antagonistic — towards    varying    portions    of    the


208  CLASSIFICATION    OF

peasant  creed  might  be  expected  to  react  upon  and  influ-
ence their  development.


Formal  Classification  of  Irish  Peasant  Lore.

If  we  classify  peasant  lore  from  a  somewhat  different
point  of  view,  we  may  divide  it  into  practices  which  pre-
suppose, more  or  less,  the  existence  and  activity  of  certain
extra-human  powers,  into  sayings  about  these  powers,  and
into  stories  of  which  they  are  the  dramatis  persona,  the
first  two  classes  forming  what  I  have  styled  the  practical,
the  third,  the  imaginative  element  of  the  lore.  In  the
first  class  we  may  have  features  of  immemorial  antiquity,
dating  far  beyond  the  period  in  which  druid  and  bard
elaborated  a  Gaelic  Pantheon  and  a  Gaelic  mythology  out
of  the  ruder  powers  of  growth  and  renovation,  we  may
have  features  belonging  to  the  period  of  druidic  and  bardic
ascendency,  we  may  have  features  due  to  the  influence  of
Christianity  exercised  in  varying  measure  upon  the  older
creed,  and  finally,  we  may  have  features  wholly  Christian
in  their  origin,  but  distorted  in  the  peasant's  mind,  accom-
modated to  his  level  of  intellect  and  fancy.  In  the  second
class,  the  sayings  about  the  powers,  all  will  probably  be
derived  from  the  druid  and  bard,  as  far  as  the  pre-
Christian  element  is  concerned,  from  the  priest  as  far  as
the  Christian  element  is  concerned,  with  some  adjustment
to  ruder  conceptions  in  the  first  case,  with  much  distortion
and  transposition  to  a  different  plane  of  thought  and  feel-
ing in  the  second  case.  The  third  class,  the  stories  of
which  extra-human  powers  are  the  dramatis  persona  belong
in  the  main  to  the  secondary  and  tertiary  stages  of  the  pre-
Christian  mythology,  although  the  amount  of  stories  purely


IRISH   PEASANT   LORE  209

Christian  in  origin  is  fairly  considerable ;  in  the  mutual
action  and  reaction  of  pre-Christian  and  Christian  mythic
romance  it  is  at  least  possible  that  the  latter  is  the  weaker,
that  the  peasant's  ideal  of  the  saint  is  influenced  by  and
assimilated  to  that  of  the  champion  and  wizard  rather  than
that  the  contrary  operation  takes  place.

In  these  general  a  priori  considerations,  as  to  what  we
may  reasonably  deduce  concerning  the  Irish  peasant  lore  of
the  last  five  hundred  years  from  the  known  historical  factors
and  conditions  of  the  previous  thousand  years,  I  have,  as
will  be  recognised  by  all  familiar  with  the  subject,  sketched
the  outlines  of  that  lore,  as  extant  at  the  present  day,
briefly  but  comprehensively.  In  every  considerable  body  of
belief  and  practices  there  are  a  multitude  of  primary  features
referable  directly  to  the  fundamental  conceptions  of  the
creed  ;  there  are,  furthermore,  a  number  of  features  due  to
the  normal,  but  nevertheless  highly  differentiated,  develop-
ment of  those  conceptions ;  there  are  features,  mostly
secondary,  due  to  abnormal  development  caused  by  the
intrusion  of  alien  conceptions ;  there  are,  finally,  features
which  cannot  be  explained  at  all,  a  fact  due  either  to  the
imperfection  of  our  knowledge,  or  to  that  element  of  purely
individualistic  fancy  which  plays  in  psychological  evolution
the  same  part  that  the  tendency  to  •  sports '  does  in
physiological  evolution.  Leaving  this  very  small  residuum
of  the  inexplicable  out  of  account,  I  think  I  may  venture
to  assert  that  nearly  the  whole  of  Irish  fairy  lore  can  be
interpreted  by  aid  of  the  historical  factors  and  conditions
I  have  mentioned — an  agricultural  ritualism  out  of  which
has  grown  a  romantic  mythology,  opposed  by,  mingling  and
harmonising  with,  an  alien  ritualism  and  an  alien  body  of
romance.

VOL.  II.  O


2io  THE   TRUE   NATURE    OF

I  do  not  propose  to  essay  here  a  methodical  exposition
and  interpretation  of  Irish  fairy  mythology  upon  the  lines
indicated  above.  Such  a  task  would  require  at  least  three
or  four  hundred  pages,  and  it  would,  in  a  large  measure,
be  a  simple  repetition  of  the  admirable  essay  prefixed  by-
Jacob  and  William  Grimm  to  their  translation  of  Crofton
Croker's  Fairy  Legends  and  Traditions  of  the  South  of
Ireland,  which  appeared  at  Berlin  under  the  title  Irische
Elfenmarchen  in  the  year  1826,  and  was  translated,  most
excellently,  by  Crofton  Croker  in  his  third  volume,  pub-
lished in  1828.  Indeed,  much  that  I  have  advanced  in
the  foregoing  pages  of  this  chapter  had  already  been
stated,  definitely  or  conjecturally,  by  the  brothers  Grimm,
and  if  I  am  able  to  carry  the  elucidation  of  the  subject
beyond  the  point  at  which  they  left  it,  this  is  simply
because  I  have  access  to  sources  of  information,  the  pre-
eleventh  century  literature  of  Ireland,  which  had  not  been
opened  up  in  their  day.  As  regards  the  actual  peasant
lore,  scanty  and  questionable  in  form  as  were  the  facts
upon  which  they  had  to  work,  their  interpretation  is  nearly
always  as  sound  as  it  is  illuminating.  I  propose,  then,
rather  to  emphasise  certain  elements,  the  importance  of
which  seems  to  me  to  have  been  overlooked,  and  to  suggest
an  agricultural  connection  for  others  which  have  hitherto
been  explained  differently  or  left  unexplained.  Moreover,
as  is  obvious  to  any  well-informed  student  now,  as  it  was
to  the  brothers  Grimm  in  1826,  the  mass  of  Irish  fairy  lore
is  akin  to  that  found  among  the  peasantry  of  every
European  land.  Any  general  principle  of  interpretation
must  be  applicable  to  Teutonic  or  Romance,  as  well  as  to
Celtic  peasant  lore.  But  the  latter  has  its  differentia;
these,  if  the  foregoing  considerations  have  any  validity  at


IRISH   PEASANT   LORE  211

all,  should  find  their  explanation  in  the  historical  con-
ditions which  have  separated  the  Celtic  world  so  markedly
from  the  rest  of  European  Christendom.  I  shall  endeavour
to  show  that  where  Irish  fairy  belief  differs  from  that  of  the
rest  of  Europe,  the  difference  is  due  to  causes  familiar  to
the  reader  of  the  foregoing  pages,  to  the  same  causes
which  have  determined  the  special  evolution  of  Irish
culture  generally.

The  Fallen  Angels  Explanation  of  the  Fairies.

The  Irish  peasant  shares  the  belief  common  to  all
European  peasantry,  that  the  fairies  are  either  the  fallen
angels  who  for  some  reason  have  escaped  the  nethermost
pit,  or  those  who,  remaining  neutral,  and  retaining  their
more  than  mortal  powers,  were  punished  by  denial  of
access  to  that  bliss  which  is  open  to  every  mortal  if  he
believe  in  and  practise  the  true  faith.  This  wide-spread
belief  was  an  almost  inevitable  outcome  of  contact  between
two  systems  of  faith,  each  of  which  held  as  firmly  as  the
other  the  objective  reality  of  the  fairy  powers,  and  one  of
which,  and  that  the  dominant  one,  regarded  them  as
hostile,  or  at  least  suspicious.  But  its  existence  has  never,
to  my  knowledge,  been  properly  utilised  for  the  history  of
fairy  mythology.  The  fallen  or  neutral  angels  play  no
important  part  in  the  purely  Christian  scheme,  nor  is  their
influence  and  activity  as  natural  a  development  from  early
Christian  doctrine  as  is  for  instance  the  intercessory,  pro-
pitiatory power  of  the  saint ;  it  is,  therefore,  unlikely  that
the  Christian  missionary  would  have  introduced  the  legend
unless  he  was  confronted  by  beliefs,  and  what  seemed  to
him  facts,  which  he  could  not  account  for  in  any  other


2i2  FALLEN    ANGEL   LEGEND

way.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  exactly  how  he  did
account  for  the  official  gods  of  paganism  to  whom  an
organised  worship  was  paid — he  described  them  as  devils,
their  worship  as  devil-worship.  Thus,  whilst  the  wide
spread  of  the  legend  testifies  to  the  equally  wide  spread  of
the  existence  of  the  belief  to  explain  which  it  was  framed,
the  difference  between  the  attitude  of  Christianity  towards
it  and  towards  official  paganism,  testifies  to  a  strongly-
marked  difference  between  the  two — in  the  eyes,  that  is,  of
the  first  Christian  missionaries.  For  we  must  not  ex-
aggerate the  difference  or  misapprehend  its  nature.  It
was  a  matter  of  outward  and  visible  form  rather  than  of
inward  spirit.  In  the  one  case  the  Christian  priest  was
confronted,  often  bitterly  opposed,  by  a  rival  sacerdotal
organisation,  in  the  other  case  he  had  to  deal  with  peasants
willing  enough  to  accept  his  organisation,  provided  he  did
not  interfere  too  rudely  with  their  beliefs  and  practices.
Small  wonder  if  the  supernatural  power  worshipped  by
the  pagan  priest  became  a  devil  in  the  Christian's  eyes,
whilst  for  the  peasant  divinities  the  fable  of  the  neutral
angels  was  sufficient  reprobation.

Now  in  Ireland  this  story,  which  belongs,  as  I  have  said,
to  common  European  folk-lore,  is  told  with  details  found
nowhere  else,  and  which  reveal  its  true  nature.  In  1879,
an  old  woman  at  Askeaton,  near  Limerick,  told  Mr.  David
Fitzgerald  that  'Crom  Dubh,  St.  Patrick's  servant,  was
asked  by  the  fairies  to  put  the  following  question  to  his
master,  "  What  time  will  the  Slanagh  Sidhe  go  to  Para-
dise?" "Not  till  the  Day  of  Judgment,  for  certain,"
answered  the  saint.  Before  that  the  Good  People  used  to
put  the  sickles  in  the  corn  and  the  spades  in  the  ground,
and  spade  and  sickle  used  to  be  seen  working  for  men


FALLEN    ANGEL    LEGEND  213

without  visible  assistance ;  but  thenceforward  the  Sidhfir
would  do  nothing.  The  question  was  put  on  the  last
Sunday  in  July,  and  ever  since,  that  day  (or  the  first
Sunday  in  August  it  sometimes  is)  is  called  in  Ireland
Crom  Dubh's  Sunday.' *

It  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  more  terse  or  pregnant
historical  myth.  Prior  to  the  advent  of  the  new  creed,  the
ancient  powers  had  controlled  and  directed  the  growth  of
cereal  and  pasture,  they  had  worked  unseen  and  in  mys-
terious wise,  but  now  their  reign  was  over,  the  priest  had
come,  and  they  would  do  nothing.  The  psychology  and
history  of  two  religions  are  summed  in  the  old  wife's  tale.
This  is  the  most  striking  instance  of  the  conception  known
to  me,  but  it  finds  varying  expression  all  throughout  Ireland.
Another  of  Mr.  Fitzgerald's  informants  tells  us  that  when
the  fairy  heard  the  saint's  answer  he  said,  '  If  that 's  so,
we  '11  do  good  and  bad  (before  that  they  had  done  nothing
but  good).'  Again,  a  Donegal  variant  makes  the  questioner
none  less  than  Mananann  Mac  Lir ;  the  question  is  put  to
Colum  Cille,  and  when  the  answer  is  returned,  '  There  is  no
forgiveness  to  be  got,'  Manannan  exclaims,  '  Woe  is  me !
for  years  I  've  helped  the  Catholics  of  Ireland,  but  I  '11  do
it  no  more,  till  they  're  weak  as  water.'

In  the  latter  instance,  the  name  of  the  anxious  questioner
shows  his  connection  with  the  old  mythology,  a  connection
still  more  marked  in  the  Askeaton  story.  For  Crom  Dubh,
Patrick's  servant,  is,  there  can  be  little  doubt,  identical
with  the  Cromm  Cruaich,  before  whose  image,  set  up  on
the  plain  of  Mag  Slecht,  the  folk  of  Ireland,  as  we  have
already  seen,  were  wont  to  sacrifice  a  third  of  their  offspring.

1  Revue  Cellique,  iv.


214  FALLEN    ANGEL    LEGEND

The  legend  told  how  the  saint  had  broken  the  power  of
the  life-thirsty  idol;  he  touched  it  with  his  crozier,  and  the
image  bowed  itself  before  him,  Crom  Dubh  became
Patrick's  servant.  It  is  significant  that  the  day  sacred  to
him  corresponds  closely  in  point  of  time  to  that  of  the
great  harvest-festival,  the  Lugnassad,  which  was  celebrated
throughout  all  Celtdom  in  the  first  week  of  August.  Mr.
Leland  Duncan  found  that  in  Leitrim,  on  the  last  Sunday
of  July,  known  as  Garland  Sunday,  the  young  folk  dress
the  wells  in  their  neighbourhood  with  garlands  of  flowers.1
Here  there  is  but  little  trace  of  the  ancient  Lugnassad,  but
at  Kilmanahan,  a  Meath  parish,  in  the  early  part  of  this
century,  the  Sunday  was  devoted  to  horse-racing  and
dancing,  whilst  the  previous  eve  was  given  up  to  worship
at  St.  Bridget's  well ; 2  this  is  quite  in  keeping  with  the
practice  of  ancient  Ireland,  where  religious  rites  and
popular  sports  were  as  closely  associated  as  they  were  in
ancient  Greece.

Thus,  upon  a  story  about  the  fairies,  itself  a  product  of
the  contact  between  the  fairy  belief  and  Christianity,  light
is  thrown  by  a  custom  which  has  likewise  felt  the  influence
of  the  younger  faith  and  is  now  no  longer  connected  with
the  fairies,  whilst  both  story  and  custom  only  assume  their
full  significance  when  they  are  compared  with  the  myths
and  rites  of  pre-Christian  Ireland.  The  special  value  of
Irish  evidence  lies  in  the  continuity  of  the  record  which
enables  us  to  definitely  connect  the  modern  practice  and
fancy  with  those  of  the  earliest  historic  times.     Had  only

1  Folk- Lore,  iv.  182.

2  Mason,  A  Stat.  Account  of  Ireland,  3  vols.  1814-19,  i.  494,  reprinted
Folk- Lore  Journal,  ii.  21 1.  Mason's  informant  gave  him  the  name  of
the  day  as  Garlic  Sunday,  probably  a  corruption  of  Garland  Sunday.


FAIRIES   AND    GIANTS  215.

the  ancient  record  been  preserved  and  no  modern  folk-lore
collected,  it  would  yet  be  safe  to  assert  that  the  latter
must  still  exist,  or  have  existed  quite  recently;  had  the
ancient  record  perished,  we  could  surmise  its  contents  with
tolerable  accuracy  from  extant  folk-lore.  The  folk-lorist
has  frequently  to  be  content  with  thus  restoring  the  chain
from  one  or  two  links ;  in  Ireland  nearly  all  the  links  have
been  preserved.

Special  Incidents  of  Fairy  Lore.

As  a  rule,  stories  about  the  fairies  throughout  Europe
are  episodic;  details  of  the  faith  took  the  popular  fancy
and  formed  the  subject  of  popular  story-telling;  com-
paratively little  is  to  be  found  applicable  to  the  fairy  class
as  a  whole,  and  from  which  the  psychological  basis  of  the
creed  may  be  inferred.  This  is  the  case  in  Ireland  as
elsewhere,  though  to  a  less  extent.  Stories  are  still  told
there  which  imply  an  appreciation  of  fairy  nature,  and
which  sum  up  in  concrete  form  the  history  of  fairy  faith.
Thus,  Mr.  Duncan  found  the  following  tale  widely  spread
throughout  Leitrim :  The  fairies  challenged  the  giants  to
fight  in  harvest  time,  and  chose  a  cornfield  for  the  battle.
When  the  giants  arrived  the  fairies  made  themselves  in-
visible, and  set  to  work  to  fight  with  the  butts  of  the
sheaves.  The  giants  stood  this  for  some  time,  and  then,
finding  it  impossible  to  return  the  blows  of  their  assailants,
they  turned  and  fled.1  This  vivid  little  myth  gives  in  brief
the  hope  and  faith  which  the  peasant  has  embodied  in  the
fairy  creed.  Against  the  giants,  the  huge  wrecking  forces
of  storm  and  flood  and  drought,  enemies  of  orderly  in-

1  Folk- Lore,  v.  178.


216  AGRICULTURAL

crease,  of  periodic  growth,  he  seeks  the  aid  of  invisible
allies,  nor  is  his  search  a  fruitless  one ;  the  sheaf  of  corn,
however  frail  a  weapon  it  may  seem,  is  strong  to  overcome
the  opposing  powers ;  struggle  as  they  may,  the  giants
must  at  last  turn  and  flee.

The  Agricultural  Festivals.

Just  as  all  over  Europe  the  peasant  tells  stories  about
the  fairies,  so  all  over  Europe  he  has  preserved  an  ancient
ritual,  the  agricultural  nature  of  which  has  been  fully  set
forth  in  the  works  of  Mannhardt  and  his  school.  But,  as  a
rule,  this  ritual  no  longer  stands  in  any  close  or  precise
connection  with  the  fairy  creed.  This  is  understandable.
The  practices  in  question  were  held  by  the  peasant  essen-
tial for  the  prospering  of  seedtime  and  harvest,  for  the
welfare  of  flock  or  herd ;  he  would  cling  to  them  at  all
costs.  They  might,  however,  be  put  under  the  patronage
of  the  new  religion,  or  at  least  the  antique  powers  this
ritual  was  designed  to  placate  might  be  discreetly  ignored.
The  bonfires  of  St.  John's  Eve  or  Hallowe'en  would  still
be  objectionable  to  the  Christian  priest,  but  less  so  than  if
the  Fairy  power  of  Life  were  directly  invoked  and  recog-
nised. For  the  most  part  the  Church  has  contented  itself
with  this  ignoring  process,  the  result  being  that  all  over
Europe  we  find  rites  which  are  obviously  not  Christian,  but
which  in  their  present  form  are  divorced  from  any  definite
anti-Christian  or  pre-Christian  doctrine,  and  thus  lack  any
effective  sanction  save  that  of  tradition.  The  Christian
peasant  continues  to  do  what  his  pagan  forefathers  did  before
him.  But  that  had  a  clear  and  precise  meaning  which  has
largely  died  out  of  the  modern  usage  which  may  be  likened


FESTIVALS  217

to  a  cathedral  service  performed  by  a  congregation  of
ignorant  atheists.  Curiously  enough  the  rite  has  at  times
been  retained  with  greater  fulness  when  definitely  associated
with  a  personage  of  the  new  faith,  the  holiness  of  the  saint
atoning  in  the  Church's  eye  for  the  heathenishness  of
the  practice.  Thus  the  parish  of  Clonmany  in  Meath  is
under  the  guardianship  of  Columkill.  On  the  festival  day,
the  9th  of  June,  the  following  customs  were  observed  at
the  beginning  of  this  century  : — 'Certain  places  were  cere-
moniously circumambulated,  certain  prayers,  deified  by  the
saint,  being  repeated  the  while.  Men  formerly  drove  down
their  cattle  to  the  beach  on  that  day  and  swam  them  in
that  part  of  the  sea  into  which  ran  the  water  of  St.  Columb's
Well.'1  Here  the  intervention  of  the  saint  has  probably
been  no  less  efficacious  in  preserving  a  pre-Christian  rite
than  was  his  known  intervention  in  support  of  the  bardic
class  when  that  ancient  repository  of  Irish  myth  and
romance  was  threatened  with  suppression  at  the  close  of
the  sixth  century.

As  a  rule,  then,  in  Ireland  as  elsewhere,  the  extensive
body  of  rites  traditionally  practised  at  the  great  Spring,
Summer,  Autumn,  and  late  Autumn  festivals  is  brought
into  no  very  close  connection  with  the  fairy  creed.  True,
that  in  Ireland,  as  elsewhere,  fairy  activity  is  commonly
believed  to  be  quickened  and  intensified  on  such  days  as
St.  John's  Eve  or  Hallowe'en.  In  Ireland  now,  as  nine
hundred  years  ago,  when  the  tale  of  Nera's  Journey  to  the
Otherworld  was  in  all  probability  written,  '  Demon  women
appear  always  on  the  night  of  samhain '  (All-hallows) 2
though  the  fact  that  the  oral  tradition  is  not  edited  by  a

1  Stat.  Account,  i.  185  ;  reprinted  Folk-Lore  Journal,  ii.  40.

2  See  ante,  vol.  i.  p.  207.


218  'AINE    IN

monk,  as  was  the  romantic  tale,  prevents  the  application  of
the  uncomplimentary  adjective.  But  this  would  not  be
sufficient  in  itself  to  stamp  the  seasonal  ritual  as  belonging
to  the  world  of  Faery.  Just,  however,  as  in  Ireland  the
tales  told  about  the  fairies,  although  closely  paralleled  else-
where, yet  reveal  their  true  nature  and  origin  more  than  do
their  non-Irish  analogues,  so  we  also  find  tales  which  un-
doubtedly take  their  rise  from  the  observances  connected
with  the  great  agricultural  festivals,  and  which  at  the  same
time  have  for  their  dramatis  persona  the  denizens  of  fairy
land.  One  such  may  be  quoted  : — Near  Loch  Guir,  in
Munster,  the  enchanted  lake  of  Earl  Gerald,  is  a  hill
known  as  Knockainy,  'Aine's  hill,  '  Every  St.  John's  Night
the  men  used  to  gather  on  the  hill  from  all  quarters.  They
were  formed  in  ranks  by  an  old  man  named  Quinlan  whose
family  lived  on  the  hill  in  1876;  and  cliars,  bunches  that
is  of  straw  and  hay  tied  on  poles  and  lit,  were  carried  in
procession  round  the  hill  and  the  little  moat  on  the
summit.  .  .  .  Afterwards  people  ran  through  the  cultivated
fields,  and  among  the  cattle,  waving  their  cliars,  which
brought  luck  to  crops  and  beasts  for  the  following  year.1
.  .  .  One  St.  John's  night  it  happened  that  one  of  the
neighbours  lay  dead,  and  on  this  account  the  usual  cliars
were  not  lit.  Not  lit,  I  should  say,  by  the  hands  of  living
men ;  for  that  night  such  a  procession  of  cliars  marched
round  Cnoc'-'Aine  as  never  was  seen  before,  and  'Aine
herself  was  seen  in  the  front,  directing  and  ordering  it.  On
another  St.  John's  Night  a  number  of  girls  had  stayed  late
on  the  hill,  watching  the  cliars  and  joining  in  the  games.

1  Precisely  such  a  rite  as  is  presupposed  for  ancient  Greece  by  the
ritual  of  the  Eleusinian  mysteries.  Cf.  Dr.  Jevons'  account  in  his  Intro-
duction to  the  History  of  Religion,  p.  365.


MUNSTER    TRADITION  219

Suddenly  'Aine"  appeared  among  them,  thanked  them  for
the  honour  they  had  done  her,  but  said  she  now  wished
them  to  go  home,  as  they  wanted  the  hill  to  themselves.  She
let  them  understand  whom  she  meant  by  they,  for  calling
some  of  the  girls  she  made  them  look  through  a  ring,
when  behold,  the  hill  appeared  crowded  with  people  before
invisible.' 1

Here  we  have  the  antique  ritual  carried  out  on  a  spot
hallowed  to  one  of  the  antique  powers,  watched  over  and
shared  in  by  those  powers  themselves.  Nowhere  save  in
Gaeldom  could  be  found  such  a  pregnant  illustration  of  the
identity  of  the  fairy  class  with  the  venerable  powers  to
ensure  whose  good-will  rite  and  sacrifice,  originally  fierce
and  bloody,  now  a  mere  simulacrum  of  their  pristine  form,
have  been  performed  for  countless  ages.  Many  are  the
tales  still  told  of  'Aine'  in  South  Ireland ;  she  is  '  the  best-
hearted  woman  that  ever  lived.'  She  was,  as  often  happens
to  the  dames  of  Faery,  mastered  by  a  mortal  lover,  a  Fitz-
gerald, to  whom  she  bore  the  famous  magician  earl,  and
the  oldest  families  of  the  district  around  Knockainy  are
proud  to  claim  descent  from  her.  Among  other  traits  of
her  good  heart  may  be  cited  her  gift  of  a  luck-bringing
sheep  which  she  bestowed  one  night  on  a  family  near
Knockainy.  Her  domain  is  a  rich  and  fertile  one  now,  but
it  was  not  always  so.  Once,  Earl  Gerald  '  came  to  visit  his
mother,  and  looking  round  on  the  bare  soil  he  said,  It  is
long  since  barley  was  winnowed  here,  'Aine\  Next  morn-
ing when  he  looked  at  the  hill  it  was  all  planted  with
pease,  set  by  his  mother  during  the  night.'

1  Revue  Celtiqjte,  iv.  190.  D.  Fitzgerald,  Popular  Tales  of  Ireland.
The  traditions  about  'Aine  were  collected  by  Mr.  Fitzgerald  in  County
Limerick  during  the  year  1876.


220  LOCAL    CHARACTER   OF

These  local  legends  of  which  'Aine  is  the  heroine  illus-
trate another  feature  special  to  Irish  fairy  lore.  As  a  rule
throughout  Europe  the  fairy  is  anonymous  and  conceived
of  by  the  peasant  collectively  rather  than  individually ;  it
is  the  exception  outside  Ireland  to  find  a  definite  name  and
personality  assigned  to  members  of  the  fairy  world,  still
more  so  to  find  them  associated  with  special  places  or
tribes,  with  which  their  activity  is  bound  up,  and  away  from
which  they  are  unknown  or  at  least  unheeded.  Extra-
human  beings  special  to  given  localities  or  connected  with
particular  families  are  of  course  common  enough,  but  they
have  generally,  outside  Gaeldom,  become  differentiated
from  the  fairies.  In  Ireland  the  possession  of  a  distinct
individuality  and  of  a  clearly  defined  domain  is  frequently
met  with  in  the  living  fairy  lore.  As  a  rule  name  and
domain  correspond  to  those  associated  with  the  Tuatha  de
Danann  chiefs  and  heroines  in  the  romantic  tales  of  the  last
six  or  seven  centuries,  and  many  incidents  still  related  of
the  fairy  class  may  likewise  be  found  in  those  tales.  It  is
thus  the  romantic  rather  than  the  practical  side  of  Irish
mythology  to  which  we  must  refer  this  trait  of  Irish  folk-
lore. But,  as  in  'Aind's  case,  legends  survive  which  do  not
seem  in  any  way  due  to  the  romances ;  the  personages  they
celebrate,  the  incidents  they  chronicle  are  unrecorded
there.  We  must  rather  turn  for  an  explanation  of  their  sur-
vival to  the  persistence  of  the  tribal  system  in  Ireland  down
to  comparatively  recent  times.  Whilst  religious  conceptions,
and  the  rites  in  which  they  were  embodied,  were  in  the
main  common  to  all  Gaels,  each  tribe  or  clan  doubtless
had  its  special  form  of  the  rites,  its  special  name  for  the
powers  worshipped,  its  special  version  of  their  fortunes.  It
was,  we  must  believe,  from  this  mass  of  local  saga  that  the


THE   FAIRIES   IN    IRELAND         221

romance  writers  (that  is,  the  official  story-telling  class)  drew
much  of  their  material ;  worked  up  in  their  hands  it  would
spread  throughout  Gaeldom  and  enrich  the  common  stock
of  mythic  narrative;  much,  however,  was  certainly  never
thus  worked  up,  and  has  either  perished  or  is  only  recover-
able in  the  shape  of  local  tradition.  Whether  derived
from  the  common  Gaelic  storehouse  of  mythic  romance,  or
from  local  saga,  the  presence  of  names,  of  personalities,  of
distinctive  groups  of  narrative  connected  with  those  person-
alities, gives  a  body,  a  reality,  to  the  fairy  world  of  Ireland
lacking  elsewhere.

Thus  alike  in  story  and  local  rite  the  true  nature  of  the
Irish  fairy  is  still  easily  apparent,  nor,  indeed,  does  the
point  require  demonstration  as  far  as  the  Irish  peasant  is
concerned.  He  fully  appreciates  what  the  fairy  can  do  for
him,  what  it  is  he  has  to  hope  for  or  fear  at  fairy  hands.
As  one  of  Mr.  Curtin's  informants  winds  up  the  story  of
Tom  Connor  and  the  fairy  cow  : — '  From  that  out  Tom
Connor's  cows  had  two  calves  apiece,  and  his  mare  two
foals,  and  his  sheep  two  lambs  every  year,  and  every  acre
of  land  he  had  gave  him  as  much  crop  in  one  year  as
another  man  got  from  an  acre  in  seven.  At  last  Connor
was  a  very  rich  man,  and  why  not,  when  the  fairies  were
with  him  ?  ' x

Fairy  Love  of  Neatness.

Stress  has  already  been  laid  upon  the  fragmentary,
episodic  nature  of  the  extant  fairy  creed.  It  was  an  inevit-
able consequence  of  its  compromise  with  Christianity,  and
so  much  of  modern  culture  as  filtered  down  to  the  present,

1  Curtin,  Tales  of  the  Fairies,  p.  126.


222  FAIRY    LOVE

that  certain  portions  of  his  antique  faith  should  become
divorced  from  their  contact,    and   thereby  susceptible  of
independent  development.      Some  elements  too   offered
more  chance  than    others   to   the   romantic,    story-telling
instinct  of  the  folk ;  these  would  survive  though  often  greatly
altered.    But  the  change,  however  great,  should  not  entirely
conceal  the  real  nature  of  the  incident.     Let  us  examine
some  of  the  most  widely  spread  items  of  the  fairy  creed,
and  see  if  they  betray  their  origin.     To  quote  Mr.  Curtin :
— '  A  striking  trait  in  the  Irish  fairy  tales  is  the  number  of
observances  caused  by  the  presence  of  fairies,  rules  of
ordinary  living,  so  to  speak.     For  instance,  nothing  is  more
pleasing  to   fairies  than   a  well-swept  kitchen  and  clean
water.     A  dirty  kitchen  and  foul  water  bring  their  resent-
ment.'1    This  love  of  neatness,  this  insistence  on  certain
observances,  are  of  course  not  peculiar  to  Irish  fairies;
they  characterise  the  fairy  clan   throughout  Europe,  and
are  strongly  marked  in  the  oldest  lengthy  and  connected
account  of  the  fairies  we  possess,  that  recoverable  from
English  writers  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.
Why  this  should  be  so  has  not,  to  my  knowledge,  been
satisfactorily  determined.     Obviously,  we  must  ask,  not,
why  do  the  fairies  like  this  or  that,  but,  why  does  man,  the
creator  of  the  fairy,  attribute  to  him  this  characteristic?
In  other  words,  we  must  seek  for  a  psychological  reason,
and  for  one  the  validity  of  which  is  likely  to  be  apparent  in
other  domains  of  thought  and  fancy.     Such  a  reason  is
furnished,  I  conceive,  by  the  known  tendency  of  the  crafts-
man, at  a  particular  stage  of  development,  to  attach  a
religious  value  to  precise  and  rigidly  determined  order  in
the  performance  of  his  craft.    The  history  of  religion  itself —

1  Curtin,  p.  178.


OF   NEATNESS  223

and  one  factor  of  religion  was  the  conception  of  it  as  a
most  potent  craft  for  securing  definite  material  ends — is  full
of  instances ;  to  this  very  day  every  jot  and  tittle  in  the
ritual  of  even  the  most  spiritual  creeds  is  guarded  with  a
reverence  which  is,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  super-
stitious. The  allied  craft  of  law  furnishes  kindred  examples,
from  the  formalities  upon  the  due  fulfilment  of  which
depended  the  legality  of  sale  among  the  Romans  down  to
the  practice  of  our  courts  at  the  present  day.  There  exists
a  ritual  which  must  be  carried  out  to  the  letter,  or  the
transaction,  spiritual  or  legal,  is  invalided.  Now,  agricul-
ture is  not  only  one  of  the  oldest  crafts,  it  is  one  in  connec-
tion with  which  the  organised  religious  spirit  manifests  its
existence  earliest.  Its  ritual  must  have  been  of  a  particu-
larly rigid  and  inflexible  nature.  But  when  the  ritual  was
partly  emptied  of  its  animating  conceptions  by  the  advance
of  Christianity,  partly  replaced  by  Christian  observances,
partly  transformed  to  meet  Christian  exigencies,  it  would
become  disorganised,  broken  up,  its  significance  would
be  obscured,  distorted.  What  would  subsist  would  be  a
vague  but  ineradicable  conviction  that  so  and  so  must  be
done  or  the  powers  would  be  displeased,  and  in  especial,
an  abiding  belief  in  the  conservatism  of  these  antique
beings,  a  distrust  of  innovation,  an  assurance  that  the
fairies  know  best,  and  that  man  must  not  meddle  with
them.  It  is  in  keeping  with  what  we  know  of  other
early  forms  of  religion,  e.g.  the  Hebrew,  that  many  of
the  observances  should  in  themselves  be  useful  and
reasonable.

If  I  am  right  in  this  conjecture,  the  widespread  and
long-continued  existence  of  stories  in  which  the  fairies  are
represented  as  the  jealous  guardians  of  definite  rural  and


224  FAIRY    REVELS

household  observances  testifies  to  their  having  at  one  time
been  the  objects  of  a  ritual  worship  in  which  the  peasant
class  was  deeply  interested,  and  the  rites  of  which  were
ineffaceably  impressed  upon  the  peasant  mind.  But  no
other  ritual  save  that  which  aims  at  increasing  and  regulat-
ing the  life  of  nature  for  the  benefit  of  the  peasant  class,
answers  the  requirement.

The  Fairy  Revels  by  Night.

The  peasant  who  holds  tenaciously  to  certain  practices,
although  he  could  give  no  other  reason  save  that  he  trod
in  his  forefathers'  footsteps,  is  also  firmly  convinced  that
fairy  life  belongs  in  the  main  to  the  night  side  of  nature.
For  him,  as  for  the  poet, —

'  The  weaker,  holier  season  wanes,
Night  comes  with  sorrows  and  with  sins,
And  in  all  forests,  hills,  and  plains
A  keener,  fiercer  life  begins.'

The  classic  manifestation  of  the  fairy  folk  is  their  dance
by  moonlight,  in  wild  and  desert  places,  which,  if  the
belated  mortal  sees,  and  seeing  is  drawn  by  an  irresistible
spell  to  share  in,  ensures  him  centuries  of  unalloyed  bliss
compressed  within  the  semblance  of  a  night,  or  dooms  him
to  a  fate  from  which  not  even  Christ's  vicar  may  save  him,
according  as  the  legend  has  been  more  or  less  modified  by
Christianity.  Some  realistic  basis  there  must  be  for  this
story  told  wherever  reigns  the  belief  in  fairydom.  A
psychological  reason  may  be  sought  in  the  opinion  that
night  is  essentially  the  time  for  growth,  vegetable  or  animal.
Increase  is  practically  imperceptible  during  the  day,  yet  it
takes  place,  and  must  therefore  take  place  at  night,  when


FAIRY  REVELS  225

the  Powers  of  Increase  must  be  active  and  strenuous.  But
this  reason  would  only  explain  why  night  is  assigned  to  the
fairy,  it  would  not  account  for  the  special  form  in  which
the  fairy  loves  to  manifest  himself.  That,  if  I  mistake  not,
is  due  to  traditional  reminiscences  of  the  ritual,  midnight,
frenzied,  orgiastic,  in  which  throughout  the  rest  of  Europe,
as  in  Greece,  the  Power  of  Increase  was  invoked,  his  aid
demanded,  his  support  assured.  We  have  seen  reason  to
hold  with  Professor  Rohde  that  this  ritual  had  effects  and
consequences  little  dreamt  of  in  all  likelihood  by  those  who
first  practised  it;  it  created  and  perpetrated  a  psycho-
logical state  out  of  which  was  developed,  together  with  other
conceptions,  that  of  a  god's  land  of  unalloyed  delight,  a
land  the  denizens  of  which  are  free  from  the  shackles  of
time,  locality,  and  personality  imposed  upon  them  in  this
world.  It  is,  therefore,  significant  that  the  legend  of
mortal  participation  in  the  midnight  fairy  dance  should  be
characterised  by  the  loss  of  all  sense  of  time  on  the
mortal's  part,  and,  though  less  frequently,  by  his  access  to
a  wonderland  of  joy  and  riches.  Reminiscences  of  the
ritual  would  thus  form  the  framework  and  supply  the
details  for  the  legend,  but  the  true  reason  for  its  persistence
lies  elsewhere  than  in  the  fact  of  its  perpetuating  the
memory  of  rites  which  impressed  the  imagination  of  the
peasant  class.  There  is,  as  we  saw,  a  psychological  justifi-
cation for  the  beliefs  which  sprang  out  of  and  embodied
themselves  anew  in  the  ritual.  The  participant  in  the
frenzied  rites  was  actually,  as  it  seemed  to  him,  delivered
from  the  bonds  of  sense,  did  actually  pass  into  a  wonder-
land of  ecstatic  joy  where  time  and  space  were  not.  All
this  is  summed  up  in  terse  dramatic  form  by  the  legend  of
the  fairy  revellers  and  their  mortal  visitor,  and  the  legend
VOL.  II.  P


226  WITCHCRAFT  AND

lives  because  it  symbolises  the  psychology  as  well  as  the
history  of  a  worship.

Witchcraft  and  Fairydom.

If  the  witness  of  living  tradition  be  required  in  defence
of  this  interpretation,  I  may  cite  again  the  story  of  'Aine
leading  her  fairy  host  in  the  torchlight  procession  and  other
midnight  rites,  by  which  herd  and  crop  are  hallowed  and
protected.  On  the  historical  side  there  is  a  fair  amount  of
evidence  that  in  districts  now  occupied  by  Celtic-speaking
peoples,  rites  akin  to  those  of  the  Dionysus  cult  were
practised.  This  evidence  has  been  discussed  by,  among
others,  Mr.  Hartland  {Science  of  Fairy  Tales)  and  Mr.
Gomme  {Ethnology  in  Folklore),  and  I  need  only  refer  to
what  they  have  said,  and  to  my  remarks  on  the  festival  of
the  Namnites  priestesses  described  by  Strabo  and  Pomponius
Mela  [ante,  ch.  xvi.).  But  I  must  dwell  a  little  upon  another
set  of  romantic  fancyings  to  which  the  ritual  of  the  Powers
of  Increase  has  given  rise  in  popular  imagination.  It  is
evident  that  even  as  the  rites  themselves  fell  more  or  less
under  the  ban  of  the  new  faith,  and  were,  as  the  case  might
be,  tolerated  as  harmless,  mildly  denounced,  or  thundered
at  with  every  missile  of  the  Church's  artillery,  so  the  re-
sulting stories  may  be  expected  to  reveal  every  gradation
of  the  struggle  between  Christianity  and  pre-Christianity.
This  is  so  even  if  we  restrict  ourselves  wholly  to  fairy-lore.
There  is  nearly  always  something  uncanny  in  the  fairy
revel,  but  in  numerous  stories  there  is  something  distinctly
unholy  and  malign.  One  such  story,  which  has  passed
through  the  hands  of  a  poet  who  gave  it  a  distinctive
Christian  colouring,  who  accentuated  the  unholy  side  of
Faerie,  is  the  Legend  of  the  Knight  Tannhauser.     If  we


FAIRY  DOM  227

compare  it  with  its  closest  analogue  (perhaps  its  immediate
prototype?),  the  story  of  Thomas  the  Rhymer  and  the
Fairy  Queen,  we  find  the  Christian  note  more  pro-
nounced, though  in  the  latter  it  is  far  more  insistent
than  in  the  vast  majority  of  living  folk-tales.  Between
the  Tannhauser  legend  at  one  end  of  the  scale,  and  at  the
other  many  a  tale  picked  up  in  this  century,  in  which  the
mortal  visitor  to  Faery  is  the  object  of  admiration  and  envy
rather  than  of  reprobation,  every  shade  of  man's  feeling
towards  the  invisible  world  may  be  noted.  But  there  exists  a
group  of  stories  and  traditions  in  which  that  world  is  wholly
malign,  its  denizens  wholly  evil,  its  mortal  ministrants
stamped  with  loathsome  and  hideous  horror.  I  allude  of
course  to  witchcraft,  and  to  the  stories  and  traditions  to
which  it  has  given  rise.  In  popular  tradition  the  most
striking  features  of  witchcraft  are  perhaps  the  witch's  power
over  animal  and  vegetable  produce  (in  nine  cases  out  of
ten  the  witch  exercises  her  malign  influence  by  preventing
butter  'coming,'  by  inflicting  barrenness,  or  by  blasting
crops),  her  ability  to  assume  animal  shape,  and  the  fact
that  she  receives  and  renews  her  power  in  assemblies  of  an
initiatory  and  sacramental  character.  It  is  this  assembly
of  witches  and  wizards,  the  sabbat,  to  use  the  technical  term,
which  forms  the  hellish  counterpart  of  the  fairy  dance.  Such
at  least  is  the  Brothers  Grimm's  opinion  :  '  Die  Reihen  auf
dem  Brocken,  die  Tanze  um  die  Johannisfeuer  waren  sicher
nichts  anders,  als  Feste  der  Lichtelfen,  sie  haben  sich  in
greuliche,  teufliche  Hexentanze  verkehrt.'1     In  my  opinion

1  Irische  Elfenmdrchen,  cxxiii.  '  The  dances  on  the  Brocken,  those
around  the  fire  on  Midsummer  Eve,  were  nothing  more  than  festivals
of  the  Elves  of  light ;  they  have  been  transformed  into  hideous,  devilish
dances  of  witches'  (Crofton  Croker's  Translation,  142).


228  WITCHCRAFT

the  inevitable  results  of  the  shock  between  Christianity  and
the  older  faith  it  superseded,  are  sufficient  to  explain  all
the  varying  forms  which  the  phenomena  of  that  faith  have
assumed  in  folklore,  including  those  of  witchcraft.  As  we
saw  just  now,  the  priest  denounced  the  pagan  god  as  a
devil,  whilst  he  contented  himself  with  styling  the  peasant's
deity  a  neutral  angel.  The  one  was  a  potent  and  in-
fluential rival,  the  other  could,  as  a  rule,  be  disregarded
or  even  brought  within  the  Christian  fold.  But  there  were
elements  in  the  peasant  faith  which  could  not  be  over-
looked, with  which  no  compromise  was  possible.  It  was
precisely  these  elements  which  were  the  most  potent ;  re-
course would  be  had  to  them  in  cases  of  emergency,  when  the
ordinary  resources  of  the  ritual  had  failed.  The  horror  of
the  Christian  priest  at  practices  which  he  could  not  but
deem  bloody  and  obscene  would  naturally  be  intensified  by
the  thought  that  his  flock  were  resorting  to  them  because
he  had  failed ;  ordinary  fairy  observances  which  could  be
carried  on  simultaneously  with  the  Church's  rites  might  be
tolerated,  but  not  usages  in  which  was  concentrated  the
fiercest  spirit  of  the  old  faith,  the  last  remains  of  organised
sacerdotal  opposition  to  Christianity.  These  considerations
seem  to  me  to  justify  the  view  expressed  by  the  Brothers
Grimm.  A  different  view  has,  however,  been  urged  by  Mr.
Gomme  in  the  most  suggestive  and  stimulating  of  his  works,
EtJmology  in  Folklore.  According  to  him  'witchcraft  is
the  survival  of  pre-Aryan  aboriginal  beliefs  from  aboriginal
sources,  fairycraft  the  survival  of  beliefs  about  the  aborigines
from  Aryan  sources.'1  I  shall  discuss  this  theory  later.
It  is  only  indirectly  connected  with  the  question  discussed
in  the  foregoing  paragraphs,  the  question,  namely,  whether

1  Op.  cit.  p.  63.


CHANGELING  BELIEF  229

fairy  revels  and  witches'  sabbat  can  be  traced  back  to  the
midnight  festivals  of  those  antique  divinities  of  growth,  who
on  Irish  soil  became  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  and  the  proto-
types of  the  modern  fairy.

The  Changeling  Belief.

If  the  fairy  is  characterised  by  a  love  of  orderly  neatness,
and  a  conservative  fondness  for  old  ways,  if  he  shows  him-
self chiefly  to  mortals  in  the  midnight  revel,  the  practice
by  which  he  comes  in  closest  and  more  frequent  contact  with
humanity  is  the  toll  he  levies  upon  human  life.    The  new-
born child,  so  be  he  is  healthy  and  vigorous,  the  young  and
prolific  woman,  are  especially  exposed  to  his  attack.     But
the  fairy  does  not  take  as  does  death,  he  admits  and  acts
upon  the  principle  of  a  life  for  a  life ;  true,  the  exchange
he  makes  with  the  mortal  is  an  unfair  one  for  the  latter,
who  receives  a  worn-out,  peevish,  ailing  existence  in  return
for  the  new  and  vigorous  one  of  which  he  has  been  robbed.
No  incident  of  fairy  intercourse  with  mortals  is  more  com-
monly recorded,  none  has  a  wider  range  of  distribution,
none  is  believed  in  more  implicitly  than  the  substitution
of  changelings  for  human  beings.     We  can  only,  in  my
opinion,  explain  the  practice  if  we  recognise  in  the  fairies
representatives  of  the  antique  lords  of  life  and  increase,  of
the  powers  to  whom  man  looked  for  the  periodical  outburst
of  new  life,  and  whom  he  strengthened  in  their  task  by
sacrifice.     This  is  substantially  the  theory  of  the  Brothers
Grimm  :  '  Wie  etwa  Homer  von  den  Geistern  erzahlt,  dass
sie  Blut  begierig  einsaugen,  um  das  Gefiihl  des  Lebens  zu
erlangen,  so  scheinen  diese  geisterhafte  Wesen  ihren  Kreis
durch  die  geraubten  jugendlichen  Menschen  zu  erfrischen


23o  CHANGELING  BELIEF

oder  wieder  herzustellen,  welches  in  Wales  wirklich  Volks-
glaube  ist.' l

There  are  two  ways  in  which,  as  it  seems  to  me,  the
sacrificial  worship  which  we  know  to  have  been  current  in
pre-Christian  Ireland  may  have  given  rise  to  the  changeling
belief.  The  sacrifice  of '  one-third  of  their  healthy  offspring,'
though  it  may  have  been  accepted  as  necessary,  must,  even
when  the  creed  was  most  firmly  believed  in,  have  weighed  as
a  heavy  burden  upon  the  people.  After  the  triumph  of
Christianity,  and  the  consequent  abolition  of  human  sacri-
fice as  a  normal  feature  of  the  ritual,  the  practice  may  well
have  assumed  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  the  aspect  of  raids
carried  out  by  an  unhuman  upon  human  society.  If  this
view  be  correct,  the  belief  would  be  the  outcome  of  natural
horror  felt  for  sacrifice  by  the  victim's  relations,  reinforced
by  the  reprobation  of  Christianity.  The  practice  of  the
fairies  would  come  to  be  looked  upon  as  altogether  detest-
able, the  gist  and  point  of  the  stories  which  narrated  it
would  be  supplied  by  the  human  ingenuity  or  courage
which  outwitted  fairy  malice.  It  is,  however,  conceivable
that  the  changeling  belief  may  be  older  than  the  change
effected  in  the  popular  mind  by  the  introduction  of  Chris-
tianity. What  was  the  root-conception  of  the  antique
agricultural  worship  ? — that  the  Powers  invoked  were  the
lords  and  depositories  of  life ;  this  they  would  dole  out  to

1  Irische  Elfenmarchen,  civ.  '  Almost  in  the  same  manner  as  Homer
relates  of  the  spirits  that  they  eagerly  sucked  blood  to  imbibe  a  sensa-
tion of  life ;  these  beings  seem  to  renovate  or  replace  their  circle  by  their
youthful  prey,  which  is  in  fact  a  popular  superstition  in  Wales'  (Crofton
Croker's  Translation,  p.  119).  I  don't  know  Grimm's  authority  for
the  last  statement,  and  I  can  find  no  definite  mention  of  such  a  super-
stition in  later  writers.


CHANGELING  BELIEF  231

their  human  worshippers,  but  on  conditions;  nothing  is
given  for  nothing,  and  if  the  Power  of  Life  and  Increase  is
to  manifest  himself,  he  must  be  fed,  hence  the  necessity  for
sacrifice ;  but  the  stated,  periodic,  ritual  feeding  of  these
powers  may,  on  however  liberal  a  scale  it  is  calculated  (and,
if  we  believe  the  dinnshenchas  of  Mag  Slecht  in  Ireland,
there  was  nothing  niggardly  in  this  respect),  be  insufficient,
in  which  case  they  have  to  forage  for  themselves,  and  what
more  likely  than  that  they  should  anticipate  their  dinner
hour  and  carry  off  likely  morsels  between-times  ?  I  have
purposely  used  crude,  brutal  terms  for  putting  this  theory,
in  order  to  emphasise  the  brutally  practical  nature  of  these
antique  faiths,  the  rigorous  logic  which  boggled  at  no  con-
clusion however  revolting.  Another  strand  of  thought  may
also  be  disentangled.  It  is  now  a  commonplace  of  our
studies  that  sacrifice  was  reckoned  efficacious  in  proportion
to  the  vitality  of  the  victim ;  hence  the  sacrifice  of  the
king,  the  representative  of  the  source  of  power,  or  rather
the  depository  for  the  time  being  of  that  power.  Life  was
hoarded  up  in  him  so  as  to  be  available  for  emergencies.
By  a  similar  train  of  reasoning,  youth,  vigour,  beauty,  free-
dom from  blemish,  have  at  divers  times  and  places  been
requisites  in  the  victim.  It  is  at  least  possible  that  the
sickly  and  ailing  would  be  rejected  when  the  time  came  for
each  family  to  supply  its  quota  of  victims,  and  this  might
easily  translate  itself  in  the  folk-memory  into  the  statement
that  the  fairies  had  carried  off  the  healthy  and  left  in  ex-
change the  sickly.  Of  these  two  explanations  the  second
is  the  more  adventurous,  and  I  should  hesitate  to  put  it
forward  otherwise  than  tentatively,  but  it  accounts  for  the
changeling  better  than  does  the  other.  In  either  case  it
should  be  noted  there  exists  some  justification,  realistic  and


232  THE  CLONMEL  CASE

psychological  (the  psychology  is  false,  but  that  doesn't
matter)  for  the  peasant  belief.  It  is  a  fact  that  the  healthy
and  vigorous  die  unaccountably,  that  the  sickly  and  ailing
live  on,  but  it  is  a  fact  which  the  peasant  cannot  consider
natural,  and  for  which  he  must  therefore  seek  an  extra-
natural  cause.

I  have  now,  I  trust,  made  it  probable  that  the  fairy  creed
of  modern  Ireland,  connected  historically  as  it  is  with  the
romantic  mythology  of  which  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  are
the  dramatis  persona,  is  the  living  representative  of  an
ancient  cult  paid  to  the  powers  of  life  and  increase;  it
has  been  modified  and  distorted  by  Christianity,  certain
elements,  in  themselves  fierce  and  horrible,  have  been
rendered  still  more  detestable,  thanks  to  the  attitude  Chris-
tianity has  taken  towards  them,  but  on  the  whole  the  domi-
nant conceptions,  in  which  are  expressed  man's  relations  to
nature,  have  remained  substantially  unaltered.  In  especial,
the  most  popular  incident  of  the  fairy  cycle,  the  changeling
story  is  found  to  be  connected  with  the  antique  conception
of  life  and  sacrifice;  how  potent  is  the  belief  finding
expression  in  this  story  may  be  gauged  when  we  remember
that  only  two  years  ago  it  induced  a  father,  a  husband,
and  half-a-dozen  cousins  (all  of  them,  save  the  husband,
average  representatives  of  their  class,  the  small  Irish  peasant)
to  slowly  roast  an  unfortunate  woman  to  death  because
they  suspected  her  of  being  a  changeling.1  Again  I  repeat
that  I  make  no  attempt  to  account  for  every  detail  of  fairy-

1  The  essential  facts  of  the  Clonmel  so-called  •  witch-burning '  case
may  be  found  Folklore,  vi.  373  et  scq.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that
whilst  the  husband  wanted  to  get  quit  of  his  wife,  her  father  and
cousins  believed,  more  or  less  strongly,  that  it  was  a  fairy  substitute
they  were  torturing.


EUROPEAN  FAIRY  BELIEF         233

lore.  I  have  endeavoured  to  lay  bare  the  broad  lines,  the
ruling  conceptions  of  the  creed,  and  I  do  not  think  I  have
gone  far  wrong.

Irish  and  General  European  Fairy-Lore.

Comparison  with  the  general  mass  of  European  fairy-lore
will  be  found,  I  think,  to  place  the  above  conclusions  be-
yond reasonable  doubt.  That  lore  is  substantially  the  same
to-day  elsewhere  in  Europe  as  it  is  in  Ireland ;  if  we  may
judge  from  the  fact  that  the  attitude  of  Christianity  towards
it  has  been  everywhere  of  much  the  same  nature,  its  same-
ness was  as  great  fifteen  hundred  or  eighteen  hundred
years  ago  as  it  is  now.  Hence  the  beliefs  and  practices
from  which  it  derives,  and  to  which  it  testifies,  must  have
been  of  such  a  nature  as  to  appeal  most  strongly  to  the
peasant  classes,  of  such  a  nature  indeed  as  to  rigidly  deter-
mine their  practical  action,  whilst  summing  up  expressively
their  view  of  the  relations  between  man  and  nature.  No
other  set  of  beliefs  and  practices  save  those  connected
with  breadwinning  (I  use  the  word  in  its  widest  sense)
answers,  unless  I  am  mistaken,  to  these  requirements.
The  peasant's  belief  is  everywhere  of  much  the  same
character,  because  everywhere  his  mode  of  life,  his  interests,
are  very  similar ;  these  have  changed  little  since  the  earliest
time,  hence  the  comparatively  slight  change  in  his  beliefs.

On  the  other  hand,  the  differences,  such  as  they  are,
between  Gaelic  and  non-Gaelic  fairy-lore  are  easily  explic-
able by  known  historical  conditions.  Gaeldom  remained
comparatively  unaffected  by  Rome,  hence  the  survival  down
to  recent  times  of  the  tribal  system,  which  has  preserved
much  local  mythology,  hence  the  continued  existence  of  a
mythological  romance,  uninfluenced  by  the  classic  mytho-


234  DEATH  AND  THE

logies,  thanks  to  which  the  Irish  fairies  have  kept  name,
attribute,  and  personalities.  England  shared,  through  the
Arthurian  romance,  in  the  ancient  stock  of  Celtic  mythic
narrative,  and  the  connection  between  the  peasant's  lore
and  the  fairy  world  of  romance  was  never  wholly  lost  sight
of  here  as  elsewhere ;  because  of  this,  English,  alone  of  the
great  modern  literatures,  has  given  a  place  of  honour  to  the
fairy,  has  sought  for  and  found  some  of  its  most  exquisite
effects  in  the  land  of  illusion  and  fantasy.1

The  Tuatha  de  Danann  and  Death.

There  is  one  aspect  alike  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  and
of  the  fairy  clan,  which  I  have  hitherto  left  unnoted,  but
which  deserves  mention,  especially  in  a  volume  which  dis-
cusses the  Irish  conception  of  life-transference,  viz.  their
connection  with  death,  their  possible  identification  with  the
spirits  of  the  dead.  We  find  a  traditional  association  of
the  Tuatha  de  Danann  with  prehistoric  monuments,  which
examination  reveals  to  be  of  a  sepulchral  nature ;  in  texts
which  are  at  least  900  years  old  this  association  is  em-
phasised, and  the  sepulchral  nature  of  the  monuments  is
insisted  upon.-  Moreover,  certain  traditions  (e.g.  those  cited
on  p.  183  etseq.)  connect  the  origin  of  the  great  festivals  with
burial  ceremonies.  Again,  modern  folklore  frequently  fails
to  distinguish  between  fairy  and  ghost;   traits,  incidents,

1  I  have  dealt  fully  with  this  point  in  my  presidential  address  to  the
Folklore  Society  for  the  Session  of  1897:  'The  Fairy  Mythology  of
English  Literature  ;  its  origin  and  nature'  {Folklore,  March  1897).

2  The  material,  archaeological  and  literary,  has  been  brought  together
and  discussed  by  Mr.  George  Coffey  :  '  The  Tumuli  and  Inscribed
Stones  at  New  Grange,  Dorset,  and  Knowth  '  ( Transactions  of  the  Royal
Irish  Academy,  November  1892).     Cf.  my  remarks,  Folklore,  iv.  370.


TUATHA  DE  DANANN  235

attributes  ascribed  to  the  one  are  ascribed  to  the  other;
and  the  churchyard  is  almost  invariably  a  favourite  haunting
place  of  the  fairies.1

Against  these  facts  we  have  to  recognise  (1)  that  nothing
in  the  recorded  mythic  romance  in  which  the  Tuatha  de
Danann  play  a  part  connects  them  with  ancestor- worship
in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term,  and  (2)  that  the  oldest
witness  to  their  connection  with  the  great  sepulchral  mounds
of  the  lower  Boyne  valley  is  furnished  by  texts  which  belong
to  the  euhemerising  period,  when  the  Tuatha  de  Danann
were  transformed  into  an  ancient  race  of  kings,  conquered
and  dispossessed  by  the  invading  Milesians.  If  the  Tuatha
de  Danann  were  not  historical  personages,  the  eighth-
tenth  century  statement  that  they  were  buried  between
certain  mounds  cannot  be  true,  and  may  be  only  an  anti-
quarian fable.  On  the  other  hand,  how  in  that  case  is  the
modern  folklore  to  be  accounted  for  ?  It  cannot  be  traced
back  to  romantic  tales  of  the  last  seven  or  eight  centuries.
These,  it  is  true,  insist  strongly  upon  the  association  of  the
Tuatha  de  Danann  with  the  great  sepulchral  monuments,
which  according  to  eighth-tenth  century  texts  were  their
favourite  burying-places,  but  they  assign  no  sepulchral
character  to  them.  The  Irish  peasant  who  listened  to  tales
about  Angus  of  the  Brugh,  would  never  learn  from  them
that  the  Brugh  was  at  one  time  regarded  as  the  grave  of
the  Dagda,  Angus'  father;  nor  would  anything  in  these
tales  give  him  the  faintest  idea  that  sepulchral  sites  generally
were  the  haunt  of  Angus'  kindred.  No,  the  connection
must  lie  deeper  than  any  antiquarian   guesswork   of  the

1  Mr.  Curtin's  already  quoted  work  ( Tales  of  the  Fairies,  etc. ,  London,
1895)  gives  full  and  precise  witness  to  the  confusion  actually  existing
in  South  Irish  folklore  between  ghost  and  fair}-.


236  DEATH  AND  THE

period  when  Irish  mythology  was  euhemerised,  or  any
influence  upon  the  official  story-telling  class  which  the  anti-
quaries may  have  exercised.  It  is,  I  think,  a  natural  and
inevitable  one.  In  the  first  portion  of  these  studies  we  saw
that  the  idea  of  a  Happy  Otherworld,  although  possibly
prior  to  and  certainly  independent  of  that  of  a  Hades,  i.e.
a  world  to  which  all  men  go  after  death,  forcedly  coalesced
with,  influenced,  and  was  influenced  by  it.  In  the  same
way  the  conception  of  Powers  of  Life  inevitably  suggests
that  of  Powers  of  Death ;  the  mere  fact  that  the  former  are
kept  in  working  order,  so  to  say,  by  sacrifice,  establishes  a
connection  between  them  and  the  something  which,  whilst
we  live,  is  ourselves,  and  when  we  cease  to  live  must  go
elsewhere.  The  theory  that  life  is  a  fixed  quantity,  that  to
obtain  possession  of  it  we  must  give  its  fair  equivalent,
necessarily  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  departed  life,  which
but  a  moment  ago  we  saw  in  full  and  vigorous  manifestation,
and  has  now  gone — somewhere — has  gone  to  reinforce  the
stock  upon  which  we  essay  to  draw  when  we  approach  the
Powers  that  hold  it  with  rite  and  sacrifice.  But  if  a  portion
of  the  universal  vital  essence  lately  animated  some  one  dear
to  and  revered  by  us,  to  whom  we  looked  up  as  a  protector
and  counsellor,  why  should  its  disposition  or  its  capacity
change  because  it  has  gone  elsewhere  ?  As  a  community
let  us  appeal  to  the  Powers  of  Life  with  the  proper  ritual ;
the  advantages  we  hope  for  will  be  shared  in  equally  by  all
the  individuals  composing  the  community ;  but  as  indi-
viduals why  should  we  not  make  the  most  of  any  private
interest  we  have  among  the  Holders  of  Life,  and  as  prudent
individuals  let  us  keep  alive  this  interest  by  rite  and  offer-
ing. In  such  a  way,  I  take  it,  ancestor-worship  would
graft  itself  in  a  natural  and  inevitable  manner  upon  the  cult


TUATHA  DE  DANANN  237

of  the  Powers  of  Life.  In  its  earlier  form  it  probably  pre-
ceded the  patriarchal  family,  and  it  would  forcedly  suffer
far-reaching  modification  in  communities  the  organisation
of  which  was  based  upon  that  institution.  It  is  known  to
us  chiefly  from  the  practice  of  such  communities,  and  our
current  theories  respecting  it  are  naturally  coloured  by  this
fact.  A  far  more  altruistic  reason  is  thus  usually  assigned
for  the  institution  than  seems  at  all  likely ;  it  is  explained
by  the  desire  to  ensure  the  comfort  and  well-being  of  the
departed — but  early  man,  we  may  be  sure,  did  not  trouble
himself  about  the  welfare  of  his  dead,  unless  he  thought  he
could  gain  something  by  his  solicitude;  the  dying  man
might  be  firmly  convinced  that  post  i7iortem  offerings  would
be  essential  to  his  comfort,  the  survivors  would  not  have
acted  on  this  conviction  unless  there  had  been  in  their
own  minds  an  equally  strong  conviction  that  the  game  was
worth  the  candle.

There  may  possibly  be  a  yet  earlier  connection  between
the  dead  and  the  Powers  of  Life.  It  has  been  urged,  in
this  country  by  Mr.  Grant  Allen  alone  to  my  knowledge,1
that,  as  growth  manifests  itself  more  freely  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood  of  the  dead  body,  the  grave  is  in  reality  the
ultimate  source  of  all  mythical  conceptions  connected  with
the  origin  and  the  essence  of  life.  I  shall  return  to  this
view  in  the  next  chapter.  Here  I  need  only  call  attention
to  it.

The  sepulchral  association  alike  of  Tuatha  de  Danann
and  of  fairy  is  thus  an  early  and,  so  to  say,  a  natural
element  of  the  worship  paid  to  these  powers.  Even  if,  as
Mr.  Grant  Allen  claims,  that  worship  was  not  originated
by  burial  practices,  it  could  not  but  develop  a  connection
1  The  Attis  of  Catullus,  London,  1892.


238  BURIAL  CUSTOMS

with  beliefs  concerning  the  dead  and  their  activity.  This
development  must  have  taken  place,  no  matter  what
the  special  burial  customs  of  the  ancient  Irish  might  be.
It  seems  immaterial,  therefore,  to  the  present  inquiry  to
examine  the  archaeological  evidence  respecting  the  disposal
of  the  dead  in  Ireland.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  same
perplexing  duality  of  practice  is  to  be  found  there  as  else-
where in  Europe,  and  notably  in  Greece.1  The  body  is
sometimes  burned,  sometimes  buried;  the  two  modes  of
disposal  overlap  each  other  in  locality  and  in  time,  indeed
there  are  tombs  in  which  remains  of  burnt  skeletons  are
found  in  company  with  entire  ones.2  No  satisfactory
hypothesis  has  been  worked  out  on  the  basis  of  the  archae-
ological evidence  as  to  differences  in  race  or  in  religion
among  the  dwellers  in  pre-Christian  Ireland.  The  record
of  the  monuments  does  not  enable  us  to  progress  beyond
our  deductions  from  early  myth  and  living  folklore.  It  is
upon  the  validity  of  these  deductions  that  I  must  rest  my
case.3

1  Cf.  Cecil  Smith,  Folklore,  December  1892.

2  Coffey,  op.  cit.  p.  18.

3  A  different  view  of  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  has  been  urged  by  M.
d'Arbois  de  Jubainville  in  his  Cycle  Mythologique.  I  have  thought  it
best  to  set  out  my  theory  rather  than  to  polemise  against  his,  the  more
so  as  the  difference  of  view  arises  in  part  from  the  fact  that  we  consider
the  beliefs  at  different  stages  of  evolution.


CHAPTER    XIX

SUMMARY   AND    CONCLUSION

Summary  of  preceding  investigation— Statement  of  results  (a)  as  regards
the  Aryan  world  generally  ;  (6)  as  regards  Greece  ;  (c)  as  regards  Ireland
— Objective  and  subjective  elements  in  the  primitive  agricultural  cults,
their  diverse  fortunes  in  the  development  of  mythology— Possible  non-
Aryan  origin  of  the  cult,  Mr.  Gomme's  views  discussed  and  criticised
—Dr.  Jevons'  views  concerning  the  development  of  the  Elysium  and
Re-birth  themes  in  the  Greek  world  discussed  and  criticised— Con-
clusion.

I  do  not  propose  to  carry  the  special  lines  of  investiga-
tion further,  and  it  is  time  to  sum  up  the  results,  and
to  endeavour  to  draw  some  conclusion.  We  started  from
the  consideration  of  an  Irish  romantic  tale  belonging,
substantially,  to  the  eighth  century  of  our  era  at  the  latest.
Embodied  in  it  are  two  main  conceptions :  (i)  that  of  a
land  of  unending  joy  to  which  mortals  may  penetrate
without  dying,  but  from  which  they  may  not  return  to
earth  under  penalty  of  death;  (2)  that  of  extra-human
beings  who  can  unite  themselves  with  mortals  and  beget
offspring,  into  whom  they  transfuse  some  of  their  extra-
human  capacities  and  attributes.  In  itself  this  tale  is  only
one,  and  not  the  most  important,  of  a  group  presenting
similar  features.  Attentive  consideration  of  the  entire
group  shows  that  the  second  conception  is  also  found  in
the  form  of  the  god's  assumption  of  manhood,  sometimes
simultaneously  with  the  manifestation  of  his  extra-human

239


240  ELYSIUM  AND  RE-BIRTH

personality,  sometimes  with  temporary  abeyance  of  the
latter ;  in  other  words,  god-incarnation  occurs  by  the  side
of  god-parentage.  Furthermore,  both  conceptions  are
found,  at  an  early  stage,  heroicised — the  personages  of  the
tales  have  more  than  human  strength,  courage,  and  beauty,
their  adventures  transcend  the  ordinary  experiences  of
humanity,  but  they  are  not,  by  definition,  extra-human ;
the  world  in  which  they  move,  however  magnified,  with
whatever  romantic  colours  endowed,  is  man's  world,  not
gods'  world.  Obviously  secondary,  these  stories  attest  by
their  early  appearance  in  extant  Irish  literature,  the  age  of
the  primary  class  of  stories  out  of  which  they  have  de-
veloped, a  class  represented  by  those  tales  in  which  some
of  the  personages  distinctly  retain  their  extra-human  char-
acter. A  presumption  is  thus  created  of  great  antiquity  as
far  as  the  latter  are  concerned,  a  presumption  strengthened
when  we  consider  that  both  conceptions  have  their
analogues  in  the  new  faith  which  in  the  fourth  and  fifth
centuries  of  our  era  profoundly  modified  the  religious,
whilst  it  affected  but  slightly  the  social,  organisation  of
ancient  Ireland.  The  Irish  Land  of  Women  and  Youth
has  analogies  with  the  Christian  Paradise  and  Heaven,  the
Irish  incarnation  stories  with  the  Incarnation  of  Christ.
In  both  cases  the  analogy  proves,  upon  investigation,  to  be
independent  of  any  direct  influence  exercised  by  Christianity
upon  pre-Christian  Irish  paganism.  Unless,  therefore,  a
simple  coincidence,  it  must  be  due  to  something  in  the
elements  which  Christianity  absorbed  into  its  complex
being  from  the  older  classical  world,  and  which  it  pro-
foundly modified.  In  the  case  of  the  Happy  Otherworld
conception,  this  '  something '  proved  to  be  the  Greek  vision
of  Elysium,  which,  equally  with  the  Greek  vision  of  Tar-


IN  THE  ARYAN  WORLD  241

tarus,  was  taken  over  by  Christianity.  Tracing  this  vision
back  as  far  as  we  can,  to  the  Homeric  poems  and  to  those
statements  of  Hesiod  and  the  mythographers,  which,
although  younger  in  point  of  record,  belong  to  a  stage  of
Hellenic  myth  as  early  as,  nay  even  earlier,  perhaps,  than
the  Homeric  poems,  we  detect  a  most  striking  similarity  to
the  Irish  tales.  Although  from  fifteen  hundred  to  two
thousand  years  separate  the  earliest  recorded  Greek  and
Irish  utterances  in  a  form,  substantially  speaking,  that
extant,  yet  both  stand  on  much  the  same  stage  of  develop-
ment, save  that  Ireland  has  preserved,  with  greater  fulness
and  precision,  a  conception  out  of  which  Homeric  Greece
had  already  emerged.  Examination  of  the  mythologies  due
to  other  Aryan  races,  or  rather,  to  prejudge  nothing,  to
peoples  speaking  Aryan  tongues  equally  with  the  Greeks
and  Irish,  reveals  the  remarkable  fact  that  Greeks  and  Irish
alone  have  preserved  the  early  stage  of  the  Happy  Other-
world  conception  in  any  fulness.  The  Vedic  mythology  of
the  Aryan  immigrants  into  Northern  India,  the  Avestic
mythology  of  the  Aryan  immigrants  into  Northern  Persia,
the  Eddie  mythology  of  the  Scandinavian  Teutons,  all
present  an  eschatology  as  advanced  as,  or  in  certain
respects  more  advanced  than,  Greek  eschatology  of  the
sixth,  fifth,  and  fourth  centuries  B.C.  Ireland,  if  we  may
judge  from  existing  native  records,  had  not  reached  the
eschatological  stage  prior  to  the  introduction  of  Christianity.
Greece  has  preserved  very  clear  traces  of  its  pre-eschato-
logical  stage,  and  in  the  range  and  continuity  of  its
mythic  record  we  are  enabled  to  trace  how  the  eschato-
logical conceptions  of  the  Otherworld  grew  out  of  the
pre-eschatological.  At  the  same  time  Vedic  India,  Avestic
Iran,  and  Eddie  Scandinavia,  show  sufficient  traces  of
VOL.  II.  Q


242  COMPARISON  OF  IRISH

the  pre-eschatological  conception  to  warrant  the  assertion
that  amongst  these  Aryan-speaking  peoples  the  course  of
development,  although  we  cannot  follow  it,  must  have
been  the  same  as  among  the  Aryan-speaking  Greeks,  where
we  can.

At  this  point  of  the  argument  we  must  revert  to  the
Irish  tales.  The  connection  between  the  two  conceptions
(Happy  Otherworld  and  Reincarnation),  although  per-
sistent, does  not,  at  first  blush,  seem  primary  or  essential.
There  is  no  apparent  necessity  why  the  story  of  Manannan
and  Mongan  should  be  associated  with  that  of  Bran's
passing  to  the  Land  of  Women,  no  apparent  necessity  why
Cuchulinn,  the  re-birth  of  Lug,  should  visit  Faery,  no
apparent  necessity  why  Etain  should  be  re-born  as  a  mortal
and  wooed  by  a  lord  of  the  Happy  Land.  If  we  consider
the  tales  simply  as  independent  tales,  either  mythical  or
romantic,  if  we  isolate  them  from  other  elements  of  Irish
culture,  there  is  no  justification,  either  mythological  or
artistic,  for  the  association  of  the  two  conceptions.  Its
great  age  is  thereby  demonstrated.  Ideas  and  themes  are
not  connected  without  reason,  and  if  no  reason  appears
on  the  face  of  extant  texts,  it  can  only  be  because  these
have  lost  features  and  elements  they  once  possessed.  As  a
matter  of  fact  the  Greek  evidence  furnishes  the  desired
clue.  In  Greek  mythology,  as  in  Irish,  the  conception  of
re-birth  proves  to  be  a  dominant  factor  of  the  same  religious
system  in  which  Elysium  is  likewise  an  essential  feature.
Thus  in  Greek  religion  the  two  conceptions  are  associated
persistently  and  reasonably,  whilst  in  Irish  mythic  fiction
they  are  associated  persistently,  but  not,  on  the  face  of  it,
reasonably.  In  Greece,  the  re-birth  conceptions  centre
around   Dionysus   and   develop   with   his   cult.     Turning


AND  GREEK  ACCOUNTS  243

back  to  Ireland,  we  note  another  connection  beyond  what
may  be  called  that  of  mere  juxtaposition  between  the  two
conceptions ;  the  same  clan  of  supernatural,  extra-human
beings  figures  in  both,  and  forms,  in  fact,  the  desired  link
between  the  two.  Something,  then,  in  the  essence  and
personality  of  these  supernatural  beings,  the  Tuatha  de
Danann,  should  account  for  their  lordship  of  the  Happy
Otherworld,  for  their  capacity  of  transformation,  of  in-
carnating themselves  in  divers  shapes.  The  comparison,
which  at  once  suggests  itself,  with  Dionysus  makes  it
probable  that  the  Tuatha  de  Danann  are  Powers  of  Life
and  Increase,  like  the  Greek  god,  a  probability  confirmed
by  examination  of  the  scanty  extant  records  of  the  cult
paid  to  them,  and  of  the  older  mythology  in  which  they
figure.  Modern  fairy-lore,  allowing  for  the  inevitable
changes  brought  about  by  Christianity,  is  found  to  be  of
the  same  nature,  to  involve  the  same  conceptions,  to  rest
upon  the  same  basis,  as  the  pre-Christian  Tuatha  de
Danann  mythology.

Such  are  the  main  results  of  the  inquiry  stated  in  the
logical  order  of  their  deduction  from  the  facts,  an  order
differing  somewhat  from  that  followed  in  the  foregoing
investigation,  which  considered  either  conception  separ-
ately. We  can  now  essay  a  reconstruction  of  the  historical
development,  points  and  phases  of  which  have  been  clearly
discerned  or  deduced  with  reasonable  certitude.  At  the
outset  we  postulate  communities  largely  if  not  mainly
dependent  for  their  support  upon  the  produce  of  the  soil
and  of  domesticated  animals.  We  only  know  of  these
communities  from  Aryan  sources,  and  we  must  conclude
that  as  far  back  as  our  records  carry  us  (say  to  the
fifteenth   or  eighteenth  century  b.c.  in   the  case  of  the


244        RECONSTRUCTION  OF  THE

Greek  or  Vedic  Aryans)  they  were  largely  if  not  mainly
Aryan.  A  prominent  if  not  the  chief  object  of  their  religion
was  the  worship  of  the  Powers  of  Life  and  Increase.  This
consisted  chiefly  in  periodic  ritual  festivals  the  purpose
of  which  was  to  induce  these  Powers  to  manifest  themselves
for  the  benefit  of  man,  and  to  strengthen  them  in  the
due  fulfilment  of  the  task  upon  which  depended  man's
welfare ;  sacrifice  being  the  means  adopted  to  accomplish
this  end.  The  philosophical  basis  of  the  worship  was
furnished  by  the  conception  that  the  vital  essence  is  of
unending  persistence  and  of  infinite  variability,  and  by  the
principle  that  nothing  is  to  be  had  for  nothing,  that  to  gain
life  we  must  give  life.  Freedom  from  mortality  and  decay,
or  rather,  an  infinite  capacity  for  entering  into  new  forms
and  assuming  new  shapes  of  life,  is  thus  an  inherent
attribute  of  the  Lords  of  Life  and  Increase.  As  soon  as  a
mythology  grew  up — as  soon,  that  is,  as  the  Powers  wor-
shipped by  man  took  upon  themselves  shape  and  individu-
ality, and  became  the  subject  of  stories  (subject  in  their
turn  to  the  fundamental  laws  of  artistic  composition) — the
beings  who  were  to  grow  with  the  progress  of  the  com-
munity, to  acquire  all  the  attributes  and  capacities  which
material,  intellectual,  and  moral  development  made  it
inevitable  for  men  to  bestow  upon  them,  were  stamped
with  certain  ineffaceable  characteristics.  Develop  and
change  as  they  might,  they  retained  to  the  last  the  marks
of  their  origin,  Other  attributes  and  characteristics  seem
due  to  the  effect  produced  upon  the  participants  in  the
sacrificial  rites ;  some  at  least  of  these  passed  into  a  state
of  ecstasy  in  which  they  shared  the  capacities  and  partook
of  the  joys  belonging  to  the  Powers  they  invoked ;  life
entered  into  them  in  a  larger,  more  intense  measure,  they


AGRICULTURAL  MYTHOLOGY     245

became  free  of  the  god's  land.  The  picture  of  this  must
go  back  to  a  comparatively  early  stage ;  its  lineaments  and
colours  are  of  a  simple  description,  betraying  little  if  any
sign  of  advanced  material  civilisation.  The  vision  to  which
man  had  access  in  the  exaltation  of  worship  derived  its  form
and  colour  from  natural  phenomena,  and  its  material  equip-
ment from  the  social  life  familiar  to  the  visionary.  The
close  connection  of  the  sun  with  the  development  of  life  in
nature  must  have  been  noticed  early  in  mankind's  career ;
the  Sun-god  was  necessarily  an  ally  of  the  gods  of  growth.
That  the  sun  as  he  sank  every  evening  to  rest  amidst  the
naming  beauties  of  the  western  sky,  was  proceeding  to  a
land  of  more  than  earthly  radiance  must  have  been  among
the  first  of  definitely  constituted  myths.  He  may  sink  into
the  earth  or  into  the  sea  according  to  geographical  posi-
tion ;  hence  the  varying  accounts  of  his  wonderland,  now
beyond  the  western  main,  now  within  the  hills  bounding
the  western  horizon.  As  the  tribes  shifted  from  inland
to  seashore,  or  worked  their  way  inland  from  the  coast,
different  versions  would  arise  to  be  harmonised  later  bv
thinkers  and  poets.

Of  the  two  aspects  of  the  ancient  worship  of  the  Powers
of  Life  and  Increase,  the  secondary,  dependent  upon  the
subjective  feelings  of  the  worshipper,  was  necessarily  the
most  capable  of  expansion.  The  objective  purport  of
the  cult,  the  increase  of  fertility,  was  bound  to  remain
the  same,  and  as  the  end  in  view  was  a  serious  and
practical  one,  little  departure  could  be  allowed  from  the
rigid  ritual  upon  which  success  was  supposed  to  depend.
Moreover,  as  the  needs  and  capacities  of  social  man  were
widened,  so  the  ancient  craft  of  agriculture  was  menaced
by  other  forms  of  human  activity  which  appealed  to  the


246  SPECIAL  DEVELOPMENT

bolder,  more  adventurous  spirits  of  the  race.  On  its
objective  side  the  agricultural  worship  tended  to  become
that  of  the  least  progressive  portion  of  the  community.
Not  so  on  the  subjective  side.  The  spirit  of  life  entering
into  the  ecstatic  visionary  was  liable  to  all  the  change,  all
the  progress  of  which  its  inmate  was  capable ;  the  rude  and
antique  vision  of  the  shape-shifting  god  in  his  simple
wonderland  may  thus  become  enriched  with  all  the  radiant
imagination  of  a  Homer  or  a  Pindar,  may  be  translated  by
the  moral  fervour  of  a  Pythagoras  or  an  Empedocles  into
an  Elysium,  or  subtilised  by  the  philosopher  into  an
allegory  of  man's  origin  and  destiny.

In  Greece  we  can  in  a  large  measure  trace  this  evolu-
tion, especially  if  the  great  differences  in  the  culture  level
between  the  various  parts  of  the  Hellenic  world  are  borne
in  mind.  The  oldest  monuments  of  Hellenic  genius,  the
Homeric  poems,  belong  to  a  society  removed  by  ages  from
the  simple  communities  in  which  the  worship  of  the  Powers
of  Life  and  Increase  had  its  rise,  yet  this  worship  was  pre-
served in  a  comparatively  primitive  form  in  other  parts  of
the  Hellenic  world  for  ages  after  the  composition  of  the
Homeric  poems.  On  the  whole,  despite  the  existence  of
such  local  cults  as  that  of  the  Eleusinian  Mother,  it  may  be
said  that  the  objective  side  of  this  worship  comes  before  us
as  a  survival  in  the  Greek  world  ;  if  it  seems  a  living  reality
in  certain  districts  or  at  certain  times  there  is  reason  to
suspect  the  intrusion  into  the  main  citadels  of  Hellenic
culture  of  ruder,  more  primitive  elements  from  outlying
regions  where  it  retained  its  full  vitality.  The  perplexing
history  of  Dionysus  worship  is  apparently  best  accounted
for  in  this  way ;  the  fiercer,  crueller  features  had  been  shed
or  softened  down  among  that  section  of  the  Greek  race  to


IN  GREECE  247

which  we  owe  Homer,  they  survived  elsewhere  and  forced
their  way  in  an  archaic  form  to  the  surface  of  the  Greek
world  at  a  later  period.  Yet  their  remoteness  and  strange-
ness were  felt,  and  Greece  imagined  fables  which  told
of  their  alien  origin.  Alien  in  one  sense  they  were,  just  as
the  beliefs  of  the  poor  wretches  who  tortured  Bridget  Clery
to  death  at  Clonmel  two  years  ago  would  be  alien  if  they
claimed  expression  in  our  present-day  worship  and  literature.
On  the  subjective  side  the  influence  of  conceptions  derived
from  the  antique  cult  was  deep  and  enduring  in  the  Greek
world.  From  the  worship  of  Dionysus  sprang  the  Drama,
its  outward  form  reproducing,  its  inmost  spirit  expressing
the  mutability  and  variety  of  social  life,  even  the  worship
was  based  upon  and  symbolised  the  mutability  and  variety
of  natural  life.  Again,  the  close  connection  between  Diony-
sus, Lord  of  Growth,  and  Apollo,  Sun-god  and  Fosterer
of  Life,  which  is  such  a  marked  feature  of  both  cults,  and
which,  if  I  am  right,  goes  back  to  almost  the  earliest  stage
of  mythological  fancy,  enriched  the  religious  possibilities
of  the  Dionysus  cult.  In  connection  with  Apollo,  Greek
religion  touches  in  some  ways  its  highest  level;  Apollo's
comrade  shared  the  ever-widening  sphere  of  beauty  and
significance  occupied  by  the  sun-god.  Whether  Professor
Rohde  is  right  or  no  in  wholly  deriving  the  remarkable
religious  movement  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  in  which  are
blended  ascetic  and  metaphysical  elements,  from  the  simple
naturalistic  worship  of  Dionysus,  and  in  asserting  its  inde-
pendence of  any  outside  influence  of  an  advanced  type —
whether,  in  fact,  Orphic  Pythagoreanism  is,  in  the  main,  a
regular  product  of  the  Greek  genius  working  up  native
elements  of  immemorial  age,  or,  on  the  contrary,  a  recent
Greek   adaptation   of   conceptions   which   had   previously


248  GREEK  DEVELOPMENT

reached  a  high  level  of  religious  development  elsewhere,
is  a  problem  I  do  not  attempt  to  solve.  I  have  stated
Professor  Rohde's  view,  and  I  have  shown,  I  think,  that
the  development  postulated  by  him  finds  a  partial,  but
striking  parallel  in  Irish  mythology ;  I  shall  state  presently
the  opposed  view,  last  advocated,  with  signal  ability  and
wide  knowledge,  by  Dr.  F.  B.  Jevons.  As  a  result  of
the  foregoing  investigations,  I  venture,  however,  to  claim
that  even  if  Orphic  Pythagoreanism  have  to  be  referred
in  part  to  outside  non-Hellenic  sources,  yet  that  never-
theless the  Dionysus  cult  is  at  once  genuinely  Greek,
and  did  from  the  outset  contain  those  elements  which
appear  in  the  sixth  and  fifth  centuries  B.C.  under  a  moral
or  philosophical  guise : — the  conception  that  life  can
pour  itself,  as  it  were,  out  of  one  vessel  into  another,  out-
comes of  which  were  the  doctrine  of  metempsychosis  and
the  ascetic-metaphysical  ideal  of  existence  which  it  pro-
duced ;  the  conception  of  a  god's  land,  the  outcome  of
which  was  an  Elysium  reserved  for  the  just,  with  the  cor-
responding Tartarus  for  the  unjust.

In  Greece  we  can  trace  this  evolution  wholly  in  pre-
Christian  texts  and  monuments.  In  Ireland  we  possess
nothing  that  is  entirely  unaffected  by  Christianity;  for
Celtdom  generally  we  have,  it  is  true,  a  few  scattered
notices  of  the  pre-Christian  period,  but  they  come  to  us
through  Greeks  and  Romans,  and  we  cannot  be  certain
how  far  they  faithfully  reproduce  Celtic  ideas.  Another
great  distinction  between  the  two  bodies  of  evidence  lies  in
the  fact  that  whilst  one  is  furnished  by  the  most  advanced
group  of  the  Aryan-speaking  peoples,  the  other  comes  from
a  group  holding,  together  with  the  Germans,  a  midway
position  in  the  Aryan  scale,  less  advanced  than  Italian,  Vedic,


IRISH   DEVELOPMENT  249

or  Iranian,  more  advanced  than  Lithuanian  or  Slavonic
Aryans.  Alike  the  necessary  imperfection  of  the  record,
due  to  its  preservation  by  Christian  hands,  and  its  inevit-
able meagreness  (even  if  we  had  it  complete),  due  to  the
less  advanced  condition  of  the  group,  forbid  us  to  look  in
Gaeldom,  as  revealed  by  extant  texts,  for  a  close  parallel  to
Greek  development.  In  Greece  the  Powers  of  Life  and
Increase,  worshipped  by  the  primitive  agriculturists,  are
but  one  element  in  the  completed  Hellenic  Pantheon,  and
this  has  been  subjected  to  so  much  change,  to  such  en-
largement and  glorification,  as  to  be  wellnigh  unrecognis-
able. In  Ireland,  to  judge  by  extant  native  texts,  these
powers  must  have  constituted  the  predominant  element  of
the  Pantheon,  and  cannot  have  departed  very  widely  from
their  primitive  form.  Yet  here  we  must  bear  in  mind  the
imperfection  of  the  record  due  to  its  transmission  through
Christians ;  it  is  the  more  highly  organised  members  of
the  Celtic  Pantheon,  those  who  reminded  the  Christian
missionaries,  as  centuries  before  they  had  reminded  classic
observers  of  the  classic  gods,  who  would  naturally  be  boy-
cotted by  the  monkish  scribes.  Allowing  fully  for  this,
and  allowing  also  for  the  fact  that  the  Continental  Celts
would,  as  they  came  in  contact  with  the  higher  civilisation
of  Greece  and  Rome,  assimilate  their  own  deities  to  those
of  the  classic  Pantheon  (why  should  they  not  ?  the  god  of
the  Celt,  the  god  of  the  Greek  or  Roman,  were  after  all
cousins,  if  cousins  who  had  got  on  in  the  world  unequally),
and  thereby  increase  the  likeness  which  enabled  the  fusion
of  the  two  systems  of  worship  after  the  Roman  Conquest,  I
still  think  the  statement  just  made  concerning  Irish  mytho-
logy likely  to  be  fairly  accurate.  In  the  main  that  mytho-
logy had  for  its  dramatis  persona  the  agricultural  Powers


250  OBJECTIVE  AND

of  Life  and  Increase,  in  the  main  it  was  made  up  of  stories
of  which  the  ultimate  essence  and  significance  were  agricul-
tural. At  what  date  it  became  heroicised,  that  is  to  say,
entered  as  an  element,  a  subordinate  element,  into  tribal
traditions  of  famous  chiefs,  warriors,  or  wizards,  it  is  im-
possible to  say.  Heroic  saga  is  everywhere  the  product  of
shock  and  stress:  as  soon  as  a  tribe  shifts  its  quarters,
comes  into  contact  with  other  tribes,  is  affected  by  marked
alternatives  of  victory  or  defeat,  it  develops  heroic  saga,
and  this,  all  the  world  over,  is  compounded  of  scenes  and
situations  which  have  already  done  duty  in  the  mythology.
All  we  can  say  is  that  from  the  eighth  to  the  third  century
B.C.  was  a  period  of  unrest,  conquest,  empire  building  and
empire  decay  for  the  Continental  Celts ;  it  is  safe  to  claim
that  Celtic  heroic  sagas  must  have  grown  up  during  this
period.  What  earlier  sagas  there  may  have  been  we  know
not,  because  we  know  nothing  of  earlier  history.

In  considering  the  history  of  Greek  religion,  I  distin-
guished between  the  objective  and  subjective  elements  of
the  primitive  agricultural  faith,  and  urged  that  the  latter
immensely  outweighed  the  former  in  interest  and  import-
ance. When  Greece  first  comes  before  us,  she  had  passed
out  of  the  purely  agricultural  stage,  and  its  positive  elements
survived  either  as  local  cults  or  as  folklore,  i.e.  as  the  creed
and  practice  of  the  less  advanced,  in  contradistinction  to
the  creed  and  practice  of  the  more  advanced  sections  of  the
community.  In  Ireland  we  naturally  expect  and  find  a
different  state  of  things.  If  we  may  judge  from  the  dinn-
shenchas  of  Mag  Slecht,  the  ritual  of  the  Irish  gods  remained
agricultural  in  essence  and  intent  down  to  its  supersession
by  Christianity.  The  object  of  worship  was  to  promote
increase,  the  theory  ot  worship  was — life  for  life.     Some


SUBJECTIVE   ELEMENTS  251

allowance,  it  may  be  urged,  should  in  this  case  be  made
for  the  imperfection  of  the  record.  Pre-Christian  notices
of  the  cult  do  not  exist ;  what  we  possess  may  possibly
describe  the  emergence  of  ruder,  primitive  elements  of  the
faith  after  Christianity  had  destroyed  its  higher  manifesta-
tions. It  is  as  if  Christianity  should  annihilate  Maho-
metanism,  and  then  describe  as  typical  of  Islamism  a
Bedouin  rite,  practised  perhaps  centuries  before  Mahomet's
day,  and  surviving  the  religious  system  he  founded.  The
mention  of  Crom  Cruaich,  the  definite  association  of  the
cult  with  the  mythical  first  king,  negative  to  my  mind  such
a  possibility.  We  are  entitled,  I  think,  to  take  the  testi-
mony of  the  Mag  Slecht  dimishenchas  as  it  stands,  and  to
say  that  in  ancient  Ireland  worship  retained  down  to  the
introduction  of  Christianity  its  primitive  intent,  and  the
primitive  mode  of  compassing  that  intent.

Irish  evidence  is  silent  as  to  any  development  of  the
subjective  element  of  the  antique  faith  among  the  Celts;
neither  a  metaphysic  nor  an  ethic  can  be  recovered  from
the  Irish  texts.  The  pantheism  of  the  Amairgen  poems  is,
I  believe,  if  the  word  pantheism  be  used  in  its  ordinary
sense,  the  result  of  reading  into  these  undoubtedly  ancient
texts  the  conceptions  of  a  later  age.  The  utmost  they  show
is  that  ancient  Ireland  had  advanced  some  steps  in  the  path
trodden  by  Vedic  India,  the  path  which  led  to  the  con-
ception of  the  priest  or  devotee  as  inherently  equal  to  his
god,  and  as  capable  of  attaining  that  equality  by  certain
definite  means.  If  this  is  so,  it  would  be  another  of  the
significant  points  which  Ireland  shares  with  Vedic  India  to
the  exclusion  of  other  Aryan-speaking  peoples,  and  the
testimony  of  which  must  be  weighed  in  any  attempt  to
determine  the  order  and  chronology  of  Aryan  migrations.


252         THE  SUBJECTIVE  ELEMENT

In  other  respects  the  incarnation  conception  has  a  purely
romantic  significance  in  extant  Irish  mythology,  it  has
originated  no  philosophic  or  moral  doctrine.

On  the  Continent  the  case  seems  different.  Many
classical  observers  testify  to  the  existence  among  the
Southern  Celts  of  a  philosophic  doctrine  taught  by  the
priests,  and  exercising  a  practical  influence  upon  the  ideal
and  conduct  of  life.  Sacrifice,  which  in  Ireland  retained
its  original  purport,  that  of  promoting  increase  of  crop  and
herd,  seems  to  have  been  practised  by  the  Southern  Celts,
with  a  view  to  acquiring  and  controlling  life  as  manifested
in  man ;  the  priests  of  the  tribe  were  thus  able  to  defeat
death,  and  to  assure  to  their  tribesmen  a  continuance  of
existence.  The  effect  of  the  doctrine  was  to  intensify  the
fighting  spirit  of  the  tribe,  to  exalt  the  powers  of  a  warrior
and  priestly  aristocracy.

This  is  apparently  the  high  water  mark  of  advance  in
this  direction  among  the  Celts.  The  virtuous  man  (taking
the  word  virtuous  in  its  etymological  sense)  was  assured  of
renewed  existence,  thanks  to  the  practices  of  his  creed ;
but  this  existence  would  seem  to  be  passed  in  this  world.
I  say  'would  seem,'  for  some  of  the  later  classical  testi-
monies, notably  that  of  Lucan,  support  an  opposite  inter-
pretation. But  if  we  consider  the  classical  evidence  as  a
whole  the  balance  inclines,  I  think,  to  the  view  that  whilst
the  Southern  Celts  utilised  the  incarnation  conception  for
religious  and  social  purposes,  they  did  not  so  utilise  the
Happy  Otherworld  conception ;  they  reached  the  idea  that
the  virtuous  would  live  on,  they  did  not  reach  the  idea
that  they  would  go  to  a  heaven.  They  probably,  nay,
almost  certainly,  possessed  in  common  with  the  Irish  the
germ  of  a  heaven  in  the  shape  of  stories  about  a  god's


IN  CELTDOM  253

land,  to  which  favoured  mortals  might  penetrate ;  they  did
not  develop  the  germ,  or  work  it  up  into  an  essential  com-
ponent of  their  creed.  As  regards  the  Irish,  I  do  not  think
either  conception  was  utilised  save  in  romance ;  on  the
philosophic  and  moral  side  neither  was  developed  in  such
a  way  as  to  raise  the  social  and  religious  ideals  of  the
community  beyond  their  primitive  level.

The  later  history  of  these  conceptions  among  the  Celtic-
speaking  communities  is  comparatively  plain.  On  the
Continent  the  Celtic  tribes  came  in  contact  with  the  rich
and  highly  organised  Grseco-Roman  mythology,  and  dis-
carded their  own  mythic  romance.  In  the  British  Isles
Celtic  mythic  romance  escaped  the  destructive  influence  of
Rome,  was  spared  by  Christianity,  and  served,  almost  down
to  the  present  day,  as  a  backbone  and  rallying  centre  to
the  peasant  lore  about  the  fairies,  which  is  substantially  the
old  agricultural  faith,  preserved  in  rude  and  crude  form,  and
partly  reshaped  by  the  fierce  opposition  or  the  insidious
patronage  of  Christianity.  Gaelic  peasant  lore  only  differs
from  that  of  other  parts  of  Europe,  because  Gaeldom  has
preserved,  in  a  romantic  form,  a  portion  of  the  pre-Christian
mythology.  Thanks  to  the  fact  that  this  mythology  enters
largely  into  the  Arthurian  romance,  the  literature  of  modern
England  has  retained  access  to  the  fairy  realm,  and  has
been  enabled  to  pluck  in  the  old  wonder-garden  of  un-
ending joy  fruits  of  imperishable  beauty.

We  may  here  fitly  consider  the  relation  of  the  antique
agricultural  faith,  which  has  been  described  to  the  totality
of  Aryan  beliefs  and  institutions.  It  is  held  by  distin-
guished scholars  to  be  pre-Aryan,  due  to  races  which
occupied  Europe  before  they  came  under  Aryan  domina-
tion, and  which  still,  after  three  to  four  millenniums  of  Aryan


254  ARYAN  OR

overlordship,  form  a  large  part  of  the  whole  population,
and  the  major  part  of  the  agricultural  population.  The
Aryans  are,  it  is  said,  the  tall,  fair-haired,  blue-eyed  men,
shepherds,  hunters,  poets,  warriors,  who  subdued  the  short,
dark  tillers  of  the  soil,  imposed  upon  them  their  language
and  social  organisation,  and  accepted  from  them,  in  part,
their  religion.

That    Europe,    viewed   solely   from    the    standpoint    of
physical  anthropology,  contains  different  races,  is  certain ;
that  in  the  earliest   monuments   of  Aryan   literature  the
Aryans  did  describe  themselves  as  fair-haired  and  light-
eyed  is  also  certain ;  that  there  is  implied  throughout  the
early  literature  of  Aryan-speaking  peoples  a  standing  op-
position between  the  fair  and  dark  races  may  again  be
granted ;  that  Aryan  institutions,  as  they  come  before  us  at
the  dawn  of  history,  are  based  upon  ancestor-worship,  and
the   patriarchal   family   may   be   conceded,    though    more
doubtfully.     Again,  the  existence  of  short,  dark  races  in
the  very  earliest  past,  and  at  the  present  day,  is  beyond
doubt ;   nor  can  the  survival  of  numerous  practices  and
beliefs,  which  seem  inconsistent  with  ancestor-worship  and
with  the  patriarchal  family,  and  all  the  patriarchal  family  in-
volves, be  denied.    It  is  more  especially  with  the  latter  argu-
ment that  I  am  concerned.     In  a  work  from  which  I  have
already  quoted,  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  Mr.  Gomme  ascribes
much  of  existing  folklore,  in  especial  agricultural  folklore,
to  the  men  who  preceded  and  were  subdued  by  the  Aryans.
The  advanced  culture  of  the  conquerors  arrested  the  de-
velopment of  the  beliefs  and  practices  of  the  conquered,
and   these   have   remained   stationary   and    archaic.      He
points  out  that  in  India,  which  we  know  to  have  been
invaded  by  Aryans  who  partially  brought  under  their  sway


PRE-ARYAN?  255

short,  dark  races,  savage  agricultural  rites  are  practised
which  the  Brahmin  priesthood,  the  representatives  of  the
conquering  Aryans,  tolerate,  but  which  cannot  be  explained
from  Vedic  and  post-Vedic  Hindu  religion,  nay,  which  are
inconsistent  with  it.  Fragmentary  survivals  of  similar  rites
occur  in  Britain,  and  can  be  reconstructed  by  comparison
with  the  living  Indian  form.  The  one  rite  has  certainly
originated  among,  and  is  practised  by,  non-Aryans,  under
partial  Aryan  supervision ;  was  this  not  also  the  case  with
the  other?

Mr.  Gomme's  argument,  based  upon  wide  knowledge  of
the  facts  and  urged  with  extreme  ingenuity,  demands
careful  attention.  I  have  no  prejudice  against  the  theory
of  pre-Aryan  survivals,  but  it  strikes  me  as  being  sometimes
used  to  account  for  facts  that  can  be  explained  more
simply  otherwise,  and  it  is,  I  think,  vitiated  by  the  implica-
tion that  the  development  of  Aryan-speaking  peoples
cannot  be  traced  back  beyond  a  certain  stage.  It  is  quite
true  that  a  well-defined  series  of  institutions  and  beliefs,
which,  for  convenience  sake,  may  be  styled  patriarchal,
can  be  recovered  from  the  records  of  Greeks,  Romans,
and  Vedic  Indians,  and  that  many  customs,  testified  to  in
antiquity  and  still  surviving,  seem  inconsistent  with  it.  But
this  inconsistency  does  not  necessarily  imply  the  presence
of  alien  racial  elements.  There  have  been,  apart  from  the
introduction  of  Christianity,  mighty  changes  in  the  Aryan
world  since  the  patriarchal  type  of  social  organism  studied
by  Fustel  de  Coulanges  and  Hearn  predominated.  There
may  have  been  changes  of  an  equally  far-reaching  character
in  the  unrecorded  past  of  the  Aryans.

To  leave  generalities  and  come  to  Mr.  Gomme's  special
instance,  I  would  point  out  that  the  history  of  the  Aryans


256  ARYAN  OR

in  India  does  reveal  changes,  religious,  social,  philosophical,
of  the  most  striking  character.  The  Brahmin  of  to-day
represents  the  Aryan  of  three  thousand  years  ago  scarce
more  faithfully  than  does  the  Christian  priest ;  can  we
argue  from  his  attitude  to  that  of  his  ancestor  who  entered
the  valley  of  the  Indus  some  three  thousand  five  hundred
to  four  thousand  years  ago  ?  Again,  it  may  be  argued  that
if  similarity  of  rite  between  aborigines  of  India  and  Britain
proves  them  to  be  both  non-Aryan,  it  also  proves  them  to
be  non-Aryan  in  the  same  way,  i.e.  to  be  racially  akin?
Mr.  Gomme  would,  I  feel  sure,  demur  to  this  conclusion  ;  but
if  it  be  held,  and  rightly  held,  that  identity  of  rite  cannot
prove  identity  of  race  between  the  peoples  practising  those
rites,  it  follows  that  difference  of  rite  does  not  necessarily
betoken  difference  of  race.  The  analogy  of  the  Semitic
world  is  instructive  in  this  connection.  There  too  the
institution  of  the  patriarchal  family  flourished  in  historical
times,  but  along  with  it  there  subsisted  more  archaic  in-
stitutions ;  there  too  we  meet  a  highly  organised  mythology
and  worship,  but  they  rest  upon,  or,  by  the  survivals
imbedded  in  them,  presuppose  an  earlier  cult  of  the
Powers  of  Life  and  Increase,  a  cult  of  much  the  same
nature,  expressing  itself  in  much  the  same  way  as  the
proto-Dionysus  cult  in  Greece,  as  that  of  the  Tuatha  de
Danann  in  Ireland.  Are  the  Semites  also  a  conquering
aristocracy  superposed  upon  a  subject  rural  population,
and  were  these  pre-Semitic  tillers  of  the  soil  akin  to  the
hypothetical  pre- Aryans  ?

In  general  I  am  disinclined  to  rely  upon  differences  in
religious  ideas  and  practices  as  a  means  of  discriminating
race.  And  in  this  special  case  I  can  but  note  that  even  if
the  conceptions  and  rites  we  have  studied  in  the  foregoing


PRE-ARYAN?  257

pages  had  their  origin  among  pre-Aryan-speaking  races,
yet  we  know  of  them  from  Aryan  records,  we  investigate
them  in  connection  with  Aryans,  they  have  been  assimilated
by  Aryans  and  become  Aryan  for  all  purposes  of  historical
inquiry.  Their  ultimate  origin  is  a  matter  of  comparative
indifference.  But  I  cannot  refrain  from  expressing  my
opinion  that  although  Aryan  records  are  mainly  either  the
history  of  chiefs  and  warriors  or  mythic  romance  designed
to  please  them,  yet  large  masses  of  the  population,  as  truly
Aryan  in  blood  (if  there  be  any  Aryan  blood  at  all)  as  the
chiefs  and  priests,  had  to  till  the  soil,  and  that  their  beliefs
and  practices  must  have  resembled  those  of  other  tillers  of
the  soil.  I  cannot,  therefore,  but  regard  as  doubtful  the
theory  of  my  friend  Mr.  Gomme,  that  the  beliefs  respectively
grouped  together  as  witch-lore  and  fairy-lore  are  derived  from
different  races,  and  may  be  used  for  racial  discrimination.1
I  have  set  forth  a  hypothetical  development  of  the  worship
of  the  Powers  of  Life  and  of  the  secondary  conceptions
derived  from  it,  which  assumes  that  both  worship  and  con-

1  Whilst  this  chapter  was  passing  through  the  press,  Professor  Karl
Pearson's  Chances  of  Death  and  other  Studies  in  Evolution  appeared.
In  the  second  volume  is  a  remarkable  group  of  articles :  '  Woman  as
Witch ' — '  Evidences  of  Mother  Right  in  the  customs  of  Mediaeval
Witchcraft ' — '  Ashiepattle  ;  or  Hans  seeks  his  luck  '— '  Kindred
Group  Marriage ' — in  which  the  author  argues  with  great  ability  and
success  in  favour  of  the  thesis  that  early  Aryan  culture  was  matri-
archal. Professor  Pearson's  evidence  is  mainly  drawn  from  the  word
and  custom  store  of  the  Teutonic  branch  of  the  Aryans ;  this  is  signifi-
cant in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  Teutons  were  the  last  of  the  great
Aryan  races  to  migrate,  and  that  the  substitution  of  patriarchalism  for
matriarchalism  seems  to  be  essentially  a  product  of  the  migration
period  when  the  older  forms  of  society  were  broken  up  and  when  the
strength  of  the  man  became  a  more  important  factor  than  the  skill  of
the  woman.

VOL.  II.  R


258  CELTIC  CONSERVATISM

ceptions  belonged  to  at  least  two  Aryan-speaking  peoples —
Greeks  and  Celts — as  far  back  as  we  can  trace  their  history,
and  that  they  grew  independently  among  either  people.     As
far  as  the  worship  is  concerned  there  would  not  be  much
opposition  to  my  thesis.     It  has  not  been  contended  as  yet,
even  by  the  straitest  advocate  of  transmission,  that  the
Celts  assisted  at  some  Thracian  festival  of  Dionysus  and
transplanted  what  they  saw  to  Ireland.      It  is  otherwise
with  the  secondary  conceptions  :  Re-birth  and  Happy  Other-
world.     These  have  found  expression  in  myth  and  romance,
and  an  influential  school  holds  that  myth  and  romance  are
nothing  but  a  series  of  borrowed  reproductions  from  one
original.     The  similarity  between  Greek  and  Irish  myth  is
sufficient  for  this  school  to  prove  dependence  of  the  one
upon  the  other.     Other  scholars,   while  not  holding  this
extreme  view,  would  yet  suspect  my  hypothesis  because  it
involves  vast  stretches  of  time,   because   it  carries   back
certain  conceptions  to  the  period  before  the  differentiation
of  the  Aryan-speaking  peoples.    This  is  enough  for  them
to  brand  the  hypothesis  as  'unscientific'      I  venture  to
think  that  this  attitude  is  unscientific,  is  indeed  mere  pre-
judice.    We  have  no  right  to  assume  the  long  continued
existence  of  institutions  or  conceptions  concerning  which
we  have  no  direct  historical  testimony,  if  we  can  account
for  them  satisfactorily  otherwise,    but   if  we   cannot,    the
mere  fact  that  centuries  or  even  millenniums  are  involved
does  not  constitute  a  valid  objection.     Especially  is  this  the
case  in  dealing  with  Celtdom  ;  we  can  trace  back  its  history
for  over  two  thousand  years,  and  we  detect  a  remarkable
persistence  of  social  institutions,  of  literary  ideals  and  con-
ventions.    Yet  the  Celts,  although  to  a  less  extent  than
almost  any  European  people,  have  been  subjected  to  violent


DR.  JEVONS'  THEORY  259

and  far-reaching  changes  in  historical  times.  If  they  have
shown  such  conservatism  during  the  last  two  thousand
years,  are  we  not  entitled  to  assume  equal  conservatism
during  the  previous  centuries  of  which  we  have  record?
I  venture  then  to  disregard  all  purely  a  priori  objections
based  upon  the  inadmissibility  of  referring  to  a  prehistoric
period  a  conception  known  to  us  only  in  comparatively
recent  historic  times.  But  I  cannot  disregard  any  attempt
to  establish  a  different  order  of  evolution  for  the  pheno-
mena I  have  noted.  Such  an  attempt  has  been  made
in  a  work  of  which  the  signal  ability,  the  wide  and  pene-
trating scholarship,  have  won  instant  recognition,  Dr.  F.  B.
Jevons'  Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Religion.  In  finding
myself  at  variance  with  a  scholar  of  Dr.  Jevons'  attain-
ments I  cannot  conceal  from  myself  the  likelihood  that  he
must  be  right,  I  wrong.  At  the  same  time,  I  cannot  but
maintain  opinions  which  are  the  result  of  such  intelligence
and  power  of  study  as  I  possess.  I  purpose  therefore  to
set  forth  Dr.  Jevons'  views,  and  state  my  objections,  and
then  to  let  the  matter  rest  for  the  decision  of  scholars.
According  as  his  view  or  mine  is  correct  the  question  of
the  ultimate  relations  of  the  conceptions  of  Elysium  and
Re-birth,  alike  to  the  older  cultures  of  the  East,  and  to
savage  culture  in  general,  appear  in  a  different  light  and
claim  a  different  answer.  It  seems  best  to  settle  firstly
what  is  the  true  place  of  these  conceptions  in  the  Aryan
world  before  discussing  their  relation  to  the  pre- Aryan  and
non-Aryan  worlds.  If  I  consider  Dr.  Jevons'  work  alone
and  disregard  statements  of  other  scholars  which  conflict
with  my  hypothesis,  it  is  because  Dr.  Jevons  has  used  the
material  I  brought  together  in  the  first  volume  of  this  work,
and  has  taken  up  a  definite  position  towards  the  problem


260  DR.  JEVONSONTHE

I  set  out  to  solve  if  I  might.  Discussion  is  more  likely  to
be  fruitful  when  the  disputants  are  in  full  possession  of
each  other's  views.

Dr.  Jevons  describes,  explicitly,  the  various  factors,
sociological,  mythological,  moral,  which  enter  into  the
concept  of  savage  religion,  and  traces,  implicitly,  their
evolution  up  to  the  establishment  of  Christianity.  He
is  concerned  alike  with  the  forms  of  religion  discernible
among  races  of  a  low  stage  of  culture  and  with  their
development  among  the  most  gifted  and  progressive  of
the  Aryan-speaking  people,  the  Greeks.  He  is  thus  led
to  examine  the  remarkable  religious  movements  which
characterised  the  Hellenic  world  in  the  sixth  and  fifth
centuries  B.C.,  and  which  resulted  in  a  highly  organised
eschatological  system  and  in  a  doctrine  of  metempsychosis.
In  thus  essaying  to  account  for  the  new  prominence  given
to  the  joys  and  penalties  of  the  next  life,  to  the  new  import-
ance which  the  mysteries  assumed  among  the  Greeks
during  these  two  centuries,  he  attacks  from  the  stand-
point of  general  religious  history  problems  which  I  have
discussed  solely  in  so  far  as  they  involved,  proximately
or  remotely,  the  Irish  evidence.


Dr.  Jevons'  Exposition  of  the  Development
of  Religion.

Savage  religion  starts  when  the  savage,  having  learned  to
discriminate  among  the  energies  which  surround  him — to
recognise  some  as  natural  (i.e.  which  he  can  control),  some
as  supernatural  (i.e.  which  he  cannot  control) — selects,  as  it
were,  certain  of  these  energies,  essays  to  enter  into  friendly
relations  with  them,  to  win  their  favour  and  assure  their


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RELIGION     261

support.  In  thus  acting,  he  was  determined  by  the  con-
ception that  certain  things  are  forbidden,  and  that  to  do
the  forbidden  thing  entails  dreadful  consequences — a  con-
ception formally  expressed  in  the  world-wide  institution  of
taboo,  which,  according  to  Dr.  Jevons,  lacks  all  realistic  or
experiential  basis,  and  is  in  its  essence  spiritual,  the  product
of  a  '  feeling  that  sense  experience  is  not  the  sole  source
or  the  final  test  of  truth.'  The  energies,  manifestations  of
supernatural  life  and  activity,  with  which  savage  man  first
sought  to  establish  relations  were  mainly  animal,  and  the
relations  he  did  establish  make  up  the  series  of  institutions
known  as  totemism.  Savage  man,  bound  by  blood  kinship
to  his  fellow-clansman,  binds  himself  by  the  same  tie  to  his
totem,  his  animal  god,  and  thus  obtains  among  the  super-
natural powers  an  ally  upon  whose  aid  he  can  rely  in  extra-
ordinary circumstances  as  confidently  as  in  ordinary  cir-
cumstances he  relies  upon  that  of  his  human  kinsmen.  In
both  cases  the  connection  is  ultimately  the  same,  hence
the  mode  of  initiating  or  renewing  it  was  of  the  same
character — by  the  blood-covenant.  The  totem,  the  animal
god,  was  sacrificed  to  induce  him  to  remain  at  the  altar  on
which  his  blood  was  smeared.  What  remained  over  of  the
body  was  consumed  by  the  worshipping  kinsmen  :  at  first
it  was  wholly  eaten ;  in  later  times  the  eatable  portions  alone
were  used  as  food,  the  bones,  offal,  etc.,  were  burnt.  Sacri-
fice was  thus  originally  an  act  of  communion,  establishing
or  renewing  between  man  and  his  god  the  blood-kinship,
the  only  form  of  alliance  upon  which  man  could  count.
Changes  in  the  social  conditions  of  the  community  effected
corresponding  changes  in  the  institution  of  sacrifice.  From
being  a  communion  it  became  a  tribute  or  an  expiation.
Expiation  presupposes  human  transgression;  hence  the  sub-


262  DR.  JEVONS  ON  THE

stitution  of  a  human  victim  as  a  more  potent  and  reason-
able form  of  atonement.  To  this  secondary  development  of
sacrifice — tribute  or  expiation  in  the  place  of  communion,
human  in  the  place  of  animal  victims — corresponds  the
rise  and  establishment  of  ancestor  -  worship.  Here,  too,
we  find  human  sacrifice,  the  wife  or  the  slave  being
slaughtered  on  the  chief's  tomb.  The  original  purport
was  to  provide  society  and  service  to  the  deceased  in  the
life  after  death.  But  the  sacrifice  came  to  assume  the
same  expiatory,  piacular  character  as  ordinary  sacrifice,
with  the  result  of  accentuating  the  likeness  between
ancestor  and  god.

By  this  time  man  had  formed  an  idea  concerning  the
next  life.  It  was  passed  in  a  far-off  land,  the  remoteness
of  which  was  proved  by  the  unfrequent  visits  of  its  inmates
to  earth ;  the  land  itself  might  be  underground,  a  natural
deduction  from  burial  customs.  It  might  be  differently
conceived  of  by  different  peoples.  Among  the  Greeks  it
was  at  first  figured  as  a  dreary,  bloodless,  shadowy  realm,
the  Hades  to  which  Odysseus  penetrates.  Burial  customs
testify  to  the  belief  that  life  was  continued  on  substantially
the  same  lines  as  in  this  world,  and  in  their  turn  led  to  the
idea  that  the  survivors  could,  by  appropriate  rites,  influence
the  well-being  of  the  departed.  The  increasing  definiteness
with  which  Hades  was  located  underground  did  not  ob-
literate the  impression  that  the  dead  might  also  go  to  a
far-off  land ;  but  this  was  relegated  to  a  far  backward  of  time,
and  if,  of  old,  men  went  there,  it  was  because  there  were
heroes  then,  deserving  of  a  better  fate  than  the  gloomy
underground  realm,  the  lot  of  most  mortals.  But  this
heroic  otherworld  still  existed,  beyond  the  rays  of  the
setting  sun,   reserved   for   the   mortals   whom    the    gods


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RELIGION      263

specially  favoured.  In  Greece  this  conception  would
seem  to  be  an  alien  one,  partly  borrowed  from  Egypt.
The  Egyptians,  too,  pictured  the  next  life  as  the  con-
tinuation of  this  one,  but  they  pictured  it  at  first  under
fair  and  smiling  colours,  and  the  fertile  plains  of  Aalu  seem
to  have  given  the  hint  of  the  Greek  Elysium.  From  the
Greeks  this  vision  of  a  happy  Otherworld — not  the  ordinary
Hades  to  which  men  at  large  went,  but  an  old-time  wonder-
land for  those  favoured  of  the  gods — spread  to  the  Celts
and  originated  the  romantic  narratives  of  which  the  Voyage
of  Bran  is  the  type.

The  existence  of  a  double  otherworld,  one  of  which  was
pictured  under  far  more  attractive  colours  than  the
other,  yielded  the  germ  of  the  retribution  theory.  Man
went  to  one  or  the  other  after  death  according  to  his
deserts  in  this  life,  his  deserts  varying,  of  course,  with
the  social  and  moral  ideals  of  the  period.  The  Egyptians
would  seem  to  have  developed  the  conception  before  other
peoples ;  at  all  events  the  monuments  and  texts  of  the
Middle  Empire  {i.e.  at  latest  1500-1000  B.C.)  show  a
definitely  constituted  hell,  to  escape  from  which  by  favour
of  and  union  with  Osiris,  was  the  ardent  preoccupation  of
the  Egyptian  devotee.  Here  again  Greece  would  seem  to
be  debtor ;  but  along  with  the  retribution  theory,  its
heaven  and  corresponding  hell,  she  borrowed  the  doctrine
of  metempsychosis.

In  the  totemistic  stage,  man  speculating  as  to  his  lot
after  death  would  naturally  aspire  after  assimilation  to  his
totem  god.  Egypt,  which  presents  so  many  traces  of
totemism,  has  preserved  the  record  of  a  time  when  change
into  an  animal  was  a  normal  post-mortem  desideratum.
The  later   development  of  belief  in  the  fertile  plains  of


264  DR.  JEVONSONTHE

Aalu  did  not  destroy  the  old  conception,  but  relegated
it  to  the  vulgar,  stamped  it  with  inferiority,  and  ultimately
branded  transmigration  into  an  animal  as  the  evil  to  be
avoided  at  all  costs.  It  was  under  this  form  that  it  was
introduced  by  Pythagoras  into  the  Greek  world.

The  impulse  to  borrow,  alike  with  the  borrowed  material,
came  from  without.  The  evolution  of  sacrifice — from  an
act  of  communion  to  an  act  of  tribute — had  been  deter-
mined by  the  evolution  of  society  from  a  nomadic,  pastoral
stage  through  agriculture  to  civilisation  (using  the  word  in
its  etymological  sense)  of  a  monarchical  or  quasi-monarchical
character.  Evolution  in  belief  proceeded  concurrently  with
the  change  and  progress  of  material  culture.  But  the  latter
might  be  arrested  or  destroyed  from  without.  This  occurred
in  the  Northern  Semitic  world  in  the  seventh  and  sixth
centuries  B.C.  The  communities  of  Syria  and  Palestine
were  overwhelmed  from  Assyria  and  Babylonia ;  the  great
empires  of  Assyria  and  Babylonia  themselves  went  down
before  the  Persian.  Calamities  so  catastrophic  begot  pro-
found unrest  and  dissatisfaction  with  the  traditional  religion.
Among  the  loftier  minds  of  the  Hebrew  people  there  was
engendered  a  new  moral  and  religious  ideal;  among  the
mass  of  worshippers  the  expiatory  aspect  of  sacrifice  became
prominent,  and  its  aspect  as  an  act  of  communion  with  the
tribal  gods  was  revived.  A  natural  effect  was  to  restore  to
honour  such  fragments  of  archaic  ritual  as  had  survived.
Hence  a  profound  modification  of  worship,  due  partly  to
the  rise  of  new  conceptions,  partly  to  the  emergence  of
old  conceptions,  transformed  to  suit  current  needs.  The
general  effect  was  to  deepen  man's  sense  of  reliance  upon  his
deity,  to  intensify  his  apprehension  concerning  his  fate  both
in  this  world  and  the  next,  to  urge  him  to  seek  salvation  in


DEVELOPMENT  OF  RELIGION      265

strange  rites,  especially  such  as  seemed  to  him  to  come  down
from  the  time  when  his  god  was  in  intimate  communion
with  him,  and  not  as  now,  estranged  and  displeased.

The  religious  spirit,  thus  modified,  blew  from  the  East  to
Greece.  It  must  have  begun  to  act  as  early  as  the  seventh
century  B.C.  Solon's  legislation  provides  for  the  existence
of  Oida-oL — religious  associations  based  upon  the  voluntary
principle  instead  of  on  that  of  blood-kinship,  the  only  bond
of  common  worship  known  to  earlier  times.  As  early  as
596  B.C.  solemn  purificatory  rites  were  resorted  to  by  the
Athenians.  Throughout  the  sixth  century  the  movement
grew.  As  in  the  East,  so  in  the  West,  it  drove  men  back
to  archaic  rituals,  which  had  lived  on  among  the  ruder,
more  backward  elements  of  the  population,  and  which  now
had  new  meaning,  added  significance,  read  into  them.
Hence  the  emergence  of  the  rustic  Dionysus  cult,  in
itself  of  the  same  nature  as  the  imported  Eastern  cults,
and  easily  identifiable  with  them;  hence  the  importance
assigned  to  the  Eleusinian  mysteries,  an  agricultural  festival
first  thrown  open  to  the  Athenians  in  the  fifth  century,  and
eagerly  resorted  to  by  them  as  the  truest  type  and  fount  of
antique  lore  concerning  the  mysteries  of  life  and  death ;
the  ancient  ritual  was  retained,  but  new  conceptions  were
read  into  it,  and  a  new  mythology  arose  to  account  for  its
perplexing  features.  The  outcome  was  the  establishment
among  the  Greeks  of  the  retribution  theory,  with  all  its
consequences,  moral  and  philosophical,  and  the  '  concep-
tion of  a  religious  community,  the  bounds  of  which  were
not  limited  by  those  of  any  political  community,  and  the
members  of  which  were  knit  together,  not  by  the  tie  of
blood  or  a  common  citizenship,  but  by  the  bond  of
spiritual  fellowship.'


266     DR.   JEVONS'   THEORY  DISCUSSED

So  far  Dr.  Jevons.     It  would  be  easy  for  me  to  minimise
certain  points  of  difference  between  his  views  and  those
which  I  have  set  forth  in  this  work.     Thus  with  regard  to
sacrifice,  I   might  point  out  that   there  is  no  necessary
incompatibility  between  his  account  and  mine.     I  do  not
profess  to  trace  the  conceptions  I  have  studied  beyond  the
agricultural  stage  of  culture.     But  Robertson  Smith,  and
Dr.  Jevons  who  adopts  his  theory  of  sacrifice,  work  back
to  a  pre-agricultural  stage,  and  both  admit  that  by  the  time
agriculture  had  become  the  basis  of  social  organisation,
the  institution  had  modified  its  character,  and  from  being
wholly  an  act  of  communion,  had  become  almost  entirely
an  act  of  tribute.     Indeed,  this  modification  is  an  essential
element  of  Dr.  Jevons'  reconstruction  of  religious  evolution;
it  is  the  dissatisfaction  felt  with  the  gift-theory  of  sacrifice,
the  reversion,  in  outward  form,  to  the  earlier  communion
theory,  enriched  as  this  was,  in  inward  spirit,  by  all  the
material  and  intellectual  conquests  of  the  community  during
the  intervening  centuries,  that  constitutes  the  great  religious
movement  of  700-400  B.C.,  the  necessary  precursor  of  the
greater  religious  movement  of  1-400  a.d.     It  is,  however,
far  from  my  wish  to  minimise  points  of  difference,  and  I
would  express  my  conviction  that  important  as  is  the  com-
munion element  in  sacrifice,  it  was  not  at  the  outset  the  sole
and  primary  one,  to  which,  at  a  later  stage,  the  gift-  and  atone-
ment-theories of  the  institution  were  added,  but  that  the  first
men  who  practised  sacrifice  had  a  clear  idea  they  were  to
get  something  definite  in  exchange  for  what  they  gave.   The
bargain  element,  the  theory  of  life  for  life,  is,  I  believe,  as
old  as  the  communion  element,  and  sacrifice  was,  from  the
first,    bloody — purposing  to    feed  the   Holders   of  Life,
which  have  their  home  in  the  earth,  or  fiery — purposing


DR.  JEVONS'  THEORY  DISCUSSED    267

to  feed  the  Fosterers  of  Life,  who  have  their  home  in
the  sun.

Apart  from  this  general  divergence,  there  is  specific
divergence  in  our  way  of  accounting  for  the  development
of  other-life  and  other-world  conceptions  among  the  Aryan-
speaking  peoples.

Points  of  Difference.

For  Dr.  Jevons  this  development  is  due  mainly  to  foreign
influence ;  for  me  it  is  due  mainly  to  the  natural  working  of
native  conditions.  I  italicise  the  word  mainly,  as  Dr.
Jevons  would  not  deny  that  the  Aryan-speaking  Greeks
had  carried  the  conception  of  the  other-life  to  a  certain
point,  nor  should  I  deny  the  possible,  or  even  the  probable,
influence  alike  of  the  eastern  world  upon  Hellas,  and  of  the
Hellenic  world  upon  Celtdom.  It  is  all  a  question  of
degree.  According  to  Dr.  Jevons,  the  Greeks  did  not
carry  the  conception  of  an  other-world  beyond  the  stage
of  a  gloomy  and  bloodless  Hades ;  a  blissful  other-world,
an  Elysium,  they  had  to  borrow  from  the  Egyptians,
passing  it  on  in  their  turn  to  the  Celts.  Although  he
speaks  less  positively  upon  this  point,  he  would  doubtless
regard  the  conception  of  a  Tartarus,  of  the  other-world  as
a  place  of  punishment,  as  equally  borrowed.  Indeed,
whatever  positive  evidence  there  may  be  for  the  Egyptian
origin  of  Elysium,  is  slight  compared  with  that  in  favour  of
the  Egyptian  origin  of  Tartarus.  Again,  Dr.  Jevons  de-
scribes the  metempsychosis  known  to  the  Greeks  of  the
sixth  and  fifth  centuries  B.C.  as  wholly  derived  from  Egypt.
I,  on  the  other  hand,  would  regard  the  ancient  agricultural
worship,  based  on  sacrifice,  the  existence  of  which  I  have


268  M.  FOUCART  ON

postulated  among  Greeks  and  Celts,  as  pregnant  with  all  the
possible  developments  of  either  the  Elysium  or  the  Re-birth
conception,  and  I  would  only  call  in  the  aid  of  foreign
influence  where  its  existence  is  indisputably  proved  by
historic  record,  or  where  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to
account  for  singularities  in  the  process  of  evolution,  which
would  otherwise  be  inexplicable.

M.  Foucart's  Theory  of  the  Eleusinia.

Up  to  a  certain  point,  Dr.  Jevons  and  I  are  at  one.  He
admits  the  existence  of  agricultural  cults  among  the  Greeks.
The  worship  of  Dionysus,  of  the  Eleusinian  Mother,  are  in
his  eyes  Greek  in  their  origin,  although  they  were  trans-
formed in  historic  times  under  the  influence  of  alien  con-
ceptions. In  this  he  differs  from  another  advocate  of  the
foreign  origin  of  certain  Greek  rites  and  myths,  M.  Paul
Foucart,  who,  in  his  Recherches  sur  les  Mysteres  d'Eleusis,
distinguishes  two  periods  of  borrowing  by  the  Greeks  from
Egypt.  Originally,  say  in  the  seventeenth-sixteenth  cen-
turies B.C.,  '  colonists  or  fugitives  from  Egypt  brought  the
cult  of  Isis  and  Osiris  to  Argos  and  Attica.  The  indigenous
Pelasgi  probably  worshipped  the  earth  among  other  natural
objects,  but  only  in  a  rude  and  impersonal  way.  The
Pelasgic  Earth-goddess  was  absorbed  by  Isis,  who  was  not
only  a  chthonic  deity,  but  also  the  giver  of  agriculture  and
civilisation.  As  Osiris  was  closely  associated  with  Isis,  the
oldest  form  of  the  Eleusinian  cult  included  a  god  as  well  as
a  goddess ;  and  in  historic  times  this  god,  who  was  at  first
known  by  the  simple  title  of  0eos,  continued  to  exist  as  Zeus
Eubouleus,  Pluto,  and  Dionysus.  Originally,  the  worship
of  the  Eleusinian  Demeter  was  merely  a  form  of  the  general


THEELEUSINIA  269

worship  of  Isis-Demeter  or  Demeter-Thesmophoros,  which
was  adopted  by  all  the  Hellenic  tribes  before  the  Dorian
tribes.  ...  In  the  seventh  century  B.C.,  the  Greeks  became
better  acquainted  with  Egypt,  and  borrowed  the  doctrine
of  a  future  life,  as  taught  in  the  religion  of  Isis  and  Osiris.
This  idea  of  a  happy  state,  reserved  for  the  initiated  after
death,  was  not  a  natural  outcome  of  the  old  worship  of
Demeter  Kapirofyopos  and  tfecr/xo^opos,  but  was  thus  a  later
addition  to  the  original  debt.' l

This  theory  has  a  more  rounded  and  logical  aspect  than
Dr.  Jevons'.  It  gets  over  the  difficulty  I  have  just  hinted
at,  for  the  French  scholar  does  not,  like  the  English  one,
allow  the  Greek  origin  of  certain  institutions,  and  then
imply  that  the  Greeks  were  incapable  of  developing  them
as  freely  as  the  Egyptians,  ex  hypothesis  had  done;  he
boldly  traces  the  entire  institution,  root  and  branch,  to  the
outside.  But  this  thorough-going  solution  of  the  problem
raises  as  many  difficulties  as  it  lays.  As  Mr.  Sikes  has  well
pointed  out :  '  the  Eleusinia  and  Thesmophoria  arose  from
agrarian  ritual ;  and  M.  Foucart  will  hardly  contend  that
agriculture  in  general  was  introduced  into  Greece  by  the
Egyptians.'  The  critic  then  goes  on  to  enumerate  the
historic  difficulties :  '  it  has  yet  to  be  proved  that  the
Egyptians  had  any  direct  intercourse  with  the  Greeks  on
the  mainland  from  the  seventeenth  to  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury B.C.  .  .  .  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  relations  between
early  Greeks  and  the  Egyptians,  except  through  the  medium
of  Phoenician  traders  and  colonists.'  The  main  reason  for
rejecting  M.  Foucart's  theory,  in  so  far  as  the  prehistoric
introduction  of  Egyptian  agricultural  rites  is  concerned,  is

1  I  have  preferred  to  give  Mr.  Sikes'  summary  of  Foucart's  theory
(Classical  Rev.  Dec.  1895).


270  EGYPTIAN  INFLUENCE

furnished  by  Dr.  Jevons  in  his  brilliant  and  convincing
exposition  of  the  Eleusinia  in  their  primitive  aspect  and
significance.1  In  so  far  as  certainty  is  possible  in  these
questions,  it  is  certain  that  the  Egyptian  ritual,  known  from
texts  of  the  fifteenth-tenth  centuries  B.C.,  could  not  have
originated  the  Eleusinian  and  allied  rituals.  The  question
I  have  raised  thus  subsists  :  why,  if  the  existence  in  Greece
of  agricultural  rituals  be  admitted,  should  the  Greeks,  by
implication,  be  denied  the  capacity  of  developing  them
without  foreign  aid  ?  This,  it  may  be  said,  is  an  a  priori
argument,  but,  then,  so  is  the  argument  of  foreign  influence,
and  one  that  derives  all  its  validity  from  the  fact  that  the
Egyptian  development  is  recorded  at  an  earlier  period  of
the  world's  history  than  the  Greek.  This  is  true,  but  it
only  proves  the  possibility  of  influence,  and  in  no  sense
constitutes  an  argument  in  favour  of  its  existence.  That
must  be  supported  by  facts,  and  up  to  now  the  facts  upon
which  the  theory  of  Egyptian  influence  upon  Greek  religion
before  the  year  iooo  b.c.  is  based  reduce  themselves  to
two  :  the  similarity  of  the  words  Aalu  and  Elysium,  and  the
statement  in  the  Odyssey  that  Menelaus  heard  in  Egypt
Proteus'  prophecy  concerning  his  rapture  to  the  isles  ruled
over  by  Rhadamanthus.2     To  my  mind  this  is  insufficient.

Egyptian  Influence  on  Greece.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  period  700-500  B.C.,  there  are
marked  signs  of  Egyptian  influence  in  the  Greek  religious
movement.  Dr.  Jevons  has  argued  with  great  ability  in
favour  of  the  traditional  dependence  of  Pythagorean  upon
Egyptian  metempsychosis,  whilst  M.  Foucart's  brilliant  con-

1  I.e.  Chapter  xxiv.  "  Jevons,  I.e.  p.  313.


ON  GREECE  271

jecture  that  the  inscribed  tablets  which  the  Orphic  devotees
had  buried  with  them  correspond  to  the  copies  of  the  whole
or  portions  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  which  invariably
accompanied  the  Egyptian  dead  to  act  as  a  guide  and
talisman  in  his  journey  through  the  otherworld,  has  won
an  assent  denied  to  his  theory  as  a  whole.  In  either  case
it  should  be  noted  that  what  the  Greeks  borrowed  was
a  doctrine,  or  a  practice  involving  a  doctrine  of  an  advanced
character,  the  alien  aspect  of  which,  as  regards  Pythagor-
eanism  at  least,  was  at  once  recognised,  perhaps  even
exaggerated,  by  themselves.  It  is  difficult  to  see  what
support  these  instances  give  to  the  general  theory  that
Greek  religion  was  revolutionised  in  the  seventh-sixth
centuries  B.C.  by  movements  originating  in  the  Northern
Semitic  area,  and  having  for  their  animating  principle  a
revival  of  the  archaic  theory  of  sacrifice.  For  Egypt  is  not
Syria,  and  Egyptian  eschatology  had  long  before  passed
beyond  dependence  upon  sacrificial  theory.  It  may,
indeed,  be  urged  that  the  North  Semitic  movement  was
a  ferment  which  induced  far  more  rapid  development  of
native  Greek  religion  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the
case,  and  that  when  the  Greeks,  thanks  to  its  introduction,
passed  in  a  relatively  short  space  of  time  through  phases
of  development  which  in  Egypt  had  lasted  throughout
millenniums,  they,  in  the  latest  stages  of  the  movement,
naturally  turned  to  the  older  land,  and  took  over  conceptions
and  practices  wholesale.  Thus  restricted,  there  is  less  ground
of  objection  to  Dr.  Jevons'  theory ;  all  that  can  be  said  is
that  the  positive  evidence  is  really  very  slight,  and  that  no
light  is  thereby  thrown  upon  the  development  of  religion
among  the  Aryans  who  invaded  India  and  established
themselves  there.      Vedic  and    post-Vedic    religion,   un-


272  ARYAN  ORIGIN

doubtedly,  reached  the  conceptions  of  a  future  life  and  of
metempsychosis.  Did  they  possess  the  germs  of  these
conceptions  when  they  entered  India,  and  did  they
develop  these  germs  independently?  In  this  case,  why
should  a  like  possibility  be  denied  to  their  Greek  kins-
men ?  Or  were  they  too  affected  by  the  hypothetical
religious  movement,  which  had  its  rise  in  the  Northern
Semitic  area  in  the  eighth-sixth  centuries  b.c.  ?  There
is,  I  believe,  not  a  scintilla  of  evidence  to  support  such
a  contention,  and  Indianists  would,  I  fancy,  demur  to  it
vigorously.  I  wish  to  insist  upon  this  point.  The  problem
of  religious  development  among  the  Greek  Aryans  cannot
be  solved  in  entire  independence  of  like  development
among  the  Indian  Aryans.1  If  certain  mythological  and
ritual  factors  are  sufficient  for  solution  in  the  one  case,
we  ought,  at  least,  to  admit  the  possibility  of  their  sufficing
in  the  other.  As  a  simple  matter  of  fact,  metaphysical
systems  of  the  utmost  complexity  and  subtlety  were
elaborated  alike  in  Greece  and  India  independently  of
each   other,  and,  if  we   may  believe   the   most   eminent

1  For  this  reason  I  demur  to  my  friend  M.  Gaidoz'  criticism  of  vol.  i.
(in  Milusine)  that  I  acted  unmethodically  and  unscientifically  in  using
Vedic  and  post-Vedic  literature  to  elucidate  the  Celtic  and  Greek
Elysium  vision.  This  is  to  commit  the  unpardonable  sin  of  '  compara-
tive mythology.'  I  must  plead  guilty,  and  I  am  an  impenitent  sinner.
I  believe  that  if  a  trait  is  common  to  Greek  and  Vedic  mythology  an  ex-
planation must  be  one  applicable  in  both  cases.  The  scientific  method
to  be  pursued  is  thus,  I  maintain,  to  compare  the  myth  and  rites  of  the
Aryan-speaking  peoples  generally,  before  discussing  the  relation  of  a
particular  Aryan  religious  system  to  those  of  non-Aryan  peoples.  This
canon  of  investigation,  of  course,  only  applies  when  the  origin  and
nature  of  the  particular  rite  or  myth  are  obscure.  But  this  is  the
case  with  the  greater  part  of  any  mythology.  And  where  foreign
influence  has  been  at  work  its  presence  is  generally  unmistakable.


IRISH  EVIDENCE  273

experts,  in  independence  of  foreign  influence.  The  races
capable  of  achievements  such  as  these  were  surely  capable
of  elaborating  the  religious  conceptions  that  confront  us  in
the  Orphic  systems.

If  the  instance  of  Indian  religious  development  affords
sound  reason  for  hesitating  to  ascribe  every  peculiar  feature
in  Greek  to  outside  foreign  influence,  the  Celtic  evidence
is,  to  my  mind,  of  yet  greater  weight.  It  will  not  have
escaped  the  reader's  attention  that  the  mass  of  Greek
evidence  concerning  the  ancient  agricultural  worship  and
its  derivative  conceptions  of  life,  although  far  more  exten-
sive than  meets  us  in  Ireland,  is  less  consistent  and
homogeneous.  This  is  what  might  be  expected  on  my
hypothesis.  I  postulate  a  set  of  rites  and  beliefs,  originally
similar,  among  Celts  and  Greeks,  which  the  former  de-
veloped to  a  slight  extent  only,  whilst  the  latter  completely
outgrew  their  primitive  aspect,  modifying  them  to  meet
material,  intellectual,  and  moral  requirements  of  the  most
advanced  nature.  What  the  Celts  have  preserved  is  scanty
indeed,  but  it  is  nearer  the  source,  less  changed  by  the
admixture  of  new  or  foreign  elements.  In  particular,  the
conceptions  of  Elysium  and  Re-birth  maintain  their  con-
nection with  a  persistence  utterly  inexplicable  on  the  face
of  our  scanty  evidence.  Would  this  be  the  case  if  the
Elysium  visions  were  simply  a  borrowed  piece  of  alien
romance  which  happened  to  strike  the  fancy  of  the  literary
class  ?  And  when  could  this  take  place  ?  Evidently  before
the  Greeks  became  acquainted  with  the  idea  of  metem-
psychosis, as  by  that  time  their  Elysium  had  reached  an
eschatological  stage,  had  become  a  heaven.  Where,  then,
did  the  Celts  get  the  re-birth  conception  ?  Did  they
develop  that   themselves  ?    And  if  so,  why  should  they

VOL.  II.  S


274  ANTIQUITY  OF  THE

be  held  incapable  of  developing  the  Elysium  vision?
Chronology,  too,  has  to  be  considered.  We  know  that
Celts  dominated  Southern  Central  Europe  from  the  Rhine
to  the  Black  Sea  throughout  the  seventh-third  centuries  B.C.
Contact  with  Greek  ideas  during  this  period  is,  to  say  the
least,  possible,  but  why  should  the  result  of  that  contact
be  limited  to  one  particular  feature  of  their  mythology
(a  feature  specially  characteristic  of  its  most  archaic  and
conservative  aspect),  that  based  upon  the  worship  of  the
powers  of  life  manifested  in  vegetable  and  animal  growth  ?
We  know  little,  and  we  are,  unfortunately,  never  likely  to
know  much,  of  the  Celtic  Pantheon.  Were  new  sources
of  knowledge  to  be  opened  up,  I,  for  one,  should  wonder
little  if  it  showed  traces  of  Greek  influence.  I  can  under-
stand the  less  advanced  race  adopting  or  copying  the  out-
ward machinery  and  trappings  of  the  higher  cult.  I  have
expressly  asserted  my  belief  in  the  possibility  of  such  a
process,  when  the  Southern  Celts  were  in  fairly  close
contact  alike  with  the  Romans  or  Romanised  North  Italians,
or  with  the  Greeks  of  Massilia,  in  the  century  and  a  half
preceding  the  Roman  Conquest.  What  I  credit  with
difficulty  is  that  the  less  advanced  race  should  pick  up
bits  and  snatches  of  the  most  obscure  and  neglected
portion  of  the  higher  creed,  or  forthwith  work  them  into
coherent  connection  with  their  own  more  archaic  beliefs.
I  do  not  assert  that  the  process  is  impossible :  I  simply
urge  that  it  is  in  the  last  degree  improbable,  and  that  we
ought  not  to  presume  its  existence  if  we  can  explain  the
facts  in  any  other  way.

I  rely,  then,  upon  the  mode  of  occurrence  of  Elysium  and
Re-birth  conceptions  in  Irish  mythic  literature,  upon  their
essential  and  intimate  connection  with  the  oldest  portions


IRISH  EVIDENCE  275

of  their  ritual  and  mythology,  as  proof  of  their  native
development,  uninfluenced  from  without,  and  I  urge  their
independent  existence  among  the  Celts  in  a  form  singularly
close  to  that  recoverable  from  the  Greek  evidence,  as  an
important  argument  in  favour  of  their  independent  exist-
ence among  the  Greeks.  The  latter  developed  them  to
the  full  extent  of  their  capacity,  and  the  last  stages  of  their
development  may  well  have  been  hastened  and  modified
by  outside  influence.  It  is  precisely  these  last  stages  of
which  we  find  not  a  single  trace  among  the  Celts,  and  this
despite  the  fact  that  after  their  attainment  by  the  Greeks,
the  latter  people  were  during  several  centuries  in  a  position
to  influence  their  Celtic  kinsmen,  and  did  actually  influence
their  material  culture  in  important  respects.  If  no  such
influence  was  exerted  during  the  centuries  when  we  know
that  Greeks  and  Celts  were  fighting  and  trading  with  each
other,  why  should  we  postulate  its  existence,  as  does  Dr.
Jevons,  at  a  period  when  we  know  nothing  concerning  the
mutual  relations  of  Greeks  and  Celts,  when,  possibly,
the  Celts  had  not  even  reached  the  stage  of  a  racial
individuality.1

One  argument  which  seems  to  have  weighed  with  Dr.
Jevons  in  deciding  against  the  possible  pan- Aryan  character
of  the  Elysium  conception  is  based  upon  its  absence  among
the  Romans.  I  confess  it  does  not  impress  me.  The
Aryan-speaking  peoples  have  developed  the  most  diverse
gifts  and  capacities,  and  the  failure  of  one  branch  to
elaborate  root-conceptions,  which  amongst  the  others  have
borne  abundant  fruit,  need  not  surprise  us.   We  are  entitled

1  i.e.  If  the  Greeks  borrowed  Aalu  from  the  Egyptians  about  1200
B.C.,  it  is  possible  that  there  were,  properly  speaking,  no  Celtic  peoples
in  existence  to  which  to  pass  it  on.


276  ANTIQUITY  OF  THE

to  judge  the  prehistoric  Roman  in  the  light  of  his  historic
record.  Be  the  reason  what  it  may,  he  displayed  throughout
the  whole  of  his  history  an  absolute  incapacity  to  invent  in
the  domain  of  mythic  romance  and  imaginative  literature
generally.  Well-nigh  all  the  stories  that  Rome  has  ever
told  are  borrowed  stories ;  not  only  has  she  contributed
scarce  one  single  new  story  to  the  treasure-house  of  the
world's  imagination,  she  has  contributed  no  new  mode  of
expressing  that  imagination  in  literature  or  plastic  art.
Compare  her  in  this  respect  with  Celtdom.  Latin  litera-
ture is  one  of  the  greatest  and  noblest  the  world  has  ever
known  ;  for  force,  dignity,  adequacy  of  thought,  and  ex-
pression it  is,  perhaps,  unrivalled.  It  has  dominated  and
recast  European  expression  as  Rome  dominated  and  recast
Europe.  Celtic  literature  is  scanty  in  bulk,  meagre
in  thought,  primitive  in  expression.  Yet  it  has  an
originality,  a  power  of  invention,  alike  of  incident  and  of
literary  form  suited  to  the  effective  presentment  of  that
incident,  wholly  denied  to  the  immeasurably  greater  litera-
ture. Why  should  we  wonder  because  the  Celts  were
sensitive  to  the  romantic  capabilities  of  a  mythic  theme
which  the  Romans  left  fallow?  The  two  peoples  had
different  gifts.  The  ultimate  origins  of  Roman  and  Brehon
law  are  the  same,  yet  how  diverse  their  growth,  how  im-
measurably diverse  the  outcome  of  that  growth.  If  the
Romans,  intent  upon  their  own  work,  utterly  neglected
to  elaborate  their  mythology,  that  is  no  reason  for  denying
the  Aryan  nature  of  Greek,  Vedic,  or  Celtic  myth.

Here  I  leave  the  question.  It  is,  I  trust,  set  forth  clearly
and  unambiguously.  It  is  important,  involving,  as  it  does,
the  larger  one,  whether  the  religious  beliefs  and  practices
of  our  Ayran-speaking  forefathers  are,  in  the  main,  a  pro-


IRISH  EVIDENCE  277

duct  of  the  same  intellectual,  artistic,  and  moral  capacities
which  have  given  to  the  world  Greek  poetry,  philosophy,
and  art,  Roman  law,  Indian  religious  metaphysic,  or
whether  they  must,  in  the  main,  be  assigned  to  the
influence  of  other  races,  of  alien  cultures.  The  correct
answer  to  this  question  is  found  to  turn,  in  a  large
measure,  upon  the  weight  and  import  of  evidence  afforded
by  the  myths  and  customs  of  peoples,  who  once  dominated
these  islands,  and  who  still  form  a  most  important  element,
alike  physical,  intellectual,  and  artistic,  of  our  mixed
population.

The  few  pages  which  follow  must  be  regarded  as  supple-
menting the  Chronological  Table  at  the  end  of  vol.  i.
Whilst  I  am  not  blind  to  the  hypothetical  nature  of  my
dates  and  periods,  I  believe  them  to  be,  at  least,  as  near
the  mark  as  those  elaborate  reconstructions  of  the  past  in
which  the  c  scientific  '  archaeologist  delights.

Summary  and  Conclusion.1

Circa  2500-2000  B.C.  This  is  the  earliest  date  to  which  we
can  carry  back  any  Aryan-speaking  community  with  reason-
able certitude.  An  agricultural  stage  of  culture  had  been
reached,  possibly  an  independent  Aryan  development,  pos-
sibly taken  over  from  subjugated  populations.  Influence
from  the  great  civilisations  of  the  Nile  and  Euphrates
valleys  should  not  be  assumed ;  they  had  probably  passed
through  a  similar  stage  of  culture,  but  had  outgrown  it,  and
any  contact  between  them  and  the  Aryans  of  Central  and
Northern  Europe  could  not  possibly  have  produced  the

1  I  have  put  these  propositions  in  a  definite  and  absolute  form,  but
it  will  of  course  be  understood  that  I  only  regard  them  as  probable.


278      CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY

social  and  religious  conditions  the  existence  of  which  we
are  entitled  to  postulate  among  the  latter.

Sociologically  speaking  this  hypothetical  early  Aryan
culture  was,  in  all  probability  matriarchal ;  its  religion  was
based  upon  a  theory  of  sacrifice  in  which  the  element  of
bargain  was  at  least  as  prominent  as  that  of  communion ;
its  mythology  had  hardly  progressed  beyond  the  individu-
alisation  of  certain  Powers  of  Life  manifest  in  vegetable
and  animal  growth ;  a  rude  eschatology  may  have  been
elaborated  on  the  supposition  that  vitality,  after  leaving
man  at  death,  joined  and  reinforced  the  Powers  of  Life,  and
may  have  resulted  in  supplementing  the  public  worship
addressed  to  the  Powers  generally,  by  private  worship
addressed  to  the  departed  kinsman ;  the  dead  were  pro-
bably buried,  and  burial  rites  may  have  been  influenced  by
and  have  influenced  agricultural  rites;  a  rude  philosophy
held  all  life  to  be  one  kind,  manifesting  itself  in  divers
shapes — control  of  this  vital  essence  was  the  god's  attribute
par  excellence.

But  for  the  prehistoric  migrations  which  scattered  Aryan-
speaking  communities  from  the  Ganges  valley  on  the  one
side  to  Westernmost  Europe  on  the  other,  and  from  Greece
to  Scandinavia,  this  primitive  stage  of  culture  might  have
lasted  on  unchanged.  Indeed  it  did  persist,  with  com-
paratively little  change,  among  the  less  advanced  Celts  and
Teutons  down  to  the  Christian  era,  among  the  Slavs  and
Lithuanians  down  to  the  Middle  Ages,  and,  as  a  matter  of
fact,  it  still  furnishes  a  very  large  part  of  peasant  custom
and  belief  throughout  Europe.

Some  time  after  2000  B.C.  began  the  migrations,  which
settled  Aryan-speaking  communities  in  Greece,  Italy,  Iran,
and  North- West  India  by  1500  b.c.  at  the  latest.     Matri-


AND  CONCLUSION  279

archalism  gave  way  to  patriarchalism ;  the  nature  and
import  of  sacrifice  were  modified ;  an  increasingly  complex
ritual  and  mythology  kept  pace  with  the  increasing  com-
plexity, alike  material  and  intellectual,  of  the  community.
In  the  case  of  the  Greek  Aryans  mythology  may  have  been
enriched  and  developed  by  loans,  direct  or  indirect,  from
the  older  civilisations  of  the  Nile  and  Euphrates  valleys.
But  the  evidence  is  by  no  means  so  conclusive  as  certain
scholars  assert,  and  it  should  be  remembered  that  the
religious  development  of  the  Vedic  Aryans,  which  does  not
seem  to  have  been  affected  by  either  Babylonia  or  Egypt,
was  as  rapid  and  as  remarkable  as  that  of  the  Greek  Aryans.
The  migration  period  probably  substituted  the  practice  of
burning  the  dead  for  that  of  burial,  and  this  may  have
given  to  the  dead  a  bloodless  shadowy  character.  Burial
and  its  accompanying  rites  persisted,  however,  and  kept
alive  belief  in  the  continued  activity  and  power  of  the  dead.

As  regards  the  conceptions  studied  in  the  present  work,
the  ideas  of  a  god's  land  of  delight,  and  of  interchange  of
form  between  extra-human  and  human  beings  were  early  de-
ductions from  the  phenomena  of  ecstasy  which  accompanied
the  primitive  sacrificial  rites.  Both  ideas  took  shape  before
they  were  brought  into  connection  with  a  doctrine  of  what
happens  to  man  after  death.  This  possibly  originated
among  the  Greek  Aryans  after  contact  with  Egyptian  civili-
sation. But  the  direct  evidence  is  meagre  and  weak,  and
there  is  no  reason  why  the  Greeks  should  be  denied  the
capacity  for  an  evolution  similar  to  that  through  which
Egypt  had  passed  centuries  before,  and  through  which
Vedic  India  passed  from  about  1200-800  b.c.

The  development  of  eschatological  doctrine  seems  to
have  been  rapid  and  marked  in  the  Greek  world  during  the


28o       CHRONOLOGICAL  SUMMARY

seventh-fifth  centuries  b.c.  It  is  questionable  if  the  pheno-
mena confronting  us  during  these  centuries  are  really  as
novel  to  Greece  as  they  appear  to  be  ;  still  more  question-
able if  they  are  due  to  religious  movements  originating  in
the  Northern  Semitic  world ;  on  the  contrary,  what  evidence
exists  in  favour  of  outside  influence  points  to  Egypt  as  its
source.  If  the  origin  and  development  of  the  movement
are  obscure,  the  result  is  plain  enough — the  constitution  of
an  ethico-philosophical  doctrine  respecting  the  relation  of
this  to  the  other-life.  Again,  let  me  note  that  momentous
as  were  the  after  consequences  of  this  Greek  movement,  it
was  in  itself  neither  so  extensive  nor  so  revolutionary  as
the  parallel  movement  which  among  the  Vedic  Indians  cul-
minated in  Buddhism.

About  1000-800  B.C.  began  in  all  probability  the  migra-
tions of  the  Celtic  Aryans.  Starting  later  than  either
Greeks  or  Vedic  Indians,  the  Celts  occupied  lands  less
adapted  to  hasten  and  intensify  their  development;  they
came,  too,  less  in  contact  with  more  advanced  civilisations
than  did  the  Greeks.  Hence  when  they  emerge  upon  the
field  of  history  they  had  departed  infinitely  less  from  the
primitive  agricultural  stage  of  culture.  Matriarchalism  on
the  whole  had  given  way,  especially  among  the  Southern
Celts,  whose  material  evolution  was  more  varied  and
intense;  they,  too,  seem  to  have  changed  the  theory  of
sacrifice  retained  in  its  original  purity  among  the  Irish.
Mythology  became  fairly  complex,  and  the  rudiments  of
an  eschatology  may  possibly  be  discerned  among  the
Southern  Celts  whilst  they  are  altogether  lacking  in
Northern  Celtdom.

The  features  common  to  Greek  and  Irish  mythology
belong  to  the  earlier  known  stage  of  Aryan  mythical  evolu-


AND  CONCLUSION  281

tion,  and  are  not  the  result  of  influence  exercised  by  the
more  upon  the  less  advanced  race.  Survivals  in  Greece,
they  represent  the  high-water  mark  of  Irish  pre-Christian
development;  hence  their  greater  consistency  and  vivid-
ness in  Ireland.  Fragmentary  as  may  be  the  form  and  dis-
torted as  it  may  be  by  its  transmission  through  Christian
hands,  we  thus  owe  to  Ireland  the  preservation  of  mythical
conceptions  and  visions  more  archaic  in  substance  if  far
later  in  record  than  the  great  mythologies  of  Greece  and
Vedic  India.


FINIS


APPENDICES


APPENDIX    A.

Seel  Tuain  maic  Cairill  do  Finnan  Maige  Bile

inso  sis.1

1.  Iar  tudecht2  do  Finnen3  Maige  Bile  cosint  soscelu  i  tir
nErend  i  crich  Ulad,4  luid 5  dochum  ldich  saidbir6  and  7
nisrelic 7  isin  les  cuci,  corothroiscset 8  aci  fo  domnach.9  Nirbu
maith  a  chretem  ind  lAich.  Asbert  Finnen  fria  muintir  :
'  Doforficba  fer  maith  nobdidnoba 10  7  innisfid  u  duib  senchas
Herend.12

2.  Iarsin  dosfic  sruith  clerich  13  arnabaYach  matain  14  moch,
feraid15  failti  friu.  '  Tait  lim-sa  dom'  disiurt,'  ol  s6,  '  is  dudchu10
duib.'     Lotar17  leis  7  dogniat  ord  18  in  domnaig19  etir  salmu

Z?.  =  Rawl.  B.  512,  fo.  97b,  2— 98b,  1.  H.  =  H.  3.  18,  fo.  38a.  £A=Lebor  na
Huidre,  pp.  15a  —  16b.  /  am  indebted  to  Prof.  Strachan  for  lending  me  his
transcript  of  H.

1  om  R.  2  dudecht  (  =  dtudecht)  U.  3  du  Finnien  R.  4  ant[l]ainriudh  add.  R.
5  ant[s]a[i]nriudh  add.  R.  6  doiuid  H.  7  nislece  R.  sidhen  add.  H.  8  corothroiscet
U.  9  7  add.  UR.  10  nobardidnoba  H.  n  innisfes  RH.  !2  oroc/i'gab/zi^  cusindiu
add  H.  13  cleirech  H.  14  iarnabarach  matan  R .  J5  feraid  R.  16  duthcha  RH.
17  iarsin  add.  R.     18  ort  R.     13  ann  add.  R.


Incipit  Imacallaim  Tuain  fri  Finnia.

Z..=Laud  610,  fo.  102a,  2-  103a,  2.

1.  Iar  tuidecht  do  Finnio  cosint  soscelu  lais  hi  ti'r  nHeirenn  hi  crich
nUlath,  luid  do  thig  laich  sommai  and.  Nisreilc  side  hi  tech  cucci.
Docinet  lais  fo  domnach,  fobith  ni  bu  maith  a  chreidem  in  laich.
Asbert  Findia  fria  muntir  :  '  Doticfa  fer  maith  nobdidnabthar  7  adfii
duib  senchasa  inna  Heirenn  file  o  cetagabath.'

2.  Tosfic  sruith  cleirech  [sic]  arnabarach  mattin,  feraith  failti
friu.     '  Toet  limsa,  ol  se,  dom  disiurt,  is  duthchu  duib.      Lotar  lais


286  APPENDIX    A

7  precept  7  offrend.  Ro-farfaig  Finnen  a  slonniud  de.1  Asbert
friu  :  'De  Ultaib  dam-sa,'  ol  se.  'Tuan  mac  Cairill2  mesi,
maic  Muredaig  Mundeirc.3  Rogabus  for  orbu4  m'athar  a
5n-dfsert  sa.6  Tuan7  mac8  Stairn  maic  Sera,  mac  brathar
do  Partholon,  rob  e  mo  slonnud  tall  ar  thus.'

3.  Ro-farfaig9  Finnen  de  imthechta  Herenn  .i.  anf10
forcoemnacair  inti  6  amsir  Partholoin  maic  Sera.  Ocus u
asbert12  Finnen  nd  airbertais13  bith  aici  coro-innised  doib
senchasa  Erenn.  Asbert  Tuan  fri  Finnen:  'Is14  ansu  dun  cen
brethir  n-De 15  atchuad-su16  dun  6  chfanaib  17  do  imradud.' 1S  '  Is
cet  duit-siu  tra,'  ol  Finnen,  'th'imthechta  fein  7  imthiis10  na
Herenn20  do21  innisin  dun  coleic.22'

4.  '  Coic  gabada  6m,'  ol  se,  'rogabad23  Heriu24  far  ndflind  7
nfsragbad  far  ndflind  corochatea 2rj  di  b\\a.dain  de'ac  ar  trib  cctaibP-^
Is  farsein  rosgab  27  Partholon  mac  Sera.  Doluid  for  longais
cetheora28  lanamna  fichet.     Nfrbo29  mor  amainsi  caich30  dfb

1  om  H  Finnien  de  a  slonnud  R.  -  acairilli«f  [sic]  R.  3  munderg  UR.
i  forba  R.  B  itaisiu  add.  H.  6  i«d  R.  1  imtitorro  add.  R.  8  \minorro
add.  H.  9  rofiarfaig/j  R.  W  indni  R,  indi  H.  "  om  R.  12  Atbert  R.
]3  hairbertais  R.  1*  fri-Is  out.  H.  15  de  U.  16  atchuadasu  R.  M  om.  UR.
!8  imrarud  U.  19  imtusa  H.  "-0  nEre««  R.  21  du  R.  d'  7/.  22  om_  u.  uait  /?.
23rogabhAr.  24  rogabsat  Erind  ^?.  "5  corochaithtea  RH.  ^  •X\XsX\2.dain  M  m\\z.  R  H .
27  rogab  UH.    28  cethora  £/.     29  nibo  if.     3«  caig/j  /?.


dogniat  hurdu  domnaig  etir  salmu  7  procept  7  offrend  7  celebrad.
Imchomaircith  a  slondud.  Asbert  friu :  '  Di  Hultaib  damsahi  sund  .i.
Tuan  mac  Cairill  mo  ainm.  Rogabus  for  orbu  mo  athar  a  Itha  cussan
disert  n-isin  do  bennaib  Bairche.'

3.  Rosiacht  Finnia  coibsena  fair  do  himthechtaib  Heirenn,  anf
forcoemnacair  o  hamsir  Parthaloin  maic  Agnomain.  Asbert  Findia
nad  n-airberdis  bith  chucci.  Asbert  Tuan  fri  Finnia  :  '  Nammuiregar-sa
immi«  lessin,  is  diliu  dund  briathar  Dei  adcois  dun  do  imradud.'
'Is  cett  dait  da.no,'  ol  Finnia,  [fo.  102b,  1]  'do  imthechta  fadein  7
imthechta  Heirend  do  innisin  dun  coleic'

4.  '  Ciiic  gabala  em  rongabath  Heriu  cossin  n-amsir  sea.  Ni  ragbad
ria  ndile  7  ni  ragbad  iar  ndfle,  cotormalta  di  bliaofo'tt  ar  mfle  fas  iar  ndul
na  dilenn  din  tfr.  Is  iarum  rogab  mac  Agnomain  maic  Starbuf,  do
G;r'gaib  a  chenel.     Dolotar  for  longais  cetheora  lanamna  fichet,  ar  is


APPENDIX    A  287

fri  araili.  Trebsat  Herinn  co  mbatar  coic  mili  dia  sil  and.
Dosanic  J  dunebad  etir  da  domnach  co  n-erblatar 2  uli  acht
oenfer  namma,3  ar  ni  gnalh  orgain  4  cen  sceola 5  do  ernam  esi 6
do  innisin  seel  dara  n-esi.  Is  mesi  dano7  in  fer  sin,'8  ol
seseom.

5.  '  Ba-sa  iar«m  o  dingnu  do  dingnu  7  0  aill  do  aill  ocom'
imditin  ar  chonaib  altaib  na  di  bliadna  ar  fichit  robai  Heriu
fas.  Dolluid  crine 9  chucum-sa  7  sentath 10  7  robd  i  n-allaib  7  i
n-dfthrubaib  7  foremed  imthecht  7  nobitis  uama  irdalta  ocum.11

6.  '  Rosgab  n  iarum  Nemed  mac  Agnoma/n  brathair  athar
dam-sa  7  atachim-sea  a  hallaib  7  ba-sa  for  a  imgabail 13  7  me
mongach  ingnech  crfn  lfath  nocht  trog14  immnedach.  Ba-sa
aidchi  and  farum  im'  chotlud  co  n-aca  mo15  dul  i  richt  oiss
allaid.  Ba-sa  i  suidiu  7  me  6c,  7  ba  maith  lim  mo  menma.
Iss1G  and  roradius-[s]a  na  bnathra  sa  sis.

Amnirt  indiu  mac  Senbath,
arroscarad  re  thendrath,
nf  fo  degblad  co  nirt  niia
ata  mac  Senbath  sennia.

1  Dosfanic  R.  2  erbaltatar  H.  3  .J.  tantum  add.  H.  *  orcuin  R.  5  sceolai  H.
6  dar  a  heisi  H.  "'  om  H.  s  int  sen  sin  H.  9  crini  U.  10  sentu  H.  11  acum  U.
12  rogab  RH.  13  imcabail  U.  14  trog/:  nocht  R.  15  mu  R.  16  From  Jure  to  aid
of  verses  om.  RH.

mar  amainse  caich  dib  fri  araile.  Trebsit  Herind  co  mbiii  mile  dia
chlaind.  Dosnic  duneba  etir  da  domnach  conidapthatar  acht  cenfer.
Ar  ni  gnath  digail  no  horgain  cen  sceolu  n-eisi  do  innisin  seel  dara
n-eisi.     Is  messi  in  fer  sin.

5.  '  Basussa  iarum  o  dangun  do  dangun  7  o  aill  do  aill  ocom  ditin  ar
chonaib  altaib  di  b\iadain  ar  trichait  rombui  Heriu  hi  fas.  Doluid
crine  form  assennath  7  addro  im  thecht.  Roba  i  n-aldaib  7  dithribib  7
nobitis  hiiama  aurdalta  lim.

6.  '  Rosgab  mac  Agnomin  iarum,  brathair  athar  damsa.  Attaciw
innsidi  [sic]  a  hallaib  7  basu  fora  n-ingabail,  os  me  mongach  ingnech
cn'n  nocht  trog  imnedach.  Basu  aidchi  n-and  im'  chotlud  conacca,
lodsa  hirricht  huiss  allaid.  Bassu  hissuidiu  iarum,  bassu  hoc,  maith  mo
menma  lim.


288  APPENDIX    A

'  Na  fir  sea  thecait  anair
cona  rennaib  ruamnait  gail,
nimtha  liid  hi  cois  nd  il-laim
do  thecht  fora  n-imgabail.

'  Starin,  is  tairbech  in  fer,
atagur  Scemel  scfathgel,
nimmain  Andind  cia  dagind,
mad  he"  B6oin,  nfsnagsind.

'  Cfa  rom[f  Jacbad  Beothach  bed,
Cacher  is  garb  a  garbgle6,
Britan  doni  da  gaib  gus,
ata  frasch  ferci  ar  Fergus.

'  Atat  chuc«m,  a  comdi  cain,
eland  Nemid  maic  Agnomai?i,
tr£n  atat  for  ti  m'  fola
do  chosnam  mo  ch^tgona.

'  Roc6raigit  dwa  tr6m'  chend
da  beind  for  trf  fichtib  rend,
co  filim  garblfath  ir-richt
ar  caemchl6d  aisi  a  bamnirt.     A.

7.  '  Bd-sa  thoisech-sa  do  almaib  Herenn  far  sudiu  6  roba
ir-richt  setha,  7  boi  alma  mor  do  ossaib  aha  immara  each
conair  nothegind.1  Dorwmalt-sa  iarom  m'amsir2  amlaid  sin3
fri  hamsir  Nemid  7  fri  amsir  a  claindi.4  Intan  iarom  tanic
Nemed  doch^m  na  Herenn  a  mz/rchoblach,  cetheora  Mrca
trichat*  a  lin  7  tricha  in  cech  bairc,  conosrala6  in  muir  for
sechran  fri  re  bliad«a7  colleith  for  muir  Chaisp,  7  robatea8

1  Ba  thoisech  do  almaib  (alltaib  H)  Erewi  7  do-imchellaind  Er/»«  7  alam  mor  di
(do  Jt)  ossaib  immum  RH.  -  m'aimsir  iarsin  R.  3  om.  RH.  4  7  fria  claind  dara
heisi  R.  5  Ar  intan  dolluid  Nemed  dochum  nErenn  cetheora barca  ar  trichaiV  RH.
B  conisrala  R.    7  bliadain  R  sechran  bliadwa  H.     8  robaitea  R  robaittea  H.


7.  'Octis  bassa  hurrae  alma  7  doimchellind  Heirind  7  alaw  mor  di
hossaib  immom.  Dorrumalt  tra  in  n-aimsir  sin  fri  hamsir  Nemed  [sic]
7  fria  hamsir  a  gabala  dia  chlaind.  Ar  intan  doluith  Nemid  [sic]
dochum  Heirenn  cetheora  barca  ar  trichait  alh'n  7  tricha  fer  in  each
[fo.  I02b  2]  bairc,  immusrala  muir  bliadain  7  leth  robaitea  7  atbathatar


APPENDIX    A  289

farsin  7  atbathatar  di x  gortai  7  d'ftaid,2  acht  cetheora  lanamna
namma3  im4  Nemed.  Roforbair5  a  sil-som  farsin  7  rochlan-
naigistar6  corrabatar  cethri  mili  ar  trichait  lanamna7  and.
Atbathatar  side  da.no  uli.8

8.  'Dolluid  farom  crfne  7  sentatu  form-sa9  7  bd-sa  for
teched10  re  n-doinib  7  conaib  altaib.11  Ba-sa  fechtas  and  i
ndorus  rn'uama,12  cuman  lim  beus 13  7  rofetar  techt  asin 14  richt
i  n-araili.15  Lud-sa  farom  i  ndeilb  thuirc  allaid.10  Iss  17  and
asbert-sa :

'  Glasreng 18  me'  indiu  etir  ciianaib,

am  triath  trdn  co  robuadaib,

domrat  i  ndubi  ndecair

ri  na  n-uli  i  n-ilrechtaib.

'  Matan  roba-sa  ac  dun  Br6
oc  comrac  fri  sensruthe,
ba  CEem  mo  churi  dar  lind,
lenad  dcbad  aibind  sind,

'  Mo  churi  robtar  dathi
etir  fiannaib  i  n-aithi,19
fogertis  mo  gai  'masech
for  6caib  Fail  for  cech  leth.

'  Intan  nobimmis  'nar  [n]ddil
oc  cocert  breth  Partholain,
ba  bind  fri  each  'na  canaind,
ba  si'at  briathra  firthadaill.

1  do/?.  2  7  d'ftaid  om.  RH.  %07n.RH.  4  vra  R.  5  Fororbart  R  roforbrisit  H.
6  a  sil  'sin  Erz««  R  a  sil-sen  a  nErinn  H.  7  cetheora  lanamma  tnchat  ar  cetheoraib
milib  lanamnan  R.  8  om.  RH.  9  Doluid  crine  formsa  7  sentath  (sentu  H)  RH.
10  teicheth  R.  n  alta  U.  12  mo  uama  R.  1»  om.  RH.  u  as  cech  richt  R.
15  beos  add.  H.  I6  alltaid  R.  em  add.  H.  W  Fro?n  here  to  end  of  verses
0711.  RH.     I8  .i.  tore  U.     lu  i«ait/zbi  with  fiunctum  dclens  over  \i  U.


[di]  gorta  acht  cetheora  lanamna  im  Nemeth.  Fororbairt  a  sil  sin  for
Herind  corrobatar  cetheora  mili  ar  trichait  lanamna  and  im  Nemed.
Dorroibtatar  da«#  huile  iatside.

8.   '  Doluid  crine  formsa  asennath  7  bassu  for  techud  ria  ndoinib  7
chonaib  pltaib.     Bassu  aidchi  and  i  ndorus  huaime,   cuimen   lim   7
rofetar  dul  asin  richt  inn-araill.     Lotsu  i  ndeilb  tuirc  allaid.
VOL.  II.  T


29o  APPENDIX    A

'  Ba  bind  mo  chocert  ani
etir  andrib  co  n-alli,
ba  segda  mo  charpat  ca=m,
ba  bind  mo  dord  dar  dubrjfen.

'  Ba  luath  mo  ch6im  cen  fordul
hi  cathaib  oc  imforcum,
ba  ccem  mo  drech,  robdi  la,
indiu  ciarsam  glasreng-sa.     Gl.

9.  '  Bci-sa  em,'  for  se",1  '  hi  sudiu  isiu  delb  sin 2  7  3  me  60c  7
ba  *  maith  lim  mo  menma  7  bam-sa 5  rurech  do  thretaib  tore
Hdrenn  7°  do-imchellainn  mo  durais  beus  intan  ticind  hisin
ench  sea  Ulad  i  n 7  -amsir  mo  chn'ne  7  mo  throge.  Ar  is  i
n-6enmagin  dockemcloind-sea8  na  delba  sin9  uli.  Is  airi  sin
nothathigind-sea  in  n-inad  sin  beus  do  idnaidi  ind  athnugthi.10

10.  '  Gabais  Semion  mac  Stariath  u  in  n-insi  sea  farsin.12  Is
dib-side13  Fir  Domnand  7  Fir  Bole  7  Galium.14  Ocus  rothrebsat
side  in  n-insi  sea  fri  re.  .  .  .Vj  Dolluid  crine  7  sentatu  form-sa
farsin 1G  7  ba  torsech  lim  mo  menma  7  forfemmedus 1T  each  ret
dogniind  remi  do  denam.18  Acht  bd-sa  i  n-uamannaib  dor-
chaib  7  i  n-allaib  dfamraib  m'oenur.19

11.  '  Lud-sa  farsin  dom'20  durais  dilis21  dogres.  Cuman  lim
each  richt  irrabd  riam.22    Ro-dinius 23  mo  thredan  amal  dogniind

1  om.  R.  2  om.  R.  3  is  R.  4  om.  R.  for  sd-ba  om.  H.  5  bam  R.  6  doim-
gabainn  7  add.  H.  7  om.  U.  8  noclaechlainnsea  RH.  9  sa  R.  om.  H.  10  RH.
emit  this  sentence.    lx  stainn  H.     12  om.  H.     13  dib  RH.     14  7  Galiuin  om.  RH.

15  something  omitted  here   in   U.  rotrebsat  :   nE'uinn   add.   H.   side — ri  07>i.    R.

16  Dollud  crine  formsa  7  sentath  R.  17  uaremedhz<^  R.  baremidus  H.  I8  dogniind
— denam  om.  RH.  19  i  n-uamaib  7  allaib  am  oenar  RH.  20  do«  R.  21  om.  RH.
22  om.  RH.    23  roaines  R .

9.  'Eim  lim  on  dano  7  maith  lim  mo  menma  7  bassu  hurras  do  tretaib
tore  nEirenn  7  dohimchellind  Heirind  7  robui  duras  lim  beos  d'athigid
issin  crich  sea  Hulad  inn-amsir  mo  crine  7  mo  throge.  Ar  is  i  n-oen-
magin  nomchloechlaind  na  delba  so  huili  dogres.

10.  '  Gabais  Semion  mac  Stairai  in  n-insi  so  7  is  dib  Fir  Domnand  7
Fir  Bolg.  Trebsat  side  Heirind.  Doluid  crine  formsa  7  ba  toirrsech
mu  menma  7  ba  reimdius  comaitecht  na  tore  7  na  tret,  acht  bassu
i  nhuamaib  7  i  n-allaib  imm'  cenur.

11.  '  Lothsa  dom'  durus  dogres.      Cuman  lim  [cech  richt]  irraba.


APPENDIX   A  291

dogres.1  Nimbdi  cumang  cena.2  Lud-sa  l'arsin  i  ndeilb  segi
mori  .i.  murrech  adbul.3  Maith  lim  on  dano  mo  menma.4
Ba  fortail  me  for  each  ret.5  Ba  sirthech6  imtholtanach 7
da«0.8  Noluinn9  dar  Erind,  rofindainn10  each  ret.11  Is12  and
atbert-sa  :

'  Seig  indiu,  glasreng  inde\

ingnad  alaig  utmaille,

ansu  lim  ar  cacA  16  de

Dia  in  cara  romcruthaige.

'  Is  sochaidi  eland  Nemid
caw  r&r  r  .  .  ech  rig  demin,
uathad  indiu  sil  Sera,
nf  fetar  cid  fotera.

'  Etir  trdtaib  tore  roba,
cfatu  indiu  etir  enelta,
rofetar-sa  'na  mbfa  de,
bfat-sa  bdus  ir-richt  aile.

'  Ingnad  ro-ordaig  Dia  dil
mesi  ocus  clanna  Nemid  :
sfat-som  ac  r£ir  demain  De\
mesi  is  Dfa  mo  chomar-se.     Seig.

12.  '  Gabais  Beothach  mac  Iarboneoil13  fdtha14  in  n-insi  sea
forsna  cenela 15  robatar  inti.1G  Is  dib-side 17  Tuatha  Dee  7  Ande 18
don£  fes  bunadas 19  lasin  n-aes  n-eolais,  acht  ba  doich 20  leo  ba

1  amal -dogres  om.  RH.  2  om.  RH.  3  segha  .i.  muiriach  (n6  muirrech)  mor  R H.
*  mo  menma  om.  RH.  5  ba  fortaill  (fortail  H.)  lim  (ia.no  R.)  mo  menma  RH.
6  siratech  U.  saithech  H.  sirtech  R.  7  vmtoltach  R.  8  om.  RH.  9  noluid-
hinn  H.  10  7  nofindaind  R.  H  rzcht  nobidh  uile  //.  12  From  here  to  end  0/
verses,  om.  RH.  13  Iardonel  UR.  W  om.  H.  maic  Nem/V  add.  R.  15  cinela
RH.  16  innte  R.  "  dib  RH.  gailioin  7  add.  H.  18  andea  RH.  19  bunad  RH.
-0  doigh  R.


Ro-asinz«  mo  thredan  cen  biad.  Ni[m]  bui  cumac.  Lothso  i  ndeilb
muirfeich  mair.  Maith  on  lim  dano.  Ba  forotren  [sic]  mo  menma,
basa  saithech  imtholtanach.  Noluind  dar  Heirind,  nohinnaind  each  ret.
12.  '  Gabais  Beothecht  mac  Iordanen  in  n-indsi  so  forsna  cenelu  batar
and  7  is  diib  in  Galiuin  7  Tuatha  Dea  7  Ande,  cenela  cosnafes  bunadus


292  APPENDIX    A

din x  longais  dodechaid  de  2  nim  doib,  ara  n-engnaigi  7  ar  febas
a  n-eolais.3

13.  '  Bd-sa  tra  amsera  mora  i  ndeilb  int  sega  sin4  co  tom-
altus5  na  cenela  sinG  uli  rogabsat7  tir  nErend.  Gabsat  dano
maic  Miled  in  n-insi  seo  for  Tuaith8  De  Danand9  ar  ecin.
Dobd-sa10  dano  and-side  i  ndeilb  inna  sega  sin  ir-rabas11  co
mba  hi  cus  craind  for  smth.  Toirsech  lim  mu  menma  acht  cia
luienn.     Ataighin  eona  uile  dom  arccuin.12

14.  '  Ro-amius  nomaid  and-side 13  7  rothuit  cotlud  form  7
16d-sa  ir-richt  iaich u  abas15  and-aide.16  Domchurithar  Dia
isin  n-abainn  farsin 17  co  mba  inti.18  Maith  lim  on  dano  7  ba-sa
setrech  saithech  7  ba  maith  mo  snam  7  no-elaind  as  cech19
gdbud  7  as  cech19  airceis20  .i.  al-lamaib  linaige  7  a  crobaib
segas21  7  6  gaib  fascaig,22  co  filet  a23  crechta24  .  .  .25  a  cech
£i  dib 2G  indium  beos.27

15.  'Fecht  n-aen  28  ann  tra28  tan  rob  am20  la  Dia  mo  chabair30
7  robltar  bfasta  icom'  ing>rm  7  nofindad  each  linaige  31  in  cech

1  don  RH.  2  dond  R.  3  ara-e61ais  om.  RH.  4  om.  R.  5  corormoltsa  R.
6  cinela  sa  R.  7  rogabustar  H.  8  tuathaib  RH.  9  donann  R.  1°  Dollodsa  R.
Iotsa  H.  U  iraba  RH.  12  Toirsech-arccuin  om.  UR.  vi  Roaoines  nomaide  ann
i  cus  craind  ^?.  u  iaic  U.  15  .i.  bratan  add.  R.  ^  om.  Rtf.  17  om.  RH.
18  and  RH.  "  gach  U.  20  as  each  airceis  om.  R.  21seabhac//.  22  iascaire  RH.
23  a  om.  R.  S4  Here  U  ends.  25  A  word  illegible  in  R.  om.  H.  26  a.d;b  0m.  H.
27  om.  H.  28  om.  H.  29  intan  robo  mithecA  H.  30  sa  add.  H.  31  romfinnad  in
each  linaidhe  //.

lasin  n-6es  n-eolach,  acht  ba  doich  [fo.   103  a  1]  leo  bith  don  longis
dodeochaid  do  nim.

13.  '  Basusa  tra  amsera  mara  i  ndeilb  int  segns  cotormalt  na  cenela
so  huili  rogabsat  tir  nEirend.  Gabsat  maic  Mileth  for  Tuatha  Dea
in  n-indsi  se  ar  heicin.  Lothso  fecht  i  ndeilb  int  sega  irraba  co  mba
hi  cuas  chraind  for  smth.  Tuirsech  mo  menma.  Addro  luamain  7
addagin  eonu  aili.

14.  '  Rohainius  nomaidi  and  7  lo!so  i  ndeilb  ind  iaich  aba;.  Dom-
chuirethar  Dia  isin  n-abaind.  Amras  lim  on  da.no  7  basa  setrech  dano
saithech  7  basa  hurrre  snama.  Adluinid  [sic]  as  each  gabud  allamaib
linaige  7  a  crobaib  sega  7  a  gaaib  linaigi,  co  filet  a  crechta  indum.

15.  '  Fecht  and  antan  roba  mithig  ra  Dia  mu  chobair-sea  7  rombatar
biasta  oc  mo  ingreim  7  romfinnad  each  linaighi  in  each  lind,  dombert


APPENDIX    A  293

lind,  domairthend  tra  lfnaigi  Cairill  rig  an  tire  sin  fecht  ann  7
dcmbeir  lais  do  mnai  Cairill  forraibi  mian  eisc.1  Cuman  lim
on  dano  7  domrat  in  fer  inn-indeoin  2  7  romimain3  7  rommian-
aig4  in  rfgan  5  7  romithenn  a  hoenur  co  mba-sa  ina  broinn.
Cuman  lim  °  dano  in  airet  roba  ina  broinn  7  am  nordided  each
frie7  isin  tig  7  a  ndoronad  ind-Erinn  ind  airet  sin.  Cuman
lim  dawc  ama/  domiinic  labrad 8  ama/  cech  nduine  7  rofinnaind
cech  re"t  donithea  i  nErinn  9  7  robsa 10  faith  7  dobreth u  ainm
dam  .i.  Tuan  mac  Cairill.  Cotainic  farom  Pdtraic  co  cretem12
dochum  Erenn.13  'Aes  mor  dam-sa  isuidiu  7  rombaitsed  7
rocreiteus  14  imm'  oenur15  do16  rig  na  n-uili  cona  duilib.'17

16.  Doniat  iarom  celebrad  7  tiagait  ina  proinntechls  Finnian
cona  muinntir  7  Tuan  mac  Cairill  far  n-aisneis  na  seel  sa  do 19
coleir  doib  7  anait 20  sechtmain  ann  imalle 21  ic  imaccallaim.
Cach  sench^j  7  each  gene\ac/i  fil  ind-Erinn  is  6  Tuan  mac
Cairiall  a  bunadaj  int  senchais  sin.22     Ronaccaillestar  Pdtraic

1  linn,  domber  linaide  fecht  ann  do  mnai  Cairill  ri  in  tire  seo  H.  -  for  in
indioin  H.  3  om.  H.  4  rommianaigestar  H.  5  ben  H.  6  on  add.  H.  "  fria
cele  H.  8  labraid  R.  9  doniathai  R.  10  robsam  H.  «  dobretha  R.  v-  lais
add.  H.  13  om.  H.  1^  romcreitius  R.  i5  a  oenur  R.  16  om.  H.  I7  na  ndule
cona  duil  H.    !S  proinntig  R.     !9  om.  H.    20  sium  add.  H.     2l  «».  H.    22  int-sin


lfnaigi  and  do  mnai  Chairill  ri  in  tiri  sea.  Cumen  lim  dawo  codomber
in  fer  7  fonuid  me  7  nomhithend  in  ben  a  hoenur  co  mba  inna  broind.
Cumen  lim  dawo  ind  airet  romba  inna  broind  7  rl.  7  an-noraided  cach
ria  cheile  isin  taig  7  a  n-doronad  ind-Efre  ind  eret  sin.  Cumen  lim
dz.no  om-thanic  labrad  ama/  each  nuidin  7  rofinnaind  cach  ret  dognfthe
i  nHere  7  ropsam  faith  7  dobreth  ainm  dam  .i.  Tuan  mac  Cairill.
Cotanic  iarum  Patraic  co  creitem  [fo.  103  a,  2].  Aesmar  dv.no  hissuidiu
7  rombaisted  7  rochreides  imm'  oenur  rig  na  nhuili  cona  duilib. '

16.  Dogniat  iarum  celebrad  7  tiagait  hi  praintech  Finm'a  cona  muntir
7  Tuan.  Arutngither  coheir  doib.  Anaitt  sechtmain  hissuidiu  occ
immacallaim.  Nach  senchas  7  nach  genelach  fir  i  nHere,  is  o  Thuan
mac  Cairill  a  bunadus.  Attraglastar  Patraic  riasindi-seo  attuaid  do
7  atraglastar  Colum  Cille  7  atchuaid  faitsine  ndo  in  tfre  7  torgaid
Finnfa  commaid  fris  nobeith  a  phort  7  ni  hetas  fair-som.  'Bith
huirdnidu  do  loc  so,'  ol  Tuan.     Tuan  fuit  in  forma  uiri  centum  annis


294  APPENDIX   A

rempu1  7  atchuaid  do2  7  ronaccaill3  Colum  Cille  7  atchuaid
Finnian  do  i  fiadnaisi  lochta4  in  tire  7  targid5  Finnian  do
comad  ris  nobeith  a  port  7  nir  etad  fair-sium.6  '  Bid  oirdnidiu
do  tech-sa  co  bnith '  ol  Tuan  ar.  .  .  .7

1  rompo  Patric  H.  "  iartain  add.  H.  3  ronacaillestar  H.  4  lucht  H.  5  tar-
gaigh  H.  tartid  R.  6  innisin  add.  H.  7  Here  R.  ends  abruptly,  do  loc-sa  ar  Tuan
ni  maith  Finit.  H.


i  nHeri  iar  Fintan.  Fiche  bliaofow  in  forma  porci,  octoginta  anni  in
forma  cerui,  centum  anni  in  forma  aquilae,  tricha  bliaa'aM  fo  lind  in
forma  pi[s]cis.  Iterum  in  forma  hominis  co  sentaith  co  haimsir
Finnio  maic  hui  Fiatach.     Finit.


Tuan  mac  Cairill's  Story  to  Finnen  of  Moville
here  below.

i.  After  Finnen  of  Moville  had  come  with  the  Gospel  to
Ireland,  into  the  territory  of  the  men  of  Ulster,  he  went  to  a
wealthy  warrior  there,  who  would  not  let  them  come  to  him
into  the  stronghold,  but  left  them  fasting x  there  over  Sunday.
The  warrior's  faith  was  not  good.  Said  Finnen  to  his  followers  :
'  There  will  come  to  you  a  good  man,  who  will  comfort  you,  and
who  will  tell  you  the  history  of  Ireland  from  the  time  that  it
was  first  colonised  until  to-day.'

2.  Then  on  the  morrow  early  in  the  morning  there  came  to
them  a  venerable  cleric,  who  bade  them  welcome.  '  Come  with
me  to  my  hermitage,'  said  he,  'that  is  meeter  for  you.'  They
went  with  him,  and  they  perform  the  duties  of  the  Lord's  day,
both  with  psalms  and  preaching  and  offering.  Thereupon
Finnen  asked  him  to  tell  his  name.     Said  he  to  them  :  '  Of  the

1  Here  L  has  the  rare  word  docinel,  '  they  fast,'  of  which  the  infini-
tive occurs  in  LU.  84a,  31  :  hi  toichned  .i.  hi  troscud,  and  in  Laws  I.
122,  n  :  toichned  ri  '  withholding  his  food-tribute  from  a  king.'


APPENDIX   A  295

men  of  Ulster  am  I.  Tuan,  son  of  Cairell,  son  of  Muredach
Red-neck,  am  I.  I  have  taken  this  hermitage,  in  which  thou
art,  upon  the  hereditary  land  of  my  father.  Tuan,  son  of  Starn,1
son  of  Sera,  son  of  Partholon's  brother,  that  was  my  name  of
yore  at  first.'

3.  Then  Finnen  asked  him  about  the  events  of  Ireland,  to
wit,  what  had  happened  in  it  from  the  time  of  Partholon,  son  of
Sera.  And  Finnen  said  they  would  not  eat  with  him  until  he
had  told  them  the  stories  of  Ireland.  Said  Tuan  to  Finnen  :
1  It  is  hard  for  us  not  to  meditate  upon  the  Word  of  God  which
thou  hast  just  told  to  us.'  But  Finnen  said  :  '  Permission  is
granted  thee  to  tell  thy  own  adventures  and  the  story  of
Ireland  to  us  now.'

4.  'Five  times,  verily,'  said  he,  '  Ireland  was  taken  after  the
Flood,  and  it  was  not  taken  after  the  Flood  until  3122  years  had
gone.  Then  Partholon,  son  of  Sera,  took  it.  He  had  gone
upon  a  voyage  with  twenty-four  couples.  The  cunning  of  each
of  them  against  the  other  was  not  great.  They  settled  in  Ireland
until  there  were  5000 3  of  their  race.  Between  two  Sundays  a
mortality  came  upon  them,  so  that  all  died,  save  one  man  only.
For  a  slaughter  is  not  usual  without  some  one  to  come  out  of  it
to  tell  the  tale.     That  man  am  I,'  said  he.

5.  '  Then  I  was  from  hill  to  hill,  and  from  cliff  to  cliff,  guard-

1  The  names  of  the  various  leaders  of  the  five  invasions  of  Ireland
have  all  the  appearance  of  being  made-up,  learned  inventions  of  a  late
age.  They  are  either  derived  from  the  Bible  (like  Semiori),  or  are
adaptations  of  Latin  names  and  words  (such  as  Partholon  from  Bartho-
lomaetis,  Mil  from  miles),  or  they  are  simply  appellative  nouns  made
into  proper  names  (like  Bith  'world,5  Fer  'man,'  Britdn  'the  Little
Briton,'  Beothach  'a  living  creature,'  etc.).  Lastly,  a  few  seem  to  be
of  Norse  origin.  Starn  looks  like  Norse  stjama  '  star '  (can  Sera  be
founded  on  Welsh  ser  '  sidus '  ?),  Stariath  also  has  a  Norse  look,  and
Nil '  cloud  '  might  be  an  Irish  rendering  of  a  Norse  Nifl.  Iarbonel  —
Iarmo-NSl '  After-Nel.'

2  This  is  the  reading  of  U.     The  three  other  mss.  have  1002  years.

3  L  has  1000.


296  APPENDIX    A

ing  myself  from  wolves,  for  twenty-two  l  years,  during  which
Ireland  was  empty.  At  last  old  age  2  came  upon  me,  and  I  was
on  cliffs  and  in  wastes,  and  was  unable  3  to  move  about,  and  I
had  special  caves  for  myself.  Then  Nemed,  son  of  Agnoman,
my  father's  brother,  invaded  Ireland,  and  I  saw  them  from  the
cliffs  and  kept  avoiding  them,  and  I  hairy,  clawed,  withered,
grey,  naked,  wretched,  miserable.  Then,  as  I  was  asleep  one
night,  I  saw  myself  passing  into  the  shape  of  a  stag.  In  that
shape  I  was,  and  I  young  and  glad  of  heart.  It  was  then  I
spoke  these  words  : 4

*  Strengthless  to-day  is  Senba's  son,
From  vigour5  he  has  been  parted,
Not  under  fair  fame  with  new  strength,
Senba's  son  is  an  old  .  .  .6

'  These  men  that  come  from  the  east
With  their  spears  that  achieve  valour,
I  have  no  strength  in  foot  or  hand
To  go  to  avoid  them.

1  L  has  32.

2  It  is  clear  that  here  and  in  §  8  ascndath  '  at  last '  is  the  original
reading,  which  later  scribes  have  altered  into  sentath,  etc.,  'old  age.'
L  alone  preserves  the  old  word.

3  Here  L  has  the  old  verb  addro,  '  I  was  unable,'  replaced  by  fcremed
in  the  other  MSS.  Cf.  atroiset  Lignir  condesetar  impi,  '  they  were  unable
(to  cross)  the  (river)  Loire  so  that  they  sat  down  on  its  banks,'  Rawl.
B.  502,  fo.  47a,  I  BB.  135a,  18,  atroi  Hib.  Min.  70,  15,  atroe  Coirpri
Nuad,  'C  was  unable  to  get  it  from  him.'  Bodleian  Cormac  s.v.
Mugeme.  atroas,  atros  '  it  was  impossible,'  Rev.  Celt.  XIII,  373,  396.
LU.  98a,  21.

4  These  verses  are  out  of  place  here.

5  tend-rath,  literally  'stout  grace.'

6  The  meaning  of  the  noun  nia  has  not  yet  been  made  out.  The
compound  senriia  also  occurs  in  Rev.  Celt.  XIII.  397,  6,  and  in  Silv.
Gad.  1.  95,  11,  where  it  is  wrongly  rendered  'old  and  blighted,' the
translator  taking  rua  to  stand  'metri  gratia'  for  ruadh  (11.  p.  557).


APPENDIX   A  297

'Starin,  fierce  is  the  man,
I  dread  Scemel  of  the  white  shield,
Andind  will  not  save  me,  though  good  and  fair,1
If  it  were  Beoin,  .  .  .

'Though  Beothach  would  leave  me  alive,
Cacher's  rough  fight  is  rough,
Britan  achieves  valour  with  his  spears,
There  is  a  fit  of  fury  on  Fergus.2

'  They  are  coming  towards  me,  O  gentle  Lord,
The  offspring  of  Nemed,  Agnoman's  son,
Stoutly  they  are  lying  in  wait  for  my  blood,
To  compass  my  first  wounding.

'  Then  there  grew  upon  my  head  3
Two  antlers  with  three  score  points,
So  that  I  am  rough  and  grey  in  shape
After  my  age  has  changed  from  feebleness.

7.  '  After  this,  from  the  time  that  I  was  in  the  shape  of  a  stag,
I  was  the  leader  of  the  herds  of  Ireland,  and  wherever  I  went
there  was  a  large  herd  of  stags  about  me.  In  that  way  I  spent
my  life  during  the  time  of  Nemed  and  his  offspring.  When
Nemed  came  with  his  fleet  to  Ireland,  their  number  was  thirty-
four  barques,  thirty  in  each  barque,  and  the  sea  cast  them  astray
for  the  time  of  a  year  and  a  half  on  the  Caspian  Sea,  and  they
were  drowned  and  died  of  hunger  and  thirst,  except  four  couples
only  together  with  Nemed.  Thereafter  his  race  increased  and
had  issue  until  there  were  4030  couples.  However,  these  all
died.

8.  '  Then  at  last  old  age  came  upon  me,  and  I  fled  from  men
and  wolves.  Once  as  I  was  in  front  of  my  cave — I  still
remember  it — I  knew  that  I  was  passing  from  one  shape  into

1  ddgind  I  take  to  stand  for  dag-find.

2  This  characterisation  of  the  various  leaders  of  the  invasion  is  a  mere
play  upon  their  names  :  Andind,  find  '  fair ' ;  Beothach,  beo  '  alive ' ;
Cacher,  acher  '  fierce  ' ;  Fergus,  ferg  '  anger.'

3  Literally,  'there  were  arranged  through  my  head.'


298  A.PPENDIX    A

another.     Then  I  passed  into  the  shape  of  a  wild  boar.     Tis
then  I  said  :

'  A  boar  am  I  to-day  among  herds,
A  mighty  lord  I  am  with  great  triumphs,
He  has  put  me  in  wonderful  grief,
The  King  of  all,  in  many  shapes.

'  In  the  morning  when  I  was  at  Dun  Bre 1
Fighting  against  old  seniors,
Fair  was  my  troop  across  the  pool,
A  beautiful  host  was  following  us.

'  My  troop,  they  were  swift
Among  hosts  in  revenge,
They  would  throw  2  my  spears  alternately
On  the  warriors  of  Fal 3  on  every  side.

'  When  we  were  in  our  gathering
Deciding  the  judgments  of  Partholon,
Sweet  to  all  was  what  I  said,
Those  were  the  words  of  true  approach.

'  Sweet  was  my  brilliant  judgment
Among  the  women  with  beauty,
Stately  was  my  fair  chariot,
Sweet  was  my  song  across  a  dark  road.

'  Swift  was  my  step  without  straying
In  battles  at  the  onset,
Fair  was  my  face,  there  was  a  day,
Though  to-day  I  am  a  boar.

9.  '  In  that  shape,  he  said,  I  was  then  truly,  and  I  young  and
glad  of  mind.     And  I  was  king  of  the  boar-herds  of  Ireland,

1  Dun  Brea  was,  according  to  LL.  169  b,  35,  i  nhuib  Briuin  Cua-
latin,  '  a  sept  giving  name  to  a  territory  comprising  the  greater  part  of
the  barony  of  Rathdown,  in  the  present  county  of  Dublin  and  some  of
the  north  of  the  county  of  Wicklow. '  O'Don.  Four  Masters,  I.  p.  340,
note  n.

2  I  tske  fogertis  to  stand  ioxfochertis.

3  A  poetical  name  for  Ireland.


APPENDIX    A  299

and  I  still  went  the  round  of  my  abode  when  I  used  to  come
into  this  land  of  Ulster  at  the  time  of  my  old  age  and  wretched-
ness ;  for  in  the  same  place  I  changed  into  all  these  shapes.
Therefore  I  always  visited  that  place  to  await  the  renewal.

10.  '  Thereupon  Semion,  the  son  of  Stariath,  seized  this  island.
From  them  are  the  Fir  Domnann,  and  the  Fir  Bolg,  and  the
Galiuin  ;  and  these  inhabited  this  island  for  the  time  that  they
dwelt  in  Ireland.  Then  old  age  came  upon  me,  and  my  mind
was  sad,  and  I  was  unable  to  do  all  that  I  used  to  do  before,
but  was  alone  in  dark  caves  and  in  hidden  cliffs.

11.  'Then  I  went  to  my  own  dwelling  always.  I  remembered
every  shape  in  which  I  had  been  before.  I  fasted  my  three
days  as  I  had  always  done.  I  had  no  strength  left.  There-
upon I  went  into  the  shape  of  a  large  hawk.  Then  my  mind
was  again  happy.  I  was  able  to  do  anything.  I  was  eager
and  lusty.  I  would  fly  across  Ireland  ;  I  would  find  out  every-
thing.    'Tis  then  I  said  :

'  A  hawk  to-day,  a  boar  yesterday,
Wonderful  .  .  .  inconstancy !
Dearer  to  me  every  day
God,  the  friend  who  has  shapen  me.

'  Many  are  the  offspring  of  Nemed
Without  obedience  ...  to  the  certain  King,
Few  to-day  are  the  race  of  Sera  ;
I  know  not  what  caused  it.

'  Among  herds  of  boars  I  was,
Though  to-day  I  am  among  bird-flocks  ;
I  know  what  will  come  of  it :
I  shall  still  be  in  another  shape.

'  Wonderfully  has  dear  God  disposed
Me  and  the  children  of  Nemed  ;
They  at  the  will  of  the  demon  of  God,
While,  for  me,  God  is  my  help.

12.  '  Beothach,  the  son  of  Iarbonel  the  prophet,  seized  this
island  from  the  races  that  dwelt  in  it.     From  them  are  the


300  APPENDIX    A

Tuatha  De"  and  Ande,  whose  origin  the  learned  do  not  know,
but  that  it  seems  likely  to  them  that  they  came  from  heaven,  on
account  of  their  intelligence  and  for  the  excellence  of  their
knowledge.

13.  'Then  I  was  for  a  long  time  in  the  shape  of  that  hawk,  so
that  I  outlived  all  those  races  who  had  invaded  Ireland.  How-
ever, the  sons  of  Mil  took  this  island  by  force  from  the  Tuatha
De  Danann.  Then  I  was  in  the  shape  of  that  hawk  in  which
I  had  been,  and  was  in  the  hollow  of  a  tree  on  a  river.

14.  'There  I  fasted  for  three  days  and  three  nights,  when
sleep  fell  upon  me,  and  I  passed  into  the  shape  of  a  river-
salmon  there  and  then.  Then  God  put  me  into  the  river  so
that  I  was  in  it.  Once  more  I  felt  happy  and  was  vigorous
and  well-fed,  and  my  swimming  was  good,  and  I  used  to
escape  from  every  danger  and  from  every  snare — to  wit,  from
the  hands  of  fishermen,  and  from  the  claws  of  hawks,  and  from
fishing  spears — so  that  the  scars  which  each  one  of  them  left
are  still  on  me.

15.  '  Once,  however,  when  God,  my  help,  deemed  it  time,  and
when  the  beasts  were  pursuing  me,  and  every  fisherman  in
every  pool  knew  me,  the  fisherman  of  Cairell,  the  king  of  that
land,  caught  me  and  took  me  with  him  to  CairelPs  wife,  who
had  a  desire  for  fish.  Indeed  I  remember  it ;  the  man  put  me
on  a  gridiron  and  roasted  me.  And  the  queen  desired  me  and
ate  me  by  herself,  so  that  I  was  in  her  womb.  Again,  I
remember  the  time  that  I  was  in  her  womb,  and  what  each
one  said  to  her  in  the  house,  and  what  was  done  in  Ireland
during  that  time.  I  also  remember  when  speech  came  to  me,
as  it  comes  to  any  man,  and  I  knew  all  that  was  being  done  in
Ireland,  and  I  was  a  seer;  and  a  name  was  given  to  me —
to  wit,  Tuan,  son  of  Cairell.  Thereupon  Patrick  came  with  the
faith  to  Ireland.  Then  I  was  of  great  age  ;  and  I  was  baptized,
and  alone  believed  in  the  King  of  all  things  with  his  elements.'

16.  Thereupon  they  celebrate  mass  and  go  into  their  re-
fectory, Finnen  with  his  followers  and  Tuan,  after  he  had  told
them  these  stories.     And  there  they  stay  a  week   conversing


APPENDIX    B  301

together.  Every  history  and  every  pedigree  that  is  in  Ireland,
'tis  from  Tuan,  son  of  Cairell,  the  origin  of  that  history  is.  He
had  conversed  with  Patrick  before  them,  and  had  told  him ;
and  he  had  conversed  with  Colum  Cille,  and  had  prophesied  to
him  in  the  presence  of  the  people  of  the  land.  And  Finnen
offered  him  that  he  should  stay  with  him,  but  he  could  not
obtain  it  from  him.  'Thy  house  will  be  famous  till  doom,'
said  Tuan.1

1  Here  the  story  ends  rather  abruptly  in  R.     H,  adds,  '  Not  good.
Finit.'


APPENDIX    B.

The  versified  dinnshenchas  of  Mag  Slecht 1

LL.=  Book  of  Leinster,  p.  213^,40;  B.  =  Book  of  Ballymote,
P-  393 «i  15;  -£•  =  Book  of  Lecan,  p.  500 a;  R.  =the  Rennes
manuscript,  fo.  115  a,  2.

1.  Sund  nobid

idal  ard  co  n-immud  fich

diarbo  chomainm  in  2  Cromm  Cruaich,

tuc  do  3  each  thuaith  beith  cen  sith.4

2.  Ba  truag  nuin5  !
nonadraitis  Gsedil  guir,
uad6nocochuingtis7  can  ch£in
a  n-dfl  imm  8  ddil 9  domuin  duir.

1  I  am  indebted  to  Mr.  Whitley  Stokes  for  kindly  furnishing  me  with
the  various  readings  of  L.  and  R.  from  photographs  in  his  possession.
As  to  the  Rennes  MS.  see  Revue  Celtique,  xi.  pp.  90-91.

2  om.  LL.  3  in  R.  4  tuc  in  each  thuaith  liith  is  sid  LL.  5  Truag
in  ruin  BLR.  6  uaid  BR.  7  nocochungtis  LL.  nocuinngidis  B.  rochu-
indcidis  L.  rocuinidgis  R.     8  do  LL.     9  a  n-dail  andil  L.


302  APPENDIX    B

3.  Ba  he  a  n-dia

in  Cromm  crin l  co  n-immud 2  cfa,
in  lucht  rocraith  3  6s  4  each  cuan,
in  flaithius 5  biian  nochosbia.6

4.  Do  cen  buaid7

marbtais  a  claind  toirsig  8  truaig,9

co  n-immud10  guil11  ocus  giid,

a  fuil  do  dail  imm 12  Chromm  Chniaich.

5.  Blicht  is  ith

uaid  nochungitis  for  rith,
dar  cend  trin  a  sotha 13  slain,14
ba  mor  a  grain 15  is  a  grith.16

6.  Is  do  sain17
noslechtaitis 18  Gaedil  glain,
is  dia  adrad — ilar  n-echt 19 —
ata*.  Mag  Slecht  ar  in  maig.

7.  Tanic  and

Tigernmas  tn'ath  Temrach  *  tall 21
aidchi  samna,  lin  a  Sloig,22
rosboi  damna 23  broin  don  band.24

8.  Luiset 25  ole,

buailset  bassa,26  bruiset  corp,
ac  coi  ri 27  demon  rosdasra 28
fertais29  frossa30  fasna  folc.

1  crich  L.  2  imat  R.  3  in  luch  amcreid  L.  nocraith  B.  co  n-iwmud
arwmlucht  no  .  .  .  cruit  LL.  *  as  L.  5  a  flaithis  L.  6  nochosluad
LL.  nosbia  B.  7  Do  cheand  mbuad  L.  8  toisig  B.  toisich  R.  tosach  L.
toirsech  LL.  9  om.  LL.  10  imat  R.  u  gail  B.  12  in  B.  a  R.
13  saotha  R.  14  om.  LL.  15  gair  BR.  16  an  grain  7  an  grith  Z.
17  sin  .5.  1S  noslectais  BR.  roslechtaidis  L.  19  ilar  echt  LL.  hilar
ndrecht  R.  20  Temra  A  21  thall  R.  all  Z.  "  sluaig  LL.  w  domna  ZZ.
24  banna  ZZ.  25  laised  Z.  luidhset  #.  26  buad  lecht  bernai  (!)  LL.
27  re  BL.  ro  7?.     28  nosd^ra  B.     29  fersad  Z.     30  frasa  LR.


APPENDIX    B  303

9.  Marba  fir

sluaig  na 1  Banba  cen  brig  m-bil 2
imm  Thigernmas  taglach3  tuaid4
d'adrad  Chruimm  Chniaich  nf  muscin.

10.  Uair  itgen,5

acht  cethramthi6  sluaig  Gdidel7  n-ger
fer  i  m-bethaid — Man s  in  sds —
nf  dechaid  cen  b£s  'na  bel.

11.  Imm  Chromm  Cruaich
and  noslechtaitis  9  na  sluaig,
cia  dosfuc  fo  mebail 10  mairb,
lenaid  a  n-ainm  u  don  maig  muaid.12

12.  'Na  srethaib

tri  hi'dail  chloch  fo  chethair,

fri  saebad  serb  inna  slog 13

delb  in  Chruimm  d'or  dodechaid.

13.  '0  boiflaith14
Herimoin  ardfir15  in  raith,
adrad  roboi  for 10  clacha 17

co  techt 1S  Patraie  Macha  maith.

14.  Ord  don  Chrumm

rogab  6  bathis  coa 19  bund,

rodichuir  cen 20  gallacht  n-gand

in  n-arracht  fand  roboi  sund.21     Sund.  no-b.

1  om.  LL.  2  co  mbri  mbil  Z.  3  om.  B.  4  do  glantuaith  L.  5  Huair
itgerw  (!)  B.  6  ceathraimi  B.  cethroime  Z.  cethrama  R.  7  om,  LL.
8  truag  Z.  9  raslechtait  LL.  roslechtadis  R.  roslectaidi  (sic)  B.
10  melaib  Z.  n  a  ainm  R.  12  thuaid  Z.  13  fa  serb  in  slog  Z.  14  O  bse
i  flaith  Z.  15  ardfer  LL.  airdfear  Z.  fir  B.  16  forna  BL.  17  adhrad
fonia  clachaib  R.  18  tiacht  BLR.  19  co  Z.  20  con  LLBR.  can  Z.
21  xnS&meckt  robai  ann  sunn  Z.


304  APPENDIX    B

i.  Here  used  to  be

A  high  idol  with  many  fights,

Which  was  named  the  Cromm  Cruaich  :

It  made  every  tribe  to  be  without  peace.1

2.  'Twas  a  sad  evil !

Brave  Gaels  used  to  worship  it.

From  it  they  would  not  without  tribute  ask

To  be  satisfied  as  to  their  portion  of  the  hard  world.

3.  He  was  their  god,

The  withered  Cromm  with  many  mists,
The  people  whom  he  shook  over  every  host,2
The  everlasting  kingdom  they  shall  not  have.

4.  To  him  without  glory

They  would  kill  their  piteous  wretched  offspring

With  much  wailing  and  peril,

To  pour  their  blood  around  Cromm  Cruaich.

5.  Milk  and  corn

They  would  ask  from  him  speedily  3

In  return  for  one  third  of  their  healthy4  issue  :

Great  was  the  horror  and  the  scare  of  him.

6.  To  him

Noble  Gaels  would  prostrate  themselves,

From  the  worship  of  him,  with  many  manslaughters,

The  plain  is  called  Mag  Slecht.

7.  There  came

Tigernmas,  the  prince  of  Tara  yonder,

On  Halloween  with  many  hosts,

A  cause  of  grief  to  them  was  the  deed.

1  It  put  vigour  and  peace  into  every  tribe  LL.

2  '  Over  every  host,'  or,  perhaps,  'harbour,'  a  common  cluville.    See
LL.  191a,  4.

3  Literally,  'a-running,'  a  common  phrase.     See  LU.  115a,  4.  20.
Broccan's  hymn,  v.  93.

4  '  Healthy,'  or  perhaps  'whole,'  dan  being  used  in  either  sense.


APPENDIX    B  305

8.  They  did  evil,

They  beat  their  palms,  they  pounded  their  bodies,
Wailing  to  the  demon  who  enslaved  them,
They  shed  falling  showers  of  tears.

9.  Dead  were  the  men

Of  Banba's  host,  without  happy  strength,

Around  Tigernmas,  the  destructive  man  in  the  north,

From  the  worship  of  Cromm  Cruaich — 'twas  no  luck  for  them.

10.  For  I  have  learnt,

Except  one  fourth  of  the  keen  Gaels  *
Not  a  man  alive — lasting  the  snare  ! —
Escaped  without  death  in  his  mouth.

11.  Around  Cromm  Cruaich

There  the  hosts  would  prostrate  themselves.
Though  he  put  them  under  deadly  disgrace,
Their  name  clings  to  the  noble  plain.

12.  In  their  ranks  (stood)

Four  times  three  stone  idols,
To  bitterly  beguile  the  hosts
The  figure  of  the  Cromm  was  made  of  gold.

13.  Since  the  rule

Of  Herimon,  the  noble  man  of  grace,

There  was  worshipping  of  stones

Until  the  coming  of  good  Patrick  of  Macha.

14.  A  sledge  hammer  to  the  Cromm
He  applied  from  crown  to  sole,

He  destroyed  without  lack  of  valour
The  feeble  idol  which  was  here.

1  This  line  has  one  syllable  too  much,     sluaig  should  be  left  out.
VOL.  II.  U


INDEX

[This  Index  has  been  compiled  by  Miss  M.  James,  to  whom  I  wish  to
express  publicly  my  appreciation  of  the  admirable  way  in  which  she  has
done  the  work.— Alfred  Nutt.]

Titles  of  works,  or  portions  of  works,  quoted  or  referred  to,  are  in  italics.


Aalu,  Plains  of,  and  Elysium,  ii.
263,  264,  270,  275.

Abdera,  i.  279.

Abduction  stories.  See  Clidna,
Cuchulinn,  Dechtire,  Etain,  Lae-
gaire,  Manawyddan,  Pywll.

Abraham,   i.    227 ;    Apocalypse    of,

255-

Academy,  quoted,  ii.  16.

Acheron,  ii.  126.

Achilles,  his  fleetness,  i.  151  ;  in
Elysium,  261,  265,  266.

Adam,  his  fall,  i.  176 ;  race,  188,
189,  203  ;  and  Paradise,  203  ;  his
daughters,  204 ;  the  Yima  parallel,
309  ;  and  Eve,  311 ;  ii.  205.

Adamnan's  Vision,  i.  138;  salient
passages,  219-223,  225 ;  classi-
fied, 249,  250,  253;  288.

Adventures.  See  Connla  and
Teigue  ;  also  Echlra  under  Irish
Texts.

/Eaea,  island  of  the  undying,  i.  261.

Aed,  son  of  Ainmire,  i.  122,  123.

Aed  Abrat,  his  daughters,  i.  153.

Aed  Slane,  i.  122  ;  birth  story  of,
ii.  82,  and  Conall  Cernach,  83,
101,  and  Mongan,  84,  93,  94.

Aed  Mac  Gabrain,  i.  139.

Aedan,  King  of  the  Scotch  Dalriada,
ii.  6.


^Eneas  in  the  Otherworld,  i.  286,
287.

Aes  Side.  See  Fairies,  Happy  Other-
world,  Side  or  Sidh,  Tuatha  de
Danann.

^Eschylus,  ii.  128.

sEthiopis,  the,  i.  261.

Agnoman,  ii.  67.

Agriculture  and  Agricultural  myth,
(see  Egypt,  Fairies,  Powers  of
Life  and  Increase,  Ritual,  Sacri-
fice, Tuatha  de  Danann),  ii.  15  ;
in  relation  to  sacrifice,  145-149,
150,  151,  152,  154;  lucky  days
for,  178 ;  in  Vision  of  Mac  Con-
glinne,  180,  181  ;  in  relation  to
the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  182,  183,
184;  and  the  Lugnasad,  185,  186;
188,  194,  197,  198,  2i2,  215 ;  im-
portance to  peasantry,  203-205,
207,  209,  216,  218,  221,  224;
origin  of  fairy  dances,  225,  226  ;
and  changeling  belief,  229 ;  root
conception,  230,  231,  249,  250,
251,  252,  253  ;  vitality  amongst
peasants,  233,  245,  246  ;  in  re-
lation to  burial,  237,  278  ;  Aryan
agricultural  worship,  its  philoso-
phical basis,  244;  245-253,  257,
266,  267,  268,  278 ;  Celtic  and
Irish,  273,  280.


3o8


INDEX


Agricultural    festivals    in    Ireland.

See  Festivals.
Ahura  Mazda,  i.  309,  310,  311,  312.
Ai,  son  of  Ollam,  ii.  184.
Aife,  i.  195.

Ailbe,  daughter  of  Cormac,  i.  190.
Ailill  Aenguba,  ii.  51,  52.

father  of  Etain,  ii.  48,  50.

Olum  of  South  Ireland,  i.  120,

202,  209,  210,  ii.  64,  66,  68.
'Ailment,'  ii.  183.
'Ain6  of  the  Hill,  ii.  218,  her  son,

219,  220;  226.
Ainge,   the    Dagda's  daughter,   ii.

188.
Ainmire,  i.  122,  123.
Aithera,  i.  138.
Alba,  ii.  49.
Aldfred,   King  of  Northumbria,  i.

245-
Alexander  the  Great,  philosophical
results   of  his  conquests,   i.   279,

313.  325-
Alexander  Polyhistor,  on  Pythagoric

symbols,  ii.  107,  114.
Alexandria,  i.  286,  ii.  107.
Alexandrine  period  of  Greek  litera-
ture, ii.  191.
Aliusa,  Adam's  daughter,  i.  204.
All    Hallows,    or    Samhain.       See

Hallowtide.
Allen,    Grant,    on    burial   customs,

ii.  237.
Althaimenes,  i.  277.
Amadis  cycle  of  Romance,  the,  ii.

181.
Amairgen,  the  poet,  his  song,  ii.  91 ;

its  date,  92  ;  its  allusions,  94,  96  ;

its  pantheism,  104,  105,  120,  135,

251.
America,  discovery  of  (cf.  Navigatio

Brendani),  i.  161,  284,  ii.  116.
Amirgen,  ii.  74.
Amhir,  son  of  Arthur,  ii.  25.
Ammianus     Marcellinus,     on     the

Druids,  ii.  108,  109.
Amometos,  i.  325.
Amorgin,  an  Ulster  chief,  ii.  39.
Amorous  Queen,  island  of,  i.   164-

169.


Amphiarus.     See  Zeus.

Ancestor  worship,  i.  178,  212,  270,
278,  ii.  235,  236,  254.

Anchises,  i.  287.

Andromeda,  i.  278.

Angels,  i.  222 ;  archangels,  221  ;
fallen  or  neutral,  ii.  206,  211,  212,
213,  214  ;  guardian,  i.  298.

Anglo-Saxon  Christian  literature
(see  Phcenix  legend),  i.  239,  244,
245,  246.

Angra  Mainyu  (Ahriman),  i.  310.

Angus  (or  Oengus,  or  Mac  Ind  Oc,
or  Mac  Oc)  of  the  Brugh,  son  of
the  Dagda,  the  wizard,  i.  197,  198,
199;  his  Brugh,  211,  212,  233,
282,  288 ;  his  mother,  215,  his
race,  304,  and  Etain,  ii.  48,  49,
50,  55  ;  his  goblet,  90.

Anier  Mac  Conglinne.  See  Vision
of  Mac  Conglinne.

Animal  births,  ii   83,  84.

re-births,  ii.  95,  140.

Annwfn  or  Hades,  ii.  89.

Annwvyn  or  Faery,  ii.  13,  14.

Anthropological  explanation  of
myth,  ii.  154,  155,  184-186.

Antoninus  Liberalis,  ii.  191,  193.

Apocalypse  of  Abraham  and  its  Kin-
dred, i.  255.

of  Zozimas  the  Hermit,  i.  251.

Apocalypses  Juives,  les,  i.  255.

Apocalypses,  Jewish.  See  Daniel,
Book  of,  Revelation  of  John,  and
Revelation  of  Peter.

Apocryphal  Christian  literature,  i.
254;  compared  with  Irish,  ii.  99.

Apollo,  and  the  Hyperboreans,  i.
279 ;  287,  ii.  141,  142,  and
Dionysus,  141,  151,  247.

Apollonius  Rhodius,  ii.  192.

Apollodorus,  ii.  121,  191,  193.

Apples,  i.  142,  145,  150,  169,  190,
192,  204,  205,  236,  254,  269,  271.

Apsaras,  or  women  of  Indra's  para-
dise, i.  324.

Arabian  Nights,  ii.  86.

Arawn,  prince  of  Faery,  ii.  13,  14.

Araxes,  i.  325.

Arbois,   d',    de  Jubainville,  i.  117,


INDEX


309


123, 126, 144,  153,  156,  160, 162,

175,  212,  233  ;  ii.  54,  77,  92,  104,
105,  106,  107,  162,  165,  169,  238.

Archaeological  evidence,  adverse  to
the  Annals,  i.  124  ;  of  the  Brugh,
212  ;  concerning  the  Dionysus
cult,  ii.  137,  191 ;  in  relation  to
the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  234-238.

ArchcBological  Review,  i.  118,  128  ;
ii.  97.

Arda  Viraf,  his  Vision,  i.  323.

Argos,  i.  258  ;  ii.  268.

Aristophanes'  idea  of  Elysium
(Frogs),  i.  276.

Armagh,  County,  i.  138 ;  See  of,
188.

Arminius,  i.  275.

Arnold,  Matthew,  on  the  Druids
(trs.  Lucan),  ii.  in.

Art,  of  North  Ireland,  i.  120.

Art  Oil,  brother,  of  Connla,  i.  146 ;
called  Aenfker,  147,  228.

Artemis,  i.  261.

Artharva  Veda,  i.  294;  its  aristo-
cratic heaven,  321.

Arthur,  the  name,  Zimmeron,  i.  139,
ii.  7.

King,  i.  140,  his  birth,  ii.  22,

23-25,  88,  wife's  unfaithfulness,
22,  23,  25  ;  his  passing,  23,  25  ;
his  expedition  to  Annwfn,  89.

son  of  Bicor,  of  Britain,  i.  137,

138,  139,  140  ;  slayer  of  Mongan,
ii.  7.

Arthurian  legend,  i.  236-7;  ii.  n,
French  form  of,  in  Wales,  18  ;  as
parallel  to  Mongan,  23,  35,  pos-
sible sources,  23,  date,  24,  26,
chronological  and  topographical
associations,  25;  earlieranalogues,
28,  developments  as  type  of
Christian  hero,  29 ;  parallel  to
Cuchulinn,  etc.,  44;  value  to
English  Literature,  234,  253.

Arthurian  Legend  (by  Prof.  Rhys),
quoted,  ii.  48,  49,  89.

Artur.     See  Arthur,  supra.

Map  Petr,  i.  139.

Arts  and  Crafts  (see  Bards,  Boats,
and    Story-tellers) — Agriculture,


ii.  15,  212,  213,  224;  Brass-work-
ing, 42 ;  Bronze-working,  63 ;
Building,  147,  174  ;  Dyeing,  and
smelting,  161,  162,  174 ;  Em-
broidery, i.  174,  ii.  174 ;  Glass-
working,  47,  50 ;  Healing  and
foreknowing,  148 ;  Leech-craft,
174,  175  ;  Natural  science  and
astronomy,  108-110,  118.  Various
arts,  175,  176,  177.

Arvon,  ii.  20.

Aryans,  aboriginal  belief,  ii.  228,
Asiatic  elements  amongst,  ii.  158,
influence  in  Europe,  159,  con-
quest of  Iran,  i.  316,  eschatology
of,  ii.  1,  143,  152,  241,  275,  de-
velopment, 241,  272,  worship,
248,  249,  255,  258,  in  relation
to  pre-  and  non-  Aryans,  259,
260  ;  271,  272,  275,  276  ;  Evidence
on  agricultural  communities,  ii.
243,  chiefly  Aryan,  244,  agri-
cultural beliefs,  etc.,  253,  277;
appearance,  254  ;  survival  of  pre-
Aryan  belief,  255,  assimilation
of,  256,  257 ;  Finn,  the  Gaelic
representative  of  Aryan  heroic
type,  ii.  88 ;  invasion  of  India,
i.  294,  315,  316,  ii.  254;  Italian
Aryan  lack  of  prehistoric  myth,
i.  283,  ii.  275  ;  migrations,  chron-
ology of,  ii.  251,  277 ;  in  relation
to  religious  conceptions,  277-280  ;
mythic  belief  a  common  inherit-
ance, i.  134,  214,  compared  with
Irish,  196,  hell  of,  256,  earliest
and  latest  utterances,  294,  295-
330;  and  the  Avestic  creed,  315  ;
other  world  beliefs,  326,  329,
Irish  form  the  most  archaic,  331,
Greek  parallels,  ii.  1  ;  evolution
of  religion,  i.  330 ;  Summary  of
views  on  Aryan  culture,  ii.  277,
278  ;  Thracian  and  Celtic  Aryans,

i.  152-157-

Aryan  Expulsion  and  Return  for-
mula amongst  the  Celts,  i.  120  ;
ii.  88.

Asceticism  in  Happy  Otherworld
ideal,  i.  291,  311,  324,  in  India,


3io


INDEX


i.  321,  ii.  156,  and  metempsy-
chosis, ii.  248,  of  Orphic-Pytha-
goreanism,  125,  141,  142,  156,
247.

Asgard,  i.  296 ;  and  its  gods,  303,
306,  307.

Ashiepattle  ;  or  Hans  seeks  his  luck,
ii.  257.

Asia,  ii.  116,  and  the  Aryan  pro-
blem, 158,  159.

Minor,  ii.  107.

Askeaton,  ii.  212,  213.

Assyria,  ii.  264.

Asphodel,  the  mead  of,  i.  272.

Ath  Brea,  i.  138.

Athene,  ii.  131.

Athens,  and  the  Athenians,  ii.  171,
home  of  Carman,,  183,  rites,  265.

Athy,  ii.  63.

Atlantis,  i.  153,  156.

Atlas,  i.  271.

Attacoren,  the,  i.  325.

Attica,  ii.  268.

Attis  of  Catullus,  The,  ii.  237.

August,  month,  ii.  183,  184,  185,
213,  214.

Augustus  Caesar,  ii.  108.

Author's  views,  as  stated  in  other
works,  i.  119,  120,  121,  122.  123,
128,  129,  131,  140,  156,  160,  167,
192,  193,  210,  218,  272,  273;  ii.  21,
25,  51,  56,  234.

Avagddu,  trie  ill-favoured,  ii.  84.

Avalon,  i.  236,  237,  ii.  23.

Avesta,  the,  i.  307,  its  doctrines,
309,  310,  311,  312,  321,  322,  323,
324,  325-329 ;  date,  313,  and
language,  314,  315,  316,  329.

Avestic  eschatology,  ii.  241.

Axiochus,  the  Pseudo  -  Platonic,
i.  275.

Babylonia,  i.  330,  its  mythology,

254,  265;  ii.  264,  279.
Bacdub,  ii.  67.
Bacchae,  ii.  139.

Bacchus,  in  the  underworld,  i.  276.
Bahma?i  Vast,  i.  323.
Balder  myth,  the,  ii.  100.
Bale's  flood,  i.  197.


Balor,    King  of  the  Isles,  ii.   170,

I73>  I7Si  his  ev'l  eye>  178,  184.

Bardic  Stories,  i.  120,  122.

Bards  (see  Amairgen,  Maile,  Sen-
chan  Torpeist,  Taliessin),  i.  123,
128,  150,  and  pre-Christian  be-
liefs, i.  127,  135-136,  146 ;  influ-
ence on  tradition,  128,  136,  166,
267 ;  ii.  9 ;  stock  figures  of,  12,
30;  45,  68,  85,  86,  89,  90,  91,  92,
108,  195,  197,  201,  204,  205,  206,
208.

Barlaam  and  Josaphat,  History  of,
i.  249.

Barrenness,  ii.  74,  83.

Bassarides,  customs  of,  ii.  139.

Bear,  constellation  of  the,  ii.  in.

Beatific  city.     See  Heaven.

Behind  story,  the,  i.  199,  200.

Becc  or  Benn  Boirche,  his  song,  i.
138  ;  ii.  7.

Be'cuille,  the  witch,  ii.  184.

Bellum  Gallicum,  ii.  108.

Bengal,  ii.  149.

Bergentriickung  (Rohde),  instances
of,  i.  277.

Bethra,  son  of  Noah,  i.  203.

Bible,  the,  quotations  from  1  Corin-
thians, i.  227.

Genesis,  i.  254,  311,  315.

Hebrews,  i.  227.

Vulgate  version,  i.  227.


Biblical  and  classical  influence  on
Irish  annals,  i.  117,  ii.  54 ;  and
chronology,  76.

Bicor  of  Britain,  i.  137, 138, 140,  ii.  7.

Bile,  i.  217.

Bird-hunting,  ii.  39,  49.

Birds,  of  Faery  (see  Dechtire,
Phoenix,  Two  Swineherds),  i.  153,
ISSi  I59>  202,  205,  206,  211 ;
Bird-flock  of  the  Land  of  Pro-
mise, 218,  235 ;  ii.  205  ;  of  Para-
dise, i.  221,  225,  of  Rhiannon,
ii.  15,  16,  17  ;  of  Tethba,  49.

Birth  customs,  Irish —
Baptism,  Christian,  ii.  79,  Druid,

75.  i°2-
Couvade,  ii.  41,  68.
Thracian,  ii.  140.


INDEX


3ii


Birth  stories  (sec  Aed  Slane,  Bress,

Connall      Cernach,     Cuchulinn ;

see  also  Re-birth),  primary,  and

secondary,  ii.  93,  94.
'  Black,' ii.  183.
Black  Bull  of  Coolney,  the,  ii.  65,

68,  69.
Black  Hag  of  Lochlann,  the,  ii.  12,

Black  Sea,  limit  of  Celtic  domina-
tion, ii.  274.
Blai,  mother  of  Oisin,  i.  151,  152,

194,  ii.  87,  88.
Blai  Briugaid  of  Ulster,  ii.  39.
Blessed  ones,  their  earthly  paradise,

i.  251,  isle  of,  278,  279,  285.
Damosel  theme  in  '  Teigue,'  i.

206.
Blod,  ii.  65,  66,  67.
Blood-kinship  and  worship,  ii.  261,

265.
Boadag  (or  Boadach),  King,  i.  145,

his  realm  (Land  of  Women),  175,

and  Connla,  229.
Boand,  and  the  Well  at  the  World's

End,  i.  214,  215.
Boats,    of    glass,    i.    146,    148  ;    of

bronze,    154,    197 ;    high-prowed

currach,    a,    195  ;    great    galley,

200  ;  of  leather,  202  ;  coracles,  ii.

91 ;  burnt,  ii.  173  ;  of  silver,  174  ;

bridge  of,  175.
Bodbh,  King  of  the  Sid  of  Munster,

and  his  sons,  i.  203,  ii.  58,  59,  60,

61,  62,  63,  64,  67,  188.
Book  of  the  Dead,  ii.  271.
Boroma  tribute,  the,  i.  119.
Bose's  Saga,  i.  302.
Boser,  C,  i.  162.
Bouriant,  Ulysse,  i.  246.
Boyne  river,  i.  211,  215,  ii.  67.
valley,  sepulchral  mounds  of,

i.  211,  ii.  235.
Bragi's  Tale,  i.  295.
Brahmanas,  the,  i.  317.
Brahmanism.  i.  317,  318,  324,  327,

chief  tenets,  330.
Brahmanic  fasting,  ii.  77.
Brahmin  priests  in  relation  to  modern

savage  rites,  ii.  255,  256.


Brahmins  and  Pythagores,  ii.  107.

Bran's  Voyage,  i.  115,  126,  its  date,
133,  linguistic  evidence  of,  135,
141,  142,  158,  175,  272,  historical
evidence,  133-136,  141,  147,  two
main  episodes,  134,  Mongan  epi-
sode, 137-141,  why  introduced,
ii.  32 ;  Christian  elements  in,  i.
141,  230,  235,  summary  of  the
story,  142-143,  presentment  of
Otherworld  idea,  142,  143,  159,
160,  176,  184,  199,  225,  229,
crudity  of,  290,  304,  305,  in  re-
lation to  other  tales,  to  Connla,
144-149,  173,  176 ;  to  Oisin,  149-
152  ;  to  Cuchulinn,  152-158,  like-
nesses and  differences,  158-160;
to  Maelduin,  163-172,  likeness,
164,  difference,  173 ;  to  Etain's
Wooing,  175,  176,  231  ;  to  the
Phanix  legend,  245,  253  ;  to
the  Dinnshenchas,  272  ;  ii.  1,  8,
date  of  prose  and  poetical  ver-
sions, 3,  26,  32,  and  of  glosses,
4,  5,  8 ;  shape-shifting  powers,
emphasised  in,  10,  13.

Bran  (son  of  Llyr),  ii.  14,  15.

Branwen,  Bran's  sister,  theMabinogi
of,  i.  129,  ii.  15,  18,  21.

Breg  Mac  Mide,  ii.  62,  63.

Brega,  Dil's  ox,  i.  213.

Bregia,  Kingdom  of,  i.  155,  187.

Brehon  law,  ii.  276.

the  Righteous,  i.  221.

Brehons,  the,  ii.  276.

Breifne,  ii.  161.

Brenainn  of  Birr,  i.  238.

Breogann,  i.  217.

Bresal  Etarlaim,  the  Druid,  ii.  48,

5°.  S2-

Bress  (Eochaid),  or  Bres,  king  of
the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  ii.  170,
173,  his  birth,  174,  agricultural
features  of  his  reign,  174,  175,
181,  his  capture,  178,  and  death,
186,  187.

Bri  Leith,  sid  of  (or  Breg  Leith),
ii.  48,  63.

Brian  of  Clontarf,  head  of  the  Dal
Cais  and  Head  King  of  Ireland,


312


INDEX


his  dynasty,  i.  124,  193,  ii.  54,
71,  race,  190.

Bricriu,  of  Ulster,  ii.  39,  40,  41.

Brig,  i.  217.

'Bright  Folk,  the,'  or  Fairies,  i,
211.

Britain  and  Britons  (see  Arthur,
Brythons,  Celts,  Druids,  Goidels,
Senlabor),  i.  137,  139,  early  in-
habitants, 213,  indebted  to  Irish
learning,  245,  Roman  influence,
288,  ii.  15,  19,  20,  22,  25,  27,  35,
57,  62,  63,  108,  and  re-birth  idea,
122  ;  171,  survival  of  agricultural
rites  in,  253,  255,  256.

Britannic  sea,  ii.  148.

Brittany  and  the  Bretons,  i.  237,
ii.  26,  57.

Brocken  dances,  ii.  227.

Broder,  the  archer,  i.  300.

Broga,  meeting-place  of  the  'Bright-
Folk,'  i.  215.

Brugh,  the(see  Angus,  and  Coffey),  i.
211,  212,  282,  ii.  188,  235.

Brythons  (see  Goidels  and  Kymry),
invasion  of  Wales  by,  ii.  19,  20,
and  the  Arthur  legend,  23,  25,  26,
28,  87  ;  their  wonder-isle,  i.  237  ;
their  Merlin  story,  ii.  66 ;  com-
munity of  mythic  material,  87.

Buchi,  the  archer,  i.  300.

Buddha,  and  Buddhism,  evolution
of,  i.  317,  date,  319,  asceticism
of,  324,  327,  essentials  of,  330,
ii.  280.

Bugge,  Prof.  S.,  i.  296.

Bulls  of  the  East  and  West.  See
Two  Swineherds.

Burial  cultus  (see  Ancestor  worship,
Death  and  Burial,  and  Eschato-
logy),  i.  178,  270,  276,  277,  as
datum,  330.

Burial.     See  Death  and  Burial.

Bundahesh,  i.  312.

Caer  Sidi,  ii.  89.

Caintigern,   mother  of  Mongan,   i.

I36.  "•  3.  3i-
Cairbre,  i.  120,  190,  191.
Caoilte,  or  Cailte,  i.  120  ;  his  swift-


ness, 151,  and   St.  Patrick,  194,

197  ;  200 ;  235,  ii.  6,  95.
Cairell,  father  of  Tuan,  ii.  77,  79.
Caithair  Mor,  his  vision,  i.  216.
Caldron  of  Caridwen,  ii.  85,  90,  92.

the  Dagda,  171,  173.

Hades,  ii.  89,  92.

Calypso,  and  her  Isle,  i.  259,  282.
Cambridge    Series    of    Texts     and

Studies,  i.  248,  249,  251.
Campbell,  i.  121,  167.
Canaan,  i.  227.
Cannan,  the  Pict,  ii.  188.
Canonical   Christian  literature  (see

Bible),  ii.  99,  100.
Cantire,  i.  138.
Caridwen,  mother  of  Taliessin,  ii.

84,  85,  88,  89,  92,  93,  133.
Carman,    her   fair,    its    origin   and

meaning,  ii.  183,  184,  185,  205.
Carmichael,  A.,  i.  119.
Cashel,  i.  124.
Cat,  the,  of  the  Island,  i.  170,  171,

3°4-
Cathal's  appetite,  i.  207.

Cathbad,  the  Druid,  father  of  Con-

chobor,  ii.  72,  73,  74.
Cathmann,  i.  202.
Catholics  and  the  Fairies,  ii.  213.
Celtchar,  of  Ulster,  ii.  41.
Celtic  Aryan  migrations,  ii.  280.
Celtic  Fairy  Tales,  i.  119,  199.
Celtic  Heathendom,  i.  129.
Celtic  Heroic  sagas.     See  Sagas.

immigration  to  Britain,  ii.  19.

Celtic  Literature,  ii.  111.

Celtic  literature,  characteristics  of,

ii.  276.
Celtic  Magazine,  the,  i.  119.
Celtic  mythic  narrative  and  romance,

ii.  159,  234.
Otherworld  stories  and  belief,

origin,  ii.  159,  263,  267,  273.
Pantheon,  i.   177,  ii.  193,  249,


274.

—  religion,  sources  of  Pantheism,
ii.  106,  129,  130,  136.

—  and    Roman    literature    com-
pared, ii.  276.

—  romance,  its  charm,  i.  169.


INDEX


3J3


Celtic  sacrifice,  ii.  146,  147 ;  Greek
parallels,  151,  157,  159.

speaking  races,  affinity  of  their

myths,  i.  129,  common  source
of,  ii.  19,  their  bespelling  tales,
S°>  5I<57  '•  and tne  Dionysiac  rites,
226  ;  pre-Christian  ideas,  248.

Celts  (see  Brythons,  Druids,
Goidels),  antique  non  -  meta-
physical faith,  ii.  251,  persistence
of  agricultural  ideas  amongst,  258,
259,  early  agricultural  stage  of
culture,  278.

continental,  in  Asia  Minor,  ii.

107;  of  France,  108,  115.

Southern,  doctrines  of,  ii.


117,  118,  119,  122,  123,  and  Greek
influence,  127,  132,  146,  151,  164,
common  fundamental  concep-
tions, 158,  philosophy,  252,  area,
274.

(general)  and  classic  in-
fluence, ii.  249,  253,  267,  273,  in
8th  to  3rd  century  B.C.,  250,
similarity  of  Greek  myth,  258,
268 ;  argument  on,  273,  274,  275,
280,  281.

insular,    ii.     29,    113,    beliefs,

121,  and  Greek  influence,  133,
134.  135.  !43.  and  sacrifice,  150,
151,  164,  166,  253.

Cerball,  i.  122.

Ceres  (see  also  Demeter),  i.  285.

Cesair,  Noah's  descendant,  i.  203,
ii.  80,  92.

Cet  Mac  Magach,  ii.  75.

Cethen,  ii.  67.

Champion's  Ecstasy,  The.  See  Baile
an  Scail  (Irish  Texts).

Chances  of  Death  and  other  studies
in  Evolution,  ii.  257.

Changeling  belief,  in  Ireland,  ii.
229,  in  relation  to  sacrifice,  230,
231,  232,  233.

Chaos,  i.  299.

Charles,  i.  254,  255.

Chastity  idea,  and  Taboos,  i.  167,
191,  204,  206,  251,  287,  291,  in
Norse  tales,  299,  300.

Chess,  ii.  176.


Chretien,  his  poem  of  Erec,  i.  236.

Christ,  i.  117,  118,  148,  227,  233,
245,  247,  248,  in  Virgil's  Eclogue,
286,  287.

Christendom,  ii.  211.

Christian  Apocalyptic  (see  Phoenix
Legend,  Revelations  of  John  and
Peter,  etc.),  i.  246-250,  Jewish
sources,  254,  255,  256,  Classic
sources,  257,  281.

and  Irish  texts,  relation  be-
tween, i.  234,  235,  236,  compared,
252,  253,  257.

Norse  chroniclers,  the,  i.  303.

and    Classic    Eschatology,


253,  255,  257,  sources  of  the  first,
256,  281.

pantheism.     See  Erigena.


Christianity  and  Christian  Classic
literature,  in  relation  to  the  Arthur
legend,  ii.  29  ;  the  Chastity  idea,
i.  167,  291 ;  to  Druidism,  i.  146,
148,  ii.  75,  102  ;  to  Irish  tradition,
i.  117,  127,  131,  133-134,  136.  14i.
142,  148,  149,  161,  172,  176,  178,
179,  189,  207,  218,  219-230,  231,
234.  235,  236,  244,  245,  250,  252-
255,  257,  266,  267,  276,  281,  288,
291,  summary,  293 ;  327,  328,
331  ;  ii.  45,  72,  76,  79,  80,  81,  82,
83,  84,  94,  96,  98,  99,  100,  102-107,
113,  166,  168,  192,  195,  196,  203,
204,  205,  206-208,  209,  211,  212,
213,  214,  216,  217,  221,  223,  224  ;
228,  240,  241.

and  Fairy  lore,  in  Ireland,  ii.

224,  226,  227,  228,  230,  232 ;   in
Europe  generally,  233,  249,  253.
and   Greek   and  other   philo-


sophies, ii.  129,  130, 132, 134,  192,
203.

—  (see  Heaven),  in  relation  to  the
Irish  Happy  Otherworld,  ii.  1,  2,
121,  240,  241,  248,  249.

influence   of,   on   Classic  and


other  divinities,  i.  307.
Norse  Eschatology,  i.  268,


302,  303,  307,  309.
Northern  and  Western


Europe,  development  of,  i.  328.


3r4


INDEX


Christianity,  Influence  of.on  Phcenix
Legend,  and  analogues,  i.  239,
244-246.

Scandinavian  myth,  ii.ioo.

introduced   to   the   Danes,    i.

124;  the  Irish,  121,  125,  131,
134,  149,  177,  236,  276,  ii.  101;
Scandinavia,  i.  302 ;  Scotland,
ii.  77.

in   relation    to   Re-birth   idea


(Irish),  ii.  2,  4,  98-102,  113,  122.
—  in  relation  to  Sacrifice,  ii.  228,


230-232,  250,  251.
Christmas    Eve   (see  also  Yule),  i.

297.
Chronological  Synopsis  of  growth  of

Indo-Germanic  Elysium  idea,   i.

326-330.
Chronology  of  the  Irish  Annalists,

i.  n8,  ii.  76  ;  of  the  Four  Masters,

ii.  160,  161,  162-170;  of  Keating,

162.
Chthonic  divinities,  i.  277,  ii.  268.
Church  Slavonic,  a  dead  language,

i.  314.
Ciabhan,  the  beloved  of  Women,  i.

194,  195,  his  sweetheart,  205.
Cian  son  of  Dian-Cecht,  ii.  173,  175.
Cian  or  Cein,  father  of  Teigue.    See

Teigue.
Ciaran,  ii.  83.
Cinaeth  or  Cinaed  hua  Artacain,  i.

125,  138,  ii.  7,  32.
Cinderella,  i.  122.
Circe,  i.  261.
Civilisation,  Irish,  i.   121,   136,  141,

193,  245,   ii.    116,  117,  120,  151,

161,  165-167,  182,  183.
Classical  evidence  respecting  Celtic

Doctrine,  ii.  107-123.
influence  on   Irish   annals,    i.

117,  on  Irish  tradition,  236.
Classical  Review,  i.  262,  ii.  269.
Claudian,  and  the  Phcenix  myth,  i.

244,  and  Elysium,  285,  286.
Cleena    Fairhead    (see    Clidna),    i.

205,  206,  a  Welsh  parallel,  ii.  17.
Clement  of  Alexandria,  ii.  107.
Clery,  Bridget  (see  Clonmel  infra),

ii.  247.


Clew,  the  magic,  i.  143,  165,  168.

Cliars,  ii.  218.

Clidna,  wave  or  flood  of,  i.  194-199,
her  death,  199,  207,  211,  233.

Clonmany,  its  guardian,  ii.  217.

Clonmel,  witch-burning  at,  ii.  232,
247.

Clontarf,  battle  of,  i.  124.

Cluan  Airthir,  church  of,  i.  138.

Clyde  river,  ii.  19.

Cnoc'-Aine  (see  Knockain)'),  the  sid
of,  ii.  218.

Cockayne,  land  of  (see  also  Elysium
and  Vision  of  Mac  Conglinne),  i.
192,  207,  278,  322,  ii.  180.

Coffey,  Andrew,  i.  210.

George,  on  the  Irish  tumuli,  i.

211,  212,  ii.  234,  238.

Colum  Cille,  or  Kille,  orSt.  Columba,
of  Hy,  takes  Mongan  to  Heaven,
ii.  8,  9,  date  of,  30,  31,  33,  35,  36,
exiled,  77,  his  pupil,  82  ;  and  the
Fairies,  213,  217.

Commodian,  poet,  i.  251,  252.

Communion  in  sacrifice,  ii.  261,  262,
264,  265,  266.

Compilers,  their  influence  on  tradi-
tion, i.  130.

Comrade  births,  ii.  12,  16,  26,  42.

Comyn,  Michael,  i.  149,  152,  201,
208,  234,  ii.  205.

Conachar,  sid  of,  ii.  58.

Conall,  i.  198,  ii.  190.

Conall  Cernach,  i.  119,  ii.  41,  birth
story  of,  74,  75,  83,  93,  101,  133.

Conall  Gulban,  vitality  of  tales  con-
cerning, i.  121.

Conception  of  the  Twice-born  by
drinking  (see  Phanes),  ii.  42,  43,
47,  48,  49,  65,  73,  131,  133;  by
holy  water,  83.

Conception,  virginal,  ii.  100,  101.

Conchobor  Mac  Nessa,  i.  118,  120,
131,  136, 146,  ii.  33,  and  Dechtire,
39,  40,  41,  43,  45,  50,  his  death,
51  ;  68,  70  ;  birth  story,  72,  73,  74,

82-  93.  95-  l89-
Conchobur,  river,  ii.  73.

Cond,  i.  147.

Conflict  of  Matthew,  i.  251.


INDEX


3i5


Conn,  the  Hundred-fighter,  i.  119,
146,  his  sons,  147,  the  prophecy
concerning  his  race,  187,  gifts  of
the  Side,  188,  203,  204,  214,  228,
ii.  6.

Connaire  Mor,  i.  118,  119,  213,
death,  ii.  53.

Connaught  (see  Ailill  and  Medb),
its  Kings,  i.  121,  122,  123,  180,
182,  208,  209,  ii.  51 ;  hosts,  i.
210,  and  men,  ii.  58-60,  61,  64,
75 ;  the  doom  of,  61,  62;  the
three'Connaughts,  62,  63 ;  65,  66,
67,  68,  69.

Connemara,  ii.  173.

Connla,  Adventures  of,  and  parallel
tales,  i.  144-149,  150,  158,  163,
173.  175.  !76,  177.  184,  199,  idea
of  other-world  in,  160,  229,  230,
231,  282,  308,  visit  to  the  other-
world  of,  204,  205,  228,  234,  his
well,  214,  fairy  gifts  to,  215,
non-entirely  Christian  origin,  235 ;
266,    272,     ii.    14 ;    euhemerised,

195-
Constantinople,  i.  297,  298.

Cooldrumma,  battle  of,  ii.  77.

Coolney,  or  Cualgne,  the  kine  of
(and  see  the  Two  Swineherds),  i.
211.

Coran,  the  Druid,  i.  145,  147.

Cormac,  king  and  archbishop  of
Cashel,  his  glossary  (see  Irish
texts),  i.  124.

Cormac  Mac  Airt,  his  adventures
in  Faery,  vitality  of  tale,  i.  120,
138,  146,  the  story,  189,  190,  191,
192,  217,  234,  evidences  of  date,
192,  282,  name  for  other-world,
228  ;  ii.  6,  Christian  influence  on
tale,  30 ;  189 ;  euhemerism  of,
195,  200.

Corpre  Cromm.king  of  the  Dalriada,
ii.  63.

Corpus  ■poeticum  Boreale,  i.  300.

Cosmological  Other-worlds  (see
Adamnan,  Chronological  synop-
sis, etc.) — Irish  conception,  i.
134,  142-143,  144-160,  essentials
of,  149;  159.  161-173;  174-185,  186-


208,  209,  210,  213,  218,  223,  224,
229,  230,  231,  232,  independence
of  idea,  288,  289,  327 ;  pre-
Christian,  331 ;  compared  with
the  Arthurian,  236-237 ;  the  Anglo-
Saxon  (Phcenix),  238-247,  248,
249,  328;  that  of  Fairyland,  247,
of  Utopia,  247  ;  the  Jewish  Chris-
tian, 250-252,  the  Greek,  258,
273,  282,  290,  293,  326-329,
Roman,  283-287,  Scandinavian,
297-303.  309.  Iranian,  309,  312,
327,  Vedic,  320,  321,  324.
Cosmological  and  Eschatological
Otherworlds,  blended  idea,  i.
202,  207,  parodied,  207-208,  234,

235.  309.  330.
Cosmos,  the,  of  Virgil,  i.  287.
Couvade,  instances  of,  ii.  41,  68.
Cox,  Miss,  i.  122.
Creation    myths,     Norse,    i.     306,

Iranian,  309,  310.
Credne,  or  Creidne,  the  brazier,  ii.

170,  177.
Cridenbel,  the  lampooner,  ii.  184.
Crimthann  Cass,  king  of  Connaught,

i.  180,  182,  183,  232.

Niadh-nar,  i.  212.

Crinna,  i.  147.

Croker,  Crofton,  i.  210,  227,  230.

Crom  Croich,  or  Cruaich,  the  Irish

idol,  ii.  149,  150,  160,  161,  163,

166,  167,  183,  213,  251.
Dubh,  servant  of  St.  Patrick,

and  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,   ii.

212,  213,  214.
Cronn  of  Agnoman,  ii.  67.
Cruachan,  the  Dun  or  sid  of,  i.  210,

ii.  58,  59,  63,  67.
Cruachan  Aigle,  i.  218.
Crucifixion,  the,  ii.  51.
Cruind,  or  Cruinn,  or  Glas  Cruind,

ii.  63,  64,  66.
Crunniuc,  ii.  64,  65,  66,  67,
Crusius,  O. ,  i.  279.
Cu,  ii.  67.
Cualgne,  or  Coolney,  i.   211.  ii.  64,

66,  68,  69.
Cuan  hua  Lochain,  i.  125.
wood,  ii.  185.


316


INDEX


Cuchulinn,  his  sick  bed,  i.  n8,  119,
131,  136,  152-160,  ii.  38,  47;
linguistic  features  of,  i.  158 ;
relation  to  Bran  and  Comila,
158,  169,  173  ;  his  immunity  from
death  and  decay,  159,  232,  267 ;
parentage,  159,  160,  175,  266,  ii.
72,  74,  93,  184 ;  idea  of  Other-
world  in  tales,  159,  160,  177 ;
relation  to  Laegaire,  184,  and  the
Kine  of  Coolney,  211;  ii.  68,  69,
237  ;  analogy  to  tale  of  Perseus,
278  ;  in  the  Ulster  cycle,  ii.  25 ;
Christian  influence  on  tale,  30 ;
33,  34,  the  birth  or  re-birth  story
of,  38,  first  version,  39-41,  second
version,  41-42,  compared,  43,
47,  archaic  nature,  55,  56  ;  70,  71,
80,  82,  88  ;  94,  95  ;  marriage,  96,
97 ;  99.  ioi,  133,  158.

in  Faery,   i.   152-160,    ii.    46,

195,  242.

Saga,  the,  and  the  Tuatha  de


Danann,  ii.  193,  possible  his-
torical basis  for,  200.

Cumal,  father  of  Finn  (see  Finn),  i.
120.

Curoi,  king  of  Munster,  ii.  50.

Curtin,  J.,  ii.  221,  222,  235.

Customs,  Bathing,  ii.  49,  73  ;  Bird-
hunting,  i.  39  ;  of  Hospitality,  39  ;
Droit  du  Seigneur,  40,  41,  51 ;
Couvade,  41,  78.

Cycle   Mythologique   Irlandaise,    i.

"7.    175.    212,    »•    77,   92.   104.

105,  107,  162,  165,  169,  188,  238.
Cycles  of  Poems.    See  Fenian,  Tain

bo  Cuailgne,  Ultonian.
Cymmrodorion,  Honourable  Society

of.  Transactions  of,  i.  129.
Cynewulf,  poet,  i.  239.
Cyrus,  birth  of,  ii.  88.

Da  Derga's  Fort,  i.  118,  ii.  53,  56.

Dagda,  or  Daghda,  the,  or  Eochaid
Ollathair,  i.  198,  211,  212,  215,
ii.  48,  170,  171,  173,  174.  176,
his  boasting,  177,  179,  188,  235.

Daimones,  i.  263,  270,  ii.  115.

Dal-cais,  clan,  the,  ii.  34.


Dalriada,  the,  139,  ii.  6,  63.
Dalian  Forgaill,  ii.  82.
Dana,   or  Danu,   the  goddess,    her
race  (see  Tuatha  de  Danann),  i.

174,   I7S-   "•   55.   172,    189 ;    the

three  gods  of,  177.
Dances.     See    Brocken,    Dionysus,

Fairy  revels.
Danes  friendly  with  Irish,  i.  124.
Daniel,   Book  of,   and  the   Jewish

Messianic  belief,  i.  254.
'  Darkness,'  ii.  183.
Darmesteter,    James,    i.    309,     his

views  on  the  Avesta,  312-315,  316,

325.
Darius,  his  inscriptions,  i.  316.
Date  of  Irish  tales  (not  to  be  judged

by  that  of  the  mss.),  i.  132,  326,

ii.  10,  11,  43,  44,  55,  84 ;  13,  18,

53.    54.    55.    61,    68,    75,     181,

183.
Dawn,    the  rosy-fingered   goddess,

i.  260,   compared  with  Etain,  ii.

50.

Day  of  Judgment,  ii.  212.

Dea  Domnand,  king,  ii.  175.

Dead  (see  also  Ancestor  worship),
cultus  of,  absent  in  Homeric
literature,  i.  .262,  developed  later,
263,  264,  265.

Death  (see  Deathlessness,  Elysium,
and  Life),  Celtic  idea  of  (see
Druids),  ii.  146,  152,  158  ;  Budd-
hist idea,  ii.  158  ;  Orphic  idea,  ii.
158  ;  Thracian  idea,  ii.  140,  152.

and  Burial  customs,  Aryan,  ii.

278,  279;  Druidic,  108,  no;
Greek  and  Irish,  ii.  238 ;  Irish
memorial  festivals,  184,  185,  186;
mound  burial  and  burning,  i.  212,
ii.  234,  235,  237,  238  ;  Thracian,
140  ;  262.

Deathlessness  and  non-decay,  i.  134,
143,  146,  150,  157,  159,  166,  176,
190,  199,  212,  213,  224,  229,  231,
237,  242,  247,  250,  251,  252,  259,
260,  261,  263,  265,  266,  271,  277,
289,  290,  301,  320,  321,  325;  ii.
5,  8,  16,  17,  25,  29,  36,  91,  125,
126,  128,  138,  140,  142,  152,  244.


INDEX


3i7


Dechtire,  sister  of  Conchobor,  her

flight,  ii.  39,  40,  acts  as  chario-
teer, 41,  42,  43,  44,  46,  47.
Deformity  a  bar  to  fairy  favour,  i.

145,    to  Irish   king-ship,  321,    ii.

170  ;  to  Yima's  enclosure,  i.  310.
Dei  terreni,  Irish.     See  Tuatha  de

Danann.
Delbaeth,  ii.  174.
Deltbanna,  ii.  188.
Deluge,  of  Noah,  i.  203,  ii.  76,  78,

80,  135.
Demeter,    i.  260,  ii.  202,  203,  268,

269.
Demons,  or  Aes  Side,  i.  146,  157,

194,    207,   209,  311,    ii.  62,    171,

206,  217.
Denier  of  Hospitality,  the,  ii.  77.
Departmental  nature  gods,  cult  of,

i.  179.
Departure  penalty,  i.   143,  148,  149,

150,    151,    167,    182,    230,    232,

absent  in  late  tales,  152,  163,  167,

232,  238.
Dcrniers    Travaux  Allemands  sur

la  Legende  du   Saint-Graal,    ii.

22.
Destruction  of  Da    Derga's    Fort.

See  Togail  Bruidne  Da  Derga.
Devil,    the,    non-existent    in   Irish

Happy  Otherworld,  i.  292.
Devils,  ii.  212.
Dian-Cecht,    artificer,  ii.   170,  173,

174.  175.  J76,  177.  178.

Diarmaid,  father  of  Aed  Slane,  ii.
82,  83.

his  love  for  Grainne,  ii.  25.

Diarmait,  son  of  Aed  Slane,  i.  120,
122,  140,  266.

son  of  Cerball,  i.  120,  122,  140,

266.

Dido  and  /Eneas,  i.  167.

Dietrich,  i.  118;  his  theory  of  Chris-
tian eschatology,  255,  256,  271,
284,  291.

Dil  and  her  ox,  Brega,  i.  213.

Diodorus  of  Sicily,  ii.  108,  114.

Diogenes  Laertius,  ii.  115.

Dionys'aea,  the,  ii.  130.

Dionysius  Perigetes,  ii.  147.


Dionysius  the  pseudo-,  ii.  104.

Dionysus  cult  (see  Bacchus  ?nd
Zagreus),  ii.  125,  130,  131,  132,
133.  135.  J37.  i38.  Rohde  on,
138,  139,  140,  141,  142,  143,  144,
248,  true  nature  of  cult,  144-147,
151,  date  and  origin,  152,  Greek
origin  and  nature,  153-155,  246,
247,  248,  268,  characteristics,
J56i  157 ;  in  relation  to  Bran,
159,  Irish  parallels,  180,  183,
euhemerism  of,  ii.  202,  203,  207,
226,  243,  Semitic  parallels,  256,
in  relation  to  the  Greek  re-birth
idea,  242,  sun-god  basis,  245,
246,  influence  on  Greek  culture,
?47,  evolution  of,  265,  Jevons
on,  268.

Dolb,  i.  180,  182.

Domestic  animals  in  fairyland,  i.  21 1,
ii.  8,  as  gifts  from,  i.  213.

Domnall,  son  of  Aed,  i.  123.

Don,  the  children  of,  ii.  19.

Donegal,  ii.  33,  35,  213.

Doom,  the  Day  of,  i.  267,  the  Great
Meeting  of,  i.  221.

Dorian  invasion,  the,  ii.  141,  156.

tribes  and  Demeter  worship,

ii.  269.

Double  idea  of  after  life.  See  Cos-
mological  and  Eschatological
otherworlds ;  see  also  Elysium,
Hades,  Happy  Otherworld,  Tar-
tarus, etc.,  and  chap.  ix.  vol.  i.

Dowth,  the  mound  at,  i.  211.

Dragon  guards  of  the  Hesperides,
i.  271,  of  Paradise,  297,  ii.  65,
68.

slain  by  Perseus,  i.  278.

Dragon  stone,  the,  i.  136,  ii.  3,  4.

Drama,  the  Greek,  in  relation  to
Dionysus  cult,  ii.  247.

Dramatists,  the  Greek,  ii.  191.

Drasidae,  the.     See  Druids.

Draught-playing,  i.  274.

Dress,  ii.  40,  67,  109,  161.

Droit  du  Seigneur,  ii.  40,  41,  51.

Drucht,  ii.  188.

Druids,  the,  and  their  teaching  {see
Bresal  Etarlaim,  Cathbad,  Coran,


3i8


INDEX


Mainchenn.andTulchine),  chants
of,  i.  145,  198,  drink  of  forgetful-
ness,  157,  and  the  Fal  stone,  187,
magic  of,  ii.  48,  50,  62,  character
of,  63,  72,  73,  74,  75,  83,  Julius
Caesar  on,  108,  109,  no,  in,  112,
113,  118,  influence  of  Greek  cul-
ture on,  119,  122,  127,  sacrifices,
148 ;  177,  208.

Dua,  the  Dark,  ii.  185.

Dub,  the  bull,  ii.  65.

Dub  Lacha's  love  for  Mongan,  ii.  10,
n,  12,  13.

Dubmuc,  ii.  67.

Dumb  Champion,  the,  ii.  185.

Dun  bull,  the,  of  Cualgne,  ii.  66.

Dun  Inbir,  palace,  i.  157.

Dun  with  the  golden  rampart,  i.  203,
204.

Duncan,  Leland,  ii.  214,  215.

Dusk,  the,  of  the  gods,  i.  306.

Duvau,  L. ,  i.  118,  ii.  39.

Dwarfing  tendency  of  the  hollow  hill
belief,  i.  200.

Dyfed,  Prince  of.     See  Pwyll.

Earl  Gerald,  son  of  Aine,  ii.  218,
219.

Earth,  goddess,  the  Pelasgic,  ii.  268.

Earth  gods,  how  propitiated,  ii.  150.

Earth,  the  hundreded  Hospitaller,
i.  216.

Eastern  Mediterranean  populations,
the  source  of  Judaism  and  Chris-
tianity, i.  281.

Eastern  Oirghialla  (Armagh),  i.  138.

Eastern  location  of  Paradise,  i.  244,
272,  279,  297.

Ebert,  on  the  Phoenix  Legend,
i.  244.

Ecstasy,  ii.  138,  139,  140,  141,  142,
143,  151,  152.

Edain,  i.  195.

Edda,  the  Prose,  i.  295,  its  mytho-
logy, 296,  ii.  241,  parallels,  i.  296,

297 ;  300.  3°3-  3°S.  »•  9°-
Eddaic  Poems,  Rydberg  on,  i.  268,

3°9-
Eden,  Garden  of,  Genesis  account
of,  i.  254,  311,  315.


Ednecha,  ii.  60.

Edward  I.  and  the  Scone  (or  Fal)
stone,  i.  187.

Egypt  and  the  Egyptians,  source  of
Phoenix  Legend,  i.  245  ;  246,  con-
tact with  Greece,  283,  eschato-
logy  of,  330,  transmigration  be-
lief, ii.  79,  in  relation  to  Greek
eschatology,  263,  267,  and  agri-
cultural rites,  268,  269  ;  270,  271,
275,  277,  279,  280.

Eilif  Gudrunson,  i.  300.

Eithne  Inguba,  i.  153.

Eithne  Taebfata,  wife  of  Cormac,
i.  190.

Elatham,  or  Elatha,  or  Elotha,
ii.  170,  173,  174,  186.

Elcmain,  i.  215.

Elusinian  mysteries,  ii.  203,  218,
246,  265,  Foucart  on,  268,  269,
Jevons  on,  270.

Eliduc,  lai  of,  ii.  51,  56.

Elijah  in  Paradise,  i.  225,  226.

Eliusa,  i.  204.

Elphin,  ii.  85.

Elves  of  light  (see  Fairies),  their
dances  degraded  into  witch-
dances,  ii.  227,  228.

Elysium  (see  also  Hades,  Heaven,
Hell,  Irish  and  other  Happy
Otherworlds,  Tartarus,  Utopia,
etc.),  i.  175,  176,  177,  179,  non-
Christian  and  Christian  descrip-
tions, parallels  between,  232,
pre-Christian,  227,  231,  Irish  con-
ception, 229,  230,  in  Christian
literature,  252,  Elysian  Plain,  259,
or  land,  261,  264,  its  non-religi-
ous character,  265,  266,  Western
island  location,  269,  276,  277 ;
date,  269,  270,  early  mythical
accounts,  271,  evolution  of  an
ethical  idea,  273,  274,  275,  322,
various  locations  of,  276,  277,  278,

279,  Elysian   field,     of    Lucian,

280,  of  Plutarch,  284,  of  Virgil,
287,  289,  291,  Roman  ethical
idea,  283-287,  compare  ii.  275 ;
Elysian  isles,  of  Sertorius,  284,
285,  of  Virgil,  287,  289,  291,  de-


INDEX


3i9


velopment  of  idea,  287,  288 ;
special  features,  280-291 ;  post-
Homeric  antithesis,  290 ;  qualifi-
cations for,  291,  292,  293,  296,
297,  321,  323,  324,  Irish  and
Norse,  296,  297,  304,  fifth  cen-
tury Greek,  i.  308,  basis  of,  323,
324,  chronological  synopsis  of
growth  of  idea,  326-328,  329,
non-eschatological  character  of
Greek  and  Irish,  329,  how  to  be
studied,  330,  331  ;  ii.  2,  myths  of,
I33>  i35j  voyages  (see  Imrana,
etc.),  180;  Greek  and  Christian,
240,  241,  and  the  poets,  246,  its
evolution,  248,  263,  267,  268,  269,
270,  273,  274,  275,  279,  280,
Greek  Dionysiac,  143.

Elysium  or  Irish  Happy  Otherworld
in  relation  to  Re-birth,  ii.  2,  134,
242,  243,  development  of,  273, 274.

Emain  Macha,  i.  267.

Emania,  city  and  plain,  i.  117,  ii.  39,
40,  41,  42,  189.

Emer,  wife  of  Cuchulinn,  i.  153, 156,

157-
Empedocles,  ii.  246.
Enid,  i.  236.

Encyclopcedia  Britannica,  ii,  144.
Engan  or  Ingen  ii.  65,  66,  67.
England  (see  Britain),  ii.  19,  23,  25.
Englic,  i.  215.
English  Fairy  mythology,  its  origin

and  nature,  ii.  234.

the,  in  Ireland,  results,  i.  149.

literature    and    the   Arthurian

romance,  ii.  234,  253.
-  writers  on  fairy  neatness,  ii.  222.


Enoch,  Book  of,  i.  254,  its  Heaven,

255.  291-
in  Paradise,  i.  226.

Eochaid  Airem,  High  King  of  Ire-
land, i.  175,  176,  ruler  in  Meath,
ii.  49,  50,  51,  52,  53.

Eochaid  Bres.     See  Bress.

Eochaid  the  Dumb,  i.  182,  183,  184.

Eochaid  Finn  or  Fionna,  uncle  of
Connla,  i.  147.

Eochaid  hua  Flainn,  i.  117,  125,
ii.  80,  171.


Eochaid  Mugmedoin,  i.  121.

Eochaid  Ollathair.    See  Dagda,  the.

Eochaid  Red -weapon  of  Ulida,
i,  194.

Eochu  the  Rough,  ii.  185.

Eogabal,  i.  198.

Eos,  i.  261.

Epic  catalogue,  Irish,  i.  130.

Epic  tradition,  Greek,  ii.  190.

Epopie  Celtique  en.  Irlande,  i.  144,
153,  160,  162.

Er,  the  Vision  of,  i.  275.

Eran  Vej,  Avestic  Paradise,  i.  311,
312,  324.

Erec,  poem,  i.  236.

Eri,  ii.  174.

Erigena,  pantheism  of,  discussed,
ii.  102-107,  136.

Erik  Saga,  the,  i.  297,  298,  302,  307.

Erin  (see  also  Ireland),  i.  153,  155,
156,  176,  188,  the  three  floods  of,
197;  198,  260,  ii.  13, 149,  150, 175,
180,  invisible  kingdom  of,  190.

Erytheia,  i.  272.

Eschatological  Otherworlds  (see
Heaven  and  Hell,  Tartarus,  etc.),
Irish  vision  of  Christian  Heaven,
i.  134,  foreign  influence  on,  219-
228,  231,  236,  326-328,  Jewish-
Christian,  242,  245,  246-249,  250,
251,   253,  Jewish  Messianic,  250,


254.


Greek    origin,    281  ;


Egyptian,  ii.  263,  267,  269  ;  Chris-
tian and  Classic  conceptions,  252,
255,  327,  Greek  influences,  256,
257,  281,  Greek  conceptions,  271,
273,  274,  275,  287,  289,  290,  291,
292,  S1^.  322,  323,  326,  327  ;
Iranian,  i.  309,  312,  322,  328,
329,  possible  Greek  influence  on,
313  ;  327  ;  Irish  (see  Happy  Other-
world)  ;  Roman,  283  ;  Scandi-
navian, 268,  295,  296,  297,  322,
328  ;  Vedic,  320,  321,  326  ;  gene-
ral, 328,  non-Irish,  329.
Eschatology,  Aryan,  early,  ii.  278,
279  ;  Egyptian,  i.  330,  ii.  79,  267,
270,  271  ;  Greek,  ii.  107,  129,  241,
248,  267,  269,  270,  273,  279  ;
Irish    (see    Happy    Otherworld),


320


INDEX


ii.  240,  241  ;  of  the  Southern  Celts,
ii.  252  ;  latent  idea,  i.  322,  329.
Etain,    or    Etain    Echraide,    Birth
story    of,    ii.    47-53,    54-56,    242,
parallels,  16,  55,  71,  73,  80,  93,

95.  133-

the  Wooing  of,  linguistic  evi-
dence of  date,  i.  175,  304 ;  its
Otherworld,  184,  225,  230,  231,
232,  253,  ii.  47,  variants,  48-53.
her  race,  52,  54,  55,  56  ;  date  and
nature  of  tale,  53,  54,  190.

Etar,  of  Inber  Cichmaine,  ii.  48,  49,

,51.  55-.
Etat  Religieux  f,  de  la  Grece  et  de
I'Orient  au  Siecle  d Alexandre,

•■  3i3-
Eterscel,  i.  198.
Ethadon,  ii.  188.
Ethiopians  and  the  Sun-myth,  i.  271,

272.
Ethlenn,  or  Ethne  (Ethlenn),  i.  1S8,

ii.  186,  (Ethne),  ii.  42,  173,  175.
Ethfiology  i?i  Eolk-Lore,  ii.  226,  228,

254-

Ette,  ii.  65,  66,  67.

Etudes  deMythologie  Celtique,  ii.  107.

Euhages,  the,  ii.  108.

Euhemerism,  i.  123,  131,  140,  169,
177,  184,  189,  200,  2ii,  212,  231,
232,  233,  253,  259,  276,  277,  278,
293.  307.  323 ;  "•  5.  8,  9,  10,  23,
28,  33,  35,  38,  45,  73,  141,  165,
167,  168,  170,  182,  191,  192,  195,
196,  197,  200,  235,  236,  240,  250.

Euhemeros,  ii.  182.

Euphorbos,  ii.  115.

Euphrates,  river,  ii.  277,  279.

Euripides,  on  the  Happy  Other-
world,  i.  271,  277  ;  on  Orphicism,
ii.  128  ;  on  the  Dionysiacs,  139  ;
on  transmigration,  140,  143.

European  and  Irish  peasant  ritual,
its  nature,  ii.  216-219.

Europe,  and  the  Powers  of  Increase,
ii.  225,  its  fairy  belief  compared
with  the  Irish,  210,  211,  212,  215,
216,  220,  222,  233,  duality  of
burial  customs,  238,  physical
anthropology  of  races,  254,  258,


influence  of  Latin  literature  on,

276.
Europe,  Central  and  Northern,  ii.

277,  Northern,  171,  Western,  278.
Eve,  i.  204,  311.
Evidences  of  A/other  Right  in  the

customs  of  Mediaeval  Witclicraft,

ii.  257.
Evil,  ii.  184.
Evil,    knowledge   and   death,    how

they  entered  the  world,  i.  215.
Exeter  Book,  the,  its  version  of  the

Phoenix  legend,  i.  239,  240-245.
Expiation  in  sacrifice,  ii.  261,  262,

264,  266.
Extinction,  ii.  183.

Fachtna  Fathach,  ii.  72,  73.

Faebar,  the  champion,  ii.  62,  63,
65,  66,  67.

Faery,  the  land  of  (see  Aes  side,  or
Side,  Annwvyn,  Birds,  Fairy  and
Fairies,  Happy  Otherworld,
Tuatha  de  Danann,  Women),   i.

179,  180,  181-183,  189-192,  well
of,  214,  215,  present  Irish  belief
in,  211,  266,  308,  ii.  6,  8,  14,  15,
16,  17,  25,  26,  28,  31,  32,  43,  45,

46,  49.  55.  73.  92,  242.
Fair  of  Carman,  ii.  184.

the    Great    at    Samhain,    i.

153-
Fair  wives'  mound  (or  sid),  ii.  49.
Fairy  folk  or  Fairies  (see  Side  and

Christianity  ;  see  also  Tuatha  de

Danann),    origin,  i.   174,   175,  ii.

228  ;  character,  i.  179  ;  armies  of,

180,  181,  199  ;  and  the  Catholics,
ii.  213 ;  Changeling  belief,  ii.
229-233  ;  as  Devils,  ii.  212,  228  ;
as  fallen  or  neutral  Angels,  206,
211,  212,  228  ;  Gaelic  and  non-
Gaelic  tales  of,  233 ;  confused
with  ghosts,  234,  235.

gifts,   Life,  i.    182,   183,   188,

190,  192 ;  the  emerald  cup,  205  ;
the  three  wonderful,  of  Ireland,
210;  of  cattle,  231  ;  silver  and
gold,  298  ;  dangers  of  accepting,
299,  300.


INDEX


321


Fairy  land,  ii.  253.

mounds  or  knolls,  i.  145,  157,

174,  175,  sanctity  of,  and  possible
origin,  178,  open  at  Hallow-e'en,
210,  211 ;  231,  ii.  3,  6,  7,  49,  58,
59.  67.  89,  175,  218,  219.

Powers  of  Life,  ii.  216.

Principle  of  Life  exchange,  ii.


229.

—  Queen.     See  Morrigan,  the.

—  Revels  by  night,  i.  181,  215,
dangers  of,  308,  psychology  of,
ii.  224,  225,  226.

Tales,  Irish,  formal  classifica-


tion of,  ii.  208,  209,  true  nature,

2IO,  311.

—    Irish      and      General


European     compared,     ii.      233,

234-

Fairies,  Irish,  modern  belief  in,  ii.
169,  characteristic  features,  help
men,  212,  invisibly,  213,  fight
giants,  215 ;  216,  love  neatness,
221,  224-226,  revel  at  night  {see
supra),  customs  connected  with,
and  their  value  to  Folk-lore,  214,
215,  217,  218,  219,  local  charac-
teristics, 220,  221,  in  relation  to
the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  243.

FairydomandWitchcraft,  discussed,
ii.  226-229,  254_257-

Fal,  the  Scone  stone,  or  Lia  Fal,  i.
187,  ii.  171.

Falga,  the  calf,  i.  213.

Falga,  or  Man  [see  Foal),  the  western
Island  of  Promise,  i.  213.

Falias,  city,  ii.  171.

Fallen  or  neutral  angels.  See  Angels.

Fann,  wife  of  Cuchulinn  in  the
Otherworld,  i.  153,  154,  155,
yields  him  up,  156,  157,  her  race,
159,  160,  174  ;  237  ;  266,  308,  ii.
46,  47.

Faye,  E.  de,  i.  255.

Febal,  father  of  Bran,  1,  146.

Femen,  or  Sid  ar  Femun,  ii.  52,
58,  59.  67,  188.

Fenian  tales,  or  Cycle,  Homeric
parallel,  i.  151  ;  component
parts,  151,    romances,  193,    idea

VOL.  II.


of  Otherworld,  201,  in  prose,  208,
in  the  Agallamh,  235,  comic
element  in  the  tales,  ii.  181.

Fenians  or  Fianna  or  Fians  (see
Finn),  destruction  of,  i.  120;  poem
on,  138 ;  mourn  for  Oisin,  150 ;
i.  193,  194,  195,  200,  201,  234,
ii.  189,  197.

Fer  Figail,  i.   198.

Ferdiad,  i.  118.

Fergna.     See  Fiachna  Lurgan.

Fergus  Cerrbel,  ii.  82.

Fergus  Mac  Roig  of  Ulster  (uncle
of  Conchobor),  ii.  39,  40,  41,  61,
his  return  from  the  Otherworld,
68.

Fern  fires  to  cause  invisibility,  ii.
186.

Festivals  (see  Dionysus,  Eleusinia,
Olympic  games,  Thesmophoria,
etc. ),  of  the  Namnites,  ii.  147,  and
Senite  priestesses,  148-149,  151 ;
the  Meriah  sacrifice,  149  ;  of  Mag
Slecht,  149,  150,  at  Hallowtide,
160,  161,  163,  166,  Carman  fair,
184,  or  Lugnasad,  185,  196,  205,
Tailtin  fair,  185,  205,  Garland
Sunday,  214,  Agricultural  exist-
ing Irish,  216-220.

Fiacha  Suighde,  or  Fiacaidh
Suighdi,  uncle  of  Connla,  i.  147.

Fiachell,  a  game,  i.  181.

Fiachna  Lurgna,  or  Fergna,  called
Mac  Dare  (see  Caintigern  and
Mongan),  the  wizard,  i.  122,  136,
137,  138  ;  139,  ii.  3,  4,  6,  12,  16,
31,  6o,  62,  63,  64,  65,  66,  67,  70.

Fiachna  mac  Retach  (of  the  Aes
Side),  i.  180,  his  daughter,  182,
183.

Fiachu,  i.  138.

Fians,  the,  i.  201.

Fianna,  the.     See  supra,  Fenians.

Fimias,  city,  ii.  171.

Finachta,  i.  119.

Findamnas,  ii.  186.

Findchoem,  mother  of  Connal,  ii.

74.  75-
Findgoll,  the  wizard,  ii.  186.
Finmark,  i.  298.


322


INDEX


Finn,  Find,  or  Fionn,  son  of  Cumal
(see  Fenians,  Mongan,  etc. ),  i.
120 ;  his  re-births,  134,  139,  ii.
3,  6,  22,  23,  32,  36 ;  Arthurian
parallel,  i.  140 ;  ii.  23-26,  29,
150,  193,  194,  195  ;  and  the  giants,
200,  201 ;  location  of,  34,  35,  36 ;
his  son  Oisin,  ii.  87,  88  ;  89  ;  in
relation  to  Taliessin,  89,  93,  95  ;
his  warriors,  189,  197,  legends  of,
200,  206.

the  Bull,  ii.  65.

Finnbennach,  the  Cow,  ii.  68.

Fintan,  ii.  80.

Firbolgs,  the  race  of,  i.  203,  ii.  78,

173.  l82-
Fire,     the    art    of,     i.    310,     lost,

312.
funereal.    See  Death  and  Burial

customs.

magic,  to  cause  invisibility,  ii.


186.


—  preservative  (circles,  ramparts,
etc.),  i.  169,  220,  223,  297.

—  punitive,  i.  170,  257.

—  purgative,  i.  246,  256,  257.
—  regenerative,  246,  312,  321.

substituted  for  sacrifice,  ii.  186,


187.

Fitzgerald,  D.,  on  Limerick  tradi-
tions, ii.  212,  213,  219.
Fitzgeralds,  the.     See  Earl  Gerald.
Five-fold   division    of    Otherworld,

Hesiodic,  i.  263.
Flann  Cinneh,  Prince,  i.  189.
Manistrech,    and    the    Irish

renaissance,   i.  125,    his  learning

and  date,  127,   186,    189,    ii.   33,

54,  55,  83.
Flesk,  Nechtan's  cup-bearer,  i.  214.
Flood.      See  Clidna,   Deluge,    and

Noah.
Floods,  the  three  great,  of  Ireland,

i.  197.
Foal,  Isle  of,  i.  187.
Folk   of    the   goddess    Dana.      See

Tuatha  de  Danann.
Folk-Lore,  i.    128,   196,    ii.   51,   56,

154,  214,  215,  232,  234,  238.
Folk-lore  (see  Dinnshenchas,  Fairies,


Zagreus  myth,  etc.),  evidences  of,
on  Irish  re-birth  idea,  etc.,  ii.  2,

5°.  S1-  S6.  57.  73.  95.  modern,
Irish,  etc.,  169,  198-202,  203,  204,
234,  235,  238,  243,  its  classifica-
tion, 208,  209,  and  nature,  210,
2ii,  tales,  212,  213;  228.

Folk-Lore  International  Congress,
Transactioiis  of,  i.  160,  ii.  22.

Folk-Lore  Journal,  ii.  214,  217.

Folk-Lore  Record,  i.  120,  121,  122,
129,  ii.  21,  88.

Folk-Lore  Society,  i.  129,  presi-
dential address  (1897),  ii.  234.

Folk-lore  themes  :  abduction  (see
Clidna,  Cuchulinn,  Dechtire,
Etain,  Incest,  Pwyll,  etc.),  i.  185,
199,  ii.  46.

deceived    husband     (see

Mongan,  etc. ),  ii.  13.

deceived     wife      (see

Caintigern,  etc.,  and  Re-birth),
ii.  11,  14.

faithless  wife  (see  Fann,


etc.),  ii.  22,  23,  25.
—   father    desiring    to  wed

daughter,  i.  122.

gambling  for  a  wife,  ii.  52.

jealous  step-mother  and

exposed  child,  ii.  56.

jealous   wife   and   perse-


cuted rival,  ii.  51,  56,  84.
mermaidens'    garments

stolen,  ii.  73.
mother  eating  offspring,

ii.  14.
mother,         producing

animals.     See  Mairend.

rash  promise,  ii.  12.

shape  -  changing.       See

Shape-changing.

supernatural  lover  in  bird


form,  ii.  52.
Swan  -  maidens'  clothes

stolen,  ii.  73.
wife  or  husband  and  lost

lover,  i.  175,  184,  ii.  14.
wonder-child  (see  Arthur,

Finn,   Mongan,  etc.),   ii.    12,  17,


28,  131,  133.


INDEX


323


Folk-lore  themes,  worm  motive  (see
Conception  by  drinking),  ii.  73,

74.  I31-
Follach,  ii.  150.

Fomorians,  the  race  of,  ii.  170,  173,

!74.  175.  J76,  177.  178,  179.  l82,
186.

Food  and  drink,  magic—

Food,  magic  (see  Apples,

and  Fruit), itsstayingpowers.i.  145,
169,  215,  238,  life-giving  powers,
149,  264,  271,  inexhaustibility,
159,  164,  204,  212,  230,  can  be
dispensed  with,  153,  206,  224,
tastes  as  desired,  165,  166  ;  170,
176,  202,  heaven's  odour  as,  222,
233,  251,  digestibility,  269,  275,
297,  dangers  of,  299,  ghostly,
320;  321,  322,  ii.  15, 16,  41,  42,  46.

Drink,  i.  150,  inexhausti-
bility of,  i.  155,  191,  192,  212,  217  ;
of  forgetfulness,  157;  sleep-giving,
165  ;  176,  182,  188,  in  the  emerald
cup,  205 ;  nectar,  271  ;  281  ;
morning  dew,  307 ;  soma,  320,
321.

Foreigner's  Isles,  ii.  175.

Forgetfulness  of  mortals  in  Faery
(see  Time),  i.  164.

Forgoll,  a  poet,  ii.  7,  82.

Fort,  the  heavenly,  of  the  Irish
kings,  i.  203.

Forth,  river,  ii.  19.

Fortunate  Isles  (see  Insula  Pomo-
rum),  i.  284,  291.

Foster-brothers  of  Maelduin,  i.  163  ;
their  fate,  170,  171.

Fothain,  ii.  8.

Foucart,  Paul,  on  the  Eleusinian
mysteries,  ii.  268,  269,  and  Orphic
tablets  of  the  dead,  270,  271.

Four  Ancient  Books  of  Wales,  ii.
19,  86.

Four  divisions  of  heaven  in
Maelduin,  i.  165,  in  Adamnan's
vision,  220-223,  225i  m  Tidings
of  Doomsday,  223-224,  225  ;  231  ;
in  Book  of  Enoch,  255.

Frag.  Hist.  Graecorum,  ii.  107,  109.

France,  ii.  108.


Frazer,  J.  G.,  ii.  144,  186.

French  Arthurian  romance,  and  the

position  of  women,  i.  156,  ii.  18.
Fresen,  i.  202.
Friedlieb,  J.  H.,  i.  250.
Friuch,  ii.  58.
Fruit  (see  Apples  and  Hesperides),

i.   214,   215,   225,   229,   230,   238,

240,  242,  245,  246,  248,  249,  250,

251,  254,  255,  261,  273,  275,  280,

284,  285,  286.
Fuamnach,   one   of  Mider's  wives,

ii.  48,  49,  50,  51,  52.
Fuat's  sod  of  truth,  i.  217.
Fuidell  mac  Fiadmire,  ii.  59.
Funeral     mounds      (see     Ancestor

worship,   etc.),    i.   178,  211,   212,

ii.  234,  235,  238.
Fursa's   vision,   i.    228,    date,    245,

249,  253,  288.
Fustel  de  Coulanges,  ii.  255.

Gabra,  battle  of,  i.  120.
Gaelic  delight  in  Music,  i.  184.

folk-tales,  modern,  i.  119,  201.

genius,  its  charm,  i.  218.

and  non-Gaelic  folk-lore,  ii.  233,

253-


popular  tales,  and  the  other-
world,  i.  152.
romance,    1.


118,  171,  173  ;
second  cycle,  120 ;  idea  of  other-
world,  and  of  re-birth,  134  ;  mythic
literature,  173 ;  possibly  akin  to
Brythonic,  237.

Gaelic  Journal,  i.  144.

Gaelic  and  Welsh  mythic  romance
compared,  ii.  13-22,  22-28,  35.

Gaels  (see  Celtic,  Celts,  Druids,
Finn,  Goidels,  etc.),  Gaelic  tales,
ii.  51,  Olympus,  76,  settlement
in  Scotland,  77 ;  gathering  at
Tailtin,  82;  88,  origin  of,  118,
119,  120,  121,  122,  123,  127,  128,
sacrifices  amongst,  148,  religion,
196,  literature,  205-206,  myth-
ology, 208,  219,  common  stock
of,  220,  221.

modern,  of  Ireland  (see  Goidels),

ii.  19.


324


INDEX


Gaels,  modern,  Wales  (see  Bry-
thons),  ii.  19.

Gaible,  son  of  Ethadon,  ii.  188.

Gaidoz,  Henri,  ii.  107,  criticism  of,
criticised,  272.

Galatians,  the,  ii.  107.

Galen,  on  the  Thracian  idea  of  life
and  death,  ii.  140.

Galiuin,  the  race  of,  ii.  78.

Gallizenae,  the  race  of,  ii.  148.

Gambling  for  a  wife,  ii.  52.

Games,  Chess,  ii.  176,  Fiachell,
i.  181,  Gambling,  ii.  52.  Olympic
and  Irish,  ii.  185,  205.

Gandharvas,  the,  of  Swarga,  i.  324.

Garad,  the  well  of  (called  Uaran
Garad),  ii.  63,  66.

Gardner,  Prof.  Percy,  on  the  de-
rivation of  Christian  eschatology,
i.  256.

Garland  Sunday,  ii.  214.

Garotman,  or  Paradise,  i.  312.

Gaster,  Rev.  Dr.,  on  the  Jewish
origin  of  the  Apocalypse  of  Peter,
i.  255,  256.

Gathas,  or  hymns  of  the  Avesta,
i.  314,  315.

Gathering  where  there  is  no  sorrow,
a  name  for  the  other  world,  ii.  3.

Gaul,  History  of,  by  Timagenes,
ii.  108.

Gauls,  the  (see  also  Celts  (con-
tinental), Druids  and  Gaels),
Roman  influence  on,  i.  288  ;  be-
liefs and  customs,  ii.  108,  109,
no,  112,  113,  Southern  Gauls,
their  doctrines,  ii.  115;  and
Graeco-Roman  civilisation,  116,
118,  119,  120,  i2i,  Greeks
amongst,  128.

Gehenna  or  Hell,  i.  250.

Geirrod,  King,  his  land,  i.  299,
300,  302,  303,  304.

Geis  or  Taboo,  ii.  187.

Genann,  i.  197.

Genesis.     See  Bible.

Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  on  Arthurian
romance,  i.  236,  237,  ii.  24.

Geraint,  in  relation  to  Erec,  i.  236.

Germany  and  the  Germans  (see  also


Teutons),  Gods  of  the  Germanic
races,  i.  177 ;  Roman  influence
on,  288 ;  independence  of  North
German  faiths,  296  ;  invaders  of
Britain,  ii.  25  ;  116  ;  248.

Getae,  the  Thracian,  their  faith,
ii.  140.

Geryon,  i.  272.

Ghosts,  absence  of,  in  Greek  Epic
belief,  i.  262,  presence  on  other
primitive  beliefs,  263,  and  later
Greek,  263,  264 ;  and  fairies  in
modern  folk-lore,  ii.  234,  235.

Giants,  in  Geirrod's  land,  i.  299 ;
in  Ireland,  200,  201 ;  ii.  187 ;
battle  with  fairies,  215,  216 ;  in
the  Western  Otherworld,  i.  200,
201.

Gifts,  the  three  wonderful,  of  Ire-
land (see  Talismans),  i.  210.

Gilla  Caemain,  i.  125,  ii.  162.

Gilla  im  Chomded  hua  Cormac,
poet,  on  Connla,  i.  227,  228.

Glastonbury,  i.  236,  237.

Glittering  Plain,  the,  i.  298,  301,
302,  307.

Godeu,  battle  of,  ii.  90.

Gods'  Garden,  rise  of  belief  in,
i.  270.

Goibniu,  or  Gobban  Saer,  the  smith,
ii.  176,  177,  178,  180,  187.

Goidels,  and  Goidelic  Celts,  in
Britain,  i.  213  ;  ii.  87.

in  Ireland,  ii.  93 ;  settle-
ment of,  163,  167,  172,  188.

in  Wales,    i.    121,    129,

ii.  19,  20.

Myth  of,  ii.  23,  28,  35,  com-
munity with  Brythonic,  87,  with
Irish  re-birth  idea,  122,  bardic
traditions,  163,  of  Crom  Cruiach,
167,  of  Tighernmas,  165,  166,
171,  of  Battle  of  Moytura,  182,
Tribal  games  of,  185.

Gold-smelting  in  Ireland,  ii.  161,
162.

Gold  Queen  and  Silver  Queen,
Gaelic  tale,  ii.  51.

Golden  age,  the,  i.  263,  269,  270,
274.  324>  327.  329.  »•  l65-


INDEX


325


Golden  Bough,  the,  ii.  144,  186.

Goll,  son  of  Dolb,  i.  120,  and  his
wife,  180,  182,  200.

Gollancz,  Israel  (see  Exeter  Book),
i.  239.

Gorame,  G.  L.,  on  Celtic-Greek
rites,  ii.  226,  on  the  origin  of
witchcraft,  228,  on  agricultural
folk-lore,  254,  255,  commented
on,  256,  257.

'Good  people,'  the,  or  fairies,  ii.  159.

Gorias,  city,  ii.  171.

Gorm,  king,  i.  299,  300,  301.

Gottfried  von  Monmouth,  i.  237.

Grail  (the  Holy),  i.  156,  167.

Grainne,  daughter  of  Cormac,  i.  120,
ii.  25.

Grasco-Roman  beliefs,  i.  132,  ii.
113,  127.

opinion  of  Celtic  beliefs,  ii.  107-

112,  113,  114,  116,  117,  118.

Great  Land,  the,  i.  176.

Plain,  the,  i.  176.

Strand,  i.  146.

Greece  or  Hellas — Archaic,  ii.  122.

Home  of  Carman,   ii.   183,  of

the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  171.

King   and    Prince   of,   i.    195,

199.

Greek  Aryan  agricultural  communi-
ties, ii.  242,  244 ;  260,  agricul-
tural cults,  268.

and  Celtic  agricultural  sacri-
ficial cults,  ii.  151-153.

Cults.       See     Dionysus     and

Eleusinian  rites.

Eschatological    development,

compared  with  Irish,  ii.  241,  258,
260,  262,  273,  275;  with  Egyptian,
263,  264,  265,  268-272,  275,  279,
280,  281  ;  Eastern  influence  on,
265-267 ;  Aryan  nature  of,  276-
280,  281.

Ethics  and  philosophy,  evolu-
tion of,  ii.  157.

Festivals    (see    Olympus    and


Olympian  Games),  ii.  185,  205.
—  Otherworld,  idea  of  (see  Ely-
sium, Hesiod,  Homer,  Hyperbor-
eans, Lucian,  Pindar,  Sophocles,


etc.),  i.  I2i,  134,  256,  257,  292,
?93.  294.  3°9.  329.  33i ;  possible
influence  on  Irish,  257,  Odysseian
accounts,  258-260,  parallels  to
Irish   idea,  261,    and  romances,

282,  283,  later  accounts,  261,  262,
269-271,  moral  idea  of,  261,  262,
263,  Iliad  accounts,  262,  266,
and  Irish  parallels,  267,  269,
Rohde's  view  of  Greek  epic  be-
lief, 262-265,  discussed,  265-269  ;
apparent  inconsistencies  in,  265,
author's  views,  269,  influence  of
Oriental  myths,  265,  267,  269,
279,  292,  325,  and  reaction  there-
on, 313,  other  influences,  270,
271,  early  mythical  accounts,
271,  a  Scotch  parallel,  272,
273,    didactic    development,  273-

283,  Romantic  development,  278;
and  literature,  280-282,  influence
on  Christian  and  Jewish  views,
281,  283,  parallel  and  relation
between  Greek  and  Irish  mythic
romance  and  literature,  282,  289,
292,  293,  294,  ii.  190-194 ;  202,
203  ;  must  not  be  strained,  i.  285,
290,  291,  effect  of  contact  be-
tween Greeks  and  Romans,  and
other  races,  283,  Norse  parallel,
308,  influence  of,  on  India  and
from  India,  313,  324,  325,  chron-
ological synopsis  of  growth  of
idea,  326,  327  ;  evolution  of  Hell,
328,  adoption  of  Hell  by  Chris-
tianity, ii.  240,  241,  non-ethical
character  of  earlier  ideas,  i.  329.

Greek  mythology,  and  Euhemeros,
ii.  182,  polytheistic,  186;  281.

Philosophy      (see     Dionysus,

Erigena,  Orphic  and  Orphic-
Pythagorean,  Plato,  the  Poets,
Pythagoras,  etc.),  influence  of,  on
Celtic,  ii.  104,  105,  106,  107,  108,
109,  112,  123,  127,  128,  129,  130,
132,  133,  134,  135,  136,  137,  142,
143,  151,  158,  159;  on  Indian
myth,  i.  313,  324,  325  ;  on  Persian
myth,  and  parallels,  309  ;  on
Roman  myth,  283,  287  ;  on  Scan-


326


INDEX


dinavian  myth,  i.  296,  297,  299,

309,  316,  and  parallels,  304.
Greek  Re-birth  myths  (see  Phanes,

and  Zagreus),  ii.  133,   in  relation

to  Elysium,  242.
Religion,  evolution  of,  i.   319,

ii.  246,  250,  260.-

Rites    (see    Dionysus,     Eleu-


sinian,  etc.),  ii.  225,  burial,  238,

255,  256,  265,  268.
Gregory  of  Tours  and  the  Phoenix

Legend,  i.  244.
Grey,   the,   of  Macha,   Cuchulinn's

horse,  i.  267.
Grianan,  of  glass,  or  bower,  ii.  48,

So.

Griechischc  Philosophic,  ii.  114.

Griechischer  Ro?nan,  i.  279.

Grimm,  the  Brothers,  on  Irish  fairy
beliefs,  ii.  210 ;  on  origin  of
witchcraft,  227,  228 ;  on  the
changeling  idea,  and  succudi,  229,
230.

Guaire,  King  of  Connaught,  i.  122.

Gudmund  of  the  Glittering  Plain,  i.
298,  299,  300,  301,  302,  303,  304,

3°5.  307.  3°8-
Gudrun-Hilde  saga,  the,  ii.  21.
Guest,     Lady    Charlotte,     i.     129,

ii.  85.
Guinevere,   i.    140,  156,    ii.   11,  22,

23>  25-

Gwales,  in  Penvro,  ii.  15.

Gwawl,  ii.  14,  15.

Gwion  Bach,  or  Taliessin,  his  meta-
morphosis, ii.  85,  a  parallel,  87,
89,  90.

Gylfi's  Beguiling,  i.  295.

Hades,  or  Annwfn.  See  also  Ely-
sium, Hell,  and  Tartarus.

Avestic,  i.  325,  327.

Greek,  i.  262,  263  ;  Ulysses  in,

264,  266,  319,  ii.  262  ;  inconsis-
tencies in  presentment  of,  i.  265  ;
269,  274,  276,  277,  278,  283 ;
^Eneas  in,  286,  287 ;  293,  Orphic
idea  of,  ii.  125,  126,  138,  236,  263,
267.

Irish,  ii.  263,  267.


Hades,  Scandinavian,  i.  306,  308.

Vedic,  i.  325.

Welsh,  ii.  89.

Hadding  and  his  guide,  i.  301,  302.
Hallowe'en     and     Hallowtide,     or

Samhain,  i.  209,  210,  215,  ii.  150,

160,  161,  216,  217.
Hand,  the  silver,  of  Nuada,  ii.  170,

174.
Hemes  Taliessin,  Welsh  text,  ii.  87.
Hanged     corpse,     the,     and      the

roaster,  tale,  i.  209,  210.
Hahn,  J.  G.  von,  ii.  88.
Happy  Otherworld  idea.     See  Cos-

mological   Otherworld,    Elysium,

EschatologicalOtherworld,  Faery,

Hades,  Heaven,  Tartarus,  etc.
Irish    conception.       See

Irish  texts.

—  a  leading   and  indepen-


dent conception  in  Ireland,  i.  124,
142,  206,  218,  non  -  Christian,
*79>  235>  331-  pre-Christian,  228,
ii.  238,  Christian  influence  on,
ii.  96,  100,  240,  241,  develop-
ment of  the  idea,  i.  158,  159,  160,
161,  172,  173,  and  tendencies,
184,  185,  189,  192-195,  200,  201,
207,  211,  215,  217,  the  Irish  idea,
a  storehouse  of  stories,  i.  232,  233,
non-ethical  conception,  i.  253,
327,  ii.  96,  salient  features,  in
Bran,  i.  142-143,  149,  176,  in
Connla,  i.  145,  149,  176,  in  Oisin,
i.  150,  151,  152,  in  Cuchulinn,  i.
153-158,  in  preceding  compared,
i.  159,  romantic  use  of  the  idea,
in  Maelduin,  i.  163-169,  in  Etain,
i.  176,  237,  ii.  52,  53,  in  Lae-
gaire,  i.  190-184,  didactic  form
in  Connla,  i.  187-189,  in  Cormac,
i.  189,  192,  234,  in  Teigue,  i.
202-206,  parodied,  207-208,  ii.
180-181  :  Chronological  synopsis,
'•  237.  328 ;  author's  deductions,
i.  331,  ii.  8  ;  method  of  study,  2,

3.  16.

Irish  classified  forms, —

Blend  of  Oversea  and  Hollow
Hill  idea,  i.  177,  179,  235 ;  God's


INDEX


327


land,  warlike,  i.  174,  178,  327 ;
ii.  225  ;  Hollow  Hill  (see  Sid,
and  Tuatha  de  Danann),  i.  145,
151,  152,  157,  174,  175,  discussed,
177  ;  sanctity  of,  178,  age  of  idea,
179 ;  200,  210,  2ii,  212,  213,  230,
231.  233,  234,  ii.  48,  51,  52,  58,
89,  Thracian  parallel,  i.  277,  ii.
140 ;  sun-god  origin  of,  245  ;  war-
like, i.  154-156,  157,  159,  180-184,
301 ;  Oversea  (see  Imrana  litera-
ture), i.  143,  146,  150,  153,  159,
160,  162,  164-166,  169  ;  peaceful,
177-178,  179,  195,  197,  198,  200,
202,  207,  213,  228,  229,  230,
231,  233,  234,  235,  ii.  32,  89;
Undersea,  i.  184,  232,  ii.  84,  88,
89.

Happy  Otherworld,  Eschatological
considerations,  i.  328.

in  relation  to  Greek  idea,

i.  236.  288,  293,  ii.  133,  134,  241,
242,  258,  263,  273.

- — a    half  -  way   house    to

Heaven,  i.  225.

and  Irish  Heaven  com-


pared, i.  219,  228.
laws  of  (and  see  Depar-
ture and  Return  penalty),  i.  146,
164,  166,  170,  171,  172.

Lords    of.      See  Arthur,

Lug  Manannan,  Mider,  Mongan,
Tuatha  de  Danann.

non  -  religious    idea,    ii.


253-

in    relation    to    re-birth

idea  (see  Sun-god),  i.  176,  ii.  242,
243 ;  vitality  of  idea,  in  Gaelic
literature,  i.  152;  non -Irish,
Christian,  and  Jewish  analogues,
i.  238-257.

British    idea,    Avalon,    i.


236,  237,  ii.  23.

classic  accounts  of,  i.  250,

256,  258-294.

Greek  and   Egyptian,  ii.


269.


Indian,  i.  310,  326,  327.
Iranian,   i.   309-316,  326,


327-


Happy  Otherworld,  Scandinavian,
295  -  3°3 1  compared  with  Irish,
303,  304,  305,  309,  327.

South  Celtic,  ii.  252,  253.

Welsh,  ii.  17,  89.

Summary,    chronological

of  the  foregoing,  i.  326-328,  329-

33i-

Harlech,  ii.  15.

Harrison,  Miss  Jane,  her  summary
of  Rohde's  views  on  Homeric
faiths,  i.  262,  263.

Hartland,  E.  S.,  i.  168,  ii.  12,  82,
144,  226.

Harun  al  Raschid,  an  Irish  parallel,
i.  199.

Haug  bui,  the,  or  wraith,  i.  268.

Head  poet,  qualifications  of,  i.  130.

Hearn,  ii.  255.

Heaven,  or  Heavenly  City.  See
also  Elysium,  Hades,  Odainsakr,
Paradise,  Tir  Tairngiri,    Utopia.

Avestic,  i.  312.

Christian,  i.  172,  of  Adam-
nan's  vision,  219,  220,  222,  an-
other account,  223,  224,  227,
according  to  Peter,  248,  in  later
visions,  248,  249,  Messianic  and
other  forms,  250,  251,  256,  257,
main  source  of  the  idea,  246,  247,
248,  249,  250,  251,  252,  254,  256,

257-

in  relation  to  Irish,  1.  225,

226,   228,   236,  252,    ii.  2,  9,  30,

3i.  249-
Chronological  synopsis  of  idea,

i.  326,  328.

Greek.    See  Greek  Otherworld.

Roman,  i.  284,  286.

-  Scandinavian,  i.  295,  296,  297,

307,  322.

Vedic,  i.  321.

Hebrew  ideals,  ii.  264.

language,  i.  314.

prophets,  and  the  Orphic  doc-
trines, i.  286.

race,  ii.  171,  religion  and  rites,

223.

Sacred  Books,  and  the  Avesta,


i-  3i3-


328


INDEX


Heaven,  Visions  of  Hell  and  Para-
dise, i.  255.

Hecataeus  of  Abdera,  i.  279.

Hecuba,  ii.  140.

Heimdall  and  his  horn,  i.  307.

Helen  of  Troy,  her  race,  i.  259,  261,
282,  ii.  8.

Helge  Thorreson,  and  Sigrun,  i.
268  ;  his  journey,  208 ;  date  of
tale,  308.

Hell,  or  Gehenna,  or  Sheol.  See
Elysium,  Hades,  Tartarus.

Christian,  i.   172,  223,  224,    a

provisional,  225,  275,  main  source
of  idea,  246,  248,  250;  256,  257,
271,  275,  predominance  of  idea,
256,  257.

Egyptian,  ii.  263,  267.

evolution  of  the  idea  in  Greece,

India,  and  Persia,  i.  328,  329.

Greek  idea,  Orphic,  i.  256,  257,

271,  ii.  115 ;  Platonic,  i.  275,
post-Homeric,  290  ;  evolution  of,
i.  328,  329 ;  Egyptian  origin  of,
ii:  263,  267.

— —  Indian,  i.  328,  329.

Irish,   no  trace    of   the    idea,

i.  304,  327,  328,  329,  ii.  96.

Persian,  i.  328,  329.

Scandinavian,  i.  296,  328.

Vedic,  i.  321,  323.

Hellas.     See  Greece.

Hellenic.     See  Greek.

Hennessy,  i.  118.

Hera,  ii.  131.

Heraclides  of  Pontus,  on  the  re-birth
of  Pythagoras,  ii.  115.

Hercules,  ii.  11.

Hereafter,  inconsistent  views  of,  i.
269,  ethical  scheme  of,  271.

Herefordshire,  ii.  25.

Heremon,  son  of  Milesius,  i.  203.

Hermes,  i.  259,  272 ;  ii.  115.

Herodotus  and  the  Phoenix  tale,  i.
244,  on  transmigration,  ii.  79,  80,
on  the  Getae,  140,  152,  202.

Heroes,  the  seven,  and  Bran's  head,
ii.  14,  15,  Irish  and  Christian,
30,  31 ;  33,  34,  power  of  re-birth,
36,  Greek,  115.


Heroic  Saga,  or  Legend  and  cycles
of  (see  also  Saga),  i.  116,  129,  131,
146,  231,  conditions  for  originat-
ing, 124,  173,  modifying,  128 ;
and  preserving,  130,  tragic  tone
of,  137,  266,  Irish  and  Welsh
parallels,  ii.  22,  23,  24,  29,  32,  33,
34,  35,  evolution  of,  44,  45 ;  53,
57,  68,  80,  date  of  collections,  71  ;
72,  80,  81,  94,  and  the  Tuatha
de  Danann,  189,  190,  Greek  par-
allels, 191,  192,  193,  194-196,  197,
200,  240,  250.

Herraud's  Saga,  i.  302.

Hervarar  Saga,  the,  i.  301.

Herzog  und  Plitt's  Real  Encyclo-
padie,  i.  244.

Hesiod  and  the  Hesiodic  poems,  in
relation  to  the  Otherworld,  i.  261,
263,  date  of  ideas,  270,  315  ;  dis-
cussed, 269,  antiquity  of  ideas,
270,  germ  of  didactic  use  of  idea,
273  ;  282,  285,  '  golden  age  '  of,
312,  324 ;  326,  ii.  137,  190,  Irish
parallels,  192,  202,  241.

pre-,  and  post-Hesiodic  Elysian

ideals,  i.  270.

Hibbert  Lectures,  i.  129,  ii.  92,  147,


116,  118,
145,  146,
149,  150,


148.
High  Kings  of  Ireland,  i
119,  120,  122,  137,   140,

189.  ii-  33-  34.  5°.  52.
173,  174,  186,  188,  189.

Hill  of  the  Axe,  ii.  187.

of  Two  Wheels,  i.  197.

Himalaya  mountains,  i.  325.

Hindu  religion,  post- Vedic,  ii.  255.

Hippolytus,  i.  271.

Historia  Brittonum,  ii.  25,  81,  162.

Historical  evidence  of  date  in  tales.
Bran,  ii.  5,  7,  32,  Mabinogion,
18,  21,  Mongan,  29,  31,  32,  34,
35  :  45-  46,  60,  63,  76,  82

History  of  Ireland  (Keating),  1.  116.

(O'Grady),  i.  118.

Homer  and  the  Homeric  poems,  in
relation  to  the  Otherworld,  i.  258,
259,260,276;  Irish  parallels,  261,
263,  264,  266,  267,  289,  290,  292 ;
pessimism  of,  264,   265,  267 ;  ii.


INDEX


329


138,  284;  comparative  date,  i.  315;
ii.  229,  230 ;  241,  246,  on  the
Dionysus  cult,  137,  141,  152  ;  158,
190,  192,  202,  203.

Homer:  post-Homeric  epics  and  the
Happy  Otherworld,  i.  261,  262,
263,  265,  and  Irish  views,  290,
292  ;  myths  of,  326.

pre  -  Homeric   Otherworld,    i.

264.

Hopkin  ap  Philip,  ii.  87.

Horace,  on  the  Happy  Otherworld,
i.  285.

Horses  in  Faery  and  in  Ireland
(see  Dechtire,  Manannan,  and
Phoebus),  i.  150,  151,  155,  157,
164,  168,  169,  182,  183,  195,  199,
2ii,  266,  271,  286,  292,  293,  298,
ii.  177,  178.

Hostages  (see  Niall),  the  fortress  of,
ii.  185.

'  Human '  dwellers  in  the  Other-
world,  i.  169.

Humber  river,  ii.  19.

Hy,  ii.  30.

Hyde,  Dr.  Douglas,  i.  210.

Hyperboreans,  the,  i.  274,  278,
their  music,  and  joys,  279,  282,
325-

IARBONEL,  ii.  79.

Iasion,  i.  260.

Ibar-Cinn-Trachta,  i.  156.

Idyll,  essential  feature  of,  i.  247.

idylls  of  the  King,  i.  236.

Ildathach,  and  his  sons,  i.  195.

Iliad,  the,  date  of,  i.  262,  264,  266,
267,  269,  ii.  192.

Illand,  i.  138.

Immanence  of  the  Divine  (see  Pan-
theism, and  Sacrifice),  ii.  121,  in
Dionysiac  rites,  139,  in  re-birth,
144,  145.

Immortals,  the,  i.  261,  271.

Inber  Cichmaine,  ii.  48,  49.

Inber,  the  Dun  of,  i.  157.

Incarnation,  Christian  doctrine  of.
See  Conception,  Virgin  Re-birth,
and  Transmigration.

ii.  2,  98,  99.


Incest,  in  Irish  literature,  i.  122 ;
ii.  26,  42,  44,  45,  46,  174.

Inconsistencies  in  the  Irish  concep-
tion of  the  Happy  Otherworld,
i.  177,  178.

Increase,  ii.  224,  the  Powers  or
Lords  of  Life  and,  225,  229,  230,
231,  236,  237,  243,  Aryan  worship
of,  244, 245,  246,  247,  249, 250, 256,

257-

Indech,  ii.  175.

India.  See  Avesta,  Aryan,  Bengal,
Brahmins,  etc.,  Buddha,  Punjab,
Transmigration,  Veda,  etc.

and  Greece,  interaction  of  Ely-
sium ideas,  i.  279,  329.

King's  sod  of,  i.  193,  199.

literature  of,  i.  318,  323.

prehistoric,  i.  319.

—  religious  evolution  in,  i.  330.
and   the  re-birth  idea,   ii.   96,


156,  158.

Vedic,  eschatology  of,  ii.  241,


and  Irish,  251,  256,  279 ;  agricul-
tural rites,  modern,  254,  255,  old
patriarchal  institutions,  255,  reli-
gion, 271,  272,  development  of,
272,  273,  277,  279,  280,  281.

Indiens  Litteratur  und  Cultur  in
historischer  Entwickelung,  i.  324.

Indo-Germanic  races,  Elysium  con-
ception amongst,  i.  326.

Indra  and  his  realm,  i.   321,  233
324.  326.

Indus  river,  ii.  256.

Ingeborg  and  Helge,  i.  298,  299.

Ingen  or  Engen,  ii.  66.

Inis  Daleb,  i.  203.

—  Escandra,  i.  203.

locha,  i.  203.

Magdena,  i.  217.

Patmos,  i.  203.

Insect  transformation  of  Etain,  ii.

5°-
Insula  Pomorum  (see  Fortunate  Isles

or  Hesperides),  i.  236.

Intercession  for  ancestors,  ii.  126.

of  Saints,  ii.  68,  83.

Introduction  a  V  Etude  de  la  Litera-
ture Celtique,  ii.  107.


INDEX


Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Reli-
gion, ii.  218,  259,  re,  260-267;  criti-
cised, 267-268.

Inver  Glas  or  Tuag  Inbir,  i.  198.

Invisibility,  i.  145,  148,  149,  157,
159,  164,  165,  166,  176,  187,  205,
211,  ii.  190,  215.

Iona  {see  Adamnan  and  Columba),
i.  218,  ii.  77.

Iphigenia,  i.  261.

Iran,  or  Persia,  Aryan  conquest  of,
i.  316,  Aryans  of,  ii.  249,  278  ;
Avestic  eschatology  and  mytho-
logy of,  307,  309-316  ;  Jewish  and
other  parallels,  313,  315,  316 ;
date,  316 ;  324,  325,  326,  327,
ii.  241  ;  264.

Ireland  and  the  Irish  (see  Agricul-
ture, Brythons,  Celts,  Christian-
ity, Elysium,  Erin,  Faery,  Fairies,
Fomorians,  Gaels,  Goidels,  Happy
Otherworld,  Irish  Texts,  Mil,  Ossi-
anic  Cycle,  Re-birth,  Sacrifice,
Side  and  Aes  Side,  Translation,
Tuatha  de  Danann,  Ultonian
cycle,  Women),  i.  115,  116,  ii.  3,
11,  14,  15,  26,  27,  29,  30,  33,  51,
57,  68,  80.

— — Christianity  in,  i.  121,  125,  131,
134,  141,  142,  177,  178,  179,  207,
218,  225,    257,  327,   328,  11.  195,

196,  203,  204,  205,  2I2-2I8,  221,
223,  224,  225,  230,  233,  240,  24I,
253,   260.

Christian-Classic    culture   in,


i.  136.

—  Civilisation  era  in,  ii.  161,  162,
165,  166.

—  Gifts,  the  three  sid,  of,  i.  210.

—  use  of  the  horse  in,  i.  150,  183.
—  as  an  intellectual  centre,  i.  245.

Invasions  of  (see  Vikings,  etc.),


i.  116,  117,  125,  202,  ii.  19,  20,
76,  78,  80,  81,  91,  94,  149.  15I-
161,  162,  163,  167,  170,  171,  172.
—  Kings  and  early  rulers  of ,  i.  116,
117,  118,  119,  120,  121-124,  131,
137-140,  144,  145,  146,  174,  175,
180,  187,  189,  198,  202,  203,  204,
209,210;  burial-place  of,  212;  233,


personal  perfection  necessary,  321,

ii.  170.
Ireland,   Missionary  effort  from,  i.

121,  245.
Mountains  and  lakes  of,  ii.  161,

177,  184,  186,  218,  261.
Pre-Christian,    and    the    Irish


race,  1.  115-120.
—  Rent  and  rebate  of  rent,  ii.  174,


175-


and    Romano-Greek    culture,
i.  121,  134,  288-289.

—  in  the  sixteenth  century,  i.  149.

—  Talismans,  the  four,  of,  ii.  171,


i/3-


in  Viking  days,  i.  124,  125,  127,
128,  129,  135,  136,  140,  151,  179,
183,  184, 185,  ii.  5  ,  21,  81,  168,196.

—  and  the  war  with  Ulster,  i.  211.

—  and  Wales  (see  Wales),  i.  121,


129.
Irische  Elfenmarchen,  ii.  227,  228,

230.
Irische  Texte,  i.  145,  190,  211,  ii.  39,

40,  57.  75-
Irish  epic  catalogue,  the,  i.  130.
and  general   European  Fairy

lore  compared,  ii.  233,  234.
God-saga,  the,  its  development,

i.  233.
Legend,     characteristics    of,


1.  131,  201.

—  Olympus,  i.  189.

—  Renaissance,  i.  125,  149,  234  ;


11.  21,  70.
Irish  Royal  Academy,  Transactions

of,  ii.  234.
Irish  Saints.    See  Columba,  Fmnen,

and  Patrick.
Scholars,  i.  117,  125,  136,  and

scholarship,  234,  245.
•  School  of  Story-telling,  its  influ-


ence on  tradition,  ii.  5,  13,  21,  27,
28,  29,  31,  34,  47,  56,  68,  69,  70,
130,  169,  236.
-  Story-telling, general  character-


istics of,  i.  131,  201.
Irish  Literature,  early,  general  con-
siderations, i.    116,    pre-Milesian
period,  116,    contact  with  Chris-


INDEX


33l


tianity  and  Classic  culture,  117,
257,  Milesian  and  Heroic  period,
117,  118,  119,  post-Heroic  pre-
Christian  period,  119,  120,  Le-
gendary period,  120-123,  Viking
and  Renaissance  periods,  123,
125,  127,  129,  136,  183,  184,  185,
Manuscript  tradition  of,  125,  Scan-
dinavian influence  on  and  from,
I28>  135.  3°4-  305.  309.  changes
from  oral  tradition,  130,  dates
and  difficulty  of  dating,  130,  131,
146,  162,  163,  169,  189,  208,  in-
fluence of  Christianity  on,  133,
134,  142,  167,  207,  219,  226,  228,

232,  235,  236,  257,  leading  ideas,
142,  wealth  of  material,  i.  144,
172,  modifications  in,  102,  149,
158,  160,  189,  192,  194,  2ii,  234,
frame-work  tales,  194,  and  de-
velopment, 195,  196,  199,  201,
216,  its  charms,  201,  218,  dis-
tinction between  prose  and  ballad
forms,  208,  218,  allegorical  texts,
215,  216,  Happy  Otherworld
idea,  229,  278,  Christian  texts,
219,  231,  compared,  252-255,  in-
fluence of  conflicting  faiths,  233,
234,  and  Greek,  257,  267,  278,
282,  285,  288,  289,  293,  294,  frag-
mentary character,  303,  problem
of  the  Text,  330,  chronological
synopsis  of  views  embodied  in,
236,  327.

Irish  Literature,  extant,  and  the
Elysium  and  Re-birth  ideas,  ii.
230,  240,  in  relation  to  Greek
ideas,  241,  242,  243,  258,  sum-
mary, 280,281,  Christian  influence
on,  241,  243,  248,  249,  non-
metaphysical  character  of,  ii.  241,
251,  252,  253,  argument  thereon,

274.  275-
pre-eleventh  century,  ii.

210.

Mythology  and   Mythic

romance,  i.  117,  119,  130,  160,
195,   199,  201,  206,  2ii,  228,  232,

233,  239,  242,  257,  258,  272,
303,  304;  ii.  23,   31,    32;  redac-


tion of  old  tales,  ii.  5,  11,  12,
l8,  30,  33,  position  of  Mongan
tale  in,  35  ;  36,  evidence  of  date,
44,  process  of  evolution,  45,  46,
47.  56.  57.  82,  168,  169,  172 ;
71,  72,  94,  characteristics  of,
71,  72,  82,  94,  95,  96,  affinity
with  the  Greek,  133,  134,  136,  142,
159  ;  compared  with  the  Greek,
190-194,  166,  181,  183,  189,  195  ;
197  ;  203,  its  conservatism,  205,
206  ;  in  relation  to  peasant  lore,
199-202,  203,  205  ;  Christian  in-
fluence ort,  206-208,  209,  2ii,  212,
121.
Irish  Texts,  quoted  and  referred
to,  See  also  m  general  index
under  names  of  persons.
Adventures  of  Cormac  in  Faery,
i.  189-192,  234.

of  Tadg  or  Teigue,  son  of

Cian,  i.  120,  201-208,  234,  ii.
38,  87.

Aed  Slane's  birth,  i.    122,  ii.  82,

83-
Agallamh  na  Senorach,  i.  151, 194,

197,  199,  201,  207,  234,  235.
Amra  Choluim  Cille,  ii.  25.
Annals,   i.   116,    Tighernach    on,

117,    qu.     137,    ii.    162,     163,

chronology  of,  117,  118 ;   121,

122,  134,  138,  233.

on  Mongan,    ii.    8,    9,   10 ;

nature  and  importance  of,  161-
163,  compared  with  the  Dinn-
shenchas,  163,  164,  Tuatha  de
Danann  in,  165,  167,  170 ;
euhemerism  of,  169,  account  of
the  battle  of  Moytura,  172-178,
compared  with  Romantic  ac-
counts, 181,  182.

of  Clonmacnoise,  i.  138,  147.

of  the  Four  Masters,  i.  116,


120,  122,  124,  137,  138,  ii.  51,
160,  161,  162,  169,  170,  171.
—  fragmentary,  of  Duald  Mac
Firbis  (O'Donovan),  i.  124.
of   Tigernach,   i.    117,    137,


139,  ii.  162,  163.
—  of  Ulster,  i.  137.


332


INDEX


Irish  Texts — continued.

Baile    an    Scail,    or   Champion's

Ecstasy,  i.  186,  188,  189,  282,

292.
Battle  of   Moytura,    ii.    172-182,

196.
Book  of  Armagh,  i.  177,  ii.  197.

of  Ballymote,  i.  190.

of  the  Dean  of  Lismore,  i.

123,  date  152,  218 ;  180,  202.
— —  of  Druim  Snechta,  ii.  53.
of  the  Dun  Cow,  date,  127,

139 ;  152-153,  158,  225,  ii.  5,  8,

10,  11,  history  and  date  of,  22,

33.  38,  42,  43.  44.  46,  53-  54-

56,  77,  82,  83.

of  Fermoy,  ii.  11,  13,  22,  34.

of  Invasions  or  Lebor  Gabala.

See  infra.
the  Yellow,  of  Lecan,  i.  190,

196.
of    Leinster,    i.    117;    date,

120,   130,    138,   151,    162 ;  180,

195,    196,    197,   212,    228,  267,

ii-  53.  57.  60,  61,  65,  66 ;  date,

67.
Boroma,  the,  i.  119.
Cause  of  Mongan's  frenzy,  i.  22,

140.  ii.  6.
Chronicorum  Scotorum,  i.  137.
C6ir  Anmann,  i.  147,  ii.  74,  193.
Colloquy  with  the  Ancients.     Sec

Agallamh,  supra.
Compert  Cuchulinn,  i.  118.

Mongain,  i.  136,  ii.  6,  11.

Conception     of      Mongan      and

Dublacha's  love  for  Mongan,

ii.  10,  13.
Conquest  of  the  Sid,  i.  211,  212,

ii.  188.
Cormac's   glossary,    i.    123,    124,

ii.  68,  179.
Cuchulinn's  Sick  Bed.     See  Ser-

glige  Cuchulinn,  infra.
Death  of  Mongan,  ii.  4.
Dinnshenchas,  the,  nature  of,  ii.

74,  168,  date   and  importance

of,   i.    196,   233,    ii.    162,    163,

and  origin,  i.  272 ;  noteworthy

points  in,  i.  199,  discrepancies


Irish  Texts — continued.

between  them  and  the  Annals,

ii.  163-167.
Dinnshenchas,   Allegorical    frag-
ments, i.  215-218.

Greek  parallels,  ii.  193.

and  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,

ii.  183-189.
Bodley,  the,  i.  124,  196,  197,

213,  214,  215,  ii.  183.
Edinburgh,  the,  i.  147,  196,

197,  ii.  183,  185,  187.
Rennes,  the,  i.   196,  ii.  150,

183,  184,  185,  187,  188.
in   Silva   Gadelica,    i.    196,

ii.  183.

of  Ath  Luain,  ii.  66,  67.

of  Boann,  i.  214.

of  Carman,  ii.  183.

of  Cam  Hui  Net,  ii.  186.

of  Cnogba,  i.  215.

of  Findloch  Cera,  i.  217,  218.

of  Loch  Garman,  i.  216.

of  Luimnech,  ii.  67.

of  Mag-m-Breg,  i.  213.

of  Mag  Slecht,  ii.  149,  150,

160,  231,  250,  251.

of  Sinann,  i.  214,  215,  246.

of  Sliab  Fuait,  i.  217.

of  Tailtin,  ii.  184,  185.

ofTonn  Clidna,  i.  194,


197.


ofTuag  Inber,  i.  197,


196,
198.


199.


Dub  da  Lethe's  Book  {see  Baile
an  Scail,  supra),  i.  188.

Echtra  Brain  (see  Imrain  Brain),
i.  145.

Condla,    i.    144,    145,    147,

compared  with  Imrain  Brain,
148,  its  language,  158 ;  227,
ii.  231.

Nerai,   i.   209,   211,  232,  ii.


217.
Egerton  MS.,  i.  138,  ii.  9,  43,  44,

46,  57.  58.  6°.  61.  6S-  66.
Epic      Catalogue,      the.        See

O'Curry,  Mat.  MS.

lists,  i.  189,  192.

Fate  of  the  Sons  of  Usnech,  i.  119.


INDEX


333


Irish  Texts — continued.
Felire  Angus,  i.  225.
Fight  of  Cuchulinn  and  Ferdiad

at  the  ford,  i.  118.
Fis  Adamnain.      See  Adamnan's

Vision  (general  index).
H.  3,  18.

Imrana,  or  Oversea  Voyages,  i.
148,  158,  160,  161,  list  of  the
tales,  162,  essentials  of,  163 ;
173, 184  ;  their  object,  186  ;  202,
a  parody  on,  207,  ii.  180  ;  date
and  spirit  of,  i.  230,  231,
Christian  modifications,  231,
ii.  38.

Bran,  i.  133,  144,  148,  158,

231.

Connla.     See  Echtra,  supra.

Maelduin,  i.  162,  163,  230.

See  Navigatio  S.  Brendani,

(general  index).

of  Snegdus  and  MacRiagla,

i.  162,  225,  226,  231.

of  the  Sons  of  O'Corra,  i.

162,  163.
Kilbride  MS.,  i.  147,  196,  ii.  183.
Laud  MS.,  ii.  8.
Leab.  na  Feinne,  i.  119.
Lebor  Gabala,  or  Book  of  Inva-
sions, ii.  77,  92,  93,  105,  192.
Mac  Conglinne's  Vision,  i.   207,

208  ;  ii.  180,  181.
Mesca  Ulad,  i.  118.
O'Curry,  M.C.,  i.  118,  123,  175.

MS.  Mat,  i.  118,  122,  130.

Oisin  in  Tir  na-n-og,  i.  149,  192.
Old  Celtic  Romances  (Joyce),  i.

162,  ii.  181.
Old  Irish  glosses  at  Wurtzburg

and  Carlsruhe,  i.  126.
Purgatory  of  Patrick,  the,  i.  228.
Pursuit  of  the  Gilla  Dacker,  the,

ii.  181.
St.  Molasius,  Life  of,  i.  122.
Serglige  Cuchulinn,   i.   118,    152-

160,  ii.  38,  47.
Silva  Gadelica  (O'Grady),  i.  119,
120,   i2i,   122,    123,    138,    151,
152,   180,   194,    196,    197,    200,
201,  202,  ii.  181.


Irish  Texts — continued.

Stat,  account  of  Ireland,  ii.  214,
217.

Story  of  Mongan,  ii.  6.

from  which  it  is  inferred  that

Mongan  was  the  son  of  Find
mac  Cumail  and  the  cause  of
the  death  of  Fothad  Airgdech,
ii.  6.

Stowe  MS.,  i.  152,  ii.  73.

Tain  bo  Cuailgne  (see  Two
Swineherds,  general  index),  i.
118,  119,  its  importance,  123,
208,  212,  remscela  to,  i.  209,
210,  211,  ii.  68,  69.

bo  Regamna,  i.  210.

Tidings  of  Doomsday,  i.  223.

Tochmarc  Emere,  i.  118.

Etaine,  i.  175,  ii.  47,  58.

Togail  Bruidne  da  Derga,  i.  118,

ii-  S3-
Tundale's  Vision,  i.  225,  228.
Voyage  of  Bran.     See  Echtra  and
Imrana,  supra,  and  Bran  (also
in  general  index).

Irish  tradition  and  belief,  i.  116,
mythological  aspect  of,  117,  119,
modified  by  Christianity,  120,
123,  oral,  125,  and  MS.,  125,
date,  127, 130,  147  ;  our  ignorance
concerning,  146,  147,  vitality  of,
120,  142,  149,  152,  158,  174,  175,
179,  201,  210,  2ii,  213,  232,  235,
308,  ii.  217.

Isidore,  and  the  Phoenix  legend,  i.
244.

Isis,  ii.  268.

Isis-Demeter,  ii.  269.

Island  of  the  Amorous  Queen,  i.
164-169.

of  the  Blessed  Ones,   i.    143,

278,   279,    in  the  Western  Sea,
284,  285.

of  the  Undying,  i.  261.

Islay,  i.  138.

Isle  of  Calypso,  i.  259,  282.

of  Fair  Women,  i.  148,  variant,

165-166.

of  Joy  or   Laughter,    i.    143,


148,  171,  172,  304,  305.


334


INDEX


Isle  of  Syria,  i.  259.

of  Truth,  i.  191,  217.

de  Voirre,  or  Glastonbury,   i.


236


of  Wailing,  i.  170,  172,  304.


Isles  of  Imitation,  i.  170,  304.

Isolt,  i.  156.

Israel,  the  Lost  Tribes  of,  i.  251.

Italy  and  the  Italians  (see  Rome,
etc.),  ii.  26;  Aryans  of,  248,
contact  with  southern  Celts,  274  ;
migrations,  278  ;  Renaissance
literature,  parallel  to  Irish  roman-
tic, i.  206.

Iuchna  Ciabfhaindech,  i.  197.

Jacobs,  J.,  i.  119,  192,  199,  201.

James,  Dr.  M.  R.,  i.  246,  248,  249,
251.

Jatakas,  The,  ii.  158.

Jevons,  Dr.  F.,  on  transmigration,
ii.  79,  80,  on  Lycurgus,  154 ;  218,
248,  on  the  development  of  re-
ligion, 239,  260,  views  stated,  260-
265,  discussed,  266-268,  269,  270,

271.  275-
Jewish  Apocalyptic  writings,  1.  254,

sources  of,  281.

Messianic  belief,   i.  250,  254,

255,  256.

Jewish  Quarterly  Review,  1.  255,
315.

John  Scot,  the  Irishman.  See
Erigena.

Johnson,  Lionel,  i.  284.

Jord  lifanda  manna.  See  Odainsakr.

Josaphat,  in  the  Otherworld,  i.  249.

Jotunheim,  i.  302,  303.

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,
i.  255,  256.

Joyce,  P.  W.,  i.  162,  ii.  181.

Judasa,  i.  289.

Judaism, influence  of,  on  Christianity,
i.  247,  250;  large  family  ideal,
291,  influence  on  idea  of  hell,  296,
on  Avestic  ideas,  311,  313.  3*4.
315.

Judgment,  the  day  of  (see  Dooms-
day), i.  221.

dreadful,  i.  145.  M7\  226.


Judgment  by  fire  and  water,  i.  312,

ii.  109.
Judicial  function  absent  from  Irish

Otherworld  rulers  (see  Laws),  i.

292.
JudischeVorstellung  vom  Leben  nach

dem  Tode,  i.  256.
Julius  Caesar,  on  the  Druids,  ii.  108,

no,   in,   112,  113,  114,  116,  117,

118,  119,  120,  121,  127,  146.
July,  ii.  213,  214.
June,  festival  on  the  ninth  day  of,

ii.  217.

Kaineus,  i.  277.

Keating,   Geoffrey,   quoted,   i.   116,

117,    118,   147,    ii.   51,   161,   162,

163,  169,  170,  171,  172,  173,    on

the  Lugnasad,  185.
Keltische  Beitrage  (see  Zimmer),  i.

128.
Kennedy,  P.,  quoted,  i.  120,  122.
Kennings,  the,  of  the  Skalds,  i.  305.
Keto,  i.  271.

Khonds,  sacrifice  of,  ii.  149.
Kicva,  i.  15.
Kilcoed,  ii.  15.

Kilhwch,  mythical  lists  in,  ii.  187.
Kilmanahan,  well-worship  at,  ii.  214.
Kindred  and  Group  Marriage,   ii.

257-
Kine  of  Coolney,  or  Cualgne,  raid

of,  i.  211,  ii.  65,  66,  68,  69,  71.
Kine  of  Munster,  ii.  186,  187.
Knockainy,  ii.  218,  219.
Knowledge  and  poesy,  the  mead  of,

i.  214.
Knowth,  mound  of,  i.  211.
Kohler,  Dr.  K.,  i.  255.
Kohut,  Rev.  Dr.  A.,  i.  311,  315.
Kronos,  i.  215,  261,  273,  ii.  131,  165.
Kurus,  the,  of  Uttara  Kuru,  i.  325.
Kymry,  the,  i.   139,  140,    ii.  7,  20,

26.  '
Kypria,  the,  i.  261.

Labraid  Loingsech,  i.  118.

father  of  Nechtan,  i.  214.

of   the   Quick    Hand   on   the

Sword,  i.  154,  155,  159-


INDEX


335


Lactantius,  and  the  Phoenix  legend,

i.  244.
Ladra's  flood,  i.  197.
Laeg,   the   charioteer,    i.   154,   155,

158,  159,  166.
Laegaire  mac  Crimthainn,  in  Faery,

i.  180-184.

son  of  Niall,  i.  121,  212.

Lake  Tegid,  ii.  84,  88.
Lam,  the  cupbearer,  i.  214.
Lament  of  the  daughter  of  Eochaid

the  Dumb,  i.  182.
Land  of  Heart's  Desire,  i.  307.
of  the  Living,  or  Tir  innambeo,

i.  145,  150,  227,  298  ;   (Land  of

Life),  301,  306,  311,  320.

of  Men,  i.  200.

of  Promise,  or  Tir  tairngiri,  i.

151,  191,  195,  197,  199,  213,  birds

of,    i.   218,   235 ;    Christian    and

Jewish  parallels,  226-2281266,  273,

292,  ii.  8,  9,  12,  17,  29,  32.
of   Saints.       See   Adamnan's


Vision.

—  of  Truth,  i.  190.

—  with  the  living  heart,  ii.  9,  17.

—  of  Women  (see  also  Isle  of  Fair
Women),  i.  143,  146,  167,  169,
175,  178,  199,  200,  229,  267,  ii.
129,  historical  parallels,  148,  240,
242.

of  Youth,  i.  149,  150,  151,  174,


201,  273,  11.  129,  240.

and  Promise,  ii.  29.


Lang,  Andrew,  i.  179.

Larminie,  on  Erigena,  ii.  106.

Lassen,  C. ,  i.  325.

Latin,  ii.  80.

Latin-Christian  culture,  i.  141.

Latin  literature,  ii.  276.

Latin,  religious  survival  of,  i.  314.

Latin  version  of  Phoenix  legend,  i.

240,  243.
Learning  in  Ireland,  8th  century,  i.

124,  245,  renaissance  of,  125,  in

nth  century,  136,  in  16th  century,

149,  234,  ii.  21,  70.
Lebadea,  i.  277.
Leflocq,  Jules,  ii.  107.
Legend  of  Perseus,  ii.  12,  82,  144.


Leinster  and  the  Boroma  tribute,  i.

119,  ii.  63.
King  of,  ii.  12,  13,  62.

men  of,  and  Carman  fair,  ii.

184,  185.

Leitrim,  well-dressing  in,  ii.  214,
other  folk-lore  of,  215.

Leth  Cuinn,  i.  120.

Moga,  i.  120,  121.

Lethe,  i.  287.

Letiusa,  i.  204.

Leuke  and  the  Leucadian  rock,  i.
216,  272.

Lia  Fail.     See  Fal,  or  Scone  stone.

Liban,  i.  154,  158,  237,  ii.  47.

Lichtenberger,  E.,  i.  128.

Life,  various  views  of  (see  Hesiod,
Homer,  Greek  and  other  Eschato-
logies ;  Increase,  Powers  of,  Re-
birth, etc.,  and  Sacrifice),  i.  287;
according  to  Pythagoras,  ii.  114,
115  ;  according  to  the  Celts,  118,
119,  120,  121,  127,  146,  149,  171,
172,  195  ;  according  to  the  South-
ern Celts,  262  ;  according  to  the
Orphic  philosophy,  125,  132  ;  ac-
cording to  the  schools,  128 ;
according  to  the  Dionysiac  philo-
sophy, 138,  139-142,  144,  145 ;
Thracian  idea,  140,  152 ;  236,  246,
250,  265,  266.

of  soul  after  bodily  death,  no

conception  of,  in  Irish  doctrine,  ii.
96.

Powers    of.       See    Increase,


Powers  of.

Life,  and  the  plain  of  Lift,  ii.
188.

Lif  and  Leifthraser,  and  their  dwell-
ing, i.  306,  307,  Iranian  parallel,
312.

Limerick,  ii.  212,  County  of,  219.

Line-mag,   i.    136,    the  woman    of,

»•  3.  4-
Linguistic  evidence  of  date  in  Irish
writings,  i.  125,  127,  133,  135,  141,
142,  158,  175,  183,  188,  189,  192,
193,  219,  needful  counterbalances,
226  ;  229,  234,  ii.  4,  n,  25,  43,  44,
61,  65,  70,  83,  87,  179.


336


INDEX


Linus,  i.  287.

Lir,  or  Ler  (see  also  Llyr),  i.  143,
191,  198,  214,  "•  3.  19.  178,  213.

Lithuanian  Aryans,  ii.  249,  their
primitive  culture,  278.

Llyn  river,  ii.  91.

Llyr  (see  also  Lir  or  Ler),  i.  129,
ii.  13,  15,  16,  19.

Llywarch  Hen,  Welsh  warrior-poet,
Irish  parallel,  i.  218.

Llwyd,  ii.  15,  and  his  wife,  16,  17.

Loch  da  Airbrech,  ii.  49.

Loch  da  Lig,  ii.  49.

Loch  Guir,  ii.  218.

Loch  Riach,  ii.  61.

Lochlann,  the  King  of,  ii.  12.

Lodan  Lucharglan,  son  of  Ler,
i.  214.

Lodan,  son  of  the  King  of  India,
i.  195,  199.

Loegaire  Lore,  i.  117.

Loegaire  the  Victorious,  ii.  41.

Logie,  D.  W. ,  i.  210.

Loire  river,  ii.  147.

Loki,  the  fire-god,  i.  307.

Lore  Mac  Maistin,  of  Meath,  ii.  62.

Lot,  F.,  on  Avalon,  i.  237.

Lough  Naneane,  i.  189.

Love  motive  in  old  Irish  myth  (see
Teigue),  i.  136,  140,  142,  143,  145,
146,  148,  149,  150,  153,  156,  159,
164, 166, 180-184, 195, 198, 199,200,
211;  227,  229,  230,  232,  233,  266,
267,  290,  291,  321,  ii.  11,  12,  13,
14, 15,  48,  50,  52,  55, 148,  189,  193,
194,  195,  in  other  myths,  Avestic,
i.  325,  Greek,  260,  288,289,  Scan-
dinavian, 268,  298,  300,  308,  321,
Scotch,  273,  Welsh,  ii.  13-17.

Luagni,  fians  of,  i.  138.

Luam,  the  cupbearer,  i.  214.

Lucan,  on  Elysium,  i.  252,  on  the
Druids,  ii.  no,  in,  112.

Luchta  the  wright,  ii.  177.

Lucian,  on  Elysium,  i.  279-281,
parallels,  282.

Lucky  days  for  agriculture,  ii.  178.

Lug-Mannair,  father  of  Dil,  i.  213.

Lug  Mac  Ethlenn,  or  Lugh  Lae-
bach,  the  Longhanded,  Wizard,


and  Lord  of  Faery,  reborn  as
Cuchulinn,  i.  160,  ii.  42,  43,  46,  47,

55-  56,  72,  73.  93.  133.  173.  242,
his  prophecy,  i.  188,  palace,  189,
ii.  46,  89,  i.  292,  304,  ii.  170,  his
talismanic  weapons,  ii,  171,  173,
with  the  Tuatha  de  Danann,  175,
176,  at  Moytura,  177,  178,  in  re-
lation to  Tailtin  fair,  184,  and  the
Lugnasad,  185,  186,  187.

Lugaid.      See  Lug.

Lugnasad,  the,  ii.  185,  186,  187,
205,  214.

Lycurgus,  ii.  154,  155.

Lykia,  or  Lycia,  i.  264,  272.

Lyric  Greek  poets  and  Greek  and
Irish  Literature,  ii.  190.

Maass,  Prof.  E.,  i.  277,  ii.  118,
124,  125,  126,  155,  157.

Mabinogi  of  Branwen,  i.  129,  ii.  15,
21.

Mabinogion,  the,  i.  129,  236  ;  and
the  Mongan  tale,  ii.  13,  14,  15,
16-18,  date  and  subject-matter,
18,  21,  22,  origin,  19-20,  external
influences  on,  21,  Irish  parallels,
90.

Mac  ind  Oc,  or  Mac  Oc.  See  Angus
or  Oengus  of  the  Brugh.

Maclnnes,  Rev.  Dr.,  i.  272,  273.

MacSwiney,  Rev.  Father,  i.  144.

Macedonian  stater  in  Britain,  ii.  120.

Macha,  the  Amazon,  i.  117.

Macha,  the  grey  horse  of,  i.  267.

Maelduin  and  his  Voyage,  i.  162,
its  date,  163,  230,  305,  outline  of
story,  163-172,  relation  to  Bran,
164-171, 172, 173,  the  cat  episode,
170,  171,  304,  Phoenix  episode,
238,  245,  246,  253,  parallels,  Irish,
202,  215,  classic,  282,  292,  Norse,
299.

Maelsechlain,  i.  189.

Maenads,  the,  ii.  139.

Mag  Breg,  ii.  63.

Mag  Mell,  i.  180,  181.

Mag  Muccrima,  battle  of,  i.  120,
146.

Mag  Rath,  battle  of,  i.  123.


INDEX


337


Mag  Slecht,  the  idols  at,  ii.  149,  150,
160,  161,  213,  ritual  of,  231,  250,

Magheracloon,    or    Cluen    Airthir,

i.  138.
Magmor,  ii.  185.
Mahabharata,  the,  its  date,  i.  323,

325-

Maheloas,  King,  i.  236.

Maidens'  Land  in  the  West  (see  Isle
of  Fair  Women  and  Land  of
Women),  i.  200.

Maile,  the  bard,  i.  197.

Mainchenn,  a  Druid,  ii.  62.

Mairend  the  Bald,  ii.  82,  83.

Maistu,  sid  of,  ii.  63.

Malthusianism  in  the  Vendidad,
i.  311.

Man,  Isle  of,  as  Oversea  Other-
world,  i.  213.

Manannan  Mac  Lir,  Rider  of  Sea-
horses, Lord  of  Faery.  See  Fann,
Ler,  Manawyddan,  Mongan,  etc.

and  Bran's  Voyage,  ii.  242.

and  Cormac,  i.  190,  191,  217,

228,  282.

and  Cuchulinn,  i.  154-157, 159.

his  father,  ii.  16,  19.

his  goblet,  i.  191,  ii.  90.

his  prophecy  of  Mongan,  i.  136,

ii.  3.  4.  6.
his  race,  i.  160,  174,  175,  304,

ii.  56,  72.
his  realm,  i.  192,  213,  217,  228,

229,  230,  237,  244,  274,  282,  28S,

3°4-

in  Heaven,  ii.  9.

in  relation  to  Women,  i.  260.

non-Christian  character  of  tale,

i.  288.
parallels  to,  Greek,  i.  292,  293,

Welsh,  ii.  16.
reborn  as  Mongan,  i.  139,  143,

149,  ii.  6,  26,  36,  89,  93.
ruler  of  sea-horses,  i.  169,  199,

233  :  ii-  x7,  178.

and  St.  Patrick,  ii.  213.

Manawyddan,    i.    129,    the   Welsh

Manannan,   i.  292,  ii.  13,   14,  15,

16,  17,  18,  89.

VOL.  II.


Manes,  the,  ii.  no.

Mannhardt  on  the  Dionysus  cult,

ii.  144,  on  agricultural  ritual,  186,

216.
Marie  de  France,  lais  of,  ii.  51,  56,

57-

Marriage  by  rape,  ii.  72,  73.

sacred.     See  Lugnasad.

Mason,  ii.  214,  217.

Massilia,  ii.  118,  119,  274.

'  Master  of  Many  Arts  '  (see  Lug),
ii.  187.

Material  character  of  Otherworld
conceptions.  See  Cosmological
Otherworlds.

Materialien  zur  Geschichte  der  I?i-
discheii  Visions  litteratur,  i.  323.

Math,  tale  of,  i.  129,  ii.  18.

Mathgen,  the  sorcerer,  ii.  177.

Matriarchy,  ii.  75,  257,  278,  279,
280.

Matronymic  used  alone,  ii.  74.

Maximus  the  Confessor,  ii.  104.

Meath,  ii.  49,  62,  63,  184,  well-
dressing  in,  214,  folk-lore  of,
217.

Medb,  queen  of  Connaught,  i.  209,
ii.  63,  64,  65,  66,  68,  character,
of,  70.

Mediterranean,  western  shores,  civi-
lisation of,  ii.  127.

Milusine,  ii.  272.

Melvas,  the  regulus,  i.  236.

Memnon,  i.  261.

Menelaus,  i.  258,  259,  261,  265,  267,
270,  282,  ii.  8,  270.

Meriah  sacrifice,  the,  ii.  149.

Merlin,  ii.  66.

Messianic  belief,  i.  249,  250,  254.

Metamorphosis.  See  Shape-shift-
ing.

Metempsychosis,  i.  273,  ii.  113,
114,  115,  117,  Celtic  modifica-
tions of  doctrine,  118,  119,  129  ;
Pythagoric  and  Platonic  doctrine
of,  126,  127,  264,  Dionysiac  cul-
tus  in  relation  to,  140 ;  142,  Bud-
dhist conception,  158  ;  248,  Egyp-
tian origin  of  idea,  263,  develop-
ment of,  264  ;  267,  270,  272,  273.


338


INDEX


Meyer,  Prof.  Kuno,  i.  118.

on  Bran,  i.  135,  137,   141 ;  on

Bran  and  Mongan,  ii.  4,  5,  8,  9,

10,  11.

on  Conchobor,  ii.  73.

on  Cuchulinn,  i.  152,  153.

—  on  Emer,  ii.  97.

on  Etain,  i.  175.

on  Laegaire,  i.  180,  183.

on  Mabinogion.  ii.  20,  21.

on    Mac    Conglinne's    Vision,

i.  207,  ii.  180.

on  Mag  Slecht,  ii.  150.

on  name  Mongan,  ii.  29.

on  Tuan  and  Finnen,  ii.  jj.

on  Two  Swineherds,  ii.  57,  65.

Mice,  the,  of  Lwyd,  ii.  15,  16.
Mider  of  the  Sid  (see  Etain,  Sid  ar

Femun,    etc.),    i.    175,     his    love

songs,  i.   176,  ii.  49 ;  i.   199,  244,

274 ;    a   non-Christian   tale,  288 ;

304 ;   and   Etain,  ii.    47,   48,  49,

5°.    52.  S3.  54.  55.  63.   his  race,

56,  63,  72.
Midgard,  i.  306.
Middle  Irish  language,  the,  i.   126,

183.

Midsummer  Eve  (see  St.  John's
Eve).

Migrations.     See  Aryans.

Mil  or  Milesius  (see  Amairgen  and
Tighernmas),  his  invasion  of  Ire-
land and  conquest  of  the  Tuatha
de  Danann,  i.  116,  117,  128,  174,
203,  ii.  79,  91,  163,  164, 165,  170,
171,  172,  182,  188,  189,  235.

Milkwhite  fawn,  the,  i.  284.

Millennium,  idea  of,  i.  245,  246,  247,
252,  254.

Mimer  and   his  seven  sons,  i.  306,

307-
Mimnermus,  i.  271.
Minokhird,  the,  i.  311,  312.
Mirabilia  (cf.  Nennius),  ii.  25.
Missionaries,  a  hint  to,  ii.  78.
Mist,  an  accessory  of  the  Tuatha  de

Danann,  i.  180,  190,  ii.  171,  172,

173,  cf.  182.
Moagdiada    or   Mor-oc-diada,    isle

of,  i.  217,  282.


Mog  Nuadat  of  Munster,  i.  119,
146.

Moloch,  ii.  207.

Mona,  ii.  20.

Monaghan,  county,  i.  138.

Monasterboice,  ii.  33.

Mongan  of  Ulster,  son  of  Fiachna,
re-birth  of  Manannan,  called  the
Shape-shifter,  historical,  i.  122 ;
testimonia  to,  137,  138,  140,  ii.
Io.  34.  35  :  date,  i-  122,  139,  ii.
29>  3°.  31.  32.  birth  and  re-birth
of,  i.  136, 139,  legends  examined,
ii.  2,  3,  4,  12,  32.

Characteristics  of,  shape-shift-
ing and  wizardry,  etc.,  i.  138,  139,
ii.  3,  13,  58,  67,  70-71,  84.

and  Columba,  ii.  8,  9,  30,  31,


32,  33.  35.  36,  82.
Death   of,  i.   136,  138,  139,  ii.

3.  4.  5,  7-

and  Dublacha,  ii.  10-13.

in  Faery,  ii.  7,  31.

—  in  Heaven.     See  Columba.
and  Muru,  ii.  35,  36.

and  parallel  tales,  connection

between,  i.  137,  138,  139, 140.

—  and  Arthur  and  Finn,  ii.  22,
26,  27,  28,  32.

—  and   Finn,  ii.   56,   87,   88,   89,

93.  95-

—  and   the    Mabinogion,    ii.    13,

17.  23.

—  References  to,  in  Bran's  Voy-
age, i.  137,  148,  ii.  3,  5,  7,  8,  13,
26,  32,  242.

in  the  glosses,  ii.  4.

in    Prose    tales,    ii.    5-7,


8,46.


in  the  Annals,  ii.  9,  10.


—  Saga,  cycle  or  legend,  ii.  26,
development,  27-35,  location  of,
33-34,  evidence  on  re-birth  idea,
u-  36,  37,  82,  Christian  influence
on,  30.

—  an     affectionate     diminutive


name,  11.  29.
Monsters  (see  Dragons),  ii.  14.
Mordu,  the  Blind,  ii.  85.
More  Celtic  Fairy-tales,  i.  192,  201.


INDEX


339


Morrigan ,  the ,  or  Fairy  Queen ,  i .  2  r  i ,
213,  ii.  177,  227.

Morte  d'  Arthur,  ii.  89.

Motherhood  (see  Matriarchy),  im-
portance of  the  phenomenon,  ii.
81,  82.

Mountain  and  hill  godlands.  See
Elysium,  Hollow  Hill  (under
Happy  Otherworlds),  Olympus,
and  Side.

Moylinny,  sid  of,  ii.  7.

Moytura,  battle  of,  i.  128,  ii.  170,
171,  172,  173,  176,  178,  182,
196.

Mugain  of  Munster,  ii.  82,  83.

Muirchertach,  i.  122.

Muller,  Dr.  E.,  i.  198,  199.

Munster,  i.    119,   146,  202,  207,    ii.

34.  5°.  58>  59.  6°.  62>  67.  69,  71,

82.
Murias,  city,  ii.  171.
Muru  of  Donegal,  ii.  8,  31,    date,

32,  33,  35.  36.

Musseus,  i.  275.

Music  and  song,  a  feature  common
to  all  other-world  legends,  i.  154,
155,  156,  159,  165,  ale  music,
169,    sid  music,  176,    ii.  49,  181,

182,  233,    the   plaint    of  the  sea,

183,  184,  the  music  of  the  branch,
190,  in  Teigue's  paradise,  203,
205,  206,  of  the  land  of  Women,
221,  223,  228,  233,  in  later
visions,  249,  Greek  Elysium
music,  i.  271,  275,  280,  282,  287,
Scandinavian,  307,  324.

Amairgen's  song,  ii.

91,  92;  Cuchulinn's  death-song,
i.  267  ;  Druid  magic  songs,  i.  145,
197,  198.

—  Mider's  songs,  i.  176,


ii.  46.

Mysteries,  their  object,  i.  275,  276.

Namxite  priestesses,  the,  ii.  147,

226.
Nature,   powers  of.     See  Increase

and  Powers  of  Life.
Natural   magic  in  Celtic  literature,

i.  206.


Navigatio    S.    Brendani,    the,     its

results,  i.  161,  162,  231,  284,  285,

328.
Neatness  in  fairy  lore,  ii.  221-224.
Nechtan  Fairhand,  son  of  Labraid,

i.  160,  his  wife,  214,  importance

of  legend,  215,  ii.  186.
Ned  Sheeny  s  Excuse,  i.  210.
Nekyia,  i.  255,  256,  271,  284,  291.
Nemed  in  Ireland,  ii.  78.
Nennius  the  chronicler,   quoted,  i.

139,  ii.  24,  25,  81,  93,  162.
Vindicatus,    i.   116,  139,  180,

ii.  7.
Nento-fo-hi-uscib,  sid  of,  ii.  60,  63.
Neo-Platonism    of   the    Avesta,    i.

313,  ii.  104,  106,  129.
Xeo-Pythagoreanism,  ii.  129.
Nept,  i.  215.
Nera,  in  the  Otherworld,  i.  209,  210,

211,  ii.  217;  stories  of  same  type,

i.  213,  232.
Nescoit,  reference  to,  ii.  180.
Ness,  mother  of  Conchobor,  ii.  72,

73-
Net,  ii.  173.

Nettlau,  Dr.  Max,  quoted,  i.  127.
New  Grange,  mound  of,  i.  211.
New  Testament  in  relation  to  Irish

legend,  ii.  99.
Niall  of  the  Nine  Hostages,  i.  121,

189,  212,  ii.  33,  his  race,  71,  190.
Niam,  i.  150.
Night,     daughters    of     (see     Hes-

perides),  i.  271.

and  increase,  ii.  224,  225.

revels  of  fairies,  ii.  224-226.

Nile  river,    civilisation   of,   ii.   277,

279.
Nine,    the  number   (see  Niall),    ii.

39,  41,  148,  161,  178,  217.
Ninian,  i.  156.

Noah,  i.  203,  313,  315,  ii.  80.
Nonnus,  ii.  130,  132.
Normans,    in    Ireland,    i.    149,    in

Italy,  ii.  26.
Norse  Eschatology,  i.  295,  296,  304,

3°S.  3°7.  3°8.  328.

influence  on  Irish  tales,  ii.  81,

on  the  Mabinogion,  ii.  21.


34°


INDEX


Norse  mythology  (see  Scandinavia),

i.  296,  297-306.
North  German  faiths,  independence

of,  i.  296.
Irish  heroes  and  saints.     See

Columba,  Finnen,  Patrick,  under

Saints.
Northern  locality  of  Happy  Other-
world  (see  Hyperboreans),  i.  279,

298-307,  308,  325.
Northmen.    See  Vikings,  Normans,

and  Scandinavia.
Northumbria,    Irish   evangelisation

of,  i.  245.
Norway,  i.  298,  299.
Nuada,  of  the  Silver-hand,  ii.  170,

173,  174,  I7S.  176.  178,  188.

Ocean,    i.     237,     259,    269,    285,

299;
Ochall  Oichni,  ii.  58,  59,  60,  61,  62,

63,  67.
O'Clery,  Michael,  compiler,  i.  116.
O'Curry,  E.,  i.   118,  120,   153,   156,

175,  186,  187,  188.
Odainsakr,   i.    297,   298,    302,   305,

Rydberg    on,    306-309,     Iranian

parallel,  312,  316.
Odin  and  the  magic  mead,  i.  214.
Odysseus,  or  Ulysses,  i.   259,  261,

264,  266,  319,  ii.  262.
Odyssey,  the,  i.  259,  260,  261,  date,

262,  269 ;  and  Elysium,  264,  265,

266,  272,  278,  282,  compared  with

Norse    mythology,   299,   305,    ii.

270.
Oenfer  or  Aenfher,  a  nickname  of

Art,  i.  147.
Ogma,  the  champion,  ii.   174,  176,

*77-

O'Grady,  Standish  Hayes,  1.  118,
119,  120,  121,  122,  123,  138,  151,
180,  192,  194,  196,  197,  200,  201,
202,  ii.  9.

Oisin,  or  Ossin,  son  of  Finn  and
Blai,  i.  120,  in  the  Land  of
Youth,  149,  150,  234  ;  death  and
birth,  151,  152,  ii.  87,  88  ;  enters
the  sid,  194,  poem  on,  201,
Welsh    parallel,    218,      and    St.


Patrick,  235;  266;  and  Taliessin,
ii.  87.

Olaf  Tryggwason,  i.  298,  302.

Old  Celtic  Romances,  i.  162,  ii.  181.

Old  Irish  language,  in  the  MSS. ,  i.
126,  127,  ii.  179.

Oldenberg,  H.,  on  the  Vedic
Heaven,  i.  317,  320,  321,  322.

Ollamh,  the,  i.  233.

O'Looney,  B.,  i.  150.

Olympic  Games,  Irish  parallels,  ii.
185,  205.

Olympus,  Greek,  i.  260,  290,  ii.  131,
and  the  Olympians,  141.

Celtic,  i.  189,  ii.  76.

Onamacritos,  ii.  130.

O'Neils,  the  (see  Niall),  head  kings
of  Ireland,  ii.  34.

Oracula  Sibyllina,  i.  250.

Oral  tradition,  defects  of,  i.  130.

v.  written  tradition,   question

of  priority,  i.  137.

Orgueilleuse,  i.  156.

Oriental  myths,  action  and  reaction
on  Greek  ideas,  i.  265,  267,  269,
279.  3*3.  325.  327.  328  ;  on  reli-
gious beliefs,  ii.  259,  267.

Orion,  i.  260.

Orpheus,  i.  287,  ii.  155.

Orpheus :  Untcrsuchnngen  zur
Griechischen  Romischen  altchrist-
lichen  Jenseitsdicktutig  und  Re-
ligion, i.  277,  ii.  118,  124,  125,
126,  155,  157.

Orphic  tablets  of  the  dead,  ii.  271.

Orphic- Pythagorean  doctrines,  i.
256,  271,  273,  275,  276,  279,  283,
286,  289,  327,  origin,  330,  331  ;
Maass  on,  ii.  157  ;  Rohde  on,
247,  248  ;  2,  106,  128,  134.

Orphicism  (see  Dionysus  cult)  in
Hellenic  world,  ii.  120,  124,  its
teachings,  125,  126,  127,  157,  158,
effect,  128,  158,  its  ritual  and
eschatology,  129,  130,  in  relation
to  Celtic  belief,  132-134 ;  137,
Orphic  pantheism,  effects  of,  135,
in  relation  to  Christian  beliefs,
135,  136,  according  to  Maass,
155.  273-


INDEX


34i


Oscar,  son  of  Finn,  i.  120,  266.

Osiris,  ii.  263,  268,  269.

Osismi,  the,  ii.  148.

Ossianic  cycle,  the  (see  Agallamh,
Clidna,  Fenian  romances,  Irish
Texts),  i.  120,  152,  192,  its  date,
193,  prose  texts,  194,  200,  charm,
206,  spirit  of,  218  ;  ii.  77.

Ossianic  Saga,   development  of,    i.

193-
Society,  i.  120,  123,  150,  192.

Ovid,    Metamorphoses  of,    i.    244,

ii.  121,  191.
Owen,  ii.  190.
Oxus,  river,  site  of  Iranian  Paradise,

i-  325-

Paganism  in  Ireland,  i.  121,  per-
sistence of,  124,  127,  128,  in  the
tales,  131,  141,  142,  146,  148,  of
the  poems,  218,  327,  329,  331,  ii.
212.

Palestine,  ii.  264.

Pantheism  (see  Sacrifice),  Irish,
Welsh,  and  Greek,  ii.  91,  of
Erigena,  102-106,  possible  sources
of,  105,  106,  120,  and  panwizardry,
121,  123,  of  Orphicism,  126,  129,
134-137,  251.

Pantheon,  the  Celtic,  ii.  193,  249,
274 ;  Greek,  249.

Panwizardism,  contrasted  with  pan-
theism, ii.  121.

Paradise  (see  also  Elysium,  Happy
Otherworld,  etc. ),  Irish,  i.  130,
Christian,  225,  307,  ii.  2,  212,
240,  not  heaven,  i.  226,  312,
pre-Christian,  236,  244,  Old
Testament,  246,  254,  311,  315,
earthly,  251,  Greek,  270,  Norse,
297,  307,  angels  of,  298,  Avestic,
311,  312,  324,  329.

Parthenius,  ii.  191.

Partholon,  invasion  of,  ii.  77,  78,  81.

Patriarchal  and  marital  authority,
Irish  and  Greek  contrasted,  i.  260,
and  Norse,  308.

rule  (see  Matriarchy),  ii.  237,

254.  255.  256.  2S7.  279.
Patrick.     See  St.  Patrick.


Patroklus,  funeral  rites  of,  i.  264.
Pausanias,   on  Greek  rite,   ii.    191,

192,  193.
Pearson,  Prof.  Karl,  ii.  257.
Peasant  belief,  ii.  231,  232,  uniform

character  of,  233.
lore,  principles  of  criticism,  ii.

210.
Penelope,  i.  261.
Pentheus,  origin  of  tale,  ii.  154.
Penvro,  ii.  15.
Persephone,  ii.  132.
Perseus,  i.  118,  278,  ii.  88.
Persia.     See  Iran.
Persian  invasion  of  Greece,  ii.  155.
Peter,  Revelation  of.  See  Revelation.
Phaecia,  i.  259,  282.
Phanes,  ii.  134,  135.
Pharaoh    Nectanebus,   date  of,    ii.

172.
Philemon,  i.  291.
Phoebus,  i.  271,  272,  276.
Phoenician  traders  and  transmission

of  myth,  ii.  269.
Phoenix  legend,  the,  in  Maelduin,  i.

238,    Anglo-Saxon    version,    239,

and    Latin,    240-243,    discussed,

244,  245,  246,  328.
Phoinke,  i.  272.
Phorkys,  i.  271.
Pict.     See  Cannan.
Pictland,  ii.  77.
Pindar,   on    Elysium,    i.    273,    and

Utopia,   274,   277,    278,    279,    ii.

246,  and  Orphicism,  ii.  128,  and

mythology,  190,  202.
Plague,   the  Yellow,   in    Ireland,   i.

122,  140.
Plain  of  Delight,  i.  154.

of  Joy,  i.  149.

of  Prostration  (see  Mag  Slecht),

ii.  150.

of  Two  Mists,  i.  180.


Plato,  and  his  doctrines,  on
Elysium,  i.  275,  291,  ii.  106,  126,
his  agnostic  successors,  128 ;  on
Orphicism,  133, 134, 136, 143,  202.

Platonising  Christian  fathers,  ii.  136.

Plautus,  i.  291.

Pleasant  Plain,  the,  i.  183,  245.


342


INDEX


Plutarch,    i.    234;    on    the   eating

human  flesh,  ii.  135.
Pluto  (cf  Yama),  i.   278,  322,  and

synonyms  for,  ii.  268.
Pohne,  le,  et  la  Lege?ide  des  Nibel-

ungen,  i.  128.
Polymestor,  the  Thracian,  ii.  140.
Pomponius  Mela,  on  the  Druids,  ii.

109-111,  on  Thracian  cultus,  147,

on     the     Gallizenas,     148,     149,

226.
Pontus,  ii.  115.

Popular  Tales  of  the    West  High-
lands, i.  I2i,  167.
Poseidon,  i.  292.
Posidonius,  on  the  Druids,  ii.  112,

116,   118,    on  Celtic   ritual,   147,

148,  149,  152.
Powell,  F.  York,  i.  298,  301,  302.
Powers  of  Life  and  Increase.     See

Increase.
Pre-Talmudic    Haggada,     The,    i.

255-
Problems  of  heroic  Legend,  11.  22.

Prophecies,  i.  146,  189,  of  Cathair
Mor,  216,  of  Fal,  the  Scone  stone,
187,  of  Proteus,  258,  259,  261,
265,  270,  ii.  270,  of  Virgil,  i.  27 ;
relating  to  Mongan,  i.  136,  ii.  3,
4  ;  to  Yima's  realm,  i.  310.

Prophet.     See  Tuan.

Proteus,  his  prophecy,  i.  258,  259,
261,  265,  270,  ii.  270.

Pryderi,  son  of  Pwyll,  ii.  14,  15,  16,

17.  23.  35-  89-

Pseudo-Dionysius,  the,    11.  104,  his

writings,  106.
Pseudo-Gildas,  the,  i.  237.
Psyche,  the,  i.  262.
Psyche:  Seelencult  und  Unsterblich-

keitsglaube  der  Griechen,  i.  262,

ii.  125,  137,  138.
Psychological  side  of  Irish  legends,

etc.,  ii.  113,  120,  146,  194.
reasons    for    association    of

Elysium  and  metamorphosis,  ii.

139,  140,  143.

basis  of  Celtic  doctrine,  ii.  146,


of  modern  fairy  creed,  224.
—  reason  for  fairy  love  of  neat-


ness, 222,   for  night  revels,  224,
236.

Psychology  of  sacrifice,  ii.  149,  152,
153.  154.  232.

Punjab,  Sanskrit-speaking  settlers
in,  i.  316,  317.

Pwyll,  prince  of  Dyfed,  i.  129,  ii.
13-18,  children  of,  19.

Pythagoras  and  his  doctrines  (see
Metempsychosis,  and  Orphic-
Pythagorean  doctrines),  i.  273,
origin  of,  ii.  107,  120,  122,  124,
125,  127,  129,  136,  in  relation  to
Celts  and  Druids,  107,  108,  109,
112,  114,  115,  117,  118,  119,  122,
123,  133,  135,  136,  143,  152  ;  and
the  re-birth  idea,  114,  115,  126,
140,  146;  on  daimones,  115;  in
the  Dionysus  cult,  156;  philosophy
of,  246,  264,  270,  271.

Queen  Victoria,  her  unique  de-
scent, i.  187.
Quinlan,  of  Knockainy,  ii.  218.

Rabelais,  i.  207,  ii.  180.

Rabelaisian  element  in  the  Tuatha
mythology,  ii.  179,  180.

Ragallach,  i.  122.

Ragnarok,  i.  312.

Ram  Yashl,  The,  i.  311.

Ramayana,  The,  i.  325.

Rathmore  of  Moylinny,  ii.  7.

Re-birth,  or  Re-incarnation  (see
Metempsychosis,  Phoenix  Legend,
etc.),  in  Avestic  philosophy,  i.  312  ;
in  Buddhist  philosophy,  i.  330,
ii.  158  ;  in  Christian-Classic  philo-
sophy, i.  330 ;  Cycle  of,  i.  256,  287;
in  Greek  philosophy  (see  /Eneas),
Orphic,  ii.  125,  126,  135,  157,  158  ;
Orphic-Pythagorean,  i.  256,  330  ;
Pythagorean,  ii.  114 ;  ethical  basis,
115,  118,  126  ;  in  Zagreus  myth,  ii.
130,  132  ;  in  relation  to  Celtic
views,  ii.  118,  119,  133,  135,  158  ;
in  Irish  Celtic  literature  and
myth,  i.  142,  281,  330,  331,  method
of  study,  ii.  2,  3,  evidence  of  the
Mongan  cycle   on,  36,  37,    early


INDEX


543


idea,  47,  personality  in,  55,  56,
71,  usual  form  of  incident  in
tales,  71,  implied  necessities  of,
81,  84,  88,  northern  idea,  82,
incoherence  of  presentment, ii.  95  ;
ii.  1-97,  non-Christian  derivation
of,  98-102,  113 ;  Classic  evidence
on,  107-123,  and  Orphicism,  129,
mythological  character,  130,  134.

Re-birth,  associated  with  the  Tuatha
de  Danann,  ii.  93,  94,  95,  100,  130,
159,  171,  172,  non-metaphysical,
96,  but  mythological,  121,  130,
134,  possible  Christian  influences,
98,  99,  101,  102,  d'Arbois  on,
104,  105,  Irish  and  South  Gallic
idea  compared,  118,  119,  120,
affinity  with  archaic  Greek  idea,
ii.  118,  119,  133,  135,  155,  158,  re-
capitulation of  argument  on,  122,
123,  close  connection  with  Elysium
myths,  ii.  134,  242,  258,  259,  268,
273,  in  relation  to  sacrifice,  ii.
144,  145,  146,  153-155,  166,  in
Norse  myth,  i.  306,  307,  in
Thracian  faith,  i.  140.

Tales,  of  Etain,  as  Etain,   i.

175,  176,  ii.  47,  48,  54,  55,  93,
95.  133  ;  of  Lug,  as  Cuchulinn  (or
Setanta),  ii.  42,  43,  47,  93,  95,  101,
133  !  and  cf  ii.  97  ;  of  Finn,  as
Mongan,  i.  134,  ii.  3,  6,  22,  23,
24,  26,  32,  36,  56,  88,  93,  95  ;  of
Finn,  as  Oisin,  ii.  87,  88 ;  of
Gwion  Bach,  as  Taliessin,  ii.  85,
86,  88,  89,  93  ;  of  Manannan,  as
Mongan,  i.  139,  ii.  3,  4,  6,  10,  11,
17,  22,  26,  32,  36,  89,  93  ;  of
Phanes,  ii.  134-135 ;  of  Pythagoras,
ii.  115  ;  of  Tuan,  ii.  79;  of  the
Two  Swineherds,  ii.  65,  93,  95  ;
of  an  unknown,  as  Conchobor,  ii.
72>  73.  93.  95  ;  of  an  unknown,  as
Conall  Cernach,  ii.  74,  75,  101,
133 ;  °f  Zagreus,  ii.  130,  132.
with  or  without  memory  of  the


past  (see  Etain,  vol.  i.), — with,  ii.
37.  55-  56.  79.  without,  49,  55,  71.
Recherches  sur  les  Mysteres  d'Eleusis,
ii.  268.


Rechabite  heaven,  the,  i.  251.

Reeves,  on  Cluan  Airthir,  i.  138.

Regions  syro-babyloniennes,  les,  et
t  Eran,  i.  313.

Re-incarnation.     See  Re-birth.

processes.     See  Conception  by

Drinking,  and  Metempsychosis.

Religion,  die,  des  Veda,  i.  317.

Religion,  evolution  of,  among  Aryan
races,  i.  330.

Religion  of  the  Semites,  ii.  144.

Remus,  ii.  88.

Rent,  imposed  in  Ireland,  ii.  174,
and  remitted,  175.

Resurrection,  Plutarch  on,  ii.  135.

Retribution,  evolution  of  idea,  ii.
265.

Revelation  of  John,  i.  246,  its  age
and  origin,  247,  256.

of  Peter,  age  and  authorities,  i.

246,  247,  248,  and  similar  visions,
249.

Revenants,  ii.  6,  68.

Revue  Celtique,  i.  120,  123,  127,  128,
140,  152,  162,  196,  197,  199,  209,
214,  216,  217,  223,  236,  239,  266,
ii.  22,  39,  40,  66,  67,  163,  172,  173,
213,  219.

Rhadamanthus,  and  his  realm,  i.
259,  260,  276,  280,  282,  ii.  8,  270.

Rhein,  Mus.,  i.  244.

Rhesus,  i.  277.

Rhiannon  ot  Faery,  ii.  14,  15,  16, 17.

Rhys,  Prof,  (see  Celtic  Heathen-
dom, and  Hibbert  Lectures),  on
Arthur,  ii.  89 ;  on  Brythons  and
Goidels,  ii.  20 ;  on  Dionysus,  ii.
147 ;  on  Etain,  ii.  16,  48,  49,  50 ;
on  Goidels,  i.  129 ;  ii.  20 ;  on
Lugnasad,  ii.  186;  on  Mabino-
gion,  ii.  20  ;  on  Nept,  i.  215 ;  on
Telyessin,  ii.  87,  89.

Riese,  i.  244.

Rig  Veda,  The,  its  date,  i.  294,  in
relation  to  Buddhism,  317,  its
heaven,  320,  321,  322,  ii.  158.

Rinn,  ii.  61,  62,  63,  65,  or  Rind,
66,  67.

Ritual,  Aryan  (hypothesis  concern-
ing), ii.  278,  279.


344


INDEX


Ritual,  Athenian,  ii.  265.

Greek    and    Celtic   sacrificial

compared,  ii.  151,  153,  159,  202,
203,  268,  273,  275.

Greek  and  Egyptian,  ii.  269,

270.

Hebrew  and  Semitic,  ii.  223,

264.

Mythic  Orphicism,  ii.  129-130,

137-139.   *4*.   I42-   144-147.    1511
153,  and  Celtic  belief,  132-134, 136.

Sacrifice  in  the  Celtic  world,  ii.


147,  149.

in  Ireland,  149,  151,  161,

164,  165,  166,  167,  183,  185-186,
187,  189,  194,  199,  203-204,  and
Christianity,  207,  209,  214,  216-
219,  220,  221,  223,  224,  230,  231,
236,  250,  251,  255.

Psychological  justification  for,


ii.  225,  effect  on  romance,  226 ;
236,  conflict  with  Christianity,
226,  228,  230,  251,  Aryan  origin
of,  244,  conservation  of,  246,  its
object,  250,  274.
—  savage,  ancient,  ii.  261.

modern,  ii.  255,  256.


Robiou,  F.,  on  Avestic  religion,  i.

3J3.  3J4-

Rohde,  Erwin,  on  Bergentriickung,
i.  277 ;  on  the  Dionysus  cult,  ii.
137,  138-143,  158,  criticised,  143,
144,  anthropological  explanation,
154,  225,  247,  248  ;  on  the  Dorian
invasion,  ii.  156 ;  on  Epic  belief,
i.  262-265,  discussed,  265-269  ;  on
Golden  age,  i.  270 ;  on  Greek-
Irish  analogies,  i.  179 ;  on  the
Hyperboreans,  i.  325  ;  on  Idyll,
its  nature,  i.  247 ;  on  Pythagoric
doctrines,  ii.  124,  125  ;  on  Tele-
gonus,  i.  261.

Romania,  i.  162.

Rome,  Roman  and  Romans.  See
Druids,  Julius  Caesar,  Tiberius
Caesar,  etc.

Roman  and  Celtic  law  compared,  ii.
223,  276,  277.

and  Celtic   myth,  ii.   19,  248,

249.  253,  274.


Roman  and  Celtic  sacrifice,  ii.  no,
146,  148.

and  Celtic  tales  compared,  i.

284-285.

culture,  effect  in  Wales,  ii.  20.

literature,  i.  283.

mythology,    i.    283-288,    289,

291,  ii.  88,  275.

Romano-Greek  culture,  influence  on
Ireland,  i.  121,  134.

Romulus,  ii.  88.

Ronan,  son  of  Tuthal,  i.  138.

Roscher's  Lexicon,  on  Dionysus,  ii.
144,  on  the  Hyperboreans,  i.  279,
on  the  Worm  myth,  ii.  131,  on
the  Zagreus  myth,  ii.  131.

Roscommon,  county,  i.  180.

Ruccne,  ii.  65,  66,  67.

Rucht,  ii.  58,  65,  66,  67.

Rustum,  i.  118.

Rydberg,  Viktor,  on  inconsistencies
of  Scandinavian  eschatology,  i.
268,  summarised  stories,  297-301,
their  paganism,  303,  305,  on
Odainsakr,  305,  306,  316,  on
Iranian  mythology,  309,  311,  312.

Sabbat,  the,  ii.  227,  229.

Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  i.  323.

dead  languages,  i.  314.

Sacrifice  (see  Christianity  and
Ritual),  continental,  ii.  252,
modified,  264.

general  agricultural,  its  under-
lying idea,  ii.   144,  145,  153,  154,

155-
Greek  and  Thracian,  ii.  144, 145,

146,  compared   with  Celtic,  151,

!53.  154.  155.  !S6.  modified,  157,

164,  183,  279.
in  relation  to  Eschatology,  ii.

271.
Indian    (see    Ritual,    savage

modern),  ii.  255.

Irish,  animal,  ii.  187.

human  and  agricultural,


ii.  12,  146,  147,  148,  150,  151,  160,
166,  186,  modification  of,  187,
212  ;  and  the  fairies,  212,  219  ;
in  relation  to  changeling  belief,


INDEX


345


230-232,   cf.    250 ;  in  relation  to

agriculture,  230-231,  236,  250,  251,

252  ;  in  relation  to  ecstasy,  244,

266,  267,  279.
Sacrifice,  Irish,  ritual,  ii.  189,  194,

198,  199,  202.
savage,   human,   ii.    260,   261,

piacular,  262.

—  summary  of  views  on,  ii.  266.
Syrian,  ii.  207.


Sacrifice  (Robertson  Smith),  ii.  144.

Saga  (see  also  Heroic  Saga  or
Legend),  Irish,  i.  126,  127,  130,
146,  constituents  of,  ii.  27.

Norse  (see  Bose's,  Herraud's,

the  Hervarar,  and  the  Eddas),
i.  297,  301,  302,  303,  308;  ii.  2i,
196.

Teutonic,  i.  128,  129.


Saint  Brandan,  or  Brendan,  his
voyage,  and  influence  of  tale,  i.
161,  282,  284,  285,  in  relation  to
Maelduin's  voyage,  162.

St.  Bridget's  Well,  ii.  214.

St.  Columba.  See  Colum  Cille  or
Columba.

St.  Columb's  Well,  ii.  217.

St.  Davids,  Bishop  of  (Rt.  Rev.
Basil  Jones,  D.D.),  on  Goidelic
populations,  ii.  19,  and  the
Mabinogion,  20.

St.  Finnen  and  Tuan,  ii.  77,  78,  82,
and  Mairend,  83.

St.  John's  Eve,  and  night,  or  Mid-
summer, fires  of,  ii.  216 ;  fairy
activity  on,  217,  218  ;  i.  227.

St.  Matthew,  his  version  of  the
Incarnation  story,  ii.  99.

St.  Patrick,  in  Ireland,  i.  121,  125  ;
and  Oisin,  151,  152,  194,  235  ;
and  Caoilte,  194,  197,  235,  200,
217  ;  and  the  birds  of  Cruachan
Aigle,  218,  235  ;  228,  ii.  9,  77,  79,
80,  149,  and  the  fairies,  212,  213,
214.

St.  Paul's  Epistles,  Latin  Irish  gloss
on,  i.  227.

Saints.     See  Irish  saints.

Sallust,  i.  284.

Sam-hain.     See  Hallowtide.


Sanskrit,  i.  314,  315,  mythic  litera-
ture, 316,  318,  327.

Sarpedon,  i.  264.

Satan,  no  Irish  parallel,  i.  292,  323.

Savage  agricultural  rites,  ii.  255.

Savage  religion,  Dr.  Jevons  on,  ii.
260,  267.

Saxo-Grammaticus,  i.  298,  299,  301,
302,  303,  304,  305.

Scandinavia,  its  myths  and  mythic
literature  (see  also  Valhalla,
Vikings,  Norse  eschatology,
Odin,  Odainsakr,  etc.),  in  relation
to  Christianity,  i.  125,  218,  268,
297,  298,  ii.  100,  acceptance  of
Christianity,  i.  302,  303,  307,  309,
in  relation  to  Irish  mythic  litera-
ture, 128,  129,  159,  268,  297,  302,
303-305,  308,  in  relation  to  Greek
myth,  296,  297,  305,  308,  309,
322,  329,  in  relation  to  Iranian
myth,  312,  316,  324,  328,  329,
its  highly  systematised  eschato-
logy, 184,  185,  268,  date  of
record,  294,  295,  296,  328,  Other-
world  idea  in  the  tale  of  Sigrun,
268,  of  Erik,  297,  298,  Helge
Thoreson,  298,  299,  of  Gorm,
Thorkill,  and  Gudmund,  299-301.
of  Hadding,  301,  of  Gudmund's
land,  301,  tales  reviewed,  302,
heaven,  322,  hell,  296,  328.

Teutons  of,  ii.  241,  278.

Scheria,  i.  282.

Schermann,  L. ,  i.  323.

Schneewitchen,  Irish  parallel,  ii.  51.

Schroeder,  L.  von,  i.  317,  324.

Schwally,  F.  i.  256.

Science  of  Fairy  Tales,  i.  168,  ii.
226.

Scone  or  Fal  stone,  the,  i.  186,  ii.
171.

Scot,  John,  the  Irishman.  See
Erigena.

Scotland,  Gaelic  folk-tales  in,  i.  119,
120,  201,  272-273,  and  the  Scone
stone,  187,  Gaels  of,  ii.  6,  19,
77;  heroes  of,  Cuchulinn,  i.  118,
ii.  34,  Finn,  24;  Pictland  of,
Christianised,  ii.  77.


346


INDEX


Seine.     See  Sena.

Semele,  ii.  131,  132,  151.

Semion,  son  of  Stariat,  his  descen-
dants, ii.  78.

Semitic  (northern)  culture,  ii.  256,
264,  271,  280.

Sena  island,  its  priestesses,  ii.  147,
148,  149,,  Irish  analogies,  151,
172.

Sencha,  of  Ulster,  ii.  39.

Senchan  Torpeist  chief  bard,  i.  123,
ii.  68,  69.

Senlabor,  fight,  i.  136,  ii.  3,  31.

Septuagint  chronology  used  by
Annalists,  i.  118.

Sertorius  and  the  Isles  of  the  Blessed,
i.  284,  285.

Setanta,  ii.  42.

Severn  sea,  the,  i.  121.

Shamrock  episode,  the,  ii.  101.

Shanachies  or  bards.     See  Bards.

Shannon  river,  i.  214  ;  ii.  60.

Shape-shifting  or  transformation
(see  Manannan,  Tuatha  de
Danann,  Two  Swineherds,  etc.),
i.  139,  152,  198,  211,  ii.  3,  10,  13,
14,  15,  16,  26,  28,  36,  39,  40,  41,
42,  43,  46,  47,  50,  52,  ss,  56,  67,
72,  78,  79,  80,  81,  85,  86,  87,  90,
91,  92,  94,  104,  115,  120,  under-
lying idea,  121,  131, 132,  133, 136,
139,  142,  143,  144,  149,  157,  158,
194,  195,  204,  227,  243,  244,  246,
278,  279.

Sheol,    i.   254,    its    four    divisions,

255-

Sibylline  Oracles,  Heaven  of  the
Second,  i.  250.

Sicily,  ii.  108.

Sid,  Side,  Sidh  Dwellers,  or  Aes
Side  (see  Ancestor  worship,
Angus,  Fairy  mounds,  Hollow
hill,  under  Happy  Otherworld,
Mider,  Rhesus.TuathadeDanann,
and  Zalmoxis),  i.  145,  151,  157,
158,  invisibility  due  to  darkness,
i.  146,  176,  and  mist,  187,  190,
301,  in  Connla,  145,:  177,  276,  in
Oisin,  151,  152,  194,  inCuchulinn,
*S7>  J77>  232,   278,    as  demons,


157,  158,  210,  identical  with
modern  fairies,  174, 175,  in  Etain's
wooing,  175,  176,  230,  282,  288,
304,  ii.  48,  49,  52,  Zimmer's
account  of  belief  in,  i.   177,   178,

179,  276,  Viking  influence  on
belief,    179,    183,      in    Laegaire,

180,  181,  183,  232,  games  of,
175,  181,  215,  ii.  52,  underwater
location,  i.  184,  276,  stature  of
the  Sidh  folk,  200,!  in  Nera,  i.
210,  211,  232,  ii.  217,  the  Bru°h
of  Angus,  i.  211,  212,  233,  282,
288,  ii.  48,  235,  conquest  of  the
sid,  i.  211,  212,  ii.  188,  women's
position  in,  i.  230,  sagas  about,
231,  Greek  parallels,  260,  274,
276,  289,  308,  ii.  140,  Norse
parallels,  i.  268,  301,  308,  age  of
the  idea,  278,  ii.  3,  6,  7,  25,  190.

Sid  ar  Femain,  Femen,  or  Femun,

ii.  52,  58,  59,  67,  188.
— —  of  Bri-Leith,  or  Breg-Leith,  ii.

48,  63.

ofC'nocAine,  ii.  118.

Conachar,  or  Cruachan,  ii.  58.

Cruachan,  ii.  58,  67.

of  Fair  Wives,  ii.  49.

Maistu,  ii.  63.

of  Moylinny,  ii.  7.

Nento-fo-hi-uscib,  ii.  60,  63.

Tea,  i.  190.

-  Ucht  Cleitigh,  i.  194.
the  champion  of  the,  i.  175.


Sidhfir.     See  Sid.

Siegfried  and   his  saga,   i.    118,    ii.

21,  44,  88,  174.
Sigurd,  i.  268.
Sigrun,  and  Helge,  i.  263.
Sikes,  ii.  269.
Sinend,  i.  214.
Skaldic  Kennings,  i.  305.
Skalds  and  Skaldic  poems,  ii.  90.
Skene,  W.,  on  Goidelic  populations,

ii.    19,    on    the  Mabinogion,   20,

86,  89,  90.
Slanagh  Sidhe.     See  Sid.
Slaney  river,  its  legend,  i.  216.
Slavonic  Aryans,  ii.  249,  278.
race,  ii.  153.


INDEX


347


Sliab  Fuait,  i.  217,  ii.  39.

Smith,  Cecil,  ii.  238.

Smith,  Robertson,  i.  144,  ii.  266.

Smuchaill,  ii.  67.

Snorre  Sturlason,  i.  300,  303,  date,
305  ;  ii.  90.

Socrates,  on  the  abodes  of  the  just,
i.  275.

Solon,  ii.  265.

Soma,  the  divine  plant,  i.  320,  321.

Son  of  Man,  his  Messianic  kingdom,
i-  254.

Sophocles,  ii.  128.

Soul  (see  Psyche),  the,  various
concepts  of,  i.  253,  255,  264,  267 ;
as  wraith,  268  ;  272,  disembodied,
non-existent  in  Irish  legend,  ii.  96.

South  Irish  folk-lore,  ii.  235.

Spain,  i.  202,  284.

Sparta,  ii.  156.

Stariat,  ii.  78.

Stilicho  the  Consul,  i.  285.

Stoic  philosophy,  ii.  129,  133,  135,
136.

Stokes,  Dr.  Whitley,  i.  118,  119,
120,  124,  126,  128,  162,  188,  190,
219,  223,  225,  226,  ii.  40,  75,  150,
163,  172,  179,  183,  187.

Stokes,  Miss,  i.  124.

Story-Teller  at  Fault ,  the,  i.  199.

Strabo,  on  the  Druids,  ii.  109,  226,
on  the  Namnites,  ii.  147.

Studies  071  the  Origin  and  Develop-
ment of  the  northern  God  and
Hero  Tales,  i.  296.

Sualtam,  ii.  42,  45.

Succubi,  ii.  229,  230.

Suir  river,  ii.  60.

Sun-god  (see  Lug,  Manannan,  and
Phcebus),  ii.  245,  247.

Sun-tear,  Fiachna's  daughter,  i.  182,
183,  184.

Supernatural  or  divine  parentage
(see  Re-birth,  Virgin  birth,  etc.),
ii.  3,  4,  5,  6,  8,  11,  12,  14,  16,  17,
22,  25,  26,  28,  31,  32,  36,  42,  43,
47.  55-  56.  73.  75.  93.  120,  133,
145.  239.  24o.

Swans,  Mider  and  Etain  as,  ii.  52.

Swarga,  i.  324 ;  parallels,  325.


Swift,  Dean,  and  the  tales  of  Finn,

i.  201.
Swineherds,    the    two.       See    Two

Swineherds.

Tabarn,  King  of  Fresen,  i.  202.
Taboo   (see    Chastity),    or   geis,  of

assembly,  ii.  187,  of  theft,  i.  170,

171.
Tadg  or  Teigue.     See  Teigue.
Tailtin,    i.    187,    ii.    82,    battle    of,

170,  the  fair  of,  184,    its  origin,
185,  205.

daughter  of  Magmor,  ii.  185.

Tales  of  the  Fairies,  ii.  221,  222.

Taliessin,  re-birth  of,  ii.  84,  85,  date
of  the  historical,  86,  and  Oisin,
87,  Irish  parallels,  88,  89,  90,  91,
92,  93,  94,  96,  105,  120.

Talismans,  the  four,  of  Ireland,  ii.

171.  173-

Tannhauser,  Legend  of  the  Knight,
ii.  226,  227.

Tara,  i.  187,  188,  190,  191,  198,
ii.  175,  176,  185,  187,  188.

Tartarus  (see  also  Hades,  Hell,  etc.),
i.  278,  287,  290,  293,  compared
with  Eddie  Hell,  296,  none  in
Irish  legend,  304,  of  the  Norse-
men, 307,  Greek,  328,  ii.  115,
125,  240-241,  248,  267.

Tea,  the  mound  of,  i.  190.

Tegid  Voel,  ii.  84.

Teigue  or  Tadg,  son  of  Cian,  i.  145,
201-208,  importance  of  story,
201,  details,  202-207,  its  charm
and  parallels,  206;  234,  282,  291,
ii.  17,  38,  87.
!  Teigue  O' Kane  and  the  Corpse,
i.  210.

Teirnyon,  ii.  14.

Teite's  Strand,  i.  195.
j    Telegonus,  the,  i.  261.

Telyessin.     See  Taliessin.
!   Tennyson,  on  Arthur,  i.  236.

Ten  Tribes,  Legend  of  the  Lost,
i.  251.

Tethba,  the  birds  of,  ii.  49.

Tethra,  the  men  of,  i.  145.

Teutonic  Mythology,  i.  268,  297.


348


INDEX


Teutonic  Mythology,  late  organisa-
tion of,  i.  294,  in  relation  to
Persian  and  Greek,  i.  316.

Teutonic  theologian-poets  and  their
belief,  i.  306.

Teutons  (see  Germans),  Aryan,  ii.
257,  Baltic  origin  of,  i.  316 ;
Scandinavian,  ii.  241,  278 ;  pea-
sant lore  of,  ii.  210.

Texts    and    Studies,    i.    248,    249,

251-

Thargelia,  Greek  rites,  ii.  203.

Thebes,  i.  261,  263.

Theft  in  the  Otherworld  (see  Laws),
i.  170,  171,  300,  304,  305.

Theft-taboos.     See  Taboos.

Thesmophoria,  rites,  ii.  269.

Thetis,  i.  261.

Thiasoi,  the,  of  Solon,  ii.  265.

Thomas  the  Rhymer,  ii.  227.

Thor,  i.  300.

Thorkill's  voyage  to  the  Otherworld,
i.  167,  172,  299-301,  302,  304,  305,
308.

Thorkill  (see  Gorm,  Thorkill,  and
Gudmund),  i.  299-301,  304,  308.

Thorsdrapa,  i.  300.

Thor  stein  Bearmagn's  Saga,  i.  302.

Thracia  or  Thrace,  and  the  Dionysus
cult,  ii.  138,  139,  soothsayers  in,
139,  belief  in  rebirth  and  cus-
toms, 140,  modification  of  cult,
141,  Irish  and  Celtic  parallel,
152,  and  differences,  153,  source
of  Dionysus  cult,  154,  155;  258,
its  hollow  hill  idea,  i.  277,  ii.  140.

Three  Legendary  cycles,  Finn,  Ar-
thur, Mongan,  origin  of,  ii.  27.

Three  Soldiers,  the,  i.  167.

Thucydides,  ii.  202.

Thyrieus,  king,  i.  277.

Tiberius,  Caesar,  his  laws  against
the  Druids,  ii.  no.

Tighernmas,  son  of  Follach,  King
of  Ireland,  his  sacrifices,  ii.  150,
annalistic  account  of,  160,  and
Crom  Cruaich,  161  -  166,  dis-
cussed, 161,  163,  real  nature  of
tales,  164,  165,  import  of,  166,
his  death,  166  ;  183.


Tigernach,  the  annalist,  i.  117,  118,
125,  his  writings,  137,  139,  ii.  7,
date  of,  162,  163,  170.

Timagenes,  on  the  Druids,  ii.  108,
109,  112,  114.

Time  in  the  Otherworld,  i.  143,  150,
151,  153,  160,  164,  165,  r66,  167,
168,  176,  206,  212,  230,  232,  237,
302,  310,  ii.  3,  4,  15,  16,  29,  48,
79,  80.

Tir  innambeo  (cf.  Land  of  the  Liv-
ing), i.  227.

Tir  na-n-og,  i.  149,  192,  234.

Tir  tairngiri  (cf.  Land  of  Promise),
i.  226,  227,  228.

Titans,  the,  ii.  131,  135.

Todd  Lectures,  the,  i.  118.

Tom  Connor  and  the  fairy  cow,  ii.
221.

Totemism,  ii.  261,  263.

Tragedy,  the  essence  of  heroic  saga,
i.  131,  266.

Transactions  of  the  Phil.  Soc. ,  i.
124.

Trans-Indian  Paradise,  i.  297.

Translation,  contrasted  with  death
(see  all  Irish  stories),  i.  259,  260,
261,  263,  264,  265,  267,  277,  289,
290,  293,  ii.  8,  25,  31.

Transmigration  of  souls  (see  Met-
empsychosis and  Re-birth),  ii.  107,
Druidic  views,  107,  112,  Egyp-
tian, 79,  80 ;  264.

Trees  of  Faery  (see  Apples  and
Fruit),  i.  155,  159,  205,  hazels
of  wisdom  and  inspiration,  214,
215  ;  216,  229,  of  paradise,  225  ;
238,  240,  249,  254,  255,  of  the
Hesperides,  269,  271,  280,  287.

Tren,  i.  197.

Triple  idea  of  after-life,  i.  306,  310,

312.  323-
Trojan  war  and  battle  of  Moytura,

ii.  176.
Trophonius,  i.  277.
Troy,    fate  of    its   heroes,    i.    261,

263.
Truth,   the  goblet  of,    i.   191,  217,

ii.  90.
the  sod  of,  i.  217.


INDEX


349


Truth :    true   tales   as  adjuncts    to

cookery,  i.  191.
Tuag  Inber  or  Inver  Glas,  i.  198.
Tuag,  her  fate,  i.  198.
Tuan  Mac  Cairill,  legend  of,  ii.  76,

77,  his  tale  and  transformations,

78,  79,  date,  80,  81,    locale,  82,
comparisons,  87,  93.

Tuatha  de  Danann,  the  (see  Fairies,
Sid,  etc.),  i.  189,  198,  199.

appearance  of,  i.  180,  181,

200,  201.


and    Carman    fair,    etc.,
ii.  183,  184.
characteristics  of,  ii.  193,


194.

and  death  and  burial,  i.

2ii,  212,  ii.  234,  in  relation  to
ancestor  worship,  235,  236,  237,
238.

development  and  persis-
tence of  myth  concerning,  ii.  181,
194-198.

dwellings,  i.  174,  177, 178,

179,  260.

and    the    Fomorians,    ii.


173,  174,  175,  176,  179.

-and  gods  of  agriculture,  ii.


188,  189,  194,  194,  195,  198,  199.
identical  with  Fairies,  i.

175,  ii.  159,  169,  220,  229.
magic  powers  of,  i.  211,

ii.   50,   56,  72,  92,  94,   105,   149,

171,  172,  173,  177,  178,  181,  189,

195.  197-

-  Masters  of  Life,  ii.  171.
at   Moytura,  ii.   177,  178,


182.
mythical,  ii.  165,  167,  168,

182,    196,    197,    and    the  reverse,

169,  189,  196,  200,  206.
as  nature  gods,  i.  178,  ii.

182,  137-194,  197.
origin,    i.


171.


177.    "•    79.

in  the  otherworld,  i.  203,
205.

as  powers  of  life  and  in-
crease, ii.  232,  243.

their    predecessors    and


successors,  ii.  94,  163,    165,  170-

179,  188,  189,  196.
Tuatha    de    Danann,     Rabelaisian

tales  concerning,  ii.  180,  188,  197.
race  of,  i.   174,    175,    ii.

55.    56.  72,  76,  Welsh  parallels,

!9.  92,  93-  l68-
and  re-birth,  ii.  93, 95, 100,


130.

reference  to,    in  Annals,

ii.  160,  165,  167,  168,  169-182 ;
in  Dinnshenchas,  ii.  160,  163,  183-
189  ;  in  Heroic  Saga,  ii.  169,  189-
197 ;  in  Ossianic  cycle,  i.  234,
Homeric  parallel,  260.

Semitic  analogies,  ii.  256.


Tuathal,  i.  138.

Tuathal  Techtmar,  High  King,   i.

119.
Tuirbe's  Strand,  ii.  187.
Tulchine,  the  Druid,  i.  213.
Tumuli  and   Inscribed   Stones  at

New  Grange,  etc.,  i.  211,  ii.  234.
Tummuc    or   Tunniuc,    ii.   64,    65,

66.
Two  Swineherds,  the  begetting  of

the,  ii.  57-72.
Tivrch  Trwyth,  tale,  i.  129,  ii.  25.

Uaran  Garad,  spring,  ii.  63,  well,
66.

Ucht  Cleitigh,  the  sid,  i.  194.

Uisnech,  hill,  i.  145.

Ulidia,  i.  194.

Ulysses  (see  also  Odysseus),  his
descent  into  Hades,  i.  264,  266,
319,  ii.  262.

Ulster,  i.  117;  its  champions,  118,
119,  and  kings,  120,  122,  137,
138 ;  209,  the  great  war,  211,
later  kings  of,  ii.  6,  7,  10,  50,  72,
legends  of,  27,  30,  31,  33,  and
warriors,  39,  40,  41,  42,  43,  45,
48,  68,  69,  72,  74,  77,  78,  97,  189,
lady  of,  55.

Ultonian  cycle,  the,  i.  118,  119,  123,
131,  152,  193,  209,  ii.  25,  27,  31,
33.  34.  70,  71.  82,  93,  95,  197.

Ultonians,  the,  i.  153,  193.

Undying  part  of  man.     See  Ghost,


35°


INDEX


Haug    bui,     Psyche,    Soul,    and

Wraith.
Undying,  the  (see   Odainsakr    and

Translation),  i.  306,  307.
Universe,  the,  i.  287,  290,  306.
the     master    of    the.       See

Kronos.
Upanishads ,  the,  i.  317.
Ussher,  i.  237.
Utopia,  Greek  idea  of,  i.  271,  274,

278,  279,  282,  parallels,  325,  327.
Uttara  Kuru,  or  Yama's  Land,  and

parallels,  i.  325.
Usnec/i,  fate  of  l/ie  sons  of,  i.  119.

Vajush,  the  heavenly  breeze,  i.  311.

Valerius  Maximus,  on  the  Druids,
ii.  109,  114.

Valhalla,  i.  159,  268,  324.

Vampires.     See  Succubi.

Vanishing  Islands,  i.  165,  166,  192,
206.

Veda.  See  Avesta,  Zendavesta,  Rig
Veda,  etc.

Vedic  India.     See  India.

Vedic  literature,  i.  314,  mythical,
316-319,  320,  321,  322,  329.

Vendidad,  the  (Avesta),  i.  309,  311,
312.

Veniusa,  i.  204.

Vergil  (see  Virgil),  his  books  of
Magic,  ii.  84.

Vestiges  of  the  Gael  in  Gwynedd,  ii.
19.

Vikings,  the,  their  inroads,  effect
on  Irish  legends,  i.  124-127,  128,
129,  135,  136,  149,  151,  159,  179,
183,  184,  abduction  elements,
185,  190,  214,  ii.  5,  21,  81,  162,
168,  196.

Violent,  ii.  183.

Virgil  on  the  Otherworld,  i.  283,
286,  287,  289,  Virgilian  influence
on  writers  of  Maelduin,  i.  167.

Virgin  Queen  of  Avalon,  the,  i.  237.

Virtue  and  Vice  (see  Druids),  ac-
cording to  Pythagoras,  ii.  114,
115,  Gaulish  views,  118,  119,
Orphic  view,  125-126,  south  Celtic
views,  252.


Vishnu,     and    the    axe  -  throw    of

Goibnu,  ii.  188.
Visio  Pauli,  i.  249.
Vision  of  Er,  i.  275.

of  Cathair  Mor,  i.  216.

of  Josaphat,  i.  249.

of  Mac  Conglinne,  i.  207,  208,

ii.  180,  181.

of  Saturus,  i.  248,  249.

Visions.     See  Apocalypses.

Vita  St.  Gildce,  i.  236.

Vivasant,  i.  320.

Volospa,    the,    i.    128,    its   creation

myth,  i.  306,  307.
Voyages.     See  Imrana,  under  Irish

Texts.
Voigt,  ii.  144.

Waifs  and  Strays  of  Celtic  Tradi-
tion, i.  123,  131,  193,  2CI,  218,
272,  ii.  25.

Wales  (see  Brythons,  Goidels,
Mabinogion,  and  Taliessin),  its
connection  with  Ireland,  i.  121,
ii.  2i,  in  story,  i.  129,  ii.  87,  88,
89,  ii.  19,  20,  belief  in  vampires,
230.

Ward,  Catalogue,  i.  237.

Water  as  inspiring,  i.  214,  as  re-
generating, 239,  referred  to,  246.

Wave  of  Clidna,  i.  194,  195,  197.

Weapons,  i.  154,  180,  182,  187,  191,
200,  306,  310,  ii.  5,  72»  91.  17I1
173.  177,  187.

Well  of  Connla,  i.  214,  246.

Well-dressing.  See  Garland  Sun-
day, and  Leitrim.

Welsh  literature  (see  Mabinogion
and  Irish),  i.  129  ;  ii.  16,  17,  18,
2i,  22,  23,  24,  87,  89.  criticism
of  poetry,  90.

Welshmen,  or  Brythons,  ii.  19.

Western  Europe,  and  Ireland  in
8th  century,  i.  245.

European  literature  influenced

by  Irish  Imrana,  i.  161.

Whitehorn  of  Ai,  the,  ii.  66.

of  Coolney,  65.

Whitney,  W.  D.,  on  Brahmanic
doctrine,  i.  317.


INDEX


3Si


Windisch,  Prof.,  on  Aed  Slane,  i.
122 ;  on  Dechtire,  ii.  39,  40 ;  on
Echtra  Condla,  i.  145,  211 ;  on
Two  Swineherds,  ii.  57,  60.

Witch-craft  and  fairydom,  ii.  226-
229,  principal  features,  227,  in
relation  to  Christianity,  228,
Gomme's   views  on  origin,   228,

257.

Withershins,  i.  215.

Wizardry  and  magic  (see  Shape-
shifting,  and  Tuatha  de  Danann),
i.  139,  140,  170,  171,  198,  2ii,
217,  300,  301,  ii.  3,  12,  13,  15,
16,  25,  26,  48,  50,  52,  58,  72,  74,
83,  84,  92,  94,  115,  121,  139,  148,
149,  165,  171,  172,  173,  176,  177,
178,  181,  182,  183,  184,  187,  188,
189,  194,  195,  197,  204,  209,  227,
250.

Woden,  or  Odin,  ancestor  of  Queen
Victoria,  i.  187,  and  the  Mead  of
Knowledge,  214,  his  hall,  268.

Wollner,  Prof.  W. ,  i.  207,  ii.  180,
181.

Woman  of  Linemag,  the,  cf.  Cain-
tigern,  ii.  3,  4.

Women.  See  Black  Hag,  a?id
others,  under  names ;  see  also
Matriarchy.

in  Christian  Apocalypses,  i.  251.

in  classic  otherworlds,  i.  259,

260,  261,  271,  278,  282,  289.

of    Faery    (see    Aine,     Blai,


Cesair,  Cleena,  Clidna,  Dil,  Fann,
Liban,  Land  of  Women,  and
variants,  Macha,  the  Morrigan,
and  Sigrun),  summon  and  detain
mortals,  i.  143,  145,  146,  149,  150,
153.  154.  i56.  159.  160,  165,  168,
177,  227,  229,  prefer  handsome
men,  145,  176,  characteristic
invisibility,  145,  ride  on  horses,
150,   164,   165,  168,    appearance,

150,  and  dress,  153,  154,  164,
165,  176,  188,  190,  197,  203,  204,
205,  216,    change  shape  at  will,

151,  152,  2ii,  ii.  16-17,  87,
possess  healing  powers,  i.  153,
237,    are   not  all  deathless,    159,


I95>  I97>  x98>  J99>  their  dignity,
164,  188,  and  self-respect,  165,
166,  167,  are  chaste,  166,  167,
191,  195,  their  independence,  200,
some  gigantic,  200,  some  are
immortal,  203,  Adam's  daughters,
204,  divine  inspiring  persons,  205,
demon  women,  209,  ii.  217,  love,
wed,  and  befriend  mortals,  210,

215,  260   (cf.  Aine),   in  allegory,

216,  in  Hollow  Hill,  reverse
ideal,  230,  and  the  soul  of
Cuchulinn,  267,  ii.  7,  14,  16,  17,
73,  218,  219.

—  in  French  Arthurian  romances,
i.  156.

of     Ireland     (see     Carman,


Matriarchy,  Matronymic,  Tailtin,
etc.),  morals  of,  ii.  6,  11;  51,  52,
73,  74,  174,  as  charioteers,  41,
as  sequestered,  48,  50,  indepen-
dence of,  and  pride,  i.  153,  ii.  70,
260,  sumptuary  laws  affecting,
161,  founders  of  festivals,  183,
184,  185,  186,  as  craftswomen,
188.

—  in  the   Mahabharata,  i.  324 ;
earlier  better  position  of,  325.
in  Norse  legends  (see  Lif,  etc.),


i.   268,   298,  299,  300,   301  ;   less
free  than  in  Irish,  308.

in    the    Vedic    Heaven,    low


position  of,  i.  322,  and  ritual,  ii.

139,  147,  148,  149.
World's  end  location  of  Otherworld,

i.  259,  261,  271.
Worth  the  condition  of  future  bliss,

i.    273,     incongruity  of    bliss  so

attained,  275.
Wraith,  i.  268!
Writing,    uncertainty    of    date    of

adoption  in  India,  i.  318.
Wurtzburg      University      Library,

Latin-Irish     commentary    in,    i.

227.

Yajur  Vedas,  i.  317.

Yama  and  his  realm,  i.   320,   321,

322,      the     Indian     Pluto,     323,

parallels,  324,  325,  326.


352


INDEX


Yasna,  liturgy  of  the  Avesta,  i.  314.
Yellow  plague  in  Ireland,  i.  122, 140.
Yima,   the   Iranian  Adam,    i.  309,

his      enclosure,      310,       possible

Jewish  origin,  311,  313,  314,  315  ;

described,  312,  321,  325,  327.
Yonec,  lai  of,  ii.  56.
Young    Manns,     Argyllshire    tale,

Greek  analogy,  i.  272,  273.
Yule-tide,  i.  298.

Zagreus    myth,  the,  ii.  130,   131,

and  the  Deluge,  135  ;  155.
Zalmoxis  of  the  Hollow  Hill,  ii.  140.
Zarathrustra,  quoted,  i.  312.
Zeitschriftfiir  Deutsches  Alterthvm,

i.  128.

fur  Deutsche  Philologie,  i.  116.

fiir  die  Kunde    des    Morgen-

landes,  i.  325.
Zeller,  E. ,  quoted,  ii.  114,  124.
Zend-Avesta,     le    (traduction     par

James  Darmesteter),  i.  309.
Zendavesta,     the,     and    the    First

Eleven  Chapters  of  Genesis,  i.  315.


Zephyrus,  i.  259,  280.

Zeus,  i.  215,  immortality  of  his
sons,  258,  259,  271 ;  260,  261,  263,
264,  270,  274,  called  Amphiarus,
277,  and  the  Zagreus  myth,  ii.
130,  131,  132,  133,  135,  in  Orphic
philosophy,    134,     and     Phanes,

134.  I3S-  called  Eubouieus,  268.
Zimmer,    H.,    quoted,  i.    116,  118.

123,  his  critical  methods,  126,
and    deductions,   127,    128,    129,

135,  on  the  name  Arthur,  139,
ii.  7  ;  on  Connla,  i.  144 ;  on
Cuchulinn,  156,  158,  160  ;  on
the  Imrana,  161,  162,  163,  166,
167 ;  on  Etain,  175,  ii.  39,  54 ;
on  the  Sid  belief,  177,  178,  179,
180,  276  ;  on  the  Behind  story,
200  ;  on  Adamnan's  Vision,  220 ;
on  the  Fourfold  Division  of  the
Otherworld,  225,  226  ;  on  the  Tir
Tairngiri,  227,  228.

Zosimas.the  Hermit, his  Apocalypse,
i.  251.


Printed  by  T.  and  A.  Constable,  Printers  to  Her  Majesty
at  the  Edinburgh  University  Press


\,


*-*$*, Vtf  uJfrfJLtfOfo,  W^^w  Of


